A Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature, Vol. 1
Hosted text — Tower of Babel library. Source: Internet Archive <https://archive.org/details/a_cyclopedia_of_biblical_literature_vol_i_1846>. Public domain.

This is a reproduction of a library book that was digitized
by Google as part of an ongoing effort to preserve the
information in books and make it universally accessible.


Google books Bein


https://books.google.com [=]


iii


HARVARD COLLEGE
LIBRARY


FROM


Airtduct, Ds Heth


A


CYCLOPADIA


or


BIBLICAL LITERATURE.


VOLUME I.


CYCLOPEDIA


or


BIBLICAL LITERATURE


EDITED BY


JOHN KITTO, D.D., F.S.A.,
WTR OF ‘ THE PICTORIAL BIBLE,’ AUTHOR OF ‘ THE HISTORY AND PHYSICAL
GEOGRAPHY OF PALESTINE,’ Sc. ee.


ILLUSTRATED BY NUMEROUS ENGRAVINGS


IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOL. I.


NEW YORK:
MARK H. NEWMAN, 199 BROADWAY.


CINCINNATI:
_ WILLIAM H. MOORE & CO., 110 MAIN STREET.
1846,


\


LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS.


INITIALS, NAMES,


W.LA..... Bev. W. L. Atexawpes, M.A., Author of ‘ The Connexion and Hasmeny of
the Old and New Testaments,’ &c.


G.B........ Rev. G. Baur, Ph. D. of the University of Giessen.
V.BB...,.. Rev. J. RB. Beanp, D.D. Member of the Historico-Theological Society of
Leinai


GMB ,....G.M. Buzz, Author of ‘ Universal Mechanism,’ &,
CHF.B.,, Rev.C. H. F, Butsopiorszr, Ph. D., Gottingen, Author of ‘De Abrogatione


Legis’ |

iB........ Bev. Jon Baowx, D.D., Professor of Exegetical Theology to the United
Secession Church.

GB...1..., Rev. Gronaz Bus, Professor of Hebrew and Oriental Literature in the
University of New York.

4D.B.,.... Bev. James D. Borixa, Abbot Resident, Theological Seminary, Andover,
United States,

KAC.....K. A. Cnmpwen, Doctor and Professor of Theology in the University of
Giessen.

&D........ Rev. 8 Davipson, LL.D., Professor of Biblical Literature and Oriental
Languages in the Lancashire Independent College.

BD........ Rev. Bexzamix Davies, D.D.


iF.D,..... Rev. J. F. Dewzam, M.A,, St. John’s College, Cambridge, F.B.S.
.W.D...... Rev. J. W. Donan, LL.D., Association Secretary of the Choreh Missionary


Society.

SS Rev. Joux Eavre, LLD., Professor of Biblical Literature to the United
Secession Church. .

GHA y.B.G.H. A. vow Ewatp, Doctor and Professor of Theology in the University
of Tiibingen.


P.W.G...... Rev. F. W. Gorcs, M.A., Trinity College, Dublin.
HACH...H. A.C. Havemmice, Doctor and Professor of Theology in the University


of KGnigsberg.

RW.H......E.W. Hexceraenena, Doctor and Professor of Theology in the University
of Berlin,

Ja... Rev. J. Jacons, of the University of Berlin.

Ry,


seeoee.. Rev. R, Jameson, M.A., Editor of ‘ Paxton’s Ulastrations of Scripture.’
RAL.....Rev. EA. Lawagnce, Haverhill, United States.
; A


wi LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS.


INITIALS, NAMES.
RL......... Rev. Ronerr Lzz, D.D., Edioburgh.


_P.BL....... Faepgaicx R. Less, Ph. D., F.S.S.A.; Editor of ‘The Trath-Seeker,’ &e.


EM. ......E. Micuetson, Ph. D. of the University of Heidelberg.

P.M. ....... Perer Meaans, Author of ‘ Tirosh,’ &.

N.M. .......Rgv. N. Morey, M.A., Author of ‘Biblical Theology,’ and Translator of
* Rosenmiiller’s Biblical Geography.’

FP. W.N......F. W. Newman, late Fellow of Balliol College, Oxford.

J.N.........d0HN NicHoson, B.A., Oxford, Ph. D., Tiibingen, Author of ‘ An Accoant


of the Establishment of the Fatemite Dee Translator of ‘ Ewald’s
Hebrew Grammar.’


-W. A.N...... W. A. Nicnorson, M.D.


J.P. P....... Bev. Joun Parres Porrer, M.A., Oriel College, Oxford.


B.P......... Rev. Bapen Powe t, M.A., F.R.S, F.G.S, Savilian Professor of Geometry
in the University of Oxford.


J. F.B......-d3. F. Royiz, M.D., F.R.S., F.L.S., F.G.S., Member of the Royal Asiatic
Societies of Calcutta and Londou; Professor of Materia Medica and


Therapeutics in King’s College, London.


J. E. B.......J. E. Ryzanp, Translator of ‘ Neander’s Church History,’ and of ceoneehe
Jostin Martyr.’


aria ee Eee es arid C. Hamriton Smita, K.H. and K.W., F.R. and L.S8.,
President of the Devon and Cornwall Natural History Society, &c. &e.


J.P.S....... Rev. J. Pyx Saurrn, D-D., F.RS., F.G.S.


H.8......... Rev. H. Sressina, D.D. of St. John’s College, Cambridge, Author of ¢A
History of the Church,’ &c,


A.T........+ Rev. A. THotucx, Doctor and Professor of Theology in the University of
Halle.


D. W........ Rev. Davin Wetsu, D.D., Professor of Divinity and Church History, New
College, Edinburgh.

L. W........ Rev. Leonarp Woops, D.D., Professor of Theology in the Andover Theo-
logical Seminary, United States.


W.W.....+.. Rev. WiLLIaM Waicur, M.A. and LL.D. of Trinity College, Dublin,
Translator of ‘ Seiler’s Biblical Hermeneutics.’


.


The initials of the Contributors of the following articles have boon inadvertently omitted -—
J.B. B., Rowan Eurirz; Tapzrnactss, Frasr ov.—H. A.C. H., Genzsis.—J. F. R,
Srrozrs; Srornax; Tamar, 1: Tzu Tarz; Tinrsan, 1.—W. W., Jups:. Nasvomap-
MRERAR.


"


PREFACE


Tux present work was undertaken with the design of providing the public with
& more complete view of the existing state of Biblical literature, both at home
and abroad, than it previously possessed. It was felt that former works of the
kind, numerous as they are, and useful as some of them may be considered,
Were built too exclusively upon the ‘old learning’ of Calmet and others; and
that some recent attempts to give a more modern character to such under-
takings had been made too entirely from home materials, and had too ex-
clusive reference to such external facts and circumstances as travellers and
antiquarians offer, to meet the demands of the present time. The work, there-
fore, owes its origin to the Editor’s conviction of the existence of a great body
of untouched materials, applicable to such a purpose, which the activity of
Modern research and the labours of modern criticism had accumulated, and
Which lay invitingly ready for the use of those who might know how to avail
ves of such resources.
It was no task for one man to gather in this great harvest. And as the


‘Stound seemed, for the most part, common to all Christian men, it appeared


desirable that assistance should be sought from a sufficient number of competent
Biblical scholars and others, without distinction of country or religious party,
that the field might be the more thoroughly swept, and the greater wealth of
lustration obtained, from men of different lines of reading and various habits of
thought, The prompt manner in which the call of the Editor for co-operation
has been met by the numerous eminent Biblical scholars and naturalists, whose
Tames appear in the List of Contributors, has been among the highest gratifica
tions arising to him out of this undertaking; while the ability, the laborious
Teearch, the care and the punctuality, with which they have discharged the
Tarious tasks confided to them, demand his warmest acknowledgments.

The only drawback likely to arise from co-operation so, various and exten
tive, lay in the probability that considerably different views might be manifested
in the several articles; and that, too, on subjects on which every reader ‘s
Wkely to have formed some opinion of his own, and will be disposed to regard as

a2


a PREFACE,


erroneous or suspicious every opinion which may not entirely coincide with that


which he has been accustomed to entertain. In this lay the sole danger and
the greatest difficulty of such an undertaking. Here was to be a book which
no one man, and not even a very few men, could produce; and which
the public would yet probably expect to exhibit as much unity, not only of
plan and execution, but of opinion and sentiment, as if it were the produce
of a single mind. The Editor, however, felt that he could not undertake
to find forty independent thinkers among whom there should be no visible
diversities of sentiment. But he thought that much might be done in pro-
ducing eo near an approach to uniformity on matters of real importance as
would satisfy every reasonable reader; especially when he should come to con-
sider that the choice lay between taking the work with such diversities as
necessarily arose from the extent of the co-operation employed in its produc-
ion, or of altogether dispensing with the immense amount of Biblical informer
tion which it embodies. Entire uniformity, if attainable at all, could only
pave been attained at the eost of providing a very different and greatly in-
fexior work ; and a work thus different and inferior could not have established
p distinction sufficiently marked from all previous undertakings of the kind to
justify its production.

It has not consisted with the Editor’s idea of the functions he had under-
taken, to dictate to the Contributors the views they were to take of the subjects
intrusted to them, or to set up his own views as the standard of correct opinion.
This he must have done, had he made it his rule to insert only such statements
as exactly coincided with his own sentiments, or to exclude altogether whatever
views of particular subjects might differ from those with which his own mind
is satisfied. The Contributors were expected to abstain from introducing the
opinions peculiar to their nation or to their religious communion; but they
have heen under slight restraint with respect to the conclusions which they
might form as independent thinkers and reasoners, competent by their attain-
ments and studies to form a judgment worthy of attention on the various matters
coming under their consideration. In conformity with no other principle could
this work have been produced ; and such being the nature of its execution, it
became necessary that the initials of the several writers should be affixed to
their contributions, that the reader might know to whom to ascribe the respon-
sibility of the particular articles, and that no one contributor might be deemed
responsible for any other articles than those to which his signature is annexed.
The Editor also, who has provided all those articles which bear no signature
(exeept those adverted to at the end of the List of Contributors), does not hold
himself responsible for any statements or opinions advanced in any other articles
than these. Some of them exhibit opinions in which he is not able to concur,
but which have nevertheless been furnished by persons whom he could not
yegard as less competent than himself to arrive at just conclusions.


Yet although gome axplanation is due to those who may possibly find in this


pe ea


) ee neta eee cee el


PREFACE. &
werk, in a few articles, opinions tn which they cannot agree, and views from
which thetr owndiffer ; it is right that the persons engaged in producing it should
Chim for ita judgment founded not upon particular articles, but upon its general
charester, which was intended to be, and is, in accordance with the known standards
of orthodox opinton in this country, es may be ascertained by reference to those
leading articles which may be regarded as stamping the character of any work
it which they are found. In fact, a Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature, as
Gntinct from Theology ‘properly #o called, offers less oceasion than might at
first sight appear for the obtrusion of those matters of doctrine and disciptinie
which Christian men regard with differences of opinion which the Editor would
fuin believe to be less wide and less important than is too generally supposed.
In the dispensations of Divine Providence, he has been by physical. privations
shut out from many of those external influences and associations which tend to
magnify euch differences, and to deepen into impassable gulfs the space which lies
hetween them. He has not found this condition a disadvantage in conducting
the work which he has now the happiness of having brought to a conclusion;
tor will he venture to regard that condition as an unmitigated evil, #f, through
the complete isolation in which he has thereby been placed, he has been enabled,
Without any compromise of the views he conscientiously entertas and which
lis own writings will sufficiently indicate, to realize more extensive co-operation
fn this undertaking than under pastoral or official connection with any religious
denomination he could expect to have attained. It is believed that the English
hinguage has no other book which eminent foreign scholars have co-operated
With our own in producing; and it is certain that it possesses no other work
Which embodies the combined labours of writers who, indeed, are of different
Communions here, and are known by different names among men, but who have
the mme hope in this world, and but one name in heaven.

The nature of the present work, and the place which its conductors desire tt
thould occupy in the Biblical Literature of this country, will be best under-
ood by a sketch of the whole field in which that place is marked out. This
Will show not only what is here attempted, but how much of this wide and

field remains open to the same process of cultivation. For this
ketch we are indebted to the able pen of Dr. Credner, who has enriched this
Work by several valuable contributions, and by whom it has been prepared
“pressly for the place which it here occupies. It will be understood by most
Yeaders that the term Theological Encyclopedia is technically employed on the
Continent, and is beginning to be employed in this country, to describe the
pas field of Sacred Literature, of which Biblical Literature, strictly 20 called,

& part.


“ A comprehensive arrangement of all that belongs to theregion of lum
toovledge has—not quite properly—been indlested by the term Encyclopedia,
bey i» chery rasdela or cyxindwoc wadela. Another term, Wissenschaft?


x - PREFACE.


Kunde (knowledge of science), has also been applied to that arrangement in
Germany, when it includes likewise an internal and scientific development of
the systems and subjects under discussion. In our title, Cyclopedia of Biblical
Literature, it is obvious that the word ‘ Cyclopeedia’ cannot be taken in the more
extended acceptation of the term, but merely so far as the Bible and Theology
are concerned. As the peculiar province of Biblical Encyclopedia can only be
clearly understood and defined in its connection with Theological Encyclopedia,

-it may be requisite to describe at length the meaning of the latter and more
comprehensive term.

But even the notion of Theological Encyclopeedia in general, is yet of too
extended range for our purpose, as it might be supposed to comprehend a sys-
tematic development of all that refers to the knowledge of God generally ; while
here cognizance can be only taken of some particular branch of that knowledge,
namely, of that belonging to Christianity alone. Our notice must therefore be
limited to the Encyclopedia of Christian theology. But Christian theology
forms: only a special and limited part of general theology. The former, in
endeavouring to comprehend scientifically the Christian religion, deals altogether
with & subject of experience. For the Christian religion, or the Christian know-
ledge of God, is not innate and constitutional in man, or something existing in
his mind @ priori, but is a religion connected with Jesus Christ as its revealer.
Christian theology is thus a positive or historical science, which can be traced
from its origin at a known point of time.

Now, nothing more intimately concerns the spirit of Christian theology than the
solution of the question, By what standard are we to determine the tenets of the
Christian religion, or from what source must they be deduced? It is in the solu-
tion of this important question that the adherents of the Christian religion divide
themselves into two large bodies; the one considers the Scriptures, emanating
from the Holy Ghost, as the first and last sourcé of knowledge for Christian
truth,—a source, however, not bounded by time and space, but continuing to flow,
and pour forth new religious truths within the range of the Church formed under
the guidance of the Holy Spirit. This doctrine is usually expressed in the follow-
ing terms: the Catholic Church assumes a double outward source of the know-
ledge of religious truth, namely, the Apostolic, both Scriptural and traditional.
The other great religious party makes a very marked distinction between the
revealed doctrines laid down in the Scriptures and the later views and develop-
ment of the same by the Church ; in other words, they distinguish between Scrip-
tural and traditional revelation. Their leading principle is that the Christian
religion can be derived pure and unalloyed from the Bible alone; and they
therefore reject, as unnecessary and unauthorised, all professed sources of reli-
gious knowledge which are foreign to the Holy Scriptures. As Christians of
the latter oneegy we here take the Scriptures as the only external source of
revelation for religious truth; and in this point of view we also trace the
outlines of theological science.


Sig” ota ete te, hag)


. PREFACE, |


:. Thus considered, a little examination of the subject leads us to discover in it
-8 threefold principle :—1. An eternal, ever-prevailing, and therefore immutable,
-Christian principle ; 2. Another, established upon -this positive foundation ;
.tad 8. One that is developing itself out of this. Our business is, therefore, not
-With a revealed doctrine which has long since been completed, which had lived,
~lost its spirit, and died ; but with one which, like the human mind itself, is conti-
nually expanding in youthful vigour—one which,-when correctly comprehended,
exhibits a mutual relationship and equal degree of development with whatever
stage of culture and civilization its adherents, the Christians, may have reached.
Thus it has happened that in process of time many truths which must ever be
most ewential to the Christian, have been variously and differently understeod
and interpreted. Every thinking Christian must strive to bring his religious
opinions and actions into a possible, perfect, and continued harmony with a cor-
rect view of the doctrines contained in the Bible. Christian Protestantism is
the spiritual advancement of humanity at the side of the Bible; and the task of
Christian theology must thus be to show, not only how far that end has been
timed at in past times and until now, but also in what manner man is to strive
after it in time to come, and to indicate the means by which the teachings of
the Scriptures are to be exhibited in their true unison with every advancement
Which mankind can make in knowledge and civilization.

It is thus evident that Christian theology stands in the closest relation to
all the departments of human knowledge, and more especially to philosophy, to
Which, when daly applied, Christianity has ever been much indebted,—while it
has caused her great damage and injury whenever its natural and necessary
boundaries have been overpassed ; and it is not less clear that the efforts of the
theologian must, above all, be directed towards a due comprehension and a pro-
Btessively seasonable development and advancement of the always living Christian
*Pirit contained in the Scriptural doctrines. This task pre-supposes a proper un-
derstanding of the Scriptures. Christian theology must, therefore, in the first
instance, try to solve scientifically the questions— What is meant by Holy Writ?
How have its doctrines been understood until now? And by what laws are we
© proceed so as to arrive at a right understanding of their scope and spirit ?
The results of these inquiries, systematically obtained, form a complete science
in themselves. As Christianity, however, is not limited to abstract speculations,
bet has for its chief aim the enkindling and diffusion of true piety, in thought
®ad in practice, Christian theology has further to display the means by which
this Christian conviction may be on the one hand called forth in the soul of man
“ed diffused abroad, and on the other quickened and defended. Christian theo-
logy is, finally, required to set forth the course which Christianity has pursued
former ages, and to describe its past vicissitudes and present condition.

The foundation of Christian theology must thus be sought in the Serip-"

fares: and, divesting ourselves of all prepossessions and hypotheses, it will, in _
the first instance, be necessary for us to obtain a clear insight as to tm


wii PREFACE.

‘olrpenatamecs aad the tinies in which the series of books which constitxite the
Meriptuses come into existence. This leads us to the first branch of theological
seeience, smmely, to Bipiican Axcus#oLocy, or BisiicaL ANTIQUITIES.
‘Biblical Archwology, usually confined within too narrow limits, is that part of
theological science which tries to unravel the various circumstances and com-
4itions which have exercised more or less influence upon the composition of the
Sexiptural books. Its object is, therefore, to treat of :-—


1. The nature of the country in which those books have originated ; to this
branch of inquiry belong Physical Geography and Natural History. By
the latter we understand not only (a common mistake) a systematic survey
of the natural productions, but also and chiefly an enumeration of the
peculiar features of their origin, growth, continuance, cultivation, use, etc.
It is, for instance, quite immaterial what place the date-palms or balsam-
shrubs occupy in the system—such investigations being of no importance
for the understanding of the Bible, the writers of which have disre-
garded those points; while, on the other hand, the peculiarities of the
locality where the palm-tree stands, its external appearance at the dif-
ferent seasons of the year, its growth, fertility, use, etc.—in short, all that
particularly strikes the sense of the beholder, have frequently exercised
considerable influence on the inspired writers; and these sources of
external impressions on the senses and mind of man, are to be par-
ticularly considered and noticed by Biblical Archsology,

2. The inhabitants of those countries; their peculiar character, manners,
customs, way of living, and their intercourse with other nations.

8. The vicissitudes of their people,—consequently, the history of the
Hebrews and Jews, down to that time when the last books of the Scrip-
tures were written.

4. The politico-religious institutions, the civil and geographical order and
division of the land and the people; and

5. The mental development of the Hebrews and Jews, the regulations
founded on it, and the degree of progress which the arts and sciences had
attained among them.


Biblical Archeology may be further divided into two classes—that of the
Old Testament and that of the New Testament: the former may again be sub-
divided into the Hebrew and the Jewish archeology.


As soon as the foundation for Biblical researches is laid by the help of
Biblical Archseology, the theologian then turns to the solution of the second main
question in theology :—What is meant by the Scriptures? How and when
have they arisen? In what form do they lie before us? The answer to all
these questions is the object of Brsi1caL INTRODUCTION, or, more correctly, of
the History of Holy Writ. It is divided into Introduction to the Old Testament
end Inteodnetion to the New Testament. It must render an aceount—


ee eee ee ees


PREFACE. xii


1. Of the origin of the individual books recefved into the sacsed canes;
not omitting to notice at the same time the various views that have been
entertained on that point: by critics of all ages, as well as those particular
opinions which are seemingly the more correct.


2. Of the origin of the collection of the books of Scripture as the repo-
sitory of Christian knowledge, or of religion ; constituting the History
of the Canon.

8. Of the spread of the Scriptures by transcriptions, translations, and

acer rae :

4. Of the vicissitudes and fate of the original text ; forming the History
Of the Text ; and—

5. Of the various motives which have led to various modes of under
sanding the Bible; being the History of Interpretation.


We next come to that important part of Theological Kacyelopesdia cone
weted with the question—What precepts have been regarded as Christian
doctrines from the introduction of Christianity to the present day ?

The answer to this important question is given by Docreing-Hreronr,*
Which, in a less limited sense than that in which the term is usually taken, points
tet the peenliar doctrines which have from time to tinee been received as artiebes
ef Christian belief. But asa variety of opinions with regard ta the essentials
of the Christian religion has arisen, not only among the various and difitwent
tects as separate bodies, but likewise at sundry times among the mentbere of
¢ven one and the same sect or party, Doctrine-History must necessarily imchode
all the peculiar features of schismatic views, their origin and history, the causes
of their rise and gradual development, as well as their connection with the
Scriptures, from which they all claim to be derived, and by which they must

be tried.

A principle that is given out by a Christian sect as an essentially Christian
doctrine, becomes an article of creed, a dogma (3éypa = 6 3édocrat).

A Dogma is understood to be the doctrine of a particular party or sect,
although that party may agree with the other sects in respect of other doctrines
of Christianity, and must necessarily agree with them in regard to the spirit
and central point of the Christian religion. Such dogmas, or articles of creed,
are the fruit of a certain way of thinking peculiar to the age in which they arise,
and obtain clerical importance when received either into the system of Symbols
or into the public liturgy. All symbols must therefore only be considered as
belonging to both a certain party and a certain time, and are thus not to be ranked
Maing the eternal and universal articles of faith. The exhibition of a finished
Quien of doctrines lies beyond the range of Symbolik ; it sets forth merely the


Dogmer-geschichts, ‘history of doctrines” We have-no corresponding English
\agug, snd herbs propors that of Dectrine-History, mae


xiv PREFACE,


maost essential truths, the fundamental elements, leaving the farther scientific or
systematic details to the sphere of Dogmatik. Dogmatik is therefore imme-
diately linked to the doctrines established by a certain party of Christians. An
universal Christian Dogmatik is not to be hoped for, so long as there are dif-
ferent parties among Christians. We should therefore have to range Symbol,
Dogma, and Dogmatik together, under the comprehensive head of Doctrine-
History. Such history ought, however, not to be limited to actual dogmas
alone, but ought likewise to embrace many of the more loose and unembodied
doctrinal views and speculations; partly on account of the influence which
they may have had upon the rise and reception of some embodied dogmas,
and partly because history shows that some doctrinal views advanced but
ejected in earlier times, have, perhaps after the lapse of some centuries, been
reproduced, received, and sanctioned. A comparative survey of the various
dogmas of the different sects or church parties is the object of Comparative
Dogmatik ; though it has hitherto limited its views chiefly to bai dogmas of the
principal sects alone.

It is greatly to be desired that the scope of Caan Dogmatik should
be so extended as to embrace the collection of those dogmas which have, from
time to time, prevailed within the church of one and the same party—as, e. g.,
of the Roman Catholics, with special regard to the variety of opinions enter-
tained by this church on some doctrinal points, from her foundation in the
second century, in comparison with those held in the fourth, fifth, and sixth
centuries. This function of Doctrine-History has been too much confined to the
established doctrines within one church-party alone ; and this limitation is almost
unavoidable with those sects which, like the Roman Catholics, look at all other
sects as infidels,—a judgment surely as erroneous as it is partial and uncourteous.


Curistran Moras is, properly speaking, only the practical part of
Dogmatik, and was, indeed, formerly always exhibited only in its connection
therewith. Its province is to show the influence which the Christian dogmas
exercise upon the dispositions of the heart, or in what degree those dogmas
may be brought into action upon the will of man. What, in our recent times,
has often been called—especially on the part of some German Protestant theo-
logians—dogmatics or doctrines of faith, without attaching to them any parti-
cular meaning of a sect or church-party, partakes mostly of a middle view ;
between church dogmatik, Biblical theology, and religious philosophy, wavering
between all, and belonging to none.


Paraisrics* and Parroxoey f seem to lie beyond the circle by which we
have defined the limits of theological science. For the notion attached to the
term ‘ Fathers of the Church’ is not universally acknowledged by all Christian
sects, and least so among Protestants, who consider it a contradiction to the


* Paratsrics, the literary character and history of the Fathers.
¢ Parnoxocy, the doctrinal and ethical systems founded on their writings. .


PBEFACE. - xv-


prineiple by which the Scriptures are recognised as the only source of the
knowledge of religious truth. ; :

The immense mass of manifold and various tenets which have prevailed
as Christian doctrines at different times and in different countries, ever since the
introduction of Christianity, makes it evidently impossible to ascertain what is
real Christian doctrine, and what is not, if we do not take the Scrrprurss as the
only guide in this labyrinth. The science, therefore, which discloses to us
the tenets of Holy Writ we call Brstican Exxcrsis, or INTERPRETATION. It
involves the difficult task of discovering the true meaning attached to the words ’
by the writer. To be able to do this, a thorough knowledge of ‘the language in |
Which the author has written down his thoughts is indispensable; consequently,
a profound knowledge of Hebrew for the Old Testament, and of Greek for the
New Testament, is of the utmost necessity, and is one of the first requisites, in an
expounderof the Bible. But as the Sacred Writings have greatly suffered from,
and have been disfigured by the liberties of transcribers and emendators, it is
needful to try to discover or restore the real words of the original text ; and the -
xience employed in this task is known by the name of Brsiicai Criticism. By
means of criticism and philological research the sense of the Biblical writings
may be ascertained, grammatically or philologically. To this mode of exegesis '
Or interpretation is given the name of Grammaticgl Exposition. But although
it is most essential to correct interpretation of the Scriptures that the text should :
be grammatically considered, yet it is equally undeniable that philological
_ @xegesis is by itself insufficient to develope completely the meaning of the
"ered writers in the words which they employ. To be able to do this completely
ind satisfactorily, it is necessary that the interpreter should possess the means of
transporting himself into the times and into the spirit of the ages in which those
Writers lived ; or, in other words, that he should be well acquainted with the
historical conditions of those ages, and with the modes of thought which then
Prevailed ; as well as with the circumstances affecting the particular position
of the individual writer of every sacred book, and of the people whom he
‘ldrewed, Biblical Archeology and Biblical Introduction are the proper in-
“ruments for the accomplishment of that object, which we call the Historical
Interpretation of the Scriptures; the ¢rue and perfect Biblical Interpretation is
thus comprised in the category of GRAMMATICO-HISTORICAL EXEGESI8,—&
term implying conditions which are hardly ever found in an equal degree of
Profundity in one and the same interpreter.

A more easy, partial, and objectionable species of interpretation is that
tilled DoomaticaL Excess, which does not limit itself to an independent
inquiry into the meaning of the sacred writings, but attempts rather to
determine the sense of the text by arbitrary dogmas. Equally objectionable,
tnd still more arbitrary, is the process of the ALLEGORICAL mode of expo-

tition, which tortures the Biblical sense into figurative meanings ; and which
Tuly fails to evince the essential difference that exists between the mode of


xvi, PREFACE.


thinking in the author and the interpreter, or between the ancient and
modern times. :

Hzemenwotics establishes the laws by which-the interpreter is to proeeed
in.his labours. Its relation to Interpretation is that of theory to practice. The
suggestions which have led to the formation of Biblical Hermeneutics were
given chiefly by Dogmatical Exegesis.

The requisites of theology are, however, not confined to the mere endea-
vour to discover by means of correct exegesis the true meaning of Holy Writ,
or of particular passages in the New Testament; but the object of theology as
a.acience is also and chiefly to collect the various religious views and doc-
trines dispersed in the Scriptures, and to compare and unite them into an entire
system; aud this science, aided by exegesis, is called Bisxica, TuroLocy,
which is the true corner-stone of Biblical Exegesis, The inquiries involved
in it are rendered difficult and intricate by the fact that the Scriptures were
cemposed by various authors, and at different, and often at very long intervals.
Biblieal Theology must in the first instance be divided into two parts, that of
the Old Testament and that of the New Testament. But at the time of the
rise of Christianity and the writing of the New Testament, the Jews had
already formed a theology of their own, founded upon what may be called
exegetical explanations of the religious views set forth in the Old Testament,
and which, although not essentially wrong in its principles, was considerably at
variance with historical truth. This system of Jewish theology represents the
religious opinions which prevailed in the time of Christ, in consequence of the
peculiar views which the Jews entertained of the Old Testament writings and
of the revelations contained in them ; and it therefore supplies an intermediate
link which is often of more direct use to us for understanding the theology of the
New Testament, than the theology of the Old Testament viewed in its purer
and more simple resulta. Neither the Biblical theology of the Old Testament,
nor the Jewish theology in general, can be of binding force upon Christians,
except in so far as either may be borne out by the Biblical theology of the New
Testament. The former bear about the same relation to the latter as Biblical
archeology does to the exegesis of the New Testament.

If the essence of Christianity be made a foundation for farther philosophical
speculations, we arrive then at CurisTiAN ReLicious-PxiLosoruy, which em-
bodies into its system some but by no means all the doctrines of Scripture.

There have always been individuals, ever since Christianity has existed, who
have particularly employed ‘themselves in diffusing, enlivening, animating,
and defending the Christian faith; and in most instances the Church, as an
independent community, has made the conservation of the Christian interests
the particular obligation of some of her members. Thus has arisen a science
for itself, directed towards the care and preservation of Christianity, and
usually called PRACTICAL THEOLOGE. ‘The province of this science is of a


PREFACE. ‘avi


1. A guidance to the right method of calling forth Christian convictton
either in those who had hitherto been attached to another religion,—
Prosetytism, Missionary-sTup1Ees; or in those who, although
Christians, are still in want of Christian instruction,—Carecuerics, |


2. The preservation and religious animation of the Church community by
means either of public worship itself,—Lrirureics; or of edifying dis-
courses during the game,— HomiLerics ; or of that peculiar agency which
has its sphere in domestic and private life,—PasToraL THEOLOGY.


8, Defence of the Christian Church, by diverting the attacks made either
against her rights, CHURCH RIGHTS; of against her sublime truths,—
APoLoGerics.


Finally, Christianity having already existed ica many centuries as a re-
ligious institution, it must be for every man, asa man, and more particularly
for the thinking Christian, of the highest importance to learn the origin of
Christianity, its propagation and vicissitudes until our present times, and the ex-
tent and nature of the influence which it has exercised upon its votaries. The
science which gives information on all these points is called Caurcu History,
describing all the known facts belonging to the total process of development of
Christianity. This science is of such an enormous extent as to compel its division
into several departments, which have also been variously treated. Such are the
History of the Spread of Christianity ; History of Church Doctrine ; History of
the Moral Influence of Christianity ; History of Religious Confusions and Fa-
Naticiems arising out of Christianity ; History of Christian Civil Constitutions ;
History of the Relations of the Church to the State ; Ecclesiastical Antiquities er
Archeology ; History of some Christian Sects, such as, History of the Jewish
Christians ; History of the Catholics; History of the Protestant Church, of
the Presbyterians, Methodists, etc.; Church History of some Countries and
Nations; History of Christian Literature. In that part of ‘Church History
Which describes the vicissitudes of the Church in times long gone by, the question
at last suggests itself, What is the present state of Christianity in the world ?
The science which—far from being as yet sufficiently cultivated—solves this
important question, goes by the name of Cuurcn Srarisrica, and with it we
Tay regard the sphere of THEOLOGICAL ENCYCLOPZDIA as completed.

It cannot lie within the province of the present work as a Cyclopedia of
Biblical Literature to embrace in the form of a dictionary all the subjects thus
described as appertaining to Christian theology. Passing by systematic theology
(which is the object of dogmatic history), practical theology, and church-history,
the work comprises those branches of positive knowledge which are indispensable
for the understanding of the Bible, and its historical interpretation, including,
therefore, Biblical Archeology and Biblical Introduction, but leaving the appli-
CAlion itself, together with grammatical criticism, to the department of Biblical

The treatment of these matters in the form here adopted has


wri . PREFACE.


certainly the disadvastage of somewhat obscuring the survey and impeding the
. systematic development of the whole; but this disadvantage is greatly counter-
balanced by the benefits arising from the easy and convenient use which in
this form can be made of the abundant and various materials belonging to the
subjects discussed : a dictionary of such a character has, moreover, this important
advantage, that the subjects embraced in its plan can be handled with such
fulness of criticism as the present age requires.

Attempts were early made to exhibit information pertaining tu the Bible
under the alphabetical arrangement of a dictionary. Of the many works of
that kind, deserving notice, are: Hierolexicon reale collectum, moderante. Ad.
Rechenbergio, Lipsiz et Francf., 1714, 2 vols.; Aug. Calmet, Dictionnaire
Historique, Critique, Chronologique, Géographique, et Littérale de la Bible,
Paris, 1722, 2 vols.,. and (most complete) 1730, 4 vols. fol.; Dictionnaire
Universelle, Dogmatique, Canonique, Historique, et Chronologique des
Sciences Ecclésiastiques, et avec des Sermons abrégés des plus célebres Orateurs
Chrétiens, par le P. R. Richard et autres Religieux Dominicaing, etc., Paris,
1760-64, 5 vols.; W. F. Hezel, Biblisches Real-Lexicon, tiber Biblische, und
die Bibel erlaiiternde alte Geschichte, Erdbeschreibung, Zeitrechnung, etc.,
Leipz., 1783-85, 3 vols., 4to.; F.G. Leun, Bibl. Encyclopedie, oder exeye-
tisches Real-worterbuch iiber die Simmtlichen Hiilfswissenschaftern des Aus-
legers, nach den Bediirfnissen jetziger Zeit, Durch eine Gesellschaft von
Gelehrten. Gotha, 1793-98, 4 vols., 4to.

Although the work of Calmet was the most learned and practically useful
of all, the partial standing point of the author rendered it unsuited to the
enlarged demands of the present age; which, with the superficiality and
want of plan in later works, had brought performances of this kind into some
disrepute ; and it was reserved for George Benedict Winer, a theologian of
Leipsic, to restore them to their former credit by his Biblisches Real-worter-
buch, Leip., 1820, 2 vols., 8vo., of which a second and improved edition was
published in 1833-38. The sphere of that work is, however, too narrowly
drawn, the critical treatment in it is of a very unequal character, and many of
the subjects examined in its pages, especially in the department of natural his
tory, have in reality no relation whatever to the Bible. Similar publications
by various other writers have been produced on the Continent, but they cannot
be regarded as exhibiting any claims to scientific criticism, or well-considered
arrangement.”


To particularise the works of the kind produced in our own country might
appear invidious. It may suffice to say that they have all in their day served
purposes of more or less usefulness, for which they are no longer available. All
that has been done till now has been in various degrees based upon Calmet’s great
work; and the present is the only production which can be regarded as even
professing to draw its materials from original sources of information. Calmet’s


PREFACE. sie


own work:wis tompbsed: in a great degree out'of.the materials already used. by
hich in'the sutes, dissertations, and prefaces of his great work, the Commensgire
Litérale; The first-trandlation of it appeared in 1732, in three large and costly
folio: volumes, exeeuted by two clergymen, Samuel d’Oyley, M.A., and Joha
Colson, M:A., F.R.S., the former of whom ttanslated to the letter. M, and the
other to the end -of- the book. This translation formed the great treasury
from which were drawn the materials of the large number of lesser Dictionaries
of the Bible which subsequently appeared. These exhibited little more diversity
from each other thaw such as naturally arises where’ persons of different habits of
mind form different abridgments of the same work, the original or-new, matter
being chiefly exhibited: by the ‘interspersion of doctrinal articles in support ‘of
‘the particular views ‘which the compiler entertained. At length a new edition of
Caimet was undertaken by Mr. Charles Taylor, and appeared in 1795 in four, and
in later editions in five, quarto volumes. ‘This was a very eccentric pertormance,
composed thus:-—two volumes consisted of an abridgment of Calmet ; one volume
of engravings; and two volumes of ‘ Fragments.’ ‘These'fragments contained a


sprinkling of useful matter drawn from histories end travels; but three-fourths.


of the whole consist of singularly wild and fanciful speculations respecting
mythotogy, ethnology, natural history, antiquities, and sundry other matters,
ud are replete with unsound learning, outrageous etymologies, and the vagaries
of an undisciplined intellect. Calmet, thus transformed, and containing as
much of the editor as of the original author, has in its turn formed the basis
of the Biblical’ Dictionaries which have since appeared, including a very /pains-
taking digest of the more usefal parts of Taylor’s matter incorporated - with
the Dictionary under one ‘alphabet, the whole abridged into one volume
royal 8¢0., which appeared in 1832. ‘This work’ was in the same year re-
Produced in America under the supervision of Dr. Robinson, who made some
few but valuable additiows. to particular articles. For the.sake'of' these addi-
tions, reference has in the present work been occasionally made to that edition,
but mdre in the ‘early than in the latter part, where the sources of such additions
Were rather soifzht in the German authorities from ;which they weresfpund
to be derived. This is the sole assistance which has been obtained from
any edition of Calmet; and it is so trifling that no notice would have
been taken of it here, were it not that Calmet’s name has been in this
Country so much used in connection with such undertakings, that many readers
Would, without this explanation, be disposed to confound the present work with
the numerous compilations based upon or made up out of his folios. Of
Winer’s Biblisches Real-wérterbuch more frequent use has, in some classes of
tubjects, been made; but rather as an index than as a direct source of materials ;
and not to any extent which ean impair the claim of this work to be derived
from original sources of information, rather than from other productions of the
“ne description.

The Editor cannot but regard with peculiar satisfaction the ample refer


-


em a ee ee


me cee a


er


ences '%6 bebks which eceur in almost every article, md which indicate ¢e ‘the
reader the means of more extensive inquiry ito the various subjects which
ave been noticed with indispensable brevity in this work. The numerous
references to Scripture will greatly assist its chief use and design—the illus-
‘tration of the sacred volume. It is believed that the articles in the depart-
ments of Biblical Inrropuctrion and Carricism embrace a body of informa-
tion, respecting the books of Scripture and sacred criticism, such as no work
of the kind in any language has hitherto contained. The Naruran History
of Scripture has now for ‘the first time been examined, and as far as possible
settled, not by mere scholars ignorant of natural history, but by natoralicts
of acknowledged eminence. The Scripture Gzocrapuy has, by the help
ef Dr. Robinson’s invaluable Biblical Researches in Palestine, and of other
publications less known in this country, assumed in the present work a
greatly altered and much more distinct aspect. The ARCHROLOGIOAL arti-
cles exhibit an extent of illustration and research which will tend greatly to
elucidate the obscurities which the subjects necessarily involve. ‘The History
has been discussed under the influence of those broad principles whieh .con-
‘atitute its philosophy; and in this, as well as in the Biocraray, it has .not
‘been fergotten that while actions are always to be judged by the muntable
‘standard of right and wrong which the word of God has established, the judge
‘ments which we pass upon men must be qualified by considerations of age,
country, situation, and other incidental circumstances.

It is hoped that with such claims to attention, and embodying, as it docs,
the. results of great labour and much anxious thought, the work now offered to
the public will receive indulgent consideration for the minute errors, defects,
and perhaps discrepancies, from which the Editor dares not hope that it is wholly
exempt, and which are perhape inevitable in a work executed by so many
different hands, and involving so large a body of references, titles, and proper
Dames. 3

JOHN KITTO.


®


Woking, Oct. 18th, 1845,


CYCLOPZDIA


BIBLICAL LITERATURE.


AARON.


AARON (FI8, etymology and signification
eaknown; Sept. *Aapdy), the eldest son of Am-
tam and Juchebad, of the tribe uf Levi, and
brother of Moses. He was born s.c. 1574
(Hales, a.c. 1730), three years before Moses, and
one year before Pharaoh's edict to destroy the
male children of the Israelites (Exod. v. 20;
ti. 7). His name first occurs in the mysterious
nterview which Moses had with the Lord, who
appearel to him in the burning bush, while he
ket Jethm’s flock in Hozeb. Among other ex-
cuses by which Moses sought to evade the great
commission of delivering Israel, one was that he
cked that persuasive readiness of speech (lite-
nally was ‘not a man of words’) which appeal
to bim essential to such an undertaking. But he
¥as reminded that his brother Aaron in
‘hich degre the endowment which he deemed so
Needful, and could therefore speak in his name
and on his behalf. During the forty years’ ab-
fence of Moses in the land of Midian, Aaron
Mariel a woman of the tribe of Judah.
tamed Elisheba (or Elizabeth), who had born
‘ him four sons, Nadab, Abihu, Eleazer, and
I mar; and Eleazer had, before the return of
“s, become the father of Phinehas (Exod.
vL 4.5),
Pursuant fo an intimation from God, Aaron
Fent into the wilderness to meet his longexiled
eee and conduct him back to Egypt. After
Y Yeats of separation they met and embraced
Sch other at the mount of Horeb. When they
sae in Goshen, Aaron, who appears to have been
tll known to the chiefs of Israel, introduced his
r to them, and assisted him in opening and
Soloreing the great commission which had been
feed tohiin. In the subsequent transactions,
iy te first interview with Pharaoh till after
delivered nation had the Red Sea,
“tn appears to have been almost always pre-
wat With his more illustrious brother, assisting and
i peotting him; and no separate act of his own
ie ‘This co-operation was ever after-
fa ‘taintained. Aaron and Hur were present
the hill frum which Moses surveyed the battle
ich Joshua fouzht with the Amalekites; and
wae long sustained the weary hands upon
oa uplifting the fate of the battle was found
“pend (Exod. xvii. 10-12), Afterwards, when
tah} ascended Mount Sinai to receive the
we of the law, Aaron, with his sons and
the ty of the elders, accompanied him part of
™*Y up, and, as a token of the Divine favour,


AARON.


were permitted to behold afar off the outskirts of
that radiant symbol of the Sacred Presence, which
Moses _was allowed to view more nearly (Exod.
xxiv. 1, 2, 9-11). :

The absence of Moses in the mountain was
prolonged for forty days, during which the people
seem to have looked upon Aaron as their head,
and an occasion arose which first brings the
respective characters of the brothers into real
comparison, and the result fully vindicates the
Divine preference of Moses by showing that,
notwithstanding the seniority and greater elo-
quence of Aaron, he wanted the high qualities
which were essential in the leader of the Israel-
ites, and which were possessed by Moses in a
very eminent degree. The people grew impa-
tient at the protracted stay of their great leader
in the mountain, and at length concluded that he
had perished in the devouring fire that gleamed
upon its top. The result of this hasty conclu-
sion gives us the first intimation of the extent to
which their minds were tainted with the rank
idolatries of Egypt. Reengnising the authority of
their lust chiefs brother, they gathered around
him, and clamorously demanded that he should
provide them with a visible symbolic image of
their God, that they might worship him as other
gods were worshipped. Either afraid to risk the
consequences of a refusal, or imperfectly im-
pressed with the full meaning of the recent and
authoritative prohibition of all such attempts to
represent or symbolize the Divine Being, Aaron
complied with their demand; and with the
ornaments of gold which they freely. offered, cast
the figure of a calf [Can¥, Goren], being, pro-
bably, no other than that of the Egyptian god
Mnevis, whose worship prevailed in Lower
Egypt. However, to tix the meaning of this
image as a symbol of the true God, Aaron was
careful to proclaim a feast to Jehovah for the en-
suing day. On that day the people met to cele
brate the feast, after the fashion of the Egyptian
festivals of the calf-idol, with dancing, with
shouting, and with sports.

Meanwhile Moses had been dismissed from the
mountain, provided with the decalogue, written
‘ by the finger of God,’ on two tablets of stone.
These, as soon as he came sufficiently near to
observe the proceedings in the camp, he cast from
him with such force that they brake in pieces.
His reappearance confounded the multitude, who
quailed under his stern rebuke, and quietly sub-
mitted to see their new-made idol destroyed. For

B


3 AARON.


this sin the population was decimated by sword
and plague. Aaron, when taxed by his brother
for his conduct in this matter, attempted to ex-
cuse himself by casting the whole blame upon
the people, and pleading the necessity of circum-
stances (Exod. xxxii.).

During his long absence in the mountain,
Moses had received instructions regarding the
ecclesiastical establishment, the tabernacle [Ta-
BERNACZ.E], and the priesthood [Priests], which
he soon afterwards proceeded to execute. “Under
the new institution Aaron was to be high-priest,
and his sons and descendants priests; and the
whole tribe to which he belonged, that of Levi,
was set apart as the sacerdotal or learned caste

Levires]. Accordingly, after the tabernacle had
een completed, and every preparation made for
the commencement of actual service, Aaron and
his sons were consecrated by Moses, who anointed
them with the holy oil and invested them with
the sacred garments. The high-priest applied him-
self assiduously to the duties of his exalted office,
and during the period of nearly forty years
that it was filled by him, his name seldom
comes under our notice. But his elevation was
soon followed by a most afilictive event. His
two eldest sons, Nadab and Abihu, were struck
dead for daring, seemingly when in a state of
ial inebriety, to conduct the service of God
man irregular manner, by offering incense with
unlawful tire. On this occasion it was enjoined
that the priests should manifest none of the ordi-
nary signs of mouming for the luss of those who
were so dear to them. To this heavy stroke Aaron
bowed in silence (Lev. x. 1-11).

Aaron would seem to have becn liable to some
fits of jealuusy at the superior influence and au-
thority of his brother; tor he joined in, or at
least sanctioned the invidious conduct of his
sister Miriam [Mrriam], who, after the wife of
Moses had been brought to the camp by Jethro,
became apprehensive for her own position, and
cast reflections upon Moses, much calculated to
damage his influence, on account of his marriage
with a foreigner—always an odious thing among
the Hebrews. For this, Miriam was struck with
temporary leprosy, which brought the high-priest
to a sense of his sinful conduct, and he sought
and obtained forgiveness (Num. xii.).

Some twenty years after (u.c. 1471), when
the camp was in the wilderness of Paran, a for
midable conspiracy was organized against the
sacerdotal authority exercised by Aaron and his
sons, and the civil authority exercised by Moses.
This conspiracy was headed by chiefs of influence
and station—Korah, of the tribe of Levi, and
Dathan and Abiram, of the tribe of Reuben [Ko-
ran]. But the divine appointment was attested
and confirmed by the signal destruction of the
conspirators: and the next day, when the people
assemble: tumultuously and murmured loudly at
the destruction which had overtaken their leaders
and friends, a fierce pestilence broke out among
them, and they fell by thousands on the spot. When
this was seen, Aaron, at the command of Moses,
niled a censer with fire from the altar, and, rush-
ing forward to the point where life had ended and
death had not begun, he stood there, and the plague
was stayed where he stood. This was in fact
another attestation of the Divine appointment ;
and, for its further confirmation, as


AB.


Aaron and his family, the chiefs of the several
tribes were required to deposit their staves, and
with them was placed that of Aaron for the tribe
of Levi. They were all laid up together over
night in the tabernacle, and in the morning it
was found that, while the other rods remained as
they were, that of Aaron had budded, blossomed,
and yielded the fruit of almonds. The rod was

rved in the tabernacle, as an authentic evi-
dence of the divine appointment of the Aaronic
family to the priesthood—which, indeed, does not
a to have been ever afterwards disputed
(Num. xvii. 1).

Aaron was not allowed to enter the Promised
Land, on account of the distrust which he, as
well as his brother, manifested when the rock
was stricken at Meribah (Num. xx. 8-13). His
death indeed occurred very soon after that event.
For when the host arrived at Mount Hor, in
going down the Wady Arabah [Arapan], in
order to double the mountainous territory of Edom,
the Divine mandate came that Aaron, accom-
li by his brother Moses and by his son

leazer, should ascend to the top of that mountain
in the view of all the people; and that he should
there transfer his pontifical robes to Eleazer, and
then die. He was 123 years old when his ca-
reer thus strikingly terminated; and his son and
his brother buried him in a cavern of the moun-
tain (Hor, Mount]. The Israelites moumed
for him thirty days; and on the first day of the
month Ab, the Jews still hold a fast in comme
moration of his death.


AARONITES, the descendants of Aaron, who
served as priests at the sanctuary (Num. iv. 5,
seg. ; 1 Chron. xii. 27; xxvii. 17).


AB (38, father) is found as the first member

of several compound Hebrew proper names, the
etymology and meaning of which may be ex-
plained by a few remarks on the laws of their
construction, This is the more necessary, as
Leusden, Hiller, and Simonis, the authors of the
three most celebrated Onomastica Sacra, as well
as the many who blindly follow them, indif-
ferently take the former or latter member of such
compounds to be in the relation of genitive to
the other, é. e. consider it equally legitimate to
say, Abner means futher of light, or light of the
futher. Nevertheless, it may be laid down as an
incontestable canon—being founded not merely
on an accessory law, but on one of the charac-
teristic peculiarities of the Syro-Arabian lan-
guages (that is, on the state construct)—that, in
all cases in which a compound name consists of
two nouns, one of which ts to be considered in the
relation of genitive to the other, that one must
invariably be the datter. Abner, therefore, can
only mean father ofslight.

This error appears to have arisen (besides the
want of sure principles of construction) from the
inability to appreciate the metaphorical sense in
which the Hebrews use the terms father, son, &e.
The name Abigail, father of joy, appeared in-
explicable as the name of a woman ; and. there-
fore those scholars thought it allowable to sacri-
fice the construction to the necessities of the
sense. And yet it is not difficult to conceive
the process by which the idea of a natural father
became modified into that of author, cause, source
(as when it is said, ‘has the rain a father?” Job


‘f


AB.


xxxviii. 28); nor that, when once the language
had sanctioned the use of father as equivalent
to source, the word might be sometimes treated
as an abstract, in idea, and be upplied without
gross incongmity to a woman.

As the Ethiopic, and especially the Arabic
languages very frequently use futher in the sense
of poss: ssor (as father of white, a name for milk),
some have been disjosed to vindicate the same
privilege to Hebrew also. Thus Gesenius seems
to have entertained this view, when he rendered
Abigail by ‘ pater exultationis, 7. e. hilaris,’ in his
Tacsaurus. In the German edition of his Afa-
nual, however, he has explained it by ‘ whose
father is yoy.’ Into the question as to the prin-
ciple involved in the latter of his modes of inter-
pretation, there is no veed to enter; the imme-
diate object of this article being solely to define
the relution of the two ncuns in a compound
proper name, when one of them is considered
dependent as a genitive on the other.

Very much light yet remains to be thrown on
compound Hebrew proper names, by a study of
those of the same class in Arabic. The innume-
rable compound prenomina and cognomina
which the Arabs Lestow not only on men, but
on beasts and inanimate objects, furnish parallels
to almost every peculiarity observable in Hebrew;
and although no example may be found in which
a woman is called father of joy, yet the prin-
ciple of the metaphorical use of terms of tela-
tionship, as the first element in a name, will re-
ceive ample illustration, and be brought within
the reach of our occidental conceptions. (See
an instructive paper on the Prenomina of the
Arabs, by Kosegarten, in Ewald’s Zeitschrift fur
die Kunde des Moryentandes, i. 297-317.)—J. N.

AB (AN; *ABSd, Joseph. Antig. iv. 4; the
Macedonian Aéos) is the Chaldee name of that
month which is the fifth of the ecclesiastical and
eleventh of the civil year of the Jews. The
name was first introduced after the Babylonian
captivity, and does not occur in the Old Testa-
ment, in which this month is only mentioned by
its numeral designation as the fifth. It com-
menced with the new moon of our August (the
reasons for this statement will be given in the
article Montus), and always had 30 days. This
month is pre-eminent in the Jewish calendar as
the period of the most signal national calami-
ties. The Ist is memorable for the death of
Aaron (Num. xxxiii. 38). The 9th is the date
assigned by Moses Cotzensis (cited in Wagen-
sei!'s Sota, p. 736) to the following events: the
declaration that no one then adult, except
Joshua and Caleb, should enter into the Pro-
mised Land (Num. xiv. 30); the destruction
of the first Temple by Nebuchadnezzar (to
these first two ‘the fast of the fifth month,’ in
Zech. vii. 5; viii. 19, is supposed to refer; yet the
tract Pesachim, cited in Reland’s Antig. Sacr.,
iv. 10, asserts that the /atter was the only
fast observed during the Captivity); the de-
struction of the second Temple by Titus; the
devastation of the city Bettar (AMD); and the
slaughter of Ben Cozibah (Bar Cocib), and of
teveral thousand Jews there ; and the ploughing
up of the foundations of the Temple by Turnus
Reffus—the two last of which happened in the
time of Hadrian. .


ABADDON. 3


With regard to the destruction of the first
Temple, although there is no doubt that the
Jews commemorate that event by a fast on the 9th
of Ab, yet the seventh is the date given for it in
2 Kings xxv. 8 (where, however, the Syriac and
Arabic versions read the ninth), and the tenth
that assigned in Jer. lii. 12. Josephus, however,
in mentioning that the Herodian Temple was
burnt on the tenth of Lous, expressly asserts that
it was on the same day of the month on which
the first Temple was destroyed (Bell. Jud. vi. 4, 5).
Buxtorf, in his Synag. Jud. ch. xxx., reconciles
the discrepancy betwecn the 9th as the day of
commemoration and the 10th as the date of the
event, by saying that the conflagration began on
ene day. Compare also Wagenseil’s Sota,
p- 912.

In a calendar ascribed to the celebrated as-
tronomer Rab Ada, who lived in the third cen-
tury, which Bodenschatz has given in his Kirch-
liche Verfassung der Juden, ii. 106, the 15th is
the day appointed for the festival of the fvAo-
gopla, in which the wood for the burnt-offering
was stored up in the court of the Temple, to
which Nehemiah alludes in x. 34, and xiii. 31.
Some place this festival on another day, or even
month; or assume, on tlie authority of the trea-
tise Taanith, that nine particular families brought
wood on nine separate days, four of which,
however, occur in Ab (Otho, Lezicon Rabbin.
p. 380). The election of particular families
accords with the statement in Nehemiah. Never-
theless, Josephus, speaking of this festival, says,
ev 1) maw €80s BAny xporgepe (Bell. Jud. ii. 17);
and the date of the day succeeding it, which he
mentions in the next section, fixes its celebra-
tion, in his time, on the ldth of the month. It
is, however, extremely difficult to-distinguish the
original from the later forms in any rite of a
people so prone to multiply its ceremonial ob-
servances as the Jews were.

Lastly, the Alegillat Taanith states that the
18th is a fast in memory of the western lamp
going out in the Temple in the time of Ahaz.
It may be conjectured that this refers to the ex-
tinction of ‘the lamps’ which is rnentioned in
2 Chron. xxix. 7, as a part of Ahaz’s attempts to
suppress the Temple service. For an inquiry
inte what is meant by the western or evening
lamp, see the article Canpesticxk.—J. N.


ABADDON, or Avouzyon ({Y198, destruc
tion; "ABadSdy in Rev. ix. 11, where it is rene
dered by the Greek "AroAAUw, destreyer). The
former is the Hebrew name, and the latter the
Greek, for the angel of death, described (Rev.
ix. 11) as the king and chief of the Apocalyptic
locusts under the fifth trumpet, and as the angel
of the abyss or ‘ bottomless pit.’ This ifi-
cation is peculiar to the present text.’ In the Bible,
and in every Rabbinical instance that occurs to us,
the word })T3N (abaddon) means destruction
(Job xxxi. 12), or the place of destruction, ¢.¢.
the subterranean world, Hades, the region of the
dead (Job xxvi. 6; xxviii. 22; Prov.xv. 11} It
is in fact the second of the seven names which
the Rabbins apply to that region; and they de
duce it particularly from Ps. Ixxxviii. 11, ‘Shall
thy loving kindness be declared in the grave,
or thy faithfulness in (abaddon) destruction ?
[Hanzs.] ;
B


4 ABANA.


ABANA, or Amana (71938 or N30; the
former being the kethib or Hebrew text, and
the latter the Aeri or marginal reading; Sept.
*ABard,), the name of one of the rivers which are
mentioned by Naaman (2 Kings v. 12), ‘ Abana
and Pharpar,’ as ‘rivers of Damascus." Amana
signifies ‘ perennial,’ and is probably the true
name, the permutation of 6 and m being very
common in the Oriental dialects. It is easy to
find ‘ rivers of Damascus;’ but there is a diffi-
culty in appropriating the distinctive names
which are here applied to them. The main stream
by which Damascus is now irrigated is called
Barrada. This river, the Chrysorrhoas, or ‘ golden
stream,’ of the ancient geographers, as soon as it
issues from a cleft of the Anti-Lebanon moun-
tains, is immediately divided into three smaller
courses. The central or principal stream runs
straight towards the city, and there supplies the
different public cisterns, baths, and fountains ;
the other branches diverge to the right and left
alony the rising ground on either hand, and having
furnished the means of extensive irrigation, fall
again into the main channel, aiter diffusing their
fertilizing influences, without which the whole
would be an arid desert, like the vast surrounding
plains. In those plains the soil is in some parts
even finer than here, but barren frum the want
of water. The main stream and its subsidiaries
unite in greatly weakened force beyond the town
on the south-east ; and the collected waters, after
flowing for two or three hours through the eastern
bills, are at length lost in a marsh or lake,
which is known as the Bahr el Merdj, or Lake
of the Meadow. Dr. Richardson (Travels, ii. 499)
states that the ‘water of the Barrnda, like the
water of the Jordan, is of a white sulphureous hue,
and an unpleasant taste.’ At the present day it
seems scarcely possible to appropriate with cer-
tainty the Scriptural names to streams. There
is indeed a resemblance of name which would
suggest the Barrada to be the Pharpar, and then
the question would be, which of the other streams
is the Abana. But some contend that the Barrada
is the Abana, and are only at a loss for the Pharpar.
Others find both in the two subsidiary streams,
and neglect the Barrada. The most recent con-
jecture seeks the Abana in the small river Fidgs
or Fyih, which Dr. Richardson describes as rising
near a village of the same name in a pleasant
valley fifteen or twenty miles to the north-west of
Damascus. It issues from the limestone rock, in
a deep, rapid stream, about thirty feet wide. It
is pure and cold as iced water; and, after coursing
down a stony and rugged channel for above a hun-
dred yards, falls into the Barrada, which comes
from another valley, and at the point of junction
is only half as wide as the Fijih, Dr. Mansford
oe Gaz. in Asana), who adopts the notion

t the Abana was one of the subsidiary streams,
well remarks that ‘ Naaman may be excused his
national prejudice in favour of his own rivers,
which, by their constant and beautiful supply,
render ie vicinity of pe paaploe ron ae the
edge of a desert, one of most beautiful s
in the worli; while the streams of Judea, Pith
the exception of the Jordan, are nearly dry the
greater of the year, and, running in deep
and rocky channels, convey but actial fertility
to the lands through which they flow.’


ABATTACHIM.


ABARIM (5°3Y; Sept. "Agapiy), a monn.
tain (BMIAYAW), or rather chain of moun-
tains (DMIAYAIN) which form or belung ts
the mountainous district east uf the Dead Sea and
the lower Jordan. It ts many distinct
masses and elevations, commanding extensive
views uf the country west of the river (Irby and
Mangles, p. a From one of the highest of these,
called Mount Nebo, Moses surveyed the Promised
Land before he died. From the manner in which
the names Abarim, Nebo, and Pisgah are connected
(Deut. xxxii. 49, ‘Get thee up into this mountain
Abarim, unto Mount Nebo;' and xxxiv. 1, ‘ Unto
the mountain of Nebo, to the top of Pisgah’), it
would seem that Nebo was a mountain of the
Abarim chain, and that Pisgah was the highest
and most commanding peak of that mountain.
The loftiest mountain of the neighbourbood is
Mount Attarous, about ten miles north of the
Amon ; and travellers have been disposed to iden-
tify it with Mount Nebo. It is represented as
barren, its summit being marked by a wild pis-
tachio-tree overshadowing a heap of stones. The
precise appropriation of the three names, however,
remains to be determined, as this locality has not
yet (1843) had the advantage of such searching
exploration as Professor Robinson has applied to

estern Palestine.


(Cacurbita eitrallus.}


ABATTACHIM (O°MB38 ; Sept. ofcvos).
This word occurs only in Numbers xi. 5, where
the murmuring Israelites say, ‘ We remember the
fish which we did eat freely in Egypt, the cucum-
bers and the abattachim, &c. The last word
has always been rendered ‘Metons.’ The pro-
bable correctness of this translation may be
inferred from melons having been known to the
nations of antiquity; and it may be proved to
be so, by comparing the original term with the
name of the melon in a cognate language such
as the Arabic.

The cucurbitacee, or gourd tribe, are remark.
able for their power of adapting themselves
to the different situations where they can be
grown. Thus Mr. Elphinstone describes some
of them as yielding large and juicy fruit in the
midst of the Indian desert, where water is 300
feet from the surface. Extreme of moisture, how-
ever, is far from injurious to them, as the great
majority are successfully cultivated in the rainy
season in India. Mr. Moorcroft describes an exe


ABATTACHIM.


tensive cultivation of melons and cucumbers on
the beds of weeds which float on the lakes of
Cashmere. They are similarly cultivated in
Persia and in China. In India, ‘ some of the
Species may be seen in the most arid places,
others in the densest jungles. Planted at the
foot of a tree, they emulate the vine in ascend-
ing its branches; and near a hut, they soon cover
its thatch with a coating of green. They form a
principal portion of the culture of Indian gar-
dens: the farmer even rears them in the neigh-
bourhood of his wells’ (Royle, Himalayan Botany,

218
e The plants, though known to the Greeks, are
not natives of Europe, but of Eastern countries,
whence they must have been introduced into
Greece. They probably may be traced to Syria
or Egypt, whence other cultivated plants, as well
as civilization, have travelled westwards. In
Egypt they formed a portion of the food of the
people at the very early period when the Israel-
ites were led by Moses from its rich cultivation
into the midst of the desert. The melon, the
watermelon, and several others of the Cucurbi-
tacem, are mentioned by Wilkinson (Thebes,
p- 212; Ancient Egyptians, iv. 62), as still cul-
tivated there, and are described as being sown in
the middle of December, and cut, the melons in
ninety and the cucumbers in sixty days.

If we consider that the occurrences so graphi-
cally detailed in the Bible took place in the
East, we should expect, among the natural pro-
ducts noticed, that those which appear from the
earliest times to have been esteemed in these
countries would be those mentioned. But as
all are apt to undervalue the good which they
possess, and think of it only when beyond their
reach, so the Israelites in the desert longed for
the delicious coolness of the melons of Egypt.
Among these we may suppose both the melon
and watermelon to have been included, and
therefore both will be treated of in this article.

By the term Abattachim there is little doubt
that melons are intended, as, when we remove
the plural form i, we have a word very similar


to the Arabic ; Butikh, which is the name


of the melon in that language. This appears,
however, to be a generic term, inasmuch as they
employ it simply to indicate the common or
musk melon, while the watermelon is called
Butikh-hindee, or Indian melon. The former is
called in Persian gu orcaiay and: in ye
khurbogya. It is babby a native of the
Pave ean ainics it has been carried
south into India, and north into Europe, the
Indian being a slight corruption of the Persian
name. As the Arabian authors append fufash as
the Greek name of butikh, which is considered
to be the melon, it is evident that fufash
must, in their estimation, be the same. From
there being no p in Arabic, and as the diacritical
point noon might, by transcribers, have easily
been mistaken for that of shen, it is more than
prbable that this is intended for wérewv, espe-
cially if we compare the description in Avicenna
with that in Bioscorides. By Galen it was called
Melopepo, from melo and pepo, the former from
being rvundish in form like the apple. The
tecion is supposed to have been the ofxvos of
Tneophrastus, and the cixvos wéxey of Hippo-


ABATTACHIM. sd


crates. It was known to the Romans, and culti-
vated by Columella, with the assistance of gome
precaution at cold times of the year. It is said
to have been introduced into this country about
the year 1520, and was called musk-melon to
distinguish it from the pumpkin, which was
usually called melon.

The melon, being thus a native of warm cli-
mates, is necessarily tender in those of Enrope, but,
being an annual, it is successfully cultivated
gardeners with the aid of glass and artifici
heat of about 75° to 80°. The fruit of the melon
may be seen in great variety, whether with respect
to the colour of its rind or of its flesh, its taste or
its odour, and also its external form and size.
The flesh is soft and succulent, of a white, yel-
lowish, or reddish hue, of a sweet and pleasant
taste, of an agreeable, sometimes musk-like odour,
and forms one of the most delicious of fruits,
which, when taken in moderation, is wholesome,
but, like all other fruits of a similar kind, is
liable to cause indigestion and diarrhoea when
eaten in excess, especially by those unaccustomed
to its use.

All travellers in Eastern countries have borne
testimony to the refreshment and delight they
have experienced from the fruit of the melon.
But we shall content ourselves with referring to
Alpinus, who, having paid particular attention to
such subjects, says of the Egyptians, ‘ Fructibus,
&c. se replent, ut ex iis solis sepe cenam, vel
prandium perficiant, cujusmodi sunt precocia,
cucurbite, pepones, melopepones; quorum quidem
nomen genericum est Batech’ (Rerum Egypt.
Hist. 1.17). He also describes in the same
chapter the kind of melon called Abdellavi, which,
according to De Sacy, receives its name from
having been introduced by Abdullah, a governor
of Egypt under the Khalif Al Mamoon. It may
be a distinct species, as the fruit is oblong,
tapering at both ends, but thick in the middle;
a figure (tab. xli.) is given in his work De
Plantis A:gypti ; but Forskal applies this name
also to the Chate, which is separately described
by ras and a figure given by him at
tab. xl.


The Cucumis Chate is a villous plant with
trailing stems, leaves roundish, bluntly angled,
and toothed ; the fruit pilose, elliptic, and tapering
to both ends. ‘ Horum usum corporibus in cibo
ipsis tum crudis, tum coctis vescentibus, salubrem
esse apud omnes eorum locorum incolas eredi-
tur’ (Alpin. lc. p. 54). Hasselquist calls this the
‘Egyptian melon’ and ‘queen of cucumbers,’ and
says that it grows only in the fertile soil round
Cairo; that the fruit is a little watery, and the
flesh almost of the same substance as that of the
melon, sweet and cool. ‘This the grandees and
Europeans in Egypt eat as the most pleasant
fruit they find, and that from which they have
the least to apprehend. It is the most excellent
fruit of this tribe of any yet known’ (Hassel-
quist, Travels, p. 258). Forskal, uniting the
Abdellavi and Chate into one species, says it is
the commonest of all fruits in Egypt, and is
cultivated in all their fields, and that many
prepare from it a very grateful drink (Flora
“Lgyptiaco- Arabica, p. 168).

With the melon it is ‘necessary to notice the
Water-Melon, which is generally supposed to be
specially indicated by the term Battich. Bat


4 ABATTACHIM.


this 2 would be difficult to determine in the
affirmative in a family like the cucurbitacea,
where there are so many plants like each other,
both in their herbage and fruit. In the first
place, the term Battich is rather generic than
specific, and, thereture, if Abattachin. were simi-
larly employed, it might include the water
melon, but not to the exclusion of the others.
In the second place, it is doubtful whether the
water-melon was introduced into Egypt at a very
early period, as we find no distinct mention of
it in Greek writers. It is now common in all
parts of Asia. It seems to have Leen first dis-
tinctly mentioned by Serapion under the name
of Dullaha, which in the Latin translation is
interpreted, ‘id est melo magnus viridis; and
Sethio is quoted as the earliest author who ap
lies the term ’Ayyoupioy to the water-melon, as
subsequently been frequently the case, though
it is often distinguished as Anguria indica. Sera-
pion, however, quotes Rhases, Meseha, and Ish-
mahelita. In the Persian bouks referred to in a
Note, the author finds Battich Aindee given as
the Arabic of turbooz, which is the name as-
signed in India to the watermelon. So Alpinus,
speaking of the anguria in Egypt, says, ‘ vulgo
Batech el Maovi (water), et m= Scriptoribus
Medicis Batech-Indi vel Anguria indica dicitur.’
One of the Persian names is stated to be hin-
duanch. It may be indigenous to India, but it is
dificult, in the case of this as of other long-culti-
vated plants, to ascertain its native country with
certainty. For, even when we find such a plant
apparently wild, we are not sure that the seed
has not escaped from cultivation; and at pre-
sent we know that the water-melon is cultivated
in all parts of Asia, in the north of Africa, and
in the south of Europe.

The water-melon is clearly distinguished by
Alpinus as cuitivated in Egypt, and called by
the above names, ‘qui intus semina tantum, et
aquam dulcissimam continent.’ It is mentioned
by Forskal, and its properties described by
Hasselyuist. Though resembling the other kinds
very considerably in its properties, it is very
different frum them in its deeply-cut leaves,
from which it is compared to a very diflerent
plant of this tribe—tiat is, the colocynth.
* Citrullus fulio colocynthidis secto semine nigro,’
A few others have cut leaves, but the water-
melon is so distinguished among the edible
species. The plant is hairy, with trailing cirrhi-
ferous stems. The pulp abounds so much in
watery juice, that it will run out by a hole made
through the rind; and it is from this peculiarity
that it has obtained the names of water-melon,
melon d'eau, wassermelun. Hasselquist says
that it is cultivated on the banks of the Nile, in
the rich clayey earth which subsides during the
inundation, and serves ‘ the Egyptians fur meat,
drink, and physic. It is eaten in abundance,
during the season, even by the richer sort of
people; but the cummon people, on whom Pro-
vidence hath bestowed nothing but poverty and
patience, scarcely eat anything but these, and
account this the best time of the year, as they
are obliged to put up with worse at other seasuns
of the year’ (Travels, p. 256).—J. F. R.

*,* Inconcluding the first article in this work
on the botany of the Bible, the author thinks
it desirable to state the mode in which he has


ABATTACHIM.


studied the subject, and the grounds upon which
he has formed his opinions, whether they agree
with or differ from those of previous writers. He
has already related, in his ‘Essay on the Anti-
quity of Hindoo Medicine,’ that his attention
was first directed to the identification of the
natural products mentioned in ancient authors,
in consequence of being requested by the Me-
dical Board of Bengal to investigate the medi-
cinal plants and drugs of India, for the purpose
of ascertaining how far the public service might
be supplied with medicines grown in India, in-
stead of importing theen nearly all from foreign
countries. In eflecting this important object,
his first endeavour was to make himself ac-
quainted with the different drugs which the na-
tives of India are themselves in the habit of
employing as medicines. Fur this purpose he
had to examine the things themselves, as well
as to ascertain the names by which they were
known. He therefore directed specimens of every
article in the bazars to be brought to him, whether
found wild in the country or the produce of
culture—whether the result of home manufac-
ture or of foreign commerce—whether of the ani-
mal, vegetable, or mineral kingdom—whether
useful as food or as medicine, or employed
in any of the numerous arts which minister to
the wants or comforts of man. In order to
acquire a knowledge of their names, he caused the
native works on Materia Medica to be collated
by competent hakeems and moonshees, and the
several articles arranged under the three heads
of the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms,
The works collated were chiefly the ‘ Mukhzun-
al-Udwieh,’ ¢ ‘Tolifat-al-Moomeneen,’ ¢ Ihtiarut
Buddie,’ and ¢ Taleet’ Shereef,’ all of them in
Persian, but consisting principally of translations
from Arabic authors. These were themselves
indebted for much of their information respect-
ing drugs to Dioscorides; but to his descrip
tions the Persians have fortunately appended the
Asiatic synonymes, and references to some Indian
products not mentioned in the works of the Arabs,
The author himself made a catalogue of the
whole, in which, after the most usually received,
that is, the Arabic name, the several synonymes
in Persian, Hindee, &c., as we!l as in metamore
phosed Greek, were inserted. Le traced the
articles as much as possible to the plants,
animals, and countries whence they were derived ;
and attached to them their natural history names,
whenever he was successful in ascertaining them,

Being without any suitable library fur such
investigations, and being only able to obtain a
small copy of Dioscorides, he was in most cases
obliged to depend upon himself fur the identi-
fication of the several substances. The results
of several of these investigations are briefly re-
corded in his observations on “Yhe history and
uses of the different natural families of plant., in
his ‘Illustrations of the Botany of the Hima-
layan Mountains.’ The author also made use of
these materials in his ‘ Essay on the Antiquity
of Hindvo Medicine,’ in tracing different Indian
products from the works of the Arabs into those
of the Greeks, even up to the time of Hippocrates.
He inferred that tropical products could only
travel trom south to north, and that the Hindoos
must have ascertained their properties, and used
them as medicines, before they became sufi-


fa


. ABBA.

ciently famous to be observed and recorded by
the Greeks. Having thus traced many of these
Eastern products to the works of almost con-
tem authors, he was led to conclude that
many of them must be the same as those men-
tioned in the Bible, especially as there is often
considerable resemblance between their Arabic
and Hebrew names «Essay, p. 138).

Although, like Hasselquist, Alpmus, Forskal,
and others, the author studied these subjects in
Eastern countries, yet he differs from them all in
the circumstances under which he pursued his in-
quiries. His investigations were carried on while
he was resident in the remotest of the Eastern
nations known in early times, who were probably
among the first civilized, and who are still ngt
only acquainted with the various drugs and th
names, but an ancient literature, in which
many of these very substances are named and
arranged. Having obtained the drugs, heard
their names applied by the natives, read their
ats glee traced ia eae pee a
formed many of his opinions from independent
sources. It may therefore be considered a strong
confirmation of the correctness of his results when
they agree with those of previous inquirers ; when
they differ, it must be ascribed to the peculiar pro-
cess by which they have been obtained.—J. F. R.


(Cucumis melo.]


ABBA (Affa, N28) is the Hebrew word
AX, father, under a form peculiar to the Chaldee
idiom. The Aramaic dialects do not the
definite article in the form in which it is found
in Hebrew. They compensate for it by adding
a syllable to the end of the simple noun, and
thereby produce a distinct form, called by gram-
marians the emphatic, or definitive, which is
equivalent (but with much less strictness in its
use, especially in Syriac) to a noun with the
article in Hebrew. This emphatic form is also
commonly used to express vocative case of
our language—the context alone determining
when it is to be taken in that sense (just as the
Doun with the article is sometimes similarly used
in Hebrew). Hence this form is appropriately
sapere in all the passages in which it occurs
in the New Testament (Mark xiv. 36; Rom. viii.
15; Gal. iv. 6): in all of which it is an invoca-
tion. Why Adda is, in all these passages, im-
mediately rendered by 5 warp, instead of xdrep,


ABBREVIATIONS. q
may


perhaps be in accounted for on the
crcrontion’ that altho the Hellenic (as well
as the classical) Greek allows the use of the
nominative with the article for the vocative
(Winer, Gram. des Neutest. Sprach. § 29), the
writers of the New Testament prefei the
former, because the article more adequately re-
presented the force of the emphatic form.

It is also to be observed that, in the usage of
the Targums, NIN, even when it is the sub-
ject of an ordinary proposition, may mean my
father; and that the absolute form of the word is
not used with the suffix of the frst person sin-
gular. Lightfoot has endeavoured (Hore Hebr.
ad Marc. xiv. 36} to show that there is an
important difference between the Hebrew 38
and the Chaldee RIN: that whereas the former
is used for all senses of father, both strict and me-
taphorical, the latter is confined to the sense of a
natural or adoptive father. This statement, which
is perhaps not entirely free from a doctrinal bias,
is not strictly correct. At least the Targums have
rendered the Hebrew father by NON, in Gen.
xlv. 8, and Job xxxviii. 28, where the use of
the term is clearly metaphorical; and, in later
times, the Talmudical writers (according to
Buxtorf, Lez. Talm.) certainly employ NIN to
express rabbi, master—a usage wo which he thinks
reference is made in Matt. xxiii. 9.—J. N.

ABBREVIATIONS. As there are satisfactory
grounds for believing that the word Selah, in the
Psalms, is not an anagram, the earlicst positive
evidence of the use of abbreviations by the Jews
occurs in some of the inscriptions on the coins
of Simon the, Maccabee. Some of these, namely,
have ¥ for SNK, and "A for MIN; and some
of those of the first and second years have N
and 3; the former of which is considered to
be a numeral letter, and the latter an abbre-
viation for 3 NY, anno II. (Bayer, De Numis
Hebreo-Samaritanis, p. 171). It is to be ob-
served, however, that both these latter abbrevia-
tions alternate on other equally genuine coins,
with the full legends MNS Nw and ONY Nw;
and that the coins of the third and fourth years
invariably express both the year and the numeral
in words at length.

The earliest incontestable evidence of the use
of abbreviations in the copies of the Old Testa-
ment is foun¢ in some few extant MSS., in
which common words, not liable to be mistaken,
are curtailed of one or more letters at the


i, .
end. Thus “XY is written for bw; and the
phrase 170M ndryd "3, so frequently recurring
mi


in Ps. cxxxvi., is in some MSS. written M 5 2.
Yet even this licence, which is rarely used, is
always denoted by the sign of abbreviation, an
oblique stroke on the last letter, and is gene-
rally confined to the end of a line; and as all
the MSS. extant (with hardly two exceptions)
are later than the tenth century, when the Rab-
bini¢al mode of abbreviation had been so long
established and was carried to such an extent,
the infrequency and limitation of the licence,
under such circumstances, might be considered
to favour the belief that it was not more freely
employed in earlier times.

evertheless, some learned men have endea-
voured to prove that abbreviations must have


® ABBREVIATIONS.


been used in the MSS. of the sacred text which
were written before the Alexandrian version was
made; and they find the grounds of this opinion
in the existence of several Masoretic various lec-
tions in the Hebrew text itself, as well as in the
several discrepancies between it and the ancient
versions, eich may be plausibly accounted for
on that assumption. This theory supposes that
both the copyists who resolved the abbreviations
(which it is assumed existed in the ancient He-
brew MSS. prior to the LXX.) into the entire
full text which we now ss, and the early
translators who used such abbreviated copies,
were severally liable to error in their solutions.
To illustrate the application of this theory to the
Masoretic readings, Eichhorn (Kinleit. ins A. T.
i, 323) cites, among other ges, Jos. viti. 16,
in which the Kethib is Vy, and the Keri ‘Y;
and 2 Sam. xxiii. 20, in which ‘1M is the Kethib,
and 5m the Keri. With regard to the ver
sions, Drusius suggests that the reason why the
LXX. rendered the words (Jon. i. 9) %33N
AY, by BovAos xuplov eiul, was because they
mistook the Resh for Daleth, and believed the
Jod to be an abbreviation of Jehovah, as if it had


been originally written "ay (Quest. Ebraic.
iii, 6). An example of the converse is cited
from Jer. vi. 11, where our text has M173" NON,
which the LXX. has rendered Ovudy pov, as if
the original form had been /*MOM, and they had
considered the Jod to be a suftix, whereas the
later Hebrew copyists took it for an abbreviation
of the sacred name. Kennicott’s three Disserta-
tions contain many similar conjectures; and
Stark's Davidis aliorumque Carminum Libri V.
has a collection of examples out of the ancient
versions, in which he thinks he traces false solu-
tions of abbreviations.

In like manner some have endeavoured to ac-
count for the discrepancies in statements of
numbers in parallel passages and in the ancient
versions, by assuming that numbers were not ex-

il in the early MSS. by entire words (as
they invariably are in our present text), but by
some kind of abbreviation. Ludolf, in his Com-
mentar. ad IHlist. Aithiop. p. 85, has suggested
that numeral /etters may have been mistaken for
the initial letter, and, consequently, for the ab-
breviation of a numeral word, giving as_a perti-
nent example the case of the Roman V being
mistaken for Viginti. He also thinks the con-
verse to have been possible. Most later scholars,
however, are divided between the alternative of
letters or of arithmetical cyphers analogous to
our figures. The last was the idea Cappellus
entertained (Critica Sacra, i. 10), although De
Vignoles appears to have first worked out the
theory in detail in his Chronologie de I Histoire
Sainte: whereas Scaliger (cited in Walton's Pro-
legomena, vii. 14) and almost all modern critics
are in favour of letters. Kennicott has treated
the subject at some length; but the best work
on it is that of J. M. Faber, entitled Literas
olim pro vocibus in numerando a scriptoribus
V. T. esse adhibitas, Onoldi, 1775, 4to.

It is undeniable that it is much easier to ex-
platn the discordant statements which are found,
for instance, in the parallel numbers of the 2nd
chupter of Ezra and the 7th of Nehemiah, by
having recourse to either of these suppositions,


ABBREVIATIONS.


than it is to conceive how such very dissimilar
signs and sounds, as the entire names of the
Hebrew numerals are, could be so repeatedly
confounded as they appear to have been. This
adequacy of the theory to account for the phe-
Nomena constitutes the internal argument for its
admission. Gesenius has also, in his Geschichte
der Hebriischen Sprache, p. 173, adduced the
following external grounds for its adoption:
the fact that doth letters and numeral notes are
found in other languages of the Syro-Arabian
family, so that neither is altogether alien to their


genius; letters, namely, in Syriac, Arabic, and .


later Hebrew; numeral figures on the Phoenician
coins and Palmyrene inscriptions (those em-

loyed by the Arabs and transmitted through
Morn to us are, it is well known, of Indian
origin). And although particular instances are
more easily explained on the one supposition
than on the other, yet he considers that analogy,
as well as the majority of examples, favours the
belief that the numerals were expressed, in the
ancient copies, by letters; that they were then
liable to frequent confusion; and that they were
finally written out at length in words, as in our
present text.

There is an easy transition from these abbre-
viations to those of the later Hebrew, or Rabbi-
nical writers, which are nothing more than a
very extended use and development of the same
principles of stenography. Lbinical abbre-
viations, as defined by Danz, in his valuable
Rabbinismus Enucleatus, § 65, are either perfect,
when the initial letters only of several words are
written together, and a double mark is placed
between such a group of letters, as in Nw’,
the common abbreviation of the Hebrew names
of the books of Job, Proverbs, and Psalms (the
ast letters only of words are also written in
Cabbalistical abbreviations); or imperfect, where
more than one letter of a single word is written,
anda single mark is placed at, the end to denote
the mutilation, as 1%” for INW*. The per
fect abbreviations are called by the Rabbinical
writers MAN WN, i. e.- capitals of words.
When proper names, as frequently happens, are
abbreviated in this manner, it is usual to form
the mass of consonants into proper syllables by
means of the vowel Patach, and to consider Jod
and Vau as representatives of J and U. Thus
DI", Rambam, the abbreviation of § Rabbi
Mosheh ben Maimon,’ and %M%, Rashi, that of
§ Rabbi Shelomoh Jarchi,’ are apposite illustra-
tions of this method of contraction. Some ace
quaintance with the Rabbinical abbreviations is
necessary to understand the Masoretic notes in
the margin of the ordinary editions of the He
brew text; and a considerable familiarity with
them is essential to those who wish, with ease
and profit, to consult the Talmud and Jewish
commentators. The elder Buxtorf wrote a valu-
able treatise on these abbreviations, under the
title De <Abbreviaturis Hebraicis, which has
often been reprinted ; but, from the inexhaustible
nature of the subject, O. G. Tychsen added two
valuable supplements, in 1768, and Selig incor
porated them with his own researches in his
Compendia rocum Hebraico-Rabbinicarum, Lips.
1780, which is the completest work of the kind
extant.

With regard to the abbreviations in the MSS,


«


ABDON.


of the New Testament, it may be observed that
they have furnished little matter for critical in-
quiry. Those that exist are almost exclusively
confined to common and easily supplied words,
e.g. God, Lord, father, son, &c.; or to the ter-
minations of formation and inflexion, in which
case they fall more ly under the province
of general Greek Pa eography. They very
varely furnish any hint of the mode in which a
Various reading has arisen, as has been suggested,
for instance, in the case of xaip@ and xuply in
Romans xii. 11. The use of /ettera for nume-
tals, however, according to Eichhorn’s Einleit,
ins N. T., iv. 199, is not only found im some
MSS. now extant, but, in the instance of the
number 666, in Rev. xiii. 18, can be traced u
to the time of the apostles ; ly on the testi-
mony of Irenzus, and partly because those MSS.
which wrote the number out in words differ in
the gender of the first word, some writing é£axd-
ew, some éfaxdoiat, some éfaxdora. The early
fathers have also unhesitatingly availed them-
& selves of the theory that numbers were originally
denoted by letters, whenever they wished to ex-
plain a difficulty in numbers. Thus Severus of
Antioch (cited by Theophylact) accounts for the
ditference of the hour of our Lord's crucifixion,
as stated in Mark xv. 25, and Jobn xix. 14, by
the mistake of y (3) for s (6). Eichhorn has
given a lithographed table of the most usual ab-
breviations in the MSS. of the New Testament.

Lastly, the abbreviations by which Origen, in
nis ‘ Hexapla,’ cites the Septuagint and other
Greek versions, deserve some notice. The nature
of this work rendered a compendious mode of
teference necessary ; and, accordingly, numeral
letters and initials are the chief expedients em-

loyed. A large list of them may be seen in

ontfaucon’s edition of the ‘ Hexapla;’ and
Eichhorn (Einleit. ins A, T. i. 548-50) has given
those which are most important.—J. N.

1. ABDON (may, a servant ; Sept. "AB3dér),
the son of Hillel, of the tribe of Ephraim, and
tenth judge of Israel. He succeeded Elon, and
judged Israel eight years. His administration
appears to have been peaceful; for nothing is
Tecorded of him but that he had forty sons and
thirty nephews, who rode on young asses—a mark
of their consequence (Judg. xii. 13-15). Abdon
died .c. 1112,

There were three other persons of this name,
which appears to have been rather common. They
are mentioned in 1 Chron. viii. 29; ix. 36;
xxxiv. 20.

2. ABDON, a city of the tribe of Asher, which
was given to the Levites of Gershom's family (Job
xxi. 30; 1 Chron. vi. 74).


ABEDNEGO (33772Y, servant of Nego, i.e.
Nebo; Sept. "ASSevayd), the Chaldee name im-
posed by the king of Babylon's officer upon
Auriah, one of the three companions of Daniel.
With his two friends, Shadrach and Meshach,
he was miraculously delivered from the burning
furnace, into which they were cast for refusing
to worship the golden statue which Nebuchad-
nezzar had caused to be set up in the plain of
Dura (Dan. iii.).


ABEL 639; Sept. “ABea), properly Heser.,
the second son of Adam, who was slain by Cain,


ABEL. 9


his elder brother (Gen. iv. 1-16). The cireams
stances of that mysterious transaction are cope
sidered elsewhere [Cain]. To the name Abel
a twofold interpretation has been given. Its
primary signification is weakness or vanity, as
the word 2371, from which it is derived, indi-
cates. By another rendering it signifies grief
or lamentation, both meanings being justified by
the Scripture narrative. Carn (a possession)
was so named tu indicate both the joy of his
mother and his right to the inheritance of the
first-born: Abel received a name indicative of
his weakness and poverty when compared with
the supposed glory of his brother's destiny, and
prophettcally of the pain and sorrow which were
to be inflicted on him and his parents.

Ancient writers abound in ations on the
mystical character of Abel ; and he is spoken of
as the representative of the pastoral tribes, while
Cain is regarded as the author of the nomadic
life and character. St. Chrysostom calls him the
Lamb of Christ, since he sutlered the most griev-
ous injuries solely on account of his innocency
(Ad Stagir. ii. 5); and he directs particular
attention to the mode in which Scripture speaks
of his offerings, consisting of the best of his
flock, ‘and of the fat thereof,’ while it seems to
intimate that Cain presented the fruit which might
be most easily procured (Hom. in Gen. xviii. 5).
St. Augustin, speaking of regeneration, alludes
to Abel as representing the new or spiritual man
in contradistinction to the natural or corrupt man,
and says, ‘Cain founded a city on earth, but
Abel as a stranger and pilgrim looked forward
to the city of the saints which is in heaven’
(De Civitate Dei, xv. i.). Abel, he says in
another place, was the first-fruits of the Church,
and was sacrificed in testimony of the future
Mediator. And on Ps. cxviii. (Serm. xxx. sec. 9
he says: ‘this city’ (that is, * the city of Gel”)
‘has its beginning from Abel, as the wicked city
from Cain.’ Irenus says that God, in the case
of Abel, subjected the just to the unjust, that the
righteousness of the former might be manitested
by what he suffered (Contra Heres. iii. 23).

Heretics existed in ancient times who repre-
sented Cain and Abel as embodying two spiritual


- powers, of which the mightier was that of Cain,


and to which they accordingly rendered divine


In the early Church Abel was considered the
first of the martyrs, and many persoris were ac-
customed to pronounce his name with a particular
reverence. An obscure sect arose under the title
of Adelites, the profeased object of which was
to inculcate certain fanatical notions respect-
ing marriage; but it was speedily lost amid a
host of more popular parties.—H. S.

ABEL (53%; Sept. ’ABéA), a name of se-
veral villages in Israel, with additions in the case
of the more important, tu distinguish them from
one another. From a comparison of the Arabio
and Syriac, it appears to mean fresh grass ; and
the places so named may be conceived to have
been in peculiarly verdant situations. In 1 Sam.
vi. 18, it is used as an appellative, and probably
signifies a grassy plain.

ABEL, Asex-Beru-Maacuau, or Apen-Marm,
a city in the north of Palestine, which seems to
have been of considerable strength from its his-


10 ABEL BETH MAACAH.


tory, and of importance from its being called ‘a
mother in Israel’ (2 Sam. xx. 19). The identity of
the city under these different names will be seen by
a comparison of 2 Sam. xx. 14, 15,15; 1 Kings xv.
20; 2 Chron. xvi. 4. The addition of ‘ Maacah’
marks it as belonging to, or being near to, the region
Maacah, which lay eastward of the Jordan under
Mount Lebanon. This is the town in which
Sheba posted himself when he rebelled against
David. Eighty years afterwards it was taken and
sacked by Benhadad, king of Syria; and 200
years subsequently by Tiglath-pileser, who sent
away the inhabitants captives into Assyria (2
Kings xx. 29).

ABEL-BETH-MAACHAAH, that is, Abel near
the house or city of Maacah: the same as Abel.


ABEL-CARMAIM (0°09 3X, place of
the vineyards ; Sept. EBeAxapulu), a village of
the Ammonites, about six miles from Philadel-
phia, or Rabbath Ammon, according to Eusebius,
in whose time the place was still rich in vine-
yards (Judg. xi. 33).

ABEL-MAIM. The same as Aber.

ABEL-MEHOLAKH, or Aneu.-Msa Oat

IMD, place of the dance ; Sept. “ABeApeovad),
a town supposed to have stood near the Jordan,
and some miles (Eusebius says ten) to the south
of Bethshan or Scythopolis (1 Kings iv. 12). It
is remarkable in connection with Gideon's victory
over the Midianites (Judg. vii. 22), and as the
birth-place of Elisha (1 Kings xix. 16).

ABEL-MIZRAIM (DY]¥D bax, the mourn-
tng of the Eguptians ; Sept. TlévOos Aiyémrov),
the name of a threshing-floor, so called on account
of the ‘ great mouming’ made there for Jacob
by the funeral party from Egypt (Gen. 1. 11).
Jerome places it between Jericho and the Jordan,
where Bethagla afterwards stood.


ABEL-SHITTIM (O17 Sax, place of
acacias ; Sept. BeAga), a town in the plains of
Moab, on the east of the Jordan, between which
and Beth-Jesimoth was the last encampment of the
Israelites on that side the river (Num. xxxiii. 49).
It is more frequently called Shittim merely (Num.
xxv. 1; Josh. ii. 1; Mic. vi. 5). Eusebius says it
was in the neighkourhvod of Mount Peor; and in
the time of Josephus it was known as Abila, and
stood sixty stadia from the Jordan (-Antig. iv.
8,1; v.1, 1). The place is noted for the severe
pen which was there inflicted upon the

sraclites whien they were seduced into the worshi
of Baal-Peor, through their evil intercourse wit
the Moabites and Midianites.

ABELA. [Apina.]

ABIL, the mother of King Hezekiah (2 Kings
xviii. 2), called also Abijah (2 Chron. xxix. 1).
Her father's name was Zachariah, perhaps the
same who was taken by Isaiah (viii. 2) for a
witness.

ABIA. [Asrsan, 3.]

ABIAH or Auisan GRIN, ‘pater Jchove,
ie. vir divinus, ut videtur, i. gq. DYTIN WS,’
Gesenius in Thesaur.; Sept. ’ABid), one of the
sons of Samucl, who were intrusted with the ad-
ministration of justice, and whose misconduct
afforded the ostensible ground on which the Is-
raelites demanded that their government should be
changed into a monarchy (1 Sam. viii. 1-5).


ABIATHAR.
ABI-ALBON. [Asrz:. 2]


ABIATHAR (M38, father of abundance ;
Sept. ’ABid@ap), the tenth high-priest of the Jews,
and fourth in descent from Kb. When his fa-
ther, the high-priest Abimelech, was slain with
the priests at Nob, for suspected partiality to the
fugitive David, Abiathar escaped the massacre ;
and bearing with him the most essential part of
the priestly raiment [Epnop], repaired to the
son of Jesse, who was then in the cave of Adul-
lam (1 Sam. xxii. 20-23; xxiii. 6). He was
well received by David, and became the priest of
the party during its exile and wanderings. As
such he sought and received for David responses
from God. When David became king of Judah
he appointed Abiathar high-priest. Meanwhile
Zadok had been appointed high-priest by Saul,
and continued to act as such while Abiathar was
high-priest in Judah. The appointment of Zadok
was not only unexccptionable in itself, but was
in accordance with the divine sentence of depo-
sition which had been passed, through Samuel,
uywn the house of Eli (1 Sam. ii. 30-36). When,
therefore, David acquired the kingdom of Israel,
he had no just ground on which Zadok could be
removed, and Abiathar set in his place; and the
attempt to do so would probably have been
offensive to his new subjects, who had been ac-
customed to the ministration of Zadok, and whose
good feeling he was anxious to cultivate. The
king got over this difliculty by allowing both
appointments to stand; and until the end of
David's reign Zadok and Abiathar were joint
high-priests. How the details of duty were set-
tled, under this somewhat ancmalous arrange-
ment, we are not informed. As a high-priest
Abiathar must have been perfectly aware of the
divine intention that Solomon should be the suc-
cessor of David: he was therefore the least ex-
cusable, in some resvects, of all those who were
parties in the attempt to frustrate that intention
by raising Adonijah to the throne. So his con-
duct seems to have been viewed by Solomon,
who, in deposing him from the high-pricstaood,
and directing him to withdraw into private life,
plainly told him that only his sacerdotal cha-
racter, and his former services to David, pre-
served him from capital punishment. This
deposition of Abiathar completed the doom
long before denounced upon the house of Eli,
who was of the line of Ithamar, the younger son
of Aaron. Zadok, who remained the high-priest,
was of the elder line of Eleazer. Solomon was
probably not sorry to have occasion to remove
the anomaly of two high-priests of different lines,
and to see the undivided pontificate in the senior
house of Eleazer (1 Kings i. 7, 19; ii. 26, 27).

In Mark ii. 26, a circumstance is described as


occurring ‘in the days of Abiathar, the high-~


priest,’ which appears, from 1 Sam. xxi. 1, to have
really occurred when his father Abimelech was the
high-priest. Numerous solutions of this difficulty
have been offered. The most probable in itself
is that which interprets the reference thus ‘in the
days of Abiathar, teho twas afterwards the
high-priest' (Bishop Middleton, Greek Article,
pp. 188-190). But this leaves open another difti-
culty which arises from the precisely opposite
reference (in 2 Sam. viii. 17; 1 Chron. xvii. 165
xxiv. 3, 6, 31) to ‘Abimelech, the son of Abia-


ABIB.


thar,’ as the person who was high-priest along
with Zadok, and who was deposed by Solomon;
whereas the history describes that nage as
Abiathar, the son of Abimelech. The only ex-
planation which seems to remove ail these diffi-
culties—although we cannot allege it to be alto-
gether satisfactory—is, that both father and son
bore the two names of Abimelech and Abiathar,
and might be, and were called by, either. But
although it was not unusual for the Jews to have
two names, it was not usual for both father and
son to have the same two names. We therefore
incline to leave the passage in Mark ii. 26, as
explained above; and to conclude that the other
discrepancies arose from an easy and obvious
transposition of words by the copyists, which was
afterwards perpetuated. In these places, the
Syriac and Arabic versions have ‘ Abiathar, the
son of Abimelech.’:
ABIB.  [Nisan.]


1. ABIEL ONDE, father of strength, i.e.
strong ; Sept. ABriA), the father of Kish, whose
son Saul was the first king of Israel, and of Ner,
whose sun Abner was captain of the host to his
cousin Saul (1 Sam. ix. 1; xiv. 5).

2. ABIEL, one of the thirty most distinguished
men of David's army, (1 Chron. xi. 32). He is
called Abi-albou (}125Y °DN) in 2 Sam. xxiii.
31; a name which has precisely the same signi-
fication (father of strength) as the other.

ABIEZER (WIN, father of help; Sept.
*aB:éCep, Josh. xvii. 2), a son of Gilead, the
graudsun of Manasseh (Num. xxvi. 30), and
founder of the family to which Gideon belonged,
and which bore his name as a patronymic—
Abiezrites (Judg. vi. 345 viii. aa Gideon him-
self bas a very beautiful and delicate allusion to
this patronymic in his answer to the fierce and
ney ie Ephraimites, who, after he had defeated
the Midianites with 300 men, chielly of the
family of Abiezer, came to the pursuit, and ca)
tured the two Midianitish princes Zeba and Za
munna. They sharply rebuked him for having
engrossed all the glory of the transaction by not
calling them into action at the first. But he
soothed their pride by a remark which insinuated
that their exploit, in capturing the princes,
although late, surpassed his own in defeating
their army :—* What have I done now in com-

ison with you? Is not the (grape) gleaning of
Ena better than the vintage of Abiezer?*
(Judg. viii. 1-3).

ABIGAIL (138 or 5Y3N, father of joy ;
Sept. *ABryala), the wife of a prosperous sheep-
master, called Nabal, who dwelt in the district
of Carmel, west of the Dead Sea. She is known
chiefly for the promptitude and discretion of her
conduct in taking measutes to avert the wrath of
David, which, as she justly ane had
been violently excited by the insulting treatment
which his messengers had received from her hus-
band [Naga]. She hastily prepared a liberal
supply of provisions, of which Bavid's troup stood
in much need—and went forth to meet him,
attended by only one servant. When they
met, he was marching to exterminate Nabal and
all that belonged to him; and not only was his
tage mollitied by her prudent remonstrances and
delicate management, but he became sensible


ABLIJAH. u


that the vengeance which he had purposed was
not warranted by the circumstances, and was
thankful that he had been prevented from shed-
ding innocent blood. The beauty and prudence
of Abigail made such an impression upon David
on this occasion, that when, not long after, he
heard of Nabal's death, he sent for her, and she
became his wife (1 Sam. xxv. 14-42). By her
it is usually stated that he had two sons, Chi-
leab and Daniel; but it is more likely that the
Chileab of 2 Sam. iii. 3, is the same as the
Daniel of 1 Chron. iii. 1; the son of Abigail
being known by both these names.


1. ABIHAIL (YIM 9K, father of light or
splendour ; Sept. ’APiata), the wife of Reh
king of Judah. She is called the daughter of Eliab,
David's elder brother (2 Chron. xi. 18): but, as
David began to reign more than eighty years before
her marriage, and was 30 years old when he became
king, we are doubtless to understand that she was
only a descendant of Eliab. This name, as borne
by a female, illustrates the remarks under As.

2. ABIHAIL (ONIN, father of might,
i.e. mighty; Sept. "ABixaiA). This name, al-
though the same as the preceding in the autho-
rized version, is, in the original, different Loth in
orthography and signification. It should be
written Apicuau.. The name was borne bi
several persons: 1. Asiciuat., the son of Hun,
one of the family-chiefs of the tribe of Gad, who
settled in Bashan (1 Chron. v. 14); 2. ApicHaiL,
the father of Zuriel, who was the father of the Le-
vitical tribes of Merari (Num. iii. 35); 3. Aasi-
Cutt, the father of queen Esther, and brother of
Mordecai (Esth. ii. 15).

ABIHU (NUNN, father of him; Sept.
*ABiovd), the second of the sons of Aaron, who,
with his brothers Nadab, Eleazer, and Ithamar,
was set apart and consecrated for the priesthood
(Exod, xxviii. 1). When, at the first establish-
ment of the ceremonial worship, the victims
offered on the great brazen altar were consumed
by tive from heaven, it was directed that this fire
should always be kept up; and that the daily
incense should be but in censers filled with
it from the great altar. But one day, Nadab
and Abihu presumed to neglect this regulation,
and offered incense in censers filled with ¢ strange’
or common fire. For this they were instantly
struck dead by lightning, and were taken away
and buried in their clothes without the camp
[Aaron]. There can be no doubt that this severe
example bad the intended effect of enforcing be-
coming attention to the most minute observances
of the ritual service. As immediately after the
record of this transaction, and in apparent refer-
ence to it, comes a prohibition of wine or strong
drink to the priests, whuse turn it might be to
enter the tabernacle, it is not unfairly surmised
that Nadab and Abihu were intoxicated when
they committed this serious error in their minis-
trations (Lev. x. 1-11).

1, ABISAH (38, 438, see signif. in
Apran; Sept. ’ABid, 2 Chiron. xiii. 1). He is also
called Abijam (D°2N; Sept. ’ABiod, 1 Kings xv.
1). Lightfoot (Harm. O. T. in loc.) thinks that the
writer in Chronicles, not describing his reign as
wicked, admits the sacred Jau in his name; but
which the book of Kings, charging him with fole


12 ABIJAH.


lowing the evil ways of his father, changes into
Jam. This may be fanciful; but such changes
of name were not unusual. Abijah was the second
king of the separate kingdom of Judah, being the
son of Rehoboam, and grandson of Sulomon. He
began to reign s.c. 958 (Hales, s.c. 973), in the
eighteenth year of Jeroboam, king of Israel ; and
he reigned three years. At the commencement
of his reign, looking on the well-founded sepa-
ration of the ten tribes from the house of David
as rebellion, Abijah made a vigorous attempt
to bring them back to their allegiance. In this
he failed; although a signal victory over Jero-
boam, who had double his force and much greater
experience, enabled him to take several cities
which had been held by Isracl. The speech
which Abijah addressed to the opposing army
before the battle has been much admired. It was
well suited to its object, and exhibits correct
notions of the theocratical institutions. His view
of the political position of the ten tribes with

t to the house of David is, however, obvi-
ously erroneous, although such as a king of Judah
was likely to take. The numbers reputed to have
been present in this action are 800,000 on the side
of Jeroboam, 400,000 on the side of Abijah, and
500,000 left dead on the field. Hales and others
regard these extraordinary numbers as corrup-
tions, and propose to reduce them to 80,000,
40,000, and 50,000 respectively, as in the Latin
Vulgate of Sixtus Quintus, and many earlier
editions, and in the old Latin translation of Jo-
sephus; and probably also in his original Greek
text, as is collected by De Vignoles from Abar-
banel’s charge against the historian of having made
Jeroboam’s loss no more than 50,000 men, contrary
to the Hebrew text (Kennicott’s Dissertations,
i, 533; ii. 201, &c. 564). The book of Chronicles
mentions nothing conceming Abijah adverse to the
impressions which we receive from his conduct on
this occasion; but in Kings we are told that ‘ he
walked in all the sins of his father’ (1 Kings
xv. 3). He had fourteen wives, by whom he left
twenty-two sons and sixteen daughters. Asa suc-
ceeded him.

There is a difficulty connected with the ma-
ternity of Abijah. In 1 Kings xv. 2, we read,
‘ His mother’s name was Maachah, the daughter
of Abishalom ;’ but in 2 Chron. xiii. 2, ‘ His
mother's name was Michaiah, the daughter of
Uriel of Gibeah.’ Maachah and Michaiah are
variations of the same name; and Abishalom is
in all likelihood Absalom, the son of David. The
word (MQ) rendered ‘ daughter’ is applied in
the Bible not only to a man’s child, but to his
niece, grand-daughter, or great-grand-daughter. It
is therefore probable that Uriel of Gibeah mar-
ried Tamar, the beautiful daughter of Absa-
lom (2 Sam. xiv. 27), and by her had Maachah,
who was thus the daughter of Uriel and grand-
daughter of Absalom.

2. ABIJAH, son of Jeroboam I., king of Israel.
His severe and threatening illness induced Jero-
boam to send his wife with a present [Presenr],
suited to the disguise in which she went, to con-
sult the prophet Ahijah respecting his recovery.
This eoptiae was the same wha had, in the days
of Solomon, foretold to Jeroboam his elevation to
the throne of Israel. Though blind with age, he
mew the disguised wife of Jeroboam, and was
authorized, by the prophetic impulse that came


ABILA.


upon him, to reveal to her that, because there
was fuund in Abijah only, of all the house of
Jeroboam, ‘some gvod thing towards the Lord,’
he only, of all that house, should come to his
grave in peace, and be mourned in Israel. Ac-
cordingly, when the mother returned home, the
youth died as she crossed the threshold of the
dvor. And they buried him, and all Israel
mourned for him’ (1 Kings xiv. 1-18).

3. ABIJAH, one of the descendants of Eleazer,
the son of Aaron, and chief of one of the twenty-
four courses or orders into which the whole body
of the priesthood was divided by David (1 Chron.
xxiv. 10). Of these the course of Abijah was the
eighth. Only four of the courses returned from
the captivity, of which that of Abijah was not
one (Ezra ii. 36-39; Neh. vii. 39-42; xii. 1).
But the four were divided into the original num-
ber of twenty-four, with the original names; and
it hence happens that Zecharias, the father of
John the Baptist, is described as belonging to the
course of Abijah or ‘ Abia’ (Luke i. 5).

ABIJAM [Aaisan, 1.] :

ABILA, capital of the Abilene of Lysanias
(Luke iii. 1); and distinguished from other
places of the same name as the Abila of Lysa-
nias CABIAy Tod Avoaviov), and (by Josephus) as
‘the Abila of Lebanon.’ It is unnecessary to rea-
son upon the meaning of this Greek name; for it
is obviously a form of the Hebrew Adel, which
was applied to several places, and means a
grassy spot. This has been supposed to be the
same as Abel-beth-Maacah, but without founda-
tion, for that was a city of Naphtali, which Abila
was not. An old tradition fixes this as the
place where Abel was slain by Cain, which is in
unison with the belief that the region of Da-
mascus was the land of Eden. But the same
has been said of other places bearing the name
of Abel or Abila, and appears to have originated
in the belief (created by the Septuagint and the
versions which followed it) that the words are
identical; but, in fact, the, name of the son of
Adam is in Hebrew Lebel (537), and therefore
different from the repeated local name of Abel
bax). However, under the belief that the
place and district derived their name trum Abel,
& monument upon the top of a high hill, near the
source of the river Barrada, which rises among the
eastern roots of Anti-Libanus, and waters Damas-
cus, has long been pointed out as the tomb of
Abel, and its Jength (thirty yards) has been
alleged to correspond with his stature! (Quares-
mius, Elucid. Terrae Sancta, vii. 7,13 Maun-
drell, under May 4th). This spot is on the
road from Helivpolis (Baalbec) to Damascus,
between which towns—thirty-two Roman miles
from the former and eighteen from the latter—
Abila is indeed placed in the Itinerary of An-
toninus. About the same distance north-west
of Damascus is Souk Wady Barrada, where
an inscription was found by Mr. Banks, which,
beyond doubt, identifies that place with the Abila
of Lysanias (Quart. Rev. xxvi. 388; Hogg’s
Damascus, i. 301). Souk means market, and is
an appellation often added to villages where
periodical markets are held. The name of Souk
(Wady) Barrada first occurs in Burckhardt (Syria,
P 2); and he states that there are here two vile

ages, built on the opposite sides of the Barrada.
The lively and refreshing green of this neigh-


ABILENE.


bourhood is noticed by him and other travellers,
and undesignedly suggests the propriety of the
name of Abel, in its Hebrew acceptation of a


8:

wABILENE CABiAnvfh, Luke iii. 1), the small
district or territory which took its name from the
chief town, Abila. Its situation is in some
degree determined by that of the town; but
its precise limits and extent remain unknown.
Northward it must have reached beyond the
Upper Barrada. in order to include Abila; and
it is probable that its southern border may have
extended to Mount Hermon (Jebel es-Sheikh). It
seems to have included the eastern declivities of
Anti-Libanus, and the fine valleys between its
base and the hills which front the eastern plains.

his is a very beautiful and fertile region, well
wooded, and watered by numerous springs from
Anti-Libanus. It also affords fine pastures; and
in most respects contrasts with the stern and
barren western slopes of Anti-Libanus.

This territury had been governed as a tetrarchate
by Lysanias, son of Ptolemy and grandson of Men-
nzus (Joseph. Antig. xiv. 13, 3), but he was put
to death, s.c. 33, through the intrigues of Cleo-
patra, who then took possession of the province
(Antig. xiv. 4,1). After her death it fell to Au-
gustus, who rented it out to one Zenodorus ; but
as he did not keep jt clear of robbers, it was
taken from him, and given to Herod the Great
(Antig. xv. 10, 1; Bell. Jud. i. 20,4). At his
death, a part (the southern, doubtless) of the terri-
tory was added to Trachonitis and Iturea to furm
a tetrarchy for his son Philip; but by far the
larger portion, including the city of Abila, was
then, or shortly afterwards, bestowed on anuther
Lysanias, mentioned by Luke (iii. 1), who is
supposed. to have been a descendant of the former
Lysanias, but who is nowhere mentioned by Jo-
sephus. Indeed, nothing is said by him or any
other profane writer, of this part of Abilene until
about ten years after the time referred to by
Luke, when the emperor Caligula gave it to
Agrippa I. as ‘ the tetrarchy of Lysanias’ (Jo-
seph. Antig. xviii. 6, 10), to whom it was after-
wards confirmed by Claudius. At his death, it
was included in that part of his poeseo which
‘vent to his son Agrippa II]. This explanation
(which we owe to the acuteness and research of
Winer), as to the division of Abilene between
Lysanias and Philip, removes the apparent dis-
crepancy between Luke, who calls Lysanias
tetrarch of Abilene at the very time that, accord-
ing to Josephus, (a part of) Abilene was in the
possession uf Philip.

1. ABIMELECH (7D1°28, father of the
king, or perhaps royal father ; Sept. "ABiuéAex),
the name of the Philistine king of Gerar in the
time of Abraham (Gen. xx. 1, sqq.: B.c. 1898;
Hales, s.c. 2054); but, from its recurrence, it
was probably less a proper name than a titular
distinction, like Puaraon for the kings of
Egypt, or Avaustus for the emperors of Rome.
Abraham removed into his territory after the
destruction of Sodom; and fearing that the
extreme beauty of Sarah might bring him into

lifficulties, he declared her to be his sister. The
conduct of Abimelech in taking Sarah into his
shows that even in those early times
kings claimed the right of taking to themselves
the unmarried females not only of their natural


ABIMELECH. 13


subjects, but of those who sojourned in their do-
minions. Another contemporary instance of this
custom occurs in Gen. xii. 15; and one of later
date in Esth. ii. 3. But Abimelech, obedient to
a divine warning communicated to him in a
dream, accompanicd by the information that Abra-
ham was a sacred person who had intercourse with
God, restored her to her husband. As a mark of
his respect he added valuable gifts, and ofiered
the patriarch a settlement in any part of the
country ; but he nevertheless did not forbear to
rebuke, with mingled delicacy and sarcasm, the
deception which had been practised upon him
(Gen. xx.). The most curious point in this trans-
action seems to be, that it appears to have been
admitted, on all hands, that he had an undoubted
right to appropriate to his harem whatever un-
married woman he pleased—all the evil in this
case being that Sarah was already married: so
early had some of the most odious principles of
despotism taken root in the East. The interposi-
tion of Providence to deliver Sarah twice from
royal harems will not seem superfluous when it is
considered how carefully women are there se-
cluded, and how impossible it is to obtain access
to them, or get them back again (Esth. iv. 5). It
is scarcely necessary to add that these practices
still prevail in some Eastern countries, especially
in Persia. The present writer, when at Tabreez,
in the days of Xbbas Meerza, was acquainted
with a Persian khan who lived in continual
anxiety and alarm lest his only daughter should
be required for the harem of the prince, who,
he was aware, had heard of her extreme
beauty. Nothing further is recorded of King
Abimelech, except that a few years after, he
repaired to the camp of Abraham, who had re-
moved southward beyond his borders, accom-
panied by Phichol, ¢ the chief captain of his host,’
to invite the patriarch to contract with him a
league of peace and friendship. Abraham con-
sented ; and this first league on record [AL.i-
axel was confirmed by a mutual oath, made at
a well which had been dug by Abraham, but which
the herdsmen of Ahimelech had forcibly seized
without his knowledge. It was restored to the
rightful owner, on which Abraham named it
Beersuesa (the Well of the Oath), and conse-
crated the spot to the worship of Jehovah (Gen.
xxi. 22-34).


2. ABIMELECH, another king of Gerar, in
the time of Isaac (about u.c. 1804; Hales, 1960),
who is supposed to have been the son of the pre-
ceding. Isaac sought refuge in his territory
during a famine; and having the same fear re-
specting his fair Mesopotamian wife, Rebekah, as
his father had entertained respecting Sarah, he
reported her to be his sister. This brought upon
him the rebuke of Abimelech, when he acci-
dentally discovered the truth. The country ap-
pears to have become more cultivated and
populous than at the time of Abraham's visit,
nearly a century before; and the inhabitants
were more jealous of the presence of such
powerful pastoral chieftains. those times, as
now, wells of water were of so much importance
for agricultural as well as pee purposes, that
they gave a proprietary right to the ‘cil, tik re-
viously appropriated, in which they were dug.
Abraham had dug wells during his sojourn im


the country; and, to bar the claim which re


14 ABIMELECH.


sulted from them, the Philistines had afte:wards
filled them up; but they were now cleared out
by Isaac, who proceeded to cultivate the ground
to which they gave him a right. The virgin soil
yielded him a hundred-fold; and his other pos-
sessions, lis flocks and herds, also received such
rodigious increase that the jealousy of the Phi-
istines could not be suppressed; and Abimelech
desired him to seek more distant quarters, in lan-
guage which gives a high notion of the wealth of
the patriarchal chiefs, and the extent of their
establishments :—‘ Depart from us: for thou art
more and mightier than we. Isaac complied,
and went out into the open country, and dug
wells for his cattle. But the shepherds of the
Philistines, out with their flocks, were not in-
clined to allow the claim to exclusive pasturage
in these districts to be thus established ; and their
opposition induced the quiet patriarch to make
successive removals, until he reached such a dis-
tance that his operations were no longer disputed.
Afterwards, when he was at Beersheba, te Te-
ceived a visit from Abimelech, who was attended
by Ahuzzath, his triend, and Phichol, the chief
captain of lis army. They were received with
some reserve by Isaac; but when Abimelech ex-
plained that it was his wish to renew, with one
so manifestly blessed of God, the covenant of
poe and goodwill which had been contracted
tween their fathers, they were more cheerfully
entertained, and the desired covenant was, with
due ceremony, contracted accordingly. (Gen.
xxvi.) From the facts recorded respecting the
connection of the two Abimelechs with Abrahain
and Isaac, it is manifest that the Philistines,
even at this early time, had a government more
organized, and more in unison with that type
which we now regard as Oriental, than appeared
among the native Canaanites, one of whose na-
tions had been expelled by these forcign settlers
from the territory which they occupied [Pui-
LisTINEs ].


3. ABIMELECH, a son of Gideon, by a con-
cubine-wite, a native of Shechem, where her family
had considerable influence. Through that influ-
ence Abimelech was proclaimed king after the
death of his father, who had himself refused
that honour, when tendered to him, both for
himself and his children (Judg. viii. 22-24). In
a short time, a considerable part of Israel seems to
have recognised his rule. One of the first acts of
his reign was to destroy his brothers, seventy in
number, being the first example of a system of
barbarons state policy of which there have been
frequent instances in the East, and which indeed
has only within a recent period been discon-
tinued. They were slain ‘on one stone’ at
Ophrah, the native city of the family. Only one,
the youngest, named Jotham, escaped ; and he
had the boldness to make his appearance on
Mount Gerizim, where the Shechemites were as-
sembled fur some public purpose (perhaps to in-
augurate Abimelech), and rebuke them in his
famous parable of the trees chousing a king
|JoTHAM; Parane]. In the course of three years

e Shechemites found ample canse to repent of
what they had done; they eventually revolted in
Abimelech’s absence, and caused an ambuscade
to be laid in the mountains, with the design of
destroying him on his return. But Zebul, his
governor in Shechem, contrived to apprise him of


ABINADAB.


these circumstances, so that he was enabled to
avoid the snare laid for him; and, having hastily
assembled some troops, appeared unexpectedly
before Shechem. The people of that place had
meanwhile secured the assistance of one Gaal
and his followers (Gaas.], who marched ont to
give Abimelech battle. He was defeated, and
returned into the town; and his inefliciency and
misconduct in the action had been so manifest,
that the people were induced by Zebul to expel
him and his followers. Although without his pro-
tection, the people still went out to the labours of
the field, This being told Abimelech, who was
at Arumah, he laid an ambuscade in four bodies
in the neighbourhood ; and when the men came
forth in the morning, two of the ambushed parties
rose against them, while the other two seized the
city gates to prevent their return. Afterwards
the whole force united against the city, which,
being now deprived of its most efficient inhabit-
ants, was easily taken. It was completely de
stroyed by the exasperated victor, and the ground
strewn with salt, symbolical of the desolation to
which it was doomed. The fortress, however, still
remained; but the occupants, deeming it un-
tenable, withdrew to the temple of Baal-Berith,
which stood in a more commanding situation.
Abimelech employed his men in collecting and
piling wood against this building, which was
then set on fire and destroyed, with the thousand
men who were in it. Afterwards Abimelech went
to reduce Thebez, which had also revolted. The
town was taken with little difliculty, and the
neople withdrew into the citadel. Here Abime-
ech resorted to his favourite operation, and while
heading a party to burn down the gute, he was
struck on the head by a large stone cast down by
a woman from the wall above. Perceiving that
he had received a death-blow, he directed his
armour-bearer to thrust him through with his
sword, lest it should be said that he fell by a
woman's hand. Thus ended the first attempt to
establish a monarchy in Israel. The chapter in
which these events are recorded (Judg. ix.) gives
a more detailed and lively view of the military
operations of that age than elsewhere occurs, and
claims the close attention of those who study that
branch of antiquities. Abimelech himself ap-
pears to have been a hold and able commander,
but utterly uncontrolled by religion, principle,
or humanity in his ambitious enterprises. His
fate resembled that of Pyrrhus IL, king of
Epirus (Justin. xxv. 53 Pausan. i. 13; Thueyd.
iit, 74); and the dread of the ignominy of its
being said of a warrior that he died by a woman’s
hand was very general (Sophocl. Trach. 1U61;
Senec. Here. Oct. 1176). Vainly did Abimelech
seek to avoid this disgrace; for the fact of hig
death by the hand of a woman was long after
associated with his memory (2 Sam. xi. 21).

ABINADAB (27238, father of roluntari-
ness; Sept.’Auwwada8). There are several persons
of this name, all of whom are also called AmiNna-
pau—the letters 6 and m being very frequently
interchanged in Hebrew.

1, ABINADAB, once of the eight sons of Jesse,
and one of the three who followed Saul to the
war with the Philistines (1 Sam. xvi. 8).

2. ABINADAB, one of Saul’s sons, who was
slain at the battle of Gilboa (1 Sam. xxxi. 2).

3. ABINADAB, the Levite of Kirjath-jearim,


ABIRAM.


in whose house, which was on a hill, the Ark of
the Covenant was deposited, after being brought


beck from the land of the Philistines. It was”


committed to the ial charge of his son Elea-
zer; and remaii there seventy yearg until it
was removed by David (1 Sam. vii. 1,2; 1 Chron.
mii. 7). [Anx.]

1, ABIRAM (OD3N, father of altitude, i.e.
high ; Sept. "ABeipdy), one of the family-chiefs of
the tribe of Reuben, who, with Dathan and On
of the same tribe, joined Korah, of the tribe of
Levi, in a conspiracy against Aaron and Moses
[Aaron]. (Num. xvi.)

2. ABIRAM, eldest son of Hiel the Bethelite
(i Kings xvi. 34). [Hizs.; Jzricuo.]

ABISHAG GMI, Sather of error ; Sept.
*ABiody), a beautiful youny woman of Shunam,
in the tribe of Issachar, who was chosen by the
servants of David to be introduced into the royal
harem, for the special purpose of ministering to
him, and cherishing him in his old age. She be-
came his wife; but the marriage was never con-
summated. Some time after the death of David,
Adonijah, his eldest son, persuaded Bathsheba,
the mother of Solomon, to entreat the king that
Abishag might be given to him in marriage.
But as rights and privileges peculiarly regal
were associated with the control and ion
of the harem of the deceased kings [Harz],
Solomon detected in this application a fresh aspi-
ration to the throne, which he visited with death
(1 Kings i. 1-4; ii. 13-25) [Aponrsax].


ABISHAI (W!3N, father of gifts; Sept.
*ABeood and *Aficaf), a nephew of David by his
sister Zeruiah, and brother of Joab and Asahel.
The three brothers devoted themselves zealously
to the interests of their uncle during his wander-
ings. Though David had more reliance upon the
talents of Joab, he appears to have given more
of his private confidence to Abishai, who seems
to have attached himself in a peculiar manner
to his person, as we ever find him near, and
ready for council or action, on critical occasions.
Abishai, indeed, was rather a man of action than
of council ; and although David must have been
gratified by his devotel and uncompromising
attachment, he had more generally occasion to
check the impulses of his ardent temperament
than to follow his advice. Abishai was one of
the two persons whom David asked to accom-
pany him to the camp of Saul; and he alone

ed the perilous distinction (1 Sam. xxvi.
5-9), The desire he then expressed to smite the
sleeping king, identifies him as the man who
afterwards burned to rush upon Shimei and slay
him for his abuse of David (2 Sam. xvi. 9).
For when the king fled beyond the Jordan from
Absalom, Abishai was again by his side: and he
was entrusted with the command of one of the
three divisions of the army which crushed that
rebellion Neer xviii, 2). Afterwards, in a
war with the Philistines, David was in imminent
pe of his life from a giant named Ishbi-benob ;

t was rescued by Abishai, who slew the giant
(2 Sam. xx. 15-17). He was also the chief of
the three ‘ mighties,’ who, probably in the same
war, performed the chivalrous exploit of break-
ing through the host of the Philistines to pruen
David a draught of water from the well of his


ABIYONAH. 15


native Bethlehem (2 Sam. xxiii. 14-17). Among
the exploits of this hero it is mentioned that he
withstood 300 men and slew them with his
r fag but the .occasion of this adventure, and

time and manner of his death, are equally
unknown. In 2 Sam. viii. 13, the victory over
the Edomites in the Valley of Salt is ascribed ta
David, but in 1 Chron. xviii. 12, to Abishai. It
is hence probable that the victory was actually
gained by Abishai, but is ascribed to David as
king and commanderin-chief.


ABISHUA (Yi"3N, father of safety ; Sept.
*ABico8), the son of Phinehas, and fourth high-
priest of the Jews (1 Chron. vi. 50). The com-
mencement and duration of his pontificate are
uncertain, but the latter is inferred from cire
cumstances, confirmed by the Chronicon of Alex-
andria, to have included the period in which
Ehud was judge, and probably the preceding
period of servitude to Eglon of Moab. Blair
places him from s.c. 1352 to 1302—equivalent
to Hales, p.c. 1513 to 1463. This high-priest is
called Abiezer by Josephus (Antig. v. 12, 5).


ABIYONAH (3°38; Sept. drmapis). This
word occurs only once in the Bible, Eccles.
xii. 5: © When the almond-tree shall flourish,
and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desive
shall fail; because man goeth to his long home.’
The word translated desire is aniyonau, which
by others has been considered to signify the
CAPER-PLANT. The reasons assigned for the
latter opinion are; that the Rabbins apply the
term abionoth to the small fruit of trees and
berries, as well as to that of the caper-bush ;
that the caper-bush is common in Syria and
Arabia; that its fruit was in early times eaten asa
condiment, being stimulating in its nature, and


(Capparis spincsa.]


therefore calculated to excite desire; that as the


ca grows on tombs, it will be liable to-


1s ABIYONAH.


be destroyed when tnese are opened ; and, finally,
that as Solomon speaks here in symbols and
allegories, we must suppose him to deviate from
the course he had apparently prescribed to him-
self, if he were to express in plain words that
“desire shall fail,’ instead of intimating the same
thing, by the failure of that which is supposed
to have been used to excite desire.

Celsius (Hierobotanicon, i. 210) argues, on
the contrary, that Solomon in other places, when
treating of the pleasures of youth, never speaks of
capers, but of wine and perfumes; that, had he
wished to adduce anything of the kind, he would
have selected something more remarkable; that
capers, moreover, instead of being pleasantly sti-
mulant, are rather acrid and hurtful, and though
occasionally employed by the ancients as condi-
ments, were little esteemed by them ; and, finally,
that the word abionoth of the Rabbins is distinct
from the abiyonah of this ge, as is ad-
mitted even by Ursinus: ‘ Nam quod vocabu-
lum MIVIAN Adbionoth, quod Rabbinis usitatum,
alia quedam puncta habeat, non puto tanti
esse momenti’ (Arboret. Biblicum, xxviii. 1). To
this Celsius replies: ‘Immo, nisi vocales et
puncta genuina in Ebraicis observentur, Babelica
fiet confusio, et coelo terra miscebitur. Incer-
tum pariter pro certo assumunt, qui cappares vo-
lunt proprie abionoth dici Rabbinis’ (2. c. p. 213).

But as the Septuagint, the Vulgate, and some
other translations, have understood the caper-
bush to be meant, it is desirable to give some
account of it, especially as, from its omamental
nature, it could not but attract attention. There
are, moreover, some points in its natural his-
tory which have been overlooked, but which may
serve to show that in the passage under review it
might without impropriety have been employed
in carrying out the figurative language with
which the verse commences.

The caper-plant belongs to a tribe of plants,
the Capparides, of which the species are found
in considerable numbers in tropical countries,
such as India, whence they extend northwards
into Arabia, the north of Africa, Syria, and
the south of Europe. The common caper-bush—
Capparis spinosa, Linn. (the C. sativa of Persoon)
—is commun in the countries immediately sur
rounding the Mediterranean. Dioscorides de-
scribes it as spreading in a circular manner on
the ground, in poor soils and rugged situations ;
and Pliny, ‘as being set and sown in stony
places especially.’ Theophrastus states that it
refuses to grow in cultivated ground. Dioscorides
describes it as having thorns like a bramble,
leaves like the quince, and fruit like the olive;
characters almost sufticient to identify it. The
caper is well known to the Arabs, being their


yp kibbur ; and designated also by the name
als| athuf or azuf. The bark of the root, which


is still used in the East, as it formerly was in
Europe, no doubt possesses some irritant property,
as it was one of the five aperient roots. The
unexpanded flower-buds, preserved in vinegar, are
well known at our tables as a condiment by the
name of capers. Parts of the plant seem to have
been similarly used by the ancients.

The caper-plant is showy and ornamental,
growing in barren places in the midst of the


ABLUTION.


rubbish of ruins, or on the walls of buildings.
It was obeerved by Ray on the Temple of Peace


‘at Rome, and in otl.er similar situations. It forme


a much-branched, diffuse shrub, which annually
loses its leaves. The branches are long and
trailing; smooth, but armed with double curved
stipulary spines. The leaves are alternate, round-
ish or oblong-oval, a little fleshy, smovth, of a
green colour, but sometimes a little reddish. The
flowers are large and showy, produced singly
in the axils of the leaves, on stalks which are
larger than the leaves. The calyx is fourleaved,
coriaceous ; the petals are also four in number,
white, and of an oval roundish form. The stamens
are very numerous and long ; and their filaments
being tinged with purple, and terminated by the
yellow anthers, give the flowers a very agreeable
appearance. The ovary is borne upon a straight
stalk, which is a little longer than the stamens,
and which, as it ripens, droops and forms an oval
or pearshaped berry, enclosing within its pulp
numerous small seeds.


Many of the caper tribe, being remarkable for
the long stalks by which their fruit is supported,
conspicuously display, what also takes place in
other plants, namely, the drooping and hang-
ing down of the fruit as it ripens. As, then, the
flowering of the almond-tree, in the first part of
the verse, has been supposed to refer to the whiten-
ing of the hair, so the drooping of the ripe fruit
of a plant like the caper, which is conspicuous
on the walls of buildings, and on tombs, may be
supposed to typify the hanging down of the head
before ‘ man goeth to his long home.’ —J. F. R.

ABLUTION, the ceremonial washing,
whereby, as a symbol of purification from un-
cleanness, a person was considered—l, to be
cleansed from the taint of an inferior and less
pure condition, and initiated into a higher and
purer state; 2. to be cleansed from the soil of
common life, and fitted for special acts of reli-
gious service ; 3. to be cleansed trom defilements
contracted by particular acts or circumstances,
and restored to the privileges of ordinary life;
4. as absolving or purifying himself, or declaring
himself absolved and purified, from the guilt of
a particular act. We do not meet with any
such ablutions in patriarchal times: but under
the Mosaical dispensation they all occur.

A marked example of the frst kind of ablution
occurs when Aaron and his sons, on their being
set apart for the priesthood, were washed with
water before they were invested with the priestly
robes and anointed with the holy oil (Lev. viii. 6).
To this head we are inclined to refer the ablution
of persons and raiment which was commanded to
the whole of the Israelites, as a preparation to
their receiving the law from Sinai (Exod. xix. 10-
15). We also find examples of this kind of purifi-
cation in connection with initiation into a higher
state. Thus those admitted into the lesser or in-
troductory mysteries of Eleusis were previously


ABLUTION.


asa ehh ph ene i aa
ing poured upon them by the Udranos.

The second kind of ablution was that which
required the priests, on pain of death, to wash
their hands and their feet before they approached
the altar of God (Exod. xxx. 17-21). For this
purpose a large basin of water was provided both
at the tabernacle and at the temple. To this the
Psalmist alludes when he says—‘I will wash my
hands in innocency, and so will I compass thine
altar’ (Ps. xxvi. G). Hence it became the custom
in the early Christian church for the ministers, in
the view of the congregation, to wash their hands in
a basin of water brought by the deacon, at the com-
mencement of the communion (Jamieson, p. 126);
and this practice, or something like it, is still
retained in the Eastern churches, as well as in
the church of Rome, when mass is celebrated.
Similar ablutions by the priests before proceeding
to perform the more sacred ceremonies were us'
among the heathen. The Egyptian priests in-
deed carricti the practice to a burdensome extent,
from which the Sein priests were, perhaps de-
signedly, exonerated; and in their less torrid
climate it was, fur purposes of real cleanliness,
less needful. Reservoirs of water were attached
to the Egyptian temples; and Herodotus (ii. 37)
informs us that the priests shaved the whole of
their bodies every third day, that no insect or
other filth might be upon them when they served
the gods, and that they washed themselves in cold
water twice every day and twice every night:
Porphyry says thrice a day, with a nocturnal
ablution occasionally. This kind of parted
as tory to a religious act, answers to
cule Wade of the Moslems, which they are
required to go through five times daily before
their stated prayers. This makes the ceremonies
of ablution much more conspicuous to a traveller
in the Moslem East at the present day than they
would appear among the ancient Jews, seeing
that the law im this obligation on the priests
only. not on the people. Connected as these
Moslem ablutions are with various forms and
imitative ceremonies, and recurring so frequently
as they do, the avowedly heavy yoke of even the
Mosaic law seems light in the comparison.

In the third class of ablutions washing is re-
garded as a purification from positive defile-
ments. The Kfosaical law recognises eleven
species of uncleanness of this nature (Lev. xii.-
xy.), the purification for which ceased at the
end of a certain period, provided the unclean
pen then washed his body and his clothes ;

t in a few cases, such as leprosy and the defile-
ment contracted by touching a dead body, he
remained unclean seven days after the physical
cause of pollution had ceased. This was all that
the law required: but in later times, when the
Jews began to refine upon it, these cases were
considered generic instead of specific—as repre-
senting classes instead of individual cases of
detiierment—and the causes of pollution requiring
paniication by water thus came to be greatly in-
creased. This kind of ablution for substantial


uncleanness answers to the Moslem vs ghash,
in which the causes of defilement greatly exceed
those of the Mosaical law, while they are perbaps


equalled in number and minuteness by those
Wich the later Jews devised. The uncleanness


ABLUTION. nv


in this class arises chiefly from the natural secre-
tions of human beings and of beasts used for
food ; and from the ordure of animals not used
for food ; and, as among the Jews, the detilement
may be communicated not only to persons, but
to clothes, utensils, and dwellings—in all which
cases the purification must be made by water, o-
by some representative act where water cannot be
applied. .

Of the ast class of ablutions, by which persons
declared themselves free frum the guilt of a partie
cular action, the most remarkable instance is that
which occurs in the expiation for an unknown
murder, when the elders of the nearest village
washed their hands over the expiatory heifer, be-
headed in the valley, saying, * Our hands have
not shed this blood, neither have our eycs seen it”
(Deut. xxi. 1-9). It has been thought by some
that the signal act of Pilate, when he washed his
hands in water and declared himself innocent of
the blood of Jesus (Matt. xxvii. 24), was a de-
signed adoption of the Jewish custom: but this
supposition does not appear necessary, as the
custom was also common among the Grecks and
Romans.

We have confined this notice to the usages of
ablution as a sign of purification sanctioned or
demanded by the law itself. Other practices not
there indicated appear to have existed at a very
early period, or to have grown up in the course
of time. From 1 Sam. xvi. 5, compared with
Exod. xix. 10-14, we learn that it was usual for
those who presented or provided a sacrifice to
purify themselves by ablution: and as this was
everywhere a general practice, it may be sup-
pet to have existed in patriarchal times, and,

ing an established and approved custum, not
to have required to be mentioned in the Jaw.
There is a passage in the apocryphal book of
Judith (xii. 7-9) which has been thought to intimate
that the Jews performed ablutions before prayer.
But we cannot fairly deduce that meaning fiom
it. It would indeed prove too much if so undere
stood, as Judith bathed in the water, which is
more than even the Moslems do before their
prayers. Moreover, the authority, if clear, would
not be conclusive.

But after the rise of the sect of the Pharisces,
the practice of ablutiun was carried to such ex-
cess, from the affectation of excessive purity, that
it is repeatedly brought under our notice in
the New Testament through the severe animad-
versions of our Saviour on the consummate liy-
pocrisy involved in this fastidious attention to
the external types of moral purity, while the
heart was left unclean. All the practices fhere
exposed come under the head of purification from
uncleanness ;—the acts’ involving which were
made so numerous that persons of the stricter sect
could scarcely move without contracting some
involuntary pollution. For this reason they never
entered their houses without ablution, from the
strong probability that they had unknowingly
contracted sume defilement in the strects; and
they were especially careful never to eat without
washing the bands (Mark vii. 1-5), because
they were peculiarly liable to be defiled; and as
unclean hands were held to communicate um
cleanness to all food (excepting fruit) which they
touched, it was deemed that there was no secu-
rity against eating unclean food but by always

Qo


18 ABNAIM,


washing the hands ceremonially before touching
any meat. We say ‘ceremonially,’ because
this article refers only to ceremonial washing.
The Israelites, who, like other Orientals, fed with
their fin washed their hands befure meals,
for the sake of cleanliness [Wasuina]. But these
customary washings were distinct from the cere-
monial ablutions, as they are now among the Mos-
lems. There were, indeed, distinct names for
them. The former was called simply ?°D3, or
washing, in which water was, poured upon the
hands; the latter was called m°90, plunging, be-
cause the hands were plunged in water (Light-
foot, on Mark vii. 4). It was this last, namely, the
ceremonial ablution, which the Pharisees judged
to be so necessary. When therefore some of that
sect remarked that our Lord’s disciples ate ‘ with
unwashen hands’ (Mark vii. 2), it is not to be
understuod literally that they did not at all wash
their hands, but that they did not plunge them
ceremonially according to their own practice.
And this was expected from them only as the
disciples of a religious teacher; for these refine-
ments were not practised by the class of people
from which the disciples were chiefly drawn.
Their wonder was, that Jesus had not inculcated
this observance on his followers, and not, as some
have fancied, that he had enjoined them to neg-
lect what had been their previous practice.

In at least an equal degree the Pharisees mul-
tiplied the ceremonial pollutions which required
the ablution of inanimate objects—* cups and
pots, brazen vessels and tables;’ the rules given
mm the law (Lev. vi. 28; xi. 32-36; xv. 23)
being extended to these multiplied contamina-
tions. Articles of earthenware which were of
little value were to be broken; and those of
metal and wood were to be scoured and rinsed
with water. All these matters are fully described
by Buxtorf, Lightfoot, Gill, and other writers
of the same class, who present many striking
illustrations of the passages of Scripture which
refer ty them. The Mohammedan usages of
ablution, which offer many striking analogies, are
fully detailed in the third book of the Alischat
wl Masdbih, and also in D'Ohsson’s Tableau,
liv. i. chap. i,

ABNAIM (0238). This word is the dual
of JAN, a stone, and in this form only occurs twice,
Exod. i. 16, and Jer. xviii. 3. In the latter passage
it undeniably means @ potter’s wheel; but what
it denotes in the former, or how to reconcile with
the use of the word in the latter text any interpre-
tation which can be assigned to it in the former,
is a question which (see Rosenmiiller tn loc.) has
mightily exercised the ingenuity and patience
of critics and philologers. The meaning appears
to have been doubtful even of old, and the ancient
versions are much at variance. The LXX. evades
the difficulty by the general expression 87ay dor
mpds r@ Thicrew, ‘ when they are about to be de-
livered,’ and is followed by the Vulgate, ‘ e¢ partus
tempus advenerit ;' but our version is more de-
finite, and has ‘and see them upon the stools.’
This goes upon the notion that the word denotes
@ particular kind of open stoul or chair con-
structed for the purpose of delivering pregnant
women. The usages of the East do not, however,
acquaint us with any such utensil, the employ-
mment of which, indeed, is not in accordance with


ABNER.


the simple manners of ancient times. Others,
therefore, suppose the word to denote stone or
other bathing troughs, in-which it was usual to
lave new-born infants. This conjecture is so
far probable, that the midwife, if inclined to
obey the royal mandate, could then destroy the
child without check or observation. Accordingly,
this interpretation is preferred by Gesenius (The
saur, 8.0. JAN), quoting in illustration The-
venot (Jtin, ii. 98), who states ‘ that the kings of
Persia are so afraid of being deprived of that
power which they abuse, and are so apprehensive
of being dethroned, that they cause the male
“children of their female relations to be de
stroyed in the stone bathing-troughs in which
newly-born children are laved.’ The question,
however, is not as to the existence of the
custom, but its application to the case in view.
Professor Lee treats the preceding opinions with
little ceremony, and decides nearly in accordance
with the LXX. and other ancient versions, none
of which, as he remarks, say anything about
wash-pots, stools, or the like. He then gives
reasons for understanding the command of Pha-
raoh thus: ‘Observe, look carefully on the tro
occasions (ft. e. in which either a male or female
child is born). If it be a son, then,’ &c. We
may add that this is a subject on which some
light may possibly be thrown at a future day
by the monuments of Egypt, in which the an-
cient manners of that country are so minutely
portrayed.


ABNER (WAN or WAN, father of light ;
Sept. ’ABevynp), the cousin of Saul (being the son
of his uncle Ner), and the commander-in-chief of
his army. He does not come much before us until
after the death of Saul, n.c. 1056, Then, the expe-
rience which he had acquired, and the character
for ability and decision which he had established
in Israel, enabled him to uphold the falling
house of Saul for seven years; and he might pro-
bably have done so longer if it had suited his
views. It was generally known that David had
been divinely nominated to succeed Saul on the
throne : when. therefore, that monarch was slain in
the battle of Gilboa, David was made king over
his own tribe of Judah, and reigned in Hebron.
In the other tribes an influence adverse to Judah
existed, and was cuntrolled chiefly by the tribe
of Ephraim. Abner, with great decision, availed
himself of this state of fecling, and tumed it to
the advantage of the house to which he belonged,
of which he was now the most important surviv-
ing member. He did not, however, venture to
propose himself as king; but took Ishbosheth,
a surviving sun of Saul, whose known imbecility
had excused his absence from the fatal fight in
which his father and brothers perished, and made
him king over the tribes, and ruled in his name.
Ishbusheth reigned in Mahanaim, beyond Jordan,
and David in Hebron. A sort of desultory
warfare arose between them, in which the ad-
vantage appears to have been always on the
side of David. The only one of the engagements
of which we have a particular account is that
which ensued when Joab, David's general, and
Abner, met and fought at Gibeon. Abner was
beaten and fled for his life; but was pursued
by Asahel, the brother of Joab and Kbishai,
who was ‘ swift of foot as a wild roe.’ Abner,


ABNER.


dreading a blood-feud with Joab, for whom be
seems to have entertained a sincere respect, en-
treated Asahel to desist from the pursuit: but
finding that he was still followed, and that his life
was in danger, he at length ran his pursuer through
the body by a back thrust with the pointed heel of
his r (2 Sam. ii. 8-82). This puta strife of
bod between the two foremost men in all Israel
(after David); for the law of bonour which had
from times before the law prevailed among the
Hebrews, and which still prevails in Arabia, ren-
dered it the conventional duty of Joab to avenge
the blood of his brother upon the person by whom
he had been slain [B1ioop-Revenag}.

As time went on, Abner had occasion to feel
more strongly that he was himself not only the
chief, but the only remaining prop of the house of
Saul: and this conviction, acting upon a proud
and arrogant spirit, led him to more presumptuous
conduct than even the mildness of the feeble
Ishbosheth could suffer to pass without question.
He took ta his own harem a woman who had
been a concubine-wife of Saul. This act, from
the ideas connected with the harem of a deceased
king [Hanzeuj, was not only a great impro-

iety, but was open to the suspicion of a oe

ign, which Abner may very possibly have en-
tertained. A mild rebuke from the nominal king,
however, enraged him greatly ; and he plainly
declared that he would henceforth abandon his
cause and devote himself to the interests of
David. To excuse this desertion to his own
mind, he then and on other occasions avowed his
knowledge that the son of Jesse had been appointed
by the Lord to reign over all Israel: but he
appears to have been unconscious that this avowa]
exposed his previous conduct to more censure than
it offered excuse for his present. He, however,
kept his word with Ishboxsheth. After a tour,
during which he explained his present views to
the elders of the tribes which still adhered to the
house of Saul, he repaired to Hebron with autho-
lity to make certain overtures to David on their
behalf. He was received with great attention
and respect; and David even thought it prudent
to promise that he should still have the chief com-
mand of the armies, when the desired union of
the two kingdoms took place. The political ex-

iency of this engagement is very clear, and to

t expediency the interests and claims of Joab
were sacrificed. That distinguished personage
happened to be absent from Hebron on service at
the time, but he returned just as Abner had left
the city. He speedily understood what had
passed; and his dread of the superior influence
which such a man as Abner might establish with
David, quickened his remembrance of the ven-
geance which his brother’s blood required. His

pose was promptly formed. Unkiionra to the

ing, but apparently in his name, he sent a

message after Abner to call him back; and as he
retumed, Joab met him at the gate, and, leading
him aside, as if to confer peaceably and privately
with him, suddenly thrust his sword into his body
(n.c. 1048). ‘The lamentations of David, the
public mourning which he ordered, and the fu-
neral honours Which were paid to the remains of

Abner, the king himself following the bier as chief

mourner, exonerated him in public opinion from

having been privy to this assassination. As for

Joab, his privilege as a blood-avenger must to a


ABNET. wp


great extent have justified his treacherous act in
the opinion of the people; and that, together with
his influence with the army, screened him from
punishment (2 Sam. iii. 6-39).

For the following interesting elucidation of
David's lament over Abner, we are indebted to a
learned and highly valued contributor.

[David's short but emphatic lament over Ab-
ner (2 Sam. iii. 33) may be rendered, with stricter
ee to the form of the original, as fol-

lows :—

‘Should Abner die as a villain dies !—

Thy hands—not bound,
Thy feet—not brought into fetters :
As one falls before the sons of wickedness,
fellest thou !’

As to the syntactical structure of these lines, it
is important to observe that the second and third
lines are two propositions of state belonging to
the last, which describe the condition in which
he was when he was slain. This kind of propo-
sition is marked by the sudject being placed first,
and by the verb generally becoming a participle.
On the right knowledge of this structure the
beauty and sense of many passages altogether
depend ; and the common ignorance of it is to
be ascribed to the circumstance, that the study
of Hebrew so very seldom reaches beyond the
vocabulary into the deeperseated peculiarities of
its construction. (See Ewald’s Hebr. Gram.
$556.) As to the sense of the words, J. D. Michaelis
(in his Uebersetzung des Alten Test. mit Anmer-
kungen fiir Ungelehrte) saw that the point of
this indignant, more than sorrowful, lament,
lies in the mode in which Abner was slain.
Joab professed to kill him ‘ for the blood of
Asahel his brother,’ 2 Sam. iii. 27. But if a
man claimed his brother's blood at the hand of
his murderer, the latter (even if he fled to the altar
for refuge, Exod. xxi. 14) would have been deli-
vered up (bound, hand and foot, it is assumed)
to the avenger of bloud, who would then
a legal right to slay him. Now Joab not only
had no title to claim the right of the Goel, as
Asahel was killed under justifying circumstances
(2 Sam. ii. 19); but, while pretending to exer
cise the avenger’s right, he took a lawless and
private mode of satisfaction, and committed a
murder. Hence David charged him, in allusion
to this conduct, with ‘shedding the blood of war
in peace’ (1 Kings ii. 5); and hence he expresses
himself in this lament, as if indignant that
the noble Abner, instead of being surrendered
with the formalities of the law to meet an
authorized penalty, was treacherously stabbed
like a worthless fellow by the hands of an
assassin.—J. N.j


\

ABNET (0338). As this word can be traced
to no rvot in the Hebrew language, and as it
occurs in the narrative immediately after the
departure from Egypt, it is reasonably supposed
by Professor Lee to be Egyptian, in opposition
however to Hottinger, who refers it to the Persie,
and to Gesenius, who finds it in the Sanscrit. It
means a band, a bandage ; and from the places
in which it occurs, it appears to have been made
of fine linen variously wrought, and used to bind
as a girdle about the body of persons in authority
especially the Jewish priests (Exod. xxix. 93
xxviii. 39; xxxix. 29; Lev. viii. 13; im xxii.

©


20 ABOMINATION.


91). These girdles may be considered as fairl
represented by those which we observe on suc!
persons in the Egyptian: paintings.


ABOMINATION (M9YIA and PPY ; Sept.
and New Test.—e. 7. Matt. xxiv. 15—A3éavypa,
for both). These words describe generally any
object of detestation or disgust (Lev. xviii. 22;
Deut. vii. 25); and are applied to an impure or
detestable action (Ezek. xxii. 11; xxx. 26; Mal.
ii. 11, &c.); to any thing causing a ceremonial

lution (Gen. xliii. 32; xlvi. 34; Deut. xiv. 3);

t more especially to idols (Lev. xviii. 22; xx.
13; Deut. vii. 26; 1 Kings xi. 5, 7; 2 Kings
xxiii. 13); and also to food offered to idols (Zech.
ix. 7); and to filth of every kind (Nahum iii. 6).
There are two or three of the texts in which the
word occurs, to which, on account of their peculiar
interest or difficulty, especial attention has been
drawn. The first is Gen. xliii. 32: ‘The Egyp-
tians might not eat bread with the Hebrews;
for that is an abomination (M3YIN) unto the
Egyptians.’ This is best explained by the fact
that the Egyptians considered themselves cere-
monially defiled if they ate with any strangers.
The primary reason a to have been that the
cow was the most sacred animal among the Egyp-
tians, and the eating of it was abhorrent to them ;
whereas it was both eaten and sacrificed by the
Jews and most other nations, who on that account
were abominable in their eyes. It was for this, as
we learn from Herodotus (ii. 41), that no Egyptian
man or woman would kiss a Greek on the mouth,
or would use the cleaver of a Greek, or his spit, or
his dish, or would taste the flesh of even clean beef
(that is, of oxen) that had been cut with a Grecian
carving-knife. It is true that Sir J. G. Wilkinson
(Ane. Egyptians, iii. 358) ascribes this to the re-
pugnance of the fastidiously clean Egyptians to
the comparatively foul habits of their Asiatic and
other neighbours: but it seems scarcely fair to
take the facts of the father of history, and ascribe


ABOMINATION.


to them any other than the very satisfactory reason
which he assigns. We collect then that it was
as foreigners, not pointedly as Hebrews, that it
was an abomination for the Egyptians to eat with
the brethren of Joseph. The Jews themselves
subsequently exemplified the same tice ; for
in later times they held: it unlawful to eat or
drink with foreigners in their houses, or even to
enter their houses (John xviii. 28; Acts x. 28;
xi. 3); for not only were the houses of Gentiles
unclean (Mishn. Oholoth. 18, § 7), but they them-
selves rendered unclean those in whose houses
they lodged (Maimon. Bishcab a. Morheb, c.
12, § 12); which was carrying the matter a step
further than the Eareeians (see also Mitzroth
Tora, fr 148). We do not however trace these
examples before the Captivity.

The second ge is Gen. xlvi. 34. Joseph
is telling his beettien how to conduct them-
selves when introduced to the king of Egypt;
and he instructs them that when asked concern-
ing their occupation they should answer: ‘ Thy
servants’ trade hath been about cattle from our
youth even until now, both we and also our
fathers.’ This last clause has emphasis, as show-
ing that they were hereditary nomade pe
and the reason is added : ‘That ye may dwell in
the land of Goshen,— for every shepherd is an
abomination unto the Egyptians.’ In the former
instance they were ‘an abomination ’ as strangera,
with whom the Egyptians could not eat ; here they
are a further abomination as nomade shepherds,
whom it was certain that the Egyptians, for that
reason, would locate in the border land of Goshen,
and not in the heart of the country. That it was
nomade shepherds, or Bedouins, and not simply
shepherds, who were abominable to the Egyptians,
is evinced by the fact that the Egyptians them-
selves paid great attention to the rearing of cattle.
This is shown by their sculptures and paintings,
as well as bv ‘he offer of this very king of Egypt
to make sucn of Jacob's sons as were men of
activity ‘overseers of his cattle’ (xlvii. 6). For
this aversion to nomade pastors two reasons are
given; and it is not necessary that we should choose
between them, for both of them were, it is most
likely, concurrently true. One is, that the inhabit-
ants of Lower and Middle Egypt had previously
been invaded by, and had remained for many years
subject to, a tribe of nomade Se ened peaked
who had only of late been expelled, and a native
dynasty restored—the grievous oppression of the
Egyptians by these pastoral invaders, and the in-
sult with which their religion had been treated. The
other reason. not necessarily superseding the former,
but rather strengthening it, ia, that the Egyptians,
as a settled and civilized people, detested the law-
less and predatory habits of the wandering ei
herd tribes, which then, as now, bounded the val-
ley of the Nile, and occupied the Arabias, Their
constantly aggressive operations upon the frontiers,
and upon all the great lines of communication,
must, with t to them, have given intensity to
the odium with which all strangers were regarded.
If any proof of this were wanting, it is found in
the fact (attested by the Rev. R. M. Macbriar
and others) that, sunk as Modern Egypt is, thera
is still such a marked and irreconcilable differ-
ence of ideas and habits between the inhabitants
and the Bedouins, whose camps are often in the
near neighbourhood of their towns and villages,


ABOMINATION.


along the Tigris and Euphrates.
The third marked use of this word again occurs
The king tells the Israelites to offer to


To which
sacrifice to
the * the abomination of the Egyptians,’
who would thereby be highly e rated against
erence back to


out going to the desert for that ;
Moses objects, that they should ace to


to
hold, not only would heifers be offered, but the
28 would feast upon their flesh.
‘ue AsominaTION or Desonation. In
Dan. ix. 27, DOYD Pip; literally, ‘ the abomi-
nation of the desolater, which, without doubt,
means the idol or idolatrous, a tus which the
desolater of Jerusalem should establish in the holy
place. This os to have been a prediction of
the pollution of the temple by Antiochus Epiphanes,
who caused an idolatrous altar to be built on the
altar of burnt offerings, wheregn unclean things
were offered to Jupiter Olympius, to whom the
temple itself was dedicated. Josephus distinctly
refers to this as the accomplishment of Duaniel’s
ronal does the author of the first bock of
in declaring that ‘ they set up the abo-
mination of desolation upon thealtar’—¢Koddunoay
1d BdéAvypa Tis épnudcews emt 7d Ovotarrhpioy
(1 Mace. i. 59; vi. 7; 2 Mace. vi. 2-5; Joseph.
Antiq. xii. 5, 4; xii.7, 6). The phrase is quoted by
Jesus, in the form of 7d B3éAvyya Tis epnudoews
(Matt. xxiv. 15), and is applied by him to
» at was to take place at the advance of the
Romans against Jerusalem. They who saw ‘the
abomination of desolation standing in the holy
place’ were enjoined to ‘ flee to the mountains.’
And this may with probability be referred to the
aivance of the Roman army against the city with
their image-crowned standards, to which idolatrous
honours were paid, and which the Jews regarded
as idols. The unexpected retreat and discom-
fiture . - ony sea forces afforded such as were
mindful of our Saviour'’s prophecy an rtuni
of obeying the injunction V hich it catained.
That the Jews themselves regarded the Roman
standards as abominations is shown by the fact
that, in deference to their known aversion, the Ro-
man soldiers quartered in Jerusalem forbore to
introduce their standards into the city : and on
one occasion, when Pilate gave orders that they
should be carried in by night, so much stir was
ae heap arse by the principal inhabitants,
lor the sake of the governor was event-
ually induced to Layee dl ihe
tig. xviii. 3, 1).
that ‘


set them up over the eastern gate, and
efered them (Joseph. Bell. Jud. vi.
- ); for (as Havercamp judiciously notes from

ertullian, Apol. c. xvi, 162) ‘ almost the entire


ABRAHAM. ‘au
religion of the Roman camp consisted in worship-


ping abhi bu swearing by the ensigns, and
In preferring the


ensigns before all the other gods.’


Nor was this the last appearance of ‘ the abomi-
nation of desolation, in the holy place :’ for, not
only did Hadrian, with studied insult to the Jews,
set up the figure of a boar over the Bethlehem gate
of the city (Elia Capitolina) which rose upon
the site and ruins of Jerusalem (Euseb. Chron.
Lt p- 45, ed. 1658), but he erected a temple to
Jupiter upon the site of the Jewish temple (Dion
Cass. Ixix. 12), and caused an image of him-
self to be set up in the part which answered to
the most holy place (Nicephorus Callist., iii. 24).
This was.a consummation of all the abominations
which the iniquities of the Jews brought upon
their holy place.

ABRAHAM (D138, father of a multi-
tude; t. ‘ABpadu), the founder of the Hebrew
nation. Up to Gen. xvii. 4,5, he is uniformly
called Apram (D738, father of elevation, or
high father ; Sept.“ABpau), and this was his ori-
ginal name; but the extended form, which it
always afterwards bears, was given to it to make it
significant of the promise of a numerous posterity
which was at the same time made to him.

Abraham was a native of Chaldea, and de-
scended, through Heber, in the ninth generation,
from Shem the son of Noah. His father was Terah,
who had two other sons, Nahor and Haran. Haran
died prematurely ‘before his father,’ leaving a son
Lot, and two daughters, Milcah and Iscah. Lot
attached himself to his uncle Abraham; Milcah
became the wife of her uncle Nahor; and Iscah,
who was also called Sarai, became the wife of
Abraham (Gen. xi. 26-29: comp. Joseph. Antig.
i. 6,5) [Iscax].

Abraham was born a.m. 2008, p.c. 1996
(Hales, a.m. 3258, n.c. 2153), in ‘Ur of the Chal-
dees’ (Gen. xi. 28). The concise history in
Genesis states nothing concerning the portion of


23 ABRAHAM.


his life prior to the age of 60; and respecting
rae vie living in times so remote no authentic
information can be derived from any other source.
There are indeed traditions, but they are too
manifestly built up on the foundation of a few
obscure intimations in Scripture to be entitled to
any credit. Thus it is intimated in Josh. xxiv.
2, that Terah and his family ‘served other gods’
beyond the Euphrates: and on this has been
founded the romance that Terah was not only a
worshipper, but a maker of idols; that the youthful
Abraham, discovering the futility of such gods,
destroyed all those his father had made, and jus-
tified the act in various conversations and argu-
ments with Terah, which we find repeated at
Jength. Again, ‘Ur of the Chaldecs’ was the
name of the place where Abraham was born, and
frum which he went furth to go, he knew not whi-
ther, at the call of God. Now Ur (98) means
Jire; and we may therefore read that he came
forth from the fire of the Chaldees; on which has
been built the story that Abraham was, for his
disbelief in the established idols, cast by king
Nimrod into a buming furnace, from which he
was by special miracle delivered. And to this
the premature death of Haran has suggested the
addition that he, by way of punishment for his
disbelief of the truths for which Abrahafn suffered,
was marvellously destroyed by the same fire from
which his brother was still more marvellously
preserved. Again, the fact that Chaldea was the
region in which astronomy was reputed to have
been first cultivated, sugyested that Abraham
brought astronomy westward, and that he even
taught that science to the Egyptians (Joseph.
Antiq.i. 8). These are goodly specimens of tradi-
tion-building; and more of them may be found
in the alleged history of Abraham by those who
think them worth the trouble of the search, It is
just to Josephus to state that most of these stories
are rejected by him, although the tone of some of
his remarks is in agreement with them.

Although Abraham is, by way of eminence,
named first, it appears probable that he was the
youngest of Terali's sons, and born by a second wife,
when his father was L180 years old. Terah was
seventy years old when tue eldest son was born
ean xi. 32; xii. 4; xx. 12: comp. Hales, i:.

07); and that eldest son appears to have been
Haran, from the fact that his brothers married tus
daughters, and that his daughter Sarai was only
ten years younger than his brother Abraham (Gen.
xvii. 17). It is shown by Hales (ii. 107), that
Abraliam was 60 years old when the family
quitted their native city of Ur, and went and
abode in Charran. The reason for this movement
does not appear in the Old Testament. Josephus
alleges that Terah could not bear to remain in
the place where Haran had died (Antig. i. 6.5);
while the apocryphal book of Judith, in’ con-
formity with the traditions still current among the
Jews and Moslems, aflirms that they were cast
forth because they would no longer worship the
gods of the land (Judith y. 6-8). The real cause
transpires in Acts vii. 2-4: ‘The God of glory
appeared to our father Abraham while he was (at
U, of the Chaldees) in Mesopotamia, before he
dwelt in Charran, and said unto him, Depart from
thy land, and trom thy kindred, and come hither
to a land (yijv) which I will shew thee. Then
Geparting from the land of the Chaldees, he dwelt


ABRAHAM.


in Charran.' This jirst call is not recorded, but
only implied in Gen. xii.: and it is distinguished
by several pointed circumstances from the second,
which alone is there mentioned. Accordingly
Abraham departed, and his tamily, including his
aged father, removed with him. They proceeded
not at once to the land of Canaan, which in-
Geed had not been yet indicated to Abraham
as his destination; but they came to Charran,
and tarried at that convenient station for fif-
teen current years, until Terah died, at the age of
205 years, Being free from his filial duties,
Abraham, now 75 years of age, received a second
and more pointed call to pursue his destination :
‘Depart frum thy land, and from thy kindred, and
Srom thy father's house, unto the land (YW,
tiv viv), which I will shew thee’ (Gen. xii. 1).
The diflerence of the two calls is obvious: in the
former the dand is indefinite, being designed only
for a temporary residence; in the latter it is detinite,
intimating a permanent abode. A third condition
was alsu annexed to the latter call, that he should
separate from his father's house, and leave his
brother Nahor's family behind him in Charran.
This must have intimated to him that the Divine
call was personal to himself, and required that he
should be isulated not only from his nation, but
from his family. He however took with him bis
nephew Lot, whom, baving no children of his
own, he appears to have regarded as his heir, and
then went furth ‘not knowing whither he went’,
(Heb. xi. 8), but trusting peal to the Divine
guidance. And it seems to have been the inten-
tion of Him by whom he had been called, to open
gradually tohim the high destinies which awaited
him and his race, as we perceive that every suc-
cessive communication with which he was fa-
voured rendered more sure and definite to him
the objects fur which he had been called from the
land of his birth.

No particulars of the journey are given. Abra
ham arrived in the Jand of Canaan, which he
found occupied by the Canaanites in a large
number of small independent communities, which
cultivated the districts around their several towns,
The country was however but thinly peopled ;
and, as in the more recent times of its depopulae
tion, it afforded ample pasture-grounds for the
wandering pastors. One of that class Abraham
must have appeared in their eyes. In Mesopo-
tamia the fannly had been pastoral, but dwelling
in towns and houses, and sending out the flocks
and herds under the care of shepherds. But the
migratory life to which Abraham lad now been
called, compelled him to take to the tent-dwelling
as well as the pastoral life: and the usages which
his subsequent history indicates are therefore found
to present a condition of manners and habits
analogous to that which still exists among the
nomade pastoral, ur Bedouin tribes of south-west-
em Asia.

The rich pastures in that part of the cowitry
tempted Abraham to form his first encampment
in the vale of Morch, which lies between the
mountains of Ebal and Gerizim. Here the strong
faith which had brought the childless man thus
far from his home was rewarded by the grand
promise :—‘I will make of thee a great nation,
and I will bless thee and make thy name great,
and thou shalt be a blessing; and I will bless
them that bless thee, and curse them that curse


ABRAHAM.


thee: and in thee shall all the families of the
earth be blessed ' (Gen. xii. 2, 3). It was further
promised that to his pay should be given the
rich heritage of that beautiful country into which
he had come (v. 7). It will be seen that this


important ise consisted of two parts, the
one temporal, the other spiritual. The temporal
was the ise of posterity, that he should


be blessed himself, and be the founder of a
great nation; the spiritual, that he should be
the chosen ancestor of the Redeemer, who had
been of old obscurely predicted (Gen. iii. 15
and thereby become the means of blessing all
the families of the earth. The implied con-
dition on his part was, that he should publicly
profeas the worship of the true God in this more
tolerant land; and accordingly ‘he built there
an altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him."
He son after removed to the district between
Bethel and Ai, where he also built an altar to that
‘Jenovan’ whom the world was then hastening
to forget. His farther removals tended southward,
until at length a famine in Palestine compelled
him to withdrew into Egypt, where corm abounded.
Here his apprehension that the beauty of his wife
Sarai might bring him into danger with the dusky
i overcame his faith and rectitude, and
he gave out that she was his sister. As he had
feared, the beauty of the fair stranger excited the
admiration of the Egyptians, and at length
reached the ears of the (ing; who forthwith ex-
ercised his regal right of calling her to his harem,
and to this Abraham, appearing as only her brother,
was obliged to submit. As, however, the king had
No intention to act harslily*in the exercise of his
Privilege, he loaded Abraham with valuable gifts,
suited to his condition, being chiefly in slaves
and cattle. These presents could not have been
refused by him without an insult which, under
all the circumstances, the king did not deserve. A
grievous disease inflicted on Pharaoh and his house-
bold relieved Sarai from her danger, by revealing
to the king that she was a married woman; on
which he sent for Abraham, and, after rebuking
him for his conduct, restored his wife to him, and
recommended him to withdraw from the country.
He accordingly returned to the land of Canaan,
tuch richer than when he left it ‘in cattle, in
silver, and in gold * (Gen. xii. 8; xiii. 2).
Lot also had much increased his possessions :
and soon after their return to their previous sta-
tion near Bethel, the disputes between their re-
@pective shepherds about water and pasturage
toon taught them that they had better separate.
The recent promise of posterity to Abraham him-
self, although his wife had been accounted barren,
probably tended also in some degree to weaken the
tie by which the uncle and nephew had hitherto
been united. The subject was broached by Abra-
bam, who generously conceded to Lot the choice
of pasture-grounds. Ipt chose the well-watered
pla in which Sodom and other towns were situ-
ated, and removed thither [Lor]. Thus was ac-
complished the dissolution uf a connection which
had been formed before the promise of children
was given, and the disruption of which appears to
have been necessary for that complete jeclntice of
the coming race which the Divine purpose re-
quired. Immediately afterwards the patriarch
was cheered and encouraged by a more distinct
tad formal reiteration of the promises which had


ABRAHAM. 33
been previously made to him, of the occupation
of the land in which he lived by a posterity nu-
merous as the dust. Not long after, he removed
to the pleasant valley of Mamre, in the neigh
bourhood of Hebron (then called Arba), and
pitched his tent under a terebinth tree (Gen. xiii.).

It tt that fourteen years before this time
the south and east of Palestine had been invaded
by a king called Chedorlaomer, from beyond the
Euphrates, who, brought several of the small dis-
united states of those quarters under tribute.
Among them were the five cities of the Plain of
Sodom, to which Lot had withdrawn. This burden
was borne impatiently by these states, and they
at length withheld their tribute. This brought
upon them a ravaging visitation from Chedorla-
omer and four other (perhaps tributary) kings, who
scoured the whole country east of the Jordan, and
ended by defeating the kings of the plain, plun-
dering their towns, and carrying the people away
as slaves. Lot was among the sufferers. When
this came to the ears of Abraham, he immediately
armed such of his slaves as were fit for war, in
number 318, and being joined by the friendly
Amoritish chiefs, Aner, Esbcol, and Mamre,
sued the retiring invaders. They were overtaken
near the springs of the Jordan; and their camp
being attacked on opposite sides by night, they
were thrown into disorder, and fled. Abraham
and his men pursued them as far as the neigh-
bourhood of Damascus, and then returned with all
the men and goods which had been taken away.
Although Abraham had no doubt been chiefly
induced to undertake this exploit by his regard
for Lot, it involved so large a benefit, that, as the
act of a sojourner, it must have tended greatly to
enhance the character and power of the patriarch
in the view of the inhabitants at large. In fact, we
afterwards find him treated by them with high
respect and consideration. When they had ar
rived as far as Salem on their return, the king of
that place, Melchizedek, who was one of the few
native princes, if not the only one, who retained
the knowledge and worship of ‘the Most High
God,’ whom Abraham served, came forth to meet
them with refreshments, in acknowledgment for
which, and in recognition of his character, Abra-
ham presented him with a tenth of the spoils. By
strict right, founded on the war usages which still
subsist in Arabia (Burckhardt's Notes, p. 97),
the recovered goods became the property of Abra-
ham, and not of those to whom they originally
belonged. This was acknowledged by the king
of Sodom, who met the victors in the valley near
Salem. He said, ‘Give me the , and
keep the goods to thyself.” But with becoming
pride, and with a disinterestedness which in that
country would now be most unusual in similar
circumstances, he answered, ‘I have lifted up
mine hand [i.e. I have sworn] unto Jehovah, the
most high God, that I will not take from a thread
even to a sandal-thong, and that I wil! not take
any thing that is thine, lest thou shouldest say,
I have made Abram rich’ (Gen. xiv.).

Soon after his return to Mamre the faith of
Abraham was rewarded and encouraged, not only
by a more distinct and detailed repetition of the

romises formerly made to him, but by the con-
tion of a solemn covenant contracted, as
nearly as might be, ‘after the manner of men’
[Covznanr] between him and God. It was now


ra ABRAHAM.


that he first understood that his promised posterity
were to grow up into a nation under foreign bond-
age; and that, in 400 years after (or, strictly,
405 years, counting from the birth of Isaac to
the Exode), they should come forth from that
bondage as a nation, to take possession of the
land in which he sojourned (Gen. xiv.).

After ten years’ residence in Canaan (B.c. 1913),
Sarai, being then 75 years old, and having long
been accounted barren, chose to put her own in-
terpretation upon the promised blessing of a pro-
geny to Abraham, and persuaded him to take
her woman-slave Hagar, an Egyptian, as a se
condary or concubine-wife, with the view that
whatever child might preceed from this union
should be accounted her own [Hagar]. The
son who was born to Abraham by Hagar, and who
received the name of Ishmael (Istumag. , Was ace
cordingly brought up as the heir of bis futher and
of the promises (Gen. xvi.). Thirteen years after
(s.c. 1900), when Abraham was 99 years old. he
was favoured with still more explicit declarations
of the Divine purposes. He was reminded that
the promise to him was that he should be the
father of many nations; and to indicate this in-
tention his name was now changed (as before de-
scribed) from Abram to Abraham. The Divine
Being then solemnly renewed the covenant to be a
God to him and to the race that should spring from
him ; and in token of that covenant directed that he
and his should receive in their flesh the sign of cir-
cumcision [Circumcision]. Abundant blessings
were prumised to Ishmacl ; but it was then first an-
nounced, in distinct terms, that the heir of the spe-
cial promises was not yet born, and that the barren
Sarai, then 90 years old, should twelve months
thence be his mother. Then also her name was
changed from Sarai to Sarah (the princess); and to
commemorate the laughter with which the prostrate
patriarch received such strange tidings, it was di-
rected that the name of Isaac (he laughed) should
be given to the future child. The very same

day, in obedience to the Divine ordinance, Abra-
ham himself, his son Ishmael, and his house-
born and purchased slaves were all circumcised
(Gen. xvii.).

Three months after this, as Abraliam sat in his
tent door during the heat of the day, he saw three
travellers approaching, and hastencd to meet them,
and hospitably pressed upon them refreshment
and rest. They assented, and under the shade of
a terebinth tree partook of the abundant fare
which the patriarch and his wife provided, while
Abraham himself stood by in respectful attend-
ance. From the manner in which one of the
strangers spoke, Abraham soon gathered fhat his
visitunts were no other than the Lord himself and
two attendant angels in human form. The pro-
mise of a son by Sarah was renewed ; and when
Sarah herself, who overheard this within the tent,
Jaughed inwardly at the tidings, which, on account
of her great age, she at first disbelieved, she in-
curred the striking rebuke, ‘Is any thing too hard
for Jehovah? The strangers then addressed them-
selves to their journey, and Abraham walked some
way with them. The two angels went forward
in the direction of Sodom, while the Lord made
known to him that, for their enormous iniquities,
Sodom and the other ‘cities of the plain’ were
about to be made signal monuments of his wrath
and of his moral government. Moved by com-


ABRAHAM.


passion and by remembrance of Lot, the patriarel -
ventured, reverently but perseveringly, to intercede
for the doomed Sodom ; and at length obtained a
promise that, if but ten righteous men were found
therein, the whole city should be saved for their sake.
Early the next morning Abraham arose to ascertain
the result of this concession : and when he looked
towards Sodom, the smoke of its destruction, rising
‘like the smoke of a furnace,’ made known to him
its terrible overthrow [Supom}. He probably
soon heard of Lot's escape : but the consternation
which this event inspired in the neighbourhood
induced him, almost immediately after, to remove
farther off into the territories of Abimelech, king
of Gerar. By a most extraordinary infatuation
and lapse of faith, Abraham allowed himself to
lag to the same mean and foolish prevarication
in denying his wife, which, twenty-three years be-
fore, had occasioned him so much trouble in Egypt.
The result was also similar Asiui.ecn], except
that Abraham answered to the rebuke of the Phi-
listine by stating the fears by which he had been
actuated—adding, ‘And yet indeed she is my
sister; she is the daughter of my father, but not
the daughter of my mother; and she became my
wife.’ This mends the matter very little, since in
calling her his sister he designed to be understood
as saying she was not his wife. As he elsewhere
calls Lot his ‘brother,’ this statement that Sarah
was his ‘sister’ does not interfere with the proba-
bility that she was his niece.

The same year* Sarah gave birth to the long-
promised son, and, according to previous direc-
tion, the name of Isaac was given to him [Isaac].
This greatly altered the position of Ishinael, whe
had hitherto appeared as the heir buth of the tem-
poral and the spiritual heritage; whereas he had
now to share the former, and could not but know
that the latter was limited to Isaac. This a

rs tu have created much ill-feeling both on his
part and that of his mother towards the child;
which was in some way manifested so pointedly,
on occasion of the festivities which attended the
weaning, that the wrath of Sarah was awakened,
and she insisted that both Hagar and her son
should be sent away. This was a very hard mat-
ter to a loving father; and Abraham was so much
pained that he would probably have refused com-
pliance with Sarah's wish, had he not been ap-
prised in a dream that it was in accordance with
the Divine intentions respecting both Ishmael and
Isaac. With his habitual uncompromising obe-
dience, he then hastened them away early in the
moming, with provision for the journey. Their
adventures belong to the article Hacar.

When Isaac was about 20 years old (n.c. 1872)
it pleased God to subject the faith of Abraham
to a severer trial than it had yet sustained, or that
has ever fallen to the lot of any other mortal man.
He was commanded to go into the mountainous
country of Moriah (probably where the temple atter-
waids stood), and there offer up in sacritice the so
of his aflection, and the heir of so many hopes and


* It is, however, supposed by some biblical
critics that the ing adventure with Abime-
lech is related out of its order, and took place at
an earlier date. Their chief’ reason is that Sarah
was now 90 years of age. But the very few yeurs
by which such a supposition might reduce this
age, seem scarcely worth the discussion (Saran}.


ABRAHAM.
= which his death must nullify. It is pro-
tha


t human sacrifices already existed; and
as, when they did exist, the offering of an only
or beloved child was considered the most merito-
Tious, it may have seemed reasonable to Abraham
that he should not withhold from his own Gud the
costly sacrifice which the heathen offered to their
idols. The trial and peculiar difficulty lay in the
singular position of Isaac, and in the unlikelihood
that his les could be supplied. But Abraham's
‘faith shrunk not, assured that what God had pru-
mised he would certainly perform, and that he was
able to resture Isaac to him even from the dead’
(Heb. xii. 17-19), and he rendered a ready, however
painful, obedience. Assisted by two of his ser-
vants, he prepared wood suitable for the pu
and without delay set out upon his maelanchaly
journey. On the third day he descried the ap-
pointed place; and informing his attendants that
and his son would go sume distance farther to
worship, and then return, be proceeded to the spot.
To the touching question of his son respecting the
victim to be offered, the patriarch replied by express-
ing his faith that God Vimeelf would provide the
sacrifice; and probably he availed himself of this
opportunity of acquainting him with the Divine
command. At least, that the communication was
made either then or just after is unquestionable ;
for no one can suppose that a young man of twenty-
five could, against his will, have been bound with
cords and laid out as a victim on-the wood of the
altar. Isaac would must certainly have been slain
by his father’s uplifted hand, had not the angel of
Jehovah interposed at the critical moment to arrest
the fatal stroke. A ram which had become en-
tangled in a thicket was seized and offered; and
a name was given to the place (XY Ain,
Jehocah-Jireh—‘the Lord will provide’) allusive
to the believing answer which Abraham had given
to his son's inquiry respecting the victim. The
pmiees before made to Abraham—of numerous
lescendants, superior i wer to their enemies,
and of the blessings which his spiritual progeny,
and especially the Messiah, were to extend to all
mankind—were again confirmed in the most so-
lemn manner; for Jehovah swore by himself
(comp. Heb. vi. 13, 17), that such should be the
rewards of his uncompromising obedience. The
father and son then rejoined their servants, and re-
tumed rejoicing to Beersheba (Gen. xxi. 19).
Eight years after (u.c. 1£60) Sarah died at
the age of 120 years, being then at or near
Hebron. This loes first taught Abraham the ne-
cessity of acquiring possession of a family sepul-
chre in the land of his sojourning. His choice
fell un the cave of Machpelah [ Macupzi.au], and
after a striking negotiation with the owner in the
gate of Hebron, he purchased it, and had it legally
secured to him, with the field in which it stood
and the trees that grew thereon. This was the
only possession he ever had in the Land of Pro-
mise (Gen. xxiii.). The next care of Abraham
Was tu provide a suitable wife for his son Isaac.
It has always been the Pwctice among pastoral
tribes to keep up the family ties by intermarriages
of Lloud-relations (Burckhardt, Notes, p. 154): and
=e ee further inducement in the
esire to maintain the purity of the separated race
from foreign and idclatrous cinbecuons: He there-
fore sent his aged and confidential steward Elie-
tet, under the bond of a solemn oath to discharge


ABRECH. F)
his mission faithfully, to renew the imtercourse be-
tween his family and that of his brother Nahor,
whom he had left behind in Charran. He pro

in his important mission [Isaac], and in
ue time returned, bringing with him Rebekah,
the daughter of Nahor's son Bethuel, who became
the wife of Isaac, and was installed as chief lady
of the camp, in the separate tent which Sarah had
occupied (Gen. xxiv.). Some time after Abraham
himself took a wife named Keturah, by whom he
bad several children. These, together with Ish-
mael, seem to have been portioned off by their
father in his lifetime, and sent into the east and
south-east, that there might be no danger of therr
interference with Isaac, thBdivinely appointed heir.
There was time for this: for Abraham lived to
the age of 175 years, 100 of which he had spent
in the land of Canaan. He died in s.c. 1822
(Hales, 1978), and was buried by his two eldest
sons in the family sepulchre which he had
chased of the Hittites (Gen. xxv. 1-10).


ABRAHAM'S BOSOM. There was no name
which conveyed to the Jews the same associations
as that of Abraham. As undoubtedly he was in
the highest state of feljcity of which departed
oe are capable, ‘ to be with Abruham' im-
plied the enjoyment of the same felicity ; and ‘to

in Abraham's bosom" meant to be in repose
and happiness with him. The latter phrase is
obviously derived from the custom of sitting or
reclining at table which prevailed among the Jews
in and before the time of Christ [Accusarion}.
By this arrangement, the head of one person was
necessarily brought almost into the bosom of the one
who sat above him, or at the top of the triclinium ;
and the guests were so arranged that the most
favoured were placed so as to bring them into
that situation with respect to the host (cump. Jolin
xiii, 23; xxi. 20). These Jewish images and
modes of thought are amply illustrated by Light-
foot, Schoettgen, and Wetstein, who illustrate
Scripture from Rabbinical sources. It was quite
usual to describe a just person as being with
Abraham, or lying on Abraham's bosom; and as
such images were unobjectionable, Jesus accom
modated his speech to them, to render himself
the more intelligible by familiar notions, when, in,
the beautiful parable of the rich man and
he describes the condition of the latter after death
under these conaitions (Luke xvi. 22, 23).


ABRECH (77138). This word occurs only
in Gen. xli. 43, where it is used in proclaiming
the authority of Joseph. Something similar
happened in the case of Mordecai; but then
several words were employed (Esth. vi, 11). If
the word be Hebrew, it is probably an impera-
tive of JAI in Hiphil, and would then mean, as
in our version, ‘ bow the knee!’ We are indeed
assured by Wilkinson (Anc. Egyptians, ii. 24)
that the word abrek is uscd to the present day
by the Arabs, when requiring a camel to kneel
and receive its load. But Luther and others sup-
pose the word to be a compound of JTIR, ‘ the
father of the state,’ and to be of Chaldee origin.
It is however probably Egyptian, and Dr. Lee
is inclined with De Rossi ¢ Etym. Eqypt. p.
to repair to the Coptic, in which Aberck or Abre
means ‘ bow the head.’ It is right to add, that
Origen, a native of Egypt, and Jcrome, both of
whom knew the Semitic languages, concur in the


%6 ABSALOM. °


@pinion that Abrech means ‘ a native Egyptian ;’
and when we consider how important it was that
Joseph should cease to be regarded as a foreigner
[Azomination], it has in this sense an import-
ance and significance which no other interpreta-
tion conveys. It amounts to a proclamation of
Naturalization, which, among such a people as
the Egyptians, was essential to enable

to work out the great plan he had undertaken.
We believe however that it is not now possible
to determine the signification of the word with
certainty.


ABSALOM (DIOWAN, father of peace ; Sept.
"ABeooaddn; Vulg. Absalon), the third son of
David, and his only son by Maachah, daughter of
Talmai, king of Geshur (2 Sam. iii. 3). He was
deemed the handsomest man in the kingdom; and
was particularly noted for the profusion of his
beautiful hair, which appears to have been re-
garded with great admiration; but of which we
can know nothing with certainty, except that it
was very fine and very ample. We are told
that when its inconvenient weight compelled him
at times (D'D'? DD PPD does not necessarily
mean ‘ every year,’ as ip the A.V.) to cut it off,
it was found to weigh ‘200 shekels after the
king's weight;’ but as this has been interpreted
as high as 112 ounces (Geddes) and as low as 74
ounces (A. Clarke), we may be content to under-
stand that it means a quantity unusually large.
David's other child by Maachah was a daughter
named Tamar, who was also very beautiful. She
became the ubject of lustful regard to her half-
brother Amnon, David's eldest son; and was vio-
lated by him. In all cases where polygamy is
allowed, we find that the honour of a sister is in the
guardianship of her full brother, more even than in
that of her father, whose interest in her is consi-
dered less peculiar and intimate. We trace this
Notion even in the time of Jacob (Gen. xxxiv. 6,
13, 25, sqq.). So in this case the wrong of Tamar
was taken up by Absalom, who kept her secluded
in his own house, and said nothing for the present,
but brooded silently over the wrong he had sus-
tained and the vengeance which devolved upon
him. It was not until two years had and
when this wound seemed to have been healed, that
Absalom found opportunity for the bloody revenge
he had meditated. He then held a great sheep-
shearing feast at Baal-hazor near Ephraim, to
which he invited all the king’s sons; and, to lull
suspicion, he also solicited the presence of his fa-
ther. As he expected, David declined for him-
self, but allowed Amnon and the other princes to
attend. They feasted together; and, when they
were warm with wine, Amnon was set upon and
slain by the servants of Absalom, according to
the previous directions of their master. Horror
struck at the deed, and not knowing but that
they were included in the doom, the other princes
took to their mules and fled to Jerusalem, filling
the king with griefand horror by the tidings which
they brought. As for Absalom, he hastened to
Geshur and remained there three years with his
father-in-law, king Talmai.

Now it happened that Absalom, with all his
faults, was eminently dear to the heart of his father.
His beauty, his spirit, his royal birth, may be sup-

to have drawn to him those fond patemal
ings which he knew not how to appreciate. At


ABSALOM.


all events, David moumed every day after the
banished fratricide, whom a regard for public
opinion and a just horror of his crime forbade
him to recall. His secret wishes to have home
his beloved though guilty son were however dis
cerned by Joab, who employed a clever woman of
Tekvah to lay a supposed case before him for judge
ment; and she applied the anticipated decision
80 adrvitly to the case of Absalom, that the king
discovered the object and detected the interposi-
tion of Joab. Regarding this as in some degree
expressing the sanction of public opinion, David
gladly commissioned Joab to ‘ call home his ba-
nished.’ Absalom returned; but David, still
mindful of his duties as a king and father, con-
trolled the impulse of his feelings, and declined
to admit him to his presence. After two years,
however, Absalom, impatient of his disgrace,
found means to com Phe attention of Joab to
his case; and through his means a complete re
conciliation was effected, and the father once
more indulged himself with the presence of his
son (2 Sam. xiii. xiv.).

The position at this time occupied by Absalom
was very peculiar, and the view of it enables us
to discover how far the general Oriental laws of
primogeniture were affected by the peculiar con-
ditions of the Hebrew constitution. At the out-
set he was the third son of David, Amnon and
Chileab being his elder brothers. But it was
sible that he might even then, while they lived,
consider himself entitled to the succession; and
Oriental usage would not have discountenanced
the pretension. He alone was of royal de-
scent by the side of his mother; and royal or
noble descent by the mother is even now (as we
see by the recent instance of Abbas Meerza in
Persia) of itself a sufficient ground of preference
over an elder brother whose maternal descent ig
less distinguished. This circumstance, illus
trated by Absalom's subsequent conduct, may
suggest that he early entertained a design upon
the succession to the throne, and that the removal
of Amnon was quite as much an act of policy as
of revenge. The other clder brother, Chileab, ap-
pears tu have died : and if the claims of Absalom,
or rather his grounds of pretension, were so im-
portant while Amnon and Chileab lived, his
“sition must have been greatly strengthened when,
on his return trom exile, he found himself the eldest
surviving son, and, according to the ordinary laws
of primogeniture, the heir apparent of the crown,
Such being his position, and his father being old,
it would seem diflicult at the first view to assign
a motive for the conspiracy against the crown
and life of his indulgent father, in which we soon
after tind him engayed. It is then to be consi-
dered that the king had a dispensing power, and
was at liberty, according to all Oriental usage,
to pass by the eldest son and to nominate a
younger to the succession. This could not have
affected Absalom, as there is every reason to
think that David, if left to himself, would have
been glad to have seen the rule of succession take
its ordinary course if favour of his best loved
son. But then, again, under the peculiar theo~
cratical institutions of the Hebrews, the Divine
king reserved and exercised a power of dispensa-
tion, over which the human king, or viceroy, had
no control. The house of David was established
asa reigning dynasty; and although the law of


ABSALOM.


iture was allowed eventually to take in
— its due course, the Divine king reserved
power of appointing any member of that house
whom he might prefer. That power had been
exercised in the family of David by the preference
of Solomon, who was at this time a child, as the
successor of his father. David had known many
before that his dynasty was to be established
mm a san not yet born (2 Sam. vii. 12); and when
Solomon was born, he could not ignorant,
even if not specially instructed, that he was the
destined heir. This fact must have been known
to many others as the child grew up, and probably
the mass of the nation was cognizant of it. In
this we find a clear motive for the rebellion of
Absalom—to secure the throne which he deemed
to be his right by the laws of primogeniture, dur-
ing the lifetime of his father; lest delay, while
awaiting the natural term of his days, should so
strengthen the cause of Solomon with his years,
as to place his succession beyond all contest.

The fine of Absalom, his cy a birth,
and his natural claim, pre-disposed the people to
regard his pretensions with favour: and this pre-

isposition was strengthened by the measures
which he took to win their regard. In the first
ce he insinuated that he was the heir apparent,
Pie state and attendance with which he ap-
peared in public; while that very state the more
enhanced the show of condescending sympathy
with which he accosted the suitors who repaired
for justice or favour to the royal audience, in-
ired into their various cases, and hinted at the
things which might be expected if he were on
the throne, and had the power of accomplishing
his own large and generous these
influences ‘he stole the hearts of the men of Israel ;’
and when at length, four years after his return
from Geshur, he repaired to Hebron and there
proclaimed himself king, the great body of the
people declared for him. So strong ran the tide
of vpinion in his favour, that David found it ex-
ient to quit Jerusalem and retire to Mahanaim,
the Jordan.

When Absalom heard of this, he proceeded to
Jerusalem and took possession of the throne with-
out opposition. Among those who had joined
him was Ahithophel, who had been David's coun-
sellor, and whose profound sagacity caused his
counsels to be regarded like oracles in Israel.
This defection alarmed David more than any
other single circumstance in the affair, and he
persuaded his friend Hushai to go and join Ab-
salom, in the bope that he might be made instru-
mental in turning the mgacious counsels of
Ahithophel to foolishness. The first piece of
advice which Ahithophel gave Absalom was that
he should publicly take possession of that portion
of his father’s harem which had been left behind
in Jerusalem. This was not only a mode by which
the succession to the throne might be confirmed
[Asisiac : comp. Herodotus, iii. 68], but in the
present case, as suggested by the wily counsellor,

this villanous measure would dispose the people
to throw themselves the more unreservedly into
his cause, from the assurance that no possibility
of reconcilement between him and his father re-
mained. Hushai had not then arrived. Soon after
he came, when a council of war was held, to con-


teder the course of operations to be taken against
David. Abihoasl genet that he’ king


. ABSALOM’S TOMB.


should be pursued that very night, and smi
while he was ‘ weary and weak restiley parr
he had time to recover strength.’ Hushai, how-
ever, whose object was to gain time for David,
speciously urged, from the known valour of the
king, the possibility and fatal uences of a
defeat, and advised that all should be
assembled against him in such force as it would
be impossible for him to withstand. Fatally for
Absalom, the counsel of Hushai was preferred to
that of Ahithophel; and time was thus given
to enable the king, by the help of bis influential
followers, to collect his resources, as well as to
give the people time to reflect upon the under-
taking in which so many of them had embarked.
The king soon raised a large force, which he
properly organized and separated into three divie
siuns, commanded severally by Joab, Abishai
and Ittai of Gath. The king himself’ intended
to take the chief command ; but the le ree
fused to allow him to risk his valued life, and the
command then devolved upon Joab. ‘The battle
took place in the borders of the forest of Ephraim
and the tactics of Joab, in drawing the enemy
into the wood, and there hemming them in, so
that they were destroyed with ease, eventually,
under the providence of God, decided the action
against Absalom. Twenty thousand of his troo|
were slain, and the rest fled to their homes. Al
salom himself fled on a swift mule; but as he
went, the boughs of a terebinth tree caught the
long hair in which he gloried, and he was left
suspended there, The charge which David had
given to the troops to respect the life of Ab-
salom prevented any one from slaying him: but
when Joab heard of it, he hastened to the

and pierced him through with three darts. His
body was then taken down and cast into a pit
there in the forest, and a heap of stones was
raised upon it.

David's fundness for Absalom was unextin-
guished by all that had passed; and as he sat,
awaiting tidings of the battle, at the gate of
Mahanaim, he was probably more anxious to
learn that Absalom lived, than that the battle
was gained ; and no sooner did he hear that Ab-
salom was dead, than he retired to the chamber
above the gate, to give vent to his paternal’
anguish. The victors, as they retu slunk
into the town like criminals, when they heard
the bitter wailings of’ the king:—*O my eon
Absalom! my son, my son Absalom! would
God I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son,
my son!’ The consequences of this weakness—
not in his feeling, but in the inability to control
it—might have been most dangerous, had not Joab
gone up to him, and, after sharply rebuking him
for thus discouraging those who had risked their
lives in his cause, induced him to go down and
cheer the returning warriors by his presence (2
Sam. Xiii.-xix. 8).

ABSALOM'S TOMB. A remarkable monu-
ment bearing this name makes a conspicuous figure
in the Valley of Jehoshaphat, outside Jerusalem ;
and it has been noticed and described by almost
all travellers. It is close by the lower bridge over
the Kedron, and is a square isolated block hewn
out from the rocky ledge so as to leave an area
or niche around it. The body of this monument
is about 24 feet square, and is ornamented om
each side with two columns and two half com


38 ABSALOM'S TOMB.


Jamns of the Ionic order, with pilasters at the
comers. The architrave exhibits triglyphs and
Doric omaments. The elevation is about 16 or
20 feet to the top of the architrave, and thus far
it is wholly cut the rock. But the adjacent
rock is here not so high as in the adjoining tomb
of Zecharias (so called), and therefore the upper
part of the tomb has been carried up with mason-
work of large stones. This consists, first, of two
square layers, of which the upper one is smaller
than the lower; and then a small dome or cupola


runs up into a low spire, which aber to have |


read out a little at the top, like an opening
me. This mason-work is perhaps 20 feet high,
giving to the whole an elevation of about 40 feet.
There is a small excavated chamber in the body
of the tomb, into which a hole had been broken
through one of the sides several centuries ago.
The old travellers who refer to this tomb, as
well as Calmet after them, are satisfied that
they find the history of it in 2 Sam. xviii. 18,
which states that Absalom, having no son, built
a monument to keep his name in remembrance,
and that this monument was called ‘ Absalom's
Hand '—that is, index, memorial, or monument
Hanp]. With our later knowledge, a glance at
is and the other monolithic tomb bearing the
name of Zecharias, is quite enough to show that
they had no connection with the times of the per-
sons whose names have been given to them. ‘The
style of architecture and embellishment,’ writes
Dr. Robinson, ‘ shows that they are of a later
period than most of the other countless sepul-
chres round about the city, which, with few ex-
ceptions, are destitute of architectural ornament.
Yet, the foreign ecclesiastics, who crowded to
Jerusalem in the fourth century, found these


monuments here; and of course it became an
object to refer them to aha mentioned in the
Scriptures. Yet, from that day to this, tradition
seems never to have become fully settled as to
the individuals whose names they should bear.
The Itin. Hieros. in a.v. 333, speaks of the two
monolithio monuments as the tombs of Isaiah and


ABSINTHIUM.


Herekiah. Adamnus, about a.p. 697, mentions
only one of these, and calls it the tomb of Jeho-
sha . . The historians of the Crusades
appear not to have noticed these tombs. The
first mention of a tomb of Absalom is by Ben-
jamin of Tudela, who gives to the other the name
of King Uzziah; and from that time to the pre-
sent day the accounts of travellers have been
varying and inconsistent’ (Biblical Researches,
i. 519, 520). The remarks of professed architects
on things requiring a real Knowledge of the
Scriptures and of the ancient Hebrews, are gene-
rally so unsound and trivial that little can be ex-
pected from them in such matters. Yet with the
clear information on some points which we now
possess, it is surprising to hear so learned an
architect as Professor Cockerell speak of this
alleged tomb of Absalom as a most precious
monument of antiquity, and insist on its un-
doubted identity, and its ‘ perfect correspondence
with holy writ’ (Athen@um, Jan. 28, 1843);
which boly writ says no more than that Absalom
did erect some monument. ;
ABSINTHIUM (Apiv@toy in New Test., by
which also the Sept. renders the Heb. M22;
A.V. wormoood). This proverbially bitter plant
is used in the Hebrew, as in most other languages,
metaphorically, to denote the moral bitterness of
distress and tyouble (Deut. xxix. 17; Prov. v 4;
Jer. ix. 14; xxiii.15; Lam. iii. 15,19; Amos v.
7; vi. 12). Thence also the name given to the
fatal star in Rev. viii. 10,11. Artemisia is the
botanical name of the genus of plants in which
the different species of wormwoods are found. The
plants of this genus are easily recognised by the
multitude of fine divisions into which the leaves
are usually separated, and the numerous clusters
of small, round, drooping, greenish-yellow, or
brownish flower-heads with which the branches are
laden. It must be understood that our common
wormwood (Artemisia absinthium) does not ap-
to exist in Palestine, and cannot therefore
Pe that specially denoted by the Scriptural term.
Indeed it is more than probable that the word is
intended to apply to all the plants of this class
that grew in Palestine, rather than to any one of
them in particular. The examples of this genus
that have been found in that country are :—1. Ar
temisia Judaica, which, if a particular species
be intended, is probably the Absinthium of Scrip-
ture. Rauwolff found it about Bethlehem, and
Shaw in Arabia and the deserts of Numidia plen-
tifully. This plant is erect and shrubby, with
stem about eighteen inches high. Its taste is
very bitter; and both the leaves and sceds are
much used in Eastern medicine, and are reputed
to be tonic, stomachic, and anthelmintic. 2. Aréo-
misia Romana, which was found by Hasselquist
on Mount Tabor (p. 281). This species is herba-
ceous, erect, with stem one or two fect high
(higher when cultivated in gardens), and nearly
upright branches. The plant has a pleasantly
aromatic scent; and the bitterness of its taste is
so tempered by the aromatic flavour as scarcely to
be disagreeable. 3. Artemisia abrotanum, found in
the south of Europe, as well as in Syria and Pales-
tine, and eastward even to China. This is a
hoary plant, becoming a shrub in warm countries;
and its branches bear loose panicles of nodding
yellow flower-heads. It is bitter and aromatic,
with a very strong scent. It is not much used in


ABSTINENCE.


medicine; but the branches are employed in im-
parting a yellow dye to wool.


Agen be
mE


(Artemisia Judaica.)


ABSTINENCE is a refraining from the use
of certain articles of food usually eaten ; or
from all- food during a certain time for some
particular ubject. It is distinguished from
Temperance, which is moderation in ordinary
food; and from Fastina, which is abstinence
from a religious motive. The first example of
abstinence which occurs in Scripture is that
in which the use of blood is forbidden to Noah
(Gen. ix. 20) [Buoop]. The next is that men-
tioned in Gen. xxxii. $2: ‘The children of Is-
rael eat not of the sinew which shrank, which
is upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day, be-
cause he (the angel) touched the hollow of Jacob’s
thigh in the sinew that shrank.’ This practice of

icular and commemorative abstinence is here
mentioned by anticipation long after the date of
the fact referred to, as the phase ‘ unto this day’ in-
timates. No actual instance of the practice occurs
in the Scripture itself, but the usage has always
been kept up; and to the present day the Jews
seisrally abstain from the whole hind-quarter on
account of the trouble and expense of extracting
the particular sinew (Allen's Modern Judaism,
p. 421). By the law, abstinence from blood was
confirmed, and the use of the flesh of even lawful
animals was forbidden, if the manner of their death
tendered it impossible that they should be, or un-
certain that they were, duly exsanguinated (Exod.
xxii. 31; Deut. xiv. 21). A broad rule was also
laid down by the law, defining whole classes of
animals that might not be eaten (Lev. xi.
(Aximat; Foon]. Certain parts of lawful ani-
mals, as being sacred to the altar, were also inter-
dicted. These were the large lobe of the liver, the
kidneys and the fat upon them, as well as the tail
of the ‘ fat-tailed’ sheep (Ley. iii. 9-11). Every-
thing consecrated to idols was also forbidden
(Exod. xxxiv. 15). In conformity with these rules
the Israelites abstained generally from food which
was more or less in use among other pore In-
stances of abstinence frum allowed food are not
frequent, except in commemorative or afilictive
fasts. The forty days’ abstinence of Moses,
Elijah, and Jesus are peculiar cases requiring to
be separately considered [Fastin]. The priests
were commanded to abstain from wine previous
to their actual ministrations (Lev. x. 9), and the
same abstinence was enjoined to the Nazarites
luring the whole period of their separation (Num.

vi. 5). A constant abstinence of this kind was, at a

later eer voluntarily undertaken by the Rechab-

ites (Jer. xxxv. 16,18). Among the early Christian

Converts there were some who deemed themselves

bound to adhere to the Mosaical limitations regard-

ing food, and they accordingly abstained from


ABYSS. 29


flesh sacrificed to idols, as well as from animals
which the law accounted unclean; while others
contemned this as a weakness, and exulted in the
liberty wherewith Christ hid made his followers free.
This question was repeatedly referred to St. Paul,
who laid down some admirable rules on the
subject, the purport of which was, that every one
was at liberty to act in this matter according to
the dictates of his own conscience; but that the
strong-minded had better abstain from the exer-
cise of the freedum they ssed, whenever it
might prove an occasion of stumbling to a weak
brother (Rom. xiv. 1-3; 1 Cor. viii.). In another
place the same apostle reproves certain sectaries
who should arise, forbidding marriage and en-
joining abstinence from meats which God had
created to be received with thanksgiving (1 Tim.
iv. 3, 4). The council of the apostles at Jeru-
salem decided that no other abstinence regarding
food should be impee’ upon the converts than
‘from meats offered to idols, from blood, and from
things strangled ’ (Acts xv. 29).

The Essenes, a sect among the Jews which is
not mentioned by name in the Scriptures, led a
more abstinent life than any recorded tn the sacred
books. As there is an account of them elsewhere
retin it is only necessary to mention here

hat they refused all pleasant food, eating nothing
but coarse bread ati drinking only water ; and
that some of them abstained from food altogether
until after the sun had set (Philo, De Vita Con-
templativd, p. 692, 696).

That abstinence from ordinary food was prac-
tised by the Jews medicinally is not shown in
Scripture, but is more than probable, riot only as
a dictate of nature, but as a common practice of
their Egyptian neighbours, who, we are informed
by Diodorus (i. 82), ‘being persuaded that the ma-
jority of diseases proceed from indigestion and ex-
cess of eating, bad frequent recourse to abstinence,
emetics, slight doses of medicine, and other simple
means of relieving the system, which some per-
sous were in the habit of repeating every two or
three days.’

ABYSS (“ABvocos). The Greek word means
literally ‘toithout bottom,’ but actually deep, pro-
found. It is used in the Sept. for the Hebrew
DINN, which we find applied either to the ocean
(Gen. i, 2; vii. 11), or to the under world (Ps.
Ixxi. 21; cvii. 26). In the New Testament it
is used as a noun to describe Hades, or the place
of the dead generally (Rom. x. 7); but more
especially that part of Hades in which the souls
of the wicked were supposed to be confined (Luke
viii. 31; Rev. ix. 1, 2, 113 xx. 1, 3; comp.
2 Pet. ii. 4). In the Revelation the authorized
version invariably renders it ‘ bottomless pit,’
elsewhere ‘ deep.’

Most of these uses of the word are explained by
reference to some of the cosmological notions
which the Hebrews entertained in common with
other Eastern nations. It was believed that the
abyss, or sea of fathomless waters, encompassed
the whole earth. The earth fluated on the abyss,
of which it covered only a small part. Acoord-
ing to the same notion, the earth was founded
upon the waters, or, at least, had its foundations
in the abyss beneath (Ps. xxiv. 2; cxxxvi. 6).
Under these waters, and at the bottum of the
abyss, the wicked were represented as groaning,
and undergoing the pumshment of their sins.


30 ABYSSINIA.”

There were confined the im—those old
giants who while living ca surrounding na-
tions to tremble (Prov. ix. 18; xxix. 16). In
those dark regions the sovereigns of Tyre, Baby-
lon, and Egypt are described by the prophets as
undergoing the punishment of their cruelty and
pride (Jer. xxvi. 14; Ezek. xxviii. 10, &c.). This
was ‘ the deep’ into which the evil spirits in Luke,
viii. 31, besought that they might not be cast, and
which was evidently dreaded by them [Cosmo-
@ony ; Hangs].

The notion of such an abyss was by no means
confined to the East. It was equally entertained
-by the Celtic Druids, who held that Annton (the
deep, the low port), the abyss from which the
earth arose, was the abode of the evil principle
(Gwarthawn), and the place of departed spirits,
comprehending both the Elysium and the
rusof antiquity. With them also wandaring spirits
were called Plant annwor, ‘ the children of the
deep’ (Davis's Celtic Researches, p. 115; Myth.

Rites of the B. Druids, p. 49).

ABYSSINIA. ‘There is no part of Africa,
Egypt being excepted, the history of which is
connected with so many objects of interest as
Abyssinia. A region of Alpine mountains, ever
difficult of access by its nature and peculiar situ-
ation, concealing in its bosom the long-sought
sources of the Nile, and the still more mysterious
origin of its singular people, Abyssinia has alone
“preserved, in the heart of Attica, its peculiar lite-
rature and its ancient Christian church. What
is still more remarkable, it has preserved existing
remains of a previously existing and wide-spread
Judaism, and with a language approaching more
than any living tongue to the Hebrew, a state of
Manners, and a peculiar character of its people,
which represent in these latter days the its
and customs of the ancient Israelites in the times
of Gideon and of Joshua. So striking is the re-


semblance between the modem Abyssinians and
the Hebrews of old, that we can hardly look upon
them but as branches of one nation; and if we
had not convincing evidence to the contrary, and
knew not for certain that the Abrahamida ori-
ginated in Chaldea, and to the northward and
eastward of Palestine, we might frame a very


‘arta- 280


ABYSSINIA.


le hypothesis, which should bring then

wn as a band of wandering shepherds from the
mountains of Habesh (Abyssinia), and identify
them with the pastor kings, who, according to
Manetho, multiplied their bands of the Pharaohs,
and being, after some centuries, expelled thence
by the will of the gods, sought refuge in Judea,
and built the walls of Jerusalem. Such an hy-
ined would explain the existence of an almost
raelitish people, and the preservation of a lan-
guage so nearly approaching to the Hebrew, in
intertropical Africa. It is certainly untrue, and
we find no other easy explanation of the facts
which the history of Abyssinia presents, and
particularly the early extension of the Jewish
religion and customs through that country’
Prichard’s Physical History of Man, pp. 279,


he above paragraph will suggest the grounds
which appear to entitle Abyssinia to a place


in a Biblical Cyclopedia. But as the coun!
has no physical connection with Palestine—whi
is, geographically, our central object—a parti-
cular description of it is not necessary, and it
will suffice to notice the points of inquiry su;
gested by the quotation. A brief outline is
that seems requisite.

‘ Anyssinta’ is an European improvement
upon the native name of ‘Hasrsu.’ That this
country lies to the south of Nubia, which sepa-
rates it from Egypt, and to the east of the Gulf
of Bab-el-Mandah and the southen of the
Arabian sea, will sufficiently indicate its position.
Abyssinia is a high country, which has been
compared by Humboldt to the lofty Plain of
Quito. By one of those beautiful synthetical
operations of which his writings offer so many
examples, the greatest living geographer, Carl
Ritter of Berlin, has established, from the writings
of various travellers, that the high country of
Habesh consists of three terraces, or distinct
table-lands, rising one above another, and of
which the several grades of ascent offer themselves
in succession to the traveller as he advances from
the shores of the Red Sea (Erdkunde, th. i.
s. 168). The jirst of these levels is the plain of
Bahamegash: the second level is the plain and
kingdom of Tigré, which formerly contained the
kingdom of Axum: the third level is High
Abyssinia, or the kingdom of Amhara. This
name of Amhara is now given to the whole king-
dom, of which Gondar is the capital, and where
the Amharic language is spoken, eastward of the
Takazzé. Ambara Proper is, however, a moun-
tainous province to the south-east, in the centre
of which was Tegulat, the ancient capital of
the empire, and at one period the centre of the
civilization of canton ee rovince is now
in the possession of the Gallas, a rous people
who have overcome all the southern parts of
Habesh. The present kingdom of Amhara is the
heart of Abyssinia, and the abode of the emperor,
or Negush. It contains the upper course of the
Nile, the valley of Dembea, and the lake Tzana,
near which is the royal city of Gundar, and like-
wise the high region of Gojam, which Bruce
states to be at least two miles above the level of
the sea.

Abyssinia is inhabited by several distinct races,
who are commonly included under the name of
Habesh or Abyssins. They are clearly distin.


ABYSSINIA.


Seda each other by their languages, but
ve more or less resemblance in manners and
physical character. These races are—l. The 71-
greni, or Abyssins of the kingdom of Tigré, which
nearly coincides in extent with the old kingdom
of Axum. They speak a language called by
Tellez and Ludolph Angua Tigrania. It is a
corruption or modern dialect of the Gheez or
old Ethiopic, which was the ancient vernacular
tongue of the province; but is now a dead
language consecrated to literature and religious
uses [Erniopic Lancuaas], and the modern
language of Tigré has been for more than five
centuries merely an oral dialect. 2. The Amharas,
who have been for ages the dominant people in
Abyssinia; the genuine Amhara being consi-
dered as a higher and nobler caste, as the military
and royal tribe. Their language—the Amharic—
now extends over all the eastern parts of Abys-
sinia, including various provinces, some of which
appear at one time to have had vernacular lan-
guages of their own. 3. The Agows, which name
is bume by two tribes, who speak different lan-
and inhabit different parts of Abyssinia.
These are the Agows of Damot, one of the most
extensive of the southern provinces, where they
are settled about the sources and on the banks of
the Nile; and the Agows of Lasta, who, acs
cording to Bruce, are Troglodytes, living in
caverns and paying the same adoration to the
river Takazzé which those of Damot pay to
the Nile. These last are called by Salt the
Agows of Takazzé; and although they scarcely
differ from the other Abyssinians in physical cha-
racter, their language shows them to be a distinct
race from the Persian as well as from the Am-
hara. 4. The Falasha, a people whose present con-
dition suggests many curious inquiries, and the
investigation of whose’ hi may hereafter
throw light upon that of the Abyssins, and of their
literature and ecclesiastical antiquities. They
all profess the Jewish religion, and probably
did so before the era of the conversion of the
Abyssins to Christianity. They themselves
fess to derive their origin from Palestine; but their
language, which is said to have no affinity with
the Hebrew, seems sufticiently to refute this pre-
tension (Vater, Mithridates, t.iii.) According to
Bruce, the Falasha were very powerful at the
time of the conversion of the Abyssins to
Cimistianity. They were formerly a caste of
ters and tile-makers in the low country of
bea, but, owing to religious animosities, and
being weakened by long wars, they were driven
out thence, and took refuge among rugged and
almost inaccessible rocks, in the high ridge called
the mountains of Samen, where they live under
Princes of their own, bearing Hebrew names, and
Faying tribute to the Negush. It is conjectured
that the Falasha and the Agows were at une time
the principal inhabitants of the south-eastern parts
of Abyssinia. 5. The Gafats, a pagan tribe,
witha distinct language, living on the southern
banks of the Nile, near Damot. 6. The Gongas
and Enareans. The former inhabit the province
of Gonga, and have a language distinct from all


the preceding, but the same which is spoken by
“7 ple of Narea, or Enarea, to the southward


abesh. 7. To these we should perhaps now
add the Gallas, & race of pandcricg bi en,
extensively spread in eastern intertropical Africa,


ABYSSINIA. 31


who have become, during the last vi
formidable by their numbers, and piace pistd
whelm the Abyssinian empire.

The Abyssinians are to be regarded as belong-
ing to the black races of men, but this is to be
received with sume explanation. Without enterin:
into particulars, it may be observed, after Ruppell
(Reise in Abyssinien), that there are two physical
types prevalent among the Abyssinians. The
greater number are a finely-formed people of the
European types having a countenance and fea-
tures precisely resembling those of the Bedouins
of Arabia. To this class belong mast of the inha-
bitants of the high mountains of Samen, and of
the plains around Lake Tzana, as well as the Fa-
lasha, or Jews, the heathen Gafats, and the Agows,
notwithstanding the variety of their dialects. The
other and very large division of the Abyssinian
people is identified, as far as physical traits are
concerned, with the race which has been distin-
guished by the name of Ethiopian. This race is
indicated by a somewhat flattened nose, thick
lips, long and rather dull eyes, and by v
strongly crisped and almost woolly hair, whi
stands very thickly upon the head. They are
therefore one of the connecting links between the
Arabian and the Negro races, being separated
from the former by a somewhat broader line than
from the latter. In their essential characteristics
they agree with the Nubians, Berberines, and
native Egyptians (Prichard’s Nat. Hist. of Man,
p. 285).

pecans has for ages been united under one
governor, who during the earliest periods resided at
Axum, the ancient capital of Tigré; but who for
some centuries past 5 resided at Gondar, a
more central part of the kingdom. For ages also
the Abyssins have been Christians, but with a
strange mixture of the Judaism which appears to
have been previously professed, and with the ex-
ceptions ‘dnch have been already indicated.
Tigré, in which was the ancient capital of the
empire, was the country in which Judaism ap-

to have been in former times the most pre-
valent. It was also the country which
in the Gheez or ancient Ethiopic, a Semitic lan-
guage. It was, moreover, the seat of civilization,
which, it is important to observe, appears to have
been derived frum’ the opposite coast of Arabia,
and to have had nothing Egyptian or Nubian
in its character.

These observations have brought us back again
to the difficulty stated at the commencement of
this article, in the words of Dr. Prichard, which
has hitherto been considered insuperable. There
is no doubt, however, that this difficulty has chiefly
arisen from attempting to explain add the phe-
nomena on a single principle; whereas two causes
at least contributed to produce them, as the fol-
lowing remarks will clearly show :—

The former profession of Judaism in the coun-
try is sufficient to account for the class of ob-
servances and notions derivable frum the Jewish
ritual, which are very numerous, and appear
singular, mixed up as they are with a professedly
Christian faith. This, however, does not account
for Jewish manners and customs, or fur the ex-
istence of a language so much resembling the
Hebrew, and so truly a Semitic dialect as the
Gheez, or old Ethiopian. For nations may adopt
a foreign religion, and maintain the usages


2 ABYSSINIA.


arising from it, without any marked change of
their customs or language. But all which this
leaves unsolved may, to our apprehension, be very
satisfactorily accounted for by the now gene-
rally admitted fact, that at least the people of
Tigré, who possessed a Semitic language so
nearly resembling the Hebrew, are a Semitic co-
lony, who imported into Abyssinia not only a
Semitic language, but Semitic manners, usages,
and modes of thought. Whether this may or
may not be true of the Amhara also, depends in
a great degree upon the conclusion that may be
reached respecting the Amharic language, which,
through the large admixture of Ethiopic and
Arabic words, has a Semitic appearance, but
may, notwithstanding, prove to be fundamentally
African. At all events, the extent to which
the Gheez language has operated upon it would
afford a proof of the influence of the Semitic
colony upon the native population : which is all
that can reasonably be desired to account for the
phenomena which have excited so much inquiry
and attention.

If it should be objected that it is not sufficient
to identify as Semitic the manners and usages
which have been described as Hebrew, we would
beg to call attention to that passage, in the com-
Mencing extract, which, with an unintended
significance, intimates that these cuskoms are
those of the early times of Gideon and Joshua,
when the Hebrews had not been long subject to the
peculiar modifying influences of the Mosaical in-
stitutions. This is very much the same as to say
that the customs and usages in view are in ac-
cordance with the general type of Semitic man-
ners, rather than with the particular type which
the Mosaical institutions produced ; or, in other
words, that they resemble the manners of the He-
brews most when those manners had least departed
from the general standard of usages which pre-
vailed among the Semitic family of nations,
They are, therefore, less Hebrew manners than
Semitic manners, and, as such, are accounted
for by the presence of Semitic races in the coun-
try. In point of fact, travellers who derive their
first notions of the East from the Bible, when they
come among a strange people, are too ready to
set down as specifically Hebrew some of the
more striking usages which attract their notice;
whereas, in fact, they are generically Oriental,
or at laut Semitic, and are Hebrew also
merely because the Hebrews were an Oriental
people, and had Oriental features, habits, and
usages. Our conclusion, then, is, that the former
prevalence of the Jewish religion in Abyssinia
accounts for the existence of the Jewish ritual
usages; and that the presence of one (perhaps
more than one) paramount Semitic colony ac-
counts for the existence, in this quarter, of a
Semitic language, and Semitic (and therefore
Hebrew) manners and usages. We entertain a
very strong conviction that this conclusion will
be corroborated by all the research into Abyssi-
nian history and antiquities which may here-
after be made.

Having thus considered the question which
alone authorized the introduction of this article, we
reserve for other articles [Canpace ; Ernropia ;
Suzpa, Queen or] some questions connected with
other points in the history of Abyssinia, espe-
cially the introduction of Judaism into that


ACCAD.


country. Of the numerous books which have
been written respecting Abyssinia, the J/istories
of Tellez and Ludolph, and the Jravels of
Kramp, Bruce, Salt, and Ruppell, are the must
important: and an admirable digest of existing
information may be found in Ritter'’s Erdhunde,
th. i., and (as far as rezards ethnography and
languages) in Prichard’s Researches, vol. ii.
ch. vi., and his Natural History of Man, sect. 26.


ACCAD (738 ; Sept. ’Apxd5), one of the five
cities in ‘the Jand of Shinar,’ or Babylonia,
which are said to have been built by Nimrod,
or rather to have been ‘the beginning of his
kingdom’ (Gen. x. 10). Their situation hus been
much disputed. Elian (De Animal. xvi. 42) men-
tions that in the district of Sittacene was a river
called ’Apyd3ns, which is so near the name ’Apyd3
which the LXX. give to this city, that Bochart
was induced to fix Accad upon that river (?’ha-
leg. iv. 17). It seems that several of the ancient
translators found in their Hebrew MSS. Achar
(58) instead of Accad (33N) (Ephrem Syrus,
Psendo-Jonathan, Targum Hieros., Jerome, Abul-
faragi, &c.); and the ease with which the similar
letters J and 9 miglit be interchanged in copying,
leaves it doubtful which was the real name. Achar
was the ancient name of Nisibis; and lnnce the
Targumists give Nisibis or Nisibin (}*2°S))
for Accad, and they continued to be identified
by the Jewish literati in the times of Jerome, But
the Jewish literati have always been deplorable
geographers, and their unsupported conclusions are
worth very little. Nisibis is unquestionably too
remote northward to be associated with Babel,
Erech, and Calneh, ‘in the land of Shinar, These
towns could not have becn very distant from each
other; and when to the analogy of names we can
add that of situation and of tradition, a strong
claim to identity is established. ‘These circum-
stances unite at a place in the ancient Sittacene,
to which Bochart had been Jed hy other analogies.
The probability that the original name was .fehar
having been established, the attention is naturally
drawn to the remarkable pile of ancient buildings
called Akker-koof, in Sittacene, and which the
Turks know as Akker-i-Namrood and Akker-i-
Babil. Col. Taylor, the British resident at Bagh-
dad, who has given much attention to the subject,
was the first to make out this idemtification, and
to collect evidence in support of it; and to his
unpublished communications the writer and other
recent travellers are indebted for their statements
on the subject. The Babylonian Talmud might
be expected to mention the site; and it occurs
accordingly under the name of Aggada. It occurs
also in Maimonides (Jud. Chaz. Tract. Madec,
fol. 25, as quoted by Hyde), who says, ‘ Abraham
x]. annos natus cognovit creatorem suuny; and im-
mediately adds,‘ Extat Aggada tres annos natus.”

Akker-koof is about nine miles west of the Ti-
gris, at the spot where that river makes its nearest
approach to the Euphrates. The heap of ruins
to which the name of Nimrod’s Hill— 7el-i-Nimn-
rood, is more especially appropriated, consists of
a mound surmounted by a mass of brick-work,
which looks like either a tower or an irregular
pyramid, according to the point from which it is
viewed. It is about 400 feet in circumference
at the bottom, and rises to the height of 125 feet
above the sloping elevation on which it stands,


ACCARON.


The mound, which seems to form the founda-
tion of the pile, is a mass of rubbish accu-
mulated by the decay of the superstructure. In
the rain itself, the layers of sun-dried bricks, of
which it is com) , can be traced very dis-
tinctly. They are cemented together by lime or
bitamen, and are divided into courses varyin
from 12 to 20 feet in height, and are separa’
by layers of reeds, as is usual in the more an-
cient remains of this primitive region. Travellers


have been perplexed to make out the use of this
remarkable monument, and various strange con-
jectures have been hazarded. ‘The embankments
of canals and reservoirs, and the remnants of
brick-work and pottery occupying the place all
around, evince that the Tel stood in an important
city; and, as its construction announces it to be
a Babylonian relic, the greater probability is that
it was one of those pyramidal structures erected
apon high places, which were consecrated to the
heavenly bodies, and served at once as the temples
and the observatories of those remote times. Such
vuildings were common to al] Babylonian towns ;
and those which remain appear to have been con-
structed more or less on the model of that in the
metropolitan city of Babylon.

ACCARON. [Exron.]

ACCENT. is term is often used with a
very wide meaning : as when we say that a per-
son has ‘a Scotch accent,’ in which case it de
notes all that distinguishes the Scotch from the
English pronunciation. We here confine the
word, in the first place, to mean those peculia-
nities of sound for which grammarians have in-
vented the marks called accents; and we natu-
rally must have a principal reference to the
Hebrew and the Greek languages. Secondly,
we exclude the consideration of such a use of
accentual marks (so called) as prevails in the
French language; in which they merely denote
a certain change in the quality of a sound
attributed to a vowel ordiphthong. It is evident
that, had a sufficient number of alphabetical
a pa piers the accents (in such a

sense) wou ve superseded. While the

Hebrew and Greek languages are here our chief

end, yet, in order to pass from the known to the

we shall throughout refer to our own
bce the ors of illustration. *In this

Tespect, we undoubtedly overstep the proper limits

of a Biblical Cyclopadia ; it weare in a

manner constrained so to do, since the whole sub-

“ect is misrepresented or yery defectively ex-


ACCENT. 33


plained in most English grammars: and if we
abstained from this full exposition, many readers
would most probably, after all, misunderstand
our meaning.

Even after the word accent has been thus
limited, there is an ambiguity in the term; it has
still a double sense, according to which we name
it either oratorical or vocabular. By the latter,
we mean the accent which a word in isolation
receives ; for instance, if we read in a vocabulary :
while by oratorical accent we understand that
which words actually have when read aloud or
spoken as parts of a sentence.

The Greek men of letters, who, after the Ma-
cedonian kingdoms had taken their final form,
invented accentual marks to assist foreigners
in learning their language, have (with a single
uniform exception) been satisfied to indicate
the vocabular accent: but the Hebrew gram-
marians aimed, when the pronunciation of the
old tongue was in danger of being forgotten, at
indicating by marks the siaditiooat inflections of
the voice with which the Scriptures were to be
read aloud in the synagogues. In consequence,
they have introduced a very complicated system
of accentuation to direct the reader. Some of
their accents (so called) are, in fact, stops, others
syntactical notes, which served also as guides to
the voice in chanting.

In intelligent reading or speaking, the vocal
organs execute numerous intonations which we
have no method of representing on paper ;
cially such as are called infections or slides by
teachers of elocution : but on these a book might
be written ; and we can here only say, that the
Masoretic accentuation of the Hebrew appears to
have’ struggled to depict the rhythm of sen-
tences; and the more progress has been made
towards a living perception of the language, the
higher is the testimony borne by the learned to
the success which this rather cumbrous system
has attained. The rhythm, indeed, was pro-
bably a sort of chant; since to this day the
Scriptures are so recited by the Jews, as also the
Koran by the Arabs or Turks: nay, in Turkish,
the same verb (ogumaq) signifies to sing and to
read. But this chant by no means attains the
sharp discontinuity of European singing : on the
contrary, the voice slides from fiote to note. Mo-
notonous as the whole sounds, a a 2 study of
the expression intended might probably lead to a
fuller understanding of the Masoretic accents.

Wherein the Accent consists.—In ordinary
European words, one syllable is proneunced with
a peculiar stress of the voice; and is then said to
be accented. In our own language, the most
obvious accompaniment of this stress on the
syllable is a greater clearness of sound in the
vowel ; insomuch that a very short vowel cannot
take the primary accent in English. Neverthe
less, it is very far from the truth, that accented
vowels and syllables are necessarily long, or
longer than the unaccented in the same word ;
of which we shall speak afterwards. In illustra-
tion, however, of the loss of clearness in a vowel,
occasioned _ a loss of accent, we may compare
@ contest with to contést ; équal with equality ; in
which the syllables con, qual, are sounded with a
very obscure vowel when unaccented.

Let us observe, in ing, that when a vowel
sound changes transposition of the ac

D


xu ACCENT.


cent, the Hebrew grammarians—instead of trust-
ing that the voice will of itself modify the vowel
when the accent is shifted—generally think it
necessary to depict the vowel differently: which
is one principal cause of the complicated changes
of the vowel points.

A second concomitant of the accent is less
marked in English than in Italian or Greek;
namely—a musical elevation of the voice. On
a pens or violin we of course separate en-
tirely the stress given to a note (which is called
forte and staccato) from its elevation (which may
be a, or c, or oh yet in speech it is natural to
‘execute in a higher tone, or, as we improperly
term it, in a higher key, a syllable on alee 1 we
desire to lay stress: possibly because sharp sounds
are more distinctly heard than flat ones. Practi-
cally, therefore, accent embraces a slide of the
voice into a higher note, as well as an emphasis
on the vowel; and in Greek and Latin it would
appear that this slide upwards was the most
marked peculiarity of accent, and was that which
gained it the names xpocwdia, accentus. Even
at the present day, if we listen to the speech of a
Greek or Italian, we shall observe a marked ele-
vation in the slides of the voice, giving the ap-
pene of great vivacity, even where no pecu-

iar sentiment is intended. Thus, if a Greek be

requested to pronounce the words cogla (wisdom),
wapaBody (parable), his voice will rise on the
{and 4 in a manner never heard trom an Eng-
lishman. In ancient Greek, however, yet greater
nicety existed; for the voice had three kinds of
accent, or slides, which the grammarians called
flat, sharp, and circumflex ; as in tls, tls3 mov.
It is at the same time to be remarked, that this
flat accent was solely oratorical; for when a
word was read in a vocabulary, or named in
isulation, or indeed at the end of a sentence, it
never took the flat accent, even on the last sy]-
lable; except, it would seem, the word qs, a
certain one. In the middle of a sentence, however,
the simple accent (for we are not speaking of the
circumflex) on a penultima or antepenultima was
always sharp, and on a last syllable was flat. Pos-
sibly a stricter attention to the speech of the best
educated modern Greeks, or, on the contrary, to
that of their peasants in isolated districts, might
detect a similar peculiarity : but it is generally
believed that it has been lost, and some uncer
tainty therefore naturally rests on the true pro-
nunciation. Qn the whole, it is most probable
that the flat accent was a stress of the voice ut-
tered in a lower note, much as the second accent
in grandfather ; that the sharp accent was that
which prevails in modern Greek, and has been
above described ; and that the circumflex com-
bined an upward and a downward slide on the
same vowel. The last was naturally incapable
of being executed, unless the vowel was long;
but the other two accents could éxist equally
well on a short vowel.

In English elocution various slides are to be
heard, more complicated than the Greek cir
cumflex ; but with us they are wholly oratorical,
never vocabular. Moreover, they are peculiar to
vehement or vivacious oratory; being abundant
in familiar or comic speech, and admissible
also in high pathetic or indignant declamation:
but they are almost entirely excluded from tran-
quil and serious utterance.


ACCENT.


Secondary Accent.—On the same word, when
it consists of many syllables, a double accent is
frequently heard, certainly in English, and pro-
bably in most languages; but in our own tongue
one of the two is generally feebler than the other,
and may be called secondary. If we agree to
denote this by the flat accent (‘) of the Greeks,
we may indicate as follows our double accent:

consideration, disobédience, inpreténding ;

sécondary, Accessiry, péremptirily.
We have purposely selected as the three last ex-
amples cases in which the secondary accent falls
on a very short or obscure vowel, such as can
never sustain the primary accent.

In some cases, two syllables intervene between
the accents, and it may then be difficult to say
which accent is the principal. In dristocrat,
équalize, cntidote, the first Sitabe has a stronger
accent than the last; but in aristocratic, éguali-
sation, dntedilivian, they seem to be as equal as
aplan though the latter catches the ear more.

n aristocracy, the former is beyond a doubt
secondary ; but here the two are separated by
only one syllable. Prédetérmindtion has three
accents, of which the middlemost is secondary.

In the Greek language a double accent is some-
times found on one word; but only when the
latter is superinduced by some short and subor-
dinate word which hangs upon the other. Such
short words are called enclitics, and form a class
by themselves in the language, as they cannot be
known by their meaning or form. By way of
example we may give, tUpavyds tis (a certain
usurper), old oe (I know thee). In these cases,
we observe that the two accents, if both are sharp,
are found on alternate syllables, as in English ;
but whether one of them was secondary we do
not know. If the former is a circumflex, the
latter is on the following syllable. Occasionally,
two or more enclitics follow each other in suc-
cession, and produce a curious combination; as,
elxds wou tl pot. These accents, however, are
not vocabular, but oratorical.

The Hebrews have, in many cases, secondary
accents, called a foretone, because with them it
always precedes the principal accent (or ‘ tone"),
as, AND, kateb; the intermediate and un-
accented vowel being in such cases exceedingly
short and obscure, so that some grammarians
refuse to count it at all. This fouretone is de-
scribed as a stress of the voice uttered in a lower
note, and therefore may seem identical in sound
with the flat accent of the Greeks. It differs,
however, in being always accompanied with the
sharp accent on the same word, and in being
vocabular, not merely oratorical.

On the Place of the Accent.—A great difference
exists between different languages as to the place
of the accent. In Hebrew it is found solely on
the last syllable and last but one, and is assumed
systematically by many grammatical terminations,
as in Melek (for Muli), a king, pl. 3fel'ahz'm.
This is so entirely opposed to the analogies of
English, that it has been alleged (Latham On the
English Language) that Princéss is the only
word in which our accent falls on a final inflec-
tion. The radical contrast of all this to our
own idiom leads to a perverse pronunciation of
most Hebrew names: thus we say Istiah, Ne
hemiah, Canaan, I’srael—although with their true


‘


.


oe


ACCENT.


accent they are Isaiah, Nehemy&h, Canf-an,
Isra<1; to say nothing of other peculiarities of
the native sound. In Greek, the accent is
found on any of the three last syllables of a
word; the circumflex only on the two last. In
the Latin language, it is very remarkable that
(except in the case of monusyllables) the accent
wever fell on the last syllable, but was strictly
continel to the penuitima and antepenultima.
This peculiarity struck the Greek ear, it is said,
more than anything else in the sound of Latin, as
it gave td it a pompous air. It is the more diffi-
cult to believe that any thoughtful Greek seri-
ously imputed it to Roman pride, since we are
told that the ABolic dialect of Greek itself agreed
in this respect with the Latin (Sce Foster On
Accent and Quantity, ch. iv.). The Latin ac-
centuation is remarkable for having the place of
the accent dictated solely by euphony, without
reference to the formation or meaning of the
word; in which respect the Greek only partly
agrees with it, chietly when the accent ‘alls on
the penultima or antepenultima. The Latin
accent, however, is guided by the quantity of
the penultimate syllable; the Greek accent by
the quantity of the ultimate vorwed The rules
are these :—

1. Greek : ‘When the last rowel is long, the

accent is on the penultima ; when the last vowel
is shurt, the accent is on the antepenultima."
Ozytons are herein excepted. 2. Latin: ‘When
the penultimate syllable is long, the accent is
upon it; when short, the accent is on the ante-
peultima. Every dissyllable is accented on the
penoitima.’ Accordingly, the Greek accent, even
on the cases of the very same noun, shifted in the
following curious fashion: N. &6épwwos, G. dx
Opexov, D. avOparw, Ac. &yOpwxov; and in Latin,
rather differently, yet witi an equal change,
N. Sermo, G. Serménis, &c. It is beyond all
question that the above rule in Greek is genuine
and correct (though it does not apply to ozytons,
that is, to words accented on the last syllable,
and has other exceptions which the Greek gram-
mars will tell); but there is a natural difficulty
among Enylishmen to believe it, since we have
been taught to pronounce Greek with the accen-
tuation of Latin ; a curious and hurtful corrup-
tion, to which the influence of Erasmus is said to
have principally contributed. It deserves to be
noted that the modern Greeks, in pronouncing
their ancient words, retain, with much accuracy
on the whole, the ancient rules uf accent; but in
words of recent invention or introduction they
follow the rule, which seems natural to an English-
inan, of keeping the accent on the same syllable
through all cases of a noun. Thus, although they
wound as of old, N. av@pwros, G. avOpérou, yet
in the word xoxdvn, @ lady, which is quite recent,
we find (plural), N. ai xoxdves, G. ray xoxdvar,
&e. Similarly, 6 xamerdyos, the captain, G. rob
anrrdyov, &c. This is only one out of many
marks that the modern Greek has lost the nice
appreciation of the quantity or time of vowel
sounds, whic: characterized the ancient.

_ Inall Latin or Greek words which we import

to English, so long as we feel them to be fo-

Feign, we adhere to the Latin rules of accentua-

thon as well as we know how; thus, in démierat,

eey democritical ; philosephy, philoso-

Phical ; astronomy, astronémical 3 doméstic, do-


ACCENT. 7)


mesticity, domésticdtion ; pédssible, possibility ;
bdrbarous, barbdrity. But the moment we treat
any of these words as natives, we follow our own
tule of keeping the accent on the radical syl-
lable; as in burbarousness, where the Saxon
ending, ness, is attached to the foreign word.
With the growth of the langnage, we become
more and more accustomed to hear a long train
of syllables following the accent. Thus, we
have cémfort, comfortable, comfortableness ; pare
lament, pdrliamentary, which used to be parlia-
mentary.

In many vinces of England, and in par-
ticular families, the older and better pronun-
Ciations, contrary, indistry, keep their place, in-
stead of the modem contrary, industry. The
new tendency has innovated in Latin words so
far, that many persons say inimical, contemplate,
inculcate, décorous, sénorous, and even céncora-
ance, for inimical, contémplate, &c. ‘Alexander
has supplanted ‘Alerdnder. In the cases of cén-
cordance, climorous, and various others, it is
probable that the words have been made to follow
the pronunciation of céncord, cldmor, as in native
Enlich derivatives. The principle of change, to
which we have been pointing, is probably deep-
seated in human speech; for the later Attics are
stated to have made a similar innovation in va-
rious words; for example, Aischylus and 'Thucy-
dides said dpoios, tpowaioy, but Plato and Aris-
totle, Suoios, tpdmatoy.

If the principal accent is very distant from one
end of a long word, a great obscurity in the dis-
tant vowel-sounds results, which renders a word
highly unmusical, and quite unmanageable to
poetry. This will be seen in such pronunciations
as parliamentary, peremptorily.

In Hebrew the sume phenomenon is exhibited
in a contrary way, the early vowels of a word
being apt to become extremely short, in conse-
quence of the accent being delayed to the end.
Thus, bri, che'l, a tent, pl. mn, ohal'm ;
YUP, gated, they killed; IMIDWP, gitadinu,
they killed him. Oratorica] reasons occasionally
induce a sacrifice of the legitimate vocabular
accent. In English this happens chiefly in cases
of antithesis; as when the verbs, which would
ordinarily be sounded incréase and decrease, re-
verse their accent in order to bring out more
clearly the contrasted syllables: ‘ He must fn-
crease, but I must dcrease.’ i

This change is intended, not for mere euphony,
but to assist the meaning. Variety and energy
seem to be aimed at in the following Hebrew
example, which Ewald has noticed, and which
seems to indicate that more of the same sort must
remain to be discovered: Judges v. 12, ’Uri,
?uri, Debord: Vivi tri, dabbiri shir ; which, after
Ewald, we may imitate by translating thus, ‘Up
thén, up thén, Deborah: fp then, Gp then, utter a
song.’ The Greek and Hebrew languages, more-
ever, in the pause of a sentence, modified the
accent without reference to the meaning of the


words. Thus the verb ordinarily sounded oy,
gade'li, with a very short penultimate vowel, be-
comes at the end of the sentence soy, gadéls,


with a long and accented penultima (See Ewald's
Hebrew Gram. § 131, 133). The = lan-
D


me ACCENT.

guage also at the end of a sentence changes a
flat accent into a sharp one; for instance, the
word riz} Chonor) before a pause becomes tinh 5
but no elongation of vowels ever accompanies this
phenomenon.

Accent in Compound Words.—It is principally
by the accent that the syllables of a word are
joined into a single whole; and on this account
a language with well-defined accentuation is
(cwteris paribus) so much the easier to be uncer-
stood when heard, as well as so much the more
musical. This function of the accent is dis-
tinctly perceived by us in such words of our lan-
guage as have no other organized union of their
pie To the eye of a foreigner reading an

glish book, steam-boat appears like two words ;
especially as our printers have an extreme dislike
of hyphens, and omit them whenever the cor-
rector of the press will allow it. In Greek or
Persian two such words would be united into one
by @ vowel of union, which is certainly highly
conducive to enphony, and the compound would
appear in the form steamiboat or steamobdtos.
As we are quite destitute of such apparatus (in
spite of a few such exceptions as handicraft,
mountcbank), the accent is eminently important ;
by which it is heard at once that stedmdboat is
a single word. In fact, we thus distinguish be-
tween a sténebor and a stone box; the former
meaning a box for holding stones, the latter a box
made of stone. Mr. Latham (Engl. Language,
§ 234) has ingeniously remarked that we may
read the following lines from Ben Jonson in two
ways:

© An‘d thy sflvershining quiver’ —
or, ‘ An‘d thy silver shining quiver'—
with a slight difference of sense.

The Hebrew language is generally regarded as
quite destitute of compound words. It possesses,
nevertheless, something at least closely akin to
them in (what are called) nouns in regimen.
Being.withvut a genitive case, or any particle
devoted to the same purpose as the English pre-
position a they make up for this by sounding
two words as if in combination. The former
word loses its accent, and thereby often incurs a
shortening and obscuration of its vowels; the
voice hurrying on to the latter. This may be
illustrated by the English pronunciation of ship
of wdr, man of tear, man at arms, phrases which,
by repetition, have in spirit becume single words,
the first accent being lost. Many such exist in
our language, though unregistered by gram-
marians—in fact, even in longer phrases the phe-
nomenon is observable. Thus, Secretary at War,
Court of Queen's Bench, have very audibly but
- one predominating accent, on the last syllable.


So, in Hebrew, from yn, xtzzdyo'n, a vision,
comes ny mn, xezyon-laild, vision of the


night (Job xx. 8). That every such case is fairly
to be regarded as a compound noun was remarked
by Dr. Campbell of Aberdeen, who urged that
otherwise, in Isaiah ii. 20, we ought to render the
words ‘ the idols of Ais silver ;) whereas, in fact,
the exact representation of the Hebrew in Greck
is not efSwda dpytpov-airod, but, so to say,
apyupelSara abrov. In Greek compounds the
position of the accent is sometimes a very cri-
tical matter in distinguishing active and passive


ACCENT.


meanings of epithets. Thus, pytpdéerovos means
mother-slain, or slain by one’s mother; while
prtpoxrdvos is mother-slaying, or slaying one's
mother. Such distinctions, however, seem to
have been confined to a very small class of
compounds.

Sense of a simple word modified by the Ac-
cent.—It is familiarly remarked in our English
grammars, that (in words of Latin origin, gene-
rally imported from French) we often distinguish
a verb from a noun by putting the accent on the
penultimate syllable of the noun and the ulti-
mate of the verb. Thus, we say, an insult, to
tnsilt; a contest, to contest ; &c., &c. The dis-
tinction is so useful, that in doubtful cases it
appears desirable to abide by the rule, and to
say (as many persons do say) a perfume, ta per
Some ; détails, to detail ; the cintents of a book,
to content ; &c. It is certainly curious that the
very same law of accent pervades the Hebrew
language, as discriminating the simplest triliteral


noun and verb. Thus, we have by», mélek,


king; “TP!), maluk, he ruled. In the Greek lan-


guage the number of nouns is very considerable
in which the throwing of the accent on the last
syllable seriously alters the sense; as, tpdros, a
manner ; tpowds, the leather of an oar: @vuds,
anger or mind; @Uuos, garlic: xplywy, judging ;
xpwor, a lily-bed: dos, a shoulder; duds, cruel.
A very extensive vocabulary of such cases is ap-
pended to Scapula’s Greek Lecicon.

Relation of Accent to Rhythm and Metre.—
Every sentence is necessarily both easier to the
voice and pleasanter to the ear when the whole is
broken up into symmetrical parts, with conve:
nient pauses between them. The measure of the
parts 1s marked out by the number of principal
beats of the voice (or oratorical accents) which
each clause contains; and when these are so
regulated as to attain a certain musical uniformity
without betraying art, the sentence has the pleas-
ing rhythm of good prose. When art is not
avowed, and yet is manifest, this is unpleasing,
as seeming to proceed from affectation and in-
sincerity. When, however, the art is avowed, we
call it no longer rhythm, but metre; and with
the cultivation of poetry, more and more melody
has been exacted of versitiers.

To the English ear, three and four beats of the
voice give undoubtedly the most convenient Jength
of clauses. Hence, in what is called poetical
prose, it will be found that any particularly me-
Jodious passage, if broken up into lines or verses,
yields generally either three or four beats in every
verse. Four example:

©Whére is the maid of Arvan ¢

Gone, as a vision of the night.

Wheére shall her lover look for her?

The hall, which énce she gladdened, is désolate.”


But no poetical prose, not even translations of
poetry which aim at a half-mctrical air, will be
found to retain constantly the threefold and fours
fuld accent. To produce abruptness, ha/f lines,
containing but two accents. are thruwn in; and
in smoother feeling clauses of five accents, which
often tend to become the true English blank
verse. All longer clauses are composite, and cau
be resolved into three and three, four and three,
four and four, &c. To illustrate this, let us take


’


ACCENT.


of the Old Testament in the common
translation. Habakkuk iii. 2:
Yh, Lérd!
I have herd thy speéch; and was afraid.
Ob Lérd!


Revive thy work in the midst of the years!

In the midst of the years make knéwn!

In wrath remémber mércy!

Géd came from Téman,

And the Hély One from Moént Péran.

His gléry cévered the heavens,

And the earth was fall of his préise.

His brightness was 4s the light,

He had hérns coming oit of his b&nd,

And thére was the hiding of his power.’ &c. &c.


The accent which we have been here describ-
ing as the source of rhythm is strictly the ora-
torical accent. As this falls only on the more
emphatic words of the sentence, it is decidedly
strong, and, in comparison with it, all the feebler
and secondary accents are unheard, or at least
uncoanted, Nor is any care taken that the suc-
cesive accents should be at equable distances,
Occasionally they occur on successive syllables ;
much oftener at the distance of two, three, or four
syllables. Nevertheless, this poetical rhythm, as
son as it becomes avowedly cultivated, is em-
bryo-metre; and possibly this is the real state of
the Hebrew versification. Great pains have been
taken, from Gomarus in 1630 to Bellermann and
Saalschutz im recent times, to detine the laws of
Hetrew metre. A concise history of these at-
tempts will be found in the Introduction to De
Wette’s Commentary on the Psalms. But al-
thouzh the occasional use of rhyme or assonance
in Hebrew seems to be more than accidental, the
failure of so many etiurts to detect any real
metre in the old Hebrew is decisive enough to
wam future inquirers against losing their labour.
(See the article Parallelismus in Ersch and
Gruber's Encyclopedic). The modern Jews, in-
deed, have borrowed accentual metre from the
Arabs: but, although there is nothing in the
genius of the tongue to resist it, perhaps the
fervid, practical genius of the Hebrew prophets
tejected any such trammel. Repetition and am-
piece mark their style as too declamatory to
we what we call . Nevertheless, in the
Psalms and lyrical passages, increasing investi-
Fation appears to prove that considerable artifice
of composition has often been used (See Ewald’s
Poetical Books of the Old Test. vol. i.).

In our own language, it is obvious to every
considerate reader of poetry that the metres called
anapestic depend far more on the oratorical
accent than on the vocabular (which is, indeed,
their essential defect); and on this account nu-
mers accents, which the voice really utters, are

[asd by as counting for nothing in the metre,
We offer, as a single example, the two following
lines of Campbell, in which we have denoted by
the flat accent those syllables the stress upon
which is subordinate and extra metrim :

‘Say, rish’'d the bild eagle exiltingly forth

tom his hime, in the dark-rilling clodds of
the nérth.’
Such Considerations, drawn entirely out of ora-

TY: appear to be the only ones on which it is


any lon, ae ‘i
ing H und useful to pursue an inguiry concern


a
English


ACCHO. 37
Con


fusion of Accent with Quantity.—It is a
striking fact ee Foster, the avis oe learned
and rather celebrated book intended to clear u

this confusion, succeeded in establishing the truth
concerning Greek and Latin, by help of ancient
grammarians, but himself fell ‘into the lar
errors whenever he tried to deal with the English
language. Not only does he allege that ‘ the
voice dwells longer’ on the first syllable of Aé-
nestly, chdracter, &c., than on the two last (and
improperly writes them hanéstly’, character), but
he makes a general statement that accent and
quantity, though separated in Greek and Latin,
are inseparable in English. The truth is so far
otherwise, that probably in three words out of
four we separate them. As single instances, con-
sider the words Adnestly, chdracter, just adduced.
The accent is clearly on the first syllable; but


that syllable in each is very short. On the other -


hand, the second syllable of both, though un-


accented, yet by reason of the consonants s ¢ J, ct, -


is long, though less so than if its vowel likewise
had been long. The words are thus, like the
Greek xv’Awdpos, a cy'linder, accented on the
first syllable, yet as to quantity an amphibrach
(9-9). Until an Englishman clearly feels
and knows these facts of his own tongue, he will
be unable to avoid the most perplexing errors on
this whole subject.

- Invention of Accents—We have already said
that the accentual marks of the Greeks were in-
vented not long after the Macedonian conquests.
To Aristophanes of Byzantium, master of the
celebrated Aristarchus, is ascribed the credit of
fixing both the punctuation and the accentuation
of Greck. He was born near the middle of the
second century #.c.; and there seems to be no
doubt that we actually have before our eyes a
pronunciation which cannot have greatly differed
from that of Plato. As for the Hebrew accentu-
ation gencrally called Afasoretic, the learned are
agreed that it was a system only gradually built
up by successive additions; the word Masora
itself meaning tradition. The work is ascribed
to the schools of Tiberias and Babylon, which
arose after the destruction of Jerusalem by the
Romans; but it cannot be very accurately stated
in how many centuries the system of vowel-points
and accentuation attained the fully-developed
state in which we have received it. There is,
however, no question among the ablest scholars
that these marks represent the utterance of a
genuine Hebrew period; the pronunciation, it
may be said with Jittle exaggeration, of Ezra
and Nelemiah.—F. 'W. N.

ACCHABIS, ([Sprper.]


ACCHO (132; Sept. “Axxw), a town and
haven within the nominal territory of the tribe
of Asher, which however never acquired pos-
session of it (Judg.i. 31). The Greek and Roman
writers call it”Axy, Ace (Strab. xvi. 8773; Diod.
Sic. xix. 93; C. Nep. xiv. 5); but it was even-
tually better known as Pro.emars (Plin. Hist.


Nat. v. 19), which name it received {rom the first ~


Ptolemy, king of Egypt, by whom it was much
improved. By this name it is mentioned in the
Apocrypha (1 Macc. x. 56; xi. 22, 24; xii. 45,
48; 2 Macc. xiii. 14), in the New Testament
(Acts xxi. 7), and by Josephus (Antig. xiii. 12,
2, seq.). It was aleo called Colonia Claudit


38 ACCHO.


Casaris, in consequence of its receiving the
rivileges of a Roman city from the emperor
laudius (Plin. v. 17; xxxvi. 65). But the

names thus imposed or altered by foreigners never

took with the natives, and the place is still known


in the country by the name of ((¢ Axxa.


It continued to be called Ptolemais by the
Greeks of the lower empire, as well as by Latin
authors, while the Orientals adhered to the ori-
ginal designation. This has occasioned some spe-
culation. Vitriacus, who was bishop of the place,
produces the opinion (Hist. Orient. c. 25) that the
town was founded by twin-brothers, Ptolemxus
and Acon. Vinisauf imagines that the old
town retained the name of Accho, while that of
Ptoletnais was confined to the more modern addi-
tions northward, towards the hill of Turon (G.
Vinisauf, i. 2, p. 248), but the truth undoubtedly
is that the natives never adopted the foreign
names of this or any other town. The word
Accho, or Akka, can be traced to no Hebrew or
Syriac root, and is, Sir W. Drommond alleges
(Origines, b.v.c.3), clearly of Arabian origin, and


derived from (*¢¢ ak, which signifies sultry.


The neighbourhood was famous for the sands
which the Sidonians employed in making glass
(Plin. Hist. Nat. v.19; Strabo, xvi. 877); and
the Arabians denote a sandy shore heated by the
sup by the word ake akeh, or 8c aket, or
(with the nunnation) aketon. During the Cra-
sades the place was usually known to Europeans
by the name of Acon: afterwards, from the occu-
pation of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem,
as St. Jean p’Acnre, or simply Acre.

This famous city and haven is situated in N.
Jat. 32° 55’, and E. long. 35° 5’, and occupies
the north-western point of a commodious bay,
called the Bay of Acre, the opposite or south-
western point of which is fered by the promon-
tory of Mount Carmel. The city lies on the plain
to which it gives its name. Its western side is
’ washed by the waves of the Mediterranean, and
on the south lies the bay, beyond which may be
seen the town of Caipha, on the site of the ancient
Calamos, and, rising high above both, the shrubby
heights of Carmel. The mountains belonging to
the chain of Anti-Libanus are seen at the dis-
tance of about four leagues to the north, while
to the east the view is bounded by the fruitful
hills of the Lower Galilee. The bay, from the
town of Acre to the promontory of Mount Carmel,
is three leagues wide and ah in depth. The
port, on account of its shallowness, can only be
entered by vessels of small burden; but there is
excellent anchorage on the other side of the bay,
before Caipha, which is, in fact, the roadstead of
Acre (Turner, ii. 111; G. Robinson, i. 198). In the
time of Strabo Accho was a great city (TroAeyais
dors peydan wdrs hy “Axny wvduatoy xpdrepoy,
xvi. p. 877), and it has continued to be a place of
importance down to the present time. But after
the Turks gained possession of it, Acre so rapidly
declined, that the travellers of the sixteenth
and seventeenth centuries concur in describing
it as much fallen from its former glory, of which,
however, traces still remained. ‘The missionary
Eugene Roger (La Terre Saincte, 1615, pp. 44-46),
remarks that the whole place had such a sacked


_ACCHO.


and desolated appearance, that little remained
worthy of note except the palace of the grand-
master of the Knights Hospitallers, and the
church of St. Andrew : all the rest was a sad and
deplorable ruin, pervaded by a pestiferous air,
which soon threw strangers into dangerous mala-
dies. The Emir Fakr-ed-din had, however, lately
built a commodious khan for the use of the
merchants : for there was still considerable traffic,
and vessels were constantly arriving from France,
Venice, England, and Holland, Jaden with oil,
cotton, skins, and other goods. The Emir had
also built a strong castle, notwithstanding re-
peated orders from the Porte to desist. Roger
also fails not to mention the immense stone balls,
above a hundredweight, which were found in the
ditches and among the ruins, and which were
thrown into the town from machines before the
use of cannon. This account is confirmed by
other travellers, who add little or nothing to it
(Doubdan, Cotovicus, Zuallart, Morison, Nau,
D‘Arvieux, and others). Morison, however, dwells
more on the ancient remains, which consisted of
portions of old walls of extraordinary height and
thickness, and of fragments of buildings, sacred
and secular, which still afforded manifest tokens
of the original magnificence of the place. He
(ii. 8) aflirms that the metropolitan church of St.
Andrew was equal to the finest of those he had seen
in France and Italy, and that the church of St.
John was of the same perfect beauty, as might
be seen by the pillars and vaulted roof, half
of which still remained. An excellent and
satisfactory account of the place is given by
Nau (liv. v. ch. 19), who takes particular notice
of the old and strong vaults on which the houses
are built; and the present writer, having observed
the same practice in Baghdad, has no doubt
that Nau is right in the conjecture that they
were designed to afford cool underground re-
treats to the inhabitants during the heat of the
day in summer, when the climate of the plain is
intensely hot. This provision might not be neces-
sary in the interior and cooler parts of the country,
Our Maundrell gives no further information, save
that he mentions that the town appears to have
Leen encompassed on the land side by a double
wall, detended with towers at smal] distances; aud
that without the walls were ditches, ramparts, and
a kind of bastions faced with hewn stone (Jourgey,
p- 72). Pococke speaks chiefly of the ruins. After
the impulse given to the prosperity of the place
by the measures of Sheikh Daher, and afterwards
of Djezzar Pasha, the descriptions difler. Much
of the old ruins had disappeared from the na-
tural progress of decay, and from their materials
having been taken for new works. It is, however,
mentioned by Buckingham, that, in sinking the
ditch in front of the then (1816) new outer wall,
the foundations of small buildings were exposed,
twenty feet below the present level of the suil,
which must have belonged to the earliest ages,
and probably formed part of the original Aecho.
He also thought that traces of Ptolemais might
be detected in the shafts of grey and red granite
and marble pillars, which lie about or have been
converted into thresholds for large doorways, of
the Saracenic period; some partial remains might
be traced in the inner walls; and he is disposed
to refer to that time the now old khan, which, as
stated above, was really built by the Emir Fakr


ACCHO.


ed-din. All the Christian ruins mentioned by
the travellers already quoted bad disappeared.
In actual bo nei however, the town had
much increased. The population in 1819 was com-
puted at 10,000, of whom 3000 were Turks, the rest
Christians of various denominations (Connor, in
Jowett, i. 423). Approached from Tyre the city
presented a beautiful appearance, from the trees in
the inside, which rise above the wall, and from the
ground immediately around it on the outside
being planted with orange, lemon, and palm
trees. Inside, the streets had the usual narrow-
ness and filth of Turkish towns; the houses
solidly built with stone, with flat roofs; the ba-
saars mean, but tolerably well supplied (Turner,
ii. 113). The principal objects were the mosque,
the pasha's seraglio, the granary, and the arsenal
(Irby and Mangles, p. 195). Of the mosque,
which was built by Djezzar Pasha, there is a
description by Pliny Fisk (Life, p. 337; also
G. Robinson, i. 200). The trade was not consider-
able; the exports consisted chiefly of grain and
cotton, the produce of the neighbouring plain;
and the imports chiefly of rice, coffee, and sugar
from Damietta (Turner, ii. 112). As thus de-
scribed, the city was all but demolished in 1832
by the hands of Ibrahim Pasha; and although
cunsiderable pains were taken to restore it, yet,
as lately as 1837, it still exhibited a most
wretched appearance, with ruined houses and
broken arches in every direction (Lord Lindsay,

Letters, ii. 81).
As the fame of Acre ig rather modern than bi-
blical, its history must in this place he briefly
told. It belonged to the Phenicians, until they,
in common with the Jews, were subjugated by the
Babrlonians. By the latter it was doubtless main-
tained as a military station against Egypt, as it
was afterwards by the Persians (Strabo, xvi. p.877).
In the distribution of Alexander's dominions Ac-
cho fell to the lot of Ptolemy Soter, who valued
the acquisition, and gave it his own name. After-
wars it fell into the hands of' the kings of Syria ;
and is repeatedly mentioned in the wars of the
Maccabees. It was at one time the head-quarters
of their heathen enemies (1 Mace. v. 15, 22, 55).
In the endeavour of Demetrius Soter and Alex-
ander Balas to bid highest for the support of Jona-
than, the latter gave Ptolemais and the lands
around to the temple at Jerusalem (x. 1, 39).
Jonathan was afterwards invited to meet Alex-
ander and the king of Egypt at that place, and
was treated with great distinction by them (x. 56-
66);-but there he at length (p.c. 144) met his
death through the treachery of Tryphon (xii. 48-
50). Alexander Jannzus took advantage of the
civil war between Antiochus Philometor and An-
tiochus Cy zicenus to besiege Ptulemais, as the only
Mantime city in those parts, except Gaza, which
not subdued; but the siege was raised by
Ptolemy Lathyrus (then king of Cyprus), who
Rot possession of the city (Joseph. Antig. xiii.
12,26), of which he was soon deprived by his
mother Cleopatra (xiii. 13, 2). She probably
Gave it, along with her daughter Selene, to Anti-
ochus Grypus, king of Syria. At least, after his
death, Selene held possession of that and some
t Phenician towns, after Tigranes, king of


menia, had acquired the rest of the kingdom
Gus 4). But an injudicious attempt to ex-


dominions drew upon her the vengeance of


ACCHO, ES]


that eror, who, in B.c. 70, reduced Ptolemais,
and, while thus employed, received with favour
the Jewish embassy which was sent hy Queen Alex-
andra, with valuable presents, to seek his friendship
(xiii. 16, 4). A few years after, Ptolemais was ab-
sorbed, with all the country,into the Roman empire;
and the rest of its ancient history is obscure and of
little note. It is only mentioned in the New Testa-
ment from St. Paul having spent a day there on
his voyage to Cwsarea (Acts xxi. vi The import-
ance acquired by the last-named city through
the mole constructed by Herod, and the safe
harbour thus formed, must have had some effect
on the prosperity of Ptolemais; but it continued
a pees of importance, and was the seat of a
bishopric in the first ages of the Christian Church.
The see was filled sometimes by orthodox and
sometimes by Arian bishops; and it has the
equivocal distinction of having been the birth-
place of the Sabellian heresy (Niceph. vi. 7).
Accho, as we may now again call it, was an
imperial garrison town when the Saracens invaded.
Syria, and was one of those that held out until
Cesarea was taken by, Amru, in a.p. 638 (Mod.
Univ. Hist. i. 473).

The Franks first became masters of it in a.p.
1110, when it was taken by Baldwin, king of Jeru-
salem. But in a.v. 1187 it was recovered by Salah-
ed-din, who retained it till a.p. 1191, when it was
tetaken by the Christians. This was the famous
siege in which Richard Ceeur-de-Lion made so
distinguished a figure. The Christians kept it
exactly ene hundred years, or till a.v. 1291; and
it was the very last place of which they were dis-

essed. It had been ‘assigned to the Knights
ospitallers of Jerusalem, who fortified it strongly,
and defended it valiantly, till it was at length
wrested from them by Khalil ben Kelaoun, Sultan
of Egypt, who is called Melek Seruf by Christian
writers (DHerbelot, in‘ Acca ;’ Will. Tyr. ]. xxiii.
c. 6, 7; Vitriacus, capp. 25, 99, 100; Quaresmius,
tom.ii. p.897). Under this dominion it remained till
a.D. 1517, when the Mamluke dynasty was over-
thrown by Selim L., and all its territories passed
to the Turks (Chronica de Syria, lib. v. cap. 13
Mod. Unio. Hist. b. xv. c. 10, § 2). After this Acre
remained in quiet obscurity till the middle of the
last century, when the Arab Sheikh Daher took
it by surprise. Under him the place recovered .
some of its trade and importance. He was suc-
ceeded by the barbarous but able tyrant Djezzar
Pasha, who strengthened the fortifications and im-
proved the town. Under him it rose once more
into fame, through the gallant and successful
resistance which, under the direction of Sir Sid-
ney Smith, it offered to the arms of Buonaparte.
After that the fortifications were further strength-
ened, till it became the strongest place in all
Syria. In 1832 the town was besieged for nearly
six months by Ibrahim Pasha, during which
35,000 shells were thrown into it, and the build-
ings were literally beaten to tig (Hogg's Da-
mascus, pp. 160-166). It had by no means
recovered from this calamity, when it was sub-
jected to the operations of the English fleet under
Admiral Stopford, in pursuance of the plan for
restoring Syria to the Porte. On the 3rd of No-
vember, 1840, it was bombarded for several hours,
when the explosion of the powder-magazine de-
stroyed the garrison and Taid the town in ruins
(Napier’s War in Syria).


4 ACCOMMODATION.


ACCOMMODATION, as used by theological
writers, has been defined to be the application of
one thing to another by analogy. This definition,
however, is far from being complete, as the term,
at least in moder times, lias been used in various
senses.

It has been applied to the form of instruc-
tion in which it pleased the Almighty to
communicate his will to mankind. Thus the
sensible images and anthropumorphitic expressions
which were used for the conveyance of divine
truths, especially in the infancy of mankind, are
frequently denominated accommodation. To
express this sense the term divine condescension
has been also employed. It is meant thereby
that God, in order to lead mankind to a know-
ledge of religion and morality, humbled himself
to the weakness, the prevailing ignorance, modes
of thought, and spiritual wants of men, and com-
municated truths under various images [An-
THROPOMORPHISM]. When it is considered that
the first oracles of our holy religion are the earliest
Monuments of human thought extant, and pre-
serve the memorials of the intancy of society, and
that, in order to attain their end—that of com-
municating instruction—they must be accommo-
dated in their form to the prevalent modes of
thought and language, we may readily perceive
the reasons for the employment of figurative ex-

ressions and typical symbols, (See Archbishop

hately’s Bumpton Lectures ; also, Lectures on
Theology, by the Rev. W. D. Conybeare, Lond.
1836). This is called divine condescension,
in order to distinguish it from Arman, which
consists in a teacher's adapting himself to the
modes of thought and imperfections of men, with
the design of leading them to fresh knowledge
and better views. This is considered to be a neces-
sary condescension to the weakness of the ignorant
and uncivilized. Few, it is maintained, would
have received wholesome truths if’ the teacher had
not regulated himself according to this system,
at least, in matters of subordinate import, so far
as this could be done without prejudice to the
truth. The person who employs this method is
said to speak xat’ olxovouiay, or economically

See Seiler's Biblical Hermeneutics, by the Rev.

« Wright, LL.D., Lond. 1834, § 31, &c.).
Symbols, types, parables, and allegories are in-
eluded under this form of instruction, of which,
in all its parts, the inspired teachers. both under
the former as well as the Christian dispensation,
are considered to have availed themselves in the
communication of the divine will. They con-
formed themselves to the capacities of their
hearers, and did not think it necessary to refute
such of their errors as had no connection with
religious truths. But in modem times, and es-
pecially within the last half-century, the principle
of accommodation in dogmatic theology has, in
the interpretation of the Scriptnres, far exceeded
these limits. While sober interpreters allowed
that it was the duty ofa religious instructor to
reserve the inculcation of certain religious truths,
which the hearers were yet inadequate to compre-
hend, or admitted that the inspired teachers
adopted the prevailing opinions in natural science,
or even in regard to genealogical records, or
points of chronology and other topics unconnected
with the salvation of mankind-—such as the re
ceived popular notions respecting demons — or, at


ACCOMMODATION.


least, would not disturb the minds of their hearers
by correcting their notions on such subjects—the
advocates of this theory, feeling the difficulty of
fixing the exact limits of the system, or consi-
dering the only substantial truths to be those of
natural religion, proceeded to the length of holding
that all beyond these, including every peculiar
doctrine of Christianity, was a mere accommoda-
tion to the prejudices or expectations of their con-
temporaries. They thus confounded what was
tme, viz., accommodation in the form, with—
what was inconsistent with the character of a
divine revelation, or even with that of an upright
human legislatur—accommodation in the matter
of their instructions; every thing mysterious and
difficult, the very notion that Christianity was a
revelation from heaven, was said to be merely a
wise condescension to the weakness of former ages 5
and this system long continued to be the prevalent
one in Germany. Others have maintained that the
sacred writers were themselves not free from the
errors and prejudices of their countrymen, and that,
instead of accommodating themselves to these, they
were only teaching what they believed to be true.
The question has assumed a new shape since the
rise and development of this latter view, according
to which the apostles have been placed, in regard
to their interpretations, said to be derived from the
Rabbinical schools, on a level with the mass of their
countrymen. The general inclination and tend-
ency of the system is this—that in the New Testa-
Ment we shall find only the opinions of Christ
and the apostles, and not religious and eternal
truths, The principle of dogmatical accommo-
dation, to a certain extent, has, in various degrees,
exercised from an early age an influence on the
interpretation of the Scriptures; but it did not
assume its present form before the time of Semler,
in whose writings we find the germ, at least, of
that system which has been considered as the most
formidable weapon ever devised for the destruction
of Christianity ( Rose's Protestantism tn Germany,
p. 75, Lond. 1829),

The dogmatical accommodation has been also
called, in latter times, Aistorical interpretation, in
contradistinction to grammatical, or doctrinal,
inasmuch as it refers to the alleged transient
opinions of a peculiar age, which the inspired
teachers are said to have employed in their in-
structions. Those who support this theory are
strongly opposed to verbal, or what they designate
literal criticism, which they contemn as being
barren, minute, and of little value, as if it had
reference only to words and syllables; but ex-
perience has shown that where verbal criticism
has been neglected, literature bas been unknown
or uncultivated (Preface to Tittman’s Aelete-
mata Sacra. See also Storr, De Sensu Histo-
rico Scripture Sacre, and his Dissertation on
the Object of the Death of Christ; also his
Confidential Letters on the subject of Religion;
Haupt’s Bemerkungen tiber die Lehrart Jesu ;
Heringa, Verhandeling, ten betooge, dat Jesus
end zyn Apostelen zich doorgaans niet geschikt
hebben naar de Verkeerde denkbeelden van
hunne tydqeenooten ; Reason and Revelation, by
Crusius; Planck's Introduction to Theological
Sciences, in Biblical Cabinet, vol. vii.; Less’s Let-
ters on the Principle of Accommodation; Lang,
in Flatt’s Magazine ; Meyer's Attempt ; Tzschir-
ners Memorabilia; and Starck's Dialogues, pp.


ACCOMMODATION.


8-116. The doctrine has been defended, with
various limitations, by Vogel, in his Aufsatze,
and in his Manual of Practical Divinity; and
by Schott, in his Journal for Clergymen. See
also Bauer's Hermeneutik, § 147-151, p. 121-126;
and Wright's Seiler, § 264-276, p. 418-438 : these
paragraphs are thus referred to by Jahn, Enchi-
ridion Hermeneutice, p. 49).—W. W.

ACCOMMODATION (exegetical or special)
is principally employed in the application of cer-
tain of the Old Testament to events in
the New, to which they had no actual historical
or typical reference. In this sense it is also called
illustration. Citations of this description are ap-

tly very frequent throughout the whole New
estament, but especially in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. As the system of exegetical accom-
modation has in modern times been the occasion
of much angry controversy, it will be necessary
to enter somewhat minutely into its character
and history.

It cannot be denied that many such passages,
although apparently introduced as referring to, or
pore of, certain events recorded in the New

‘estament, seem to have, in their original con-
nection, an exclusive reference to quite other ob-
jects. The difficulty of reconciling such seeming
misapplications, or deflections from their original
design, has been felt in all ages, although it has
been chiefly reserved to recent times to give a
solution of the difficulty by the theory of accom-
modation. By this it is meant that the prophecy
or citation from the Old Testament was not de-
signed literally to apply to the event in question,
but that the New Testament writer merely adopted
it for the sake of ornament, or in order to produce
a strong impression, by showing a remarkable

Helism between two analogous events, which
in themselves no mutual relation.

There is a catalogue of more than seventy of
these accommodated passages adduced by the
Rev. T. H. Horne, in support of this theory, in his
Introduction to the Critical Study of the Holy
Scriptures (vol. ii. part i. ch. iv. sect. 11, p. 343,
Ith ed. 1834), but it will suffice for our pur-
pose to select the following specimens, which are
those given by Jahn, in his Enchiridion Her-
meneutica, § 31 :—


Matt. xiii. 35, cited from Psalm Ixxviii. 2.


vw Vili, 17 om Isaiah liii. 4.*

» ld » Hosea xi. 1.

» 17,18 4 Jeremiah xxxi. 15.
» ii 8 > Isaiah xl. 3.


_ It will be necessary, for the complete elucida-
tion of the subject, to bear in mind the distinction
not only between accommodated passages and
such as must be properly explained (as those which
are abslutely aidduced as proofs), but also be-
tveen such passages and those which are merely
turrowed, and applied by the sacred writers, some-
times in a higher sense than they were used by the


* Jahn has observed that the quotation from
the Old Testament in this ‘ He cast out
the spirits with his word, and healed all that were
Sick, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken

a8, saying. Himself took our infirmities,
c bare our ncknesses, is constantly used in
Re,’ t sense when cited in other parts of the


ACCOMMODATION. 41


original authors. Passages which do not strictly
and literally predict future events, but which can
be applies to an event recorded in the New Testa-
ment by an accidental parity of circumstances,
can alone be thus designated. Such accommo-
dated passages therefore, if they exist, can only be
considered as descriptive, and not ictive.

It will here be necessary to consider the various
modes in which the prophecies of the Old Testa-
ment are supposed to be fulfilled in the New.
For instance, the opinion has been maintained
by several divines, and is adopted in Mr.
Home's Introduction, that there is sometimes a
literal, sometimes only a mediate, typical, or

iritual fulfilment. Sometimes a prophecy is
cited merely by way of illustration ( accommoda-
tion), while at other times nothing more exists
than a mere allusion. Some prophecies are sup-
posed to have an immediate literal fulfilment, and
to have been afterwards accomplished in a
and more extensive sense; but as the full de-
velopment of this part of the subject appertains
more properly to the much controverted question
of the single and double sense of prophecy, we
shall here dwell no further on it than to observe,
that not only are commentators who support the
theory of a double sense divided on the very im-
portant question, what are literal prophecies and
what are only prophecies in a secondary sense,
but they who are agrecd on this question are at
variance as to whut appellation shall be given to
those passages which are applied by the New Testa-
ment writers to the ministry of our Saviour, and yet
historically belong to an antecedent period. In
order to lessen the difficulty, a distinction bas
been attempted to be drawn, by Dathe and others,
from the formula with which the quotation is
ushered in. Passages, fur instance, introduced
by the formula fya wAnpw6@f, ‘ that it might be
fulfilled,’ are considered, on this account, as di-
rect predictions by sume, who are willing to con-
sider citations introduced with the expression
aére exAnpwéOn, ‘then was fulfilled,’ as nothing
more than accommodations. The use of the
former phrase, as applied to a mere accommoda-
tiun, they maintain is not warranted by Jewish wri-
ters: such ges, therefore, they hold to be pro-

hecies, at least in a secondary sense (see Bishop

Marsh's seventeenth Lecture, in which, however,
he justly observes, that if add prophecies were to be
considered such only in a secondary or mystical
sense, they would lose much of their satisfactory
character). Bishop Kidder (Demonstration of
the Messias, part ii. p. 81, Lond. 1726) appo-
sitely observes, in regard to this subject, that ‘a
scripture may be said to be fulfilled several ways,
viz., properly and in the letter, as when that which
was foretold comes to pass; or again, when what .
was fulfilled in the type is fulfilled again in the
antitype ; or else a scripture may be fullilled more
improperly, viz., by way of accommodation, as
when an event happens to any place or people like
to that which fell out some time before.’ He in-
stances the citation, Matt. ii. 17, ‘In Ramah was
a voice heard, &c. ‘ These words,’ he adds, ‘ are
made use of by way of allusion to ex this
sorrow by. The evangelist doth not say “ that it
might be fulfilled,” but “ then was fulfilled,” g.d
such another scene took place.’

It must at the same time be admitted that this
distinction in regard to the formula of quotation


42 ACCOMMODATION.


is not acknowledged by the majority of commen-
tators, either of those who admit or of those who
deny the theory of accommodation. Among the
former it will suffice to name Calmet, Doddridge,
Rosenmiiller, and Jahn, who look upon passages
introduced by the formula ‘that it might be ful-
filled,’ as equally accommodations with those
which are prefaced by the words ‘then was ful-
filled ;’ while those who deny the accommodative
theory altogether, consider both as furmulas of
direct prophecies, at least in a secondary or typi-
cal sense. This, for instance, is the case espe-
cially in regard to the two citations of this de-
scription which first present themselves in the
New Testament, viz. Matt. ii. 15, and Matt. ii.
17, the former of which is introduced by the
first, and the latter by the second of these for-
mulas. But inasmuch as the commentators above
referred to cannot perceive how the citation from
Hosea xi. 1, ‘Out of Egypt have I called my
son,’ although prefaced by the formula ‘that it
might be fallilfed," and which literally relates to
the calling of the children of Israel out of Egypt,
‘can be prophetically diverted from its historical
meaning, they look upon it as a simple accommo-
dation, or applicable quotation, and consider the fva
wAnpw6h 23 a Jewish formula of accommodation.
Mr. Horne, after referring in support of this ex-
plication to some questionable examples from Su-
renhusius's BiBAos kaTadAayijs, and Rosenmiiller’s
Commentary on the New Testament, observes, that
‘it was a familiar idiom of the Jews, when quoting
the writings of the Old Testament, to say, that it
might be fulfilled which reas spoken by such and
such @ prophet, not intending it to be understood
that such a particular passage in one of the sacred
books was ever designed to be a real prediction of
what they were then relating, but signifying only
that the words of the Old Testament might Le
roperly adopted to express their meaning and
illustrate their ideas’ (Jntroduction, vol. ii. part i.
ch. 4). ‘The apostles,’ he adds, ‘who were Jews
by birth, and wrote and spoke in the Jewish
idiom, frequently thus cite the Old Testament,
intending no more by this mode of speaking, than
that the words of such an ancient writer might
with equal propriety be adopted to characterize
any similar occurrence which happened in_ their
times. The formula “that it might be fulfilled,”
does not therefore differ in signification from the
hrase “then was fulfilled,” applied in the fol-
lowing citation in Matt. ii, 17, 18, from Jer.
xxxi. 15-17, to the massacre of the infants at
Bethlehem. They are a beautiful quotation,
and not a prediction of what then happened,
and are therefore applied to the massacre of
the infants according not to their original and
historical meaning, but according to Jewish
hraseology.” Dr. Adam Clarke, also, in his
mmentary on Jeremiah (xxxi. 15-17), takes the
same view :—‘ St. Matthew, who is ever fond of
accommodation, applicd these words to the mas-
sacre of the children of Bethlehem; that is, they
were suitable to that occasion, and therefore he
applied them, but they are not a prediction of that
event. So opposed, however, was the late Rev.
Hugh James Rose to this principle of accommo-
dation, that he included the application of it to
this very passage among those which ought to ex-
clude Kuinoel as a commentator from the library
of the theological student (Supplement to State


ACCOMMODATION,


of Protestantism, p. xlii.); and the Rev. Chas.
orster, in his Critical Essays, p. 59, in which
he altogether opposes the theory, designates the
distinction attempted to be drawn by Dathe and
Bishop Marsh between the formulas of citation
as “in all its bearings fanciful and licentious.”
Mr. Forster's view is, that in the return of the
Messiah out of Egypt, and in his return alone,
the promise of the Lord to Rachel (Jer. xxxi. 16),
‘and they shall come again from the land of
the enemy,’ which was figuratively fulfilled in
the return of the Jews of the three generations
from the captivity in Babylon, was adequately and
literally fulfilled, and that his coming again out
of Egypt is an event distinctly predicted of the
Messiah, under the figure of Israel in Egyptian
bondage (Hos. xi. 1), .

In the same manner he infers that, so far from
the prophecy in Jer. xxxi. being an accommo-
dation of the evangelist’s, the prophet himself had
diverted to his immediate purpose (the Babylonish
captivity), in the way of accommodation only, the
prophetic type (Gen. xxxv. 16-19) frum its proper
object, the birth of the Messiah at Bethlehem, in
which the historical type found its literal fulfil-
ment (Critical Essays, p. 31).

D. J. G. Rosenmiiller gives as examples, which
he conceives clearly show the use of these for
mulas, the ges Matt. i. 22, 23; ii. 15, 17, 23;
xv. 7; Tate iv. 21; James ii. 23; alleging that
they were designed only to denote that something
took place which resembled the literal and historical
sense. The sentiments of a distingnished English
divine are to the same elfect :—‘I doubt not that
this phrase, “that it might be fulfilled,” and the
like were used first in quoting real prophecies, but
that this, by long use, sunk in its value, and was
more vulgarly applied, so that at last it was given
to scripture only accommodated.” And again,
‘If prophecy could at last come. to signify sing+
ing (Titus i, 12; 1 Sam. x. 10; 1 Cor. xiv. 1),
why might not the phrase fulfilling of Scripture
and prophecy signify only quotation’ (Nicholl's
Conferenee with a Theist, 1698, part iti. p. Mee

The accommodation theory in exegetics has
been equally combated by two classes of uppo-
nents. Those of the more ancient sclool con-
sider such mode of application of the Old Testa-
ment passages not only as totally irreconcilable
with the plain grammatical construction and ob-
vious meaning of the controverted passages which
are said to be so applied, but as an unjustifiable
artitice, altogether unworthy of a divine teacher ;
while the other class of expositors, who are tu be
found chiefly among the most modern of the
German (so called) Rationalists, maintain that the
sacred writers, having been themselves trained in
this erroneous mode of teaching, had mistakenly,
but bond fide, interpreted the passages which they
had cited from the Old Testament in a sense
altogether diflerent from their historical meaning,
and thus anplied them to the history of the Chris-
tian dispensation. Some of these have maintained
that the accommodation theory was a mere shift


(see Rosenmiiller’s Historia Interpretationis)


resorted to by commentators who could not other-
wise explain the application of Old Testament
prophecies in the New consistently with the inspi-
ration of the sacred writers: while the advocates
of the system consider that the apostles, in adapt-
ing themselves to the mode of interpretation which


ACCOMMODATION.


was customary in their days, and-in further
adopting what may be considered an argument
@ concessis, were employing the most persuasive
mode of oratory, and the one most likely to ve
effectual; and that it was therefore lawful to
adopt a method so calculated to attract atten-
tion to their divine mission, which they were at
all times prepared to give evidence of by other
and irrefragable proofs. : ‘

We shall conclnde with giving a brief sketch
of the history of this method of interpretation.
Mr. Stuart, of Andover, in the Excursus to his
Commentary on Hebrews, alleges that the fathers
of the church had no hesitation in applying this
system to the interpretation of the Scriptures. But
be has furnished us with no example of their cri-
tical application of it, and any such application
seems to us scarcely compatible with the allegori-
cal fancies to which they seem to have been ad-
dicted. The difference, indeed, bad been at all
times felt, from Origen downwards, between the
historical sense of the citations, and that to which
they are applied in the New Testament ; and ex-
positors have been divided into two classes ; the
one making the New Testament interpretation
the rule for the explanation of Old Testament
passages, and the other attempting, in various

“ways, to reconcile the discrepancy (see Tho-
luck’s Commentary on Hebrews). But the first
who appears to have led the way to the mode of
interpretation in question, was Theodore of Mop-
suestia, in the fifth century, who, so far as we can
judge frum the few writings of bis which have
come duwn to us, was decidedly favourable to
literal and historical interpretation. He con-
sidered that the Old Testament contained very
few direct prophecies of the Messiah, and in re-
ference to other quotations, such as that in John
xix. 24, and Rom. x. 6, observes that the apostle
‘alters the phrase to suit it tuhis argument ' (see
Tholuck’s Commentary on Hebrews). And
again, in reference to Psalm xxii. 19, Theodore
observes that the second verse, and consequently
the psalm itself, cannot possibly refer to Him
‘who did no sin, neither was guile found in His
mouth ;’ but that as our Lord on the cross cited
the words of the psalm, ‘ My God, my God, why
bast thou forsaken me? the apostle, on this ac-
count, accommodated to Christ the words of this
verse also: ‘They parted my garments among
them, and fur my vesture did they cast lots.’
He seems at the same time to have acknowledged
the existence of a higher and lower sense, for he
observes that some passages referring to the Mes-
siah had been ‘hyperbolically applied to his-
torical personages in the Old Testament,’ and
says of Psalm Ixix. 22, that the words may, in
another sense, be referred to our Lord, although the
Psalm did not historically refer to him (see
Rosenmilller's Histuria Interpretationis, vol. iii.
%60). Rosenmiiller conceives, from an expres-
sien of Nichvias Lyranus, that he (Nicholas)
had at least a glimpse of this system. But the
Person who, ‘so fur as modern theology is con-
cemed,’ to use the words of the Rev. J. J. Cony-
beare (Bampton Lectures), ‘was the first and most
€minent patron and advocate of the system’ was
Calvin, who ‘adopted principles of exposition

which, since the condemnation of Theodore, in the
fifth century, had scarcely perhaps been heard of,
snd assuredly uever been entertained in the


ACCOMMODATION. cf


Christian church.’ Erasmus and Luther had, no
doubt, led the way by their advocacy of the
literal interpretation ; but, even in passages which
have been supposed to bear a double relation to the
Jewish and Christian church, Calvin appears
rather to ground such application on the nature
and similarity of the subjects and their condi-
tion, than u anything of a distinctly typical
and prophetical character. He is, therefore, dis-
posed to Jook not so much for an intention origin-
ally spiritual and predictive of higher things, as
for the authoritative application of a new and
more extended sense by thei bired writers them-
selves. On Heb. ii. 6, he za ‘that it was not
the apostle’s intention to give the genuine exposi-
tion of the words, and that no inconvenience can
result from supposing that the apostle makes allu-
sions to the Old Testament e for the sake
of embellishment.’ In onal to the passages in
Matt. ii. 15-17, already cited, he observes, ¢ be
yond controversy, the passage Hos. xi. 1, must
not be restricted to Christ ;’ and in reference to the
second quotation (Jerem. xxxi. 15), he says ‘it is
certain that the prophet refers to the slaughter of
the tribe of Benjamin, which took place in his
own time; and Matthew, in citing the words of
the prophet, does not mean that this was a predic-
tion of what Herod was about to do, but that
there was a renewal of the lamentation of the Ben-
jamites.’ And again, ‘Non tam impetratur, quam
pid deflexione ad Christi personam accommodat’
(Calvin's Commentary on Hebrews, passim).

But while the credit of this invention has been
thus attributed to Calvin, ‘a writer, whom on
the one hand no one will accuse of any Neo-
logian tendency, while on the other the most
suber and judicious critic will tind nothing in his
exposition revolting to the strictest rules of just
interpretation’ (Lectures, &c., by W. D. Cony-
beare), the doctrine of accommodation, once -em-
ployed for the purpose of discarding all spiritual
and allegorical methods of interpretation, was at
a later period extended to all that had been
hitherto considered as typical. In England, Dr.
Sykes, in his answer to Collins, and in the pre-
face to his Commentary on the Epistle to the
Hebrews, surrendered the whole scheme of typical
prefiguration and secondary prophecy, as desti-
tute of proof, and accommodated to the mission of
our Lord in condescension to the reigning preju-
dices of the people. Le Clerc carried his notions
of accommodation to such excess, as nearly to in-
validate the prophetical character of the Old Testa-
ment altogether, and considerably to depreciate
the divine authority of the New; and Semler
pronounced all the references made in Scripture

y our blessed Lord and his disciples, to be the
mere result of a compliance with the false and
Rabbinical theories of their unenlightened coun-
trymen.

Among those who, in modern times, have most
ably vindicated the system of the typical inter-
pretation of prophecy, as opposed to the accom-
modation theory, is Professor Tholuck, of Berlin,
in the Dissertation affixed to his Commentary
on Hebrewcs. He does not, indeed, deny all in-
stances of accommodation, but refers a great
number of passages which had been so interpreted
(as Matt. it. 15, 18; xxvii. 9,35; John it. 145
xix. 24, 36; Acts i. 20; ii. 27-31) to the class
of typical prophecies.


‘4 ACCUBATION. —


The only canon furnished by Professor Tholuck
‘for distinguishing between types and accommo-
dation is, the consideration of the importance of
the subject to which they are applied—a rule
which must ever be vague and unsatisfactory. The
Rev. J. J. Conybeare is of opinion that we are
* not to look for any secondary sense but what is
inherent in and consequential on the typical, the
typical being determined by the real and essential

ints of analogy between the connected objects.’

fessor Tholuck had been preceded by Bilroth
in his Commentary on Corinthians, who had ob-
served in reference to the citation in 1 Cor. i. 19,
that we are ‘not to look for a strict historical
identity between the meaning which St. Paul
attaches to the passages, and that entertained by
their original authors, but merely a connection of
an analogical kind.’ Bilroth then proceeds to vin-
dicate the sacred writers from the charge of igno-
yance, if not disingenuousness, by the consideration
that the Old Testament, taken as a whole, is a
type of the New. This is the idea on which
Tholuck has enlarged, and which, he thinks, dis-
pels all misconception on the subject; but Bil-
roth’s translator observes that, if it be meant that
‘the declarations of the prophets, instead of being
actual descriptions of the coming Messiah, directly
communicated by divine impulse, were merely
poetical delineations of persons or events connected
with Jewish history, and intended by the divine
Spirit to be typical of what was to happen in after
times, then were they, correctly speaking, no pro-
ecies at all, and it was vain and foolish in our
rd and his apostles to stp to the fulfilment
of them in Him and His church, as a proof that
he was the Messiah to whom they referred.’ The
writer conceives it to be more philosophical to
consider the Old Testament as having
the meaning which the apostle ascribes to them,
than suppose our own interpretation of them to be
correct, or attempt to explain them in an accom-
modative or even typical sense. To remark on
these views would amount to a reopening of the
question : we shall, therefore, conclude these ob-
servations in the words of the temperate and
judicious writer whom we have already cited.

Although, even the most cautious and un-
questionably pious expositors of Scripture have
admitted that some few passages of the Old
Testament, quoted or referred to in the New,
must, in the present state of our knowledge, be
regarded as so applied or accommodated to the
description and illustration of subjects foreign to
their origina] scope and intention, yet it is surely
unreasonable and uncritical to argue from these
few to the whole, or even the larger portion of
those sayings, which we are assured that holy men
of old uttered, as the spirit directed and enabled
them’ (Bampton Lectures, by J. J. Conybeare,
Oxford, 1826).—W. W.

ACCUBATION, the posture of reclining on
couches at table, which prevailed among the Jews
in and before the time of Christ. We see no rea-
son to think that, as commonly alleged, they bor-
rowed this custom from the Romans after Judea
had been subjugated by Pompey. But it is best
known to us as a Roman custom, and as such
roust be described. The dinner-bed, or triclintum,
stood in the middle of the dining-room, clear of
‘the walls, and formed three sides of a square
which enclosed the table. The open end of the


ACCUBATION.


square, with the central hollow, allowed the servants
to attend and serve the table. In all the existing

tations of the dinner-bed it is shown to
have been higher than the enclosed table. Among


VV
A - d Ye /
RUF Lagi }
IfS LE. Pe
atid I


the Romans the usual number of guests on
each couch was three, making nine for the three
couches, equal to the number of the Muses; but
sometimes there were four to each couch. The
Greeks went beyond this number (Cic. In Pes.
nad the Jews appear to have had no parti-
cular fancy in the matter, and we know that at
our Lord's last supper thirteen persons were pre-
sent. As each guest leaned, during the greuter
part of the entertainment, on his left elbow, so as
to leave the right arm at liberty, and as two or
more lay on the same couch, the head of one
man was near the breast of the man who lay
behind him, and he was, therefore, said ‘to
lie in the bosom ’ of the other. This phrase was
in use among the Jews (Luke xvi. 22, 23; John
i. 18; xiii. 23), and occurs in such a manner as
to show that to lie next below, or ‘in the bosom’
of the master of the feast, was considered the most
favoured place ; and is shown by the citations of
Kypke and Wetstein (on John xiii. 23) to have
been usually assigned to near and dear connec-
tions. So it was ‘the disciple whom Jesus loved’
who ‘reclined upon his breast’ at the last supper.
Lightfoot and others suppose that as, on that oc-
casion, John lay next below Christ, so Peter, who
was also highly favoured, lay next above him.
This conclusion is founded chiefly on the fact of
Peter beckoning to John that he should ask Jesus
who was the traitor. But this seems rather to
prove the contrary —that Peter was not near
enough to speak to Jesus himself. If he had been
there, Christ must have lain near Ais bosom, and
he would have been in the best position for whis-

ing to his master, and in the worst for beckon-
ing to John. The circumstance that Christ was
able to reach the sop to Judas when he had
dipped it, seems to us rather to intimate that he
was the one who filled that place. Any person
who tries the posture may see that it is not easy
to deliver anything but to the person next above
or next below. And this is not in contradiction
to, but in agreement with, the circumstances.
The morsel of favour was likely tobe given to one
in a favoured place ; and Judas being so trusted
and honoured as to be the treasurer and almoner
of the whole party, might, as much as any other
of the apostles, be expected to fill that place.
This also gives more point to the narrative, as
it aggravates by contrast the turpitude and base-
ness of his conduct.

The frame of the dinner-bed was laid with mat-
tresses variously stuffed, and, latterly, was furnished
with rich coverings and hangings. Each person


ACCUBATION.


was wually provided with a cushion or bolster
oa which tu support the upper part of his person in
psomewhat raised position; as the left arm alone
could not long without weariness sustain the
weight. The lower part of the body being ex-
tended diagonally on the bed, with the feet out-
ward, it is at once perceived how easy it was for
‘the woman that was a sinner’ to come behind
between the dinner-bed and the wall, and anoint
the feet of Jesus (Matt. xxvi. 75 Mark xiv. 3).
The dinner-beds were so various at different
times, in different places, and under different cir-
cumstances, that no one description can apply
tothem all. Even among the Romans they were
at fit (after the Punic war) of rude form
and materials, and covered with mattresses
stuffed with rushes or straw; mattresses of hair
and wool were introduced at a later period. At
first the wooden frames were small, low, and
round; and it was not until the time of Au-
gustus that square and ornamented couches came
into fashion. In the time of Tiberius the most
splendid sort were veneered with costly woods or
tortoiseshel], and were covered with valuable em-
broideries, the richest of which came frum Baby-
Jon, and cost large sums (U.K.S. Pompeii, ii. 88).
The Jews pee had all these varieties, though
it is not likely that the usage was ever carned
to such a pitch of luxury as among the Romans ;
and it is probable that the mass of the people fed
in the ancient manner—seated on stools or on the
It a that couches were often s0
low, that the feet rested on the ground; and that
cusbions or bolsters were in general use. It would
also seem, from the mention of two and of three
couches, that the arrangement was more usually
square than semicircular or round (Lightfoot,
Hor, Hed. in Jobn xiii. 23).


. ‘ yr = =
ee
Y/N abcPoKokohokoKohals \\


i ee


it is utterly improbable that the Jews derived
this custom from the Romans, as is constantly
alleged. They certainly knew it as existing among
the Persians long before it had been adopted by the
Romans themselves (Esth. i.6; vii. re earthen
presumption is that they adopted it while subject
to that people. The Greeks also had the usage
(from the Persians) before the Romans; and with
the Greeks of Syria the Jews had very much in-
tercourse. Besides, the Romans the
custom from the Carthaginians (Val. . xii.
1,2; Liv. xxviii, 28); and, that they had it,
implies that it previously existed in Phamicia, in
the nei of the Jews. ‘Thus, that in
the time of Christ the custom had been lately


ACELDAMA. &


adopted from the Romans, is the last of various
probabilities. It is also unlikely that in so short
a time it should have become usual and even (as
the re maar a pata to eat the Passover
in that ure of indulgent and in no
other. ir the sacred and oun literature of
this subject has been most industriously brought
together by Stuckius (Antig. Convivalium, ii. 34);
and the works on Pompeii and Herculaneum sup-
ly the more recent information.

ACCURSED. [AnatHema.] |

ACCUSER (3°) and 3%) UN; Sept.
and New Test. *Avr{8:xos). The original word,
which bears this leading signification, means,
1. One who has a cause or matter of contention ;
the accuser, i age or plaintiff in any suit
(Judg. xii. 2; Matt. v. 25; Luke xii. 58). We
have little information respecting the manner in
which causes were conducted in the Hebrew
courts of justice, except from the Rabbinical au-
thorities, who, in matters of this description, may
be supposed well informed as to thé later customs
of the nation. Even from these we learn little
more than that great care was taken that, the
accused being deemed innocent until convicted,
he and the accuser should appear under equal
circumstances before the court, that no preju-
dicial impression might be created to the disad-
vantage of the defendant, whose interests, we are
told, were so anxiously guarded, that any one was
allowed to speak whatever he knew or had to eay
in his favour, which privilege was withheld from
the accuser (Lewis, Origines Hebrae, i. 68).
The word is, however, to be understood in regard
to the real plaintiff, not to the advocates, who
only became known in the later period of ‘the
Jewish history EB vousrs

The word is also applied in Scripture, in the

eral sense, to any adversary or enemy (Luke
xviii. 3; 1 Pet. v. 8). In the latter passage there
is an allusion to the old Jewish notion that Satan
was the accuser or calumniator of men before
God (Job i. 6, 89.3 Rev. xii. 10, sg.; comp.
Zech. iii. 1). In this application the forensic
sense was still retained, Botan being represented
as laying to man’s charge a breach of the law, as
in a court of justice, and demanding his punish-
ment [Saran].

ACELDAMA, (AreA3ayzd, from the Syro-
Chaldaic, 893 DBM, sield of blood), the field
purchased with the money for which Judas be-
trayed Christ, and which was appropriated as a
place of burial for strangers (Matth. xxvii. 8; Acts
i. 19). It was previously ‘a potter's field.’ The
field now shown as Aceldama lies on the slope of
the hills beyond the valley of Hinnom, south of
Mount Zion.. This is obviously the spot which
Jerome points out (Onomast. 8.v.‘ Acheldamach’),
and which has since been mentioned by almost
every one who has described Jerusalem, San-
dys thus writes of it: ‘ On the south side of this
valley, neere where it meeteth with the valley of
Jehoshaphat, mounted a good height on the side
of the mountain, is Aceldama, or the field of
blood, purchased with the restored reward of tres-
son, for a burial place for strangers. In the
midst whereof a large square roome was made by
the mother of Constantine; the south side, walled
with the naturall rocke; flat at the top, and equal
with the vpper level; out of which ariseth certaine


“6 ACHAIA.


little cupoloes, open in the midst to let doune the
dead bodies. Thorow these we might see the bot-
tome, all conered with bones, and certaine corses
but newly let doune, it being now the sepulchre
of the Armenians. A greedy graue, and great
enough to deuoure the dead of a whole nation.
For they say (and I believe it), that the earth
thereof within the space of eight and forty houres
will consume the flesh that is laid thereon’ (Je-
lation of a Journey, p. 187). He then relates the
common story, that the empress referred to caused
270 ship-loads of this tlesh-consuming mould to
be taken to Rome, to form the soil of the Campo
Sancto, to which the same virtue is ascribed. Cas-
tela aflirms that great quantities of the wondrous
mould were removed by divers Christian princes
in the time of the Crusades, and to this source
assigns the similar sarcophagic properties claimed
not only by the Campo Santo at Rome, but by
the cemetery of St. Innocents at Paris, by the
cemetery at Naples (Le Sainct Voyage de Hieru-
salem, 1603, p. 150; also Roger, p. 160); and,
we inay add, that of the Campo Santo at Pisa.
The plut of ground originally bought ‘to bary
strangcrs in,’ seems to have been early set apart
by the Latins, as well as by the Crusaders, as a
place of burial for pilgrims (Jac. de Vitriaco,
. 64). The charnel-house is mentioned by Sir
John Mandeville, in the fourteenth century, as
Velonging to the Knights-hospitallers. S.ndys
shows that, early in the seventeenth century, it was
in the possession of the Armenians. Eugene
Roger (La Terre Saincte, p. 161) states that they
bought it for the burial of their own pilgrims, and
ascribes the erection of me charnel-house to them.
They still possessed it in the time of Maundrell,
or rather rented it, at a sequin a day, from the
Turks. Corpses were still deposited there; and
the traveller observes that they were in various
stages of decay, frum which he conjectures that
the grave did not make that quick dispatch with
the bodies committed to it which had been re-
ported. ‘The earth, hereabouts, he observes, ‘is
of achalky substance; the plot of ground was not
above thirty yards long by fifteen wide; and a
moiety of it was occupied by the -charnel-honse,
which was twelve aahls high’ (Journey, p. 136).
Richardson (Travels, p. 567) affirms that bodies
were thrown in as late as 1818; but Dr. Robin-
son alleges that it has the appearance of having
been for a much longer time abandoned: ‘The
field or plat is not now marked by any boundary
todistinzuish it trom the rest of the hill-side; and
the former charnel-house, now a ruin, is all that
Temains to point out, the site....An opening at
each end enabled us to look in; but the bottom
was empty and dry, excepting a few bones much
decayed’ (Biblical Researches, & 524).


ACHAIA (‘Ayaia), a region of Greece, which ,


in the restricted sense occupied the north-western
portion of the Peloponnesus, including Corinth
and its isthmus (Strabo, viii. p. 438, sq.). By
the poets it was often put for the whole of
Greece, whence "Axaol, the Greeks. Under
the Romans, Greece was divided into two pro-
vinces, Macedunia and Achaia, the former of
which included Macedonia proper, with Illyri-
cum, Epirus,and Thessaly; and the latter, all that
lay southward of the former (Cellar. i. p. 1170,
1022). It is in this latter pas peas that
tne name of Achaia is always employed in the


ACHAN.


New Testament (Acts xviii. 12, 16; xix. 22;
Rom. xv. 26; xvi. 25; 1 Cor. xvi. 15; 2 Cor.
i. 13 ix. 2; xi. 10; 1 Thess. i. 7,8). Achaia
was at first a senatorial province, and, as such, was
governed by proconsuls (J)ion Cass. liii. p. 704).
Tiberius changeit the two into one imperial
vince under procurators (Tacit. Anna/. i. 76); but
Claudius restored them to the senate and to the
poccenlat form of government (Suet. Claud. 25).
ence the exact and minute propriety with which
St. Luke expresses himself in giving the title of
proconsul to Gallio, who was appointetl to the
province in the time of Claudius (kets xvili, 12),


ACHAICUS (Ayaixds), a native of Achaia,
and a follower of the apostle Paul. He, with
Stephanus and Fortunatus, was the bearer of the
Ist Epistle to the Corinthians, and was recom-
mended by the apostle to their special respect
(1 Cor. xvi. 17).


ACHAN (S225 Sept.“Axav, or “Axap, Josh.
vii. 1). In the parallel passage (1 Chron. ii. 7) the
name is spelt DY, and as it has there the meaning
of troubling, it is thought by some that this is an
intentional change, after the fact, to give the name
a siznificant reference to the circumstance which
renders it notorious. The city of Jericho, before
it was taken, was put under that awful ban, of
which there are other instances in the early Scrip-
ture history, whereby all the inhabitants (except-
ing Rahab and her family) were devoted to
destruction, all the combustible goods to be can-
sumed by fire, and all the metals to be conse-
crated to God. This vow of devotement was
rigidly observed by all the troops when Jericho
was taken, save by one man, Achan, a Judahite,
who could not resist the temptation of secreting
an ingot of gold. a quantity of silver, and a costly
Babylonish garment, which he buried in his
tent, deeming that lis sin was hid. But God
made known this infraction, which, the vow
having been made by the nation as one body, had
involved the whole nation in his guilt. The
Israelites were defeated, with serions loss, in their
first attack upon Ai; and as Joshua was well as-
sured that (is humiliation was designed as the
punishment of a crime which had inculpated the
whole people, he took immediate measures to dis-
cover the criminal. As in other cases, the matter
was referred to the Lord by the lot, and the lot
ultimately indicated the actual criminal. The
conscience-stricken | offender then contessed his
crime to Joshua; and his confession being verified
by the production of his ill-gotten treasure, the
people, actnated by the strong impulse with which
men tear up, root and branch, a polluted thing,
hurried away not only Achan, but his tent, his
goods, his spoil, his cattle, his children, to the
valley (afterwards called) of Achor, north of
Jericho, where they stoned him, and all that be-
longed to him; after which the whole was con-
sumed with fire, and a cairn of stones raised
over the ashes. The severity of this act, as re
gards the family of Achan, bas provoked some
remark. Instead of vindicating it, as is generally
done, by the allegation that the members of
Achan’s family were probably accessories to his
crime after the tact, we prefer the supposition that
they were included in the doom by one of those
sudden impulses of indiscriminate popular ven-
geance to which the Jewish people were exceed-


ACHAR.


ing! and which, in this case, it would not
ba tenn the power of Joshua to control by
any authority which he could under such circum-
stances exercise. It is admitted that this is no
more than a conjecture: but, as such, it is at
least worth as much, and assumes considerably
less, than the conjectures which have been offered
by others (Josh. vil.).

ACHAR, [Acian.] 7

ACHASHDARPENIM (DYE TIVES ; Sept.

garparcs and orparryol ; Vulg. satrapa; A.V.
“rulers of ances! It occurs in Esth. iii. 12;
viii, 9; ix. 3; and with the Chaldee termination
an, in Dan. iii. 2, 3, 27; vi. 2,3). The word is
undoubtedly merely another form of writing the
Persian word satrap, the origin of which has been
much disputed, and does not claim to be here
considered. These satraps are known in ancient
history as the governors or viceroys of the pro-
yinces into which the Persian empire was divided.
Strictly speakin they had an extended civil
jurisdiction over several smaller provinces, each
of which had ita own TIM} or governor, Thus
Zerubbabel and Nehemiah were ‘ governors’ of
Judea, under the Persian satraps of Syria (Ezra,
iv. 3,6; Neh. ii, 9). The power and functions
of the Persian satraps were not materially dif-
ferent from those of the modern Persian governors
and Turkish pashas; and, indeed, the idea of
provincial government by means of viceroys, en-
trusted with almost regal powers in their several
jurisdictions, and responsible only to the king, by
whom they are appointed, has always been pre-
valent in the East. The important peculiarity
and distinction in the ancient Persian govern-
ment, as admirably shown by Heeren (Jtesearches,
i489, sq.), was that the civil and military powers
were carefully separated : the satrap being a very
pewerful civil and political chief, but having no
immediate control over the troops and garrisons,
the commanders of which were responsible only to
the king. The satraps, in their several provinces,
al grt themselves in the maintenance of order
and the regulation of affairs; and they also col-
lected and remitted to the court the stipulated
tribute, clear of all charges for local rovernment
and for the maintenance of the troops (Xenoph.
Cyrop. viii. 6, § 1-3). In later times this prudent
wparation of powers became neglected, in favour
of royal princes and other great persons (Xenoph.
Anab. i. 1, § 2), who were entrusted with the mi-
litary as well as civil power in their govern-
ments; to which cause may be attributed the
revolt of the younger Cyrus, and the other rebel-
lions and civil wars, which, by weakening the
empire, facilitated its ultimate subjugation by
Alexander.

ACHBAR. [Movse.]

ACHISH (38, signification uncertain ;
Sept. "Ayxois, also Apyis, Axfs, called Abime-
lech in the title of Ps. xxxiv.), the Philistine
king of Gath, with whom David twice sought re-
fuge when he fled from Saul (1 Sam. xxi. 10-15;
xm. Aes ae first time David bay in ae
minen ger; forhe was recognised and spoken
of by the officers of the court Sone whose glory
had been won at the cost of the Philistines. his

talk filled David with such alarm that ke feigned
himself mad when introduced to the notice of

Achish, who, seeing him ‘scrabbling upon the


ACHMETHA. 41


doors of the gate, and letting his spittle fall down
upon his beard,’ rebuked his people sharply for
bringing him to his presence, hang, ‘Have I
need of madmen, that ye have brought this fellow
to play the madman in my presence? Shall this
fellow come into my house:” After this David
lost no time in quitting the territories of Gath.
Winer illustrates David's conduct by reference to
the similar proceeding of some other great men,
who feigned themselves mad in difficult circum-
stances—as Ulysses (Cic. Off. iii. 26; Hygin.
f. 95, Schol. ad Lycophr. 818), the astronomer
Meton (Elian, IHis¢. xiii. 12), L. Junius Brutus
(Liv. i. 56; Dion. Hal. iv. 68), and the Arabian
king Bacha (Schultens, Anth. Vet. Hamasa, p.
535). About four years after, when the character
and position of David became better known, and
when he was at the head of not less than 600 reso-
lute adherents, he again repaired with his troop
to King Achish, who received him in a truly
royal spirit, and treated him with a generous con-
fidence, of which David took rather more advan-
tage than was creditable to him [Davin].


ACHMETHA (SNDII8, Ezra vi. 2; *Ex-
Bdrava, 2 Macc. ix. 3; Judith xi. 1; Tob. v. 9;
Joseph. Antig. x. 11,7; xi. 4,63 also, in Greek
authors, "EyBdrava and ’AyBdrava), a city in
Media. The derivation of the name is doubtfal ;
but Major Raw] nson (Geogr. Journal, x. 134) has
left Tittle question that the title wag applied exclu-
sively to cities having a fortress for the protection
of the royal treasures. In Ezra we learn that in
the reign of Darius Hystaspes the Jews petitioned
that search might be made in the king's treasure-
house at Babylon, for the decree which Cyrus had
made in favour of the Jews (Ezra v. 17). Search
was accordingly made in the record-office (‘house
of the rolls"), where the treasures were kept at Ba-
bylon (vi. 1): but it appears not to have been found
there, as it was eventually discovered ‘at Ach-
metha, in the palace of the province of the Medes’
(vi, 2). It is here worthy of remark, that the
LXX. regarded ¢ Achmetha,’ in which they could
hardly avoid recognising the familiar title of
Ecbatana, as the generic name for a city, and, ac-
cordingly, rendered it by dais; and that Jo-
sephus, as well as all the Christian Greeks, while
retaining the proper name of Ecbatana, yet agree,
with the Greek Serures in employing the word
Bdpis to express the Hebrew NAVI, Birtha
(«the palace’), which is used as the distinctive
epithet of the city.

In Judith i. 2-4, there is a brief account of
Ecbatana, in which we are told that it was built
by Arphaxad, king of the Medes, who made it
his capital. It was built of hewn stones, and
surrounded by a high and thick wall, furnished.
with wide gates and strong and lotty towers. Hero-
dotus ascribes its foundation to Dejoces, in obe-
dience to whose commands the Medes erected
‘that great and strong city, now known under
the name of Aghatana, where the walls are built
circle within circle, and are so constructed that
each inner circle overtops its outer neighbour by
the height of the battlements alone. This was
effected partly by the nature of the ground, a
conical hill, and’ partly by the building itself.
The number of the circles was seven, and within
the innermost was the palace of the treasury.
The battlements of the first circle were white, of


48 ACHMETHA.


the second black, of the third scarlet, of the fourth
blue, of the fifth orange ; all these were brilliantly
coloured with different pigments; but the battle-
ments of the sixth circle were overlaid with silver,
aud of the seventh with gold. Such were the pa-
lace and the surrounding fortification that Dejoces
constructed for himself: but he ordered the mass of
the Median nation to construct their houses in a
circle around the outer wall (Herodot. i. 98). It is
contended by Major Rawlinson (Geogr. Journal,
x. 127) that this story of the seven walls is a fable
of Sabzan origin, the seven colours mentioned
being precisely those employed by the Orientals to
denote the seven yreat heavenly boclies, or the seven
climates in which they revolve. He adds (p. 128
©I cannot believe that at Agbatana the walls
were really painted of these colours: indeed,
battlements with gold and silver are manitlestly
fabulous; nor do I think that there ever could
have been even seven concentric circles: but in
that early age, where it is doubtful whether mith-
raicism, or fire-worship, had originated in this
part of Asia, it is not at all improbable that, ac-
cording to the Sabaan superstitions, the city
should have been dedicated to the seven heavenly
hodies, and perhaps a particular part assigned to
the protection of cach, with some coloured device
emblematic of the tutelar divinity.”

This Ecbatana has been usually identified
with the present Hamadan. Major Rawlinson,
however, while admitting that Hamadan occupies
the site of the Median Ecbatana, has a learned
and most elaborate paper in the Geographical
Journal (x. 65-158 ; On the Site of the Atropa-
tenian Ecbatana), in which he endeavours to
show that the present Takht-i-Suleiman was the
site of another, the Atropatenian Ecbatana;
and that to it, rather than to the proper Median
Ecbatana, the statement in Herodotus and most
of the other ancient accounts are to be understood
to refer. Our only business is with the Achmetha
of Ezra; and that docs not require us to enter into
this question. The major, indeed, seems inclined
to consider the Ecbatana of the apocryphal books
as his Atropatenian Ecbatana ; but is rather more
doubtful in claiming it as the Achmetha of Ezra.
But without undertaking to determine what
amount of ancient history should be referred to
the one or to the other, we fee] bound to conclude
that Hamadan was the site of the Achmetha of
Ezra, and the Echatana of the Apocrypha : 1. Be-
cause it is admitted that the Median Ecbatana
was a mire ancient and more anciently great city
than the Atroputenian metropolis, 2. Because
the name ‘Achmetha’ may easily, through the
Syrian Ahmethan, and the Armenian Ahmetan,
be traced in the Persian Hamadan, 3. And be-
cause all the traditions of the Jews refer to Ha-
madan as the site of the Achmetha and Ecbatana
of their Scriptures.

Hamadan is still an important town, and the
seat of one of the governments into which the Per
sian kingdom is divided. It is situated in north
lat. 34° 53’, east long. 40°, at the extremity of a
rich and fertile plain, on a gradual ascent, at the
base of the Elwund Mountains, whose higher sum-
mits are covered with perpetual snow. Some rem-
nants of ruined walls of great thickness, and also
of towers of sun-dried bricks, present the only
positive evidence of a more ancient city than the
present on the same spot. Heaps of compara-


ACHMETHA.


tively recent ruins, aud a wall fallen to decay,
attest that Hamacau has declmed fiom even its
modern importance. The population is said by
Southgate to be about 30,000, which, from waoat
the present writer has seen of the place, he should
judge to exceed the truth very considerably. It
is little distinguished, inside, from other Persian
towns of the same rank, save by its excellent and
well-supplied bazaars, and the unusually large
number of khans of rather a superior description.
This is the result of the extensive transit trade of
which it is the seat, it being the great centre
where the routes of traffic between Persia, Meso-
potamia, and Persia converge and meet. Its own
manufactures are chiefly in leather. Many Jews
reside here, claiming to be descended from those of
the Captivity who remained in Media. Ben;amin
of Tudela says that in his time the number was
50,000. Modern travellera assign them 500
houses; but the Rabbi David de Beth Hilel
(Travels, pp. 85-87, Madras, 1832), who was not
likely to understate the fact, hd had the best
means of infornation, gives them but 200 families.
He says they are mostly in good circumstances,
having fine houses and gardens, and are chiefly
traders and goldsmiths. They speak the broken
Turkish of the country, and have two synagogues,
They derive the name of the town from ‘I/aman’
and ‘Mede,’ aud say that it was given to that foe of
Mordecai by King Ahasuerus. In the mitst of the
city is a tomb which is in their charge, and which
is said to be that of Mordecai and Esther. It is
a plain structure of brick, consisting of a small
cylindrical tower and a dome (the whole about
20 feet high), with small projections or wings on
three sides. Within are two apartments—a small

rch formed by one of the wings, and beyond
it the tomb-chamber, which is a plain room
paved with glazed tiles. In the midst, over the
spots where the dead are supposed to lie, are two
large wooden frames or chests, shaped like sarco-
phagi, with inscriptions in Hebrew and flowers
carved upon them. There is another inscription
on the wall, in bas-relief, which, as translated by
Sir Gore Ouseley, describes the present tomb as
having been built over the graves of Mordecai
and Esther by two devout Jews of Kashan, in
a.m. 4474. The original structure is said to
have been destroyed when Hamadan was sacked
by Timour. As Ecbatana was then the sum-
mer residence of the Persian court, it is pro-
bable enough that Mordecai and Esther died
and were buried there; and traditional testi-
mony, taken in connection with this fact, and
with such a monument in # place where Jews
have been permanently resident, is better evidence
than is usually obtained for the allocation of an-
cient sepulchres. The tomb is in charge of the
Jews, and is one of their places of pilgrimage.
Kinneir, Ker Porter, Morier, Frazer, and South-
gate furnish the best accounts of modern Ha-
madan.

History mentions another Echatana, in Pales-
tine, at the foot of Mount Carmel, towards Ptole-
mais, where ,Cambyses died (Herod. iii. 64:
Plin. v.19). It is not mentioned by this or any
similar name in the Hebrew writings: and we
are at a loss to discover the grounds which Major
Rawlinson says exist for concluding that there
was a treasury in this position (Geogr. Journ.
x. 134).


ACHOR.


ACHOR CHOY; Sept. "Axdép), a valley be-
tween Jericho and Ai, which received this name
(signifying trouble) from the trouble rought
upon the Israelites by the sin, of Achan (Josh.
vil. 24) [Acuan].

ACHSAH (ADDY, an anklet ; Sept. "Axod),
the daughter of Caleb, whose hand her father
offered in marriage to him who should lead the
attack on the city of Debir, and take it. The
prize was won by his nephew Othniel; and as
the bride was conducted with the usual cere-
mony to her. future home, she alighted from
her as, and sued her father for an addition of
springs of water to her dower in lands. It i

le that custom rendered it unusual, or at
least ungracious, for a request tendered under
such circumstances by a daughter to be refused ;
and Caleb, in accordance with her wish, bestowed
upon her ‘the upper and the nether springs ’ (Josh.
rv. 16-19; Judg. i. 9-15).


ACHSHAPH ("WY ; Sept. "Aid, "Axodp,
and ’Ayi9), a royal city of the Canaanites (Josh.
x. 1), has been supposed by many to be the
mme as Acuzis, both being in the tribe of
Asher. But a careful consideration of Josh. xix.
3 and 29, will make it probable that the places
were di There is more reason tehagh
cmjectare (Hamelsveld, iii. 237) that Achsha:
was another name for Accho u Acre, seeing
that Accho otherwise does not occur in the list
of towns in the lot of Asher, although it is
certain, from Judg. i. 31, that Accho was in the
portion of that tribe.

ACHU (37). This word occurs in Job viii.
Il, where it is said, ‘Can the rush grow up with-
out mire? can the ¥LaG grow without water?’
Hee flag stands for oe 3 which would = to
indicate some ific plant, as gome, or rush, in
the first elatie of die senlence, may denote the
ree Achu occurs also twice in Gen. xli. 2,
8, ‘And, behold, there came up out of the river
seven well-favoured kine and fat-fleshed, and they
fed in a meadow :’ bere it is rendered meadow,
and must, therefore, have been considered by our
translators as a general, and not a specific term.
In this difficulty it is desirable to ascertain the
interpretation put upon the word by the earlier
tanslators. Dr. Harris has already remarked that
‘the word is retained in the Septuagint, in Gen.
éy 1g &xec; and is used by the son of Sirach,
Eccles. xi. 16, Gye or &xet, for the copies vary.
Jerume, in his Hebrew questions or fealitrens on
Genesis, writes ‘Achi neque Grecus sermo est,
tec Latinus, sed et Hebreeus ipse corruptus est.’
Toe Hebrew vau } and iod ° being like one
another, differing only in length, the LXX., he
observes, wrote ‘MN, achi, for IFN, achu, and
sccording to their usual custom put the Greek x
fo the double aspirate M (Nat. Hist. of the
Bible, in ‘ Flag’).

From the context of the few passages in which
echu occurs, it is evident that it indicates a
acest ae which grew in or in the neigh-

: of water, and also that it or they were
Muitable as pasturage fur cattle. Now it is gene-
tally well known that most of the plants which
(ow in water, as well as many of those which
pate ite vicinity, are not well suited as food for

3 some being very watery, others very coares


Geran


ACHU. 49


in texture, and some possessed of acrid and even
poisonous epee None, therefore, of the Alga
can be intended, nor any species of Butomus.
different kinds of Juncus, or rush, though abound-
ing in such situations, are not suited for pastur-
age, and in fact are avoided by cattle. So are the
majority of the Cyperacec, or sedge tribe; and
also the numerous species of Carez, which grow in
moist situations, yet yield a very coarse grass,
which is scarcely if ever touched by cattle. A few
ies of Cyperus serve as pasturage, and the roots
of some of them are esculent and aromatic; but
these must he dug up before cattle can feed on
them. Some species of scirpus, or club-rush, how-
ever, serve as food for cattle: S. cespitosus, for in-
is the principal food of cattle and sheep in
the highlands of Scotland, from the beginning of
March till the end of May. Varieties of S. mart
timus, found in different countries, and a few of
the numerous kinds of Cyperacee common in
Indian pastures, as Cyperus dubius and heza-
stachyus, are aleo eaten by cattle. Therefore, if
any specific plant is intended, as seems implied in
what Ley before, it is perhaps one of the edible
ies of scirpus or cyperus, perhaps C. esculentus,
ahi, Reeever has distinct ‘Arabie names: or
it may be a true grass; some species of panicum,
for instance, which form excellent re in
warm countries, and several of which grow lux-
uriantly in the neighbourhood of water.


(Cyperas esculentus.}


But it is well known to all acquainted with
warm countries subject to excessive drought, that
the only pasturage to which cattle can resoit
is a green strip of different grasses, with some
sedges, which runs along the banks of rivers or of
pieces of water, varying more or less in breadth
according to the height of the bank, that is, the dis-
tance of water from the surface. Cattle emerging
from rivers, which they may often be seen doing
in hot countries, as has been well remarked by the
editor of the ‘Pictorial Bible’ on Gen. xli. 2, would
naturally go to such green herbage as intimated
in this passage of Genesis, and which, as indicated
in Job xviii. 2, could not grow without water in
a warm dry country and climate. As no similar
name is known to be applied to any plant or

ants in Hebrew, endeayuurs have been made to

d a similar one so applied in the cognate Jan-
guages; and, as quoted by Dr. Harris, the learned
says, ‘we have no radix for MX

a


50 ACHZIB.


unless we derive it, as Schultens does, from the
Arabic achi, to bind or join together.’ Hence it
has been inferred that it might be some one of the
or sedges employed in furmer times, as

some still are, for making ropes. But there is
robably some other Arabic rout which has not yet
bo ascertained, or which may have become ob-
solcte; for there are numeruus words in the Arabic
language having reference to greenncss, all of
which have ak as a common element. Thus


ols akhyas, thickets, dark groves, places full
of reeds or flags, in which animals take shelter;
calyot akhevas, putting forth leaves; so akh-


zirar, greenness, verdure ; akAchishab, abounding
in grass. These may be connected with keh,
& common term for grass in Northern India,
derived from the Persian, whence amber is called
kah-robehy, grass-attracter. So Jerome, with
reference to achu, says, “ Cum ab eruditis que-
rerem, quid hic sermo significaret, audivi ab
Egyptis hoc nomine lingua eorum omne quod in
palude virens nascitur appellari."—J. F. R.


ACHZIB (AN). There were two places
of this name, not usually distinguished.

1, Acuzrn (Sept. "Aoxa(i), in the tribe of Asher
nominally, but almost always in the possession of
the Phonicians; being, indeed, one of the places

. from which the Israelites were unable to expel the
former inhabitants (Judg. i. 31). In the Tal-
mud it is called Curzin. The Greeks called
it Ecpiprs, from the Arame«an pronunciation
338 (Ptol. v. 1} and it still survives under
the name of Zr. It is upon the Mediterranean
coast, about ten miles north of Acre. It stands
on an ascent close by the sea-side, and is described
as a small place, with a few palm-trees rising
above the dwellings (Pococke, ii. 115; Richter,
p. 70; Maundrell, p. 71;7Irby and Mangles,
p- 196; Buckingham, ch. iii.).

2. Acuzis (Sept. ’Ax(éB) in the tribe of Judah
(Josh. xv. 44; Mic. i. 14), of which there is no
historical mention, but, from its place in the cata-
logue, it appears to have been in the middle part
of the Western border-land of the tribe, towards
the Philistines. This is very possibly the Chezib
(AND) of Gen. xxxviii. 5.

ACRA (“Axpa), a Greek word, signifying a
citadel, in which sense NPM also occurs in the
Syriac and Chaldaic. Hence the name of Acra
was acquired by the eminence north of the Tem-
Bes on which a citadel was built by Antiochus

piphanes, to command the holy place. It thus
became, in fact, the Acropolis of Jerusalem.
Josephus describes this eminence as semicircular;
and rts that when Simon Maccaheus had
succeeded in expelling the Syrian garrison, he not
only demolished the citadel, but caused the bill
itself to be levelled, that no neighbouring site
might thenceforth be higher or so high as that on
which the temple stood. The people had suffered
s0 much from the garrison, that they willingly
Jaboured day and night, for three years, in this

t work (Antig. xiii. 6.6; Bell. Jud. v. 4.1).

a later period the palace of Helena, queen of
Adiabene, stood on the site, which still retained
the name of Acra, as did also, probably, the coun-
cil-house, and the repository of the archives
. é


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.


(Bell. Jud. vi. 6.3; see also Descript. Urbis Iero-
solyme, J. Heydenum, lib. iii. cap. 2).

1, AC ATTENE, a district or toparchy
of Judea, extending between Shechem (now N&-
bulus) and Jericl&, inclining east. It was about
twelve miles in length. It is not mentioned in
Scripture, but it occurs in Josephus (Bell. Jud. ii.
12, 4; iii. 3, 4, 5). It took its name from a town
called Acrabi in the Onomasticon, s. v.’AxpaBBely,
where it is described as a large village, nine
Romen miles east of Neapolis, on the road to
Jericho. In this quarter Dr. Robinson (Bib. Re-
scarches, iii. 103) found a village still existing
under the name of Akrabeh.

- 9, ACRABATTENE, another district in that
portion of Judea, which lies towards the south
end of the Dead Sea, occupied hy the Edomites
during the Captivity, and afterwards known as
Idumza. It is mentioned in 1 Macc. v. 3;
Joseph. Antig. xii. 8.1. It is assumed to have
taken its ame from the Maaleh Akrabbim
(Da py nbyo), or Steep of the Scorpions, men-
tioned in Num. xxxiv. 4, and Josh. xv. 3, as
the southern extremity of the tribe of Judah
Lene |

ACRE. [Accno.

ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. This is the
title of one of the canonical books of the New Testa-
ment, the fifth in order in the common arrange
ment, and the last of those properly of an historical
character. Commencing with a reference to an
account given in a former work of the sayings
and doings of Jesus Christ before his ascension,
its author proceeds to conduct us to an acquaint-
ance with the circumstances attending that event,
the conduct of the disciples on their return from
witnessing it, the outpouring on them of the Holy
Spirit according to Christ's promise to them be-
fore his crucifixion, and the amazing success
which, as a consequence of this, attended the first
announcement by them of the doctrine conceming
Jesus as the promised Messiah and the Saviour
of the World. After following the fates of the
mother-church at Jerusalem up to the period
when the violent persecution of its members by
the rulers of the Jews had broken up their society
and scattered them, with the exception of the
apostles, throughout the whole of the surrounding


sregion ; and after introducing to the notice of the


reader the case of a remarkable conversion of one
of the most zealous persecutors of the church, who
afterwards became one of its most devoted and
successful advocates, the narrative takes a wider
scope and opens to our view the gradual) expansion
of the church by the free admission within its
pale of persons directly converted from heathenism
and who had not passed through the preliminary
stage of Judaism. The first step towards this
more liberal and cosmopolitan order of thines
having been effected by Peter, to whom the
honour of laying the foundation of the Christian
church, both within and without the contines of
Judaism, seems, in accordance with our Lord’s
declaration concerning him (Matt. xvi. 15), te
have been reserved, Paul, the recent convert and
the destined apostle of the Gentiles, is brought
forward as the main actor on the scene. On his
course of missionary activity, his successes and
his sufferings, the chief interest of the narrative
is thencefurward concentrated, until, having fol-
lowed him to Rome, whither he had been sent as


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.


4 prisoner to abide his trial, on his own appeal, at
the bar of the emperor himself, the book abruptly
closes, leaving us to gather further information
concerning him and the fortunes of the church
from other sources. * :

Respecting the authorship of this book there
can be no yround for doubt or hesitation. It is,
unquestionably, the production of the same writer
by waom the third of the four Gospels was com-
posed, as is evident from the introductory sen-
tences of both (comp. Luke i. 1-4, with Acts 2. 1).
That this writer was Luke has not in either case
been called in question. With regard to the book
now under notice tradition is firm and constant
in ascribing it to Luke (Irenaeus, Adv. Her. lib. i.
¢.31; iii, 14; Clemens Alexandr. Strom. v. p. 5855
Tertullian, Adr. Marcton. v. 2; De Jejun. c. 10;
Origen, apud Euseb. Hist, Eccles. vi. 23, &c.
Eusebius himself ranks this book among the

juodnyotizeve, H. E. iii. 25). From the book itself,
also, it appears that the author accompanied Paul
to Rome when he went to that city as a prisoner
(xxvii... Now, we know from two cpistles
wnitten by Paul at that time, that Luke was with
him at Rome (Col. iv. 1M; Phil. 28), which
favours the supposition that he was the writer of
the narrative of the apostle’s journey to that city.
The only parties in primitive times by whom this
book was rejected were certain heretics. such as
the Marciunites, the Severians, and the Mani-
chean:, whose objections were entirely of a dog-
matical, not of a historical nature; indeed, they
can hanily be said to have questioned the authen-
ticity of the book; they rather cast it aside be
cause it did not favour their peculiar views. At
the same time, whilst this book was acknowledged
as genuine where it was known, it does not ap-
pear tuhave been at first so extensively circulated
asthe other historical books of the New Testa-
ment; for we find Chrysostom complaining that
by many in his day it was not so much as
known (Hlom. i. in Act. sub init.), Perhaps,
however, there is some rhetorical exaggeration in
this statement ; or, it may be, as Kuinoel ( Proleg.
ia Acta App. Comment. tom. iv. p. 5) suggests,
that Chrysostom’s complaint refers rather to a

alent omission of the Acts from the number
of books publicly read in the churches, which
would, of course, lead to its being comparatively
little known among the people attending those
churches. ,

Many critics are inclined to regard the
Gospel by Luke and the Acts of the Apostles as
having formed originaliy only one work, con-
Ssting of two parts. For this opinion, however,
there does not appear to be any satisfactory au-
thority; and it is hardly accordant with Luke's
own description of tle relation of these two wri-
tings to cach other; being called by him, the one
the former and the other te latter treatise (Adyos)
& term which would not oe appropriate had he
intended to designate ov it the first and second
Parts of the same treatise. It would he difficult,
also, on this hypothesis to account for the two,
invariably and from the carliest times, appearing
with distenct titles.

Of the greater part of the events recorded in
the Acts the writer himself appears to have been
witness. Hee is for the first time introduced into
the narrative in ch. xvi. 11. where he speaks of ac-
Sampanying Paul to Philippi. He then disap-


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES. st


en from the narrative until Paul's return to
hilippi, more than two years afterwards, when
it is stated that they left that place in company
(xx: 6); from which it may be justly inferred that
Luke spent the interval in that town. From this
time to the close of the period embraced by his
narrative he appears as the companion of the
apostle. For the materials, therefore, of all he
has recorded from ch. xvi. 11, to xxviii. 31, he may
be regarded as having drawn upon his own recol-
lection or on that of the apostle. To the latter
source, also, may be contidently traced all he
has recorded concerning the earlier events of the
/apostle’s career; and as respects the circum-
stances recorded in the first twelve chapters of
the Acts, and which relate chiefly to the church
at Jerusalem and the labours of the apostle Peter,
we may readily suppose that they were so much
matter of general notoriety among the Christians
with whom Luke associated, that he needed no
assistance from any other merely human source
m recording them. Some of the German critics
have laboured hard to show that he must have had
recourse to written documents, in order to com-
pose those parts of his history which record what
did not pass under his own observation, and they
have gone the length of supposing the existence of
a work in the language of Palestine, under the
tile of NBYIT MAYO or KNMON, of which
the Apocryphal book TMpdéers Mézpov or Khpuypya
Tlérpov, mentioned by Clement of Alexandria
and Origen, wes an interpolated edition (Hein-
richs, Prolegg. in Acta App. p. 21; Kuinoel,
Proleg. p.14). All this, however, is mere un-
grounded supposition.* ‘There is not the shadow
of evidence that any written documents were
extant from which Luke could have drawn his
materials, and with regard to the alleged impos-
sibility of his learning fiom traditionary report
the minute particulars he has recorded (which is
what these citics chiefly insist on), it is to be
remembered that, in common with all the sacred
writers, gie enjoyed the superintending and in-
spiring influence of the Divine Spirit, whose office
it was to preserve him from all error and to guide
him into all truth.

A more important inquiry respects the de-
sign of the evangelist in writing this book, A
prevalent popular opinion on this head is, that
Luke, having in his Gospel given a history of the
life of Christ, intended to follow that up by giving
in the Acts a narrative of the establishment and
early progress of his religion in the world. That
this, however, could not have been his design is
ohvions from the very partial and limited view
which his narrative gives of the state of things in


* This is admitted by Heinrichs: ‘Quot enim
et qualia fuerint illa monumenta, quo idiomate
consignata, num_ Syriaco, Arameo, an Greco,
quo titulo vulgata, quotusque i Luca excerpta,
&c. de his quidem non certissime, sed ex con
jecturarum tantummodo umbris poterit disquiri*
(Heinrichs, 2. ¢. p. 21). Of documents whose
names, nature, language, as well as the extent to
which they were used by a writer who is said to
have been indebted for his materials to them, can
be gathered only out of the ‘shadowy regions of
conjecture,’ one would think no mind that is ac-
customed to weigh evidence would think it wi
while to teke any notice,


‘ 22


32 ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.


the church generally during the period through
which it extends. As little can we regard this
book as desizned to record the official history of
the apostles Peter and Paul, for we tind many
particulars concerning both these apostles men-
tioned incidentally elsewhere, of which Luke
takes no notice (comp. 2 Cor. xi.; Gal. i. 17;
ii. 11; 1 Pet. v.13. See also Michaelis, Intro-,
duction, vol. iii. p. 323. Haenlein’s Eindeitung,
th. iii. 8. 150). Heinrichs, Kuinocl, and others
are of opinion that no particular design should be
ascribed to the evangelist in composing this book
beyond tiat of furnishing his friend Theophilus
with a pleasing and instructive narrative of such
events as had come under his own personal notice,
either immediately through the testimony of his
senses or through the medium of the orts of
others; but such a view savours too much of the
lax opinions which these writers unhappily enter-
tained regarding the sacred writers, to be adopted
by those who regard all the sacred books as de-
signed for the permanent instruction and benefit
of the church universal. Much more deserv-
ing of notice is the opinion of Haenlein, with
which that of Michaelis substantially accords,
that ‘the general design of the author of this book
was, by means of his narratives, to set forth the
co-operation of God in the diffusion of Christi-
anity, and along with that, to prove, by remark-
able facts, the dignity of the apostles and the
fectly equal right of the Gentiles with the
yore to a participation in the blessings of that
religion’ Crinlettung, th. ii, 8. 156. Comp.
Michaelis, Introduction, vol. iii. p. 330). Perhaps
we should come still closer to the truth if we
were to say that the design of Luke in writing
the Acts was to supply, by select and suitable
instances, an illustration of the power and
working of that religion which Jesus had died
to establish. In his gospel he had presented
to his readers an exhibition of Christianity as
embodied in the person, character, and works of
its great founder; and having followed him in
his narration until he was taken up ouf of the
sight of his disciples into heaven, this second work
was written to show how his religion operated
when committed to the hands of those by whom
it was to be announced ‘to all nations, beginning
at Jerusalem’ (Luke xxiv. 47). In this point of
view tlic recitals in this book present a theme that
is practically interesting to Christians in all ages
of the church and all places of the world; for
they exhibit to us what influences gnided the
actions of those who laid the foundations of the
church, and to whose authority all its members
taust defer—what courses they adopted for the
extension of the church,—what onlinances they
appointed to be observed by those Christians who,
under their auspices, associated together for
mutual edification—and what difficulties, pri-
vations, and trials were to be expected by those
who should zealousty exert themselves for the
triumph of Christianity. Weare thus taught not
by dogmatical statement, but by instructive nar-
rative, under what sanctions Christianity appears
in our world, what blessings she offers to men,
and by what means her influence is most ex-
tensively to be promoted and the blessings she
offers to be most widely and most fully enjoyed.

Respecting the time when this book was com-


posed it is impossible to speak with certainty.


ACTS OF THE APOSTLES.
As the history is continued up to the close of the


second year of Paul's imprisonment at Rome, it
could not have been written Lefore a.p. 63; it
was probably, however, composed very soon after,
so that we shall not err far if’ we assign the ine
terval between the year 63 and the year 65 as the
eee of its completion. Still greater uncertainty

angs over the place where Luke composed it, but
as he accompanied Paul to Rome, perhaps it was
at that city and under the auspices of the apostle
that it was prepared,

The style of Luke in the Acts is, like his
style in his Gospel, much purer than that of most
other bouks of the New Testament. The He-
braisms which occasionally occur are almost
exclusively to be found in the speeches of others
which he has reported. These speeches are in-
deed, for the most part, to be regarded rather as
summaries than as full reports of what the speaker
uttered ; but as these summaries are given in the
speakers’ own words, the appearance of Hebraisms
in them is as easily accounted for as if the ad-
dresses had been reported in full. His mode of
narrating events is clear, dignified, and lively;
and, as Michaelis observes, he ‘has well suysported
the character of each person whom he has intro-
duced as delivering a public harangue, and has
very faithfully and happily preserved the manner
of speaking which was peculiar to each of his
orators’ (Introduction, vol. iii. p. 332).

Whilst, as Lardner and others have very satis-
factorily shown (Lardner'’s Credibility, Works,
vol. i.; Biscoe, On the Acts ; Paley’s Hore Pau
line ; Benson's History of the First Planting of
Christianity, vol. ii. &e.), the credibility of the
events recorded by Luke is fully authenticated both
by internal and external evidence, very great ob-
scurity attaches to the chronology of these events,
Of the many conflicting systems which have been
published for the purpose of settling the questions
that have arisen on this head. it is impossible
within such limits as those to which this article is
necessarily contined, to give any minute account.
As little do we feel ourselves at liberty to attempt
an original investigation of the subiect, even did
such promise to be productive of any very satis-
factory result. The only course that appears
open to us is to present, in a tabular form, the
dates affixed to the leading events by those writers
whose authority is most deserving of consideration
in such an inquiry.—(See next page.)

The majority of these dates can only be regarded
as approximations to the truth, and the diversity
which the above table presents shows the uncer-
tainty of the whole matter. The results at which
Mr. Greswell and Dr. Anger have arrived are, in
many cases, identical, and upon the whole the
earlier date which they assign to the ascension of
Christ seems worthy of adoption. We cannot
help thinking, however, that the interval assigned
by these writers to the events which transpired be-
tween the ascension of Christ and the stoning of
Stephen is much too great. The date which they
assign to Paul's first visit to Jerusalem is also
plainly too late, for Paul himself tells us that his-
flight from Damascus occurred whilst that town
was under the authority of Aretas, whose tenure
of it cannot be extended beyond the year 38 of the
common wra (2 Cor. xi. 32. See alsv Neander’s
remarks on these in Geschichte der Pflanze:
und Leitung der Christlichen Kirche, Bad. 1.


of


The Ascension of Christ . . + + + «
Stoning of Stephen . .
Conversion of Paul. 2s 2 + + 2
Paul's first journey to Jerusalem (Actsix. 26)
James's Martyrdom, &. 2s
Paul's second journey to Jerusalem
MI UD) se ec Ses ee

Pout bt mics tour . . 2. .
Paul's third journey to Jerusalem (Acts xv.)
Paul arrives at Corinth . . . .
Paul's fourth journey to J (Acts
Mvili, 22). 2 6 ww ee ew
Paul's abode at Ephesus . . . 2 2
Paul's fifth journey to Jerusalem (Acts
BS1D).S ce he ace Sw. ek oe
Paul arrivesin Rome... ... -


e
ove ee e


‘Acts


.


80). Perhaps the following is the true order
of the events of the apostle’s early career, as
a Christian. In Gal. ii. 1, he speaks himself
of going up to Jerusalem fourteen years, or about
fourteen years, after his conversion (for so we un-
derstand his words). Now this visit could not
have been that recorded in Acts xv., because we
cannot conceive that after the events detailed in
that chapter Peter would have acted as Raul
describes in Gal. ii. 11. We conclude, therfore,
that the visit here referred to was one earlier than
that mentioned in Acts xv. It must, therefore,
have been that mentioned in Acts xi. 12, Now,
this being at the time of the famine, its date is
ed well fixed to the year 45, or thereabouts.
ubtract 14 from this, then, and we get 31 us the
date of Paul's conversion, and adding to this the
three years that elapsed between his conversion and
his first visit to Jerusalem (Gal. i. 18), we get the
year 34 as the date of this latter event. If this
anangement be not adopted, the visit to Jerusalem
mentiuned in Gal. ii. 1, must, for the reason just
mentiuned, be intercalated between the commence-
ment of Paul's first missionary tour and his visit
to Jerusalem at the time of the holding of the so-
called council; so that the number of Paul's
Visits to that city would be siz, instead of five.
Schrader adopts somewhat of a similar view, only
pal oe this additional vistt between the fourth
and fifth of those mentioned in the Acts (Der
Apostel Paulus, 4 Th. Leipz. 130-1835).

9. Of separate commentaries on the Acts of
the Apostles the most valuable are the following :
Limborch, Commentarium in Acta Apostolorum,
&c. fol, Roterodami, 1711; J. E. M. Walch,


seas Folio. Bremae, 1686, p. 641.
nnales Pawini. Opp. Posthuma. to.
Lond. 1688, = PA


etn to the New Testament, vol. iii.


“4 Ejnleitung, 3te Auflage, Bd. ii. s. 307.
» Einleitung, %e Aufl. Bd. iii, s. 157.
Dissertations, &e. 5 vols. 8yo. Oxf. 1837.


7 De Temporum §; ‘ ;
Lips 1833. in Actis App. Ratione. 8vo


P


Dissertt. in Acta App. 8 tom. 4to. Jena, 1756
1761; Sam. F. N. Morus, Versio et Explicatio
Act. App. ed. Dindorf, 2 tom. 8vo. Leips. 1794;
Richard Biscoe's History of the Acts, confirmed
Srom other authors, &c. 8vo. Oxford, 1829;
Kuinvel, Comment. in Acta App. which forms
the fourth vol. of his Comment. in Libros Hist.
N. T. Leips. 1818; Heinrichs, Acta App. per-
petua Annott. illustrata, being the third vol.
of the Nov. Test. Koppianum. The works of
Benson on the Planting of the Christian Churches,
3 vols. 4to.; and of Neander, Geschichte der
Leitung und Pflanzung der Christlichen Kirche
durch die Apostel (recently translated into Eng-
lish as part of the Edinburgh Biblical Cabinet),
may be also viewed in the light of Commentaries
on the Acts.—W. L. A.

ACTS, SPURIOUS [Apocrypua]. This

term has been applied to several ancient writings

retended tu have been composed by, or to supply
Fistorical facts respecting our Blessed Saviour
and his disciples, or other individuals whose ac-
tions are recorded in the holy Scriptures. Of
these spurious or pseudepigraphal writings several
are still extant; others are only known to have
existed, by the accounts of them which are to be
met with im ancient authors.

Acts or Curist, Spurious. Several sayings
attributed to our Lord, and alleged to be handed
down by tradition, may be included under this
head, as they are supposed by some learned men
to have been derived from histories which are no
longer in existence. As explanatory of our
meaning it will suffice to reter to the beautiful
sentiment cited by St. Paul (Acts xx. 35),
Maxdpidv éors paddov biddvar 2 AauBdvew, te
which the term apocryphal has been sometimes
applied, inasmuch as it is not contained in any
of the written biographies of our Lord. This
term is so applied by M. Gaussen of Geneva, in
his Theopneustia (English translation, Bagster,
1842). The learned Heinsius is of opinion that
the passage is taken from some lost apocryphal
book, such as that entitled, in the Recognitions
of Clement, ‘ the Book of the Sayings of Christ,’
or the pretended Constitutions of the Apostles.


54 ACTS, SPURIOUS.


Others, however, conceive that the apostle, in
Acts xx. 35, dues not refer to any one saying of
our Saviour's in particular, but that he deduced
Christ's sentiments on this head from several of
his savinzs and paratles (see Matt. xix. 21; xxv.;
and Luke xvi. 9). But the probability is that
St. Paul received this passage by tradition from
the other apostles.

There is also a saying ascribed to Christ to be
found in the Lpistle of Barnabas, a work at
least of the second century: ‘ Let us resist all
iniquity, and hate it;’ and again, ‘So they who
would see me, and lay hold on my kinzdom,
must receive me through much suffering and tri-
bulation ;’ but it is not improbable that these
passayes contain merely an allusion to sume of
our Lord's discourses.

Clemens Romanus, the third bishop of Rome
after St. Peter (ur the writer who passes under
the name of Clement), in his Second Epistle to
the Corinthians, ascribes the following saying
to Christ :—* Though ye should be united to me


in my bosom, and yet do not keep my com- ~ Fathers.


mandments, I will reject you, and say, Depart
from me, I know not whence ye are, ye daikon
of iniquity.” This passase seems evidently to be
taken from St. Luke's gospel, xiii. 25, 26, 27.

There are many similar passazee, which several
eminent writers, such as Grabe, Mill, and Fabri-
cius, have considered as derived from apocryphal
gospels, but which seem with greater probability
to be nothing more than loose quotations from
the Scriptures, which were very common among
the apostolical Fathers.

There is a saying of Christ's, cited by Clement
in the same eyistle, which is fuund in the apocry-
phal gospel of the Ezyptians :—‘ The Lord, being
asked when his kingdom should come, replied,
When two shall be one, and that which ts with-
out as that which ts within, and the male with
the female neither male nor female‘ |Gosrens,
Apocryrmar.].

We may here mention that the genuineness of
the Second Epistle of Clement is itself disputed,
and is rejected by Eusebius, Jerome, and others ;
at least Eusebius says of it, ‘We know not that
this is as highly approved of as the former, or
that it has been in use with the ancients’ (Jlist.
Eccles. iii. 38, Cruse’s translation, 1812).

Eusebius, in the last chapter of the same book,
states that Papias, a companion of the apostles,
§gives another history of a woman who had been
accused of many sins before the Lord, which is
also contained in the Gospel according to the
Nazarenes.’ As this latter work is lust, it is
doubtful to what woman the history refers. Some
suppose it alludes to the history of the woman
taken in adultery; others, to the woman of Sa-
maria. There are two discourses ascribed to
Christ by Papias, preserved in Ireuzus (Adversus
Heres. v. 33), relating to the doctrine of the
Millennium, of which Papias appears to have
been the first propazator. Dr. Grabe has de-
fended the truth of these traditiuns, but the dis-
ca themselves are unworthy of our blessed

There is a saying ascribed to Christ by Justin
Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho, which has
been supposed by Dr. Cave to have been taken
from the Gospel of the Nazarencs. Mr. Jones
conceives it to have been an allusion to a passage


ACTS, SPURIOUS.


in the prophet Ezekiel. The same Father fure
nishes us with an apocryphal history of Christ's
haptism, in which it is asserted that ‘a fire was
kindled in Jordan.’ He also acquaints us that
Christ worked, when he was on earth, at the trade
of a carpenter, making ploughs and yokes for
oxen.

There are some apocryphal sayings of Christ
preserved by Irenzeus, but his most remarkable
observation is, that Christ ‘lived and taught be-
yond his fortieth, or even fiftieth year.’ This he
founds partly on absurd inferences drawn from
the character of his mission, ae on Jolin vii!
57, and alsv on what he alleges to have beer
Jolin’s own testimony, delivered to the presbyter
of Asia. It is scarcely necessary to refute thi
absurd idea, which is m contradiction with all
the statements in the genuine gospels. There is
also an absurd saying attributy 4 to Christ by
Athenagoras, Legat. pro Christ’ ais, cap. 28.

There are various sayings ag bed to our Lord
by Clemens Alexandrinus ¢ -d several of the
One of the most rer -arkable is, ‘ Be ye
skilful money-changers.’ Tuts is supposed to
have been contained in the Gospel of the Naza-
renes. Others think it to har* been an early in-
terpolation into the text of Scripture. Onigen
and Jerome cite it asa sayt . of Christ's.

In Origen, Contra Celsuat lib. i., is an apocry-
phal history of our Saviow nd his parents, in
which it is reproached to Cl t that he was born
in a mean village, of a poot woman who gained
her livelihood by spinning, and was tumed off by
her husband, a carpenter. Celsus adds that Jesus
was ublized by poverty to work as a servant in
Egypt, where he learned many powerful arts, and
thought that on this account he ought to be
esteemed asa god. There was a similar account
contained in some apocryphal books extant in the
time of St. Aucustine. It was probably a Jewish
forgery. August ue, Epiphanius, and others of the
Fathers equally cite sayings and acts of Christ,
which they probably met with in the early apo-
eryphal guspels.

There is a spurious hymn of Christ's extant,
ascribed to the Priscillianists by St. Augustine.
There are also many such acts and sayinzs to be
found in the Aoren of Mahomet, and others in
the writinss of the Mvhammedan doctors (see
Toland’s Nazarenus).

There is a prayer ascribed to our Saviour by
the same persons, which is printed in Latin
and Arabic in the learned Selien’s Commentary
on Eutychius's Annals of Alexandria, published
at Oxford, in 1650, by Dr. Pococke. It contains
a petition fur pardon of sin, which is suilicient to
stainp it as a forgery.

We must not omit to mention here the two
curious acts of Christ recorded, the one by Eu-
sebius, and the other by Evagrius. The first of
these included a letter said to have been written
to our Saviour by Agbarus (or Abgarus), king of
Eilessa, requesting him to come and heal a dis
ease under which he laboured. The letter, to-
gether with the supposed reply of Christ, are pre-
served by Eusebius. This learned historian asserts
that he obtained the documents, together with the
history, frum the public registers of the city of
Edessa, where they existed in his time in the
Syriac language, from which he translated them
into Greek.


ACTS, SPURIOUS.


These letters are also mentioned by Ephraim
Syrus, deacon of Edessa, at the close of the fourth
eentury. Jerome refers to them in his comment on
Matt. x.,and they are mentioned by Pope Gelasius,
who rejects them as spurious and apocryphal. They
are, however, referred to as genuine by Evagrius
and later historians. Among modern writers the
genuineness of these letters has been maintained
by Dr. Parker, in the preface to his Demonstra-
tion of the Law of Nature, and the Christian
Religion, part ii. § 16, p. 235; by Dr. Cave,
in his Histcria Literarva, vol. i. p. 23; and
by Grote, in his Spicilegium Patrum, particularly
p. 319. On the other hand, most writers, in-
cluding the great majority of Roman Catholic
divines, reject them as spurious. Mr. Jones, in
his valuable work on the Canonical Authority of
the New Testament, although he does not venture

to deny that the Acts were contained in the public

registers of the city of Edessa, yet gives it, as a

probable conjecture, in favour of which he adduces

some strong reasons, drawn from internal evi-
_ dence, that this whole chapter (viz. the 13th
of the first book) in the Ecclesiastical History of

Eusebius is itself an interpolation. But the let-

ters will speak for themselves :—

Copy of a@ Letter written by King Agbarus to
Jesus, and sent to him at Jerusalem, by Ana-
nias, the courier.

‘Agbarus, prince of Edessa, sends greeting, to
Jesus, the excellent Saviour, who has appeared in
the borders of Jerusalem. I have heard the re-
ports respecting thee and thy cures, as performed
by thee without medicines and without the use of
herbs. For, as it is said, thou causest the blind
to see again, the lame to walk, and thou cleansest

. the lepers, and thou castest out impure spirits and
demons, and thou healest those who are tormented
by long disease, and thou raisest the dead. And
bearing all these things of thee, I concluded in
my mind one of two things: either, that thou art
God, and having descended from heaven, doest
these things; or clse, doing them, thou art the Son
ad God. Therefore, now I have written, and be-
sought thee to visit me, and to heal the disease
with which I am afflicted. I bave also heard
that the Jews murmur against. thee, and are plot-
tmg to injure thee; I have, however, a very small
bat noble estate, which is sufficient for us both.’

The Answer of Jesus to King Agbarus, by the

courier Ananias.

‘Blessed art thou, O Agbarus, who, without
teeing, hast believed in me. For it is written
omcerning me, that they who have seen will not
telieve, that they who have not seen may believe,
ai live. But in regard to what thou hast
‘ntten, that I should come to thee, it is neces-
sry that I should fulfil all things here, for which
I am sent, and after their fulfilment, then to be
teceived again by him that sent me; and after I
bare been received up, I will send to thee a
certain one of my disciples, that he may heal thy
affliction, and give lite to thee and those who are
with thee’ [Episti.zs, Spurtous].

‘The other apocryphal history related by Eva-
frius, out of Procopius, states that Agbarus sent a
limner to draw the picture of uur Saviour, but
that not being able to do it by reason of the bright-
ness of Christ's countenance, var Saviour ‘took a
cloth, and laying it upon his divine and life-
Giving face, he impressed his likeness on it.’ This


ACTS, SPURIOUS. oo


story of Christ’s picture is related hy several, in
the Second Council of Nice, and by other ancient
writers, one of whom (Leo) asserts that he went to
Edessa, and saw ‘the image of Christ, not made
with hands, worshipped by the le.” This is
the first of the four likenesses of Christ mentioned
by ancient writers. The second is that said to
have been stamped on a handkerchief by Christ,
and given to Veronica, who had followed him to
his crucifixion. The third is the statue of Christ,
stated by Eusebius to have been erected by the
woman whom he had cured of an issue of blood,
and which the learned historian acquaints us
he saw at Caesarea Philippi (Eusebius, Hist.
Eccles. vii. 18). Sozomen and Cassiodorus assert
that the emperor Julian took down this statue
and erected his own in its place. It is, how-
ever, stated by Asterius, a writer of the fourth
century, that it was taken away by Maximinus,
the predecessor of Constantine. The fourth pic-
ture is one which Nicodemus presented to Ga-
maliel, which was preserved at Berytus, and which
having been crucified and pierced with a spear by
the Jews, there issued out fromi the side blood and
water. This is stated in a spurious treatise con-
cerning the passion and image of Christ, falsely
ascribed to Athanasius. Eusebius the historian
asserts (doc. cit.) that he had here seen the pictures
of Peter, Paul, and of Christ himself, in his time
(see also Sozomen, Hist. Kceles. v. 21).

Acts or THE ApostLgs, Spurious.

Of these several are extant, others are Jost, or
only fragments of them are come down to us.

Of the following we know little more than that
they once existed. They are here arranged cliro-
nologically :—'he Preaching of I’cter, referred
to by Origen, in his Commentary on St. John's
Gospel, lib. xiv.; also referred to by Clemens
Alexandrinus.— The Acts of Peter, supposed by
Dr. Cave to be cited by Serapion.— The Acts of
Paul and Thecla, mentioned by Tertullian, Lid.
de Baptismo, cap. xvii.: this is, however, sup-
posed by some to be the same which is found in
a Greek MS. in the Bodleian Library, and has
been published by Dr. Grabe, in his Spictl. Pa-
trum Secw. I.— The Doctrine of Peter, cited by
Origen, ‘ Proem.’ in Lib. de Princip.— Tie Acts
of Paul, ib. de Princip. i. 2—The Preaching of
Paul, referred to by St. Cyprian, T'ract. de non
tterando Baptismo.— The Preaching of Paul and
Peter at Rome, cited by Lactantius, De vera Sap.
iv. 21.—The Acts of Peter, thrice mentioned by
Eusebius, ist. Eccles. iti. 3: ‘as to that work,
however, which is ascribed to him, called “The
Acts” and the “Gospel according to Peter,” we
know nothing of their being handed down as Car
tholic writings, since neither among the ancient
nor the ecclesiastical writers of our own day has
there been one that has appealed to testimony
taken from them.'—he Acts of Paul, ib.—
The Revelation of Peter, ib.— The Acts of
Andrew and John, ib. cap. 25. Thus,’ he
says, ‘we have it in our power to know ...
those books that are adduced by the heretics,
under the name of the apostles, such, viz. as com-
pose the gospels of Peter, Thomas, and Matthew,
.-+. and such as contain the Acts of the Apostles
hy Andrew and John, and others of which no ope
of those writers in the ecclesiastical succession
has condescended to make any mention in his
works; aud, indeed, the character of the style if-


ss ADAD.


self is very different frem that of the apostles, and
the sentiments and the Ferret of those things that
are advanced in them, deviating as far as possible
from sound orthodoxy, evidently proves they are
the fictions of heretical men; whence they are to
be ranked not only among the spurious writings,
but are to be rejected as altogether absurd and
impious.’'— The Acts of Peter, John, and Thomas.
Athanasius, Synops. § 76.— The Writings of Bar-
tholomew the Apostle, mentioned by the pseudo-
Dionysius.— The Acts, Preaching,and Revelation
of Peter, cited by Jerome, in his Catal. Script.

tecles.— The Acts of the Apostles by Seleucus,
ib. Epist. ad Chrom., &c.—The Acts of Paul and
Thecla, ib. Catalog. Script. Eccles.— The Acts of
the Apostles, used by the Ebionites, cited by
Epiphanius, Adversus Heres. § 16.— The Acts of
Leucius, Lentius, or Lenticius, catled the Acts
of the Apostles, Augustin. Lib. de Fid. c. 38.—
The Acts of the Apostles, used by the Manichees.
—The Revelations of Thomas, Paul, Stephen,
&c. Gelasius, de Lib. Apoc. apud Gratian. Dis-
tinct. 15. c. 3.

To these may be added the genuine Acts of
Pilate, appealed to by Tertullian and Justin
Martyr, in their Apologies, as being then extant.
Tertullian describes them as ‘the records which
were transmitted from Jerusalem to Tiberius
concerning Christ.” He refers to the same for
the proof of our Saviour's miracles.

he following is a catalogue of the principal
spurious Acts still extant:—The Creed of the
Apostles.— The Epistles of Barnabas, Clement,
Ignatius, and Polycarp.—The Recognitions of
Clement, or the Trarels of Peter.—The Shep-
herd of Hermas.— The Acts of Pilate (spurious),
or the Gospel of Nicodemus.— The Acts o,
Paul, or the Martyrdom of Thecla.—Abdias's
History of the Tuclve Apostles.—The Consti-
tutions of the Apostles—The Canons of the
Apostles.— The Liturgies of the Apostles.—St.
Paul's Epistle to the Laodiceans.—St. Paul's
Letters to Sencea. Together with some others,
for which see Cotelerius's Ecclesia Grace Mo-
numenta, Paris, 1677-92; Fabricius, Coder Apo-
eryphus, N. T.; Du Pin, History of the Ca-
mon of the New Testament, London, 1699;
Grabe's Spicileyium Patrum, Oxford, 1714;
Lardner's Credibility, &c.; Jones's New and Just
Method of Settling the Canonical Authority of
the New Testament; Birell’s Tuctarium, Hafnie,
1804; Thilo’s Acta St. Thome, Lips. 1823, and
Codex Apocryphus N. T., Lips. 1832.—W. W.

ADAD is the name of the chief deity of the
Syrians, the sen, according to Macrobius, whose
words are (Saturnal. i, 23): ‘Accipe quid
Assyrii de Solis potentia opinentar; deo enim,
quem summnm maximumque vencrantur, Adad
nomen dederunt. Ejus nominis interpretatio
significat waus. 2... Simulacrum, Adad in-
signe cernitur radiis inclinatis, quibus monstratur
vim ceeli in radiis esse Solis, qui demittuntur in
terram.’ Moreover, Pliny (Hist. Nat. xxxvii. 11,
71), speaking of remarkable stunes named after
fers of the body, mentions some called * Ada-

lunephros, ejusdem oculus ac digitus dei;’ and
adds, ‘et hic colitur a Syris.’ He is also culled
“Abw50s Bactte’s Oeav by Philo Byblius (in
Eusebii Prepar. Evan. i. 10), where the occur-
rence of the long o for a is to be ascribed to the
characteristic pronunciation of the Western Ara-


-


ADAM.


mean dialect. The of Hesychius whieb
Harduin adduces in his note to Pliny, concem-
ing the worship of this god by the Phrygians,
only contains the name “Ade3os by an emenda-
tion of Salmasius, which Jablonski declares to be
inadmissible (De Ling. Lycaonica, p. 64).

This Syrian deity claims some notice here, be-
cause his name is most probably an element in
the names of the Syrian kings Benhadad and
Hadadezer. Moreover, several of the older com
mentators have endeavoured to find this deity in
Isaiah Ixvi. 17; either by altering the text there
to suit the name given by Macrobius; or by
adapting the name he gives to his interpretation
and to the reading of the Hebrew, so as to make
that extract bear testimony to a god Achad.
Michaelis has argued at some length against both
these views: and the modern commentators, such
as Gesenius, Hitzig, Bottcher (in Proben Altest.
ee and Ewald, do not admit the
name of any deity in that passage.—J. N.

ADAD-RIMMON, properly Hapav-Rimmow
(HOTTIE ; Sept. fowv, a garden of pomegra-
nates), a city in the valley of Jezreel, where
was fought the famous battle between King Jo-
siah and Pharaoh-Necho (2 Kings xxiii. 29;
Zech. xii. 11). Adad-rimmon was afterwards
called Maximianopolis, in honour of the emperor
Maximian (Jerome, Comment. tn Zach. xii.).
It was seventeen Roman miles from Ceesarea, and
ten miles from Jezreel (Jtin. Hieros.).


ADAH (i17Y, adornment, comeliness ; Sept.
*A&d): 1. one of the wives of Lamech (Gen. iv.
19). 2. one of the wives of Esau, daughter of
Elon the Hittite (Gen. xxxvi. 4). She is called
Judith in Gen. xxvi. 34.


ADAM (D8), the word by which the Bible
designates the first human being.

It is evident that, in the earliest use of lan-
guage, the vocal sound employed to designate the
first perceived object, of any kind, would be an
aprpellative: and would be formed from something
known or apprehended to be a characteristic pro-
py of that object.. The word would, therefore,

at once the appellative and the proper name.
But when other objects of the same kind were dis-
covered, or subsequently came into existence, dif-
ficulty would be felt; it would become necessary
to guard against confusion, and the inventive
faculty would be called upon to obtain a discri-
minative term for each and singular individual,
while some equally appropriate term would be
fixed upon for the whole kind. Different me-
thods of effecting these two purposes might be
resorted to, but the most natural would be to
retain the original term in its simple state, for the
first individual: and to make some moditication
of it by prefixing another sound, or by subjoining
one, or by altering the vowel or vowels in the body
of the word, in order to have a term for the kind,
and for the separate individuals of the kind.

This reasoning is exemplified in the first appli-
cations of the word befure us: (Gen. i. 26), ‘Let
us make man [Adam] in our image;" (i. 27
‘And God created the man [the Adam] in his
own image.’ The next instance (ii. 7) expresses
the source of derivation, a character or property,
namely, the material of which the human bod
was formed: ‘And the Lord God [Jehovab


.


ADAM.


Flohim] formed the man [the Adam] dust from
the ground [the adamah]’. The meaning of the
primary word is, most probably, any kind of
reddish tint, as a beautiful human complexion
(Lam. iv. 7); but its various derivatives are
applied to different objects of a red or brown hue,
or approaching to such, The word Adam, there-

is an appellative noun made into a proper
one. It is further remarkable that, in all the
other instances in the second and third chapters
of Genesis, which are nineteen, it is put with the
article, the man, or the Adam. It is also to be
observed that, though it occurs very frequently in
the Old Testament, and though there is nu gram-
matical difficulty in the way of its being declined
by the dual and plural tenninations and the pro-

Rominal suffixes (as its derivative D4, dam,
blood, is), yet it never undergoes those changes;
it is used abundantly to denote man in the gene-
nal and collective sense—manfind, the human
race, but it is mever found in the plural num-
ber. When the sacred writers design to éxpress
nen distributively, they use either the compound
term, sons of men (DIN 33, benei adam), or
the plural of BAIN enosh, or WN ish.

The question arises, Was the uttered sound,
@ginally employed for this purpose, the very
tocable Adam, or was it some other sound of cor-
respondent signification? This is equivalent to
asking, what was the primitive language of men?

That language originated in the instinctive
cries of human beings herding together in a cun-
dition like that of common animals, is an yt
thesis which, apart from all testimony of revela-
ton, must appear unreasonable to a man of seri-
ous reflection. There are other animals, besides
tan, whose organs are capable of producing arti-
culate sounds, through a considerable range of
Yanety, and distinctly pronounced. How, then,
Bit that parrots, jays, and starlings have not
among themselves developed an articulate lan-
Guage, transmitted it to their successive genera-
tions, and improved it, buth in the life-time of
the sliadial anal in the series of many gene-
Rations? Those birds never attempt to speak
till they axe compelled by a difficult process on
the part of their trainers, and they never train
tach other.

Upon the mere ground of reasoning from the
Necessity of the case, it seems an inevitable con-
clusion that not the capacity merely, but the
actual use of speech, with the corresponding fa-
calty of promptly understanding it, was given to
the first human beings by a superior power: and
it would be a gratuitous absurdity to suppose that

erto be any other than the Aliplty Creator.

what manner such communication or infusion
of what would be equivalent to a habit took
it isin vain to inquire; the subject lies
yond the range of human investigation : but,
from the evident exigency, it must have been in-
Santaneous, or nearly so. It is not necessary to
Suppose that a copious language was thus be-
sowed upon the human creatures in the first stage
of their existence. We need to suppose only so
Much as would be requisite for the notation of the
ideas of natural wants and the most important
mental conceptions ; and from these, as germs,
the powers of the mind and the faculty of vocal

“signation would educe new words and combina-
"uns as uccasion demanded


‘ ADAM. 57

That the language thus formed continued to be
the universal speech of mankind till after the
deluge, and ti’ the great cause of diversity
[Lanauacs] took place, is in itself the most
probeble supposition. If there were any famie
ies of men which wer not involved in the
crime of the Babel-builders, they would almost
certainly retain the primeval language. The
longevity of the men of that period would be a
powerful conservative of that language against
the slow changes of time. That there were such
exceptions seems to be almost an indubitable in-
ference from the fact that Noah long survived the
unholy attempt. His faithful piety would not
have suffered him to fall into the snare; and it is
difficult to suppose that none of bis children and
descendants would listen to his admonitions, and
hold fast their integrity by adhering to him: on
the contrary, it is reasonable to suppose that the
habit and character of piety were established in
many of them.

The confusion of tongues, therefore, whatever
was the uature of that judicial visitation, would
not fall upon that portion of men which was the
most orderly, thoughtful, and pious, among whom
the second father of mankind dwelt as their ac-
knowledged and revered head.

If this supposition be admitted, we can have no
difficulty in regarding as the mother of languages,
not indeed the Hebrew, absolutely speaking, but
that which was the stock whence branched the
Hebrew, and its sister tongues, usually called the
Shemitic, but more properly, by Dr. Prichard, the
Syro-Arabian. It may then Le maintained that
the actually spoken names of Adam and all the
others mentioned in the ante-diluvian history were
those which we have in the Hebrew Bible, very
slightly and not at all essentially varied.

On the other hand, some of the greatest names
in the study and comparison of languages maine
tain that ‘the primeval Janguage has not been
anywhere preserved, but that fragments of it
must, from the common origin of all, everywhere
exist; that these flagments will indicate the ori-
ginal derivation and kindredship of all; and
that some direct causation of no common agency
has operated to Legin, and has so permanently
affected mankind as to establish, a striking and
universally experienced diversity’ (Mr. Sharon
Turner ‘On the Languages of the World,’ &c., in
the Transactions of the Royal Society of Lite-
rature, the volumes published in 1827 and 1834),
We take this citation from Dr. Bosworth's Anglo-
Saxon Dictionary, Pref. p. iii., where that eminent
scholar and antiquary seems tacitly to intimate
his concurrence with Mr. Turner, and subjuins,—
© A gentleman, whose erudition is universally ac-
knowledged, and whose opinion, from his exten-
sive lingual knowledge and especially from his
critical acquaintance with the Oricntal tongues,
deserves the greatest attention, has come to this
conclusion; for he has stated, “ The original lan-
guage, of which the oldest daughter is fhe Sanskrit,
the fruitful mother of so many dialects, exists no
longer" (Prof. Hamaker's Academische Voorle-
zingen, Leyden, 1835).

Upon this hypothesis it will follow that a
knowledge of the proper names of the first human
family, and of all down to the times of Abraham,
is absolutely unattainable ; and that the Hebrew
designations which we possess are not echoes of the


5a ADAM.


sounds, but representatives or translations of their
signification. We acknowledge that the former
seems to us the more probable opinion.

That men and other animals have existed from
eternity, by each individual being born of parents
and dying at the close of his period, that is, by an
infinite succession of finite beings, has been as-
serted by some: whether they really believed their
own assertion may well be doubted. Others have
maintained that the first man and his female
mate, or a number of such, came into existence
by some spontaneous action of the earth or the
elements, a chance-combination of matter and

perties, without an intellectual designing cause.

e hold these notions to be unworthy of a serious
refutation. An upright mind, upon a little se-
rious reflection, must perceive their absurdity,
self-contradiction, and impossibility. To those
who may desire to see ainple demonstration of
what we here assert, we recommend Dr. Samuel
Clarke On the Being and Attributes of God ; Mr.
Samuel Drew’s Essays; or an admirable work
not known in a manner corresponding to its
worth, Discourses om Atheism, by the Rev. Thomas
Allin, 1828.

It is among the clearest deductions of reason,
that men and all dependent beings have been
created, that is, produced or brought into their
first existence by an intelligent and adequately
powerful being. A question, however, arises, of
great interest and importance. Did the Almighty
Creator produce only one man and one woman,
from whom all other human beings have de-
scended ?—or did he create several parental pairs,
from whom distinct stocks of men ees been de-
rived? The aftirmative of the latter position has
been maintained by some, and, it must be con-
fessed, not without apparent reason. The mani-
fest und great differences in complexion and
figure, which distinguish several races of man-
kind, are supposed to be such as entirely to forbid
the conclusion that they have all descended from
one father and one mother. The question is
usually regarded as equivalent to this: whether
there is only one’species of men, or there are
several. But we cannot, in strict fairness, admit
that the questions are identical. It is liypotheti-
cally conceivable that the Adorable God might
give existence to any number of creatures, which
should all possess the properties which charac-
terize identity of species, even without such difler-
ences as constitute varieties, or with any degree
of those differences. A learned German divine,
Dr. de Schrank, thinks it right to maintain that,
of all organized beings Lesides man, the Creator
gave existence to innumerable individuals, of
course in their proper pairs (Comm. in Gen. p. 69,
Sulzbach, 1835). His reason probably is, that
otherwise there would not be a provision of foorl :
but whether the conjecture be admitted or not, it
is plain that it involves no contradiction, and
that therefure distinct races of men might have
been created, differing within certain limits, yet
all possessing that which physiologists lay down
as the only proper and constant character, the

tuity of propagation.

ut the admission of the possibility is not a
concession of the reality. So great is the evidence
im favour of the derivation, of the entire mass of
human beings from one pair of ancestors, that it
bas obtained the suffrage of the men most com-


ADAM.

petent to judge upon a question of comparative
anatomy and physiology. _ The late illustrious
Cuvier and Blumenbach, and our countryman
Mr. Lawrence, are examples of the highest order.
But no writer has a claim to deference upon this
subject superior to that of Dr. J.C. Prichard. He
has devoted a large work, which is still in the
progress of publication, to this subject and others
allied to it—Rescarches into the Physical History
of Mankind, 3 volumes, and one more at least
to come, 1836-1841: also another work, just
completed—The Natural History of Man, 1842.
In the Introductory Observations contained in
the latter work we find a passage which we cite
as an example of that noble impartiality and dis-
regard of even sacred prepossessions with which
the author has pursued his laborious investigation:
‘I shall not pretend that in my own mind I re-
gard the question now to be discussed as one of
which the decision is indifferent either to religion
or to humanity. But the strict rule of scientific
scrutiyy exacts, according to modern philosophers, -
in matters of inductive reasoning, an exclusive
homage. It requires that we should close our
eyes against all presumptive and extrinsic evi-
dence, and abstract our minds from all considere
ations not derived from the matters of fact which
bear immediately on the question. The maxim
we have to follow in such controversies is, fiat
Justitia, ruat calum. In fact, what is actually
true, it is always most desirable to know, what-
ever consequences may arise from its admis-
sion.’

The animals which render eminent services to
man, and peculiarly depend upon his protection,
are widely dittused—the horse, the dog, the hog,
the domestic fowl. Now of these the varieties in
each species are numerons and diierent, to a de-
gree so great, that an observer ignorant of phy-
siological history would scarcely believe them to
be of the same species. But man is the most
widely diffused of any animal. In the progress
of ages and generations, he has naturalized him-
self to every climate, and to modes of life which
would prove fatal to an individual man suddenly
transferred from a remote point of the field. The
altcrations produced affect every part of the body,
internal and external, without extinguishing the
marks of the specilic identity. A further and
striking evidence is, that when persons of diferent
varieties are conjugally united, the offspring,
especially in two or three generations, becomes
more prolific, and acquires a higher perfection in
physical and mental qualities than was found in
either of the parental races. From the deepest
African black to the finest Caucasian white, the
change runs through imperceptible gradations ;
and, ifa middle hue be assumed, suppose sume
tint of brown, all the varieties of complexion may
be explained upon the principle of divergence in-
fluenced by outward circumstances. The con-
clusion may be fairly drawn, in the words of the
able translators and ilustrators of Baron Cuvier's
great. work:~— ‘We are fully warranted in con-
cluding, both from the comparisun of man with
inferior animals, so far as the inferiority will
allow of such comparison, and, beyond that, by
comparing him with himself, that the great family
of mankind loudly proclaim a descent, at some
period or other, from one common origin.’ (Ant-


mal Kingdom, with the Supplements of Mr. E,


--


ADAM.


Griffith, Col. Hamilton Smith, aud Mr. Pidgeon,
vol. i. p. 179).

Thus, by an investigation totally independent
of historical authority, we are brought to the con-
clusion of the inspired writings, that the Creator
‘hath made of one blood all nations of men, for
to dwell on all the face of the earth’ (Acts
xvii. 26).

We shall now follow the course of those sacred

its in tracing the histury of the first man,
inerps that their right interpretation isa sure
is of truth. At the same time we shall not
reject illustrations from natural history and the
Teason of particular facts.

It is evident upon a little reflection, and the
closest investigation confirms the conclusion, that
the first human pair must have been created in a
state equivalent to that which all subsequent hu-
man beings have had to reach by slow degrees, in
growth, experience, observation, imitation, and
the instruction of others: that is, a state of prime
maturity, and with an infusion, concreation, or
whatever we may call it, of knowledge and ha-
bits, both physical and intellectual, suitable to
the place which man had to occupy in the system
of creation, and adequate to his necessities in that
place. Had it been otherwise, the new beings
could not have preserved their animal existence,
Dor have held rational converse with each other,
tor have paid to their Creator the homage of know-
ledge and love, adoration and obedience; and
Teawn clearly tells us that the last was the no-
blest end of existence. Those whom unhappy
Prejudices lead to reject revelation must eitler
admit this, or must resort to suppositions of pal-
Pabie absurdity and impossibility. If they will
dot admit a direct action of Divine power in
Creation and adaptation to the designed mode of


existence, they must admit something far beyond


the miraculous, an infinite succession of finite
rings, Or a spontaneous production of order, orga-
Nization, and systematic action, from sume unin-
tellizent origin: The Bible coincides with this
dictate of honest reason, expressing these facts in
fimple and artless language, suited to the cir-
Cumstances of the men to whom revelation was
first granted. That this production in a mature
Mate was the fact with regard to the vegetable
part of the creation, is declared in Gen. ii. 4, 5;
“In the day of Jehovah God's making the earth
and the heavens, and every shrub of the field
before it should be in the earth, and every herb of
the field before it should bud.’ ‘Rye reader sees
that we have translated the verbs (which stand
™ te Hebrew future form) by our potential
Mood, as the nearest in correspondence with the
idiom called by Dr. Nordheimer the ¢ Dependent
Use of the Future’ (Critical ‘Grammar of the
Heb, Lang, vol. ii. p. 186; New York, 1S41).
The two terms, shrubs and herbage, are put, by
"common synecdoche, to designate the whole
Yegetable kingdom. The reason of the case com-
ends the other division of organized nature ;
us is applied to man and all other ani-
in the words, ‘ Out of the ground—dust
out of the ground—Jehovah God formed them.’
at ri to be observed that there are two narratives
°s beginning of the Mosaic records, different
a ae and maraner, distinct and independent ;
ae i Sight somewhat discrepant, but when
“y examined, perfectly compatible, and each


and


ADAM. 49


one illustrating and completing the other. The
first is contained in Gen. i. 1, to ii. 3; and the
other, ii. 4, to iv. 26. As is the case with the
Scripture history generally, they consist of a few
principal facts, detached anecdotes, leaving much
7 necessary implication which the good sense of
the reader is called upon tu supply ; and i
over large spaces of the history a life, pon which
all conjecture would be fruitless.

In the second of these narratives we read,
‘And Jehovah God formed the man [Heb. the
Adam}, dust from the ground [MDINiT, Aaada-
mah}, and blew into his nostrils the breath of
life; and the man became a living animal’ (Gen.
ii. 7). Here are two objects of attention, the
organic mechanism of the human body, and the
vitality with which it was endowed.

The mechanical material, furmed (moulded, or
arranged, as an artificer models clay or wax)
into the human and all other animal bodies, is
called ‘dust from the ground.’ This would bes
natural and easy expression to men in the earl
ages, before chemistry was known or minute phie
losophical distinctions were thought of, to convey,
in a general form, the idea of earthy matter, the
constituent substance of the ground on which we
tread. To say, that of this ihe human and every
other animal body was formed, is a position whick
would be at once the most easily apprehensible to
an uncultivated mind, and which yet is the most
exactly true upon the highest philosophical
grounds. We now know, from chemical ana-
lysis, that the animal body is comjpsed, in the
inscrutable manner called organization, of car-
bon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, lime, iron, sul-
phur, and phosphorus. Now all these are mineral
substances, which in their various combinations
furm a very large part of the solid ground.

Some of our readers may be surprised at our
having translated TM WHI nephesh hhaya by
living animal. There are good interpreters and
preachers who, confiding in the cominon transla-
tion, dicing soul, have maintained that here is
intimated the distinctive pre-eminence of man
above the inferior animals, as possessed of an im-
material and immortal spirit. But, however true
that doctrine is, and supported by abundant
argument from both philosophy and the Scrip-
tures, we should be acting untaithfully if we were
to affirm its being contained or implied in this

ge. The two words are frequently conjoined
in the Hebrew, and the meaning of the compound
phrase will be apparent to the English reader,
when he knows that our version renders it, in Gen.
i, 20, ‘creature that hath life ;’ in verse 24, ‘living
creature,’ and so in ch. ii. 19; ix. 12, 15,16; and
in ch. i. 30, ‘wherein there is life.’

This expression therefore sets before us the or-
GANIC Live of the animal frame, that mysterious
something which man cannot create nor restore,
which baffles the most acute philosophers to search
out its nature, and which reason combines with
Scripture to refer to che immediate agency of the
Almighty—‘in him we live, and move, and have
our being.’ :

The other narrative is contained in these words,
‘God created man in his own image: in the image
of God created he him; male and female, created he
them’ (Gen. i. 27). The image (DDY taclem,
resemblance, such as a shadow bears to the object
which casts it) of God is an expression which


60 ADAM.


‘breathes at once archaic simplicity and the most
recondite wisdom: fur what term could the most
cultivated and copious language bring forth
more suitable to the purpose? It presents to us
-man as made in a resemblance to the author of
his being, a true resemblance, but faint and sha-
dowy; an outline, faithful according to its capa-
city, yet infinitely remote from the reality: a
distant form of the intelligence, wisdom, power,
rectitude, goodness, and dominion of the Adorable
Supreme. To the inferior sentient beings with
which he is connected man stands in the place of
God. We have every reason to think that none
of them are capable of conceiving a being higher
than man. Al), in their different ways, look up
to him as their superior; the ferocious generally
flee betore him, afraid to encounter his power, and
the gentle court his protection and show their
highest joy to consist in serving and pleasing

im. Even in our degenerate state it is manifest
that if we treat the domesticated animals with
wisdom and kindness, their attachment is most
ardent and faithfal.

Thus had man the shadow of the divine domi-
mion and authority over the inferior creation.
The attribute of power was also given to him, in
his being made able to convert the inanimate ob-
jects and those possessing only the vegetable life,
into the instruments and the materials for supply-
ing his wants, and continually enlarging his
sphere of command.

In such a state of things knowledge and twis-
dom are implied: the one quality, an acouaint-
ance with those substances and their changeful
actions which were necessary for a creature like
man. to understand, in order to his safety and com-
fort ; the other, such sagacity as would direct him
in selecting the best objects of desire and pursuit,
and the right means for attaining them.

Above all, moral excellence must have been
comprised in this ‘image of God;’ and not only
forming a part of it, but being its crown of beauty
and glory. The Christian inspiration, than
which no more perfect disclosure of God is to take
place on this side eternity, casts its light upon
this subject: for the apostle Paul, in urging the
obligations of Christians to perfect holiness, evi-
dently alludes to the endowments of the first man
in two parallel and mutually illustrative epistles ;
‘— the new man, renewed in knowledge after the
image of Hix that created him; the new man
which, after [xara, according to] Gon, is created
in righteousness and true holiness’ (Col. iii. 10;
Eph. iv. 24).

In this perfection of faculties, and with these
high prerogatives of moral existence, did human
nature, in its first subject, rise up from the creating
hand. The whole Scripture-narrative implies
that this sraTE of existence was one of corre-
spondent activity and enjoyment. It plainly
represents the Derry himself as condescending to
assume a human form and to employ human
speech, in order to instruct and exercise the
happy creatures whom (to borrow the just and
beautiful language of the Apocryphal ‘ Wisdom’)
6God created for incorruptibility, and made him
an image of his own nature."* The only plau-


ADAM.


sible objection to this is, that the condescension is
too great, an objection which can be no other than
@ presumptuous limiting of the Divine goodness.
It was the voice of reason which burst through the
trammels of an infidel philosophy, when the cele-
brated German, Fichte, wrote, ‘Who, then, edu-
cated the first human pair? A spirit bestowed
its care upon them, as is laid down in an ancient
and venerable original record, which, taken alto-
gether, contains the profoundest and the loftiest
wisdom, and presents those results to which all
philosophy must at last return’ (cited in the
German Bible of Brentano, Dereser, and Scholz,
vol. i., p. 16, Frankfort, 1820-1833).

The noble and sublime idea that man thus
had his Maker for his teacher and guide, pre-
cludes a, thousand difficulties. It shows us the
simple, direct, and effectual method by which
the newly formed creature would have communi-
cated to him all the intellectual knowledge, and
all the practical arts and manipulations, which
were needful and beneficial for him. The uni-
versal management of the ‘ garden in.Eden east-
ward’ (Gen. ii. 8), the treatment of the soil, the
use of water, the various training of the plants
and trees, the operations for insuring future pro-
duce, the necessary implements and the way of
using them ;—all these must have been included
in the words ‘ to dress it and to keep it’ (ver. 15).
To have gained these attainments and habits
without any instruction previous or concomitant,
would have required the experience of men in
society and co-operation for many years, with
innumerable anxious experiments, and often the
keenest disappointment. If we suppose that the
first man and woman continued in their primitive
state but even a few wecks, they must have re-
quired some tools for ‘dressing and keeping the
garden :’ but if not, the condition of their chil-
dren, when severe labour for subsistence became
necessary, presented an obvious and undeniable
need. They could not do well without tron in-
struments. Iron, the most useful and the most
widely diffused of all the metals, cannot be
brought into a serviceable state without processes
and instruments which it seems impossible to
imagine could have been first possessed except in
the way of supernatural communication. It
would, in all reasonable estimation, have re-
quired the difficulties and the experience of some
centuries, for men tv have discovered the means
of raising a sufficient heat, and the use of fluxes:
and, had tha€ step been gained, the fused iron
would not have answered the purposes wanted.
To render it malleable and ductile, it must be
beaten, at a white heat, by long continued strokes
of prodigious hammers. To make iron (as is the
declinical term) requires previous iron. If it be
said that the first iron used by man was native
metallic iron, of which masses have been found,
the obvious reply is, not only the rarity of its oc-
currence, but that, when obtained, it also requires
previous iron instruments to bring it into any
form for use. Tubal-cain most probably lived
before the death of Adam; and he acquired fame
as ‘a hammerer, a universal workman in brass
and iron’ (Gen. iy. 22). This is the most literal


* Wisd. Sol. ii. 23. én’ dpOapala, incorrupti-
bility, often denoting immortality. We have
translated id:érns, nature, not being able to find


a better word. The exact meaning of the Greek
is, the whole combination of characteristic pecus
liarities,


ADAM.


translation of this grammatically difficult clause.
Tn this brief description it is evident that much is
implied beyond our power of ascertaining. The
necessity and importance of the greatest hammers
seem to be included. Considering these in-
stances as representatives of many similar, we are
contirmed in our belief that God not only gave to
the earliest human families such knowledge as
Was requisite, but the materials and the instru-
ments without which knowledge would have been
in vain.

Religious knowledge and its appropriate habits
also required an immediate infusion: and these
are pre-eminently comprebended in the ‘image of
Gol.’ On the one hand, it is not to be supposed
that the newly created man and his female com-
panion were inspired with a very ample share of
the doctrinal knowledge which was communi-
Gated’ to their posterity by the successive and
accumulating revolutions of more than four thou-

years; and, on the other, the idea of their
being left in gross ignorance upon the existence
and excellencies of the Being who had made them,
their obligations to him, and the way in which
they might continue to receive the greatest bless-
ings from him. It is self-evident that, to have
attained such a kind and degree of knowledge, by
Spontaneous effort, under even the favourable cir-
cumstances of a state of negative innovcence,
Would have been a long and arduous work. But
the sacred narrative leaves no room for doubt
upon this head. In the primitive style it tells
of God as speaking to them, commanding, in-
structing, assigning their work, pointing out their
ger, and showing how to avoid it. All this,
reduced to the dry simplicity of detail, is equi-
valent to saying that the Creator, infinitely kind
and condescending, by the use of forms and modes
adapted to their capacity, fed their minds with
truth, gave them a ready understanding of it and
that delight in it which constituted holiness,
taught them to hold intercourse with himself by
direct addresses in both praise and prayer, and
gave some disclosures of a future state of blessed-
tess when they should have fulfilled the condi-
Hons of their tion.

An especial instance of this instruction and in-
fusion of practical habits is given to us in the nar-
mative: “Out of the ground Jehovah God formed
every beast of the field and every fowl of the air

Hebr. of the heavens]; and brought them unto
the man [Hebr. the Adam], to see what he would
call them’ (Gen. ii, 19). “This, taken out of the
styleof condescending anthropomorphism, amounts
to such a statement as the following : the Creator

not only formed man with organs of speech,
but he taught him the use of them, by an imme-
diate communication of the practical faculty and
its accompanying intelligence; and he guided
the man, as yet the solitary one of his species, to
this among the first applications of speech, the
Uesignating of the animals with which he was
Connected, by appellative words which would
both be the help of his memory and assist his
mental operations, and thus would be introductory
and facilitating to more enlarged applications of
thought and language. We are further war
manted, by the recognised fact of the anecdotal
and fragmentary structure of the Scripture
history, toregard this as the selected instance for
ealibiting a whole kind or class of operations or


ADAM. 61


processes; implying that, in tLe same or similar
manner, the first man was led to understand some-
thing of the qualities and relations of vegetables,
earthy matters, the visible heavens, and the other
external objects to which he had a relation.

The next fmportant article in this primeval
history is the creation of the human female. It
has been maintained that the Creator formed
Adam to be a sole creature, in sume moe of an-
drogynous constitution capable of multiplying
from his own organization without a conjugate
onli This notion was advanced by Jacob (or

ames) Behmen, the Silesian ‘Theosophist,’ and
«one very similar to it has been recently promul-
gated by Baron Giraud (Philosophie Catholique
de U' Histoire, Paris, 1841), who supposes that the
‘deep sleep’ (Gen. ii. 21) was a moral fainting
(‘détaillance'), the first step in departing from
God, the beginning of sin, and that Eve was its:
personitied product by some sort of divine concur-
rence or operation. To mention these vagaries is
sufficient for their refutation. Their absurd and
unscriptural character is stamped on their front.
The narrative is given in the more summary man-
ner in the former of the two documents :—‘ Male
and female created he them’ (Gen. i. 27). It
stands a little more at length in a third docu-
ment, which begins the fifth chapter, and has the
characteristic heading or title by which the He-
brews designated a separate work. ‘This, the
book of the generations of Adam. In the day
God created Adam ; he made him in the likeness
[ND demuth, a different word from that al-
ready treated upon, and which merely signifies
Hantacacsary | of God, male and female he created
them ; and he blessed them, and he called their
name Adam, in the day of their being created ’
(ver. 1, 2). The reader will observe that, in
this passage, we have translated the word for man
as the proper name, because it is so taken up in
the next following sentence.

The second of the narratives is more circumstan-
tial: ‘And Jehovah God said, it is not good
the man’s being alone: I will make for him a
help suitable for him.’ Then follows the passage
conceming the review and the naming of tne in-
ferior animals; and it continues—‘ but for Adam
he found not a help suitable for him. And Je
hovah God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the
man [the Adam], and he slept: and he took one
out of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in its place :
and Jehovah God built up the rib which he had
taken from the man into a’ woman, and he brought
her to the man: and the man said, this is the
hit; bone out of my bones, and flesh out of my
flesh ; this shall be called woman [ishaA}, for this
was taken from out of man [#s/]' (Gen. ii. 18-23).

Two remarkable words in this passage demand
attention. ‘ Suitable for him’ (17333 chenegdo),
literally, according to his front-presence, than
which no words could better express a peifect
adaptation or co lence. That we render
BYDM Aappaam, the hit, seems strange and
even vulgar; but it appears necessary to the pre-
servation of rigorous fidelity. The word, indeed,
might have acquired a secondary adverbial
meaning, like our English now, when very em-

tical and partaking of the nature of an inter-
jection; but there is only one passage in which
that signification may be pléaged, anc it is there
repeated—‘ now in the open place, now in the


62 ADAM.


streets’ (Prov. vii. 12). It properly means a
smart, bold, successful stroke, and is used to sig-
nify Aitting the precise time of any action or re-
quirement. In this first and primitive instance
it is equivalent to saying, this ig the very thing,
this hits the mark, this reaches to what was de-
sired.

This pecuciar manner of the creation of the
woman has, by some, been treated as merely a
childish fable ; by others, as an allegorical fiction
intended to represent the cluse relation of the
female sex to the male, and the tender claims
which women have to sympathy and love. That
such was the intention we do not doubt; but
why should that intention be founded upon a
mythic allegory? Is it not taught much Letter,
and impressed much more forcibly, by its stand-
ing not. on a fiction, but on a fact? We have
seen that, under the simple archaic phrase that
man was made of the ‘dust of the ground,’ is
fairly to be understood the truth, which is veritied
by the analysis of modern chemistry ; and, in the
case of the woman, it is the same combination of
materials, the same carbon, and hydrogen, and
lime, and the rest; only that, in the first instance,
those primordial substances are taken immedi-
ately, but in the second, mediately, having been
brought into a state of organization. Let an
unprejudiced mind reflect, and we think that he
must see in this part of the will and working of
the Almighty, at once, a simplicity gentle and
tender, adapted to aflect, in the strongest manner,
the hearts of primitive men; and yet, a subli-
mity of meaning worthy of ‘ Jehovah of hosts,’ at
whose command stand all atoms and organisme,
and ‘who is wonderful in counsel and excellent
in working.’

The form of direct speech which appears here
and in every part of these most ancient writings,
and is a characteristic of the Hebrew and other
ancient writings, should make no difficulty. It
is the natural language of lively description ; and
it is equal to saying, such was the wise and be-
nevolent will of God, and such were the feclings
and thoughts ot Adam. The 24th verse is a
comment or doctrinal application of the inspired
writer ; pointing out the great law of marriage as
founded in the original constitution of human
nature.

The next particular into which the sacred his-
tory leads us, is one which we cannot approach
without a painful sense of its difficulty and deli-
cacy. It stands thugin the authorized version :
‘And they were both naked, the man and his
wife; and were not ashamed’ (ii. 25). The
common interpretation is, that, in this respect, the
two. human beings, the first and only existing
ones, were precisely in the condition of the
youngest infants, incapable of perceiving any
incongruity in the total destitution of artificial
clothing. But a little reflection will tell us, and
the more carefully that reflection is pursued the
more it will appear just, that this supposition is
inconsistent with what we have established on
solid grounds, the supernatural infusion into the
minds of our first patents aud into their nervous
and muscular faculties, of the knowledge and

ctical habits which their descendants have

to acquire by the long process of instruction
and example. We have seen the necessity that
there must have been communicated to them,


ADAM.


directly by their Creator, no inconsiderable mea-
sure of natural knowledge and the methods of
applying it, or their lives could not have been
secured ; and of moral and spiritual ‘ knowledge,
righteousness, and true holiness,’ such a measure
as would belong to the sinless state, and would
enable them to render an intelligent and perfect
worship to the Glorious Deity. It seems impos-
sible for that state of mind and habits to exist
without a correct sensibility to proprieties and
decencies which infant children cannot under-
stand or feel ; and the capacities and duties of
their conjugal state are implied in the narrative.
Further, it cannot be overlooked that, though we
are entitled to ascribe to the locality of Eden the
most bland atmosphere and delightful svil, yet
the action of the sun's rays upon the naked skin,
the range of temperature through the day and the
night, the alternations of dryness and moisture, the
various labour among trees and bushes, and ex-
posure to insects, would render some protective
clothing quite indispensable.

From these considerations we feel ourselves
obliged to understand the word DYY (arom) in
that which is its most usual sienification in the
Hebrew language, as importing rot an absolute,
but a partial or comparative nudity. It is one
of a remarkable family of words which appear to
have branched off in different ways from the
same root, originally W (ar or er), but assuming
several early forms, and producing five or six di-
verzent participials: but they all, and especially
this arom, are employed to denote a stripping off
ot the upper garment, or of some other usual
article of dress, when all the habiliments were
not laid aside ; and this is a more frequent signi-
fication than that of entire destitution. If it he.
asked, Whence did Adam and Eve derive this
clothing? we reply, that, as a part of the divine
instruction which we have established, they were
taught to take off the inner bark of some trees,
which would answer extremely well for this pur

e. If an objection be drawn trom Gen, iit. 7,
10, 11, we reply, that, in consequence of the trans
gression, the clothing was disyracefully injured.

Another inquiry presents itself, How long did
the state of payadisiac innocence and happiness
continue? Some have regarded the period as
very brief, not more even than a single day; but
this manifestly falls very short of the time whicha
reasonable probability reqaires. The first man
was brought into existence in the region called
Eden; then he was introduced into a particular
part of it, the garden, replenished with the richest
oes of the Creator's bounty for the de

ight of the eye and the other senses; the most
agreeable labour was required ‘to dress and. to
keep it,’ implying some arts of culture. preserva-
tion from injury, training flowers and fruits, and


‘ knowing the various uses and enjoyments of the


produce; making observation upon the works of
God, of which an investigation and designating of
animals is expressly specified; nor can we sup

that there was no contemplation of the magniti-
cent sky and the heavenly bodies: above all, the
wondrous communion with the condescending
Deity, and probably with created spirits of supe
rior orders, by which the mind would be excited,
its capacity enlarged, and its holy felicity con-
tinually increased. It is also to be remarked,
that the narrative (Gen. ii. 19, 20) conveys the


ADAM.


implication that some time was allowed to elapse,
that Adam miglit discover and feel his want of a
companion of his own species, ‘a help correspond-
ent to him,’

These considerations impress us with a sense of
probability, amounting to a conviction, that a
period not very short was requisite for the exercise
of man’s faculties, the disclosures of his happi-
ness, and the service of adoration which he could
pay to his Creator. But all these considera-
tions are strengthened by the recollection that they
attach to man’s solitary state; and that they all
require new: and enlarged application when the
addition of conjugal lite is brought into the ac-
count. The conclusivn appears irresistible that a
duration of many days, or rather weeks or months,
would be requisite for so many and important


purposes.

Thus divinely honoured and happy were the
Przenitors of mankind in the state of their
creation. :

The next scene which the sacred history brings
lefore us is a dark reverse. Another agent comes
into the field and successfully employs his arts
fr seducing Eve, and by her means Adam, from
their original state of rectitude, dignity, and hap-


Among the provisions of divine wisdom and
goolness were two vesctable productions of
wondrous qualities and mysterious significancy ;
‘the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and
the tree of knowledge of good and evil’ (Gen. ii. 9).
It would add to the precision of the terms, and
perhaps aid our understanding of them, if we were
toadhere strictly to the Hebrew by retaining the
detinite prefix : and then we have ‘ the tree of the
life’ and ‘the tree of the knowledge.’ Thus
would be indicated Tux particular life of which
the one was a symbol and instrument, and THE
fatal Anocledge springing from the abuse of the
other, At the same time, wedo not maintain
that these appellations were given to them at the
beginning. We rather suppose that they were ap-
Plied afterwards, suggested by the events and
connection, and so became the historical names.

We see no sufficient reason to understand, as
tome do, ‘the tree of the life,’ collectively, as im-
plying a species, and that there were many trees

species. The figurative use of the ex-
Pression im Rev, xxii. 10, where a plurality is
plainly intended, involves no evidence of such a
design in this literal narrative. ‘The phraseology
of the text best agrees with the idea of a single
tee, desiened fora special purpose, and not in-
tended to nate its kind. Though in the
Mate of innucence, Adam and Eve might be liable
totome corporal suffering frum the changes of the
‘easons and the weather, or accidental circum-
Mances; in any case of which occurring, this tree
endowed by the bountiful Creator with
‘medicinal and restorative property, probably in
Way of instantaneous miracle. We think
aloo that it was designed for a sacramental or
Fmbolical . a representation and pledge
of ‘the life,’ emphatically so called, heavenly
Tamortality when the term of probation should be
rily completed. Yet we by no means suppose

t this “tree of the life’ any intrinsic
per of communicating immortality. In the
eae it was a sign and seal of the divine


‘se. But, with regard to ¢he former inten-


ADAM. 63


tion, we see nothing to forbid the idea that it had
most efficacious medicinal properties in its fruit,
leaves, and other parts. Such were called trees
of life by the Hebrews (Prov. iii. 18; xi. 30;
xiii. 125 xv. 4).

The ‘tree of the knowledge of good and evil’
might be any tree whatever; it might be of any
species even yet remaining, though, if it were so,
we could not determine its species, for the plain
reason, that no name, description, or information
whatever is given that could possibly lead to the
ascertainment. One cannot bgt lament the vul-
gar practice of painters representing it as an
apple-tree; and thus giving occasion to profane
and silly witticisms.

Yet we cannot but think the more reasonable
probability to be, that it was a tree having poi-
sonous properties, stimulating, and intoxicating,
such as are found in some existing species, espe-
cially in hot climates. On this ground, the pro-
hibition to eat or even touch the tree was a bene-
ficent provision against the danger of pain and
death. Should any cavil at the placing of so
perilous a plant in the garden of delights, the
abode of sinless creatures, we reply, that virulent

isons, mineral, vegetable, and animal, though

hurtful or fatal to those who use them impro-
perly, perform important and beneficial parts in
the general éconumy of nature.

But the revealed object of this ‘tree of the
knowledge of good and evil’ was that which
would require no particular properties beyond
some degree of external beauty and fruit of an
immediately pleasant taste. That object was to
be a test of obedience. For such a purpose, it is
evident that to select an indifferent act, to be
the object prohibited, was necessary ; as the obli-
gation to refrain should be only that which arises
simply, so far as the subject of the law can know,
from the sacred will of the lawgiver. This does
not, however, nullify what we have said upon
the possibility, or even probability, that the tree in
question had noxious qualities: for upon either
the affirmative or the nezative of the supposition,
the subjects of this positive Jaw, having upon all
antecedent grounds the fullest conviction of the
perfect rectitude and benevolence of their Creator,
would see in it the simple character of a test, a
means of proof, whether they would or would not
implicitly confide in him. For so doing they
had every possible reason; and against any
thought or mental feeling tending to the viola-
tion of the precept, they were in possession of
the most powerful motives. There was no diffi-
culty in the observance. They were sutrounded
with a garadise of delights, and they had no rea-
son to imagine that any good whatever would
accrue to them from their seizing upon anything

rohibited. If perplexity or doubt arose, they

ad ready access to their divine benefactor for
obtaining information and direction. But they
allowed the thought of disobedience to form itself
into a disposition, and then a purpose.

Thus was the seal broken, the integrity of the
heart was gone, the sin was generated, and the
outward act was the consummation of the dire
process. Eve, less informed, less cautious, less
endowed with strength of mind, became the more
ready victim. ‘The woman, being deceived, was
in the transgression;’ but ‘Adam was not de-
ceived’ (1 Tim. ii. 14). He rushed -snowingly


64 ADAM.


and deliberately to ruin. The offence had grievous
aggravations. It was the preference of a trifling
gratification to the approbation of the Supreme
Lord of the universe; it implied a denial of the
wisdom, holiness, goodness, veracity, and power
of God; it was marked with extreme ingratitude ;
and it involved a contemptuous disregard of con-
sequences, awfully impious as it referred to their
immediate connection with the moral government
of God, and cruelly seltish as it respected their
posterity.

The instrument gf the temptation was a ser-
pent; whether any dne of the existing kinds it is
evidently impossible for us to know. Of that
numerous order many species are of brilliant co-
lours and playful in their attitudes and manners;
so that une may well conceive of such an object
attracting and fascinating the first woman.
Whether it spoke in an articulate voice, like the
human, or expressed the sentiments attributed to
it by a succession of remarkable and significant
actions, may be a subject uf reasonable question.
The latter is possible, and it seems the preferable
hypothesis, as, without a miraculous intervention,
the mouth and throat uf no serpent could form a
vocal utterance of words; and we cannot attri-
bute to any wicked spirit the power of working
miracles.

This part of the narrative begins with the
words ‘And the serpent was crafty above every
animal of the field’ (Gen. iii. 1). It is to be ob-
served that this is not said of the order of serpents,
as if it were a general property of them, but of
that particular serpent. Had the noun been in-
tended generically, as is often the case, it would
have required to be without the substantive verb;
for such is the usual Hebrew method of expressing
universal propositions: of this the Hebrew scholar
may see constant examples in the Book of Pro-
verbs,

Indeed, this “cunning craftiness, lying in wait
to deceive’ (Eph. iv. 14), is the very character of
that malignant creature of whose wily stratagems
the reptile was a mere instrument. The existence
of spirits, superior to man, and of whom some
have become depraved, and are labouring to
spread. wickedness and misery to the utmost of
their power, las been found to be the belief of all
nations, ancient and modern, of whom we possess
information. It has also been the general doc-
trine of both Jews and Christians, that one of
those fallen spirits was the real agent in this first
and successful temptation. Of this doctrine, the
declarations of our Lord and his apostles contain
strong confirmation. In the same epistle in which
St. Paul expresses his apprehension of someot the
Corinthian Christians being seduced into error
and sin, he adverts to the temptation of Eve as a
monitory example: ‘Lest Satan should get an
advantage over us, for we ure not ignorant of his
devices. I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ. ‘Such are false apostles, deceitful workers,
transforming themselves into apostles of Christ ;
and no marvel; for even Satan himself is trans-
formed into an angel of light’ (2 Cor. ii, 113 xi.
3, 14). In the book of the Revelation the great
tempter is mentioned as ‘that old (dpyaios, he
of antiquity) serpent, who is called the devil
and the Satan, who deceiveth the whole world


ADAM. ©


(2 Cor. xii. 9; xx. a The language of Jesus
is a very definite allusion to the guilty trans
action of Eden: ‘Ye are of your father the devil,
and the desires of your father ye are determined
(0éAere) to do. He was a man-murderer (dy6poe
woxrévos) from the beginning; and in the truth
he stood not, for truth is not in him. When
he speaketh falsehood, out of his own (stores)
he speaketh, for a lar is he, and the father ot
it (t.e. of falsehood)’ (John viii, 44). The
summary of these passages presents almost a
history of the Fall—the tempter, his manifold
arts, his serpentine disguises, Lis falsehood, his
restless activity, his bloodthirsty cruelty, and
his early success in that eareer of deception
and destruction. The younger Rosenmiiller says
upon this passage, ‘That it was not a natural ser-
ans that seduced Eve, but a wicked spirit which
nad assumed the form of a serpent; and although
Moses dues not expressly say so, from the fear of
affording a handle to superstition, yet it is probable
that he designed to intimate as much, from the
very fact of his introducing the serpent as a ra-
tional being, and speaking; also, that this opiniun
was universal among the nations of Central and
Upper Asia, from the remotest antiquity, appears
from this, that, in the system of Zoroaster, it: is
related that Abriman, the chief of wicked spirits,
seduced the first human beings to sin by putting
on the form of a serpent’ (Schol. in Gen. iii. Ls
and he refers to Klcuker’s German version of the
Zendavesta, and his own Ancient and Modern
Oriental Country).

The condescending Deity, who had held gra-
cious and instructive communion with the pa-
rents of mankind, assuming a human form and
adapting all his proceedings to their capacity,
visibly stood before them; by a searching inter-
rogatory drew from them the confession of their
guilt, which yet they aggravated by evasions and
insinuations against God himself; and pro-
nounced on them and their seducer the sentence
due. On the woman he inflicted the pains of
child-bearing, and a deeper and more humiliating
dependence upon her husband. Ie doomed the
man to hard and often fruitless toil, instead of
easy and pleasant labour, On both, or rather on
human nature universally, he pronounced the
awful sentence of death. The denunciation of
the serpent partakes more of a symbolical cha-
racter, and su seems to carry a strong implication
of the nature and the wickedness of the concealed
agent. The human sulflerings threatened are all,
excepting the last, which will require a separate
consideration, of a remedial and corrective kind.
The pains and subjection of the female sex, when
they come into connection with the benignant
spirit of the gospel, acquire many alleviationg,
and become means of much good in relative life,
which reacts with a delightful accumulation of
benefit upon the Christian wife, mother, daughter,
sister, friend. So also human labuur, in the cul-
tivation of the various svils, in all geognostic
operations, in all fabrics and machinery, in means
of transit by land, and in the wonders of naviga-
tion over the ocean, which for many ages was
regarded as the barrier sternly forbidding inter
course ;—while these have been the occasion of
much suffering, they have been always towering
over the suflering, counteracting and remedying
it, diminishing the evil, and increasing the sum


ADAM.


of good. Further, under the influence of true
Christianity, these and all the other mechanical
end liberal] arts are consecrated to the universal
improvement of mankind ; they afford means of
spreading the gospel, multiplying every kind of
good agencyand increasing its force. Thus, ‘in
all labour there is profit,’ and ‘labour itself be-
comes a pleasure.’

Of a quite different character are the penal
denunciations upon the serpent. If they be un-
derstood literally, andl of course applied to the
whole order of Opiidia (as, we believe, is the
commen interpretation), they will be found to be
to flacrantly at variance with the most demon-
arated facts in their physiology and economy, as
to lead to inferences unfavourable to beliei in
revelation, Let us examine the particulars :—

‘Because thou hast done this, cursed art thou
above all cattle ;’ very properly so rendered, for
webavenot an English singular noun to answer
to D3, so as to elect a literal translation of
‘above every behemah.’ But the serpent tribe
cannot be classed with that of the behemoth. The
word is of very frequent occurrence in the Old
Testament; and though, in a few instances, it
tems to be put for brevity so as to be inclusive
of the focks as well as the herds, and in poetical
diction it sometimes stands metonymically for
animals generally (as Job xviii. 3; Ps. xxiii. 22;
Eccles, iii, 18, 19, 21); yet its proper and uni-
versal application is to the large animals (pachy-
derms and ruminants), such as the elephant,
camel, deer. horse, ox, rhinoceros, hippopotamus,
&c. (Braxworu }.

AAs Hittle will the declaration, ‘cursed —,’ agree
with natural truth. It may, indeed, be supposed
to be veritied in the shuddering which persons
generally feel at the aspect of any one of the order
of serpents; but this takes place also in many
other cases, It springs from fear of the formi-
dable weapons with which some species are armed,
as few persons know beforehand which are venom-
ous and which are harmless; and, after all,
this is rather an advantage than a curse to the
animal, It is an effectual defence without effort.
Indeed, we may say that no tribe of animals is
so secure from danger, or is so able to obtain its
sustenance and all the enjoyments which its capa-
city snd habits require, as the whole order of ser-
pents. If, then, we decline to urge the objection
from the word dehemah, it is diflicult to conceive
that serpents have more causes of suffering than
shy her great division of animals, or even so
muc

Fr-ther, ‘going upon the belly ’ is to none of
them a punishment. With some differences of
mode, their progression is produced by the pushing
of scales, shields, or rings against the ground, by
muscular contractions and dilatations, by elastic
spenzings, by vertical undulations, or by hori-
wntal wrigelings ; but, in every variety, the en-
tire oraanization—skeleton, muscles, nerves, in-
tecuments—is adapted to the mode of progression
belonging to each species, That mode, in every
Yarety of it, is sufficiently easy and rapid (often
Very rapid) for all the purposes of the animal's
life and the amplitude of its enjoymeats. To
imagine this mode of motion to be, in any sense,
& change from a prior attitude and habit of the
eect kind, or being furnished with wings, indi-
Cates a perfect ignorance of the anatomy of ser-


ADAM. 6


pents. Yet it has been said by learned and
eminent theological interpreters, that, before this
crime was committed, the serpent probably did
‘not go upon his belly, but moved upon the
hinder part of his body, with his head, breast, and
belly upright’ (Clarke's Bible, p. 1690). This
notion may have obtained credence from the fact
that some of the numerous serpent species, when
excited, raise the neck pretty high; but the pos-
ture is to strike, and they cannot maintain it im
creeping except for a very short distance.

Neither do they ‘eat dust.’ All serpents are
camivorous: their food, according to the size and
power of the species, is taken fiom the tribes of
insects, worms, frogs, and toads, and newts, birds,
mice and other small quadrupeds, till the scale
ascends to the pythons and boas, which can mas-
ter and swallow very large animals. The excel-
lent writer just cited, in his anxiety to do honour,
as he deemed it, to the accuracy of Scripture
allusions, has said of the serpent, ‘ Now that he
creeps with his very mouth upon the earth, he
must necessarily take his food out of the dust, and
so lick in some of the dust with it. But this is
not the fact. Serpents habitually obtain their
food among herbage or in water; they seize their
prey with the mouth, often elevate the head, and
are no more exposed to the necessity of swallowing
adherent earth than are carnivorous birds or qua-
drupeds. At the same time, it may be understood
figuratively. ‘Lating the dust is but another
term for grovelling in the dust; and this is equi-
valent to being reduced to a condition of mean-
ness, shame, and contempt.—See Micah vii. 17°
(Bush on Genesis, vol. i. p. 84. New York, 1840),

But these and other inconsistencies and difti-
culties (insuperable they do indeed appear to us)
are swept away when we consider the fact before
stated, that the Hebrew is TN WMIR hanna-
chash haiah, tuk serpent was, &e., and that it
refers specifically and personally to a rational and
accountable being, the spirit of lying and cruelty,
the devil, the Satan, the old serpent. That God,
the infinitely holy, good, and wise, should have
permitted any one or more celestial spirits to
apostatize from purity, and to be the successful
seducers of mankind, is indeed an awful and over-
whelming mystery. But it is not more so than
the permitted existence of many among mankind,
whose rare talents and extraordinary command of
power and opportunity, combined with extreme de-
pravity, have rendered them the plague and curse of
the earth; and the whole merges into the awful
and insolvable problem, Why has the All-perfect
Deity permitted evil at all? We are firmly
assured that He will bring forth, at last, the
must triumphant evidence that ‘ He is right-
eous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works.’ In the mean time, our happiness lies in
the implicit confidence which we cannot but feel
to be due to the Being of Infinite Perfection.

The remaining part of the denunciation upon
the false and cruel seducer sent a beam of light
into the agonized hearts of our guilty first parents:
‘And enmity will I put between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed: he
will attack thee [on] the head, and thou wilt
attack him [at] the heel.’ The verb here used
twice, occurs in only two other places of the O.
T.: Job ix. 17,‘ Who breaketh upon me with a
tempestuous horror ;’ and Ps. cxxxix. 11, ‘And if

¥


66 ADAM.


I say, Surely darkness will burst upon me,’ ¢. ¢.
asa sudden and impervious covering. The mean-
ing is established by Gesenius after Umbreit as
the idea of a violent and cager assault, Christian
interpreters generally regard this as the Protevan-
gelium, the first gospel-promise, and we think
with good reason. It was a manifestation of
mercy : it revealed a Deliverer, who ‘should be a
human being, in a peculiar sense the o/lspring of
the temale, who should also, in some way not yet
made known, counteract and remedy the injury
inflicted, and who, though partially sullering from
the malignant power, should, in the end, com-
letely conquer it and convert its very success
into its own punishment’ (J. Pye Smith, Scrip-
ture Testimony to the Messiah, vol. i. p. 226).

The awful threatening to man was, ‘In the day
that thou catest of it, thou wilt die the death.’
Beyom, literally in the day, was also used as a
general adverb of time, denoting when, without
a strict limitation to a natural day. The verbal
repetition is a ra eee idiom to represent not only
the certainty of the action, but its intensity and
efficacy: we therefure think that the phrase die
the death would more exactly convey the sense of
the original than what some have proposed dying
thou shalt die. The infliction is Death in the
most comprehensive sense, that which stands op-
posed to Life, the life of not only animal enjoy-
ment, but holy happiness, the life which com-
ported with the image of God. This was lost by
the fall; and the sentence of physical death was
pronounced, to be executed in due time. Divine
mercy gave a long respite.

The same mercy was displayed in still more
tempering the terrors of justice. The garden of
delights was not to be the abode of rebellious
creatures. But before they were turned out into
a bleak and dreary wilderness, God was pleased
to direct them to make clothing suitable to their
new and degraded condition, of the skins of ani-
mals. That those animals had been offered in
sacrifice is a conjecture supported by so much

robable evidence, that we may regard it as a
well-established truth, Any attempt to force back
the way, to gain anew the tree of life, and take
violent or fraudulent posssession, would have been
equally impious and nugatory. The  sacritice
(which all approximative argument obliges us to
Cavan united with the promise uf a deliverer,
and the provision of substantial clothing, ‘con-
tained much hope of pardon and grace. The
terrible debarring by lightning flashes and their
consequent thunder, and by visible supernatural
agency (Gen. iii. 22-21), from a retum to the
bowers of bliss, are ahaa in the characteristic
patriarchal styleofanthropopathy; but the meaning
evidently is, that the fallen creature is unable by
any etlorts of his own to reinstate himself in the
favour of God, and that whatever hope of restora-
tion he may be allowed to cherish must spring
solely from free benevolence. ‘Thus, in laying the
first stone of the temple which shall be an im-
mortal habitation of the Divine glory, it was
manifested that ‘Salvation is of the Lord,’ and
that ‘grace reigneth through righteousness unto
eternal life.’

From this time we have little recorded of the
lives of Adam and Eve. Their three sons are
mentioned with important circumstances in con-
nection with each of them. See the articles Cain,


ADAR.


Asgt, and Sern. Cain was probably born ia
the year after the fall; Abel, possibly some years
later; Seth, certainly one hundred and _ thirty
years from the creation of his parents. After that,
Adam lived eight hundred years, and had sons
and daughters, doubtless by Eve, and then he
died, nine hundred and thirty years old. In that
prodigious period many events, and those of great
importance, must have occurred; but the wise
providence of God has not seen fit to preserve to
us any memorial of them, and scarcely any ves-
tiges or hints are atfurded of the occupations and
mode of life of men through the antediluvian
period [Anrepit.uvians].—J. P.S.

2. ADAM, acity at some distance east from
the Jordan, to which, or beyond which, the overe
flow of the waters of that river extended when
the course of the s‘ream to the Dead Sea was
stayed to atlord the Israelites a passage across its
channel. Our public version follows the ert,
or marginal reading. of Josh. iii. 16, ‘very far
from Adam’ (BIND); but the kethid, or textual
reading, is, ‘in Adam’ (DIN2). The former
suggests that the overflow extended beyond Adam,
the latter that it reached thereto. It appears
from 1 Kings iv. 12; vii. 46, that Zarethan was
on the west side of the Jordan, in the tribe of
Manassch: whereas certainly Adam was on the
east side of that river, where the Israelites al-
ready were. The text must therefore signify that
the overflow reached on the east side to Adam,
and on the west to Zarcthan; and it admits of
the construction that the ‘heap of waters’ was
‘beside’ Zarethan and beyond Adam, instead of
that Zarethan itself was ‘beside Adam.’ The
name of the city Adam (red) was probably de-
rived from the colour of the clay in the neigh-
bourhood.

ADAMAH. [Apan.]

ADAMANT. [Sramre.]


ADAR (118; ’Addp, Esth. iii. 7; the Mace-
donian Averpos) is the sixth month of the civil
and the twelfth of the ecclesiastical year of the
Jews. The name was first introduced afier the
Captivity. The following are the chief days in
it which are set apart for commemoration :—-The
7th is a fast for the death of Moses (Deut.
xxxiv. 5,6). There is some difference, however,
in the date assigned to his death by some ancient
authorities. — Josephus (Antig. iv. 8) states that
he died on the first of this month; which also
agrees with Midrash Mezillath Esther, cited by
Reland (Antiz. Hebr.iv. 10): whereas the Talmud-
ical tracts Kiddushim and Sota give the serenth
as the day. It is at least certain that the latter
was the day on which the fast was observed. On
the th there was a fast in memory of the conten-
tion or open rupture of the celebrated schools of
Hillel and Shammai, which happened but a few
years before the birth of Christ. The cause of
the dispute is obscure (Wolf's Biblioth. Hebr.
ii, 826). The 13th is the so-called ‘ Fast of
Esther.” Iken observes (Antig. Hebr. p. 150)
that this was not an actual fast, but merely a
commemoration of Esther's fast of three days
(Esth. iv. 16), and a preparation for the ensuing
festival. Nevertheless, as Esther appears, from
the date of Haman’s edict, and from the course
of the narrative, to have fasted in Nisan, Buxtorf
adduces from the Rabbins the fullowing account


ADARCONIM.


of the name of this fast, and of the foundation
of its observance in Adar (Synag. Jud. p. 554):
that the Jews assembled together on the 13th, in
the time of Esther, and that, after the example of
Moses, who fasted when the Israelites were about
to engage in battle with the Amalekites, they
devoted that day to fasting and prayer, in prepa-
tation for the perilous trial which awaited them
onthe morrow. In this sense, this fast would
stand in the most direct relation to the feast of
Purim. The 13th was also, ‘by a common
decrve,’ appointed as a festival in memory of the
death of Nicanor (2 Macc. xv. 36). The Mth
and 15th were devoted to the feast of Purim
(Fsth. ix. 21). In case the year was an inter-
calary one, when the month of Adar occurred
twice, this feast was first moderately observed in
the intercalary Adar, and then celebrated with
_ fall splendour in the ensuing Adar. The former
of these two celebrations was then culled the
lesser, and the latter the great Purim. These
designations do not apply, as Horne has erro-
neously stated (Introduction, iii. 177), to the two
days of the festival in an ordinary year, but to its


double celebration in an intercalary year.—J.N.


ADARCONIM (O'*AITIN ig. DODT;
Sept. Spaxu4 and Xpucoils 3 Vals. drachma and
Gureus). Gesenius and most others are of opinion
that these words, which occur in 1 Chron. xxix. 7;
Ezra viii. 27; ii. 69; Neh, vii. 70-72, denote the
Persia Daric, a gold coin, which must have been
M circulation amenz the Jews during their sub-
Jection to the Persians, ‘The & is prosthetic ; and
PIN occurs in the Rabbins. Dr. Lee disputes
the etymolozy of the word with Gesenius: but it is
sufficient to observe that the Daric, which is radi-
cally included in these words, is not, as might be
fancied, derived from the name of any particular


King, but from the Persian Vile dara, aking. Tie


last of these words seems to identify itself with the
Greek Spaxud; and, ol-erving that in some of
the texts it is manifestly connected with words
denoting weisit, and in none with names of coins,
he expresses some doubt of its being the dapeuchs
(daric) of the Greeks. He is rather inclined to
suppose, with Sulmuasius, that the Arabic dirhem


on or ad presents us with the same word.


The opinion of Heeren (Researches, i. 410) would,
indirectly, go to discountenance the notion that the
daric is to be here understood. He aflirms that
‘before the time of Darius Hystaspes the Persians
no coinaze of their own, and that the daricus
coined by hine was probably a medal (Herod. iv.
166) of the finest gold. When the darics became
Current, especially after the mercenary troops
were paid in them, their numbers must have
been greatly augmented: yet Strabo assures us
(xv. p. 1068) that the coin was by no means
abundant among the Persians, and that gold was
employed by them rather in decoration than as
a circulating medium.’ This, however, is of
little real consequence ; for it proceeds on the
toneous supposition that the coin derived its
Tame from the first Darius, and could not have
Previously existed. In the later day of Strabo the
con may have become scarce, although once
Plentiful. Be this as it may, the daric is of
Mterest, not only as the most ancient gold coin of


ADASHIM. 67


which any specimens have been preserved to the
present day, but as the earliest coined money
which, we can be sure, was known to and used
by the Jews. The distinguishing mark of the
coin was a crowned archer, who appears with
some slight variations on different specimens. His


.


garb is the same which is seen in the sculptures
at Persepolis, and the figure on the coin is called,
in numismatics, Sagittarius. The specimens
weighed by Dr. Bernard were fifteen grains heae
vier than an English guinea, and their intrinsic
value may, therefore, be reckoned at twenty-five
shillings (Eckhel, Doctrina Numortun Veterum ;
Bernard, De Mensuris et Ponderibus).
ADARGAZERIN (J"HITIN). This isa
Chaldee word which occurs in Dan. iii. 2, 3,
where the titles of the Babylonian officers are
enumerated. It is difficult, perhaps impossible,
to determine the particular office which the word
describes; and opinions and versions have differed
greatly. The Sept., which is followed by the
Vulgate, has répavvor. Our version has ¢ trea-
surers ;’ and although we do not know the reason
on which they proceeded, we may find one in the
fact that gaza (yda), which seems the principal
element of the word, means a treasury, and was
avowedly adopted by the Greeks from the Pere
sians. Jacchiades, who identifies all these officers
with those of the Turkish court and government,
compares the present to the defterdars, who haye
the charge of the receipts and disbursements of
the public treasury. Gesenius and others conceive
that the word means chief-judges (from TW,
magnificent, and }'t3, deciders) ; but Dr. Lee,
while admitting the uncertainty of the whole
matter, seems to prefer seeking its meaning in the
Persian yd Jire, and ps passing ; and hence
concludes that the Adargazerin were probably
oflicers of state who presided over the ordeals by
fire, and other matters connected with the governs
ment of Babylon. This last explanation is not,
however, new, being the one rejected by Gesenius.
ADASA, or Aparsa (Adaod), called also by
Josephus Avazer, Apaco, and AcoDAco, a city
in the tribe of Ephraim, said to have been four
miles from Reth-horon, and not far from Gophna
(Joseph. Antig. xii.17; Euseb, Onomast. in’ Adacd).
It was the scene of some important transactions in
the history of the Maccabees (1 Mac. vii. 40, 45;
Joseph. Antig. xii. 175 Bell. Jud. i. 1).
ADASHIM (OWT; Sept. gaxds; Vulg.
lens). ‘ Lenti.es’ is the interpretation given
by our own and most other versions, and there is
no reason to question its accuracy. In Syrié


lentiles are still called in Arabic  addas


(Russel, N. H. of Aleppo, i. 74). Lentiles ap-

pear to have been chiefly used for making a kind

of pottage. The red pottage for which Esau bar
¥2


48 ADASHIM.


tered his birthright was of lentiles (Gen. xxv. 29-
34). The term red was, as with us, extended to
yellowish brown, which must have been the true
colour of the pottage, if derived from lentiles.
The Grecks and Romans also called lentiles red
(see authorities in Celsius, i. 105). Lentiles were
among the provisions brought to David when he
fled from Absalom (2 Sam. xvii. 25), and a field
of lentiles was the scene of an exploit of one of
David's heroes (2 Sam. xxiii. 11). From Ezek.
iv. 9, it woulda that lentiles were sometimes
used as bread. is was, doubtless, in times of
scarcity, or by the poor. Sonnini (Travels, p. 603,
English translation) assures us that in southern-
most Egypt, where corn is comparatively scarce,
lentiles mixed with a little barley form almost
the only bread in use among the poorer classes,
It is called bettan, is of a golden yellow colour,
and is not bad, although rather heavy. In that
country, indeed, probably even more than in Pa-
lestine, lentiles anciently, as now, formed a chief
article of food among the labouring classes. This
is repeatedly noticed by ancient authors; and so
much attention was paid to the culture of this use-
ful pulse, that certain varieties became remark-
able for their excellence. The lentiles of Pe-
lusium, in the part of Egypt nearest to Pales-
tine, were esteemed both in Egypt and foreign
eountries (Virg. Georg. i. 228); and this is pro-
bably the valued Egyptian variety which is men-
tioned in the Mishna (tit. Kilvim, xviii. 8) as
neither large nor small. Large quantities of
lentiles were exported from Alexandria (Augustin.
Comm. in Ps. xlvi.). Pliny, in mentioning two
Egyptian varieties, incidentally lets us know that
one of them was red, by remarking that they like
a red soil, and by speculating whether the pulse
may not have thence derived the reddish colour
which it imparted to the pottage made with it
(Hist. Nat. xviii. 12). This illustrates Jacob's red
ln We Dr. Shaw (i. 257) also states that
these lentiles easily dissolve in boiling, and form
a@ red or chocolate coloured tage, much
esteemed in North Africa and Western Asia.
Putting these facts together, it is likely that the
reddish lentile, which is now so common in Egypt
(Descript. de V Egypte, xix. 65), is the sort to
which all these statements refer.

The tomb-paintings actually exhibit the i ied
tion of preparing pottage of lentiles, or, as Wilkin-
sori (Anc. Egyptians, ii. 387) describes it, ‘a man
engaged in cooking lentiles for a soup or porridge;
his companion brings a bundle of faggots for the
fire, and the lentiles themselves are seen standing
near him in wicker baskets.’ The lentiles of Pa-
lestine have been little noticed by travellers.


Nau (Voyage Nouveau, p. 13) mentions lentiles
along with com and as a principal article
of traffic at Tortoura ; D’Arvieux (Alémoires, ii.
237) speaks of a mosque, originally a Christian
church, over the patriarchal tomb at Hebron,
Connected with which was a large kitchen, where


ADDER.


lentile ge was prepared every day, and dis-
tributed freely to strangers and poor eves, in
memory of the transaction between u and
Jacob, which they (erroneously) believe to have
taken place at this spot.

The lentile (Ervwm lens) is an annual plant,
and the smallest of all the leyuminose which are
cultivated. It rises with a weak stalk about
eighteen inches high, having poe Jeaves at
each joint composed of several pairs of narrow
leaflets, and terminating in a tendril, which sup.
ports it by fastening about some other plant.


Lentiles (Cicer lens).


The small flowers, which come out of the sides of
the branches on short peduncles, three or four
together, are purple, and are succeeded by the
short and flat Jegumes, which contain two or
three flat round seeds slightly curved in the
middle. The flower appears in Mag, and the
seeds ripen in July. When ripe, the plants are
rooted up, if they have been sown along with other
Plants, as is sometimes done; but they are cut
wn when grown by themselves. They are
threshed, winnowed, and cleaned like corn.
ADBEEL, one of the twelve sons of Ishmael,
and founder of an Arabian tribe (Gen. xxv.


13, hs :
ADDER, the English name of a kind of ser-
t, is a dialectical variation of the same word
in a variety of languages of the Gothic and Teu-
tonic family. Another name, varying, in the
old European tongues, from ag, ach, to hag,
has more connection with the Semitic; and in
the south of Europe, where the Latin and its
derivatives prevail, both are represented by the
word vipera (viper). The first radically indicates
« poison ; the second, pain, distress, strife ; the third,
eer of offspring, not in the state of an egg,
ut of the perfect animal. Though not clearly
distinguisbed, in common acceptation, from in-
noxious snakes, all strictly indicate serpents
armed with poisonous fangs, and therefore all are
truly viviparous. In the English version of the
Bible the name ‘adder’ occurs several times, and is
there used not for a particular species, but gene-
rally for-several of this dangerous class of reptiles,
without, therefore, being intended to be confined to
a genus, in the sense modern systematists would


ascribe to that denomination. We have before ug


ADDER.


a list, far from complete, of the erpetology of Pales-
tine, Arabia, and Egypt, in which there are,
among forty-three species indicated, about eight
whose bite is accompanied with a venomous effu-
sion, and therefore almost all very dangerous.
The Hebrew names applicable to them, depending
upon some radical word descriptive of a property
or character of the animal, are in themselves
mostly insufficient to distinguish the one meant
payearel and therefore recourse must be had to
kindred dialects, and to a careful study of
each species. This object is so far from being
accomplished, that, in our present state of know-
ledge, we deem it best to discuss, under the words
Serpent and Virer, all the Hebrew names not
noticed in this article, and to refer to them those
occurring in our version under the appellations of
‘asp,’ ‘cockatrice,’ &c.; and likewise to review the
allusions to colossal boas and pythons, evidently
meant, in some places, where a terms JF) than
and }'3M thannin are used; and, finally, to
Notice water-snakes and murene, which translators
and biblical naturalists have totally overlooked,


ADDER. 69


although they must exist in the lakes of the
are abundant on the north coast of Africa,
and often exceed eight feet in length.

In this place we shall retain that genus alone
which Laurenti and Cuvier have established
characters distinguished from the innocuous colu-
ber and the venomous vi and denominated
naja, one of the Sanscrit forms of the same oe
lation whence we have the word hag, before
noticed; and to the same root, in the Semitic
tongues, we may refer the Hebrew JW) ach-
sub, found in Psalm exi. 3, and declared to be
derived from a verb implying ‘ to bend back w
oneself '—a characteristic which most, if not all, of
the species of the genus Naja evince. The Chaldee
se pelea render it by W*I5Y acchabis, per-

ps erroneously applied to the spider, which, if
we refer to several of the noxious arachnides, pos-
sesses nevertheless the faculty of springing back
upon its victim, and therefore comes within the
radical meaning of the term.

The genus Naja—Haridi (?) of Savary—is dis-
tinguished by a plaited head, large, very venomous


Naja Ilaje; and the form of Cneph from the
Fyyptian Monuments.


fangs, a neck dilatable under excitement, which
raises the ribs of the anterior part of the body into
the form of a disk or hood, when the scales, usu-
ally not imbricated, but lying in juxta-position,
are ted, and expose the skin, which at that
time displays bright iridescent gleams, contrast-
ing highly with their brown, yellow, and bluish
colours. ‘The species attain at least an equal, if
hot a superior, size to the generality of the genus
Viper; are more massive in their structure; and
tome possess the faculty of self-inflation to triple
their diameter, gradually forcing the body up-
wards into an erect position, until, by a convulsive
crisis, they are said suddenly to strike backwards
at an enemy or a pursner. With such powers of
destroying animal life, and with an ct at
once terrible and resplendent, it may be easily ima
gined how soon fear and superstition would com-
at periods anterior to historical data, to raise
monsters into divinities, and endeavour to
rate their wrath by the blandishments of
worship; and how design and cupidity would
teach these very votarics the manner of subduing
their ferocity, of extracting their instruments of


Naja Tiipudians and Cobra di Capello; or, Hooded
and Spectacled Snakes.


mischief, and making them subservient to the won-
der and amusement of the vulgar, by using cer-
tain cadences of sound which affect their hearing,
and exciting in thetn a desire to perform a kind of
pleasurable movements that may be compared to
dancing. Hence the nagas of the East, the hag-
worms of the West, and the haje, have all been
deified, styled agathodemon or good spirit; and
figures of them occur wherever the superstition of
Pagan antiquity has been accompanied by the
arts of civilization.

The most prominent species of the genus at

esent is the naja tripudians, cobra di capello,
Trodiled or spectacled snake of India, venerated by
the natives; even ba arneroerecs styled
the good serpent to this day, and yet so terocious
that it is one of the very few that will attack a
man when surprised in its haunt, although it may
be gorged with prey. This species is usually
marked on the nape with two round spots, trans
versely connected in the form of a pair of spec-
tacles; but among several varieties, one, perhaps
distinct, is without the marks, and has a pa
golden hood, which may make it identical wi


70 ADDER.


the naja haje of Egypt, the undoubted Ihh-nuphi,
eneph, or agathodwmon of ancient Egypt, and
accurately representeil on the walls of its temples,
in almost innumerable instances, both in form
and colour. This serpent also inflates the skin
on the neck, not in the expanded form of a hood,
but rather into an intumefaction of the neck.
As in the former, there is no marked difference of
ri dale between the sexes; but the psilli, or
charmers, by a particular presse on the neck
have the power of rendering the inflation of the
animal, already noticed a3 a character of the
genus, so intense, that the serpent becomes rigid,
and can be held out horizontally as if it were a
rod. This practice explains what the soothsayers
of Pharaoh could pertonn when they were op-
posing Moses, and reveals one of the names by
which the Hebrews knew the species; for although
the text (Exod. iv. 3) uses, tor the rod of Aaron
converted into a serpent, the word WM} nachash,
and eireagh aged (vii. 15) IN thananin, it is plain
that, in the second passage, the word indicates
‘monster,’ as applied to the nachash just named—
the first being an appellative, the second an cpi-
thet. That the rods of the magicians of Pharaoh
were of the same external character is evident
from no different denomination being given to
them: therefure we may infer that they used a
real serpent as a rod—namely, the species now
called Aaje—for their imposture; since they no
doubt did what the present serpent-charmers per-
form with the same species, by means of the
temporary asphyriation, or suspension of vitality,
before noticed, and producing restoration to active
life by liberating or throwing down. Thus we
have the miraculous character of the prophet’s
mission shown by his real rod becoming a serpent,
and the magicians’ real serpents merely assuming
the form of rods; and when both were opposed,
in a state of animated existence, by the rod
devouring the living animals, conquering the
great typical personitication of the protecting di-
vinity of Egypt. Nachash may, therefore, with
some confidence, be assumed to have been the
Hebrew name, or at least one of the names, of the
naza haje, el haje, and haye nacher, of the Arabs.*
This species may be regarded as extending to India
and Ceylon; and probably the naje tripudians
is likewise an inhabitant of Arabia, if not of
Egypt, although the assertion of the fact (common
in authors) does not exclude a supposition that
they take the two species to be only one. We are
disposed to refer the * winged’ or ‘tlying” serpent to
the naja tripudians, in one of its varieties, because
—with its hood dilated into a kind of shining wings
on each side of the neck, standing, in undulating
(ADIYD) motion, one-half or more erect, rigid,
and fierce in attack, and deadly puisonous, yet
still denominated ‘ good spirit,’ and in Egypt
ever figured in combination with the winged


® Nechash was intensely the serpent of serpents
with the Hebrews; and when figured with the
crowns or caps of Upper and Lower Egypt, was
the crowned serpent and basilisk. It is evident
that nach-ash led authors, and Pliny among the
number, to affix the term aspis to the haje, which
however he did not recognise as the sacred serpent
of Egypt. The true asp is a small viper, not-
withstanding the opinion of M. Geoffroy to the
contrary.


°


ADDER.


globe—it well may have received the name of
SW saraph,and may thus meet all the valid ob-
jections, and conciliate seemingly opposite com-
ments (see Num. xxi. 6, 8; Deut. viii. 15;
Isa. xvi. 29; xxx. 6; and Paxton’s Illustra-
tions), excepting the authority of Herodotus,
Pausanias, and Bochart, which, with all the re-
spect due to their names, is not now suflicient to
establish the existence of a kind of serpents whose
structure is contrary to the laws of zoological or-
ganization.*

Acusus (WSDY naya (2), reflectriz, nobis)
is another name of a serpent which may be con-
sidered us specitically different from the former,
though it is most probably one more of this group
of terrible creatures, The root of the name im-
plies bending back, recurving, but not coiling u
for all snakes have that faculty. The syllable
ach, however, shows a connection with the former
denominations ; and both are perfectly reconcil-
able with a serpent very common at the Cape of
Good Hope, not unfrequent in Western Alrica,
and probably extending over that whole continent,
excepting perhaps Morocco. It is the * poff-adder *
of the Dutch leche about three feet in length,
and about six inches in circumference at the
middle of the body; the head is larger than is
usual in serpents; the eyes are large, and v:
brilliant; the back beautifully marked in half
circles, and the colours black, bright yellow, and
dark brown; the belly yellow; the appearance at
all times, but chiefly when exci extremely
brilliant; the upper jaw greatly protruding, some-
what like what occurs in the shark, places the
mouth back towards the throat, and this structure
is said to be connected with the practice of the
animal when intending to bite, to swell its skin
till it suddenly rises up, and strikes backwards as
ifit fell over.f It is this fucnlty which appears
to be indicated by the Hebrew name achsud, and
therefure we believe it to refer to that species, or
to one nearly allied to it. The Dutch name
(poll-adder, or spooch-adder) shows that, in the act
of swelling, remarkable eructations and spittings
take place, all which no doubt are so many wam-


* In Isaiah xiv. 29, and xxx. 6, the epithet
FDI meupheph, ‘vibrating,’ (rendered ¢ flying’
in A. V.) is another form for * winged,’ and occurs
in passages unconnected with the events in Exo-
dus, Both bear metaphorical interpretations.

A further contirmation of the ‘fiery serpents,’
or ‘serpents of the buming bite,’ being najas,
occurs in the name Ras om Haye (Cape of the
Haje serpents), situated in the locality where yeo-
graphers and commentators agree that the children
of Israel were aftlicted by these reptiles. Should
it be objected that these are the haje, and not the
7 aaa it may be answered that both

rabs and Hindoos confound the species.

+ The writer is indebted tor the details concern-
ing this reptile to the kindness of Captain Stevens
of the Royal Marines, who killed several; and from
whom we learn the further fact that, in order to
ascertain the truth of the universal report con-
cerning the mode of striking back, ascribed to the
serpent, he had a quill introduced into the vent of
one lying dead on the table, and blown into. The
skin distended till the body rose up nearly all its
length: he then caused the experiment to stop,
from the alarming attitude it assumed.


o


ADDON. —


ings, the bite being fatal. The poff-adder usually

resides among brushwood in stuny places and

rocks, is fond of basking in the sun, rather slow
in moving, and is by nature timid [Sgrpent;

Virer].—C. H.S. :

ADDON (fl), one of several places men-
tioned in Neh. vii. 61, being towns in the land of
captivity, from which those who returned to Pa-
lestiye were unable to ‘ shew their father’s house,
or their seel, whether they were of Israel.’ This,
prbably, means that they were unable to furnish
such undeniable legal proof as was required in
such casez, And tlus is in some degree explained
by the subsequent (v. 63) mention of priests who
Wer expelled the priesthood because their descent
Was not found to be genealogically registered.
Thee instances show the impurtance which was
attached to their genealugies by the Jews [Ge-
wauogry}.

ADIABENE (’A8:anrf), the principal of
the six provinces into which Assyria was di-
Yided. Pliny (Hist. Nat. v. 12) and Ammianus
(axii. 6, § 20) comprehend the whole of As-
fyria under this name, which, l.owever, properly
denoted only the province which was watered by
the rivers Diab and Adiab, or the Great and
Little Zab (Dhab), which flow into the Tigris
below Nineveh (Mosul), from the north-east. This
Reyion is not mentioned in Scripture; but in
loephus, its queen Helena and her son Izates,
who became converts to Judaism, are very often
named (Joseph. Antig. xx. 2, 43 Bell. Jud. ii.
16, 19; v. 4, 6, 11).

ADIDA (AdBd; Vulg. Addus), a fortified
town in the tribe of Judah. In 1 Macc. xii. 38,
we read that Simon Maccabeus set up ‘ Adida
in Sephela CARA ev 7H ZephAa), and mae it
strong with bolts and bars.’ Eusebius says that
Sephela was the name given in his time to the
pen country about Eleutheropolis. And this
Adida in Sephela is probably the same which
i mentiuned in the next chapter (xiii. 13) as
‘Adida over against the plain,’ where Simon

calwus encamped to dispute the entrance


» into Judea of Tryplion, who had treacherously


mee


sized on Jonathan at Ptolemais. In the parallel
Passage Josephus (Antig. xiii. 6, 4) adds that this
Adida was upon a hill, before which lay the
Plains of Juda. Lighttvot, however, contrives
multiply the single place mentioned in the
Ccabees and Josephus into four or five dif-
ferent towns (see Chorog. Decad. § 3). One of
the places which Josephus calls Adida (Bell. Jud.
W.9,1) appears to have been near the Jordan,
and was probably the Hadid of Ezra ii. 32,
ADJURATION. This is a solemn act or
appeal, whereby one man, usually a person vested
“ith natural or official authority, imposes upon
another the obligation of speaking or acting as if
under the solemnity of an oath. We find the
Word PIWiT used in this sense in Cant. it. 7;
mM. 9, &c. In the New Testament the act of
adjuration is perfurmed with more marked eflect ;
‘ when the high-priest thus calls upun Christ,
Tadjure thee by the living God, tell us’ &c.—
opie ge Kath Tod Ocod Tod (aytos, Kc.
(Matt, xxvii. ae The word used here is that
by which the LKX. render the Hebrew (see also
k v.75 Acts xix. 13; 1 Thess. v.27). An
sath, although thus imposed upon one without


ADONIBEZEK. n


his consent, was not only binding, but solemn
in the highest degree; and when connected with
@ question, an answer was compulsory, which
answer being as upon oath, any falsehood in it
would be perjury. Thus our Saviour, who had
previously disdained to reply to the charges brought
against him, now felt himself bound to answer the
question put to him. The abstract moral right of
any man to impose so serious an obligation upon -
another without his consent, may very much be
doubted—not, indeed, as compelling a true an-
swer, which a just man will give under all cir
cumstances, but as extorting a truth which he
might have just reasons for withholding.

ADMAH, one of the cities in the vale of -
Siddim (Gen. x. 19), which had a king of its
own (Gen. xiv. 2). It was destroyed along with
Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen. xix. 24; Hos. xi. 8).


ADMONI (JOINS ; Sept. supsdens; Vulg.
rufus). This word means red-haired, and is so
rendered in the ancient versions, although ours
understands @ ruddy complexion. It would thus
appear that Esau (Gen. xxv. 25) and David
(1 Sam. xvi. 12; xvii. 42) were red-haired. Red
hair is 90 uncommon in the East, that it forms a
particular distinction, as in the Scriptural in-
stances; but it is by no means unknown, espe-
cially in mountainous countries. The writer has
observed it in Persia repeatedly, accompanied
with the usual fresh complexion. Such hair and
complexion together seem to have been regarded
as a beauty among the Jews. The personal cha-
racters of Esau and David appear to agree well
with the temperament which red hair usually
indicates.

ADONAI (‘2118 ; Sept. Kipios, lord, master),
the old plural form of the noun })IN adon,
similar to that with the suitix of the first person 5
used as the pluralis excellentia, by way of dig-
nity, for the name of Jenovan. The similar
form with the sugfic is also used of men, as of
Joseph's master (Gen. xxxix. 2, 3, sg.); of Joseph
himself (Gen. xlii. 30, 33; so also Isa. xix. 4).
The Jews, out of superstitious reverence for the
name JeHOVAH, always, in reading, pronounce
Adonai where Jehovah is written; and bence the
letters M7 are usually written with the points
belonging to Adonai [Jsnovau]. The view that
the word exhibits a plural termination without
the aflix is that of Gesenius (Thesaur. s.v. $1),
und seems just, though rather disapproved by Pro-
fessor Lee (Lez. in }YIN). The latter adds that
‘Our English bibles generally translate 771’, by
LORD, in capitals; when preceded by })7N7,
they translate it Gop; when MINIY tzabaoth
follows, by Lory; as in Isa, iii. 1, ‘The Lord,
the Lorp of Hosts.’ The copies now in use are
not, however, consistent in this respect.

ADONIBEZEK (PIII, lord of Bezek ;
Sopt. "AdwriBeCéx), king or lord of Bezek, a town
which Eusebius (in Be(éx) places 17 miles east of
Neapolis or Shechem. The small extent of the
kingdoms in and around Palestine at the time
its invasion by the Hebrews is shown by the fact
that this petty melek had subdued no less than
seventy of them; and the baibarity of the war-
usages in those carly times is painfully shown by
his cutting off all the thumbs and great toes of
his prisoners, and allowing them no food but that


712 ADONIJAH.


which they gathered under his table. These con-
quests made Adonibezck ‘a triton among the
minnows ;’ and we find him at the head of the
confederated Canaanites and Perizzites, against
whom the tribes of Judah and Simeon marched
after the death of Joshua. His army was routed
and himself taken prisoner. The victors failed
not to express their indignation at the mode in
which he had treated his captives, by dealing
with him in the same manner. His conscience
was then awakened to the enormity of his con-
duct, and in his own treatment he recognised a
severe but just application of the lex talionis.
That the act was so intended by the captors is
very clear; and it is strange that this strong re-
robation of his conduct by the Israelites should
ve been construed into an example of their own
barbarous usages in war. Adonibezek was taken
to Jerusalem, where he died, n.c. 1449.


ADONIJAH (i218, Jehovah [is] my
Lord ; Sept. "Adwvias), the fourth son of David,
by Hagyith, He was born after his father
became king, but when he reigned over Judah
only (2 Sam. iii. 4). According to the Oriental

- Notion developed in the article Ansar.om, Ado-
nijah might have considered his claim superior
to that of his eldest brother Amnon, who was
born while his father was in a private station;
but not to tiat of Absalom, who was not only his
elder Lrother, and born while his father was a
king, but was of royal descent on the side of his
mother. When, however, Amnon and Absalom
were both dead, he became, by order of birth,
the heir-apparent to the throne. But this order
had been set aside in favour of Solomon, who was
born while his father was king of all Israel. Ab-
salom perished in attempting to assert his claim
of primogeniture, in opposition to this arrange-
ment. Unawed by this example, Adonijah took
the same means of showing that he was not
disposed to relinquish the claim of primogeniture
which now devolved upon him. He assumed
the state of an heir-apparent, who, from the ad-
vanced age of David, must soon be king. But it
does not appear to have been his wish to trouble
his father as Absalom had done; for he waited
till David appeared at the point of death, when
he called around him a number of influential
men, whom he had. previously gained over, and
caused himself to be proclaimed king. This was
@ formidable attempt to subvert the appointment
made by the Divine king of Israel ; for Adonijah
was supported by such men as Joab, the ge-
neral-in-chief, and Abiathar, the high-priest ; both
of whom had followed David in all his fortunes.
The adhesion of such men, and the previous
defection of the nation to Absalom, show the
strength of the hereditary principle among the
Israelites. In all likelihood, if Absalom had
waited till David was on his death-bed, Joab and
Abiathar would have given him their support 5 but
his premature and unnatural attempt to dethrone
his father, disgusted these friends of David, who
might not otherwise have been adverse to his
claims. This danger was avoided by Adonijah:
but his plot was, notwithstanding, defeated by the

mpt measure taken by David, who directed So-
lomon to be at once proclaimed, and crowned,
end admitted to the real exercise of the sovereign
power, Adonijah then saw that ull was lost, and


ADONI-ZEDEK.


fled to the altar, which he refused to leave with-
out a promise of pardon from King Solomon.
This he received, but was warmed that any further
attempt of the same kind would be fatal to him,
Accordingly, when, some time after the death of
David, Adonijah covertly endeavoured to re-
produce his claim through a marriage with Abi-
shag, the virgin widow of his father [AnisHaa],
his design was at once penctrated by the king,
by whose order he was instantly put to death
(1 Kings i.-ii, 13-25).

ADONIRAM (DYSTS, lord of height, ig.
high lord ; Sept. "Adwvipdu, 1 Kings iv. 6). This
name is exhibited in the contracted form of Apo-
Ram (DWN) in 2 Sam. xx. 24; 1 Kings xii.
ie and of Hadoram (D177) in 2 Chron. x

8. :

1, ADONIRAM, or Haporax, son of Toi,
king of Hamath, who was sent by his father to
congratulate David on his victory over their com-
mon enemy Iadarezer, king of Syria (1 Chron,
xviii, 10). This prince is called Joram in 2
Sam. viii, 10.

2. ADONIRAM. A person of this name is
mentioned as receiver-general of the imposts in
the reigns of David, Solomon, and Rehoboam.
Commentators have been much at a loss to de-
termine whether the office was held by one person
fur so long a period, or by two or three persons
of the same name. It appears very unlikely that
even two persons af the same name should succea-
sively bear the same oflice, in an age when no
example occurs of the father’s name being given
to his son. We find also that not more than
forty-seven years elapse between the first and last
mention of the Adoniram who was ‘over the
tribute;" and as this, although a long term of
service, is not too long for one life, and as the

rson who held the office in the beginning of

ehoboam’s reign had served in it long enough
to make himself odious to the people, it appears
on the whole most probable that one and the same
person is intended throughout. Only one incident
1s recorded in connection with this person. When
the ten tribes seceded from the house of David,
and made Jeroboam king, Rehoboam sent Ado-
niram among them, for the purpose, we may pre-
sume, of collecting the ee imposts, which had
become very heavy. Perhaps he had been rigid in
his invidious office under Solomon: at all events
the collector of the imposts which had occasioned
the revolt was not the person whose presence was
the most likely to south the exasperated passions of
the people. They rose upon him, and stoned him
till he died. Rehoboam, who was not far off, took
waming by his fate, and, mounting his chariot,
returned with all speed to Jerusalem (1 Kings
xii. 18),

ADONIS. [Tuaumuz.] i

ADONI-ZEDEK (PTS7JTS 5 Sept. "Adax-
BeCex, confounding him with Adonibezek). The
name denotes lord of justice, i.e. gust lord, but
some would rather have it to mean Aing of Zedek,
He was the Canaanitish king of Jerusalem when
the Israelites invaded Palestine; and the similarity
of the name to that of a more ancient king of (as
is supposed) the same place, Melchi-zedek (Aing
of justice, or king of Zedek), has suggested that
Zedek was one of the ancient names of Jerusalem,
Be that as it may, this Adonizedek was the first


reas fF Fee


et ee ee ee eS es ee, ee CG ee ee oe ee ET ee ee Ne ee a Re eg Ne ee ee Oe ee a eS ea


ADOPTION.


of the native princes that attempted to make
head against the invaders. After Jericho and
Ai were taken, and the Gibeonites had succeeded
in forming a treaty with the Israelites, Adoni-
sedek was the first to rouse himself from the stupor
which had fallen on the Canaanites (Josh. i. 9-11),
and he intluced the otherAmoritish kings of Hebron
—Jarmuth, Lachish, and Eglon—to join him in a
confederacy against the enemy. They did not, how-
ever, march directly against the invaders, but went
and besieged the Gibeonites, to punish them for the
discouraging example which their secession from
the common cause aa afforded. Joshua no sooner
heard of this than he marched all night from
Gilgal to the relief of his allies; and falling unex-
pectedly upon the besiegers, soon put them to utter
tout. The pursuit was long, and was signalized by
Joshua's famous command to the sun and moon, as
well as by a tremendous hail-storm, which greatly
distressed the fugitive Amorites [Josuua]. The
five kings took refuge in a cave; but were ob-
eerved, and by Joshua's order the mouth of it was
Closed with large stones, and a guard set over it,
until the pursuit was over. When the pursuers
tetumed, the cave was opened, and the five kings
brought out. The Hebrew chiefs then set their
feet ujon the necks of the prostrate monarchs—


* amancient mark of triumph, of which the monu-


ments of Persia and Egypt still afford illus-
trations. They were then slain, and their bodies
hung on trees until the evening, when, as the law
forbade a longer exposure of the dead (Deut.
xxi. 23), they were taken down, and cast into
the cave, the mouth of which was filled up
with large stones, which remained long after
(Josh. x. 1-27). The severe treatment of these
Engs by Joshua has been censured and defended
With equal disregard of the real circumstances,
Which are, that the war was avowedly one of ex-
termination, no quarter being given or expected
oa either side: and that the war-usages of the
Jews were neither worse nor better than those of
the people with whom they fought, who would
Mest certainly have treated Joshua and the other
Hebrew chiefs in the same manner, had they fallen
mtr their hands.

ADOPTION. The Old Testament does not
Contain any word equivalent to this; but the act
Occurs in various forms. The New Testament
nas the word viodecta often (Rom. viii. 15, 23;
Ix 4; Gal. iv. 5; Eph. i. 5); but no example of

act occurs. The term itself is well defined,
urd the act described, in the literal signification
of the Greek word. It is the placing as a son of
Ove who is not so by birth.

The practice of adoption had its origin in the
Genre for male offspring among those who have,
™ the ordinary course, been denied that blessing,
have been’ deprived of it by circumstances.

felling is common to our nature; but its
tion is less marked in those countries where
equalizing influences of high civilization lessen

Peculiar privileges of the paternal character,

where the security and the well-observed laws
by which estates descend and property is trans-
Titted, withdraw one of the principal induce-
ments to the practice. And thus most of the

Tastances in the Bible occur in the patriarchal pe-

ae The law of Moses, by settling the relations

families and the rules of descent, and by for-
™ally establishing the Levirate law,which in some


ADOPTION. 73


sort secured a ntative posterity even to a
man who died without children, appears to have
put some check upon this custom. The allu-
sions in the New Testament are mostly to practices
of adoption which then existed among the Greeks
and Romans, and rather to the latter than to the
former; for among the more highly civilized Greeks
adoption was less frequent than among the Romans.
In the East the practice has always been come
mon, especially among the Semitic races, in
whom the love of offspring has at all times been
strongly manifested. And here it may Le ob-
served that the additional and peculiar stimulus
which the Hebrews derived from the hope of
giving birth to the Messiah, was inoperative with
respect to adoption, through which that privilege
could not be realized. ,

In early times there appears to have been no
limitation or restriction of the exercise of the
power of adoption. But as the arrangements of
society became more complicated, some restric-
tions were imposed, and certain public forms
were made necessary to legalize the act. We are
not much acquainted with the usages in this
matter, which, in different ages, were, among the
Hebrews, connected with the act of adoption,
This is partly because the practice had ceased to
be common among them by the time the sources
of information became more open. And, indeed,
the culpable facility of divorce in later times ren-
dered unnecessury those adoptions which might
have arisen, and in earlier times did arise, from
the sterility of a wife. The want of posifive in-
formation, however, is supplied, in some dezree, -
by our acquaintance with the analogous practices
of other Eastern nations.

It is scarcely necessary to say that adoption
was confined to sons. The whole Bible history
affords no example of the adoption of a female; for
the Jews certainly were not behind any Oriental
nation in the feeling expressed in the Chinese
proverb—‘ He is happiest in daughters who has
only sons’ (Mém. sur les Chinois, t. x. 149).

The first instances of adoption which occur in
Scripture are less the acts of men than of women,
who, being themselves barren, give their female
slaves to their husbands, with the view of adopt-
ing the children they may bear. Thus Sarah
gave her handmaid Hagar to Abraham; and the
son who was born, Ishmael, appears to have been
considered as her son as well as Abraham's, until
Isaac was born. In like manner Rachel, having
no children, gave her handmaid Bilhah to her
husband, who had by her Dan and Naphtali
(Gen. xxx. 5-9); on which his other wife, Leah,
although she had sons of her own, yet fearing that
she had left off bearing, claimed the right of giv-
ing her bandmaid Zilpah to Jacob, that she might
thus increase their number; and by this means
she had Gad and Asher (Gen. xxx. 9-13). In
this way the greatest possible approximation to a
natural relation was produced. The child was
the son of the husband, and, the mother being the
property of the wife, the progeny must be her
property also; and the act of more particular
appropriation seems to have been that, at the time
of birth, the handmaid brought forth her child
‘upon the knees of the adoptive mother’ (Gen.
xxx. 3). Strange as this custom may seem, it
is in accordance with the notions of representation
which we find very prevalent in analogous states of


4 ADOPTION.


society. We do not see the use of explaining awa
customs we do not like, or which do not agree wi
our own notions, by alleging that by this expression
nothing more is meant than that the son was to
be dandled and brought up upon the knees of the
adoptive mother. In this case the vicarious bear-
ing of the handmaid for the mistress was as com-
yee as possible; and the suns were regarded as
ully equal in right of heritage with those by the
legitimate wife. This privilege could not, how-
ever, be cunferred by the adoption of the wife, but
by the natural relation of such sons to the husband.
A curious fact is elicited by the peculiar cir-
cumstances in Sarali's case, which were almost
the only circumstances that could have arisen to
try the question, whether a mistress retained her
power, as such, over a female slave whom she had
thus vicariously employed, and over the progeny
of that slave, even though by her own husband.
The answer is given, rather startlingly, in the
affirmative in the words of Sarah, who, when the
birth of Isaac had wholly changed her feelings
and position, and when dhe was exasperated by
the offensive conduct of Hagar and her son, ad-
dressed her husband thus, ‘ Cast forth this bond-
woman and her sun; fur the son of this bond-
woman shall not be heir with my son, even with
Isaac’ (Gen. xxi. 10).

' A previous instance of adoption in the history
of Abraham, when as yet he had no children,
appears to be discoverable in his saying, ‘ Oue
born in my house is mine heir.’ This unquestion-
ably denotes a house-born slave, as distinguished
_ from Swe bought with money. Abraham had
several such; and the one to whom he is sup-
posed here to refer is his faithful and devoted
steward Eliezer. This, therefore, is a case in
which a slave was adopted as a son—a practice
still very common in the East. A boy is
often purchased young, adopted by his master,
brought up in bis faith, and educated as his son;
or if the owner has a daughter, he adopts him
through a marriage with that daughter, and the
family which springs from this union is counted
as descended frum him. But house-born slaves are
usually preferred, as these have never had any home
but their master’s house, are considered members
of his family, and are generally the most faithful
of his adherents. This practice of slave adoption
was very common among the Romans; and, as
such, is more than once referred to by St. Paul
(Rom. viii. 15; 1 Cor. ii. 12), the transition from
the condition of a slave to that of a son, and the
privilege of applying the tender name of ‘ Father‘
to the former ‘ Master,’ afiording a beautiful
-illustration of the change which takes place from
the bondage of the law to the freedom and privi-
leges of the Christian state.

As in most cases the adopted son was to be
considered dead to the family from which he
sprung, the separation of natural ties and con-
nections was avoided by this preference of slaves,
who were mostly foreigners or of foreign descent.
For the same reason the Chinese make their adop-
tions from children in the hospitals, who have
been abandoned by their parents (Mém. sur les
Chinois, t. vi. 325). The Tartars are the only
people we know who preter to adopt their near
relatives—nephews or cousins, or, failing them, a
Tartur of their own banner (/d¢d, t. iv. 136). The
only Scriptural example of this kind is that in


ADOPTION.


which Jacob adopted his own grandsons Ephraim
aud Manasseh to be counted as his sons. Some
have questioned whether this was really an act of
adoption : but it seems to us that there is no way in
which an act of adoption could be more clearly
expressed. Jacob says to Joseph, their father—
‘ Thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, shall be
mine: .... as Reuben and Simeon (his two
eldest sons), they shall be mine. But thy issue
which thou begettest after them shall be thine’
(Gen. xlviii. 6). The object of this remarkable
adoption was, that whereas Joseph himself could
only have one share of his father’s heritage along
with his brothers, the adoption of his two sons
enabled Jacob, through them, to bestow two por- ,
tions upon his favourite son. One remarkable
effect of this adoption was that the sons of Jacob,
and the tribes which sprung from them, thus be-
came thirteen instead of twelve; but the ultimate
exclusion of Levi from a share of territory, recti-
fied this so far as regarded the distribution of
lands in Canaan.

The adoption of Moses by Pharaoh's daughter
(Exod. ii. 1-10) is an incident rather than a
practice; but it recalls what has just been stated
respecting the adoption of outcast children by the
Chinese.

A man who had only a daughter would na-
turally wish to build up a family, to be counted
as his own, through her. We have seen that,
under such circumstances, the daughter is often
married to a freed slave, and the childrem
counted as tHuse of the woman's father, or the
husband himself is adopted as a son. An in-
stance of the former kind occurs in 1 Chron. ii.
34, sg. Sheshan, of the tribe of Jndah, gives bis
daughter to Jarha, an Egyptian slave (whom, as
the Targum premises, he no doubt liberated on
that occasion): the posterity of the marriage are
not, however, reckoned to Jarha, the husband of
the woman, but to her father, Sheshan, and as Ais
descendants they take their heritage and station
in Israel. The same chapter gives another in-
stance. Machir (grandson of Joseph) gives his
daughter in marriage to Hezron, of the tribe of
Judah, She gave birth to Segub, who was the
father of Jair. This Jair possessed twenty-three
cities in the land of Gilead, which came to him
in right of his grandmother, the daughter of
Machir; and he acquired other towns in the same
quarter, which made up his possessions to threes
score towns or villages (1 Chiron. ii. 21-245
Josh. xiii. 9; 1 Kings iv. 13). Now this Jair,
though of the tribe of Judah by his grandtuther,
is, in Num. xxxii. 41, counted as of Manasseh,
for the obvious reason which the comparisun of
these texts suygests, that, through his grand-
mother, he inierited the property, and was the
lineal represerttative of Machur, the son of Ma-
nasseh, ‘This case is of some importance from the
gronnd which it offers for the opinion of those who
account for the diflerence between the pedigree of
Christ as given by Matthew, and that in Luke,
by supposing that the former is the pedigree through
Joseph, his supposed father, and the latter through
his mother Mary. This opinion, which will be
examined in another place LG enearocy je sup-
poses that Mary was the daughter of Heli, and
that Joseph is called his son (Luke iii, 2) be»
cause he was adopted by Heli when he married
his daughter, who was an heiress, aa is proved by


ADORAIM.


the fact of her going to Bethlehem to be regis-
tered, when in the last stage of pregnancy.
The fo. lowing are among the foreign customs con-
nected with adoption which are supposed to be
alluded to in the New Testament; and in explana-
tion of these it may be remarked, that by the time
of Christ the Jews had, through various channels,
become well acquainted with the more remark-
able customs of the Greeks and Romans; and the
perfect familiarity of St. Paul, in particular, with
such customs would be probable from circum-
stances, even were it not constantly apparent in
his Epistles. In Jobn viii. 36, ‘If the Son shall
make you free, ye shall be free indeed,’ is sup-
poe by Grotius and other commentators to refer
toa custom in some of the cities of Greece, and
ehewiere, called adeApodecia, whereby the son
and heir was permitted to adopt brothers and ad-
mit them to the same rights which he himself
enjoyed, But it seems more likely that the reter-
ace was to the more familiar Roman custum,
by which the son, after his father’s death, often
made free such as were born alaves in his house
(Theophil. Antecensor, Institut. Imp. Justinian. i,
6.5). In Rom. viii. 23, viodeciay amexSexopevor,
‘anxiously waiting for the adoption,” the former
Word appears to be used in a sense different trom
that which it bears in ver. 15, and to signify the
consummazion of the act there mentioned ; in which
pont ol view it is conceived to apply to the two-
fold ceremony among the Romans. ‘The one was the
Private act, between the parties; and if the per-
00 to be adupted was not already the slave of the
adopter, this private transaction involved the pur-
chase of him from his parents, when practicable.
In this manner Caius and Lucius were purchased
from their father Agrippa before their adoption by
Augustus, The other was the public acknowledg-
ment of that act on the part of the adopter, when
the adopted person was sulemnly avowed and
declared to be his son, The peculiar force and
Propriety of such an allusion in an epistle to the
Romans must be very evident.

lh Gal. iv. 5, 6, there is a very clear allusion

to the privileze of adopted slaves to address their

T master by the endearing title of Abba, or
Father. Selden has shown that slaves were not
allowed to use this word in addressing the master
the family to which they belonged, nor the
Corsponding title of A/ama, mother, when speak-
ng to the mistress of it (De Succ. in Bona De-
funct. secund. Hebr. c. iv.).

A more minute investigation than would here
be in place, might discover other allusions to the
Custom of adoption, The ideas and usayes
Connected with the adoption of an official suc-
Cesor are considered elsewhere [INvesTiTuRE].


_ ADORAIM (DYN ; Sept. "Adwpaiu), a town
mM the south of Judah, enumerated along with
ebrun and Mareshah, as one of the cities forti-
fied by Rehoboam (2 Chron. xi. 9). Under the
hame of Adora it is mentioned in the Apocrypha
(I Mace. xiii. 20), and also often by Josephus
Antiq. viii. 10, 1; xiii. 6, 4. 15, 43 Bell. Jud.
42,6.8,4), who usually connects Adora with

aressa, as cities of the Jater Idumwa. It was
Captured by Hyrcanns at the same time with

aresa, and rebuilt by Gabinius (Joseph.
Antig, mui. 9,15 xiv. 5,3). This town does not
occur in any writer after Josephus, until the re-


ADRAMMELECH. 15


cent researches of Dr. Robinson, who discovered
it under the name of Dura, the first feeble letter
having been dropped. It is situated five miles
W. by S. from Hebron, and is a large village,
seated on the eastern slope of a cultivated hill,
with olive-groves and fields of grain all around.
There are no ruins (Robinson's Bib. Researches,


iii. 2-5).
‘ADORATION. This word is Pie Tea
of ad ‘ to,’ and os, oris, ‘the mouth,’ and literally
signifies to apply the hand tu the mouth,’ that is,
‘to kiss the hand.’ The act is described in
Scripture as one of worship. Job says :—¢ If
I had beheld the sun when it shined, or the
moon, walking in brightness; and my heart had
been secretly enticed, or my mouth had kissed
my hand; this also were an iniquity to be
punished by the judge’ (Job xxxi. 26, 27).
And. this very clearly intimates that kissing the
hand was considered an overt act of worship in
the East. So Minutius Felix (De Sacrijic. cap.
2, ad fin.) remarks, that when Cecilius observed
the statue of Serapis, ‘ Ut vudjus superstitrosus
solet, manum ori admovens, osculum labiie
pressit; according to the custom of the supere
stitious vulgar, he moved his hand to his mouth,
and kissed it with his lips.’

The same act was used asa mark of respect
im the presence of kings and persons high in office
or station. Or rather, perhaps, the hand was not
merely kissed and then withdrawn from the
mouth, but held continuously beture or upon the
mouth, to which allusion is made in such texts
as Judg. xviii. 10; Job xxi. 53 xxix. 9; xl. 45
Ps. xxxix. 9; in which ‘laying the hand upon
the mouth’ is used to describe the highest degree
of reverence and submission; as such, this pos-
ture is exhibited on the monuments of Persia
and of Egypt. In one of the sculptures at
Persepolis a king is seated on his throne, and
before him a person standing in a bent posture,
with his Yaris laid upon his mouth as he ad-


(lresses the sovereign (fig. 1). Exactly the same
attitude is observed in the sculptuies at Thebes,
where one person, among several (in various 08
tures of respect) who appear before the scribes to
be registered, has his hand placed thus submis-
sively upon his mouth (fig. 2). The particular
object of this act is said to have been to prevent
the breath from reaching the face of the superior.
But we are not to suppose that this was always
its direct purpose, seeing that many acts which
originally Vad a specific purpose, eventually be-
came merely conventional marks of respect and
homage under given circumstances.

ADRA.  [Anap.]

ADRAMMELECH (ORTIY, *Aspauévex)
is mentioned, together with Anammelech, in
2 Kings xvii. 31, as one of the idols whose


‘


96 ADRAMMELECH.


worship the inhabitants of Sepharvaim established
in Samaria, when they were transferred thither by
the king of Assyria, and whom they worshipped
by the sacrifice of their children by fire. This
constitutes the whole of our certain knowledge of
this idol. With regard to the etymology of the
aame, the two most probable modes of interpreta-
tion are those which assume, either that, as the
latter half of the word is evidently Semitic, the
former is so too, and that it means the magnificence
of the king (and this is the view which Gesenius
now favours); or, according to a suggestion first
made by Reland (in his Dissertat. Miscell. ii.
113), that the former member is Assyrian, and
that the word means the king of fire. It is to
be observed that, although it has been disputed
to what family of languages the Assyrian be-
longs, some modem scholars incline to consider
it as Medo-Persian (Gesenius, Geschichte der
Hebr. Sprache, p. 62), and that, in this case, the
position of that member of the compound which
would be dependent on the other as the genitive,
is exactly the converse of that which is necessary
in Hebrew and the other Syru-Arabian languages.
As to the figure under. which this idol was
worshipped, the Babylonian Talmud (cited at
length in Carpzov's Apparatus, p. 516) asserts
that he was adored under that of a mule ; whereas
Kimchi says it was under that of a peacock ; state-
ments upon which little reliance can be placed.
There is greater unanimity in the opinion that
the power adored under this name was one of the
heavenly bodies, in general accordance with the
astrological character of the Assyrian idolatry
(Gesenius, Jesaia, iii. 327, seq.). Selden (De
Diis Syris, i. 6) und others have identified him
with Moloch, chiefly on the ground that the
sacrifice of children by tire, and the general sig-
nification of the name, are the same in both.
According, then, to the great difference of opinion
conceming Moloch, authorities of nearly equal
weight may be adduced for the opinion that
Adrammelech represents the planet Saturn, or
the Sun: the kind of sacrifice being the chief
argument in favour of the former; the etymology
of the name being that in favour of the latter
[Morse

Selden has also maintained (De Diis Syris, ii. 9)
that Adrammelech and Anammelech are only dif-
ferent names of one and the same idol. The con-
trary, however, is asserted by most ancient autho-
rities, and by Hyde, Jurieu, Gesenius, and others,
among the modems. No argument for their
identity can be drawn from the kethid, ,in
2 Kings xvii. 31, because the singular mbox
is not found tn prose prior to the Captivity (and,
even if it were, it would be defectively written
here, of which there is only one instance in our
sen text, unless when ithas a prefix or suffix).

ides, upwards of seventy MSS. ,and several
early editions read the plural DY moe in the
text here (De Rossi, Var. Lect. ad loc.) ; and it is
also the Keri of our printed copies.—J. N.

2. ADRAMMELECH, one of the sons and
murderers of Sennacherib, king of Assyria (2
Kings xix. 27; Isa. xxxvii. 38).

ADRAMYTTIUM (ASpautrrioy), a sea-port
town in the province of Mysia in Asia Minor, op-

ite the isle of Lesbos, and an Athenian colony
Strabo, xiii. p.606; Herod. vii. 42), It ismentioned
an Scripture only (Acts xxvii. 2) from the fact


ADULLAM.


that the ship in which Paul embarked at Cesarean
as a prisoner on his way to Italy, belonged to Adra-
myttium. It was rare to find a vessel going direct
from Palestine to Italy. The usual course there-
fore was to embark in some ship bound to one of
the ports of Asia Minor, and there go on board
a vessel sailing for Italy. This was the course
taken by the centurion who had charge of Paul.
The ship of Adramyttium took them to Myra
in Lycia, and here they embarked in an
Alexandrian vessel bound for Italy. Some com-
mentators (Hammond, Grotius, Witsius, &c.)
strangely suppose that Adrametum in Africa
(Plin. v. 3; Ptol. iv. 3) was the port to which
the ship belonged. Adramyttium 1s still called
6 Adramyt.’ It is built on a hill, contains about
1000 houses, and is still a place of some com-
merce (Turner, Tour, iii. 265).

ADRIATIC SEA (A8plas, Acts xxvii. 27),
This name is now confined to the gulf lying be-
tween Italy on one side, and the coasts of Dal-
matia and Albania on the other. But in St.
Paul's time it extended to all that part of the
Mediterranean between Crete and Sicily. Thus
Ptolemy (iii. ") says that Sicily was bounded
on the east by the Adriatic, and that Crete was
bounded by the Adriatic on the west; and Strabo
(ii. p. 185; vii. p. 488) says that the Ionian gulf was
a part of what was in his time called the Adriatic
Sea. This fact is of importance, as relieving us
from the necessity of finding the island of Melita
on which Paul was shipwrecked, in the present
Adriatic gulf; and consequently removing the
chief difficulty in the way of the identitication of
that island with the present Malta. To this use
it has been skilfully applied by Dr. Falconer in
his tractate On the Voyage of St. Paul.


ADRIEL O8)TD, the flock of God; Sept.
“AdpfA), the person to whom Saul gave in
marriage his daughter Merab, who had heen ori-
ginally promised to David (1 Sam. xviii, 19).
Five sons sprung from this union, who were taken
to make up the number of Saul's descendants,
whose lives, on the principle of blood-revenge, were
required by the Gibeonites to avenge the cruelties
which Saul had exercised towards their race
(GisgonirEs]. In 2 Sam. xxi. §, the name of
Michal occurs as the mother of these sons of
Adriel: but as it is known that Merab, and not
Michal, was the wife of Adriel, and that Michal
had never any children (2 Sam, vi. 23), there
only remains the alternative of supposing cither
that Michal’s name has been substituted for
Merab’s by some ancient copyist, or that the word
which properly means bare (which Michal are
unto eran should be rendered ‘brought up or
educated (which Michal brought up for Adricl).
The last is the chvice of our public version, and
also of the Targum. The Jewish writers conclude
that Merab died early, and that Michal adopted
her sister's children, and brought them up for
Adriel (7. Bab. Sanhed. fol. 19. 2). But, as the
word i779’ will not easily take any other sense
than ‘ she bare,’ the change of names seems the
easier explanation.


ADULLAM (OP78; Sept. ’O80AAdz), an
old city (Gen. xxxvili. 1, 12, 20) in the plain
country of the tribe of Judah (Josh. xv. 35), and
one of the royal cities of the Canaanites (Josh.


El ed ee al


a Se eee oe


Se ae Ee EES UE One Fee Og Soe oe,


~


ADULLAM.


xii. 15). It was one of the towns whith Rehoboam
fortified (2 Chron. xi. 7; Micah i. 15), and is men-
tioned after the Captivity (Neh, xi. 30; 2 Macc.
12, 3°). Eusebius and Jerome state that it ex-
isted in their time as a large village, ten miles to
the east of Eleuthervpulis; but they follow, the
Sept. in confounding it’ with Eglon (}i53y),
whereas it is certain that these were different
laces, and had distinct kings in the time of
Fhe (xii. 12,15), It is evident that Adullam
was one of the cities of ‘the valley,’ or plain between
the hill conntry of Judah and the sea; and from
its place in the lists of names (especially 2 Chron.
xi. 8), it appears not to have been far from the
Philistine city of Gath. This circumstance
would suggest that the ‘cave of Adullam’ (1 Sam.
xxii. 1), to which David withdrew immediately
from Gath, was near the city of that name. But
there is no passage of Scripture which connects
the city and the cave, and it is certainly not in
a plain that one would look for a cave capable
of affording a sccure retreat to 400 men; nor
has any such cave been found in that quarter.
It is therefore far from improbable that the cave
¢f Adullam was in the mountainous wilderness
in the west of Judah towards the Dead Sea, where
fuch caves occur, and where the western names
(as Carmel) are sometimes repeated. This con-
}ectvre is favoured by the fact that the usual
haunts of David were in this quarter; whence
be moved into the land of Moab, which was quite
cvntiguous, whereas he must have crossed the
Whole Lreadth of the land, if the cave of Adullam
bad been near the city of that name. Other
Tasons occur which would take too much room
to state: but the result is, that there appears at
kngth good grounds for the local tradition which
fixes the cave on the borders of the Dead Sea,
althouzh there is no certainty with regard to
particular cave usually pointed out. The
cave sy designated is at a point to which David
Was far more likely to summon his parents, whom
he intended to take from Bethlehem into Moab,
than ta any place in the western plains. It is
atout six miles south-west of Bethfchem, in‘ the
side of a deep ravine (ary Khureitun) which
passes beluw the Frank mountain (Heropion]
onthe south. It is an immense natural cavern,
the mouth of which can be approached only on
foot along the side of the cliff. Irby and Man-
gles, who visited it without being aware that it
was the reputed cave of Adullam, state that it
‘rans in hy a long winding, narrow passage, with
small chambers or cavitics on either side. We
son came to a large chamber with natural arches
of great height; from this last there were nu-
Merons passazes, leading in all directions, occa-
tionally joined by others at right angles, and
forming a perfect Jab rinth, which our guides as-
us had never been perfectly explored, the

people being afraid of losing nla at The
Passages are generally four feet high by three feet
wide, and were all on a level with each other.
There were a few petrifactions where we were :
Hevertheless the grotto was perfectly clean, and
the air pure and good’ (Travels, pp. 310, 341). It
seems prubable that David, as a native of Beth-
Jehem, must have been well acquainted with this
remarkable spot, and had probably often availed
himself of its shelter when out with his father’s


Socks. It would therefore naturally occur to


ADULTERY. 17


him as a place of refuge when he fled from Gath;
and his purpose of forming a hand of tollowers
was much more likely to be realized here, in the
neighbourhood of his native place, than in the
westward plain, where the city of Adullam lay.
These circumstances have considerable weight,
when taken in connection with what has alread
been adduced; but the question is one which
there is no means of deciding witb certainty.

ADULTERY. In the common acceptation of
the word adultery denotes the sexual intercourse of
a married woman with any other man than her
husband, or of a married man with any other woman
than his wife. But the crime is not understood in
this extent among Eastern nations, nor was it so un-
derstood by the Jews. With them, adultery was the
act whereby any married man was exposed to the
risk of having a spurious. offspring imposed upon
him. An adulterer was, therefore, any man who
had illicit intercourse with a married or betrothed
woman; and an adulteress was a betrothed or mar-
ried woman who had intercourse with any other
man than her husband. An intercourse between
a married man and an unmarried woman was not,
as with us, deemed adultery, but fornication—a
great sin, but not, like adultery, invulving the
contingency of polluting a descent, of turning
aside an inheritance, or of imposing upon a man
a charge which did not belong to him. Adultery
was thus considered a great social wrong, against
which society protected itself by much severer
penalties than attended an unchaste act not ine
volving the same contingencies,

It will be seen that this Oriental limitation of
adultery is intimately connected with the exist-
ence of polygamy. If adultery be defined as a
breach of the marriage covenant, then, where the
contract is between one man and one woman, as
in Christian countries, the man as much as the
woman infringes the covenant, or commits adul-
tery, by every act of intercourse with any other
woman; but where polygamy is alluwed—where
the husband may marry other wives, and take
to himself concubines and slaves, the marriage
contract cannot and does not convey to the woman
a legal title that the man should belong to her
alone. If, therefore, a Jew associated with a
woman who was not his wife, his concubine, or
his slave, he was guilty of unchastity, but com-
mitted no offence which gave a wile reasun to
complain that her legal rights had been infringed.
If, however, the woman with whom he associated
was the wife of another, he was guilty of adultery
—not by infringing his own marriage covenant,
but by causing a breach of that which existed
between that woman and her husband (Michaelis,
Mosdisches Recht. art. 259; Jalun’s Archdvlogie,
th. i. b. 2, § 183). By thus excluding from the
name and punishment of adultery, the offence
which did not involve the enormous wrong of
imposing upon a man a supposititious offspring, in
a nation where the succession to landed property
went entirely by birth, so that a father could not
by his testament alienate it from any one who was
regarded as his son—the law was enabled, with
less severity than if the inferior offence had
been included, to punish the crime with death.
It is still so punished wherever the practice of
polygamy has similarly operated in limiting the
crime—not, perhaps, that the law expressly as-
sigus that punishment, but it recognises the right


“98 ADULTERY.


of the injured party to inflict it, and, in fact,
leaves it, ina great dezree, in his hands. Now
death was the punishinent of adultery before the
time of Moses; and if he had assigned a less pu-
nishment, his law would have been inoperative,
for private venzeance, sanctioned by usage, would
still have inflicted death. But by adopting it
into the law, thos» restrictions were imposed upon
its operation which necessarily arise when the calm
Inquiry of public justice is substituted for the im-
sive action of excited hands. Thus, death would
less frequently inflicted ; and that this effect
followed secms to be implied in the fact that the
whole biblical history offers no example of capital
setae for the crime. Indeed, Lightfoot goes
farther, and remarks, ‘I do not remember that I
have any-vhere, in the Jewish Pandect, met with
an example of a wife punished for adultery with
death. There is mention (7. Hieros. Sinhed. 242)
of the danghter of a certain priest burned for
committing fornication in her father’s house; but
she was not married’ (/for. Hebr. ad Matt. xix. 8).
Eventually, divorce superseded all other punish-
ment. There are indeed some grounds for thinking
that this had happened betore the time of Christ,
and we throw it out as a matter of inquiry, whe-
ther the Scribes and Pharisees, in attempting to
entrap Christ in the matter of the woman taken
in adultery, did not intend to put him between
the alternatives of either declaring for the revival
of a practice which had already becom: obsolete,
but which the law was supposed to command;
or, of giving his sanction to the apparent infrac-
- tion of the law, which the substitution of divorce
involved (John viii. 1-11), In Matt. v. 32, Christ
seems to assuine that the practice of divorce for
adultery already existed. In later times, it ccr-
tainly did; and Jews who were averse to part
with their adulterous wives, were compelled to
put them away (Maimon. in Gerushin, c. 2). In
the pussa-re just referred to, onr Lord does not ap-
pear to render divorce compulsory, even in case of
adultery; he only permits it in that case alune,
by forbidding it in every other.

In the law which assigns the punishment of
death to adultery (Lev. xx. 10), the mode in
which that punishment should be inflicted is not
specified, because it was known from custom. It
was not, however, strangulation, as the Talmud-
ists contend, bnt stoning, as we may learn
from various passages of Scripture (e. g. Ezek.
xvi. 38, 40; John viii. 5); and as, in fact, Moses
himself testifies, if we compare Exod. xxxi. 14;
xxxy. 23 with Num. xv. 35, 36. If the adulteress
was a slave, the guilty parties were both scourged
with a leathern whip (79P3), the number of
blows not exceeding forty. In this instance the
adulterer, in addition to the scourzing, was suh-
ject to the further penalty of bringiny a trespass
offering (a ram) to the door of the tabernacle, to
be offered in his behalf by the priest (Lev. xix.
20-22). Those who wish to enter into the reasons
of this distinction in favour of the slave, may con-
sult Michaelis (Mosdisches Recht. art. 261). We
only observe that the Moslem Jaw, derived from
old Arabian usage, only inflicts upon a slave, for
this and other crimes, half the punishment in-
curred by a free person.

It seems that the Roman law made the same
important distinction with the Hebrew, between
the infidelity of the husband and of the wife.


“ADULTERY.


‘

© Adultery’ was defined by the civilians to be the
violation of another man’s bed (riolatio toré
alient); so that the infidelity of the husband
could not constitute the offence. The more an-
cient laws of Rome, which were very severe
against the offence of the wife, were silent as to
that of the hushand. The offence was not. capital
until made so by Constantine, in imitation of the
Jewish law; but under Leo and Marcian the
penalty was abated to perpetual imprisonment, or
cutting off the nose; and, under Justinian, the
further mitigation was granted to the woman,
that she was only to be scourged, to lose her
dower, and to he shut up in a convent.

The punishment of cutting off the nose brings
to mind the passage in which the prophet Ezekiel
(xxiii. 25), after, in the name of the Lord, reprov-
ing Israel and Judah for, their adulteries (ze.
idolatries) with the Assyrians and Chaldeans,
threatens the punishment—‘ they shall take away
thy nose and thy ears,’ which Jerome states was
actually the punishment of adultery in these na-
tions. One or both of these mutilations, most
generally that of the nose, were also inflicted by
other nations, as the Persians and Egyptians, and
even the Romans; but we suspect that among the
former, as with the latter, it was less a judicial
punishment than a summary infliction by the
agsrieved party. It is more than once alluded. to
as such by the Roman poets: thus Martial asks,

* Quis tibi persnasit nares abscindere meecho ?”
and in Virgil (2a. vi. 496) we read— '

‘Ora, manusque ambas, populataque tempora

raptis
Anribus, ct trancas inhonesto vulnere nares.”

It would also seem that these mutilations were
more usually inflicted on the male than the
female adultercr. In Ezypt, however, cutting off
the nose was the female punishment, and the man
was beaten terribly with rods (Diod. Sic. i. 89,
20), The respect with which the conjugal union
was treated in that country in the earliest times
is manifested in the history of Ahraham (Gen.
xii, 19). 5

ADULTERY, TRIAL OF. It would ke
unjust to the spirit of the Mosaical lezislation
to suppose that the trial of the suspected wife
by the bitter water, called the Water of Jea-
lousy, was by it first produced. It is to be
regarded as an attempt to mitigate the evils of,
and to bring under decal control, an old custom
which could not be entirely abrogated. The ori-
ginal usage, which it was designed to mitivate,
was probably of the kind which we still find in
Western Africa; and a comparison of the two may
sugyest the real points of the evil which the law
of Moses was designed to rectify, and the real ad-
vantages which it was calculated to secure. The
matter deserves particular attention, inasmuch
as it relates to the only ordeal in use among the
Israclites, or sanctioned by their law. The illus.
trative details of the 77a by Ited Water, as it is
called, vary among different nations, in minute
particulars, which it would be tiresome to distin-
guish, The substantial tacts may be embodied
in one statement :—

The ordeal is, in some tribes, confined to the
case of adultery, but in others it is used in all cases.
Differences, rather than resemblances, must indi-
cate the particular points in which the Mosaical
law, while retaining the form, abandoned the subs


ADULTERY.


stance and obviated the evils of this institution.
The diflerences are, in fact, all-important. In
Africa the drink is poisonous, and calculated to pro-
duce theeffectswhichthe vath imprecates; whercas
the ‘water of jealousy,’ however unpleasant, was
red in a prescribed manner, with ingredients

toall tobe perfectly innocuous. It could not
there‘ore injure the innocent; and its action upon
the yuilty must have resulted from the conscious-
ness of haying committed a horrible perjury, which
crime, when the oath was so solemnly confirmed
by the draught, and attended by such awful im-
Precations, was believed to be visitable with im-
mediate death from heaven. It cannot be too
strongly inculcated, that in the African examples
the effect is not ascribed to the drink, but to a
supematural visitation upon a perjury which the
confirmation of the oath-drink renders so awful.
This name of ‘outh-drink’ is commonly applied
toit on the Gold Coast. And it was, doubtless,
to strengthen such an impression that this awful
drink, so much dreaded in Africa, was with the
Jews exclusively appropriated to the only ordeal
tral among them. On the Gould Coast the oath-
drink (not, of course, poisonous) is used as a
confirmation of all oaths, net only oaths of purga-
ton, but of accusation, or even of obligation. In
all caxs it is accompanied with an imprecation
tiut the Fetish may destroy them if they speak
unruly, or do not perform the terms of their
ohligation; and it is firmly believed that no one
who is perjmed under this form of oath will live
an hour (Villault; Bosman). Doubtless the im-
Pression with respect to this more ordinary oath-
drink is derived from observation of the eflects
tending the drink used in the actual ordeal ;
it is our object to show that the popular

and general opinion regards such an cathe as of
® solemn a nature that perjury is sure to bring
down immediate punishment. ‘The red-water as
an crdeal is confined to crimes of the worst class.
These are murder, adultery, witchcraft. Perhaps
his arises less from choice than from the fact that
Such crimes are not only the highest, but are the
Teast capable of that direct proof for which the
ordeal is intended as a substitute. A party is
accused: if he denies the crime, he is required
to drink the red water, and, on refusing, is deemed.
guilty of the offence. The trial is so much
drealed that innocent persons often confess them-
elves guilty, in order to avoid it. And yet,
the immediate eflect is supposed to result less
from the water itself than from the terrible oath


with which it is drunk; for there are instances ’


which show that the draught is the seal and sunc-
ton of the most sulemn oath which barbarous ima-
ginations have been able to devise; and in kind it
is the same—if we may be forgiven the familiar
Ulustration—which is heard but too often in our
own land, ‘ May this drink be my poison, if—." So
the person who drinks the red water invokes the
Fetish to destroy him if he is really guilty
of the offence with which he is charged. The
drink is made by an infusion in water of pieces
of a certain tree, or of herbs. It is highly
Polsonous in itself; and, if rightly prepared, the
only chance of escape is the rejection of it by the
stomach, in which case the party is deemed inno-
cent; as he also Js if, being retained, it has no
tnsible effect, which can only be the case when
the priests (s0 to cal) them), who have the ma-


\


ADULTERY. io


nagement of the matter, are influenced by privete
considerations, or by reference to the probabilities
of the case, to prepare the draught with a view to
acquittal. The imprecations upon the accused if
he be guilty, are repeated in an awful manner by
the priests, and the effect is watched very keenly.
Tf the party seems affected by the draught, like
one intoxicated, and begins to foam at the mouth,
he is considered undoubtedly guilty, and is slain
on the spot; or else he is left to the operation of
the poisonous draught, which causes the belly to
swell and burst, and occasions death (Barhot,
% 126; Bosman, p. 148; Artus, in De Bry, vi. 62;

ilault, p. 191; Corry's Windward Coast, p. 113
Church Missionary Paper, No. 17; Davis's
Journal, p. 24).

The resemblances and the differences between
this and the trial by bitter water, as described in
Num. vy. 11-31, will be apparent on comparison.
The object, namely, to discover a crime incapable
of being proved by evidence, is the same; the oath,
and a dranght as its sanction, are essentially the
same ; and similar also are the effects upon the
guilty. If, therefore, we suppose the pre-existing
custom to have been analogous to that which has
been described, similar practices may be produced
from other quarters. Hesiod, in his 7eogonia, re-
ports that when a falsehood had been told by any
of the gods, Jupiter was wont to send Iris to bring
some water out of the river Styx in a golden
vessel ; upon this an oath was taken, and if the god
swore falsely, he remained for a whole year without
life or motion. There was an ancient temple
in Sicily, in which were two very deep basins, -
called Delli, always full of hot and sulplurous
water, but never running over. Here the more
solemn oaths were taken; and perjuries were im-
mediately punished most severely (Diod. Sic. xi.
67). This is also mentioned by Aristotle, Silius
Italicus, Virgil, and Macrobius; and from the
first it would seem that the oath was written upon
a ticket and cast into the water. The ticket
floated if the oath was true, and sunk if it was
false. In the Jatter case the punishment which
followed was considered as an act of Divine ven-
geance.

The result of these views and illustrations will
be, that the trial for suspected adultery by the bit- °
ter water amounted to this—that a woman sus-
pected of adultery by her husband was allowed to
repel the charge by a public oath of purgation,
which oath was designedly made so solemn in it-
self, and was attended by such awful circuin-
stances, that it was in the highest degree unlikely
that it wonld be dared by any woman not sup-
ported by the conscionsness of innocence. And
the fuct that no instance of the actual appli-
cation of the ordeal occurs in Scripture, affords
some countenance to the assertion of the Jewish
writers—that the trial was s0 much dreaded hy
the women, that those who were really guilty ge-
Nerally avoided it by confession; and that thus
the trial itself carly fell into disuse, And if, as
we have supposed, this mode of trial was only
tolerated by Moses, the ullimate neglect of it
must have been desired and intended by him. In
later times, indeed, it was disputed in the Jewish
schools, whether the husband was bound to proses
cute his wife to this extremity, or whether it was
not lawful for him to connive at and pardon her
act, if he were so inclined. There were some who


80 ADUMMIM.


held that he was bound by his duty to beatae
while others maintained that it was left to his
pleasure ce Hievos. tit. Sotah, fol. 16, 2).

From the same source we learn that this form
of trial was finally abrogated about forty years
before the destruction of Jerusalem, The reason
assigned is, that the then themselves were at that
time generally adulterous; and that God would
not fulfil the imprecations of the ordeal oath upon
the wife while the husband was guilty of the
same crime (John viii. 1-8).

AvbuLreEry, in the symbolical language of the
Old Testament, means idolatry and apostacy from
the worship of the true God (Jer. iii. 8, 9; Ezek.
xvi. 32; xxiii. 37; also Rev. ii. 22). Hence an
Adulteress meant an apostate church or city, par-
ticularly ‘the daughter of Jerusalem,’ or the
Jewish church and people (Isa. i. 21; Jer. iii. 6,
8,9; Ezek. xvi. 22; xxiii. 7). This figure resulted
from the primary one, which describes the con-
nection between God and his separated people as
a marriage between him and them. By an appli-
cation of the same figure, ¢ a adulterous genera-
tion’ (Matt. xii. 39; 3 xvi, 45 Mark viii. 38)
means a faithless and impious generation.


ADUMMIM (DYDIN; Sept. "Adauuly; va-
rious readings are "Adon ply PAdoupl, and *Edw-
plu), a place ' which is only twice named in Scrip-
ture. Once (Josh. xv. 7), where, from the context,
it seems to indicate the border between Judah and
Benjamin, and that it was an ascending road
(DYDOIN MPYID) between Gilgal (and also Jeri-
cho) and Jerusalem. The second notice (Josh.
xviii. 17) adds no further infurmation, but repeats
§the ascent to Adummim.” Most commentators take
the name to mean the place of blood (from the Heb.
1), and follow Jerome, who finds the place in
the danzerous or mountainous part of the road
between Jerusalem and Jericho, and supposes that
it was so called from the frequent eflusion of
blood by the robbers, by whom it was much infested.
In his time it was called corruptly Bali domin ;
in Greek, “Avafa; in Latin, Ascensus rufforum,
sive robentium. These are curious interpretations
of the original word, which is most likely from
DIN, and merely denotes the redness of the soil
or rock. It does not appear that any traveiler
mentions the geological aspect of the spot, and
therefore this must Le regarded only as a probable
conjecture. However, as a difficult pass in a de-
solate rucky rezion, between important cities, the

art of the road indicated by Jerome, and all after
lia was as likely to be infested by robbers in
earlier times as in those of Jerome and at the pre-
sentday. Indeed, the character of the road was so


notorious, that Christ lays the scene of the parable .


of the good Samaritan (Luke x.) upon it; and Je-
rome informs us that Adummim or ‘Adommim was
believed to be the place where the traveller (taken
as a real person) ‘ fell among thieves.” He adds
that a furt and garrison was maintained here for
the safezuard of travellers (Jerome, in Loc. Hed.
Appvomin, et in Epit. esi The travellers
of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries noticed
the ruins of a castle, and supposed it the same as
that mentioned by Jerome (Zuallart. iv. 30}; but
the jadicious Nau ( Voyage Nouveau de la Terre-
Sainte, p. 319) perceived that this castle belonged
to the time of the Crusades. Not far from this
spot was a khan, called the ‘ Samaritan’s khan’


ETHIOPIA.


(le Khdn du Samaritain), in the belief that it
was the ‘inn' to which the Samaritan brought the
wounded traveller. The travellers of the present
century mention the spot and neighbourhood
nearly in the same terms as those of older date;
and describe the ruins as those of ‘a convent
and a khan’ (Hardy, 193). They all represent
the road as still infested by robbers, from whom
some of them (as Sir F. Henniker) have not
escaped without danger. The place thus indi-
cated is about eight miles from Jerusalem, and
four from Jericho.

ADVOCATE (MapdxAnros). one who pleads the
cause of another ; also one who exhorts, detends,
comforts, prays for another. It is an appellation
given to the Holy Spirit by Christ (Jubn xiv. 16;
xv. 26; xvi. 7), and to Christ himself by an
apostle (1 John ii. 1; see also Rom. viii. 31;
Heb. vii. 25).

In the forensic sense, advocates or pleaders were
not known to the Jews until they came under the
dominion of the Romans, and were obliged to
transact their law affairs atter the Roman manner.
Being then little conversant with the Roman
Jaws, and with the forms of the jurists, it was ne-
cessary for them, in pleading a cause befure the
Roman magistrates, to obtain the assistance of
a Roman lawyer or advocate, who was well versed
in the Greek and Latin laneuages (Otti Nyicil.
Crim. p. 325). In all the Roman provinces such
men were found, who devoted their time and labour
to the pleading of causes and the transacting of
other legal business in the provincial courts (Lam-
prid. Vit. Alex. Sev. c. 44). It also appears (Cic.
pro Celio, c. 30) that many Roman youths who
had devoted themselves to forcnsic business used
to repair to the provinces with the consuls and
prators, in order, by managing the causes of the
provincials, to fit themselves for more important
ones at Rome. Such an advocate was Tertullus,
whom the Jews employed to accuse Paul before
Felix (Acts xxiv. 1); for although ‘Pytwp, the
term applied to him, signities primarily an orator
or speaker, yet it also denotes a pleader or advo-
cate (Kuinoel, Comment. and Bloomticld, Recens.
Synopt. ad Act. xxiv. 2) [Acccser}.

ADYTUM, that which is inaccessible or im-

etrable ; and hence considered us descriptive
of the holy” of holies in the temple of Jerusalem,
and of the innermost chambers, or penetralia, of
other edifices accounted sacred, and of the secret
places to which the priests only were admitted,
It is used metaphorically by ecclesiastical writers,
and employed to signify the heart and conscience
of a man, and sometimes the deep, spiritual
meaning of the Divine word.—H. S.

fEGYPT. [Eoyrpr.

4ELIA CAPITOLINA. [Jerusa.em.]


JENON (Aivdy, from J}, fountain; Buxt.
Lex. Ch. Rab. Talm. 1601), the name of a place
near Salem, where John baptized (John i iii, 23) 5
the reason given, ‘ because there was much water
there,’ would suggest that he baptized at the
springs from lich the place took its name. On
the situation of AEnon nothing certain has been
determined, although Eusebius places it eight
Roman miles south of Sexthopiis (Bethshan),
and fifty-three north-east of Jesusalem.

/ERA. JHRONOLOGY. |

ASTHIOPIA. Bosch]


AFFINITY.


AFFINITY is relationship by marriage, as
distinguished from consanguinity, which is rela-
tionship by blood. Marriages between persons
thus related, in various degrees, which previous
usage, in diflerent conditions of society, had al-
lowed, were forbidden by the law of Moses. These
degrees are enumerated in Lev. xviii. 7, sg. The
examples. before the law are those of Cain and
Abel, who, as the necessity of the case required,
married their own sisters. Abraham married
Sarah, the daughter of his father by another wife :
and Jacob married the two sisters Leah and
Rachel. In the first instance, and even in the
second, there was an obvious consanguinity, and
coly the last offered a previous relationship of
alhnity merely. So also, in the prohibition of the

W, a consanguinity can be traced in what are
usually set down as degrees of affinity merely.
The dezrees of real affinity interdicted are, that a
man shall not (not a woman in the correspond-
inz relations) marry—I. his father’s widuw (not
his own mother); 2. the daughter of his father's
wife by another husband ; 3. the widow of his

l uncle; 4. nor his brother's widow if he

left children by her; but, if not, he was
bound to marry her to raise up children to his
deceased brother [Levirate Law]. The other
rettrictions are connected with the condition of
Polygamy, and they prohibit a man from having
—l. a mother and her daughter for wives at
the same time; 2. or two sisters for wives at
same time. These prohibitions, although
founded in Oriental notions, adapted to a parti-
cwar condition of society, and connectel with
the peculiarities of the Levitical marriage Jaw,
ve been imported wholesale into our canon law.
The fitness of this is doubted by many: but as,
apart from any moral questions, the prohibited
marriazes are such as few would, in the present
cndition of European society, desire to contract,
and such as would be deemed repugnant to good
taste and correct: manners, there is little real
matter of regret in this adoption of the Levitical
law. Indeed, the objections tv this adoptiun have
Tested chiefly upon one point; and that happens
tohea puint in which the law itself happens to
have heen egregiously misunderstood. This is in
the injunction which. under permitted polygamy,
forulea man to have two sisters at once; an in-
nection which has been construed, under the
Ciristian law, which allows but one wife, to apply
equally to the case of a man marrying the sister
ofa deceased wife. The law itself, however, is so
plain, that it is difficult to conceive how its true
ject—concerning which nearly all commentators
are agreed—could have been thus interpreted. It
4 tendered in our version, ¢ Neither shalt thou
eawile to her sister, to vex her, to uncover
ber nakedness, beside the other in her lifetime.’
Clear as thia seems, it is still clearer if, with
Geenius and others, we take the word NY,
Fenlered to vez, to mean to rival, as in the
Sept. Arabic, and Vulgate. The Targum of
Jouathan, the Mishna, and the celebrated Jewish
commentators Jarchi and Ben Gerson, are satisfied

t feo sisters at once are intended ; and there
veers an obvious design to prevent the occurrence
of such unseemly jealousies and contentions be-

tween sister-wives as enbittered the life of Jacob
—the father of the twelve tribes. The more
Tecondite sense as been extracted, with. rather


AGABUS. 81


ungentle violence to the principles of Hebrew
construction, by making ‘ vex her’ the antece-
dent of ‘in her lifetime,’ insteail of ‘ take her
sister to her, in her lifetime.’ Under this view
it is explained, that the married sister should
not be ‘ vexed’ in her lifetime by the prospect
that her sister might succeed her. It may be
safely said that such an idea would never
have occurred in the East, where unmarried
sisters are far more rarely than in Europe brought
into such acquaintance with the husband of the
married sister as to give occasion for such § vex-
ation’ or ‘rivalry’ as this. Yet, this view of
the matter, which is completely exploded among
sound biblical critics, has received the sanction of
several Christian Councils (Concil. Illiber. can.
Gl; Aurat. can. 17; Auxer. can. 30); and is
perhaps not calculated to do much harm, ex-
cept under peculiar circumstances, and except
as it may prove a snare to some sincere but
weak consciences. It may be remarked, that in
those codes of law which most resemble that of
Moses on the general subject, no prohibition of
the marriage of two sisters tm succession can be
found.

AFFIRMATIVES. Among the Jews the for-
mula of assent or affirmation was M37 12,
ov elxas, thou hast said, or, thou hast rightly
said. It is stated by Aryda and others that this
is the prevailing mode in which a person expresses
his assent, at this day, in Lebanon, especially
when he does not wish to assert anything in ex-
press terms. This explains the answer of our
Saviour to the high-priest Caiaphas (Matt. xxvi.
6£), when he was asked whether he was the Christ,
the son of God, and replied ob efmas (see alsu
Matt. xxvi. 25). Instances occur in the Talmud :
thus, ‘A certain man was asked, “Is Rabbi dead +”
He answered, “ Ye have said:” on which they
rent their clothes’—taking it for granted from
this answer that it was so (7. Micros. Kilaiin,
xxxii. 2). All readers even of translations are fa-
miliar with a frequent elegancy of the Scriptures, or
rather of the Hebrew language, in using an affirm-
ative and negative together, by which the sense is
rendered more emphatic : sometimes the negative
first, as Ps. exviii. 17, © I shall not die, but live,’
&c.; sometimes the nezative first, as Isa. xxxviii. 1,
©Thou'shalt die, and not live.” In John i. 20,
there is a remarkable instance of empliasis pro-
duced by a negative being placed between two
aflirmatives—xal dpodrdynce, kal obx hpyfcare,
nal dpordynoev— And he confessed, and denied
not, but confessed, I am not the Christ.’

AFRICA. This ‘ quarter of the world’ is not
mentioned as such by any general name in Scrip-
ture, although some of its regions are indicated.
It is thought by some, however, that Africa, or as
much of it as was then known, is denoted by ‘ the
land of Ham’ in several of the Psalms. But we
are inclined to think that the context rather re-
stricts this designation to Egypt. Whether Afriea
was really ‘the land of Ham, that is, was peopled
by the descendants of Ham, is quite another
question {Hans}.

AGABUS (“AyaBos; either from the Hebrew
23M, @ locust, or 33, to love), the name of
‘a prophet,’ supposed to have been one of the
eon disciples of Christ. He, with others,
came from Judea to Antioch, while Paul and

a


62 AGAG.
Barnabas (a-p. 43) were there, and announced en
a hing famine, which actually occurred the


following year. Some writers suppose that the
famine was general; but most modern commen-
tators unite in understanding that the large terms
of the original, “Oanv Thy oixovnevny, apply not
to the whole world, nor even to the whole Raman
einpire, but, as in Luke ii. 1, to Judea only.
Statements respecting four famines, which oc-
curred in the reign of Clandius, are produced by
the commentators who support this view; and as
all the countries put torener would not make up
a tenth part of even the Roman empire, they
think it plain that the words must be understood
toapply to that famine which, in the fourth year
of Claudius, overspread Palestine. The poor
Jews, in general, were then relieved by the Queen
of Adiabene, who sent to purchase corn in Egypt
for them (Joseph. Antig. xx. 2, 6); and for the
relief of the Christians in that country contri-
butions were raised by the brethren at Antioch,
and conveyed to Jerusalem by Paul and Bar-
nabas (Acts xi. reg Many years after, this
same Agabus met Paul at Casarea, and warned
him of the sufierings which awaited lim if he
prosecuted his journey to Jerusalem.


AGAG (328; Sept. "Aydy), the name of
two kings of the Amalekites, and perhaps a
common name of all their kings, like Pharaoh
in Egypt (comp. Num. xxiv. 7; 1 Sam. xv. 8, 9,
20, 32). The first of these passages would imply
that the king of the Amalekites was, then at least,
a greater monarch, and his people a greater
people, than is commonly imagined [Asa.E-
xires]. The latter references are to that king
of the Amalekites who was spared by Saul, con-
trary to the solemn vow of devotement to de-
struction, whereby the nation, as such, had of old
precluded itself from giving any quarter to that
people (Exod. xvii. 11; Num. xiv. 45). Hence,
when Samuel arrived in the camp of Saul, he
ordered Agag tv be brought forth. He came
‘ pleasantly,’ deeming secure the life which the
king had spared. But the prophet ordered him
to be cut in pieces; and the expression which he
employed—* As thy sword hath made women
childless, so shall thy mother be childless among
women’—indicates that, apart from the obliga-
tions of the vow, some such example of retributive
justice was intended, as had been exercised in the
case of Adonibezek ; or, in other words, that Aga
had made himself infamous by the same treat-
ment of some prisoners of distinction (probably
Israelites) as he now received from Samuel. The
unusual mode in which his death was inflicted
strongly supports this conclusion.

AGAGITE, used as a Gentile name for Ama-
lekite in Est. iii. 1, 105 viii. 3, 5.

AGAPE, Acar (dydwn, &ydra:), the Greek
term for love, used by ecclesiastical writers (most
frequently m the plural) to signify the social
meal of the primitive Christians, which generally
accompanied the Eucharist. Much learned re-
search has been spent in tracing the origin of this
custom; but though considerable obscurity may
rest cn the details, the general historical connec-
tion is tolerably obvious. It is true that the
&ayoi and éraipfau, and other similar institutions
of Greece and Rome, presented some points of re-

. semblance which facilitated both the adoption and


AGAPE.


the abuse of the Agaps by the Gentile converts of
Christianity; but we cannot consider them as the
direct models of the latter. If we reflect on the
profound impression which the transactions of
‘the night on which the Lord was betrayed’ (1
Cor. xi. 23) must have made on the minds of
the apostles, nothing can be conceived more pa~-
tural, or in closer accordance with the genius of
the new dispensation, than a wish to perpetuate
the commemoration of his death in connection
with their social meal (Neander, Leben Jesu,
p- 643; History of the Planting, &c. of the Chris-
tian Church, vol. i. 27, Edinb. 1842). The pri-
mary celebration of the Eucharist had impressed
a sacredness on the previous repast (comp. éo@:-
dvtwy abtaey, Matt. xxvi. 26; Mark xiv. 22, with
pera 7d dernvjoa, Luke xxii. 20; 1 Cor. xi. 25);
and when to this consideration we add the ardent
faith and love of the new converts on the one hand,
and the loss of property with the disruption of old
connections and attachments on the other, which
must have heightened the feeling of brotherhood, we
need not look further toaccount for the institution of
the Agape, at oncea symbol of Christian love and
a striking exemplitication of its benevolent energy.
However soon its purity was soiled, at first it was
not undeserving of the eulogy pronounced by the
great orator of the church—%os KdAAtorov wal
xpnowdraroy’ xal yap aydwns indbeois Fv, wad
mevias mapauvia, Kal wAotTou cwppontcpes, Kas
tamewodpocivys biSacKaAla. ‘A custom most
beautiful and most beneficial; for it was a sup-
porter of love, a solace of poverty, a moderator of
wealth, and a discipline of humility!

Thus the common meal and the Eucharist
formed together one whole, and were conjointly
denominated Setmvoy rod Kuplov, Seirvoy xupiaxdy,
and dydryn. They were also signitied (according
to Mosheim, Neander, and other eminent critics)
by the phrases xAdyres &proy (Acts ii. 46), eAdors
Tov &prov (Acts ii, 42), eAdoa: &proy (Acts xx.
7). We find the term dydra: thus applied once,
at least, in the New Testament (Jude 12),
© These are spots in your feasts of charity * (ev tats
dydras tuav). The reading in 2 Pet. it. 13, is
of doubtfnl authority : ‘Spots and blemishes, living
luxuriously in their Agape’ (eytpuparres ev rats
dydraus aitéy); but the common reading ie, éy
reais axdras attay, ‘in their own deccivings.’
The phrase dydxny roteiy was carly employed in
the sense of celebrating the Eucharist; thus in
the epistle of Iynatius to the church at Smyrna
(exxanoia ty otoy ev Spvpyn), § vill. ode egy
dorly xwpls rod emiaxdmov, ofte Barrie, otre
dydrnv woeiv. In § vii. dyardy appears to refer
more especially to the Agapm.

By ecclesiastical writers several synonymes are
used for the Agapa, such as cupduia (Balsamon,
ad Can. xxvii. Concil. Laodicen.); xowal tpame-
(a, ebwxia, Kowal éoridcers, xowd cuundoia
(Chrysostom); Serva xowd (CEcumenius) ; ove-
oitle Kal ovpndoia (Zonaras).

Though the Agapx usually preceded the Fu-
charist, yet they are not alluded to in Justin
Martyr's description of the latter (Apol. i. § 65,
67); while Tertullian, on the contrary, in his ac-
count of the Agapw, makes no distinct mention of
the Eucharist. ‘ The nature of our Cena,’ he says,
‘may be gathered from its name, which is the
Greek term for love (dilectio). However much it
may cost us, it is real gain to incur such expense


aePretrr ee


>]


ay hl hae FAR e2 seeks


RR QR Bez wl


ra


AuWsaAaBPraguy 42 ABB WAGE wer. ee we


AGAPE,


in the cause of piety : for we aid the poor by this
refreshment; we do not sit down to it till we
have first tasted of prayer to God (non prius dis-
cumbitur, quam oratio ad Deum pregustetur) ;
we eat to satisfy our hunger; we drink no more
than befits the temperate; we feast as those who
tecullect that they are to spend the night in de-
Yotion; we converse as those who know that the
Lori is an ear-witness. After water for washing
bands, and lights have been brought in, every
one is required to sing something to the praise
of God, either from the Scriptures or from his own
thoughts; by this means, if any one has indulged
in excess, he is detected. The feast is closed with
prayer.’ Contributions or oblations of provisions
and money were made on these occasions, and the
surplus was placed in the hands of the presiding
elder (3 xpoeorss—compare 1 Tim. vy. 17, of
"pocoteres mpeaBurepo.), by whom it was ap-
plied to the relief of orphans and widows, the sick
ant destitute, prisoners and strangers (Justin.
Apol. i. 67).

Allusions to the xupiaxdy Betrvov are to be met
with in heathen writers. Thus Pliny, in his cele-
brated epistle to the emperor Trajan, after de-
scribing the meeting of the Christians for worship,
tepresents them as assembling again ut a later
hour, ‘ad capiendum cibum, promiscuum tamen
einnozium.’ By the phrase ‘cibum promiscuugn’
(Augustine remarks) we are not to understand
merely tood partaken in common with others, but
common fool, such as is usually eaten; the term
mrozium also intimates that it was perfectly.
wiclesome and lawful, not consisting, for ex-
ample, of human flesh (for, among other odious im-
patations, that of cannibalism had been cast upon
the Christians; which, to prejudiced minds, might
derive some apparent support from a misinterpre-
fauon of our Lord’s languaye in John vi. 53,‘ Un-
less ve eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son
of nian *), nor of herbs prepares with incantations
and mayical rites. Lucian also, in his account
of the pLilosopher Peregrinus, tells us that when
unyisoned on the charze of being a Christian, he
Was visited by his brethren in the faith, who
bousht with them Sefmva mouxtAa, which is gene-
ily understood to mean the provisions which
Were reserved for the alisent members of the
church at the celebration of the Lord's Supper.

er remarks, on this expression, ‘Agapas,
ofcrente unoguogue aliquid, quod una conswne-
rent; hine moira; non @ luct.’

From the passages in the Epistles of Jude and
Peter, already quoted, and more particularly

the language of Paul in 1 Cor. xi., it ap-
pears that at a very early period the Agapa were
perverted from their original design: the rich
frequently practised a selfish indulgence, to the
deslect of their pourer brethren: xagros 7d {Bioy
heirvoy xpodauBdver (1 Cor. xi. 21); ie. the rich
fastel on the provisions they brought, without
Waiting for the poorer members, or granting them
‘portion of their abundance. They appear to
have imitated the Grecian mode of entertainment
called deixvov dad axvpidos (see Xenophon’s Me-
Piste ike nan Neander’s History of ae
ng 0, istian Church, vol. i. ish
tmma.) p°299), hy (Eng
ae oe these and similar irregularities,
y te to elude the notice of their
Penecutors, the Christians, about the middle of


AGAPE. 8,


the second century, frequently celebrated the Enu-
charist by itself and before daybreak (antelucanie
certibus) (Tertullian, De Cor. Militis, § 3). From
Pliny's Epistle it also appears that the Agape
were suspected by the Roman authorities of be-
longing to the class of Hetwriw (éra:pfa:), unions
or secret societies, which were often employed for
political purposes, and as such denounced by the
imperial edicts; for he says (referring to the
‘cibum promiscuum,’ &c.) ‘quod tpsum facere
desiisse post edictum meum, quo secundum man-
ae tua Hetarrias esse vetueram’ (Plin. Ep. 96,
al. 97

At 2 still later period the Agape were subjected
to strict regulation by various councils. Thus
by the 28th canon of the Council of Laodicea it
was forbidden to hold them in churches: 67: od
Bet ev rots xupiaxois 4) éy rats exxAnolas ras
Acyouevas aydwas mov, nal ey TE olxp rod
Geo eabiew nal dxovBrra (accubitus) orpwryvery.
At the Council of Carthage (a.p. 397) it was
ordered (Can. 29) that none should partake of the
Eucharist unless they had previously abstained
from food: ‘ Ut sacramenta altaris nonnisi a
J sinis hominibus celebrentur ;* but it is added,
‘ excepto uno die anniversario, quo cana domint
celebratur.’ This exception favours the suppo-
sition that the Ag: were originally held in
close imitation of the Last Supper, t.e. before,
instead of after, the Eucharist. ‘The same prohi-
bition was repeated in the sixth, seventh, and
ninth centuries, at the Council of Orleans (Can.
12), a.v. 533; in the Trullanian Council at Con-
stantinople, a.p. 692; and in the council held at
Aix-la-Chapelle, a.v. 816. Yet these regulations
were not intended to set aside the Agape alto-
gether. In the Council of Gangra in Paphla-
gonia (about a.p. 369) a curse was denounced
(avdGeua %orw) on whoever despised the partakers
of the Agape or refused to join in them. When
Christianity was introduced-among the Anglo-
Saxons by Austin (a.p. 596), Gregory the Great
advised the celebration of the Agapx, in booths
formed of the branches of trees, at the consecration
of churches.

Besides the Eucharistic Agape, three other
kinds are mentioned by ecclesiastical writers:
1. Agape natalitiz, held in commemoration of
the martyrs (Theodoiet, Evang. Verit. viii. pp. 923-
924, edit. Schulz); 2. <dgape connubiales, or mar-
riage-feasts (Greg. Naz. Epist. i. 14); 3. Agape
Junerales, funeral feasts (Greg. Naz. Carm. X.),
probably similar tp the rep{Secrvoy or vexpdderx-
voy of the Grecks.

In modem times social meetings bearing a
resemblance to the Agapz, and, in allusion
to them, termed Love-feasts, have been regularly
held by the Church of the United Brethren, or
Moravians, and the Wesleyan Methodists; also
in Scotland, by the followers of Mr.
Sandeman.

(The following works may be consulted: Hal-
Jet's Notes and Discourses, vol. iii. disc. 6, 1736 ;
Auguste, Handbuch der Christlichen Archaologie,
Leipz. 1836-1837 ; Gieseler, Lehrbuch der Kir-
chengeschichte, Bonn, 1831-1840 (this work has
been translated in America, but is not yet com-
pleted in the original); Neander, Allgemeine
Geschichte, &c., Hamburg, 1825-1840; Drescher,
De Veterum Christianorum <Agapis, Giessa,
1824; Bruns, Canones dpostolorum nee

a


4 AGATE.


iv.-vii., Berolini, 1839; Suiceri Thesaurus,
e.0v. &ydan, xadois.)—J. E. R.


AGATE (13 ; Sept. axdrns; Vulg. achates),
a precious or rather ornamental stone, which was
one of those in the pectoral of the high-priest
(Exod. xxviii. 19; xxxix. 12). The word agate, in-
deed, occurs also in Isa. liv. 12, and Ezek. xxvii.
6, in our translation ; but in the original the word
in these texts is altogether different, being T3733

Kapkop]. It seems not to have been questioned

at some stone of the agate kind is intended.
This stone is popularly known in this country
under the name of Scotch pebble. Theophrastus
describes the agate as ‘an elegant stone, which
took its name from the river Achates (now the
Drillo in the Val di Noto) in Sicily, and was
sold at a great price’ (xadds kal Al@os nal 6
*Axdrns 6 amd tot JAydrov morapov Tob ev
ZiceAlg wal wwAcirar rintos, 58). This, no doubt,
means that the stune was first found by the
Greeks in the Achates. But it must have been
known long before in the East ; and, in fact, there
are few countries in which agates of some quality
or other are not produced. The finest are those of
India; they are plentiful, and sometimes fine, in
Italy, Spain, and Germany; but those found in
this country are seldum good.

We have no evidence that agates were found in
Palestine. Those used in the desert were doubt-
less brought from Ezypt. Pliny says that those
found in the neighbourhood of Thebes were usually
sed, veined with white. He adds that these, as
well as most other agates, were deemed to be
effectual against scorpions; and gives some curious
accounts of the pictorial delineations which the
variegations of agates occasiunally assumed. Many
such instances are produced by later authors.
Agate is one of the numerous modifications of
form under which silica presents itself, almost in
a state of purity, forming 98 per cent. of the
entire mineral. The siliceous particles are not so
arranged as to produce the transparency of rock
crystal, but a semi-pellucid, sometimes almost
opaque substance, with a resinous or waxy fiac-
ture; and the various shades of colour arise
from minute quantities of iron. The same stone
sometimes contains parts of different degrees of
translucency, and of various shades of colour; and
the ‘endless combinations of these produce the
beautiful and singular internal forms, from which,
together with the high polish they are capable of
receiving, agates acquire their value as precious
stones. Agates are usually found in detached
rounded nodules in that variety of the trap rocks
called amygdaloid or mandelstein, and occasion-
ally in other rocks. Some of the most marvellous
specimens on record were ly merely fancied,
and possibly some were work of art, as it is
known that agates may be artificially stained.
From Pliny we lear that in his time agates were
Jess valued than they had been in more ancient
times (Hist. Nat. xxxvii. 10). The varieties of
the agate are numerous, and are now, as in the
time of Pliny, arranged according to the colour
of their ground. The Scripture text shows the
early use of this stone for engraving; and several
antique agates, engraved with exquisite beauty,
are still preserved in the cabinets of the curious.

AGE. |[Cirononoay; Erernity; Gene-

Ration; Lonoxvity.]


AGE.


AGE, OLD. The strong desire of a protracted
life, and the marked respect with which aged per-
sons were treated among the Jews, are very often
indicated in the Scriptures. The most striking
instance which Job can give of the respect in
which he was once held, is that even old men stood
up as he passed them in the streets (Job xxix. 8),
the force of which is illustrated by the injunction
in the law, ‘ Before the hoary head thou shalt stand
up, and shalt reverence the aged’ (Lev. xix. 30).
Similar injunctions are repeated in the Apocrypha,
sv as to show the deportment expected fiom young
men towards their seniors in company. Thus, in
describing a feast, the author of Ecclesiasticus
(xxxii. 3, 7) says, ‘Speak thou that art the elder,
for it becometh thee. Speak, young man, if there
be need of thee, and yet scarcely, when thou art
twice asked.’

The attainment of old age is constantly pro-
mised or described as a blessing (Gen. xv. 15; Job
vy. 26), and communities are represented as highly
favoured in which old people abound (Isa. Ixv.
20; Zech. viii. 4, 9), while premature death is de-
nounced as the greatest of calamities to indivi-
duals, and to the families to which they belong
(1 Sam. ii. 32); the aged are constantly supposed
to excel in understanding and judgment (Job xii.
20; xv. 10; xxxii. 9; 1 Kings xii. 6, 8), and the
mercilessness of the Chaldeans is expressed by
their having ‘no compassion * upon the * old man,
or him who stooped for age’ (2 Chiron. xxxvi. 17).

The strong desire to attain old ave was neressa-
rily in some degree connected with or resembled
the respect paid to age:l persons; for people would
scarcely desire to be oli, were the aged neglected
or regarded with mere su‘Terance.

Michaclis, carrying ont a hint of Montesquieu,
fancies that veneratiyn for old age is ‘ peculiarly
suitable to a democracy,’ and, consequently, ‘to
the republican circumstances of the Israelites.’
He adds, ‘In a monarchy or aristocracy, it is
birth and office alone which give rank. The
more pure a democracy is, the more are all on an
equal footing; and those invested with authority
are obliged to bear that equality in mind. Here
great actions confer respect and honour; and the
right discharge of ofticial duties, or the arrival of
old age, are the only sources of rank. For how
else can rank be established among those who have
no official situation, and are by birth pertectly
equal’ (Mos. Recht., art. cxl.). This is ingenious,
and partly true. It would perhaps be wholly so, if,
instead of connecting it with ‘republican circum-
stances,’ the respect for age were rather regarded in
connection with a certain state of society, short of
high civilization, in which the sources of distinction.
from whatever causes, are so limited, that room is
left for the natural condition of age itself to be
made a source of distinction. Of all marks of re-
spect that to age is most willingly paid; because
every one who does homage to age, may himself,
evntually, become an object of such homage. We
almost invariably observe that where civilization
advances, and where, in consequence, the claims
to respect are multiplied, the respect for old age in
itself, diminishes; and, like other conditions, it is
estimated hy the positive qualities which it exhibits.
In the East, at present, this respect is mani-
fested under every form of government. In the
United States the aged are certainly not treated with
more consideration than under the monarchica] and


————


AGMON.


aristocratical governments of Europe. Professor

C. Stowe (in Am. Bib. Repos.) who had unusual

means of comparison, says they are there treated

with Jess; and this seems to prove satisfactorily,
that it is rather the condition of civilization than
the condition of government, which produces the
greater or less respect for age. Ma

Attention to age was very general in an-

cient times; and is still observed in all such
conditions of society as those through which the
Imaelites passed. Among the Egyptians, the
young men ruse before the aged, and always
yielded to them the first place (Herod. ii. 80).
The youth of Sparta did the same, and were
silent—or, as the Hebrews would say, laid their
hand upon their mouth—whenever their elders
spoke. At Athens, and in other Greek states, old
men were treated with corresponding respect. In
China deference for the aged, and the honours
and distinctions awarded to them, form a capital
Point in the government (Mem. ster les Chinois, vol.
1p. 450); and among the Moslems of Western
Asia, whose usages offer so many analogies to those
of the Hebrews, the same regard for seniority is
strongly shown. Among the Arabs, it is very
seldom that a youth can be permitted to eat with
men (Lane, Arabian Nights, c. xi. note 26). With
the Turks, age, even between brothers, is the object
of marked deference (Urquhart, Spirit of the
East, ii, 471).

In all such instances, which might be accumu-
lated without number, we see the respect for age
prvidentially implanted the most strongly in
those states of social existence in which some
such sentiment is necessary to secure for men of
decayed physical powers, that safety and exem
tim from nezlect, which are ensured to them in
higher conditions of civilization by the general
Tather than the particular and exemptive operation
of law and softened manners.


AGMON (J123N) occurs in Job xl. 21;
wli.2; Isa. ix. 14; xix. 15; lviii. 5; in the first
of which passaves it is translated in our authorized
version by flag; in the second by Aook; in the
two next by rush ; and in the last by budrush. As
to plant is known under this name in the Hebrew
or cornate languages, its nature has been sought
for by tracing the word to its root, and by judging
of its nature from the context. Thus DIX agom
is said to mean a lake or pool of water, also a


reed; and in Arabic plat, pronounced ijam,


is translated reed-bed, cane-bed. Agom is also
considered to be derived from the same root as
RD goma, the papyrus. Some have even
concluded that both names indicate the same
hing, and have translated them by juncus, or
Tush.

Celsius is of opinion that in all the above pas-
sages agmon should be translated by arundo, or
reed. Dr. Harris (art. ‘Reed ') has suggested that
in Job xli. 2, instead of ‘ Canst thou put an Aook
into his nose,’ we should read ‘Canst thon tie up
his mouth with a rush rope,’ as had previously
teen suggested by others (Celsius, Hicro-Bot.
rol. 1. 467); and that in ver. 20 we should read

out of his nostrils goeth smoke, and the rushes
ere kindled before it,’ instead of ‘as out of a
=e pot or caldron,’ as in the authorized ver-


AGONY. 85


Lobo, in his Voyage d Abyssinie, speaking of
the Red Sea, says, ‘Nous ne l'avons pas jamais
vue rouge, que dans les lieux ou il y a-beaucoup de
Gouemon.’ ‘Tl y a beaucoup de cette herbe
la Mer rouge.’ What this herb is does not else-
where appear. Forskal applies the name of
ghobeibe to a species of arundo, which he consi-
dered closely allied to A. phragmites, the plant
which Celsius conceived to be the agmon of Scrip-
ture. M. Bové, in his Voyage Botanique en
Egypte, observed, especially on the borders of the
Nile, quantities of Saccharum egyptiacum and of
Arundo egyptiaca, which is, perhaps, only a va-
riety of A. donaz, the cultivated Spanish or Cyprus
reed, or, a8 it is usually called in the south of
Europe, Canna and Cana. In the neighbourhood of
Cairo he found Poa cynosuroides (the koosha, or
cusa, or sacred grass of the Hindoos), which, he
says, serves ‘aux habitans pour faire des cordes,
chauffer leurs fours, et cuire des briques et pote-
ries. Le Saccharum cylindricum est employé
aux mémes usages.’ The Egyptian species of
arundo is probably the A. isiaca of Delile, which is
closely allied to A. phragmites, and its uses may
be supposed to be very similar to those of the latter.
This species is often raised to the rank of a genus
under the name of phragmites, 90 named from
being employed for making partitions, &c. It is
about six feet high, with annual stems, and is
abundant about the banks of pools and rivers, and
in marshes. The panicle of flowers is very large,
much subdivided, a little drooping and waving in
the wind. The plant is used for thatching, making
screens, garden fences, &c.; when split it is made
into string, mats, and matches. It is the gemeine
rohr of the Germans, and the Canna or Cana
palustre of the Italians and Spaniards.

Any of the species of reed here enumerated will
suit the different passages in which the word
agmon occurs; but several species of saccharum,
growinz toa great size in muist situations, and
reed-like in appearance, will also fulfil all the
conditions required, as affording shelter for the
behemoth or hippopotamus, being convertible into
ropes, forming a contrast with their hollow stems
to the solidity and strength of the branches of
trees, and when dry easily set on fire: and when
in flower their light and feathery inflorescence
may he bent down by the slightest wind that
blows.—J. F. R. .

~ AGONY (’Ayovla), a word generally denoting
contest, and especially the contests by wrestling,
&c. in the public games; whence it is applied
metaphorically to a severe struggle or conflict
with pain and suffering. Agony is the actual
struzgle with present evil, and is thus distin-
guished from anguish, which arises from the re-
flection on evil that is past. In the New Testa-
ment the word is only used by Luke (xx. 44), and
is employed by him with terrible significance to
describe the fearful struggle which our Lord sus-
tained in the garden of Gethsemane. The cir-
cumstances of this mysterious transaction are
recorded in Matt. xxvi. 36-46; Mark xiv. 3242;
Luke xx. 39-48; Heb. v. 7,8. None of these
yassages, taken separately, contains a full history
of our Saviour’s agony. Each of the three Evan-
gelists has omitted some particulars which the
others have recorded, and all are very brief. The

ge in Hebrews is only an incidental notice.
Te three Evangelists appear to have had the


86 AGONY.


game design, namely, to convey to their readers


an idea of the intensity of the Lord’s distress ; but
they com it in different ways. Luke alone
notices agony, the bloody sweat, and the
appearance of an angel from heaven strengthening
him. Matthew and Mark alone record the change
which appeared in his countenance and manner,
the complaint which he uttered of the over-
powering sorrows of his soul, and his repetition of
the same prayer. All agree that he prayed for
the removal of what he called ‘ this cup,’ and are
careful to note that he qualified this earnest pe
tition by a preference of his Father's will to his
own.


All the circumstances of this wonderful mental
conflict have been minutely and ably examined
by Dr. Lewis Mayer, of New York, in the Am.
Bib. Repository for April, 1841. We are necessi-
tated to confine our attention to the most essential
points, the cause and nature of this agony.

Jesus himself intimates the cause of his over-
whelming distress in the prayer, ‘If it be possible,
let this cup pass from me; the cup which his
Father had appointed for him; and the question
is, what does he mean by ‘ this cup.’ Duddridge
and others think that he means the instant agony,
the trouble that he then actually endured. But
this is solidly answered by Dr. Mayer, who shows,
bygeference to Jolin xviii. 18, that the cup re-
specting which he prayed was one that was then
before him, which ie had not yet taken up to
drink, and which he desired, if possible, that the
Father should remove. It could, therefure, be no
other than the scene of suffering upon which he
was about to enter. It was the death which the
Father had appointed for him—the death of' the
croas — with all the attending circumstances which
aguravated its horror; that scene of woe which
bezan with his arrest in the garden, and was
consummated by his death on Calvary. Jesus
had long been familiar with this prospect, and
had looked to it as the appointed termination of
his ministry (Matt. xvi. 21; xvii. 9-12; xx. 17,
19, 28; Mark x. 32-34; John’ x. 18; xii. 32, 33).
But when he looked forward to this destination,
as the hour approached, a chill of horror sume-
times came over him, and found expression in
extemal signs of distress (Jolin xii. 27; comp.
Luke xii. 49, 50). But on no occasion did he
exhibit any very striking evidence of beers
or anguish. He was usually calm and collecteds
and if at any time he gave utterance to feelings
of distress and horror, he still preserved his self-
possession, and quickly checked the desire which
nature put forth to be spared so dreadful a death.
It is, ierefires hardly to be supposed that the
near approach of his sufferings, awful as they
were, apart from everything else, could alone
have wrought so great a change in the mind of
Jesus and in his whole demeanour, as soon as he
had entered the garden. It is manifest that
something more than the cross was now befure
him, and that he was now placed in a new and
hitherto untried situation. Dr. Mayer suys: ‘1
have no hesitation in believing that he was here
put upon the trial gf his obedience. It was the

e of God to subject the obedience of Jesus
to a severe ordeal, in order that, like gold tried
in the furnace, it might be an act of more perfect
and illustrious virtue; and for this end he per-
mitted him to be assailed by the tierccst tempta-


AGRAMMATOS,


tion to disobey his will and to refuse the >
pointed cup. In pursuance of this purpose, the
mind of Jesus was left to pass under a dark
cloud, his views lost their clearness, the Father's
will was ehrouded in obscurity, the cross appeared
in ten-fold horror, and nature was left to indulge
her feelings, and to put forth her reluctance.’

Dr. Mayer admits that the sacred writers
have not explained what that was, connected in
the rind of Jesus with the death of the cross,
which at this time excited in him so distressing a
fear. ‘Pious and holy men have looked calmly
upon death in its most terrific forms. But the
plous and holy man has not had a world’s sal-
vation laid upon him; he has not been required
to be absolutely perfect before God; he has
known that, if he sianed, there was an advocate
and a ransom for him. But nothing of this con-
solation could be presented to the mind of Jesus.
He knew that he must die, as he had lived, with-
out sin; but if the extremity of suffering should
so far prevail as to provoke him into impatience
or murmuring, or into a desire fur revenge, this
would be sin; and if he sinned, all would be
lost, for there was no other Saviour. In such
consideration may probably be found the remote
source of the agonies and fears which deepened
the gloom of that dreadful night.”. Under another
head [Bioopy Sweat] will be found the con-
siderations suzgested by one of the remarkable
circumstances of this event.

AGORA (Ayopd), a word of frequent occur-
rence in the New Testament: it denotes generally
any place of public resort in towns and cities
where the people came tugether; and hence more
specially it signilies, 1. A public place, a broad
street, &c., as in Matt. xi. 165 xx. 35 axili. 7;
Mark vi. 56; xii. 38; Luke vii. 32; xi. 485
xx. 46. 2. A forum or market-place, where
goods were exposed for sale, and assemblies or
public trials held, as in Acts xvi. 195; xvii. 17.
In Mark vii. 4, it is doubtful whether ayop&
denotes the market itself, or is put for that which
is brought from the market; but the known cus-
toms of the Jews suggest a preference of the former
signification.

AGORAIOS (Ayopaios), a Greek word sizni-
fying the things belouging to, or persons fre-
quenting, the Agora. In Acts xix. 38, it is
applied to the days on which public trials were
held in the forum; and in ch. xvii. 5, it denotes
idlers, or persons lounging about in the markets
and other places of public resort. There is a
peculiar force in this application of the word,
when we recollect that the market-places or ba-
zaars of the East were, and are at this day, the
constant resurt of unoccupied people, the idle, and
the newsmonzers.

AGRAMMATOS (‘Aypauparos), a Greek
word meaning turlearned, illiterate. In Acts iv.
13, the Jewish literati apply the term to Peter
and Jolin, in the same sense in which they
asked, with regard to our Lord himself, ‘ How
knoweth this man letters, having never learned’
(Jubn vii. 15). In neither case did they mean
to say that they had been altogether without
the benefits of the common education, which con-
sisted in reading and writing, and iu an acquainte
ance with the sacred books; but that they were
not learned men, had not sat at the feet of any
of the great doctors of the law, and had not been


tm oy


AGRARIAN LAW.


imtrocted in the mysteries and refinements of
their peculiar learning‘and literature.

AGRARIAN LAW. To this, or some such
heading, belongs the consideration of the peculiar
laws by which the distribution and tenure of land
were regulated among the Hebrews; while the
modes in which the land was cultivated belong to
AoricururE.

It has been the custom to regard the Hebrews
wa pastoral people until they were settled in Pa-
letine, In a great degree they doubtless were
so; and when they entered agricultural Egypt, the
land of Goshen was assigned to them expressly
because that locality was suited to their pus-
toral habits (Gen. xvii. 4-6). These habits were
mbsuntially maintained ; but it is certain that
they became acquainted with the Egyptian pro-
cewes of culture; and it is more than probable
that they raised for themselves such products
of the soil as they required for their own use.
We may, indeed, collect that the portion of

their territory which lay in the immediate vi-
cinity of the Nile was placed by them under
culture (Deut. xi. 10), while the interior, with the
fee pastures of the desert beyond their immediate
temitory, sufficed abundantly for their cattle
(1 Chron. vii. 21). This partial attention to
agriculture was in some desree a preparation fur
the condition of cultivators, into which they were
destined eventually to pass. While the Israelites
Tenained in a state of subjection in Exypt,
the maintenance of their condition as shepherds
was highly instrumental in keeping them distinct
from the Egyptians, who were agri-
caltunsts, and had a strong dislike to pastoral
habits (Gen. xlvi. 34). But when they became
a independent and sovereign nation, their sepa-
Tation from other nations was to be promoted
by inducing them to devote their chief attention
to the culture of the soil, A large number
of the institutions given to them had this object
of syaration in view. Among these, those re-
lating to agriculture—forming the agrarian law
of the Hebrew people—were of the first import-
ane. They might not alone have been sufli-
Cent to secure the end in view; but no others
could have been effectual without them; fur, with-
_ Sut such attention to agriculture as would render
them a self-subsisting nation, a greater degree of
Mtercourse with the neighbouring and idolatrous
Bations must have been maintained than was con-
Sstent with the primary object of the Mosaical in-
Situations, The commonest observation suffices
to show how much less than others agricultural
saaeaap are open to external influences, and
bw much less disposed to cultivate intercourse
With strangers.
_ It was, doubtless, in subservience to this ol-
{%, and to facilitate the change, that the Israel-
tes were put in possession of a country already in
S state of high cultivation (Deut. vi. 11). And
it was in order to retain them in this condition, to
give them a vital interest in it, and to make it a
source of happiness to them, that a very peculiar
Then law was given to them. In stating this
rides m declaring it to have been in the highest
ats rani and salutary, regard must be had
tion rhe He shi with reference to the segregi-
which thi sid oils people: for there are points in
is and other Mosaical laws were unsuited
usr, some by the very circumstances


AGRARIAN LAW. 8%


which adapted them so admirably to their i
object. hen the Israelites were num just
before their entrance into the land of Canaan, and
were found (exclusive of the Levites) to exceed
600,000 men, the Lord said to Moses: ‘ Unto
these the land shall be divided for an inheritance,
according to the number of names. To many
thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to the
few thou shalt give the less inheritance; to every
one shall his inheritance be given according to
those that were numbered of him. Notwith-
standing the land shall be divided by lot: ac-
cording to the names of the tribes of their fathers
shall they inherit’ (Num. xxvi. 33-54). This
equal distribution of the soil was the basis of the
agrarian law. By it provision was made for the
support of 600,000 yeomanry, with (according to
different calculations) from sixteen to twenty-five
acres of land to each. This land they held inde-
pendent of all temporal superiors, by direct tenure,
from Jehovah their sovereign, by whose power
they were to acquire the territory, and under
whose protection they were to enjoy and retain it.
‘ The land shall not be sold for ever, for the land
is mine, saith fhe Lord: ye are strangers and
sojourners with me’ (Lev. xxv. 23). Thus the
basis of the constitution was an equal agrarian
law. But this law was guarded by other provi-
sions equally wise and salutary. The accumula-
tiun of debt was prevented, first, hy prohibiting
every Hebrew from accepting of interest from
any of his tellow-citizens (Lev. xxv. 35, 36); next,
hy establishing a regular discharge of debts every
seventh year; and, finally, by ordering that no
lands could be alienated for ever, but must, on
each yeur of Jubilee, or every seventh S.bbatic
year, revert to the families which originally pos-
sessed them. Thus, without absolutely depiving
individuals of all temporary dominion over their
landed property, it re-established, every fiftieth year,
that original and equal distribution of it, which
was the fuundation of the national polity; and as
the period of this. reversion was fixed and regular,
all parties had due notice of the terms on which
they negotiated ; so that there was no ground for
public commotion or private complaint.

This law, by which landed property was re-
leased! in the year of Jubilee from all existins obli-
gations, did not extend to houses in towns, which,
if not redeemed within one year after being sold,
were alienated for ever (Lev. xv. 29, 30). This
must have given to property in the country a de
cided advantage over property in cities, and must
have greatly contributed to the essential object
of all these regulations, by affording an induce-
ment to every Hebrew to reside on and culti-
vate his land. Further, the original distribution
of the land was to the several tribes according to
their families, so that each tribe was, so to speak,
settled in the same county, and each family in
the same harony or hundred. Nor was the estate
of any family in one tribe permitted to pass into
another, even by the marriage of an heiress (Num.
xxvii.); so that not only was the original balance
of property preserved, but the closest and dearest
connections of affinity attached to each other the
inhabitants of every vicinage.

It often happens that laws in appearance simi-
lar have in view entirely different objects. In
Europe the entailment of estates in the direct line
is designed to encourage the formation of large


88 AGRARIAN LAW.


ponaces In Israel the effect was entirely dif-
ferent, as the entail extended to all the small
estates into which the land was originally divided,
so that they could not legally be united to form
a large property, and then entailed upon the de-
scendants of him whom the ly was
formed. This iiviai of the land eal estates
among the people, who were to retain them in
perpetuity, was eminently suited to the leading
objects of the Hebrew institutions. It is allowed
on all hands that such a condition of landed pro-
perty is in the highest degree favourable to high
cultivation, and to increase of population, while it
is leas favourable to pasturage. The two first were
objects which the law had in view, and it did not
intend to afford undue encouragement to the
pastoral life, while the large pastures of the adja-
cent deserts and of the commons secured the coun-
try against such a scarcity of cattle as the di-
vision of the land into small heritages has already
uced in France.

For this land a kind of quit-rent was payable
to the sovereign proprictor, in the form of a tenth
or tithe of the produce, which was assigned to the
priesthood [Tirues]. The condition of military
service was also attached to the Janu, as it ap-
pears that every freeholder (Deut. xx. 5) was
obliged to attend at the general muster of the
national army, and to serve in it, at his own ex-

se (often more than repaid by the phinder), as
long as the occasion required. — In this direction,
therefore, the agrarian law operated in securing a
body of 600,000 men, inured to labour and in-
dustry, always assumed to be ready, as they were
bound, to come forward at their country’s call.
This great body of national yeomanry, every one
of whom had an important stake in the national
indgy:cndence, was ofticered by its own hereditary
chiefs, heads of tribes and families (comp. Exod.
xviii, and Num. xxxi. 14); and must have pre-
sented an insuperable obstacle to treacherous am-
bition and political intrigue, and to every attempt
to overthrow the Hebrew commonwealth and esta-
blish despotic power. Nor were these institutions
less wisely adapted to secure the state against
foreign violence, and at the same time prevent offen-
sive wars and remote conquests. For while this
vast body of hardy yeomamry were always ready
to defend their country, when assailed by foreign
foes, yet, being constantly employed in agricultme,
attached to domestic life, and enjoying at home
the society of the numerous relatives who peopled
their neighbourhood, war must have been m a
high deyree alien to their tastes and habits. Re
ligion also took part in preventing them from
being spre dao by the splendour of military
glory. On returning from battle, even if vic-
torious, in order to bring them back to more
peaceful feelings after the rage of war, the law re-
hehe them to consider themselves as polluted by
slaughter, and unworthy of appearing in the
camp of Jehovah until they had employed an en-
tire day in the rites of purification (Num. xix.
13-16; xxxi. 19). Besides, the force was en-
tirely infantry ; the law forbidding even the kings
to multiply horses in their train (Deut. xvii. 16);
and this, with the ordinance requiring the attend-
ance of all the males three times every year at
Jerusalem, proved the intention of the legislator
w confine the natives within the limits of the
Xromised Land, and rendered long and distant


AGRICULTURE.


wars and conquests impossible without the virtual
renunciation of that religion which was inco!
rated with their whole civil polity, and which was,
in fact, the charter by which they held their pro
petty and enjoyed all their rights (Graves’s Lec
tures on the Pentateuch, \ect. iv.; Lowman's Civid
Gov. of the Heb. c. iii. iv. ; Michaelis, Afos.
Recht, i. 240, sqq.).

AGRICULTURE. The antiquity of agricul-
ture is indicated in the brief history of Cain and
Abel, when it tells us that. the former was a ‘ tiller
of the ground,’ and brought some of the fruits of
his labour as an offering to God (Gen. iv. 2, 3),
and that part of the ultimate curse upon him was:
‘when thou tillest the ground, it shall not hence-
forth yield to thee her strength’ (iv. 12). Of the
acniak state of agriculture befure the deluge we
know nothing. It must have been modified con-
siderably by the conditions of soil and climate,
which are supposed by many to have undergone
some material alterations at the flood. Whatever
knowledze was possessed by the old world was
doubtless transmitted te the new by Noah and
his sons; and that this knowledge was consider
able is implied in the fact that one of the opera-
ticns of Noah, when he ‘began to be a husband-
man,’ was to plant a vineyard, and to make wine
with the fruit (Gen. ix. 2). There are few agri-
cultural notices belonging to the patriarchal pe-
riod, but they suffice to show that the land of
Canaan was in a state of cultivation, and that
the inhabitants possessed what were at a later date
the principal products of the svil in the same
country. It is reasonable therefore to conclude
that the modes of operation were then similar to
those which we afterwards find among the Jews
in the same country, and concerning which our
information is more exact.

In giving to the Israelites possession of a country
already under cultivation, it was the Divine inten-
tion that they should keep up that cultivation,
and become themselves an avricultural people ;
and in doing this they doubtless adopted the prac-
tices of agriculture which they found already esta-
bhished in the country. This may have been the
more necessary, a8 ariculture is a practical art ;
and those of the Hebrews who were acquainted
with the practices of Egyptian husbandry had
died in the wilderness; and even had they lived,
the processes proper to a hot climate and alluvial
soil, watered hy river inundation, like that of
Egypt, although the same in essential forms, could
not have been altogether applicable to so different
a country as Palestine.

As the nature of the seasons lies at the root of
all agricultural operations, it should be noticed
that the variations of sunshine and rain, which
with us extend throughout the year, are in Pales-
tine confined chiefly to the latter part of autumn
and the winter. During all the rest of the year
the sky is almost uninterruptedly cloudless, and
rain very rarely falls. The autumnal rains usu-
ally commence at the latter end of October or
beginning of November, not suddenly, but by de-
grees, which gives opportunity to the husbendman
to sow his wheat and barley. The rains continue
during November and December, but afterwards
they occur at longer intervals; and rain is rare
after March, and almost never occurs as late ag
May. The cold of winter is not severe; and ag
the ground is never frozen, the labours of the hus-


FES RPRVIRVE


“
a


REGRSER ES


=
a


ee, ee oe ae


AGRICULTURE.


bandman are not entirely interrupted. Snow falls
in different parts of the country, but never lies
long on the ground. In the plains and valleys
the heat of summer is oppressive, but not in the
more elevated tracts. In these high grounds the
nights are cool, often with heavy dew. The total
absence of rain in summer soon destroys the ver-
dure of the fields, and gives to the general land-
evex in the hich country, an aspect of
drought and barrenness. No green thing remains
but the foliage of the scattered fruit-trees, and oc-
casional vineyards and fields of millet. In autumn
the whole land becomes dry and parched; the
cisterns are nearly empty ; and all nature, animate
and inanimate, looks forward with longing for the
return of the rainy season. In the hill country
the time of harvest is later than in the plains of
the Jordan and of the sea-coast. ‘The barley har
vest is about a fortnight earlier than that of wheat.
Inthe plain of the Jordan the wheat harvest is
erly in May; in the plains of the coast and of
Esdraelon, it is tow: the latter end of that
month; and in the hills, not until June. The
general vintage is in September, but the first
Srapes ripen in July; and from that time the
towns are well supplied with this fruit (Robinson,
Biblical Researches, ii. 96-100).
_ Som, §e.—The geoiogical characters of the soil
in Palestine have never been satisfactorily stated ;
but the different epithets of description which tra-
eles employ, enable us to know that it differs
considerably, both in its ay ce and character,
indifleent parts of the land; but wherever soil
of any kind exists, even to a very slight depth, it
is found tobe highly fertile. As parts of Palestine
are hilly, and as hills have seldom much depth of
‘oil, the mode of cultivating ther in terraces was
anciently,and is now, much employed. A series
of low stone walls, one above another, across the
face of the hill, arrest the soil brought down by
the rains, and afford a series of levels for the
erations of the husbandman. ‘This mode of cul-
hvation is usual in Lebanon, and is not unftre-
quent in Palestine, where the remains of terraces
across the hills, in various parts of the country,
attest the extent to which it was anciently carried.
This terace cultivation has necessarily increased
o declined with the population. If the people
Were so few that the valleys afforded sufticient food
for them, the more difficult culture of the hills
Was neglected ; but when the population was too
large for the valleys to satisfy with bread, then the
hills were laid under cultivation.
Tnsuch a climate as that of Palestine, water is
the great fertilizing agent. The rains of autumn
and winter, and the dews of spring, suffice for the
ordinary objects of agriculture; but the ancient
inhabitants were able, in some parts, to avert even
the aridity which the summer droughts occasioned,
and to keep up a garden-like verdure, by means of
aqueducts communicating with the brooks and
rivers (Ps. i. 3; Ixv. 10; Prov. xxi. 1; Isa. xxx.
25; xxxii. 2,20; Hos. xii. 11). Hence springs,
ins, and prea were as much esteemed by
‘ as by shepherds (Josh. xv. 19; Judg.
1 15). | The soil was also Din of pedals.
carefully cultivated; and its fertility was in
eres by the ashes to which the dry stubble and
ae ig inte occasionally reduce.l by being burned
wath surface of the ground (Prov. xxiv. 313 Isa.
3 xxxii. 13). Dung, and, in the neighbour-


AGRICULTURE. 89


hood of Jerusalem, the blood of animals, were also
used to enrich the soil (2 Kings ix. 37; Ps. lxxxiii.
10; Isa. xxv. 10; Jer. ix. 22; Luke xiv. 34, 35).

“[hat the soil might not be exhausted, it was
ordered that every seventh year should be a sabbath
of rest to the land: there was then to be no sowing
or reaping, no ing of vines or olives, no vintage
or ering of fruits; and whatever grew of itself
was to be left to the poor, the stranger, and the
beasts of the field (Lev. xxv. 1-7; Deut. xv. 1-10).
But such an observance required more faith than
the Israelites were prepared to exercise. It was for
a long time utterly neglected (Lev. xxvi. 34, 35;
2 Chron. xxxvi. 21), but after the Captivity it was
more observed. By this remarkable institution
the Hebrews were also trained to habits of economy
and foresight, and invited to exercise a large de-
gree of trust in the bountiful providence of their
Divine King.

Fietps.—Under the term 43 .dagan, which

we translate ‘ grain’ and ‘corm,’ the Hebrews
comprehended almost every object of field culture.
Syria, including Palestine, was regarded by the
ancients as one of the first countries for corn

Pliny, Hist. Nat. xviii. 7). Wheat was abun-

ant and excellent; and there is still one bearded
sort, the ear of which is three times as heavy, and
contains twice as many grains, as our common
English wheat (Irby and Mangles, p. 472). Bar-
ley was also much cultivated, not only for bread,
but because it was the only kind of com which
was given to beasts ; for oats and rye do not grow
in warm climates. Hay was not in use; and
therefore the barley was mixed with chopped straw
to form the food of cattle (Gen. xxiv. 25, 62;
Judg. xix. 19, &c.) Other kinds of field cultwie
were millet, spelt, various species of beans and peas,
pepperwort, cummin, cucumbers, melons, flax,
and, perhaps, cotton. Many other articles might
be mentioned as being now cultivated in Palestine ;
but, as their names do not occur in Scripture, it is
difficult to know whether they were grown there in
ancient times, or not.

Anciently, as now, in Palestine and the East

the arable lands were not divided into fields by
hedges, as in this country. The ripening products
therefore presented an expanse of culture un-
broken, although perhaps variegated, in a large
view, by the difference of the products grown. The
boundaries of lands were therefore marked by
stones as landmarks, which, even in patriarchal
times, it was deemed a heinous wrong to remove
(Job xxiy. 2); and the law pronounced a curse
upon those who, without authority, removed them
(Deut. xix. 14; xxvii. 17). The walls and hed,
which are occasionally mentioned in Seaeewe
longed to orchards, gardens, and vineyards.


Aaricutturat Orrrations.—Of late years
much light has been thrown upon the agrie


90 AGRICULTURE.


cultural ions and implements of ancient
times, by the discovery of various representations
on the sculptured monuments and painted tombs


of Egypt. As these agree isingly with
notices in the Bible, and, ly differ little
what we find employed in Syria and Ezypt, it is
very safe to receive them as guides on the present
subject.

Ploughing.—This has always been a light and
superficial operation in the East. At first, the
ground was opened with pointed sticks; then, a
kind of hoe was employed; and this, in many
parts of the world, is still used as a substitute for


the plough. But the plough was known in Egypt
and Syria before the
(Job i. ‘ee In the East, however, it has always
been a light and inartificial implement. At first,
it was little more than a stout branch of a tree,
from which projected another limb, shortened and
pointed. is, being turned into the ground,
made the furrow; while at the farther end of the
larger branch was fastened a transverse yoke, to
which the oxen were harnessed. Afterwards a
handle to guide the plough was added. Thus
the plough consisted of—l. the pole; 2. the point
or share; 3. the handle; 4. the yoke. The Syrian
plough is, and doubtless was, light enough for a
man to carry in his hand (Russell's Nat. Hist. of
Aleppo, i. 73). We annex a figure of the ancient
Egyptian plough, which had the most resemblance


) ZA
APN


t» the one now used (as figured in p. 89), and tne
comparison between them will probably suggest
: fair idea of the plough which was in use among
the Hebrews. The following cut (from Mr. Fel-
lowes’ work on Asia Minor) shows the parts of a


1, The plough.
4, ee lee :
still lighter plough used in Asia Minor and
Syria, with but a single handle, and with dif-


2. The pole.


3. Shares (various).
5. Yokes. a >


6. Ox-gi


AGRICULTURE.


ferent shares according to the work it has to
execute.

The plough was drawn by oxen, which were
sometimes urged by a scourge (Isa. x. 26; Na-
hum iii. 2); but oftener by a long staff, fur-
nished at one end with a flat piece of metal for
clearing the plough, and at the other with a spike
for goaling the oxen. This ox-goad might be
easily used as a spear (Judg. iii. 31; 1 Sam.
xiii, 21). Sometimes men followed the plough
with hoes to break the clods (Isa. xxviii. 24);
but in later times a kind of harrow was em-
ployed, which appears to have been then, as now,
merely a thick tek of wood, pressed down by a
weight, or by a man sitting on it, and drawn over
the ploughed field.

Sowing.—The ground, having been ploughed
as soon as the autumnal rains had mollified the
soil, was fit, by the end of October, to receive the
seed ; and the sowing of wheat continued, in dif-
ferent situations, through November into December.
Barley was not generally sown till January and
February. The seed appears to have been sown
and harrowed at the same time; although some-
times it was ploughed in by a cross furrow.


Ploughing in the Seed.—The Egyptian paintings
illustrate the Scriptures by showing that in those
soils which needed no previous preparation by
the hoe (for breaking the clods) the sower followed
the plough, holding in the left hand a basket of
seed, which he scattered with the right hand,
while another person filled a fresh basket. We
also see that the mode of sowing was what we eall
‘broad-cast,’ in which the seed is thrown loosely
over the field (Matt. xiii. 3-8). In Exypt, when
the levels were low, and the water had continued
Jong upon the land, they often dispensed with the
plough altogether ; and probably, like the present
inhabitants, broke up the ground with hoes, or
simply dragged the moist mud with bushes after
the seed had been thrown upon the surface. To
this cultivation without ploughing Moses probably
alludes (Deut. xi. 10), when he tells the Hebrews
that the land to which they were going was not
like the land of Egypt, where they ‘sowed their
seed and watered it with their foot as a garden of
herbs.’ It seems however that*even in Syria, in
sandy soils, they sow without ploughing, and then
plough down the seed (Russell's N. H. of Aleppo,
1.73, &c.). It does not appear that any instrument
resembling our harrow was known; the word ren«
dered fo harrow, in Job xxxix. 10, means literally


AGRICULTURE.


to break the clods, and is so rendered in Isa. xxviii.
4; Hos.x. 11: and for this purpose the means
used have been already indicated. The

in Job, however, is important. It shows that this
breaking of the clods was not always by the hand,
but that some kind of instrament was drawn by
an animal over the ploughed field, most probably
the rough log which is still in use.

Harvest.—It has been already mentioned that
the time of the wheat harvest in Palestine varies,
in diflerent situations, from early in May to late
inJune; and that the barley harvest is about a
fortnight earlier than that of wheat. Among the
Israelites, as with all other people, the harvest was
4 season of joy, and as such is more than once al-
luded to in Scripture (Ps. cxxvi. 5; Isa. ix. 13).
_Reaping.—Different modes of reaping are in-
dicated in Scripture, and illustrated by the Egyp-
tan monuments. In the most ancient times, the
om was plucked up by the roots, which continued


to be the practice with particular kinds of grain
afer the sickle was known. In Egypt, at this day,
ley and dourra are pulled up by the roots. The
ice between these modes of operation was pro-
bably determined, in Palestine, by the considera-
tion pointed out by Russell (NV. H. of Aleppo, i.
4), who states that ‘wheat, as well as barley in
Beneral, does not grow half as high as in Britain ;
and is therefore, like other grain, not reaped with
the sickle, but plucked up by the ropts with the
In other parts of the country, where the

Com grows ranker, the sickle is used.’ When the
le was used, the wheat was either cropped off
the ear or cut close to the ground. In the
case, the straw was afterwards plucked up


for use; in the latter, the stubble was left and
bumt on the ground for manure. As the Egyp-
not such manure, and were economi-


cal of straw, they generally followed the former
method ; while the Israelites, whose lands derived
benefit from the burnt stubble, used the latter; al-
though the practice of cutting off the ears was also


known to them (Job xxiv. 24). Cropping the
ears short, the Egyptians did not Ps bind
them into sheaves, but removed them in baskets.
Sometimes, however, they bound them into double
sheaves ; and such as they plucked up were bound
into sinzle long sheaves. The Israelites appear
generally to have made up their corn into sheaves
(Gen. xxxvii. 7; Lev. xxiii. 10-15; Ruth ii. 7,
15; Job xxiv. 10; Jer. ix. 22; Mich. iv. 12),
which were collected into a heap, or removed in a
cart (Amos ii, 13) to the threshing-floor. The
carts were probably similar to those which are
still employed for the same purpose. The sheaves
were never made up into shocks, as with us, al-
though the word occurs in our translation of Judg.
xv. 5; Job v. 26; for the original term signifies
neither a shock composed of a few sheaves stand-
ing temporarily in the field, nor a stack of many
sheaves in the home yard, properly thatched, to
stand for a length of time ; But a heap of sheaves
laid loosely together, in order to be trodden out as

uickly as possible, in the same way as is done in
the East at the present day (Brown, Antig. of the
Jews, ii. 591).

With regard to sickles, tnere appear to have
been two kinds, indicated by the different names
chermesh (WON) and meggol 30); and as
the former occurs only in the Pentateuch (Deut.
xvi. 93 xxiii, 20), and the latter only in the Pro-
phets (Jer. ii, 16; Joel i. 17), it would seem that
the one was the earlier and the other the later in-
strument. But as we observe two very dif-
ferent kinds of sickles in use among the Egyptians,
not, only at the same time, but in the same field
oa the cut, p. 92), it may have been so with the

ews also. Phe figures of these Egyptian sickles
probably mark the difference between them. One
was very much like our common reaping-hook,
while the other had more resemblance in its shape
to a scythe, and in the Egyptian examples appears
to have een toothed. This last is probably the
same as the Hebrew meggol, which is indeed ren-
dered by scythe in the margin of Jer. 1. 16. The
reapers were the owners and their children, men-


92 AGRICULTURE.


«w


servants and women-servants, and day-labourers
(Ruth ii, 4, 6, 21,23; John iv. 36; James v. 4).
Refreshments were provided for them, especially
drink, of which the gleaners were allowed to par-
take (Ruth ii. 9). So in the Egyptian harvest-
scenes, we perceive a provision of water in skins,
hung against trees, or in jars upon stands, with
the reapers drinking, and gleaners applying to
share the draught. Among the Israelites, gleaning


was one of the stated provisions for the poor: and
for their benefit the corners of the field were left
unreaped, and the reapers might not return for a
forgotten sheaf. The gleaners, however, were to
obtain in the first place the express permission
of the proprietor or his steward (Lev. xix. 9, 10;
Deut. xxiv. 19; Ruth ii, 2, 7).


Threshing.—The ancient mode of threshing, as
described in Scripture and figured on the Egyptian
monuments, is still preserved in Palestine. For-
merly the sheaves were conveyed from the field to
the threshing-fluor in carts; but now they are
borne, generally, on the backs of camels and asses.
The threshing-floor is a level plot of ground, of a
circular shape, generally about fifty feet in dia-
meter, prepared for use by beating down the earth
till a hard floor is formed (Gen. 1. 10; Judg. vi.
37; 2 Sam. xxiv. 16, 24). Sometimes several of
these fluors are contiguous to each other. The
sheaves are spread out upon them; and the grain
is trodden out by oxen, cows, and young cattle,
arranged five abreast, and driven in a circle, or
rather in all directions, over the floor. This was the
common mode in the Bible times ; and Moses for-
bade that the oxen thus employed should be muz-
szled to prevent them from tasting the corn (Deut.
xxv. 4; Isa. xxviii. 28). Flails, or sticks, were
- only used in threshing small quantities, or for the
lighter kinds of grain (Ruth ti. 17; Isa. xxviii.
37). There were, however, some kinds of thresh-


AGRICULTURE.


ing-machines, which are still used in Palestine
and Egypt. One of them, represented in the an~
nexed figure, is very much used in Palestine. It


is composed of two thick planks, fastened together
side by side, and bent upwards in front. Sharp
fragments of stone are fixed into holes bored in
the bottom. This machine is drawn over the corn
by oxen—a man or boy sometimes sitting on it to
increase the weight. It not only separates the
grain, but cuts the straw and makes it fit for fod-
der (2 Kings xiii. 7). This is, most probably, the
Charutz PYM, or ‘ corn-drag,’ which is men-
tioned in Scripture (Isa. xxviii. 27; xli. 15;
Amos i. 3, rendered ‘ threshing instrument "), and
would seem to have been sometimes furnished with
iron points instead of stones. The Bible also no-
tices a machine called a Moreg, WO (2 Sam.
xxiv. 22; 1 Chron. xxi. 23; Isa. xli. 15), which
is unquestionably the same which bears in Arahic


the name of gy9) Noreg. This is explained by


Freytag (from the Kamoos Lex.) by—‘ tribulum,
instrumentum, quo fruges in area tentatur (in
Syria), sive ferreum, sive ligneum.’ This ma-
chine is not now often seen in Palestine; but is
more used in some parts of Syria, and is common
in Egypt. It is asort of frame of wood, in which
are inserted three wooden rulJers, armed with iron
teeth, &c. It bears a sort of seat or chair, in which
the driver sits to give the benetit of his weight. It
is generally drawn over the corn by two oxen, and
separates the grain, and breaks up the straw even
more elfectually than the drag. In all these
processes, the corn is occasionally turned by a
fork; and, when sufficiently threshed, is thrown
up by the same fork against the wind to te
the grain, which is then gathered up win-
nowed.


Winnowing.—This was generally accomplished
by repeating the process of tossing up the grain
against the wind with a fork (Jer. iv. 11, 12), by
which the broken straw and chaff were dispersed
while the grain fell to the ground. The grain af.
terwards passed through a sieve to separate the bits
of earth and other impurities. After this, it un-
derwent a still further purification, by being tossed
up with wooden scoops or short-handed shovels,


such as we see in Egyptian paintings (Isa. xxx.
2; Jahn, Biblisches TT haat, b. i. ch. i. kap.
4; Winer, Biblisches Realworterbuch, s.v. ‘ Ac-
kerbau ;’ Paulsen, Ackerbau d. Morgenlander ;
Snreohusius, Aischna, part i.; Ugolini, De Re
Rustica Vett. Hebyeorum, in Thesaurus, t. xxix. ;
Norberg, De Agricult. Orientali, in Opusc. Acad.
1.3 Reynier, Del Economie Publique et Rurale
des drabes ct des Juifs ; Brown, Antiquities of the
Jews; Robinson, Biblical Researches in Palestine ;
Wilkinson, Ancient Egyptians ; Description de
Egypte, Antiquités, and Etat Moderne ; Rosel-
lini, Monumenti dell’ Egitto. Information re-
Specting the actual products and agriculture of
Palestine, collected from numerous travellers,
may be seen in Kitto's Pictorial History of Pales-
tine, Physical Tistory, ‘ History of the Months.’)
AGRIELAIA (AypieAaia; New Test. dypié-
Aas), The wild olivetree is mentioned by
St. Panl in Romans xi. 17, 24. Here different
opmions have been entertained, not only witis
Tespect to the plant, but also with respect to the
explanation of the metaphor. One great difficulty
has arisen from the same name having heen
applied to different. plants, Thus by Dioscorides
\Ye Mater, Med. i. 137) it is stated that the
Aypiehala, or wild olive-tree, is by some called
Cotinus, and by others, the Ethiopic olive. So, in
the notes to Theoph. ed Boda Stapel, p. 224, we
ral, ‘Sed hic xérwos lego cum Athenwo, id est
Cleaster, Est vero alius cotinus, frutex, de quo
Plinius, xvi. 18. Est et in Apennino frutex qui
Vocatur Cotinus, ad lineamenta modo conchylii
Colore insignis. Hence the wild olive-tree has
ben confounded with rhus cotinus, or Venetian
‘umach, with which it has no point of resem-
ce. Further confusion has arisen from the
esent Eleagnus angustifolia of botanists having
at one time called Olea sylvestris. Hence it
has been inferred that the ’AypieAaia is this very
Eleagnus, E. angustifolia, or the narrow-leaved
Oleaster-tree of Paradise of the Portuguese. In
Tany points it certainly somewhat resembles the
tue olive-tree—that is, in the form and a ce
of the leaves, in the oblong-shaped fruit (edible
™ tome of the species), also in an oil being
Pia from the ieee ; but it will not balan
Present se, ag no process of ing wi
tnable the Fea ‘ bs panne.


gnus to bear olives of any kind. -


Ifweexaminea little further the account given
by Dicscorides of the "AypieAaia, we find in i. 141,
Tiepl Saxpiov eraias Ai@tomixchs, that our olives
and wild olives exude tears—that is, a gum or
Tesin, like the Ethiopic olive. Here it is im-
portant to remark that the wild olive of the

ans is distinguished from the wild olive of


AH. 93


Ethiopia. What plant the latter may be, it is
a easy to determine with certainty; bat
ian authors translate the name by zatt-al-
Soudan, or the olive of Ethiopia. Other synorymes
for it are louz-al-bur, or wild almond ; and badam
kohee, i.e. mountain almond. Under the last name
the writer has obtained the kernels of the apricot in
Northern India, and it is given in Persian works
as one of the synonymes of the bur-kookA, or aysi-
cot, which was originally called apricock and
ia, no doubt from the Arabic bur-kookh.
e apricot is extensively cultivated in the Hi-
malayas, chiefly on account of the clear beautiful
oil yielded by its kernels, on which account
it might well be compared with the olive-tree.
But it does not serve better than the Eleagnus to
explain the passage of St. Paul.
an the account of Dioscorides, however, it is
clear that the Ethiopic was distinguished from
the wild, and this from the cultivated olive; and
as the plant was well known both to the Greeks
and Romans, there was no danger of mistaking it
for any other plant except itself in a wild state,
that is, the true "AypieAaia, Oleaster, or Olea
europea, in a wild state. That this is the very
plant alluded to by the Apostle seems to be
proved from its having been the practice of the
ancients to graft the wild upon the cultivated
olive tree. Thus Pliny (Hist. Nat. xvii, 18) says,
‘ Africa peculiare quidem in oleastro est inserere.
Quadam zternitate consenescunt aera adop-
tioni virga emissa, atque ita alia arbore ex eadem
juvenescente : iterumque et quoties opus sit, ut
wevis eadem oliveta constent. Inseritur autem
oleaster calamo, et inoculatione.’ In the ‘ Pio-
torial Bible’ this practice has already been ad-
duced as explaining the text; and Th
and Columella (De Re Rust. v. 9) also refer to
it. The apostle, therefore, in comparing the Ro-
mans to the wild olive tree grafted on a cultivated
stock, made use of language which was most in-
telligible, and referred to a practice with which
they must have been perfectly familiar—J. F. R.
AGRIPPA [Heropran Faminy]. Although
of the two Hi , father and son, who also bore the
name of Agrippa, the latter is best known by his
Roman name, it seems proper to include him with
the other members of the Herodian dynasty, under
the name which he bore among his own peuple.
AGUR (W3N), the author of the sayings
contained in Prov. xxx., which the inscription
describes as com of the epts delivered
by ‘Agur, the son of Jakeh,’ to his friends ‘Ithiel
and Ucal.’ Beyond this everything that has been
stated of him, and of the time in which he lived,
is pure conjecture. Some writers have regarded
the name as an appellative, but differ as to its
signification. The Vulgate has ¢ Verba Congre-
gantis filii Vomentis.’ Most of the fathers think
that Solomon himself is designated under this
name; and if the word is to be understood as
an appellative, it may be as well to look for its
meaning in the Syriac, where, according to Bar
Bahlul, in Castell. pass means gui sapicniie


studiis se applicat. The Septuagint omits the
chapter ascribed to Agur, as well as the nine first
verses of the fullowing chapter.

AH (M&, brother) or rather Acu, js frequently
found, according to the inadequate representation


* of the sun-god Baal.


ot AHAB.


of the guttura! which is followed in our Version,
as the first sylluble of compound Hebrew proper
uames. The observations already offered in the
article Ap may be referred to fur some illustration
of the metaphorical use of the term brother in
such combinations, as well as for the law of their
construction, whenever the two members are nouns
of which one is dependent as a genitive on the
other.—J. N.


AHAB (ANTS, father's brother ; Sept.
*Axad8), son of Omri, and the sixth king of
Israel, who reigned twenty-one years, from B.c.
918 to 897. Ahab was, upon the whole, the
weakest of all the Israelitish monarchs; and
although there are occasional traits of character
which show that he was not without good feelings
and dispositions, the history of his reign proves
that weakness of character in a king may some-
times be as injurious in its eflects as wickedness.
Many of the evils of his reign may be ascribed to
the close connection which he formed with the
Phoenicians. There had long been a beneficial
commercial intercourse vetween that people and the
Jews; and the relations arising thence were very
close in the times of David and Solomon. After
the separation of the kingdoms, the connection
appears to have been continued by the nearer
kingdom of Israel, but to have been nearly, if not
quite, abandoned by that of Judah. The wife of
Ahab was Jezebel, the danziter ot’ Ethbaal, or
Ithobaal, king of Tyre. Sie was a woman of
adecidel and energetic character, and, as such,
soon established that influence over her husband
which such women always acquire over weak, and
not unfrequently also over strong, men. Ahab,
being entirely under the control of Jezebel, sanc-
tioned the introduction, and eventually established
the worship of the Phoenician idols, and especially
Hitherto the zolden calves
in Dan and Bethel had been the only objects of
idolatrous worship in Israel, and they were in-
tended as symbols of JeHovan. But all reserve
and limitation were now abandoned. ‘The king
built a temple at Samaria, and erecte an image,
and consecrated a grove to Baal. A multitude
of the priests and prophets of Baal were main-
tained. Idolatry became the predominant reli-
gion; and Jehovah, with the golden calves as
symbolical representations of him, were viewed
with no more reverence than Baal and his image.
So strong was the tide of corruption, that it ap-
peared as if the knowledge of the true God was
soon to be for ever lost among the Israelites.
But a man suited to this emergency was raised
up in the person of Elijah the prophet, who
boldly opposed himself to the rezal authority,
and succcetled in retaining many of his country-
men in the worship of the true God. The greater
the power which supported idolatry, the more
striking were the prophecies and miracles which
directed the attention of the Israelites to Je-
hovah, and brought disgrace on the idols, and
confusion on their worshippers. At length the
judgment of God on Ahab and his house was pro-
nounced by Elijah, who announced that, during
the reign of his son, his whole race should be ex-
terminated. Ahab died of the wounds which he
received in a battle with the Syrians, acconling
to a prediction of Micaiah, which the king dis-
believed, but yet endeavoured to avert by dis-


AHALIM.


guising himself in the action (1 Kings xvi. 20,
xxii. 40).

2. AHAB and ZEDEKIAH. The names of
two false prophets, who deceived the Israelites at
Babylon. For this they were threatened by Je-
remiah, who foretold that they should be put to
death by the king of Babylon in the presence of
those whom they had beguiled; and that in fol-
lowing times it should become a common male-
diction to say, ‘The Lord make thee like Ahab
and Zedekiah, whom the king of Babylon roasted
in the fire’ (Jer. xxix. 21, 22).


AHALIM cording) and AHALOTH


comida, usually translated Asogs, occur in
several passages of the Old Testament, as in
Psalm xly. 8, ‘All thy garments smell of myrrh,
and ahaloth, and cassia;’ Prov. vii. 17, § IT have
perfumed my bed with myrrh, with cinnamon
and ahalim ;’ Canticles, iv. 14, § Spikenard and
suiiron, calamus and citmamon, with all trees of
frankincense, myrrh and ahaloth, with all the
chief spices.’ Krom the articles which are as-
sociated with ahaloth aud ahalim (both names
indicating the same thing), it is evident that it
was some odoriferous substance, probably well
known in ancient times. Why these words have
been translated * aloes,’ not only in the English,
but in most of the older versions, it may not Le
easy to ascertain; but there is little doult that
the odoriferous ahaloth of the above passazes
ought not to be confounded with the Litter and
nauseous aloes famed only as a medicine. Tie
latter, no doubt, has some agreeable odour, when
of the best quality from the island ot) Socotra,
aud when freshly-imported pieces are first broken ;
some not unpleasant odour may also he perceived
when small pieces are burnt. But common aloes
is usually disagreeatle in odour and nauseous in
taste, and could never have been employed as a
perfume. Its usual name in Arabic, sidbar, has
no resemblance to its European name. | The
earliest. notice of aloes seems to be that of Dios-
corides, iii. 25; the next that of Pliny (Nat. Hiet,
xxvii. 5). Both describe it as heimg brought
from India, whence also probably came its name,
which is eea in Hindce.

The oldest and most complete account with
which we are acquainted of the fragrant and aro-
matic substances known to the ancients is that
given in the first twenty-eizht chapters of the first
book of Dioscorides. There, ions with Tris,
Acorum, Cyperum, Cardamomum, several Nards,
Asarum, Phu, Malabathrum, Cassia, Cinnamon,
Costus, Scheenus, Calamus aromaticus, Balsa-
mum, Aspalathus, Crocus, &c., mention is also
made of Agallochton, which is described as a
wood brought from India and Arabia. In this
list, which we shall afterwards have frequent
occasion to refer to, we find Avallochnm asso-
ciated with most of the same substances which are
mentioned along with it in the above passages of
Scripture, whereas tne author describes the true
aloe in a very different part of his work. Subse-
quently to the time of Dioscorides, we find Agallo-
chum mentioned by Orobasius, Atius,and P, Aigi-
neta; but they add nothing to the tirst description.
The Arabs, however, as Rhases, Serapion, and Avi-
cenna, were well acquainted with this substance,
of which they describe several varieties, most)
named from the places where they were jrodtioet


AHALIM.


and give other particulars respecting it, besides
quoting Dioscorides and previous authors of their
own country. In the Latin translation of Avi-
cenna these pci oa aver under Agallo-
chum, Xilaloe, and Lignum aloes; but in the Ara-


bic edition of the same author, under wyetel
Aghlajooa, egkl Aghalookhi, but most fully
under dye ‘“Aod, pronounced ood. This is one


instance, and many others might be adduced, of
the Arabs describing the same thing under two
names, when they found a substance described by
the Greeks—that is, Galen and Dioscorides, un-
der one name, and were themselves acquainted
with it under another. In the Persian works on
Materia Medica (vide AparTacuim) we are in-
formed that agallokhee is the Greek name of this
substance, and that the Hindee name of one kind,
by them called aod-t-hindce, is aggur. Having
thus fraced a substance which was said to come
from India to the name by which it is known
in that country, the uext Jrocess would perhaps
Naturally have been to procure the substance, and
trace it to the plant which yielded it. We, how-
ever, followed the reverse method ; having first
obtained the substance called Agyur, we traced
it through its Asiatic synonymes, to the Agallo-
cham of Dioscorides, and, as related in the J/ustr.
of Himalayan Botany, p. 171, obtained in the
of Northern India three varieties of this
far-famed and fragrant wood—1. and-i-hindee ;
2a kind procured by commerce from Surat,
which, however, does not appear to difler essen-
tally from the third, aod--kinaree, which was
wid to come from China, and is, no doubt, the
Glamericum of Avicenna,
_ 10 the north-western provinces of India aggu
4 mid to be brought front Surat and Calcutta.
Gurciasab Horto (Clusius, Exotic. Hist.), writing
% this subject near the former place, says that it
4 called ‘ in Malacca garro, selectissimum autem
bac.’ Dr. Roxburgh, writing in Calcutta,
Wates that is the Sanscrit name of’ the
Meense or aloe-wood, which in Hindee is called
‘oor, and in Persian aod-hindee; and that there
is little or no doubt that the real calambae or
‘gallochum of the ancients is yielded by an
Tnmense tree, a native of the mountainous tracts
st and suuth-east from Silhet, in about 24° of
N. latitude. This plant, he says, cannot be dis-
Snguished from thriving plants exactly of the
fame age of the Garo de Malacca received from
that place, and then in the Botanic Garden of
Calcutta, He further states that small quantities
agallochum are sometimes imported into Cal-
Cutta by sea from the eastward ; but that such is
always deemed inferior to that of Silhet (Flora
Indi, 493), #
The Garo de Malacca was first described by
ck from a specimen presented to him by
a as that of the tree which yielded the
bois Paigle of commerce. Lamarck named this
fee Aquilaria Malaccensis, which Cavanilles
afterwards changed unnecessarily to A. ovata.
As Dr. Roxburgh found that his plant relooesd
same geuus, he named it Aguilaria Ag
chem, but it is printed Agadlocha in his Flora
Indica, probably by an oversight. He is of
opmaion that the Agcllochum secundarium of


AHALIM. 6


Ramphius (Amb. ii. 34, t. 10), which that author
received under the name of Agallochum malac-
cense, also belongs to the same genus, as well as
the Sinfoo of Kempfer (Amdn. Exot. p. 908),
and the Ophispermum sinense of Voureiro.


[Aquilaria Agallochum.}


These plants belong to the Linnean class and
order Decandria monogynia, and the natural
family of Agutlarinee ; at all events, we have
two trees ascertained as yielding this fragrant wood
—one, Aquilaria Agallochum, a native of Silbet ;
and the other, A. ovata or malaccensis, a native
of Malacca. ‘The missionary Loureiro, in his
piri da of the Flora of Cochin-China, describes
a third plant, which he names Aloerylum, ‘ idem
est ac lignum aloe,’ and the species A. Agallo-
chum, represented as a large tree growing in the
lofty mountains of Champava elastin to Co-
chin-China, about the 13th degree of N. lat. near:
the great river ‘ Lavum ;’ ‘Omunes veri aloes ligni

ies ex hac arbore procedunt, etiam pretiosie-
sima, que dici sulet Calambac.’ ‘This tree, he- °
longing to the class and order Decundria mono-
gynia of Linnewus, and the natural family of
Leguminosa, las always been admitted as one
of the trees yielding Agallochum. But as Lou-
reiro himself confesses that he had only once seen
a mutilated branch of the tree in flower, which.
by Iong carriage, had the petals, anthers, and
stigma much bruised and torn, it is not impos-
sible that this may also belong to the genus Aqui-
laria, especially as his tree agrees in so manv
points with that described by Dr. Roxburgh,
as already observed by the latter in his Hist.
Flor. Ind. 1.c. | Rumphius has described and
figured a third plant, which he named arbor ex-
ceéans, from ‘ Blindhout,’ in consequence of
its acrid juice destroying sight—whence the
generic name of Excecaria; the specific one
of. agallochum he applied, because its wood is
similar to and often substituted for agallochum ;
¢ Lignum hoc tantam hahet cum agallocho simi-
litudinem.’ And epi that it was sometimes
exported as such to Europe, and even to China.
This tree, the Exceecaria agallochum, of the Lin-
neean class and order Dicecia triandria, and the
natural family of Euphorbiacez, is also very com-
mon in the delta of the Ganges, where it is called
Geria ; ‘ but the wood-cutters of the Sunder.


96 AHALIM.


bunds,’ Dr. Roxburgh says, ‘who are the people
best acquainted with the nature of this tree, re-
pet the pale, white, milky juice thereof to be

ighly acrid and very dangerous.” The only use
male of the tree, as far as Dr. Roxburgh could
learn, was for charcoal and firewood. Agallochum
of any sort is, he believed, never found in this
tree, which is often the only one quoted as that
yielding agila-wood; but, notwithstanding the
hegative testimony of Dr. Roxburgh, it may, in
particular situations, as stated by Rumphius, yield
a substitute for that fragrant and long-famed wood,

Having thus traced the agallochum of commerce
to the trees which yield it, it is extremely interesting
to find that the Malay name of the substance,
which is agile, is so little different from the
Hebrew ; not more, indeed, than may be observed
in many well-known words, where the hard g of
one languaze is turned into the aspirate in another.
It is therefore probable that it was by the name
agila (aghil, in Rosenmiiller, Bibl Bot. p. 231)
that this wvod was first known in commerce,
heing couveved across the Bay of Bengal to the
island of Ceylon or the peninsula of India, which
the Arab or Phirnician traders visited at very
remote periods, and where they obtained the early-
known spices and precious stones of India. It is
not a little curious that Captain Hamilton (Ac-
count of E. Indies, i. 68) mentions it by the name
of agala, an odoriferous wood at Muscat. We
know that the Portuguese, when they reached the
eastern coast from the peninsula, obtained it under
this name, whence they called it pao d'aguila, or
eagle-wood ; which is the origin of the geucric
uame Aquilaria.

The term agila, which in Hebrew we suppose
to have been converted into a@hel, and from
which were formed akadim and ahaloth, appears
to have been the source of its confusion with
aloes. Sprengel has observed that the primitive
tiame scems to be preserved in the Arabic ap-


pellations agl!l and g\t{, which may be read
alloeh (or alloet) and allieh, These come ex-
tremely near \L! aelwa, pronounced elica—the


Hindoo name of the medical aloe. Hence
the two names became confounded, and one of
them applied to two very different substances,
But it) was soou found necessary to distin-
guish the agallochum by the term &vAaddyy,
which has been translated into lign-aloe. That
the name aloe was considered to be synonymous
with ahalin, at an early period, is evident, as
§ the Chaldce translation of the Psalms and Can-
ticles, the old Latin version of the Proverbs and
Canticles, and the Syriac translation, have all
rendered the Hebrew word by aloes’ (Rosenmiiller,
doc. p. 234). There can be little or no doubt
that the same odoriferous agila is intended in the
passage of John xix. 39. When the body of our
Saviour was taken down from the cross, Nico-
demus, we are told, brought myrrh and aloes
for the purpose of winding it in linen clothes
with these spices. But the quantity (100 lbs.)
used has been objected to by some writers, and
therefore Dr. Harris has suggested, that, ‘ instead
of éxardv, it might originally have been Sexardv,
10 Ibs. weight.’ It is well known, however, that
very large quantities of spices were occasionally
used at the funerals of Jews. But befure object-


AHALIM.


ing to the quantity of this expensiye wood, die-

tants should have ascertained the proportions
in which it was mixed with the myrrh, an article
sufficiently abundant and of moderate price, be
cause easily obtained by the Arabians trom the
opposite coast of Africa. Dr, Harris has, more-
over, objected, that ‘ the Indian ligu-alves is so udo-
riferous and so agreeable, that it stands in no need
of any composition to increase or moderate its
perfume.’ But this very excellence makes it
better suited for mixing with less fragrant sub-
stances, and, however large the quantity of these
substances, like the broken vase, ‘the scent of the
roses will hang round it still.’

The only passage where there is any difficulty
is that in which there is the carliest mention of
the ahalok (Num. xxiv. 6). Here Balaam,
referring to the flourishing condition of the Israel-
ites, says, ‘as the trees of @halim, which the
Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the
waters.” Whether the expression is here to be un-
derstood literally, or meiely as a poctical form,
is doubtful, especially as authorities dilter as to
the true reading; some versions, as the Septua-
gint, Vulgate, Syriac, and Arabic, having ‘tents’
instead of ‘lign-alves,’ frum which it would seem
that, in place of DOAN, ahalin, they lad found


in their copies pay, ohalim (Rozenmiiller,
p- 235).

In Arabian authors numerous varieties of a zallo-
chum are mentioned, These are enumerate.l by
various writers (Cels. [ierabot. p. 143). Persian
authors mention only three :—L. Aud-i-Arndce, that
is, the Indian; 2. Aod-i-chinee, or Chinese kind
(probably that from Cochin-China); while the
third, or Sanunduree, aterm generally applied to
things brought from sea, may have reference to
the inferior variety from the Indian islands. In
old works, such as those of Bauhin and Ray,
three kinds are also mentioned :—1l. Ayalluchum
prestantissimum, also called Calambac ; 2. A. Of-
ficinarum, or Palo de Aguilla of Linschoten; 3.
A. sylvestre, or Agzalla brava. But besides these
varieties, obtained from different localities, pore
haps from diflerent plants, there are alsu distinct
varicties, obtainable from the same plant. Thus
in a MS. account by Dr. Roxburgh, to which
we have had access, and where. in a letter, dated
8th Dec., 1808, from R. K. Dick, esq, judve
and magistrate at Silket, it is stated that four difs
ferent qualities may be obtained from the same
tree:—Ist. GAurkee, which sinks in water, and
sells from 12 to 16 rupees per seer of 2 Ths.; 2nd.
Doim, 6 to § rupees per seer; 3rd. Sininla,
which floats in water, 3 to 4 rupees; and 4th,
Choorum, which is in small pieces, and also
floats in water, from 1 to 14 rupee per seer (the
three last names mean only 2nd, 3rd, and 4th
kinds); and that sometimes $0 Ibs. of these four
kinds may be obtained from one tree. — All these
tuggur-trees, as they are called, do not produce
the Aygur, nor does every part of even the must
productive tree. The natives cut into the wood
until they observe dark-coloured veins yielding
the perfume: these guide them to the place
containing the agyur, which generally exteuds
but a short way through the centre of the trunk or
branch. An essence, or attur, is obtained by
bruising the wood in a mortar, and then infusing
it in builing water, when the attur fluats uu the


AHASUERUS.


warface. Karly decay does not seem incident to
all kinds of agallochum, for we possess specimens
of the wood gored with fragrant resin (Jllustr.
Him. Bot. p. 173) which show no symptoms of it ;
bat still it is stated that the wood is sometimes
buried in the earth. This may be for the purpose of
Increasing its specific gravity. A large specimen
in the Musenm of the East India House displays
acancellated structure, in which the «resinous
farts remain, the rest of the wood having been
removed, apparently by decay.—J. F. R.


AHASUERUS (WITWON), or AcHasnve-
Rosui, is the name, or rather .he ¢i¢/e, of four Median
and Persian monarchs mentioned in the Bible. The
aarlier attempts of Simonis and others to derive this
name from the Persian dchash are unworthy of
mtice. Hyde (De Helig. Vet. Pers. p. 43) more
boldly proposed to disrezard the Masoretic punc-
tuatin, and to read the consonants, Acswares,
$0 a3 to correspond with ’Ogudpns, a Persian royal
title Among those who assume the identity of
the names Achashverosh and Xerxes, Grotelend
believes he has discovered the true orthography of
Xertes in the arrowhead inscriptions of Persepolis.
He tas deciphered signs representative of the
founds AAshhérshé, and considers the first part
of the word to be the Zend form of the later
shah, ‘king’ (Heeren's Idceny i. 2, 350). Gesenius
aly ‘in his Thesaurus) assents to this, except that
{a Reland had done hefore) he takes the first
lalof the word to be the original form of sh’r,
Gon, and the latter to be that of shah. The
Hebrew Achashverosh might thus be a modifica-
ton of Khshhershé : the prosthetic aleph being
Priixed (as even Scalizer suggested), and a
"W vowel being inserted between the first two
ond, merely to obviate the difficulty which, as
"well known, all Syro-Arabians find in pro-
loneng two consonants before a vowel. One of
ie highest aathorities in such questions, however,
AK. Pott (Etymol. Forschungen, i. p. Ixv.),
Considers Xerxes to be a compound of the Zend
‘athra, king (with loss of the t), and esahya, also
Meaning king, the original form of shah; and

Mzzets that Achashverosh—its identity with

"xe, ashe thinks, not being establistied—may
i thePeblvi Auzcaresh,‘hero™ (from Au,‘ good,’ and
<ur, ‘strength’ }, corresponding to &phios, which

“lotus (vi. 98) says is the true sense of Xerxes.
ee indeed, first proposed the derivation trom
siti (in his Archaol. ii. 2, a); but then he
is thought that the first part of the name was
i, re 4 modern Persian word, which only seems
th “enote price, value. Lastly, it deserves notice

at the kethib, in Esther x. 1, has WMS,
at Ackashresh ; and that the Syriac version
i ae (and sometimes the Arabic also, as in Dan.

: iene the name Achshiresh. gen adopts
a ethib as the authentic consonants of the
ate but changes the vowels to Achshdresh, and

no his etymology accordingly.

hae first Alasuerus (Sept. "Acgotnpos, Theo-
. 1, Eéptys) is incidentally mentioned, in
; nei c as the father of Darius,the Mede. It
ints ae ly azreed that the person here referred to

“te Astyages of profane history. See the article

ARICR,
nie _Ahasuerus (Sept. "Agcotnpos) oc-
beginning of Wv. 6, where it is said that in the

ing of his reign the enemies of the Jews


AHASUERUS. 7


wrote an accusation against them, the result of
which is not mentioned. The whole questiun, as
tothe Persian king here meant, depends on the
light in which the passage of this chapter, from
ver. 6 to 24, is regarded. The view which Mr.
Howes seems to have first proposed, and which Dr.
Hales adupted in his Analysis of Chronology,
proceeds on the theory that the writer of this chap-
ter, after mentioning the interruption to the build-
ing of the temple from the time of Cyrus down to
that of Darius, king of Persia (ver. 1-5), is led,
by the association of the subject, to enter into a
detail of the hindrances thiown in the way of
building and fortifying the city (after the temple
had been completed), under the successors of
Darius Hystaspis (ver. 6-23); and that, after
this digressive anticipation of events posterior to
the reign of Darius, he returns (in ver. 24) to the
history of the building of the temple under that
prince. This view necessarily makes the Achash-
verosh and Artachshashta of ver.6 and 7 to be the
successors of Darius Hystaspis, i. e. to be Xerzes
and Artazerzes Longimanus. The main argu-
ment on which this theory rests, seems to be the
circumstance that, in the whole passage, there is
no mention whatever of the temple; but, on thé
contrary, that the setting up the zad/s of the rebel-
lious city forms the sole ground of complaint : so
that the passage must refer to what occurred after
the temple was finished (see the extract from
Howes in the Pictorial Bible, ad loc.).

There are, however, some objections against the
conclusiveness of this reasoning; for, first, even
assuming the object of the enemies of the Jews, in
this accusation, to have been to hinder the build-
ing of the temple, it is yet easy to conceive how
the omission of all mention of the temple might be
compatible with their end, and dependent on the
means they were obliged to employ. They could
only obtain their object through the Persian king ;
they therefure used arguments likely to weigh
with him. They appealed to motives of state
policy. Accordingly, they sought to alarm his
Jealousy lest the rebellious city should become
strong enough to resist tribute, and refuse to allow
the transit of his armies; they drew attention to
the rebuilding of the defences, as the main point of
the argument; and said nothing about the temple,
because that would be a matter of secondary
importance in the only point of view in which the
subject would appear to the Persian king. But,
secondly, it has been shown hy a minute inquiry
by Trendelenburg (in Eichhorn’s Einlett. in die
Apocryph. Schrift. p. 351), that the first book of
the apocryphal Esdras is principally a free, but in

arts continuous, translation of the canonical

Ezra. It is, therefore, remarkable that the author
of Esdras, who has taken this very aceount of the
accusation from Ezra, was so far from discerning
the omission of the temple, and the conclusion that
Mr. Howes has drawn from it, that Ais letter
(i. 16-30) states, that ‘The Jews, being come inte

erusalem, that rebellious city, do build the mar-
ket-place, and repair the walls of it, and do lay the
foundation of the temple . « » » And forasmuch
as the things pertaining to the temple are noto in
hand, we think it meet not to neglect such a mat-
ter.’ Josephus also (Antig. xi. 2), conformably
to his general adherence, in this far to the apo-
eryphal Esdras, both uses, in Ais letter, the same
terms about the reconstruction of the temple being

az


a8 AHASUERUS.


then commenced, and even tells the whole story as
referring to Cambyses, which makes it clear that
he understood the passage of the immediate suc-
cessor of Cyrus. Thirdly, it is even probable, 4
priori, that the rebuilding of the temple and of
the city itself would, to a certain extent, necessa-
rily go on together. The Jews must have had
sufficient time and need, in the fifteen years be-
tween the accession of Cyrus and that of Darius Hys-
taspis, to erect some buildings for the sustenance
and defence of the colony, as well as for carrying
on the structure of the temple itself. As we read
of ¢ ceiled houses’ in Hagyai i. 4, they may have
built defences sufficient to give a colour to the
statements of the letter; and enough to free a cri-
tic from the necessity of transferring the passage
in Ezra to the time of Artaxerxes Longimanus,
solely because it speaks of the erection of the wadls.
Moreover, as Ezra (ix. 9) speaks of God having ena-
bled the Jews to repair the temple, and of bis hav-
ing ‘ given them a wall in Jerusalem,’ we find that,
when the temple was finished (and no evidence
shows how long before that), they actually had
built a wall. Josephus also (intig. xi. 4, 4)
Mentions even ‘strong walls with which they hed
surrounded the city’ befure the temple was com-
ici (It is worth while to remark that Dr.
ales, speaking of this wadé of Ezra, endeavours,
consistently with his theory, to make it * most
robably mean the fence uf a shepherd's fold,
here figuratively taken for their establishment in
their own land.’ But any lexicon will sliow that
V7 means a fence, a wall, generally ; and that
it is only limited by the context to mean the wall
of agarden, the fence of u fold.) Again, it is
assumed that Neliemiah shows that the walls of
the city were not built until his time. Not such,
nor the same, as he erected, granted. But—to
borrow a remauk of J. D. Michaelis—when we
read in Neh. i. 2, of the Jews who returned to
Persia, and who answered Nehemiah’s inquiry
after the fate of the colony, by informing him that
* the wall of Jerusalem is broken down and the
gates thereof bumed with fire,’ is it possible that
they canrefer to the destruction of the walls by
Nebuchadnezzar, ‘144 years before? Was such
news 80 long in reaching Nehemiah? Is it not
much easier to believe that the Jews, soon after
their return, erected some defences against the
hostile and predatory clans around them; and
that, in the many years which intervene between
the books of Nehemiah and Ezra (of which we
have no record), there was time enough for those
tribes to have burt the gates and thrown down
the walls of their imperfect fortifications ?- Lastly,
the view of Mr. Howes seems to require peculiar
philological arguments, to reconcile the construc-
tion of the digression with the ordinary style of
Hebrew narrative, and to point out the particles,
or other signs disjunctive, by which we may know
that ver. 24 is to be severed from the preceding.
Nor is it altogether a trivial objection to his
theory, that no scholar appears to have entertained
it before himself. The nearest approach to it has
been made by Vitringa, who, in his Hiypotyposi
Temporum (cited in Michaelis's Adnott. Uberior.),
suggests, indeed, that ver. 6 refers to Xerxes, but
explains all the rest of the passage as applying to
Cambyses.
If the arguments here adduced are satisfactory,
the Abasuerus of our passage is the immediate


AHASUERUS.


successor of Cyrus—the frantic tyrant ~Cambyses,
who came to the throne n.c. 529, and died after a
reign of seven years and five months; and the
discrepancy between Ezra and the apocryphal
Esdras and Josephus—both of whom Meare out
ver. 6, and mention only the king of whom the de-
tailed story of the letter is related, whom the one
calls Artaxerzes, and the other €ambyses—may
be recoyciled, by supposing that they each make
the reigns of Cambyses and of the impostor Smer-
dis into one.

The third Ahasuerus (Sept. "Apratépéns) is the
Persian king of the book of Esther. The chief
facts recorded of him there, and the dates of
their occurrence, which are important in the sub-
sequent inquiry, are these: In the third year of
his reign he made a sumptuous banquet for all
his nobility, and prolunged the feast for 180 days.
Being on one occasiun merry with wine, he
ordered his queen Vashti to be brought out, to
show the people her beauty. On her refusal to
violate the decorum of her sex, he not only in-
dignantly divorced her, but published an edict
concerning her disobedience, in order to insure to
every husband in his dominions the rule in his
own house. In the seventh year of his reign
he married Esther, a Jewess, who however con-
ceale.l her parentage. In the éwe/fth year of his
reign, his minister Haman, who had received
some slights from Mordecai the Jew, offered him
10,000 talents of silver for the privilege of or-
dering a massacre of the Jews in all parts of the
empire on an appointed day. The king refused
this immense sum, but acceded to his request;
and couriers were despatched to the most distant
provinces to enjoin the execution of this decree.
Belore it was accomplished, however, Mordecai
and Esther obtained such an influence over him,
that he so far annulled his recent enactinent as to
despatch other couriers to empower the Jews to
defend themselves manfully against their enemies
on that day; the result of which was, that they
slew 860 of his native subjects in Shushan, and
75,000 of them in the provinces.

Although almost every Medo-Persian king, from
Cyaxares 1. down to Artaxernes IIE. (Ockus), bas in
his tur found some champion to assert his title to
be the Ahasuerus of Esther, yet the precent inquiry
may reasonably be confined within much nar-
rower limits than would be requisite for a dis-
cussion of all the rival claims which have been
preferred. A succinct statement, principally de-
rived from Justis ingenious Versuch wler den
Konig Ahasverus (in Eichhorn’s Repertoriun,
xv. 1-38), will suffice to show that Darius [Lysta-
ave is the earliest Persian king in whom the
plainest marks of identity are nut evidently want-
mg; that Darius Hystuspis himself is, neveithes
less, excluded on Jess obvious, but still adequate
grounds; and thit the whole question ley and
with what preponderance of probalility, between
Xerxes and his successor Artaxeracs Lungi-
manus.

As Ahasnerus reigned from India to Ethiopia
(Esth. i. 1), and imposed a tribute (not neces-
sarily for the first time) on the land and isles of
the sea (x.1); and laid the disobedience of
Vashti_ before the seven princes which see the
king's face, and sit first in the kingdom (i. 14):
it is argued that these three circumstances concur,
according to the testimony of profane history.


aeels


&


ES 8


~
a


sub
sa


Fount)


SP ba SE He


AHASUERUS.


sexclude all the predecessors of Darius Hystaspis.
For Danus was the first Persian king who sub-
dued India, which thenceforth formed the twen-
tieth province of his empire; and, as for Ethiopia,
Cambyses, who first invaded it, only obtained a
neg conquest there (Herod. iv. 44; iii. 25,
. Darius was also the first who imposed a
stated tribute on the different provinces of the
empire, as, from the times of Cyrus, the revenue
depended on the voluntary gifts of the people
(Herod. iii. 89). Lastly, the seven princes, and
their privilege of seeing the king's face, are traced
to the events attending the elevation of Darius to
throne: when the seven conspirators who slew
the usurper Smerdis stipulated, before ever it was
decided which of their number should obtain the
crown, that all the seven should enjoy special pri-
Tileges, and, among uthers, this very one of seemg
the king at any time without announcement
(Herod. iii. 81). This is confirmed by the fact,
although the Persian counsellors of the time
anterior to Darius are uften mentioned (as when
Cambyses laid befure them a question parallel to
that about Vashti, Herod. iii. 31), yet the definite
Dumber seven dues not occur; whereas, after
nus we find the seven counsellors both in
sand again in the reign of Artaxerxes Longi-
manus (Fara vii, 14). (It is an oversight to ap-
Pal to this account of the seven conspirators, in
et to find the precise number of secen princes.
% the narrative in Herodotus shows that, as
Ws was chosen king fiom among the seven,
here could only be six persons to claim the pri-
Mleve of seeing the king's face; not to insist that
es, who made a separate demand for himself,
aad who withtew from the party before those sti-
tons were made, may possibly have reduced
Tuner of privilesed counsellors to fice.)
nt neither can it Le Darius Hystaspis himself,
ough he possesses all these marks of accement
With the person intended in the book of Esther.
For, fst, not only can tone of the names of the
"en conspirators, as given either by Herodotus
& by Ctesias, be brought to accord with the
hames of the seven princes in Esther; but, what
Of greater importance, it is even more difficult
find the name of Darius himyelf in Achashve-
6 Fur, notwithstanding the diverse corrap-
sto which proper names are exposed wlhien
smitted through different fureizgn lancua:res,
® 15 yet such an agreement between the Zend
me found by Grotefend in the cuneifurm in-
“rptios, and the Darius of the Greeks, and
is “eresh (the name by which Darius Hystaspis
wuloubtedly designated elsewhere in the Old
Stament), that the genuineness of this title is
‘i {0 less suspicion than that of almost any
plica Penian king. It would, therefore, be inex-
ie ‘le that the author of the book of Esther
ve all others should not only not call him by
: net sacred as well as profane
y but should apply to him a name which
has leen shown to E ai in almost all con-
P Porary books of the Old Testament, to other
frsian kings. Secondly, the moral evidence is
Rah him. The mild and just character
‘ted to Darius renders it highly improbable
bbe pale the Jews bane i oe to
year of his reign, he should become a
pipe in the hands of Haman, and con-
extirpation, Lastly, we read of his


.


AHASUERUS. 99


marrying two daughters and a granddaughter of
Cyrus, and a daughter of Otanes—and these only ;
would Darius have repudiated one of these for
such a trifle, when his peculiar position, as the
first king of his race, must have rendered such
alliances indispensable ?

It only remains now to weigh the evidence
against Artaxerxes, in order to lead more co-
gently to the only alternative left—that it is
Xerxes. As Artaxerxes allowed Ezra to go to
Jerusalem with a colony of exiles in the seventh
year of his reign (Ezra vii. 1-7); and as he issued
a decree in terms so exceedingly favourable to
the religious as well as civil interests of the Jews
(giving them liberal grants and immunities,
speaking of their law as the law of the God of
heaven, and threatening punishment to whoever
would not do the law of God and of the king, Ezra
vii. 11-26): how could Haman, jive years after-
tcards, venture to describe the Jews to him as a
people whom, on the very account of their law, it
was not for the king’s profit to suffer? And how
could Haman so directly propose their extermi-
Nation, in the face of a decree so signally in their
favour, and so recently issued by the same king ?
especially as the laws of the Medes and Persians
might not be altered! Again, as Artaxerxes
(assuming always that he is the Artachshast of
Fara vii. 1, and wot Nerres, as is, nevertheless
maintained by J. D. Michaelis, Jahn, and De
Wette) was capable of such liberality to the
Jews in the seventh year of his reign, Jet us not
forget that, if he is the Ahasuerus of the book of
Esther, it was in that same year that he married
the Jewess. Now, if—byv taking the first and
tenth months in the seventh year of the king (the
dates of the departure of Ezra, and of the marriage
of Esther) to be the first and tenth months of the
Hebrew year (as is the usual mode of notation;
see Hitzig, Die xii Aleinen Propheten, note to
Hagzai i. 1), and not the first and tenth from the
period of his accession—we assume that the de
parture of Ezra took place after his marriage
with her, his clemency might be the effect of her
influence on his mind. Then we have to explain
how he could be induced to consent to the extir-
pation of the Jews in the twelfth year of his reign
notwithstanding that her intluence still continu
—tor we find it evidently at work in the twelfth
year. But if, on the other hand, his indulgence
to Ezra was before his marriage, then we have
even a greater difliculty to encounter. For then
Artaxerxes must have acted from his own un-
biassed lenity, and his purposed cruelty in the
twelfth year would place him in an incongruous
opposition with himself. As we, moreover, find
Artaxerxes again propitions to their interests, in


_the twentieth year of his relyn—when he allowed


Nehemiah to return to Jerusalem—it is much
easier to believe that he was also favourably dis-
posed to them in the twelfth. At any rate, it
would be allowing Esther a long time to exercise
an influence on his disposition, if his clemency in
the twentieth year was due to her, and not to his
own inclination. Besides, the fact that neither
Ezra nor Nehemiah gives the least hint that the
liberal policy of Artaxerxes towards them was
owing to the influence of their countrywoman, is
an important negative pvint in the scale of proba-
bilities. In this case also there is a serious diffi-
culty in the name. As Artaxerxes . called
ax


100 AHASUERUS.


Artachshast in Ezra and Nehemiah, we cer-
tainly might expect the author of the book of
Esther to agree with them in the name of a king
whom they all had had such occayion to know.
Nor is it, perhaps, unimportant to add, that
Norberg asserts, on the authority of native Per-
sian historians, that the mother of Balman, @. e.
Artaxerxes Lungimanus, was a Jewess ( Opus-
cule Acad. iii, 218). This statement would
agree excellently with the theory that Xerces was
Ahasuerus. Lastly, the joint testimony bore
to his clemency and magnanimity by the acts
recorded of him in Ezra and Nehemiah, and by
the accordant voice of profane writers (Plutarch,
Artazerzes ; Diodor. Sic. xi. 71; Ammian. Mar-
cell. xxx. 8), prevents us fiom recognising Ar-
taxerxes in the debauched, imbecile, and cruel
tyrant of the book of Esther.

On the ground of moral resemblance to that
tyrant, however, every trait leads us to Xerxes.
The king who scourged and fettered the sea; who
beheaded his enyineers because the elements de-
stroyed their bridge over the Hellespont; who so
ruthlessly slew the eldest son of Pythius because
"his father besought him to leave him one sole sup-
port of his declining years; who dishonoured the
remains of the valiant Leonidas; and who be-
guiled the shame of his defeat by such a course of
sensuality, that he publicly offered a reward for
the inventor of a new pleasure—is just the despot
to divorce his queen because she would not ex-

e herself to the gaze of drunken revellers ; is
just the despot to devote a whole people, his sub-
jects, to an imliscriminate massacre; and, by way
of preventing that evil, to restore them the myht
of self-defence (which it is hard to conceive how
the first edict ever could have taken away), and
thus to sanction their slaughtering thousands of
his other subjects. :

There are also remarkable coincidences of date
between the history of Xerxes and that of Abha-
suerus. In the third year of his reign the latter
gave a grand feast tohis nobles, which lasted 180
days (Esth. i. 3); the former, in Ais third year,
also assembled his chief’ officers to deliberate on
the invasion of Greece (Herod. vil. 8). Nor
should we wonder to find no nearer agreement in
the two accounts than is expressed in the mere
fact of the nobles being assembled. The two re-
lations are quite compatible: each writer only
mentioning that aspect of the event which had
interest fur him. Again, Ahasuerus married
Esther at Shushan, in the seventh year of his
reign: in the same year of Ais reign, Xerxes re-
tured to Susa with the mortification of his de-
feat, and songht to forget himself in pleasure ;—
not an unlikely occasion for that quest for fair
virgins for the harem (Esth. ii. 2). Lastly, the
tribute imposed on the land and isles of the sea
also accords with the state of his revenue ex-
hausted by his insane attempt against Greece.
In fine, these arguments, negative and attirmative,
render it so highly probable that Xerxes is the
Ahasuerus of the book of Esther, that to de-
mand more conclusive evidence, would be to
mistake the very nature of the question.

The fourth Ahasuerus CAcotnpos) is mentioned
in Tobit xiv. 15, in connection with the destruction
of Nineveh. That circumstance points out Cy-
axares J. as the person intended (Herod. i. Has


AHAZ.


AHAVA (SDN ; Sept. ’Aovd, Ezra viii. 91
31, and ’Evel, verse 15), the river by which the
Jewish exiles assembled their second caravan
under Ezra, when returning to Jerusalem. It
would seem from ch. viii. 15, that it was desig-
nated from a town of the same name: ‘I as-
sembled them at the river that flows towards
Ahava.’ In that case, it could not have been of
much importance in itself; and possibly it was
no other than one of the numerous canals with
which Babylonia then abounded. This is pro-
bably the true reason that Biblical geographers
have failed to identify it. Some have sought the
Ahava in the Lycus or Little Zab, finding that
this river was anciently called Adiaba or Diaba.
But these names would, in Hebrew characters,
have no resemblance to NIN; and it is exceed
ingly unlikely that the rendezvous for a Palestine
caravan should have been north-east of the Tigris
in Assyria, with the two great rivers, Tigris and
Euphrates, between them and the plains they were
to traverse. It is not so clear, however, that
Rosenmuller is right in supposing that it probably
lay to the south-west of Babylonia, because that
was in the direction of Palestine. It is too
much forgotten by him and other writers, that
caravan routes seldom run in straight lines be
tween two places. In this case, a straight line
would have taken the caravan through the whole
breadth of a desert seldom traversed but by the
Arabs; and to avoid this, the usual route for
large caravans lay, and still lies, north-west through
Mesopotainia, much above Babylonia ; and then,
the Euphrates being crossed, the direction is south-
west to Palestine. The greater probability, there-
fore, is, that the Ahava was one of the streams
or canals of Mesopotamia communicating with
the Euphrates, somewhere in the north-west of
Babylonia.


AHAZ (IX, possessor; Sept."Axa(; Joseph.
"Axd(ys), son of Jotham, and eleventh king of
Judah, who reigned sixteen years, from n.c. 775
to 759. Ahaz was the most corrupt monarch that
had hitherto appeared in Judah. He respected
neither Jehovah, the law, nor the prophets; he
broke through all the restraints which law and
custom had imposed upon the Hebrew kings, and
had regard only to his own depraved inclinations,
He introduced the religion of the Syrians into
Jerusalem, erected altars to the Syrian gis, al-
tered the temple in many respects after the Syrian
model, and at length ventured to shut it up alto-
gether. Such a man could not exercise that faith in
Jehovah, as the political head of the nation, which
ought to animate the courage of a Hebrew king.
Hence, after he had sustained a few repulses from
Pekah and Rezin, his allied foes, when the Edom-
ites had revolted trum him, and the Philistines
were making incursions into his country, notwith-
standing a sure promise of divine deliverance, he
called Pul, the fing of Assyria, to his aid [Assy-
ria]. He even became tributary to that monarch,
on condition of his obliging Syria and Israel to
abandon their design of destroying the kingdom
of Judah; and thus afforded to Tiglath-pilezer,
the successor of Pul, an opportunity of conquering
Syria, Israel beyond the daatar: and Galilee. It
would be wrong, however, to say that this would
not have occurred but for the application of


Ahaz; for the Assyrians were then prepared to


waeerRdABe er PRTBR ARTE ERERERE


AHAZIAH.


eatend their empire west of the Euphrates, and
would assuredly have done so without the imme-
diate occasion which that application offered.
The Assyrians, as might be expected, acted only
with a view to their own interests, and afforded
Ahaz no real assistance; on the contrary, they
drove him to such extremities that he was
tarcely able, with all the riches of the temple,
of the nobility, and of the royal treasury, to
po release from his troublesome protectors.

died ut the age of thirty-six (2 Kings xvi.;
2 Chruw. xxviii.; Isa. vii.; Jahn, Biblisches Ar-
chiologie, ii. 185; iii, 145; Hales, Analysis, ii.
417-419).

1. AHAZIAH (AMAR and §ON, whom
Jehorah sustains ; Sept. *Oxolias), son and suc-
cessor of Ahab, and seventh king of Israel. He
Teigued two years, B.c. 897-895. It seems that
Jezebel exercised over her son the same influence
which had guided her husband; aud Ahaziah
pursued the evil courses of his futher. The
mst signal public event of his reign was the
revolt of the Moabites, who took the opportunity
of the defeat and death of Ahab to discontinue
the tribute which they had paid to the Israelites.

atiah became a party in the attempt of Jeho-

phat, king of Judah, to revive the maritime
huftic by the Red Sea; in consequence of which
ie enterprise was blasted, and came to nothing
(2Chrn, xx. 35-37). Soon after, Ahaziah, having
*" much injured by a fall from the roof-gallery
his talace, had the infatuation to send to
conault the oracle of Baal-zebub, the god of
™, respecting his recovery. But the mes-
‘users were met and sent back by Elijah, who
Snounced tothe king that he should rise no more

im the bed on which he lay (1 Kings xxii. 51,
2 Kings j. 50).
ie AHAZIAH, otherwise Jeioanaz, son of
j m by Athaliah, daughter of Ahab and
eetel, and sixth king of Judah. He reigued
ie one year (u.c. 885), and that ill, suffering
™melf in all things to be guided by the wicked
“unsels of his idolatrous mother, Athaliah. He
Cultivated the eonnections which had unhappily
oes up between the two dynasties, and which
i tow been cemented by marriage. Hence he
Wined his uncle Jehoram of Israel in an expe-

On against Hazael, king of Damascene-Syria,

recovery of Ramoth-Gilead; and after-

his Paid him a visit while he lay wounded in
ummer palace of Jezreel. The two kings
Cut in their several chariots to meet Jehu ;
Wien Jehoram was shut through the heart,

‘ah attempted to escape, but was pursued,
tad being mortally wounded, had only strength to
ach Me-iddo, where he died. His body was
Caarever by his servants in a chariot to Jeru-
em for mterment (2 Kings ix. 22-28). In
Ton. xxii. 7-9, the circumstances are some-

What ditlerently stated ; but the variation is not
: tial, and requires no particular notice. It
— from that passage, however, that Jehu
in Tight in considering Ahaziah as included

': 8 commission to root out the house of Ahab.
ane Ahab’s descendant (grandson by the

ie rer side) both in blood and character; and

pas m Jezreel at the time of Jelu’s

borden: 18 considered as an arrangement of
nee fur accomplishing his doom.


AHIMAAZ, 101


AHIAH (ASN, frater Jehove, i.e. friend
% God ; Sept. ’Ax:d, 1 Sam. viii. 3), eon of

hitub, and high-priest in the reign of Saul,
and brother and predecessor of the Abimelech
whom Saul slew for assisting Navid. Seeing that
Abimelech, a son of Ahitub, was alse high-priest
in the same reign (1 Sam. xxii. 1), some have
thought that both names belonged to the same
person ; but this seems less likely than the expla-
nation which has just been given. +

AHIAH, one of the two secretaries of Solo-
mon (1 Kings iv. 3). Two other persons of this
name occur in 1 Sam. xiv. 3; 1 Chron. viii. 7.

AHIAM, one of David's thirty heroes (2 Sam.
xxiii. le

AHIEZER, the hereditary chief or prince of
the tribe of Dan at the time that the lites
quitted Egypt (Num. i. 12).

AHIHUD, a prince of the tribe of Asher,
who, with the other chiefs of tribes, acted with
Joshua and Eleazer in dividing the Promised
Land (Num. xxxiv. 27).

AHIJAH (same name as Antan), a prophet
residing in Shiloh in the times of Solomon and
Jeroboam. He appears to have put on record
some of the transactions of the former reign
(2 Chron. ix. 29). It devolved on him. to an-
nounce and sanction the separation of the ten
tribes from the house of David, as well as the
foundation (1 Kings xi. 29-39), and, after many


- years, the subversion of the dynasty of Jeroboam


(1 Kings xiv. 7-11) [Jrronoam].

AHIKAM, one of the four persons of distine-
tion whom Josiah sent to consult Huldah, the
wrophetess (2 Kings xxii. 12-14). Ahikam and
Mis family are honourably distinguished for their
protection of the prophet Jeremiah (Jer. xxvi. 29;
xxxix. 14),


AHIMAAZ (j'YOMN, brother of anger, :.e.
trascible ; Sept. "Axiudas), wn and successor of
Zadok, who was joint bigh-priest in the reign
of David, and sole high-priest in that of Solomon.
His history chicfly belongs to the time of David,
to whom he rendered an important service during
the revolt of Absalom. David having refused to
allow the ark of God to be taken from Jerusalem
when he fled thence, the high-priests, Zadok and
Abiathar, necessarily remained in attendance
upon it; but their sons, Ahimaaz and Jouathan,-
concealed therselves outside the city, to be in
readiness to bear off to David any important in
formation respecting the movements and designs
of Absalom which they might receive from
within. Accordingly, Hushai iaving commu-
nicated to the priests the result of the council af
war, in which his own advice was preferred to
that of Abithoplel [Ausaiom], they instantly
sent a girl (probably to avoid suspicion) to direct
Abimaaz and Jouathan to speed away with the
intelligence. The transaction, however, was wit-
nessed and betrayed by a lad, aul the messengers
were so hotly pursued that they took refuge iu a
dry well, over which the woman of the house
placed a covering, and spread thereon parched
corn. She told the pursuers that the messengers
had passed on in baste; and when all was safe,
she released them, on which they made their way
to David (2 Sam. xv. 24-375 xvii. 15-21). As
may be inferred from his being chosen tor this
service, Ahimaaz was swift of foot. Of this we


163 AHIMAN.


beve a notable example soon after, when, on the
defeat and death of lesion: he prevailed on Joab
to allow him to carry the tidings to David.
Another messenger, Cushi, had previously been
despatched, but Ahimaaz outstripped him, and
first came in with the news. He was known afar
off by the manner of his running, and the king
said, ‘ He is a good man, and cometh with good
tidings ;’ and this favourable character is justified
by the delicacy with which he waived that part
of his intelligence concerning the death of Ab-
salom, which he knew would greatly distress s0
fond a father as David (2 Sam. xviii. 19-33).
AHIMAN, one of three famous giants, of the
race of Anak, who dwelt at Hebron when the
Hebrew spies explored the land (Num. xiii. 22).


AHIMELECH (7D2"NN, brother of the king,
ive. the king's friend ; Sept. "ABiwérex 3 Cod.
Alex. ’AyiméAex ), son of Abitub,and brother of
Ahiah, who was most. probably his predecessor in
the high-priesthood [Amram]. When David fled
from Saul, he weut to Nob, a city of the priests
in Benjamin, where the tabernacle then was; and
by representing himself as on pressing business
from the king, he obtained from Ahinelech, who
had no other, some of the sacred bread which had
been removed trom the presence-table. He was
also furnished with the sword which he had him-
self taken from Gehah, and which had been laid
up as a trophy in the tabernacle (1 Sam. xxi.
1-9). These circumstances were witnessed by
Doeg, an Edomite in the service of Saul, aud
were so reported by him to ths jealous king as to
appear acts of connivance at, and support. to,
David's imagined disloyal designs. Saul imme-
diately sent for Ahimelech and the other priests
then at Nob, and laid this treasonable offence to
their charge; but they declared their ignorance
eof any hostile designs on the part of David
towards Saul or his kingdom. This, however,
availed them not; for the king commanded his
guard to slay them. Their refusal to fall upon

ersons invested with so sacred a character might

ve brought even Saul to reason; but be re-
peated the order to Doeg himself, and was too
readily obeyed by that malignant. person, who,
with the men under his orders, not only slew
the priests then present, eighty-stx iu number, but
marched to Nob, and put to the sword every
living creature it contained. The only priest that
escaped was Abiathar, Ahimelech’s son, who fled
to David, and afterwards became high priest (1
Sam. xxii.) [Anratuar].

AHINADAB, one of the twelve oflicers who,
in as many districts into which the country was
divided, raised supplies of provisions in monthly
rotation for the royal househuld. © Abinadah’s
district was the southern half of the region beyond
the Jordan (1 Chron. vi. 23). :

AHINOAM (DYINR, brother of grace ;
Sept. "Axivdaz), a woman of Jezreel, one of the
wives of David, and mother of Amnon. She was
taken ae by the Amalekites when they plun-
dered Ziklag, but was recovered by David (1 Sam.
xxv. 43; xxvii. 3; xxx. 5; 2 Sam. ii. 2; iii, 2).

AHIO (Nx, brotherly ; Sept., as an appel-
lative, Ais [Uzzah's} brothers—oi &BeAgo} avrod),
one of the sons of Abinadab, who, with his brother
Uzzah, drove the new cart on which the ark was


AHITUB.


placed when David first attempted to remove #%
to Jerusalem. Ahio went befure to guide the
oxen, while Uzzah walked by the cart (2 Sam,
vi. 3,4. [Uzzan.

AHIRA, chief of the tribe of Naphtali when
the Israelites quitted Egypt (Num. i. 15>

AHISHAR, the ofticer who was ‘ over the
household” of King Solomon (1 Kings iv. 6).
This has always been a place of high importance
and great influence in the East.


AHITHOPHEL (RMN, brother of fool-
ishness, i.e. foolish ; Sept. "AxirdpedA), the very
singular name of a man who, in the time of
David, was renowned throughout all Israel for
his worldly wisdom. He is, im fact, the only
man mentioned in the Scriptures as having ac-
quired 4 reputation for political sagacity among
the Jews; and they regarded his counsels as
oracles (2 Sam. xvi. 23). He was of the council
of David; but was at Giloh, his native place, at
the time of the revolt of Absalom, by whom he was
summoned to Jerusalem; and it shows the
strength of Absalom’s cause in Israel that a man
so capable of foreseeing results, and estimating
the probabilities of success, took his side in so
daring an attempt (2 Sam. xv. 12). The news
of his defection appears to have occasioned
David more alarm than any other single in
cident in the rebellion. He eamestly prayed
God to turn the sage counsel of Ahithophel
§to foolishness * (probably alludinz to his name);
aud being immediately after jicet by his
old friend Hushai, he inducca him te go
over to Absalom with the express view that he
might be instrumental in deteatinz the counsels
of this dangerous person (xv. 31-37). Psalm lv.
is supposed to contain (12-14) a further expres-
sion of David's feelings at this treachery of one
whom he had so completely trusted. aud whom
he calls §‘ My companion, my guide, and my
familiar friend.” The detestable advice which
Ahithophel gave Absalom to appropriate his
father's harem, committed him absolutely to the
cause of the young prince, since after that he
could hepe for no reconcilement with David
(2 Sam. xvi. 26-23). His proposal as to the con-
duct of the war undoubtedly indicated the best
course that could have been taken under the cir-
cumstances; and so it seemed to the council,
until Hushai interposed with his plausible ad-
vice, the object of which was to gain time to
enable David to collect his resources [Ansazost ].
When Abhithophel saw that his counsel was re-
jected for that of Hushai, the far-sceing man
gave up the cause of Absalom for lost; and he
forthwith saddled bis ass, returned to his home
at Giloh, deliberately settled his affairs, and then
hanged himself, and was buried in the sepulchre
of his fathers, p.c. 1023 (ch. xvii.). This is the
only case of suicide which the Old Testament re-
cords, unless the last acts of Samson and Saul
may be regarded as such,

1, AHITUB (AAOMIN, brother of goodness
or benignity, i.e. benign; Sept. Axit#8), son of
Phinehas, and grandson of the high-priest Eli.
His father Phinehas having been slain when the
ark of God was taken by the Philistines, he suc-
ceeded his grandfather Eli s.c. 1141, and was
ee succeeded by his son Ahiah about B.c.

093.


riwa ee


STS SPSS eoseterae’t eck rea bt


PReEkra’®


AHITUB.


9. AHITUB was also the name of the father
of Zadok, who was made high-priest by Saul
after the death of Ahimelech (2 Sam. viii. 17;
| Chron. vi. 8). There is not the slightest ground
for the notion that this Ahitub was ever high-priest
himself—indeed, it is historically impossible.

AHOLAH and AHOLIBAH (ADA and
nga), two fictitious or symbolical names
adopted by Ezekiel (xxiii. 4) to denote the
two kingdoms of Samaria (Israel) and Judah.
There is a significant force in these names which
must be noted. AHoLan, nbn, is usually
rendered ‘a tent,’ but more properly, tentorium
suum (habet illa), ‘she has her own tent or
temple,’ signifying that she has a tent or taber-

of her, own or of human invention. Ano-
LIBAH, nabne, means ‘ my tent, i.e. temple,
is in her,’ that is to say—I, Jehovah, have
given her a temple and religious service. They
are both symbolically described as lewd women,
adulteresses, prostituting themselves to the Egyp-
tans and the Assyrians, in imitating their abomi-
uations and idolatries ; wherefore Jebovah aban-
loved them to those very people for whom they
showed sich inordinate and impure affection.

were carried into captivity, and reduced to
the severest servitude. But the crime of Aholibah
Was greater than that of Aholah, for she possessed
‘nore distinguished privileges, and refused to be in-
‘tucted by the awful example of her sister's ruin.
The allegory is an epitome of the history of the
Jewish church.

AHOLIAB, of the tribe of Dan, a skilful
Uttilicer appointed along with Bezaleel to construct
the Tabemacle (Exod. xxxv. 34).

AHUZZATH (TYMS, @ possession), the
‘find’ of Abimelech IL, king of Gerar, who
attended him on his visit to Isaac (Gen. xxvi. 26).
Inhim occurs the first instance of that unofficial

t important personage in ancient Oriental
“ourts, called ‘the king's friend,’ or favourite.
Several interpreters, following the Chaldee and
Jerome, take Ahuzzath to be an appellative, de-
toting a company of friends, who attended Abi-
_. The Sept. has Ox0(a0 5 vuupayayds

‘Ou, .


AI ('Y, Josh. vil. 2; "YT, Gen. xii. 8; in
Neb. xi, 31, NYY; in Isa. x. 28, MY; Sept.
Anal, Ayyat, and Tat; Vulg. Hai) a royal
“ty of the Canaanites, which lay east of Bethel.
lt existed in the time of Abraham, who pitched
his tent between it and Bethel (Gen. xii. 8;
“ul. 3); but it is chiefly noted for its capture
and destruction by Joshua (vii. 2-5; viii. 1-29).

a a military transaction, is noticed else-
where {Amsuscape]. At a later period Ai
Was rebuilt, and is mentioned by eaiah | (x. 28),
and also after the captivity. :'The site was
kuown, and some scanty ruins still existed in
the time of Eusebius and Jerome ( Onomast. in
Agai), but Dr. Robinson was unable to discover
ny certain traces of either. He remarks (Bid.

searches, ii. 313), however, that its situation

ay regard to Bethel may be well determined by
te recorded in Scripture. hat Ai lay to
ve east of Bethel is distinctly stated ; and the two

ter et N0t 20 fur distant from each other but
the men of Bethel mingled in the pursuit of


AIL.’ 103
the Israelites when they feigned to flee before the
king of Ai, and thus both cities were left defence-
less (Josh. viii. 17); yet they were not so near
but that Joshua could place an ambush on the
west (or south-west) of Ai, without its being ob-
served by the men of Bethel, while he himself
remained behind in a valley to the north of Ai
(Josh. viii. 4, 11-13). A litfle to the south of a
village called Deir Diwan, and one hour's journey
from Bethel, the site of an ancient place is in-
dicated by reservoirs hewn in the rock, exca-
vated tombs, and foundations of hewn stone.
This, Dr. Robinson inclines to think, may mark
the site of Ai, as it agrees with all the intimations
as to its position. Near it, on the north, is the
deep Wady el-Mutyih, and towards the south-
west other smaller wadys, in which the ambus-
cade of the Israelites might easily have been
concealed.

AIL Ow; Sept. xplos; deer, generically, ac-
cording to Dr. Shaw) :

AJAL Ow; Sept. Zaapos; hart, in Deut. xii.

15; Ps. xlii. 1; Isa. xxxv.6):

AJALAH (MN; Sept. o7ércxos; hind, in

¥ Gen, xlix. 21; 2 Sam. xxii.

34; Job xxxix. 1; Ps. xviii. 31; Prov. v. 19;

Cant. ii. 7; Jer. xiv. 5; Habak. iii. 19).


* [Cervus barbarus.]


The hart and hind of our versions and of the older
comments ; but this interpretation is generally
rejected by recent writers, who either suppose
different ies of antelope to be meant, or,
with Dr. Shaw, consider the term to be generical
for several ies of deer taken together. Sir J. G.
Wilkinson believes Ajal to be the Ethiopian oryx,
with nearly straight horns. In the article Anrg-
Love it will be shown under what terms the Oryges
appear to be noticed in the Bible, and at present we
only observe that an Ethiopian species could not
well be meant where the clean animals fit for the
food of Hebrews are indicated, nor where allu-
sion is made to suffering from thirst, and to high
and rocky places as the refuge of females, or of
both, since all the species of oryx inhabit the
open plains, and are not remarkable for their desire
of drinking; nor can either of these propensities
be siping ascribed to the true antelopes, or ga-”
zellw, of Arabia and Syria, all being residents of
the plain and the desert; like the oryges, often


8


104 AIL.


geen at immense distances from water, and un-
willing to venture into forests, where their velocity
of flight and delicacy of structure impede and
destroy them. Taking the older interpretation,
and reviewing all the texts where hart and hind
are mentioned, we find none where these ob-
jections truly apply. Animals of the stag kind
prefer the security: of forests, are always most
robust in rocky mountain covers, and seek water
with considerable anxiety; tor of all the light-
footed ruminants, they alone protrude the tongue
when hard pressed in the chace. Now, comparing
these qualities with several texts, we find them
perfectly appropriate to the species of these genera
alone. Ajal appears to be a mutation of a com-
mon name with éAapos; and although no great
stress should be laid on names which, more par-
ticularly in early times, were used without much
attention to specific identity, yet we find the
Chaldee Aja] and Sarmatic Jelen strictly applied
to stag. Hence the difficulty lay in the modern
denial that ruminants with branched deciduous
horns existed in the south-west of Asia and Egypt;
and Cuvier for some time doubted, notwithstanding
Virgil's notice, whether they were found in any
part of Africa; nevertheless, thouzh not abundant
where water is rare, their existence from Morocco
to the Nile and beyond it cannot be denied; and
it is likely that an Asiatic species still appears
sometimes in Syria, and, no doubt, was formerly
common there.

The first species here referred to is now known
by the name of Cervus Barbarus, or Barbary stag,
in size between our red and fallow deer, distin-
guished by the want of a bisantler, or second
branch on the horns, reckoning from below, and by
a spotted livery, which is eflaced only in the third
or fourth year, This species is figured on Egyptian
monuments, is still occasionally seen about the
Natron lakes west of the Nile, and, it seems, was
observed by a reverend friend in the desert east of
the Dead Sea, on his route from Cairo towards
Damascus. We take this to be the Igial or Ajal
of the Arabs, the same which they accuse of
eating fish—that is, the ceps, lizards, and suakes,
a propensity common to other species, and simi-
rede ascribed to the Virginian and Mexican

eer.

The other is the Persian stag, or Maral of the
Tahtar nations, and Gewazen of Armenia, larger
than the stag of Europe, clothed with a heivy
mane, and likewise destitute of bisanlters. We
believe this species to be the Soégur of Asiatic
Turkey, and Mara of the Arabs, and therefore resi-
ding on the borders of the mountain forests of Syria
and Palestine. One or both of these species were
dedicated to the local bona dea on Mount Li-
banus—a presumptive proof’ that deer were found
in the vicinity. °

Of the hind it is unnecessary to say more than
that she is the female of the stag, or hart, and that
in the manners of these animals the males always
are the last to hurry into cover.*—C. H. S.
ae
* In Gen. xlix. 21, Bochart’s version appears
to be preferable to our present translation—
‘ Naphtali is a hind let loose; he giveth goodly
words ;' this, by a slight alteration of the punc-
tuation in the Hebrew, he renders ‘ Naphtali is a
spreatling tree, shouting forth beautiful branches.’
In Ps. xxix. 9, instead of ‘The voice of the Lord


ATR.


AIN ({'Y, usually En in the English ver-
sion), the Hebrew word for a fountain, which
signification it also bears in Arabic, Syriac, and
Ethiopic. It chiefly attracts notice as combined
with the proper names of various places; and
in all such cases it points to some remarkable or
important fountain near or at the spot. Thus,
TNPY, En-gedi, fountain of kids’ (Ex-onor] ;
DIY, En-gannim (Josh. xv. 84), ¢ fountain
of the gardens ;’ WW'TTPY, En-dor, ‘ house-foun-
tain’ (fons habitationis, Gesenius) |En-por];
Mp, En-haddah (Josh. xix. 21), ¢ sharp,’
fe. Sswift fountain;'’ DBD Y, En-mishpat
(Gen. xiv. 7), ‘ fountain of judgment ;’ there
also called WP, but proleptically, as that name
appears to have origmated at a, later period
(Num, xx. 13), [Kavgsn] ; Dvdaapy, En-
eqiain, ¢ fountain. of two calves’ (Ezek. xlvii. 10)
[En-zataim] : VOW} Y, En-shemesh (Josh. xv.
7), ‘fountain of the sun;’ 2IV}Y, En-rogel
(2 Sam. xvii. 17, &c.), literally ‘ fountain of the
foot,’ which is construed in the Targum ‘fuller’s
fountain,’ because the fullers there trod the cloths
with their feet; others, ‘fountain of the spy’
{En-roaer.]. There are other names with which
}'Y is thus used in composition; but these are
the most important. In one case }'P occurs
alone as the name of a place in the north-east of
Palestine (Gesenius, TAcsaur. in }'Y. In the
plural it only occurs in the New Testament
(John iii, 23) as Enon (Alvéy), or fountains, as
in our Fountains Abbey in Yorkshire. | .

AIR (afp), the atmosphere, as opposed to the
ether (aidjp), or higher and purer region of the sky
(Acts xxii, 245 1 Thess. iv. 17; Rev. ii. 2: xvi
17). The phrase eis d€pa AaActy—to speak into th
air (1 Cor. xiv. 9), is a proverbial expression to de-
note speaking in vain, like centis verba profundere
in Latin (Lucret. iv. 929), and a similar one in
our own language; and eis dépa Sépew, to bear
the air (1 Cor, ix. 26), denotes acting in vain,
and is a proverbial allusion to an abortive
stroke into the air in puyilistic contests. The
later Jews, in common with the Gentiles, espe
cially the Pythagoreans, believed the air to be
peopled with spirits, under the government of a
chief, who there held his seat of empire (Philo,
31, 28; Diog. Laert. viii, 32). These spirits
were supposed to he aan but malignant, and
to incite men to evil. That the Jews held this
opinion is*plain from the Rabbinical citations of
Lightfoot, Wetstein, &c. Thus in Pirke Abuth
83. 2, they are described as filling the whole air,
arranged in troops, in regular subordination. The
early Christian fathers entertained the same belief
(Ignat. Ad Ephes. § 13), which has indeed come
down to our own times. It is to this notion that
St. Paul is supposed to allude in Eph. ii. 2, where
Satan is called &pywy rijs eEovgias tov dépos,
‘prince of the power (4. e. of those who exercise
the power) of the air.’ Some, however, explain
hp here by darkness, a seuse which it bears also
in profane writers. But the apostle no doubt
speaks according to the notions entertained by most
of those to whom he wrote, without expressing the


maketh the hind to calve, and discovereth the
forests,’ Bishop Lowth gives, ‘ The voice of the Lord
striketh the oak, and discovereth the forests,’ which
is also an improvement.


AJALON.


extent of his own belief (see Lightfoot, Whitby,
Koppe, Wetstein, and Blogmfield, in doc.).
AJALON (jiO%; Sept. Aiaady), a town and
valley in the tribe of Dan (Josh. xix. 42), which
was given to the Levites (Josh. xxi. 24; 1 Chron.
vi. 69). It was not far from Bethshemesh
(2 Chron. xxviii. 18), and was one of the places
which Rehoboam fortified (2 Chron. xi. 10), aud
amoug the strongholds which the Philistines took
from Ahaz (2 Chron. xxviii. 18). But the town,
or rather the valley to which the town gave name,
derives its chief renown from the circumstance
that when Joshua, in pursuit of the five kings, ar-
rived at some point near Upper Beth-horon, looking
back upon Gibeon and down upon the noble valley
before him, he uttered the celebrated command :
‘Suu, stand thou still on Gibeon, and thou moon,
in the valley of Ajalon’ (Josh, x. 12). From
the indications of Jerome, who places Ajalon two
Roman miles from Nicopolis, on the way to Je-
Tuslem, joined to the preservation of the ancient
tame in the form of Yalo, Dr. Robinson ( Bid/.
Researches, iii. 63) appears to have identified the
valley and the site of the town. From a house-
top in Beit Ur (Beth-horon) he looked down
upon a broad and beautiful valley, which lay
at his feet, towards Ramleh. ‘This valley runs
out west by north through a tract of hills, and
then bends off south-west througl? the great
Wetem plain. It is called Merj Ibn ‘Omeir.
Upon the side of the long hill which skirts the
ley on the south, a small village was per-
ceved, called Yalo, which cannot well be any
other than the ancient Ajalon; aud there can be
litle question that the broad wady to the north
itis the valley of the same name.
AKKO, [Goar.]
AKRABBIM (D’DY MoYP, Scorpion
i Sept. "AvdBaois "AxpaBiv), an ascent,
hill, o chain of hills, ince from the name,
Would appear to have been much infested by
‘orpions and serpents, as some districts in that
ag cetainly were (Deut. viii. 15; comp.
Olney, ii. 256). It was one of the points which
ae only mentioned in describing the frontier-line
the Promised Land southward (Judg. i. 36).
be W conjectures that Akrabbim may probably
the same with the mountains of Akabah, by
ch he understands the easternmost range of
bedava tpn, ‘black mountains’ of Ptolemy,
*tending from Paranto Judea. This range has
'y become well known as the mountains of
of being those which bound the great valley
Arabah on the east (Travels, ii. 120). More
y, he seems to refer Akrabbim to the
ion of this range, near the for-
tess of Akabah, and the extremity of the eastern
ulf of the Red Sea; where, as he observes,
from the badness of the roads, and many rocky
se that are to be surmounted, the Mohamme-
ea lose a number of camels, and are no
: than the Israelites were formerly in
getting over them.’ Burckhardt (Syria, p. 509)
he ches nearly the same conclusion, except that
ae refers ‘the ascent of Akrabbim,’ to the
t ivity of the western mountains from the plain
eae This ascent is very steep, wa has
ay given to the place its name of Akabah,
means a cliff, or steep declivity.’ The
ity of this identification depends upon the


ABABASTER. 105,


ae, whether the south-eastern frontier of
udah would be laid down so far to the south in
the time of Moses and Joshua. If so, the identi-
fication is fair enough; but if not, it is of no
weight or value in itself. The apparent analogy
of names can be little else than accidental, when
the signification in the two languages is altogether
different.

AKROTHINION (AxpoSinov). This Greek
word, which occurs in Heb. vii. 4, means the
best of the spoils. The Greeks, after a battle,
were accustomed to collect the spoils into a
heap, from which an offering was first made to
the gods: this was the dxpo8ivioy (Xenoph. Cyrop.
vii. 5, 35; Herodot. viii. 121, 122; Pind. Nem.
7, 58). In the first-cited case, Cyrus, after the
taking of Babylon, first calls the magi, and com-
mands them to choose the dxpo@{v1a of certain
portions of the ground for sacred poe:

ALABASTER (AAdBaorpor). This word oc-
curs in the New Testament only in the notice of
the ‘ alabaster box,’ or rather vessel, of ‘ ointment
of spikenard, very precious,” which a woman
broke, and with its valuable contents anointed
the head of Jesus, as he sat at supper in Bethany
in the house of Simon the leper (Matt. xxvi. 7;
Mark xiv. 3). At Alabastron, in E, there was a
manufactory of small pots aud vessels for holding
perfumes, which were made from a stone found in
the neighbouring mountains. The Greeks gave to


these vessels the name of the city from which they
came, calling them alabastrons. This name was
eventually extended to the stone of which they
were formed: and at length the term alabas-
tra was applied without distinction “to all per-
fume vessels, of whatever materials they consisted.
Theoeritus speaks of golden alabastra, Zuplw
pipw xptoet dadBaorpa (Idyl. xv. 114); and
perfume yessels of different kinds of stone, of
glass, ivory, bone, and shells, have been found in
the Egyptian tombs (Wilkinson, iii, 379). It
does not, therefore, by any means follow that the
alabastron which the woman used at Bethany was
really of alabaster: but a probability that it was
such arises from the fact that vessels made of
this stone were deemed peculiarly suitable for the
most costly and powerful perfumes (Plin. Hist.
Nat. xiii. 2; xxxvi. 8, 24). The woman is said


106 ALAH~


‘to have ‘ broken’ the veseel ; which is explained
by supposing that it was one of those shaped
somewhat like a Florence oil-flask, with a long
and narrow neck ; and the mouth being curiously
and firmly sealed up, the usual and easiest way
of getting at the contents was to break off the
upper part of the neck.
he alabastra were not usually made of that
white and soft gypsum to which the name of
alabaster is now fur the most part confined. Dr.
John Hill, in his useful notes on Theophrastus
sets this matter in a clear light :—‘ The alabas-
trum and alabastrites of uaturalists, although
by some esteemed synonymous terms, and by
others confounded with one another, are dif-
ferent substances. The alabastrum is properly
the soft stone [the common “alabaster” ]' of a
pseous substance, burning easily into a kind of
plaster ; and the alabastra, the jal, bearing a
good polish, and approaching the texture of
marble. This stone was by the Greeks called
also sometimes onyx, and by the Latins marmor
onychites, from its use in making boxes to pre-
serve precious ointments; which boxes were com-
monly called, “ onyxes " and “ alabasters.”” Thus


Dioscorides, ddAaBacrpirns 5 Kadrotpevos Sruk.


And hence have arisen a thousand mistakes in the
later authors, of less reading, who have misunder-
stood Pliny, and confounded the onyx marble, as
the alabaster was frequently called, with the pre-
cious stone of that name.”

This is now better understood. It is appre-
hended that, from certain appearances common
to both, the same name was given not only to the
common alabaster, called by mineralogists gyp-
sum, and by chemists sulphate of lime ; but also
to the carbonate of lime, or that harder stone
from which the alabastra were usually made,
and which was often distinguished by the name
of onyx alabaster, on account of the approach of
its colour to that of the human finger-nails.


ALAH (MbN), the name of a tree, which,
both in its singular and plural form, occurs often
in the Scriptures. It is variously rendered in an-
cient and modem versions—as oak, terebinth,
teil (linden) tree, elm, and even plain. This
has occasioned more of apparent perplexity than
now really belongs to the subject. In the mas-
culine singular (9%) it occurs only in Gen.
xiv. 6, in connection with Paran, or as El-Paran.
This the Sept. renders by terebinth (repeBlyOov
vis Sapdv) ; Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodo-
tion by ‘oak,’ guercus; and the Samaritan,
Onkelos, Kimchi, Jerome, &c., by ‘ plain,’
which is aleo adopted in the margin of our Bibles.
The primary import of the word is strength,
power ; weence some hold that it denotes any
mighty tree, especially the terebinth and the
oak, But the oak is not a mighty tree in
Palestine; and, as it possesses its own distinct
name [Aston], which is shown, by the gpposition
of the names in Isa, vi. 13, and Hos. iv. 13, to
denote e different tree from alah, one can have
little hesitation in restricting the latter to the
terebinth. Indeed, this conclusion has not been
much questioned since it was shown by Celsius
(Hierobotan. ii. 34-58) that the terebinth was
most probably denoted by the Hebrew alah ;


that the terebinth is the but'm eas of the Arabs ;


ALAEH.


‘arid that the Arabian Sut’m is frequent in Palee-


tine. The first position is of course incapable of
absolute proof; the second has been confirmed
by Forskal and Ehrenberg; and the third is
attested by a host of travellers, who speak of it
under both names. Celsius exhibits the testimo-
nies which existed in his time: to which those of
Forskal, Hasselquist, and Dr. Robinson may now
be added. The last-named traveller gives the best
account of the tree as it is found in Palestine. At
the point where the roads from Gaza to Jerusa-
lem, and from Hebron to Ramleh, cross each
other, and about midway between the two last-
named towns, this traveller observed an immense
but'm-tree, the largest he saw anywhere in Pales-
tine. ‘ This species (Pistacia Terebinthus) is,
without doubt,’ he adds, ‘ the terebinth of the
Old Testament; and under the shade of such a
tree Abraham may well have pitched his tent at


ls 7


(Pistacia Te.ebinthus.]
Mamre. The but'm is not an evergreen, as is
often teil; but its small feathered lancet-
sha leaves fall in the autumn, and are renewed


in the spring. The flowers are small, and fol-
lowed by small oval berries, hanging in clusters
from two to tive inches in length, resembling
much the clusters of the vine when the grapes are
just set. From incisions in the trunk there is
said to flow a sort of transparent balsam, consti-
tuting a very pure and fine species of turpentine,
with an agreeable odour, like citron or jessamine,
and a mild taste, and hardening gradually into a
transparent gum. In Palestine nothing seems to
be now known of this product of the but'm. The
tree is found also in Asia Minor (many of them
near Smyrna), Greece, Italy, the south of
France, Spain, and in the north of Africa ; -and
is described as not usually rising to the height of
more than twenty feet. It often exceeded that
size as we saw it in the mountains; but here in
the plains it was very much larger.’

In Palestine and the neighbouring countries
the terebinth seems to be regarded with much the
same distinction as the oak is in our northern lati-


ALSIMUS. “
tades. The tree is long-lived; and it is certain
that there were in the country ancient terebintha,

for their real or su connection


renowned

with seri

of Christ, there was at Mamre, near Hebron, a
venerable terebinth, which a tradition, old in
the time of Josephus, alleged to be that (rendered
‘plain’ in oar version of Gen. xiii. 18) under
which Abraham pitched his tent; and which,
indeed, was believed to be as old as the creation


commissioned angels,’ become a place of
resort and pilgrimage both of Jews and
Christians, the Phoenicians, Syrians, and Ara-
‘Diane were attracted to it with commercial ob-
Jects; and it thus became a great fair. At this fair
thousands of captive Jews were suld for slaves by
order of Hadrian in a.v. 135 (Jerome, Comm. in
Zech, xi. 4, De Locis Heb. 87; Hegesipp. iv. 17;
Sozom. Hist. Eccles. ii. 4,5; Niceph. viii. 30;
Reland, Palest. p. 714). Being a place of such
heterogeneous assemblage, great abominations and
scandals, religious and moral, arose, to which
a stop was at length put by Eusebius of Cersarea
and the other bishops of Palestine, who, by
order of Constantine, cast down all the pagan
altars, and built a church by or under the tree.
It is said that the tree dried up in the reign of
Theodosius the Younger; but the still vital
tronk threw off shoots and branches, and pro-
duced a new tree, from which Brocard (vii. 64),
Saliguac (x. 5), and other old travellers declare
that they brought slips of the new and old wood
to their own country. Zuallart, who alleges that
some of its wood was given to him by. the
mouks at Jerusalem, candidly admits the diffi-
calty of believing the stories which were told of
its long duration : but he satisfies himself with. the
authority of the authors we have mentioned, and
caicludes Phat God may have specially interfered
tw preserve at, with other old memorials, for his
own glory and for our instruction (Voyage de
Jérwalem, iv. 1), The tree was accidentally
destroyed by fire in 1616 a.p. (Mariti, p. 520).
ALCIMUS, or Jacimus (AAniuos 6 Kal Idies-
wos, Joseph. Antig. xii. 9. 3, Greecised forms of
ari and Joachimn—nam: re “ often inteectinnged
in Hebrew), an usurping high-priest of the Jews
in the time of Judas Maccabeus |Maccanzzs;
Paussts, Hion).
_ALEXANDER THE GREAT. This mighty
king is named jn the opening of the first book of
Maccabees, and is alluded to in the prophecies of
Daniel. These, however, are not the principal rea-
sons for giving his name a place in this work : he is
chiefly entitled to notice here because his military
career tly affected the political state of
the Jewish people, as well as their philosophy and
literature, It is uot our part, therefore, to detail
¢ren the outlines of his history, but to point out
the causes and nature of this great revolution, and
the influence which, formally through Alexander,
igo exerted over the religious history of
est.


Mage ieee Asia by Greeks was
to thoroughly provided for by predisposing canses,


ALEXANDER. ay


as to be no mere accident ascribable to Alexander
as an individual. The ware which were camied


on between Greece and Persia in the reigns of
Darius, Xerxes, and Artaxerxes—from 3.c. 490
to n.o. 449—sufficiently showed the decisive
superiority in arms which the Greeks ,
though no Greek as yet aspired to the conquest of
Persia. Brave freemen, attached to their own
soil, would not risk abandoning it for ever for the
satisfaction of chasing their foe out of his home.
But after the convulsions of the Peloponnesian
War (n.c. 431-404) had filled Greece with exiles,
whose sole trade was that of soldiers, a devoted
standing army could be had for money. By the
help of such mercenaries, Cyrus, younger brother
of Artaxerxes II., attempted to seize the crown
of Persia (n.c. 401); and although he was him-
self slain, this, in ita results (which cannot be here
properly detailed), did but show more signally that
Greeks might force their way to the very palace
of the great king, just as they afterwards trium-
phantly retreated through the heart of his empire.
Soon after this, Agesilaus, king of S appears
to have had serious designs of founding a Spartan
province in Asia Minor, where he met with easy
success ; but he was recalled by troubles at home
(s.c. 394). About the year s.c. 374, Jason, the
chief man of Phere, in Thessaly, and virtually
monarch of the whole province, having secured
the alliance of Macedon, seriously meditated the
conquest of the Persian eres and he ‘or his
son) might probably have effected it, had he not
been assassinated, n.c. 370. The generation who
heard ‘of that event witnessed the rise of Mace-
don to supremacy under the great Philip, whose
reign reached from n.c. 359 to n.c. 338. He too
had proposed to himself the invasion and conquest
of Persia as the end of all his campaigns the
reward of all his labours; and he tuo was suddenly
taken off by the assassin’s dagver. He was suc-
ceeded by his greater son, for whom it was re-
served to accomplish that of which eae
generals had now for seventy years dreamed. It
seems therefore clear that Gs was destined to
overflow into Asia, even without Alexander; for
Persia was not likely to have such a series of able
monarchs, and such an exemption from civil
wars, as alone could have hindered the event.
The 1 genius of the Macedonian hero,
however, hanno form and a suddenness
of the uest 5 in spite of his premature
death, the peficy which he paras seems to have
left some permanent effects. It is indeed possible
that, in regard to the toleration of Oriental cus-


ms ALEXANDER.


toms and religions, no other policy than his could
have held the empire together. Since the Romans
in Asia and the British in India have followed
the same procedure, any other Greek conquerors
of Persia might have done the same had Alex-
ander never existed. Be this as it may, it is
certain that his conciliatory policy was copied
by his successors for at least a century and a


His respectful behaviour to they Jewish high-
priest has been much dwelt on by Josephus (An-
tig. xi. 8, 4-6), a writer whose trustworthiness
has been greatly overrated. Special reasons for

uestioning the story may be found in Thirlwall
(aie of Greece, vi. 206): but in fact, as it evi-

ently rests on mere tradition, even a knowledge
of human nature, and of the particular author,
justifies large deductions from the picturesque
tale. Some of the results, however, can hardly be
erroneous, such as, that Alexander guaranteed to
the Jews, not in Judea only, but in Babylonia
and Media, the free observance of their hereditary
laws, ;and on this ground exempted them from
tribute every seventh (or sabbatical) year. From
the Romans in later times they gained the same
indulgence, and it must no doubt have been en-
joyed under the Persian king also, to whom they

id tribute at the time of Alexander's invasion.

t is far frem improbable then that the politic
invader afiected to have seen and heard the high-
priest in a dream (as Josephus relates), and
showed him great reverence, as to one who had
declared ‘that he would go before him and give
the empire of Persia into his hand.’ The pro-
found silence observed concerning Juda by all
the historians of Alexander, at any rate proves
that the Jews passed over without a struggle from
the Persian to the Macedonian rule.

Immediately after, he invaded and conquered
Egypt, and showed to its gods the same respect as
to those of Greece. Almost without a pause he
founded the celebrated city of Alexandria (n.c.
332), an event which, perhaps more than any
other cause, permanently altered the state of the
East, and brought about a direct interchange of
mind between Greece, Egypt, and Juda. Sidon
had been utterly ruined by Artaxerxes Ochus
(a.c. 351), and Tyre, this very year, by Alexan-
der: the rise of a new commercial metropolis
on the Mediterranean was thus facilitated ; and
when the sagacious Ptolemy became master of
Egypt (s.c. 323), that country presently rose to
a prosperity which it never could have had under
its distant and intolerant Persian lords. The
Indian trade was diverted from its former course
up the Euphrates into the channel of the Red
Sea; and new Egyptian capital soon became
a centre of attraction for Jews as well as Greeks.
Under the dynasty of the Ptolemies the Hellenic
race enjoyed such a practical ascendency (though
on the whole to the benetit of the native Egyptians)
that the influx of Greeks was of course immense.
At the same time, owing to the proximity of the
Egyptian religion, both the religion and the philo-
sophy of the Greeks assumed here a mortified
form , and the monarchs, who were accustomed to
tolerate and protect Egyptian ee uae were
naturally very indulgent to Jewish peculiarities.
Alexandria therefore became a favourite resort of
the Jews, who here lived under their own laws,
administered by a governor (¢@vdpxms) of their own


ALEXANDER.


nation; but they learned the Greek tongue, and
were initiated more or less into Greek philosophy.
Their numbers were so great as to make them a
large fraction of the whole city ; and out of their
necessities arose the translation of the Old Testa-
ment into Greek. The close connection which this
Egyptian colony maintained with their brethren
in Palestine produced various important mental
and spiritual effects on the latter (Essanes].
The most accessible specimen of rhetorical mo-
rality produced by the Hebrew culture of Greek
leaming is to be seen in the book called the Wis-
dom of Solomon : the most elaborate development
of Hebrew Platonism is contained in the works
of Philo. In the writing called the Third Book
of the Maccabees is a sufficiently unfavourable
specimen of an attempt at rhetorical history by 3
mind educated in the same school. How dee
an impress has been left on the Christian Chure
by the combination of Greek and Hebrew learning
which characterized Alexandria, it needs many
pages for the ecclesiastical historian to discuss.
The Grecian cities afterwards built in northern
Palestine [Dcarorts] seem to have exerted little
spiritual influence on the south; for a strong re-
tiision existed in the strictly Jewish mind against
th Samaria and Galilee.

The tolerant policy of Alexander was closely
followed by his great successor Seleucus, who ad-
mitted the Jews to equal rights with Macedonians
in all his new cities, even in his capital of Antioch
(Joseph, Antig. xii. 3,1); and similar or greater
liberality was exercised by the succeeding kings
of that line, down to Antiochus Epiphanes [An-
Tiocnus]. It cau scarcely be doubted that on
this to a great extent depended the remarkable
westward migration of the Jews from Media and
Babylon into Asia Minor, which went on silently
and steadily until all the chief cities of those
parts had in them the representatives of the twelve
tribes, This again greatly influenced the planting
of Christianity, the most favourable soil for which,
during the time of its greatest purity, was in @&
Greek population which had previously received a
Jewish culture. In passing we may remark, that
we are unable to find the shadow of a reason for
the popular assumption that the modern European
Jews are descendants of the fteo more than of the
other fen or eleven tribes.

The great founder of Alexandria died in his
thirty-second year, 2.c. 323. The empire which
he then left to be quarrelled for by his geuerals
comprised the whole dominions of Persia, with
the homage and obedience of Greece superadded,
But on the final settlement which took place after
the battle of Ipsus (n.c. 301), Seleucus, the Greek
representative of Persian majesty, reigned over a
less extended district than the last Darius. Not
ouly were Egypt and Cyprus severed from the
eastern empire, but Palestine and Colesyria also
fell to their ruler, placing Jerusalem for uearly a
ceutury beneath an Egyptian monarch, On this
subject, see further under ANTiocHvs.

The word Alexander means the hAciper or res-
cuer of men, denoting military prowess. It is
Homer's ordinary name for Paris, son of Priam,
and was borne by two kings of Macedon before
the great Alexander. The history of this con-
queror is known to us by the works of Arrian and
Quintus Curtius especially, besides the general
sources for all Greek history. Neither of these


ALEXANDER,


authors wrote within four centuries of the death of
Alexander; but they had access to copious con-
temporary narratives siuce lost.—F. W. N.

2. ALEXANDER, surnamed BALAS, from
his mother Bala, a personage who figures in the
history of the Maccabees and in Josephus. His
extraction is doubtful; but he professed to be the


natural son of Antiochus Epiphanes, and in that
capacity, out of opposition to Demetrius Soter,
was recognised as king of Syria by the king of
Egypt, by the Romans, and eventually by Jonathan
Maccabeus, on the part of the Jews. The degree
of strength aud influence which the Jewish chief
possessed, was suflicient to render his adhesion
valuable to either party in the contest for the throne.
As he was sbligedt to take a side, and had reason
to distrust the sincerity of Demetrius, Jonathan
yielded to the solicitations of Alexander, who, on
arriving at Ptolemais, sent him a purple robe and
a crown of gold, tv induce him to espouse his cause
(1 Mace. x. 18). Demetrius was not long after
slain in battle, and Balas obtained possession of
the kingdom. He then sought tostrengthen him-
elf by a marriage with the king of Egypt's
daughter, This marriage was celebrated at Pto-
lemais, and was attended by Jonathan, who re-
ceived marks of high consideration from the
Egyptian (Ptolemy Philome or) and Syrian kings
(1 Mace. 51-56 ; “Joseph. Antig. xiii. 4). Pros-
etd ruined Alexander, he soon abandoned
himself to voluptuousness and debauchery, leav-
ing the goverument in the hands of ministers
Whose misrule rendered his reign odious. This
encouraged Demetrius Nicator, the eldest son of
the late Demetrius Soter, to appear in arms, and
chim his father’s crown. Alexander took the
field against him; and in the brief war that fol-
lowed, although his father-in-law Ptolemy (who
his own designs upon Syria) abandoned his
cause, Jonathan remained faithful to him, and
rendered him very important services, which the
king rewarded by bestowing on him a golden
chain, such as princes only wore, and by giving
hin possession of Ekron (’Axxapév). The defec-
tion of the Egyptian king, however, was fatal to
the cause of Balas; he was defeated in a pitched
battle, and fled with 500 cavalry to Abe in Ara-
and sought refuge with the emir Zabdiel.
Arabian murdered his confiding guest in the
year of his reign over Syria, and seut his head
to Ptolemy, who himself died the same year, w.c.
145. Balas left a young son, who was eventually
made king of Syria by Tryphon, under the name
of Antiochus Theos (1 Macc. xi. 13-18; Joseph.
Antig. xiii, 4),
3. ALEXANDER JANN/EUS, the first
Prince of the Maccabaan dynasty who assumed
the title of king [Maccapzgs).


ALEXANDRIA. 109


4. ALEXANDER, son of Herod the Great and
Marianne [Eenoous Famuny].

5. ALEXANDER, a Jew of Ephesus, known
only from the part he took in the uproar about
Diana, which was raised there by the preaching of
Paul. As the inhabitants confounded the Jews
and Jewish Christians, the former put forward
Alexander to speak on their behalf, but he was
unable in the tumult to obtain a hearing (Acts
xix. 33). Some suppose that this person is the
same with ‘ Alexander the coppersmitb,’ of 2 Tim.
iv. 14, but this is by no means probable: the
name of Alexander was in those times very
common among the Jews.

6. ALEXANDER, a coppersmith or brazier
(mentioned in | Tim. i. 20; 2 Tim. iv. 14), who
with Hymeneus and others broached certain he-
resies touching the resurrection, for which they
were excommunicated by St. Paul. These persons,
and especially Alexander, appear to have maligned
the faith they had forsaken, and the character
of the apostle. As every Jew learned some trade, it
has been imagined that Alexander was really a man
of learning, and not an artizan, although acquainted
with the brazier’s craft. But we are not aware
that it was usual to designate a Jiterate person
by the name of the trade with which he was ac-
quainted, although this may possibly have been
the case when a man bore a name so common and
so undistinguishing as that of Alexander.

ALEXANDRE, or SALOME, wife of Alex-
ander Janneus | Maccasees].

ALEXANDRIA (AdAcédySpera, 3 Mace. iii.
1, 21), the chief maritime city, and long the
metropolis of Lower Egypt. As this city owed
its foundation to Alexander the Great, the Old
Testament canon had closed before it existed ;
nor is it often mentioned in the Apocrypha, or
in the New Testament. But it was iu many ways
‘most importantly connected with the later hist
of the Jews—as well from the relations whic
subsisted between them and the Ptolemies, who
reigned in that city, as from the vast numbers
of Jews who were settled there, with whom a
constant intercourse was maintained by the Jews
of Palestine. It is perhaps safe to say that, from
the foundation of Alexandria to the destruction
of Jerusalem, and even after, the former was of all
foreign places that to which the attention of the
Jews was most directed. And this appears to
have been true even at the time when Autioch
first, aud “afterwards Rome, became the seat of
the power to which the nation was subject.

Alexandria is situated on the Mediterranean,
twelve miles west of the Canopic mouth of
the Nile, in 31° 13/ N. lat. and 25° 53/ E.
long. It owes its origin to the comprehensive
policy of Alexander, who perceived that the
usual channels of commerce might be advanta- -
geously altered; and that a city occupying this
site could not fail to become the common empo-
rium for the traffic of the eastern and westen
worlds, by meaus of the river Nile, and the two
adjacent seas, the Red Sea and the Mediterranean :
and the high prosperity which, as such, Alexandria
very rapidly attained, proved the soundness of his
judgment, and exceeded any expectations which
even he could have entertained. For a long period
Alexandria was the greatest of known cities; for
Nineveh and Babylon had fallen, and Rome had
not yet risen to pre-eminence: and even when


110 ALEXANDRIA.


~_ eager the meseeie. of the world, =
lexandria only the me is of a province,
latter was second only pegged in wealth, ex-
tent, aud importance; and was honoured with
the magnificent titles of the second metropolis of
the world, the city of cities, the queen of the
East, a second Rome (Diod. Sic. xvii.; Strab.
xvii.; Ammian. Marcell. xxii.; Hegesipp. iv. 27;
Joseph. Bell. Jud. iv. 11,5).
city was founded in B.c. 332, and was
built under the superintendence df the same
architect (Dinocrates) who had rebuilt the
Temple of Diana at Ephesus. As a foreign
city, not mentioned at all in the Old Testa-
ment, and only accidentally in the New
Acts vi. 9; xvili. 24; xxvii. 6), it is intro-
uced into this work only on account of its con-
nection with the history and condition of the


ALEXANDRIA.


Jewish To the facts resulting from or
bearing on connection, our notice must there-
fore be limited, without entering into those de-
scriptions of the ancient or of the modern city
which are given in general and geographical cyclo-
pedias. It may suffice to mention that the ancient
city to have been of seven times the extent
of the modern. If we may judge from the length
of the two main streets (crossing each other at right
angles) by which it was intersected, the city was
about four miles long by one and a half wide : and
in the time of Diodorus it contained a free popu-
lation of 300,000 persons, and altogether pro-
bably 600,000, if we double the former number, as.
Mannert suggests, in order to include the slaves.
The port of Alexandria is described by Josephus
(Bell. Jud. iv. 10,5); and his description is in
perfect conformity with the best modern accounts.


It was secure, but difficult of access; in conse-
quence of which, a magnificent pharos, or light-
house, was erected upon an islet at the entrance,
_which was connected with the mainland by a
dyke, This pharos was accounted one of the
seven * wonders of the world. It was begun by
Ptolemy Soter, and completed under Ptolemy
Philadelphus, by Sostratus of Cnidus, B.c. 283.
It was a square structure of white marble, on the
top of which fires were kept constantly burning
for the direction of mariners. It was erected at a
cost of 800 talents, which, if Attic, would amount
to 165,000/., if Alexandrian, to twice that sum,
It was a wonder in those times, when such erec-
tions were almost unknown; but, in itself, the
Eddystone lighthouse is, in all probability, ten
times more wonderful.

The business of working out the great design
of Alexander could not have devolved on a more
fitting person than Ptolemy Soter. From his first
arrival in Egypt, he made Alexandria his resi-


dence: and no sooner had he some respite from
war, than he bent all the resources of his mind to
draw to his kingdom the whole trade of the East,
which the Tyrians had, up to his time, carried on
by sea to Elath, and from thence, by the way of
Rhinocorura, to Tyre. He built a city on the
west side of the Red Sea, whence he sent out fleets
to all those countries to which the Phanicians
traded from Elath. But, observing that the Red
Sea, by reason of rocks and shoals, was very danger-
ous towards its northern extremity, he transferred
the trade to another city, which he founded at the
greatest cticable distance southward. This
port, which was almost on the borders of Ethiopia,
he called, from his mother, Berenice; but the
harbour being found inconvenient, the neighbour-
ing city of Myos Hormos was preferred. Thither
the products of the east and south were conveyed
by sea ; and were from thence taken on camels to
Coptus, on the Nile, where they were again
shipped for Alexandria, and from that city were


ALEXANDRIA,


into all the nations of the west, in ex-
change for merchandise which was afterwards
exported to the East (Strabo, xxii. p. 805; Plin.

Hist. Nat. vi. 23). By these means, the whole

trade was fixed at Alexandria, which thus became

the chief mart of all the traffic between the East
and West, and which continued to be the greatest
emporium in the world for above seventeen cen-
tures, until the discovery of the passage by the

Cape of Good Hope opened another channel for

the commerce of the East.

Alexandria became uot only the seat of com-
merce, but of learning and the liberal sciences.

This distinction also it owed to Ptolemy Soter,

himself a man of education, who founded an aca-

demy,or society of learned men, who devoted them-
selves to the study of philosophy, literature, and
science. For their use he made a collection of
choice books, which, by degrees, increased under
his successors until it became the finest library in
the world, and numbered. 700,000 volumes (Strab.
xii.p.791; Euseb. Chron.) It sustained repeated
losses, hy fire and otherwise, but these losses were
as repeatedly repaired ; and it continued to be
of great fame and use in those parts, until it
was at length burnt by the Saracens when they
made themselves masters of Alexandria in a.p. 642.
Undoubtedly the Jews at Alexandria shared in
the benefit of these institutions, as the Christians
did afterwards ; for the city was not only a seat of
heathen, hut of Jewish, and subsequently of Chris-
tan learning. The Jews never had a more pro-
foundly leamed man than Philo, nor the Christians
men more erudite than Origen and Clement ; and
ifwe may judge from these celebrated natives of
Alexandria, who were remarkably intimate with
the heathen philosophy and literature—the learn-
Ing acquired in the Jewish and Christian schools
of that city must have been of that broad and com-
prlensive character which its large and liberal
ustitutiuns were fitted to produce. It will be
temembered that the celebrated translation of
the Hebrew Scriptures into Greek (Serruacint]
was made, under every encouragement from Pto-
lemy Philadelphus, principally for the use of the
Jews in Alexandria, who knew only the Greek
language; but partly, no doubt, that the great
library might possess a version of a book so re-
markable, and, in some points, 80 closely con-
nected with the ancient history of Egypt. The
work of Josephus against Apion affords ample
evidence of the attention which the Jewish Scrip-
tures excited.

At its foundation Alexandria was peopled less
by Egyptians than by colonies of Greeks, Jews, and
other foreigners. The Jews, however much their
telizion was disliked, were valued as citizens; and
every encouragement was held out by Alexan-
det himself and by his successors in Egypt, to in-
duce them to settle in the new city. The same
Wivileges as those of the first class of inhabit-
ants (the Greeks) were accorded to them, as well
as the free exercise of their religion and peculiar
usazes: and this, with the protection and security
which a powerful state afforded against the perpe-
{ual conflicts and troubles of Palestine, and with

the inclination to traffic, which had been acquired

during the Captivity, gradually drew such im-

Manse numbers of Jews to Alexandria, that they

eventually formed a very large portion of its vast

bopulation, and at the same time constituted a


* ALEXANDRIA, 11)


most thriving and important section of the Jewish
nation. The Jewish inhabitants of Alexandria are
therefore often mentioned in the later history of
the nation; and their importance as a section of
that nation would doubtless have been more fke-

uently indicated, had not the Jews of Egypt
thrown off their ecclesiastical dependence upon,
Jerusalem and its temple, and formed a separate
establishment of their own, at On or Heliopolis
[On; Ontas]. This left them less inducement
or occasion than they would otherwise have had
to nix themselves up with the affairs of the pa-
rent country: but they were not wanting in ie
coming patriotism; aud they were on more than
one occasion involved in measures directed against
the Jews as a nation, and occasionally expe-
rienced some effects of that anger in the ruling
powers, or of exasperation in the populace, of
which the Jews in Palestine were the prima
objects, or which resulted from the course wach
they had taken.

The inhabitants of Alexandria were divided
into three classes: 1. The Macedonians, the ori-
ginal founders of the city; 2. the mercenaries who
had served under Alexander; 3. the native Egyp-
tians. Through the favour of Alexander and Ptole-
my Soter, the Jews were admitted into the first of
these classes, and this privilege was so important
that it had great eflect in drawing them to the new
city (Hecatwus, in Joseph. Contra Apion. 1. ii. ;
Bell, Jud, ii. 36; Q. Curt..iv. 8). These privi-
leges they enjoyed undisturbed until the time of
Ptolemy Philopator, who, being exasperated at
the resistance he had met with in attempting to
enter the temple at Jerusalem, wreaked his wrath
upon the Jews of Alexandria, on his return to
Egypt. He reduced to the third or lowest class
all but such as would consent to offer sacrifices
to the gods he worshipped; but of the whole body
ouly 300 were found willing to abandon their prin-
ciples in order to preserve their civil advantages,
The act of the general body in excluding the 300
apostates from their congregations was so repre-
sented to the king as to move his anger to the
utmost, and he madly determined to exterminate
all the Jews in Egypt. Accordingly, as many
as could be found were brought together, and shut
up in the spacious hippodrome of the city, with
the intention of letting loose 500 elephants upam
them ; but the animals refused their horrid task,
and, turning wildly upon the’ spectators and
the soldiers, destroyed Jarge numbers of them.
This, even to the king, who was present, seemed
80 manifest an interposition uf Providence in
favour of the Jews, that he not only restored their
privileges, but loaded them with new favours.
This story, as it is omitted by Josephus and other
writers, and only found im the third book of
Maccabees (ii.-v.), is considered doubtful.

The dreadful persecution which the Jews of
Alexandria underwent in a.p. 39, shows that,
notwithstanding their long establishment there,
no friendly relations had arisen between them
and the other inhabitants, by whom in fact they
were intensely hated. This feeling was so well
known, that at the date indicated, the Roman
govemor Avillius Flaccus, who was anxious to ins
gratiate himself with the citizens, was persuaded
that the surest way of wining their affections
was to withdraw his protection from the Jews,
against whom the emperor was already exaspe-


3 ALEXANDRIA.


rated by their refusal to acknowledge his right
to divine honours, which he insanely claimed,
or to admit his images into their synagogues.
The Alexandrians soon found out that they would
not be called to account for any proceedings they
might have recourse to against the Jews, The in-
sult and bitter mockery with whicn they treated
Herod Agrippa when he came to Alexandria, be-
fore proceeding to take possession of the kingdom
he had received from Caligula, gave the first inti-
mation of their dispositions. Finding that the
governor connived at their conduct, they pro-
ceeded to insist that the emperor's images should
be introduced into the Jewish synagogues; and
on resistance being offered, they destroyed most
of them, and polluted the others by introducing
the imperial images by force. The example thus
set by the Alexandrians was followed in other cities
of Egypt, which contained at this time about a
million of Jews; and a vast number of oratories
of which the largest and most beautiful were
called synagogues—were all either levelled with
the ground, consumed 5y fire, or profaned by
the emperor's statues (Philo, In Flacc. p. 968-
1009, ed. 1640; De Leg. ix.; Euseb. Chron.
27, 285.

Flaccus soon after declared himself openly, by
publishing an edict depriving the Jews of the
rights of citizenship, which they had so long en-
joyed, and declaring them aliens. The Jews
then occupied two out of the five quarters (which
tovk their names from the five first letters of the
alphabet) into which the city was divided; and
as they were in those times, before centuries of
oppression had broken their spirit, by no means
remarkable for their submission to wrongous
treatment, it is likely that they made some etlurts
towards the maintenance of their rizhts, which
Philo neglects to record, but which gave some
kind of pretence for the excesses which followed.
At all events, the Alexandrians, regarding them
as abandoned by the authorities to their mercy,
phy proceeded to the most violent extremities.

he Jews were forcibly driven out of all the
other parts of the city, and confined to one quar-
ter; and the houses from which they had been
driven, as well as their shops and warchouses,
were plundered of all their eflects. Impoverished,
and pent up in a narrow comer of the city, where
the greater part were obliged to lie in theopen air,
and where the supplies of food were cut off, many
of them died of hardship and hunger; and who-
ever was found beyond the boundary, whether he
had escaped from the assigned limits, or had
come in from the country, was seized and put
to death with horrid tortures. So likewise, when
a vessel belonging to Jews arrived in port, it was
boarded by the mob, pillaged, and then burnt,
together with the owners.

At length king Herod Agrippa, who stayed long
enough in Alexandria to see the begimming of
these atrocities, transmitted to the emperor such a
report of the real state of affairs as induced him to
send a centurion to arrest Flaccus, and bring him
a prisoner to Rome. This put the rioters in a false
position, and brought some relief to the Jews; but
the tumult still coutinued, and as the magistrates
refused to acknowledge the citizeuship of the
Jews, it was at length agreed that bot ries
should send delegates, five on each side, to Rome,
and refer the decision of the controversy to the em-


ALEXANDRIA.


peror. At the head of the Jewish delegation was
the celebrated Philo, to whom we owe the account
of these transactions; and at the head of the Alex.
andrians was the noted Apion. The latter chielly
rested their case upon the fact that the Jews were
the only people who refused to consecrate images
to the emperor, or to swear by his name. But on this
point the Jewish delegates defended themselves so
well,that Caligula himself said, ‘ These men are not
so wicked as ignorant and unhappy, in not believ-
ing me to be a god!" The ultimate result of this
appeal is not known, but the Jews of Alexandria
continued to be harassed during the remainder of
Caligula’s reign; and their alabarch Alexander
Lysimachus (brother of Philo) was thrown into
prison, where he remained till he was discharged by
Claudius, upon whose accession to the empire the
Alexandrian Jews betook themselves tu arms, This
occasioned such disturbances that they attracted
the attention of the emperor, who, at the joint en-
treaty of Herod and Agrippa, issued an edict con-
ferring on the Jews of Egypt all their ancient privi-
leges (Philo, In Flace. Op. p. 1019-1043 ; Joseph.
Antig. xviii. 10; xix. 4). The state of feeling
in Alexandria which these facts indicate, was very
far from being allayed when the revolt of the Jews
in Palestine caused even those of the nation who
dwelt in foreign parts to be regarded as enemies,
both by the populace and the government. In
Alexandria, on a public occasion, they were at-
tacked, and those who could uot save themselves
by flight were put to the sword. Only three were
taken alive, and they were dragged through the
city to be consigned to the flames. At this spec-
tacle the indignation of the Jews rose beyond all
bounds. They first assailed the Greek citizeus with
stunes, and then rushed with lighted torches to the
amphitheatre, to set it on fire and burn all the
people who were there assembled. The Roman
prefect Tiberius Alexander, finding that milder
measures were of no avail, sent against them a
body of 17,000 soldiers, who slew about 50,000 of
them, and plundered and bummed their dwellings
(Joseph. Beil. Jud. ii. US. 7; comp. Matt. xxiv. 6).
After the close of the war in Palcstine, new
disturbances were excited in Ezypt by the Sicarii,
many of whom had fled thither. They endea-
voured to persuade the Jews to acknowledge no
king but God, and to throw off the Roman yoke.
Such persons as opposed their desigus and teu-
dered wiser counsels to their brethren, they secretly
assassinated, accurding to their custom. But the
principal Jews in Alexandria having in a general
assembly eamestly warned the people against
these fanatics, who had been the authors of all
the troubles in Palestine, about 600 of them were
delivered up to the Romans. Several tled into
the Thebaid, but were apprehended and brought
back. The most cruel tortures which could be
devised had no effect in compelling them to ac-
knowledge the emperor for their soveicign; and
even their children seemed endowed with souls
feailess of death, and bodies incapable Gf pain,
Vespasian, when informed of these transactions,
sent orders that the Jewish temple in Esypt should
be destroyed. Lupus the pretect, bowever, only
shut it up, after having taken out the consecrated
gifts: but his successor Paulinus stripped it come
sletely, and excluded the Jews eutiely from it.
his was in a.p. 75, being the 343rd year from
its erection by Onias.


SAA A SOR et


ei the


bas


EEE SEE eT Bea PEP esp Fe F


ALEXANDRIUM.


= St. Mark is said to have introduced the
Ctristian religion into Alexandria, which early
became one of the strongholds of the true faith.
The Jews continued to form a principal portion of
the inhabitants, and remained in the enjoyment
of their civil rights till a.p. 415, when they in-
curred the hatred of Cyril the patriarch, at whose
instance they were expelled, to the number of
40.000, and their synagogues destroyed. How-
ever, when Amron, in a.p. 640, took the place for
the caliph Omar, he wrote to his master in these


,terms:—‘T have taken the great city of the west,


which contains 4000 palaces, 4000 baths, 400 the--
atres, 12.000) shops fur the sale of vegetable food,
end 40.000 tributary Jews.’ From that time the
ptsperity of Alexandria very rapidly declined ;
and when, in 969, the Fatemite caliphs seized on
Egypt and built New Cairo, it sunk to the rank
of a secondary Egyptian city. The discovery of
the passage to the East by the Cape, in 1497,
almost annihilated its remaining commercial im-
Pytance; and althoush the commercial and ma-
nume enterprises of Mehemet Ali have again
Rived it to some distinction, Alexandria must still
be acconnted as one of those great ancient cities
whose glory has departed. When Benjamin of
Tudela visited the place (J¢in. i. 158, ed. Asher),
the number of Jews was not more than 3000, and
does not now exceed 500 (J. A. St. John, Egypt,
ii. 3°41), The whole population at the present
hme (1843) is between 36.000 and 40,900, of
whom 4876 are foreigners (Hogg’s Visit to Alex-
ondria, i. 101).

ALEXANDRIUM, a castle built by Alex-
ander Jauneus on a mountain near Cores
‘Kopéar), one of the principal cities of northern-
most Judea towards Samaria. The princes of
the founder's family were inostly buried here ;
and hither Herod carried the remaius of his sons
Alexander and Aristobulus (who were maternally
of that family), after they had been put to death
at Sebaste (Joseph. Antig. xiii. 24; xiv. 6, 10, 27;
xvi. 2, et ult.). The situation of Coree, which
determines that of the castle, is not known; but
Dr. Robinson ( Bib. Researches, iii. 83) conjectures
that he may have found it in the modem Kuriyzet,
which is about eight miles S. by E. from Nabulus
(Shechem). But this place, we imagine, is too far
north to have’ been within even the northernmost
limits of Judeea.-

ALGUM ( ovpraby ), or Atuua Trees
(Danby ), These are, no doubt, two forms
of the same word, as they occur in passages re-
fering to the same events, and differ only in the
transposition of letters. In 1 Kings x. II, it is
said, « And the navy also of Hiram, that brought
gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great
plenty of almug-trees and precious stones. And
the king made uf the almug-trees pillars for the
lone of the Lord, and for the King's house,
harm also and psalteries for singers.’ In the pa-
railel passages of 2 Chron. ix. 10, 11, the word
alzum is substituted for almug, and it is added,
‘ were none such seen before in the land of
Judah. As no similar name has yet been disco-
vered which is applicable to any kind of wood

from the countries whence the almug-trees are
"pposed to have been brought, various conjec-
tares have been formed respecting then. It is
Receemry first to settle whence these trees were


ALGUM. 118
“Drought. To us there appears no doubt that
Ophir was to the iuihwaal of the Red Sea, and


was most probably in some part of India (Pio-
torial Bible, ii. capers The products brought
from theuce, such as gold, precioua stones, ivory,
apes, and peacocks, were all procurable only from
that country. Even tin, obtained at a later period
from Tartessus, was probably first procured from an
earlier Tarshish, as it is abundant in ‘Tennaserim,
the Malayan peninsula, the island of Banca, &e.
Its uses were well known to the Indians, who re
ceived it also in exchange when brought to them
by the Red Sea, as it no doubt was, at the time
when the Periplus of the Erythrean Sea was
written,

Various trees have been attempted to be iden-
tified with the almug. These it is unnecessary to
enumerate at length, as ouly a few of them seem
deserving of attention. The Greek translator of
the book of Kings explains the Hebrew word by
HuAa dreAeknrta, ‘ unhewn wood ;* but in both the
places in Chronicles it is rendered EvAa wedxiwa,
‘pinewood.’ This is also the interpretation of
the old Latin version at 2 Chron. ii. 8; but in
the two other passages that version gives it the ac-
ceptation of ‘ thyine-wood' (Ligna thyina). The
thyine-wood which is mentioned in Rey. xviii. 12,
is no doubt the Liguum thyinum, which was also
called citrinmm, citron-wood. It was highly valued
by the Romans, and employed by them for the
doors of their temples and the images of their gus.
This wood was obtained from the north of Africa,
where the tree producing it has recently been re-
discovered. If algum-wood was brought from
the north coast of Africa, there certainly dues not
appear any tree more worthy to be considered
as such than Thuya articulata, or Callitris qua-
diivalvis [Tuying Woop]. From the passage
of 2 Chron. ii. 8 :—* Send me also cedar-trees,
fir-trees, and algum-trees out of Lebanon,’ it
has been inferred that this might be one of
the pine tribe procurable in that mountain; but
in the parallel passage in 1 Kings v. 8, only
timber of cedar and timber of fir are mentioned,
On this Rosenmiiller observes, ‘ that the addi-
tion of “almug” in the book of Chronicles
appears to have been the interpolation of a
trauscriber’ (Bibl. Bot. p. 245). If the almug
had been a tree of Lebanon, we should have a
difficulty in understanding how, after the time
of Solomon, ‘ there came no such almug-trees,
nor were such seen unto this day’ (1 Kings
x. 12).

We feel satisfied, however, that almug-trees
were brought from southern regions by the Red
Sea; and it could not have been more difficult
to convey them from thence to the Mediterranean
than it must have been to transport timber from
Joppa to Jerusalem. If we consider the great de-
ficiency of timber on the coasts both of Arabia
and of Egypt—a deficiency which, from the ge-
neral dryness of the soil and climate, must huve
been experienced in remote ages, as well as at the

resent time—we should expect that, where we
lee notices of so much shipping, there must
early have been established a trade in timber.
Forskal particularly mentions the importation of
timber-wuods from India into Arabia, Of the kinds
ermmerated, it has been shown that saj, abnoos, and
shishum are teak, ebony, and sissoo (Essay on
Hindoo Medicine, p. 128). Forskal also meations

1


114 ALGUM.
the Teak as imported into Egypt: ‘ Carina navis
fundatur Ligno saj ,\.) ex India allato,’ p. lvi.

Having been brought from so a distance,
and thought sufficiently remarkable to be worthy
of special record, it is reasonable to suppose
that almug-trees possessed properties not common
in the timber usually met with in Palestine,
whether in appearance, in colour, or in odour.
Several Indian trees have been enumerated as
likely to have been the almug. Of these, bukkum,
or sapan wood (Ce@salpinia sappan), much used
in dyeing, belongs to the same
wood of South America, but its nearest locality
is the eastern side of the Bay of Bengal. The
teak, highly valued from its indestructible nature,
great size, and strength, might be more reasonably
adduced, because more easily urable, from
the greater accessibility of the Malabar coast ; but
being a coarse-grained wood, it might not be so
well suited for musical instruments. If one of
the pine tribe be required, none is more deserving
of selection than the deodar (deo, god; dar,
wood : Pinus deodara), as it grows to a large size,
yields excellent timber, which is close-grained
and fragrant; but the tree is found only in very
inaccessible situations.

Others have been in favour of sandal-wood, but
have confounded with the true and far-famed kind
what is called red sandal-wood, the product of
Pterocarpus santalinus, as well as of Adenanthera
pavonina, But there are two kinds of fragrant
sandal-wood, the yellow and the white, both men-
tioned in old works on Materia Medica. Both
these are thought by some to be the produce of
the same tree, the younger and outer layers of
wood forming the white, while the centre layers
become coloured, and form the yellow.

Recent investigations confirm the opinion of
Garcias, that the yellow and white sandal-woods
are the produce of different trees, both of which,
however, belong to the same genus, Santalum.
M. Gaudichaud has described the species, which
he has named S. Freycinetianum, as that yield-
ing the yellow sandal-wood so much valued by
the Chinese, and obtained by them from the
Feejee, Marquesas, and Molucca Islands.

ut the most common sandal-wood is that
which is best known and most highly esteemed in
India. It is produced by the Santalum album,
a native of the mountainous parts of the coast of
Malabar, where large quantities are cut for export
to China, to different parts of India, and to the
Persian and Arabian gulfs. The outer parts of this
tree are white and without odour; the parts near
the root are most fragrant, especially of such trees
as grow in hilly situations and stony ground.
The trees vary in diameter from 9 inches to a
foot, and are about 25.or 30 feet in height, but
the stems soon begin to branch. This wood is
white, fine-grained, and ly fragrant, and is
much employed for making rosaries, fans, ele-
gant boxes and cabinets. The Chinese use it also
as incense both in their temples and private
bouses, and burn long slender candles formed
by covering the ends of sticks with its sawdust
mixed with rice- .

As sandal-wood has been famed in the East
from very early times, it is more likely than any
other to have attracted the notice of, and been
desired by, more northern nations. We do not,


nus as the Brazil- .


ALGUM.


however, trace it by its present
name at a very early period in


2 a4 Q
VERRLS
BOK


(Santalum albam._


Greek authors: it may, however, have been con-
founded with agila-wood, or agallochum, which,
like it, is a fragrant wood and used as incense.
Sandal-wood is mentioned in early Sanscrit works,
and also in those of the Arabs, Actuarius is the
earliest Greek author that expressly notices it, but
he does so as if it had been familiarly known. In
the Periplus of Arrian it is mentioned as one of the
articles of commerce obtainable at Omana, in Ge-
drosia, by the name EvAa ZaydAwa, which Dr.
Vincent remarks may easily have been corrupted
from ZayddAwa. As it was produced on the
Malabar coast, it could easily be obtained by the
merchants who conveyed the cinnamon of Ceylon
and other Indian products to the Mediterranean.
That sandal;wood has often been employed in
buildings is evident from J. Barb, ‘ Viaggio alla
Persia :’ ‘La porta della camera ora de sandali
eutarsiata con file d’ oro,’ &c. The Hindoo temple
of Somnat, in Guzerat, which was plundered
and destroyed by Mahomed of Ghizni, had gates
made of sandal-wood. These were carried off by
the conqueror, and afterwards formed the gates of
his tomb, whence, after 800 years, they were
taken by the British conquerors of Ghizni, and
brought back to India in 1842,

Thatsandal-wood, therefore, might have attained
celebrity, even in very early ages, is uot at all
unlikely; that it should have attracted the notice
of Phoenician merchants visiting the west coast of
India is highly probable; and also that they should
have thought it worthy of being taken as a part of
their cargo on their return from Ophir. That it is
well calculated for musical instruments, the au-
thor is happy to adduce the opinion of Professor
Wheatstone, who says, ‘I know no reason why
sandal-wood should not have been employed in
ancient days for constructing musical instrumeuts,
It is not so employed at present, because there are
many much cheaper woods which present a far
handsomer ce. Musical instruments
would appear very unfinished to modern taste
unless varnished or French-polished, and it would
be worse than useless to treat fragrant woods in
this way. Formerly perhaps it might have been


7 a


\


BaekREEHRR eR BER rede h ALR AHE EPEC KAMP OR SEA ROR Be


ALISGEMA.


more the fashion to delight the senses of smell and

bearing simultaneously than it is with us, in

which case odoriferous woods would be preferred
for things so much handled as musical instru-

meats are.'—J, F. R.

ALISGEMA (AAforynpa), a Hellenistic word,
which occurs in Acts xv. 20 (comp. ver. 29 and
1 Cor. viii.), with reference to meat sacrificed to
vs = there means defilement, pollution. The

postle in these alludes to the customs of
the Gentiles, Gants ghoai—afier a sacrifice had
been concluded and a portion of the victim had
been assigned to the priests—it was usual to hold

a sacrificial feast in houour of the god, on which

occasion they ate the residue of the flesh. This feast

might take place either in the temple or in a pri-
vatehouse, But there were many who, from need or
avarice, salted and Jaid up the remnants fur future
we iTheoph. Char. c. x.), or even gave them to
the butchers to sell in the shambles (Shvettg. Hor.

Heb. ad Act. xv. 20; 1 Cor. viii.). This flesh,
having been offered to idols, was held in abo-
mination by the Jews; and they considered not
auly those who had been present at these feasts,
but also those who ate the flesh which had been
ofered up, when afterwards exposed for sale in the
thambles, as infected by the coutagion of idolatry.
The council at Jerusalem, therefore, at the sug-
gestion of St. James, directed that converts should
refuse all invitations to such feasts, and abstain
from the use of all such meat, that no offence
might be given to those Christians who had
been ‘ie See more largely Kuinoel, ad Act.
xv. 20,

ALLEGORY (AAAryopla). This word is
foand in the Authorized Version of Gul. iv. 24,
but it does not actually exist as a noun in the
Greek Testament, nor even in the Septuagint.
Inthe passage in question Saint Paul cites the
history of the free-born Isaac aud the slave-born
Ismael, and in proceeding to apply it spiritually
sys, arod dary ddAryopodmeva, which doves
not mean, as in the A.V., ‘which things are an
allegory, but ‘which things are allegorized.’

is is of some importance; for in the one case the
Apostle is made to declare a portion of Old Testa-
ment history an allegory, whereas in truth he only
poeta it as allegorically applied. Allegories
tl Ives are, however, of frequent occurrence
m Scripture, although that name is uot there ap-
plied to them.

An ALtgcory has been sometimes considered
w only a lengthened metaphor ; at uther times, as
continuation of metaphors. But the nature of
allegory itelf, and the character of allegorical
mteryretation, will be best understood by attend-
Mg to the origin of the term which denotes it.
Now the term ‘Allegory,’ according to its ori-
final and proper meaning, denotes a representa-
ton of ove thing which is intended to excite the
Wpreeentation of another thing. Every allegory
must therefore be subjected to a twofold exami-
tation: we must first examine the immediate re-
Presentation, and then consider what other repre-
‘elation it is intended to excite. In most alle-
(ries the immediate representation is made in
the form of a Narrative; and, since it is the object

of the allegory itself to convey a moral, not an

Nistorie truth, the narrative itself is commonly

fictitious, The immediate r ion is of no

value than as it | to the ultimate


c


ALLEGORY. ns


representation. It is the application or the moral
of the allegory which oat ited its worth,

Since, then, an allegory comprebends two dis-
tinct representations, the interpretation of an al-
legory must comprehend two distinct operations.
The first of them relates to the immediate repre-
sentation, and the second to the ultimate repre-
sentation. The immediate representation is un-
derstood from the words of the allegory; the
ultimate representation depends upon the imme-
diate representation applied to the proper end.
In the interpretation, therefore, of the former, we
are concerned with the interpretation of swords ;
in the interpretation of the “latter, we are con-
cemed with the things signified by the words.
Now, whenever we speak of allegorical inter-
pretation, we have always in view the ultimate
Tepresentation, and, consequently, are then con-
cerned with the interpretation of things. The
interpretation of the words, Which attaches only
to the immediate representation, or the. plain nar-
rative itself, is commonly called the grammatical
or the Jiterad iiterpretation; although we should
speak more correctly in calling it the verdal in-
terpretation, since even in the plainest narratives,
even in narratives not designed for moral applica-
tion, the use of words is never restricted to their
mere literal senses. Custom, however, having
sanctioned the use of the term ‘literal,’ instead of
the term ‘verbal’ interpretation, to mark the oppo-
sition to alleycrical interpretation, we must un-
derstand it accordingly. But whatever be the
term, whether verbal or literal, which we employ
to express the interpretation of the words, it must
always be borne in mind that the allegorical in-
terpretation is the interpretation of things—of the
things signified by the words, not of the words
themselves.

Bishop Marsh, from the fifth of whose Lectures
on the Criticism and Interpretation of the Bible,
these priuciplcs are derived, proceeds, in that Lec-
ture, to apply them to a few of the Scriptural exam-
ples. Every parable is a kind of allegory ; and there-
fore the parable of the sower (Luke viii. 5-15),
being especially clear and correct, is taken as the
first example. In this we have a plain narrative,
a statement of a few simple and intelligible facts,
such, probably, as had fallen within the observa-
tion of the persons to whom our Saviour addressed
himself. When he had finished the narrative, or
the immediate representation of the allegory, he
then gave the explanation or ultimate representa-
tion of it; that is, he gave the allegorical inter-
pretation of it. And that the interpretation was -
an interpretation, uot of the words, but of the
things signified by the words, is evident from the
explanation itself: ‘The seed is the word of God;
those by the wayside are they that hear,’ &c.
(v. 11, &c.) The impressive and pathetic alle-
gory addressed by Nathan tu David affords a
similar instance of au allegorical narmative ac-
companied with its explanation (2 Sam. xii. 1-14).
Allegories thus accompanied, constitute a kind of
simile, in both parts of which the words them-
selves are coustrued either literally or figuratively,
according to the respective use of them; and then
we institute the comparison between the things
signified in the former part, and the things sig-
nified in the latter part.

But allegorical narratives are frequently left to
explain themselves, especially when ve resera-

1


ry
116 ALLELULIA.


blance between the immediate and ultimate re-
Presentation is sufficiently apparent to make an
explanation unnecessary. Of this kind we cannot
have a more striking example than that beautiful
one contained in the 80th Psalm: ‘Thou
broughtest a vine out of Egypt,’ &c.

The use of allegorical interpretation is not,
however, confined to mere allegory, or fictitious
narratives, but is extended also to history, or real
narratives. And in this case the grammatical
meaning of a passage is called its historical mean-
ing. in contradistinction to its allegorical meaning.
There are two different modes in which Scripture
history has been thus allegorized. According to
one mode, facts and circumstances, especially
those recorded in the Old Testament, have been
applied tu other facts and circumstances, of which
they have been described as representative. Ac-
cording to the other mode, these facts and circum-
stances have been described as mere emblems.
‘Phe former mode is warranted by the practice of
the sacred writers themselves; for when facts and
circumstances are so applied, they.are applied as
types of those things‘to which the application is
made. But the latter mode of allegorical inter-
pretation has no such authority in its favour,
though attempts have been made to procure such
authority. For the same things are there de-
scribed not as types or as real facts, but as mere
tdeal representations, like the immediate repre-
sentations in allezory. By this mode, therefore,
history is uot treated as allegory, but converted
into allegory. That this mode of interpretation
cannot claim the sanction of St. Paul, from his
treatment of the history of Isaac and Ishmael, has
already been shown: the consideration, however,
of the allegorical modes of dealing with the real
histories of Scripture is a different subject from
that of allegories and their interpretation, and be-
lonys to another place [Inrerpreration, Br-


BLIicat.].
ALLELUIA. [Hatvenusag.]
ALLIANCES. Froma dread lest the example


of foreizn nations should draw the Israelites into
the worship of idols, they were made a peculiar
and separate people, and intercourse and alliance
with such nations were strongly interdicted (Lev.
xviii. 3, 4; xx. 22,23). The tendency to idolatry
was in those times so strong, that the safety of the
Israelites lay in the most complete isolation that
could be realized; and it was to assist this object
that a country more than usually separated from
others by its natural boundaries was assigued to
them. It was shut in by the sea on the west, by
deserts on the south and east, and by mountains
aud forests on the north. Among a people so
situated we should not expect to hear much of
alliances with other nations.

By far the most remarkable alliance in the po-
litical history of the Hebrews is that between
Solomon and Hiram king of Tyre. It is in a
great degree connected with considerations which
belong to another head [Commerce]. But it
may primarily be referred to a partial change of
feeling which originated in the time of David, and
which continued to operate among his descendants,
During his wanderings he was brought into con-
tact with several of the neighbouring princes, from
some of whom he received sympathy and support,
which, after he ascended the throne, he gratefully
remembered (2 Sam. x. 2). There was probably


ALLIANCES.


more of this friendly intercourse than the Scripture
has had occasion to record. Such timely aid, com-
bined with the respect which his subsequently vie-
torious career drew from foreign nations, must have
gone far to moiify in him and those about him that
aversion to strangers which the Hebrews generally
had been led to entertain. He married the
daughter of a heathen king, and had hy her his
favourite son (2 Sam. iii. 3); the king of Moab
protected his family (1 Sam. xxii. 3,4); the king
of Ammon showed kindnrss to him (2Sam. x. 2);
the king of Gath showered favours upon him
(1Sam., xxvii. ; xxviii. 1,2); the king of Hamath
serit his own son to congratulate him on his vic-
tories (2 Sam. viii. 15): in short, the rare power
which David possessed of attaching to himself the
good opinion and favour of other men, extended
even to the neighbouring nations, and it would have
been difficult for a person of his disposition to repel
the advances of kindness and consideration which
they made: Arong those who made such ad-
vances was Hiram. king of Tyre; for it eventually
transpires that ‘Hiram was ever a lover of David"
(1 Kings v. 2); and it is probable that other in-
tercourse had preceded that relating to the palace
which Hiram’, artificers built for David (2 Sam.
v. 11). The king of Tyre was not disposed to
neglect the cultivation of the friendly interconrse
with the Hebrew nation which had thus been
opened. He sent an embassy to condole with
Solomon on the death of his father, and to con-
gratulate him on his accession (1 Kings v. 1).
The plans of the young king rendered the friend-
ship of Hiram a matter of importance, and ac-
cordingly ‘a league’ was formed (1 Kings v. 123
between them: and that this league had a re-
ference not merely to the special matter then in
view, but wasa general league of amity, is evinced
by the fact that more than 250 years after, a pro-
phet denounces the Lord's vengeance upon Tyre,
because she ‘ remembered not the brotherly cove-
nant’ (Amos i. 9). | Under this league large
bodies of Jews and Phoenicians were associated,
tirst in preparing the materials for the Temple
(1 Kings v. 6-18), and afterwards in navigating
the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean (1 Kings
ix. 26-28): and this increasing intercourse with
the heathen appears to have considerably weak-
ened the sentiment of separation, which, in the
case of the Hebrews, it was of the utmost im-
portance to maintain. The disastrous consequences
of even the seemingly least objectionable alliances
may be seen in the long train of evils, both
to the kingdom of Israel and of Judah, which,
ensued from the marriage of Ahab with Jezebel,
the king of Tyre’s daughter (Anan; Jezenet.].
These consequences had been manitested even in
the time of Solomon; for he formed matrimonial
alliauces with most of the neighbouring kingdoms,
and to the influence of his idolatrous wives are
ascribed the abominations which darkened the
latter days of the wise king (1 Kings xi. 1-8).
The prophets, who were alive to these conse-
ences, often raised their voices against such
dumecus connections (1 Kings xx. 38; 2 Chron,
xvi. 7; xix. 2; xxv. 7,&c.3 Isa. vii. 17); but it
was found a ditticult matter to induce even the
hest kings to place such absolute faith in Jehovah,
the Head of their state, as to nezlect altogether
those human resources and alliances by which
other nations strengthened themselves against their


By


Lea

=
od
a=
re
Co
Se
=i
og
I
—$
.
K~
se
a
=
—=s
rb
“3
1

1
3
a
ay
Te
ot


a


BOAR Ea 8


ALLIANCES.


enemies. The Jewish history, after Solomon,
affords examples of several treaties with different
kings of Syria, and with the kings of Assyria and
Babylon. Asa, one of the most pious monarchs
that ever sat on the throne of Judah, finding his
kingdom menaced and his frontier invaded, sent
to Benhadad, who reigned in Damascus, the most
costly prevents, reminding him of the league which
had long subsisted between them and their fathers,
and conjuring him not to succour the enemies of
Jadah, uor renonuce the obligations of their old
alliance (1 Kings xv. 16-20). Attacked by an-
other king of Israel, whom another king of Da-
mascus protected, Ahaz implored the king of
Assyria for aid, and with the treasures of the tem-
ple and the purchased a defensive alliance
(2 Kings xvi, 5, &c.; 2 Chron. xviii. 16, &c.).


_ In later times, the Maccabees appear to have con-


tidered themselves unrestrained by any but the
ordiuary prudential considerations in contracting
alliances; but they confined their alliances to dis-
tant states, which were by no meaus likely ever to


 @tercise that influence upon the religion of the


people which was the chief object of dread. The
most remarkable alliances of this kind in the
whole Hebrew history are those which were con-
trcted with the Romans, who were then begin-
tng to take a part in the affairs of Western Asia.
Judas claimed théir friendly intervention in a
Negotiation then pending between the Jews and
Antiochus Eupator (2 Mace. xi. 34, sg.) ;and two
years after he sent ambassadors to the banks of
the Tiber to propose a treaty of alliance and amity.
By the terms of this treaty the Romans ostensibly
ttrew over the Jews the broad shield of their
daugerous protection, promising to assist them
in their wars, and forbidding any who were at
Peace with themselves to be at war with the
Jews, or to assist directly or indirectly those who
Were so, The Jews, on their part, engaged to
umst the Romans to the utmost of their power in
any wars they might wage in those parts. The
obligations of this treaty might be enlarged or
diminished by the mutual consent of the contract-
ing parties, This memorable treaty, having been
cuucluded at Rome, was graven upon brass and
deposited in the Capitol (1 Macc. viii. 22-28;
Josephus, Antig. xii. 10: other treaties with the
are given in lib. xiii.).

_ Anterior to the Mosaical institutions, such al-
liances with foreigners were permitted, or at least
tolerated. Abraham was in alliance with some
of the Canaanitish princes (Gen. xiv. 13); he also
entered into a regular treaty of alliauce, being
the first on record, with the Philistine king Abi-
melech (ch. xxi. 22, ag.), which was renewed by
their sons (ch. xxvi. 26-30). This primitive treaty
18a model of its kind: instead of minute stipu-
ous, it leaves all details to the honest inter-
Petation of the contracting parties. Abimelech
‘Sys: ‘Swear unto me here by God that thou wilt
not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor
with my son's son; but according to the kindness
that Ihave done unto thee, thou shalt do unto me,
and unto the land wherein thou hast sojourned.’
Even after the law, it appears, from some of the
Instances already adduced, that such alliances
tas distant nations as could not be su posed to
ve any dangerous effect upon the religion or


. Pia ls of the people, were not deemed to be inter-


The treaty with the Gibeonites is a re-


ALLON. 117


markable proof of this. Believing that the am-
bassadors came from a great distance, Joshua and
the elders readily entered into an alliance with
them; and are condemned for it only on the
ground that the Gibeonites were in fact their near -
neighbours (Josh. ix. 3-27).

From the time of the patriarchs, a covenant of
alliance was sealed by the blood of some victim.
A heifer, a goat, a ram, a turtle dove, and a young
pigeon, were immolated in confirmation of the co-
venant between the Lord and Abraham (Gen.
xv. 9), The animal or animals sacrificed were
cut in two (except birds, ver. 10), to typify the
doom of pAbjurers. This usage often recurs in the
poets aud there are allusions to it in the New

‘estament (Jer. xxxiv. 18; Dan. xiii. 55; Matt.
xxiv. 51; Luke xii. 46). The perpetuity of co-
venants of alliance thus contented is expressed
by calling them ‘ covenauts of salt’ (Num. xviii.
19; 2Chron. xiii. 5), salt being the symbol of in-
corruption. The case of the Gibeonites affords an
exemplary instance, scarcely equalled in the an-
nals of any nation, of scrupulous adherence to
such engagetnents. The Israelites had been abso-
lutely cheated into the alliance; but, having been
confirmed by oaths, it was deemed to be invio-
lable (Josh. ix.19). Long afterwards, the treaty
having been violated by Saul, the whole nation
was punished for the crime by a horrible famine
in the time of David (2 Sam. xxi. 1, sgg.). The
prophet Ezekiel (xvii. 13-16) pours terrible
denunciations upon king Zedekiak, for acting
contrary to his sworn covenant with the king of
Babylon. In this respect the Jews were certainly
most favourably distinguished among the ancient
nations; and, from numerous intimations in Jose-
phus, it appears that their character fo fidelity to
their engagements was so generally recognised
after the Captivity, as often to procure for them
highly favourable consideration from the rulers of
Western Asia and of Egypt.


ALLON (how ; Sept. BdAavos; Vulg. Quer-
éus ; Auth. Vers. Oak). The Hebrew word, thus
inted, as it occurs in Gen, xxxv. 8; Josh. xix. 32;
sa. ii. 133 vi. 13; xliv. 14; Hos. iv. 13; Amos
ii. 9; Zech. xi, 2, was understood by the ancient+
translators, and has been supposed by most inter-
preters, to denote the oak, and there is no reason
to disturb this conclusion. In our version other
words are also rendered by ‘ oak,’ particularly”


Alah nde), which more probably denotes the
terebinth-tree [Aaa]. The oak is, in fact, less
frequently mentioned in the original than in the
A. V., where it occurs so often as to sugyest that
the oak is as conspicuous and as common in Pales-
tine as in this country. But in Syria oaks are by
no means common, except in hilly regions, where
the elevation gives the eflect of a mure northern
climate; and even in such circumstances it does
not attain the grandeur in which it often appears in
our latitudes, Indeed, Syria has not the species
(Quercus robur) which forms the glory of our own
forests. The ‘oaks of Bashan’ are in Scripture
mentioned with peculiar distinction (Isa. 1. 3;
Ezek. xxvii. 6; Zech. xi. 2), as if in the hills be-
yond the Jordan the oaks had been more abuudant
and of larger growth than elsewhere, This is the
case even at the present day. In the hilly regions
of Bashan and Gilead, Burckhardt repeatedly
mentions forests of thick oaks—fhicker than any


118 ALLON.


forests he had seen in Syria. He gratefully
of the shade thus afforded; and doubtless it was
the presence of oaks which imparted to the scenery
that European character which he notices (Syria,
265, 348). On that side of the river a thick oak-
forest occurs as fas south as the vicinity of Amman,
the capital of the Ammonites (p. 356). Oaks of
low stature are frequent in the hills and plains nea:
the sources of the Jordan (pp. 45, 312, 315):
and some of large dimensions are found in differ-
ent parts of the country, beside the natural re-
servoirs of water fed by springs (pp. 193, 315). On


HIS
WSS


[Branch of Quereus Xgilops.}


the lower slopes of Lebanon low oak-trees ave nu-
merous, and the inhabitants employ their branches
in the construction of the flat roofs of their dwell-
ings (pp. 4, 7, 189193, 312, &c). Next to
Burckhardt, Lord Lindsay is the traveller who
makes the most frequent mention of oaks in Pales-
tine. He confirms their existing abundance in the
countries of Bashan and Gilead. He calls thent
‘noble prickly oaks,’ and ‘evergreen oaks,’ and
notices a variety of the latter with a broader leaf
@han usual (Travels, ii. 122, 124, 1271.

- But oak-trees are by uo means wanting on the
west of the Jordan, in the proper Land of Ca-
naan. Lord Lindsay descrives the hills of
southern Judea about Hebron as covered to the
top with low shrubs of the prickly oak. Fine
park scenery, composed chiefly of prickly and
evergreen oaks, occurs between Samaria aud
Mount Carmel. The same trees abound on the
southern prolongations of that mountain, and on
the banks of the Kishon. The thick woods which
cover Mount Tabor are compet chiefly of oaks
and pistachic-trees; and oaks are found in the
valleys which trend from that mountain (Lind-
say, 1i. 51, 77, 85). Hasselquist found groves of
the Kermes oak (Q. coccifera) in the valleys
beyond the plain of Acre, on the road to Naza-
reth (Travels, p. 153).

From the above and other notices we collect
that the species of oak found in Palestine, and
probably all comprehended under the word A.-
Lon, are—I1. The Evergreen Oak (Quercus ilex),
which is met with not only in Western Asia, but in
Norther Africa and Southem Europe. This is a
tall but not wide-spreading tree ; and the timber,


ALLON-BACHUTH.


pa hard, is much used for purposes in
whi Compacinas and durability are required.
2. The Holly-leaved Montpelier Oak (Q. gra-
muntia), another eve which may be inserted
on the authority of Pococke. This tree also, as
its name imports, is a native of Southern Europe,
and is markedly distinguished from the former
by its numerous straggling branches and the
thick underdown of its leaves. 3. The bingo
cupped Oak (Q. crinata), so called from
bristly appearance of the calyx. It grows to a
considerable size, and furnishes an excellent tim-
ber, much used by the Turks in the building of
ships and houses. But although this species
exists in Syria, it is much more common in Asia
Minor. 4. The Great Prickly-cupped Oak (Q.

‘ or Valonia), which takes its name from
its large prickly calyx. This species is common
in the Levant, where it is a handsome tree, which
it is not in our ungenial climate, though it has
long been cultivated. The wood of this spe-
cies is of little worth; but its acorns form the
valonia of commerce, of which 150,000 cwt. are
yearly imported into this country for the use of
tanners. 5. The Kermes Oak (Q. coccifera)
takes its name from an insect (kermes, of the
genus coccus) which adheres to the branches of
this bushy evergreen shrub, in the form of small
reddish balls about the size ofa pea. This affords
a crimson dye, formerly celebrated, but now supet
seded by cochineal. This dye was used by the
ancient Hebrews; for the word n\n, which
denotes a worm, and particularly the kermes worm,
denotes also the dye prepared from it (Isa. i. 18;
Lam. iv. 5), and is accordingly rendered sdecscvor
in those passages where it occurs.


(Quercus Aegilops or Valonia.)


From the hints of travellers there to be
some other species of oaks in Palestine, but their
information is not sufficiently distinct to enable
us to identify them.

ALLON-BACHUTH (the oak of weeping), a


a


wae


. ALMON. ’


in Bethel, where Rebekah's norse was buried
xxxv, 8).


ALMON (ftObY; Sept.*AAude, 0.7. Tdwara),
ene of the three cities which belonged to the priests
in the tribe of Benjamin (Josh. xxi. 18). It 1s sup-
posed to be the same as the Alemeth of 1 Chron.
ti. 60, Jarchi and Kimchi ideutify it with Ba-
barim, which name the Targum (2 Sam. iii. 16)
renders by Almeth—both words signifying ‘ youth.’

site 1s unknown,

_ALMON-DIBLATHAIM, oue of the star
tous of the Israelites on their way from Mount

Hor to the plains of Moab, round by Mount

Ser (Num. xxxiii. 46).

ALMOND-TREE. [Luz]

ALMS (dtenuoobyn). The English word is an
aridged form of the Greek, brought down in se-

tuceessive corruptions, still to he found in
the Anglo-Saxon and early English dialects:
thus the Saxon translation of the original term is
iat. vi. 4) swelmessan; Luther's, almosen;
iclif's, almesse ; Cranmer's, almose ; Tyndale's,
almes. The Greek word is derived from 2Acos,
Pity or merey; and hence comes to denote our
manifestation of pity, namely, benefactions to the
neely—‘ an almes-deede,’ as it is translated in
the Rheims version of the New Testament. The
Primary meaning of ‘ alms‘ does not, as is the
cae in its Greek original, appear on the face of
the word, and the derivative signification only
remains in the English term; so that a word
which pomsly signified merciful feelings and
merciful actions towards the indigent has, iu pro-
(ess of time, been restricted to one particular kind
of charitable deeds, denoting now scarcely any-
thing more than giving money to beggars. This
arture from the etymological meaning of the
onginal word should be carefully borne in mind
by those who undertake to expound such passages
{Scripture as bear on the subject.

The regulations of the Mosaic law respecting
Property, and its benign spirit towards the poor,
Went far to prevent the existence of penury as a

t condition in society, and, consequently,
Precluding beggary, to render the need of
almsgiving unnecessary. Poverty, however, con-
fidered as a state of comparative want, Moees
sems to have contemplated as a probable event
m the social frame which he had established ; and
accordingly, by the appointment of specific regu-
htions, and the enjoining of a general spirit of
z ness, he sought to ent destitu-
tion and its evil consequences. e law which
be promulgated in this matter is found in Lev.
mv. 35: ‘And if thy -brother be waxen poor,
tod fallen into decay with thee, then shalt
relieve him.’ The benignity and large-
bem of spirit of the legislator appear in the con-
Cludiog words—‘ Yea, though he be a stranger
a sojourner, that he may live with thee.” The
whole of the chapter may be advantageously con-
salted. The consideration by which this merci-
ful enactment is recommended has peculiar force,

Tam the Lord your God, which brought you
Halo of the land of Egypt to give you the

ain! of Canaan, and to be your God.’ The spi-
nt of the Hebrew legislator on this point is forci-

exhibited in Dent. xv. 7 et seg. : ‘If there he
Paar Hag ® poor man... . thou shalt open thine
wide unto him, .... Beware that thine eye


ALMS; ne
be not evil against thy poor brother, and thon
givest him nought; and he cry unto the Lord
against thee, and it be sin unto thee. Thou shalt
surely give him, and thine heart shall not be
grieved when thou givest unto him: because that
for this the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all
thy works.’ The great antiquity of the practice
of benevolence towards the poor is shown in the
very beautiful passage which is found in Job .
xxix. 13 e¢ seg. The phrase, ‘ father to the poor,”
there given to the venerable patriarch, involves
higher praise even than Cicero's ‘ pater patrie.”
How high the esteem was in which this virtue con-
tinued to be held in the time of the Hebrew
monarchy may be learnt from Psalm xli. 1—
€ Blessed is he that considereth the poor; the
Lord will remember him in time of trouble.’
See also Psalm cxii. 9; Prov. xiv. 31. The pro-
gress of social corruption, however, led to the
pj rgset of the poor, which the prophets, after

ir manner, faithfully reprobated (Isaiah lviii.3):
where, among ‘other elected duties, the -
ites are required to deal their bread to the hungry,
and to bring the outcast poor to their house. See
also Isaiah x. 2; Amos it. 7; Jer. v. 28; Ezek.
xxii. 29,

However favourable to the poor the Mosaic im-
stitutions were, they do not appear to have wholly

revented beggary ; for the imprecation found in

salm cix. 10, ‘ Let his children be vagabonds
and beg,’ implies the existence of beggary as a
known social condition. Begging naturally Jed
to almsgiving, though the language of the Bible
does not present us with a term for ‘alms’ till the
ad of the Babylonish captivity, during the ca-
lamities attendant on which the need probabl
introduced the practice. MPTY corresponds with
the Greek eAenuocdyn, signifying originally that
which is riglit, just,—and thence, derivatively,
mercy and merciful deeds; and affords an inter
esting illustration of the gentle spirit of the Mo-
saic religion, since the ideas of justice and mercy
are represented as springing from the same radical
conception. In Psalm cxlv. 7, occurs, perhaps,
the earliest passage in which: the word clearly s1
nifies love or mercy. ‘ They shall ghandantly
utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shalk
sing of thy righteousness ;’ where the parallelism
shows that by p3¥ ‘mercy’ is intended. In
Daniel, however, 1v. 27, we find the word actu-
ally rendered eAenuootvg in the Septuagint—
though ‘righteousness’ is retained in our version,
The ensuing member of the sentence puts the
meaning beyond a question—‘ O king, break off
thy sins by righteousness and thine iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor, if it may be a length-
ening of thy tranquillity.’ A new idea is here pre-
sented, namely, that of merit and purchase, which
is found more forcibly expressed in the Greek ver-
sion &uaprias gov éy edennocivaus Abrpwons.
Almsgiving had come to be regarded as a means of
conciliating God’s favour and of warding off
evil. Ata still later period this idea took a firm
seat in the national mind, and alms-deeds were
regarded as a mark of distinguished virtue (Tobit
14,15; iv. 11). That begging was customary in
the time of the Saviour is clear from Mark x. 48,
‘ Blind Bartimeus sat by the wayside begging ;’
and Acts iii. 2, A lame man was laid daily at
the gate of the temple, called Beautiful, to ask
alms.’ Comp. verse 10. And that it was anal fog


1p ALOE.


the worshippers, as they entered the temple, to give’


relief, appears from the context, and particularly
from the tine answer to the lame man’s entreaty,
made by the apostle Peter. The general spirit of
Christianity, in regard to succouring the needy, is
nowhere better seen than in 1 John iii, 17:—
£ Whoso hath this world’s good, and seeth his
brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels
from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?
With the faithful and conscientious observance of
the ‘ royal law ' of love, particular manifestations
of mercy to the poor seem to be leftby Christi-
anity to be determined by time, place, and cir-
cumstances; and it cannot be supposed that a
religion, one of whose principles ig ‘ that, if any


would not work, neither should he eat’ (2 Thess.


iii. 10), can give any sanction to indiscriminate
almsyiving, or intend to encourage the crowd of
waudering, idle beggars with which some parts of
the world are still infested. The emphatic lan-
guage employed by the Lord Jesus Christ and
others (Luke iii. 11; vi. 30; xi. 41; xii. 33;
Matt. vi. 1; Acts ix. 37; x. 2,4) is designed to
enforce the general duty of a merciful and prac-
tical regard to the distresses of the indigent—a
duty which all history shows men have been la-
mentably proue to neglect; while the absence of
ostentation and even secrecy, which the Saviour
enjoined in connection with almsgiving, was in-
tended to correct actual abuses, and bring the
practice into harmony with the spirit of the Gos-
pel. In the inimitable reflections of Jesus on the
widow's mite (Mark xii, 42) is found a principle
of great value, to the effect that the magnitude of
men’s offerings to God is to be measured by the
disposition of mind whence they proceed ; a prin-
ciple which cuts up by the very roots the idea
that merit attaches itself to almsgiving as such,
and increases in proportion to the number and
costliness of our alms-deeds.

One of the earliest effects of the working of
Christianity in the hearts of its professors was the
care which it Jed them to take of the poor and in-
digent in the ‘household of faith.” Neglected
and despised by the world, cut off from its sympa-
thies, and denied any succour it might have given,
the members of the early churches were careful
not only to make provision in each case for its
own poor, but to contribute to the necessities of
other though distant communities (Acts xi. 29;
xxiv. 17; 2 Cor. ix. 12). This commendable
practice seems to have had its Christian origin in
the deeply interesting fact (which appears from
Jobn xiii. 29) that the Saviour and his attend-
ants were wout, notwithstanding their own compa-
rative poverty, to contribute ont of their small
Tesources something for the relief of the needy.—


J.R. B.

ALOE. [Aman].
ALPHA (A), the first letter of the Greek al-
bet, corresponding to the Hebrew &, Aleph.
th the Hebrews and the Greeks employed the
letters of their alphabets as numerals, and A
Alpha or Aleph) therefore denoted one or the
rst. Hence our Lord says of himself, that he is
(1d A) Alpha and (7d 2) Omega, 4. ¢. the first
and the last. the beginning and the ending, as he
Poole explains it (Rev. i. 8, 11; xxi. 6; xxii.

3


ALPHABET. The origin of alphabetical
writing belongs to a period long antecedent to the


ALPHABET. °


date of any historical testimonies, or ancient mo=
numents, which have come down to us. This
want of documentary evidence, however, bas left
a wider field for conjecture ; and a mistaken and
sometimes disingenuous zeal for the honour of
the Scriptures has not only led many learned
men to ascribe the invention of letters to Adam,
Seth, Enoch, and Noah, but to produce copies
of the very alphabets they employed. Several
such alphabets, derived chiefly from Bonaventura,
Hepburn, Roccha, and Athanasius Kircher, may
be seen in Bangii Calum Orientis (or, according
to the new title which was subsequently prefixed
to it, Exercitationes de Ortu et Progressu Ltte-
rarum), Hafnia, 1657, p. 99, sqq. Our own
time also has produced an attempt to from
the sattalogiea! character of the Hebrew alphabet
—#. e. from its representing the relations of the
zodiac and seven planets —that it was discovered,
probably by Noah, on the 7th Sept. n.c. 3446
(Seyffart’s Unser Alphabet ein Abbild des Thiers
kreises, Leipa. 1834).

The earliest and surest data, however, on which
any sound speculation on this subject can be
based, are found in the genuine palaeographical
monuments of the Phoenicians; in the manifest
derivation of all other Syro-Arabian and almost
all European characters frum that type, and in
the testimony which history bears to the use and
transmission of alphabetical writing.

The true principles of comparative Syro-Ara-
bian palaography are a discovery of almost mo-
dem date. Bochart, Bernard, aud others, in their
early attempts, did not even possess the Phoenician
alphabet at all, but only the Samaritan of printed
books or of the Hasmonwan coins; for Rhenterd
was the first that produced the genuine alphabet,
in 1705. Besides, there was a very general pre-
judice that our preset square Hebrew character
was the primitive type (a list of some of the
champions of which opinion is given in Carpzov's
Crit. Sacr. p. 227); and the want of documents
Tong concurred with that notion in hindering any
important effort in the right direction. It was
reserved for Kopp to make (in his Bilder und
Schriften der Vorzeit, Manheim, 1519) the first
systematic representation of the genealogy of an-
cient Syro-Arabian alphabets. The latter portiun
of his second volume contains elaborate tabular
views of the churacters of a wide ethnographical
circle, arranged according to their proximity to
the parent type; and, by the breadth of his com-

arisou, as well as by bis deductious from the
taws affecting the art of writing, he first suc
ceeded in establishing a number of new and un-
expected truths, which have had a permanent
influence on all subsequent inquiries. Lastly,
Gesenius, who possesses infinite philological ad-
vantages over Kopp, and who has also lung de-
voted a more exclusive attention to- Phoenician
remains, has recently given accurate copies of the
completest collection uf them ever pubhshed, and
has illustrated the characters and tle language of
the monuments themselves, and the general sub-
ject of palwography, with great Jearning and
acumen: Scripture Lingueque Phanicia Monu-
menta, P. 111, Lips. 1837—to which this article
has many obligatious.

Seventy-seven inscriptions and numerous coins
—found chiefly at Tyre and Sidon, at Malta aud
Cyprus, in Sicily, the north uf Attica, aud on the


mavenrar,
rchen, ay
_ according
by preted
ressu Lip

Our on
prove, fica
w alplabt
ions of
discurered,
. Bic. S18
| des Tings


ron which
ject can be
exgraphial
ve manirst
val ald
pe, axle
be uxt ad


Srr-Ane
Jrvgat oor
rs, in tbe
Persea
of pruted
- Rhevierd
alpdabet,
vefal pres
chaartep
eu the
Umea 'g


roy


ALPHABETS:


Digitized b


» Google


a= | - zlgee| S. ath | 2° |eo
ee = i= = bascel al a= | « on
ateph| AE] AE | AIR ACAR Neg 8 f

cn 2 OU SSIA 9 1 2d [sa 3 2
Gimel| 7 J} 1 1) TH-- ye. |aeN 4 “
pa 4 9/9 4/5) 7] L. [3 7 :

ae (| S| ee A | a > a
ww! 7 7] X ery Tt Aes ’ é

BRL, Oe Weatasongs 43\ | Lt 5 1

Cheth! A 4| @ |ai nv Hin p

teth| @ |.--1¥] 0] G |? i) 3
soa ON) Za HH eT 5 .
caph 7 7 YM fae] Y |S Blo, pina 4) >, Final yf

teal Lo elegky. aah 5 5 i
Mem Hf ed 4) So js Pina Final B] 3
won | YF ALY fj) S| a final §] >, Final gs
Same “4 ) | SY 433 D p w
Ajin] OO} UV |VI_Y¥ J \s » %
Phe | “4 4 SF) po inalp} p, Final ql
zade| \% \S| we lat... S |S Final y) 5, Final zl) 8
Zph| %7|‘P PLR|P P| MS |P p ¥
reset! GQ 41 94/9/44 TN ° ;
Cent eee yee ee | ener ee a Sree ee
Schin™ WY Wro)\ul YY) Woo ly


ALPHABETS.


ETHIOPIC


ARMENIAN


COPTIC


I m | Aip || Ik & | Alpha,
(j=) F Pjen Vida
. Ki
ee i . a Tt Gamma
" a
rig | F | tevach A a | Dalda
Za Ge Ki
jim) & z E Cc | Zida
tha! @ ‘ si L Jeth Ha Hida
Kha eC *“Schaat fi schiat A a 0 e Thida
Dal | Kat | Pk f ee ‘J 5s Jauda
Ines! sis Nw ‘aoe R K | Kabba
R ) Thawi T = fu | Che A A | Laula
e Sims if
Fi Tjawi i ta & | Dsa U ns Mi
Ze 2 Harm % cha 4 Gjen N in Ni
Sin | O ll Nahas| % ona ‘ Hho Exi
Dest sie. g | Tsa 3 E cae
‘Schin} Q# — ||Gnahas [7 phat 0
| 7 qe | Ghad O o
Sad | UW? Alph ro ‘ x | Dshe Ta Pi
nied] ue |] Raf | LH ge wey aon |] “Pp '| Ro
*Chaf | TA du | Hi + .
Ta | b | J Ce Sima
Wawe | (Dwi Lb No D
Tra | & Ain | OU >: Sha a i v pau
Wo Lv | He
Ain] E Zai | Hs a an | Pl
, F Tsh: i
Chain) & ‘Jai | "Hj: é B - ‘ :
| - ||Jaman| P 4 2 Hs | Chi
lid oer 7 | Dshe] tb | Ebsi
| k f GS Dent P da Po Rra Ww
‘a *
a) ffm of ye | se o | 0
het Geml | "2 i y | Wyev ‘I q Fei
Lam J Wee om | Diun Xx zk Giangia
ait | M
Mim} @ | fTschait) YE tsche £y/ ai oO © | Scima
| Xvun (3) Pait B ya J f cv W y Scei
| : « | Hiun 2 2 ;
: . |\\Tzadai] QQ tza fe fe Hori
He | y ¥ - Ppiur b 4 :
| Wan | 9 Zappa| O Khe || Chei
Af 4. > | 4 rf Dei Ligane
ody “ || Psa | Joga | fa So |


ALPHABET.


evest of Spain—have to us the earliest
form of that alphabet from which all others have
been derived. These remains themselves belong
generally to the period between Alexander the
Great and the reign of Augustus ; yet one is su

to belong to the year B.c. 394, and the

to be of the year a.p. 203. They are thus
much later than the oldest Greek inscriptions ;
but that, nevertheless, does not affect their claim
of preserving the most ancient known furm of the
Primitive alphabet,

The characters of this alphabet, as seen on these
monuments, are remarkable for their very angular
and comparatively complex shape. This is an
evidence of their antiquity ; as this is just that
feature which the tachygraphy and softer writing-
materials of later times would naturally tend to
obliterate, They also approach nearer to rude
Teemblances of the physical objects after which
they are named, than those in any other Syro-
Arabian alphabet, and, as another confirmation,
resemble most their nearest descendant, the oldest
Greek letters. This alphabet may be said to con-
ast solely of consonants; as in it ° 18 do not,
except under the very narrowest limitations, pos-
tess the power of denoting the place aud quality
ofa vowel, as they do in Hebrew. The mode of
Wniting is, to use a technical term, im every re-
spect much more defectire than in Hebrew, espe-
cally in the middle of a word. “There are no
Vestiges of vowel. points nor of final letters. Words
we chiefly written continuously, yet sometimes
With intervals, and with a rudimental interpunc-
fon. The use of diacritical marks seems to have

known; and that of abbreviations is very
uent. The course of the writing is from right
tolet, and there are no traces of the alternate or
siege order. This alphabet was evidently
Mvented, or first used, by a people speaking a
Sro-Arabian language ; A pi alpbatee consist-
NF 80 exclusively of consonants is possible only
m that family of language in Shick the vowels
express merely the accidental part, the moiiti-
catis and relations of the idea, and not its
emence. It is, moreover, fully adequate to denote
all the sounds of their speech ; for it distinguishes
tremarkable series of gutturals which is pe-
culiar to the Syro-Arabians; and is able to ex-
Pres every sound without compound letters, to
Which other nations, who adapted Phamician cha-
Tacters to their own native sounds, have been
obliged to have recourse. The names of the
twenty-two characters and the order of their ar-
Tangement can only be gathered (but then with
Considerable certainty) from the Hebrew and
Greek alphabets. The names are evidently Syro-
lan; and, as they a) in Hebrew, belong,
ato their form, to z Seiad anterior to the de-
Yelopment of that language as we find it in the
tarliest books of the Old Testament: and, as they
appear in the Greek, they have undergone modi-
Cations which (although some have considered
| to betray signs of the Aramaic status em-
Phaticus) are explained by Gesenius to be chiefly
etfect, of an influence, which is seen in other
(233, viBra; OOD, ddl) which the

$ derived from the Phoenicians.

In tracing the derivation of all other alphabets


tom this type, t . a
‘ins ee he records of the intercourse of na:


tition of each other and of their gradual acqui-


the arts of civilization furnish indeed an


ALPHABET. tat
important evidence ; but the eye, especially when .
trained in the school of such observation, 2 alone
sroalisiea to test the truth of even historical de-

luctions on such a subject. It is, therefore, or]

the attentive view of accurate plates which will
enable the reader fally to understand the follow- -
ing genealogical table of alphabets, which is
taken from Gesenius. To give it entire is, never-
theless, the shortest way of laying before the stu-
dent the results of a tedious inquiry; and will,
at the same time, secure the opportunity of subse-
quent reference, by which the treatment of the
several Syro-Arabian languages, under their re-
spective heads, may be materially facilitated.

The lines which run between the different
names are intended to mark the channel, and
sometimes the distinct yet convergent channels,
through whick any given character has been de-
rived. Thus, to give an illustration, the square
Hebrew of our printed books is shown to descend -
from the old Aramean of Egypt, but to be mo-
dified by the influence of the Palmyrene.

This primitive alphabet underwent various
changes in its transmission to cognate and alien
nations, The former class will be incidentally
noticed when treating of the Syro-Arabiam lan-
guages separately. Among the latter, those mo-
ditications which were necessary to adapt it to
the Greek language are the most remarkable.
The ancient Greek alphabet is an immediate de-
scendant of the Phanician; and its letters cor-
respoud, in name, figure, and order, to those of its
prototype. Even the course of the writing, from
right to left, was at first observed in short iuscrip-  ~
tions ; and then half retained in the BoverpognZdv.
But as the characters were reversed in the alter- ~
nate lines of the Bovorpognddv, and the order
from left to right became at length the standard
one, the systematic reversal of the characters be-
came the law. This of itself was a striking de-
parture from the Phoenician mode of writing. A
more important change was produced by the na-
ture of the language. The Greeks found the nume-
rous gutturals superfluous, and at the same time
felt the indispensable necessity of characters to
denote their vowels. Accordingly, they con-
verted Aleph, He, Jod, and Ain into A, E, I, O.
This last transmutation (which is the only sur-
prising one) is accounted for by Gesenius, on the
ground that the Phenician Ain leaned so much
to the O sound, that it was written in Phoenician
inscriptions to express that vowel (in cases when
it arose from the fusion of the sounds A and L),
and that the Greeks, when writing a Pheenician
word in their own way, represented it by O, as
BoAabhs = *MN2Y3. Moreover, the LX X. appear
to have felt the same influence, as Mwxa for.
Myo, Gen. xxii. 24 (Vide Gesenii Afonumenta,
p- 431). Cheth also became the rough breathing,
and subsequently was appropriated to the long E.

The two alphabets correspond as follows :


NRA pe yo

3B . 1 BT

afr 2 K x‘-—

74 Soa Pp Kérwa
ne DM 7 ?P

Y F Bat 3 oN a > 7)
tz Diya =oinT

nu


133 ALPHABET. ALPHABET.
. es
The earliest Phoenician.
Ancient Greek. Ancient Persian. Ancient Hebrew Aramean, Later Himjarite,
on Hasmon. coins, on Egypt.mon. Phoenician,
or
Numidian.
Etruscan. Roman. Samaritan in Palmyrene. Ethiopic.
the Pentateuch.
Umbrian.
Oscan. Square Hebrew.
‘ Vulgar
Samnite. Samaritan.
Sassanide.
Celtiberian, Tsabian, Estrangelo and
Z Nestorian.
end. aK
Kiaic, Peshito. Uigur.
|
|
Nischi.


There is evidence that the Greeks received all
these letters (except Tsade), because they con-
tinued to employ them as numerals, after they
had ceased to use them as letters. The loas of
Tsade, however, affected the numerical value of
all letters below its place in the series. They
subsequently rejected three letters in writing:
d, Roman F ; «éwxa, the Roman Q; and

one of the sibilants. Gesenius explains the last
“ case thus: The ancient alphabet had adopted

Zeta for Zain, Sigma properly for Samech, and
San for Shin, As the sound sh was disagreeable
to the ear of the Greeks, it was dropped. Having
thus no need of two characters to express their
single S, the two letters gradually coalesced, and
were indiscriminately called Sigma and San.
But the S retained the position of the Shin, and
not of the Samech ; and when X¢ was introduced,
it us the place of the Samech. He also
thinks that, in the statement of Pliny (Hist. Nat.
vii. 66), about sizteen or eighteen Cadmean letters,
the first number is decidedly too small ; but finds
some ground for the eighteen of Aristotle, in the
facts that the Greeks rejected three, and so rarely
used Z, that the actual number of current letters
was reduced to that amount.

The historical testimonies respecting the use
and transmission of letters disagree much as to the
nation to which the discovery is to be ascribed.
There are, however, only three nations which can
compete for the honour—the Babylonians, the

-Phasnicians, and the Egyptians, Many eminent
men, amoung whom are Kopp and Hoffmann,
support the Babylonian claim to the priority of
use. The chief argumeuts, as stated by them


(Bilder und Schriften, ii.6147; Gram. Syr.
. 61), are based on the very early civilization of
bylon ; on numerous which attribute
the discovery to the Zupor, Syri, and XaA8aior
(quoted in Hoffmann, /. c.); and especially on
the existence of a Babylonian brick containing
an inscription in characters resembling the Pha-
nician. To these arguments Gesenius has re-
lied most at length in the article Paleoyraphie,
in Ersch and Gruber's Allgemeine Encyclopidie.
He especially endeavours to invalidate the evi-
dence drawn from the brick (of which Kopp pos-
sessed an inaccurate transcript, and was sale able
to give an. unsatisfactory interpretation), and
asserts that the characters are Pheenician, but by
no means those of the most antique shape. He
eonsiders the language of the inscription to be
Aramaic; and maintains that the ae conclu-
sion which can fairly be drawn from the exist-
ence of such an inscription there, is, that during
the time of the Persian kings the Babylonians
possessed a common alphabet almost eutirely
agreeing with the Phenician. And, indeed, as
this inscription only contains seven letters, its
claim to originality is not a matter of much mo-
ment ; for, in the enly practical question of pa-
lxography, the Phenician alphabet still continues
to be, to us at least, the primitive one. He also
objects that it is, in itself, improbable that the
alphabet was inveated by the Arameans, on the
ground that, in their dialect, as far as it is known
to us, °1YN are very weak and indistinct;
wKereas the existence of such letters in the pri-
mitive al t at all, is an evidence that bey
were well marked consonants, at least to the


ALPHABET.
poopie who felt the necessity of denoting them by


eeparate si

Nearly ei equal number of ancient authorities
might be cited as testimonies that the discovery of
letters was ascribed to the Phosnicians and to the
Egyptians (see Walton's Prolegomena, ii. 2).
And, indeed, there is a view, suggested by Gese-
nius (Paleographée, i. c.), by which their rival
claims might, to a certain extent, be reconciled :—
that is, by the supposition that the hierogly-
phical was, indeed, the earliest kind of all
Writing; but that the Phoenicians, whose com-
merce led them to Egypt, may have borrowed
the first germ of alphabetical writing from the
phonetic hieroglyphs. There is at least a re-
markable coincidence between the Syro-Arabian
alphabet and the phonetic hieroglyphs, in that in
both the figure of a material object was made the
sign of that sound with which the name of the
object began. To follow this further would lead
beyond the object of this article. But, if this


| Exprosive.


The names annexed to the left-hand of the
ows are not perfectly satisfactory. To ‘ Labial’
20 objection can be made. Neither ‘ Dental’ nor

Palatal’ fitly describes the second row, in
Which the sounds are produced by contact (more
less slight and momentary) of the tongue with
the teeth, gums, or palate; while the third row,
™ the contrary, dues not need contact. The
tem ‘Guttural’ is apt, improperly, to give the
idea of a roughness which does not exist in &
tnd g. The soft palatal sounds of x, 7, ch,
cannot be named absolutely ‘ Palatals,’ without
Tannding them with those of the row above.

Peace ‘ Aspirate’ (or breathing) has in English

en generally appropriated to a ‘ rough’ breath-

10g; and it is against our usage to conceive of
liquid y as a breathing at all.

Pic Consonants are called explosive on which

hips cannot dwell when they terminate a
fo? #4 ap, ak, ad. At their end a rebound of
organs takes place, giving the sound of an


ALPHAEET. iss


theory were true, it would still leave the Phani-
cians the possibility of having actually devel

the first alphabetical writing; and that, beet
with the fact that the earliest monuments of the
Syro-Arabians have preserved their charac’
and the unanimous consent with which ancient
writers ascribe to them the transmission of the
alphabet to the Greeks (Herod. v. 58% Diod.
Sic. v. 74), may make the probabilities prepon-
derate in their favour [Wairina; Waritina-
MaTERIALS].—J. N.


AvpuassricaL Sounps. In connection with
the subject of the Hebrew and Greek alphabets,
we may be allowed to enter on some consider-
ations which are seldom duly developed in the
grammars of either language; and which will
besides throw some light on the Greek spelling of
Hebrew names.

Let us first request the reader to bestow a little
study on the following table of consonants :—-


obscure vowel; as appé for ap: for if this final
sound be withheld, but half of the consonant is
enunciated. The Latins, following the Greeks,
called these ‘Mutes.’ Or. the contrary, we name
those continuous the sound of which can be in-
definitely prolonged, as affff..., assss...

For the names thin and full, others say sharp
and flat ; or hard and soft; or surd and sonant ;
or whispering and vocal. It would appear that
in whispering the two are merged in one; for
instance, p cannot be distinguished from }, nor
z from s, Yet the ‘ Aspirates’ (or fourth row) will
not strictly bear this test.

By the Greek letters 6, 3, x, 7, we understand
the sounds given to them by the modern Greeks;
in which @ = Enylish 2A in thin; 8 = English
th in that ; x = German or Irish ch ; ¥ = Dutch g.
To conceive of the last sound, when we know that
of x, it is only requisite to consider that the fol.
lowing proportion strictly holds :—g (hard) : & 3:
7:x- At the same time, y and x have a double


134 ALPHABET.


hice iy rougher and smoother, as ch in
has. When their roughness is much


exaggerated, they give the Arabic sounds t (kha)
and € (slain), which last is the consonant gh


heard in gargling. As for the softer sounds, when
their softness is exaggerated, the X passes through
the softest German ch into a mere y; while the 7
is gradually merged in the soft imperfect r of
lispers, and finally in vw.
ut the fourth row, or the Aspirates,’ yet more
urgently need explanation to an Englishman.
The explosive aspirates come under the general
head of what is called the Soft Breathing in Greek
gramunar (although Y in the Arab mouth is far
enough from soft), while the continuous aspirates
are Rough Breathings. Moreover, Y is a fuller
and stronger N, just as M is a fuller and stronger
#1; and although the relation does not seem to be
precisely that of 5: p, ord: 2, it is close enough
to justify our tabular arrangement. As for i, it
is rather softer than our English A; and NM, or Ah,
is the Irish A, a wheezing sound. The consonant
& is the hiatus heard between the vowels in the
Greek word Ine, and Y is the same sound exag-
gerated by a compression of the throat, The last
is, in short, a jerking hiatus, such as a stuttering
man often pretixes to a vowel-sound, when with
effort he at length utters it. That &, Y, are ex-
pone and 7}, M, continuous, is evident on trial.
t is also clear that the hiatus & readily softens
itself into the liquid y. Just so, for the name


NOM (Max'lalél) the Sept. readls Marencha,
where the € before 4A is in fact meant for an
Enzlish y. On this ground we have put y into
the fourth row.

It_ is important to observe Aoto the consonants
of different nations differ. For instance, the Ger-
man p and b are intermediate to the English Pp
and 6, 50 as to be difficult to our ears to distin-
guish, and the Armenians have two different ps.
So the English ’ is intermediate in strictness to 7
and M, if at least we assume that these Hebrew


letters had the sound of the Arabic § and c:


Now this is a general phenomenon, in comparing
the Indo-European with the Syro-Arabian sounds.
Our & is between the two Hebrew or Arab k's;
our ¢ is between their two t's; and so on. To
explain this, observe that we may execute a ¢ in
various ways; first, by slapping the tongue flat
against the teeth, as an Irishman or man of Cum-
berland does when he says water ; secondly (what
is rather less broad), by slightly touching the root of
the teeth, as a Frencliman or Italian does ; thirdly,
by touching only the gums, which is the English
method ; fourthly, by touching the palate, or by
pressing on the gums with a muscular jerk. One


or other of the last is the Hebrew 0), the Arab |, ;


hence some call it a palatal, others a strong é
In touching the palate, the throat is involuntarily
opened, and a guttural sound is imparted to the
letter and to the following vowel; for which
reason it has been also called a guttural #4. The
other method, of pressing the tongue firmly, but
not on the palate, is an Armenian ¢, but perhaps
not the true Syro-Arabian.

What we have here to insist on is, that differ-
@aces which with us are provincialisms, with


ALPHABET.


‘
taem constitute differences of elementary sounds.
To a Hebrew, N differs from 9, or 3 from P, as
decidedly as with us p from b. On the other
hand, ¢ and ¢h (thin), as d and th (full), which
with us have an elementary distinction, are but
euphonic variations in Hebrew.

After this, we have to explain that 5 was ori-
ginally sounded forwarder on the palate than
English &, as P was far backwarder, at the root
of the tongue. So D was probably forwarder,
and ¥ certainly backwarder than our s, each of
them being nevertheless, a kind of s. That ¥
was not ts is seen by PY, f*¥, DD, &c. &e,
which are written Zeaad, Zidy, Mecpaly, &c. &c.
in the Sept., as well as from the analogy of the


Arabic | 9. The ¢s pronunciation is a late in-


vention, as is the ng sound, which has been arbi-
trarily assigned to . Nevertheless, out of WY the
Greeks made Tupos, which is contrary to the ana-
logy of Z<dav for WY: yet the adjective Sarra-
nus, instead of Tyrius, used by Virgil. may prove
that Sarr or Sour was in ancient, as in modern
days, the right pronunciation of Tyre. In English
we have the double sound s and sf, which is illus
trative of M and 8, 3 and p, &c., to which modifi-
cation it is closely analogous, For sh is only a
moditied s, being formed with the broad or central
part of the tongue, instead of the tip. In this action
the forepart of the tongue forms itself into a sort of
cup, the whole rim of which comes near to the
palate while the breath rushes between. On the
contrary, in sounding ¥, only a single transverse
section of the tongue approaches the palate; but
this section is far back, and the lips are protruded
and smacked, so as to consitite a mouthing s.
Farther, the alliance of r to s. so strongly marked
in the Greek and Latin languages, justifies our
arranging them in one row. ‘The r is formed by
a vibration along the tongue, which bears some
analogy to the rush of the neath along its surface,
on which the s and sh depend. The Armenians
have a twofold r, of which one, if we mistake not,
is related to the other, as our sh to s.

The Hebrews were commonly stated to have
given two sounds to each of the letters B 2 n
‘TJ 80 as to produce the twelve sounds, p Ss
bvy,tOdikyxg 7; but it is now generally ad-
mitted that it was not so originally. The Greeks
(at least provincially), even in early days, pro-
nounced Byjra, Veta, as they now also say
Ghamma, Dhelta; and the Italians for Latin &
sometimes have v, sometimes 6. The Hebrew
cormption was however so early as constantly to
show itself in the Sept.; indeed, as a general
Tule, we must regard the thin consonants B M9
as having assumed the continuous, instead df the
explosive, pronunciation ;, 7.¢. they were become
Sf, % x. Thus we, San, 9D are written
ticav, CoBEA, Xavady, in spite of the dagesh lene
hy which the later Masorites directed the initial
letters to be sounded P, T, K. Yet there is no
immovable rmle. Thus the DAD is in the same
book variously rendered Xerreceiu amd Keridoy
(1 Mace. i, 1, and viii. 5). It will be observed
that a decidedly dental ¢ is very near to th, and
a k, very mincing and forward in the mouth,
easily melts into ky, as in the Turkish language,
and thence into soft x. In this way, @ and x
having been adopted for Mand 5, 7 and « were
left as the general representatives of D and p. It


ALPHABET.
is well known that the Ephraimites at an early


iod said s, at least in some words, for sh, as in
the celebrated tale of Shibboleth; but this cor
ruption went on increasing after the orthography
had been fixed, so that it became requisite to
denote by a dot many a & sh, the sound of
which had degenerated into Ds. It is rather
is jlexing to find D occupy the same place in the

ebrew alphabet as % in the Greek, a fact which
perhays still needs elucidation.

But we must turn to an important subject—
the tendency of aspirates to degenerate into
towels. The muscular language of barbarians
seems to love aspirates; in fact, a vowel ener-
getically sounded is itself an aspirate, as an
aspirate softened is a vowel. Let it be noticed in
pasing that an over-vocalised language is by no
means soft. Such a word as Inse has of necessity
strong hiatuses between the vowels, which hiatuses,
although not zritfen in Western languages, are
virtually consonantal aspirates ; in which respect
an English representation of some barbarous jis
guages is very m’sleading. The Hebrew spelling
of Greek names often illustrates this; for ex-
ample, Antiochus is DYDN DIN, where the central
& indicates the hiatus between ¢ and 0. That the
letters (inal), 9, 1, from the earliest times were
used for the long vowels A, I, U, scems to be
beyond doubt. At a later period perhaps, N was
used for’ another A: the Gieeks adopted Y for O,
and finally for a long E. It is probable that a
caruption in the Hebrew pronunciation of 1
and A had already come in when the Sept.
adopted the spelling of proper names which we
find. As for 71, it is the more remarkable that the
Greek aspirate should not have been used for it 5
th in Greece and in Italy thé A sound must
have been very soft, and ultimately has been lost.
So we find in the Sept. ’ABéA for 720 Hebel,
Qoyi for WAN Hoshe'a; and even the rougher
and stronger aspirate M often vanishes. Thus
"Evdy for 3M Hhenok ; ‘PowBsb0 for NAN Reh-
hobot, Ke, Sometimes however the M becomes x,
as in Xap for DM, Xaadx for nb3; which may
posibly indicate that M, at least in proper names,
Occasionally retained the two sounds of Arabic


and ch and ce The Y was of necessity


omitted in Greck, since, at least when it was be-
tween two vowels, no nearer representation could
be mace than by leaving a hiatus. Where it has
been denoted by Greek y, as in Pépuoppa, Tauddé,
Anylp, there is no doubt that it had the force of


the Arabic ¢ (hain), whether or not this sound


ever occurred in Hebrew except in proper names.
ecting the vowels, we may add that it is

Dow historically established, alike in the Syro-
ian and in the Indo-European languages,
that the sounds ¢ and a (pronounced as in maid
and boat) are later in time than those of 4, }, #,
and are in fact corruptions of the diphthongs ai,
au. Hence, originally, three lung vowels, 4, 7, #%
with three vowel-points for the same when short,
to suffice, On the four very short
Hebrew a needless obscurity is left in
ey grammars by its not being observed that we
ve the same number in the English language,
ab distinct; as in sudd?n (or castlé), con-
ry, nobody, beneath ; although it is probable


.


typeared
vowels of


ALTAR,


that with M the vowel was clearer and
than in any short English a. We have even the


Surtive vowel of which the Hebrew


speak ; namely, when a word. ends in r, preceded
by a lang accented vowel or diphthong. In this
case, a very short a is heard in true English

fh, but not in Irish, before the r, as in deer,
one flour (whence the orthography flower,
bower, &c.), which corresponds to the Hebrew
M7, YR. The Arabs have it also when the final
letter is p.—F. W. N.

1. ALPHLEUS (’AAgaios), father of James the
Less (Matt. x. 3; Luke vi. 15), and husband of
Mary, the sister of our Lord's mother (Sobn xix.
25); for which reason James is called ‘the Lord's
brother’ [Broruer]. By comparing John xix.
25, with Luke xxiv. 10, and Matt. x. 3, it ap-
pears that Alphmus is the same person as Cleo-
pes Alpheus being his Greek, and Cleophas

is Hebrew or Syriac name, according to the
custom of the provinces or of the time, when men
had often two names, by one of which they were
known to their friends and countrymen, and by
the other to the Romans or strangers. Possibly,
however, the double name in Greek arises, in this
instance, from a diversity,in pronouncing the M
in his Aramean name, ‘DM, a diversity which
is common also in the Septuagint (see Kuinoel
in Joan. xix. 25) [Names].

2. ALPH AUS, the father of the evangelist
Levi or Matthew (Mark ii. 14).

ALTAR (13}?) from M3}, to slay (a victim),
but used also for the altar of incense; Sept. ge-
nerally @vc.arrhpioy, sometimes Bwpds). The
first altar we read of in the Bible was that erected
by Noah on leaving the ark. According to a


125


Rabbinical legend, it was partly formed fiom the ~


remains of one built by Adam on his expulsion.
from Paradise, and afterwards used by Cain and
Abel, on the identical spot where Abraham _pre-
pared to offer up Isaac (Zohar, In Gen. fol. 51, 3,
4; Targum, Jonathan, Gen. viii. 20). Mention
is made of altars erected by Abraham (Gen. xii.
7; xiii. 4; xxii, 9); by Isaac (xxvi. 25); by Jacob
(xxxiii. 20; xxxv. 1, 3); by Moses (Exod. xvii.
15). After the giving of the law, the Israelites were
commanded to make an altar of earth (MI%D
MDW); they were also permitted to employ
stones, but no iron tool was to ke applied to them.
This has been generally understood as an inter-
diction of sculpture, in order to guard against a
violation of the second commandment. <Altars
were frequently built on high places (03, ND3,
Bwpoi); the word being used not only for the
elevated spots, but for the sacrificial structures upon
them. Thus Solomon duz¢ an high place for Che-
mosh (1 Kings xi. 7), and Josiah brake down and


‘burt the high place, and stamped it small to


powder (2 Kings xxiii. 15); in which passage
D3 is distinguished from MIO. This practice,
however, was forbidden by the Mosaic law (Deut.
xii, 13; xvi. 5), except in particular instauces,
such as those of Gideon (Judg. vi. 26) and David
(2 Sam. xxiv. 18). It is said of Solomon ‘ that he
loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of David, his
father, only he sacrificed and burnt incense on the
high places’ (1 Kings iii. 3). Altars were some-
times built on the roofs of houses: in 2 Kings
xxiii, 12, we read of the altars that were on the
top of the upper chamber of Ahaz. In the taber


,


126 ALTAR.


nacle, and afterwards in the temple, two altars
were erected, one for sacrifices, the other for
incense: the table for the shew-bread is also
sometimes called an altar,

1, The altar of hurnt-offering rbyn nar)
belonging to the tasernacle was a hollow square,
five cubits in length and breadth, and three
cubits in height; it was made of Shittim-wood

Seicehled and overlaid with plates of brass. In

e middle there was a ledge or projection,
1515, deambulacrum, on which the priest stood
while ofticiating ; immediately below this, a brass
grating was let down into the altar to support the
fire, with four rings attached, through which poles
were passed, when the altar was removed. Some
critics have supposed that this grating was placed
perpendicularly, and fastened to the outward
edge of the 3573, thus making the lower part of
the altar larger than the upper. Others have
imagined that it extended horizontally beyond
the 25°55, in order to intercept the coals or

rtions of the sacrifice which might accidentally

Hl off the altar. Thus the Targumist Jonathan
says, ‘ Quod si cadat frustum aut pruna ignis ex
altari, cadat super craticulam nec pertingat ad
terram ; tum capieut illud sacerdotes ex craticula
et reponent in altari.’ But for such a purpose
(as Dr. Bahr remarks) a grating seems very un-
suitable. As the priests were forbidden to go up
by steps to the altar (Exod. xx. 26), a slope of
earth was probably made rising to a level with
the 9595. According to the Jewish tradition
this was on the south side, which is not im-
probable; for on the east was ‘the place of the
ashes’ (U1 DIP), Lev. i. 16, and the laver
of brass was probably near the western side, so
that only the north and south sides were left.
Those critics who suppose the grating to have
been perpendicular or on the outside, consider the
injunction in Exod. xx. 24, as applicable to this
altar, and that the inside was filled with earth;
so that the boards of Shittim-wood formed merely
a case for the real altar. Thus Jarchi, on Exod.
xxvii. 5, says, ‘ Altare terreum est hoc ipsum
gneum altare, cujus concayum terra impledatur
cum castra metarentur.’

In Exod. xxvii. 3, the following utensils are
mentioned as belonging to the altar, all of which
were to be made of brass. (1) MWD siroth,

or dishes to receive the ashes that fell
thicuet the grating. (2) D'Y" yaim, shovels (for-
cipes, Vulg.) for cleaning the altar. (3) MP WO
misrakoth (basons, Auth. Vers.; giddat, Sept.; pa-
tera sacrifica, Gesenius), vessels for receiving, the
blood and sprinkling it on the altar. (4) M1719
mizlagoth (' flesh-hooks,’ Auth. Vers.; xped-ypat,
Sept.; fuscinule, Vulg.), large forks to tum
the pieces of flesh or to take them off the
fire (see 1 Sam. ii. 13). (5) MINMD machthoth
¢ Jire-pans,' Auth. Vers.; 1d mupeiov, Sept.):

e same word is elsewhere translated censers,
Num. xvi. 17; but in Exodus xxv, 38, ‘ snuff-
dishes ;’ Sro0¢uara, Sept.

2. The altar of burt-offering in Solomon's
temple was of much larger dimensions, ‘ twenty
cubits in Jength and breadth, and ten in height’
Chron. iv. L), and was made entirely of brass.
It is said of Asa that he renewed (WIM), that is,
either repaired (in which sense the word is evi-
dently used in 2 Chron. xxiv. 4) or reconsecrated
(@vexalvioe, Sept.) the altar of the Lord that was


ALTAR.


before the porch of the Lord (2 Chron. xv. 8),
This altar was removed by king Ahaz (2 Kings
xvi. 14; it was ‘cleansed’ (WO, ayrl(w) b
Hezekiah; and in the latter part of Manasseh’s
reign was rebuilt (J ketib; 2% te

3. Of the altar of burnt-oflering in the second
temple, the canonical scriptures give us no in-
formation excepting that it was erected before
the foundations of the temple were laid (Ezra
iii. 3, 6) on the same place where it had formerly
been built, é¢° of Kal xpérepor Fy dvpxodounnévoy
téxov (Joseph. Antig. xi. 4. 1). From the Apo-
crypha, however, we may infer that it was made,
not of brass, but of unhewn stone, for in the
account of the restoration of the temple service by
Judas Maccabeeus, it is said, ‘ They took whole
stones (AlOous ddAokAfpous), according to the law,
and built a new altar according to the former’
(1 Mace. iv. 47). When Antiochus a
piece Jerusalem, Josephus infurms us that he
eft the temple bare, and took away the golden
candlesticks and the golden altar [of incense}
and table [of shew-bread], and the altar of burnt-
Oflering, 7a @votaorrhpia (Antig. xii. 5. 4).

4. The altar of bunutt-ollering erected by
Herod is thus described by Josephus (De Bell.
Jud. vy. 5. 6): ‘ Betore this temple stood the
altar, fifteen cubits high, and equal both in
length and breadth, each of which dimensions
was fifty cubits. The figure it was built in was
a square, and it had corners like hos (xepa-
toedeis mpoayéxwy ywvias), and the passage up
to it was by an insensible acclivity from the
south. It was formed without any iron tool, nor
did any iron tov] so much as touch it at any
time.’ The dimensions of this altar are differently
stated in the Mishna. It is there described as a
square 32 cubits at the base; at the height of a
cubit it is reduced 1 cubit each way, making it 30
cubits square ; at 5 cubits higher it is similarly
contracted, becoming 28 cubits square, and at
the base of the horns, 26 cubits; and allowing a
cubit each way for the deambulacrum, a square
of 24 cubits is left for the fire on the altar. Other
Jewish writers place the deambulacrum 2 feet
below the surface of the altar, which would cer-
tainly be a more suitable construction. The
Mishna states, in accordance with Josephus, that
the stones of the altar were unhewn, agreeably to
the command in Exod. xx. 25; and that they
were whitewashed every year at the Passover and
the feast of tabernacles. On the south side was
an inclined plane, 32 cubits long and 16 cubits
broad, made likewise of unhewn stones. A pipe
was connected with the south-west horn, through
which the blood of the victims was discharged by
a subterraneous passage into the brook Kedron.
Under the altar was a cavity to receive the drink-
offerings, which was covered with a marble slab,
and cleansed from time to time. On the north
side of the altar several iron rings were fixed to
fasten the victims. Lastly, a red line was drawn
round the middle of the altar to distinguish -
between the blood that was to be sprinkled above
and below it.

II. The second altar belonging to the Jewish
Cultus was the altar of incense, WOPDN Naw
or MIDPA MAW; bvoiarrhpiov Ovpiduaros,
Sept.; @ussarhpiov, Josephus; called also the
golden altar (Num. iv. 11) 37t% mary. It
was placed between the table of shew-bread


ALTARS.
and the golden candlestick, in the most holy


Oni altar in the tabernacle was made of
Shittim-wood overlaid with gold plates, one cubit
in length and breadth, and two cubits in height.
It had horns (Lev. iv. 7) of the same materials ;
and round the flat surface was a border (", crown,
Auth. Vers.; orperrhy otepdyny xpuojy, Sept.)
of gold, underneath which were the rings to
yTeceive ‘the staves (D'T3, cxvrdAa) made of
Shittim-wood, overlaid with gold to bear it withal’
Exod, xxx. 1-5; Joseph. Antig. iii. 6. 8).

2. The altar in Solomon’s Temple was similar,
but made of cedar (1 Kings vi. 20; vii. 48;
1 Chron, xxix. 18) overlaid with gold.

3, The altar in the second temple was taken
away by Antiochus Epiphanes (1 Wace. i, 23),
and restored by Judas Maccabeus (1 Macc.
iv. 49), On the arch of Titus there appears no
altar of incense; it is not mentioned in Heb. ix.,
nor by Joseph. Antig. xiv. 4. 4 (vide Tholuck
On the Hebrews, vol. ii. p. 8; Biblical Cabinet,
vol. xxix.) (Winer's Realwérterbuch, articles
‘Altar’ ‘Brandopfer altar,’ ‘ Raucheraltar ;"
Bar's ik des Mosaischen Cultus, bd. 1.
es 1837).—J. E. R.

‘ARS, FORMS OF. In the preceding
article the reader is furnished with all the posi-
tive information which we possess respecting the
altars mentioned in Scripture; but as, with regard
to material objects so frequently named as altars,
We feel a desire to have distinct images in the
mind, some further remarks respecting the forms
which oe probably bore, may not be unac-


The direction to the Israelites, at the time of
their leaving Egypt, te construct their altars
of unhewn stones or of earth, is doubtless to be
understood as an injunction to follow the usage
of their patriarchal ancestors; and not to adopt
the customs, full of idolatrous associations, which

had seen in Egypt, or might see in the land
of Canaan, As they were also strictly enjoined to
destroy the altars of the Canaanites, it ia more than
probable that the direction was levelled against
such usages as those into which that people had
fallen. The conclusion deducible from this, that
the patriarchal altars were of unhewn stones or of
th, is confirmed by the circumstances under
Which they were erected, and by the fact that
they are always described as being ‘built.’ The
Provision that they might be made of earth, aj
Plies doubtless to situations in which stones could
not be easily obtained, as in the open plains and
Wildemesses, Familiar analogies lead to the
inference that the largest stones that could be
in the neighbourhood would be employed to
the altar; but where no large stones could
a that heaps of smaller ones might be made
e.


As these altars were erected in the open air, and
Were very carefully preserved, there is at least
& strong probability that some of those ancient
Monuments of unhewn stone, usually called Dru-
idical remains, which are found in all parts of the
World, were derived from the altars of primitive

. These are various in their forms; and their
peculiar uses have been very much disputed. It
8 admitted, however, that some of them must have
been altars ;’ but the difficulty is, to determine

these altars are to be sought in the Crom-


’ through a mass


ALTARS. 127


lechs or the Kistvaens. In another work (Pio-
torial Hist. of Palestine, Supp. Notes to b. iii.
chs. i. iii. iv.) the whole subject is largely exe
amined in its scriptural relations; and the author,
of authority and illustration, there
reaches the conclusion that the arguments pre-
derate in favour of the opinion that the Crom-
echs are the representatives of the primitive
altars, and that the Kistvaens (stones disposed
in a chest-like form) are analogous to the arks
of the Jewish ritual and of some of the pagan
religions [Arx].

Cromlechs, as is well known, are somewhat in
the form of a table, one large stone being sup-
ported, in a horizontal or slightly inclined posi-
tion, upon three or more, but usually three stones,
set upright. That they were used as altars is


almost instinctively suggested to every one that,
views them; and this conclusion is strengthened
when, as is often the case, we observe a small cir-
cular hole through which probably the rope was
run by which the victims, when slaughtered, were
bound to the altar, as they were to the angular
projections or ‘horns’ of the Jewish altar (Ps,
cexviii. ay It was natural that where a suffi-
ciency of large stones could not be found, heaps of
smaller ones should be employed ; and that, when
practicable, a large flat stone would be placed on
the top, to give a proper level for the fire and
the sacrifice. Such are the cairn-altars, of which
many still remain; but as they are sometimes
found in places where stones of large size might
have been obtained, it seems that in later times
such altars had a special appropriation; and
Toland (Hist. B.’ Druids, 101) shows that the
sacred fires were burned on them, and sacrifices
offered to Bel, Baal, or the Sun,


The injunction that there should be no ascent by
steps to the altar appears to have been imperfectly
understood. There are no accounts or figures of
altars so elevated in their fabric as to require such
steps for the officiating riests; but when altars
are found on rocks or hills, the ascent to them is
sometimes facilitated by steps cut in the rock,
This, therefore, may have been an indirect way of
preventing that erection of altars in high places
which the Scriptures so often reprobate.

It is usually supposed, however, that the effect
of this prohibition was, that the tabernacle altar,


128 _ALTARS,


ALTARS.


like most ancient altars, was so low as to need no- known to those by whom Herod's altar was built,
Very different figures, however, have been formed
from these descriptions. .


ascent; or else that some other kind of ascent
was provided. The former is Calmet’s view,
the latter Lamy’s. Lamy gives a sloping asceut,
while Calmet merely provides a low standing-
board for the officiating priest. The latter is
pels tight, for the altar was but three cubits

igh, and was designed to be portable. There
is une error in these and other figures of the Jewish
altars composed from the descriptions ; namely,
with regard to the ‘horns,’ which were placed
at the corners, called ‘the horns of the altar’
(Exod. xxvii. 2; xxix. 12; 1 Kings ii. 28), and
to which the victims were tied at the time
of sacrifice. The word horn (JP heren) was
applied by the Jews as an epithet descriptive


of any point projecting in any direction after the
manner of a horn (not necessarily like a nom
in shape); and there is no reason to doubt
that the horns of the successive altars of bumt-
offerings resembled those corners projecting up-
wards which are seen in many ancient altars,
These are shown in the view now given (from
the Pictorial Bible), which, although substantially
the same, is, in this and other respects, a con-
siderable improvement upon that of Calmet.


By the time of Solomon it appears to have been
understood that the interdiction of steps of ascent
did not imply that the altar was to be low, but
rather that it was to be high, and that only a
ticular mode of ascent was forbidden. The altar
of the temple was not Jess than ten cubits high,
and sume means of ascent must have been pro-
videl. The usual representations of Solomon's
altar are furmed chiefly from the descriptions of
that in Herod's temple given by Josephus and the
Rabbins; and although this last was almost one-
third higher and larger than the other, it was
doubtless upon the same model. The altar of the
first temple had been scen, and could be described,
by many of those who were present when that of
the second temple was erected; and the latter was


The first figure is taken from Calmet's original *
work, and exhibits the form which, with slight
variation, is also preferred by Bernard Lamy, and
by Prideaux (Connection, 1. 200). It is excel-
lently conceived; but is open to the objection
that the slope, so far from Leing ‘insensible,’ as
Josephus describes it, is steep and inconvenient ;
and yet, on the other hand, a less steep ascent
to am object so elevated must have been incon-
veniently extended.

Calmet gives the above only as in accordance
with the Rabbinical descriptions. His own view of


iGiax


on
ae 7) ee Panta


the matter is conveyed in the annexed figure. This
is certainly a very handsome altar in itself, but it
would be scarcely possible to devise one more nn-
suitable for the actual, and occasionally exten-
sive, services of the Jewish altar. None of these
objections apply to the next figure, derived frum
Surenhusius (A/tshna, tom. ii. p. 261), which, tor


use and effect, far exceeds any other representation
that has hitherto been attempted. An ascent


RPRBEREae BB TRE SE


BR


ALTARS.


by an inclined plane to an altar so high as that
of Solomon must either have been inconveni-
ently steep, or have had an unseemly extension—
objections obviated by the provision of three as-
cents, of fonr steps each, conducting to successive
platforms. , In the description of Ezekiel's temple,
‘steps’ (MOY) are placed on the east. side of
the altar (Ezek. xliii. 17); and as it is generally
supposed that the details of that description agree
with those of Solomon's temple, it is on that au-
thority the steps are introduced. If they actually
existed, it may be asked how this was consistent
with the law, which furbade altogether. The
obvious answer is, that, as public decency was the
ostensible ground of the prohibition (Exod. xx. 26),
it might be supposed thet it was not imperative
ifsteps could be so disposed that decency should
not be violated; and that, if a law may be in-
‘erpreted by the reason of its enactment, this law
could only be meant to forbid a continuous flight
of steps, and not a broken ascent. If it is still
urged against this view that, according to Jo-

the ascent in the temple of Herod was
by an insensible slope, an answer is found in the
fact, that, at the time of its erection, a mode of
interpreting the law according to the dead letter,
mather than the spirit, had arisen; and we have
no doubt that even had it been then known that
steps actually existed in Solomon's altar, or in
that of the second temple, this would have been
regarded as a serious departure from the strict
letter of the law, not to be repeated in the new
altar. Ina similar way the student of the Bible
May account for sume other discrepancies between
tir of Solomon and Ezekiel, and that of


_ Tae avrar ov INcENsE, being very simple in
Ss parts and uses, has been represented with so little
difference, except in some ornamental details, that
one of the figures designed from the descriptions
may suffice. It is the same as the one inserted in
the Pictorial Bible (Exod. xxx.); and, as to the
comers (“horns”), &c., is doubtless more accurate

than those given by Calmet and others.
It is not our object to describe the altars of other
pert but, to supply materials for comparison
nd illustration, a group of the altars of the prin-
Haale of Oriental and classical antiquity
luced. One obvious remark occurs


ALTARS. 129


namely, that all the Oriental altars are square or
oblong, whereas those of Greece and Rome are
more usually round; and that, upon the whole,
the Hebrew altars were in aclaes with the
general Oriental type. In all of them we observe
bates with corresponding projections at the top;
and in some we find the true model of the ‘horns,
or prominent and pointed angles.


1,2,3. Greek. 4. Egyptian. 5. Babylonian.
6. Roman. 7,8. Persian.


Not regarding the ¢able of shew-bread as an
altar, an account of it is reserved for the proper
head; and other articles affurd information re-
specting the uses and privileges of the altars of
burnt-offering and of incense [Asy1.um ; Censer;
Incense; Sacrivics].

AuTar at Arnens. St. Paul, in his admired
address before the judges of the Areopagus at
Athens, declares that he perceived that the Athe-
nians were in all things too ry eran for
that, as he was passing by and Iding their
devotions, he found an altar, inscribed, ‘To rug
Unxnown Gop;’ and adds, with unexpected
force, ‘Him whom ye worship without knowing
(dv ody dyvootvres eboeBeire), I set forth unto
you’ (Acts xvii. 22, 23). The questions sug-
gested by the mention of an altar at Athens, thus
inscribed ‘to the unknown God,’ have engaged.
much attention; and different opinions have been,
and probably will continue to ts entertained on
the subject.

The principal difficulty arises from this, that
the Greek writers, especially such as illustrate
the Athenian antiquities, make mention of many
altars dedicated dyvéaros Scots, to the un-
known gods, but not of any one dedicated dy
véoty Oc, to the unknown god. The passage


* AcioSaiwovertépovs—a word that only occurs
here, and is of ambiguous signification, being ca-
pable of a good, bad, or indifferent sense. est
modern, and some ancient, expositors hold that it
is here to be taken in a good sense Sot in ae
as it was not the object of the apostle to give need-
less offence. ‘This explanation also agrees best
with the context, and with the circumstances of
the case. A man may be ‘very religious,’ though
his religion itself may be false.

x


130 ALTARS.


in Lucian (Philopatr. § 9), which has often
been appealed to as evidence that there existed
at Athens an altar dedicated, in the singular,
to the unknown God, dyvéorm cg, is of little
worth for the purpose. For it has been shown
by Eichhorn, and Niemeyer (Interp. Orat. Paul.
Ath, in Areop. habd.), that this witty and profane
writer only repeats the expression of St. Paul, with
the view of casting ridicule upon it, as he does
on other occasions, The other passages from
Greek writers only enable us to conclude that
there were altars at Athens dedicated to many
unknoten gods (Pausan. i. 1; Philostrat. Vit. Ap.
vi. 3). It has also been supposed that the allusion
may be to certain enonymous altars, which were
erected by the philosupher Epimenides, in the
time of a terrible pestilence, as a sulemn expiation
for the country (Diog. Laert. Vit. Epimen. i. 29),
Dr. Doddridye, among others, dwells much on
this. Hut it is a strong objection to the view
which he has taken, that the sacrifices on these
altars were to be offered not dyvéorw Oca, but rH
mpootKoyrt Og, i.e. to the God to whom this
affair appertains, or the God who can avert the
pestilence, whoever he may be; and such, no
doubt, would have been the inscription, if there
had been any. But these altars are expressly
said to have been Bwyol dydvupoi, i.e. anony-
mous altar4, evidently not in the sense of altars
inscribed to the unknown God, but altars without
Gny name or inscription.

Now, since the ancient writers tell us that
there were at Athens many altars inscribed to the
unknown yods, Erasmus, Le Clerc, Brodus, and
many others, have maintained that St. Paul
‘changed the plural number into the singular in
accommodation to his purpose. Of this opinion
was Jerume (Comment. in Tit. i. 12), who testifies
that this inscription (which, he says, had been
read by him) was, @eois "Actas xal Evpémns xal
AsBins, Gcois dyvdoras Kal Edvors, ‘To the gods
of Asia, Europe, and Africa; to the unknown and
strange gods.’ Bretschneider, relying on this
authority, supposes (Lex. N. T., 8.0. b-yvworos)
the inscription to have heen dyvdécros @cois,
f.e. to the gods of foreign nations, unknown to
the Athenians; indicating that either foreigners
might sacrifice upon that altar to their own gods,
or that Athenians, who were about to travel
abroad, might first by sacrifice propitiate the
favour of the gods of the countries they were
about to visit. He quotes the sentiment of Ter-
tullian: ‘I find, indeed, altars prostituted to
unknown gods, but idolatry is an. Attic tenet;
also to uncertain gods, but superstition is a tenet
of Rome.’ To the view that such was the in-
scription which Paul noticed, and that he thus
accommodated it to his immediate purpose, it has
been very justly objected that, if this interpretation
be admitted, the whole strength and weight of the
apostle's argument are taken away; and that his
assertion might have been convicted of falsity by
his opponents. Therefore, while admitting the
authorities for the fact, that there were altars in-
scribed to the unknown gods, they contend that
St. Paul is at least equally good authority, for
the fact that one of these altars, if not more, was
inscribed ip the singular, to the unknown God.
Chrysostom (Jn Acta Ap.), who objects strongly
to the preceding hypothesis, offers the conjecture
that the Athenians, who were a people exceedingly


ALTARS.


superstitious, being apprehensive that they might
have overlooked some divinity and omitted to wor
ship him, ew-cted altars in some part of their |
inscribed to the unknown God; whence St. Pa
took occasion to preach to the Areopagites Je
hovah as a God, with respect to them truly un-
known ; but whom they yet, in some sort, adored
without knowing him. Similar to this in essential
import is the conjecture of Eichhoum (Allgem.
Biblioth. iii, 414) to which Niemeyer subscribes,
that there were standing at Athens.seyeral very
ancient altars, which had originally no inscrip-
tion, and which were afterwards not destroyed,
for fear of provoking the anger of the gods to
whom they had been dedicated, although it
was no longer known who these gods were. He
supposes, therefore, that the inscription dyvéare
@ecg, to an [some] unkncwn God, was placed
upon them; and that one of these altars was seen
by the apostle, who, not knowing that there were
others, spoke accordingly. To this we may add
the notion of Kuinvél (Comm. in Act. xvii. 23), who
considers it proved that there were several altars
at Athens on which the inscription was written in
the plural number; and believes that there was
a/so one altar with the inscription in the singular,
although the fact has been recorded by no other
writer. For no argument can be drawn from this
silence, to the discredit of a writer, like St. Paul,
of unimpeached integrity. The altar in question,
he thinks, had probably been dedicated dyvdary
@ew, on account of some remarkable benefit re-
ceived, which seemed attributable to some God,
although it was uncertain to whom.

It would be improper to dismiss this subject
without noticing the opinion of Augustine, who
had no doubt that the Athenians, under the ap-
pellation of the unknown God, really worshipped
the true one. Others besides him have thought
that the God of the Jews was the real object of
this altar, he being a powerful God, but not fully
known to them, as the Jews never used his name
in speech, but substituted ‘Tux Lorn’ for ‘Se.
Hovan. One of the warmest modern advocates
of Augustine's opinion is Dr. Hales, who, among a
multitude of other matters, irrelevant to his ‘ Chro-
nology,’ but interesting in themselves, has criti-
cally examined this subject (vol. iii. pp. 519-531).
Alluding to the alleged fact that Athens was
colonized from Sais in Egypt, where there was a
temple to Neith, the Egyptian goddess of wisdom,
on which was the famous inscription, "Eyd eu?
TIAN 1d -yéyevos, kal dy, xal écduevor’ al thy
eudv wéxdov ovdels mw Ovntds drexaruper—* I
am Aut. that has been, and is, and shall be; and
my veil no mortal hath uct uncovered, he seems
disposed to connect this inscription with the one
om the Athenian altar, and to refer both to that
remote ‘unknowable’ Wispvom, far beyond all
known causes, whom the heathen dimly guessed at
under obscure metaphors and recondite phrases ;
but whom the Hebrews Anewo under the name of
Jehovah. :

But there is no end of these hypotheses; and
we are content to rest in the conclusion of Pro-
fessor Robinson (Add. in Am. Edit. of Calmet):
©So much at least is certain, that altars to an
unknown god or gods existed at Athens. But
the attempt to ascertain definitively whom the
Athenians worshipped under this appellatiow
must ever remain fruitless for want of sufficient


BE &€ Rai wp B BREAD EATS RTP TARP ree ee


i


EEE Se RY STRAT TA Aa dd


ny rar ee ge


ALUKAH.


data. The inscription afforded to Paul a happy
occasion of proclaiming the Gospel; and those
who embraced it found indeed that the being
whom they had thus “ ignorantly worshipped,”
was the one only living and true God.’


ALUKAH (NDISY; Sept. BBéara; Vulg.
Sanquistaa; A. V. * Horse-leech’) aceurs only
in Prov. xxx. 15 (genus, termes ; order, intesti-
natz, Lim, Viviparous, brings forth only one
offspring ata time: many species). ‘The horse-
leech” is properly a specics of leech discarded for
medical purposes on account of the coarseness of
its bite. There is no ground for the distinction of
apecies made in thy English Bible.

_ Although the Hebrew word is translated leech
m all the versions, there has been much dispute
whether that is its proper meaning. Against the
received translation, it has been urged that, upon
an examination of the context in which it occurs,
the intuduction of the leech seems strange: that
it is impossible to understand what is meant by
its ‘treo daughters,’ or three, as the Septuagint,
Syriac, and Arabic versions assign to it; and
tht, instead of the incessant craving apparently
atiniuted to it, the leech drops off when filled.
Inenler to evade these difficulties it has been at-
tempted, but in vain, to commect the passage either
with the preceding or subsequent verse. It has
als) teen attempted to give a different sense to
the Hebrew word, But as it occurs nowhere
besides, in Scripture, and as the root from which
it would seem to be derived is never used as a
verb, no assistance can be obtained from the Scrip-
tures themselves in this investigation. Recourse is
therefore had to the Arabic. The following is the
line of criticism pursued by the learned Bochart
(Hierozoicon, a Roseumiiller, iii, 785, &c.). The
Arabic wurd for leech is alakah, which is de-
rived from a verb signifying to hang or to adbere
to. But the Hebrew word, alekah, he wonld de-
Tive frum another Arabic root, aluk, which mneais
‘fate, heavy misfortune, or impending calamity” 5
aud hence he infers that alukah properly means
destiny, and particularly the necessity of dying
which attaches to every man by the decree of
God. He urges that it is not strange that
offspring should be ascribed to this divine ap-
puntment, since, in Prov. xxvii. 1, offspring
IS attributed to time, a day—‘ Thou kuowest
pot what a day may bring forth. And the
Hebrews call events the children of time. We
also speak of the womb of time. Thus, then,
hart considers that destiny, or the divine de-
cree concerning death, is bere personitied and
Tepresented as having, ‘two daughters crying,
five, give;’ namely, 2INW, Hades, or the state
of departed souls, and the grave. He cites Prov.
xxvii”, as a parallel passuge: ‘ Hell (shcol)
aud the grave are never full,’ which the Vulgate
renders ‘infernus et perditio.” Hence he sup-
poses that sheol and the grave are the two
daughters of Alukah or Destiny ; each cries ‘give’
at the same moment—the former asks for the soul,
and the latter for the body of man in death; both
are insatiable, for both invulve all mankind in one
common ruin. He further thinks that both these
are called daughters, because each of the words
w of the feminine, or, at most, of the com-
Ton gender; and in che 16th verse, the grave
(seal) is sperified as one of the ‘ things that are


AMALEK. 181


never satisfied.’ In further confirmation of this
view, Bochart cites rabbinical writers, who state
that by the word alukah, which occurs in the
Chaldee paraphrase on the Psalms, they under-
stand destiny to be signified; and also remark
that it has two daughters—Eden and Gehenna,
Paradise aud Hell—the former of whom never
has enough of the souls of the righteous, the latter
of the souls of the wicked.

In behalf of the received translation, it is
urged that it is scarcely credible that all the
ancient translators should have coufuunded alukah
with alakah; that it is peculiarly unlikely that
this should have been the case with the Septua-
gint translator of the book of Proverbs, because
it is believed that ‘this ranks next to the trans-
lation of the Pentateuch for ability and fidelity
of execution;’ and that the author of it must
have been well skilled in the two languages


. (Home's Introduction, ii. 43: ed. 1828). It is


further pleaded that the application of Arabic
analogies to Hebrew words is not decisive;
and finally, that the theory proposed by Bo-
chart is not essential to the elucidation of the
passage. In the preceding verse the writer (not
Solomon—see verse 1) speaks of ‘a generation,
whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw-teeth as
kuives to devour the poor from off the earth, and
the needy from among men ;’ and then, after the
abrupt and picturesque style of the East, espe-
cially in their proverbs, which is nowhere more
vividly exemplified than in this whole chapter, the
leech is introduced as an illustration of the covet-
ousness of such persons, and of the two distin-
guishing vices of which it is the parent, avarice
and cruelty. May not also the ‘ two daughters
of the leech, crying, Give, give,’ be a figurative
description of the two lips of the creature (for
these it has, and perfectly formed), which are
a part of its very complicated mouth? It cer-
tainly is agreeable to the Hebrew style to call the
offspring of inanimate things daughters, for so
Lrauches are called daughters of trees (Gen.
xlix. 22—margin). A s'milar use of the word
is found in Eccles. xii. 4, ¢ All the daaghters of
music shall be brought low,’ meaning the lips,
front tecth, and other parts of the mouth. It is
well remarked by Professor Paxton, that ‘ this
figurative applicaticn of the entire genus is suffi-
cient to justify the interpretation. The leech, as a
symbol, in use among rulers of every class and in .
all ages, for avarice, rapine, plunder, rapacity,
and even assidnity, is too well known to need il-
lustration’ (Plau, Epidic. art. 2; Ciccro, ad At-
tic.; Horace, Ars Poet. 476; Theocritus, Phar-
maceut.; &c. &c.).—J. F. D.


ALUSH (tiSN; Sept. AlAods), one of the
places at which the Hebrews rested on their way
to Mount Sinai (Num. xxxiii. 13). It was be-
tween Doplkah aud Rephidim, The Jewish Chro-
nology (Seder Olam Rabba, ¢. 5, p. 27) makes
it twelve miles from the former and eight from
the latter station. The Targum of Jonathan calls
it ‘a strong fort;’ and it is alleged (upon an in-
terpretation of Exod. xvi. 30) that in Alush the
Sabbath was instituted, and the first Sabbath
kept.

AMALEK (POY), a son of Eliphaz (the


first-bom of Esau) by his concubine oe he
x


432 AMALEKITES.


was the chieftain, or Emir (FON, Sept. irreudv,
Auth. V. Duke), of an Idumwan tribe (Gen.
xxxvi. 16),

AMALEKITES, the name of a nation inha-
biting the country to the south of Palestine be-
tween Idumaa and Egy pt. and to the east of the
Dead Sea and Mount Seir. ‘The Amalekites
dwell in the land of the south’ (3337 a,
Num. xiii. 29.). ‘Saul smote the Amalekites
from Havilah until thou comest to Shur, that
is over against Egypt’ (1 Sam. xv. 7). ‘David
went up and invaded the Geshurites, and Gezrites,
and the Amalekites, for those nations were of
old the inhabitants of the land as thou guest
to Shur, even unto the land of Egypt’ (1 Sam,
xxvii. 8). In 1 Chron, iv. 42, it is said that
the sons of Simeon went to Mount Seir and
smote the pies the Amalekites that were es-
vaped. According to Josephus (Aatig. iii. 2,$1
the Amalekites iphabited” Gatlin Gan 4
Ixxiii, 8; TéBara, TdBada, Stephanus Byz.;
TeBadnvh, TaBadnvf, Euseb.) and Petra, and
were the most warlike of the nations in those
parts: of re thy ToBoAiriw Kal thy Mérpay Karot-
wouvres, of KadouvTa: pey ’Auadnkira, max ipc-
raro 8 Tay excioe COvav Swipxov. In another
passage he says, ‘Aliphaz had five legitimate
sons, Theman, Omer, Saphus, Gotham, and
Kanaz; fur Amalek was not legitimate, but by a
concubine, whose name was Thamna. These
dwelt in that part of Idumza called Gobolitis,
and that called Amalekitis, from Atnalek * (Anttg.
ii, 1); and elsewhere he speaks of them as
‘reaching from Pelusium of Egypt to the Red
Sea* (Antig. vi. 7). We find, also, that they had
a settlement in that part of Palestine which was
allotted to the tribe of Ephraim. Abdon, one of
the judges of Israel, was buried in Pirathon, in
the land of, Ephraim, in the mount of the Ama-
lekites, *PODYA, WD. In Deborah‘s triumphal
ode it is said POOYA DIAW ODN 120, * out
of Ephraim was there a root of them against
‘Asmalek * (Auth. Vers.), which Ewald (Die Poe-
tischen Bicher des Alten Bundes, &c., Got-
tingen, 1839, Band. i. 129) translates ‘ Von
hale die, deren Wurzel ist in Amalegq,’ ‘of

phraim those whose root is in Amalek,’ é. ¢.
the Ephraimites who dwelt in the mount of the
Amalekites. On comparing this text and Joshua
xvi. 10, ‘they drave nut out the Canaanites that

_ dwelt in Gezer (233), but the Canaanites dwelt
among the Epbraimites unto this day '—with
1 Sam. xxvii. 8, ‘David invaded the Geshurites,
and Gezrites, and the Amalekites,’ &c.,—it seems
robable that the Gezrites (3) were the inha-
Pitanta of Gezer ("P3) (ev. Gesenius); but in that
case David must have marched northward instead
of southward, and the southern ition of the
Amalekites is expressly stated. The first. mention
of the Amalekites in the Bible is Gen. xiv. 7;
Chedorlaomer and his confederates returned and
came to En-mishipat, which is Kadesh, and smote
all the country of the Amalekites, and also the
Amorites that dwelt in Hazezon-tamar.’ From
this passage it has been inferred that the Amale-
kites existed as un independent nation at that
time, and were, therefore, totally distinct from the
descendants of the sun of Eliphaz. On the other
hand, it has been remarked that while several other
gations are specified (‘the Rephaims, the Zuzims,
the Emims,’ y. 6, ‘the Horites,’ v. 6, aud ‘ the


“people with the edge of the sword.’


AMALEKITKES.


Amorites,’ v. 7), the, pnrase ‘all the country of
the Amalekites* cpbnyn mids) may have
been used by the sacred historian to denote the
locality not then, but long afterwards, occupied
by the posterity of Amalek (Hengstenberg’s Die
Authentic des Pentateuches, Band ii.,305). The
LXX. appear to have read wis, all the
princes, instead of BADD, all the country,
karexo~ay mwdvras tols kpyovras *’AuaAtn; a
reading which, if correct, would be in favour of
the former supposition. Origen says (In Numer.
Homil. xix.), interfecerunt omnes principes Ama-
lek, Rufinus’s Latin version. After starting the
question, whether this name belonged to two na-
tions, without attempting to settle it, he turns
off to its aileetiea iuterpretation (Opera, x.
230, Berol. 1840). The Amalekites were the
first assailants of the Israelites after their passage
through the Red Sea (Exod. xvil.). Inv. 13 it
is said ‘Joshua discomfited Amalek and his
Amalek may
here be employed as the name of the chief of the
tribe, as Pharaoh was the name of the successive
kings of Egypt, and in this case the words must
mean the prince und his army. But if ¢ Amalek *
stand for the nation, ‘his people’ must mean their
confederates, It has been thought improbable
that in so short a period the descendants of Esuu’s
grandson could have been sufficiently numerous
and powerful to attack the host of Israel; but
within nearly the same period the tribe of Ephraim
had increased so that it could muster 40.500 men
able to bear arms, and Manasseh 32,200: and
admitting in the case of the Israelites an extraor-
dinary rate of increase (Exod. i. 12, 20), still, if
we consider the prostrating influence of slavery on
the national character, and the absence of warlike
habits, it is easy to conceive that a comparatively
small band of inarauders would be a very for-
midable foe to an wndisciplined multitude, cir-
curstanced as the Israelites were, in a locality so
adapted to irregular warfare. It appears too that
the attack was made on the most dvaucelias por-
tion of the host. * Remember (said Moses) what
Amalek did unto thee by the way when ye were
come forth out of Egypt; how he met thee by the
way and smote the hindmost, of thee, even all that
trere feeble behind thee cosse'nan Sept. xom-
ayres, Vulg. lassi), when thou wast faint and
weary * (Deut. xxv. 17). In Balaam’s prophecy
(Num. xxiv.) Amalek is denominated ‘the first
of the nations, DO NWN. The Tarcumists
and several expositors, both Jewish and Christian,
have taken this to mean ‘the first of the nations
that warred against Israel’ (Marg. reading, Auth.
Vers.). But it appears more agreeable to the an-
tithetical character of Oriental poetry to interpret
it of the rank held by the Amalekites among the
surrounding nations, their pre-eminence as a war-
like tribe, here contrasted with their future down-
fall and extinction. Or if we understand the
term FYWS, of priority in time, of the antiquity
of the nation, this would become a striking con-
trast with ‘his latter end’ ((MYONN). In the
Pentateuch the Amalekites are frequently men-
tioned in connection with the Canaanites (Num,
xiv. 25, 43, 45), and, in the book of Judges, with
the Moabites end Ammonites (Judg. ii, 13),
with the Midianites (Judy. vi. 3; vii. 12: 6 The
Midianites, and the Amalekites, and all the chil-
dren of the East lay along in the valley like


AMALEKITSES.


for multitude; and their camels
were without number, as the sand by the sea-side

for multitude’); with the Kenites, 1 Sam. xv. 6.
By divine command, as a retribution for their
hostility to the Israelites on leaving Egypt
(1 Sam. xv. 2), Saul invaded their country with
an army of 210,000 men, and ‘utterly destroyed
(B10, strangely taken for a proper name in
the Sept.: xdvra ror Aady Kal ‘leplu dwdxresver)
all the people with the edge of the sword ;’ but
be preserved their king Agag alive, and the best
of the cattle, and by this act of disobedience
forfeited the regal authority over Israel. Josephus
states the number of Saul’s army to be 400,000
men of Israel and 30,000 of Judah. He also
represents Saul as besieging and taking the cities
of the Amalekites, ‘some by warlike machines,
some by mines dug underground, and by building
Walls on the outside; some by famine and thirst,
and some by other methods’ (Antig. vi. 7, f 2).
Abont twenty years later they were attacked by
David during his residence among the Philistines
(1 Sam. xxvii.). It is said ‘that he smote the
Jand and left neither man nor woman alive:’ this
language must be taken with some limitation, for
shortly after the Amalekites were sufficiently re-
covered from their defeat to make reprisals, and
burnt Ziklag with fire (1 Sam. xxx.). David, on
his return from the camp of Achish, surprised
them while celebrating their success, ‘ eating, and
drinking, and dancing,’ and ‘smote them from
twilizht even unto the evening of the next day,
and there escaped not a mau of them save 400
young men which rode upon camels, and fled '
(1 Sam. xxx. 17). At a later period, we find
that David dedicated to the Lord the silver and
geld of Amalek and other conquered nations
(2 Sam. viii. 12). The last notice of the Ama-
lekites asa nation is in 1 Chron. iv. 43, from
which we learn that in the days of Hezekiah, king
of Judah, 500 men of the sons of Simeon ‘ went
to Mount Seir, and smote the rest of the Ama-
Iekites that were escaped.’

In the book of Esther, Haman is called the
Agagite, and was probably a descendant of the
tyal line (Num. xxiv. 7; 1 Sam. xv. 8). Jo-
fephus says ‘that he was by birth an Amalekite
(Antig. xi. 6, § 5).

The editor of Calmet supposes that there were
no less than three distinct tribes of Amalekites.—
1. Amalek the ancient, referred to in Gen. xiv.;
2. Atribe in the region east of Egypt, between
Egypt and Canaan (Exod. xvii. &; Sam. xv.
&e.); 3. Amalek, the descendants of Eliphaz.
No such distinction, however, appears to be
male in the Biblical narrative; the national
character is everywhere the same, and the dif-
ferent Iccalities in which we find the Ama-
lekites may be easily explained by their habits,
which evidently were daen as belong to a warlike
Bomade people. Le Clere was one of the first
critics who advocated the existence of more than
one Amalek. Hengstenbery infers from 1 Chron.
iv. 42, 43, that in a wider sense Amalckites might
be considered as belonging to Idamwa, and urges,
in behalf of the descent of the Amalekites from
the son of Eliphaz, the improbability that a people
who acted 82 conspicuons a part in the Israelitish
Pospel alan ne their origin concealed, and

as he terms it, ‘ dyeveaddynros, contrary to th
whole plan of the Pentateueh* (v. Die ‘Authentia,


&c., ii. 303). Arabian writers mention ¢falLaby
Galas, Whee, Amatiza, Amalik, Imlik, as
an aboriginal tribe of their country, descended
from Ham (Abulfeda says from Shem), and more
ancient than the Ishmaelites. They also give the
eame name to the Philistines and other Canaanites,
and assert that the Amalekites who were con-
quered by Joshua passed over to North Africa.
Philo (Vita Moysis, i. 39) calls the Amalekites
who fought with the Isiaelites on leaving Egypt,
Pheenicians (¢olvxes). The same writer inter-
prets the name Amalek as meaning ‘a
that licks up or exhausts :’ b "Auarhn, ds épunved-
eras Aads exrAelyww (Legis Allegar. iii. 66, L®.
de Migr. Abr. 26, Cong. erud. grat. 11).—J. E. R.
1. AMANA (AION), a mountain mentioned
in Cant. iv. 8. Some have supposed it to be
Mount Amanus in Cilicia, to which the dominion
of Solomon is alleged to have extended northward.
But the context, with other circumstances. leaves
little doubt that this Mount Amana was rather the
southern part or summit of Anti-Libanus, and
was 80 called perhaps fiom containing the sources


of the river Amana [Azana].

2. AMANA, a river of Damascus [Asana].

1, AMARIAH (ON, word of Jehovah ;
Sept. "Auapla, ’Auapias), mentioned in 1 Chron.
vi. 7, in the list of the descendants of Aaron by
his eldest son Eleazer. He was the son of Me
raioth and the father of Ahitub, who was (not
the grandson and successor of Eli of the same
name, but) the father of that Zadok in whose
person Saul restored the high-priesthood to the line
of Eleazer. The years during which the younger
line of Ithamar enjoyed the tificate in the
persons of Eli, Ahitub, and Ablimelech (who was
slain by King Saul at Nob) doubtless more than
cover the time of Amariah and his son Ahitub;
and it is therefore sufficiently certain that they
never were high-priests in fact, although their
names are given to carry on the direct line of
succession to Zadok.

2. AMARIAH, high-priest at a later period,
the son of Azariah, and also father of a second
Ahitub (1 Chron. vi. 11). In like manner, in
the same list, there are three high-priests bearing
the name of Azariah.

3. AMARIAH, great-grand father of the prophet
Zephaniah (Zeph. i. 1).

1, AMASA (RMDP. a burden s Sept. "Apeo-
cat), son of Abigail, a sister of king David. As
his name does not occur prior to Absalom’s rebel-
lion (2 Sam. xvii. 25), he must have been neglected
by David in comparison with Joab and Abishaji,
the sons of his other sister Zeruiah, who had before
then Leen raised to greut power and influence,
This apparent estrangement may Peale be con-
nected with the fact that Abigail had married an
Ishmuelite called Jether, who was the father of
Amasa, This is the more likely, as the fact is
pointedly mentioned (1 Chron. ii, 17), or co-
vertly indicated (2 Sam, xvii. 25) whenever the
name of Abigail occurs, whereas we are quite
ignorant who was the husband of the ather sister,
Zeruiah, and father of her distinguished sons.
We may thus form a conjecture of the giounds on
whicn Amasa joined Absalom, and obtained the
command of rebel army. He was defeated


hee AMASA.


by his cousin Joab, who commanded the army of

avid. Tunis transaction appears to have made
David sensible of the neglect with which Amasa
had been treated ; and he eventually ofiered
him not onty pardon, but the command of the
army in the room of Joab (2 Sam. xix. 13),
whose overbearing conduct had become intoler-
able to him, and to whom he could not entirely
forgive the death of Absalom. David, however,
was too good a soldier himself to have made this
offer, had not Amasa, notwithstanding his defeat,
displayed high military qualities during his com-
mand of Absalom's army. But on the bieaking
out of Sheba's rebellion, Amasa was so tardy in
his movements (;robably fiom the reluctance of
the troops to follow him), that David despatched
Abishai with the household troops in pursuit of
Sheba, and Joab joined his brother as a volunteer.
When they reached * the yieat stone of. Gibeon,’
they were overtaken by Amasa with the foice he
had been able to collect. Joab thouzht this a fa-
vourable opportunity of getting rid of so danseious
a rival, and immeiltate’y executed the treacherous
purpose he had formed. He saluted Amasa,
asked him of his heuth, and took his beard in his
right hand to kiss him, while with the unheeded
left hand he smote him dead with his swoid,
Joab then put himself’ at the head of the troops,
and continued the pursuit of Sheba; and such
was his populaiity with the army, that David was
unable to remove him from the command, or call
him to account for this bloody deed: s.c. 1022

Asner; Ausatom; Joan].

2. AMASA, a chief of Ephraim, who, with
others, vehemently resisted the 1etention as pri-
soners of the persons whom Pekah, king of Israel,
bad taken captive in a successful campaign
against Ahaz, he of Judah (2 Chron, xxvii.
12). :
AMASAIL, the principal leader of a consider-
able budy of men fiom the tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, who joined David at Ziklag. The
woids with which David received them indicate
some apprehension, which was instant] y dissipated
by a fervent declaration of attachment fiom
Amasai (1 Chron. xii. 16-18).

AMATH, Enaru. or Hamary, a city of Syria;
the same with Kmesa on the Ouontes es:

AMATHITIS, the district in Syria of whic!
Amath or Hamath on the Orontes was the capital
(1 Mace. xii. 25) [Haman].

AMATUUS (‘Ayaéois), a fortified town beyond
the Jonlan, which the Onomast. (s. v. AZmeth)

laces 21 Roman miles south of Pella. It was taken

y Alexander Jannans (Joseph. Bell, Jud. i. 4, 25
Antig. xiti. 13, 5), and its impoitance is shown
by the fact that Gabinius made it the seat of one
of the five jmisdictions (cuvédpia) into which he
divided the country (Antig. xiv. 5,4; Bell. Jud.
i. 8,5). Josephus elsewhere (Antig. xvii. 10, 6)
mentions that a palace was buint éy ’Aua@ots on
the Jordan, which was probably the same place.


1. AMAZIAH (YON, strength of Jehovah ;
Sept.’Aueooias ; Vuly. imasias). son of Joash, and
eighth king of Judah. He was 25 vears old when
he bezan to reign, and be reigned 29 vears—fioin
B.o. 838 to B.c. 809. He commenced his sove-
reignty by punishing the murderers of his father ;
and it is mentioned that he 1es)ected the law of
Moses, by not including the childien in the doom


AMBASSADOR.

of their parents, which seems to show that a

practice had previously existed. In the twelfth
year of his reign Amaziah attempted to reimpose
upon the Edomites the yoke of Judah. which they
had cast off in the time of Jehoram. The shength
of Edom is evinced by the fact that Amaziah con-
sideied the unaided strength of his own kingdom
unequal to this undertaking, and therefore hired
an auxiliary force of 100,000 men fiom the king
of Israel for 100,000 talents of silver. This is the
first example of a mercenary Brmy that occure
in the history of the Jews. It did not, however,
render any other service than that of giving Amae
ziah an oppoitunity of manifesting that he knew
his true place in the Hebrew constitution, as the
viceroy and vascal of the king Janovan [Kina].
A pophet commanded him, in the name of the
Lord. to send back the auxiliaries, on the ground
that the state of alienation fiom God in which the
kingdom of Istael lay, rendered such assistance
not only useless but dangerous. Tie king obeyed
this seeminzly hard command, and sent the men
home, although by doing so he not only lost their
services, but the 100,000 talents, which had been
alieady paid, and incurred the resentment of the
Isaelites, who were naturally exaspeiated at the
indignity shown to them. ‘This exas; eration they
indicated by plundering the towns and destroying
the 1 eojle un their homeward march.

The obedience of Amaziah was rewarded by a
gieat victory over the Edomites, ten thousand of
whom were slain in Lattle and ten thousand more
Bivazely destroyed by being hurled down fiom the
high clifls of their native mountains. But the
Edomites afterwards wete avenged : for among the
goods which fell to the conqueior wee some of
their idols, which, althouzh impotent to deliver
their own worshippers, Amaziah betook himself
to worship. This proved his iin,  Putied
up by his late victories, he thonght also of re-
ducing the ten triles under his dominion. In this
attempt he was defeated by king Joash of Israel,
who cairied hin a prisoner to Jerusalem. Joash
tnoke down great part of the city wall, plundered
the city, and even laid his hands upor the sacred
things of the temple. He, however, left Amaziah
on the throne, but not without taking hostazes for
his good behaviour. The disasters which Ama-
ziah’s infatuation had brought upon Judah pro-
hably occasioned the conspiracy in which he lost
his life. On receiving intelligence of this con-
spiracy he hastened to throw himself into the
fortiess of Lachish; but he was pursued and slain
by the conspirators, who brought back his body
‘upon horses’ to Jerusalem for intesment in the
royal sepulchre (2 Kings xiv.; 2 Chron. xxiv.).

2. AMAZIAH, the priest of the colden calves
at Bethel, in the time of Jeroboam IL. He coms
plained to the king of Amos’s prophecies of coming
evil, and urged the prophet himself to withdraw
into the kingdom of Judah and prophesy there
(Amos vii. 10-17),

AMBASSADOR. The relations of the Hebrews
with foreign nations were too limited to aflord
much occasion for the services of ambassadors,
Still, the long course of their history atioids
some bal of the employment of such funce
tionaries, which enable us to discover the position
which they were considered to occupy. Of ame
bassadors resident at a foreign court they had, of
course, no notion; all the embassies of which we


AMBER.


read being ‘extraordinary,’ or for i services

and occasions, such as to congratulate a king on

his accession or victories, or to condole with him

imhis troubles (2 Sam. viii. 15; x. 2; 1 Kings v. 1),

to remonstrate in the case of wrong (Judy. xi. 12),

to solicit favours (Num. xx. 14), or to contract

alliances (Josh. ix. 3, sqg.; 1 Mace. viii. 17).

The notion that the ambassador represented the
person of the sovereign who sent him, or the dig-
nity of the state from which he came, did not exist

in ancient times in the same sense as now. He

was a highly distinguished and privileged mes-
senger, and the inviolability of his person (2 Sam.
x. 1-5) was rather that of our heralds than of
our ambassadors. It may have been owing, in
some dezree, to the proximity of all the nations
with which the Israelites had intercourse, that their
ambassadors were intrusted with few if any dis-
eretionary powers, and could not go beyond the
letter of their instructions. In general their duty
was limited to the delivering of a message and
the receiving of an answer; and if this answer
Was such as required a rejoir der, they returned for
fresh instructions, unless they had been authorized
how to act or speak in case such an answer should
given.

The largest act performed by ambassadors ap-
pears to have been the treaty of alliance con-
tracted with the Gibeonites (Josh. ix.), who were
mposed to have come fiom ‘a tur country ;’
and the treaty which they contracted was in
agreement with the instructions with which they
profexed to be furnished. In allowing for the
eect of proximity, it must Le remembered that
the ancient ambassadors of other nations, even
© comtries distant from their own, generally
adhered to the letter of their instructions, and weie
reluctant to act on their own discretion. Generals
of armies must not. however, be confounded with
ambassadors in th’s resj:ect.

AMBER. [Cuasau1..]

AMBIDEXTER, one who can use the left hand
aw well asthe right, or, more literally, one whose
éands are both right hands, It was long sup-
pored. @hat hards are naturally equal, and
that the preference of the right hand, and com-
Partive incapacity of the left, are the result of
education and habit. But it is now known
that the difference is really physical (see Bell's
Bridgwater Treatise on the Hand), and that
the ambidexterous condition of the hands is not a
Batural development.

The capacity of equal action with both hands
was highly prized in ancient times, especially in
war. Among the Hebrews this quality seems to
bave been most common in the tribe of Benjamin,
as all the persons noticed as being endued with it
Were of that tuibe. By comparing Judg. iii. 15,
3x. 16, with 1 Chron. xii. 2, we may gather that
We fersuns mentioned in the two former texts a8
“left-handed,” were really ambidexters. In the
latter text we learn that the Benjamites who
Ped David at Ziklag were ‘mighty men, helpers
W the war. They were aimed with bows, and
could use both the right hand and the left in burl-
tng [slinging] and shooting arrows out of a how.’

e were thirty of them; and as they appear to
Yavebeen all of une family, it might almost seem as
the greater commonness of this power among the
hjamites arose from its being a hereditary pe-
saliatity of certain families in that tribe. It may


AMEN. 188


also ly have heen the result of cultivation
for although the left hand is not naturally an
equally strong and ready instrument as the right
hand, it may doubtless he often rendered such by
early and suitable training.

AMBUSCADE and AMBUSH, in military
phraseology, are terms used promiscuously, though
It is understood that the first more properly ap-
plies to the act, and the second to the locality, of
a stratagem which consists mainly in the ecn-
cealment of an army, or of a detachment, where
the enemy, if be ventures, in ignorance of the
measure, within the sphere of its action, is sud~
denly taken at a disadvantage, and liable to be
totally defeated. The principles which must
guide the contrivers of an ambuscade have heen
nearly the same in all ages; embracing con-
cealment from the observation of an enemy 80 as
to create no suspicion; a position of advantage
in case of being attacked by superior forces, and
having the means of retreating. as well as of
issuing forth to attack, without impediment, when
the proper moment is arrived. The example of
Joshua at the capture of Ai shows the art to have
been practised among the Jews on the best possible
principles. The failure of a first attempt was sure
to produce increased confidence in the assailed,
who, being the armed, but not disciplined, inhabit-
ants of a strong place, were likely not to be under
the control of much caution. Joshua, encamping
within sight, but with a valley intervening, when
he came up to make a false attack, necessarily
appeared to disadvantage, the enemy being above
him, and his retreat towards his own camp ren-
dered difficult by its being likewise above him
on the other side, and both sides no doubt very
steep, as they are in general in the hills near
Libanus. His men theretore fled, as directed, not
towards the north, where the camp was, but east-
ward, towards the plain and desert; while in the
hills, not behind, but on the west side, lay the
ambuscade, in sufficient force alone to vanquish
the enemy. This body of Israelites had not there-
fore the objectionable route to take from behind
the city, a movement that must have been seen
from the walls, and would have given time to
cluse the gates, it’ not to warn the citizens hack;
but, rising from the woedy hills, it had the short-
est distance to digo over to come down directly
to the gate; and, if an accident had caused fail-
ure in the army of Joshua, the detachment could
not itself be intercepted before reaching the camp
of the main body; while the citizens of Ai, pur-
suing down bill, had little chance of returning
up to the gates in time, or of being in a condition
to make an effectual onset. This example, as a
military operation, may be cited as perfect in all
its details.. In the attempt to surprise Shechem
(Judg. ix. 30, sgg.) the operation, so far as it
was a military mancuvre, was unskilfully laid,
although ultimately successful in consequence of
the party spirit within, and the intelligence which
Abimelech maintained in the fortress —C. H. &


AMEN (JPN; New Test. ’Aujv). This word
is strictly an adjective, signifying ‘ firm,’ and,
metaphorically, * faithful.’ Thus in Rev. iii.
14, our Lord ia called ‘ the amen, the sa re
and true witness.’ In Isa. Ixy. 16, the Heb.
has ‘the God of amen,’ which our version ren-
ders ‘the God of truth,’ i.e. of Adelity. In its ade


an AMETHYST.


verbial sense amen means certainly, trudy, surely.
It is used in the beginning of a sentence by way
of emphasis—rarely in the Old Test. (Jer. xxviit.
6), but often by our Saviour in the New, where
it is commonly translated ‘ verily.’ In John's
eel alone it is often used by him im this way

uble, s. e. ‘verily, verily.’ In the end of a
‘sentence it often occurs singly or repeated, espe-
cially at the end of hymns or prayers, as ‘ amen
and amen’ (Ps. xli. 14; Ixxii. 19; Ixxxix, 53).
The proper signification of it in this position is to
confirm the words which have preceded, and in-
voke the fulfilment of them: ‘so be it,’ fiat;
Sept. yévorro. Hence in oaths, after the priest has
repeated the words of the covenant or impreca-
tion, all those who pronounce the amen bind
themselves by the oath (Num. v. 22; Deut. xxvii.
15,17; Neh. v. 13; viii. 6; 1 Chron. xvi. 36;
comp. Ps. cvi. 48).


AMETHYST (iPM; Sept. "Auéovoros ;
Vulg. Amethystus), a precious stone, mentioned
in Scripture as the ninth in the breastplate of the
high-priest (Exod. xxviii. 19; xxxix. 12); and
the twelfth in the foundations of the New Jeru-
salem (Rev. xxi. 20). The concurrence of various
gircumstances leave little doubt that the stone
anciently known as the amethyst is really de-
noted by the Hebrew word; and as the stone so
ealled by the ancients was certainly that which
still continues to bear the same name, their iden-
tity may be considered as established.

The transparent gems to which this name is
applied are of a colour which seems composed of
a strong blue and deep red; and according as
either of these prevaila, exhibit different tinges of
purple, sometimes approaching to violet, and
sometimes declining even to a ruse colour. From
these differences of colour the ancients distin-
guished five species of the amethyst: modem
collections afiord at least as many varieties, but
they are all comprehended under two species,
the Oriental Amethyst and the Occidental Ame-
thyst. Thliese names, however, are given to
stones of essentially different natures; which
were, no doubt, anciently confounded in the
same manner. The Oriental amethyst is very
scarce, and of great hardness, lustre, and beauty.
It is in fact a rare variety of the adamantine

r, or corundum. Next to the diamond, it is

e hardest substance known. It contains about
90 per cent. of alumine, a little iron, and a little
silica. Of this species, emery, used in cutting
and polishing glass, &c., is a granular variety.
To this species also belongs the sapphire, the
most valuable of gems next to the diamond;
and of which the Oriental amethyst is merely
a violet variety. Like other sapphires, it loses
its colour in the fire, and comes out with so
much of the lustre and colour of the diamond,
that the most experienced jeweller may be de-
ceived by it.

The moie common, or Occidental amethyst, is a
variety of quartz, or rock crystal, and is found in
various forms in many parts of the world, as
India, Siberia, Sweden, Germany, Spain; and
even in England very beautiful specimens of
tolerable hardness have been discovered. This
also loses its colour in the fire.

Amethysts were much used by the ancients
fer rings and cameos; and the reason given by


AMIR.


Pliny—because they were easily cut—‘ sculpturis
faciles’ (Hist. Nat. xxxvii. 9), shows that the
Occidental species is to be understood. The
ancients believed that the amethyst possessed the
power of dispelling drunkenness in those who wore
or touched it, and hence its Greek name (‘ab « pri-
vativo et eOvw ehrius sum’— Martini, Excurs. p.
158). In like manner, the Rabbins derive its
Jewish name from its supposed power of procuring


dreams to the wearer. D2 signifying ‘to dream’
(Bruckmann, Abhandlung von der Edelsteine ;
Hill's Theophrastus, notes; Bochart, Hieroz. ;
Hillier, Tract. de xii. Gemmis in Pector. Pontif.
Hebreorum ; Winer, Bibl:sches Realicérterbuch 3
Rosenmiiller, Mineralogy, &c. of the Bible).

1. AMINADAB (27}Y, famulus princi
pis; Sept. ’AwwaddB), one of the ancestors of
David and of Christ (Matt. i. 4). He was the
son of Aram, and the father of Naasson, and of
Elisheba, who became the wife of Aaron (Exod.
vi. 23).

2. AMINADAB, in Cant. vi. 12. The cha
riots of this Aminadab are mentioned as pro-
verbial for their swiftness. Of himself we know
nothing more than what is here glanced at, from
which he appears to have been, like Jehu, one of
the tnost celebrated charioteers of his day. In
many MSS. the Hebrew term is divided into two
words 3°93 "DY, Ami nadib; in which case, ine
stead of the name of a person, it means ‘ of my
willing,’ or ‘loyal people.’ This division has been
followed in the Syriac, by the Jews in their Spanish
version, and by many modern translators; but,
taken in this way, it is difficult to assign any
satisfactory meaning to the passage. See Good's
Song of Songs, note on vi. 12.

AMIR (WDN; Sept. ex’ Sxpou perecdpov in
Isa. xvii. 6, and of "AuodSato: in ver.9; Vulg. sum-
mitate rami; Auth. Vers. ‘ uppermost bough’).
The word occurs only in Isa. xvii.6,9. It has been


usual to derive it from the Arabic _yel, and to
e
take its signification from eal, Qhich means a


general, or Emir, and hence, in the present text, the
higher or upper branches of a tree. Gesenius admits


that this interpretation is unsatisfactory; and Lee,
who regards it as very fanciful, endeavours (Lex. i
voce) to establish that it denotes the caul or sheath
in which the fruit of the date-palm is enveloped.
According to this view he translates the verse thus:
‘Two or three berries in the head (or upper part)
of the caul (or pod, properly sheath), four or five
in tts fissures.” On this he remarks: * YD sig-
nifies any fissure, and is also applicd to those of
rocks. If, therefore, the word ON signities this
caul or pod, the word YD, in the following
context, applies well to its opening, but is quite
unintelligible in any other sense.’ This is at
least ingenious; and if it be admitted as a suund
interpretation of a passage confessedly difficult,
this text is to be regarded as affording the only


AMMAN.


allusion to the fact that the fruit of the
dstepalm is, during its growth, contained in a
sheath, which rends as the fruit ripens, and at
first partially, and afterwards more fully, exposes
its precious contents [Pazm].

AMMAN, [Ransau.]

AMMON. [No Asmon.]

AMMONITES (POY Ya, ONY; Sept.
viol Auydy, Aupavira:), the descendants of the
younger sou of Lot (Gen. xix. 38), They ori-
ginally occupied a tract of country east of the
Amorites, and separated from the Moabites by
the river Ammon. It was previously in the pos-
sesion of a gigantic race called Zamzummins
(Deut. ii. 20), ‘but the Lord destroyed them
before the Ammonites, and they succeeded them
and dwelt in their stead.” The Israelites, on
teaching the borders of the Promised Land, were
commanded not to molest the children of Ammon,
for the sake of their progenitor Lot. But, though
thus preserved from the annoyance which the
pasage of such an immense host through their
couutry might have occasioned, they showed
them no hospitality or kindness; they were there-
fore prohibited from ‘entering the congregation
of the Lord’ (i. e. from being admitted into the
cml community of the Israelites) ‘to the tenth
generation for ever’ (Deut. xxiii. 3), This is
evidently intended to be a perpetual prohibition,
and was so understood by Nehemiah (Neh.
xiii. 1), The first mention of their active hos-
tility against Israel occurs in Judges iii. 13:
‘The king of Moab gathered unto him the chil-
dren of Ammon and Amalek, and went and
mote Israel.’ About 140 years later we are in-
formed that the children of Israel forsook Jehovah
and serve the gods of various nations, including
those of the children of Ammon, and the anger
of Jehovah was kindled against them, and he
told them into the hands of the Philistines and
of the children of Ammen. The Ammonites
crosed over the Jordan, and fought with Judah,
Benjau.in, and Ephraim, so that ‘ Israel was sore
distessl.’ In answer to Jephthah'’s messengers
(Judy. xi. 12), the king of Ammon charged the
Imaelites with having taken away that part of his
territories which lay between the rivers Arnon
and Jabuk, which, in Joshua xiii. 25, is called
Shalf the land of the children of Ammon,’ but
was in the possession of the Amorites when the
Israelites invaded it; and this fact was urged by
Jephthah. in order to prove that the charge was
il-fonnded, Jephthah ‘smote them from Aroer
to Minith, even twenty cities, with a very great
slaughter’ (Judg. xi. 33; Joseph. Antig. v. 7).
The Ammonites were again signally defeated by
Ssul (w.c. 1095) (1 Sam, xi. 11), and, according
to Josephus, their king Nahash was slain (Antig.
vi. 5). His successor, who bore the same name,
was a friend of David, and died some years after
is accession to the throne. In consequence of
the gross insult offered to David's ambassadors by
his son Hanun (2 Sam. x. 4; Joseph. Antig. vil.
6, awar ensued, in which the Ammonites were
defeated, and their allies the Syrians were 80
daunted ‘that they feared to help the children
of Ammon any tmore’ (2 Sam. x. 19). In_ the
following year David touk their metropolis, Rab-

and great abundance of spoil, which is pro-
bably mentione! by anticipation in 2 Sam. viii,


AMMONITES.


12 (2 Sam. x. 14; xii. 26-31; Joseph. Antig.
vii, 7). In the reign of Jehoshaphat (.c. &96
the Ammonites joined with the Moabites an
other tribes belonging to Mount Seir,* to mvade
Judah; but, by the divine intervention, were led
to destroy one another. Jehoshaphat and his
people were three days in gathering the spoil (2
Chron. xx. 25). The Ammonites ‘ gave gifts’
to Uzziah (2 Chron. xxvi. 8), and paid a tribute
to his son Jotham for three successive years, con-
sisting of 100 talents of silver, 1000 measures of
wheat, and as many of barley. When the two
and a half tribes were carried away captive, the
Ammonites took possession of the towus belonging
to the tribe of Gad (Jerem. xlix. 1). ‘Bands of
the children of Ammon’ and of other nations
came up with Nebuchadnezzar against Jerusalem
(n.c. 607), and joined in exulting over its fall
(Ezek. xxv. 3, 6). Yet they allowed some of the
fugitive Jews to take refuge among them, and
even to intermarry (Jer. xl. 11; Neh. xiii. 13).
On the return of the Jews from Babylon the Am-
monites manifested their ancient hostility by
deriding and opposing the rebuilding of Jerusa-
lem (Neh. iv. 3, 7,8). Both Ezra and Nehemiab
expressed vehement indignation against those
Jewsdvho had intermarried with the heathen, and
thus transgressed the divine command (Deut. vii,
3; Ezra x.; Neh. xiii. 25). Judas Maccabeus
(s.c. 164) fought many battles with the Ammo-
nites, and took Jazer with the towns belonging
to it: Thy "laChp cal ras Ovyarepas abrijs. Justin
Martyr affirms that in his time the Ammonites
were numerous: *Apavirwy gore viv TOAD WAT O0s
(Dial. cum Tryph. §.119). Origen speaks of their
conntry under the general denomination of
Arabia. Josephus says that the Moabites and
Ammonites were inhabitants of Cole-Syria
(Antig. i. 11, 4).

Their national idol was Molech or M:lcom,
whose worship was introduced among the Israel-
ites by the Ammonitish wives of Solomon (1
Kings xi. 5,7); and the high places built by
that sovereign fur this ‘ abomination ' were not de-
stroyed till the reign of Josiah (s.c. 610) (2
Kings xxiii. 13).

Besides Nahash and Hanun, an Ammonitish


Ess is as ee
* In 2 Chron. xx. 1, it is said, ‘It came to
pass after this also, that the children of Moab and
the children of Ammon, and with them [other]
beside the Ammonites, came against Jehoshaphat
to battle.’ Auth. Vers. D')}D~MD would be
correctly translated ‘part (or some)’ of the Am-
monites, aa in Exod. xvii. 5, ‘31D, ‘some a,
the eld:rs;' 2 Sam. xi. 17; Gen. xxxiti. 1
Dy}, ‘some of the people.’ But as the
children of Ammon had already been mentioned,
a doubt arises as to the correctness of the present
reading. As the inhabitants of Mount Seir are
joined with ,the Moabites and Ammonites, in
verses 10, 22, 23, possibly the word D*D Ni
© some of the Edomites, stood in the origi
text, or, by a slight transposition of two letters,
we may read D')1I~OMD, ‘ some of the Me
hunims;' Sept. é« ra» Muvaiey, a tribe men-
tioned in 2 Chron. xxvi. 7, éxl robs Muvalovs.
In the Sth verse, for ‘the Ammonites gave gifts,’
the Sept. reads %€cxay of Muivaio: Supa; ve
Maurer, Commentarius Grammaticus Criticus tz
Vet. Test., Lips. 1835, i. 240. ‘


138 AMNON.


king Baalis (D'Sy3 ; Sept. BeAcsod and Beaod)
is mentioned by Jeremiah (xl. 14). Sixteen
manuscripts read O°>Y3, Baalim ; and Josephus,
MadAew (Antig. x. 9, § 3). ;

In the writings of the prophets terrible denun-
ciations are uttered agaist the Ammonites an
account of their rancorous hostility to the people
of Israel ; and the destruction of their metropolis,
Rabbah, is distinctly foretuld (Zeph. ii. 8; Jer.
xlix. 1-6; Ezek. xxv. 1-5, 10; Amos i. 13-15).
These passages will be more ropely noticed
under the article Raszau.—J. E. R.

AMNON (jUDN, faithful), the eldest son of
David, by Ahinoam of Jezreel. He was born at
Hebron, about s.c. 1056. He is only known for
his atrocious conduct towards his half-sister Tamar,
which his full-brother Absalom revenged two years
after, by causing him to be assassinated while a

at his table, in s.c. 1032 (2 Sam. xiii.)
Assaiou].

AMOMUM (ucpov). This word is only
found in Rev. xviii. 13, and is even there omitted
in some MSS., probably from the homeoteleuton.
It denoted an odoriferous plant or seed, used in
preparing precious ointment. It differed from the
modern amomum of the drugyists, but the exact
species is not known (see Schleusner’s and Robin-
son's Greek Lexicons).

AMON (IO€, Jer. xIvi. 25) is the name of
an Egyptian god, in whom the classical writers
unauimously recognise their own Zeus an Ju-
piter. The primitive seat of his worship appears
to have beeu at Mervé, frum which it descended
to Thebes, and thence, according to Herodotus
(ii. 54), was transmitted to the Oasis of Siwah
and to Dodona; iu all which places there were
celebrated oracles of this god. His chief temple


and oracle in Egypt, however, were at Thebes, a
city peculiarly consecrated to him, and which is
probably meant by the No and No Amon of the
prophets. He is generally represented on Egyptian
monuments by the seated .figure of a man with a
ram's head, or by that of an entire ram, and of
a blue colour. In honour of him, the inhabitants
of the Thebaid abstained from the flesh of sheep,
but they annually sacrificed a ram to him and
dressed hia image in the hide. A religious reason
for that ceremony is assigned by Herodotus (ii.
42); but Divdorus (iii. 72) ascribes his wearing
horns to a more trivial cause. There appears to


AMON.
be no account of the manner in which his oracular


responses were given; but as a sculpture at
Qamiiq, which Creuzer has copied from the De-
scription @*Egypte, represents his portable taber-
nacle mounted on a boat and borne on the
shoulders of forty priests, it may be conjectured,
from the resemblance between several features of
that representation and the description of the
oracle of Jupiter Ammon in Diodorus, xvii. 50,
that’ his responses were communicated by some
indication during the solemn transportation of
his tabernacle.

As for the power which was worshipped under
the form of Amon, Macrobius asserts (Saturnal.
i. 21) that the Libyans adored the setting sun
under that of their Ammon; but he points to the
connection between the ram‘s horns of the god
and Aries in the Zodiac. Jablonski, however,
has endeavoured to show that Amon represented
the sun at the vernal equinox (Pantheon, i. 165,
sqy.). This again has been questioned by Jo-
mard (in the Descript. d’ Eyypte), who maiutains
that the ancient vernal equinox was in Taurus,
aud considers Amon to denote the overflow of the
Nile at the autumnal equinox. The precise
ground of this objection is nut apparent; br the
Egyptian year was movable, and in every 119
years the vernal equinox must have fallen in a
different sign of the Zodiac (Ideler, Iuandbuch
der Chronologic, i. 91). But Creuzer (Symboliky
ii, 205) still adheres to Jablonski’s opinion ; and
the fact that Amon bears some relation to the sun
seems placed beyond doubt by euchorial inscrip-
tions, inwhich Aion Ra is found, Ra meaning sun
(Kosegarten, De Prisca .Egyptiorum Literatura,
p- 31). F.S. de Schmidt also, in his essay De
Zodiuci Origine .Eyyptia, p. 33, sqq. (inserted in
his Opuscula quibus Res Egyptiace illustrantur,
Carolsiuhw, 1765), endeavours by other argu-
ments to prove the connection between Amon and
Aries. In doing this he points out the coinci-
dence of the festival of Amon, and of the sacrifice
of the ram, with the period and with the kind of
offering of the Jewish Passover, as if the appoint-
ment of the Paschal lamb was in part Tatended to
separate the Jews more entirely from the Egyp-
tians. For this he not only cites the passage of
Tacitus, caso aricte velut in contumeliam Ham-
monis (Hist. v. 4), but adduces an extract to the
same effect from Rabbi Abrah. Seba; Bahr, how-
ever (in his Symbolik des Mostischen Cultus, ii.
641), when objecting to Baur's attempt to draw a
similar parallel between the festival of Amon and.
the Passover, justly remarks that the Hebrew text,
besides allowing the Paschal offering to be a kid,
always distinguishes between a male lamb aud a
ram, and that the latter is not the sacrifice of the


‘Passover (Ibid. p. 296).


The etymology of the name is obscure. Eus-
tathius says that, according to some, the word
means shepherd. Jablunski proposed an etymology
by which it would signify producing light ; and
Champullion, in his latest interpretation, assigned
it the sense of hidden. There is little doubt that
the pointed Hebrew text correctly represents the
Egyptian name of the god, and, besides what may
be gathered from the forms of the name in the
classical writers, Kosegarten argues that the en-,
chorial Amn was pronounced Amon, because
names in which it forms a are so written in


Greek, as "AporpacdsOnp. oreover, "Auer and


AMON.


"Aue are found in Iamblicus and Plutarch;
aod the latter expressly says that the Greeks
changed the native name into “Apuey.

There is no reason to doubt that the name of
this god really occurs in the paasage ‘ Behold, I
will visit Amon of No,’ in Jer. xlvi. 25. The
context and all internal grounds are in favour of
this view. The Sept. has rendered it by ’Aupdr,
as it has also called No, in Ezek. xxx. 14, Asdo~
mois. The Peshito likewise takes it as a pro-
per name, as {]ON does nut exist in Syriac in the
signification which it bears as a pure Hebrew word.
The Targum of Jonathan and the Vulgate, how-
ever, have rendered the passage ‘the maltitude of
Alexandria.’ The reason of their taking }ON
to mean ‘multitude’ ray perhaps be found in the
fact that, in Ezek. xxx. 15, we read yon,
which does bear that sense. Nevertheless, modern
scholars are more disposed to emend the latter
reading by the furmer, and to find Amon, the
Egyptian god, in both places. —J. N.

AMON (}iON, artificer), son of Manasseh, and
fourteenth king of Judah, who began to reign s.c.
644, and teimed two years. He appears to have
derived little benefit fiom the instructive example
which the sin, punishment, and repentance of Nis
father ofiered ; for he restored idolatry, and again
set up the imazes which Munasseh had cast down,
He was assassinated in a court conspiyacy ; bat
the people put the rezicides to death, and raised
to the throne his son Josiah, then but eight years
old (2 Kings xxi. 19-26; 2 Chion. xxxiii. 21-25).

AMORITES (JON; Sept. *Apopsaior),
the descendants of one of the sons of Canaan;

3 Sept. rdy ’AuopSaiov; Auth. Vers. the
Emorite, They were the most powerful and dis-
boguished of the Canaanitish mations, We find

first noticed in Gen. xiv. 7—‘the Amorites
that dwelt in Hazezon-tamar,’ YON TENN, the
cutting of the palm-tree, afterwards called En-
pedi, IIPY, fountain of the kid, a city in the
wilderness of Juda not far from the Dead Sea.
In the promise to Abraham (Gen. xv. 21), the
Amorites are specified as one of the nations whose
country would be given to his posterity. But at
that time three confederates of the patriarch be-
longed to this tribe; Mamre, Aner, and Eshcol
(Gen. xiv. 13, 24). When the Israelites were
about to enter the promised Jand, the Amorites
occupied a tract on both sides of the Jordan.
That part of their territories which lay to the east
of the Jordan was allotted to the tribes of Reuben,
Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh. They were
under two kings—Sihon, king of Heshbon (fre-
quently called king of the Amurites), and Og,
king of Bushan, who ‘dwelt at Ashtaroth [and
in [at] Edrei, SYTIND NALD (Deut. i.
compared with Josh. xii. 43 xiii, 12). Before
hostilities commenced messengers were sent to
Sihon, Tequesting permission to pass through his

d; but Sibon refused, and came to Jahaz and
fousht with Israel; and Israel smote him with

edge of the sword, and possessed his land from

mun (Modjeb) unto Jabbok (Zerka) (Num.
311.24), Og also gave battle to the Israelites at
Edrei, and was totally defeated. After the cap-
ture of Ai, five kings of the Amorites, whose do-
Minions lay within the allotznent of the tribe of
Judah, leagued together to wreak vengeance on

Gibeonites for having made a separate peace


AMOB. 139
with the invaders. Joshua, on being apprised of
their design, marched to Gibeon and defeated
them with great slaughter (Josh. x. 10). Another
confederacy was shortly after formed on a still
larger scale; the associated forces are described
as ‘much peuple, even as the sand upon the sea-
shore in multitude, with horses and chariots very
many’ (Josh. xi. 4). Jusephus says that they
consisted of 300,000 armed foot-soldiers, 10,000
cavalry, and 20,000 chariots (Antig. v. 1).
Jushua came suddenly upon them by the waters
of Merom (the luke Samachonites of Josephus,
Antig. v. 6, § 1, and the modern Bahrat-al-
Hule), and Israel smote them until they left
none remaining (Josh. xi. 8). Still, after their
severe deleats, the Amorites, by means of their
war-chariots and cavalry, contined the Danites to
the hills, and would not suffer them to settle in
the plains: they even succeeded in retaining
possession of some of the mountainous parts.


‘The Amorites would (5x1 obstinaverunt se,
J. H. Michaelis) dwell in Mount Heres in Aija-
lon, and in Shaalbim, yet the hand of the house
of Joseph prevailed, so that they became tribu-
taries. And the coast of the Amorites was from
the going up to Akrabbim, DIINPY nbyo {the
steep of Scorpions) from the rock and upwards"
(Judg. i. 34-36). It is mentioned as an extra-
ordinary circumstance that in the days of Samuel
there was peace between Israel and the Amorites
(1 Sam. vii. 14). In Solomon's reign a tribute
of bond-service was levied on the remnant of the
Amorites and other Canaanitish nations (1 Kings
ix. 21; 2 Chron. viii. 4.

A discrepancy has been supposed to exist be-
tween Deut. i. 44, and Num. xiv. 45, since in the
former the Amorites are said to bave attacked the
Israelites, and in the latter the Amalekites ; the
obvious explanation is, that in the first passage
the Amalekites are not mentioned, and the Amo-
rites stand fur the Canaanites in the second pas-
sage. From the language of Amos (ii 9) it has
been inferred that the Amorites in general were
men of extraordinary stature, but perhaps the
alfasion is to an individual, Og, king of Bashan,
who is described by Moses as being the last ‘ of
the remnant of the giants.’ His bedstead was of
iron, ‘nine cubits in length and four cubits in
breadth * (Deut. iii. 21). Though the Gibeonites
in Josh. ix. 7, are called Hivites, yet in 2 Sam.
xxi. 2, they are said to be ‘of the remnant of the
Amorites,’ probably because they were descended
from a common stock, and were in subjection to
an Amuritish prince, as we do not read of any _
king of the Hivites—J. E. R.

AMOS (DyOY), carried, or a burden; one
of the twelve minor prophets, and a contem-
porary of Isaiah and Hosea. Gesenins conjec-
tures that the name may be of Egyptian origin,
and the same as Amasis or Amosis, whicl means
son of the moon (v. Gesenit Thesaur. s.v. DIDY
and 1/9). He was a native of Tekoah, about
six miles S. of Bethlehem, inhabited chietly
by shepherds, to which class he belonged, being
also a dresser of sycamore-trees. Though
some critics have supposed that he was a
native of the kingdom of Israel, and took re-
fuge in Tekoah when persecuted by Amaziah ;
yet a comparison of the passages Amos i. 1; vil.
14, with Amaziah’s language vii. 12, leads us to


140 AMOS.


believe that he was born and brought up in that
place. The period during which he filled the

ic office was of short duration, unless we
suppose that he uttered other predictions which
are not recorded. It is stated expressly that he
prophesied in the days of Uzziah, King of Judah,
and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash,
king of Israel, two years before the earthquake
(Amos i. 1). As Jeroboam died in the fifteenth
year of Uzziah's reign, this earthquake, to which
there is An allusion in Zechariah (xiv. 5), could
not have happened later than the seventeenth year
of Uzziah. Josephus indeed (Antig. ix. 10) and
some other Jewish writers represent the earthquake
as a mark of the divine displeasure against
Uzziah (in addition to his leprosy) fur usurping
the priest's office. This, hqwever, would not
agree with the sacred narrative, which informs us
that Jotham, his son, acted as regent during the
remainder of his reign, was twenty-five years old
when he became his successor, and consequently
was not bom till the twenty-seventh year of his
father’s reign. As Uzziah and Jeroboam were
contemporaries for about fourteen years, from B.c.
798 to 78.4, the latter of these dates will mark the
period when Amos prophesied.

In several of the early Christian writers, Amos
the prophet is confounded with Amoz (}4D8),
the father of Isaiah. Thus Clement of Alexandria
(Strom. i. 21, § 118), xpopnrevouar 88 ex” abrod
*Auws nal ‘Hoalas 6 vids abtov: this mistake
arose from their ignorance of Hebrew, and from
the name ’Ayds being applied to both in the
Septuagint. In our Authorized Version the names
are, as above, correctly distingnished, though,
strange to say, some commentators have asserted
that the two individuals are named alike.

When Amos received his commission, the king-
dom of Israel, which had been ‘cut short’ by
Hazael (2 Kings x. 33) towards the close of
Jeliu's reign, was restored to its ancient limits
and splendour by Jeroboam the Second (2
Kings xiv. 25). But the restoration of na-
tional prosperity was followed by the prevalence
of luxury, licentiousness, and oppression, to an
extent that again provoked the divine displeasure,
and Amos was called from the sheep-folus to be
the harbinger of the coming judgments. Not that
his commission was limited entirely to Israel.
The thunder-sturm (as Ruckert poetically ex-
presses it) rolls over all the surrounding king-
doms, touches Judah in its progress, and at length
settles upon Israel. Chap. i.; ii. 1-5, form a
solemn prelude to the main subject; nation after
nation is summoned to judgment, in each instance
with the striking idiomatical expression (similar
to that in Proverbs xxx. 15, 18, 21, and to the
tpls nal rerpdxts, the terque quaterque of the
Greek and Roman poets), ‘ For three transgres-
sions—and for fuur—I will not turn away the
punishment thereof.’ Israel is then addressed in
the same style, and in chap. ili. (after a brief
rebuke of the twelve tribes collectively) its de-
generate state is strikingly portrayed, and the
denunciations of divine justice are intermingled,
like repeated thunder-claps, to the end of chap.
vi. The seventh and eighth chapters contain
various symbolical visions, with a brief historical
episode (vii. 10-17), In the ninth chapter the
majesty of Jehovah and the terrors of his justice
are set furth with a sublimity of diction which


AMPHIPOLIS.


rivals and partly copies that of the royal Psalmist
(comp. vers. 2, 3, with Ps. cix., and ver. 6 with Ps.
civ.). Towards the close the scene brightens, and
from the eleventh verse to the end the promises of
the divine mercy and returning favour to the
chosen race are exhibited in imagery of great
beauty taken from rural life.

The allusions in the writings of this prophet
are numerous and varied; they refer to natural
objects, as in iii, 4, 8; iv. 7, 9; v. 8; vi. 12;
ix. 3: to historical events, i. 9, 11, 135 ii. 1s
iv. 11; v. 26: to agricultural or pastoral employ-
ments and occurrences, i. 3; ii, 13; iii, 5, 12;
iy. 2, 9;ev. 19; vii. 1; ix. 9,13, 15: and to
national institutions and customs, ii. 8; iii. 15;
iv. 45 v. 21; vi. 4-6, 105 viii. 5, 10, 14.

Some peculiar expressions occur; such as
© cleanness of teeth,” a parallelism to ‘ want of
bread,’ vi. 6. § God of Hosts” is found only in
Amos and the Psalms. ‘The high places of
Isaac,’ vii. 9; ‘the house of Isaac,’ vii. 16. 6 He
that createth the wind,’ iv. 13. In the ortho-
graphy there are a few peculiarities, as INMD
for AYN, vi. 8; DIDWID for DIDDD, v. 11;
pny for PNY’ (found also in Ps. cv., and
Jerem, xxxiii.). és

The evidence afforded by the writings of this
prophet that the existing religious institutious both
of Judah and Israel (with the exception of the
corruptions intruduced by Jeroboam) were framed
according to the rules prescribed in the Penta-
teuch, and the argument hence arising for the
genuineness of the Mosaic records, are exhibited
very lucidly by Dr. Hengstenberg in the second
part of his Beitrage zur Linleitung ins Alte
Testament (Contributions to an Introduction to
the Old Testament)—Die Authentie des Pen-
tateuches (The Authenticity of the Pentateuch),
i. p. §3-125,

The canonicity of the book of Amos is amply
supported both by Jewish and Christian aed
rities. Philo, Josephus, and the Talmud include
it among the minor prophets. It is also in the
catalogues of Melito, Tenine, and the 60th canon
of the Council of Laodicea, Justin Martyr, in
his Dialogue with Trypho (§ 22), quotes a con-
siderable part of the 5th and 6th chapters, which
he introduces by saying, dxotoate was wept
tovtov A€ye Sid’ Auds évds Tay Budexa—‘ Hear
how he speaks conceining these by Amos, one of
the twelve.” There are two quotations from it in
the New Testament: the tirst (v. 25, 26) by the

roto-maityr seus Acts vii. 42; the second (ix,
1) by the apostle James, Acts xv. 16.—J. E.R.

AMOSIS, an Egyptian monarch, the founder
of the eighteenth dynasty, who ascended the throne
in nc. 1575. The period of his accession, and
the change which then took place in the reigning
family, strongly conlirm the opinion of his being
the ‘new king who knew not Joseph’ (Exod. i. 8)3
and if it be considered that he was from the dis-
tant province of Thebes, it is reasonable to expect
that the Hebrews would be strangers to him, and
that he would be likely to look upon them with
the same distrust and contempt with which the
Egyptians usually regarded foreigners (Wilkin-
son's Anc. Egyptians, i, 48; also Sharpe's Early
Hist. of Egypt, pp. 12, 48) [Eayrr].

AMPHIPOLIS (‘Audixoais), a city of Greece,
through which Paul and Silas passed on their wa
from Philippi to Thessalonica (Acts xvii. 1). 4


AMRAM,


was situated on the left bank of the river Strymon,
oe below its egress from the Jake Kerkine (now

‘akino), and about three miles above its influx
into the sea. This situation upon the banks of a
navigable river, a short distance from the sea, with
the vicinity of the woods of Kerkine, and the gold-
mines of Mount Pangiwus, rendered Amphipolis
a place of much importance, and an cbiect of
contest between the Thracians, Athenians, Lace-
dzmonians, and Macedonians, to whom it suc-
cessively belonged. It has long been in ruins;
and a village of about one hundred houses, called
Jeni-keni, now occupies part of its site (Thucyd.
i. 100; iv. 102, sg. ; Herod. vii. 117; Diod. Sic.
xvi. 8; Appian. iv. 104, sg.; Plin. iv. 17; Liv.
xly. 29; Cellar. Nod#t. i. 1053, sq.).

AMRAM, son of Kohath, of the tribe of Levi.
He married his father’s sister Jochebad, by whom
he had Aaron, Miriam, and Moses. He died in
Egypt, at the age of 137 years (Exod. vi.).

AMRAPHEL, king of Shinar, one of the four
kings who invaded Palestine in the time of Abra-
tam (Gen, xiv. 1, 2, sg.) [Apranam; Cue-
DORLAOMER ].

AMULET (probably from the Arabic Dem,
a pendant; Isa. iii, 20, DWND: Talm. MyDP).
From the earliest ages the Orientals have believed
in the influences of the stars, in spells, witchcraft,
and the malign power of the evil eye; and to
protect themselves against the maladies and other
evils which such influences were supposed to occa-
sion, almost all the ancient nations wore amulets
(Plin. Hist. Nat. xxx. 15). These aimulets con-
sisted, and still consist, chiefly of tickets inscribed
with sacred sentences (Shaw, i. 365; Lane's
Mod. Egypt. ii. 365), and of certain stones (comp.
Plin. Hist, Nat. xxvii. 12, 34) or pieces of metal
(Richardson, Dissertation ; D’Arvieux, ili. 208;
Chardin, i, 243, syqg.; iil, 205 sqg.; Niebuhr,
i. 65; ii, 162). Not only were persons thus pro-
tected, but even houses were, as they still are,
guarled from supposed malign influences by cer-
tain holy inscriptions upon the doors.


L. Modern Oriental. 2, 3, 4, 5. Ancient Egyptian.


The previous existence of these customs is im-
flied in the attempt of Moses to turn them to
becoming uses, by directing that certain pas-
®4ges extracted from the law should be employed
(Exod. xiii. 9,16 ; Deut. vi. 8; xi. 18). The door-


AMULET. ~ 141


schedules being noticed elsewhere [Mzzuzorx],
we here limit our attention to personal amu-
lets. By this religious appropriation the then
all-pervading tendency to idolatry were in this
matter obviated, although in later times, when
the tendency to idolatry bad passed away, such
written scrolls degenerated into instruments. of
superstition.

The ond of Isa. iii. 20 (Sept. wepidéia;
Vulg. inaures ; Auth. Vers. earrings), it is now
allowed, denote amudets, although they served also
the purpose of ornament. They were probably pre-
cious stones, or small plates of gold or silver, with
sentences of the law or magic formulz inscribed on
them, and worn in the ears, or suspended by a chain
round the neck. ‘ Earrings’ is not perhaps a bad


(Egyptian Ring and Earring Amulets.)


translation. It is certain that earrings were some-
times used in this way as instruments of super-
stition, and that at a very eatly period, as in Gen.
xxxv. 4, where Jacob takes away the earrings of
his people along with their false gods. Earrings,
with strange figures and characters, are still used
as charms in the East (Chardin, in Harmer, iii.
314). Augustin speaks strongly against earrings
that were worn as amulets in his time (Epis¢. 75,
ad Pos.). Schroeder, however, deduces from
the Arabic that these amulets were in the form of
serpents, and similar probably to those golden
amulets of the same form which the women of the

gan Arabs wore suspended between their breasts,
the use of which was interdicted by Mohammea
(Schroeder, De Vestitu Mulierum, cap. xi. pp. 172,
173; Grotefend, art. Amulete, in Ersch and Gru-
ber’s Encyclop. ; Rosenmiiller, ad Isa. iii. 20 ; Ge-
senius, ad eund. ; and in his Thesaurus, art. WM).

That these lechashim were charms inscribed on
silver and gold was the opinion of Ahen Ezra.
The Arabic has boxes of amulets, manifestly con-
cluding that they were similar to those ornamental
little cases for written charms which are still used
by Arab women. This is represented in_ the
first figure of cut 1. Amulets of this kind


142 ANAB.


are called khegab, and are specially adapted to
protect and preserve those written charms, on
which the Moslems, as did the Jews, chiefly
rely. The writing is covered with waxed cloth,
and enclosed in a case of thin embossed gold
or silver, which is attached to a silk string, or a
chain, and generally hung on the right side, above
the girdle, the string or chain beiny passed over
the left shoulder. In the specimen here fizured
there are three of these hhezuhs attached to one
string. The square one in the middle is almost
an inch thick, and contains a folded paper; the
others contain scrolls. Amulets of this shape, or
of a triangular form, are worn by women and
children; and those of the latter shape are often
attached to children’s head-dress (Lane's Mudern
Egyptians, ii. 365).

The superstitions connected with amulets grew
to a great heizht in the later periods of the Jewish
history. ‘There was hardly any people in the whole
world,” says Lightfoot (Mor. cbr. ad Matt. xxiv,
24), that more used or were more fond of amulets,
charms, mutterings, exorcisms, and all kinds of
enchantments. . . . The amulets were either little
roots hung about the neck of sick persons, or, what
was more common, bits uf paper (and parchment),
with words written on them, whereby it was sup-
posed that diseases were either driven away or
cured. They wore such amulets all the week, but
were forbidden to go abroad with them on the
Sabbath, unless they were ‘ approved amulets,”
that is, were prescribed by a person who knew
that at least turee persons had heen cured by the
saine means. In these amulets mysterious names
and characters were occasionally employed, in
lieu of extracts fiom the law. One of the most
usual of these was the cabalistic hexazonal firure
known as “the shield of David ” and © the seal of
Solomon"’ (Bartulucc. Bibliotheca Rabbinica, i.


676; Lakemacher, Observatt. Philol. ii. 143,
8qq.). The reputation of the Jews was so well
established in this respect, that even in Arabia,
before the time of Mohammed, men applied to
them when they needed charms of peculiar virtue
(Mischat-ul-Masabih, ii. 377).

ANAB (3))), one of the cities in the moun.
tains of Judah, from which Joshua expelled the
Anakim (Josh. xi. 21; xv. 15). From Main
(the Maon of Scripture) Dr.” Robinson (Ite-
searches, ii. 195) observed a place of this name,
distinguished by a small tower.

ANAH (133; Sept. *Avd), son of Zibeon the
Hivite, and father of Esau’s wife Aholibamah
Gen. xxxvi. 24). While feeding asses in the

lesert he discovered ‘ warm springs’ (aque ca-
ide), as the original °° is rendered by Jerome,
who states that the word had still this signitication


ANAMME’LECH.


in the Punic language. Gesenius and most
modem critics think this interpretation correct,
supported as it is by the fact that warm springs
are still found in the region east of the Dead Sea,
The Syriac has simply ‘ waters,’ which Dr. Lee
seems to prefer. Most of the Greck translators
retain the original as a proper name Iauefu, pro-
bably not venturing to translate. The Samaritan
text, followed by the Tarzums, has ‘ Emims,’
giants. Our version of ‘mules’ is now generally
abandoned, but is supported by the Arabic and
Veneto-Greek versions.

ANAKIM (0°23), or Bener-Anak 773
PY) and Benzi-Anaxim (O'PIV793), a wan-
dering nation of southern Canaan, descended
from Anak, whose name it bore (Josh. xi. 21).
It was composed of three tribes, descended from
and named after the three sons of Anak—Ahi-
man, Sesai, and Talmai. When the Israelites
invaded Canaan, the Anakim were in possession
of Hebron, Debir, Anak, and other towns in the
country of the south. Their formidable stature
and appearance alarmed the Hebrew spies; but
they were eventually overcome and expelled by
Caleb, when the remnant of the race took refuge
among the Philistines (Num. xiii. 23; Deut.
ix. 2; Josh. xi. 215 xiv, 12; Judg. i. 20). This
favours the opinion of those who conclude that
the Anakim were a tribe of Cushite wanderers
from Babel. and of the same race as the Philis-
tines, the Phoenicians, the Philitim, and the
Exyptian shepherd-kings.

ANAMME’LECH (2929. 2 Kings xvii. 31)
is mentionel, together with Adrammelech, as a
god of the people of Sepharvaim, who colonized
Samaria. He was also worshippe.l by the sacritice
of children by fire. No satisfactory etymology
of the name has been discovere.l. Hyde (Rel. Vet.
Persar. p. 128) considers the fist part of the
word to be the Aramaran N3Y or W sheep, and
the latter to he king (although, from his rendering
the compound Pecus Rex, it is not at all clear
in what relation he considered the two elements
to stand to each other). He takes the whole
to refer to the constellation Cenheus, or to that
part of it in which are the stars called by the
Arabs the shepherd and the sheep (ar Réi tad
Ganam), which Ulug Beg terms the stars of the
flock (Aawdkib ul Firg). This theory is erro-
neously stated both by Gesenius and Winer
(by the former in his TAcsaurus, and by the
latter in his Kealeirterbuch), who make out
that the constellation Cepheus itself is called
by the Arabs the shepherd and his sheep. Hyde
certainly does not say so; and al Qazwini (in
Ideler’s Untersuchungen rber die Sternnamen,
p. 42) expressly assigns the name of ‘the shepherd?
to the star in the left toot of Cepheus ; that of ‘the
sheep’ (al Aqndm, as he calls it) to those between
his feet; and that of ‘the flock ‘to the one on his
right shoulder. The most that can be said of
Hyde's theory is, that it is not incompatible with
the astrology of the Assyrians. Gesenius, in the
etymology he proposes, considers the tirst part of
the name to be the Arabic canam, ‘image,’ with
achange of P into Y, which is not unusual in
Aramaic (see Ewald’s Hebr. Grammar, §. 106),
The latest etymology proposed is that by Benfey
(Monatsnamen einiger alter Volker, p. 188), who
suggests that the first part of the word may be


ANANIAS.


an abbreviation of the name of the Persian goddess

Anahit, or of that of the Ized Antran. The same

obscurity prevails as to the form under which the

god was worshipped. The Babylonian Talmud
states that his image had the tigure of a horse ; but

Kimchi says that of a pheasant, or quail (Carp-

zov's Apparatus, p. 516).—J. N.

ANANIAS, son of Nebedwus, was made high-
priest in the time of the procurator Tiberius
Alexander, about a.v. 47, by Herod, king of

~ Chalcis, who for this removed Joseph, son
of Camydus, from the Hich-priestlioad (Joseph.
Antig. xx. 5,2). He held the oftice also under
the procurator Cumanus, who succeeded Tiberius
Alexander. Being implicated in the quarrels of
the Jews and Samaritans, Ananias was, at the in-
stance of the latter (who, being dissatisfied with
the conduct of Cumanus, appealed to Ummidius
Quadratus, president of Syria), sent in bonds to
Rome, to answer for his conduct before Claudius
Czsar. The emperor decided in favour of the
accusel party. Ananias appears to have returned
= withcredit, and to have remained in his priest-
hood until Agrippa gave his office to Ismael,
the son of Tabi (Antig. xx. 8, 8), who suc-
ceeded a short time before the departure of the
procurator Felix, and occupied the station also
under his successor Festus, »Ananias, after re-
tiring from his high-priesthoud, ¢ increased in
glory every day’ (Antig. xx. 1, 2), and ob-
tained favour with the citizens, and with Albinus,
an procurator, by a lavish use of the great
Wealth he had hoarded. His prosperity met with
a dark and painful termination. The assassins
(sicarii), who played so fearful a part in the
Jewish war, set fire to his house in the commence-
ment of it, and compelled him to seek refuge by
concealment; but being discovered in an aque-
duct, he was captured and slain (Antig. xx. 9, 2;
Bell, Jud. ii, V1, 9).

It was this Ananias before whom Paul was
brought, in the procuratorship of Felix (Acts
mt The noble declaration of the apostle, ‘I
have lived in all good conscience befure God until
this day,” s0 displeased him, that he commanded

attendant to smite him on the face. Indig-
Rant at so unprovoked an insult, the apostle re-
plied, ‘God shall smite thee, thou whited wall: a

which the previous details serve to prove
Wants not evidence of having taken effect. Paul,
however, immediately restrained his anger, and
allowed that he owed respect to the office which
jas bore. After this hearing Paul was sent
to Casarea, whither Ananias repaired, in order to
lay a formal charge against him before Felix, who
Ptponed the matter, detaining the apostle mean-
While, and placing him under the supervision of a
centurion (Acts xxiv.).—J. R. B.

ANANIAS, a Christian belonging to the in-
fant church at Jerusalem, who, cons piring with

wife Sapphira to deceive and defiaud the

Wethren, was overtaken by sudden death, and
Momediately buried. The Christian community
at Jerusalem appear to have entered into a solemn
agreement, that each and all should devote their
2H pts the great work of furthering the gospel

Siving succour to the needy. Accordingly

they proceeded to sell their possessions, and
lmvught the proceeds into the common stock of
the church. “Thus Barnabas (Acts iv. 36, 37)
having land, sold it, and brought the money,


ANANIAS. 143


and laid it at the apostles’ feet.’ The apostles then
had the general disposal, if they had not also the
immediate distribution, of the common funds.
The contributions, therefore, were designed for the
sacred purposes of religion (Acts v. 1-11).

As all the members of the Jerusalem church
had thus agreed to hold their property in common,
for the furtherance of the holy work in which they
were engaged, if any one of them withheld a
part, and offered the remainder as the whole, he
committed two offences—he ‘lefrauded the church,
and was guilty of falsehood: and as his act re-
lated not to secular but to religious affairs, and
had an injurious bearing, both as an example,
and as a positive transgression against the Gospel
while it was yet struggling into existence; Ana-
nias lied not unto man, but unto God, and was
guilty of a sin of the deepest dye. Had Ananias
chosen to keep his property for his own worldly
purposes, he was at liberty, as Peter intimates, so
to do; but he had in fact alienated it to pious

yurposes, and it was therefore no longer his own.

Vet he wished to deal with it in part as if it
were so, showing at the same time that he was
conscious of his misdeed, by presenting the resi-
due to the common treasury as if it had been his
entire property. He wished to satisfy his selfish
cravings, and at the same time to enjoy the repu-
tation of being purely disinterested, like the rest
of the church. He attempted to serve God and
Mammon. The original, évorgicaro, is much
more expressive of the nature of his misdeed than
our common version, ‘ kept back’ (part of the
price). The Vulgate renders it ‘fraudavit ;’ and
both Wiclif and the Rheims version employ a
corresponding term, ‘defraudid,’ ‘ defrauded.
In the only other text of the New Testament
where the word is found (Tit. ii, 10), it is trans-
lated ‘purloining.’ It is, indeed, pyoperly applied
to the conduct of jersons who appropriate to their
own purposes money destined for public uses.

It is the more important to place the crime of
Ananias and his wife in its trae Light, because un-
just reflections have been cast upon the apostle
Peter (Wolfenb. Fragm. Ztceck Jesu, p. 256) for
his conduct in the case. Whatever that conduct
may have been, the misdeed was of no trivial
kind, either in itself or in its possible conse-
quences. If, then, Peter reproves it with warmth,
he does no more than nature and duty alike re--
quired ; nor does there appear in his language on
the occasicn any undue or uncalled for severity.
He sets forth the crime in its naked heinousness,
and leaves judsment in the hands of Him to
whom judgment belongs.

With strange inconsistency on the part of those
who deny miracles altogether, unbelievers have
accused Peter of cruelly smiting Ananias and his
wife with instant death. The sacred narrative,
however, ascribes to Peter nothing more than a
spirited exposure of their aggravated offence.
Their death, the reader is left to infer, was by the
hand of God; nor is any ground afforded in the
narrative (Acts v. 1-11) for holding that Peter
was in any way employed as an immediate in-
strument of the miracle.

That the death of these evil-doers was miraculous
seems to be implied in the record of the transaction,
and has been the general opinion of the church. An
attempt, however (Ammon, Krit. Journ. d. Theol.
Lit. i, 249), has been made to explain the fact


144 : ANANIAS.


by the supposition of apoplexy, caused hy the
shame and disgrace with which the guilty pair
were suddenly overwhelmed at the detection of
their baseness. If such an hypothesis might ac-
count for the death of Ananias, it conld scarcely
suffice to explain that of his wife also; for that
two persons should be thus taken off by the same
hysical cause is,-in the circumstances, in the
highest degree improbable. A mathematical cal-
culation of the doctrine of chances in the case
would furnish the best exposure of this anti-super-
natural explanation.

The view now given may serve also to show
how erroneous is the interpretation of those who,
like Tertullian, have maintained that the words
of Peter were a species of excommunication which
the chief of the apostles fulminated against Ana-
nias and his wife. The thunders of a corrupt
church tind no sanction in the sacred record.

The early Christian writers were divided as to

the condition of Ananias und Sapphira in the
unseen world. Origen, in lis treatise on Matthew,
maintains that, being purified by the punishment
they underwent, they were saved by their faith in
Jesus, Others, among whom are Augustin and
Basil, argue that the severity of their punishment
on earth showed how great their criminality had
been, and left no hope for them hereafter :—pa-
riter et vitam perdiderunt et salutem.—J. R. B.
. ANANIAS, a Christian of Damascus (Acts ix.
10; xxii. 12), held in high repute, to whom the
Lord appeared in a vision, and hade him proceed
to ‘the street which is called Straight, and inquire
in the house of Judas for one called Saul of
Tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth.’ Ananias had
difficulty in giving credence to the message, re-
membering how much evil Paul had done to the
saints at Jerusalem, and knowing that he had
come to Damascus with authority to lay waste
the church of Christ there. Receiving, however,
ap assurance that the persecutor had been con-
verted, and called to the work of preaching the
Gospel to the Gentiles, Ananias went to Paul,
and, putting his hands on him, bade him receive
his sight, when immediately there fell from
his eyes as it had been scales; and, recover-
ing the sight which he had lost when the Lord
appeared to him on his way to Damascus, Paul,
the new convert, arose, and was baptized, and
preached Jesus Christ.

Tradition represents Ananias as the first that
published the Guspel in Damascus, over which

lace he was subsequently made bishop; but
having roused, by his zeal, the hatred of the
Jews, he was seized by them, scourged, and finally
stuned to death in his own church.—J. R. B.

ANAPHA (BIN; Sept. xapaSpids; Vulg.
earadryon and caradrium; Eng. Vers. heron,
Lev. xi. 19, and Deut xiv. 18), an unclean bird,
but the particular Lird denotel by the Hebrew
word has been much disputed. The kite, wood-
cock, curlew, peacock, parrot, crane, lapwing,
and several others have been suggested. Since the
word occurs but twice, and in both instances is
isolated, no aid can be derived from a comparison
of passes.

Recourse has consequently been had to etymo-
logy. The root anaph signifies to breathe, to
snort, especially from anger, and thence, figura-
tively, to be angry. Purkhurst observes that ‘ as
the heron is remarkable for its angry disposition,


ANAPHA.


especially when hurt or wounded, this bird seems
to be most probably intended.’ But this equally
applies to a great number of different species of
birds, Bochart supposes it may mean the moun-
tain falcon, called dvowaia, by Homer ( Odys. i,
320), because of the sisnilarity of the Greek
word tu the Hebrew. Isut if it meant any kind
of eagle or hawk, it would probably have been
reckoned with one or other of those species men-
tioned in the preceding verses. Perhaps, under
all the circumstances, the traditional meaning
is most likely to Le correct, which it will now be
attempted to trace.

The Septuagint renders the Hebrew word by
xapadpids. Jerome, who, though professing to
translate from the Hebrew, was no doubt well
acquainted with the Septuagint, adhered to the
same word in a Latin form, caradryon and cara-
drium. The Greek and Roman writers, from the
earliest antiquity, refer to a bird which they call
charadrius. It is particularly descritied by Aris-
totle (Hist. An. vil. 7), and by Aflian (/list. An
xv. 26). The latter naturalist derives its name
from xapadpa, a hullow or chasm, especially one
which contains water, because, he says, the bird
frequents such places. It is, moreover, certain,
that by the Romans the charadrius was also called
icterus, which signifies the jaundice, from a notion
that patients aflected with that disease were cured
by looking at this bird, which was of a yellow
colour (Pliny, xxxiv.3 Corl. Aurel. iii. 5), and
by the Greeks, xAwpiwy; and in allusion to the
same fabulous notion, ferepos (Aristotle, list. An.
ix. 13, 15, and 22; Mian, Hist. An. iv. 47).
These writers concur in describing a bird, some-
times of a yellow colour, remarkable for its vora-


‘city (from which circumstance arose the phrase


Xapadpiod Bios, applied to a glutton), migratory,
inhabiting watery places, and especially mountain
torrents and valleys. :

Now, it is certain that the name charadrius
has been applied by ornithologists to the same
species of birds from ancient tines duwn to the
present age. Linnaus, under Order iv. (consist-
ing of waders or shore birds), places the genus
Charadrins; m which he includes all the nu-
merous species of plovers. The ancient accounts
may be advantageously compared with the fol-
lowing description of the genus from Mr. Selby’s
British Ornithology, ii. 230: ‘The members of ibis
genus are numerous, and possess a wide geographical
distribution; species being found in every quarter
of the globe. They visit the cast about April.
Some of them, during the greater part of the year,
are the inhabitants of open districts and wide
wastes, frequenting both dry and moist situations,
and only retire toward the coasts during the
severity of winter. Others are continnally re-
sident upon the banks and about the mouths of
rivers (particularly where the shore consists of
amal] gravel or shingle). They live on worms,
insects, and their larve. The tlesh of many that
live on the coasts is unpalatable.’

The same writer describes one ‘species, chara-
drius pluvialis, called the golden plover trom its
colour,’ and mentions the well-known fact that
this species, in the course of moulting, tuins com-
pletely black. Analogous facts respecting the
charadrius have been established by observations in
every part of the globe, viz. that they are gregarious
and migratory. The habits of the majority are


of rivers and the shores of lakes ; ‘like the gulls,
moist soil with their pattering


mountain, Ps. r. 11: Isa. xviii. 6%).


es of
Paleine, as the C. pluvialis (golden plover, of


(Charadrius pluvialis—winter plumage.]


which a figure is here given), C. edicnemus (stone-
curlew), and C. spinosus (lapwing). (Kitto's
Physical Hist. of Palestine, p. 106.) And, in


connection with some of the preceding remarks, it
's Important to observe that in these ies a yel-
low colour is more or less mathe. F, Dz.
_ ANATHEMA (dyd@eua), literally anything
laid up or suspended (from* dvarl@nu, to lay
wp) and hence anything laid up in a temple,
fet apart as sacred. this general sense the
form employed is dvd@nua, a word of not unfre-
quent occurrence in Greek classic authors, and
found once in the N. 'T., Luke xxi. 5. The form
ua, as well as its meaning, appears to be
veculiar to the Hellenistic dialect Yalckenaer,
‘hol. tom. i. p. 593). The distinction has pro-
tably arisen from the special use made of the
vord by the Greek Jews. In the Septuagint,
“dteua is the ordinary rendering of the Hebrew
word DIM, cherem (although in some instances it
‘antes between the two forms, as in Lev. xxvii,
%, 29), and in order to ascertain its meaning it
will be necessary to inquire into the signification
of this word,

We find that the DIN was a person or thing
Cmsecrated or devoted irrevocably to God, and
that it differed from anything merely vowed or
fuctified to the Lord in this respect, that the
liter could be redeemed (Lev. xxvii. 1-27),
Whilst the former was irreclaimable (Lev. xxvii.
21, 28); hence, in reference to living creatures,
the thing, whether man or beast, must be
pt to death (Lev. xxvii. 29). ‘The prominent

fore, which the word conveyed was that


ANATHEMA, 145


ofa person or thing devoted to destruction, or
aecursed. Thus the cities of the Canaanites were
anathematized (Num. xxi. 2, 3), and after their
complete destruction the name of the place was
called Hormah (7990; Sept. dvd8ena). Thus,
again, the city of Jericho was made an anathema
to the Lord (Josh. vi. Lip that is, every living
thing in it (except Rahab and her family) was
devoted to death; that which could be destroyed
by fire was bumt, and all that could not be thus
consumed (as gold and silver) was for ever alien-
ated from man and devoted to the use of the
sanctuary (Josh. vi. 24). The prominence thus
given to the idea of a thing accursed led naturally
to the use of the word in cases where there was no
reference whatever to consecration to the service
of God, as in Deut. vii. 26, where an idol is
called DON, or dvd@eua, and the Israelites are
warned against idolatry lest they should be ana-
thema like it. In these instances the term de-
notes the object of the curse, but it is sometimes
used to designate the curse itself (e. g. Deut. xx.
17, Sept.; comp. Acts xxiii. 14), and it is in
this latter sense that the English word is generally
soa a he

_In this sense, also, the Jews of later times use
the Hebrew term, though with a somewhat dift
ferent meaning as to the curse intended. The
DON of the Rabbins signifies excommunication
or exclusion from the Jewish church. The more
recent Rabbinical writers reckon three kinds or
degrees of excommunication, all of which are
occasionally designated by the generic term DN °
(Elias Levita, in Sepher Tisbi). The first of these,
*Y'72, is merely a temporary separation or suspen~
sion from ecclesiastical privileges, involving, how-
ever, various civil inconveniences, particularly
seclusion from society to the distance of four
cubits. The person thus excommunicated was
not debarred entering the temple, but instead of
going in on the right hand, as was customary, he
was obliged to enter on the lett, the usual way of
departure: if he died whilst in this condition
there was no mouming for him, but a stone was
thrown on his coffin to indicate that he was se-

rated from the people and had deserved stoning.

Baxtorf (Ler. Chald., Talm. et Rabbin., col.
1301) enumerates twenty-four causes of this kind
of excommunication : it lasted thirty days and
was pronounced without a curse. If the indi-
vidual did not repent at the expiration of the
term (which, however, according to Buxtorf, was
extended in such cases to sixty or ninety days
the second kind of excommunication was resort
to. This was called simply and more properly
DIN. It could only be pronounced by an as-
sembly of af. least ten persons, and was always
accompanied with curses. The formula employed
is given at length by Buxtorf (Lez. col. 828). A
person thus excommunicated was cut off from all
religious and social privileges: it was unlawful
either to eat or dsink. with him (com 1 Cor.
v. 11). The curse could be dissolved, however,
by three common persons, or by one person af
dignity. If the excommunicated person still
continued impenitent, a yet more severe sentence
was, according to the later Rabbins, pronounced
against him, which was termed NNDY (Elias
Levita, in Tisbi). It is described as a complete
excision from the church and the giving oP
the individual to the judgment of God an


*


of
to


146 ANATHEMA.


final perdition. There is, however, reason to be-
lieve that these three grades are of recent origin.
The Talmudists frequently use the terms by
which the first and last are designated inter-
changeably, and some Rabbinical writers (whom
Lightfoot has followed in his Hore Hebr. et
Talm., ad 1 Cor. v. 5) consider the last to be a
lower grade than the second ; yet it is probable
that the classification rests on the fact that the
sentence was more or less severe according to
the circumstances of the case; and though we
cannot expect to find the three grades distinctly
marked in the writings of the N. T., we may not
improbably consider the phrase droouvdyayov
rwovev, John xvi. 2 (comp. ix. 22; xii. 42), as re
ferring to a lighter censure than is intended by
one or more of the three terms used in Luke vi.
22, where perhaps different grades are intimated.
The phrase wapadiSdvar te garavg (1 Cor. v. 5;
1 Tim. i. 20) has been by many commentators
understuod to refer to the most severe kind of
excommunication. Even admitting the allusion,
however, there is a very important difference be-
tween the Jewish censure and the formula em-
ployed by the Apostle. In the Jewish sense it
would signify the delivering over of the trans-
gressor to final perdition, whilst the Apostle ex-
pressly limits his sentence to the ‘destruction of
the flesh’ (2. ¢. the depraved nature), and resorts
to it in order ‘that the spirit may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus.’

But whatever diversity of opinion there may be
as to the degrees of excommunication, it is on all
hands admitted that the term ON, with which we
are more particularly concerned as the equivalent
of the Greek dyd@eua, properly denotes, in its Rab-
binical use, an excommunication accompanied
with the most severe curses and denunciations of
evil. We are therefore prepared to find that the
anathema of the N. T. always implies execration ;
but it yet remains to be ascertained whether it is
ever used to designate a judicial act of excom-
munication. That ,there is frequently no such
reference is very clear: in some instances the
Andividual denounces the anathema on_ himself,
unless certain conditions are fulfilled. The
Noun and its corresponding verb are thus
used in Acts xxiii. 12, 14, 21, and the verb
occurs with a similar meaning in Matt, xxvi. 74;
Mark xiv. 71. The phrase ‘to call Jesus ana-
thema * (1 Cor. xii. 3) refers not to a judicial
sentence pronounced by the Jewish authoritics,
but to the act of any private individual who ex-
ecrated him and pronounced him accursed. That
this was a common practice among the Jews ap-
pears from the Rabbinical writings, The term,
as it is used in reference to any who should preach
another gospel ‘Let him be anathema ’ (Gal. i.
8, 9), has the same meaning as, let him be ac-
counted execrable and accursed. In none of
these instances do we find any reason to think
that the word was employed to designate specifi-
cally and technically excommunication either
from the Jewish or the Christian church, There
remain only two sages in which the word oc-
curs in the N. T., both presenting considerable
difficulty to the translator. With regard to the
first of these (Rom. ix. 3) Grotius and others un-
derstand the phrase dyd@eua elva: dxd rod Xpic-
rob to signify excommunication from the Chris-
tian church whilst most of the fathers, together


‘


ANATHEMA.


with Tholuck, Riickert, and a great number of
modern interpreters, explain the term as referring
to the Jewish practice of excommunication. On
the other hand, Deyling, Olshausen, De Wetta,
and many more adopt the more general meaning
of accursed. The great difficulty is to ascertain
the extent of the evil which Paul expresses his
willingness to undergo; Chrysostom, Calvin, and
many others understand it to include final separa-
tion, not indeed from the love, but from the pre-
sence of Christ ; others limit it to a violent death;
and others, again, explain it as meaning the same
kind of curse as that under which the Jews then
were, from which they might be delivered by re-
nigunaie and the reception of the Gospel (Dey-

ingii Observatt. Sacre, P. II. p. 495 and sgq.).
It would occupy too much space to refer to other
interpretations of the passage, or to pursue the in-
vestigation of it further. ‘There seems, however,
little reason to suppose that a judicial act of the
Christian Church is intended, and we may re
mark that much of the difficulty which commen-
tators have felt seems to have arisen from their
not keeping in mind that the Apostle does not
speak of his wish as a possible thing, and their
consequently pursuing to all its results what
should be regarded simply as an expression of the
most intense desire.

The phrase dydGeua papdy d6d (1 Cor. xvi. 22)
has been considered by many to be equivalent to
the NNDY of the Rabbins, the most severe form
of excommunication, This opinion is derived
from the supposed etymological identity of
the Syriac phrase RMN JW, ‘the Lord cometh,’
with the Hebrew word which is considered
by these commentators to be derived from
NNN OW, ‘the Name (¢. ¢. Jehovah) cometh.’
This explanation, however, can rank no higher
than a plausible conjecture, since it is sup-
ported by no historical evidince. The Hebrew |
term is never found thus divided, nor is it ever
thus explained by Jewish writers, who, on the
contrary, give etymologies different from this
(Buxtorf, Lex. col. 2466). It is moreover very
uncertain whether this third kind of excommumi-
cation was in use in the time of Paul; and the
Sebel which he employs is not found in any

abbinical writer (Lightfoot, Hore Hebr. et
Talm., on 1 Cor. xvi. 22*), The literal meaning
of the words is clear, but it is not easy to under-
stand why the Syriac phrase is here employed, or
what is its meaning in connection with anathema,
Lightfoot supposes that the Apostle uses it to sig-
nify that he pronounced this anathema against
the Jews. However this nay be, the supposition
that the anathema, whatever be its precise object,
is intended to designate excommunication from
the Christian church, as Ciretius and Augusti
understand it, appears to rest on very slight
grounds: it seems preferable to regard it, with
Lightfoot, Olshausen, and most other commen-
tators, as simply an expression of detestation.
Though, however, we find little or no evidence of
the use of the word anathema in the N. T. as


* Augusti (Handbuch der Christl. Archaol,
vol. iii. p. 11) has fallen into a strange mistake
ina feanling to Buxtorf and Lightfoot in_ support
of this interpretation: the former very
doubtfully on the subject, and the express object
of the latter is to controvert it.


\
ANATHOTH. .


the technical term for excommunication, it is
eertain that it obtained this meaning in the early
ages of the church; for it is thus employed in the

lic canons, in the canons of various coun-
eils, by Chrysostom, Theodoret, and other Greek
fathers ‘Suiceri Thesaurus Eccl. sub voce. dyd-

Geua anil dpopicuds).—F. W. G.

ANATHUTH (ANI; Sept. "Avaddé), one
of the tuwns belonging to the priests in the tribe
of Benjamin, and as such a city of refuge (Josh.
xxi. 185 Jeri 1). It occurs also in 2 Sam,
xxiii. 27; Ezra ii, 23; Neh. vii. 27; but is
chiefly memorable as the birthplace and usual
residence of the prophet Jeremiah (Jer. i. 1; xi.
21-23; xxix. 27), whose name it seems to have
bome in the tine of Jerome, ‘ Anathoth, qua
hodie appellatur Jeremia* (Onomast. s.r. Ana-
thoth). ‘The same writer (Comment. in Jer. i. 1)
places Anathoth three Roman miles north of Je-
reslem, which correspond with the twenty stadia
assigned Ly Josephus (Antig. x. 7. 3). Pro-
fewur Robinson appears to have discovered this
place in the present village of Anata, at the
distance of an hour and a quarter frum Jeru-
salem. It is seated on a broad ridge of hills,
and commands an extensive view of the eastern
slope of the mountainous tract of Benjamin ;
including also the valley of the Jordan, and
the northern part of the Dead Sea. It seems
to have Leen once a walled town and a place ef
strength, Portions of the wall still remain, built
of large hewn stones, and apparently ancient, as
are als the foundations of some of the houses.
It is now a small and very poor village. From
the vicinity a favourite kind of building-stone is
camed to Jerusalem. Troops of donkeys are met
with em;luyed in this service, a hewn stone being
slunz on each side; the larger stones are trans-
ports on camels (Robinson, Aesearches, ii. 109;

mer's Palastina, p. 169).

ANCHOR, [Suip.]

ANDREW (Avipéas), one of the twelve
apostles. His name is of Greek origin, but was
mM we amongst the Jews, as appears from a
pesaae quoted from the Jerusalem Talmud by

ghtfoot (Harmony, Luke v. 10). He was
2 native of the city of Bethsaida ig Galilee, and
brother of Simon Peter. He was at first a dis-
ciple of John the Baptist, and was led to receive
Jesns as the Messiah in consequence of John’s
expressly pointing him out as ‘the Lamb of God"
(Join i. 36), His first care, after he had satis-
fied himself as to the validity of the claims of
Jesns, was to bring to him his brother Simon.
Neither of them, however, became at that time
stated attendants on our Lord; for we find that
they were still pursuing their occupation of fisher-
men on the sea of Galilee when Jesus, after John’s
Imprisonment, called them to follow him (Mark
111,16). Very little is related of Andrew by
any of the evangelists: the principal incidents in
which his name occurs during the life of Christ
ar, the feeding of the five thousand (John vi. 9);
his introducing to our Lord certain Greeks who
desired to see him (John xii. 22); and his asking,
along with his brother Simon and the two sons
of Zebedee, for a further explanation of what our

had said in reference to the destruction of
the temple (Mark xiii. 3). Of his subsequent
history and Jabours we have no authentic record.
Tradition assigns Scythia (Euseb. iii. 1, 71),


ANETHON. 147


Greece eodoret, i. 1425), anu Thrace (Hip
polytus, ti. 30) as the scenes of his ministry: be
1s said to have suffered crucifixion at Patre in
Achaia, on a cross of the form called Crux de-
cussata (X), and commonly known as ‘ St. An-
drew's cross’ (Winer's Bidl. Realworterbuch, sub
voce). His relics, it is said, were afterwards
removed from Patre to Constantinople. An apo-
cryphal book, bearing the title of ‘The Acts of
Andrew,’ is mentioned by Eusebius, Epiphanius,
and others. It is now completely lost, and seems
never to have been received except by some here-
tical sects, as the Encratites, Origenians, &c.
This book, as well as a ‘ Gospel of St. Andrew,’
was declared apocryphal by the decree of Pope
Gelasius (Jones, On the Canon, vol. i. p. 179 and
qq.) [Acts, Spurious; GospEzs, Spunious].—

F. W. @.

1, ANDRONICUS (Ap8porixos), the regent-
governor of Antioch in the absence of Antivchus
Epiphanes, who, at the instigation of Menelaus,
put to death the depused high-priest Onias; for
which deed he was himself ignominiously slain
on the return of Antiochus (2 Macc. iv.) B.c.
169 [Ontas].

2. ANDRONICUS, a Jewish Christian, the
kinsman and felluw-prisoner of Paul (Rom.
xvi. 7).

1. ANER (139; Sept. Advdy), ESHCOL, and
MAMRE, three Canaanitish chiefs in the neigh-
Pourhood of Hebron, who joined their forces with
those of Abralum in pursuit of Chedorlaomer and
his allies, who had pillaged Sodom and carried
Lot away captive (Gen. xiv. 24). These chiefs
did not, however, imitate the disinterested conduct
of the patriarch, but retained their purtion of the
spoil [Aurauam].

2. ANER, a city of Manasseh, given to the
Levites of Kohath's family (1 Chron. vi. 70).

ANETHION (&m@ov) occurs in Matt. xxiii.
23, where it is rendered anise, ‘Woe unto you—
for ye pay tithe of mint and anise and cummin,’
By the Greek and Roman writers it was employed
to designate a plant used both medicinal and
as an article of diet. The Arabian translators of
the Greek medical authors give as its synunyme


W% shabit, the name applied in eastern


countries to an umbclliferous plant with flattened
fruit commonly called * seed,’ which is surrounded
with a dilated margin. In Europe the word has
always been used to denote a similar plant, which
is familiarly known by the name of Dill. Hence
there is no doubt that in the above passage, in-
stead of ‘ anise,’ &yn@oy should have been trans-
lated ‘dill;’ and it is said to be rendered by a
synonymous word in every version except our
own,

The common dill, or anethum graveolens, is
an annual plant, growing wild among the com
in Spain and Portugal; and on the coast of
Italy, in Evypt, and about Astracan. It re-
sembles fennel, but is smaller, has more glau-
cous leaves, and a less pleasant smell; the fruit
or seeds, which are finely divided by capillary
segments, are elliptical, broader, flatter, and sure
rounded with a membrancous disk. They have
a warm and aromatic taste, owing to the i
of a pale yellow volatile oil, which itself has a
bot taste and a peculiar penetrating oe

L


48 ANGELS,


The error in translation here pointed ont is
not of very great consequence, as both the anise
and the dil/ are umbelliferous plants, which are


[Anethum graveolens.)


found cultivated in the south of Europe. The
seeds of both are employed as condiments and
carminatives, and have been so from very early
times; but the anethon is more especially a
“genus of eastern cultivation, since either the dill
or another species is reared in all the countries
from Syria to India, and known by the name
shubit ; while the anise, though known, appears
to be so only by its Greck name dvioov. Rosen-
miiller, moreover, says, ‘In the tract Massroth
(of Tithes), cap. iv. § 5, we read, “ The seed, the
leaves, and the stem of dill (M3W shaboth) are,
according to Rabbi Eliezer, subject to tithe,”’
which indicates that the herb was eaten, as is
indeed the case with the eastern species in the
present day; and, therefore, to those acquainted
with the cultivated plants of eastern countries,
the dill will appear more appropriate than anise
in the ahove passage. ‘

ANGELS (‘AyyeAou, used, in the Sept.,and
New Test. for the Hebrew 0°32 ; sing. aon),
@ word signifying both in Hebrew and Greek
messengers, and therefore used to denote what-
ever God employs to execute his purposes, or to
manifest his presence or his power. In some pas-
sages it occurs in the sense of an ordinary mes-
senger (Job i. 14; 1 Sam. xi. 3; Luke vii. 4; ix.
52): in others it is applied to prophets (Isa. xliii.
19; Hag. i. 13; Mal. iii.): to priests (Eccl. v.
&; Mal. ii. 7): to ministers of the New Testa-
ment (Rev. i. 20). It is also applied to imper-
sonal agents; as to the pillar of cloud (Exod.
xiv. 19): to the pestilence (2 Sam. xxiv. 16,17;
2 Kings xix. 30): to the winds (‘who maketh the
winds his angels,’ Ps. civ. 4): so likewise,
pares generally, are called ‘evil angels’ (Ps.

xxviii. 49), and Paul calls his thorn in the
flesh an ‘ angel of Satan ’ (2 Cor. xii. 7).

But this name is more eminently and distinc-
tively applied to certain spiritual beings or
heavenly intelligences, employed by God as the
tninisters of His will, and usually distinguished
as angels of God or angels of Jehovah. In
this case the name has respect to their official
capacity as ‘ messengers,’ and not to their nature
or condition. The term ‘ spirit,’ on the other
hand (in Greek xveiua; in Hebrew M17), has re-
ference to the nature of angels, and characterizes
them as incorporeal and invisible essences. But


’


: ANGELS.


neither the Hebrew MD nor the Greck xveipa,
nor even the Latin spirtéus, corresponds exactly
to the English spirit, which is opposed to mutter,
and designates what is immaterial ; wheicas the
other terms are not oyposed to matter, but to body,
and signify not what is immaterial, but what is
incorporeal. “The modern idea of spirit was un-
known to the ancients. They conceived spirits
to be incorporeal and invisible, but not imma-
terial, and supposed their essence to be a pure ait
or asubtile fire. The proper meaning of xveiya
(from wvéw, I blow, I breathe) is air in motion,
wind, breath. The Hebrew MY is of the same
import ; as is also the Latin spiritus, from spiro,
I blow, I breathe. When, therefore, the ancicnt
Jews called angels spirits, they did not mean to
deny that they were endued with bodies. When
they affirmed that angels were incorporeal, they
used the term in the sense in which it was un-
derstood by the ancients ;—that is, as free from
the impurities of gross matter. The distinction
between ‘a natural body ’ and ‘a spiritual body’
is indicated by St. Paul (1 Cor. xv. 44); and
we may, with sufficient safety, assume that angels
are spiritual bodies, rather thun pure spirits in the
modern acceptation of the word.

It is disputed whether the term Elohim ody
is ever applied to angels, but the inquiry belongs
to another place (Enourm]. It may suffice here
to,observe that both in Ps. viii. 5, and xcvii. 7,
the word is rendered by angels in the Sept. and
other ancient versicns; and both these texts are so
cited in Heb. i. ,6; ii. 7, that they are called
Beni-Elghim, D'TON '93, Sons of God. In the
Scriptures we have frequent notices of spiritual
intelligences, existing in another state of bein;,
and constituting a celestial family, or hierarchy,
over which Jehovah ese The Bible coves
not, however, treat of this matter professedly and
as a doctrine of religion, but mere adverts to it
inciuentally as a fact, without furnishing any
details to gratify curiosity. It speaks of no obli-
gations to these spirits, and indicates no duties
to he performed towards them. A belief in the
existence of such beings is not, therefore, an essen-
tial article of religion, any more than a belief
that there are other worlds besides our own: but
such a belief Serves to enlarge our ideas of the
works of God, and to illustrate the greatness of
his power and wisdom (Mayer, 4m. Bib. Repos.
xii. 360). The practice of the Jews, of referring
to the agency of angels every manifestation of
the greatness and power of God, has led some to
contend that angels have no real existence, but
are mere personifications of unknown powers of
nature; and we are reminded that, in like man-
ner, among the Gentiles, whatever was wonderful,
or strange, or unaccountable, was referred by
them to the agency of some one of their gods,
Among the numerous passages in which angels
are mentioned, there are, however, a few which
cannot, without improper force, be reconciled
with this hypothesis. It may be admitted that
the ges in which angels are described as
speaking and delivering messages, might be inter-
preted of forcible or apparently supernatural sug-
gestions to the mind: but they are sometimes
represented as performing acts which are wholly
inconsistent with this notion (Gen. xvi. 7-12;
Judg. xiii. 1-21; Matt. xxviii. 2-4); and if Matt.
xx. 30, stood alone in its testimony, it ought to


ANGELS.


settle the question. Christ there says, that ‘in the
resurrection they neither marry nor are given in
marriage, but are as the angels of God.’ The
force of this passage cannot be eluded by the

; ar eccommonarion| that Christ mingled
with his instructions the erroneous notions of
those to whom they were addressed, seeing that he
spoke to Sadducees, who did not believe in the
existence of angels (Acts xxiii. 8). So likewise,
the passage in which the high dignity of Christ is
established, by arguing that he is superior to the
angels (Heb. i. 4. 89g.) would be without force or
meaning if angels had no real existence.

That these superior beings are very numerous is
evident from the following expressions, Dan. vii. 10,
‘ thousands of thousands,’ and ‘ten thousand times
ten thousand ;’ Matt. xxvi. 53, ‘ more than twelve
legions of angels ;’ Luke ii. 13, ‘multitude of the
heavenly host ;° Heb. xii. 22, 23, ‘ myriads of
angels.’ It is probable, from the nature of the
cace, that among so great a multitude there may be
different grades and classes, and even natures—
ascending frum man towards God, and forming a
chain of being to till up the vast space between the
Creator and man—the lowest of his intellectual
creatures. This may be inferred from the analo-
gies which pervade the chain of being on the earth
whereon we live, which is as much the divine crea-
tion as the world of spirits. Accordingly the Scrip-
ture describes angels as existing in a suciety cum-
posed of members of unequal dignity, power, and
excellence, and as having chiefs and rulers. It is
admitted that this idea is not clearly expressed
in the buuks composed befure the Babylonish cap-
tivity; but it is developed in the books written
during the exile and afterwards, especially in the
Writings of Daniel and Zechariali. In Zech. i. 11,
au angel of the highest order, one tcho slands be-

fore God, appears in contrast with angels of an
inferior class, whom he employs as his messengers
and agents (comp. iii. 7). In Dan. x. 13, the ap-
pellation pore WY, and in xii. 1, [YI W
are given to Michael. The Grecian Jews ren-
dered this appellation by the term dpxd-yeAos,
Archangel, which occurs in the New Testament
(Jude 9; 1 Thess. iv. 16), where we are thught
that Christ will appear to judge the world éy pws
epyeryytAcv. This word denotes, as the very
analogy of the language teaches, a chief of the
angels, one superior to the other angels, like
dpysepets, dpxuorpdrryos, dpxicuvdyeryos. The
on, therefore, that there were various orders
angels, was not peculiar to the Jews; but was
held by Christians in the time of the apostles, and
1s mentioned by the apostles themselves. The
distinct divisions of the angels, according to their
rank in the heavenly hierarchy, which we find in
the writings of the later Jews, were either almost
or wholly unknown in the apostelical jeriod. The
appellations dpyal, eEovgiat, Buvduers, Opdvot,
€s, are, indeed, applied in Eph. i. 21,
Col. i, 16, and clsewhere, to the angels; not,
ever, to them exclusively, or with the intention
Of denoting their particular classes; but to them
common with all beings possessed of might
and power, résible as well as invisible, on earth
@ well as in heaven.

In the Scriptures angels appear with bodies,
aud in the human form ; and no intimation is any-
Where given that these bodies are not rial, or that
they are only assumed for the time and then laid


ANGELS, 149


aside. It was manifest indeed to the ancients
that the matter of these bodies was nut like that
of their own, inasmuch as angels could make
themselves visible and vanish again from their
sight. But this experience would suggest no
doubt of the reality of their bodies: it would
only intimate that they were not composed of
gross matter. After his resurrection, Jesus often
rd sii to his disciples, and vanished again
before them ; yet they never doubted that they saw
the same body which had been crucified, although
they must have perceived that it had under-
gone an important change. The fact that angels
always ap; in the human form, doves not, in-
deed, prove that they really have this form; but
that he ancient Jews believed so. That which is
not pure spirit must have some form or other:
and angels may have the human form; but other
forms are possible. The question as to the food
of angels has been very much discussed. If they
do eat, we can know nothing of their actual food;
for the manna’ is manifestly called ‘ angels’ food '
(Ps. Ixxviii. 25; Wisd. xvi. ne merely by way
of expressing its excellence. The only real ques-
tion, therefore, is whether they feed at all or not.
We sometimes find angels, in their terrene mani-
festations, eating and drinking (Gen. xviii. 8;
xix. 3); butin Judg. xiii. 15, 16, the angel who
appeared to Manoah declined, in a very pointed
manner, to accept his hospitality. The manner
in which the Jews obviated the apparent discre-
pancy, and the sense in which: they understood
such passages, appear from the apocryphal book
of Tobit (xii. 19), where the ange] is made to say :
© It seems tu you, indeed, as though I did eat and
drink with you; but I use invisible food which
no man can see.’ This intimates that they were
supposed to simulate when they appeared to par-
take of man’s fuod ; but that yet ey had food
oftheir own, proper to their natures. Milton,
who was deeply read in the ‘angelical ’ literature,
derides these questions :—
© So down they sat

And to their viands fell : nor seemingly

The angel, nor in mist (the common gloss

Of theologians), but with keen dispatch

Of real hunger, and concoctive heat

To transubstantiate : what redounds

Transpires through spirits with ease.’

Par. Lost, v. 433-439,
The same angel had previously satisfied the
curiosity of Adam on the subject, by stating that
© Whatever was created, needs
To be sustained and fed.’


If this dictum were capable of proof, ex
from the analugy of Anown natures, it would settle
the question. But if angels do not need it; if
their spiritual bodies are inherently incapable of
waste or death, it seems not likely that they gra-
tuitously perform an act designed, in all its
known relations, to promote growth, to repair
waste, und to sustain existence.

The passage already referred to in Matt. xxii,
30, teaches by implication that there is no dis-
tinc‘ion of sex among the angels. The Scripture
never makes mention of {i male angels. The Gen-
tiles had their male and female divinities, who were
the parents of other gods. But in the Scriptures
the angels are all males: and they appear to be
so represented, not to maik rp eputont oe of sex,
but because the masculine is the more


150 ANGELS.


gender. Angels are never described with marks
of age, but sometimes with those of youth (Mark
xvi. 5). The constant absence of the features of
age indicates the continual vigour and freshness of
immortality. The angels never die (Luke xx.
36). But no being besides God himself has es-
sential immortality (1 Tim. vi. 16): every other
bein: therefure is mortal in itself, and can be im-
mortal only by the will of God. Anzels, conse-
uently, ure not eternal, but had a beginning.
is Moses gives no account of the creation of
anvels in his description of the orizin of the world,
although the circumstance would have been too
important for omission had it then taken place,
there is no doubt that they were called into
being before, probably very long before the acts
of creation which it was the object of Moses to
relate.
' The preceding considerations apply chiefly to
the existence and nature of angels. Some of
their attributes may be collected from other pas-
sages of Scripture. That they are of super
human intelligence is implied in Mark xiii. 32:
© But of that day and hour knoweth no man, not
even the angels in heaven.’ That their power is
great, may be gathered from such expressions as
© mighty anzels’ (2 Thess. i. 7); ‘ angels, power
ful in strensth' (Ps. ciii. 20); ‘angels who are
greater (than man] in pee and might.” The
moral perfection of angels is shown by such: phrases
as ‘ holy anzels * (Luke ix. 26) ; ‘the elect anzels’
(2 Tim. v. 21). Their felicity is beyond question
in itself, but is evinced by the passage (Luke xx,
36) in which the blessed in the future world are
said to be isdyyeAo, Kal viol Tod Oeod, ‘like unto
the angels, and sons of God.

The ministry of angels, or that they are em-
ployed by God as the instruments of His will, is
very clearly taught in the Scriptures. The very
name, as already explained, shows that God em-

loys their agency in the dispensations of His

rovidence. And it is further evident, from certain
actions which are ascribed wholly to them (Matt.
xiii. 41, 49; xxiv. 31; Luke xvi. 22); and from
the Scriptural narratives of other events, in the
accumplishment of which they acted a visible
part (Luke i. 11, 26; ii. 9, sg.; Acts v. 19, 20;
x. 3, 19; xii. 7; xxvii. 23), that their agency is
employed principally in the guidance of the des-
tinies of man. In those cases also in which the
agency is concealed from our view, we may admit
the probability of its existence; because we are
told that God sends them forth ‘to minister to
those who shall be heirs of salvation ' (Heb. i. 14;
also Ps. xxxiv. 8, 91; Matt. xviii. 10). But the
angels, when employed for our welfare, do not
act independently, but as the instruments of God,
and by His command (Ps. ciii. 20; civ. 4; Heb.
i. 13, 14): not unto them, therefore, are our con-
fidence and adoration due, but only unto Him
(Rev. xix. 10; xxii. 9) whom the angels them-
selves reverently worship. *

Guardian Ad was a favourite opinion
of the Christian fathers that every individual is
under the care of a particular angel, who is as-
signed to him asa guardian. They spoke also
of two angels, the one guod, the other evil, whom
they conceived to be attendant on each individual :
the guod angel prompting to all good, and averting
iN; and the evil angel prompting to all ill, and
averting good (Hermas, ii. 6). The Jews (except-


ANGLING.


ing the Sadducees) entertained this belief, as dc
the Moslems. The heathen held it in a modified
form—the Greeks having their tutelary demon,
and the Romans their genius. There is, however,
Nothing to support this notion in the Bible. The
passa ses (Ps. xxxiv. 7: Matt. xviii. 10) usually
referred to in support of it, have assuredly no such
meaning. The former, divested of its poetical
shape, simply denotes that God employs the mi-
nistry of angels to deliver his people from afflice
tion and danger; and the celebrated passage in
Matthew cannot well mean anything more than
that the infant children of believers, or, if prefer
able, the least among the disciples of Christ, whom
the ministers of the church might be disposed to
neglect from their apparent insignificance, are in
such estimation elsewhere, that the angels do not
think it below their dignity to minister to them
[area] (Storr and Flatt’s Lehrbuch der Ch.

logmatik, § xlviii.; Dr. L. Mayer, Scriptural
Idea of Angels, in Ar Bib. Repository, xii. 356-
388; Moses Stuart's Sketches of Angelology in
Robinson’s Bibliotheca Sacra, No. I.; Merheim,
Hist. Angelor. Spec.; Schulthess, Engelwelt, &c.).


ANGLING. The word i137, which the
Anth. Vers. renders * angle,’ in Isa. xix. §; Heb.
i. 15, is the same that is rendered hook,’ in Job
xli. 1, 12. In fact, ‘angling’ is described as
‘fishing with a hook.” The Scripture contains
several allusions to this mode of taking fish. The
first of these oecurs as early as the time of Job:—
“Canst thou draw out leviathan with an hook; or
his tongue (palate, which is usnally pierced by the
hook] with a cord [line], which thou lettest down?
Canst thon put a hook into his nose, or bore his
This


pv through with a thom? (Job xli. 1, 2).


ast phrase obvionsly iefers to the thorns which
were sometimes used as hooks, and which are long
after mentioned as 72 NIWDI, te. with the
thorns of fishing (Amos iv. 2), in the Auth. Vers.
§ tish-hooks.”


Of the various passages relating to this subject,
the most remarkable is that which records, as an
important part of the ‘ burden of Egypt, that
‘the fishers also shall mourn; and all they that
cast angle [the hook] into the brooks shall lament,
and they that spread nets upon the waters shall
languish’ (Isa. xix. 8). In this poetical description
of a part of the calamities which were to befal
Egypt, we are furnished with an account of the


ANKLETS.

various modes of fishing practised in that country,
which is in exact conformity with the scenes de-
icted in the old tombs of Egypt [Fisu1ne].
ling appears to have been regarded chiefly as

an amusement, in which the Egyptians of all
ranks found much enjoyment. ‘ Not content
with the abundance afforded by the Nile, they
constructed within the?r ground spacious sluices
or ponds for fish (Isa. xix. 10), like the vivaria
of the Romans, where they fed them for the table,
where they amused themselves Dy angling, and
by the dexterous use of the bident.s These favourite
occuyations were not confined to young 8,
nor thought unworthy of men of serious habits ;
and an Egyptian of consequence is frequently
Tepresented in the sculptures catching fish in a
canal or lake, with the line, or spearing them as
they glided past the bank. Sometimes the angler
posted himself’ in a shady spof at the water's edze,
and having ordered his servant to spread a mat
upon the ground, he sat upon it as he threw the
ine; and some, with higher notions of comfort,
used a chair for the same purpose. The rod was


short, and a tly of one piece; the line usu-
ally single, though instances occur of a double
Tine, each furnished with its own hook. The

generally used the net in preference to
the line, but on some occasions they used the
latter, seated or standing on the bank. It is,
however, probable that there were people who
could not afford the expense of nets; and the use
of the line is generally confined in like manner,
at the present day, to the poorer classes, who de-
pend upon skill or good fortune for their subsist-
ence’ (Wilkinson's Anc. Egyptians, iii. 54).

This last was doubtless the state of many in
ancient Palestine, and probably furnished the
only case in which angling was there practised,
as we find no instance of it for mere amusement.
The fish caught in the lake of Tiberias were, some
time since, taken exclusively with the rod and
line, in the absence of Loats upon that water; and
ai this is the case still. The Egyptian

were of bronze, as appears from the speci-
mens that have been found. Insects, natural or
atificial, were not used in angling, ground bait
being exclusively employed : and the float does
ape to have been known.

ANIMAL FOOD. [Foop.]

ANKLETS. This word does not occur in
re, but the ornament which it denotes
% clearly indicated by ‘the tinkling (or jin-

) ornaments about the feet,’ mentioned in


ANNA. 151


the curious description of female attire which
we find in Isa. iii. Even in the absence of
ial notice, we might very safely conclude
t an ornament to which the Oriental women
have always been so partial was not ynknown
to the Jewish ladies. In Egypt anklets of gold
have been found, which are generally in the
shape of simple rings, often however in that of
snakes, and sometimes inlaid with enamel or
even precious stones. The sculptures show that
they were worn by men as well as women (Wil-
kinson’s Anc. Egyptians, iii. 375). Their pre-
sent use among the women of Arabia and Egypt
sufficiently illustrates the Scriptural allusion.
The Koran (xxiv. 31) forbids women ‘to make
a noise with their feet,’ which, says Mr. Lane
(Mod. Egyptians, i. 221), ‘alludes to the prac-
tice of knocking together the anklets, which the
Arab women in the time of the prophet used
to wear, and which are still worn by many women
in Egypt.’ Elsewhere (ii. 364) the same writer
states, ‘Anklets of solid gold and silver, and of
the form here sketched (like fig. 3), are worn by
some ladies, but are more uncommon than they
formerly were. They are of ‘course very heavy,
and, knocking together as the woman walks,
make a ringing noise.’ He thinks that in the
text referred to (Isa. iii. 16) the prophet ailudes
to this kind of anklet, but admits that the
description may apply to another kind, of
which he thus speaks further on (ii. 368):
‘ Anklets of solid silver are worn by the wives
of some of the richer peasants, and of the
sheykhs of villages. Small ones of iron are
woin by many children. It was also a common
custom among the Arabs for girls ur youn
women to wear a string of bells on their feet. i
have seen many little girls in Cairo with small
round bells attached to their anklets. Perhaps
it is to the sound of ornaments of this kind, rather
than of the more common anklet, that Isaiah ~
alludes" (see also Chardin, tom. i. 133, 148, 194).
These belled anklets occur also in India umong
the several sorts which the dancing-girls employ,
It is right to add that the auklets which the pre
sent writer has himself seen in use amony the


Arab women in the country of the Tigris and
Euphrates are not usually solid, but hollow, so
that, in striking against each other, they emit a
much more sharp and sonorous sound than solid


oT. ANNA (‘Avva), wife of Tobit, whose his-


152 ANNA.


tory is contained in the apocryphal book named
after him (Tob. i. 9, &c.).

2. ANNA, an aged widow, daughter of
Phanr.el, of the tribe of Asher. She had married
early, but after seven years her husband died,
and during her long widowhood she daily at-
tended the morning and evening services of the
Temple. Anna was eighty-four years old when
the infant Jesus was brought to the Temple by his
mother, and entering as Simeon pronounced. his
thanksgiving, she also broke forth in praise to
God for the fullilment of his ancient promises
(Luke ii. 36, 37).

ANNUNCIATION. This word, like many
others, has obtained a particular signification in
theological writings. As a general term, it ex-
presses the communication of important intelli-

nce by chosen measengers of Heaven; but it

scame, at an early period of Christianity, ree
stricted to the announcement of the blessed Vir
gin’s miraculous conception. The first formal
mention that we meet with of its being com-
Memorated among the festivals of the church, is
in the decrees of the Council of Trullo, convened
at the close of the seventh century. By one of
the acts of this assembly it is ordered to be ob-
served, though occurring in the solemn season of
Lent, like the Sabbath and the Lord's day. So
highly was it regarded at this time, that authors
speak of it as the crown of all festivals, as exhi-
biting the beginning and head of our salvation.
Sermons attributed to St. Athanasius and other
fathers have been referred to as proving the ob-
servance of the day long before the seventh cen-
tury; but the best critics consider these discourses
as bre rious,
he effect of the solemn announcement upon
the mini of the blessed Mary was doubtless deep
and permancnt. It is conjectured by some that
her hastening to Elisabeth was the consequence
of an eazer desire to prove at once the reality of
the angelic visitation. The pious writers who
have hazarded this opinion seem to have forgotten
that such a notion represents the Virgin as more
wanting in faith than Zacharias himself, and
that it can scarcely be made to agree with the
beautiful and devout sentiment, ‘ Behold the
bandmaid of the Lord: Be it unto me according
to thy word !"—H. S.
ANOINTING, The practice of anointing
with perfumed oils or ointments appears to have
been very common among the Hebrews, as it was
among the ancient Egyptians. The practise, as
to its essential meaning, still remains in the East ;
but perfurned waters are now far more commonly
employed than oils or ointments.
n the Scriptures three kinds of anointing are

iitingaisauie :—I. For consecration and inau-
ration; 2. For guests and strangers; 3. For
Ith and cleanliness. Of these in order.

1. Consecration and Inauguration.—The act
of anvinting appears to have been viewed as em-
blematical of a particular sanctitication ; of a de-
signation to the service of God; or toa holy and
sacred use. Hence the anointing of the bigh-priests
(Exod. xxix. 20; Lev. iv. 3), and even of the
sacred vessels of the tabernacle age xxx, 26,
&c.) ; and hence also, probably, the anointing of
the king, who, as ‘the Lord's anointed,’ and,
under the Hebrew constitution, the viceroy of
Jebuvah, was undoubtedly invested with a sacred


ANOINTING.


character. eal thea s elbaetiaeeae oy
Egyptians, among whom ing was, ex 0;

the ighpricst, and as such, doubtless, rather than
in his secular capacity, was solemnly anointed at
his inauguration. ;

The first instance of anointing which the Scri
tures record is that of Aaron, when he was solemnly
set apart to the high-priesthood. Being first invested
with the rich robes of his high office, the sacred oil
was poured in‘much profusion upon his head. It is
from this that the hizh-priest, as well as the king,
is called ‘ the Anointed * (Lev. iv. 3; v. 16; vi.
15; Ps. cxxxiii.2). In fact, anointing being the
principal ceremony of regal inauguration among
the Jews, as crowning is with us, ‘ anointed,’ as
applied to a king, has much the same signification
as ‘crowned.’ It does not, however, appear that this
anointing was repeated at every succession, the
anointing of the founder of the der being
considered efficient for its purpose as long as
the regular line of descent was undisturbed ;
hence we find no instance of unction as a sign
of investiture in the royal authority, except in the
case of Saul, the first king of the Jews, and of
David, the first of his line; and, subsequently, in
those of Solomon and Joash, who both ascended
the throne under circumstances in which there
was danger that their right might be forcibly dis-
vated (I Sam. xix. 21; 2 Sam. ii. 4; v. 1-3;

Chron. xi. 1,2; 2 Kings xi, 12-20; 2 Chron.
xxiii, 1-21). Those who were inducted into the
royal office in the kingdom of Israel appear to have
been inaugurated with some peculiar ceremonies
(2 Kings ix. 13), But it is not clear that they
were anvinted at all; and the omission (if real)
is ascribed by the Jewish writers to the want of the
holy anointing oil which could alone be used an
such occasions, and which was in the keine of
the priests of the Temple in Jerusalem. The pri-
vate anointing which was performed by the pro-
phets (2 Kings ix.3; comp. 1 Sam. x. 1) was not
understood to convey any abstract right to the
crown; but was merely a symbolical intimation
that the person thus anointed should eventually
ascend the throne.

As the custom of inaugural anointing first oc-
curs among the Israelites immediately after they
left Egypt, and no example of the same kind 1°
met with previously, it is fuir to conclude that the
practice and the notions connected with it were
acquired in that country. ‘ With the Eyyptians,
as with the Jews,” the investiture to any sacred
office, as that of king or priest, was confirmed by
this external sign; and as the Jewish lawgiver
mentions the ceremony of pouring oil upon the
head of the high-priest after he had put on his
entire dress, with the mitre and crown, the
Egyptians represent the anointing of their priests
and kings after they were attired in their full
robes, with the cap and crown upon their heads
(cut 1). Some of the sculptures intruluce a
priest pouring oil over the monarch’ (Wilkin-
son's Anc. Egyptians, iv. 280).

2. The anointing of our Saviour’s feet by
€the woman who was a sinner’ (Luke vii. 38),
led to the remark that the host himself had
neglected to anoint his head (v. 46); whence
we learn that this was a mark of attention which
those who gave entertainments paid to their guests,
As this is the onty direct mention of the custom
the Jews are supposed by some to have borrowed


ANOINTING.


it from the Romans at a late period, and Wetstein
and others have brought a large quantity of Latin
erudition to bear on the subject. But the careful
reader of the Old Testament knows that the
custom was an old one, to which there are various


indirect allusions. The circumstances connected
with feasts and entertainments are indeed rarely
intimated ; nor would the present direct reference
to this custom have transpired but for the remarks
which the act of the woman in anointing the feet
of Jesus called forth. Such passages, however, as
Ps. xxiii. 5; Prov. xxi. 7; xxvii. 9; Wisd. ii. 7;
as well as others in which the enjoyments of
oil and wine are coupled together, may be re-
garded as‘ containing a similar allusion. It is,
therefore, safer to refer the origin of this custom
among the Hebrews to their nearer and more
ancient neighbours. the Egyptians, than to the
Romans or the Greeks, who themselves had pro-
bably derived it from the same people. Among
the Egyptians the antiquity of the custom is
evinced Ly their monuments, which offer in this

t walogies more exact than classical anti-
quity, or modern usage, can produce. With them
‘the custom of anointing was not confined to
the appointment of kings and priests to the
sacred offices they held. It was the ordinary
token of welcome to guests in every — at the
house of a friend ; and in Egypt, no less than in
Judea, the metaphorical expression “ anointed


with the oil of gladness” wa; fully understood,
and applied to the ordinary occurrences of life.


ANOINTING. 153


It was customary for a servant to attend every
guest as he seated himself (cut 2), and to anoint
sais), * (Wilkinson’s Anc. Egyptians, iv. 279;
ii. .

3. It is probable, however, that the Egypti
as well hy Greeks and Jews, enone deen
selves at home, before going abroad, although
they expected the observance of this etiquette
on the part of their entertainer. That the Jews
thus anointed themselves, not only when paying
a visit, but on ordindry occasions, is shown by
many ges, especially those which describe
the omission of it as a sign of mourning (Deut.
xxviii. 40; Ruth iii, 3; 2 Sam. xiv. 2; Dan.
x. 3; Amos vi. 6; Mic. vi. 15; Esth. ii. 12;
Ps. civ. 15; Isa. Ixi. 3; Eccles. ix. §; Cant.
1.3; iv. 10; also Judith ge Sus. 17; Ecclus.
xxxix. 26; Wisd. ii. 7). of these passa
be civ. 15, ‘oil that ok the face to shine’)

ows very clearly that not only the hair but
the skin was anointed. In our northern cli-
mates this usage may not strike us as a pleasant
one, but as the peculiar usages of most nations
are found, on strict examination, to be in accord-
ance with the peculiarities of their climate and
condition, we may be assured that this Oriental

redilection for external unction must have arisen
ma belief that it contributed materially to
health and cleanliness. Niebuhr states that ‘in
Yemen the anointing of the body is believed to
strengthen and protect it from the heat. of the
sun, by which the inhabitants of this province, as
they wear but little clothing, are very liable to
suffer. Oil, by closing up the pores of the skin,
is supposed to prevent that too copious transpira-
tion which enfeebles the frame; perhaps, too,
these Arabi.ns think a glistening skin a beauty.
When the intense heat comes in, they always
anoint their bodies with oil.’

Anointing the Sick.—The Orientals are indeed
strongly persuaded of the sanative properties of
oil; and it was under this impression that the
Jews anointed the sick, and applied oil to
wounds (Ps. cix. 18; Isa. i. 6; Wark vi. 13;
Luke x. 34; James v.14). Anointing was used in
sundry disorders, as well as to promote the general
health of the body. It was hence, as a salutary
and approved medicament, that the seventy dis-
ciples were directed to ‘anoint the sick’ (Mark
vi. 13); and hence also the sick man is directed
by St. James to send for the elders of the church,
who were ‘to pray for him, anointing him with
oil in the name of the Lord.’ The Talmudical
citations of Lightfoot on Matt. vi? 16, show
that the later Jews connected charms and super-
stitious mutterings with such anointings, and
he is therefore probably right in understanding
this text to mean—‘ It is customary for the unbe-
lieving Jews to use anointing of the sick joined
with a magical and enchanting muttering ; but
how infinitely better is it to join the pious prayers
of the elders of the church to the anointing of the
sick.. Niebuhr assures us that at Sana (and
doubtless in other parts of Arabia) the Jews, as ~
well as many of the Moslems, have their bodies
anointed whenever they feel themselvesindisposed.

Anointing the Dead.—The practice of anoint-
ing the bodies of the dead is intimated in Mark
xiv. 8, and Luke xxiii. 5€. This ceremony was
pene after the body was washed, and was

esigned to check the progress of corruption.


154 ANT, -


Although, from the mode of application, it, is
called anointing, the substance employed appears
to have been a svlution of odoriferous drugs.
This (together with the laying of the body in
spices) was the only kind of embalment in use
among the Jews [Burian, Eupanmrne].

The composition of the Jewish ointments and

fumes is,noticed elsewhere [Pervumes].

ANT (nto; Sept. Mépuné; Vulg. Formica ;
fifth order of insects; Hymenoptera, Linn.; oc-
curs Prov. vi. 6; xxx. 25). Ants have only lat-
terly become the subjects of accurate observation.
The investigations of Latreille, Gould, Geer,
Huber, and Kirby and Spence, have dissipated
Many erroneous notions respecting them, and re-
vealed much interesting infurmation concerning
their domestic polity, language, migrations, allec-
tions, passions, virtues, wars, diversions, &c.
The folloyfng facts are selected as relevant to
Scriptural illustration. Ants dwell together in
societids; and although they have ‘no guide,
overseer, or ruler,’ yet they have all one soul, and
are animated by one object —their own welfare,
and the welfare of each other. Each individual
strenuously pursues his own peculiar duties ; and
regards (except in the case of females), and is re-
garded by, every other member of the republic
with equal respect and affection. They devote
the utmost attention to their young. The egy is
cleaned and licked, and gradually expands
under this treatment, till the worm is hatched,
which is then tended and fed with the most
aflectionate care. They continue their assiduity
to the pupa, or chrysalis, which is the third
transformation. They heap up the pup, which
greatly resemble so many grains of wheat, or
rather rice, by hundreds in ti-eir spacious lodges,
watch them in an attitude of defence, carry them
out to enjoy the radiance of the sun, and remove
them to dillerent situations in the nest, according
to the required degree of temperature; open the
pupa, and at the precise moment of the trans-
formation, disentlural the new-born insect of its
habiliments.

The most prevalent and inexcusable error, how-
ever, respecting ants, has been the belief that they
hoard up grains of corn, chiefly wheat, for their
supply during winter, having first bitten out the
germ to prevent it from growing in their nests.
The leamed Bochart hus collected an immense
array of the most eminent. authors and naturalists
of antiquity (Jewish,Greek, Roman, and Arabian),
who all gravely propound this assertion. The
same assertion is made in a letter published by
the French Academy, and afterwards inserted by
Mr. Addison in the Guardian, No. 156. He
addg, ‘any one may make the experiment, and
even see that there is no germ in their corn.’
Notwithstanding that this notion has been com-
pletely exploded during the last hundred years,
with regard to European ants, the belief of it
constitutes, to this hour, one of our popular errors.
Even Solomon himself, whose renowned attain-
ments in natural history included the knowledge
of insects (1 Kings iv. 33), has been inconsiderately
supposed to have sanctioned the sa-ne opinion in
the two passages in his writings which refer to the
ant. The mistake has no. doubt arisen from the

reat similarity, both in shape, size, and colour,
fore mentioned, of the pupa or chrysalis of the
ant toa grain of corn, and frum the ants being ub-


ANT.


served to carry them about, and to the cuticle
to let out the enclosed insect. wenhoeck
was the first who distinguished, with ision, the


precise forms which the ant assumes in the several
stages of its development, from the egg to the
larva, from the larva to the pupa, and thence
to the perfect insect. Swammerdam renewed
the inquiry, and discovered the encasement of
all the parts of the future ant, and showed that
it appeared in such different forms only from
the nature of its envelopes, each of which, at
its proper period, is cast off. It is now also
ascertained beyond a doubt that no European
ants, hitherto properly examined, feed on corn, or
any other kind of grain. Bonnet found that,
however long they had been kept without food,
they would not touch corn. Nor du they attack
the roots or stems of corn, nor any other vegetable
matter. Nor has any species of ant been yet
found with food of any kind laid up in its nest.
The truth is, that ants are chiefly carnivorous,
preying indiscriminately on all the soft parts of
other insects, and especially the viscera; also
upon worms, whether dead or alive, and small
birds or animals. If unable to drag their booty
to the nest, they make an abundant meal upon
it, and, like the bee, disgorge it, upon their return
home, for the use of their companions; and they
appear able to retain at pleasure the nutritious
juices unchan zed for a considerable time. Ants
are also extremely fond of saccharine matt ,
which they obtain from the exndation of trees, or
from ripe fruits, &c.; but their favourite food is
the saccharine exudation from the body of the
aphides, or plant-lice. Every one must have ab-
served these insects on the rose-tree, &c. Each
different species of vegetable has its peculiar
species of aphis (Reaumur, vi, 566). The aphides
insert their tube or sucker between the fibres of
vegetables, where they find a most sulstantial
nutriment. Tuis natriment they retain a cone
siderable time, if no ant approaches them. The
ant has the talent of procuring it from the aphides
at pleasure. It approaches the aphis, strikes it
gently and repeatedly with its antenna, when it
instantly discharges the juice by two tubes, easily
discerned to be standing out from its body,
These creatures are the milch kine of the ants.
By a remarkable coincidence, which M. Huber
justly considers too much to be ascribed to
chance, the aphides and the ants become torpid
at the same degree of cold (27 deg. Fahr.),
and revive together at the same degree of warmth.
He says, ‘1 am not acquainted with any ants
to whom the art of obtaining from the pucerons
(aphides) their subsistence is unknown. We
might even venture to affirm that these insects
are made for their use’ (Huber, Natural History
of Ants, p. 210, &c.).

It is highly probable that the exotic ants sub-
sist by similar means. The accounts given us of
the termites, or ants, inhabiting the hottest cli-
mates, clearly show that they are carnivorous.
Bosman, in his description of Guinea, says that
they will devour a sheep in one night, and that a
fowl is amusement to them only fir an hour. In
these situations living animals often become their
victims, An Italian missionary at Congo relates
that a cow in a stall had been known to be de-
voured by these devastators (Encyclopedia Bri-
tannica, 7th ed. art. ‘ Ant’). the Jntroduction


ANT.


to Entomol: gy, by Kirby and Spence, some diff-
dence is expressed (ii. 46) respecting the inference
that no exotic ants have magazines of provisions,
till their habits shall have been * more accurately
explored.’ Still, are we not in possession of sufh-
cient data to form a strong agcen age in regard
to the ants of Palestine, to which Solomon of
course alluces in his writings? The ants of the
Holy Land certainly have to encounter a degree
of cold quite as severe as ever occurs in England
(Physical Hist. of Palestine, 210, 216). Is it not
highly probable that the ants at such times be-
come forpid, an need no magazine of provisions ?
since we leam from the same authority
G 31) that there are intervals, even in the depth
winter, when the sun shines, and there is no
wind, when it is perfectly warm, sometimes al-
most hot, in the open air, may not the ants of
Palestine and their food revive together at such
times, as is the case in our own country, where
ants may often be seen pursuing their avocations
over the snow ¥ With regard to Solomon's words
Tespecting the ant, Kirby and Spence are of
opinion ‘that if they are properly considered it
will be found that the interpretation which seems
to favour the ancient errur respecting ants has
been fathered upon them rather than fairly
deduced from them. He does not atlirm that
the ant, which lhe proposes to the sluggard as
anexample, laid up in her magazine stores of
grain against winter, but that, with «considerable
Prudence and foresight, she makes use of proper
seasons to collect a supply of provisions suflicient
for her purposes, There is not a word in them
implying that she stores up grain or other provi-
sions, She prepares her bread and gathers her
food (namely, such food as is suited to her) in
summer and harvest (that is, when it is most
Benny and thus shows her wisdom and pru-
ce by using the advantages offered to her,’
A brief examination of the passages (Prov. vi. 6 ;
xx. 25) with reference to their context, will
werve to confirm these observations, In the pre-
ceding verses, Sulumon has cautioned his readers
against incurring dangerous responsibilities on
behalf of another. Should this have inadvertently
been done, he advises the surety to give no sleep
to his eyes, nor slumber to his eyelids, till he
has delivered himself from his rash engagement.
He then adds, ‘Go to the ant, (hou sluggard,
consider her ways, and be wise: which having no
guide, overseer, or ruler, provideth her meat in
the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest.’
sense is thus ably given by Dr. Hammond:
‘As in the matter just mentioned the least delay
B pemnicious, so tn all things else sluggishness, or
negligence of those things which concern us most
nearly, should ever be avoided; and if we need
any instructor on this head, we may go to one of
the least and meanest of creatures.’ The moral,
then, intended in Solomon's allusion to the ant,
u simply to avail one’s self of the favourable time
without delay. The description which follows,
of the sluszard sleeping, evidently during the
y, the proper season of activity, and of the con-
Sequences of his vice, agrees with this interpreta-
ton. The other passage (xxx. 25), probably by
‘different writer, also considers the ant simply
& the symbol of diligence.
peculiar use of the terms summer and
marvest, among the Jews, may have contribuced


. ANTEDILUVIANS. +185


tm the erroneous interpretation. The Jews had
no word to signify spring or autumn. They

only of summer and winter: by the former

designated the whole of the more genial time of
the year, and by the latter the whole of the less
favourable. Hence Solomon uses summer and
harvest as synonymous terms (Prov. x. 5; xxvi. 1:
see also Jer. viii. 28; Matt. xxiv. 32). In the
same way the Romans employed estas and messis,
and the Greeks @épos and Gepi¢w.—J. F. D.

ANTEDILUVIANS, the name given col-
lectively to the people who lived before the
Deluge. The neal from the Creation to that
event is not less, even according to the Hebrew
text, than 1657 years, being not more than
691 years siurter than that between the Deluge
and the birth of Christ, and only 167 years leas
than from the birth of Christ to the present ti
and equal to about two-sevenths of the whole

riod frum the Creation. By the Samaritan and
Becuagint texts (as adjusted by Hales) a much
greater duration is assigned to the antediluvian
period—namely, 2256 years, which nearly equals
the Hebrew interval from tne deluge to the birth
of Christ, and much exceeds the interval from
the birth of Christ to the present time.

All our authentic information respecting this
Jong and interesting period is contained in 49
verses of Genesis (iv. 16, to vi. 8), more than half
of which are occupied with a list of names and
ages, invaluable for chronology, but conveying
no patticulars regarding the primeval state of
man. The information thus afforded, although so
limited in extent, is, however, eminently sugges-
tive, and largg treatises might be, and have been,
written upon its intimations. Some additional in-
formation, though less direct,may be safely deduced
from the history of Noah and the first men after
the Deluge; for it is very evident that society did
not beyin afresh after that event; but that, through
Noah and his sons, the new families of men were
in a condition to inherit, and did inherit, such
sciences and arts as existed befure the Flood.
This enables us to understand how settled and
civilized communities were established, and large
and magniticent woiks undertaken, within a few
centuries after the Deluge.

In the article ‘Apam’ it has been shown that
the father of men was something more than ‘ the
noble savage,’ or rather the grown-up infant,
which sume have represented him. He was an in-
structed man;—and the immediate descendants
of a man so instructed could not be an ignorant
or uncultivated people. It is not necessary indeed
to suppose that they possessed at first more culti-
vation than they required; and for a good while
they did not stand in need of that which results
from, or is connected with, the settlement of men
in organized communities. They probably had
this before the Deluge, and at first were pusseased
of whatever knowledge or civilization their agri-
cultural and pastoral pursuits required. Such
were their pursuits from the first; for it is ree
markable that of the strictly savage or hunting
condition of life there is not the slightest trace
befure the Deluge. After that event, Nimrod,
although a hunter (Gen. x. 9), was not a savage,
and did not belong to hunting tribes of men.
In fact, savageism is not discoverable before
the Confusion of Tongues, and was in all like-
libood a degeneracy from a state of cultivationy


456 ANTEDILUVIANS.
eventually produced in particular communities
by that great social convulsion. At least that
a degree of cultivation was the primitive con-
dition of man, from which savageism in
ticular quarters was a degeneracy, and that he has
not, as too generally has been supposed, worked
himself up from an original savage state to his
nt position, has been powerfully argued by

: Phitp Lindsley (Am. Bib. Repos., iv. 277-
298; vi. 1-27), and is strongly corroborated by
the conclusions of moder ethnographical re-
search ; frum which we learn that, while it is easy
for men to degenerate into savages, no example
has been found of savages rising into civilization
but by an impulse from without, administered b:
a more civilized people; and that, even with suc!
impulse, the vis inertia of established habits is
with difficulty overcome. The aboriginal tradi-
tions of all civilized nations describe them as re-
ceiving their civilization from without—generally
through the instrumentality of foreign colonists :
and history affords no example of a case parallel
to that which must have occurred if the primitive
traces of men, being originally savage, had civi-
Uzed themselves.

All that was peculiar in the circumstances of
the antediluvian period was eminently favour-
able to civilization. The respected contributor
[J. P. S.], to whose article [Abani] we have
already referred, remarks, in a further communi-
cation. that ‘The longevity of the earlier seventeen
or twenty centuries of human existence is a theme
containing many problems. It may be here re-
ferred to fur the purpose of indicating the advan-
tages which must necessarily have therefrom ac-
cmed to the mechanical arts. In pottery, mining,
metallurgy, cloth-making, the applications of heat
and mixtures, &c., it is universally known that
there is a tact of manipulation which no instruc-
tion can teach, which the possessor cannot even
describe, yet which renders him powerful and un-
failing within his narrow range, to a degree almost
incredible ; and when he has reached his limit of
life he is confident that, had he another sixty or
seventy years to draw upon, he could carry his
art to a perfection hitherto unknown. Something
like this must have been acquired by the ante-
diluvians; and the paucity of objects within their
grasp would increase the precision and success
within the range.’

By reason of their length of life, the ante-
diluvians had also more encouragement in pro-
tracted undertakings, and stronger inducements
to the erection of superior, more costly, more
durable, and more capacious edifices and munu-
ments, public and private, than exist at present.
They might reasonably calculate on reaping the
benefit of their labour and expenditure. The
earth itself was probably more equally fertile,
and its climate more uniformly healthful, and
more auspicious to longevity, and consequently
to every kind of mental and corporeal exertion
and enterprise, than has been the case since the
great convulsion which took place at the Deluge.

But probably the greatest advantage enjoyed
by the antediluvians, and which must have been
in the highest degree favourable to their advance-
ment in the arts of life, was the uniformity of
language. Nothing could bave tended more
Powerfully to maintain, equalize, and promote
whatever advantages were enjoyed, and to prevent


ANTEDILUVIANS.


‘eny portion of the human race from degenerating
into savage life.

Of the actual state of society and of the arts
before the Deluge some notice has occurred in a
iayoae article [Anam], and other particulars will

found in the articles relating to these subjects.

The opinion that the old world was acquainted
with astronomy, is chiefly founded on the ages of
Seth and his descendants being particularly set
down (Gen. v. 6, sgqg.), and the precise year,
month, and day being stated in which Noah and
his family, &c. entered the ark, and made their
egress from it (Gen. vii. 11; viii. 13). The dis-
tinctions of day and night, and the lunar month,
were of course observed; and the thirteenth rotation °
of the moon, compared with the sun's return to
his primary position in the heavens, and the
effects produced on the earth by his return, would
point out the year. The variation between the
rotations of the moon and sun easily became dis-
coverable from the difference which in a very
few years would be exhibited in the seasons; and
hence it may be supposed that, although the cal-
culations of time might be by lunar months or
revolutions, yet the return of vegetation would
dictate the solar year. The longevity of the
‘antediluvian gatriarchs, and the simplicity of
their employments, favour this conjecture, which
receives additional strength from the fact that the
Hebrew for year, 713, implies an iteration, a
return to the same point, a repetition; and it is
also remarkable that the Indians, Chinese, Baby-
lonians, Egyptians, Greeks, and other nations, all
deduce their origin from perscnmages said to be
versed in astronomy.

The knowledge of zoology, which Adam
sessed, was doubtless impaited to his children;
and we find that Noah was so minutely informed
on the subject as to distinguish between clean and
unclean beasts, and that his instructions extended
to birds of every kind (Gen. vii. 2-4). A know-
ledge of some essential principles in botany is
shown by the fact that Adam knew how to dis-
tinguish ‘seed-bearing herb)’ and ‘tree in which
is a seed-bearing fruit,’ with ‘every green herb’
(Gen. i. 29, 30). The trees of life and of know-
ledge are the only ones mentioned before the Fall ;
but in the history of Noah the vine, the olive,
and the wood of which the ark was made (Gen.
vi. 14; viii. 115 ix. 20), are spoken of in such
a manner as clearly to intimate a knowledge of
their qualities. With mincralogy the antedilu-
vians were at least so far acquainted as to dis-
tinguish metals; and in the description of the
garden of Eden gold and precious stones are no-
ticed (Gen. ii. 12).

That the antediluvians were acquainted with
music is certain; for it is expressly said that
Jubal (while Adam was still alive) became ¢ the
father of those who handle the 1)35D Avnnur and
the ANY Augab.’ The kinnur was evidently a
stringed instrument resembling a lyre; and the
Augad was without doubt the pandian pipe,
composed of reeds of different lengths joined
together. This clearly intimates considerable
progress in the science; for it is not probable that
the art of playing on wind and on stringed in-
struments was discovered at the same time; we
may rather suppose that the principles of harmony,
having been discovered in the one, were b
analogy transferred to the other; and that Jubal,


ANTEDILUVIANS.


by repeated efforts, became the first performer on
the harp and the pipe [Music]. -

Our materials are too scanty to allow us to
affirm that the antediluvians possessed the means
of communicating their ideas by writing or by
bieroglyphics, although tradition, and a hint or
two in the Scriptures, might support the assertion.
With respect to poetry, the story of Lamech and
his wives (Gen. iv, 19-2) is evidently in verse, and
is most probably the oldest specimen of Hebrew
peetry extant; but whether it was written before
or after the Flood is uncertain, although the pro-
balility is that it is one of those previously

existing documents which Moses transcribed into

his writings.

With regard to architecture, it is a singular
and important fact that Cain, when he was driven
. from his first abode, built a city in the land to
which he went, and called it Enoch, after his son.
This shows that the descendants of Adam lived in
houses and towns from the first, and consequently
aflurds another contirmation of the argument for
the original cultivation of the human family.
Wlut this ‘city ' was is not mentioned, except in
the term itself; and ‘as that term is in the carly
Seniptures applied to almost every collection of
human habitations, we need not attach any very
exalted ideas to it in this instance. But if we
tuke into view the requisites necessary to enable
Neah to erect so stupendous a fabric as the ark
must have been [Arx, Noan’s], it, will not be
iliticult to conceive that the art of building had
tached considerable advancement before the
Delnge; nor can one reflect on the building of
Babel without a conviction that it must have
ieen through the great patriarchs who lived in the
td world that so much knowledze was obtained
48 to lead to the attempt of erecting a fabric
«hose summit was intended to reach the clouds,
It is not likely that the builders would, by their
own intuitive genius, be equal to a task which
they certainly were not inspired by Heaven to

execute,

The metallurgy of the antediluvians has been
Doticed in‘ Apam;’ and to what is there said of
agriculture we shall only add a reference to the
case of Noah, who, immediately after the Flood,
heeame a husbandman, and planted a vineyard.
He also knew the method of Eanenting the juice
of the grape; for it is said he drank of the wine,
shich produced inebriation (Gen, ix. 20, 21).
This knowledge he doubtless obtained from his
isan anterior to the destruction of the old
world.

Pastu appears to have been coeval with
Nistandeye sabe wae a keeper of sheep, while
his brother was a tiller of the ground (Gen. iv. 2);
but there is no necessity for supposing that Cain's
husbandry excluded the care of cattle. The
class of tent-dwelling pastors—that is, of those
who live in tents that they may move with their
flocks and herds from one pasture-ground to an-
other—did not originate till comparatively late
after the Fall; for Jabal, the seventh from Adam
in the line of Cain, is said to have been the
‘father * or founder of that mode of life (Gen. iv.

20). Tt is doubtful whether the manufacture of

cloth is involved in the mention of tents, seeing

that excellent tent-coverings are even at this day

Tade of skins; and we know that skins were the

first articles of cluthing used by fallen man (Gen.


ANTEDILUVIANS, 137


iii. 21). The same doubt applies to the garment
with which the sons of Noah covered their inebri-
ated father (Gen. ix. 23). But, upon the whole,
there can be little doubt that, in the course of so
long a period, the art of manufacturing cloths of
hair and wool, if not of linen or cotton, had been
acquired. ; :

t is impossible to speak with any decision
respecting the form or forms of government which
prevailed before the Deluge. The slight intima-
tions to be found on the subject seem to favour the
notion that the particular governments were pa-
triarchal, subject to a general thevcratical control
—God himself manifestly interfering to uphold
the good and check the wicked. The right of pro-
perty was recognised, for Abel and Jabal
flocks, and Cain built a city. As ordinances of
religion sacrifices certainly existed (Gen. iv. 4
and some think that the Sabbath was observed ;
while some interpret the words, ‘Then men began
to call upon the name of the Lord’ (Gen. iv. 26)
to signify that public worship then began to be
practised. From Noah's familiarity with the
distinction of clean and unclean beasts (Gen. vii.
2), it would seem that the Levitical rules on this
subject were hy no means new when laid down
in the code of Moses.

Marriage, and all the relations springing from
it, existed from the beginning (Gen. ii. 23-25);
and although polygamy was known among t
antediluvians (Gen. iv. 19), it was most probably
unlawful ; for it must have been obvious that, if
more than one wife had been necessary for a man,
the Lord would not have confined the first man
to one woman, The marriage of the sons of *
Seth with the daughters of Cain appears to have
been prohibited, since the consequence of it was
that universal depravity in the family of Seth so
forcibly expressed in this short passage, ‘ Add flesh
had corrupted its way upon the earth’ (Gen. vii.
11). This sin, described Orientally as an inter-
marriage of ‘the sons of God’ with ‘ the daugh-
ters cf men’ (Gen. vi. » appears to have been
in its results one of the grand causes of the
Delage; for if the family of Seth had remained

ure and obedient to God, he would doubtless

ave spared the world fur their sake; as he would
have spared Sodom and Gomorrah had ten righte-
ous men been found there, and as he would have |
spared his own people the Jews, had they not
corrupted themselves by intermarriages with the
heathen.

A contributor [J. P. S.] suggests that even the
longevity of the antediluvians may have conitri-
buted to this ruinous result :—‘ There was also,
probably, a great waste of time. Vastly more
time was upon their hands than was needful for
clearing woodlands, draining swamps, and other .
laborious and tedious processes, in addition to
their ordinary agriculture and care of cattle; so
that the temptations to idleness were likely to be
very strong; and the next step would be to li-
centious habits and selfish violence. The ample
leisure possessed by the children of Adam might
have been employed for many excellent purposes
of social life and religious obedience, and un-
doubted}y it was so employed by many; but to
the larger it became a snare and the occasion
of temptations, so that “ the wickedness of man
became great, the earth was corrupt before Gud,
and was filled with violence.” ’


158 ANTELOPE.


It will be seen that many of the topics only
slightly touched upon in this article will full to
be consitlered more Jargely under other heads,
(Critica Biblica, iv. 14-20; P. Lindsley, D.D.,
On the Primitive State of Mankind, in Am,
Bib. Repos. iv. 277-298; vi. 1-27: see also Ant.
U. Hist. i. 142-201).

ANTELOPE (WOM, Jachmur ; WN, Theo,
Teo ; WT, Dishon, Pygarg ; ‘D¥, Tsebi, Dorcas).
Although this word does not occur in our version
of the Scriptures, yet there can be no doubt that
in the Hebrew text several ruminants to which it
is applicable are indicated under different deno-
minations. In scientific nomenclature, the term
antelope, at first applied to a single species, has
gradually become generical, and {1s now the desig-
nation of a tribe, or even of a family of genera,
containing a great many species. According to
present usage it embraces some species that are of
considerable size, so as to be invariably regarded
by the natives as having some aflinity to cattle,
and others delicate anid rather small, that may
be compared with young deer, to which, in truth,
they bear a general resemblance. The origin of
the word is involved in great obscurity. In the
Hezaémeron of Eustathius, bishop of Antioch,
who wrote in the reign of Constantine, we first
find the name *Av@éAcy applied to an animal,
which he describes as ‘ very swift, and hunted
with difficulty. It had long horns in the shape


of saws, with which it sawed trees of considerable’


size. When thirsty, it approeched the Euphrates,
and gamboled along its banks among brambles,
wherein it was sometimes entangled, and then
could be caught and slain.”

It may be doubted whether the word antholops
was, in the beginning of the fourth century of our
era, a local Asiatic Greek paraphrase of the Arabic


Jie gazal, purporting a similar allusion to


fine or blooming eyes; although the fact, if estab-
lished, would prove that the Grecian residents
in Asia viewed the greater antilopide of our
systems as belonging typically to the gazelle
family, as we do now. Certain it ia, however,
that in the Greek and Latin writers of the middle
and later ages, we find the same name, but so
variously inflected that we are justified in con-
cluding that it was drawn from some other source
than the bishop's Hercaémeron ; for it is written
antalopos, analopos, aptalos; in Albertus Magnus,
calopus and panthalops, which, though evidently
Alexandrian Greek, Bochart would make the
Coptic name for unicorn. Towards the close
of the fourteenth century English heralds intro-
duced the name, and ‘tricked out’ their antelope
as a supporter of the armorial bearings and cog-
nizance of a younger branch of the Plantagenet
family; and although the figures are monstrous,
they bear clear indications of being derived at first
from the saw-horned, and svon after from a real
oryx.

In order to explain somewhat more fully the
station of antelopes among the families of rumi-
nants, and point out more strictly the species we
have to notice, as well as the general Giaricters
of the order, it may be desirable to give a short
definition of ruminants, and thereby obviate the
necessity of again recurring to them when other
species of this section come under consideration.


'


ANTELOPE.


Ruminating animals are possessed of the singular
faculty of chewing their food a second tine, by
means of the peculiar structure of their stumachs—
a structure which enables them to force it back
again into the mouth after a first deglutition. For
this purpose, all ruminants have four stomachs,
whereof the three first are so disposed that the ali-
ments can enter at will into any one of them, the
@sophagus being placed at the point of their com-
munication. The first and largest is the paunch,
externally appearing as twofold, but internally
divided into four slight partitions. In this is re-
ceived the fodder simply broken by a first masti-
cation, in which state it is transmitted into the
second stomach, bonnet, or honeycomb bag, the
walls of which are internally shaped like the cells
of a honeycomb. Here the herbage is imbibed,
and compressed, by its globular form, into small
masses or balls, which are thus prepared to be
forced upwards again into the mouth for a second
trituration—a process always going on when cattle
lie down, and are seen grinding their cheek teeth,
After this it descends into the third stomach

(manyplies), which is the smallest, and is longitu-
dinally furnished with folds, somewhat resembling
the leaves of a book : from thence it passes into
the fourth (the red), next in size to the paunch,
and pear-shaped, the stomach properly so called,
where the process of digestion is accomplished,
All ruminants, moreover, are distinguished by
cloven feetaby the want of incisor teeth in’ the
upper jaw, and by all the grinders being fur-
rowed Jike ridges on millstones.

, This abstract of the characters of ruminating
animals is here given because the faculty of
chewing the cud, or rumination, cannot exist
without the foregoing apparatus; because that
apparatus is found, without exception, to belong
to all the species having bisulcate feet and the
modified dentition before noticed, and belongs to
no other class or genus of maminalia. The
numerous species of the order are distributed into
three grand divisions, viz.. Ist. those without
horns, like the camel * and the musk; 2nd. those
with deciduous horns, or such as are shed yearly,
and replaced by a new growth, like the stag ;
and, 3rd. those which have persistent horns, cons
sisting of a bony core, upon which a horny sheath
is fixed, which grows by annual additions of the
substance at the base, such as antelopes, goats,
sheep, and oxen or neat cattle.

The antelopes, cousidered as a family, may be
distinguished from all others by their uniting the
light and graceful forms of deer with the permanent
horns of goats, excepting that in general their
horns are round, annulated, and marked with striag,
slender, and variously inflected, according to the
subdivision or group they belong to, They have
usually large, soft, and beautiful eyes, tear-pits
beneath them, and round tails. They are often
provided with tufts of hair, or brushes, to protect
the fore-knees from injury; they have inguinal
pores ; and are distinguished by very great powers
of speed. Among the first of the subordinate
groups is the subgenus oryx, already named, con-
sisting of five or six species, whereof we have to
notice at least three.


* The camel, although it lias cloven feet par-
tially united by a common sole, and is armed
with several false molars, is still a true ruminant,


ANTELOPE.


The Jacumur (DM, Deut. xiv. 5; | Kings
iv, 23) is not, as in our Auth, Vers., ‘the fallow-
deer,’ but the Oryx leucoryx of. the moderns, the
true oryx of the ancients, and of Niebuhr, who

R. Jona, and points out the Chaldaic
Jochmura, and Persian kutzkohi ( bly a
mistake for maskandos), and describes it as a
great goat. The eastern Arabs still use the


[The Jachmur. Oryx leucoryx.]


name jazmur, although, according to the usage
of Oriental nomenclature respecting these ani-
mals, the terms abe (father) and bahr (desert,
valley) are generally made parts of generic
appellations, which, in the case of the larger
antelopes, are commonly associated with gau or
bu (cow or ox), forming the terms gau-bahrein,
bekrel-wash, elrcalrus, el-bukrus, abu-harb, abu-
bakr; and, particularly west of the Nile, mahatz,
targea; while collectively, buggera-el-almoor is
used. Most of these denominations, albeit they
are laxly applied by the Arabs, show that the
animals so named are considered to be more
neatly allied to the bovine species than to the
guelles of the country; and the fact of their
universal application to the great antelopes, from
the Ganges to Morocco, is sufficient to establish
the general conclusion, that, in the earliest ages,
similar notions led the Hebrews to adopt similar
terms; and that, when the Scriptures notice wild
oxen, or wild cattle, we are in reality to under-
stand not a bovine, but an antilopine animal,
and not always the same species, excepting per-
haps in one case, which will be noticed under
the word Bunn.
The Oryges are all about the size of the stag
of Europe, or larger, with long, annulated, slender
rising in continuation of the plane of the
forehead, slightly divergent, regularly but not
greatly curved, entirely straight or lyrated, and
from three feet to three feet eight inches in length.
‘The head is rather clumsy, and more or less pied
with black and white; the neck ewed, or arched,
like that of the camel; the carcass bulky, com-
pared with the legs, which are slender, firm, and
capable of sustaming great action; the tail ex-
tends only to the heel, or hough ; the hair on the
shoulders and neck is invariably directed for-
as ga no doubt, keeping the animal cool


ANTELOPE. 189
The Leucoryz, as the name implies, is white,
naving a black mark down the nose, black cheeks
and jowl, the legs, from the elbow and heel to
the pastern joints, black, and the lower half of
the thighs usually, and often the lower flank,
bright rufous; hence the epithet hommar, ON
(rubere, to redden). The species now resides in
pairs, in small families, and not unfrequently
singly, on the mountain-ranges along the sdndy dis-
tricts, in the desert of eastern Arabia, and on the
banks of the Lower Euphrates; and may extend
as far eastward as the west bank of the Indus,
feeding on shrubby acacias, such as tortilis and
Ehrenbergi. It was, no doubt, formerly, if not at
present, found in Arabia Petrza, and in the eastern
territories of the people of Israel; and from the
circumstance of the generical name of wild cow
or bull being common to this, as to other allied
ies, it was equally caught with nets and with
noose, and styled INN (tao, to, theo). To
this species may be referred more particularly
some of the notions respecting unicorns, since
the furehead being narrow, and the horns long and
slender, if one be broken off near the root, the re-
maining one stands so nearly on the medial line,
that, taken in connection with its white-coloured
hair, to uncritical inspection, a single-horned
animal might appear to be really present. By
nature vicious and menacing, from what may
be observed in the Egyptian paintings of the
industry which imposture exercised, we may con-
clude that human art, even in early ages, may
have contributed to make artificial unicorns; and
most probably those seen by some of the earlier
European travellers were of this kind.


(Oryx tao, or Nubian oryx.]


INN, Deut. xiv.5; Isa. li. 20, (Oryx tao, the
Nubian oryx, Ham. Smith.) is either a species or
a distinct variety of leucoryx. The male, being
nearly four feet high at the shoulder, is taller than
that of the leucoryx; the horns are longer, the body
comparatively lighter, and every limb indicative
of vigour and elasticity: on the forehead there is
a white spot, distinctly marked by tie particular
direction of the hair turning downwards before the
inner angle of the eye to near the mouth, leaving
the nose rufous, and forming a kind of letter A.


1@0. ANTELOPR.


ANTELOPE.


Under the towards the cheek, there is a same structure as the others, tnt is somewhat
darkjsh ran very distinct; the limbe, belly, higher at the creup,; it has a coarse beard under


and tail are white; the body mixed white and
red, most reddish about the neck and lower
hams. It is possible that the name éao or too is
connected with the white spot on the chaffron.
This species resides chiefly in the desert west of
the Nile, but is most likely not unknown in
Arabia; eertain it is, that both are figured on
Egyptian monuments, the leucoryx being distin-
guished by horns less curved, and by some indi-
cation of black on the face. Here, then, we have
a second wild bove; but there is still a third re-
ferable to the antilopida, though not an oryx,
but most likely belonging to the genus damalis
and the acronotine group of Griffith's Cuvier. It
is the Antilope defassa of Sir J. Wilkinson, which
we would place by the side uf acronotus bubalis,
if it be not the same, as might be inferred from
the figures at Beni Hassan,” in which the elevated
withers are very conspicuous, where it is represented
actually caught by the nvcse or lazzo. If the
two oryges were not anciently distinguished as


(Antilope defassa of Wilkinson. Acronotus defassa.]


species, then tao, theo, would apply to the pre-
sent, the name indicating the spinal cross; but
in that case, it must have existed in early ages
as far north at least as the borders of Palestine,
which is by no means improbable. This last spe-
cies would answer completely to the description
of wild bull, while there can be no doubt that, in
the dialects of some provinces of that country, the
oryges of Arabia may still be denominated reem,
even when bearing both horns; and all are suffi-
ciently vicious, energetic, and capable of mischief,
to justify the characters assigned to them in
poetical phraseology, agreeably to the amplifying
spirit of Aramzan nations.

Oryz addax may have been known to the
Hebrews by the name of }\¥', dishon. It
is three feet seven inches at the shoulder, has the


~ * Wilkinson's Anc. Egyptians, vol. iii. p. 18,
cut 327. In cut 328, No. 3 appears to be A. Bu-
balis, and No. 4, defassa, distinguished by lunate,
dow-like horns, and a black cross on the shoulders
and spine. A. Bubalis still comes occasionally
to the Nile, and all the ruminants of the wilder
ness are at times liable to migrate from famine
caused by drought ar locusts.


(Oryx addax. Dison or Pygarg.)


the gullet, a black scalp and forehead, divided
from the eyes and nose by a white bar on each side,
passing along the brows and down the face to the
cheek, and cunnected with one another between
the eyes. The general colour of the fur is white,
with the head, neck, and shoulders more or less
liver-colour grey ; but what distingnishes it most
from the others are the homs, which in structure
and length assimilate with those of the other spe-
cies, but in shape assume the spiral flexures of
the Indian antelope. The anima! is figured on
Egyptian monuments, and may be the pygarg
or dishon, uniting the characters of a white rump:
with strepsicerotine horns, and even those whieh
Dr. Shaw ascribes to his ‘ didmee.”

We have now to notice the second group of
antilopide, classified under the subgenus gazella,
whereof at least one species, but more probably
four or five, still inhabit the uplands and deserts
of Egypt, Arabia, and the eastern and southern
borders of Palestine. They are named in the Greek


~ : s\n,
. PO tog
Sys f Pr
(Tsebi or Doreas. Ariel or Gazella Arabica.)
Aopxds, dorcas, and in the Hebrew '3¥ ‘sedi, both


terms being applicable to the whole group ; and the
Hebrew name is by distant nations now used


ANTHROPOMORPHISM.


allied species which are unknown in Arabia‘and
Syria. Thus the Bechuana Hottentots give the
name of tsebi, and the Caffres that of teshe, to the
gazella euchore or springbok of the Cape. The term
dorcas was apparently generalized so as to in-
clude the roebuck of Europe, which was certainly
Hot, as in our translation, the tsebi of Scripture. It
appears from Hermolaus that neither Aristotle nor
Dioscorides confounded such distinct genera, and
that they used the term dor for the species with
persistent horns, and dorcas for the roebuck,
whose horns are annually renewed. This confu-
sion, created by the classical grammarians of an-
tiquity, was further increased by schoolmen and
Sportsmen constantly confounding fallow-deer
with roebuck till within the seventeenth century,
as is plainly perceptible in the writings of Gesner,
that mine of zoological lore, not sufliciently con-
tulted by Scriptural commentators. The Biblical
species clearly included in the section gazella
are Antilope dorcas, Linn., Ariel or A. Arabica,
Licht.; more remotely, A. Aevella, A. corinna,
auctor.; and for Eastern Arabia, A. cora, Ham.
Smith; while A. sudgutturosa, Guldenst., may
be claimed for the north-eastern countries, where
the species exists both in Asia Minor and Arme-
ma, and therefore on the borders of Syria. All
these species are nearly allied, the largest not
Measuring more than two feet in height at the
thoulder, and the least, the corinna, not more
than about twenty inches. They are graceful and
elegant in form, with limbs exceedingly slender,
and have large and soft eyes, lyrated horns, black,
wrinkled, and striated—most robust in subguttu-
rosa and Kevella, most slender in corinna, and
smallest in cora. Their livery is more or less
buff and dun, white beneath, with small tufts
of hair or brushes on the fore-knees: they have
aladark streak passing from each ear through
the eyes to the nostrils, and a band of the same
colour from the elbow of the fore-leg along the
sides to the flank, excepting the corinna, whose
markings are more rufous and general colours
lighter. Most, if not all, have a feeble bleating
Voice, seldom uttered, are unsurpassed in graceful
timidity, gregarious in habit, and residents on
open deserts, where they are unceasingly
watchful, and ed to flee with such speed,
that greyhounds are liable to be killed by over
‘xertion in the chace. Of the species here enu-
merated, all, but more especially A. Arabica,
A. doreas, and A. cora, must have been designated
by the terms dorcas and tsebi, and the Arabic
tabi; generically, Gazal. The Chaldee taditha,
and Persic zebegat, may refer more immediately
‘0 A. subgutturosa, the aku of Kempfer, tseiran
of modern Persia, and Jairou of the Turks.
One or other of these, according to geographical
localities, occurs in the Authorized Version under
name of roe; in Deut. xii. 15, 22; xiv. 5;
xv. 22; 1 Kings iv. 23; 1 Chron. xii. 8; 2 Sam.
N83 Prov. vi. 55 vii.33 viii. 145 Isa. xiii. 14;
dorcas, Kecles. xxvii, 20.—C. H. S.
ANTHROPOMORPHISM, a term in theo-
logy used to denote that figure whereby words
derived from human objects are employed to ex-
ss something which relates to the Deity. Asa
ite being can have no intuitive knowledge of
= sa 80 no language of rational creatures
a. ly express the nature of God and render
comprehensible. All further knowledge of


ANTHROPOMORPHISM. 161


God must be communicated by words used to
express ourselves intelligibly concerning human
and other terrestrial objects. Such words and
phrases have their foundation in a resemblance,
which, according to our conceptions, exists be-
tween the Deity and mankind. This resem-
blance, when essential, is such as regards the
pure perfections of our minds, that is, such as
are unaccompanied with any imperfection, as
reason, liberty, power, life, wisdom, and good-
ness. Those expressions afford an analogical
knowledge, from whence arise analogical phrases,
which are absolutely necessary whenever we
speak of God, and would acquire or commu-
nicate some knowledge of his perfections. Such
analogical expressions must, however, be unuer-
stood properly, although they give no immediate
and intuitive, but only a symbolical knowledge
of the Deity. In this sense it is that in Gen.
ii. 165 iii. 9; vi. 13; xii. 1; xv.3 xvii.; xviii.;
Exod. iii. 4, 5—speech is immediately ascribed
to the Deity while addressing Adam, Noah.
Abraham, and Moses. The Deity is also in this
sense said to speak mediately to man, viz. by his
messengers. But although the speech here as-
cribed to the Deity is to be understood in a dif-
ferent manner from the language of men, it is
not to be understood in such instances figura-
tively, or in the anthropomorphitic sense, but
really and properly. ‘ Either,’ says St. Au-
gustin, ‘immutable truth speaks to man ineflably
of itself to the minds of rational creatures, or
speaks by a mutable creature, either by spiritual
images to our minds, or by corporeal voices to the
bodily senses.’ But God speaks not properly,
but anthropopathically, when his decrees and
their execution are described in human methods,
or in the form of dialogues and conversations, as
in the phrase (Gen, i. 2) ‘ Let there be light, and
there was light.’ ‘This,’ says Maimonides, ‘ is to
be understood of the will, not the speech,’ and, in
like manner, St. Augustin, ‘ This was performed
by the intellectual and eternal, not by the audible
and temporal word’ (City of God, ch. vii.).

Anthropomorphitic phrases, generally consi-
dered, are such as ascribe to the Deity mixed
perfections and human imperfections. These

hrases may be divided into three classes, accord-
ing to which we ascribe to God :—

1. Human actions (av@pwxomolnais).

2. Human affections, passions, and sufferings
(anthropopathy).

3. Human form, human organs, human mem-
bers (anthropomorphism).

A rational being, who receives impressions
through the senses, can form conceptions of the
Deity only by a consideration of his own powers
and properties. Anthropomorphitic modes of
thought are therefore unavoidable in the religion
of mankind; and although they can furnish no
other than corporeal or sensible representations of
the Deity, they are nevertheless true and just
when we guard against transferring to God qua-
lities pertaining to the human senses. It is, for
instance, a proper expression to assert that God
knows all things ; it is improper, that is, tropical
or anthropomorphitic, to say that He sces all
things. Anthropomorphism is thus a species of
accommodation (which see), inasmuch as by these
representations the Deity as it were lowers bim-
self to the comprehension of men. And it is

M


162 ANTHROPOMORPHISM.
altogether consonant to his wisdom and benevo-


lence in communicating divine revelations to
address mankind in language adapted to their
inferior capacities. Therefore it is that this figure
is called by the Fathers Divine Economy (Theo-
doret, Dialog. 2) and Condescension (Gregory of
Nazianzus, Orat. 1).

‘Divine affections,’ says Tertullian, ‘are ascribed
to the Deity by means of figures borrowed from
the human form, not as if he were endued with
corporeal qualities: when eyes are ascribed to
him, it is denoted that he sees [viz. knows] all
things; when ears, that he hears all things: the
speech denotes the will; nostrils, the perception of
prayer; hands, creation; arms, power; feet, im-
mensity ; for he has no members, and performs
no office for which they are required, but executes
all things by the sole act of his will. How can
he require eyes, who is light itself? or feet, who is
omnipresent ¥ Ilow can he require hands, who is
the silent creator of all things? or a tongue, to
whom to think is to command. Those members
are necessary to men, but not to God, inasmuch
as the counsel of men would be inefticacious un-
less his thoughts put his members in motion ;—
but not to God, whose operations follow his will
without effort.’

In the same manner human affections, as grief,
repentance, anger, revenge, jealousy, &c., are
ascribed to the Deity. These aflections are not,

roperly speaking, in the mind of God, who is
infinitely happy and immutable, but are ascribed
to him anthropopathically by way of similitude.
For instance, when God forgives the peniteut
what he had denounced against the wicked who
continue in sin, he is said {o act as men do in
similar cases. Thus St. Augustin observes, ‘ By
repentance is signified a change of events. For
as a man whien he repents bewails the crime
which he had committed, so, when God alters
anything unexpectedly, that is, beyond man’s
expectation, he, figuratively, is said to have re-
pented of the punishment when man repents of
the sin’ (Ps. cx.). Thus also, when ignorance is
ascribed to the Deity (Gen. iv. 9), the same Father
remarks, ‘ He inquires, not as if really ignorant,
but as a judge interrogates a prisoner ;’ and
Luther, in reference to the passage (Is. ii. 4)
where laughter is ascribed to the Deity, thus ob-
serves, ‘ Not that God laughed as men do, but to

int out the absurdity of men’s undertaking
impossibilities ; meaning, that the matter was as
ridiculous as it would be for a fool with a long
stick to attempt to thrust the sun out of the firma-
ment, and to rejoice as if he had performed his
task to admiration’ (Works, ii. Ep. ps. 37).

Anthropomorphiiic phrases are found through-
out the whole Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments. In the infancy of mankind concep-
tions derived from the human senses were uni-
versal, and the Deity is constantly spoken of in
anthropomorphitic phrases. We tind these ideas
more pure after the times of Moses, who forbade
the making of any representation of the Deity (see
Decatoaus). The conceptions of men became
still less sensuous in the times of the Prophets,
who propounded still clearer notions of the sub-
lime perlections of the Deity. But even under the
Christian dispensation anthropomorphitic modes
of expression were unavoidable; for although
Christianity imparta purer and more spiritual


ANTILEGOMENA.


sentiments than the former revelations, the m-
spired teachers could not express themselves with-
out the aid of images derived from human
objects, if they would make their communications
in regard to divine things intelligible to their
hearers, who were habituated to the anthropomor- -
phitic expressions of the Old Testament. Such
a mode of teaching was therefore indispensable in
itself, and tended to promote the instruction and
enlightenment of mankind; ‘ the attention was
more easily kept up among the sensuous hearers
and readers of the sayings and writings of Jesus
and his apostles; the truths, figuratively presented,
made a deeper impression on the mind ; it intro:
duced variety into the discourse; the affections
were moved, and religious instruction the more
readily communicated * (see Seiler's Biblical Her-
meneutics, part i. sect. 2, § 54-62, London, 1835,
and Glass’s PAilologia Sacra).—W. W.

ANTICHRIST. The meaning attached to
this word has been greatly modified by the con-
troversies of various churches and sects. In Scrip-
ture, however, and the early Christian writers,
it has an application sufficiently distinct from
partial interpretations. Antichrist, according to
St. Jolin, is the ruling spirit of error, the enemy
of the truth of the Gospel as it is displayed in
the divinity and holiness of Christ. This is the
primary meaning of the term, and we are led at
once to consider it as the proper title of Satan.
But the same apostle speaks of the existence of
many antichrists; whence we learn that it is ap-
pals to any being who opposes Chirist in the
tigh places of spiritual wickedness. St. Paul
speaks of ‘ the man of sin’ as not yet revealed,
and it is supposed by most interpreters that anti-
christ is to be understood as the object alluded to
by the apostle; but if we attend strictly to his
words, the antichrist of whum he spoke must have
been then, and at the time when he was writing,
‘opposing and exalting himself above all that is
called God,’ although awaiting some distant
season fur the open display of his power and
wickedness. Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue tcith
Trypho, describes him as exercising his wrath
against Christians with especial fury in the period
immediately preceding the Second Advent. Cyril
of Jerusalem represents him as reigning three
years and six months preparatory to the entire
destruction of his dominion at the second coming
of Christ. The same Father says that he will de
ceive both Jews and Gentiles; the former, by res
estos himself as the Messiah; the latter, by

is magical arts and incantations. St. Clirysostom
observes, on the passage in the Second Episde to
the Thessalonians, that antichrist will not lead
men to idolatry, but will rather abolish the wor-
ship of false gods as well as that of the true God,
commanding the world to worship himself alone
as the only Deity.

These views of the carly writers, as well as the
expressions of Scripture, have been perverted by
many men of warm imaginations to the worst
purposes of controversy. ‘The eflects of general
corruption have often been charged upon offices
and individuals; and the appellation of anti
christ as readily applied to them as if it had
actually been coupled in Scripture with their
name and titles.—H. S.

ANTILEGOMENA (avticydueva, contra-
dicted or disputed), an epithet applied by the early


EBSeagFRARRSwe eres


Re F


S&F REL APA |


ANTILEGOMENA


Christian writers to denote those books of the New
Testament which, although known to all the
ecclesiastical writers, and sometimes publicly
read in the churches, were not fur a considerable
ume admitted to be genuine, or received into the
canon of Scripture. These books are s» deno-
minated in contradistinction to the Homologou-
mene, or universally acknowledged writings. The
following isa cataluzue of the Antil: gomena :—
The Second Epistle of St. Peter—The Epistle
of St. James.—The Epistle of St. Jude—The
Second and Third Epistles of St. John.— The
Apocalypse, or Revelation of St John.—The
Epistle to the Hebrews.

The earliest notice which we have of this distinc-
tion is that eontained in the Ecclesiastical History
of Eusebius, the leamed bishop of Caesarea, who
flourished a.p. 270-340. He seems to have formed
a triple, or, as it appears to some, a quadruple di-
Vision of the bouks of the New Testament, terming
them—l, the Aomologoumena (received); 2, the
an ilegomena (controverted); 3, the notha (spu-
Nous); and, 4, those which he calls the wfterly
spurwus, as being not only spurious in the same
sense as the former, but also absurd or impious.
Among the spurious he reckons the Acts of Paul,
the Shepherd of Hermas, the Revelation of Peter,
the Epistle of Barnahas, and the Instructions of

the Apostles. He speaks doubtfully as to the class
towhich the Apocalypse belongs, for he himself
includes it among the spurious: he then observes
that some reject it, while others reckon it among
the acknowledged writings (homologoumena).
Among the spurious writings he also enumerates
the Gospel according to the Hebrews. He aids,
at the same time, that all these may be classed
among the antilegomena. His account is conse-
quently confused, not to say cuntradictury.
Among the utterly spurious he reckons such bouks
asthe heretics brought forward under pretence of
their being genuine productions of the apostles,
suchas the so-called Gospels of Peter, Thomas,
and Matthias, and the Acts of Andrew, John,
and the other apostles. These he distinguishes
from the antilegomena, as being works which not
one of the ancient ecclesiastical writers thought
worthy of being cited. Their style he considers
® remote from that of the apvstles, and their
contents so much at variance with the genuine
doctrines of Scripture, as to show them to have
been the inventions of heretics, and not worthy
fa me even among the spurious writings.
These latter he has consequently heen supposed to
ve considered as the compositions of orthodox
men, written with good intentions, but calculated
y their titles to mislead the ignorant, who might
be disposed to account them as apostolical pro-
ductions, to which honour they had not even a au-
bious claim. (See Eusebius, Iist, Eccles. iii. 5, 25.)
The same historian has also preserved the testi-
mony of Origen, who, in his Commentary on St.
John (cited by Eusebius), observes: ‘ Peter, upon
whom the church of Christ is built, against which
the gates of hell shall not prevail, has left one
epistle undisputed ; it may be, also, a second, but
of this there is some doubt. What shall we say
of him who reclined on the breast of Jesus, John,
st has left one Gospel, in which he confesses
rat he could write so many that the whole world
read Not contain them? He also wrote the
pocalypse, being commanded to conceal, and


ANTILEGOMENA. 163


not to write, the voices of the seven thunders. He
has also left us an epistle consisting of very few
lines (orlxo1); it may be also a second and third
are from him, but all do not concur in their ge-
nuineness ; both together do not contain an hun-
dred stichi’ (for the signification of this word, see
Christian Remembrancer, vol. iii. p. 465, et seg.).
And again, in his Homilies, ‘The epistle with the
title “ To the Hebrews,” has not that peculiar
style which belongs to an apostle who cur fesses
that he is but rude in speech, that is, in his
phraseology. But that this epistle is more pure
Greek in the composition of its phrases, every one
will cunfess who is able to discern the difference
of style. Again, it will be obvious that the ideas
of the apostle are admirable, and not inferior to
any of the books acknowledged to be apostolic.
Every one will confess the truth of this who at-
tentively reads the apostle’s writings... 2. +
would say, that the thoughts are the apostle’s, but
that the diction and phraseology belong to sume
one who has recorded what the apustle has suid,
and as one who has noted down at his leisure
what his master dictated. If, then, any church
considers this epistle as coming from Paul, let
him be commended for this, for neither did these
eminent men deliver it for this without cause:
but who it was that really wrote the epistle God
only knows. The account, however, that has
been current before uur time is, accurding to some,
that Clement, who was bishop of Rome, wrote the
epistle; according to others, that it was written
by Luke, who wrote the Gospel and the Acts.’
(Euseb. Hist. Eccles. vi. 25.)

Upen other occasions Origen expresses his doubts
in regard to the antilegomena, as, where, in his
commentary on St. John’s Gospel, he speaks of the
reputed (pepopévn) Episéle of James, and in his
commentary on Matthew, where he uses the
phrase, ‘If we acknowledge the Epistle of Jude’
and of the Second and Third Epistles of Jobn he
observes that ‘all do not acknowledge them as
genuine: by which epithet, we presume, le means,
written by the persons to whom they are ascribed.
It is remarkable that Eusebius (ii. 23; iii. 25
classes the Epistle of James, the Acts of Paul,
the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Epistle of Bar-
nabas, at one time with the spurious, and at
another with the antilegomena. By the word
spurious, in this instance at least, he can mean
no more than that the genuineness of such books
was disputed: as fur instance the Gospel of the
Hebretcs, which was received by the Ebionites
as a genuine production of the evangelist Matthew.
This is the work of which Jerome made a tran-
script, as he himself informs us, from the copy
preserved by the zeal of Pamphilus in the Ceesa-
rean Library. He also informs us that he trans-
lated it into Greek, and that it was considered by
most persons as the original Gospel of St. Matthew
(Dialog. contra Pelag, iii. 2, and Comment. in
Matt. xii.). Whether the Shepherd of Hermas
was ever included among the antilegomena seems
doubtful. Eusebius informs us that ‘it was dix
puted, and consequently not placed among the
homologoumena. By others, however, it is judged
most necessary, especially to those who need an
elementary introduction: hence we know that it
has been already in public use in our churches,
and I have also understood, by tradition, that
some of the most ancient writers have u we

u


164 ANTILEGOMENA.


of it’ (iii. 3). Origen speaks of The Shepherd as
‘commonly used by the church, but not received
as divine by the unanimous consent of all.’
He there‘ore cites it, not as authority, but
simply by way of illustration (lib. x. in Epist.
ad Roman.).

Eusebius further informs us that in his own
time there were some in the church of Rume
who did not regard the Epistle to the Hebrews
as the production of the apostle Paul (vi. 25;
iii. 3). Indeed, it was through the influence of
Jerome that the church of Rome, at a much later

riod, was with much difficulty brought to ac-

nowledge it as canonical. The most ancient
Latin or Western church did not rank it among
the canonical writings, though the epistle was
well known to them, for Clement of oat has
quoted from it many passages. It is true that
some Latin writers in the fourth century received
it, among whom was Jerome himself; yet even
in the time of Jerome the Latin church had not

laced it among the canonical writings’ (Marsh's
Michaclis, vol. iv. p. 266). “* The reputed Epistle
to the Hebrews,’ says Jerome, ‘is supposed not to
be Paul's on account of tie difference of style,
but it is believed to have been written by Bar-
nabas, according to Tertullian, or by Luke the
evangelist ; according to others, by Clement,
afterwards bishop of the Roman church, who is
said to have diced to order and embellished
Paul's sentiments in his own language; or at
least that Paul, in writing to the Hebrews, had
purposely omitted all mention of his name, in
consequence of the odium attached to it, and
wrote to them eloquently in Hebrew, as a Hebrew
of the Hebrews, and that what he thus eloquently
wrote in Hebrew was still more eloquently written
in Greek, and that this was the cause of the ditfer-
ence in style’ (Ex Catalog.). And again, in his
one to Dardanus : ‘1 must acquaint our people

at the epistle which is inscribed “To the He-
brews” is acknowledged as the apostle Paul’s, not
only by the churches of the East, but by all the
Greck ecclesiastical writers, although most [of the
Latins?| conceive it to be either written by Bar-
nabas or Clement, and that it matters nothing by
whom it was written, as it proceeds from a church-
man (ecclesiastici viri), and is celebrated by
being daily read in the churches. But if the
custom of the Latins docs not reccive it among
the canonical Scriptures, nor the Greek churches
the Apocalypse of St. Joln, J, notwithstanding,
receive them both, not following the custom of the
present age, but the authority of ancient writers,
not referring to them as they are in the habit of
doing with respect to apocryphal writings, and
citations from classical and profane authors, but
as canonical and ecclesiastical.’ ‘ Peter also,’
says Jerome, ‘ wrote two epistles called Catholic ;
the second of which is denied by most, on account
of the difference of style (Ex Cafalog.). Jude is
rejected by most in consequence of the citation
from the apocryphal book of Enoch. Notwith-
standing, it has authority by use and antiquity,
and is accounted among the Holy Scriptures’
(Ibid.); and in his Letter to Paulinus: ¢ Paul
wrote to seven churches, but the Epistle to the
Hebrews is by most excluded from the number;’
and in his commentary on Isaiah, he observes
that ‘the Latin usage does not receive the Epistle
to the Hebrews among the canonical books.’


ANTILEGOMENA.


Contemporary with St. Jerome was his antar
gonist Ruflinus, who reckons fourteen epistles of
Paul, two of Peter, one of James, three of John,
and the Apocalypse.

It seems doubtful whether, antecedent to the
times of Jerome and Ruffinus, any councils, even
of single churches, had settled upon the canon of
Scripture, and decided the question respecting
the antilegomena, for the removal of doubts among
their respective communities ; for it seems evident
that the general or ecumenical Council of Nice,
which met in the year 325, formed no catalogue.
The first catalogue, indeed, which has come down
tu us is that of an anonymous writer of the third
century. He reckons thirteen epistles of St. Paul,
accounts the Epistle to the Hebrews the work
of an Alexandrian Marcionite, mentions the
Epistle of Jude, two of John, and the Revela-
tions of Jobn and Peter, saying with respect to
them, that ‘some among us are opposed to their
being read in the church’ (see Hugss’s Zntroduc-
tion, sect. xiv.). But soon after the Council of
Nice, public opinion turned gradually in favour
of the antilezomena, or controverted books ; for
we then tind them for the first time cited with-
out any marks of doubt as to their canonicity.
Thus, in the year 348, Cyril of Jerusalem enu-
merates fourteen epistles of Paul and seven Ca-
tholic epistles. Gregory of Nazianzus, who, ac-
cording to Cave (IIistoria Literaria), was bom
about the time of the Nicene Council, and died
in 389, enumerates all the books now received,
except the Apocalypse.

Epiphanius, who was chosen bishop of Con-
stantia in a.p. 367 or 368, and composed his
Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers in 392, cites,
in his Panarium, the different books of the
New Testament in a manner which shows that
he received all that are in the present canon.
Of the Apocalypse he says that it was ‘ gene
rally or by most received ;’ and, speaking of the
Alogians, who rejected all John's writings, he
observes, ‘If they had rejected the Apocalypse
only, it might have been supposed that they had
acted from a nice critical judgment, as being cir-
cumspect in regard ty an apocryphal or myste-
rious book: but to reject all John's writings was
a sign of an anti-Christian spirit”. Amphilochius
also, bishop of Iconium, in Lycaonia, who was
contemporary with Epiphanius, and is supposed
to have died soon after the year 394, after citing
the fourteen epistles of Paul, in his Jambics,
adds, ‘ But some say the Epistle to the Hebrews
is spurious, not speaking correctly, fur it is a
genuine gift. Then the Catholic Epistles, of
which some receive seven, others only three, one
of James, one of Peter, one of John; while others
receive tliree of John, two of Peter, and Jude's.
The Revetation of John is approved by some, while
many say it is spurious.’

The eighty-tilth of the Apostolival Canons, a
work falsely ascribed to Clement of Rume, but
written at latest in the fourth century, enume-
rates fourteen Epistles of St. Paul, one of Peter,
three of Jolin, one of James, one of Jude, two of
Clement, and the (so called) Apostolical Consti-
tutions, among the canonical books of Scripture,
This latter book, adds the pseudo-Clement, it is
not fit to publish before all, ‘ because of the mys
teries contained in it.’

The first council that is supposed to have


m+


BBR ORB ea wR AN Ree RR ee en men


TT ER wee RH RR oy


ANTILEGOMENA.


given a list of the cananica] books is the much
agitated Council of Laodicea, supposed to have
been held about the year 360 or 364, by thirty or
forty bishops of Lydia and the neighbouring
; but the 59th article, which gives a cata-
e of the canonical books, is not generally
held to be genuine. Its genuineness, indeed, has
been questioned by both Roman Catholic and
Protestant historians. In his Introduction to the
Old Testament, Jahn refers to this canon as the
of ‘an anonymous framer.’ Among the
canonical books included in the pretended 59th
canon of this council are the seven Catholic
: pd viz, one of James, two of Peter, three of
lohn,one of Jude, fourteen of Paul, in the fol-
lowing order, viz: Romans, 1 and 2 Corinthians,
latians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians,
land 2 Thessalonians, Hebrews, 1 and 2 Ti-
mothy, Titus, and Philemon. The Apocalypse is
not named,
We now come to the times of Jerome and
Augustin, whose opinions had great influence in
settling the canon of Scripture. We have already
seen Jerome's sentiments on this subject; and in re-
gard to the books of the New Testament Augustin
entertained the same views. He was present in the
year 393 at the Council of Hippo, which drew up
a catalogue of all the books of Scripture, agreeing
in all points, so far as the New Testament was
concerned, with the canon universally received,
with the exception perhaps of the Hebrews, for the
ancient doubt still appears through the wording
of the acts of this council. They commence with
oumerating only thirtecn epistles of Paul, and
then add ‘one, by the same author, to the Hebrews.’
then mention fico of Peter, three of Jolin,
ene of James, and the Apocalypse, with a proviso
that the churches beyond the sea be consulted
with respect to this canon. And to the same
effect the Council of Carthage, held in the year
397, having adopted the same catalogue, the
assembled. in council add: ‘ But let this
be known to our brother and fellow-priest (con-
tacerdoti) Boniface [bishop of Rome], or to the
other bishops of those parts, that we have received
those [bouks] from the Fathers to be read in the
church.’ The same catalogue is repeated in the
Epistle of Innocent I., bishop of Rome, tu St. Exu-
pere, bishop of Toulouse,in the year 404, which, by
those wlio acknowledge its genuineness, is looked
™pon as a confirmatiun of the decrees of Hippo
and Carthage. It was still more formally confirmed
in the Roman synod presided over by Pope Gela-
fius in 491, ‘if, indeed,’ to use the words of the
Boman Catholic Jahn, ‘the acts of this
fynod are genuine’ (see his Introduction). But,
ever this may be, the controversy had now
nearly subsided, and the antilegomena were hence-
ard put on a par with the acknowledged
books, and took their place beside them in all
Copies uf the Scriptures. Indeed, subsequently to
the eras of the councils of Hippo and Carthage,
We bear but a solitary voice raised here and
there acainst the genuineness of the antilegomena.
Theodore, bishop of Mopsuestia, for instance, the
celebrated Syrian commentator and preather, who
Hed about a.p. 428, is accused by Leo of Byzan-
aD of having ‘ abrogated and antiquated the
pistle of St. Janes, and afterwards uther Catholic
d istles (see Canisii Thesaurus, i. p- 577). And
Indicupleustes, so called frum the voyage


ANTILEGOMENA. 165


which he made to India about the year 535 to 647,
in his Christian Topography, has the following
observations in reference to the authority of these
books: ‘I forbear to allege arguments from the
Catholic epistles, because from ancient times the
church has looked upon them as of doubtful ane
thority. ...... Eusebius Pamphilus, in his
Ecclesiastical History, says that at Ephesus there
are two monuments, one of John the Evangelist,
and another of Jobn, an Elder, who wrote two of
the Catholic epistles, the second and third ine
scribed after this manner, “The Elder to the
elect lady,” and “ The Elder to the beloved
Gaius,” and both he and Irenzus say that but
two are written by the apostles, the first of Petey
and the first of Jobn. . . . . Among the Syrians
are found only the three before mentioned, viz.,
the Epistle of James, the Epistle of Peter, and
the Epistle of John; they have not the rest. It
does not become a perfect Christian to confirm
anything by doubtful bouks, when the books in
the Testament acknowledged by all (homolo-
goumena) ‘have sufticiently dleclgiet all things
to be known about tle heavens, and the earth,
and the elements, and all Christian doctrine.’

The most ancient Greek manuscripts which
have come down to our times contain the antile-
gomena. From this circumstance it is extremely
probable that the copies from which they were
transcribed were written ufter the controversies
respecting their canonicity had subsided. The
Alexandrian manuscript in the British Museum
contains all the books now commonly received,
together with some others, with a table uf con-
tents, in which they aie cited in the fullowing
order: —‘ Seven Catholic Epistles, fourteen of
Paul, the Revelation of Jon, the First Epistle of
Clement, the Second Epistle of Clement, and the
Psalms of Sulomon (which latter have, however,
been lost fiom the MS.).’ It is observable that
Eusebius classes the First Epistle of Clement
among the Homologoumena, or universally re-
ceived books; but by this he probably meant no
more than that it was acknowledged by all to be
the genuine work of Clement. The Alexandrian
manuscript is now generally believed to have
been written either in the fourth or early in the
fifth century. The order ofall the epistles is the
same as in our modern Bibles, except that the
Epistle to the Hebrews is placed after the Second
Epistle. to the Thessalonians. In the Vatican
manuscript B, which in respect of antiquity
disputes the precedence with the Alexandrian,
the Apocalypse is wanting, but it contains the
remaining antileyomena,

The Syrian canon of the New Testament did
not include all the antilegomena. All the manu-
scripts of the Syrian version (the Peschito, a work
of the second century) which have come down to
us omit the Second Epistle of Peter, the Second
and Third of John, that of Jude, and the Apo-
calypse. Nor are these books received tu this
day either by the Jacobite or Nestosian Clris-
tians. These are all wanting in the Vatican and
Medicean copics, written in the years 548 and
586, and in the beautiful manuscript of the Pe-
schito, preserved in the British Museum, which is
most accurately described by the Rev. J. Forshall,
in the catalogue of the Oriental Manuscripts,
and the writing of which was concluded at the
monastery of Bethkoki, ap. 768. It is written


166 ANTIOCH.


on 197 leaves of vellum, in the Estrangelo cha-
racter.

In the inquiring age immediately preceding
the Reformation the controversy respecting the
@ntilegomena was revived, especially by Erasmus
and Cardinal Cajetan; by the latter, however, upon
principles so questionable as to expose him to the
eharge of assailing the authority of the Epistle to
the Hebrews with the same weapons which the
emperor Julian had employed to impugn the
euthirity of St. Matthew's Gospel. doubts
thus raised were in a great measure silenced by
the «ecree of the Council of Trent, although there
have not been wanting learned Roman Catholic
@ivines since this period who, have ventured to

estion at least the Pauline authorship of the

pistle to the Hebrews. It is well known that
Lut er, influenced in this instance not so much by
histurico-critical as by dogmatical views, called
the Epistle of St. James ‘an epistle of straw’ ( Epis-
tola straminea). He also wished the antilego-
mena to be distinguished from the other books in
his translation of the Bible. In consequence of this,
the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistles of James
and Jude, and the Apocalypse have no numbers
attached to them in the Geman copies of the
Bitle up to the middle of the seventeenth cen-
tury: and it is observed by M. Tholugk (Com-
mentary on Hebrews, in Biblical Cabinet), that
§ the same plan should have been adopted with
respect to 2nd Peter and 2nd and 3rd Jolin, but
it did not seem proper to detach them from the
Homologoumena which belonged to tiem. Thus
he wished at the same time to point out what
weie the ‘right noble chief books of Scripture.’
Weare informed by Father Paul Sarpi (/istory
of the Council of Trent, book ii. chap. xliii.
tom. i. p. 235; and chap. xlvii. p. 240) that one
of the charges collected from the writings of
Luther in this council was, ‘that no books should
be admitted into the canon of the Old Testa-
ment which were not in the canon of the Jews,
and that from the New should be excluded the
Epistle to the Hebrews, the Epistle of James, the
Second Epistle of Peter, the Second and Third
of John, and the Apocalypse.’ M. Tholuck states
that the ‘ Evangelical churches, both Lutheran
and Reformed, adopted the same canon with re-
spect to the New Testament as that of the Coun-
cil of Trent’ (Comment. on Heb. vol. i. Introd,
chap i. § 3, and note b). Some, or all.: of the
antilegomena have been again impugned in recent
times, especially in Germany, as the reader will
find noticed under their several heads.—W. W.

ANTI-LIBANUS. [Leaanon.]

ANTIOCH (’Avridxeia). Two places of this
name are mentioned in the New Testament.
1. A city on the banks of the Orontes, 300 miles
north of Jerusalem, and about 30 from the Medi-
terranean. It was situated in the province of
Seleucis, called Tetrapolis (TerpdwoAis). from
containing the four cities, Antioch, Seleucia,
Apamea, and Laoticea: of which the first was
named after Antiochus, the father of the founder ;
the second after himself; the third after his wife
Apamea, and the fourth in honour of his mother.
The same apppellation (Tetrapolis) was given
also to Antioch, because it consisted of four town-
ships or quarters, each surrounded by a separate
wall: and all four by a common wall. The first
was built by Seleucus Nicatur, who peopled it


ANTIOCH.


with inhabitants from Antigonia ;
the settlers belonging to the


third by Seleucus Callinicus; and the fourth b

Antiochus Epiphanes (Strabo, xvi. 2; iii. 354).
It was the metropolis of Syria (Antiochiam,
Syria caput. Tac. Hist. ii. 79), the residence
of the Syrian kings (the Seleucide) (1 Macc.
iii. 37; vii. 2), and afterwards me the
capital of the Roman provinces in Asia. It
ranked third, after Rome and Alexandria, among
the cities of the empire (Joseph. De Bell. Jud.
iii, 2, § 4), and was little inferior in size and
splendour to the latter, or to Seleucia (Strabo,
xvi, 2.3 vol. iii. p. 355, ed. Tauch.). Its suburb
Daphne was celebrated for its grove and foun-
tains (Strabo, xvi. 2. ; vol. iii. p. 356, ed. Tauch.

its asylum (&cvAoy térov, 2 Macc. iv. 33>
and temple dedicated to Apollo and Diana.
©The temple and the village were deeply bo-
somed in a thick grove of laurels and cypresses
which reached as far as a circumference of ten
miles, and formed in the most sultry summers a
cool and impenetrable shade. A thousand streams
of the purest water, issuing from every hill, pre-
served the verdure of the earth and the tempera.
ture of the air’ (Gibbon, ch. xxiii.). Hence An-
tioch was called Epidaphnes (*Avrioxelg rij éxt
Adgvn, Joseph. Anttg. Jud. xvii. 2; Epidaphnes
cognominata, Plin. Hist. Nat. v.18), It was very


Pew within 150 years after its erection the
e


ws slew 100,000 persons in it in one day
(1 Mace. xi. 47). In the time of Chrysostom the
population was computed at 200,000, of whom
one-half, or even a greater proportion, were pro-
fessors of Christianity (7d mAdoy rijs réAcws xpro~
ntavdy, Chrysos. Adv. Jud. Orat. t.i. p.588; Hom.
in S. Iqnat. t. ii. p. 597; In Matt. Hom. 85,
t. vii. p. 810). Chrysostum also states that the
church at Antioch maintained 3000 poor, besides
occasionally relieving many more (Jn Matt. Hom.
t. vii. p. 658). Cicero speaks of the city as distin-

tished by men of learning and the cultivation of
the arts (Pro Archia, 3). A multitude of Jews
resided in it. Seleucus Nicator granted them the
rights of citizenship, and placed them on a perfect
equality with the other inhabitants (Joseph. Antig.
xii. 3,§ 1). These privileges were continued to
them by ian and Titus—an instance (Jose-
i remarks) of the equity and generosity of the

mans, who, in ition to the wishes of the
Alexandrians Antiocheans, protected the


Wea Ae


Se BRTR SH Os RAS


ANTIOCH.


Jews, notwithstanding the provocations they had
received frum them in their wars. They were also
allowed to have an Archon or Ethnarch of their
own (Joseph, De Bell. Jud. vii. 3). Antioch is
called libera by Pliny (Hist. Net. v. 18), having
obtained from Pompey the privilege of being
governed by its own laws. This fact is com-
memorated on a coin bearing the inscription,
ANTIOXENN MHTPOTIOA. ATTONOMOT.

The Christian faith was introduced at an early
period into Antivch, and with great success
(Acts xi. 19, 21,24). The name ‘ Christians’
Was here first applied to its professors (Acts
xi 26). Antioch soon became a central point
for the diffusion of Christianity among the Gen-
tiles, and maintained for several centuries a high
rank in the Christian world. A controversy
which arose between certain Jewish believers from
Jerusalem and the Gentile converts at Antioch
Tespecting the permanent oblizatiun of the rite of
circumcision was the occasion of the first apos-
tolic council or convention (Acts xv.). Antioch
was the scene of the early labours of the apostle

Paul, and the place whence he set forth on his
first missionary labours (Acts xi. 26; xiii, 2).
Ignatius was the second bishop or overseer of the
church, for about forty years, till his martyrdom
inav. 107, In the third century three councils
(the last in a.v. 269) were held at Antioch rela-


tive to Paul of Samosata, who was bishop there.


about a.p. 260 (Neander’s Allgemeine Geschichte,
&e. i. 3, p. 1013; Gieseler's Lehrbuch, i. 242;
Mushemii Commentarii, p. 702). In the course
of the fourth century a new theological school
Was formed at Antioch, which aimed at a middle
course in Biblical Hermeneutics, between a rigo-
rusly literal and an allegorical method of inter-
pretation. Two of its most distinguished teachers
Were the presbyters Dorotheus and Lucian, the
latter of whom suffered martyrdom in the Diocle-
sian persecution, a.p. 312 (Neander's Aligemcine
Geschichte, i. 3, p. 12375 Gieseler’s Lehs buch,
1272; Lardner's Credibility, pt. ii. ch. 55, 58),
Libanius (born a.p. 314), the rhetorician, the
friend and panegyrist of the emperor Julian, was
a native of Antioch (Lardners Testimonies of
Ancient Heathens, ch. 49; Gibbon’s Decline and
Fall, &. ch. 24). It had likewise the less equi-
vocal honour of being the birthplace of his illus-
ffous pupil, John Chrysostom (born a.p. 347;
died ap. 407) (Lardner's Credibility, pt. ii.
ch. 118; Neander’s Allgemeine Geschichte, ii. 3,
pp. 1410-56).

As the ecclesiastical system became gradually
asimilated to the political, the churches in those
Cities which held the highest civil rank assumed
& corresponding superiority in relation to other

ristian communities. Such was the case at

e, Alexandria, and Antioch, and, in the
Coyrse of time, at Constantinople and Jerusalem,
where the term Exarch was applied to the resident
bishop, Lut shortly exchanged for that of Pa-
triatch (Neander, Ally. Gesch. ii. 1, p. 346-51).
At esent time there are three prelates in
Syria who claim the title of watsneels of An-
toch, namely: (1) the patriarch of the Greek
church ; (2) of the Syrian Monophysites ; (3) of
the soar Monioctis Mosheim, edited by

Pp. 304-11).

Few cities have undergone and survived

Greater vicissitudes and disasters than Antioch.


ANTIOCH. 167


In a.p. 260 Sapor, the Persian king, surprised
and pillaged it, and multitudes of the inhabitants
were slain or sold as slaves. It has Leen fre-
quently brought to the verge of utter ruin by
earthquakes (a.p. 340, 394, 396, 458, 526, 528);
by that of a.p. 526 no less than 250,000
were destroyed, the population bein swelled by
an influx of strangers to the festival of the As-
cension. The emperor Justinian gave forty-five
centenaries of gold (180,0002.) to restore the city.
Scarcely had it resumed its ancient splendour
(a.p. 5140) when it was again taken and delivered
to the flames by Chosroes. In a.p. 658 it was
captured by the Saracens. Its ‘ safety was ran-
somed with 300,000 pieces of gold, but the throne
of the successors of Alexander, the seat of the
Roman government in the East, which had been
decorated by Cxsar with the titles of free and
holy and inviolate, was degraded under the yoke
of the caliphs to the secondary rank of a pros
vincial town’ (Gibbon, ch. 51). In a.v. 995 it
was retaken by Nicephoras Phocas. In a.p. 1080
the son of the governor Philaretus betrayed it
into the hands of Soliman. Seventeen years after
the Duke of Normandy entered it at the head of
300,000 Crusaders; but as the citadel still held
out, the victors were in their turn besieged by a
fresh host under Kerboga and twenty-eight emirs,
which at last gave way to their desperate valour
(Gibbon, ch. 58). In a.p. 1268 Antioch was
occupied and ruined by Boadocbar or Bibars,
sultan of Egypt and Syria; this first seat- of the
Christian name being dispeopled by the slaughter
of 17,000 persons, and the captivity of 100,000.
About the middle of the fifteenth century the
three patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, and Je-
rusalem convoked a synod, and renounced all
connection with the Latin church.

Antioch at present belongs to the Pashalic of


Haleb (Aleppo), and bears the name of {,<\h3{


Antakia. The inhabitants are said to have
amounted to twenty thousand before the earth-
quake of 1822, which destroyed four or five thou-
sand. On the south-west side of the town is a
precipitous mountain-ridge, on which a consider-
able portion of the old Roman wall of Antioch is
still standing, from 30 to 50 feet high and 15 feet
in thickness, At shot intervals 400 high square
towers are built up in it, containing a staircase
and two or three chambers, prubably for the use
of the suldiers on duty. At the east end of the
western hill are the remains of a fortress, with its
turrets, vaults, and cisterns. Toward the moun-
tain south-south-west of the city some fragments
of the aqueducts remain. After heavy rains
antique marble pavements are visible in many
parts @f the town; and gems, camelians, and rings
are frequently found. The present town stands
on scarcely one-third of the area enclosed by the
ancient wall, of which the line may be easil
traced ; the entrance to the town from Aleppo is
by one of the old gates, called Bab Bablous, or
Paul's gate, not far from which the members of
the Greek church assemble for their devotions in
a cavern dedicated to St. John (Madox's Ezcur-
sions, ii. 74; Monro's Summer Ramble, ii. 140-
143).—J. E. R.

2. Anriocu in (or near) Pisidia CArriéxeuws
rijs Thowdias), being a border city, was consi
at different times as belonging to different pro-


168 ANTIOCHUS.


vinces, Ptolemy places it in Pamphylia, and
Strabo in Phrygia. It was founded by Seleucus
Nicanor, and its first inhabitants were from Mag-
nesia on the Mwander. After the defeat of An-
tiochus (III.) the Great by the Romans, it came
into the possession of Eumenes, king of Perga-
mos, and was afterwards transterred to Amyntas.
On his death the Romans made it the seat of
a proconsular government, and invested it with
the privileges of a Colonia Juris Italici, which
included a freedom from taxes and a municipal
constitution similar to that of the Italian towns
(Ulpianus, lib. 50: Jn Pisidia juris Halict est
Colonia Antiochensium). When Paul and Bar-
nabas visited this city (Acts xiii. 14), they found
a Jewish synagogue and a considerable number
of proselytes (of poBotpeva toy Geov, v. 16; Trav
cweBonévoy xpoondttav, v. 43; Tas ceBoudvas
‘yovaixas, v. 50), and met with great success
among the Gentiles (v. 48), but, through the vio-
lent opposition of the Jews, were obliged to leave
the Secs which they did in strict accordance
with their Lord's injunction (v. 51, compared
with Matt. x. 14; Luke ix. 5).

Till within a very recent. period Antioch was
sup) to have been situated where the town of
Ak-Sheker now stands; but the researches of the
Rev. F. Arundell, British chaplain at Smyma in
1833, contirmed by the still later investigations
of Mr. Hamilton, secretary of the Geographical
Society, have determined its site to be adjoining
the town of Yalobatch; and consequently that
Ak-Sheker is the ancient Philomelion described
by Strabo (xii. 8.; vol. iii. p. 72, ed. Tauch.). ‘In
Phrygia Paroreia is a mountainous ridge stretching
from east to west; and under this on either side lies
a great plain, and cities near it; to the north Philo-
melion, and on the other side Antioch, called An-
tioch near Pisidia: the one is situated altogether
on the plain; the other on an eminence, and has
a colony of Romans.’ According to Pliny, Antioch
was also called Casarea (Jnsident verticem Pi-
side, quondam Solymi appellati, quorum colonia
Cesarea, eadem Antiochia, v. 24). Mr. Arundell
observed the remains of several temples and
churches, besides a theatre and a magnilicent aque
duct; of the latter twenty-one arches still re-
mained in a perfect state. Mr. Hamilton copied
several inscriptions, all, with one exception, in
Latin. Of one the only words not entirely
effaced were ANTIOCHEAE CAzsaRI.

Antioch was noted in early times for the wor-
ship of Men Arceus, or Lunus. Numerous
slaves and extensive estates were annexed to
the service of the temple; but it was abvlished
after the death of Amyntas (Strabo, xii. 8;
iii. 72). Arundell’s Discoveries in Asta Minor,
London, 1834, i. 268-312; Hamilton's Reseeches
tn Asia Minor, Pontus, and Armenia, London,
1842, i. 472-474 5 ii. 437-439; ‘ Laborde’s work
on Syria and Asia Minor contains a guod view
of the aqueduct'—Coins of Antioch, v. Culmet's
Plates, viiiJ. E. R.

ANTIOCHUS. Ofthe many kings who bore
this name, Antiochus, called Epiphanes, has the
chief’ claim on our attention in a Biblical Cyclo-
peedia, since in the Books of Maccabees and in
the prophecies of Daniel his person is so promi-
nent. evertheless, it will be our business to set
forth, not that which readers of the Bible can
gather for themselves, but such preliminary and


ANTIOCHUS.


collateral information as will tend to throw light
on the position of the Jews towards the Syrian
monarchy.

The name Antiochus may be interpreted he
who withstands, or lasts out ; and denotes mili-
tary prowess, as du many other of the Greek
names. It was borne by one of the generals of
Philip, whose son, Seleucua, by the help of the
first Ptolemy, established himself (s.c. 312) as
ruler of Babylon. The year 312 is in conse-
quence the era from which, under that monarchy,
time was computed, as, for instance, in the Books
of Maccabees. For eleven years more the contest
in Asia continued, while Antigonus (the ‘one-
eyed 2 was grasping at universal supremacy. At
length, in 301, he was defeated and slain in the
decisive battle of Ipsus, in Phrygia. Ptofemy,
son of Lagus, had meanwhile become master of
southern Syria; and Seleucus was too much in-
debted to him to be disposed to eject him by force
from this possession. In fact, the three first Ptolemies
(u.c. 323-222) louked on their extra-Egyptian
pee as their sule guarantee for the sufety of

wypt itself against their formidable neighbour,
and succeeded in keeping the mastery, not only
of Palestine and Cele-Syria, and of many towns
on that coast, but of Cyrene and other parts of
Libya, of Cyprus, and other islands, with nume-
rous maritime posts all round Asia Minor. A
permanent fleet was probably kept up at Samos
(Polyb. v. 35, 11), so that their arms reached ts
the Hellespont (v. 34,7); and for some time they
ruled over Thrace (xviii. 34, 5).. Thus Syria
was divided between two great powers, the north-
ern half falling to Seleucus and his successors,
the southern to the Ptolemies ; and this explains
the titles ‘king of the north’ and ‘king of the
south,’ in the 11th chapter of Daniel. The line
dividing them was drawn somewhat to the north
of Damascus, the capital of Coele-Syria.

The first Seleucus built a prodigious number of
cities with Greek institutions, not, like Alexander,
from military or commercial policy, but to gratify
ostentation, or his love for Greece. This love,
indeed, led him to fix his capital, not at Babylon,
where Alexander would have placed it, but in the
north of Syria (see ANT10cH#); and in extreme old
age his life fell a sacrifice to his romantic passion
for revisiting his native Macedonia. To people his
new cities was often a diflicult matter; and this
Jed to the bestowal of premiums on those who
were willing to become citizens. Hence we may
account for the extraordinary privileges which
the Jews enjoyed in them all, having equal rights
with Macedonians. At the same time (whether
from the example which Alexander had set or
from the force of circumstances) that age dis-
played remarkable tendencies to religious fusion
everywhere; insomuch that—if, with Josephus,
we may trust to the letter in the Ist book of
Maccabees (xii. 21)—even the Lacedamonians
put in their claim to be regarded as children of
Abraham. [See Sparta, on the authenticity of
this correspondence.] But there was still another
cause which recommended the Jews to the Syrian
kings. A nation thus diffused through their ill-
compacted empire, formed a band most useful to
gird its parts tozether. To win the hearts of the
Jews, was to win the allegiance of a brave brother-
hood, who would be devoted to their protector, and
who could never make commun cause with any


a ee eee


“SS & GRWRRDAEADe EF aaah aban


ANTIOCHUS.


irit of local independence. For this reason An-
uae the Great, and doubtless his predecessors
also, put peculiar trust in Jewish garrisons.
In a letter which Josephus has transcribed
(Antig. xii. 3,4) he orders the removal of 2000
Jews of Mesopotamia and Babylonia, with all
their goods, into Lydia and Phrygia, for garrison
service: and although the authenticity of the
letter may be suspicious, it at any rate proves the
traditionary belief that the earlier kings of the
house of Seleucus had transported troops of Jewish
families westward fur military purposes.


[Antiochus the Great.]


Again: through the great revolution of Asia,
the Hebrews of Palestine were now placed nearly
on the frontier of two mighty monarchies ; and
it would seem that the rival powers bid against
one another for their good will—so great were
the benefits showered upon them by the second
Ptolemy. Even when a war broke out for the
possession of Coele-Syria, under Antiochus the
Great and the fourth Ptolemy (n.c. 218, 217),
though the peuple of Juda, as part of the battle-
field and contested possession, were — to
severe suffering, it was not the worse for their
ultimate ts. Antiochus at least, when at
a later period (p.c. 198) left master of southern
Syria, did but take occasion to heap on the Jews

Jerusalem new honours and exemptions
(Joseph. Antig. xii. 3,3). In short, in days in
which no nation of those parts could hope for
plitical ind ence, there was none which
seemed so likely as the Hebrew nation to enjoy
an honourable social and religious liberty.

The Syrian empire, as left by Antiochus the
Great to his son, was greatly weaker than that
which the first Seleucus founded. Scarcely, in-
deed, had the second of the line begun to reign
(a.c. 280) when four sovereigns in Asia Minor
established their complete independence :—the
kings of Pontus, Bithynia, Cay locia, and Per-
gamus. In the next reign—that of Antiochus

e revolt of the Parthians under Arsaces
(ac. 250) was followed speedily by that of the

t province of Bactriana. For thirty years
together the Parthians continued to grow at the
expense of the Syrian monarchy. The great
Antiochus passed a life of war (n.c. 223-187). In
his youth he had to contend against his revolted
satrap of Media, and afterwards against his kins-
man Acheus, in Asia Minor. We have already
noticed his struggles in Cele-Syria against the
pcre pare this, he was seven naga

ged in successful campai against the Par-
thians and the king of Bactriene: and, finally,


—_ ted and staggering reverses in war
with the Romans, #0 that his last days were in-
glorious and his resources ghly broken. Re-
Specting the reign of his son, Seleucus Philopator


ANTIOCHUS. 169


(s.c. 187-176), we know little, except that he left
his kingdom tributary to the Romans (Livy, xiii.
6) [see also Se.zucus Puitoparor]. In Daniel,
xi, 20, he is named a@ raiser of tares, which
shows what was the chief direction of policy in
his reign. De Wette renders the words rather
differently (‘der einen eintreiber die Krone des
Reiches [Judiia] durchziehen liisst’), yet perhaps
with the same general meaning. Seleucus having
been assassinated by one of his courtiers, his bro-
ther Antiochus Epiphanes hastened to occupy the
vacant throne, although the natural heir, Deme-
trius, son of Seleucus, was alive, but a hostage at
Rome. In Daniel, xi. 21, it is indicated that
he gained the kingdom by flatteries ; and there
can be no doubt that a most lavish bribery was
his chief instrument. According to the descri
tion in Livy cen 20), the magnificence of his
largesses had almost the appearance of insanity.
A prince of such a temper and in such a posi-
tion, whose nominal empire was still extensive,
though its real strength and wealth were depart-
ing, may naturally have conceived, the first mo-
ment that he felt pecuniary need, the design of
plundering the Jewish temple. At such a crisis,
the advantage of the deed might seem to over-
balance the odium incurred: yet, as he would
convert every Jew in his empire into a deadly
enemy, a second step would become necessary—


° [Antiochus Epiphanes.]


to crush the power of the Jews, and destroy their
national organization. The design, therefore, of
prohibiting circumcision and their whole cere-
monial, would naturally ally itself to the plan of
spoliation, without supposing any so enmity
against the nation on_ his ust then, how-
ever, a candidate for the high-priesthood gave an
impetus to this course of events, by setting the ex-
ample of assuming Greek manners in the hope of
gaining the king’s favour; as is narrated in the
1st book of Maccabees. We have written enough
to show how surprising to the Jews must have
been the sudden and almost incredible change of
policy on the part of the rulers of Syria; and how
peculiarly aggravated enmity Antiochus Epipha-
nes must in any case have drawn on himself.
Instead of crushing his my eee, pny foes, he
raised up heroes against himself [Maccanrgs],
who, helped by the civil wars of his successors, at
length achieved the deliverance of their le ;
so that in the 170th year of the Seleucid (s.c.
143) their independence was formally acknow-
ledged, and they began to date from this period
(1 Mace. xiii. 42) as a new birth of their nation.’
Whether Antiochus Epiphanes committed all the
atrocities alleged in the second book of Maccabees
may be doubted; but having started amiss, with
no principle to guide or restrain him, it is certaim


170 ANTIOCHUS.


that he was capable of aiding cruelty to iniquity,
to whatever amount the necessity of the mument
might prompt. The intensity of Tacitus’s hatred
of the Jews is lamentably displayed in his re-
marks on this king, Hist. v. 8: ‘ Rex Antiochus,
demere superstitionem et mores Greecorum dare
adnixus, quominus teferrimam gentem in melius
mutaret, Partiuram bello prohibitus est.’

The change of policy, from conciliation to cruel
persecution, which makes the reign of Epiphanes
an era in the relation of the Jews to the Syrian
monarchy, has perhaps had great permanent moral
results. It is not impossible that perseverance in
the conciliating plan might have sapped the energy
of Jewish national faith: while it is certain that
persecution kindled their zeal and cemented their
unity. Jerusalem, by its sufferings, became only
the murd sacred in the eyes of its absent citizens;
who vied in replacing the wealth which the sacri-
legious Epiphanes had ravished. According to
1 Maccab. vi. 1-16, this king died shortly after
an attempt to plunder a temple at Elymais; and
Josephus follows that account. Appian (yr. 66)
adds that he actually plundered it. Strabo, how-
ever (xvi. 1), and Justin ene 2) tell the story of
Antiochus the Great, and represent him as losing
his life in the attempt. Polybius and Diodorus
decide nothing, as the fragments which notice the
deed ascribe it merely to ‘ the king Antiochus,’
Nevertheless, Josephus appeals to Polybins as

" agreeing with him; and the editors of Polybius
so understand the matter. On the whole, it would
appear that this attempt is rightly assiyned to
Epiphanes: it is not likely to have been two
events, though the stories do not agree as to the
name of the deity of the temple. We onght, how-
ever, to add, that Winer (Real-Worterbuch) is
disposed to believe that father and son both ended
their lives with the same act; and this view of the
case is also taken in Dr. W. Smith's Dictionary
of Greek and Roman Biography.

An outline of the deeds of the kings of Syria in
war and peace, down to Antiochus Epiphanes, is
pret in the 11th chapter of Daniel ; in which

piphanes and his father are the two principal
figures. Nothing but ignorance or a heated ima-
gination can account for some modem expositors
referring that chapter to the events of the eighteenth
century after Christ. The wars and treaties of the
kings of Syria and Eeypt from B.c. 280 to B.c. 165
are described so minutely and go truly, in vv. 6-36,
as to force all reasonable and well-informed men
to choose between the alternatives,—either that it
is a most signal and luminous prediction, or that
it was written after the event.

Besides Antiochus Epiphanes, the book of Mac-
cabees mentions his son, called Antiochus Eupator,
and another young Antiochus, son of Alexander
Balas, the usurper ; both of whom were murdered
ata tender age. In the two last chapters of the
book a fourth Antiochus apiearhpccalle by the
Greeks Sidetes, from the town of Sida, in Pam-
phylia. This is the last king of that house, whose
reputation and power were not unworthy of the
great name of Seleucus. In the year uc. 134 he
besieged Jerusalem, and having taken it next year,
after a severe siege, he pulled down the walls, and
reduced the nation once more to subjection, after
only ten years’ independence. His moderation and
regard for their religious feclings are contrasted by
Josephus with the impiety of Epiphanes (Antig.


ANTIPATRIS.


xiii. 8, 231). It is remarkable that, though the

beginning of his quarrel with the Jewish high-

priest is narrated in the first book of Maccabees,
the story is cut short abruptly.

The most compact and unbroken account of
the kings of this dynasty is to be found in Appian's
book (De Rebus Syriacis), at the end. The dates
of the following table are taken from Clinton's
Fasti Hellenici, vol. iii. Appendix, ch. iii. :—

1, Seleucus Nicator, p.c. 312—280.

2. Antiochus Soter, his son, 280—261.

3. Antiochus Theus, his son, 261—247.

4. Selencus Callinicus, his son, 247—226.

5. (Alexander, or) Seleuacus Ceraunus, his son,

226— 223.

6. Antiochus the Great, his brother, 223—187.

7. Seleucus Philopator, his son, 18S7—176.

8. Antiochus Epiplanes, his brother, 176—164,

9. Antiochus Eupator, his son (a minor),

16 £—162.
. Demetrius Soter, son of Seleucus Philopator,
162—150.

. Alexander Balas, a usurper, who pretends
to be son of Antiochus Epiphanes, and is
acknowledzed by the Romans, 152—116,

Antiochus Theus, or Alexander (a minor),
son of the preceding. He is murdered by
the usr per Try pho, who contests the kinge
dom till 140.]

12. Demetrius Nicator, son of Demetrius Soter,
reigns 146—141, when he was captured
by the Parthians.

13. Antiuchus Sidetes, his brother, 111—128.*

F.W.N.

ANTIPAS (‘Avrizas), a person named as ‘a
faithful witness,” or martyr, in Rev. ii. 13.

2 ANTIP.AS, or Hsrov-Anripas. [Haro
DIAN Faminy,

ANTIPATER. [Heropran Faniry.]

ANTIPATRIS (Avtirarpis), a city built by
Herod the Great, on the site of a former place
called Caphar-saba (XaBap(aSa or Kapapoafa,
Joseph. Antig. xiii. 15.1). ‘The spot was well
watered, and fertile; a stream tluwed round the
city, and in its neighbourhood were groves of
large trees (Antig. xvi. 5. 2). Caphar-saba was
120 stadia from Joppa; and between the two
places Alexander Balas drew a trench, with a
wall and wouden towers, as a defence aguinst the
approach of Antiochus (Anéig. xiii. lo. 1; De
Bell, Jud. i. 4.7). Antipatris also lay between
Cesarea and Lydia, its distance from the former
place being twenty-six Roman miles (Jtin.
Hieros, p. 600). These circumstances indicate
that Antipatris was in the midst of a plain, and
not at Arsuf, where the Crusaders suppused they
had found it (Will. Tyr. ix. 19; xiv. 16; Vitra-
cus, c. 23; Brocard, c. 10; comp. Reland,
Palast. pp. 569, 570). On the road from Ram-
lah to Nazareth, north of Ras-el Ain, Prokesch
(Reise ins Heilige Land. Wien, 1831) came to
a place called Kaflr Saba; and the position
which Brighaus assigns to this town in his map
is almost in exact agreement with the position
assigned to Antipatris in the /tin. Hieros. Pere
ceiving this, Professor Raumer (Dalis/ina, pp.
144, 462) happily conjectured that this Katlr


[12.


~® Kings of the same family reigned in Antioch
until Pompey reduce! Syria to the form of a
Roman province, B.o. 63.


5


a


wlu:s Pwd eee Pee a tay FOTO SS BRR g


ss
=


ANTIQUITIES.


Seba was no other than the uced name of
Caphar-saba. which, as in many other instanceg,
has again supplanted the foreign, arbitrary, and
leter name of Antipatris. This conjecture has
been confirmed by Professor Rolsinson, who gives
Kefr Saba as the name of the village in question
(Researches, iii. 46-48). St. Paul was brought
from Jerusalem to Antipatris by night, on his
Toute to Caarea (Acts xxiii. 31).
ANTIQUITIES, a term the meaning of which

ia somewhat arbitrary and unsettled, but, as li-

mited to the nations and people with whom the

Bible has to do, may be considered as embracing

whatever relates to the religious, political, social,

domestic, and individual life, not only of the

Hebrew race. but also of those kingdoms, tribes,

and persons that were connected with, or more or

less influenced by, the chosen people. With the
exception of history and biography, the science
of Biblical antiquities comprises whatever insti-
tutions, Jaws, customs, observances, rites and cere-
manies—in a word, every influence which tended
to give ‘form and pressure” to the Israelitish na-
tion in the several stages of its development prior
to the capture of Jerusalem by the Romans, and
to the Christian church during the earlier ages.
An accurate knowledge of the subjects embraced
under Biblical antiquities is of the greatest im-
Portance toa divine, as being indispensable to a
correct and complete acquaintance with the sub-
ject matter, the modes of thought, life, and action
Presented in those books and writings, which, as
an expositor of the divine oracles, he is called on
to understand himself, and then to expound
to others. Godwyn, in the dedication of his work
om the subject, well remarks, ‘ That many lave
bo better acquaintance witl: Christ and his apostles,
is because they are such strangers with Moses and
Were custumes antiquated thorowly
knowne, many difficulties in Scripture would ap-
pear ele canciea, and the places which now through
Oieicty dishearten the reader would then be-
Con .seet invitements to an unwearied assiduity
in ptusing the sacred oracles.’

The Scriptures themselves are the great source
whence a Einwledee of Hebrew and Christian
aatiquities may Le drawn; and whoever wishes
to have an accurate and a thorough acquaintance
With the subject must, with this express purpose
M view, make the holy record the object of a
careful, sustained, and systematic study. To
such an effort it is that scholars owe in the main
the views they have formed and the treatises they
have written. An intelligent student of the Old
and New Testaments may gain no inconsiderable
acquaintance with Biblical antiquities, even un-
aided by the researches of thevlozical scholars.
Much of the Old Testament is, in the best sense
of the term, picture writing ; and the history of

Saviour carries us into the very bosom of do-
mestic life. The knowledge which is acquired

these sources is peculiarly. valuable, from the
stamp of truth which every part of it bears. Few,
however, have the disposition, the leisure, or the
ability for the requisite study ; and therefore the
aid of the schular and divine is desirable, if not
indispensable.

But besides what may be learned from the
Scriptures themselves, much remains to be known
“hich they do not and cannot teach; for, like all
other bouks relating to ages long bygone, they con-


ANTIQUITIES. 171


tain allusions, phraseology, modes of thought and
speech, which can be understood either not at all,
or but imperfectly, without light derived from ex-
traneous sources ; and that the rather because the
Hebrews were not a literary people, and the aim
of the sacred penmen was far higher than to
achieve intellectual reputation.

The heathen writers afford very scanty mate-
rials for illustrating Biblical antiquities, s0 igno-
rant or prejudiced were they on topics of that kind,
Indirect information and undesigned testimonies
may be here and there extracted from their writ-
ings, but in general they communicate no useful
information except on geographical and kindred
subjects. The least barren of them is the earliest

rose-writer extant, Herodotus, who, in his second
k and part of the third, furnishes snatches of
information which may be of service, especially
in conjunction with the light which recent dis-
coveries in Egyptian antiquities have so happily
thrown on the Biblical records (The Egypt of
Herodotus, by Juhn Kenrick, M.A., 1841; Mfan-
ners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, by
Sir J. G. Wilkinson, 1837, 1841).

The study of Biblical antiquities, viewed as an
aid in the interpretation of the books of the Old
Testament, began probably on the return from
the Babylonish exile, when a lengthened past al-
ready stretched out to the Israelitish nation as
they looked back towards their origin; and, from
the new circumstances in which they were placed,
and the new modes of thought and action to which
they had become habituated, they must have found
many things in their sacred books which were as
difficult to be understood as they were interesting
to their feelings. The ideas, views, and observa-
tions which thence resulted were held, taught, trans
mitted, and from age to age augmented by Jewish
doctors, whose professed duty was the expounding
of the Jaw of the Fathers; and after having passed
through many generations by oral communication,
were at length, in the second and sume subsequent
centuries of the Christian era, committed to writing
[Ta.mup]. This source of information, as being
traditionary in its origin, and distigured by igno-
rance, prejudice, and superstition, must, to be of
any service, be used with the greatest care and
discrimination. It seems, however, to have fallen
into somewhat undue depreciation, but has been
successfully employed by recent writers in deli+
neating a picture of the age in which our Lord ap-
peared (Das Jahrhundert des Heils, durch A. F,
Gtrorer, Stuttgard, 1838). In the first century
Josephus wrote two works of unequal merit, on
The Jecish War, and The Antiquities of the Jews,
which, notwithstanding some credulity and bad
faith on the part of the author, aflurd valuable
information, particularly in relation to the man-
ners, customs, and opinions of his own times.
Had another work of which the writer speaks
(preface to the Antiquities) come down to these
days, which appears to have been a sort of philo-
sophical treatise on the Mosaic laws and inetitu-
tions, giving probably, after the manner of Mi-
chaelis in his Mosaisches Recht, the rationale of
the several observances enjoined, some consider
able light might have been thrown on the aati-
quities of the nation ; though the known propensity
of Josephus to the allegorical method of inter-

retation diminishes the regret experienced at its
Toes. The works of Philo, the celebrated Alexan-


.


173 ANTIQUITIES.


drian teacher, which were ulso produced in the
first century, have their value too much abated
by his love of the same allegorical method ; which
he was led to pursue mainly by his desire to bring
the mind of the Hebrew nation into harmony with
Oriental, and especially Grecian, systema of philo-
sophy, of which Philo was a diligent student and
@ great admirer.

Little advantage is to be gained by the study
of writers among the modern Jews; for till a very
recent period no sound intellectual activity was
found among this singular and most interesting
race. Inspired, however, by the spirit of the
eighteenth century, Mendelsso!.n opened to his
fellow-believers a new era, and introduced a man-
ner of thinking and writing which prepared the
way for many valuable Jewish productions, and
gave an impulse to the mind of ‘the nation,’ the
best outward results of which are only beginning
to be seen.

The study of classical antiquity, which com-
menced at the revival of letters, was not without an
influence on Biblical archeology; but this branch
of knowledge is chiefly indebted for its most valu-
able results to the systematic study of the Bible,
and the cultivation of the long-neglected Hebrew
language, which the interests of tue Reformation
both needed and called foith. It was nut, how-
ever, till within the last century that the intelli-
gent spirit which had been applied to the exami-
nation of classical antiquity in Germany, so di-
rected the attention of Oriental scholars to. the
true way of prosecuting and developing a know-
ledge of Hebrew and Christian antiquities, as to
bring forth treatises on the subject which can be
regarded as sutisfactory in the present advanced
state of general scholarship.

In no one thing has the mental activity of re-
cent times contributed more to the science of
Biblical antiquities than by leading well-infonned
travellers to penetrate into Eastern countries,
especially Syria, since, by communicating to the
world the fruits of their enterprise, they have been
enabled to present to no small extent a picture of
what these aad: and their inhabitants must have
been of old, permanence being one of the chief
characteristics of the Oriental mind. From Shaw

Travels in Barbary and the Levant) and Harmer

Observations on various Passages of Scripture)

lown to the invaluable work recently published
by Professor Robinson (Jiblical Researches in
Palestine, 1841), a numerous series of publica-
tions have been put forth, which have contributed
to throw very great light on Jewish and Christian
antiquity.

The earliest treatise in the English language

reasly on the subject of Jewish antiquities was
written by Th. Godwyn, B.D. (Aloses and Aaron,
Cwil and Ecclesiastical Rites used by the Ancient
Hebrews observed, &c. 4to. 1614). This work
passed through many editions in England ; was
translated into Latin by J. H. Reiz (1679): fur-
nished with a preface and two dissertations by
Witsius (1690); was illustrated, amended, and
enlarged by Hottinger (1710); and further anno-
tated on by Carpzovius, 1748. Considering the
age in which it appeared, Godwyn's work well
deserved the reputation which it gained : and for
a condensed, but accurate and leamed view of
the subject on which it treats, may be still studied
with advantage. In 1724-5, Thomas Lewis gave


ANTIQUITIES.


to the public his Origines Hebree, or Antiquities
¢ the Hebrew Republic, 4 vols. 8vo., which is a
very elaborate and carefully bane ae treatise,
composed of materials drawn from the best autho-
rities, both Jewish and Christian. A work of much
value, as affording fuller views on some topics,
and written in an easy style, is a posthumous
publication by Dr. Jennings, entitled Jewish Ants-
quities, or a Course of Lectures on the three First
Books of Godicyn’s Moses and Aaron, London,
1766; edited, with a preface of some value, by
Philip Furneaux. Fleury's work (Dr. Adam
Clarke's edition) on The Manners of the Ancient
Israelites, containing an Account of the peculiar
Customs, Latos, Policy, and Religion of the
Israelites, oflers a pleasing and useful introduo-
tion to the study of the Old Testament Scriptures.
A valuable and (for ordinary pu s) complete
treatise may be found by the English student in
Biblical Antiquities, by John Jahn, D.D., téans-
lated by T. C. Upham ; reprinted from the Ame-
rican transMition, at Oxford in 1636, and at Lon-
don in 1841. Those who wish to enter more fally
into the subject may consult the original, of which
the foregoing is an abridgment (Biblisches Ar
chaologte). A carefully compiled and well-written
work may be found in The Antiquities of the
Jews from authentic Sources, and their Customs
tlustrated by Modern Travels, by W. Brown, D.D.
2 vols. 8vo. Lond. 1820. Much important matter
is presented in Academical Lectures on the Jewish
Scriptures and Antiquities, by J.G. Palfrey, D.D.
LL.D. 2 vols. 8vo. Boston (U, S.), 1840.

Without attempting to enumerate the several
works which Gemnan scholars have produced on
the’subject, we may mention as worthy of special
attention, G. L. Bauer's Aurzgefasstes Lehrbuch
der Hebr. Alterthiimer des A.tt. N. T.; the second
edition, by E. F. K. Rosenmiiller, Leipsic, 1835,
should be obtained; J. Mt. A. Scholz’s Handbuch
der Bibl. Archiologie, Bonn u. Wien, 1834. De
Wette (Lehrbuch der Hebr. Jidisch. Archdologie,
Leips. 1830) has also published a work on the sub-
ject which has reached a second edition, and pos-
sesses no few of the excellencies which characterize
the writings of its accomplished author.

Helon’s Pilgrimage to Jerusalem may serve as
a connecting link between Jewish and Christian
antiquities, being almost equally useful for both,
as it presents a picture of Judaism in the century
which preceded the advent of our Saviour. The
English translation (by the Rev. Jubn Kenrick,
noe from the German original is accompanied
by valuable notes and a preface, in which may be
found a brief outline of the sources of Biblical
archeology. The work is conceived and executed
in the form of a story or novel, and possesses no
ordinary interest, independently of its high theo-
logical value, as affording a living picture of the
customs, opinions, and laws of the Jewish people.
In French there is a somewhat similar work by
M. de Montbron, under the unsuitable title of
Essais sur la Littérature des Hebreuz, 4 tomes,
12mo. Paris, 1819, in which a number of short
tales illustrative of ancient Hebrew usages and
opinions, are prefaced by a large and elaborate
Introduction, and followed by a great number of
learned ayd curious notes.

Among the fathers of the Christian church,
Jerome, who was long resident in Palestine, has
left in various works very important information


BEE EOE EOS PP ee RPS eR RSE TH AVE Pee Pee


aed Fw eT


“ST SV BALA APWIP BOW


ANTIQUITIES.


respecting the geography, natural history, and
customs of the country. Most of the fathers,
indeed, fumish, directly or indirectly, valuable
Notices respecting Cliristian antiquity, and in a
body constitute the source whence for the most
part writers and scholars of later ages have drawn
their materials, The reader ma with advantage
consult Same Account of the Writings and Opi-
nions of Clement of Alerandria, by John, Bishop
of Lincoln, 1835; also, Some Account of the
Writings and Opinions of Justin Martyr, by the
same, Cambridge, 1529. A useful compendium,
as giving specimens of the writings, and therein
views of the opinions, manners, rites, and observ-
ances of the early Christian church, may be found
in Bidliotheque Choisie des Peres de I’ Eglise
co et Latine, par M. N.S. Guillon, Paris,


For a long period after the revival of learning
the subject of Christian antiquities received no
Specific attention, but was treated more or less
summarily in general histories of the Church of

ist; as, for instance, in the great Protestant
work, Ecclesiast. Historia per aliquot viros in
ure Mandeburg, 1559-74; and on the part of
the Catholics, by Baronius, Annales Ecclesiast. a
Christo nato ad annum 1198 (Rom. 1558). If
any exception is to be made to this general state-
ment, it is on behalf of Roman Catholic writers,
whose works, however, are too inaccurate and
ai to be of any great value in these times.

tint general treatise on Christian antiquity
proceeded from the pen of an Enylish divine,
dos. Bingham, Origines Ecclesiastica, or the
Antiquities of the Christian Church, London,
1708-22, 10 vols. Svo.; which was translated into
Latin by Grischow (1738), and into German


(1778). “The writer was, from an early period of:


his life, a dilizent student of Christian antiquity,
as exhibited in the writings of the fathers; and
having filled his mind with the copious materials
which he there met with, he undertook ‘to give
such a methodical account of the antiquities of
the Christian church, as others have done of the

k and Roman and Jewish antiquities; not
by writing an historical or continued chronolo-
gical account of all transactions as they hap-
pened in the church, but by reducing the ancient
Customs, usages, and practices of the church
Under certain proper heads. ‘I was moved with
sort of emulation to see so many learned men
employed in publishing the antiquities of Greece
and Rome, whilst we had nothing that could be
called a complete collection of the antiquities of
the church’ (Preface, ed. London, 1834). The
work corresponds in no slight degree to the learn-
ing, care, and time bestowed upon it ; but, besides
being somewhat in the rear of the learning of the
day, it has its value diminished by the High
Church notions of the writer, as well as by the
strength of his prejudices against the Roman Ca-
tholics. A useful compendium, written in a
Viteral spirit, and compiled chiefly from German
sources, has lately been published in this country
(A Manual of Christian Antiquities, by Rev. J.
E. Riddle, M.A. London, 18395, in which (Pre-
face, § 2, and Appendix H) may be found a con-
cise but detailed account of the literature of
Christian antiquities. A more complete catalogue
of works, embracing each particular branch, is
fren in Winer's valuable book, Handbuch der


APE. 178


Theologischen Literatur, 2 vols. 8vo. Leipsig,
1838. Among the best Continental treatises on
the general sul,ject of Christian antiquities may be
mentioned those of Augusti, Handbuch @. Christl.
Archaol., Leipsig, 1836-7, 3 vols. 8vo.; Bohmer,
Die Christl.-kirchl. Allerthum Wissenschaft,
Bres]. 1836, Svo. ; Siegel, Handbuch der Christl.-
Kirchl. Alterthimer, Leipsig, 1836-7, 3 vols. 8vo,

—J.R. B.

ANTONIA, a fortress in Jerusalem, on the
north side of the area of the temple, often men-
tioned by Josephus in his account of the later
wars of the Jews. It was originally built by the
Maccabees, under the name of Baris, and was
afterwards rebuilt with great strength and splen-
dour by the first Herod. In a more particular
description, Josephus states (De Bell Jud. v.5.8)
that the fortress stood upon a rock or hill 50 cubits
high, at the north-west corner of the temple
area, above which its wall rose to the height of
40 cubits. Within it had the extent and ap-
pearance of a palace, being divided into apart-
ments of every kind, with galleries and baths,
and broad halls or barracks for soldiers; so
that, as having everything necessary within itself,
it seemed a city, while in magnificence it resem-
bled a palace. At each of the four corners was a
tower. Three of these were 50 cubits high; Lut
the fourth, at the south-east corner, was 70 cubits
high, and overlooked the whole temple, with its
courts. The fortress communicated with the
northern and western porticues of the temple
area, and had flights of stairs descending into
both, by which the garrison could at any time
enter the courts of the Temple, and prevent tu-
mults. On the north it was separated from the
hill Bezetha by a deep trench, lest it should
be approachable frorh that quarter, and the depth
of the trench added much to the apparent eleva-
tion of the towers (De Bell. Jud. v. 4, 2).

This fortress is called 4 wapexBoAh in the
New Testament (Acts xxi. 34, 37), and is the
* castle’ into which Paul was carried from the
temple by the soldiers: from the stairs of which
he addressed the people collected in the ad-
jacent court (Acts xxi. 31-40). Professor Robin-
son (Jtescarches, i. 422) conceives that the deep
and otherwise inexplicable excavation called
‘the pool of Bethesda * was part of the trench oe-
low the north wall of this fortress; in which case,
as he remarks, its extent must have been much
more considerable than has usually been sup-


sed.
pe APE aap koph ; Gr. xijpwos, xijBos, Kijpos;
whence the Latinized name Cephus). In the
Hebrew and Semitic cognate tongues, and in the
classical langnages,these names, under various mo-
difications, designate the Simiada, including, no
doubt, species of Cercopithecus, Macacus, and Cy-
nocephalus, or Guenons, apes, and baboons; that 18,
all the animals of the quadrumanous order known
to the Hebrews, Arabs, Eyyptians, and the classical
writers. Accordingly, we tind Pliny and Solinus
speaking of Ethiopian Cephi exhibited at Rome:
and in the upper part of the celebrated Pra-
nestine mosaic representing the inundation of the
Nile, figures of Simiad occur in the region which
indicates Nubia; among others, one in a tree,
with the name KHUIEN beside it, which may
be taken tor a Cercopithecus of the Guenon nt
But in the triumphal procession of Thotlimes ILI.


174 APE.
at Thebes, nations from the interior of Africa,


APE.


neither ks nor ts are indigenous in


ly from Nubia, bear curiosities and tribute, - Africa: they belong to India and the mountains


among which the Camelopardalis or Giratie and -


six quadrumana may be obeerved. The smallest


[Apes from Rosellini's Monumenti dell’ Egitto.}


and most effaced animals may be apes, but the
others, and in particular the three figured and
coloured from careful drawings, in Plate xxi. of
Rosellini’s work, are undoubtedly Macaci or Cy-
nocephali, that is, species of the genus baboon, or
baboon-like apes. Natnraljsts and commentators,
not deterred by the interminable list of errors
which the practice has occasioned, are often unne-
cessarily anxions to assign the names of animals
Noticed in Scripture and.in the ancient classics,
to species characterized by the moderns; although
the origina] designations are to be taken in a
familiar sense, and often extend even beyond a
generical meaning. In the instance before us
we have the futility of this pea fully exem-
plified; for Buffon presumed his Mona (Cerco-
pithecus Mona) to be the Kebos of the Greeks,
and not without plansibility, since the western
Arabs, it seems, apply the word Moune to all
long-tailed apes. Linnzus referred Cephus to his
Simia Cephus, now Cercopithecus Cephus, or
Moustache Guenon, of a ditferent group; while
Lichtenstein referred it to his Simia, or rather, as
now arranged, Cercopithecus Diana, But as
none of these are known to inhabit eastern Africa,
it is more probable that the Keipen of the Pra-
nestine mosaic is in reality the Cercopithecus
Griseovirides, or Grivet of Cuvier, which, with
equal pretensions in regard to form, has the ad-
vantage of being a native of Ethiopia and Nubia,
and belongs, with the two last mentioned, to the
group which has been called Callitrix.

But these considerations do not serve to point
out the Koph of Scripture; for that animal, named
only twice (1 Kings x. 22, and 2 Chron. ix. 21),
is in both cases associated with DY DN, Thoukiimn,
perhaps erroneously rendered ‘ peacocks.’ Now


of high Asia, and therefore the version ‘ pea-
cocks,’ if correct, would decide, without doubt,
not only that Koph denotes none of the Simiada
above noticed, but also that the fleet of Tarshish *
visited India or the Australasian islands. Thou-
kiim, apparently meaning crested, indicates birds,
per! ts, but cannot refer to the pintado or
Guinew hen, the Numidia of naturalists and the
Meleagris of the ancients; nor to the Pterocles or
Sandgrouse, both being familiarly known in U;
Egypt, and the last mentioned, in particular,
abundant in Arabia an Palestine. The inter-
pretation proposed by Hase, which would con-
vert Kophim into Succim—dwellers in caves, is
inadmissible, such a description being quite in-
applicable to long-tailed monkeys. Like the
whole order of quadrumana, they are constituted
not for troglodyte, but arboreal life, or to be
dwellers in trees; baboons alone venturing be-
yond woody covers in steep rocky situations, and
sometimes finding shelter in clefts. For these
reasons we conclude that the Hebrew koph, and
names of the same root, were, by the nations in
question, used generically in some instances and
specitically in others, though the specics were not
thereby defined, nor on that account identical.

Baboons, we have already shown, were known
to the Egyptians, and cannot well have escaped
observation among the people of Palestine, since
they resided cluse upon the great caravan-routes,
which, as is well known, were frequented from
the earliest antiquity by showmen exhibiting
wild beasts. In Egypt, however, a baboon was
the type of some abstract power in nature or in
metaphysics; as such the animal was idolized,
and figures of a cynocephalus were invariably
placed on the summit of weighing-scales, where
they still appear on the monuments.


If there be truth, as the following authorities
show, in the existence of a large ape or baboon in
Yemen, and even in Mesopotamia, the untract-
able and brutal character of the whole genus
would be sufficient to sanction the Arabic name
Saadan, and the Hebrew DW, Sadim; which
indicate the satyrs of the desert, noticed m Mr.
Rich's Afemoir on the Ruins of Babylon, p. 30,


* If the voyage excended to the Spice Islands,
then, indeed, both peacocks and ourang-outans
were at hand.


APE.


where they are denominated Sted Assad, and

descritsl as found in woody places near Semana,

on the Euphrates. Thus we have the DY),

Sayrim, or ‘hairy ones‘ of Levit. xvii. 7, in accord-

ance with Pliny, who conceived satyrs to be large

ayes. In the Prenestine mosaic, before quoted, a

baboon is figured which, we are assured, had the

name Catypoc, or Satyrus, by its side.* The
only species of ape of the baboon furm known in

Arabia is the Mocko of Edwards, noticed in our

illustrated series of drawings as Macacus Ara-

bicus, a species nearly allied to Cynocephalus

Hamadryas on the one hand, and to Mac. Silenus

on the other—all three powerful, fierce, and Jibi-

dinous animals. Mac. Arabicus may ultimately

Prove to be a true baboon, and the same as Simia

cynomolgus of Hasselquist. It is a remarkable

Recies for stature and aspect, having the dox-like

dose and approximating eyes of baboons; the skin

of the face uf a reddish colour; the snout, lips, and
chin black; the forehead low, and the sides of the
bead furnished with bushy, lonz, white ‘hair; the
breast, arms, and shoulders similarly covered, but
loing and lower extremities of a fine chestnut ;
the tail of the same colour, of no great length,
tufted at the end, and all the hands black. It is
found from the straits of Bab-el-Mandeb, through
Souther Arabia to the Euphrates, and even be-
yond the junction of that river with the Tigris,
Like other large and formidable Simiada, it is
less sulicitous about the vicinity of trees, becanse
itis armed with powerful canines; holds its enemy
firmly grasped, and fights, not singly, but assisted
by the whole troop: it frequents scrubby under-
wood near water, but becomes more rare eastward
of Yemen. Comparing the characters of this
fecies, we find it by configuration, colours, and
manners peculiarly adapted to the purposes of
idolatry in its grossest and most debasing aspect.
The Hebrew people, already familiar with a si-
nilar worship in Egypt, may have copied the
Native tribes in the wilderness, and thus drawn
upon themselves the remonstrance in Levit. xvii.
7, where the allusion to these animals is very
descriptive, as is that in Isa. xiii. 21; and again,
xxxiv. 14, where the image is perfect, when we
picture to ourselves the ‘ hairy ones‘ lurking about
the river in the juniper and liquorice jungle, as
described by Mr. Rich.

It is not unlikely that the baboon idol may
have had goat s horns, since we find the same attri-
bute on rams’ heads in Eyypt; on lions’ heads on
coms of Tarsus, and on horses’ and elephants’
heals on rfedals of Syrian kings. The Greek
mythologists, ignorant of the baboon figure, may
have preferred an imaginary compound of man
and goat to that of the cynocephalus, which they
confounded with the hyzna, or, in their love of
ideal Leauty, may have considered it too disgust-
ing even for an idol. Perhaps the most ancient
form of the Arabian Urolalt was that of a baboon,


* This name does not occur in the copies in
oar possession, and, we fear, was lust in the break-
ing up of the mosaic, which is now preserved
fraginentally in different museums.

+ See Falwards’s Gleanings, and Pennant’s
History of Quadrupeds, Ato. vol. i. p. 195. The
information in the text is derived from an officer


who was in the Honourable East India Company's
@arvey ing service,


APHEREMA. 1%


male or female, the name apparently having some
reference to red, and to the Indian monkey-
worship (see Gesner, s. v. ‘ Hyena’). Urolalt
and monkey-worship are connected with a solar
mythus.—C. H.S.

APELLES (’AweAAjjs), a Christian at Rome,
whom Paul salutes in his Epistle to the Church
there (Rom. xvi. 10), and calls rbv Sdxiuov éy
Xpiorg, aes in Christ,’ fe. an approved
Christian. Origen doubts whether he may not
have been the same person with Apollos; but this
is far from likely [ eoeorl: According to the
old church traditions Apelles was one of the
seventy disciples, and bishop either of Sinyrna or
Heracleia (Epiph. Cont. Hares. p. 20; Fabrici
Lez. Evangelii, pp. 119, 116, &c.). The name
itself is notable from Horace’s ‘ Credat Ju-
deus Apella, non ego’ (Sat. i. 5), hy which he
less probably means a circumcised Jew in ge-
neral, as many think, than a particular Jew
of that name, well-known at Rome.


APHARSACHITES or ApHarsaTucHITEs
(RAPIEN or RIQNDION; Sept. “Apapoada-
xaior), the name of the nation to which belonged
one portion of the colonists whom the Assyrian
king planted in Samaria (Ezra iv. 9; v. 6).
Schulthess (Parad. p. 362) identifies the ‘ Aphar-
sachites’ with the Persian, or rather Median
© Paratacene’ of the Greek geographers (Strabo
xi. 522; xv. 732; Plin. xvi. 29). This con-
clusion is strengthened by the fact that the A
is often prosthetic in Strabo; as in xv. 764,
where the names Mardi and Amardi are inter-
changed.

APHEK (PAN; Sept. "Adéx); the name sig-
nifies strength ; hence a citadel or fortified town.
There were at least three places so called, viz. :

1. APHEK, a city in the tribe of Asher
(Josh. xiii. 45 xix. 30), called P*DN in Judg.
i. 33, where we also fot that the tribe was
unable to gain possession of it. This must be
the same place with the “Agaxa which Euse-
bius (Constant. iii. 55) and Sozomen (pp. 2, 5)
place in Lebanon, on the river Adonis, where
there was a famous temple of Venus. A village
called Afka is still found in Lebanon, situated
at the bottom of a valley, and may possibly mark
the site of this Aphek (Burckhardt, i. 70 ; Richter,
p- 107).

2. APHEK, a town near which Benhadad was
defeated by the Israelites (1 Kings xx. 26, sg.),
which seems to correspond to the Aphaca of
Eusebius (Onomast. in “Apaxa), situated to the
east of the Sea of Galilee, and which is mentioned
by Burckhardt, Seetzen, and others under the
name of Feik.

3. APHEK, a city in the tribe of Issachar,
not far from Jezreel, where the Philistines twice
encamped before battles with the Israelites (1 Sam.
iv. 1; xxix. 15 comp. xxviii, 4).° Either this
or the first Aphek, but most probably this, was
the Aphek mentioned in Josh. xii. 18, as a royal
city of the Canaanites.

APHEKAH (ARDS), a town in the moun-
tains of Judah (Josh. xv. 23).

'APHEREMA (Agalpeua), one of the three
‘toparchies added to Judma by the kings of Syria
(t Mace. xi. 34). This is perhaps the Ephrem
or Ephraim mentioned in John xi. 54.


1% _ APHSES.


APHSES, head of the eighteenth sacerdotal
family of the twenty-four into which the priests
were divided by David for the service of the
temple (1 Chron. xxiv. 15).

APOCRYPHA (dméxpupa, sc. BiBAla, hid-
den, secreted, mysterious), a term in theology,
applied in various senses to denote certain books
elaine a sacred character. The word occurs
Mark iv. 22: ¢ There is nothing hid, which shall
not be manifested, neither was anything kept se-
cret (drdxpugoy) ,but that it should come abroad ;'
also Luke viii. 17; and Col. ii. 3: ‘In whom
are hid (dwdxpupor) all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge.” It is first found, as denoting
a certain class of books, in Clemens Alexandrinus,
Stromata, 13, c. 4, ée twds droxptpwr.

In the early ages of the Christian Church this
term was frequently used to denote books of an
uncertain or anonymous author, or of one who
had written under an assumed name. Its ap-
pion however, in this sense is far from

eing distinct, as, strictly speaking, it would
include canonical bouks whose authors were un-
known or uncertain, or even pseudepiyraphal. § Let
us omit,’ says St. Augustine, ‘ those fabulous books
of Scripture, which are called apocryphal, be-
cause theirsecret origin was unknown to the futhers.
We do not deny that Enoch, the seventh from
Adam, wrote sumething, as Jude asserts in his
canonical Epistle that he did ; but it is not with-
out a purpose that they are not found in the
Jewish canon preserved in the Temple. The
books, therefure, which are published in his name
are rightly judged by prudent men not to be his,
as morc recent works were given out as written by
apostles, which, however, have been separated,
upon diligent investigation, from the canon of
Scripture, under the name of apocryphal.” And
again: ‘ From such expressions as “ The Book of
the Wars of the Lord” men have taken occasion
to forge books called apocryphal.’ And in his
book against Faustus, he says: ‘ Apocryphal books
are not such as are of authbrity, and are kept se-
cret; but they are books whose original is obscure,
and which are destitute of proper testimonials, their
authors being unknown, and their characters either
heretical or suspected.’ Origen also, on Matt.
xxii. had applied the term apocryphal in a simi-
lar way: ‘ This passage is to be found in no ca-
nonical book’ (regulari, for we have Origen’s
work only in the Latin translation by Rufinus),
‘but in the apocryphal book of Elias’ (secretes
Elie). And, ‘ This is plain, that many examples
have been adduced by the apostles and evangelists,
and inserted in the New Testament, which we do
not read in the canonical Scriptures which we
possess, but which are found in the Apocrypha’
(Origen, Pref. in Cantic.). So also Jerome, re-
ferring to the words (Eph. v. a ‘ Awake, thou that
sleepest, and arise from the dead,’ observes that
‘the apostle cited this from Aidden (reconditis)
a ces and such as seem to be apocryphal, as
he has done in several other instances.” Epipha-
nius thought that this term was applied to such
books as were not placed in the Ark of the
Covenant, but put away in some other place (see
Snicer’s Thesaurus for the true reading of the
passage in this Father). Under the term apoery-
phal have been included books of a religious cha-
tacter, which were in circulation among private
Christians, but weze not allowed to be read in the


APOCEYPHA.


piblie assemblies; such as 3 and 4 Esdras, and
and 4 Maccabees. 4

In regard to the New Testament, the term has
been usually applied to books invented by bere-
tics to favour their views, or by Catholics under
fictitious signatures. Of this description were
many spurious or apocryphal gospels (which see).
It is probably in reference to such that Basil,
Cyril of Jerusalem, and Jerome gave cautions
against the reading of apocryphal books; although
it is possible, from the context, that the last-named
Father alludes to the bouks which were also called
Ecclesiastical, and afterwards Deutero-cunonical.
The following passaye from his Epistle to Leeta,
on the education of her daughter, will serve to illus-
trate this part of our subject :—‘ Let her first learn
the Psalter, and give her hours of leisure to those
holy songs. From the Proverbs of Solomon she
will gather practical instruction; Ecclesiastes
will teach her to despise the world; in Job she
will find examples of virtue and endurance. Then
let her go to the Gospels, and never lay them down,
The Acts of the Apostles, with the Epistles, must
be imbibed with all the ardour of her heart,
When her mind is thoroughly stored with these
treasures, she may commit the Prophets to her me-
mory, together with the Heptateuch, and the books
of Kings and Chronicles, with those of Esdras
and Esther. The Song of Solomon she may
read last without danger: if she reads it earlier,
she may not discern that a spiritual union is ce-
lebrated under carnal words. All apocryphal
books should be avoided; but if she ever wishes
to read them, not to establish the truth of doe-
trines, but with a reverential feeling for the
truths they siqnify, she should be told that
they are not the works of the authors by whose
names they are distinguished, that they contain
much that is faulty, and that it is a task requir-
ing great prudence to find gold in the midst of
clay. The works of Cyprian should ever be in
her hands. She may run over the epistles of
Athanasius, and the books of Hilary, without any
danger of stumbling. Let her pleasure be in
such treatises and writers of such character as
most evince the picty of an unwavering faith,
All other authors she should read to judge of
what they say, not simply to follow their instrace
tions.” And to the same effect Philastrins :—
‘Among whom are the Manichees, Gnostics [&c.],
who, having some apocryphal books under the
apostles’ names (2. e. some separate Acta), are
accustomed to despise the canonical Scriptures ;
but these secret Scriptures, that is, apocryphal,
though they onght to be read by the perfect fur
their morals, ought not to be read by all, as igno-
norant heretics have added and taken away what
they wished.’ He then proceeds to say that the
books to which he reters are the Acts of Andrew,
written by ‘the disciples who were his followers,’
&e.: Quos conscripserunt discipuli tunc sequentes
apostolumn (Heres. 40).

In the Bibliotheque Sacrée, by the Rev. Domi-
nican Fathers Richard and Giraud (Paris, 1822),
the term is defined to signify—: 1) anonymous er
pseudepigraphal books ; (2) those which are not
publicly read, although they may be read with
edification in private; (3) those which do not
pass for authentic and of divine authority, al-
though they pass for being composed by a sacred.
author or an apostle, as the Epistle of Barnabas 5


APOCRY PHA.


and (4) dangerous books composed by ancient
heretics to favour their opinions. They also apply
the name ‘to books Stic after having been con-
tested, are put into the canon by consent of the
churches, as Tobit, &c.’ And Jahn applies it in its
most strict sense, and that which it has borne since
the fourth century, to books which, from their in-
scription, or the aathor’s name, or the subject, might
easily be taken for inspired books, but are not so in
reality. It has also been applied, by Jerome, to
certain hooks not found in the Hebrew canon, but
yet publicly read from time immemorial in the

Christian church for edification, although not

considered of authority in controversies of faith.

These were also termed Ecclesiastical books, and

consisted of the books of Tobit, Wisdom, Ecclesi-

asticus, Baruch, the two firat books of Maccabees,
the seven last chapters (uccurding to Cardinal

Huge's division) of the book of Esther, and those

(a0 called’ parts of the book of Daniel which are

not fuind in Hebrew, viz. the Song of the Child-

ren, the Speech of Azariah, the History of Su-
sannah, and the Fable (as Jerome calls it) of

Bel and the Dragon. These have been denomi-

hated, for distinction’s sake, the deutero-canonical

bonks, in as much as they were not in the original
or Hebrew canon. In this sense they are called
by some the Antilegomena of the Old Testament.
‘The uncanonical books,’ says Athanasius, or the
anthor of the Synopsis, ‘ are divided into antile-
gomena and apocrypha’ [Drvrero-canoytcar].

Of Spurious and Apocryphal Books, as distinct
from Antilegomena or Ecclesiastical.—Among
this class are doubtless to be cunsidered the 3rd
and 4th books of Esdras; and it is no doubt in re-
ference to these that, in his letter to Vigilantius,
Athanasius speaks of a work of Esdras which he
says that he had never even read. Playing upon
the name of Vigilantius, he adds, ‘ You sieep vigi-
lantly (tu vigilans dormis), and write in your
slep; proposing to me an apocryphal book, which
isread by you and others like you, under the name
of Esdras, wherein it is written that no one should
be prayed for after his death (See 4 Esdras, viii.
BU... Why take in hand what the Church
does not receive? Read, if you like, all the
feigned revelations of all the patriarchs and pro-
phets, and when you have learned them, sing
them in the women’s weaving-shops, and propose
them to be read in your taverns, that you may
the more readily by them allure the unlettered
rabble to drink.’

Of the same character are also the Book of
Enoch, the Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs,
the Assumption of Moses, &c.; which, as well as
3and 4 Esdras, being by many considered as the
fictions of Christians of the second and third cen-
turie, it is doubtful whether they ought to be
clased in the Apocrypha of the Old or of the
New Testament. Origen, however, believed the
New Testament to have contained citations
from books of this kind written before the times
of the apostles; and, in reference to such, ob-
terves, in his preface tu the Cunticles, ‘This, how-
ever, is manifest, that many passages are cited
Gther by the apostles or the evangelists, and in-
wrted in the New Testament, which we do not

tead in those Scriptures of the Jews which we call

canonical, but which are nevertheless found in
ye eigen books, or are taken from them. But
«will give no authority to apocryphal writings,


APOCRYPHA. 17


for the bounds which our fathers have fixed are
not to be removed ; and possibly the apostles and
evangelists, full of the Holy Ghost, might know
what should be taker out of those Scriptures and
what not. But we, who have not such a measnre
of the Spirit, cannot, without great danger, pre-
sume to act in that manner.’ Then, in his Let/er to
Apianus, he observes, that there were many things
kept from the knowledge of the public, but which
were preserved in the hidden or apocryphal books,
to which he refers the passage (Heb. xi. 37),
‘They were sawn asunder.’ Origen probabl
alludes here to that description of books hich
the Jews called D‘}323, a word of the same
signification with apocrypha, and applied to
books laid aside, or not permitted to be publicly
read, or considered, even when divinely inspired,
not fit for indiscriminate circulation: among the
latter were the first chapter of Genesis, the Sung of
Solomon, and our last eight chapters of the pro-
phet Ezekiel.

The books which we have here enumerated, such
as the Book of Enoch, &c., which were all known tu
the ancient Fathers, have descended to our times;
and, although incontestably spurious, are of con-
siderable value from their antiquity, as throwing
light upon the religious and theological opinions
of the first centuries. The most curious are the
3rd and 4th books of Esdras, and the Book of
Enoch, which has been but recently discovered,
and has acquired peculiar interest from its con-
taining the passage cited by the apostle Jude
{Exocn]. Nor are the apocryphal books of
the New Testament destitute of interest. Al-
though the spurious Acts extant have no longer
any defenders of their genuineness, they are not
without their value to the Biblical student, and
have been applied with success to illustrate the
style and language of the genuine books, to which
they bear a close analogy. The American trans-
lator of Mosheim’s Ecclesiastical Iistory tenws
them ‘harmless and ingenious fictions, intended
either to gratify the fancy or to silence the ene
mies of Ciristianity.’

Some of the apocryphal books have not been
without their defenders in modern times. The
Apostolical Canons and Constitutions, and the
various Liturgies ascribed to St. Peter, St. Mark,
&c., and published by Fabricius, in his Cod-x
Apocryphus Novi Testamenti, were considered
by the learned and eccentric William Whiston,
and the no less learned Grabe, to be of equal
authority with any of the confessedly genuine
apostolic compositions (see Whiston’s Primitive
Christianity and Grabe’s Spicilegium).

They are, however, regarded by most as ori-
ginally not of an earlier date than the second
century, and as containing interpolations which
betray the fourth or fifth: they can, therefore,
only be considered as evidence of the practice
of the Church at the period when they were
written. They have generally been appealed to
by the learned as having preserved the traditions
of the age immediately succeeding the apostolic ;
and, from the remarkable coincidence which is
observable in the most essential parts of tne s0-
called Apostolic Liturgies, it is by no means im-
probable that, notwithstanding their interpola-
tions, they contain the leading portions of the
most ancient Christian forms of worship.

Most of the a ls and Acts

"


178 APOCRYPHA.


noticed by the fathers, and condemned in the ca-
talogue of Gelasius, which are generally thought
to have been the fictions of heretics in the
second century, have long since fallen into obli-
vion. Of those which remain, although some
have been considered by learned men as ge-
nuine works of the apostolic age, yet the greater
are universally rejected as spurious, and as
written in the second and third centuries. A few
are, with great appearance of probability, assigned
tw Leucius Clarinus, supposed to be the same
with Leontius and Seleucus, who was notorious
for similar forgeries at the end of the third cen-
tury. The authorship of the £péistle uf Barnabas
is still a matter of dispute; and there ap
but too much reason to believe that there existed
grounds for the charge made by Celsus against
the early Christians, that they had interpolated or
forged the ancient Sibylline Oracles.

In the letter of Pope Innocent I. to St. Exupere,
bishop of- Toulouse, written about the year 405,
after giving a catalogue of the books forming the
canon of Scripture (which includes five books of
Solomon, Tobit, and two books of Maccabees), he
observes :—‘ But the others, which are written under
the name of Matthias, or of James the Less, or thuse
which were written vy one Leucius under the name
of Peter and John, or those under the name of
Andrew by Xenocheris and Leonidas the philoso-
pher, or under the name of Thomas; or if there
be any others, you must know that they are not
only to be rejected, but condemned.’ These sen-
timents were afterwards confirmed by the Ro-
man Council of seventy bishops, held under Pope
Gelasius, in 494, in the acts of which there is a
Jong list of apocryphal Gospels and Acts, the
greater part of which are supposed to have pe-
rished. The acts of this council, however, are
not generally considered to be genuine.

But, whatever authority is to be ascribed to
these documents, it cannot be denied that the
early Church evinced a high degree of discri-
mination in the difficult task of distinguishing
the genuine from the spurious books. ‘ It is not
80 easy a matter,’ says the learned Jeremiah Jones,
‘as is commonly imagined, rightly to settle the
canon of the New Testament. For my own part,
I declare, with many learned men, that in the
whole compass of learning I know no question in-
volved with more intricacies and feclehine dif-
ficulties than this’ (New and Full Method, vol. i.
p. 15). Referring to the same subject, the pious
Richard Baxter had also observed, ‘ Few Christians
among us, for ought I find, have any better than the
Popish implicit faith in this point, nor any better
arguments than the Papists have to prove the
Scripture to be the word of Gei. They have
received it by tradition, Godly ministers and
Christians tell them so: it is impious to doubt
of it; therefore they believe it. ...... It is
strange to consider how we all abhor that piece of
' #P , a8 Most injurious to God of all the rest,
which resolves our faith into the authority of the
Church, and yet that we do content ourselves
with the same kind of faith, only with this dif-
ference—the Papists believe Scripture to be the
word of God, because their Church saith so; and
we, because our Church or our leaders say so... .
Many a thousand do profess Christianity, and
sealously hate the enemies thereof, upon the same
grounds, to the same end, and from the same cor-


APOCRYPHA.


rupt principles, as the Jews did hate and kill
Christ. It is the religion of the country, where
every man is reproached that believes otherwise.
«.... Had they been born and bred in the reli-
gion of Mahomet, they would have been as zea-
lous for him.’ (Saint’s Rest, p. 2.) ‘If the

uestion be,’ says Mr. Jones, ‘ why Barnabas’s
Epistle be rejected and Jude's received—why the
Guspel of Peter is excluded and the Epistle of
Peter admitted into the canon as the word of
God, &c., alas! how little shall we have given in
answer, unless what Baxter says, “ We believe
as the Church dves!’" Mr. Jones conceives that
testimony and tradition are the principal means
of ascertaining whether a book be canonical or
apocryphal. Inquiries of this kind, however, must
of necessity be confined to the few; and it is only
to those who have time and opportunity that the
foregoing observations can sily: The mass of
Christians, who bave neither time nor other means
of satisfying themselves, must confide, in ques-
tions of this kind, either in the judgment of the
learned, or the testimony at least, if not the au-
thority, of the Church; and it ought to be a
matter of much thankfulness to the private Chrie-
tian, that the researches of the most learned and
diligent inquirers have conspired, in respect to
the chief books of Scripture, in adding the weight
of their evidence to the testimony of the Church
Uaizens)

The following are the principal apocry
(or spurious) books of the dia Tutaient. which
have descended to our times. The greater
number of them can scarcely be considered as
properly belonging to the Apocrypha of the Old

estament, as they have been most probably
written since the Christian era, and not before the
second century :—Third and fourth Esdras, the
Book of Enoch, the apocryphal book of Elias the
Prophet, the third, fourth, and fifth books of Mac-
cabces (received by the Greek Church), the Ascen-
sion of Isaiah, the Assumption of Moses, with @
few others.

The best accounts of the apocryphal books will
be found in Fabricii Coder Pseudepigraphus V.T.
Hamburg and Leipzig, 1713 and 1741, and Codex
Apocryphus N. T.. Hamburg, 1713-1722; Aucta-
rium Codicis Apocryphi N. T. Fabriciant, edidit
And. Birch, Copenhagen, 1804. 4 New and Full
Method of Settling the Canon of the N.T., by the
Rev. Jeremiah Jones, Oxtord, 1726 —last edition,
Oxford, 1827. Du Pin, Prolegomena, Amst.1701,
and Canon of the Old and New Testaments, Lon-
don, 1700; and especially Codex Apocryphus
N.T., ¢ libris ineditis maximé Gallicanis, Ger-
manicis, et Italicis, collectus, recensitus, notisgue
et prolegomenis illustratus, opera et studio T. C.
Thilo, tom. i. Lips. 1832, 8vo.: the remaining two
volumes are not yet published. Vol. i. contains :
1. The history of Joseph the Carpenter, Arab. and
Lat. 2. The Gospel of the Infancy. 3. The
Protevangelion of James, and the Gospel of Tho-
mas the Israelite, Greek and Lat. 4. The Gos-
pel of the Nativity of Mary, and the History of
the Nativity of Mary and the Saviour, Lat. 5,
The Gospel of Marcion, collected by Dr. Hahn,
from ancient Greek MSS. 6. The Gospel of
Nicodemus, Gr. and Lat. 7. Apprehension and
Death of Pilate, Gr. 8. The mutilated and al-
tered Gospel of St. John, preserved in the archives
of the Templars of St. John of Jerusalem in Paris,


APOLLONIA.


with Griesbach’s text. 9. An Apocryphal Book of
the Apustle John. Lat. [Acts, Gospgzs, EpisTLxs,
and Rvziations, Spurious].—W. W.
APOLLONIA (‘AwoAAcvia), a city of Mace-
donia, in the province of Mygdonia (Plin. iv. 17),
situated between Amphipvlis and Thessalonica,
thirty Roman miles from the former, and thirty-
six from the latter (Itiner. Anton.) St. Paul
gassed through Amphipolis and Apollonia in his
way to Thessalonica (Acts xvii. 1).
APOLLONIUS, Three persons of this name
occur in the history of the Maccabees.—1. Apox-
lonivs, 8 general whom Antiochus Epiphanes
sent into Judea, and who took Veuslcns but
who was eventually defeated and slain by Judas
Maccabeus, n.c. 166 (1 Mace. iii. 10, 11).—
2 Apoionius, governor of Coele-Syria, and
general of Demetrius Nicanor, who was defeated
by Jonathan on behalf of Alexander Balas, n.c.
M8 (1 Macc. x. 69-76).—3. APoLLonius, one
of the governors left by Lysias in Judea, after
the treaty between the Jews and Antiochus
Enpator (2 Mace. xii. 2) [Maccanexs].
_ APOLLOS (AwoAAds), a Jew of Alexandria,
is described as a learned, or, as some understand
it, an eloquent man (avhp Adyios), well versed in
the Scriptures and the Jewish religion (Acts
Mili, 24), About a.p. 56 he came to Ephesus,
where, in the synagogues, ‘he spake boldly the
things of the Lord, knowing only the baptism
of John’ (ver. 25); by which we are probably
to understand that he knew and taught the
doctrine of @ Messiah, whose coming John had
announced, but knew not that Jesus was the
Christ. His fervour, however, attracted the
notice of Aquila and Priscilla, whom Paul had
let at Ephesus; and they instructed him in
this higher doctrine, which he thenceforth taught
openly, with great zeal and power (ver. 26).
Having heard from his new friends, who were
much attached to Paul, of that apostle’s pro-
ceedings in Achaia, and especially at Corinth,
he tesolved to go thither, and was encouraged in
this design by the brethren at Ephesus, who fur-
nished him with letters of introduction. On his
arrival there he was very useful in watering th
med which Paul had sown, and was instrumen’l
in gaining many new converts from Judaém.
There was perhaps no apostle or apostolica] man
who 0 much resembled Paul in attainments an
character as Apollos. dis immediate disciples
became so much attached to him, as well nigh
to bave produced a schism in the Church, some
waying, ‘I am of Paul;’ others, ‘J am of Apollos ee
ethers, ‘Iam of Cephas’ (1 Cor. iii. 4-7, 22). There
must, probably, have been some difference in their
mole of teaching to occasion this; and from the
Firt Epistle to the Corinthians it would appear
that Apollos was not prepared to go so far as
Paul in abandoning the figments of Judaism,
and insisted less on the (to the Jews) obnoxious
ition that the Gospel was open to the Gentiles.
ere was nothing, however, to prevent these two
eminent men from being perfectly united in the
rita uA Cieecan see and brotherhood.
08 that Paul was again at
Byheniis, ke wart thither to see him; and as he
‘as there when the first Epistle to the Corin-
thians was written (a.p. 59), there can be no doubt
that the apostle received from him his information
concerning the divisions in that church, which


APOSTLE. 179


he #0 foreibly reproves. It strongly Mustrates
the character of Apollos and Paul, that the
former, doubtless in disgust at those divisions
with which his name had been associated, de-
clined to return to Corinth; while the latter,
with generous confidence, urged him to do s0
(1 Cor. xvi. 12), Paul again mentions Apollos
kindly in Tit. iii. 13, and recommends him and
Zenas the lawyer to the attention of Titus
knowing that they designed to visit Crete, where
Titus then was. Jerome is of opinion ((m-
ment. in loc.) that he remained at Crete untl he
heard that the divisions at Corinth had been
healed by means of St. Paul's letter; and that
he then returned to that city, of which he after-
wards became bishop. This has an air of pro-
bability; and the authority on whieh it rests is
better than any we have for the efferent state-
ments which make him bishop of Duras, of Co-
lophon, of Iconium (in Phrygia’ oF of Casarea.

APOSTLE (Gr. Amdoroaon from dxooréaac,
to send forth). In Attic Geek the term is used
to denote a fleet, or naval armament. It occurs
only once in the Sept. (1 Kings xiv. 6), and
there, as uniformly in the New Testament, it sig-
nifies a person sent ly another, @ measenger.
It has been asserted tat the Jews were accus-
tomed to term the collector of the half-shekel,
which every Israelie paid annually to the Tem-
ple, an apostle; aid we have better authority for
asserting that thy used the word to denote one
who carried alovt encyclical letters from their
rulers, CEcunenius states that dwoordaAous Be
eicérs nai viv Gos éoriylov8alous dvoud (ew rods
éyxixdia -pdupara mapa trav dpxdvroy abray
dyaxopi(osévous, © It is even yeta custom among the
Jews to cal) those who carry about circular letters
from tlvir rulers by the name of apostles.’ To this
use ofzheterm Paul hasbeen supposed to refer (Gal.
i. 1)when he asserts that he was ‘an apostle, not
of men, neither by men'—an apostle, not like
those known among the Jews by that name, who
serived their authority and received their mission
from the chief priests or principal men of their
nation. ‘The import of the word is strongly
brought out in John xiii. 16, where it occurs along
with its correlate, ‘ The servant is not greater than
his Lord, neither he who ts sent (dxdorodos)
greater than he who sent him.’

The term is generally employed in the New
Testament as the descriptive appellation of a
comparatively small class of men, to whom Jesus
Christ entrusted the organization of his church
and the dissemination of his religion among man-
kind. At an early period of his ministry ‘he
ordained twelve’ of his disciples ‘that they should
be with him.’ ‘These he named apostles.’ Some
time afterwards ‘he gave to them power against
unclean spirits to cast them out, and to heal all
manner of disease ;’ ‘and he sent them to preach
the kingdom of God’ (Mark iit 14; Matt. x.
1-5; Mark vi. 7; Luke vi. 13; ix. 1). To them
he gave ‘the keys of the kingdom of God,’ and
constituted them princes over the spiritual Israel,
that ‘people whom God was to take from among
the Gratlles, for his name’ (Matt. xvi. 19; xviii.
18; xix. 28; Luke xxii. 30). Previously to hie
death he promised to them the Holy Spirit, to fit
them to be the founders and governors of the
Christian church (John xiv. 16, 17, 26; xv. 26,:
27; xvi. 7-15). After his seementee he so»

u


180 APOSTLE.


lemnly confirmed their call, saying, Ka8as dx-
doradné pe 6 Marhp, ndyo weurw tuas— As the
Father hath sent me, so send [ you;’ and gave
them a commission to ‘preach the gospel to every
creature’ (John xx. 21-23; Matt. xviii. 18-20).
After his ascension he, on the day of Pentecost,
communicated to them those supernatural gifts
which were necessary to the performance of the
high functions he had commissioned them to ex-
ercge ; and in the exercise of these gifts, they, in
the Gospel history and in their epistles, with the
Apocalypse, gave a complete view of the will of
their Master in reference to that new order of
things of which he was the author. They ‘had
the mind ¢f Christ.’ They spoke ‘the wisdom of
God in a mystery.” That mystery *God revealed
to them by hs Spirit,” and they spoke it ‘not in
words which taan'’s wisdom teacheth, but which
the Holy Ghost -eacheth.’ They were ‘ambassa-
dors for Christ,’ and besought men, ‘in Christ's
stead, to be reconcked to God.’ They authorita-
tively taught the doctrine and the law of their
Lord; they organize] churches, and required
them to ‘keep the tralitions,’ ¢.e. the doctrines
and ordinances delicerol to them’ (Acts ii.;
1 Cor, ii. 165 it. 7, 10, 13, 2 Cor. v. 203 1 Cor.
xi, 2). Of the twelve orginally ordained to
the apostleship, one, Judas Iscariot, ‘ fell from
it by transgression,’ and Matthias, ‘who had
companied? with the other Aposles ‘all the tine
that the Lord Jesus went out and in among
them,’ was by lot substituted in lis place (Acts
i. 17-26). Saul of Tarsus, afterwards termed
Paul, was also iniraculously added +o the num-
ber of these permanent rulers of the Christian
society (Acts ix.; xx. 45 xxvi. 10-18, 1 Tim.
i, 125 ii. 7; 2 Tim. i. 11).

The characteristic features of this highes. office
in the Christian church have been very accu-
rately delineated by M*Lean, in his Aposilic
Commession. *It was essential to their office—
{. That they should have seen the Lord, and bee
eye and ear witnesses of what they testified to the
world (John xv. 27). This is laid down as an
essential requisite in the choice.of one to succeed
Judas (Acts i. 21, 22). Paul is no exception
here ; for, speaking of those who saw Christ after
his resurrection, he adds, ‘and last of all he was
seen of me’ (1 Cor. xv. 8). And this he elsewhere
mentious as one of his apostolic qualitications :
‘Am I not an apostle? have I not seen the Lord?
(i Car. ix. 1). So that his ‘seeing that Just One
and hearing the word of his mouth’ was necessary
to his being ‘a witness of what he thus saw and
heard * (Acts xxii. 14, 15). 2. They must have
been immediately called and chosen to that oflice
by Christ himself. This was the case with every
one of them (Luke vi. 135 Gal. i. 1), Matthias
not excepted; for, as he had been a chosen dis-
ciple of Christ betore, a0 the Lord, by determining
the lot, declared his choice, and immediately
called him to the office of an apostle (Acts i. 24-
26). 3. Infallible inspiration was also essentially
necessary to that oflice (John xvi. 135 1 Cor. ii.
10; Gal. i. 11, 12). They had not only to ex-
plain the true sense and spirit of the Old Testa-
ment (Luke xxiv. 27; Acts xxvi. 22, 23; xxviii.
23), which were hid trom the Jewish doctors, but
also to give forth the New Testament revelation
to the world, which was to be the unalterable
standard of faith and practice in all succeeding


APOSTLE.


generations (1 Pet. i. 25; 1 John iv. 6). It was
therefore absolutely necessary that they should
be secured against all error and mistake, by the
unerring dictates of the spirit of truth. Accord-
ingly Christ promised and actually bestowed on
them the Spirit to ‘teach them all things,’ to
bring all things to their remembrance whatso-
ever he had said to them’ (John xiv. 26), to
‘guide them into all truth,’ and to ‘show them
things to come’ (Jom xvi. 13). Their word
therefore must be received, ‘not as the word of
men, but as it is in truth, the word of God’
(1 Thes. ii. 13), and as that whereby we are to
distinguish ‘the spirit of truth from the spirit of
error’ (1 John iy. 6). 4. Another apostolic qua-
lification was the power of working miracles
(Mark xvi. 20; Acts ii. 43), such as speaking
with divers tongues, curing the lame, faesling the
sick, raising the dead, discerning of spirits, con-
ferring these gifts upon others, &c. (1 Cor. xii.
8-11). ‘These were the credentials of their divine
mission. ‘Truly,’ says Paul, ‘the signs of an
apostle were wrought among you in all patience,
in signs and wonders and mighty deeds’ (2 Cor.
xii. 12). Miracles were necessary to confirm
their doctrine at its first publication, and to gain
credit to it in the world as a revelation from God,
and by these ‘God bare them witness’ (Heb ii.
4). 5. To these characteristics may be added
the wniversality of their mission. Their charge
was not confined to any particular visible church,
like that of ordinary pastors, but, being the oracles
of God to men, they had ‘the care of all the
churches" (2 Cor. xi. 28). They had a power w
settle their faith and order as a model to future
ages, to determine all controversies (Acts xvi. 4
and to exercise the rod of discipline upon all
offenders, whether pastors or fluck (1 Cor. v. 3-63
2 Cor. x. 8; xiii, 10).

It must be obvious, from this scriptural account
of the apostolical office, that the Apostles bad, in
the strict sense of the term, no successors, Their
qualifications were supernatural, and their work,
once performed, remains in the infallible record
vf the New Testament, for the advantage of the
Guurch and the world in all future ages. They
are the only authoritative teachers of Christian
doctiine and law. All official men in Christian
churéyes can legitimately claimn no higher place
than expounders of the doctrines and administrators
of the laws found in theirs writings. Few things
have ben more injurious to the cause of Chiris-
tianity than the assumption on the part of ordi-
nary office-bearers in the Church of the peculiar
pees of ‘the holy apostles of our Lord

esus.” Much that is said of the latter is not at
all applicable to the former; and much _ that
adnnts of being applied, can be so, in accordance
with truth, only in a very secondary and extenu-
ated sense.

It is the opinion of the leamed Suicer (The
saurus, art. ’Amdotodos) that the appellation
‘apostle’ is in the New Testament employed as @
general name tor Christian ministers or pastors,
who are ‘ sent by God, in a qualitied use of that
phrase, to preach the word of God. But this
opinion does not seem to rest on any sulid found-
ation. Itis true indeed that the word is used
in this loose sense by the Fathers, Thus we tind
Archippus, Philemon, Apphia, the seventy dis-
ciples (Luke x. 1-17), termed apostles; and even


APOSTLE.


Mary Magdalene is said yerdoas rois drooréAos
drécrodos, to become an apostle to the Apostles.
No satisfactory evidence, however, can be brought
forward of the term being thus used in the New
Testament. Andronicus and Junia (Rom. xvi. 7)
are indeed said to be éxlonpot év Trois droordAats,
‘of note among the Apostles ;’ but these words by
Bo means necessarily imply that these persons
were apostles ; they may, and probably do, signify
merely that they were persons well known and
much esteemed by the Apostles. The Zuvepyol,
the fellow-workers of the Apostles, are by Chrysus-
tom denominated LvvarderoAo.

The argument founded on 1 Cor. iv. 9, com-
pared with ver. 6, to prove that Apollos is termed
apostle, cannot bear a close examination. The
only instance in which it seems probable that the
word, as expressive of an office in the Christian
church, is applied to an individual whose call to
that ullice is nut made the subject of special nar-
Tation, is to be found in Acts xiv. 4, 14, where

abaa, as well as Paul, is termed an apwostle.

At the same time it is by no means abecluitely
certain that the term apostles, or messengers, does
Dot in this place refer rather to the mission of
Paul and Barnabas by the prophets and teachers
at Antioch, under the palee of the Holy Ghost
(Acts xiii. 1-4), than to that direct call to the
Christian apostleship which we know Panl re-
ceived, and which, if Barnabas had received, we
can scarcely persuade ourselves that no trace of so
mportant an event sliould have been found in the
sacred history, but a passing hint, which admits,
to say the least, of being plausibly accounted for
Mm another way. We know that on the occasion
referred to, ‘ the prophets and teachers, when they
had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on
Bumabas and Saul (&méAvoay), sent them away ;’
00 that, in the sense in which we will immediately
find the words occurring, they were dxdaroAo1—
of the prophets and teactiers. i
The word ‘apostle’ occurs once in the New Tes-
tament (Heb. iii. 1) as a descriptive designation
of Jesus Christ: ‘The apostle of our profession,’
Le. the apostle whom we profess or acknowledge.
The Jews were in the habit of applying the term


my, from nbvi, to send, to the person who pre-


sided over the synagozue, and directed all its
officers and affairs. The Church is represented as
‘the house or family of God,’ over which he had
placed, during the Jewish economy, Moseg, as
the superintendent,—over which he has placed,
onder the Christian economy, Christ Jesus. The
import of the term apostle, is—divinel y-commis-
sioned superintendent; and of the whole plsase,
‘the apostle of our profession, the divinely-com-
Miissioned superintendent, whom we Christians
acknowledge, in contradistinction to the divinely-
appointed superintendent Moses, whom the Jews
acknowledged.
In 2 Cor. viii. 23, we meet withthe phrase
éxéeroAos exxAnoiay, rendered in our version
tue messengers of the churches.’ Who these
apostles were, and why they received this name,
is obvious from the preceding context. The
churches of Macedonia had made a liberal con-
trilution for the relief of the impoverished and
ainiety ae of jue, and had not merely
Ne Apostle ‘to receive the gif! d
take on him the fellowship of ministering ae tke


APPEAL. 181


saints,’ but at his suggestion had appointed some
individuals to accompany him to Jeualen with
their alms. These ‘ apostles or messengers of the
churches" were those ‘ who were chosen of the
churches to travel with the Apostle with this grace
[gift], which was administered by him,’ to the
glory of their common Lord (2 Cor. viii. 1-4,19).
Theophylact explains the phrase thus : of dd ray
exxrAnoidy weupbevres kal xeipororndérres, ‘ those
sent and chosen by the churches.’ ’

With much the same meaning and reference
Epaphroditus (Phil. ii. 25) is termed dxdarodAos
—a messenger of the Philippian Church—having
been employed by them to carry pecuniary as-
sistance to the Apostle (Phil. iv. 14-18). Theo-
phylact’s exposition is as follows :—’AnéoroAoy
tuay—ry wap’ Sudy drocraddvta mpbs me—3e
abrod yap toay orelAavres aitg Ta mpds xpelay.

It is scareely worth while to remark that the
Creed, commonly called the The Apostles’, though
very ancient, has no claim to the name, except as
it contains apostolical doctrine. A full and satis-
factory account of it will be found in Lord King’s
History of the Apostles’ Creed, with Critical Ob-
servations on its several Articles. The Canons
and Constitutions, called apostolical, are gene-
rally admitted to be forgeries, probably of the fifth
century.

In the early ecclesiastical writers we find the
term 6 drdarodos, ‘ the Apostle,’ used as the de-
signation of a portion of the canonical books,
consisting chiefly of the Pauline Epistles. The
Psalter’ and § the Apostle’ are often mentioned
together. It is also not uncommon with these
writers to call Paul ‘The Apostle,’ xat’ eioxjv.—

.B


APPEAL. The right of appeal to superior
tribunals has generally been considered an essen-
tial concomitant of inferior judicatories. When,
from the paucity of the population or any other
cause, the subjects of litigation are few, justice is
usually administered by the first authority in the
state, from whose award no appeal can lie. But
when the multiplication of causes precludes the
continuance of this practice, and one or more
inferior courts take cognizance of the less im-
portant matters, the right of appeal to the superior
tribunal is allowed, with increasing restrictions
as, in the course of time, snbjects of litigation
multiply, and as the ple become weaned
from the notion that the administration of justice
is the proper function of the chief civil magis-
trate.

In the patriarchal times, as among the Be-
douins, the patriarch or head of the tribe, that
is to say, the Sheikn, administered justice; and
as there was no superior pawer, there could be no
appeal from his decisions. The only case of pro-
cedure ugainst a criminal which occurs during
the patriarchal period is that in which Judah
commanded the supposed adulterous Tamar to
be brought forth and buint (Gen, xxxviti, 24).
But here the woman was his daughter-in-law,
and the power which Judah exercised was that
which o man possessed over the females of his
own immediate family. If the case had been
between man and man, Judah could have given
no decision, and the matter would, without doubt,
have been referred to Jacob. . :

In the desert Moses at first judged all canses
himself; and when, finding his time and s|


unequal to this duty, he, at the suggestion of
Jethro, established a series of judicatories in
numerically ascending scale (Exod. xviii. 13-26),
he arranged that cases of difficulty should be
-eferred from the inferior to the superior tribunals,
and in the last instance to himself. Although not
distinctly stated, it appears from varivus circum-
stances that the clients had a right of appeal,
similar ta that which the courts had of reference.
‘When the prospective distribution into towns,
of the population which had hitherto remained
in one compact body, made other arrangements
pecessary, it was directed that there should bea
g.milar reference of diflicult cases to the metro-
politan court or chief magistrate (‘ the judge that
shall be in those days’) for the time being (Deut.
xvi. 18; xvii. 8-12), That there was a con-
current right of appeal, appears from the use
Absalom made of the delay of justice, which
arse from the great nuinber of cases that came
befure the king his father (2 Sam. xv. 2-4).
These were doubtless aypeal cases, according to
the above direction; and M. Salvador (Jns¢é-
tutions de Mo'se, ii. 53) is scarcely warranted in
deducing from this instance that the clients had
the power of bringing their cases directly to the
supreme tribunal.

Of the later practice, before and after the
time of Christ, we have some clearer knowledge
from Jo::phus and the Talmudists. It seems
that a man could carry his case by appeal
through all the inferior courts to the Grand San-
hedrim at Jerusalem, whose decision was in the
highest degree absolute and final. The Jews
themselves trace the origin of these later usages
up to the time of Moses: they were at all events
based on early principles, and therefore reflect
back some light upon the intimations respecting
the right of appeal which we find in the sacred
bouks (Mishna, de Synedr. ch. x.; Talm. Hieros.
ch. xvili.; Talm. Bab. ch. iii. and x.; Maimon.
de Synedr. ch. x.; Selden, de Synedr. b. iii.
ch. 10; Lewis, Origines Hebree, b. i. c. 6; Pas-
toret, Législution des H¢ébreuz, ch. x.; Salvador,
Hist. des Institutions de Moise, liv. iv. ch. 2).

The most remarkable case of appeal in the
New Testament belongs to another class. It is
the celebrated appeal of St. Paul from the tri-
bunal of the Roman procurator Festus to that of
the emperor; in consequence of which he was
sent as a prisoner to Rome (Acts xxv. 10, 11).
Such an appeal having been once lodged, the go-
vernor had nothing more to do with the case: he
could not even dismiss it, although he might be
satisfied that the matter was frivolous, and not
worth forwarding to Rome. Accordingly, when
Paul was again heard by Festus and king
Agrippa (merely to obtain materials for a report
to the emperor), it was adinittel that the apostle
might have been liberated if he had not appealed
to Cesar (Acts xxvi. 32). Paul might therefore
seem to have taken a false step in the matter, did
we not consider the important consequences
which resulted from his visit to Rome.

It may easily be seen that a right of ap-
peal which, like this, involved a long and ex-
pensive journey, was by no means frequently
resorted to. In lodging his appeal Paul exercised
one of the high privileges of Roman citizenship
which belonged to him by birth (Acts xxii. 28).
How the rights of Roman citizenship might be


AQUILA.


uired by a Jewish native of Cilicia will be
explained elsewhere [Crrizensuip]. The right
of appeal connected with that privilege originated
in De Valerian, Porcian, and Sempronian lawa,
by which it was enacted that if any magistrate
should order flagellation or death to be inflicted
upon ; Roman citizen, the accused igh
appeal to the judgment of the people, and
senile he should See ne at the hands
of the magistrate until the people had judged his
cause. But what was Si ae the prerogative
of the people had in Paul's time become that of
the emperur, and appeal therefore was made to
him. Hence Pliny (Ep. x. 97) mentions that he
had sent to Rome some Christians, who were
Roman citizens, and had appealed unto Caesar.
This privilege could not be disallowed by any
magistrate to any person whom the law entitled
to it. Indeed, very heavy penalties were attached
to any refusal to grant it, or to furnish the party
with facilities for going to Rome.

APPHIA (‘Argia), the name of a woman
(Philemon 2) who is supposed by Chrysostom and
Theodoret to have been the wife of Philemon.

APPII-FORUM (Arsfouv odpov), a market-
town in Italy, 43 Roman miles from Rome (Jtiner.
Anton. p. 107), on the great road (via Appia)
from Rome to Brundusium, constructed by
Appius Claudius. The remains of an ancient
town, supposed to be Appii-Forum, are stil] } re-
served at a place called Casarillo di Santa Maria,
on the border of the Pontine marshes. Its vi-
cinity to the marshes accounts for the badness of
the water, as mentioned by Horace (Sat. i. 5, 7).
When St. Paul was taken to Italy, some of the
Christians of Rome, being apprised of his approach,
journeyed to meet him as far as ‘ Appiit-Forum
and the Three Taverns’ (&xpis Awmfov pdpou nat
Tpidv TaBepray, Acts xxviii.15). The ‘Three Ta-
verns' were eight or ten miles nearer to Rome than
Appii-Forum. The probability is that some of
the Christians remained at the ‘Three Taverns,’
where it was known the advancing party would
rest, while some others went on as far as Appii-
Forum to meet Paul on the road. The ‘Three
Taverns’ was certainly a place for rest and re-
freshment (Cic. ad Attic. ii. 11, 13), perhaps on
account of the bad water at Appii-Forum. — It
must be understood that Tres Taberne was, in
fact. the name of a town ; for in the time of Con-
stantine, Felix, bishop of Tres Taberna, was one
of the nineteen bishops who were appointed to
decide the controversy between Dunatus and
Cecilianus ( Optat. de Schism. Donat., |. i. p. 26).
As to the taberne themselves, fiom which the
place took its name, it is probable that they
were shops for the sale of all kinds of refresh-
ments, rather than inns or places of entertainment
for travellers. The ruins of this place still exist
under the same name.

APPLE, APPLE-TREE. [Tarruacn.]

APPLES OF SODOM. [Sopvom, App1.xs ee

AQUILA (Axvaas), a Jew with whom Pa
became acquainted on his first visit to Corinth; a
native of Pontus, and by occupation a tent-maker.
He and his wife Priscilla had been obliged to
leave Rome in consequence of an edict issued
by the Emperor Claudius, by which all Jews
were banished from Rome (Judeos, tmpulsore
Chresto, assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit :—
Sueton. Claud. c. 25; Neander’s History of the


@ah eR PR See esaeernnaeaeenn


R&S


wv a8


 & ' ere eg hed owe ud r wae L A hin a


AQUILA. ARABAH, 168


Planting of the Christian Cherch, vol. i. s before.the Prefect Rusti ‘Where
Mer ee of Habis pert amenble? wou cooleacte; said the be
fii.) This decree was made not by the senate, Justin replied, Wherever it suits each one’s
but the emperor, and lasted only during his life, ference and ability: you take for granted that 9s
if even 10 long. Whether Aquila and Priscilla all meet in the same place ; but ny not for
were at that time converts to the Christian faith the God of the Christians is not coeamaehibed
cannot be paitively determined ; Luke's expres- place, but, being invisible, fills heaven and
tion, speciAbey abrots, Acts xviii. 2, as Kuinoel and is everywhere worshipped and glorified by
observes, rather implies that Paul sought their the faithful. Rusticus then said: Tell me where
pers on grounds ean than for the pur- you meet together, or in what place you collect
ee eis tee egg et ae oa Marin Uw po ches
cw : ad
ey Christians, Paul's ‘ joining himself to of meeting besides this (xal ob solo: pieves
is highly probable; while, if they were still - wd ovyéAevow), and if any one wished to come
wires lm, they would have tenet me I commerce him the nad of
rs intimacy with the Apostle. At all events, they call ry hae Pe dior tes pickets
ites Soest ea a Gases Sierra pe aap
panied him to Ephesus, and. meeting Gere ait Justind Masters Ona d oe Laie
Apt, who ‘knew only the baptism of ‘John, 586, Parisiis, 1742). sai rig
sa te areccte anes nan Mae
they appear to have been zealous promoters of the and Priscill a I fe ne eile Cairne
Christian cause. Paul styles them his ‘helpers where he is enced Bishop of Hersclaa, = says
Sepreend and intimates that they had ex- (Calmet).—J. E. R. 2
emselyes to imminent danger on hi - 7 :
Drak (cle tate Ge aay lite laid mht AR CW; Sept. THp), the capital city of the
their own necks,"*Rom. xvi. 3, 4), though of Moabites (Num. xxi. 28; Deut. ii. 9, 18, 29),
the time and place of this transaction we have near the river Amon (Deut. ii. 18, 24; Num.
to information. When Paul wrote his epistle xxi, 13-15). Jt appears te nave emi yee
tp the Romans they were at Rome; but some by King Sihon (Num. xxi. 28), and Isaiah, in
year after they returned to Ephesus, for Paul describing the future calamities of the Moabites,
wns salutations to them in his Second Epistle to says,‘ In the night Ar of Moab is laid waste
Timothy (2 Tim. iv. 19; Lardner's Credibility, and brought to silence’ (Isa. xv. 1). In his
patii.ch. 11). Their occupation as tent-makers comment on, this. pastage, Jerome states that in
pobably rendered it necessary for them to keep a his youth there was a great earthquake, by which
number of workmen constantly resident in their Ar was destroyed in the vight-time. This he
family, and to these (to such of them at least as evidently regards as a fulfilment of the ice
ae Chctian Waitiyieay nefee hopes, Onan Mca ered DAN or dio cier
mustable expression, the Church that is in their mle Se name of the city
, Thy Kar’ olkoy aire rane ea
hee oh er aie sires, Sacra (Ce hintiy wana cols Ballance abies
ch 11}, Origen’s explanation of these wordscie and, to distinguish it from Rabbath of Ammon,
very similar: * Magna enim gratia in hospitali- Rabbath-Moab. Ptolemy calls it Rabmathon ;
tats officio non solum apud Deum, sed et apnd Steph. Byzantinus, Rabathmoma ; and Abulfeda
Liines “hivenituc, “(Quis Saeaent tes quoniam (Tab. Syr., p. 90), Rabbath, and also Mab, The
ten sclum in voluntate et proposito dominorum, site still bears the name of Rabbah. The i oe has
wed et grato ac fideli constitit ministerio famu- been visited ane desenlet hy ppurcktards,
lorum, idcirco omnes qui ministerium istud cum Legh, Macmicheel, and Irby and angle: at
ipris fideliter adimplebant, domesticam eorum is about 17 miles east of the Dead Sea, 10 miles
nominavit Ecclesiam’ (In Ep. ad Rom. Com- south of the Arnon (Modjeb), and about the same
ment. lib. x.; Opera, t. vii. i: 431, ed. Berol distance north of Kerek, “The ruins of Rabbah
1837). ? . sc oe on KS low hill, he Lipase the
Dr. Neander su that asAqui whole plain. They present nothing o' interest
tequire extensive a for Sa ah except two old Roman temples ud pre fa07
be, perbape, set apart one room for the use of a Irby and Mangles ( Letters, p. 457) remark, with
section of the Church in whatever place he fixed surprise, that the whole circuit of the town does
his residence, and that as his superior Chris- not seem to have exceeded a mile. Burckhardt
tian knowledge and piety qualified him for the “Y% * half an hour in circuit,’ and that no trace
office of a 88donados, he gave religious instruc- ot wallescoult foand : but it is obvious from
tion to this small assembly. The salutations the descriptions that the city whose ruins they
to individuals which follow the expression in saw was & comparatively modem town, less
Ron. xvi. 5, show that’ they were nut referred to important and extensive than the ancient me-
in it, and are quite inconsistent with the supposi- tropolis of Moab.
= that the whole church met in Aquila’s house. ARABAH (i172; Sept. “Apafa), a Hebrew
o is it Pee te Se lene body of word, signifying in general a desert plain, or
retina syns would alter their steppe. In the Authorized Version it is trans-
pninent critic Cin pales a's return. The same lated * the plain,’ but in the original it appears
the can ths pills rd as an illustration of to be supplied with the article on purpose, as
—— ination of Justin Martyr proper name (NI"Yi1 ba-Arabab, the Arabeb),


184 ARABIA.


of the great plain or valley in its whole extent,
which is partly occupied by the Jordan and its
Jakes, and is prolonged from the Dead Sea to the
Elanitic Gulf. The name has come down to
the present day in the same furm in Arabic,


el-Arabah (4) ,9)\); but it is now restricted to


the part between the lake and the gulf. The
more extended application of the name by the
Hebrews is successfully traced by Professor Robin-
son from Gesenius: ‘ In connection with the Red
Sea and Elath’ (Deut. i. 1; ii. 8). ‘As extend-
ing to the lake of Tiberias ’ (Josh. xii. 3; 2 Sam.
iv. 7; 2 Kings xxv. 4). ‘Sea of the Arabah, the
Salt Sea’ (Josh. iii, 16; xii. 3; Deut. iv. 49),
©The arboth (plains) of Jericho’ (Josh. v. 10;
2 Kings xxv. 5). ‘Plains (arboth) of Moab,’


4. ¢. opposite Jericho, probably pastured by the

Moalitcs; though it sathin their jaime tert
Deut. xxiv. 1, 8; Num. xxii. 1) (Arasia;
onpAN, VALLEY OF].


ARABIA, an extensive region occupying the
south-western extremity of Asia, between 12° 45/
and 314” N. lat., and 32}° and 60° E. tong. from
Greenwich; having on the W. the Isthmus of
Suez and the Red Sea (called from it the Arabian
Gulf), which separate it from Africa; on the S.
the Indian Ocean; and on the E. the Persian
Gulf and the Euphrates. The boundary to the
north has never been well defined, for in that di-
rection it spreads out into interminable deserts,
which meet those of Palestine and Syria on the
west, and those of Irak-Arabi (i. e. Babylonia)
and Me:opotamia on the east; and hence some

rapbers include that entire wilderness in
Arabie The form of the peninsula is that of a
trapezoid, whose superficial area is estimated at
four times the extent of France. It is one of the
few countries of the south where the descendants
of the aboriginal inhabitants have neither been
extirpated nor expelled by northern invaders.


ARABIA.


They have not only retained possession of their
ancestral homes, tat have sent forth colonies to
all the adjacent regions, and even to more distant
lands, both in Africa and Asia. ‘There is no
people,’ says Ritter (Erdkunde, th. ii. p. 172),
‘who are less circumscribed to the territory
usually assigned to them than the Arabs; their
range outstrips geographical boundaries in all
directions.’

With the history of no country save that of
Palestine are there connected so many hallowed
and im: ive associations as with that of Arabia.
Here lived and suffered the holy patriarch Job;


_ here Moses, when ‘a sane oul epee ae
i


the burning, unconsuming bush; here Elijah found
shelter from the rage of persecution; here was the
scene of all the marvellous displays of divine

wer and mercy that followed the deliverance of
Terael from the Egyptian yoke, and accompanied
their journeyings to the Promised Land; and
here Jehovah manifested himself in visible glory
to his people. From the influence of these asso-
ciations, combined with its proximity to Palestine,
and the close affinity in blood, manners, and
customs between the northern portion of its in-
habitants and the Jews, Arabia is a region of
culiar interest to the student of the Bible; and it
is chiefly in its relation to subjects of Bible study
that we are now to consider it. It was well re-
marked by Burckhardt (who knew Arab life and
character better than any other European traveller
that has yet appeared) that ‘the sacred historian
of the children of Israel will never be thoroughly
understood, so long as we are not minutely ac-
quainted with everything relating to the Arab
Bedouins and the countries in which they move
and pasture.’

In early times the Hebrews included a part of
what we call Arabia among the countries they
vaguely designated as D°) Kedem, ‘the East,’
the inhabitants being num among the 33
Dip Beni-Kedem, ‘Sons of the East,’ &. e.
Orientals. But there is no evidence to show (as
is asserted by Winer, Rosenmiiller, and other
Bible-geographers) that these phrases are ever ap-
plied to the whole of the country known to us as
Arabia. They appear to have been commonly
used in sree ing of those parts which lay due
east of Palestine, or on the north-east and south-
east ; though occasionally they do seem to point
to tracts which lay indeed to the south and south-
west of that country, but to the east and south-
east of Egypt. Hence Joseph Mede (who is
followed by Bellermann, Handbuch d. Bib. Li-
terat. th. iii. p. 220) is of opinion that the phrase-
ology took its rise at the period when the Israelites
were in Egypt, and was retained by them as a
mode of speech after they were settled in Canaan.
That conjecture would, doubtless, considerably
extend the meaning of the term; yet even then it
could scarcely embrace the extreme south of
Arabia, a queen in which (on the supposition of
Yemen being identical with Sheba) is, in the
New Testament, styled not ‘a queen of the
East,’ but Baolaicoa Nérov, ‘a queen of the
South.’ Accordingly we find that whenever the
expression Aedem has obviously a reference to
Arabia, it invariably points to its northern divi-
sion only. Thus in Gen. xxv. 6, Abraham is said
to have sent away the sons of Hagar and Keturah
to the Lrets-Kedem—Kedemah, i. «. the Kaa


ARABIA.


country, eastward; and none of them, so far as
we know, were located in peninsular Arabia; for
the story which represents Ishmael as settling at
Mecca is an unsupported native tradition. The
Patriarch Jub is described (Job i, 3) as ‘the
greatest of all the men of the east,’ and though
opinions differ as to the precise locality of the land
of Uz, all are agreed that it was in some part of
Arabia, but certainly not in Arabia Felix. In
the Book of Judges (vi. 3; vii. 12; viii. 10)
among the allies of the Midianites and Ama-
lekites (tribes of the north) are mentioned the
* Beni-Kedem,’ which Josephus translates by
Apafas. the Arabs. In Isa. xi. 14, the parallelism
Fequires that by ‘sons of the east’ we understand
the Nomades of Desert Arabia, as corresponding
to the Philistines ‘on the west ;’ and with these
ar conjoined the Edomites, Moabites, and Am-
monites, who were all northern Arabians, ‘The
command was given (Jer. xlix. 28) to the Baby-.
lonians ‘to smite the Beni-Kedem,’ who are there
clased with the Kedarenes, descendants of Ish-
mael (comp. I Kings iv. 30). In more modern
times a name of similar import was applied to
the Arabs generally ; they were called Saracens
(Sharakiyun, 4. e. Orientals) from the word shark,
‘the east,’ whence also is derived the term sirocco,
the east wind. The name of Saracens came into
use in the west in a vague and undefined sense
after the Roman conquest of Palestine, but does
Dot sem to have been adopted as a general desig-
Ration till about the eighth century. It is to be
remarked here that though in Scripture Keqem
must commonly denotes Northern bia, it is
also used of countries faither east, e.g. of the
Rative country of Abraham (Isa. xli. 2; comp.
Gen. xxix. 1), of Balaam (Num. xxiii. 7), and
even of Cyrus (Isa. xlvi. 11); and, therefore,
though the Magi who came te Jerusalem (Matt.
ii. 1} were dd dvaroAGy, ‘ from the east,’ it does
not thence follow that they were natives of
Arabia.


We find the name AY (©,) Arab, first


beginning to occur about the time of Solomon.
It designated a portion of the country, an in-
habitant being called Arabi, an Arabian (Isa. xiii.
2), or in later Hebrew, Arbi (Neh. ii. 19), the
plural of which was Arbim (2 Chr. xxi. 16), or
Arbiim (Arabians) (2 Chr. xvii. 11). In some
places these names seem to be given to the No-
madic tribes generally (Isa. xiii. 20; Jer. iii, 2)
and their country (Isa. xxi. 13). The kings of
Arabia from whom Solemon (2 Chr. ix. 14) and
Jeosaphat (2 Chr. xvii. 11) received gifts were,
pahally, Bedouin chiefs; though in the place
parallel to the former text (1 Kings x. 15), instead
of Arab we find Ereb, rendered in Jer. xxv. 20,
2, ‘mingled people,’ but which Gesenius, fol-
lowing the Chaldee, understands to mean ‘ fureign
allies." It is to be remarked, however, that in
all the passages where the word Arad occurs it
designates only a small portion of the territory
known to us as Arabia. Thus in the account
given by Evekiel (xxvii. 21) of the Arabian tribes
that traded with Tyre, mention is specially made
of Arab (comp. Jer. xxv. 24). In 2 Chr. xxi.
16; xxii. 1: xxvi. 7; Neh. ‘iv. 7, we find the

Arabians classed with the Philistines, the Ethi-
Opians (i. e. the Asiatic Cushites, of whom they

fare said to have been neighbours), the Mehunims,


ARABIA. 185


the Ammonites, and Ashdodites. At what period
this name Arad was extended to the whole region
it is impossible to ascertain. From it the Greeks
formed the word ’Apafia, which occurs twice in
the New Testament; in Gal. i. 17, in reference
probably to the tract adjacent to Damascene
Syria, and in Gal. iv. 25, in reference to the
peninsula of Mount Sinai. Among the strangers
assembled at Jerusalem at the Pentecost there
were “ApaBes, Arabs (Acts ii. 11), the singulax
being “Apay.

As to the etymology of the name Arab various
opinions have been expressed. Hezel (Bib. Real
Lex.) and Bellermann (Handbuch d. Bib. Liter.
th. iil, p. 219) absurdly derive it from a trans-
position of letters in the name of Eber, the father
of Joktan ; Pococke follows the native writers in
thinking the name was taken frum Araba, a dis-
trict of Yemen, so called from Yarab, Joktan’s
son ; some suppose that as this country was called
by the Taran tes Kedem, ‘the east,’ so by the
Shemitic tribes who dwelt beyond the Euphrates
it was termed Arad in the sense of ‘the west;’
while others derive it frum the same word in the
sense of ‘mixed people,’ or ‘merchants.’ But dis-
missing these conjectures as groundless and unsa-
tisfactory, the most obvious etymology of the name
is from MIW Arabah, a steppe, i.e. a desert
plain or wilderness. That was, in point of fact,
the name given by the ancient Hebrews to the
tract of country extending northward from Elath,
on the Arabian Gulf, to the Dead Sea (Deut. i. 1b
ii. 8), and even as far as the Lake of Tiberias
(Josh. xii. 3). It was called Ma-Arabah, com
monly rendered in our version by ‘the piu’
(hence the Dead Sea was styled the ‘sea of the
Arabah,’ Josh. iii. 16); and it included tie
plains (Arboth) of Jericho and Moab aa ve
10; Deut. xxxiv. 1, 6). In the list of the cities
of Judah contained in the book of Joshua we find
(xy. 61), ‘in the wilderness, Beth-Arabah,’ in the
Hebrew AAW MA, #.¢. * the house of the plain.*
It had been mentivned at v. 6, as on the nurthem
borders; and hence, at xviii. 22, it appears also
asa city of Benjamin, one of whose boundaries,
it is said at v. 18, ‘passed over against [the
Arabah northward, and went down into [the
Arabah.’ Now it is a remarkable circumstance
that the southern part of this great valley is still
known by the name of Wady-el’Arabah, and
there is no improbability in the conjecture that
this designation, which was applied at sv early a
period as the days of Moses to one particular dis-
trict, was gradually extended to the entire region.
No designaticn, indeed, could be more compre-
hensive or correct; for, looking to Arabia as a
whole, it may fitly be described as one vast desert
of arid and barren plains, intersected by chains
of rocky mountains, where the oases, or ‘spots of
living green’ (probably a corruption of the Arabic
word wady, a valley or seaticante exist but in
a very small proportion to the sterilitv and deso-
lation which reign around.

The modern name, Jeshirat-el-Arab, i.e. ‘the
peninsula of the Arabs,’ applies to the southern
part of the region only. Another native appella-
tion is Beled-cl-Arab, i.e. ‘the land of the Arabs.’
the Persians and Turks call it Arabistin. Mr.
Lane informs us that in Egypt the term Arad is
now generally limited to the Bedawees, or people
of the desert; but formerly it was used to desig-


196 ARABIA,


nate the le and villagers of Arabian
origin, while those of the desert were called Aarab
or Aarabees : the former now call themselves Owo-
Wad-el-Arab, or sons of the Arabs.

The early Greek geographers, such as Erato-
sthenes and Strabo, mention only two divisions of
this vast region, Happy and Desert Arabia.
But after the city of Petra, in Idumma, had be-
come celebrated as the metropolis of a commercial

le, the Nabathmwans, it gave name to a third
division, viz. Arabia Petrea (improperly trans-
lated Stony Arabia); and this threefold division,
which first occurs in the geographer Ptolemy,
who flourished in the second century, has obtained
throughout Europe ever since. It is unknown,
however, to native or other Eastern geographers,
who reckon Arabia Deserta as chiefly belonging
to Syria and to Irak-Arabi, or Babylonia, while
they include a great part of what we call Arabia
Petrza in Egy .

1. Amana Feurx (in Gr. *ApaBla 4 Ebdaipor,
the Arabia Eudemon of Pliny), i. e. Happy
Arabia. The name has commonly been sup-
posed to owe its origin to the variety and richness
of the natural productions of this portionef the
country, compared with those of the other two
divisions, Sume, however, regard the epithet
‘happy’ as a translation of its Arabic nume


wt Yemen, which, though primarily denot-


ing the land of the right hand, or south,* aleo
bears the secondary sense of ‘happy, prosperous,”
This part of Arabia lies between the Red Sea on
the west and the Persian Gulf on the east, the
boundary to the north being an imaginary line
drawn between their respective northern extremi-
ties, Akaba and Basra or Bussora. It thus em-
braces by far the greater portion of the country
known to us as Arabia, which, however, is very
much a terra incognita; for the accessible dis-
tricts have been but imperfectly explored, and
but little of the interior has been as yet visited by
any European traveller.

Arabia may be described generally as an ele-
vated table-land, the mountain ranges of which
are by some regarded asa continuation of those
of Syria, but Ritter (Erdkunde, th. i. p. 172)
views them as forming a distinct and independent

4, peculiar to the country. In Arabia
Felix the ridges, which are very high in the inte-
tior, slope gently on the east towards the Persian
Gulf, and on the north-east towards the vast
plains of the desert. On the west the declivities
are steeper, and on the north-west the chains are
connected with those of Arabia Petra. Com-
mencing our survey at the north end of the Red
Sea, the first province which lies along its shore is
the Hedjaz, which Niebuhr and others reckon as
-belonging to Arabia Petra, but which the editor
of Burckhardt's Travels in Arabia has shown to
belong properly to Arabia Felix. This was the
cradle of Mohammedan superstition, containing
both Mecca, where the prophet was born, and


* This phraseology may have originated in the
worship of the rising sun at the Kaaba, or ancient
temple of Mecca, when the worshipper hud the
east before him, the west behind him, the south
on his right, and the north on his deft: hence
Syria is called Esh-Sham, the left, Yet the He-
brews had the same idiom.


ARABIA,


Medina, where he was buried; and hence it be
came the Holy Land of the Moslem, whither they
resort in pilgrimage from all parts of the East,
It is on the whole a barren tract, consisting
chiefly of rugged mountains and sandy plains.
Still more unproductive, however, is the long,
flat, dreary belt, of varying width, called Te-
hdma, which runs along the coast to the south of
Hedjaz, and was at no distant period covered by
the sea. But next to this comes Yemen (the


name of a particular province, as well as of the |


whole country), the true Arabia Felix of the
ancients, ‘ Araby the Blest’ of modern poets, and
doubtless the finest portion of the peninsula. Yet
if it be distinguished for fertility and beauty, it
is chiefly in the way of contrast, for it is far from
coming up to the expectations which travellers
had formed of it. Here is Sanaa (supposed to be
the Uzat of Scripture), the seat of an imaum;
Mareb, which some identify with Sheba ; Mocha,
the chief mart for coffee; and Aden, a place
rapidly increasing in importance since taken
signees of by Britain, with a view tu secure
ner navigation of the Red Sea. Tuming from
the west to the south coast of the peninsula, we
Next come to the extensive province of Hhadra-
maut (the Hazarmaveth of the Bible), a regiun
not unlike Yemen in its general features, with
the exception of the tracts called Mahliah and
Sahar, which are dreary deserts. The south-east
corner of the peninsula, between Hhadramaut
and the Persian Gulf, is occupied by the im-
ache district of Oman, which has recently

cbme better known to us than most other parts
of Arabia Felix by the travels und researches of
Lieut. Wellsted (Z'ravels in Arabia, London,
1838, 2 vols. 8vo.). Oman bas been in all ages
famous for its trade; and the present imaum of
Muscat, a politic and enterprising prince, has
greatly extended it, and thereby increased and
consolidated his own power by forming commer-
cial alliances with Great Britain, the United
States, and other foreign nations. Along the
Persian Gulf northward stretches the province of
Lahsa, or rather El Hassa, to which belong the
Bahrein Islands, famous for their pearls. The
districts we have enumerated all lie along the
coasts, but beyund them in the south stretches the
vast desert of Akhal, or Roba-el-Khali, ¢. e. ‘ the
empty abode,’ a desolate ant dreary unexplored
waste of sand. To the north of this extends the
great central province of Nedsched or Nejd.
Ritter regards it as forming neatly a half of the
entire peninsula. It may be described as having
been the great officina gentium of the south, as
were Scandinavia and Tartary of the north; for
it is the region whence there issued at different
periods those countless hordes of Arabs which
overran a great part of Asia and Africa. Here
too was the origin and the seat of the Wahabees
(so formidable until subdued in 1818 by Mehemet
Ali, pasha of Egypt), their chief town being
Dereyeh.

The geological structure and mineralogical
productions of this part of Arabia are in a great
Measure unknown. In the mountains about
Mecca and Medina the predominant rocks are of
grey and red granite, porphyry, aud limestone,
This is also the case in the great chain that runs
southward towards Maskat ; only that in the ridge
that rises behind the Tehama there is found


hg st


EES eee ee, ae


nae


ARABIA,


echistus and basalt instead of granite. Traces of
volcanic action may be perceived around Me-
dina, as also at Aden and in many other parts of
the peninsula. Hot-springs are of frequent oc-
carrelice on the Hadjee or pilgrim road to Mecca.
The ancients believed that Arabia yielded both
gold and precious stones, ut Niebuhr doubts if
this ever was the case. The most valuable ore
found now is the lead of Oman: what is called
the Mocha stone is a species of agate that comes
from India. The native iron is coarse and brittle;
at Lobeia and elsewhere there are hills of fossil
salt. The botany of Yemen was investigated by
Forskil, one of the fellow-travellers of Niebuhr.
Arabia Felix has always been famous for frank-
Incense, myrrh, aloes, balsam, gums, cassia, &c. ;
bat it is doubtful whether the last-mentioned and
other articles su to be indigenous were not
imported from India. Here are found all the
fruits of temperate and warm climates, among
which the date, the fruit of the palm-tree, is the
most common, and is, along with the species of
gain called dhourra, the staple article of food.
Bat the most valuable vegetable production is
coffee (Arab. kahweh, an old term for wine, the
fit being called dunn); for Yemen, if not its
Rative country, is the Aabitat where it has
Teached the greatest state of perfection. Culti-
vation here is not confined to the plains, but is
carried up the sides of the mountains, which are
laid out in terraces and supplied with water by
means of artificial reservoirs. In the animal
kingdom Arabia possesses, in common with the
adjacent regions, the camel (the ‘living ship of
the desert’), panthers, lynxes, hyznas, jackals,
gazelles, asses (wild and tame), monkeys, &c.
Bat the glory of Arabia is its horse. As in no
other country is that animal so much esteemed,
so in no other are its noble qualities of swiftness,
endurance, temper, attachment to man, so finel
developed. Of the insect tribe:, the locust, bo
from its numbers and its destructiveness, is the
most formidable scourge to vegetation. The
Arabian seas swarm with fish, sea-fowl, and
thelis; coral abounds in the Red Sea, and pearls
in the Persian Gulf.
2 Anapia Deserta, called by the Greeks
Anvins ApaBla, or % “Epnuos ‘Apaple, and by
the Arabs OLS! EL-Badiah, i.e. the Desert.


This takes in that ion of the country which
lies north of Arabia Felix, and is bounded on the
Borth-east by the Euphrates, on the north-west by
Syria, and on the west by Palestine and Arabia
Petrea. The Arabs divide this ‘ great wilderness’
into three parts, so called from their proximity to
the respective countries, viz. Badiah esh Sham
@yria), Badiak el Jeshirah (the peninsula, ¢. e.
Arabia), and Badiah et Irak (Babylonia). From
this word Badiah comes the name of the nomadic
tribes hy whom it is traversed, viz. Bedawees
(better known to us by the French corruption of
Bedouins), who are not, however, confined to this
portion of Arabia, but range throughout the entire
Fegion. So far as it has yet been explored, Desert
Arabia appears to be one continuous, elevated,
mterminable steppe, occasionally intersected by
Tanges of hills. Sand and salt are the chief ele-
ments of the soil, which in many places is entirely
bare, but elsewhere yields stinted and thorny
or thinlyscattered saline plants. ‘That


ARABIA. 107


part of the wilderness called E? Hhammad lies
on the Syrian frontier, extending from the Hauran
to the Euphrates, and is one immense dead and
dreary level, very scantily supplied with water,
except near the banks of the river, where the fields
are irrigated by wheels and other artificial con-
trivances.

The sky in these deserts is generally cloudless,
but the burning heat of the sun is moderated by
cooling winds, which, however, raise fearful
tempests of sand and dust. Here, too, as in
other regions of the East, occasionally prevails
the burning, suffocating south-east wind, called
by the Arabs El Hharur (the Hot), but more
commonly Samim, and by the Turks Samyelé
(both words meaning ‘the Poisonous’), the effects
of which, however, have by some travellers been
greatly exaggerated. This is probably ‘ the east
wind’ and the ‘wind from the desert’ spoken of
in Scripture. Another phenomenon, which is
not peculiar, indeed, to Desert Arabia, but is
seen there in greatest frequency and perfection,
is what the French call the mirage, the delusive
appearance of an expanse of water, created by
the @mulous, undulatury movement of the va-
pours raised by the excessive heat of a meridian
sun. It is called in Arabic serad, and is no
doubt the Hebrew sarad of Isa. xxxv. 7, which
our translators have rendered ‘the parched ground.’

3. Arabia Perraa (Gr. Merpala) appears to
have derived its name from its chief town Petra
(se. a rock), in Heb. Selah; although (as is re-
marked by Burckhardt) the epithet is also appro-
priate on account of the rocky mountains and
stony plains which compose its surface. It em-
braces all the north-western portion of the coun-
try; being bounded on the east by Desert and
Maury Arabia (for we have included the Hedjaz
in the latter), on the north by Palestine and the
Mediterranean, on the west by Egypt, and on the
south by the Red Sea. This division of Arabia
has been of late years visited by a great man
travellers from Europe, and is consequently mu:
better known than the other portions of the coun-
try. Confining ourselves at present to a general
outline, we refer for details to the articles Sinaz,
Exopus, Epom, Moar, &c. Beginning at the
northern frontier, there meets the elevated plain
of Belka, to the east of the Dead Sea, the district
of Kerak (Kir), the ancient territory of the
Moabites, their kinsmen of Ammon having set-
tled to the north of this, in Arabia Deserta. The
north border of Moab was the brook Arnon, now
the Wady-el-Majib ; to the south of Moab, sepa-
rated from it by the Wady-el-Ahsy, lay Mount
Seir, the dominion of the Edomites, or Jdumea,
reaching as far as to Elath on the Red Sea.
The great valley which runs from the Dead Sea
to that point consists, first, of El-Ghor, which ia
comparatively low, but gradually rises by a suc-
cession of limestone clitis into the more elevated
plain of El-Arabah, formerly mentioned. ‘We
were now,’ says Professor Rubinson (Biblical Re-
searches, vol. ii.,p. 502), ‘upon the plain, or
rather the rolling desert, of the Arabah ; the sur-
face was in general lvose gravel and stones,
everywhere furrowed and torn with the beds of
torrents. A more frightful desert it had hardly
been our lot to behold. ilepirary pee alla
presented a most uninviting jideous azpect 5
precipices and naked conical peaks of chalky


"188 - ARABIA.


and gravelly formation rising one above another
without a sign of life or vegetation.. It was
once believed that through this great valley the
Jordan anciently flowed, before the catastrophe
of the cities of ‘the plain (Arabah);’ but from
the depressed level of the Dead Sea (recently
found by Lieut. Symonds to be no less than 1337
feet below that of the Mediterranean), from the
great elevation of the Arabah, the long descent
northward, and the run of the watercourses in
the same direction, the hypothesis is found to be
no longer tenable.* The structure of the moun-
tains of Edom on the east of the Arabah is
thus described by Robinson (vol. ii. p. 651): ‘At
the base low hills of limestone or argillaceous
rocks ; then the lofty masses of porphyry, consti-
tuting the body of the mountain; above these
sandstone broken up into irregular ridges and
grotesque groups of cliffs; and again, farther
back and higher than all, long elevated ridges of
- limestone without precipices. East of all these
stretches off indefinitely the high plateau of the
great eastern desert. The character of these
mountains is quite different from those on the
west of the Arabal. The. latter, which @emed
to be not more than two-thirds as high, are wholly
desert and sterile; while these on the east appear
to enjoy a sufticiency of rain, and are covered
with tufts of herbs and occasional trees.’ This
mountainous region is divided into two districts :
that to the nurth is called Jebal (¢. e. mountains,
the Gebal of Ps. lxxxiii. 7); that to the south
Esh-Sherah, which has erroneously been supposed
to be allied to the Hebrew ‘Seir;’ whereas the
latter (written with a }) means ‘hairy,’ the former
denotes ‘a tract or region.” To the district of
Esh-Sherah belongs Mount Hor, the burial-place
of Aaron, towering above the Wady Mousa (val-
ley of Moses), where are the celebrated ruins of
Petra (the ancient capital of the Nabatheo-
Iduinzans), brought to light by Seetzen and
Burckhardt, and now familiar to English readers
by the illustrations of Inby and Mangles, La-
borde, &c. As for the mountainous tract imme-
diately west of the Arabah, Dr. Robinson de
scribes it as a desert limestone region, full of
precipitous ridges, through which no travelled
road has ever 7

To the west of Idumea extends the ‘ great and
terrible wilderness’ of £¢-T%A, i.e. ‘the Wander
ing,’ so called from being the scene of the wan-
derings of the children of Isracl. It consists of
vast interminable plains, a hard gravelly soil,
and irregular ridges of limestone lulls. The re-
searches of Robinson and Smith furnish new and
important information respecting the geography
of this of Arabia and the adjacent peninsula
of Sinai. It appears that the middle of this
desert is occupied by a long central basin, ex-
tending from Jebel-et-Tih (3. ¢. the mountain of
the wandering, a chain pretty far south) to the
shores of the Mediterranean. This basin descends
towards the north with a rapid slope, and is
drained through all its length by Wady-el-Arish,


* Yet Mr. Beek, in a paper read to the Geo-

graphical Society (May 9, 1842), thinks the pro-

of the Jordan to the Red Sea was arrested

y volcanic eruptions, which, while they formed

the chasm now filled by the Dead Sea, upraised
the ridge called El Suté.


- ARABIA.


which enters the sea near the place of the same
name, on the borders of Egypt. ‘West of this
basin other wadye run by themselves down to the
sea. On the east of the same central hasin is


-another similar and parallel one between it and


the Arabah (the two being separated by the chain
E]-Ojmeh and its continuation), drained through-
out by the Wady-el-Jerafeh, which, having its
head in or near the Tih, falls into the Arabah not
far from El-Mukrah. North of this last basin
the tract between the Arabah and the basin of
the Arish is filled up by ranges or clusters of
mountains, from which, on the east, short wadys
run to the Arabah, and on the west lonyer ones to
Wady-el-Arish, until, farther north, these latter
continue by themselves to the sea nearer Gaza.’

This description of the formation of the north-
ern desert will enable us to form a more distinct
conception of the general features of the penin-
sula of Sinai, whict: lies south of it, being formed
by the two arms of the Red Sea, the Gulfs of
Akaba and Suez. If the parallel of the north
coast of Egypt be extended eastward to the great
Wady-el-Arabah, it appears that the desert, south
of this parallel, rises gradually towards the south,
until on the summit of the ridge Et-Tib, between
the two gulfs, it attains, according to Russegger,
the elevation of 4322 feet. The waters of all
this great tract flow off northward either to the
Mediterranean or the Dead Sea. The Tih forms
a sort of ofiset, and along its southern base the
surface sinks at once to the height of only about
3000 feet, forming the sandy plain which extends
nearly across the peninsula. Alter this the moun-
tains of the peninsula proper commence, and rise
rapidly through the formations of sandstone, griin-
stein, porphyry, and granite, into the lofty masses
of St. Catherine and Um Shaumer, the former of
which, according to Russegger, has an elevation
of 8168 Paris feet, or nearly double that of the
Tih. Here the waters all run eastward or west-
ward to the Gulfs of Akaba and Suez.

The suil of the Sinaitic peninsula is in general
very unproductive, yielding only palm-trees, aca-
cias, tamarisks (from which exudes the gum called
manna), coloquintida, and dwartish, thomy
shrubs. Among the animals may be mentioned
the mountain-guat (the beden of the Arabs), ga-
zelles, leopards, a kind of marmot called tober,
the sheeb, supposed by Col. Hamilton Smith to
be a species of wild wolf-dog, &c.: of birds there
are eagles, partridges, pigeons, the sata, a species
of quail, &c. There are serpents, as in ancient
times (Num. xxi. 4, 6), and travellers speak of a
large lizard called dhob, common in the desert,
but of unusually frequent occurrence here. The

ninsula is inhabited by Bedouin Arabs, and
its entire population was estimated by Burckhardt
at not more than 400U souls.

Though this part of Arabia must ever be me-
morable as the scene of the journeying of the
Israelites from Egypt to the Promised Land, yet
very few of the sputs mentioned in Scripture can
now be identitied ; nor after the lapse of so many
centuries ought that to be occasion of surprise.
According to Niebuhr, Robinson, &c. they crossed
the Red Sea near Suez, but the tradition of the
country fixes the pvint of transit eight or ten
miles south of Suez, opposite the place called
Ayoun Mousa, ¢.e. the Fountains of Moses, where
Robinson recently found seven wells, some of


ARABIA.


which, however, were mere excavations in the
sand. About 154 hours (33 geographical miles)
south-east of that is the Well of Hawarah, the
Marah of Scripture, whose bitter water is pro-
nounced by the Arabs to be the worst in these
regions. Two or three hours south of Hawdrah
the traveller comes to the Wady Ghirandel,
supposed to be the Elim of Moses. From the
plain of El-Kaa, which Robinson takes to be the
desert of Sin (not to be confounded with that of
Zin. which belonged to the great desert of Ka-
desi, they would enter the Sinaitic range pro-
bably along the upper part of Wady Feiran and


through the Wady-esh-Sheikh, one of the prin-_


cipal valleys of the peninsula, The Arabs call
this whole cluster of mountains Jebel-et-Tur;
the Christians generally designate it as ‘ Sinai,’
and give the name of Hore’ to a particular moun-
fain, whereas in Scripture the names are used
interchangeably. To which of the lofty peaks
Moses ascended that he might receive the Law
and thence publisi it to the people, can only be
matter of conjecture. Tradition fixed on the
Jebel Mousa, ae. ‘the mountain of Moses,” at
the fuct of which is the convent of Mount Sinai,
and opposite to it stands Mount St. Catharine,
which is a thousand feet higher, and has on that
account by some been taken for the true Sinai.
Professor Rubinson is inclined to identify the ve-
nerated spot with the Ras Ls-Nufsafeh, the highest
peak on the northern brow ot Horeb, which ¢ raises
16 buld and awful front in frowning majesty’
above the extensive plain of Er-Rahah, where
there was ample room tor the encampment of the
‘many thousands of Israel.’ Others have thought
of the Jehed Serbal, a magnificent mountain, nine
or ten hours north-west of the convent, and sup-
posed by Burckhardt to be the highest of all the
aks, but since ascertained by Riippell to be
700 feet lower than St. Catharine.


Having now taken a rapid survey of this ex-
tensive revion in its three divisions, let us advert
to the peuple by whom it was at first settled, and
by whose descendants it is still inhabited. There
isa prevalent notion that the Arabs, both of the
south and north, are descended from Ishmael ;
and the passage in Gen. xvi. 12, ¢ he (Ishmael)
shall dwell in the presence of all his brethren,’
is often cited as if it were a prediction of that
National independence which, upon the whole, the
Arabs have maintained more than any other
pople. But this supposition (in so far as the
true meaning of the text quoted is concerned) is
founded on a misconception of the original He-
brew, which runs literally, * he shall dwell before
the faces of all his brethren,’ ¢.e. (according to
the idiom above explained, in which ‘ before the
face’ denotes the east), the habitation of his pos-
terity shall be ‘ to the east’ of the settlements of
Abraham's other descendants. This seems also
to be the import of Gen. xxv. 18, where, in
reference to Ishmael, it is said in our version,
‘be died in the presence of all his brethren ;°
but the true sense is, ‘ the lot of his inheritance

fell to him before the faces (i.e. to the east) of

all his brethren.” ‘These prophecies found their
pare nang in the fact of the sons of Ishmael
being located, generally speaking, to the east of
the other descendants ‘of Abraham, whether by


Sarah or by Ketorah,


ARABIA. 189


But the idea of the southern Arabs being of
the posterity of Ishmael is entirely without foun-
dation, and seems to have originated in the tra-
dition invented by Arab vanity, that they, as
well as the Jews, are of the seed of Abraham—
a vanity which, besides disfiguring and falsifying
the whole history of the patriarch and his son
Ishmael, has transferred the scene of it from
Palestine to Mecca. If we go to the most
authentic source of ancient ethnography, the
book of Genesis, we there find that the vast
tracts of country known to us under the name
of Arabia gradually became peupled by a variety
of tribes of different lineage, though it is now
impossible to determine the precise limits within
which they fixed their permanent or nomadic
abode. We shall here exhibit a tabular view of
these races in chronological order, #. e. according
to the successive #ras of their respective pro-
genitors :—


I. Hamires, ¢.e. the posterity of Cush, Ham's
eldest son, whose descendants appear to have
settled in the south of Arabia, and to have sent
colynies across the Red Sea to the opposite coast
of Africa; and hence Cush became a general
name tor ‘ the south, and specially for Arabian
and African Ethiopia. The sons of Cush (Gen.
x. 7) were Seba, Havilah, Sabtah, Raamah or
Ragma (his sons, Sheba and Dedan), and Sab-
theca.

II. Snesrrss, including the fullowing :

A. Joktanites, i.e. the descendants of Joktan
(called by the Arabs Kachéan), the second son of
Eber, Shem’s great-grandson (Gen. x. 25, 26).
According to Arab tradition Kachtan (whom
they also regard as a son of Eber), after the con-
fusion of tongues and dispersion at Babel, settled
in Yemen, where he reigned as king. Ptolemy
speaks of an Arab tribe called Aatanites, who
may have derived their name from him; and the
richest Bedouins of the southern plains are the
Kahtan tribe on the frontiers of Yemen, Joktan
had thirteen sons, some of whose names may be
obscurely traced in the designations of certain
districts in Arabia Felix. Their names were
Almodad, Shaleph, Hhazarmaveth (preserved in
the name of the province of Hhadramaut, the
Hebrew and Arabic letters being the same),
Jarach, Hadoram, Uzal (believed by the Arabs
to have been the founder of Sanaa in Yemen),
Dikla, Obal, Abimael, Sheba (father of the
Sabwans, whose chief town was Mariaba or
Mareb; their queen Balkis He ga to be the
queen who visited Solomon*), Ophir (who gave
name to the district that became so famous for


its gold), Havilah, and Jobab.


B. Abrahamites, divided into—

(a) Hagarenes or Hagarites, so called from
Hagar the mother; otherwise termed Ishmaelites
from her son; and yet in course of time these
names appear to have been applied to different
tribes, for in Psalm Ixxxiii. 6, the Hagarenes are


* The honour of being the country of the
queen of Sheba is also claimed by Abyssinia;
but if (as Bruce informs us) there was also a
Saba in African Ethiopia, and if these opposite
coasts of the Red Sea formed at times Lut one
kingdom, the two opinions are not irrecoucilable.


190 ARABIA.


expressly distinguished from the Ishmaelites
(comp. 1 Chron. v. 10, 19, 22, and the apocryphal
book of Baruch i. 35; iii. 23). The twelve sons
of Ishmael (Gen. xxv. 13-15), who gave names
to separate tribes, were Nebaioth (the Nabathzans
in Arabia Petrea), Kedar (the Kedarenes, some-
times also used as a designation of the Bedouins
generally, and hence the Jewish rabbins call the
Arabic language ‘ the Kedarene’), Abdeel, Mib-
sam, Mishma, Dumah, Massa, Hadad or Hadar,
Thema, Jetur, Naphish (the Iturmans and Na-
phishians near the tribe of Gad: 1 Chron. v. 19,
2)), and Kedmah. They appear to have been
for the most part located near to Palestine on the
east and south-east. ‘

(B) Keturahites, ¢.e. the descendants of Abra-
ham and his concubine Keturah, by whom he
had six sons (Gen. xxv. 2): Simram, Jokshan
(who, like Raamah, son of Cush, was also the
father of two sons, Sheba and Dedan), Medan,
Midian, Jishbak, and Shuach. Among these, the
posterity of Afidian became the best known.
Their principal seat appears to have been in the
neighbourhood of the Muabites, but a branch of
them must have settled in the peninsula of
Sinai, for Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, was’
a priest of Midian (Exod. iti. 1; xviii. 5; Num.
x. 29). To the posterity of Shuach belunged
Bildad, one of the friends of Job.

(y) Edomites, i.e. the descendants of Esau,
who possessed Mount Seir and the adjacent
region, called from them Idumwa. They and
the Nabathzans formed in later times a flourish-
ing commercial state, the capital of which was
the remarkable city called Petra.


C. Nahorites, the descendants of Nahor,
Abraham's brother, who seem to have peopled
the land of Uz, the country of Job, and of Buz,
the country of his friend Elihu the Buzite, these
being the names of Nabor's sons (Gen. xxii. 21).


D. Lotites, viz. :

(a) Moabites, who occupied the northern
of Arabia Petra, as above described ; an
kinsmen, the—

(8) Ammonites, who lived north of them, in
Arabia Deserta.


Besides these, the Bible mentions various other
tribes who resided within the bounds of Arabia,
but whose descent is unknown, e.g. the Amale-
kites, the Kenites, the Horites, the inhabitants of
Maon, Hazor, Vedan, and Javan-Meusal (Ezek.
xxvii. 19), where the English version has, ‘ Dan
also and Javan going to and fro.”

In process of time some of these tribes were
perhaps wholly extirpated (as seems to have been
the case with the Amalekites), but the rest
were more or less mingled together by inter-
marriages, by military conquests, political revo-
lutions, and other causes of which history has

reserved no record ; and thus amalgamated, they

came known to the rest of the world as the
‘ Arnans,’ a people whose physical and mental
characteristics are very strongly and distinctly
marked. In both respects they rank very high
among the nations ; s0 much so, that some have
regarded them as furnishing the prototype—the

imitive model form—the standard figure of the
uman species. This was the opinion of the
famous Baron de Larrey, surgeon-general of


rtion
their


.


ARABIA.


Napoleon's army in Egypt, who, in speaking of
the Arabs on the east side of the Red Sea, says
(in a Memoir for the Use of the Scientific Com-
mission to Algiers, Paris, 1838) ‘They have a
physiognomy and character which are quite
culiar, and which distinguish them generally
from all those which appear in other rezions of
the globe.’ In his dissections he found ‘ their
physical structure in all respects more perfect
than that of Europeans; their orzans éf was
exquisitely acute; their size above the average of
men in general ; their figure robust and elegant
(the colour brown); therr intelligence propor-
tionate to that physical perfection, and, without
doubt, superior, other things being equal, to that
of other nations.’

The inhabitants of Arabia have, from remote
antiquity, been divided into two great classes,
viz. the cownsmen (including villagers), and the
men of the desert, such being, as we remarked,
the meaning of the word ‘ Bedawees’ or Be-
douins, the designation given to the ‘ dwellers
in the wilderness.’ From the nature of their
country, the latter are necessitated to lead the life
of nomades, or wandering shepherds; and since
the days of the patriarchs (who were themselves
of that occupation) the extensive steppes, which
form so large a portion of Arabia, have been tra-
versed by a pastoral but warlike people, who, in
their mode of life, their food, their dress, their
dwellings, their manners, customs, and govern
ment, have always continued, and stil] continue,
almost unalterably the same. They consist of
a great many separate tribes, who are co'lected
into different encampments dispersed taron.ch
the territory which they claim as their own; and
they move from one spot to another (commenly
in the neizhbourhood of pools or wells) as soon
as the atinted pasture is exhausted by their cattle.
It is only here and there that the ground is sus-
ceptible of cultivation, and the tillage of it is
commonly left to peasants, who are often the
vassals of the Bedawees, and whom (as well as
all ‘ townsmen’) they regard with contempt as an
inferior race. Having constantly to shift their
residence, they live in movable tents (comp.
Isa. xiii. 20; Jer. xlix. 29), trom which circum.
stance they received from the Greeks the name of
Axqvirat, i.e. dwellers in tents (Strabo, xvi. p. 747;
Diod. Sic. p. 254; Ammian, Marcell. xxiii. 6),
The tents are of an oblong figure, not more than
six or eight feet high, twenty to thirty lung, and
ten broad; they are made of goat's or camel's
hair, and are of a brown or black colour (such
were the tents of Kedar, Cant. i. 5), differing in
this respect from those of the Turcomans, which
are white. Each tent is divided by a curtain or
carpet into two apartments, one of which is ap-
propriated to the women, who are not, however,
subject to so much restraint and seclusion as
amoung other Mohammedans. The tents are
arranged in an irregular circle, the space within
serving as a fuld to the cattle at night. The
heads of tribes ure called sheikhs, a word of
various import, but used in this case as a title of
honour; the goverment is hereditary in the
family of each sheikh, but elective as to the
particular individual appointed. Their allegi-
ance, however, consists more in following his
example as a leader than in obeying his com-
mands ; and, if dissatistied with his government,


ARABIA.
they will d or abandon him. As the inde-
dent lords of their own deserts, the Bedawees


ve from time immemorial demanded tribute or
presents from all travellers or caravans (Isa.
xxi. 13) passing through their country ; the tran-
sition from which to robbery is so natural, that
they attach to the latter no disgrace, plundering
without mercy all who are unable to resist them,
or who hare not secured the protection of their
tribe. Their watching for travellers ‘in the


ways, ie. the frequented routes through the .


desert, is alluded to Jer. iii. 2; Ezra viii. 31;
and the fleetness of their horses in carrying them
into the ‘depths of the wilderness,’ beyond the
reach of their pursuers, seems what is referred to
in Isa. Ixiii. 13, 14. Their warlike incursions
into more settled districts are often noticed (e. g.
Job i, 15; 2 Chron. xxi. 16; xxvi. 7) The
acuteness of their bodily senses is very remark-
able, and is exemplitied in their astonishing
magacity in tracing and distinguishing the foot-
steps of men and cattle, a faculty which is known
by the name of athr. The law of thar, or blood-
Tevenge, sows the seeds of perpetual feuds; and
what was predicted (Gen. xvi. 12) of the posterity
of Ishmael, the ‘ wild-ass man’ (a term most gra-
Phically descriptive of a Bedawee), holds true of
tae whole people. Yet the very dread of the conse-
quences of shedding bluod prevents their frequent
conflicts fiom being very sanguinary: they show
bravery in repelling a public enemy, but when
they fight for plunder, they bebave like cowards.
Their bodily frame is spare, but athletic and
active, inured to fatigue and capable of under-
gving great privations: their minds are acute and
Inquisitive; and though their manners are some-
What grave and formal, they are of a lively and
wcial disposition. Of their moral virtues it is
necessary tu speak with caution. They were long
held up as models of guod faith, incorruptible
integrity, and the most generous hospitality to
strangers ; but many recent travellers Neny them
the possession of these qualities ; and it is certain
that whatever they may have been once, the
Bedawees, like all the unsuphisticated ¢ children
of nature,’ have been much corrupted by the
influx of foreigners, and the national character is
in every point of view lowest where they are most
exposed to the continual ge of strangers.
It is, however, no part of our present design
to enter on & more minute account of this
angular and interesting people; information re-
garding many of their peculiarities which throw
light on Scripture will be found under other
heads. Let every one who wishes to study Arab
life in the desert consult the romance of Antar,
translated by Hamilton, and Burckhardt's Notes
on the Bedouins ; and with respect to the manners
and customs of the more settled inhabitants,
Many curious details will be found in Lane's
Modern Egyptians, and in the notes ta his new
Translation of the Thousand and One Nights ;
for since the downfal of the Arab empire of
Sagdad, Cairo has been the chief of Arabian
Cities, and there Arab manners exist in their most
tefined form. The pulation of the entire pe-
Paar ie fa been estimated at frum

leven to twelve milli
hie ions, but the data are pre-
‘The principal source of the wealth of ancient
was its commerce. So early as the days


ARABIA: 1


of Jacob (Gen. xxxvii. 28) we read of a mixed
caravan of Arab merchants (Ishmae ‘tes and
Midianites) who were engaged in the conveyance
of various foreign articles to Egypt, and made
no scruple to add Joseph, ‘a slave,’ to their other
purchases. ‘The Arabs were, doubtless, the first
navigators of their own seas, and the great care
riers of the pruduce of India, Abyssinia, and
other remote countries to Westen Asia and
Egypt. Various Indian productions thus ob-
tained were common among the Hebrews at an
early period of their history (Exod. xxx. 23, 25).
The traffic of the Red Sea was to Solomon a
source of great profit; and the extensive com-
merce of Sabaa (Sheba, now Yemen) is men-
tioned by profane writers as well as alluded to
in Scripture (J Kings x. 10-15). In the de-
scription of the foreign trade of Tyre (Ezek.
xxvii. tee! various Arab tribes are introduced
(comp. Isa. Ix. 6; Jer. vi. 20; 2 Chron. ix. 14).
The Nabathwo-Idumeans became a great trading
people, their capital being Petra. ‘The transit-
trade from India continued to enrich Arabia
until the discovery of the ge to India by
the Cape of Good Hope; but the invention of
steam-navigation has now restored the ancient
route for travellers by the Red Sea.

The settlers in Arabia are by native writers
divided into two classes: the old tribes (who
belonged to the fabulous period of history, and
are long since extinct); and the present inhabit-
ants. The latter are classed either among the
§ pure or genuine,’ or the Moséarati, the mixed or
naturalized Arabs. A ‘ pure’ Arab boasts of
being descended from Kachtan (the Joktan of
Scripture, Gen. x. 29), ad calls himself a/
Arab al Araba, ‘an Arab of the Arabs,’ a phrase
of similar emphasis with St. Paul’s ‘ Hebrew of
the Hebrews’ (Phil. iii. 5). The mixed Arabs
are supposed to be descended from Ishmael by a
daughter of Modad, king of Hedjaz, the district
where the Ismaelites chiefly settled. ‘The Kach-
tanites, on the other hand, occupied the southern
part of the peninsula, for Kachtan's great-grand-
son Saba gave name to a kingdom, one of whose
queens (called by the Arabians Balkis) visited
Solomon (1 Kings x. 1). A son of Saba was
Himyar, who gave name to the famous dynasty
of the Himyarites (improperly written Homerites),
that seein to have reigned for many centuries
over Saba and part of Hhadramaut. In the
latter province Lieut. Wellsted recently dis-
covered ruins called Nakab-el-Hajar (* the exca-
vation in the rock’), consisting of a massive wall,
thirty to forty feet high, tlanked with square
towers. Within the entrance on the face of the
building he fouud an inscription in characters
eight inches long, which Gesenius supposes to be
the ancient Himyaritic writing. Arabia, in
ancient times, generally preserved its independ-
ence, unatiected by those great events which
changed the destiny of the surrounding nations ;
and in the sixth century of our era, the decline
of the Roman empire and the corruptions and
distractions of the Eastern church favoured the
impulse given by a wild an@ warlike fanaticism.
Mahomet arose, and succeeded in gatherin
around his standard the nomadic tribes of cent:
Arabia ; and in less than fifty years that stan-
dard waved triumphant ‘ from the straits of
Gibraltar to the hitherto unconquered regions


183, ARABIC LANGUAGE.


beyond the Oxus." The khalifs transferred the
seat of government successively to Damascus,
Kufa, and Bagdad; but amid the distractions of
their foreign wars, the chiefs of the interior of
Arabia gradually shvok off their feeble allegiance,
and resumed their ancient habits of independ-
ence, which, notwithstanding the revolutions that
have since occurred, they fur the must part retain,
At present, indeed, the authority of Mchemet
Ali, the Pasha of Ezypt, is acknowledged over a
yreat portion of the nurthern part of Arabia,
while in the south the Imam of Maskat exer-
cises dominion over a much greater extent of
country than did any of his predecessors.—N, M.
ARABIC LANGUAGE. That important
family of languages, of which the Arabic is the
most cultivated and most widely-extended branch,
has long wanted an appropriate common name.
The term Oriental languages, which was exclu-
sively applied to it from the time of Jerome down
to the end of the last century, and which is even
now not entirely abandoned, must always have
been an unscientific one, inasmuch as the coun-
tries in which these languages prevailed are only
the cast in respect to Europe; and when Sanscrit,
Chinese, and other idioms of the remoter East
were brought within the reach of our research, it
hecame palpably incorrect. Under a sense of
this impropriety, Eichhorn was the first, as he
says himself (Ally. Bibl. Biblioth. vi. 772), to
introduce the name Semitic languages, which
was soon generally adopted, and which is the
must usual one at the present day. Nevertheless,
Stange (in his henley. Symmikta) justly objected
to this name as viulating the statements of the
very Mosaic acconnt (Gen. x.) on which the
propriety of its use professed to be based. For,
according to that genealogical table, some nations,
which in all probability did not speak a lan-
guage belonging to this family, are descended
frum Shem; und others, which did speak such a
language, are derived from Ham. Thus ‘Elam
and Asshur are deduced from Shem (ver. 22);
and the descendants of Cush in Arabia and
Ethiopia, as well as all the Canaanites, from
Ham (ver. 7, sg.). In modern times, however,
the very appropriate designation Syro-Arabian
languages lias been proposed by Dr. Prichard, in
his Physical History of Man. This term, besides
being exempt fum all the above-mentioned ob-
jections on the score either of latitude or inade-
quacy, has the advantage of forming an exact
counterpart to the name by which the only other
great fumily of languages with which we are
likely to bring the Syro-Arabian into relations of
contrast or accordance, is now universally known
—the Judo-Germanic. Like it, by taking up
only the two extreme members of a whole sister-
hood according to their geographical position
when in their native seats, it embraces all the
intermediate branches under a common band ;
and, like it, it constitutes a name which is not
only at once intelligible, but one which in itself
conveys a notion of that affinity between the
sister dialects, which it is one of the objects of
ae philology to demonstrate and to
apply.
FOr this family, then, the Arabic forms, together
with the Ethiopic, the southern branch. In it
we find the full and adult development of the
genius of the Syro-Aravian languages. In the


ARABIC LANGUAGE.


abundance of its roots, in the manifold variety
of its furmations, in the syntactical delicacies of
its construction, it stands pre-eminent as a lan-
guage among all its sisters. Every class of com-
position also: the wild and yet noble lyrics of
the son of the desert, who had ‘ nothing to glory
in but. his sword, his guest, and his fervid tongue;’
the impassioned and often sublime appeals of the
Quran; the sentimental poetry of a Mutanabbi;
the artless simplicity of their usual narrative
style, and the philosophic disquisitioa of an Ibn
ChaldGn ; the subtleties of the grammarian and
scholiast ; medicine, natural history, and the
Metaphysical speculations of the Aristotelian
school—all have found the Arabic languaze a
fitting exponent of their feeling and thought.
And, although confined within the bounds of the
Peninsula by circumstances to which we owe the
preservation of its pure antique form, yet Islam
made it the written and spoken Janguaze of the
whole of Western Asia, of Eastem and Northern
Africa, of Spain, and of some of the islands of
the Mediterranean; and the ecclesiastical lan-
guage of Persia, Turkey, and all other Jands
which receive the Mohammedan faith; in all
which places it has left sensible traces of its
former occupancy, and in many of which it is
still the living or the leamed idiom. Such is the
Arabic language; so important its relations to
the literary and civil history of a large portion of
the human race: the more important also to us
as bridging over that wide chasm which inter-
venes between the extinction of classical lite-
rature and the revival of that spirit to which the
literature of all modern Lansuages owes its origin,
Into these general virw.s of the Arabic language,
however, it is not te province of this work to
enter: an able aitic'e a the Penny Cyclopedia,
by the late lamented Dr. Rosen, will satisfy
those who desire such information. Our ubject
here is to show the mode and the impaitance of
its bearings upon Biblical philology.

The close aftinity, and consequently the incal-
culable philological use, of the Arabie with
regard to the Hebrew lanzuage and its other
sisters, may be considered partly as a question of
theory, and partly as one of fact. The fornner
would regard the concurrent records which the
Old Testament and their own traditions have
preserved of the several links by which the Arabs
were connected with diflerent generations of the
Hebrew line, and the evidences which Scripture
otters of persons speaking Arabic being intelli-
gible to the Hebrews; the latter would observe
the demonstrable identity between them in’ the
main features of a language, and the more
subtle, but no less convincing traces of 1esem-
blance even in the points in which their diversity
is most apparent.

The following are the theoretical grounds :—
first, the Arabs of Jemen are derived from
Qahtan, the Joktan of Gen. x. 25, whom the
Arabs make the son of “Eber (Pococke’s Specanen
Hist. Arab, p. 39, sg.).’ These form the pure
Arabs. Then Ishmael intermarried with a de-
scendant of the line of Qahtan, and Lecame the
progenitor of the tribes of Hlig'az. These are the
tnsititious Arabs. These two roots of the nation
correspond with the two great dialects into which
the language was once divided: that of Jemen,
under the name of the Himjarite, of which ali


ARABIC LANGUAGE.


@at lias come down to us (except what may have
ed in the Ethiopic) is a few in-
eriptions; and that of Hig’dz, under that of the
dialect of Mudhar, or, descending a few gene-
Fations in the same line, of Quraish—the dialect
of the Quran and of all their literature. Then,
Abraham sent away his suns by Keturah, and
they also became the founders of Arabic tribes.
Lastly, the circumstance of Esau's settling in
Mount Seir, where the Idumzeans descended from
his loin, may he considered as a still later
medium by which the idioms of Palestine and
Arabia preserved their harmony. Secondly, Olaus
Celsins (in his Hist. Ling. e¢ Erudit. Arab.) cites
the fuct of the sons of Jacob conversing with the
Isimaclite caravan (Gen. xxxvii. 28), and that
of Moss with his father-in-law the Midianite
(Exod. iv. 18), To these, however, Schelling (in
bis tohandd. c,d. Gebrauch der Arab. Sprache,
14) objects that they are not conclusive, as the
marlites, being merchants, might have ac-
quired the idiom of the nations they traded with,
and as Moses might owe an acquaintance with
Anliic to his residence in Egypt. Nevertheless,
one of Celsius’s inferences. derives considerable
"ability from the only instance of mutual in-
tell sibility which J. D. Michaelis has adduced
In his Beurtheilung der Mittel die ausgestorbene
er. Sprache zu verstehen, p. 156), namely, that
Gide and his servant went down by night to
the camp of ‘Midian, Amalek, and all the
Bene Qedem,’ to overhear their conversation with
each other. and understood what they heard
(Judy. viii. 9-14), Lastly, Scliultens (Oratio de
Req. Saheor., in his Opp. Minora) labours to
show that the visit of the queen of Shela to
Solomon is a strong proof of the degree of prox-
imity in which the two dialects then stood to
each other. These late traces of resemblance,
Moreover, are ret:dered more striking by the
Notice of the early diversity between Hebrew and
Aramate (Gen. xxxi. 47). The instance of the
Ethionian chamberlain in Acts viii. 28, may not
be considered an evidence, if Heinrichs, in his
note ad loc. in Nov. Test. edit. Kopp., is right
in averting that he was reading the Septuagint
Nite and that Philip the deacon was a Hel-
ensist,

Thus springing from the same root as the
Hebrew, and possessing such traces of affinity to
so late a period as the time of Solomon, this
dialect was further enabled, by several circum-
fances in the social state of the nation, to retain
tts native resemblance of type until the date of
the earliest extant written documents, These
cieamstances were, the almost insular position of
the country, which prevented conquest or com-
merce from debasing the language of its inhabit-

, uits; the fact that so large a portion of the
nation adhered to a mode of life in which every

Impression was, as it were, stereotyped, and knew
Qu variation for ages (a cause to which we may
alo in part ascribe the comparatively unim-
portant changes which the language has under-
a cote the 1400 years in which we can

OHow its history); and the great and just pride
which they felt in the mG. of their Taneanee,
which, according to a valuable testimony of

i pg a competent judge of the learned as

well as the living idiom, is still a characteristic

Of the Bedouins (Notes on the Bedowins, p. 211).


ARABIC LANGUAGE. 198


These causes preserved the language from foreign
influences at a time when, as the Quran and a
national literature had not yet given it its full
stature, such influences would have been most
able to destroy its integrity. During this interval,
nevertheless, the language received a peculiarly
ample development in a certain direction. The
limited incidents of a desert life still allowed
valour, love, generosity, and satire to occupy
the keen sensibilities of the chivalrous Bedouin.
These feelings found their vent in ready verse
and eloquent prose; and thus, when Islam first
called the Arabs into the more varied activity
and more perilous collision with foreign nations,
which resulted from the union of their tribes
under a common interest to hold the same faith
and to propagate it by the sword, the language
had already received all the development which
it could derive from the pre-eminently creative
and refining impulses of poetry and eloquence.
However great may be the amount of resem-
Dlance between Arabic and Hebrew which a due
estimate of all the theoretical grounds for the
affinity, and for the diversity, between them
would entitle us to assume, it is certain that a
comparison of the actual state of both in their
purest form evinces a degree of proximity which
exceeds expectation. Not only may two-thirds of
the Hebrew routs (to take the assertion of Auri-
villins, in his Dzssertationes, p. 11, ed. J. D.
Michaelis) be found in Arabic under the same
letters, and either in the same or a very kindred
sense,, provided we know that the last radical of
the ms roots in Hebrew is Wave or Ja in Arabic ;
and that those whose first radical is Jod in
Hebrew is Waw in Arabe: ; and that the letters


YO INN correspond to glue XSJ, and that


either when the latter have a diacritical point
or not; but, if we allow for the changes of 3


into es i into 8 and Gs, T into 3, * into os
D and & into us 7. into \, and & into Us
and (24, we shall be able to discover nearly


nine-tenths of the Hebrew roots in Arabic. To
this great fundamental agreement in the vocabu-
lary (the wonder of which is somewhat diminished
by aright estimate of the immense disproportion
between the two languages as tu the number of
roots) are to be added those resemblances which
relate to the mode of inflexion and construction.
Thus, in the verb, its two wide tenses, the mode
by which the persons are denoted at the eud in
the Perfect, and at the beginning (with the ac-
cessory distinctions at the end) in the Imperfect,
its capability of expressing the gender in the
second and third persons, and the system on
which the conjugations are formed; and in the
noun, the correspondence in formations, in the use
of the two genders, and in all the essential cha-
racteristics of construction; the possession of the
definite article; the independent and affixed pro-
nouns; and the same system of separable and
attached particles—all these form so broad a basis
of community and harmony between the twé
dialects, as could hardly be anticipated, when we
consider the many centuries which separate the
earliest written extant documents of each.

The diversities between them, which consist

o


194 ARABIC LANGUAGE.


avrsost entirely of fuller developments on the side
of the Arabic, may be summed up under tbe fol-
lowing heads :--A much more extensive system of
conjugations in the verb, the dual in both tenses,
and four forms of the Imperfect (three of which,
however, exist potentially in the ordinary imperfect,
the jussive, and the cohortative of the Hebrew: see
Ewald’s Hebr. Gram. § 290, 293) ; the full series
of infinitives; the use of auxiliary verbs; in the
noun, the formations of the plural called broken
or internal plurals, and the flexion by means of
terminations analogous to three of our cases; and
a perfectly defined system of metre. The most
important of these differences consists in that final
vowel after the last radical, by which some of the
forms of the imperfect and the several cases in
the noun are indicated; and it is a matter of
some moment to determine whether they are to
be ascribed to the genuine natural expansion of
the language, or are only an’ attempt of the
grammarians to introduce Greek inflexions into
Arabic. The latter opinion has been seriously
propounded by Hasse, in a paper in his Magazin
fiir Biblisch-Orientalische Litteratur, i. 230;
and even Gesenius has expressed himself to the
same etlect (Gesch. d. Hebr. Spr. p.95). Never-
theless, the notion springs from a forgetfulness of
the fact that the date of the early poems, the
Hamaia and the Mu‘allaqit, is much anterior to
the perio when any such foreixn influence as
Hasse alludes to could have had effect; and from
an ignorance of the absolute necessity of all those
flexional vowels to preserve the metre of the
poetry. If any productions of Arabic genius are
old—if any are national in the highest sense, both
as to substance and fori, it is those poems. And
so essential a part of their furm is the metre
according to which they were conceived, that it
is incontestable that their metrical disposition and
their existence are coeval. When Hasse, then,
© candidly admits that these terminations of case
were in use as early as the second century of the
Hig'ra,’ he merely admits his ignorance of the
fact that the earliest remains of Arabic literature,
those which are older by centuries than the
Quran, are composed in a form which is unin-
telligible unless read according to the nicest
distinctions of this vocalization of the final syl-
lables. This error is, moreover, akin to a not
uncommon statement, that Al Chali], who lived
in the second century of the Hig'ra (Freytag’s
Darstellung d. Arab. Verskunst, p. 18), invented
the art of Prosody:; which is as true as that
Aristotle invented the art of Poetry, merely be-
cause he abstracted the laws of composition from
the masterpieces of Greek genius.

The Arabic alphabet also presents some re-
markable differences. As a representation of
sounds, it contains all the Hebrew letters; but in
consequence of the greater extent of the nation as
a source of dialectual varieties of pronunciation,
and also in consequence of the more developed
and refined state of the language, the value of
some of them is not exactly the same, and the
characters that correspond to YOY IAN are
used in a double capacity, and represent both
hglves of those sounds which exist unseparated in
the Hebrew. The present order of the letters also
is different, although there are evidences in their

_ Bumerical value, when so used, and in the me-
morial words given in Ewald’s Grammatica Cri-


ARABIC LANGUAGE.


tica Ling. Arab. § 67, that the arrangement was
once the same in both. In a palwographical
point of view, the characters have undergone
many changes. The earliest form was that in the
Himjarite alphabet. The first specimens of this
character (which Arabic writers call al Musnad,
i.e. stilted, columnar) were given by Seetzen im
the Fundgruben des Orients. Since then Professor
Rodiger bas produced others, and illustrated them
in a valuable paper in the Zeitschrift fir die
Kunde des Morgenlandes, i. 332. The letters of
this alphabet have a striking resemblance to those
of the Ethiopic, which were derived from them.
In Northern Arabia, on the other hand, and not
very long before the time of Muhammad, the
Syrian character called Estrangclo became the
model on which the Arabic alphabet called the
Kufic was formed. This heavy, angular Kufic
character was the one in which the early copies
of the Qurin were written; and it is also found
in the ancient Mnhammadan coinage as late as
the seventh century of the Hig'ra. From this, at
length, was derived the light, neat character
called Nisch?, the one in which the Arabs con-
tinue to write at the present day, and which we
have endeavonred to represent in our printed
bouks. The introduction of this character is
ascribed to Ibn Mugla, who died in the year 327
of the Hig'ra. (See the table given in the article
Apuanert.) Lastly, it is worthy of notice that
all the letters of the Arabic alphabet are only
consonants; that, in an unpointed text, the dong
vowels are denoted by the use of Alif, Waw, and
Ja, as matres Iectionis ; and that the short vowels
are not denoted at all, but are left to be supplied
according to the sense in which the reader takes
the words; whereas, in a pointed text, thrce points
ouly suftice to represent the whole vocalization ;
the equivalents to which, according to the way in
which they are expressed in this work, are a, t, u,
pronounced as in Italian.

The manifold uses of the Arabic language in Bib-
lical philology (exclusive of the advantages it af-
fords for comparing the Arabic versions) may in part
be gathered from the degree of its aflinity to the He
brew ; and, indeed, chiefly to the Hebrew before the
exile, after which period the Aramaic is the most
fruitful means of illustration (Mahn, Darstelleng
der Lezicographie, p. 391). But there are some
oe in the relative position of the two dia-
ects which considerably enhance the value of the
aid to be derived from the Arabic. The Hebrew
language of the Old Testament has preserved to
us but a small fragment of a Hiterature. In the
limited number of its roots (some of which even
do not occur in the primary sense), in the rarity
of some formations, and in the antique rudimentary
mode in which some of its constiuctions are de-
noted, are cuntained those difficulties which can.
not receive any other illustration than that which
the sister dialects, and most especially the Arabic,
afford. For this purpose, the resemblances be-
tween them are as useful as the diversities. The
former enable us to feel certain on points which
were liable to doubt: they confirm and esta-
blish an intelligent conviction that the larger
portion of our knowledge of the meaning of words,
and of the force of constructions in Hebiew, is on
a sure foundation; because we recognise the same
in a kindred form, and in a literature so volu-
minous as to afford us frequent opportunities of


ARABIC VERSIONS.


testing our notions by every variety of experience,
The diversities, on the other hand (according to a
mode of observation very frequent in cumparative
anatomy), show us what exists potentially in the
rudimentary state, by enabling us to see how a
language of the same genius has, in the further
progress of its development, felt the necessity of
denoting extemally those relations of formation
and construction which were only dimly per-
ceived in its antique and uncultivated form.
Thus, fo adduce a single illustration fiom the
Arabic cases in the noun :—The precise relation
Of the words month and life, in the common He-
rew phrases, ‘I call my mouth,’ and ‘ he smote
him his life’ (Ewald’s Hebr. Gram. 4452) is
easily intelligible to one whom Arabic has fami-
lansed with the perpetual use of the so-called
accusative to denote the accessory descriptions of
state. Anotier important advantage to be de-
tWed from the study of Arabic, is the opportunity
Seng the grammar of a Syro-Arabian language
explained by native scholars. Hebrew grammar
4s suffered much injury from the mistaken no-
¢f men, who, understanding the sense of the
en documents by the aid of the versions, have
empted from obtaining any independent
inwad feeling of the genius of the tanzuage,
axl have therefure not hesitated to accommodate
It to the yrammar of our Indo-Germanic idioms.
Arabic, however, we have a language, every
ranch of the philosophical study of which has
ben succesfully cultivated by the Arabs them-
selves, Their own lexicographers, grammarians,
and schuliasts (to whom the Jews also are in-
debted fur teaching them the grammatical treat-
ment of Hebrew) have placed the language before
us with such elaborate explanation of its entire
character, that Arabic is not only by far the most
accessible of the Syro-Arabian dialects, but may
even challenge comparison, as to the possession of
these advantages, with the Greek itself.—J. N.


ARABIC VERSIONS. As Christianity never
attained any extensive or permanent influence
among the Arabs as a nation, no entire nor
ees sanctioned Arabic version of the Bible

been discovered. ‘But, as political events at
length made the Arabic language the common
vehicle of instruction in the East, and that to
Jews, Samaritans, and Christians, independent
Versions of sinzle books were often undertaken,
according to the zeal of private persons, or the in-
terests of small communities. The following is a
— list of only the most important among


writ


I Arahic versions formed immediately on the
original texts.

A. Rabbi Saadjah Haggaén, a native of Faijam,
and rector of the academy at Sora, who died
4D. 912, is the author of a version of some por-
tins of the Old Testament. Erpenius and
Pocuck, indeed, affirm that he translated the
whole (Walton's Prolegomena, ed. Wrangham, ii.
516); but subsequent inquirers have not hitherto

able, with any certainty, to assign to him
More than a version of the Pentateuch, of Isaiah,
of Job, and of a portion of Hosea,
That of the Pentateuch firet appeared, in
Hebrew characters, in the folio Tetrarlott Penta-
teuch of Constantinople, in the year 1516. The


exact title of this exceedingly rare book is not


ARABIC VERSIONS. 195


given by Wolf, by Masch, nor by De Rossi (it is
said to be found in Adler's Biblisch-kritische
Reise, p. 221); but, according to the title of it
which b. G. Tychsen cites from Rabbi Shabtai
(in Eichhorn’s Repertorium, x. 96), Saadjah’s
name is expressly mentioned there as the author
of that Arabic version. Nearly a century later
an Arabic version of the Pentateuch was printed
in the Polyglott of Paris, from a MS. belonging
to F. Savary de Breves; and the text thus ob-
tained was then reprinted in the London Poly-
glott, with a collection of the various readings cf
the Constantinopolitan text, and of another MS.
in the apperidix. For it was admitted that
Saadjah was the anthor of the Constantinopolitan
version; and the identity of that text with that
of the Paris Polyglott was maintained by Pocock
(who nevertheless acknowledged frequent intere
polations in the latter), and had been confirmed
even by the cullation which J. H. Hottinger
had instituted to establish their diversity. The
identity of all these texts was thus censidered a
settled point, and long remained so, until J. D.
Mi haelis published (in his Orient. Bibl, ix.
155, sg.) a copy of a Latin note which Jos. Ascari
had pretixed to the very MS. of De Breves, from
which the Paris Polyglott had derived its Arabic
version. That note ascribed the version to ‘ Saidus
Fajumensis, Monachus Coptites ;’ and thus Saad-
jah’s claim to be considered the author of the
version in the Polyglotts was again liable to
question, At length, however, Schnurrer (in his
Disertat. de Pentat. Arab. Polygl. in his Dissert,
Philologico-critice) printed the Arabic preface of
that MS., proved that there was no foundation for
the ‘Monachus Coptites,’ and endeavoured to
show that Said was the Arabic equivalent to the
Hebrew Sa‘adjah, and to re-establish the ancient
opinion of the identity of the two texts. The
results which he obtained appear (with the excep-
tion of a feeble attempt of O. G. Tychsen to
ascribe the version to Abu Sa’id, in the Reper-
torium) to have convinced most modem critics;
and indeed they have received much confirmation
by the appearance of the version of Isaiah. This
version of the Pentatench, which is an hononrable
monument of the Rabbinical Biblical philology
of the tenth century, possesses, in the imdepend-
ence of its tone, and in some peculiarities of in-
terpretation, the marks of having been formed on
the original text. It leans, of course, to Jewish
exegetical authorities generally ; but often follows
the Sept., and as often appears to express views
peculiar to its author. Carpzov has given nume-
rous examples of its mode of interpretation in his
Crit. Sacr. p. 646, sg. It is also marked by a
certain loose and paraphrastic style of rendering,
which makes it more useful in an exegetical
than in a critical point of view. It is ditticult,
however, to determine how much of this diffuse.
ness is due to Saadjah himself. For, not only is
the printed text of his version more faulty, in this
respect, than a Florentine MS., some of the read-
ings of which Adler has given in Eichhorn's
Einleit. ins A. T., ii. 245; but it has suffered a
systematic interpolation. A comparison of the
Constantinopolitan text with that of the Poby-
glotts shows that where the former retains those
terms of the Hebrew in which action or passion is
ascribed to God —the so-called dépamwordSerai—
the latter has the ‘ Angel of God,’ or rd other
°o


196 ARABIC VERSIONS.


mode of evading direct expressions. These inter-
polations are ascribed by Eiclihorn toa Samaritan
source; for Morinus and Hottinger assert that
the custom of omitting or evading the anthro-
pomorphisms of the Hebrew text is a charac-
teristic of the Samaritan versipns,

Aversion of Isaiah, which in the original MS.
is ascribed to Saadjah, with several extrinsic
evidences of truth, and without the opposition of
a single critic, appeared under the title, R.
Saadie Phijumensis Versio Jesaie Arabica
e MS. Budley. edidit atque Glossar. instrurit,
H. E. G. Paulus, fasc. ii., Jena, 1791, §vo. The
text was cupied from a MS. writtefi in Hebrew
characters, and the difficulty of always discover-
ing the equivalent Arabic letters into which it
was to be transposed, has been one source of the
inaccuracies observable in the work. Gesenius
(in his Jesatas, i. 8S, sq.) has given a summary
view of the characteristics of this version, and has
shown the great general agreement between them
and those of the version of the Pentateuch, in a
manner altogetler confirmatory of the Lelief in
the identity of the authors of both.

His version of Job exists in MS. at Oxford,
where Gesenius took a copy of it (Jesaias, p. x.).

That of Hosea is only known from the citation
of ch. vi. 9, by Kimchi (Pococke’s Theolog.
Works, ii. 280).

B. The version of Joshua which is printed in
the Paris and London Polyglotts, the author and
date of which are unknown.

C. The version of the whole passage from
1 Kings xii. to 2 Kings xii. 16, inclusive, which
is also found in the same Polyglotts. Professor
Rodiger has collected the critical evidences which
prove that this whole interval is translated from
the Hebrew; and ascribes the version to an un-
known Damascene Jew of the eleventh century.
Likewise, the passage in Nehemiah, from i. to ix.


27, inclusive, as it exists in both Polyglotts, which -


he asserts to be the translation of a Jew (resem-
bling that of Joshua in style), but with subsequent
interpolations by a Syrian Christian. (See his
work De Origine Arabica Libror. V. T. Hus-
toric. Interpretationis, Halle, 4to.)

D. The very close and almost slavish version
of the Pentateuch, by some Mauritanian Jew of
the thirteenth century, which Erpenius published
at Leyden in 1622—the scealted Arabs Erpenii.

FE. The Samaritan Arabic version of Abu
Said. According to the author’s preface affixed
to the Paris MS. of this version (No. 4), the
original of which is given in Eichhorn’s Brdl.
Biblioth. iii. 6, Abu Said was induced to under
take it, partly by seeing the corrupt state to which
ignorant copyists had reduced the version then
used by the Samaritans, and partly by discover-
ing that the version which they used, under the
belief that it was that of Abu’l Hasan of Tyre,
was in reality none other than that of Saadjah
Haggatn. His national prejudice being thus
excited against an accursed Jew, and the ‘ mani-
fest impiety’ of some of his interpretaticns, he
applied himself to this translation, and accom-

nied it with notes in order to justify his render-
ings, toexplain difficulties, and to dispute with
the Jews. His version is characterized by ex-
treme fidelity to the Samaritan text (¢.¢. in other
words, to the Hebrew text with the differences
which distinguish the Samaritan recension of it),


ARABIC VERSIONS.


retaining even the order of the words, and often
sacrificing the proprieties of the Arabic idiom to
the preservation of the very terms of the original.
It is certainly not formed on the Samaritan
version, although it sometimes agrees with it;
and it has such a resemblance to the version of
Saadjah as implies familiarity with it, or a
desiyned use of its assistance; and it exceeds
both these in the constant avoidance of all anthro-
pomorphic expressions. Its date is unknown, but
It must have been executed between the tenth
and thirteenth centuries because it was neces-
sarily posterior to Saadjah’s version, and becanse
the Barberini copy of it was written a.p. 1227.
It is to be regretted that this version, although it
would be chiefly available in determining the
readings of the Samaritan Peutateuch, is stil?
unpublished. It exists in MS. at Oxford (one of
the copies there being the one cited by Castell in
the Appendix to the London Polyglott), at Paris,
Leyden, and at Rome, in the celebrated Barberini
Triglott (the best description of which is in De
Rossi's Specimen Var. Lect. et Chald. Estheris
Additamenta, Titbingen, 1783). Portions only
have heen printed : the earliest by J. H. Hottinger,
in his Promtuarium, p. 98; and the two longest
by De Sacy, with an interesting dissertation, in
Eichhorn’s Bibl. Brblioth. x.. and by Van
Victen, in his Specim. Philolog. continens de-
scrip. cod. MS. Biblioth. Luqd.-Bat. Partemque
Vers. Sam. Arab. Pentat., Leite, 1803.
¥. A version of the Gospels, which was first
rinted at Rome in 1590, then in the Arabic
New Testament of Erpenius in 1616, and after-
wards in the Paris Pobyelott (the text of which
last is the one copied in that of London). Thaw
first two of these editions are derived from MSS.,
and the variations which distinguish the tex of
Paris trom that of Rome are also supposed to have
been obtained froma MS, The agreement and
the diversity of all these texts are equally 1e-
markable, The agreement is so great as to prove
that they all represent only one and the same
version, and that one based immediately on the
Greek. The diversities (exclusive of errors of
copyists) consist in the irregular changes which
have been made in every one of these MSS., se-
festa to adapt it indiscriminately to the
eshito or Coptic versions, This surprising
amalgamation is thus accounted for by Hug:
When the prevalence of the Arabic language had
rendered the Syriac and Coptic obsolete, the
Syrians and Copts were obliged to use an Arabic
version. They therefore took some translation in
that language, but tirst adapted it to the Peshito
and Memphitic versions respectively. As the
Peshitu and Coptic versions still continued to be
read first in their churches, and the Arabic trans-
lation immediately afterwards. as a kind of Tar
gum, it became usual to write their national ver-
sions and this amended Arabic version in parallel
columns. This mere juxtaposition led to a
further adulteration im each case. Afterwards,
two of these MSS. which had thus suffered different
adaptations, were brought together by some means,
and mutually corrupted each other—by which a
third text, the hybrid one of our Arabic version,
was produced. ‘The age of the original Arabic
text is uncertain; but the circumstance of its
adoption by the Syrians and Copts places it near
the seventh century (Bertholdt’s Hindeit. i692, s¢.),


ARAD.


@. The version of the Acts, of the Epistles of
Paul, of the Catholic Epistles, and of the Apo-
calypee, which is found in both the Polyglotts.
The author is unknown, but he is supposed to
have been a native of Cyrene, and the date to be
the eighth or ninth century (Bertholdt, ibid.).

Il. Arabic versions founded on the LXX.

A. The Polyglott version of the Prophets,
which is expressly said in the inscription in the
Paris MS. to have been made from the Greek by
an Alexandrian priest. Its date is probably later
than the tenth century.

B, That of the Psalms (according to the Syrian
Tecension) which is printed in Justiniani’s Psalé.
Octapium. Genoa, 1516, and in Liber. Psalmor.
@ Gabr. Sionita et Vict. Scialac. Rome, 1614.

C. That version of the Psalms which is in use
by the Malkites, or Orthodox Oriental Christians,
made by ‘Abdallah hen al Fadhl, before the
twelfth century. It has been printed at Aleppo in
1706, in London in 1725, and elsewhere.

D. The version of the Psalms (according to

Egyptian recension) which is found in Both

Polyglotts,

Ill. Arabic versions formed on the Peshito.

A. The Polyglott version of Job, of Chronicles,
and (according to Rédizer, whu ascribes them to

tan translators in the thirteenth and four-
teenth centuries) that of Judges, Ruth, Samuel,
1 Kings i. to xi., and 2 Kings xii. 17, to xxv.

B. The version of the Psalms printed at
Qashaia, near Mount Lebanon, in 1610. (The
Einleitungen of Eichhorn, Bertholdt, and De
Wette contain ample researches, or references,
for the further investigation of this extensive sub-
ject.) —J. N.

ARAD, an ancient city on the southernmo.t
boniers of Palestine, whose inhabitants. drove


back the Israclites as they attempted to penetrate,


from Kadesh into Canaan (Num. xxi. 1, where
the Auth. Vers. has ‘King Arad,’ instead of
‘King of Arad‘), but were eventually subdued
by Joshua, along with the other southern Ca-
naanites (Josh. xii. 14, comp. x. 41; also Judg.
1.16), Eusebius and Jerome piace Arad twenty
Roman miles from Hebron, which would be
equal to about eight hours with camels. This
accords well with the sitnation of a hill called
Tell ‘Arad, which Dr. Robinson observed on the
toad from Petra to Hebron. He describes it as
‘a barren-looking eminence rising above the
conntry around.’ He did not examine the spot,
but the Arabs said there were no ruins upon or
Rear it, but only a cavern. The name alone
is, however, too decisive to admit a doubt that the
bill marks the site of the ancient Arad,
ARADUS. [Aavap.]


ARAM (D7, probably from DY, high, g.d.
the Highlands’) was the name given by the
Hebrews to the tract of country lying between
Phanicia on the west, Palestine on the south,
Arabia Deserta and the river Tigris on the east,
and the mountain-range of Taurus on the north.
Many parts of this extensive territory have a
much lower level than Palestine, but it might
receive the designation of * highlands,’ because it
oes rise to a greater elevation than that country
at most points of immediate contact, and espe-
Cially on the side of Aram, or


ARAM. 197


seems to have corresponded generally to the Syria
and Mesopotamia of the Greeks and Romans
(see those articles). We find the following di-
visions expressly noticed in Scripture:—1. ARam-
Damursex, POT DU, the ‘ Syria of Da-
mascus’ conquered by David, 2 Sam. viii. 5, 6,
where it denotes only the territory around Da-
mascus; but elsewhere ‘ Aram,’ in connection
with its capital ‘ Damascus,’ appears to be used
in a wider sense for Syria Proper (Isa. vii. 1, 8;
xvii. 3; Amos i. 5). At a later period Da-
mascus gave name to a district, the Syria Da-
mascena of Pliny (v.13). To this part of Aram
the ‘ land of Hadrach’ seems to have belonged
(Zech. ix. 1). 2. ARam-Maacuan, TIYD DIN
(1 Chron. xix. 6), or simply Afaachah (2 Sam.
x. 6, 8), which, if formed from YD, to ‘ press
together,’ would describe a country enclosed and
hemmed in by mountains, in contradistinction
to the next division, ‘ Aram-beth-Rechob,’ ¢. e.
Syria the wide or broad, M3 being used in
Syriac for a ‘district of country.’ Aram-Maachah
was not far from the northern border of the Israel-
ites on the ‘east of the Jordan (comp. Deut. iii,
14, with Josh. xiii. 11, 13). In 2 Sam. x. 6, the
text has ‘king Maachah,’ but it is to be corrected
from the parallel passage in 1 Chron. xix. 7,
‘king of Maachah.’ 3. Aram-BeTH-RecHos,
AWN MD OAS, the meaning of which may be
that given above, but the precise locality cannot
with certainty be determined. Some comnect it
with the Beth-relob of Judg. xviii, 28, which
Rosenmiiller identities with the Rehob of Num.
xiii. 21, situated ‘as men come to Hamath,’ and
supposes the district to be that now known as the
Ardh-el-Hhule at the foot of Anti-Libanus, near
the sources of the Jordan. A place called Reliob
is also mentioned in Judg. i. 31; Josh. xix. 28,
30 ; xxi. 31; but it is doubtful if it be the same.
Michaelis thinks of the Rechoboth-ha-Nahar (lit.
streets, t.e. the village or town on the river
Euphrates) of Gen, xxxvi. 37; but still more
improbable is the idea of Bellermann and Jabn
that Aram-beth-Rechob was beyond the Tigris in
Assyria. 4. ARAM-ZouaH, MIV¥ OW, or, in the
Syriac fourm, S319 Zoba (2 Sam. x. 6). Jewish
tradition has placed Zobah at Aleppo (see the
Itinerary of Benjamin of Tudela), whereas
Syrian tradition identifies it with Nisibis, a city
in the north-east of Mesopotamia. Though the
latter opinion long obtained currency under the
authority of Michaelis (in his Dissert. de Syria
Subea, to be found in the Comment. Soe. Got-
ting. 1769), yet the former seems a much nearer
approximation to the truth, We may gather
from 2 Sam. viii. 3, x. 16, that the eastern boun-
dary of Aram-Zubah was the Euphrates, but
Nisibis was far beyond that river; besides that
in the title bf the sixtieth Psalm (supposing it
genuine) Aram-Zobah is clearly distinguished
from Aram-Naharaim, or Mesopotamia. It is
true, indeed, that in 2 Sam. x. 16, it is said that
Hadarczer, king of Zobah, brought against David
© Aramites from beyond the river; but these wee
auxiliaries, and not his own subjects. The people
of Zobah are uniformly spoken of as near neigh
bours of the Israelites, the Damascenes, and other
Syrians; and in one place (2 Chron. viil. 3)
Hamath is called Hamath-Zobah, as pertaining
to that district. We, therefore, conclude that
Aram-Zobah extended from the Euphrates west


198 ARAM.
ward, perhaps as far north as to Aleppo. It was
* long le aad powerful of the betty Kingloiis of


Aramza, its princes commonly bearing the name
of Hadacdezer or Hadarezer. 5. ARam-N AHARAIM,
BM DW, i.e. Aram of the Two Rivers, called
in Syriac ‘ Beth-Nahrin,’ i.e. ‘the land of the
rivers,’ following the analogy by which the
Greeks formed the name Megomoraula, ‘ the
country between the rivers.” For that Meso;
tamia is here designated is admitted universally,
with the exception only of Mr, Tilston Beke, who,
in his Origines Biblice, among many other para-
doxical notions, maintains that ‘ Aram-Naharaim’
is the territury of Damascus. The rivers which
enclose Mesopotamia are the Euphrates on the
west and the Tigris on the east; but it is doubtful
whether the Aram-Naharaim of Scripture embraces
the whule of that tract or only the northern portion
of it (comp. Gen. xxiv. 10; Deut. xxiii. 4;
Judg. iii. 8). A part of this rezion of Aram
is also called Padan-Aram. DIS JTS, the plain
of Aram (Gen. xxv. 2th; xxviii. 2, 6.73; xxxi.
18; xxxiii. 18), and once simply Padan (Gen.
xviii. 7), also Sed. h- Aram, DIN AW, the field
of Aram (Hos. xii. 13), whence the ‘ Campi
Mesopotamiw’ of Quintus Cuitius (ili, 2. 3;
iii. 8.1; iv. 9.6). But that the whole of Aram-
Naharaim did not belong to the flat country of
Mesopotamia appears from the circumstance that
Balaam, who (Deut. xxiii. 4) is called a native
of Aram-Naharaim, says (Numb, xxiii. 7) that
he was bought ‘from Aram, out of the moun-
tains of the east.’ The Septuagint, in some of
these places, has Mecororaula Zuplas, and in
others Zupia Moraudy, which the Latins rendered
by Syria Interamna ,

But though the districts now enumerated be
the only ones expressly named in the Bible as
belonging to Aram, there is no doubt that many
More territories were included in that extensive


region, e.g. Geshur, Hul, Arpad, Riblah, Tad- .


mor, Hauran, Abilene, &c., though some of them
may have furmed part of the divisions already
specified, A native of Aram was called ‘ON
Arami, an Aramwzan, used of a Syrian (2 Kings
v. 20), and of a Mesopotamian (Gen. xxv. 20).
The feminine was Aramiah, an Aramitess
(1 Chron. vii. 14), and the plural Aramin
(2 Kings viii. 29). It appears from the ethno-
graphic table in the tenth chapter of Genesis
ig 22, 23) that Aram was a son of Shem, and
that his own suus were Uz, Hul, Gether, and
Mash. If these gave names to districts, Uz was
in the north of Arabia Deserta, unless its name
was derived rather from Huz, son of Nahor,
Abraham's brother (Gen. xxii. 21). Hul was
probably Coele-Syria; Mash, the Mons Masius
north of Nisibis in Mesopotamia; Gether is un-
known. Another Aram is mentioned (Gen.
xxii. 21) as the grandson of Nahor and son of
Kemuel, but he is not to be thought of here. The
descent of the Aramzans fiom a son of Shem is
contirmed by their language, which was one of
the branches of the Semitic family, and nearly
allied to the Hebrew. Many writers, who have
copied without acknowledgment the words of
Calmet, maintain that the Arameeans cume from
Kir, appealing to Amos ix. 7; but while that

ge is not free from obscurity, it seems evi-
ently to point, not to the aboriginal abode of the
people, but to the country whence God would


ARAMAIC LANGUAGE.


recover them when banished. The prophet had
said (Amos i. 5) that the people of Aram should
go into captivity to Kir toasty the coun
on the river Kur or Cyrus), a prediction of whi
we read the accomplishment in 2 Kings xvi. 93;
and the allusion here is to their future restoration.
Hartmann thinks Armenia obtained its name
from Aram. Traces of the name of the Arameans
are to be found in the “Apiuo: and *Apayato: of
the Greeks (Strabo, xiii. 4.6; xvi. 4.27; comp.
Homer's liad, ii, 783) [see Assyria]. They were
sv noted for idolatry, that in the language of the
later Jews RMON was used as synonymous
with heathenism (see the Jishna of Sureniusius,
ii. 401; Onkelos on Levit. xxv. 47). Castell, in his
Lexie. Heptaglott. col, 229, says the same form of
speech prevails in Syriac and Ethiopic. The
Hebrew letters \ resh and "I daleth are so alike,
that they were often mistaken by transcribers;
and hence in the Old Testament DS Aram is
sumetimes found instead of DIN Edom, and
vice versd. Thus in 2 Kings xvi. 6, according
to the text, the Aramaans are spoken of as pos
sessing Elath on the Red Sea; but the Ma-oretic
marginal reading has ‘ the Kdomites,’ which is
also found in many manuscripts, in the Septua-
gint and Vulzate, and it is obviously the correct
reading.—N. M.


ARAMAIC LANGUAGE (MYON. 2 Kings
xviii. 263; Dau. ii. 4). The Aramaic language—
that whole, of which the Chaldee and Syriac dialects
form the parts—constitutes the northern and least
developed branch of the Syro-Arabian family.
Its cradle was probably on the banks of the Cyrus,
according to the best tuterpretation of Amos ix. 73
but Mesopotamia, Babylouia, and Syria form
what may be considered its home and proper do-
main. Political events, however, sub-equently
caused it to supplant Hebrew in Palestine; and
then it became the prevailing form of speech from
the Tigris to the shore of the Mediterranean, and,
in a contrary direction, from Armenia down to
the confines of Arabia, After obtaining such a
wide dominion, it was forced, from the ninth cen-
tury onwards, tu give way before the encroaching
ascendency of Arabic; and it now ouly survives,
as a living tongue, among the Syrian Christians in
the neighbourhood of Mosul.

According to historical records which trace the
mizrations of the Syro-Arabians from the East to
the South-west, and also according to the compa-
ratively ruder form of the Aramaic language itself,
we might suppose that it represents, even in the
state in which we have it, some image of that ab-
original type which the Hetews and Arabians,
under more favourable social aud climatical ins
fluences, subsequently developed into fisluess of
sound and structure. But it is difficult for us now
tu discern the particular vestiges of this archaic
form; fur, not only did the Aramaic not work
out its own development of the original elements
common to the whole Syre-Arabian sisterhood of
languages, but it was pre-eminently exposed, both
by neighbourhood and by conquest, to harsh col-
lision with languages of an utterly different
family. Moreover, it is the only one of the
three great Syro-Arabian branches which has no
fruits of a purely national literature to boast of.
We possess 10 monument whatever of its own ge-
nius; nut any work which may be considered the


ARAMAIC LANGUAGE.


— of the political and religious culture of
nation, and characteristic of it—as is so em-
Phatically the case both with the Hebrews and
the Arabs. The first time we see the language, it
3s used by Jews as the vehicle of Jewish thought ;
aad although, when we next meet it, it is em-
ployed by native authors, yet they write under
the literary impulses of Christianity, and under
the Greek influence on thought and language
which necessarily accompanied that religion,


These two modifications, which constitute and.


define the so-called Chaldee and Syriac dialects,
are the only furms in which the normal and stand-
ard Aramaic has been preserved to us.

It is evident, from these circumstances, that,
&p to a certain period, the Aramaic language has
no other history than that of its relations to He-

ew. The earliest nutice we have of its separate
existence is in Gen. xxxi. 47, where Laban, in
Sing his own name to the memorial heap, em-

8 words which are genuine Aramaic both in
‘orm and use. The next instance is in 2 Kings
XMiL. 26, where it appears that the educated Jews
uxlerstood Aramaic, but that the common people
wc hot. A striking illustration of its prevalence
“found in the circumstance that it is employed,
& the language of ofticial communication, in the
edict addressed by the Persian court to its sub-
Fects in Palestine (Ezra iv. 17). The later rela-


bout of Aramaic to Hebrew consist entirely of ha


gradual encroachments on the part of the former.
The Helrew language was indeed always ex-
peed, particularly in the north of Palestine, to
Aramaic influences; whence the Aramaisms of
the book of Judges and of some others are de-
tived. It also had always a closer conjunction,
both by origin and by intercourse, with Aramaic
than with Arabic. But in later times great political
eveuts secured to Aramaic the complete ascend-
ency ; for, on the one hand, after the deportation of
the ten tribes, the repeuopling their country with
colonists chiefly of Syrian origin generated a
mixed Aramaic and Hebrew dialect (the Samari-
tan) in ceutral Palestine; and on the other, the
exile of the remaining two tribes exposed them to
acousiderable, although generally overrated, Ara-
maic influence in Babylon, and their restoration,
by placing them in contact with the Samaritans,
tended still further to dispossess them of their
vemacular Hebrew. The subsequent dominion
of the Seleucid, under which the Jews formed
& portion of a Syrian kingdom, appears to have
completed the series of events by which the Ara-
waic supplanted the Hebrew language entirely.
The ciief characteristics in form and flexion
which distinguish the Aramaic from the He-
language are the following :—As to the con-
sonants, the great diversity between the forms of the
same root as it exists iu both languages, arises
Priucipally from the Aramaic having a tendency
to avoid the sibilants. Thus, where }, Y, and ¥
are found in Hebrew, Aramaic often uses ‘T, N,
and; and even Y for ¥. Letters of the same
Organ are also frequently interchanged. and gene-
rally so that the Aramaic, consistently with its
characteristic roughness, prefers the harder sounds.
The number of vowel-sounds generally is much
smaller: the verb is reduced toa monosyllable, as
ra aa fee forms of ‘nouns, The de
anguage of some distinct forms whic!
ame marked in Hebrew ; but the number and variety


ARARAT. ‘Y09


of nominal formations is aleo in other respects
much more limited. The verb no vestige
of the conjugation Niphai, but forms all its pas
sives by the prefix MN. The third person plural
of the perfect has two forms, to mark the difference
of gender. The use of the imperfect with vao
consequutivum is unknown. There is an im

tive mood in all the passives. Each of the active
coujugations, Pael and Aphel, possesses two parti~
ciples, one of which has a ive signification.
The participle is used with the personal un
to form, a kind ,of present tense. The classes of
verbs i1? and NX), and other weak forms, are al
most indistinguishable. In the noun, again, a
word is rendered definite by appending the vowel
@ to the end (the so-called status emphaticus);
but thereby the distinction between simple femi-
nine and definite masculines is lost in the singu-
lar. The plural masculine ends in fn. The
relation of genitive is most frequently expressed
by ‘the pretix 3, and that of the olject by the -
preposition ?.

All these peculiarities are common to both the
dialects of Aramaic, and may therefore be consi-
dered to constitute the fundamental character of
the language. The statement of the points in
which they differ from each other, and an account
of their literary remains, of their palwographical
history, and of the subordinate dialects which
ve been derived from them, are reserved for
other articles (Cuanpex Lanouaae].—J. N.


ARARAT (OV) occurs nowhere in Scripture
as the name of a mountain, but only as the name
of a country, upon the ‘ mountains’ of which the
ark rested during the subsidence of the flood
(Gen. viii. 4). In almost every part of the East,
where there is the tradition of a deluge, the in
habitants connect the resting-place of the ‘ great
vessel’ with some conspicuous elevation in their


_own neighbourhood. Thus we are informed by


the lamented Sir A. Burnes (Z'ravels to Bukhara,
vol. i, p. 117), that on the road to Peshawur
and Cabul, the Sufued Koh, or ‘ White Moun-
tain,’ rears its crest on one side, and the towering
hill of Noorgill, or Kooner, on the other. Here
the Afghans believe the ark of Noah to have rested
after the Deluge. Another sacred mountain in
the East is Adam's Peak, in the island of Ceylon,
and it is a curious circumstance, that in Gen.
viii. 4, the Samaritan Pentateuch has ‘ Sarandib,’
the Arabic name of Ceylon. In the Sibylline
verses it is said that the mountains of Ararat
were in Phrygia; but Bochart has ingeniously
conjectured that the miscunception arose from the
city of Apamea there having been called Kibotos
(the Greek word for an ark), because inclosed in
the shape of an ark by three rivers. Shuckford,
after Sir Walter Raleigh, would place Ararat
far to the east, in part of the range anciently
called Caucasus and Imaus, and terminating in
the Himmaleh mountains, north of India ; and te
this opinion a late writer (Kirby) inclines in his
Bridgewater Treatise (p. 45). Dr. Pye Smith
also, when advocating the local and partial nae
ture of the Deluge, seeks for a less elevated moun-
tain than the Armenian Ararat, and lays hold of
this among other hypotheses (The Relation be-
tween Scripture und Geological Science, p. 302) 5
whereas Kirby embraces it for the very bi ape
reason, viz., because, holding the universality of


,


20 ARARAT.
the Flood, he thinks that mountain is not high
enough to account for the long period that elapsed
(Gen. viii. 5) before the other mountains became
visible. Now it is evident that these and such-
Like theories have been framed in forgetfulness of
what the Bible bas recorded respecting the loca-
lity of Ararat. We may be unable to fix with
cision where that region lay, but we can with-
out difficulty decide that it was neither in Af-
ghbanistan nor Ceylon, neither in Asia Minor nor
in Northern India.

The only other passages where ‘ Ararat’ occurs
are 2 Kings xix. 37 (Isa. xxxvii. 38) and Jer.
li. 27. In the former it is spoken of as the coun-
try whither the suns of Sennacherib, king of As-
ayria, fled, after they had murdered their father.
The apocryphal book of Tobit (i. 21) says it was
els 7a Spn ’"Apapdé, ‘ to the mountains of Ararath.’
This points to a territory which did not form
part of the immediate dominion of Assyria, and

might not be far off from it. The description
is quite applicable to Armenia, and the tradition *
of that country bears, that Sennacherib’s sons
were kindly received by king Paroyr, who al-
lotted them portions of land bordering on As-
syria, and that in course of time their posterity also
established an independent kingdom, called Vas-
purakan (Avdall's Yranst. of Chamich’s Hist.
of Armenia (vol i. p. 33, 34). The other Scrip-
ture text (Jer. li. 27) mentions Ararat, along with
Minni and Ashkenaz, as kingdoms summuned to
arm themselves against Babylon. In the pa-
rallel place in Isa. xiii. 2-4, the invaders of Ba-
bylonia are described as ‘ issuing from the moun-
tains;’ and if by Adéznt we understand the J/i-
nyas in Armenia, mentioned by Nicholas of Da-
mascus (Josephus, Antig i. 3. 6), and by Ashkenaz
some country on the Lurine Sea, which may have
had its original name, A.renos, from Ashkenaz, a
son of Gomer, the progenitor of the Cimmerians
(Gen. x. 2, 3)—then we artive at the same con-
clusion, viz., that Ararat was a mountainous re-
gion north of Assyria, and in all probability in
Armenia. In Ezek. xxxviii. 6, we tind Togar-
mah, another part of Armenia, connected with
mer, and in Ezek. xxvii. 14, with Meshech
and Tubal, all tribes of the north. With this
agree the traditions of the Jewish and Christian
churches, and likewise the accounts of the native
Armenian writers, who inform us that Ararad
was the name of one of the ancient provinces of
their country, supposed to correspond to the
modern pashaliks of Kars and Bayazeed, and
part of Kurdistan. According to the tradition
preserved in Moses of Chorene, the name of Ara-
rat was derived from Arai, the eighth of the native
seta who was killed in a battle with the Ba-
ylonians, about s.c. 1750 ; in memory of which
the whole province was called Aray-iarat, 1. ¢.
the ruin of Arai.

But though it may be concluded with tolerable
certainty that the land of Ararat is to be identitied
with a portion of Armenia, we possess no historical
data for fixing on any one mountain in that country
as the resting-place of the ark. Indeed it may be
fairly questioned whether the phrase in Gen. viii.


* A similar tradition is reportel by the Ar-
menian historian, Moses of Chorene, but he dates
the event in the reign of Skaiord, the father of
Paroyr.


ARARAT.


4 AINA MIN, ‘and the ark rested,’ necessarily
means that the ark actually grounded on the
of @ mountain; it may merely imply that
it had been driven and tossed to and fro on
waste of waters, it at length settled, ¢. e. i
@ measure of comparative repose, and became


lu


more stationary over (by) the mountains of


Ararat, when the waters began to subside. That
this may be the import of the expression will be


-denied by none who are acquainted with the


genius of the Hebrew language, and with the
latitude of meaning attachable to the verb M3,
which (as is observed by Taylor in his Concord-
ance) includes whatever comes under the idea of
‘ remaining quietly in a place without being dix»
turbed.’ A vessel enjoys more real rest when be-
calmed, than when she grounds on the gd a
submarine mountain in a troubled sea. What
gives plausibility to our conjecture is the fact
that whether the ‘ rest’ was obtained on the bosom
of the now calmer deep, or by coming into con-
tact with the dry land, it was nearly three months
after this before ‘the tops of the mountains were
seen’ (Gen. viii. 5); the same mountains being
evidently intended as those spoken of in the pre-
vious verse, viz. the mountains of Ararat. Now,
as the waters were all the while abating (v. 3), it
is much easier to reconcile this latter statement
with the idea of the ark being still afluat, than
with the common belief that it lay on a mountain
peak; besides, that by this interpretation we get
rid of otherwise inexplicable difliculties. If our
supposition be correct, then, for anything that ap-
pears to the contrary, the ark did not touch the
earth unti] the waters were abated to a level with
the lower valleys or plains, and, consequently,
the inmates were not left upon a dreary elevation
of 16,000 or 17,000 feet, never till of late deemed
accessible to human footsteps, and their safe de
scent frum which, along with al] the ‘living
creatures’ committed to their care, would have
been a greater miracle than their deliverance
from the flood. By this explanation also we ob-
viate the geological objection against the moun-
tain, now called Ararat, having been submerged,
which would imply a universal deluge, whereas
by the ‘ mountains of Ararat’ may be understood
some lower chain in Armenia, whose height would
not be incompatible with the notion uf a partial
flood. F iunlly, we on this hypothesis solve the
question :—If the descendants of Noah settled
near the resting-place of the ark in Armenia, how
could they be said to approach the plain of
Shinar (Gen. xi. 2), or Babylonia, from the East?
For, as we read the narrative, the precise restin z-
place of the ark is nowhere mentioned; and
though for a time stationary ‘ over’ the mountains
of Ararat, it may, before the tinal subsidence of
the waters, have been carried considerably to the
east of them.

The ancients, however, attached a peculiar sa-
credness to the tops of high mountains, and hence
the belief was cally propagated that the ark must
have rested on some such lofty eminence. The
earliest tradition fixed on one of the chain of
mountains which separate Armenia on the south
from Mesopotamia, and which, as they also inclose
Kurdistan, the land of the Kurds, obtained the
name of the Kardu, or Carduchian range, cor
rupted into Gordiwan and Cordywan. This


ARARAT.

opmion prevailed among the Chaldeans, if we
may rely on the testimony of Berosus as quoted
by Josephus (Antig. i. 3.6): ¢ It is said is
still some part of this ship in Armenia, at the
mountain of the Cordyzans, and that people
carry off pieces of the bitumen, which they use as
amulets.” The same is reported by Abydenus
(in Euseb. Prep, Evang. ix. 4), who says they
employed the wood of the vessel against diseases.
Hence we are red to find the tradition
adopted by the Chaldee paraphrasts, as well as
a. Syriac translators and commentators, and
a the Syrian churches. In the three texts where
Ararat’ occurs, the Targum of Onkelos has }77)
Hardu; and, according to Buxtorf, the term
* Kardyan’ was in Chaldee ymous with
Armenian.’ At Gen. viii. 4, the Arabic of Er-
Penius has Jibal-el-Karud (the Mountain of the


Kurds), which is likewise found in the ‘ Book of
Adam’ of the Zabeans. For other fs that
this was the prevalent opinion umong the Eastern


churches, the reader may consult Eutychius,
(Annals,) and Epiphanius (Heres. 18). It was
no doubt from this source that it was borrowed
by Mahomet, who in his Koran (xi. 46) says,
‘ The ark rested on the mountain Al-Judi.’ That
name was probably a corruption of Giordi, i.e.
Gordizan (the designation given to the entire
range), but afterwards applied to the special lo-
cality where the ark was sw to have rested.
This is on a moantain a little to the east of
Jezirah ibn Omar (the ancient Bezabde) on the
Tigris. At the foot of the mountain there was a
village called Karya Thaminin, i. e. the Village
of the Eighty—that being the number (and not
eight) saved from the flood according to the Mo-


‘ammedan belief. The historian Elmacin men-
tions that the Heractius went up, and
Visited this as ‘the place of the ark.’ Here, or in
the neizhbourhood, was once a famous Nestorian
Monastery, ‘ the Monastery of the Ark,’ destroyed
by lightning in a.v. 776. The credulous Jew,
njamin of Tudela, says that a mosque was
built at Mount Judi, ‘ of the remains of the ark,’
by the Khalif Omar. Macdonald Kinneir, in
deseribing his journey from Jezirah along the left
bank of the Tigris to Nahr Van, says, ‘ We had a
of mountains running parallel with the

road on the left hand. This range is called the
Juda Dag (i.e. mountain) by the Turks, and one
of the inhabitants of Nahr Van assured me that
he had frequently seen the remains of Noah's ark
on a lofty peak behind that village.’ (Comp.
Rich's Kurdistan, vol. ii. p- 124.) A French
savant, Eugene Boré, who lately visited those
ot says the Mohammedan dervishes still main-
here a perpetually burning Jamp in an ora-


tory. (Revue Frangaise, vol. xii. ; or the Semeur
of October 2, 1839.

After the disappearance of the Nestorian mo-
nastery, the tradition which fixed the site of the
ark on Mount Judi appears to have declined in
credit, or been chiefly confined to Mahometans,
and gave place (at least among the Christians of
the West) to that which now obtains, and accord-
ing to which the ark rested on a great mountain
in the north of Armenia—to which (so strongly
did the idea take hold of the popular belief) was,
in course of time, given the very name of Ararat,
as if no doubt could be entertained that it was
the Ararat of Scripture. We have seen, however,
that in the Bible Ararat is nowhere t!e name of
a mountain, and by the native Armenians the
mountain in question was never so designated ; it
is by them called Macis, and by the Turks
Aghur-dagh, i. ec.‘ The Heavy or Great Moun-
tain.” The Vulgate and Jerome indeed, render
Ararat by ‘ Armenia,’ but they do not particur


202 ARARAT.


larize any one mountain. Still there is no doubt
of the antiquity of the tradition of this being (as
it is sometimes termed) the ‘ Mother of the World.’
The Persians call it Kuhi Nuch, ‘ Noah's Moun-
tain.’ Tne Armenian etymology of the name of
the city of Nakhchevan (which lies east of it) is
said to be ‘first place of descent or lodging,’
being regarded as the place where Noah resided
after descending from the mount. It is men-
tioned by Josephus under a Greek name of si-
milar import, viz. "AwoBarhpiov, and by Ptolemy
as Nazua'a.

The mountain thus known to Europeans as
Ararat consists of two immense conical eleva-
tions (one peak considerably lower than the other),
towering in massive and majestic grandeur from
the valley of the Aras, the ancient Araxes Smith
and Dwight give its position N. 57° W. of
Nakhchevan, and S. 25° W. of Erivan (Re-
searches in Armenia, p. 267); and remark, in
describing it befure the recent earthquake, that in
no part of the world had they seen any mountain
whose impusing appearance could plead half so
powerfully as this a claim to the honour of having
once been the stepping-stone between the old
world and the new. ‘It appeared,’ says Ker
Porter, ‘ as if the hugest mountains of the world
had been piled upon each other to form this one
sublime iinmensity of eaith and rocks and snow.
The icy peaks of its double heads rose majesti-
cally into the clear and cloudless heavens; the
sun blazed bright upon them, and the reflection
sent forth a dazzling radiance equal tu other suns.
My eye, not able to rest for any length of time
upon the blinding glory of its summits, wandered
down the apparently interminable sides, till I
could no longer trace their vast lines in the mists
of the horizon ; when an irrepressible impulse im-
mediately carrying my eye upwards, again re-
fixed my gaze upon the Seful glare of Ararat.’
To the same effect Morier writes :—* Nothing can
be more beautiful than its shape, more awful than
its height. All the surrounding mountains sink
into insignificance when compared to it. It is
perfect in all its parts; no hard rugged feature,
no unnatural prominences, everything is in har-
mony, and all combines to render it one of the
sublimest objects in nature.’

Several attempts had been made to reach the
top of Ararat, but few persons had got beyond the
limit of perpetual snow. The French traveller
Tournefort, in the year 1700, long persevered in
the face of many difficulties, but was foiled in the
end. Between thirty and forty years ago the
Pasha of Bayazeed undertook the ascent with no
better sutcess. The honour was reserved to a
German, Dr. Parrot, in the employment of Rus-
sia, who, in his Reise zum Ararat (Journey to
Ararat) gives the following particulars :—‘ The
summit of the Great Ararat is in 39° 42/ north
lat., and 61° 55/ east long. from Ferro. Its per-

dicular height is 16,254 Paris feet above the
Fevel of the sea, and 13,350 above the plain of the
Araxes. The Little Ararat is 12,284 Paris feet
above the sea, and 9561 above the plain of the
Araxes.’ After he and his party had failed in
two attempts to ascend, the third was successful,
and on the 27th Sep'ember (0. s.), 1529, they
stood on the summit of Mount Ararat. It was
a slightly convex, almost circular plattorm, about
200 Paris feet in diameter, composed of cternal


ARCH.


ice, unbroken by a rock or stone: on account of
the immense distances, nothing could be seen
distinctly. The mountain was, it is said, after.
wards ascended by a Mr. Antonomoff, hut the
fact both of his and Parrot’s having reached the
top is stoutly denied by the natives, and especially
by the inmates of the neighbouring convent of
Echmiadzin, who have a firm persuasion that in
order to preserve the ark no one is permitted to
approach it. This is based on the tradition that
a monk, who once made the attempt, was, when
asleep from exhaustion, unconsciously carried
down to the point whence he had started; but at
last, as the reward of his fruitless exertions, an
angel was sent to him with a piece of the ark,
which is preserved as the most valuable relic in
the cathedral of Echmiadzin.

Since the memorable ascent of Dr. Parrot,
Ararat has been the scene of a fearful calamity.
An earthquake, which in a few moments changed
the entire aspect of the country, commenced on
the 20th of duce (0. s.), 1°10, and continued, at
intervals, until the Ist of September. Traces of
fissures and Jandslips have been left on the sur
face of the earth, which the eye of the scientific
observer will recognise after many ages. The
destruction of houses and other property ina wide
tract of country around was very great; fortu-
nately, the earthquake having happened during
the day, the loss of lives did not exceed fifty.
The scene of greatest devastation was in the
narrow valley of Akorhi, where the masses of
rock, ice, and snow, detached from the summit of
Ararat and its lateral points, were thrown at one
single Lound from a heizht of 6000 teet to the
bottum of the valley, where they lay scattered
over an extent of several miles. (See Major
Voskoboinikot"s Report, in the Atheneum for
1841, p. 157).—N. M.

ARAUNAH (72738), or Ornan (1288),
a man of the Jebusite nation, which possessed
Jerusalem before it was taken by the Israelites.
His threshing-floor was on Mount Moriah; and
when he understood that it was required for the


“site of the Temple, he liberally offered the ground


to David as a free gift; but the king insisted
on paying the full value for it (2 Sam. xxiv. 18;
1 Chron. xxi. 18).

ARBA. [Hennon.]

ARBELA. [(Bern-Axset.]

ARCE, or Anke, by change of pronunciation
Rexkem; the same%&s Petra,the capital of Arabia
Petraa [Perna].

ARCH. Arches with vaulted chambers and
domed temples figure so conspicuously in mo
dern Oriental architecture, that, if the arch did
not exist among the ancient Jews, their towns
and houses could not possibly have oflered even
a faint resemblance to those which now exist:
and this being the case. a great part of the ana-
logical illustrations of Scripture which modem
travellers and Biblical illustrators have obtained
from this source must needs fall to the ground.
It is therefore of importance to ascertain whether
the arch did or did not exist in those remote
times to which most of the history of at least the
Old Testament belongs. Nothing against its
existence is to be inferred from the fact that no
word signifying an arch can be found in the
Hebrew Scriptures (for the word so rendered in


ARCH.


Esck. x]. 16, has not that meaning). The archi-
tectural notices in the Bible are uecessarily few
and general; and we have at this day histories
and other books, larger than the sacred volume,
in which no such word as ‘ arch’ occurs. There
3s certainly no absolute f that the Israelites
employed arches in their Puildings; but if it can
be shown that arches existed in Egypt at a very
early period, we may safely infer that so useful
an invention could not bave been unknown in
Palestine. :


Until within these few years it was common to
ascribe a comparatively late origin to the arch;
but circumstances have come to light one after
another, tending to throw the date more and more
backward, until at length it seems to be admitted
that in Egypt the arch already existed in the
time of Joseph. The observations of Rosellini
and of Sir J. G. Wilkinson led them irresistibly
to this conclusion, which has also been recently

by Mr. Cockerell (Lect. iii., in Athenaum
for Jan. 28, 1843) and other architects.

Itis shown by Sir J. G. Wilkinson that the
arch existed in brick in the reign of Amenoph I,
as early as p.c. 1540; and in stone in the time
of the second Psamaticus, p.c. 600. This evi-
dence is derived from the ascertained date of
arches now actually existing; but the paintings
at Beni-Hassan afford ground for the conclusion
that vaulted buildings were constructed in Egypt
as early as the reign of Osirtasen I., who is pre-
timed to have been contemporary with Joseph.
Indeed, although the evidence from facts does
Rot ascend beyond this, the evidence from
aalogy and probability can be carried back
to about .c. 2020 (Wilkinson's Anc. Egyptians,

HGS iii. as Sir J. G. Wilkinson suggests

probability that the arch owed its invention
to the small quantity of wood in Egypt, and the
consequent expense of roofing with timber. The
apie may be thus arranged in chronological


The evidence that arches were known in the


ARCH. 208
time of the first Osirtasen is derived from the
drawings at Beni-Hassan (Wilkinson, ii. 117).


In the secluded valley of Dayr el Medeeneh,
at Thebes, are several tombs of the early date of
Amenoph I. Among the most remarkable of
these is one whose crude brick roof and niche,
bearing the name of the same Pharaoh, prove the
existence of the arch at the remote period of
B.c. 1510 (Wilkinson, Topography of Thebes,
see . Another tomb of similar construction

the ovals of Thothmes III., who reigned
about the time of the Exode (Anc. Egyptians,
iii, 319). At Thebes there is also a brick arch
bearing the name of this king (Hoskins, Travels
in Ethiopia).

To the same period and dynasty (the 18th)
belong the vaulted chambers and arched door
ways (see cut, fig. 4) which yet remain in the
crude brick pyramids at Thebes (Wilkinson,
Anc. Egyptians, iii. 317).

In ancient Egyptian houses it a) that the
roofs were often vaulted, and built, like the rest
of the house, of crude brick; and there is reason
to believe that some of the chambers in the pa-
vilion of Rameses III. (about p.c. 1245), at
Medeenet Habov, were arched with stone, since
the devices in the bah es of the walls show
that the fallen roofs this form (see cut,
fig. 3).

ne most ancient actually existing arches of
stone occur at Memphis, near the modern village
of Saqqara. Here there is a tomb with two large
vaulted chambers, whose roofs display in eve

rt the name and sculptures of Psamaticus iL.
about s.c. 600). The chambers are cut in the
limestone rock, and this being of a friable nature,
the roof is secured by being, as it were, lined with
an arch, like our modern tunnels.


To about the same period—that of the last
dynasty before the Persian invasion—belong the
remarkable doorways of the enclosures surround-
ing the tombs in the Assas¢ef, which are com-

el of two or more concentric semicircles of

rick (fig. 2) (Wilkinson, Anc. Egyptians, iil.
319).

Although the oldest stone arch whose age has

been positively ascertained does not date earlier


204 ARCH.


than the time of Psamaticus, we cannot suppose
that the use of stune was not adopted by the
Egyptians for that style of building previous to
his reign, even if the arches in the pyramids in
Ethiopia should prove not to be anterior to the
same era. ‘Nor does the absence of the arch in
temples and other large buildings excite our sur-
prise, when we consider the style of Egyptian mo-
numents; and no one who understands the cha-
racter of their architecture could wish for its
introduction. In some of the small temples of
the Oasis the Romans attempted this innova-
tion, but the appearance of the chambers so con-
structed fails to please; and the whimsical ca-
price of Osirei (about u.c. 1385), also introduced
an imitation of the arch in a temple at Abydus.
In this building the roof is formed of single
blocks of stone, reaching from one architrave to
the other, which, instead of being placed in the
usual manner, stand upon their edges, in order
to allow room for hollowing out an arch in their
thickness ; but it has the eflect of inconsistency,


CN nd
ee a tied


—


without the plea of advantage or utility.” Ano-
ther imitation of the arch occurs in a building
at Thebes, constructed in the style of a tomb.
The chambers lie under a friable rock, and are
case with masonry, to prevent the fall of its
crumbling stone; but, instead of being roofed on
the principle of the arch, they are covered with a
number of large blocks, placed horizontally, one
projecting beyond that immediately below it, till
the uppermost two meet in the centre, the interior
augles being afterwards rounded off to form the
appearance of a vault (tiz. 1). The date of this
building is about n.c. 1500, and consequently
many years after the Ezyptians had been ac-
quainted with the art of vaulting (Wilkinson,
Ane, Egyptians, ii. 321).

Thus as the temple architecture of the Egyptians
did not admit of arches, and as the temples are
almost the only dui/dings that remain, it is not
strange that arches have not oftener been found.
The evidence offered by the paintinzs, the tombs,
and the pyramids is conclusive for the existence
and antiquity of arches and vaults of brick and
atone; and if any remains of houses and palaces
had now existed, there is little doubt that the arch
would have been of frequent occurrence. We
observe that Sir J. G. Wilkinson, in portraying
an Egyptian mansion (Ane. Eyyptians, ii. 131),
makes the grand entrance an archway.

After this it seems unreasonable to doubt that
the arch was known to the Hebrews also, and was
employed in their buildings. Palestine was in-
deed Letter wooded than Exypt; but still that
there was a deficiency of wood suitable for build-
ing and for roofs is shown by the fact that large
imporiations of timber from the forests of Lebanon
were necessary (2 Sam. vii. 2, 7; 1 Kings v. 63
1 Chron. xxii. 453 2 Chron. ii. 3; Ezra ili. 73
Cant. i. 17), and that this imported timber,
although of no very high quality, was held in
great estimation.


ARCHITECTURE,


ARCHELAUS, son of Herod the Great, and
his successor in Idumma, Judea, and Samaria
(Matt. ii. 22) [Heropian Famity].

ARCHERY. [Arms.]

ARCHIPPUS (“Apxirxos), a Christian mi-
nister, whom St. Paul calls his ‘ fellow-soldier,’
in Philem. 2, and whom he exhorts to renewed
activity in Col. iv. 17. From the latter refer-
ence it would seem that Archi had exercised
the office of Evangelista sometimes at Ephesus,
sometimes elsewhere ; and that he finally resided
at Colosse, and there discharged the oftice of pre-
siding presbyter or bishop when St. Paul wrote
to the Colossian church. The exhortation given
to him in this Epistle has, without sufficient
grounds, been construed into a rebuke for past
negligence. ;

ARCHISYNAGOGUS (Gr. dpxiourd-yeryos,
called also dpxywy tis cuvayeryis (Luke viii.
41), and simply &pxw» (Matt. ix. 18); Heb.
NDIIA WN, chief or ruler of the synagogue).
In large synagogues there appears to have been a
college or council of elders (D°IPt = wzpeafd-
tepot, Luke vii. 3) to whom the care of the syna-
gogue and the discipline of the congregation were
committed, and to all of whom this title was
applied (Mark v. 22; Acts xiii. 15; xviii. 8,
compared with v. 17). Their duties were to
side in the public services, to direct the reading of
the Scriptures and the addresses to the congregation
(Vitringa, De Synagoga Vetere, lib. 3, part i. c.


-73 comp. Acts xiii. 15), to superintend the dis-


tribution of alms (Vitr. ¢. 13), and to punish
transgressors either by scourging (Vitr. c. 11s
compare Matt. x. 173 xxiii. $4; Acts xxii, 19)
or by excommunication (Vitr. c. 9). In a more
restricted sense the title is sometimes applied to
the president of this council, whose othce, ac-
cording to Grotius (Annotatioues in Matt. ix. 18;
Lue. xiii, 14) and many other writers, was dif-
ferent from and superior to that of the elders in
general. Vitringa (p. 586), on the other hand,
maintains that there was no such distinction of
office, and that the title thus applied merely de-
signates the presiding elder, who acted on behalf
of and in the name of the whole.—F. W. G.


ARCHITECTURE. It was furmerly com-
mon to claim for the Hebrews the invention of
scientific architecture; and to alleze that clas-
sical antiquity was indebted to the Temple of
Solomon for the principles and many of the de-
tails of the art. A statement so strange, and even
preposterous, would scarcely seem to demand
attention at the present day; but as it is still
occasionally reproduced, and as some respectable
old authorities can be cited in its favour, it cane
not be passed altogether in silence. The question
belongs properly, however, to another head
[Teseenel, It may here suthce to remark that
temples previously existed in Exypt, Babylon,
Syria and Pheenicia, from which the classical
ancients were far more likely to borrow the ideas
which they embodied in new and beautiful com-
binations of their own. But there are few uotions,
however untenable, which have not some apparent
foundation in fact. So in the present case, it
is shown, first, that a resemblance of plan and
detail can be traced between certain heathen tem-
ples and the Temple at Jerusalem; and, secondly,
it is alleged that this could not be owing to imiita.


ARCHITECTURE.


tion in the latter, because the tabernacle (of which

the Temple was a sort of imitation) was a divine

suggestion, beng framed according to a pattern

thown tu Moses on the Mount (Exod. xxv. 40),

This is the sule ground on which the claim made

for the Hebrew architecture can be rested. But

‘a pattern’ is not necessarily or probably a new

thing; inthe usual sense it is almost always a

new combination or adaptation of existing mate-

nals, And it may be shown, not ouly from  his-
torical probability, but trom actual examples

[Arxi, that nothing more than this is here to be

understood—nothing more than that Moses was

istucted how Lest to apply the materials of
fusing sacred architeciure (more especially that
of Ezypt) to the object in view. ‘The pattern

Was necessary to make him understand how this

application was to be made, and to render it clear

to him what parts of existing structures should be

Rjected or retained. Indeed, this is proved by

the Scripture itself’; for David, in his charge to

lenin conceming the Temple, says ‘ All this
the Lent made me understand in writing by his
ant upon ne, evets all the works of this pattern *
C.un xxviii, 19), Now, whatever be the

Meanins of this (and. the authorized translation

4 urpusely retained), it must mean nearly the

fame thing as in the parallel passage respecting

the tabernacle. Yet it is on all hands admitted
that the Temple, of which this is said, was an ap-
plication and extension of ideas already existing

m the tabernacle. This text, therefure, must not

be taken in the sense of complete origination.
And if we are forbidden to understand the terms
as proving the complete originality of the
Temyle, by what rule of Scripture interpretation
are we compelled to understand precisely similar
terms as proving the complete originality of the
tabernacle ?

Mr. Cockerell, in one of his recent ‘ Lectures’
(Athenaun, Jan 21, 1843), strongly upholds
thuse high claims of Jewish architecture which
all Biblical scholars now admit to be untenable,
and which sound historians and antiquarians have
long repudiated. It has therefore been deemed
heceasary thus particularly to refer to the matter,
lest the authority of a high name in architec-
ture should tend to revive pretensions which had
almost becume obsolete. Yet even Mr, Cock-
eel] endeayuurs to correct one ‘common error’
om the subject, which, he states, is ‘the attempt
w trace this resemblance in the styles or the
orbo-raphic figure of the parts and orders—
tue mere vesture of the scheme; and the failure
in straining the texts and examples (Corinthian
or Doric) to a peifect correspondence .....
Lut the comparison of the plans makes the taber-
ae the type of the Greek and Roman temple,’


There has never in fact been any people for whom
a peculiar style of architecture could with less pro-
bubility be claimed than for the Israelites. On
leaving Egypt they could only be acquainted
with Egyptian art. On entering Canaan they
hecessarily occupied the buildings of which they
had dispossessed the previous inhabitants; and
the succeeding generations would naturally erect
such buildings as the country previously con-
tained. The architecture of Palestine, and as
such, eventually that of the J ews, had doubtless its
own by which it was suited to the


AREOPAGUS. 205


climate and condition of the country; and in the
course of time many improvements would no
doubt arise from the causes which usually operate
in producing change in any practical art. From
the want of historical data and from the total
absence of architectural remains, the degree in
which these causes operated in imparting a pe-
culiar character to the Jewish architecture cannot
now be determined; for the oldest ruins in the
country do not ascend beyond the period of the
Roman domination. It does, however, seem proba-
ble that among the Hebrews architecture was al-
ways kept within the limits of a mechanical craft,
and never rose to the rank ofa tine art. Their usual
dwelling-houses ditfeed little from those of other
Eastern nations, and we nowhere find anything in-
dicative of exterior embellishment. Spleudid edi-
fices, such as the palace of David and the Temple
of Solomon, were completed by the assistance
of Phoenician artists (2 Sam. v. 113 1 Kings
vy. 6, 18; 1 Chron. xiv. 1). After the Baby-


_lonish exile, the assistance of such foreigners


was likewise resorted to for the restoration of the
Temple (Ezra iii. 7). From the time of the
Maccabwan dynasty, the Greek taste began to
gaiu ground, especially under the Heiodian
princes (who seem to have been possessed with a
sort of mania for building), and was shown in the
structure aud embellishment of many towns,
baths, colonnades, theatres and castles (Joseph.
Antiq. xv. 8,1; xv. 19. 4; xv. 10.3; De Bell.
Jud.i. 4.1). The Phenician style, which seems
to have bad some affinity with the Egyptian, was
not, however, superseded by the Grecian; and
even as late as the Mishna (Bava Bathra, ili.
6), we read of Tyrian windows, Tyriau porches,
&c. | House].

With regard to the instruments used by build-
ers—besides the more common, such as the axe,
saw, &c., we find incidental mention of the
731M or compass, the JIN or pluimb-line (Amos
vii. 7), the 1) or measuring-line (see the several
words). Whiner's Biblisches Realwérterbuch. ast.
‘Baukunst ;’ Steigletz’s Geschicht der Baukunst
der Alten, 1792; Hirt’s Gesch. des Bauk. bet
der Alten; Schmidt's Bibl. Mathematicus;
Bellermann’s Handbuch, &c.

ARCHITRICLINUS (ApxirpixAwos, master
of the triclinium, or dinner-bed—AccuBaTION),
very properly rendered in John ii. 8, 9, ‘ master
of the feast,” equivalent to the Roman Magister
Convicti, The Greeks also denoted the same
social ollicer by the title of Symposiarch (cumro-
olapxos). He was not the giver of the feast, but
one of the guests specially chosen to direct the
entertainment, and promote harmony and good
fellowship among the company. In the apocryphal
Ecclesiasticus (xxxv. 1, 2) the duties of this officer
among the Jews are indicated. He is there, how-
ever, called iyyoupevos :—-‘ If thou be made the
master hg a feast], lift not thyself up, but be
among them as one of the rest; take diligent care
for them, and so sit down: and when thou hast
done all thy office, take thy place, that thou
mayest be merry with them, and receive a crown
for thy well ordering of the feast.”

AREUPAGUS, an Anglicized form of the
original words (é”Apeios xdyos), signifying, in
reference to place, Mars Lill, but, in reference to

rsons, the Council which was held on the hill.

be Council was also termed 7 év ’Apely mdyy


206 AREOPAGUS.


Bovat (or 4 Bovrh 4 dv Apely wdyq), the Coun-
cil on Mars Hill; sometimes 4 &yw Bovdt, the
Upper Council, from the elevated position where
it was held; and sometimes simply, but empha-
tically, 4 Bovaf, the Council; but it retained, till
a late period, the original designation of Mars
Hill, being called by the Latins Scopulus Martis,
Curia Martis (Juvenal, Saé. ix. 101), and still
more literally, Aream Judicium (Tacit. Annal.
ii. 55). The place and the Council are topics
of interest to the Biblical student, chiefly from
their being the scene of the interesting narrative
and sublime discourse found in Acts xvii., where
it appears that the apostle Paul, feeling himself
moved, by the evidences of idolatry with which
the city of Athens was crowded, to ch Jesus
and the resurrection, both in the Jewish syna-
gogues and in the market-place, was set upon by
certain Epicurean and Stoic philosophers, and
led to the Areopagus, in order that they might
leam from him the meaning and design of
his new doctrine. Whether or not the Apostle
was criminally arraigned, as a setter furth of
strange gods, before the tribunal which held its
sittings on the hill, may be considered as unde-
termined, though the balance of evidence seems
to incline to the affirmative. Whichever view on
this point is adopted, the dignified, temperate, and
high-minded bearing of Paul under the peculiar
circumstances in which he was placed are worthy
of high admiration, and will appear the more
striking the more the associations are known and
weighed which covered and surrounded the spot
where he stood. Nor does his eloquent discourse
appear to have been without guod effect; for
though some mocked, and some procrastinated,
yet others believed, among whom was a member
of the Council, ‘ Dionysius, the Areopagite.’ who
has been represented as the first bishop of Athens,
and is said to have written books on the ‘ Celes-
tial Hierarchy ;’ but their authenticity is ques-
tioned.

The accompanying plan will enable the reader
to form an idea of the locality in which the Apostle
stood, and to conceive in some measure the im-
pressive and venerable objects with which he was
environed. Nothing, however, but a minute de-
scription of the city in the days of its pride, com-
prising some details of the several temples, porti-
coes, and schools of learning which crowded on his
sight, and which, whilst they taught him that the
city was ‘wholly given to idolatry,’ impressed him
also with the feeling that he was standing in the
midst of the highest civilization, both of his own
age and of the ages that had elapsed, can give an
a eae conception of the position in which
Paul was placed, or of the lofty and prudent
manner in which he acted. The history in the
Acts of the Apostles (xvii. 22) states that the
speaker stood in the mi@st of Mars Hill. Having
come up from the level parts of the city, where
the markets (there were two, the old and the new)
were, he would probably stand with his face to-
wards the north, and would then have imme-
diately behind him the long walls which ran down
to the sea, affording protection against a foreign
enemy. Near the sea, on one side, was the har-
‘bour of Peirwus, on the other that designated
Phalerum, with their crowded arsenals, their busy
workmen, and their gallant ships. Not far off in
the ocean lay the island of Salamis, ennobled for


AREOPAGUS.


O. Street of Tripods.
P. Monument of Philopeppus,


jopolis. Q. Temple of Fortune,
E. Temple of Jupiter Olympius. R. Panathenaic Stadium,
A f Bacchus, 8. Tomb of H--rodes,
7 Cacia of Regilla. T. Gate of Diochnres.
. Povx.


- Gate of Acharnm,


1. Temple of Theseus. . Dipylum.
W. Gate called Hippades,


J. Gymnas‘um of Ptolemy,


K, Stoa of Hadrian. X. Lveabcttus,
L. Gate of New Agora. Y. Peimic Gate,
M. Tower of Andronicus, Z. Prytancium.
a. Tombs. 4. Gate,

b. To the Academia, k. Bridge.

e, Cerameicus Exterior, 4. Gardens


im. Ttonian Gate,

a. River Tissus,

oe. Callirrbo’,

p. Scale of balf an Englich
mile.


d, Mount Anchesmus,
e. Ancient Walls.
J. Modern Walls,

. Hond to Marmthon.

. Road to the Mesogera,


ever in history as the spot near which Athenian
valour chastised Asiatic pride. and achieved the
liberty of Greece. The apostle had only to turn
towards his right hand to catch a view of a small
but celebrated hill rising within the city near
that on which he stood, called the Pnyx, where,
standing on a block of bare stone, Demosthenes
and other distinguished orators had addressed the
assembled people of Athens, swaying that arro-
gant and fickle democracy, and thereby making
Philip of Macedon tremble, or woking good or
ill for the entire civilized world. Immediately
before him lay the crowded city, studded in every
part with memorials sacred to religion or pa-
triotism, and exhibiting the highest achievements
of art. On his left, somewhat beyond the walls,
was beheld the Academy, with its groves of plane
and olive-trees, its retired walks and cooling foun-
tains, its altar to the Muses, its statues of the
Graces, its temple of Minerva, and its altars to
Prometheus, to Love, and to Hercules, near
which Plato had his country-seat, and in the
midst of which he had taught, as well as his
followers after him. But the most impressive
spectacle lay on his right hand, for there, on the
small and precipitous hill named the Acropolis,
were clustered tozether monuments of the highest
art, and memorials of the national religion, such
as noother equal spotof ground lias everborne. The
Apostle's eyes, in tuming to the right, would fall
on the north-west side of the eminence, which was
here (and al] round) covered and protected by a
wall, parts of which were so ancient as tu be of
Cyclopean origin. The western side, which alone
gave access to what, from its original destination,
may be termed the fort, was, during the adminis-
tration of Pericles, adorned with a splendid flight
of steps, and the beautiful Propylea, with its
five entrances and two flanking temples, con-
structed by Mnesicles of Pentelican marble,
at a cost of 2012 talents, In the times of fhe


AREOPAGUS.


Roman emperors there stood before the Propylea
equestrian statues of Augustus and Agrippa. On


the southern wing of the Propylea was a temple
of Wingless Victory ; on the northem, a Pina-
cotheca, or picture gallery. On. the highest part
of the platiorm of ‘the Acropolis, not more dan
300 feet from the entrance-buildings just de
scribed, stood (and yet stands, though shattered
and mutilated) the Parthenon, justly celebrated
ut the world, erected of white Pentelican
le, under the direction of Callicrates, Ictinus,
Tpion, and adorned with the finest sculp-
‘ures from the hand of Phidias. Northward from
Parthenon was the Erechtheum, a compound
building, which contained the temple of Minerva
Polias, the proper Erechtheum (called also the
Cecropium), and the Pandroseum. This sanc-
tuary contained the holy olive-tree sacred to Mi-
nerva, the holy salt-spring, the ancient wooden
image of Pallas, &c., and was the scene of the
oldest and most venerated ceremonies and recol-
Jections of the Athenians. Between the Propylea
and the Erechtheam was placed the colossal
bronze statue of Pallas Promachos, the work of
Phidias, which towered so high above the other
buildings, that the plume of her helmet and the
point of her spear were visible on the sea between
Sunium and Athens. Moreover, the Acropolis was
occupied by so great a crowd of statues and mo-
numents, that the account, as found in Pausanias,
excites the reader's wonder, and makes it difficult
for him to understand how so much could have
been crowded into a space which extended from
the south-east corner to the south-west only 1150
feet, whilst its greatest breadth did not exceed
500 feet. On the hill itself where Paul had his
station, was, at the eastern end, the temple of the
Furies, and other national and commemorative
edifices. The court-house of the council, which
was also here, was, according to the simplicity of
ancient customs, built of clay. There was an altar
consecrated by Orestes to Athene Areia. In the
same place were seen two silver stones, on one of
which stood the accuser, on the other, the accused.
Near them stood two altars erected by Epime-
nides, one to Insult (“YBpews, Cic. Contumelia),
the other to Shamelessness (‘Avaidelas, Cic. Im-


ne court of was one of the oldest
< most honoured, not only in Athens, but in
ge of Greece, and, indeed, in the ancient
rg - Through a long succession of centuries,
Preserved its existence amid changes corre-

b prendre which the state underwent,
ii. 55), The age of the Czsars (Tacitus, Ann.
ancients are full of eulogies on its


AREOPAGUS. 207


value, equity, and beneficial influence; in con-
sequence of which qualities it was held in so
much respect that even foreign states sought its
verdict in difficult cases. Like everything hu-
man, however, it was liable to decline, and, after
Greece had submitted to the yoke of Rome,
retained probably little of its ancient character
beyond a certain dignity, which was itself cold
and barren; afd however successful it may in
earlier times have been in conciliating for its de-
terminations the approval of public opinion, the
historian Tacitus (ut supra) mentions a case in
which it was charged with an erroneous, if not a
corrupt, decision.

The origin of the court ascends back into the
darkest mythical period. From the first its con-
stitution was essentially aristocratic ; a character
which to some extent it retained even after the
democratic reforms which Solon introduced into
the Athenian constitution. By his appointment
the nine archons became for the remainder of
their lives Areopagites, provided they had well
discharged the duties of their archonship, were
blameless in their personal conduct, and had
undergone a satisfactory examination. Its power
and jurisdiction were still further abridged by
Pericles, through his instrument Ephialtes. Fol-
lowing the political tendencies of the state, the
Areopagus became in process of time less and Jess
aristocratical, and parted piecemeal with most of
its important functions. First its political power
was taken away, then its jurisdiction in cases of
murder, and even its moral influence gradually
departed. During the sway of the Thirty Tyrants
its power, or rather its political existence, was de-
stroyed, On their overthrow it 1ecovered some
consideration, and the oversight of the execution
of the laws was restored to it by an express de-
cree. Isocrates endeavoured by his ’Apeora-
yitixds Adyos to revive its ancient influence.
The precise time when it ceased to exist can-
not be determined ; but evidence is not wanting
to show that in later periods its members ceased
to be uniformly characterized by blameless
morals,

It is not easy to give a correct summary of its
several functions, as the classic writers are not
agreed in their statements, and the jurisdiction of
the court varied, as has been seen, with times and
circumstances. They have, however, been di-
vided into six general classes (Real-Encyclo-
pédie yon Pauly, in me I. Its judicial func-
tion ; II. Its political; III. Its police function ;
IV. Its religious; V. Its educational ; and VI.
(only partially) Its financial. In relation to these
functions, such details only can be given here as
bear more or less immediately on its moral and
religious influence, and may serve to assist the
student of the Holy Scriptures in forming an
opinion as to the relation in which the subject
stands to ‘the Gospel, and its distinguished mis-
sionary, the apostle Paul.

Passing by certain functions, such as acting
as a court of appeal, and of general supervision,
which under special circumstances, and when
empowered by the people, the Areopagus from
time to time discharged, we will say a few words
in explanation of the points already named,
giving a less restricted space to those which con-
cern its moral and religious influence. Its judi-
cial function embraced trials for murder and


28 AREOPAGUS.


manslaughter (pdvou Sica, 72 porind), and was
the oldest and most peculiar sphere of its activity.
The indictment was brought by the second or
king-archon (&pywv BaciAevs), whose duties
were for the most of a religious nature.
Then followed the oath of both parties, accom-
panied by solemn appeals to the gods. After
this the accuser and the accused had the option
of making a speech (the notion of the proceedings
of the Areopagus being carried on in the darkness
of night rests un no suflicient foundation), which,
however, they were obliged to keep free from all
extraneous matter (tw rod xpdypyaros), as well
as from mere rhetorical ornaments. After the
first speech, the accused was permitted to go into
voluntary Lanisiunent, if he had no reason to ex-
pect a favourable issue. Theft, poisoning, wound-
ing, incendiarisin, and treason, belonged also to
this deparlment of jurisdiction in the court of the
Areopagus. :

Its political function consisted in the constant
watch which it kept over the legal condition of
the state, acting as overseer and guardian of the
Jaws (éxioxoros Kal piAag Trav vépwv).

Its police function also made it a protector and
upholder of the institutions and laws. In this
character the Areopagus had jurisdiction over
novelties in religion, in worship, in customs, in


everything that departed from the traditionary’


and established usages and modes of thought
(watplois vouiwos), which a regard to their ances-
tors endeared to the nation. This was an ancient
and well-supported sphere of activity. The mem-
bers of the cuurt had a right to take oversight of
festive meetings in private houses. In ancient
times they fixed the number of the guests, and
determined the style of the entertainment. Ifa
rson had no obvious means of subsisting, or was
known to live in idleness, he was liable to an
action before the Areopagus ; if condemned three
times, he was punished with &rmia, the loss of
his civil rights. In later times the court pos
sessed the right of giving permission to teachers
(philosophers and rhetoricians) to establish them-
selves and pee their profession in the city.

Its strictly religious jurisdiction extended itself
over the public creed, worship, and sacrifices,
embracing generally everything which could
come under the denumination of rd ispd—sa-
cred things. 1: was its special duty to see that
the religion of the state was kept pure from all
foreign elements. ‘Tie accusation of impiety
Cypaph aoeBelas)—the vagueness of which ad-
mitted almost any charge connected, with reli-
gious innovations—belonzed in a special manner
to this tribunal, though the charge was in some
cases heard before the court of the Heliaste.
The freethinking poet Euripides stood in fear
of, and was restrained by, the Areopagus
(Euseb. Prep. Evang. vi. 145 Bayle s. ov.
Eurip.). Its proceeding in such cases was
sometimes rather of an admonitory than punitive
character.

Not less influential was its moral and educa-
tional power. Isocrates speaks of the care which
it took of good manners and good order (ris
edxoopias, evragias). Quintilian relates that the
Areopagus condemued a boy for plucking out the
eyes of a quail—a proceeding which has been
both misunderstood and misrepresented (Penny
Cyclop. in voc.), but which its original narrator


SRETAS.


approved, assigning no insufficient reason, namely,
that the act was a sign of acruel disposition, likely
in advanceil life to lead to baneful actions: ¢ Id
signum esse perniciosissima# mentis, multisque
malo futurw si adolevisset’’ (Quint. v. 9). The
court exercised a salutary influence in general
over the Athenian youth, their educators and their
education.

Its financial position is not well understood ;
most probably it varied more than any other part
of its administration with the changes which the
constitution of the city underwent. It may suf-
fice to mention, on the authority of Plutarch
(Themis. c. 10), that in the Persian war the
Areopagus had the merit of completing the num-
ber of men required for the fleet, by paying eight
drachmw to each.

In the following works corroboration of the facts
stated in this article, and further details, with
discussions on doubtful points, may be found :—
Meursius, Areopagus, sive de Senatu Areopagitico,
in Thes. Gron. t. v. p. 207; Sigonius, De Rep.
Ath, iii. 2. p. 1568; De Canaye, lecherches
sur UAréopage, pp. 273-316; Mém. de U Acad.
des Inscr. t. x. 5 Suede, De Areop. and Schwab
Num quod Areop. in plebiscita aut confirmanda
aut rejicicnda jus exercucrit legiimum, Stutt.
1818; Meier, Von der Blutgcrichtsharkeit des
Areopag.; Matthia, De Jud. Ath. in Mise. Philog.
Krebs, de Ephetis. Notices on the subject may
also be found in the works of Tittman, Heffter,
Hudtwalcker, Wachsmuth, Pauly, and W iner.—


JR. B

AREOPOLIS. [Ar; Arozr.]
ARETAS (Apéras; Arab. a, v. Pocock,
Spec. Ifist. Arab. p. 58, or, in another form,
dole = BAIN, Pococke, i. c. 70, 76, 77, 89),


the common name of several Arabian kings. ©


1. The first of whom we have any notice was a
contemporary of the Jewish bizh-priest Jason
and of Antivchus Epiphanes about u.c. 170
(2 Mace. v. 8), ‘In the end, therefore, he (Jason)
had an unhappy return, being accused before
Aretas, the king of the Arabians.’ 2. Josephus
(Antig. xiii. 13. 3) mentions an Aretas, king of
the Arabians (called Obedas, ’Ofe8as, xiii. 13. 5),
contemporary with Alexander Jannaus (died B.c.
79) and his sons. After defeating Antiochus
Dionysus, he reigned over Cale-Syria, * being
called to the government by those that held
Damascus (xAnOels cis Thy dpxhy bed tar Thy
Aauacndy éxdytwv) by reason of the hatred they
bore to Ptolemy Meunwus’ (Antig. xiii. 15. 2).
He took part with Hyrcanus in his contest for
the sovereignty with his brother Aristubulus, and
laid siege to Jerusalem, but, on the approach of
the Roman general Scaurus, he retreated to Phi-
ladelphia (De Bell. Jud. i. 6. 3) Hyrcanus
and Aretas were pursucd and defeated by Aris-
tobulus at a place called Papyron, and lost
above 6000 men. Three or four years after,
Scaurns, to whom Pompey had committed the
government of Ceele-Syria, invaded Petra, but
finding it dificult to obtain provisions for his
army, he consented to withdraw on the offer of
300 talents from Aretas (Joseph. Antig. xiv. 5. 1),
Havercamp has given an engraving of a denarius
intended to commemorate this event, on whicn
Aretas appears in a supplicating posture, and


ARGAZ,


faking hold of a camel's bridle with his left
hand, and with his right hand presenting a
branch of the frankincense-tree, with this in-
scription, M. SCAVRVS. EX. S.C., and be-
neath, REX ARETAS (Joseph. De Bell. Jud.
i 8.1). 3. Aretas, whose name was origin-


ally Hneas, succeeded Obodas (Opé8as). He
was the father-in-law of Herod Antipas. The
latter made proposals of marriage to the wife
of his half-brother Herod-Phili Herodias, the
daughter of Aristobulus their Pier and the
Sster of Agrippa the Great. (On the apparent
diserepaney tween the Evangelists and Jost~
in reference to the name of the husband of

= see Lardner’s Credibility, &c. pt. i.
bi, ch. 5; Works, ed. 1835, i. 408-416.) In
tment of this, the daughter of Aretas re-

fora t2 her father, and a war (which had Been
“mented by previous disputes about the limits
of their tive countries) ensued between
Aretas and Herod. The army of the latter was
tutally destroyed; and on his sending an account
of his disaster to Rome, the emperor immediately
ordered Vitellius to bring Aretas prisoner alive,
or, if dead, to send his head (Joseph. Antig. xviii.
5.1). But while Vitellius was on his march
'o Petra, news arrived of the death of Tiberias,
upon which, after administering the oath of alle-
glance to his troops, he dismissed them to winter-
quarters and returned to Rome. It must have
been at this juncture that Aretas took possession
of and placed a governor in it (e@ydp-
xns) with a garrison. For a knowledge of this
fact we are indebted to the apostle Paul. ‘In
Damascus the governor under Aretas the king
kept the city of the Damascenes with a garrison,
desirous to apprehend me; and through a window
in a basket was I let down by the wall, and
escaped his hands’ (2 Cur. xi. 82, compared with
Acts ix. 24). We are thus furnished with a
chronotogical mark in the Apostle’s history. From
Gal. i, 18, it appears that Paul went up to Jeru-
salem from Damascus three years after his con-
vasion. The emperor Tiberius died in a.p. 37;
and as the affairs of Arabia were settled in the
seeund year of Caligula, Damascus was then most
probably reoccupied by the Romans. If, then,
Paul's flight took place in a.p. 39, his conversion
rey ra —— in a.p. 36 (Neander’s His-
of the Planting of the Christian Church,

\. 107, English trans.; Lardner's Credibility, &c.
Supplement, ch. xi.; Works, ed. 1835, y. 497).—
J.E.R.

ARGAZ G28; Sept. O¢ua), the receptacle,
called in tne Authorized Version, a coffer’
‘I Sam. vi. 8, 11, 15), which the Philistines
placed beside the ark when they sent it home, and
‘0 which they l the golden mice and eme-
rods that formed their trespass-offering. Gese-
=_ and Lee agree in regarding it as the same,


or nearly the same thing as the Arabian 3j;le
5 . . : J
“Seva, which Jauhari describes as ¢a kind of wck.


ARIMATHEA. 209


let, into which stones are put: it is hung to one
of the two sides of the haudaj [a litter borne by a
camel or mule] when it inclines towards the
other.’ Dr. Lee, however, thinks that the Hebrew
word denotes the wallet itself; whereas Gesenius
is of opinion that it means a coffer or small box,
to which, from its analogous use, the same name
was applied.

ARGOB (25298 ; Sept. ’Apydg), a district in
Bashan, east of the Lake of Gennesareth, which
was given to the half-tribe of Manasseh (Deut. iii.
4,13; 1 Kings iv. 13). The name Argob may
be traced in Ragab or Ragaba, a city of the dis-
trict (Joseph. Antig. xiii. 18. 5; Mishna, tit. Me-
nachoth, viii. 3), which Eusebius places 15 Roman
miles west of Gerasa. Burckhardt i te that
he had found the ruins of this city in t of El
Hossn, a remarkable but abandoned position on
the east side of the lake (Syria, p. 279); but Mr.
Bankes conceives this El Hossn to have been the
site of Gamala (Quarterly Review, xxvi. 389).

1, ARIEL (8S; Sept. "Aprha), a word
meaning ‘ lion of God,’ and correctly enough ren-
dered by ‘lion-like,’ in 2Sam. xxiii. 20; 1 Chron.
xi. 22. It was applied as an epithet of distinction
to bold and warlike persons, as among the Ara-
bians, who surnamed Ne ‘The Lion of God.’

2. ARIEL. The same word is used as a lo-
cal proper name in Isa. xxix. 1, 2, applied to
Jerusalemn— as victorious under God '—says Dr.
Lee ; and in Ezek. xliii. 15, 16, to the altar of
burnt-offerings. Here Gesenius and others, unsa-
tisfied with the Hebrew, resort to the Arabic, and
find the Ari in )) fire-hearth, which, with 58
God, supplies what they consider a more satis-
factory signification. It is thus applied, in the
first place, to the altar, and then to Jerusalem as
containing the altar. ;

ARIMATHEA, the birth-place of the wealthy
Joseph, in whose sepulchre our Lord was laid
(Matt. xxvii. 57; John xix. 38). Luke (xxiii.
51) calls it ‘a city of the Jews;° which may be


explained by 1 Macc. xi. 34, where King Deme-
trius thus writes—‘ We have ratified unto them.
[the Jews] the borders of Judza, with tHe three
governments of Aphereum, Lydda, and Rama-
thaim, that are added unto Judza from the coun-
try of Samaria.’ Eusebius (Onomast. s. v.) and
Jerome (Epit. Paule) regard the Arimathea of
Joseph as the same place as the Ramathaim of
Samuel, and place it near Lydda or Diospolis.
Hence it has iy some been identified with the ex-
isting Ramleh, because of the similarity of the
,


210 ARIMATHEA.


name to that of Ramah (of which Ramathaim is
the dual); and because it is near Lydda or Dios-
polis. Professor Robinson, however, disputes this
conclusion on the following 1. that
Abulfeda alleges Ramleh to have been built after
the time of Mohammed, or about a.p. 716, by
Suleiman Abd-al Malik; 2. that Ramah and
Ramleh have not the same signification; 3. that
Ramleh is in a plain, while Ramah implies a
town on a hill. To this it may be answered,
that Abulfeda’s statement may mean no more
than that Suleiman rebuilt the town, which had
previously been in ruins, just as Rehoboam and
others are said to have built many towns which
had existed long before their time ; and that the
Moslems seldom built towns but on old sites and
out of old materials; so that there is not a town
in all Palestine which is with certainty known to
have been founded by them. In such cases they
Tetained the old names, or others resembling
them in sound, if not in signification, which
may account for the difference between Ramah
and Ramleh. Neither can we assume that a
place called Ramah could not be in a plain,
unless we are ready to prove that Hebrew proper
names were always significant and appropriate.
This they probably were not. They were so in
early times, when towns were few; but not even-
tually, when towns were numerous, and took
their names arbitrarily from one another without
regard to local circumstances. Further, if Ari-
mathea, by being identified with Ramah, was
necessarily in the mountains, it could not have
been ‘near Lydda,’ from which the mountains are
seven miles distant. This matter, however, be-
longs more properly to another place Forney
Ramatuaim-Zopuim]; and it is alluded to
here merely to show that Dr. Robinson's objec-
tions have uot entirely destroyed the grounds for
following the usual course of describing Ramleh
as representing the ancient Arimathea.
Ramleh is in N. lat.31°59/, and E. long. 35° 28,
8 miles S.E. from Joppa, and 24 miles N.W.by W.
from Jerusalem. It lies in the fine undulating
lain of Sharon, upon the eastern side of a broad
low swell rising from a fertile though sandy plain.
Like Gaza and Jaffa, this town is surrounded by
olive-groves and gardens of vegetables and deli-
cious fruits. Occasional palm-trees are also seen,
as well as the kharob and the sycamore. The
streets are few ; the houses afe of stone, and many
of them large and well built. There are five
ues, two or more of which are said to have
once been Christian churches; and there is here
one of the largest Latin convents in Palestine.
The place is supposed to contain about 3000 inha-
bitants, of whom two-thirds are Moslems, and the
rest Christians, chiefly of the Greek church, with a
few Armenians. The inhabitants carry on some
trade in cotton and,soap. The great caravan-
road between Egypt and Damascus, Smyrna,
and Constantinople passes through Ramleh, a.
well as the most frequented road for Euro;
pilgrims and travellers between Joppa and Jeru-
salem (Robinson, iii. 27; Raumer, p. 215). The
tower, of which a figure is here given, is the most
bans ig object in or about the city. It
a little to the west of the town, on the
highest | aa of the swell of land; and is in the
midst of a large quadrangular enclosure, which
has much the appearance of having once been a


ARIMATHEA.


endid khan. The tower is wholly isolated,
ea wy lan ben Ss eciginal atnalicl


It is about 120 feet in height, of Saracenic
architecture, square, and built with well-hewn
stone. The windows are of various forms, but al]
have pointed arches. The corners of the tower
are supported by tall slender buttresses ; while
the sides taper upwards by several stories tothe
top. It is of solid masonry, except a narrow
staircase within, winding up to an external gal-
lery, which is also of stone, and is carried quite
round the tower a few feet below the top (Robin-
son, iii, 32), In the absence of any nistorical
evidence that the enclosure was a khan, Dr. Ro-
binson resorts to the Moslem account of its having
belonged to a ruined mosque. The tower itself
bears the date 718 a.u. (a.v. 1310), and an
Arabian author (Mejr-ed-Din) reports the com-
pletion at Ramleh, in that year, of a minaret unique
for its loftiness and grandeur, by the sultan of


ARISTARCHUS,


Rgypt, Nazir Mohammed ibn Kelawan (Robin-
a, ii. 38; also Vulney, ii. 281). Among the
dlantations which sunound the town occur, at
tvery step, dry wells, cisterus fallen in, and vast
vaulted reservoirs, which sbow that the city must
in former times have been upwards of a league
and a half in extent (Vulney, ii. 280).

The town is first mentioned under its present

name by the monk Bemard, about ap. 870.
About a.p. 1150 the Arabian geographer Edrisi
(ed. Jaubert, p. 339) mentions Ramleh and Jeru-
salem as the two principal cities of Palestine. The
first Crusaders on their approach found Ramleh
deserted by its inhabitants; and with it and
Lydda they endowed the first Latin bishopric im
Palestine, which touk its denomination from the
latter city. From the situation of Ramleh be-
tween that city and the coast, it was a post of
much importance to the Crusaders, and they held
possession of it generally while Jerusalem was in
their hands, and long afterwards. In a.p. 1266 it
was finally taken from the Christians by the Sul-
tan Bibars. Subsequently it is often mentioned
in the accounts of travellers and pilgrims, most
ef whom rested there on their way tw Jerusalem.
It seems to have declined very fast from the time
that it came into the ession of the Crusaders.
Benjamin of Tudela (déin. p. 79, ed. Asher), who
Was there in a.p. 1173, speaks of it as having been
formerly a considerable city. Belon (Observat.
p 311), in 15£7, mentions it as almost deserted,
sarcely twelve houses being inhabited, and the
fields mostly untilled. This desertion must have
occurred afier 1457; for, Le Grant Voyage de
Hierusalem, tolz xiv., speaks of it as a peopled
tuwn (though partly ruined), and of the ‘ seig-
neur de Rama’ as an important personage. By
1674 it had somewhat revived, Lut it was still
rather a large unwalled village than a city, with-
out any guod houses, the governor himself being
miserably lodged (Nau, Voyaye Nouveau, liv. i.
ch. 6). Accentury later it remained much in the
same state, the governor being still ill-lodged,
and the population scarcely exceeding 200 fami
lies (Volney, ii. 220). Its recent state must,
therefure, indicate a degree of comparative pro-
Sperity, the vrowth of the present century.

ARISTARCHUS (’Apictapyxos), a faithful
adberent of St. Paul, whose name repeatedly oc-
cars in the Acts and Epistles (Acts: xix. 29;
xx. 4; xxvii. 2; Col. iv. 10; Philem. 24). He
was a native of Thessalonica, and became the
companion of St. Paul, whom he accompanied to
Ephesus, where he was seized and nearly killed
in_the tumult raised by the silversmiths. He
left that city with the Apostle, and accompanied

him in his subsequent journeys, even when taken
as a prisoner to Rome: indeed, Aristarchus was
bim-elf sent thither as a prisoner, or became such
while there, for Paul calls him his ‘ fellow-
priauner” (Col. iv. 10). The traditions of the

Greek church represent Aristarchus as bishop of

Apamea in Phrygia, and allege that he continued

tpaccompany Paul after their liberation, and

‘was at length beheaded along with him at Rome
tm the time of Nero. The Roman martyrologies
make him bishop of Thessalonica. But little
Teliance is to be placed on accounts which make
4 buchop of almost every one who happens to be
ar < m the Acts and Epistles; and ‘a tie case
istarchus, it is little likely that one who


ARITHMETIC. ail


constantly travelled about with St. Paul exer-
cised any stationary office.

ARISTOBULUS (’ApiordBovdcs), @ person
named by Paul in Rom. xvi. 10, where he sends
salutations to his household. He is not himself
saluted; hence he may not have been a believer,
or he may have been absent or dead. Nothing
certain is known respecting him. But tradition
has not neglected him: it represents him as bro-
ther of Barnabas, and one of the seventy disciples,
and alleges that he was ordained a bishop by
Bamabas, or by Paul, whom he followed in his
travels; and that he was eventually sent into
Britain, where he laboured with much success,
and where he at length died.

Aristobulus is a Greek name, adopted by the
Romans, and in very common use amoung them.
It was also adopted by the Jews, and was borne
by several persons in the Maccabean and He-
rodian families—viz. 1. Arisrosuus, son and
successor of John Hyrcanus ({Maccaszgs].
2. AristosuLus, second son of Alexander Jan-
neus, and younger brother of Hyrcanus, with
whom he disputed the succession by arms [Mac-
capers]. 3. Axisronuus, grandson of the pre-
ceding, and the last of the Maccabwean family,
who was murdered by the contrivance of Herod
the Great, uc. 34 [Maccanges]. 4, Arisro-
Bunus, son of Heroi the Great by Mariamne
{Heroprian Fantry].

ARITHMETIC. or, as the word, derived from
the Greek &p:Ouos, signifies, the science of num-
bers or reckoning, was unquestionably practised as
an art in the dawn of civilization; since to put’
things, or their symbols, together (addition), and
to take one thing from another (subtraction), must
have been cveval with the earliest efforts of the
human mind ; and what are termed multiplication
and division are only abbreviated forms of addi-
tion aud subtraction. The origin, however, of the
earliest and most necessary of the arts and sciences
is lost in the shades of antiquity, since it arose
long before the period when men began to take
specitic notice and make some kind of record of
their discoveries and pursuits. In the absence of
positive information we seem authorized in refer-
ring the first knowledge of arithmetic to the East.
From India, Chaldza, Phoenicia, and Egypt, the
science jussed to the Greeka, who extended its
laws, improved its processes, and widened its
sphere. ‘To what extent the Orientals carried
their acquaintance with arithmetic cannot be
determined. The greatest discovery in this depart-
ment of the mathematics, namely, the establish-
ment of our system of ciphers, or of figures consi-
dered as distinct from the letters of the alphabet,
belongs undoubtedly not to Arabia, as is generally
supposed, but to the remote East, probably India.
It is to be regretted that the name of the dis-
coverer is unknown, for the invention must be
reckoued among the greatest of human achieve-
ments. Our numerals were made known to these
western paris by the Arabians, who, though they
were nothing more than the medium of transmis
sion, have enjoyed the honour of giving them their
name. These numerals were unknown to the
Greeks, who made use of the letters of the alpha-
bet for arithmetical purposes.

The Hebrews were not a scientific, but a reli-

gious and practical nation. What they borrowed
ficm others of the arts of life they sl
P


‘


212 ARK, NOAH'’S.


surrounding it with theory or expanding and
framing it into asystem. So with arithmetic, by
them called 930, from a word signifying to de-
termine, limit, and thence to number. Of their
knowledge of this science little is known more
than may be fairly inferred from the pursuits and
trades which they carried on, for the successful
prosecution of which some skill at least in its
simpler processes must have been absolutely ne-
cessary; and the large amounts which appear here
and there in the sacred books serve to show that
their acquaintance with the art of reckoning was
considerable. Even in fractions they were not
inexperienced (Gesenius, Lehrgeb. p. 704). For
figures, the Jews, after the Babylonish exile, made
use of the letters of the alphabet, as appears from
the inscriptions on the so-called Samaritan coins
(Eckhel, Doctr. Num. i. iii, 468); and it is not
unlikely that the ancient Hebrews did the same,
as well as the Greeks, who borrowed their alphabet
from the Phenicians, neighbours of the Israelites,
and employed it instead of numerals.—J. R. B.


ARK, NOAH'S (713) tebah; Arab. yl);


Sept. xiBwrds, @ chest ; Joseph. Adpvag, a coffer ;
Vulg. arca, Gen. vi. 14). The word here em-
ployed is ditierent trom that (]198 aron) which
1s applied to the ‘ark’ of the covenant and other
receptacles which we know to have been chests
or coflers. But it is the same that is applied to
the ‘ark’ in which Moses was hid (Exod. ii. 3),
the only other part of Scripture in which it oc-
curs. In the latter passage the Septuagint renders
it @{Bn, a ship, in the former, x:Bwrds, a chest.
The truth seems to be, that }}W8 denotes any kind
of chest or cofier: while the exclusive applica-
tion of MIN to the vessels of Noah and of
Moses, would suggest the probability that it was
restricted to such chests or arks as were intended
to float upon the water, of whatever description.
The identity of the name with that of the wicker
basket in which Moses was exposed on the Nile,
has led some to suppose that the ark of Noah
was also of wicker-work, or rather was wattled
and smeared over with bitumen (Auth. Vers.
* pitch, ’ Gen. vi. 14). This is not impossible,
seeing that vessels of considcrable burthen are
thus constructed at the present day; but there is
no sufficient authority for carrying the analogy to
this extent.

/ast labour and ingenuity have been employed
by various writers, in the attempt to determine
the form of Noah's ark and the arrangement of its
parts. The success has not been equal to the
exertion; for, on comparing the few simple facts
in the Scripture narrative, every one feels how
slight positive data there are for the minute de-
scriptions and elaborate representations which
such writers have given. That form of the ark
which repeated pictorial representations have
rendered familiar—a kind of house in a kind of
boat—has not only no foundation in Scripture,
but is contrary to reason. The form thus given
to it is fitted for progression and for cutting the
waves; whereas the ark of Noah was really des-
tined to float idly upon the waters, without any
other motion than that which it received from
them. If we examine the passage in Gen. vi. 14-16,
we can only draw from it the conclusion that the
ark was not a boat or ship; but, as Professor
Robinson describes it, ‘a building in the form of a


ARK, NOAH'S.


parallelogram, 300 cubits long, 50 cubits broad,
and 30 cubits high. The length of the cubit, in
the great variety of measures that bore this name,
it is impossible to ascertain and useless to con-
jecture. So far as the name affords any evi-
dence, it also goes to show that the ark of Noah
was not a regularly-built vessel, but merely in-
tended to float at large upon the water. We
may, therefore, probably with justice, regard it as
a large, oblong, floating house, with a roof either
flat or only slightly inclined. It was con-
structed with three stories, and had a door in the
side. There is no mention of windows in the
side, but above, t.e. probably in the flat roof,
where Noah was commanded to make them of a
cubit in size (Gen. vi. 16). That this is the
meaning of the passage seems apparent from Gen.
viii, 13, where Noah removes the covering of
the ark in order to ascertain whether the ground
was dry; a labour unnecessary surely, had there
been windows in the sides of the ark’ (Add. to
Calmet’s Dict. s. v. ARK).

The purpose of this ark was, to preserve cer-
tain -persons and animals from the Deluge with
which God intended to overwhelm the land, in
punishment for man’s iniquities. The persons
were eight—Noah and his wife, with his three
sons and their wives (Gen. vii. 7; 2 Pet. ii. 5).
The animals were, one pair of every ‘unclean’
animal, and seven pairs of all that were ‘ clean.”
By ‘ clean,’ we understand fit, aud by ‘unclean,’
unfit for food or for sacrifice. Of birds there
were seven pairs (Gen. vii. 2, 3). Those who
have written professedly and largely on the sub-
ject, have been at great pains to provide for all
the existing species of animals in the ark of
Noah, showing how they might be distributed,
fed, and otherwise provided for, But they are
very far from having cleared the matter of all
its difliculties; which are much greater than they,
in their general ignorance of natural history, were
aware of. These dilliculties, however, chietly
arise from the assumption that the species of
all the earth were collected in the ark. The
number of such species has been vastly underrated
by these writers—partly from ignorance, and
partly from the desire to limit the number for
which they imagined they required to provide.
They have usually satisfied themselves with a
provision -fur three or four hundred species at
most. * But of the existing mammaha consi-
derably more than one thousand species are
known; of birds, fully tive thousand ; of reptiles,
very few kinds of which can live in water, two
thonsand ; and the researches of travellers and
naturalists are making frequent and most inte-
resting additions to the number of these and all
other classes. Of insects (using the word in the
popular sense) the number of specics is immense ;
to say one hundred thousand would be moderate :
each has its appropriate habitation and food, and
these are necessary to its life; and the larger
number could not live in water. Also the innu-
merable millions upon millions of animaleules
must be provided for; for they have all their ap-
propriate and diversitied places and circumstances
of existence’ (Dr. J. Pye Smith, On the Relation
between the Holy Scriptures and some Parts of
Geological Science, p. 135). Nor do these num.
bers form the only difliculty; for,as the same
writer observes :—* All land animals have their


BREA YW RS sy”


A Bae BS


L ase
=


ee


— SNS SHED TRY


ARK, NOAH’S,


geographical regions, to which their constitutional
natures are congenial, and many could not live
in any other situation. We cannot represent to
ourselves the idea of their being brought into one
smaH spot, from the polar regions, the torrid
zone, and all the other climates of Asia, Africa,
Europe, America, Australia, and the thousands of
islands, their preservation and provision, and
the final disposal of them, without bringing up
the idea of miracles more stupendous than any


- which are recorded in Scripture.”


These are some of the difficulties which arise
on the supposition that all the species of animals
existing in the world were assembled together
and contained in the ark. And if the object, as
usually assumed, was to preserve the species of
creatures which the Deluge would otherwise have
destroyed, the provision for beasts and birds only,
must have been altogether inadequate. What
then would have become of the countless reptiles,
insects, and animalcules to which we have already
referred ? and it is not clear that some provision
must not also have been necessary for fishes and
shell animals, many of which cannot live in fresh
water, while others cannot live in salt.

The ditficulty of assembling in one spot, and

of providins fur in the ark, the various mammalia
and birds alone, even without including the other-
wise essential provision fur reptiles, insects, and
fishes, is quite sufficient to sugzest some error in
the current belief We are to consider the dif-
ferent kinds of accommodation and food which
would be required fur animals of such different
habits and climates, and the necessary provision
for ventilation and for cleansing the stables or
dens. And if so much ingenuity bas been re-
quired in devising arrangements for the compa-
ratively small number of species which the writers
on the ark have been willing to admit into it;
what provision can be mace fur the immensely
larger number which, under the supposed condi-
tions, would really have required its shelter?

There seems no way of meeting these difticulties

but by adopting the suggestion of Bishop Stilling-
ficet, approved by Matthew Poole,Dr. J. Pye Smith,
Le Clerc, Rosenmiiller, and others, namely, that, as
the object of the Deluze was to sweep man from
the earth, it did not extend beyond that region of
the earth which man then inhabited, and that only
the animals of that region were preserved in the
ark. The question, as regards the universality of
the Deluge, will be considered elsewhere (Dr-
LveR]; and for the portion of the matter involved
in the present inquiry, we must be content to pro-
duce the sentiments of Bishop Stillingfleet, who
wrote in plain suberness long before gevlogy was
known as a science, and when, therefure, those
discoveries were altozether unthought of by which,

m our day, such warm controversies have been

excited. ‘The bishop expresses his belief that the

Flood was universal as to mankind, and that all

men, except those preserved in the ark, were de-

stroyed; but he sees no evidence frum Scripture
that the whole earth was then inhabited; he does
not think that it can ever be proved to have been
#05 and he asks, what reason there can be to ex-
tend the Flood beyond the occasion of it? He
grants that, as far as the Flood extended, all
the animals were destroyed ; ‘ but,’ he adds, ‘I
ita to extend the destruction of these
‘yond the compass of the earth which men


ARK, NOAH'S. 313


then inhabited; the punishment of the beasts
was occasioned by, and could not but be con-
comitant with, the destruction of mankind. But
(the occasion of the Deluge being the sin of
man, who was punished in the beasts that were
destroyed for his sake, as well as in himself)
where the occasion was not, as where there were
animals and no men, there seems no necessity for
extending the Flood thither’ (Origines Sacre,
b. iii. ch. iv.). The bishop further argnes that
the reason for preserving living creatures in the
ark was, that there might be a stock of the tame
and domesticated animals that should be imme-
diately ‘serviceable for man after the flood:
which was certainly the main thing locked at in
the preservation of them in the ark, that men
might have all of them ready for use after the
Flood ; which could not have been, had not the
several kinds been preserved in the ark, although
we suppose them not destroyed in all parts of the


world.


As Noah was the progenitor of all the nations
of the earth, and as the ark was the secund cradle
of the human race, we might expect to find in all
nations traditions and reports more or less distinct

ting him, the ark in which he was saved,
aa the Deluge in general. Accordingly no na-
tion is known in which such traditions have not
been found, They have been very industriously
brought together by Banier, Bryant, Faber, and
other mythologists ([De1uaez; Noan]. Our pre-
sent concern is only with the ark. And as it ap-
pears that an ark, that is, a boat or chest, was
carried about with great ceremony in most of the
ancient mysteries, anil occupied an eminent sta-
tion in the holy places, it has with much rea-
son been concluded that this was originally in-
tended to represent the atk of Noah, which
eventually came to be regarded with superstitious
reverence. Qn this point the historical and my-
thological testimonies (as collected in the authors
to whom we have referred) are very clear and
conclusive. The tradition of a deluge, by which
the race of man was swept from the face of the
earth, has been traced among the Chaldmans,
Egyptians, Phoenicians, Assyrians, Persians,
Greeks, Romans, Goths, Druids, Chinese, Hin-
doos, Burmese, Mexicans, Peruvians, Brazilians,
Nicaraguans, the inhabitants of Westen Cale-
donia, and the islanders of the Pacific; and
among most of them also the belief has prevailed
that certain individuals were preserved in an ark,
ship, boat, or raft, to replenish the desolated earth
with inhabitants. Nor are these traditions un-
corroborated by coins and monuments of stone.
Of the latter there are the sculptures of Egypt
and of India; and, as hinted in a previous
article (Aurar], it is not unlikely that those of
the monuments called Druidical, which bear the
name of kist-vaens, and in which the stones are


disposed in the form of a chest or house, were in-
tended as memorials of the ark. At least, it has
been shown by Davis (Celtic Researches) that


iy


als ARK, NOAH'S.


_ the ark was not only typified among the Celts by
“ yafts and islands, but by a stone ark or chest,

which is precieely the meaning of ist (chest)

vaen.
Being anxious to touch as lightly as possible
upon the vast and curious subject of Arkite
worship, we shall confine our medallic illus-
trations to the two famous medals of Apamea.
There were six cities of this name, of which the
most celebrated was that of Syria; next to it, in
importance, was the one in Phrygia, called also
Ki8wrés, Kibotos, which, as we have seen, means
an ark or hollow vessel. This latter city was built
on the river Marsyas; and there seems to have been
a notion that the ark rested on the adjoining hills
of Celene: and the Sibylline oracles, wherever
they were written, also include these hills under the
name of Ararat, and mention the same tradition.
The medals in question belong, the une tu the elder
Philip, and the other to Pertinax., In the former
it is extremely interesting to observe that on the
front of the ark is the name of Noah, NOE, in


Greek characters. The designs on these meda!s
correspond remarkably, although the legends some-
what vary. In both: we perceive the ark floating
on the water, containing the patriarch and his
wife, the dove on wing, the olive-Lranch, and the
raven perched on the ak. These medals also
represent Noah and his wite on terra firma, in the
attitude of rendering thanks for their safety. On
the pannel of the ark, in the coin of Pertinax,
is the word NHTON, perhaps a provincialism fur
Nijvos, ‘ an island,’ or New, ‘ to revive.” On the
exergue of the same medal we read distinctly AIIA-
MEON, as we do also in that of the other, the first
syllable terminating the first line. The genuine-
ness of these medals haa been established beyond
all question by the researches of Bryant and the
critical inspection of Abbé Barthélemy. There
is another medal, strick in honour of the emperor
adrian, which bears the inscription ANAMEQN


ARK OF THE COVENANT.


KIBQTOX MAPXIIA, ‘the ark and the mazeyas
of the Apameans.. The coincidences which
these medals offer are at Jeast exceedingly cu-
rious; and they are ecarcely less illustrative of
the prevailing belief to which we are referring, if,
as some suppuse, the figures represented are those
of Deucalion and Pyrrha.


ARK OF THE COVENANT ({7® ; Sept.
and New Test. x:Bwrés). The word here used
for ark is, as already explained, different from
that which is applied to the ak of Noah. It is
the common name for a chest or coffer, whether
applied to the ark in the tabernacle, to a coffin,
toa mummy-chest (Gen. 1. 26), or to a cliest for
money (2 Kings xii. 9, 10). Our word ark has
the same meaning, being derived from the Latin
arca, a chest. The distinction between aron and
the present word has already been suggested. The
sacred chest is distinguished from others as


DYMO [IW the «ark of God” (1 Sam. iii. 3):
TN NW “ark of the covenant ' (Josh. iti. 6):
and NTA ba Sark of the law’ (Exod. xxv.
22). Tuis ark was a kind of chest, of an oblong
shape, made of shittim (acacia) wood, a cubit
an a half broad and high, two cubits long,
and covered on all sides with the purest gold.
It was ornamented on its upper surface with a
border or rim of gold; and on each of the two
sides, at equal distances from the top, were two
gold rings, in which were placed (to remain there
perpetually) the gold-covered poles by which the
ark was carried, and which continued with it
after it was deposited in the tabernacle. The lid
or cover of the mk (MDS, iAacrhpiov, exlOnua)
was of the same length and breadth, and made of
the purest gold. Over it, at the two extremities,
were two cherubim, with their faces turned tuwards
each other, and inclined a little towards the lid
(otherwise called the mercy-seat). Their wings,
which were spread out over the top of the ark,
formed the throne of God, the King of Israel,
while the ark itselt’ was his footstool (Exod. xxv.
10-22; xxxvii. 1-9).

This ark was the most sacred object among
the Israelites: it was deposited in the innermost
aud holiest part of the tabernacle, called ‘the
holy of holies’ (and afterwards in the correspond-
ing apartment of the Temple, where it stood so
that one end of each of the poles by which it was
carried (which were drawn out so far as to allow
the ark to he placed against the back wall),
touched the veil which separated the two apart-
ments of the tabernacle (1 Kings viii. 8). In: the
ark were deposited the tables of the law (Exud.
xxv. 16). A quantity of manna was laid up
beside the ark ina vase of guld (Exod. xvi. 32,
36; 1 Kings viii.9); as were also the rod of Aaron
(Nunn. xvii. 10), and a copy of the book of the
law. (Deut. xxxi. 26).

Nothing is more et throughout the his-
torical Scriptures than the extreme sanctity which
attached to the ark, as the material symbol of the
Divine presence. During the marchesof the Israel-
ites it was covered with a purple pall, and borne
by the priests, with great reverence and care, in
advance of the host (Num. iv. 5,6; x. 33). It
was before the ark, thus in advance, that the
waters of the Jordan separated; and it remained
in the bed of the river, with the attendant priests,
until the whole host had passed over; and no


SeREERR BU 8 ee


we PS Tao


Erm s


AO ee a, a


ARK OF THE COVENANT.


soomer was it also brought up than the waters
yesumed their course (Josh. iii.; iv. 7, 10, 11, 17,
18). ‘The ark was similarly conspicuous in the
grand procesion round Jericho (Josh. vi. 4, 6, 8,
11, 12). It is not wonderful therefore that the
neighbvaring nations, who had no notion of spi-
ritaal worship, looked upon it as the God of the
Issaelites (1 Sam. iv. 6, 7), a delusion which may
have been strengthened by the figures of the che-
rubim on it. After the settlement of the Jews
in Palestine, the ark remained in the tahernacle
at Shiloh, until, in the time of Eli, it was carried
along with the army in the war against the Phi-
listines, under the superstitious notion that it would
secure the victory to the Hebrews. They were,
however, not only beaten, but the ark itself was
taken by the Philistines (1 Sam. iv. 3-11), whose
triamph was, however, very short lived, as they
were 90 op by the hand of God, that, after
seven months, they were glad to send it back
again (1 Sam. v. 7). Alter that it remained
from the tabernacle, at Kirjath-jearim (vii.
1, 2), where it continued until the time of David,
who purposed to remove it to Jerusalem; ‘but the
old prescribed mode of removing it from place
to place was so much neglected as tu cause the
death of Uzzah, in consequence of which it was
left in the house of Obededom (2 Sam. vi. 1-11);
but after three months David took courage, and
succeeded in effecting its safe removal, in grand
procession, to Mount Zion (ver. 12-19). When
the Temple of Solomon was completed, the ark
was deposited in the sanctuary (1 Kings viii. 6-9).
The passage in 2 Chron, xxxv. 3, in which Josiah
directs the Levites to resture the ark to the holy
place, is understood by some to imply that it had
either been removed by Amon, who put an idol
in its place, which is assumed to have been the
“trespass ' of which he is said to have been guilty
(2 Chron. xxxiii. 23); or that the priests them-
selves had withdrawn it during idolatrous times,
and preserved it in sume secret place, or had re-
moved it from one place to another. But it seems
more likely that it had been taken from the holy
of holies during the purification and repairs of
the Temple by this same Josiah, and that he, in
this passage, merely directs it to be again set
in its place. What became of the ark when the
Temple was plundered and destroyed by the Ba-
bylonians is not known, and all conjecture is
useless. The Jews believe that it was concealed
from the spoilers, and account it among the hidden
things which the Messiah is tu reveal. It is cer-
tain, however, from the consent of all the Jewish
writers, that the old ark was not contained in the
second temple, and there is no evidence that
any new one was made. Indeed the absence of
the ark is one of the important particulars in
which this temple was held to be inferior to that
of Solomon. The most holy place is therefore
generally considered to have been empty in the
vecond temple (as Josephus states, De Bell. Jud. v.
14); of at most (as the Rabbins allege) to have
contained only & stone to mark the place which
the ark should have occupied. The silence of
Ezra, Nehemiah, the Maccabees, and Josephus,
who repeatedly mention all the other sacred
utensils, but never name the ark, seems conclusive
we he subject. | But notwithstanding this weight
testimony, there are writers, such as Prideaux
1 P-207), who contend that the Jews


ARK OF THE COVENANT. 21&


could not properly carry on their worship without
an ark, and that if the origina) ark was not
recovered after the Captivity, a new one must have
been made. This matter is fully investigated m
Calmet's Dissertation sur P Arche d' Alliance.
We now come to consider the design and form
of the ark, on which it appears to us that clear
and unexpected light has been thrown by the
discoveries which have of late years been made in
Egypt, and which have unfolded to us the rites and
mysteries of the old Egyptians. The subject may
be opened in the following words, from the two
volumes on the Region and Agriculture of the
Ancient Egyptians, which have been published
by Sir J. G@. Wilkinson since we first had occa-
sion to notice this subject (see Pictorial Hist.
of Palestine, pp. 247-250) :—‘ One of the most
important ceremonies was the “ procession of
shrines,” which is mentioned in the Rosetta
and frequently occurs on the walls of the tem-
ples. e shrines were of two kinds: the one a
sort of canopy; the other an ark or sacred boat,
which may be termed the great shrine. This
was carried with grand pomp by the priests, a
certain number being selected for that duty, who
supported it ou their shoulders by means of long
staves, passing through metal rings at the side of
the sledge on which it stood, and brought it into
the temple, where it was deposited upon a stand
or table, in order that the prescribed ceremonies
might be discharged before it. The stand was
also carried in procession by another set of priests,
following the ee by means of similar staves;
a method usually adopted for carrying large ”
statues and sacred emblems, too heavy or too
important to be borne by une person. The same
is stated to have been the custom of the Jews in
some of their religivus processions (comp. 1 Chron,
xv. 2,15; 2 Sam. xv. 24; and Josh. 1ii. 12), as
in carrying the ark to its place, into the oracle
of the house, to the most holy place, when the
Temple was built by Solomon (1 Kings viii. 6).
++eSome of the arks or boats contained the
emblems of Life and Stability, which, when the
veil was drawn aside, were partially seen; and
others presented the sacred beetle to the sun, over~
shadowed by the wings of two figures of the god-
dess Thenei, or Truth, which call to mind the
cherubim of the Jews’ (Anc. Egyptians, v. pp
271, 275).

In reading this passage, more points of resem-
blance than occurred to Sir J. G. Wilkinson will
strike the Biblical student, and will attract his
close attention to the subject. In the above de-
scription three objects are distinguished :—1. The
*stand;’ 2. The boat or ‘ ark ;’ 3. The‘ canopy.’
This last is not, us the extract would suggest, an
alternative for the second ; but is most generally
seen with and in the boat. This is sliown in the
first cut, which exhibits all the parts together,
and at rest.

The points of resemblance to the Jewish ark
in the second cut are many and conspicuous : |
in the ‘stand,’ which, in some of its forms, an
leaving out the figures represented on the sides,
bears so close a resemblance to the written de-
scription of the Hebrew ark, that it may safely
be taken as an authentic illustration of its form.
Then the cherubim of the Hebrew ark find ma-
nifest representatives in the figures facing each
other, with wings spread inwards and meeting


36 =0©=60ARK OF THE COVENANT.


each other, which we find within a canopy or
shrine which sometimes rests immediately upon
this ‘stand,’ but more generally in the boat,
which itself rests thereon. These are shown in


the annexed cut (3), in which the winged figures
are, in their position, if not in their form, re-
markably analogous. We direct attention also
to the hovering wings above, which are very con-
spicuous in all such representations. This
of the subject is interesting; but, as it will obtain
te attention [Cugzrusim], we omit parti-
‘aalar nition of it here. Other analogies occur in
the persons who bear the shrine—the priests; and


ARK OF THE COVENANT.


im the mode of carrying it, by means of poles
inserted in rings; and it is observable that, as
im the Hebrew ark, these poles were not with
drawn, but remained in their place when the
shrine was at rest in the temple. Such are the
principal resemblances. The chief difference is,
the entire absence, in the Jewish ark, of the boat,
in which most of the idolatrous objects were as-
sembled. There are, indeed, circumstances which
might suggest the idea that the ‘ mercy-seat’ was
not, as commonly supposed, the lid of the ark,
but such a covering or canopy as we see in the
yptian shrines. The ground relied upon as
showing that it was the iid, t namely, that its di-
mensions were the same as those of the ark,
plies equally to the canopy, the bottom of which
is usually of the same dimensions as the top of the
stand or chest which answers to the Jewish ark.
The fact, however, that the cherubim stood upon
the mercy-seat, seems to show that it was the
lid, and not the canopy; and the absence of this
must therefore be taken as another difference.
To show the effect of these conclusions, we take
the stand, as already represented (in cut 2), and
we place thereon, without alteration (but without
the canopy), the winged figures as they appear in


an Egyptian shrine (the same as in cut 3); and
we need not point out that the tation, thus
formed without any alteration of the parts, affurds
a most striking resemblance to one of the two
forms of the ark with the cherubim above, which
scholars and artists, wholly unacquainted with
Egyptian antiquities, have drawn from the de-
scriptions of the Jewish ark which we find in
Exodus, as represented in the annexed cut (5)


’ ;
Again, we take the same ark, and place theregn
the figures of another shrine (6); aud we com:


.


weauaeweivwn ~


this with another of the common forms of the
ish ark as drawn from the descriptions (7).


Imi i |


These resemblances and differences appear to us
to cast a strong light, not only on the form, but
on the purpose of the Jewish ark. The disco-
veries of this sort which have lately been made
in ¥; have added an overwhelming weight
of to the evidence which previously existed,
that the ‘ tabernacle made with hands,’ with its
utensils and ministers, bore a desigued external
resemblance to the Egyptian models; but purged
of the details and peculiarities which were the
most open to abuse and misconstruction. That
the Israelites during the latter part of their sojourn
in Egypt followed the rites and religion of the
country, and were (at least many of them) gross
idolaters, is distinctly affirmed in ‘Scripture
(Josh. xxiv. 14; Ezek. xxiii. 3, 8, 19}; and is
shown by their ready lapse into the worship of
the ‘ golden calf;’ and by the striking fact that
they actually carried about with them one of these
Egyptian shrineg or tabernacles in the wilderness
nots 28) From their conduct and the whole
of their sentiments and character it appears
that this stiff-necked and rebellious conde were
incapable (as a nation) of adhering to that simple
form | of worship and service which is most
pleasing to God.
‘The parts of the Egyptian shrine which are omit-
ted im the ark are the boat and the canopy : the boat,
» Probably because it was not only intimately con-
acca) its very form with the Arkite worship,
which the previous article alludes, but because


ARKITES. ait


itwas the part which was absolutely crowded
with idolatrous images and associations; and the
canopy, pratebly because it often shrouded the
image of a god, whereas its absence made it


manifest that only the symbolic cherabim rested
on the ark. The parts retained were the stand or
chest, which was not an object of idolatrous re-
gard even among the Egyptians, and the winged
figures, which were purely symbolical, and not
idolatrous representations.


ARKITES (D'S ; Sept. "Apouxaios), the in
habitants of Arka, mentioned in Gen. x. 17;
1 Chron. i. 15, as descended frum the Pheenician
or Sidonian branch of the great family of Canaan.
This, in fact, as well as the other small northern
states of Phanicia, was a colony from the great
parent state of Sidon. Arka, or Acra, their chief
town, lay between Tripolis and Antaradus, at the
western base of Lebanon (Joseph. Antig. i. 6.23;
Jerome, Quest. in Gen. x. 15). Josephus (Antig.
viii, 2. 3) makes Baanah—who in 1 Kings iv. 16,
is said to have been superintenent of the tribe of
Asher—governor of Akra by the sea; and if, as
commonly supposed, the capital of the Arkites is
intended, their smal] state must, in the time of
Solomon, have heen under the Hebrew yoke. Sub-
sequently Akra shared the lot of the other small
Phornician states in that quarter; but in later times
it formed part of Herod Agrippa’s kingdom. The
name and site seem never to have been unknown,
although for a time it bore the name of Cwsarea
Lebani from having been the Lirth-place of Alex-
auder Severus (Munnert, p. 391). It is repeatedly
mentioned by the Arabian writers (Michaelis,
Spicil. pt. ii. p. 23; Schultens, Vita Saladini ;
Abulfeda, Tad. Syria, p. 11). It lay 32 R
miles from Antaradus, 18 miles from Tripoli,
and, according to Abulfeda, a parasang from
the sea. Ina position corresponding to these in-
timations, Shaw (Observat. p. 270), Burckhardt
(Syria, p. 162), and others noticed the site and
ruins. Burckhardt, in travelling from the north-
east of Lebanon to Tripoli, at the distance of
about four miles south of the Nahr-el-kebir (Eleu-
therus), came to a hill called Tel-Arka, which, from
its regularly flattened conical form and smooth
sides, appeared to be artificial. He was told
that on its top were some ruins of habitations and
walls. Upon an elevatiun on its east and south
sides, which commands a beautiful view over the

lain, the sea, and the Anzeyry mountains, are
ge and extensive heaps of rubbish, traces of
ancient dwellings, blocks of hewn stone, remains
of walls, and fragments of granite columns. These
are no doubt the remains of Arka; and the bill
was probably the acropolis or citadel, or the site
of a temple. :


318 ARM.


ARM. This word is frequently used in Scrip-
ture in a metaphorical seuse to denote power.
Hence, to ‘break the arm’ is to diminish or de-
stroy the power (Ps. x. 15; Ezek. xxx. 21; Jer.
alviii. 25). It is also employed to denote the in-
finite power of God (Ps. Ixxxix. 13; xlviii. 25 Tea.
iii. 1; John xii. 38). Ina few places the metaphor
is, with great force, extended to the action of the
arm, as:—‘I will redeem you with a stretched
out arm’ (Exod. vi. 5), that is, with a power fully
exerted. The figure is kere taken from the atti-
tude of ancient warriors baring and outstretching
the arm for fight. Thus in Isa. lii. 10, ‘ Jehovah
hath made bare his holy arm in the sight of all
the nations.’ Bishop Lowth has shown, from the
Sept. and other verstons, that in Isa. ix. 20, ‘ they
shall eat every one the flesh of his own arm,’
should be ‘ the flesh of his neighbour ;’ similar to
Jer. xix. 9, meaning that they should harass and
destroy one another. (See Wemyss's Clavis
S8ymbolica, pp. 23, 24.)

ARMAGEDDON, properly ‘the mountain of
Meygiddo,’ a city on the west of the river Jordan,
rebuilt by Selomon (1 Kings ix. 15). Both
Ahaziah and Josias died there. In the mystical
language of prophecy, the word mountain repre-
sents the Church, and the events which took
place at Megiddo are supposed to have had a
typical reference to the sorrows and triumphs of
the ple cf God under the gospel. ‘In that
day, says Zechariah, xii. 11, ‘shall there be a
great monrning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of
Hadadrimmon in the valley of Meziddon;’ re-
ferring to the death of Josias. But the same
spot witnessed, at an earlier period, the greatest
triumph of Israel, when ‘ fought the kings of
Canaan in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo’
(Judy. v. 19). ‘He gathered them together into
a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armaged-
don,’ is the languaye of the Apocalypse; and the
word has been translated by some as ‘the moun-
tain of destruction,’ by others as ¢ the mountain of
the gospel ;) many ingenious speculations having

employed on the passage in which it occurs,
but with little satisfaction to the more sober
readers of divine revelation.—H. S.

ARMENIA, a country of Western Asia, is
not mentioned in Scripture under that name, but
is supposed to he alluded to in the three following
Hebrew designations, which seem to refer either
to the country as a whole, or to particular dis-
tricts. I. Ararat OVS, the land upon (or over)
the mountains of which the ark rested at the
Deluge (Gen. viii. 4); whither the sons of Sen-
nacherib fled after murdering their father (2 Kings
xix. 37; Isa. xxxvii. 38); and one of the * king-
doms’ summoned, along with Minni and Ash-
kenaz, to arm against Babylon (Jer. li. 27). That
there was a province of Ararad in ancient Ar-
menia, we have the testimony of the native histo-
rian, Moses of Chorene. It lay in the centre of
the kingdom, was divided into twenty circles,
and, being the principal province, was commonly
the residence of the kings or governors. For other
particulars respecting it, and the celebrated moun-
tain which in modern times bears its name, see
the article Ararat. II. Minni ‘3D is men-
tioned in Jer. li. 27, along with Ararat and Ash-
kenaz, as a kingdom called to arm itself against
Babylon. The name is by some taken for a con-
traction of ‘Armenia,’ and the Chald. in the


ARMENIA.


text in Jeremiah has °)97)7. There appears a

trace of the name Minni in a passage quoted by

Josephus (Antig. i. 3. 6) from Nicolas of Damas-

cus, where it is said that ‘there is a great moun-

tain in Armenia, iwép thy Mudd, called Baris,

upomwhich it is reported that many who fled at

the time of the Deluge were saved; and that one

who was carried in an ark came on shore upon

the top of it; and that the remains of the timber

were a great while preserved. This might be the

man about whom Moses, the legislator of the Jews,

wrote.” Saint-Martin, in his erudite work entitled

Mémoires sur T Arménie (vol. i. p. 249), has the
not very probable conjecture that the word ‘ Minni*®

may refer to the Manavazians, a distinguished

Armenian tribe, descended from Manavaz, a son
of Haik, the capital of whose country was Ma-
navazagerd, now Melazgerd. In Ps. xlv 8, where

it is said ‘out of the ivory palaces whereby they

made thee glad,’ the Hebrew word rendered

‘whereby’ is minni, and hence some take it for
the proper name, and would translate ‘ palaces
of Armenia,’ but the interpretation is forced and

incongruous. III. Thogarmah AON, in some
MSS. Yhorgamah, and found with great variety

of orthography in the Septuagint and Josephus.
In the ethnographic table in the tenth chapter of
Genesis (ver. 3; comp. l Chron. i. 6) Thogarmah
is introduced as the youngest son of Gomer (son
of Juphet), who is supposed to have given name
to the Cimmerians on the north coast of the
Euxine Sea, his other sons being Ashkenaz and
Riphat, both progenitors of northern tribes, among
whom also it is natural to seek for the posterity
of Thogarmah, The prophet Ezekiel (xaxviii. 6)
also classes along with Gomer ‘the house of Tho-
garmah and the sides of the north’ (in the Eng.
Vers. fof the north quarters"), where, as also at
Ezek. xxvii. 14, it is placed beside Meshech and
Tubal, probably the tribes of the Moschi and
Tibareni in the Caucasus. Now, though Josephus
and Jerome tind Thogarmah in Pirygia, Bochart
in Cappadocia, the Chaldee and the Jewish rab-
bins in Germany, &c.; yet a comparison of the
above passages leads to the conclusion that it is
rather to be sought for in Armenia, and this is
the opinion of Eusebius, Theodoret. and others of
the fathers, It is strikingly confirmed by the
traditions of that and the neighbouring countries,
According to Moses of Chorene (Whiston’s edi-
tion, i, 8, p. 24), and also King Wachtang’s
History of Georgia (in Klaproth’s Travels in the
Caucasus, vol. ii. p. 6b), the Armenians, Georgians,
Lesghians, Mingrelians, and Caucasians are all
descended from one common progenitor, called
Thargamos, a son of Awanan, son of Japhet, son
of Noah (comp. Eusebius, Chron. ii. 12). After
the dispersion at Babel, he settled near Ararat,
but his po-terity spread abroad between the Cas-
pian and Euxine seas. A similar account is
found in a Georgian chronicle} quoted by an-
other German traveller, Guldenstedt, which states
that Turgamos was the father of eight sons, the
eldest of whom was Aos, the ancestor of the An
menians. They still call themselves ‘the house
of Thorgom,’ the very phrase used by Ezekiel,
MNIN NM, the corresponding Syriac word. for
*house* denoting ‘land or district... From = the
house or province of Thogannah the market of
Tyre was supplied with horses and mules (Ezek,
xxvii. 14); and Armenia, we kuow, was famed


e353 82R wan vren”mU TT ee le


~


OS Re


ARMENIA.


of old for its breed of horses. The Satrap of Ar
menia sent yearly to the Persian court 20,000
foals for the feast of Mithras (Strabo, xi. 13. 9;
Xenoph. Ancbas. iv. 5. 24; Herod. vii. 40).

The 'Apueria of the Greeks (sometimes aspi-
rated ‘Apperia) is the Armintya or Irmintya of
the Arabs, the Ermenistan of the Persians. Moses
of Chorene derives the name from Armenagh, the
second of the native princes; Hartmann draws
jt from Aram (see that article), a son of Shem,
who also gave name to Aramza or Syria; but
the most probable etymology is that of Bochart,
etz., that it was originally 3 0, Har-Minni
or Mount Minni, i.e the High-land of Minyas,
or, according to Wahl (in his work on Asia,

807), the Heavenly Mountain (i. e. Ararat),
hime in Zend, and myno, myny, in Parsee,
signify ‘heaven, heavenly.’ In the country it-
self the name Armenia is unknown; the people
are called Haik, and the country Hayotz-zor, the
Valley of the Haiks—from Haik, the fifth de-
scendant of Noah by Japhet, in the traditionary
genealozy of the country (comp. Ritter’s Erd-
kunde, th. ii. p. 714). . :

The boundaries of Armenia may be described
generally as the southern range of the Caucasus
on the north, and a branch of the Taurus on the
south; but in all directions, and especially to
the east and west, the limits have been very fluc-
tuating. It forms an elevated tableland, whence
rise mountains which (with the exception of the
gigantic Ararat) are of moderate height, the
plateau gradually sinking towards the plains of
Iran on the east, and those of Asia Minor on the
west. The climate is generally cold, but salu-
brious. The country abounds in romantic forest
and mountain scenery, and rich pasture-land,
especially in the districts which Neale upon
Persia. Ancient writers notice the wealth of Ar-
menia in metals and precious stones. The great
rivers Euphrates and Tigris both take their rise
in this region, as also the Araxes, and the Kur
or Cyrus. Armenia is commonly divided into
Greater and Lesser, the line of separation being
the Euphrates ; but the former constitutes by far
the larger portion, and indeed the other is often
regarded as pertaining rather to Asia Minor.
There was anciently a kingdom of Armenia, with
its metropolis Artaxata: it was sometimes an
independent state, but most commonly tributary
to some more powerful neighbour. Indeed at no
period was the whole of this region ever comprised
under one government, but Assyria, Media, Syria,
and Cappadocia shared the dominion or alle-
giance of some portion of it, just as it is now
divided among the Persians, Russians, Turks,
and Kurds ; for there is no doubt that that part
of Kurdistan which includes the elevated basins
of the lakes of Van and Oormiah anciently be-

longed to Armenia. The unfortunate German
traveller Schulz (who was murdered by a Kurd-
ish chief) discovered in 1827, near the former
lake, the ruins of a very ancient town, which he
supposed to he that which is called by Armenian
storians Shamiramakert (i. e. the town of Se
miramis), because believed to have been built by
the famous Assyrian queen. The ruins are co-
Yered with inscriptions in the arrow-headed cha-
pees 3 mn ni of them Saint-Martin thought he
phered the words KAshéarsha son of Daréioush


es son of Darius). In later times Armenia


ARMENIAN LANGUAGE. 329


was the border-country where the Romans and
Parthians fruitlessly strove for the mastery; and
since then it has been the frequent battle-field of
the neighbouring states. Towards the end of the
Jast war between Russia and Turkey, large bodies
of native Armenians emigrated into the Russian
dominions, so that their number in what is termed
Turkish Armenia is now considerably reduced.
By the treaty of Turkomanshee (2st Feb. 1828)
Persia ceded to Russia the Khanats of Erivan
and Nakhshivan. The boundary-line (drawn
frum the Turkish dominions) passes over the
Little Ararat; the line of separation between
Persian and Turkish Armenia also begins at
Ararat; 20 that this famous mountain is now
the central boundary-stone of these three em-
ines.
ij Christianity was first established in Armenia
in the fourth century; the Armenian church has
a close aflinity to the Greek church in its forms
and polity ; it is described by the American mis-
sionaries who are settled in the country as ina
state of great corruption and debasement. The
total number of the Armenian nation throughout
the world is supposed not to exceed 2,000,000.
Their favourite pursuit is commerce, and their
merchants are found in all parts of the East. For
the history of the cquntry, see Moses of Chorene,
Father Chamich, and the Hist. of Vartan, trans-
lated by Neumann. For the topography, Morier,
Ker Porter, Smith and Dwight, Southgtfe, &c.,
and especially the vols. of the Journal of the
Geographical Society, containing the researches
of Monteith, Ainsworth, and others.—N. M.
ARMENIAN LANGUAGE. The Arme-
nian or Haikan language, notwithstanding the
great antiquity of the nation to which it belongs,
no literary documents prior to the fifth
century of the Christian era. The translation of
the Bible, begun by Miesryb in the year 410, is
the earliest mouument of the language that has
come down to us. The dialect in which this ver-
sion is written, and in which it is still publicly
read in their churches, is called the old Arme-
nian, The dialect now in use— the modem
Armenian—in which they preach and carry on the
intercourse of daily life, uot only departs from
the elder form by dialectual changes in the native
elements of the language itself, but also by the
great intermixture of Persian and Tunkish words
which has resulted from the conquest and subjec-
tion of the country. It is, perhaps, this diversity
of the ancient and modern idioms which
given rise to the many conflicting opinions that
exist as to the relation in which the Armenian
stands to other lanyuayes. Thus Cirbied and
Vater both assert that it is an original language,
that is, one so distinct from all others in its fun-
damental character as not to be classed with any
of the great families of languages. Eichhorn, on
the other hand (Sprachenkunde, yp. 349), attirms
that the learmed idiom of the Armenian undoubt+
edly belongs to the Medo-Persiau family.
Whereas Pott (Untersuchungen, p. =) says
that, notwithstanding its many points of relation
to that family, it cannot strictly be considered to
belong to it; and Gatterer actually classed it as
a living sister of the Basque, Finish, and Welsh
languages.
As to form, it is said to be rough and full of
consonants; to possess fen cases in the noun—®


220 ARMENIAN VERSION.


number which is only exceeded by the Finnish ;
to have no dual; to have no mode of denoting
gender in the noun by change of form, but to be
obliged to append the words man and tcoman as
the marks of sex—thus, to say prophet-tcoman for
prophetess (nevertheless, modern writers use the
syllable owhs to distinguish the feminine; Wahl,
Geschichte d. Morgenl. Sprachen, p. 100); to
bear a remarkable resemblance to k in the
use of the participle, and in the whole syntactical
structure; and to have adopted the Arabian sys-
tem of metre.

The history of its alphabetical character is
briefly this: until the third century of our era,
the Armenians used either the Persian or Greek
alphabet (the letter in Syrian characters, men-
tioned by Diodor. xix. 23, is not considered an
evidence that they wrote Armenian in Syrian
characters, as that letter was probably Persian),
In the fifth century, however, the translation of
the Bible created the necessity for characters
which would more adequately represent the pecu-
liar sounds of the language. Accordingly, after
a fruitless attempt of a certain Daniel, and after
several efforts on his own part, Miesrob saw a
hand in a dream write the very characters which
now constitute the Armenian alphabet. The 38
letters thus obtained are chiefly founded ou the
Greek, but have partly made out their number
by deriving some forms from the Zeud alphabet.
The omer of writing is from left to right.
Miesrob employed these letters in his translation
of the Bible, and thus ensured their universal
and permanent adoption by the nation (Gesenius;
article Puleographie, in Ersch and Gruber).—

J. N.

ARMENIAN VERSION. The Armenian
version of the Bible was undertaken in the year
410 by Miesrob, with the aid of his pupils Joan-
nes Ecelensis and Josephus Palnensis. It appears
that the patriarch Isaac first attempted, in conse-
quence of the Persians having destroyed all the co-
pies of the Greek version, to make a translation from
the Peshito; that Miesrob became his coadjutor
in this work ; and that they actually completed
their translation from the Syriac. But when the
above-uamed pupils, who had been sent to the
eccl€siastical council at Ephesus, retumed, the
brought with them an accurate copy of the Grek
Bible. Upon this, Miesrob laid aside his trans-
lation from the Peshito, and prepared to com-
mence anew from a more authentic text. Imper-
fect knowledge of the Greek language, however,
induced him to send his pupils to Alexandria, to

uire accurate Greek scholarship; and, on
their return, the translation was accomplished.
Moses of Chorene, the historian of Armenia, who
was also employed, as a disciple of Miesrob, on
this version, fixes its completion in the year 410;
but he is contradicted by the date of the Council
of Ephesus, which necessarily makes it subsequent
to the year 431.

In the Old Testament this version adheres ex-
ceedingly closely to the LXX. (but, in the book
of Daniel, has followed the version of Theodotion).
Its most striking characteristic is, that it does not
follow any known recension of the LXX. Al-
though it more often agrees with the Alexandrine
text, in readings which are peculiar to the latter,
than it does with the Aldine or Comp!utensian
text; yet, on the other hand, it also has fol-


ARMLET.


lowed readings which are only found in the two
last. Bertholdt accounts for this mixed text by
assuming that the copy of the Greek Bible sent
from Ephesus contained the Lucian recension,
and that the pupils brought back copies accordi

to the Hesychian recension from Alexandria,
that the translators made the latter their standard,
but corrected their version by aid of the former
(Einleit. ii. 560). The version of the New Tes-
tament is equally close to the Greek original, and
also represents a text made up of Alexandrine and
Occidental readings.

This version was afterwards revised and adapted
to the Peshito, in the sixth century, on the occa-
sion of an ecclesiastical union between the Syrians
and Armenians. Again, in the thirteenth cen-
tury, an Armenian king Hethom or Haitho, who
was so zealous a Catholic that he turned Francis-
can monk, adapted the Armenian version to the
Vulgate, by way of smoothing the way for a
union of the Ruman and Armenian churches.
Lastly, the bishop Uscan, who printed the first
edition of.this version at Amsterdam, in the year
1666, is also accused of having interpolated the
text as it came down to his time, by adding all
that he found the Vulgate contained more than
the Armenian version. The existeuce of the verse
1 John v. 7, in this version, is ascribed to this
supplementary labour of Uscan. It is clear from
what has been said, that the critical uses of this
version are limited to determining the readings of
the LXX. and of the Greek text of the New Tea
tament which it represents, and that it has sulfered
many alterations which diminish its usefulness in
that respect.—J. N.

ARMLET. Although this word has the same
meaning as bracelet, yet the latter is practically
so exclusively used to denote the ornament of
the wrist, that it seems proper to distinguish by
armilet the similar ornament which is worn on the
upper arm. There is also this dilicrence between
them, that in the East bracelets a:« encrally worn
by women, and armlets only by en. The arm-
let, however, is in use among meu only as one of
the insignia of sovereign power. There are three
different words which the Auth. Vers. renders by
bracelet. These are, 1. MIYYN etzadah, which
occurs in Num. xxxi.50; 2Sam. i. lO; and which
being used with reference to men only, we take to
be the armlet. 2. “WDY¥ tzamid, which is found
in Gen. xxiv. 22; Num. xxxi. 50; Ezek. xvi.
11. Where these two words occur together (as in
Num, xxxi. 5). the first is rendered by ‘chain *
and the second by ‘ bracelet.” 3. MY shiryah,
which occurs only in Isa. iii. 19. The first we
take to mean armlets worn by men; the second,
bracelets worn by women and sometimes by men 3


and the third, a peculiar bracelet of chain-work
worn only by wumen. It is observable that the


“=F RS Bue BB ee 8 FT em


ARMON.


two first occur in Num. xxxi. 50, which we

suppose to mean that the men offered their own
armoilets and the bracelets of their wives. In the
only other in which the first word occurs
it denotes the royal ornament which the Amalekite
took from the arm of the dead Saul, and brought
with the other regalia to David. There is little
question that this was such a distinguishing band
of. jewelled metal as we still find worn as a mark
of royalty se the Tigris to ei one ies
E; ian kings are represented with armlets,
eich were also worn by the Egyptian women.
‘These, however, are not jewelled, but of plain or
enamelled metal, as was in all likelihood the
case among the Hebrews. In modern times the
most celebrated armlets are those which form part
of the regalia of the Persian kings, and which
formerly belonged to the Mogul emperors of
India. These ornaments are of dazzling splendour,
and the jewels in them are of such large size
and immense value that the pair are reckoned
to be worth a million of our money. The prin-
cipal stone of the left armlet is famous in the East
by the name of the Devid-e-nur, or Sea of light.
It weighs 1*6 carats, and is considered the dia-
mond of finest lustre in the world. The principal
jewel of the left armlet, although of somewhat in-
ferior size (146 carats) and value, is renowned as
the g-e-mah, ‘Crown of the moon.’ The im-
per.al armlets, generally set with jewels, may also
be observed in most of the portraits of the Indian
emperors [Bracrter].


ARMON (}i0Y; Chaldes, mi]; Syriac,
Jado»; Arabic, , Jo ; Sept. wAdrayos ;


Vulg. platanus ; Luth. ahorn; A. V. ‘ chestnut-
tree’), a tree, which is named thrice in the
Scriptures. It occurs among the ‘spetkled rods’
which Jacob placed in the watering-troughs before
the sheep (Gen. xxx. 37): its grandeur is indi-
cated in Ezek. xxxi. 8, as well as in Ecclus.
xxiv. 19: it is noted for its magnificence, shooting


its high boughs aloft. This description agrees
see the plane-tree (Platanus Orientelis),
which is adopted by all the ancient transla-


ARMON. 221


to which the balance of critical opi
lines,,and which actually grows in

tine. The beech, the maple, and the chestnut
have been adopted, in di t modern versions,
as representing the Hebrew Armon ; but scarcely
any one now doubts that it means the plane-tree.
It may be remarked that this tree is in Genesis
associated with others—the willow and the poplar
—whose habits agree with it; they aie all ase
of the low grounds, and love to grow where the
soil is rich and humid. This is strikingly illus-
trated by the fact that Russel (NV. H. of Aleppo,
i. 47) expressly names the plane, the willow, and
the poplar (along. with the ash), as trees which
grow in the same situations near Al

But this congruity would be lost if the chestnut
were understood, as that tree prefers dry and hilly
situations. There is a lateut beauty also in the
passage in Ezekiel, where, in describing the great-
ness and glory of Assyria, the prophet says, ‘ The
Armon-trees were not like his boughs, nor any
tree in the garden of God like unto him for beauty.’
This not only expresses the grandeur of the trec,
but is singularly appropriate from the fact that
the plane-trees (chenars, as they are called) in
the plains of Assyria are of extraordinary size and
beauty, in both respects exceeding even those of
Palestine. It consists with our own experience
that one may travel far in Western Asia without
meeting such trees, and so many together, as occur
in the chenar-groves of Assyria and Media. ,

The Oriental plane-tree ranks in the Linnzan
class and order Monecia Polyandria, and in
the natural order among the Platanacee. West-
ernmost Asia is its native country, although, ac-
cording to Professor Royle, it extends as far
eastward as Cashmere. ne stem is fall, erect,
and covered with a smooth bark which annually
falls off. The flowers are smal] and scarcely
distinguishable: they come out a little before
the leaves. The wood of the plane-tree is fine-
grained, hard, and rather brittle than tough; when
old, it is said to acquire dark veins, aud to take
the appearance of walnut-wood.

In those situations which are favourable to its
growth, huge branches spread out in all direc-
tions from the massive trunk, invested with broad,
deeply-divided, and glossy green leaves. This

ly of rich foliage, joined to the smoothness of
the stem, and the symmetry of the general growth,
renders the plane-tree one of the noblest objects in
the vegetable kingdom. It has now, and had also
of old (Plin. Nat. Hist. xii. 1), the reputation
of being the tree which most effectually excludes
the sun’s beams in summer, and most readily
admits them in winter—thus affording the ‘best
shelter from the extremes of both seasons.

For this reason it was planted near public build-
ings and palaces, a practice which the Greeks and
Romans adopted; and the former delighted to
adorn with it their academic walks and places of

ublic exercise. In the East, the plane seems to
hae been considered sacred, as the oak was for-
merly in Britain. This distinction is in most
countries awarded to the most magnificent species
of tree which it produces [tans Sacrep]. In
Palestine, for instance, where the plane does not
appear to have been very common, the terebinth
seems to have pre-eminence [Evan].
No one is ignorant of the celebrated story of
Xerxes arresting the march of his grand army


2 ARMON.


before a noble plane-tree in Lydia, that be might
tender honour to it, and adom its boughs
golden chains, bracelets, and other rich ornaments
—an action misunderstood, and egregiously mis-
represented by ASlian (Var, Hist. ii. 14).

The Oriental plane endures our own climate
well, and grows to a fine tree; but not to the
enormous size which it sometimes attains in the
East. Several grand old plane-trees have been
mentioned. Pausanias (1. viii. ¢. 23) notices a
noble plane in Arcadia, the planting of which
was ascribed, by tradition, to Menelaus; so that
if this tradition were entitled to credit (and it
claims little), it must, when he wrote, although in
a sound state, have been above 1300 years old.
Pliny, inhis curious chapter on this tree (Nat.
Hist. xii. 1), mentions one in Lycia, in the
trunk of which had been gradually formed an
immense cavern, eighty feet in circumference. L.
Mutianus, thrice consul, and governor of the
vince, with eighteen other persona, often dined
and supped commodionsly within it. If nothing
more were known of this L. Mutianus, we should
like him fur the pleasure, not unmingled with
regret, with which he records the satisfaction
which he occasionally derived from hearing the
rain patter upon the leaves overhead, while he
and his company sat dry and safe within: it was
the music of their feast. Caligula also had a tree
of this sort at his villa near Velitre, the hollow
of which accommodated fifteen persons at dinuer
with a proper suite of attendants, The emperor
called it ‘Ais nest ;’ and it is highly jrobable
that his friend Herod Agrippa may occasionally
have been one of the fifteen birds who nestled
there along with him. Modern travellers also
notice similar trees. Belon (Obds. Sing. 1. ii.
p- 105), La Roque (Voy. de Syrie, pp. 197-199),
and others, mention the groves of noble planes
which adorn the plain of Antioch; and the last-
named traveller records a night's rest which he en-
joyed under planes of great beauty in a valley of

non (p. 76). That they are among the prin-
cipal trees in the plantations near Aleppo has al-
Teady been observed, on the authority of Russel.


(Branch of Platanus Orientalie,


Buckingham names them among the trees which
Tine the Jabbok (Travels in Palestine, ii. 108).
Evelyn (in his Sylva) seems to ascribe the intro-


ARMS, ARMOUR.


duction of the plane-free into England to the great
Lord Bacon, who planted some which were still
flourishing at Verulam in 1706. This was, per
haps, the first plantation of any note; but it appears
from Turner's Herbal (published in 1551), that
the tree was known and cultivated in this country
before the chancellor was born. (Besides the
authorities quoted, see Hiller, Hierophyticon, cap.
43; Celsius, Hierobotanicon, 512-516; and
Winer's Realorterbuch, in. * Ahorn’).

ARMS, ARMOUR. In order to give a clear
view of this subject, we shall endeavour to show
succinctly, and from the best authorities now avail-
able, what were the weapons, both offensive and
defensive, used hy the ancient Asiatics; and then,
under other proper heads, explain the compvusition
and tactical condition of their armies; their sys-
tems of furtitication; and, finally, their method of
conducting sieges and battles; and their usa ses of


war as regards spoil, captives, &c.


1, 2, 8. Clabes. 8. Hardwood Sword.

4,8. Crooked Billets, or 9. Sharhs-teeth Sword,
throwing-bats, 10, Flint Sword.

6. Mace. 1. Saw-tish Sword.

7. Battle-axe. 12,13. Egyptian Battle-axes,


The instruments at first employed in the chace,
or to repel wild beasts, but converted by the
wicked to the destruction of their fellow-men, or
used by the peaceable to oppose aggression, were
naturally the most simple. Among these were the
club and the throwing-hat. The first consisted
originally of a heavy piece of wood, variously
shaped, made to strike with, and, according to its
form, denominated a mace, a bar, a hammer, or a
maul. This weapon was in use among the He.


ARMS, ARMOUR.


brews; for, in the time of the kings, wood had
already been superseded by metal ; and the DIY


Griz shevet barzel, rod of iron (Ps. ii. 9), is sup-
pa to mean a mace, or gavelock, or crowbar,
t is an instrument of great power when used by
a strong arm; as when Van Amburgh, with one
in his hand, compels a tiger's ferocity to submit
to his will. (See Wilkinson's Manners and Cus-
toms of the Ancient Egyptians, vol. i. p. 327,
fig. 3, 4; and mace, fig. 1,2. The throwstick
or lissan occurs p. 329.) The other was also
known, if, as is probable, PDD maphiets (Prov.
xxv. 18) bea maul, a martel, or a war-hammer.
It is likely metal was only in general use at a
later period, and that a heavy crooked billet con-
tinued lung to serve both as a missile and a sword.
The throwstick, made of thorn-wood, is the same
instrument which we see figured on Egyptian
monuments. By the native Arabe it is still called
lissan, and was anciently known among us by
the name of crooked billet. These instruments,
supplied with a sharp edge, would naturally con-
stitute a battle-axe, and a kind of sword; and
such in the midest ages we find them, made with
flints set into a groove, or with sharks’ teeth firmly
secured to the staff with twisted sinews. On the
earliest monuments of Egypt, for these ruder in-
struments is already seen substituted a piece of
metal with a steel or bronze blade fastened into a
globe, thus forming a falchion-axe; and also a
lunate-blade, riveted in three places to the handle,
forming a true battle-axe (Wilkinson, vol. i. p. 325,
326); and there were, besides, true bills or axes
in form like our own,


1. Horn Dagger.


4,5. Tulwar Swords.
2, 3. Swords.


6. Quarter. pike.


Next came the dirk or poniard, which, in the
Hebrew word JW cherev, may possibly retain
some allusion to the original instrument made of
the ante! ope’s horn, merely sharpened, which is still
usel in every part of the East where the material
can be yrocured. From existing figures, the dirk
appears to have been early made of metal in
Egyyt, and worn stuck in ‘a girdle (Wilkinson,
3 a); but, from several texts (1 Sam. xvii. 39;
inte 8; and 1 Kings xx. 11), it is evident

: ny real eword was slung in a belt, and that
= lis loosing the sword’ were synony-
The blake for commencing and ending a war.
Were, it seems, always short (one is


ARMS, ARMOUR. 233


mentioned of a cubit’s length); and the dirk-
sword, at least, was always double-edged. The
sheath was ornamented and polished. In Egypt
there were larger and heavier swords, more near!
like modern tulwars, and of the form of an Engli
round-pointed table-knife. But while metal was
scarce, there were also swords which might be
called quarter-pikes, being composed of a v
short wooden handle, surmounted by a spear-head,
Hence the Latin telum and ferrum continued in
later ages to be used for gladius. In Nubia,
swords of heavy wood are still in use.


ns


1, 2. Spear-heads, 3, 4. Datrs.
. ard Oryx horn spear-head.


The spear, M07 ramach, was another offensive
weapon common to all the nations of antiquity,
and was of various size, weight, and length.
Probably the shepherd Hebrews, like nations
similarly situated in northern Africa, anciently
made use of the horn of an oryx, or a leucoryx,
above three feet long, straightened in water, and
sheathed upon a thorn-wood staff. When sharp-
ened, this instrument would penetrate the hide of
a bull, and, according to Strabo, even of an ele-
phant : it was light, very difficult to break, resisted
the blow of a battle-axe, and the animals which
furnished it were abundant in Arabia and in the
desert east of Palestine. Ata later period, the head
was of brass, and afterwards of irou. Very ponder-
ous weapons of this kind were often used in Egypt
by the heavy infantry ; and, from various cireums
stances, it may be inferred that among the Hebrews
and their immediate neighbours, commanders in
particular were distinguished by heavy spears.
Among these were generally ranked the most va-
liant in fight and the largest in stature; such as
Goliath, ‘whose spear was like a weaver’s beam”
(1 Sam. xvii. 7), and whose spear’s head weighed
six hnndred shekels of iron; which by some is
asserted to be equal to twenty-five pounds
weight. The spear had a point of metal at the
but-end to fix it in the ground, perhaps with
the same massy globe above it, which is still in
use, intended to counterbalance the point. It
was with this ferrel that Abner slew Asahel (2
Sam. ii. 22, 23). The form of the head and
length of the shaft differed at different times, both
in Egypt and Syria, and were influenced by the
fashions set by various conquering nations.

The javelins, named MIM chaneth, and [V3
kedon, may have had distinct forms: from the
context, where chaneth first occurs, it appears to
have been a species of dart carried by light troops
(1 Sam. xiii, 22; Ps. Bak while the kedon which
was heavier, was most likely a kind of pilum.


ARMS, ARMOUR.


most nations of antiquity the infantry, not bear-
ing a , carried two , those lightly armed
wai. box for long casts, and the heavy-armed
only one for that purpose; the second, more

lerous than the other, being reserved for throw-
ing when close to the enemy, or for handling in
the manner of a 5; This explanation may
throw light on the fact of the chaneth being
named in connection with the i13¥ tsenna, or
larger buckler (1 Chron. xii. 34), and may re-
concile what is said of the kedon (Job xxxix. 23;
xii. 29, and Josh. viii. 10). While on the subject
of the javelin, it may be remarked that, by the
act of casting one at David te Sam. xix. 9, 10),
Saul virtually absolved him from his allegiance ;
for by the customs of ancient Asia, preserved in
the usages of the Teutonic and other nations, the
Sachsen recht, the custom of the East Franks,
&c., to throw a dart at a freedman, who escaped
from it by flight, was the demonstrative token of
manumission given by his lord or master; he was
thereby seut out of hand, manumissus, well ex-


sore in the old English pores ‘ scot-free.’
ut for this act of Saul, David might have been
viewed as a rebel.


224


t


we


UMN


1


= 8


id aS,


1, 2, 3, 4. Bows. 7,8. Arrows.


But the chief offensive weapon in Egypt, and,
from the nature of the country, ieiay be Pforred?
in Palestine also, was the war-how, NINWDP
keshtoth, and NUP kesheth, the arrows being de-
nominated DY¥N Ahitzem, YN hAitz. From thesim-
ple implements used by the first hunters, consisting
merely of an elastic reed, a branch of a tree, or rib
of palm, the bow became in the course of time
strong and tall, was made of brass, of wood backed
with horn, or of horn entirely, and even of ivory ;
some being shaped like the common English bow,
and others, particularly those used by riding na-
tions, like the buffalo horn. There were various
modes of bending this instrument, by of
the knee, or by the foot, 71, treading the bow, or
by setting one end against the foot, drawing the
middle ary the hand of the same side oo
the hip, an ing the uj int forward wi
the wom id er till the ane passed. the loop
of the string beyond the nock. The horned bows
of the cavalry, shaped like those of the Chinese,
Occur on monuments of antiquity. They cannot
be bent from tisir Semiof'a Roman C to that of


5, 6. Quivers.


ARMS, ARMOUR.


what is termed a Cupid's bow _—~—W, but by
placing one end under the thigh; and as they are
short, this operation ro pluto by Tahtar riders
while in the saddle. This was the Parthian bow, as
is proved by severa] Persian bas-reliefs, and may
have been in use in the time of the Elamites, who
were a mounted people. These bows were carried
in cases to protéct the string, which was composed
of deer sinews, from injury, and were slung on the
right hip of the rider, except when on the point of
engaging. Then the string was often cast over the
head, and the bow hung upon the breast, with the
two nocks above each shoulder, like a pair of horns.
The hhitzim, or arrows, were likewise enclosed in
@ case or quiver, 'DP) tele, hung sometimes on the
shoulder, and at other times on the left side; and
six or eight flight-arrows were commonly stuck
in the edge of the cap, ready to be pulled out
and put to the string. The infantry always
carried the arrows in a quiver on the right
shoulder, and the bow was kept unbent until the
moment of action. Ona march it was carried on
the shield arm, where there was frequently also
a horn bracer secured below the elbow to receive
the shock from the string when an arrow was dis-
charged. The flight or long-range arrows were
commonly of reed, not always feathered, and
mostly tipped with flint points; but the shot or
aimed arrows, used for nearer purposes, were of
wood tipped with metal, about 30 inches long,
and winged with three lines of feathers, like
those in modern use: they varied in length at
different periods, and according to the substance
of the bows. ;
The last missile instrument to be mentioned

is the sling, yop kala (Job xli. 28), an im-
provement upon the simple act of throwing
stones. It was the favourite weapon of the Ben-
jamites, a small tribe, not making a great mass
in an order of battle, but well composed for light
troops. They could also boast of using the sling
rad well with the left hand as with the right.
sling was made of plaited thongs, somewhat
broad in the middle, es lode the stone or leaden
missile, and was twirled two or three times roun {
before the stone was allowed to take flight.


(Egyptian Slingers and Sling.)

Stones could not be cast above 4CO feet, but
leaden bullets could be thrown as far as 600 feet.
The force as well as precision of aim which
might be attained in the use of this instrument
was remarkably shown in the case of David; and .
several nations of antiquity boasted of great skill
in the practice of the sling.


en eee ee


“SRR OS Ak eA Se A RB


~~


Sael


ARMS, ARMOUR.


All these hand-weapons were in use at different

periods, not only among the Hebrews and Egyp-
tians, but likewise in Assyria, Persia, Greece, and
Macedonia ; in which last country the sarissa car-
ried. by the heavy infantry of the phalanx differed
from the others only in the great length of theshaft.
The Roman pilum was a kind of dart, distinguish-
ed from those of other nations chiefly by its weight,
and the great proportional length of the metal or
iron part, which constituted one half of the whole,
or from two and a half to three feet. Much of this
length was hollow, and received nearly twenty
inches of the shaft within it: the point was never
booked like that of common darts, because the wea-
pon being nearly indestructible, the soldiers always
reckoned upon advancing in battle and recover-
ing it without trouble when thrown; whereas, if
it had been hooked or hamate, they could not
have wrenched it out of hostile shields or breast-
plates without trouble and delay.

Dsrznsivse Arms.-The most ancient defensive
piece was the shield, buckler, roundel, or target,
composed of a great variety of materials, very
different in form and size, and therefore in all


1. The Tsenna, or Great Shield. 2. Common Egyptian
Shield. 3. Target. 4, 5. Ancient Shields of un-
known tribes. 6. Roundel.


nations bearing a variety of names. The He-
brews used the word M19¥ tsenna, for a great shield ;
defence, protection (Gen. xv. 1; Ps. xvii. 9;
Prov. xxx. 5), which is commonly found in con-
nection with spear, and was the shelter of hea-
vily-armed infantry; $319 magin, a buckler, or
smaller shield, which, from a similar juxtapo-
sitiun with sword, bow and arrows, appears to
have been the defence of the other-armed infan-
try and of chiefs; and MND sohairah, parma,
@ roundel, which may have been appropriated
to archers and slingers; and there were D'DOY
shelatim, and ‘thy shelti, synonymous with
magin, only different in ornament. In the
more advanced eras of civilization shields were
made of light wood not liable to split, covered
with bull-hide of two or more thicknesses and
bardered with metal: the lighter kinds were made

ef wicker-work or osier, similarly, but less solidly
sei crof double ox-hide cut into a round form.
were others of a single hide, extremely thick


team baring been boiled ; their surface presented


ARMS, ARMOUR. "335
Hn eppeeranics of many folds, like round waves
up and down, which might yield, but could rarely
be penetrated.

e may infer that at first the Hebrews bor-
rowed the forms in use in Egypt, and that their
common shields were a kind of parallelogram,
broadest and arched at the top and cut square
beneath, bordered with metal, the surface being
covered with raw hide with the hair on. The
lishter shields may bave been soaked in oil
and dried in the shade to make them hard; no
doubt, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, and elephant skin
shields were brought from Ethiopia and purchased
in the Phoenician markets; but small round
hand-bucklers of whale-skin, still used by Ara-
bian swordsmen, came from the Erythraan sea.
During the Assyrian and Persian supremacy the
Hebrews may have used the square, oblong, and
round shields of these nations, and may have sub-
sequently copied those of Greece and Rome. The
princes of Israel had shields of precious metals :
all were managed by a wooden or leathern handle,
and often slung by a thong over the neck. With
the larger kinds a testudo could be formed by
pressing the ranks close together ; and while the
outside men kept their shields before and on the
flanks, those within raised theirs above the head,
and thus produced a kind of surface, sometimes
as close and fitted together as a pantile roof, and
capable of resisting the pressure even of a body of
men marching upon it.

The tsenna was most likely what in the feudal
ages would have been called a pavise, for such
occurs on the Egyptian monuments. This weapon
was about five feet high, with a pointed arch above,
and square below, resembling the feudal knight's
shield, only that the point was reversed. This
kind of large-sized shicld, however, was best fitted
for men without any other armour, when combat-
ing in countries, or carrying on sieges; for
it may be remarked in general that the mili-
tary buckler of antiquity was Jarge in proportion
as other defensive armour was wanting. Shields
were hung upon the battlements of walls, and, as
still occurs, chiefly above gates of cities by the
watch and ward. In time of peace they were
covered to preserve them from the sun, and in
war uncovered ; this sign was poetically used to
denote coming hostilities, as in Isa. xxii. 6, &c.
In Europe, where the Crusaders could imitate the
Saracens, but not introduce their climate, shields
were carved in stone upon towers and gates, as
at York, &c. The Eastern origin of this practice
seems to be attested by the word Zuine, which,
in German, stil] denotes a battlement, something
pointed, a summit, and conveys the idea of a
pavise with the point uppermost, a shape such as
Arabian battlements often assume.

The Helmet was next in consideration, and
in the earliest ages was made of osier, or rushes,
in the form of a beehive, or of a skull-cap. The
skins of the heads of animals—of lions, bears, wild
boars, bulls, and horses—were likewise adopted,
and were adorned with rows of teeth, manes,
and bristles. Wood, linen cloth in mang folds,
and a kind of felt, were also in early use, and
belmets of these materials may be observed worn by
the nations of Asia at war with the conqueror kings
of Egypt, even before the di re of Israel. At
that time also these kings helmets of metal,
of rounded or pointed forms, adorned with a figure

Q


276 ARMS, ARMOUR.


of the serpent Kneph ; and an allied nation,

haps the Carian, reported to have first worn a
military crest, bears on the patie of their
brazen hanes a pair of horns with a globe in the
middle—the solar arkite symbol. The nations of


i. Parthian,
1x, 13. Other Asiatic tribes


farther Asia, however, used the woollen or braided
caps, still retained, and now called kaouk and
fez, around which the turban is usually wound.
These were almost invariably supplied with long
lappets to cover the ears and the back of the
head, and princes usually wore a radiated crown
on the summit. This was the form of the Syrian,
aud probably of the Assyrian helmets, excepting
that the last mentioned were of brass, though they
still retained the low cylindrical shape. The 3315
koba, some helmet of this kind, was worn by the
trained infantry, who were spearmen among the
Hebrews; but archers and slingers had round
skull-caps of skins, felts, or quilted stuffa, such
as are still in use among the Arabs. The form
of Greek and Roman helmets, both of leather and
of brass, is well known; they were most likely
adopted also by the Hebrews and jans
during their subjection to those nations, but require
no further notice here.


8, 4. Egypt.


Body Armour.—The most ancient Persian
idols are clad in shagged skins, such as the A&gis
of Jupiter and Minerva may have been, the type
being taken from a Cyrenean or African legend,


ARMS, ARMOUR.


and the pretended red goat-ekin may be supposed
to have been that of a species of pate (Ce

Gorgon, Ham. Smith), an animal fabled to have
killed men by its sight, and therefore answering
to the condition both of a kind of goat and of
producing death by the sight alone, In Egypt
cuirasses were manufactured of leather, of brass,
and of a succession of iron hoops, chiefly covering
the abdomen and the shoulders; but a more an-
cient national form was a kind of thorax, tippet,
py shereyon, or square, with an opening in it

t the head, the fuur points covering the

back, and both y arms. This kind in par-
ticular was affected by the rvyal band of relatives
who surrounded the Pharaoh, were his subordinaze
Peco erapeee messengers, re a Janda bear-
ing staudards, ensign-fans, sun-screens,
his portable throne, his bow and arrows. Beneath
this square was another piece, protecting the trunk
of the body, and both were in general covered
with a red-coloured cloth or stuff. On the oldest
fictile vases a shoulder-piece likewise occurs,
worn by Greek and Etruscan warriors. It covers
the upper edge of the body armour, is periarased
in the middle to allow the head to pass, ut hangs


1. Egyptian tigulated.


equal on the breast and back, square on the
shoulders, and is evidently of leather. (Sep the
figure of Meuelans discovering Helen in the
sack of Troy. Millin, Mon. inédits.) This piece
of armour occurs also on the shoulders of Va-
rangi (northmen, who were the budy-guards of the
Greek emperors); but they are studded with roun-
dels or bosses, as they appear figured in mosaic or
fresco on the walls of the cathedral of Ravenna,
dating frum the times of Justinian. The late Ro-
man legionaries, as published by Du Choul, again
wear the tippet armour, like that of the Egyptians,
and one or other of the above forms may be found
on figures of Danes in illuminated manuscripts
of the eleventh century.

By their use of metal for defensive armour, the
Carians appear to have created astonishment
among the Egyptians, and therefore may be pre-
sumed to have been the first nation so pro-
tected in western Asia; nevertheless, in the
tombs of the kings near Thebes, a tigulated
hauberk . is ted, composed of sunall
three-coloured pieces of metal; one golden, the
others reddish and green. I¢ is this suit which


2. Sleeve of ring-mail, Ionian.


Ae”


*


REBEAR HR BTR GER


vd


ARMS, ARMOUR.


Denan refffeseuts as composed of rin; set on

but they are all parallelograms, with the ee

edie furming the segment of a circle, and each
piece, beside the fastening, has a button and a ver-
tical slit above it, giving flexibility by means of
the button of each square working in the aperture
of the piece beneath it. This kind of armour
may de meant by the word NINN techera, the
closest interpretation of which appears to be de-
cussatio, tigalatio, a tiling. The expression in 2
Chron. xvilti. 33, may be that Ahab was struck in
one of the grooves or slits in the squares of his
techera, or between two of them where they do not
overlap; or perhaps, with more probability, between
the metal of the trunk of the shereyon before
mentioned, where the thorax overlaps the abdomen.
The tern OW PY) kaskasim, ‘scales,’ in the case
of Goliath’s armvur, denotes the squamous kind,
most likely that in which the pieces were sewed
upon a cloth, and not hinged to each other, as in the
techera. It was the defensive armour of Northern


and Eastern nations, the Persian Cataphracti,
Parthians, and Sarmatians. But of true annular
or ringed mail, Denon’s figure heing incorrect, we
doubt if there is any positive evidence, excepting
where rings were sewn separately upon cloth,
anterior to the sculpture at Takt-i-Boostan, or
the close of the Parthian era. The existence of
mail is often incorrectly inferred from our trans-
lators using the word wherever flexible armour is
to be mentioned. The techera could not well
be worn without an under-garment of some den-
sity to resist the friction of metal; and this may
have been a kind of sagum, the shereyon of the
Hebrews, under another form—the dress Saul put
upon David before he assumed the breastplate
and girdle. The Roman sagum offers a parallel
instance. Under that name it was worn at firet
@ loricd, then beneath it, and at last again
st but the brie made into a kind of felt.
‘wtrass and Corslet, strictly king, were

ef prepared leather (corium), but often alos com-
pored of quilted cloths: former in ancient
Umes generally denoted a suit with leathern ap-
ee eet at the shoulder, as used
Rae Ramans ; the latter, one in which the barrel
nee come down below the hips, and usually

G . a leathern vite, which was nationally

weed back later ages it always designates a breast
Prece of steel. It is, however, requisite


ARMS, ARMOUR. bs]
to observe, that in estimating the meaning of
Hebrew names for armour of all kinds, they are


1,2. Early Greek.
3. Greek.


liable to the same laxity of use which all other
languages have manifested ; for in military mat-
ters, more perhaps than in any other, a name
once adopted remains the same, though the ob-
ject may be changed by successive modifications,
till there remains but little resemblance to
that to which the designation was originally
applied. The objects above denominated ap-
sas es and vitte (in the feudal ages, lam-

requins), were straps of leather secured to the
lower rim of the barrel of a suit of armour, and
to the openings for arm-boles : the first were about
three and a half inches in width ; the second, two
and a half. They were ornamented with em-
broidery, covered with rich stuffs and goldstaiths’
work, and made hcavy at the lower extremity, to
cause them always to hang down in proper order ;
but those on the arm-holes had a slight connection,
s0 as to keep them equal when the arm was lifted.
These vitta: were rarely in a single row, but in
general formed two or three rows, alternately co-
vering the opening between those underneath, and
then protecting the thighs nearly to the knee, and
half the upper arm. In the Roman service, under
the suit of armour, was the sagum, made of
red serge or haize, coming down to the cap of the
knee and folding of the arm, so that the vitte
hung entirely upon it. Other nations had always
an equivalent to this, but not mally long; and
in the opinion of some, the Hebrew shereyon
served the same purpose.

The Roman and Greek suits were, with slight
difference, similarly laced together on the left, or
shield side; and ae shoulders Lala _ a
clasps, comparatively narrow in those of the
mans, which covered the joinings of the breast and
back pieces on the shoulders, came from bebind,
and were fastened to a button on each breast. At
the throat the suit of armour bad always » double

‘ 8


228 ARMS, ARMOUR.


edging, often a band of brass or silver; in the Ro-
man, and often in the Greek, adorned with a lion's
or a Gorgou’s head. It was here that, in the time
of Augustus, and probably much earlier, the war-
viors distinguished for particular acts of valour
wore insiynia; a practice only revived by the
moderns under the names of crosses and decora-
tions. The Romans, it appears, had phiale and
phalere of honour, terms which have been su

posed to signify bracelets and medals; but all
opinion on the subject was only conjectural pre-
viously to the discovery, on the borders of the
Rhine, of a monumental bas-relief, raised by the
freedman of Marcus Calius Lembo, tribune of
the (xiix ) 18th legion, who fell in the disastrous


overthrow of Varus. The effigy is of three-quarter
length, in a full suit of armour, with a laurel
crown on the head, a Gallic twisted torque round
the neck ; and from the lion-head shoulder-clasps
of the cuirass hang two embossed bracelets, having
beneath them a label with three points, from which
are led five medals of honour; one large,
on the pit of the stomach, re ting a face of
Medusa ; and two on eaoh side, one beneath the
other ; and all as far as can be seen charged with
lions’ faces and ee ee ee The mo-
nument is now in the museum of the university at
-Bonn.
The girdle, or more properly the baldric or belt
Césaguila or bette), was used by the Hebrews
under the name of “}if& ézor: it was of leather,
studded with metal plates or bull; when the
armour was slight, broad, and capable of being
girt upon the hips; otherwise it supported the
sword scarf-wise fn the shoulder. -
Greaves were likewise known, even so early as
the time of David, for Goliah wore them.
consisted of a pair of shin-covers of brass or strong
leather, bound by thongs round the calves and
above the ankles. They reached only to the knees,
excepting among the Greeks, whose greaves, elastic
behind, caught nearly the whole Jeg, and were
raised in front ahove the knees. The Hebrew
word }XD scin, in Isaiah ix. 5, is supposed to
mean a half-greave, though the passage is alto-
gether obscure. Perhaps the warboot may be
explained by the war-shoe of Egypt with a metal
point; acs then the stortiz anight bo neaderel, ‘For
every greave of the armed foot is with confused
noise and garments rolled in blood,’ &c., instead
of * Every battle of the warrior,’ &c. But, after
all, this is not quite satisfactory.—C. H. 8.


They sisted of two parts, or distinct cities;


AROER.


e
ARNON (ATW ; Sept. "Apyayv), a river form-
ing the southern boundary of trans-Jordanic Pa-
lestine, and separating it from the land of Moab
Num. xxi. 13, 26; Deut. ii. 24; iii. 8, 16;
osh, xii. 13 Isa. xvi. 2; Jer. xlviii. 20).
Burckhardt was the first to give a satisfactory
account of this river, under the name of Wady
Modjeb, which it now bears, It rises in the
mountains of Gilead, near Katrane, whence it
pursues a circuitous course of about eighty miles
to the Dead Sea. It flows in a rocky bed, and, at
the part visited by Burckhardt, in a channel so
deep and precipitous as to appear inaccessible; yet
along this, winding among huge fragments of rock,
lies the most frequented road, and, not being far
from Dibon, probably that taken by the lnpeliies
The descent into the valley from the south took
Irby and Mangles (Letters, p. 461) one hour and a
half; the descent from the north took Burckhardt
(Syria, p.372) thirty-five minutes. The last-named
traveller declares that he had never felt such suf-
focating heat as he experienced in this valley from
the concentrated rays of the sun and their reflec-
tion from the rocks. The stream is almost dried
up in summer ; but huge masses of rock, torn from
the banks, and deposited high above the usual
channel, evince its fulness and impetuosity in the
rainy season. Irby and Mangles suppose that it
is this which renders the valley of the Arnon less
shrubby than that of most other streams in the
country. ‘There are, however, a few tamarisks,
and here and there are oleander growing about it.’
Near this place the old Roman road comes down
upon the stream ; and here there remains a single
high arch of a bridge, all the others having dis-
appeared.


AROER (Wi; Sept. *Apofp), a town on
the north side of the river Arnon, and therefore on
the southern border of the territory conquered from
the Amorites, which was assigned to the tribes of
Reuben and Gad (Deut. ii. 36; Josh. xii. 2;
xiii. 9). The Amorites had previously dispos-
sessed the Ammonites of this territory ; and al-
though, in the texts cited, the town’ seems to be
given to Reuben, it is mentioned as a Moabitish
city by Jeremiah (xlviii. 19). Burckhardt found
the ruins of this town under the name of Araayr,
on the edge of a precipice overlooking the river
(Travels in Syria, 372). They are merely alluded
to by him, and have not been noticed by other tra-
vellers. Aroer is always named in conjunction
with ‘ the city that is in the midst of the river ;’
whence Dr. Mansford (Script. Gaz.) conjectures
that, like Rabbath Ammon [which see], it con-
one on
the bank of the river, and the other in the valley
beneath, surrounded, either naturally or artificially,
by the waters of the river.

2. AROER, one of the towns ¢ built,’ or probably
rebuilt, by the tribe of Gad (Num. xxxii. 34). It
is said in Josh. xiii. 25. to be ‘ before Rabbah’
{of Ammon}; but, as Raumer well remarks (Pa-
fastina, p. 249), this could not possibly have
been in the topographical sense of the words (in
which before means east of), seeing that Aroer, as
a town on the eastern border of Gad, must have
been west of Rabbah. But to a person in Palestine
Proper, or coming from the Jordan, Aroer would be
before Rabbeh in the ordinary sense; and it a
pears to have been thus understood by Burckhardt


AROER.


(Syria, 355), who, in journeying from Szalt

towards mabe Ammon, notices a ruined site,
called Ayra, as ‘one of the towns built by the
tribe of Gad.’ This Ayra, about seven miles
south-west from Szalt, is probably the same with
the Array-el-Emir, visited by Legh P 246), on
his way from Heshbon to Szalt, and which in
Berghaus's celebrated map of Palestine is placed
two German (nine English) miles WNW. of
Rabbah, Aroer of Gad is also mentioned in
Judg. xi, 33, and 2 Sam. xxiv. 5.

3. AROER, a city in the tribe of Judah (1
Sam. xxx. 28),

4. AROER, a city in the south of Judah, to
Which David sent presents after recovering the
dale pad (1 Sam. xxx. 26,28). At the

of twenty geographical miles S. by W.
from Hebron, Dr Robinson came to a broad Wady
Where there are many pits for water, which are
Called ‘Ararah, and which gave name to the valley.
In the vulley and on the western hill are evident
traces of an ancient village or town, consisting
caly of foundations of unhewn stones, now much
watered, but yet sufficiently distinct to mark them
as foundations. Small fragments of pottery are
tho everywhere visible. The identity of name
satisfies the traveller that he had here found the
Arver of Judah,


ARPHAD, or Arran (THR ; Sept. "Appdd),
a Syrian city, baving its own king, and in Scrip-
tare always associated with Hamath, the Epi-
phania of the Greeks (2 Kings xviii. 34; xix.
34; Isa. x. 95 xxxvi. 19). It has very com-
mouly been confounded with the Phonician
Arvad or Aradus [Arvap]. Michaelis and
others seek Arphad in Raphanw or Raphanew of
the Greek geographers (Ptolem. v. 15; Steph.
Byzant. in 'Empdvewa; Joseph. De Bell. Jud. vii.
1.3; vii. 5. 1), which was a day's journey west
of Hamath (Mannert, vi. p. 431). Some, however,
are content to find this Arphad in the Arpha
which Josephus (De Bell. Jud. iii. 3. 6) mentions
&s situated on the north-eastern frontier of the north-
emmost province of Herod Agrippa’s tetrarchy.
Bat all these explanations are muely: conjectural,
and must still be numbered among un-
ascertained Scriptural sites.


ARPHAXAD (TWDDW; Sept. "Appatds),
the son of Shem, and father of Salah; born one
Year after the Deluge, and died s.c. 1904, aged
438 years (Gen. xi. 12, &c.).

ARROW. This word is frequently used as
the symbol of calamity or disease inflicted by
God (Job, vi. 4; xxxiv. 6; Ps. xxxviii. 2;
Deut. xxxii. 23; comp. Ezek. v. 16; Zech. ix.
14). The metaphor thus ects was also in use
among tle heathen: thus, Ovid—

*Nou mea sunt summa leviter destricta sagitta
Pectora: descendit vulnus ad ossa meum.’


It derived its iety and force from the
lar belief that all diseases were itammadiats p a
special inflictions from Heaven.
Lightnings are, by a very fine figure, described
& the arrows of God (Ps. xviii. 14; cxliv. 6;
abak. iii, 11; comp. Wisd. v. 21; 2 Sam.
xxii. 15),
‘ Arrow’ is occasionally used to denote some
mudden or inevitable danger; as in Ps. xci. 5 :—
The arrow that flieth by day.’ It is also figue


ARTAXERXES. 28


rative of anything injurious, as a deceitfal tongue
(Ps. exxix. 4; Jer. ix. 7); a bitter word (Ps.
Ixiv. 3); a false testimony (Prov. xxv. 18). As
symbolical of oral wrong, the figure may perhaps


‘have been derived from the darting ‘ arrowy


tongue ' of ts.

The arrow, owenee is not always symbolical
ofevil. In Ps. cxxvii. 4, 5, well-conditioned
children are compared to ‘ arrows in the hands of
a mighty man;’ é. ¢. instruments of power and
action. The arrow is also used in a good sense
to denote the efficient and irresistible energy of
the word of God in the hands of the Messiah
(Ps. xlv. & Isa. xliv. 2, and ene note
thereon).—Wemyss's Clavis Symbolica, &c.

ARROWS. Ker

ARROWS, DIVINATION BY. [Divi-
NATION. } \ :

ARTAXERXES, Arracusuast (RROUTIE WE
as it is most frequently written) is the title under
which more than one Persian king is mentioned
in the Old Testament. The Hebrew form isa
slight corruption of ANWNNW, which letters De
Sacy has deciphered in the inscriptions of Nakshi
Rustam, and which he vocalizes Artahshetr (An-
tig. d. 1. Perse, p. 100). Gesenius pronounces
them Artachshatr; and, by assuming the easy
change of r into s, and the transposition of the s,
makes Artachshast very closely represent its pro-
totype. The word is a compound, the first ele-
ment of which, arta—found in several Persian
names—is generally admitted to mean great; the
latter part De Sacy conceived to be the Zend
Khshethro, King, to which Gesenius and Pott
assent. Thus the sense of great toarrior, which
Herodotus (vi. 98) assigned to the Greek form
Artaxerxes, accords with that which etymology
discovers in the original Persian title (particu-
larly when we consider that, as the king could
only be chosen from the soldier-caste—from the
Kshatriyas—warrior and king are so far cognate
terms); although Pott, according to his etymo-
logy of Xerzcs, takes Artaxerxes to be more than
equivalent to Artachshatr—to be ‘ magnus regum
rex’ (Etym. Forsch. i. p. \xvii.).

The first ARTACHSHASHT (RAY YES, and
once pointed Artachshashta ; Sept. ’ApOacacd)
is mentioned in Ezra iv. 7-24, as the Persian king
who, at the instigation of the adversaries of the.
Jews, obstructed the rebuilding of the Temple,
from his time to that of Darius, king of Persia,
According to the arguments adduced in the art,
Aunasurnus, this king is the immediate prede-.
cessor of Darius Hystaspis, and can be no other
than the Magian impostor, Smerdis, who seized
on the throne s.c. 521, and was murdered after a
usurpation of less than eight months (Herod. iii.
61-78). Profane historians, indeed, have not
mentioned him under the ¢it/e of Artaxerxes; but
neither do Herodotus and Justin (the latteruf whom
calls him Oropasta, i. 9) ayree in his name; so
that this fact is not, of itself, enough to invalidate
any deductions which are in other respects sound.

As to the second ArTacHsH AST (RADY AAS 3
Sept. Ap@aeacéd), in the: seventh year of whose
pao Ezra led 3 second colony of the Jewish:
exiles back to Jerusalem (Ezra vii. 1, sg.), the
opinions are divided between Xerxes and his son
Artaxerxes Longimanus. The arguments brought
forward by the advocates fur Xerxes, among whom


930 ARTAXERXES.


are J.D. Michaelis, Jahn, and De Wette, are
briefly as follows: That, as the preceding portion
of the book of Ezra ielutes to Darius Hystaspis,
it is most natural to expect that the next following
section should refer to bis successor, Xerxes; that,
on the supposition that Artaxerxes is here meant,
we not only have to explain how the reign of
Xerxes, who had been so favourable to the Jews,
is entirely omitted here, but also how the narrative
can make etch a tremendous leap as from the
sixth year of Darius to the seventh of Artaxerxes,
@ period of fifty-eight years; that, on that suppo-
sition, the interval between the seventh year of his
reign, when Ezra set out, allows too short a space
for the affairs of the colony to have reached that
state of disorder in which Nehemiah found them
on his arrival at Jerusalem, in the twenticth year
of his reiyn; and, lastly, that Josephus calls the
king in question Xerxes (Antig. Jud. xi. 5).

The supporters of the other altemative-- that
the king here neant is Artaxerxes Longimanus—
among whom are J. H. Michaelis, Eichhorn, and
Bertholdt, rest on the following reasons, as stated
chiefly by Bertholdt : That the coherence between
the several portions of the book of Ezra is by no
means sv strict as to make the first argument con-
elusive; as, even assuming that Xerxes is the
person referred to, there is still a gap of thirty-six
years between the end of ch. vi. and the beginning
of ch. vii.; that the objection, that the interval
between the arrivals of Ezra and Nehemiah in
Jerusalem is too short (on the supposition that the
former left Babylon in the reign of Artaxerxes)
to account for the confusion in which the latter
found the colony, loses its force, if we consider
that the progress of the infant state was neces-
sarily slow in its difficult position, and if we also
conceive Ezra’s efforts to have been more glirected
to returm the religious than the civil state of the
Jews; that the appeal to Josephus is of no avail,
as he calls the king in whose reign Nehemiah re-
turned Xerxes also, which is decidedly incorrect,
since Nehemiah went back to Persia in the thirty-
second year of the king (xiii. 6), and Xerxes only
reigned twenty-one years; that the Apoeryphal
Esdras, in its version of this history, calls the
king Artaxerxes; that, in taking our Artachshast
to be Artaxerxes Longimanus, we have the sup-
port of a considerable resemblance in the two
names; and lastly, that (if Xerxes ts the Achash-
verosh of the books of Esther and Ezra) we not
only avoid the evil attending the other alternative
—the evil of being obliged to recognise him wider
two wisely different names in almost contempo-
raneous books—but also find Artaxerxes under
one and the same name in the books of Ezra and
Nehemiah. This last argument. proceeds on the
assumption that the Artachshast of whom Ezra
and Nehemiah speak is the same person, and, as
Ezra and Nehemiah were decidedly contempo-
raries (Neh. viii. 9), the reasons here adduced
may derive some additional force from the argu-
ments brought forward below.

The third Arracusitast (the forms in the He
brew and Sept. are the same as in the last case)
is the Persian king who, in the twentieth year of
his reign, considerately allowed Nehemiah to go
to Jerusalem for the furtherance of purely national
objects, invested him with the goverument of his
own people, and ailowed him to remain there for
twelve years (Neh. ii. 1, s9.; v.14). It is almost


ARTEMIS.


unanimously agreed that the king here intended is
Artaxerxes Lougimauus, who reigned from the
year 464 to 425 u.c. The date of Nehemiah’s
departure is, therefore, the year 444 ».c. Some
few have indeed maintained (and it seems prin-
cipally for the purpose of reconciling Neb. xiii.
28, with Josephus, Antig. xi. 8) that the king bere
referred to is Artaxerxes Mnemon, who reigned
from the year u.c. 404 to 359; and J. D. Mi
chaelis (Anmerk. f. Ungel.) admits that he should
not know how to refute any one who advocated
that opinion. Bertholdt, however (Eindeit. iii.
1014), endeavours to find a conclusive argument
in the fact that Eliashib, who was the high-priest
when Nehemiah arrived at Jerusalem (iii. 1), was
the grandson of the high-priest Jeshua, who ac-
companied the first colony under Zerubbabel (xii.
1,10). He argues, namely, that the three gene
rations which elapsed between the accession of
Cyrus aud the arrival of Nehemiah, and which in
the ordinary computation amount to ninety-nine
years, tally so exactly with the ninety-two years
which intervene between the first year of Cyrus
and the twentieth year of Artaxerxes Longimanus,
as to render it far more probable that the latter is
the Artachshast of the book of Nehemiah; where-
as, on the supposition that Artaxerxes Muemon is
the person meant, Eliashib and his father and
grand{ather must have enjoyed the high-priesthood
between them for the incredible period of 154
ears.—J. N.

ARTEMAS (Apreuas). This name (which
is a contraction for Artemidorus) occurs only
once (Tit. iii. 123, as that of an esteemed dise
ciple whom St. Paul desi:ned to send into Crete
to supply the place of Titus, whom he invited to
visit him at Nicopolis. When the Epistle was
written, the Apostle seems not to have decided
whether he should send Artemas or Tychicus for
this purpose.

ARTEMIS (“Apreus, Acts xix. 24), the Diana
of the Romans, is a goddess known under various
mnodifications, and with almost incompatible
attributes. As the tutelary divinity of Ephesus,
iu which character alone she concerns us here,
she was undoubtedly a representative of the same
power presiding over conception and birth which
was adored in Palestine under the name of AsH-
TorxetH. She is therefore related to all the cog-
nate deities of that Asiatic Juno-Venus, and
partukes, at least, of their connection with the
moon, Creuzer has combined a number of testi-
monies in order to show how her worship was
introduced into Ephesus from the coasts of the
Black Sa; and endeavours to point out the
several Medo-Peisian, Exyptian, Libyan, Scy-
thian, and Cretan elements of which she is com-
pounded (Symbolth, ii, 115, sg.).

Her earliest image, which was said to have
fallen from heaven, was probably very rude, aud,
to judge from its representation on ancient coins,
little more than a head with a shapeless trunk,
supported by a staff on each side. There is some
dispute as to the material of which her image was
made, Most authorities say it was of ebony, the
black colour being, as Creuzer thinks, symbo-
lical. Pliny relates that Mucianus, who had
seen it, aftirms that it was of the wood of the virre,
and that it was ro old that it had survived seven
restorations of the temple (Z/ist. Nat. xvi. 79),
According to Xenophon, it was of guld Cheek:


v.8), The later image with the full development
of attributes, of which we give a representation
below, is, as Creuzer says, a Pantheon of Asiatic
and Egyptian deities. Even in it, however, we
see how little influence Greek art had in modify-
ing its antique rudeness. It is still more like a
tummy than a Greek statue. Some of the most sig-
nificant attributes in this figure are—The turreted
head, like that of Cybele ; the nimbus behind it
Tepresenting the moon; the zodiacal signs of the
bull, the twins, and the crab on her bosom; below
them, two garlands, one of flowers and the other
of acorns; the numerous breasts; the lions, stags,
and cows in various parts; the bees and flowers
on the sides; and others described in Muillin’s
Galerie Mythol. i. 26. Her priests were called
Megabyzi, and were eunuchs.


The Arabic versiou of the Acts renders Arte-
mis, in the chapter cited, by Az Zuharat, which
is the Arabic name for the planet Venus.—J. N.

ARTICLES. In the later development of lan-
guages, logical fulness and accuracy are attained
at the expense of conciseness and delicacy ; and,
if not before, at least in this stage the small words
called articles are uniformly produced. If we
confined our view to the languages which are de-
Bived from Latin, we might easily believe that


ARTICLES,
the of these parts of


snd poo that ro oraghe gadis rg
y reached : for in French, Italian, Spanish,
ille


231


and Portuguese, derivatives from the Latin

and unus fulfil the part of the English the and a.
Nor is the lesson taught by the Greek language
apparently very different : for in its earliest extant
specimens (the poems of Homer), the word 6, %, 73
is far oftener used as a demonstrative or relative
pronoun, than as the definite article. We seem
to be able to trace its growth and establishment
in this later function; and we are tempted to
infer from its appearing so much earlier in Greek
than in Latin, that this is owing to the earlier
development of logical acuteness in the Greek.
mind. Finally, in modern Greek, the old nume-.
ral eis, évds, one, has given birth to a new indefi-
nite article, évas, perfectly analogous to the Ita-
lian uno, French un, and English a.

Weare here perhaps in danger of building upa
theory too rapidly. It is true, that in languages
generally, the early and poetical style is defective
in articles, while the late, prosaic, and logical
style is even redundant with them. Nevertheless,
we cannot safely infer a high logical cultivation,
much less the attainment of the secondary stage,
of development, from the presence of articles in a
language. Hebrew has possessed a definite article
as long as it can be traced back; but it would
be too much to impute it to an unusually strong
and premature argumentative acuteness in the
nations of Canaan, whose speech the family of
Isaac adopted. That there is a germ of truth in
this matter, we believe; but until the relation of
the Syro-Arabian to the older languages which
they supplanted is better understood, it is hazard-
ous to engage in any of these speculations.

So much can be stated as fact. If a language
has as yet no definite article, it will gradually
form one out of its demonstrative pronoun, pro-
vided that it be not tied down to a fixed state by
imitating classical models. Under the same cir-
cumstances, there is a tendency tu generate an
indefinite article out of the numeral one. Closely
akin to the last is the use of the word that -pro-
perly means single, in the sense pf the indefinite
article—a change which can be traced in the
Bagdad dialect of Arabic.

In the Hebrew language the definite article, as.
printed in our books, appears under the form iT
(ha), accompanied by a redoubling of the fol-.
Towing consonant, if it be such a consonant as,
Hebrew euphony allows to be doubled. It is not
to be quate: that the real word, when isolated,


was ba (hal), corresponding to the Arabic J
(al or el), ially as the final 7 in the Arabic
article also is, in numerous cases, assimilated to
the consonant which follows. 'The Hebrews have
one demonstrative form i bre (élle) these, which
approaches remarkably near to the Arabic; and
there is some reason for regarding ?i] as a com-
posite, or at least an elongated form, of which.
NIN (Aw) he, is the root. To this attach themselves
two different consonants to denote the ideas of
vHaT and Tu1s, 1 and px, which latter becomes
z or D in different dialects. The px is found. in

Arabic (as, indeed, in English, strange to
think!); but in Hebrew it is z, in Chaldee p, in
German p, in Greek 1; though, iu these Eu-


39a. ARTICLES..
lominates


ropean tongues the idea of rHar pred
over TH1s. The 1. is found in Latin (tlle, eae
t


and the old Latin words olli, oltra, are thoug
te indicate that yon, yonder, is its primitive
sense. Just 50, TNDT (hala) for ultra, Beyond.
As regards the form of the Hebrew article, it thus
appears that the root Ao or Au first took to itself
the terminating J, and then in pronunciation gra-
dually rubbed it off again.

The radical element of the Greck article vacil-
lates between Ao and fo; and a gencral survey of
all the kindred languages makes it probable that
these are mere varieties of the same root. In
Latin and in Zend the 4 maintains its place
throughout; in Sanscrit the Greek ho and to
change into sa and fa, this relation of 4 to 8
being notoriously common. In Lithuanian only
ta is found; and the seo, dha, of the Anglo-Saxon,
sufficiently establish the connection of sa with ta ;
for the sound th, by mere lisping, naturally dege-
Nerates into either s or t, and dh into z or d.
We are thus nearly brought to a conviction that
the two elements Au and dha of the Syro-Arabian
languages were, at a much earlier stage, variations
of but one root. Nor is this opinion absurd ; so
many are the proofs of the extreme antiquity of
the material which is so differently worked up in
extant languages. In fact, the root hu (this)
shows itself likewise in the Welsh tongue.

The Chaldee branch of the Syro-Arabian has a
peculiarity of its own, in compensation for the
definite article. This consists in the annexation
of the vowel & at the end of nouns, to produce
what is called the emphatic state; which is prac-
tically, it seema, equivalent in sense to the Eng-
lish the. Whether this termination has any ety-
mological relation to the Hebrew article is
uncertain. In Arabic, especially in its modem
Syrian dialect, a very similar elongation of nouns
is common, with a view of giving specification or
individuality to that which was collective: as


exh (Gin), fig or figs; dace (tina), a fig;
w™ (semn), butter; data (semna), a piece of


butter. This, however, agrees more nearly to the
indefinite than to the definite article; nor does
its construct form indicate relatiouship to the
Chaldee termination.

It belongs to grammars of the special languages
to discuss the uses of the article, and only a few
general remarks can find place here. The chief

uliarity in Hebrew occurs with words joined
in what is technically called ‘ regimen’ or ‘ con-
struction ;’ in which case @ single article between
the two nouns serves to define both of them.
Thus, 771213 J3 (ben hal-melk) means, the sou
of the king. If the Hebrews wish to join two
nouns in this relation, so as to detine the latter
and leave the former undefined, they are forced
to abandon the, construct form, and to employ
the preposition ?, which in this case is to he
rendered of, nut for. Thus, ‘A Psalm of David’
is TTD WON (mizmor li David). This re
mark, we believe, was made first by Ewald.

The importance which some critics have given to
the Greek article, in regard to the Trinitarian con-
troversy, is truly extraordinary. Even Mr. Schole-
field, as professor of Greek at Cambridge, did not


-ARVAD.


hesitate to assert that, in Ephes. v. 5, the words
dy tH Basirelg toi Xpictov nal Seov, should
be translated, ‘in the kingdom of (him who is)
Christ and God.’ It seems to have been taken for
granted, that, contrary to the practice of all other
nations, the Greeks allowed themse!ves no latitude
as to the use of the article; and this, though proof
to the contrary is so close at hand, both in the
New Testament and in classical writers. It is
undoubtedly more perspicuous, when two nouns
are in apposition or immediate connection, to re-

t the article if they refer to different objects ;
Just as we should say, The king and general, if
one person were intended, but the king and the
general, if they were two persons. But such rules
often give way, in cases where no ambiguity
is apprehended. Thus, Hebr. ix. 19, 7d alua
Tov udcxeov Kal rpd-yev, ‘ the blood of the calves
and goats,’ for ‘of the calves and the goats.’
This is equally common in the classics; as in
the opening words of Thucydides: ‘ Thucydides
of Athens wrote the history of the war of the
Peloponnesians and Athenians,’ roy xéAcuor rae
TleAowovyncioy wal A@nvaley. Another rule
which some have sought to establish is, that when
a noun is followed by another noun in the geni-
tive, the latter must take the article, if the former
has it. But neither is this universally true; for
instance, Heb. ix. 13, ei yap 7d aia Tabpev Kat
tpd-yov, ‘ for if the blood of bulls and goats,’ &c.

It seems to be a general result of the history of
the article, that in elevated style there is a ten-
dency to drop it, because such style generally
savours of the antique and the poetical. Thus,
odpavds xal yij rapeAcdcerat, ‘ Heaven and earth
shall pass away,’ is more elevated than ‘ The
heaven and the earth, &c. But beside and in
contrast to this, every language possesses nu
merous familiar furmulas or special words, frona
which the article is dropped ; and to become ac-
quanta with these is always very difficult. In
daily life they abound, not only after prepositions,
but as nominative cases: thus, to sit at table ;
to travel by ship; ‘No fear lest dinner cool.” A
dim perception of this fuct seems to have led to
the universal rule (as sume have wished to make
it), that the article may always be omitted afier
& preposition.

In the above, we have naturally said little of
the indefinite article, because it occurs but a few
times in the New Testament (la, one, put forA),
and never in the Hebrew of the Old Testament.
Otherwise, though of less importance to language,
its history appears to be governed by the same
general laws which regulate that of the definite
article. —F. W. N.


ARVAD (TYW ; “Apados, 1 Macc. xv. 23), or,
as it might be spelt, Aruap, whence the present
name Ruad, a small island and city on the coast
of Syria, called by the Greeks Aradus, by which
name it is mentioned in 1 Macc. xv. 23. It is
a small rocky island, vpposite the mouth of the
river Eleutherus, to the uiorth of Tripolis, about
one mile in circumference and two miles from the
shore. Strabo (xvi. p. 753) describes it as a rock
rising in the midst ob the waves (wérpa wepixAve-
ros); and modern travellers state that it is steep om
every side. Strabo also describes the houses as ex-
ceedingly lofty, and they were doubtless so built,
on account of the scantiness of the site: hence,


ARVADITES.


for its size, it was exceeding] lous (Pom:

Mela, |. ii.c. 7). Those of Papeloes Crome.
the island could not accommodate found room in
the town and district of Antaradus, on the oppo-
site coast, which also belonged to them. Arvad


is not the same as Arpad or Arphad, as most
books of Biblical Geography allege.


ARVADITES ("Ty RS ; Sept. “Apd3io1, Gen.
x. 18; 1 Chron. i. 16), the inhabitants of the
idand Aradus {Arvap], and doubtless also of
the neighbouring coast. The Arvadites were de-
seended from Arvad, one of the sons of Canaan
ces 18). Strabo (xvi. p. 731) describes the

ites as a colony from Sidon. They were
boted mariners (Ezek. xxvii. 8, 11; Strabo, xvi.
754), and formed a distinct state, with a king of
own (Arrian, Exped. Alez. ii. p.90); yet they
te to have been in some dependence w
=J'e, for the prophet represents them as furnish-
Mg their contingent of mariners to that city
xxvii, 8, 11). The Arvadites took their
hare in the maritime traffic for which the
Phenician nation was celebrated, particularly
aftr Tyre and Sidon had fallen under the domi-
Rion of the Greeco-Sytian kings. They early en-
tered into alliance with the Romans, and Aradus
is named among the states to which the consul
Lacius formally made known the league which
had been contracted with Simon Maccabsus
(U Mace. xv. 23).

ARUBOTH. (Arasan.]

ARUMAH, otherwise Ruman, a city near
ar where Abimelech encamped (Judg.
ix.

ASA (NDN, healing or physician; Sept
“Agod), son of Abijah, grandson of Rehoboam,
and'third king of Judah. He began to reign two
years before the death of Jeroboam, in Israel, and
he reigned forty-one years, from B.c. 955 to 914.
As Asa was very young at his accession, the
affairs of the government were administered by
his mother, or, according to some (comp. 1 Kings
xv. 1, 10), his grandmother Maachah, who is un-
derstood to have been a granddaughter of Absa-
lom (Maacuan]. She gave much encourage-
ment to idolatry ; but the young king, on assum-
ing the reins of government, zealously rooted out
the idolatrous practices which had grown up
during his minority and under the preceding
Teigns ; and only the altars in the high places’
Were suffered to remain (1 Kings xv. 11-13; 2
Chron. xiv. 2-5). He neglected no human means
of putting his kingdom in the best possible mili-
tary condition, for which ample opportunity was

by the peace which he enjoyed in the ten

fit years of his reign. And his resources were so
well organized, and the population had so increased,
he was eventually in a condition to count

on the military services of 580,000 men (2 Chron.
nv. 6-8). In the eleventh year of his reign, rely-
Ig upon the Divine aid, Asa attacked and de-
the numerous host of the Cushite king

1, who had penetrated through Arabia Pe-
trea into the vale of Zephathah, with an immense
reckoned at a million of men (which Jose-
teduces, however, to 90,000 infantry and

00,000 cavalry, Antig. viii. 12. 1), and 300
chariots (2 Chron. xiv. le As the pamper

ites were returning, laden with spoil, to
Jerusalem, they were met by the prophet Azariah,


ASCENSION. 333


who declared this splendid victory to be a conse-
bara ue Asa’s confidence in Jehovah, and ex-
im to erance. Thus encouraged,

the king erated himself to exti the remains
of idolatry, and caused the le to renew their
covenant with Jehovah (2 Chron. xv. 1-15). It
was this clear knowledge of his dependent poli-
tical position, as the vice-gerent of Jehovah,
which won for Asa the highest praise that could
be given to a Jewish king—that he walked in the
steps of his ancestor David (1 Kings xv. 11).

evertheless, towards the latter end of his reign
the king failed to maintain the character he had
thus acquired. When Baasha, king of Israel,
had renewed the war between the two kingdoms,
and had taken Ramah, which he was proceeding
to fortify as a frontier barrier, Asa, the conqueror
of Zerah, was so far wanting to his kingdom and
his God as to employ the wealth of the Temple
and of the royal treasures to induce the king
of Syria (Damascus) to make a diverston in his
favour by invading the dominions of Baasha.
By this means he recovered Ramah, indeed; but
his treasures were squandered, and he incurred
the rebuke of the t Hanani, whom he cast
into prison, being, as it seems, both alarmed and
enraged at the effect his address was calculated
to produce upon the people. Other persons (who

probably manifested their disapprobation)
also suffered from his anger (1 Kings xv. 16-22;
2 Chron. xvi. 1-10). In the three last years of
his life Asa was afflicted with a grievous ‘ disease
in his feet ;’ and it is mentioned to his reproach
that he placed too much contidence in his physi-
cians. At his death, however, it appeared that
his popularity had not been substantially im-
paired ; for he was hononred with a funeral of
unusual cost and magnificence (1 Chron. xvi.
ir He was succeeded by his son Jehosla-
phat.


ASAHEL (ONMWY, God's creature; Sept.
*AgafaA), son of David's sister Zeruiah, and bro-
ther of Joab and Abishai. He was noted for his
swiftness of foot; and after the battle at Gibeon
he pursued and overtook Abner, who, with great
reluctance, in order to preserve his own life, slew
him with a backthrust of his spear, s.c. 1055
[Anner] (2 Sam. ii, 18-23).

ASAPH (F\DN, assembler ; Sept. "Acdo), a
Levite, son of Barachias (1 Chron. vi. 39; xv.
17), eminent as a musician, and appointed by
David to preside over the sacred choral services
which he organized. The ‘sons of Asaph’ are
afterwards meutioned as choristers of the temple
(1 Chron. xxv. 1,2; 2 Chron. xx. 14; xxix. 13;
Ezra ii. 41; iii. 10; Neh. vii. 44; xi. 22); and
this office appears to have been made hereditary in
his family (1 Chron. xxv. 1, 2). Asaph was cele-
brated in after times as a prophet and poet (2
Chron. xxix. 30; Neh. xii. 16), and the titles
of twelve of the Psalms (Ixxiii. to ]xxxiii.) bear
his name. merits of this appropriation are
elsewhere examined [Psams].—There were two
other persons named Asaph: one who occupied
the distinguished post of mazkir (‘Y3tD) or ‘ re-
corder’ to king Hezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 18; Isa,
xxxvi. 3); another who was keeper of the royal
forests under Artaxerxes (Neh. ii. 8).

ASCENSION. The event spoken of under
this title is among those which Christians of every


234 ASENATHL


age have contemplated with most profound satis-
faction. It was in his ascension that Christ exhi-
bited the perfect triumph of humanity over every
antagonist, whether in itself, or in the circum-
stances under which it may be supposed to exist.
The contemplation of this, the eutrance of the
Redeemer iuto glory, inspired the prophets of old
with the nublest views of his kingdom. ‘Thou
hast ascended on high; thou hast led captivity
captive; thou hast received gifts fur men; yea,
for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them’ (Ps. Ixviii. 18); and ‘Lift
up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye litt up, ye
everlasting duors, and the king of glory shall
come in’ (Ps. xxiv. 9). That something of vast
importance, in respect to the completion of the
great scheme of salvation, was involved in this
event, appears from the words of our Lord himself,
©Touch me not; foram not yet ascended to
my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto
them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father;
and to my God and your God’ (John xx. 17).
Nor was it till this had taken place that he poured
ont the grace of the Spirit upon his church, or
began the higher exercises of his office as a me-
diating priest. In the primitive church, the feast
of the Ascension, called also by St. Chrysostom
the Assumption of Christ, was considered, like
the sulemn days of the Nativity and the Passion,
as of apvstulic origin. St. Chrysostom, in his
homily on the subject, calls it an illustrious and
refulzent day, and describes the exaltation of
Christ as the grand proof of God's reconciliation
to mankind (Opp. t. ii. p. 457).—H. S,


ASENATH (NON; Sept. “Acevéd), the
daughter of Potipherah, priest of On, whom the
king of Egypt bestowed in marriage upon Joseph,
with the view probably of strengthening his posi-
tion in Egypt by this high connection, The con-
siderations suggested by this marriage belong
to another place [JoszpH}; atteution is here
only required to the name, which, in common
with other words of foreign origin, has attracted
considerable notice. No better etymology of
Asenath has been proposed than that by Jablonski,
who (Panth. Egypt. i. 56, and Opuscul. ii, 2:)5)
regards the forms Asenath aud ’Agevé@ as repre-
sentative of a Coptic compound Assheneit. The
latter part of this word he takes to Le the name of
Neith, the titular goddess of Sais, the Athene
of the Greeks; and considers the whole to mean
worshipper of Neith, Gesenins, in his Thesaurus,
suggests that the orizinal Coptic form was Asneith,
which means, who belongs to Netth—qua Neithe
est. That the name refeis to this goddess is the

nerally received opinion (in modern times, Von

hlen alone has, in his Genesis, proposed an un-
satisfactory Semitic etymology): it is favoured

the fct that the Egyptians, as Jablonski has
shown, were accustomed to choose names ex-
pressive of some relation to their gods; and it
appears liable to no stronger objection than the
doubt, whether the worship of Neith existed at so
early a period as that of the composition of the
book of Genesis.

ASH. [Oren.| |

ASHDOD (TiTWN; Sept. “A¢wros), the
Azorus of the Greeks and Romans, and so
called in 1 Macc. iv. 15; Acts viii. 40 (see also
Plin. Hist. Nat. v. 14; Ptolem. y. 16); a city


ASHDOD.


on the summit of grassy hill, near the Medi-
terranean coast, nearly mid-way between Gaza
and Joppa, being 18 geog. miles N. by E. from
the former, and 21 S. from the latter; and
more exactly mid-way between Askelon and
Ekron, being 10 geog. miles N. by E. from the
former, and S. by W. frum the latter. Ashdod
was a city of the Philistines, and the chief town
of one of their five states (Josh. xiii. 3; 1 Sam.
vi. 17). It was the seat of the worship of Dagon
(1 Sam. v.5; 1 Macc. xi. 4), before whose shrine
in this city it was that the captured ark was de-
patel and triumphed over the idol (1 Sam. v.

-9). Ashdod was assigned to Judah; but many
centuries passed before it and the other Phi-
listine towns were subdued [Pui.istines]; and
it appears never to have been permanently im
possession of the Judahites, although it was dis-
mantled by Uzziah, who built towns in the terri-
tory of Ashdod (1 Chron. xxvi. 6). It is men-
tioned to the reproach of the Jews after their retam
from captivity, that they married wives of Ashdod;
the result of which was that the children of these
marriages spoke a mongrel dialect, one of
Hebrew and the speech of Ashdod (Neh, xiii. 23,
24). These facts indicate the ancient importance of
Ashdod. It was indeed a place of great strength ;
and being on the usual military route between
Syria and Egypt, the possession of it became an
object of importance in the wars between Egypt
and the great northern powers. Hence it was
secured by the Assyrians before invading Egypt
(Isa. i. 1, sg.); aud at a later date it was taken
by Psammetichus, after a siege of twenty-nine
years, the longest on record (Herodot. ii, 157).
The destruction of Ashdod was foretold by the
prophets (Jer. xxv, 20; Amos i. 8; iii. 9; Zeph.
Hi. 45 Zach, ix. 85 and was accomplished. by
the Maccabees (1 Mace. v. 68; x. 77-84; xi. 4).
It is enumerated among the towns which Pompey
juined to the province of Syria (Joseph. Antig.
xiv. 4. 4, De Bell Jud. i. 7. 7), and among the
cities ruined in the wars, which Gabinius or-
dered to be iebuilt (Antiq. xiv. 5.3). It was
included in Herod's dominion, and was one
of the three towns bequeathed by him to his
sister Salume (De Bell. Jud, vii. 8. 1). The
evangelist Philip was found at Ashdod after he
had baptized the Ethiopian eunuch (Acts viii.
40), Azotus early became the seat of a hishop-
ric; and we find a bishop of this city present at
the councils of Nice, Chalcedon, a.v. 359, Se-
lencia, and Jerusalem, a.p. 536 (Reland, 2’a-
lestina, ). 609).

Ashdod subsisted as a small unwalled town
in the time of Jerome. It was in ruins whes
Benjamin of Tudela visited Palestine (/een,
ed. Asher, i. 79); but we learn fiom William
of Tyre and Vitriacus that the bishopric was
revived by the Latin Christians, at least titu-
larly, and made suffragan of Treves. Sandys
(Travailes, p. 151) describes it as ‘a place of oe
reckoning ;’ and Zuallart (Voyage, iv. p. 132)
speaks of it as an Arab village. And this seems
to be its present condition, for Irby and Mangles
(p. 180) describe it as inhabited. The site is
marked by ancient ruins, such as broken arches,
and partly buried fragments of marble columns :
there is also what appeared to these travellers to be a
very ancient khan, the principal chamber of which
had obviously, at some former period, been used


ASHER.
asa Christian chapel. The place is still called
Wydal Esdud.


ASHER (WN, happiness ; Sept. "Aotp), one
of the sms of Jacob by Zilpah, the handmaid
of Yeah (Gen. xxx. 13; xxxv. 26), and founder

of one of the twelve tribes (Num. xxvi. 44-47).
Asher had four sons and one daughter (Gen.
xlix. 20; Dent. xxxiii. 24). On quitting Egypt
the number of adult males in the tribe of Asher
was 41.500, which made it the ninth of the tribes
(excluding Levi) in numbers—Ephraim, Manas-
teh, and Benjamin only being below it. But be-
fore entering Canaan an increase of 11,900—an
Increase exceeded otily by Manasseh—raised the
umber to 53,400, and made it the fifth of the
tibes in population (comp. Num. i. 40, 41; xxvi,
47). The inheritance of this tribe lay in a very

itful country, on the sea-coast, with Lebanon
Rorth, Carmel and the tribe of Issachar south, and
Zebulon and Naphtali east. It is usually stated
that the whole of the Phoenician territories, in-
cluding Sidon, were assigned to this tribe. But

are yarious considerations which militate
against this conclusion (see the arguments on
sides in Pictorial Bible, Num. xxvi, 24;
Josh. xix. 24; Judy. i. 31), and tend to show that
the assigned frontier-line was drawn out to the sea
south of Sidon. The strongest text for the inclusion
of Sidon (Tyre was not then founded) is that in
which it is mentioned to the reproach of the
Asherites, that they did not drive out the Sido-
hians (Judg. i. 31). This Michaelis is disposed to
Teject as an interlopation; but J. Kitto (Pict.
Bib. in loc.) conceives it to denote that the
Asherites were unable to expel the Sidonians, who
by that time had encroached southward into parts
of the coast actually assigned to the Asherites; and
he strengthens this by referring to the subsequent
foundation of Tyre, as evincing the disposition
of the Sidonians to colonize the coast south of
their own proper territories. The Asherites were
fora long time unable to gain possession of the
territories actually assigned them, and ‘dwelt
among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the
land” (Judg. i. 32); and, ‘as it is not usual to
say of a larger number that it dwells among the
mnaller, the inference is, that they expelled but
comparatively few of the Canaanites, leaving them,
in fact, a majority of the population’ (Bush, note
on Judg. i, 32).

ASHES, in the symbolical language of Scrip-
ture, denote human frailty (Gen. xviii. 27), deep
humiliation (Esth. iv. 1; Jonah iii. 6; Matt. x1.
41; Luke x. 13; Job xlii.6; Dan. ix. 3). To
Gt in ashes was a token of grief and mourning
(Job ii. 8; Lam. iii. 16; Ezek. xxvii. 30), as
was also strewing them upon the head (2 Sam.
uu. 10; Isa. xli.3) [Mournina]. ‘ Feeding
om ashes,’ in Ps. cii. 9, appears to express grief, as
‘fone with whose food the ashes with which he is
cuvered mingle. But in Isa. xliv. 20, ‘feeding
ashes,’ which afford no nourishment, is judged
to denote ineffectual means, labour to no purpose.
Compare Hus. xii. L.

ASHIMA (NOWR, 2 Kings xvii. 30; Sept.
Acipd8} is only once mentioned in the Old Testa-
ment as the god of the people of Hamath, The
loan Talmud, in the treatise ‘Sanhedrin’

Cited in Carpzov’s Apparatus, p. 516), and the


ASHTAROTH. 8
majority of Jewish writers, assert that Ashins
was worshi under the form of a goat without
wool; the Talmud of Jerusalem says, under that
of a lamb. Elias Levita, a learned Rabbi of the
sixteenth century, assigns the word the sense of
ape; in which he wag, in all Protebility, deceived
by the resemblance in sound to the Latin siméa,
Jurieu and Calmet have proposed other fanciful
conjectures. The opinion, however, that this idol
had the form of a goat appears to be the one best
supported by arguments as well as by authorities.
Thus Pfeiffer (in his Dubia Verata, ad loc.) sug-
gests that ashima may be brought into relation
with the word NOW, which the Samaritan ver-
sion uses in the sense of some species of goat, as a
translation of the original 1DN in Deut. xiv. 5.
On this ground we might conjecture that the word
ashima actually means a goat without wool, by
deriving it from DWN, which, though it usually
signifies to be guilty, yet occurs in the sense of fo
be laid waste, to be bare, as a cognate of DY and
DMNY: so that ashima would mean bare, bald.
Besides, as a goat, the Egyptian god Mendes
would afford an excellent parallel to Ashima; as
likewise the Greek Pan (cf. Lev. xvii. 7).

It is worthy of mention that the name of this
idol furnished Aben Ezra with an opportunity of
displaying the inveterate hatred of the Jews
against the Samaritans. In his preface to the
book of Esther, he asserts that the Samaritan
text of Gen. i. 1, begins with the words ‘In
the beginning Ashima created.’ It need hardly
be said that there is no trace of this reading either
in the Samaritan text or version. Aben Ezra's
own words are cited at length in Hottinger’s Ex
ercit, Antimorin. p.40.—J. N.

ASHKENAZ (123V8 ; Sept. ’Aoxavdt; Gen.
x. 3); and Asucuenaz (Jer. li. 27), the proper
name of a son of Gomer, son of Japhet, and
of a tribe of his «descendants. In Jeremiah
it is placed with Ararat and Minni, provinces of
Armenia; whence it is probable that Ashkenaz
was a province of Armenia; or at least that it lay
not far from it, near the Caucasus, or towards the
Black Sea. The commentators have been all
bound to something like this conclusion by the
passage in Jeremiah. and nothing more satisfac-
tory is now attainable. The various fanciful at-
tempts to trace the mame may be seen in Winer
(Bib. Realwort., s. v. ‘Askenas’). The modern
Jews fancy the name denotes the Germans.

ASHPENAZ, chief of the eunuchs of king
Nebuchadnezzar, to whose care Daniel and his
companions were consigned, and who changed
their names (Dan. i. 3, 7). —

ASHTAROTH (NYINPY; Sept. *Acraps6),
and AsurarnoTH-Carnaim (D1) NPY ;
Sept. ’Aorapé@ xal Kapvaiy), a town of Bashan
(Deut. i. 4; Josh. ix. 10) which was included in the
territory of the half-tribe of Manasseh (Josh. xiii.
31), and was assigned to the Levites (1 Chroa.
vi. 71). It is placed by Eusebius 6 miles from
Edrei, the other principal town of Bashan, and
25 miles from Bostra, The town existed in the
time of Abraham (Gen. xiv. 5); and as its name
of Ashtaroth appears to be derived from the wore
ship of the moon under that name [see the fullow-
ing article], there is little ueed to look further
than the crescent of that luminary and its symbo-
lical image for an explanation of the addition Car-


236 ASHTORETH.


warm, or rather Karwarm, ‘horned.’ In 2 Macc.
xii. 26, mention is made of the temple of Atergatis
(Ashtaroth) in Camion, which is described as a
strongly fortified town of difficult access, but which
was taken by Judas Maccabeeus, who slew 25,000
of the people therein (2 Macc. xti. 21, 26). Asta-
roth-Carnaim is now usually identified with Meza-
reib, the situation of which corresponds accurately
enough with the distances given by Eusebius.
Here is the first castle on the great pilgrim road
from Damascus to Mecca, It was built about
340 years ago by the Sultan Selim, and is a
equare structure, about 100 feet on each side,
with square towers at the angles and in the
centre of each face, the walls being 40 feet high.
The interior is an open yard with ranges of ware-
houses against the castle wall to contain stores of

visions for the pilgrims. There are no dwell-
ings beyond the castle, and within it only a few
mud huts upon the flat roofs of the warehouses,
occupied by the peasants who cultivate the neigh-
bouring grounds, Close to this building on the
north and east side are a great number of springs,
whose waters at a short distance collect into a
lake or pond about a mile and a half in circumfer-
ence. In the midst of this lake is an island, and at
an elevated spot at the extremity of a promontory
advancing into the lake, stands a sort of chapel,


around which are many ruins of ancient build-.


ings. There are no other ruins, (Burckhardt, p.
242; Buckingham’s drab Tribes, p. 162.)

*ASHTORETH (NVAYY, 1 Kings xi. 5;
Sept. "Acrdprn) is the name of a goddess of the
Sidonians (1 Kings xi. 5, 33), and also of the
Philistines (1 Sam. xxxi. 10), whose worship was
introduced among the Israelites during the period
of the judges (Judg. ii. 13; 1 Sam. vii. 4), was ce-
lebrated by Solomon himself (1 Kings xi. 5), and
was finally put down by Josiah (2 Kings xxiii.
13). She is frequently mentiuned in connection
with Baal, as the corresponding female divinity
(Judg. ii. 13); and, from the addition of the words,
“and all the host of heaven,’ in 2 Kings xxiii. 4
(although Ashérah occurs there, and not 'Ashtoreth,
which will be accounted for below), it is probable
that she represented one of the celestial bodies,
There is also reason to believe that she is meant
by the ‘queen of heaven,’ in Jer. vii. 18; xliv.
17; whose worship is there said to have been so-
lemnised by buming incense, pouring libations,
and offering cakes. Further, by comparing the
two ges, 2 Kings xxiii.4, and Jer. viii. 2,
iemgee ks of oe and moon and all
the of heaven, whom served,’ we ma:
conclude that the moon was pail eile under the
names of queen of heaven and of ‘Ashtoreth, pro-
vided the connection between these titles is esta-
blished. This constitutes nearly the sum of all
the indications in the Old Test. concerning ’Ash-
toreth.

According to the testimonies of profane writers,
the worship of this goddess, under different names,
existed in all countries and colonies of the Syro-
Arabian nations. She was especially the chief
female divinity of the Phoenicians and Syriaus—
the Baaltis (i. «. *Nby3 domina mea, equivalent
to the Greek address, A¢crowa!) to Baal; *Ac-
tdprn 4 peylorn, as Sanchoniathon calls her (ed.
Orelli, p. 34). She was known to the bebe


nians as Mylitta (i. ¢. possibly NMTOW, the


ASHTORETH.


emphatic state of the feminine participle active of
Aphel, genetriz), Herod. i. 131; to Arabians
as Alitta, or Alilat, Herod. iii, 8 (i. ¢. according
to Pocock’s etymology—Specim. p- 110—al Ila-
hat, the goddess [which may, however, also mean
the crescent moon—see Freytag's Lez. Ar.]; ot
al Hilal, the moon; or, according to Kleuker’s
suggestion, al Walid, genetriz. See

De Relig. Arab. Anteislamica, Argentor. 1834.


p- 7). Thesupposed Punic name Tholath, non,
which Miinter, Hamaker, and others considered
to mean genetriz, and to belong to this goddess,
cannot be adduced here, as Gesenius has recent]
shown that the name has arisen from a false -
ing of the inscriptions (see his Monum. Ling.
Pheenic. p. 114). But it is not at all open to
doubt that this goddess was worshipped at ancient
Carthage, and probably under 8 Phanician
name.


The classical writers, who usually endeavoured
to identify the gods of other nations with their
own, rather than to discriminate between them,
have recognised several of their own divinities in
Ashtoreth. Thus she was considered to be Juno
(BRAGS 4 “Hpa 4 *"Appodirn, Hesychius; * Juno
sine dubitatione a Poenis Astarte vocatur,’ Au-
gustin. Quest. in Jud. xvi.); or Venus, especi-
ally Venus Urania (Cicer. Nat. Deor. iii. 23;
*Aordpryn 8t dorw 4 wap’ “EAAnow "Agpodsiry
xpocayopevouévn, Theodoret. in Libr. iii, Reg.
Quest. 1..; and the numerous inscriptions of Bona
Dea Corlestis, Venus Ceelestis, &c., cited in Miin-
ter's Religion der Karthager, p. 75); or Luna
COupavlay bolvixes "Aatpodpxny dvoud(over, ce-
Afwny eva: éAovres, Hervdian, v. 13; Lucian
De Dea Syra, iv.).

The fact that there is a connection between all
these divinities cannot. escape any student of an-
cient religions; but it is not easy to discover the
precise link of that connection. Winer ingeniously
suggests (Bibl. Realwirt.) that Ashtoreth was con-
founded with Juno, because she is the female
counterpart to Baal, the chief god of the Syrians
—their Jupiter, as it were; and with Venus, be-
cause the same lascivious rites were common to her
worship, and to that of Ashtoreth and her cognate
Mylitta (Creuzer’s Symbolik, ii, 23). But 80
great is the intermixture and confusiun between
the gods of pagan religions, ¢ pro diversitate no-
minis, non pro numinis varietate,’ as Ambrose
says, that Minter further identities Ashtureth—
due allowance being made for difference of
time and place—with the female Kabir, Axio-
kersa, with the Egyptian Isis, with the Paphian -
Venus, with the Taurian and Ephesian Diana,
with the Bellona of Comana, with the Arme-
nian Anihid, and with the Samian, Maltesian,
and Lacinian Juno. She has also been considered
to be the same as the Syrian fish-deities [ATgr-
@atis].

As for the power of nature, which was worshipped
under the name of Ashtoreth, Creuzer and Miinter
assert that it was the principle of conception and
parturition—that subordinate power which is fe-
cundated by a superior influence, but which is
the agent of all births throughout the universe.
As such, Miinter maintains, in his’ Religion der
Babylonier, p. 21, in opposition to the remarks of
Gesenius in his Jesaias, iii. 337—that the origé-
nal form under which Ashtoreth was worshipped


ASHTORETH.


was the moon; and that the transition from that
to the planet Venus (which we will immediately
hotice) was unquestionably an innovation of a
later date. It is evident that the moon alone can
be properly called the queen of heaven; as also
that the dependent relation of the moon to the sun
makes it a more appropriaté symbol of that sex,
whose functions as female and mother, throughout
the whole extent of animated nature, were embo-
died in Ashtoreth [Baat].

The rites of her worship, if we may assume
their resembling those which profane authors de-
Scribe as paid to the cognate goddesses, in part
agree with the few indications in the Old Test.,
in part complete the brief notices there into an
accordant picture. The cakes mentioned in
Je. vii, 18, which are called in Hebrew 0°13
Kaveanim, were also known to the Greeks by the
hame yaBdves, and were by them made in the
shape of a sickle, in reference to the new moon.
Among animals, the dove, the crab, and, in later
times, the lion, were sacred to her; and among
fruits, the pomegranate. No blood was shed on
her altar; but male animals, and chiefly kids,
were sacrificed to her (Tacit. Hist. ii. 3). Hence
some su that the reason why Judah pro-
mised the harlot a kid, was that she might sacri-
fice it to Ashtoreth (see Tuch’s note to Se
xxviii. 17), The most prominent of her
worship, however, consisted of pre ith lee
orgies, which Augustine, who was an eye-witness
of their horrors in Carthage, describes with such
indignation (De Civit. Dei, ii. 3). Her priests
were eunuchs in women’s attire (the peculiar
name of whom is DW), sacri, i. e. cinedi,
Galli—1 Kings xiv. 24), and women (MW"P,
Sacre, i.e. meretrices—Hos, iv. 14, which term
ought to be distinguished from ordinary har-
lots, 1211), who, like the Bayaderes of India,
prostituted themselves to enrich the temple of this
goddess. The prohibition in Deut. xxiti. 18 ap-
= to allude to the dedication of such funds to
such a purpose. ‘

As for the places consecrated to her worship, al-
though the numerous passages in which the autho-
rized version has erroneously rendered TWN by
grove, are to be deducted (as is explained below),
there are yet several occasions on which gardens
and trees are mentioned as peculiar seats
of (probably, Aer) lascivious rites (Isa. i. 29;
Ixv. 3; 1 Kings xiv. 23; Hos. iv. 13; Jer. ii.
20; iii, 13). She also had celebrated temples
(1 Sam, xxxi. 10). ‘

As to the form and attributes with which Ash-
loreth was ‘represented, the oldest known image,
that in Paphos, was a white conical stone, often
seen on Phoenician remains in the figure which
Tacitus describes, 7. c. as ‘Simulacrum non

ie hamana; continuus orbis latiore initio
tenuem inambitum, mete modo, exsurgens, et
ratio in obscuro.’ Miinter is unwilling to con-
sider this a Lingam symbol; nevertheless, there
appears to be some room for disputing his opinion.
In Canaan she was probably as a
cow. It is said in the book of Tobit i. 5, that
the tribes which revolted sacrificed + Bdad TH
Saudade, where the feminine article with BdaA is
to be remarked. In Phoenicia, she had the head
of a cow or bull, as she is seen on coins. San-
choniathon states that ‘ Astarte the head
of a bull as a symbol of her sovereignty ;’ he also


accounts for the star which is her most usual
emblem, by saying that ‘ when she passed through
the earth, she found a fallen star, which she con-
secrated in Tyre (J. c. p. 34). At length, she was
figured with the human form, as Lucian expressly
testifies of the Syrian goddess—which is substan-
tially the same as Ashtoreth; and she is so found
on coins of Severus, with her head surrounded with
rays, sitting on a lion, and holding a thunderbolt
and a sceptre in either hand. What Kimchi says
of her being worshipped under the figure of a
sheep is a mere figment of the Rabbins, fuunded
on a misaj ension of Deut. vii. 13. As the
words jN¥ NYINWY there occurring may be
legitimately taken as the doves of the flock ( Veneres
pecoris), t.e. either the ewes or the lambs, the
whole foundation of that opinion, as well as of the
notion that the word means sheep, is unsound.
The word Ashtoreth cannot be plausibly de-
rived from any root, or combination of roots, in
the Syro-Arabian languages. The best etymology,
that approved by Gesenius, deduces it from the
Persian sitdrah, star, with a prosthetic guttural.
The latest etymology is that suggested by Sir W.
Betham, in his Etruria Celtica, ii. 22, who re-
solves Astarte into the Irish elements: As, out of ;
tar, beyond ; te, deity—the goddess of long voy-
ages! Ashtoreth is feminine as to form ; its plural
Ashtaroth also occurs (and is sometimes errone-
ously taken to be the proper name of the goddess) ;
but it is understood to denote a plurality of
images (like the Greek ‘Epuai), or to belong to
that usage of the plural which is found in words
denoting dord (Ewald’s Hebr. Gram. § 361).


To come now to Asneran (TWN, Judg.
vi. 25): Selden was the first who endeavoured to
show that this word—which in the LXX. and
Vulgate is generally rendered grove, in which our
authorized version has follawed them—mnust in
some places, for the sake of the sense, be taken to
mean a wooden image of Ashtoreth (De Diis
Syris, ii. 2). Not long after, Spencer made the
same assertion (De Les. Hebre@or I. ii. 16).
Vitringa then followed out the same argument, in
his note to Isa. xvii. 8. Gesenius, at length, has
treated the whole question so elaborately -in his
Thesaurus, as to leave little to be desired, and
has evinced that Asherah is a name, and also
denotes an image of this goddess,

Some of the arguments which support this par-
tial, or, in Gesenius’s case, total rejection of the
signification grove, for WE, are briefly as fol-
lows. It is argued that Asherah almost always
occurs with words which denote idols and
statues of idols; that the verbs which are em-
ployed to express the making an Asherah, are
incompatible with the idea of a grove, as they are


338 ASIA.
such as fo build, to shape, to erect (except in one
ge, where, however, Gesenius still maintains
that the verb there used means to erect 1) 3 that the
words used to denote the destruction of an Ashe-
rah are those of breaking to pieces, subverting ;
that the image of Asherah is placed in the Tem-
ple (2 Kings xxi. 7); and that Asherah is coupled
with Baal in precisely the same way as Ashtoreth is:
comp.Judg. 11.13; x. 6; 1 Kings xviii.19; 2 Kings
xxtii.4; and particularly Judg. iii. 7, and ii, 13,
where the plural form of both words is explained
as of itself denoting wnages of this goddess. Be-
sides, Selden objccts that the signitication grove
is even incongruous in 2 Kings xvii. 10, where we
read of ‘ setting up groves under every green tree.’
Moreover, the LXX. has rendered Asherah by
Astarte, in 2 Chron. xv. 16 (and the Vulgate has
done the same in Judyes iii. 7), and, conversely,
has rendered Ashtaroth by groves, in 1 Sam.
vii. 3.

On the strength of these arguments most modern
scholars assume that Asherah is a name for Ash-
toreth, and that it denotes more especially the
relation of that goddess to the planet Venus, as the
lesser star of good fortune. It appears, namely,
to be an indisputable fact that both Baal and
Ashtoreth, although their primary relation was to
the sun and moon, came in process of time tu be
connected, in the religious conceptions of the
Syro- Arabians, with the planets Jupiter and Venus,
as the two stars of good fortune (Sce the article
Meni]. Although the mode of transition from
the one to the other is obscure, yet many kindred
circumstances illustrate it. For instance, the
connection between Artemis and Selene; that be-
tween Juno and the planet Venus, mentioned in
Creuzer ii. 566; the fact that, in the Zendavesta,
Anahid is the name of the genius of the same pla-
net; and that NINO astro (which word is only
an Aramaic form of the same si/arah which, as
was remarked above, furnishes the best derivation
for Ashtoreth) is also the name of the same planet
in the religious hooks of the Tsalians (Norberg’s
Onomast. Cod. Nasar@i, p. 20). It is in refer-
ence to this connectiun, too, that a sfar is so often
found among the emblems with which Ashtoreth
is represented on ancient coins, Lastly, whereas
the word Asherah cannot, in the sense of grove,
be legitimately deduced from the primitive or
secondary signification of any Syro-Arabian root
WR, asa name of the goddess of yood furtune,
it admits of a derivation as natural in a philo-
logical point of view, as it is appropriate in sig-
nification. The verb WN means to prosper ;
and Asherah is the feminine of an adjective
signifying fortunate, happy.—J. N.

ASIA. The ancients had no divisions of the
world into parts or quarters; and hence the word
Asia, in the extended modern sense, does not occur
in Scripture. It does not indeed occur at all, in
any sense, in the Hebrew Scriptures, but is found
in the books of the Maccabees and in the New
Testament. It there applies, in the largest sense,
to that peninsular portion of Asia which, since
the fifth century, has been known by the name
of Asia Minor; and, in a narrower sense, to a
certain portion thereof which was known as Asia
Proper. Thus, it is now generally agreed,—
1, that ‘Asia’ denotes the whole of Asta Minor,
in the texts Acts xix. 26, 27; xx. 4, 16, 18;
xxvii. 2, &c.: but, 2. that only Asia Propsgr,


ASIARCH &.


the Roman or Proconsular Asia, is denoted in
Acts ii. 93, vi. 9; xix. 10,22; 2 Tim. i. 15;
1 Pet. i.6; Rev. i. 4,11. Asta Minor com-
proce Bithynia, Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia,
icilia, Pamphylia, Pisidia, Lycaonia, Phrygia,
Mysia, Troas (all of which are mentioned in the
New Testament), Lydia, Ionia, Zolis (which are
sometimes included under Lydia), Caria, Doris,
and Lycia. Asta Propgr, or Proconsular Asia,
comprehended the provinces of Phrygia. Mysia,
Caria, and Lydia (Cicero, Pro Flacc. 27; Ep.
Fam, ii. 15). But it is evident that St. Luke
uses the term Asia in a sense still more restricted ;
fur in one place he counts Phrygia (Acts ii. 9,
10), and in another Mysia (xvi. 6,7), as pro-
vinces distinct from Asia. Hence it is probable
that in many, if not all, of the second set of re
ferences the word Asia denotes only Lonia, or the
entire western coast, of which Ephesus was the
capital, and in which the seven churches were
situated, This is called Asia also by Strabo.
ASIARCHAS (‘Aoidpxas, Acts xix. 31; Vulg.
Aste principes; Tertull. presides sacerdotales ;
Auth. Vers. * certain of the chief of Asia’). These
asiarcha, who derived their appellation from
the name of the province over which they pre-
sided (as Syriarch, 2 Macc. xii. 2, Lyciarch,
Cariarch, &c.), were in Proconsular Asia the
chief presidents of the religious rites, whose
ottice it was to exhibit solemn games in the
theatre every year, in honour of the gods and of
the Roman emperor. This they did at their own
expense (like the Roman adiles), whence none
but the most opoleut persons could bear the office,
although only of one year’s continuance. The
appointment was much as follows: at the begin-
ning of every year (i. e. about the autumnal equi-
nox) each of the cities of Asia held a public
assembly, in order to nominate one of their citi-
zeus as asiarch. A person was then sent to the
general council of the province, at sume one of
the principal cities, as Ephesus, Smyrna. Sardis,
&c., to amounce the name of the individual who
had been selected. Of the persons thus nomi-
nated by the cities the council designated ten.
As the ’Agidpya: are repeatedly mentioned in the
plural, some suppose that the whole teu presided
as a college over the sacred rites (comp. Strabo,
xiv. p. 649). But in Eusebius (7Zist. Eecles.
iv. 15) Polycarp is said to have suflired maityr-
dom when ¢ Philip was esiarch and Statins Qua-
dratus proconsul of Asia ;" from which and other
circumstances it is deemed more probable that, as
in the case of the Irenarch, the names of the ten
nominated by the general council were submitted
to the proconsul, who chose one of the number to
be asiarch, Kuinoel (at Acts xix. 31) admits
that one chosen by the proconsul was pre-emi-
nently the asiarch, but conceives that the other
nine acted as his assessors aud also bore that title.
Others, however, think the plurality of asiarchs
sufticiently accounted for by supposing that those
who had served the office continued to bear the
title, as was the case with the Jewish high-priests;
but the other branch of the alternative is usually
preferred. Winer judiciously remarks, that in
the course of time changes may have been made in
the office. which our fragmentary information does
not enable us to trace; and he contends that the
solitary testimony of Eusebius amounts to no more
than that one asiarch, Philip, thev and there pre-


ASKELON.


sided at the public games, but not that the
arrangements of all the games were made and
ided by that one asiarch, (See Kuinoel,
mmond, Bloomfield, &c., on Acts xix. 31; and
Winer's Biblisches Realworterbuch, s. v. ‘ Asi-
ache,’ with the authorities there cited.)


ASKELON (HOp¢M; Sept. "AcndAwy), a
city of the Philistines, and the seat of one of their
five states (Judg. xiv. 19; 1 Sam. vi. 17; 2 Sam.
iW). It was situated on the Mediterranean
coast, between Gaza and Ashdod, twelve geog.
tailes north of the former, and ten S. by W.
from the latter, and thirty-seven W.S.W. from
Jerusalem. It was the only one of the five
Steat Philistine towns that was a maritime port,
and stood out close to the shore. Askelou was
asiynel to the tribe of Judah (Josh. xiii. 13;
Comp. Judg. i. 18); but it was never for any

th of time in possession of the Israelites. The
par of the country in which it stood abounded in
aromatic plants, onions, and vines (Plin, xix. 32;
Strabo, xvi. p.759; Dioscor. i. 124; Colum. xii. 10;
Alex. Trall. viii. 3). It was well fortitied (Joseph.
De Bell. Jud. iii. 21; comp. Mela, i. 11), and early
ecame the seat of the worship of Decerto (Diod.
Sic, ii. 4). After the time of Alexander it shared
the lot of Phanicia and Judza, being tribu-
tary smetimes to Egypt, and at other times to

Syria (1 Mace. x. 86; xi. 60; xii. 33; Joseph.
Antig. xii. 4.5). The magniticent Herod was Lorn
at Askelon, and although tie city did not belong
to his duminion, he adoined it with fountains,
baths, and colonnades (De Bell. Jud. i. 12. 11);
and after his death Salome, his sister, resided in a
palace at Askelon, which Cesar bestowed upon her
(Antig. xvii. 11.5). It suflered much in the Jewish
war with the Romans (De Bell. Jud. ii. 18. 5;
iti, 2. 1-3); for its inhabitants were noted for their
dislike of the Jews, of whom they slew 2500
who dwelt there (ii. 18. 53 iii. 2.°1). After this
Askelon again revived, and in the middle ages was
Doted not only as a stronghold, but as a wealthy
and important town (Will. Tyr. xvii. 21). As
@ sea-port merely it never could have enjoyed
much advantage, the coast being sandy and difli-
cult of access. The town bears a prominent part
in the history of the Crusades, Alter being several
times dismantled and _ re-fortitied in the times
of Saladin and Richard, its fortifications were
at length totally destroyed by the Sultan Bibars
aD. 1270, and the port filled up with stones, for
fear of future attempts on the part of the Cru-
aaders (Wilkin. Gesch. der Kreuz. vii. 586). This,
bo doubt, sealed the ruin of the place. Sandys
(Travaies, p. 151, a.p. 1610) describes it as
‘pow a place of no note, more than that the
Turke doth keepe there a garrison. Fifty years
after (a.v. 1660), Von Troilo found it still par-
tially inhabited. But its desolation bas long

complete, and little now remains of it but
the walls, with numerous fragments of granite
pillars, The situation is described as strong;
the thick walle, flanked with towers, were built
on the of a ridge of rock that encircles the
town, and terminates at each end in the sea.
The ground within sinks in the manner of an
amphitheatre (Richardson, ii. 202-204; Eli Smith,
m Missionary Herald for 1827, p. 341). The


Place still bears the narae of Askulan wine,


ASPALATHUS. 339


ASMODEUS (Acyo8aios; Tob. iii. 85, a de-
mon or evil spirit, mentioned in the Apocryphal
book of Tobit as having beset Sarah, the daughter
of Baguel, aud killed the seven husbands whom
she had married before Tobit (Tob. iii. 8; vi. 14;
viii. 2, 3). The Rabbins have a number of ab-
surd traditions respecting Asmodeus, which inay
be seen in the original edition of Calmet and in
Lightfoot (Hor. Hebr, ad Lue. xi. 15). They call
him, as well as Beelzebub, ‘the prince of devils,’
whence the two names have been supposed to refer
to the same demon. But this title they also give
to ‘the angel of death,’ as the destroyer of all
mankind : hence some derive the name Asmodeus
from the Hebrew 330% shamad, to exterminate,
which identifies it with Ashmodai and also
Abaddon (see the word), the same as Apollyon,
the angel of death. This is likely, and thus the
story in Tobit means no more than that the seven
husbands died successively on their marriage with
Sarah.

ASMONEANS. [Maccasess.]


ASNAPPER (BION; Sept. ‘Accevapdp),
the name of the king, or possibly Assyrian satrap,
who sent the Cuthean colonies into Palestine
(Ezra iv. 10). Taking him for king of Assyria,
he is generally identitied with Esar-haddon, al-
though some believe the name to denote Salma-
nezer. The title NYP NIV (Auth. Vers. ‘most
noble’) which is given to him belonged to the
satraps.

ASPALATHUS (dondaa6os), a word which
occurs only in Ecclus. xxiv. 15, of the Apo-
crypha, where the substance which it indicates
is enumerated with other spices and perfumes to
which wisdom is compared. Though this drug is
not mentioned in the canonical Scriptures, it is pro-
bable that it may have been one of the substances
compreliended under the general name of spices.
It was no doubt one of the substances employed by
the ancients as a perfume and incense, as it is
described by Dioscorides (i. ¢. 19), as well as enu-
merated by Theoyhrastus (ix. c. 7), and by both
among aromatic substances. It forms one of the
ingredients of the cynhi, or compound incense
made use of by the Ezyptian priests, as related
both by Plutarch and Dioscorides. The substance
which was called aspalathus has not heen very
clearly ascertained, though several plants have
been indicated as yielding it. Lignum Lhodium
is sometimes consuicred to be one of the kinds of
aspalathus described by Dioscorides, but this is a
produce of the Canary Islands and of the plant
called Convolvulus scoparius. From it the per-
fumers of Paris obtain ['Huile de bois de Rhodes.
By others aspalathus, which has been supposed to
be the same thing as Syrian aloe, or that of
Rhodes and of Candia, is thought to have been
yielded by syecies of the genus which has been
called Aspalathus, and especially by the species
A. creticus, which is now called Anthyllis Her-
mannie ; but there does not seem to be sufficient
proof of this. Others again have held that
aspalathus was a kind of asallochum [Anan],
and Dr, Harris (sub. Lign.—aloe) seems to have
thought that he got rid of a difficulty: by snggest-
ing that ahalim, which we have shown to be agal-
lochum, should be rendered AspanatHa. Arab
authors, as Avicenna and Scrapion, give Dar-sht-
shan as the Arabic synonyme of aspalathus. They


7) ASPHALTUM.


quote some of their own countrymen as authorities
respecting it, in addition to Galen and Dioscorides.
Hence it would appear to have been a product of
the East rather than of the West, as for such they
usually give only the Greek name or its transla-
tion, and quote only Greek authorities. Avicenna,
in addition to his description, says that some think
it may be the root of Indian nard. Hence it may
justly be inferred that Dar-shishan, which the Ara-

ians thought to be aspalathus, must have come to
them from India, or they would not bave hazarded
this supposition. In India the name Dar-shishan
is applied to the bark of a tree which is called
Kaephul or kyphul. This tree is a native of the
Himalayan mountains from Nepal to the Sutlej,
and has been figured and described by Dr.
Wallich, in his Zentamen Flore Nepalensts, p.
59, t. 45, by the name Myrica sapida, in conse-
quence of its fruit, which is something like that
of the arbutus, being edible. The leaves, on
being rubbed, have a pleasantly aromatic though
faint smell. The tack forms an article of com-
merce from the hills to the plains, being esteemed
in the latter as a valuable stimulant medicine.
It may be seen mentioned by the name ka-i-phul
in Gladwin’s translation of the Persian U/faz-i-
Udwieh, No. 884, as a synonyme of Dar-sheeshan,
which is described as an aromatic bark, while
at No. 157 Dar-shecshan is considered to be a


synonyme of ¢ w jp illn.ts\ ishtelayoos, which seems


to be a corruption of aspalathos from the errors of
transcribers im the diacritical points. Kaephul
has, moreover, been lung celebrated by Sanscrit
authors, and it may therefore have easily formed
one of the early articles of commerce from the East
to the West, together with the Nard, the Costus,
and the Lycium of these mountains.—J. F. R.


ASPHALTUM ("11 chemar ; Arab. pase


chomar; Sept. &cpadros; Auth. Vers. ‘ pitch’),
Luther, like the modern Rabbins, erroneously
translates the Hebrew by ‘clay.’ The Hebrew
and Arabic names probably refer to the reddish
colour of some of the specimens (Divscorides,
i, 99). The Greek name, whence the Latin Asphal-
tum, is doubtless derived from the Lake Asphal-
tites (Dead Sea), whence it was abundantly ob-
tained. Usually, however, asphaltum, or com-
pact bitumen, is of a shining black colour; it is
solid and brittle, with a conchoidal fracture, alto-
gether not unlike common me Its specific
gravity is from 1 to 1-6, and it consists chiefly
of bituminous oil, hydrogen gas, and charcoal.
It is found partly as a solid dry fossil, inter-
mixed in layers of plaster, marl, or slate, and
partly as liquid tar flowing from cavities in rocks
or in the earth, or swimming upon the surface of
lakes or natural wells (Burckhardt, ii. 77). To
judge from Gen. xiv. 10, mines of asphaltum
must have existed formerly on the spot where
subsequently the Dead Sea, or Lake Asphaltites,
was formed, such as Mariti (Travels, iv. 27)
discovered on the western shore of that sea. The
Palestine earth-pitch, however, seems to have had
the preference over all the other sorts (Plin. xxviii.
23; Discor. i. p. 100), It was used among the
ancients partly for covering boats, paying the
bottoms of vessels (comp. Niebuhr, ii. p. 336; Gen,
vi. 14; Exod. ii.3; Joseph. De Bell. Jud. iv. 8. 4;
Buckingham, Afesozot, p. 346), and partly as a


ASPHALTUM.


substitute for mortar in buildings; and it is
toought that the bricks of which the walls of
Babylon were built (Gen. xi. 3; Strabo, xvi. p,
743; Herod. i. 179; Plin. xxxv. 51; Ammian.
Marcell. xxiii.6; Virtruv. viii. 3; comp. Jose;
Antig. i. 4. 3) had been cemented with
bitumen, which imparted to them great solidity.
Tn ancient Babylon asphaltum was made use of
also for fuel, as the environs have from the earliest
times been renowned for the abundance of that
substance (Diod. Sic. ii. 12; Herod.i.179; Dion.
Cass. Ixviii. 26; Strabo, xiv. 8. 4; Plut, Alex.
c. 35; Theodoret, Quest. in Genes. 59; Ritter,
Geogr. ii. 345; Buckingham, Mesopot. p. 346).
Neither were the ancient Jews unacquainted with
the medicinal properties of that mineral (Jo-
seph De Bell. Jud. ibid.)

Asphaltum was also used among the ancient
Egyptians for embalming the dead. Strabo
(xvi.) and many other ancient and modern .
writers assert, that only the asphalt of the Dead
Sea was used for that purpose; but it has in more
recent times been proved, from experiments made
on mummies, that the Egyptians employed slacgy
mineral pitch in embalming the dead. This
operation was performed in three different ways :
first with slaggy mineral pitch alone; second
with a mixture of this bitumen and a liquor
extracted from the cedar, called cedoria ; and
third with a similar mixture, to which resinous
and aromatic substances were added (Haiiy.
Mineral. ii. p. 315).

aaron is found in masses on the shore of
the Dead Sea, or floating on the surface of its
waters. Dr. Shaw (Travels in Barbary and the
Levant) was told that this bitumen, for which
the Dead Sea is so famous, rises at certain times
from the bottom of the sea in large pieces of
semiglobular form, which, as soon as they touch
the surface, and the external air operates upon
them, burst asunder in a thousand pieces, with
a terrible crash, like the pulvis fulminans of
the chemists, This, however, he continues, only
occurs along the shore; for in deep water, it
is supposed that these eruptions show themselves
in large columns of smoke, which are often
seen to rise from the lake. The fact of the as-
cending smoke has been much questioned by
naturalists; and although apparently confinned
by the testimonies of various travellers, collected
by Biisching, in his Erdbdeschreibung, it is not
confirmed by the more observant travellers of
recent years. Pococke (Description of the
East, &c. ii. § 46) presumes that the thick
clumps of asphalt collected at the bottom of the
lake have been brought up by subterraneous fire,
and afterwards melted by the agitation of the
waters. Also Strabo (xvi. p. 76-1) speaks of sub-
terraneoys tires in those parts (comp. Burckhardt,
Syria, 394).

Dr. Robinson, when in the neighbourhood,
heard from the natives the same story which had
previously been told to Seetzen and Burckhardt,
namely—that the asphaltum flows down the face
of a precipice on the eastern shore of the lake,
until a large mass is collected, when, from its
weight or some shock, it breaks off and falls into
the sea (Seetzen, in Zach's Monatl. Correspond.
xviii. 441; Burckhardt, p. 394; Robinson, ii.
229). This, however, he strongly doubts, for
assigned reasong, and it is agreed that nothing of


ASS.


-thekind occurs on the western shore. The Pro-
fessor rather inclines to receive the testimony of
the local Arabs, who affirm that the bitumen
only appears after earthquakes. They allege that
after the earthquake of 1834 huge quantities of
it were cast upon the shure, of which the Jehalin
Arabs alone took about 60 kuntars (each of
98lbs.) 10 market; and it was corroboratively
recollected by the . Eli Smith, that a large
amount had that year been purchased at Beirut
by the Frank merchants. There was another
sarthquake on January 1, 1837, and soon after a
large mass of asphaltum (compared by one person
‘oan island, and by avother to a house) was disco-
vered floating on the sea, and was driven aground
on the western side, near Usdum. The neigh-
bowing Arabs assembled, cut it up with axes,
removed it by camels’ loads, and sold it at
the rate of fuur piastres the rudd, or pound; the
product is said to have been about 3000 dollars.
during these two years, the Sheik of the
Jelwlin, a man fifty years old, had never known
bitumen appear in the sea, nor heard of it from
his fathers ( Robinson's Bib. Researches, ii. p. 230).
information may serve to illustrate the ac-
count of Josephus, that ‘ the sea in many places
ends up black masses of asphaltum, which float
ou the surfuce, having the form and size of head-
less oxen’ (De Bell. Jud. ix. 8. 4); and that of
Diodorus (ii. 48), who states that the bitumen is
‘town up in masses, covering sometimes two or
three plethra, and having the appearance of
ilands.—E. ML,


ASS (WON chamor), Equus Asinus of Lin-
haus; by some formed into a subgenus, containing
that gtoup of the Equide which are not striped like
Zebras, and have forms and characters distinguish-
able from true horses, such as a peculiar shape of
body and limbs, long ears, an upright mane, a
‘ail only tufted at. the end, a streak along the
spine, often crossed with another on the shoulders,
‘braying voice, &e.

Besides the ordinary term Chamor, the Hebrews
likewise used PN Athon, Aton, Atun ; DVD
Sirim; $B Para; and WWY Orad, Oredia. By
‘ese words, no doubt, though not with the strict
Pcision of science, diflerent species and distinct
‘aces of the group, as well as qualities of sex and
ge, were indicated ; but the contexts in general
afford only slight assistance in discriminating
them 3 aud reliance on cognate languages is often
“navailing, since we find that similar words fre-
‘ently point to secondary and not to identical
“eceptations,

1. Cuamon we take to be the name of the com-
‘on working ass of Western Asia; an animal of
Small stature, frequently represented on Egyptian
onuments with panniers on the back, usually
of a reddish colour (the Arabic Hamar and
Camara denoting red), and the same as the
Turkish Hymar. It to be a domesticated
race of the wild ass ia, Mesopotamia, and
. m Persia, where it is denominated Gour :
in Scripture it is distinguished by the name of
‘WY Orud (Job xxxix. 5), and in the Chaldee of
Daniel, STAY Oredia (v. 21 ds both terms being
most ~— derived from the braying voice of the


ue its natural state it never seeks woody, but up-
Pasture, mountainous and rocky retreats ; and


it is habituated to stand on the brink of precfpices
(a practice not entirely obliterated in our own do-
mestic races), whence, with protruded ears, it sur-


(Domestic Ass of Western Asia.)
veys the scene below, blowing and at length


braying in extreme excitement. This habit is
beautifully depicted by Jeremiah, when speaking
of the Para (xvii. 6) and Orud (xlviii. 6), where, -
instead of YAY Oror, heath, we should read
WW Orud, wild ass; for there is no heath, erica,
in Asia.

DY Oir, Oirim; in the Chaldee ‘Sy Zi ;
Auth. Vers. young ass, colt; but this rendering
does not appear on all occasions to be correct,
the word being sometimes used where the Oirim
or Ourim carry loads and till the ground, which
seems to ufford evidence of, at least, full growth
(Isa. xxx. 6, 24). JINN Aton, Atunuth, is
unsatisfactorily rendered ‘ sle-ass,’ unless we sup-

it to refer to a breed of greater beauty and
importance than the common, namely, the silver
grey of Africa; which being large and indocile,
the females were anciently selected in preference
for riding, and on that account formed a valuable
kind of property. From early ages a white breed of
this race was reared at Zobeir, the ancient Bassora,
and capital of the Orcheni, from which place civil
dignitaries still obtain their white asses and white
mules. It is now the fashion, as it was during
the Parthian empire, and probably in the time of
the Judges, to dapple this breed with spots of
orange or crimson or of both colours together;
and we agree with the Editor of the Pictorial
Bible (uote on Judg. v. 10) that this is the meaning
of the word “M¥ Tzachor (chequered 7); an in-
terpretation which is contirmed by the Babylonian
Sanhedrim, who, in answer to King Sapor’s offer
of a horse to convey the Jewish Messiah, say : ‘non
est tibi equus centimaculus, qualis est ejus (Mes-
siw) asinus.’ Horses and asses thus painted occur
frequently in Oriental illuminated MSS., and
although the taste may be puerile, we conceive that
it is the record of remote conquest achieved by a
nation of Central Asia mounted on spotted or
clouded horses, and revived by the Parthians, who
were similarly equipped. See Introduction to
Hist. of Horse and the Tangum Horse, Natu-
ralist's Library, vol. xii. No other primeval
invasion from the east by horsemen on Tza
animals than that of the so-called Centaurs is
recorded : their era coincides nearly with that of
the Judges. ‘
2


m3 ASS.


By the law of Moses the ass was declared un-
clean, and therefore was not used as food, except-
ing, as it would appear, in cases of extreme famine.
This inference, however, is drawn from a case where
the term ‘ass's head’ may be explained to mean
not literally the head of an ass, but a certain mea-
sure or weight so called, as in 1 wy xvi. 20,
where it is said that Jesse sent toSaul ‘an ass of
bread ;’ for, in our version, ‘ laden with’ is an ad-
dition to the text. Although therefore the famine
in Samaria may possibly have compelled the
people to eat asses, and a head may have been
very dear, still the expression may denote the
measure or weight which bore the same name.
The prohibition, however, had more probably an
economical than a religious purpose: hunting
was thus discouraged, and no horses being used,
it was of importance to augment the number and
improve the qualities of the ass.

As this animal was most serviceable to man,
its name was beld in respect rather than con-
tempt. The slander, therefore, current among the
Romans and directed agaiust the Jews, that they
adored the head of an ass in secret, may not have
originated in direct malice or misinterpretation,
but have arisen out of some Gnostic fancies, in
which the Alexandrian Jews, who had nearly for-
saken the Scriptures in search of the magical delu-
sions of the Cabala, and new semi-Christians in
that city, 20 deeply indulged during the first cen-
turies of our era. Hence the Ophite sect figured
in the circles of Behemoth, the last genius or
Eon (4), under the name of Onoel, shaped like an
ass; and there exists an engraved Abraxa, or talis-
man, of Gentile or Gnostic origin, bearing the
whole-length form of a man in flowing robes with
an ass’s head, and holding an open book with the
inscription, ‘Deus Christianorym menenychites.’
It is not likely that mere malice would engrave
its spite upon amulets, although, if Jablonski be
correct, the ass was held in contempt in E
and therefore in Alexandria; but among
Arabs and Jews we have ‘the voice of one crying
in the wilderness,’ a solemn allusion derived
from the wild ass, almost the only voice in the
desert; and in the distinguishing epithet of Mir-
van II., last Ommiad caliph, who was called
Hymar-al-Gezerah, or wild ass of Mesopotamia—

fs that no idea of contempt was associated with
ee prophet's metaphor, and that, by such a desix-
nation, no insult was intended to the person or dig-
nity of the prince. In more remote ages Tartak or
Tarhak was an ass-god of the Avim, and Yauk was
the Arabian name of another equine divinity, or a
different name for the same Tartak, whose form
may possibly be preserved to the present day in
the image of the Borak, or mystical camel, which,
according to the Koran, bore Mohammed, and is
now carried in ions at the Nourous. It is
shaped like a horse, having a white body with red
legs, a peacock’s tail,and a woman’s instead of
an ass’s head.

2. NH Para, rendered likewise ‘ wild ass,’ is a
derivative of the same root which in Hebrew has
eee YW Paras, horse, and DWH Parasim,

en, Persians, and Parthians, Though evi-
dently a generical term, the connie uses it in a
specific sense, and seems to intend by it the horse-
ass, or wild mule, which the Greeks denominated
Hemionos, and the moderns Djiggetai; though
we think there still remains some commixture in


nearly of the same stature, and not unlike in the
general distribution of colours and markings, but
the He-nionos is distinguished from the other by
its neighing voice and the deficiency of two teeth


in the jaws. The species is first noticed by Aris-
totle, who mentions nine of these animals as being
brought to Phrygia by Pharnaces the satrap,
whereof three were living in the time of his son
Pharnabazus. This was while the Onager still
roamed wild in Cappadocia and Syria, and proves
that it had until then been considered the same
species, or that from its rarity it had escaped dis-
crimination; but no doubt remains that it was
the Gourkhur, or horse-ass, which is implied by
the name Hemionos. The allusion of Jeremiah,
in speaking of the Para (xiv. 6), most forcibly
depicts the scarcity of food when this species,
inured to the desert and to want of water, are made
the prominent example of suffering.
ey were most Tikely used in traces to draw
chariots: the animals so noticed in Isa. xxi. 7
and by Herodotus are the same which Pliny,Strabo,
and Arnobius make the Caramamians and Scy-
thians employ in the same way. We claim the
Para, and not the Orud, to be this species, because
the Hemionos, or at least the Gourkhur, does not
bray, as before noticed ; and because, notwithstarrd -
ing its ferceness and velocity, it is actually used
at present as a domestic animal at Lucknow, where
it was observed by Duvaucel. The Hemionos is
little inferior to the wild horse; in shape it re-
sembles a mule, in gracefulness a horse, and in
colour it is silvery, with broad spaces of flaxen or
bright bay on the thigh, flank, shoulder, neck, and
head ; the ears are wide like the zebra’s, and the
neck is clothed with a vertical dark mane pro-
longed in a stripe to the tuft of the tail. The com-
pany of this animal is liked by horses, and, when
domesticated, it is gentle: it is now found wild
from the deserts of the Oxus and Jaxartes to
China and Central India. In Cuteh it is never
known to drink, and in whole districts which it
frequents water is not to be found: and, though
the natives talk of the fine flavour of the flesh, and
the Gour in Persia is the food of heroes, to an
European its smell is abominable. For detailed
remarks on all the species of Equids we refer
to vol. xii. of the Natwralist's Library, where,
however, there are several typographical errors in
the Hebrew names. i
Muze (TW Pered, « alight alterstion from


ASSHUR.


Para, before referred to) occurs in 2 Sam. xiii.
29; | Kings i. 33; x. 25; and in


(Mules: from an Egyptian Painting.—Drit. Museum.]


This animal is sufficiently well known to require
no particular description. Where, or at what
penod, breeding mules was first commenced is
totally unknown, although, from several circum-
stances, Western Asia may be regarded as the


locality and the era as coinciding with that of the
fist kings of Israel. In the time of David, to be
lowed to ride on the king's own mule was an
erstood concession of great, if not sovereign au-
‘nority, and several years before the mention of
event all the king's sons already rode upon
mules. It does not appear that the Hebrew
People, at this early period at least, bred mules;
Teceived them from Armenia, the large
fran race being considered the offspring of
the Onager and mare; but the most utiful
Were no doubt brought from the vicinity of Bas-
‘ra, a8 before noticed. ‘The claim of Anah, son
Tibeon, to the discovery of breeding mules, as
‘serted in the Talmuds, may be regarded as an
‘sion of national vanity. It rests on Gen.
avi, YU, where D9? Jemim, or Ha-yimim is ren-
ered mules: but it more probably means toater.
UI Reches (Esth. vili. 10, 14; 1 Kings iv.
we take to be one of the many names for
runing camels; at Herat still called Badees;
oh Anti, Deloul, Oo Shaary, and Hedjeens
“to carry expresses ; or horses, ancient]
Asiandi or Agsci, now Crane or Chappes,
which, according to Xenophon, existed in Persia
the time of Cyrus, and are still in use under
ifferent appellations over all Asia.—C. H. S.
ASSHUR, a son of Shem, who gave his name
‘ Assyria (Gen. x. 11-22) [Assyria].
_ASSIDEANS (O*DN chasidim, 1 Mace.
"1. 13, "Agiaio1, the pious, or righteous); a
Pa derived from the root IDM, a word used to
Pte very good or a very bad action, but more
feetly the former. As a description of a par-
“ular body of men it does not occur in the
Foal Scriptures, nor in Josephus ; but in the
nt Book of Maccabees, as above, it is applied to
ody of zealous and devoted men who rose at
€ signal for armed resistance given by Matta-
thias, the father of the Maccabees, and who,
under him and his successors,. upheld with the
the great doctrine of the unity of God, and
stemmed the advancing tide of Grecian manners
and Ttlatis.
¢ Jews at a later period gave the name of
Chasidin to those pious persons who devoted them-
elves toa life of austerities and religious exercises,


10 the of hastening the coming of the Mes-


\ ASSYRIA. 248


siah, and of making an atonement for their own
sins and for the sins of others. The name of Cha-
sidim has also been assumed by a Jewish sect
which originated in Poland about a hundred years
since, and which still subsists. There is an account
of it in the Penny Cyclopedia, art. ‘ Assidians.’
The ideas connected with this later appropriation
of the term have, by an obvious association, been
carried back to and connected with the Chasidim
or Assideans who joined Mattathias, and who
have generally been regarded as a sect subsisting
at that time. No such sect, however, is mentioned
by Josephus in treating of the affairs of that period ;
and the texts which refer to them (1 Macc. ii. 42;
vii. 13; 2 Macc. xiv. 18) afford no sufticient evi-
dence that the Assideans formed a sect distinct
from other pious and faithful Jews. The analogous
Hebrew term Chasidim occurs in various passages
of Scripture appellatively for good and pious men
(Ps. cxly. 10; cxlix. 1; Isa. lvii. 1; Mic. vii.
2), but is never applied to any sect or body of men.
Upon the whole, in the entire absence of collateral
information, it seems the safest course to conclude
that the Assidwans were a body of eminently
zealous men, devoted to the Law, who joined
Mattathias very early, and remained the constant
adherents of him and his son Judas—not, like
the mass of their supporters, rising occasionally
and then relapsing into the ordinary pursuits of
life. It is possible that, as Jennings conjectures
(Antig. p. 295), the name doidaio, or ‘saints,’
came to be applied to them by their enemies as a
term of reproach, like ‘ Puritans’ formerly in this
country, and ‘saints’ very often in the present
day.

ASSOS ("Acgos), a town of Lesser Mysia, or
of Adramyttium, opposite the island of Lesbos,
or Mitylene. Paul came hither on foot from
Troas, to meet with his friends, in order to take
shipping for Mitylene (Acts xx. 13,14). It is
now a miserable village, called Beiram, built
high upon the rocks on the side towards the land
(Richter, p. 465, sg.).

ASSYRIA. We musthere distinguish between
the country of Assyria, and the Assyrian empire.
They are both designated in Hebrew by WWS
Asshur, the peuple being also described by the
same term, only that in the latter sense it is mas-
culine, in the former, feminine. In the Septua-
gint it is commonly rendered by "Aggodp or
“‘Agovptous, and in the Vulgate by Assur and
Assyrii, aud seldom or never by ’Agovpla, or As-
syria. Let it be noted, that the Asshurim (’Aggou-
pie(u) of Gen. xxv. 3, were an Arab tribe; and
that at Ezek. xxvii. 6, the word ashurim (in our
version ‘ Ashurites’) is only an abbreviated form
of teashur, box-wood.

I. Assyria Proper was a region east of the
Tigris, the capital of which was Nineveh. It
derived its name from the progenitor of the abo-
riginal inhabitants—Asshur, the second son of
Shem (Gen. x. 22; 1 Chron. i. 17), a different
person from Asshur, son of Hezron, and Caleb's
grandson (1 Chron. ii. 4; iv. 5). Its limits in
early times are unkuown; but when its mo-
narchs enlarged their dominions by conquest,
the name of this metropolitan province was ex-
tended to the whole empire. Hence, while Homer
calls the inhabitants of the country north of Pas
lestine Arimci (evidently the Aramim or Arex


4 ASSYRIA.


means of the Hebrews), the Greeks of a later
period, finding them subject to the Assyrians,
called the country Assyria, or (by contraction)
Syria, a name which it has ever since borne. It
ison this account that, in classical writers, the
names Assyria and Syria are so often found inter-
changed; and a recent commentator on Isaiah is
of opinion that this too is the case in Scripture;
for by ‘Assyria,’ in Isa. xix, 23-25, he understands
the prophet to mean ¢ Syria’ (Henderson on Isaiah,
Lond. 1840, p. 173). The same conjecture had
been hazarded by Hitzig (Begriff d. Kritch Alt.
Test. Heidelhers, 1831, p. 98): but it may be
questioned whether in Hebrew ¢ Asshur’ and
© Aram’ are ever confounded. The same, how-
ever, cannot be affirmed of those parts of the As-
syrian empire which lay east of the Enpbrates,
but west of the Tigris. The Hebrews, as well as
the Greeks and Romans, appear to have spoken
of them in a loose sense as being in Assyria,
because in the Assyrian empire. Thus Isaiah
(vii, 20) describes the Assyrians as those ‘beyond
the river,’ ¢. e. east of the Euphrates, which river,
and not the Tigris, is introduced at viii. 7, as an
image of their power, In Gen, xxv. 18, the lo-
cality of the Ishmacelites is described as being east
of Egypt, ‘as thou goest to Assyria,’ which, how-
ever, could only be reached through Mesopotamia
or Babylonia; and this idea best reconciles the
apparent incougrnity of the statement in the same
hook (ii. 14), that the Hiddekel, or Tigris, runs
© on the east of Assyria,’ ¢. e. of the Assyrian pro-
vinces of Mesupotamia and Babylonia; for there
can be no doubt that, not only during the exist-
ence of the Assyrian monarchy, but long after its
overthrow, the name of Assyria was given to those
provinces, as having once formed so important a

art of it. For example, in 2 Kings xxiii. 29,
Neburludieiar is termed the king of Assyria,
though resident at Babylon (comp. Jer. ii. 18; La-
ment. v.6; Judith i. 7; ii. L); yea, in Ezra vi. 22,
Darius, king of Persia, is called king of Assyria
(comp. Plin, Hist. Nat. xix. 19); aud, on a similar
principle, in 2 Macc. i. L9, the Jews are said to
have been carried captive to Persia, ¢. e. Baby-
lonia, because, as it had formerly been subject to
the Assyrians, so it was afterwards under the do-
minion of Persia. (Comp. Herodotus, i. 106, 178;
iii. 53 vii. 63; Strabo, ii, 84; xvi. 1; Arrian,
vii.; Exped. Alex. vii. 21. 2; Ammianus Mar-
cellinus, xxiii. 20; xxiv. 2; Justin, i. 2. 13.)
One writer, Dionysius Periegeta (v. 975), applies
the designation of Assyria even to Asia Minor, as
far as the Black Sea.

Yet, ultimately, this name again became re-
stricted to the original province east of the Tigris,
which was called by the Greeks ’Agcupla (Ptolemy,
vi. 1), and more commonly ’Aroupla (Strabo, xvi.

». 507), or "Arupia (Dion Cassius, Ixviii. 28), the
latter being only a dialectic variety of prounncia-
tion, derived from the Aramzan custom of chang-
ing sinto ¢. A trace of the name is supposed to


be preserved in that of a very ancient place yl


Athur, on the Tigris, from four to six hours N.E.
of Mosul. Rich, in his Residence in Kurdistan
(vol. ii. p. 129), describes the ruins as those of the
© city of Nimrod,’ and states that some of the better
informed of the Turks at Mosul ¢ said it was Al
Athur, or Ashur, from which the whole country
was denominated.’


ASSYRIA.


According to Ptulemy, Assyria was in his day
bounded on the north by Armenia, the Gordiwan
or Carduchian mountains, especially by Mount
Niphates; on the west by the river Tigris and
Mesopotamia; on the south by Susiana, or Chu-
zistan, in Persia, and by Babylonia; and on the
east by a part of Media, and mounts Choathras and
Zagros (Ptolemy, vi.l; Pliny, L/ist. Nat. v.13;
Strabo, xvi. p. 736). It corresponded to the mo-
deru Kurdistan, or country of the Kurds (at least
to its larger and western portion), with a pat of
the pashalik of Mosul. § Assyria,’ says Mr. Ains-
worth (Researches in Assyria, Babylonia, and
Chaldea, Lond. 1838), ‘including Taurus, is
distinguished into three districts : by its structure,
into a district of plutonic and metamorphic rocks,
a district of sedentary formations, and a district
of alluvial deposits; by con fiyuration, into a dis-
trict of mountains, a district of stuny or sandy
plains, and a district of low watery plains; by
natural productions, into a country of furests and
fruit-trees, of olives, wine, corn, and pasturage, or
of barren rocks; a country of mulberry, cotton,
maize, tobacco, or of barren clay, sand, pebbily or
rocky plains; and into a country of date-trees,
rice, and pasturage, or a land of saline plants.”
The northern part is little else than a mass of
mountains, which, near Julamerk, rise to a very
great height, Mount Jewar being supposed to have
an elevation of 15,000 feet; in the south it is
more level, but the plains are often burnt up with
scorching heat, while the traveller, looking north-
ward, sees a snowy alpine ridge hanzing like a
cloud in mid air. On the west this country is
skirted by the great river Tigris, the Hiddekel of
the Hebrews (Gen. ii. 145; Dan. x. 4), the Dijlat
of the Arabs, noted for the impetnosity of its curs
rent. Its banks, once the residence of mighty
kings, are now desolate, covered, like those of its
twin-river the Euphrates, with relics of ancient
greatness, in the ruins of fortresses, mounds, and
dams, which had been erected for the defence or
irrigation of the country. Niebubr describes a
large stone dam at the castle of Nimrod, eicht
leagues below Mosul, as a work of great skill and
labour, and now venerable for its antiquity ; and
some suppose that it was from the circumstance
of so many canals from the Tigris watering the
country, and rendering it fruitful, that that river
received the Arabic name of Nahr-as-salam, the
River of Peace, % e. prosperity. It leaves the
high land at some distance above Tekrit, rushing
with great velocity through a pass in the Hamrine
Mountains, In its prdgress along Assyria, the
Tigris receives from that country, besides other
rivers, two rapid mountain-streams, the Great and
Little Zab C4rab. Dhab, 7. e. Wolf), called by
the Greeks the Lykos, or Wolf, and the Capros,
or Wild Boar. The greater Zab (called by the |
Kurds Zerb), used to be laid down as a different
river from the Hakkary, but Dr. Grant found them
to be identical ; and he likewise detected an error
of Kimeir, in representing the Bitlis-su as the
same as the Khabfir, whereas they are different
streams. (See Grant's Nesivrians, p. 46.)

The most remarkable feature, says Ainsworth,
in the vegetation uf Taurus, is the abundai.ce 6”
trees, shrubs, and plants in the northern, and
their comparative absence in the southern district.
Besides the productions above enumerated, Kur
distan yields gall-nuts, gum-arabic, mastich,


ASSYRIA.


manna (used as sugar), madder, castor-oil, and
various kinds of grain, pulse, and fruit. An old
traveller, Rauwolf, who by Mosul in 1574,
dwells with admiration on the tinely-cultivated
fields, on the Tigris, so fruitful in com, wine,
and honey, as to remind him of the Assyrian Rab-
shakeh’s description of his native country in 2
. Kings xviii. 32, Rich informs us that a great
quantity of honey, of the finest quality, is pro-
duced; the bees (comp. Isa. vii. 18, ‘ the bee in
the land of Assyria’) are kept in hives of mud.
The naphtha springs, on the east of the Tigris, are
les productive than those in Mesopotamia, but
are much more numerous. The zoology of
the mountain district includes bears (black and
) panthers, lynxes, wolves, foxes, marmots,
donnice, fallow and red deer, roebucks, ante-
lopes, &e., and likewise goats, but not (as was
once supposed) of the Angora breed. In the plains
ue found lions, tigers, hyesnas, beavers, jerboas,
wild boars, camels, &c.

Ptolemy divides Assyria into siz provinces.
Farthest north lay Arrapachitis, so called, as Ro-
saumiiller conjectures, from Arphachsad, Asshur’s
: (Gen. x. 22-24; but see Vater on Genesis,
1151), South of it was Calakine, by Strabo

Wntten Calachene ; perhaps the Chalach of 2 Kings
mm. 6; xviii, 11. Next came Adiabene, so
talled from the above-mentioned rivers Dhab or
Diab; it was 80 important a district of Assyria,
% wometimes to give name to the whole coun-
ty [Apunene]. In Aramean it is called
Ch 'yad, or Hadyab. North-east of it lay Arbe
In which was Arbela (now Arbil, of which
wean account in Rich's Kurdistan, vol. ii. p. 14:
Appendix, No. i. and ii.), famous for the
lattle in which Alexander triumphed over Darius,
th of this lay the two provinces of Apolloniatis

Sittakene. " The capital of the whole country

¥ Nineveh, the Ninos of the Greeks ( Herodot.
1.102; the Hebrew name being supposed to de-
Rote ‘the abode of Ninos,’ the founder of the em-
Pue. Its site is believed to have been on the
east bank of the Tigris, opposite the modern town
‘Alosul, where there is now a small town called

i Yunus (i. e. the prophet Jonah), the ruins
*ound which were explured by Rich, and are
tibed in his work on Kurdistan [Ninzven].

in Gen. x, 11, 12, three other cites are men-
tioned along with Nineveh, viz. Rechoboth Ir,
‘e, the city of Rehoboth, the locality of which is
nown, Calach (in our version Calah), either
*piare in the province of Calachene above men-
red, or the modern Hulwan, called by the
Mans Chalach; and Mesen, ‘a great city be-
ween Nineveh and Calach,’ which Bochart iden-
tities with the Larissa of Xenophon (Anabasis, iii.
7). and Michaelis with a place called Ressin
sh-Ain, caput fontis ?), destroyed by the Arabs
4D. 772. Rich notices an old place and convent
of that name near Mosul (ii. 81). At the town
of Al Kosh, N. of Mosul, tradition places the
birth and burial of the prophet Nahum, and the
Jews resort thither in pilgrimage to his tomb. But
though he is styled an El-koshite (Nah. i. 1), his
denunciations against Assyria and Nineveh were
evidently uttered in Palestine; and St. Jerome
fixes his birth-place at Helkesei, a village in Ga-
ilee.  StiNL it is possible that he was the descend-
at of oue of the Israelities carried captive by
, king of Assyria, ‘to Chalach and to


ASSYRIA. 245
Chabor on the river Goran (or rather to.Chabor @
river of Gozan), and to the cities of the Medes’ (2
Kings xvii. 6; xv. 29; xviii. 9; 1 Chron. v.
26). Of Chalach we have already spoken. In
Chabor some recognise the mountain-tract in
Assyria, called by Ptolemy Chaboras, in which
rises the river Khabnr, which pursues a south-
western course past Zaku to the Tigris; while
others rather identify the river Chabor with the
Khabur of Mesopotamia, which, after a similar
course, joins the Euphrates at Kerkisiyeh, and is
the same as the Chebar (that being the Syriac
form), on the banks of which Ezekiel saw ‘ visions
of God’ (Ezek. i. 3). Indeed it may be doubted
whether any of the localities specitied were in As-
syria Proper, with the exception of Chalach; and
if with some we place it at Hulwaén, then it was
in Babylonian Irak. Major Rawlinson has re-
cently endeavorred to show that Chalach was
neither at Hulwan nor at the neighbouring town
of Zohab, but at a place caled Sir-e-Pool-e-Zohab,
eight miles S. of the latter, where he found not
only Sassanian ruins and mounds like those of -
Babylon and Nineveh, but bas-reliefs and a royal


.tomb precisely like those of Persepolis. (See the


Journal of the Geograph. Soc. vol. ix. part i. p 35,
Lond. 1839.) The country of Kir, to which the
Assyrians transported the Damascene Syrians (2
Kings xvi. 9; Amos i. 5), was probably the re-
gion about the river Kur (the Cyrus of the Greeks),
4. e. Iberia and Georgia.

The greater pait of the country which formed
Assyria Proper is under the nominal sway of the
Turks, who compose a considerable proportion of
the population of the towns and larger villages,
filling nearly all public offices, and differing in
nothing from other Osmanlis. The pasha of
Mosul is nominated by the Porte, but is subject
to the pasha of Bagdad; there is also pasha at
Solymaneah and Akra; a bey at Arbil, a mus-
sellim at Kirkouk, &c. But the aboriginal in-
habitants of the country, and of the whole moun-
tain-tract that here divides Turkey from Persia,
are the Kurds, the Carduchii of the Grecks; from
them a chain of these mountains were anciently
called the Carduchian or Gordyazan, and from
them now the country is designated Kurdistan,
Klaproth, in his Asta Polyglotta (Paris, 1823,
dto. p. 75), derives the uame from the Persian
root urd, t. e. strong, brave. They are still, as
of old, a barbarous and warlike race, occasionally
yielding a formal allegiance, ou the west, to the
Turks, and, on the east, to the Persians, but never
wholly subdued ; indeed, some of the more power-
ful tribes, such as the Hakkary, have maintained
an entire independence. Some of them are sta-
tionary in villages, while others roam far and
wide, beyond the limits of their own country, as
nomadic shepherds; but they are all, more or less,
addicted to predatory habits, und are regarded
with great dread by their more peaceful neigh-
bours. They profess the faith of Islam, and are
of the Soonee sect. All travellers have remarked
many points of resemblance between them and the
ancient Highlanders of Scotland. (See Mr. Ains-
worth’s second work, Travels and Researches in
Asia Minor, Mesopotamia, &c. 2 vuls. Lond.
1842.

The Christian population is scattered over the
whole region, but is found chiefly in the north.


It includes Chaldans, who form that branch of —


As ASSYRIA.


the Nestorians that adheres to the church of
Rome, a few Jacobites, or monophysite Syrians,
Annenians, &c. But the most interesting portion
is the ancient church of the primitive Nestorians,
a lively interest in which has lately been excited
in the religions world by the publications of the
American missionaries, especially by a work en-
titled The Nestorians, by Asahel Grant, M.D.
Lond. 1841. Besides the settlements of this
peuple in the plain of Oorvomiah to the east, and
In various parts of Kurdistan, where they are in
a state of vassalaze, there has been for azes an
independent community of Nestorians in the
wildest and most inaccessible part of the country,
It lies at nearly equal distances from the lakes af
Van and Oorvumiah, and the Tigris, and is
hemmed in on every side by tribes of ferocious
Kurds; but, entrenched in their fastnesses, the
Nestorians have defied the storms of revolution
and desolation that have so often swept over the
adjacent regions ; and in their character of bold
and intrepid, though rude and fierce mountaineers,
have so entirely maintained their independence
unto the present day, as to bear among their neigh-
bours the proud tile of Ashéret, ‘ the tributeless.’
The second patt of Dr. Grant's work is taken up
with an elaborate attempt to prove that this in-
_ teresting people are the descendants of the * lost’
ten tribes of Israel. But for a satisfactory refu-
tation of this hypothesis, we refer the reader to
an able paper by Dr E. Robmson, in the Amer.
Bibl. Reposit. for Oct. 1841, and Jan. 1842,
Isnars.] Comp. an article by the Rev. J. Per-
ins in the same valuable Miscellany for Jan.
1841; also his Residence in Persia, New York,
1843; and the recent work of Ainsworth. An-
other peculiar race that is met with in this and
the neighbouring countries is that of the Yezidees,
whom Grant and Ainsworth would likewise con-
nect with the ten tribes; but it seems much more
robable that they are an offshoot from the ancient
anichees, their alleged worship of the Evil
Principle amounting to no more than a reverence
which Meeps them from speaking of him with dis-
respect. (See Homes in the Amer. idl. Reposit.
for April, 1842.) Besides the dwellers in towns,
and the azricultural population, there are a vast
number of wandering tribes, not only of Kurds,
but of Arabs, Turkomans, and other classes of
robbers, who, by keeping the settled inhabitants in
constant dread of property and life, check every
effort at improvement; and, in consequence of
this, and the influence of bad government, many
of the finest portions of the country are little better
than unproductive wastes A copy of a famous
history of Kurdistan, entitled Sarikh-al-Akrad
(Akrad being the collective name of the people),
was procured by Mr. Rich when in the country,
and is now, along with the other valuable Orien-
tal MSS. of that lamented traveller, preserved in
the British Museum.—N. M.

2. Tue Assyrian Empirg. No portion of
ancient history is involved in greater obscurity
than that of the empire of Assyria. In attempt-
ing to arrange even the facts deducible frum
Scripture, a difficulty presents itself at the outset,
aising from the ambiguity of the account given
of the origin of the earliest Assyrian state in
Gen. x. 11. After describing Nimrod, son of
Cush, ‘as a mighty one in the earth,’ the historian
adds (ver. 10), ‘And the beginning of his king-


ASSYRIA.


dom (or rather, the first theatre of his dominion)
was Babeh, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh,
in the land of Shinar,’ #. e. Babylonia. Then
follow the words :—NWR R¥ RTT PAA
NINN JI", which may be rendered as in t
English version: ‘Out of that land went forth
Asshur and builded Nineveh,’ or (as it is in the
maryin) ‘ out of that land he (¢. e. Nimmod) went
out into Assyria and builded Nineveh.’ It is
objected to the latter translation, that had the
writer meant to say ‘to Assyria, he would have
useil a preposition, or added the 7 locale, and
written TNU'N. But verbs signifying ‘to go to
a place’ are construed with the noun in the accusa-
tive; and Noldius, in his Concordance of Hebrew
Particles (edit. Tymp., p. 223), gives instances of -
the 7 locale being sometimes omitted (comp. in
Heb. 2 Sam. x. 2, with | Chr. xiii. 13; xix, 2).
Looking at the entire context, and following the
natura] curnent of the writer's thoughts, we shall
find the second translation yields the must con-
gruous sense. Moses is enumerating the descen-
dants of Ham, and it is not likely that he would
interrupt the details to give an acconnt of Asshur,
ason of Shem, whose posterity are not intruduced
till ver. 21. Besides. in the circumstance of
Asshur leaving one country to settle in another,
there was nothing remarkable, for that was the
case with almost all Noah's grandchildren. But
if we understand it of Nimrod, both the connection
and the sense will be manifest. The design ob-
viously is to represent him as a potent monarch
and ambitious conqueror. His brethren, the other
sons of Cush, settled in the south, but he, ad-
vancing northward, first seized on Babylonia,
and proceeding thence into Assyria (already par-
tially colonized by the Asshurites, from whom it
took its name). he built Nineveh and the other
strongholds mentioned, in order tosecure his con-
quests. This view is confirmed by a passage in
Mic. v. 6, where, predicting the ovethrow of
Assyria by the Medes and Babylonians, the Pro-
phet says, ‘ They shall devour the land of Asshur
with the sword : even the land of Nimrod in the
entrances thereof.’ (Comp. v. 5.)

It likewise agrees with the native tradition (if
we can depend on the report of Ctesias), that the
founder of the Assyrian monarchy and the builder
of Nineveh was one and the same person, via.
Ninus, from whom it derived its name (q. d.
Nin’s Abode’, and in that case the designation
of Nimrod (the Rebel) was not his proper name,
but an opprobrious appellation imposed on him
by his enemies. Modern tradition likewise con-
nects Nimrod with Assyria ; for while, as we Lave
seen, the memory of Asshur is preserved in the
locality of Athur, that place is also termed the
‘city of Nimrid,” and tis the above-mentioned
dam on the Tigtis is styled Nimrod’s Castle)
Rich informs us that ¢ the inhabitants of the neigh-
bouring village of Deraweish consider him as their
founder.’ He adds, that the village story-tellers
have a book they call the ‘ Kissel-Nimrud,’ or
Tales of Nimrod.

It is true that the Authorized Version of Gen.
x. 11 is countenanced by most of the ancient
translators and by Josephus; but on the other
hand, the one we have preferred is that of the
Targums of Onkelos and Jerusalem, and of St.
Jerome; and (among the ane of Bochart,
Hyde, Marsham, Wells, Faber, Hales, and many


ams xe BDT Ban Se TRS Vea SF Aa AP FP ewe


a


ASSYRIA.


Gthen, Yet, thoagh Nimrod’s ‘kingdom’ eme
braced the lands both of Shinar and Asshur, we
ae left in the dark as to whether Babylon or
Nineveh became the permanent seat of govern-
ment, and uently, whether his empire should
be designated that of Babylonia or that of Assy-
ma. No certain traces of it, indeed, are to be
found in Scripture for ages after its erection. In
the days of Abraham, we hear of a king of Elam
(i. ¢. Elymais, in the south of Persia) named
Chedorlaomer, who had held in subjection for
twelve years five petty princes of Palestine (Gen.


xiv. 4), and who, in uence of their rebel-
lion, invaded that country docs with three other
gs one of whom was ‘Amruphel, king of
Shinar,’ Josephus says ‘the Assyrians had then
dominion over Asia;’ and he styles these four
kings merely commanders in the Assyrian army.
It is possible that Chedorlaomer was an Assyrian
viceroy, and the others his deputies; for at a later
period the Assyrian boasted, ‘ Are not my princes
altogether kings?’ (Isa. x. 8). Yet some have
rather concluded from the narrative, that by this
time the monarchy of Nimrod had been broken
up, or that at least the seat of government had been
transferred to Elam. Be this as it may, the name
of Assyria as an independent state does not again
Appear in Scripture till the closing period of the
age of Moses. Balaam, a seer from the northern
part of Mesopotamia, in the neighbourhood of
Assyria, addressing the Kenites, a :nountain tribe
on the east side of the Jordan, ‘ took up his pa-
table, ¢. e. raised his oracular, prophetic chant,
and said, ‘Durable is thy dwelling-place! Yea
in a rock puttest thou thy nest: nevertheless,
wasted shall be the Kenite, until Asshur shall
lead them captive.’ In this verse, besides the
play upon the word ken (the Hebrew for a
Best), the reader may remark the striking con-
trast drawn between the permanent nature of
the ahode, and the transient possession of it by
the occupants. The prediction found its ful-
“iment in the Kenites being gradually reduced
© strength (comp. 1 Sam. xv. 6), till they
finally shared the fate of the Transjordanite
tribes, and were swept away into captivity by the
Asyrians (1 Chr. v. 26; 2 Kings xvi. 9; xix.
12, 13; 1 Chr. ii. 55.) But as a counterpart
this, Balaam next sees a vision of retalia-
tory vengeance on their oppressors, and the awful
anes the threatened devastations, though be-
ld in far distant times, extorts from him the
fxclamation, ‘Ah! who shall live when God
doeth this? For ships shall come from the coast
 Chittim, and shall afflict Assuur, and shall
rab Eber, but he also [the invader] shall perish
er,


This is not without obscurity ; but it has com-
only been supposed to point to the conquest of
Tegions that once formed the Assyrian empire,
fext by the Macedonians from Greece, and then
bid both of whose empires were in
tum overthrown.

Inthe time of the Judges, the people of Israel be-
Ciaha subject to a king of Mesopotamia, Chushan-
Ribaim (Judg. iit. 8), who is by Josephus
rb King of the Assyrians ; but we are lett in
lee ignorance as in the case of Chedor-
tovers;’, 2 {0 whether he was an independent
"reign or only a vicegerent for another. The
Sehty-thind Peaim (ver. 9), mentions Ashur as one


ASSYRIA, ay


of the nations leagued against Israel ; but as the
date of that composition is unknown, nothing cer-
tain can be founded on it. The first king of
Assyria alluded to in the Bible, is he who reigned
at Nineveh when the prophet Jonah was sent
thither (Jon. iii. 6). Hales sup him to have
been the father of Pul, the first Assyrian monarch
named in Scripture, and dates the commence-
ment of his reign u.c. 821. By that time the
metropolis of the empire had become ‘ an exceed-
ing great’ and populous city, but one pre-emi-
nent in wickedness (Jon. i. 2; iii. 3; iv. 11).
The first expressly recorded appearance of the
Assyrian power in the countries west Of the Eu-
phrates is in the reign of Menahem, king of Israel,
against whom ‘the God of Israel stirred up the spirit
of Pu (or Phul), king of Assyria’ (1 Chron. v. 26),
who invaded the country, and exacted a tribute
of a thousand talents of silver ‘that his hand’
4. e. his favour, ‘ might be with him to confirm
the kingdom in his band’ (2 Kings xv. 19, 20).
Newton places this event in the year s.c. 770,
in the twentieth year of Pul’s reign, the com-
mencement of which he fixes in the year s.c. 790.
As to his name, we find the syllable Pal, Pel,
or Pul entering into the names of several Assy-
rian kings (e. g. Péléser, Sardanapal-us); and
ce sume connect it with the Persian ‘dela,’
ie. high, exalted, and think it may have been
ee of the title which the Assyrian monarchs
re. Hales conjectures that Pul may have been
the second Belus of the Greeks, his fame having
reached them by his excursions into Western
Asia. About this period, we find the prophet
Hosea making frequent allusions to the practice
both of Israel and Judiea, to throw themselves for
support on the kings of Assyria. In ch. v. 13;
x. 6, our version speaks of their specially seeke
ing the protection of a ‘king Jareb,’ but the
original there is very obscure; and the next Assy-
rian monarch mentioned by name is Tiglath-
pileser. The supposition of Newton is adopted
by Hales, that at Pul’s death his dominions were
divided between his two sons, Tiglath-pileser and
Nabonassar, the latter being made ruler at Baby-
lon, from the date of whose government or reign
the celebrated era of Nabonassar took its rise,
corresponding to B.c. 747. The name of the
other is variously written Tiglath and Tilgath,
Pileser and Pilreser:; the etymology of the first
is unknown (some think it has a refereuce to the.
river Dijlath, &. ¢. the Tigris). Pileser signifies
in Persian ‘exalted prince. When Ahaz, kin
of Judah, was hard press:d by the coined
forces of Pekah, king of Israel, and Rezin, king
of Damascene-Syria, he purchased Tiglath-pile-
ser's assistauce with a large sum, taken out of his
own and the Temple treasury. The Assyrian
king accordingly invaded tbe terzitories of both
the confederated kings, and annexed a portion of
them to his own dominions, carrying captive a
number of their subjects (2 Kings xv. 29; xvi.
5-10; 1 Chr. v. 26; 2 Chr. xxviii. 16; Isa. vii
1-11; comp. Amos i. 5; ix. 7). His successor
was Shalman (Hos. x. 4), Shalmaneser or Sal-
manassar, the Enemessar of the apocryphal book
Tobit (ch. i, 2). He made Hoshea, king of
Israel, his tributary vassal (2 Kings xvii. 3) ; but
finding him secretly negotiating with So or So-
baco (the Sabakoph of the SRA, king of
Egypt, he laid siege to the Israelit capital,


as ASSYRIA.


Samaria, took it after an investment of three
years (u.c. 719), and then reduced the country
of the ten tribes to a province of his empire,
carrying into captivity the king and his people, and
settling Cutheans from Babylonia in their room
(2 Kings xvii. 3-6; xviii. 9-11). Hezekiah,
king of Judah, seems to have been for a time his
vassal (2 Kings xviii. 7); and we learn from the
Tyrian annals, preserved by Menander of Ephe-
sus ‘as cited by Josephus, Antig. x. 14. 2), that he
subdued the whole of Phanicia, with the excep-
tion of insular Tyre, which successfully resisted
a siege of five years. The empire of Assyria
seems now to have reached its greatest extent,
having had the Mediterranean for its boundary
on the west, and including within its limits
Media and Kir on the north, as well as Elam on
the south (2 Kings xvi.9: xvii. 6; Isa. xx. 6).
In the twentieth chapter of Isaiah (ver. 1), there is
mention of a king of Assyria, Sargon, in whose
reign Tartan besieged and took Ashdod in Phi-
listia; and as Tartan is elsewhere spoken of
(2 Kings xviii. 17) as a general of Sennacherib,
some have supposed that Sargon is but another
name of that monarch, while others would iden-
tify him either with Shalmaneser, or with Esar-
haddon, Sennacherib’s successor. But the cor-
rectness of all these conjectures may fairly be
questioned; and we adhere to the opinion of
Gesenius (Comment. on Isa. in loc.), that Sar-
gon was aking of Assyria, who succeeded Shal-
maneser, and had a short reign of two or three
years. He thinks the name may be equivalent
to Ser-jauneh, © Prince of the Sun.” Von Bohlen
prefers the derivation of sergun, ‘ gold-coloured,”
His attack on Egypt may have arisen from the
jealousy which the Assyrians entertained of that
Nation's influence over Palestine ever since the
negotiation between its king So, and Hoshea,
king of Israel. From many incidental expres-
sions in the book of Isaiah we can infer that
there was at this time a strong Egyptian party
among the Jews, for that people are often warned
against relying for help on Egypt, instead of
simply confiding in Jehovah (Isa, xxx. 2; xxxi.
1; comp. xx. 5,8). The result of Tartan’s expe-
dition against Egypt and Ethiopia was predicted
by Isaiah while that general was yet on the
Ezyptian frontier at Ashdod (Isa. xx. 1-1); and
it is not improbable that it is to this Assyrian
invasion that the prophet Nahum reters when
he speaks (iii, 8-10) of the subjuzation of No,
8. ¢. No-Ammun, or Thebes, the capital of Upper
Egypt, and the captivity of its inhabitants. The
occupation of the country by the Assyrians, how-
ever, must have been very transient, for in the
reign of Sargon’s successor, Sennacherib, or San-
cher ib, we find Hezekiah, king of Judah, throwing
off the Assyrian yoke, and allying himself with
Egypt (2 Kings xviii. 7, 21}. This brought
against him Sennacherib with a mighty host,
which, without difficulty, subdued the fenced
cities of Judah, and compelled him to purchase
peace by the payment of a large tribute. But
‘the treacherous dealer dealt very treacherously ’
(Isa. xxxiii. 1); and, notwithstanding the azree-
ment, proceeded to invest Jerusalem. In answer,
however, to the prayers of the * good king’ of Ju-
dah, the Assyrian was diverted from his purpose,
partly by the ‘rumour” (Isa. xxxvii. 6) of the
approach of Tirhakah, king of Ethiopia, and


ASSYRIA.


partly by the sudden and miraculous destruction
of a great part of his army (2 Kings xviii. 13-375
xix.; Isa. xxxvi. and xxxvii.). He himself fied.
to Nineveh, where, in course of time, when wore
shipping in the temple of his god Nisroch, he was
slain by his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer, the
parricides escaping into the land of Armenia—a
fact which is preserved in that country's tradi-
tionary history [Ararat]. Regarding the period
of Sennacherib’s death chronologists differ. Hales,
following the apocryphal book of Tobit (i. 21),
places it fifty-five days after his return from his
Jewish expedition; but Gesenius (Comment. on
Isa. p. 999) has rendered it extremely probable
that it did not take place till long after. He
founds this opinion chiefly on a curious fragment
of Bervsus, preserved in the Armenian translation
of the Chronicle of Eusebius. It states that, after
Sennacherib’s brother had governed Babylon as
the Assyrian viceroy, the sovereignty was suc-
cessively usurped by Acises, Merodach, or Bero-
dach Baladan (Isa. xxxix. 1; 2 Kings xx. 12),
and Elibus or Belibus. But, after three years,
Sennacherib .regained dominion in Babylonia,
and appointed as vicerny his own son Assordan,
the Esarhaddon of asd ee This statement
serves to explain how there was in Hezekiah’s
time a king at Babylon, though, both before and
after, it was subject to Assyria. The only objec-
tion to it is, that Isaiah relates the murder of
Sennacherib before Merodach Baladan’s embassy
to Jerusalem. But to this Gesenius replies that
that arrangement is followed by the prophet in
order to conclude the history of the Assyrian mo=
narch, so as not to have to retum to it again.
Sennacherib is obviously the king of Arabia and
Assyria mentioned by Herodotus under the name
of Sanacharibos, of whom he relates (ii. 141) that
‘he attacked Egypt with a mighty army, but
that on his arrival at Pelusinm his camp became
infested during night with so vast a number of
mice, that their quivers and bows, together with
what secured their shields to their arms, were
gnawed in pieces; and finding themselves, in the
morning, detenceless, they fied in confusion, and
lost great numbers of their men. There is now
to be seen (he adds) in the temple of Vulcan a
marble statue of this king, having a mouse in his
hand, and with this inscription, “ Whoever thou
art, learn from my fortune to reverence the gods,"*”
The king of Egypt was Sethos, or So, priest of
Vulcan. Prideaux and others suppose that we
have here a corruption of the story of the miraca-
lous destruction of the Assyrian army before Je~
rusalem, but the point is open to doubt. Gese~
nius is inclined to identify Sennacherib with the
Sardanapalus to whom Arrian (Exped. of Alex.
ii. 5) and Strabo (xiv. 4. 8) ascribe the erection
of the cities of Anchiale and Tarsus in Cilicia,
after his successful suppression of a revolt of the
Greeks there. But there is much confusion in
the ancient accounts of Sardanapalus, and some
have supposed that the name was a royal title,
common to all the Assyrian kings, g.d. Sar-dana-
bala, 4. e. wise, exalted prince. As to the ety-
mology of *Sennacherib,’ Von Bohlen suggests
its affinity to the Persian ‘Sangerb,' ¢. ¢. ‘ splen-
dour of the conqueror.’

Sennacherib was succeeded by his son Esar
haddon, or Assarhaddon, who had been his father's
viceroy at Babylon (2 Kings xix. 37; Isa. xxxvii,


oe ee eet Meg Cede Se rere Set GS Cee ns Ge Gee eee Ee Oe PS ef ee ge are


ASSYRIA.


38). He is the Sacherdon, or Sarchedon, of Tobit
i, 21), and the Asaradinus of Ptolemy’s Canon.
regards him as the first Sardanapalus. The
aly notice taken of him in Scripture is that he
wetted some colonists in Samaria (Ezra iv. 2),
on (at ver. J) teat mere is ascribed
great and noble Asnapper,’ it is supposed
that that was another name ie Hoarhndidue, but
itmay have been one of the great officers of his
empire. It seems to have been in his reign that
the captains of the Assyrian host invaded and
Tavaged Judah, carrying Manasseh, the king, ca
tive to Babylon. The subsequent history of the
Mpire is involved in almost as much obscurity
as that of its origin and rise. The Medes had
ly shaken off the yoke, and the Chaldzans
‘oon appear on the scene as the dominant nation
of Westem Asia; yet Assyria, though much re-
duced in extent, existed as an independent state
for a considerable period after Esarhaddon. Hales,
following Syncellus, makes him succeeded by a
prince called Ninus (s.o. 667), who had for his
successor Nebuchodonosur (B.c. 658), for the
transactions of whose reign, including the ex
dition of his general Holofernes into Judea, Hales
telies on the apocryphal book of Judith, the au-
thority of which, however, is very questionable.
The last monarch was Sarac, or Sardanapalus II.
{a.c. 636), in whose reign Cyaxares, king of
Media, and Nabopolassar, viceroy of Babylon,
combined against Assyria, took Nineveh, and,
dividing what remained of the empire between
them, reduced Assyria Proper to a province of
Media (p.c, 606).
_ In this brief sketch of the history of the Assy-
tan empire, we have mainly followed the writers
of the Old Testament, from whom alone any
consistent account can be derived. The original
sources of profane history on this subject are
Herodotus and Ctesias, but every attempt to re-
concile their statements with those of Scripture,
or even with cach other, has hitherto failed. The
former fixes the duration of the Assyrian domi-
hion in U Asia at 520 years (Herod. i. 95);
while the latter again assigns to the Assyrian em-
pue, from Ninus to Sardanapalus, no less a period
than 1305 years (Diodor. Sicul. ii. 21). The
authority of Ctesias, however, is very general]
discredited (it was s0 even by Aristotle), thoug!
be has recently found a defender in Dr. Russell,
in his Connection of Sacred and Profane History.
truth is (as is remarked by the judicious
Heeren) that the accounts of both these historians
are little better than mere traditions of ancient
es and heroines (witness the fables about
Semiramis '), without any chronological data,
and entirely in the style of the East. To detail
all the fanciful hypotheses which have been pro-
Pounded, with the view of forming out of them a
Consistent and coherent narrative, forms no part
of our present design. The curious in these spe-
prlations we refer to the essays of Pezron, Sevin,
Teret, an Debrosse, in the Mémoires de I’ Acad.
Inscriptions ; Fourmont, Réflerions Antiques
tur les Histoires des Anciens Peuples ; Volney,
echerches Nouvelles sur U Hist. Ancienne—a
He, valuable elucidation of the chronology of
erodotus,
. The political constitution of the Assyrian em-
Was no doubt similar to that of other ancient
of the Kast, such as Chaldma and Persia.


ASTRONOMY. 249


The monarch, called ‘the great king’ (2 Kings
xviii. 19; Isa. xxxvi. 4), ruled as a despot, sur-
rounded with his guards, and only accessible to
those who were near his person I)iod. Sicul. ii.
21, 23). Under him there were provincial satra
called in Isa. x, 8, ‘princes,’ of the rank
power of ordinary kings. The great officers of
the household were commonly eunuchs (com
Gesenius on Isa. xxxvi. 2). The religion of
Assyrians was, in its leading features, the same
as that of the Chaldwans, viz. the symbolical wor
ship of the heavenly bodies, especially the planets.
In Scripture there is mention of Nisroch, Adram-
melech, Anammelech, Nebchaz, Tartak, &c., as
the names of idols worshipped by the natives
either of Assyria Proper or of the adjacent coun-
tries which they subdued (see Gesenius On
Isaiah, vol. ii. p. 347). The language did not
belong to the Semitic, but to the Medo-Persian
family. As Aramaic, however, was spoken by a
large part of the western population, it was ‘pro-
bably understood by the great officers of state,
which accounts for Rabshakeh addressing Heze-
kiah’s messengers in Hebrew (2 Kings xviii. 26),
though the Rabbins explain the circumstance by
supposing that he was an apostate Jew.—N. M.

ASTARTE. [Asurorzru.]

ASTRONO (dorhp and ydyos), that
science which treats of the laws of the stars, or
heavenly bodies, considered in reference to their
magnitude, movements, and respective influence
one upon auother. Astronomy may be divided
into empirical and scientific; the first being
founded on the apparent phenomena and move-
ments of the heavenly budies, the second upon
their real phenomena and movements. The kuow-
ledge of the ancients was limited to the first ; or
if they possessed any truths connected with the
second, they were nothing more than bold or for-
tunate guesses, which were not followed out to
their lezitimate consequences, nor formed into a
systematic whole.

The cradle of astronomy is to be found in Asia.
The few and imperfect notices which have come
down to these times, give a cuncurrent testimony
in favour of this statement; and therewith agrees
the fact, that the climate, the mode of life, and
the occupations of the Oriental nations that were
first civilized, prompted them to watch and ob-
serve the starry heavens. Tle Chaldeans are ac-
counted to have excelled in astronomical know-
ledge.

Pliny; in his celebrated enumeration (Hist. Nat.
vii. 57) of the inventors of the arts, sciences, and
conveniences of life, ascribes the discovery of
astronomy to Phoenician mariners: ‘ Siderum
observationem in navigando Phenices;’ and in
the same chapter he speaks of astronomical ob-
servations found on burnt bricks (cuctilibus later-
culis) among the Babylonians, which ascend to
above 2200 years p.c. Alexander sent to Aris-
totle from Babylon a series of astronomical ob-
servations, extending through 1900 years. The
astronomical kuowleilge of the Chinese and In-
dians goes up to a still earlier period (Plin. Hist.
Nat. vi. 17-21). From the remote Hast astro-
nomy travelled in a westerly direction. The
Egyptians at a very early period had some ac-
quaintance with it. To them is to be ascribed
a pretty near determination of the length of
the year, as consisting of 365 days 6 hours


ASTRONOMY.
The Egyptians were the


250
(Herodotus, ii. 4).
teachers of the Greeks.

Some portion of the knowledge which prevailed
on the subject would no doubt penetrate to and be-
come the inheritance of the H: 3 who do not,
however, appear to have possessed any views of as-
tronomy which raised their knowledge to the rank
of a science, or made it approach to a more correct
theory of the mechanism of the heavens than that
which was generally held. Nor, if the Bible is
taken as the witness, do the ancient Israelites a
pear to have had extensive knowledge in the
matter. They ed such an acquaintance
with it as tillers of the ground and herdsmen
might be expected to furm while pursuing their
business, having, as was natural, tlicir minds di-
rected to those regions of the heavens which night
after night brought before their eyes : accordingly,
the peculiar Oriental names of the constellations
are derived from circumstances connected with a
nomade people. A peculiarity of the greatest im-
portance belongs to the knowledge which the
Israelites display of the heavens, namely, that it
is thoroughly imbued with a religious character ;
nor is it possible to find in any other writings,
even at this day, so much pure and elevated piety,
in connection with observations on the starry firma-
iment, as may be gathered even in single books of
the Bible (Amos v. 8; Psalm xix.).

As early as the days of the patriarchs the minds
of pious men were attracted and enraptured by
the splendour of the skies (Gen. xxxvii. 9); and
imagery borrowed from the starry world soon tixed
itself firmly in human speech. The sun and
moon were distinguished from other heavenly
bodies, in consequence of their magnitude and
their brilliancy, as being the lights of heaven and
earth (Gen. i. a and fiom the course of the
moon time was divided into parts, or months, of
which the oldest form of the year, the lunar, was
made up. Every new moon was greeted with re-
ligious festivities. While, however, the sun in his

wer, the moon walking in brightness, and all
the stars of light conspired to excite devotion,
their influence on the hearts of the ancient Is-
raelites, who were happily instructed in a know-
ledye of the true God, the one Jehovah, the sole
Creator of the world, stopped short of that idola-
trous feeling, and was free from those idolatrous

tices to which, among nations of Jess religious

wledge—and especially among their own
neighbours, the Babylonians, for instance—it is
sey known to have led.

As early as the time of the composition of per-
haps the oldest book in the Bible, namely, that
of Job, the constellations were distinguished one
from another, and designated by peculiar and ap-
propriate names (Job ix. 9; xxxviii. 31). In the


Bible are found, 1. bn) the morning star, the
lanet Venus (Isa. xiv. 12; Rev. ii. 28); 2. ADD
Job ix. 9; xxxviii. 35; Amos v, 8), the Pleiades ;

3. ’D>, Orion, a large and brilliant constella-

tion, which stands in a line with the Pleiades. The

Orientals seem to have conceived of Orion asa

huge giant who had warred against God, and as

baund in chains to the firmament of heaven (Job

xxxviii. 31); and it has been emcees that

this notion is the foundation of the history of

Nimrod (Gesen. Comment. zu Isaiah, i. 457) 5

4. Wy (Jub ix. 9), the Great Bear, which bas still


ASTRONOMY.


the same name among the Arabians (Niebubr,
b. 113). In the common version No. 4 is ren-
dered ‘ Arcturus,’ No. 3 ‘Orion,’ and No 3
* Pleiades.’ See Job xxxviii. 32, where the sons
of Arcturus are the three stars in the tail of the
Bear, which stand in a curved line to the left.
5. WMI (Job xxvi. 13, ‘the crooked serpent ”),
Draco, between the Great and the Little Bear ;
a constellation which spreads itself in windings
across the heavens; 6. Aidoxovpo: (Acts xxviii.
11), Gemini, or the Twins, on the belt of the
Zodiac, which is mentioned in 2 Kings xxiii. 5,
under the general name of ‘ the planets mid;
aword which signifies dwellings, stations in which
the sun tarries in his apparent course through the
heavens. (Compare Gen. xxxvii. 9.) The entire
body of the stars was called ‘ the host of heaven’
DOW NIY (Isa. xl. 26; Jer. xxxiii. 22).

No trace is found in the Old Testament of a
division of the heavenly bodies into planets, fixed
stars, and comets; but in Jude 13, the phrase
‘ wandering stars’ (dordpes wAayira) is emr
ployed figuratively.

After the Babylonish exile, the Jews were
compelled, even for the sake of their caleudar, to
attend at least tu the course of the moon, which
became an object of study, and delineations were
made of the shapes that she assumes (Aischna
rosch hassh. ii. 8).

At an early period of the world the worship of
the stars arose from that contemplation of them
which in every part of the globe, and particularly
ju the East, has been found a source of deep and
tranquil pleasure. * Men by nature’ ‘ deemed
either fire or wind, or the swift air, or the circle
of the stars, or the violeut water, or the lights of
heaven, to he the gods which govern the world
‘with whose beanty being delighted, they took
them to be gods’ (Wisdom xiii, 2). Accord -
ingly, the religion of the Egyptians, of th
Chaldees, Assyrians, and the aucient Arabians,


-was nothing else than star-worship, although ia


the case of the tirst its origin is more tlickly
veiled. The sun, moon, and seven plare‘s (those,
that is, of the fixed stars which shine with especial
brightness) excited most attention, and won the
greatest observance. We thus find among the
Babylonians Jupiter (Belus, 13, Isa. Ixv. 11),
Venus (°30, Isa. Ixv. 11, where the first is ren-
dered in the common version ‘ that troop,’ the
second ‘that number"). Both these were consi-
dered good principles. Mercury, honoured as the
secretary of heavn, is also found in Isa. xlvi. 1,
‘Neb. stoopeth ;’ Satum (}'3, Amos v. 26);
Mars (5313, 2 Kings xvii. 30): the two last
were worshipped as principles of evil. The cha-
racter of this worship was formed from the notions
which were entertained of the good or ill which
certain stars occasioned. Astrology found its
sphere principally in stars connected with the
birth of individuals, Thus Herodotus (ii. $2)
states that among the Egyptians every day was
under the influence of some god (some star), and
that according to the day on which each person
was bom, so would be the events he would meet
with, the character he would bear, and the period
of his death. Astrology concemed itself also with
the determination of lucky and unlucky days: so
in Job iii. 3, ‘ Let the day perish wherein I was
born ;’ and Gal. iv. 10, ‘ Ye observe days, and


ATAD.


wcths, and times, and years.” The Chaldeans,
who studied the stars at a very early period, were
touch given to astrology, and wére celebrated for
their skill in that pretended science (Isa. xlvii. 13).
In Daniel ii. 27; v. 11, the calculators of nati-
ities (M12) are named. Diodorus Siculus (ii.
%, 31) says of the Chaldzans, ‘ They assert that
the greatest attention is given to the five stars
alled planets, which they name interpreters ; 90
aalled because, while the other stars have a fixed
path, they alone, by forming their own course,
thow what things will come to pass, thus inter-

Preting tp men the will of the gods; for to those

who study them carefully they foretell events,

partly by their rising, partly by their setting, and
alw by their colour. Sometimes they show heavy
winds, at others rains, at others excess of heat.
The appearance of comets, eclipses of the sun,
earthquakes, and, in general, anything extraordi-
tary, has in their opinion an injurious or a bene-
ficial effect, not only on nations aud countries,
but kings, and even common individuals : and
they consider that those stars contribute very much
of good of of ill in relation to the births of men:
and in consequence of the nature of these things,
and of the study of the stars, they think they know
accurately the events that befal mortals.’ Comets
were for the most part considered heralds of evil
tidings (Joseph. De Bell. Jud. vi. 5.3). The Ori-
entals of the present day hold astrology in honour
(Niebuhr, p. 120); and. stipendiary astrologers
form a part of their court (Kimpfer, Amen.

37, oe On the subject of this article may

consulted Hammer, Ueber die Sternbilder der
Araber ; Ideler, Untersuchungen uber den Ur-
sprung, &e. der Sternamen, Berlin, 1809; also
his Unter. iber die Astron, beobacht der Alten.
Berlin, 1806; and Weidler, Hist. Astronom.
Viteb. 714.—J. R. B.

ATAD, the person on whose threshing-floor the
sons of Jacob and the Egyptians who accom-
panied them performed their tinal act of solemn
mouming for Jacob (Gen. L. 11); on which ac-
connt the place was afterwards called Abel-Miz-
raim, ‘the mourning of the Egyptians.’

ATAD. [Tuorn].


ATAROTH (NYY). Several places of this
Bame (which means crowns) occur in the Scrip-
tures. 1. Ataroth-beth-Joad, in the tribe of Judah
(I Chron. ii. 54). 2. Ataroth, on the borders of
Ephraim (Josh. xvi. 2,7) which some identify
with, and others distinguish from, the Ataroth-
Addar of the same tribe mentioned in Josh. xvi.
5; xviii. 13, 3. Ataroth, in the tribe of Gad, be-
you? the Jordan (Num. xxxii. 3, 34). 4. Ata-
roth-Skophan, in the same tribe (Num. xxxii. 35),
Which some identify with the preceding ; but it
appears more likely that the addition was used to
distinguish the one from the other. Eusebius and
Jerome (Onomasticon, 3. v. Ataroth, *Arapa0)
ate two places in the tribe of Benjamin called
Aaroth 5 but they do not occur in Scripture.
The site of one of these appears to have been
discovered by Professor Robinson (Bt. Re-
searches, ii, 314) under the name of Aéara.

ther place of the same name (Atara) he found
about six miles N. by W. of Bethel, which a
Pear to represent the Ataroth of Ephraim (Josh.
XvL.27). It is now a large village on the sum-
Tit of a high hill (Robinson, iii. 8).


a
ATERGATIS. 251


ATBACH (N38) is not a real word, but a
fictitious cabbalistic term, denoting by its very
letters the mode of changing one word into
another by a peculiar commutation of letters.
The on which it is founded is this: as
all the letters have a numerical value, they are
divided into three classes, in the firet of which
every pair makes the number fen ; in the second,
@ hundred ; and in the third, a thousand.

Thus: 13, 1). 13, ON, every pair making ten.

DD, Y?, BS, 3°, ” a hundred. .

DN, TL YP, »  & thousand
Three letters only cannot enter into any of these
numerical combinations, 71, 3, and 9. The first
two are nevertheless coupled together; and the
Jast is suffered to stand without commutation.
The commutation then takes place between the
two letters of every pair; and the term Atbach
thus expresses that X 1s taken for b, and 3 for Mh,
and conversely. To illustrate its application,
the obscure word 3), in Prov. xxix. 21, may
be turned by Atbach into MIMD, testimony.
Buxtorf, De Abbreviaturis, s. v.

Arnsase (Y3DN) is a similar term for a
somewhat different principle of commutation. In
this, namely, the letters are also mutually inter-
changed by pairs; but every pair consists of a
letter from each end of the alphabet, in regular
succession. ‘Thus, as the technical term Athbash
shows, % and MM, and 3 and &, are interchange-
able; and so on throughout the whole series. By
writing the Hebrew alphabet twice in two parallel
lines, but the second time in an inverse order, the
two letters which form every pair will come to
stand in a perpendicular line. This system is
also remarkable on account of Jerome having 80
confidently applied it to the word Sheshak, in
Jer. xxv. 26. His words are, ‘ Quomodo Babel
intelligatur Sesach, non magnopere laborabit qui
Hebrew linguw parvam saltem habuerit scien
tiam.’ He then propounds the same system of
commutation as that called Athbash (without
giving it that name however, and without ad-
ducing any higher authority for assuming this
mode of commutation, than the fact that it was
customary to learn the Greek alphabet finst straight
through, and then, by way of ensuring accurate
retention, to repeat it by taking a letter fiom each
end, alternately), and makes to be the same
as 535. (See Rosenmiiller's Scholia, ad loc.)
Hottinger possessed an entire Pentateuch ex-
plained on the principle of Athbash (Thesaur.
Philol. p. 450).

There is also another system of less note, called
Aupam (D29N), which is only a modification of
the preceding. For, in it, the alphabet is divided
into halves, and one portion placed over the other
in the natural order, and the pairs are formed out
of those letters which would then stand in a row
together.

"All these methods belong to that branch of
the Cabbula which is called MDN, commu-
tation.— J. N.

ATERGATIS (CArepydrns, or *Arapydris) is
the name of a Syrian goddess, whose temple
(Arepyareiov) is mentioned in 2 Macc. xii. 26.
That temple appears, by comparing | Macc. v.
43, to have been situated at Ashteroth- Karnaim,
Her worship also flourished at Mabiig (‘- e. Bam-


a
252 ATERGATIS.


byce, afterwards called Hierapolis) according to
Pliny (Hist. Nat. v. 19).

There is little doubt that Atergatis is the same
divinity as Derketo. Besides internal evidences
of identity, Strabo incidentally cites Ctesias to
that effect (xvi. p. 1132); and Pliny uses the
terms ‘ Prodigiosa Atergatis, Grecis autem Der-
ceto dicta’ (I.c.). We read that Derketo was
worshipped in Phoenicia and at Ascalon under
the form of a woman with a fish's tail, or witha
woman's face only and the entire body of a fish ;
that fishes were sacred to her, and that the inha-
bitants abstained from eating them in honour of
her. These facts are found in Lucian (De Dea
Syria, xiv.), and, together with a mythological
account of their origin, in Diodorus (ii. 4). Fur-
ther, by combining the passage in Diodorus with
Herodotus (i. 105), we may legitimately conclude
that the Derketo of the former is the Venus Urania
of the latter. Atergatis is thus a name under
which they worshipped some moditication of the
same power which was adored under that of Ash-
toreth. That the "Arepyareioy of 2 Macc. xii. 26
was at Ashteroth-Karnaim, shows also an imme-
diate connection with Ashtoreth. Whether, like
the latter, she bore any particular relation to the
moon, or to the planet Venus, is not evident.
Macrobius makes Adargatis to be the earth
(which as a symbol is analogous to the moon),
and says that her image was distinguished from
that of the sun by rays * sursum versum inclinatis,
monstrando radivrum vi superne missorum enasci

uscunque terra progenerat’ (Saturnal. i. 23).

reuzer maintains that those representations of
this goddess which contain parts of a fish are the
most ancient; and endeavours to reconcile
Strabo’s statement that the Syrian goddess of
Hicrapolis was Aterzatis, with Lucian’s express
notice that the former was represented under the
form of an entire woman, by distinguishing be-
tween the forme of different periods (Symbolik, ii,
68). This fish-form shows that Atergatis bears
some relation, perhaps that of a female counter-
part, to Dacon.


wy


No satisfactory etymology of the word has been
discovered. That which assumes that Atergatis is
31 WIN addir dag, i.e. magnificent tish, which
has often been adopted from the time of Selden
down to the bhi day, cannot be taken exactly in
that sense. The syntax of the language requires, as
Michaelis has already objected to this etymology
(Orient. Biblioth. vi.97), that an adjective placed
before its subject in this manner must be the pre-
dicate of a proposition. The words therefore
would mean ‘ the fish ts magnificent’ (Ewald’s
Hebr. Gram. § 554). Michaelis himseéf, as he
found that the Syriac name of some idol of
Haran was NXNYIN, which might mean aperture,
asserts that that is the Syriac form of Derketo, and
brings it into connection with the great fissure in
the earth, mentioned in Lucian (1. c. xili.), which
awallowed up the waters of the flood (see his edi-
tion of Castell’s Lex. Syr. p. 975). On the
other haud, Gesenius (Thesaur. sub voce pn


ATHENS.
fers. considering Derketo to be the Syrine
tiie for NNT fish; and it is certain


such an intrusion of the Resh is not uncommon
in Aramaic.—J. N.


ATHALIAH (MONY or ONY whom Jon
hovah remembered ; Sept. To9oala) daughter of
Ahab, king of Israel, doubtless by his idolatrous
wife Jezebel. She is also called the daughter of
Omri (2 Chron. xxii. 2), who was the father of
Ahab; but by a comparison of texts it would
Appear that she is so called only as being his
grand-daughter. Athaliah became the wife of
Jehoram, the son of Jehoshaphat, king of Judah.
This marriage may fairly be considered the act
of the parents; and it is one of the few stains
upon the character of the good Jehoshaphat that
he was so ready, if not anxious, to connect him-
self with the idolatrous house of Ahab. Had he
not married the heir of his crown to Athaliah,
many evils and much bloodshed might have
been spared to the royal family and to the king-
dom. When Jehoram came to the crown, he, as
might be expected, ‘walked in the ways of the
house of Ahab,' which the sacred writer obviously
attributes to this marriage, by adding, ‘for he
had the daughter of Ahab to wife’ (2 Chron.
xxi. 6). This king died .c. 885, and was suc-
ceeded by his youngest son Ahaziah, who reigned
but one year, and whose death arose from his
being, by blood and by circumstances, involved
in the doom of Ahab’s house [Anazian]. Before
this Athaliah had acquired much influence in
public atlairs, and had used that influence for
evil; and when the tidings of her son's untimely
death reached Jerusalem, she resolved to seat her.
self upon the throne of David, at whatever cost,
To this end she caused all the male branches of
the royal family to be massacred (2 Kings xi. 1);
and by thus shedding the blood of her own grand-
children, she undesignedly became the instru-
ment of giving completion to the doom on her
father's house, which Jehu had partially accom-

lished, n.c. 884, One infant son of Ahaziah,
however, was saved by his aunt Jehosheba, wife
of the high-priest Jehviada, and was concealed
within the walls of the temple, and there brought
up £0 secretly that his existence was unsuspected
by Athaliah. But in the seventh year (B.c. 878)
of her blood-stained and evil reign, the sounds of
unwonted commotion and exulting shouts within
the Temple courts drew her thither, where she
beheld the young Joash standing as a crowned
king by the pillar of inauguration, and acknow-
ledged as sovereign by the acclamations of the
assembled multitude. Her cries of ‘Treason !*
failed to excite any movement in her favour,
and Jehoiada, the high-priest, who had organized
this bold and successful attempt, without allow-
ing time for pause, ordered the Levitical guards to
remove her from the sacred precincts to instant
death (2 Kings xi.; 2 Chron. xxi. 6; xxii. lU-12;
xxiii.).

ATHENS, This celebrated city, as the births
place of Plato, and through him ‘so widely in-
fluential on Judaism and Christianity, deserves
something else than a gengraphical notice here,
We shall briefly allude to the stages of her history,
and remark on someof the causesof her pre-eminent
greatness in arms, arts, and intellectual subtlety,

The earlier and more obscure period of the Grex


ATHENS.
cian province named Attica reaches down nearly
to the final establishment of democracy in it. Yet
we know enough to see that the foundations of her
greatness were then already laid. Even the un-
fertile soil and dry atmosphere of Attica, in con-
nection with the slender appetite of the people,
have been thought as favourable to their mental
development, as the fertility of the neighbouring
Beotia was injurious to its voracious inhabitants.
The barrenness of the soil, moreover, prevented
invaders from coveting it; so that through a course
of ages the population remained unchanged, and
a moral union grew up between the several dis-
trict, To u king named Theseus (whose deeds
are too much mixed with fable to he narrated as
history) is ascribed the credit of uniting all the
country-towns of Attica into a single state, the
capital of which was Athens. This is the first
political event that we can trust as historical,


ATHENS. 253


although its date and circumstances are by no_
means free from obscurity.

The lation of this province was variously
called Pelasgian, Achaian, and Ionian, and
bably corresponds most nearly to what was after-
wards called ASolian (Prichard, Phys. Hist. of
Man, iii. p. 494). The first name carries the mind
back to an extremely primitive period. When the
Dorians, another tribe of Greeks of very different
temperament, invaded and occupied the southern
pontnvels, great numbers of its Achaian inha-

itants took refuge in Attica. Shortly after, the
Dorians were repulsed in an inroad against Athens,
an event which has transmitted to legendary re-
nown the name of King Codrus; and thence-
forward Athens was looked upon as the bulwark
of the Ionian tribes against the barbarous Dorians.
Overloaded with population, Attica now poured
forth colonies into Asia; some of which, as Mi-


letus, soon rose to great eminence, and sent out
numerous colonies themselves; so that Athens was
teverenced as a mother of nations, by powerful
children scattered along the western and northern
coasts of Anatolia. :

Dim tradition shows us isolated priesthoods and
elective kings in the earliest times of Attica; these
however gradually gave way to an aristocracy,
which in a series of years established themselves
as a hereditary ruling caste. But a country
‘ever unravaged’ (and such was their beast)
could not fail to increase in wealth and numbers ;
and after two or three centuries, while the highest
commoners on the nobles, the lowest
became overwhelmed with debt. The disorders
caused by the strife of the former were vainly
sought to be stayed by the institutions of Draco;
the sufferings of the latter were ended, and the
s@urces of violence dried up, by the enactments
of Solon. Henceforth the Athenians revered the
laws of Solon (vbuor) as the groundwork of their
whole civil polity; yet they retained by the side
af them the ordinances of Draco (@eopol) in


js Zag (ie


many matters pertaining to religion. The date
of Solon’s reforms was probably s.c. 594.

The tion of Pisistratus and his sons
made a partial breach in the constitution; but
upon their expulsion, a more serious change was
effected by Cleisthenes, head of the noble house
of the Alemaonide (.c. 508), almost in the
same year in which Tarquin was expelled from
Rome. An entirely new organization of the
Attic tribes was framed, which destroyed whatever
remained of the power of the nobles as an order,
and established among the freemen a democracy,
in fact, as well as in form. Out of this proceeded
all the good and all the evil with which the name
of Athens is associated; and though greatness
which shot up so suddenly could not be perma-
nent, there can be no difficulty in deciding that
the good greatly preponderated.

Very soon after this commenced hostilities with
Persia ; and the self-denying, romantic, successful
bravery of Athens, with the generous affability
and great talents of her stat: soon raised her
to the head of the whole Ionian confederacy. As


254 ATHENS.


Jong as Persia was to he feared, Athens was loved ;
but after tasting the sweets of power, her sway
degenerate! into a despotism, and created at
length, in the war called the Peloponnesian, a
coalition of all Dorian and ASolian Greece against
her (s.c. 431). In spite of a fatal pestilence and
the revolt of her Iunian subjects, the naval skill of
Athenian seamen and the enterprise of Athenian
commanders proved more than a match for the
hostile confederacy ; and when Athens at last
fell (u.c. 101), she fell by the effects of internal
sedition more truly than by Spartan lances or
Persian gold, or even by her own rash and over-
grasping ambition, The Cemoralizing effects of
this war on all Greece weie intinitely the worst
result of it, aud they were transmitted to succeed-
ing generations. It was substantially a civil war
in every province; and, as all the inhabitants of
Attica were every summer furced to take refuge
in the few fortresses they possessed, or in Athens
itself, the simple countrymen became transfurmed
into a hungry and profligate town rabble.

From the earliest times the Ionians loved the
lyre and the song, and the hymns of poets formed
the staple of Athenian education. The constitu-
tion of Solon admitted and demanded in the
people a great knowledge of Jaw, with a large
share in its daily administration. Thus the acute-
ness of the lawyer was grafted on the imagination
of the pcet. These are the two intellectual elements
out of which Athenian wisdom was developed ;
but it was stimulated and enriched by extended
political action and political experience. Histury
and Philosophy, as the words are understood in
modem Europe, had their birth in Athens about
the time of the Peloponnesian war. Then first,
also, the Oratory of the bar and of the popular
assembly was systematically cultivated, and the
elements of mathematical science were admitted
into the education of an accomplished man.
This was the period of the youth of Plato, whose
philosophy was destined to leave so deep an im-
press on the Jewish and Christian schools of
Alexandria. Its great effort was to unite the con-
templative mysticism of Eastern sages with the
accurate science of Greece ; to combine, in short,
the two qualities—intellectual and moral, argu-
mentative and spiritual—into a single harmo-
nious whole: and whatever opinion may be formed
of the success which attended the experiment, it
is not wonderful that so magnificent an aim
attracted the desires and riveted the attention of
thoughtful and contemplative minds for ages
afterwards.

In the imitative arts of Sculpture and Paint-
ing, as well as in Architecture, it need hardly be
said that Athens carried off the palm in Greece:

et, in all these, the Asiatic Canes vied with

. Miletus took the start of her in literary com-
position; and, under slight conceivable changes,
might have become the Athens of the world.
But all details on these subjects would be here out
of place.

That Athens after the Peloponnesian war never
recovered the political place which she previously
held, can excite no surprise—that she rose so high
toward it was truly wonderful. Sparta and Thebes,
which successively aspired to the ‘ leadership ’ of
Greece, abused their power as flagrantly as Athens
had done, and, at the same time, mure coarsely.
The never-ending cabals, the treaties made and vio-


ATONEMENT.


lated, the coalitions and breaches, the alliances and
wars, recurring every few years, destroyed all mus
tual confidence, and all possibility of again unit-
ing Greece in any permanent form of independ-
ence; and, in consequence, the whole country was
soon swallowed up in the kingdom of Macedonia,
With the loss of civil liberty, Athens lost her ge-
nius, her manly mind, and whatever remained of
her virtue: she long continued to produce talents,
which were too often made tools of iniquity, pan-
ders to power, and petty artiticers of false philo-
sophy.

"a Christian church existed in Athens soon after
the apostulic times; but as the city had no po-
litieal importance, the church never assumed any
eminent position.—F. W. N.

ATONEMENT. The Greek word is xaraA-
Aayh, translated, Rom. v. 11, atonement, but in
other places. reconciliation (See Rom. xi. 15; 2
Cor. v. 18, 19). In ecclesiastical writers, and in
the canons of Councils, karaddayf is employed
to signify the reconciliation of offenders to the
Church after a due course of penitence. Of this
there are said to have been two kinds: the one
consisting merely in the remission of punishment;
the other, in the restoration of the penitent to all
the rights and privileges of communion. For the
doctrine of Atonement, see articles Sacrivicg,
Revemprion.—H. S. 2

ATONEMENT, DAY OF (WB) BY, day
of pardon, Lev. xxiii 27; xxv. 9). In the Tal-
mud this day is callea 517) MYA, great fast-
ting, or merely NOV, re day; a circumstance
which has suggested to some commentators the no-
tion that by qucpa (Heb. vii. 27) the apostle in-
tended this atonement day. Though perhaps ori-
ginally meant as a temporary day of expiation for
the sin of the golden calf (as some would infer from
Exod. xxxiii.), yet it was permanently instituted
by Moses as a day of atonement for sins in
general ; and this day—the 10th of Tishri (our
September)—is indeed the only fast ordained by
Moses, thongh the later Jews, in commemoratiun
of some disastrous events, especially those which
occurred at and after the destruction of the two
temples, instituted a few more fast days, which they
observed with scarcely less rigour and stricmess
than the one ordained hy Moses for the purpose
of general absolution. This great fast, like all
others among the Jews, commenced at sunset of
the previous day, and lasted twenty-four hours,
that is, from sunset to sunset, or, as the Rabbins
will have it, until three stars were visible in the
horizon. The ceremonies observed on this occa-
sion are minutely described in Leviticus xvi. and
were of a very laborious character, especially for
the high-priest, who had to prepare himself during
the previous seven days in nearly solitary contine-
ment for the peculiar services that awaited lim,
and abstain ducing that period from all that could
render him unclean, or disturb his devotions. Tie
most remarkable ceremony of the day was the
entrance of the high-priest into the Sanctuary,
a thing not allowed on any other day, and to
which Paul alludes, Heb. ix. 7. According to
the Talmud (7ract. ND\') and Maimonides


(o™pon py nsdn, chap. iv.), the entrance
of the high-priest into the Sanctuary took place
four different times. The first time he was pro.


ATONEMENT.


vided with the golden censer and the vessel filled
with incense, when, after having entered, he placed
the former between the two poles of the Tabernacle,
and put the incense upon the coals. This done,
he went out (according to the Talmud, 1did.,
backwards, so as not to turn his back on the
Sanctuary). At his second entrance, he took with
him the blood of the bullock which he had offered
in expiation for his own sins and those of the otlier
Priest, placed himself between the poles of the
Tabernacle, dipped his finger in the blood, and
cape it seven times below and once. above
e mercy-seat, This done, he left the bason
with the blood behind, and withdrew again. The
thinl time, he entered with the blood of the ram
which he had offered for the sins of the nation,
with which he sprinkled towards the veil of the
Tabemacle eight times; and having mixed it
with the bload of the bullock, he sprinkled
again towards the horns of the altar o incense
feren times, and once above it towards the east,
after which he poured out the whole on the floor
of the altar of burnt offering, having again left
the Sanctuary, and taken with him the basons
of blood. The fourth ‘time, he entered merely to
fetch back the censer and vessel of incense; and
having returned, he washed his hands and per-
fumed the other ceremonies of the day.
_ That the high-priest entered more than once
mo the Sanctuary during this solemnity is cer-
tainly clear from the various rites which he had to
[eee there, as described in Lev. xvi. 12, 14, 15.
or does the assertion of the Talmud contradict
Heh. ix. 7, where the Apostle tells us that the high-
Piet had entered only once on that day, since the
(pression, dwa Tod évavrod, may refer to the
ove day in the year when such a service alone
tock place,
The other duties of the high-priest on that day
comaisted in frequent washings, changing his clothes,
ighting the lamps, burning incense, &c. ; which
eps commenced soon after midnight of the
th of the seven month (Tishri). The cere-
monies of worship peculiar to this day alone (be-
ate those which were common to it with all
et days) were: 1. That the high-priest, in his
jentifical dress, confessed his own sins and those of
: family, for the expiation of which he offered a
uillock, on which he laid them; 2 That two
ae were set aside, one of which was by lot sacri-
ced to Jehovah, while the other (Azazel), which
Was determined by lot to be set at liberty, was
sent to the desert burdened with the sins of the
eae (Lev. xvi.). According to the Talmud,
goats were to be alike in colour, stature, and
age (at the time of their being set aside for the
purposes of that day). For the peculiar cere-
monies of the day, as regards the sacrifices,
sprinkling of the blood, smoking the incense, &c.,
see Maimonides’ DUBIN OW ANIY (Wor
: hip of the Day of Atonement), and D. Danzen’s
two Dissertationes de Functione Pontificis Maz-
uni in Adyto Anniversario,
eee day also the high-priest gave his bless-
a whole nation ; and the remainder of the
YY was spent in prayers and other works of


ars ce,
brent humerous meanings assigned to the word
: ras = 1), we should be inclined to prefer
ak f render it expressive of the destination
goat, or which derive it from the Arabic


ATTITUDES. 965


JF (to remove). Srey would then be equi-
valent tc Ji4 (solitude, desert); since we find
a similar form in M7IY¥¥M from WYN. In the
Talmud also (Mishna, tit. Yomah, iv. 2) this
scape-goat goes by the name of nbneon we,
the removed or sent-off goat, though it is uncertain
whether this is meant as a translation of the word
Azazel, or is merely an epithet derived from one
of the destinations of the goat (V. Ch. Hermanzen,
Observat. de nomine Azazel, 1833).

Among the present orthodox Jews, for the scape-
goat of old a sock seems to have been substituted,
which they call BD (pardon, atonement); and
which, on the eve of the day of Atonement, they
turn three times round their head, each time say-
ing (in Hebrew) that the cock is to be sacrificed
instead of them, after which it is slaughtered and
eaten. Towards evening of the 9th of Tishri, and
before they take the last meal for the next twenty-
four hours, they repair to the synagogue, and
each inflicts upon his neighbour thirty-nine blows
with a piece of leather: this infliction is called
MD50, in expiation of those sins which are pu-
nished by the law of Moses with flogging. Most
of the Jews on that day (of atonement) wear a
white gown—the same shrouds in which they are
buried ; while al? of them are obliged to stand the
whole day without shoes, or even slippers. For
many more ceremonies observed among the pre-
sent Jews on the day of Atonement, see B. Picard,
Cérémonies et Coutumes Religieuses, &c. t. i.
c. 6, p. 18.—E. M.

ATTALEIA (ArrdAcia), a maritime city of
Pamphylia, in Asia Minor, near the mouth of
the river Catanhactes. It derived its name from
jts founder, Attalus Philadelphus, king of Per
gamos (Strabo, xiv. p. 667). It was visited by
Paul and Barnatas, a.v. 45 (Acts xiv. 25). It
still exists under the name of Adalia, and ex-
tensive and important ruins attest the former
consequence of the city (Leake’s Asia Minor,


p. 193).

ATTITUDES. The allusions in Scripture to
attitudes and postures expressive of adoration, sup-
plication, and respect, ae very numerous. From
these we leain enongh to perceive that the usages
of the Hebrews in this respect were very nearly, if
not altogether, the same as those which are still
practised in the East, and which the paintings
and sculptures of Egypt show to have been of old
employed in that country. These sources supply
ample materials for illustration, which it may be
well to arrange uniter these heads into which
such acts naturally divide themselves.

Aporation anp Homacx.—The Moslems in
their prayers throw themselves successively, and
according to an established routine, into the va-
rious postures (nine in number) which they deem
the most appropriate to the several parts of the ser-
vice. For the sake of reference and comparison, we
have introduced them all at the head of this article;
as we have no doubt that the Hebrews employed
on one occasion or another nearly all the various
postures which the Moslems exhibit on one occa-
sion. This is the chief difference. In public and
common worship the Hebrews prayed standing (1
Kings viii. 54; Ezra ix. 5; Dan. vi. 10; 2 Chroo.
vi. 13); but in their separate and private acts of


worship they assumed the position which, accord-
ing to their modes of doing homage or showing
respect, seemed to them the most sditable to their
pet feelings or objects. It would appear,

wever, that some fourm of kneeling was most
usual in private devotions.

Standing in public prayer is still the practice
of the Jews. This posture was adopted from the
synagogue by the primitive Christians; and is still
maintained by the Oriental Churches. This ap-
pears, from their monuments, to have been the cus-
tom also among the ancient Persians and Egyp-
tians, although the latter certainly sometimes
kneeled before their gods. In the Moslem worship,
four of the nine positions (1, 2, 4, 8) are standing
ones ; and that posture which is repeated in three
out of these fuur (2, 4, 8), may be pointed out as
the proper Oriental posture of reverential stand-
ing, with fulded hands. It is the posture in which
veople stand befure kings and great men.

While in this attitude of worship, the hands were
sometimes stretched forth towards heaven in suppli-
cation or invocation (1 Kings viii. 22; 2 Chron. vi.
12, 29; Isa.i. 15). This was perhaps not so much
the conventional posture (1) in the Moslem series, as
the more natural posture of standing adoration
with outspread hands, which we observe on the
Egyptian monuments. The uplifting of one hand


(the right) ofly in taking an oath was so common,
that to say, ‘I have lifted up my hand,’ was
equivalent to ‘I have sworn’ (Gen. xiv. 22;
comp. xli. 44; Deut. xxxii. 40). This posture


was aleo common among other ancient nations;
and we find examples of it in the sculptures of
Persia (fig. 1) and Rome (fig. 2).

Kurggxina is very often described as a posture
of worship (1 Kings viii. 54; Ezra ix. 6; Den.


vi. 10; 2 Chron. vi. 13; comp. I Kings xix. 18;
Luke xxii. 41; Acts vii. 60). This is still an
Oriental custom, and three forms of it occur (5,
6, 9) in the Moslem devotions. It was also in
use, although not very frequent, among the an-
cient Egyptians; who likewise, as well as the
Hebrews (Exod. xxxiv. 18; 2 Chron. xxix. 29;
Isa. i. 15) sometimes themselves upon


the ground. The usual mode of prostration
among the Hebrews by which they expressed the
most intense humiliation, was by bringing not
only the body but the head to the ground.


a


The ordinary mode of prostration at the present
time, and probably anciently, is that shown in one
of iS peste of Moslem worship (5), in which
the y is not thrown flat upon the ground,
but rests upon the knees, arms, and head. In
order to express devotion, sorrow, compunction or
humiliation, the Israelites threw dust npan their
heads (Josh. vii.6; Job ii. 12; Lam. ii. 10;
Ezek. xxiv. 7; Rev. xviii. 19), as was done also
by the ancient Egyptians, and is still done by
the modern Orientals. Under similar circum-
stances it was usual to smite the breast (Luke
xviii. 13). This was also a practice among the
Egyptians (Herod. ii, 85), and the monuments 2¢


Thebes exhibit persons engaged in this act while
they kneel upon one knee.


ATTITUDES.


In 1\Chron. xvii. 16 we are told that ‘David
the king came and sat before the Lord,’ and in
that posture gave utterance to eloquent prayer, or
rather thanksgiving, which the sequel of the chap-
ter contains. Those unacquainted with Eastern
mamers are surprised at this. But there is a
mode of sitting in the East which is highly re-
spectful and even reverential. It is that which
occurs in the Moslem forms: of worship (9). The

n first kneels, and then sits back upon his
eels, Attention is also paid to the position of
the hands, which they cross, fold, or hide in the
opposite sleeves. The variety of this formal sitting
which the following figure represents is highly


respectful, The prophet Elijah must have been
in this or some other similar posture when he in-
clined himself so much forward in prayer that his
almost touched his knees (1 Kings xviii.


Surpricarion, when addressed externally to
man, cannot possibly he exhibited in any other
foms than those which are used in supplica-
Yon to God. Uplifted hands, kneeling, prostra-
Yon, are common to both. On the Egyptian


mounments, suppliant captives, of different na-
Hons, are ted as kneeling or standing
with outspread hands. This also occurs in the
Sculptures of ancient Persia (Persepolis). The
first of the Egyptian figures is of peculiar in-
terest, as representing ar inhabitant of Lebanon.
Prostration, or falling ut the feet of a person, is
often mentioned in Scripture as an act of suppli-
cation orof reverence, or of both (1 Sam. xxv. 24;
2 Kings iv, 37; sth, viii. 3; Matt. xviii. 29;
xxvili. 9; Mark y, 22; Luke viii. 41; John xi. 32;
Acts x. 25). In the instance last referred to, where
Cornelins threw himself at the feet of Peter, it ma
sie why as apostle forbade an act mine
jot unusual among his own le, allegin:
as the reason— I myself also cy atest The
answer is, that among the Romans, prostration was
reaped i an act of adoration, rendered only to
gods, and therefore it had in him a signifi-
cance which it would not have had in an Oriental
(Kauinoel, ad Act. x, 26). This custom is still
very general among the Orientals; but, as an act
hea ae merely, it is seldom shown except to
eae re oa of alarm or supplication, it
Sometimes in this posture, or with the knees


ATTITUDES. 251


bent as before indicated, the Orientals bring their
forehead to the ground, and before resuming an
erect position either kiss the earth, or the feet, or
border of the garment of the king or prince be-
fore whom they are allowed to appear. There


is no doubt that a similar practice existed among
the Jews; spent! when we refer to the ori
ginal words which describe the acts and attitudes


of salutation, as TYAN bps to bend down to the
earth, ASIN MINN to fall prostrate on the
earth, YIN DDN YD to fall with the face
to the earth, and connect them with allusions ta
the act of kissing the feet, or the hem of the gar
ment (Matt. ix. 20; Luke vii. 38, 45). Késsing
the hand of another as a mark of affectionate
respect, we do not remember as distinctly men-
tioned in Scripture. But as the Jews had the
other forms of Oriental salutation, we may con-
clude that they had this also, although it does -
not happen to have been specially noticed. It
is observed by servants or pupils to masters, by
the wife to her husband, and by children to their
father, and sometimes their mother. It is also an
act of homage paid to the aged by the young, or
to learned and religious men by the less in-
structed or less devout. Kissing one’s own hand is
mentioned as early as the time of Job (xxxi. 27
as an act of homage to the heavenly bodies. It
was properly a salutation, and as such an act of
adoration to them. The Romans in like manner
kissed their hands as they passed the temples o
statues of their gods [Aporarion].


ieee
trr= a's


v


It appears from 1 Sam. x. 1; 1 Kings xix. 18;
Ps, ii. 12, that there was a peculiar kiss of ho-
mage, the character of which is not indicated. Jt
was probably that kiss upon the forehead expres
sive of high respect which was formerly, if not
now, in use among the Bedouins (Antar, ii, 119).

Bow1ne.—In the Scriptures there are different
words descriptive of various postures of respectful
bowing ; as IIp to incline or bow down the head,
ND to bend down the body very low, 113 to bend
the knee, also to bless. These terms indicate a
conformity with the existing usages of the East, in
which the modes of bowing are equally diversified,
and, in all likelihood, same. These are—

- 8


258 AVA.


2. ing the right hand upon the breast, with or
without an inclination of fe head or of the body ;


1. touching the lips (is this the kissing of the
hand noticed abowe?) and the forehead with
the right hand, with or without an inclination of
the head or of the body, and with or without pre-
viously touching the ground; 3. bending the
body very low, with folded arms; 4. bending the
body and resting the hands on the knees: this is
one of the postures of prayer, and is indicative
of the highest respect in the presence of kings and
princes. In the Egyptian paintings we see

sons drop their arms towards the ground while
bowing to a superior, or standing respectfully
with the right hand resting on the left shoulder.


It is observable that, as before noticed, the word
‘TNA, darak, means to bless ani to bend the knee,
which suggests the idea that it was usual for a

to receive a blessing in a kneeling posture.

e know also that the person who gave the blessing
Jaid his hands upon the head of the person blessed.
(Gen. xlviii. 14). This is exactly the case at the

t day in the East, and a picture of the ex-
isting custom would furnish a perfect illustration of
the patriarchal form of blessing. This may be
perceived from the annexed engraving, which, with
some of the other attitudes given in this article, is
from Lane's Translation of the Arabian Nights
Entertainments—a work which, in its notes and
pictorial illustrations, affords a more complete
picture of the persons, manners, and habits of the
people of south-western Asia and of Egypt, than
all the books of travels put together.


AVA (NYY; Sept. "Aid, 2 Kings xvii. 24),
also Ivan (3; Sept. "ABd, 2 Kings xviii. 34;
xix, 13; Isa. xxxvii. 13), the capital of a small
manarchical state conquered by the Assyrians, and


AVIM.
from which king Shalmaneser sent colonies inte
Samaria. Some take it for the river, or rather
the town which gave nang to the river Ahava
of Ezra viii. 21 (Bellermann, Handbuch, iii. 374).
Iken (Dissertt. Philol. Theolog. p. 152) would
identify it with the Phenician town Av: men-
tioned in the Notitia Vet. Dignitatum Imper. Rom.
(but the reading here is rather doubtful: Reland,
Palest. p. 232, sqq.) ; or with the town of Abeje,
between Beirut and Sidon, which Paul Lucas men-
tions as the seat of a Druse prince. But these are
mere conjectures. Michaelis derives the name from


IQS or se latrare, and supposes it to be the


land of the Avites between Tripoli and Beirut, be-
cause they are described as worshippers of IM)
Nibhaz (2 Kings xvii. 31), an idol which he com-
pares with the great stone dog that formerly stood in
that quarter, on which account the Lycus obtained
its name of Nahr-el-Kelb, Dog-river (comp. Man-
nert, vi. 1. 380). It is most probable, however,
that Ava was a Syrian or Mesopotamian town, of
which no trace can now be found either in the
ancient writers or in the Oriental topographers.

AVEN ({\8 ; Sept.*0y), a plain, ‘ the plain of
the sun,’ of Damascene Syria (Amosi. 5). It is
usually supposed to be the same as the plain of
Baalbec, or valley of Baal, where there was a
magnificent temple dedicated to the sun. Being
between Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon, it is sup-
posed by Rosenmiiller and others to be the same
plain or valley that is mentioned as ‘ the valley
of Lebanon’ in Josh. xi. 17. Some, however, in-
fluenced hy the Septuagint, would rather seek
Aven in the plain of Un, four leagues from Da-
mascus towards the desert.

AUGUSTUS (Feneradie), the title assumed
by Octavius, who, after his adoption by Julius
Cesar, took the name of Octavianus (i.e. Ex-
Octavius), according to the Roman fashion ; and
was the first peacefully acknowledged en:peror
of Rome. He was emperor at the birth and during
half the life-time of our Lord; but his name has
No connection with Scriptural events, and occurs
only «nce (Luke ii. 1) in the New Testament. The
successors of the first Augustus took the same
name or title, but it is seldom applied to them
by the Latin writers. In the eastern part of the
empire the Greek %eBaords (which is equivalent)
seeins to have been more common, and hence is
used of Nero (Acts xxv. 21). In later times
(after Diocletian) the title of Augustus was given
to one of the two hetrs-apparent of the empire,
and Cwsar to their younger colleagues and heirs-
apparent.

AVIM (BY ; Sept. Edaiox), called also Avirrs
and Hivirss, a people descended from Canaan
(Gen. x. 17), who originally occupied the south-
ernmost portion of that territory in Palestine along
the Mediterranean coast, which the Caphtorim or
Philistines afterwards possessed (Deut. ii. 23). As
the territory of the Avim is mentioned in Josh.
xiii. 3, in addition to the tive Philistine states, it
would appear that it was not included in theirs, and
that the expulsion of the Avim was by a Philistine
invasion prior to that by which the five principa-
Jities were founded. The territory began at
and extended southward to ‘ the river of Egypt’
(Deut. ii. 23), forming what was the sole.Philistine
kingdom of Gerar in the time of Abraham, when we


AWL.


do not hear of any other Philistine states, There
were then Avim, or Hivites, at Shechem (Gen.
muir, 2), and we afterwards find them also at
Gibeon (Josh. ix. 7), and beyond the Jordan, at the
foot of Mont Hermon (Josh. xi. 3); but we have
w means of knowing whether these were original
wttlements of the Avim, or were formed out of
the frasneuts uf the nation which the Philistines
eiyelled frum southern Palestine. The original
country of the Avim is called Hazerim in Deut.
iB (Geuan; Pauruistines].


AURANITIS, [Havran.]
AWL (YW; Sept. éxfriov). The Hebrew


word, which denotes an aw! or other instrument for
boringa small hole, occurs in Exod. xxi. 6; Deut.
xv. I7. Considering that the Israelites had at
that time receutly withdrawn from their long
sour in Ezypt, there can be no doubt that the in-
Stuments were the same as those of that country,
the forms of which, from actual specimens in the

itsh Museum, are shown in the annexed cut.
They are such as were used by the sandal-makers
aud uber woikers in leather.


AXE. Several instruments of this description
ew discriminated in Scripture as to show that the
Hebrews had them of different forms and for various
Wes. 1. 93 garzen, which occurs in Deut. xix.
5312.19; 1 Kings vi. 7; Isa. x.15. From these


passages it appears that this kind was employed in
felling trees, and in hewing large timber for build-
me The coujecture of Gesenius, that in 1 Kings
aE it ape the mee of a stonemason is by
Teans usive. The first text supposes &
as of the head slipping from the helve in fell-
E a tree. This would suggest that it was shaped


AZANIAH. 258


like fig. 3, which is just the same instrument as our
common hatchet, and appears to have been applied
by the ancient Egyptions to the same general use
as with us. The reader will observe the contri-
vance in all the others (wanting in this) of fasten-
ing the head to the haft by thongs. 2. T¥YD
maatzad, which occurs only in Isa. xliv. 12; and
Jer. x. 3. From these it appears to have
been a lighter implement than the former, or a kind
of adze, used for fashioning or carving wood into
shape ; it was, probably, therefore, like figs. 4 to 7,
which the Egyptians employed for this popes
Some texts of Scripture represent t as
being employed in carving images—the use to
which the prophets refer. The ditlerences of form
and size, as indicated in the figures, appear to have
been determined with reference to light or heavy
work: fig. 3 is a finer carving-tuol. 3. Dp
gardom ; this is the commonest name for an axe or
hatchet. It is this of which we read in Judy. ix. 48;
Ps. Ixxiv. 5; 1 Sam. xiii. 20, 21; Jer. xlvi. 22.
It appears to have been more exclusively employed
than the garzen for felling trees, and had therefore
probably a heavier head. In one of the Egyptian
sculptures the inhabitants of Lebanon are repre-
sented as felling pine-trees with axes like fig. 1.
As the one used by the Egyptians for the same
purpose was also of this shape, there is little doubt
that it was also in use among the Hebrews.

The word rendered ‘axe’ in 2 Kings vi. 5 is li-
terally ‘ iron ;' but as an axe is certainly intended,
the > is valuable as showing that the axe-
hhesilaancony the Hebrews were of iron. Those
which have been found in Egypt are of bronze,
which was very anciently and generally used for
the purpose. But this does not prove that they
had none of iron; it seems rather to suggest that
those of iron have been consumed by the corrosion
of three thousand years, while those of bronze have
been preserved. All our figures are from actual
specimens now in the British Museum.


AZANIAH (i19}); Sept. ‘Aasaleros, Vulg.
halyetus and halietos, Auth. Vers. ‘ospray "), an
unclean bird; but there is a difference of opinion
as to the particular species intended. The ety-
mology of the Hebrew word would seem to
point to some bird remarkably powerful, fierce,
er impudent. Bochart supposes the black eagle
to be meant, but reasuns upon the mere conye
that by the word peAavaieros is intended adualeros
(Hieroz. tom. iii. p. 188, &c.).

The traditional meaning strongly favours the
English rendering. The following ig the line
through which it is traced:—The modern sys-
tems of ornithelogy fur the most retain the
names of birds given to them by Linngus in his
Systema Nature. ‘ The system of Willughby is
without doubt the hasis on which the ornithological
classification of Linneeus is founded’ (Neville
Wood's Ornithologist’s Textbook, p.3). Mr. Ray,
giving an account of the assistance he rendered
Mr. Willughby in that undertaking, says, ‘ Con-
cerning the names of birds we did not much
trouble ourselves, but have for the most part fol-
lowed Gesner and Aldrovandus, being unwilling
to disturb what is settled, or dispossess names
that may, for their use, plead acres * (Pre-
face to the Eng. ed. of Willughby’s Ornitho-
logy); and it is well known that Gesner and
Aldrovandus derived their names and ae

8


260 AZANIAH.


tions of birds from their predecessors, including
Aristotle and Pliny. In the same preface, Mr.
Ray observes, ‘Gesner and Aldrovandus wrote
mere pancects of birds, comprising whatever had
bafore been written by others.’ This continuation


(Ospray. Falco Halistas.)
of the same names of many at least of the same
birds, from Aristotle to the present day, is, in the
instance of the haliztos, or ospray, peculiarly clear
and unbroken; and the same striking descrip-
tions also of the bird so designated accompany its
name from the earliest times.

The following statement places the matter
in a clear light: — Aristotle, about s.c. 300,
describes the ddAraleros as ‘a species of eagle
dwelling near seas and Jakes; and remarks, it
sometimes happens to it, that having seized its
prey, and not being able to carry it, it is drowned
in the deep’ (Hist. Animal. ix. c. 32). The
word is rendered alietus in the ancient transla-
tion, aquila marina and halietus by Gaza (Ven.
a.b. 1476), and aquila marina, nisus haliztus,
and halietus by Scaliger. About the time of
Aristotle, the ablest of all the Septuagint trans--
laturs renders the Hebrew work azaniah b
GXtaleros. The same word is found in the writ-
ings of Pliny (a.p. 70) with the following de-
scription, ‘There remains (to be mentioned) the
haliztos, having the most penetrating vision of all
(eagles); soaring (or balancing itself) on high,
and upon perceiving a fish in the sea, rushing
down headlong, and with its breast dashing aside
the waters, seizing its prey’ (Hist. Nat. x. 3).
The same word is adopted by Jerome as answer-
ing to the Hebrew azaniah, a.v. 380, and the
halietus is described in the very words of Aris-
totle and Pliny by Aldrovandus (lib. xii. Bonon.
1594, p. 194); the transference of names into
the Linnzan system has already been traced (sce
Systema Natura, vol. i. p. 129, Holmia, 1767).
The word, according to its etymology, signi-
fies sea-eagle, and the traditional English word
is ospray. The following accounts from modern
naturalists are strikingly in accordance with the
ancient descriptions :— :

Species of the halisetus, or sea-eagle, occur in


_ slippery prey.’


AZARIAH.


Europe, Asia, Africa, America, and Australia
(Selby's British Ornithology).

Mr. Macgillivray describes ‘ its savage scream
of anger when any one approaches the neighbour-
hood of its nest, its intimidating gestures, and
even its attempts to molest individuals who have
ventured among its native crags.’

Mr. Selby (Idustrations of British Ornitho-
logy, 1825) respecting the ospray, observes, ‘ It is
strictly piscivorous, and is found only in the
vicinity of lakes, rivers, or such pools as abound
with fish. It isa powerful bird, often weighing
five pounds; the limbs are very muscular in pro-
portion to its general dimensions; its feet are
admirably adapted for retaining firm hold of is
Mr. Montagu (Ornithological
Dictionary, 1802, article ‘ Ospray ') remarks, ‘ Ita
Principal food is tish, which it often catches with
great dexterity, by pouncing upon them with vast
rapidity, and carrying them off in tts talons.
In the supplement to his work, Exeter, 1813,
many additional facts are related respecting
the ospray, which, together with the foregoing
Teasons, serve to identify it with the halieetus of
the ancients (see also Grandsagne's edition of
Pliny, with Notes and Excursus by Cuvier,
Parigiis, 1828, p. 215).—J. F. D.


AZARIAH (TWUY, whom Jehorah aids, on-
swering to the German name Gofthelf.; Sept.
*A(aplas), 4 very common name among the He-
brews, and hence horne by a considerable number
of persons mentioned in Scripture.

1. AZARIAH, a high-priest (1 Chron. vi. 9),
perhaps the same with Amariah, who lived under

shcdtiatthat king of Judah (2 Chron. xix. 11),
about n.c. 896.

2. AZARIAH, son of Johanan, a high-priest
(1 Chron. vi. 10), whom some sup the same
as Zechariah, son of Jehoiada, who was killed
B.c. 840 (2 Chron. xxiv. 20-22).

3. AZARIAH, the high-priest who opposed
king Uzziah im offering incense to Seioveh (2
Chron. xxvi. 17).

4. AZARIAH, a high-priest in the time of
Hezekiah (2 Chron. xxxi. 10).

5. AZARIAH, the father of Seraiah, who was
the last high-priest before the Captivity (1 Chron.
vi. 14).

6. AzaRIAH, son of the high-priest Zadok ;
but it is uncertain if he succeeded his father (1
Kings iv. 2). ‘

7. AZARIAH, captain of king Solomon's
guards (1 Kings iv. 5).

8. AZARIAH, otherwise called Uzziah, king
of Judah (Uzzran].

9. AZARIAH, a prophet who met king Asa on
his return from a great victory over the Cushite
king Zerah (2 Chron. xxiii. 1) [Asa].

10. AZARIAH, a person to whom the high-
riest Jehoiada made known the secret of the ex-
istence of the young prince Joash, and who assisted
in placing him on the throne (2 Chfon. xv. 1).

ll. AZARIAH, one of the two sons of king
Jehoshaphat (2 Chron. xxi. 2).

12. AZARIAH, one of the‘ proud men’ who
rebuked Jeremiah for advising the people that re-
mained in Palestine, after the expatriation to Ba-
bylon, not to retire into Egypt ; and who took the
pope himrelf and Baruch along with them
to that country (Jer. xliii. 2-7).


AZARIAH.


13. AZARIAH, the Chaldman name of Abed-
hego, one of Daniel's three friends who were cast
into the flery furnace (Dan, i. 7; iii. 9).

AZZAH (3), a mode of spelling the Hebrew
name which is elsewhere rendered Gaza. The djf-
ference arises from the uncertain power of the first
letter Y, which, in proper names, sume use as the
comonaut G; while others regard only the vowel
tound connected with it, which in this case is A
ores The name occurs in this form in

it, 23; Jer. xxv. 20; which last clearly
hows that Gaza is intended.


B.


BYAL, The word Sy3 ba’al, as it signifies
lord, master, is a generic term for god in many
of the Syro-Arabian languages. As the idolatrous
hatiuns of that race had several gods, this word,
by means of some accessory distinction, became
applicable as a name to many different deities.

1s no evidence, however, that the Israelites

erer calle] Jehovah by the name of Baal; for the

Paxage in Hos. ii, 16, which has been cited as

fuch, only contains the word baal as the sterner,
aflectiunate representative of husband.


Baas éyaa, with the definite article, Judg.
4135 Sept. 6 Bdaa, but also # Bdaa, Jer. xix,
+ Xxxix. 355; Rom. xi. 4) is appropriated to the
chief male divinity of the Phoenicians, the prin-
Cipal seat of whose worship was at Tyre. The
idolatrous Israelites adopted the worship of this
(almost always in conjunction with that of
Asitoreth) in the period of the Judges (Judg. ii.
3 they continued it in the reigns of Ahaz and
‘anassch, kings of Judah (2 Chron. xxviii. 2;
ings xxi. 3); and, among the kings of Israel,
pecially in the reign of Ahab, who, partly
Mtough the influence of his wife, the daughter
of the Sidonian king Ethbaal, appears to have
made a systematic attempt to suppress the wor-
‘Ip of God altogether, and to substitute that of
in its stead (1 Kings xvi. 31); and in that

f Hoshea (2. Kings xvii. 16), although Jehu and
Hoiada once severally destroyed the temples and
Priesthood of the idot (2 Kings x. 18, sg. ; xi. 18).
ra Ve read of altars, images, and temples erected
baal Kings xvi. 32; 2 Kings iil. 2). The
a tars were generally on heights, as the summits
alls or the roofs of houses (Jer. xix. 5; xxxii.
). His priesthood, the proper term for which
nie tobe DW, were a very numerous body
( Kings xviii. 19), and were divided into the
pe Classes of prophets and of priests (unless the
erm Servants, which comes between those words,
rE denote o third order—a kind of Levites;
ae x. 19). As to the rites by which he was
ols tipped, there is most frequent mention of
NaC being affered to him (2 Kings xxiii. 5),
sae ea of bullucks being sacrificed (1 Kings
(er. 4), and even of children, as to Moloch
i Kon 5). According to the description in
danced Xvi, the priests, during the sacrifice,
‘nal we in the sarcastic expression of the ori-
zn imped) about the altar, and, when their
alee . oi not answered, cut themselves with
of Bellone hg blood flowed, like the priests
(Lucan. Pharsal, 3. 565; Tertull.


BAAL. 261
Apologet. ix.; Lactant. Div. Instit. 1.21), We
also read of homage paid to him by bowihg the


knee, and by kissing his image (1 Kings xix. 18;
comp. Cicero, In Verrem, iv. 43), and that his
worshippers used to swear by his name (Jer. xii.
16).
As to the power of nature which was adored
under the form of the Tyrian Baal, many of the

es above cited show evidently that it was
one of the heavenly bodies; or, if we admit that
resemblance between the Babylonian and Persian
religions which Miinter assumes, not one of the
heavenly bodies really, but the astral spirit re-
siding in one of them; and the same line of in-
duction as that which is pursued in the case of
Ashtoreth, his female counterpart, leads to the
conclusion that it was the sun. Nevertheless, the
same difference of opinion between Gesenius and
Minter as that on the subject of Ashtoreth meets
us here in the case of Baal, and of the Babylonian
Bel, which we shall, in what follows, regard as
being essentially the same god. The former—
who has stated his arguments in his Thesaurus,
in his Jesaias, and at some length in the Alige-
meine Encyclopedie, vols. viii. & xvi.—main- *
tains that the idolatry of Babylon was astrolo-
gical, and that, from the connection between
Aramzan and Phoenician religious ideas, Baal
and Bel were representatives of the planet Ju-
piter, as the greater star of good fortune. He
builds much on the facts, that the Arabian ido-
aters worshipped this planet under the name of
Mushteri, and sacrificed a sucking-child to him
on a Thursilay (dies Joris), and that his temple
was pyramidal (see Norberg’s Onomast. Cod.
Nas. p. 28); that Bel is also the name of this
planet in the Tsabian books; and that the Ro-
mans called the Babylonian Bel by the name of
Jupiter. He asserts that the words ‘to Baal, to
the sun,’ in 2 Kings xxiii. 5, so far from proving
the idendity of Baal and the sun, rather directly
oppose it; and, as it is impossible to deny that
the sun was worshipped by the Phanicians, he
evades the force of the passage from Sanchonia-
thon, cited below, by argumg that, even allowing
that the sun was the chief Tyrian god according
to the entire religious system, it does not follow
that he was necessarily the Baal xar’ ééoxhy, the
most worshipped god of Tyre or Babylon: just
as, in the middle ages, the excessive worship of
patron saints and of the Virgin Mary was com-
patible with a theoretical acknowledgment of the
Supreme Being.

Miinter, on the other hand, in his Religion der
Babylonier, does not deny the astrological cha-
racter of the Babylonian religion, but maintains
that, together with and Lesides that, there existed
in very early times a cosmozonical idea of the
primitive power of nature, as scen in the two
functions of generation an of conception or par-
turition; that this idea is most evident in the
Kabiric religion, but that it exists all over the
East; and that the sun and moon were the fittest
representatives of these two powers. He does not

mit that the Tsabian books or Efraem Syrus,
are any authority for the religious notions of the
Babylonians at a period so remote from their own
time, and especially when they are opposed by
better and older testimonies. Among these, he
relies much on the statement of Sanchoniathon
(p. 14, ed. Orelli), that the Phoenicians considered


263 BAAL.


the sun to be ‘udvos obpavoi’ xépios,’ calling him
© Beelsamen, which is the Zeus of the Greeks.’
Balsamen (i.e "OW by lord of the heavens)
also occurs in Plantus (Penul. act. v. s. 2. 67),
‘where Bellermann, Lindemann, and Gesenius
recognise it to be the same name.  Isidorus
Hispalensis has the words, ‘ Apud Assyrios Bel
vocatur, quadam sacrorum suorum ratione, et
Saturnus et Sol’ (Orig. viii. LL). We moreover


find fon bys (i e. deus solaris, from MON, the
sun, Job xxx. 28, with the acjective ending dn;
see Ewald's Hebr. Gram. § 341) in several Car
thayinian inscriptions (in Gesen. Mon. Ling.
Phen. p. 164), which is an evidence that the
Carthaginians worshipped the sun.

As to Gesenius’s assertion that 2 Kings xxiii. 5
is opposer to the identity of Baal and the sun, a
consideration of the whole passage would seem to
show he has judged hastily. The words are,
‘which burnt incense to Baal, to the sun, and to
the moon, and to the zodiacal signs, and to alk
the lost of the heavens.’ Now the omission of
the and before the sun appears decidedly to
favour the notion that the sun is an apposition to
Baal, and not a distinct member of the same co-
ordinate series. This view might, perhaps, re-
commend itself to those who appreciate the pe-
culiar use of and in the Hebrew syntax. Besides,
solar tmages (as he himself’ interprets DN)
are mentioned in 2 Chron. xxxiv. 4, as being
placed on the altars of the Baals; which is not
well reconcilable with any other theory than that
of the identity of Baal and the sun.

In a certain sense, every argument which goes
to show that Ashtoreth was the moon is also, on
account of the close conjunction between her and
Baal, as valid a reason for Baal being the sun ;
for the two gods are such exact correlates, that
the discovery of the true meaning of the one
would lead, by the force of analogy, to that of
the other. Nevertheless, as has been already ob-
served in the article Asuroreru, it must be
admitted that the astrological view did subse-
quently prevail, and that tie planets Jupiter and
Venus became mysteriously connected with some
modifications of the same powers which were pri-
marily worshipped under the cosmogonical ideas
of Bel and Mylitta, sun and moon, This rela-
tion between Baal and the planet Jupiter is
noticed in the article Gap. For the relation be-
tween Baal and Moloch, and that between Baal
and Melkarth, the Tyrian Hercules, see Mo.ocu
and Hexcunes.

2 Baa. Bexita (AD bys, covenant-lord ;
Sept. Vat. BaaaBepid; Alexand. Bdad d:adhnns ;
Judg. ix. 4) is the name of a god worshipped by
the people of Shechem (JSudg. viii. 33 ; ix. 4, 46),
who, on account of the signitication of the name,
has been compared to the Zeis “Opxios of the
Greeks, and the Latin Deus Fidius. Bochart
and Creuzer think that this name means ‘God
of Berytus;* but, as the name of that town is
probably to be recognised in the ANNI of Ezek.
xlvii. 16, there is hardly any ground for their
opinion.

3. Baan Pror yp bya, or sometimes
only YB, respectively represented in the Sept.
by BeeAgeydp, and ¢0ydp) appears to have been

perly the idol of the Moabites (Num. xxv.

-9. Deut. iv. 3; Jos. xxii.17; Ps. cvi. 29;


BAAL.


Hos. ix. 10); but also of the Midianites (Num.
xxxi. 15, 16).

It is the common opinion that this god was
worshipped by obscene rites; and, from the time
of Jerume downwarils, it has been usual to com-
pare him to Priapus. Selden and J. Owen (De
Diis Syris, i. 5; Theologoumena, v. seem to
be the only persons who have disputed whether
any of the passages in which this god is named
really warrant such a conclusion. The utmost
that those passages express is the fact that the
Israelites received this idolatry from the women
of Moab, and were led away to eat of their sacri-
fices (ct. Ps. evi. 28); but it is very possible for
that sex to have been the means of seducing.
them into the adoption of their worship, without
the idolatry itself being of an obscene is It
is also remarkable that so few authors are agreed
even as to the general character of these rites.
Most Jewish authorities (except the Targum of
Jonathan on Num. xxv.) represent his worship to
have consisted of rites which are filthy in the ex-
treme, but not lascivious (see Braunius, De Vestit.
Sacerd. i. p. 7, for one of the fullest collections
of Jewish testimonies on this subject). 1f, how-
ever, it could be shown that this god was wor
shipped by libidinous rites, it would be one more
confirmation of the relation between Baal and
the sun; as, then, Baal Peor would be a mascu-
line phasis of the same worship as that of which
Mylitta is, both in name and rites, the female
representative. The sense assigned by the Rab-
bins to the verb WB is now generally considered
untenable. Peor (Aiadus) is supposed to have
been the original nae of the mountain; and
Baal Peor to be the designation of the god wor
shipped there. The verb “WY¥I. to be hound,
coupled, which is only used in the Old Testament
to denote being joined to Baal Peor, has been
supposed to express cither some obscene rite, or
soine mere symbol of initiation in the worship of
this god. The Sept. renders it by éreAdoOncay;
and J.D. Michaelis tirst tried to reconcile the
primitive sense of binding with the notion of ini-
tiation, by taking it to mean binding-on fill ts.
Gesenius, however, points to the same veib in
Ethiopic, in the sense of fo serre, to worship;
and maintains that that is its force here. Never-
theless, Hitzig, in his note to Hos. ix. 10, still
tries to show that the verb may mean to tocar a
band, as symbol of initiation; and argues that
YN, there used, as contrasted with the appro-
priate word YWOY¥', implies the correspondence
between the It) and the WOY¥ (cf. 2 Sam. i. 10).
Some identily this god with Cuzmosu.


4. Baanzenus (3937 bys, Fly-lord; Sept.
7@ Baad pviay Gedy, always; where more than
one emendation appears necessary) occurs in
2 Kings i. 2-16, as the god of the Philistines at
Ekron, whose oracle Abaziah sent to consult.
There is much diversity of opinion as to the sig-
nification of this name, according as authors con-
sider the title to be one of honour, as used by his
worshippers, or one of contempt. The former
class find a parallel to him in the Zebs ‘Awdyuis
of Elis, and suppose that he was regarded as the
god who delivered his worshippers from the an-
noyance of flies. We are unable, however, to
discern the appusiteness of this parallel. The
name Fly-lord appears rather to mean the god ©


‘A


BAAL.


f fie, than the averter and destroyer of flies. As
pense is the one sed by Ahaziah aaa it
is difficult to su tat it was not the

and reverential Mite of the god ; and the ae a
as Beelzebul, in Matt. x. 25, seems to be the con-
temptuous corruption of it. Any explanation,
therefore, of the symbolical sense in which flies
may have been regarded in ancient religions, and
by which we could conceive how his worshippers
could honour him as the god of flies, would ap-
pear to us much more compatible with his name
than the only sense which can be derived from
the Greek parallel. This receives some confirm-
ation, perhaps, from the words of Josephus (Antig.
it 2), who says, ‘Ahaziah sent to the god Fly,
for that is the name of the gud’ (rg 69).

The analogy of classical idolatry would lead
usto conclude that all these Baals are only the
same god under various modifications of attri-
butes and emblems; but the scanty notices to
which we owe all our knowledge of Syro-Arabian
lolatry do not furnish data for any decided opi-
nion on this subject.—J. N.

BAAL is often found as the first element of
compound names of places. In this case, Gese-
nius thinks that it seldom, if ever, has any
relerence to the god of that name; but that it

denotes the place which possesses, which is the
abode of the thing signified by the latter half of
the compound—as if it was a synonyme of M3.
The best support of this opinion is the fact that
and beth are used interchangeably of the
sme place; as Baalshalisha and Baaltamar are
aalled by Eusebius Bethshalisha and Betitann
J.N.

BAALAH, Baare-Jupaw, Kirsatu-Baat
[Kinuara J Bari].


BAALAH (MDB, Josh. xv. 29), Baraw
(ha, Josh. xix. 3), Bunaau (71193, 1 Chron.
v.29), a town in the tribe of Simeon, usually
Confounded with Baalath ; but, as the latter was


in Dan and this in Simeon, they would appear to
ve been distinct. :


_ BAALATH (NDY3 ; Sept. PeBeeads), a town
in the tribe of Dan (Josh. xix. 44), appa-
tently the same that was afterwards rebuilt by
Sclomon (1 Kings ix. 18). Many have conjectured

is Baalath to be the same as Baalbek ; but in

t case it must have lain in northernmost Dan,
whereas the possession of it is ascribed to that
trite when its territory was wholly in the south
of Judah, and many years before the migration
(recorded. in Sudg. xviii.) which gave Dan a
Dorthern territory. Correspondingly, Josephus
Places the Baalath of Solomon (which he calls
Baleth) in the southern part of Palestine, near to

2 (Antig. viii. 2), within the territory
which would have belonged to Dan, had it ac-
Quired possession of the lands originally’ assigned
to it. The Talmud affirms that Baalath lay so
near the line of separation between Dan and Ju-
dah, that the fields only were in the former tribe,
the buildings being in the latter.


BAALATH-BEER (3 mby3; Sept. Bae
Adz), probably the same as te re of 1 Chron.
Ne ed of Simeon; called also Ramath-
Vian cen gy meth (Joab, xix. 8; comp.


BAAL-GAD. 23


BAAL-GAD (7) bya ; Sept. Barayd3), a
city ‘in the valley of Lebanon under Mount
Hermon’ (Josh. xi. 17; xii. 7). We are also in
formed that among those parts of Palestine which
were unsubdued by the Hebrews at the death of
Joshua, was ‘all Lebanon towards the sun-rising,
from Baal-gad, under Mount Hermon, unto the
entering into Hamath’ (Josh. xiii. 5). This po-
sition of Baal-gad is not unfavourable to the con-
clusion which some have reached, that it is no
other than the place which, from a temple conse-
crated to the sun, that stood there, was called
by the Greeks Heliopolis, i.e. city of the sun;
and which the natives called and still call Baal-
bek, a word apparently of the same meaning.
The honour of being identified with Baalbek
has also been claimed for the Baalath which
Solomon built or fortified: but this claim has
already been disposed of [BaaLaTH]; and no
weight is to be attached to the local traditions
which claim Solomon as the founder of Baalbek,
seeing that it is the practice of the natives to
ascribe to that great king every grand ancient
work of unknown date which the country contains,
It is also to be observed that those who contend
for Haalath admit its possible identity with
Baal-gad, and hence there are no conflicting
claims to adjust. Even those who suppose the
Baal-hamon of the Canticles (viii. 11) to be
Baalbek, conceive that to be a later name for
Baal-gad ; and hence the only question that re
mains is, whether Baal-gad be not the more
ancient name of the place afterwards known as
Heliopolis and Bualbek.

Baalbek, in the Syrian language, signifies
the city of Baal, or of the sun; und, as the
Syrians never borrowed names from the Greeks,
or translated Greek names, it is certain that
when the Greeks came into Syria they found
the place bearing this name or some other
signifying ‘city of the sun,’ since they termed
it Heliopolis, which is doubtless a translation
of the native designation. We entertain no doubt
that it was then called Baalbek by the natives.
Now the question is, whether this word has the
same meaning as Baal-gad, and if not, whether
any circumstances can be pointed out as likely
to occasion the change of name. If we take Baal
for the name of the idol, then, as in the case of
Baalbek, the last member of the word must be
taken as a modifying appellation, not as in itself
a proper name; and as Gad means a troop, @
multitude, or a press of people, Baal-gad will
mean Baal’s crotod, whether applied to the in-
habitants, or to the place as a resort of pilgrims.
The syllable de& has precisely the same meaning
in the Arabic.

If this should not seem satisfactory, we may
conclude that Baal was so common an element
in the composition of proper names, that it is
not sufficiently distinctive to bear the stress of
such an interpretation; and may rather take it
to signify (as Gesenius says it always does in
geoggaphical combinations) the place where @
thing is found. According to this view Baal-gad
would mean the place of Gad. Now Gad was
an idol (Isa. Ixv. 11), supposed to have been
the god or goddess of good fortune (comp. Se;
Téxn; VWulg. Fortuna), and identified by t
Jewish commentators with the planet Jupiter


264 BAAL-GAD,


Gan]. But it is well known that Baal was iden-
ied with Jupiter as well as with the sun; and
it is not difficult to connect Baalbek with the wor-
ship of Jupiters John of Antioch affirms that the
great temple at Baalbek was dedicated to Ju-
ter; and in the celebrated of Macro-
ius (Saturnal. i. 23), in which he reports that
the worship of the sun was brought by Fuyp
tian priests to Heliopolis in Syria, he expressly
states that they introduced it under the name of
Jupiter (sub nomine Jovis). This implies that
the worship of Jupiter was already established
and popular at the place, and that heliolatry
previously was not; and therefore we should
rather expect the town to have borne some name
referring to Jupiter than to the sun; and may be
sure that a name indicative of heliolatry must
have been posterior to the introduction of that
—= by the Egyptians; and, as we have no
ground for supposing that this took place before
or till long after the age of Joshua, it conld not


BAAL-GAD.
then be called by any name corresponding: to
Heliopolis,

We have touched upon this matter because
it presents the subject in its Biblical relations,
which receive comparatively little attention in
works of general reference. To such works, as
well as to the travels named at the end of this
article, we may refer for ample descriptions of the
ruins, &c., which require but slight notice here,
secing that it is barely probable that the site is
even named in the Scri

Baalbek is pleasantly situated on the lowest
declivity of Anti-Libanus, at the opening of a
small valley into the plain El-Bekaa. Through
this valley runs a small stream, divided into
numberless rills for irrigation. The place is in
N. lat. 34° 1/ 30”, and E. long. 36° 11’, distant
109 Boog. miles from Palmyra, and 38} from
Tripoli. ;

ts origin appears to be lost inthe most remote
antiquity, on the historical notices of it are


very scanty ; the silence of the classical writers
5c gate it would alone seem to imply that it

viously existed under another name. In
the ce of more positive information we can
only conjecture that its situation on the high-road
of commerce between Tyre, Palmyra, and the
farther East, must have contributed largely to
the wealth and magnificence which it mani-
festly attained. It is mentioned under the name
of Heliopolis by Josephus (Antigq. xiv. 3. 4), and
also by Pliny (Hist. Nat. v. 22). Two Roman
inscriptions of the time of Antoninus Pius give
sanction to the statement of John of Antigch,
who alleges that this emperor built a great temple
to Jupiter at Heliopolis, which was one of the
wonders of the world (Hist. Chron. lib. xi.).. From
the reverses of Roman coins we learn that Helio-
polis was constituted a colony by Julius Cwsar ;
that it was the seat of a Roman garrison in the


time of Augustus; and obtained the Jus Italicum
from Severus. Some of the coins of later date
contain curious representations of the temple.
After the age of Constantine the splendid tem-
= of Baalbek were probably consigned to neg-
ect and decay, unless indeed, as some appearances
indicate, they were then consecrated to Christian
worship. From the accounts of Oriental writers
Baallek seems to have continued a pig of im-
portance down to the time of the Moslem invasion
of Syria. They describe it as one of the most
splendid of Syrian cities, enriched with stately
palaces, adorned with monuments of ancient times,
and abounding with trees, fountains, and what-
ever contributes to luxurious enjoyment. On the
advance of the Moslems, it was reported to the
emperor Heraclius as protected by a citadel of
great strength, and well able to sustain a siege.
After the capture of Damascus it was regularly


: BAAL-GAD.


invested by the Moslems, and—containing an over-
ore fe amply supplied with provi-
sions military stores—it made a courageous
‘defence, but at length capitulated. Its importance
at that period is attested by the ransom exacted
by the conquerors, consisting of 2000 ounces of
4000 ounces of silver, 2000 silk vests, and
000 swords, together with the arms of the gar-
rison. It afterwards became the mart for the
rich pillage of Syria: but its prosperity soon re-
yeah a fatal blow from the khalif of Damascus,
‘by whom it was sacked and dismantled, and the
incipal inhabitants put to the sword (a.p. 748).
ar the Crusades, being incapable of mak-
ing any resistance, it seems to have quietly sub-
mitted to the strongest. In - year 1400 it ba
illaged by Timour Beg, in his progress to
eg he had taken Al Afterwards
it fell ito the hands of the Metaweli—a bar-


barous tribe, who were nearly extermi-


nated Djezzar Pasha pee? subjected
the whole district to Turkish supremacy.
The rains of Heliopolis lie on an eastern branch


of the mountain, and are called, by way of emi-
nence, the Castle. The most prominent objects
visible from the plain are a lofty portico of six
columns, part of the great temple, and the walls
and columns of another smaller temple a little
below, surrounded by green trees. There is also
asingular and unique circular temple, if it may
se so called, of which we give a figure. These,
with a curious column on the highest point
within the walls (which may possibly have been a
clepsydra, or water-dial), form the only erect por-
tions of the ruins. These ruins have been so often
and so minutely described by scores of travellers,
as well as in many works of general reference, that,
since their identification as a Scriptural site is
uncertain, a few additional observations only may
suffice. The ruins at Baalbek in the mass are
apparently of three successive eras: first, the gi-
ic hewn stones, in the face of the platform or

ent on which the temple stands, and which

to be remains of older buildings, perhaps

the more ancient temple which occupied the site.
Among these are at least twenty standing upon a
basement of rough stones, which would be called
enormous anywhere but here. These celebrated


blocks, which in fact form the great wonder of
place, vary from 30 to 40 feet in length; but
eres Sree = upper course 20 feet


being severally of the enormous dimensions of 63
and 64 feet in length, by 12 in breadth and thick-
ness (Addison’s Damascus and Palmyra, ii. 55
‘They are,’ says Richter (Wallfahrten, p. 281
‘the largest stones I have ever seen, and might of
themselves have easily given rise to the
opinion that Baalbek was built by angels at the
command of Solomon. The whole wall, indeed,
is composed of immense stones, and its resem.
blance to the remains of the Temple of Solomon,
which are still shown in the foundations of the
ue on Mount Moriah, cannot fail
to be observed.’ This was also pointed out by
Dr. Richardson. In the neighbouring quarries,
from which they were cut, one stune, hewn out
but not carried away, is of much larger dimen-
sions than any of those which have been men-
tioned. To the second and third eras belong the
Roman temples, which, being of and about the
time of Antoninus Pius, preseut some of the finest
specimens of Cormthian architecture in existence,
andl possess a wonderful grandeur and majesty
from their lofty and imposing situation (Addison,
ii. 57).

ae the ornaments of these buildings Richter
finds confirmation of the following statement of
Macrobius— Isis and Horus often unequivocally
appear. The winged globes surrounded with ser-

ts show that the priests of Baalbek received their
ideas of divinity from On, the Heliopolis of Ezypt.”
Speaking generally of these remains, Burekhardi
says, ‘The entire view of the ruins of Palmyra,
when seen at a certain distance, is infinitely more
striking than those of Baalbek, but there is not
any one spot in the ruins of Tadmor so imposing
as the interior view of the temple of Baalbek’
(Syria, p.13). He adds that the architecture of
Baalbek is richer than that of Tadmor. Mr. Addi-
son remarks that ‘the ruins, though so striking and
‘magnificent, are yet, however, quite second-rate
when compared with the Athenian ruins, aun dis-
play in their decoration none of the bold concep-
tions and the genius which characterize the Athe-
nian architecture.’

The present Baalbek is a small village to the east
of the ruins,in a sad stateof wretchedness and decay.
It is little more than a heap of rubbish, the houses
being built of mud and sun-dried bricks. The
population of 5000, which the place is said to have
contained in 1751, is now reduced to barely 2000
persons; the two handsome mosques and fine serai
of the Emir, mentioned by Burckhardt, are no
longer distinguishable; and travellers may now
inquire in vain for the grapes, the pomegranates,
aul the fruits which were formerly so abundant
(Iken. Dissert. de Baal-Hamon et Baal-Gad, in
Dissertt. Philologico-Theolog. tom. i. p. 136;
Wood and Dawkins, Ruins of Baalbec, Lond.
1757; Pococke, Description of the East ; Maun-
drell, Journey from Aleppo to Damascus ; the
Travels of Volney, Burckhardt, Richardson, Hogg,
Addison, Lord Lindsay; Richter, Wallfahrten
ein Morgenlande ; Schubert, Reise in das Mor-
genland, Erlangen, 1841; see also Rosenmiiller,
Biblical Geography, ii. pp. 252-257

BAAL-GUR, or Gur-Baa.. e read in
2 Chron. xxvi. 7, that ‘the Lord assisted Uz-


2
z§
i
Ee


266 BAAL-HAMON.


zigh against the Philistines, and (OMI WTP
Sya-a DIN) against the Arabians that
dwelt in Gur-Baal.’ The Septuagint renders this
by «al él robs”ApaBas rovs xatoiourras ent
Tis Tlérpas—‘ and the Arabiaus that dwelt above
Petra.’ It was doubtless some town of Arabia-
Petra. ;

BAALHAMON (jin 5y3; Sept. Beea-
audy), a place where Solomon is said to have
had a vineyard (Cant. viii. 11). Roseumiiller
conceives that if this Baal-Hamon was the name
of a place that actually existed, it may be reasou-
ably supposed identical with Baal-Gad or He-
liopolis ; for Hamon may have been a corruption
of Amun, the Hebrew way of pronouncing the
Amnnon of the Egyptians (see Nah. iii. 8), whom
the Greeks identitied with Jupiter (Bib. Geog.
ii. p.253). We are not inclined to lay much stress
on this conjecture. There was a place called
Hamon, in the tribe of Asher (Josh. xix. 28),
which Ewald thinks was the same as Baal-
Hamon. The book of Judith (viii. 3) places a
Balamon (Badaudy) or Belamon (BeAuuoév) in
central Palestine, which suggests another alter-
aative. :

BAAL-HAZOR (“W3 by ; Sept. BeAacdp),
the place where Absalom kept his flocks, and held
his sheep-shearing feast (2 Sam. xiii. 23). The
Targum makes it ‘the plain of Hazor.’ It is
said to have been ‘ beside Ephraim,’ not in the
tribe of that name, but near the city called
Ephraim which was in the tribe of Judah, and
is mentioned in 2 Chron. xiii. 19; John xi. 54,
This Ephraim is placed by Eusebius cight miles
from Jerusalem on the road to Jericho; and is
supposed by Reland to have been between Bethel
and Jericho (Palestina, i. 377).


BAAL-HERMON (1079 bya). The Sep-
tuagint makes two names of this in 1 Chron.
v. 23, Badd, "Epuay; and in Judy. iii. 3, where
the original has ‘ Mount Baal-Heimon,’ it has

us Tov *Acepudv, Mount Hermon. It seems ta
have been a place in or near Mount Hermon, and
not fur from Baal-gad, if it-was not, as some
suppose, the same place.

BAAL-MEON (iY) V2; Sept. Beeauedv5
Num. xxxii. 36; 1 Chron v. 8; otherwise Beru-
Meron, Jer. xviii, 25, and Breru-Baa.-Meon,
Josh. xiii. 17), a town in the tribe of Reuben
beyoud the Jordan, but which was in the possession
of the Moabites in the time of Ezekiel (xxv. 9).
At the distance of two miles south-east of Hesh-
bon, Burckhardt found the ruins of a place called
Myoun, or (as Dr. Robinson corrects it) Mdr’n,
which is doubtless the same, although Eusebius
makes the distance greater.

BAAL-PERAZIM (O°¥79 5y3; Sept. Bada
fapactv). This name, meaning ‘place of breaches,’
which David imposed upon a place in or near
the valley of Rephaim, where he defeated the
Philistines (2 Sam. v. 20; comp. 1 Chron. xiv.
11; Isa. xxviii. 21), is important as being the
only one with the prefix Baal of which we know
the circumstances under which it was imposed ;
and we are thus enabled to determine that the
word was sumetimes at least ustd appellatively
without any reference to the name of the idol
Baal or to his worship.


BABEL, TOWER OF.


BAAL-SHALISHA (Ay*>Y bya; Beste
prod, Cod. Alex. Ba@oapwdé, 2 Kings iv. 42
a place in the district of Shalisha (1 Sam. ix. 4
Eusebius and Jerome describe it as a city fifteen
Roman miles north from Diospolis, near Mount
Ephraim.

BAAL-TAMAR (0A 5y3; Sept. Bada
@audp), a place near Gibeah, in the tribe of Ben-
jamin, where the other tribes fought with the
Benjamites (ads. xx. 33). Eusebius calls it
Bethamar, thus affording an instance of that
interchange of Beth and Baal which is also
exemplitied in the preceding article and in
Baal-Meon. :


BAAL-ZEPHON (}B¥ 5y3; Sept. Beea-
cexpay), a town belonging to Egypt, on the
border of the Red Sea (Exod. xiv. 2; Num.
xxxiii. 7). Forster ‘ Eniet. ad J. D. Michaelem,

. 28) believes it to have been the same place as
Heroopolis (‘HpwwrdAcs) on the western gulf of
the Red Sea (Plin. Hist. Nat. v.12; Strabo, xvii.
R 836 ; Ptolem. iv. 5), where Typhon (which
forster makes in Coptic AQYON; but, contra,
see Rosenmiiller, Alterthum. iii. 261) was wor-
shipped. But according to Manetho (Joseph.
Contra Apion. i. 26), the name of Typhon’s city
was Avaris (Avapis). In fact, nothing is known
of the situation of Baal-zephon; and whatever
conjectures may be formed respecting it must be
conuected with a consideration of the route taken
by the Israelites in leaving Egypt, for it was
‘over against Baal-zephon’ that they were en-
camped before they passed the Red Sea [Exuvus]


BABEL, TOWER OF. From the accou’
given in Genesis xi. 1-9, it appears that the pri
mitive fathers of mankind having, fiom the time
of the Deluge, wandered without fixed abode
settled at length in the land of Shinar, where they
took up a permaneut residence. As yet they hae
remained together without experiencing thos
vicissitudes aud changes in their outward lv
which encourage the formation of ditfercut mode
of specch, and were, thevefure, of one language
Arnved however in the land of Shinar, aw! find
ing materials suitable fur the const-iction of
editices, they proceeded to make and bun bricks,
aml using the bitumen, in which puts of th-
country abound, for cement, they built acity and
a tower of great elevation. A divine inteiference,
however, is related to have taken place. In con-
sequence, the languave of the Luilders was con-
founded, so that they were no Jonzer able to
understand each other. They therefore ¢ left off
to build the city,’ and were scattered ¢ abroad
upon the face of ell the earth.” The narrative adds
that the place took its name of Babel (confusion)
from this conftsion of tongues. That the werk
was subsequeutly resumed, and in process of
time compleed, is known on the best historical
vouchers.

Versions more or less substantially correct of
this account are found among other nations. The
Chaldwans themselves relate (Abydenus, quoted
by Eusebius, Prepar. Evang. i. 14) that ‘the
first men, relying on their size and strength, raised
a tower reaching towards heaven in the place
where Babylon afterwards stood, but that the
winds assisting the gods brought the building
down on the heads of the builders, out of the


BABEL, TOWER OF.


ruins of which Babylon itself was built. Before
this event, men had spoken the same tongue, but
afterwards, by the act of the gods, they were made
to differ in their speech.’ Plato also reports a
tradition that, in the golden age, men and animals
made use of one common language, but too am-
bitiously aspiring to immortality, were, as a

ishment, confounded in their speech by Jupiter.
naw details of the story of the war of the Titans
against the Gods may also be traced some tradi-
tionary resemblance to the narrative of the Bible.
‘The Sibyl,’ says Josephus (Antig. i. 4) ‘ also
makes mention of this town, and of the confusion
of language, when she says thus :—‘‘ When all
men were of one language, some of them built a
high tower as if they would thereby ascend up to
heaven, but the gods sent storms of wind, and over-
threw the tower; and gave every one his peculiar
language ; and for this reason it was that the city
was called Babylou.”?

The same writer assigns as the reason of this
overthrow and confusion, the displeasure of God
at seeing them act so madly under the influence
of Nimrod, ‘a bold bad man,’ who, in order to
alienate the minds of the poe from God, and
to take revenge for the Deluge which had destroyed
their forefathers, induced them to build a tower too
high for the waters to be able to reach. Aben
Ezra has given a more probable explanation.
© Those, he says, ‘ who built the Tower of Babel
were not so insensate 2s to imagine they could by
any such means reach to heaven; nor did. they
fear another Deluge, since they had the promise of
God to the contrary, but they wished for a city
which should be a commun residence and a
general rendezvous, serving in the wide and open
carte of Babylonia to prevent the traveller from

ing his way; in order that whilst they took
measures for their own convenience and advan-
tage, they might also make themselves a name
with future ages.’

The sacred narrative (Gen. xi. 4) assigns as the
reason which prompted men to the undertaking,
simply a desire to possess a building so large and
high as might be a mark and rallying point in the
vast plains where they had settled, in order to pre-
vent their being scattered abroad, and thus the ties
of kindred be rudely sandered, individuals be in-
volved in peril, and their numbers be prematurély
thinned at a time when population was weak and
iusnfficieut. The idea of preventing their being
scattered abroad by building a lofty tower is
applicable in the most remarkable manner to the
wide and level plains of Babylonia, where scarcely
one object exists different from another to guide
the traveller in his journeying, and which, in those
early days, as at present, were a sea of land, the
compass being then unknown.

Such an attempt agrees with the circumstances
in which the sons of Noah were placed, and is in
itself of a commendable nature. But that some
ambitious and unworthy motives were blended
with these feelings isclearly implied in the sacred
record, which, however, is evideutly conceived and
set forth in a dramatic mauner (ver. 6, 7), and may
wear around an historical substance somewhat of
a poetical dress (Bauer, Mythol. i. 223). The
apostate Julian has attempted to turn the narrative
into ridicule ; but even if viewed only as an attempt
to account for the origin of diversity of languages,
and of the dispersion of the human family, it


BABEL, TOWER OF. 267


challenges consideration and The opinion:
of Heeren (Asiatic Nations, vol. ii. p. 146) is far
different and mure correct : ‘there is,’ says he, ‘per-
haps nowhere else to be found a narrative so ve-
nerable for its antiquity, or so important in the
history of civilization, in which we have at once
preserved the traces of primeval international com-
merce, the first political associations, and the first
erection of secure aud permanent dwellings.” A
comparison of this uarrative with the absurd or
visionary pictures which the Greeks and Romans
give of the primitive condition of mankind, will
gratify the student of the Bible and confirm the
faith of the Christian, by showing the marked
difference there is between the history contained
in Genesis and the fictions of the poet, or the tra-
ditions of the mythologist.

After the lapse of so many centuries, and the
occurrence in ‘ the Jand of Shinar’ of so many
revolutions, it is not to be expected that the
identification of the Tower of Babel with any


actual ruin should be easy, cr lead to any very
certain result. The majority of opinious, how-
ever, among the learned, make it the same as the
temple of Belus described by Herodotus, which
is found in the dilapidated remains of the Birs
Nimrud. :


Herodotus describes the temple in his own
simple but graphic manner (i. 181). | ‘In the
other division of the city is the temple of the
god Belus, with brazen gates, remaining till my
own time, quadrangular, and in all of two
stadia. In the middle of the sacred enclosure
there stands a solid tower of a stadium both
in depth and width; upon this tower another
tower is raised, and another upon that, to the
number of eight towers. An ascent to them has
been made on the outside, in a circle extending
round all the towers. When you reach about
halfway you find resting places. In the last
tower is a large temple, and in the temple lies a
large bed well furnished, and near it stands a
golden table; but there is no image within; nor
does any one remain there by night, only a native
female, one whom the god has chosen in prefer-
ence to all others, as say the Chaldeans who
are priests of that god. And these persons also
say, asserting what I do not believe, that the god
himself frequents the temple and reposes on the


.


268 BABEL, TOWER OF. .


couch, And there belongs to the temple in
Babylon another shrine lower down, where there
stands a large golden image of the god, and
near it is placed a large golden table, and the
pedestal and throne are gold, and, as the Chal-
deans say, these things were made for eight
hundred talents of gold. And out of the shrine
is a golden altar; and there is another great
altar where sheep-offerings are sacrificed, for it
is not permitted to gacrifice upon the golden altar,
except sucklings only; but upon the greater
altar the Chaldaans offer every year a thousand
talents’ worth of frankincense at the time when
they celebrate the festival of the god. And there
was at that time in the temple a statue of twelve
cubits of solid gold: but I did not see it, and
relute merely what was told me by the Chaldaans,
Darius Hystaspis wished to have this statue, but
did not dare to take it, but Xerxes his sun took it
and slew the priest who forbade him to move the
statue. Thus is this sacred place adorned ; and
there are also in it many private offerings.’ These
Offerings, made by individuals, consisting of
statues, censers, cups, and sacred vessels of massy
gold, constituted a property of immense value.
On the top Semiramis placed three golden statues
of Jupiter, Juno, and Rhea. The first was 40
feet high, and weighed 1000 Babylonish talents.
The statue of Rhea was of the same weight; the
goddess was seated on a golden throne with lions
at éach knee, and two serpents of silver. The
statue of Juno was erect like that of Jupiter,
weighing 800 talents; she grasped a serpent by
the head with her right hand, and held in her left
a sceptre enriched with gems. A table of beaten
gold was common to these three divinities, weigh-
ing 500 talents. On the table were two goblets
of 30 talents, and two censers of 500 talents each,
and three vases of prodigious magnitude. The
total value of the precious articles and_ treasures
contained in this proud achievement of idolatry
has been computed to exceed one hundred and
twenty millions sterling.

From the Holy Scriptures it appears that when
Nebuchaduezzar conquered Jerusalem and le-
velled most of the city with the ground, ‘ he
brought away the treasures of the temple, and
the treasures of the king's house, and put them all
into the temple of Bel at Babylon.’ The brazen
and other vessels which Svlomon had caused to
be made for the service of Jehovah are said to
have been broken up by order of the Assyrian
monarch, and formed into the famous gates of
brass which so long adorned the superb entrances
into the great area of the temple of Belus.

The purposes to which this splendid edifice was
appropriated may have been partly gathered from

preceding statements. These purposes varied
in some degree with the changes in opinions and
manners which successive ages brought. The
signal disappointment inflicted on its original
founders show, that even in its origin there was
connected with it something signally displeasing
to God. It seems, indeed, always to have existed
in derogation of the divine glory. Consecrated
at the first, as it probably was, to the immoderate
ambition of the monotheistic children of the
Deluge, it passed to the Sabian religion and thus
falling one degree from purity of worship, became
a temple of the sun and the rest of the host of
heaven, till, in the natural progress of corruption,


BABEL, TOWER OF


it sank into gross ido) 3 and, as the passage
from Herodotus maces polluted by the vices
which generally accompanied the observances of
heathen superstition. In one pw it un-
doubtedly proved of service to mankind. The
Babylonians were given to the study of astronomy.
This ennobling pursuit was one of the peculiar
functions of the learned men, denominated by
Herodotus, Chaldeans, the priests of Belus; and
the temple was crowned by an astronomical
observatory, from the elevation of which the starry
heavens could be most advantageously studied
over plains so open and wide, and in an atmos-
phere so clear and bright, as those of Babylonia.

- To Nimrod the first foundations of the tower
are ascribed; Semiramis enlarged and beautified
it, but it appears that the temple of Bel, in its
most renowned state, was not completed till the
time of Nebuchadnezzar, who, after the accom-
plishment of his many conquests, consecrated
this superb editice to the idolatrous object to
whom he ascribed his victories. That the ob-
servatory on the tower was erected in remote
times, there is good reason to believe. Prideaux
mentions the circumstance that when Alexander
made himself master of Babylon, Calisthenes,
the philosopher, who attended him thither, found
astronomical observations ascending upwards 1900
years,

The appearance of the tower is deeply impres-
sive, rising suddenly as it does out of a wide
desert plain, with its rent, fragmentary, and fire-
blasted pile, masses of vitrified matter lying
around, and the whole hill itself on which it
stands caked and hardened out of the materials
with which the temple had been built. — Its
dreary aspect scems tu justify the name which
the remnant of the captivity, still abiding
amongst the waters of Babylon, give to the place,
namely, ‘ Nebuchadnezzar's Prison '—an appella-
tion which may have been assigned from the cir-
cumstance of that monarch’s being contined there,
under the care of the priesthood, during the period
of his madness ; or from the king of Isvael’s hav-
ing been incarcerated within its precincts by
Nebuchadnezzar, after his last conquest of Je-
rusalem (2 Kings xxv.). A very considerable
space round the tower, forming a vast court or
area, is covered with ruins, affording abundant
vestiges of former buildings; exhibiting uneven
hea)s of various sizes, covered with masses of
broken brick, tiles, and vitrified fragments—all
bespeaking some signal overthrow in former days.
The towerlike ruin on the summit is a solid mass
28 feet brvad, constructed of the most beautiful
brick masonry. It is rent from the top nearly
halfway to the bottom. It is perforated in ranges
of square openings, At its base lie several im-
mense unshapen masses of fine brick work—some
changed to a state of the hardest vitrification,
affording evidence of the action of fire which
seems to have been the lightning of heaven.

The base of the tower, at present, measures 2082
feet in circumference. Hardly half of its former
altitude remains. Of the original pyramidal form,
the erectious of Semiramis and Nebuchadnezzar’
appear to have begun at the stage of the former
overthrow. An elevation is subjoined according to
the description of the structure given by historians ;
the dotted line marks the height of the present re-
mains. From its summit, the view in the distance


BABYLON.


presents to the south an arid desert plain; to the
west the sume trackless waste; towards the north-
east marks of buried ruins are visible toa vast


distance. The bricks which compose the town are
mostly stamped with several lines of inscription,
in the Cuneiform or Babylonian character. Some
extend to four or even seven lines, but the dimen-
sions of all are the same. The bricks of Babylon
are of two kinds, sun-dried and fire-burnt. The
former are larger and of a coarser make than the
latter; their solidity is equal to that of the hardest
stone. They are composed of clay mixed with
chopped straw or broken reeds, in order to increase
their compactness. This is the sort of brick
which the children of Israel made while in
Egyptian bondage. The unburnt bricks com-
monly form the interior or mass of a building.
This is the case with the great tower, while it
was faced with the more beautiful fabric made in
the furnace or kiln.—J. R. B.


BABYLON, from the Greek BafvAdy; the


uame in Hebrew is 233 Babel, from the confu-
sion of tongues (Gen. xi. 1-9). Another deriva-
tion deduces the word from 23 383, © the court
or city of Belus.” In Daniel iv. 27 the place is
appropriately termed ‘Babylon the Great ;" and by
Josephus also (Antig. viti. 6.1), peydan BaBuardy.
This famons city was the metropolis of the pro-
vince of Babylon and of the Babylonio-Chaldzan
empire. It was situated in a wide plain on the
Euphrates, which divided it into two nearly equal
parts. According to the book of Genesis, its
foundations were laid at the same time with those
of the tower of Babel. In the revolutions of cen-
turies it underwent many changes, and received
miccessive reparations and additions, The an-
cients were not agreed as to the authors or times
of these, and any attempt to determine them now
with strict accuracy must be fruitless, Semi-
ramis and. Nebuchadnezzar are those to whom the
city was indebted for its greatest augmentations
and its chief splendour. Its site has been with
much probability ascertained to be near Hillah,
about forcy miles from Bagdad.

According to Herodotus, the walls of Babylon
were sixty miles in circumference, built of large
bricks cemented together with bitumen, and raised
round the city in the form of an exact square;
hence they measured fifteen miles along each face.
They were 87 feet thick and 350 feet high
(Quintus Curtius says four horse-chariots could
pass each other on them without danger), protected.
on the outside by a vast ditch lined with the same
material, and proportioned in depth and widtk to
the elevation of the walls. The city was entered
by twenty-five gates on each side, made of solid


BABYLON. 269


brass, and additionally strengthened by 250
towers, so placed that between every two gates
were four towers, and four additional ones at the
four corners. From all the gates proceeded streets
running in straight lines, each street being fifteen
miles in length, fifty in number, and crossing
each other at right angles. Other minor divisions
occurred, and the whole city contained 676
squares, each two miles and a quarter in circum-
ference. The river ran through the city from
north to south; and on each side was a quay of
the same thickness as the walls of tHe city, and
100 stadia in length. In these quays were gates
of brass, and from each of them steps descending
into the river. A bridge was thrown across the
river, of great beauty and admirable contrivance,
a furlong in length and 30 feet in breadth. As
the Euphrates overflows during the summer
months, throngh the melting of the snows on the
mountains of Armenia, two canals were cut to
turn the course of the waters into the Tigris, and
vast artificial embankments were raised on each
side of the river. On the western side of the city
an immense lake forty miles square was exca-
vated to the depth, according to Herodotus, of 35
feet, and into this lake the river was turned till
the work was completed. At each end of the
bridge was a palace, and these had a subterrane-
ous communication.

The account given by Quintus Curtius (vy.
1) of the entrance of Alexander into Babylon
may serve to enliven the narrative, and at the
same time make the impression on the reader's
mind more distinct. ‘A great part of the inha-
bitants of Babylon stood on the walls, eager to
catch a sight of their new monarch; many went
forth to meet him. Among these Bagophane:,
keeper of the citadel and of the royal treasure,
atrewed the entire way before the king with fiowers
and crowns; silver altars were also placed on
both sides of the road, which were Joaded not
merely with frankincense, but all kinds of odori-
ferous herbs. He brought with him for Alexan-
der gifts of various kinds—flocks of sheep and
horses: lions also and pauthers were carried be-
fore him in their deus. The Magi came next,
singing in their usual manner their ancient
hymns. After them came the Chaldeans, with
their musical instruments, who are not only the
prophets of the Babylonians, but their artists, The
first are wont to sing the praises of the kings; the
Chaldzans teach the motions of the stars and the

riodic vicissitudes of the times and seasons.

hen tollowed last of all the Babylonian kniglits,
whose equipment, as well as that of their horses,
seemed designed more for Juxury than magnifi-
cence. The king, Alexander, attended by armed
men, having ordered the crowd of the townspeople
to proceed in the rear of his infantry, entcred the
city in a chariot and repaired to the palace. The
next day he carefully surveyed the household
treasure of Darius, and all his money. For the
rest, the beauty of the city and its aye turned the
eyes not only of the king, but of every one, on
itself, and that with good reason.” Within a brief
period after this, Alexander lay a corpse in the
palace. .

The greatest circumference ascribed by the
ancients to the city walls is 480 stadia, the
most moderate 360. The smallest computatior
supposes an area for the city of which we can


x


«


270 BABYLON.


now scarcely form an idea. Its population how-
ever may not have been in proportion to its extent.
The place was probably what in these days
would be considered au enclosed district rather
than a compact city. Quintus Curtius reports that
the buildings were not continuous, and that within
the precincts of the city was arable and pasture
land sutticient to produce food for the population,
as a resource against a sieze.

One or two additional facts may aid in convey-
ing a full idea of this greaband magniticent city.
When Cyrus touk Babylon by tuming the Eu-
phrates into a neighbouring flake, the dwellers in
the middle of the place were not for some time
aware that their fellow-townsmen who were near
the walls had been captured. This, says Herudotus
(i. 191), was owing to the magnitude of the city,
and to the circumstance that at the time the inha-
bitants were engaged in caronsals, it being a festive
uccasion. Nor, according to Xenophon, did the
citizens of the opposite quarter learn the event till
three hours after sunrise—the city having been
taken in. the night. Alexander had to employ
10,000 men during two months, to remove the ac-
cumulated ruins pre-ipitated by order of Xerxes
nearly 200 years before. From the fallen towers
of Babylon have arisen not only all the present
Cities in its vicinity, but others which, like itself,
have long since gone duwn into the dust. Since the
days of Alexander four capitals, at least, have
been built out of its remains—Seleucia by the
Greeks, Ctesiphon by the Parthians, Al Maidan
by the Persians, and Kufa by the Caliphs; with
towns, villayves, and cauravansaries without num-
ber. The necessary fragments and materials were
transported along the rivers and the canals,

The antiquity of the canals of Babylonia dates
from the must remote periods of the Chaldzo-
Babylonian monarchy. ‘The ancient kings of
Assyria and Babylonia well understood the value
of canals, and their empire arose upon alluvial
plains, amid a system of irrigation and draining
which spread like a net-work over the land. It
may be sullicient to specify the Nahr Malikah, or
Royal Canal, the origin of which has Leen referred
both to Nimrod and Cush, Abydenus, however,
attributes it to Nebuchadnezzar. From the ac-
count of Herodotus it appears to have been of
sufficient breadth and depth to be navigable for
merchant vessels. It is not, therefore, surprising
that some writers have considered it as the ancient
bed of the Euphrates.

The soil around Babylon is of a light yielding
nature, easily wrought for canals and other pur-
poses, wheter of art or war. Cyrus, theretore,
would find no great difficulty in digging a trench
about the city sufficient to contain the waters
of the river (Cyrop. vii.). Alexander (Strabo,
xvi. p. 510), in enlarging one of the canals
and forming basins fur his fleet, laid open the
graves of many buried kings and princes—which
shows how readily the soil yields and gives way
before the labours of man.

The new palace built by Nebuchadnezzar was
ne in size and superb in embellishments.

ts outer wall embraced six miles; within that
circumference were two other embattled walls,
besides a great tower. Three brazen gates led
into the grand area, and every gate of consequence
throughout the city was of brass. In accordance
with this fact are the terms which Isaiah (xlv. 1, 2)


BABYLON.


employs when, in the name of Jehovah, he pro
mises Cyrus that the city should fall before him,
‘1 will open before him the two-leaved gates: I
will break in pieces the gates of brass ’—a pro
phecy which was fulfilled to the letter when Cyrus
made himself master of the place in the dead of
the night. Having first hy means of its canals
turned the river into the great dry lake west of
Babylon, and then marched through the emptied
channel, he made his way to the outer walls of the
fortitied palace on its banks; when finding the
brazen gates incautiously left open by the royal
guards while engaged in citable: he entered with
all his train; ‘the Lord of Hosts was his leader,’
and Babylon, as an empire, was no more.

The palace was splendidly decoratet with sta-
tues of men and animals, with vessels of sold and
silver, and furnished with luxuries of all kinds
brought thither from conquests in Egypt, Palestine,
and Tyre. Its greatest boast were the hanging
gardens, which acquired even from Grecian
writers the appellation of one of the wonders of
the world. ‘They are attributed to the gallantry
of Nebuchadnezzar, who constructed them in com-
pliance with a wish of his queen Amytis to possess
elevated groves such as she had enjoyed on the hills
around her native Ecbatana. Babylon was all
flat; and to accomplish so extravagant a desire an
artificial mountain was reared, 400 feet on each
side, while terraces one above another rose to a
height that overtopped the walls of the city, that
is, above 300 feet in elevation. The ascent from
terrace to terrace was made by corresponding flights
of steps, while the terraces themselves were reared
to their various stages on ranges of regular piers,
which, forming a kind of vaulting, rose in succes-
siun one over the other to the required height of
each terrace, the whole being bound together by a
wall of 22 feet in thickness. The level of each
terrace or gardeu was then formed in the fullowing
manner : the top of the piers was first laid over with
flat stones, 16 feet in length and 4 feet in width;
on these stones were spread beds of matting, then
a thick layer of bitumen; after which came two
courses of bricks, which were covered with sheets
of solid lead. The earth was heaped on this plat-
form; and in order to admit the roots of large
trees, prodigious hollow piers were built and tilled
with mould. From the Euphrates, which flowed
close to the foundation, water was drawn up by
machinery. The whole, says Q. Curtius (v. 5.),
had, to those who saw it from a distance, the
appearance of -woods overhanging mountains,
Such was the completion of Nebuchadnezzar’s
work, when he found himself at rest iu his house,
and flourished in his palace. The king spoke and
said, ‘Is not this great Babylon that 1 have built
fur the house of the kingdom by the might of my
power, and the honour of my majesty’ (Dan. iv.)
a picture which is amply justified by the de
scriptions of heathen writers. Nowhere could the
king have taken so comprehensive a view of the
city he had so magnificently coustructed and
adorned as when walking on the highest terrace of
the gardens of his palace.

The remains of this palace are found fh the
vast mound or hill called by the natives Kasr.
It is of irregular form, 8U0 yards in length and
600 yards in breadth. Its appearance is con-
stantly undergoing change from the continual
digging which takes place in its inexhaustible


BABYLON.


quarries for brick of the strongest and finest ma-
fexal. Hence the mass is furrowed into deep


I


ravines, crossing and recrossing each other in
every direction. Every vestige, however, disco-
vered in it declares it to have been composed of
buildings far superior to all the rest in the Kastern
quarter. In this mass Rich found a lion of
colossal dimensions, standing on a pedestal of a
coarse kind of grey granite and of rude workman-
ship; in the mouth was a circular aperture, into
which a man might introduce his fist. Hollows


cansed by excavation occur in the mound, in
which pertons have lost their lives. Considerable
fragments of wall are still standing; and also de-
tached masses, composed of furnace-burnt bricks of
abeauty and freshness truly admirable. The bricks
used in the construction of the palace a to
have heen exclusively of the burnt kind. The face
of every brick is invariably placed downwards.
On the north side of the Kasr, amongst the moul-
dering fragments, and elevated on a sort of ridge,
stands the famous solitary tree, called by the Arabs
Atheleh ; it bears every mark of antiquity in ap-
pearance, situation, and tradition. Its trunk was
originally enormous; but, worn away by the lapse
of ages, it is now but a ruin amid ruins: never
theless it bears spreading and ever-green branches,
which are peculiarly beautiful, being adorned
with long treas-like tendrils resembling heron
feathers, growing from a central stem. These
slender and delicate sprays bending towards the
ground give the whole the appearance of a weep
ing willow, while their gentle waving in the wind
whenever a breeze blows, producesa low and melan-
eboly sound. ‘This tree is revered by the Arabs as
holy, from a tradition current among them, that the


-time. One or two may be


BABYLON. an


Almighty himself preserved it here from the earliest
time, to form a refuge for the Caliph Ali, who
fainting with fatigue from the battle of Hillah,
found secure repose under its shade.

In digging in the extensive mounds which
constitute the ruins of Babylon, an endless suc-
cession of curious objects is found from time to
ified :—e large


cylinder of baked clay, covered with a cuneiform


oY, PY ld ye


inscription; an agate seal finely cut, representing
a priest surrounded by various symbols of the

ian worship; a small dog in bronze, with a
collar of pure gold round his neck, about three
inches in height. Small figures, both in bronze
and clay, are frequently picked up all over the
ruins of Babylon. One of a larger kind is a
fragment seen lying midway between Hillah and
the site of Seleucia, consisting of the lower half
of the statue of a man ina sitting posture; the
legs are naked, and closed together in the
Egyptian style; the hands rest on the thighs.
Jt is cut ina bluish basalt. That so few cam-
paratively of these relics are now visible is not
surprising, since, as Babylon had plundered
Egypt, Assyria, and Judwa of their statues, their
gold and silver, and even the architectural orna-
ments of their palaces, so in its turn this rich
treasury of the antiquities of all nations became
the prey of successive conquerors; and plunderers
completed the work of spoliation. One or two


drawings are here given of relics discovered on
this site. The first represents a cylinder pre


‘senting a very remarkable group of personages,


and an inscription in cuneiform characters of a

uliar kind. The figures are connected with
the rites of the lunar deity, who was worshipped
by the Persians and the Chaldwans under the


272 BABYLON.


names of Mylitta and Abytta, or Araites and
Aranus. According to Maimanides, this Baby-
lonish deity had numerous bands of young
women devoted to her service; and here is seen a
priestess introducing a virgin to her temple to
receive the benediction of the priests. These
dedicated females, Herodutus says, sat once in
tneir lives in the shrine of Venus, their heads
bound with garlands and their bodies with cords.
Thus exposed, if any stranger threw gold into her
lap, she was obliged to retire with him into the
temple, when her charms became the victim of
its impure rites. The money was then laid on
the altar to be consecrated to the goddess. These
outrages seem to be referred to by Moses in the
law, when he says, ‘Thou shalt not bring the hire
of a harlot into the house of the Lord thy God.’
The second cut is from a cylinder of white agate.
The engraving is of good workmanship. The
hierogly phics are the sun, moon, five and
the archaspand, or seven balls, indicative of the
seven celestial powers or intelligences, always
attendant on the Chaldwan and Persian great
deity. The figure beneath the sun holds a wreath


formed of globular shapes in his left hand. On
his back appear to be a bow and quiver; balls
surmount these weapons. Before him springs an
object sprayed like a flower, and he is preceded,
in advancing towards a superior kind of being,
by a bareheaded figure, whose hands are held up
as if in the act of addressing that being whi

fronts him standing upon the unicorn tall. An
ethcrial nage is seen over the head of the
ancuveel ai unadorned figure. The august
bearded figure, which the last addresses, bears the
symbols of divinity among the Chaldzans, such
as sceptres, axes, and other weapons. The floating
figure in the rays clearly points out a close
affinity between the religious system of the Chal-
dgans and the ancient Persians; showing that
they used the same symbolical representations, and
also prefigured the same gods and their attributes
in the sun and moon; and hence it appears pro-
bable that the alleged difference between the two
religions chiefly lay in the one worshipping the
imaged symbols as gods, while the other restricted
itself to adoring the heavenly host in themselves
alone. The two engravings which follow are
introduced less with reference to their subjects
than for the sake of the illustrations of Baby-
lonian costume which they afford. The figures
have been selected from the engraved cylinders
and gems, and probably convey as much in-
formation on this subject as can now be ob-


Babylon, as the centre of a great kingdom,
was the seat of boundless luxury, and its in-
habitants were notorious for their addiction to


self-indulgence and effeminacy. Q. Curtius
(v. 1) asserts that, ‘nothing could be more
corrupt than its morals, nothing more titted
to excite and allure to immoderate pleasures.
The rites of hospitality were polluted by the
grossest and most shameless lusts. Money «is-
solved every tie, whether of kindred, respect, or
esteem. The Babylonians were very greatly
given to wine, and the enjoyments which accom-
pany inebriety. Women were present at their
convivialities, first with some degree of propriety,
but, growing worse and worse by degrees, they
ended by throwing off at once their modesty and
their clothing.’ On the gronnd of their awful
wickedness the Babylonians were threatened wi
condign punishment, through the mouths of

3 and the tyranny with which the nilers
of the city exercised their sway was not without a
decided effect in bringing on them the terrific
consequences of the Divine vengeance. Nor in
the whole range of literature is there anything to
be found approaching to the sublimity, force, and
terror with which Isaiah and others speak on this

inful subject (Is. xiv. 11; xlvii. 1; Jer. li. 38;

an. v. 1),

Under Nabonnidus, the last king, ».c. 538 or
539, Babylon was taken by Cyrus, after a siege
of two years. An insurrection, under Darius
Hystaspis (s.c. 600), the object of which was to
gain emancipation from Persian bondage, led
that prince to punish the Babylonians by throw-
ing down the walls and gates which had been left
by Cyrus, and by expelling them from their
homes. Xerxes plundered and destroyed the
temple of Belus, which Alexander the Great
would probably, but for his death, have restored.
Under Seleucus Nicator the city began to sink

ily, after that monarch built Seleucia on the

‘igria, and made it his place.of abode. In the
time of Strabo and Diodorus Siculus the place


~ BABYLON.


tay in ruins. Jerome, in the fourth century of
the Christian era, learnt that the site of Babylon
had been converted into a park or hunting-ground
for the recreation of the estes monarchs, and
that, in order to preserve the game, the walls had
heen from time to time repaired. If the following
extract from Rich (p. ~ is compared with these
‘historical facts, the prophecy of Isaiah (xiii. 19)
wil to have been strikingly fulfilled to the
letter: ‘I had always imagined the belief of the
existence of satyrs was confined to the mythology
ot the West; but a choadar who was with me
when I examined this ruin (the Mujahlibah

mentioned that in this desert an animal is foun

resembling a man from the head to the waist, but
having the thighs and legs of a sheep or goat : he
also said that the Arahs hunt it with dogs, and
eat the lower parts, abstaining from the upper, on


“BABYLON. 273


“account of their resemblance to those of the bi-


man species.’

More thorough destruction than that which has
overtaken Babylon cannot well be conceived.
Rich was unable to discover any traces of its
vast walls, and even its site has been a subject of
dispute. ‘On its ruins,’ says he, ‘there is not
a single tree growing, except the old one,’ which
only servés to make the tea accn more apparent.
Ruins like those of Babylon, com of rub-
bish impregnated with nitre, cannot be cultivated.
The ruins of Babylon and its vicinity consist in
general of mounds of earth formed by the decom-

ition of buildings, channelled and furrowed

y the weather, and having the surface strewed with
pieces of brick, bitumen, and pottery. In addi-
tion to the Birs Nimrod and the Kasr, already
described, mention may be made of the Mujahli-


bah, which lies to the north of the Kasr, five
miles from Hillah, and 950 yards from the river
bank. Its shape is oblong and its height irre-
gular. The sides face the cardinal points: the
northern is 200, the southern 219, the eastern 182,
and the western 186 yards in length; and the
elevation of the south-east or highest aagle is 141
feet. The western face is the most interesting,
on account of the appearance of building which it
presents. Near the summit is a low wall, composed
of unburnt bricks, mixed up with chopped straw


or reeds, and cemented with clay mortar of great «


thickness, having between every layer of bricks a
layer of reeds ; and on the north side are also some
vestiges of a similar construction. The south-west
angle is crowned by something like a turret o”
lantern. All the sides are worn into furrows,
which in some instances are of great depth. The
summit is covered with heaps of rbbish, in which
layers of broken burnt bricks cemented with mor-
tar have been found, and also entite bricks with
i iptions. Scattered over the whole are frag-
ments of pottery, brick, bitumen, les, vitrified
brick or scoria, and even shells, bits of glass, and
matberof-pearl.


In the northern face, near the-


enough for @ man


is a niche or recess, high r
pe i oe in, at the back of which is a low


apertu: eading to a small cavity, whence a
i Rar off to the right, sloping upwards
in a westerly direction, ti] it loses itself in the
rubbish. Mr. Rich was informed that a human
body had been found here, swathed ina tight
wrapper, partially covered with bitumen, and in-
closed in a coffa of mulberry-wood. Being in-
duced to dig here, he came to a shaft, or hollow
ier, 60 feet square, lined with fine brick Jaid in
itumen, and filled up with earth, in which were
found a brass spike, some earthen vessels, and a
beam of date-tree wood. This hollow pier cor-
se ea with Strabo’s description (p. 738) of the
hollow brick piers which supported the hanging-
gardens, and in which the large trees grew. Rich
also discovered, in a continuation of the passage
to the eastward. a wooden coffin containing a
skeleton in good preservation. Under the head
of the coffin was a round pebble; attached to the
coffin, on the outside, was a brass bird, and inside
an ornament of the same material, bears

a ly been suspended to some
eleton. A little farther on ingests child

T


214 BABYLONIA.


was found, and Rich was of opinion that the
whole passage was occupied in a similar manner.
It may therefore be conjectured that the Mujahli-
bah was a great brick pyramid for the dead. It
may a!so have been used for an observatory.

Neither the ancient nor the modern authorities
are in exact agreement respecting particular places
and locaiities, and any attempt to fix them now
can be nothing more than an approach to the
reality. Instead, therefore, of repeating uncer-
tainties, or adding conjectures to conjectures, we
judge it better to refer the reader to the works
enuinerated at the foot of the ensuing article.

In the prophetic writings of the Apocalypse
(xiv. 8; xvi. 19; xvii. 5; xviii. 2) Babylon stands
for Rome, symbolizing Heathenism :-—* Babylon
is fallen, that great city, because she made all
nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication.’ This reference appears to have been
derived from the practice of the Jews, who were
accustomed to designate Rome, which they hated,
by the opprobrious and not inappropriate name
of Babylon (Schéttgen, Hor. Hebr. i. p. reces

BABYLONIA (so called from the name of its
chief city, termed also Chaldwza, from those who
ata later period inhabited it), a province of
Middle Asia, bordered on the north by Mesopo-
tamia, on the east by the Tigris, on the south by
the Persian Gulf, and on the west by the Arabian
Desert. On the north it begins at the point where
the Euphrates and Tigris approach each other,
and extends to their common outlet in the Per-
sian Gulf, pretty nearly comprising the country
now designated Irak Arabi. The two words, Ba-
bylonia and Chaldza, were however sometimes
used in another signification: Babylonia, as con-
taining in an extended sense Assyria also and
Mesopotamia, nearly all the countries which
Assyria in its widest meaning embraced ; while
Chaldea indicated, in a narrower signification,
the south-western part of Babylonia between the
Euphrates and Babylon (Strabo, xvi.; Ptol.).
In Hebrew, Babylonia bore the name of Tot,
Shinar, or ‘the land of Shinar;’ while ‘ Babylon’

Ps. cxxxvii. 1) and ‘ the land of the Chaldzans’

Jer. xxiv. 5; Ezek. xii. 13) seem to signify the
empire of Babylon, The climate is temperate
and salubrious. The country in ancient times
was very prolific, especially in corn and palms.
‘Timber-trees it did not produce. Many parts
had springs of naphtha. As rain is infrequent,
even in the winter months, the country owes its
fruitfulness to the annual overflow of the Eu-
phrates and the Tigris, whose waters are conveyed
over the land by means of canals. Quintus Cur-
tius (i. 5) declares that the country between the
Euphrates and the Tigris was covered with so
rich a soil, that the cattle were driven from their
pastures lest they should be destroyed by satiety
and fatness.

The alluvial plains of Babylonia, Chaldza,
and Susiana, including all the river, lake, and
newer marine deposits at the head of the Persian
Gulf, occupy an extent of about 32,400 square

graphic miles. The rivers are the Euphrates and
its tributaries, the Tigris and its tributaries, the
Kerah, the Karun and its tributaries, the Jerahi,
and the Idiyan; constituting, altogether, a vast hy-
drographical basin of 189,200 geographic square
miles; containing, within itself, a central de-


BABYLONIA.


it of 32,400 miles of alluvium, almost entirely
Feeaahe down by the waters of the various rivers,
and which have been accumulating from periods
long antecedent to all historical records. All
these rivers present the peculiarity of flowing, for
a great part of their course, through supra-creta
cevus formations of a very friable nature, easily
disintegrated by the action of the elements, and
still more so by that of running waters when
swollen by floods, and carrying down pebbles
Near Bushiyah, about ten miles beyond the south-
east quarter of ancient Babylon, on a level
plain, are found a number of sand-hills, which are
constantly shifting their place and number, and
yet always occupy the same general locality.
They appear to owe their existence to the presence
of springs, which moisten the sand and cause its
accumulation, at the same time allowing the pre-
valent winds to alter the form and number of the
hills, while their bases have a fixed point of at-
traction. They are objects of superstition to the
Arabs, who often look upun them as the sepulchral
pall of brethren who have fallen in battle. The ef
florescences of nitrate of potassium and of chloride
or hydro-chlorate of sodium are common on these
plains; the one is most probably derived from the
decomposition of vegetable matters, and, conse-
quently, characteristic of alluvium of river or
marshy origin; the other is indicative of deposi-
tions from seas or bays. The modern accumula-
tions of svil in Babylonia from annual inundations
is still very great. Several canals, such as the
Isa, the Nahr Zimberani-Yah, the Muhawil, &c.,
convey water at certain seasons of the year from
one river and part of the country to another. In
general, the alluvium that is brought down by
canals and rivulets, and deposited at their mouths,
isa fine clay. The great extent of the plain of
Babylonia is everywhere altered by artificial
works; mounds rise upon the otherwise uniform
level, walls and mud ramparts and dykes inter-
sect each other, elevated masses and friable soil of
pottery are succeeded by low plains inundated
during great part of the year, and the antique
beds of canals are visible in every direction.
There is still some cultivation and some iniga-
tion. Flocks pasture in meadows of coarse grasses
the Arabs’ dusky encampments are met with here
and there; but, except on the bauks of tie Eu-
phrates, there are few remains of the date-groves,
the vineyards, and the gardens which adorned the
same land in the days of Artaxerxes; and still
less of the population and labour which must
have made a garden of such soil in the time of
Nebuchadnezzar. The vegetation of these tracts
is characterized by the usual saline plants, the
river banks being fringed by shrubberies of tama-


_Tisk and acacia, and occasiunal groves of a


poplar which has been mistaken for a willow,
the weeping willow (Salix Babylonica) is not
met with in Babylonia. ‘he solitary tree, ‘of a
Species altogether strange to this country’ (Heeren,
Ariatie Nations, vol. ii, p. 158), which Rich
calls lignum-vita, and which bas been supposed
to be a Sast remnant or offspring of the sloping or
hanging gedens that appeared to Quintus Car-
tius like a forest, is in reality a tamarisk. No
monuments in Xabylonia and Chaldwa appear
to be more decisive of the antiquity and Agsy-
Tian origin of sites than the lofty artificial mound,
of which the present degenerate hordes of the tent


BABYLONIA.


ond the spear narrate so many fabulous tales,
bat whici: almost everywhere present themselves
whore there are also other strong grounds of pre-
sumption of an Assyrian or Chaldao-Babylonian
origin. Thus at Irkah, at Wasit, at Teredon, at
the Birs Nimrud, the Mujahlibah, E] Heimar,
&c., these colossal piles are found domineering
over the dieary waste, to the uniformity of which
they offer a striking contrast, being visible at
great distances; and, although thrown by the
Mirage into strange and contorted shapes, yet
they always appear, when seen upon the verge of
the horizon, as if possessing colossal dimensions,
vand produce an ellect in point of grandeur
which cannot easily be surpassed. Long before
the period when inan began to erect these feeble
semblances of mountains, a various level of allu-
vium had been established in the spaces between
the rivera, by which in one part the waters of the
Euphrates tind a higher level than the Tigris,
into which they flow at the high season; while at
another place the Tigris sends its waters to the
-Euphrates, and restores the flood by which it had
been previously enriched from the ‘Great River.’
The Euphrates is still a majestic sticam, but
wanders through a dreary solitude. Its banks are
hoary with reeds, and the grey osier-willows are
yet there on which the captives of Israel huug up
their harps, and, while Jerusalem was not, refused
to be comforted, At that time its now broken
hills were palaces; its long undulating mounds,
streets ; its vast solitude was filled with the busy
subjects of the proud mistress of the East. Now,
‘ wasted with misery,” her habitations are not to
be found; and, for herself, ‘the worm is spread
over her.” Strabo makes the Euphrates a stadium
(500 feet) in breadth at Babylon; according to
Rennel it is about 191 English feet; D’Anville
reduces it to 330; Rich, on the other hand,
raises it to 450 feet; its lueadth, however, varies
in its passage through the ruins. Rich ascertained
its depth to be 24 fathoms, and that the cunent
runs gently at the medium rate of about two
knots an hour. The Euphrates is far less rapid
than the Tigris, and rises at an earlier period.
When at its height—from the latter end of April
tothe latter end of June—it overflows the surround-
ing country, fills, without the aid of human labour,
the canals dug fur its reception, and facilitates
agriculture in a surprising degree. The ruins d¥
Babylon are then so inundated as to render many
rts of; them inaccessible. The water of the
uphrates is esteemed more salubrious than that
of the Tigris, The course of the river through the
site of Babylon is north and south. Bricks and
other fragments of buildings are frequently found
in it by fishermen who ply on its waters.
During the three great empires of the East, no
tract of the whole appears to faite been so reputed
for fertility and riches as the district of Babylonia,
which arose in the main fiom the proper manage-
ment of the mighty river which flowed through it.
Herodotus mentions that, when reduced to the
rank of a province, it yielded a revenue to the
kings of Persia which comprised half their in-
come. And the terms in which the Scriptures
describe its matural as well as its acquired su-
premacy when it was the imperial city, evidence
the same facts. They call it ‘Babylon, the
glory of kingdoms; the beauty of the Chaldee
excellency ; the lady of kingdoms, given to plea-


BABYLONIA. 275


sure; that dwelleth carelessly, and sayeth im her
heart, Jam, and there is none else beside me.’
But now, in the expressive and inimitable lan-
guage of the same holy book, may it be said—
* She sits as a widow on the ground. There is no
more a throne for thee, O daughter of the Chal-
deans!" As for the abundance of the country,
it has vanished as clean away as if ‘ the besom of
desolation’ had swept it from north tu south; the
whole land, from the outskirts of Bagdad to the
farthest reach of sight, lying a melancholy waste.

In order to defend the country against hostile
attacks from its neighbours, northward from Ba-
bylon, between the two rivers, a wall was built,
which is known under the name of the Median
Wall (7d MnBlas xadovpevoy teixos, Xen. Anad.
ii. 4, 12). The Babylonians were famous for the
manufacture of cloth and carpets: they alsu ex-
celled in making perfumes, in carving in wood,
and in working in precious stones. They were @
commercial as elas a manufacturing people,
and carried on a very extensive trade alike
by land and by sea. Babylon was indeed a
commercial depot between the Eastem and the
Western worlds (Ezek. xvii. 4; Is. xliii, 14).
Thus favoured by nature and aided by art, Baby-
lonia became the first abode of social order and
the cradle of civilization. Here first arose a powers
ful empire—lhere astronomy was first cultivated—
here measures and weirhts were first employed.

The original inhabitants were without doubt of
the Shemitic family ; and their language belonged
to the class of tongues spoken by that race, partis
cularly to the Aramaic branch, and was indeed a
dialect similar to that whichis now called Chaldee.

From the account which is found in Gen. x. 8,
Nimrod, the son of Cush, appears to have founded
the kingdom of Babylon, and to have been its first
sovereign. In the 14th chap. of the same book,
Amraphel is cursorily mentioned as king of
Shinar. In the reign of Hezekiah (a.c. 713}—
2 Kings xx. 12—‘ Berodach-baladan, the son of
Baladan,’ was ‘king of Babylon,’ and ¢ sent let-
ters aud a present unto Hezekiah, for he had heard
that Hezekiah had heen sick.’ About a hundred
years later, Jeremiah and Habakkuk speak of the
invasion of the Babylonians under the name of
the Chaldeans; and now Nebuchadnezzar ap-
pears in the historical books (2 Kings xxiv. 1, ¢.3
Jer. xxxvi. 9. 27) as lead of the all-subduing
empire of Babylon. Evilmerodach (2 Kings xxv.
27; Jer. lit, 31), son of the preceding, is also
mentioned as ‘king of Babylon ;’ and with Bele
shazzar (Dan. v. 1, 30), the Nabonedus of Bero-
sus, the line of the Chaldwan kings was closed :
he perished in the conquest of Babylon by the
Medo-Persians (Dan. v. 31), ‘and Darius, the
Median, took the kingdom.’

The domination of the Chaldzans in Babylon
has given historians some trouble to explain. The
Chaldaans appear to have originally been a
Nomadic tribe in the mountains of Armenia,
numbers of whom are thought to have settled in
Babylon as subjects, where, having been civilized
and grown powerlul, they seized the supreme power
and founded a Chaldao-Babylonian empire.

Herodotus has noticed the Chaldzans as a tribe
of priests (i. at Diodorus (i. 28), as a separate
caste under Belus, an Egyptian priest; while the
book of Daniel refers to them as astrologers,
magicians, and soothsayers: but ee en be

Tr


°


276 BACA.


little doubt, as laid down by Gesenius on Isaiah
xxiii, 14, that it was the name of a distinct
nation, if not, as Heeren (Manual of Anc. Hist.
28) has maintained, the name of the Northern
nomades in general. In connection with Baby-
lonia the Chaldwans are to be regarded as a
conquering nation as well as a learned people:
they introduced a correct method of reckoning
time, and began their reign with Nabonassar,
s.c. 747. The brilliant period of the Chaldzo-
Babylonian empire extended to B.c. 538, when
the great city, in accordance with the prophecy
of Daniel, was sacked and destroyed. .

Babylonia, during this period, was ‘ the land
of the Chaldeans,’ the same as that into which
the children of Judah were carried away captive
(Jer. xxiv. 5); which contained Babylon (Jer.
1.1; Ezek. xii. 13); was the seat of the king
of Babylon (Jer. xxv. 12), and contained the
house of the god of Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. i.
1, 2). The profane historians lend their testi-
mony to the same effect. There is another scrip-
tural reference to this proud period in the history
of the Chaldees, when learned men filled the
atreets and the temples of Nineveh and Babel :—
§ Behold the Jand of the Chaldeans; this people
was not, till the Assyrian founded it for them that
dwell in the wilderness: they set up the towers
thereof, they raised up the palaces thereof; and
he brought it to ruin’ (Isa. xxiii. 13).

A full description of the actual condition of
Babylonia, Babylon, and Babel, with illustrations,
disquisitions, maps, plans, &c., may be found in
the fullowing works :—Memoir on the Ruins of
Babylon, by C. J. Rich, 2nd edit. London, 1836 ;
Travels in Georgia, Persia, Armenia, and An-
cient Babylonia, by Sir Robert Ker Porter, Lon-
don, 1622; Ainsworth’s Researches in Babylonia,
London, 1838; Fraser's Travels in Kocrdistan,
Mescpotamia, &c. London, 1840; Rosenmiiller’s
Biblische Alterthumskunde ; Gesenius in the Cy-
clopiidie of Ersch and Gruber; Heeren, Ideen, i.
4; Wahl, Geschichte der Morg. Spr. pp. 570;
Winer, Biblisches Real-worterbuch.—J. R. B.


BACA (N)3) and BECAIM (0°N33) occur,
the first in Ps. lxxxiv. 6, ‘ Who passing through
the valley of Baca make it a well; the rain
also filleth the pvols;’ the second in 2 Sam. v.
23, 2A, and in 1 Chron. xiv. 14, 15, « And let it
be, when thou hearest the sound of a guing in
the tops of the mulberry trees, that thou shalt
bestir thyself.’

Neither the mulberry nor the pear-tree, con-
sidered to be the haca of the Scriptures, satis-
fies translators and commentators, because they
do not possess any characters particularly suitable
to the above passages. With regard to the mul-
berry, Rosenmiiller justly observes, that this inter-
pretation is countenanced neither by the ancient
translators nor by the occurrence of any similar
term in the cognate languages. We should ex-
pect, however, some notice in Scripture of a tree
which must have been common, and always
esteemed for its fruit [SyKaminos]. Rosenmiiller

refers pear-trees in the preceding passages, as
ing the oldest rendering of the i But the
correctness of this translation is not confirmed by
any of the cognate dialects; nor is the pear-tree
more appropriate than the mulberry.
In consequence no doubt of these difficulties,


BACA.


other plants have been resorted to; and Celsius
quotes Abu'l Fadli’s description of a shrub
of Mecca: ‘ Baca nota est arbor s. frutex, in
Mecca, et tractibus vicinie. Similis est rZ
Lay Bascham, nisi quod folia ejus longiora
sint. Fructum, perinde ac illa, plurimum fert,
sed majorem et rotundiorem. Temperamento
calida est et sicca. Et cum folium ejus resecatur,
lacryma quedam inde distillat, alba, calida, et
acris, virtutis tamen nullius. Probata est me-
dicina contra dolorem dentium, si hujus arboris
ramis fricentur. Quin et confortat gingivas, et
prohibet ne malum renovetur’ (Cels. i. 339}.
The same plant is probably that referred to by
Forskal (p. 198) among the obscure plants with-
out fructification which he obtained from Djobba,


and which he says was called . Baka, vel al


Ebka: ‘Arbor foliis obovatis, glabris, integris,
lactescens, venenata.”

If this be the same as the former, both are still
unknown any further, and we cannot therefore de- *
termine whether they are found in Palestine or not.

The tree alluded to in Scripture, whatever it
is, must be common in Palestine, must grow
in the neighbourhood of water, have its leaves
easily moved, and have a name in some of
the cognate languages similar tou the Hebrew
Baca. The only one with which we are ace
quainted answering to these conditions is that
called bak by the Arabs, or rather shajrat-al-bak
—that is, the fly or gnat tree. It seems to
be so called from its seeds, when loosened from
their capsular covering, floating about like gnats,
in consequence of being covered with light
silk-like hairs, as is the case with those of the
willow. In Richardson's Arabic Dictionary the
bak-tree is considered to be the elm, but to
us it appears to be the poplar: for the dirdar
of the Arabians seems to be another kind of
bak-tree, probably the arbor culicum of the Latin
translators of Avicenna. Of this tree Plempius
says, ‘ Leguntur in codice Romano principio hxc,
Dicit Dioscorides hance arborem esse salici simi-
lem; aSyris vocari dirdar, 4 Chaldwis culicum
arborem.' As this passage is not found in Dio-
scorides, it is curious that it should occur in
an old manuscript. For in other Arabic authors
the dirdar is said to be a kind of ghurb, and
the ghurb we have ascertained to be the Lom-
bardy poplar (v. dust. imal. Bot., p. 344). The
willow and the poplar are well known to have the
same kind of eed whence they are included by
botanists in the group of Salicinez.

As it seems to us sufficiently clear that the bak-
tree is a kind of poplar, and as the Arabic ‘ bak’
is very similar to the Hebrew ‘ Baca,’ so it is pro-
bable that one of the kinds of poplar may be in-
tended in the above passages of Scripture. And it
must be noted that the poplar is as appropriate as
any tree can be for the elucidation of the passages
inwhich baca occurs. For the poplar is wel] known
to delight in moist situations, and Bishop Home,
in his Comm. on Psalm Ixxxiv., has inferred that
in the valley of Baca the Israelites, on their way
to Jerusalem, were refreshed by plenty of water.
It is not less appropriate in the passages in
2 Samuel and 1 Chronicles, as no tree is more
remarkable than the poplar for the ease with
which its leaves are rustled hy the slightest


BACA.


movement of the air; an effect which might be
caused in a still night even by the movement of a
body of men on the ground, when attacked in flank
or when unprepared. That poplars are common in
Palestine may be proved from Kitto’s Palestine,
p- 1}4: © Of poplars we only know, with cer-
tainty, that the black poplar, the aspen, and the
Lombardy poplar grow in Palestine. The
whose long Jeafatalke cause the leaves to tremble
with evcry breath of wind, unites with the willow
* and the oak to overshadow the watercourses of
the Lower Lebanon, and, with the oleander and
the acacia, to adorn the ravines of southemn
Palestine: we do not know that the Lombardy
poplar bas been noticed but by Lord Lindsay,
who describes it as growing with the walnut-tree
and weeping-willow under the deep torrents of
the Upper Lebanon.’—J. F. R.

BACA, THE VALLEY OF (Ps. lxxxiv. 6),
or Valley of Weeping. Some, with our translators,
regard this as the name of a place, and by such it
has been usually sought in the Bekaa (el-Bekaa),
a valley or plain in which Baalbek is situated.
But this spot is far from possessing the dreariness
and drought on which the point of the Psalmist's
allulusion depends. It does not appear neces-

to understand that there is any reference to
an actual valley so called. The Psalmist in
exile, or at least at a distance from Jerusalem, is
speaking of the privileges and happiness of those
who are permitted to make the usual pilgrimages
to that city, in order to worship Jehovah in the
Temple: ‘They knew the ways that lead thither
yea, though they must pass through rough and
dreary paths, even a vale of tears; yet such are
their bope and joy of heart, that all this is to them
as a well-watered country, a land crowned with
blessings of the early rain.” Dr. Robinson (Add.
to Calmet) concludes that something like this is
the sense of the passage. Few versious regard the
word as a proper name. The Sept. has eis rhy
aordda Tov kAavOuaves; the Vulgate, in valle
lacrymarum.

BAD. [Brssvs.]

BADG This is unquestionably a wrong
interpretation of the word WTIN tachash, since the
badger is not found in Southern Asia, and has not
as yet been noticed out of Europe. The word oc-
curs in the plural form in Exod. xxv.5; xxvi. 14;
xxv. 7,23; xxxvi. 19; xxxix. 34; Num. iv. 6,
8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 25; and Ezek. xvi. 10; and in
connection with FY oroth, skins, is used to denote
the covering of the Tahernacle. Skins of some
animal no doubt are meant, though any confirma-
tion in favour of the badget, derived from the
Chaldee version, with or without a prefix, is
equally untenable, since the species is likewise
unknown in Chaldza, A judicious Biblical critic
observes that it is questionable whether the skin of
an unclean animal would have been suffered to
come in contact with objects kept so sacred as the
Tabernacle and all that pertained to it. This con-
sideration was evidently paramount when we find
rams’ skins, stained red, employed in the first co-
vering, and these, like all the other materials
required for the purpose, were free gifts from the

people; consequently the skins for the external
covering were likewise possessed by the public,
and therefore were used or intended for common


purposes.
_In the present state of zoological knowledge it


BAG. 277


is not necessary to refute the notions that tachash
was the name of a mermaid or homo marinus,
or of the walrus, a Polar animal, or of the dugong
or seal, for neither of these is known in the In-
dian, Red, or Persian seas, and there is little
probability that in remote ages they frequented
the south-east extremity of the Mediterranean,
where the current sweeps all things northward ;
still less that they nestled in the lakes of the
Delta, where crocodiles then ahounded. But


Niebuhr's hint respecting tie name ae!


tachash, given, with some reference to colours, to
@ species of delphinus or porpoise, by the Arabs
near Cape Mussendum, may deserve considerati
since the same people still make small rounded
bucklers and soles of sandals of the Aout's skin,
which is a cetaceous animal, perhaps identical
with Niebuhr’s. This material might have been
obtained from the caravan-traders of Yemen, or
from the Ismaelites of Edom, but does not appear
to have been fitted for other purposes than pack-
saddles and sandal-soles: considering fecha:
therefore, not to indicate a colour, but the skin of
an animal, which may have derived its name from
its colour, probably deep grey, ash, or slaty (Aya-
ginus), we must look for the object in question to
the zoology of the region around, or to places acces-
sible by means of the traders and tribute importa-
tions of raw materials in Egypt, where we actually
observe leopard or panther kins and others of a
smaller carmivorous animal with a Jong fox-tail
represented in the triumphal procession of
Thothmes III. at Thebes (Wilkinson's Ane.
Egyptians, vol. i. pl. 4). These may have been of
a canine genus, such as the agriodus, or megalutis
Lalandii, which is actually iron-grey; or of a
viverrous species, whereof there are many in Africa
hoth grey and spotted. Still these are unclean ani-
mals, and for his reason we turn to another view
of the case, which may prove the most satisfac-
tury that can now be obtained. Negroland and
Central and Eastern Africa contain a number of
ruminating animals of the great antelope family :
they are known to the natives under various
names, such as pacasse, empcasse, thacasse,
facasse, and tachaitze, all more or less varieties
of the word tachash: they ure of considerable
size; often of slaty and purple-grey colours, and
might be termed stag-goats and ox-goats. Of
these one or more occur in the hunting-scenes on
Egyptian monuments, and therefore we may con-
clude that the skins were accessible in abundance,
and may have been dressed with the hair on for
coverings of baggage, and for boots, such as we
see worn by the human figures in the same pro-
cessions. Thus we have the greater number of
the conditions of the question sufficiently realized
to enable us to draw the inference that tachash
refers to a ruminant of the Aigocerine or Damaline
groups, most likely of an iron-grey or slaty-
coloured species.—C, H. S.

BAG, a purse or pouch (Deut xxv. 13; Job
xiv. 17; 1 Sam. xvii. 40; Luke xii. 33). The
money deposited in the treasuries of Eastern
princes, or intended for large payments, or to be
sent to a government as taxes or tribute, is cok
lected in loug, narrow bags or purses, each con-
taining a certain amount of money, and sealed
with the official seal. As the money is counted
for this purpose, and sealed with great care by


278 BAHURIM.


officers properly appointed, the bag, or purse,

ses current, as lung as the seal remains un-
bale, for the amount marked thereon. In the
receipt aud payment of large sums, this is a great
and important convenience in countries where the
mauagement of large transactions by paper is
unknown, or where a currency is chielly or
wholly of silver: it saves the great trouble of
counting or weighing loose money. This usaze
is so well established. that, at this day, in the
Levant, ‘a purse’ is tne very name for a certain
amount of money (now five pounds sterliny), and
all large payments are stated in ‘ purses.’ The
antiquity of this custum is attested by the monu-
ments of Egypt, in which the ambassadors of


distant nations are represented as bringing their
tributes in sealed bays of money to Thothmes
III.; and we see the same bays deposited intact
in the royal treasury. When coined money was
not used, the seal must have been considcred a
voucher not only for the amount, but for the pu-
rity of the metal. The money collected in the
Temple, in the time of Joash, svems to have been
made up into bags of equal value after this
fashion; which were probably delivered, sealed,
to those who paid the workmen (2 Kings xii. 10;
comp. also 2 Kings v. 23; Tobit ix. 5; xi. 16).
BAHURIM, a place not far from Jerusalem,
beyond the Mount of Olives, on the road to the
Jordan, where Shimei cursed and threw stones at
David (2 Sam. xvi. 5; Joseph. Antig. vii. 9. 7).
BALAAM (DYD2; Sept. and Philo, Badadu;
Josephus, BdAauos). The name is derived by
Vitringa from bya and DY, lord of the people ;
but by Simonis from Y72 and DY, destruction
of the people—un allusion to his supposed super-


natural powers. His father’s name WY comes
likewise from a root which means to consume or


devour. It is deserving of notice that yoo. the
first king of the Edomites, was also the son of a
WPI Beor (Gen. xxxvi. 32). In 2 Peter ii. 15,
Balaam is called the Son of Bosor, which Gese-
nius attributes to an early corruption of the text,
but Dr. Lightfoot considers it to be a Chaldaism,
and infers from the Apostle’s use of it, that he was
then resident at Babylon. (Works, vol. vii. p.
80: Sermon on the way of Balaam.) In the
other passage of the New Testament (Rev. ii.
14, 15), the sect of the Nicolaitans is described
as following the doctrine or teaching of Balaam ;
and it appears not improbable that this name is
employed symbolically, as NixdéAaos, Nicolaus,
is equivalent in meaning to Balaam. The first
mention of this remarkable person is in Numbers
xxii. 5, where we are informed that Balak ‘ sent
messengers unto Balaam the son of Beor to Pethor,
which is by the river of the land of the children
of his people.’ Twelve Hebrew MSS. examined
by Dr. Kennicott, two of De Russi’s, the Sama-


BALAAM.


ritan text, with the Syriac and Vulgate versions,
instead of YOY 33 ‘children of his people,’ read
Woy %33 ‘children of Ammon,’ This is ap-
proved by Houbigant and Kennicott, but is in-
congistent with Deut. xxiii. 4, which informs us
that Pethor was in Mesopotamia; for the Am-
monites, as Rosenmiiller observes, never extended
so far as the Euphrates, which must be the river
alluded to. If the received reading be correct, it
intimates that Pethor was situated in Balaam's |
native country, and that he was not a mere
sojourner in Mesopotamia, as the Jewish patriarchs
were in Canaan. In Joshua xiii. 22, Balaam is
termed ‘the Soothsayer’ PDIP, a word which,
with ils cognates, is used almost without exc
tion in an unfavourable sense. Josephus calls
him pdvyris &pirros, an eminent diviner (Antig.
iv. 6 § 2); and what is to be understuod by this
appellation, may be perhaps best learned from
the following description by Philo :—‘ There was
a man at that time celebrated for divination, who
lived in Mesopotamia, and was an adept in all the
forme of the divining art; but in no branch was he
more admired than in augury; to many persons
and on many occasions he gave great and astound-
ing proofs of his skill. For to some he foretold
storms in the height of summer; to others drought
and heat in the depth of winter; to some scarcity
succeeding a fruitful year, and then again abun-
dance after scarcity; to others the overflowing and
the drying up of rivers; and the remedies of pesti-
lential diseases, and a vast multitude of other
things, each of which he acquired great fame for
predicting’ (Vita Moysis, § 48). Origen speaks
of Balaam as famous for his skill in magic, and
the use of noxious incantations, but denies that
he had any power to bless, for which he gives
the following reason :—‘ 473s enim magica nescit
benedicere quia nec demones sctunt benefacere.
(in Num. Hom, xiii.) Balak’s language, ‘ 1 wot
he whom thou blessest is blessed’ (Numb. xxii. 6),
he considers as only designed to flatter Balaam,
and render him compliant with his wishes.

Of the numerous paradoxes which we find in
‘this stranze mixture of a man,’ as Bishop New-
ton terms him, not the least striking is that with
the practice of an art expressly forbidden to the
Israelites, (* there shall not be found among you
one that useth divination (DY9DP DOP, Deut.
xviii, 10), for all that do these things are an
abomination to the Lord'—ver. 12) he united the
knowledge and worship of Jehovah, and was in
the habit of receiving intimations of his will:
ST will bring you word again as the Lord (Je
hovah) shall speak unto me’ (Num. xxii. §).
The inquiry uaturally arises, by what means did
he become acquainted with the true religion?
Dr. Hengstenberg sugzests that he was led to
renounce idolatry by the reports that reached
him of the miracles attending the Exodus; and
that having experienced the deceptive nature of
the soothsaying art, he hoped by becoming a
worshipper of the God of the Hebrews, to acquire
fresh power over nature, and a clearer insight
into futurity. Yet the sacred narmative gives us
no reason to suppose that he had any previous
knowledge of the Israelites. In Num. xxii. 11,
he merely repeats Balak’s message, ‘ Behold
there is a people come out of Egypt,’ &e., with-
out intimating that he had heard of the miracles
wrought on their behalf. The allusion in Nam,


BALAAM.'


xxiii. 22 might be pted by the divine affla-
tus which he then felt. And had he been ac-
tuated, in the first instance, by motives of per-
sonal aggrandizement, it seems hardly probable
that he would have Leen favoured with those
divine communications with which his language
in Num. xxii. 8 implies a familiarity. Since, in
the case of Simon Magus, the offer to ‘ purchase
the gift of God with money’ (Acts viii. 20) called
forth an immediate an’ awful rebuke from the
Apostles, would not Balaam’s attempt to obtain
a similar gift with a direct view to personal
emolument and fame have met with a similar
repulse ?—Dr. H. supposes, indeed, that there
was a mixture of a higher order of sentiments, a
eense of the wants of his moral nature, which led
him to seek Jehovah, and laida foundation for
intercourse with him. In the absence of more
copious and precise information, may we not
reasonably conjecture that Jacob's residence for
twenty years in Mesopotamia contributed to
maintain some just ideas of religion, though min-
gled with much superstition? To this source
and the existing remains of Patriarchal religion,
Balaam was probably indebted for that truth
which he unhappily ‘held in unrighteousness’
(Rom. i. £8).

On the narrative contained in Numbers xxii.
22-35 a difference of opinion has long existed,
even among those who fully admit its authen-
ticity. The advocates for a literal interpretation
urge, that in a historical work and a narrative
bearing the same churacter, it would be unnatural
to regard any of the occurrences as taking place
in vision, unless expressly so stated ; — that it
would be difficult to determine where the vision
begins, and where it ends; — that Jehovah's
‘opening the mouth of the ass’ (Num. xxii. 28)
must have been an external act ; and, finally, that
Peter's language is decidedly in favour of the
literal sense: two(iyiov Epwyov, ev dxOpdmov
guava pbeyiduevoy exddvoe Thy Tod xpophrov
wapappoviay—‘ The dumb ass, speaking with a
man’s voice, reproved the madness of the Prophet’
(2 Peter ii. 16). Those who conceive that the
speaking of the ass and the appearance of the

’ Angel occurred in vision to Balaam (among
whom are Maimonides, Leibnitz, and Hengs-
stenberg) insist upon the fact that dreams and
visions were the ordinary methods by which God
made himself known to the Prophets (Num. xii.
6); they remark that Balaam, in the introduc-
tion to his third and fourth prophecies (xxiv. 3,
4, 15), speaks of himself as ‘the man who had
his eyes shut’ (DNY = DNY and DND, v. Lam.
iii. 8), and who, on falling down in prophetic
exstasy, had his eyes opened ;—that he expressed
no surprise on hearing the ass speak; and that
neither his servants nor the Moabitish princes who
accompanied him appear to have been cognizant
of any supernatural appearance. Dr. Jortin su
poses that the Angel of the Lord suffered himself
to be seen by the beast, but not by the Prophet ;
that the beast was terrified, and Balaam smote
her, and then fell into a trance, and in that state
conversed first with the beast and then with the
Angel. The Angel presented these objects to his
imagination as strongiy as if they had been before
his eyes, so that this was still a miraculous or
preternatural operation, In dreaming, many
singalar incongruities occur without exciting our


BALDNESS. 3”


astonishment; it is therefore not wonderful if the
pe ci conversed with his beast in vision, with-
out being startled at such a phenomenon (v. Jor-
tin’s ‘ Dissertation on Balaam,’ pp. 190-194).

The limits of this article will not allow of an
examination of Balaam’s magnificent prophecies,
which, as Herder remarks (Geist der Ebrdischen
Povste, ii, 221), ‘are distinguished for dignity,
compression, vividness, and fulness of imagery:
there is scarcely anything equal to them in the
later Prophets, and’ (he adds, what few readers,
probably, of Deut. xxxii. xxxiii. will be Ce aie
to admit) ‘ nothing in the discourses of Moses.’
We must refer on this subject tv Bishop Newton
and Dr. Hengstenberg. The latter writer has
ably discussed the doubts raised by Dr. de Wetté’
and ot er German critics, respecting the antiquity
and genuineness of this portion of the Pentateuch.
(Dr. Jortin’s Siz Dissertations, Lond. 1755, pp.
171-194: Bishop Butler's Sermons at the Bolle
Chapel, Serm. vii. Bishop Newton On the Pro-
phecivs, vol. i. ch. 5. Déscours Historiques, &c.,
par M. Saurin, Amst. 1720, tome ii. Disc.
64. Die Geschichte Bileams und seine Weie-
sagungen erlautert, von E. W. Hengstenberg,
1842. Origenis Opera, Berl. 1840, tom. x. pp.
168-258.)—J. E. R.

BALADAN. [Meropacu-Barapan.]


BALAK (P93, empty; Sept. Bardx), oom
of Zippor, and king of the Moabites (Num.
xxii. 2, 4), who was so terrified at the approach
of the victorious army of the Israelites, who in
their passage through the desert had encamped
near the confines of his territory, that he applied
to Balaam, who was then reputed to possess great
influence with the higher spirits, to curse them.
The result of this application is related under
another head [Banaam]. From Judg. xiv. 25, it
is clear that Balak was so certain of the fulfilment
of Balaam’s blessing, ‘ blessed is he that blesseth
thee, and cursed is he that curseth thee’ (Num.
xxiv. 9), that he never afterwards made the least
military attempt to oppose the Israelites (comp.
Mic. vi. 5; Rev. ii. 14).—E. M.

BALANCE. (Weiauina.]


BALDNESS (I) may be artifitial-or na-
tural. Artificial baldness, caused by cutting
or shaving off the hair of the head, a custom
among all the ancient and Eastern nations, in
token of mourning for the death of a near
relative (Jer. xvi. 6; Amos viii. 10; Micah i
16), Moses forbade to the Israelites (Deut. xiv.
1), probably for the very reason of its being a
heathen custom; for a leading object of his
policy was to remove the Jews as far as
sible from the ways and customs of the sux
rounding nations. Natural baldness, though Moses
did not consider it as a symptom of leprosy,
and declared the man afflicted with it to be clean
and sound (Lev. xiii. 40, sg.), yet was always
treated among the Israelites with contempt (tbid.),
and a bald man was not unfrequently exposed to
the ridicule of the mob (2 Kings ii. 3; Isa. iii. 175
comp. Suet. Cas. 45; Domit. 18); perhaps from
the suspicion of being under some leprous taint, as
the Hebrew word PP originally implied an ulcer,
or an tlcered person. The public prejudice thus
entertained against a bald-headed man was per
haps the main reason Why he was declared unfit


By BANQUETS.


for the priestly office (Lev. xxi. 20; Mishn. s#.
Bechoroth, vii. 2).—E. M.

BANQUETS. The entertainments spoken of
in Scripture, on however large a scale, and of
however sumptuous a character, were all provided
at the expense of one individual; the &payos of
the Greeks, to which every guest present contri-
buted his proportion, being apparently unknown
to the Jews, or at least practised only by the
humbler classes, as some suppose that an instance
of it occurs in the feast given to our Lord, shortly
before his Passion, by his friends in Bethany
(Matt. xxvi. 2; Mark xiv. 1: comp. with Joln
xii. 2). Festive meetings of this kind were held
only towards the close of the day, as it was not
*till business was over that the Jews freely in-
dulged in the pleasures of the table; and although
in the days of Christ these meals were, after the
Roman fashion, called suppers, they corresponded
exactly to the dinners of modern times, the hour
fixed for them varying from five to six o'clock
P.M., or sometimes later.

On occasions of ceremony the company were
invited a considerable time previous to the cele-
bration of the feast; and on the day and at the
hour appointed, an express by one or more ser-
vants, according to the number anil distance of
the expected guests, was despatched to announce
that the preparations were completed, and that
their presence was looked for immediately (Matt.
xxii. 8; Luke xiv. 17). (Grotinus, in loc. ;
also Morier’s Journey, p. 73.) This custom
obtains in the East at the present day; and the
second invitation, which is always verbal, is de-
livered by the messenger in his master’s name,
and frequently in the very language of Scripture :
‘Behold I have prepared my dinner; my oxen
and fatlings are killed, and all things are ready *
(Matt. xxii. 4). It is observable, however, that
this after-summons is sent to none but such as
have been already invited, and have declared
their acceptance ; and, as in these circumstances,
people are bound by every feeling of honour and
propriety to postpone all other engagements to the
duty of waiting upon their entertainer, it is mani-
fest that the vehement resentment of the grandee
in the parable of the great supper, where each of
the guests*%is described as offering to the bearer of
the express some frivolous apologies for absence,
_ was, so far from being harsh and unreasonable, as
infidels have characterized it, fully warranted and
most natural according to the inanners of the age
and country. By accepting his invitation they
had given a pledge of their presence, the violation
of which on such trivial grounds, and especially
after the liberal preparations made for their enter-
tainment, could bs viewed in no other light than
as a gross and deliberate insult.

At the small entrance door a servant was sta-
tioned to receive the tablets or cards of those who
were expected ; and as curiosity usually collected
a crowd of troublesome spectators, anxivus to
press forward into the scene of gaiety, the gate
was opened only so far as was necessary for the
admission of a single person at a time, who, on
presenting his invitation ticket, was conducted
through a long and narrow passage into the re-
ceiving-room ; and then, after the whole company
were assembled, the master of the house shut the
door with his own hands—a signal to the ser-
vant to allow himself to-be prevailed on neither


BANQUE®S,


by noise nor by importunities, however loud and
long continued, to admit the bystanders. Te
this custom there is a manifest reference in Luke
xiii, 24, and Matt. xxv. 10 (Morier’s Journey,
. 142).
. nae of the first marks of courtesy shown to the
guests, after saluting the host, was the refreshment
of water and fragrant oil or perfumes; and hence
we find our Lord complaining of Simon's omission
of these customary civilities (Luke vii. 44; see aleo
Mark vii. 4) [Anointing]. But a far higher,
though necessarily less frequent attention paid to
their friends by the great, was the custom of fur-
nishing each of the company with a magnificent
habit of a light and showy colour, and richly em-
broidered, to be worn during the festivity (Eccles,
ix. 8; Rev. iii. 4, 5). The loose and flowing
atyle of this gorgeous mantle made it equally
suitable for all; and it is almost incredible
what a variety of such sumptuous garments the
wardrobes of some great men could supply to
equip a numerous party. In a large company,
even of respectable persons, some might appear in
a plainer and humbler garb than accorded with
the taste of the voluptuous gentry of our Lord's
time; and where this arose from necessity or
limited means, it would have been harsh and un-
reasonable in the extreme to attach blame, or to
command his instant and ignominious expulsion
from the banquet-room. But where a well-ap-
pointed and sumptuous wardrobe was opened for
the use of every guest,—to refuse the gay and
splendid costume which the munificence of the
host aise! and to persist in appearing in one’s
own habiliments, implied a contempt both for the
master of the house and his entertainment, which
could not fail to provoke resentment—and our
Lord therefore spoke in accordance with a well-
known custum of his country, when, in the parable
of the marriage of the king's son, he describes the
stern displeasure of the king on discovering one
of the guests without a wedding garment, and his
instant command to thrust him out (Matt. xxii.
11). At private banquets the master of the
house of course presided, and did the honours of
the occasion; but in large and mixed companies
it was anciently customary to elect a guvernor of
the feast (John ii. 8; see also Ecclus. xxxii. 1),
who should not merely perform the office of chair
man, apxirpixAuvos, in preserving order and deco-
rum, but take upon himself the general manuge-
ment of the festivities. As this ottice was con
sidered a post of great responsibility and delicacy,
as well as honour, the choice which among the
Greeks and Romans was left to the decision of dice,
was more wisely made by the Jews to fall upon
him who was known to be possessed. of the requisite
qualities—a ready wit and convivial turn, and
at the same time firmness of character and habits
of temperance [acura cules: The guests
were scrupulously arranged according to their re-
spective ranks. This was done either by the host
or governor, who, in the case of a family, placed
them according to seniority (Gen. xlii. 33), and
in the case of others, assizned the most honourable
a place near his own person; or it was done hy the
party themselves, on their successive arrivals, and
after surveying the company, taking up the po-
sition which it appeared tittest for each according
to their respective claims to occupy. It might be
expected that among the Oveniale by whom the


BANQUETS.


laws of etiquette im these matters are strictly ob-
ewved, many absurd and ludicrous contests for
lence must take place, from the arrogance
of some and the determined perseverance of others
to wedge themselves into the seat they deem the:n-
selves entitled to. Accordingly Morier, who is
well acquainted with the manners of the Persians,
informs us, ‘that it is easy to observe by the
countenances of those present, when any one has
taken a higher place than he ought.’ ‘On one
occasion,’ he adds, ‘ when an assembly was nearly
full, the governor of Kashan, a man of humble
mien, came in, and had seated himself at the
lowest place, when the host, after having testified
his particular attentions to him by numerous ex-
pressions of welcome, pointed with his hand to an
upper seat, which he desired him to take ' (Second
Journey). As a coun to this, Dr. Clarke
states that ‘ ata wedding feast he attended in the
house of'a rich merchant at St. Jean d'Acre, two
who had seated themselves at the top were
noticed by the master of ceremonies, and obliged
to move lower down’ (see also Joseph. Antig. xv.
2). The knowledge of these liarities serves to
illustrate several passages of Scripture (Prov. xxv.
6,7; Matt. xxiii. 6; and especially Luke xiv. 7,
where we find Jesus making the unseemly ambi-
tion of the Pharisees the subject of severe and
merited animadversion). That class were notori-
ously eager to occupy the chief seats of honour
when mingling in society with their fellow-citizens.
unequivocal symptoms of such contention
oar Lord had probably witnessed in the house of
the opulent Pharisee with whom he was dining,
and if He himself were sitting at the lower part
of the table, the reproof of their pride and foolish
ambition, conveyed in the parable He delivered on
that occasion, would be the more pointed and
severely felt.

It would be difficult within a short compass
to describe the form and arrangements of the table,
as the entertainments spoken of in Scripture were
not al] conducted in a uniform style. In ancient
Egypt, as in Persia, the tables were ranged along
the sides of the room, and the guests were placed
with their faces towards the walls. Persons of
high official station were honoured with a table
apart for themselves at the head of the room ; and
in these particulars every reader of the Bible
will trace an exact dence to the arrange-
ments of Joseph's entertainment to his brethren.
According to Lightfoot (Exercit. on John xiii.
23), the tables of the Jews were either wholly
uncovered, or two-thirds were spread with a cloth,
while the remaining third was left bare for the

dishes and vegetables. In the days of our Lord
the prevailing form was the triclinium, the mode
of reclining at which is described elsewhere
Uecuseson|: This effeminate practice was
not introdu until near the close of the Old
Testament history, for amongst all its writers
}®ior to the age of Amos 30”, to sit, is the word
invariably used to describe the posture at table
(1 Sam. xvi., margin, and Ps. cxxviii. 3, im-
plying that the ancient Israelites sat round
table, crose-legyed, like the Orientals of the
present day), whereas dvaxAlve, signifying a re-
cumbent is the word employed in the
Gospel. And whenever the word ‘sit’ occurs in
the New Testament, it ought to be translated ‘lie,’
acccrding to the universal practice of that age.


BANQUETS. m


The convenience of spoons, knives, and firks
being unknown in the East, or, where known,
being a modem innovation, the hand is the only
instrument used in conveying food to the mouth,
and the common practice, their food being chiefly
prepared in a liquid form, is to dip their thin
wafer-like bread in the dish, and folding it
between their thumb and two fingers, enclose a
portion of the centents. It is not uncommon
to see several hands plunged into one dish at
the same time. But where the party is nu-
merous, the two persons near or opposite are
commonly joined in one dish; and accordingly,
at the last Passover, Judas, being close to his
master, was pointed out as the traitur by being
designated as the person ‘ dipping his hand with
Jesus in the dish.’ The Apostle John, whose
advantageous situation enabled him to hear the
minutest parts of the conversation, has recorded
the fact of our Lord, in reply to the question,
‘ Who is it?’ answering it by ‘ giving a sop to
Judas when he had dipped’ (John xiii. 27); and
this leads us to mention it as not the least among
the peculiarities of Oriental manners, that a host
often dips his hand into a dish, and lifting a
handful of what he considers a dainty, offers the
Woploy or sop to one of his friends. However
the fastidious delicacy of a European appetite
might revolt at such an act of hospitality, it is
one of the greatest courtesies that an Oriental
can show, and to decline it would be a violation
of propriety and good manners (see Jowett's
Christian Researches). In earlier ages, a double
or a more liberal portion, or a choice piece of
cookery, was the form in which a landlord showed
his respect fur the individual he delighted to
honour (Gen. xliii. 34; 1 Sam. i. 4; ix. 23;
Prov. xxxi. 15; see Voller’s Gree. Antig. ii. 387;
Forbes, Orient. Mem. iii. 187). :

While the guests reclined in the manner de-
scribed above, their feet, of course, being stretched
out behind, were the most accessible parts of their
yerson, and accordingly the woman with the
alabaster-box of ointment could pay her grateful
and reverential attentions to Jesus without dis-
turbing him in the business of the table. Nor
can the presence of this woman, uninvited and
unknown even as she was to the master of the
house, appear at all an incredible or strange cir-
cumstance, when we cunsider that entertainments
are often given in gardens, or in the outer courts,
where strangers ure freely admitted, and that
Simon’s table was in all likelihood as accessible to
the same promiscuous visitors as are found hover-
ing about at the banquets and entering into the
houses of the most respectable Orientals of the
present day (Forbes, Orient. Mem). In the course
of the entertainment servants are frequently em-
ployed in sprinkling the head and person of the
guests with odoriferous perfumes, which, probably
to counteract the effects of too copious perspira-
tion, they use in great profusion, and the fragrance
of which, though generally too strong for Euro-

is deemed an agreeable refreshment (see
Be. xlv. 8; xxiii. 5; cxxxiii. 2).

The various items of which an Oriental enter-
tainment consists, bread, flesh, fish, fowls, melted
butter, honey, and fruits, are in many places
set on the table at once, in defiance of all
taste. They are brought in upon trays—une,
containing several dishes, being assigned to &


283 BANQUETS.


group of two, or at most three, and the
number and quality of the dishes being regulated
according to the rank and consideration of the

rty seated before it. In ordinary cases four or

ive dishes constitute the portion allotted to a
guest; but if he he a person of consequence, or
one to whom the host is desirous of showing more
than ordinary marks of attention, other viands
are successively brought in, until, if every vacant
corner of the tray is uccupied, the bowls are piled
one above another. The object of this rude but
liberal hospitality is, not that the individual thus
honoured 1s expected to surfeit himself by an
excess of indulgence in order to testify his sense
of the entertainer’s kindness, but that he may
enjoy the means of gratifying his palate with
greater variety; and hence we read of Joseph's
displaying his partiality for Benjamin by making
his ‘ mess five times s0 much as any of theirs’
(Gen. xliii. 34). The shoulder of a lamb, roasted,
and plentifully besmeared with butter and milk,
is rezarded as a great delicacy still (Bucking-
hain's 7ravels, ii. 136), as it was also in the days
of Samuel. But according to the favourite
cookery of the Orientals, their animal food is for
the most part cut into small pieces, stewed, or

pared in a liquid state, such as seems to have
sil the ‘broth’ presented by Gideon to the angel
(Judz. vi. 19). The made-up dishes are ¢ savoury
meat,” being highly seasoned, and bring to re-
membrance the marrow and fatness which were
esteemed as the most choice morsels in ancient
times. As to driuk, when particular attention
was intended to be shown to a guest, his cup was
filled with wine till it ran over (Ps. xxiii. 5), and
it is said that the ancient Persians begaa their
feasts with wine, whence it was called ‘a banquet
of wine’ (Esther v. 6).

The hands, for occasionally both were required,
besmeared with grease during the process of eating,
were anciently cleaned by rubbing them with
the soft part of the bread, the crumbs of which,
being alluwed to fall, became the portion of dogs
(Matt. xv. 27; Luke xvi. 21), But the most
common way now at the conclusion of a feast is
for a servant to go round to each guest with
water to wash, a service which is perfurmed by
the menial pouring a stream over their hands,
which is received into a strainer at the bottom of
the basin. This humble office Elisha performed
to his master (2 Kings iit. 11).

People of rank and opulence in the East fre-
quently give public entertainments to the poor.
The rich man in the parable, whose guests dis-
appointed him, despatched his servants on the
instant to invite those that mizht be found sitting
by the hedges and the highways—a measnre
which, in the circumstances, was absolutely neces-
sary, as the heat of the climate would spoil the
meats long before they could be consumed by
the members of his own household. But many
of the great, from benevolence or ostentation, are
in the habit of proclaiming set days for giving
feasts to the poor; and then, at the time ap-
Pome, may be seen crowds of the blind, the

t, and the maimed bending their steps to the
scene of entertainment. This species of charity
claims a venerable antiquity. Our Lord recom-
mended his wealthy hearers to practise it rather
than d their fortunes, as they did, on luxu-
vious living (Luke xiv. 12); and as such invi-


BAPTISM:


tations to the are of necessity given by
public proclamation, and female messengers are
employed to publish them (Hasselquist saw ten
or twelve thus perambulating a town in Egypt),
it is probably to the same venerable practice tha
Solomon alludes in Prov. ix. 3.—R. J. :
BAPTISM. A conviction of the holiness of
God excites in man the notion that he cannot
sibly come into any amicable relation with
im before he is cleansed of sin, which sepa-
rates him from God. This sentiment found
a very widely extended symbolic expression in
the lustrations which formed an essential part of
the ceremonial creeds of the ancient nations.
These justrations were prevalent not only among
the heathen nations, more especially those of the
southern climates, such as the Indians, Egyptians,
Greeks, and Romans (comp. Wetstein, Nov. Test.
Evang. Matth. iii. 6), but also among the Jews.
With these latter they were preparations for divine
services of a different nature, and even for private
prayer (Judith xii). They formed a part of the
otlering-service, and more especially of the sin-
oflering (Lev. xvi.); and for that reason they
usually established the prayer-houses (xpocevyal)
in the vicinity of running waters (comp. Kuinoel,
ad Act. xvi. 13). Josephus (Antig. xviii. L. 5)
gives an account of the manifold lustrations of
the Essenes. In the language of the prophets,
cleansing with: water is used as an emblem
of the purification of the heart, which in the
Messianic age is to glorify the soul in her in-
nermost recesses, and embrace the whole of the ¢
theocratic nation (Ezek. xxxvi. 25, sq.3 Zech.
xiii. 1). Such declarations gave rise to or nou.
rished the expectation that the advent of the
Messiah would manifest itself by a preparatory
lustration, by which Elijah or some other great
prophet would pave the way for him. This sup-
position lies evidently at the bottom of the ques-
tions: which the Jews put to Jubn the Baptist
(John i, 25; comp. Matt. and Luke, iii. 7),
whether he was the Messiah, or Elijah, or some
other prophet ? and if not, why he undertook to
baptize? (comp. Schneckenberger, Ueber das AL
ter der Jtidischen Proselytentaufe, § 41, 8q.).
Thus we can completely clear up the historical
derivation of the rite, as used by John and Christ,
from the general and natural symbol of baptism,
from the Jewish custom in particular, and from
the expectation of a Messianic consecration.
Danz, Ziegler, and others have, nevertheless,
supposed it to be derived from the Jewish cere-
monial of baptizing prose/ytes ; and Wetstein has
traced that rite up to a date earlier than Chris-
tianity. But this opinion is not at all tenable :
for, as an act which strictly gives validity to the
admission of a proselyte, aud is no mere accomn-
paniment to his admission, baptism certainly is
not alluded to in the New Testament; while, as
to the passages quoted in proof from the classical
(profane) writers of that period, they are all open to
the most fandamental objections. Nor is the utter
silence of Josephus and Philo on the subject, not-
withstanding their various opportunities of tonch-
ing on it, a less weighty argument against this
view. It is true that mention is made in the
Talmud of that regulation as already existing in
the tirst century a.p.; but such statements belong
only to the traditions of the Gemara, and require
careful imvestigation before they can serve ag
t


BAPTISM.


authority. This Jewish rite was pro-
y originally only a purifying ceremony; and
it was raised to the character of an initiating
and indispensable rite co-ordinate with that of
mcritice and circumcision, only after the destruc-
tion of the Temple, when sacrifices had ceased,
and the circumcision of proselytes had, by reason
of public edicts, become more and more imprac-
ticable (comp. Schneckenb. %.). E.G. Bengel
(Ueber d. Alter der Jiid. Pros. Tauf. 1814) sees,
in its original establishment only an act of ini-
tiation, which, though before the destraction of
the Temple merely of an accidental character,
had through John and Christ received a peculiar
and solid basis. ‘The view of De Wette (De Morte
Christ. Expiat.), that this rite was transferred
from Christianity to Judaism, Winer ( Real-wor-
terb. art. ‘ Proselyten’) justly rejects as utterly
improbable. .
sPrisu ov JoHN.—It was the principal object
of Jolin the Baptist to combat the prevailing opi-
nion, that the performance of external ceremonies
Was sufficient to secure participation in the king-
dom of God and his promises ; he required repent-
ance, therefore, (Bdwrigua peravolas,) as a prepara-
ton fur the approaching kingdom of the Messiah.
That he may ibly have baptized heathens
also, seems to fall from his censuring the Pha-
Tees for confiding in their descent from Abraham,
while they had no share in his spirit: yet it
thould not be overlooked that this remark was
drawn from him by the course of the argument
(Matt. iii. 8,9; Luke iii. 7,8). Angusti (Denk-
wrrdigheiten aus der Christl. Archiol. vii. 30)
itis true, advances a few counter-reusons, but they
are easily refuted (comp. Schneckenb. lL. i. § 37).
We must, on the whole, assume that John const-
dered the existing Judaism as a stepping-stone by
. Which the Gentiles were to arrive at the kingdom
of God in its Messianic form.
The elation of the baptism of John to the
Christian baptism gave rise to a sharp controversy
in the sixteenth century. Zwingle and Calvin
Were in favour of the essential equality of the two;
while Luther, Melanchthon, and the Catholic
church (Coneid, Trident. Sess. vii.) maintained
the coutrary. The only difference Calvin allowed
Nis that John baptized in the name of the future
Messiah, while the apostles buptized in that of the
Alesiah already come, But this difference could
he of little moment; the less so, since a step to-
wards the manifestation of the Messiah was already
rie in the appearance of John himself (comp.
ee 1.31). On the other hand, Calvin considers
most important puint of equality between the
two to exist in the fact, that both include repent-
la and rdon of sin in the name of Christ.
j i os point of view, however, from which
contemplated the Messiah and his kingdom
was that of the Old Testament, though closely
nee on Christianity, He regards, it is true,
alteration Jn the mind and spirit as an indis-
at condition for partaking in the kingdom
essiah ; still he looked for its establishment
ee of conflict and external force, with
ae Messiah was to be endowed ; and heex-
= ae ie a Judge and Avenger, who was to
ah rag iedee and visible distinctions. It is,
wh ther baptism ane a matter of indifference


tat Crist who Bocied teins the nated rence


BAPTISM. 283


or of the suffering and glorified One, such as the
apustles knew him ; and whether it was considered
a preparation for a political, or a consecration into
a spiritual theocracy (comp. Dr. Neander’s Leben
Jesu Christi, p. 57, sq.). Jobn was so far from
this latter view, so far from contemplating a
purely spiritual develupment of the kingdom of
God, that he even began subsequently to entertain
doubts concerning Christ (Matt. xi. 2). Tertul-
lian distinguishes the essential characteristics of the
two baptisms in their spirit and nature. To that of
John he ascribes the negative character of repent-
ance, and to the Christian the positive impartation
of new life (De Bapt.x.11); a distinction which
arises out of the relation of daw and gospel, and is
given in the words of the Baptist himself, — that he
baptizes with water and unto repentance, while the
greater one who was to come after him would
baptize with the Holy Ghost (Matt. iii. 11; Luke
iii. 16; John i. 25). John’s baptism had not
the character of an immediate, but merely of
& preparatory consecration for the glorified theo-
cracy (John i. 31). The apostles, therefore,
found it necessary to rebaptize the disciples of
John, who had still adhered to the notions of their
master on that head (Acts xix.). To this aj
stulic judgment Tertullian appeals, and in his
opinion coincide the most eminent teachers of the
ancient church, both of the East and the West
(comp. Augusti, 1. 1. p. 31).*

Tue Barrisa o¥ dee BY Joun (Matt. iii.
13, sq.; Mark i. 9, sq.; Luke iii. 21, 8q.; comp.
John i. 19, sq.; the latter passage refers to a time
after the baptism, and describes, ver. 32, the inci-
dental facts attending it).—‘The baptism of
Jesus, ds the first act of his public career, is one
of the most important events recorded in evan-
gelical history: great difficulty is also involved
in reconciling the various accounts given by the
evangelists of that transaction, and the several
points connected with it. To question the fact it-
self, not even the negative criticism of Dr. Strauss
has dared. This is, however, all that has been
conceded by that criticism, viz., the mere and
bare fact ‘that Christ was baptized by John,’ while
all the circumstances of the event are placed in
the region of mythology or fiction.

Critical inquiry suggests the following ques-
tions :—

1. In what relation did Jesus stand to John
before the baptism ?

2. What object did Jesus intend to obtain by
that baptism ?

3. In what sense are we to take the miraculous
incidents attending that act ?

With regard to the first point, we might be
apt to infer, from Luke and Matthew, that there
had been an acquaintance between Christ and
John even prior tu the baptism ; and that hence
Jolin declines (Matt. iii. 14) to baptize Jesus,


* Jusepbus (Antig. xviii. 5. 2) gives a general
character of John, tinctured, it is true, with
some hellenistic notions, yet not contradictory to
the gospels. He calls him ‘a good man, who
bade the Jews to be virtuous, just and devout,
and so to come to his baptism; for in this way it
would be accepted of God, if used, not for the
blotting out of certain sins, but for purification of
the body, supposing the soul to have been pre-
viously puritied by righteousness.’


284 BAPTISM.


arguing that he needed to be baptized by him.
This, however, seems to be at variance with John
i. 81, 33. Liicke (Comment. i. p. 416, sq. 3rd
edit.) takes the words ‘I knew him not" in their
strict and exclusive sense. John, he says, could
not have spoken in this manner if he had at all
known Jesus; and had he known him, he could
not, as a prophet, have failed to discover, even at
an earlier period, the but too evident ‘ glory ’ of the
Messiah. In fact, the narrative of the first three
Gospels presupposes the same, since, as the herald
of the Messiah, he could give that refusal (Matt.
iii. 14) to the Messiah alone. Liicke considers
John as a sure authority; as for the contra-
diction in Luke, he makes less of it, regarding
the whole narrative of the infancy to have only a
secondary historical value; while the contradic-
tion in Matthew he thinks to remove by giving to
vers. 14, 15, a different place from that which they
now occupy in the text; and, after the example of
the Ebionitic revision of the Gospel according to
the Hebrews, in Epiphanius (Heres. xxx. 13), he
uts these words into the mouth of John, only after
Yhrist had been revealed to him tu be the Messiah
by means of the baptism (comp. also Schleier-
macher, Ueber die Schriften des Lucas, p. ah
That such a compromise is forced, appears still
more clearly by the remark of Neander (Leben
Jesu Christi, p. 67), that the words, ‘He forbad
him,’ and ‘Suffer it to be so now,’ naturally refer
tu Christ's descending into the water. Strauss
(Leb. Jesu, i. 3:30, sq.) and De Wette (ad Matth.
iii, 14) agree so far with Liicke, in admitting
a contradiction between the Gospel of John and
the other accounts, Strauss is of opinion that the
three Gospels proceeded from the popular point of
view, to designate the important relation of the
two divine messengers as permanent or of long
standing ; while Johm had a different object in
view, to found the acquaintance of both upon
revelation. We may admit the truth of the
latter part of this hypothesis, always bearing in
mind that the fact to which John refers is histori-
cally true; but the first part is at variance with the
silence which Matthew and Mark observe as to
any early acquaintance, while Luke expressly
brings only the mothers, and not the sons, into
intercourse. There is more ground in the other ob-
jection, viz. how a prophet of Jolin’s developed cha-
racter could, after the miraculous things that had
according to the accounts of the Guspels,
gin to doubt as to the mission of Christ (Matt. xi.
2), especially after so short a period of observation,
his difficulty has not escaped the notice of any
sober critic ; but in what we have stated at the
outset concerning the theocratic views of John
may easily be found the reason of his having
afterwards entertained some doubts of Jesus. At
all events, considering the scanty information we
of John, we are not justified in resorting,
Fike Strauss, to the conclusion, that because the
narratives are at variance, therefore the accounts
of the baptism, having for their object to extol John
and Christ, must be a fiction (comp. Liicke).
Meyer (ad Matth. iii. 14), Neander (1. c. p.
65, 2q.), and Winer (Bibl. Real-wirterb., art.
‘ Johannes"), endeavour to gxplain the accounts of
the baptism in favour of an earlier acquaintance
between John and Jesus. Neander, for instance,
maintains that Joln's disclaiming all knowledge
of Jesus refers merely to his Messianic character,


BAPTISM.


while his refusal to baptize him panes
from the impression Tr sublime sanctity whi

Jesus had made on his mind while he stood befare
him and prayed (Luke iii. 21). This view does
not, however, remove the following difficulties :—

1. That the simple construction of the words
of John (John i. 31, sq.) speaks more in favour of
Liicke’s interpretation.

2. That Luke's account of the early history of
Christ does not receive even by this view its full
validity, since, frum his narrative, we can hardly
help coming to the conclusion that John was ac-
quainted with all the circumstances attendant on
the birth of Christ, in which the latter was cha-
racterized as the Messiah, and that he had even
often been in previous intercourse with him, eo
that there was hardly any fair reason for his
doubting who the Messiah was; and,

3. That the prayer of Jesus (Luke iii. 21) can-
not be alleged as a reason for John’s declining to
baptize him, since it took place subsequently to
the baptism.

With regard to the second point at issue, as to
the olyect of Christ in undergoing baptism, we
find, in the first instance, that he aaled this action
among those of his Messianic calling. This object
is still more detined by John the Baptist (John i.
31), which Liicke interprets in the following
words: ‘Only by entering into that community
which was to be introductory to the Messianic, by
attaching himself to the Baptist like any otherman,
was it possible for Christ to reveal himself to the
Baptist, and through him to others.’ Christ, with his
never-failing reliance on God, never for a moment
could doubt of bis own mission, or of the right

riod. when his character was to be made manifest

y God (Paulus, Exeget. Handbuch, i.; Hase,
Leben Jesu, § 54); but John needed to receive
that assurance, in order to be the herald of the Mes-
siah who was actually come. For all others whom
John baptized, either before or after Christ, this act
was a mere preparatory consecration to the king-
dom of the Messiah; while for Jesus it was a
direct and immediate consecration, by means of
which be manifested the commencement of his
career as the founder of the new theocracy, which
began at the very moment of his baptism, the
initiatory character of which con-tituted its ge-
neral principle and tendency. Strauss, however,
neglecting this point, only dwells on that which
was unsuitable for the Messiah in the baptism of
John, according to the Gospels. Jesus, he says,
could not possibly have considered himself as the
Messiah, or it would have been simulation in him
to take a part in the act of baptism, which was
perfurmed for the purpose of initiation into the
future Messiah. He probably came, like others,
with the intention of becoming a disciple of John,
whose notions he first imbibed, bat which he after.
wards purified, and carried through according to
his own plan, when the Baptist had already quit-
ted the stage of action (comp., against this view,
Neander, 1. c. p. 61).

Another objection raised by Strauss is to be
found among the Ebionites of the ancient church.
Jerome (Dial. adv. Pelag. iii. 2) quotes the
following fragment from a gospel of that sect :
‘ Ecce mater Domini et fratres ejus dicebant ei :
Joannes baptista baptizat in remissionem pecca-
turum ; eamus et baptizemur ab co. Dixit autem
jis: quid peccavi ut vadam et baptiser ab eo?


BAPTISM.


Nisi forte hoc ipsum quod dixi ignorantia est.’.


This is also the opinion of Strauss, narhely, that
the partaking of Bdrriopa petavolas pre-supposes
a participation in sin. In refutation of this, Ne-
anier (1. 1. p. 64) argues that it would be ab-
surd fur Jesus to come to be baptized, because
conscious of needing pardon of sin, and neverthe-
less afterwards profess to pardon sins himself.
De Wette also thinks that the baptism of Christ
must be founded, if not in read sin, at least in its
possibility. If, by this possibility, he meant a
disposition to sin, similar to the ‘ peccability ’
ascribed to him by Basilides, we must deny it in
the Redeemer; nor does the history of the Tempta-
tion, which the advocates of this notion try to
connect with it, prove anything in its favour.
And if, by that possibility, he meant to imply
the free principle which lies at the basis of the
free will of man, neither can that constitute the
ground for baptism.

With respect to the miraculous incidents which
accompanied the baptism of Jesus, if we take for
our starting-point the narration of the three Gos-
pels, that the Holy Spirit really and visibly de-
scended in the form of a dove, and proclaimed
Jesus, in an audible voice, to be the Son of God,
there can be no difficulty in bringing it to har-
monize with the statement in the Gospel of John.
This literal sense of the text has, indeed, for a long
time been the prevailing interpretation, though
many doubts respecting it had very early forced
themselves on the minds of sober inquirers, traces
of which are to be found in Origen (Con¢r.
Céls. i. 48), and which Strauss (p. 376) has more
elaborately renewed. To the natural explana-
tions belong that of Paulus (Ezeg. Handb.),
that the dove was a real one, which had by
chance flown near the spot at that moment;
that of Meyer, that it was the figure of a meteor
which was just then visible in the sky; and that of
Kuinoel (ad Marth. iii.), who considers the dove as
4 figure for lightning, and the voice for that of
thunder, which the eye-witnesses, in their extatic

eelings, considered as adivine voice, such as the
Jews called a Bath-kol (Meyer). Such interpreta-
tions are not only irreconcilable with the evange-

cal text, but even presuppose a violation of the
Common order of nature (comp. Strauss, p. 376,
#.), in favohr of adherence to which these inter-
pretations are advanced: it is not to be won-
dered at, therefore, that they have met with die
ndicule from the last-mentioned critic. The
conjecture of Schulthess, who proposes to read és
Tepirrepdy, is ngainratical: and improbable,
and hardly deserves notice.

A more close investigation of the subject, how-
‘ver, induces us to take as a starting-point the ac-
yount of the apostle St. John. It is John the Baptist
awe who speaks. He was an eye-witness, nay,

Judge from Matthew and John, the only one
Present with Jesus, and is consequently the only
sahara or without Christ—of information.
me if there were more jor nt, as we
iy most inclined to infer from Luke, they can-
Bei ceived the miracles attending the
rey of Jesus, or John and Christ would no

ubt have appealed to their testimony in verifi-

pages them. (Comp. Schleiermacher, p. =)
auth ‘us taking the statement in St. John for the

- vee basis of the whole history, a few slight

in it may afford us the means of solving the


BAPTISM. 285


difficulties attending the literal conception of the
text. John the Baptist knows nothing of an external
and audible voice, and when he assures us (i. 33)
that he had in the Spirit received the promise, that
the Messiah would be made manifest by the Spirit
descending upon him, and remaining—be it upon
or in him—there; this very remaining assuredly
precludes any material appearance in the sha
of a bird, The internal probability of the text,
therefore, speaks in favour of a spiritual vision
in the mind of the Baptist; this view is still
more strengthened by the fact, that Luke sup-
poses there were many more present, who not-
withstanding perceived nothing at all of the
miraculous incidents. The reason that the Spirit
in the vision assumed the figure of a dove,
we would rather seek in the peculiar flight and
movement of that bird, than, as Strauss and De
Wette think, in its form and shape. Liicke and
Neander find the resemblance in the swift flight
of the dove; Winer, however (1. c. art. ‘ Taube’),
in its rapid and straight movement. The image
moreover was suited to the poetic character of the
beholder, and it is probable, though not necessary,
that the recollection of Gen. i. 2, where the Spirit
of God is described as soaring over the waters,
might have contributed to raise in the mind of the
Baptist that image; neither is it necessary here
to bear in mind the speculations of the Rabbins
concerning the verse in Gen. (comp. Wetstein,
ad Matth. iii.; Schéttgen, Hor. Hebr. 1.), since all
these are of a later date than the words of John,
whose turn of mind and education were besides
quite o} to Rabbinism.

In a similar way is this event explained, with-
out denying the divine operation upon the mind
of the Baptist, by Origen (1. c.), Theodorus Mop-
suest. (in Liicke, p 423), ‘ according to a sort of
Spiritual contemplation.....to John alone :—for
the appearance was a vision, not a reality.’
(Liicke; Neander; comp. also De Wette, ad
Matth. iii.). This interpretation moreover has
the advantage of exhibiting the philosophic con-
nection of the incidents, since the Baptist appears
more conspicuously as the immediate end of the
divine dispensation (Neander). Christ had thus
the intention of being introduced by him into the
Messianic sphere of operation, while the Baptist -
recognizes this to be his own peculiar calling : the
signs by which he was to know the Messiah had
been intimated to him, and now that they had come
to pass, the prophecy and his mission were fulfilled.
Neander, therefore, considers the manifestation as
merely subjective (or in the mind of John), while
Julius Miiller and Liicke suppose a real ope-
ration at the same time of the Spirit on Christ.
In process of time tradition converted this vision
into a sensible external phenomenon. Matthew
(comp. De Wette), though he appears (ver. 17)
to consider the fact as external, nevertheless, to
judge from the phrase ‘ unto him’ (ver. 16),
which most probably refers to the Baptist, agrees
with John, that the Baptist was the immediate
end of that revelation. But to the Jess refined
conception of Mark and Luke, it was natural
to refer that revelation solely to Jesus as the
principal personage. Luke shows himself par
ticularly partial to the sensible form (coparueG
e%e:). The more the Ebionitic view obscures
the tradition, the more does it stray from the
simple expositica of the Gospel of St. John.


286 BAPTISM.


Justin Martyr mentions an anecdote (Dial.
cont. Tryph. § 88) ascribed to the apustles,
according to which Christ was surrounded by
flames of fire when standing in the Jordan, but
wheu he was rising frum the water the Holy Spirit
descended upon him, while a voice uttered, be-
sides the words mentioned in the Guspels, those
of the 7th verse of the 2nd Psalm. By this
it was intended to establish the spiritual birth of
Christ only from the moment of his baptism,
contrary to the apostolic reports concerning his
birth. The same report is given in a still more
pointed manner in an Ebionitic Fragm. (Epiphan.
xxx, 13), according to which a light shines around
the place, while a voice addresses itself first to
Jesus and next to the Baptist, who then falls at his
feet. The Spirit, also, in the figure of a dove, not
only descends upon him, but enters also into him
(ev elder wepiorepas KareAGovans Kal eiceAPovons
eis atrdv). The notion that Christ was dis-
tinguished from the prophets in the Old Testa-
ment by the Holy Spirit remaining with him per-
manently, while with the former it was mercly
partial and momentary, is still more distinctly
expressed in a fragment of the Gospels of the
Nazarenes (Jerome, Adv. Pelag. iii. 2): * De-
scendit fons omnis Spiritus sancti et requievit
super eum et dixit: Fili mi, im omnibus Propletis
exspectabam te ut venires et requiescerem in te.
Tu es enim requies mea, tu es filins primigenitus,

ui regnas in sempitemum.’ However distigured

@ fact may appear in these Apocrypha, the
genera] and decided purport of the tradition with
regard to the divine manifestation, assuredly leads
back to an historical origin, which can nowhere
be better or more successfully sought than in
the depositions of the Baptist.

Strauss, in his obstinate scepticism, refuses,
notwithstanding, to accept this view. He re
jects the assumption of a mere vision in John
1, 31, sg., and sees in ‘like a dove’ nothing
but a visible phenomenon; neither indeed does
it suit his views to assume such a vision, since
it would pre-suppose a momentary miraculous
inspiration, a thing he is averse to acknowledge.
But there is no necessity for taking ‘like a
dove’ for anything else than an embodied symbol,
and more especially as the simile is wanting in
ver. 33 (Liicke); nor is there, in the momentary
inspiration in that instance, anything so extra-
ordinary as to compel us to look at the incident
as a mere fiction: on the contrary, we consider
the state of propletic ecstasy, which is so common
to the prophets in the Old ‘Testament, to be quite
in unison with the prophetic character of John.

Strauss maintains, moreover, that the imparting
of the Spirit at his baptism, and the superluman
generation of Jesus, are two facts altoether at
variance with each other. Je Wette also thinks
it impossible to understand both in their proper
and full signification, and is of opinion that the
fact that Christ was in possession of the Spirit is
more certain to the Christian than the manner in
which he received it. Liicke’s reply to this (Com-
ment. p. 433, sq.) is of importance. He thinks
that John makes a decided distinction between the
divine /ogos in its existence before it was incar-
nated, and the Spirit. The former is a person, of
whom it may be said ‘ He was made flesh,’ but not
ao of the Spirit, which stands in contrast to flesh,
and constitutes the principle of communication


BAPTISM.


and manifestation to an already existing person.
Jesus, having within himself the Zogos as the divine
awhyject, was therefore capable of receiving the evere
lasting communication of the Spirit. As man,
subject ty human development, he stood in need
of an external excitement and animation by
God, such as took place at his baptism. . It was,
as Liicke thinks, one of those leading epochs, at
which the ever-continued process of divine com-
munication with mankind gives rise to new ex-
ternal developments.

This way of reconciling the two events is con-
ceivable. On the other hand, those critics, who,
like Neander and others, do not at all assume
that there was any immediate operation of the
Holy Spirit on Christ at the baptism, but consider
all this as a mere development of the divine prin-
ciple which was in him, do not need to make
compromises in trying to reconcile the two events.
According to their view, the Baptist saw in the
resting of the Spirit on Christ, nothing but a
necessary union of his own mission with that of
Jesus; yet even so, we have to confine ourselves
in this particular tu the relation of Jolin alone,
since the other thiee Gospels, in connecting the
baptism of Jesus with the history of his temptas
tion, certainly seem to insinuate thereby a more
powerful operation of the Spirit on Jesus. The
advocates of the latter view may fairly refer to
the fact that the difference that exists in’ the
narrative of the baptism between the Three
Gospels and that of Jolin, is chiefly owing to
their respective views with regard to the Messiah.
The former rest their views of him more on
the Old Testament: he is therefore with them
a king and prophet acting in the name of God,
by whom he is anointed with the Holy Spirit and
power (.\cts x. 37), and becomes manifest through
miracles, and is finally raised to divine majesty.
Not so the more sublime conception of Jun
in that matter: he sees in him the incarnated
logos, the independent source of his divine miuni-
festations, ‘to the execution of which he wanted,
it is true, such external calls as present them-
selves in the relations of practical hie, but by no
means a new communication of the Spint. The
doctrine of St. Paul, ‘Son of God after the
Spirit, Son of David after the tesh, may be con-
sidered as the link between them. ‘The ca-
nonical Gospels have not gone so far in dis-
crepancy as to com into real conflict. The thee
first speak plainly of the superhuman generation
of Christ; and all that can be imputed to then:
is that they do not lay so much stress on it as
John does, and are not fully aware of its import.
Only the partial view of the Ebionites renders
the subject quite irreconcilable.

Cuanistian Baprisu.—Jesus, having under.
gone baptism as the founder of the new kingdom,
ordained it as a legal act by which individuals
were to obtain the rights of citizens thereiu,
Though he caused many to be baptized by his
disciples (John iv. 1, 2), yet add were not bap-
tized who were converted to him; neither was it
even necessary after they bad obtained partici-
pation in him by his personal choice ayd for-
giving of sin. But when he could no longer
personally and immediately chouse and receive
members of his kingdom, when at the same time
all had been accomplished which the founder
thought necessary for its completion, he gave


BAPTISM.


sagt the spiritual community to receive, in

is stead, members hy baptism (Matt. xxviii. 19;
Mark xvi. 16). Baptism essentially denotes the
regenerating of him who receives it, his partici-
pation both in the divine life of Christ and the
promises rested on it, as well as his reception as
a member of the Christian community.

Fach of these momentous points implies all
the rest; and the germ of all is contained in
the words of Christ (Matt. xxviii. 19; comp.
Neander, History of the Planting, &c. ii.). The
details are variously digested by the Apostles
acconling to their peculiar modes of thinking.
John dwells—in like manner as he does on the
holy communion—almost exclusively on the in-
ternal natur@of baptism, the immediate mystical
union of the Spirit with Christ ; baptism is with
him, equivalent to ‘being born again’ (John
iit. 5,7). Paul gives more explicitly and com-
pletely the other points also. Ile understands by
It not only the union of the individual with the
Head, by the giving one’s self up to the Redeemer
ani the receiving of his life (Gal. iii. 27), but also

union with the other members (ib. 28; 1 Cor.
13,13; Ephes. iv. 5; v.26). He combines the
hexative and positive points of regeneration, alike
with the death and resurrection of Christ, and
alo with the sinking in and rising up at baptism
(Rom. vi. 4, sg. Col. ii. 12).

Tegards the relation between the external
and the internal, the normal condition of baptism
Tequired that the ceremony should be combined
With regeneration in him who received it, while

Who administered it should have a perfect

Wledge of the state of the baptized, and

Id aim at strengthening and promoting the
new life in him. There is no doubt that when

Christ himself gave the assurance that he had
Feeived some one into his community, whether
with or without baptism, such a declaration of
™ choice was met by the individual with a
ition already prepared to begin the new
But the Church is not in a state of perfec-
wil and being deficient both in knowledge and
Will, she cannot fix the moment of regeneration
order to combine with it the act of baptism.
Nevertheless places both in a necessary mu-
Telation, and considers baptism only then
plete when regeneration takes place; the
Church therefore either delays baptism until after
eNeration, or administers it befurehand, con-
fiding in the assurance that the agency of the
Aurch (animated by the spirit of Christ and
directed in behalf of an individual who enters
ito a sort of preliminary connection with the
Church by this act of baptism) will also produce
™ him regeneration, provided always that te
dividual has the will for it.
In the Apostolic times the Church was in a
8 mixed state; a comparatively large number,
pethaps 4n actual majority, of the whole body of
the baptized might at that time have passed for con-
erts, as the inward and outward conditious of bap-
ism were then not eo far removed from each other
as they afterwards became. The necessity of exa-
Tining the comparative merits of both conditions
‘parately grew with the growing imperfection
t the community. The Apostles did not yet
he its they considered both only in the light of

it Necessary union with each other, as Paul,


life,


Sor instance, says (Tit. iii. 5; comp. Mark xvi..


BAPTISM. 37


16) of the external symbol, what belongs only to
the union of both. Traces of separation, however,
were already perceptible in the apostolic age.
Among the symptoms of the perfect union of the
convert with the Redeemer, was one peculiar to
that period alone, manifesting the new life exter-
nally by the extatic state of the individual in
whom the Spirit of God had operated. It was
usually wrought by the hands laid on the bap-
tized to bless, as the concluding act of baptism,
Sometimes, however, that extacy manifested itself
independently of the external act of baptism (Acts
%. 47); while baptism, on the other hand, was
sometimes performed without the requisite proper
inward sentiments of the baptized, and without
the ‘ gift of the Spirit’ (Acts viii. 13,19). The
words of Peter (Acts x. 47) taken in connection
with the whole, mean, that the Spirit of God is
not bound to external ceremony, but to inward
union and fellowship by belief. To ascribe the
promises to baptism without that inward union,
would be making it an opus operatum and its
efficacy a magic power; but, on the other hand,
since the institution of Christ comprises also the
external signs, it cannot be complete without them,
and he who would abolish these external signs
would deprive the Church of an essential tie of
fellowship. The Catholic church rather favours
the former doctrine, and a few mystical sects,
the Quakers, &c., the latter.

Invant Baprism was established neither by
Christ nor the apostles. In all places where we
find the necessity of Laptism notified, cither in
a dogmatic or historical point of view, it is evi-
dent that it was only meant for those who were
capable of comprehending the word preached, and
of being converted to Christ by an act of their own
will. A pretty sure testimony of its non-existence
in the Apostolic age may be inferred from 1 Cor.
vii. 14, sce Paul would certainly have veferred
to the baptism of children for their holiness (comp,
Neander, Hist. of the Planting, &c.,i. p. 206). But
even in later times, several teachers of the church,
suchas Tertullian (De Bapt. and others, reject
this custom; ‘indeed. his church in general (that
of North Africa) adhered longer than others to
the primitive regulations. Even when baptism
of cuildren was already theoretically derived from
the apostles, its practice was nevertheless for a
long time confined to a maturer age.

In support of the contrary opinion, the advo-
cates in former ages (now hardly any) used to
appeal to Matt. xix. 14; but their snongest am
gument in its favour is the regulation of baptizing
all the members of a house and family (1 Cor.
xvi. 15; Acts xvi. 33; xviii. 8). In none of
these instances has it been proved that there were
little childven among them; but, even supjosing
that there were, there was no necessity for exclud-
ing thera from baptism in plain words, since such
exclusion was understood as a matter of course.
Many circumstances conspired early to introduce
the practice of infant-baptizing. The confusion
between the outward and inward conditions of
baptism, and the magical effect that was imputed
to it; confusion of thought about the visible and
invisible church, condemning all those who did
not belong to the former; the doctrine of the
natural corruption of man sv closely connected
with the preceding; and, finally, the desire of
distinguishing Christian children fron the Jewish


288 BAPTISM.


and Heathen, and of commending them more
effectually to the care of the Christian commu-
nity—all these circumstances and many more
have contributed to the introduction of infant
baptism at a very early period.

ut, on the other tigi, the bapfism of children
is not at all at variance with the principle of
Christian baptism in general, after what we have
observed on the separation of regeneration and
baptism. For, since it cannot be determined
when the former begins, the real test of its ex-
istence lying only in the holiness continued to the
end of man’s life, the fittest point for baptism is
evidently the beginning of life. Nevertheless, the
profession of faith is still needed to complete it ;
Contirmation, or some equivalent observance, is
therefore a very important consummation. The
Ades infantium is an absurd assumption, of which
the Scriptures know nothing. On the other hand,
the baptized child is strongly recommended to
the community and to the Spirit of God dwelling
therein, becoming the careful object of the edu-
cation and holy influence of the Church (comp.
1 Cor. vii. 14). Nature and experience teach us,
therefore, to retain the baptism of children, now
that it is introduced.

To be admitted to baptism in the Apostolic age
there needed no further development of Christian
knowledge than a professed belief that Jesus was
the promised Messiah, To be baptized in his
name meant, to receive baptism in the belief that
the power and dignity contained in the idea of a
Messiah was realized in Jesus. The profession of
faith (1 Pet. iii. 21) probably was such as to con-
vey this idea; and next also the formula of bap-
tism in the name of Christ, or, according to Matt.
xxviii. 19, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
when the whole body was immersed in water.
Christ did not intend by these words to institute
a fixed formula of baptism, but merely meant to
indicate thereby the substance of the essential re-
lations of baptism, since in his life-time people
could not yet be baptized in the name of the
Holy Ghost. As the Church, however, knew of
no better compendiary text for the article of faith,
she declared herself early for that furmula, which
was already in general use at the time of Justin
Martyr. To preface the act of baptism by minute
instruction was impossible in a time when the
preaching of the Gospel was as yet limited to but
a very few. A brief Ketch of the history of Christ,
the central point of which was his death and
resurrection, and a reference to the Old Testament,
where be had been pre-announced by the prophets,
were deemed sufficient at that time(comp. Neander,
Hist. of the Plant. ; Hast. of the Church, ii. ; Acts
ii, 19). The apostles either themselves baptized,
of which there are many instances in the Acts, or
charged others to do it, and confined themselves
to the ‘ laying on of hands’ on which followed the
communication of the Spirit. The reason of this
limitation is, no doubt, the same which actuated
also Christ in not himself baptizing, viz. that
they might be less interrupted in the task of
preaching the Gospel. Paul had subsequently
also another inducement for not doing so, not to be
made the leader of a party (1 Cor. i. 14-16).

Baptism vor THE Dgap.—Paul (1 Cor. xv.
29) uses this phrase. It is difficult, almost im-
possible, to arrive at a satisfactory and certain
result a3 to his meaning, since neither he nor any


BAPTISM.


other authorities furnish us with the necessary data.
Few passages have undergone mure numerous and
arbitrary emendations than this text. To give,
however, some order to the numerous interpreta-
tions, we may in the first instance observe, that
they all chiefly turn upon the question, whether
the baptism here mentioned is the general church-
baptism, or some particular one independent of
the former. We shall examine, first—

A. Those interpretations which take it to be
some particular application of baptism.

From the wording of the sentence, the most
simple impression certainly is, that Paul speaks
of a baptism which a living man receives in the
place of a dead one. This interpretation is par-
ticularly adopted by those expoundess with whom
grammatical construction is of paramount im-
portance, and the first thing to be considered.

Foremost among the older critics is Ambrose (Hi-
lar.): ‘Intantum natum et stabilem valt osten-
dere resurrectionem mortuorum, ut exemplu: det
eorum, qui tam securi erant de futura resurrectione,
ut etiam pro mortuis baptizarentur, si quem forte
mors praevenisset, timentes, ne aut male aut non
resurgeret, qui baptizatus non fuerat; vivus no
mine mortui tinguebatur.” Among the moderns are

us, Scaliger, Grotius, Calixtus ; and of the
more recent the most considerable are Augusti
(Archaol. iv.), Meyer (who understands trép,= to
the advantage, in favour, which may indced well
be the case), Billroth, and Rickert, who suj:poses
that the Corinthians, convinced of the necessity
and benefit of baptism, but erroneously consider-
ing it not as a symbol, but as a real means of
punisins the heart itself, had taken it into their
eads to give the benefit thereof also to the dead,
by administering baptism to them by a substitute,”
a living person, and thus imagined that a baptism
by prory was practicable. De Wette considers
this the only possible meaning of the words.

With regard to this interpretation, some doubt
arises as to the real existence at that time of such
a custom, since the only information respecting it
would be this passage, though Riickert thinks this
is sufficient evidence. It is true, that they refer to
the Shepherd of Hermas (Simi. ix. 16); but all that
can be inferred from it is, that they had at that time
already begun to evince an overdue and extrava-
gant respect for outward baytism. Tertullian
(Contr. Marcion. v.10) seems in a more direct way
to speak of the existence of the custom: ‘ Noli
apostolum novum statim auctorem aut confirma-
torem ejus (institutionis) denotare, ut tanto mazis
sisteret carnis resurrectionem, quanto ili qui vané
pro mortuis baptizarentur, fide resurrectionia hoc
facerent. Habemus illum alicubi unius baptismi
detinitorem. Igitur ct pro mortuis tingui pro cor-
poribus est tihgui; mortuum enim corpus ostendi-
mus’ (comp. De Resurrect. Carn. 48). Tertullian
in these words distinguishes a false application of
baptism by substitution, from the yencral one ad-
hered to by the apostle; he thinks that the apostle
confirms baptism pro mortuis, not in that erro-
neous but in a proper sense, compatible with
his other and general views of baptism. Of
that erroneous practice, however, Tertullian, in
this as in the other place, evidently knows no
more than what is indicated by Paul in the
above passage; neither does he mention that
such a custom had prevailed in his time among
the Marcionites or any others (comp. Neander,


BAPTISM.


Hist. of the Church, i. 2, p. 523, sq., 3rd edit.).
More certain information is given by Chrysos-
tum, who relates of the Marcionites (Homil.
40, ad 1 Cor.) that when a catechumen died
among them, a living person used to lay him-
self under the bed of’ the deceased, and answer
in his stead the customary questions, after which
the deceased was baptized. He says that they
Teferred to the approval of St. Paul in the above
ge. It is true that this absurd custom
Is certainly met with among the rough and su-
erstitions Marcionites of later times, yet is it
ighly improbable, as Neander (ut supra) justly
observes, that such a custom should ever have
emanated from Marcion himself, who had entered
more deeply into the spirit of the Pauline ‘ Faith’
than any of his contemporaries.

A similar account is given by Epiphanius
(Heres. xxviii. 7) of the Gnostic sect of Cenallia
Who were much opposed to the Marcionites : ‘ In
this country,—I mean, Asia,—and even in Ga-
latia, their schov] Hlourished eminently; and a
traditional fact concerning them has reached us,
that when any of them had died without baptism,
they used to baptize others in their name, lest in

the resurrection they should sufler punishment as

unbaptized.’ We are not justitied in denying
credence to this statement, though there is just
®spicion against Epiphanius from his total want
Of critical judgment, and lis erroneous supposition

at Paul was particularly combating the opinions

Cerinthus, a supposition which he applies aleo to

the passage hefore us. In the Concil. Carthagin.
40.397, can, 6, and Codez Eccles. Afric. can. 18,
itis forbidden to administer baptism and the holy
Cmmunion to the dead: ‘cavendum est etiam,
Re mortuos baptizari posse fratrum infirmitas
t; quum eucharistiam mortuis non dari ani-

a Verterit,” Here baptism by proxy is not al-
ded to, and we must therefore assume that the
uncils had uo ground. for its prohibition, the
custum having, as it seems, not then existed in

"se parts, Augusti (I. 1. vii. p. 42) reters to the

yte baptism of the Jews, where, he thinks,
co underwent the rite for their children.
ut all the authorities quoted in its favour by

"ehtfoot (al Math. iii. 6) prove nothing as to
wed tion s and even if they did so, it would

be highly improbable that the Gentile churches
Would Lave adopted it from them (comp. Schnec-
enberger, 1. Lp. 79).

therefore we can infer from the above state-
a 1s, that baptism by substitution had taken
Place among the Marcionites, and perhaps also
oak the Cerinthians and other smaller sects
oe the end of the fourth century, a peried
hie the confused views of the Church as to the

‘ations of the external to the spiritual might
easily have favoured that erroneous custom; but

t it a between that period and the time
aul wrote the above passage is wholl
the Stantiated, Is it possible to suppose that Rf

_¥arious quarters of the Church of which we
¥e any information, nu notice whatever should

Ve been taken either by a synodical decree, or
ea contemporary writer within that period, of a
oe which, the earlier it existed, must have
ein gar ons 80 much the more offensive. Is it
ifec Clore evident that if it is found 300 years

ards, it was by no means a continuation
Pumutive custom, but had arisen inde-


BAPTISM. 289
pendently of the latter, either in in,itation of it,
or from a mistaken interpretation of the Apostle
in our passage ?

The idea, then, that such a superstitious custom
existed in the Corinthian community is devoid
of all historical evidence; especially as the ma-
gical notions of baptism had as yet so little pre-
vailed as not even to have given rise to infant bap-
tism. Add to this, that the Corinthian church was
far in advance of mest others at that period in edu-
cation and diffused knowledge, and that, in fact,
their very striving for spiritual development threat-
ened to lead them into onesidedness, and we must
confess that the clearer the sense of the words be-
comes the more obscure becomes the thing itself.

The difficulties will still more increase, if we
were to admit, with Olhausen, Riickert, and De
Wette, that the Apostle approved of the absurd
practice in question, since he wonld thus be brought
into contradiction with his own principles on the
importance of faith and external works, which he
developes in his Epistle to the Galatians. Such a
striking error could not have been a mere slip in
Paul; it might therefore certainly give cause to
suspect similar-superstitions views in him. Even
Ambrose (1.c.) had already correctly judged, when
he said, ‘Exemplo hoc non factum illorum probat,
sect fidem fixam in resurrectione ostendit.’ In the
words of Paul we discover no opinion of his own
concerning the justice or injustice of the rite; it is
merely brought in as an argumentuin ex concesso
in favour of the object which he pursnes through the
whole chapter (comp. 1 Cor. ii. 5). However much
may be objected against this interpretation, it is by
far more reasonable than the explanations given by
other critics. The Corinthian community was cer-
tainly of a mixed character, consisting of indivi-
duals of various views, ways of thinking, and dif-
ferent stages of education ; so that there might still
have existed a small number among thein capable
of such absurdities. We are not sufliciently ac-
quainted with all the particulars of the case to
maintain the contrary, while the simple gram-
matical sense of the passage is decidedly in furour
of the proposed interpretation.

2. Origen (Dial. contr. Marcion.), Luther,
Chemnitz, and Joh. Gerhard, interpret the words
as relating to baptism over the graves of the mem-
bers of the community, a favourite rendezrous
of the early Christians. Luther says that, in order
to strengthen their faith in the resurrection, the
Christians baptized over the tombs of the dead,
In that case dtp with genit. must be taken in its
local sense, quite an isolated instance in the New
Testament (comp. Winer, Grammat. p. 263).
The custom alluded to, moreover, dates from a
much later period, when the adoration of the
martyrs had begun to spread.

3. The above-quoted passage of Epiphanius
mentions also a view, according to which yexool
is not to be translated by dead, but mortally
tll persons, whose baptism was expedited by
sprinkling water upon them on their death-bed,
instead of immersing them in the usual way; the
rite is known under the name of baptismus cli-
nicus, lectualis. But few of the modern theolo-
gians (among whom, however, are Calvin and
Estius) advocate this view, which transgresses not
less against the words of the text, than against all
historical knowledge of the subject.

B. The interpretations which suppcse that the

s


290 BAPTISM.


text speaks of gencral church baptism. To these
belongs the oldest opinion we know of, given in
Tertullian (1. c. comp. De Resurrect. Carn. 48):
© Quid et ipsos baptizari ait, si non que baptizan-
tur corpora resurgunt?’ According to this view
éwép is here taken in the sense of on account of,
and vexper in that of dead bodies, they themselves,
the baptized, as dead persons. ‘The notion which
lies at the bottom of this version is, that the body
esses a guarantee for resurrection in the act of
ptism, in which it also syares. The sinking
under and rising up is with them a symbol of bury-
ing and resurrection. Some of the Greek Fathers
also favour this interpretation, and more especially
Theodoret, who thus develoyes the notion: ‘ He
who undergoes baptism is therein buried with his
Lord, that having partaken in his death, he may
become partaker in his resurrection also. But if
the body is a corpse and rises not, why is it ever
baptized ? Chrysostom ; ‘ Paul said, Unless there
is a resurrection, why art thou baptized for
corpses, that is, fur mere bodies. For tu this end
art thou baptized, for the resurrection of thy
dead body, &c.’ The idea thus developed is
by itself admissible, and harmonizes well with
the whole conrse of ideas pursued by Paul from
ver, 19. The form of the sentence, however,
becomes uncommonly harsh, because of the tran-
sition: ‘else what shall they do who are baptized
on account of the dead?" (on account of them-
selves, who are dead)? Indeed, it is by far more
jarring than Rom. v. 6, which is quoted as a
parallel passaze.

2. The words of Chrysostom, just quoted, cer-
tainly convey also the same meaning as regards
“the dead,’ but differ from the two former in-
terpretations with regard to dep: ‘im behalf of
the dead’ thus means, ‘in the belief of the resurrec-
tion of the dead.’ This ungrammatical version is
adopted by Theophylact: ‘Why are men bap-
tized at all in hehalf of resurrection, that is, in
expectation of resurrection, if the dead rise not?’
(Isidor. Pelas. ‘ If bodies rise not at all, why do
we believe that in baptism they are changed to
incorruptibility 2° perhaps with reference to our


e).
3. Pelagins, Olearius, Fabricius, are of opi-
nion that the plirase, ‘on account of the dead,’
or ‘of those who are dead,’ although strictly
plural, here alludes to an individual, namely, to
Christ, on account of whom’ we are baptized,
alluding to Rom. vi. 3. Though the plural is
in itself admissible (Winer, Gram. p. 163), its
use here would nevertheless be rather strange,
there being no ground whatever for the use of so
perulst a phraseology; neither can we account
for the fact, that the regular construction of
Barri(e with eis should have been converted into
the unprecedented construction with éwép. Vater
justifies the plural, by including in it John the
Baptist ; Semler understands it of Christ and
those of the Apostles and teachers of the church
who were already dead at that time; Flatt, by
adding, on account of Christ, and those who have
died in him (in the belief in him) :—all quite in-
admussible combinations.
4. Among the best interpretations is that of
heim and Joh. Christ. Wolf. They consider
$ the dead ' to be martyrs and other believers, who,
by firmness and cheerful hope of resurrection,
have given in death a worthy example, by tchich


BAPTISM.


(stp) others were also animated to receive bap-
tism. Still this meaning would be almost too
briefly and enigmatically expressed, when no par-
ticular reason for it is known, while also the
allusion to the exemplary death of many Chris-
tians could chiefly apply to the martyrs alone, of
whom there were as yet none at Corinth.

5. Olhausen's interpretation is of a rather
doubtful character. In the first instance he in-
terprets dxtp=instead of, in favour of ; and the
meaning of the passage he takes to be, that ‘all
who are converted to the church are Laptized—
Jor the good of the dead, as it requires a certain
number (Meyer: or rather the conversion of all,
Rom. xi. 12-25), a “ fulness” of believers, before
the resurrection can take place. Every one
therefore who is baptized is so fur the good of
believers collectively, and of those who have
already died in the Lord’ (both of which, we
can hardly suppose vexpay to embrace at once ?.
Olhausen is himself aware that the Apostle
could not have expected that such a difficult
and remote idea, which he himself calls ‘a
mystery,’ would be understood by his readers
without a further explanation and development
of his doctrine. He therefore proposes an inter-
pretation as already suggested by Clericus and

oderlein (Jnstit. I.). In this explanation, it
is argued, that the miseries and hardships
Christians have to struggle against in this life can
only be compensated by resurrection. Death ,
causes, as it were, vacancies in the full ranks of
the believers, which are ayain filled up by other
individuals. ‘What would it profit those who
are baptized tn the place of the dead (to fill up
their pice in the community) if there be no re-
surrection? The tendency of the whole con-
nection of the text, however, would rather lead us
to exyect the question, ‘What would the dead
profit by it? since the tenor of the passage de-
cidedly refers to them. To make dwtp=derl,
therefore, is quite unsuitable; not to mention, that
the idea—to enter into the ranks of Christians—
must first be supposed to be contained in the word
‘baptism,’ in order to draw from it the fisure of
substitution. A reference is made, in support of
the opinion which considers dtp = dy), to Disrive
Halicar, (Antig. viii.), where he is treating of a
new consciiption, which was to be made to till up
the ranks rendered vacant by the death of tie
soldiers who had fallen in the war, and the ex-
pression there used is — otrot hkiovy bxtp tov axo-
Oavovray orpariwray érépous kataypdpew. Nor
are there wanting other similar passazes in proof
of this; but we must bear in mind, that in
Dionys. the word denotes a literal substitution,
while in uur passage the sudstitution is figurative,
fartetched, and hard to unriddle. — It is not pro-
bable that the Apostle should not have said 4:7),
if he had really wished to express that thou ht.
Moreover, the wery essence of the argument, the
notion that resurrection is the compensatiun for
the sufferings of life, is here not at all given, nor
even hinted at except we connect the éwei di-
rectly with ver. 19., a thing quite impossible. A
sumewhat similar opinion is expressed by F. J.


Hermann, that trép=preter iby, Genes. xxvii.


9), ‘Cur preter eos qui jam mortui sunt, alii
quoque baptismum suscipiunt, et ita initiati reli-
gionem Christianorum prutitentur, si tamen nulla


BAR


erit resurrectiv mortuorum nec melioris vitw pra-
mium expectandum est 7’ In this sense, however,
tai would require the accusative.

C. Barri(suevor, ina figurative sense.

Some (referring to the words of Christ, Matt.
xx. 22) take it in the sense of the baptism of
passion, suffering ; this is evidently too forced to
Tequire refutation.

The interpretations of many others who have
still more transgressed against grammar and his-
tory in the process, we have wifh reason omitted.
They are partly to be found in the collection of
interpretations in Joh. Christ. Wolf's Curae PAi-
lologice, &c. and Heidenreich's Comment. ad
N.C—J. J.*


BAR (13), a Hebrew word meaning son, but
used only poetically in that language (Ps. ii. 125
Prov. xxxi.2), In Syriac, however, Bar Go
oe jy) answered to the more common Hebrew


word for son, i. e. 3 ben; and hence in later

times, in the New Testament, it takes the same

pie in the formation of proper names which Ben
formerly occupied in the Old Testament.


BARABBAS (probably RAND, son of Abba,
acommon name in the Talmud), a person who had
forfeited his lite for sedition and murder (Mark
v.75 Luke xxiii. U5). Asa rebel, he was subject
fothe punishment laid down by the Roman law

such political offences; while, as a murderer,

conld not escape death even by the civil code
ofthe Jews, But the latter were ao bent on the
death of Jesus, that, of the two, they preferred
‘ning this double criminal (Matt. xxvii.
6-6; Mark xv. 7-15; Luke xxiii. 18-25; John
Xrht, 40). Origen says that in many copies
arabbas was also called Jesus. The Armenian
frsion has the same reading: ‘Whom will ye
T shall deliver unto you, Jesus Barabbas, or
fsus that is called Christ?’ Griesbach, in his
Omment., considers this as an interpolation;
While Fritzsche has adopted it in his text. We
certainly conceive that a name afterwards
™ sacred may have been thrown out of the text
¥ ome bigoted transcriber.—E. M.
ea ee ee
* As the topic of baptism seemed to be well
Usted in this country, the Editor thought that
freshness of effect might be produced hy
Presenting the subject to the reader from a Ger-
Man point of view. The article was, therefore,
oflered to Dr. Neander, the church historian,
and Professor of Theology in the university of
His multiplied pre-engagements, how-
ever, induced him, with the Editor's consent,
to cmsign the subject to the Rev. J. Jacobi, of

1 same university; and in due time the MS.
the e€ present article arrived, accompanied by
he following note from Dr. Neander, to wliose


Inspection it had previously been submitted by
author :—


Work out the article (on Baptism) for the “ Cyclo-
‘a of Biblical Literature,” I requested a dear
St J. Jacobi, to undertake it, who, by his
‘owledye and critical talents, is fully qualified
the task, and whose theological principles are
unison with my own.—A, Neanpen.’


* As my other labours would not permit me to .


BARBARIAN. 291


BARACHIAS (Bapay/as), father of the Zecha-
riah (Zacharias) mentioned in Matt. xxiii. 38
[Zecuariax].

BARAK (P13, lightning ; Sept. Bdpax), son of
Abinoam of Kedesh-Naphtali, a Galilean city of
refuge in the tribe of Naphtali (Judg. iv. 6;
comp. Josh. xix. 37; xxi. 32). He was sume
moned by the pruphetess Deborah to take the
field against the ‘iatile army of the Canaanitish
king Jabin, commanded by Sisera, with 10,000
men from the tribes of Naphtali and Zebulon, and
to encamp on Mount Tabor, probably because
the 900 chariots of iron (Judg. iv. 3), in which
the main force of Sisera consisted, could not
so easily manceuvre on uneven ground. After
some hesitation, he resolved to do her bidding, on
condition that she would go with him, which she
readily promised. Contiding, therefure, in the
God of Israel, he attacked the hostile army by
surprise, put them to flight, and routed them to
the last man (Judg. v. 14, 15, 16). In cone
junction with Deborah, he afterwards composed a
song of victory in commemoration of that event
(sid.).—E. M.

BARBARIAN (Sdpfapos). This term is used
in the New Testament, as in classical writers, to
denote other nafions of the earth in distinction
from the Greeks. ‘I am debtor both to the
Greeks and Barbarians’ —“EAAnol re wal Bap-
Bdpos (Rom. i. 14); ‘der Griechen und der Un-
griechen’—Luther; ‘To the Grejges and to them
which are no Grekes'—Tyndale, 1534, and Ge-
neva, 1557 ; ‘To the Grekes and to the Ungrekes’
—Cranmer, 1539. In Coloss. iii. 11, ‘Greek nor
Jew—Barbarian, Scythian'—BdpBapos seems to
refer to those nations of the Roman empire who did
not speak Greek, and Zxu@ys to nations not under
the Roman dominion (Dr. Robinson). In 1 Cor.
xiv. 1] the term is applied to a difference of
language: ‘If I know not the meaning of the
voice, 1 shall be unto him that speaketh a bare
barian (‘as of another language, Geneva Vers.),
and he that speaketh shall be a barbarian (‘as of
another language,’ Geneva Vers.) unto me.’ Thus
Ovid, ‘ Barbarus hic ego sum, quia non intel-
ligor ulli, 7ris¢. v. 10. 37. In Acts xxviii. the
inhabitants of Malta are called BdpBapor, because
they were originally a Carthaginian colony, and
chiefly spoke the Punic language. In the a 6
tuagint, BdpBapos is used for the Hebrew tY,
© A people of strange language’ (Ps. cxiv. 1); in
the Chaldee paraphrase *N373 NOYD. In the


Rabbinical writers }Y2 is applied to foreigners .
in distinction fiom the Jews; and in the Jeru- .
salem Talmud it is explained by F139}, &. e. the

Greek language; Rabbi Solomon remarks, that —


whatever is not in the Holy tongue, is called
(Buxtorf, Lez-Talm.). According to Herodo-
tus, the Egyptians called all men barbarians .
who did not speak the same language as
themselves: ph opics duoyAdacous, ii. 158. Cle-
ment of Alexandria uses it respecting the
Egyptians and other nations, even when speaking
of their progress in civilization, as in his Strom,
i. c. 16, §74.: Od pdms 5E ¢iAocogplas, &AAL wal
axdons oxeddy réxvns evdperal BdpBapo. Alyéy-
Tot ‘your mwpa&ror dorpodcylay eis dvOpdwous
dhveynay, Suolws 8¢ wal Xardaio.—‘ Barbarians»
have been inventors not only of Philosophy, but
v


292 BAR-JONA.


likewise of almost every art. The Egyptians, and
in like manner the Chaldeans, first introduced
among men the knowledge of astrology.’ Ina
singular passage of Justin Martyr's tirst Apo-
logy, the term is applied to Abraham and other
distinguished Hebrews: ‘We have learmed and
have before explained, that Christ is the first be-
gotten of God, being the Word (or reason) Adyor
byra, of which the whole human race partake.
And they who live agreeably to the Word (or rea-
son of werd Adyou Bidcayres, are Christians, even
though esteemed atheists: such among the Greeks
were Socrates, Heraclitus, and thelike; and among
the barbarians (‘among other nations,’ Cheval-
lier’s Trans.) év BapSdpos, Abraham, Ananias,
Agzarias, Misael, and Elias, and many others. —
Apol. i. 46. Strabo (xiv. 2) suggests that the
word Bardar-os was originally an imitative
sound, designed to express a harsh dissonant
language, or sometimes the indistinct articulation
of the Greck by foreigners, and instances the
Carians, who on the latter account he conjectures
were termed by Homer apBapdépwva: (Il. ii.
867). The word appears to have acquired a re-
proachful sense during the wars with the Persians;
their country was called 4 BdpBapos (yi). (De-
mosth. Philipp. iii.) —J.E.R. ©

BAR-JESUS (Bapinoois). [Enymas.]

BAR-JONA (Bap "Iwva, son of Jonas). the
patronymic appellation of the Apostle Peter (Matt.
xvi. 17). Be:

BARKENIM. [Tuorns.]

BARLEY (WY). This grain is mentioned
in Scripture as cultivated and used in Egypt
(Exod. ix. 31), and in Palestine (Lev. xxvii. 16;
Deut. viii. 8; 2 Chron. ii. 10; Ruth ii. 17;
2 Sam. xiv. 30; Isa. xxviii. 25; Jer. xli.8; Joel
i..11). Barley was given to cattle, especially
horses (1 Kings iv. 28), and was indeed the only
cor grain given to them, as oats and rye were
unknown to the Hebrews, and are not now grown
in Palestine, although Volney affirms (ii. 117)
that small quantities are raised in some parts of
Syria as food for horses. Hence barley is men-
tioned in the Mishnah (Pesach. fol. 3) as the food
of horses and asses. This is still the chief’ use of.
barley in Western Asia. Bread made of barley
was, however, used by the pourer classes (Judg.
vii. 13; 2 Kings iv. 42; John vi. 9, 13; comp.
Ezek. iv. 9). In Palestine barley was for the
most part sown at the time of the autumnal rains,
October—November (Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr. ad
Matt. xii. 1), and again in early spring, or rather
as soon as the depth of winter had passed (Mish.
Berachoth. p. 18). This later sowing has not
hitherto been much noticed by writers on this
part of Biblical illustration, but is confirmed by
various travellers who observed the sowing of
barley at this time of the year. Russell says that
it continues to be sown to the end of February
(Nat. Hist. Aleppo, i. 14; see his meaning
evolved in the Pictorial Palestine, Phys. Hist.,
p- 214; comp. p. 229). The barley of the first
crop was ready by the time of the Passover, in the
month Abib, March—April (Ruth i, 22; 2 Sam.
xxi. 9; Judith viii. 2); and if not ripe at the
expiration of a (Hebrew) year from the last cele-
bration, the year was intercalated (Lightfoot, u¢
supra) to preserve that connection between the
feast and the barley-harvest which the law required


BARNABAS,


(Exod. xxiii. 15, 16; Deut. xvi. 16). Accard-
ingly, travellers concur in showing that the barley-
harvest in Palestine is in March and April—ad-
vancing into May in the northern and mountain-
ous parts of the land; but April is the month in
which the harley-harvest is chiefly gathered in,
although it begins earlier in some parts and later
in others (Pict. Palestine, pp. 214, 229, 239). At
Jerusalem, Neibuhr found harley ripe at the end
of March, when the later (autumnal) cron had
only been lately sown (Beschreib. von Arabien,
. 160).

: Tee Gok in Isa. xxxii. 20 has been supposed
by many to refer to rice, as a mode of culture by
submersion of the land after suwing, similar to
thatof rice, is indicated. The celebrated passage,
*Cast thy bread upon the waters,’ &c. (Eccles.
xi. 1), has been by some supposed to refer also to
such a mode of culture. But it is precarious to
build so important a conclusion, as that rice had
been so early introduced into the Levant,

such slight indications; and it now sean tual
barley is in some parts subjected to the same sub-
mersion after sowing as rice, as was particularly
noticed by Majer Skinner (i. 320), in the vicinity
of Damascus. In Exod. ix. 31, we are told that
the plague of hail, some time before the Passover,
destroyed the barley, which was then in the green
ear; but not the wheat or the rye, which were
only in the blade. This is minutely corroborated
by the fact that the barley sown after the inun-
dation is reaped, some after ninety days, some in
the fourth month (Wilkinson's Thebes, p. 395),
and that it there ripens a month earlier has the
wheat (Sonnini, p. 395).


BARNABAS (TN13) 195; Baprdfas). His
name was originally "Iwojjs, Joses, or ‘lwohd,
Joseph (Acts iv. 36); but he received from the
Apostles the sumame of Barnabas, which signi-
fies the Son of Prophecy. Luke interprets it by
vids mapaxAjoews, i.e. Son af Exhortation. The
Hebrew term and its cognates are used in the
Old Testament with a certain latitude of mean-
ing, and are not limited to that of foretelling
future events, Thus Abraham is termed in Gen,
xx. 7 N99, Sept. xpopfrns, as being a person
admitted to intimate communion with the Deity,
and whose intercession was deemed of superior
efficacy. In Exod. vii. 1 Jehovah declares to
Moses, ‘I have made thee a god to Pharaoh, and
Aarun, thy brother, shall be thy prop/et,’ JS'23,
which Onkelos translates by JOIN. thy in-
terpreter (Buxtorf, Lez. Talmud.). In like
manner xpopytela, in the New Testament,
means not merely prediction, but ‘includes the
idea of declarations, exhortations, or warnings ute
tered by the prophets while under divine influ-
ence’ (Dr. E Rubinson). ‘He that prophe-
sieth (6 mpopytedwy) speaketh unto men, unto
edification, and exhortation (mapaxAnow), and
comfort’ (1 Cor. xiv. 3). Of Silas and Judas it
is said, ‘being prophets, they exhorted (mapexdAe-
cay) the brethren’ (Act xv. 32). It can hardly
be doubted that this name was given to Juses to
denote his eminence as a Christian teacher. In
Acts xiii. 1 his name is placed first in the list of
prophets and teachers belonigtig to the church at
Antioch, Chrysostom, however, understands the
surname in the same way as the Auth. Vers,
Son of Consolation, and supposes that it was


BARNABAS,


given to Barnabas on account of his mild ard
gentle disposition : ‘This Barnabas was a mild


and gentle person. His name means Son of


Consolation : heuce he became a friend of Paul ;

and that he was very kine and easy of access is

proved hy the instance before us, and by the

case of Sohn (Mark)’ (Jn Act. Apost. Hom. a

He is described by Luke as ‘a good man, full

of the Holy Ghost and of faith’ (Acts xi. 24).

He was a native of Cypms, but the son of Jewish

parents of the tribe of Levi. From Acts iv. 36,

37 it appears that he was possessed of land, but

whether in Judzea or Cyprus is not stated. He

generously disposed of the whole for the benefit of
the Christian community. and ‘laid the money
at the Apostles’ feet.’ As this transaction occurred
soon after the day of Pentecost, he must have
been an early convert to the Christian faith.
According to Clement of Alexandria (Strom.
ti. c. 20, vol. ii. p- 192, ed. Klotz), Eusebius
(Hist. Eccles. i, 12), and Epiphanius (Her. xx.
4), he was one of the seventy disciples (Luke
x1). It has been maintained that Barnabas
Ws identical with Joseph Barsabas, whose name
Sceurs in Acts i. 23. Most modern critics, how-
ever, embrace the contrary opinion, which they
conceive is supported by the circumstantial man-
fer in which Barnabas is first mentioned. How-
‘ver similar in sound, the meanings of the names
we very different; and if no further notice is
aken of Barsabas (a circumstance which Ullman
‘wees in favour of his identity with Barnabas),
same may be affirmed of Matthias. Chry-
‘stom observes, on Acts iv. 36,‘ This person is
hot, in my opinion, the same that is mentioned
With Matthias; for he was called Joses and Bar-
and afterwards surnamed Justus; but this
man was surnamed by the apostles Barnabas,
Son of Consolation ; and the name seeins to have
given him from the virtue, inasmuch as he
¥@s competent and fit fur such a purpose’ (Jn
 Apost. Homil. xi. 1).

When Paul made his first appearance in Jeru-
salem after his conversion, Barnabas introduced
him to the Apostles, and attested his sincerity
(Acts ix. 27). This fact lends sume support to
™ ancient tradition that they had studied toye-

in the school of Gamaliel—that Barnabas
often attempted to bring his companion over
tv the Christian faith, but hitherto in vain—that
meeting with him at this time in Jerusalem, not
ware of what had uccurred at Damascus, he once
More renewed his efforts, when Paul threw him-
telf weeping at his feet, informed him of § the
venly vision,’ and of the happy transformation
of the persecutor and blasphemer into the obedient
and zealous disciple (Acts xxvi. 16).
neh the conversion of Cornelius and his
Ousehold, with its attendant circumstances, had
Biven the Jewish Christians clearer views of the
Comprehensive character of the new dispensation,

Yet the accession of a large number of Gentiles to

Ne church at Antioch was an event so extraur-

inary, that the Apostles and brethren at Jerusa-

sem resolved on deputing one of their number to

‘vestigate it. Their choice was fixed on Barnabas.

er witnessing the fomishing condition of the
church, and adding fresh converts hy his personal
exertions, he visited Tarsus to obtain the assistance
of Saul, who returned with him to Antioch, where
laboured for a whole year (Acts xi. 23-26),


BARNABAS. m3


In anticipation of the famine predicted by Agabhs,
the Antiochian Christians made a contribution for
their poorer brethren at Jerusalem, and sent it by
the hands of Barnabas and Saul (Acts xi. 28-30),
who speedily returned, bringing with them John
Mark, a nephew of the former. By divine direc-
tion (Acts xii. 2) they were separated to the office
of missionaries, and as such visited Cyprus and
some of the principal cities in Asia Minor (Acts
xiii. 14). Soon after their return to Antioch, the
peace of the church was disturbed by certain
zealots from Judea, who insisted on the observance
of the rite of circumcision by the Gentile converts.
To settle the controversy, Paul and Bamabas
were deputed to consult the Apostles and elders
at Jerusalem (Acts xv.1, 2); they returned to com-
municate the result of their conference (ver. 22),
accompanied by Judas Barsabas and Silas, or
Silvanus. On preparing for a second missionary
tour, a dispute arose between them on account of
John Mark, which ended in their taking different
routes; Paul and Silas went through Syria and
Cilicia, while Barnabas and his nephew revisited
his native island (Acts xy. 36-41). In reference
to this event, Chrysostom remarks—‘ Tf ody; ex@pod
dvexcpnoay; wh yévorro. ‘Opas yap perk rovre
BapvdBay xordGy eyncopuleov arodavoyra wapd
TlavAov ey tais dxoroAais. Mapotucuds, pyoty,
eyévero, obx %Opa ovde pidoverxia:’ * What
then? Did they part as enemies? Far from it.
For you sce that after this Paul bestows in his
Epistles. many commendations on Barnabas.
There was “a sharp fit of anger” (Doddridge) he
(Like) says, not enmity, nor love of strife.” At
this point Barnabas disappears from Luke's nar-
rative, which to its close is occupied solely with
the labours and sufferings of Paul. From the
Epistles of the latter a few hints (the only authen-
tic sources of information) may be gleaned rela-
tive to his early friend and associate. From
1 Cor, ix. 5, 6, it would appear that Barnabas was
unmarried, and supported himself, like Paul, by
some manual occupation. In Gal. ii.) we have
an account of the reception given to Paul and
Barnabas by the Apostles at Jerusalem, probably
on the occasion mentioned in Acts xv. In the
same chapter (ver. 13) we are informed that Bar-
nabas so fur yielded to the Judaizing zealots at
Antioch, as to separate himself for a time from
communion with the Gentile converts, The date
of this occurrence has been placed by some critics
soon after the Apostolic convention at Jerusalem
(about a.v. 52); by others, on the return of Paul
from his second missionary journey (a.p. 55).
Dr. Paley thinks ‘that there is nothing to hinder
us from supposing that the dispute at Antioch
was prior to the consultation at Jerusalem, or
that Peter, in consequence of this rebuke, might
have afterwards maintained firmer sentiments
(Hore Pauline, ch. es The same view has
been taken by Hag and Schneckenburger; but
(as Dr. Neander remarks) though Paul may not
fullow a strict chronological order, it is difficult
tu believe that he would not place the natrative
of an event so closely connected with the confer-
ence at Jerusalem, at the beginning, instead of
letting it follow as supplementary ( [istury of the
Planting of the Christian Church, vol. i. p. 248,
Enz. oe It has been inferred from 2 Cor.
viii. 18, 19, that Barmabas was not only recon-
ciled to Paul after their separation (Acts xv. 39),


a4 BARNABAS.


bat also became again his coadjutor; that he was
*the brother whose praise was in the Gospel
through all the churches.” Chrysostom says that
some suppose the brother was Luke, and others
Bamabas. Theodoret asserts that it was Barna-
bas, and appeals to Acts xiii. 3, which rather
serves to disprove his assertion, for it ascribes the
appointment of Paul and Barnabas to an express
divine injunction, and not to an elective act of the
church ; and, besitles, the brother alluded to was
chosen, not by a single church, but by several
churches, to travel with Paul (xeporovnOels bxd
Tey exxdnoiey cuvéxdnpos judy, 2 Cor. viii. 19).
In Coles. iv. 10, and Pailemon, ver. 24, Paul men-
tions Mark a3 his fellow-labourer; and at a still
later period, 2 Tim. iv. 1], he refers with strong
_ approbation to hi. services, and requests ‘Timothy
to bring him to Rome; but of Bamabas (his re-
lationship to Maik excepted) nothing is said.
The most probable inference is, that he was al-
ready dead, and that Mark had subsequently as-
sociate.l himself with Paul. For the latter years
of Barnabas we have no better guides than the
Acta et Passio Barnabe in Cypro, a forgery in
the name of John Mark, and, from the acquaint-
ance it discovers with the localities of Cyprus,
probably written by a resident in that island; and
the legends of Alexander, a Cyprian monk, and
of Theodore, commonly called Lector (that is, an
évayvworhs, or reader), of Constantinople; the
two latter belong to the sixth century. Accord-
ing to Alexander, Barnabas, after takinz leave of
Paul, landed in Cyprus, passed through the whole
island, converted numbers to the Christian faith,
and at last arrived at Salamis, where he preached
in the synazozue with great success. Thither he
was followed by some Jews from Syria (the author
of the Acta names Barjesus as their leader), who
stirred up the people against him. Barnabas, in
anticipation of his approaching end, celebrated
the Eucharist with his brethren, and bade them
farewell. He gave his nephew directions respect-
ing his interment, and charged him to go after
his decease to the Apostle Paul. He then entered
the synagogue, and bezan as usual to preach
Christ. But the Jews at once laid hands on him,
shut him up till night, then dragged him forth,
and, after stoning him, endeavoured to bur his
mangled body. The corpse, however, resisted the
action of the flames; Mark secretly conveyed it
to a cave about five stadia from the city; he then
joined Paul at Ephesus, and afterwards accom-
panied him to Rume. A violent persecution, con-
sequent on the death of Barnabas, scattered the
Christians at Salamis, so that a knowledge of the
place of his interment was lost. This account
agrees with that of the pseudo Mark, excepting
that, according to the latter, the corpse was reduced
to ashes. Under the emperor Zeno (a.v. 474-191),
Alexander gues on to say, Peter Fullo, a noted
Monophysite, became patriarch of Constantinople.
He aimed at bringing the Cyprian church under
his patriarchate, in which attempt he was sup-
ported hy the emperor. When the Bishop of
Salamis, a very worthy man, but an indifferent
debater (6Avyoorbds 5¢ mpds Sade), was called
upon to defend his rights publicly at Constanti-
nople, he was thrown into the greatest perplexity.
But Barnabas tvok compassion on his fellow-
countryman, appeared to him by night no less
than three times, assured him of success, and told


. BARNABAS.


him where he might find his hody, with a copy of
Matthew's guspel lying upon it. The bishop
awoke, assembled the clergy and laity, and found
the body as described. The sequel may be easily
conjectured. Fullo was expelled from Antioch;
the independence of the Cyprian church acknow-
ledged; the manuscript of Matthew's gospel was _
deposited in the palace at Cunstautinople, and at
Easter lessons were publicly read from it; and by
the emperor's command a church was erected oa
the spot where the corpse had been interred.
These suspicious visions of Barnabas are termed
by Dr. Cave, ‘a mere addition to the story, de-


* signed only to serve a present tum, to gain credit


tu the cause, and advance it with the emperor.’

Neither Alexander uor Theodore is very ex-
plicit respecting the copy of Matthew's gospel
which was found with the corpse of Barnabas.
The former represents Barnabas as saying to An-
themius, éxe? pod +d way capa Gxoxerrat, «al
evayyéAtov ididxeipoy 9 e&éAaBov axd Marbalov—
‘There my whole body is deposited, and an auto-
graph gospel which I received from Matthew.
Theodore saya, Exov ex) ornbois 7d Kata Mar-
Oaiov evaryyéAtov, iSib-ypapov Tov BapyaBa—‘ Hav-
ing on his breast the Gospel accurding to Matthew,
an autograph of Barnabas.’ The pseudo Mark
omits the latter circumstance. If we believe that,
as Alexander reports, it was read at Cunstanti-
nople, it must have Leen written not in Hebrew, but
in Greek. ‘The year when Barnabas died cannot
be determined with certainty; if his nephew
joined Paul after that eveut, it must have taken
place not later than a.p. 63 or 64. ‘ Chrysostom,’
it has been asserted, ‘ speaks of Barnabas as alive
in a.p. 63.’ The exact statement is this: in his
Eleventh Homily on the Epistle to the Colossians
he remarks, on ch. iv. 10,‘ touching whom ye
received commandments, if he come unto you
receive him’—iows wapad BapydBa évroAds ZAaBor
—‘ perhaps they received commands from Bar
nabas.”

There is a vague tradition that Barnabas was
the tirst bishop of the church at Milan, but it is so
ill supported as scarcely to deserve notice. It is
enongh to say that the celebrated Ambrose (b. a.p.
340, d. 397) makes no allusion to Barnabas when
speaking of the bishops who preceded himself
(v. Hefele, Das Sendschreiben des Apostels Bar
nabas, pp. 42-17).

From the iucident narrated in Acts xiv. 8-12
Chrysostom infers that the personal appearance of
Bamabas was dignitied and commanding. When
the inhabitants of Lystra, on the cure of the impo-
tent man, imagined that the gods were come dowa
to them in the likeness of men, they called Bar-
nabas Zeus (their tutelar deity), and Paul, Hermes,
because he was chief speaker: éyol Sone? xal wd
THs opews akiowperhs eiva: d BapydBas (In ce.
Apost. Hom. xxx).

BARNABAS, GOSPEL OF. A spurious
gospel, attributed to Banabas, exists in Arabic,
and has been translated into Italian, Spanish, and
Engl'sh. It was probably forged by some heretical
Christians, and has since been interpolated by the
Mohammedans, in order to support the pretensions
of their prophet. Dr. White has given copious ex-
tracts from it in his Bampton Lectures, LISA;
Sermon viii. p. 358, and Notes, p. 41-69 (See
also Sale’s Koran, Prelim. Dissert. sect. 4). It
is placed among the Apocryphal in the


BARNABAS.


Stichometry prefixed by Cotelerius to his edition
of the Apostolical Constitutions (Lardner's Cre-
dibility, part ii. ch. 147). It was condemned by
ea I. (Tillemont, Mémoires, &c. 1.
DP .
_ Bannanas, Eptstie ov. The title of this an-
cient composition is found in the Stichometries (or
catalogues of the sacred books) of the ninth cen-
tury; but from that period to the seventeenth: cen-
tury the work itself remained entirely unknown.
Jacob Sirmond, a Jesuit, in copying the transcript
of aGreek manuscript of Polycarp's Epistle to the
Philippians, which belonged to Turrianus (a
memier of the same order), discovered another
piece appended to it, which proved to be the Epistle
(so called) of Barnabas. It was also found in
two manuscripts of Pulycarp, at Rome, which
Cressolius collated. Siimond. sent a copy to the
Benedictine, Hugo Menard, who had not long be-
fore fond an ancient Latin translation of the
Epistle of Barnabas in the Abbey of Corbey.
Abont the same time Andieas Schottus (also a
Jesuit) obtained a manuscript containing the
Epistles of Polycarp and Bamabas; this was
transcribed by Claudius Salmasius, and given,
with a copy of the Corbey version, to Isaac Vossins.
“sius shortly after paid a visit to Archbishop

sher, who was then preparing for publication an
ancient Latin version of the shorter Ignatian Epis-
tls. It was agreed between them to anuex to
this work the Epistle of Barnabas. But it had

rdly been sent to press when the great fire at
Oxford occurred (1644), in which the manuscript
Was destoyed, with all the archbishop’s notes, and
only a few pages saved which were in the cor-
rector's hands, These were alterwards inserted by

‘shop Fell, in the Preface to his edition of Bur-

nabas, Oxford, 1685. The first edition of Bar-
Rabas apneared at Paris, in 1645; it had been
Prepared by Menard, but, in consequence of his
death, was edited by Luke d’Acherry. In the
fllowing year a new and much improved edition
Was yublished by Vossius, for which he collated
Wee manuscripts; it was appended to his editco
Princeps of the Inatian Ejistles. In 1672 Co-
teleiius published his magniticent edition of the
Apostolic Fathers. Besides the Greek text, and
tLey's version of Barnabas, it contained a new
tanslation and valuable notes by the editor. The
Tepriut, in 1724, contained additional notes by
Davis and Le Clerc. In 1685 two adilitions ap-
ared; Bishop Fell's, alieady noticed, and one

Y Stephen le Moyne, at Leyden, in the first vo-
lume ofhis Varia Sacra, with copious notes. It

W also contained in Russel's edition of the Apos-
tolic Fathers, Lond. 1746, and in the first volume
of Galland’s Bibliotheca veterum Patrum, Ven.
N65. The most recent and convenient edition is
that by Dr. C. J. Hefele, in his Patrum Aposto-
ticorum Opera, Tiibingen, 1839 and 1842. Four
German translations have appeared, by Amold
(1696), Gliising (Hamb. 1723), Grynaus (1772
and Most (1774); it was translated into English,
by Archbishop Wake (The genuine Epistles of the
Apostolic Fathers, &c., Loud. 1693 and 1710);
and a French translation hy Le Gras is inserted
in Desyrez’s Bible, Paris, 1717. On comparing
Corbey version with the Greek text, it appears
that the latter wants four chapters and a half at
the begining, and the former four chapters at the
end; thus each supplies the deficiencies uf the


@ BARNABAS. 296


other. It is remarkable that all the Greek manu-
scripts hitherto found are similarly defective ;
which plainly shows that they are all derived
from the same source, and form only one family
of manuscripts.

The Epistle of Barnabas consists of twenty-one
chapters. The first part (i. 17) treats of the
abrogation of the Mosaic dispensation, and of the
types and prophecies relating to Christ; the last
four chapters are composed entirely of practical
directions and exhortations. The names and resi-
dence of the persons to whom it is addressed are
not mentiuned, on which account, probably, it
was called by Origen a Catholic Epistle (Origen,
Contr. Cas. lib. i. p. 49). But if by this title he
meant an epistle addressed to the general body of
Christians, the propriety of its application is doubt-
ful, for we meet with several expressions which
imply a personal knowledge of the parties. It has
been disputed whether the persons addressed were
Jewish or Gentile Christians. Dr. “Helele strenu-
ously contends that they were of the former class,
His chief argument appears to he, that it wonld be
unnecessary tu insist so earnestly on the abolition
of the Mosaic economy in writing to Gentile cou-
verts. But the Epistle of Paul to the Galatians
is a proof to what danger Gentile Christians were
exposed in the first ages from the attempts of
Judaizing teachers; so that, in the absence of
more exact information, the supposition that the
persons addressed were of this class, is at least
not inconsistent with the train of thought in the
Epistle. But more than this: throughout the
Epistle we tind a distinction maintained between
the writer and his friends on the one hand, and the
Jews on the other. Thus in chap. iii, ‘God
speaketh to them (the Jews), concerning these
things, “ Ye shall not fast as ye do this day,” &e.;
but to ts he saith, “Is not this the fast that I have
chosen +” &c.; and at the end of the same chapter,
‘Te hath shown these things to all of us that we
should not run as prose/ytes to the Jewish law '—
Sante ostendit omnibus nebis ut non incurramus
tanguam proselyti ad illorum legem. This
would be singular language to address to persons
who were Jews by birth, but perfectly suited to
Gentile converts, In chap. xiii. he says, ¢ Let us
inquire whether the covenant be with ts or with
them’ (the Jews), and concludes with quoting the
promise to Abraham (with a slight verbal differ-
ence), ‘ Behwld I have made thee a father of the
nations which tithoul circumcision believe in the
Lord,’ a passage which is totally invelevant to
Jewish Christians, For other similar passages,
see Junes On the Canon, part iii. chap. 39.

Whether this Epistle was written by Barnabas,
the companion of St. Paul, has been a subject of
controversy almust ever since its publication in
the seventeenth century. Its first editors, Usher
and Meuard, took the negative, and Vossins the
ailirmative side of the question. Of modern cri-
tics, Hug, Ullman, Neander, Winer, and Hefele
agree with the former, and Rosenmiiller, Gieseler,
Bleek, Heuke, and Rordam with the Jatter. The
external evidence for its genuineness, it may be
allowed, is considerable ; but besides some con
flicting testimonies, criteria furnished by the Epistle
itself lead to the opposite conclusion, We shall
present a view of both as succinctly as possible,

I. The first writer who alludes to this Epistle
is Clement of Alexand:ia. 1. He quotes a sen-


298 BARNABAS.


tence from the tenth chapter, and adds, ‘These
things saith Barnabas’ (Seon ii. 15. § 67,
vol. ii, p. 165, ed. Klotz. Lips. 1831). 2. A sen-
tence from chap. xxi., of which he says, ‘ Bar-
nabas truly speaks mystically’ (Strom. ii. 18.
§ 84. vol. ii. p. 174). 3. Again, quoting chap. x.,
© Barnabas says’ (Strom. v. 8. § 52, vol. iii.
p- 38). 4. Alter quoting two passages from chap.
1. and ii, he calls the author the apostle Bur-
nabas (Strom. ii. 6. § 31, vol. ii. p. 142). 5. He
cites a passage from chap. iv. with the words
‘the apostle Barnabas says’ (Strom. ii. 7. § 35,
vol. ii, 144). 6. He prefaces a passage from chap.
xvi. with “I need not say more, when I adduce
as a witness the apostolic Barnabas, who was one
of the Seventy, aud a fellow-labourer with Paul’
(Strom. ii, 20. § 116, vol. ii. p. 192). 7. He makes
two quotations from chap. vi., which he introduces
with these words: § But Barnabas also, who pro-
claimed the word with the apostle, in his ministry
among the Gentiles’ (Strom. v. 10. § 64, vol. iii,
p- 46). The name of Barnabas occurs in another
passage (Strom. vi. 8. § 64, vol. iii. 136), but
probably by a lapse of memory, instead of Cle-
mens Rumanus, from whose first Epistle to the
Corinthians a sentence is there quoted. There is
also an evident allusiog to the Epistle of Barna-
bas in Pedag. ii. 10. § 83, vol. i. p. 245), and in
some other passages, though the author’s name is
not mentioned.

II. Origen quotes this Epistle twice. 1. The
sentence in chap, v. respecting the apostles, which
he says ‘is written in the Catholic Epistle of
Barnabas’ (Contr. Cels, i. 49). 2. A passage
from chap. xviii.: “To the same purpose Bar-
nabas speaks in his Epistle, when he says, that
“there are two ways, one of light, the other of
darkness," " &c. (De Princip. iii, 2).

On these testimonies it has been remarked, that
both these Alexandrian fathers have quoted works
unquestionably spurious without expressing a
doubt of their genuineness: thus Clement refers
to the Revelation of Peter, and Origen to the
Shepherd of Hermas, which he believed to be in-
spired (‘que scriptura valde mihi utilis videtur,
et, ut puto, divinitus inspirata,” In Ep. ad Rom,
Comment. lib. x.); and though Clement speaks
of the apostolic Barnabas, he evidently does not
treat this Epistle with the same deference as the
canonical writings, but freely points out its mis-
takes. Tertullian calls all the seventy disciples
apostles, and in this inferior and secondary sense,
as Dr. Lardner observes, Clement terms Barnabas
an apostle.

III. Eusebius, in the noted passage of his Ec-
elesiastical History (iii. 25), quoted at length (in
the original) by De Wette, in his Lehrbuch der
historisch-kritischen Einleitung in die Bibel, &c.,
Berlin, 1840, Theil. i. § 32, and translated by
Lardner, Credibility, part ii. chap. 72), says, ‘The
Epistle reputed to be written by Barnabas is to he
ranked among the books which are spurious’—év
tois vd0o1s KatarerdxGa—h pepouevn BapydBa
éxioroAf; and elsewhere, ‘He (Clement of Alex-
andria) makes use of testimonies out of those
scriptures that are contradicted (amd tay avi
Aeyoudvav ypapay), that called the Wisdom of
Solomon, and of Jesus the Son of Sirach, and the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and that of Barnabas and
of Clement, and of Jude’ (fist. Eccles. vi. 13).
He also observes of Clement, ‘In his book called


BARNABAS,


Hypo! he gives short explications of afl
the canonical jae er (xdons Tijs evB:aPfjxov
ypapiis),* not neglecting even the controverted
books (ras avr:Aeyouevas), I mean that of Jude
and the other Catholic Epistles, the Epistle of
Barnubas, and that called the Revelation of
Peter.’

IV. Jerome, in his work on illustrious men, os
Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers, thus speaks
of Barnabas: ‘ Barnabas of ed aan called also
Joseph, a Levite, was ordained, with Paul, an
apostle of the Gentiles: he wrote an Epistle for
the edification of the church, which is read among
the Apocryphal scriptures’ (Catal. Vir. tlust.
cap. vi.); and in his Commentary on Exekiel
xhi. 19, ‘Many parts of the Scriptures, and
especially the Epistle of Barnabas, which is reck-
oned among the apocryphal Scriptures,’ &c. In
another place he quotes, as the words of Ignatius,
the passage relative to the apostles, which is cited
by Origen from the Epistle of Barnabas (Lard-
ner's Credibility, pt. ii. ch. 114).

It is evident, as Valesius (with whom Lardner
and Hefvle agree) has remarked, that Eusebius
uses the term vd6a, not in the strict sense of
spurious, but as synonymous with avriveyouera,
i.e. disputed, controverted, and applies it to
writings which were received by sume, but re-
jected by others. The term apocryphal also,
used hy Jerome, was applied both by Jews and
Christians to works ahah (though the authors
were known) were not considered canonical.
The use of these terms, therefore, in reference to
the Epistle befure us, cannot be deemed as abso-
lutely decisive against its genuineness. The
following considerations, however, omitting some
af less weight which have been urged by different
writers, will, it is believed, go far to prove that
Barnabas was not the author of this Epistle.

1. Though the exact date of the death of
Barnabas cannot be ascertained, yet from the
particulars already stated respecting his nephew,
It is hizhly probable that that event took place
before the martyrdom of Paul, a.v. 64. But a
passage in the Epistle (ch. xvi.) speaks of the
temple at Jerusalem as already destroyed : it was
consequently written after the year 70.

2. Several passages have been adduced to show
that the writer (as well as the persons addressed
belonged tu the Gentile section of the Church;
but waiving this point, the whole tone of the
Epistle is different from what the knowledge we
possess of the character of Bamabas would lead
us to expect, if it proceeded from his pen. From
the hints given in the Acts he appears to have
been a man of strong attacliments, keenly alive
to the ties of kindred and father-land ; we find
that on both his missionary tours his native island
and the Jewish synagogues claimed his first
attention. But throughout the Epistle there is
a total absence of sympathetic regard for the
Jewish nation: all is cold and distant, if not
contemptuous. ‘It remains yet that I speak tu
you (the 16th chapter bezins) concerning the
temple; how those miserable men, being deceived,
have put their trust in the house.” How unlike


® ¢ Libri canonici vocantar év8:d@qeot quia effi-
ciunt utrumque Testamentum (S:adheqy Greci
appellaut) vetus scilicet et novum’ (Suiceri Z/es.
8. v. évdidénxos.


BARNABAS.


the friend and fellow-labourer of him who had
‘great heaviness and continual sorrow in his
heart for bis brethren, his kindred according to
the flesh’ (Rom. ix. 2). -

3. Bamabas was not only a Jew by birth, but
aLevite; from this circumstance, combined with
what is recorded in the Acts, of the active part he
took in the settlement of the points at issue be-
tween the Jewish and the Gentile converts, we
might reasonably expect to find, in a composition
bearing his name, an accurate acquaintance with
the Mosaic ritual—a clear conception of the
nature of the Old Economy, and its relation to
the New Dispensation, and a freedom frum that
addiction to allegorical interpretation which
marked the Christians of the Alexandrian school
in the second and succeeding centuries. But the
following specimens will suftice to show that ex-
actly the contrary may be affirmed of the writer
of this Epistle; that he makes unauthorized addi-
tions to various parts of the Jewish Cultus; that
his views of the Old Economy are confused and
erroneous; and that he adopts a mode of inter-
Fretation countenanced by none of the inspired
writers, and at utter variance with every principle
of sound criticism, being to the last degree puerile
and absurd, The inference is unavoidable, that
Bamabas, ‘ the Son of Prophecy,’ ‘ the Man full
hoy Holy Spirit and of faith,’ was not the au-

of this Epistle.

(1.) He mentions in two passages the fact re-
corded in Exod. xxxii. 19, of Moses breaking the
two tables of stone, and infers that Jehovah's co-
Yenant was thereby annulled. The falsity of
this statement need not be pointed out to the
Biblical student. He says, ‘They (the Jews)
have for ever lost that which Moses received. For
thus saith the Scripture: And Moses...... re-
ceived the covenant from the Lord, even two
tables of stone, &c. But, having turned them.
elves to idols, they Jost it; as the Lord said unto
Moses, Go down quickly, &c. And Moses cast

two tables out of his hands, and their cove-
hant was broken, that the love of Jesus might
be sealed in your hearts unto the hope of his faith’
ch. iv.). The second passage, in ch. xiv., is very
similar, and need not be quoted.
1,2) On the rite of Circumcision (Acts xv.

12) we find in this Epistle equal incorrectness,
ft wniter denies that circumcision was a sign
of the covenant, ‘You will say the Jews were
Streumcised for a sign, and so are all the Syrians
and Arabians, and all the idolatrous priests.’
in geudotus (ii, 37), indeed, asserts that the Syrians

gars received the practice of ee

le Egyptians; but Josephus, both in his
uiguities and Treatise cine eeek remarks

7 © must have alluded to the Jews, because
ae the only nation in Palestine who were
iw meised (Antig. viii. 10, §. 3; Contr. Apion.
trav. A How,’ says Hug, ‘ could Barnabas, who
vince ed with Paul through the southern pro-

€s of Asia Minor, make such an assertion

35 ie the heathen priests !"
va Nelerring to the goat (chap. vii.) either
that Mentioned in Num. xix. or las Men says,
washed plane and they only, shall eat the un-
in itself hen with vinegar.’ Of this direction,
in i Yy improbable, not a trace can be

4.) In ts, Bible, or even in the Talmud.

same chapter, he says of the scape-


BARNABAS. 2


goat, that all the congregation were commanded
to spit upon it, and put scarlet wool about its
heads and that the person appointed to convey
the goat into the wilderness touk away the scarlet
wool and put it on a thorn-bush, whose young
sprouts, when we find them in the field, we are
wont to eat; so the fruit of that thorn only is
nf On all these particulars the Scriptures are
silent.

(5.) In chap. viii. our author's fancy (as Mr.
Jones remarks) seems to grow more fruitful and
luxuriant. In referring to the red heifer (Num. .
xix.), he says that men in whom sins are come
to perfection (éy ols Guapria: réAeiu) were to
bring the heifer and kill it; that three youths
were to take up the ashes and put them in vessels;
then to tie a piece of scarlet wool and hyssop upon
a stick, and so sprinkle every one of the peuple.
© This heifer is Jesus Christ; the wicked men
that were to offer it are those sinners who brought
him to death; the young men signify those to
whom the Lord gave authority to preach his Gos-
pel, being at the beginning twelve; becanse there
were twelve tribes of Israel.’ But why (he asks)
were there three young men appointed to sprinkle ¥
To denote Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And why
was wool put upon a stick? Because the king-
dom of Jesus was founded upon the cross, &c.

(6.) He interprets the distinction of clean and
unclean animals in a spiritual sense. ‘ Is it not
("Apa otx—v. Dr. Hetele’s valuable note, p. 85)
the command of God that they should not eat
these things {—(Yes.) But Muses spoke in spirit
(€ wvevuart). He named the swine, in orger to
say, Thou shalt not join those men who are like
swine, who, while they live in pleasure, forget
their Lord,’ &. He adds—Neither shalt thou
eat of the hyana: that is, thou shalt not be an
adulterer.’ If these were the views entertained by
Bainabas, how must he have keen astonished at
the want of spiritual discernment in the Apostle
Peter, when he heard from his own lips the ac-
count of the symbolic vision at Joppa, and his
reply to the command—‘ Arise, Peter, slay and
eat. But I said, Not so, Lord, for nothing com-
mon or unclean hath at any time entered into my
mouth * (Acts xi. 8).

(7.) In ch. ix. he attempts to show that Abra-
ham, in circumcising his servants, had an espe-
cial reference to Christ and his crucifixion :—
€ Learn, my children, that Abraham, who first
circumcised in spirit, having a regard to the Son
(in Jesum, Lat. Vers.), circumcised, applying the
mystic sense of the three letters (Aafdy tpidy
ypappdtav Bdypara—den gehcimen Sinn dreier
Buchstaben anicendend, Hetele). For the Scrip-
ture says that Abraham circumcised 318 men of
his house. What then was the deeper insight
(yvéors) imparted tohim? Mark first the 18,
and next the 300. The numeral letters of 18 are
1 (Jota) and H (Eta), 1 = 10, H = 8; here you
have Jesus "IHooty; and because the cross in
the T(Tau) must express the grace (of our re
demption), he names 300; therefore he signified
Jesus by two letters, and the cross by one.’

It will be observed that the writer hastily as-
sumes (from Gen. xiv. 14) that Abraham circum-
cised only 318 persons, that being the number ot
“the servants born in his own house,’ whum he
armed against the four kings ; but he circumcised
his household nearly twenty years later, incluye


298 BARRENNESS.


ing not only those born in his honse (with the
addition of Ishmael), but ‘all that were bought
with money’ (Gen. xvii. 23). The writer evi-
dently was unacquainted with the Hebrew Scrip-
tures, by his committing the blunder of supposing
that Abraham was familiar with the Greek alpha-
bet some centuries before it existed.

Our limits will not allow us to enter into the
question of the integrity of the Epistle in its pre-
sent form; but this and several other topics are
discussed very fully and with great ability in Dr.
Hefele’s 7'reatise, to which, and the other works
mentioned below, the reader is referred.

A new and full Method of settling the Cano-
nical Authoriiy of the New Testament, by the
Rey. Jeremiah Joncs, Oxford, 1827, vol. ii. part
iii. ch. 37-43; Das Sendschreiben des Apostels
Barnabas aufs Neue untersucht, vbersetzt, und
erklurt, von Dr. Carl Joseph Hefele, Tiibingen,
1840; Patrum Apostolicorum Opera, edidit C.
J. Hefele, Tubingw, 1639; Lardner'’s Credibi-
lity of the Gospel History, part ii. ch. i.; Nean-
der, Allgemeine Geschichte der Christlichen Re-
ligion und Kirche, i. 653, 1100, or, History of
the Christian Religion and Church, translated
by the Rev. J. H. Rose, 1841, vol. ii. pp. 329-
331; Lives of the most eminent Fathers of the
Church, by William Cave, D.D., Oxtord, 1840,
vol. i. pp. 90-105.—J. E. R.

BARRENNESS is, in the East, the hardest
lot that can befal a woman, and was considered
among the Israelites as the heaviest punisliment
with which the Lord could visit a female (Gen.
xvi, 2; xxx. 1-23; 1 Sam. i. 6,29; Isa. xlvii. 9;
xlix, 21; Luke i. 25; Niebuhr, p.76; Volney, ii.
35Y). In the Talmud ( Yeramoth, vi. 6) a man
was bound, after ten years childless conjugal life,
to marry another woman (with or without repudi-
ation of the first), and even a third one, if the se-
cond proved also barren. Nor is it improbable
that Moses himself contributed to strengthen the
opinion of disgrace by the promises of the Lord
of exemption from barrenness as a_ blessing
(Exod. xxiii, 26; Deut. vii. 14). Instances
of childless wives are fonnd in Gen. xi. 30;
xxv. 21; xxix. 31; Judy. xiii. 2,3; Luke i. 7,
36. Some cases of unlawful marriages, and
more especially with a brother's wile, were visited
with the punishment of barrenness (Lev. xx. 20,
21); Michaelis, however (Mosaisches Recht, v.
290), takes the word DY here in a figurative
sense, implying that the children born in such an
illicit marriage should not be ascribed to the real
father, but to the former brother, thus depriving
the second husband of the share of patrimonial
inheritance which would otherwise have fallen
. to his lot if the first brother had died childless.

This general notion of the disgrace of barrenness
in a woman may early have given rise, in the
patriarchal age, to the custum among barren
wives of introducing to their husbands their maid-
servants, and of regarding the children born in
that concubinage as their own, by which they
thought to cover their own disgrace of Larrenness
(Gen. xvi. 2; xxx. 3). [Cuiivren.J]—E. M.

BARSABAS. [Josgru Barsapas; Jupas
Bansanas. ]


BARTHOLOMEW (BapSodopaios "PON 73,
f. e. the son of Tulmai: DN) is a name that
occurs in the Old Testament (Josh. xv. 14); Sept.


BARTHOLOMEW.


@or ap), Corpat; Auth. Vers., Talmai; (2 Sam.
xiii. 37) Sept. @oaAul, @oroual. In Josephus, we
find @oAopaios (Antig. xx. 1.§1). The @odApaios
in Antig. xiv. 8.1 is called MroAeuaios in Bell.
Jud. i. 9. § 3, not improbably by an error of the
transcriber, as another person of the latter name
is mentioned in the same sentence. Bartholomew
was one uf the twelve Apostles, and is generally
supposed to have been the same individual who
in John’s gospel is called Nathanael. The
reason of this opinion is, that in the three first
gospels Philip and Bartholomew are constantly
named together, while Nathanael is nowhere
mentioned; on the contrary, in the fourth gos-
pel the names of Philip and Nathanael are
similarly combined, but nothing is said of Bartho-
lomew. Nathanael therefore must be considered as
his real name, while Bartholomew merely expresses
his filial relation. He was a native of Cana
in Galilee (John xxi. 2). He was introduced
by Philip to Jesus, who, on seeing him ap-
proach, at once pronounced that eulogy on his
character which has made his name almost
synonymous with sincerity : ‘ Behold an Israelite
indeed, in whom there is no guile!’ (Jolin i. 47).*
He was one of the disciples to whom our Lord
appeared after his resurrection, at the Sea of
Tiberias (John xxi. 2); he was also a witness of
the Ascension, and returned with the other apostles
to Jerusalem (Acts i. 4, 12, 18). Of his sub-
sequent history we have little more than vagne
traditions, According to Eusebius (Hist. Eccies.
v. 10), when Pantenus went on a mission to the
Indians (towards the close of the second century),
he found amoung them the Gospel of Matthew,
written in Hebrew, which had been left there by
the apostle Bartholomew. Jerome (De Vir. Idlustr.
c. 36) gives a similar account, and adds that
Pantanus brought the copy of Matthew's Gospel
back to Alexandria with him. Hut the title of
Indians is applied by ancient writers to so many
different nations, that it is difficult to determine the
scene of Bartholomew's Jabours, Mosheim (with
whom Neander agiees) is of opinion that it was a
part of Arabia Felix, inhabited by Jews, to whom
alone a Hebrew gospel could be of any service.
Socrates (Hist. Eccles. i, 19) says that it was the
India bordering on Ethiepia; and Sophronius
reports that Bartholomew preached the Gospel of
Christ "Ivdots rots xaAounevas evdainoow. This
apostle is sail to have sufiered crucifixion at
Albanopolis in Armenia, or, according to Nice-
phorus, at Urbanopolis in Cilicia, A’ spurious
gospel which bears his name is in the catalogue
of apocryphal books condemned by Pope Gelasius
(Fabricius, Cod. Apoc. i, 187; Mosheim, Com-
mentarics on the Affairs of the Christians, &¢.
translated by }idal, vol. it, p. 6, 7; Tiilemont,
Memoires, &c., i. 960. 1160; Neander, Age
meine Geschichle, i. 113; Cave, Lives of the
Apostles, Oxford, 1840, pp. 357-392).—J. 1. R.


* We have thus the highest evidence of the fulse-
hood in one instance (and the apostle John is
another), of the assertion of the psceudo- Barnabas
‘that Jesus selected for his apostles men laden
with the greatest sins (ixép sacay auapriay
dvouwrépous) in order to show that he came not
to call the righteous, Lut sinners to repentance’
(Ep. Barnab.ch. v.: v. Hafele’s Das Sendschrei-
ben, &c., p. 160).


BARTIMZUS.


‘ BARTIM AUS (Bapr{patos), the blind beggar
of Jericho whom Christ restored to sight (Mark
‘x. 46).


BARUCH (7973, blessed ; Sept. Bapovx), the
faithful friend and amanuensis of the prophet
Jeremiah, was of a noble family of the tribe of
Judah, and generally considered to he the brother
of the prophet Seraiah, both being represented as
sons of Neziah ; and to Baruch the prophet Jere-
miah dictated all his oracles. During the siege
of Jerusalem, Baruch was selected as the depo-
sitary of the deed of purchase which Jeremiah had
made of the territory of Hanameel, to which
deed he had been a witness. In the fourth year
of the reign of Jehoiachim, king of Judah (s.c.
605), Baruch was directed to write .all the pro-
phecies delivered by Jeremiah up to that period,
and to read them to the peuple, which he did
from a window in the Temple upon two solemn
occasions. He afterwards read them before the
counsellors of the king at a private interview,
when Baruch being asked to give an account of
the manner in which the prophecy had been com-

, gave an exact description of the mode in
which he had taken it down from the prophet's
dictation, Upon this they ordered him to toate
the rll, advising that he and Jeremiah should
conceal themselves. They then informed the king
of what had taken place, upon which he had the
nll read to him; but, afler hearing a part of it,
he cut it with a penknife, and, notwithstanding
the remonstrances of his counsellors, threw it into
the fire of his winter parlour, where he was sitting.
He then ordered Jeremiah and Baruch to be seized,
but they could not be found. The Jews to this

Y commemorate the burning of this roll by an
atmual fast,

Another roll was now written by Barnch from
the prophet’s dictation, containing all that was in
the former, with some additions, the most remark-
able of which is the rophecy respecting the ruin
of Jehoiachim and fis house, as the punishment
of his impious act. This roll is the prophecy of
eremiah which we now possess. Banieh, being
himself terrified at the threats contained in the
Prophetic roll, received the comforting assurance
that he would himself be delivered from the cala-
Mities which should befal Judah and Jerusalem.
In the fourth year of Zedekiah (n.c. 595), Baruch
‘supposed by some to have accompanied Seraiah
to Babylon, when the latter attended Zede-
ra with the prophecies contained in Jeremiah,
pene and li, which he was commanded by
eremiah to read on the banks of the Euphrates,
2; then to cast the prophetic roll into the river,
lasti ‘ stone attached to it, to signify the ever-

‘ng ruin of Babylon (Jer. li. 61). At least,
alia in the Look which bears his name (Ba-
tan Boox ork is said to have read these pro-
acts at Babylon, in the hearing of king Je-
oat "m and the captive Jews, in the fifth year
next hing of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans (sce
artic‘e), which must have been the same
ng of it in which Jehoiachim was made pri-
in the el or alter the other taking of Jerusalem,
when on year of the reign of king Zedekiah,
obetin e Jews, after their return from Babylon,
ieuutly persisted in their determination to
Migrate t z .
0 Lgypt, against the remonstrances of the
» both Baruch and Jeremiah accompanied


BARUCH. 209


them to that country, where they remained until
the death of Jeremiah, and from whence there is
no account in Scripture of Baruch’s return. The
Rabbins, however, allege that he died in Babylon,
in the twelfth year of the exile (see Calmet's Pre-
Jace). Josephus asserts that he was well skilled
in thm Hebrew language ; and that, after the tak-
ing of Jerusalem, Nebuzaradan treated Baruch
with consideration, from respect to Jeremiah,
whose misfortunes he had shared, and whom he
had accompanied to prison and exile (Antig. x.
11).—W. W.

ARUCH, BOOK OF (Apocrrpua), follows
next after the book of Jeremiah in the Septuagint
Version. It is the only one of the deuterocano-
nical books named in the catalogue of the cele-
brated fifty-ninth canon of the Council of Laodicea.
If Baruch, the scribe of Jeremiah, be the author of
this book, he must have removed from Egypt to
Babylon immediately after the death of Jeremiah,
inasmuch as the author of the book lived in Ba-
bylon in the fifth year afler that event, unless we
suppose, with Eichhorn, Arnold, and others, that
the reference (Baruch i. 1) is to the fifth year from
the captivity of Jehuiachim. Jalin (Introductio
tn Epitomen redacta, § 217, &c.) considers this
latter opinion ut variance with Baruch i. 1, where
the destruction of Jerusalem is spoken of as having
already taken place. De Wette (Lehrbuch der
Einleitung in das A. und N. T.) ingeniously con-
jectures that fre: (year) is a mistake or core
rection of some transcriber for znvf (month); and
there is no question that the present reading,
which mentions the year, and the day of the
month, without naming the month itself, is quite
unaccountable. :

If Baruch, the friend of Jeremiah, was the
author of the present work, it must be a transla-
tion from the Hebrew or Chaldee; and it is by no
means impossible that this is the case, as the work
abounds in Hebraisms. These Hebraisms, how-
ever, in the opinion of Jahn (ntroduction), might
have originated with a Jew writing Geek, al-
though he Jeans to the opinion that, from the use
of the word manna, and the frequent Hebraisms,
this work not only does not belong to the Greek
age of the Jews, but was actually written in
Hebrew. This is also the opinion of Calmet
(Preface t6 Baruch), Huet (Demonstratio Evan-
gelica), and others; while Grotius, Eichhorn, and
most of the German writers favour the idea of a
Greek original. They conceive that the writer
was some unknown person in the reign of Ptolemy
Lagos, who, wishing to contirm in tie true rehi-
gion the Jews then residing in Egypt, attributed
his own ideas to Baruch the scribe. There a
pears, however, no reason, on this latter hypothesis,
why the author should speak of the return from
Babylon. Grotius conceives that the book abounds
not only in Jewish, but even in Christian interpo-
lations (see Eichborn's Einleitung in die Apo-
brufe Schriften).

though Cyril of Jerusalem speaks of the book
of Baruch as canonical, it is not expressly named
in any of the ancient catalogues of the canon of
Scripture, except, as already observed, that. of the
Council of Laodicea; and the remarkable cir
cumstance of this being the only deuterocano-
nical book named in the canon of that Council
has viven rise to various cqnjectures. Dean Pri-
deaux, indeed, conceives that the words of the


. 200 BARUCH.


. canon, ‘ Jeremiah, with Baruch, the Lamenta-
tions, and the Epistle,’ were intended to express
no more than Jeremiah’s Prophecies and La-
mentions; that by the Epistle is meant only the
epistle in the 28th chapter of Jeremiah ; and that
Harnch's name is added only because of the part
he bore in collecting them together, and gdding
the last chapter (Connezion, vol. i. p. 50). But
on examining the Alexandrian manuscript in the
British Museum, it will be seen that the arrange-
ment of these Louks exactly tallies with the words
of the canon. Immediately after Jeremiah follows
Baruch, with its title and subscription ; then the
Lamentations, with title and subscription; and,
last of all, the Epistle, with the title, ‘ The Epistle
of Jeremiah,’ and the following subscription,
‘ Jeremiah, Lamentations, and the Epistle.”

Whiston (Authentic Records, vol. i. p. 1, &e.)
strongly contends for the canonicity of this book,
founding his opinion on Origen’s mode of citing
it, with the formula ‘It is written,’ as well as his
testimony, recorded by Eusebius (Hist. Eccles.
vi. 25), that Zhe Epistle (Baruch vi.) was owned
by the Jews; in addition to the fact, that it is
stated in the Apostulical Constitutions that the
book of Baruch, together with the Lamentations,
was publicly readin the synagogues on the tenth
day of the month Gorpieus.

Among the fathers the book of Baruch is cited
generally as part of the book of Jeremiah,—by
Jrenwus, Cyprian, Clement of Alexandria, Euse-
bius, Ambrose, Augustin, Chrysostom, Basil, Epi-
phanius, and others, Augustin, having cited
under the name of Jeremiah the passage in our
Bibles, Baruch iii. 35-37, observes, ‘Some ascribe
this saying not to Jeremiah, but to Baruch, his
amanuensis, but it is now known under the name
of Jeremiah (City of God, ch. xxxiii.). The book
of Baruch is also cited as part of Jeremiah in the
Roman oliice for the Saturday in Whitsun week.
This mode of citing it most probably accounts
for the fact of its name being omitted in the
ancient catalogues, including those of Hippo and
Carthage. It was at length cited as a separate
book by the Council of Florence, and afterwards,
not without a strugyle (see Father Paul's history),
by the Council of Trent.

It is at the same time observed by Calmet, that
its ‘canonicity had been denied not only by the
Protestants, but by several Cathulics, among whom
he instances Driedo, Lyranus, and Dionysius of
Carthage. He considers that Jerome treats the
buok with harshness when (Preface to Jeremiah)
that father observes, ‘I have not thought it worth
while to translate the book of Baruch, which is
generally joined in the Septuagint versiou to Jere-
miah, aud which is not found among the Hebrews,
wor the pseudepigraphal epistle of Jeremiah.’
This is the epistle forming the sixth chapter of
Baruch, the geuuineness of which is questioned
by several who acknowledge that of the former part
of the book. Must modern writers of the Roman
church, among whom are Dn Pin (Canon of
Scripture), Calmet (Commentary), and Allber
(Hermeneutica Generalis), reckon this a genuine
epistle of Jeremial's, Jahn, however, after St.
Jerome, maintains its spurious and pseudepigra-
phal character. This he conceives sufticiently
attested by the difference of style, and its freedom
from Hebraisms. He considers it to be an imitae
tion of the Epistle of Jeremiah (ch. xxix.). This


BASAM.


Epistle, however, is confessedly more ancient than
the second book of Maccabees, for it is there re
ferred to (Macc. ii. 2, comp. with Baruch vi. 4)
as an ancient document. The position of this
letter varies in manuscripts; it sometimes pre-
cedes and sumetimes follows Lamentations.

The book of Baruch was marked with obeli in
Origen's Herapla ; the translation in the Latin
Vulgate is older than the time of Jerome.

The subject of the book is (1) an exhortation
to wisdom and a due observance of the law.
(2) It then introduces Jerusalem as a widow,
comforting her children with the hope of a return.
(3) An answer follows in confirmation of this
hope. A prologue is prefixed, stating that Baruch
had read his bouk to Jeremiah and the people in
Babylon by the river Sud (Euphrates), by which
the people were brought to repentance, and sent
the bouk with a letter and presents baci

W. W.

BARZILLAI (*D7 73), a wealthy old Gileadite
of Rogelim, who distinguished himself by his loy-
alty when Darid fled beyond the Jordan from his
son Absalom. He sent in a liberal supply of pro-
visions, beds, and other conveniences for the use of
the king's followers (2 Sam. xvii. 27; xix. 32).
On the king's triumphant return, Barzillai at-
tended him as far as the Jordan, but declined, by
reason of his advanced aye, to eel to Jeru-
salem and receive the favours to which he had
entitled himself.


BASAM, or BAAL-SHEMEN (jovy3,
balsam-tree). The word balm occurs frequently
in the authorized version, as in Gen. xxxvil.
25; xl. 11; Jerem. viii. 22; xlvi. 11; li. 8;
and Ezek. xxviii. 17. In all these passages the
Hebrew text has ceri, translated balm, which
is generally understood to be the true balsam,
and is considered a produce of Gilead, a moun-
tainous district, where the vegetation is that of
the Mediterranean region and of Europe, with
few traces of that of Africa or of Asia. But as
it is not certain that ¢zeré indicates the balsam-
tree, we shall contine our attention here to the
latter, and reserve what we have to say respecting
the former to the article Tzrru.

The name balsam is no doubt deriyed from the


Arabic Qjbely balesan, which is probably also


the origin of the BdAcauoy of the Greeks. Forskal
informs us that the balsam-tree of Mecca is there


called Abosham, ¢.e. perodora. The word pits


basham, given by him, is the name of a fragrant
shrub growing near Mecca, with the branches and
tufts of which they clean the teeth, and is supposed
to refer to the same plant. These names are
very similar to words which occur in the Hebrew
text of several passages of Scripture, as in the
Song of Solomon, v. 1, ‘I huve gathered my
myrrh with my spice’ (dasam); ver. 13, ¢ His
cheeks are as a bed of spices’ (6asam); and in
vi. 2, ‘gone down into his garden to the beds of
spices’ (basam). The same word is usel in
Exod. xxxv. 28, and in 1 Kings x. 10, ‘There
came no more such great abundance of spices
(basam) as those which the Queen of Sheba gave
to King Solomon.’ In all. these passages besom
or bosem DYA and DY’a, though translated
‘spices,’ would seem to indicate the ‘ balsam-tree,


BASAM.


if we may infer identity of plant or substance
from similarity in the Hebrew and Arabic names.
Bat the word may indicate only a fragrant aro-
matic substance in general. The passages in the
Song of Solomon may with propriety be under-
stood as referring to a plant cultivated in Judwa,
but not to spices in the general sense of that term.
Queen Sheba might have brought balsam or


balsam-trees, as well as spices, for both are the
of southern latitudes, though far removed
m each other.


The balsam-tree was one of the most celebrated
md hizhly esteemed among the ancients. Pliny
Hist. Nat. xii. 25) says, ‘ Sed omnibus odoribus
Prefertur balsamum, wni terrarum Jude@ con-
essam. Qstendere arbusculam hane urbi im-
eee Vespasiani.’ Pompey the Great also
ted of having had it borne in triumph.
faxin the historian (xxxvi. 3) says, ‘Opes genti
udaice, ex vectigalibus opobalsami crevere,
quod in his tantum regionibus giznitur. Est
Ramque yallis, &c. nomine Hierichus dicitur.
Nea valle sylva est, et ubertate, et amanitate
arborum insignis; siqnidem palmeto et opobal-
fino distingnitur.’ So Strabo and Diodorus
iculus, Dioscorides states that it is found in one
valley of Judea, and also in Egypt. Ata much
earlier period Theophrastus was aware of the fact
t the balsamum tree was found in a valley

of Syria, and that it was cultivated only in two
fardens, one of twenty acres, the other much
Taller, as is also stated by Pliny. Josephus
ete us that the balsam is produced only in
e a lee of Jericho, Abdollatif (© Memorabilia
i. eypt,’ as quoted hy Rosenmiiller) says that he
read in Galenus that the best balsam is pro-
duced in Palestine; but now (in Abdollatif’s
age) he says, that no more balsam is found in

, at country ; also that he knew of it only as
oly reared at Ain-Shames in Exypt, in
a enclosed piece of ground,’ Prosper Alpinus
ems us that Messoner, a eunuch, governor of

Pai : 1519, caused to be brought from Arabia
Mand oe ele he placed in the garden of
teenth lon, in the early part of the six-
century, saw the shrubs in the balsam
farlens of Matareah, a village near Cairo, and his
mptin of them agrees very well with that


BASAM. 01


given by Abdollatif. Hence it would appear
from ancient authors that the plant yielding
balsam was never very common in Palestine—
in fact, that it was contined to one locality,
where it was fuund only as a plant in cultivation,
though it may have been, and probably was, in-
troduced at a very early period. That it has
long disappeared from thence is evident from the
authors we have just quoted, as well as from the
testimony of all travellers in Palestine. That
it was a southern plant we may believe from its
being cultivated in the warm southern valley of
Jericho, and that it was introduced into that lo-
cality we have the testimony of Josephus (Antitg.
viii. 6), who says that it was brought thither
by Queen Sheba.  Straiso, moreover, stutes that
myrrh, frankincense, and the balsam-tree were
produced in the country of the Sabzans.

The balsam-tree, or balm of Gilead tree, as it is
also very generally called, is not a native of that
region, nor indeed does it appear ever to have been
cultivated there. It is probable, therefore, that
some other tree producing a balsamic secretion is
intended in the above passages, where the ‘word
balm has been considered as the equivalent of
tzeri. The true balsam, we have seen, was cul-
tivated near Jericho, and at a later age in Egypt.
From that country it has been traced to Arabia.
Thus Gerlach, as quoted by Bergius, relates that
the tree which produces the balsam of Mecca grows
near Bederhunin, a village between Mecca and
Medina, ina sandy rocky soil, confined to a
amall tract, about a mile in length. Strabo, we
have found, was aware that the balsam-tree grows
on the coast near Saba, in the happy land of the
Sahwans. Bruce identities this spot with that part
of the African coast near the straits of Babelman-
del, which now bears the name of Azab; and he
further states, that: among the myrrh-trees behind
Azab all along the coast to the straits of Babel-
mandel is the native country of the balsam-tree.
It grows to above fourteen feet high, sponta-
neously and without culture, like the myrrh, the
coffee, and frankincense tree, all equally the woud
of the country, and occasionally cut down and
used for fuel. It was no doubt early transplanted
into Arabia, that is, into the southern part of Arabia
Felix, immediately fronting Azab: the high
country of Arabia was too cold for it, being all
mountainous, and water freezing there. The first
plantation that succeeded secins tu have been at
Petra, the ancient metropolis of Arabia, now
called Beder, or Beder Hunein. Brice has,
Moreover, given two figures of the balsam-tree,—
one of the whole tree, the other of a single branch,
with the dissection of the finit. ‘These, he says,
may be depended on, as being carefully drawn,
after an exact examination, from two very fine
trees brought from Beder-Hunein. Salt also
found it on the west coast of the Red Sea, and
Mr. Brown, having examined his specimen, is
sufficient evidence of its authenticity.

The balsam-tree, having been seen by Bruce and
Salt, and figured by the former as well as by Nees
von Esenbeck, and introduced into India, has been
describe by the first and by Wight and ‘Amott,
and is now pretty well known. It forms a middle-
sized tree, with spreading branches and a smooth
ash-coloured bark, but which is no doubt rough
in the older parts, as represented by Bruce. The
ultimate branches are short, and thorn-like, with


302 BASAM.


small very short abortive branchlets, bearing at
their extremities the leaves and flowers. The
fruit is pointed, fleshy, with a, viscid pulp; nut
4-angled; 1—2-celled, containing one perfect
seed.

This species is now considered to be iden-
tical with the Amyris opobalsamum of Forskal,
found by him in Arabia, in the neighbourhood
of the caravanserai of Oude, not far from Has,


where it is called pl.sg) aboosham, é. e. pero-
9?


dora; and the wounded bark of which yields opo-
balsamnum, or balsam of Mecca. It is as highly
esteemed by all Orientals in the present day as
it was by the civilized nations of antiquity. An-
other species, discovered by Forskal, and called by
him Amyris K:ifal, from its Arabic name as, is
now also referred to the genus Balsamodendron.
It is a tree with reddish-coloured wood, and with
branches rather spinous. The younzer leaflets
are described as being villous and acute, the old
ones smooth, often obtuse; the berry compressed,
with an elevated ridge on each side, the apex
forming a black prominent point. The ‘wood
he describes as forming an article of consi-
derable commerce, especially to Exypt, where
water-vessels are impregnated with its smoke. It
is probably the twigs of this species which are
taken to India, and there sold under the name of
aod-i balessan; that is, the wood of the balsam-
tree, aud therefore analozuus to the xylobalsamum
of the ancients. Carpubalsamum was probably
only the fruit of one of these species. Opohal-
samum, or juice of the balsam, is generally de-
scribed as the finest kind, of a greenish colour, and
found in the kernel] of the fruit. Carpobalsamum
is said to have been made by the expression of the
fruit when in maturity, and xylobalsamum, by
the expression or decoction of the small new twigs,
which are of a reddish colour. But the ancients
probably employed both the fruit and the wood
for macerating in oil, which would extract the
odour. The greatest quantity of balsam, and the
best in quality, must in all times have been pro-
duced by an incision into the bark when the juice
is in its strongest circulation, in July. August, and
the beginning of September. It is then received
into a smal! earthen bottle, and every day's pro-
duce is poured into a larger, which is kept closely
corked. The whole quantity collected is but
small. When Sultan Sclim conquered Egypt
and Arabia in 1516, three pounds were ordered
to be sent yearly as a tribute to Constanti-
nople.

f, then, we compare ancient statements with
modern investigations, we find that the latter
confirm the former, as to the balsam-tree being a
native of southern latitudes,—that is, of Arab™h
and the opposite coast of Africa; to both of which
Tegions Bruce supposes the name of Saba to have
been applied. Ayain, if we consider the estima-
tion in which the tice is even now held by Ori-
ental nations, we shall have uo difficulty in
believing that the ancients may have equally
valued jt; and if so, the probability is, that it
would be noticed in some part of the Old Testa-
ment, as we find it is, in the above passages of the
Canticles, Exodus, and Kings; while the Hebrew
and Arabic names are too similar to allow us to
doubt their being applied to the same plant,


A


BASHAN.


namely, the far-famed balsam-tree of Arabia and
Africa.—J. F. R.

BASCA, or BASCAMA, a town near Beth-
shan, where Jonathan Maccabaus was killed
(1 Mace. xiii. 23; Josh. xiii. 1).

BASHAN, {U2 and {V320; Samaritan Vers.
PIN; Targ. INIA, Pa. Ixviii. 13, also [IND ;
the latter Buxturf suggests may nave originated.
in the mistake of a transcriber, yet both are found
in Targ. Jon.; Deut. xxxiii. 22; v. Lex. Talim.
col. 370; Sept. Bacdy and Bacamtis; Josephus
and Eusebius, Baravala. El Bottein is the modern
name. The word probably denotes the peculiar
fertility of the soil: in the ancient. versions. instead
of using it as a proper name, a word meaning
Sruitful or fat is adopted. Thus in Ps. xxii. 13,
for Bashan, we tind in Sept. xloves; Aquila,
Auwapol; Symmachus, oiriotol ; and Vulg. Pin-
gues (Ps. Ixvii. 16), for Atdl of Bashan ; Sept.
tpos xiov; Jerome (vy. Bochart, Hierozoicon, pars
i. col. 531), mons pinguis. The sacred wiiters
include in Bashan that part of the country east-
ward of the Jordan which was given to half the
tribe of Manasseh, situated to the north of Gilead.
Bochart incorrectly places it between the rivers
Jabok and Amon; and speaks of it as the allot-
ment of the tribes of Reuben and Gad (Num.
xxxii. 33). Tire tinst notice of this country is in
Gen xiv.5. | Cherdorlaomer and his confederates
‘smote the Rephaims in Aslitaroth Karmaim.’
Now Og, king of Bashan, dwelt in) Ashtaroth,
aud ‘was of the remnant of the Rephaim’ (‘giauts’
Auth, Vers.), Jushua xii. 4. When the Israelites
invaded the Promised Land, Argob, a province of
Bashan, contained ‘sixty fenced cities, with walls
and yates and brazen bars, besides unwalled towns
a great many’ (Deut, iii. 4,55 1 Kings iv. 13).
These were all taken by the Israelites, and Og
and his people utterly destroyed. Golan, une of
the cities of refuge, was situated in this country
(Deut. iv. 435 Josh. xx. 853 xxi, 27). PavAeay
év 7H Baraverdd: (Joseph. Antg iv. 7. 9 4).
Solomon appointed twelve officers to fumish
the moutuly supplies for the royal household,
and allotted the region of Argob to tie sun of
Geber (1 Kings iv. 13). Towards the close of
Jelu's reign, Haael invaded the lund of Israel,
and smote the whole eastan  territury, Seven
Gilead and Bashan’ (2 Kings x. 33; Jo-eph.
Antig. ix. 8.§1); but after his death the cities he
had taken were recovered by Jehoash (Joash)
(2 Kings xiii, 25), who defeated the Syrians in
three battles, as Elisha had predicted (2 Kings
xiii, 19; Joseph. Antg. ix. 8. § 7). Alter the
captivity the name Bataniea was applied to only
a pert of the ancient Bashan; the rest being
ealled Trachonitis, Auranitis, and Gaulanitis
(v. Lightfoot’s Chorographival Notes upon the
places mentioned in St. Luke: Works, vol. x.
p- 282). All these provinces were granted by
Augustus to Herod the Great, and on his death
Batanza formed a part of Philip's tetrarchy (Jo-
seph. De Bell Jud. it. 6. § 3; Antig. xviii, 4. § 6),
At his decease, a.p. 34, it was annexed, by Tibe-
Trius, to the province of Syria; but in a.w. 37 it
was given by Caligula tou Herod Agrippa, the
son of Aristobulus, with the title of hing (Acts
xii. 13 Joseph, Antiz. xviii, 6. § 10). From the time
of Agrippa’s death, in a.p. 44, to a.v. 93, the
government again reverted to the Rumans, but i¢


BASKET.


was-toea restored by Claudius to Agrippa II,

(Acts xxv. 13; Joseph, Antig. xx. 7. $1).

The richness of the pasture-land of Bashan, and

the consequent superiority of its breed of cattle,
are frequently alluded to in the Scriptures. We
read in Deut. xxxii. 14, of ‘rams of the breed
(Heb. sons) of Bashan.’ (Ezek. xxxix. 18)
‘Rams, lambs, bulls, goats, all of them fatlings
of Bashan.” The oaks of Bashan are mentioned
in connection with the cedars of Lebanon (Isa. ii.
13; Zech. xi, 2). In Ezekiel’s description of
the wealth and magnificence of Tyre it is said,
‘Of the oaks of Bashan have they made their
Oars (xxvii. 6). The ancient commentators on
Amos iv. 1,‘ the kine of Bashan, Jerome, Theo-
dovet, ancl Cyril, speak in the strongest terms
of the exuberant ‘fertility of Bashan (Bochart,
Hitnzeicon, pars i. col. 306), and modern tra-
vellers corroborate their assertions (v. Burck-
harlt's Tt-avels in Syria and the Holy Land,
Pp. 286-288 ; Buckingham's Travels in Palestine,
thogh the countries of Bashan and Gilead,
Londom, 1.822, vol. ii. pp. 112-117).—J. E. R.

BASKET. There are several words in the
Helrew Scriptures by which diflerent kinds of
baskets &p pear to be indicated :-—

» TW dud, which occurs in 2 Kings x. 7,
where the heads uf Ahab’s sons are sent from Sa-
mane to Jezveel in baskets; Jer. xxiv. 2, as con-
taining figs; and Ps. Ixxxi. 6 (rendered pots),
also as containing figs; where, therefore, deliver-
Mce from the baskets means deliverance from the
bondage of carrying burdens in baskets. In fact,
very heavy burdens Were thus carried in Egypt,
as corn in very large baskets from the field to the
threshing-floof, and from the threshing-floor to the
Stinaries, They were carried between two men by
&@ pole resting on their shoulders ; which agrees
With the previous clause of the cited text, ‘ I re-
Moved his shoulder from the burden.’ This labour
and form of the basket are often shown in the

“gyptian sculptures.


2.820 teba, which occurs in connection with
eo objects, ‘the basket and the store’
(Deut, xxvi. 2-4; xxviii. 5-17), and would there-
fore appear to have been somewhat similar to the
above; and, in fact, the Egyptiah sculptures shew
different baskets applied to this use.

3.3199 kelub. From the etymology, this ap-
to have been an interwoven Lasket, made of

rial lean In Lev. v. 27, however, it is used
a bird-cage, which must have been of open-
work, and probably not unlike our own wicker
rao The name is also applied to fruit-
kets (Arcos viii. 1, 2), Egyptian examples of


BASKET. 303


which are presented in figs. 3 and 4 (whieo
contain pomegranates) of the annexed cut.


[Ancient Egyptian.)


4, nidobo, salsilloth, occurs only in Jer. vi. 9,
where it obviously denotes baskets in which


grapes were deposited as they were gathered.
The form of the baskets used for this purpose is
often shown on the Egyptian monuments, and is
similar to that represented in fig. 4, cut 3.

5. In all the other places where the word basket
occurs, we are doubtless to understand a basket
made of rushes, similar both in form and ma
terial to those used by carpenters for carrying
their tools. This is still the common kind of
basket throughout Western Asia; and its use
in ancient Egypt is shown by an actual spe-
cimen which was found in a tomb at Thebes, and
which is now in the British Museum. It was,
in fact, a carpenter's basket, and contained bis
tools (fig. 1).

The specimens of Rgyptian baskets in the
British Museum, represented in our cut, convey
a favourable idea of the basket-work of ancient
times. Sume of these are worked ornamentally
with colours (figs. 3, 5, cut 2; also the modern
examples, figs. 2,7, cut 3). And bes des these the
monuments exhibit a large variety of hand-baskets,
of different shapes, and so extensively employed
as to show the numerous applications of basket-
work in the remote times to which these represent-
ations extend. They are mostly manufactured, the
stronger and larger sorts of the fibres, and the
finer of the leaves of the palm-tree, and not in-
frequently of rushes, but more seldom of reeds.


In the pone cut of examples of modern
Oriental basketa, many are of the same form, and


me BASTARD.


mostly of the same materials as those found in
the Egyptian tombs or pictured on their walls.
We doubt not that the three engravings taken
together furnish examples of all the different kinds
of baskets in use among the Israelites.

BASTARD. By this word the Auth. Vers.
renders the Hebrew WD, which occurs only in
Deut. xxiii. 2, and Zech. ix. 6. But Michaelis
(Mos. Recht, ii. § 139) reads the word with a dif-
ferent punctuation, 0 as to make it a compound
of two words “¥ DY, meaning stain, defect
of a stranger, implying the stain that would
be cast upon the nation by granting to such a
stranger the citizen-right. Some understand by
it the offspring of prostitutes, but they forget that
prostitutes were expressly forbidden to be tole-
rated by the law of Moses (Lev. xix. 29; Deut.
xxiii, 17). The most probable conjecture is that
which applies the term to the offspring of heathen
prostitutes in the neighbourhood of Palestine;
since no provision was made by Moses against
their toleration (Potter, Arch@ol. i, 354), and
who were a sort of priestesses to the Syrian god-
dess Astarte (comp. Num. xxv. 1, sg.; Gesenius,
Comment. on Isaiah, ii. 339; Hos. iv. 143
1 Kings xiv. 24, xv. 12; xxii. 47; 2 Kings
xxiii. 7; Herodot. i. 199),

That there existed such bastard offspring among
the Jews, is proved by the history of Jephthah
(Judg. xi. 1-7), who on this account was ex-
pelled, and deprived of his patrimony.—E. M.

BAT cabo *atalleph) occurs in Lev. xi.
19; Deut. xiv. 18; Isa. ii. 20; and Baruch vi. 22.
In Hebrew the word implies flying in the dark;
which, taken in connection with the sentence
*moreover the othelaph and every creeping thing
that flieth is unclean unto you; they shall not
be eaten,’ is so clear, that there cannot be a mis-
take respecting the order of animals meant;
though to modern zoology neither the species, the
genus, nor even the family is thereby manifested :
the injunction merely prohibits eating bats, and
may likewise include some tribes of insects. At
first sight, animals so diminutive, lean, and repug-
nant to tle senses, must appear scarcely to have
required the legislator’s attention, but the fact evi-
dently shows that there were at the time men or
tribes who ate animals classed with bats, a prac-
tice still in vogue in the great Australasian
islands, where the frugivorous Pteropi of the harpy
or goblin family, by our seamen denominated
flying-dogs, and erroneously vampyres, are caught
and eaten; but where the insectivorous true bats,
such as the genera common in Europe, are re-
jected. Some of the species of harpies are of the
bulk of a rat, with from three to four feet of ex-
panse between the tips of the wings; they have a
fierce dog-like head, and are nearly all marked
with a space of rufous hair from the forehead over
the neck and along part of the back.

They reside in the most dense foliage of large
trees, whence they fly out at nizht and do consi-
derable damage to the plantations of fruit-trees.
Among them the Pteropus edulis, kalong or
edible goblin bat, is conspicuous, and not unfre-

uently found in our museums of natural history.
he first tribe of them, distinguished by being
without tails, is not at present known in Egypt
or Northern Arabia, but of the second, baving
tails, a large species was discovered by M. Geof-


BATH KOL.


froy in the pyramids, and a very large one is
figured on de oldest monuments. Species of
this or of both are likewise common in Madagas-
car; and thence it may be inferred that they still
exist in Southern Arabia. It was to one or more
species of this section of Cheiroptera that we think
the Mosaic prohibition was chiefly directed; and
it is likewise to them that may be referred the
foundation of the ancient legends concerning
harpies, which, however much they may be dis-
torted, have a basis of truth. Indeed, when
we consider their voice, the faculty they have
of feeding with their thumbs, their formidable
teeth, their habit of flying in the day during
dark weather, and their willingness, though they
are frugivorous, to devour not only insects, but also
the blood and flesh of small animals, we may
admit that originally they were more daring in
the presence of man; that their true characters aie
but moderately amplified by poetical fancy; and
that the Mosaic injunction was strikingly appro-
priate.

In the texts of Scripture, where allusion is made
to caverns and dark places, true Vespertilionida,
or insect-eating bats, similar to the European, are
clearly designated.—C. H. S.


BATANZEA. [Basuan.]


BATH KOL dip Na daughter of the voice).
Under this name the Talmud, the later Targums,
and the Rabbinical writers, make frequent mention
of a kind of oracular voice, constituting the fourth
grade of revelation, which, although it was an in-
strument of divine communication throughout the
early history of the Israclites, was the most pro-
minent, hecause the sole, prophetic ‘manifestation
which existed during (and even after) the period
of the second Temple. The Midrashim ani the
Gemara, cited in Reland’s Antig. Sacr. pt. ii. ch.
ix., severally affirm that the Hath Kol is the voice
which spoke to Abraham, Moses, David, Nebu-
chadnezzar, and others; and the Tarzums of
Jonathan and of Jerusalem make the Bath Kol
appear in Gen. xxxvili. 26; Num. xxi. 6; and
in other places. The treatise Sanhedrin, cited in
Vitringa’s Obser. Sacr. ii. 338, uses the words: -
‘From the death of Haggai, Zechariah, and Ma-
lachi, the Holy Spirit (WAPN NY, which, ac-
cording to’ the Jewish distinction, is only the
second degree of the prophetical gift] was with-
drawn from Israel; but they nevertheless enjoy cd
the use of the Bath Kol.’

The Jewish authorities are not agreed as to
what the Bath Kol was, nor as to the precise reason
of its designation. It is disputed whether the
persons hearing the Bath Kol heard the very
voice from heaven, or only a daughter of it—an
echo of it; whether, as thunder is often men-
tioned as a sign of the Divine presence, and as
the word voice appears to be used for thunder in
Exod. ix. 23; Jer. x. 135 Ps. xxix. 3, the Bath
Kol may not signify an articulate voice proceed-
ing out of the thunder; or whether, according to
the explanation of Maimonides, ‘the Bath Kol is
when a man has such a strong imagination that
he believes he hears a voice from withoot him-
self. As to the meaning of the name itself, pas-
sages are cited in Buxtort’'’s Ler. Tain. 8. v. 3,
and in Reland’s Antig. Sacr. 1. c., which show
that the daughter of the vuice sometimes means
the echo of a sound, and sometimes merely a pri-


BATH KOL.


mary sound itself. It is certain that the Peshito
sometimes rendered the simple Greek gwvh
by ‘daughter of the voice,” as in Acts xii, 22;
1Tim. vi. 20; Heb. iii, 15. It is necessary,
ever, to remark that, according to a funda-
mental law of all Syro-Arabian grammar, these
two words must either stand to each other
in the relation of apposition, or of the state
construct. But as apposition can only take
place between equivalent and convertible terms,
which * daughter’ and ‘voice’ are not, ac-
Conlingly, the alternative rendering of daughter
vowe proposed by Prideaux (which Horne also
nas adopted, Introduct. iv. p. ie) violates that
rule; becanse, in such an English combina-
tion, the word ‘daughter’ has the force of an
adjective s and the Hebrew language, possessing
but few auljectives, would have expressed the
sn of daughter voice (if that had been the sense
tatnded to be conveyed by Bath Kol) by making
+ Bath the dase word, depending as a genitive on
the former, For instance, what we render the
Holy Spirit is literally ‘the spirit of holiness’ in
Uehrew, Thus ‘daughter roice” is not an appo-
ston in English, nor is it the translation of a
slate construct according to the Hebrew order ;
but of a state construct in which Prideaux has
taken the liberty of transposing the dependent
word, ¢. e. of making ‘danghter of the voice’ be-
come, in effect, ‘voice of a daughter.’ Jennings
% In his Jewish Antig. p. 229, when he ren-
ders Bath Kol by ‘jilia vor, seu filia vocis, only
Commits, in the first case, the same error more
Plpably 5 and is guilty of quite as great a viola-
ten of ‘the first principle of Hebrew grammar, as
would be, in the case of Latin, were he to
Tanslate Jilia vocis by ‘voice of the daughter.’
The uccasions on which it is alleged that the
Bath Kol was heard after the death of Malachi are
of very Various degrees of solemnity or significance.
“upposiny the instances mentioned in Josephus
vAntig, xiii. 10), of the voice which announced
Yreanus that his sons had conquered Anti-
ochus, and (De Bell. Jud. vi. 5) of the awful voice
Witch was heard in the Temple, just before the
capture of Jerusalem, to exclaim, MeraBaivwnev
evreiev'—not to belong to the Bath Kol (as it
‘S to be observed that the pseudo-Josephus ben
Ton has, in these cases, merely used the He-
rew word for voice), most of the other recorded
stances fall far short of these in dignity; and
some appear inreconcilable to even very credulous
hotions of the limits of Divine interposition, Only
a few of them, however, can be classed with quite
@$ trivial a species of divination as the Sortes
Iygiliane, which is done in the unfair statement
of Prideaux (Connez. ii. p. 354). The fact is, that
ta Christian writers who have treated of the
at Kol have not been able to divest themselves
of an undue desire to discredit its pretensions, in
Sensequence of their fearing any comparison
which might be instituted between it and the
ers from heaven mentioned in the New Test.
cnueed, Lightfoot (in his Hor. Hebr. ad Matth.
17) considers all cases of Bath Kol to be
either Jewish fables or devices of the devil. In-
stances of voices from heaven, on occasions out-
bes Y very analogons to some among the Jews,
scr ste ta Ci
N ; as instrumental in
making Alexander bishop of Jerusalem, and that


BATTLE. 388


which exhorted Polycarp to be of good coura;
(Eusebii Hist. Eccles. at 11; iv. 15).

Two very learied dissertations on the Bath
Kol may be found in Vitringa’s Obser. Sacr. ii.
pp. 341-363; and (by Danz) in Meuschen’s Noo.
Lest.ex Talmude illustratum, pp. 351-378.—J. N.

BATH-SHEBA, also Batu-suva, daughter of
Eliam, grand-daughter of Ahitophel, and wife of
Uriah. She was seduced and became pregnant by
King David during the absence of her husband,
who was then engayed at the siege of Rabbah (2
Sam. xi. 4,5; Ps. li. 2). The child thus born in
adultery became ill and died (2 Sam. xii, 15-18),
After the lapse of the period of mourning for her
husband, who was slain by the contrivance of
David (xi. 15), she was legally married to the
king (xi. 27), and bore him Solomon (xii. 24;
1 Kings i. 11; ii.13). In 1 Chron. iii. 5 she is
called Bath-shua instead of Bathsheba; and her
father, Ammiel, instead of Eliam (comp. Matt.
i. 6). The other children of Bath-sheba are
named in 2 Sam. v. 14; 1 Chron. iii. 5. She is
afterwards noticed only in consequence of her
good-natured intercession for Adonijah; which
incidentally displays the respect with which she
was treated by king Sulomon, her son (1 Kings
ii. 19). [Davip, Avonisan.]

The Rabbins describe Bath-sheba as a woman
of vast inturmation and a highly cultivated mind,
to whose education Solomon owed much of his
wisdom and reputation, and even a great part of
the practical philosophy embodied in his Pro-
verbs. —E. M.

BATYLE, SYSTEM OF. Though the He-
brews in their mode of conducting warlike ope-
rations varied somewhat in the course of ages,
and are elsewhere shown to have been swayed by
the practice of greater and more military nations,
still, from the period when the institution of
royalty gave rise to an organized system, it was a
maxim to spare the soldiers all unnecessary fa-
tigue before an engagement, and to supply them
liberally with food. Their arms were enjuined to
be in the best order, and when drawn up for
battle they formed a line of solid squares of a
hundred men, each square being ten deep, and
with sufficient interval between to allow of fa-
cility in movements, and the slingers to pass
throngh. ‘The archers may have occupied the
two flanks, or forrned in the rear, according to
the intentions of the commander on the occa-
sion; but the slingers were always stationed in
the rear until they were ordered forward to im-
pede an hostile approach, or to commence the
engagement, somewhat in the manner of modern
skirmishers. Meantime, while the trumpets waited
to sound the last signal, the king. or his representa-
tive, appeared in his sacred dress (the YP 3
hadré kodesh, rendered in our version ‘the heau-
ties of holiness’), except when he wished to remain
unknown, as at Megiddo (2 Chron, xxxv. 22);
and proceeded to make the final dispositions,
in the middle of his chosen braves, attended
by priests who, by their exhortations, animated the
ranks within hearing. It was now, we may suppose,
when the enemy was at hand, that the slingers
would be ordered to pass between the intervals of
the line of solid squares, open their order, and
with shouts, let fly their stone or leaden missiles,
until by the gradual approach of the opposing
fronts they would be hemmed in, and be recalled

=x


306 BATTLE.


to the rear, or to cover a flank. Then would come
the signal to charge, and the great shout of battle ;
the heavy infantry, receiving the order to attack,
would, under cover of their shields and levelled
rs, press direct upon the front of the enemy ;
Xa rear ranks might then, if so armed, cast
their second darts, and the archers from the rear
shoot high, so as to pitch the arrows over their
own main line of spearmen into the dense masses
beyond them. If the enemy broke through the in-
tervals, we may -magine that a line of charioteers
in reserve, breaking from their position, might in
charge among the disordered ranks of the

oe, drive them back, and facilitate the restoration
of the o ges masses, or wheeling round a
flank, fal upon the enemy, or be encountered
by a similar manceuvre, and perhaps repulsed.
The king, meanwhile, surrounded by his princes,
ted close to the rear of his line of battle, and

in the middle of theshowered missiles, would watch
the enemy and remedy every disurder. In this
ition it was that several of the sovereigns of
codah were slain (2 Chron. xviii. 33, and xxxv.
23), and that such an enormous waste of human
life touk place; for the shock of two hostile lines
of masses, at least ten in depth, advancing under
the confidence of breastplate and shield, when
once engaged hand to hand, had difficulties of no
ordinary nature to retreat; because the hinder-
most ranks not feeling personally the first
slaughter, would not, and the foremost could
not, fall back; neither could the commanders
disengage the line without a certainty of being
defeated. The fate of the day was therefore no
longer within the control of the chief, and nothing
but obstinate valour was left to decide the victory.
Hence, from the stubborn character of the Jews,
battles fought among themselves were particularly
sanguinary ; such, for example, as that in which
feroboam, king of Israel, was defeated by Abijah
of Judah (2 Chron. xiii, 3. 17), wherein, if there
be no error of copyists, there was a greater slaughter
than in ten such battles as that of Leipzig, al-
though on that occasion three hundred and fifty
thousand combatants were engaged for three suc-
cessive days, provided with all the implements of
modern destruction in full activity. Under such
circumstances defeat led to irretrievable con-
fusion; and where either party possessed supe-
riority in cavalry and chariots of war, it would
be materially increased : but where the infantry
alone had principally to pursue a broken enemy,
that force, laden with shields, and preserving
order, could overtake very few who chose to aban-
don their defensive armour, unless they were
hemmed in by the locality. Sometimes a part
of the army was posted in ambush, but this ma-
Neuvre was most commonly practised against the
garrisons of cities (Josh. viii. 12; Judg. xx, 38).
In the case of Abraham (Gen. xiv. 16), when he
led a small body of his own le suddenly col-
lected, and fell w the guard of the captives,
released them, and recovered the booty, it was a
surprise, not an ambush ; nor is it necessary that
be should have fallen in with the main army of
the enemy. At a later period, there is no doubt
that the Hebrew armies, in imitation of the Ro-
mans, formed into more than one line of masses ;
but there is ample evidence that they always
possessed more stubborn valour than disci; ae
HS


BEARD.


BATTLEMENT. ([Hovss.]

BAY-TREE. [Exracu.]

BDELLIUM. [Bxporacz.]

BEAN. [Puut.]

BEAR (31°) dod, in Arabic dub, in Persic deeb
and dod, is noticed in 1 Sam. xvii. 34, 36, 37;
2 Sam. xvii. 8; 2 Kings ii. 24; Prov. xvii. 12;
xxviii. 15; Isa. xi.7; Lam. iti. 10; Hos. xiii
8; Amos v.19, &c. Although the moderns have


denied the existence of bears in Syria and Africa,
there cannot be a doubt of the fact, and of a
cies of the genus Ursus being meant in the He-
brew texts above noted. David defended his flock
from the attacks of a bear (1 Sam. xvii. 34, 35,
36), and bears destroyed the children who mocked
the poet (2 Kings ii. 24). genus Ursus is
the largest of all the plantigrade carnassiers, and
with the faculty of subsisting on fruit or honey
unites a greater or less propensity, according to
the species, to slaughter and animal fuod. To
a sullen and ferocious disposition it joins immense
strength, little yilnceability, considerable saga-
city, and the power of climbing trees. The brown
bear, Ursus arctos, is the most sanguinary of the
species of the Old Continent, and Ursus Syriacus,
or the bear of Palestine, is one very nearly allied
to it, differing only in its stature being propor
tionably lower and longer, the head and tail more
lonzed, and the colour a dull buff or light

y, often clouded, like the Pyrenwan variety,
with darker brown. On the hack there is a ridge
of long semi-erect hairs running from the neck to
the tail. It is yet found in the elevated woody
parts of Lebanon. In the time of the first cru-
sades these beasts were still numerous and of con-
siderable ferocity ; for during the siege of Antioch,
Goilfrey of Bouillon, according to Math. Paris,
slew one in defence of a poor woodcutter, and
was himself dangerously wounded in the en-
counter.—C. H. S.

BEARD. The ancient nations in general
agreed with the modern inhabitants of the East in
attaching a great value to the possession of a
beard. The total absence of it, or a sparse and
stinted sprinkling of hair upon the chin, 1s thought
by the Orientals to be as yieat a deformity to the
features as the want of a nose would appear to
us; while, on the contrary, a long and bushy
beard, flowing down in luxuriant profusion to the
breast, is considered not only a must graceful or
nament to the person, but as cuntributing in no
amall degree to respectability and dignity of cha
racter. So much, indeed, is the possession of this


BEARD.


venerable badge avsociated with notions of honour

and importance, that it is almost constantly intro-

duced, in the way either of, allusion or appeal, into
the languae of famitiar and daily life. When
8 mau’s veracity is doubted, ‘Look at this beard,"
he will say, «the very sight of it may satisfy you
as tu the truth and probity of its owner.’ When
censuring a bad or dishonest action, ‘Shame on
you beard’ ig the ordinary style of rebuke.
When friends express their mutnal good wishes,
‘May Godt preserve your beard’ is the strongest
and most ardent form of benediction. When re
questing a favour from any one, the most earnest
tems of supplication are to bez ‘by his beard, or
thelife of his beard,’ that he will grant it; and
do higher idea of the value of a thing can be
gin than by saying, ‘It is worth more than
ow's beard.’ In ‘short, this hairy appendage of
theclin is most highly prized as the attribute of
maily dignity; and hence the energy of Eze-
kie 8 lanzuage when, describing the severity of
the Divine judgments upon the Jews, he intimates
that, aithy rugh that people had been as dear to God
an’ as fondly cherished by him as the beard was
by them, the razor, t.e. the agents of his angry

Poridence, in righteous retribution for their long-

cmtinned sins, would destroy their existence as a

Nation (Ezek. v. 1-5). With this knowledge of

the €xtraordinary respect and value which have in

al ages been attached to the beard in the East,

We are prepared to expect that a corresponding

Cate would be taken to preserve and improve its

appearance; and,-accordingly, to dress and anoint

It with oil and perfume was, with the better classes

Cast, an indispensable part of their daily toilet

{ 8. €xxxiii. 2). In many cases it was dyed with

Variesated colours, by a tedious and troublesome

Speration, described by Morier (Journ. p. 247),

Whic 1, In consequence of the action of the air, re-

ques to be repeated once every fortnight, and

Which, as that writer informs us, has been from

time immemorial a universal practice in Persia.
tm the history of Mephibosheth, it seems pro-

< ble, that the grandees in ancient Palestine
trimmed their beards’ with the same fastidious
Care and by the same elaborate process; while the
allowing these to remain in a foul and dishe-
Velled State, or to cnt them off, was one among
€ many features of sordid negligence in their
Personal appearance by which they gave outward
indications of deep and overwhelming sorrow (2
im. xix. 24; Ezra ix. 13; Isa. xv. 2; Jer. xli.5;

comp. Herodot. ii. 36; Suet. Caligula, ch. y.).

7 Or were they less jealous in guarding the
honour of this attribute of manhood, than in setting
Mt off to advantage. The slightest exhibition
OF contempt, by sneering, spitting at, pulling, or
even pressing against it in a rude and careless
manner, was resented as an insult, such as would
how, among men of the world, be deemed expi-

Pi only by a duel (Burckhardt, Tra. in
reba p- 61). No one was permitted to touch

ti xcept in the way of respectful and affec-
enate salutation, which was done by gently

ing hold of its extremity with the right hand,
and Kissing it; but even in that case it was only
it in approaching their husbands, children
fate the nearest and most Attached
m4 8, to whom this unusual liberty was granted
art tele Coutumes des Arabes, ch. 7). The
welf being an expression of kind and cordial


BEARD. 307


familiarity, its performance by Joab shows m a
flagrant light the base and unprincipled conduct
of that ruthless veteran, when he took Amasa by
the beard with his right hand to kiss him (rather
it), and then, having assumed this attitude under
the mask of the most friendly feelings, smote his
unsuspecting victim under the fifth rib (2 Sam.
xx. 9).

To be deprived of a beard was, and still
is, in some places of the East, the badge of
servility—a mark of infamy, that degraded a
person from the ranks of men to those of slaves
and women (Niebuhr, Arabia, ch. vii.; Volney,
ii. p. 118); while to shave it off voluntarily, even
for a time, as the fornter writer mentions he
knew was done by some in mere wantonness
or a drunken fit, frequently subjects the offender
tu so great odium as to exclude him frum so-
ciety. Nay, so great is the disgrace entailed
by the appearance of a smooth and naked chin,
that D'’Arvieux describes the case of an individual
who, having sustained a dangerous wound in his
jaw, preferred hazarding his life rather than allow
the surgeon to remove his beard. Among people
influenced by such ideas, the forcible erasure of
a beard must be felt to be the severest punish-
ment that the malice of an enemy can inflict;
and we can easily conceive how deep and in-
tolerable was the affront which the young and
ill-advised king of the Ammonites put upon the
ambassadors of David, when, among other acts of
insolence, he shaved off one-half of their beards,
and sent them home in that grotesque condition,
exposed to the derision of their countrymen (2
Sam. x.). Persons of their high rank, who, in all
probability. were fastidious about the orderly state
and graceful appearance of their beards, would
be even more sensitive as to this ignominious
treatment than those of an humbler condition;
and, as the shaving off one-half of the beard was
among some ancient nations the punishment of
cowartlice, these circumstances united will help
to account for the spirit of determined revenge
which the kiag and the whole nation of Israel
breathed, on receiving intellizence of the national
outrage. (See also Herodotus, ii. 121; Lane's Afo-
dern Egyptians, i. p. 322, note.)—R. J.

From the above facts it is clear thatthe Israel-
ites maintained their beard and the ideas con-
nected with it, dming their alode among the
Egyptians, who were a shaven people. This is
not unimportant as one of the indications which
evince that, whatever they learned of good or evil
in that country, they preserved the appearance
and habits of a separate people. As the Exyptians
shaved their beards off entirely, the injunction in
Lev. xix. 27 against shaving * the corners of the
beard’ must have been levelled against the prac-
tices of some other bearded nation. The pro-
hibition is usually understuod to apply against
rounding the corners of the beard where it joins
the hair; and the zeason is supposed to have been
to counteract a superstition of certain Arabian
tribes, who, hy shaving cif or rounding away the
beard where it joined the hair of the head, devoted
themselves to a certain deity who held among
them the place which Bacchus did among the
Greeks (Heredot. iii. 8; comp. Jer. ix. 26;
xxv, 23; xlix. 32). The consequence seems to
have been altogether to prevent the Jews from
shaving off the edges of their beards. i” effect

xz


$8 BEARD.

of this prohibition in establishing a distinction of
the Jews from other nations cannot be understood,
unless we contemplate the extravagant diversity
in which the beard was and is treated by the
nations of the East. The first cut is very in-


teresting, being a collection of bearded heads of
foreigners obtained from the Egyptian monu-
ments, and, without doubt, including the beards,
head-dresses, and physiognomies of most of the
nations bordering ou Egypt and Palestine. In
nearly all of them we see that the upper edges of
fhe beard were shaven off, and apparently the
hair of the upper lip. The second cut, fig. 1, repre-
sents the head and beard of the Babylonian figure
given at full length (on a smaller scale) in the
second cut at p. 272; fig. 2 is the regal Persian


beard, curiously curled and tressed; fig. 3 is a
somewhat similar beard from the recently-dis-
covered sculptures of Xanthus in Asia Minor;
and fig. 4 is Grace Sein: from the sculptures at
Palmyra. With these it may be useful to com-
pare the principal varieties of the heard among
the modern orientals, whose tastes in this matter
are in general much less fantastic than those of
their predecessors. In the following cut the first
figure is that of a modern Egyptian (Copt), and
the second that of a Persian, exhibiting a remark-
able contrast between the amplitude of the one
beard and the scantiness of the other. The other
two figures we offer with pleasure, as presenting,
in all probability, correct resemblances of such
beards as were wom by the ancient Israelites.
Fig. 3 is that of an Arab sheikh, and fig. 4 that
of a Syrian Jew.

The ancient Egyptians, although they shaved


their beards, had the singular custom of tying a
false beard upon the chin. This was probably
by way of compromise between their love of
cleanliness and their desire to preserve some trace
of the distinguishing sign of manhood. It was
made of plaited hair, and had a peculiar form
according to the rank of the persons by whom
they were worn. Private individuals had a
small beard, scarcely two inches long; that of a
king was of considerable length, and square at
the bottom; and the figures of gods were distin-
guished by its turning up at the end (Wilkinson,
Ane. Egyptians, iii. 362).


2, 3, 5, 11. Gods.

’
BEASTS. In the Bible, this word, when used
in contradistinction to man (Ps. xxxvi. 6), de


1, 4, 6,9, 10. Kings.
7, &. Private persons.


BEASTS.


notes a brute creature generally; when in contra-
distinction to creeping things (Lev. xi. 2-7;
xxvii, 26), it has reference to four-fuoted animals ;
and when to tcild mammatlia, as in Gen. i. 25, it
means domesticated cattle. ;

Tziyim, OY (Isa. xiii. 21), denotes wild beasts
of the upland wilderness. “Ochim, DYN, ren-
dered * doleful creatures’ ana ‘marsh animals,’
may, we think with more propriety, be considered
45‘ poisonous and offensive reptiles.’

Setrim, DVYY, shagwy ones, is a general term
apes—not satyrs,a pagan poetical creation unlit
for Scriptural language: it includes Saadim as
‘i maa na DIN, Tannim, monsters of the
cep andi of the wilderness — serpents, Croco-
diles, dolphins, and sharks. an ii
The zoology of Scripture may, in a general
nse, be said to embrace the whole range of
aumated nature; but after the first brief notice
of the creation of animals recorded in Genesis,
tis limited more particularly to the animals
fund in Egypt, Arabia, Palestine, Syria, and
the countries eastward, in some cases, to be-
yond the Euphrates. It comprehends mam-
malia, birds, reptiles, fishes, and invertebrate ani-
mals; but in a work like the Bible, written for a
ifferent purpose, we might naturally expect
that only a small part of these would be found
described, and that generical indications would
More frequently occur than specific character-
bie As the intention of Scripture, in its al-
USions to animate or inanimate objects, was not
scientific description, but the illustration of argu-
ments and precepts by imazes drawn from objects
familiar to those to whorn it was addressed, it is
eG to be expected that zoology or botany should
2€ treated systematically, ur in terms such as
modem science has adopted : yet, where we can
Row fully ascertain the true meaning of the text,
the imagery drawn from natural history is always
forcible, correct, and elective, even where it treats
fe subject under the conditions of the contem-
Porary popular belief; for, had the inspired writers
entered into explanations on matters of science
Not then commonly understood, the poetical force
of the imagery, and consequently its intended
effect, must necessarily have been greatly dimi-
Nished ; and, where system is appropriate, we tind
a classified general distribution of the creation,
Simple indeed, but sufficiently applicable to all

@ purposes for which it was iutroduced. It
Tesembles other parts of the philosophy of the
earliest nations, in which the physical distribu-

tion of matter, excepting so far as man is con-
Cemed, proceeds by triads. Botany is treated
under the beads of grass, shrubs, and trees:
MM animated nature, bezinning with the lowest
Organized in the watery element, we have first
|e Sheretz, ‘the moving creature that hath

ife, animalcula, crustacea, insecta, &c.; second,

ONIN Tanninin, tishes and amphibia, including

the huge tenants of the waters, whether they also

frequent the land or Not, crocodiles, python serpents,
and perhaps even those which are now considered as

a a More ancient zuology than the present system,

i sreat Saurians of geology; and third, it appears,

a0 a Oph, ‘tlying creatures’ (Gen. i. 20);

Pi advancing (cetaceans, pinnatipeds, whales

Semin sone excluded), we have quadrupeds,

morn 3 i: other divisions or orders : Ast, cattle,

mah, embracing the ruminant her-


BEASTS. 38


bivora, generally gregarious and capable of do-
mesticity ; 2nd, wild beasts, MM Chayah, care
nivora, including all beasts of prey; and 3rd,
reptiles, WO Remes, minor quadrupeds, such
as creep by means of many feet, or glide along
the surface of the soil, serpents, annelides, &c. 3
finally we have man, ON Adam, standing alone
in intellectual supremaey. The classification of
Moses, as it may be drawn from Deuteronomy,
appears to be confined to Vertebrata alone, or
animals having a spine and ribs, although the
fourth class might include others. Taking man as
one, it forms five classes—Ist, Man; 2nd, Beasts ;
3d, Birds; 4th, Reptiles; 5th, Fishes. It is the
same as that in Leviticus xi. where beasts are
further distinguished mto those with solid hoofs,
the Solipedes of systematists, and those with
cloven feet (Bisulei), or Ruminantia. But the
assage specially refers to animals that might be
awfully eaten because they were clean, and to
others prohibited because they were declared un-
clean, although some of them, according to the
common belief of the time, might ruminate; for,
it may be repeated, that the Scriptures were not
intended to embrace anatomical disquisitions
aiming at the advancement of human science,
but to convey moral and religious truth, without
disturbing the received opinions of the time on
questions having little or no relation to their
main object. In like manner, fishes: and birds
are divided into clean and unclean; and, taken
altogether, the classification now described forms
an excellent series of distinetions, which, even at
the present day, and in countries far distant from
the scene where it was ordained, still remains
applicable, with few exceptions; and from its
intrinsic propriety will remain in force, notwith-
standing our present knowledge of the manners
and opinions of the East and of Egypt has
rendered many of the earlier comments upon it
in a great measure useless.

The Scriptures, as already mentioned, contain
no minute details on natural history, and no-
tice only a stnall proportion of the animals in-
habiting the regions alluded to. Notwithstanding
the subsequent progress of science, the observation
of Dr. Adam Clarke is still in a great measure
true, that, ‘of a few animals and vezetables
we are comparatively certain, but of the great
majority we know almost nothing. Guessing
and conjecture are endless, and they have on these
subjects been already sufliciently employed.
What learning—deep, solid, extensive learning
and judgment could do, has already been done
by the incomparable Bochart in his Hierozoicon.
The leamed reader may consult this work, and,
while he gains much general information, will
have to regret that he can apply so little of it to
the main and grand question.’ With these facts
before him, it is singular that the learned doctor
did not suspect the incompetence of mere philo-
logists to solve questions in natural history, of
which the true principles were so little known in
the time of Bochart, and which still remain but
little investigated by Biblical scholars; for, even
now, some appear to believe in the faculty of ru-
mination ‘in a variety of the hare,’ although such
a capability would remove the animal from the
genus and even from the order of Rodents, and
place it in that of the Ruminantia. Nor is phy-
sical science sometimes better understood ; for we


810 _ BEASTS.


_ find a recent writer objecting to needless miracu-


Tous interposition in the case of the prophet Jonah,
by supposing that he was swallowed by a whale,
because, according to him, wuales do not exist
in the Mediterranean, and have not swallow
sufficiently wide to admit a human body: he
therefore contends that the monster must have
been a shaik: as if ayything short of a miracle
could preserve human Jife for more than ten
minutes in the swallow of a whale or shaik, no
matter which. Yet with such trifling do books
on a subject above all others important, aome-
times abound, being written by men who are
believed competent to the task, merely on the
ground of their extensive Biblical learning. But
the acts and laws by which it has pleased the
Almighty to vindicate his own incomprehensible
power ought not to be trifled with in this way; a
more logical spirit is demanded for such in-
quiries, and he who undertakes to explain His
word must endeavour to comprehend at least
the general laws which it has pleased Omnipo-
tence to impress upon matter; laws from which
He never departs, but on rare and great occa-
sions, fur the accomplishment of His unfathom-
able purposes. It is in this spirit that the


“questions connected with zoological science are


intended to be viewed in this work. Care will be
taken not to lose sight of the Hebrew and cognate
languages, nor to overlouk the possible is#tence
of Pelhevi and other dialects of the Sanscrit
family, which even in Palestine appear to have
formed an element in the tongues of the popu-
lation anterior to the great immigration of the
people of Israel. Notwithstanding the advance
of zological science in the field in question,
where Niebuhr, Forskal, Hasselquist, Bruce,
Russell, Hemprich, Ehrenberg, Riippell, Wilkin-
son, and others illustrious in this field of in-
quiry, have toiled, we are still obliged to confess

iat but a small portion of the local zoology
is known, and that only a certain number of
animals can be identified with complete cer-
tainty. Others can never attain more than the
consent of acquiescence, because in the Hebrew
text of the sacred writings the names of animals
are mostly descriptive of characters applicable to
several species, und sume are more even than
generically vague. Resortiug to the roots of the
language often increases the difliculty ; and be-
sides our still scanty knowledge of the present
fauna of Western Asia and Ezypt, it is only by
inference that we can conjecture what changes have
taken place in the species during the course of ages.
Ancicntly the lion, ostrich, and wolf were undeni-
ably abundant in these countries; while the hyana,
jackal, domestic horse, buflalo, &c. were either
unknown or are not indicated with sufficiently
distinguishable characters; and where we must
rely upon an epithet or quality for tixing a name,
our increased information supplies us with two or
more distinct species equally entitled to the de-
Nomination. Thus, for instance, we might refer
to the four or five species of smaller Canidae,
Tnoes, Jackals, and true foxes at present fuund
in Syria and Egypt, and the absence of the real
wolf, such as he is so beautifully and distinctly
characterized in the parables of our Saviour;
while the hyena, only known in classical litera.
ture by the absurdities assigned to it, has now not
only superseded the real wolf in Palestine and


BEDOLACH.


Syria, but has spread northward into Natolia, and
may be heard sometimes in Constantinople how]-
ing on the eastern side of the Bosphorus. Another
difficulty arises from the many dilferent Hebrew
names given to one species. When this occurs
with reference to the lion, so obviously important
in the eyes of a resident population, we necd not
wonder ; but the case is different as regards the
ostrich, so liable to be confounded with the bus-
tard or with the various names that are translated
by owl, or where it is mixed with the epithets ap-
lied to the crane and stork.* Whether a clear
indication of an otis can be derived from any of
the texts in Scripture we have not yet been able
to ascertaiu satisfactorily, and we own that where
schulars have had no doubts of their own inter-
pretations, but bave shown the laxity of others
who have given a different version of the same
text, sometimes widely departing from the other,
it is with no small hesitation we should venture
to propose our own. ‘These questions, however,
will fall to be discussed under separate heads, as
do those also which refer to animals now extinct,
or which are differently located from what they
were in the earlicr ages of the world.—C. H. S.
BEDAN (j'73). In 1 Sam. xii. 11, we read
that the Lord sent as deliverers of Isracl—Jerub-
baal, Bedan, Jephthah, Samuel. Three of these
we know to have been judges of Israel, but we
nowhere find Bedan among the number. The
Targum understands it of Samsun, and »o Jerome
and the geneiality of interpreters; but this inter-
wretation goes on the supposition that [73 should
rendered t2 Dan, # e. one in Dan, or of
the tribe of Dan, as Samson was. In this sense,
as Kimchi observes, it would have the same furce
as Ben-Dan, a son of Dan, a Danite. Such an ine
termixture of proper names and appellatives, how-
ever, is very doubtful, and it is to be noted that
Bedan is mentioned before Jephthah, whereas
Samson was after him. The Septuagint, Syriac,
and Arabic have Barak, which many think the
preferable reading (comp. Heb. xi. 32). A man
of the name of Badan occurs, however, among the
posterity of Manasseh (1 Cheon. vii. 17), and
Junius, followed by some others, thinks that the
judge Jair is meant, and that he is here called
Bedan to distinguish him from the more ancient
Jair, the son of Manasseh. The order in which
the judges are here named ts not at variance with
this view (Num. xxxii. 41; Judg. x. 3, £); but
surely if Jair had been really intended, he might
have been called by that name without any danger
of his being, in this text (where he is called a de-
liverer of Isracl, and placed among the judges),
confounded with the more ancient Jair.


BEDOLACH (M93). This word occurs
but twice in the Scriptures: in Gen. ii. 12, asa
product of the land of Havilah; and Num. xi. 7,
where the manna is likened to it. It has been
much disputed among critics, both ancient and
modern. In the Sept. it is considered as_a_ pres
cious stone, and translated (Gen. ii. 12) by


* Otis Hobara, Otis Arabica, and several other
species are birds of the desert in Egypt and
Arabia, and occur on the plain of Esdraelon.
They are figured on monuments, and distin.
guished from the young ostrich by their quill-
feathers and three-toed feet.


BEDOLACH.


peg, and (Num. xi. 7) by xpveraddos; while
Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotiun, and the Vul-
gate render it bdellium, a transparent aromatic
gum from a tree growing in Arabia. Of this
opinion alsy is Josephus (Antig. iii. 1. 6), where
be describes the manna—8po.oy Tr] Tay épwudroy
Ai/AAn, #.¢. similar to the aromatic bdellium
(Num. xi, 7). In the Syriac version it is


LiSoss brulcho, evidently for bSoesd


bduicho, the two letters r and d being so similar
—with the exception of the dot, which stands in
r over, and in the d under—as to be easily
confounded with one another in transcribing.
¢ tind the same translation in the Samaritan
and Chaldee, while the precious stones given by
the Sept. and others bear with them a different
mame, MSyp2p or Mdipp.
The Jewish Rabbins, however, followed by a host
heir Arabian translators, and to whom Bochart
Hieroz. iii, p. 593, sq.), and Gesenius (The-
sour. 1.181), accede, translate bedolach by pearl,


and consider Havilah (nbn) as the part of -


Arubia mear Catipha and Babrein on the Persian
Gulf, where the pearls are found,

Those who regard bedolach as some kind of
Precious stone, rest their argument on the fact
that it is placed (Gen. ii. 12) by the side of DAW
Shoham, which is a precious stone, and occurs
*everal times in the Scriptures, and that they are

th mentioned as belonging to the productions
ofthe land Havilah. But the least knowledge

Hebrew construction must satisfy us that, if
this meaning were intended, the reading ought


to be Dmwiny noqan j38 OY, and not, as it


actually stands, DMW7 JIN) NOW DL, ex-
poly excluding bedolach from the mineral
ingdom,
Those who translate becolach by ‘ pearl’ refer
to the later Jewish and Arabian expounders of
the Bible, whose authority, if not strenzthened
“y Valid arguments, is but of little weight. It
4 moreover, more than probable that the pearl
Was as yet unknown in the time of Moses, or he
Would certainly not have excluded it from the
Costly contributions to the tabernacle, the priestly
fresses, or even the Urim and Thummim, while
ite fellow shoham, though of less value, was va-
Nously used among the sacred ornaments (Exod.
Xxv. 75 xxxv. 9, 275 xxviii. 20; xxxix. 13).
Nor do we find any mention of pearl in the times
of David and Solomon, It is true that Luther
translates O°999H (Prov. iii. 135 viii. 11; x. 255
Xxxi, 10) by petrls, but this is not borne out by
t. iv. 7, where it is indicated as having a
red colour, The only passage in the Old ‘Testa-
ment where the pearl really occurs under its
true Arabic name is in Esth. i. 6, WT (dar),


Arab. 9; and in the New Testament it is very
frequently mentioned under the Greek name
Hapyaplrys.
It is, therefore, most probable that the Hebrew
: h is the aromatic gum bdellivn, which
rae from a tree growing in Arabia, Media, and
- dies. Dioscorides (i, 80) informs us that
Was called uaBeAnoy or Bodxdy, and Pliny
x11. 19) that it bore the names of brochon, mala-
im, and ma; The frequent interchange


BEDS. 311


of the x and the 8 3 brings the form very
near to that of the Hebrew word; nor is the
similarity of name in the Hebrew and Greek, in
the case of natural productions, less conclusive
of the nature of the article, since the Greeks
probably retained the ancient Oriental names
of productions coming from the East. Pliny's
description of the tree from which the bdellium
is taken makes Kaempfer's assertion (Amen.
Exot. p. 668) highly probable, that it is the sort
of palm-tree (borassus flabelliformis, Linn. ci.
6. 3, Trigynia) so frequently met with on the
Persian coast and in Arabia Felix. The term
bdellium, however, is applied to two gummy-
resinous substances. One of them is the /ndian
bdellium, or false myrrh (perhaps the bdellium
of the Scriptures), which is obtained from Amyris
(balsamodendron?) Commiphora. Dr. Roxburgh
(Flor, Ind. ii, 245) says that the trunk of the
tree is covered with a light-coloured pellicle, as
in the common birch, which peels off from time
to time, exposing to view a smovth green coat,
which in succession supplies other similar ex-
foliations. This tree diffuses a grateful faagrance,
like that of the finest myrrh, to a considerable
distauce around. Dr. Royle (Illus. p. 176) was
informed that this species yielded bdetium 4 and
in contirmation of this statement, we may add
that many of the specimens of this bdellium in
the British Museum have a yellow pellicle ad-
hering to them, precisely like that of the com-
mon birch, aud that some of the pieces are per
forated by spiny branches—another character
serving to recognise the origin of the bdellium.
Indian bdellium has considerable resemblance to
myrrh. Many of the pieces have hairs adhering
to them.

The other kind of bdellium is called African
dbdellium, and is obtained from Heudolotia Afri-
cana (Richard and Guillemin, FU. de Sénéyam-
bie). It is a natural production of Senegal,
and is called by the natives, who make tvoth-
picks of its spines, nivtéout. It consists of
rounded or oval tears, from one to two inches
in diameter, of a dull and waxy fracture, which,
in the course of time, become opaque, and are
covered externally by a white or yellowish dust.
It has a feeble but peculiar odour, and a bitter
taste. Pellitier (Ann. de Chim. Ixxx. p. 39)
found it to consist of resin 59°03; suluble gum,
9°2; bassorin, 30:6; volatile oil and loss, 1-2
Resin of bdellium (African bdellium ?) consists,
according to Johnstone, of carb. 40, hydr. 31,
oxyg. 5.—E. M.

BEDS. The manner of sleeping in warm
Eastern climates is uecessarily very different
from that which is followed in our colder regions.
The present usages appear to be the same as
those of the ancient Jews, and sufficiently explain
the passages of Scripture which bear on the sub-
ject. Beds of feathers are altogether unknown,
and the Orientals generally lie exceedingly hard.
Poor people who have no certain home, or when
on a journey, or employed at a distance from their
dwellings, sleep on mats, or wrapped in their
outer garment, which from its importance in this
respect was forbidden to be retained in pledge
over night (D’Arvieux, iii. 257; Gen. ix 21,
23; Exod. xxii. 27; Deut. xxiii. 13). Under

uliar circumstances a stune covered with some
folded cloth or piece of dress is often used for


313 BEDS.


a pillow (Gen. xxviii. 11), The more wealthy.
classes sleep on mattresses stuffed with wool or
cotton, which are often no other than a quilt
thickly padded, and are used either singly or one
or more placed upon each other. A similar quilt

finer materials forms the coverlet in winter,
and in summer a thin blanket suffices; but some-
times the convenient outer garment is used for
the latter purpose, and was so among the Jews, as
we lear from 1 Sam. xix. 3, where Michal covers
with a ‘333, cloak or mantle (corresponding to the
modern abba or Ayk), the image which was to repre-
sent her husband sleeping. The difference of use
here is, that the poor wrap themselves up in it, and
it forms their whole bed; whereas the rich employ
it as a covering only. A pillow is placed upon
the inattress, and over both, in good houses, is laid
a sheet. The bolsters are more valuable than the
mattresses, both in respect of their coverings and
material: they are usually stufled with cotton or
other soft substance (Ezek. 19; xviii. 21); but
instead of these, skins of goats or sheep ap-
pear to have been formerly used by the poorer
classes and in the hardier ages. ‘These skins
were probably sewed up in the natural shape, like
water-skins, and stuffed with chaff or wool (1 Sam.
xix. 13). It is not unlikely that the Israelites were
acquainted with those wooden crescent-shaped
bolsters of wood, which were common in ancient
Egypt (see one in the cut of a couch below) ;
the comfort in the use of which is not very ap-
parent, till-one tries the experiment and realizes
the complete repose which is obtained by resting
the nape of the neck and base of the skull upon
some similar coutrivance.

It has been doubted whether the couches of the
Jews for repose and for the use of the sick, called
MOD mittah (Gen. xlvii. 31; 1 Sam. xix. 13;
2 Sam. iv. 7; 2 Kings i. 4), ADU" mishcad
Sates xxi, 18; 2 Sam. xii. 5; Cant. iii. 1). or

teres (Job vii. 13; Cant. i. 16, properly
bedstead,’ comp. Deut. tii. 11), were actually bed-
steads of diferent sorts, or simply the standing and
fixed divans such as thuse on which the Western
Asiatics commonly make their beds at night. It
has been usually thought that the choice must
lie between these alternatives, because it has not
been understood that in the East there is, in fact,
& variety of arrangement in this matter; but we
feel satisfied that the different Hebrew words
auswer to and describe similarly ditlerent arrange-
ments, although we may be unable now to assign
to the several cords their distinctive applications
to still subsisting things.

The divan, or dais, is a slightly elevated plat-
form at the upper end and often along the sides
of the room. On this gre laid the mattresses op
which the Western Asiatics sit cross-legged in the
day-time, with large cushions ayainst the wall to
support the back. At night the light bedding is
usually laid out upon this divan, and thus beds
for many persons are easily formed. The bed-
ding is removed in the morning, and deposited in
recesses in the room, made for the purpose. This
is a sort of general sleeping-room for the males
of the family and for guests, none but the master
having access to the inner parts of the house,
where alone there are proper and distinct bed-
chambers. In these the bedding is either laid on
the carpeted fluor, or placed on a low frame or
bedstead. This ditlerence between the public


+ BEDS.


and private sleeping-room, which the arrange
ment of an Eastern household renders ni i)
seems to explain the difficulties which have pere
plexed readers of travels, who, finding mention
only of the more public dormitory, the divan,
have been led to conclude that there was no other
or different one.

The most common bedstead in Egypt and
Arabia is of this shape, framed rudely of palm-


sticks. It was used in ancient Egypt, and is
figured in the mural paintings. In Palestine,
Syria, and Persia, where the palm-tree is not com-
mon, and where timber is more plentiful, a bed-
frame of similar shape is made of boards. This
kind of bedstead is Ao used upon the house-tops
during the season in which people sleep there.
It is more than likely that Og's bedstead was of
this description (Deut. iii. 11). In the times in
which he lived the palm-tree was more common
in Palestine than at present, and the bedsteads in
ordinary use were probably formed of palm-sticks.
They would therefore be incapable of sustaining
any undue weight without being disjointed and
bent awry; and this would dictate the necessity
of making that destined to sustain the vast
bulk of Og, rather of rods of iron than of the
mid-ribs of the palm-fronds. These bedsteads are
also of a length seldom more than a few inches
beyond the average human stature (commonly
6 feet 3 inches); and hence the propriety with
which the length of Og’s bedstead is stated, to
convey an idea of his stature—a fact which has
perplexed those who supposed there was m6 other
bedstead than the divan, seeing that the length of
the divan kas no determinate reference to the sta-
ture of the persons reposing on it.

It is not necessary to suppose that the bedsteads
were all of this sort. There are traces of a kind of
portable couch (1 Sam. xix. 15), which appears
tu have served as a sufa fur sitting on in the day-
time (1 Sam. xxviii, 3; Ezek. xxiii. 41; Amos
vi. 4); and there is now the less reason to doubt
that the ancient Hebrews enjoyed this conve-
nience, as we find such couches in use among
the neighbouring nations, and figured on their
monuments. The subjuined example is from


ancient Egypt. The elegance of shape in this
and other specimens, shows the perfection to which
the manufacture of these articles had been brought
among that people. Persons are represented sitting


BEE.


az soch sofas in the day-time; and that they were
used by single persons for sleeping on at night,
is shown by the wooden pillow placed thereon, as
well as by the steps for ascent that occur beside
some of the specimens (as the present) which stand
higher than the others. Such couches were ca-
pable of receiving those ornaments of ivory which
are mentioned in Amos vi. 4; which of itself
shows that the Hebrews had something of the kind,
ing an ornamental article of furniture.
The next cut shows another variety of couch-
from the sculptures discovered by Mr. Fel-
lon in Asia Minor.


A bed with a tester is mentioned in Judith xvi.
3, which, in connection with other indications,
and the frequent mention of rich tapestries hung
upon and about a bed for Inxuriousness and or-
hament, proves that such beds (represented in the
annexed cut) as are still used by royal and dis-
Unguished were not unknown under
the Hebrew monarchy (cump. Esth. i. 6; Prov.
Vi. 16, seg. ; Ezek. xxiii. 41).

A


MrrrnnnviZaRs
LV


) MV
Be Fat
Aiea


It is evident that the ancient Jews, like the
inbabitants of their land, seldom or never
changed their dress on going to bed. Most people
only divest themselves of their outer garment, and
the ligatures of the waist, excepting during
hottest part of the summer, when they sleep
entirely unclad.
ER (occurs in Deut. i. 44; Judg. xiv. 8;
ie oe 2; Isa. vii. 18). This insect belongs
the family apide, order Aymenoptera, species
yout mellifica, commonly called the honey-bee,
use this species has often yielded honey to


BEE. 313


man. The bee is one of the most generally
diffused creatures on the globe, being found in
every region. Its instincts, its industry, and the
valuable product of its labours, have obtained
for it universal attention from the remotest times.
No nation upon earth has had so many histo-
rians as this insect. The naturalist, agricul-
turist, and politician have been led by a regard
to science or interest to study its habits. Cicero
and Pliny refer to one philosopher (Aristomachus)
who devoted sixty years to it; and another
(Philiscus) is said to have retired to the desert to
pursue his inquiries, and to have obtained, in
Consequence, the name of Agrius.

A prodigious number of books have been
written, periodical publications have a
and even leamed societies have been founded with
a view to promote the knowledge of the bee, and
increase its usefulness to man. Poets and mo-
ralists of every age have derived from it some of
their most beautiful and striking illustrations.

The following is a mere outline of the facts
ascertained by Swammerdam, Maraldi, Reaumur,
Schirach, Bonnet, and Huber. Its anatomy and
physiology, comprehending the antennze, or tactors,
by which it exercises at least all the human
senses, if not more ;—

* Her glanceful eye
Set with ten thousand lenses,’
and studded with hairs to ward off the pollen, or
dust of flowers, and the three additional eyes
on the top of the head, giving a defensive vision
upwards from the cups of flowers; the double
stomach, the upper performing the office of the _
se in birds, and regurgitating the honey, «nd
the lower secreting the wax into various sacklets;
the baskets on the thighs for carrying the pollen;
the hooked feet; the union of chemical and me-
chanical perfection in the sting; its organs of pro-
gressive motion ; its immense muscular strength :—
the different sorts of bees inhabiting a hive. and
composing the most perfect furm of insect s0-
ciety, from the stately venerated queen-regnant,
the mother of the whole population and their
leader in migrations, down to the drone, cach
distinguished by its peculiar form and occupa-
tions :—the rapidity of their multiplication ; the
various transitions from the egg to the perfect in-
sect; the amazing deviations from the usual
laws of the animal economy; the means by
which the loss of a queen is repaired, amounting
to the literal creation of another; their architec-
ture (taught by the great geometrician, who
© made all things by number, weight, and mea-
sure’) upon the principles of the most refined
geometrical problem; their streets, magazines,
royal apartments, houses for the citizens; their
care of the young, consultations and precautions
ih sending forth a new colony; their military
prowess, fortifications, and discipline; their at-
tachment to the hive and the common interest, yet
patience under private wrongs; the subdivision
of labour, by which thousands of individuals
te without confusion in the construction

of magnificent public works; the uses they serve,
as the promoting of the fructification of flowers ;
the amazing number and precision of their in-
stincts, and the capability of modifying these
by circumstances, so far as to raise a doubt
whether they be not endowed with a portian at
least of intelligence resembling that of man.


314 BEE.


In proceeding to notice the principal passages
of Scripture in which the bee is mentioned, we
first pause at Deut. i. 44, where Muses alludes to
the irresistible vengeance with which bees pursue
their enemies: ‘ The Amorites came out against
you and chased you as bees do, and destroyed
you in Seir unto Hormah.’ The powerlessness
of man under the united attacks of these insects
is well attested. Pliny relates that bees were so
troublesome in some parts of Crete, that the in-
habitants were comieliet to forsake their homes ;
and lian records that some places in Scythia
were formerly inaccessible on account of the
swarms of bees with which they were infested.
Mr. Park (Travels, vol. ii. p. 37) relates that
at Dvofroo, some of the rile being in search
of honey, unfortunately disturbed a swarm of
bees, which came out in great numbers, attacked
both men and beasts, obliged them to fly in all
directions, so that he feared an end had been
put tu his journey, and that one assdied the same
night, and another the next morning. Even in
this country the stings of two exasperated hives
have been known to kill a horse ina few mi
nutes.

The reference to the bee contained in Judg.
xiv. 8, has attracted the notice of most readers.

"Ie is related in the 5th and 6th verses that Sam-
son, aided by supernatural strength, rent a young
lion, that warred against him, as be would have
rent a kid, and that ‘after a time,’ as he retarned
to take his wife, he turned aside to see the carcass
of the lion, ‘and, behold, there was a swarm of
bees and honey in the carcass of the lion.’ It has
been hastily concluded that this narrative favours
the mistaken notion of the ancients, possibly
erived {rom misunderstanding this very account,
that bees might be engendered in the dead bodies
of animals (Virgil, Georg. iv.); and ancient
authors are quoted to testify to the aversion of
bees to flesh, unpleasant smells, and filthy places.
But it may readily be perceived that it is not
said that the bees were bred in the body of the
lion. Again, the frequently recurring phrase,
“after a time,’ literally ‘after days,” introduced
into the text, proves that at least suflicient
time had elapsed for all the flesh of the animal
to have been removed by birds and beasts of
prey, ants, &c. The Syriac version translates
the bony carcass.’ The learned Bochart remaiks
that the Hebrew phrase sometimes signilies a
whole year, and in this passage it would seem
likely to have this meaning, because such was
the length of time which usually elapsed between
espousal and marriage (see ver. 7). He refers to
Gen. iv. 3; xxiv. 55; Lev. xxv. 29, 39; Judg. xi.
4; comp. with ver. 40; 1 Sam. i. 35; comp. with
vers, 7, 20; and 1 Sam. ii. 19; and 1 Sam. xxvii.
7. The circumstance that ‘ Aoney’ was found in
the carcass as well as bees, shows that suflicient
time had elapsed since their ession of it, for
all the flesh to be removed. Novis such an abode
for bees, probably in the skull or thorax, more
unsuitable than a hollow in a rock, or in a tree,
or in the ground, in which we know they often
reside, or those clay nests which they build for
themselves in Brazil. Nor is the fact without
parallel. Herodotus (v. 114) relates that a swarm
of bees touk up their abode in the skull of one
Silius, an ancient invader of Cyprus, which they
filled’ with honeycombs, after the inhabitants had


BEELZEBUL.


suspended it over the gate of their city. A similar
story is told by Aldrovandus (De Insects, lib. i.
p. 110) of some bees that inhabited and built
their combs in a human skeleton in a tomb ina
church at Verona.

The phrase in Ps. cxviii. 12, ‘ They com-
passed me about like bees,’ will be readily under-
stood by those who know the manner in which bees
attack the object of their fury.

The only remaining passage has been strangely
misunderstood (Isa. vii. 18): * The Lord shall
hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost parts of
the river of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the
land of Assyria.. Heise the fly and the bee are
no doubt personitications of those inveterate
enemies of Israel, the Egyptians and Assyrians,
whom the Lord threatened to excite against his
disobedient people. But the hissing for them has
been interpreted, even by modern writers of
eminence, us involving ‘an allusion to the prac-
tice of calling out the bees from their hives, by
a hissing or whistling sound, fo their labour in the
Jields, and summoning them to return when the
heavens begin to lower, or the shadows of evening
to fall’ (Dr Harris's Natural History of the
Bible, London, 1825). No one has oflered any
proof of the existence of such a custom, and the
idea will itself seem sufficiently strange to all
who are acquainted with the habits of bees.

The true reference is, no doubt, to the custom
of the people of the East, and even of many parts
of Europe, of calling the attention of any one in
the street, &c. by a significant hiss or rather hist,
as Bishop Lowth translates the worl both here
and in Isa. vy. 26, but which is generally dune in
this country by a short significant Aem! or other
exclamation. Hissing, or rather histing, is in use
among us for setting a dog on any object. Hence
the sense of the threatening is, 1 will direct the
hostile attention of the Egyptians and Assyrians
against you. It may be remarked that in the
Septuagint version there is an allusion to the bee,
immediately after that of the ant (Prof vi. 8)
which may be thus rendered—* Or go to the bee,
and learn how industrions she is, and what a
magniliceut work she produces; whose labours
kings and common people use for their health.
And she is desired and praised by all. And
thouch weak in strength, yet prizing wisdom, she
ye This passage is not now found in any

ebrew copy, and Jerume informs us that it was
wanting in his time. Neither is it contained in
any other version except the Arabic. It is never
theless quoted by many ancient writers, as Clem.
Alex. Strom. lib. i; Origen, ta Num. Mom. 27,
and in Isat, IIom. 2; Basil, Uecameron, Hom.
8; Ambrose, v.21; Jerome, in Ezek. iii.; Theo-
doret, De Providentia, Orat. 5; Antiochus, Abbas
Sabbe, Hom. 36; and Jolin Damascenus, ii. 89.
It would seem probable that it was in the copy
used by the Greek translators. The ant and
the bee are mentioned together by many writers,
because of their similar habits of industry and
economy.—J. F. D.

BEKF. [Foov.]

BEELZEBUL (BeeA(eBova) is the name as-
signed (Matt. xii. 24) to the prince of the
dwmons. There is no doubt that the reading
Beelzebul is the one which has the support of
almost every criticai authority; and the Beel-
zebub of the Deshito (if indeed it is not a corrup-


BEER.


1 flan, as Michaelis thinks), and of the Vulgate, and

of some modern versions, has probably been ac-

commodated to the name of the Philistine god
Baalzebub. Some of thse who consider the latter
to have been a reverential title for that god, be-
lieve that Beelzebul is a wilful corruption of it,
inorder to make it contemptible. tt is a fact
that the Jews are very fund of turning words into
ridicule, by such changes of letters as will con-
Yert them into words uf contemptible significa-
ton, Of this usage Lightfoot gives many in-
stances ( FZor. Hebr. ad Matth. 2. c.). Beelzebul,
then (Be’el being the Aramaic pronunciation for
Be'al), is considered to mean dominus stercoris.
Inthe Hebrew language of the Old Test., however,


all the derivations of the root bar occur solely
in the sense of dielling; and it is only the
later language of the Talmud which has the
sense of s¢ercorare. The very form zebid is not,
indeed, found in that later idiom. Nevertheless,

the word is only a contemptuous perversion of
wbub, fly, some licenee of formation would be
eaily excused. It is evident from numerous
Puaes in the Tulmud, cited by Lightiout, that


many derivatives of sr are used, as terms of the
Uonost disgust, to denote idolatry. It also appears
t subbed, stercorare, is at the same time a per-
Version of zabach, to sacrifice, and, as such, is
» With the same constuction as the latter, to
ion Sacriticing to idols. From these combina-
8 It is easy to conceive how the name Beel-
ub might have been formed, and how, as
Meaning duminus stercoris, it might be considered
fry. E Preprint name of the archdemon of idula-


Some scholars, however, still adhere to the
@Xcient Hebrew sense of dwelling. Among these,
-D. Michaelis (Suppl. ad Lex, p. 205), proposes
an astrological interpretation of the name: zebu,
&ccording to him, means house, in that sense in
which the heavens are divided into twelve man-
‘ous, in every one of which some planet presides,
ae the lord of the house. the planets
#0 were objects of idulatrous worship, he con-
Selves lord of the house to have become a fitting
tame for the author of idolatry. This view,
wever untenable utherwise, produces a striking
antithesis when seen in connection with the rest of
e jrassage: ‘If they have called the master of
the house Beelzebul,” &c. (Matt. x. 25),
Af the reading Beelzebub were retained, it
Might, according to the proposal of Storr and
merieln, receive sume support from the Syriac
Be eldebobo, lord of hatred, of enmity (which is
reba wed for enemy)=8idBodos. Michaelis (in
18 Lex, Syr.) questions whether debobo by itself
Means enmity; although he admits that the
compound Beeldebobo means enemy. His doubt
may, however, be removed ; for, although debobo
Se not occur in that sense by itself, in Aramaic,
vetit does in the Samaritan Version (e. g. Gen.
M1. 15), and dabidb means slanderer, in Arabic.
1 t is remarkable that, amidst all the daemono-
Ogy of the Talmud and Rabbinical writers, this
name should be exclusively confined to the New
estament.—J. N.
BEER CRZ, a well; Sept. Bartp), a local
tl Jame, denoting, whether by itself or in
Pesition, the presence of a well of water.
were two places so called—1. A place


in the land of Moab, which was one of the en-
campinents of the Israelites (Num. xxi. 16).—
2. A town in the tribe of Judah. It is mentioned
only once in Scripture (Judy. ix. 21), as the
place to which Jotham fied. Eusebius (Onomast,
8.7. Bapd, Bera) places Beer eight R. miles north
of Eleutheropolis; but this is probably an error,
as he also states that it becomes visible at the
seventh R. mile on the road from Nicopolis to
Jerusalem, which cannot be true of a town situ-
ated as he indicates; but is true of a place still
bearing the corresponding name of el-Bireh, which,
since Maundrell's time, has been identified with
Beer (Journey, March 25). Eusebius probably
wrote ‘Eleutheropolis’ instead of ‘ Jerusalem ;’
for the place in question is nearly at the ex-
pressed distance, northward, from the latter
city. Bireh is mentioned, under the name of
Bira, by Brocard (c. vii. p. 178), in whose time
it was held by the Templars. By the Crusaders
and the later ecclesiastics it was erroneously con-
founded with the ancient Michmash. Bireh is
situated on the ridge, running from east to west,
which bounds the northern prospect, as beheld from
Jerusalem and its vicinity, and may be seen from
a great distance north and south. It is now a
large village, with a population of 700 Moslems.
The houses are low, and many of them half under-
ground. Many large stones and various sub-
structions evince the antiquity of the site; and
there are remains of a fine cld church of the time
of the Crusades (Robinson, ii. 131; Reland, Pa-
lestina, p. 617; Richter, Wallfahrten, p. 54).
BEEROTH (4983), the plural of Beer, and
by many taken for the same place. Dr. Robinson
thinks that if they were diffrent (but he believes
them the same), the Bireh mentioned in the pre-
ceding article represents Beeroth rather than Beer,
Beeroth is mentioned as a city of the Gibeonites
(Josh. ix. 17), and was reckuned in the tribe of
Benjamin (2 Sam. iv. 2; Ezra ii. 25). Eusebius
distinguishes it from Beer (Onomast. s. v. Bnpdd,
Becroth), and assigns it a position coincident with
that now occupied by Bireh, 1. e. seven R. miles
(in fact rather more) north of Jerusalem,
BEERSHEBA (Y2Y TW, teed of the oath ;
Sept. BnpoaBeé), a place in the southernmost
part of Canaan, celebrated for the sojourn of the
patriarchs. It took its name from the wedd which
was dug there by Abraham, and the oath which
confirmed his treaty with Abimelech (Gen. xxi.31).
It seems to have been a favourite station of that
patriarch, and here he planted one of those ‘ groves’
which formed the temples of those remote times
(Gen. xxi. 33). A town of some consequence
afterwards aruse on the spot, and retained the
same name. It was first ussigned to the tribe
of Judab (Josh. xv. 28), and afterwards trans-
ferred to Simeon (Josh. xix. 2), but was still
popularly ascribed to Judah (2 Sam. xxiv. 7).
As it was the southermmost city of the land, its
name is of frequent occurrence, being proverbially
used in describing the extent of the country, in the
phrase ‘from Dan (in the north) to Beersheba’
(in the south), and reversely, ‘from Beersheba
unto Dan’ (Judg. xx. 1; 2 Sam, xvii. 113
1 Chron, xxi. 2; 2 Chron, xxx. 5). When the
land was divided into two kingdoms, the extent
of that of Judah was in like manner described
by the phrase ‘from Beersheba to Mount Ephraim’


- 316 BEERSHEBA.


(2 Chron. xix. 4). It was at Beersheba that Samuel
established his sons as judges for the southern-
most districts (1 Sam. viii. 2): it was from thence
that Elijah wandered out into the southern desert
(1 Kings xix. 3): here was one of the chief seats
of idolatrous worship in the time of Uzziah
(Amos v. 5; viii. 14); and to this place, among
others, the Jews returned after the Captivity (Neh.
_ Xi. 27, 30). This is the last time its name occurs
in the Old Testament. In the New Testament
it is nut once mentioned ; nor is it referred to, as
then existing, by any writer earlier than Eusebius
and Jerome, in the fourth century, who describe
it as a large village (Euseb. xdémn meylorn; Je-
rome, vicus grandis), and the seat of a Roman
garrison. In the centuries before and after the
Moslem conquest it is mentioned among the epis-
copal cities of Palestine (Reland, Palest. i. 35 ;
but none of its bishops are anywhere named. The
site to have been forgotten till the four-
teenth century, when Sir John Maundeville,
Rudolf de Suchem, and William de Baldensel
recognised the name at a place which they passed
on their route from Sinaito Hebron. It was then
uninhabited, but some of the churches were still
standing. From that time till the recent visit of
Dr. Robinson, the place remained unvisited and
unknown, except for the slight notice obtained by
Seetzen from the Arabs (Zach's Monatl. Corresp.
xvii. 143). Dr. Robinson gives a clear idea of
the southernmost district of Palestine, in which is
Beersheba, and with which the book of Genesis
has connected so many interesting associations.
Coming from the south, he emerged from the
desert by a long and gradual ascent, over swell-
ing hills scantily covered with grass. The
summit of this ascent afforded a view over a
broad barren tract, bounded on the horizon by
the mountains of Judah south of Hebron: ‘We
now felt that the desert was at an end. Descend-
ing gradually, we came out upon an open undu-
lating country; the shrubs ceased, or nearly so;
green grass was seen along the lesser watercourses,
and almost green sward; while the gentle hills,
covered in ordinary seasons with grass and rich
pasture, were now burnt over with drought. In
three-quarters of an hour we reached Wady es-
Leba, a wide watercourse or bed of a torrent,
running here W.S.W., upon whose northern side,
close upon the bank, are two deep wells, still
called Bir-es-Leba, the ancient Beersheba. We
had entered the borders of Palestine!’ These
wells are 55 rods apart. They are circular, and
stoned up very neatly with masonry, apparently
very ancient. The largest of them is 124 feet
in diameter, and 44} feet deep to the surface of
the water, 16 of which, at bottom, are ex-
cavated in the solid rock. The other well is 5
feet in diameter by 12 feet deep. ‘The water
in both is pure and sweet, and in great abun
dance; the finest, indeed, we had found since
leaving Sinai. Both wells are surrounded with
drinking-troughs of stone for camels and flocks,
such as were doubtless used of old by the flocks
which were fed on the adjacent hills’ (Robinson,
i. 301). No ruins were at first visible ; but, on
examination, foundations of former dwellings were
traced, dispersed loosely over the low hills, to the
north of the wells, and in the hollows between.

seem to have been built chiefly of round
stones, although some of the stones are squared


BEHEMOTH.


and some hewn; suggesting the idea of a small
straggling city. The site of the wells is nearly
midway between the southern end of the Dead Sea
and the Mediterranean at Raj or twenty-
seven miles south-east from Gaza, and about
same distance south-by-west from Hebron. Its
present Arabic name, Bir-es-Seba, means ‘ well of
the seven,’ which some take to be the significa-
tion also of Beersheba, in allusion tu the seven
ewe-lambs which Abraham gave to Abimelech,
in token of the oath between them. There is no
ground for rendering it by ‘ seven wells,’ as some
have done. :

BEETLE. [Cuarcor.]

BEEVES (7p. Bakar, in Arabic, al-bakar),
cattle, herds, applicable to all Ruminantia, the
camels alone excepted ; but more particularly to
the Bovide and the genera of the larger antelopes.


Ox or beeve, mx, aluph, the most important
of all clean beasts (Ps. viii. 7; cxliv. 14; Jer.
xi.19). Bull, WW, shor ; Chaldee, taur; Arabic,
al-taur; Latin, taurus; Celtic, tor. Young
bull, "5, phar; Belgic, veir (Job xxi. 10; 1 Sam.
vi. 7,10; Ps. Ixix. 31). Heifer, WB, pharah.
Calf. Sy, égel; Arabic, idgl; but thed, NN,
although the hunched ox occurs on i
monuments, we take to refer to an oryx, as well
as Beker-el-wash, unless it be the Antilope defassa
of Wilkinson, a species not yet scientifically de-
scribed.—C. H. S.

BEGGARS. [Axwus.]

BEHEADING. [Punisuwents.]

BEHEMOTH (nioita, Job xl. 15; in
Coptic, according to Jablonski, Pehemont) is
2 led as the plural of behemah, 71973, but
commentators are by no means as to its
true meaning. A number of learned men, with


(Hippopotamus.]


Bochart and Calmet at their head, understand
the word in the singular number as a specific
name, denoting the hippopotamus, seeking, by
somewhat forced interpretations of the beautiful
poetical allusions in Job xl. 15-24, to prove the
exactness of the description when compared with
the species. In some respects, however, it is more
applicable to the elephant, while in others it is
equally so to both animals. Hence the term
behemoth, taken intensively (for in some places it
is admitted to designate cattle in general), may
be assumed to be a poetical personification of the
great Pachydermata, or even Herhbivora, wherein
the idea of pera is predominant. This
view accounts for the ascription to it of characters
not truly applicable to one species; for instance,
the tail is likened to a cedar (provided 33f
really denotes the tail, which the context makes


BEL,


very doubtful. See Zeddel, Beitr. z. Bibl.

Zoologie), which is only admissible in the case

of the elephant; again, ‘the mountains bring
him forth food ;’ ‘ke trusteth that he can draw
up Jordan,’ a river which elephants alone could
reich; ¢ his nose pierceth through snares,’ cer-
taiily more indicative of that animal's proboscis
with its extraordinary delicacy of scent and
touch, ever cautiously applied, than of the obtuse
perceptions of the river-horse. Finally, the ele-
phunt is far more dangerous as an enemy than
the hippupotamus, which numerous pictorial sculy-
tures om the monuments of Egypt represent as
farless] y ed by a single hunter standing on
\is float’ of log and-reeds. Yet although the ele-
plant is scarcely less fund of water, the descrip-
ti referring to manners, such as lying under
tle shade of willows, among reeds, in fens, &c., is
more directly characteristic of the hippopotamus.
The book of Job appears, from many internal
indications, to have been written in Asia, and is
full of knowledge, although that knowledge is
uot expressed according to the precise techni-
calities of modern science; it offers pictures in
magnificent outline, without condescending to
mnute and laboured details. Considered in this
light, the expression in Ps. 1. 10, ‘ For every beast
of the forest is mine, and the cattle (behemoth)
“pon a thousand hills,’ acquires a grandeur and
force far surpassing those furnished by the mere
idea of cattle of variouskinds. If, then, we take
this plural noun in the sense here briefly indicated,
we may, in like manner, consider the leviathan, -
18 Counterpart, a similarly generalized term, with
the idea of crocodile most prominent; and as
this name indicates a twisting animal, and, as
“ppears from various texts, evidently includes the
Steat pythons, cetacea, and sharks of the sur-
rounding seas and deserts, it conveys a more sub-
lime conception than if limited to the crocodile,
“0 animal familiar to every Egyptian, and well
‘Down even in Palestine.—C. H. S.

BEKAH, half a shekel. [We1curs.]


BEL ba, contracted from bya, the Aramaic


form of bya; Sept. BhA and Bios), is the
name under which the national god of the Baby-
Onians is cursorily mentioned in Isa. xlvi. 1;
Jer. 1.25 li, 44. The only passages in the Bible
which contain any further notice of this deity
are Bar. vi. 40, and the apocryphal addition to
the book of Daniel, in the Sept., xiv. 1, sq.,
where we read of meat and drink being daily
offered to him, according to a usage occurring in
classical idolatry, and termed Lectisternia (Jer.
li. 44%). We, erefore, turn to the testimonies
of profane writers, A particular account of the
sie aers temple of Bel, at Babylon, is given
y Herodotus, i. 181-183. It is there also stated
that the sacrifices of this god consisted of adult
cattle (xpéBara), of their young, when sucking
(which last class were the only victims offered
Up on ‘ golden ae), and of incense. The
Custom o} iding him with Lectisternia may
be inferred from the table placed before the
statue, but it is not expressly mentioned. Dio-
(ii. 9) gives a similar account of this
temple; but adds that there were large golden
Statues of Zeus, Hera, and Rhea on its summit,
with a table, common to them all, before them.
lus, in order to support his own theory,


BELL. 317


endeavours to show that this statue of Zeus must
have been that of Saturn, and that that of Rhea
represented the sun. Hitzig, however, in his note
to Isa. xvii. 8, more justly observes that Hera is
the female counterpart to Zeus-Bel, that she is
called so solely because it was the name of the
chief Greek goddess, and that she and Bel are
the moon and sun. He refers for confirmation to
Berosus (p. 50, ed. Richter), who states that the
wife of Bel was called Omorca, which means
moon; and to Ammian. Marcell. xxiii. 3, fora
statement that the moon was, in later times, zea-
lously worshipped in Mesopotamia. The clas-
sical writers generally cal] this Babylonian deity
by their names, Zeus and Jupiter (Herod. and
Diod. J. c.; Plin. Hist. Nat. vi. 30); by which
they assuredly did not mean the planet of that
zame, but merely the chief god of their religious
system. Cicero, however (De Nat. Deor. iii. 16
recognises Hercules in the Belus of India, whic!
is a loose term for Babylonia. This favours the
identity of Bel and Melkarth.

The question whether the sun or the planet
Jupiter was the power of nature adored under
the name of Bel, is discussed under the article
Baa.

The following engraving, taken from a Baby-
lonian cylinder, represents, according to Miinter,
the sun-god and one of his priests. The triangle’
on the top of one of the pillars, the star with
eight rays, and the half moon, are all significant
symbols.—J. N.


BEL and DRAGON. [Danre1, Apocrr-
PHAL AppITIONs TO. ]

BELA. [Zoar.]

BELL. e first bells known in history are
those small golden bells which were attached to
the lower part of the blue robe (the robe of the ephod)
which formed part of the dress of the high-priest in
his sacerdotal ministrations (Exod. xxviii. 33, 34:
comp. Ecclus. xlvy.11). They were there placed
alternately with the pomegranate-shaped knobs,
one of these being between every two of the bells.
The number of these bells is not mentioned in
Scripture; but tradition states that there were
sixty-six (Clem. Alex. Stromata, p. 563). We
need not seek any other reason for this rather sin-
gular use of bells than that which is assigned :
*His sound shall be heard when he goeth into the
holy place before the Lord, and when he cometh
out, that he die not ’ (Exod. xxviii. 35); by which
we may understand that the sound of the bells
manifested that he was properly arrayed in the
robes of ceremony which he was required to wear
when he entered the presence-chamber of the Great
King; and that as no minister can enter the pre-
sence of an earthly potentate abruptly and un-


318 BELLOWS.


announced, so he (whom no human being could
introduce) was tc have his entrance harbingered
by the sound of the bells he wore. This sound,
heard outside, also notified to the people the time
in which he was engaged in his sacred ministra-
tions, and during which they remained in prayer
(Luke i. 9, 10).

© Baris oy THE Horses’ are mentioned in
Zech. xiv. 20, which were probably such as were at-
tached to the bridles or foreheads, or to belts around
the necks of horses trained for war, that they
might thereby be accustomed tu noise and tumult,
and not by their alarm expose the riders to
danger in actual warfare. Hence a person who
had not been tried or trained up to anything was
by the Greeks called dxw8dévierros, ‘one not used
to the noise of a bell,’ by a metaphor taken from
horses. The mules employed in the funeral

ymp of Alexander had at each jaw a golden bell.

e incline to think, however, that the use of
horse-bells with which the Jews were most familiar,
and which the prophet had in view, was that
which at present exists in the East. anid in other
countries where carriage by pack-horses and mules
is common. The laden animals, being without
riders, have bells hung from their necks, that they
may be kept together, in traversing by night the
open plains and deserts, by patls und roads un-
confined by fences or boundaries; that they may
be cheered hy the sound of the bells; and that if
any horse strays, its place may be known by the
sound of its bell, while the general sound from
the caravan enables the traveller who has strayed
or lingered, to find and regain his party, even in
the night.

That the same motto, Honiness To THE Lorp,
which was u the mitre of the high-priest,
should, in the happy days foretold by the prophet,
be inscribed even upon the bells of the horses,

* manifestly signifies that all things, from the
highest to the lowest, should in those days be sanc-
tified to God.

It is remarkable that there is no appearance of
bells of any kind in the Egyptian monuments.


BELLOWS. This word only occurs in Jer.
vi. 29, and is there employed with reference to the
casting of metal. As fires in the East are always
of wood or charcoal, a sufficient heat for ordinary

is soon raised by the help of fans, and the
use of bellows is confined to the workers in metal.
Such was the case anciently; and in the mural
paintings of Egypt we observe no bellows but such
as are used for the forge or furnace. They
occur as early as the time of Moses, being repre-
sented in a tomb at Thebes which bears the name
of Thothmes UI, They consisted of a leathen


bag, secured and fitted into a frame, from which
a leng pipe extended for carrying the wind to the
fire. y were worked by the feet, the operator


BEN.


standing upon them with one under each foot and
pressing them alternately, while he pulled up
each exhausted skin with a string he held in his
hand. In one instance it is observed from the
painting, that when the man left the bellows they
were raised as if filled with air, and this would
imply a knowledge of the valve (Wilkinson’s
Anc. Egyptians, iii. 338).

BELLY. Among the Hebrews and most an-
cient nations, the belly was regarded as the seat of
the carnal affections, as being, according to their
notions, that which first partakes of sensual plea-
sures (Tit. i. 2; Phil. iii. 9; Rom. xvi. 18). It
is used likewise symbolically for the heart, the
innermost recesses of the soul (Prov. xviii. 8;
xx. 27; xxii. 18). The expression embittering
of the belly signifies all the train of evils which
may come upon aman (Jer. iv. 19; ix. 15; comp.
Num. xviii. 27).7

BELOMANCY. [Divinatron.]


BELSHAZZAR (NWA ; Sept. Baardoap)
is the name given in the book of Daniel to the last
king of the Chaldces, under whom Babylon was
taken by the Medes and Persians. Herodotus calls
this king, and also his father, Labynetus, which is
undoubtedly a corruption of Nabonnedus, the
name by which he was known to Berosus, in Jo-
seph. Contr. Apion. i. 20. Yet in Joseph. (Antig.
x. 11. 2) it is stated that Baltasar was called
Naboangdel by the Babylonians. Nabonadius in
the Canon of Ptolemy, Nabonedus in Euseb.
Chron. Armen. i. p. 60 (from Alexander Poly-
histor.), and Nabonnidohus in Euseb. Prep.
Evan, ix. 41 (from Megasthenes), are remarked
by Winer as other varieties of his name. Winer
(Simon. Lez.) conjectmes that in the name Bel-
shazzar the element shazzar means ‘the principle


of fire’ a :


Nothing is really known of this king except
from the book of Daniel, the authenticity and
credibility of which will be treated under the
article Danixy. That which is told of Nabon-
nedus by Berosus does not agree with the Scri
tural account, viz. that losing a pitched iattle
against Cyrus in the oneu plain, Nabonnedus was
shut up in the city Borsippa on the Euphrates,
below Babylon, and soon forced to stirender his
peron. Cyrus received him kindly, sent him
into Caramania, and settled him on an estate,
weere he ended his life peaceably. No hypothesis
will reconcile this account with the other, since
it is certain that Nabonnedus is the last king in
the one narrative, as Belshazzar in the other
Some of the older critics in vain endeavoured to
remove the difficulties, by making Belshazzar the
same as Laborosoarchod, who preceded Nabon-
nedus. Xenophon (Cyrop. vii. 5, 30) agrees with
the book of Danie) as to the fate of Belshazzar —


F.W.N.

BELTESHAZZAR. [Danre1..]

BELUS, TEMPLE OF. [Basst.]

BEN (]3, son) is often found as the first ele-
ment of proper names; in which case the word
whicu follows it is always to be considered de-
ponent on it, in the relation of our genitive.

ne word which follows Ben may either be of
iteelf a proper name, or be an appellative or ab-
stract, the principle of the connection being essen-
tially the same in both cases. As for the first


BENAIAH.


class, as the Syro-Arabian nations are all parti-
eularly actdicted to genealogy, and as they possess
wo surnames, nor family names in our sense, they
have no means of attaching a definite designation
to a person, except by adding some accessory
specification to his distinctive, or, as we would
term it, Christian, name. This explains why so
snany persons. both in the Old and New Testa-
ments, are distinguished by the addition of the
names of their father. The same usage is espe-
cially frequent among the Arabs; but they have
improved its definiteness by adding the name of
the person's child, in cnse le has one. In doing
this they always observe this arrangement—the
name of the child, the perscn’s own name, and
the name cf his father. Thus the designation of
the patriarch Isaac would, in’ Arabic, run thus—
Father of Jacob, Isaac, son of Abraham (Aba
Ja‘gib, Ishaq, ben Ibrahim). As for the latter
class, there is an easy transition from this strict
use of son to its employment in a figurative sense,
to denote a peculiar dependence of derivation.
The principle of such a connection not ouly ex-
plains such proper names as Ben Chésed (son of
mercy), but applies to many striking metaphors
in other classes of words, as sons of the bow, a son
of seventeen years (the usual mode of denoting
age), a hill, the son of oil (Isa. v. 2), and many
others, in which our translation effaces the On-
etal type of the expression. All proper names
which Legin with Ben belong to one or the other
of these classes. Ben Aminadah, Ben Gaber, and
Ben Chesed (1 Kings iv. 10, 11) illustrate all
the possibilities of combination noticed above.
In these names, Ben would, perhaps, be better not
translated, as it is in our version; although the
Vulgate has preserved it, as the Sept. also ap-
pears to have once done in ver, 8, to judge by the
reading there.

These remarks apply also in part to Bar, the
Aramaic synonyme of Ben, as in the name Bar-


BENAIAH (871193 or 11393 ;, Sept. Bavalas),

sn of Jehoiada, and commander of David's guard
(the Cherethites and Pelethites, 2 Sam. viii. 18).
His exploits were celebrated in Israel. He over-
came two Moabitish champions (‘lions of God’),
slew an Egyptian giant with his own spear, and
went down into an exhausted cistern and de-
stroyed a lion which had fallen into it when
covered with snow (2 Sam. xxiii. 21). Benaiah
(donttless with the guard he commanded) ad-
hered to Solomon when Joab and others attempted
to set up Adonijah; and when that attempt fuiled,
he, as belonged to his office, was sent to put Joab
to death, after which he was appointed com-
mander in chief in his place (1 Kings i. 36; ii.
29). Some persons named Benaiah returned from
the exile with Ezra (x. 25, 30, 35, 43).


BENHADAD (TU12, son of Hadad ; Sept.
vids “A8ep), the name of three kings of Damascene-
Syria. As to the latter part of this name,
Hadad, there is little doubt that it is the name
of the Syrian god Apap, The expression son
of Hadad, which denotes dependence and obe-

dience, not only accords with the analogies of
other heathen names, but is also supported by the
existence of such terms as ‘sons of God’ among

the Hebrews (cf. Pa, Ixxxii. 6).


BENJAMIN. 310


1. BENHADAD, the king of Syria who was
subsidised by Asa king of Judah to invade Israel,
and thereby compel Raasha (who had invaded
Judah) to retnm to defend his own kingdom
(1 Kings xv. 18). [Asa.] This Ben-hadad has,
with some reason, supposed Hadad the
are who rebelled against Solomon (1 Kings
xi. 25).

2. BENHADAD, king of Syria, son of the

receding. His earlier history is much involved
in that of Ahab, with whom he was constantly at
war [Anas]. He’ owed the signal defeat in
which that war terminated to the vain notion
which assimilated Jenovan to the local deities
worshipped by the nations of Syria, deeming
Him ‘a God of the hills,” but impotent to defend
his votaries in ‘the plains’ (1 Kings xx. 1-30).
Instead of pursuing his victory, Ahab concluded
a peace with the defeated Benhadad, which was
observed for about twelve years, when the Syrian
king declared war against Jehorem the son of
Ahab, and invaded Israel: but all his plans and
operations were frustrated, heing made known
to Jchoram by the prophet. Elisha (2 Kings vi. 8,
ad fin.). After some years, however, he renewed
the war, and besieged Jehoram in his capital,
Samaria, until the inhabitants were reduced to
the last extremities and most revolting resources
by famine. The siege was then unexpectedly
raised, according to a prediction of Elisha,
through a panic infused into the besiegers, who
concluding that a noise which they seemed to
hear portended the advance wpon them of a foreign
host procured by Jehoram, thought only of saving
themselves by flight. The next year Benhadad,
learning that Elisha, through whom so many of
his designs had been brought to nought, had
arrived at Damascus, sent an oflicer of distinction
named Hazael with presents, to consult him as to
his recovery from an illness under which he then
suffered. The prophet answered, that his disease
was not mortal, but that he would nevertheless
die. This was accomplished a few days after by
this very Hazael, who smothered the sick monarch
in his bed, and mounted the throne in his stead,
nic. 884 (2 Kings viii. 7-15). [Enisua; Ha-
zagEL; JRHORAM.]

3. BENHADAD, king of Syria, son of the
Hazael just mentioned. He was thrice defeated
by Jehoash, king of Israel, who recovered from him
al the territories beyond the Jordan which Ha-
zael had reut from the dominion of Israel (2 Kings
xiii. 3, 24, 25).

BENJAMIN (}113; Sept. Beviauly), young-
est son of Jacob, by Rachel (Gen. xxxv. 18). His
mother died immediately after he was born, and
with her last breath named bim ‘JY J2_ (Ben-
Oni, § Son of my pain’), which the futher changed
into Benjamin, a word of nearly the same sound,
but portending comfort and consolation, ‘ Son
of my right hand? probably alluding to the
support and protection he promised himself from
this, his last child, in his old age. This su
position is strengthened when we reflect on the
reluctance with which he consented to part with
him in very trying circumstances, yielding only
to the pressure of famine and the most urgent
necessity (Gen. xlii.).

In Gen. lvi. 21, #g., the immediate descendants
of Benjamin are given to the number of ten,


320 BENJAMIN.


whereas in Num. xxvi. 38-40, only seven are
enumerated, and some even under diflerent names,
This difference may probably be owing to the
circumstance that some of the direct descendants
of Benjamin had died either at an early period
or at least childless.

The tribe of Benjamin, though the least nu-
merous of Israel, became nevertheless a consi-
derable race in process of time. In the desert it
counted 35,400 warriors, all above twenty years
of age (Num. i. 36; ii. 22); and, at the entrance
of Israel into Canaan, even as many as 45,600.
The portion allotted to this tribe was in pro-
portion to its small number, and was encom-
passed by the districts of Ephraim, Dan, and
Judah, in central Pafestine. In Josh. xviii. 11-20,
the northern and southern boundaries are mi-
nutely described ; from ver. 12 to 16 is sketched
the northern boundary-line, and from 16 to 20, the
southern. Within the boundaries described in
these eight verses lay a district rather small, but
highly-cultivated and naturally fertile (Joseph.
Antiq. v. 1.22; Reland, p.637), containing thirty-
six towns (with the villages appertaining to them),
which are named in Josh. xviii. 21-28; and the
principal of which were Jericho, Bethagla, Bethel,
Gibeon, Ramah, and Jebus or Jerusalem. This
latter place subsequently became the capital of
the whole Jewish empire; but was, after the
division of the land, still in possession of the
Jebusites. The Benjamites had indeed been
charged to dispossess them, and occupy that im-
portant town; but (Judg. i. 21) the Benjamites
are reproached with having neglected to drive
them from thence, that is, from the upper, well-
fortified part of the place Zion, since the lower
and less fortified part had already been taken by
Judah (Judg. i. 8), who in this matter had
almost a common interest with Benjamin. Zion
was finally taken from the Jehusites by David
(2 Sam. v. 6, 89.).

In the time of the Judges, the tribe of Benjamin
became involved in a civil war with the other
eleven tribes, for having refused to give up to jus-
tice the miscreants of Gibeon who had publicly
violated and caused the death of a concubine of
a man of Ephraim, who had passed with her
through Gibeon. This war terminated in the
almost utter extinction of the tribe; leaving no
hope for its regeneration from the circumstance,
that, not only had nearly all the women of that
tribe been previously slain by their foes, but the
eleven other tribes had engaged themselves by a
solemn oath not to marry their daughters to any
man belonging to Benjamin. When the thirst
of revenge, however, had abated, they found
means to evade the letter of the oath, and to
revive the tribe again by an alliance with them
(Judg. xix. 20, 21). This revival was so rapid,
that, in the time of David, it already numbered
59,434 able warriors (1 Chron. vii. 6-12); in
that of Asa, 280,000 (2 Chron. xiv. 8); and
in that of Jehoshaphat, 200,000 (2 Chron. xvii.
17).

This tribe had also the honour of giving the
first king to the Jews, Saul being a Benjamite
(1 Sam. ix. 1, 2). After the death of Saul, the
Benjamites, as might have been expected, de-
clared themselves for his son Ishbosheth (2 Sam,
ii. 8, sg.i; until, after the assassination of that
prince, David became king of all Israel. David


BEROSH.


haying at last expelled the Jebusites from Zion,
aud made it his own residence, the close alliance
that seems previously to have existed between
the tribes of Benjamin and Judah (Judy. i. 8)
was cemented by the circumstance that, while
Jerusalem actually belonged to the district
of Benjamin, that of Judah was immediately
contiguous to it. Thus it happened, that, at the
division of the kingdom after the death of Solo-
mon, Benjamin espoused the cause of Judah, and
formed, together with it, a kingdom by them-
selves. Indeed, the two tribes stood always in
such a close connection, as often to be included
under the single term Judah (1 Kings xi. 13;
xii. 20). After the exile, also, these two tribes
constituted the flower of the new Jewish colony
in Palestine (comp. Ezr. xi. 1; x. 9).—E. M.

BEREA (Bépoia), Acts xvii, 10, a city of
Macedonia, which Pliny (Hist. Nat. iy. 10)
places in the northern part of that province; and
Ptolemy (Geog. iii. 13) in that part of it called
/Emathia. It was on the river Astreus, not far
from Pella, towards the south-west, and near
Mount Bermius. It was afterwards called Ire-
nopolis, and is now known by the name of Buor.
Paul and Silas withdrew to this place from Thes-
salonica; and the Jewish residents are described
as more ingenuous, and of a better disposition
(not ‘more noble,’ as in the Authorized Version)
‘than those of Thessalonica’ (obra: 38 joav
ebyevértepo Tay év Oecoadovixn), in that they
diligently searched the Scriptures to ascertain the
truth of the doctrines taught by the Apostles.

BERENICE (Bepvicn), eldest daughter of
Herod Agrippa I., and sister of the younyer
Agrippa (Acts xxv. 13, 23; xxvi. 30). She
was married to her uncle Herod, king of Chalcis ;
and after his death, in order to avoid the merited
suspicion of incest with her brother Agripra, she
became the wife of Polemon, king of Cilicia.
This connection being soon dissolved, she re-
turned to her brother, and afterwards became
the mistress of Vespasian and Titus (Joseph.
<Antig. xix. 5. 1; xx. 73 2, 3; Tacit. Hist. ii.
81; Suet. Zit. 7).

BERODACH-BALADAN. [Menopacu-Ba-
LADAN.]


BEROSH (€173) occurs in several passages of
Scripture, as in 2 Sam. vi. 5; 1 Kings v. 8; vi.
15 and 34; ix. 11; 2 Kings ix. 23; 2 Chron.
ii. 8; iii.5; Ps. civ. 17; Isa. xiv. 8; xxxvii.
24; xl, 19; Iv. 13; Ix. 13; Ezek. xxvii. 5;
xxxi. 8; Hos. xiv. 9; Nah. ii. 3; Zech. xi, 2),
and Berori (M113), which is said to be only
the Aramaan pronunciation of the same word, in
Cant. i. 17, ‘the bearers of our honse are cedar,
and the rafters of fir’ (Beroth). So in most of
the other passages Eres and Berosh, translated
Cedar and Fir in the Auth. Vers., are mentioned
together, as 1 Kings v. 8, ‘And Hiram sent to
Solomon saying, I will do all thy desire con-
cerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of
fir;’ Isa. xiv. 8, ‘ Yes, the fir-trees rejoice at thee,
and the cedars of Lebanon. But Rosenmiiller
says, ‘In most of the passages where the Hebrew
word occurs, it is by the oldest Greek and the
Syriac translators rendered Cypress.’ Celsius, on
the contrary, is of opinion that Berosi indicates
the cedar of Lebanon, and that Lres, which ig
usually considered to have the same meaning, is


e


BEROSH.


the common pi ious sylvestris), apparently
because he ee Beroeh to be } apes from
sherbin, the Arabic name of pine. Others have
thought that Berosh is the box, ash, juniper, &c.
The word berosh or beroth is slightly varied in
the Syriac and Chaldee versions, being written
berutha in the former, and berath in the latter.
All these are closely allied to bruta, a name
of the Savine plant, which is the Bpdév, Bpdéuy,
and Bapafous of the Greeks, and which the Arabs
have converted into burasee and buratee. By
them it is applied to a species of janie which
they cail abhud and arus or orus. It appears
to as that many of these terms must be con-
sidered generic, rather than specific in the mo-
dem sense, when so much care is bestowed on
the accurate discrimination of one species from
another. Thus arus, applied by the Arabs toa
juniper, indicates a pine-tree in Scripture, whether
we follow the common acceptation and consider
it the cedar, or adopt the opinion of Celsius, that
the pinus sylvestris is indicated. So buratec may
have been applied by tle Arabs, &c. not only to the
Savine and other species of juniper, but also to
ants, such as the cypregs, which resemble these.
tscany of those cases, therefore, where we are un-
able w discover any absolute identity or similarity
of name, we must be guided by the nature of the
trees, the uses to which they were applicd, and the
situations in which they are said to have been found.
Thus, as we find Eres and Berosh so constantly
associated in Scripture, the former may indicate
the cedar with the wild pine-tree, while the latter
tay comprebend the juniper and cypress tribe.


= aaa


163. (Cypress—Cupressus sempervirens.]
The different ies of juniper have by some
botanists been senked antes Calas the true
species being distinguished by the title of Cedrus
baccifera, and the pines by that of Cedrus
conifera. Of Juniperus, the Bpxev8os of the
Greeks and abhul of the Arabs, there are several
species in Syria. Of these J. communis, the com-
mon juniper, is a very widely diffused species,
being found in Europe and Asia, in the plains
of northem and in the mountains of southern
latitudes ; usually forming a low shrub, but in
tome situations being 19 feet, and even 30 feet
igh. J. Oxycedrus, the sharp or prickly, or


e


BEROSH. 321


brown-berried juniper, closely allied to the com-
mon juniper, is an evergreen shrub, from 10 to 12,
but sometimes even 20 feet high. It was found
by M Boué on Mount Lebanon. J. drupacea
or large-fruited juniper is a species whfich was
introduced into Europe from the East under the
Arabic name Habhel. This name, however, is
applied rather to all the species than to any one
in pecenle: It is a native of Mount Cassius,
and is thought to be the sume as the greater
juniper found by Belon on Mount Taurus, which
e Nescttbes as rising to the height of a cy-
press. J. Phenicea, or Phenician juniper, is
great juniper of Divscorides, and is a native of .
the south of Europe, Russia, and Syria. It has
imbricated leaves, bears some resemblance to
the cypress, and attains a height of from 20 to 30
feet. J. Lycia, or Lycian juniper, is a dwarf
species, and J. Sabina, or the common Savine,
is usually. a low spreading shrub, but some-
times rises to the height of 10 or 12 feet. It
is a native of the south of Europe and Syria.
Of these species J. Oxycedrus and J. Phe-
nicea are the only species which could have
been the Berosh of Scripture. Some are of opi-
nion that the wood of J. Oxycedrus, rather than
that of the so-called cedar of Lebanon, is the
cedar-wood so famed in ancient times for its
durability, and which was therefore employed in
making statues. It is to the wood of certain
species of juniper that the name of cedar-wood
is now specially applied.

Cupressus, the cuwdpurgos of the Greeks and the
suroo of the Arabs, called also by them shujrut-al-
yat, or tree of life, is the Cupressus sempervirens,
or the evergreen cypress of botanists. This tree
is well known as being tapering in form, in conse-
quence of its branches growing upright and close
to the stem, and also that in its general appear
ance it resembles the Lombardy poplar, so that the
one is often mistaken for the iiher when seen in
Oriental drawings. In southem latitudes it usu-
ally grows to a height of 50 or 60 feet. Its branch-
lets are closely covered with very small imbricated
leaves, which remain on the tree for 5 or 6 years.
Du Hamel states that he bas observed on the
bark of young cypresses small particles of a sub-
stance resembling gum tragacanth, and that he has
seen bees taking great pains to detach these par-
ticles, probably to supply some of the matter re-
quired for forming their combs. This cypress is a
native of the Grecian Archipelago, particularly of
Candia (the ancient Crete) and Cyprus, and also
of Asia Minor, Syria, and Persia. tt may be seen
on the coast of Palestine, as well as in the interior,
as the Mahomedans plant it in their cemeteries.
That it is found on the mountains of Syria is
evident from the following which with
others is quoted and translated by Celsius, Hiero-
bot. i. p. 133: Cyrillus Alexandr. in Esaiam, p.
848—‘ Mons est Pheenices Libanus, cedris, cu-
pressis ac pinis densus, et ipsis thuris fruticibus.’
So Jerome, Comment. in Hos. xiv. 6—‘ Crebra
hic crescunt cedri. Recta quoque et elects abietes,
odorifere cupressi, seu cyparissi, pingues olives,
pini, buxi,’ &c. The cy being so common,
we should expect it to be frequently mentioned in
Scripture ; but this does not appear to be the case,
if we judge by the Auth. Vers., as it occurs there
only once, in Isa. xliv. 14, ‘ He heweth him down
cedars and taketh the cypress and the oak,’ for the

x


322 BESHA.


purpose of making idols. The word here translated
oypress’ is tirza, which there does not appear to
be any other authority for identifying with the cy-
press. But the cypress is expressly mentioned in the
Apocrypha (Ecclus, xxiv. 13), where it is described
as growing upon the Mountains of Hermon; and
it has been observed by Mr. Kitto, that if this
be understood of the great Hermon, it is illus-
trated by Pococke, who tells us that it is the only
tree which grows towards the summit of Lebanon.
In Ecclus. 1. 10, the high-priest is compared
to a ‘ cypress towering to the clouds,’ on account
of his tall and noble figure. The wood of the
cypress is hard, fragrant, and of a remarkably fine
close grain, very durable, and of a beautiful red-
dish hue, which Pliny says it never loses.’ As to
the opinion respecting the durability of the cypress-
wood entertained by the ancients, it may be suffi-
cient to adduce the authority of Pliny, who says
* that the statue of Jupiter, in the Capitol, which
was formed of cypress, had existed above 6U0
years without showing the slightest symptom of
decay, and that the doors of the Temple of Diana
at Ephesus, which were also of cypress, and were
400 ycars old, had the appearance of being quite
new.’ This wood was used for a variety of pur-
ses, as for wine-presses, poles, rafters, and joists,
Fores says, that whatever was thought worthy
of being handed down to remote posterity was
preserved in cypress or cedar wood: and Virgil
refers to it in these lines (Georg. ii. 442), :
“dant utile lignum
Navigiis pinos, domibus cedrumque cupressosque.’
In all the passages of Scripture, therefore, the
cypress will i found to answer completely to the
descriptions and uses of the Berosh ; for it is well
adapted for buildiny, is not subject to destruction,
and was therefore very likely to be employed in
the erection of the Temple, and also for its gates
and flooring; for the decks of ships, and even
for musical instruments and lances. J. E. Faber,
as quoted by Roseniiiller, conjectures that the
Hebrew name Berosh included three different
trees which resemble each other, viz. the evergreen
cypress, the thyine, and the savine. The last, or
Juniperus Sabina, is so like the cypress, that the
ancients often called it by that name, and the
moderns have noticed the resemblance, especially
as to the leaves. ‘Hence, even among the Grecks,
both trees bore the old Eastern names of Berosh,
Beroth, Brutha, or Brathy * ( apene ess Bot. of
Bible, Trans. p. 260).—J. F. R.

BERYL. (Snowam.]

BESHA (TU83) occurs in the singular form
in Job xxxi. 40, ‘Let thistles grow instead of
wheat, and cockle (besha) instead of burley ;’
and in the plural form in Isaiah v. 2, ‘He (Je-
hovah) planted it with the choicest vine, and also
made a wine-press therein ; and he looked that it
should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild
grapes’ (D'YNI beushim). So also in verse 4 of
the same chapter. It is probable that the same
plant is referred to in these two passages ; but dithi-
culties have here, as elsewhere, been experienced
in ascertaining the precise plant intended. All,
however, are agreed that sume useless, if not
noxious, herb must be understood in both cases.
Some have supposed that it was a plant with
offensive odour, as the worl implies a bad smell ;


others, that it was a thorny plant, a bramble,


BESHA.


damel, &c. In addition to these conjectures we
may infer, that, if not a general term for weeds,
the word denoted a plant which sprung up in
cultivated ground. Celsius seeks in Arabic for
the name of some noxious plant similar to desha,
and he finds it in the besh or dish, which has
long been known as one of the most powerful
of poisons. This name seems to have been
adopted by the Arabs from the Hindoos, among
whom the ish is likewise celebrated as a poison,
and is pointed out as a product of the Himalayan
mountains. Celsius refers it to the Hebrew
verb WN, but it is no doubt derived from
the Sanscrit ofsha, signifying poison; and the

lant is the Aconitum feroxr of Dr. Wallich
PPL Asiat. Rar. i. 2. 41) and Royle (JHustr.
Himalayan Bot. p. 46). The Latin translators
of Avicenna consider the bish to be the Napellus,
or an Aconite, proving that in some cases a con-
siterable approximation to correctness was at-
tained in ascertaining the kind of plants yield-
ing drugs which were formerly in use in medi-
cine. ish having thus been ascertained to be
an Aconite, and to be the same word as besha,
the latter has in consequence been thought to
indicate Aconitum album, the only species which
appears to be found in Syria. It is not anywhere
very common, but is most likely to occur on the
sides of hills, the situations usually selected as
the sites for vineyards.

But as we have seen that dish is probably de-
rived from the Sanscrit visha, the correspondence
of the Arabic d¢sh with the Hebrew besha is acci-
dental, and does not prove them to be even allied.
The Aconite, moreover, is not very likely to have
sprung up instead of barley in a vineyard of
Palestine, and still less so"in a more southern
latitude, to which the passage in Job must refer,
the scene of that book being thought to have
been Idumea, a part of Arabia Petraa, on the
south-east of the tribe of Judah. Hence other plants
have been sought for; some being in favour of the
&uredos aypla of the Greeks and ludrusca of the
Romans, which is considered to be the wild variety
of Vitis vinifera. Of this Dioscorides ‘ genera duo
fecit: alterius enim va non maturescit, sed florem
tantum profert olydv@ny nominatum; altera fruc-
tum perficit, ex parvis acinis nigris subastrin-
gentibus.’ In the neighbourhood of Tripoli, Rau-
wolf found wild vines, called labrusce, on which
nothing appeared, but only the flower (ananthe).

Others, not satistied with this determination,
have endeavoured to tind some plant which, re-
sembling the vine in some respects, should yet be
stronyly contrasted with it in its properties. Thus,
the Hebrew name of the grape being Aancb, there
can be no doubt that it is the same word as the
Arabic ‘anab, which also signifies the grape. But
in Arabia it is rather used generically than spe-
cifically, as, besides the common grape, there are
also anab-al-salih, or ox's grape, and anab-al dub,
or wolf-grape. The former name we have found
applied in Fis to the var. tndicum of Solanum
nigrum, which is a common weed in Europe,
and even in India, especially in the neighbour-
hood of cultivated ground. This, which some-
what resembles the grape in the furm of its berried
fruit, is very different in its properties, being
narcotic and poisonous, Hasselquist came nearly
to the same conclusion, for in reference to the pas-
sage of Isaiah, he says, ‘ I am inclined to beheve


-


=


BESOR.


that the prophet here means the hoary nightshade

Solanum incanum), because it is common in

gypt and Palestine, and the Arabian name
agrees well with it. The Arabs call it anib-el-
did, i. e. wolf-giape. The prophet could not have
found a plant more opposite to the vine than this,
for it grows much in the vineyards, and is very

icious to them, wherefore they root it out: it
Riewise resembles a vine by its shrubby stalk’
(Hasselyuist, Travels, p. 289). This plant ap-
pears better entitled than the Aconite to be con-
trasted with the grape-vine, and_it is not un-
worthy of notice that either it or the Solanwn
nigrum _ suit the passage of Job equally well.
—J.F.

BESOR (2; Sept. Boodp), a brook men-
tioned in 1 Sam. xxx. 9. Sanutus derives its
course from the interior Carmel, near Hebron, and
states that it enters the sea near Gaza (Liber
Secretorum, p. 252). It is without doubt the
same that Richardson crossed on approaching
Gaza from the south, and which he calls Oa di
Gaza (Wady Gaza). The bed was thirty yards


wide, and its stream was, early in April, already —


exhausted, although some stagnant water re-
mained.

BETH (NA house) is often found as the
first element of proper names of places in the


BETHANY. 323


Bible. It is ouly necessary to observe that, in all
such compounds, as Bethel, &c., the latter part of
the word must be considered, according to our
Occidental languages, to depend on the former in
the relation of the genitive ; so that Bethel can
only mean ‘house of God.’ The notion of house
is, of course, capable of a wide application, and
is used to mean temple, habitation, place, ac-
cording to the sense of the word with which it is
combined.—J. N. ‘

BETHABARA (ByOaBapd) or Berunaran.
This name means place of the ford, i.e. of or over
the Jordan ; and is mentioned in John i. 28, as
the place where John baptized. The best manu-
scripts and receut editions, however, have Bydavla
(Bethany): the reading By@afapd appears to
have arisen from the conjecture of Origen, who
in his day found no such place on the Jordan as
Bethany, but knew a town called Bethabara,
where John was said to have baptized, and there-
fore took the unwarrantable liberty of changing
the reading (Orig. Opp. ii. p. 130, ed. Huet ;
Kuinoel, Comment. in Joh, i. 28).

BETHANY (Bn Gavia, from the Heb. ¥2*7 3,
place 7, dates). 1. The place near the Jordan
where Jolin baptized, the exact situation of which
is unknown. _ Some copies here read Bethabara,
as stated in the preceding article. 2, Beruany, a


Jn ey


town or village about fifteen furlongs east-south-
east from Jerusalem, beyond the Mount of Olives
(John xi. 18), 80 called, probably, from the
number of palm-trees that grew around. It was
the residence of Lazarus and his sisters Mary
and Martha, and Jesus often went out from
Jerusalem to lodge there (Matt. xxi. 17; xxvi.
6; Mark xi. 1,11, 12; xiv. 3; Luke xix. 29;
xxiv. 50; John xi. 1,18; xii. 1). The place
mill subsists in a shallow wady on the eastem
slope of the Mount of Olives. Dr. Robinson
reached Bethany in three-quarters of an hour from


the Damascus gate of Jerusalem; which gives a
distance corresponding to the fifteen furlongs


. (stadia) of the evangelist. It is a poor village of


about twenty families. The only marks of an-
tiquity are some hewn stones from more ancient
buildings, found in the walls of some of the
houses. The monks, indeed, show the house of
Mary and Martha, and of Simon the leper, and
also the sepulchre of Lazarus, all of which are con-
stantly mentioned in the narratives of pilgrims
and travellers. The sepulchre is a deep vault,
like a cellar, excavated in the a rock
x


324 BETH-ARBEL.


in the middle of the village, to which there is a
descent by twenty-six steps. Dr. Robinson (ii.
101} alleges that there is not the slightest pro-
bability of its ever having been the tomb of
Lazarus. The form is not that of the ancient
sepulchres, nor does its situation accord with the
narrative of the New Testament, which implies
that the tomb was not in the town (John xvi. 31,
38). The present Aiab name of the village is
el-Azirezeh, frum el-Azir, the Arabic form of
Lazarus.

BETH-ARBEL O82 3), a place men-
tioned only in Hos. x. 14; and as it seems to be
there implied that it was an impregnable fortresa,
the probability is strengthened of its being the
same as the Arbela of Josephus. ‘This was a vil-
jage in Galilee, near which were certain fortified
caverns. They are first mentioned in connection
with the march of Bacchides into Judea, at
which time they were occupied by many fugitives,
and the Syrian general encamped there long
enougii tu subdue them (Antig. xii. 11.1; 1 Macc.
ix.2). At a later period these caverns formed the
retreats of banded robbers, who greatly distressed
the inhabitants throughout that quarter. Josephus
gives a graphic account of the means taken by
Herod to extirpate them. The caverns were
situated in the midst of precipitous clills, over-
hanging a deep valley, with only a steep and
narrow path leading to the entrance: the attack
was therefure exceeding difficult. Parties of sol-
diers being at length let down in large boxes,
suspended by chains from above, attacked those
who defended the entrance, with fire and sword,
or dragged them out with long hooks and dashed
them down the precipice. In this way the place
was at length subdued (Joseph. Antig. xiv. 15,
4,5; De Bell. Jud. i. 16. 2-4). These same
caverns were afterwards fortified by Josephus
himself against the Romans during his command
in Galilee. In one place he speaks of them as
the caverns of Arbela, and in another as the
caverns near the lake of Gennesareth (Joseph.
Vita, § 37; De Bell. Jud, ii. 20. 6). According
to the Talmud, Arbela Jay between Sepphoris
and Tiberias (Lightfoot, Chorog. Cent. ¢. 85).
These indications leave little doubt that Arbela
of Galilee, with its fortified caverns, may be iden-
tified with the present Kulat ibn Maan and the
adjacent ruins now known as Irbid (probably a
corruption of Irbil, the proper Arabic form of
Arbela). This latter is the site which Pococke
(ii. 58) supposed to be that of Bethsaida, and
where he found columns and the ruins of a large
church, with a sculptured doorcase of white marble.
The Lest description of the neighbouring caves is
that of Burckhardt (p. 331), who calculates that
they might afford refuge to about 600 men.

BETH-AVEN, a nickname for the town of
Bethel, applied to it after it became the seat of the
worship of the golden calves (Bsruui.]. There
was, however, a town of this name not far from
Bethel eastward (Josh. vii. 2; 1 Sam. xiii. 5),
the existence of which, perhaps, occasigned the
transfer of the name to Bethel. The Talmudists
confound it with Bethel. There was also a desert
of the same name (Josh, xviii. 12).


BETIIEL (ON 92; Sept. Baca), originally
Luz and; Sept. Aov(d). an ancient town which
Eusebius places 12 R. miles north of Jerusalem, on


BETHEL,


the right hand of the road toShechem. Jacob rested
here one night on his way to Padan-Aram, and
commemorated the vision with which he was fa-
voured by erecting and pouring oil upon the stone
which had served him for a pillow, and giving to
the place the name of Bethel (place or house of
God), which eventually superseded the nfore an-
cient designation of Luz (Gen. xxviii. 11-19).
Under that name it is mentioned prolept:cally with
reference to the earlier time of Abraham (Gen. Xi.
18; xiii. 3). After his prosperous return, Bethel
became a favourite station with Jacob: here he
built an altar, buried Deborah, received the name
of Israel (for the second time), and promises of
blessing ; and here also he accomplished the vow
which he had made on his going forth (Gen. xxxv.
1-15; comp. xxxii, 28, and xxviii, 20-22). It
seems not to have been a town in those early
times; but at the conquest of the land, Bethel is
mentioned as a soak city of the Canaanites
(Josh, xii. 16). It became a boundary town of
Benjamin toward Ephraim (Josh. xviii. 22), and
was actually conqnered by the latter tribe from
the Canaanites (Judy. i. 22-26), At this place,
already consecrated in the time of the patriarchs,
the nik of the covenant was, apparently for a
long while, deposited [Ark], and probably the
tabernacle also (Judg. xx. 26; comp. 1 Sam. x.
3). It was also one of the places at which
Samuel held in rotation his court of justice
(1 Sam. vii. 16). After the separation of the
kingdoms Bethel was included in that of Israel,
which seems to show, that although originally in
the formal distribution assigned to Benjamin, it
had been actually possessed by Ephraim in right
of conquest from tle Canaanites—which might
have been held by that somewhat unscrupulous
tribe to determine the right of possession to a
place of importance close on their own frontier.
Jeroboam made it the southern seat (Dan being
the northern) of the worship of the golden calves;
and it seems to have been the chiet’ seat of that
worship (1 Kings xii, 28-33; xiii, 1). The
choice of Bethel was probably determined by the
consideration that the spot was already sacred in
the estimation of the Israelites, not only from
patriarchal consecration, but from the more recent
presence of the ark ; which might seem to point
it out as a proper seat for an establishment de-
signed to rival that of Jerusalem. This appro-
priation, however, completely desecrated Bethel in
the estimation of the orthodox Jews; and the
prophets name it with abhorrence and contempt—
even applying to it, by a sort of yeu de mot, the
name of Bethaven (house of idols) instead of
Bethel (house of God) (Amos y. 5; Hos. iv. 15;
v. 8; x. 5,8). The town was taken from Jeroboam
by Abijah, king of Judah (2 Chron. xiii. 19); but
it again reverted to Israel (2 Kings x. 28).
After the Israelites were carried away captive by
the Assyrians, all traces of this illecal worship
were extirpated by Josiah, king of Judah, who thus
fultilled a prophecy made to Jeruboam 350 years
before (2 inns xiii. 1, 2; xxiii, 15-18). The
place was still in existence after the Captivity, and
was in the possession of the Benjamites (Ezra ii,
28; Neh. vii. 32). In the time of the Maccabees
Bethel was fortified by Bacchides for the king of
Syria (Juseph, Antig. xiti, 1. 13). It is not
named in the New Testament; but it still ex-
isted and was taken by Vespasian (Joseph. De


BETHER.


Bell. Jud. iv. 9.9). It is described by Eusebius
and Jerome as a small village (Onomast. s. vv.
Aggat and Lua); and this is the last notice of it
as an inhabited place. Bethel and its name
were believed to have perished until within these
few years; yet it has been ascertained by the
Protestant missionaries at Jerusalem that the
name and a knowledge of the site still existed
among the people of the land. The name was
indeed preserved in the form of Beitin—the
Arabic termination in for the Hebrew el being
not an unusual change. Its identity with Bethel
had been recognised by the Oriental Christian
priests, who endeavoured to bring into use the
Arabic form Beitil, as being nearer to the original ;
but it had not found currency beyond the circle
of their influence.

The situation of Beitin corresponds very exactly
with the intimations afforded by Eusebius and
others; the distance from Jerusalem, 3} hours,
being equal to the 12 Roman {niles assigned in
the Onomasticon. The ruins lie upon the point
of a low hill, between the heads of two shallow
wadys which unite below, and run off ‘into a
deep and rugged valley. The spot is shut in by
higher land on every side. The ruins are more
considerable than those of a ‘large village,’ as the
place was in the time of Jerome; and it is there-
fore likely that, although unnoticed in history, it
afterwards revived, and was enlarged. The
ruined churches upon the site and beyond the
valley evince that it was a place of importance
even down to the middle ages. Besides these,
there yet remain numerous foundations and half-
standing walls of houses and other buildings: on
the highest part are the ruins of a square tower,
and in the western valley are the remains of one
of the largest reservoirs in the country, being 314
feet in length by 217 in breadth. The bottom is
now a green grass plat, having in it two living
springs of good water.

BETHER (13). The Mountains of Bether
are only mentioned in Cant. ii. 17; viii. 14; and
no place called Bether occurs elsewhere. The
word means, properly, dissection. The mountains
of Bether may therefore be mountains of dis-
junction, of separation, etc., that is, mountains
cat up, divided by ravines, etc. In the Au-
thorized Version the same words that are ren-
dered ‘ mountains of Bether’ in Cant. ii. 17,
are rendered ‘ mountains of spices’ in viii. 14,
It is an objectionable mode of disposing of two
different interpretations, to adopt sometimes the
One and sometimes the other. The second inter-
Pretation is reached by considering that the monn-
tains derived their name from the growth of trees,
from incisions (with reference to the etymology)
ma which odorous gums distilled. This is after
the Sept.—ipy rav dpwydrey ; which version also
eets the example of a difference in rendering by
Biving vpn xoAwpdrewy, hollow mountains, in the
Previous passage. As the word is found nowhere

else as a proper name, it is doubtful if it should
Ve taken in the Canticles.


Pie csi: (BnGco8d; from Heb. N'IDM NA
fe or place of mercy), a pool (KoA: Gpa) at
the Sheep-gate ‘of Jerusale: Lanetn eet wih
porches for the accommodation of the sick who
sought benefit from ‘the healing virtues of the
Water, and upon one of whom Christ performed


BETHESDA. 325


the healing miracle recorded by St. John (v. 2-9).
That which is now, and has Jong been pointed out
as the Pool of Bethesda, isa dry basin or reservoir
outside the northern wall of the enclosure around
the Temple Mount, of which wall its southern
side may be said to forma part. The east end
of it is close to the present gate of St. Stephen.
The pool measures 360 feet in length, 130 feet
in breadth, and 75 in depth to the bottom, be-
sides the rubbish which has accumulated in it for
ages. Although it has been dry for above two
centuries, it was once evidently used as a re-
servoir, for the sides internally have been cased
over with small stones, and these again covered
with plaster; but the workmanship of these addi-
tions is coarse, and bears no special marks of
antiquity. The west end is built up like the
rest, except at the south-west corner, where two
lofty arched vaults extended westward, side by
side, under the houses that now cover this part.


Dr. Robinson was able to trace the continuation
of the work in this direction under one of these
vaults for 100 feet, and it seemed to extend
much farther. This gives the whole a length of
160 feet, equal to one-half of the whole extent of
the sacred enclosure under which it lies: and
how much more is unknown. It would seem as
if the deep reservoir formerly extended farther |
westward in this part; and that these vaults were

built up, in and over it, in order to support the
structures above. Dr. Robinson considers it pro-
bable that this excavation was anciently carried
quite through the ridge of Bezetha, along the
northern side of Antonia to its N.W. corner, thus
forming the deep trench ‘which separated the
Sortress from the adjacent hill (Bib. Researches,
1. 433, 434). The mere rd ieee of the place,
and its position immediately under the wall of
the sacred enclosure, strongly support this Lr pe
ture, so that we are still left to seek the Pool of
Bethesda, if indeed any trace of it now remains.
Dr. Robinson himself, without having any de-
finite conviction on the subject, asks whether the
Pool of Bethesda may not in fact be the ‘ Fountain
of the Virgin’? The question was suggested to his
mind by the exceedingly abrupt and irregular plan
of that fountain. He remarks—‘ We are told
that an angel went down at a certain Season into
the pool and troubled the water ;’ and then who-
soever first stepped in was made whole (John v.
2-7). There seems to bave been no special me


326 BETH-HORON.


dicinal virtue in the water itself, and only he
who first stepped in after the troubling was
healed. Does not this troubling of the water look
like the irregular plan of this fountain? And as
the Sheep-gate seems to have been situated not
far from the Temple (Neh. iii. 1, 32), and the
wall of the ancient Temple probably ran along
this valley ; may not that gate have been some-
where in this part, and the Fountain of the
Virgin correspond to Bethesda? the same as the
© King’s Pool’ of Nehemiah, and the ¢ Solomon's
Pool’ of Josephus? (Bibl. Researches, i. 518).
For an account of the Fountain to which these
inquiries relate, we must refer to the article on
the Fountain, with which that of the Virgin is
closely connected [S1.0am, Poot. or].


BETH-HORON (j)11 NR ; Sept. Ba:dupdy):
two places of this name are distinguished in
Scripture as the Upper and Nether Beth-horon
(Gosh. xvi, 3,55 xvii, 13; 1 Chron. vii. 24). The
Nether Beth-horon lay in the N.W. corner of
Benjamin; and between the two places was a
ee called both the ascent and descent of Beth-

oron, leading from the region of Gibeon (el-Jib)

down to the western plain (Josh. xviii. 13, 145
x. 10, 11; 1 Macc. iii. 16, 24). Down this pass
the five kings of the Amorites were driven by
Joshua (Josh. x. 11). The upper and lower
towns were both fortitied by Solomnon (1 Kings
ix. 17; 2 Chron. viii. 5). At one of them Nicanor
was attacked by Judas Maccaba-us; and it
was afterwards fortified by Bacchides (1 Mace.
vii. 39, seg.; ix. 50; Joseph. Antig. xii. 10.55
xiii, 1. 3). Cestius Gallus, the Roman pro-
consul of Syria, in his march from Cwsarea to
Jerusalem, after having burned Lydda, ascended
the mountain by Beth-lLoron and encamped near
Gibeon (Joseph. De Bell. Jud. ii. 19.1). Dr.
Robinson collects from these intimations that in
ancient times, as at the present day, the great
road of communication and of heavy transport be-
tween Jerusalem and the sea-coast was by the
pass of Beth-horon (Bibl. Researches, iii. 61).

In the time of Eusebius and Jerome the two
Beth-horons were smal] villages; and, according
to them, the Upper Beth-horon was 12 Roman
miles from Jerusalem: according to Josephus,
it was 100 stadia from thence, and 50 stadia from
Gibeon. From the time of Jerome the place
appéars to have been unnoticed till 1801, when
Dr. E. D. Clarke recognised it in the present
Beit-Ur (Travels, vol. i. pt. ii. p. 625); after
which it appears to have remained unvisited
till 1838, when the Rev. J. Paxton, and, a few
days after, Dr. Robinson, arrived at the place.
The Lower Beit-Ur is upon the top of a low ridge,
which is separated by a wady, or narrow valley,
from the foot of the mountain upon which the
Upper Beit-Ur stands, Both are now inhabited
villages. The lower is very small, but forndations
of large stones indicate an ancient site— doubtless
that of the Nether Beth-horon. The Upper Beit-
Ur is likewise small, but also exhibits traces of
ancient walls and foundations. In the steep ascent
to it the rock is in some parts cut away, and the
path formed into steps, indicating an ancient
road. On, the first offset or step of the ascent are
foundations of huge stones, the remains perhaps
of a castle that once guarded the pass.

It is remarkable that the places are still dis-


BETH-LEHEM.


tinguished as Beit-Ur el-Foka (the Upper), and
Beit-Ur el-Tahta (the Lower), and theie can be
no question that they represent the Upper and
Lower Beth-horon. ‘In the name,’ remarks Dr.
Robinson (iii. p. 59), ‘we find the rather unusual
change from one harsh Hebrew guttural to one
still deeper and more tenacious in Arabic ; in all
other respects the name, position, and other cir-
cumstances agree.’


BETH-LEHEM (DM) 1°, house or place


of bread, i.q. Bread-towon ; now Sw),


house of flesh; Sept. BnOdreeu),' a city of
Judah (Judg. xvii. 7), six miles southward from
Jerusalem, on the road to Hebron. It was gene
rally called Bethlehem-Judah, to distinguish it
from auother Bethlehem in Zebulun (Josh. xix.
15; Judg. xii. 10). It is also called Ephratah
(the fruitful), and its inhabitants Ephratites
(Gen. xlviii. 7; Mic. v. 2 Bethlehem is chiefly
celebrated as the birth-place of David and of
Christ, and as the scene of the Book of Ruth.
It was fortified by Rehoboam (2 Chron. xi. 6);
but it does not appear to have been a place
of much importance; for Micah, extolling the
moral pre-eminence of Bethlehem, says, ‘ Thou,
Bethleem Epbratah, though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah, &c. (Mic. v. 2).
Matthew quotes this as— and thou, Bethlehem of
Judah, art not the least of the cities of Judah,’
&c. (Matt. ii. 6). which has the appearance of a
discrepancy. ut it is answered that a city
may be litte, without being the least; or that
the evangelist may have quoted from memory,
and hence the slight ditlerence in expression, while
the sense remains the same.

There never has been any dispute or doubt
about the site of Bethlehem, which has always
been an inhabited place, and, from its sacred
associations, has been visited by an unbroken
series of pilgrims and travellers. It is now a
large village, beautifully situated on the brow of
a high hill, which commands an extensive view
of the surrounding mountainous country, and
rises in parterres of vineyards, almond-groves
and fig plantations, watered hy gentle rivulets
that murmur through the terraces; and is diver
sitied by towers and wine-presses. It is a strag-
gling village, with one broad and principal street.
The houses have not domed rvofs like those of
Jerusalem and Rumla, they are built for the most
part of clay and bricks; and every house is pro-
vided with an apiary, the beehives of which are
constructed of a series of earthen pots, ranged on
the house-tops. The inhabitants are said to be
3000, and were all native Christians at the time
of the most recent visits; for Ibrahim Pasha, tind-
ing that the Moslem and Christian inhabitants
were always at strife, caused the former to with-
draw, and left the village in quiet possession of
the latter, whose numbers had always greatly pre-
dominated (Wilde's Narrative, ii. p. 411). e
chief trade and manufacture of the inhabitants
consist of beads, crosses, and other relics, which
are sold at a great profit. Some of the articles,
wrought in mother-of-pearl, are carved with more
skill than one would expect to find in that remote
quarter; and the wdtkmanship in some instances
would not discredit the artists of Britain. The
people are said to be remarkable for their ferocity


BRTH-LEHEM.


and radeness, which is indeed the common char,
sacter of the inhabitants of most of the places
accounted holy in the East.

At the farthest extremity of the town is the
Latin convent, connected with which is the
Church of the Nativity, said to have been built
by the empress Helena. It has suffered much
from time, but still bears manifest traces of its
Grecian origin; and is alleged to be the most
chaste architectural building now remaining
in Palestine. It is # spacious and handsome
hall, consisting of a central nave amid aisles
separated from each other by rows of tall Corin-
than pillars of grey marble. As there is no ceil-
ing, the lofty roof is exposed to view, and although
composed of the cedars of Lebanon, is still in
good preservation, and affords a fine specimen of
the architecture of that age. Two spiral stair-
eases lead to the cave called the ‘Grotto of the
Nativity,’ which is about 20 feet below the level
of the church. This cave is lined with Italian
marbles, and lighted by numerous lamps. Here
the pilgrim is conducted with due solemnity
toa star inlaid in the marble, marking the exact
spot where the Saviour was born, and corre-
sponding to that in the firmament occupied by
the meteor which intimated that great event; he
is then led to one of the sides, where, in a kind of
recess, a little below the level of the rest of the
floor, is a block of white marble, hollowed out in
the form of a inanger, and said to mark the place
of the one in which the infant Jesus was laid.
His attention is afterwards directed to the ‘ Se-
palchre of the Innocents ;’ to the grotto in which
St. Jerome passed the greater portion of his life;
and to the chapels dedicated to Joseph and other
saints. There fins been much controversy respect-
ing the claims of this grotto to be regarded as the

lace in which our Lord was born. Tradition is in
Its favour, but facts and prohnbilities are against it,
It is useless to deny that there is much force in a
tradition regarding a locality (more than it would
have in the case of an historical fact), which can
be traced up toa period not remote from that
of the event commemorated; and this event was
so important as to make the scene of it a point of
such unremitting attention, that the knowledge
of the epot was not likely to be lost. This view
would be greatly strengtliened if it could be satis-
factorily proved that Adrian, to cast odium upon
the mysteries of the Christian religion, not only
erected statues of Jupiter and Venus over the
holy sepulchre and on Calvary, but placed one
of Adonis over the spot of the Nativity at Beth-
lehem. This part of the evidence is examined
under another head [Canvary]. Ayainst tradi-
tion, whatever may be its value in the present
case, we have to place the utter improbability that
& subterranean cavern like this, with a steep
descent, should ever have been used as a stable
for cattle, and, what is more, for the stable of a
khan or caravanserai, which doubtless the ‘inn’
of Luke ii. 7 was. Although therefore it is true
that cattle are, and always have been, stabled in
caverns in the East; yet certainly not in such
caverns as this, which appears to have been origin-
allyatomb, Old empty tombs often, it is argued,
afford shelter to man and cattle; bnt such was
hot the case among the Jews, who held themselves
ceremonially defiled by contact with sepulchres.

Besides, the circumstance of Christ's having been


BETHPHAGE. mm


born in a cave would not have been less remsark-
able than his being laid in a manger, and was
more likely to have been noticed by the evangelist,
if ithad occurred: and it is also to be observed
that the present grotto is at some distance from
the town, whereas Christ appears to have been
born in the:town, and whatever may be the case
in the open country, it has never been usual in
towns to employ caverns as stables for cattle. To
this we may add the suspicion which arises from
the fact, that the local traditions seem to connect
with caverns almost every interesting event re-
corded in Scripture, as if the ancient Jews had
been a nation of troglodytes [Caves]. Under all
these circumstances, perhaps the most solid interest
connected with the so-called ‘ Cave of the Na-
tivity,’ is to be found in the long abode in the
convent of so eminent a father as the learned
Jerome; and in the fact that there most of his
great and useful works were com

On the north-east side of the town isa d
valley, alleged to be that in which the ange’
apueare to the shepherds announcing the birth
of the Saviour (Luke ii. 8). In the sume valley
is a fountain, said to be that for the water of
which David longed, and which three of his
mighty men procured for him at the hazard of
their lives (2 Sam. xxiii, 15-18). Dr. Clarke
stopped and drank of the delicious water of this
fountain, and from its correspondence with the
intimations of the sacred historian and of Jo-
sephus, as well as from the permanency of natural
fountains, he concludes that there can be no doubt
of its identity. '

There are accounts of Bethlehem in nearly all
books of travels in Palestine. The best of modern
date are those of Clarke, Wittman, Richardson,
Buckingham, Hardy, Elliot, Wilde, Robinson,
Paxton, Olin, Prokesch, Richter, Schubert (see
also Raumer's Paldstina, pp. 307-313).

BETH-NIMRA (76192 1°); Sept. Bawée


vaBpd; or simply Nira, IVY); Sept. Naupd),
a town in the tribe of Gad (Num. xxxii. 3, 36;
Josh. xiii. 27), which Eusebius (who calls it Beth-
nabris, BnOvaBpls) places five Roman miles north
of Livias. This leaves no doubt of its being the
same ruined city called Nimrin, south of Szalt,
which Burckhardt mentions (Syria, p. 355) as
situated near the point where the Wady Shoeb
joins the Jordan. Dr. Robinson understood that
there was here a fountain corresponding to ‘ the
waters of Nimra’ (Isa. xv. 6; Jer. xlviii. 34).


BETHPHAGE (Bndpayh; Syr. Lae Amo;


Heb. NID MQ, house of figs ; comp. Cant. ii.
13), a small village, which our Lord, coming
from Jericho, appears to have entered before
reaching Bethany (Matt. xxi. 1; Luke xix. 29);
it probably, therefore, lay near the latter place,
a little below it to the east. The site usuall
assigned to it beyond Bethany in the same di-
rection, and between it and the Mount of Olives,
cannot be correct, nor does any trace of Beth-
phage now exist (Robinson, ii. 103). The name
occurs often in the Talmud; and the Jewish
glossarists induced Lightfoot (Chorog. Cent. ch.
xli.) and Otte (Ler. Rabb. p. 101, sg.) tu regard
it as a district extending from the foot of the
Mount of Olives to the precincts of Jerusalem,
and including the village of the same name.


as BETHSAIDA.
_ BETH-REHOB. [Raxos.]
BETHSAIDA (ByGouidd ; Syr. Im had


Fishing-Tovwn), a town (wéais, John i. 45; xdpn,
Mark viii. 23) in Galilee (John xii. 21), on the
western side of the sea of Tiberias, towards the
middle, and not far from Capernaum (Mark vi.
45; viii. 22). It was the native place of Peter,
Andrew, and Philip, and the frequent residence
of Jesus, This gives some notion of the neigh-
bourhood in which it lay; but the precise site is
utterly unknown, and the very name has long
eluded the search of travellers. The last histori-
cal notice of it is by Jerome, but he affords no
more information than may be derived from the
intimations in the New Testament. It is true that
Pococke (ii. p. 99) finds Bethsaida at Irbid ; Seet-
zen at Khan Minyeh (Zach's Monath. Corresp.
xviii. 348); Nau at Mejdel ( Voyage, p. 578; Qua-
resmius, tom. ii. 866), apparently between Khan
Minyeh and Mejdel; and others at Tabighah—
all different points on the western shore of the
lake. But Dr. Robinson expresses his delibe-
rate persuasion that these identifications can have
no better foundation than the impression of the
moment. He inquired perseveringly among the
natives along the western border of the lake;
but no Moslem knew of any such name, or any
name that could be moulded into a resemblance
to it. The Christians of Nazareth and Tiberias
are indeed acquainted with the name, as well as
that of Capernaum, from the New Testament;
and they have learned to apply them to different
places according to the opinions of their monastic
teachers, or as may best suit their own conveni-
ence in answering the inquiries of travellers. It
is thus that Dr. Robinson (Bibl. Researches, iii.
295) accounts for the fact that travellers have
sometimes heard the names along the lake. When-
ever this has not been the consequence of direct
leading questions, which-an Arab would always
answer allirmatively, the names have doubtless
heen heard from the monks of Nazareth, or from
the Arabs in a greater or less degree dependent
upon them.

2. BETHSAIDA.  Chirist fed the 5009 ¢ near
to a city called Bethsaida’ (Luke ix. 10); but
it is evident from the parallel passages (Matt.
xiv. 13; Mark vi. 32-45), that this event took
place not in Galilee, but ou the eastern side
of the lake. This was held to be one of the
greatest difficulties in sacred geography (Cellar.
Notit. Orb. ii, 536), till the ingenious Reland
afforded materials fur a satisfactory solution of it,
by distinguishing taco Bethsaidas; one on the
western, and the other on the north-eastern border
of the lake (Palestina, p. 653). ‘The former was
undoubtedly ‘the city of Andrew and Peter ;’
and, although Reland did not himself think that
the other Bethsaida is mentioned in the New Tes-
tarment, it has been shown by later writers that it is
in perfect agreement with the sacred text to con-
clude that it was the Bethsaida near which Christ
fed the five thousand, and also, probably, where
the blind man was restored to sight. This, and
not the western Bethsaida (as our English writers
persist in stating), was the Bethsaida of Gaulo-
nitis, afterwards called Julias, which Pliny (J/ist.
Nat. xv.) places on the eastern side of the lake
and of the Jordan, and which Josephus describes
as situated in lower Gaulonitis, just above the en-


-BETH-SHAN,


trance of the Jordan into the lake (De Bell. Jud,
ii. 9. 15 iii, 10. 7). It was originally only a
village, called Bethsaida, but was rebuilt and
enlarged by Philip the Tetrarch not long after
the birth of Christ, and received the name of
Julias in honour of Julia the daughter of Augus-
tus (Luke iii, 1; Joseph. Antig. xviii. 2 1).
Philip seems to have made it his occasional resi-
dence; and here he died, and was buried in a
costly tomb ae xviii. 4.6). At the northern
end of the lake of Gennesareth, the mountains
which form the eastern wall of the valley through
which the Jordan enters the lake throw out a spur or
promontory, which extends for some distance south-
ward along the river. This is known by the
people on the spot by no other name than el Tell
(the hill), On it are some ruins, which were vi-
sited by the Rev. Eli Smith, and proved to be the
most extensive of any in the plain. The place is
regarded as a sort of capital by the Arabs of the
valley (the Ghawarineh), although they have lost
its ancient name, and now occupy only a few
houses in itas magazines. The ruins cover a large
rtion of the Tell, but consist entirely of un-
ewn volcanic stones, without any distinct trace
ofancient architecture (Robinson, Bidl. Researches,
iii. 308; Winer, Bibl. Realwort. s, v. ‘ Beth-
saida’).


BETH-SHAN ({NU N'3, house of rest, or
Rest- Town; Sept. Ba:éody), a city belonging to the
half-tribe of Manasseh, west of the Jordan, and
situated in a valley of that river, where it is
bounded westward by a low chain of the Gilboa
mountains. It is on the road from Jerusalem to
Damascus, and is about two miles frum the Jordan,
eighteen from the southern end of Lake Gennesa-
reth, and twenty-three from Nazareth. It also bore
thename of Scythopolis, perhaps because Scythians
had settled there in the time of Josiah (.c. 631),
in their passage through Palestine towards Egypt
(Herod. i. 205; comp. Pliny, Hist. Nat. v. 16,
20; Georg. Syncellus, p. 214). This hypothesis
is supported by 2 Mace. xii. 30, where mention
is made of ‘ Jews who lived among the Scythiang
(in Bethshan’); and by the Septuagint version
of Judg. i. 27; Badody, } cor: Xxv0av wédis. In
Judith iii, 2, the place is also called Sxu0avr
wéAis, and #0 likewise by Josephus and others,
The supposition that these were descendants of*
the Scythians in Palestine, renders more intel-
ligible Coloss. iii. 11, where the Scythian is
named with the Jew and Greek; and it also ex-
plains why the ancient Rabbins did not consider
Scythopolis as a Jewish town, but as oue of an
unholy people (Havercamp. Observat. ad Joseph.
Antig. v. 1. 22). On coins the place is called
Scythopolis and Nysa, with figures of Bacchus
and the panther (Eckhel, pp. 438-440; comp.
Reland, p. 993, sq.). As Succoth lay somewhere
in the vicinity, east of the Jordan, some would
derive Scythopolis from Succuthopolis (Reland,
p. 992, sg.; Gesenius in Burckhardt, p. 1053,
German edit.). It is alsa not improbably supposed
to be the same as Beth-Sitta (Judg. vii. 22).

Josephus does not account Scythopolis as be-
longing to Samaria, in which it geographically
lay; but to Decapolis, which was chiefly on the
other side of the river, and of which he calls it the
largest town (De Bell. Jud. iii. 9. 7).

Although Bethshan was assigned to Manassela


BETH-SHEMESH.


(Jush. xvii. 11), it was not conquered by that
tribe (Judg. i. 17). The body of Saul was fas-
tened to the wall of Bethshan by the Philistines
(1 Sam. xxxi. 10); Alexander Janneus had an in-
terview here with steal re (Joseph. Antig. xiii. 13.
3); Pompey marched through it on his way from
Damascus ty Jerusalem (xiv. 3. 4); and in the
Jewish war 13,000 Jews were slain by the Scytho-
politans (De Bell. Jud. ii. 18.3). In the middle
the place had become desolate, although
it still went by the name of Metropolis Palestina
tertia (Will. Tyr. pp. 749, 1034; Vitriacus,
p- 1119). We find bishops of Scythopolis at the
councils of Chalcedon, Jerusalem (a.p. 546), and
others. During the Crusades it was an arch-
bishopric, which was afterwards transferred to
Nazareth (Raumer’s Palastina, 147-149).
The ancient native name, as well as the town
itself, still exists in the Beisan of the present day.
It stands on a rising ground somewhat above the
valley of the Jordan, or in the valley of Jezreel
where it opens into the Jordan valley. It isa
poor place, containing not more than sixty or
seventy houses. The inhabitants are Moslems,
aud are described by Richardson and others as a
wt of inhospitable and lawless fanatics. The
rains of the ancient city are of considerable ex-
tent. It was built along the banks of the rivulet
which waters the town and in the valleys formed
by its several branches, and must have been nearly
three miles in circumference. The chief remains
are large heaps of black hewn stones, with many
foundations uf houses and fragments of a few co-
lumns (Burckhardt, p. 243). The principal ob-
ject is the theatre, which is quite distinct, but
now completely filled up with weeds; it measures
across the front about 180 feet, and has the singu-
larity of possessing three oval recesses half-way up
the building, which are mentioned by Vitruvius
as being constructed to contain the brass sounding-
tubes. Few theatres had such an apparatus even
in the time of this author, and they ure scarcely
ever met with now. The other remains are the
tombs, which lie to the north-east of the Acrupolis
without the walls. The sarcophagi still exist in
some of them; triangular niches for lainps have
also been oliserved in them; and some of the
doors continue hanging on the ancient hinges
of stone in remarkable preservation. Two
streams run through the ruins of the city, al-
most insulating the Acropolis. There is a fine
Roman bridge over the one to the south-west of
the Acropolis, and beyond it may be seen the
paved way which led to the ancient Ptolemais,
now Acre. The Acropolis is a high circular
hill, on the top of which are traces of the walls
which encompassed it (Irby and Mangles, Tra-
vels, pp. 301-303).


BETH-SHEMESH (9Y M3, house of the
aun, ig. Sun-town; Sept. Badoapts), a sacer-
dotal city (Josh. xxi. 16; 1 Sam. vi. 15; 1
Chron. vi, 59) in the tribe of Judah, on the
oe) border of Dan (Josh. xv. 10), and the
Lind of the Philistines (1 Sam. vi. 12), probably
in a low-land plain (2 Kings xiv. 1);
placed by Eusebius ten Roman miles from Eleu-

trevpolis, in the direction of the road to Nico-

Ee lt belonged at an early date to the Phi-

tines, and they had again obtained 100
of it in the time of Ahaz (1 Kings iv. 9; 2 Chron.


.


BETHULIA. 329
xxviii. utes It was to this place that the ark was
taken milch kine from the land of the Philis
tines, and it was here that, according to the present
text, ‘fifty thousand and threescore and ten men”
were miraculously slain for irreverently exploring
the sacred shrine (1 Sam. vi. 19). his number
has occasioned mach discussion. It appears likely
that the text has been ted in transcri

tion by an erroneous solution of an arithmetical
sign. The Syriac and Arabic have 5070 instead


we ee

of 50070 (OY instead of 3Y), and this statement
agrees with 1 Cod. Kemicott (comp. Gesenius
Gesch. der Hebr. Sprache, p. 174). Even with
this reduction, the number, for a provincial town
like Beth-Shemesh, would still be great. The
fact itself has been accounted for on natural prin-
ciples by some German writers, in a spirit at
variance with that of Hebrew antiquity, and in
which the miraculous part of the event has been
explained away by ungrammatical interpreta-
tions.

At the distance, and in the vicinity indicated
by Eusebius and Jerome, a place called Ain
Shems was found by Dr. Robinson, and, with
great probability, identified with Beth-Shemesh.
The name is applied to the ruins of an Arab vil-
lage chasteabted of ancient materials. To the
west of the village, upon and around the plateau of
a low swell or mound, are the vestiges of a former
extensive city, consisting of many foundations
and the remains of ancient walls of hewn stone.
With respect to the exchange of Beth for Ain,
Dr. Robinson temarks (iii. 19) :—‘ The words Beit
(Beth) aud Ain are so very common in the Arae
bic names of Palestine, that it can excite no wone
der there should be an exchange, even without
an obvious reason. In the same manner the an-
cient Beth-Shemesh (Heliopolis, of Egypt) is
known in Arabian writers as Ain Shems.’ The
Ir-Shemesh of Joshua (xix. 4) is su to be the
same as this Beth-Shemesh, 2. fi ere was ano-
ther Beth-Shemesh in Naphtali (Judg. i. 33).
3. Another in Issachar (Josh. xix. 22). 4. And
the Egyptian Beth-Shemesh is named in Jer.
xiii, 13; although usually called Qu.


BETHUEL (D813 ; Sept. Bafovfa), son of
Abraham's brother Nahor, and father of Laban
and of Rebecca, whom Isaac married (Gen. xxii.
22, 23). His name only occurs incidentally
(Gen. xxiv. 50) in the account of the transactions
which led.to that marriage, in which Laban takes
the leading part. This has given occasion to a
number of uncertain conjectures, Josephus con-
cludes that he was then dead; and that the Be-
thuel here mentioned was a younger brother,
named after the father (Antig. i. 16. 1).


BETHULIA (Bervaota; Heb. ™3N3), a
lace mentioned only in the Apocryphal book of
Sadith (iv. 5; vii. 1, 3), and which appears to
have lain near the plain of Esdraelon on the south,
not far from Dothaim, and to have guarded one
of the passes towards Jerusalem. Modern eccle-
siastical tradition identifies Bethulia with Safed,


and near the lake of Gennesareth. Travellers prior to


the seventeenth century usually give the name of
Bethulia to the Frank Mountain in Judea and
to the mins at its foot. Raumer has lately offered
a conjecture in favour of Sanur (Palast. p. 149).
But Dr. Robinson has intimated the inapplicability


330 BETH-ZUR,


of all these identifications (Bibl. Researches, ii,
172; iii. 152, 325), and we must be content to
regard the site of Bethulia as still undetermined.
BETH-ZUR (W¥N'}; Sept. BnOcotp), a
fown in the tribe of Judah (Josh. xv. 55), twenty
~ Roman miles from Jerusalem, on the road to
Hebron (Onomast. s. y. ‘ Beth-gur"), and conse-
ques two miles from the latter city. It was
lortitied by Reloboam (2 Chron. xi. 7). The
inhabitants assisted in building the walls of Jeru-
salem (Neh. iii. 16). SLysias was defeated in
the neighbourhood by Judas Maccabeus, who
fortifiet the place as a stronghold azainst Idu-
mea (1 Macy iv. 29, 61; 2 Macc. xi. 5; comp.
1 Mace. vi. 7, 26). It was besieged and taken
by Antiochus Eupator (1 Mace. vi. 31, 50), and
fortified by Bacchides (ix. 52), whose garrison
defended themselves against Jonathan Macca-
beus (x. 11); but it was taken and fortified by
his brother Simon (xi. 65, 66; xiv. 7, 33).
Josephus calls Beth-zur the strongest fortress in
Judea (Antig. xiii. 5. 6). Its site has not been
ascertained. The traditional Beth-zur, near Beth-
Yehem, where the fountain (of St. Philip) at which
the Ethiopian eunuch was baptized is pointed out
(Cotovic, p. 247; Pococke, ii. 67; Maundrell,
yp. 116}, cannot be the real place: for, as we have
seen, Eusebius places it much more to the sonth,
and is in this supported by its history, which
shows that it lay on what was the southern border
of the Jordan, in the time of the Maccabees, when
the Idumeans had taken possession of the south-
ernmost part of the country and made Hebron their
chief town. In those times, indeed, Beth-zur, or
Bethsaida, appears to have been the corresponding
fortress on the Jewish side of the fountain to that
of Hebron on the side of Idumiea, standing at a
short distance, and prohably over against it, as
many similar fortresses are found tu do at the
present day.
BETROTHING. [Marrraae.]
BETULLIA, anointed stones. (Srones.]
BETZAL (5Y3, in the plural DYSY3 betzalim)
occurs in Numbers xi. 5, where the Israelites
“murmur for the leeks, and the onions (betzalim),
and the garlick’ of Egypt. Though the ideuti-
fication of many Biblical plants is considered un-
certain, there can be no doubt that Betzal means
the commun onion, the Allium Cepa of botanists,
This 1s proved by its Arabic name, and its early
employment as an article of diet in Ezypt.
In the present day the onion, distinguished from
other species of Allium by its fistular leaves and
swelling stalks, is well known to be cultivated
in all parts of Europe and in must parts of
Asia. Its native country is not known; but it
is probable that some pait of the Persian region
may have first produced it in a wild. state, as
many species of Allium are found in the moun-
tainous chain which extends from the Caspian to
Cashmere, and likewise inthe Himalayan Moun-
tains. It is common in Persia, where it is
called piaz, and has been long introduced into
India, where it receives the same name. By


the Arabs it is called Clay bast or bassal,


under which name it is described in their works
on Materia Medica, in which the description
of xpdupvoy given by Diuscorides (ii. 18}) is
adopted. The Arabic is tuo similar to the He-


BEZER.


brew name to allow us to doubt that both were

originally the same word.

That the onion has long been cultivated in the
south of Europe and in the north of Asia, is evident
from the different kinds enumerated by Theo-
phrastus, which, he states, derived their names
chiefly from.the places where they were reared.
Among these, probably, some other species may
have been included; but no doubt several were
varieties only of the onion. Pliny (Hist. Nat,
xix. 6) also enumerates these, as well as others
cultivated in Italy, and notices the superstition of
the Eyyptians in regard to them: ‘Where, by the
way, I cannot overpasse the foolish superstition of
the Aigyptians, who use to swear by yarlick and
onions, calling them to witness in taking their
othes, as if they were no less than some gods’
(Holland's transl.). Juvenal (Saé. xv. 9) in like
manner ridicules the Egyptians for their supersti-
tious veneration of onions, &c. :

§ Porrum et cepe nefas violare et frangere morsu.
O sanctas gentes, quibus hee nascuntur in hortis
Numina!"

This, however. must be an exaggerated state:
ment, as it is unlikely that the Israelites should
have been allowed toregale themselves upon what
was considered too sacred for, or forbidden, tv theit
task-masters. It is probable, as suggested by Dr.
Harris, that the priests only refrained from what
was freely partaken of by the rest of the people.
This may be observed in the present day among
the Brahmins of India. It has also been sup-
Hepa that some particular kind of onion may
have been held sacred, from its utility as a medi-
cine, as the sea onion, or squill (Scilla mavitima),
which grows in abundance on the sea-coust in the
neighbourhood of Pelusium, whose inhabitants
are said by Lucian to have especially worshipned
the onion, But it is evident that the Israelites
in the desert did not long for this acrid bulb, as
they did for the melons and cucumbers.

It may, moreover, be remarked, that the onions
of warm dry countries grow to a considerable
size, and, instead of being acrid and pungent
in taste, are comparatively bland, and = mild
and. nutritious articles of diet. This is particu-
larly conspicuous in the Portugal onions, which
are largely imported into this country. Other
celebrated varieties are those of Spain and Tri-
poli; but Egypt itself is famed for the pro-
duction of fine onions, as stated by Hassel-
quist: ‘Whoever has tasted onions in Egypt,
must allow that none can be had better in any
part of the universe. Here they are sweet; in
other countries they are nauseous and strong. Here
they are soft; whereas in the northern and other
parts they are hard, and their coats are so com-
pact, that they are difticult of digestion. Hence
they cannot in any place be eaten with less pre-
judice and more satisfaction than in Egypt..—

J.F.R.

BEZEK (p13; Sept. Be(ér), a city over
which Adoni-lezek was king (Judg. i. 4, sq.),
and where Saul mustered his army to march
to the relief of Jabesh-Gilead (1 Sam. xi. &
Eusebins and Jerome mention two towns of this
name close together, seventeen miles from Nea
polis in Shechem, on the road to Bethshan.


BEZER (133; Sept. Boodp), a city beyond
the Jordan, in the tribe of Reuben, and one of the


- BIBLE.


six cities of refuge (Deut. iv. 43; Josh. xx. 8).
The site is unknown,
. BEZETHA. [Jerusavem.]

BIBLE, BiSAla, libelli (the small books), a
name supposed to have been first applied in the
fifth century to denote the collective volume of the
sacred writings. The word occurs in the Prologue
to Ecclesiasticus, ‘the Law, the Prophets, and the
Test of the books" (@:BAlay and 2 Tim. iv. 13,
Sand the buoks’ ene Betore the adoption of
this name the more usual terms in the Chiristian
Church by which the sacred bovks were denomi-
nated were, the Scripture or writing (ypapf), the
Scriptures (ypapal), the sacred writings (ypapal
&yu.), and the sacred letters (iepa ypdupara).
These names are thus frequently applied to the
sacred books of the Old Testament by Josephus
and Philo, as well as by the writers of the New
Testament (2 Pet. i. 20; Matt. xxii. 29; Rum.
i 2; 2 Tim. iii, 15). Jerome substitutes for
these expressions the term Bibliotheca Divina (see
Hieronymi Opera, ed. Martianay, vol. i. Proleg.),
a phrase which this leamed father probably bor-
rowed from 2 Maccabees, ii. 13, where Nehemiah
is said, in ‘founding a library’ (BiBAtoOjKn), to
have ‘ gathered“together the acts of the kings, and
the prophets, and of David, and the epistles of the
kings concerning the holy gifts." But although
it was usual to denominate the separate bovks in
Greek by the term Bibiia, which is frequently so
a ae by Josephus, we first find it simply ap-
plied W the entire collection by St. Chrysostom
in his Second Homily, ‘The Jews have the dvoks
(BBAia), but we have the treasure of the Looks;
they have the letters (ypdupara), but we have both
spirit and letter.” And again Jom. ix. in Epist.
ad Coluss., ‘Provide yourselves with books (B:B-
Ma}, the medicine of the soul, but if you desire
no other, at least procure the new (xau), the
Apostolos, the Acts, the Gospels.” He alsu adds
to the word B.BAla the epithet divine inhis Tenth
Homily on Genesis: ‘Taking before and after
meals the divine books’ (ra eta BiBAla), or, us we
should now express it, the Holy Bible. This
name, in the course of time, superseded all others
both in the Eastern and Western Church, and is
now everywhere the popular appellation. The
sacred books were denominated by the Jews the
writing (chetib or mikra), a name of the same
character as that applied by the Mahometans
(korawn) to denote their sacred volume.

The Bible is divided into the Old and New
Testaments, 7 waAdatd, xa) 7 Kash S:a0hnn. The
tame Old Testament is applied to the books of
Moses by St. Paul (2 Cor. iii. 14), inasmuch as

the former covenant comprised the whule scheme
of the Mosaic revelation, and the history of this
is contained in them. This phrase, ‘book of the
covenant, taken probably from Exod. xxiv. 7;
1 Mace. i. 57 (B:BAlov d:aGhans), was transferred
in the course of time by a metunymy to signify
the writings themselves. The word d:a6f«n,
which we now translate testament, signifies either
a testament or a covenant, but the translators of
the old Latin version have by a Grecism always
rendered, it,even when it was used as a trans-
lation of the Hebrew Berith (covenant), by the
word Testamentum. The names given to the

Old Testament were, the Scriptures (Matt. xxi.

42}, Scripture (2 Pet. i. 20), the Holy Scriptures

‘Rom. i. 2), the sacred letters (2 ‘Tim. iii. 15),


BIRD-CAGES. 331


the holy bioks (Sanhed. xci. 2), the law (Johm
xii. 34), the law, the prophets, and the pealms
(Luke xxiv. 44), the law and the prophets (Matt.
v. 17), the law, the prophets, and the other books
Prol. Ecclus.), the Tooke of the old covenant
Neh, viii. 8), the book of the covenant (1
cc. i, 57; 2 Kings xxiii. 2). :

The other books (not in the canon) were call
apocryphal, ecclesiastical, and deuterucanonical.

he term New Testament has been in common
use since the third century, and is employed by
Eusebius in the same sense in which it is now
commonly applied (Hist. Eccles. iii. 23). Tertul-
lian employs the same phrase, and also that of
‘the Divine Instrument’ in the same signification.
For detailed information on subjects connected
with Bisig, see Scripture, Hoty.—W. W.

BIER. [Buriat]

BIGTHAN (193). an eunuch in the court
of king Ahasuerus, whose conspiracy against that
monarch was frustrated through the disclosures of
Mordecai (Esth. ii. 21).

BILDAD (T393 ; Sept. BaA8dB), the Shuhite,
one of the friends of Job, and the second of his oppo-
nents in the disputation (Job ii. 11; viii. 1; xviii.
1; xxv. 1). The Shuah, of which the Septuagint
makes Bildad the prince, or patriarch (Baaddd 6
Zavxéwy Tupayvos), was probably the district as-
signed to Shuah, the sixth son of Abraham by
Keturah, and called by his name. This was
doubtless in Arabia Petraa, if Shuah settled in the
same quarter as his brothers, of which there can be
little doubt; and to this region we are to refer the
town and district to which he gave his name, and
in which Bildad was doubtless a person of conse-
quence, if not the chief [Suuan]. Wemyss (Job
and his Times, p. 111) remarks :—‘ Bildad at-
tacks the poor sufferer with more keenness than
Eliphaz, but with less acerbity than Zophar. He
renews the charge which Eliphaz had advanced,
but with less eluquence and less delicacy. His
second address is full of imagery, and wrought up
to a high pitch of terror. He is filled with re-
sentment against Job, merely because the latter
defends himself from their criminations; and he
uses provoking and taunting expressions. His de-
hunciatiuns are furious and awful; yet he is
rather elevated than sublime, and more passionate
than energetic.’

BILHAH (73 ; Sept. Badad), the hand-
maid whom the childless Rachel bestowed upon
her husband Jacob, that through her she might
have children, Bilhah became the mother of
Dan and Naphtali (Gen. xxx. 1-8).

BIRD-CAGES are named in Jer. v. 27; Rev.
xviii. 2; and are perhaps implied in Job xli. 5,
where ‘ playing with a bird’ is mentioned. This
just suffices to show that the ancient Israelites kept
birds in cages; but we have no further informa-
tiun on the subject, nor’ any allusions to the singe


ing of hies so kept. The cages were probably
of the same forms which we still observe in the


333 BIRDS.


East, and which are shown in the annexed en-
graving. It is remarkable that there is no appear-
ance of bird-cages in any of the domestic scenes
which are portrayed on the mural tablets of the
Egyptians.

BIRD-CATCHING. [Fow:ina.]

BIRDS may be defined oviparous vertebrated
animals, organized for flight. The common
name DY ¢tsippor is used of small birds gene-
rally, and of the sparrow in particular; ))}) ‘oph,
translated ‘ fowl’ (Gen. i. 21), properly means
flyer; OY ait, a bird of prey; AETOX, an eagle ;
in Gen. xv. 11, Job xxviii. 7, and Isa. xviii. 6,
rendered ‘ fowls;’ in Jer. xii. 9, ‘ bird;’ and in
Isa. xlvi. 11, and Ezek. xxxix. 4, ‘ ravenous
birds.” D373 barburim denotes fatted gallina-
cea; it occurs only in 1 Kings iv. 23, and is there
translated ‘fowls,’ though it may be questioned
whether domestic fowls are mentioned in any part
of the Hebrew bible [Cock]. Gesenius applies
the word to geese.

In the Mosaic law birds were distinguished
as clean and unclean: the first being allowed for
the table, because they fed on grain, seeds, and
vegetables; and the second forbidden, because
they subsisted on flesh and carrion. ‘The birds
most anciently used in sacrifice were, it seems,
turtledoves and pigeons. In Kitto’s Physical
History of Palestine there is a more complete
Notice than exists elsewhere of the actual orni-
thology of the Holy Land.—C. H.S.

BIRDS'-NESTS. The law in Deut. xxii. 6,
7, directs that if one falls in with a bird's-nest
with eggs or young, he shall allow the dam to
escape, aud not take her as well as the nest. The
reasou Maimonides (Mure Nevochim) gives for
this is, ‘ The eggs on which the dani is sitting, or
the young ones which have need of her, ave not, in
general, permitted to be eaten; aud when the
dam is allowed to escape, she is not distressed by
seeing her young ones carried off. It thus fre-

uently happens that all are untouched, because

at which might be taken may not be lawfully
eaten.” Ile adds, ‘If the law then be thus careful
to prevent birds and beasts (for he had been al-
luding to the instances of this humanity of the
Jaw) from suffering pain and grief, how much
more mankind !*

BIRTH. In Eastern countries child-birth is
usually attended with much less pain and diffi-
culty than in our northern regions; although
Oriental females are not to be regarded as exempt
from the common doom of woman, ‘ in sorrow
shalt thou bring forth children’ (Gen. iii. 16). It
is however uncertain whether the diflerence arise
from the eflect of climate or from the circum-
stances attending advanced civilization ; perhaps
both causes operate, to a certain degree, in pro-
ducing the elect. Climate must have some eflect
but it is observed that the difficulty of child-biith,
under any climate, increases with the advance of
civilization, and that in any climate the class on
which the advanced condition of society most
operates finds the pangs of child-birth the most
severe. Such consideration may probably account
for the fact that the Hebrew women, after they
had Jong been under the influence of the Egyptian
climate, passed through the child-birth pangs
with much more facility than the women of Egypt,
whose habits of life were more refined and sel{-in-
dulgent (Exod. i. 19). There were, however,


BIRTH-DAYS.


already recognised Hebrew midwives while the
Israelites were in Egypt ; and their office appears
to have originated in the habit of calling in some
matron of experience in such matters to assist in
cases of difficulty. A remarkable circumstance
in the transaction which has afforded these illus
trations (Exod. i. 16) has been explained under
ABNAIM.

The child was no sooner born than it was
washed in a bath and rubbed with salt (Ezek.
xvi. 4); it was then tightly swathed or bandaged
to prevent those distortions to which the tender
frame of an infant is 6o much exposed during the
first days of life (Job xxxviil. 9; Ezek. xvi. 4;
Luke ii. 7, 11). This custom of bandaging or
swathing the new-born infant is general in
Eastern countries. It was also a matter of much
attention with the Greeks and Romans (see the
citations in Wetstein, at Luke ii. 7), and even
in our own country was not abandoned till the last
ceutury, when the repeated remonstrances of the
physicians seem to have led to its discontinuance.

It was the custom at a very ancient period for
the father, while music celebrated the event, to
clasp the new-born child to his m, and by
this ceremony he was understood to declare it to
be his own (Gen. 1. 23; Job. iii. 3; Ps. xxii. 11).
This practice was imitated by those wives who
adopted the children of their handmaids (Gen, xvi.
2; xxx. 3-5). The messenger who brought to
the father the first news that a son was born unto
him was received with pleasure and rewarded
with presents (Job iii. 3; Jer. xx. 15), as is still
the custom in Persia and other Eastern countries.
The birth of a daughter was less noticed, the dis-
appointment at its not being a son, subduing for
the time the satisfaction which the birth of any
child naturally occasions,

Among the Israelites, the mother, after the
birth of a son, continued unclean seven days ; and
she remained at home during the thirty-three days
succeeding the seven of uncleanness, forming alto-
gether forty days of seclusion. After the birth of
a daughter pe number of the days of unclean-
ness and seclusion at home was doubled. At the
expiration of this period she went into the taber-
nacle or temple, aud presented a yearling lamb,
or, if she was poor, two turtle doves and two
young pigeous, as a sacrifice of purification (Lev.
xii. 1-8 ; Luke ii. 22) (Capren}.

BIRTH - DAYS. The observance of birth-
days may be traced to a very ancient date; and
the birth-day of the first-Lorm son seems in parti-
cular to have been celebrated with a degree of
festivity proportioned to the joy which the event of
his actual birth occasioned (Job i. 4, 13,18). The
birth-days of the Egyptian kings were celebrated
with great pomp as eatly as the time of Joseph
(Gen. x1. 20). These days were in Egypt looked
upon as holy ; no business was done upon them,
and al] parties indulged in festivities suitable to
the occasion. Every Egyptian attached much
importance to the day, and even to the hour of
his birth; and it is probable that, as in Persia
(Herodot. i. 133; Xenoph. Cyrop. i. 3.9), each
individual kept his birth-day with great rejoicings,
welcoming his friends with all the amusements of
society, and a more than usual profusion of deli-
cacies of the table (Wilkinson, v. p. 290). In the
Bible there is no instance of birth-day celebra-
tions among the Jews themselves. The example


BIRTH-RIGHT.


of Herod the tetrarch (Matt. xiv. 6), the celebra-
tion of whuse birth-day cust John the Baptist his
life, can scarcely be regarded as such, the family
to which he belonged being notorious for its adop-
tion of heathen customs. In fact, the later Jews
at least regarded birth-day celebrations as parts of
idolatrons worship (Lighttoot, Hor. Hebr.ad Matt.
xiv. 6); and this probably on account of the idol

atrous rites with which they were observed in
honour of those who were regarded as the patron
gods of the day on which the party was born.


BIRTH-RIGHT (152 ; Sept. xpwrordmia).
This term denotes the rights or privileges belong-
ing to the first-born among the Hebrews. The
particular advantages which these conferred were
the following :—

1. A right to the priesthood. The first-born
became the priest in virtue of his priority of
descent, provided no blemish or defect attached
tohim. Reuben was the first-born of the twelve
patriarchs, and therefore the honour of the priest-
hood belonged to his tribe. God, however, trans-
ferred it from the tribe of Reuben to that of Levi
(Num. iii, 12, 13; viii. 18). Hence the first-
hom of the other tribes were redeemed frum serv-
ing God as priests, by a sum not exceeding five
shekels. Being presented before the Lord in the
teraple, they were redeemed immediately after
the thirtieth day from their birth (Num. xviii. 15,
16; Luke ii, 22). It is to be observed, that only
the first-born who were fit for the priesthood (1. e.
such as had no defect, spot, or blemish) were thus
presented to the priest.

2. The first-born received a double portion of
his father’s property. There is some difficulty in
determining precisely what is meant by a double
portion. Some suppose that half the inheritance
was received by the elder brother, and that the
other half was equally divided among the re-
maining brethren, This is not probable. The
Rabbins believe that the elder brother received
twice as much as any of the rest; and there is
no reason to donbt the correctness of this opi-
nion. When the first-born died before his father's
property was divided, and left children, the right
of the father descended to the children, and not to
the brother next of aze.

3. He succeeded to the official authority pos-
sessed Ly bis father. If the latter was a king, the
former was regarded as his legitimate successor,
unless some unusual event or arrangement inter-
fered.

Atter the law was given through Moses, the
right of primogeniture could not be transferred
from the first-born to a younger child at the fa-
ther’s option. In the patriarchal age, however,
it was in the power of the parent thus to convey
it from the eldest to another child (Deut. xxi.
15-17; Gen. xxv. 31, 32).

It is not difficult to perceive the reason why the
first-Lom enjoyed greater privileges than the rest of
the children. The jreuliae honour attaching to
them is easily accounted for. They are to be viewed
as having reference to the Redeemer, the first-born

oftheVirgin. Hence in the epistle to the Romans,

vil. 29, it is written concerning the Son, ¢ that

he might be the first-born among many brethren,’

ant in Coloss. i. 18, ‘who is the beginning, the
first-born from the dead; that in all things he

might have the pre-eminence’ (see also Heb. i. 4,


BISHOP. 333


5, 6). As the first-born had a double portion, so
the Lord Jesus, as Mediator, has an inheritance
superior to his brethren; he is exalted to the right
hand of the Majesty on high, where he reigns
until all his enemies shall be subdued. The
universe is his rightful dominion in his media-
torial character. Again, he alone is a true priest:
he fulfilled all the functions of the sacerdotal
office ; and the Levites, to whom, under the law,
the priesthood was transferred from all the first-
born of Israel, derived the etticacy of their mi- °
nistrations from their connection with the great


high priest (Jahn’s Biblical Archeology, § mea
s.


BISHOP. The active controversy in which the
subject of episcopacy has been involved, although
it has not reconciled conflicting opinions, has
brought out the historical facts in their fullest
cleamess, The able and candid on opposite sides
can scarcely be said to differ as to the facts them-
selves; but they differ in their estimate of them.

The Apostles originally appointed men to su-
periutend the spiritual, and occasionally even the
secular wants of the churches (Acts xiv. 23; xi.
30; see also 2 Tim. ii. 2), who were ordinarily
called pea Bdrepoi, elders, from their age, sume-
times emicxowoi, overseers (bishops), from their
oftice. They are also said rpoitctacOa, to pre-
side (1 Thess, v.12; 1 Tim. v.17), never &pxew,
to rule, which has far too despotic a sound. In
the Epistle to the Hebrews (xiii. 7, 17, 24)
they are named jyyoupevor, leading men (comp.
Acts xv, 22); and, figuratively, woméves, shep-
herds (Ephes. iv. 11). But that they did not
always teach is clear from 1 Tim. vy. 17; and
the name Elders proves that originally age, experi-
euce, and character were their most necessary
qualifications. They were to be married men
with families (1 Tim. iii. 4), and with converted
children (Tit. 1.6). In the beginning there had
been no time to train teachers, and teaching was
regarded far more in the light of a gift than an
oflice; yet St. Paul places ‘ability to teach’ among
episcopal qualitications (1 Tim. iii. 2; Titus i. 9;
the latter of which passages should be trans-
lated, ‘that he may be able both to exhort men
by sound teaching, and also to refute opposers).
That teachers had obtained in St. Paul's day a
fixed official position, is manifest from Gal. vi. 6,
and 1 Cor. ix. 14, where he claims for thema
right to worldly maintenance : in fact, that the
shepherds ordered to ‘feed the flock,’ and he its
‘overseers’ (1 Pet. v. 2), were to feed them with
knowledge and instruction, will never be dis-
puted, except to support a hypothesis, The
leaders also, in Heb. xiii. 7, are described as
‘speaking unto you the word of God.’ Eccle-
siastical history joins in proving that the two
offices of teaching and superintending were, with
few exceptions, combined in the same persons, as,
indeed, the nature of things dictated.

That during St. Paul's lifetime no difference
between elders and bishops yet existed in the con-
sciousness of the church, is manifest from the en-
tire absence of distinctive names (Acts xx. 17-28;
1 Pet. v. 1,2). The mention of bishops and
deacons in Phil. i. 1, and 1 Tim, iii., without
any Notice of elders, proves that at that time no
difference of order subsisted between bishops and
elders. A formal ceremony, it is generally be-


_ lieved, was employed in appointing elders, al-


334 BISHOP.


though it does not appear that as yet any fixed
name was appropriated to the idea of ordination,
The word ordained is inexcusably interpolated in

e English version of Act i, 22. In Tit. i. 5 the
Greek word is xatacrhons, set, or set up; and in
Acts xiv. 23 it is xe:porovharartes, having elected,
properly, by a show of hauds; though, abusively,
the term came to mean simply, having chosen or
nominated (Acts x. 41); yet in 2 Cor. viii. 19,
itseems to have its geuuine democratic sense).
In 1 Cor. xvi. 15 we find the house of Stephanas
to have volunteered the task of ‘ ministering to
the saints ;* and that this was a ministry of ¢ the
word,’ is evident from the Apostle’s urging the
church to submit themselves to such.’ It would
appear then that a formal investiture into the
ottice was not as yet regarded essential. Be this
as it may, no one doubts that au ordination by
laying ou of hands svon became gencral or uni-
versal. Hands were first laid on not to bestow
an office. but to solicit a spiritual gift (1 Tim.
iv. 14; 2 Tim. i. 6; Acts xiii. 3; xiv. 26; xv.
40). Tothe same effect Acts viii. 173 xix. 6;—
me whichexplain Heb. vi. 2. On the other

and, the abavlute silence of the Scriptures, even
if it were not contirmed, as it is, by positive tes-
timony, would prove that no idea of consecration,
as distinct from ordination, at that time existed
at all; and, consequently, although individual
elders may have really discharged functions
which would afterwards have been called episco-
pal, it was not by virtue of a second ordination,
nor, therefore, of episcopal rank.

The Apostles themselves, it is held by some,
were the real bishops of that day, and it is quite
evident that they performed many episcopal
functions. It may well be true, that the only
reason why no bishops (in the moderu sense) were
then wanting was, because the Apustles were
living; but it cannot be iuferred that in any strict
sense prelates are co-ordinate tn rank with the
Apostles, and can claim to exercise their powers.
The later ‘bishop’ did not cume forward as a
successor to the Apostles, but was developed out
of the presbyter; much less can it be proved, ur
alleged with plausibility, that the Apostles took
any measures for sectuing substitutes for them-
selves ‘in the high character of Apostles) after
their decease. It has Leen with many a favourite
notion that Timothy and Titus exhibit the epis-
copal type even during the life of Paul; but this
is an obvious misconception. They were attached
to the person of the Apostle, and not to any one
church, In the last Epistle written by lum
(2 Tim. iv. 9) he calls Timothy suddenly to
Rome, in words which prove that the latter was
not, at least as yet, bishop, cither of Ephesus or of
any other church. That Timothy was an cvan-
eg is distinctly stated (2 Tim. iv. 5), and that
ne had receive spiritual gifts (i. 6, &c.); there
is then no diflicnIty in accounting for the autho-
rity vested in him (1 Tim. v.13; xix. 22), with-
out imagining hin to have been a bishop; which
is in fact disproved even by the same Fives
(i. 3). That Titus, morever, had no local at-
tachment to Crete, is plain from Titus ili. 13, to
say nothing of the earlier Epistle, 2 Cor. passtm.
Nor is it true that the episcopal power developed
itself out of wandering evangelists any more than
out of the Apostles.

On the other hand it would seem that the


BISHOP.


bishop began to elevate himself above the pres
byter while the Apostle John was yet alive, and
in churches to which he is believed to have pecu-
harly devoted himself. The meaning of the title
angel, in the opening chapters of the Apocalyyse,
has been mystically expluined by some; but its
true meauing is clear from the nomenclature of
the Jewish synagoznes. In them, we are told,
the minister who ordinarily led the prayers of the
congregation, besides acting as their chief funce


fionary in matters of business. was entitled mbes
WIAA [Syxagoaur}., a name which may be
translated literally nuscius ecclesia, aud is here
expressed by the Greek dyyedos. The substane
tive naxdo also (which by analogy would be


rendered ayyeAla, as qwbn is dyyedos) has the
ordinary seuse of opus, ministerium, making it
almost certain that the ‘anyels of the churches*
are nothing but a harsh Hebraism for ¢ ministers
of the churches.’ We therefore here see a single
officer, in these rather large Christian communi-
ties, elevated into a peculiar prominence, which
has been justly regarded as episcopal. Nor does
it signify that the authorship of the Apocalypse
is disputed, since its extreme antiquity is beyand
a doubt: we find, therefore, the gerin of episco-
pacy here planted, as it were, ander the eyes of
an Apostle. (Neander, Pflunzung und Leitung,
ii. 468.)

Nevertheless, it was still but a germ. It is
vain tu ask, whether these angels received a second
ordination and had been promoted from the rank of
presbyters. That this was the case is possible, but
there is no proof of it; and while some will regard
the question as decply interesting, others will think
it unimportant. A second question is, whether the
angels were overseers of the congregation only,
or of the presbyters too; and whether the church
was formed of many local unions (such as we
call parishes), or of one. Peilays both questions
unduly imply that a set of fixed rules was al-
ready in existence. No one who reads P.ul’s
own account of the rebuke he uttered azainst
Peter (Gal. ii.), need doubt that in those days a
zealons elder would assume autherity over other
elders, officially his equals, when he thought they
were dishonouring tie Gospel; and, @ fortiori,
he would act thus towards an official “inferior,
even if this had not previously been defined or
understood as his duty, Su again, the Christians
of Ephesus or Miletus were probably too numer-
ous ontinarily to meet ina single assembly, expe
cially before they had large buildings erected: for
the purpose; and convenience must have Jed ata
very early period to subordinate assemblies (such
as would now be called ‘ chapels-of-ease" to. the
mother church); yet we have no ground for sup-
posing that auy sharp division of the Church into
organic portions had yet commenced.

Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Congrega-
tionalists azree in one point, viz. that (because
of its uiility and general convenience) it is law-
fal for Christians to take a step for which they
have no clear precedent in the Scripture, that of
breaking up a church, when it becomes of un-
wieldy magnitude, into fixed divisions, whether
parishes, or congregations, The question then
arises, whether the organic union is to be still
retained at all. To this (1) Congregationalists
reply in the negative, saying that the congrega-


BITHRON.


tions in different parts of a great city no more
need to be in organic union, than those of two
different cities; (2) Presbyterians would keep
up the union by means of a synod of the elders;
(3) Episcopalians desire to unite the separate
churches by retaining them under the supervision
of a single heal—the bistop. It seems impos-
sible to refer to the practice of the Apostles as
deciding in favonr of any one of these methods;
for the case had not yet arisen which could have
Jed to the discussion. The city churches had
not yet become so laryze as to make subdivision
positively necessary ; and, as a fact, it did not
take place. To organize distant churches into
a fixed and formal connection by synods of their
bishops, was, of course, quite a later process; but
such unions are by no means rejected, even by
Congrezationalists, as loug as they are used for
deliteration and advice, not as assemblies for
ruling and commanding. The spirit of Episco-
pacy depends far Jess on the episcopal form itself,
than on the size and wealth of dioceses, and on
the union of bishops into synods, whose decisions
are tobe authoritative on the whole church: to
fay nothing of territorial establisliment and the
Supjert of the civil government. If, under any
ecclesiastical form, either oppression or disorder
should arise, it cannot be deteuded ; but no form
Wasecurity against such evils. Our experience
Tay. iu these later times, possibly show us which
of these systems is on the whole preferable; but
the discussion must belong to ecclesiastical his-
tory, and would be quite out of place here.—
F.W.N,
BITHRON (2 Sam. ii. 29), This name has
same meaning as Bether. It probably denotes
aregion of hills and valleya, and nut any defi-
mite place,
BITHYNIA (Biduvia), a province of Asia
Minor, on the Euxine Sea and the Propontis ;
hounded on the west by @lysia, on the south and
cat hy Phrygia ahd Galatia, and on the east by
Paphlagunia. The Bithyuians were a rude and
uncivilized people, Thracians who had colonized
this part of Asia, and occupied no towns, but lived
Mi cillages (kwpomoAeis, Strabo, p- 566). That
Christian congregations were formed at an early
period in Bithynia, is evident trom the Apostle
ae having aduressed the tirst of his Epistles to
hem (1 Pet.i.1). The Apostle Paul was at one
time Jichined to go into Bithynia with his assist-
a Silas and Tinothy, ‘ but the Spirit suffered
Hn not’ (Acts xvi. 7).
F BITTER, BITTERNESS. Bitterness (Exod.
ee Ruth i, 205 Jer. ix. 15) is symbolical of
‘cton, misery, and servitude. It was for this
Teason that, in the celebration of the Passover, the
*erviiude of the Israelites in Egypt was typically
Tepresenited, by bitter herbs.
n the day of bitterness in Amos viii. 10,
comp. Tibullus, ii. 4. L1—
In Ha ae dics, ct noctis amarior umbra est.’
bitter vakk, 1.6 the Chald:raus are called ‘that
ich swift nation ;’ which Schultens illus-
anne 'Y remarking that the root Merer in Arabic
a tian to the Hebrew word for bitter) is
a) applied to strength and courage.
a gall of bitterness (Acts viii. 23) describes
¢ of extreme wickediess, highly offensive to
1 and hurtful to others.


A root of bitterness (Heb. xiii15) expresses


’


BLACK. 335


a wicked or scandalous person, or any dangerous
sin leading to apostacy (Wemyas's Clavis Symbo-
lica, &e.).

BITTER HERBS (O'V; literally ditters ;
Sept. wiepides; Vuly. lactuce agrestes), There
has been much difference of opinion respecting
the kind of herbs denoted by this word. On this
subject the reader may consult Carpzov, Apparat.
p. 404, sq.

It however seems very doubtful whether any
particular herbs were intended by so general a
term as bitters; it is far more probable that it
denotes whatever bitter herbs, obtainable in the
place where the Passover was eaten, might be fitly
used with meat. This seems to be established by
the fact that the first directions respecting the
Passover were given in Egypt, where also the
first Passover was celebrated ; and as the esculent
vegetables of Egypt are very diflerent from those
of Palestine, it is obvious that the bitter herbs used’
in the first celebration could scarcely have been
the same as those which were afterwards em-
ployed for the same purpose in Canaan. Ac-
cording to the Mishna (J’esachim, ii. 6), and the
commentators thereon, there were five sorts of
bitter herbs, any one or all of which might be used
on this occasion. There were—1. MUM chazereth,
supposed to be wild lettuce, which the Septuagint
and Vulgate make stand for the whole. 2. pod
‘ulshin, endives; or, according to some, wild
endives. 3. ADON thamca, which some make
the garden endive, others horehound, others tansy,
others the green tops of the horse-raddish, while,
according to De Pomis, in Zemach David, it is
no other than a species of thistle (carduus marra-
bium). 4. HYIMIN charchadina, supposed to
be a kind of nettle. 5. WWD maror, which takes
its name from its bitterness, and is alleged by the
Mishnic commentators to be a species of the most
bitter coriander, All these might, according to
the Mishna, be taken either fresh or dried; but
not pickled, boiled, or cooked in any way.

BITTERN. [Kuiprop.]

BITUMEN. [Aspua.tum.]

BLACK. Although the Orientals do not wear
black in mourning, they, as did the ancient Jews,
regard the colour as a symbol of affliction, disaster,
and privation. In fact, the custom of wearing
black in mouming is a sort of visible expression
of what is in the East a figure of speech. In
Scripture blackness is used as symbotical of
afflictions occasioned by drought and famine
(Job xxx. 30; Jer. xiv. 2; Lam. iv. 8; v. 10).
Whether this be founded on any notion that the hue
of the complexion was deepened by privation, has
not been ascertained ; but it has been remarked
by Chardin and others, that in the periodical
mouming of the Persians for Hossein many of
those who take part in the ceremonies appear
with their bodies blackened, in order to express
the extremity of thirst and heat which Hossein
suffered, and which, as is alleged, was so great
that Ae turned black, and the tongue swelled till
it protruded from his mouth.

n Mal. iii. 14 we read, ‘ What profit is it that
we keep his ordinances, and that we have walked
in blackness (Authorized Version ‘moumfully ’)
before the Lord of Hosts; meaning that they
had fasted in sackcloth and ashes. ‘ Black’
occurs as a symbol of fear in Jvel ii. 6—‘ All


336 BLAINS.


faces shall gather blackness,’ or darken with ap-
prehension and distress. This use of the word
may be paralleled from Virgil, Zn. ix. 719,
‘ Atrumque timorem ;' and Georg. iv. 468,

* Caligantem nigra formidine lucum.’
The saine expression which Joel uses is employed
by Nahum (ii. 10) to denote the extremity of
pain and sorrow.

In connection with this subject it may be
remarked that black is studiously avoided in
dress by all Orientals, except in certain gar-
ments of hair or wool, which are naturally of
that colour. Black is also sometimes imposed
as a mark of humiliating distinction by domi-
nant nations upon subject or tributary tribes, the
must familiar instance of which is the obligation
laid upon the Jews in Turkey of wearing black
turbans.


BLAINS. The word MYIBYIN, which, in
the only places where it occurs, is in our version
tendered dlains, strictly means eruptions. The
reots MY and Y33, which are the cognate forms
of the root from which the word is derived, have
the primary sense of: ebullience and efllorescence ;
and the specific kind of eruption here intended
cannot, on account of the vague term by which it
is described, be determined with any accuracy.
The Septuagint renders it by @AuwriSes, which
is also a general tern for pustules and vesicles
[Diseases ].—J. N.


BLASPHEMY ( DY 323; Sept. Brac-
gnpla). The Greek word BAacgnyia is generic,
denoting verbal abuse proceeding from an evil
disposition. It is equivalent to defamation or
elander, involving an attempt to lessen the cha-
racter of others, with the intention of doing them
injury. All kinds of abusive language, whether
called imprecation, calumny, or reviling, come
under the term.

* The English word blasphemy is more restricted
in its signification. It refers to God only. In
like manner when BAacgnpla is directed against
the Supreme Being, or when Jehovah is the object
of it, it is specitic. In these circumstances it
corresponds to the English blasphemy. The Greek
Baacgnula is employed in reference to the de-
famation of men or angels equally with the Deity;
bnt it is proper to use the term blasphemy cas
when God is spuken against, Thus the Greek
and English words are not coextensive in im-


rt.

Out English translators have not adhered to
the right use of the term. They employ it with
the same latitude as the Greek ; but it is gene
rally easy to perceive, from the connection and
subject of a pasaage, whether blasphemy, properly
so called, be meant, or only defamation. It
would certainly have been better to have em-
ployed detraction or calumny rather than blas-
phemy where man is the object; reserving the
latter for that. peculiarly awful slander which is
directed against: the ever-blessed God.

Blasphemy signities a false, irreverent, inju-
rious use of God's names, attributes, words, and
works. Whenever men intentionally and directly
attack the perfections of Jehovah, and thus Jessen
the reverence which others entertain tor him, they
are blasphemers. If the abusive language pro-
cecd from ignorance, or if it be dishonouring to
the majesty of Heaven only in the consequences


BLASPHEMY.


deduced from it by others, blusphemy has no
existence. It is eilful calumny directed against
the name or providence of God that aldhe consti
tutes the crime denoted by the tenn.

Examples of the general acceptation of BAac
¢@npla in the New Testament are common, where
the objects of it are men, angels, or the devil,
as in Acts xiii. 45; xviii. 6; Jude 9. The re-
stricted sense is found in such passages as Luke
v. 21; John x. 36.

By the Mosaic law blasphemy was punished
with death (Ley. xxiv. 10-161; and the laws of
some countries still visit it with the same punish-
ment. Fines, imprisonment, and various corporal
intlictions are annexed to the crime by the laws
of Great Britain. It is matter, however, of siucere
satisfaction, that there are very few instances im
which these enactments require to be enforced.

Much has been said and written respecting the
blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, usually but
improperly denominated the unpardonable sin
against the Holy Ghost. Some refer it to cam-
tinued opposition to the Gospel, ¢. e. obstinate
impenitence or final unbelief. In this view it is
unpardonable, not because the blood of Christ is
unable to cleanse from such a sin, uor because
there is anything in its own nature which separates
it from all other sins and places it beyond for-
giveness, but because, as long as man continues to
disbelieve, he voluntarily shuts himself out from
the forgiving mercy of God. By not receiving
the Gospel, he refuses pardon. In the same
manner, every sin might be styled unpardon-
able, as long as an individual continues to indulge
in it.

But we object to this opinion, because it gene-
ralizes the nature of the sin in quesfion. On the
contrary, the Scripture account arrows it to a
particular sin of a special kind, discountenancing
the idea that it is of frequent occurrence and
inarked by no circumstances of unwonted agera-
vation. Besides, all the notices which we have
reter it not so much to a state 5f mind, as to the
outward manifestation of a singularly malignant
disposition by the utterance of the lips.

The occasion on which Christ introduced his
mention of it (Matt. xii. 31, &c.; Mark iii. 28,
&c.), the subsequent context, and, above all, the
words of Mark iii. 30 (‘because they said, He
hath an unclean spirit’) indicate, with tolerable
plainness, that the sin in question consisted in at-
tributing the miracles wrought by Christ, or his
apostles in His name, to the agency of Satan.
It was by the power of the Holy Ghost, given to
the Redeemer without measure, that he cast out
devils; and whoever maligued the Saviour, by
affirming that an unclean spirit actuated and
enabled him to expel other spirits, maligned the
Holy Ghost.

There is no connection between the description
given in the Epistle to the Hebrews, vi. 4-6, and
this unpardonable Teen: The passages in
the Gospels which speak of the latter are not pa-
rallel with that in the Epistle to the Hebrews:
there is a marked difference between the states of
mind and their manifestations as described in
both. The sins ought not to be identilied:; they
are altogether dissimilar.

It is difficult to discover the ‘sin unto death,’
noticed by the apostle John (1 John y. 16), al-
though it a gencrally thought to coincide


JBLASTUS.


with the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit; buat
the ead Jobn does not afford’ data for

ing them one and the same. The first
three gospels alone describe the blasphemy which
aball not be forgiven: from it the ‘sin unto
death’ stands apart (See Liicke’s Commentar
ther die Briefe des Evangelisten Johannes,
Zweyte Auflage, pp. 305-317; Campbell's Preit-
minary Dissertations to the Gospels, Dissertat. ix.
part ii.; Olshausen's Commentar, Dritte Auflage,
pp. 306-7).—S. D.

BLASTUS (Badoros), a man who was cubt-
cularius to king Herod Agrippa, or who had the
charge of his bed-chamber (Acts xii. 20). Sucli
persons had usually great influence with their
masters, and hence the importance attached to
rn favouring the peace with Tyre and


BLEMISHES, There were various kinds of
blemishes, #. ¢. imperfections or deformities, which
excluded men from the priesthood, and animals
from being offered in sacrifice. These blemishes
are described in Lev. xxi. 17-23; xxii. 19-25;
Deut. xv. 21. We learn from the Mishna (Ze-
bachim, xii. 1; Becoroth. vii. 1), that temporary
blemishes excluded a man from the priesthood
only as long as those blemishes continued. The
tale concerning animals was extended to im-
perfections of the inward parts : thus if an animal,
free from outward blemish, was found, after being
slain, intemally defective, it was not offered in
sacritice. The natural feeling that only that
which was in a perfect condition was fit for sacred
purposes, or was a becoming offering to the
gods, produced similar rules concerning blemishes
among the heathen nations (Conf. Pompon. Let.
De Sacerdot. cap. 6; Herodot. ii. 38; Iliad, i.
68; Servius ad Virg. :n. ii. 4).

BLESSING. The terms ‘blessing’. and ‘to

ess” occur very often in the Scriptures, and in
applications too obvious to require explanation or
comment. The patriarchal blessings of sons form

exception, these being, in fact, prophecies
tather than blessings, or blessings only in so far
as they for the most part involved the invocation
and the promise of good things to come upon the
Parties concerned. It has been thought by many,
iM all nations, that the departing soul has unusual
eeliness of perception with respect to the past
and the future, and in a particular manner
Receives strong inspirations of things to come.

Ow far this may be generally true no one can
With certainty affirm or deny. But that a faculty
OF this sort existed in the leading members of the
chosen family of Abraham is beyond all question.

‘e most remarkable instances are those of Isaac
1p sing’ Jacob and Esau (Gen. xxvii.); of Jacob

lessing’ his twelve sons (Gen. xlix.); and of
‘Orn ‘blessing’ the twelve tribes (Deut. xxxiii.).

1 the first of these trandactions Professor George

uch remarks—‘ It cannot be doubted that from

uch @ father as Isaac a common blessing was to

* expected on all his children; but in this

ly there was a peculiar blessing pertaining to
tical et eem—a solemn, extraordinary, prophe-
of Al nediction, entailing the covenant blessing

Avraham, with all the promises temporal and
FA belonging to it, and by which his poste-

¥ were to Le distinguished. as God’s peculiar
People (Notes on Genesis). This was the bless-

® which Isaac intended to bestow upon his


BLINDNESS. avi


ed agi Esau, but which was secured for
‘acob.

With regard to the blessing bestowed by Jacob
upon his twelve sons, the same author prefaces his
valuable commentary thereon with these remarks
—‘1. That the blessings or announcements have
respect mainly to the posterity and not to the
persons of the twelve sons of Jacob; 2. That
consequently, the materials of a just interpreta-
tion are to be sought in the subsequent history of
these tribes. It is only from the documents fur-
nished in the sacred record that the leading cha-
racteristic traits and the most important events
related of each tribe can be determined ; 3. That
the fulfilment of these blessings is to be traced not
in any one event or in any single period of time,
but in a continuous and progressive series of
accomplishments, reaching down to the latest era
of the Jewish polity; 4. That the peculiar phra-
seology in whith the blessings are couched has
in most cases a verbal allusion to the names
bestowed upon the twelve phylarchs, or princes of
tribes—a circumstance not, indeed, obvious to the
English reader, but palpable to one who consults
the original.’ Most of these latter observations
apply equally to the blessing pronounced by
Moses, which is in fact a magnificent prophetic
poem, characterized by the finest attributes of the
class of Hebrew poetry to which it belongs.


BLESSING, VALLEY OF (7379 POY;
Sept. Kowds EvAoyias), a translation of the name
Valley of Berachah (benediction), which was
borne by the valley in which Jehoshaphat cele-
brated the miraculous overthrow of the Moabites
and Ammonites. It was from this circumstance
it derived its name ;-and from the indications in
the text, it must have been in the tribe of Judah,
near the Dead Sea and Engedi, and in the neigh-
bourhvod of Tekva (2 Chron. xx. 23-26).

BLINDING. [Punisuments.]

BLINDNESS. The frequent occurrence of
blindness in the East has always excited the asto-
nislment of travellers. WVolney says that, out of
a hundred persons in Cairo, he has met twenty
quite blind, ten wanting one eye, and twenty
others having their eyes red, purulent, or ble-
mished (Travels in Egypt, i. 224). This is prin-
cipally owing to the Ezyptian op thalmia, which
is endemic in that country and on the coast of
Syria. This disease commences with such a vio-
Jent inflammation of the conjunctiva, that, ina
few hours, the whole of that membrane, which lines
the anterior surface of the eye and the internal
surface of the eyclids, is covered with red fleshy
elevations, resembling granulations, and secreting
a purulent discharge. The inflammation spreads
rapidly over the eyeball; the delicate internal
tissues are destroyed and converted into pus; the
outer coats ulcerate through ; and the whole con-
tents of the eye are evacuated. In its acute and
most virulent form, the disease runs its course in
$7 days; otherwise it may continue for as many
weeks or months. It is to be ascribed to those
peculiar conditions of the atmosphere which are
termed miasmatic, of which, however, nothing is
known, except that they exert a specific influence
on the body, different from the ordinary effects of
cold and damp. The variety of causes assigned
by travellers for this disease, such as the sus -
pension of fine dust and saline particles in the

z


BLOOD.


the custom so prevalent amongst the
inhahitants of all Eastern countries of sleeping on
the roofs of the houses, pena winds, bad diet,
shaving the head, &c., can only be regarded as
secondary or occasional causes; and amongst
these bad diet, great fatigue, and exposure to the
night dews are the most important. The Egyptian
ophthalinia is contagious ; but it is not often com-
municated from one individual to another. It is
not confined to the Eust, but appears here and
there throughout Europe; and during the last war,
ly on account of the practice of bivouacking
in the open air, and the great hardships to which
the troops were often exposed, it was a dreadful
scourge to most of the European armies, more
particularly to the Prussians during the campaigns
of 1813 and 1814, although that army had never
left Europe (Jungken’s Augenkrank. p. 336).
The French and English suffered greatly from it
while they were in Egypt, and subsequently.

Small-pox is another great cause of blindness
in the East (Volney, J. c.).

In the New Testament, blind mendicants are
frequently mentioned (Matt. ix. 27; xii. 22; xx.
30; xxi. 14; John v. 3). The blindness of Bar
Jesus (Acts xiii. 6) was miraculously produced,
and of its nature we know nothing. Winer (s. v.
Blindheit) infers that it was occasioned by specks
on the cornea, which were curable, because the
same term, &xAds, is made use of by Hippocrates
(Mpopparixdy, ii. 215, ed. Kiihn), who says that
GxAves will disappear, provided no wound has
been inflicted. Before such an inference can be
drawn, we must be sure that the writers of the
New Testament were not only acquainted with
the writings of Hippocrates, but were also accus-
tomed to a strict medical termindlogy. The hazi-
ness implied by the expression axAvs may refer
to the sensation of the blind person, or to the
appearance of the eye, and, in buth cases, the
cause of the haziness may have been referrible to
any of the other transparent media, as well us to
the cornea. Tobit’s blindness (Tobit ii. 10) was
attributed to sparrows’ dung having fallen into
his eyes. Ifthe story be considered true (which
we are by no means required to believe), his
cure must be regarded: as altogether mira-
culous. Though the gall of a fish was an
old remedy for diseases of the eyes (Plin.
Hist. Nat. xxxii. 24), and has been frequently
used in modem times (Richter, Anfangsgr. d.
Wundarzneik. iii. p. 130), it cannot be supposed to
have had any medicinal effect in Tobit's case;
for not only was the cure instantaneous, but the
specks which impeded vision were seen to escape
from the corners of his eyes; which plainly shows
that the whole process, if not the disease itself,
was of a kind which does not fall under the pro-
vince of science [Mepicine]. Exaraples of
blindness from old age occur in Gen. xxvii. 1;
1 Kings xiv. 4; 1 Sam. iv. 15. The Syrian army
that came to apprehend Elisha was suddenly
smitten with blindness in a miraculous manner
(2 Kings vi. 18); and so also was St. Paul (Acts
ix. ie, The Mosaic law has not neglected to
inculcate humane feelings towards the blind
(Lev. xix. 14; Deut. xxvii. 18). Blindness is
sometimes threatened in the Old Testament as a

ishment for disobedience (Deut. xxviii. 28;
i xxvi. 16; Zeph. i. 17)—W. A. N.
BLOOD. There are two respects in which the


° * BLOOD.


ordinances of the Old and New Testaments con-
cerning blood deserve notice here—the prohibition
of its use as an article of food, and the appoint-
ment and significance of its use in the ritual of
sacrifice ; both of which appear to rest on a com-
mon ground,
In Gen. ix. 4, where the use of animal food is
allowed, it is first absolutely forbidden to eat
‘flesh with its soul, its blood ;’ which ion,
were it otherwise obscure, is explained by the mode
in which the same terms are employed in Deut.
xii. 23. Inthe Mosaic law the prohibition is re-
ted with frequency and emphasis; although it
1s generally introduced in connection with sacri-
fices, as in Lev. iii. 7; vii. 26 (in both which
places blood is coupled iu the prohibition with
the fat of the victims); xvii. 10-14; xix. 3;
Deut. xii. 16-23; xv. 23. In cases where t
rohibition is introduced in connection with the
lawful and unlawful articles of diet, the reason
which is generally assigned in the text is, that
‘the blood is the soul,’ and it is ordered that it be
red on the ground like water. But where it
1s introduced in reference to the portions of the
victim which were to be offered to the Lord, then
the text, in addition to the former reason, insists
that ‘the blood expiates by the soul’ (Lev. xvii.
11, ey This strict injunction not only applied
to the Israelites, but even to the strangers residing
among them. The penalty assigned to its trans-
gression was the being ‘cut off from the people ;’
by which the punishment of death appears to be
intended (cf. Heb. x. 28), although it is difficult
to ascertain whether it was inflicted by the sword
or by stoning. It is observed by Michaelis (Mos
Recht. iv. 45) that the blood of fishes does not
appear to be interdicted. The words in Lev.
vii. 26 only expressly mention that of birds and
cattle. This accords, however, with the reasons
assigned for the prohibition of blood, so far as
fishes could not be offered to the Lord; although
they formed a significant offering in heathen re-
ligions. To this is to be added, that the Apostles
and elders, assembled in council at Jerusal
when desirous of settling the extent to which the
ceremonial observances were binding upon the
converts to Christianity, renewed the injunction
to abstain from blood, and coupled it with things
offered to idols (Acts xv. 29). It is perha
worthy of notice here, that Mohammed, while
professing to abrogate some of the dietary restric-
tions of the Jewish law (which he asserts were im-
-osed on account of the sins of the Jews, Sura iv.
158), still enforces, among others, abstinence from
blood and from things offered to idols (Qurdn,
Sur. v. 4, vi. 146, ed. Fliigel).

In direct opposition to this emphatic prohibition
of blood in the Mosaic law, the customs of unci-
vilized heathens sanctioned the cutting of slices
from the living animal, and the eating of the flesh
while quivering with life and dripping with blood.
Even Saul's army committed this barbarity, as we


* We can only for brevity refer the reader to
Bubr's Symbolik, 11. 207, for the philological rea-
sons for this rendering. He there shows that
DID, which is generally rendered as the mere
object of the verb, must, instead, be the instru-
ment; so that the sense is, in that the soul is im
the blood, therefore the blood atones ; or, the blood


atones by means of the soul, its soul.


BLOOD AND WATER.


read in I Sam. xiv. 32; and the prophet also lays
it to the charge of the Jews in Ezek. xxxiii. 25.*
This practice, according to Bruce's testimony,
exists at present among the Abyssinians. More-
over, pagan religions, and that of the Phenicians
among the rest, appointed the eating and drinking
of blood, mixed with wine, as a rite of idolatrous
worship, and especially in the ceremonial of swear-
ing. To this the in Ps. xvi. 4 appears to
allude (cf. J. D. Michaelis, Critisch. Colleg.
P- 108, where several testimonies on this subject
are collected),

The appointment and significance of the use of
blood in the ritual of sacrifice belongs indeed to
this head; but their further notice will be more
Appropriately pursued in the art. Sacririce.—


J.N.
BLOOD AND WATER (John xix. 34) are
said to have issued from our Lord’s side when
the soldier pierced him on the cross. The only
natural explanation that can be offered of the fact
4s to suppose that some effusion had taken place
in the cavity of the chest, and that the spear
Fenetrated below the level of the fluid. Sup-
pong this to have happened, and the wound to
ve been inflicted shortly after death, then, in
addition to the water, blood would also have
trickled down, or, at any rate, have made its ap-
pearance at the mouth of the wound, even though
none of the large vessels had been wounded. It
Minot necessary to suppose that the pericardium
Was pierced ; for, if eflusion had taken place
there, it might also have taken place in the ca-
vides of the pleura; and, during health, neither
pericardium nor the pleura contains fluid, but
are merely lubricated with moisture on their in-
al ur opposing surfaces, so as to allow of free
Motion to the heart and lungs. ;
It may be objected to this view of the question,
, according to the longest computation, our
rd died in six hours, and that this is too short
atime to occasion effusion. Indeed, reasoning
Xperience alone, it is very difficult to un-
derstand the physical cause of our Lord’s death.
€ Crucifixion is quite inadequate to account
Orit; fur, even if the impression produced by
8 torture on a weak nervous system wus sufli-
Clent to annihilate consciousness and sensibility,
ath of the body, or what physiologists have
"med organic death, could not have taken place
12 60 short a time, as long as the brain, lungs,
‘nd circulation, the so-called atria mortés, Lad
Sustained no material injury. In other words,
fonctions of respiration, circulation, secretion,
dutrition must have continued for a far
Ber time, In fact, we learn from Eusebius
ut. Eccles. viii. 8) that many of the Egyptian
Martyrs perished from hunger on the cross, al-


on,


&
The use of the preposition by in this passage
(been entirely micaivlerstood by Spencer, who
f Leg. Hebr. ii, 11) adduces much testimony
de Profane suurces for the existence of the rite
thee t8 over the blood of the victim. Never-
less, that this Preposition also has the sense of
Gen in addition to, insuper, is established by
Cr xxxi, 125 Exod. xii, 9 (Ewald’s Hebr.
the wh 524); as well as by the recurrence of
refuted S, Phrase in1 Sam. xiv. 32, Deyling has
Bacy. i. 35)" in a special dissertation ( Odcerv.


BLOOD AND WATER. 339


though they were crucified with their heads down-
wards, According to Richter, some survive on
the cross for three, four, and even for nine days

Viner's Bibl. Readwort. s. v. Jesus). Our Lord's

leath could not have been occasioned by tetanus,
or else it would have been mentioned ; and even
this disease, though the sufferer be racked with
the most frightful convulsions without intermis-
sion, most rarely puts an end to life in less than
twelve hours. Nor can we attribute it to the
wound inflicted by the soldier; for although, when
it is said he ‘expired, and the soldiers saw that
he was dead,’ our Lord might have merely fainted,
yet -it is impossible to suppose that the soldier
would not have perceived Te error the moment
he inflicted the wound, provided it was mortal;
for then would have commenced the death-
struggle, which, in cases of death by xia
and hamorrhage, is very severe, and woul ve
struck the most careless spectator. :

Schuster (in Eichhorn’s Bibl. Biblioth, ix. 1038)
is of opinion that, as blood is known to oe
into a red coagulum and a watery fluid, the ex-
pression ‘ blood and water ’ is to be understood as
an hendiadys, meaning nothing more than blood.
To this it must he objected that blood is onl
observed {o separate in that way when it is ale
lowed to coagulate in a vessel, and that therefore
the opportunities for observing it must have been
& great deal too rare to allow of such figurative
language being employed and understood. That
it certainly was not so understood is clear; for
some of the fathers (Orig. Contr. Cels. ii. 82) in-
terpreted the expression literally, and looked upon
the fact as a miracle, and a proof of our Lord’s
divine nature. According to Strauss (Leben J
ii. 571), the evangelist recollected that dead blood
separates in the manner just mentioned, and, as
he wished to bring forward the strongest proof of
our Lord’s death, he asserted that blood and
water issued from the wound, meaning thereby
that our Lord's blood had already undergone
that change which is only observed when it is
removed from the body and deprived of its vi-
tality. This hypothesis is wholly untenable ; for,
if we suppose the evangelist so well acquainted
with the separation of blood, he would have
known that the coagulum, which, according to
the hypothesis, is designated by the term blood,
could not, on account of its solidity, have issued
from the wound. Moreover, St. John must have
known, what every one knows, that the fact of no
blood at all being seen would have been a far
better proof of our Lord's death. Indeed, the ap-
pearance of blood and water could not have been
regarded as a proof of death, but rather as some-
thing General and inexplicable; for the words
of Origen, tay GAAay vexpav capdrory 7d alua
whyvutat, wal twp nabapdy ox &woppei (1. c.),
express a fact which every one in days
must have known from personal experience. St.
John then must have entirely failed in his ob-
ject, and merely from his ignorance of the most
vulgar opinions.

It has heen asserted Ly some (as by Winer)
that, when deep incisions are made in the body
after death, the blood will be found
into cruor and serum. This is incorrect. Even
in the heart and large vessels the serum cannot be
distinguished, because it readily transudes, and
is imbibed Ly the surrounding tissues. - maby

s


340 BLOOD, ISSUE OF.


eases coagulation takes place very imperfectly
after death.

It must not be supposed that the fact of blood
coming from the wound at all militates against
the idea that our Lord was dead at the moment
he was pierced. This argument is, indeed, made
use of by Strauss (7. c.); but it can he refuted by
the most ordinary experience. It is well known
that, even many days after death, blood will
trickle from deep incisions, especially where any
of the large veins have been wounded. The po-
pular opinion that blood will not flow from a
corpse, must be taken in a relative, and not ab-
solute sense. It certainly will not flow as it’ does
from a living body; and, when the wound is
small and superficial, sometimes not a drop will
be seen.

The three other evange
circumstance. —W. A.


sts do not mention the


att. ix. 20). The
morrhagia ; but we
that it continued un-
: ws. It is a universal
-.: g of the duration of a chronic
isease gama the intervals of comparative
deal may occur during its course; so that
“Spb@i'a; Bleease is merely stated to have lasted a
certain time, we have still to learn whether it was
of a strictly continuous type, or whether it inter-
mitted. In the present case, as this point is left
undecided, we are quite at liberty to suppose that
the disease did intermit ; and can therefore under-
stand why it did not prove fatal even in twelve


ears.
: Bartholinus (De Morb. Bibl. p. 61) quotes a
case in which hemorrhage is said to have oc-
curred for upwards of two years without cessa-
tion; but the details necessary to render such
an extraordinary case credible are not at aged


BLOOD-REVENGE, or revenge for blood-
shed, was regarded among the Jews, as among
-all the ancient and Asiatic nations, not only as
a right, but even as a duty, which devolved upon
the nearest relative of the murdered who


on this account was called DIN PNii (goel
' hadam), the reclaimer of blood, or one who de-
mands restitution of blood, similar to the Latin
sanguinem repeterc.

The Mosaical law (Num. xxxv. 31) expressly
forbids the acceptance of a ransom for the forfeited
life of the murderer, although it might be saved by
his seeking an asylum at the altar of the Taber-
nacle, in case the homicide was accidentally com-

“mitted (Exod. xxi. 13; 1 Kings i. 50; ii, 28).
When, however, in ess of time, after Judaism
- had been fully developed, no other sanctuary was
tolerated but that of the Temple at Jerusalem,
' the chances of escape of such an homicide from
the hands of the avenger, ere he reached the
gates of the Temple, became less in proportion
to the distance of the spot where the murder
was committed from Jerusalem, six cities of re-
Suge (odpp Y oreh miklot) were in conse-
quence appointed for the momentary safety of

e murderer, in various parts of the kingdom,
the roads to which were kept in good order to
facilitate his escape (Deut. xix. 3). Thither the
avenger durst not follow him, and there he lived

im safety until a proper examination had taken


BLOOD-REVENGE.


place before the authorities of the place (Jos. xx.
6, 9), in order to ascertain whether the murder
was a wilful act or not. In the former case he
was instantly delivered up to the Goél, against
whom not even the altar could protect him
(Exod. xxi. 14; 1 Kings ii. ahi in the latter
case, though he was not actually delivered into
the hands of the Goéi, he was notwithstanding not
allowed to quit the precincts of the town, but was
obliged to remain there all his lifetime, or until
the death of the high-priest (Num. xxxv. 6;
Deut. xix. 3; Josh. xx. 1-6), if he would not run
the risk of falling into the hands of the avenger,
and be slain by him with impunity x um. Xxxxv.
26; Deut. xix. 6). That such a voluntary exile
was considered more in the light of a punishment
for manslaughter than a provision for the safe
retreat of the homicide against the
designs of the 533, is evident from Num. xxxv.
32, where it is expressly forbidden to release him
from his confinement on any condition whatever.
That the decease of the high-priest should have
been the means of restoring him to liberty was
probably owing to the general custom among the
ancients, of granting free to certain pri-
soners at the demise of their legitimate prince or
sovereign, whom the high-priest represented, in a
spiritual sense, among the Jews. These wise re-
gulations of the Mosaical law, as far as the spirit
of the age allowed it, prevented all family hatred,
persecution, and war from ever taking place,
as was inevitably the case among the other na-
tions, where any bloodshed whatever, whether
wilful or accidental, laid the homicide open to
the duteous revenge of the relatives and family
of the slain person, who again in their turn were
then similarly watched and hunted by the op-
ang party, until a family-war of extermination
legally settled itself from generation to gene-
tation, without the least prospect of ever being
brought to a peaceful termination. Nor do we
indeed find in the Scriptures the least trace
of any abuse or mischief ever having arisen
from these regulations (comp. 2 Sam. ii. 19, sg. ;
iii, 26, sq.).

That such institutions are altogether at va-
riance with the spirit of Christianity may be
juiced from the fact that revenge, so far from

ing counted a right or duty, was condemned
by Christ and his apostles as a vice and passion
to be shunned (Acts vii. 60; Matt. v. 44; Luke
vi. 28; Rom. xii. 14, sg.; comp. Rom. xiii.,
where the power of executing revenge is vested in
the authorities alone).

Of all the other nations, the Greeks and Ro-
mans alone seem to have such cities
¥ refuge (Serv. ad En. viii. 342; Liv. i. 8;

‘ac. Ann. iii. 60), of which Daphne, near An-
tioch, seems to have been one of the most promi-
nent (2 Macc. iv. 34; comp. Potter's Greek
Archeol. i. 480), and to have served as a refuge
even for wilful murderers. The laws and cus-
toms of the ancient Greeks in cases of murder
may be gathered from the principle laid down
by Plato on that head (De Legib. ix. in t.
ix. p. 28, ag.): ‘Since, according to tradition,
the murdered person is greatly irritated against
the murderer during the first few months after the
perpetration of the deed, the murderer ought there-
fore to inflict a punishment upon himself, by ex-
iling himself from his country for a whole year,


‘


1 e


BLOODY SWEAT.
by keepi


be appeased and grant

pardon; but in case he does not submit to that
punishment, or dares even to enter the temple
while the guilt of blood is still his hands,
the avenger shall arraign him before the bar of
Jostice, where be is to be punished with the
infiction of a double fine. But in case the
avenger neglects to proceed against him, the guilt
passes over to him (the avenger), and any one
may take him before the judge, who passes on
him the sentence of banishment for five years.’

The high estimation in which blood-revenge
stood among the ancient Arabs may be judged of
from the fact that it formed the subject of their
most beautiful and elevated (comp. the
Scholiast. Taurizi to the 16th in Schulten’s
Exzcerp. Hamas). Mahomet did not abolish, but
modify, that rigorous custom, by allowing the
ac ce of a ransom in money for the for-
feited life of the murderer (Koran, ii. 173-175),
and at the worst, forbidding the infliction of any
cruel or painful death (Ibid. xvii. 35).

In Rurope the custom of blood-revenge is still
Prevalent in Corsica and Sardinia, where, how-
ever, it is more the consequence of a vindictive
character than of af established law or custom.
A Corsican never passes over an insult without
retaliation, either on the offender or his family,
and this cruel and un-Christian custom (vendetta
traversa, mutual vengeance) is the source of
Many amassinations. The celebrated General
Paoli did his best to eradicate this abominable
Practice, but his dominion was of too short du-
ration for the effective cure of the evil, which has
SAived ground ever since the first French revo-
lution, even among the female sex. It is calcu-
lated that about four hundred persons yearly lose
their lives in Sardinia by this atrocious habit
(Simonot, Lettres sur la Corse, p. 314).—E. M.

BLOODY SWEAT. According to Luke
Xxu. 44, cur Lord’s sweat was ‘as great drops of
blood falling to the ground.’ Michaelis takes
the passage to mean nothing more than that the
drops were as large as falling drops of blood
(Anmerk, fir Ungelehrte, ad loc.). This, which
also appears to be a common explanation, is
liable to some objection. For, if an ordinary

et compares a fluid which he is accustomed

to see calatislege to bloud, which is so well known

% well characterized by its colour, and

Not specify any particular point of resem-

blance, be would sealg sutaralty: be understood

to allude to the colour, since it is the most pro-
minent and characteristic quality.

here are several cases recorded by the older

medical writers, under the title of bloody sweat.

'th the exception of one or two instances, not

suspicion of frand, they have, however, all

hi Cases of general hemorrhagic disease, in
Which blood has flowed from different parts of the
cere such as the nose, eyes, ears, lungs, stomach,
ki bowels, and, lastly, from various parts of the
in. When blood oozes from the skin, it must
nea the external surface through orifices in the
“Pidermis, which have been produced by rupture,
eis We must suppose that it has been extravasated
the sweat-ducts. But, even in this latter
fase, we must no more consider hemorrhage of


BLOODY SWEAT. 34


the skin to be a modification of the function of
sweating, than bleeding from the nose to be a mo-
dification of the secretion of mucus. The blood:
is simply mixed with the sweat, precisely in the
same way as, when spit up from the lungy, it is
mixed with mucus and saliva in passing through
the air-tubes and mouth. It is, therefore, in-
correct to suppose that hamorrhage from the akin
indicates a state of body at all analogous to that
which occasions sweating. If this distinction
had been clearly understood, and clearly stated
by medical writers, it would have been seen at
once how far their experience went to illustrate
the case before us.

The greater number of cases described by-
authors were observed in women and childrea,,
and sometimes in infants. Mental anxiety we.
have only found mentioned as a cause or as a
concomitant symptom, in one case, which will be.
noticed below. The case of a young lady who
was afflicted with cutaneous hwmorthage is de-
tailed by Mesaporiti in a letter to Valisneri. She.
is noticed to have been cheerful, although she
must have suffered greatly from debility and
febrile symptoms (PAi. Trans. No. 303,
2114). The case of an infant, only three seal
old, affected with the same disease, is related b
Du Gard (Phil. Trans. No. 109, p. 193). rq
similar case is described in the Nov. Act. Acad.
Nat. Cur. tom. iv. p. 193. See also Eph. Acad.
Nat, Cur. obs. 41; and, for other references,
Copeland's Dict. of Med. ii. p. 72. Where
hemorthagic diathesis exists, muscular exertion
is a powerful exciting cause of all kinds of
hemorrhage, and must likewise give rise to the
cutaneous form of the disease. A most remark-
able case of the kind, occurring in a horse, is
mentioned by Dr. Copeland. His friend Dr..
W. Hutchinson had a tine Arabian horse, whose
sweat was sanguineous after moderate exertion,
and almost pure blood upon violent exertion.
(Diet. of Med, lc.)

Bloomfield (Greek Test. note on Luke xxii. 44)
says that Aristotle adduces a case of bloody sweat
from extreme agitation, in his Hest. Anim. iii. 19.
This statement, however, is incorrect. Aristotle
is merely speaking of the blood in a general way;
and says, ‘si sanguis immodice humescit, morbus
infestat: sic enim in speciem saniei diluitur et
adeo serescit, ut jam nonnulli sudore cruento ex-
undarint.’ There is no allusion made to any
case, nor a word said about extreme agitation.
There is, however, a case of this kind recorded by
Durius, a German physician (Afiseell. cur. Ephe-
merid. p. 354, obs. 179). A student was put
into prison, ‘ propter tnsolenflas nocturnas et alia
tentata, when he was seized with such fear and
agitation that of blood burtt forth, here
and there, from his hands, chest, and arms,
Durius was ordered by the magistrate, who was
informed of the circumstance, to visit the pri-
soner ; and he witnessed all that had been related
to him. The prisoner was of course immediately
released, and was restored to his former state of
health as acon as the cause of his anxiety had
been removed. If this was really a fact, the stu-
dent must have been affected with bemorrhagic
disease, or have had a very strong tendency to it;
but the story does not deserve the slightest cre-
dence. The author does not appear to have ima
gined, for a moment, that it was a cam of impo-


383: ' BOANERGES.


sition, or that it might be afterwards suspected to
be such. His account is, therefore, confined to
the bare statement of the fact, and affords no evi-
dence of the correctness of his observation. It is


highly im ble that a student of such habits
should feel great alarm at being put in prison ;
while nothing is more conceivable than that he


should attempt to impose on the credulity of his
attendants, in order tu obtain his release, and that
he should even succeed in decdiving a physician.
Medical experience abounds in cases of successful
imposition of a far more extraorlinary nature
(Bartholinus, Hist. Anat. rar., cent. i. hist. 52).

While, then, on the one hand, experience
teaches that cutaneous hemorrhage, when it does
occur, is the result of disease, or, at any rate, of
@ very liar idiosyncracy, and is in no way
indicative of the state of the mind, we have, on
the other, daily experience and the accumulated
testimony of ages to prove that intense mental
emotion and pain produce on the body effects
even severer in degree, but of a very different
nature, It is familiar to all that terror will
blanch the hair, occasion momentary paralysis,
fainting, convulsions, melancholy, imbecility, and
even sudden death. Excessive grief and joy will
Produce some of the worst of these. Sweat is
caused by fear, and by bodily pain; but not by
sorrow, which excites no secretion except tears.

- It is very evident, then, that metlical expe.
rience does not bear at all upon the words of St.
Luke. The circumstances connected with our
Lord's sufferings in the garden must be considerel
by themselves, without any reference to actual
observation ; otherwise, we shall be in danger of
rendering a statement, which may be easily re
ceived on its own gronnds, obscure and contra-
dictory.

It may be remarked that the passage in ques-
tion only occurs in St. Luke, and is omit in
five MSS. of that Gospel.—W. A. N.

BLUE. [Purpzs.]

BOANERGES (Boavepyés, explained by viv}
Bporrijs, sons of thunder, Mark iii. 17), a sur-
name given by Christ to James and John, pro-
bably on account of their fervid, impetuons spirit
ear. Luke ix. 54, and see Olshausen thereon).

e word boanerges has greatly perplexed philo-
logists and commentators. It scems agreed that
the Greek term does not correctly represent the
original Syro-Chaldee word, although it is dis-
puted what that word was. Many, with Jerome,
think that the true word is Bevepee{u, from the
Hebrew DY" 33 bene-ra’am, as in Hebrew DY
constantly denotes thunder. But this varies too
much from the vestigia literarum. Others derive
it from the Hebrew W993 bene-ra’ash, which
deviates still further, and only signities—sons of
tumult or commotion. Recent interpreters there-
fore incline to the derivation of Caninius, De Dieu,
and Fritzsche, who take it from W3" °33 bene-

es, for reges in Syriac and Arabic signifies
‘thunder.’ Thus the word boan-erges would
seem to be a slight corruption from boane-reges,
the boane being very posnbly the Galilean
nunciation instead of bene (comp. Bloomfield’s
New Test. on Mark iii. 17; and Robinson's Gr.
Lex. s.v. Boavepyés).

BOAR (YN hasir or chazir, in Arabic chiz-
ron). Occurs in Lev. xi. 7; Deut. xiv. 8; Ps.
Ixxx. 13; Prov. xi. 23; Isa. Ixv. 4; Ixvi. 3, 17.


BOAZ.


‘The Hebrew, Egyptian, Arabien, Phentcim,
and other neighbouring —— abstained from
hog’s flesh, and consequently, ing in
and (at a later period) beyond the Sea of
lilee, no domesticated swine were reared.


_ 167, CWild Boar.


Egypt, where swineherds were treated as the
lowest of men, even to a denial of adinission into
the temples, and where to have been touched by
a swine defiled the person nearly as much as
it did a Hebrew, it is difficult to conjecture for
what purpose these animals were kept so abun-
dantly, as it appears hy the monumental pictures
they were; foe'themarss service of treading down
seed in the deposited mud of the Nile when the
inundation subsided, the only purpose alleged,
cannot be admitted as a sufficient explanation
of the fact. Although in Palestine, Syria, and
Phaonicia hogs were rarely domesticated, wild boars
are often mentioned in the Scriptures, and they
were frequent in the time of the Crusades; for
Richard Coeur-de-Lion encountered one of vast
size, ran him through with his lance, and while
the animal was still endeavouring to gore his
horse, he leaped over its back and slew it with
his sword. At present wild boars frequent the

marshes of the Delta, and are not uncommon on

Mount Carmel and in the valley of Ajalah. They

are abundant about the sources of the Jordan, and

lower down where the river enters the Dead Sea.

The Koords and other wandering tribes of Meso-

poems and on the banks of both the great rivers

hunt and eat the wild boar, and it may be sus-

pected that the half human satyrs they pretend

sometimes to kill in the chace, derive their cloven-

footed ‘hind-quarters from wild boars, and offer a

convenient mude of concealing from the women

and public that the nutritive flesh they bring

bome is a luxury forbidden by their law. The

wild boar of the East, though commonly smaller

than the old breeds of domestic swine, grows occa- +
sionally to a very large size. It is passive while

unmolested, but vindictive and fierce when roused.

The ears of the species are small, and rather

rounded, the snout broad, the tusks very A at

minent, the tail distichous, and the colour dark

ashy, the ridge of the back bearing a profusion

of long bristles. It is doubtful whether this

species is the same as that of Europe, for the

furrow are not striped: most likely it is identical

with the wild hog of India.—C. H. S.


1. BOAZ (193, alacritas ; Sept. Bod(), a wealthy
Bethiehemite, and near kinsman of the first hus-
band of Ruth, whom he eventually under
the obligations of the Levirate law, which he will-
ingly incurred. The conduct of Boas—his fine
spirit, just feeling, piety, and amenity of manners


BOAZ.


to advantage in the book of Ruth,
ey pes alsentine portraiture of the condi-
tion and t of what was in his time the
upper class of Israelites. By his marriage with
Rath he became the father of Obed, from whom
came Jesse, the father of David. He was thus
one of the direct ancestors of Christ, and as such
his name occurs in Matt. i. 5. There are some
chronological difficulties respecting the time of
Boaz and his genealogical connections; but as
these are involved in the cdnsiderations which de-
termine the time of the bouk of Ruth, they will be
more advantageously examined in connection
with that larger subject [RurH ; Genzazooy].

2. BOAZ, the name given to one of the two
brazen ples which Solomon erected in the court
of the Temple (Jacuin anv Boaz].

BOCHIM (D'93, weepings), the name given
to a place (probably near Shiloh, where the taber-
tacle then was) where an ‘angel of the Lord’
reproved the assembled Israelites for their disobe-
dience in making leagues with the inhabitants of
the land, and for their remissness in taking pos-
wesion of their heritage. This caused the bitter
Weeping among the people for which the place
took its name (Judg. ii. 1). ‘Angel’ is here
hice pat in the ordinary sense of ‘ messen-
get,’ and he is supposed to have been a prophet,
which is stren; ‘ by his being said ‘a lee
come from Gilgal: for it was not usual to say
that an angel came from another place, and Gilgal
Was a noted station and resort of holy men (Grx-
oar]. Most of the Jewish commentators regard
this personage as Plhinehas, who was at that time
the high-priest. There are many, however, who
deny that any man or created angel is here meant,
and affirm that no other than the Great Angel of
the Covenant is to be understood—the same who
8ppeared to Moses in the bush, and to Joshua as
the Captain of Jehovah's host. This notion is
Stounded on the fact that ‘the angel,’ without
using the usual formula of delegation, ‘ thus saith

) says at once ‘J made yuu to go up out
of Egypt,’ &e.

BOHAN (}13, a thumb; Sept. Badv), a
Reubenite, in whose honour a stone was erected
Which afterwards served as a boundary-mark on
the frontier between Judah and Benjamin (Josh.
Xr.6; xviii, 17). It does not appear from the

whether this stone was a sepulchral monu-
Ment, or set up to commemorate some great ex-
It performed by this Bohan in the conquest of
1 Bunting (Jtinerar. tot. S. Script.
44), mentioning Bahurim, says that near to it, in
valley, is a stone called Bohan, ef extraordi-
Rary size, and shining like marble. This wants
Soofirmation, and no authority is given.

BOND, BONDAGE. [Suavzny.]

BOOK. (Warrino.

BOOK OF LIFE. “Io Phil. iv. 3 Paul

Xs of Clement and other of his fellow-labour-
o whose names are written in the bok of life.’
this Heinrichs (Annotat. in Ep. Philipp.) ob-
Srves that as the future life is represented under the
mage of a wovlreuua (citizenship, community,
Political society) just before (iii. 20), it is im
Flas with this to suppose (as usual) a cata-
Of the citizens’ names, both natural and
ated (Luke x, 20; Rev. xx. 15; xxi. 27),
which the unworthy are erased (Rev.


BOOTH. 348,


iii. 5). Thus the names of the good are often
represented as registered in heaven (Matt. iii. 5\.
But this by no means implies a certainty of sal-
vation (nor, as Doddridge remarks, does it appear
that Paul in this passage bad any pare oalee
revelation), but only that at that time the persons
were on the list, trom which (as in Rev. iii. 3
the names of unworthy members might be

This explanation is sufficient and satisfactory for
the other important passage in Rev. iii. 5, where
the glorified Christ promises to ‘him that over-
cometh,’ that he will not blot his name out of the
book of life. Here, however, the illustration has
been sought rather in military than in civil life,
and the passage has been supposed to contain an
allusion to the custom according to which the
names of those who were cashiered for misconduct
were erased from the muster-roll.

When God threatened to destroy the Israelites
altogether, and make of Moses a great nation—
the legislator implored forgiveness for them, and
added—‘ if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the
book which thou hast written’ (Exod. xxxii. 34).
By this he meant nothing so foolish or absurd as
to offer to forfeit eternal life in the world to
come—but only that he, and not they, should be
cut off from the world, and brought to an untimely
end. This has been regarded as an allusion to
the records kept in the courts of justice, where the
deeds of criminals are registered, and hence would
signify no more than the purpose of God with
reference to future events; so that to be cut off by
an untimely death is to be blotted out of this book.

A sealed book (Isa. xxix. 1); Rev. v. 1-3) is
a book wh@e contents are secret, and have for a
very long time been so, and are not tu be published
till the seal is removed.

A book or roll written within and without, i.e.
on the back side (Rev. v. 1), may be a book con-
taining a long series of events; it not being the
custom of the ancients to write on the back side
of the roll, unless when the inside would not con-
tain the whole of thewriting (comp. Horace, Ep.
i. 20, 3). as

To oe a book signifies to consider it carefully,
and digest it well in the mind (Jer. xv. 16; Rev.
x. 9). A similar metaphor is used by Christ in
John vi., where he repeatedly proposes himself as
‘the Bread of Life’ to be eaten by his people.


BOOTH (30 succah; pl. succoth), a hut
made of branches of trees, and thus distinguished
from a tent properly so called. Such were the
booths in which Jacob sojourned for a while on
his return to the borders of Canaan, whence the

lace obtained the name of Succoth (Gen. xxxiii.

7); and such were the temporary green sheds in
which the Israelites were directed to celebrate the
Feast of Tabernacles (Lev. xxiii. 42, 43). As
this observance was to commemorate the abode of
the Israelites in the wilderness, it has been rather
unwisely concluded by some that they there lived
in such booths. But it is evident from the narra-
tive, that, during their wanderings, they dwelt in
tents ; and, indeed, where, in that treeless region,
could they have found branches with which tg
construct their booths? Such structures are only
available in well-wooded regions; and it is ob-
vious that the direction to celebrate the feast in
booths, rather than in tents, was given becauss
when the Israelites becamea settled people in Pales-


a BORITH.
tine, and ceased to have a general use of tents, it
was easier for them to erect a temporary shed of
green branches than to provide a tent for the
occasion.

BOOTY. [Srom.]


BORITH (N72) occurs in two passages of
Scripture—first, in Jerem. ii. 22, ‘For though
thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much
sope (borith), yet thine iniquity is marked before
- me, saith the Lord God ;’ and again, in Malachi
iii, 2, ‘But who may abide the day of his
coming ? and who shal] stand when he appeareth?
for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers’ sope
(borith).’ From neither of these passages does it
distinctly appear whether the substance referred
to by the name of borith was obtained from the
mineral or from the vegetable kingdom. But it
is evident that it was possessed of cleansing pro-
perties; and this is confirmed by the origin and
signification of the word, which is thus illustrated
by Celsius: ‘a verbo "3 Barar, purificavit,
que vox etiam apud Chaldzos, Syros, Arabes
in usu fuit, descendit nomen 2 Bor, puritas’
(Hierobot. i. p. 419). So Maimonides, on the
Talmud, tract Shemittah, ‘Species ablutionibus
apt, uti sunt Borith et Ahal.

The word dorith is very similar to the boruk of
the Arabs, written baurakA in the Latin transla-
tions of Serapion and Avicenna ; and translated ni-
trum—that 1s, natron, or carbonate of soda. Boruk
appears, however, to have been used in a generic
rather than ina specific sense, as in the Persian works
on Materia Medica, derived chiefly from the Ara-
bic, which we have collated, we find that no less
than six different kinds of boruk (Persian booreh)
are enumerated; of which some are natural, as
the Armenian, the African, &c. ; others artificial,
as that obtained from burning the wood of the
poplar; also that employed in the preparation
of glass. Of these it is evident that the two
last are, chemically, nearly the same, being Loth
varbonates of alkalis; the incineration of most
plants, as well as of the poplar, yield the car-
bonate of potash (commonly called potash, or
pearlash); while carbonate of soda, or barilla, is
the alkali used in the preparation of glass. Pre-
vious to the composition of bodies having been
definitely ascertained by correct chemical ana-
lysis, dissimilar substances were often grouped
together under one general term; while others,
although similar in composition, were separated.
om account of some unimportant character, as
differcnce of colour or of origin, &c. It is unne-
cessary for our present purpose to ascertain the
other substances included by the Arabs under
the general term of bork, and which may have
been also included under the nitrum of the Greeks.
It is evident that both the carbonate of soda and
of potash were comprehended under one name by
the furmer. It would be difficult, therefore, to dis-
tinguish the one trom the other, unless some cire
cumstances were added in addition to the mere
name. Thus in the above passage of Jeremiah
we have nefer (nitre) and borith (scope) indicated
as being both employed for washing, or possessed
of some cleansing properties; and yet, from
vecurring in the same passage, they must have
differed in some respects. The term natron we
know was, in later times, confined to the salt ob-
tained chiefly from the natron-lakes of Egypt,


BORROWING.


and neter may also have been so in earlier times.
Since therefore the natural carbonate of soda is
mentioned in one part of the verse, it is very pro-
bable that the artificial carbonates may be alluded
to in the other, as both were in early times em-
ployed by Asiatic nations for the ag eee of
washing. The carbonate of potash, obtained
from the burning of most plants growing at a
distance from the sea or a saline soil, mi
not have been distinguished from the carbonate
of soda, produced fromthe ashes of plants grow-
ing on the shores of the sea or of sult-water lakes.

Hence it is probable that the ashes of plants,
called boruk and boreh by Asiatic nations, may be
alluded to under the name of borith, as there is
no proof’ that soap is intended, though it may
have been known to the same le at very early
periods. Still less is it probable that borax is
meant, as has been supposed by some authors,
apparently from the mere similarity of name.

Supposing that the ashes of plants are intended

by the word borith, the next point of inquiry is,
whether it is to be restricted to those of any par-
ticular plants. The ashes of the poplar are men-
tioned by Arabian authors, and of the vine by Dios-
corides ; those of the plantain and of the Butea
Jfrondosa by Sanscrit authors: thus indicating
that the plants which were most common, or which
were used for fuel, or other purposes, in the different
countries, had also their ashes, that is, impure
carbonate of potash, employed for washing, &c.
Usually the ashes only of plants growing on the
sea-shore have been thought to be intended. All
these, as hefore mentioned, would yield barilla, or
carbonate of soda. Many of them have been burnt,
for the soda they yield, on the coasts of India,
of the Red Sea, and of the Mediterranean.
They belong chiefly to the natural family of the
Chenopodew and to that of the Mesembryanthe-
mums. In Arabic authors, the plant yielding
soda is said to be called tshnan, and its Persian
name is stated to be ghasool, both words signifying
‘the washer’ or ‘washing-herb.’ Rauwolf' points
out two plants in Syria and Palestine which
yield alkaline salts. - Hasselquist considered one
of them to be a Mesembryanthemum. Fors
kul has enumerated several plants as being
bumed for the barilla or soda which they afford :
as Mesembryanthemum geniculatum and nodi-
florum, vothof which are called ghasool. Sal-
sola kali, and his Sueda munoica, called asul,
are other plants, especially those last named, which
yield sal-alkali. So on the coasts of the Indian
Peninsula, Salicornia Indica and Salsola nudi-
Sora yield barilla in great abundance and purity,
as do Salsola sativa, Kali, Soda, and Tragus; and
also Salicornia annua, on the coasts of Spain and
of the South of France.—J. F. R.

BORROWING. On the general subject, as
a matter of law or precept, see Loan.

In Exod. xii. 35 we are told that the Israelites,
when on the point of their departure from Egypt
“borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and
jewels of gold, and raiment ;’ and it is added, that
‘the Lord gave the people favour in the sight of the
Egyptians, so that they lent unto them such things.
as they required. And they spoiled the Egyptians.’
This was in pursuance of a Divine command which
had been given to them through Moses (Exod. ub
22; xi. 2). This has suggested a difficulty, seeing
that the Israelites had certainly no intention @


BORROWING.
retin to Egypt, or to restore the valuables which
they thus obtained from their Egyptian ‘neigh-
bours.’ The removal of this difficulty has been
sought in various modes. The first is to question
the accuracy of the present translation. It is ad-
mitted that the general acceptation of the word


wendered borroto byw) is to request or demand;


although there are places (Exod. xxii. 14; 1 Sam.
i. 28; 2 Kings vi. 5) where borrowing is certainly
denoted by it. The real question, therefore, is,
which of these significations agrees best with the
context and the circumstances of the transac-
fion. Those who would at all hazards discon-
nect the Divine name from a transaction resting
on this basis, allege that the Israelites did not
borrow the valuables, but demanded them of
their Egyptian neighbours, as an indemnity for
‘heir services, and for the hard and bitter bondage
which they had endured, But this does not
appear to us to mend the matter much; for the
Imaelites had been public servants, rendering
Certain onerous services to the state, but not in
Personal bondage to individual Egyptians, whom,
nevertheless, they, according to this account,
tmulcted of much valuable property in com-
pestn for wrongs committed by the state.
ese individual Egyptians also were selected
not with reference to their being implicated more
others in the wrongous treatment of the Is-
taclites: they were those who happened to be their
‘neighbours,’ and as such open more than others
to the exaction. This mode of extorting private
and partial compensation for public wrong will
not stand the test of our rules of public mo-
nility, any more than that of borrowing without
the intention to re-ture. As so little is to be gained
by the proposed change, we incline to adhere to
he old interpretation, that the Israelites actually
did borrow the valuables of the Egyptians, with
the understanding, on the part of the latter, that
were to be restored. is agrees with the
fact that the professed object of the Hebrews was
Not to quit Egypt for ever, but merely to with-
‘aw for a few days into the desert, that they
might there celebrate a high festival to their God.
At such festivals it was usual among all nations
‘0 appear in their gayest attire, and decked with
Many omaments; and this suggests the grounds
on which the Israelites might rest the application
to their Egyptian neighbours for the loan of their
Jewels and rich raiment. Their avowed intention
Tetum in a few days must have made the re-
Quest appear very reasonable to the Egyptians;
and in fact the Orientals are, and always have
, remarkably ready and liberal in lending
it Ornaments to one another on occasions of
Meigious solemnity or public ceremony. It would
reem also as if the avowed intention to return
Precluded the Hebrews from any other ground
that of borrowing; for if they had required

« demanded these things as compensations or
gifts, it would have amounted to an admission
It t they were quitting the country altogether.
18 therefore best to take these things Pires
rowing us a necessary result of the pro-

= Intention to wou; ass, although the
“ing without the intention to restore, looks
a Unjustifiable than the avowed intention to
a Ta, when the real intention was to withdraw
facts must be tried by the same


BOTNIM. $48


general doctrine of public morals, and must be
explained with reference to the same general prin-
ciples. Turn which way we will in this matter,
there is but a choice of difficulties; and this leads
us to suspect that we are not acquainted with all
the facts bearing on the case, in the absence of
which we spend our strength for nought in labour-
ing to explain it. One of the difficulties is some-
what softened by the conjecture of Professor Bush,
who, in his Note on Exod. xi. 2, observes, ‘We
are by no means satisfied that Moses was required
to command the people to practise the device here
mentioned. We regard it rather, as far as
were concerned, as the mere prediction of a fact
that should occur.’

BOSOM. It is usual with the western Asiatics
to carry various sorts of things in the bosom of
their dress, which forms a somewhat spacious de-
pository, being wide above the girdle, which con-
tines it so tightly around the waist as to prevent
anything from slipping through. Aware of this,
Harmer and our other Biblical illustrators rather
hastily concluded that they had found an expla~
nation of the text (Luke vi. 38), ‘Good measure,
pressed down, and shaken together, and running
over, shall men give into your bosom.’ All these ~
expressions obviously apply, in the literal sense,
to corn; and it is certain that corn and things
measured in the manner described never are car-
ried in the bosom. They could not be placed
there, or carried there, or taken out without serious
inconvenience, and then only in a small quantity.
The things carried in the bosom are simply such
as Europeans would, if in the Kast, carry in their
pockets. Yet this habit of carrying valuable
property may indicate the origin of the image, as
an image, into the bosom, without requiring us to
suppose that everything described ac bene given
into the bosom really was deposited there.

To have one in our bosom implies kindness,
secrecy, intimacy (Gen. xvi. 5; 2 Sam. xii. 8).
Christ is in the bosom of the Father ; that is, pos-
sesses the closest. intimacy with, and most perfect
knowledge of, the Father (John i, 18). Our Saviour
is said to carry his lambs in his bosom, which
touchingly represents his tender oare aad watch-
fulness over them.

BOSSES, the thickest and strongest parts, the
prominent points of a buckler [Arnms, ARMOUR].

BOTNIM (D'~) occurs only in Gen. xliii.
11, where Jacob, wishing to conciliate the ruler
of Egypt, desires his sons on their return to ‘take
of the best fruita in the land in their vessels and
carry down the man a present,’ ni aloug with
other articles mentions ‘nu¢s and almonds.’ Here
the word rendered nuts is botnim. Among the
vagious translations of this term Celsius ennme
rates walnuts, hazel-nuts, pine-nuts, peaches, dates,
the fruit of the terebinth-tree, and even almonds ;
but there is little doubt that pistachio-nuts is the
true rendering. From the context it is evident
that the articles intended for presents were the
 seaha of Syria, or easily procurable there.

ence they were probably tess common in Egypt,
and therefore suitable for such a purpose.

The Hebrew word botnim, reduced from ite


plural form, is very similar to the Arabic »i


datam, which we find in Arabian authors, as
Rhases, Serapion, and Avicenna. It is sometimes


346 BOTNIM.
written baton, boton, botin, and albotin. The
name is applied specially to the terebinth-tree, or
Pistacia terebinthus of botanists, the réppurOos or
vepéBivbos of the Greeks. This is the be grad
yielding pistacia, a native of Syria of the
Greek Archipelago, which bas already been
described in the article ALau. The tree, as there
mentioned, is remarkable for yielding one of the
finest kinds of turpentine, that usually called
of Chio or of Cyprus, which, employed as a medi-
cine in ancient times, still holds its place in the
British acopeias. From being produced
only in a few places and from being highly valued,
it is usually slalterated with the common kinds of
turpentine. In many places, however, where the
tree grows well, it Hoes not yield turpentine, which
may account for its not being noticed as a pro-
duct of Palestine; otherwise we might have in-
ferred that the turpentine of this species of pistacia
formed one of the articles sent as a present,.into
Egypt. This seems to have been the view of the
translators of the Sept., who render botnim hy
rep¢BivOos. The name batam is applied by the
Arabs both to the turpentine and to the tree. It
appears, however, to be sometimes used yeneri-
cally, as in some Arabic works it is applied to a
tree of which the kernels of the seeds are described
as being of a green colour. This is the distin-
guishing characteristic of another species of pista-
cia, the P. vera of botanists, of which the fruit is
well kuown to the Arabs by the name of fistuk,
which seems to be derived from the Persian
pisteh. This, no doubt, gave origin to the Greek
miordxia, said by Dioscorides to be produced in
Syria and to be like pine-nuts. Besides these edible
kernels, the pistacia-tree is described in the Arabic
works on Materia Medica as yielding another
uct somewhat similar to the turpentine of the
ttam, but which is called ’ aluk-al-anbat, a resin
of the andat, as if this were anuther name for the
istacia-tree. This brings it much nearer the
tnim of Seri The Botna of the Talmud
is considered by annotators to be the pistacia
(Celsius, Hierobot. i. p. 26). Bochart for this
and other reasons considered botnim to be the

kernels of the pistacia-tree.

The pistachio-nut-tree is well known, extending
as it does from Syria to Affghanistan. From the
latter country the seeds are carried as an article
of commerce to India, where they are eaten in
their uncooked state, added to sweetmeats, or asa
dessert fried with pepper and salt, being much
relished by Europeans for the delicacy of their
flavour. The pistacia-tree is most common in the
northern, that 1s, the cooler of Syria, but it
is also found wild in Palestine in some very
remarkable positions, as Mount Tabor, and
the summit of Mount Attarous (Nebo?), (Phy-
sical Palestine, p. 323}. This tree is said to have
been introduced from Syria into Italy by Lucius
Vitellius in the reign of Tiberius. It delights in
a dry soil, and rises to the height of 20, and some-
times 30 feet. As it belongs to the same genus
as the terehinth-tree, so like it the male and fe-
male flowers grow on separate trees. It is there-
fore necessary for the fecundation of the seed that
a male tree be planted among the female ones.
It is probably owing to the flowers of the latter
not being fecundated, that the trees occasional]
bear oblong fruit-like but hollow bodies, which
are sometimes described as galls, sometimes as


BOTTLE.


nuts, of little value. Tee one are inclosed
in a woody but brittle whitish-coloured shell, and
witbin it 1s the seed-covering, which is thin, mem-

and of a reddish colour. The kemel
is throughout of a green colour, abounds in oil,
and has a sweetish agreeable taste. Pistachio-
nuts are much eaten by the natives of the countries
where they are grown, and, as we have seen, they
form articles of commerce from Affghanistan to
India—a hot country like Egypt. They are also
exported from Syria to Europe in considerable
quantities. They might therefore have well formed
a part of the present intended for Joseph, notwith-
standing the high position which he occupied in


Egypt.—J. F. R.

BOTTLE. Natural objects, it is obvious,
would be the earliest things employed for holdi
and preserving liquids; and of natural obj
those would be preferred which either presented
themselves nearly or quite ready for use, or such
as could speedily be ht into the requisite
shape. The skins of animals afford in themselves
more conveniences for the purpose than any other
natural product. When an animal had been
either for food or sacrifice, it was easy and
to use the hide for enveloping the fat or other sub-
stances, and with very little trouble the parts of
the skin might be sewed together so as to make it
hold liquids. The first bottles, therefore, were
probably made of the skins of animals. Accord-
ingly, in the fourth book of the Iliad (1. 247) the
attendants are represented as bearing wine for use
in a bottle made of goat's skin, "Acxg ¢y aiyely.
In Herodotus also (ii. 121) a passage occurs
by which it appears that it was customary among
the ancient Eyyptians to use bottles made of skins;
and from the language employed by him it may
be inferred that a bottle was formed hy sewing 5p
the skin and leaving the projection of the leg
foot to serve as a cock; hence it was termed
wo8edéy. This aperture was closed with a plug or
astring. In some instances every was sewed
up except the neck; the neck of the animal thus
became the neck of the bottle. This alleged use
of skin-bottles by the Egyptians is confirmed by
the monuments, on which such various forms as
the following occur. Fig. 1 is curious as showing


the mode in which they were carried by a yokes
and as it balances a large bottle in a case, this skin


BOTTLE.


may be presumed to have contained wine. Fig.7
is such a skin of water as in the agricultural
scenes is suspended from the bough of a tree, and
from which the labourers occasionally drink.
Figs. 2 and 3 represent two men with skins at
their backs, belonging to a party of nomades
entering Egypt. This party has been with some
oer supposed to represent the sons of
jacob—a point elsewhere considered [JSoszPx}.

The Greeks and Romans also were accustomed
to use bottles made of skins, chiefly for wine.
Some interesting examples of those in use amon;
the Romans are represented at Herculaneum an
Pompeii, and are copied in the annexed en-
graying.


Skin-bottles doubtless existed among the He-
brews even in patriarchal times ; but the first clear
notice of them does not occur till Joshua ix. 4,
where it is said that the Gibeonites, wishing to im-
pose upon Joshua as if they had come from a long
distance, took ‘ old sacks upon their asses, and
wine-bottles old and rent and bound up.’ So in
the 13th verse of the same chapter : ‘ these bottles
of wine which we filled were new; and behold,
= be rent; and these our garments and our
shoes are become old by reason of the very long
Joumey.’ Age, then, the effect of wearing
and tearing the bottles in question, which must
Consequently have been of skin. To the same
effect is the passage in Job xxxii. 19, ‘My belly is
rad which hath no vent; it is ready to burst,
hs € New bottles.’ Our Saviour’s language (Matt.
145 Luke v. 37, 38; Mark ii. 22) is thus
tryed explained : ‘Men do not put new wine into
Old bottles, else the bottles break and the wine
Tunneth out, and the bottles perish ;’ ‘ New wine
id be put in new bottles, and both are preserved.’
of, the conception of an English reader who knows
rie bottles but such as are made of clay or glass,
F idea of hotles breaking through age presents an
pe grey  aealty ; but skins ey become
vy Tens bound up;’ they also e, in
pa) hard and inelastic, and would | apie a
in ition be very unfit to hold new wine, probably
i state of active fermentation.- Even new skins

ght be unable to resist the internal pressure
na by fermentation. If, therefore, by ‘new’
J cones ‘untried,’ the passage just cited from

a ho inconsistency.

Mal the drinking of wine is illegal among the
Rigs who are now in possession of Western
’, little is ‘seen of the ancient use of skin-


BOTTLE 347.


bottles for wine, unless among thé Christians of”
Georgia, Armenia, and Lebanon, where they are
still thus employed. In Georgia the wine is
stowed in large ox-skins, and is moved or at
hand for use in smaller skins of goats or ki


But skins are still most extensively used through-
out Western Asia for water. Their most usual
forms are shown in the above cut a which also
displays the manner in which they are carried.
The water-carriers bear water in such skins and


_ in this manner.


It is an error to represent bottles as being
made exclusively of dressed or undressed skins
among the ancient Hebrews (Jones, Biblical Cy-
clopedia, in voc.). Among the Egyptians orna-
mental vases were of hard stone, alabaster, glass,
ivory, bone, porcelain, bronze, silver or gold; and
also, for the use of the people aoa of glazed

»ttery or common earthenware. ly as

thmes III., assumed to be the P! of the
Exodus, s.c. 1490, vases are known to have ex-
isted of a shape so elegant and of workmanship
so superior, as to show that the art was not, even
then, in its infancy.


"RRR +
SON
POA VS LLG


XK SITE


—


171.—1, 2.Gold. 3. Cut glass. 4. Earthenware.
5,7. Porcelain. 6. Hard stone. 8. Gold, with plates
and bands. 9. Stone. 10. Alabaster, with lid.


Many of the bronze vases found at Thebes and
in other parts of E are of a quality which
cannot fail to excite iration, and which proves
the skill possessed by the Egyptians in the art of
working and compounding metals. Their shapes
are m@t various—some neat, some plain, some
grotesque; some in form not unlike our cream


jogs, others as devoid of taste as the wine-bottles


these vases and bottles, from actual specimens in
the British Museam.


4 2, 4
3
=
O
9


IIDID ILD PP p


SD) Lea


Nar erds vee


“1


178.—1, 3. Earthenware. 2, 5, 6, 7. Green glass.
4. Blue glass. 8,11. Alabaster. %, 10. Porcelain.


The subjoined representation of a case con-
taining bottles, supported on a stand, is among
the Egyptian antiquities in the Berlin Museum,
and is supposed to have belonged to a medical
man or to the toilet of a Theban lady wane
son, ii. 217). It forms a suitable conclusion to
this set of illustrations,


The perishable nature of skin-bottles led, at an
early period, to the employment of instruments of
a more durable kind; and it is to be presumed
that the children of Israel veld ons their
sojourn in Egypt, learn, among other arts prac-
tised by their isa that of working in ee
ware. Thus, as early as the days of the Judges
Gv. 19; v. 25), bottles or vases oe of
some earthy material, and apparently of a supe-
rior make, were in use; for, what in the fourth
chapter is termed ‘a bottle,’ is in the fifth desig-
mated ‘a lordly dish.’ Isaiah (xxx. 14) expressly
mentions ‘the bottle of the potters,’ as the seadiug
im tha margin gives it, being a literal translation


BOWELS.


from the Hebrew, whilethe terms which the prophet
employs show that he could not have intended
any thing made of skin—‘he shall break t¢ as the
breaking of the potter's vessel that is broken in
shall not be found in the


get
“break the bottle ;’ ‘Even so, saith the Lord of
Hosts (ver. 11), will I break this people and this
city as one breaketh a potter's vessel, that cannot
be made whole again’ (see also Jer. xiii. 1214).
~ Metaphorically the word bottle is used, especially
in poetry, for the clouds considered as i
out and pouring down water (Job xxxviii. 37),
‘Who can stay the bottles of heaven?’ The cut
already given in is 278 affords an illustration
of a passage in the Psalms (Ivi. 8), ‘ Pug thoa
my tears in a bottle '—that is, ‘ treasure them up
—‘ have a regard to them as something precious.”
It was, as appears from the cut at Ba a
tomary to tie up in bags or small jes, and
secure with a seal, — value, such as


precious stones, other ornaments. —
J.RB.
BOUNDARIES. [Lanpmarxs.]
BOW. [Arms] bow is frequently mes-
tioned symbolically in Scripture. In Ps. vii. 12


it implies victory, signifying judgments laid up in
store against offenders. It is sometimes to
denote lying and falsehood (Ps. xiv. 4; xx. 4;
Jer. ix. 3), bly from the many circumstances
which tend to render a bow inoperative, ially
in unskilful hands. Hence also ‘a deceitful bow’
(Ps. Ixxviii. 57; Hos. vii. 16); with which com-
pare Virgil's ‘ Perfidus ensis frangitur.’

The bow also signifies any kind of arms. The
bow and spear are the most frequently mentioned,
because the ancients used these most (Ps. xliv. 6;
xlvi. 9; Zech. x. 4; Josh. xxiv. 12).

In Habakk. iii. 9 ‘ thy bbw was made bare,’
means that it was drawn out of its case. The
Orientals used to carry their bows in a case hung
on their girdles,

In 2 Sam. i. 18 tne Authorized Version has
* Also he (David) bade them teach the children
of Judah the use of the bow.’ ‘Here,’ says Pro-
fessor Robinson (Addit. to Calmet), ‘the words
“the use of” are not in the Hebrew, and cony
a sense entirely false to the English reader. vA
should he “teach them the bow," i.e. the song of
THE now, from the mention of this weapon in |
verse 22. This mode of selecting an inscription
toa or work ig common in the East; so in
the Koran the second Sura is entitled the cow,
from the incidental mention in it of the red heifes:
comp. Num. xix. 2. In a similar manner, the
names of the books of the Pentateuch in the He-
rh Bibles are merely the first word in each


BOWELS are often put by the Hebrew writers
for the internal parts generally, the inner man, and
80 also for heart, as we use that term. Hence the
bowels are made the seat of teuderness, mercy, and
compassion; and thus the Scriptural expressions
of the bowels being moved, bowels mercy,
straitened in the bowels, &c. By a similar asso-
ciation of ideas, the bowels are also sometimes
made the seat of wisdom and understanding (Job
xxxviii. 36; Ps. li. 10; Isa. xvi. 11). .


‘BOZRAH.


' BOWING. [Arrrrupes.]
BOX-TREE. [Terasuur.]


BOZRAH (i1}¥3 ; Sept. Boodp), an ancient
city, known also to the Greeks and Romans by the
name of Bosrra. In most of the passages of the
Old Testament where it is mentioned, it ap
asa chief city of the Edomites (Isa, xxxiv. 6; Ixiii.
1; Amos i, 12; Jer. xlix. 13, 22). In Jer. xlviii.
% Bozrah is named among the cities of Moab:
but it does not hence follow, as Raumer and others
‘contend, that we should regard them as different
cities; for, in consequence of the continual wars,
incursions, and conquests which were common
among the small kingdoms of that region, the pos-
session of particular cities often into dif-
ferent hands. Thus Selah, 7. e. Petra, the capital
of the Edomites, taken from them by Amaziah,
king of Judah (2 Kings xiv. 7), is also mentioned
by Isaiah (xvi. 1) among the Moabitish cities.
Since lay not in the original territory of the
Edomites, te. south-east of Judah, but north of the
territory of the Ammonites, in Auranitis, or Hau-
Tan, we must suppose that the Edomites had be-
Come masters of it by conquest, and that it was
afterwards taken from them by the Moabites, who
for a time retained it in their possession, This is

«upon the whole more satisfactory than the conclu-

- sion of Raumer ( Palastina), who makes Bostra to
be the Bozrah of Moab, and seeks the Bozrah of

' Edom in the present Besseyra, i. ¢. little Bozrah,
‘so-called, he conjectures, to distinguish it from the
Bozrah of Moab. His principal argument, that

. Edom. is described as dwelling in ‘the clefts of
the rocks ' (Jer. xlix. 16), is of little weight, seeing
ithat it is very possible for the dwellers in rocks
and mountains to have possessions in the neigh-

plains.


174. [Bozrah.]
Bozrah lay southward from Edrei, one of the

. Capitals of Bashan, and, according to Eusebius,
_ Roman miles distant from it. The Romans
teckoned Bozrah as belonging to Arabia Deserta
(Amm. Marcell. xiv.27). Alexander Severus
tmade it the seat of a Roman colony. In the acts

( the Nicene, Ephesian, and Chalcedonian coun-
~ Cs mention is made of bishops of Bozrah ; and
bh later period it became an important seat of the
*storians (Asseman, Biblioth. Orient. tom. iii.
Bi rh, 395 730). Abulfeda makes it the capi-
tal of the Hauran, in which, according to Burck-


w


‘BOZRAH. 349


hardt, it is still one of the most important towns.
Although the place has been since visited by La-
borde (from ake our engraving is taken), Lord
Lindsay, and other later travellers, the account
which Burckhardt gives of Bozrah is still the best
that we possess. ‘ Bozrah is situated in the
oer pie and is at present the last inhabited
in the south-east extremity of the Hauran.
t was formerly the capital of Arabia Provincia,
and is now, including the ruins, the largest town
in the Hauran. It is of an oval shape, its greatest
gy bg from east to west; its circumference
is quarters of an hour, It was anciently
enclosed by a thick wall, which gave it the repu-
tation of a place of great strength. Many pbs
of this wall, especially on the west side, still re-
main; it is constructed with stones of a moderate
size, strongly cemented together. The principal
buildings of Bozrah were on the east side, and in
a direction thence towards the middle of the town.
The south and south-east quarters are covered
with the ruins of private dwellings, the walls of
many of which are still standing, but most of the
roofs have fallen in. The style of building seems
to be similar to that observed in all the other an-
cient towns of the Hauran. On the west side are
springs of fresh water, of which I counted five be-
yond the precincts of the town and six within the
walls; their waters unite with a rivulet, whose
source is on the north-west side, within the town,
and which loses itself in the southern plain, at
several hours’ distance. On the eastern quarter of
the town is a large birket, or reservoir, almost per-
fect, 190 paces in length, 153 in breadth, and
enclosed by a wall seven feet in thickness, built
of large square stones; its depth may be about 20
feet. Acstaircase leads down to the water, as the
basin is never completely filled. This reservoir is
a work of the Saracens, made for watering the pil-
grims’ caravans to Mecca, which as late as the
seventeenth century passed by Bozrah. ... Just
beyond the walls is a large castle of Saracenic
origin, probably of the time of the Crusades ; it is
one of the best-built castles in Syria, and is sur-
rounded by adeep ditch. Its walls are very thick,
and in the interior are alleys, dark vaults, subter-
raneous passages, &e. of the most solid construc-
tion. This castle is a most important post to
obi the harvests of the Hauran against the
ungry Bedouins. ... Of the vineyards for which
Bozrah was celebrated, and which are commemora-
ted in the Greek medals of the Colonia Bostre, not
a vestige remains, There is scarcely a tree in the
neighbourhood of the town, and the twelve or
fifteen families who now inhabit it cultivate no-
thing but wheat, barley, horse-beans, and a little
dhourra (Indian corn). A number of fine rose-
trees grow wild among the ruins of the town, and
are just beginning (April 28th) to open their
buds’ (Burckhardt’s Syria, pp. 224-236 ).

The same writer gives a very ample description
of the various ruins, the extent and importance of
which are alone sufficient to evince the ancient
consequence of the place. They are of various
kinds, Greek, Roman, and Saracenic, with traces of
the native works in the private dwellings.

These monuments of ancient grandeur serve
but to heighten the impression which is created by
the present desolation and decay.— Bozrah,’ says
Lord Lindsay, ‘is now for the most part a heap
of ruins, a most dreary spectacle ; here and. there


350 BRACELET.


thé direction of a street or alley is discernible, but
that is all. The modern inhabitants —a mere
handful — are almost lost in the maze of ruins,
Olive-trees grew here within a few years, they told
us—all extinct now, like the vines for which the
Bostra of the Romans was famous. And such,
in the nineteenth century, and under Moslem
rule, is the condition of a city which even in the
seventh century, at the time of its capture by the
Saracens, was called by Caled “the market-
place of Syria, Irak, and the Hedjaz.” “Ihave
sworn by myself, saith the Lord of Hosts, that
Bozrah shall become a desulation and reproach, a
waste and a curse; and all the cities thereof shall
be perpetual wastes!” (Jer. xlix. 13.) And it is
80. Y


BRACELET. This name, in strict propriety,
is as applicable to circlets worn on the upper part
of the arm as to those worn on the wrist; but as
it has been found convenient to distinguish the
former as Armusrs, the term bracelet must be
restricted to the latter. These are, and always
have been, much in use among Eastern females.
Many of them are of the same shapes and patterns
as the armlets, and are often of such considerable
weight and bulk as to appear more like manacles
than ornaments. Many are often worn one-above
another on the same arm, so as to occupy the
greater part of the space between the wrist and
the elbow. The materials vary according to the
condition of the wearer, but it seems to he the
rule that bracelets of the meanest materials are
better than none. Among the higher classes they
are of mother-of-pearl, of fine flexible gold, and
of silver, the last being the most common. The
saat women use plated steel, horn, brass, copper,

ds, and other materials of a cheap description.
Some notion of the size and value of the bracelets
used both now and in ancient times may be
formed from the fact that those which were pre-
sented by Eliezer to Rebecca weiylied ten shekels
Gen. xxiv. 22... The bracelets are sometimes

t, but more frequently round or semicircular,
except at the point where they open to admit the
hand, where they are flattened. They are fre-
quently hollow, giving the show of bulk (which
is much desired) without the inconvenience.
Bracelets of gold twisted rupe-wise are those now
most used in Western Asia; but we cannot detér-
mine to what extent this fashion may have existed
in ancient times.

BRAMBLE, [Tuorn.]

BRANCH. As trees, in Scripture, denote
great men and princes, sv branches, boughs,
sprouts, or plants denote their offspring. In
conformity with this way of speaking, Christ, in
respect of his human nature, is styled a rod from
the stem of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots

Isa. xi. m4 that is, a prince arising from the

mily of David. This symbol was also in use
among the ancient poets (Sophocles, £ectra, iv.
18; Homer, Iliad, 11. 47, 170, 211, 252, 319;
Pindar, Olymp. ii. 6, &c.). ‘ And so even in
our English tongue (emake Wemyss), the word
imp, which is originally Saxon, and denotes a
lant, is used to the same purpose, especially by

‘ox, the martyrologist, who calls King Edward
the Sixth an imp of great hope; and by Thomas
Cromwell, Earl of Essex, in his dying speech,
who has the same expression concerning the
ame prince.’


A branch is the symbol of kings descended
from royal ancestors, as branches from the root
(Ezek. xvii. 3,10; Dan. xi. 7). As only a vigo-
aie ia can send ida tieroe bran a

ranch is used as a general symbol of prosperity
(Job viii. 16). has

From these explanations it is easy to see how a
branch becomes the symbol of the Messiah (Isa.
xi. 1; iv. 2; Jer. xxiii. 15; Zech. iii. 8; vi. 12;
and elsewhere).

Branch is also used as the symbol of idole
trous worship (Ezek. viii. 17), probably in allu-
sion to the general custom of carrying branches
as a sign of honour.

An abominable branch (Isa. xiv. 19) means a
tree on which a malefactor has been hanged. In
Ezek. xvii. 3 Jehwiachim is called the Aighest
branch of the cedar, as being a king. ;

BRASS. This word occurs in the Authorized
Version. But brass is a factitious metal, not
known to the early Hebrews, and wherever it
occurs, copper is to be understood [Coppsr].
That copper is meant is shown by the text, ‘ Gut
of whose hills thou mayest dig brass’ (Deut.
viii. 9), it being of course impossible to dig a
factitious metal, whether brass or bronze, out of
mines. That compound of copper and rine
which forms our brass does not appear to have
been known to the ancients; but we have every
evidence that they knew and used bronze arms,
implements of that metal having been found
in great abundance among ancient tombs and
ruins. This, instead of pure copper, is probably
sometimes, in the later Scriptures, meant by the
word YN) [Coprsr].

Brass (to retain the word) is in Scripture the
symbol of insensibility, baseness, and presumption
or obstinacy in sin (Isa. xlviii. 45 Jer. vi. 28;
Ezek. xxii. 18). Brass is also a symbol of
strength (Ps. cvii. 16; Isa. xlviii. 4; Mic. iv.
13). So in Jer. i, 18 and xv. 20, brazen walls sig-
nify a strong and lasting adversary or opponent.

The description of the Macedonian empire as
a kingdom of brass (Dan. ii. 39) will be better
understood when we recollect that the arms of
ancient times were mostly of bronze; hence the
fizure forcibly indicates the warlike character of
that kingdom. The mountains of brass, in Zech.
vi. 1, are understood by Vitringa to denote those
firm and immutable decrees by which God go-
verns the world, and it is difficult to affix any
other meaning to the phrase (comp. Ps. xxxvi. 6).

BREAD. The word ‘ bread’ was of far more
extensive meaning among the Hebrews than with
us. There are passages in which it appears to be
applied to all kinds of victuals (Luke xi. 3);
but it more generally denotes all kinds of baked
and pastry articles of food. It is also used,
however, in the more limited sense of bread made
from wheat or barley, for rye is little cultivated
in the East. Barley being used chiefly by the
poor, and for feeding horses [Bar.ey ], bread,
in the more limited sense, chiefly denotes the
various kinds of cake-like bread prepared from
toheaten flour.

Corn is ground daily in the east abe e
After the wheaten flour is taken from
mill, it is made into a dough or paste in a small
wooden trough. It is next leavened; after which
it is made into thin cakes or flaps, round or oval,
and then baked.


kneading-troughs, in which the dough is
respi lpn dg tis aies oc alitbs:

one person does not bake bread for many fami-
lies, as in our towns, and as one family does
not bake bread sufficient for many days, as in
our villages, but every family bakes for the day
caly the quantity of bread which it requires, only
@ comparatively small quantity of’ dough is pre-
pared. This is done in small wooden bowls; and
that those of the ancient Hebrews were of the
same description as those now in use appears
from their being able to carry them, together with
the dough, wrapped up in their cloaks, upon
their sbuulders without difficulty. The Bedouin
Arabs, indeed, use for this purpose a leather,
which can be drawn up into a bag by a running
cord along the border, and in which they prepare
and often carry their dough. This might equally,
and in some respects better answer the described
conditions; but, being especially adapted to the
use of a and tent-dwelling people, it is
more likely that the Israelites, who were not
such at the time of the Exode, then used the
Wooden bowls for their ‘ kneading-troughs’ (Exod.
Vii. 3; xii. 34; Deut. xxviii. 5, 7). It is clear,
from the history of the departure from Egypt,
that the flour had first been made into a dough
by water only, in which state it had been kept
tome little time before it was leavened ; for when
the Israelites were unexpectedly (as to the moment
compelled in all haste to withdraw, it was foun
that, although the dough had been prepared in

ing-trough, it was still unleavenedl

(Rxod. xii. 34; comp. Hos. vii. 4); and it was
™ commemoration of this circumstance that they
and their descendants in all ages were enjoined
to eat only unleavened bread at the feast of the
Passover,


The dough thus red is not always baked
athome. In towns dee are public ovens and
bakers by trade; and although the general rule
in large and respectable families is to bake the
bread at home, much bread is bought of the
bakers by unsettled individuals and poor persons;
and many small households send their dough to
baked ‘at the public oven, the baker receiving
for his trouble a portion of the baked bread,
which he adds to his day's stock of bread for sale.
Such public ovens and bakers by trade must
ve existed anciently in Palestine, and in the
t generally, as is evident from Hos. vii. 4 and
Jer. xxvii, 21. The latter text mentions the bakers’
(or rather bakers’ place or market), and this
Would suggest that, as is the case at present, the
ers, as well as other trades, had a particular
Part of the bazaar or market entirely appropriated
to their business, instead of being dispersed in
different parts of the towns where they lived.
F or their larger operations the bakers have ovens
ick, not altogether unlike our own; and in
ne there are similar ovens. The
Ovens used in domestic baking are, however,
veually of a portable description, and are large
Yesels of stone, earthenware, or copper, inside of
bili when properly heated, small loaves and
re 3 are baked, and on the outer surface of which
in flaps of bread, or else a large wafer-like bis-
cult, may be prepared.
Avother mode of baking bread is much used,
Specially iu the villages. A pit is sunk in the
tulddle of the floor of the principal room, about


BREAD. 351


four or five feet deep by three in diameter, well
lined with compost or cement. When sufficiently
heated by a fire kindled at the bottom, the bread
is made by the thin pancake-like flaps of dough
being, by a peculiar knack of hand in
women, stuck against the oven, to which they ad-
here for a few moments, till they are sufficient]
dressed. As this oven requires considerable fuel,
it is seldom used except in those parts where that
article is somewhat abundant, and where the winter
cold is severe enough td render the warmth of the
oven desirable, not only for baking bread, but for
warming the a ent.

Another sort of oven, or rather mode of baking,
is much in use among the pastoral tribes. A ine
low hole, about six inches deep by three or four
feet in diameter, is made in the ground: this is
filled up with dry brushwood, upon which, when


-kindled, pebbles are thrown to concentrate and re-


tain the heat. Meanwhile the dough is prepared ;
and when the oven is sufficiently heated, the ashes
and pebbles are removed, and the spot well
cleaned out. The dough is then deposited in
the hollow, and is left there over night. The
cakes thus baked are about two fingers thick, and
are very palatable. There can be little doubt that.
this kind of oven and mode of baking bread were
common ameng the Jews. Hence, Hezel very
ingeniously, if not truly, conjectures (Real-Lext-


con, art. ‘ Brod’) comes the 1M ‘Sp of Gen. x1


16, which he renders, or rather paraphrases, ‘ baskets
full of bread baked in holes,’ not * white baskets,’
as in the Authorized Version, nor ‘baskets full of
holes,’ as in our margin; nor ‘ white bread,’ as
in most of the continental versions, seeing that all
bread is white in the East. As the process is
slower and the bread more savoury than any otber,
this kind of bread might certainly be entitled to
the distinction implied in its being prepared for
the table of the Egyptian king. That the name of
the oven should to the bread baked in it, is not
unusual in the Bast, just as the modern tadsheen
(pan) gives its name (say pan-cake) to the cake
baked by it. Hezel’s conjecture that the oven in
question is called a hole, 1}M in Hebrew, and that
the bread baked by it is called therefrom hole-
bread, is corroborated by, if not founded upon, a
passage cited by Buxtorf in his Lex. Talmud :
© Faciunt 1M foramen, vel cavitatem in terra, et
calefacinnt eam igni coquuntque in ea panem, qui
vocatur FIN, a NM cavitate illa in qua coctus
est.” .

There is a baking utensil called in Arabic tajen


(qyele) which is the same word (rrydvov) by


which the Septuagint renders the Hebrew NINO
machabath, in Lev. ii. 5. This leaves little doubt
that the ancient Hebrews had this tajen. It is-
a sort of pan of earthenware or iron (usually the
latter), flat, or slightly convex, which is put over
a slow fire, and on which the thin flaps of dough
are laid and baked with considerable expedition,
although only one cake can be baked in this way
atatime. This is not a household mode of pre-
paring bread, but is one of the simple and pri-
mitive processes employed by the wandering and
semi-wandering tribes, shepherds, hushandmen
and others, who have uccasion to prepare a small
quantity of daily bread in an easy off-hand man-
ner. Bread is also baked in a manner which, al-


353 BREAD.


though apparently very different, is hut a modifi-
cation of the principle of the tajen, and is used
chiefly in the houses of the peasantry. There is a
cavity in the fire-hearth, in which, when required
for baking, a fire is kindled and burnt down to hot
embers, A plate of iron, or sometimes copper, is
placed over the hole, and on this the bread is baked.

Another mode of baking is in use chiefly among
the pastoral tribes, and Ly travellers in the open
country, but is not unknown in the villages. A
smooth clear spot is chosan in the loose ground, a
sandy svil—so common in the Eastern deserts and
harder lands—being preferred. On this a fire is
kindled, and, when the ground is sufficiently
heated, the embers and ashes are raked aside, and
the dough is laid on the heated spot, and then
covered over with the glowing embers and ashes
which had just been removed. The bread is seve-
ral times turned, and in less than half an hour is
sufficiently baked. Bread thus baked is called in”
Scripture M3) 'uggah (Gen. xviii. 6 ; 1 Kings xvii.
13; Ezek. iv. 12), and the indication, 1 Kings
xix. 6, is very clear, DXDY1 NAY ‘uggath retzafim
(coal-cakes), i.e. cakes baked under the coals.
The Septuagint expresses this word 'uggath very
fairly by éyxpuplas, punis subcinericius (Gen.
xviii. 6; Exod. xii. 39). According to Busbequius
(dtin. p. 36), the name of Huyath, which he in-
terprets ash-cakes, or ash-bread, was in his time
still applied in Bulgaria to cakes prepared in this
fashion; and as soon as a stranger arrived in the
villages, the women baked such bread in all haste,
in order to sell it tohim. This conveys an in-
teresting illustration of Gen. xvi. 6, where Sarah,
on the arrival of three strangers, was required to
bake ‘quickly’ such ash-bread—though not for
sale, but for the hospitable entertainment of the
unknown travellers. The bread thus prepared is
gvod and palatable, although the outer rind, or
crust, is apt to smell and taste of the smoke and
ashes. The necessity of turning these cakes givea
@ satisfactory explanation of Hos. vii. 8, where
Ephraim is compared to a cake not turned, ¢. e.
only baked on one side, while the other is raw and
adhesive.

The second chapter of Leviticus gives a sort
of list of the different kinds of bread and cakes in
use among the ancient Israelites. This is done
incidentally, for the purpose of distinguishing the
kinds which were and which were not suitable for
offerings. Of such as were fit for offerings we
find—

I. Bread baked in ovens (Lev. ii. 4); but this
is limited to two sorts, which appear to be, Ist, the
bread baked iuside the vessels uf stone, metal or
earthenware, as already mentioned. In this cuse
the oven is half filled with small smooth pebbles,
upon which, when heated and the fuel withdrawn,
the dough is laid. Bread prepared in this mode is
necessarily full of indentations or holes, from the
pebbles on which it is baked: 2nd, the bread pre-

by dropping with the hollow of the hand a thin
ayer of the almost liquid dough upon the outside
of the same oven, and which, being baked dry the
moment it touches the heated surface, torms a thin
water-like bread or biscuit. The first of these
Moses appears to distinguish by the characteristic


epithet of mn, perforated, or full of holes ; and


the other by the name of D'P'p", thin cakes,
being, if correctly identified, by much the thin-


BREAD.


nest of any bread used in the East. A cake of
the former was offered as the first of the dough
(Lev. viii. 26), and is mentioned in 2 Sam. vi. 19,
with the addition of * ‘ bread,'— perforated bread


(n> nbn). Both sorts, when used for offerings,
were to be unleavened (perhaps to secure their being
prepared for the special pwypose); and the tirst
sort, namely, that which appears tu have been baked
inside the oven, was to be mized up with oil, while
the other (that baked outside the oven), which from
its thinness could not possibly be thus treated, was
tobe only smeared with oil. The fresh olive oi},
which was to be used for this purpose, imparts to
the bread something of the flavour of butter, which
last is usually of very indifferent quality in
countries.

Il. Bread baked in a pan—l\st, that which,
as before described, is baked in, or rather
on, the tajen. This also as un offering was to
be unleavened and mixed with oil. 2nd. This,
according to Lev. ii. 6, could be broken into
pieces, and oil poured over it, forming a dis-
tinct kind of bread and offering. And m fact
the thin biscuits baked on the éajen, as well as the
other kinds of bread, thus broken up and re-made
into a kind of dough, form a kind of food or pastry
in which the Orientals take much delight, and
which makes a standing dish among the pastoral
tribes. The ash-cake answering to the Hebrew
“uggah is the most frequently employed for this pnr-
pose. When it isbaked, it is broken up into crumbs,
and re-kneaded with water, to which is added,
in the course of the operation, butter, oil, vinegar,
or honey. Having thus again reduced it to a
tough dough, the mass is broken into pieces, which
are baked in smaller cakes and eaten as a
dainty. The preparation for the Mosaical ofering
was more simple; but it serves to indicate the
existence of such preparations among the ancient
Israelites.

III. Bread baked upon the hearth — that ia to
say, baked upon the hearth-stone, or plate covering
the firepit which has already been mentioned.
This also was to be mixed with oil (Lev. ii. 7).

As these various kinds of haked breads were ‘al-
lowed as offerings, there is no question that they were
the best modes of preparing bread known to the
Hebrews in the time of Moses; and as all the in-
gredients were such as Palestine abundantly pro-
duced, they were such ufferings as even the poorest
might without much difticulty procure.

Besides these there are two other modes of pre-
paring bread indicated in the Scriptures, which
cannot with equal certainty be identitied by re-
ference to modern usages.

One of these is the OTP) nikuddin of 1 Kings
xiv. 3, translated ‘cracknels’ in the Authorized
Version, an almost obsolete word denoting a kind
of crisp cake. The original would seem by its
eiyinbloge (from “Ip3, speckled, spotted), to de-
note something spotted or sprinkled over, &c.
Buxtorf (Lez. Chald. et Talm.) writes under this
word ; ‘Orbiculi parvi panis instar dimidii orf,
Teramoth, c. 5;) and in another place (2zpit. rad,
Hebr. p. 544), ‘Et bucellata, 1 Reg. xiv. 3, qua
biscocta vulgo vocant, sic dicta, quod in frusta
exigua rotunda, quasi puncta conficerentur, aut
quod singulari forma interpunctarentur.” It ig
indeed not improbable that they may bave been a
sort of biscuit or small and hard baked cakes,


BREASTPLATE.


calculated to keep (for a journey or some other pur-

pore) by reason of their excessive hardness (or per-

ps being twice baked, asthe word biscuit implies).

Not only are such hard cakes or biscuits still used

in the East, but they are, like all biscuits, punc-

tured to renderthem more hard, aud sometimes also
they are sprinkled with seeds ; either of which cir-
cumstances sufficiently meets the conditions sng-
gested by the etymology of the Hebrew word. The
existence of such biscuits is further implied in

Josh. ix, 5, 12, where the Gibeonites describe their

bread as having become as hard as biscuit (not

‘ tmouldy,’ as in the Authorized Version), by rea-

son of the length of their journey.

The other was a kind of fancy bread, the making
of which appears to have been’a rare accomplish-
ment, since Tamar was required to prepare it for

on in his pretended illness (2 Sam. xiii. 6).
€ name only indicates that it was some
favourite kind of cake, of which there may have

n different sorts, no conjecture with reference

to it cam be offered. See Hezel, Real-Lexicon,
att.‘ Brod ;’ Burckhardt, Notes on the Bedouins ;
and the various travellers in Palestine, &c., par-
ticularly Shaw, Niebuhr, Mouconys, Russell,
Lane (Modern Egyptians), Perkins, Olin, &c.
compared with the present writer's personal ob-
servations,

BREAD or rn Presence. [Suew Braan.]

BREASTPLATE, a piece of defensive ar-
mour. [Aras, ARMouR.

BREASTPLATE or ‘tue Hicu-Prizst, a
splendid omament covering the hreast of the high-
rest. It was composed of richly embroidered
cloth, in which were set, in four rows, twelve pre-
cous stones, on each of which was engraven the
tame of one of the twelve tribes of Israel (Exod.
xvi, = 15-29; xxxix. 8-21). [Pruxsts,
DRESS OF. ‘

BREECHES. —_— DRESS O¥F:]

BRICKS. Bricks compacted with straw and
dried in the sun, are those which are chiefly men-
toned in the Scriptures. Of such bricks the tower
of Babel was doubtless composed [Banet, Bany-
ton], and the making of such formed the chief

Of the Israelites when bondsmen in Egypt

‘xod. i. 13, 14), This last fact constitutes the
Pncipal subject of Scriptural interest connected
Ma bricks; ‘and leads us to regard with peculiar
Teo the mural paintings of that country, which
teately been brought tu light, in which scenes

ck-making are depicted,


175. (Egyptian Brickmaking.]


Pi: use of crude brick, baked in the sun,
epee in Upper and Lower Egzpt, both


€ and private buildings; ane ‘be brick-


BRICKS. 353


field gave abundant occupation to numerous
labourers throughout the country. These simple
materials were found to be particularly suited to
the climate, and the ease, rapidity, and cheapness
with which they were made, afforded additional
recommendations. Inclosures of gardens or gra-
naries, sacred circuits encompassing the courts of
temples, walls of fortifications and towns, dwell- .
snlacnes and tombs, in short, all but the temples
themselves were of crnde brick ; and so great was
the demand, that the Egyptian government, ob-
serving the profit which would accrue from a
monopoly of them, undertook to supply the pub-
lic at a moderate price, thus preventing all un-
authorized persons from engaging in the manu-
facture. aA in order the more effectually
to obtain this end, the seal of the king, or of some
privileged person, was stamped upon the bricks
at the time they were made. This fact, though
not positively mentioned by any ancient author,
is inferred from finding bricks so marked both
in public and private buildings; some having
the ovals of a king, and some the name and titles
of a priest, or other influential person: and it is

bable that those which bear no characters be-
onged to individuals who had obtained a licence
or permission from the government, to fabricate
them for their own consumption. The employ-
ment of numerous captives who worked as slaves,
enabled the government to sell the bricks at a
lower price than those who had recourse solely to
free labour ; so that, without the necessity of a pro-
hibition, they speedily became an exclusive manu-
facture; and we find that, independent of native
labourers, a great many foreigners were constantly
engaged in the brick-fields at Thebes and other
parts of Egypt. The Jews, of course, were not
excluded trom this drudgery; and, like the cap-
tives detained in the Thebaid, they were con-
demned to the same labour in Lower Egypt.
They erected granaries, treasure-cities, and other
public buildings for the Egyptian monarch: the
materials used in their construction were the work
of their hands; and the constant employment of
brick-makers may be accounted for by the exten-
sive supply ki and kept by the government
for sale’ (Wilkinson’s Ancient Egyptians, ii. pp.
97, 98).

Captive foreigners being thus found engaged
in brick-making, Biblical illustrators, with their
usual alacrity, jumped to the conclusion that
these captive foreigners were Jews, and that the
scenes represented were those of their actual opera-
tions in Egypt. Sir J. G. Wilkinson satisfac-
torily disposes of this inference by the following
remark: ‘To meet with Hebrews in the sculptures
cannot reasonably be expected, since the remains
in that part of Egypt where they lived have not
been preserved ; but it is curious to discover other
foreign captives occupied in the same manner, and
overlooked by similar ‘task-masters,’ and perform-
ing the very same labours as the Istaelites described
in the Bible; and no one can look at the paintings
of Thebes, representing brick-makers, without a
feeling of the highest interest... .. It is scarcely
fair to argue that, because the Jews made bricks,
and fhe persons here introduced are so engaged,
they must necessarily be Jews; since the Egyp-
tians and their captives are constantly required to
perform the same task; and the great quantity
made at all times may be justly a ag from

a


354 BRIDGE.


the number of buildings which still remain, oon-
structed of these materials: but it is worthy of
remark that more bricks bearing the name of
Thothmes Ili. (oho is supposed to have been the
king at the time of the Exode) have been dis-
covered than at any other period, owing to the
-many prisoners of Asiatic nations employed by
him, independent of his Hebrew captives.’
The process of manufacture indicated by the re-
ntations in cut 175, does not materially differ
m that which is still followed in the same coun-
try. The clay was brought in baskets from the Nile,
thrown into a heap, thoroughly saturated with
water, and worked up to a proper temper by the
feet of the labourers. And here it is observable
that the watering and tempering of the clay is per-
formed entirely by the light-coloured - labourers,
who are the captives, the Egyptians being always
painted red. This labour in such a climate
must have been very fatiguing and unwholesome,
and it consequently appears to have been shunned
by the native Egyptians. There is an allusion to
the severity of this labour in Nabum iii. 14, 15.
The clay, when tempered, was cut by an instru-
ment somewhat resembling the agricultural hoe,
and monilded in an oblong trough; the bricks were
then dried in the sun, and some from their colour
appear to have been baked or Lured, but no
trace of this operation has yet been discovered in
the monuments (Dr. W. C. Taylor's Bible Illus-
trated, p. 82). The writer just cited makes the
following pertinent remarks on the order of the king
. that the Israelites should collect the straw with
which to compact (not bum) their bricks: ‘It is
evident that Pharaoh did not require a physical im-
possibility, because the Egyptian reapers only cut
away the tops of the corn eee eel: We
must remember that the tyrannical Pharavh issued
his orders prohibiting the supply of straw about
two months before the time of harvest. If, therefore,
the straw had not been usually left standing in
the fields, he would have shown himself an idiot as
well as a tyrant; but the narrative shows us that
the Israelites found the stems of the last year's
harvest standing in the fields; for by the word
‘stubble’ (Exod. v. 12) the historian clearly
means the stalks that remained from the last
year's harvest. Still the demand that they
should complete their tale of bricks was one that
could scarcely be fulfilled; and the conduct of
Pharaoh on this occasion is a perfect specimen of
Oriental despotism.’
BRIDE, BRIDEGROOM. [Marriace. ]
BRIDGE. It is somewhat remarkable that
the word bridge does not occur in all Scripture,
although there were without doubt bridges over
the rivers of Palestine, especially in the country
beyond the Jordan, in which the principal peren-
nial streams are found, There is mention of a mili-
tary bridge (2 Mace. xii. 13) which Judas Macca-
beeus intended to make, in order to facilitate his
operations against the town of Caspis, had he not
been prevented. There are traces of ancient bridges
across the Jordan, above and below the lake of Gen-
nesareth, and also over the Arnon and other rivers
which enter the Jordan from the East; and some
of the winter torrents which traverse the western-
. most plain (the plain of the coast) are crossed
by bridges. But the oldest of these appear to
be of Roman origin, and some of more recent
date.. It would be useless, in a subject so little


BRIDGE.


Biblical, to trace the contrivances which were
probably resorted to in the ruder and more
remote ages. Such contrivances, before the stone
bridge is attained, are Pega ey the same in
most countries, or varied only by local circum-
stances. The bridges which existed in the later
ages of Scriptural history are probably not very
different from those which we still find in and
near Palestine ; and under this view the following
representations of existing bridges are introduced.


176, [Jacob's Bridge.]


The principal existing bridge in Palestine is
that shown in cut 176, It crosses the upper
Jordan about two miles below the lake Houle.
The river here flows rapidly through a narrow
bed; and here from the most remote ages has
lain the high road to Damascus from all parts of
Palestine; which renders it likely that a bridge
existed at this place in very ancient times,
although, of course, not the one which is now
standing. The bridge is called Jacob's Bridge
(Jissr Yakoub), from a tradition that it marks
the spot where the patriarch Jacoh crossed the
river on his return from Padan-Aram. But it is
aleo sometimes called Jissr Beni Yakoud, the
Bridge of Jacob's Sons, which may suggest that


177, [Bridge at El Sek.}


BRIDGE.


the name is rather derived from some Arab tribe
called the Beni Yakoub. The bridge is a very
solid structure, well built, with a high curve in
the middle like all the Syrian bridges; and is
composed of three arches, in the usual style of
these fabrics. Close by it, on the east, is a khan
much frequented by travellers, built upon the
remains of a fortress which was erected by the
Crusaders to command the passage of the Jordan.
A few soldiers are now stationed here to collect a
ha upon all the laden beasts which cross the
ge.


No. 177 is abridge or arch thrown over a ravine
= El im the aseaaty of which is evinced by
é sculptured cliffs with which it is connected.

ewhat similar to this is the bridge next re- ten [oanaces Beige)
presented (No, 178), which is in many respects @ No. 18] is a Persian bridge; but it is here ine
: troduced as a very fair specimen of the general
character of the bridges which are met with in
all parts of Western Asia.


i Teer
=
{ _
ee


181, [Persian Bridge.]


BRIERS. | [Txorns.]

BROOK (5) nachal ; Sept. xeluappos) : the
original word thus translated might better be
rendered by torrent. It is applied, 1. to small
streams arising from a subterraneous spring, and
flowing through a deep valley, such as the Arnon,
Jabbok, Kidron, Sorek, &c.; and also the brook
of the willows, mentioned in Isa. xv. 7; 2. to
winter-torrents, arising from rains, and which are


178. [Bridge of St. Anthony.)


curious and remarkable structure. It leads {oa 000 dried up in the warm season (Job vi. 15, 19).
convent Cof St. Anthony) among the mountains; Such is the noted river (brook) of Egypt, so often
which explains the Christian symbols that haye mentioned as at the southernmost border of Pales-


place: upon it.


tine (Num. xxxiv. 5; Josh. xv. 4, 47), and, in
fact, such are most of the brooks and streams of
Palestine, which are numerous in winter and early
spring, but of which very few survive the beginning
of the summer.

BROTHER (NW ; New Test. ’AdeAgds). This
term is so variously and extensively applied in
Scripture, that it becomes important coals to
distinguish the different acceptations in which it
is used.

1. It denotes a brother in the natural sense, whe-
ther the offspring of the same father only (Matt. i. 2;
Luke iii. 1, 19), or of the same father and mother
, 4 f (Luke vi. 14, &c.).—2. A near relative or kinsman

a by blood, cousin (Gen. xiii. 8; xiv. 16; Matt. xii.

179. [Bridge at Tchavdere.] 46; John vii. 3; Acts i. 14; Gal. i. 19).—3. One

No. 179 ; who is connected with another by any tie of
Asia Mj 9 is an ancient bridge. at Tchavdere, in intimacy or fellowship: hence—4. One bom in
of meg _It is introduced as a fair specimen the same country, descended from the same stock,
.-Y ancient bridges of one arch, by which a fellow countrymaM™(Matt. v. 47; Acts iii. 22;


mer torrents and small streams are crossed in Heb. vii. 5; Exod. ii. 11; iv. 18).—5. One of


ae and Asia Minor, equal rank and dignity (Job xxx. 29; Prov. xviii.
entind Bes, such as the following (No. 180), also 9; Matt. xxiii. 8).—6. Disciples, followers, &c.
¥ unfenced, frequently occur. (Matt. xxv. 40; Heb. ii. 11, 12).—7. One of the


242


356 BULL.


same faith (Amos i. 9; Acts ix. 30; xi. 29;
1 Cor. v. xi.); from which and other texts it ap-
pears that the first converts to the faith of Jesus
were known to each other by the title of Brethren,
till the name of Christians was given to them at
Antioch (Acts xi. 26).—8. An associate, colleague
in office or dignity, &c. (Ezra iii. 2; 1 Cor. i. 1;
2 Cor. i. 1; &c.)—9. One of the same nature, a
fellow-man (Gen. xiii, 8; xxvi. 31; Matt. v.
22, 23, 24; vii. 5; Heb. ii. 175 viii. 11).—10.
One beloved, ¢. e. as a brother, in a direct address
(Acts ii. 29; vi. 3; 1 Thess. v. 1).

In Matt. xiii. 55 James, Joses, Simon, and
Judas are mentioned as the Lrothers of Jesus, and
in the ensuing verse sisters are also ascribed to
him. The Protestant spirit of opposition to the
Popish notion about the perpetual virginity of
Mary, has led many commentators to contend
that thie must be taken in the literal sense,
and that these persons are to be regarded as
children whom she bore to her husband Joseph
after the birth of Christ. On the whole we incline
to this opinion, seeing that sich a supposition is
more in agreement with the spirit and letter of the
context than any other; and as the force of the
allusion to the brothers and sisters of Jesus would
be much weakened if more distant relatives are
to be understood. Nevertheless there are some
grounds for the other opinion, that these were not
natural brothers and sisters, but near relations,
probably cousins, of Christ. In Matt. xxvii. 56
a James and Joses are described as sons of Mary
(certainly not the Virgin); and again a James
and Judas are described as sons of Alpheus (Luke
vi. 15, 163, which Alpheus is probably the same
as Cleophas, husband of Mary, sister of the Virgin
(John xix. 25). If therefore it were clear that
this James, Juses and Judas are the same that
are elsewhere described as the Lord’s brothers,
this point would be beyond dispute ; but as it is,
much doubt must always hang over it.

BUBASTIS,. [Pipeseru.]

BULL (WY shor), with other kindred terms,
has been already noticed in the article Bexves.
We may add WN éor, which occurs only in Ezra
vi. 9,17; vii. 17; Dan. iv. 25, 32, 33 [iv. 22,
29, 30]; in all which passages it seems to refer to
bullocks, labouring or yoke oxen, and cattle wild
or tame, taken collectively ; DY WIN adirim, im-
plying strength, and rendered ‘ bulls,’ is tound
in Ps. xxii. 12; 1.13; Ixviii. 30; Isa. xxxiv. 7,


and Jer. xlvi. 21; and nvdoy agioth, DYOIN
aglim, are used when the animals are under three
years of age. It is contended that the castra-
tion of no animal was practised among the
Hebrews. If that was the case other methods
than those generally alluded to must have been
adopted to break oxen to labour; for tiie mere
application of a metal ring through the cartilage
of the nostrils, although it might have greatly
restrained the ferocity of the beasts, would not
assuredly have rendered them sufficiently docile
to the yoke and goad of a people whose chief
dependence for food was in the produce of the
plough,

The rearing of horned cattle was encouraged by
the people of Israel. These aiPiale were protected
in some cases by express provisions of the law;
they were held clean, being the usual sacrifice of
consideration, and the chief article of flesh diet of


x


BULL.


the population. Judging from Egyptian remains,
there were two great breeds of straight-backed
cattle, the Tong-horned and the short-horued ; and
in Upper Egypt at least, there was one without
horns. Another bunched species existed, which
served to draw chariots, yoked in the same man-
ner as the Brahminee bulls of India are at present.
It is still abundant in Nubia, and, under the
name of bos sacer, or Indicus, notwithstanding it
breeds with the common species, is yet considered
distinct. The calf is born with teeth; and although
in central Africa, India, and China it is mixed
with the other species, and when low in flesh is
almost deprived of its lunch, the natural cha-
racters nevertheless continue; and from the evi-
dence of ancient Egyptian pictures and written
documents it must have been propagated for
above 3000 years.

In Egypt the straight-hacked or common cattle
appear, from the same evidence, to have formed
a very liandsome breed with Iunate hors. They
were generally spotted black or red upun a white
ground, and there were, besides, others white, red,
orblack. They all served for common use, but those
without red were selected when new sacred bulls,
apis or mnevis, were to be supplied ; for they alone
had the colours which could show the marks made
by chance or by art, and required to tit the animal
for the purpose intended. There was, besides, a
sacred cow; and a black bull was worshipped at
Hermonthis. This was the bash, the largest of bulls,
by the Greeks changed to onapliis, basis, bazis,
and had the additional character of the hair run-
ning the wrong way, or forward ; hence, evidently
it was not a true ox or bull, but a species of gnu,
the catoblepas gorgon, or cat. taurina, still denomi-
nated. baas (which is a Namaqua Hottentot uame,
and not Dutch, although the same word in Dutch
signifies ‘ master’) by the Namaquas, and a con-


gener or the same as the dis Seshtall of Shaw,


whose name indicates a similar maned and
bristled external. This presents another instance
of the extension of Semitic words and names to
South Africa; for though it may he that the same
word was applied tu a species of an approximating
genus, perhaps the Aigocerus niger, which is
black, and, like others of the group, has the direc-
tion of the hair on the mane and anterior parts
turned forward, either or both of the above species
may have extended so far northward as to have
been within the occasional reach of the Egyptian
priesthood ; and the first, at least, which has con-
geners in Northern Africa, possesses external cha-
racters sufficiently remarkable to have answered
their purposes.

In Palestine the breed of cattle was most likely
in ancient times, as it still is, inferior in size to
the Egyptian; and provender must have been
abundant indeed, if the number of beasts sacri-
ficed at the great Jewish festivals, mentioned in
Josephus, be correct, and could be sustained for
a succession of years. :

Unless the name be taken synonymously with
that of other species, there is not in the Bible any
indication of the buffalo. The Asiatic species was
not known in Greece till the time of Aristotle, who
tirst speaks of it by the name of the Arachosian ox.
No species of Bos Bubalus is known even at this
day in Arabia; but in Ezypt the Asiatic species has
been introduced in consequence of the Moham-


BURIAL. BURIAL. 357


medan conquests in the Kast. The indigenous marking the increase, and selecting a portion for
buffaloes of Africa, amounting at least to two consumption, in the same manner as is still

very distinct species, appear to have belonged to tised in some parts of Europe. For although the
the south and west of that continent, and only at words, ‘ fat bulls of Bashan close me in on every
a later period to have approached Egypt as far side,’ are an indication of wild manners, the word
as the present Bornou; for none are figured on ‘ fat’ somewhat weakens the impression ; and we
any known monument in either Upper or Lower know that the half-wild white breed of Scotland
Egypt. With regard, however, to wild oxen of likewise) retains the character of encompassing
the true Taurine genus, some may, at a very remote objects that excite their distrust. . It was therefore
period, have been found in Bashan, evidently natural that in Palestine wild gregarious instincts
the origin uf the name,—a region where moun- should have still remained in operation, where real
tain, wood, and water, all connecting the Syrian dangers beset herds, which in the time of David
Libanus with Taurus, were favourable to their were still exposed to lions in the hills around them.
existence; but the wild bulls of the district, See Anrg.opgr, and Car, where Bahumed seems
mentioned in Psalm xxii. 12, and in various to be a modification of Bahema. Baal is said to
other passages, appear, nevertheless, to refer to do- have been worshipped in the form of a beeve,
maestic species, probably left to propagate without and Moloch to have had a calf’s or steer's-head
much human superintendence, except annually [Bsevrs; CaLr].—C. H. S,


~


182. [Ancient Jewish Funeral:


BURIAL and SEPULCHRES. Abraham,
in his treaty for the cave uf Macpelah, spoke the
language of nature when he expressed his anxiety
to obtain a secure place in which ‘ to bury his
dead out of his sight ;’ and accordingly, amongst
every people whose natural feelings have been
influenced by pure morality and religion, the
consignment of the mortal remains of those near
and dear to them to the custody of their mother
earth, has been approved of as the most proper
and pleasing mode of disposing of the dead.
Two instances, indeed, we meet with in sacred
history of the harbarous practice of burning them
to ashes: the one in the case of Saul and his sons,
whose bodies were probably so much mangled as
to sania their receiving the royal honours of
embalment (1 Sam. xxxi. 12); the other, men-
tioned by Amos (vi. 10), appears to refer to a
season of ailing pestilence, and the burning
of those who died of plague was probably one of
the sanatory measures adopted to prevent the
spread of contagion. But taraglioc the whole
of their national history the people of God ob-
served the practice of burial. Amongst them, as
amongst many other ancient nations, the rites of
sepulture were considered as of indispensable
importance. It was deemed not only an act of
humanity, but a sacred duty of religion to pay

the last honours to the departed; while, to be
deprived of these, as was frequently the fate of
enemies at the hands of ruthless conquerors

(2 Sam. xxi.9-14; 2 Kings xi. 11-16 ; Ps. Ixxix.

23 Eccles. vi. 4), was considered the greatest ca-

lamity and disgrace which a person could suffer.

On the death of any member of a family, pre-
parations were forthwith made for the burial,
which, among the Jews, were in many respects
papal ae nage are common in the East at,

presen and wer ess i
ie na < mug oe less expensive


the corpse, which was perfumed by the nearest
relative, having been laid out and the head covered
with a napkin, was subjected to entire ablution in
warm water (Acts ix. 37), a precaution probably
adopted to guard against premature interment.
But, besides this first ani indispensable attention,
other cares of a more elaborate and costly descrip-
tion were amongst certain classes bestowed on
the remains of deceased friends, the origin of
which is to be traced to a fond and natural,
though foolish anxiety to retard or defy the
aie of decomposition, and all of which may

included under the general head of embalm-
ing. Nowhere was this operation performed with
such religious care and in so scientific a manner
as in ancient Egypt, which could boast of a class
of professional men trained to the business; and
such adepts had these ‘ physicians’ become in the
art of preserving bodies, that there are
mummies still found, which must have existed


~183, [Interior of a Mummy Pit.)


After the solemn for many thousand years, and are probably the


Ces.
ceremony of the last kiss and closing the eyes, remains of subjects of the early Pharaohs. The


358 BURIAL.


bodies of Jacob and Joseph underwent this emi-

- nently Egyptian preparation for burial, which on
both occasions was doubtless executed in a style
of the greatest magnificence (Gen. 1. 2, 26).
Whether this expensive method of embalming
was imitated by the earlier Hebrews, we have no
distinct accounts; but we learn from their prac-
tice in later ages that they had some observance
of the kind, only they substituted a simpler and
more expeditious, though it must have been a
Tess efficient process, which consisted in merely
swathing the corpse round with numerous folds of
linen, and sometimes a variety of stuffs, and
anointing it with a mixture of aromatic sub-
stances, of which aloes and myrrh were the
chief ingredients. A. sparing use of spices on
such occasions was reckoned a misplaced and
discreditable economy ; and few higher tokens of
respect could be paid to the remains of a departed
friend than a profuse application of costly per-
fumes. Thus we are told by the writers of the
Talmud (Massecheth Semacoth, viii.), that not
less than eigity pounds weight of spices were
used at the funeral of Rabbi Gamaliel, an elder;
and by Josephus ( Antiq. xvii. 8. § 3), that in the
splendid funeral procession of Herod, 500 of his
servants attended as spice-bearers. Thus, too,
after the crucilixion, Nicodemus and Joseph of
Avimathea, two men of wealth, testitied their
regard for the sacred body of the Saviour by
6 bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes about
an hundred pound weight’ (John xix. 39, 16);
while, unknown to them, the two Marys, together
with their associates, were prepared to render the
same ollice of friend-hip on the dawn of the first
day of the week. Whatever cavils the Jewish
doctors have made at their extravagance and
unnecessary waste in lavishing such a quantity of
costly perfumes on a person jn the circumstances
of Jesus, the liberality of those pious disciples in
the performance of the rites of their country was
unquestionably dictated by the profound venera-
tion which they cherished for the memory of their
Lord. Nor can we be certain but they intended
to use the great abundance of perfumes they pro-
vided, not in the common way of anvinting the
corpse. but, as was done in the case of princes
and very eminent personages, of preparing 6a bed
of spices,’ in which, after burning them, they might
deposit the body (2 Chron, xvi. 145 Jer. xxxiv. 5)
For unpatriotic and wicked princes, however,
the people made no such burnings, and hence
the honour was denied to Jehoram (2 Chron. xxi.
19>.

The corpse, after receiving the preliminary
attentions, was enveloped in the grave-clothes,
which were sometimes nothing more than the
ordinary dress, or folds of linen cloth wrapped


184, (Grave-clothes.]


round the body, and a napkin about the head ;
though in other cases a shroud was used, which
had Jong before been prepared by the individual
for the purpose, and was plain or ornamental
according to taste or other circumstances. The
body thus dressed was deposited in an upper


BURIAL.


chamber in solemn state, open to the view of all
visitors (Acts ix. 37).

From the moment the vital spark was extin-
guished, the members of the family, especially
the females, in the violent style of Oriental grief,
burst out into shrill, loud, and doleful lamenta-
tions, and were soon joined by their friends and
neighbours, who, on hearing of the event, crowded
to the house in such numbers that Mark describes
it by the term @dpuBos, a tumult (v.38). By the
better classes, among whom such liberties were
not allowed, this duty of sympathizing with the
bereaved family was, and still is, performed by a
class of females who engaged themselves as pro-
fessional mourners, and who, seated amid the
mourning circle, studied, by vehement sobs and
gesticulations, and by singing dirges in which
they eulogized the personal qualities or virtuous
and benevolent actions of the deceased (Acts ix.
*9), to stir the source of tears, and give fresh
impulse to the grief of the afllicted telatives.
Numbers of these singing men and women la-
mented the death of Josiah (2 Chron. xxxv. 25).
The etlect of their melancholy ditties was some-
times heightened by the attendance of minstrels
(aiAnral, properly pipers); and thus im solemn
silence, broken only at intervals by vocal and
instrumental strains suited to the mournfal occa-
sion, the time was passed till the corpse was
carried forth to the grave.

The period between the death and the burial
was much shorter than custom sanctions in our
country; fora long delay in the removal of a
corpse would have been attended with much
inconvenicnce, from the heat of the climate gene-
rally, and, among the Jews in particular, from
the circumstance that every one that came near
the chamber was unclean for a week. Interment,
thereture, where there was no embalming, was
never postponed beyond twenty-four hours after
death, and generally it touk place much earlier.
It is still the practice in the Past to have burials
soon over; and there are two instances in sacred
history where consignment to the grave followed
immediately after decease (Acts v. 6, 10).

Persons of distinction were deposited in coffins.
Among the Ezyptians, who were the inventors of
them, these chests were formed most commonly
of several layers of pasteboard glued together,
sometimes of stone, more rarely of sycamore
wood, which was reserved for the great, and fur-
nished, it is probable, the materials of the coffin
which received the honoured remains of the vizier
of Egypt. There is good reason to believe also that
the kings and other exalted personages in ancient
Palestine were buried in cottins of wood or
stone, on which, as additional marks of honour,
were placed their insignia when they were carried
to their tombs—if a prince, his crown and sceptre
—if a warrior, his armour,—and if a rabbi, his
books. -

But the most common mode of carrying a
corpse to the grave was on a bier or ded (2 Sam.
iii. 31), which in some cases must have been fur-
nished in a costly and elegant style, if, as many
learned men conclude from the history of Asa
(2 Chron. xvi. 14) and of Herod (Josephus,
Antig. xvii. 8. § 3), these royal personages were
conveyed to their tombs on their own beds.
The bier, however, in use among the common and
meaner sort of people was nothing but a plain


- BURIAL.


Woodall board, on which, supported by two poles,
the body lay concealed aly by a slight corel


nN


ws


185. [Ancient Sarcophagi in Palestine.]


from the view of the attendants. On such 3


humble vehicle was the widow's son of Nain
carried (Luke vii. 14), and ‘ this mode of per-
forming funeral obsequies,’ says an intelligent
traveller, ‘ obtains equally in the present day
among the Jews, Maigmmiedans and Christians
of the East.’ The nearest relatives kept close by
the bier, and performed the office of in
which, however, they were assisted by the com-
pany in succession. For if the deceased was a

lic character, or, though in humble life, had

m much esteemed, the friends and neighbours
showed their respect by volunteering attendance
in great numbers; and hence, in the story of the
affecting incident at Nain, it is related that
‘ much people of the city were with the widow.’
In cases w the expense could be afforded,
hired mourners accompanied the procession, and,
by every now and then lifting the covering and
exposing the corpse, gave the signal to the com-
pany to renew their shouts of lamentation. A
remarkable instance occurs in the splendid fu-
neral cavalcade of Jacob. Those mercenaries
broke out at intervals into - most seria
expressions of yrief, but especially on a ching
the boundaries of Canaan and the tte of the
sepulchre: the immense company halted for seven
days, and, under the guidance of the mourning
attendants, indulged in the most violent pa-
roxysms of sorrow.

Sepulchres were, as they still are in the East,
—by a prudential arrangement sadly neglected in
our country—situated without the precincts of
cities, Among the Jews, in the case of Levitical
cities, the distance required to be 2000 cubits,
and in all it was considerable. Nobody was
allowed to be buried within the walls, Jeru-
salem forming the only exception, and even there
the privilege was reserved for the royal family of

vid and o few of exalted character
(1 Kings ii. 10; 2 Kings xiv. 20). In the vi
cinity of this capital were public cemeteries for
the general accommodation of the inhabitants,
hesides a field appropriated to the burial of
strangers,—the supposed site of which, together
with the discoveries made in it, has been described
by : late traveller, Wilde, in @ most interesting
Fe iiererlarctd manner, but the evidence en

: ‘or bis conclusions does not admit
abridgment here,


BURIAL. MH


The styleof the public cemeteries around the cities
of ancient Palestine in all probability resembled
that of the present burying-places of the East,
of which Dr. Shaw gives the following descrip-
tion:—‘ They occupy a large space, a great
extent of ground being allotted for the La! ong
Each family has a portion of it walled in like a
garden, where the bones of its ancestors have -
remained undisturbed for many generations. For
in these inclosures the graves are all distinct and

te; each of them having a stone placed
upright, both at the head and feet, inscribed with
the name or title of the deceased; whilst the
intermediate is either planted with flowers,


bordered round with stone, or paved with tiles.’


ep”

a |,
Coal 7 hes

eae FID


Ue


186, (Modern Syrian Tombs.) °


Examples of these tombs are given in Nos.
186 and 187. By these it is seen that, as among
people in Circumstances, the monumental


stcnes are placed upon quadrangular tombs, in
the centre of whieh evergreen or flowering shrubs
are often planted, and tended with much care,


189. (Garden Tomb.)


There were other sepulchres which were private
property, erected at the expense and for the use of
several families in a neighbourhood, or provided
by individuals as a separate burying-place for
themselves. These were situated either in some
conspicuous place, as Rachel's on the highway to
Bethlehem (Gen. xxxv. 19)—the comparatively
modern representation of which is given above in
No. 18S—or in some lonely and sequestered spot,
under a wide-spreading tree (Gen. xxxv. §) in
a field or a garden. Of such garden tombs a
modern Oriental specimen is given in No. 189,
and over which, especially when the tomb is that
of some holy person. lamps are sometimes hung
and occasionally lighted. In common cases,
sepulchres were formed by digging a small depth
into the ground. Over these, which were con-
sidered an humble kind of tomb, the wealthy
and great often erected small stone buildings, in
the form of a house or cupola, to serve as their
family sepulchre. These are usually. open at the
sides, as in the two specimens annexed, Nos. 190
and 191, which are of forms such as a traveller in
the East has daily occasion to notice. Some-
times, however, these interesting’ monuments are
built up on all sides, as in the tomb of Rachel
figured above (No. 188); so that the walls are
required to be taken down, and a breach made to
a certain extent, on each successive interment.
‘This custom,’ says Carne, ‘which is of great
antiquity, and particularly prevails in the lonely
parts of Lebanon, may serve to explain some

ges of Scripture. The prophet Samuel was
ried in his own house at Ramah, and Joab was
buried in his house in the wilderness. These,
it is evident, were not their dwelling-houses, but
mansions for the dead, or family vaults which
they had built within their own policies.’ Not
unfrequently, however, those who 1 esta-
blishments, and whose fortunes enabled them to
command the assistance of human art and labour,


BURIAL.


purchased, like Abraham, some of the natural ca
verns with which Palestine abounded, and con-
eae them py some hapiioi ary into

ily sepulchres; while o with vast pains
and expense made excavations in the solid rock
(Matt. xxvii. 60). These, the entrance to which
was either horizontal or by a flight of steps, had
their roofs, which were arched with the native
stone, so high as to admit persons standing upright,
and were very ious, sometimes being divided.
into several distinct apartments; in which case the
remoter or innermost chambers were dug a little
deeper than those that were nearer the entrance, the
approach into their darker solitudes being made
by another descending stair. Many sepulchres of
this description are still found in Palestine; but
the descent into them is so choked up with the
rubbish of ages, that they are nearly inaccessible,
and have been explored only by a few indefatigable


9 ——————


192, [Interior of Tomb of the Kings.)


hunters after antiquities. Along the sides of those
vast caverns niches were cut, or sometimes shelves
ranged one above another, on which were depo-
sited the bodies of the dead, while in others the
ground-floor of the tomb was raised so as to make
different compartments, the lowest place in the
family vaults being reserved for the servants.
These interior arrangements may be the better
understood by the help of the annexed engravings
showing the interiors of tombs now actually exist-
ing in Palestine. No. 192 is the interior of the
celebrated Tomb of the Kings A called), near
Jerusalem. In it are some further specimens of
the stone sarcophagi already noticed. No. 193


Cali


193. [Ground Plans of Sepulchres.]


contains two ground-plans showing the general
character of the interior arrangements of the more
extensive ado Some of those found near
Tyre, and at Alexandria, are of the round form
showf in fig. 1, but these seem exceptions; for
the tombs at Jerusalem, in Asia Minor, and ge-
nerally in and the East, offer the arrange-
ment shown in fig. 2.


(2)
Yang


194. [Interior of Sepulchre at Tyre.]


The ahove cut (No. 194) is a chamber of
ove of the sepalehtes situstad near ‘Tyre, with


BURIAL. 361


owe niches in which the bodies were d
Bl -
The entrance chamber of an extensive crypts
examined -by Dr. Wilde (Narrative, ii. 344),
situated on what he supposes to have been the site
of Aceldama near Jerusalem, is shown in No. 195.
The different doors, at the upper end and on each
side, lead to small oblong chambers or crypts,
about seven feet long, containing on each side a
stone trough or sar in every one of which
bones still remain. The knowledge of this in-
ternal arrangement in those immense subterra-
nean receptacles serves to illustrate that
nificent passage, where the prophet in a strain
of the most sublime represents all the
kings of the earth as lying in sepulchral glory,


95, [Interior of Sepulchre near Jerusalem.)


and as raising themselves from their cells or
thrones in astonishment at the arrival of the
haughty tyrant of Assyria (Isa. xiv. 18). The
inore elevated the position of these sepulchres
was in the rock—perched, as it were, among the
high and seemingly inaccessible clifis—of course
the more notice and admiration they attracted,
and the greater was thought to be the honour of
having achieved so difficult an undertaking ; and
hence we discover the source of Shebna’s vanity,
which drew upon him in so pointed a manner the
displeasure and rebuke of God (Isa. xxii. 16).


196, [Exterior of Tomb of the Kings.]


The mouth of the sepulchre was secured by a
huge stone (Matt. xxvii. 60; John xi. 38). But
the entrance-porch, to which the removal of this
rude door gave admittance, was so large that
several persons could stand in it and view the
interior ; and hence we read that the women who
visited the sepulchre of our Lord, ‘ entering in, saw
a young man sitting, clothed in a long white
garment’ (Mark xvi. 5); and in like manner, in
reference to the flight of steps, that Peter ‘ stoop-
ing down, and looking in, saw the linen clothes
lying’ (John xx. 5). Some of the more splendid


rw


(Exterior of Sepulchre: Jerusalem.]


iy:


197.


of these tombs, however, instead of the block of
stone, have the porches surmounted with tasteful
mason-work, and supported by well-finished co-
lonnades; and as they stand open and exposed,
do now, as they did formerly, afford retreats to
numbers of vagrants and lawless characters.
The rocky valleys around Jerusalem exhibit
numberless specimens of these sepulchral excava-
tions. Representations of two of these are here
given. No. 196 shows the exterior of the so-called
sepulchre of the Kings, the interior of which is
represented in No. 192. The other (No. 197) is
the exterior view of the sepulchre, the interior
arrangements of which are shown in No. 195.
An interesting account of this tomb is given by
Dr. Wilde (ut sup.), by whom it was first exa-
mined and described, after it had been recently
discovered by the Arabs.

Monuments of this elegant description were
erectel to many of the prophets and other holy
men who figured as prominent characters in
the early history of Israel, and it seems to have
been considered, in the degenerate age of our
Lord, an act of great piety to ir and oma-
ment with fresh devices the sepulchres of those
ancient worthies (Matt. xxiii. 29). The art and
taste of the times would, of course, expend their
chief resources in what was deemed the patriotic
service of adding fresh beauty and attraction to
edifices which contained such venerable and pre-
cious dust. But humbler tombs received also
some measure of attention, all in the neighbour-
hood of Jerusalem being at certain seasons white-
washed (Matt. xxiii. 27). The origin of this
prevailing custom is to be traced not so much to
a desire of rendering all such objects of interest
in the environs of Jerusalem pleasing to the eye,
as of making them easily discernible, and so pre-
venting the risk of contracting ceremonial defile-
ment through accident or ignorance, more es;
cially at the annual festivals, when multitudes
unacquainted with the localities resorted to the
capital. To paint them with white was obviously
the best preservative against the hended
danger ; and the season chosen for this garniture
of the sepnichres was on the return of spring, a
little before the Passover, when, the winter rains
being over, a long unbroken tract of dry weather
usually ensued. The words of Christ referred to
were spoken but a few days before the Passover,
when the fresh coating of white paint would be
conspiciious on all the adjoining hills and valleys;
and when we consider: the striking contrast that
must have been presented between the graceful
architecture and carefully dressed appearance of


BURNT OFFERINGS. .


these tombs without, and the disgusting relics. of
mortality that were mouldering within, we cannot
fail to perceive the emphatic energy of the lan-
guage in which our Lord rebuked the Aypocrisy
of the Pharisees.

It remains only to notice that, during the first
few weeks after a burial, members of a family,
especially the females, paid frequent visits to the
tomb. This affecting custom still continues in
the East, as groups of women may be seen daily
at the graves of their deceased relatives, strewing
them with flowers, or pouring over them the tears
of fond regret. And hence, in the interesting


narrative of the raising of Lazarus, when Mary
rose abruptly to meet Jesus, whose approach had
been privately announced to her, 1t was natural
for her assembled friends, who were ignorant of
her motives, to suppose ‘she was going to the graye
to weep there’ (John xi, 31).—R. J.


—,-
a


198. [Women at Tombs.} =


BURNT-OFFERINGS (M01) ‘olah, from MOY,
to ascend), sacrifices which owed their Hebrew
name to the circumstance that the whole of the
offering was to be consumed by fire upon the
altar, and to rise, as it were, in smoke towards
heaven: hence also the term $5 (Deut. xxiii.
10; 1 Sam. vii. 9; Ps. li. 21; comp. Judg. xx.
40); Chald. ND); Gr. dAoxavreua, entire
burnt-offering, alluding to the fact that, with the
exceytion of the skin, nothing of the sacrifice came
to the share of the officiating priest or priests in
the way of emolument, it being toholly and
entirely consumed by fire.

Such burnt-offerings are among the most an-
cient, if not the earliest, on Scriptural record.
We find them already in use in paiaione
times; hence the opinion of some, that Abel's
offering (Gen. iv. 4) was a burnt-offering as re-
garded the firstlings of his flock, while the pieces
of fat which he offered was a thank-offermg, just
in the manner that Moses afterwards ordained, or
rather confirmed from ancient custom (Lev. i.
8q.). It was a burnt-offering that Noah offered
to the Lord after the Deluge (Gen. viii. 20).

Originally and generally all offerings from the
animal kingdom seem to have passed under the
name of olah, since a portion at least of every
sacrifice, of whatever kind—nay, that very por-
tion which constituted the offermg to God—was


RES


BURNT-OFFERINGS.


eensumed by fire upon the altar. In process
‘ of Wme, however, when the sacrifices became di-
vided into numerous classes, a more limited sense


was given to the term ndy, it being solely ap-
lied to those sacrifices in which the priests did not
and which were intended to propitiate the
anger of Jehovah, for some particular transgres-
sion, Only oxen, male sheep or goats, or turtle-
doves and young pigeons, all without blemish,
were fit for burtt-offerings. The offerer, in person,
was obliged to carry this sacrifice first of all into
the fure-court, as far as the gate of the tabernacle
or temple, where the animal was examined by the
officiating priest to ascertain that it was without
blemish. The offerer then laid his hand upon
the victim, confessing his sins, and dedicated it
as his sacrifice to propitiate the Almighty. The
imal was then killed (which might be done by
the offerer himself) towards the north of the altar
(lev. i. 11), in allusion, as the Talmud alleges,
to the coming of inclement weather (typical of
the Divine wrath) from the northern quarter of
the heavens. After this began the ceremony of
taking up the blood and sprinkling it around
the altar, that is, upon the lower part of the altar,
not immediately upon it, lest it shoul extin-
guish the fire thereon (Lev. iii. 2; Deut. xii. 27;
3 Chron. xxix. 22).
la the Talmud (Tract Zebachim, sect. i. ch. 1.)
various laws are prescribed concerning this sprink-
ling of the blood of the burnt-offering: among
others, that it should be perfurmed about the
middle of the altar, below the red line, and only
twice, so as tov form the figure of the Greek
gamma; also, that the priest must first take his
stand east of the altar, sprinkling in that position
first to the east and then to the west: which
done, he was to shift his position to the west, sprink-
ling again to the east aud west, and lastly only
round about the altar as prescribed in Lev. i. 5.
next act was the skinning or flaying of the
animal, and the cutting of it into pieces, actions
which the offerer himself was allowed to perform
(Lev. i. 6). The skin alune belonged to the
officiating priest (Lev. vii. 8). The dissection
of the animal began with the head, legs, &c., and
it was divided into twelve pieces. The pricst
then took the right shoulder, breast, and entrails,
and placing them in the hands of the offerer, he
pat his own hands beneath those of the former,
and thus waved the sacrifice up and down several
times in acknowledgment of the all-powerful pre-
sence of God (Tract Cholin, i. 3). The officiating
Priest then retraced his steps to the altar, placed
he wood upon it in the form of a cross, and
lighted. the fire. The entrails and legs being
¢leansed with water, the separated pieces * were
Placed together upon the altar in the form of a
slain animal. Poor people were allowed to bring
&@ turtledove or a young pigeon as a bumt-
oflermg, these birds being very common. and
cheap in Palestine (Maimonides, Moreh Nevo-
chim, iii. 46). With regard to these latter,
nothing is said about the sex, whether they were
to be males or females. The mode of killing
gE ee ee ee ee
* In Lev. i. 8 mention is made only of the head
and the fat, but these comprised, no doubt, also the
oo the sacrifice being an nby, in which
8 was left to the priests.


BYSSUS. ass
them was by nipping off the head with the nails
oftieland. -


Standing public burnt-offerings were those used
daily moming and evening (Num. xxviii. 3;
Exod. xxix. 38), and on the three great festivals
Sie xxiii. 37; Num, xxviii. 11-27; xxix. 2-22;

. xvi. 3; comp. 3 Chron. xxxv. 12-16).

Private and occasional burnt-offerings were
those brought by women rising from childbed
(Lev. xii. 6); those brought by persons cured
of leprosy (4. xiv. 19-22); those brought by
persons cleansed from issue (2b. xv. 14, g.); and
those brought by the Nazarites when rendered
unclean by having come in contact with a dead
body (Num. vi. 9), or after the days of their sepa-
ration were fulfilled (¢5, vi. 14).

Nor were the burnt-offerings confined to these
cases alone; we find them in use almost on all
important occasions, events, and solemnities,
whether private or public, and often in very
large numbers (comp. Judg. xx. 26; 1 Sam. vil.
9; 2 Chron, xxxi. 2; 1 Kings iii. 4; 1 Chron.
xxix. 21; 2 Chron. xxix. 21; Ezra vi. 17; viii.
35). Heathens also were allowed to offer burnt-
offerings in the temple, and Augustus gave orders
to sacrifice fur him every day in the temple at
Jerusalem a burnt-offering, consisting of two
Jambs and one ox (Philo, Ozp. ii. p. 592; Joseph.
De Bell. Jud. ii. 17. 2).—E. M.

BUSHEL is used in the Auth. Vers. to expres
the Greek yd8i0s, Latin modius, a measure of


about a peck.
BUTTER. [Mixx.]
BUTZ. [Byssus.]


BUZ, son of Nahor and Milcah, and brother
of Huz (Gen. xxii. 21). Elihu, one of Job's
friends, who is distinguished as an Aramman or
Syrian (Job xxxii. 2), was doubtless descended
from this Buz. Judgments are denounced upon
the tribe of Buz by Jeremiah (xxv. 23); and
from the context this tribe appears to have been
Jocated in Arabia Deserta; which may render it
uncertain whether the descendants of Nahor's son
are intended, although a migration south of the
Euphrates is by no means unlikely, and bad
perhaps already occurred in the time of Elibu.

BYSSUS. ‘The Greek word Biooos vccurs in
Luke xvi. 19, where the rich man is described as
being clothed in purple and fine linen ; and also in
Rev. xviii. 12, 16, and xix. 8, 14, among the
merchandise, the loss of which would be mourned
for by the merchants trading with the mystical
Babylon. But it is by many authors still consi-
dered uncertain whether this byssus was of flaz or
cotton. Reference has been made to thisarticle both
from bad and butz, and might be also from shesh.
For, as Rosenmiiller says, ‘The Hebrew word shesh,
which occurs thirty times in the two first books of
the Pentateuch (v. Suxsu, and Celsius, ii. p. 259),
is in these places, as well as in Prov. xxxi. 22, by
the Greek Alexandrian translators, inter
byssus, which denotes Egyptian cotton, and also the
cotton cloth made from it. In the later writings
of the Old Testament, as for example, in the
Chronicles, the book of Esther, and Ezekiel, buz
is commonly used instead of shesh, as an expres-
sion fur cotton cloth.’ This however seems to
be inferred rather than proved, and it is just as
likely that improved civilization may have in-
troduced a substance such as cotton, which was
unknown at the times when shesh was spoken of


- 364 CAB.


. and employed; in the same manner as we know
that in Europe woollen, hempen, linen, and cotton
clothes have, at one period of society, been more
extensively worn than at another.

32. bad ocurs in numerous Lp of Scrip-
tore, as Exod. xxviii. 42, and xxix. 29; Lev.
vi. 3; xvi. 4, 23, 32; 1 Sam. ii. 18; xxxii. 18;
2Sam. vi. 14; 1 Chron. xv. 27; Ezek. ix. 2,
3, 11; x. 2, 6, 7; Dan. x. 5; xii. 7. Inall
these places the word Jinen is used in the Author-
ized Version, and Rosenmiiller (Botany of the
Bible, p. 175) says, ‘The official garments of
Hebrew, as well as of Egyptian priests, were
made of linen, in Hebrew bad.’ Celsius, however
(ii. p. 509), states his opinion thus: ‘ Non fuit
igitur I vulgare linum, ut arbitrati sunt viri
quidam doctissimi; sed linum AZgypti optimum
et subtilissimum ;’ and he quotes (p. 510) Aben
Ezra for its being the same thing as butz: ‘ Butz
idem est quod bad, nempe species lini in Egypto.’

Y'3 butz or due occurs in 1 Chron. iv. 21;
xv. 27; 2 Chron. ii. 14; iii. 14; v. 12; Esther
i. 6; vili. 15; Ezek. xxvii. 16; and in these pas-
sages in the Authorized Version it is rendered

linen and white linen. According to
Celsius, ‘ Butz idem est quod Greci Btocoy et
Latini dyssum adpellant;' while Rosenmiiller,
as above stated, considers buz and byssus to in-
dicate cotton and the cloth made from it; as does
Forster in his book De Bysso Antiquorum.

The mere similarity of name would not prove
the correctness of either opinion, for they are not


more like than are ws kootn, and yes
kutan, adduced by Rosenmiiller (Bibl. Bot. p.


176), as the Arabic names of cotton, while in fact
they indicate, the first cotton, and the second, flax.


So at p. 179, the same author states that ‘in the P


Sanscnit, karpasum denotes a linen cloth. Now
nothing is more certain than that the Sanscrit
word indicates cotton, and cotton only, which
was no doubt known to the Hebrews during a
part at least of the time when the Scriptures
were written. Mr. Harmer has justly observed
that ‘there were various sorts of Jinen cloth in
the days of antiquity; for little copious as the
Hebrew language is, there are no fewer than four
different words, at least, which have been rendered
“linen,” or “fine linen,” .by our translators.’
These words are, bad, butz, pishet, and shesh.
To which may be added carpas or karpas, and as
Dr. Harris suggests, sadin and seethun. But as it
will be more satisfactory, in the midst of so many
uncertainties, to proceed from the known to the
unknown, and from a knowledge of things to the
names by which they were in early times indi-
cated, so it will be desirable in this work to treat
of the different substances employed for clothing,
-ander the heads of Corron, Fiax, and Hemp,
as well as under Six and Woo..—J. F. R.


c.


CAB, a measure mentioned in 2 Kings vi. 25.
The Rabbins make it the sixth part of a seah or
eatum, and the eighteenth part of an ephah. In
that case a cab contained 3} pints of our wine
measure, or 24 pints of our corn measure.

CAB. [Kanwaran.]


CAESAREA.


CABUL (939; Sept. “Opior). A district
given to Hiram, king of Tyre, by Solomon, in
acknowledgment of the important services which
be had rendered towards the building of the
Temple (1 Kings ix. 13). Hiram was by no
means pleased with the gift, and the district re-
ceived the name of Cabul (unpleasing) from this
circumstance. The situation of Cabul has been
disputed ; but we are content to accept the in-
formation of Josephus (Antig. viii. 5. ae
seems to place it in the north-west part of Galilee,
adjacent to Tyre. In Galilee it is also placed
by the Septuagint. There was a town named
Cabul in the tribe of Zebulun (Josh. xix. 27),
and as it was in Galilee, it is possible that it
was one of the twenty towns consigned to Hiram,
who, to mark his dissatisfaction, applied the
significant name of this one town to the wholg
district. The cause of Hiram’s dislike to what
Solomon doubtless considered a liberal gift, is
very uncertain. It has been conj (Pic-
torial Bible, note on 1 Kings ix. 13) that ‘ pro-
bably, as the Phonicians were a maritime and
commercial people, Hiram wished rather for a part
of the coast, which was now in the hands of
Solqmon, and was not therefore prey to ap-
prove of a district which might have of con-
siderable value in the eyes of an agricultural
people like the Hebrews. Perhaps the towns
were in part payment of what Solomon owed
Hiram for his various services and contributions."


CESAR, a name assumed by, or conferred
upon, all the Roman emperors after Julius Caear.
In this way it became a sort of title like Pharach,
and, as such, is usually applied tu the emperors
in the New Testament, aichont their distinctive
roper names (Aucusrus). The Cesars mentioned
in the New Testament are Augustus (Luke ii. 1);
Tiberius (Luke iii. 1; xx. 22); Claudius (Acts
xi. 28); Nero (Acts xxv. 8); Caligula, whe suc-
ceeded Tiberius, is not mentioned.

C/ESAREA. There were two important towns
in Palestine thus named in compliment to Roman
emperors.

1. Casarza Parzstina, or Casares of Pales-
tine, so called to distinguish it from the other Cx»-
sarea, or simply Caesarea, without addition, from its
eminence as the Roman metropolis of Palestine,
and the residence of the procurator. Itwas built by
Herod the Great, with much of beauty and cun-
venience, twenty-two years before the birth of
Christ, on a spot where had formerly stood a tower
called Straton's Tower.

The whole coast of Palestine may be said to be
extremely inhospitable, exposed as it is to the fury
of the western storms, with no natural port afford-
ing adequate shelter to the vessels resorting to it.
To remedy this defect, Herod, who, though an
arbitrary tyrant, did much for the improvement
of Judea, set about ‘erecting, at immense onst
and labour, one of the most stupendous works of
antiquity. He threw out a semicircular mole,
which peotected the port of Cassares on the south aed
west, leaving only a sufficient opening for vessels to
enter from the north ; so that, within the enclosed
space, a fleet might ride at all weathers in perfect
security. /The mole was constructed of immense
blocks of stone brought from a great distance, and
sank to the of 20 fathoms in the sea. The
best idea of the work may perhaps be realised,


CSAREA.


by comparing it as to design and execution with
the Breakwater at Plymouth. Besides this, Herod
added many splendid buildings to the city:
among which was a temple, dedicated to Cesar,
a fheatre, and an amphitheatre; and when the
whole was finished, which was within twelve years
from the commencement of the undertaking, he
fixed his residence there, and thus elevated the
city. to the rank of the civil and military capital
of Judea, which rank it continued to enjoy as
long as the country remained a province of the
Roman empire (Joseph. Antig. xv. 9. &c. See
Dr. Mansford, Script. Gazetteer). Vespasian
raised Caesarea to the rank of a Roman colony,
granting it first, exemption from the capitation
tax, and afterwards, from the ground taxes (the
real jus Italicum, see Co1.ony). The place was,
however, inhabited chiefly by Gentiles, though
some thousands of Jews lived in it (Joseph. De
Bell. Jud. iii. 9. 1; iii, 145; Antig. xx. 8.7;
Vita, 11).


CAESAREA. 365


Cwsarea is the scene of several interesting. cir-
cumstances described in the New Testament,
such as the conversion of Cornelius, the first-fruits
of the Gentiles (Acts x); the residence of Philip
the Evangelist (Acts xxi. 8); the journey thither
of St. Paul; his pleading there before Felix ; his
imprisonment for two years; and his final plead-
ing before Festus and King Agrippa (Acts xxiv.).
It was here also, in the amphitheatre built by his
father, that Herod Agrippa was smitten of God,
and died (Acts xii. 21-23).

It seems there was a standing dispute between
the Jewish and Gentile inhabitants of Caesarea,
to which of them the city really belonged. The for-
mer claimed it as having been built by a Jew,
meaning King Herod ; the latter admitted this,
but contended that he built it for them and
not for Jews, seeing that he had filled it with
statues and temples of their gods, which the latter
abominated (Joseph. De Bell. Jud. ii. 13, 7). This
quarrel sometimes came to blows, and eventually,


the matter was referred to the emperor Nero,
whose decision in favour of the Gentiles, and the
behaviour of the latter thereupon, gave deep offence
to the Jews generally, and afforded occasion for
the first ontbreaks, which led to the war with the
Romans (Joseph. De Bell. Jud. ii. 14). One
of the first acts of that war was the massacre of
all the Jewish inhabitants by the Gentiles, to the
number of-20,000 (Joseph, w. 8. ii. 18. 1.).

_In later times, Cesarea is chiefly noted as the
a ge and episcopate of Eusebius, the cele-
brated Church historian, in the beginning of the
4th century.

Casarea is almost thitty-five miles north of
ae or Jaffa, and fifty-five miles from Jerusalem.

t still retains the ancient name in the form
of Kaiseraih; but has long been desolate. The
‘nest Conspicuous ruin is that of an old castle, at


the extremity of the ancient mole (see the en-
graving). A great extent of ground is covered
by the remains of the city. A low wall of
grey-stone encompasses these ruins, and without
this is a moat now dry. Between the accumu-
lation of rubbish and the growth of long grass, it
is difficult to define the form and nature of the
various ruins thus enclosed. Nevertheless, the
remains of two aqueducts, running north and
south, are still visible. The one next the sea is
carried on high arches; the lower one, to the east-
ward, carries its waters along a low wall, in an
arched channel, five or six feet wide. The water
is abundant and of excellent quality; and the
small vessels of the country often put in here to
take in their supplies. Czsarea is, apparently,
never frequented for any other purpose; even t

high-road leaves it wide; and it has been visited


306 CESAREA.
by very few of the numerous travellers in Palestine.
The present tenants of the ruins are snakes, scor-
ES lizards, wild boars, and jackals (George
inson, Z'ravels, ii. pp. 189,191 ; see also D’Ar-
vieux, Clarke, Buckingham, Joliffe, and Monro).
2 Casarega Puissipp1. Towards the springs
of the Jordan, and near the foot of Isbel Shrik, or
the Prince's Mount, a lofty branch of Lebanon,
forming in that direction the boundary between
Palestine and Syria Proper, stands a city ori-
ginally called Banias, which has erroneously
been considered by many to be the Laish cap-
tured by the Danites, and by them called Dan
(Judg. xviii. 7-29). But it appears, from the
testimony of both Eusebius and Jerome, that
they were then separate and distinct cities, si-
tuated at the distance of four miles from each
other. This city, which was in later times much
enlarged and beautified by Philip the tetrarch,
who called it Caesarea in honour of Tiberius the
emperor, adding the cognomen of Philippi to
distinguish it from Casarea of Palestine, lay about
120 miles north from Jerusalem, and a day and
a half's journey from Damascus (Matt. xvi. 13;
Mark viii. 27). Herod Agrippa also bestowed
upon it a considerable share of attention, still
further extending anid embellishing it. In com-
pliment to the emperor Nero, its name was
afterwards changed to Neronias: and Titus,
after the overthrow of Jerusalem, exhibited some
public games here, in which the Jewish prisoners
were compelled to tight like gladiators, and num-
bers perished in the inhnman contests. Under
the Christians it was erected into a bishopric wf
Phenicia. ‘During the Crusades,’ says Dr.
Robinson, ‘it was the scene of various changes
and conflicts. It first came into the possession of
the Christians in 1129, along with the fortress on
the adjacent mountain, being delivered over to
them by its Israelite governor, after their unsuc-
cessful attempt upon Damascus in behalf of that
sect. It has now resumed its original name of
Banias, which is the Arabic pronunciation of the
Paneas of the Greeks and Romans. The city and
castle were given as a fief to the Knight Rayner
Brus. In 1132, during the absence of Rayner,
Banias was taken, after a short assault, by the
Sultan Ismail of Damascus. It was recaptured
by the Franks, aided by the Damascenes them-
selves, In 1139, the temporal control was restored to
Rayner Brus; and the city made a Latin bishop-
ric, under the jurisdiction of thy archbishop of
Tyre (Researches in Palestine, vol. iii. p. 360).
Banias has now dwindled into a paltry and in-
significant village, whose mean and destitute
condition contrasts strikingly with the rich and
luxuriant character of the surrounding country.
It is said that many remains of ancient architec-
ture are found in the neighbourhvod, bearing tes-
timony to the former grandeur of the place, al-
though it is difficult to trace the site of the splen-
did temple erected here in honour of Augustus,
The ruins of the ‘castle of Binias, which appears
to have been a work of the Saracens, crown the
summit of the adjoining mountain, and display a
wall 10 feet in thickness, by which the fortress
was defended. The ruins of another fortiticd
castle are visible on the south of the village, and
a substantial bridge which conducts to it, in-
scribed with an Arabic legend, its date being of

the age of the Crusades.—R. J.


CAIN.


CAIN. The derivation of this word is dis-
puted. Most writers trace it to }*P, an acquisition
or posscssion, but some derive it from a verb sige
nifying to ament, and others from a verb of similar
sound, signifying to envy. Both Eusebius and
Chrysostom seem to support the last interpretation ;
but the best Hebrew authorities are on the side of
that first named.

Abounding as the Scriptures do with proofs of
human guilt, and filled yet more as are the secu-
lar annals of the world with instances of crime,
none impress the mind with a stronger feeling of
horror than that of Cain. It is easy to understand
how the passion of envy or jealousy wrought in
the heart of the offender; but some degree of mys-
tery attends theimmediate origin of his crime. Abel,
it appears, brought two offerings, the one an obla-
tion, the other a sacrifice. Cain brought but the
furmer—a mere acknowledgment, it is supposed,
of the sovereignty of God ; neglecting to ofler the
sacrifice which would have been a confession of
fallen nature, and, typically, an atonement for
sin. It was not, therefore, the mere diflerence of
feeling with which the two offerings were brought
which constituted the virtue of the one, or the guilt
of the other brother. God's righteous indignation
against sin had been plainly revealed, and there
can be nu doubt that the means of safety, of recon-
ciliation and atonement, were as plainly made
known to Adam and his oftspring. The 1efusal,
therefore, of the sacrifice was a virtual denial of
God's right to condemn the sinner, and at the
same time a proud rejection of the proflered
means of grace.

The punishment which attended the crime was
such as could only be inflicted by an Almighty
avenger. It admitted of no escape, scarcely of any
conceivable alleviation. Cnrsed from the earth
himself, the earth was doomed to a double barren-
ness wherever the offender should set his foot. Not
like his futher, sentenced merely to gather his food
from the unwilling ground, bearing herbs, though
thorns sprong up along with them, for him it was
not to yield its strength; it was to be as without
life beneath him. Physical want and hardship,
therefore, were among the first of the miseries
heaped upon his head. Next came those of mind
and conscience: ‘The voice of thy brother's blood
crieth unto me from the ground,’ was the announce-
ment of his discovered guilt. He could now bear
that same voice himself; nor did any retreat
remain to him from the terrors of his own soul
or those of Divine vengeance: § From thy face
shall I be hid,’ was his agonizing ery, even when
trembling at the voice of his judge; no hope, as
he knew and thus confessed, continuing to exist
for him who was utterly cut off from communion
with God. By the statement that ‘Cain went
out from the presence of the Lord,’ probability is
given to the conjecture which represents him as
abiding, till thus exiled, in some favoured spot
where the Almighty still, by visible signs, mani-
fested himself to his fallen creatures. The ex-
pression of dread lest, as he wandered over the
face of the earth, he might be recognised and
slain, has an awful sound when falling from the
mouth of a murderer. But he was to be protected
against the wrath of his fellow-men ; and of this
God gave him assurance, not, says Shuckford, by
setting a mark upon him, which is a false transla-
tion, but by appointing a sign or token which he


-


himself might understand as a proof that he
should not perish by the hand of another, as Abel
had peri by his. i

What was the Divine purpose in affording him
this protection it is difticult to determine. That
it was not with the intention of prolonging his
misery may be conjectured from the fact, that it
was granted in answer to his own piteous cry for
mercy. Some writers have spoken of the possi-
bility of his becoming a true penitent, and of his
having at length. after many long years of suf-
fering, obtained the Divine forgiveness. It must
be confessed that this affords the easiest solution
of some difficulties in the circumstance alluded
to; nor ought we, in any way, peremptorily to
conclude that such tance was impossible,
when both our blessed Lord and St. Stephen, and
awhole host of martyrs, did not refuse to pray for
their murderers, assuredly intimating thereby that
to irrevocable sentence had, as yet, been passed
upon them.

It may be worthy of observation, that especial
mention is made of the fact, that Cain having
travelled into the land of Nod there built a city;
and further, that his descendants were chiefly
celebrated for their skill in the arts of social life.
In both accounts may probably he discovered the
powerful struggles with which Cain strove tu over-
come the difficulties which attended his position
as one to whom the tillage of the ground was
virtually prohibited.—H. S.


CAINAN ({3°2, possessor ; Sept. Kaivdy).
1. Son of Enos, and father of Mahaleel (Gen. v.
9; 1 Chron, i. 2). 2. Son of Arphaxad, the son
of Shem, and father of Salah. His name is
wanting in the present copies of the Hebrew
Scriptures; but is found in the Septuagint
version of Gen. x. 24; xi. 12, and in Luke
iii, 36. As the addition of his generation of
130 years in the stries of names is of great
chronological importance, and is one of the
circumstances which render the Septuagint com-
putation of time longer than the Hebrew, this
matter has engaged much attention, and has led
to great discussion among chronologers. Some
have suggested that the Jews purposely excluded
the second Cainan from their copies, with the
design of rendering the Septuagint and Luke sus-
pected; others, that Moses omitted Cainan,
being desirous of reckoning ten generations only
from Adam to Noah, and from Noah to Abra-
ham. Some suppose that Arphaxad was father
of Cainan and Salah, of Salah naturally, and of
Cainan legally ; while others allege that Cainan
‘and Salah were the same person, under two
names. It is believed by many, however, that
the name of this second Cainan was not originally
in the text of Luke, but is an addition of inad-
vertent transcribers, who, remarking it in some
Copies of the Septuagint, added it (Kuinoél, ad
Lue. iii. 36). Upon the whole, the balance of
critical opinion is in favour of the rejection of
this secon Cainan. Even Hales, though, as an
aivocate of the longer chronology, predisposed to
its retention, decides that we are fully warranted
to conclude that the second Cainan was not, ori-

binally, in the Hebrew text, and the Sey.tua-

as versions derived from it. And since water
pact bt to a level higher than that of the
ping from which it issues, so neither can the


CAIAPHAB. 367


authority of the New-Testament for its retention,
rise higher than that of the Old Testament, from
which it is professedly copied, for its exclusion
(Chronology, i. p. 291). Some of the grounds for
this conclusion are—l. That the Hebrew and
Samaritan, with all the ancient versions and tar
gums, concur in the omission; 2. That the a
tuagint is not consistent with itself; for in the
repetition of genealogies in 1 Chron. i. 24, it
omits Cainan and agrees with the Hebrew text;
3. That the second Cainan is silently rejected by
Josephus, by Philo, by John of Antioch, and by
Eusebius; and that, while Origen retained the
name itself, he, in his copy of the Septuagint,
marked it with an obelisk as an unauthorized
reading.

CAIAPHAS (Kaidpas), called by Josephus
(Antig. xviii. § 2) Joseph Caiaphas,was high-priest
of the Jews in the reign of Tiberius Caesar (Luke
iii. 2). We lear from Josephus that he suc-
ceeded Simon the son of Camith (about a.p. 27 or
28), and held the office nine years, when he was
deposed. His wife was the daughter of Annas,
or Ananus, who had formerly been high-priest,
and who still possessed great influence and con-
tro] in sacerdotal matters, several of his family
successively holding the high-priesthood. The
names of Annas and Caiaphas are coupled by
Luke—‘ Annas and Caiaphas being the high-
priests ;’ and this has given occasion to no small
amount of discussion. Some maintain that An-
nas and Caiaphas then discharged the functions
of the high-priesthood by turns; but this is not
reconcilable with the statement of Josephus.
Others think that Caiaphas is called high-priest,
because he then actually exercised the functions
of the office, and that Annas is so called because he
had formerly tilled the situation. But it does not
thus appear, why of those who had before Caia-
ae held the bigh-priesthood, Annas in particu-

ar should be named, and not Ishmael, Eliazer,
or Simon, who had all served the office more
recently than Annas. Hence, Kuinoel and others
consider it as the more probable opinion, that
Caiaphas was the bigh-priest, but that Annas
was his vicar or deputy, called in the Hebrew,
q3D sagan. Nor can that office be thought un-
worthy of a man who had filled the pontifical
oflice, since the dignity of sagan was ales great.
Thus, for instance, on urgent occasions he
might even enter the Holy of Holies (Lightfoot,
Hor. Heb. ad Luc. iii. 2). Nor ought it to seem
strange or unusual that the vicar of a high-
priest should be called by that name. For if, as
it appears, those who had once held the office were
ever after, by courtesy, called high-priests, with
greater justice might Annas, who was both a pon-
tifical person and high-priest’s vicar, be so called.
In fact, the very appellation of high-priest is given
to a sagan by Josephus (Antig. xvii. 6, 4). See
the commentators on Luke iii. 2; particular]
Hammond, Lightfoot, Kuinoé], and Bloomfield.

Caiaphas is the high-priest who rent his clothes,
and declared Jesus to be worthy of death, When
Judas had betrayed him, our Lord was first taken
to Annas, who sent him to Caiaphas (John xviii.
13), who perhaps abode in another part of the
same palace. What became of Caiaphas after
his deposition in a.v. 38, is not known.


CAKES (Brzap).


348 CALAH.


CALAH (Mbp; Sept. Xaady), or rather
Cazacn, a city of Assyria, built by Ashur or
Nimrod (the plirase in Gen. x. 11, 12, being
ambiguous). It was at some distance from
Nineveh, the City of Resen lying between them.
Most writers concur in placing it on the Great
Zab (the ancient Lycus) not far from its junction
with the Tigris, and Resen is placed higher up
on the same river, so as to be between it and
Nineveh, There appears to be a trace of this
name in Calachene, which Strabo describes as a
Province of Assyria, lying between the source of
the Lycus and the Tigris. Many ct pe that
this Calah is the same as the Chalach (Auth.
Vers. Halah) in 1 Kings xviii. 6; xvii. 11,
whither Sulmanassar transplanted a colony of
Israelites; but there are good reasons assigned
under another head (Halah) for disputing this
conjecture.

CALEB (353, dog; Sept. XdAeB), son of
Jephunneh, of the tribe of Judah. He was sent with
Joshua and others to explore the land of Canaan,
and in consequence of his joining with Joshua in
opposing the discouraging accounts brought back
by the other spies, they were both specially ex-
empted from the decree of death which was pro-
nounced on the generation to which they belonged
(Num. xiii. 6; xiv. 6, 24, 33). When the land
of Canaan lad been invaded and partly con-
quered, Caleb was privileged to choose Kirjath-
arba, or Hebron, and its neighbourhood, for his pos-
session (Josh. xiv. 6-15). He accordingly went
and wrested it from the native inhabitants, and
thence proceeded to Debir, which was taken for
him by lis nephew Othniel, who, as his reward,
received in marriage the hand of Caleb's daughter
[eonesen with a valuable dower. (Josh. xv.

3-19). Caleb is usually supposed to have out-
lived Joshua,


CALF (539) is mentioned in several places,
but, not requiring a zoological explanation, it


200. (Egyptian Calf-Idol.)


may be sufficient to make a few remarks on
the worship of calves and other superstitious
practices connected with them. The most ancient
and remarkable notice in the Scriptures on this
head, is that of the golden calf which was cast
by Aaron from the carrings of the people, while
the Israelites were encamped at the foot of Sinai
and Moses was absent on the Mount. The next
Notice refers to an event which occurred ages after,
when Jeroboam, king of Israel, set up two idols
in the form of a calf, the one in Dan and the
‘other in Bethel. This almost incomprehensible


‘


CALF.


ion of human reason was, more particu-
larly in the first instance, no doubt the result of
the debasing influences which operated on the
minds of the Israelites during their sojourn in
Egypt, where, amid the daily practice of the
most degrading and revolting religious cere-
monies, they were accustomed to see the image of
a sacred calf, surrounded by other symbols, car-
ried in sclemn pomp at the head of marching
armies; such as may be still seen depicted in
the processions of Rameses the Great or Sesostris.
The preceding figure is a representation of a
calf-idol which the present writer copied from the
original collection made by the artists of the French
Institute of Cairo. It is recumbent, with human
eyes, the skin flesh-culoured, and the whole after-
parts covered with a white and sky-blue diapered
drapery: the horns are not on the head, but above
it, and contain within them the symbolical glube
surmounted by two feathers. Upon the neck is
a blue and yellow yoke, and the flagellum, of va-
rious colours, is suspended over the back: the
whole is fixed upon a broad stand for carrying,
as here shown. ‘The rendering of the Auth. Vers.,
which alludes to the image being finished with
a graving tool, is obviously correct, for all the
lines and toolings of the covering cloth, of the
eyes, and of the feathers, must have required that
manual operation (Exod. xxxii. 4). It is doubt-
ful whether this idolatrous form is either Apis or
Mnevis; it may perhaps represent the sun’s first
entrance into Taurus, or more probally bea symbol
known to the Egyptians by an undeciphered de-
signation, and certainly understood by the Edom-
ites of later ayes, who called it bahtuned and kharuf,
or the calf, the mysterious anima mundi: accord-
ing to Von Hammer (Pref. to Ancient Alpha-
bets), the Nabathwan secret of secrets, or the be-
ginning and retum of everything. With the
emblems on the back, it may have symbolized the
plural Elohim, long before the cabbalistical adudi-
tions of this mysterious type had changed the tigure.
At the time of the departure of the Israclites from
Egypt this may have been the Moloch of their
neiylibours, for that idol was figured with the head
ofa calforsteer. A similar divinity belonged to the
earliest Indian, Greek, and even Scandinavian my-
thologies; and therefore it may be conceived that
the symbol, enduring even to this day, was at that
period generally understood by the multitude, aud
consequently that it was afterwards revived by
Jeroboam without popular opposition, Egyptian
pene: illustrate the contempt which the prophet
osea (x.5) casts upon the practice of those
whom he designates as ‘coming to sacrifice and
kiss the calves ;’ aud commentators have been at
pains to explain in what manner Moses reduced
the golden calf to such a state as to make jt
petable in water; but surely as the science of
making gold-leaf for gilding was already prac-
tised in Egypt, there could be no difficulty, even
if chemical processes had not then been disco-
vered, in effecting the object. With regard to
Jer. xxxiv. 18,19, it may Le sufficient to mention
that many nations of antiquity had a practice of
Linding themselves to certain resolutions by the
ceremony of cutting a calf or other victim into two
halves or sides, laying them on the ground, and
passing between the severed parts. This was con-
sidered as constituting a peculiarly binding obli-
gation (comp, Gen. xv. 10, 17).—C. H.S,


CALNEH.


CALNEH (1373 ; Sept. Xaddvvy), or rather
Cuanneu, the fourth of Nimrod’s cities (Gen. x.
10), and probably not different from the Calno of
Isa. x. 9, or the Canneh of Ezek. xxvii. 23.
According to the Chaldee translation, with which
Eusebius and Jerome agree, this is the same

lace that was subsequently caHed Ctesiphon.
ke lay on the Tigris, opposite Seleucia, an

for a time the capital of the Parthians. This
ancient opinion respecting Chalneh is rendered
probable by the circumstance that the district
uamed Ctesiphon was called by the Greeks
Chalonitis (Pliny, Hist. Nat. vi. 26, 27; Polyb.
y. 44). Ammianus Marcellinus (xxiii. 6. 23)
states that it was the Persian king Pacorus
(who reigned from a.p. 71 to 107) who changed
(he name of the city to Ctesiphon ; but that name
must have been more ancient, as it is mentioned by
Polybius, In the time of the prophet Amos, Cal-


201.


CALVARY, the place where Christ was
crucified. In three of the Gospels the Hebrew
name of the place, Go.corna (place of a skull),
is given; and in Luke (xxiii. 33), where we
find Calvary in the Authorized Version, the
orisinal is net Calvary, but Cranion (xpavtoy), a
Cuninutive of kxpavoy (a skull). Calvaria is the
Latin translation of this word, adopted by the
Valgate, from which it found its way into our
version. But as the names Cranion and Calvaria
are respectively Greek and Latin translations of
the original Golgotha, which occurs in three out
of the four Gospels, the plan of this work requires
that the various particulars connected with the
ste of the Crucifixion should be referred to Gox-
GUTHA,


CAMBYSES. [Anasverus.]


CAMEL fes}] gamal in Hebrew and Syriac,
gamala in Chaldaic, jemel in ancient Arabic,
djammel in modern, and xdundos in Greek).
‘These are the principal names in Eastern history
of the genus Camelus, as constituted by modern
naturalists. In this arrangement it comprises two
species positively distinct, but still possessing the
common characters of being ruminants without
Soms, without muzzle, with nostrils forming ob-
lique slits, the upper lip divided, and separately
movable and extensile, the soles of the fect horny,
with two toes covered by unguiculated claws,
the limbs long, the abdomen drawn up, and the
neck, long and slender, is bent down and up, the


CAMEL. 389


neh appears to have constituted an independent
principality (Amos'vi. 1, 2); but not ine oe
it became, with the rest of Western Asia, a prey to
the Assyrians (Isa. x. 9). About 150 years later,
Calneh was still a considerable town, as may be
inferred from its being mentioned by Ezekiel
(xxvii. 23) among the places which traded with
Tyre. The site of Ctesiphon, or Calneh, was after-
wards oceupied by El-Madain, ¢. e. the (two)
cities, of which the only remains are the ruins of
a remarkable palace called Tauk-kesra, some
mounds of rubbish, and a considerable extent of
massive wall towards the river. The ruined
palace, with its broken arch, although it stands
on Jow ground, is a most conspicuous object, and
is seen at a considerable distance, in ascending
the river, in varied and’striking points of view, in
consequence of the serpentine course of the stream
in this part.


——
(Tauk-kesra.]


reverse of that of a horse, which is arched. Ca-
mels have thirty-six teeth in all, whereof three
cuspidate on each side above, six incisors, and
two cuspidate on each side below, which, though
differently named, still have all more or less the
character of tushes. They have callosities on the
breast-bone and on the flexures of the joints. Of
the four stomachs, which they have in common
with other animals chewing the cud, the ventri-
culus, or paunch, is provided with membranous
cells to contain an extra provision of water, ena-
bling the ies to subsist for four or more days
without drinking. But when in the desert, the
camel has the faculty of smelling it afar off, antl
then, breaking through all control, he rushes on-
wards to drink, stirring the element previously
with a fore-foot, until quite muddy. Camels are
temperate animals, being fed on a march only once
in twenty-four hours, with about a pound weight
of dates, beans, or barley, and are enabled in the
wilderness, by means of their long flexible necks
and strong cuspidate teeth, to snap as they pass at
thistles and thorny plants, mimosas and caper-
trees. They are emphatically called the stipe
of the desert; having to cross regions where no
vegetation whatever is met with, and where they
could not be enabled to continue their march but for
the aid of the double or single hunch on the back,
which, being com of muscular fibre, and cel-
lular substance highly adapted for the accumula-
tion of fat, swells in proportion as the animal is
healthy and well fed, or sinks by absorption as it
as


3% CAMEL.


supplies the want of sustenance under fatigue and
scarcity; thus giving an extra stock of food with-
out eating, till by exhaustion the skin of the pro-
minences, instead of standing up, falls over, amd
hangs like empty bags on the side of the dorsal
tidge. Now, when to these endowments are added
a lofty stature and great ayility ; eyes that discover
minute objects at a distance; a sense of smelling
of prodigious acuteness—ever kept in a state of
sensibility Ly the animal's power of closing the
nostrils to exclude the acrid particles of the sandy
deserts; a spirit, moreover, of patience, not the
result of fear, but of forbearance, carried to the
length of self-sacrifice in the practice of obedience,
so often exemplified by the camel's bones in great
numbers strewing the surface of the desert ; when
we perceive it furntshed with a dense wool, to
avert the solar heat and nightly cold, while on
the animal, and to clothe and lodge his master
when manufactured, and know that the female
carries milk to feed him,—we have one of the most
incontrovertible examples of Almighty power and
beneficence in the adaptation of means to a direct

, that can well be submitted to the ap-
prehension of man; for, without the existence of
the camel, immense portions of the surface of the
earth would be uninhabitable, and even impassable.
Surely the Arabs are right, ‘ Job's beast is a monu-
ment of God's mercy!’ The two speciesare—1. The
Bactrian camel (camelus Bactrianus of authors)
is large and robust; naturally with two hunches,
and originally a native of the highest table-lands
of Central Asia, where even now, wild individuals


may be found. The species extends through China,
Tartary, and Russia, and is principally imported
across the mountains into Asia Minor, Syria, and
Persia. One appears figured in the processions of
the ancient Persian satrapies amoung the bas-reliefs
of Chehel Minar, where the Arabian species is not
seen. It is also this species which, according to the
researches of Burckhardt, constitutes the brown
Tavus variety ofsingle-hunched Turkish or Toorkee
camels commouly seen at Constantinople, there
being a very ancient gait among breeders,
not, it appears, attended with danger, of extir-
pating with a knife the foremost hunch of the
animal soon after birth, thereby procuring more
for the packsaddle and load. 1t seems that

is mode of rendering the Bactzian cross-breed


CAMEL.


similar to the Arabian camel or dromedary (for
Burckhardt misapplies the last name), is as of
the principal causes of the confusion ani contra-
dictions which occur in the descriptions of the
two species, and that the various other intermix-
tures of races in Asia Minor and Syria, having for
their object either to create greater powers of en-
durance of cold or of heat, of body to carry weight,
or to move with speed, have still more perplexed


the question. From these causes a variety of
names have arisen, which, when added to the Ara-
bian distinctions for each sex, and for the young
during every year of its growth, and even for the
camels nursing horse-foals, the appellatives be-
come exceedingly numerous. We notice only—


<a]
203. (Arabian Camel: baggage.)


2. The Arabian camel or dromedary (camelus
@romedarius or Arabicus of naturalists, D3
bacar; and female and young M1729, Isa, Ix. 6;
Jer. ii. 23) is properly the species having natu-
rally but one hunch, and considered as of West-
em-Asiatic or of African origin, although no
kind of camel is figured on any monument of
Egypt, not even where there are representations of
live stock such as that found in a most ancient
tomb beneath the pyramid of Gizeh ; which shows
herdsmen bringing their cattle and domesticated
animals to be numbered before a steward and his
scribe; and in which we see oxen, goats,
asses, geese, and ducks, but neither horses nor
camels. That they were not indigenous in the ear]:
history of Egypt is countenanced by the mythic
tale of the priests describing ‘the flight of Ty-

hon, geven days’ journey upon an ass. We find,

wever, camels mentioned in Genesis xii.; but
being placed last among the cattle given by
Pharaoh to Abraham, the fact seems to show
that they were not considered as the most import-
ant part of his donation. This can be true only
upon the supposition that only a few of these ani
mals were delivered to him, and therefore that
they were still rare in the valley of the Nile;
though soon after there is abundant evidence of
the nations of Syria and Palestine having whole
herds of them fully domesticated. These seem
to imply that the genus Camelus was onpoaly
an inhabitant of the elevated deserts of Central
Asia, its dense fur showing that a cold but dry
atmosphere was to be encountered, and that it
came already domesticated, towards the south and
west, with the oldest colonies of mountaineers whe
are to be distinguished from earlier tribes who sub-
dued the ass, and perhaps from others still more an-


CAMEL.


cient, who, taking to the rwers, descended by water,
and afterwards coasted and crossed narrow seas.
Of the Arabian species two very distinct
races are noticed; those of stronger frame but
slower pace used to carry burdens, varying from
500 to 700 weight, and travelling little more
than twenty-four miles per day; and those of
lighter form bred for the saddle with single riders,
whereof the fleetest serve to convey intelligence,
&c., and travel at the rate of 200 miles in
twenty-four hours. They are designated by seve-
tal appellations, such as Deloul, the best coming


204. [Arabian Came!: saddle.)


from Oman, or from the Bishareens in Upper
Egypt; also Hadjeens, Ashaary, Maherry, Reches,
Badees at Herat, Rawahel,and Racambel in India,
all names more or less implying swiftuess, the
same as dpouds, swift. Caravans of loaded camels
have always scouts and flankers mounted on these
light animals, and in earlier ages, Cyrus and
others employed them in the line of battle, each
carrying two archers. The Romans of the third
and fourth centuries of our era, as appears from
the ‘ Notitia,’ maintained in Egypt and Palestine
several a/@ or squadrons, mounted on dromeda-
Ties; probably the wars of Belisarius with the
northern Africans had shown their importance in
protecting the provinces bordering on the desert ;
such was the ala dromedariorum Antana at Am-
mata in the tribe of Judah, and three others in the
Thebais. Buonaparte formed a similar corps, and
in China and India the native princes and the
East India Company have them also.

All camels, frum their very birth, are taught to
bend their limbs and lie down to receive a load or
arider. They are often placed circularly in a
recumbent posture, and together with their loads
form a sufficient rampart of defence against rob-
bers on horseback: ‘The milk of she-camels is
still considered a very nutritive cooling drink,
and when turned it becomes intuxicating. Their
dung supplies fuel in the desert, and m sandy
regions where wood is scarce; and occasionally it
is a kind of resource for horses when other food is
wanting in the wilderness, Their flesh, particu-
larly the hunch, is in request among the Arabs,
but was forbidden to the Hebrews, more perliaps
from motives of economy, and to keep the people
from again becoming wanderers, than from any
real uncleanuess.

Camels were early a source of riches to the pa-
triarchs, and from that period became an increas-
ing object of rural importance to the several tribes


CANA. sn


of Israel, who inhabited the grazing and border
districts, but still they never equalled the num-
bers possessed by the Arabs of the desert. In
what manner the Hebrews derived the valuable
remunerations obtainable from them does not di-
rectly appear, but it may be surmised that by
means of their camels they were in ssion of
the whole trade that passed by land from Asia
Minor and Syria to the Red Sea and Egypt;
and from the Red Sea and Arabia towards the
north, and to the Phenician sea-ports. On swift
dromedaries the trotting motion is so hard that
to endure it the rider requires a severe appren-
ticeship; but riding upon slow camels is not
disagreeable, on account of the measured step of
their walk; ladies and women in general are
conveyed uyon them in a kind of wickerwork
sedan, known as the takht-ravan of India and
Persia. Those which carried the king's ser-
vants or guests, according to Philostratus, were
always distinguished by a gilded boss on the
forehead.

It is likely the word DYSINWNN achashteranim
(Esth. viii. 10), rendered ‘ young dromedaries’
(though Bochart regards it as meaning mules),
implies the swift postage or conveyance of orders,
the whole verse showing that all the means of dis-
patch were set in motion at the disposal of govern-
ment. With regard to the passage in Matt. xix,
24, ‘It is easier for a camel to go through the eye
of a needle,’ &c., and that in Matt. xxiii. 24,
‘Ye strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel,’ it
may be suiticient to observe, that both are prover-
bial expressions, similarly applied in the kindred
languages of Asia.—C. H. S.


CAMPHIRE. (Copusr.]


CANA (Kava), a town in Galilee, not far from
Capernaum, where Christ performed his first mi-
racle by turning water into wine (John iv. 46).
This Cana is not named in the Old Testament,
but is mentioned by Josephus as a village of
Galilee (Vita, § 16, 64; De Bell. Jud. i. 17. 5),
The site has long been identified with the present
Kefr Kenna, a small place about four miles north-
east from Nazareth, on one of the roads to Tibe-
rias. It is a neat village, pleasantly situated on
the descent of a hill looking to the south-west,
and surrounded by plantations of olive and other
fruit trees. There is a large spring in the neigh-
bourhood, enclosed by a wall, which, if this be the
Cana of the New Testament, is doubtless that
from which water was drawn at the time of our
Lord's visit. It is also observable that watere
pots of compact limestone are still used in this
neighbourhood, and some old ones are, as might
be expected, sliown as those which once contained
the miraculous wine. Here are also the remains
of a Greek church, and of a house said to be that
of Nathaniel, who was a native of Cana (John
ii. 1-11). The view which we give is that of the
traditional Cana.

There is a ruined place called Kana el-Jelil,
about eight miles N.4E. from Nazareth, which
Dr. Robinson is inclined to regard as the more
probable site of Cana. His reasons, which are
certainly of considerable weight, may be seen in
Biblical Researches, iii. 204-208. Descriptions
of Kefr Kenna may be found in Pococke, Burck-
hardt, Clarke, G. Robinson (Travels), Richard-
gon, Monro, Schubert, &c. <a

3


372


CANAAN (jY23 ; Xavady), son of Ham and
dson of Noah. The ion of his
‘ather Ham (Gen. ix. 22-27), to which some sup-
pose Canaan to have been in some way a party,
gave occasion to Noah to pronounce that doom on
the descendants of Canaan which was, perhaps,
at that moment made known to him by one of
those extemporaneous inspirations with which the
triarchal fathers appear in other instances to
fave been favoured [Busssina]. That there is
no just ground for the conclusion that the de-
scendants of Canaan were cursed as an immediate
consequence of the transgression of Ham, is shown
by Professor Bush, who, in his Notes on Genesis,
has fairly met the difficulties of the subject.
CANAAN, Lanp or, the ancient name of
that portion of Palestine which lay to the west of

the Jordan (Gen, xiii. 12; Num. xxxiii, 51;

Deut. xi. 30: Judg. xxi. 12), the beyond
_ the Jordan eastward being distinguished by the

general name of Gilead (comp. Judg. xxi. 12).
The denomination Canaan included Philistia
and Phenicia (comp. isa. xxiii. 11, and Gese-
nius thereon; Ezek. xvi. 29; Zeph. ii. 5). The
name occurs on Pheenician coins (Eckhel, Doctr.
Num. iv. 409}, and was not even unknown to
the Carthaginians (Gesen. Gesch, d. Heb. Sprach.
p- 16). For an account of the geography, &c.
of the country, see PaLEsTINE.

_ CANAANITES: (2923; Sept. Kavavaloc),
the descendants of Canaan, the son of Ham and
grandson of Noah, inhabitants of the land of
Canaan and the adjoining districts. A general
account of the different nations included in the
term is given in the present article, and a more
detailed account of each will be found under
their respective names.

The Israelites were delivered from Egypt by
Moses, in order that they might take possession of


=z
205. (Cana: Kefr Kenna.]


Sr a


the land which God had erty to their fathers.
This country was then inhabited by the descend-
ants of Canaan, who were divided into six or seven
distinct nations, viz. the Hittites, Girgashites,
Amorites, Canaanites, Perizzites, Hivites, and
Jebusites (Exod. iii. 17, where the Girgashites
are not mentioned ; Deut. vii. 1, &c.). All these
tribes are included in the most general accepta-
tion of the term Canaanites ; but the word, in its
more restricted sense, as applied to one tribe, de-
signated those ‘who dwelt by the sea, and by
the coasts of Jordan’ (Num. xiii. 29). Besides
these ‘seven nations,’ there were several tribes of
the Canaanites who lived beyond the borders of the
Promised Land, northward. These were the
Arkites, Sinites, Arvadites, Zemarites, and Hama-
thites (Gen. x. 17, 18), with whom, of course, the
Israelites had no concern, There were also other
tribes of Canaanitish origin (or possibly other names
given to some of those already mentioned), who
were dispossessed by the Israelites. The chief of
these were the Amalekites, the Anakites, and the
Rephaim (or ‘giants,’ as they are frequently
called in our translation).* These nations, and
especially the six or seven so frequently mentioned
by name, the Israelites were commanded to dis-
ae and utterly to destroy (Exod. xxiii. 23;

um. xxxiii, 53; Deut. xx. 16,17). The de-


* Other tribes are mentioned in the promise to
Abraham (Gen. xv. 19), viz. the Kenites, Ke-
nizzites, and Kadmonites. Of these the Kenites,
or at least a branch of them, seem to have adhered
to the Israelites, through their connection by mar-
riage with Moses (Judg. iv. 11), and they were
treated with kindness when the Amalekites were
destroyed by Saul (1 Sam. xv. 6). The others
oH 4 peach God eit 1a), term Kenezite,
applied to Caleb (Josh. xiv. 14), being a patro-
nymic. (See Josh. xv. 17.)


Digitized ty GOOe
Cc


CANAANITES.


struction, however, was not to be accomplished
at once. The promise on the part of God was
that he would ‘ put out those nations by little and
little,’ and the command to the Israelites cor-
responded with it; the :eason given being, ‘lest
the beasts of the field increase upon thee’ (Exod.
xxiii. 29; Deut. vii. 22). ‘

The destructive war commenced with an attack
on the Israelites, by Arad, king of the Canaanites,
which issued in the destruction of several cities in
the extreme south of Palestine, to which the name
of Hormah was given (Num. xxi. 1-3). The
Israelites, however, did not follow up this victory,
which was simply the consequence of an unpro-
voked assault on them; but tuning back, and com-
passing the land of Edom, they attempted to pass
through the country on the other side of the Jordan,
inhabited by a tribe of the Amorites. Their pas-
sage being refused, and an attack made on them
by Sihon, king of the Amorites, they not only
forced their way through his land, but destroyed
its inhabitants, and proceeding onwards towards
the adjoining kingdom of Bashan, they in like
manner destroyed the inhabitants of that district,
and slew Og, their king, who was the last of the
Rephaim, or giants (Deut. iii. 11). The tract of
which they thus became possessed was subse+
quently allotted to the tribes of Reuben and Gad,
and the half tribe of Manasseh.

After the death of Moses the Israelites crossed
the Jordan, and, under the conduct of Joshua,
took possession of the greater part of the Promised
Land, and destroyed its inhabitants. Several cities,
however, still held out, particularly Jebus, after-
wards Jerusalem, which was not taken till the
time of David (2 Sam. v. 6), and Sidon, which
seems never to have yielded to the tribe of Asher,
to whom it was allotted (Judy. i. 31). Scattered
portions also of the Canaanitish nations escaped,
and were frequently strong enough to harass,
though not to dispossess, the Israelites. The in-
habitants of Gibeon, a tribe of the Hivites, made
peace by stratagem, and thus escaped the destruc-
tion of their fellow-countrymen. — Individuals
from amongst the Canaanites seem, in later times,
to have united themselves, in sume way, to the
Israelites, and not only to have lived in peace,
but to have been capable of holding places of
houour and power; thus Uriah, one of David's
captains, was a Hittite (1 Chron. xi. 41). In the
time of Solomon, when the kingdom had attained
its highest glory and greatest power, all the rem-
nants of these uations were made tributary, and
boud-service was exacted from them (1 Kings ix.
20). ‘The Girgashites seem to have been either
whully destroyed or absorbed in other tribes.
We find no mention of them subsequent to the
book of Joshua, and the opinion that the Gerye-
senes, or Gaclawnes, in the time of our Lord, were
their descendants, has very little evidence to
support it (Rosenmiiller, Scholia in Gen. x.
16; Reland, J’alestina, i, 27, p. 188). The
Anakites were completely destroyed by Joshua,

except in three cities, Gaza, Gath, and Ashdod
(Jush. xi, 21-23); and the powerful nation of the
Amalekites, many times defeated and continually
harassing the Israelites, were af last totally de-
struyed by the tribe of Simeon (1 Chron. iv. 43).
Even after the retum of the Jews from the Baby-
lonish captivity, there were survivors of five of the
Canaanitish vations, with whom alliances bad been


CANAANITES. 378


made by the Jews, contrary to the commands
which had been given them. Some of the Canaan-
ites, according to ancient tradition, left the land
of Canaan on the approach of Joshua, and emi-
grated _to the coast of Africa. Procopius (De
Bello Vandalico, ii. 10) relates that there were in
Numidia, at Tigisis (Tingis), two columns on
which were inscribed, in Phoenician characters,
iyeiseopey of pvydvres amd mpordxou "Inaot Tov
Anorod viod Navii—‘ We are those who fled from
the face of Joshua, the robber, the son of Naue.’
(Bochart, Peleg, i. 24; Michaelis, Laws of
Afoses, art. 31, vol. i. p. 176, Smith’s Transl. ;
Winer's Realwworterbuch, arts. ‘ Canaaniter’ and
‘ Josua’.)

The manner in which the Israelites became
possessed of the Promised Land has been so fre-
quently brought as an objection to the inspired
character of the Old Testament, and indeed is so
far removed from the ordinary providential go-
vernment of God, that it will be proper, in closing
this account, to notice the difficulty which has
been felt, and to advert tv some of the hypotheses
by which it is sought to be removed. Many have
asserted, in order to alleviate the difliculty, that
an allotment of the world was made by Noah to
his three sons, and that by this allotment the Land
of Promise fell to the share of Shem—that the de-
scendauts of Ham were therefore usurpers and in-
terlopers, and that on this ground the Israelites, as
the descendants of Shem, had the right to dispossess
them. This explanation isas old as Epiphanius,
who thus answered the objection of the Mani-s
cheans, Others justify the war on the ground that
the Canaanites were the first aggressors—a justitica-
tion which applies only to the territory on the other
side of the Jordan. Michaelis, to whom we must
refer for a lengthened investigation of the subject
(Laws of Moscs, b. ii. ch. iii. vol. 1, p. 111-179,
Smith’s Tiansl.), dissatistied with these and other
attempted apologies, asserts that the Israelites had
aright to the land of Canaan, as the common pase
ture land of their herdsmen, in consequence of the
undisturbed possession and appropriation of it
from the time of Abraham till the departure of
Jacob into Egypt—that this claim had never been
relinquished, aud was well known to the Canaan-
ites, and that therefore the Israelites only took
possession of that which belonged to them. The
same hypothesis is maintained by Jahn (/lebrew
Commonwealth, ch. ii. § x. Stowe's Transl.). In
the Fragments appended to Taylor's edition of
Calmet's Dictionary (vol. iv. pp. 95, 96), another
ground of justification is sought in the supposed
identity of race of the Egyptian dynasty under
which the Israelites were oppressed, with the tribes
that overran Canaan—so that the destruction of
the latter was merely an act of retributive justice
for the injuries which their compatriots in Egypt
had inflicted on the Israelites. To all these and
similar attempts to justify. on the ground of legal
right, the forcible occupation of the land by the
Istaelites, and the extermination (at least to a great
exteut) of the existing occupants, it is to be objected,
that uo such reason as any of these is hinted at in
the sacred record. The right to carry on a war of
extermination is there rested simply on the divine
command to do so. That the Israelites were in
struments in God's hand is a lesson not only con-
tinually impressed on their minds by the teaching
of Moses, but enforced by their deteat whenever


374 CANDACE,.


they relied on their own strength. That there
may have been grounds of justification, on the plea
of human or legal right, ought not indeed to be
denied, but it is, we imagine, quite clear, from
the numerous attempts to tind what these grounds
were, that they are not stated in the Old Testa-
ment; and to seck for them as though they were
necessury to the justification of the Israelites, seems
to be an abandonment of the high ground on
which alone their justification can be safely rested
—the express commanl of God.

It may be said that this is only shifting the
difficulty, and that just in proportion as we
exculpate the Israelites from the charges of rob-
bery and murder, in their making war without
legal ground, we lower the character of the Being
whose commands they obeyed, and throw doubt
on those commands being really given by God.
This has indeed been a favourite objection of inti-
dels to the divine authority of the Old Testament,
Such objectors wonld do well to consider whether
God has not an absolute right to dispose of men as
he sees fit, and whether an exterminating war,
from which there was at least the opportunity of
escape by flight, is at all more opposed to our
notions of justice, than a destroying flood, or
earthynake, or pestilence. Again, whether the
fact of making a chosen nation of Lis worshippers
the instruments of punishing those whose wicked-
ness was atoriansty great, did not much more
impressively vindicate his character as the only
God, who ‘will not give his glory to another,
hor his praise to graven images,’ than if the pu-
nishment had been brought about by natural
causes. Such considerations as these must, we
apprehend, silence those who complain of injustice
done to the Canaanites. But then it is objected
further, that such an arrangement is fraught with
evil to those who are made the instruments of

unishment, and, as an example, is peculiarly
Platte to be abused by all who have the power to
-persecute. Asto the first of these objections, it
must be remembered. that the conduct of the war
was never put into the hands of the Israelites—


that they were continually reminded that it was:


for the wickedness of those nations that they were
driven out, and, above all, that they themselves
would be exposed to similar punishment if they
were seduced into idolatry—an evil to which they
were especially prone. As to the example, it can
apply to no case where there is not an equally
clear expression of God's will. A person without
such a commission has no more rigit to plead the
example of the Israelites in justification of his ex-
terminating or even harassing those whom he ima-
gines to be God's enemies, than to plead the
example of Moses in justification of his promul-
gating a new law purporting to come from God.
In a word, the justitication of the Israelites, as it
appears tous, is to Le sought in this alone, that
they were clearly commissioned Ly God to ac-
complish this work of judgment, thus, at once,
giving public testimony to, and receiving an aw-
ful impression of, His power and authority, so as
in some measure to check the outrageous idolatry
into which almost the whole world bad sunk.—
F.W.G.

CANDACE, or, more correctly, Kanpakk
(both the c's being hard), was the name of that
queen of the Ethiopians (Kavdden 7 Bacliicoa


Aidiéxwv), whose high treasurer was converted to


CANDACE,.


Christianity under the preaching of Philip the
Evangelist (Acts viii, 27). The country over
which she ruled was not, as some writers allege,
what is known to us as Abyssinia; it was that
region in Upper Nubia which was called by the
Greeks Mervé and is supposed to correspoud to
the present province of Atbara, lying between 13°
and 18°? north latitude. From the circumstance of
its being nearly enclosed by the Atbara (Astubo-
ras or Tacazze) on the right, and the Bahr el
Abiad, or White river, and the Nile on the left,
it was sometimes designated the ‘Islaud” of Me-
roé; but the ancient kingdom appears to have
extended at one period to the north of the island
as far as Mount Berkal. The city of Merve
stood near the present Assour, about twenty miles
north of Shendy ; and the extensive and magnifi-
cent ruins found not ouly there, but along the
upyer valley of the Nile, attest the art and civiliza-
tion of the ancient Ethiopians. These ruins, seen
only at a distance by Bruce and Burckhardt,
have since been minutely examined and accu-
rately described hy Cailliaud (Voyage @ Meroé.,
Riippel ( Reisen’in Nubien, &c.), and other travel-
lers. Merot, from being long the ceutre of com-
mercial intercourse between Africa and the south
of Asia, became one of the richest countries upon
earth; the ‘ merchandise’ and wealth of Ethiopia
(Isa. xlv. 14) was the theme of the poets both of
Palestine and Greece; and since much of that
affluence would find its way i:to the royal coffers,
the circumstance gives emphasis to the phrase—
axdons THs yaCns, ‘all the treasure’ of Queen Can-
dace. It is further interesting to know, from the
testimonies of various profane authors, that for
some tine both before and after the Christian era,
Ethiopia Proper was under the rule of female
sovereigns, who all bore the appellation of ‘ Can-
dace, which was not so much a proper name as
a distinctive title, common to every successive
queen, like ‘Pharaoh’ and ‘ Ptolemy’ to the kings
of Egypt, and * Caesar’ to the emperors of Rome.
Thus Pliny (é/ist. Nat. vi, 29) says that the cen-
turions whom Nerv sent to explore the country
reported —‘ regnare in Meroé feminam Candacen,
quod nomen multis jam annis ad reginas transiit."
Strabo also (p. 820, ed. Casaub.) speaks of a
warrior-queen of Ethiopia called Candace, in the
reign of Augustus, the same whom Diou Cassius
(liv. 5) describes as queen of the Ai@iowes ixip
Alybrtov oixotvres. An insult having been of-
fered to the Romans on the Ethiopian frontier of
Egypt, Caius Petronius, the governor of the lat-
ter province, marched against the Ethiopians, and
having defeated them in the tield, took Pselca,
and then crossing the sands which had long before
proved fatal to Cambyses, advanced to Premunis,
a strong position. He next attacked Napata, the
capital of Queen Candace, took and destroyed it;
but then retied to Premnis, where he left a gar-
rison, whom the warlike queen assailed, but they
were relieved by Petromius. This Napata, by
Dion called Tenape, is supposed to have stuod near
Mount Berkal, and to have been a kind of second
Mervé ; and there is still in that neighbourhood
(where there are likewise many splendid ruins) a
village which bears the very similar name of
Merawé, Eusebius, who flourisued in the fourth
century, says, that in his day the queens of Ethi-
Opia continued to be called Candace,

A curious confirmation of the fact of female


CANDLESTICK.


sovereignty having prevailed in Ethiopia has been
remarked on the existing monuments of the coun-
try. Thus, on the largest sepulchral pyramid
near Assour, the’ ancient Meroé (see Cailliaud,
plate xlvi.), a female warrior, with the royal en-
signs on her head, drags forward a number of
captives as offerings to the gods; on another com-
ment she is in a warlike habit, about to de-
stroy the same group. Heeren, after describing
the monuments at Naga, or Naka, south-east of
Shendy, says, ‘It is evident that these representa-
tions possess many peculiarities, and that they
are not pure Egyptian. The most remarkable
difference appears in the offering. The
queens appear with the kings; and not merely as
presenting offerings, but as heroines and con-
querors. Nothing of this kind has yet been dis-
covered on the Egyptian reliefs, either in Egypt
or Nubia. It may therefore with certainty be
concluded, that are subjects peculiar to
Ethiopia. Among the Ethiopians, says Strabo
(p. 1177), the women also are armed. Herodotus
(ii. 100) mentions a Nitocris among the ancient
queens of Ethiopia. Upon the relief [on the
monument at Kalabshé] r ting the con-
quest of Ethiopia by Sesostris, there is a queen,
with her sons, who appears before him as a ca)
tive’ (Heeren, On the Nations of Africa, vol. i.
p- 399). It is singular enough, that when Bruce
was at Shendy, the government of the district was
in the hands of a female called Sittina, i.e. the
lady or mistress. He says ‘There is a tradition
there, that a woman, whose name was Hendaqué,
once governed all that country, whence we might
imagine that this was part of the kingdom of
Candace; for writing this name in Greek letters
it will come to be no other than Hendaqué, the
native or mistress of Chendi or Chandi’ (Travels
to discover the Source of the Nile, vol. iv. p. 529;
comp. vol. i. p. 505). It is true that, the name
Kandaké being foreign to the Jews, it is in vain to
seek with Calmet for its etymology in Hebrew, but
the conjectural derivation proposed ‘by Bruce is
wholly inadmissible; nor is the attempt of Hiller
to trace its meaning in the Ethiopic language
much more satisfactory (Simonis, Onomasticon
Nov. Test. p. 88). Te Dieu asserts, on the au-
thority of ecclesiastical tradition, that the proper
name of the queen mentioned in the Acts was
Lacasa, and that of her chamberlain Judich.
It is not unlikely that some form of Judaism was
at this period professed to a certain extent in
Ethiopia, as well as in the neighbouring country
of Abyssinia. Irenwus (iii. 12) and Eusebius
(Hist. Eccl. ii. 1) ascribe to Candace’s minister
her own conversion to Christianity, and the pro-
mulgation of the Gospel throughout her kingdom ;
and with this agrees the Abyssinian tradition, that
he was likewise the apostle of Tigré, that part of
Abyssinia which lay nearest to Meroé; it is
added that he afterwards preached the Gospel in
Arabia Felix, and also in the island of Ceylon,
where he suffered martyrdom (See Tillemont,
Mem. Hist. Eccl. tom. ii.; Basnage, Exercitatt.
anti-Baron. p. 113; Ludolf, Comment. ad Hist.
Zithiop. p. §9).  [Erniorra; malian Py


CANDLESTICK (A307; Sept. 4 Avxvla).
The candelabrum which Moses was commanded
to make for the tabernacle, after the model shown


CANDLESTICK. 375

him in the Mount, is chiefly known to us by the
in Exod. xxv. 31-40 ; xxxvii. 17-24; on

which some additional light is thrown by the
Jewish writers, and by the tation of the
spoils of the Temple on the arch of Titus.


19 re


YY


The material of which it was made was fine
gold, of which an entire talent was expended on
the candelabrum itself and its appendages. The
mode in which the metal was to be worked is
described by a term which appears to mean
wrought with the hammer, as opposed to cast by
fusion. The structure of the candelabrum, as far
as it is defined in the passages referred to, con-
sisted of a base; of a shaft rising out of it; of
six arms, which came out by threes from two
opposite sides of the shaft ; of seven lamps, which
were supported on the summits of the central
shaft and the six arms; and of three different
kinds of ornaments belonging to the shaft and
arms. These ornaments are called by names
which mean cups, globes, and blossoms. The
cups receive, in verse 33, the epithet almond-
shaped (it being uncertain whether the résem-
blance was to the fruit or to the flowers). Three
such cups are allotted to every arm; but four to
the shaft : two-and-twenty in all. Of the four on
the shaft, three are ordered to be placed seve-
rally under the spots where the three pairs of arms
set out from the shaft. The place of the fourth
is not assigned ; but we may conceive it to have
been either between the base and the cup below
the lowest tier of arms, or, as Bahr prefers, to
have been near the summit of the shaft. As for
the name of the second ornament, the word only
occurs in two places in the Old Testament, in
which it appears to mean the capital of a column;
but the Jewish writers generally (cited in Ugolini,
Thesaur. xi. 917) concur in considering it to
mean apples in this place. Josephus, as he
enumerates four kinds of ornaments, and there-
fore two of his terms must be considered identical,
may be supposed to have understood globes, or
pomegranates (apatpta, potoxot, Antig. iii.6). But
as the term here is not the common name
for pomegranates, and as the Sept. and Vul-


378. CANDLESTICK.


gate render it opapwrijpes and spharula, it is
safest to assume that it denotes bodies of a spherical
shape, and to leave the precise kind undetined.


Bahr, however, is in favour of apples (Symboltk,:


i. 414). The name of the third ornament means

- blossom, bud ; but it is so general a term that it
may apply to any flower. The Sept., Josephus,
and Maimonides, understand it of the lily; and
Bahr prefers the flower of the almond. It now re-
mains to consider the manner in which these
three ornaments were attached to the candela-
brum. The obscurity of verse 33, which orders
that there shal] be ‘three almond-shaped cups on
one arm, glube and blossom, and three almond-
shaped cups on the other arm, glube and blossom ;
so on all the arms which come out of the shaft,’
has led some to suppose that there was only one
globe and blossom to every three cups. However,
the fact that, according to verse 34, the shaft
(which, as being the principal part of the whole,
is here called the candclabrum itself), which had
only four cups, is ordered to have globes and
blossoms (in the plural), is a suflicient proof to
the contrary.

It is to be observed, that the original text does
not define the height and breadth of any part of
the candelabrum; nor whether the shaft and
arms were of equal height; nor whether the arms
were curved round the shaft, or left it ata right
angle, and then ran parallel with it. The Jewish
authorities maintain that the height of the can-
delabrum was eighteen palins, or three ells; and
that the distance between the outer lamps on each
side was two ells. Bibr, however, on the ground
of harmonical proportion with the altar of incense
and table of slew-bread, the dimensions of which
are assigned, conjectures that the candelabrum
was only an ell and a half high and broad. The
Jewish tradition uniformly supports the opinion
that the arms and shaft were of equal height; as
do also Josephus and Philo (d.¢.; Quis Rer. Div.
Her, § 44); as well as the representation on the
arch of ‘Vitus, Scacchius has, however, main-
tained that they formed a pyramid, of which the
shaft was the apex. F

This candelabrum was placed in the Holy
Place, on the sowth side (i. e. tu the lcft of a person
entering the tabernacle), opposite the table of shew-
breal (Exod. xxvi. 35). Its lamps, which were
supplied with pure olive oil only, were lighted every
evening, and extinguished (as it seems) every
morning (Exod. xxvii. 21; xxx. 7, 8; Lev. xxiv.
3; 1 Sam. iii. 3; 2 Chron. xiii, 11). Although
the tabernacle had no windows, there is no good
ground for believing that the lamps burnt by day
in it, whatever may have been the usage of the
second temple. It has also been much disputed
whether the candelabrum stood lengthwise or
diagonally as regards the tabernacle; but no
conclusive argument can be adduced for either
view. As the lamp on the central shaft was
by the Jewish writers called ‘A999 3, the
western, or evening lamp, some maintain that
the former name could not be applicable unless
the candelabrum stood across the tabernacle, as
then only would the central lamp puint to the
west. Others again achere to the latter signitica-
tion, and build on a tradition that the central
lamp alone burnt from evening to evening, the
other six being extinguished by day (Reland,
Antig. i. 5. 8).


; CANON.


In the first temple, instead of this single can.
delabrum, there were ten candelabra of gold
(whose structure is not described, although flowers
are mentioned : 1 Kings vii. 49; 2 Chron. iv. 7),
one half of which stood on the north and the other
on the south side of the Holy Place. These were
carried away to Babylon (Jer. lii. 19). In the
temple of Zerubbabel there appears to have been
only one candelabrum again i Mac. i. 21; iv.
49,50). It is probable that it also had only seven
lamps. At least, that was the case in the cande-
labrum of the Herodian temple, according to the de-
scription of Josephus (De Bell, Jud. vii.5). This
candelabrum is the une which, after the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem, was carried with other spoils to
Rome; then, a.p. 455, became a part of the plun-
der which Genseric transported to Africa; was
again, about a.p. 533, recaptured from the Van-
dals by Belisarius, and carried to Constantinople,
and was thence sent off to Jerusalem, and from
that time has disappeared altogether. It is to this
candelabrum that the representation on the arch
of Titus at Rome was intended to apply; and,
although the existence of the figures of eagles and
marine monsters on the pediment of that lamp
tends, with other minor objections, to render the
accuracy of that copy very questionable (as it is in-
credible the Jews should have admitted any such
graven images into their temple), yet there is
reason to believe that, in other points, it may be
relied upon as a reasonably correct representation
of the Herodian candelabrum. Reland bas de
voted a valuable little work to this subject, De
Spoliis Templi Hierosolym. in Arce Titiano, ed.
sec. Schulze, 1775.—J. N.

CANE (or Caramus), Sweet, an aromatic
seed, mentioned among the drugs with which sae
cred perfumes were compounded (Ezek. xxvii. 19)
[Kaneu].

CANKER-WORM. [Yexex.]

CANNEH (Ezck. xxvii. 23), probably the
same as Catnen (Gen. x. 10), which see.

CANON. 1. The Greek word Kavéy de-
notes, primarily, a straight rod; and from this
flow numerous derivative uses of it, in all of
which the idea of straightness, as opposed to obli-
quity, is apparent. Among the rest, it is em-
ployed to denote a rule or standard, by a refer-
ence to which the rectitude of opinions or actions
may be determined. _In this latter acceptation it
is used in the New Testament (comp. Gal. vi. 16;
Phil. iii. 16). In the same sense it is frequently
used by the Greek fathers (Suicer. Thes. Eccles.
in voce); and as the great standard to which
they sought to appeal in all matters of faith and
duty was the revealed will of God contained in
the scriptures of the Old and New Testaments,
they came insensibly to apply this term to the
collective body of those writings, and to speak of
them as THE Canon or Runs. In the same ac-
ceptation we shall use the term in th’s article.

2. The Canon then may be detined to be ‘ The
Authoritative Standard of Religion and Morals,
composed of those writings which have been given ‘
for this purpose by God to men.’ A definition
frequently given of the Canon is, that it is ‘The
Catalogue of the Sacred Books;’ while Semler
(Von Freier Untersuchungen des Canons), Doe-
derlein (dnstitutio Theol. Christ. tom. i. p. 83),
and others, detine it as ‘ The List of the Books
publicly read in the meetings of the early Chris


CANON.


tians.’ The former of these definitions, however,
leaves out of sight the true meaning of the term
Canon ; and the latter is doubly erroneous, as it
not only omits the main characteristic of the
Canon, tts divine authority, but substitutes for
this a characteristic which is historically false,
as the Canon was not at any fime synonymous
with the list of books read in public in the early
churches.

3. According to this definition, in order to esta-
blish the Canon of Scripture, it is necessary to
show that all the books of which it is composed
are of divine authority ; that they are entire and
incorrupt: that, having them, it is complete
without any addition from any other source; and
that it comprises the whole of those books for
which divine authority can be proved. It is ob-
vious that, if any of these four particulars be not
true, Scripture cannot be the sole and supreme
standard of religious truth and duty. If any of
the books of which it is composed be not of di-
vine authority, then part of it we are not bound
tosubmit to; and consequently, as a whole, it is
not the standard of truth and morals. If its se-
parate parts be not in the state in which they left
the hands of their authors, but have been muti-
lated, interpolated, or altered, then it can form
no safe standard ; for in appealing to it, one can-
not be sure that the apyfeal is not made to what is
spurious, and what, consequently, may be erro-
neous. If it require or admit of supplementary
revelations from God, whether preserved by tra-
dition or communicated from time to time to the
Church, it obviously would be a mere contradic-
tion in terms to call it complete, as a standard of
the divine will. And if any other books were
extant, having an equal claim, with the books
of which it is composed, to be regarded as of di-
vine authority, it would be absurd to call it the
sole standard of truth; fur in this case the one
class of books would be quite as deserving of our
Teverence as the other.

4. Respecting the evidence by which the Canon
is thus to be established, there exists considerable
difference of opinion amongst Christians. Some
contend, with the Catholics, that the authorita-
tive decision of the Church is alone competent to
determine the Canon; others appeal to the concur-
rent testimony of the Jewish and early Christian
writers; and others rest their strongest reliance
on the internal evidence furnished by the books
of Scripture themselves. We cannot say that we
are satisfied with any of these sources of evidence
exclusively. As Michaelis remarks, the first is
one to which no consistent Protestant can ay:peal
for the matter to be determined is of such a kind,
that, enless we grant the Church to be infallible,

it is quite possible that she may at any given pe-
riod of her existence determine erroneously ; and
one sees not why the question may not be as suc-
cessfully investigated by a private individual as
by the Church. The concurrent testimony of the
ancient witnesses is invaluable so far as it goes;
but it may be doubted if it be sufficient of itself
to actile this question, for the question is not en-
térely one of facts, and testimony is good proof
only tur facts. As for the internal evidence, one
neets only to look at the havoc which Semler and
his school have made of the Canon, to he satisfied
that where dogmatical considerations are allowed
to determine exclusively such questions, each


.


CANON. wm


man will extend or extruncate the Canon so as
to adjust it to the Procrustean couch of his own
ceived notions. As the question is one
partly of fact and partly of opinion, the sre
priate grounds of decision will be best secured by
a combination of authentic testimony with the
evidence supplied by the books themselves. We
want to know that these books were really wriften
by the persons whose names they bear; we want
to be satisfied that these persons were commonly
reputed and held by their contemporaries to be
assisted by the divine spirit in what they wrote;
and we want to be sure that care was taken by those
to whom their writings were first addressed, that
these should be preserved entire and uncorrupt.
For all this we must appeal to the testimony of
competent witnesses, as the only suitable evidence
for such matters. But after we have ascertained
these points affirmatively, we still require to be
satisfied that the books themselves contain nothing
obviously incompatible with the ascription to
their authors of the divine assistance, but, on the
contrary, are in all respects favourable to this
supposition. We want to see that they are in
harmony with each other; that the statements they
contain are credible; that the doctrines they
teach are not foolish, immoral, or self-contradic-
tory; that their authors really assumed to be
under the divine direction in what they wrote,
and afforded competent proofs of this to those
around them; and that al] the circumstances of
the case, such as the style of the writers, the allu-
sions made by them to places and events, &c., are
in keeping with the conclusion to which the exe
ternal evidence has already led. In this way we
advance to a complete moral proof of the divine
authority and canonical claims of the sacred
writings. F
5. The books specified as canonical in the 6th
Article of the Church of England, and the lst
of the Confession of the Church of Scotland, are
received as such by the majority of Protestants.
To these the Church of Rome adds, as part of the
Old Testament, ten other books, or parts of books,
which Protestants reject as Apocryphal [Apo-
cryPHA]. For the evidence in support of the
genuineness and divine authority of those books
universally regarded by Christians as canonical,
taken individually, we shall refer here to the ar-
ticles in this work under the titles of these books
respectively. The remainder of the present ar-
ticle shall be devoted to a sketch of the formation
and history of ‘the Canon, first of the Old Testa-
ment, and then of the New.

6. Formation of the Old Testament Canon.—

y this is meant the collection into one whole of
all those books whose divine authority was recog-
nised by the Jews, and which now form the Old
Testament, as that is received by the Protestant
churches. The question is—At what time and
by whom was this done ?

In answer to this, a very steadfast tradition of
the Jews ascribes the completion of the Old Testa-
ment Canon to Ezra, and certain other persons who,
after the re-building of the Temple, formed with
him, and under his auspices, what has been called


the Great Synagogue (M5173 NDI). Without


pretending to be able to give full demonstration of
the accuracy of this traditionary opinion, it seems
to us one which may by evidence, both direct and


378 CANON.


circumstantial, be rendered so extremely pro-
bable, that to call it in question would be to ex-
hibit a degree of scepticism such as, in all other
questions of a similar kind, would be thought
highly unreasonable and absurd. In the jirst
lace, there is the testimony of the tradition itself.
t occurs in one of the oldest books of the Tal-
mud, the Pirke Aboth; and is repeated, with
greater minuteness, in the Babylonian Gemarah
(Tr. Baba Bathra, ful. 13, 2. See the passages
in Buxtorf’s Tiberias, lib. i. c. 10). The sub-
stance of it is that, after Moses and the elders,
the sacred bouks were watched over by the pru-
hets; and that the Canon was completed by
izra, Nehemiah, and the men of the Great Syna-
gogue. Against this tradition it has been ob-
jected that it proves too much, for it says that the
men of the Great Synagogue wrote the later books,
such as the twelve minor prophets, &c. But that,
by writing, is here meant not the original com-
posing of these books, but the ascription (the to-
writing) of them to the sacred Canon may be in-
ferred, partly from the circumstance that, in the
same tradition, the men of Hezekiah are said to
have written the Proverbs, which can only mean
that they copied them (see Prov. xxv. 1), for the
purpose of inserting them in the Canon; and
ttly from the fact that the word here used
{3M3) is used by the Targumist, on Prov. xxv.
1, as equivalent to the Heb. pny. An attempt
has also been made to discredit this tradition, by
adducing the circumstance that Simon the Just,
who lived long after Ezra, is said, in the Pirke
Aboth, to have been one of the members of the
Great Synagogue; but to this much weight can-
not be allowed, partly because Simon is, in the
passage referred to, said to have been one of the
remnants of the Great Synagogue, which indi-
cates his having outlived it; and principally be-
cause the same body of tradition which states
this opinion, makes him the successor of Ezra: 80
that either the whole isa mistake, or the Simon
referred to must have been a diflerent person frum
the Simon who is commonly known by the title of
‘Just’ (Cf. Othonis, Lex. Rabbin. Philul. p. 604,
Gen. 1675; Hivernick’s Linlettung in das A. T.
Th. i. Abt. 1, 8. 43). Or we may adopt the opinion
of Hartmann (Die Enge Verbindung des Alt.
Test. mit d. Neuen, s. 127), that the college of
men learned in the law, which gathered round
Ezra and Nehemiah, and which properly was the
synagogue, continued to receive accessions for
many years after their death, by means of which
it existed till the time of the Maccabees, without
our being required to suppose that what is af-
firmed concerning its duings in the time of Ezra
is meant to refer to it during the entire period of
its existence. Suspicions have also been cast
upon this tradition trom the multitude of extrava-
gant wonders narrated by the Jews respecting the
Great Synagogue. But such are found in almost
every traditionary record attaching to persons or
bodies which possess a nationally hervic cha-
racter; and it is surely unreasonable, because a
chronicler tells one or two things which are in-
credible, that we should disbelieve all besides
that he records, however possible or even probable
it may be. ‘Je ne nie pas,’ says Fabricy (Des
Titres Primitifs de la Reévélation, i. 81, Rome,
1772), ‘que les Docteurs Juifs n'ayent avancé
bien des chiméres au sujet de cette Grande-Syna-


CANON.


gogue; mais laissons le fabuleux, et ons ce
qu'il y a de vrai dans um point d'antiquité Hé-
braique, appuyé sur des témvignages que la
bonne critique ne permet pas de révoquer en
doute.'—2ndly. The part of this tradition which
ascribes the formation of the Canon, before the
Exile, to Moses and the prophets, is sufficiently
supported by the testimony of Scripture itself.
When Moses had tinished the writing of the Law,
She delivered it to the priests, the sons of Levi,
and unto the elders of Israel’ (Deut. xxxi. 9);
and the book was then taken and put in the side
of the ark, in the most holy place ies 26). To-
wards the close of the bovk of Joshua it is said
that ‘le wrote these words in the book of the
law of God;' which Le Clerc, with considerable
probability, explains as meaning that he aggluti-
nated the membrane on which his words were
written to the volume of Moses which had been
deposited in the side of the ark (Comment. in
loc.). At a later period we find that Samuel,
when he had told the people the manner (OEWD
the jus publicum) of the kingdom, wrote it in the
book (BDI), and laid it up before the Lord
(1 Sam. x. 25). Hilkiah, at a still later date, is
said to ‘have found the book of the Law in the
House of the Lord’ (2 Kings xxii. 8). Isaiah,
in calling attention to his own prophecies, says,
‘Seek ye out of the book of the Lord and read;
no one of these shall fail’ (xxxiv. 16); a ge
on which Gesenius says (Comment. i. 921), ‘ The
t seems to have before his mind the placing of
faces in a collection of oracles and sacred
writings, whereby future generations might judge
of the truth of his predictions.” And Daniel in-
forms us, that he ‘understood, by the books, the
number of the years of the captivity’ (ix. 2); an
expression which seems to describe the sacred Ca-
non so far as it then was complete (Gesenius, Lex.
Hebd. in v. “BD). From these notices we may
gather—that such books as were sanctioned by
the authority of Moses and the prophets (whose
business it was, as the watchmen of Zion, to
guard the people against either the reception of
any writing that was spurious or the loss of any
that was genuine) were acknowledged by the
Jews, before the Exile, as of divine authority;
that in all probability an authentic copy was in
every case laid up in the sanctuary, and placed
under the care of the priests * (Joseph. Antig. v.
1.17), from which copies were taken and circu.
lated among the people (2 Chron. xvii. 9); and
that collections of these were made by pious
sons for their own use, such as Daniel probably
aad in Babylon, and such as Jeremiah seems to
rave had, from the frequent quotations in his pro-
phecies from the older books.—Jrdly. It isenatu-
ral to suppose that, on the return of the people
from their exile, they would desiderate an autho-
ritative collection of their sacred books. We
know that, on that occasion, they were tilled with
an anxious desire to know the will of God, for neg-
lect of which, on the part of their fathers, they
had so severely suffered ; and that, to meet this
desire, Kzra and certain of the Priests and Le


EE AE a ee ee Se

* The entrusting of the sacred books to the
care of the priesthood was common to the Jews
with the ancient nations generally. See Huver
nick's Eindcit. i. 1. § 17, and the authors cited
there.


CANON.


vites read and expounded the word of the Lord
to the people (Neh. viii. 1-8; ix. 1-3). As their
fathers also had been misled by false prophets, it
is natural to suppose that they would earnestly
crave some assurance as to the writers whose
words they might with safety follow. The
Temple also was now bereft of its sacred treasures
(Joseph. De Bell. Jud. vi. 6; Tract. Rabbin.
Joma. ed. Sheringham, p. 102, sqq.). During
the exile, and the troublous times preceding it,
several propliets had committed their oracles to
writing, and these required to be added to the
Canon; and the majority of the people having
lost acquaintance with the Hebrew, a translation
of their sacred books had become necessary. All
this conspired to render it imperative that some
competent authority should, at the time of the
secynd temple, form and fix the code of sacred
truth.—4thly. The time of Ezra and Nehemiah
was the latest at which this could be done. As
the duty to be performed was not merely that of
determining the genuineness of certain books, but
of pointing out those which had been divinely or-
dained as a rule of faith and morals to the
Church, it was one which none but a prophet
could discharge. Now in the days of Nehemiah
and Kzra there were several prophets living,
among whom we know the names of Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachi; but with that age ex-
pired the line of prophets which God had ap-
pointed ‘to comfort Jacob, and deliver them by
assured hope’ (Ecclus. xlix. 10). On this point the
evidence of Josephus, the Apocryphal books, and
Jewish tradition, is harmonius (comp. Joseph.
Cont. Apion. i.8; 1 Mace. iv. 463 ix. 27; xiv.
41; Hieronym. ad Jes. xlix. 21; Vitringa, Obs.
Sac. lib. vi. cap. 6, 7; Havernick, Lindeit. i. 1.
27; Henystenberg, Beitrage zur Einleit. ins A.
T. i. s. 245). As the men of the Great Syna-
gogue were thus the last of the prophets, if
the Canon was not fixed by them, the time was
eis when it could be fixed at all.—sthly.

hat it was fixed at that time appears from the
fact, that all subsequent references to the sacred
writings presuppose the existence of the complete
Canon ; as well as from the tact, that of no one
among the Apocryphal books is it so much as
hinted, either by the author or by any other
Jewish writer, that it was worthy of a place
among the sacred books, though of some of them
the pretensions are in other respects sufliciently
high (e.g. Ecclus, xxxiii. 16-18; 1.28). Jose-
phus, indeed, distinctly aflirms (Cont. Ap. loc. cit.)
that, during the long period that had elapsed be-
tween the time of the close of the Canon and his
day, no one had dared either to add to, or to take
from, or to alter anything in, the sacred books. This
plainly shows that in the time of Artaxerxes, tu
which Josephus refers, and which was the age of
Ezra aud Nehemiah, the collection of the sacred
books was completed by an authority which
thencefor ward ceased to exist.

7, Division of the Canon into three parts, the
Law, the Vrophets, and the Writings (AWN
D’DIND OND). This division is very ancient;
it appears in the prologue to Ecclesiasticus, in the
New Testameut, in Philo, in Josephus, and in the
Talmud (Sureuhusii BiB. KataAa. p. 49). Re-
specting the principle on which the division has
been made, there is a considerable difference of
opinion. Whilst all are agreed that the first


e
CANON. a9


the Law, was so named from its ini
Lteotie laws and regulations ; the ae tae
are regarded by some as named from the charac-
ter of the writings they contain; by othérs, from
the office and station of their authors; and by


‘others, from a sort of accidental combination, for


which no reason can now be assigned. Of
the second is the only one that will bear the test
of examination. Two very material points in
its favour are, Ist, that in the days of the Theo-
cracy there was @ class of persons who bore the
name of Prophets (D°'N'3)) professionally, te.
they were persons not who were occasionally
favoured with divine revelations, but who, re-
nouncing all other occupations, gave themselves
up to the duties of the prophetic office ; and, 2ndly,
that of all the books in the second division the
reputed authors belong to this class; while of those
in the third division, none of the authors, with
two exceptions, belong to this class. The ex-
ceptions are Daniel and Lamentations. Of these
the first is only apparent, for, though Daniel ut-
tered prophecies, i was not by profession a pro
phet. The Jatter presents a greater difficulty;
the best way of getting over which perhaps is,
with Havensick, to admit it to be an exception,
and suppose it made intentionally, for the pur-
pose of classing this book of elegies with the
Psalms and other lyric poetry of the Jews (Einleit.
§ 11, s. 65). Adopting this theory, the title of
the second division is accounted fur. As tor that
of the third, the most probable account of it is,
that, at first, it was fuller—viz. ‘the other writ-
ings,’ ag distinguished from4le Law and the Pro-
phets (comp. the expression 7a &AAa BiBAla, used
by the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. Prol.); and that in
rocess of time it was albreviated into ‘the writ-
ings,’ This part is commonly cited under the
title Hagiographa.

8. Subsequent History of the Old Testament
Canon.—The Canon, as established in the time of
Ezra, has remained unaltered to the present day.
Some, indeed, have suppused that, because the
Greek version of the Old ‘Testament contains some
books not in the Hebrew, there must have been
a double canon, a Palestinian and an Egyptian
(Semler, Apparat. ad liberaliorem V. T. inter-
pret. §9,10; Corrodi, Beleuchtung der Gesch.
des Judisch. wv. Christlich. Kanons, 8. 155-184 ;
Augusti, Eindeit. ins. A.T. 8. 79); but this notion
has been completely disproved by Eichhorn
(Einleit. bd. i. », 23), Havernick (Kind. i. § 16),
and others. All extant evidence is against it.-
The Son of Sirach, and Philo, both Alexandrian
Jews, make no allusion to it; aud Josephus, who
evidently used the Greek version, expressly de-
clares against it in a passage above referred to
($6). The earlier notices of the Canon simply
designate it by the threefuld division already con-
sidered. The Sou of Sirach mentions ‘ the Law,
the Prophets, and the other books of the fathers ;’
and again, ‘the Law, the Prophecies, and the
rest of the books ;’ expressions which clearly in-
dicate that in his day the Canon was fixed.* In


* Hitzig and some others speak of the title
thus applied to the third division as ‘ vague,’ an
as indicating no settled canon. But this is ab-
surd. ‘The rest of the books’ pre-snpposes a fixed
number of books, by subtracting from which the
remainder is found.


e
380 CANON.


the New Testament our Lord frequently refers to
the Old Testament, under the title of ‘The Scrip-
tures,’ or of ‘The Law’ (Matt. xxi. 42; xxii.
29; ‘iain x. 30, &c. &c.); and in one place he

yeaks of ‘the Law of Moses, the Prophets, and

e Psalms’ (Luke xxiv. 44); by the third of
these titles intending, doubtless, to designate ¢he
Haziographa, either after the Jewish custom of
denoting a collection of books by the title of that
with which it commenced; or, as Hiivernick sug-
gesta, using the term WaApol as a general desigua-
tion of these books, because of the larger compara-
tive amount of lyric poetry contained in them
(Einl. § 14); Paul applies to the Old Testa-
ment the appellations ‘The Holy Writings’
(ypapa) &ylai, Rom. i. 2); ‘the Sacred Letters’
(iepd ypdupara, 2 Tim. iii. 15), and ‘the Old
Covenant’ (4) wadaid 8:a0hKn, 2 Cor. iii. 14) ; both
‘our Lord and his Apostles ascribe divine autho-
tity to the ancient Canon (Matt. xv. 3; Jolm x.
84-36; 2 Tim. iii. 16; 2 Peter i. 19-21, &c.);
and in the course of the New Testament, quota-
tions are made from all the books of the Old ex-
cept Ruth, Ezra, Nehemiah, Esther, Canticles,
Lamentations, and Ezekiel; the omission of
which may be accounted for on the simple prin-
ciple that the writers had no occasion to quote
from them. Philo attests the existence in his
time of the lep& ypduuara, describes them as
comprising laws, oracles uttered by the prophets,
hymns, and the other books by which knowledge
aud godliness may be increased and perfected (De
Vita Contemplit. in Opp., tom. ii, p. 275, ed.
Mangey); and quotations from or references to
the most of the buoks are scattered through his
writings. The evidence of Josephus is very im-
poe for, besides general references to the sacred

»oks, he gives a formal account of the Canon, as
it was acknowledged in his day, ascribing five
books, containing laws and an account of the origin
of man, to Moses, thirteen to the Prophets, and four,
containing songs of praise to God and ethical pre-
cepts for men, to diflerent writers, and aflirming
that the faith of the Jews in these books is such that
they would for them sutfer all tortures and death
itself (Cont. Apton. i. 7, 8; Eichhorn, Etnlett. i.

50; Jatin, Introductio, p. 50). Melito, bishop of
ardis in the second century of the Christian era,
ives, ag the result of careful inquiry, the same
ks in the Old Testament Canon as we have
now, with the exception of Nehemiah, Esther, and
Lamentations; the two first of which, however,
he probably included in Ezra, aud the last in
Jeremiah (Kuseb. Hist. Eccles. iv. 26; Eichhorn,
Finl. i, § 52). The catalogues of Origen (Euseb.
Hist. Eccles. vi. 2,5), of Jerome (Prol. Galeat.
in Opp. iii.), and of others of the fathers, give sub-
stantially the same list (Eichhorn, l ¢.; Au-
gusti, Einl. §54; Cosins, Scholastical Hist. of
the Canon, ch. iii. vi.; Henderson, On Inspira-
tion, 449). In the Talmudic Tract entitled
Baba Bathra, a catalogue of the books of
the sacred Canon is given, which exactly cor
responds with that now received by Christians
(Buxtorf, Tiberias, c. 11). Hence it appears
that all the evidence we have shows that the
Canon, once fixed, has remained unaltered.

9. Formation of the New Testament Canon.
—Whilst there is abundance of evidence in
favour of the divine authority of the New Testa-
ment books, taken separately, fully greater per-


CANON.


haps than can be adduced in su of many
of those of the Old Testament, the Aaitiey of the
formation of the New Testament Canon is in-
volved in much greater obscurity than that of the
Old. An ecclesiastical tradition ascribes to the
apostle John the work of collecting and sanctian-
ing the writings which were worthy of a place in
the Canon; but this tradition is too late, too un-
supported by collateral evidence, and too much oj

by certain facts, such as the existence of doubt
an some of the early churches as to the canonicity
of certain books, the different arrangement of the
books apparent in catalogues of the Canon still
extant, &c., for any weight to be allowed to it.
A much more probable opinion, and one in which
nearly all the modern writers who are favourable
to the claims of the Canon are agreed, is, that
each of the original churches, especially thogg of
larger size and greater ability, collected for itself
a complete set of those writings which could be
Proved, by competent testimony, to be the pro-
duction of inspired men, and to have been com-
municated by them to any of the churches as
part of the written word of God; so that in this
way 8 great many complete collections of the
New Testament scriptures came to be extant, the
accordance of which with each other, as to the
books admitted, furnishes irrefragable evidence of
the correctness of the Canon as we now have it.
This opinion, which in itself is highly probable, is
rendered still more so when we consider the scru-
pulous care which the early churches took to dis-
criminate spurious compositions from such as were
authentic—the existeuce, among some, of doubts
regarding certain of the New Testament books,
indicating that each church claimed the right of
satisfying itself in this matter—their hizh venera-
tion for the genuine apostolic writings—their
anxious regard for each other's prosperity leading
to the free communication from one to another
of whatever could promote this, and, of course,
among other things, of those writings which had
been entrusted to any one of them, and by which,
more than by any other means, the spiritual welfare
of the whole would be promoted—the practice of
the fathers of arguing the canonicity of any book,
from its reception by the churches, as a sufficient
proof of this—and the reason assizned by Euse-
bius (Hist, Eccles. iii, 25) for dividing the books
of the New Testament into duodcyotpevo: and
éyrideyduevot, viz. that the former class was
composed of those which the universal tradition
of the churches authenticated, while the latter
contained such as had been received by the mae
jority, but not by all (Storch, Comment. Hist.
Crit. de Libb. N. Testamenti Canone, &c. p. 112,
ff.; Olshansen'’s Echtheit der IV. Evang. a, 439).
In this way we may readily believe that, with-
out the intervention of any authoritative decision,
either from an individual or a council, but by
the natural process of each body of Christians
secking to procure for themselves aud to convey to
their brethren authentic copies of writings in
which all were deeply interested, the Canon of the
New Testament was formed.

10. History of the New Testament Canon.—
The first certain notice which we have of the
existence of any of the New Testament writings,
in a collected form, occurs in 2 Pet. iii. 16, where
the writer speaks of the epistles of Paul in such @
way asto lead us to infer that at that time the


CANON.


whole or the greater part of these were eollected
together, were known amongst the churches gene-
rally (fur Peter is not addressing any particular
church). and were regarded as on a par with ‘the
other Scriptures,’ by which latter expression Peter
plainly means the sacred writings both of the
Old Testament and the New Testament, as far
as then extant.—That John must have had before
him copies of the other evangelists is probable
from the supplementary character of his own
gospel.—In the anonymous Epistle to Diognetus,
*‘ which is, on good grounds, supposed to be one of
the earliest of the uninspired Christian wnitings,
the writer speaks of the Law, the Prophets, the
Gospels, and the Apostles (§ xi. ed. Hefele).—Ig-
natius speaks of ‘betaking himself to the Gospel
as the flesh of Jesus, and to the apostles as the
Presbytery of the church,’ and ads, ‘the pro-
phets also we love;' thus showing, that it is to the
Scriptures he was referring (Ep. ad Philadel-
phenos, § v. ed. Hefele).—Theophilus of Antioch
speaks frequently of the New Testament writings
under the appellation of af &y:a: ypapai, or 5 Oeios
Adyos, and in one place mentions the Law, the
Prophets, and the Gospels, as alike divinely in-
spired (Ad Autol. iii. 11).— Clement of Alexandria
frequently refers to the books of the New Testa-
ment, and distinguishes them into ‘ the Gospels
and Apostolic Discourses’ (Quis Dives Salvus?
prope fin.; Stromat. sepissime). — Tertullian
distinctly intimates the existence of the New
Testament Canon in a complete form in his day,
by calling it ‘Evangelicum Instrumentum'
Adv. Marc. iv. 2), by describing the whole
ible as ‘totum instrumentum utriusque Testa-
menti’ (Ade. Prax. c. 20), and by distinguish-
ing between the ‘ Scriptura Vetus" and the ‘ No-
vum Testamentum’ (ibid. c. 13). — Ireneus
repeatedly calls the writings of the New Testa-
ment ‘the Holy Scriptures,’ ‘ the Oracles of God’
(Adv. Heer. ii, 27; 1.8, &e.), and in one place
ke puts the Evangelical and Apostolical writings
ona par withthe Law and the Prophets (7id. i. 3,
§6). From these allusions we may justly infer
that belcre the middle of the third century the
New Testament Scriptures were generally known
by the Christiaus m a collected form, and re-
yerenced as the word of God. That the books
they received were the same as those now possessed
by us, is evident from the quotations from them
furnished by the early Fathers, and which have
been so carefully collected by the learned and
Jaborivus Lardner, in his Credibility of the Gospel
History. The same thing appears from the re-
searches of Orizen and Eusebius, both of whom
carefully inquired, and have accurately recorded
what books were received as Canonical by the
tradition of the churches or the church writers
(éxxAnotaetixh wapddocts), and both of whom
enumerate the same bovks as are in eur present
Canon, though of some, such as the Epistles of
James and Jude,* the 2nd Ep. of Peter, the 2nd
aud 3rd of Jolin, and the Apocalypse, they men-
tion that though received by the majority, they
were doubted hy some (Euseb. H. E. iii. 25;
* Origen omits these altogether in his list as
givens by Eusebius, but elsewhere in his writings
be so fully admits their Canonicity, that this
omission can be regarded only as an eversight
either op his part or on that of Eusebius.


CANTICLES. 381


vi. 24). Besides these sources of information we
have no fewer than ten ancient catalogues of the
New Testament books still extant. Of these, six
accord exactly with our present Canon, while of
the rest three omit only the Apocalypse, and one
omits, with this, the Epistle to the Hebrews
(Lardner’s Works, vol. iv. and v., 8vo.; Horne’s
Introduction, vol. i. p. 70, Sth edition). An
accumulation of evidence so copious and direct
as this renders the integrity of the New Testament
Canon a fact, than which none of a purely his-
torical kind is better ascertained.

11. With the external evidence thus furnished
in favour of the sacred Canon, the internal fully
accords. In the Old Testament all is in keeping
with the assumption that its books were written
by Jews, sustaining the character, surrounded by
the circumstances, and living at the time as-
scribed to their authors; or if any apparent dis-
crepancies have been found in any of them, they
are of such a kind as further inquiry has served to
explain and reconcile. The literary peculiarities
of the New Testament, its language, its idioms,
its style, its allusions, all are accordant with the
hypothesis that its authors were exactly what they
profess to have been—Jews converted to Chris-
tianity, and living at the commencement of the
Christian era. Of both Testaments the theo-
logical and ethical systems are substantially in
harmony; whilst all that they contain tends to
one grand result—the manifestation of the power
and perfection of Deity, and the restoration of
man to the image, service, and love of his Creator.
The conclusion from the whole facts of the case
can be none other than that the Bible is entitled
to that implicit and undivided reverence which
it demands, as the only divinely appointed Canon
of religious truth and duty.

12. Besides the immortal work of Lardner and
the different introductions to the critico-historical
study of Scripture, the following works may
with advantage be consulted on the subject of the
Canon : — Cosin’s Scholastical History of the
Canon, 4to. London, 1657, 1672; Du Pin’s
History of the Canon and Writers of the Books
of the Old and New Test. 2 vols. folio, London,
1699-1700 ; Ens. Bibliotheca Sacra, sive Dia-
tribe de Librorum Nov. Test. Canone, 12mo.
Amstel. 1710; Storch, Comment. Hist. Crit. de
Libd. Nov. Test. Canone, Svo. Francof. ad
Viadrum, 1755; Schmid, Hist. Antiq. et Vin-
dicatio Canonis V. et N. Test. 8vo. Lips. 1775 ;
Millii Prodeg. in Nov. Test. Pars Prima, Oxon,
1707; Jones's Neto and Full Method of settling
the Canonical Authority of the New Test. 3
vols, 8vo.; Paley's Hore Pauline; Alexan-
der’s Canon of the Old and New Test. ascer-
tained, 12mo. Princeton, U.S. 1826, London,
1828.—W. L. A.


CANTICLES, or Sotomon’s Sona (VY
DW; Sept. doua tov dopdrov; Vulg. Can-
ticum Canticorum ; all signifying the Song of
Songs), is generally believed to have been so
denominated in the inscription, to denote the
superior heauty and excellence of this poem. It
is one of the five megilloth, or volumes, placed
immediately after the Pentateuch in the present
manuscripts of the Jewish Scriptures, in the fol-
lowing order, viz. Canticles, Ruth,. Lamenta-
tious, Ecclesiastes, and Esther; although this


303 CANTICLES.


order is sometimes violated Repatbictens Horr].
It also constitutes the fourth of the Cecubim, or
writings (hagiographa), which in the Jewish enu-
meration comprehend the Psalms, Proverbs, Job,
Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther,
Daniel, and Ezra; which last includes the book
of Nehemiah. These Looks are supposed to have
been so called in contradistinction to the Law,
which was delivered oradly, aud to the propheti-
cal books, which were dictated ina peculiar
manner. The Cetubim the Jews regard as the
inspired writings of men who had no prophetic
mission [Hacroarapua].

Canonicity of Canticles—In favour of the


canonical authority of this book (which has been.


questioned in ancient and modern times) we may
observe, that it is found in all the copies of the
Hebrew Bible which have descended to our times,
as well as in the version of the Seventy, which was
finished some time in the second century before
the Christian era. It is also found in all the
ancient catalogues which have come down to us
froin the early Christian charch. The most ancient
which we possess, that of Melito, bishop of Sardis
(a.p. 170), preserved by Eusebius (dist. Eccles.
iv. ch. 26.), professes to give an account of the
books of the Old Testament, according to the
order in which they were written, from accurate
information obtained in the East. The names of
these books, he acquaiuts us, are as follows :—
© of Muses, five books, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus,
Numbers, Deuteronomy; Jesus Naue, Judyes,
Ruth; four books of Kings; two of Paralipo-
mena; Psalms of David; Proverbs of Sulomen;
Ecclesiastes ; Song of Songs; Jov; of Prophets,
Isaiah, Jeremiah; of the twelve Prophets, one
book; Daniel, Ezekiel, Esdras? The book of
Canticles is invariably contained in all subse-
quent catalogues. It has consequently all the
external marks of canonicity possessed by any
other book of the Old Testament not expressly
cited in the New. Those who have questioned
its right toa place in the sacred volume have pro-
ceeded more in dozmatical than on listorico-criti-
cal grounds. It has heen, indeed, attempted to be
shown that the Song of Solomon was not included
by Josephus in his account of the books of canoni-
eal Scripture, on the following grounds :—Jose-
phus divides these books into the ‘tive books of
Moser: thirteen books containing the history of
their own times, written by the Prophets who suc-
ceeded him, to the time of Artaxerxes, son of
Xerxes, king of Persia; and the remaining four
consisting of hymns to God, and admonitions
for the conduct of men’s lives.” It is generally
supposed that these fouf books are— Psalins,
Proverbs, Keclesiastes, and Canticles; and that
the thirteen other books, included under the term
Prophets, are—Joshua, Judges and Ruth, Samuel,
Kings, Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah, Esther,
Isaiah, Jeremiah and Lamentations, Ezekiel,
Daniel, the twelve minor Prophets, and the book
of Job. But it has been maintained, that this
last book more appropriately belongs to the four
which contain hymns and admonitions for hu-
man conduct, than to the Prophets who wrote
the history of their own times after Moses, and
Consequently that there is no place left for Canti-
eles. Those who adopt this view are compelled
to separate the book of Ezra from that of Nehe-
miah, in order to make up the number of thirteen


‘


CANTICLES.


ets; but whatever appearance of truth there
Lai in this aaniie. veh is that advanced
by Mr. William Whiston, in bis supplement to
his Essay towards restoring the Text of the Old
Testament, it is overbalanced by the fact alread:
stated, that this book formed part of the Jewiah
canonical Scriptures and of the Septuagint ver-
sion. It is true that other books are found in the
copies of this latter version, which were cither
originally written in Greek, as the Book of Wis-
dom and others, or are translated from the
Hebrew or Chaldee, as Ecclesiasticus, and the
first book of Maccabees; but it is confessed that
these never formed part of the first or Jewish
canon. The Book of Canticles was also translated
into Greek, from the original, by Symmachus
the Jew, and by Aquila, in the second cen-
tury.

The Canticles was one of the books translated
by Jerome from the Greek, or rather, corrected
from the older Latin version, and published
by that Father; but this work is now Jost. We
still possess in the present Latin Vulgate Je-
rome’s translation of this book from the original
Hebrew.

Subject of Canticles.—The subject of this
book is corfessedly Love. But it has been a
matter of much controversy, especially in modern
times, what kind of love is here celebrated. It is
equally a matter of dispute among divines whe
ther the interpretation of the poem is limited to
its obvious and primary meaning, or whether it
does not also include a latent mystical and alle
gorical sense. We shall speak of these subjects
in order. And, first, as to the literal and _pri-
mary meaning, the earliest information which we
have is contained in the preface of Origen to his
commentary on this book. This eminent scholar
holds it to be an epithalamium, or marriage-song,
in the fourm of adrama. This idea has been, iu
modern times, improved by Lowth, Bossuet,
Michaelis, and other commentators, ‘The Song
of Songs,’ says Bishop Lowth, ‘for so it is entitled,
either on account of the excellence of the subject
or of the composition, is an epithalarnium, or
nuptial dialogue, or rather, if we may be allowed
to give it a title more agreeable to the genius of
the Hebrews, a Song of Loves. Such is the title
of Psalm xlv. It is expressive of the utmost
fervour as well as delicacy of passion: it is in-
stinct with all the spirit and sweetness of aftec-
tion. The principal characters are Solomon him-
self and his bride, who are represented speaking
both in dialogue, and in soliloquy, when acci-
dentally separated. Virgins, also, the compa-
nions of the bride, are introduced, who secm to be
constantly on the stage, and bear a part uf the
dialogue. Mention is also made of young men,
friends of the bridegroom, but they are mute
persons. This is exactly conformable to the
manners of the Hebrews, who had always a num-
ber of companions to the bridegroom, thirty of
whom were present in honour of Samson at his
nuptial feast (Judg. xiv. 13). In the New Tes-
tament, according to the Hebrew idiom, tbey are
called children, or sons of the bridechamber, and
friends of the bridegroom. There, too, we find
mention of ten virgins who went forth to meet
the bridegroom and conduct him home; which
circumstances indicate that this poem is founded
on the nuptial rites of the Hebrews, and is ex


,


CANTICLES.


pressive of the forms or ceremonial of their mar-
siage. In this opinion, indeed, the harmony of
commentators is not less remarkable than their
disagreernent concerning the general economy
and conduct of the work, and the order and ar-
rangement of the several parts. The present
object of inquiry, however, 1s only whether any
plot or fable be contained or represented in this
poem; and upon this point the most probable
opinion is that of the celebrated Bossuet, a critic
whose profound learning will ever be acknow-
ledged, and a scholar whofe exquisite taste will
ever he admired.’

Bossuet’s idea of this poem was, that itis a
regular drama, or pastoral eclogue, consisting of
seven acts, each act filling a day, concluding
with the Sabbath, inasmuch as the bridegroom on
this day does not, as usual, go forth to his rural
employments, but proceeds from the marriage
chamber into public with his bride. The fol-
lowing are Bossuet's divisions of the plots :—


First day . . Chap. i.—ii. 6.
Second day . i.7—17. -
Third day . iii—v. 1.
Fourth day . v. Wvi. 9.
Fifthday . . vi. 10—vii. 11.
Sixth day . . vii. 12—viii. 3.

* Sabbath. .. viii, 4—14.

Lowth 80 far differs from Bossuet as to deny the


existence of a regular drama, inasmuch as there
is no termination to the plot. Michaelis, in his
notes to his German translation of Lowth’s Pre-
lections, endeavours to overturn the views of
Bossuet and Lowth, and to show that this poem
can have no relation to the celebration of a mar
‘riage, inasmuch as the bridegroom is compelled
in his nuptial week to quit his spouse and friends
for whole days, in order to attend to his cattle in
the pastures; and while he altogether repudiates
the idea, which some have had the rashness to
maintain, that the subject of the poem, in its
literal signification, is a clandestine amour, inas-
much as the transaction is described as legal and
public, and the consent of parents plainly inti-
mated, he equally rejects the views of those
who conceive that these songs relate to the state
cf parties betrothed before marriage. His opinion
is, that this poem has no reference to a future mar
riage, but that the chaste loves of conjugal and do-
mestic life are described. This state, he conceives,
in the East, admits of more of the perplexities,
jealousies, plots, and artifices of love than it does
with us; the scene is more varied, and there is
_ Consequently greater scope for invention.

But the idea that the conjugal state, or the loves
of married persons, are here referred to, has heen
strongly opposed by some of the ablest modern
writers, including Eichhorn (Eindettung), Rosen-

-miiller (Scholia in Cant. Pref. p. 261), Jahn (Ein-
leitung and Introduct. in Compendium redacta),
who maintain that the chaste mutual loves of two
young persons antecedent to marriage are here cele-
brated. The last-named writer having observed that
neitherin monogamy nor in polygamy isthe passion
of love so ardent as is here Tepresented, proceeds
to maintain that no other object remains but ‘the
chaste and reciprocal affection of the sexes pre-
viously to marriage. Some of the language,’ he
adds, ‘may be thought indecorous in persons in
such circumstances; but this is not the case, un-
less it be taken in the worst sense. It admits of


CANTICLES. 38


a meaning perfectly chaste, which in the mouths
of chaste lovers, such as the parties are uni-
formly represented, is the only one that can be
true.” He conceives that there is no necessity
to suppose any actual historical foundation for
the poem. :

Here it may be necessary to state, that the
leamed are divided on the point whether the
Canticles consist of one continued and connected
poem, or of a number of detached songs or
amorets. The first person who maintained the
latter opinion was Father Simon, who was on
this account unjustly accused of denying the
canonicity of the book. This opinion as been
subsequently defended by Eichhorn (Einleitung),
Jahn, Pareau (Institutio Interpretis V. 7. p.
iii. § iv. c. xi. §3; Biblical Cabinet, vol. ii. p.
129), and many others. A very general opinion
is, that it is an idyl, or rather, a number of idyls,
all forming a collective whole. Suchisthe opinion
held, among others, by Sir William Jones and
Dr. J. Mason Good, in his beautiful translation of
the Song of Songs. Dr. Adam Clarke, however,
will not allow that the book of Canticles comes
under the denominatiun of a pastoral, an idyl,
an ode, or an epithalamium. He conceives it
to be a composition sui generis, partaking more
of the nature of a mask than anything else—an
entertainment for the guests who attended a mar-
riage ceremony. He admits no mystical sense.
Jahn, in the work above alluded to, having
stated his opinion that the work comprehends
several amatory poems, thus distributes them :—
1. An innocent country maiden makes an undis-
guised profession of her attachment, and her lover,
a shepherd, replics to it with equal protestations
of aflection (i. 2—ii. 7). Some prefer conclud-
ing this dialogue at i. 11, and making i. 12—ii. 7,
a soliloquy, in which the maiden is suppused to
repeat some compliments of her lover. But this
is without sufficient reason.—2. A maiden sings of
her lover, who is seeking her everywhere, and she
also confesses her warm affection (ii. 8—iii. 5).
Some suppose that ii. 8—14 is a dream, and that
in verse 15 the maiden awakes, who dreams again
in iii. 1-5. But if these places are similar to
dreams, it ought to be remembered that waking
dreams are not uncommon with lovers. This the
poet, true to nature, has here represented.—3. A
maiden in a Hitter, surrounded hy Solomon's
soldiers, is brought to the harem of the king.
The lover prefers, far before all the royal beau-
ties, his own beloved, in whose society he declares
that he is happier than the king himself (ii. 6-
vy. 1). Some choose to make iv. §8—yv, 1, a distinct
poem; but they can hardly offer any sufticient
reason for separating this portion from the other.
Nevertheless the distribution of the work into its
several parts must be left very much to the
reader's own taste and feeling. —4. A maiden
beloved sings of her lover. He had come to
her door at night, and had fled away before she
opened it. She seeks him; is beaten by the watch,
and stripped of her veil. She describes the
beauty of her lover, who at length answers, cele-
brating her loveliness, with a contemptuous
glance at the multitude of the king's wives (v. 2
vi. 9).—5. Shulamith recounts, in few words,
the allurements of the courtiers, whom she has
met with unexpectedly in the garden, and her
rejection of them, and celebrates her affection for


.


34: QGANTICLES.


her lover (vi. 10—viii. 3).—6. Protestation and
praists“of constant affection (viii. 4-7).—7. A
discourse between two brothers, about guarding
and giving away their sister in marriage; who
replies with scorn, that she would be her own
guardian (viii. 8-12).—8. A fragment. A lover
wishes to hear his beloved. She replies by per-
suading him to fly. Perhaps her parents or rela-
tions were near, who, in the East, never permit
such meetings (viii. 13, 14).

Ewald considers the poem to consist of a drama
in four parts. The heroine of the poem, accord-
ing to this writer, is a country maiden, a native
of Engedi, who, while rambling in the plains, fell
in with the chariots of Solomon, and was carried
by him into his palace. (Ewald’s Das Hohe Lied
Salomo's, Gotting. 1826).

We may here mention, that the divisions in
general of this poem have been modified accord-
ing to the views of its diferent commentators.
Those, for instance, who regard it as prophetical,
have adopted various divisions; such as the
legal and evangelical—the former commencing
with the captivity, and ending with the death of
Christ, from the commencement to chap. iv. 6;
and the latter from chap. iv. 7to the end. Ni-
_ cholas Lyranus considers the six first chapters to

represent the Old Testament, and the two last the

New. Ederus (Gconom. Bibl. p. 180) sees
that it describes the history of the church to
the time of Christ, in ten dramas. Gregory
de Valentia divides it into two parts—the first
containing the history of the Israelitish church
to Solomon; and the second, the professing
Christian church, to the time of Constantine.
Comelius a Lapide finds in it the Christian
church in its infancy to the feast of the
Pentecost, its youth to the time of Constantine,
its manhood under Constantine, its old age
in the time of the Arian and Nestorian heresies,
and its renovation under Basil, Chrysostom, and
Augustin. Those who consider it as a dogmatical
book form other divisions. Thus, Cocceius,
holding it to be a representation of the progress of
religion in the soul, or the spiritual wedlock of
Christ and the church, divides it into four parts,
consisting of espousals, mutual love, reconciliation,
and consummation in heaven; while Calovius
forms of it three divisions, consisting of the-desire
of Christ and his advent, grief for the loss of the
bridegroom, and the song of the bridegroam and
bride.

Object of the Canticles.—It has been in all
ages a matter of dispute, whether we are to seek
for any hidden or occult meaning under the enve-
lope of the literal and obvious sense. While seve-
tenia men have maintained that the object
of these poems is confined to the celebration of
the mutual love of the sexes, or that its main
design, in so far as its sacred character is consi-
dered, is the inculcation of marriage, and espe-
cially of’ monogamy, the majority of Christian
interpreters, at least since the days of Origen,
have believed that a divine allegory is contained
under the garb of an epithalamium, founded on
the historical fact of the marriage of Sulomon
with the daughter of Pharaoh ; others have held it
to be a simple allegory, having no historical truth
for its basis. We are intormed by Jerome, that
Origen wrote ten books of commentaries on this
poem, containing twenty thousand stichi. Of


GANTICLES,


these there are extant, in Latin, two homilies,
translated from the original Greek by Jerome;
and four books of Commentaries, in the version of
Rufinus (Origen, Opera, Paris, 1740, vol. iii.).
While the celebrated author admits the historical
sense, he represents, according to his custom, a
hidden sense, in which either the church or the
soul of the believer (for he does not determine
which) converses with the divine Redeemer.
This little book,’ be saya, ‘seems to be an epi-
thalamium —that is, a nuptial cae canta ie
Solomon, and sung in the person of a bride to her’
bridegroom, who is the word of God burning with
celestial love. For she loved him passionately,
whether we consider her as the soul made after his
image, or the church.’ Jerome, in his /pistle io
Pope Damasus, observes, that ‘ Origen, having in
his other writings exceeded all others, in his work
on Canticles has exceeded himself.’ Jerome and
the Fathers in general have followed Origen’s in-
terpretation. The only exception to this view,
among the early writers, whose name has come
down down to us, is the famous Syrian commenta-
tor, Theodore, Bishop of Mopsuestia, the friend
and schvolfellow of St. Chrysostom. This emi-
nent writer altogether denied the allegorical
interpretation, and is said to have considered the
Canticles to have been composed with the view of
gaining the aflections of an Ethiopian princess.
Theodoret, in his Commentary on Canticles,
while he states that Eusebius, Cyprian of Car-
thage, and others nearer to the apostolic age re-
cognised the Canticles as a spiritual book, ac-
quaints us that there were persons who slandered
the book, and denied its spiritual meaning, put-
ting together fables unworthy of a doting o'd
woman; others, he observes, were of opinion that


-the wise Solomon writes concerning himself’ and


the daughter of Pharaoh, while some authors of
the same class feigned that the Shunamite (for
the word is sometimes thus read) was no other
than Abishag, who was a native of Shunem. St.
Bemard assigns to the book three senses—a_his-
torical, a moral, and a spiritual. He describes
it as an agreeable and figurative epithalamium,
in which Solomon sings the mysteries of an eternal
marriage; and among the moderns, Bossuet ob-
serves, that ‘Solomon adduces, as an example,
his chaste aflection towards Pharaoh's daughter;
and while on the foundation of a true history hie
aptly describes the most passionate love, be sings,
under the envelope of an elegant fable, celestial
loves and the union of Cirist and the Church.’
Among those who have maintained the opinion
that the Song of Songs is an allegory founded on
facts, were Isidore Clavius and Francis Vatablus.
Lightfoot also considers the poem to refer to a
daughter of Pharaoh, an Ethiopian and a Gentile.
thers, as we have observed, among whom are
the learned Lutherans Carpzov (Jntroductio
ad Libros Canonicos ¥. T.), and Gerhard (Hos-
till, Salomonis, in Cant. proem. cap. x. ), main-
tain that the book is a simple allegory, having no
historical base whatever, but describing the love
which subsists between Christ and the Church
under figures borrowed from the ardour of human
vassion. These writers maintain that there ex-
ists no double sense whatever, Lut. that its pri-
mary is its only sense, and that this primary
sense is entirely of a spiritual character. ‘
As, however, the Scriptures give no intimation


; CANTICLES.


that this book contains a mystical or allegorical
eense, recourse has been had to the analogy of
some of saat Messianic Psalms, —_ a ae
to Spiri obj is recognised in the New
Totes Bevecially a great resemblance has
been observed between the character of the Can-
ticles and the 45th Psalm ; and it will suffice for
our t to cite the opinion of Rosen-
miiller, one of the ablest commentators on the
Messianic Psalms, in reference to this subject.
Professing to follow he one pts ancient
Hebrews, communica! ry lee para-
asia oee-eir of the Epistle to the He

—namely, that the 45th Psalm celebrated the
excellencies and praises of the great Messiah ; he
observes, ‘Throughout the latter of the
psalm this allegory, in which the Hebrew poets
particularly delighted, is maintained. They were
accustomed to represent God as entertaining, to-
wards his chosen people, feelings which they com-
pared to conjugal affections; and which they
deduced, under this figure, into all their various
and even minute expressions. In the illustrating
and beautifying of this allegory, the whole of
the Song of Songs is occupied: that the subject
of that poem, and that of the psalm before us,
ts the same, there is no doubt among sound in-
terpreters.. The reader may also refer, in illus
tration of this subject, to the mr:-; passages of
the Old and New Testament j% which this tigure
is retained by the sacred wy%cers: such as Isaiah
liv. 5; xii. 5; Jerem. tii. 1, &c.; Ezek. xvi.
and xxiii.; Matt. ix..25; John iii. 29; 2 Cor.
xi 2; Ephes. v. 2,3, &c.; Rev. xix. 7; xxi. 2;
xxii. 17, (See, especially, Bishop Lowth’s 2Ist
Lecture, De Sacra Heb. Poesi.) The writers,
however, who have admitted the allegorical sense,
are divided as to the object and design of the
allegory. The ancient Chaldee paraphrast, a
writer not more ancient than the sixth century,
has been considered by some as preserving the
tradition of the Jews on this subject. In this
commentary (the Targum) the Canticles are ex-
plained as a figurative description of the gracious
conduct of Jehovah towards his people, in deli-
vering them from the Egyptian bondage, con-
ferring great benefits on them during their pro-
gress through the wilderness, and conveying them
in safety to the promised land. Aben Ezra, the
celebrated Jewish commentator of the 12th cen-
tury, considered that the Canticles represented the
history of the Jews from Abraham tothe Messiah.
Others have conceived the bride to be Wis-
dom, with whom Selumon was acquainted from
his childhood, and with whose beauty he was
captivated (Leo Hebreus, Dialog. iii. De Amore).
This latter is the view followed by Rosenmiiller
in his Scholia. He conceives the sudden tran-
sitions of the bride from the court to the grove
inexplicable, on the principle that the Canticles
describe only human love; but while adopting
the allegorical! interpretation, he professes to fol-
low the Chaldee paraphrast and Solomon Jarchi,
and terms the Canticles a dramatico-allegorical
poem. Luther, inhis Commentary on Canticles,
maintained the allegorical interpretation, con-
ceiving Jebovah to he the bridegroom, the bride
the Jewish nation, and the poem itself a figura-
tive description of Solomon's civil government,
which, as we have already seen, appears, from
Theouoret, to have been an opinion of some of the


CANTICLES. 385


ancients. In his Commentary on 1 Peter, how-
ever, he explains the bride to be the New Testa-
ment church. For the view in his Commentary
on Canticles he is put down as a follower of those
ancient heretics by Sixtus of Sienna, and other
writers of the church of Rome. But from this
charge he is ably defended by Gerhard (ut supra).

The modern writers of the Roman church have,
in general, followed Origen and Jerome in their
allegorical interpretations. The leamed Hug,
however (Das Hohelied in einen noch wnver-
suchten Deutung, Freyberg, 1813), has given an
entirely new interpretation. He finds, under the
image of the bride, the ten tribes, and by the
brothers of the Shulamite he understands the
citizens of Judah, inasmuch as they did not
think the Jews worthy of being united with them.
He regards the book as an attempt made in the
time of Hezekiah to re-unite the remnant of the
ten tribes to the tribe of Judah. Carpzov states
that the big ee find Christ the spouse, and Mary
the bride ; but this only applies to very few writers
in the Roman communion. Others among them
explain the allegory as descriptive of the union be-
tween Christ and perfect souls, including the
blessed Virgin; among English commentators
also the idea is very prevalent that the Canticles
have a peculiar reference to the union of the soul
of the believer with Christ. The Rev. T. Scott
observes, in his Commentary, that ‘no other poem
of the kind could be so explained as to describe
the state of the heart at different times, and to
excite admiring, adoring, grateful love to God
our Saviour as this does."| We shall briefly dis-
miss the other views held respecting the Canticles
by those who admitted the allegorical sense.
Grotius has been justly censured for his views on
this subject. Conceiving it to be a dialogue be-
tween Sulomon and the daughter of the king of
Egypt, he supposes that the mysteries of matriage
are hidden under modest expressions. His com-
ments cannot be too highly -reprobated for their
grossness and obscenity. At the same time he
adds that ‘Solomon, in order to perpetuate the
woik, composed it with such art that, without
much distortion, it might be found to contain an
allegory expressive of the love of God to the
Israelites, as held by the Chaldee paraphrast and
Maimonides. But as this was a type uf the love
of Christ to his Church, Christians laudably em-
ployed their genius in applying the words of the
Song to this.’ Carpzov, who admits no literal
interpretation, considers that Bossuet only re-
hashed this idea of Grotius, whom he acknow-
ledges to have been a great man, if he had let
sacred subjects alone.

Among the remaining allegorical senses given
to this poem, is that of its being a dialogue be-
tween God and the human soul, and even between
the divine and human nature of Christ; while
the alchemists conceive the whole book to treat
of nothing but the philosopher's stone, of which
Solomon was in search (see Carpzov’s Introduc-
tion). We must not omit the opinion of the
learned Keiser, who conceives it to be a histurico-
allegorical song, celebrating the restoration of the
Mosaic worship by Zerubhabel, Ezra, and Nehe-
miah (Das Hohelied, Erlangen, 1825).

We are now to give some account of those who
deny any but a literal interpretation of this book.
We find in the Mishna (Perke seek ont AMae-

ce


396 CANTICLES.


sechet Jadaim) some allusion to an idea that
until the time of Ezra doubts were entertained as
to the authenticity of this book; and to a deci-
sion of the Rabbins, that so far from its being an
impure book, it was the most holy of all the ha-
giographa; and that if any controversy existed, it
was only in respect to Ecclesiastes. We are also
informed by Origen and Jerome that the Jews
forbade this book to be read by any one until he
arrived at thirty years of age—a restriction which
these Fathers approved of in consequence of the
amatory character of the poem. Among the
Christian writers we have already observed that
the only author of antiquity who has defended its
literal interpretation was Theodore of Mopsuestia,
who was condemned at the second Council of
Constantinople for having ‘disparaged the Can-
ticles, by asserting that Solomon wrote these
things to his bride, expounding things unntter-
able to Christian ears.’ Leontius of Byzantium,
a writer of the seventh century, in his book against
Nestorius (see Canisius, vol. i. p. 577), observes,
among other things, of Theodore, that he ‘ inter-
preted libidinously, according to his own mind,
and with meretricious tongue, the most holy Song
of Songs, which, with incredible audacity, he cuts
off from the sacred books. Jahn also (Jntro-
duction) says, that the worst interpretation of all
was that of Theodore, who considered the Can-
ticles an obscene book. Dr. Nathaniel Lardner
had long since observed that this accusation was
probably false, as being made by his enemies. The
reader can only form his jadgment from the few
fragments which have come down to us from this
eminent interpreter. The following is, perhaps,
the most remarkable :—‘ It becomes al] readers to
reflect that this book of the wise man cannot be
looked on as an encouragement to immorality, and
therefore to be held in disrepute. Neither should the
book, on the other hand, be commended as having
a prophetical character, fur the edification of the
Church; for had it been a prophetical book, there
would have been some mention in it of the name
of God ; but all onght to know that the book is a
table entertainment, such as Plato, at a later
period, wrote concerning love, on which account
the public reading of the Canticles was never
allowed either to the Jews or to us, as being a
domestic and nuptial Song of Solomon, singing
to his guests the reproaches cast upon his bride.’
But whatever might have been Theodore's parti-
cular views, he appears to have had no followers
for many ages; the allegorical interpretation has
been the current one in the Christian Church.
Erasmus is said to have been the first after Theo-
dore to deny this interpretation (American Ency.,
art.‘Sol.’s Song’). Le Clerc, at a later period, took
the same view, maintaining that it was simply
an idyl or pastoral eclogue; and, in more
modern times, some of the most distinguished in-
terpreters have followed this interpretation.

The opinions of those who have acknowledged
no other than the literal interpretation of the
Canticles has had a considerable influence in the
question of the canonicity of the book. Nor is it
at all surprising that those who were in the habit
of attaching a spiritual meaning to it should find
it difficult to believe that a book, treating of
human love, should lave a place in the inspired
volume. Jalm endeavours to explain this by
the hypothesis that the author or authors of these


CANTICLES.


songs do not celebrate all kinds of chaste leve of
the sexes before marriage, but only that which
leads to monogamy (which is commended in
Ecclesiastes ix. 9) and polygamy condemned,
iii, 6-11, and vi. 8, 9; or that the oper
sibly Haggai, Zechariah, and Me hi—who
placed the Canticles in the canon, seem to have
understood it in the mystical sense; so that the
canonical sense is mystical, although this sense
was not intended by the authors [Inspraa-
T10N]. Most, however, of the literal commenta-
tors are of opinion that marriage, being a divine
institution, the chaste love of the sexes is a fit
subject for sacred song. Thus Pareau (Jnstitutio
Interpretis V. T.; see Translation in Bib. Ca-
binet, vol. ii. p. 291), who conceives that these
songs are employed in ‘describing the chastest
love subsisting between a certain young man and
agirl betrothed to him, in which the poet gives
the reins to a most luxuriant imagination,’ thinks
that, at the same time, nothing is seen adapted to
excite or nourish impure feelings, but that the
author seems to have studiously endeavoured to
adorn the virtuous loves of the future spouses with
all those allurements which a fervid and Oriental
genius could imagine, that he might more ettica-
ciously recal the young men of his time from the
enticements of impure love (See also Seiler's
Hermeneutics, §. 175). Seiler conceives that the
aim of these songs consists in a commendation of
conjugal fidelity, and of pure love for one wite,
who is the legitimate spouse, even in a state of
polygamy.

An argument has been maile use of against the
litera] sense derived from the style of the poem;
some critics having maintained that actual de
formities are ascribed to the bride, which is incon-
sistent with an amatory poem; but from this
charge it has been powerfully vindicated by
writers of exquisite taste, of whom it will be sufii-
cient to name Hossuet, Lowth, Eichhorn, and Dr.
J. Mason Good. * Even regarding it,’ says Calmet,
Sas a mere human composition, it has all the
beauties of which a piece of this nature is capable.
The bride and bridegroom express their seuti-
ments in figurative and enigmatic periods, and
by comparisons and similitudes derived from
tural scenery. If the comparisons are sometimes
too strong, we must allow something to the genius
of the Orientals and the vivacity of love. The
style is tender, lively, animated, and delicate’
(Preface to Canticles). .

These views, however, respecting the Leauties of
the poem, leave the question of its mystical and
spiritual character untouched. We kuow that
many ywets, ancient and modern, have written
amatory songs, which have allegorical, distinct
from the primary, meaning. To adduce a fami-
liar instance, it is known that several of Mr.
Moore's Melodies are of this character. It is,
therefore, at least possible that the Canticles may
have a hidden meaning ; but as the Scriptures no
where refer to this, it can only be inferred from
analogy. It is, at the same time, remarkable,
that although the ancient Jews have attached a
Messianic character to several of the psalms, they
have never, as far as we know, sought this mean-
ing in the Canticles. :

It was chietly the subject of the poem that in-
fluenced Dr. J. Pye Smith in rejecting the Canti-
cles from the Canon, although he also main


CANTICLES.


with Whiston, that Josephus did not include it
in his catalogue (Scripture Testimony, i. 55,
3rd edit. 1837; also Congregational Magazine
for 1837, 1838.)

But by many who defend the allegorical inter-

tation, it is acknowledged that, even in its

itera] sense, it has a just claim to be considered
acanunical book. Dr. J. Mason Good, for instance,
who, although he acknowledges that we have no
sufficient data to build a decisive opinion, still
believes it an allegory (observing that ‘this alle-
goric mode of describing the sacred union sub-
sisting between mankind at large, or an indivi-
dual and pions soul, and the great Creator, is
common to almost all Eastern poetry,’ in proof of
which he refers to the chaste and virtuous Sadi or
the more impassioned Hafiz), and maintains that
‘to those who disbelieve the existence of such an
allegory, they still afford a happy example of the
pleasures of huly and virtuous love; they incul-
cate, beyond the power of didactic poetry, the
tendemess which the husband should manifest
for his wife, and the deference, modesty, and
fidelity with which his affection should be
returned ; and, considered even in this sense alone,
they are fully entitled to the honour of constitut-
ing a part of the sacred Scriptures’ (Song of
Sonas, or Sacred Idyls, by J. Mason Good, M.D.).

The translators of the Canticles have come in
for their share of obloquy. * Sebastian Castellio,’
says Beza, ‘wanted to expunge the Cuanticles
from the Canon as an impure and obscene poem,
and heaped the vilest repruaches on those ministers
who resisted him. For this he was summoned
before the senate, and expelled from Geneva.
Conceiving the whole to relate to the amours of
the polygamist monarch, he rendered it into
Latin so as to express the efleminate and softly
breathing sighs uf lovers, imitating rather Ca-
tullus and Petronius than a divine prophet.’
Beza styles Castellio an ambitious and self-opini-
ated man. Sixtus Senensis is equally severe on
Castellio’s translation (ib. Sue. book vi. heer.
xiii. p. 664). He has been even accuse:l of call-
ing the Canticles ‘a flagitious book.’ These are,
however, it must be borne in mind, the accusa-
tions of Castellio’s enemies; and ft must be recol-
lected that Castellio was particularly obnoxious
to Beza on other accounts, especially for disap-

ving of the buming of Servetus, which Beza
pe defended, together with the propriety of
burning heretics in general (Beza's Life of
Calvin). Beza himself subsequently incurred
similar obloquy for his own translation; and it
is known, that when in his old age he married his
second wife, he facetiously called his youthful
bride by the name of his Shunamite.

Author and Age of Canticles.—These have
been also much disputed. The inscription as-
cribes it to Solomon; and this is contirmed by
the universal voice of antiquity, although some
of the Jews have attributed it to Hezekiab.

From some Aramaic words, the spelling of
David, in -the sulitary instance im which it
occurs, with a % (yod), and the abbreviation of the

noun “WN, the work has been supposed, by
Richhorn, Jahn, and others, to be written after
the captivity. Rosenmiiller dwells on the word
‘Paradise,’ which is found only here (ch. iv. 13),
and in Ecclesiastes (ii. 5), and (Nehemiah (iv.
8), as a proof of this later date. The two latter


CAPERNAUM, 367


books he regards as evidently written after the:
exile. But this mode of spelling David, which
also occurs in Amos (vi. 5), only proves that the

t text is corrupted. Aramaic words are.
found in other books of Scripture, whose antiquity
is undisputed. Ewald fixes it to the year B.o.
920, which brings it near the age of Solomon; and
Pareav, although coinciding with Rosenmiiller in
the opinion that Ecclesiastes was written after the
captivity, has not ‘the least doubt that the song
is rightly attributed to Solomon ;' and the emi-
nent critic De Wette (Ledrbuch) is of opinion
that the whole range of the figures and allusions,
and the character of the manners depicted, prove
that this work belongs to the age of Solomon. He
accounts for the later features by supposing
several minor poems to have been collected at some
late period. —W. W.

CAPERNAUM (Kawepvaor'z), a city on the .
north-western side of the Lake of Gennesareth,
and on the border of the tribes of Zebulun and
Naphtali. The infidelity and impenitence of the
inhabitants of this place, after the evidence given
to them by our Saviour himself of the truth of his
mission, brought upon them this heavy denuncia-
tion : —‘ And thou, Capernaum, which art ex-
alted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell s
for if the mighty works which have been done in
thee had been done in Sodom, it would have re- |
mained. unto this day,’ &c. (Matt. xi, 23.) This
seems to have been more than any other place
the residence of Christ after he commenced his
great mission; and hence the force of the denun-
ciation, which has been so completely accom-
plished, that even the site of Capernaum is quite
uncertain. Dr. Robinson (Bibl. Researches, iii.
288-294) exposes the errors of all previous travel-
lers in their various attempts to identify the site
of Capernaum ; and, from a hint in Quaresmius,
he is rather inclined to look for it in a place
marked only by a mound of ruins, called by the
Arabs, Khan Minyeh. This is situated in the
fertile plain on the western border of the Lake of
Gennesareth, to which the name of ‘the land of
Gennesareth’ is given by Josephus (De Bell. Jud.
iii, 10, 8) This plain is a sort of triangular hol-
low, formed hy the retreat of the mountains about
the middle of the western shore. The base of this
angle is along the shoe, and is about one hour's
journey in length, whereas it takes an hour and a
half to trace the inner sides of the plain. In this
plain Josephus places a fountain called Caphar-
naum : he says nothing of the town; but, as it
can be collected from the Scriptural intimations
that the town of Capernaum was in this same
plain, it may be safely concluded that the foun-
tain was not far from the town, and took its name
therefrom. In this plain there are now two foun-
tains, one called ‘Ain el Madauwarah, the ‘Round
Fountain’—a large and beautiful fountain, rising
immediately at the foot of the western line of
hills. This Pococke took to be the Fountain
of Capernaum, and Dr. Robinson was at the time
disposed to adopt this conclusion. There is an-
other fountain called “Ain et-Tin, near the north-
em extremity of the plain, and not far from the
lake. It is overhung by a fig-tree, from which it
derives its name. Near this are several other
springs, the water of which is said to be brackish 5
but Burckhardt, who rested for some time under
the great fig-tree, describes the mae of ie main

°


388 CAPHTHOR.


source as sweet. This is the fountain which Dr.
Robinson inclines to regard as that which Josephus
mentions under the name of Capharnaum ; and
the reasons which he assigns certainly make it
appear preferable to the other fountain at the mner
part of the plain. Whichever be the Caphar-
naum, we should look for some traces of an
ancient town in the vicinity, and, finding them,
should be justified in supposing that they formed
the remains of Capernaum. There are ro ancient
remains of any kind near the Round Fountain,
which is one of the reasons against its claim to
indicate the site of ancient Capernaum. But
near the ‘Ain et-Tin is a low mound of ruins,
occupying a considerable circumference, which
certainly offer the best probability which has yet
* been offered of being the remains of the doomed
city: and if these be all its remains, it has, ac-
cording to that doom, been brought low indeed.
Near the fountain is also a khan, which gives the
name of Khan Minyeh to the spot. This khan
is now in ruins, but was once a large and well-
built structure. Close on the north of this khan,
and of the fountain, rocky hills of considerable
elevation come down quite to the lake, and form
the northern termination of the plain. It is im-
portant to add, that Quaresmius expressly states,
that in his day, the place called by the Arabs
Minyeh, was regarded as marking the site of Ca-
permaum (Elucid. r. 8. ii. p. 864).


CAPHTHOR (ANB3} Deut. ii. 23; Jer. xlvii.
4; Amos ix. 7) was the real and proper country
of the Philistines. There has been a great diver-
sity of opinion with regard to the exact situation
of that country. The general opinion that Caph-
thor was Cappadocia, is, upon the whole, founded
more on the ancient versions of the Bible, such
as the Septuagint and the Targums, than on any
sound argument. Against this opinion have been
urged :—1. The authority of Josephus, who
seems to seek Cuphthor somewhere between Egypt
and Ethiopia; 2. That the Caphthorim came
originally from Egypt, from which Cappadocia
is so far removed, that it seems highly improbable
that an Egyptian colony should first have emi-
grated thither, and then again removed to Pa-
lestine still more remote ; 3. That Caphthor and
Cappadocia are very dissimilar names even in
aound; 4. That Caphthor is (Jer. xlvii. 4) de-
signated as an island (°%), though °X sometimes
also signifies a coast.

Others again, such as Calmet (Dissert. sur
l Origine des Philistins, p. 321), and still more
J. G. Lackemacher (Qbser. Phil. p. 2, 11, s¢q.),
have tried to prove that the Philistines derived
their origin from the island of Crete, because—
1, Caphthor is, with Jeremiah, an island, aud—
2. The proper name of the Philistines is D°N 5
(Ezek. xxv. 16; Zeph. ii. 5; 1 Sam. x. 14). The
Sept., however, evidently makes a distinction be-
tween DMNNDD and D'S; nor is it probable
that Crete should have been so populous, in the
time of Abraham, as to send colonies to remote
Palestine.

By far more probable is Calmet's previous
Opinion (found in the first edition of his Comment.
on Genesis, but which he afterwards recalled),
that Caphthor is the island of Cyprus. From the
geographical situation of that island, it may have
been known to the Egyptians at a very early pe-


CAPTIVITIES.


riod, and they may have sent colonies thither, who
afterwards removed, from some reason or other, to
the southern coast of Palestine bordering on Exypt.
Swinton (Inser. Cit. Oxon. 1750, pp. 78, 85) ace
tually found on that island an ancient Phoenician
coin, with the ad Ba Y135 (Kubdor), not
very unlike IND; but in the Allgemeine Liter,
Zeitung (Leipsic, 1825, i. 440) it has been proved
that Swinton was mistaken in the reading of that
inscription. Forster (Epist. ad Michael. p. 17,
sq.) thinks that the Caphthorim had lived on the
Egyptian coast (as °N in Jer. xlvii. 4 is also used
of sea-coasts), somewhere ae as From
hence,” he su a colony of that le,
and their brethren and easterly right bossy the
Casluchim, had gone forth, in the period between
the first wars of the world (described in Gen. xiv.)
ani the birth of Isaac, and settled on the southern
coast of Palestine, under the name of Philistines,
after having expelled the Avim, who lived about
Gaza [Avim]. Only in subsequent times, Forster
thinks, these new Philistines had again sent a
colony who conquered the province of Lapethus,
inthe island of Cyprus. This colony he identifies
with the Ethiopians, who lived, according to Hero-
dotus (vii. 85), upon that island. There is much
solid ground in favour of this opinion.—E. M.
CAPPADOCIA (KarraSox{a), an ancient
province of Asia Minor, bounded on the north by
‘ontus, on the east by the Euphrates and Arme-
nia Minor, on the south hy Mount Taurus (be-
yond which are Cilicia and Syria), and on the east
by Phrygia and Galatia. The country is moun-
tainous and abounds in water, and was celebrated
for the production of wheat, for its fe pastures,
and for its excellent breed of horses, asses, and
sheep. The inhabitants were notorious for their


‘dulness and vice. They were calle? ‘Syrians’


in the age of Herodotus (i. 72; v. 49), and even
in Strabo's days they bore the name of ‘ Leuco-
Syrians,’ #. e. ‘White Syrians’ (xii. bbe g in
contradistinction to those dwelling ae the
Taurus, whose complexion was darkened by the
sun. Cappadocia was subjugated by the Persians
under Cyrus; but after the time of Alexander
the Great it had kings of its own, who bore the
common name of Ariarathes. It continued to be
governed by tributary kings under the Romans
till a.pv. 17, when Tiberius made it a Roman pro-
vince. Christianity .was very early propagated
in Cappadocia, for St. Peter names it in address-
ing the Christian churches in Asia Minor (1 Pet.
i. 1). Cappadocians were present at Jerusalem
on the day of Pentecost (Acts ii. 9).
CAPTIVITIES. The word Captivity, as ap-
plied to the people of Israel, has been appropriated,
contrary to the analogy of our language, to mean
Expatriation. The violent removal of the entire
population of. city, or sometimes even of a dis-
trict, is not an uncommon event in ancient history.
As a measure of pulicy, no objection to it on the
ground of humanity was felt by any one; since,
in fact, it was a very mild proceeding, in compa-
rison with that of selling a tribe or nation into
slavery. Every such destruction of national
existence, even in modern times, is apt to be em-
bittered by the simultaneous abe ee of religious
bonds; but in the ancient world, the positive
sanctity attributed to special places, and the local
attachment of Deity, made expatriation doubly
severe. The Hebrew people, for instance, in many


CAPTIVITIBS.
most vital points, could no longer obey their sacred.
law at all, whee petsonally removed from Jerusa-


lem; and in many others they were forced to
modify it by reason of their change of circum-
stances.


Two principal motives impelled conquerin

ers thus rape rt Peaim in hip toast

the desire of rapidly filling with a valuable
population new cities, built for pride or for policy ;
next, the determination to break up hostile organi-
zatiuns, or dangerous reminiscences of past great-
ness. Both might sometimes be combined in the
same act. To attain the former object, the skilled
artisans would in particular be carried off; while
the latter was better effected by transporting all
the families of the highest birth, and all the well-


trained soldiery. The Greeks used the special fate


epithet dvdowacro: for a population thus removed
(Herod. vi. 93, et passim).

The expatriation of the Jewish people belongs
to two great eras, commonly called the first and
second Captivity; yet differing exceedingly in
character. It is to the former that the above re-
marks chiefly apply. In it, the prime of the na-
tion were carried eastward by the monarchs of
Assyria and ps and were en a no
unnecessary harshness, even under the dynasty
that captured them. So far were they from the
condition of bondsmen (which the word ‘ captive’
suggests), that the book of Susanna represents their
elders in Babylon as retaining the power of life
and death over their own people (i. 28), when
Daniel was as yet avery young man. The au-
thority of that book cannot indeed be pressed as
to the chronology ; yet the notices given by Eze-
kiel (xiv. 1; xx. 1) concur in the general fact,
that they still held an internal jurisdiction over
theirown members. At a later time, under the
Seleucidm, we have distinct proof that in the
principal cities the Jews were governed by an
Ofticer (€@vdpyns) of their own nation; as also in
Egypt under the Ptolemies. The book of Tobit
exhibits Israelites in Media  gercaie of slaves
themselves (viii. 18); the book of Daniel tells us
of a Jew, in eminent political station ; and that of
Esther celebrates their power and uence in
the Persian empire. Under the Seleucidew [AN-
TiocHus] they were occasionally important as
garrison-soldiers ; and it may be suspected that,
on the whole, their lot was milder than that of the
other ered nations among which they dwelt.

That which we name the first Captivity, was by
no means brought about by a single removal of the
population. In fact, from beginning to end, the
period of deportation occupied full 150 years; as
the period of return reaches probably through 100.
The first blow fell upon the more distant tribes of
Israel, about 741 n.c.; when Tiglath-pileser,
king of Assyria (2 Kings xv. 29), carried off the
pastoral pupulation which lived beyond the Jordan,
with Zebulon aud Naphtali. (To this event allu-
sion is made in Isaiah ix. 1; a passage Very ill
translated in our received version.) In the time
of this conquering monarch, Assyria was rapidly
rising into power, and to aggrandize Nineveh was
probably a great object of policy. It is therefore
credible, as he had received no particular provoca-
tion from the Israelites, that he carried off these
masses of population to stock his huge city with.
His succeseor Shalmanezer made the Israelitish
king Hoshea tr.tuary. When the tribute was


CAPTIVITIES. rd
withheld, be attacked and reduced Samaria


721 f i d of
Cla dead Eta Mae


very distant cities; many of them probably not
far from the Caspian Sea; and their place was
supplied by celonies from Babylon and Susis
(2 Kings xvii. 24). Such was the end of Israel
asa ki m.—An interval of more than @ cen-
tury followed before Judah was to suffer a similar
. Two te deportations are narrated in
the book of Kings, three in that of Jeremiah, while
a fourth and earlier one a in the book of
Daniel. Jeremiah dates by the years of Nebu-
chadnezzar's reign (who came to the throne s.c.
606 or 605), and estimates that in his seventh
year 3023 were carried off, in his eighteenth 832,
and in his twenty-third only 745; making in all,
as the writer is careful to note, 4600 (Jer. lii.
28, &c.). The third removal he ascribes ty Nebu-
zaradan, the Babylonian general. That some
error here exists, at least in the numbers, appears
undeniable; for 4600 persons was a very petty
fraction of the Jewish people ; and, in fact, 42,360
are stated to have returned immediately upon the
decree of Cyrus ( Ezra ii. 64). In 2 Kings xxiv.
8-16, we tind 18,000 carried off at once, in the
third month of king Jehoiachin, and in the eighth
year of Nebuchadnezzar; which evidently is the
same as the first removal named by Jeremiah, and
may be placed in p.c. 598. After this, the
vassal king Zedekiah having rebelled, his city is
beleaguered, and finally in his eleventh year is
reduced (u.c. 588) by Nebuchadnezzar in per-
son; and in the covfrse of the same year, ‘the
nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar’ (2 Kings xxv. 8),
Nebuzaradan carries away all the population ex-
cept the peasants. Perhaps we need not wonder
that no mention is made in the ‘ Kings’ of the third
deportation; for the account of the destruction
was in a manner complete, upon the second inva-
sion. There is a greater aie in the state-
ment with which the book of Daniel opens, which
is generally interpreted to mean that tn the third
year of Jehoiakim, Nebuchasinezzar besieged and ,
captured Jerusalem, partially plundered the tem-
ple, and carried off the first portion of the people
into captivity, among whom was Daniel.

text however does not explicitly say so much,
although such is the obvious meaning ; but if this
is the only interpretation, we find it in direct col-
lision with the books of Kings and Chronicles
(which assign to Jehoiakim an eleven years’
reign), as also with Jeremiah xxv. 1. The
statement in Daniel partially rests on 2 Chron.
xxxvi. 6; which is itself not in perfect accord-
ance with 2 Kings xxiv. In the earlier history,
the war broke out during the reign of Jehoiaki
who died before its close; and when his son an
successor Jehviachin had reigned three months,
the city and its king were captured. But in the
Chronicles, the same event is made to happen twice
over, at an interval of three months and ten days
(2 Chron, xxxvi. 6 and 9), and even so, we do not
obtain accordance with the received interpretation


390 CAPTIVITIFS.


of Daniel i. 1-3. It seems on the whole the easiest
supposition, that ‘the third year of Jehoiasim’ is
there a mistake for ‘the third month of Jehoia-
chin.’ Heuystenberg, however, and Havernick
defend the common reading, and think they recon-
cile it with the other accounts. On the whole, it is
pretty clear that the people of Judah, as of Israel,
were carried out of their land by rwo principal
removals. The former, p.c. 588, was directed to
swell the armies and strengthen the towns of the
conqueror; for of the 18,0U0 then carried away,
1000 were ‘craftsmen and smiths, all strong and
apt for war,’ and the rest are called ‘ mighty men
of valour.’ (Yet there is a difficulty about verses
14 and 16 in 2 Kings xxiv.) It was not until
the rebellion of Zedekiah that Nebnchadnezzar
proceeded to the extremity of breaking up the
national existence, u.c. 58%. As the temple
was then burnt, with all the palaces and the city
walls, and no government was left but that of the
Babylonian satrap, this latter date is evidently the
true era of the captivity. Previously Zedekiah
was tributary; but so were Josiah and Ahaz long
before; the national existence was still saved.
Details concerning the Return from the capti-
vity are preserved in the books denominated after
Ezra and Nehemiah; and in the prophecies of
two contemporaries, Hagzai anc Zechariah. The
first great event is the decree of Cyrus, B.c. 536,
‘in consequence of which 42.360 Jews of Babylon
returned under Sheshbazzar, with 7337 slaves,
besides cattle. This ended in their building the
altar, and laying the foundation of the second
temple, 53 years after the destruction of the first.
The progress of the work was, however, almost im-
mediately stopped : for Zerubbabel, Jeshua and the
rest abruptly refused all help from the half-heathen
inhabitants of Samaria, and soon felt the eflects of
the enmity thus induced. That the mind of
Cyrus was changed by their intiizues, we are not
informed; but he was proSably absent in distant
parts, through continual war. (There is a difli-
culty in Ezra iv. as to the names Ahasuerus and
Artaxerxes; yet the general facts are clear.)—
When Darius (Hystaspis), an able and generous
monarch, ascended the throne, the Jews soon ob-
tained his favour. At this crisis, Zerubbabel was in
chief authority (Sheshbazzar perhaps being dead),
and under him the temple was begun in the second
and ended in the sixth year of Darius, u.c. 520-
516. Although this must be reckoned an era in
the history, it is not said to have been accompa-
nied with any new immigration of Jews. We
pass on to ‘the seventh year of king Artaxerxes’
(Longimanus). Ezra vii. 7, that is, 4.¢. 458, when
Ezra comes up from Babylou to Jerusalem, with
the king’s commendatory letters, accompanied by
a large body of his nation, The enumeration in
Ezra viii. makes them under 1800 mates, with
their families; perhaps amounting to 5090 per-
sons, young and old: of whom 113 are recounted
as having heathen wives (Ezra x. 18-43). In the
twentieth year of the same king, or B.c. 445,
Nehemiah, his cupbearer, gains his permission to
restore ‘his fathers’ sepulchres,’ and the walls of
his uative city ; and is sent to Jerusalem with large
powers. This is the crisis which decided the na-
tional restoration of the Jewish people: fur before
their city was fortitied, they had no defence against
the now confirmed enmity of their Samaritan
neighbours; und, in fact, before the walls conld


CAPTIVITIES.


be built, several princes around were able to offer
great opposition Teuvacicae]: The Jewish po-
pulation was overwhelmed with debt, and had
generally mortgaged their little estates to the rich;
but Nehemialh's influence succeeded in bringing
about a general forfeiture of debts, or at least of
the interest : after which we may regard the new
order of things to have been finally established in
Judea [Nenemsan]. From this time forth it
is pi le that numerous families returned in
small parties, as to a secure home, until all the
waste Jand in the neighbourhood was re-occupied.

There has been great difference of opinion, as to
how the 70 years of captivity spoken of by Jere-
miah (xxv. 12; xxix. 10) are to be estimated. A
plausible opinion would make them last from the
destruction of the first temple, s.c. 588, to the
finishing of the second, s.c. 516: but the words
of the text so specify ‘ the punishing of the king
of Babylon’ as the end of the 70 years—which
gives us the date s.c. 538—that many, with Jahn,
cling to the belief that a first captivity took place
in the third year of Jehoiakim, p.c. 605. Winer,
on the contrary, suspects that a desire to make out
the 70 years in this way, has generated the story
in Daniel, so irreconcilable with the bvoks oft
Kings and of Jeremiah. But, in fact, if we read
Jeremiah himself, it may appear that in ch. xxv.
he intends to compute the 70 years from the time
at which he speaks (ver. 1, ‘in the fourth year of
Jchoiakim,’ ¢. e. u.c. 604); and that in xxix. 10
the number ‘seventy years’ is still kept up, in
reaiembrance of the former prophecy, although
the language there used is very lax.

The great mass of the Israelitish race never-
theless remained in dispersion, Previous to the
captivity, many Israelites had settled in Egypt
(Zech, x. 11; Isa. xix. 1S), and many Jews
afterwards fled thither from Nebuzaradan (Jer.
xli. 17). Others appear to have established them-
selves in Sheba (sve Jost's Geschichte &c), where
Jewish influence became very powerful (SuEBa).

It is maintained by Von Buhlen (Genesis, p.
exvi.) that the ten tribes intermarried eo treely
with the surrounding population as to have be-
come completely absorbed; anu it appears to be
a universal opinion that no one now knows where
their descendants are. But it is a harsh assump-
tion that such intermarriages were commoner
with the ten tribes than with the two; and cer-
tainly, in the apostolic days, the ¢rcelve tribes are
referred to as a well-known people, sharply de-
fined from the heathen (James 1. 1; Acts xxiv. 7
Not a trace appears that any repulsive principle
existed at that time between the Ten and the
Two. ‘Ephraim no longer envied Judah, nor
Judah vexed Ephraim ;’ but they had become
fone nation;’ though only partially ‘on the
mountains of Israel’ (Isa. xi. 13; Ezek. xxxvii,
22). It would seem, therefore, that one result of the
captivity wes to blend all the tribes together, and
produce a national union which had never been
effected in their own land. If ever there was a
difference between them as to the books counted
sacred, that difference entirely vanished; at least
no evidence appears of the contrary fact. When,
morevver, the laws of landed inheritance no longer
enforced the maiutenance of separate tribes and
put a difficulty in the way of their intermarriage,
an almost inevitable result in course of time
was the entire obliteration of this distinction ,


CAPTIVITIES, :


and as a fact, no modern Jews know to what
tribe they belong, although vanity always makes
them choose to say that they are of the two or
three, aud not of the ten tribes. That all Jews
now living have in them the blood of all the
twelve tribes, ought (it seems) to be believed,
until sume better reasun mere assertion is
advanced against it. ;

When Cyrus gave permission to the Israelites
to return to their own country, and restored their
sacred vessels, it is not wonderfnl that few per
sons of the ten tribes were eayer to take ad-
vantage of it. In two centuries they had become
thoroughly naturalized in their eastern settle-
ments ; nor had Jerusalem ever been the centre
of proud aspirations to them. It is perhaps re~
markable, that in Ezra ii. 2, 36 (see also x. 18,
25), the word Israel is used to signify what we
might call the Laity as opposed to the priests and
Levites ; which might seem as though the writer
were anxious to avoid asserting that all the fa-
milies belonged to the two tribes. (If this is not
the meaning, it at least shows that all discrimi-
nating furce in the words Israel and Judah was
already lost. So, too, in the book of Esther, the
twelve tribes through all parts of the Persian
empire are called Jews.) Nevertheless, it was
to be expected that only those would return to
Jerusalem whose expatriation was very recent;
and principally those whose parents had dwelt in
the Holy City or its immediate neighbourhood.
The re-migrants doubtless consisted chiefly of the
pious and the poor; and as the latter proved do-
cile to their teachers, a totally new spirit reigned
im the restored nation. Whatever want of zeal
the anxious Ezra might discern in his comrades,
it isno slight matter that he could induce them
to divorce their heathen wives—a measure of
harshness which St. Paul would scarcely have
sanctioned (1 Cor. vii. 12): and the century
which followed was, on the whule, one of great
religious activity and important permanent re-
sults on the moral character of the nation. Even
the prophetic spirit by no means disappeared tyr
a century and a half; although at length both
the true and the false prophet were supplanted
among them by the leamed and diligent scribe,
the anxious commentator, and the over-literal or
over-figurative critic. In place of a people prone
to go astray after sensible objects of adoration,
and readily admitting heathen customs; attached
to monarchical power, but inattentive to a hier-
rachy; careless of a written law, and movable
by alternate inpulses of apostacy and repentance ;
we hencefoith find in them a deep and perma-
nent reverence for Moses and the prophets, an
aversion to foreigners and foreign customs, a
profound hatred of idolatry, a great devotion to
ptiestly and Levitical rank, and to all who had
an exterior of piety ; in short, a slavish obedience
both to the Jaw and to its authorized expositors.
Now lirst, as far as can be ascertained (observe
the particularity of detail in Neh. viii. 4, &c.),
were the synagogues and houses of prayer in-
stituted, and the law periodically read aloud.
Now began the close observance of the Passover,
the Sabbath, and the Sabbatical year. Such was
the change wrought in the guardians of the Sacred
Books, that, whereas the pious king Josiah had
sat eighteen years on the throne without knowing
of the existence of ‘the Hook of the Law’ (2


CAPTIVITIES. 391


Kings xxii. 8, 8); in the later period, on the
contrary, the text was watched over with a
scrupulous and fantastic punctiliousness. From
this era, the civil power was absorbed in that of
the priesthood, and the Jewish people affords the
singular spectacle of a nation in which the
py tule came, later in time than that of
ereditary kings. Something analogous may
perhaps be seen in the priestly authority at Co-
mana in Cappadocia under the Roman sway
(Cicero, Ep. ad Div. xv. 4, &c.).

In their habits ‘of life also, the Jewish nation
was pom affected by the first captivity.
The love of agriculture, which the institutions of
Moses had so vigorously inspired, had necessarily
declined in a foreign land; and they returned
with a taste for commerce, banking, and retail
trade, which was probably kept up by constant
intercourse with their brethren who remained in
dispersion. The same intercourse in turn pro-
pagated towards the rest the moral spirit which
reigned at Jerusalem. The Egyptian Jews, it
would seem, had gained little good from the con-
tact of idolatry (Jer. xliv. 8); but those who had
fallen in with the Persian religion, probally about
the time of its great reform by Zoroaster, had
been preserved from such temptations, and re-
turned purer than they went. Thenceforward
it was the honourable function of Jerusalem to
act as a religious metropolis to the whole dis
persed nation ; and it cannot be doubted that the
ten tribes, as well as the two, learned to be proud
of the Holy City, as the great and free centre of
their name and their faith. The same religious
influences thus diffused themselves through all
the twelve tribes of Israel. .

Thus in Egypt and Arabia, in Babylonia,
Assyria, Media, masses of the nation were
planted, who, living by tratlic and by banking,
were necessitated to spread in all directions as
their numbers increased. By this natural progress
they moved westward, as well as eastward, and,
in the time of St. Paul, were abundant in Asia
Minor, Greece, and the chief cities of Italy.

The extermination suffered hy the Jewish in-
habitants of Palestine, under the Romans, far
better deserves the name of captivity: for after
the massacre of countless thousands, the captives
were reduced to a real bondage. According to
Josephus (De Bell. Jud. vi. 9. 3), 1,100,000 men
fell in the siege of Jerusalem by Titus, and
97,000 were captured in the whole war. Of the
latter number, the greatest part was distributed
among the provinces, to be butchered in the
amphitheatres or cast there to wild beasts; others
were doomed to work as public slaves in Egypt:
only those under the age of seventeen were sold
into private bondage. An equally dreadful de-
struction fell upon the remains of the nation,
which had once more assembled in Judea, under
the reign of Hadrian (a.p. 133), which Dion
Cassius concisely relates: and by these two
savage wars, the Jewish population must have been
effectually extirpated from the Holy Land itself,
aresult which did not follow from the Babylonian
captivity. Afterwards, a dreary period of fitteea
hundred years’ oppression crushed in Europe all
who bore the uame of Israel, and Christian nations
have visited on their head a crime perpetrated by
a few thousand inhabitants of Jerusalem. who
were not the real forefathers of the European


303 CARAVAN.


Jews. Nor in the East has their lot been mach
more cheering. With few and partial exceptions,
they have ever since been a despised, an op;
| naturally a degraded peuple; though from
them have spread light and truth to the distant
ations of the earth.—F. W. N.


CARAVAN (.j\5yS>) i the name given to


a body of merchauts or pilgrims as they travel
in the East. A multitude of people, of all ages
and conditions, assembling to undertake a journey,
and prosecuting it en masse for days and weeks
together, is a thing unknown in Europe, where, from
the many facilities for travelling, and a well or-
ganized system of police, travellers can go alone
and unprotected along the highways to any dis-
tance with the most perfect security. But troops
of people on march are a common spectacle along
the roads of Eastern countries; and, indeed, the
nature of the countries in many places, as well as
the disorderly state of suciety, points out the only
practicable way of travelling to be in large cara-
vans. The dangers arising from the vast deserts
that intersect these regions, as well as from wild
beasts and bands of marauding Arabs, are too nu-
merous and imminent for single traders or solitary
travellers to encounter; and hence merchants
and pilgrims are accustomed to unite for mutual
protection in traversing these wild and inhospit-
able parts, as well as fur oflefing a more effectual
resistance to the attacks of robbers. Through this
kind of intercourse, which principally obtains in
Turkey, Persia, and Arabia, most of the inland
commerce of the East is carried on; and certainly
of aJl the various modes in which the commodi-
ties of one country are conveyed to another, it is
the cheapest and the most expeditious, as the pos-
session of the camel aflurds facilities for journey-
ing over barren and sandy regions, which would
be inaccessible to wheel-carriages, and the dilh-
culties aud privations of which no beast of bur.
den but this invaluable creature could endure.
The company composing a caravan is often very
numerous, consisting, it may be, of several hun-
dred persons, and as many thousand camels ; and
it may be supposed that the assembling of so
many individua's, together with the orderly
distribution of their respective bales of mer-
chandise and travelling equipage, is an affair
requiring both time and the most careful atten-
tion. Accordingly, the packing and unpacking
of the camels, as well as the general service of the
carayaus, employ a great many hands, some of
whom, by dint of economy and active habits,
often raise themselves trom the condition of ser-
vants to the more respectable status of merchants,
who travel on their own account or in the capa-
city of carriers. Any person can, under certain
regulations, fourm a caravan at any time. But
gevemlly there are stated periods, which are well

nown as the regular starting-times fur the mer-
cantile journeys; and the merchants belonging
to the company, or those travellers who are de-
sirous of accompanying it fur the benetit of a safe
conduct, repair to the place of rendezvous where
the caravan is to be formed, exhibiting, as their
gools and camels successively arrive, a motley
group—a busy and tumultuous scene of prepara-
tion, which can be more easily conceived than
described. As in the hot season the travelling
is performed under night, the previous part of the


CARAVAN.


bead on which ie corkven jon is consumed in
prepara: Ts o ing—an ind's;
able pranpeneae which Nas been observed aith
unbroken uniformity since the days of Ezekiel
(xii. 3); and then, about eight o'clock, the usual
starting-time, the whole party put themselves in
motion, and continue their journey without inter-
ruption till midnight (Luke xi. 5, 6) or later.
At other seasons they travel all day, only halting
for rest and refreshment during the heat of noon,
The distances are measured by a day's journey;
and from seven to eight hours seem to have been
a usual day's journey for caravans (Hornemann,
p. 150); so that, estimating the slow and un-
wieldy gait of a camel at 2} miles an hour, the
average rate of travel will be from 17 to 20 miles
per day.

The earliest caravan of merchants we read of
is the itinerant company to whom Joseph was
sold by his brethren (Gen. xxxvii.). ‘ Here,’ says
Dr. Vincent, ‘ upon opening the oldest history in
the world, we find the Ishmaelites frum Gilead,
conducting a caravan loaded with the spices of
India, the balsam and myrth of Hadramaut, and
in the regular course of their traffic proceeding to
Egypt for a market, The date of this transaction
is more than seventeen centuries before the Chris-
tian era, and notwithstanding its antiquity, it has
all the genuine features of a caravan crossing the
desert at the present hour’ (Commerce and Navig.
of the Ancients, vol. ii. p, 262). This caravan
was a mixed one, consisting of three classes, Ish-
maelites (ver. 25), Midianites (ver. 28), and Me-
danites, as the Hebrew calls the last (ver. 36), who,
belonging to the mountainous region of Gilead,
would seem, like the nomade tribes of Africa in the
present day, to have engaged themselves as com-
mercial travellers, and were then, in passing over
the plain of Dothan, on the high caravan-road for
the market of Egypt. This circumstance, though
minute, and incidentally introduced, is a beauti-
ful contirmation of the truth of Scripture history ;
for it is well known that the ancient Egyptians
were not addicted to commerce, and that all their
traltic was thrown into the hands of foreigners, who
by overland carriage regularly imported the pro-
ductions of other countries—slaves, from Ethiopia;
incense, from Arabia; and spices, from ludia
—into Egypt, which was then, as it bas been in
all ages, the emporium of the Southern and West-
em nations.

Besides these communities of travelling mer-
chants in the East, there are caravans of pilgrims,
t.¢. of those who go for religious purposes tu Mecca,
comprising vastly greater multitudes of people.
Four of these start regularly every year: one from
Cairo, consisting of Mahommedans from Bar-
bary; a second from Damascus, conveying the
Turks; a third from Babylon, for the accommo-
dation of the Persians; and a fourth from Zibith,
at the mouth of the Red Sea, which is the rendez.
vous for those coming from Arabia and India.
The organization of the immense hordes which,
on such occasions, assemble to undertake a dis-
tant expedition, strangers to each other, and un-
accustomed tu the strict discipline which is indis-
pensable for their comfort and security re
the march, though, as might be expected, a war!
of no small difficulty, is accomplished in the East
by a jew simple arrangements which are the result
of loug experience. One obvious bond of union


CARAVAN.


@ the main body, when travelling by night and
fhrough extensive deserts, is the music of the Arab
servants, who by alternate songs in their national
manner beguile the tedium of the way; while
the incessant jingling of innumerable bells fas-
tened to the necks of the camels—a character-
istic feature of Oriental caravans—enlivens the
beasts, frightens animals of prey: and
eeps the party together. To meet all the exigen-
cies of the journey, however, which would bes
task impracticable without the establishment of
some kind of order, and a prudent division of la-
bour, the caravan is placed under the charge of a
caravan bashé, the chief who presides over all,
ami under whom there are five leading officers
inted to different departments:—one who re-
pe pe the march; a second, whose duties only
commence at halting time; a third who gu
intends the servants and cattle; a fourth who takes
charge of the baggage; a fifth who acts as pay-
master, &c.; and besides these, there are the officers
of the military escort that always accompanies it.
One fanctionary of the highest importance remains
to be noticed—the Aybeer, or guide, a word de-
rived by Bruce from the Arabic verb Aubbar, to
inform or direct, and whose services are indispens-
able in crossing the great deserts, such as that
along the coast of the Red Sea or on the western
extremities of Africa. He is commonly a person
of influence, belonging to some powerful tribe,
whose valuable assistance on an emergency may
by his means be obtained ; and, besides the indis-
pensable qualities of truth and fidelity, his per-
sonal qualifications must embrace an extensive
and accurate acquaintance with the whole features
of the land. For as he has the lives and property
of all in his power, it is absolutely necessary that
he understand the prognostics of the weather,
the time and places where the terrible simoom or
hot wind blows, and the tracts occupied by shift-
ing sands; and that he know the exact locality
and qualities of the wells, the oases that afford
the refreshments of shade for the men and grass
for the cattle, the situation of hostile or treach-
erous tribes, and the means of escaping those
threatened dangers.

This description of the general economy of cara-
vans we follow up by the account given by Pitts
of the Hadj caravan which he accompanied to
Mecca, and embracing so many minute details,
that it may be both interesting and instructive to
the reader to be furnished with it in the traveller's
own words. ‘The first day,’ says he, ‘we set out
from Mecca, it was without any order at all—all
hurly-burly ; but the next day every one laboured
to get forward, and in order to do it there was
many times much quarrelling and fighting. But
after every one taken his place in the cara-
van, they orderly and peaceably kept the same
place till they came to Grand Cairo. They travel
four camels abreast, which are all tied one after
another like as in teams. The whole body is di-
vided into several cottors, or companies, each
of which has its name, and consists, it may be, of
several thousand camels; and they move, one
cottor after another, like distinct troops. At the
head of each cottor is some great gentleman or
officer, who is carried in a thing like a litter,
borne by two camels, one before and the other be-
hind. At the head of every cottor there goes like-
wise a sumpter camel, which carries his treasure,


CARAVAN. 303


&c. This camel has two bells, hanging one on
each side, the sound of which may be heard »
great way off. Others of the camels have bells
round about their necks, like those which our
carriers put about their fore-horse’s neck; which,
together with the servants who belong tn the
camels, and travel oa ae singing all night, make
a pleasant noise, and the journey passes away de-
lightfully. Thus they taavel in good order a
day till they come to Grand Cairo; and were it
not for this order, you may guess what confusion
would be among such a vast multitude. They
have lights by night (which is the chief time of
travelling, because of the exceeding heat of the
sun), which are carried on the top of high poles, to
direct the hadjis, or pilgrims, on their march,
These are somewhat like iron stoves, into which
they put short dry wood, which some of the
camels were loaded with: it is carried in great
sacks, which have a hole near the bottom, where
the servants take it out as they see the fire needs
arecruit. Every cottor has ane of these poles
belonging to it, some of which have ten, some
twelve, of these lights on their tops, or more or
less: they are likewise different m figures as well
as in numbers—one perhaps oval-way, like a gate ;
another triangular, or like N or M, &c.; so that
every one knows by them his tive cottor.
They are carried in the front, and set up in the
place where the caravan is to pitch, before that
come up, at some distance from one another.
They are also carried by day, not lighted; but
yet, by the figure and number of them, the hadjis
are directed to what cottor they belong, as sol-
diers are by their colours where to rendezvous;
and without such directions it would be impo»
sible to avoid confusion in such a vast number of
people.’

This description of the Hadj caravans that
travel yearly to Mecca, bears so close a resem-
blance to the far-famed journey of the Israelites
through almost the same extensive deserts, that, as
the arrangement of those vast travelling bodies
seems to have undergone no material alteration
for nearly four thousand years, it affords the best
possible commentary illustrative of the Mosaic
narrative of the Exodus. Like them, the immense
body of Israelitish emigrants, while the chief
burden devolved on Moses, was divided into com-
panies, each company being under the charge of
a subordinate officer, called @ prince (Num.
vii). Like them, the Hebrews made their first
stage in a hurried manner and in tumultuous dis-
order (Exod. xii. 11); and, like them, each tribe
had its respective standard, the precise form and
device of which, amid the conflicting accounts of
the Rabbins, it is not easy to determine (Srann-
arps]; but which, of whatever description it
was, was pitched at the different stages, or thrust
perpendicularly into the ground, and thus formed
a central point, around 4vhich the straggling
party spread themselves during their hours of rest
and leisure (Num. ij. 2). Like them, the signal
for starting was given by the blast of a tum
or rather trumpets (Num. x. 2, 5); and the time
of march and halting was regulated by the same
rules that have been observed by all travellers
from time immemorial during the hot seasun.
Like theirs, too, the elevation of the standard, as
it was borne forward in the van of each company,
formed a proininent object to prevent dispersion, or


30d CARAVAN,


Spells sancierery ©) rssore) Saee pace wits Oa
line or division to which they belonged. Nor
was there any difference here, except that, while
the Israelites in like manner prosecuted their
journey occasionally by night as well as by day,
they did not require the aid of fires in their
standards, as the friendly presence of the fiery
illar superseded the necessity of any artificial
Fghts. One other poiut of analogy remains to be
traced in the circumstance of Hobah being en-
listed in the service of the Hebrew caravan as
its guide through the great Arabian desert. At
rst sight, the extreme solicitude of Moses to
secure his brother-in-law in that capacity may
appear strange, aud not easily reconcilable with
fact that they enjoyed the special benefit of a
heavenly guide, wha had guaranteed, in a super-
natura] manner, to direct their progress through
the wilderness. But the difficulty will vanish
when it is borne in mind, that although the
illar of cloud by day and of fire by night suf-
ced to regulate the main stages of the Hebrews,
foraging parties would at short intervals require
to be sent out, and scouts to reconnvitre the
ebuntry for fuel, or to negotiate with the native
tribes for provender and water. And who so well
ualified to assist in these important services as
Hobah, from his intimate acquaintance with the
localities, his influence as a Sheikh, and his
family connection with the leader of Israel ?

The nature and economy of the modern Hadj
caravans might be applied also to illustrate the
retum of the Hebrew exiles under Ezra from the
land of their captivity.

The bands of Jewish pilgrims that annually
tepaired from every comer of Judwa to attend
the three great festivals in Jerusalem, wanted
this government and distribution into distinct
companies, and seem to have resembled less
the character of the greut Mecca caravans than
the irregular processions of the Hiudoos to and
from the scene of some of their religious pageants,
On such occasions multitudes of men, women,
and children, amounting to ten or twenty thou-
sand (Roberts Oriental {Uustrations, and Ward's
View of the Hindoos), may be seen bending
their way to the place of ceremonial, with
their beds, cuoking implements, aud other lug-
gage on their heads, prosecuting their journey
in this manner from day to day, by lung or
shorter stages, as custom or physica] strength
may dictate. As ina crowd of this motley de-
scription not the slightest regard is paid to regu-
larity or order, and every one of course takes the
pees or mingles with the group that pleases

im, the separation of the nearest friends for a
whole day must, in such circumstances, be a
common aud unavoidable occurrence; and yet
anxiety is never felt, unless the missing one fail
to sppeat at the appointed rendezvous of the
family. In like manner among the ancient
Jews, the inhabitants of the same village or
district would naturally form themselves into
travelling parties, for mutual security as well
as for enjoying the society uf acquaintance. The
poorer surt would have to travel on foot, while
females and those of the better class might
ride on asses and camels. But as their country
was divided into tribes, and those who lived in
the same hamlet or canton would be more or less
eunnected by family ties, the young, the volatile,


CARAVANSERAIS,


and active among the Jewish pilgrims: had fer
more inducements to dis themselves amongst
the crowd than those of the modern processions.
numbers of whom are necessarily strangers to each
other. In these circumstances it is easy to under-
stand how the young Jesus might mingle succes-
sively with groups of his kindred and acquaint-
ance, who, captivated with his precocious wisdom
and piety, might be fond to detain him in their
circle, while his mother, together with Joseph,
felt no anxiety at his absence, knowing the grave
and sober character of their companions in travel :
and the incident ie the more eerie that his
rents are said to have gone ‘ one day’s journey’
fan Jerusalem before they missed him ; since,
according to the nt, and probably the ancient,
practice of the Hast, the first stage is always a
short one, seldom exceeding two or three hours,
Micimash—the modern El Vyra, where Mary's dis-
covery is reputed to have been made—is, accord-
ing to Mr. Munro(Summer Ramble, vol. i. p.265),
scarcely three miles from Jerusalem, where the
caravan of Galilean pilgrims halted.— R. J.
CARAVANSERAIS. In the days of the elder
patriarchs, there seem to have been no places spe-
cially devoted to the reception of travellers, at
least in the pastoral districts frequented by those
venerable nomades; for we find Abrah.m, like the
Oriental shepherds of the present day, under a
strong sense of the difficulties and privatious with
which journeying in those regions was attended,
deeming it a sacred duty to keep on the outlook,
and offer the wayfaring man the rites of hospitality
in his own tent. Nor could the towns of Pales-


tine, as it would seem, at that remote period,
boast of any greater advance with respect to esta-
blishments of this sort; for the angelic strangers
who visited Lot in Sodom were entertained in his
private house; and on the tumultuous outrage
occasi by their arrival disinclining them to
subject his family to inconvenience and danger
by prolonging their stay, they announced their
intention to lodge in the streets all night. This
elicited no surprise, nor any other emotion than a
strenuous opposition on the part of their kind-
hearted host to their exchanging the comforts of
his home for a cheerless exposure to the cold and
dews of midnight ; and hence we conclude that
the custom, which is still frequently witnessed jn
the cities of the East, was then not uncom
for travellers who were late in arriving, and who
had no introductions to a private family, to
bivouac in the streets, or wrapping themselves
up in the ample fulds of their hykes, to pass the
night as they best could in the open air. In
the Arab towns and vill however, when a tra-
veller arrives in the daytime, the sheikh, or some
rincipal person of the place, goes out to welcome
im, and treats bim with great civility in his own
house; or else he conducts him to the mensil, which,
though a place of rather a nondescript character,
is understood to be the house occupied by these
who entertain strangers, when there are no othet
lodgings, and to which the women in the sheikh’s


.CARAVANSERAIS.


house, having surveyed the number of the guests,
send provisions of every kind according to the

wide every accommodation the
ford (La Roque, De la Palestine,


the account of the return of Jacob’s sons from
Egypt (Gen. xlii. 27); and as it was situated
within the confines of that country, and at the
first stage from the metropolis, it is probable that
the erection of such places of entertainment origi-
nated with the Egyptians, who were far superior
to all their contemporaries in the habits and the
arts of civilized life, and who, though not them-
selves a commercial people, yet invited to their
markets such a constant influx of fureign traders,
that they must have early felt the necessity and
provided the comforts of those pole establish-
ments. The ‘ inns’ where travellers lodge in the
East do not, however, bear the least resemblance
to the respectable houses of the same class in this
country, much less do they approximate to the
character and appurtenances of European hotels.
The Egyptian inn, where the sons of Israel
halted to bait their asses, was pony from
the remote period to which it belonged, of a
rule and humble description, in point both of
appearance and accommodation—merely a shed,
under the roof of which the cattle and their
drivers might obtain shelter from the heats of
Noon and the dews of midnight; and such is
the low state of art, or the tyrannical force of
custum in the East, that establishments of this
kind in the present day can, with few exceptions,
boast of improvements, that render them superior
to the mean and naked poverty of those which
received the pilgrims of the patriarchal age. .

we khan, or os! iy karavanserai, is
the name which this kind of building bears;
and though the terms are often applied indis-
enminately, there is an acknowledged distinc-
tion, which seems to be, that Ahan is applied
to those which are situated in or near towns,
whereas caravanserais (a lodge for caravans, as
the compound word imports) is the more appro-
priate designation of such as are erected in desert
and sequestered places. A khan is always to be
found im the neighbourhood of a town; and while
houses corresponding to the description of the
other are generally disposed at regular stages
along public and frequented roads, they are more
or less numerous in proportion to the relative dis-
tances of towns, and the populous or desert state
of the country. Some are provided at the public
expense, or owe their existence to devoted Mussul-
mans, who bestow a portion of their wealth, us a
Meritorious act of churity, in promoting the com-
fort and refreshment of pilgrims ; while others are
erected by the contributions of private merchants
for their own accommodation, The latter, of
courne, are the most spacious, the most elegant
and best appointed ; but though varying in cha-
racter and size, this class of establishments pre-
eeives so generally the same unifurm plan of con-
struction, that a description of one may serve to
. convey an idea of all. Let the reader imagine,
then, a large editice, which, though in the distance
it seems an immense pile, resembling a castellated


fort, on a mearer approach loses much of this for-


CARAVANSERAIS, 8


midable appearance, when it is found that no
of the building rises above the enclosing wail
It presents the form of a square, the sides of which,
about 100 yards in length each, are surrounded
by an external wall of fine brickwork, based on
stone, rising generally to the height of twenty feet.
In the middle of the front wall there is a wide
and lofty archway, having on one or both sides
a lodge for the porter and other attendants;
while the upper part of it, being faced with carv-
ing or omamental mason-work, and containing
several rvoms, surmounted by elegant domes, is
considered the most honourable place of the
building, and is therefore appropriated to the use
of the better sort. This areas leads into a °
spacious rectangle, the area forming a courtyard
for cattle, in the midst of which is a well or foun-
tain. Along the sides of the rectangle are piazzas
extending the whole length, and opening at ev
few steps into arched and open recesses, whieh
are the entrances into the travellers’ apartments.
An inner door behind each of these conducts to a
small oblong chamber, derjving all its light from
the door, or from a small open window in the back
wall entirely destitute of furniture, and affording
no kind of accommodation in the way of presses
or shelves, except some rude niches excavated in
the thick walls. This cell is intended for the
dormitory of the traveller, who generally prefers,
however, the recess in front for sitting in under
shade during the daytime, as well as fur sleeping in
during the night, when the season allows; being the
more adapted for this purpose that the floor is neatly
paved, or consists of a smooth bed of earth, on a
platform rising two or three feet above the level of
the area. There being no other door but the en-
trance archi, each occupant remains isolated in
his own quarters, and is cut off from all commue
nication with the other inmates of the caravan-
serai. But in the middle of each of the thive sides
there is a large hall, which serves as a travellers’
room, where all may indiscriminately assemble ;
while at the end of each side there is a staircase
leading to the flat roof of the house, where the cool
breeze and a, view of the surrounding country may
be enjoyed. These chambers generally stand on
the ground-floor, which is a few feet above the
level of the court-yard ; but in the few buildings
of this sort which have two stories, the travellers
are accommodated above, while the under flat is
reserved for the use of their servants, or appro-
priated as warehouses fur goods. And in such
establishments there is fuund one other additional
advantage in having a supply of servants and
cooks, as well as a shop in the porter’s house,
where all commodities may be procured. Cara-
vanserais of this superior class, however, are rarely
to be met with. The most part are but wretched
lodging-places—filled, it may be, with dirt and
vermin—consisting only of bare walls, in which
not an article of furniture is to be seen, vor a
cooking utensil te be found, nor provisions of any
sort to be obtained for love or money. The tra-
veller must carry along with him, as well as
provide with his own hands, whatever is necessary
for his use and comfort. Lf he perfurins his journey
on camels or on horseback, he must, on arriving
at the stage, act as his own oetler, tie up his beast,
and distribute its provender and litter. To a
on dee of a divan and bed, he must take
is mat and carpet, which, folded up, may bave


36 CABAVANSERAIS.


served him for a saddle, and squat upon the floor,
or himself at night; or if he is a pedestrian,
acd roust travel as lightly as possible, he makes
the cloak which he wears by day discharge the
effice of a counterpane by night. In the vic-
tualling department he finds as great a dearth
as in that of furniture. He must subsist on the
eupply of food and articles of luxury he may
have had the foresight to provide, and husband
them as well as he can, as no addition to his
stores can be made till he reaches the next
town. In general he must content himeelf with
a plain diet of dry bread, fruits, or such prepared
viands as admit of ation ; or if he wishes a
fresh cooked meal, he must himself furnish the
fuel, kindle the fire, superintend the boil or the
roast, as well as wash and arrange his eating-pan.
‘ The baggage of a man, therefore, who wishes to
be completely provided,’ says Volney, ‘ consists
of a catpet, a mattress, a blanket, two sauce
with lids, contained within each other; two dishes,
two plates, &c., coffee-pot, all of copper well
tinned. A small wooden box for salt and pepper,
@ round leather table, which he suspends from the
saddle of his horse, small leather bottles or bags
for oil, melted butter, water, a pipe, a tinder-box,
& cup of cocoa-nut, some rice, dried raisins, dates,
Cyprus cheese, and, above all, coffee berries, with
& roaster and wooden mortar to pound them.’
Every one, although his travelling equipage may
not be so complete as this, must find several of
these items and implements indispensable to
existence during a journey in the East; for in
many of the khans or caravanserais to which he
may come, he can look for nothing from the
keeper except to show him the way to his cham-
ber, and give him the key if it is furnished with
a dvor. One assistance only he may depend upon,
and it is no inconsiderable one,—that of receiving
some attendance and aid if overtaken by sickness ;
for one of the requisite qualifications for the office
is, that the functionary possess a knowledge of
simples, and’ the most approved practice in case
of fracture or common ailments. And hence the
good Samaritan in the parable (Luke x. 30),
although he was obliged, in the urgency of the
case, himself to apply from his own viaticum a
few simple remedies for the relief of the distressed
man, left him with full coufidence to be treated
and nursed by the keeper of the khan, whose assi-
duities in dressing the wounds and bruises of his
patient might be quickened, perhays, by the liberal
remuteration he was promised, as well as by the
example of the humane traveller.

Among the Egyptians, and indeed among the
ancients generally, the keepers of houses of public
entertainment were always women (Herod. ii.
35); and hence we can easily account for the
ready admission which the spies obtained into the
house of Rahab, ‘on the wall of Jericho,’ situated,
as such houses were, for the reception of strangers,
for the most part at the gate or entrance into the
town (Josh. ii, 1), This woman is called a
harlot in our translation. But the Hebrew, 731?
zonah, signifies also the landlady of an inn or
taven—most of whom, doubtless, in ancient
times, were women of easy virtue—the more so as
the idolatrous religion to which they were educated
encouraged prostitution : and hence there being
only asingle word in the original descriptive of
both professions, and the first having been adopted


_cidents of travel.


CARAVANSERAIS.


by the Septuagint, which was the common ver
sion of the Jews in the days of Paul and James
(Heb. xi. 31; James ii. 25), those two Apostles
might have used the same expression that they
found there. The original Hebrew, however,
admits of being translated by another word, to
which no degrading or infamous asociations are
attached.

‘The preceding observations on the ancient and
existing accommodation for journeying in the
East, will serve to illustrate many passages in the
sacred volume, where allusions are made to m-
oe ae The awe - Juda, however,
in time of Christ ani les, was,
bably, in respect to means pean al
much superior to that of any Oriental country in
the present day ; and we may be disposed to con-
clude that for the encouragement of intercourse
between distant parts, that country was then
studded with houses of public entertainment on
a scale of liberal provision at present unknown in
the same quarter of the world. But the warm
commendations of hospitality #0 frequently met
with in the works of contemporary classical writers,
as well as the pressing exhortations of the in-

ired Apostle to the practice of that virtue, too
plainly prove that travellers were then chiefly
dependent on the kindness of private indivi-
duals. The strong probability is, that the ‘ inns’
mentioned in the New Testament find their true
and correct representations in the Eastern khans
and caravanserais of the present day; and that,
although the Jews of that period could not have
been acquainted with the largest and most mag-
Niticent of this class of buildings, which do not
date earlier than the commencement of the Mecca
caravans, and which the devotion of opulent
Mussulmans then began to erect for the accom-
moiation of the pilgrims, they had experience of
nothing better than the bare walls and cell-like
apartments of such edifices as we have described
above. Bishop Pearce, Dr. Campbell, and others,
indeed, have laboured to show that xardAuna,
the word used by Luke to denote the place whence
Mary was excluded by the previous influx of
strangers, is not synonymous with wa»doxeioy,
the house to which the good Samaritan brought
the wounded stranger, althongh in both instances
our translators, for want of corresponding terms
in the English language, have indiscriminately
rendered it by ‘inn.’ KardAuga signities the guest-
chamber (Mark xiv. 14; Luke xxii. 11); and it
is extremely probable that, as upper-rooms were
always the largest in a house, and most suitable
for the reception of a numerous company, every
respectable householder in Jerusalem appropriated
one gratuitously to his friends, who Rocked to
Jerusalem at the annual-feasts, and who from
that circumstance might call it their ‘inn.’
Tlavdoxecoy, again, was a house set apart for the
accommodation of all strangers who could pay for
their lodging and entertainment; and as the
name, ‘receiver of everything,’ seems to imply,
was of a mean description, having no partition
wall, men and cattle beicg both included under

same roof, the former occupying one side,
and the latter the other. Beth-lehem being the
chief city of the family of David, a xardAuya
might have been placed, by the kindness of some
friend, at the service of lone Mary, who
were wont to resort to it as often as business or


CARAVANSERAIS,


friendship called them to town. But as the same
privilege might have been offered to others, who,
owing to the general census, flocked in such un-
wonted numbers, that the first comers completely
occupied every vacant space, they were obliged
to withdraw to the waydoxeiov, where, in the
only retired comer, viz., at the head of the cattle,
the mother of Jesus brought forth her child, This
explanation of these eminent critics, however,
does not invalidate, nor in the least degree affect
the views we have advanced respecting the
general resemblance of the ancient inns of Judza
to the modem kbans or caravanserais; for in
these, as well as in the xaraAtquera, persons are
generally admitted without payment. And occa-
sions are constantly occuring to set multitudes
on travel, many of whom are driven, like Joseph
and Mary, for want of room, from the iun to the
adjoining stables.

Many caravanserais, however, have not the
accommodation of stables, the cattle being al-
lowed to range in the open area; and hence has
arisen an opinion warmly espoused by many
learned writers, and sup by a venerable
tradition, that our Lord was born in an adjoining
shed, or probably in a subterranean cave, like the
grotto that is sometimes connected with the foun-
vain of the place (Justin Martyr, Dial. with
Trypho, p. 303; Origen, Cont. Cels.). [Buru-
uguzm.] Moreover, much learning has been ex-
eg on the word gdryy, which our trans-
ators have rendered ‘ manger;’ al: h it is
capable of the clearest demonstration, that the
ancients, equally with the modern inhabitants
of the East, are strangers to the conveniences
which go under that name in Euro stables.
Tbe anecdote, quoted by Campbell from He-
rodotus, respecting Mardonius, the Persian ge-
neral, baviug brought with him a brazen man-
ger for his horses, only establishes our remark,
proving as it does that those ancient mangers were
more like troughs than the crib out of which our
horses are feil ; and, indeed, in the only other place
in the New Testament where pdrv7 occurs, it is
rendered ‘ stall ;’ that is, not the thing out of which
the cattle ate, but the place from which they ate
(see Parkhurst, in loco). No explanation, how-
ever, that we have met with, appears so satisfac-
tory, and conveys such an intelligible picture
to the eye, as that given by the editor of the
Pictorial Bible (Luke ii. 73 with whose words
we shall conclude this article. ‘ The most com-
plete establishments have very excellent, stables
in covered avenues, which extend behind the
ranges of apartments—that is, between the back
walls of these ranges of building and the ez-
ternal wall of the khan; and the entrance to it
1s by a covered passage at one of the corners of
the quadrangle. The stable is on a level with
the court, and consequently below the level of
the buildings, by the height of the platform on
which they stand. Nevertheless, this platform is
allowed to project behind into the stable, so as to
form a bench, to which the horses’ heads are
turned, and on which they can, if they like, rest
the nose-bag of hair-cloth, from which they eat,
to enable them to reach the bottom when its con-
tents get low. It also often happens that not
only this bench exists in the dalle, but also re-


cesses CO! ding to those in front of the apart-
ments, and formed by the side walls which divide


CARMEL. 397


the rooms, being allowed to project behind into
the stable, just as the projection of the same walls
into the great area forms the recesses in front.
These recesses in the stable or the bench, if there
are no recesses, furnish accommodation to the
servants and others who have charge of the beasts;
and when persons find on their arrival that the
a ents usually appropriated to travellers are
ready occupied, they are glad to find accom-
modation in the stable, particularly when the
nights are cold or the season inclement. It is
evident, then, from this description, that the part
of the stable called ‘ the manger,’ could not rea-
sonably have been other than one of those recesses,
or at least a portion of the bench which we have
mentioned, as affording accommodation to travel-
lers under certain circumstance.'"~-R. J.
CARBUNCLE. [Expau.]
CARCHEMISH (D372) is mentioned in
Isa. x. 9 among other places in Syria which had
been subdued by an Assyrian king, probably
Tiglath-pileser. That Carchemish was a strong-
hold on the Euphrates appears from the title of a
prophecy of Jeremiah against Egypt (xlvi. 2) :—
‘ Against the army of Pharaoh-necho, king of
Egypt, which lay on the river Euphrates, at Car-
chemish, and which Nebuchadnezzar the king
of Babylon overthrew, in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim, the son of Josiah, king of Judah.’
According to 3 Chron. xxxv. 20, Necho had five
years before advanced with his ally Josiah, the
father of Jehoiakim, against the Babylonians, on
the Euphrates, to take Carchemish. These two
circumstances—the position of Carchemish on the
Euphrates, and its being a frontier town, render
it probable that the Hebrew name points to a city
which the Greeks called Kirkesion, the Latins


Cercusium, and the Arabs, Kerkesiyeh (4.03 .3)3


for this too lay on the western bank of the Euphrates,
where it is joined by the Chaboras. It was a large
city, and surrounded by strong walls, which, in the
time of the Romans, were occasionally renewed,
as this was the remotest out-post of their empire, ©
towards the Euphrates, in the direction of Persia
(Ammian. Marcell. xxiii. 11). It is unknown
whether any traces of it still exist; for, as it lies
off the usual route of caravans, it has not been
noticed by modern travellers (Rosenmiiller, Bed.


Geog.

aka (Kapia), a country lying at the south-
western extremity of Asia Minor, to which, among
others, the Romans wrote in favour of the Jews
(1 Mace. xv. 22, 33). Its principal towns were
Halicarnassus, Cnidus, and Myndus, which are
all mentioned in the rescript of the Roman senate,
to which we refer. Halicarnassus was the birth-
place of Herodotus ; Cnidus is mentioned in Acts
xxvii. 7, as having been passed by St. Paul on
his voyage to Rome.

CARMEL (5973; Sept. Kdpundos), a range
of hills extending north-west from the plain of
Esdraelon, and ending in a promontory, or ca)
which forms the Bay of Acre. The extent of this
range of hills is about six miles, not in a direct
line ; but the two extremities (on the western side
towards the sea) jut out, and stand over against
each other, forming a bow in the middle. The
height is about 1500 feet; and at the foot of the
mountain, on the south, runs the brook Kishon,


398 CARMEL.


and a little further north, the river Belus. Mount

el consists rather of several connected hills
than of one ridge; the north and eastern parts
being somewhat higher than the southern and
western. The foot of the northern portion ap-
proaches the water very closely, so that, when
seen from the hills north-east of Acre, the moun-
tain appears as if ‘dipping his feet in the western
sea ;" but further south it retires more inland, so


as to leave between the mountain and the sea
an extensive and very fertile plain.


Mount Carmel forms the only great promontory
upon the coast of Palestine. According to the
reports of most travellers, the mountain well de-
serves its Hebrew name (Carmel—country of
vineyards and gardens). Mariti describes it as
‘a delightful region,’ and says the good quality of
its soil is apparent from the fact that many odori-
ferous plants and flowers, as hyacinths, jonquils,
tazettos, anemones, &c., grow wild upon the moun-
tain (Travels, p.274, sq). Otto von Richter (HW all-
Sahrten, p. 64) gives the following account : Mount
Carmel is entirely covered with verdure. On its
summit are pines and oaks, and further down
olives and laurel trees, everywhere plentifully
watered. It gives rise to a multitude of crystal
brooks, the largest of which issues from the so-called
Founain of Elijah ; and they all hurry along, be-
tween banks thickly overgrown with bushes, to the
Kishon. Every species of tillage succeeds here
admirably, under this mild and cheerful sky.
The prospect from the summit of the mountain
over the gulf of Acre and its fertile shores,
and over the blue heights of Lebanon and the
White Cape, is enchanting.’ Mr. Carne also
ascended the mountain, and traversed its whole
summit, which occupied several hours. He says
—‘No mountain in or around Palestine retains
its ancient beauty so much as Carmel. Two or
three villages and some scattered cottages are
found on it; its groves are few, but luxuriant ;
it is no place for crags and precipices, or rocks of
the wild goats; but its surface is covered with a
rich and constant verdure’ (Letters, ii, 119). Such
descriptions admirably illustrate the vivid repre-
sentations of the inspired Hebrew prophets and

in respect of Carmel. Thus, Isaiah (xxxv.
Balludes to ‘the excellency (splendid ornaments)
of Carmel.’ So, on account of the graceful form


CARMEL. _


and verdant beauty of the summit, the head of
the bride in Cant. vii. 5 is compared to Carmel.
It was also celebrated for its pastures, and is there-
fore ranked with Bashan in Isa. xxxiii. 9; Jer.
i. 19; Amos i. 2.

It is nevertheless right to state that a much less
glowing account of Carmel is given by many
travellers ; but we are satisfied that the difference
arises from the time of the year at which the place
was visited. Those who were on Carmel in the
spring, or early summer, found the mountain
covered with verdure; whereas those whose visit
was later in the year—towards the end of summer
or in autumn,—found everything parched, dry,
and brown. This is the real secret of the discord
ant accounts which travellers of equal credit often
give of the same places.

The mountain is of compact limestone, and, as
often happens where that is the case [Caves], there
are in it very many caverns—it is said, more than
athonsand. In one tract, called the Monk's Ca-
vern, there are as many as four hundred adjacent
to each other, furnished with windows and with
places for sleeping hewn in the rock. A peculi-
arity of many of these caverns is mentioned by
Shulz (Leitung, &c., v. pp. 187, 382), that the en-
trances into them are so narrow that only a
single person can creep in at a time; and that
the caverns are so crooked that a person is
immediately out of sight unless closely fol-
lowed. This may serve to give a clearer idea
of what is intended in Amos ix. 3, where the
Lord says of those who endeavour to escape his
punishments, ‘Though they hide themselves in
the top of Carmel, I will search and take them
out thence.’ That the grottoes and caves of
Mount Carmel were already, in very ancient
times, the abode of prophets and other religious
ae is well known. The pro Elijah and

lisha often resorted thither (1. Kings xviil. 19, sq.
42; 2 Kings ii. 25; iv. 25; and comp. perhaps
1 Kings xviii. 4, 13). At the present day is
shown a cavern called the cave of Elijah, a little
below the Monks’ Cavern already mentioned, and
which is now a Moslem sanctuary. Upon the
summit is an ancient establishment of Carmelite
monks, which order, indeed, derived its name
from this mountain. The old convent was de-
stroyed by Abdallah Pasha, who converted the
materials to his own use; but it has of late years
been rebuilt on a somewhat imposing scale by the
aid of contributions from Europe (Dr. Robinson's
Addit. to Calmet, in art. ‘Carmel ;’ comp.
Winer'’s Biblisches Realworterbuch ; Raumer's
Palistina; and the following travellers; D'Ar-
vieux, Maundrell, Pococke, Mariti, Clarke,
Buckingham, Irby and Mangles, Monro, Skinner,
Hardy, G. Robinson, Richter, Schubert, &c.

2. CARMEL. Another Carmel, among the
mountains of Judah, is named in Josh. xv. 55. It
was here that Saul set up the trophy of his victory
over Amalek (1 Sam. xv. 12), and where Nabal
was shearing his sheep when the affair took place
between him and David in which Abigail bore so
c icuous a 1 Sam. xxv. 2, sg.). This
Cannel is dae fe Eusebius and Aiea as,
in their day, a village, with a Roman garrison,
ten miles from Hebron, verging towards the
east. From the time of the Crusades till the

nt century its name seems to have been


orgotten. But it was recognised by Seetzen,


CARPUS.


and more recently by Count Bertou and Dr.
Robinson, under the name of Kurmul. The
place is now utterly desolate, but the ruins indi-
\ cate a town of considerable extent and importance.
These ruins lie around the head and along the
two sides of a valley of some width and depth,
the head of which furmsa semicircular amphi-
theatre shut in by rocks. They consist chiefly of
the foundations and broken walls of dwellings
and other edifices, scattered in every direction,
and thrown together in mournful confusion and
desolation. The most remarkable ruin is that of
acastle, quadrangular, standing on a swell of
ground in the midst of the town. A minute de-
scription of this and the other remains is given b
Dr. Robinson (Bib. Researches, ii. pp. 195-201).
The distance of this place from Hebron is nearer
eight Roman miles than ten, as assigned by Eu-
sebius and Jerome.
CARNAIM. [Asutrarorn.]
CARPENTER. [Hanorcrarr.]
CARPUS (Kdpzos), a disciple of Paul who
dwelt at Troas (2 Tim. iv. 13).


CART (i139; Sept. “Auaga). The Hebrew
word rendered by our translators in some places
by ‘wagyon,’ and in others by ‘ cart,’ denotes any
vehicle moving on wheels and usually drawn by
oxen; and their particular character must be de-
termined by the context indicating the purpose
for which they were employed. First, we have
the carts which the king of Egypt sent to assist
in transporting Jacob's family from Canaan
(Gen. xlv. 19, 27). From their being 80 sent
it is manifest that they were not used in the
latter country ; and that they were known there as


being peculiar to Egypt is shown by the contirm- -


ation which they aflurded to Jacob of the truth of
the strange story told by his sons. These carts or
waggons were, of course, not war-chariots, nor
such curricles as were in use among the Egyptian
nobility, but were not suited for travelling. The


only other wheel-vehicles actually or probably
used by the Egyptians themselves are those re-
presented in figs. 1, 2,of No. 210. But they ara
not found on the monuments in such connection
as to show whether they were employed for travel-
ling or for agriculture. The solid wheels would
suggest. the latter use, if, indeed, the same feature
does not rather chow that, although figured on
Egyptian monuments, they are the cars of a fo-
reign people. This is the more probable, inasmuch
as the ready means of transport and travel by the
Nile seems to have rendered in a great measure
unnecessary any other wheel-carriages than those
for war or pleasure. The sculptures, however,
exhibit some carts as used by a nomade people
(enemies of the Egyptians) in their migrations.
If any of these had, by the rout of this people, been
seft in the hands of the Egyptians, the king would
no doubt consider them suitable to assist the mi-
@ation of another people of similar habits. At


CAT. 398


any rate, they afford the only attainable analcgy,
and are for that reason here represented (No. 209).

Elsewhere (Num. vii. 3,6; 1 Sam. vi. 7) we read
of carts used fur the removal of the sacred arks
and utensils. These aleo were drawn by two oxen.


In Rossellini we have found a very curious repre-
sentation of the vehicle used for such purposes by
the Egyptians (No. 210, fig. 3). It is little more
than a platform on wheels; and the apprehension
which induced Uzzah to put forth his hand to
stay the ark when shaken by the oxen (2 Sam. vi.
6), may suggest that the cart employed on that
occasion was not unlike this, as it would be easy
for a jerk to displace whatever might be upon it.
As it appears that the Israelites carta,
they doubtless employed them sometimes in the
removal of agricultural produce, although we
are not aware of any’ distinct mention of this
practice in Scripture. This is now the only use
for which carts are employed ju Western Asia.
They are such as are represented in No. 211.


211.


CASLUHIM (D'NDDD ; Sept. Xacueotely),
properly Casluchim, a people whose progenitor
was a son of Mizraim (Gen. x. 14; 1 Chron. i,
12). He, or they, for the word applies rather to
a people than to an individual, are supposed
by Bochart and others to have carried 4 colony
from Egypt, which settled in the district between
Pelusium and Gaza, or, in other words, between
the Egyptians and the Philistines. .There are


_some grounds for this conjecture ; but it is impos-


sible to obtain any certainty on so obscure a
subject.

CASSIA. [Kerziau.]

CASTLE. [Fortirications.]

CASTOR ann POLLUX (A:dcxovpor), the
Dioscuri: in heathen mythology, the twin sons
of Jupiter by Leda. They had the special pro-
vince of assisting persons in danger of shi
wreck (Theocrit. Jd. xxii. 1; Xenoph. Symp. vii.
29; comp. Ilorat. Carm. i. 3.2; iv. 8. 31); and
hence their figures were often adopted for ‘the
sign’ (7d xapdompoy, insigne), from which a ship
derived its name, as was the case with that ¢ shi
of Alexandria’ in which St. Paul sailed on bis
journey for Rome (Acts xxviii. 11}.

CAT (atfaoupos). It might be assumed that
the cat was an useful, if not a necessary, domestic
animal to the Hebrew people in Palestine, where
corm was grown for exportation, as well as for


CAT.


consumption of the resident population, twenty
or thirty-fold more than at present, and where,
moreover, the conditions of the climate required
the precaution of a plentiful store being =
in reserve to meet the chances of scarcity.
animal could not be unknown to the people,
for their ancestors had witnessed the Egyptians
treating it as a divinity, under the denomina-
tion of Pasht, the Lunar Goddess, or Diana,
holding every domesticated individual sacred,
embalming it after death, and often sending it
for interment to Bubastis. Yet we find the cat
nowhere mentioned in the canonical books as
a domestic animal. And in Baruch it is no-
ticed only as a tenant of Pagan temples, where
no doubt the fragments of sacrificed animals
ae ee eee vermin, a a
the presence of cats necessary. This singu
circumstance, perhaps, resulted from the animal
being deemed unclean, and being thereby ex-
cluded domestic familiarity, though the Hebrews
may still bave encouraged it, in common with
other vermin-hunters, about the outhouses and
farms, and corn-stores, at the risk of sume loss
among the broods of pigeons which, in Pales-
tine, were a substitute for poultry. If the do-
mestic species of cats were not tolerated, there
could not exist many wild in a country almost
destitute of forests; but, in their stead, at least
in Egypt, Syria, Arabia, and Persia, there are
numerous species of viverride and mustelide,
to which, in common phrase, we apply the word
cat, as civet cat and polecat. These are species
that hunt in open grounds and visit ruined build-
ings; and among them, perhaps, some wild ca-
nides may be collectively ous Necpesiniated: with
obvious propriety, DY Triyim.


With regard to the neighbouring nations just
named, they all had domestic cats, it is presumed,
derived from a wild species found in Nubia, and
first described by Ruppel under the name of Felis
Maniculata. The typical animal is smaller,
more slender, and more delicately limbed than
the European. The fur is pale yellowish grey,
with some dark streaks across the paws, and at the
tip of the tail. In the domesticated state it varies
n colours and markings, for the ancient monu-
ments of Egypt contain many painted figures,
which show them cross-barred like our wild species
in Europe. Two specimens are here given from
these paintings ; one clearly a cat ; the other, in the
original, figured as catching birds; acting like a
retriever for his master, who is fowling in a boat.
It is not, apparently, a cat, but a species of gen-
net or paradoxurus, one of the genera before
hinted at. Both are nearly allied to the cele-
brated Ichneumon, the Herpestes of authors, the
modern Nems, which is even now occasionally


CAVES.


pte rca doe tt fru be plan,

raonis not uent a
t willingly takes the was H. 8.

CATERPILLAR. [Cuasuw.

CATTLE. ([Baasrs; Bunt.

CAVES. The geological formation of Syria is
highly favourable to the production of caves, It
consists chiefly of limestone, in different degrees
of density, and abounds with subterranean rivu-
lets. The springs issuing from limestone gene-
rally contain carbonate of lime, and most of them
yield a large quantity of free carbonic acid upon
exposure to the air. To the erosive effect upon
limestone rocks, of water charged with this acid,
the formation of caves is chiefly to be ascribed
(Ene. Metropol. art. ‘Geology,’ pp. 692, 693).
The operation of these causes is earings exem-

ified by a torrent perforating a rock, form-
pi a ieearal ce ike that of the Nahr el
Leben, which falls into the Nahr El Salib, called
also the river of Beirout. The arch is upwards
of 160 feet long, 85 feet wide, and nearly 200
feet above the torrent (Kitto’s Physical History
of Palestine, art. ‘Geology and Mineralogy’

e subordinate strata of Syria, sandstone, chal
basalt, natron, &c. favour the formation of caves.
Consequently the whole region abounds with sub-
terranean hollows of different dimensions. Some
of them are of immense extent; these are noticed
by Strabo, who speaks of a cavern near Damascus
capable of holding 4000 men (xvi, p. 1096, edit.
1707). This cavern is shown to the present day.
Modern travels abound with descriptions of the
caves of Syria. The Crusade writers record the
local traditions respecting them current in their
times (William Tyre; Quaresmius, Elucid.
Ter. Sanc.). Tavernier ( Voyage de Perse, part ii.
chap. iv.), speaks of a grotto between Aleppo
and Bir, which would hold near 3000 horse.
Maundrell has described a large cavern under a
high rocky mountain, in the vicinity of Sidon,
containing 200 smaller caverns (Tvavels, pp.
158, 159). Shaw mentions the numerous dens,
holes, and caves, in the mountains on the sea
coast, extending through a long range on each
side of Joppa. The accounts of the latest and
most accurate travellers verify their statements.
The first mention of a cave in Scripture relates
to that into which Lot and his two daughters
retired from Zoar, after the destruction of So-
dom and Gomorrah (Gen. xix. 30). It was
some cavern in the mountains of Moab, but
tradition has not fixed upon any of the nu-
Tperous hollows in that region. The next is the
cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron, which
Abraham of the sons of Heth (Gen.
xxv. 9, 10). There Abraham buried Sarah, and
was himself afterwards buried ; there also Isaac,
Rebecca, Leah, and Jacob, were buried (Gen.
xlix. 31; 1.13). The cave of Machpelah is said
to be under a Mabometan mosque, surrounded
by a high wall called the Haram; but even the
Moslems are not allowed to descend into the
cavern. The tradition that this is the burial-
place of the patriarchs, is supported by an im-
mense array of evidence (Robinson, Biblical Re-
searches in Palestine, ii. 433-410).

The situation of the cave at Matkedah, into
which the five kings of the Amorites retired upon
their defeat by Joshua, and into which their car-
cases were ultimately cast, is not known (Josh. x


CAVES.
-6, 27). Some of the caves mentioned in the Scrip-
tures were artificial, or consisted of natural fissures
enlarged or modified for the purposes intended.
It is recorded (Judg. vi. 2), that * because of the
Midianites, the children of Israel made them the
dens which are in the mountains, and caves, and
strongholds.’ Caves made by art are met with in
various quarters. An innumerable multitnde
of excavations are found in the rocks and valleys
round Wady Musa, which were probably formed
at first as sepulchrea, but afterwards inhabited,
like the tombs of ‘Ihebes (Robinson's Jvescarches,
ii. 529). Other excavations ocenr at Deir Dub-
ban (ii. 353); others in the Wady leading tu
Santa Hannch (ii. 395). ‘In the mountains of
Kiul‘at Ibn Ma‘an, the natural caverns have been
united by passages cut in the rocks, in order to
tender them more commodious habitations. In
the midst of these caverns several cisterns have
been built; the whole would afford refuge for
600 men’ (Burckhardt’s Trarels, p. 331). Caves
were used as dwelling-places by the early inha-
bitants of Syria. The Horites, the ancient inha-
bitants of Idumea Proper, were Troglodytes or
dwellers in caves, as their name imports. Jerome
records that in his time Idumza, or the whole
southern region from Hleutheropolis to Petra and
Ailah, was full of habitations in caves, the inha-
bitants using subterranean dwellings on account
of the great heat (Comm. on Obad. v. 6). ‘The
excavations at Deir Dubbfn and on the south side
of the Wady, leading to Santa Hanneh, are pro-
bably the dwellings of the ancient Horites* (Ro-
binson, ii. 353), and they are peculiarly nume-
rous around Beit Jibrin (Eleutheropolis) (ii.
425). The Scriptures abound with references
to habitations in rocks; among others. see Num,
xxiv. 21; Cant. ii. 14; Jer. xlix. 16; Obad.
3. Even at the present time many persons
live in caves. The inhabitants of Anak, a town
on the east of the Jordan, lat. 32°, long. 35°
E,, all live in’ grttocs or caves hollowed out
of the rock (Buckingham’s Travels among the
Arab Tribes, p. 61). In the neighbourhood of
Hebron peasants still live in caves, and especially
during the summer, to be near theirdlocks (Wil-
Kinson’s raveds, i. 313). Poor families live in
cavers in the rocks which seem formerly to have
been inhabited as a sort of village, near the ruins
of El Burj. So also at Siloam, and in the neigh-
bourhood of Nazareth. Caves afforded excellent
refuge in the time of war. Thus the Israelites
(1 Sam. xiii. 6) are said to have hid themselves in
caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high
paces, and in pits. Sve also Jer. xli. 9; Joseph.
aAlntig. xii. 1.1, Hence, then, to ‘enter into the
tock, to go into the holes of the rocks, and into the
caves of the earth’ (Isa. ii. 19), would, tothe Israel-
ites, Le a very proper and familiar way to express
terror and consternation. The pits spoken of
seem to have consisted of large wells, in ‘the sides’
of which, excavations were made, leading into
various chambers, Such pits were sometimes
used as présons (Isa. xxiv. 22; li. 14; Zech. ix.
115; and with niches in the sides, for durying-
places (Ezek. xxxii. 23). Many of these vaulted
pits remain to this day. The cave in which La-
zarus tas buried was probably something of this
kind. The tomb shown as his, at Bethany, is not
attended with the slightest probability (Robinson,
ii, 100). The strongholds of Engedi, which


CAVES. 401


afforded a retreat to David and his followers (7
Sam. xxiii. 29; xxiv. can be clearly identi-
fied. They are now called Ain Tidy by the
which means the same as the Hebrew,
namely, ‘The Fountain of the Kid.’ ‘On alf
sides the country is full of cavers, which might
serve as lurking-places for David and his men,
as they do for outlaws at the present day. The
whole scene is drawn to the tite" (Robinson, ii,
203)). The cave of Adullam, to which David
retired to avoid the persecutions of Saul (1 Sam.
xxii. 1, 2), and in which he cut off the skit of
Saul’s robe (1 Sam. xxiv, i is an immense natu-
ral cavern at the Wady Khiureitun, which passes
below the Frank mountain (Herodium: see the
Bap of Palestine). For adescription of this cave
by Irby and Mangles, and the reasons for believing
its identity, see article Apuri.am. Dr. Pococke
refers to a tradition that 30,000 versons once
retired into it to avoid a malaria. Such is the
extent of the cavern, that it is quite conceivable
how David and his men might ‘remain in the
sides of the cave,’ and not be noticed by Saul
Travels, vol. ii. p. 41). Caverns were also
requently fortified and occupied by soldiers.
Josephus often mentions this circumstance. He
relates also that Herod sent horsemen and footmen
to destroy the robbers that dwelt in caves, and did
much mischief in the country. They were very
Near to a village called Arbela (now called Kilat
Ibn Ma’an); the adjacent ruins ate known by
the name of Ibid, a corruption of Irbil, Ara-
bic for Arbela (Burchhardt's Travels, p. 331)
On the fortieth day after, Herod came with hia
whole army to exterminate them. The robbers
sallied out of their caves and boldly gave him
battle, and even caused the left wing of his army
to give way, though they were ultimately defeated.
Herod then laid siege to certain other caverns
containing robbers, but found operations agaiust
them very ditticult. These were situated on the
middle of abrupt and precipitous mountains, and
could not be come at from any side, since they nad
only some winding pathways, very nairow, by which
they got up to them. The rock that lay on their
front overhung valleys of immense depth, and of
an almost perpendicular declivity. To meet
these difficulties Herod caused large boxes filled
with armed men to be lowered trom the top of the
mountain. These men had long hooks in their
bands with which they might pull out those who
resisted them, and tumble them down the moun-
tains. From these boxes they at length slipped
into the caverns, destroyed the robbers and set
fire to their goods (Antig. xiv. 15, §4, 5; De
Bell. Jud. i. 16, § 2-4). This description of
caves of robbers reminds us of our Lord's words,
in which he reproaches the Jews with having
made the Temple a den of thieves, owhAaov
Anoray (Matt. xxi. 13). In the former of these
passages Josephus calls them robs ev rois on-
Aaiois Anoras, and in the latter, Anorwr Tier ev
omnaAaias Katoxouvtay. Certain caves were
afterwards fortified by Joseytins himself during
his command in Galilee under the Romans. In
one place he speaks of these as the caverns of Ar-
bela (Vita, § 37), and in another as the caveins
near the lake Gennesareth (Ve Bedl. Jud. ii, 20. 6).
A fortified cavern existed in the time of the Cre
sades. It is mentioned by William of Tyre (xxii.
15-21), as situate in the country beyond the Jordan,
2p


2 CKILING.


sixteen Roman miles from Tiberias. The cave
of Elijah is pretended to be shown, at the foot of
Mount Sinai, in a chapel dedicated to him; and
a hole near the altar is pointed out as the place
where he lay (Robinson, i. 152).—J. F. D.

CEDAR. [Enss.]

CEILING. The orientals bestow much atten-
tion upon the ceilings of their principal rooms.
Where wood is not scarce, they are-usually com-
posed of one curious piece of joinery, framed
entire, and then raised and nailed to the joists.
These ceilings are often divided into small square
compartments ; but are sometimes uf more com-

licated patterns. Wood of a naturally dark co-
tour is commonly chosen, and it is never painted.
In places where wood is scarce, and sometimes
where it is not particularly so, the ceilings are
formed of fine plaster, with tasteful mouldings and
ornaments, coloured and relieved with gilding,
and with pieces of mirror inserted in the hollows
formed by the involutions of the raised mouldings
of the ues, which enclose them as in a
frame. The antiquity of this taste can be clearly
traced by actual examples up to the times of the
Old Testament, through the Egyptian monu-
ments, which display ceilings painted with rich
colours in such patterns as are shown in the
annexed cut. ‘The explanation thus obtained


218.


satisfactorily illustrates the nliar ez.phasis
with which ‘ceiled bouses' and ‘ceiled chambers’

a by Jeremiah (xxii. 14) and Haggai
i. 4).

CENCHREZ (Keyxpeaf), one of the of
Corinth, whence Paul sailed for Ephesus (Acts
xviii. 18). It was situated on the eastern side of
the isthmus, about seventy stadia from the city :
the other on the western side of the isthmus
was called Lecheum. [Conrinra.]


CENSER, the vessel in which incense was
presented in the temple (2 Chron. xxvi. 19; Ezek.


CENSER.


viii. 11; Eeclus. 19). Censers were used in the
daily offering of incense, and yearly on the day


214, [Egyptian Censers.]


of atonement, when the high-priest entered the
Holy of Holies. On the latter occasion the priest
filled the censer with live coals from the sacred
fire on the altar of burnt-offering, and bore it
into the sanctuary, where he threw upon the
burning coals the ‘sweet incense beaten small’
which he had brought in his hand (Lev. xvi.
12, 13). In this case the incense was bumt
while the high-priest held the censer in his hand;
but in the daily offering the censer in which the
live coals were brought from the altar of burnt-
offering was set down upon the altar of incense.
This alone would suggest the probability of some
difference of shape between the censers used on
these occasions. The daily censers must have had
a base or stand to admit of their being placed on
the golden altar, while those employed on the
day of atonement were probably Kimished with
a handle. In fact, there are different names for
these vessels. Those in daily use were called
MDP) miktereth, from NOPD, ‘incense;' whereas
that used on the day of atonement is distinguished
by the title of AMMO mschtah or ‘ ser aa
We learn also that the daily censers were of

(Num. xvi. 39), whereas the yearly one was ot
gold (Joseph. Antig. xvi. 4.4). The latter is
also said to have had a handle (Mishn. tit. Foma,
iv. 4), which, indced, as being held by the priest
while the incense was burning. it seems to have
required. ‘Lhese intimations help us to con-
clude that the Jewish censers were unlike those
of the classical ancients, with which the sculp-
tures of Greece and Rome have made us familiar ;
as well‘as those (with perforated lids, and swung
by chains) which are used in the church of Rome.
The form of the daily censer we have no means
of determining beyond the fact that it was a pan
or vase, with a stand whereon it might rest on
the golden altar. Among the Egyptians the in-
cense was so generally burned in the hand of the
officiating priest, that the only censers which we
find in the least degree suited to this purjase are


CENTURION.


those representéd in figs. 2 and 3 of No. 214.

But the numerous figures of Egyptian censers,

consisting of a small cup at the end of a long

shaft or handle (often in the shape of a hand),
ly offer adequate illustration of those em-
pr by the Jews on the day of atonement.
was, however, another kind of censer (fig. 1)

Jess frequently seen on the Egyptian monuments,
- and likewise furnished with a bandle, which

will probably be regarded by many. as offering a

more ble resemblance. It is otwervable that

in all cases the Egyptian cilia
incense made up into small round pellets, whic
they projected successively from between their
finger and thumb into the censer, at such a dis-
tance, that the operation must have required a
peculiar knack to be acquired only by much
practice. As the incense used by the Jews was
made up into a kind of paste, it was probably
employed in the same manuer.
ENSUS. [Poru:ation.]

CENTURION (éxarovrdpxns and éxatdv—

tapxos), a Roman military ofhcer in command of
a hundred men, as the title implies. Cornelius,
the first Gentile convert to Christianity, held this
rank (Acts x. 1, 22). Other Centurions are
mentioned in Matt. viii. 5, 8, 13; xxvii. 54;
Luke vii. 2, 6; Acts xxi, 32; xxii. 25, 26;
xxiii. 17, 23; xxiv. 23; xxvii. 1, 6, 11, 31, 435
xxviii. 16.

CEPHAS (Kngas ; in later Hebrew or Syriac
ND), a surname which Christ bestowed upon
Simon (John i. 42), and which the Greeks ren--
dered Ly Mézpos, and the Latins by Petrus, both
words meaning a ‘ rock,’ which is the signification
of the original [Peter].

CERATIA, Ceratonza, is the name of a tree
of the family of Leguminous plants, of which
the fruit used to be called Siligua edulis and St-
ligua dulcis. By the Greeks, as Galen and Paulus
A£gineta, the tree is called xepatia, xepatovia,
from the resemblance of its fruit to xépas, a Lorn.
The.word xepdrov occurs in Luke xv. 16, where it
has been translated husks in the Authorized Ver-
sion : ourSaviour, in the parable of the prodigal son,

- says that ‘he would fain have filled his belly with
the Ausks that the swine did eat; and no man
gave unto him.’ In the Arabic Version of the New


Testament, the word Hy Kharoob, often writ-


ten 4) a Kharnoob, is given as the synonym
of Aeratia. According fo Celsius, the modern
Greeks Lave converted the Arabic name into
xapovBa, and the Spaniards into Garrova and
Algaroba. The Italians call the tree Caroba,
the French Carroubier, and the English Carob-
tree. Though here, little more than its name is
known, the Carob-tree is extremely common in
the South of Europe, in Syria, and in Egypt. The
Arabs distinguish it by the name of Aharnood
shamee—that is the Syrian Carob. The ancients,
as Theophrastus and Pliny, likewise mention it asa
native of Syria. Celsius states that no tree is more
frequently mentioned in thr. Talmud, where its
fruit is stated to be given as food to cattle and
swine: it is now given to horses, asses, and mules.
During the Peninsular war the horses of the Bri-
tish cavalry were often fed on the beans of the
_Carvb-tree. Both Pliny (Hist. Nat. xv. 23) and
Columella (vii. 9) mention that it was given as


- CHABAZZELETH. 403


food to swine. By some it has been thought, bag
apparently without reason, that it was u
husks of this tree that John the Baptist fed in the
wilderness: from this idea, however, it is often
called St. John’s Bread, and Locust-tree.


215. ([Ceratonia Siliqua.]


The Carob-tree grows in the south of Europe
and north of Africa, usually to a moderate-size,
‘but it sometimes becomes very large, with a
trunk of great thickness, and affords an agreeable


shade. The quantity of pods borne by each tree
is very chusidenible being often as much as 800
or 900 pounds weight: they are flat, brownish-
coloured, from 6 to 8 inches in length, of a sub-
astringent taste when unripe, but, when come to
maturity, they secrete, within the husks and round
the seeds, a sweetish-tasted pulp. When on the
tree, the pods have an unpleasant odour; but, when


dried upon hurdles, they become eatable, and
are valued by pov le, and during famine in
the countries where the tree is grown, especially in


Spain and Egypt, and by the Arabs. They are
given as food to cattle in modern, as we read they
were in ancient, times ; but, at the best, can only
Le considered very poor fare—-J. F. R.

CETUBIM (D‘33N3, the Writings), ane of
the three larger divisions of the Old Testament
used by the Hebrews, and thus distinguished from
the Law and the Prophets (the other two divisions)
as being in the first instance committed to writing,
and not delivered orally. Hence the book of
Daniel is found in this division; his prophecies
having been originally written down, and not
orally delivered. This is the division of Scripture
known also by the corresjonding Greek name of
HaaioaraPHa. It contained Psalms, Proverbs,
Job, Canticles, Ruth, Lamentations, Ecclesiastes,
Esther, Daniel, Ezra and Nehemiah (reckoned as
one), and Chronicles.

CHABAZZELETH cneyan) occurs in
two places in Scripture, first in passage of
Cant. ii. 1, where Li bride ples. 1 ee the
D>


4 CHABAZZELETH. ’ ™


#

Rose of Sharon and the lity of the valleys;’ and
secondly, in Isa. xxxv. 1, ‘ The wilderness and
the solitary place shall be glad for them; and the
desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.’ In
both passages we see, that in the Auth. Vers., as
also in sume others, the word is considered to in-
dicate the rose. The Sept. renders it simply by

in the passage of the Canticles. In this it
has been followed by the Latin Vulgate, Luther,
&c. It is curious, however, as remarked by Celsius,
Hiero., i. p. 489, that many of those who translate
chabazzeleth by rose or flower in the ge
of the Canticles, render it by dily in that of
Isaiab.


216. (Narcissus tazetta.)


The rose was, no doubt, highly esteefned by the
Greeks, as it was, and still is, by almost all
Asiatic nations, and, as it forms a very frequent
subject of allusion in Persian poetry, it has been
inferred that we might expect some reference to
80 favourite a flower in the poetical books of the
Scripture, and that no other is better calculated
to illustrate the above two passages. But this does
not prove that the word chabazzeleth, or any
similar one, was ever applied to the rose. Other
Gowers, therefore, have been indicated, to which
the name chabbazzeleth may be supposed, from its
derivation, to apply more fitly. Scheuzer refers
to Hiller (Hierophyt. p. 2), who seeks chabazzeleth
among the bulbous rooted plants, remarking that
the Hebrew word may be derived from chabab
and batzal, a bulb, or bulbous root of any
plant ; as we have seen it applied to the onion in
‘the article Betza.. So enmniiller remarks
that the substantial part of the Hebrew name
shows that it denotes a flower growing from a


bulb, and adds in a note ‘that NS¥AN is formed


from 5Y¥3 or bulb, the guttural M being some-
times put before triliterals, in order to fourm qua-
driliterals from them’ (see Gesen. Gram. p. 863).
Some therefore have selected the equal as the
bulbous plant intended; respecting which the
author of ‘ Scripture I]lustrated ’ remarks, ‘ It is
@ very beautiful and odoriferous flower, and
highly praised by two of the greatest masters of
Grecian song. Hesiod says it grows commonly


CHAIN.


in woods; and Homer (Odyss., i. 24) calls the |
Elysian fields ‘ meads filled with asphodel.’
Celsius (¢.c.) bas already remarked that Bochart
has translated chabazzeleth by narcissus; and
not without reason, as some Oriental translators
have so explained it. In the Targum, Cant. ii.
1, instead of chabazzeletl we have sarkom,
which, however, should have been written narkos
DIP, as appears from the words of David Cohen
de Lara, ‘ Narkos idem est ac chabazzeleth Saron.”
So in Isa, xxxv. 1, chabazzeleth is written cham-
saloito in the Syrian translation, ‘quod maronita
Latine vertit narcissum’ (Cels. Hierobot. i. p.
489). This, Rosenmiiller informs us, according
to the testimony of Syriac Arabic Dictionaries,
denotes the ‘colchicum autumnale,’ that is, the
meadow saffron. Tie lee certainly has a bulb-
like root-stock ; in the flowers resemble those
of the crocus, are of a light violet colour, but
without any scent. Narkom and narkos are, ne
doubt, the same as the Persian nurgus, Arabic


(Us>_y), and which, throughout the East, in-


dicates Narcissus Taszetta, or the polyanthus naz
cissus. ‘Fhe ancients describe and allude to the
Narcissus on various occasions, and Celsius has
quoted various passages from the poets indicative
of the esteem in which it was held. As they were
not so particular as the moderns in distinguishing
species, it is probable that more than one may be
referred to by them, and, therefore, that N. Tazetta
may be included under the same name as N.


_ poeticus, which was best known to them. , It is


not unimportant to remark that the narcissns was
also called BoABds euerixds, and Bulbus vomi-
torius, and the Arabic busi-al-kye, no doubt refers
to the same or a kindred species. It is curious
also that an Eastern name, or the corruption of
one, should be applied by gardeners even in this
country to a species of narcissus—thus, N. Trew-
rianus and crenulatus,—the former, supposed by
some to be a variety of N. orientalis, were Once
called bazalman major and bazalman minor.
That the narcissus is found in Syria and Palestine
is well known, as it has been mentioned by several
travellers; and, also, that it is highly esteemed
by all Asiatics from Syria even as far as India.
Hence, if we allow that the word chabazzeleth has
reference to a bulb-bearing root, it cannot apply
tothe rose. The narcissus, therefore, is as likely
as any other of tne bulbous tribe to have been
inténded in the above passages.—J. F. R.

CHAFF, the refuse of winnowed corn. It
is used as a symbol for unprofitable and worthless
characters (Ps.i. 4; Matt. iii. 12).

CHAIN. Chains of gold appear to have been
as much used among the Hebrews, for ornament ur
official distinction, as they are among ourselves at
the present day. The earliest mention of them
occurs in Gen. xli. 42, where we are told that
a chain of gold formed a of the investi-
ture of Joseph in the high office tv which he was
raised in Egypt; a later instance occurs in Dan.
v. 29, from which we learn that a golden chain
was part of a dress of honour at Babylon. In
Egypt the judges wore chains of gold, to which
was attached a jewelled figure of Thmei, or Truth;
and in that country similar chains were also worn
as ornaments by the vom de is not, alee
necessary to suppose that ebrews deriv
this custom from the Egyptians; for the fac?


CHALCEDONY.


that chains are mentioned among the spoil of the
Midianites shows that they were in use among

ple whose condition of life more nearly resem-
Gel that of the Israelites before they obtained
possession of Canaan. It would seem that chains
were worn both by men and women (Prov. i. 9;
Ezek. xvi. 11), and we find them enumerated
among the ornaments of brides (Cant. i. 10;
iv. 9).

eis a custom among the Romans to fasten a
prisoner with a light chain to the soldier who was
appointed to guard him. One end of it was at-
tached to the right hand of the prisoner, and the
other to the left hand of the soldier. This is the
chain by which Paul was so often bound, and
to which he repeatedly alludes (Acts xxviii. 20;
Eph. vi. 20; 2 Tim. i. 16). When the utmost
‘secnrity was desired, the prisoner was attached by
two chains to two soldiers, as was the case with
Peter (Acts xii. 6).

CHALCEDONY (xarxnddéy, Rev. xxi. 19),
a precious stone, supposed by some to be the sane
that occurs in the Hebrew Scriptures (Exod.
xxviii, 1S) under the name of nophek (translated
‘emerald ’); but this is doubtful. Chalcedony
is a variety of amorphous quartz, and the distinc-
tion between it and agate is not very satisfactorily
etablished. ‘It is harder than flint (specific gra-
vity 2°04), commonly semi-transparent, and is
generally of one uniform colour throughout, usu-
ally a light brown and often nearly white; but
other shades of colour are not infrequent, such as
grey, yellow, green, and blue. Chalcedony occurs
in irregular masses, commonly forming grotesque
cavities, in trap rocks and even granite. It is
found in most parts of the world; and in the
east is employed in the fabrication of cups and
plates, and articles of taste, which are wrought
with great skill and labour, and treasured among

ious things. In Europe it is made into snufi-
oe buttons, knife-hundles, and other minor
articles.

CHALD.EAN PHILOSOPHY. This is a
subject of interest to the student of the Bible, in
consequence of the influence which the Baby-
lonian philosophy exerted on the opinions and
manner of thinking of the Israelites during their
captivity in Babylon—an influence of a general
and decided character, which the Rabbins them-
selves adinit, m alleging that the names of the
angels and of the months were derived by the
house of Israel from Babylon ( Rosh Hashanah,
p. 56). The system of opinion and manner of
thinkitrg which the captives met with in Babylon
cannot be characterized exclusively as Chaldean,
but was made up of elements whose birth-place
was in various parts of the East, and which appear
to have found in Babylon a not unconyenial svil,
where they grew and produced fruit which co-
alesced into one general system. Of these ele-
ments the two principal were the Chaldzan and
the Medo-Persian or Zorvastrian. It ia to the
first that the reader's attention is invited in this
article.

The Chaidzans, who lived in a climate where
the rays of the sun are never darkened, and the
night is always clear and bright by means of the
light of the moon and stars, were led to believe
that light was the soul of nature. Accordingly
it was by the Sight of the sun and stars that the
upiversal spirit brought forth all things; and


CHALDZAN PHILOSOPHY. 405


therefore the Chaldzans offered their homage to
the Supreme Being in the heavenly bodies, where
he appeared to them in a special manner to dwell.
As the stars form separate bodies, imagination re-
presented them as distinct existences, which bad
each their peculiar functions, and exerted a se-
parate influence in bringing forth the productions
of nature. The idea of a universal spirit dis-
appeared, as being too abstract for the people, and
not without difficulty for cultivated minds; and
worship was offered to the stars as so many
abe that governed the world. It is easy to see

w the Chaldwans from this early con
ruption of the primitive religion of the Bible to »
low and degrading polytheism,

As light was regarded as the only moving-
power of nature, and every star had its own in-
fluence, so natural phenomena appeared the result
of the particular influence of that heavenly body
which at any given time was above the horizon;
and the Chaldzan philosophers believed that they
found the cause of events in its position, and the
means of foretelling events in its movements,
These views, and perhaps the extraordinary heat
and the pestilential winds which in certain months
prevail in the country, and against which there is
no protection except in the hills, led the Chal-
dzans to the mountains which gird the land.
On these observatories, which nature seems to have
expressly formed for the purpose, they studied the
positions and movements of the heavenly host.
They thought they saw that similar pheriomens
were constantly accompanied by the same con-
junction of the stars, which seemed to observe
tegular movements and a similar course. On
this the Chaldawan priests came to the convic-
tion that natoral events are bound together, and
that sacritices do not interrupt their course; that
they all have a common origin, which works ace
cording to unknown principles and laws, whose
discovery is so important as to deserve their best
attention. The heavenly bodies themselves are
obedient to these laws; their foimation, position,
and influence, are consequences of these universa)
laws, by which nature was controlled. This de-
termined the Chaldwans to seek in the heavens
the knowledge of the original cause which created
the world, and of the laws which that cause fol-
lowed in the formation of things, and in the pro-
duction of phenomena, since in the heavens dwelt
the power which brings all things forth.

The stars were masses of light; the space which
held them was filled with light; no other power
appeared to operate therein : accordingly the Chal-
dwans held light to be the moving-power which
had produced the stars. It could not he doubted
that this power possessed intelligence, and the
operations of the mind appear to have so much
resemblance to the subtlety and fleetness of light,
that men who had only imagination for their
guide had no hesitation to represent intelligence
as a property of Jight, aud the universal spirit or
highest intelligence as light itself. The observa-
tions of the Chaldeans had taught them that the
distances of the stars from the earth are unequal,
and that light decreases in its approach to the
earth, on which they concluded that light streams
forth from an endless fountain far removed from
the earth, in doing which it fills space with its

beamr, and forms the heavenly bodies in different
positions and of different magnitudes. The


406 CHALDEAN PHILOSOPHY.


creative spirit was therefore set forth by them
under the image of an eterna] inexhaustilte foun-
tain of light; they thought this fountain was to
the universe what the sun is to the regions
lighted and warmed by his beams,

As light becomes less in propagating itself, its
fountain must be of an inconceivable subtlety and

urity, and accordingly, in its loftiest condition,
intelligent. As its beams are removed from their
source they lose their activity, and by the gradual
waning of their influence sink from their
original perfection; they therefore produced dif-
fereut existences and intelligences, in proportion as
they became more distant from the fountain of
light; at last, passing from one element into
another, they lost their lightness, were pressed
together, and maide dense, till they became cor-
poreal, ani produced chaos, There accordingly
was between the Supreme Being and the earth a
chain of intermediate existences whose perfections
decreased as they were more remote from the First
Great Cause. This Supreme Being bad com-
municated in a distinguished degree his primary
radiations, intelligence, power, productiveness ;
all other emanations had, in proportion to their
distance from the highest. intelligence, a less and
less share in these perfections; and thus were
the different regions of light, trom the moon to the
dwelling-place of the Supreme, filled with varioas
orders of spirits.

The space which contained the First Cause, or
Fountain of radiations, was tilled with pure and
happy intelligences. Immediately beneath this
region began the corporeal world, or the empy-


reum, which was a boundless space, lighted by?


the pure light which flowed immediately from
the Great Source ; this empyreum was tilled with
au: infinitely less pure fire than the original light,
but immeasurably finer than all bodies, Below this
was the ether, or grosser rezion, tilled with still
grosser fire, Next came the fixed stars, spread over
a wideregion where the thickest parts of the ethereal
fire had come together and formed the stars, The
world of planets succeeded, which contained the
sun, moon, and the wandering stars. Then came the
last order of beings—the rude elements which are
deprived of all activity, and withstand the mo-
tions and infinence of light. The diferent parts
of the world are in contact, and the spirits of the
upper regions can influence the lower, as well as
descend and enter into them. As the chaotic
elemeuts were without shape and motion, the
spirits of the higher rezions must have formed the
earth, and human souls are spirits sprung from
them. To these spirits from above the system of
the Chaldwans ascribed all the productions, ap-
pearances, aud movements upon the earth. The
formation of the human body, the growth of the
fruits, all the gifts of nature, were attributed to
beneficent spirits. In the space below the moon,
in the midst of night, tempests arose, lightnings
threaded the dark clunds, thander broke forth and
laid waste the earth; there were found spirits of

kness, corporeal demons spread through the
air. Oftery, tuo, were flames of fire seen to rise
out of the bosom of the earth, and the mountains
were shaken. Earthly powers or demons were
supposed to dwell in the centre of the eaith; and
since matter was held to be without activity, all
movements were attributed to spirits. Storms,
volcanves tempests, appeared to have uo other


CHALDEAN PHILOSOPHY.


object than to destroy human happiness; and
these demons were held to be wicked spirits who
produced these evils; to them every unfostunate
event was ascribed, and a sort of hierarchy was
formed of these evil beings, as had been done in the
case of the good spirits. But why did not the Su-
preme mind put down, by an exertion of his power,
this swarm of wicked spirits? Some thought it was
beneath the dignity of the Primary Essence to
contend with these demons; others were of opi-
nion that these bad spirits were uaturally inde-
structible, and as the Supreme could neither
destroy nor improve them, he had banished them
to the centre of the earth and to the region bengath
the moon, where they indulged in their baseness
and exercised their dominion: in order, however,
to protect ihe human race agamst fiends so nu-
merous and fearful, he commissioned good spirits,
whose office it was to defend men against these
corporeal demons. As the good and the bad
spirits had various degrees of power, and different
ollices, so they had names given to them which
described their functions. As the good spirits
were under an obligation to protect men and
furnish succour in their need, they were com-
pelled to learn human language; accordingly it
was believed that a guardian angel against every
evil was possessed by every one who bore his
mysterious name—a name which was to be pro-
nounced only when succour was needed. All
manner of names were therefore devised, by
which the good spirits were conjured or informed
of human necessities; and all the combinations of
the al phabet were exhausted in order tu bring about
a commerce between men and angels. Here is the
origin of the Cabbala, which gave strange names
to these spirits, in order to bring them into con-
nection with men, and by this means to do wonder-
ful things (Matt. xii. 24-27). These names also
sometimes served to drive bad spirits away: they
were a kind of exorcism. For since it was be-
lieved that these demons had been banished to the
centre of the earth, and that they could uo evir
only in consequence of having baffled the vigi-
lance of the guardian spirits and escaped to the
outer world, so, it was held, they were compelled
to flee as svon as they heard the name of the good
angels whose business it was to keep them shut
up in subterranean caverns, and to punish them
if they ventured from their prisonhouse. A power,
too, was ascribed to the name of the spirit, or to
the image which marked his office—a power
which forced the spirit to come on being called ;
and, accordingly, it was held that this name
carved on a stone kept the spirit near the person
who wore the stove—a notion in which is pro-
Lably found the origin of Talismans, which were
formed either by words or symbolical tigures.

The fragments of Berosus, preserved by Eu-
sebius and Josephus, and to be found in Sca-
liger (De Emendat. Temp.). aud more fully in
Fabricius (Bid. Gr. xiv. 175), afford some ine
formation on the subject of Chaldzan philosophy.
Berosus was a priest of the god Baal, at Babylon,
in the time of Alexander the Great. The Talmud
and other works of the Jewish Rabbins may also
be advantageously consulted, together with the
following authorities -—Euseb. Prop. Evang. ix.
Ws; Philo, De Miz. Mun.; Selden, De Diis
Syris, Proleg. 3; Stanley's History of Oriental
Philosophy ; Kuorrii de Rosenroth, Cabbada de.


CHALDAANS, ,


studata, 2. doctrina Ebrworum transcendentalis
et metaphysica atque theologica, t. 1, Solish.
1677, t. 2. ‘ Liber Johan. restitutus,’ Francof. 1684 ;
Kleuker, Ueber der Natur und den Ursprung der
Emanationslehre bei den Kabbalisten, Riya,
1786; Molitor, Philosophie der Geschichte,
1827-8; Hartman, Die enge Verbindung des
A. T. mit dem N., 1831; Ketzer, Lexicon von
P. Fritz, 1838; Brocker, Hist. Crit. Phil. ;
Ritter, Geschtch. der Phil.; Vergleichende My-
thologie von Nork, 1836.—J. R. B.


CHALD.-EANS (0°39) is the name which
is found appropriated in parts of the Old Testa-
ment to inhabitants of Babylon and subjects
of the Babylonian kinglom. In 2 Kings
xxv., where an account is given of the siege
of Jerusalem in the reign of Zedekiah, by Nebu-
chadnezzar, the latter monarch is expressly desig-
uated ‘King of Babylon,’ while his troops in
general are spoken of as ‘Chaldees,’ ‘the army
of the Chaldees.’ In Isaiah xiii. 19, Babylon
is calied ‘the glory of kingdoms, the beauty
of the Chaldees’ excellency;’ and in xxiii.
13 of the same book, the country is termed
‘the land of the Chaldeans.’ So in Daniel
ix. 1,‘In the first year of Darius, of the seed of
the Medes, which was made king over the realm
of the Chaldeans.’ Ptolemy uses the term XaA-
Bala (xépa), Chaldaa, for that part of Babylonia
which, lying in the south-west, borders on Arabia
Deserta. Strabo speaks to the same eflect, and
Pliny terms Babylon Chaldaicarum gentium
caput, the head of the Chaldwan nations. The
origin and condition of the people who gave this
name to the Babylonians, have been subjects of
dispute among the learned. Probably, however,
they were the same people that are described in
Greek writers as having originally been an uncul-
tivated tribe of mountaineers, placed on the Car-
duchian mountains, in the neighbourhood of
Armenia, whom Xenophon describes as brave and
fond of freedom (Cyrop.i. 31; Anabd. iv. 3, 4, 7,
8, 25). In Habakkuk i. 6-10 the Chaldzans ure
spoken of in corresponding terms: ‘ Lo, 1 raise up
the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, which
shall march through the breadth of the land to
possess the dwelling-places that are not theirs;
they are terrible and dreadful; their horses ae
switter than leopards and more tierce than evening
wolves; their horsemen shall spread themselves ;
they shall fly as the eagle that hasteth to eat.’
They are also mentioned in Job i. 17: ‘Chal-
dzans fell upon the camels (of Job) and carried
them away.’ These passages show not only their
warlike aud predatory habits, but, especially that
in Job, the eaily period in history at which they
were known.

_As in all periods of history hardy and brave
tribes of mountaineers have come down into the
plains and conquered their comparatively civil-
ized and effeminate inhabitants, so these Arme-
nian Chaldseans appear to have descended on
Babylon, made themselves masters of the city
and the goverument, and eventually founded a
dominion, to which they gave their name, as well
as to the inhabitants of the city and the country
¢ributary to it, infusing at the same time young
blood and fresh vigour into all the veins and
members of the social frame. What length of

me the changes herein implied may have


CHALDAZANS. we


taken cannot now he ascertained. Winer ( Real-
teorterbuoh, 8. v. Chaldder) conjectures that the
Chaldeans were at first subjects of the Assy-
rian monarchy, which, from 2 Kings xvii. 24,
&c., also 2 Chron. xxxiii. 11, appears to have
been established in Babylon; and that, while
subjects of that empire, they became beers
gained for themselves the government, and found
the Chaldee-Babylonian kingdom or dynasty.

Of the kingdom of Babylun, Nimrod (Gen. x.
8, sqq-) was the founder and first sovereign.
The next name of a Babylonian monarch is
found in Gen. xiv. 1, where ‘ Amraphel, king
of Shinar,’ is cursorily mentioned. A long im
terval occurs, till at last, in 2 Kings xx. 12, 13,
the name of another is given: ‘ Berodach-ba-
ladan, the son of Baladan, king of Babylon,’
it appears ‘sent letters and a present unto Heze-
kiah; for he had heard that Hezekiah had been
sick. And Hezekiah learkened unto them, and
shewed them all the house of his precious
things: there was nothing in his house, nor in
his dominion, that Hezekiah shewed them not.’
On becoming acquainted with this fact, the
prophet Isaiah announced that the treasures of
the kingdom would be plundered and taken
to Babylon along with the descendants of Heze-
kiah, who were to become eunucls in the palace
of the king of Babylon. The friendly act which
passed between these two kings took place in the
year s.c. 713. Abont ga hundred years later, the

rophets Jeremiah fat Habakkuk speak of the
invasion of the Chaldwan army. Nebuchad-
ezzar now appears in the historical books, and,
in Ezra v. 12, is described as ‘the king of Baby-
Jon, the Chaldsean, who destroyed this house (the
temple), and carried the people away into Baby-
lon.’ How extensive and powerful his empire
was, may be gatliered from the words of Jeremiah
xxxiv. 1—* Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon,
and all his army, and all the kingdoms of the
earth of his dominion, and all the people, fougit
against Jerusalem.’ The result was, that the
city was surrendered, and the men of war tled, to-
gether with king Zedekiah, but were overtaken in
the plains of Jericho and completely routed. The
Israelitish monarch was carried before Nebu-
chadnezzar, who ordered his eyes to he put
out, after he had been compelled to witness
the slaughter of his sons: he was then bound
in fetters of brass and conveyed a captive to
Babylon. Tbe next Chaldee-Babylonian mo-
narch given in the Scriptures is the son of the
preceding, Evil-merodach, who (2 Kings xxv. 27)
lores his reign (n.c. 562) by delivering Jeboia-
chin, king of Judah, after the unfortunate sove-
reign had endured captivity, if not incarceration,
for a period of more than six and thirty years.
Circumstances incidentally recorded in connection
with this event serve to display the magnitude
and grandeur of the empire; for it appears (ver.
28) that there were other captive kings in Baby-
lon besides Jehoiachin, and that each one of them
was indulged with the distinction of having his
own throne. With Belshazzar (s.c. 538), the son
of Nebuchadnezzar, closes the line of Chaldean
monarchs, In the seventeenth year of his reign,
this sovereign was put to death, while engaged
with all bis court in high revelry, by Cyrus, when
he took the city of Babylon in the night season
(Dan. v. 30), and established in the city and its


408. CHALD ANS.


dependencies the rule of the Medo-Persians [Bat-
SHAZZAR ].

It has seen, from the foregoing statements,
that the history of Babylon supplied by the Scri
tures is brief, imperfect, and fragmentary. Little
additional light can be borrowed from other quar-
ters, in relation to the period comprised within
the Biblical accounts.

The oldest history of the land, as delivered by
Berosus (Euseb. Chron.), gives no information
capable of being annexed to the sacred narratives ;
whilst there is in the Canon of Ptolemy a list of
Babylonian kings, which, in union with Berosus
and Abydenus (Euseb, Chron.), leads to a not im-
probable result. This canon enumerates from the
time of Nabonassar (s.c. 747), the first inde-

lent king of Babylon, nineteen Babylonian
ings, whose united reigns, including two periods
of interregnum, make a total of 210 years. The
first name which is found alike in Ptolemy and
Berosus is Belibus, or Elibus, and Berosus repre-
sents this monarch as immediately succeeding
Merodach-baladan, with the remark that the last,
after the murder of the Assyrian viceroy, had
liberated Babylon from the Assyrian yoke, and
Belibus, putting his predecessor to death, took the
government as an independent prince, until, after
a period of three years, Sanherib besieged the city,
and made Babylon again an Assyrian province,
under his son Esarhaddon, or Asordanius. With
Nabopolassar, the father. of Nebuchadnezzar,
there begins a new and clearer epoch in Baby-
lonian history. This prince, who was properly an
Assyrian viceroy or satrap in Babylon, being
supported by an alliance with the Median rulers,
succeeded in making himself the independent
sovereign of Babylon, destroyed the city of Nine-
veh, and established his dominion over Pheenicia
and Cele-Syria. His son (n.c. 604) pushed
these conquests as far as Egypt. Evil-merodach,
his son, succeeded him (s.c. 561), but was, in the
second year of his reign, put to death by his
brother-in-law Neriglissar. The latter, on the
death of his wife, undertook the government, and
after four years (u.c. 555) was succeeded by his
son, Laboro-soarchod. But the youth could not
sustain himself in power for longer than nine
months. A conspiracy robbed him of his crown
and life, and Nabonnidus (in Herodotus called
Labynetus), that is, the Belshazzar of the Bible,
ascended the throne, who, in the year u.c. 538 or
539, was overcome by Cyrus. From this event
Babylon became a Persian province, and shared
the fate of the Persian empire.

Authentic history affurds no information as to
the time when the Chaldwau immigration took
place. It is possible that, at a very early period,
a tribe of Chaldees wandered into Babylon and
gave to the land the seven Chaldee kings men-
tioned by Berosus; but it is possible also that
the Chaldaans etered in a mass into the Baby-
lonian territory for the first time not long before
the era of Nabonassar (s.c. 747). which Michaelis
and others have thought the words of Isaiah ren-
der probable, ch. xxiii. 18—* Behold the land
of the Chaldwans, this people was not, till the
Assyrian founded it for them that dwell in the
wilderness.’ The “circumstance, moreover, that
a Shemitic dialect is found to have prevailed in
Babylon, corroborates the idea that the Chaldzans
were immigrants, since the northern Chaldzans


CHALDAANS.,
must, from their position, have spoken a differen


form of speech.

The kingdom of the Chaldees is found among
the four ‘thrones’ spoken of by Daniel ( vii.
3, sqq.), aud is set forth under the symbol of a
lion having eagles’ wings. The government was
despotic, and the will of the monarch, who bore
the title of ‘King of Kings’ (Dan. ii. 37), was
supreme law, as may be seen in Dan. iii. 12; xiv.
28. The kings lived inaccessible to their subjects
in a well-guarded palace, denominated, as with
the ancieut Persians (Xenop. Cyrop. 1), ‘the gate
of the king’ (Dan. ii. 49, compared with Esther
ii. 19, 21, and iii. 2). The number of court and
state servauts was not small; in Dan. vi. 1,
Darius is said to have set over the whole kingdom
no fewer than ‘an hundred and twenty priuces.’
The chief officers a) to have been a sort of
‘mayor of the palace,’ or prime minister, to which
high office Daniel was appointed (Dan. ii. 49),
‘a master of the eunuchs’ (Dan, i. 3), 6a captain
of the king’s guard’ (Dan. ii. 14), and ‘a mastet
of the magicians,’ or president of the Magi (Dan,
iv. 9). Distinct probably from the foregoing was
the class termed (Dan. iii. 24, 27) ‘the king's
counsellors,’ who seem to have formed a kind
of ‘privy council’ or even ‘cabinet’ for advising
the monarch and governing the kingdom. The
entire empire was divided into several provinces
(Dan. ii. 48; iii. 1), presided over by officers of
various ranks. An enumeration of several kinds
may be found in Dan. iii. 2, 3. The head officers,
who united in themselves the highest civil and
military power, were denominated IDIIWN,
‘ presidents’ (Dan. vi. 2); those who presided over
single provinces or districts bore the title of
ND (Hagg. i. 1; ii. 2), in the Chaldee dialect
NNN, ‘governor.” The administratiqn of
criminal justice was rigorous and cruel, will
being substituted for law, aud buman life and
human suffering being totally disregarded. Ne
buchadnezzar (Dan. it. 5) declares to the college
of the Magi—‘ If ye will not make known unto
me the dream with the interpretation thereof, ye
shall be cut in pieces, and your houses shall be
made a dunghill’ (see also Dan. iii. 19; vi. 8;
Jer. xxix. 22). The religion of the Chaldees was,
as with the ancient Arabians and Syrians, the
worship of the heavenly bodies; the planets
Jupiter, Mercury, and Venus were hunoured as
Bel, Nebo, and Meni, besides Satum and Mars
(Gesenius On Isaiah). Astrology was naturally
connected with this worship of the stars, and the
astronomical observations which have made the
Chaldean name famous were thereby guided
and advanced. The language spoken in Babylon
was what is designated Chaldee, which is Shemi-
tic in its origin, belonging to the Aramaic
branch. The immigrating Chaldeans spoke
probably a quite different tongue, which the geo-
graphical position of their native country shows
to have belonged to the Medo-Persian stock.

The term Chaldwans represents aley a branch
of the order of Babylonian Magi (Hesych. XAa-
Baior yévos Mdyov). In Dan. ii. 2 they appear
among ‘the magicians, and the astrologers, and
the sorcerers,’ who were ‘called for to shew the
king his dream.’ In the 10th verse of the same
chapter they are represented as speaking in the
name of the rest ; or otherwise theirs was a


designation which comprised the entire class


CHALDEE LANGUAGE.


iv. 7; v. 7): a general description of these
ifferent orders is found in Dan. v. 8, as ‘the
king's wise men.’ In the Greek and Roman
writers the term Chaldeans describes the whole
order of the learned men of Babylon, (Strabo, xv.
598; Diod. Sic. ii. 29; Cic. De Div. i.1.2). In
ater periods the name Chaldwans seems, without
reference to place of birth, to have been applied in
the western parts of the world to persons who lived
by imposing on the credulity of others, going from
place to place professing to interpret dreams and
disclose the future. In this sense the word is
obviously used by Josephus (De Bell. Jud. ii.
vii. 38), when ‘diviners and some Chaldzans’
are said to have been called in by Archelaus to
d what was ‘portended’ by a dream he


had had when he ‘seemed to see nine ears of


com, fall and large, but devoured by oxen.’ —
Winer’s Realworterbuch ; Real - Encyclopddie
der Class. Alterthum, W. von Pauly; Ideler,
Handbuch der Chron. [Banrson].—J. R. B.

CHALDEE LANGUAGE is the name by
which the elder form of the Aramaic idiom is
generally distinguished. Whether there is any
authority in the Old Testament for applying this
designation to the Aramaic language is a question
which depends on the sense in which the expres-
sion ‘ tongue’ of the Chaldees,’ in Dar. i. 4, is to
be taken; and which involves such important
historical points that it does not come within the
scope of this article (see Hengstenberg, Authentie
des Daniel, p. 310). Another preliminary ques-
tion is, whether there is any propriety in the
common definition of the Chaldee language as
the eastern, and especially as the Babylonian
dialect—or, indeed, even as a dialect at all—of
the Aramaic. Hupfeld strenuously maintains
the neggtive of all these propositions in the Theo-
logische Studien for 1830, p. 290, sy. Avoiding
these debateable points, however, we apply the
name Chaldee language to that Aramaic idiom
which, in our present text of the Old Testament,
is employed in the passages of Daniel, from
ii. 4 to vii. 28; in Ezra, from iv. 8 to vi. 18,
and vii. from 12 to 26; in Gen. xxxi. 47; and
in Jer. x. 11; as also to that in which several
translations and paraphrases of portions of the
Old Testament, the so-called Targums, are
written. The language is thus distinguished, as
to the nature of the documents in which it is
employed, into Biblical and Targumical Chaldee.
Winer, bowever, regarding linguistical charac-
teristics chiefly, distinguishes three grades of its
purity: the language, as found in the Targum
of Onkelos, as most free from Hebraisms; the
Biblical Chaldee, which, as it frequently inter-
mixes certain peculiarities of Hebrew (as the 71
of the article, the plural ending im, the dual
form, and the conjugation Hophal), ranks below
the first class; and the idiom of the other Tar-
gums, which not only abounds with foreign
words, but several peculiar formations
which border on those of the Syriac and of Rab-
binical Hebrew. The language of the Talmud
is also usually called Chaldee ; and, if we except
the Mishnah (which is written in an idiom not so
very far removed from Biblical Hebrew, with a
tincture of Chaldee), it is true of the Gemaras
that they are written in such very corrupt
Chaldee that their idiom is more properly desig-
nated as the Talmudical dialect.


CHAMBERS OF IMAGERY. 408


We have psuing Gaara Lanevace]} no-
ticed those several features which the Chaldee
possesses in common with the Syriac; and it
now remains to define those, certainly not market,
characteristics by which it is distinguished from
it. These are—the predominance of the a-sound
where Syriac has 0; the avoidance of diphthongs
and of otiant letters; the use of dagesh-forte ;
the regular accentuation of the last syllable;
and the formation of the infinitives, except in
Peal, without the prefurmative ©. The mode of
writing is also much less defective than in Syriac
[Tarcum].—J.N.

CHAMBERS OF IMAGERY. The scenes
of pictorial representation referred to by this
phrase are connected with an interesting passage
in the history of Ezekiel and the Jewish exiles,
who were stationed in Assyria, on the banks of
the Chebar. At one of their interesting pra;
meetings for the restoration of Israel, which had
been held so often and so long without any
prospect of brighter days, and when the faith and
hopes of many of the unfortunates were waxing
dim and feeble, Ezekiel, in presence of his friends,
consisting of the exiled elders of Judah, was sud-
denly i in mystic vision, and graciously
shown, for his own satisfaction, as well as that of
his pious associates, the reasons of God's
tracted controversy with Israel, and the sad
necessity there was for still dealing hardly with
them. Transported by the Spirit (not bodity,
indeed, nor by external force, but in imagina-
tion) to the city and temple of Jerusalem, he
there saw, as plainly as if it had been with the
eye of sense, atrocities going on within the pre-
cincts of the holy place—the perpetration of
which in the very capital of Judsa, the place
which God had chosen to put his name there, af-
forded proof of the woful extent of national apos-
tacy and corruption, and was sufticient to justify,
both to the mind of the prophet, and his circle of
pious associates, the severity of the divine judg-
ments on Israel, and the loud call there was for
prolonging and increasing, instead of putting a
speedy end to, the dire calamities they had so
long been suffering (Kzek. viii.).

The first spectacle that caught his eye, as he

bulated, in mystic vision, the outer court
of the Temple—that court where the people usu-
ally assembled to worship—was a colossal statue,
probably of Baal, around which crowds of de-
votees were performing their frantic revelries,
and whose forbidden ensigns were proudly bla-
zoning on the walls and portals of His house,
who had proclaimed himself a God jealous of
his honour (ver. 3, Lowth in loc.). Scarcely
had the prophet recovered from his astonish-
ment and horror at the open and undisguised
idolatry of the multitude in that sacred enclosure,
when his celestial guide bade him turn another
way, and he would see greater abominations.
Leading him to that side of the court, along
which were ranged the houses of the priests, his
conductor pointed to a mud-wall (ver. 7), which,
to screen themselves from observation, the apostate
servants of the true God had raised; and in that
wall was a small chink, by widening which he
discovered a passage into a secret chamber, which
was completely impervious to the rays of the sun,
but which he found, on entering it, lighted up
by a profusion of brilliant lamps. The sides of


410 CHAMBERS OF IMAGERY.


it were covered with numerous paintings of beasts
and reptiles—the favourite deities of Egypt ; and,
with their eyes intently fixed:on these decora-
tions, was a conclave of seventy persons, in the
garb of priests—the exact number, and, in all
robability, the individual members of the San-
rim, who stood in the attitude of adoration,
holding in their hands each a golden censer, con-
taining all the costly and odouriferous materials
which the pomp and magnificence of the Egyptian
ritual required. ‘ There was every form of creep-
ing things and abominable beasts, and all the
idols of the house of Israel portrayed round
about.’ The scene described was wholly formed
on the model of Egyptian worship; and every
one who has read the works of Wilkinson, Bel-
oni, Richardson, and others, will perceive the
close resemblance tliat it bears to the onter walls,
the sanctuaries, and the hieroglyphical figures
that distinguished the ancient mythology of
Egypt. What were the strange and unsightly
images engraven on the walls of this chamber
discovered by Ezekiel, and that formed the ob-
jects of the profane reverence of these apostate
councillors, may be known from the following
metrical description, which the late Mr. Salt,
long the British Consul in Egypt, has drawn of
the gods worshipped by the ancient idolatrous in-
habitants of that country. Those who have pro-
secuted their researches among the rubbish of the
temples, he says, have found in the deeply-se-
questered chambers they were able to reach—
© The wildest images, unheard of, strange,
That ever puzzled antiquarians’ brains :
Genii, with heads of birds, hawks, ibis, drakes,
Of liens, foxes, cats, fish, frogs, and snakes,
Bulls, rams, and monkeys, hippopotami ;
With knife in paw, suspended from the sky,
Gods germinating men, and men turn‘d gods,
Seated in honour, with gilt crouks and rods;
Vast scarabai, ylobes by hands upheld,
From chaos springing, ‘mid an endless field,
Of forms grotesque, the sphinx, the crocodile,
And other reptiles from the slime of Nile.’
In order to show the reader still further how ex-
actly this inner chamber that Ezekiel saw was
constructed after the Egyptian fushion, we sub-
join an extract from the work of another traveller,
descriptive of the great Temple of Edfou, one of
the admired relics of antiquity; from which it will
be seen that the degenerate priests of Jerusalem
had borrowed the whole style of the edifice, in
which they were celebrating their hidden rites—
its form, its entrance, as well as its pictorial
ornaments on the walls—from their idolatrous
neighbours of Ezypt :—‘ Considerably below the
surface of the adjoining building, says he, ‘my
conductor pointed out to me a chink in an old
wall, which, he told me, I should creep through
on my hands and feet; the aperture was not two
feet anda half high, and scarcely three feet and
ahalfbroad. My companion had the courage
to go first, thrusting in a lamp before him: I fol-
lowed. The passaye was so narrow that my
mouth and nose were almust buried in the dust,
and I was nearly suffocated. After proceeding
about ten yards in utter darkness, the heat be-
came excessive, the breathing was laborious, the
repiration poured down my face, and I would
Eaves given the world to have got out; but my
@ompanion, whose person I could not distinguish,


CHAMBERS OF IMAGERY.


though his voice was audible, called out to me to

crawl a few feet farther, and that I should find
plenty of room. I joined him at length, and had
the inexpressible satisfaction of standing once
Toore upon my feet. We found ourselves in a
splendid apartment of great magnitude, adomed
with an incredible profusion of sacred paintings
and hieroglyphics’ (Madden's Trav. in Tur-
key, Egypt, &c.; see also Maurice, Indian Antig.

vol. ii, p. 212). In the dark recesses of such a

chamber as this, which they entered like the tra-

veller through a hole in the outer wall, and in

which was painted to the eye the grotesque and

motley group of Egyptian divinities, were the

chief men at Jerusalem actually employed when

Ezekiel saw them. With minds highly excited

by the dazzling splendour, and the clouds of fra-

grant smoke that filled the apartment, the per-
formers of those clandestine rites seem to have
surpassed even the enthusiastic zeal of their an-

cestors in the days of Moses, when, crowding.
round the pedestal of the golden calf, they rent
the air with their cries of ‘ These be thy gods, 0

Israel!’ Beneath a calmer exterior, the actors ip
the scene pointed out to Ezekiel concealed a
stronger and more intense passion for idolatry.
Every form of animal ‘life, from the noblest qua-
druped to the most loathsome reptile that spawned
in Egypt, received a share of their insane homage;
and the most extraordinary feature of the scene
was that the individual who appeared to be the
directur of these foul mysteries, the master of
ceremonies, was Jaazaniah, a descendant of that
zealous scribe who had gained so much renowa
as the principal adviser of the good king Josiah,
and whuse family had for generations been re
garded as the most illustrious for piety in the
land. The presence of a scion of this genet
house iu such a den of impurity, struck the prov
phet as an electric shock, and showed better, than
all the other painful spectacles this chamber exhi-
bited, to what a fearful extent idolatry had inun-
dated the land.

It might have been supposed impossible for
men to have sunk to a lower depth of superstition
than that of imitating the Egyptians in worshi
ping the monsters of the Nile, or the vegetable
produce of their fields and gardens, had not the
prophet been directed to tum yet again, and he
would see greater abominations that they did.
© Then he brought me to the gate of the Lord's
house, which was towards the north; and behold
there sat women weeping for Tammuz’ (ver. 14).
This, the principal deity of the Phoenicians, and
who was often called also by that people Adoni,
that is, My Lord, became afterwards famous in the
Grecian mythology under the well-known name
of Adonis; and the circumstance of his being se
lected for the subject of their most beautiful tic-
tion by so many of the classic jwets, is a suilicient
proof of the great popular interest his name and
ritual excited among the idolators of the ancient
world. It is said to have originated in a tragic
adventure that befel an intrepid and beautiful
prince of Phoenicia, who was killed while hunting
a wild boar, by which that land was infested,
and whose untimely death in the cause of his
country was bewailed in an annual festival beld
to commemorate the disastrous event. Dunng
the seven days that the festival lasted, the Pha»
nicians appeared to be a natiqn of mourners ;


CHAMELEON.
in every town and village a fictitious representa-
tion of Tammuz was got up for the occasion, and
the whole population assembled to pour forth
their unbounded sorrow for his a fate, more
especially at Byblos, in Syria, where a temple
was erected in honour of this national deity.
A strange imposture was’ practised to influence
the public lamentations. There was on this
temple a gigantic statue of the god, the eyes of
which were filled with lead, which, on fire being
applied within, of course melted and fell in big
drops to the ground, a signal for the loud wail-
ings of the bystanders, whose eyes in sympathetic
imitation were dissolved in tears. Conspicuous
among the crowd, on such occasions, a band of
mercenary females directed the orgies; and, in
conformity with an ancient custom of bewailing
thedead on anniversaries at the doors of houses
drag Gree, Antig. b. iv. ch. 3), others. took

ir station at the gate, with their faces di-
rected northward, as the sun was said to have
been in that quarter of the heavens at the time
when Tammuz died. These violent efforts in

‘mourning were always fullowed by scenes of
the roel ticendlons and revolting revelry, which,
though not mentioned, are manifestly implied
among the ‘greater abominations’ which de-
graded this other group of idolators.

Besides the bhsatvibics of Egypt and the
orgies of Tammuz, there was another form of su-
perstition still, which in Jerusalem, then almost
wholly given to idolatry, had its distinguished
patrons. ‘ Turn thee yet again,’ said his celestial
guide to the prophet, ‘ and thou shalt see greater
abominations than these’ (ver. 16). And he brought
him ‘unto the inner court of the Lord's house, and
behold at the door of the temple of the Lord, be-
tween the porch and the altar, were about five-and-
twenty men, with their backs towards the temple
of the Lord, and their faces towards the east; and
they worshipped the sun towards the east.’ Perhaps
of all the varieties of superstition which had crept
in among the Hebrews in that period of general
decline, none displayed such flagrant dishonour to
the God of Israel as this (Clemens Alexandrinus,
Strom. vii. p. 520); for, as the most holy place
was situated at the west end of the Sanctuary,
it was impossible for these twenty-five men to
pay their homage to the rising sun without turn-
mg their backs on the consecrated place of the
divine presence; and accordingly this fourth
circle is mtroduced last, as if their employment
fotmed the climax of abominations—the worst
and most woful sign of the times. Could stronger
proofs be wanted that the Lord had not forsaken
srael, but was driven from them? This was the
lesson intended, and actually accomplished, by
the vision; for while the prophet was made aware
by. this mystic scene of the actual state of things
among his degenerate countrymen at home, he
say himself—and instructed the pious circle
aryund him to see—a proof of the long-suffering
and the just severity of God in deferring to an-
swer their fervent and long-continued prayers for

the emancipation of their country.—R. J.

CHAMELEON ap to be a satisfactory
translation of M2WIN tinshemeth, st denotes
asmall species of lizard, celebrated for the faculty

it has of changing the colour of its skin. This

rty, however, has no reference to the substance
may be placed on, as generally asserted, but is


CHAOS.


411
solely derived from the bulk of its pon ged
organs acting upon a t skin, and on the
blood of the animal. The chameleons form a-
small genus of Saurians, easily distinguished by
the shagreened character of the skin, and the five
toes on the feet, divided differently from those of
most other animals, there being, if the expression
may be allowed, two thumbs opposed to three
fingers. .Their eyes are telescopic, move
rately, and can be directed backwards or forwards.
Chameleons are slow, inoffensive, and capable of
considerable abstinence from food ; whiclr consists
solely of flies, caught by the rapid protrusion of a


217. (Chameleon Africanus.]


long and viscous tongue. Among themselves
they are irascible, and are then liable to change
their colours rapidly: dark yellow or grey is
redominant when they are in a quiescent state,
ut, while the emotions are in activity, it
into green, purple, and even ashy black. The
species found in Palestine and all Northern
Africa, is the common Chameleon Africanus,
and is that referred to in Lev. xi. 30, where
unclean animals are mentioned.—C. H. S.

CHAMOIS. Leases)

CHAOS, a term taken from the Greek mytho-
logy, according to which Chaos was the first ex-
istence and the origin of all subsequent forms of
being (Hesiod, Theogon. 116; Ovid, Afeta-
morph. i. 5). The description which Ovid gives
of Chaos itself, and of the formation of the world
from tlie chaotic mass, bears so many striking re-
semblances to the Mosaic account of the creation,
that one can scarcely fail to regard it as having
been derived from traditions, the source of which
is to be traced to the sacred record. There is,
however, this great difference between the scri
tural and the heathen cosmogonies—that
former sets out with the emphatic declaration
that the unformed mass was the creation of God ;
whilst the latter speaks of it as the already exist-
ing materials out of which he formed the world,
or even as itself the cause and author of all
things. If, however, heathen philosophers have
been indebted to the inspired narrative for their
most consistent views of the formation of the
world, on the other hand Christian philosophers
have borrowed from them (with very little advan-
tage, as we think) the term by which the un-
formed condition of the world was denoted, and,
with the'word, have too frequently associated some
part of the heathen idea attached to it. Our pre-
sent object is to inquire what the Chaos was of
which Moses speaks (Gen. i. 2). Was it the first
form in which matter was created? and do the
succeeding operations described relate to the very
beginning of material order and animal life? Or
was it merely a condition preparatory to the re-


412 CHAOS.


organization of the world, which had already been
the abode of living beings ?—in other words, is
the first verse of the inspired record to be dissoci-
ated frum the succeeding, and to be understood
only as a declaration of the important truth, that
the visible universe was nut made from anything
already existing (Heb. xi. 3); whilst the confu-
sion and darkness which are described in the
succeeding verse, relate to a state long subse-
quent to the ‘beginning,’ and were introductory
to a new order uf material existence, of which
man is the chief and lord? The first of these opi-
anions is not only in accordance with the ancient
notions of chaos to which we have referred, but is
that which would be naturally maintained, unless
cause be shown to the contrary. No one would
gratuitously assume a long interval, where it
must be admitted there is no intimation of such
an interval having occurred. Accordingly, most
interpreters, who have been ignorant of geological
phenomena, have at once decided that the chaos
of which Moses speaks was the fourm in which
matter was first created. Some have even (e-
clared that there cannot have been any such in-
terval as we have spoken of (Prof. Stuart, in Bib.
Repos. No. xxi., Jan. 1636). But, on the other
hand, the world gives intimations, in the rocks
which compose its crust, of various and long-con-
tinued changes both of condition and of inhabit-
ants. Those who have carefully examined these
different forms of being, and have attentively
studied the circumstances in which their remains
are now found, have been forced to the convic-
tion, that in many cases the rocks have been gra-
dually formed by deposition at the bottom of an
ocean, which has been successively the habitation
of races differing alike from each other and from
those now existing; that the coeval land likewise
kas had its distinct races of inhabitants, and that
the land and water have changed places many
times in the history of the world. It is impos-
sible to do more than barely glance at these
geological facts; but it will be seen that they
lead to these three conclusions—(1) that the
world has existed during some long period before
the Mosaic record of creation in six days —(2)
that, during that period, it was the abode of ani-
mals differing in organization and structure from
those now found on its surface—and (3) that it
has been exposed to various convulsions and re-
organizations, more or less general. In the face of
these facts it appears impossible to hold the ordi-
narily received opinion that the universe was cre-
ated only just before the creation of man; and
the question then is, how are these facts to be
reconciled with the Mosaic narrative? Not by
denying the evidence of our senses (which is, in
truth, a very dangerous mode of upholding the
sacred record, though it has been adopted by
those who especially claim to themselves the title
of Scriptural Geoloristi), nor, on the other hand,
by treating the Mosaic account as a mythus, or
allegorical representation (a mode of explanation,
which, if ever admissible, ought not to be re-
sorted to without the most pressing necessity),
but surely by re-examining the interpretation we
have put on the words of Scripture, and by seek-
ing to ascertain whether the discrepancy does not
arise from over view of the narrative. A favourite
mode of explaining the Mosaic account, a few
years back, was to take the six days of cre-


CHARGOL.


ation for unlimited periods, during wnich the
changes we are speaking of took place. This
ground has, however, been almost completely
abandoned, both because the account a0 under-
stood does not agree with the physical pheno
mena, aud because such an interpretation is, to
say the least, hardly admissible on exegetical
principles. If we keep in mind that the revela-
tion of God to man is not intended to teach phy-
sical science—that it never speaks the language
of philosophy, but of appearances—and that it
tells of these only so far as they relate to the bu-
man race, we obtain a clue by which we may be
safely guided throngh these difficulties. We
shall not then wonder that no notice should be
taken of previous conditions and inhabitants of
this earth, supposing such to have existed. The
first sentence of the inspired record will then be
regarded as the majestic declaration of a fact,
which the world had lost sight of, but which it
deeply concerned men to know. What occurred
subsequently, until the earth was tu be furnished
for the abode of man, is to be gathered not from
the written word, but from the memorials en-
graven on the tablets of the world itself. The
succeeding verse of the Mosaic account then re-
lates to a state of chaos, or confusion, into which
the world was thrown immediately before the last
reorganization of it. The connection of the two
sentences by the Hebrew copulative } seems to us
to furnish no serious difficulty. Every attentive
reader knows that this particle is very frequently
used to continue a narrative when the events so
connected were by no means immediately conse-
cutive. Nor is such a chaos opposed to geologi-
cal phenomena, which plainly tell of ‘critical
periods’ and of ‘revolutions of organic life’
(Phillips's Geology, in Cab. Cycl. vol. ii. p. 264).
Geologists are not indeed at present (if ever
they may be) in a condition to identify the die
ruption and confusion of which we sup
Moses to speak with any one of these violent
convulsions; but that events which might be de-
scribed in his language have taken place in the
world’s history, over considerable portions of its
surface, seems to be fully established. Whether
the chaos of which we are now speaking was uni-
versal, or was confined to those regions which
formed the cradle of the human race, is a que~
tion on which we do not feel it needful to enter.
We do not regard the evidence which geology
furnishes as complete enough to decide such a
point, though the latter supposition has been
adopted by Dr. Pye Smith, in his lectures Or the
Relation between the Holy Scriptures and some
Parts of Geological Science. To these lectures,
as well as to the articles by Professor Hitchcock,
in the Biblical Repository (Nos. 17, 18, 20, and
22), and to various payers which have appeared
at different times in the Christian Observer, the
reader is referred for a fuller discussion of this
and kindred questions.—F. W. G.


CHARGOL (5359 ; Sept. "Ogioudyns 5 Volx.
Ophiomachus; Fng. Vers. Beetle ; found only in
Lev. xi. 22). This word cannot mean the beetle.
No species of scarabeus was ever used as food by
the Jews, or perhaps any other nation. Nor does
any known species auswer to the generic descrip-
tion given in the preceding verse: ‘ This ye may
eat of every winged creeper which goeth upon four


CHARGOL.


(fet); that which hath joints at the upper part
ofits uind legs, to leap with them upon the earth’
(wmp. Niebuhr, Descrip. de [ Arabie, Copen-
hague, 1773, p. 33). Hence it is plain that the
shargol is some winged creeper, which has at
lest four feet, which leaps with its two hind
jointed legs, and which we might expect, from the
pemission, to find actually used as food. This
description agrees exactly with the locust-tribe
of insects, which are well known to have been
eaten hy the common people in the East from the
earliest times tu the present day. This conclusion
is also favoured by the derivation of the word,


which comes from 3°¥1, to shake, and by, the foot,
like the English grasshopper, and French sauterelle.


The Arabic Ja > is derived from a word sig-


nifying a troop or swarm, and is explained by
Golius as a specics of locusts without tings.
. It seems, indeed, to be so generally agreed
among the learned that chargol denotes the lo-
cost, that the matter of dispute is rather what
particular species of locust is intended, or whe-
ther the word describes any one of those several
states through which the locust passes, in each
of which it greatly resembles the peifect insect,
the only difference being, that in the larva state
it is entirely destitute of wings and wing-cases,
and that in the pupa state it heen only the
rudiments of those members gathered up 60 as tu
form four little buttons on the shoulders. Swam-
merdam observes that the want of attention to
these particulars, in former writers, had led to
@ very unnecessary multiplication of names, Al-
drovaral, Johnson, Mouffet, and others having
described the locust in these several states under
the names bruchi, atelabi, aselli, &c., supposing
to be so many distinct species. Michaelis,

On the other hand, contends that the several


words in this passage, DYSD, $99N, 33M, M3,


denote only the four successive states of locusts,
luced by casting off their several skins or
coverings.
Their first state, he thinks, is before they
we cast uff their first cuticle; but that, since in
this state they are so small as not to be readily
used for food, Moses enumerates only their four re-
maining states (Supplement. ad Lexicon Hebraic.
Ae Pp. 667-669, and 910-912). To this view,
ever, it is justly objected by Rosenmiiller (apnd
dochart), that the phrase ‘after its kind or spe-
cles,’ added to each of these terms, is not con-
ae with the various states merely through
which the locust passes, Tychsen maintains that
pstehied refer to fonr different species of locusts,
endeavours to show that MIN is the gryllus
gregarius, Forskalii; that nyo is the gryllus
eversor de asso apud Reeselium ; Soon, the gryllus
As eed ci et grylius verrucivorus, Linn. ;
T heey © 33M is the gryllus coronatus, Linn.
zee h Comment. de Locustis Biblicis, sub-
ha ndlung Don Ignacio de Asso y del Rio's, Ab-
Rostock, 1 781-8), Heuschrecken und ihren, &c.,
attempting to ascertai
Gi torant intended by Anata ‘ chargol,’ great
earn ae due to the term adopted by the Sep-
dently deival tees by Jerome, which is evi-
rom Sis and pdyn, and indicates


icular species


CHARGOL. 413


a creature that fights with serpents. Inapplicable
as such a description may seem to be to the habits
of any known species of locust, it may, never


#18. (Troxalis nasutas.}
theless, help to identify the species: of which we


are in search. Now the ancients have certainly
referred to the notion of locusts fighting with ser-
pents (Aristot. Hist. Anim. ix. 9; Plin. Hist.»
Nat. xi. 35). Although this notion is justly
discarded by Cuvier (Grandsagne’s edition of
Pliny, Parisiis, 1828, p. 451, note), yet it may
serve to account for the application of the term
Spioudy'ns to a species of locust. For this word
instantly suggests a reference to the tchneumon,
the celebrated destroyer of serpents and other
vermin ; and it is remarkable that Hesychius, in
the second century, applies the word ogioudyos
both to the ichneumon, and a species of locust
having no wings. If then any species of locust
can be adduced whose habits resemble those of
the tchneumon, may not this resemblance ac-
count for the name, quasi the ichneumon (locust) ;
just as the whole genus of insects called Ichneu-
monide were so denominated because of the sup-
posed analogy between their services and those
of the Egyptian ichneumon? and might not this
name, given to that species of locust at a very
early period, have afterwards originated the es-
roneous notion referred to by Aristotle and Pliny ?
Now, there is one kind of locusts, the genus truzalis
(fierce or cruel), inhabiting Africa and China, and
comprehending many species, which bunts and
preys upon insects. It is also called the truxalis
nasutus, or long-nosed. May not, then, this winged,
leaping, insectivorous locust, and its various
species, be ‘the chargol, after its kind,’ and the
ddiondyns of the Septuagint ? or might the name
have arisen from the similarity of shape and
colour, which is striking, between the truxalis
nasutus and the ichneumon; just as the locust
generally, is, at this time, called cavalette by the
Italians, on account of its resemblance in shape
tothe horse? We know that the ancients in-
dulged in tracing the many resemblances of the
several parts of locusts to those of other animals
ee Hieroz. pt. ii. lib. iv. c. 5, p. 475).
t may be observed, that it is no objection to the
former aud more probable supposition, that a
creature which lives upon other insects should be
allowed as food to the Jews, contrary to the general
principle of the Mosaic law in regard to birds and
quadrupeds, this having been unquestionably the
case with regard to many species of fishes coming
within the regulation of having ‘fins and scales,’
and known to exist in Palestine at the present
time—as the perch, carp, barbel, &c. (Kitto's
Physical History of Palestine, article Fisnxs).
The fact that the Chargol is never made the means
of the divine chastisementa (for which purpose 3


4 CHARIOTS.


locyst preying upon insects could scarcely be
used), conetérs, at least, with the foregoing specu-
lation—J. F. D.

CHARIOT RACES. [Gamezs.}

CHARIOTS. The Scriptures employ diffe-
rent words to denote carriages of different sorts,
but it is not in every case easy to distinguish
the kind of vehicle which these words severally
denote. We are now, however, through the dis-
.covery of ancient sculptures and paintings, in

ion of such information respecting the cha-
riots of Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, and Persia, as
gives advantages in the discussion of this subject
which were not possessed by earlier writers.
The chariots of these nations are, in fact, men-
tioned in the Scriptures; and by connecting the
known with the unknown, we may anive at more
determinate conclusions than have hitherto been
‘attainable.

The first chariots mentioned in Scripture
are those of the Egyptians; and by close atten-
tion ty the various vtices which occur respect-
ing them, we may be able to discriminate the
different kinds which were in use among that
people. .

he earliest notice on this head occurs in
Gen. xli. 43, where the king of Egypt honours
Joseph by commanding that he should ride in
the second of the reyal chariots. ‘This was
doubtless a state-charivt, and the state-charivts
of the Egyptians do not appear tu have been
different from their war-chariots, the splendid
military appointments of which reudered them
fit for purposes of royal pomp. This view of the
matter is cunfirmed Ly our finding that, although
the same word (T2350 mercadah) is again used
for chariots of state in Gen. xlvi. 29, 1 Sam. viii.
11, 2 Sam. xv. 1, it undoubtedly denotes a
war-chariot in Exod. xv. 4, Joel ii. 5. In Isa.
ii. 7, the same word appears to comprehend
chariots of every kind which were fuund in cities.
This may be accounted for by the fact that cha-
riots anciently in the east were used almost
entirely fur purposes of state or of war, being
very rarely employed by private persons. We
also observe that where private cariages were
known, as fh Egypt, they were of the same
shape as those’ used in war, and only differed
from them by having less complete military
accoutrements, although even in tliese the case
for arrows is not wanting. One of the most
interesting of the Egyptian paintings represents a
person of quality arriving fate at an entertain-
ment in his curricle, drawn (like all the Egyptian
chariots) by two horses. He is attended by a


number of running footmen, one of whom hastens
forward to knock at the door of tke house, another
advances to take the reins, a third bears a stool


CHARIOTS.


to assist bis master in alighting, and most of them
carry their sandals in their hands that they may
run with the more ease. This conveys a lively
illustration of such passages as 1 Sam. viii. 11;
2 Sam. xv.1. ‘The principal distinction between
these private chariots and those actually used in
war was, as appears from the monuments, that in
the former the party drove himself, whereas in war


_ the chariot, as among the Greeks, often cuntained


a second person to drive it, that the warrior might
be at liberty to employ his weapons with the more
effect. But this was not always the case; for in
the Egyptian monuments we often see even myal
mages alone in their chariots, warring fu-
tiously, with the reins lashed round their waist
(No. 223). So it appears that Jehu (who cer
tainly rode in a war-chariot) drove himself; for
his peculiar style of driving was recognised at a
considerable distance (2 Kings ix. 20).

There has been some speculation as to any dif
ference of meaning between the preceding word »
mercabah (FINS), and mercab (33%). In
1 Kings v. 6, the latter obviously means chariots,
taken collectively. But in Lev. xv. 9 (rendered
in the Auth, Vers. ‘saddle’) and Cant. iii. 10 (ren-
dered ‘the bottom’) it has been understood by
some to denote the seat of a chariot. To this view
there is the fatal objection that ancient chariots
had no seats. It apy to denote the seat ofa
litter (the only vehicle that had a seat), and its
name mercab may have been derived fiom the
general resemblance of the body of a litter (dis-
tinguished from the canopy, &c.) both in form
and use, to that of a chariot.

Another word, 339 receb, from the same root,
appears to signify a carriage of any kind, and is
especially used with rcference to large bodies of
carriages, and hence most generally of war-cha-
riots; for chariots were anciently seldom seen to-
gether in large numbers except when employed in
war. It is applied indifferently to the war-chariots
of any uation, as to those of the Egyptians (Exod.
xiv. 9), the Canaanites (Josh. xvii. 18; Judg. i. 195
iv. 3), the Hebrews (2 Kings ix. 21, 24; x. 16),
the Syrians (2 Kings v. 9), the Persians (Isa. xxi.
7,9). By a comparison of these references with
those passages in which mercaah occurs, we find
the two words applied with so little distinction to
all sorts of carriages as to suggest that they were
uyed indifferently and interchangeably, just as we
should say either ‘carriage ’ or ‘coach, —neither of
which is specific, and both of which ditler more from
each other than the Hebrew receb and mercabuh
—to denote the same vehicle. Indeed there ae
passages in which both words are manifestly ap-
plied to the same identical vehicle, as in 2 Kings
v. 9, 21, and 1 Kings xxii. 35, 38; where no reader
would suspect a change of vehicles, which some
have endeavoured to establish in order to make out
a dillerence between the reccd and mercabah. Mr.
Charles Taylor, in one of the fragments appended
to his edition of Calmet, indulges in much in-
genious speculation on this subject, and labours
to make out that while ise mercabah denvted a
chariot of state drawn by four horses, the reced
was a humbler chariot drawn by two harses, and
sometimes a litter carried by two horses. To this
it may be sufficient to answer that chariots of
state were not drawn by four horses in the East;
that no instance of such a practice can be pro-
duced ; and that the hest Hebrew echolars of the


~


CHARIOTS,


ewment deny that it can be that reced
aywhere denotes a litter, for which indeed there
sadifferent word (Lirrsr}.

There is another word ,which is sometimes
radered by chariot, viz. MOS) ‘agalah ; but as
we have elsewhere [Carr] shown that it denetes
a cart, or waggon, drawn by oxen, we
need not here return to the subject, It is indeed

alleged that in Ps. xlvi. 9 the word manifestly
7 a chariot of war. The plural ‘agaloth,
ia there used, and the supposition that it means
achariot of war procceds on the assumption that
nly chariots were used in war.
the fact, for in the scenes of Egyptian warfare
we find carts, drawn by oxen, brought into the
feld hy certain nomade nations, and in which
they endeavour to escape from their pursuers.

In the prophecy of Nahum, who was of the
fint captivity, and resident (if not born) at El-
Kosh in Assyria, there is much allusion to chariots,

« suggested doubtless by their frequency before his
eyes in the streets of Ni ineveb and throughout om

Assyrian empire. In fact, when prophesying the

downfall of Nineveh, he gives a particular and

animated description of their action in the streets
of the great city :—

The shield of his mighties is made red :

The valiant men are clothed in scarlet :

The chariots are as the fire of lamps, in the

day when he prepareth them.

And the horsemen spread fear

In the streets, the chariots madden :

They run to and fro in the broad places :

Their a is as lamps, they run

as lightning. Nahum ii. 3, 4.


These allusions to the horsemen and chariots of
ineveh give much interest to one of the very
recent discoveries of M. Botta, on the site of that
very ancient city. In excavating @ certain mass
of building, which appears to have formed part of
tome much more extensive pile, he discovered
Various inscriptions and sculptures, which seem
to show that the work was earlier than the age of
Cyrus, and may be referred to the times of the
Assyrian Empire. In one place is a bas-relief,
Tepresenting a horseman at full gallop. Another
part of the same wall represents two horsemen
galloping side by side, with another follow-
ing at a short distance, Further on, two armed
horsemen are visible, one following the other at
full gallop. The movement of the horses is very
animated ; and both men and horses sbow traces
of colour. In another place are two horsemen walk-
tug their horses side by side. The only horse-
man visible has a sword ; a quiver and bow are
pee his shoulder, and his legs are clothed in
only ; These figures are very interesting, not
dist) eeection with the prophecy which so
int ee mentions the ‘horsemen’ of Nineveh,
figu use are, in fact, the only mounted
ribet which Occur among the more ancient
ie of Asia. None have been found at
Heels on, Rone at Persepolis; and among the
aie wolita sculptures and paintings of Egypt, only
crossed thet unarmed figure, who seems to have
i aprign back of the animal by accident. But
* cririous, bestest interest is the discovery of
by two horses, past » Tepresenting a chariot drawn
Principal of ince Containing three persons. The
Appears to be a bearded man,


But this is not -


CHARIOTS OF WAR. 415
lifting his right arm, and bolding in his left hand
a bow. He wears a tiara painted red (‘the valiant
men are ares in Epler aps ey a
beardless slave, carrying a fri parasol, at
ae is the onesie pags ype

whip. The principal person ioteer
wear sarciige The chariot-wheels have eight
spokes: the chariot itself has been covered with
carving, now impossible to be made out. The
most noticeable thing is a bench, which seems to
be attached to the chariot by a double belt, and
which M. Botta supposes to have been a metal
rod, intended to secure the solidity of the whole.
The horses are admirably drawn, and afford in-
dications of pure Arabian blood. Their harness is
very rieb, am afill bears evident traces of colouring,


among which blue and red only can be dis-


tinguished, the rest having turned black. Be-

hind the chariot rides a cavalier, bearing a lance,

with a sword at his belt, and a a over his
8


).


shoulder (Atheneum, July 29, 1


930. [Persian Charlot.)


From this description it would appear that the
Assyrian chariots were considerably different
from those of the ancient Egyptians, and even
from those of the Persians, with which we are
acquainted through the Persepolitan sculpture
(now in the British Museum), here copied
(No. 220), and which are of a much heavier
build than those of Egypt, as perhaps the more
mountainous character of the country required.
The chariots of Assyria would seem in some
respects to have occupied a middle place between
the other two. Among other points we observe that
the spokes of the wheels are never nfore than six
in the Egyptian chariot, while in the Assyrian


221. [Babylonian Chariot.)


there are eight, and in the Persian eleven. Not
very different from the Persian chariot is one repre-
sented on a coin found at Babylon (No. Guta
but the spokes of the wheels are eight, as in the
Assyrian chariot, This coin has given occasion
to much unsound speculation in the attempt to
connect it with the history of Daniel.
CHARIOTS OF WAR. The Eyyptians
used horses in the equipment of an armed force


416 CHARIOTS OF WAR.
before Jacob and his sons had settled in Goshen ;


' CHARTUMMIM.
in the time of the Maccabees (2:Mac. xiii. 5),


they had chariots of war, and mounted asees and and in Britain whén Casar invaded the islar’;


mules, and therefore could not be ignorant of the
art of riding; but for ages after that period Arab
nations rode on the bare back, and guided the ani-
mals with a wand. Others, and probably the shep-
herd invaders, noosed a single in asli
round the lower jaw, forming an imperfect bridle,
with only one rein; a practice still in vogue
among the Bedouins. Thus cavalry were but little
formidable com with chariots, until a complete
command over the horse was obtained by the disco-
very of a true bridle. This seems to have been first
introduced by chariot-drivers, and there are figures
of well-constructed hamess, reins, and mouth-
pieces, in very early Egyptian monuments, repre-
‘senting both native and foreign chariots of war.
These differed little from each other, both consist-
~ jing of a light pole, suspended between and on the
withers of a pair of horses, the after end resting on a
light axle-tree, with two low wheels. Upon the axle


Bi
aS
Seg


oi


bez
aM
er


222. (Egyptian War Chariot.)


stood a light frame, open behind and floored for
the warrior and his charioteer, who both stvod
within: on the sides of the frame hung the war-
bow, in its case; a large quiver with arrows, and
darts had commonly a particular sheath. In
Persia, the chariots, elevated upon wheels of con-
siderable diameter, had four horses abreast; and,
in early ages, there were occasionally hooks or
scythes attached to the axles. In fighting from
chariots great dexterity was shown by the warrior,
not only in handling his weapons, but also in
stepping out upon the pole to the horses’ shoulders,
in order the hetter to attain his enemies, and the
charisteer was an important person, sometimes
equal in rank to the warrior himself. Both the
kingdoms of Judah and Israel had war-chariots,
and, from the case of king Josiah at the battle of
Megiddo, it is clear they had also travelling-
vehicles, for being wounded he quitted his fighting-
chariot, and in a second, evidently more commo-
dious, he was brought to Jerusalem (2 Chron. xxxv.
24). Chariots of war continued to be used in Syria


223. [Egyptian War Charlot.) j


but it would lead us beyond our proper limits if °
we were to expatiate un the Biga and Quadriga,
the Essedum, Rheda, and Covinus of the ancients.
The subject belongs more ey to a dictionary
of classical antiquities. —C. H. S.
CHARITY. The Greek word édyden, fre-

uently thus rendered in the Authorized Version of
the New Testament (e.g. 1 Cor. xiii. throughout),
is that which is more usually translated ‘ Jove’ in
the same version (e.g. John xv. throughout).
The translation of the word by ‘love’ is the
more proper, seeing that ‘ charity” has acquired
a signification in our language which limits it to
overt acts of beneticence. *Aydawn denotes that
kindly state of mind or feeling which renders a
person full of such goodwill or affectionate regard
towards others as is always ready to evince itself
in word or action. In short, it describes that state
of feeling which the apostle enjoiued the Romans
(xii. 10) to entertain: ‘ Be ye kindly affectioned
one to another.” This extended meaning of the
word explains the pre-eminence which the apostle
assigns to the virtue which it implies over every
other Christian grace (1 Cor. xiii.).

CHARMING OF SERPENTS. [Appzr.]~


CHARTUMMIM (D°OD7N; Sept. exaosBol,
gappaxol). This is the title rendered ‘magicians’
in our version, applied to the ‘ wise men’ of Egypt
(Gen. xli. 8,22; Exod. vii. 1]; viii. 7, 18, 19; ix.
11), and of Babylon (Dan. i. 20; ii. 2). The word
‘magicians’ is not in either case properly applied,
as the magi belonged to Persia, rather than to
Babylon or Egypt; and should be altogether
avoided in such application, seeing that it has
acquired a sense different from that which it once
bore. The Hebrew word properly denotes ‘ wise
men,’ as they called themselves and were called by
others; but, as we should call them, ‘men eminent
in learning and science,’ their exclusive possession
of which in their several countries enabled them
occasionally to produce effects which were ac-
counted supernatural by the people. Pythagoras,
who was acquainted with Ecypt and the East, and
who was not unaware of the unfathomable depths
of ignorance which lie under the highest attainable
conditions of human knowledge, thought the ino
dest title of philosopher (giAdcoges), ‘lover of
wisdom,’ more becoming, and accordingly he
brought it into use; but that of ‘wise men’ still
retained its hold in the East.


.CHARUL.


Gesenius concludes that the Egyptian Chartum-
tim were those of the Egyptian priests who had
darge of the sacred records. His etymological
reasons may be seen in his Thesaurus, There can
be little doubt that they belonged to some branch
of the priesthood, seeing that the more recondite

of learning and science were culti-
vated exclusively in that powerful caste.


CHARUL én occurs in three places in
Scripture, and in them all is translated ‘netéles’ in
the Auth. Version. Thus in Prov. xxiv. 30, 31, it
is written, ‘J went by the field of the slothful, &c.,
ani, lo, it was all grown over with thorns, and net-
tle (charullim) had covered the face thereof.’ So
in Job xxx. 7 it is stated that he was insulted
by the children of those whom he would formerly
have disdained to employ, and who were s0 ab-
ject and destitute that ‘among the bushes they

yed; under the nettles they were gathered
together ;’ and in Zepb. ii. 9, ‘Surely Moab shall
be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as
Gomorrah, even the breeding of nettlvs, and salt-
its, and a perpetual desolation.’ Considerable
jittculty has been experienced in determining
the plant which is alluded to in the above pas-
sages, which, as Celsius says, ‘sacris scriptoribus
parcius memorata, et notis paucissimis descripta,
ac distincta.” The majority of translators and
commentators have thought that some thorny or
prickly plant, or a nettle, is intended by the charul,
on account of the other plants which are men-
tioned along with it. Hence brambles, the wild
aye and thistles, have been severally selected ;
t nettles have had the greatest number of sup-
pe. Celsius however prefers the Zizyphus Pa-
iurus, or the plant which has been called Christ's
thorn, as that best suited to the several contexts.
Of all these determinatious, however, it must
be observed that they amount to nothing more
than conjectures, because, as Rosenmiiller says,
the cognate languages have not this word, and
also because ‘the Greek translators of Alexandria
in the first and last of these three places (the only
places in which the Hebrew word occurs) entirely
deviate from our present Hebrew text; but in the
passage of Job they translate charul by wild
shrubs.” To us it does not appear, from the import
of the above passages, that @ thorny plant is neces-
sarily Meant by the term under review. All that
is implied is that neglected fields, that is, fields
'n cultivation which are neglected, will become
He ia ker and that these should se

nv such as id as inthe passage o!
might take shelter ' under, or lie down among.
frie Passage, indeed, seems to preclude any
ts 1, plant or nettle, as noone wonld volun

nity resort to such a situation; and one of the
commentators, as quoted by Celsius (ii. p. 168),
Henar to have been of the same opinion: ‘ Bar
eat Mul apud Castellum pisa vel cicerculas a
whe that is, he considers pease, or rather vetches,

oe Moreover, it is worthy of remark,

7 word in a cogna
bic, which isnot very dlielar ons ohavotor the-

and which is applied to plants apparently quite


Suitable toall the above passages. The word o>


to plants which are employed


CHARUL. 417


fox the same purposes as mustard (as we to
be able to show in the article aatey and pt miee
very unlike the kharud or charul of Scripture. In
fact, theydo not differ more than many words which
are considered to have been originally the same.
Some of the wild kinds of mustard are well
known to spring up in com fields, and to be the
most troublesome of all the weeds with which the
husbandman has to deal : one of these, indeed, as-
napis arvensis, is well known to be, and is specially
mentioned by a modern botanical author, Sir James
Smith, as abundant in corn-fields, where it isa very
troublesome weed, and also in waste ground,
when newly disturbed. So also, as old a writer
as Gerarde, in his Herbal, says, ‘ There be three
sorts of wild turneps ; one our common rape, which
beareth the seed whereof is made rape-vil, and
feedieth singing birds: the other, the common eni-
my to come, which we call charlock.’ He likewise
mentions that this is also called carlock, chadlook
and kedlock, words which it is curious to observe for
their resemblance to khardul, kharul, or charul,
and which are applied in our country to this
wild kind of mustard, as. khardul is to the species
of mustard indigenous in different parts of Asia.
That some of these are found in Syria and Pales-
tine is well known, as Russel mentions the above
stnapis arvensis, or charlock, as common in the
neighbourhood of Aleppo, and, in fact, it is one of
the most widely diffused of the species. Decan-
dolle, in his Syst. Natural. ii. Pp 615, describes
it as ‘Habitat arvis, vineis, agris Europa inter-
dum nimis copiosa, a Lusitania ad Petropolim,
a Sicilia ad Daiiata: ab Anglia ad Tauriam.’


224. [Sinaple Orlentalis.]


Irby and Mangles moreover state, that in their
khardul ; oie journey from Bysan to Adjeloun they met with the
well as eet in all old Arabic works, as mustard plant growing wild, and as high as their

and Sieent cay, to different species of - horses’ heads. In fact, 00 large dosome of the


species grow in these countries, that one of them
8


418 CHASIL.


has been supposed to be the“mustard tree alluded
to by our Saviour. S. arvensis being 90 widely dif-
fused is probably also found in Palestine, though
this can only be determined by a good botanist on
the spot, or by a comparison of genuine specimens.
But there is another species, the S. orientalis, which
is common in corn-fields in Syria, and south
and middle Europe, and which can scarcely be
distinguished from S. arvensis. Kither of these
will suit the above passages, and as the naine
is not very dissimilar, we are of opinion that it is
better entitled to be the charud of Scripture than
any other plant that has hitherto been adduced.
It would be the first to spring up in a carelessly
cultivated field, and choke the neglected corn,
while it would soon cover deserted fields, and
might readily be resorted to for shelter from a hot
wind, or even from the rays of the sun, when
growing so large as is described by some of the
travellers in the Holy Land.—J. F. R.
CHASE. [Huntina.]


CHASIL (S300; Sept. Bpodyos; Vulg.
bruchus ; Eng. Vers. caterpillar) occurs in He-
brew, 1 Kings viii. 37; 2 Chron. vi. 28; Ps.
xxviii. 46; lea. xxxiii. 4; Joel i, 4; ii. 25.

In the Sept. Lev. xi. 22; 3 Kings viii. 37;
2 Chron. vi. 28; Ps. civ. 34; Joel i. 4; ii. 255
Amos vii. 1; Nahum iii. 15, 16.

In the Vulg. Lev. xi. 22; 2 Chron. vi. 28;
Ps. civ. 34; Isa. xxxiii. 4; Jer. li. 14; Joel i.
4; Nahum iii. 15, 16.

In the Auth. Vers. 1 Kings viii. 37; 2 Chron.
vi. 28; Ps. Ixxviii. 46: cv. 34; Isa. xxxiii. 4;
Jer. Ji. 14, 27; Joel i. 4; ii. 25. :

The English word caterpillar belongs strictly to
the /arve of the genus lepidoptera, and more especi-
ally to the larva of a section of it, the Papilronide.
It is, however, far from provable that the Sion


isany species of caterpillar. The root 2DM, from
which it is derived, signities to ‘consume’ or ‘de-
vour, and it is especially used todenote the ravages


of the locust (Deut. xxviii. 38, 7587 35D»).
The Arabic and Syriac cognates also signify to
consume. The word Bpotxos, by which it is fre-
quently rendered in the Septuagint. from Bpdone,
J eat up, conveys also the idea of ravenousness,
All these names indicate a creature whose chief
characteristic is voracity, and which also attaches
to all the species of locusts. The ancients, in-
deed, concur in referring the word to the locust
tribe of insects, but are not agreed whether it sig-
nities any particular species of locust, or is the
name for any of those states or transformations
through which the locust passes from the egg to
the perfect insect. The Latin Fathers take it to
mean the larva of the locust, and the Greck un-
derstand it as the name of an adult locust. The
Latins give the name bruchus to the young locust
before it has wings, call it attelabus when it begins
to fly, and locusta when it is fully able to tly.
Thus Jerome, in his Comm. on Nahum, c. iii.
‘ Bruchus nihil aliud faciat, nisi semper in terra
sit, et absque alis cibo et ventri serviat ; attelabus
autem saltem modicas assumat alas, et, cum in
altum volare non possit, tamen de terra exsilire
Notatur, et tandem perveniens in locustam volitat.’
And again, ‘ Attelabus quem significantius com-
messorem interpretatus est Aquila, parva Jocusta
est, inter bruchum, et modicis pennis


CHASIL.


reptans, potius quam volans semperque subsiliens.’
Augustine also, on Ps. civ., says ‘ Bruchus est
locuste fetus ; una plaga est locuste et bruchi,
quoniam altera est parens, et alter est foetus’
The same opinion is maintained by Gregorius
‘in Jobum 1b. xxxiii. c. 17.’ These statements
of Jerome, and the other Latins, are very remark-
able, since the Vulgate, in Nahum iii. 16, reads
Bruchus expansus est et avolavit, and flies away ;
and the Septuagint, also, in the same place, reads
Bpotxos Spunce xal ekererdo6n, and what is still
more remarkable, Jerome himself, Lev. xi, 22,
puts the bruchus among the volucrea = It is curi-
ous to see the Greek fathers ascribing tings and
the power of flight to the bruchus, in their com-
ments on the same passages. Thus Cyril upon
Nahum iii. : aol yap, 811, rewrovons XaAdCns, wal
berav xatapnyyvunevey adpavhs eis wrjow 5
Bpotixos, xaradeSeupévwr ate tav wrépwy. And
Theodoret upon the same passage: THs jAsaxhs
mposBadAotons axrivos avlorata: cal weravruct
Ta wrepa. kal els Erepov peraBalver réxoy. The
same writer on Amos vii. 1 plainly distinguishes
the bruchus from the young of the locust. ’Exryo-
vty de dxplSwy, he observes, exadnoe Toy’ Acovpioy,
Bpotxov 8¢ thy BaBuadvoy. The Septuagint also
in Lev. xi. 22, seems to distinguish the bruchus
and its 7a 8yo1a, ‘and its kind,’ from the &xpis, or
common locust, and its rd Suora as differing not
in age but in species. Theophrastus also, Mep) ray
GOpdwy pawdpevav (hwy says, xadewal uty ody al
axpides, xarenwrepar 8¢ of aTTéAEBot, Kal ToUTeP
pdALoTa obs Kadove: BpovKous (Apovxous). The
testimony of Hesychius is very clear: Bpov-
os axplSav el8os “laves. Kuwpio: 3¢ thy xAwpay
axplda, Bpodxay. Tapavrivo: 5t, "ATeAcBoy, érepor,
*Apovpaiay pavriw. The inconsistency of Jerome's
statements, and the contrariety both of his notions
on the subject and of the other Latins to those of
the Greeks, may be owing to the circumstance
that in his time the use of the words in question
might have become arbitrary, or loose and uncer-
tain. Even Pliny calls the attelabi, minima lo-
custarum sine pennis (Nat. Hist. xxix. 4, 20).


Thus Jerome translates bypn, in 1 Kings viii, 37,
by mbigo; nor does the Septuagint observe strict
uniformity ; for, in Ps. Ixxviii, 46, it bas
épvaiBy and in Is. xxxiii. 4, axpides.

The superior antiquity however of the Septua
gint entitles its opinion to preference, and, in the
passages already quoted, it ascribes flight to the
Bpovxos, and ‘sieaks of it as a distinct species;
and in the former particular especially, it 1s difti-
cult to suspect it of an egregious error. The
statement of Aristotle is also worthy of notice, who
speaks of the atfe/abos as a mature insect, for
he refers to its parturition and eggs (Jlist. An.
v. 29).

The arguments and speculations of the most
eminent modern writers may be seen in Bochart,
Hierozo. ; Rosenmiiller, vol. iii. p. 256, sqq. Lips.
1793-6. Upon those arguments and speculations,
the leamed editor gives an opinion, which appears
to us the best that can be formed ; it is this, that
the Hebrew word does mean a locust, but of what
species it is impossible to determine. One of his
observations we cannot forbear to quote, namely,
that in Ps, Ixxviii. 46, the bon is parallel to
MAW, the most certain name, for the locust; and
that in Isa. xxiii. 4, the 0°7°DM auswer to the


CHASMIL,


3 in the other member of the sentence, a col-
tion which seems plainly to intimate different
gpecies.—J. FP. D.

CHASMIL (O9Y1, Ezek. i. 4, 27; viii. 3)
was ly a composition of several sorts of
ell ies even §Aex7poy, by which the word is
tendered by the ancients, frequently signifies a com-

ition of gold and silver (Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxiii.

3 ix. 65). Nor were the ancients unacquainted
with the art of amalgamating various species of
metal; and the Latin aurichalcum, at least ac-
cording to the derivation of Isidorus (Orig. xvi.
19:‘ Aurichalcam dicitur, quod et splendorem auri
et doritiem aris possideat’), would thus coincide
with Bochart's etymology (Hieroz. iii. p. 893) of

3 for he thinks the word composed of WN)
@s,and Sop aurum, and proposes to read ,
instead of . Neither can there be any doubt
that avrichalcum is a mere Latinized form of
the Greek dpelxadxos (Homer, Hymn. v. 9; Hes.
Seut.122; Callim. In lav. Pallad. 19). According
to Serv. (ad .£n. xii. 87), the aurichalcum pos-
seemed the brightness of gold and the hardness
of copper, and might not improbably have been
our t_platina, which has been re-discovered
in the Ural mountains, after having long been
known as an American fossil. Pliny (Hist.
Nat. xxxiv. 1) says of aurichalcum, ‘ Nec re-
eral longo iam tempore, effeta tellure.’ Perhaps

y the INYO NMI (Ezra viii. 27) was meant
Gurichalcum ; at least the derivation of the words
tallies with the properties of that metal.—E. M.

CHATZIR (3M), or Cuazir, also Crasir.
This word occurs in several places in the Old
Testament, where it is variously translated, as
gross, in 1 Kings xviii. 5, 2 Kings xix. 26, Job
xl. 15, Ps. xxxvii. 2, &c.; herb in Job viii. 12;
hay, in Prov. xxvii. 25, and Isa. xv.6; and
court, in Isa. xxxiv. 13: but in Num. xi. 5, it is
translated leeks. Hebrew scholars state that the
‘word signifies ‘ greens’ or ‘grass’ in general ; and
itisno doubt clear, from the context of most of the
above passages, that this must be its meaning. There
is therefore no reason why it should not be so trans-
lated in all the ges where it occurs, except
in the last. It 1s evidently incorrect to trans-

it Aay, as in the above passages of Proverbs
and Isaiah, because the people of Eastern coun-
tries, as it has been observed, do not make hay.
The author of Fragments, in continuation of
Calmet, has justly remarked on the incorrectness
of our version, ‘The hay appeareth, and the ten-
der grass showeth itself, and the Aerbs of the
mountains are gathered" (Prov. xxvii. 25) :—‘ Now
certainly,’ says he, ‘if the tender grass is but just
beginning to show itself, the Aay, which is grass
eutand dried after it has arrived at maturiy, ought
by no means to be associated with it; still less
Ought it to be placed before it.’ The author con-
tinues, ‘The word, I apprehend, means the first
shoots, the rising, just tidding spires of grass.’
So in Isa. xv. 6.

Jn the of Num. xi. 5, where the Israel-
ites in the desert long for ‘the melons, and the
leeks, and the onions, and the garlick’ of Egypt,
it is evident that it was not grass which they de
sired for fuod, but some green, perhaps grass-like
vegetable, for which the word chatzir is used, and
which is above translated decks. In the same


probable, therefore, that chatzir is here similarly
employed, though this does not prove that leeks
are intended. Ludolphus, as quoted by Celsius
(Hiecrobot. ii. 264), supposes that it may mean
lettuce, or salads in general, and others that the
succory or endive may be the true plant. But
Rosenmiiller states, ‘The most ancient Greek and
the Chaldee translators unanimously interpret the
Hebrew by the Greek xpdoa, or leeks.” The name
moreover seems to have been specially applied to
leeks from the resemblance of their leaves to grass,
and from their being conspicuous for their green
colour. This is evident from minerals even having
been named from xpdooy on account of their co-
lour, as prasius, prasites, and chrysoprasium. The


Arabs use the word 4\,S kooras, or koorath,


as the translation of. the xpdooy of the Greeks,
and with them it signifies the leek, both at the
present day and in their older works. It is cu-
rious that of the different kinds described, one is
called kooras-al-bukl, or leek used as a vegetable.
That the leek is esteemed in Egypt we have the
testimony of Hasselquist, who says, ‘that the
kind called karrat by the Arabs must certainly
have heen cne of those desired by the children of
Israel; as it has been cultivated and esteemed
from the earlicst times to the present time in
Egypt.’ So the Roman satirist—
*Porrum et cepe nefas violare et frangere
morsu,
O sanctas gentes, quibus hee nascuntur in
hortis
Numina!’

The Romans employed it much as a season-
ing to their dishes, as is evident from the namber
of recipes in Apicius referred to by Celsius. The
leek (Allium Porrum) was introduced into this
country about the year 1562, and, as is well known,
continues to be esteemed as a seasoning to soups
and stews.—J. F. R. F eae

8


#20 CHEBAR. '


CHEBAR (133; Sept. XoBdp), a river of
Mesopotamia, upon the banks of which king
Nebuchadnezzar planted a coluny of Jews. among
whom was the prophet Ezekiel (2 Kings xxiv.
15; Ezek. i. 1,3; aii. 15, 23; x. 15,22). This
ia without doubt the same river that was known
among the Greeks as the Chaboras, and which
now bears the name of Khabour. It flows to
the Euphrates through Mesopotamia, and is the
only considerable stream which enters that river.
It is formed by the junction of a number of
small brooks, which rise in the neighbourhood
of a ruined town called Ras-el-Ain, 13 furlongs
south-west of Merdin, It takes a southerly direc-
tion till it receives the waters of another stream
equal to itself, when it bends westward to the Eu-
phrates, which it enters at Kerkesia, the Carche-
mish of Scripture. [CarcuysisH.] (Rosenmiiller,
Bw. Geog. ii. 180; Kinnier, Geug. Mem. of the
Persian Empire, p. 244).

CHEDEK. [Tuorns.]

CHEDORLAOMER, King of Elam, and
leader of the five kings who invaded Canaan in
the time of Abraham (Gen. xiv). [ABRAHAM;
Assyria; Enax.]

CHEESE. The most important passage in
which this preparation from muk is mentioned in
Seripture is that where Job, figuratively describing
the furmation of the fetus in the womb, says—

‘Hast thou not poured me out like milk,

And curdled (cundensed, solidified) me like

cheese f° (x. 10).

We know not how our Biblical illustrators have
deduced frony this that the cheese used in the
East necessarily was in a semi-fluid state. It ra-
ther alludes to that progressive soliditication which
is common to all cheese, which is always soft
when new, though it hardens when it becomes old.
But for the tendency to sevck remote and recon-
dite explanations of plain things, it must seem
perfectly obvious that to ‘curdle like cheese’ does
not mean that curdled milk teas cheese ; but that
milk was curdled to form eventually the hardened
cheese. If the text proves anything as to the
condition of cheese, it would rather show that,
when considered fit for use, it was hard, than
that it was soft or fluid; the process of soliditi-
cation being the subject of altisioa, of which
curling the milk is, in the case of cheese, only
the tirst though the most essential operation. Un-
doubtedly the Orientals do eat curds, or curdled
milk; but that therefore their cheese consists of
curdled milk is not the correct inference. We
also eat curds, but do not regard curds as cheese
—neither du they. The other passages describe
‘cheese’ in the plural, as parts of military pro-
vision, for which the most solid and compact sub-
stances are always preferred. Persons on a march
would not like to encumber themselves with
curdled milk (2 Sam. xvii. 29).

‘Fhere is much reason to conclude that the
cheese used by the Jews differed in no respect from
that still cagmmon in the East; which is usually
exhibited in small cakes about the size of a tea
saucer, white in culour, and excessively salt, It

no rind, and soon becomes excessively hard
and dry—being, indeed, not made for long keep-
ing. It is best when new and comparatively soft;
and, in this state, large quantities are consumed
in lumps or crumbs not made up into cakes. All


CHELBENAH.


cheese in the East is of very indifferent quality;
and it is within the writer's own knowledye that
the natives infinitely prefer English or Dutch
cheese when they can obtain it. In making
cheese, the common rennet is either butter-milk or
a decoction of the great-headed thistle, or wild
artichoke. The curds are afterwards put into
small baskets made of rushes or palm leaves, which
are then tied up close, and the necessary pressure
applied.

There are several decisions in the Mishnah
relative to the pressure by which cheese was mace
(Cholim, viii. 2). This proves that, as observed
before, no preparation of milk was regarded as
cheese while in a fluid state, or beture being sub-
jected to pressure. In another place (Avoda Sara,
ii. 5) it is decided that cheese made by fureigners
could not be eaten, from the fear that it might
possibly be derived from the milk of some animal
which had Leen offered in sacrifice tu idols.


CHeLBENAH (7}351) is mentioned in
Exod. xxx. 34, as one of the substances from
which the incense for the sanctuary was to be
prepared: ‘Tuke unto thee sweet spices, stacte
and onycha and (chelbenah) galbanum.’ The
Hebrew word is very similar to the Greek
xaArBarn, which occurs as eaily as the time of
Hippocrates. The substance is more particu-
larly described by Dioscorides, who gives werémioy
as an additional name, and states that it is an
exudation produced by a ferula in Syria. So
Pliny (xii. 25), as translated by Tolland,
‘ Moreover we have from Syria out of the same
mountain, Amanus, another kind of gum, called
galbanum, issuing out of an herb-like fennel-
geant, which some call by the name of the said
resin, others stagonotis. The best galbanum,
and which is most set by, is grisly and clear,
withal resembling hammoniacum.’ Theophras-
tus had long previously (dist. Pl. ix. 7) said
that galbanum flows from a Panax of Syria.
In both cases it is satisfactory to find a plant of
the same natural family of Umbellifere pointed
out as yielding this drug, because the plant has
not yet been clearly ascertained. The Arabs,
however, seem to have been acquainted with it, as
they give its names. Thus, ‘ galbanum’ in Persian
works has barzu assigned to it as the Arabic,
birceja as the Hindovstanee, with Ahulyan and
metonion as the Greek names (evident corruptions
of xaA Baden and perdmioy, arising from errors in the
reading of the diacritical points): AinneA and
nafeel are stated to be names of the plant, which is
described as being jointed, thomy, and fragrant
(Royle, Ilust. Himal. Bot. p. 23). Lobel made an
attempt to ascertain the plant by sowing some
seeds which he found attached to the gum of com-
merce: ‘ Oritur in hortis nostris hac pervenusta
planta semine copioso, Jato, foliacea, arymatico,
reperto Antwerpia in gallant lachryme’ (Obs. p.
431). The plant which was thus obtained is the
Ferula ferulago of Linnzus, a native of N. Africa,
Crete, and Asia Minor. It has been objected, how-
ever, that it does nut yield galbanum in any of these
situations; but the same objection might be made,
though erroneonsly, to the mastich-tree, as not
yielding mastich, because it does not do so except
in a svil and climate suitable to it. Other plants,
as the Bubon galbanum and gummiferum, have,
in consequence, been selected, but with less claim,


CHELBENAH.


as they are natives of the Cape of Good Hope.
The late Professor Don, having found some seeds
of an umbelliferous plant sticking to the galba-
num of commerce, has named the plant, though

et unknown, Galbanum officinale. These seeds,

wever, may or may not have belonged to the
yalbanum plant. Dr. Lindley has suggested
another plant, which he has named Opoidia galbani
fera, and which grows in Khorassan, in Durrood,
whence specimens were sent to this country by
Sir John M‘Niell, as yielding an inferior sort of
ammoniacum. Upon the whole, it is evident
that the plant is yet to be ascertained. Gal-
banum is in the present day imported into this
country, both from the Levant and from India.
That from the latter country is exported from
Bombay, having been first imported thither, pro-
bably from the Persian Gulf. It is therefore pro-
table that it may be produced in the countries at
the head of that malt that is, in the northern
parts of Arabia or in Per-ia, (portious of which, as
is well known, were faeluded in the Syria of the
ancients;) perhaps in Kurdistan, which nearly
corresponds with ancient Assyria. The later
Greeks, finding the country to the north of Pales-
tine subject to the Assyrians, called the country
Assyria, or by contraction Syria. It is on this
account that in classical writers the names
Assyria and Syria are so often found interchanged
(Le. p. 244).

Galbanum, then, is either a natural exudation,
or obtained by incisions from some umbelliferous
plant. It occurs in commerce in the form either
of tears or masses, commonly called Jump-gal-
banum. The latter is of the consistence of wax,
tenacious, of a brownish, or brownish yellow
colour, with white spots in the interior, which are
the agglutinated tears. Its odour is strong and
balsamic, but disagreeable, and its taste warm
and bitter. It is composed of 66 per cent. of
resin, and 6 of volatile oil, with gum, &c., and im-
purities. It was formerly held in high esteem as
astimulant and anti-spasmodic medicine, and is
still employed as such, and for external applica-
tion to discuss indolent tumours. A French
author enumerates various pharmaceutic prepa-
rations of which it formerly constituted an in-
gredient, as ‘le Mithridate, Porvietan, le dioscor-
dium de Fracasta, l’onguent des eee ou de-
dacapharmaque d'Avicenna, &c., les emplatres
divin de Jacques Lemort, manus Dei magnetique
d'Ange Sola,’ &c. It is still more to our pur-
pose that we learn from Dioscorides that, in
preparing a fragrant ointment, galbanum was
mixed with other aromatic substances; as under
Merdatoy he says, in the Latin translation of
Sprengel, ‘ Paratur et in gypto unguentum, ver-
naculo nomine Metopium dictum, scilicét propter
galbani permistionem. Lignum enim e quo gal-
banum manat, metopium vocatur. Ex oleo om-
phacino et amygdalarum amararum, cardamomo,
scheno, calamy, melle, vino, myrrha, balsamisemi-
ne, galbano et resina componitur.’ Hence we see
that it was the practice of the ancients to mix gal-
banum with the most fragrant substances with
which they were acquainted. The eflect of such
inixture must depend upon the proportion in which
it or any other strong-smelling substance is in-
termixed, more than upon what is its peculiar
‘odour when in a concentrated state. We need
Rot, therefore, inquire into the reasons which have


Z
CHERETHITEs. mh
‘been assigned to account for galbanum being in-
termixed with stacte and ila as sweet fe
We see that the same practice existed among the
Greeks and the Gf ear F.R.
CHEMOSH ( 19; Sept. Xauds) is the
name of a national god of the Moabites (1 Kings
xi. 7; 2 Kings xxiii. 13; Jer. xlviii. 7; who are
for this reason called the ‘ people of Chemosh,’ in
Num. xxi. 29), and of the Ammonites (Judg. xi.
24), whose worship was introduced among the
Israelites by Solomon (1 Kings xi. 7). No ety-
mology of the name which has been proposed, and
no attempt which has been made to identify this
god with others whose attributes are better known,
are sufficiently plausible to deserve particular
notice, Jerome's notion that Chemosh is the same
as Baal Peor has no historical foundation ; and
the only theory which rests on any probability is
that which assumes a resemblance between Che-
mosh and Arabian idolatry (cf. Beyer, Addit. ad
Selden. p. 322; Pocock, Specimen, p. 307). Jew-
ish tradition affirms that he wag worshipped under
the symbol of a black star; and Maimonides
states that his worshippers went bare-headed, and
abstained from the use of gannents sewn together
by the needle. The black star, the connection


“with Arabian idolatry, and the fact that Chemosh


is coupled with Moloch, favour the theory that he
bad some analogy with the planet Satun.—J, N.

CHENANIAH (72220, God's goodness 3
Sept. Xwvevia), a master of the temple music,
who conducted the grand musical services when


the ark was removed from the house of Obed-edom
to Jerusalem (1 Chron. xv. 22), +


CHERETHITES and PELETHITES (‘N23
*NbD), Crethi and Plethi without the final D in the
plural; Sept. Xepe6} xal @eAe61), names borne by
the royal Jife-guaids in the time of David (2 Sam.
viii, 185 1 Chron. xviii. 17). Prevailing opinion
translates their names, ‘ Headsmen and Foot-run-
ners.” The word DM is used for woodcutters,
2 Chron. ii. 10, and it might seem probable that
the Cherethites, like the lictors of the Roman dicta-
tor, carried axes, both asa badge of office and for
prompt use. Iu the later years of David, their
captain, Benaiah, rose tu a more commanding
importance than the generals of the regular troops ;
just as in imperial Rome the praefect of the pre-
torian guards became the second person in the
empire. It is evident that, to perpetrate any sum-
mary deed, Benaiah and the guards were chiefly
relied on. That they were strictly a body-guard
is distinctly stated in 2 Sam. xxiii. 23. The
grammatical form of the Hebrew words is never-
theless not quite clear: and as the Cherethites are
named as a nation of the south (1 Sam. xxx. 14),
some are dispused to believe Crethi and Plethi fo
be foreign Gentile names used collectively. No
small confirmation of this may be drawn from 2
Sam. xv. 18: * All the Cherethites and all the
Pelethites and all the Gittites, six hundred men,’
&c. If the two first words were grammatical
plurals, like the third (Gittites), it is scarcely cre-
dible that final D should be added to the third,
and not also to the other two. As the word ail is
repeated three times, and 600 men is the number
intended the third time, the Cherethites and Pele-
thites must have been reckoned by the hundred ;
and since the Gittites were clearly foreigners, all


@e


422 CHERITH.


the a priori improbability which some have seen im
David's defending himself by a foreign guard
falls to the ground. His Gittite satellites are one
more proof of the intensity of the tyrannical prin-
ciple already come in; since equally among the
Greeks and Romans, and in modern Europe, for a
prince to trust the care of his person to foreign
guards has ever been looked on as the most
evident mark that he is keeping down hig own
subjects by force.

That in 2 Sam. xv. 1, Absalom's runners are
called by the name D'S, which they also after-
wards bear, may ;erhaps go to prove that Plethi
or Pelethites does 20¢ mean ‘runners.’ Indeed, as
such a meaning of the word cannot be got out of

ure Hebrew, but recourse to the Arabic language
1s needed, the probability would in any case be,
that the institution, as well as the name, was
imported by David fiom the south. Ewald be-
lieves that Plethi means Philistines, and that it
has been slightly corrupted to rhyme with Crethi.
May not Plethi have been from anuther dialect ?
Be this as it may, these body-guards for the
Prince are not found under the reign of Saul.—
F. W.N.

CHERITH (3; Sept. Xofsd0), a river
in Palestine, on the banks of which the pro-
phet Elijah found refuge (1 Kings xvii. 3-7).
Eusebius and others have conceived themselves


bound by the words {7°77 "35 by, rendered ‘east
of the Jordan’, to seek the river in the Trans-
Jordanic country: but although the words some
times require this translation (as in Gen. xxv. 18 ;
Josh. xv. 18), they may also be rendered ‘ towards,’
or ‘before the Jordan’ (comp. Gen. xvi. 22)—that
is, in coming from Samaria. And this interpreta-
tion, which places the Cherith west of the Jordan,
agrees with the history, with Josephus (.Antiq. viii.
13, 7), and with the local traditions which have
uniformly placed the river of Elijah on this side
the Jordan, Dr. Robinson drops a suggestion
that it may be the Wady Kelt, which is formed
by the union of many streams in the mountains
west of Jericho, issuing from a deep gorge, in
which it passes by that villaze and then across
the plain to the Jordan, It is dry in summer.


CHERUBIM (Cherub, pl. Cherubim) is the
Mame of certain symbolical figures frequently
mentioned in Scripture. Hebrew nouns of the
masculine gender generally end in im, and
our translators, in adopting this form into their
version in preference to the English cherubs, have
in several places improperly added the letter s
to the termination of the word—a grammatical
error, supposed by some to have orizinated in the
circumstance of the writers of the preceding age
employing in the vulgar Latin, then in use, the
term cherubini, instead of cherubi. Parkhurst and
other learned =Hutchinsonians derive the word
3D from 5, a particle of similitude, and 35,
‘great’ or ‘powerful’—soas, according to the theory
of their school, to constitute the chernbic figures
emblems of the Almighty. Archbishop New-
come and others trace its origin to a Chaldee
root 3D, signifying ‘to plough,’ and hence,
this operation being in ancient times and in
Eastern countries the work of oxen, cherub is
sometimes used in Scripture to denote that ani-
mal—as in Ezekiel (i. 10), where the face of
@ cherub is synonymous with that of an ox.


CHERUBIM.


A third class of etymologists, considering that
God is frequeutly described as riding on the che.
rubim as his chariot, propose by a transposition
of the letters to deduce it from 33%, the Arabic
word signifying ‘to ride ;’ while another derivation,
on the same principle of transposition, has lately
been suggested by Dr. Kirby, who thinks that 773,
* to bless’ or * curse,’ is more likely to be the genuine
root of the term. Without deciding to which of
these etymological conjectures the preference is
due, as they are all founded on the views which
their respective authors have adopted of the cha-
racter and design of those remarkable images, it
may be observed in general, that they all involve
the leading idea that the cherubim were sym-
bols, either directly emblernatic of Deity, or sig-
nificant of the ruling powers by which the agency
of God is carried on in the natural and moral
world.

Figures of the cherubim were conspicuous im-
plements in the Levitical lahernacle: Two of
them were placed at each end of the mercy-seat,
standing in a stooping attitude, as if looking
down towards it, while they overshadowed it with
their expanded wings—and, indeed, they were
component parts of it, formed out of the same
mass of pure gold as the mercy-seat itself (Exod.
xxv. 19).

These figures were afterwards transferred to the
most huly place in Solomon's temple, and it Tas
been supposed from 1 Chron. xxviii. 19, that that
prince constructed two additional ones after the
same pattern, and of the same solid and costly
material; but whether it was with a view to increase
their number in accordance with the more spa-
cious and magnilicent edifice to which they were
removed, or merely to supply the place of those
made by Moses, which in the many vicissitudes
that betel the ark might have been mutilated or
entirely separated from the mercy-seat to which
they were attached—is not ascertained. This
much, however, is known, that Solomon erected
two of colossal dimensions, in an erect posture
with their faces towards the walls (2 Chron. iii.
13), covering with their outstretched wings the
«1 tire breadth of the debir, or most holy place.
These sacred hieroglyphics were profusely em-
Lroidered un the tapestry of the tabernacle, on
the curtains and the great vail that separated the
holy fiom the most holy place (Exod. xxvi. 1-31),
as well as carved in several places (1 Kings viii.
6-8) on the walls, doors, and sacred utensils of
the temple. The position occupied by these sin-
gular images at each extremity of the mercy-seat
—while the Shechiuah, or sacred flame that sym-
bolized the divine presence, and the awful name
of Jehovah in written characters (Bates, Critica
Hebrea, p. 288) were in the intervening space—
gave rise to the well-known phraseology of the
sacred writers, which represents the Deity dwell-
ing between or inhabiting the cherubim ; and, in
fact, so intimately associated were they with the
manifestation of the divine glory, that whether the
Lord is described as at rest or in motion, as seated
on a throne, or riding in a triumphal chariot,
these symbolic figures were essential elements in
the description (Numb. vii. 89; Ps. xviii. 10;
Ixxx. 1; xcix. 1-10; Isa. vi. 2; xxxvii. 16).
It may be remarked, on the second last passage,
that the clause which our translators have ren-
dered ‘ubove him stood the seraphim,’ is in the


CHERUBIM.
Septuagint ‘the cherubim stood round abont
him.”


The prominent place assigned to these cherubic
figures in the divinely-appointed place of ancient
worship invests them vith an interest and impor-
tance sufficient to stimulate the curiousity of the
Biblical student to inquire both into their form
and their design. The difficulties, however, at-
tending the inquiry are neither few nor small.
Josephus, a learned Jew of the sacerdotal tribe,
declares that they resembled no animals that ever
were seen by man, and that their form no man knew
inhis day (Antig. iii.6); and several modem
Jews of great erudition, among whom is Abenezra,
think that the term cherubim was indiscrimi-
nately applied to figures ‘of any kind that were
sculptured on stone, engraven on metal, carved
on wood, or inwrought on cloth,’ although that
writer himself states it to be his opinion—founded
apparently on no basis more solid than a conjéc-
tural idea of the comparative ease with which
the human form admits of bending forward, and,
therefore, adopted by the ancient masters in their
pares feet the figures which Moses placed

voking down at the mercy-seat were those of
winged men or boys. But although the later Jews
lost all knowledge of these mystic symbols, and
in the Scriptures—the only source whence true
information is to be obtained—much obscurity as
well as great dliversity mark all the passages that
contain allusions to the subject, yet sufficient data
exist frum which, if we cannot surmount all the
difficulties that lie in the way of the investigation,
we may at Jeast approximate to the truth. Re-
jecting the opinion of those who maintain that the
cherubim were of various shapes, we assume it to
be, if not absolutely certain, at least highly pro-
bable, that in all the passages of Scripture where
they are spoken of their figures were uniform.
The first occasion on which they are mentioned
is on the expulsion of our first parents from Eden,
when the Lord placed cherubim on the east of
the garden. The word DP, translated ‘on the
east, may signify as well ‘before or on the edge
of;' and the historian does not say that the Lord
placed there cherubim, but D'DIDA, the che-
tubim. Besides, 3¥”, rendered by our translators
‘placed, ’signities properly ‘to placein a tabernacle,’
an expression which, viewed in connection with
some incidents in the after history of the primeval
family (Gen. iv. 14-16), seems a conclusive es-
tablishment of the opinion that this was a local
tabemacle, in which the symbols of the Divine
Presence were manifested, suitably to the altered
circumstances in which man after the Fall came
belore God, and to the acceptable mode of wor-
ship he was taught to observe. That consecrated
place, with its striking symbols, called ‘the pre
sence of the Lord,’ there is reason to believe, con-
tinued till the time of the deluge, otherwise there
wonld have been nothing to guard the way to the
tree of life; and thus the knowledye of their form,
from the longevity of the antediluvians, could
have been easily transmitted to the time of Abra-
ham (Faber, Hore Mosaice, b. ii. ch. 6). Moreover,
it is an approved opinion that, when those em-
blems were removed at the close of the patriarchal
dispensation from the place of public worship,
the ancestors of that patriarch formed small
models of them for domestic use, under the name
Seraphim, or Teraphim, according to the Chal-


?


CHERUBIM. 423


dee dialect (Faber, Origin of Pag. Idol. i. 256).
The next occasion in the course of the sacred his-
tory on which the cherubim are noticed is when
Moses was commanded to provide the furniture
of the tabernacle; and, although he received in-
structions to make all things according to the

ttern shown him in the Mount, and although it
is natural to suppose that he saw a figure of the
cherubim, yet we find no minute and special de-
scription of them, as is given of everything else,
for the direction of the artificers (Exod. xxvi. 31).
The simple mention which the sacred historian
makes, in both these passages, of the cherubim,
conveys the impression that the symbolic figures
which had been introduced into the Levitical
tabernacle were substantially the same with those
established in the primeval place of worship on
the outskirts of Eden, and that by traditional
information, or some other means, their form was
so well known, both to Bezaleel and the whole
congregation of Israel, as to render superfluous
all further description of them. On no other
ground can we account for the total silence as to
their configuration, unless we embrace the ground-
less and unworthy opinion of those who impute
to the author of the Pentateuch a studied con-
cealment of some parts of his ritual, after the
manner of the Mystics (Landseer, Sabean Re-
searches, p. 321). But there was no mystery as to
those remarkable figures, for Ezekiel knew at once
(x. 20) the living creatures which appeared
in his vision supporting the throne of God, and
bearing it in majesty from place to place, to be
cherubim, from having frequently seem them, in
common with all other worshippers, in the carved
work of the outer sanctuary. Moreover, as is the
opinion of many eminent divines, the visionary
scene, with which this prophet was favoured, ex-
hibited a transcript of the Temple, which was
shown in pattern to David, and afterwards erected
by his son and successor; and, as the chief de
sign of that Tater vision was to inspire the Hebrew
exiles in Babylon with the hope of seeing, on their
return to Juda, another temple, more glorious
than the one then in ruins, it is reasonable to
believe that, as the whole style and apparatus
of this mystic temple bore an exact resemblance
(1 Kings vi. 20) to that of Sulomon’s magniticent
edifice, so the cherubs also that appeared to his
fancy portrayed on the walls would be fac-
diusiled of thuse that belonged to its ancient pro-
totype. Taking then his description of them to
be the proper appearance that belonged in com-
mon to all his cherubic creatures (chaps. i. x.
xli.), we are led to conclude that they were
compound figures, unlike any living animals or
real object in nature; but rather a combination,
in one nondescript artificial image, of the distin-
guishing features and properties uf several. The
ox, as chief among the tame and useful animals,
the lion among the wild ones, the eagle among
the feathery tribes, and man, as head over all—
were the animals which, or rather paits of which,
composed the symbolical figures. Each cherub
had four distinct faces on one neck—that of a
man in front, that of a lion on the right side, and
of an ox on the left; while behind was the fuce of
aneagle. Each had four wings, the two under
ones covering the lower extremities (Heb. the feet),
in token of decency and humility, while the upper
ones, spread out on a level with the head and


va


mi CHERUBIM.


shoulders, were 90 joined together, to the edge of perhays


his neighbours’, as to form a canopy; and in this
manner they soared rather than flew, without any
vi motion with their wings, through the
air. Each had straight feet. The Hebrew version
renders it ‘a straight foot ;’ and the probability is,
that the legs were destitute of any flexible pm
at the knee, and so joined together that its
motions ome have performed “2 — other
way than by the ordinary process of walking, or
lifeng one foot after another. Dr. Adam Clarke
has explained this by referring ‘to some ancient
Egyptian images of Isis, Osiris, Anubis, &c. in
his possession, where the legs were not separated,
nor was there any bend at the knees; so that if
there was any motion at a met have been by
liding, not progressive walking’ (Comment. in
foe. The ideal picture, then, which Ezekiel’s
description would us to form of the cherub,
is that of a winged man, or winged ox, according
to the particular phase it exhibited or the particu-
lar direction from which it was seen. If viewed
in une aspect, it showed conspicuously the face,
hands, and body of a man ; in another, the broad
face, less, and cloven foot of an ox appeared as
the prominent features of the image. And this
consideration may serve to reconcile the discre-
pancies that appear in the accounts which, in dif-
ferent parts of Scripture, are given of the cheru-
bim. Thus, for instance, in certain parts of the
lavers of Solomon's Temple were carved, between
groups of palm-trees, the faces of lions and oxen,
evidently as parts of the cherubim (1 Kings, vii.
29, 36), while no hint is given of the usual ac-
companiments of the man and the eagle; and in
the mystic temple of Ezekiel, the cherubim, which,
alternately with a pali-tree, were seen engraven
on its walls and doors, exhibited the face of a man
and a lion, while no mention is made of either an
eagle or an ox, of the human hands, or the ox-like
feet of these singular images. The difference in
these several descriptions is to be accounted for
from the circumstance of the living creatures
being beleld by the prophet at one point of ob-
servation, and of the artificial ones being engraven,
carved, or embroidered on a flat extended sur-
face; and, consequently, one side or a small part
only of the figure appeared to theeve of the beholder.
To use the words of Dr. Watts, ‘That figure which
would have had all four faces visible if it had
stood forth as a real animal or a statue, could
have had but two faces, or at most three, visible
when figured on a wall or curtain, the other bei:
hid behind ; and thus the cherubs may be in al
places of Scripture the same four-faced animals,
and yet only two or three of their faces appear, ac-
cording to theimdesigned situation and the art of
tive (Remnants of Time, xx.).

Whether the golden calf coustructed by Aaron
might be—not the Apis of Egypt—but a repre-
sentation of the antediluvian Chernbim —as some
suppose, from its being made on ‘a feast to the
Lord,’ and called ‘the gods of Israel’ (Exod.
xxxii. 5), and whether Jeroboam, in the erection
of his two calves, intended a schismatic imitation
of the sacred symbols in the Temple of Jerusalem
rather than the introduction of a new species of
idolatry (1 Kings xii. 28), we shall not stop to
inquire. But, as paganism is a corruption of
patriarchal worship—each nation having added
something according to its own taste and fancy—


CHERUBIM.


we may find u confirmation of the views
given above of the compound form of the cherubim
fe the eiranse ligaisce Cal ade pisoped sopetar ta
the heathen deities. The numerous ox-heads, for
instance, in the statue of the ancient Diana, and
particularly the Asiatic idols, almost all of which
exhibit several heads and arms attached to one
person, or the heads of different animals combi:
afford a collateral f, similar to the univ.
prevalence of sacrifice, that the form of the pri-
mitive chernbim has been traditionally
and extended over a large portion of the world.
See Calmet, Fragments; Clarke On Ezekiel;
and, prea: Parkhurst, Heb. Lez.

[This may indeed be shown by the following
actual figures cupied from ancient monument,
all of which illustrate some one or more of the


notions which we attach to the cherubic forms; and


while they afford material assistance to our ideas
om the subject, they show that figures of this kind,
as sacred symbols, were not peculiar to the He-
brews, and that their presence in the sanctuary
was not calculated to excite any surprise among
the neighbouring nations, or to Jead to the notion
that the Jews also were worshippers of idols, for
even in the pagan monument they never a

as idols, but as symbols; and it was very possibly
this fact—that the cherubic figures were not liable
to be misunderstood—which induced the Divine
wisdom to permit their introduction into the most
holy place. Of all these, the most remarkable is
the Hgure sculptured in bas-relief. The first
group (No. 226) is from E; The figures are
the more remarkable from bemg such as appear
upon the sacred arks of that country, and the dis-
position of their wings agrees much with one or
another of the arrangements which have been
ascribed to the cherubim of the Ark Laas): As
such figures certainly existed in Egypt before the
time of Moses, this may suggest another reason in
addition to that already given, why a particular de-
scription of the cherubim was not judged necessary.


aN
hn


The next group of figures (No. 227
Egyptian, and shows the diversity of nts winged
symbols which so often appear on the monuments,


CHERUBIM. CHERUBIM. 425


Figs. 1 and’8 are such hovering winged figures as bols are discovered. The cut (No. 228) is from

a sacred tablet or an antique gem found at Babylon. It combines

shrine: and to such hovering wings there seem the hinatant and iathrtpetla opaan With the wings

a of a bird, and is not unlike the Egyptian sphinx,

excepting that the head is that of a man, not of a

woman. The next (No. 229) is from a Baby-

lonian cylinder, and is remarkable as giving not

ved the wings but the head of a bird to the human
orm.

In proceeding to the monuments of ancient
Persia, the winged symbols become still more
striking. The very remarkable example in the
annexed engraving is from a bas relief at Mourg
Aub (No. 230), re ting a man arrayed in a
aang Cteothoel: soba, with such ara le
wings as the vision of Ezekiel ascribes to the
rubim, with the addition of ample horns (the
well-known symbols of regal pen issuing from
the head, and upbearing a symbolical crown or
mitre, such as is often seen on the heads of the
Egyptian gods and their ministering priests,


fi SS
RI S&sSss


some symbolical allusions in Scripture even when
the cherubim are not mentioned. Fgure 4, that
of a hawk with the face and symbols of Isis, and
the crowned and winged serpents (figs. 6, 7), are


or: | Ra
APSE Tw


VE ca pasando tiinilek, dedlac winged se


<a - eS
ESSSSS
RSs


Uf +


pene


group of figures (No. 231) is col-
different ancient Persian sculptures
and gems. Fig. 1 is a hovering winged


ri


426. CHERUBIM.


which occurs as frequently in the Persian monu-
ments as the similar figures do in those of Egypt.
land 4 are remarkable as offering a near
proach to the traditional figure which has been
assigned to angels; and 3 affords a very curious
example of quadruple wings, resembling those in
No. 230, but being much shorter.


The 4th figure in the above cut (232) affords
a@ rare example of the combination of the beast,
bird, and man, and seems to be the same as the
Babylonian sphinx in a different position. The
other figures in the same cut are frequently re-
peated in the Persian sculptures. They are
acknowledged Mithric symbols; and, as such,
they go far to evince the purely symbolical
character of the cherubic figures. In all of
these, except the last, a warrior is represented
grasping these winged symbols by the single
horn, with which all of them are furnished,
with one hand, while he thrusts his second
into them with the other. It is observable that
these figures, taken together, include all thove


CHERUBIM.


which Exzekiel’s vision assigns to the Cherubim—
the head of a man, an eagle, a lion, and an or
(fig. 5): but we do not any where find all theee
combined in a single figure, as a to have
been the case in the visionary cherubim.

It is of some im ce to remark, that the
winged symbolical figures of this description are
far more rare in the remoter East—in Jndia—
China, than in Western Asia.]

The opinions conceming the design of the che-
rubim are as diversified as those relative to their
form. ll are agreed that they had a symbolical
meaning, although it is not easy to ascertain it.
The ancients, as well as the fathers, considered
that they had both a physical and a metaphysical
object : thus, for instance, Philo regarded them as
signifying the two hemispheres; and the flaming
sword, the motion of the planets; in which opi
nion he is joined by some moderns, who piesa
them to have been nothing more than astronomical
emblems—the Lion and the Man being equivalent
to Leo and Aquarius—the signs of the zodiac
(Landseer, Sab. Resear. p. 315). Irenaeus views
them asemblematic of several things, suchas the four
elements, the four quarters of the globe, the four

1s, the four universal covenants (Adv. Heres.
iii. 11). Tertullian supposed that the cherubic
figures, particularly the flaming sword, denoted
the torrid zone (Apol. cap. 47). Justin Martyr
imagined that the living creatures of Ezekiel
were symbolical of Nebuchadneszzar, the Assyrian
monarch, in his distress; when he ate grass like
an ox, his hair was like a lion's, and his nails likea
bird's claws (Quest. xliv.). And Athanasius su
that they were significant of the visible
eavens (Quest. ad Antiocl. cxxxv.). The opi-
nions of the moderns may be reduced to three
systems. Hutchinson and his followers consider
the cherubim as emblems of the Trinity, with man
incorporated into the divine essence: in proof of
which they remark that DION WT signify
either a flaming fiery sword, as the words are
rendered by the Septuagint, or rather, a flame of
fire and a sword or Tnife; so that, in this figure,
there was exhibited in visible form, to the minds
of our first parents, fire—the emblem of divine
wrath, as well as an instrument for sacrifice—
which, as it enfolded or revolved round itself


(ASHINOT or as Ezekiel writes nnponp), can
mean nothing else than a picture of the satisfaction
to be made by deityitself. But the grand objection
to this theory, where it is at all intelligible, is, that
not only are the cherubim, in all the places of Scrip-
ture where they are introduced, described as distinct
from God, and no more thau his attendants, but that
it represents the divine Being. who is a pure spirit,
without parts, passions, or anything material, mak-
ing a visible picture of himself, when in all ages,
from the beginning of time, he has expressly pro-
hibited ‘the likeness of anything in heaven above’
(see Parkhurst, Heb. Lexicon, sub voce). Another
system regards the cherubim as symbolical of the
chief ruling powers by which God carries on the
operations of nature. As the heaven of heavens
was typified by the holy of holies in the Levitical
tabernacle (Heb. ix. 3-12, 24-28), this system
considers that the visible heavens may be typified
by the holy place or the outer sanctuary, agi
cordingly finding, as its supporters imagine

do, ther bim identified with the aerial firma-


CHILDREN. .


ment and its elements in such passages as the fol-
lowing : ‘ He rode upon a cherud, and did fly, yea,
he did fly upon the wings of the sind,’ where the
last hemistich is exegetical of the former (Ps.
xviii, 10); ‘ Who rideth upon the heavens in thy
help, and in his excellency upon the sky’ (Deut.
muiii. 26; Ps. Ixviii. 4); ‘He maketh the clouds
his chariot :’ be is said to descend in fire (Exod.
xix. 18), aud between which be dwelt in light
(1 Tim, vi. 16); and it was in this very man-
ner be manifested his divine glory in the tabernacle
and temple—they interpret the cherubim, on which
the Lord is described as riding, to be symbolical
of the wind, the clouds, the fire, the light; in
short, the heavens, the atmosphere, the great
Physical powers by which the Creator and pre-
server of the universe carries on the operations of
Dature,

A third system considers the cherubim, from
their being instituted immediately after the Fall,
as having particular reference to the redemption
of man, and as symbolical of the great and active
rales or ministers of the church. Those who
adopt this theory as the true explanation of their
enblematical meaning, are accustomed to refer
to the living creatures, or cherubim, mentioned in
the Apocalyptic vision (Rev. iv. 6), improperly
rendered in our English translation ‘ beasts’ ((a@a),
aud which, it is clear, were not angels, but redeemed
men connected with the church, and deeply in-
terested in the blessings and glory procured by the
Lamb. ‘ihe same character may be ascribed to
tie living creatures in Ezekiel’s visions, and to
the cherubim, which stood over and luoked into
the mercy-seat, sprinkled with the blood of the
atonement, and on the Shechinah, or divine glory
arising from it, as well as the cherubic figures which
were placed on the edge of Eden ; and thus the che-
tubim, which are prominently introduced in all
the three successive dispensations of the covenant of
Brace, appear to be symbuls of those who, in every
aye, should officially study and proclaim the
gloy and manifold wisdom of God (See on
this curious subject Monceau, Aaron Purgatus ;
Shay, On the Cherubim; Spencer, De Legib.
Ilebreor. ; Grotius, Notes on the Old Test.; Bo-
chart, De Animal. ; Bryant's Aythol.; Kirby's
Jnnoduet. to Bridgercater Treatise.j—R. J

CHESTNUT-TREE. [Armon.]

CHILDREN. The word ‘children’ is some-
times used im the plural number, when meant to
designate only one male issue (comp. 1 Chron. ii.
31; 2 Chron. xxiv. 25; xxxiii.6). In such places
the terms D°92, literally ‘ sons,’ is equivalent to
ollspring, all of whom had probably died except
the last-mentioned in the text. The more children
—especially of male children—a person had
among the Hebrews, the more was he honoured,
it being considered asa mark of divine favour,
while sterile people were, on the contrary, held in
contempt (comp. Gen. xi. 30; xxx. 13 1 Sam. ii.
5; 2Sam. vi. 23; Ps. cxxvii. 3, 8g.3 exxviil. 3;
Luke i. 7; ii. 5). That children were often
taken as bondsmen by a creditor for debts con-
acted by the father, is evident from 2 Kings iv.
1; Is. 1. 1; Neb. v. 5. Among the Hebrews,
a father had almost unlimited power over his
children, nor do we find any law in the Penta-
teuch restricting that power to a certain age;
it was indeed the parents who even. selected wives
for their sone (Gen. xxi. 31; Exod. xxi, 9, 10,


CHIOS. 438


11; Judg. xiv. 2, 5). It would appear, however,

a father's power over his daughters was
still greater than that over his sons, since he might
even annul a sacred vow made by a daughter,
but not one made by a son (Num. xxx. 4, 16).
Children cursing or assaulting their parents
were punished by the Mosaical Law with death
(Exod. xxi. 15, 17; Lev. xx. 9); a remarkable
instance of which is quoted by Christ (Matt. xv.
4, 6; Mark vii. 9, 13). Before the time of
Moses a father had the right to choose among his
male children, and declare one of them (usually
the child of his favourite wife) as his first-born
(133), though he was perhaps only the youngest.
Properly speaking, the ‘ first-born’ was he who
was first beyotten by the father, since polygamy
excluded all regard in that respect to the mo-
ther. Thus Jacob had sons by all his four wives,
while only one of them was called the tirst-born
(Gen. xlix. 3); we find, however, instances,
where that name is applied also to the first-born
on the mother’s side (1 Chron. ii. 50; comp. v.
42; Gen. xxii. 21). The privileges of the -
born were considerable, as shown in Birts-
RIGHT.

The first-born son, if not expressly deprived by
the father of his peculiar rights, as was the case
with Reaben (Gen. xlix.), was at liberty to sell
them to a younger brother, as hhppened in the
case of Esau and Jacub (Gen. xxv. 31, 4q.).
Considering the many privileges attached to
first-biith, we do not wonder that the Apostle
called Esau a thoughtless person (Heb. xii. 16).
There are some allusions in Scripture to the
modes in which children were carried. These
appear to be adequately represented by the ex-
isting usages, as represented in the following cut
(No. 233), in which fig. 1 represents a Nestorian
woman bearing her child bundled at her back,
and (ig. 2, an Egyptian female bearing her child


f 2


or her shoulder, The former mode appears to
be alluded to in several places, and the latter in
Isa. xlix, 22. For other matters regarding chil-
dren, see Apoprion, Birts, Birrurieut, Epu-
cation.—E. M.

CHINNERETH. LC nanese.|

CHIOS ( Xfos), one of the principal islands of
the Ionian Archipelago, mentioned in Acts xx.
15. It belonged to Ionia, and lay between the
islands Lesbos and Samos, and distant eight
miles from the nearest promontory (Arennum
Pr.) of Asia Minor. It is thirty miles long trom
N. to S., and its greatest breadth ten miles,
It is very fertile in cotton, silk, aud fruit, and
was anciently celebrated for its wine. Tre
principal town was also called Chios, and cad
the sy eantage of a good harbour (Strabo xiv.
p- 645). The island is now called by the Greeks


a8 CHISLEV.


Khio, and by the Italians Scio, The wholesale
waassacre and enslavement of the imhabitants by
the Turks in 1823 forms one of the most shocking
incidents of the Greek war.


CHISLEV (1003; 1 Macc. i. 54, Xavered)
is the name of that month which is the third of
the civil, and the ninth of the ecclesiastical year
of the Jews, and which commences with the new
moon of our December. It corresponds, in Jo-
esephus, to the Macedonian month ’AweAAaios.
As it is now admitted that Chislev is one of those
Persian names of months which the Jews adopted
after the captivity, it is fruitless to search fur a
Syro-Arabian etymology of the word. Benfey


has shown that ybD> is a mutilated form of


Subp; and, by an ingenious, although adven-
‘turous, mode of derivation, deduces that word
from the Zend Khsathravairya, through a. series
of commutations incident to its transit through
the different dialects (Alonatsnamen einiger alter
Volker, p. 124). :

The memorable days which were observed in
this month were :—The feast of the dedication of
the Temple, in commemoration of its being puri-
fied from the heathen abominations of the Syrians,
which was celebrated by illuminations and great
demonstrationg, of joy for eight days, beginning
from the 25th of this month (1 Mac. iv. 59): and
a fast on account of Jehoiakim having, in this
month, burnt the roll containing Jeremiah’s pro
phecy (Jer. xxxvi. 22, 23). There is some dis-
pute whether this fast was observed on the 6th or
on the 28th of the month. It is an argument in
favour of the earlier day that the other would fall
in the middle of the eight days’ festival of the
dedication.—J. N.

CHITTAH. [Wueat.]

CHITTIM, or Kirti (O°FD, OYAD), a
branch of the descendants of Javan, the son of
Japheth (Gen. x. 4). The plural termination of
Chittim, and other names in this ethnographical
survey (ver. 13, 14), renders it probable that the
term son must be understood (like its correlate,

Sather ; vy. Aw) not in the strict sense of that re-
lation. On the authority of Josephus, who is
followed by Epiphanius and Jerome, it has been
generally admitted that the Chittim migrated
from Phoenicia to Cyprus, and founded there the
town of Citium, the modern Chitti. i Chethimus
possessed the island of Chethima, which is now
called Cyprus, and from this, all islands and
maritime places are called Chethim by the He-
brews’ (Joseph. Antig. i. 6, § 1). Cicero, it may
be remarked, speaks of the Citians as a Phoeni-
cian colony (De Finibus, iv. 20), ‘scis enim Ci-
tizos clientes tuos a Phoenicia profectos.’ Dr.
Pococke copied at Citium thirty-three inscrip-
tions in Phoenician characters, of which an en-
@raving is given in his Description of the East,
(vol. ii. p. 213), and which have recently been
explained by Gesenius in his AMonum. Phenic.
p. 124-133). Some passages in the prophets
(Ezek. xxvii, 6; Isa. xxiii. 1, 12) imply an inti-
mate connection between Chittim and Tyre. At
a later period the name was applied to the Mace-
donians (1 Mace. i. 1, Xerrecefu; and viii. 1,
Keriéwy). Hengstenberg has lately endeavoured
prove that in every passage in the Old Testa-
ment where the word occurs, it means Cyprus, or


CHRONICLES.


the i On Nambers xxiv. 24, be remarty
that the invaders of Ashur and Eber are said to
come not from Chittim, but D'ND 3D, from the
coast of Chittim, that being the track of vessels
coming from the west of Palestine. In Dan. xi,
30, he contends that the use of the absolute
furm, O'¥, instead of the constract, denotes a
less intimate connection with the following
word, and that the phrase means, like that in
Balaam’s prophecy bo which he supposes the
prophet alludes), ships sailing along the coast of
Clittim. The Vulgate translates Chittim, in this
passage, Romanos, an interpretation adopted by
several of the ancient Jewish and Christian writers.
Bochart attempts to support it on etymological
grounds, of which Michaelis to say,
‘etymologica autem que de Latio Bochartus
habet, facile ipsi relinquo, questiones geogra-
phicas his crepundiis carere cupiens.’

After a careful examination of the works of
which the titles are given at the end of this article,
the writer is disposed to acquiesce in the opinion
expressed by the editor of the Pictorial Bible,
©Chittim seems to be a name of large signification
(such as our Levant), applied to the islands and
coasts of the Mediterranean, in a loose sense,
without fixing the particular part, though particu-
lar and different parts of the whole are probably
in most cases to be understood’ (v. notes on Ezek.
xxvii. 6; Michaelis, Spicilegrum Geographie
Hebreorum Extere post Bochartum, pars i. pp.
1-7, 103-114; Michaelis, Supplementa ad Lerica
Hebraica, pp. 1138, 1377-1380; Bocharti Geogr.
Sacr, c. 157-161; Gesenii Thesaurus, p. 726;
Pococke's Description of the East, vol. ii. p.
213; Newton's Dissertations on the Prophecies,
v.; Henystenberg, Die Geschichte Bileams und
seine Weissayungen, Berlin, 1842, pp. ee

J.E.


CHIUN. ee

CHLOE (XaAén), a Christian woman at Co-
rinth, some members of whose family afforded
Paul intelligence concerning the divisions which
reigned in the church at that place (1 Cor. i. 11).

CHOACH. [Tuorns.]

CHORAZIN (Xopativ), a town mentioned in
Matt. xi. 21; Luke x. 13, in connection with
Bethsaida and Capernaum, not far from which,
in Galilee, it appears to have been situated.
Jerome makes it a village of Galilee, on the shore
of the lake Tiberias, two miles from Capernaum
(Onomast., art. ‘Chorozain*). Lightfoot and other
Talmudical scholars have endeavoured to identify
it with certain places named in the Mishnah;
and travellers have hazarded various conjectures
as to its site. But no place of the name has
been historically noticed since the days of Jerome:
and not only the town, but its very name ap
pears to have long since perished. [Brrnespa;
Caprrnaum.

CHRIST. [Jesus.]

CHRONICLES. Name.—This name seems
to have been first given to two historical books of
the Old Testament by Jerome (Prolog. Galeat.).
The Hebrews call them D'D'71 3%, i. e. words
of days, diaries, or journals, and reckon them
but one book. The Alexandrian translators, who
regarded them as two books, used the appellation
TlapaAvcindueva, things omitted, as if they were
supplementary to the other historical records be-
longing to the Old Testament canon.


“CHRONICLES.


Contents.—In 1 Chron. +1x. is given 8 series
of genealogical tables interspersed with historical
notices. ‘These genealogies are not complete.

1 Chron. x-xxix. contains the history of David,
partly agreeing with the account given of him in
the books of Samuel, though with several impor-
tant additions relating to the Levites.

2 Chron. ix. contains the history of Solomon.

2 Chron. x-xxviii. furnishes a succinct account
of the kingdom of Judah while Israeé still re-
mained, but separate from the history of the latter.

2 Chron, xxix-xxxvi. describes the kingdom of
Judah after the downfall of Israel, especially with
reference to the worship of God.

From this analysis it appears that the Chro-
icles contain an epitome of sacred history, par-
ticularly from the origin of the Jewish nation to
the end of the first captivity.

Diction.—The diction is such as suits the time
tmmediately subsequent to the captivity. It is
substantially the same with that of Ezra, Nehe-
miah, and Esther, which were all written shortly
after the Babylonish exile. It is mixed with
Arameaisms, marking at once the decline of the
Jews in power, and the corruption of their native
tongue. The pure Hebrew had been then laid
aside. It was lost during their sojonrn in Babylon.
The orthography is characterized by an adoption
of the matres lectionis, particularly in the word
IW, which is written I. In one passage (2
Chron. xxv. 1) DSeAT occurs for Dw. In
Froper names A/eph is frequently interchanged
with Ae quiescent at the end, as NYP for My (1
Chron. xiii. 7). A contrary interchange of’ the
same letters is found at the commencement of a
word, ‘as JT for WN (1 Chron. xiii. 12). Aleph
prosthetic occurs in 8 tor W (1 Chron. ii,
13). We meet also with such peculiarities of
diction as }\IN for JOIN (2 Chron. ii.6); P,
a Persian word (2 Chron. ii. 13); AVI, which
appears also to be of Persian origin (1 Chron,
xxx. 1); J?32 (1 Chron. xxviii. 11); YANN
(1 Chron. v. 17); WI (2 Chron. xxiv. 27;
xiii. 22); 33 (1 Chron. xxi. 7); JOY (2 Chron
ii, 15); 53 (2 Chron. xxix. 16); WOON (1
Chron. xxv. 8). (See Gesenius's Geschichte der
Heb. Sprache und Schrift; Gramberg’s Die
Chrontk nech ihrem Geschichtl. Charakter, &c. 3
De Wette's Einleitung, 4th ed. § 189.)

Age and Author.—Internal evidence suf-
ficiently demonstrates that the Chronicles were
written after the captivity. Thus the history
is brought down to the end of the exile, and
mention is made of the restoration by Cyrus
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 21, 22). It is certain that
they were compiled after the time of Jeremiah
(2 Chron. xxxv. 25), who lived to see the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem by the Chaldseans. The genea-
logy of Zernbbabel is even continued to the time
of Alexander (1 Chron. iii. 19-24). The same
eee is supported by the character of the or-
thography and the nature of the language em-
ployed, as we have already seen, both which are
Aramuean in complexion, and harmonize with the
books confessedly written after the exile. The
Jews generally uscribe the Chronicles to Ezra
(Baba Bathra, f. xv.c.1). Such is their most
ancient pir aa Reta false it may be in the
opinion wald. With them a =
Eictsborn, Keil, and Huvernick; but Calmet, ahn,


CHRONICLES. #29


De Wette, Bertholdt, Gramberg, and Movers at- -
tribute them to some unknown author. The fol-
lowing arguments may be adduced in favour of
the current Jewish opinion :—

Ist. The language of Ezra, who is generally
thought to have written the book that bears his
name, remarkably coincides with that of the
Chronicles. Accordingly, Movers fully concedes
that Chronicles and Ezra formed originally one
book’ and proceeded from one author, although he
argues that only a part of the book of Ezra was
written by himself, while the other part and the
books of Chronicles were compiled by some priest
or Levite. But if Ezra wrote a portion of that
book which is now called by his name, there is no
good ground for supposing that he did not com-
pose the whole; and if he compiled the whole,
then we argue that the fragmentary character and
the entire style present a remarkable similarity to
the books of Chronicles. They obviously
point to the same writer (See Keil's Apologetischer
Versuch uber die Chrontk, Berlin, 1833, 8vo.).

2ndly. Another argument in support of the
same view is, that the book of Ezra begins with
the same words with which the Chronicles termi-
nate. The same person repeats his own words in
order to connect his history,

This repetition, however, has been accounted
for in other ways. Thus it has been conjec-
tured that the last two verses were added by sume
transcriber, who, having finished the book of Chro-
nicles at verse 21, proceeded, without leaving the
usual distance between different books, to write
the book of Ezra; but, soon finding his mistake,
broke off abruptly and began Ezra at the usual
peepee without erasing the lines which he had
carelessly appended to Chronicles. This supposes
that Ezra once followed Chronicles. Others ac-
count for the repetition by referring to a practice
among the Jews, who, ‘in the public reading of
their Scriptures, to avoid ending with the recital

,of any calamity producing dejection, add the
commencement of the next paragraph, or repeat a
portion of that which precedes, in order to finish
with something consolatory.’ Gramberg thinks
that such repetition proves the writer of Chronicles
to have had the book of Ezra before him; but
this is purely conjectural, and contrary to other
evidence. Besides, why may it not as well es-
tablish the reverse? The wish of this Rationalist
writer to bring down these books to a very late
period prompted him to advance an argument so
utterly baseless.

To the first mode, which attributes this remark-
able recapitulation to a transcriber, we do not
attach much probability. It may be objected that
there are at least two verbal differences between
the words as they appear in Chronicles and in
Ezra, so that the careless transcriber must he sup-
posed not only to have written so far without per-
ceiving his mistake, but also to have copied inac-
curately. Besides, it is not consistent with the
habitual accuracy of the Jewish scribes to have
committed so palpable an error; or, after having
fallen into it, not tu rectify it. The universality
of its existence also militates against the hypothe-
sis. Another copyist must soon have detected the
mistake, unless he had chosen to shut his eyes.
All copies contain the passage in both places ; and
it is found in the Septuagint translation both of
Chronicles and Ezra.


430 . CHRONICLES.


The second mode of accounting for the fact
is equally improbable. The practice to which
appeal is made relates to the public recital of the
Hebrew Scriptures, rather than to their toritten
state. Besides, the mnemonic term ppM’ in-
cludes a definite number of books, viz. Isaiah,
the twelve minor prophets, Lamentations, and
Ecclesiastes, in reading which the Jews were ac-
customed to repeat the portion that precedes the
termination. That they added the commence-
ment of the paragraph subsequent to the sad por-
tion, or that such a practice was extended to Ezra,
or indeed to any other of the sacred books except
those specified, can never be proved. It is a
gratuitous supposition, destitute of all foundation.

In short, no metho of accounting for the
repetition is so probable as that which makes
Ezra cuntinue his own history nearly in his own
words.

Srdly. The portions peculiar to the Chronicles
are just such as we might expect from Ezra.
They correspond to his character as a zealous
reformer and priest.

In opposition to these arguments it has been
asserted— :

Ist. That the genealogy of Zerubbabel is
brought down to the time of Alexander, who was
later than Ezra. Hence sume have even placed
the writer in the time of Alexander the Great,
So De Wette. in the third edition of his Jntroduc-
tion to the Old Testament. Eichhorn, Jahn, and
Dahler assume, that 1 Chron. iii, 19-24 was ap-
pou by a modern hand. This conjecture may

true, though it does not commend itself to our
approbation, because there is strong evidence in
favour of the opinion that the canon was com-

leted by Ezra and the learned men with whom
was associated (see Havernick’s Einlettung in
das Alte Testament, p. 49). Was it not possible,
however, for Ezra to write the portion in question?
If he was inspired, as we believe, is there aught
to forbid the supposition that such knowledge way,
directly communicated to him? The fact of his
inspiration is quite suilicient to account for his
recording the genealogy of Zerubbabel.

2ndly. Tie difference of the genealogies in
1 Chron. vi. 3, etc., and Ezra vii. 1, etc., proves
that Ezra was not the writer of both, So De
Wette. This argument is weak. Ezra's design
in writing the book that bears his name must have
been diflerent from his object in compiling the
Chronicles. Most properly, therefore, does he
vary in his accounts. Sometimes he relates more
briefly what he had already narrated in detail,
and vice versd.

Srdly. It is improbable that the histories con-
tained in the books of Kings and Chronicles
should be written by the same person, since they
contain numerous discrepancies and contradic-
tions. This objection is valid only against those
who believe that the books of Kings were written
by Ezra. So far from supposing, with Dr. Allix
and others, that Ezra wrote the Chronicles about
26 years after the Kings, we believe, upon the
ground of strong internal evidence, that there was
almost an interval of a century between the com-
position of the two works.

4thly. Such passages as 2 Chron. v. 9 and viii.
8, the former of which speaks of the ark being in
the holy place ‘ unto this day,’ and the latter, of
tribute being paid ‘ until this day,’ seem to imply


CHRONICLES.


that the Chronicles were written while the temple
was standing, befure the decline of Judah.

Were it supposed that Ezra was the original
writer of these passages, they would prove fatal to
the idea of his having composed these historical
books. But, on the contrary, they were tran
scribed from records existing before the temple
was demolished, and inserted verbatim as Ezra
found them. But why, it may be asked, did he
not accommodate them to his own time? Did he
quote indiscriminately, as has been said, without
taking the trouble to reconcile inconsistencies?
Far be it from us to adopt or sanction such un-
guarded Janzuage as virtually sets aside the in-
spiration of the writer.

The Chronicles were intended as a supplement
to other historical books, especially Samuel and
Kings. Accordingly, the portions repeated from
these for the sake of completeness, or derived
from public aunals, the compiler did not deem
Necessary or desirable to adapt in every in-
stanve to the-time in which he himself lived.
They were copied with the subordinate design of
connecting such portions as he was prompted to
write for the first time. They are tncidental, not
essential, to the author's purpose. They serve as
links to give unity and compactness to such para-
graphs as the Holy Spirit thought to be the most
important, To change these extracts was not,
theretore, regarded necessary. Minute and sys-
tematic effuit for attaining accuracy does not
characterize the sacred authors. With an ingenu-
ous and noble negligence they disdain artiticial
trammels. Expressions like these show the scru-
pulous fidelity with which the compiler adhered
to the ancient records. The same passages, it may
be remarked, also occur in the books of Kings
(1 Kings viii. 8; 1 Kings ix. 21). and show, from
their exact similarity, that they were copied from
the same original.

Sthly. The difference of style and manner of
narration in Ezra and Chronicles shows that Ezra
was not the author. So Jabu. This assertion is
certainly unfounded. -The style, language. and
idiom are remarkably alike, as will be manifest to
the attentive reader of these works. The manner
of narration in both partakes. of no greater dissi-
milarity than the different objects with which they
were written demand and justify. Other argu-
ments in favour of Ezra may be seen in Keil’s
Apologetischer Versuch uber die Chrontk, Berlin,
1833, 8vo.

Scope.—The principal design of the writer
seems to have been to maintain the proper distinc-
tions between the tribes and families of the re-
turing Hebrews, that the Messiah's descent out
of the tribe and family whence he was to spring
according to prophecy, might be made manifist.
Accordingly, the family of David is specially no-
ticed and prominently portrayed. The author also
shows how the lands had been distributed before
the captivity, that the people might obtain the
ancient inheritance of their fathers. In doing so
he goes back to the most ancient times, and pre--
sents to his countrymen their earliest history, lest,
during their exile, they might have forgotten their
original and lost the traces of their real ancestry.
In addition to this object it was also intended to
show how the worship of God should be properly
resumed and orderly re-established. In accord
ance with such a purpose he gives the genen-


pw he &


a Pe ee ee, ee


~~ = @& we Ba epe es ae @ = S&S wee eee ee i,


BeRU RR FP YP FB AR


7s wo = = wa - Go a


-—-—— + eee


CHRONICLES.


gy of the priests and Levites more fally than
avy other writer, records their functions and rank,
and enters with particularity into the arrange-
ments established among them by David and
Solomon. These two purposes, which are closely
allied, will serve to demonstrate the perfect con-
gruity of all that is peculiar in the Chronicles.
They account for the genealogical tables, the spe-
cifications of tribes and families with their situa-
tion, as also for a variety of references to the

iesta and Levites, to the preparations made by

vid for building the temple, the reformations
which took place at ditlerent periods, the pros-
perity of such kings as feared Jehovah and walked
m his ways, to the marvellous interpositions of
Haven on behalf of those wh trusted in Him
alone, to the idolatry of Israel and their conse-
quent misfortunes.

The books of Chronicles as compared with those
of Kings are more didactic than historical. The
historical tendency is subordinated to the didactic.
Indeed, the purely historic furm appears to be
preserved only in so far as it presented an appro-
pate medium for those religious and moral ob-
servations which the author was directed to ad-
duce. Samuel and Kings are more occupied
with the relation of polttical occurrences; while
the Chronicles furnish detailed accounts of eccle-
Sastical institutions.

Scurces.—A_ thorough examination of these
bouks as compared with those of Samuel and
Kings will satisfy the inquirer that the latter were
known to Ezra and extensively used by him in
the composition of Chronicles. It is impossible
to believe, with Le Clerc, that the writer of the
Chronicles did not know the books of Samuel and
Kings. De Wette and Movers reler to the cha-
tacter of originality belonging to the earlier ac-
counts of Samuel and Kings as contrasted with
the compilation-manner of the records in the
books before us, but this has a feeble and ques-
tionable existence, The earlier books thernsel ves
must have been compiled from annals, So far
as the history contained in them is concerned, it
bears little evidence of originality. It is true that
the books of Samuel present no references to na-
tional records such as occur in Kings, but their
internal character and structure evince their deri-
vation from annals contemporaneous with the
events they relate.

But the books of Samuel and Kings are not
the only source from which the Chronicles have
been taken. Public documents formed the com-
mon groundwork of tle thiee histories. The
Pentateuch has also been used in their compi-
latiun. A comparison of the first nine chapters
of 1 Chron. with the Mosaic books will show the
peeiise existing between them; and it should

especially noticed that 1 Chron. i. 43-54 agrees
verbatim with Genesis xxxvi. 31-43. Perhaps,
however, this passage in both has been drawn
from the same source.

As the Almizhty does nothing superfluously,
and puts forth no exertion of his power where his
infinite wisdum does not perceive a fitting neces-
sity, it would have been unnecessary, as far as we
can perceive, to suggest anew to the mind of the
writer facts with which he must have been
tially acquainted by tradition, and which he had
an opportunity of knowing from the sacred records,
lt is evident that the Chronicles were compiled


CHRONICLES. 48}


not only from former inspired writings, but, fos
the most part, from public records, registers, and
genealogies belonging to the Jews. That national
annals existed there can he nodoubt. They are
expressly mentioned, as in 1 Chron. xxvii. 24.
They contained an account of the most important
events in the history of the Hebrews, and were
generally lodged in the tabernacle or temple,
where they could he most conveniently consulted.

The histories of kings appear to have been
usually written by prophets (1 Chron. xxix. 29;
2 Chron, ix. 29; xii. 15; xiii. 22). Hence they
constantly refer to the divine rewards and punish-
ments characterizing the theocracy. These his
torical writings of the prophets were, for the
most part, inserted in the public annals, as is
evident from 2 Chron. xx. 34; xxxii. 32; xii. 15;
xxiv. 27. Whether they were always so inserted
is questionable, for they seem to be distinguished
from the annals of the kingdom in 2 Chron.
xxxiii. 19. From such sources Ezra extracted
the accounts which he was prompted to write for
the use of mankind in all ages. We cannot be-
lieve that his selection was indiscriminate or care
less. His inspiration effectually secured him
against everything that was inaccurate or unsuit-
able to the purposes for which he was supernae
turally enlightened. That he committed mistakes
cannot for a moment be admitted, else his history
is impugned and its position in the canon inex-
plicable. His veracity, integrity, and scrupulous
exactness must be held fast by every right-minded
believer.

The following are the references to older me-
moirs or historical works:—1. The book of Sa-
muel the seer, the book of Nathan the prophet,
and the book of Gad the seer (1 Chron. xxix. sae
This cannot mean the inspired books of Samuel,
because they do not contain the entire history of
David (‘ his acts first and last’). It refers toa
history of his own times written by Samuel, and
to a continuation of it, embracing succeeding
times, written by Nathan and Gad, frum which
it is probable that part of the contents of the
present books of Samuel was drawn.—2. The
book of Nathan the prophet, the prophecy of
Ahijah the Shilonite, and the visions of Iddo the
seer (2 Chron. ix. 29).—3. The book of Shemaiah
the prophet, and of Iddo the seer concerning ge-
nealoyies ; or, a3 De Wette translates it, after
the manner of family-registers (2 Chron. xii.
15).—4. The story, or rather, the interpretation
(midrash) of the prophet Iddo (2 Chron. xiii. 22),
—5. The book of Jehu the son of Hanani, inserted
in the book of the Kings of Israel (2 Chron. xx.
34).—6. The history of Uzziah, by Isaiah the son
of Amoz (2 Chron. xxvi. 22).—7. The vision of
Isaiah the prophet, in the book of the Kings of
Judah and Israel] (2 Chron. xxxii. 32.) (See
Gesenius's Commentar uber den Jesaia ; Einleit.

4.)—8. The sayings of Hosai (2 Chron. xxxiii.
19).—9. The interpretation of the book of the
Kings (2 Chron. xxiv. 27).—10. The book of the
Kings of Judah and Israel (2 Chron. xvi. 11;
xxv. 263 xxvii. 73 xxviii. 26; xxxv. 27; xxxvi.
8). This could not have been our present books
of Kings, but public annals, because in several
instances where the reader is referred to them for
further information, our books of Kings contain
less than what is stated in the Chronicles.—11.
The book of the Kings of Israel (2 Chron. xx. 34).


4 CHRONICLES. .


—12. The words or histories of the Kings of Israel
2 Chron. xxxiii, 18). It is probable that Nos.
0, 11, and 12 refer to the same historical wurk.

-—13. The Chronicles of King David (1 Chron.

xxvii. 24).—14. The Lamentations (2 Chron.

xxxv. 25). This does not mean the Lamentations

of Jeremiah which we now have, but other La-

mentations com by the prophet on the death
of Josiah, and long since lost.

Discrepancies between the books of Chronicles
and former histories.—These discrepancies may
be Peasy under three heads: I., variations #7
orthography and diction ; IL, in arrangement ;
oer tn facts and numbers. ‘

« Older and more difficult expressions are
usually changed for such as are later and
easier.


Those variations that respect orthography alone
are of a threefold kind.

(a.) The Seriptio plena instead of the defec-
on comp. 2 Chron. viii. 18 with 1 Kings ix.


(5.) Variations adapted to the ater and, for
the most part, the Aramean form of the language
(comp. 2 Chron. x. 18 with 1 Kings xii. 18).

cy Corrections of anomalous forms (comp. 3
Chron. xxi. 9 with 2 Kings viii. 21).

Variations of a grammatical nature exhibit the
same endeavour tv accommodate the text of the
bates and more difficult original to later usage,

us -—

- (a.) The older form of a substantive is changed
for a later form from the same root (comp.
1 Chron. xiv. 2 with 2 Sam. y. 12),

(6.) The more ancient or irregular flexion of a
substantive or verb is altered into that belonging
to later usage (comp. 2 Chron. ix. 19 with
1 ‘ha x. 20; 1 Chron. xix, 12 with 2 Sam.
x. 11).

(¢.) Alterations adapted to the later usus lo-
quendi are made in the construction. Thus, in
place of the infinitive absolute, joined to the finite
verb of the same root, the writer of the Chronicles
uinfurmly omits the intinitive (comp. 1 Chron.
xiv. 10 with 2 Sam. v. 19; 2Chron. vii. 19 with
1 Kings ix. 6).

(d.) Grammatical corrections. Thus, in verbs
Lamed He, the writer of the Chronicles uses the
apocopated future conversive, instead of the full
form (comp. 2 Chron. xviii, 23, 33 with 1 Kings
xxii. 24, 34).

Thus far with regard to the orthography and
grammatical character. In respect to the lan
guage of these books we find—

(a.) That an older or unusual expression is
changed for one later or more current (comp.
1 Chron. xxi. 2 with 2 Sam. xxiv. 2; 1 Chron.
x. 12 with 1 Sam, xxxi. 12).

(4.) Names that had become rare or antiquated,
are altered into such as had become current and
better known (comp. 2 Chron. xvi. 4 with 1 Kings
xv. 20).

(c.) Definiteness and precision are given to
indefinite expressions used in the sources whence
the writer drew (comp. 2 Chron. xxxiv. 24 with
2 Kings xxii. 16).

(d.) Expressions liable to be taken in an er-
roneous or bad sense are changed for others which
are synonymous (comp. 2 Chron. xxii. 12 with
2 Kings xi. 3; 1 Chron, xix. 4 with 3 Sam.
x. 4) :


CHRONICLES.


II. Diserepancies in arrangement. ‘

Even a cursory perusal of these bucks, as com
pared with those of Samuel aud Kings, will show

that several sections are differently placed. This 4
fact, however, is of no weight against the authen-
ticity or authority of the Chronicles, The sacred
writers do not proless to follow the order of time.
The historical writings of Moses, the prophecie
of Isaiah and Jeremiah, the Gospels of Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, are not place in the exact
order of time: 1 Chrun xiv. (comp. 2 Sam. v.
11-25), 2 Chron. i, 14-17 (comp. 1 Kings x.
26-29), and 2 Chron. ix. 25, &c., are evidently
out of their true chonological position.

ILL. Under this head may be classed—

Gu Omissions®of words, phrases, sentences,
aud paragraphs; as aleo abbreviations of former
statements.

(6.) Additions, longer or shorter, as compared
with preceding accounts relative to the same
topics.

If we remember that these books are supple
mentary, we shall not be surprised at such par
ticulars, but rather be prepared to expect them.
Several localities had changed their uames or
undergone alterations. ‘Ihe restored Jews knew
certain things under other appellations and by other
detinitive marks than those which had formerly
distinguished them. The writers had also ditie-
ent purposes, requiring an adaptation of their nar-
Tatives to the circumstances amid which they
lived, and the state of kuowledge possessed by
their contemporaries. Besides, the materials were
more numerous after the captivity. So far, then,
from accusing the writer of incorrectness, sense-
lessness, and confusion, as De Wette does, be-
cause of these discrepancics, we regard them as
evidences of his fidelity and proofs of Lis artless-
ness. Variations are not contradictions. No
two historians in narrating the same events will
give exactly the same circumstances, although

th their narratives may be most true.

(c.) Discrepancies and contradictions.

But not only do discrepancies exist between
the Chronicles and former histories, there are also
contradictions. Looking at the Masorctic text,
the fact cannot be questioned. However disagree-
able or unwelcome, it must be admitted.

Many passages, however, which are usually
adduced under this bead, do not belong to it.
Thus—

2 Chron. ix. 25 ....... 1 Kings iv. 26.

yy XXii. 2.0006 3 Kings viii. 26.

1 Chron. xxi. 1 ..00+26 2 Sam. xxiv. 1.


AKL S eceee. gp xxiv. D
: xxi, 11,12... 9 xxiv. 13.
wo XXI. Beceese gy XXIV. 2d.


2 Chron. xiii. 2....... 1 Kings xv. 10.

are not opposed to one another. There is no con-
tradiction in them: they are quite reconcilable.
Dr. Kennicott and others have hastily inferred
that there is corruption, because they did not. per
ceive their right meaning. Our space will not
allow us to point out the true mode of harmo-
nizing them; we may therefore be permitted to
refer to Davidson's Sacred Hermeneutics, where
they are fully resolved. The preceding are not
all the passages frequently quoted as contradic-
tory. They furnish a specimen of those that ap-

to be so. In Movers, Kennicott, and Gram-
bere, others may be found which are injudiciously


RRR RP R Se see


ss


ae


aS ER SRE 8 Re


see ewe H BS


—— =


=-


CHRONICLES:


Brought forward as truly at variance; yet there
wre real contradictions. Thus— :

2 Chron. viii. 18 ..... 1 Kings ix. 28.

1 Chron. xi. 11 ...... 2 Sam, xxiii. 8.

» XX 5.00... 4. xxiv. 9, where
the numbers of Judah are different.
»  -Xvilil. 4..... 2 Sam. viii. 4.
» xix. I ..... 4 x. 18
and other places that might be quoted, present
real contradictions. How then are they to he dis-
posed of ? To this we reply, that the text is cor-
tupt. It is well known that the text of the books
of Samuel, Kings, and Chronicles is in a worse
condition than that of the other inspired writings.
The fact is unquestionable, in whatever way it
may be explained. Here, transcribers fell into
more mistakes than they have elsewhere com-
mitted. Many of the names and words that are
differently written, should he referred to this
head. Sume omissions and some interpolations
also belong to it. They are nothing but corrup-
tions i the text. But the principal contradic-
tions relate to numbers. These seem to have been
expressed in various ways; and copyists, having
ditferent methods of marking them, were natu-
tally expose: to errors. Sometimes numbers were
designated by letters, occasionally by ciphers ;
and again they were marked by eords.

It is time that the text of these historical books
thould be rectified in those instances where an
unquestionable necessity exists. If there be not
manuscript evidence to warrant certain changes,
we should not be deterred from making them,
Common sense, the credit of the inspired writers,
and. above all, their sacred authority, outweigh
all scruples about correcting by conjecture. Real
contradictions should never be allowed to, tarnish
a text written under the immediate superintend-
ence of the Holy Spirit. Errors committed by
copyists should be at once removed, else evil-
minded men may charge them on the original
authors. Some are averse to believe that they have
originated, since the close of the canon, in the un-
avoidable chanzes incident to the multiplication
of copies during many centuries. It is mar-
vellous to observe the attachment with which Ra-
tionalists adhere to the Masoretic text as if it were
perfect. On the ground of its absolute correct-
ness, they attribute to the sacred writers ignorance,
falsitication, and error. We greatly admire a
conscientious zeal for the general purity of out
present text, and envy not the motives of the man
who emends it raslily. A disposition to alter it
fienently and frivolously is not far from scepti-
cism. But we equally dislike that rigid adher-
ence to its present condition which individuals
having no concem for the truth of God or the
honour of his word exhibit—an adherence, so far
from being commendable, that it subserves the
very worst purpose, even to impugn the truthful-
ness of the most honest historians.

Rut De Wette aflirms that the writer of Chro-
nicles contratlicts himself, as well as preceding
historians. In proof of this assertion ‘- quotes
‘be following passages :—

2 Chron. xiv. 1 ...... 2 Chron. xv. 19, and

1 Kings xv. 32.
xiv. 2 .0++0.. 2 Chron. xv. 17.


7 xvii 6 cece) | EL BS,
» “xxx. 26 ..... 4 xxxv. 18,
From a careful perusal and comparison of these


.CHRONICLES. 483


laces, we affirm that they are not contradictory.

it is only the superficiality of rationalism or
the blindness of infidelity that discovers opposi-
tion in them.

The character of such statements as are pe
culiar to the Chrontcles.—From an inspection
of 1 Chron. xvi. 4-41; 1 Chron. xxii.-xxvi. 28;
xxviii.; xxix.; 2 Chron. xv. 1-15; 2Ch
xvii. 7, &c.; xxvi. 16-215 xxx. 53 xxxi., it wil
be manifest, that it was one design of Ea to
Notice with particularity the order of the divine
worship as established by David and Solomon,
with various reformations in the theocracy that
took place at different times. The Levitical
priesthood, and the public service of God, are
specially noticed and prominently brought into
view. From 2 Chron. xiii.; xx. 21, &c.; xix.
2, &c.; xxv. 7, &c., it is evident that God’s
miraculous interference on behalf of Judah,
and his displeasure with idolatrous Israel, were
also intended to be depicted. In accordance with
the same object, pious kings evincing appropriate
zeal for the glory of Jehovah are commended, and
their efforts marked with approval (comp. 2 Chron.
xiv. 6-15; xvii. 10, &e.3; xx.3 xxvi. 5, &e. 3
xxvii. 4-6, &c.), while the ruin of idolatrous prac-
tices is forcibly adduced (2 Chron. xxi. 11, &e.3
xxviii. 5, &c.; xxxiii. 11, &c.; xxv. 14, &e.3
xxxvi. 6).

Sugh are the characteristic peculiarities of
these books; and we now ask the impartial reader
to consider if they be not worthy of the Holy
Spirit under whose. guidance the Chronicles were
written. Are they not admirably in unison with
the character of Eara the high-priest and reformer ?
What more natural, or more accordant with the
solicitudes of this holy man, than to dwell upon
such matters as relate to the worship of Jehovah,
to the priests, and Levites? Surely he was ap-
Propriately directed to record the reformations
etfected by godly kings, and the disastrous conse-
quences of forsaking the true God, whose zeal was
abundantly manifested in reform, and to whom
idolatry was peculiarly offensive. And yet upon
these very chapters and paragraphs charges the -
most flagrant have been founded. The author of
them has been accused of hatred to Israel, predi-
lection for the Levites, love of the marvellous,
design to magnify pious kings and to heighten
the mistakes of the ratoe of Israel. It is un-
necessary to enter into any refutation of these
monstrous accusations. They bear with them
their own condemnation. They are the offspring
of that Rationalism which resolves to see nothing
but what it relishes. On every page of these his-
torical bovoks are impressed genuineness and
honesty. The writer candidly refers to the
sources whence his information was derived ; and
contemporary readers, placing implicit reliance
on his statements, allowed the original documents
to perish. He relates many things disgraceful to
Judah and its kings, while he evinces no desire
to palliate or conceal sin, He even retains, as
we have seen before, expressions incongruous with
his own age, and therefore exactly copied from
the ancient records. Surely a writer guilty of
falsification would have been careful to alter
these into exact correspondence with his own
times. Transparent simplicity of character needs
not such minutia.


We have alluded to the attacks che upos
r


434 CHRONOLOGY.


these books in Germany, because they are of a
most serious nature. Nor have they yet ceased.
They are still continued. Since De Wette put
forth his energies in the unholy service (in his
Beitrage zur Einleitung in das Alte Testament,
Halle, 1806, Svo.), he has repeated and enlarged
hia objections in every edition of a Saline! Intro-
eC9 to the Old Testament, although Dahler,

je Librorum Paralipomenén auctoritate atque
fide historica, Argentor. 1819, 8vo., successfully
combated his statements. He has been aided too
and strengthened by Gramberg, inhis Die Chrontk
nach ihrem Geschichtl. Charakter und threr
Glaubwiirdigkeit neu geprift, Halle, 1823, 8vo.,
and indirectly encouraged by Gesenius, in his
Geschichte der Hebr. Sprache und Schrift,
Leipzig, 1815, 8vo.; and in his Commentar wher
den Jesaia, Yet the credibility of the books has
stood these various attacks, uninjured. In oppo-
sition to De Wette and Gramberg, two scholars
have appeared who have successfully vindicated
the Chronicles from their superficial accusers.
We refer to F.C. Movers, who, in his Kritische
Untersuchungen tiber die Biblische Chrontk,
Bonn, 1834, 8vo., has entered into an examina-
tion of all the points connected with these books
with great skill and minuteness. His work is of
a masterly and most satisfactory character. It
is immeasurably the best on the subject that has
ever appeared. In addition to Movers, we allude
to C. F. Keil, whose Apologetischer Versuch uber
die Chronik, Berlin, 1833, 8vo., forms a very
valuable treatise on the same side. Differing in
various respects from Movers, he takes up some in-
teresting topics in connection with the Chronicles,
and occasionally advances opinions more correct
than those of the pastor in Bonn. To these may
be subjoined the observations of Eichhorn, in his
Fxtroduction, who is wondrously judicious and
sound on this subject; as also the Introduction
of Jahn, who displays here his wonted ability.
Nor should the old but valuable Introduction of
Carpzov be neglected.—S. D.

CHRONOLOGY is the science which mea-
@ores time by the periodic revolutions of the
heavenly bodies, particularly of the sun, moon,
and stars. The idea of time is derived from the
succession of events which happen in the hea-
vens or on the earth. The entrance of events
in human history is accidental and irregular, but
in the history of the heavens it is subject to fixed
and certain Jaws. Accordingly the heavenly
phenomena, afford the surest basis for the divi-
sion of time, and serve best to give orderly ar-
rangements to the irregular and accidental events
which succeed each other in civil history. Chro-
nology is divided into two kinds, theoretical and
practical, or mathematical and historical. The
first teaches the division of time in reference to
the phenomena of the heavens; the second teaches
it in regard to the succession of human events.
The culmination of a star, or, what is the same
thing, the daily turning of the earth on its axis,
offers a regular and constantly-recurring event
as a measure of time, and answers for this pur-

e better than the varying period of time which
1s derived from the revolution of the earth round
the sun.

The knowledge of the Hebrews in chronology
rested altogether on appearances; not a trace of
anything like a scientific view is to be found in


v


CHRONOLOGY.


their literature. The books of the Old Testament
recognise none of the great eras which other
nations have employed. Nor is it until the first
book of the Maccabees that any such guide is
found. Times and periods are for the most part
left relatively undetermined; and consequently
it is difficult, if not impossible, to establish any
satisfactory chronology for the succession of
events in the history of the Hebrew le.
Genealogical tables indeed are not anting, wat
they are of little service for the general purposes
of chronology. Neither the new moon nor the
year were the ancient Hebrews able to mea-
sure and foretel with astronomical accuracy, so
as to possess some standard for chronological
purposes; and they were content, so far as re-
gards the moon, with such information as marks
and traces on the hills, or messengers could
afford, after the new moon had made her appear-
ance.

The last thing which appears of importance to
the annalist of a rude age is to mark the precise
order of the occurrences which he records, and
more especially to afford the means of deter-
mining their place in the map of time, by noting
their distance from some common point to which
they may all be referred. In the more ancient
portion of the Old Testament we have to rely
almost solely upon the uncertain standard which
is founded upon the average duration of human
life and the length of a generation—a mode of
reckoning which, as it proceeds upon a principle
at no time fixed, and assumes the constancy of
elements which are subject to an incessant, but
irregular variation, cannot be applied with any
degree of confidence to establish the date of
events removed from one another by the lapse of
centuries, From the flood to the days of Abra-
ham the generation or period between the birth
of a father and that of his eldest son became
gradually contracted; but as the rate of dimi-
nution was far from being uniform, no satis-
factory conclusion can hence be deduced in
regard to the number of years which passed from
the nativity of Arphaxad to the infancy of the
patriarch. Had the sacred historians been led
to measure the lapse of time and the succession
of events by a reference to the epoch of creation,
or even to that of the deluge, there would have
been no difficulty in finding the proper place of
every other occurrence, as well as the true limits
of every particular epoch. From the Exode down
to the era of Christianity, the life of the human
being, having fallen more nearly to its present
extent, supplies a better standard; and hence
from the death of Moses to the decline of the
Jewish state, chronology shines with a clearer and
more steady light.

Chronology finds it no easy task to harmonize
the discrepancies which present themselves alike
in regard to the length of the entire period which
elapsed from the Creation to the birth of Christ,
and the several great periods into which, for the
sake of convenience, the lengthened whole has
been divided. The distance of the Creation from
the Christian era, which has been stated with
about 140 different variations, is given in the
Indian Chronology, as computed by Gentil, at
6174 years; in the Babylonian, by Bailly, at 6158,
in the Chinese, by Bailly, at 6157; in the Sep-
tuagint, by Abulfaragius, at 5508; while Jewish


~


CHRONOLOGY.


writers bring it down below the computation of
Capellus, namely, 4000, and one, Rabbi Lipman,
to so coutracted a sum as 3616. The separate


ry


Usuzr.
Years.


From Creation to Deluge . . «© - 1656 .


» Deluge to Birth of Abraham. . 292 .
n Birth to his leaving Haran . . 134 .
» that event tothe Exode . . . 430 .
» Exode to foundation of Temple. 479 «
» Temple to Christianera . . 1013 .
4004


The clironology of the English Bible was regu-
lated by the views of Usher, who followed, in
general, the authority of the Hebrew text. Jack-
son and Hales put themselves under the guidance
of the Septuazint and Josephus, maintaining that
the modern Hebrew text has been greatly vitiated
in the whole department of chronology, aud more
especially in the genealogical tables which respect
the antediluvian patriarchs, as well as the ten
generations immediately after the Flood. The
computation of Jackson places the Creation n.c.
5126; that of the modern Hebrew for the same
era is 1004, making a difference of 2422 years.
According to Hales the world was created B.c.
S411; according to the modern Hebrew Bible,
4004—difference, 1407 years. The shortened
scheme, adupted by Usher from the Masorite Jews,
is recent in its origin, when compared with the
more comprehensive chronology of the Septuagint,
This last was used before the advent of our Lord,
was followed by the fathers of the church, and
appears nut to have been called in question till,
in the eighth century, a disposition to exchange
it for the Rabbinical method of reckoning was
first manifested by the venerable Bede. The
preference given, in consequence of the reformation
from Popery, to everything Hebrew, or connected
therewith, led, at an early period afier that great
Protest aya‘nst the corruptions of the Western
church, to the adoption and general use, at least
in this country, of the numbers of the original
Hebrew text. “In time, however, opponents to this
fystem appeared. Isaac Vossius, in his treatise
De Vera tate Mundi, was the tirst of any note.
He was fect:ly answered by Homius. Pezron, in
Is work L’Antiquité des Tems rétablie et dé-
Sendue contre les Juifs et Irs nouveaut Chrono-
boyistes. produced a great impression in favour of
Jengthened period advocated by Vossius. The
Pesitions of Pezron were assailed by Martianay,
whose chief merit lies in having given occasion
for Pezron's teply, entitled Défense de [ Anti-
quite des Tems. ‘The treatise of Mr. Hayes on
the chronology of the Septuagint is the first_con-
siderable work by an English author on the
Berealogical numbers of the Greek Scriptures
compared with those of the Hebrew text, and it
4 peculiarly valuable for a successful attempt to
Prove that the Chaldean and Egyptian antiquities
We consistent with the sacred history of the Jews,
when viewed through the medium of the Septua-
fat. It was not, however, till the middle of the
century that the indefatigable Jackson pro-


in three volumes, quarto, his great work,


CHRONOLOGY. 435
numbers which compose this chronological period
are thus stated by Usher, Playfair, Jackson, and
Hales :-—

Prarrarr. Hares. Jacxsow.
Years. Years. Years.

- . 1656 . . . 2256 . . . 2256
« 6 202 . . . 1002 . . . 10726
oe Wee. WH... 1
- « 430. . . 480... 480
- » 540 . 2. «. 621 2. . . 579
« « Wl4 . . « 1027 . «. . 1014
4007 5411 5426

the Chronological Antiquities. Adopting the


principles of Vossius, Pezron, and Hayes, he
made the interval between Adam and Christ
5126 years. In the beginning of the preseut
century Dr. Hales published the first volume of a
laborious work entitled, A New Anaiysis of Chro-
nology, an undertaking which ultimately ex-
tended to three volumes, without adding anything
of much value to the conclusions of Jackson.
Mr. Faber, in his work on Pagan idolatry, offers
some judicious observations on the chronulogy of
ancient history, treading generally in the footsteps
of Hales. The Origines of Sir William Drum-
mond proceeds also on the ground supplied by
the Septuagint chronology.

The contracted scheme of the Hebrew text is
rejected by the greatest names in this branch of
Biblical Jiterature, as being glaringly incow-
sistent not only with the records of other nations,
but even with the history of the ancient Hebrews
themselves. A detailed statement of grounds for
admitting the authority of the Septuagint in

reference to that of the original Hebrew may
te found in a preliminary dissertation prefixed
to the first volume of Dr. Michael Russell's
Connection of Sacred and Profane History,
JSrom the Death of Joshua to the Decline of the
Kingdoms of Israel and Judah, London, 1827.
The computation which Dr. Russell considers to
‘accor best with the ancient Scriptures, as well
as with the several histories which have been
derived from them, dors not extend the number
of years from the creation to the advent of
Christ beyond 5441.’ The same writer under-
takes to prove that the great difference which is
found between the chronology of the modem
Hebrew Scriptures and the system of dates which
determine the order of the corresponding events,
as recorded in the Samaritan Pentateuch, in the
Septuagint version, and in the works of Josephus,
did not always exist, but must have been occa-
sioned by an alteration introduced into the
Jewish registers between the period at which the
translation of the Seventy was first made public
and the middle of the second century of the
Christian era. Evidence is also adduced to
show that this difference was not accidental and
such as might have originated in the ignorance or
carelessness of transcribers, but was regularly
planned and effected for an unworthy object.
The chronology of the Hebrew Scriptures and
that of the Greek version, the author contends,
were originally the same; and that the accuracy
of the latter was not called in wea tree

F


e


436 CHRONOLOGY.


Jews for nearly four hundred years—that is, until
the rapid progress of Chiistianity awakened the
enmity of certain unprincipled individuals of
that ‘nation,’ who were induced to alter the
dates of their ancient chronicles in order to
weaken the arguments derived from them in
support of the new religion.

The entire period which elapsed from the Crea-
tion till the birth of Christ is usually divided for
chronological purposes into the following ages :—
From the Creation to the Deluge; from the De-
luge to the birth of Abraham; from the birth of
Abraham to the Exode of the Israelites; from the


Lived before Birth of
Eldest Son.


Malaleel . . .
Jared .
Enoch. 2. 1.
Methuselah . .
Lamech . 2 .


Noah, at the Flood 600 | 600


To the Flood . . {1656 |1307 2262 2256


Thus, from the Creation to the Deluge, the
number of years, according to the


Hebrew text, is. . . «© 1656
Samaritan Pentateuch. . 1307
Septuagint Version, . . 2262
Josephus. ww we 2256


Between Josephus and the Septuagint the dif-
ference is only six years; while both of these
dider from the modern Hebrew Bible not less
than six hundred, The cause of this remarkable
variation, or rather what has been considered the
manner in which it was occasioned, may be dis-
covered in the principle according to which the
Jews constructed tneir chronological tables. They
measured the several eras of their ancient history
uot by adding together the full lives of their
successive patriarchs, but by taking the sum of
their generations—that is, the aye to which they
had respectively attained at the birth of their
eldest son. For example, the generation of Enos,
or his age at the bith of Cainan, is estimated by
the Hebrew and Samaritan texts as having ex-
tended to 90 years; the residue of his life, ac-
cording to the same authori! es, is 815 years;
and the total length of life, being the amouut of
both these sums, is 905 years; whereas, in the
Septuagint and Josephus, the generation is en-
larged to 190 years; tie residue of life is dimi-
nished to 715 years; while the full length of life,
or 905 vears, is the same in all these ancient


CHRONOLOGY,


Exode to the building of Solomon's temple; from
the building of the temple to the destruction of
the same; from the destruction of the temyle to
the restoration of the Jews; and from that event
to the Christian era. In the tirst of the above
periods a very great discrepancy is found to
srevail between the numeration of the modern

ebrew text and that of the Septuagint and
Josephus. The amount of the difference between


these ancient authorities, as well as the singular
variation which appears in the Samaritan Penta-
teuch, will be understood from the following
table :—


Number of Years from the Creation to the Detuar.


After the Birth of
Eldest Son.


Total Length of Life.


records. Hence, in order to lengthen or shorten
any particular era, it was only necessary to alter
the proportion between the generation and the
residue of life, and such, Dr. Russell states, was
the method actually adopted. ;

an era properly so called the ancient Hebrews
did not possess. Signal events seem to have been
made use of as points from which to date. Moses,
like Herodotus, reckoned by generations. The
Exodus, as may be seen in Exod. xix. 1, and
Num. xxxiii. 38, probably, also, the building of
the first temple (1 Kings ix. 10; 2 Chron. iii. 2),
were employed as starting-points to aid in assign-
ing events their position in historical succession.
Also the destruction of the first temple, or the
beginning of the Babylonish captivity (in the
summer of the year n.c. 586), and the liberation
of the Jews from the Syrian yoke by the valour of
the Maccabees (in the autumn of the year B.c.
143), were used as epochs from which time was
reckoned. After the manner of other nations, the
Hebrews c.myputad time by the succession of their
pence as may be scen throughout the baoks ot

ings and Chronicles. Ata later period, and in
the tirst book of the Maccabees, what is termed the
Greek era, or that of the Seleucidw, began to be
employed. This era, which is also called the era
of the Syro-Macedonians, commences from the
year of Rome 442, twelve years after the death of
Alexander, and 311 years and four months before


CHRONOLOGY.


the Lirth of our Saviour, the epoch of the first con-
quest of Seleucus Nicator in that part of the West
which afterwards com; the immense empire
of Syria. The Julian year, formed of the Roman
months, to which Syrian names were given, was
used. This era prevailed not only in the do-
minions of Seleucus, but among almost all the
perl of the Levant, where it still exists. The
ews did not abandon the use of this era until
within the last 400 years. At present they date
from the Creation, which they hold to have taken
place 3760 years and three months before the
commencement of the Christian era. In order to
fix their new moons and years, as well as their
feasts and festivals, they were obliged to make use
of astronomical calculations and cycles. The
first cycle they used for this purpose was one of
4 years; but this being discovered to be faulty,
they had recourse to the Metonic cycle of 19 years,
which was established by the authority of Rabbi
Hillel, prince of the Sanhedrim, about the year
360 of the Christian era. This they still use, and
tay it is to be observed till the coming of the
Mesiah. Indeed, some contend that their pre-
sent practice of dating from the Creation of the
world is of great antiquity. Their year is luni-
tolar, consisting either of 12 or 13 months each,
and each month of 29 or 30 days; for in the
compass of the Metonic cycle there are 12 com-
mon years, consisting of 12 months, and seven
intercalary years, consisting of 14 months, which
are the third, sixth, eighth, eleventh, fourteenth,
seventeenth, and nineteenth of the cycle.

The birth of the Saviour of the world probably
took place somewhat earlier than the date which
13 usually assigned to it. Usage, however, has
long fixed the era to which it gave rise, namely
the Christian era, or the era of the Incarnation,
* to begin on the 10th day of January, in the
middle of the fourth year of the 194th Olympiad,
the 753rd year of the building of Rome, and in
the 4714th of the Julian period. The use of the
Christian era was introduced in the sixth cen-
tury; in France it was first employed in the
seventh. About the eighth it was generally
adopted; but considerable difference hus existed
hot only in various countries but even in the
same place in the same country and at the same


CHRONOLOGY. 437


period, ing the commencement of the year.
or did the use of the era become universal in
Christendom till the fifteenth century. The
Christian year consists of 365 days for three suo-
cessive years, and of 366 in the fourth, which is
termed leap-year. This computation subsisted


for 1000 years without alteration, and is still used


by the followers of the Greek church. The sim-
plicity of this form has brought it into very
general use, and it is custumary for astronomers
and chronologists, in treating of ancient times, to
date back in the same order from its commence-
ment. There is unfortunately a little ambiguity
on this head, some persons reckoning the year ime -
mediately before the birth of Christ as 1 3.c.,
and others noting it with 0, and the second year
before Christ with 1, thus producing one year less
than those who use the former notation. The first,
however, is the usual mode.

The Christian year, arranged as has been shown,
was 11! 11” too long, an error which amounted to
a day in nearly 129 years. Towards the end of
the sixteenth century the time of celebrating the
Church festivals had advanced ten days beyond
the periods fixed by the Council of Nice in 825.
It was, in consequence, ordered by a Bull of Gre-
go XIII. that the year 1582 should consist of
only 355 days, which was brought about by
omitting ten days in the month of October, namely
from the 5th to the 14th. And to prevent the re-
currence of a like irregularity, it was also ordered
that in three centuries out of four the last year
should be a common instead of a Jeap-year, as it
would have been by the Julian Calendar. The
year 1600 remained a leap-year, but 1700, 1800,
and 1900 were to be commun years. This
amended mode of computing was called* ‘The
New Style.’ It was immediately adopted in all
Catholic countries, but Protestants came to use it
only gradually. In England the reformed ca-
lendar was adopted in the year 1752 by omitting
eleven days, to which the difference between the
styles then amounted. The alteration was effected
in the month of September, the day which would
have been the third being called the fourteenth,

The following summary shows the correspon-
dence of the principal epochs, eras, and periods
with that of the birth of Christ, or Christian era.


Epocha, Eras, and Periods.

The Grecian year of the World . 2 6s
The ecclesiastical era of Constantinople . ..

e civil era of Constantinople . 2 + »
The Alexandrian era>. . . © - @
The ecclesiastical era of Antioch . . « «
The Julian period «© © 2 0 ew te we
The Mundane era. 6 6 es 8 ee
The Jewish Mundane era . 2 2s 6
The civil Jewishera . 2 6 se 8
Theeraof Abraham . . 2... 6
The destruction of Tro o 6s © oe we
The epoch of the building of Solomon's temple
The era of the Olympiads. 6 2. 2 ee
TheRomaneras . . . ke wes
The eraof Nabonassar. 2. 2 2. 2 6
The epoch of Daniel's 70 weeks. . 5s
ts poe cycle, » 2 1. ew ee

ne Calippic period . 6 2 ww es
The Philippeaners 22111


Months and Years of Commencement.


September 1, .c. 5598.

March 21, or April 1, B.c. 5508.
September 1, B.c. 5508.

August 29, B.c. 5502.

September 1, 3.c. 5492.

January 1, p.c. 4713.

October, B.c. 4008.

Vernal equinox, 3.c. 3761.

October, s.c. 3761.

October 1, 5.c. 2015,

June 12 or 24, n.c. 1184.

May, b.c. 1015.

New moon of Summer solstice, 3.c. 776,
April 21, n.c. 753.

February 26, B.c. 747. .
Vernal equinox, B.c. 458.

July 15, p.c. 432.

New moon of Summer solstice, 5.c. 330


| June, s.c. 323,


438 CHURCH. -


Epoehs, Eras, and Periods.


The Syro-Macedonian era .
The Tyrianera. . -« «
The Sydonianera . .
The Cesarean era of Antioc
The Julianera. «© .
The Spanish erase
The Actianera. . .
The Actian era in Egypt
The Augustanera . .
The Pontifical indiction
The indiction of Constantinople
The vulgar Christian era.

The destruction of Jerusalem
The era of the Maccabees .

The era of Dioclesian .

The era of Ascension.


The era of Martyrs...
The era of the Armenians
The era of the Hegira «5 wee
The era of Yezdegird, or Persian


.
.
e
e
.
e
.
.
.
e
.
.
.
.
.
e
.
e


oe ee eee
Cd


ed


.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
e
.
.
e
e
.
.
.
.
.
.
e


In addition to the works mentioned in the ar-
ticle, the following will be found of service to the
student of Biblical Chronology : Prideaux, Old
and New Testament Connected ; Shuckfurd, The
Sacred and Profane History of the World Con-
nected ; Mémoires de l Académie des Inscriptions
et Belles Lettres; Michaelis, Schretben an
Schlozer, die Zeitrechnung von der Siindfiuth
bis Salomo betreffend, im ‘Gotting. Mag. der
Wissensch.’ 1 Jahrg.; Gesenius, De Pentateuchi
Samarit. Origine, Hal. 1815. On the era of
the Selencides see Petavii Doctr. Temp. ix.
40. Hesewisch, Lund. in die Hist. Chron. Alt.
W811; V.Lnules, Crronologie de U Iistuire Sainte,
&e., Hei, 1783; Beer's Abhandlungen zur
Erléut. d. alten Zeitrechn. Leipz. 1752; Frank's
Astronom.-Grundrechnung der Bibl. Gesch.
Leipz. 1753; Lud. Capelli Caronol.; Bengelii
Ordo Temp.; Silberschlag, Chronologie der
Welt, Berlin, 1783; Chronology of History, hy
Sir H. Nicholas, in Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopedia.
A valuable treatise on Eras of Ancient and
Blodern Times may be fuund in the Cumpanion
to the Almanac, 1830.—J. R. B.

CHRYSOLITE. [Tuarsuisn.

CHRYSOPRASUS. [Snouan.

CHURCH (ExxaAngia). The original Greek
word, in its larger signification, denotes a number
of persons called together fur any purpose, an
assembly of auy kind, civil or religious. As,
however, it is usually applied in the New Testa
ment to religious assemblages, it is very properly
translated by ‘ assembly,’ in the few instances in
which it occurs in the civil sense (Acts xix. 32,
39,41). It is, however, well to note that the
word rendered ‘assembly’ in these verses is the
ora which is rendered ‘ church’ everywhere
else.

In a few places the word occurs in the Jewish
sense, of a congregation, an assembly of the people
for worship, either in a synayogue (Matt. xviii.
17) or generally of the Jews regarded as a teli-
gious body (Acts vii. 38; Heb. ii, 12). The text
last cited is quoted from Psalm xxii. 22; where
the Septuagint uses exxAnola fur the Hebrew


Np, which bas the same meaning, namely, assem-


CILICLA,


Months and Years of Commencement.


September 1, s.c. 312.
October 19, s.c. 125.
October, 3.c. 110.
September 1, B.c. 48.
January 1, B.c. 45.
January 1, 8.c. 38.
January 1], s.c. 30,
September 1, 3.c. 30.
February 14, B.c. 27.
December 25, or January 1, Bo. &

September 1, n.c. 3.

January 1, a.v. 1.

September 1, a.p. 69. o
November 24, a.v. 166.

September 17, a.p. 284.

November 12, a.v. 295.

February 23, a.v. 303.

July 7, a.v. 552.

July 16, a.v. 622.

June 16, a.v. 632.


bly or congregation. Elsewhere also this w
which we render ‘ church ' in the New Ti =
is used by the Sept. for the Hebrew word which
we render ‘ congregation’ in the Old Testament.

But the word most frequently occurs in the
Christian sense of an assemblage (of Christians)
generally (1 Cor. xi. 18). Hence it denotes a
church, the Christian church ; in which, however,
we distinguish certain shades of meaning, viz.—
1. A particular church, a church in a certain
place, as in Jerusalem (Acts viii. 1; xi. 22, &e.),
in Antioch (Acts xi, 26; xiii. 1, &c.), in Corinth
(1 Cor. i. 2; 2 Cor. i. 1), &c. &c. 2% Churches
of (Gentile) Christians, without distinguishing
place (Rom. xvi. 4). 3. An assembly of Chrie-
tians which ineets anywhere, as in the house of
any one (Rom. xvi.5; 1 Cor. xvi.19; Philem. 2).
The Church universal—the whole body of
Christian believers (Matt. xvi. 18; 1 Cor. xii.
28; Gal. i, 13; Eph. i. 22; iii. 10; Heb. xii.
23, &c.).

CHUSHAN-RISHATHAIM (O'NYCHA [43;
Sept. Xovcapoabalu), a king of Mesopotamia, by
whom the Israelites were oppressed for eight years
(s.c. 1394 to B.c. 1402), until delivered by Oth-
niel (Judy. iii. 8-10).

CHUZA (Xoufas), steward of Herud Antipas,
whose wife Joanna was one of those who em-
ployed their means in contributing to the wants
of Christ and his apostles (Luke viii. 3),

e CILICIA (KiAucia), the south-eastem part
of Asia Minor, bounded on the W. by Pamphy-
lia; separated on the N. from Cappadocia by
the Taurus range, and on the E. by Amanus
from Syria; and having the gulf of Issus (Isken-
deroon) and the Cilician Sea (Acts xxvii. 5) on
the South. By the ancieuts the eastern part was
called Cilicia Propria (4 iSiws KuAula, Ptolemy),
or the level Cilicia (4 medids, Strabo) ; and the
western, the rough (4 tpaxeia, Strabo, xiv. 5), or
mountainous (7 épewh, Herod. ii. 34). The
former was well-watered, and abounded in various
Kinds of grain and fruits (Xenoph. Anad. i. 2.
§ 22. Cilicia—dives bonis omnibus terra. Am-
mianus Marcell. xiv. 8. § 1. The chief towns in
this division were Jesus (Xenoph. Anab. i 4), at


the sonth-eastern extremity, celebrated far’ the
victory of Alexander over Darins Codomanus
(s.c. 333), and not far from the passes of Amanus.
(rée "Aparider ver TvAdy. Poly xii.
8); Sole, originally a ¢olony of Argives and
ae the bid place eh oon t pe comic
B.c. 262); stoic phi Chrysi
fe 206), on of Aratus, author of the stunts
mical poem ra daudpeva (B.c. 270); and Tarsus,
the birth-place of the Apostle Paul pens.
Cilicia Trachea furnished an inexhaustible supply
of cedars and firs for ship-building; it was also
noted for a species of goat, of whose skins cloaks
and tents were manufactured. Its breed of horses
was so superior, that 360 (one for each day of the
tia formed part of the annual tribute to the
ing of Persia (Herod. iii. ve The neighbour-
hood of Corycus produced large quantities of
saffron (Crocum sylvestre optimum. Prima no-
bilitas Cilicio, et ibi in Coryco monte, Plin. Nat.
Hist. xxi. 17). Herodotus says that the first
inhabitants of the country were called Hypachai,
“Traxaiol; and derives the name of Cilicia from
Cilix, son of Agenor, a Phoenician settler (vii.
91). He also states that the Cilicians and Ly-
cians were the only nations within the Halys who
Were not conquered by Croesus (i. 28). Though
partially subjected to the Assyrians, Medes, Per-
sians, Syrians, and Romans, the Eleuthero- (or
free) Cilicians, as the inhabitants of the moun-
tainous districts were called, were governed by
their own kings (Reguli, Tacit. ii. 78), till the
time of Vespasian. The sea-coast was for a long
time occupied by pirates, who carried on the ap-
}ropriate vocatiun of slave-merchants, and found
ample eneouragement for that nefarious traffic
among the opulent Romans (Mannert, vi. 1;
Strabo, xiv. 5); but at last their depredations be-
came so formidable, that Pompey was invested
with extraordinary powers for their suppression,
which he accomplished in forty days. Hesettled
the surviving freebcoters at Sole, which he rebuilt
and named Pompeiopolis. Cicero was proconsul
of Cilicia (a.v.c. 702), and gained some successes
over the mountaineers of Amanus, for which he
was rewarded with a triumph (Epist. ad Fam.
xv. 4). Many Jews were settled in Cilicia.
(Acts vi. 9; Philo, De legat. ad Caium, § 36.)
According to the modern Turkish divisions of
Asia Minor, Cilicia Proper belongs to the Pashalic
of Adana; and Cilicia Trachea to the Liwah of
Itchil in the Mousselimlik of Cyprus. (Malte-
Brun's Geography, Edinb. 1822, vol. ii. p. 97.)
A copious account of the ancient Geography cf
Cilicta is given in Mamnert’s Geographie der
Griechen und Romer. vi. 2 pp. 32-113.—


JER
CINNAMON. [Kinnemon.]


CINN ERETGY, or Cinneroru (M233 or
nina), one of the ‘fenced cities’ of the tribe of
Naplitali (Josh. xix.85; Deut. iti. 17; Josh. xi. 2).
Ih the last of the texta cited it seems to in-
dicate a district, It is also the earlier name
of the lakeGennesareth (which is supposed to be a
corruption of Cinnereth), from whieh we may
collect that the town lay on the western border of
ene om and was of sufficient consequence to

S own name to it. It is even supposed
that Cinnereth, afterwards Geanesareth, eas the
ver name of the town of Tiberias, and under the


CIRCUMGISION. 40
Tatter change still extended its owh denomination:
to the lake ; nor is there anything improbable in
this conjecture. ‘

CIRCUMCISION. The history of Jewish Cir
cumcision lies on the surface of the Old Testament.
Abraham received the rite from Jehovah, Moses
established it as a national ordi and Joshua
carried it into effect before the Israelites entered
the land of Canaan. Males only were subjected te
the operation, and it was to be performed on the
sights day of the child’s life: foreign slaves also
were forced to submit to it, on entering an Ierael-
ite’s family. Those who are unacquainted with
other sources of information on the subject besides
the Scriptures might easily suppose that the rite
was original with Abraham, characteristic of his
seed, and practised among those nations only whe
had learned it from them. This, however, ap
not to have been the case; and the petucipal oh
ject of the present article is to put together what
is known on the ertra-Jewish Circumcision.

The topic has been treated with much research.
by so many learned writers that it may seem im-
probable that any of ancient authoss
which bear upon it can have escaped notice.
Michaelis (Laws of Moses, vol. iv.), to whom we
are indebted for various references, bas dedicated
forty-one pages to the subject: nor does it appear
that any important addition has been made by
later inquirers. It remains, therefore, to form our
own judgment upon the facts which have been
ascertained.

First of all, the Egyptians were a citcum-
cised people. Vonck, followed by Wesseling
(ad Herod. ii. 37) and by numerous able writers,
alleged that this was not true of the whole nation,
but of the priests only ; that at least the priests.
were circumcised is beyond controversy. No one
can for a moment imagine that they adopted the
rite from the despised shepherds of Goshen; and
we are immediately forced to believe that Egyp-
tian circumcision had an independent origin. A
great preponderance of argument, however, ap-
pears to us to prove that the rite was universal.
among the old Egyptians, as long as their native
institutions flourished ; although there is no ques
tion that, under Persian and Greek rule, it gradasr
ally fell into disuse, and was retained chiefly by
the priests and by those who desired to cultivate
ancient wisdom (see Origen, quoted by Michaelis,
§ 185, p. 25).

Herodotus distinctly declares that the Egyp-
tians practised circumcision; and that he meant
to state this of the whole nation is manifest, not.
only since he always omits to add any restriction,
but because, immediately following his first state-
ment of the fact, he annexes this remark—‘ The
priests moreover shave their whole body every other
day,’ &c. (Herod. ii. 37). It is difficult to suppose
that the historian could have been mistaken on this

int, considering his personal acquaintance with
Reypt Further, he informs us that the Colchians
were a colony from Egypt, consisting of soldiers
from the army of Sesostris. With these be had
conversed (ii. 104), and he positively declares
that they practised circumcision. Yet if the rite
had heen contined to the priestly caste of Egypt,
it could hardly have been found among the Col-
chians at all. The same remark will apply to
the savage Troglodytes of Africa, every branch of
whom, except one (the Kolobi), as Diodorus in-


am CIRCUMCISION.


forms us (iii. 81), was circumcised, having learnt
the practice from the Egyptians. The Troglo-
dytes appear to have been widely diffused through
Libya, which argues a corresponding diffusion of
the rite; yet, from the silence of Diodorus con-
cerning the other savage nations whom he re-
counts as African Ethiopians, we may infer that
it was not practised by them. The direct testi-
mony of Diodorus, Philo, and Strabo is to the
same effect as that of Herodotus respecting Egypt ;
yet this can hardly be called contirmatory, since
in their days the rite was no longer universal.
Josephus (Contra Ap. ii. 13) speaks of it as
practised by the priests only; he however re-
aches Apion for neglecting the institutions of
is country in remaining uncircumcised. Origen,
in the passage above referred to, confirms the state-
ment of Josephus. In Kenrick’s Herodotus (ii.
37) the French commissioners who examined
some Egyptian mummies, are quoted, as estab-
lishing from them the fact of Egyptian circum-
cision.

Herodotus, moreover, tells us that the Ethiopians
were also circumcised ; and he was in doubt whe-
ther they had learned the rite from the Egyptians, or
the Egyptians from them. By the Ethiopians we
must understand him to mean the inhabitants of
Mervé or Sennaar. In the present day the Coptic
Church continues to practise it, according to C.
Niebuhr (quoted by Michaelis); the Abyssinian
Christians do the same (Ludolf. Hist. Ethiop.
do. do.); and that it was not introduced among
the latter with a Judaical Christianity appears
from their performing it upon both sexes. (It is
scarcely worth while to invent a new name, reci-
sion, or resection, for accuracy’s sake.) Olden-
dorp describes the rite as widely spread throngh
Western Africa—16° on each side of the Line,—
even among natives that are not Mpbhammedan.
In later times it has been ascertained that it is
practised by the Kalir nations in South Africa,
more properly called Kosa, or Amakosa, whom
Prichard supposes to form ‘a great part of the
native population of Atrica to the southward of
the Equator." He remarks upon this :—* It is
scarcely within prubability that they borrowed the
custom from nations who profess Islam, or we
should find amoung them other proofs of intercourse
with people of that class. It is more probable
that this practice is a relic of ancient African
customs; of which the Egyptians, as it is well
known, partook in remote ages’ (Prichard, Phy-
sical Hist. of Man, 3rd ed. vol. ii. p. 257).

How far the rite was extended through the
Syro-Ambian races is uncertain. In the 9th sec-
tion of the Epistle uf Barnabas (which, whether
genuine or not, is very old), the writer comments
as follows :—‘ But you will say, the Jews were
circumcised for a sign. And so are all the Sy-
rians and the Arabians, and the idolatrous priests ;
+++... and even the Egyptians themselves are
circumcised.’ This language is vague and po-
pular ; yet it shows how notorious was the wide
diffusion of the custom. The Philistines, in the
days of Saul, were however uncircumcised ; 80
also, says Herodotus (ii. 104), were all the Pha-
nicians who had intercourse with the Greeks.
That the Canaanites, in the days of Jacob, were
not all circumcised, is plain from the affair of
Dinah and Shechem. ‘The story of Zipporah.
(Exod. iv. 25) who did not circumcise her son,


CIRCUMCISION.


until fear came over her, that Jehovah would slay
her husband Moses, proves that the family of
Jethro, the Midianite, had no fixed rale about i

although the Midianites are generally regard

as children of Abraham by Keturah. On the
other hand, we have the distinct testimony of
Josephus (Antig. i. 12, 2) that the Ishmaelite
Arabs, inhabiting the district of Nabathwa, were
circumcised after their 13th year: this must be
connected with the tradition which no doubt
existed among them, of the age at which their fore-
father Ishmael underwent the rite (Gen. xvii. 25).
St. Jerome also (quoted by Michaelis) informs us
that, to his day, ‘tsque hodie,’ the tribes dwelling
round Judza and Palestine were circumcised,
‘especially all the Saracens who dwell in the
desert.’ Elsewhere he says that, ‘except the
Egyptians, Idumeans, Ammonites, Moabites, and
Ishmaelites of the desert, of whom the greater part
are circumcised, all other nations in the world
are uncircumcised.’ A negative argument is
more or less dangerous: yet there is something
striking in the fact, that the books of Moses, of
Joshua, and of Judges, never bestow the epithet
uncircumcised as a reproach on any of the seven
nations of Canaan, any more than on the Moab-
ites or Ammonites, the Amalekites, the Midianites,
or other inland tribes with whom they came into
conflict. On the contrary, as soon as the Philis-
tines become prominent in the narrative, after the
birth of Samson, this epithet is of rather common
occurrence. The fact also of bringing back, as a
trophy, the foreskins of slain enemies, never oc-
curs except against the Philistines (1 Sam. xviii.).
We may perhaps infer, at least until other proof


_or disprooft is attained, that while the Philistines,


like the Sidonians and the other maritime Syrian
nations known to the Greeks, were wholly strangers
to the practice, yet among the Canaanites, and
all the more inland tribes, it was at least so far
common that no general description could be
given them from the omission.

It appears from Josephus (Antig. xiii. 9), that
when Hyrcanus subdued the Idummans, he forced
them to be circumcised on pain of expatriation.
This shows that they had at least disused the rite.
But that is not wonderful, if it was only a cus-
tom, and not a national religious ordinance; for,
as Michaelis observes, the disuse of it may have
dated from the edict of Antiochus Epiphanes, of
which it is said (1 Macc. i. 41,42), ‘The Kin
Antiochus wrote to all his kingdom, that al


- should be one people; and that all shold keep


the ordinances of his country: and all the na-
a acquiesced according to the word of the
ing.’

The rather obscure notices which are found in
Jeremiah and Ezekiel of the circumcision of the
nations who were in immediate contact with Israel,
admit of a natural interpretation in conformity
with what has been already adduced (Jer. ix. 25;
Ezek. xxxi. 18; also xxxii. 19, et passim). The
difficulty tums on the new moral use made of the
term ‘uncircumcised,’ to mean simply impure.
The passage in Jeremiah is thus translated by
Ewald :—

‘ Behold, the days come, that I visit all the un-
circumcised circumcised ones; Egypt and Judah,
Edom and the children of Ammon and Moab;
and all the dwellers in the wilderness that are
shaven on the temples: for all the heathen are


rm US- bt OL... o owe


Hecrigt


et tm ww


CIRCUMCISION.


meircumcised, and so is all the house of Israel
uncircumcised in heart.’

The shaving of the temples appears to be a reli-
gious custom of the same ied: Heraiotns (iii. 8)
ascribes it to the Arabs generally, and Josephus
rather strangely regards the epithet rpoxoxovpides,
in the ancient Greek poet Cheerilus (c. Ap. i.
22), as a description of his own countrymen.
Knowing that the Egyptians were circumcised,
it no longer remains doubtful how the reproach
of Egypt (Josh. v. 9) should be interpreted.

How far the rite of circumcision spread over
the south-west of Arabia no detinite record sub-
sists, The silence of the Koran confirms the
statement of Abulfedi (Histor. Ante-Islamica,
p. 180, ed. Fleischer, 1831), that the custom is
older than Mohammed, who, it would appear, in
No respect regarded it as a religious rite. Ne-
vertheless it has extended itself with the Moham-
medan faith, as though it were a positive ordi-
nance. Pocock (Specimen Hist. Arab., p. 309)
cites a tradition, which ascribes to Mohammed
the words—


Lall Soho JleN ku ball


Circumcision is an ordinance for men, and
honourable in women. This extension of the
Tite to the other sex might, in itself, satisfy us
that it did not come to those nations from Abra-
ham and Ishmael. We have already seen that
Abyssinian circumcision has the same pecu-
lianty: so that it is every way probable that
Southem Arabia had the rite from the same
source or influence as Ethiopia. In fact, the
Very closest relations are known to have subsisted
between the nations on the opposite coasts of the
Red Sea. Another passage of Abulfeda (Annales
Muslemici, vol. i. p. 92) gives specitic intorma-
ton on this sudject. In the battle of Ohod, in
the third year of the Hegira, ‘ Hamza, the uncle
of the prophet, committed great slaughter. When
Sabba' ben’ Abd ul Uzza, whose mother was a
circumciser in Mecca, passed by him, Hamza
called out, Come on, you son ofa she-circum-
ciser! [resectricis nympharum!)' The form of
the word proves that this was strictly the trade of
the old woman, and that the custom, as applied
to females, was no innovation of those days.

Pocock quotes the ecclesiastical historian Phi-
lostorgius, for the fact that the Himyarite Arabs
circumcise their children on the eighth day. He
adds a passage from Al Gazzili, in which the
writer says, that the Arabs differ from the Jews
as to the time; for they postpone it until the
child has teeth, which he dink safer. Finally,
* he cites Ibn Athir, who, writing of the times
antecedent to Mohammed, says that the Arabs
were accustomed to circumcise between the tenth
and fifteenth years.

The statement of Philostorgius may receive
light from the Arab historians, who relate (Jost,
Geschichte der Israetiten, vol. v. p. 236, 8qq.)
that about a century before the Christian era,
several Jewish sovereigns reigned in the region
called Sheba by the Jews, and Yemen by the
moderns, where the Himyarites (ur Homerite)
dwelt. The few facts preserved show that they
were not close observers of the Mosaic Law, and
the suxpicion might arise that they were called
Jews chiefly from their having received Jewish


CIRCUMCISION, ' ry


cireumeision.. We have, however, a collateral
evidence of much importance, to prove that the
influence acting on them had really come from
Judea; namely, it is well known that in Abys-
sinia a nation called the Falasha still exists,
which has very thoroughly adopted the Jewish
religion, insomuch as to have invented legends
that allege their descent from the Hebrews.
They possess the Old Testament in the Gheez
language and character, but their own language
is said to be quite alien from the Hebrew; facts
which prove that they were really proselyted by the
Jews at some early period. [Asyssinra.] At that
same time, it is credible, the Hebrew faith met with
similar success on the opposite coast of the Red Sea.
Just believes that, during the war of the Macca-
bees, great numbers of Jews migrated into Arabia ;
and it is certain that in later times they were very
numerous in Yemen, and their influence great.
Wherever they were settled proselytes must have
been made; and great zeal was doubtless used to
induce them to circumcise their children duly
according to the Mosaic rite. We can then
quite understand Philostorgius's fact, if we are
allowed to suppose that he spoke loosely of ‘the
Himyarites’ doing that which was done by a
great many of them. [Concerning the connection
of the Jews with Yemen, see farther under SoLo-
MON.

AL interesting story is told by Josephus—the
date so late as the reign of the Emperor Claudius
(Antig. xx. 2)}—how Izates, the young king of Adi-
abene, and his mother Helena, were converted by
Jewish teachers to a belief in the one true God, the
God of the Hebrews: and how, when Izates was
desirous of being circumcised, and his mother
dreaded that it would alienate his subjects, his
Jewish instructor Ananias warmly seconded her
views, with a heart like that of Paul ; telling him
that if he was resolved to imitate Jewish institu-
tions, he could, without being circumcised, adore
the true divinity; and that this was far more import-
ant than circumcision. At the time he satisfied
the young monarch ; but afterwards, another Jew,
named Eleazar, came from Galilee, and in-
veighed so strongly on the impiety of his dis-
obedience, that, without more delay, Izates sub-
mitted tc the rite. It is evident that, in a con-
troversy of this sort, the more narrow-minded
teacher had the advantage: and, in consequence,
it appears that ‘ proselytes of righteousness’ were
always circumcised (Judith xiv. 10, and Tacit.
Hist. v. 5). The facility with which whole
nations have adopted. the practice from the Mo-
hammeilans proves that it is not so serious an ob-
stacle to the spread of a religion as some have
thought it.

The moral meaning of the word ‘ uncircam-
cised’ was a natural result of its having been
made legally essential to Hebrew faith. ‘ Uncir-
cumcised in heart and ears’ was a metaphor to
which a prophet would be carried, as necessarily
as a Christian teacher to such phrases as ‘ unba,
tized in soul,’ or ‘washed by regeneration." if
however, we try to take a step farther back still,
and ask why this ordinance in particular was
selected, as so eminently essential tu the seed of
Abraham, we probably find that we have reached
a point at which we must be satisfied with know-
ing the fact without the reason. Every external
ordinance, as for instance baptism, must have


“3 CIRCUMCISION.


amore or less that is arbitrary init. It is, however,
abundantly plain that circumcision was not in-
tended to separate the Jews from other nations

erally, for it could not do so: and, least of all
a the Egyptians, as the words in Joshua v. $
sbow. Rather, it was a well known and already
wnderstood symbol of purity.

A great deal of speculation and argument has
been employed on the utility and origin of the
rite to the Egyptians and others. Herodotus, long
ago, declared that it was adopted for cleanliness,
xabapistytos elvexa: anda slight acquaintance
with the ideas of the Turks, concerning personal
detilement, will make it easy to believe that an
idea of cleanliness continued the practice among
nations which had once become habituated to it.
In the ancient Egyptians this Turkish spirit was
carried to a great height; nor is it wonderful that
in hot climates detailed precepts of cleanliness
form a very large part of primitive religion. But
we can hardly rest in this as a sufficient account
of the origin of the rite. A sort of circumcision
has been found in various parts of the Indian
Seas and Pacitic Ocean; many notices of which
have been collected in the Penny Cyclopedia
(art. Circumcision); but noting would be
gained by reproducing them here. It is more im-
pent to state that an adequate physical reason

for performing the operation on females of several
African races has been fully substantiated. The
curious reader will find in Laurence’s Lectures
(chap. v.), the decisive testimony of Mr. Barrow
and De. Sumerville on this point; with an allu-
sion to the eflorts of the Romish missionaries to
forbid the practice in Abyssinia, and the unex-
pected conseqftences which thwarted them. No
itive evidence has yet been obtained, that
Bis apeatiaa is equally expedient for the males
in any of the same races: yet the analogy of
the two cases forces us to believe that in both
the custom has a physical or medical ground ;
especially when it is remarked to predominate so
much in Africa, where alone (as far as yet ap-
pears) such physical peculiarities of structure
exist. It was practised, moreover, by the males
of African tribes so savage and so little addicted
to religious ceremonialism, that a broader ground
must be suught for it than simple cleanliness.
We have already named the Trogludytes. Strabo
mentions two other tribes of Africa, whom he
calls Kreophagi and Kolobi (xvi. 4; pp. 387-
390, 392. ed. Tauch.), who practised on themselves
@ yet more shocking mutilation («oAoBol ras
Baddyovs), ascribed to the Kulobi by Diodorus
also. The fact, also, that most of these natious
te whatever operation it was, uct on in-
fants, but on those who were advancing towards
tmarriageable aye, conspires to indicate that some
physical inconvenience gradually slowed itself
as with the Bushmen females), of which they
esired to yet rid. Jost looks upon infant cir-
cumcision as the distinguishing mark of Judaism ;
and this may be nearly correct, though we Lave
seen that, according to Abulfeda, some Arabs de-
layed it only till after teething. In fact Diodorus
(iti, 31), when speaking of that branch of the
Troglodyte nations, which was called Kolobi,
declares that they were subjected to the operation
in infancy (é« yyrlov). Their unnatural and
cruel custom is possibly to be referred to super
étition. Some indeed have looked on circum-


CISTERN.


cision itself as a softened form of the barbarous
rite by which the Galli, or priests of Cybele,
were qualified for their office. The Kolobite
custom might, on the contrary, be a carrying out
of that barbarity to the extremest point possible,
short of exterminating the population of a tribe. In
Winer's Realworterbuch (art. Beschneidung) will
be found details of the mode in which the Jews carry
their Jaw into effect ; and of the still more singular
and painful process by which a circumcised per
son was in some sort restored to his uatural con-
dition, (see 1 Macc. i. 15; Joseph. Antig. xii. 5.
1; and Paul, 1 Cor. vii. 18, éxtowao6a:).

If an independent and human origin been
discovered for Egyptian circumcision, the thought
of necessity arises that the Israelites must have
had it frum the sange sources as the nations around
them ; and it has been discussed (Spencer, De Leg.
Heb.) whether they even borrowed it from the
Egyptians. The idea has naturally given much
offence: but in truth the question involves no
peculiar difficulty ; it is only part of another far
wider inquiry. It is notorious that many other
ancient nations had various ceremonies and insti-
tutions in common with the Jews, and that the
Hebrew law is by no means in all points original.
That sacrifice pre-existed, is on the surface of the
Bible History. The same, however, is true of
temples, tabernacles, priests, ever-buming fire,
oracles, &c. The fact has been often denoted by
saying that the Jewish institutions are a selection,
revision and re-enactment of an older patriarchal
religion.—F. W. N.

CISTERN. In a country which has scarcely
more than one perennial stream, where fountains
are not abundaut, and where the months of sum-
mer pass without rain, the preservation of the rain-
water in cisterns must always have been a matter
of vast importance, not only in the pasture-
grounds, but in gardens, and, above all, in
towns. Hence the frequent mention of cisterns
in Scripture, and more especially of thuse which
are found in the open country. These were, it
seems, the property of those by whom they were
formed (Num. xxi, 22). They are usually
little more than large pits, but sometimes take the
character of extensive. subterraneous vaults, open
only by a small mouth, like that of a well.
They are filled with rain water, and (where the
climate allows) with suow during winter, and are
then closed at the mouth with large flat stones,
over which sand is spread in such a way as to
prevent their being easily discovered. If by any
chance the waters which the shepherd has thus
treasured up are lost Ly means of an earthquake


_or some other casualty, or are stolen, both he and


his tlocks are exposed to great and imminent
danger; as are also travellers who hasten to s
cistern and find its waters gone. For this reason
a failure of water is used as the image of any
great calamity (Isa. xli. 17, 18; xliv. 3). There
is usually a large deposit of mud at the bottom of
these cistems, so that he who falls into them, even
when they are without water, is liable to perish
miserably (Gen. xxxvii. 22, sq.; Jer. xxxviii. 6;
Lam. ii. 53; Ps. xl. 2; Ixix. 15). Cisterms
were sometimes used, when empty, as prisons, and
indeed prisons which were coustructed “under
ground received the same name, 112 (Gen.
xxxix. 20; xl. 15).

In cities the cisterns were works of much


CISTERN.


Inbour, for they were either hewn in the rocks er
warrounded with subterraneous walls, and lined
with a fine incrustation. The system which in
this respect formerly prevailed in Palestine Be
doubtless, the same that exists at present ;
indeed there is every probability that most of
the cisterns now in use were constructed in very
ancient times. Professor Robinson assures us,
that ‘the main dependence of Jerusalem at the
present day is on its cisterns; and this has
bably always been the case.’ He then mentions
the immense cisterns now and anciently existing
within the area of the Temple; supplied partly
~ by rain water, and partly by an aqueduct frum So-
loman's Pools, and which, of themselves, would fur
nish a tolerable supply in case of a siege. ‘ But,
in addition to these, almost every private house in
Jerusalem, of any size, is understood to have at
least one or more cisterns, excavated in the soft
limestone rock on which the city is built. The
house of Mr. Lanneau, in which we resided, bad
no less than four cisterns; and as these are but a
imen of the manner in which all the better
of houses are supplied, I subjoin here the
dimerisions ;


Length. Breadth. Depth.
L 15 feet 8 feet. 12 teet.
i. 8 4» 15
I.10 ,, 10 ,, 15
IV. 30 ,, 30 20


”

This last is enormously large, and the numbers
given are the Jeust estimate. The cisterns have
usually merely a round opening at the top, some-
times built up with stouework above, and fur-
nished with a curb and a wheel for the bucket;
wo that they have externally much the appear-
ance of an ordinary well. The water is con-
ducted into them from the rvofs of the houses
during the rainy season; and, with proper care,
Femains pure and sweet during the whule summer
and autumn. In this manner most of the larger
houses and the public buildings are supplied.
The Latin convent, in icular, is said to be
amply furnished; and in seasons of drought is
able to deal out a sufficiency for all the Christian
inhabitants of the city.

Most of these cisterns have undoubtedly come
down from ancient times; and their immense
extent furnishes a full solution of the question as
to the supply of water for the city. Under the
disadvantages of its position in this respect, Jeru-
salem must necessarily Lave always been depend-
ent on its cisterns; and a city which thus an-
dually laid in its supply for seven or eight months
could never be overtaken by a want of water
during a siege. Nor is this a trait peculiar to
the Holy City; for the case is the same
throughout all the hill-country of Judah and Ben-
jamin. Fountains and streains are few, as com-
ee with Europe and America; and the inha-

itants, therefore, collect water during the rainy
seasun in tanks and cisterns in the cities, in the
fields, and along the high roads, for the sustenance
of themselves aud of their flocks and herds, and
for tne comfort of the passing traveller. Many,
if not the most, of these are obviously antique ;
and they exist not unfrequently along the ancient
toads which are now deserted. Thus, on the long-
forgotten way from Jericho to Bethel, ‘ broken
cisterns’ of high antiquity are found at regular
intervals, That Jerusalem was thus actually


CITIES OF REFUGE aé8
supplied of old with water is apparent also from


the numerous remains of ancient cisterns still exe
isting in the tract north of the city, which was
once enclosed within the walls’ [Reszrvorns].

CITIES. eel

CITIES OF REFUGE. Places of refuge
where, under the cover of religion, the guilty
and the unfortunate might find shelter and
tection were not unknown among the ancient
heathen. The jus asyli, or right of shelter and
impunity, was enjoyed by certain places reputed
sacred, such as groves, temples and altars.
This protective Liat commonly spread itself
over a considerable district round the holy spot,
and was watched over and preserved by severe
penalties. Yet the fate of Pausanias, were there
no other similar case, shows that it could not
always stand against the assaults of popular in-
dignation. Pausanias, having tampered with the
great enemies of his native country, the Persi
was tried at Sparta and condemned. In order to
escape from the consequent punishment, he fled
into a temple of Minerva. With a view to k
him there and thus punish him with death, the
Ephori blocked up the doors and destroyed the
roof, the mother of the criminal bringing the first
stone.

Among the Greeks and Romans the number of
these places of asylum became in process of time
very great, and led, by abuse, to a fresh increase
of criminals. Tiberius, in consequence, caused =
solemn inquiry into their eflects to be made,
which resulted in a diminution of their number
and a limitation of their privileges (Suet. Tid.
37, compared with Emesti, Excursus ad h. 1.3
Osiander, De Asylis Gentium, in Gronov. The- -
saur. t, vi.).

In the Apocrypha (2 Mace. iv. 33) mention is
made of a city having the jus asyli— Onias
withdrew himself into a sanctuary at Daphne
that lieth by Antiochia.’ The temple of Diana
at Ephesus (Acts xix. 27) was also a heathen
asylum, whose privileges in this respect increased
with the progress of time.

This pagan custom passed into Christianity.
As early as Cunstantine the Great, Christian
churches were asylums for the unfortunate persons
whom an outraged law or powerful enemies pur-
sued. Theodosius, in 431, extended this privilege
to the houses, gardens, and other places which
were under the jurisdiction of the churches, and
the synod of Toledo, in 681, widened the right of
asylum to thirty paces from every church. Since
then this ecclesiastical privilege prevailed in the
whole of Catholic Christendom, and was
served undiminished, at least in Italy, so long
as the papal independence remained. The
tight acted beneficially in ages when violence
and revenge predominated, and fixed habitations
were less common than now ; but its tendency to
transfer power from the magistrate to the priest-
hood was injurious to the inviolability of law
and the steady administration of justice. It has
accordingly in recent times been abrogated b'
eo governments (Cunversations Lezicon, in
voc.).

Among the Jews the ‘cities of refuge’ bore
some resemblance tu the asylum of the classic
nations, but were happily exempt from the evil
consequences to which reference has been made,
and afford, even to the present day, no mean


444 CITIES OF REFUGE.


proof of the superior wisdom and benignant spirit
of the Jewish laws.

The institution was framed with a view to
abate the evils which ensued from the old esta-
blished rights of the blood-avenger [Broop-Re-
veNcE], and thereby to further the prevalence in
the nation of a mild, gentle, and forgiving spirit.
- From the laws on this point (Exod. xxi. 13;
Num. xxxv. 9-35; Deut. xix. 1-13) it appears
that Moses set apart out of the sacerdotal cities
six as ‘cities of refuge.’ There were, on the
eastern side of the Jordan, three, namely, ‘ Bezer
in the wilderness, in the plain country of the
Reubenites, and Ramoth in Gilead of the Gadites,
and Golan in Bashan of the Manassites’ (Deut.
iv. 43); on the western side three, namely, ‘Kedesh
in Galilee in Mount Naphtali, and Shechem in
Mount Ephraim, and Kirjath-arba, which is He-

in the mountain of Judah’ (Josh. xx. 7).
If found desirable, then other cities might be
added. An inspection of the map will show how
wisely these places were chosen so as to make a
city of refuge easy of access from all parts of the
land. To any one of these cities a person who
had unawares and unintentionally slain any one
might flee, and if he reached it before he was
overtaken by the avenger of blood, he was safe
within its shelter, provided he did not remove
more than a thousand yards from its circuit, nor
quit the refuge till the decease of the high-priest
under whom the homicide had taken place. If,
however, he transgressed these provisions, the
avenger might lawfully put him to death. The
roads leading to the cities of refuge were to be
kept in good repair. Before, however, the fugitive
* could avail himself of the shelter conceded by
the laws, he was to undergo a solemn trial, and
make it appear to the satisfaction of the magis-
trates of the place where the homicide was com-
mitted that it was purely accidental. Should
he, however, be found to have been gnilty of
murder, he was delivered ‘into the hand of the
avenger of blvod, that he might die.’

And the Israelites were strictly forbidden to
spare him either from considerations of pity or in
consequence of any pecuniary ransom. This dis-
allowal of a compensation by money in the case
of murder shows a just regard for human life, and
appears much to the advantage of the Hebrew
legislation when compared with the practice of
other countries (Athens, for instance, and Islam),
in which pecuniary atonements were allowed,
if not encouraged, and where, in consequence,
the life of the poor must have been in as great
jeopardy as the character of the wealthy.

The asylum afforded by Moses displays the
same benign regard to human life in respect of
the homicide himself. Had no obstacle been put
in the way of the Goel, instant death would have
awaited any one who had the misfortune to occa-
gion the death of another. By his wise arrange-
ments, however, Moses interposed a seasonable
delay, and enabled the manslayer to appeal to
the laws and justice of his country. Momentary
wrath could hardly execute its fell purposes, and
a suitable refuge was provided for the guiltless
and unfortunate.

Yet as there is a wide space between the inno-
cence of mere homicide and the guilt of actual
taurder, in which various degrees of blame might
easily exist, so the legislator took means to make


CITIES OF REFUGE.


the condition of the manslayer less happy than it
was before the act or the mischance, tot entire
impunity might lead to the neglect of necessary
precaution and care. With great iol init
therefore, was the homicide made to feel some
legal inconvenience. Accordingly he was re
moved from his imony, restricted in his
sphere of locomotion, affected indirectly in his
pecuniary interests, and probably reduced from
an affluent or an easy station to one of service and
labour (Michaelis, Mos. Recht, vi. 4). Should
any reader still think that this treatment of a
manslayer was unnecessarily severe, let him
advert to the spirit of the age, and especially
study the recognised rights of the next of kin to a
alain person, and he will most probably be ready
to allow that everything was done in this matter
which circumstances admitted. The benefit of
the protection afforded was common to strangers
and sojourners with native Israelites.

What ensues rests on the authority of the
Rabbins. In order to give the fugitive all poe-
sible advantage in his flight, it was the business
of the Sanhedrim to make the roads that Jed to
the cities of refuge convenient by enlarging them
and removing every obstruction that might hurt
his foot or hinder his speed. No hillock was left,
no river was allowed over which there was not a
bridge, and the road was at least two and thirty
cubits broad. At every turning there were posts
erected bearing the words Refuge, Refuge, to
guide the unhappy man in his flight; and two
students in the law were appointed to accompany
him, that, if the avenger should overtake him
before he reached the city, they might attem
to pacify him till the legal investigation could
take place.

When once settled in the city of refuge, the
manslayer had a convenient habitation assigned
him gratuitously, and the citizens were to teach
him some trade whereby he might support him-
self. To render his confinement more easy, the
mothérs of the high-priests used to feed and
clothe these unfortunate fugitives, that they might
not be impatient and pray for the death of their
sons, on whose decease they were restored to their
liberty and their property. If the slayer died in
the city of refuge before he was feleased, his
bones were delivered to his relations, after the
death of the high-priest, to be buried in the
sepulchre of his fathers (Lewis, Origines He-
braice),

That the right of asylum among the Jews was
in later periods of their history so extended as to
open the door to great abuses may be inferred
from 1 Macc. x. 43, where unqualified impunity
and exemption from both liabilities and penalties
are jiromised, under the influence, not of the
Mosaic law, but of heathen morals and ambition,
to ‘ whosoever they be that flee unto the temple
at Jerusalem, or be within the liberties thereof.’

In the words now cited reference appears to be
made to a custom which prevailed from very early
times, both among the chosen le and the na-
tions of the world, of fleeing, in case of personal
danger, to the altar. With the Jews it was custom-
ary for the fugitive to lay hold of the borns of
the altar, whether in the tabernacle or temple;
by which, however, shelter and security were ob-
tained only for those who had committed sins of
ignorance or inadvertence: thus true did Moses


CITIZENSHIP.


remain to his principle that the wilful shedding of
tuman blood could only by blood be atoned—a
principle which the advances of civilization and
the spread of the gentle spirit of the Gospel have
caused to be questioned. ifnot exploded (Exod. xxi.
14; 1 Kings i. 50; ii. 28). From the two last pas
sages it seems that state criminals also sought the
protection of the altar, probably more from the
force of custom than any expresslaw. Their safety,
however, depended on the will of the king; for in
the passages referred to it appears that in one case
(i of Adonijah) life was spared, but in the other

that of Joab) it was taken away even ‘by the
altar.” Compare Matt. xxiii. 35.—J. R. B


CITIZENSHIP. Strict isolation did by no
Means, as some suppose, form the leading prin-
ciple in the system of theocracy as aid down by
Moses, since even non-Israelites, under the va-
rious names of "3, 3), or AWN, not only were
allowed to reside in Palestine, but had the
fullest protection of the law, equally with the
uative Israelites (Exod. xii. 19; Lev. xxiv. 22;
Num. xv. 15; xxxv. 153; Deut. i. 16; xxiv. 17:
the law of usury, Deut. xxiii. 2, made, how-
ever, an exception), and were besides recom-
mended in general terms by Moses to humanity
and charity (Exod. xxii. 21; xxiii. 9; Lev. xix.
33, 34 ; Deut. x. 18; comp. Jer. vii. 6; Mal. iii.5;
Joseph. Contra Ap. ii. 28), as well as to a participa-
tion in certain prerogatives granted to the poor of
the land, such as a share in the tithe and feast-
Offering, and the harvest in the Jubilee-year
(Deut. xiv. 29; xvi. 10, 14; xxvi. 11; Lev.
xxv. 6). In return, it was required on the part of
non-Israelites not to commit acts by which the
teligious feelings of the people might be hurt
(Exod. xx. 10; Lev. xvii. 10; xviii. 26; xx. 2;
xxiv. 16; Deut. y. 14. The eating of an animal
which had died a natural death, Deut. xiv. 21,
seems to have been the sole exception). The advan-
tage the Jew had over theGentile was thus strictly
spiritual, in his Leing a citizen, a member of the
theocracy, of the MyM bap (community of God),
on whom positive laws were enjoined. But even
to this spiritual privilege Gentiles were admitted
under certain restrictions (Deut. xxiii. 1-9) ;
thus we find among the Israelites, INT, an
Edomite (1 Sam. xxi. 8.), as also AYN, an
Hittite (a Canaanite). he only nations that
were altogether excluded from the citizenship of
the theocracy by especial command of the Lord,
were the Ammonites and Moabities, froma feeling
of vengeance against them: aud in the same situ-
ation were all castrated persons, and bastards, from
a feeling of disgrace and shame (Deut. xxiii, 1-6).
In the time of Solomon, no less than 153,600 stran-
gers were resident in Palestine (2 Chron. ii. 17).

Roman citizenship (aoArrefa, Acts xxii. 28,
jus civitatis, civitas) was granted in the times
of the Emperors to whole provinces and cities (Dio
Cass. xli. 25; Suet. Aug. 47), as also to single
individuals, for some service rendered to the state
or the imperial family (Suet. Aug. 47), or even
fr acertain sum of money (Acts xxii, 28; Dio
Cass. xli. 24). The Apostle Paul was a Roman
citizen hy family (Acts, 4.¢.), and hence his pro-
testing against corporal or capital punishment
{Acts xvi. 37; comp. Cic. Verr. v. 57, 65; Euseb.
Hist. Eccles, v. 1, etr.).—E. M.

CITRON. [Tavuacu.]


CLEOPAS, 445


CLAUDA (Katy), a small island off the
S.W. coast of Crete, mentioned in Acts xxvii. 16.
It was also called Gaudos (Mela, ii. 7; Plin.
Hist. Nat. iv. 42), and now the name of


Gozzo.

CLAUDIA (Kaav3/a), a Christian female of
Rome, mentioned in 2 Tim. iv. 21.

CLAUDIUS (Kaavdios), the fifth Roman em-
peror, and successor of Caligula, a.p. 41-54
(Acts xi. 28; xvii? 2). His full name was
Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus. Previously
to his accession he led rather a dissolute life, and
the throne was in a great measure secured to him
through the address and solicitations of Herod
Agrippa (Joseph. Antig. xix. 2. 1, c. 3 and 4;
comp. Suet. Claud. 10). This obligation he
returned by great and peculiar favours to that
personage ; and the Jews were generally treated -
with indulgence till the ninth year of his reign,
when those who abode at Rome were all banished
thence (Acts xviii. 2; comp. Suet. Claud.
25). Several famines occurred under Claudius,
one of which, in the fourth year of his reign,
extended to Palestine and Syria, and appears to
be that which was foretold by Agabus (Acts xi.
28, and Kuinoel, in loc.; also Krebs, Obs. in
N. T. p, 219).

CLAUDIUS LYSIAS. [Lysras.]

CLAUDIUS FELIX. [Fexix.]

CLAY, a substance frequentiy mentioned in
Scripture, chiefly with reference to its employment
by the potter, the elegant and useful forms assumed
by the rude material under his hands supplying a
significant emblem of the Divine power over the
destinies of man (Isa, Ixivy. 8; Rom. ix. 21). A
remarkable allusion to the use of clay in sealing
occurs in Job xxxviii. 14, ‘ He turmeth it as clay
to the seal." This may be explained by reference
to the ancient practice of impressing unburnt
bricks with certain marks and inscriptions which
were obviously made by means of a Jarge seal or
stamp. We trace this in the bricks of Egypt and
Babylon [Bricxs]. Modern Oriental usages
supply another illustration. Travellers, when
entering the khans in towns, often observe the
rooms in which goods have been left in charge of
the Ahanjee sealed on the outside with clay. A

iece of clay is placed over the lock, and impreased
s a large wooden stamp or seal.

CLEMENT (Kajjyns), a person mentioned by
Paul (Phil. iv. 3), as one whose name was in the
book of life. For the meaning of this phrase, see
Book or Lirz. This Clement was, by the ancient
church, identified with the bishop of Rome of the
same name (Euseb. Hist. Eccles. iii. 4; Constitut.:
Apost. vii. 46); and that opinion has naturally
been followed by Roman Catholic expositors. It
cannot now be proved incorrect; but the suspicion
exists that the case here may be as with many
other names in the New Testament, which have
been assigned to celebrated persons of a later
period. Clement is said to have lived to the third
year of the emperor Trajan (a.p. 100), when he
suffered martyrdom.

There is an epistle of Clement to the Corin-
thians, which was highly esteemed by the ancient
church, and was publicly read in many churches
[Erist.xs, Aposro.icar.]. 3

1. CLEOPAS (KaAcéxas), one of the two dis-
ciples to whom Jesus appeared in the way to
Emmaus (Luke xxiv. 18). He is not to be com-


446 CLOUD.


founded with the other Cleophas, who was also
called Alphzus. :

2. CLEOPHAS (KAwris), or rather Clopas,
who was also called Alpheus, which see,

CLIMATE. [Pavzsrinz.]

CLOUD. The allusions to clouds in Scripture,
as well as their use in symbolical language, must
be understood with reference to the nature of the
climate, where the sky scarcely exhibits the trace
of a cloud from the beginning of May tothe end of
September, during which period clouds so rarely
appear, and rains so seldom fall, as to be considered.
phenomena—as was the case with the harvest rain
which Samuel invoked (1 Sam. xii. 17, 18), and
with the little cloud, not larger than a man’s
hand, the appearance of which in the west was
immediately noticed as something remarkable not
only in itself, but as a sure harbinger of rain
(1 Kings xviii. 44).

Ag in such climates clouds refreshingly veil the
oppressive glories of the sun, clouds often symbo-
lize the Divine presence, as indicating the splen-
dour, insupportable to man, of that glory which
they wholly or partially conceal (Exod. xvi. 10;
xxiii. 9; xxxiv. 5; xl. 34, 35; Num. xi. 25;
xxi. 5; Job xxii. 14; Ps. xviii. 11, 12; xevii. 2;
civ. 3; Isa. xix. 1; Matt. xvii. 5; xxiv. 30, &c.;
Acts i. 9; Rev. i. 7; xiv. 14, 16). Somewhat
allied to this use is that which makes clouds
the symbols of the Divine power (2 Sam. xxii. 12;
Ps. Ixviii. 345 Ixxxix. 6; civ. 3; Nahnmi. 3).

Clouds are also the symbol of armies and mul-
titudes of people (Jer. iv. 13; Isa. Ix. 8; Heb.
xii. 1). This is often very scientitically ex-
plained by the information that clouds are com-

posed of innumerable drops of rain or vapour.

his, although true, is certainly not the truth
which the Hebrew poets had in view. Any one
who has noticed the effect of a large and compact
body of men upon the surface of an extensive
plain, moving like a cloud in the clear sky, or
who has seen a similar body of men upon the
side of a distant hill, will find a more obvious
source of the comparison.

There are many other dispersed symbolical
allusions to clonds in Scripture not coming under
these descriptions ; but their purport is in every
case too obvious to need explanation (see particu.
larly Prov. xvi. 15; Eccles. xii. 2; Isa. iv. 5;
xliv. 22; 2 Pet. ii. 17; Jude 12).

CLOUD, PILLAR OF. ([Exopus.]

CNIDUS (Kyvidos), otherwise Gnipvus, a town
and peninsula of Doris in Caria, jutting out from
the south-west part of Asia Minor, between the
islands of Rhodes and Cos. It was celebrated
for the worship of Venus (Strabo, xiv. p. 965;
Plin. Hist. Nat. xxxvi. 15; Hom. Odyss. i. 30).
The Romans wrote to this city in favour of the
Jews (1 Macc. xv. 23), and St. Paul passed it in
his way to Rome (Acts xxvii: 7).

COAL, It is generally assumed that, in those
numerons passages of our version in which the
word coal occurs, charcoal, or some other kind of
artificial fuel, is to be understood ; at all events,
that the word has not its English meaning. The
idea is founded upon the supposition that fossil
coal was not known to the ancients as an article
of fuel, and especially to the ancient inhabitants
of Syria, whose country it is generally imagined
did not produce it. It has indeed been strongly
T™aintained that coal bas not been used for fuel,


COAL.


even in England, much more than 400 years;
notwithstanding the reasons alleged by Horsley
and others that the Romans worked coal-mines in
this country‘; and by Whittaker, that it was used
as fuel by the Saxons. Truth, however, here,
perhaps, as usually, lies in the middle. Al-
though the general use of coal for fuel is even in
this country of comparatively recent date, and
certainly so in every other, yet the conclusion
that it was totally unknown and unemployed for
any purpose, either here or in other countries, in-
cluding even Syria, does not necessarily follow.
The existence of coal in Syria is now placed be-
youd a doubt. Many indications of coal occur
in the Lebanon mountains; the seams of this
mineral even protrude through the superincumbent
strata in various directions. At Cornale, eight
hours from Beiront, at 2500 feet above the level
of the sea, where the coal-seams are three feet in
thickness, a mine is actually being worked by
order of Mohammed Ali, in which more than 100
men are employed, The coal is of good quality,
and mixed with iron pyrites. In 1837 the quan-
tity of coal extracted was 14,700 cantars of 217
okes, each making about 4009 tons. A furnace
for smelting the ore and a railroad to convey the
coals to Beirout were then in contemplation.
(Elliot, vol. ii, p. 257; and Dr. Bowring's
* Report’). .

The following passage from the Mep) ray Aldey
of Theophrastus, proves beyond a doubt, in the
opinion of his learned translator and annotator
Sir John Hill, that fossil coal was employed at
least by ‘ the smiths,’ of yaAxets, in the time of
that ancient naturalist. Ods 8¢ xadodow ebOds
&yOpaxas, Tay Opurrouerwy, Sia Thy xpedy, cid
yewders. exxalorvras 5¢ Kal xupovvras xaddwep of
&vOpaxes. iol Se wepl re Thy Aryuotixny, Srov rad
7d frextpov, wal év 77) ‘Hela, Badi(svreoy 'OAum-
wid(e rhy 8° Spous, ols xal of yadneis yparrat, 7.
On this passage Sir John Hill observes, ‘ The
substance here denoted, whatever inistukes there
have been among authors since about it, appears
to me to be evidently no other than the common
pit-coal ; and I have made it appear as clearly
so in the translation, only by having properly
rendered the word &8paxes, the carelessly mis-
understanding which word alone has been the
occasion of all the erroneous guesses abvut the
substance denoted. The authors of these seein
all to have understood the word av@pag as signi-
fying fossil or pit-coal; and therefore as the author
compares the burning of this substance to that,
they were necessitated to think of some other sub-
stance that he might here mean, as it was impos-
sible he should compare a thing to itself, éxxal-
ovra: xaddrep of dvOpaxes, evidently, “ they kindle
and burn like wood coals,” or, as we call it, char-
coal, for that is the genuine and determinate sense
of the word d&pag in Greek and carbo in Latin,
as is evident from the other works of Theophras-
tus, Pliny, and all the older naturalists. Even
the more correct of the modems, when they would
express what we call it-coal, the substance here
described by the author, never use the words
avOpat or carbo, but always Af@ayOpag or carbo
fossilis (see Woodward, Charlton, and Merritt).
The similar use of this bitumen got it the name
of coal, but always with an addition that distin-
guished it from what was more commonly and


properly sv called, and expressed its being not ot


COAL.


vegetable but of fossil origin’ (London, 1774, pp.
6466). So cleara testimony to the use of pit-
coal by artificers in Greece, nearly 300 years 8.<.,
with the well-ascertained existence of coal in
Syria, emerging to the very surface, may, in con-
junction with some particulars respecting the
mention of coal in the Scriptures, tend to show
_ the possibility that coal, in the proper sense, was
not wholly unknown or unemployed by the an-
cient Hebrews, &c. The Hebrew words most
frequently and properly translated coal are two,


roma and OMD. Though the Hebrews seem to


have frequently used the word nbna in the same
generic sense as we do when we say a ton of coals,
meaning coals not yet burnt, a pan of coals,
meaning coals on fire, and as the Greeks, though
not 80 loosely, apply dy@paxia, and the Romans
carbo, yet when precision required it, the Hebrews,
as well as ourselves and the Greeks and Romans,
knew how to express the difference in the case of
ignited coals, which they most commonly do by
the addition of YN, a distinction preserved in the
Septuagint by the word wip (though the Septua-
gint often introduces this word when the sense of
the sing@e Hebrew word seems to require it, and
generally with great correctness) ; and which dis-
tinction is also generally preserved in the Vulgate
by the use of the appropriate word pruna :—Serv.
ad En. xi. 788: ‘Docet hoc esse discrimen inter
punam et carbonem, quod, illa accensa sit, hic
verd extinctus, Sed etiam dum ardet carbo dici-
tur’ Ucar) The following classification is
offered, comprehending al] the instances in which
the word nbny occurs :—First, in its generic and
indefinite application, that is, meaning coal
whether ignited or not: 2 Sam, xiv. 7, ‘they shall
quench my coal which is left;' Sept. &dpaxa;
Vulg. scintillam ; evidently ignited, used ¢ropic-
ally for posterity, like 1 Kings xv.4, and several
other passages: Job xli. 21, ‘his breath kindleth
coals,’ dvOpaxes, prunas, i.e. coals not before ig-
nited: Isa. xlvii. 14, ‘not a coal to warm at,’
bat here the word DDN} decides the iguition,
dyOpaxas wupds, prun@: Ps. xviii. 8, ‘coals were
kindled at it,’ d@paxes, carbones suceensi sunt :
Ps. cxx. 4, ‘with coals of juniper,’ Sept. cy rots
dvOpagt rors epnuscois; Vulg. cum carbonibus
desolatoriis: Prov. vi. 28, Euglish version sup-
Plies (hot) coals: Sept. adds wupds to avOpduev,
prunas; Prov. xxv. ‘shall heap coals of fire
upon his head,’ Sept. supplies wupés, prunas:
Isa, xliv. 19, upon the coals,’ dvOpdxwy, car-
bones: Ezek. xxiv. 11, ‘upon the coals,’ d@paxas,
prinas.

Our second class consists of instances in which
the word Y& is added, in order to fix the sense of
ignition :—Lev. xvi. 12, ‘a censer full of burning
coals of fire,” dx@pdxwv wupdés, prunis: 2 Sam,
xxii. 9, 13, ‘coals of fire were kindled at. it,’ &v-
@paxes xupds, carbones ignis: Ps. xviii. 12, ‘ the
coals of tire passed,’ GvOpaxes wupds, carbones
ignis: Ps. ex]. 10, ‘let burning coals fall on them,”
dOpdues mupds, carbones: Ezek. i, 13, ‘coals
of fire,’ dv@pdxeov xupds, carbonum ignis: Ezek.
x. 2, ‘coals of fire,” av@pdxwv mupds, prunis ignis.

The other Hebrew word translated coal is DMD.
It occurs only three times:—Prov. xxvi. 21,


np o*5m25, ‘as coals are to burning coals, and
wood to fire, &c., "Erxdpa &vOpafi, sicut carbones


COAL. 4a


: here the word DM® plainly means
unignited coal (Qu. mineral coal), as appears
from the parallel comparison, and ‘as t00od to fire.”
Isa. xliv. 12, ‘the smith worketh in the coals: the
Sept. has no corresponding word, but old com-
mentators read év 1, in prunis. Isa. liv.
16, ‘the smith that bloweth the coal in the fire,”
v8paxas, prunas. From the foregoing analysis it
appears that the word ndma often means coals
thoroughly ignited; but OMB, coal before being
ignited. i

There are several instances in which the word
‘coal’ in our version is an improper transla-
tion. 1 Kings, xix. 6, D'DY7 Myy ‘a cake baken
on the coals,’ éyxpuplas, subcinericius panis.
TIDY here praperly means a hot stone (a pave-
ment, Esth. 1. 6, and elsewhere), and D'DY ny

ly mean small cakes baked wider ashes—
a common food to this day among the Orientals,
especially when travelling [Brean]. 5)¥7 is also
a hot stone thrown into milk or broth in order to
heat it (Gesenius). Another mis-translation oc-
curs (Hab. iii. 5), ‘ burning coals went forth at his
feet’ in the margin ‘ burning diseases’ (Deut.
xxx 24). The Sept. varies widely ; the Vulgate
still more widely—‘egredietur diabolus,’ which is,
however, explained as pestis by the commentators.
Another mis-translation is (Lam. iv. 8), ‘Their
visage is blacker than a coal; margin, ‘darker
than blackness ;’ WNWD WM, itp do AdAny, su-
per carbones. Another mis-translation occurs
(Cant. viii. 6), ‘the coals thereof are coals of
fire ;, WN DUA TPDW, weplrrepa abrijs, wepix-
tepa wupds, Ald. GvOpaxes wupds, ut lampaies
ignis. A questionable translation occurs (Is. vi.
6), ‘a live coal, DY, dvOpaxa wupds, calculus 5
but the Rabbis render it ‘coal.’ The instances of
the word coal in the New Testament remain to be
noticed :—(John xviii. 18), ‘a fire of coals,’ dv@pa-
nid, ad pranas. The word here evidently means a
mass of live charcoal (so Suid. dv@paxia regu
ropévor ByOpaxes, who gives an adage w ich
makes a plain difference—ph thy téppay ged-
ry, els dv@paxiay wéons,’ which may be ex-
actly paralleled by a well-knowon English adage).
(Eccl. viii 10; xi. 32, occur in the same sense
in the Apocrypha.) From the foregoing analysis
the following passages are selected as counte-
nancing the Wea that the ancient Hebrews were
acquainted with natural coal. In the sublime
description of the leviathan (Job xli. 21), ‘his
breath kindleth coals,’ the representation, though
highly hyperbolical, is of course supported by a
consistency and proportion of tdeas. But to
suppose that the word here rendered coals means
any kind of artificial fuel, reduces the whole
scene to an intolerable bathos ; whereas if we refer
the word to the natural production, it is admir-
ably preserved. The association of charcoal
with a creature which ‘makes the d to boil
like a caldron,’ and which, when on land, ‘ is
king of the children of pride,’ is too incongruous
to be attributed to the sublimest of ancient poets ;
but it is a conception worthy of his powers to
represent a mass of coal ignited by the breath of
leviathan. A similar remark is due to the mag-
nificent representation (2 Sam. xxii. 9, 13, and
Ps, xviii. 8), ‘through the brightness before Him
were coals of fire kindled.’ This oft-repeated
expression suits only, but it suits well, the idea of


448 COCK.


a stratum of mineral matter as being


ignited by


the material splendors attending on the Divine ™


appearance and, interposition.—J. F. D. .

COCK (éAécrwp; in Hebrew possibly 133
Gaber, if Jerome’s version of Isa. xxii. 17, 18 be
correct: our version of the vere is obscure).
It is somewhat singular that this bird and poultry
in general should not be distinctly noticed in the
Hebrew Scriptures; especially as rearing galli-
naceous fowls was an aiiest of considerable eco-
nomical importance in Egypt, and their flesh one
of the principal resources for the table in every
part of Southern and Western Asia. It is true,
the date when the practice of obtaining them by
artificial heat commenced in Egypt is sufficiently
disputable, and birds of the geuus Gallus, pro-
perly so called, are not indigenous in Western
Asia, but helong in their original condition to
lower India, Indo-China, and the great islands of
Austral-Asia. They were, it may be surmised,
unknown in Egypt when the Mosaic law was
promulgated, and, though imported soon after,
they alwavs remained in an undetermined con-
dition, neither clean nur unclean, but liable to be
declared cither by decisions swayed by prejudice,
or by fanciful analogies; perhaps chietly the
latter; because poultry are devourers of unclean
animals, scorpions, scolopendra, small lizards,
and young serpents of every kind.

But although rearing of common fowls was not
encouraged by the Hebrew population, it is evi-
dently drawing inferences beyond their proper
bounds, when it is asserted that they were un-
known in Jerusalem, where civil wars, and Greek
and Roman dominion, had greatly affected the
national manners. The excess of pharisaical
punctiliousness is evidence that opinions and
customs widely opposed to their own were pre-
valent, and, in the dependant state of the nation,
were openly professed even by the numerous resi-
dent foreigners, the Pagan garrisons, and by many
Jews, under the influence of the Epicurean phi-
losophy.

In the denials of Peter, described in the four
Gospels, where the cock-crowing is mentioned by
our Lord, the words are plain and direct, not
we think admitting of cavil, or. of beim taken to
signify anything but the real voice of the bird,
the dAexropopwria, as it is expressed in Mark xiii.
35, in its literal ucceptation, and not as denoting
the sound of a trumpet, so called, because it pro-
claimed a watch in the night; for, to what else
than a real hen and her brvod does our Saviour
allude in Luke xiii. 34, where the text is
proof that the image of youltry was familiar to
the disciples, and consequently that they were
not rare in Jud#? To the present time in the
East, and on the Continent of Europe, this bird
is still often kept, as amongst the Celtee (Casar,
Bell. Gall. iv. 12), not so much for food as for
the purpose of announcing the approach and dawn
of day.—C. H.S.

COCKATRICE. (Ssrpent.

COCKCROWING. The cock usually crows
several times about midnight, and again about
break of day. The latter time, because he then
crows loudest, and his ‘shrill clarion’ is most use-
ful by summoning man to his labours, obtained
the appellation of the cockcrowing emphatically,
and by way of eminence; though sometimes the
distinctions of the firs¢ and second cockcrowing


A


\ COCKCROWING.


are met with in Jewish and heathen writers
Bochart, vol. iii. p. 119). These times, and
ese names for them, were, no doubt, some of the
most ancient divisions of the night adopted in
the East, where ‘the bird of dawning’ ia most
probably indigenous. The latter dAcxropopovla
was retained even when artificial divisions of time
were invented. In our Lord's time the Jews had
evidently adopted the Greck and Roman division
of the night into four periods, or watches; each
consisting of three hours; the first beginning at
six in the evening, éy 17 Seurdpa pudaay, xal ey
whi tplty pvdaxG (Luke xii. 38); rerdpry 3¢
Qudaai Tis vuxrds (Matt. xiv. 25; Mark vi. 48). °
These watches were either numbered first, second,
third, and fourth, as now specified, or were called
GYé, pecovinrioy, dAeKTopopwvia, wpwt. These
are all mentioned (Mark xiii. 35; Veget. Re
Milt, iii. 8, ‘In quatuor partes ad clepsydram
sunt divise vigiliz, ut non amplius quam tribus
horis nocturnis, necesse est vigilare, Censurin, de
Die Natal. Mep) . rerdyryy, vide Joseph. Antig.
xviii. 9, C. Meph $. Seurepay, Diod. Sic. 18. 40 ;
Xen. Anad. iv. 1. 5).

It has been considered a contradiction that Mat-
thew (xxvi. 34), records our Lord to have said to
Peter, xply dadcropa pwviicat, pls drapvicoy pe,
whereas St. Mark (xiv. 30), says, xply } dls gwry-
oa. But Matthew, giving only the general sense
of the admonition (as also Luke xxii, 34; Jolin
xiii, 38), evidently alludes to that only which was
customarily called the cockcrowing, but Mark,
who wrote under Peter's inspection, more accu-
rately recording the very words, mentions the
two cockcrowings (Wetstein on Mark xiv. 30;
Scheuchzer, Phys. Sacr. on Mark xiii. 33;
Whitby's Note on Matt. xxvi. 34). Another ob-
jection to this part of the Evangelical histury has
been founded upon an assertion of the Mischna,
in Bava Kama, vii. 7, Poss pod PR
Dw HD DENA, They do not breed cocks
at Jerusalem because of the hc?y things’: because
it is interpreted, cocks turn up the dunzhills,
and set free the reptiles by which the sacrifices
might be polluted which were eaten as food; and
that, consequently, Peter could not hear one crow.
But this is sufficiently answered in the preceding
article. Even the traditions themselves on this
subject are not uniform; witness the story in
Erudin, p. 26. 1, of a cock which killed a child,
and was stoned by order of the council. Other
instances are given by Reland, which show that
the cock might crow, though not in the city, and
yet be heard by Peter in the stillness of the night,
especially as the palace of Caiaphas stood on au
elevated situation, at the distance of scarcely 400
yards from the city walls. At the same time the
word dAékrap, being everywhere anarthrous in
the New Testament (except Luke xxii. 60, where,
however, the article is rejected by Griesbach upon


- the authority of a multitude of MSS.), it nay be


inferred from this indefiniteness, that cocks, if at
all tolerated in Jerusalem, were far less common
than with us. Als, in Mark, is for é« Seurépou,
and pfs is explained, semel iternmque, plus
simplici vice, a certain for an uncertain number,
as 1 Cor. xii. 28. So Eusth. ap. Sch. Ler. says
zpls is for woAAdats. Thus the seeming contradic-
tion, at least, between Mark and the other Evans
gelists is removed (Lightfoot, Wor. Ich s Byneus _


‘ CCELESYRIA.


te morte Christi, ii. 6; Reland, Orat. de Gall.
Cantu; Altmann De Gallicin.; Biel, Animad.
ad J. G. Altmann; Ansaldi Comment., the four
jast in Ugolini, Thesaur. vol. xxvii. Ven. 1763;
Adam's Roman Antig. p. 33; Winer, Biblisches
Real-Wirterbuch, Leipzig, 1833, art. Hiihner).—


COCKLE. [Bzsua.]

CCELESYRIA (3) xolAn Zupla), the hollow
Syria. This name, which is evidently of Gre-
cian origin in the times of the Seleucide, was
originally applied to the valley lying between
the mountain-ranges of Libanus and Anti-Libanus.
It was also used to denote the whole tract of
country (with the exception of Judma and Pha-
nicia) reaching from Seleucis to Arabia and the
confines of Egypt (Strabo, xvi. 2, vol. iii. p. 365,
ad. Tauch.; Polyb. Hist. y. 80, § 3). In the
time of David, Ceelesyria was probably included
in ‘ Syria of Damascus,’ which was conquered by
that monarch (2 Sam. viii. 6), but recovered from
Solomon by Rezon the son of Eliadah (1 Kings
xi. 24}. The possession of it was an object of
many struggles between the Seleucidw and the
Kings of Egypt (Polyb. i. 35 ii, 713 iii, 1;
v.40; xvi. 895 xxvii. 17). Amyce, the name of
the plain through which the Orontes flowed (7d
‘Auukys medloy, Polyb. v. 59), is derived by
Bochart from the Syriac NP'OY Anica, which
means deep, and is nearly synonymous with the
Greek Cele (vid. Geogr. Sac. Pars poster. i.
1.) The same learned writer supposes that
Syropheenicia is the same as Calesyria. Scytho-
polis and Gadara are mentioned hy Josephus as
cities of Calesyria (Antig. xiii, 13 tte § 3).
The name frequently occurs in the Apocrypha
(I Mace. x. 69; 2 Mace. viii. 8; x. IL; Esdr,
ii, 17, 24; iv. 485 vii. 1); in Esdr. vi. 3, it is
called simply Syria. Under the emperor Diocle-
tian, Phanice and Ca@lesyria formed one pro-
vince, called Phanicia Libanica. Under the
present Turkish government the western part of
Cwlesyria is in the Pashalic of Saide, and the
eastern in tiie Pashalic of Damascus.—J. E. R.
“COFFIN. [Buriat.]

COLONY (Koddéua). This distinction is
F Lee to Philippi in Macedonia (Acts xvi. 12).
Augustus Casar had deported to Macedonia most
of the Italian communities which had espoused the
cause of Autony ; by which means the towns of
Philippi, Dyrrachium, &c., acquired the rank of
Roman colonies (Dio Cass. p. 455). They pos-
sessed the jus coloniarium (Plin. Hist. Nat. v. 1),
fe, so-called jus Italicum (Digest. Leg. viii. 8),
cousisting, if complete, in a free municipal con-
stitution, such as was customary in Italy, in
exemption from personal and land taxes, and in
the commerce of the soil, or the right of selling
the land.

COLOSS 42 (Kodoggaf), a city of Phrygia, on
the river Lyeus (now Gorduk), not far fiom
its confluence with the Meander, and near the
towns of Laodicea, Apamea, and Hieropulis (Col.
ii. 1; iv. 13, 15; comp, Plin. Hist. Nat. v. 41;
Strabo, xii. p. 576). A Christian church was
formed here very early, probably by Epaphras (Col.
i.7; iv. 12, sq.), consisting of Jews acl Gentiles,
to whom Paul, who does not ai to have ever
visited Colosse in person (Col. ii. 1) addressed an
Epistle from Rome. Not long after, the town
‘was, together with Laodicea and Hierapolis, de-


COLOSSIANS. 449


stroyed by an earthquake. This, according to
Eusebius, was in the ninth year of Nero; but the
town must have been immediately rebuilt, for in
his twelfth year it continued to be named as a
flourishing place (Nicet. Chron. p. 115). It
still subsists as a village named Rinite! The


s=


huge range of Mount Cadmus rises immedi-
ately behind the village, close to which there is
in the mountain an immense dicular
chasm, affording an outlet for a wide mountain
torrent. The ruins of an old castle stand on
the summit of the rock forming the left side of
this chasm. There are some traces of ruins and
fragments of stone in the neighbourhood, but
barely more than sufficient to attest the existence
of an ancient site; and that this site was that
of Colossw is satisfactorily established by the
Rey. F. V. J. Arundell, whose book (Discoveries
tn Asia Minor) contains an ample description of
the place.

COLOSSIANS, Episr.z ro Tur.—That this
Epistle is the genuine production of the apostle
Paul is proved by the most satisfactory evidence,
and has never indeed been seriously called in
question. It is less certain, however, when and
where it was composed by him. The common
opinion is that he wrote it at Rome dyring his
imprisonment in that city (Acts xxvifJ16, 30).
Erasmus, followed by others, supposes that Ephesus
was the place at which it was composed; but
this suggestion is obviously untenable from its
incompatibility with the allusions contained in
the Epistle itself to the state of trouble and im-
prisonment in which the Apostle was whilst com-
posing it (i. 24; iv. 10,18). In Germany, the
opinions of theologians have been divided of late
years between the common hypothesis and one

posed by Dr. David Schulz in Ullmann and
Dnubreit’s Theologische Studien und Kritiken for
1829, s. 612 ff., viz., that this Epistle, with those
to the Ephesians and Philemon, was written
during the Apostle’s two years’ imprisonment at
Cwsarea previous to his being sent to Rome.
This opinion has been adopted and defended by
Schott, Bottger, and Wiggers, whilst it has been
opposed by Neander, Steiger, ay Riick ert,

a


450 COLOSSIANS.


Crediner, and others. The following is a synopsis
of the leading arguments in favour of this opi-
nion, and of the counter-arguments of those who
oppose it:--1. It is highly improbable that Paul
would allow two years of easy imprisonment
(Acts xxiv. 23-27) to pass away without writing
to some of the churches at a distance, especially
as he tells us that upon him ‘ came daily the
care of all the churches’ (2 Cor. xi. 28), and as
we find that he secured time for this even when
most actively employed in his public apostolic
labours. To this it is replied that, admitting the
facts here assumed, they only prove that Paul
might have employed himself during these two
years in epistolary correspondence with distant
churches, but afford no certain evidence that he
really did so, far less that he wrote then the very
epistles in question, 2. These epistles bear evi-
dent marks of having been written in consequence
of communications made personally to Paul by
parties connected with the churches to which
they were addressed ; and there is greater proba-
hility of his receiving such communications at
Cxsarea than at Rome, especially during the
earlier part of his residence there, to which these
epistles (if written at Rome) must be ascribed.
But it is replied to this that, distant as Rome was
from the churches of Asia Minor, there is nothing
unlikely in the supposition that Epaphras and
others may have undertaken a journey thither to
consult the Apostle about the state of these
churches, threatened as they were with danger;
and, for anything we know to the contrary,
many of the Asiatic Christians may have had
vccasion to be at Rome at any rate on affairs of
their own. 3. There is no small difficulty in
supposing that in the early part of the Apostle’s
residence at Rome, all the parties mentioned in
these epistles, viz, Timothy, Aristarchus, Mark,
Jesas-Justus, Epaphras, Luke, Demas, Onesimus,
Tychicus, should be found there with him, espe-
cially as we are told (Acts xxvii. 2) that only
<Aristarchus accompanied Paul and Luke from
Casaiea, and as, in the epistles known to have
heen written from Rome, only two of the parties
above-mentioned, Timothy and Luke, are referred,
to as with the Apostle (Phil. i. 15 ii.19; 2 Tim.
iv. 11); whilst, om the other hand, from Acts
xx. 4, we learn that sume, at least, of these parties
were with Paul at Caesarea. In answer to this,
it is said that it does not appear other than
natural that Paul should have gathered around
him in his imprisonment those young men who
had elseWhere been the companions and instru-
ments of his operations, and have used them for
the purpose of maintaining a continual inter-
course with distant churches according to their
circumstances and wants. 4. The appearance of
Onesimus, the slave of Philemon, at the place
where Paul was, very soon (pds Spav) after he
had left his master at Colossee (Philem. ver. 15),
agrees better with the supposition that Paul was
at Casarea, than with the supposition that he was
at Rome. To this it is replied, that Rome waa
the most likely of all places for a fugitive slave
to betake himself to, and that with respect to the
expression pds &pay, it is so vague, and is used
so obviously as an antithesis to aidmoy in the
same verse, that nothing certain can be argued from
it, 5. The request of Paul to Philemon (ver. 22),
that he would provide him a iodging at Corosse,


COLOSSIANS,


as he hoped to visit that place shortly, agrees
better with the supposition that this epistle was
written at Caesarea, whilst yet hopes might be
entertained of his liberation, than that it was
written at Rome, when his expectations of free-
dom must have become faint, and whence, ac-
cording to his avowed purpose (Rom. xv. 28), he
was more likely, in case of being liberated, to
travel westwards into Spain, than to return to Asia.
The answer to this is, that though the Apostle had
originally designed to journey from Rome to
Spain, the intelligence he received of the state of
things in the churches of Asia Minor may have
determined him to alter his resolution ; and upon
the whole, we know so little of the Apostle’s rela-
tions during his imprisonment at Rome, that it is
not safe to build much upon any such allusions
(Schulz, loc. cit.; Neander, Hist. of the Apos-
tolic Churches; Eng. Transl. vol. i. p. 373;
Credner, Einleit. in das N. T. 8. 390; Schott,
Isagoge in N. T. § 66; Steiger, Der Br. Pauli
an d. Kolosser u. 8. w. 8. 335; Harless, Com-
ment, ub. d. Br. Pauli an d. Epheser. u. s. w.
8. 63; Riickert, Der Br. Pauli an d. Ephes.
u. 8. 10. 8. 305; Bottger, Beitrege, &c. 3 Abth.)
In a very able article in a recent number of the
Studien und Kritiken, the whole question has
been subjected to a new investigation by Dr.
Julius Wiggers of the University of Rostoch, who
comes to the conclusion, that of the facts above
appealed to, none can be regarded as decistre for
either hypothesis. He inclines, however, to the
opinion of Schulz, chiefly on the grounds that
Paul, in writing to the Ephesians, makes no men-
tion of Onesimus, who accompanied Tychicus,
the bearer of his epistle to that church, and that
both in this epistle and in that to the Colossians,
he states that he had sent Tychicus eis aird
tovto, va yore Ta wep) Hua, Kal Tapaxadr€oy
Tas kapdias Suey (Eph. vi. 22; Col. iv. § [ac-
cording to the best MSS.]) The former of these,
Wiggers thinks. can be accounted for only on the
supposition that Tychicus and Onesimus having
to set out from Casarea, would reach Colossa first,
where the latter would tarry, so that he did not
anced to be commended to the church at Ephesus ;
the latter of these, he thinks, indicates that the
place whence Tychicus was to set out was one
from which he might proceed either to Colossa or
to Ephesus first, not one from which he had, as a
mere matter of course, to pass through Ephesus in
order to reach Colosse ; and hence he infers that
Cesarea, and not Rome, was the place whence
these epistles were despatched (Stud. u. Krit. L841,
s. 436). We cannot say that these two considera-
tions appear to us so cogently decisive of this
question as they do to Dr. Wiggers. For, not to
insist upon the obvious incoherence of the one with
the other, it does not by any means appear neces-
sary that Paul should have commended Onesi-
mus to the care of the church at Ephesus in case
of bis passing through that city, seeing he was the
companion of one whose introduction would be
enough to secure their kind offices on his behalf;
and surely there is nothing improbable in the sup-
position that Paul should have sent Tychicus on
the same errand both to Colossw# and tou Ephesus,
even though he must needs pass through the one to
reach the other. In a case where the internal
evidence produces so exact an equipvise, the testi-
mony of tradition may fairly be permitted to.


eve fe eee eS SP Pa Ke Swe Fe eo


COLOSSIANS.


settle the question; and this is unequivocally
in favour of the opinion that these epistles were
written from Rome during the earlier part of the
Apostle’s confinement there.

In what order the-e three epistles were written,
it is not possible clearly to determine. Between
that to the Colossians and that to the Ephesians
the coincidences are so close and numerous (see
Home's Introduction, vol. iv. p. 381) that the
one must have Leen written immediately after the
other, whilst the mind of the Apustle was occu-

ied with the’ same leading train of thought.

y the greater part the priority is assigned to the
Epistle to the Colossians; though for this no
more convincing argument has been adduced
than that which Harless, Steiger, and Wiggers
have urged, viz.: that this supposition best ex-

ains the furce of the conjunction xal before jets

m Eph. vi. 21. The expressiun ‘that you also
may know, &c.,’ seems to imply that the same
knowledge had been conveyed to others; and as
Paul mak& the same statement to the Colossians,
but without the «al duets, it is argued that the
recollection of haviug made that statement being
in his mind when he was writing to the Ephesians,
he expressed himself’ in the manner above noted,
This, it must be allowed, is not very satisfactory,
for, as an argument, it holds good only on the
supposition either that the Epistle to the Colossians
was to be read also and first by the Ephesians, or
that the Apostle fel] unconsciously into the mistake
of supposing that because what he had written to
the Colossians was fresh in his own recollection,
it must be as well known to the Ephesians. The
Epistle to Philemon being a mere fiiendly letter,
intended chiefly to facilitate the reconciliation of
Onesimus to his master, was probably written
immediately before the departure of the party by
whom it was to be carried.

The Epistle to the Colossians was written, ap-
parently, in cunsequence of information received

y Paul through Epaphras concerning the inter-
nal state of their churct (i. 6-8). Whether the
Apostle had ever himself’ before this time visited
Colosse is matter of uncertainty and dispute.
From ch, ii. 1, where he says, ‘I would that ye
knew what great conflict L have fur you and for
them at Laodicea, and for as many as have not
seen my face in the flesh, &c., it has by sume been
very contidently concluded that he had not. To
this it is replied by Yneodoret, Lardner, and
others, that Paul does not intend to include the
Colossians and Laodiceans among those who had
not seen his face, but specifies the latter as a
distinct class; as is evident, they think, from his
using the third person in ver. 2. This latter con-
sideration, however, is of no weight, for the use of
the third person here is easily accounted fur uu the
principle that the pronoun takes the person of the
hearer noun rather than that of the more 1emote
(cf. Gal. i, 8); and it certainly wonld be absurd
to maintain that all contained in the second verse
has no relation to the Colossians and Laodiceans,
notwithstanding the reference to them in ver. 1,
and again in ver. 4. As respects the words in
ver. 1, they will, ina mere philological point of
view, bear to be understood in either way. It
has been urged, however, that when, in ver. 5, the
Apostle says, ‘though I am absent in the flesh,

et am 1 with you in the spirit,’ &c., his language
is strongly indicative of his having formerly been


COLOSSIANS, 451


amongst the Colossians, for the verb awemu is
used properly only of such absence as arises from
the person's having gone away from the place of
which his absence is predicated. In support of
the same view have been adduced Paul's having
twice visited and gone through Phrygia (Acts
xvi. 6; xviii. 23), in which Colosse was a chief
city; his familiar acquaintance with so many of
the Colossian Christians, Epaphras, Archippus,
Philemon (who was one of his own converts, Bat
13, 19), and Apphia, probably the wife of Philemon
[Appuia]; his apparent acquaintance with One-
simus, the slave of Philemon, so that he recog-
nised him again at Rome; the cordiality of
friendship and interest subsisting between the
Apostle and the Colossians as a body (Cul. i. 24,
25; ii. 1; iv. 7, &c.); the Apostle’s familiar ac-
quaintance with their state and relations (i. 6;
ii. 6, 7, &c.); and their knowledge of so many of
his companions, and especially of Timothy, whose
name the Apostle associates with his own at the
commencement of the epistle, a circumstance
which is worthy of consideration from this, that
Timothy was the companion of Paul during his
first tour through Phrygia, when probably the
Guspel was first preached at Colossx.’ Of these
considerations it must be allowed that the cumu-
lative force is very strong in favour of the opinion
that the Christians at Colossee had been privileged
te enjoy the personal ministrations of Paul. At
the same time, if the Culossians and Laodiceans
are not to be included among those of whom Paul
says they had not seen his face, it seems unac-
countable that in writing to the Colossians he
should have referred to this class at all. If,
moreover, he had visited the Colossians, was it
not strange that he should have no deeper feeling
towards them than he had for the multitudes of
Christians scattered over the world whose faces he
had never seen? In fine, as it is quite possible
that Paul may have been twice in Phrygia with-
out being once in Colosse, is it not easy also to
account for his interest in the church at Colussa,
his knowledge uf their affairs, and his acquaint-
ance with individuals among them, by supposing
that members of that church had frequently visited
him in different places, though he had never visited
Colosse ? (Lardner’s Credibility, Suppl., ch. xiv.3
Schulz in Stud. und Krit., Jalirg. 1829, 8. 536 ;
Wiggers, Ibid. Jalirg. 1838, 8. 165; Steiger, Co-
losserbr. s. 200; Whitby, Pref. to Coluss.)

A great part of this Epistle is directed against
certain false teachers who had crept into the church
at Colosse. To what class these teachers bee
lunged has not been fully determined. Heinrichs
(Nov. Test. Koppian. vol. vii. part ii. p. 156) con-
tends that they were disciples of John the Baptist.
Michaelis aud Storr, with more show of reason,
conclude that they were Essenes. Hug (/ntrod,
vol. ii, p. 449, E. T.) traces their system to the
Magian philosophy, of which the outlines are furs
nished by lamblichus. But the best opinion seems
to be that of Neander (cb. cit. i. 374, #f.), by whom
they are represented us a party of speculatists who
endeavoured to combine the doctrines of Oriental
theosuphy and asceticism with Christianity, and
promised thereby to their disciples a deeper insight
intothe spiritual world, and a fuller approxima-
tion to heavenly purity and intelligence than
simple Christianity could yield. Against this
party the Apostle argues by remini dive Co-

@


,


452 COLOSSIANS. :


Jossians that in Jesus Christ, as set before them in
the Gospel, they had all that they required --that
he was the imaze of the invisible Goi, that he
was before all things, that by him all things con-
sist, that they were complete in him, and that he
would present them to God holy, unblamable,
and unreprovable, provided they continued sted-
fast in the faith. He then shows that the pre-
scriptions of a mere camal asceticism are not
worthy of being submitted to by Christians; and
concludes by directing their attention to the ele-
vated principles which should regulate the con-
science and conduct of such, and the duties of
social and domestic life to which these would
prompt.

In the conclusion of the Epistle, the Apostle,
after sending to the Colossians the salutations of
himself and others who were with him, enjoins
the Colossians to send this Epistle to the Laodi-
oceans, and that they likewise should read rhy és
Aaodixelas. It is disputed whether by these con-
cluding words Paul intends an Epistle from him
to the Laodiceans or one from the Laodiceans to
him. The use of the preposition é« favours the
latter conclusion. and this bas Leen strongly urged
by Thevdofet, Chrysostom, Jerome, Philastrius,
G£cumenius, Calyin, Beza, Storr, and a multi-
tude of other interpreters. Winer, however, clearly
shows that the preposition here may be under
the law of attraction, aud that the full force of
the passage may be thus given—‘that written
to the Laodiceans and to be brought from Lao-
dicea to you’ (Grammatik d. Neutestamentl.
Sprachidioms, s. 434, Leipz. 1830). It must be
allowed that such an interpretation of the Apostle’s
words is in itself more probable than the other;
for supposing him to refer to a letter from the
Laodiceans to him, the questions arise, How were
the Colossians to procure this unless he himeelf
sent it to them? And of what use would such a
document be to them? To this latter question it
has been replied that probably the letter from the
Laodiceans contained some statements which in-
fluenced the Apostle in writing to the Colossians,
and which required to be known before his letter
in reply could be perfectly understood. But this
is said without the slightest shadow of reason from
the Epistle beture us; and it is opposed by the
fact that the Laodicean epistle was to be used by
the Colossians after they had read that to them-
selves (STav avayvwoO7, K.7.A.). It seems, upon
the whole, most likely that Paul in this passage
refers to an epistle sent by him to the church in
Laodicea at the same time with that to the church
at Colossa. It is probable also that this Epistle
is now lost, though the suggestion of Grotius that
it was the same with the Canonical Epistle to the
Ephesians has found some advocates [ EpHEsiANs,
Epist.z To eh The extant epistle to the
Laodiceans is on all hands allowed to be a clumsy
forgery (Michaelis, Jatrod. vol. iv. p. 124, 1.5
Hug, Introd. ii. 436 ; Steiger, Colosserbr. in loc. ;
Heinrichs, i loc.; Raphel. én doc.).

Besides the commentaries mentioned in this
article the following are deserving of notice :—
Davenant, Expositio Ep. D. Pauli ad Colossen-
ses, Cantab. 1627, fol., translated by the Rev.
J. Allport, 2 vols. 8vo. Lond. 1831-32; Boéhmer,
Teagoge in Ep. a Paulo ad Coloss. datam, &e.
8vo. Berol. 1829: Bahr, Commentar ub. d. Br.
Paul: an die Kolosser. 8vo. Basel, 1830; Storr,


COMMENTARY.


Interpretatio Ep. ad Coloss. (in Opuse. Acad. ii.
120).—W. L. A.

COMFORTER. [Paracretus.}

COMMENTARY. In the discussion of this
subject we propuse to pursue the following ar-
rangement :—

1. To inquire what is meant by commentary.

2. To notice different kinds of commentary.

3. To mention the prominent defects of existing
commentaries,

4. To review the leading and best known com-
mentaries.

1. By commentary, in its theological applica-
tion, is usually meant an exhibition of the mean-
ing which the sacred writers intended to convey ;
or a development of the truths which the Holy
Spirit willed to communicate to men for their
saving enlightenment. This is usually effected
by notes more or less extended—by a series of
remarks, critical, philological, grammatical, or
popular, whose purport is to bring out into view
the exact sentiments which the inspired authors
meant to express. The ideas contained in the
Old and New Testaments are thus transferred
into other languages, and rendered intelligible by
the help of oral or written signs. There is a high
and holy meaning in the words of holy men who
spake as they were moved. To adduce this ina
perspicuous form is the important office of the
commentator. As there never has been, and from
the nature of the case there never can be, a uni-
versal language, God selected for the revelation
of his will those languages which were in al] re
spects the fittest media for such a purpose. Hence
arises the necessity of transplanting from these in-
dividual dialects the momentous truths they were
selected to express; and of clothing in the coe
tume of various people, as far as that costume can
be adapted to such an object, the precise senti-
ments which were in the minds of the iuspired
writers, It is true that this can only be imper-
fectly done, owing to the various causes by which
every language is aflected; but the substance of
revelation may be adequately embodied in a great
variety of garb. The truths that make wise unto
salvation are capable of being fairly represented
in every tongue and dialect under heaven. There
is an adaptation in their nature to the usage of
every language that can possibly arise. The re-
lation of immortal beings to their great Creator is
every where the same; and the duties consequent
upon such a relation are also identical. Their
wants and necessities, too, are essentially alike.
Hence there is a peculiar fitness in divine. truth
for appearing without injury in the linguistic
costumes of different tribes.

The characteristics of commentary are,—

(a.) An elucidation of the meaning belonging
to the words, phrases, and idioms of the original.

The signification of terms is generic or specitic.
A variety of signitications also belongs to the
same term, according to the position it occupies.
Now a commentary points out the particular
meaning belonging to a term in a particular
place, together with the reason of its bearing such
a sense. Sv with phrases. It should likewise ex-
plain the construction of sentences, the

iarities of the diction employed, the difficulties
belonging to certain combinations of words, and
the mode in which they affect the general mean-
ing. But this is only a small part of the business


Oa ae 8 Fee A eg oe gc ee nes eek Sd ee. A eae! es ee ee Se, eee


—<—$——<$— — —:


‘COMMENTARY.


belonging to a commentator. He may be able to
unfold the signitications of words with discrimi-
nating nicety; with the genius of language he
may be familiar; he may clearly perceive all its
idioms, and rightly apprehend its difticult phrases.
In short, as far as verbal criticism is concerned,
he may be a consummate master, while yet he
may pruve an indifferent commentator. True
commentary embraces much more than an ac-
quaintance with isolated words and phrases, or
with the grammatical principles of the Hebrew
and Greek languages. It fills a more extended
and elevated sphere than simple philology. It
takes a higher range than grammatical minutie
or rhetoricul adjustment. These, indeed, form one
of its elements, but they are far from being the
oaly feature by which it is distinguished.

(4) Ancther characteristic of commentary is
an exhibition of the writer's scope, or the end he
has in view in a particular place. It ascertains
the precise idea he intended to inculcate in a
given locality, and how it contributes to the ge-
neral truth enforced. Every particle and word,
every phrase and sentence, forms a Jink in the
chain of reasoning drawn out by an_ inspired
author—a step in the progress of his holy revela-
tions. It is therefore essential to perceive what
contribution it makes to the import of’ an entire

ge, whether in the way of enriching or qua-
ifying the sentiments embodied. A commentary
should thus exhibit the design of a writer in a
certain connection,—the arguments he employs
to establish his positions, their coherence with
ene unother, their general harmony, and the
degree of importance assigned to them. The
drift of a discourse should never be lost sight
of, elee an author will be misunderstood and mis-
interpreted.

(c.) In addition to this, the train of thought or
reasoning pursued throughout an entire book or
epistle, the various topics discussed, the great end
of the whole, with the subordinate particulars it
embraces, the digressions made by the writer,—
these, and other particulars of a like nature,
should be pointed out by the true commentator.
Tie connection of one argument with another, the
cousistency and ztimate bearing of all the state-
ments advanced—in short, their various relations,
as far as these are developed or intimated by the
author, should be clearly apprehended and intel-
ligently stated. There is a plan ur purpose that
pervades every hook, epistle, or prophecy of the
sacred writers; a plan which dues not, indeed,
wholly exclude, but which usually takes pre-
cedence of, other objects to which the book may
be subservient. To trace such a plan, as it is
carried out by the original writer, and to unfold
the precise mode in which it promotes the highest
interests of mankind, is one of the chief charac-
teristics of commentary.

(d.) Another characteristic of commentary is,
that it presents a comparison of the seutiments
contained in one book, or one entire connected
portion of Scripture, with those of another, and
with the genera) tenor of revelation. A beautifal
harmony pervades the Bible. Diversities, indeed,
it exhibits, just as we should expect it @ priort
to do; it presents difhculties and mysteries which
we cannot fafliom; but, with this variety, there is
a uniformity worthy of the wisdom of God. All


bis works are distingnished by the same Leautiful


COMMENTARY. 5.)


arrangement; and the revelation of his will forms
no exception. A commentator should therefore
bring into juxtaposition the various ions of
the divine word, and point out their divine sym-
metry. He should be able to account for diver-
sities of sentiment, in reference to the same topic,
that appear in the pages of books written at dif-
ferent periods, and addressed to individuals or
communities whose circumstances, intellectual
and physical, were dissimilar. - An exposition
that fails to do this is deficient in one of its
highest qualities. Without it, religious truth
will be seen in disjointed fragments; no con-
nected system, compact and harmonious in its
parts, will meet the eye. The adaptation of the
entire scheme of revelation to the salvation of
mankind will be dimly apprehended, while
there is no comprehensive survey of its fair pro-
portions.

From what has heen stated in regard to the
constituents of commentary, it will also be seen
that it differs from translation. The latter en-
deavours to find in another language eguivalent
terms expressive of the ideas which the words of
the Hebrew and Greek Janguages were framed to
convey. It seeks to embody the same sentiments
as are contained in the Scriptures, by means of
phraseology closely corresponding in ifs sym-
bolical character to the diction of the Bible. It
is easy to see, however, that itn many cases this
cannot be done, and that in others it can be
effected very imperfectly. There are and must
be a thousand varieties of conception expressed in
the original Janguayes of Scripture, of which no
other can afford an adequate representation, The
inhabitants of the countries where the sacred books
were written lived amid circumstances in many
respects diverse fiom those of other people. These
circumstances naturally gave a colouring to their
language. They affected it in such a way as to
create terms for which there are no equivalents in
the languages of tribes who are conversant with
different objects, and live amid different relations.
‘Translation fails in numerous instances, just be
cause the language of one people contains words
and idioms to which that of none other presents
fit counterparts. In such a case, no expedient is
Jeft but circumlocution. By the help of several
phrases, we must try to approximate at least the
sentiment or shade of thought which the inspired
writers designed to express. Where exact repre-
sentatives cannot be found, we bring together
various terms which may give as vivid a repre-
sentation of the original as can be effected through
the medium of the language in which the inter-
pretation is given. Commentary is thus more
diffuse than ¢ranslation. Its object is not to find
words in one language correspouding to those of
the original languages of the Scriptures, or nearly
resembling them in significance, but to set f
the meaning of the writers in notes and remarks
of considerable Jength. Paraphrase occupies @
middle place between (ranslation and com-
mentary; partaking of greater diffuseness than
the former, but of Jess extent than the latter.
It aims at finding equivalent terms to those which
the sacred writers employ, accompanied with
others that appear necessary to fill up the sense,
or to spread it out betore the mind of the reader
in such a form as the authors themselves might
be supposed to have employed in reference to the


454 COMMENTARY.


people to whom the paraphrast belongs.
differ from commentary only in brevity. They
are short notes on passages of Scripture. Some-
times dificult places alone are selected as their
object ; at other times they embrace continuously
an entire book. In every case brevity is, or ought
to be, their distinguishing feature.

2. There are two kinds of commentary which
we shall notice, viz. the critical aud the popular.
The former contains grammatical and philo-
logical remarks, unfolds the general and special
signitications of words, points out idioms and pe-
culiarities of the original languages, and always
brings into view the Hebrew or Greek phraseologs
employed by the sacred writers. It dilates on the
peculiarities and difficulties of construction which
may present themselves, referring to varivus read-
ings, and occasionally bringing into comparison
the sentiments and diction of profane writers
where they resemble those of the Bible. In a
word, it takes a wide range, while it states the
processes which Jead to results, and shrinks not
from employing the technical language common
to scholars. In this way the meaning of the ori-
ginal is brought out. Extended dissertations are
sometimes given, in which the language is made
the direct subject of examination, and the aid of
Jexicons and grammars called in to support or
contirm a certain interpretation. J’opular com-
mentary states in perspicuous and untechnical
phraseology the sentiments of the holy writers,
usually without detailing the steps by which that
meaning has been discovered, It leaves philo-
logical observations to those whose taste leads
them to such studies. All scientific investigations
are avoided, Its great object is to present, in an
attractive form, the thoughts of the sacred authors,
so that they may vividly impreas the mind and
interest the heart. It shuns all peculiarities that
might repel the simple-minded, reflecting reader
of the Bible, and endeavours to adduce the truth
of God without minute details or tedious di-
gressions. It avoids every thing that a reader
unacquainted with Hebrew and Greek would not
understand ; aud occupies itself solely with the
theology of the inspired authors — that holy sense
which enlightens and saves inankind. — This,
however, is rather what popular commentary
should do, than what it has hitherto done. We
have described the appropriate sphere of its duty,
rather than the province which it has actually
occupied.

The limits of critical and popular commentary
are not so wide as to prevent a partial union of
both. Their ultimate object is the same, viz. to

resent the exact meaning which the Holy Spirit
intended to express. Both may state the import
of words and phrases; both may investigate the
course of thought pursned by prophets and apostles.
They may develope processes of argumentation,
the scope of the writers’ remarks, the bealing of
each particular on a certain purpose, and the
connection between different portions of Scripture.
In these respects critical and popular commentary
may substantially coincide. Perhaps the union
of both presents the best model of commentary,
provided the former be divested of learned parade
and repulsive technicalities, and the latter be
picuously full. Yet there is much dilliculty

in combining their -espective qualities. In popu-
darising the critical, and in elevating the popular


Scholia


.thoughts of the holy men who wrote.


COMMENTARY.


to the standard of intelligent interpretation, there
is rocm for the exercise of great talent. The former
is apt to degenerate into philological sterility ;
the latter into ¢rite reflection. But by vicifying
the one, and solidifying the other, a good degree
of affinity would be eflectec. The results which
learning has attained, by processes unintelligible
to all but the scholar, might surely be presented
to the unlearned reader so as to be perceived and
relished. And what are the results which it is
the great object of every commentator to realise ?
They are simply tke tdeas which the inspired
writers designed to set forth. These constitute
theology. They are emphatically the truth. They
are the holy mind of God, as far as he has thought
fit to reveal it to men—the pure and paramount
realities which metamorphose the sinner into the
saint. The commentatur who comes short of this
important end, or fails in exhibiting the whole
counsel of God in its harmonious proportions, is
not successful. It matters little whether he be
eerie of profound learning, if he cannot ex-
nibit in all their strength and richness the exact
To this all
his erudition should be subordinate. Critical and
antiquarian knowledge should only be regarded
as a inean of arriving at such an object. Geo-
graphical, chronological, and historical remarks
should solely subserve the educement or contirma-
tion of Jehovah's will, The building about which
they are employed they should raise, strengthen,
or consolidate. As long as they contribute nothing
to the rearing or cementing of its parts, they are
useless lumber. The grand question with every
commentator should be, what did the Holy Ghost
mean to express by such a phrase or sentence?
What train of thought does the inspired writer
pursue? what truth does he design to teach, what
doctrine to embody, what duty to inculcate? Am
I exhibiting as the mind of the Spirit what I have
sufficient reason to believe to be really such ?
Have I examined every thing within my reach,
which could be supposed to throw light on the
original, or aid in understanding it? Has every
kuown circumstance been taken into account ?
These and similar questions should never be lost
sight of by the intelligent commentator; for in
proportion as he is actuated by the motives they
imply will he produce a solid and safe exposition,
such as the sacred original was truly meaut to
exhibit,

3. The prominent defects of existing com-
mentaries.

(@.) Prolixity. This defect chiefly applies to
the older works: hence their great size. It is not
uncommon to meet with a large folio volume of
commentary on a book of Scripture of moderate
extent. Thus Byfield, on the Epistle to the Co-
lossians, fills a folio valume; and Venema, on
Jeremiah, two quartos. Peter Martyr's ‘ most
learned and fruitfull commentaries upon the
Epistle to the Romans’ occupy a folio, and his
*commentarie upon the bovk of Judges’ another
tome of the same extent. But Venema on the
Psalms, and Caryl on Job, are still more extra-
vagant, the former extending to no Jess than six
volumes quarto, the latter to two goodly folios,
It is almost superfluous to remark that such
writers wander away, without confining them-
selves. to exposition. We do not deny that even
their extraneous matter may be good and edifying


COMMENTARY.


to those who have the patience to wade through
its labyrinths, but still it is not commentary. It
is not a simple elucidation of the meaning which
the sacred writers intended to express. To say
every thing that it is almost possible to say on a
passage, or to write cown what first comes up in
the mind, and nearly in the same form in which
it suggests itself, ie far from giving the true sense,
which ought ever to be the one object in view. It
is very easy to write, currente calamo, any thing
however remotely connected with a passage, or to
note down the thoughts as they rise; but to think
out the meaning of a place, to exercise inde-
pendent mental effort upon it, to apply severe
and rigid examination to each sentence and
paragraph of the original, is quite a different
process. To exhibit in a lucid and self-satistying
manner the results of deep thought and indomit-
able industry, is far from the intention of those
prolix interpreters, who, in their apparent anxiety
to compose a full commentary, present the reader
with a chaos of annotations, and bury the holy
seuse of the inspired writers beneath the rubbish
of their prosaic musings. .

(6.) Some commentators are fond of detailing
various opinions, without sifting them. This also
we reckon a defect. They procure a number of
former expositions, and write down out of each
what is said upon a text. They tell what one and
another learned annotator aftirms, but do not
search or scrutinise his affirmations.¢ No doubt
an array of names looks imposing ; and the reader
may stare with surprise at the extent of research
displayed ; but nothing is easier than to fill up

ges with such patchwork, and to be as entirely
ignorant of the nature of commentary as befure.
The intelligent reader will be inclined to say,
What matters it to me what this rabbi has said,
or that doctor has stated? I am anxious to know
the true sense of the Scriptures, and not the vary-
ing vpinions of men concerning them. I long to
have the refreshing truths of the Bible presented
to me in their native purity, just as they are fuund
in the pages of inspiration. Do not perplex me
with the notions of numerous commentators,
many of whom were utterly incompetent for their

‘task ; but let me see the mind of the Spirit fully
and fairly exhibited, without the artificial techni-
calities of scholastic theology. It is a work of
supererogation to collect a multitude of annota-
tions from various sources, most of which the in-
dustrious collector knows to be improbable or
erroneous. It is folly to adduce and combat
interpretations, from which the common sense and
simple piety of the unsophisticated reader turn
away with instinctive aversion. If plausible views
be stated, they should be thoroughly analysed.
But in all cases the right meaning ought to be a
prominent thing with the commentator, and pro-
minently should it be manifested, surrounded, of
possible, with those hues which Heaven itself’ has
given it, and qualitied by such circumstances as
the Bible may furnish, ;

(c.) Another defect consists in dwelling on the
easy, and evading the difficult Passages. This
feature belongs especially to those English com-
mentaries which are most current arrong us. By
a series of appended remarks, plain statements
are expanded ; but wherever there is a real per-
plexity, it is glozed over with marvellous super-
ficiality. It may be that much is said about it,


COMMENTARY. 46


but yet there is no penetration beneath the sur
face; and when the reader asks himself what is
the true import, he finds himself in the same state
of ignorance as when he first took up the Com-
mentary in question. Prous reflections, and mul-
titudinous inferences enter largely into our po-
pular books of exposition. They spiritualise, but
they do not expound. They sermonise upon a
book, but they do not catch its spirit, or compre-
hend its meaning. All this is out of place. A
preaching, spirttualising commentary dves not
deserve the appellation of commentary at all.
When a writer undertakes to educe and exhibit
the true sense of the Bible, he should not give
forth his own meditations, however just and proper
in themselves. Put in the room of exposition,
they are wholly out of place. The simple por
tions of the Bible are precisely those which re-
quire little to be said on them, while to the more
difficult superlative attention should be paid.
But the reverse order of procedure is followed by
our popular commentators. They pivusly de-
scant on what is well known, leaving the reader
in darkness where he most needs assistance.

The intelligent part of the public are beginning to
see that no one man, be his industry what it may,
is competent tu write a commentary on the whole
Bible. Let him possess vast learning, great abi-
lities, sound judgment, mental acumen, and in-
defatigable zeal, he will still find it impossible to
peccte a solid commentary on all the canonical

oks, It is true that one person may write
tohat ts commonly styled a commentary em-
bracing the entire Bible, but how little of inde-
pendent inquiry does such a work present! How
feebly does it trace out the course of thought pur-
sued by each of the inspired writers, the numer-
ous allusions to manners and customs, the whole
meaning of the original. Much, very much is
left by it untouched. It pursues an easy path,
and difficulties vanish befure it, because the
highest object of the right-minded interpreter, so
far from being attained, is not sought to be real-
ized. There may be a great amount of writing
—the thonghts of preceding commentators may
be given in another costume with appended re
flections; but, in all this, there is no profound or
satisfying investigation. The mere surface of
revelation is skimmed. The work is performed
perfunctorily. Nothing of value is added to
former interpretations. The essence and spirit of
the original are to a great extent unperceived.
The shades and colourings of thought are un-
reflected. Two or three bouks are quite sufticient
for one man, to whatever age he may attain. By
intelligently expounding them, he will do more ty
advance the cause of sacred interpretation, than
if he were to travel over the entire field of the
Bible. We had rather see a sound and able com-
mentary on one book, than a prosing expansion
of stale remarks on all. It displays more real
talent, as it exhibits more independent thought.
We value highly the labours of those men whe
devote themselves to a few books, with an honest
determination to ascertain their true meaning,
and with such qualifications intellectual, moral,
and literary, as have been already noticed. If
they he men of the right stamp, we may expect
great benefit from their investigations. As for
those who have the self-confidence to undertake
the exposition of all Scripture, we are inclined to


456 COMMENTARY.


by their harmless drudgery, never looking to
it for true exposition. They are mere hewers of
wood and drawers of water. They collect the
observations of others; but it will be found that
sermonising and discursive annotations fill up
their lengthened pages.

4. We shall very briefly refer to the principal
commentators on the Bible.

Calvin.—In all the higher qualifications of a
commentator Calvin is pre-eminent. His know-
ledge of the original Janguages was not so great as
that of many laterexpositors; but in developing the
meaning of the sacred writers, be has few equals.
It has been well remarked that he chietly at-
tended to the logic of commentary. He possessed
aingular acuteness, united to a deep acquaintance
with the human heart, a comprelension of mind
by which he was able to survey revelation in all
its features, and an enlightened understanding
competent to perceive sound exegetical principles,
and resolute in adhering to them. He can never
be consulted without advantage, although all his
opinions should not be followed. His works pre-
sent specimens of exegesis that deserve to be
ranked among the best extant, because they are
occupied with the spiritual essence of the Bible—
with the theology of the inspired writers.

Beza.— Beza's talents ure seen to great advan-
tage in expounding the argumentative parts of
the Bible. He possessed many of the best exe-
getical qualities which characterized his great
master. In tracing the conuection of one part
with another, and the successive steps of an argue
ment, he displays much ability. ILis acuteness
and leaming were considerable. He was better
acquainted with the theology than the criticism
of the New Testament. °

Hammond.—This learned anuotator was well
qualilied for interpretation. His paraphrase and
annotations on the New Testament possess con-
siderable value; and many good specimens of
criticism are found in his notes. Yet he las not
entered deeply into the spirit of the original, or
developed with uniform success the meaning of
the inspired writers, Many of the most dithcult
portions he has superticially examined, or wholly
mistaken.

Poole.—Poole’s annotations on the Holy Bible
contain several valuable, judiciuus remarks. But
their defects ure numerous, The pious author
had only a partial acquaintance with the original.
He was remarkable neither fur profundity nor
acuteness. Yet he had piety and good sense,
amazing industry, and an extensive knowledge of
the older commentators.

Poli Synopsis Criticorum.—In_ this large
work, the annotations of a great mumber of the
older commentators are collected and condensed.
But they are seldom sifted and criticised, su that
the reader is left tu choose among them for himself.
Such a chaos of remarks is apt to confuse the
mind. Whoever has time, and patience, and
discrimination, may find correct exegesis scat-
tered through the whole; but simpler and more
direct commentary is much to be preferred.

Grotius.—This very learned writer investizates
the literal sense of the Scriptures with great dili-
gence and success. He had considerable exe-

etical tact, and a large acquaintance with the
then classivs, from which ie was accustomed.
to adduce parallels. His taste was good, and


COMMENTARY.
his mode of unfulding the meaning of a passage


simple, direct, and brief. His judgment was
suund, free from prejudice, and libel beyond
the age in which he lived. As a commentator
he was distinguished for his unifvrialy good sense.
But he wanted the depth and acuteness of Calvin.
It has been said without reason, that he found
Christ nowhere in the Old Testament. It is true
that he opposed the Cocceian method, but in this
he should be commended. His chief defect is in
spiritual discernment. Hence he rests in the
literal meaning in many cases, where there is a
higher or ulterior reference.

Le Clerc.—Excellent notes are in
througliout the commentaries of this author, which
the younger Rosenmiiller transcribed into his
Scholia. His judgment was gvod, and his mode
of interpretation perspicuous, From his richly
stored mind he could easily draw illustrations of
the Bible both pertinent aud just. Yet he was
very: defective in theological discrimination.
Hence, in the prophetic and doctrinal books, he
is unsatisfactory. It has been thought, not with-
out truth, that he had a rationalistic tendency.
It is certain that he exalted his own judgment too
highly, and pronounced doginatically where he
ought to have manifested a modest diftidence.

Calmet.—Calmet is perhaps the most distin-
guished commentator on the Bible belonging to
the Roman Catholic Church, In the higher qua-
lities of commentary his voluminous work is very
deficient. It contains a good collection of bisto-
Tical materials, and presents the meaning of the
original where it is already plain; but his histo-
rical apparatus needs to be purified of its irrele-


vant, erroneous statements; while on the difticult:


portions no new light is thrown.

Patrick, Lowth, Arnald, and Whitby. —
Bishop Patrick had many of the elements belong-
ing to a good commentator. His learning was
great when we consider the time at which he
lived, his method brief and perspicuous. Lowth
was inferior to Patrick. Whitby presents a re-
markable compound of excellences and imper-
fections. In philosophy be was a master. In cri-
tical elucidations of the text he was at home. Nor
was he wanting in acuteness or philosophical
ability. His judgment was aipulaity clear, and
his manner of annotating straightfurward. Yet
he had not much comprehensiveness of intellect,
ora deep insight into the spiritual nature of re-
velation. The sublime harmony of the New
Testament was but dimly seen by him. In the
spirit of a high relish tur the purity of the Gospel
he seldom mounts up into its mysteries. Deeply
baptized in the Spirit's influences he could not
have been, else many of bis expusitory nutes would
have heen different.

Henry.—The name of this good man is vener-
able, and will be held in everlasting remem-
brance. His commentary dees not contain much
exposition. It is full of sermonising. It is sur-
prising, however, to see how far his good sense and
simple piety led him into the doctrine of the
Bille, apart from many of the higher qualities
belonging to a successful commentator. In
thoroughness and solidity of expusition he is not
to be named with Calvin. His prolixity is
great. Practical preaching is the burden of his
voluminous notes.

GilL—The prominent characteristic of Uill's


eS a er ee = ee cae ae


COMMENTARY.


commentary is heaviness. It lacks condensation
and brevity. The meaning of the inspired authors
is often undeveloped, and more frequently dis-
torted. It has the lumber and rubbish of learn-
ing, without learning itself.

Doddridge.—The taste of this pious commen-
tator was good, and his style remarkably pure.
He had not much acumen or comprehension of
mind; but he had an excellent judgment, and a
calm candour of inquiry. His paraphrase leaves
much unexplained, while it dilutes the strength
of the original. It is too discursive and ser-
monising. The notes are few, and ordinarily
correct.

Scott. — Thé prevailing characteristic of
Scott's commentary is judiciousness in the opi-
nions advanced. The greater portion of it, how-
ever, is not proper exposition. The pious author
preaches about and paraphrases the original. His
simplicity of purpose generally preserved him
from mistakes; but as a commentator he was
neither acute nor learned. He wanted a com-
petent acquaintance with the original, power of
analysis, a mind unprepossessed by a doctrinal
system, and penetration of spirit.

A. Clarke.—In most of the higher qualities by
which an interpreter should be distinguished, this
man of much reading was wanting. His histo-
tical and geographical notes are the best. But
he had no philosophical ability. His prejudices
warped his judgment. His philology 1s not un-
frequently puerile. Acuteness and penetration
are not seen in his writings. There 1s no deep
insight into the mind of the sacred writers.

The modern Germans, prulific as they are in theo-
logical works, have seldom ventured to undertake
an exposition of the whole Bible. Each writer
usually confines himeelf to the task of commenting
on a few books. In this their wisdom is mani-
fested. Yet they do not excel in good specimens
of commentary. They are toord-erplainers. In
pontine out various readings, in grammatical,

istorical, and geographical annotations, as also
in subtle speculatiuns respecting the genius of the
titnes in which the writers of the Bible lived,
they are at home. In the dover criticism we
willingly sit at their feet and learn. But with
regard to the Aigher, in all that pertains to the
logic uf commentary, in development of the sense
in its holy relations, they are lamentably wanting.
Refined notions usurp the place of practical piety
in their minds; and the minutiz of verbal cri-
ticism furnish them nutriment apart from the
tich repast of theological sentiment and sanctify-
ing truth. But there are sume noble exceptions.

E. F.C. Rosenmiiller—The Scholia of this
laborious writer extend over the greater part of the
Old Testdment. Looking to the last editions,
they are unquestionably of high value. They
bring together a mass of annotation such as is
sufficient to satisfy the desires of most Biblical
students, Yet the learned author undertook too
much to perform it in a masterly style. Hence
his materials are not properly. sifted, the chaff
from tie wheat. He has not drunk deeply into
the spirit of the inspired authors. He seems in-
deed not to have had a soul attuned to the spi-
tituality of their utterances, or impregnated with
toe celestial fire that touched their hallowed lips.
His father, the author of the Scholia on the New
Testament, is a good word-expiainer for students


COMMERCE. 437


beginning to read the original. He has not prto-
duced a masterly specimen of commentary on
any one hook or epistle.

Olshausen.—The best example of commen-
tary on the New Testament with which we are
acquainted has been given by thiswriter. It isa
model of exposition unrivalled in any language.
Verbal criticism is but sparingly introduced, al-
though even here the hand of a master is appa-
rent. He is intent, however, on higher things.
He investigates the thought, traces the connection,
puts himself in the same position as the writers,
and views with philosophic ability the holy reve-
lations of Christ in their comprehensive tenden-
cies. The critical and the popular are admirably
mingled. Greatly do we Tastent that the writer
was cut off before he completed so excellent a
performance.

Tholuck.—The commentaries of this eminent
writer on various books of the New Testament,
especially those on the Epistles to the Romans and
Hebrews, exhibit the highest exegetical excellen-
ces, While he critically investigates phrases
and idioms, he ascends into the pure region of the
ideas, unfolding the sense with much skill and
discernment. His commentary on Jolin is of a
more popular cast. His interpretation of the
Bergpredigt, or Sermon on the Mount, is very
valuable. :

In addition to these, Germany has produced
other specimens of commentary that occupy a
high place in the estimation of competent judges.
Liicke, on John’s writings, especially in the third
edition now in progress; Gesenius, on Isiah; De
Wette, on the Psalms ; Havernick, on Ezekiel and
Daniel; Billroth, on the Corinthians; Harless, on
Ephesians; and Baehr, on the Colossians, possess
much merit, accompanied, it is true, with some
serious faults. As examples of thorough and
svlid commentary, the English language presents
none equal to those of Professor Stuart on the
Epistles to the Romans and Hebrews. The learned
author has fully entered into the spirit of the
great Apostle, evading no difficulty, aud wacing
the course of his reasoning with considerable suc-
cess. He has consequently thrown more light on
these difficult Epistles than many are willing to
allow. A valuable commentary on the Epistle
to the Romans we also possess in that of Professor
Hodge, although the author cannot be said to
have gone far beyond Calvingin whose steps he
has closely trod.

Our space will not allow us to mention other
expository treatises. Those we have noticed are
best known in this country, and most perused.


COMMERCE. The idea conveyed by this
word is represented in the sacred, writings by
the word trade; the Hebrew term ba rekel sig-
nifying literally ‘trade ’ or ¢ trattic.”

Commerce, in its usual acceptation, means the
exchange of one thing for auother—the exchange of
what we have to spare fur what we want, in whatever
country it is produced. The origin of commerce
must have been nearly coeval with the world. As
pasturage and agriculture were the only employ-
ments of the first inhabitants, so cattle, flocks, and
the fruits of the earth were the only objects of the
first commerce, or that species of it called barter
It would appear that some progress had been
made in manufactures in the ages hefore the flood


458 COMMERCE.


The building of a city or village by Cain, how-
ever inaizniticaut the houses may have been, sup-
arid the existence of some mechanical know-
ledge. The musical instruments, such as harps
and organs, the works in brass and in iron exhi-
bited by the succeeding generations, coufirm the
belief that the arts were considerably advanced.
The construction of Noah's ark, a ship of three
decks, covered over with pitch, and much larger
than any modem effort of architecture, proves
that many separate trades were at that period
carried on. There must have been parties who
supplied Noah and his three sons with the great
quantity and variety of materials which they re-
quired, and this they would do in exchange for
other commodities, and perhaps money. That
enormous pile of building, the tower of Babel,
was constricted of bricks, the process of making
which appears to have been well understood.
Some learned astronomers are of opinion that the
celes'ial observations of the Chinese reach back to
2249 years before the Christian era; and the ce-
Jestial observations made at Babylon, contained
in a calendar of above nineteen centuries, trans-
mitted to Greece by Alexander, reach back to
within fifteen years of those ascribed to the Chi-
nese. The Indians appear to have had observa-
tions quite as early as the Babylonians.

Such of the descendants of Noah as lived near
the water may be presumed to have made use of
vessels built in imitation of the ark—if, as some
think, that was the first floating vessel ever seen
in the world—but on a smaller scale, fur the pur-
pose of crossing rivers. In the course of time
the descendants of his son Japhet settled in ‘the
isles of the Gentiles,’ by which are understuod the
islands at the east end of the Mediterranean sea,
aud those between Asia Minor and Greece, whence
their colonies spread into Greece, Italy, and other
western lands.

Sidon, which afterwards became so celebrated
for the wouderful mercantile exertions of its in-
habitants, was founded about 2290 years before
the Christian era. The ueishbouring mountains,
being covered with excellent cedar-trees, furnished
the best and most durable timber for ship-build-
ing. The inhabitants of Sidon accordingly built
numervus ships, and exported the produce of the
adjoining country, and the various aaticles of their
own manufacture, such as fine linen, embroidery,
tapestry, metals, glass, both coloured and figured,
cut, or carved, ard even mirrors. They were un-
rivalled by the inhabitants of the Mediterranean
coasts in works of taste, elegance, and luxury.
Their great and universally acknowledged _pre-
eminence in the arts procured for the Phanicians,
whose principal seaport was Sidon, the honour of
being esteemed, among the Greeks and other na-
tions, as the inventors of commerce, ship-building,
navigation, the application of astronomy to nau-
tical purposes, and particularly as the discoverers
of several stars nearer to the north pole than any
that were known to ether nations; of naval war,
writing, arithmetic, book-keeping, measures and
weights; to which it is probable they might have
added money.

Egypt appears to have excelled all the neigh-
bouring countries in agriculture, aud particularly
in its abundant crops of com. The fame of its
fertility induced Abraham to remove thither with
his numerous family (Gen. xii, 10).


COMMERCE


‘The earliest accounts of bargain and sale reach
no higher than the time of Abraham, and his trans
action with Ephron. He is said to have weighed
unto him ‘400 shekels of silver, current money
with the merchant’ (Gen. xxiii. 16), The word
merchant implies that the standard of money was
fixed by usage among merchants, who comprised
a numerous and respectable class of the com-
munity. Manufactures were by this time so far
advanced, that not only those more immediately
connected with agriculture, such as flour ground
from corn, wine, oil, butter, and also the most
necessary articles of clothing and furniture, but
even those of luxury and magnificence, were
much in use, as appears by the ear-rings, brace-
lets of gold and of silver, and other precious
things presented by Abraham's steward to Re-
becca (Gen, xxiv. 22, 53).

In the book of Job, whose author, in the opinion of
the most learned commentators, resided in Arabia,
and was contemporary with the sons of Abraham,
much light is thrown upon the commerce, manu-
factures, and science of the age and country in
which he lived. There is mention of gold, iron,
brass, lead, crystal, jewels, the art of weaving,
merchants, gold brought from Ophir, which im-
plies commerce with a remote country, and to-
pazes from Ethiopia; ship-building, so far im-
proved that some ships were distinguished for the
velocity of their motion; writing in a book, and
engraving letters or writing on plates of lead
and on stone with iron pens, and also seal-en-
graving ; fishing with hooks, and nets, and spears;
sausica) instruments, the harp and organ; astro-
nhomy, and names given to particular stars. These
notices tend to prove that, although the patri-
archal system of making pasturage the chief
object of attention was stil] maintained by many
of the greatest inhabitants where the author of the
book of Job resided, the sciences werg actively
cultivated, the useful and ornamental arts in an
advanced state, and commerce prosecuted with
diligence and success; and this at a period when,
if the chronology of Job is correctly settled, the
arts and sciences were scarcely so far advanced
in Egypt, from whence, and from the other coun-
tries bordering upon the eastern part of the Medi-
terranean Sea, they afterwards gradually found
their way into Greece.

The inhabitants of Arabia appear to have
availed themselves, at a very early period, of their
advantazeous situation between the two fertile
and opulent countries of India and Egypt, and to
have obtained the exclusive monopoly of a very
profitable carrying trade between those countries.
They were a class of people who gave their whole
attention to merchandise as a regular and esta-
blished profession, and travelled with caravans
between Arabia and Egypt, carrying upon the
backs of camels the spiceries of India, the balm
of Canaan, and the myrth produced in their own
country, or of a superior quality from the opposite
coast of Abyssinia—all of which were in great de-
mand among the Egyptians for embalming the
dead, in their religious ceremonies, and for rai-
nistering to the pleasures of that superstitious and
luxurious people. The merchants of one of these
caravans bought Joseph from his brothers for
twenty pieces of silver, that is about 22. Ils. Sd,
sterling, and carried him into Egypt. The south-
ern Arabs were eminent traders, and enjoyed a


ERS tae RRBR ATH STAR HE OR


=


COMMERCE.


large ion, and in general the entire mo-
nopoly, of the trade between India and the west-
em world, from the earliest ages, until the system
of that important commerce was totally over
turned when the inhabitants of Europe discovered
a direct route to India by the Cape of Good


Hope.

At the period when J ’s brethren visited
Egypt, inns were established for the accommo-
dation of travellers in that country and in the
northern parts of Arabia. The more civilized
southern parts of the peninsula would no doubt
be furnished with caravanserais still more come
modious.

During the residence of the Israelites in Egypt
manufactures of almost every description were
carried to great perfection. Flax, fine linen, gar-
ments of cotton, rings and jewels of gold and
silver, works in al] kinds of materials, chariots for

leasure, and chariots for war, are all mentioned

Moses. They had extensive manufactories of
bricks. Literature was in a flourishing state;


* and, in order to give an enlarged idea of the


accomplishments of Moses, it is said he was
‘leaned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians’ (Acts
xii, 22).

a sheila of the Canaanites from a great

a of their territories by the Israelites under
foshua, led to the gradual establishment of co-
lonies in Cyprus, Rhodes, and several islands in
the Ezean Sea; they penetrated into the Euxine
or Black Sea, and, spreading along the shores
of Sicily, Sardinia, Gaul, Spain, and Africa,
established numerous trading places, which gra-
dually rose into more or less importance. At
this periol mention is first made of Tyre as a
strong or fortified city, whilst Sidon is dignified
with the title of Great.

During the reign of David, king of Israel, that
powerful monarch disposed of a part of the wealth
obtainel by his conquests in purchasing cedar-
timber from Hiram, king of Tyre, with whom he
kept up a friendly correspondence while he lived.
He also hired Tyrian masons and carpenters for
carrying on his works. Solomon, the son of David,
cultivated the arts of peace, and indulged his taste
for magnificence and luxury to a great extent.
He employed the wealth collected by his father in
works of architecture, and in strengthening ‘and
improving his kingdom. He built the famous
Temple and fortifications of Jerusalem, and many
cities, among which was the celebrated Tadmor
or Palmyra. From the king of Tyre he ob-
tained cedar and fir, or cypress-timbers, and large
stones cut and prepared for building, which the
Tyrians conveyed by water to the most con-
venient landing-place in Solomon's dominions,
Hiram also sent a vast number of workmen to
assist and instruct Solomon's people, none of
whom had skill ‘to hew timber like the Si-
Honians." Solomon, in exchange, furnished the
Tyrians with com, wine, and oil, and received a
Valance in gold. Solomon and Hiram appear to
have subsequently entered into a trading specu-
lation or adventure upon a large scale. Tyrian
shipwrights were accordingly sent to build vessels
for both kings at Eziongeber, Solomon's port on
the Red Sea, whither he himself went to animate
them with his presence (2 Chron. viii. 17). These
ships, conducted by Tyrian navigators, sailed in
cunpany to some rich countries called Ophir and


COMMERCE. Cd


Tarshish, regarding the position of which the
learned have multiplied conjectures to little pur
pose. The voyage occupied three years; yet the
returns in this new found trade were very great and
profitable. This fleet took in apes, ebony, and
parrots on the coasts of Ethiopia, gold at Ophir,
or the place of traffic whither the people of
Ophir resorted ; it traded on both sides hike Red
Sea, on the coasts of Arabia and Ethiopia, in all
parts of Ethiopia beyond the straits when it had
en the ocean ; thence it passed up the Persian
Gulf, and might visit the places of trade u

both its shores, and run up the Tigris or the

phrates as far as these rivers were navigable.

After the reign of Solomon the commerce of the
Israelites seems to have very materially declined.
An attempt was made by Jehoshaphat, king of
Judab, and Ahaziah, king of Israel, to effect its
revival ; but the ships which they built at Ezion-
geber having been wrecked in the harbour, the
undertaking was abandoned. It dves not
that they had any assistance from the Phoenicians
in fitting out this fleet. Great efforts were made
by the Egyptians to extend the commerce of
their country, among which, not the least consi-
derable was the unsuccessful attempt to construct
a canal from the Nile to the Arabian Gulf.

The rising prosperity of Tyre soun ecli the
ancient and long-flourishing commercial city of
Sidon. About 600 years before Christ her come
mercial splendour appears to have been at its
height, and is graphically described by Ezekiel
(xxvii). The imports into Tyre were fine linen
from Egypt; blue and purple from the isles of
Elisha ; silver, iron, tin, and jeail from Tarshish—
the south part of Spain; slaves and brazen vessels
from Javan or Greece, Tubal, and Meshech ;
horses, slaves bred to horsemanship, and mules
from Togarmah ; emeralds, purple, embroidery,
fine linen, corals, and agates from Syria; corn,
balm, honey, vil, and gums from the Israelites ;
wine and wool from Damascus; polished iron-
ware, precivus oils, and cinnamon from Dan,
Javan, aud Mezo; magnificent carpets from De-
dan; sheep and goats from the pastoral tribes of
Arahia; costly spices, some the produce of India,
precivus stones, and gold from the merchants of
Sheba or Sabeea, and Ramah or Regma, countries
in the south of Arabia; blue cloths, em-
broidered wake ach apparel in corded cedar-
chesta, supposed to be original India packages,
and other goods from Sheba, Ashur, and Chilmad,
and from Haran, Canneh, and Eden, trading
ports on the south coast of Arabia. The vast
wealth that thus fluwed into Tyre from all quar
ters brought with it its too general concomitants
—extravayance, dissipation, and relaxation of
morals.

The subjection of Tyre, ‘ the renowned city
which was strong in the sea, whose merchants
were princes, whose traffickers were the honour
able of the earth,’ by Cyrus, and its subsequent
overthrow by Alexander, after a determined and
most formidable resistance, terminated alike
the grandeur of that city and the history of an-
cient commerce, as fur as they are alluded to in
Scripture (Anderson's History of Comerce ;
Vincent's Commerce and Navigation of the In-
dian Ocean; Heeren'’s Researches; Barnes's
Ancient Commerce of Western Asia, in Ameri
can Biblical Repository, 1841).—G. M. B.


a COMMON.


COMMON (xowds). ‘The Greek term properly
signifies what belongs to ald (as in Wiad. vii. 3,
woiwds ahp),, but the Hellenists applied it (like
the Hebrew bn) to what was profane, i. ¢. not
holy, and therefore of common or promiscuous
use (Acts x. 14). They also applied the term
to what was impure, whether naturally or legally
(as in Mark vii. 2, compared with Macc. i. 47,
62). And, finally, it was used of meats for-
bidden, or such as had been partaken of by ido-
laters, and which, as they rendered the partakers
thereof impure, were themselves called xowe
(common), and &xd@apra (unclean) (see Kuinoel
on Acts x. ay

COMMUNION (xowevfa), a fellowship or
agreement, when several persons join and partake
together of one thing (2 Cor. vi. 14; 1 Johni. 3);
hence its application to the celebration ofthe Lord's
supper as an act of fellowship among Christians (L
Cor. x. 16): and it is to this act of participation
or fellowship that the word ‘communion’ is now
restricted in the English language, the more fami
liar application of it having fallen into disuse.

CONCORDANCE, the name assigned to a
book which gives the words contained in the Holy
Scriptures in alphabetical order, with a reference
to the place where each may be found. This is
the essential idea of a concordance ; other ancil-
lary information may be presented in concord-
ances, such as a separate order of proper names,
the meanings which in the compiler's opinion im-
portant words are found to bear, and the etymolo-
gical signitication of appellatives, &c. There are
two great distinctive principles on which con-
cordances may be constructed—either to present
every word found in the Bible, or only the lead-
ing and most important words. The adoption of
the first necessarily swells a book to inconvenient
dimensions, and renders its use in the ordinary
pu of study somewhat onerous and incon-
venient. But great judgment is requisite in
compiling a concordance on the other principle,
lest words of less importance should be preferred
to those of greater; and as importance is alto-
gether a relative matter, the selection made by
the author may omit words which some, if not
many, readers would desiderate. The Germans
also make a distinction between concordances of
things and concordances of words: the tirst com-
prising in detailed and alphabetical form the
subject-matter of the sacred volume; the second
corresponding with the ordinary English notion

‘of a concordance. Concordances, too, vary with
the languages in which, or for which, they are
constructed, as for the original Hebrew and
Greek, or for the several versions of the Scrip-
tures, such as the Vulgate, the German, the
English, &c.

It is not. here intended to present a full or a
chronological history of all the concordances
which have been produced, but to put down those
particulars which seem to combine interest and
utility.

Writings of this kind imply that the sacred
Scriptures are regarded with reverence, held to be
authoritative in religion, and are made the subject
of appeal alike in learning, teaching, and dispu-
tation. So long therefore as the Bible was scat-
tered piecemeal up and down the world in con-
vents and libraries, and so long as it was rarely
studied even by the professed ministers of religion,


CONCORDANCE.


concordances were neither needed nor produced ;
yet there never ceased, in the darkest ages of the
Church, to be same who felt a profound interest in
the study of the venerable book, and consequently
some rude essays appear to have been made in
this way before the age in which concordances
may properly be said to have had their origin.
It is to the Reformation and the deep and general
concern which it awakened touching the truths
contained in the Scriptures; it is to the primary
principle of the Reformation—the appeal from
tradition to the Bible, from the Churen to the
word of God; it is to the wide-spread conviction
of the plenary and even verbal inspiration of the
Bible, that the world is indebted for the care,
diligence, learning, and self-denial which have
been employed in constructing and perfecting the
concordance.

The utility of concordances in the way of ex-
egesis, that is, to assist the student in the disco-
very and explanation of the meaning of the
sacred writings, is based on the position that the
several parts of divine revelation are consistent
with each other and form harmonious elements in
one grand system of Dita truth, so that by
comparing together parallel passages what is clear
may be exemplified and confirmed, and what is
dark may be expounded. Books of this sort, too,
are of service to the Christian teacher, as afford-
ing facilities by means uf those fragmentary re-
collections of words and things which the mere
hearing of the Scriptures read leave in the mind,
for readily discovering the particular book and
verse where any desired passage is to be found ;
and also as enabling him, with comparatively
little trouble, to take a survey of what the Bible
contains in regard to any particular subject which
he may have to handle.

Antony of Padua (bor a.v. 1195, died 1231
is said to have produced the first work of the kin
entitled Concordantia Morales, which was formed
from the Vulgate translation. _Hugo de Santo
Caro, better known as Cardinal Hugo, a Domi-
nican monk, who died about 1262, followed An-
tony in 1244, by compiling for the Vulgate a con-
cordance of the Scriptures. Having given himself
sedulously to the study of holy writ, with a view of
writing a commentary thereon, he was, in order to
facilitate his labour, led to project and undertake
to form a concordance, calling to his aid his brother
monks to the number of no fewer than five hundred.
Their labours have been a rich storehouse fur sub-
sequent compilers. The concordance thus made
was improved by Conrad of Halberstadt, who
flourished about 1290, and by Jolin of Segovia in
the ensuing century.

These works seem to have led to the first He-
brew concordance, which was produced by Rabbi
Mordecai Nathan, which he began in 1438, and
finished in 1448, after ten years’ hard labour by
himself and some assistants. It was first printed
at Venice in 1523, fol., by Dan. Bomberg, then
in Basle in 1581, and afterwards at Rome in
1621. It is entirely Hebrew, and entitled The
Light of the Way. In 1556 it was translated
into Latin by Renchlin, but both the Hebrew
and the Latin editions are full of errors.

These errors were for the most part corrected
and other deficiencies supplied by Calasio, a
Franciscan friar, who saibl aed Concordantia
Sacr. Bibl. Hebr. et Latin. Rome, 1621, 4


aS lade = peti at et cates cat Pe ig ee fed (oo ak


CONCORDANCE.


vols. ful. Referring the reader for details respect-
ing this work to Orme's Bibliotheca Biblica, p.
112, we dwell a little more on a work which is
found less seldom than the former in private theo-
logical libraries—Concordantie Bibi. Ebraica,
nora et artificiosa methodo disposite, Basil, 1632,
fol. This is the production ot John Buxtorf, the
father, but was published by his son. It takes
for its basis the work of Rabbi Nathan, though it
is much Letter arranged, more correctly printed,
the roots more beacon ascertained, and the
meanings more accurately given; but as the re-
ferences are made by Hebrew letters, and relate to
the Rabbinical divisions of the Old Testament,
it is of little service, unless the student is familiar
with the Masoretic system. This work was
abridged under the title of Fons Leonis, &c., Be-
rolini, 1677, 8vo. The concordance of Calasio
was republished in London under the direction of
W. Romaine, 1747-9, 4 vols. fol., and under the
patronage of all the monarchs in Europe, not ex-
cepting the pope himself. Before this republica-
tion, however, there appeared, in 1679 (Kopenh.
fol.), Ch. Nolde Concor. particularum Ebr.
Chaldaicarum. Reference may also be made to
Simonis Onomasticon V. T. Halle, 174k, fol.
But tie best and, at least to the English reader,
most important work on this subject is, The He-
brew Concordance, adapted to the English Bible,
disposed after the manner of Buxtorf, by John
Taylor, D.D., London, 1754, 2 vols. fol. Dr.
Taylor was an eminent Presbyterian divine at
Norwich, the author of several publications which
show great industry and learning. His concord-
ance is by far the most complete work of the kind.
It was tie fruit of many years’ Jabour, and has
left little room tor improvement. The patronage
of al! the English and Irish bishops recommended
the work to the world.

An edition of Buxtorf's Hebrew Concordance,
which has received so much care and attention on
the part of the author, as nearly to deserve the
name and bear the character of a new work—
Hebriischen und Chaidaischen Concordanz 2u
den Heiligen Schrifien Alten Testaments, von
Dr. Julius Fiirst (Leipzig, Tauchnitz; London,
Nutt) offera one of the most useful aids to the
study of the Bible that have ever appeared,
The necessity of such a work as the present
arises not only from the errors fuund in Buxtorf
and the comparative rarity of the work, but also
from the great advances which, since the time
when Luxtorf’s work appeared (a.p. 1632), have
been made both in the knowledge of the Shemitic
languages, in the general science of theology, and
the particular department of Biblical exegesis.
We may specify one or two of the advantages
offered by this work. In addition to those of a
more mechanical kind, such as a good type and
clear arrangement, there are, 1. A corrected text,
founded on Hahn's Vanderhoogt ; 2. The Rab-
binical significations; 3. Explanations in Latin,
giving the etymolugy of the Rabbinical ; ilustra-
tions from the three Greek Versions, the Aramaic
Paraphrase, the Vulgate, &c.; the Greek words
employed by the Seventy as renderings of the
Hebrew ; together with philological and archo-
logical notices, 0 as to make the Concordance
contain an ample Hebrew lexicon. This work
is far preferable to Taylor's Hebrew Concordance,
sbich is now not easily met with. Every theolo-


CONCORDANCE. 461


gical library which has not a copy of First must
be considered as wanting an essential requisite.
The work, when known, will, we are assured, be
welcomed by English scholars,

The best Greek concordance to the Septuagint
is that which bears the titlh—A. Trommii Con.
Gree. Vers. vulgo dic. LXX. Interpre. Amst.
1718, 2 vols. fol. The author of this learned and
most laborious work was minister of Groningen,
and published the concordance in the eighty-
fourth year of his age. He was born in 1623
and died in 1719. It follows the order ef the
Greek words of which it first gives a Latin trans-
lation, and then the Hebrew word or words for
which the Greek term is used in the Seventy.
Then the different places in which the words
occur follow in the order of the several books and
chapters. When the word occurs in any of the
ancient Greek translators, Aquila, Symmachus, or
Theodotion, the places where it is found are re-
ferred to at the end of the quotations from the
Sept. The words of the Apocrypha are placed
at the end of each enumeration. There are two
indices at the end of the work : one Hebrew and
Chaldaic, by examining which the Greek term
used in the Septuagint for any Hebrew or Chaldee
word is seen at once, with the Latin version and
the place where it is found in the concordance,
that Tromm serves in a measure for a Heb
concordance; the other index contains a lexicon
to the Hexapla of Origen, and comprehends the
Greek words in the fragments of the old Greek
translators published by Montfaucon.

The first Greek concordance to the New Testa-
ment, now exceedingly rare, is entitled Xysti
Betuleii Concordantie Grece Novi Testamenti,
Basil. 1546, fol. The author, whose real name
was Birck, was a minister of the Lutheran church ;
be was born in 1500, and died at Augsburgin 1554.
A concordance to the Greek New Testarnent, pro-
jected and partly executed by Robert Stephens,
and completed and published by his son Henry
(Genev. 1594, fol.), is too inaccurate to merit
more than a passing notice. The ensuing is the
work which the divine should possess—Erasmi
Schmidii Novi Testamenti J.C. Graci; hoc est,
originalis lingue tausteiov, &c. Vetemb. 1638,
fol. The author, a Lutheran divine, was a pro-
fessor of the Greek language in the university of
Wittemberg, where he died in 1637. In 17178
revised edition was published at Gotha, of which
a handsome reprint, in 2 vols. 8vo., was issued
from the Glasgow University press in 1819. The -
same work, edited by Greenfield, has been printed
by the Messrs. Bagster of London, in a thin, flat
pocket volume, and in another form, 32mo., being
one of their ‘ Polymicrian Series.’ By omitting
the unimportant proper names, the indeclinable

rticles, the pronouns and the verb substantive,

y substituting simple references for citation
under such circumstances as allow of the change,
the ponderous labours of the Stephenses and
Schmid are in these editions compressed into
neat, low-priced, and convenient pockae volumes,
without any detraction from utility.

A new and very superior edition of Schmid's
tajuefoy has recently been put forth by C. H.
Bruder, who has improved the work so as to bring
it into accordance with the advanced and en-
lightened views on critical and hermeneutical
subjects which characterize what may be termed


462 CONCORDANCE.


the scientific theology of Germany in the present
day. Among the advantazes of this edition, let
it suftice to specify, 1. Fulness, accuracy, and cor-
respondence with Griesbach’s edition; 2. Regard
has been paid to the editions of Lachmann and
Scholz; all the readings of the Elzevirs, Mill,
Bengel, Knapp, Tittmann, Scholz, aud also of
Erasmus, Robert Stephens’ third edition, and of
Schmid himself, are either given or pointed out.
The student is presented also with a selection of
veadings from the most ancient MSS., from the
interpreters of Scripture who lived in the earlier
ages of the church, and the works of the eccle-
siastical fathers: no various reading possessing
critical value is omitted. This, indeed, is a work
of so much value, that no good thevlogical library
can be without it; and when its worth and utility
come to be known in this country, it will soon
supersede the ordinary editions and reprints of
Sclimid's Concordance. It is put forth under the
auspices of that spirited publisher Tauchnitz of
Leipsic.

One of the most valuable aids for the general
study of the New Testament which modem times
have produced is ‘ The Englishman's Greek Con-
cordance of the New Testament ; being an at-
tempt at a Verbal Connexion between the Greek
and the English Texts. London, 1839.’ Tle work,
Phich is carefully compiled and beantifully got
up, takes Schmid as its basis. The plan is to
present in alphabetical succession every word which
occurs in the Greek New Testament with the
series of passages (quoted frum the English trans-
lation) in which each such word occurs; the word
or words exhibiting the Greek word under imme-
diate consideration being printed in italic letters.
The utility of such a work is various. We will
give one instance. Let it be supposed that the
student is engaged in endeavouring to learn the
import of the words ‘ that it miglit be fultilled.’
If Ris acquaiutance with Greek is small, he has
to refer to an index at the end of the volume in
order to ascertain what is the Greek word which
our translators have rendered by ¢ fulfilled.’ If
he is familiar with the Greek New ‘Testament, he
at once turns to the word wAnpdw, which he finds
in both Greek and English characters, immediately
followed by the several passages in English which
are renderings of xAnpéw in the original. For the
sake of completing our illustration, we transcribe
several of these renderings, taking them in the
order in which they are funnd in this Concordance
—the order, that is, in which the books of the
New Testament stand in the Common Version:
these renderings are, ‘ fulfilled,’ ¢ to fulfil,” ‘ was
full,” ‘fill ye up,’ ‘filled,’ ‘had ended,’ ‘ full
come,’ § make full,’ § were (years) expired,’ § were
ended,’ ‘ fultil ye my joy,’ ‘God shall supply,’
“ye are complete,’ ‘ works perfect." Now enough
of the context is given to enable a diligent reader
of the English New Testament to learn, as his eye
runs down the column of citations, on which sub-
ject each quoted passage bears, and generally
which therefore is the general import and bearing
of each rendering of the Greek original. First
impressions are thereby at ouce gained—perhaps
definite convictions as well—witiout once re-
ferring to the Greek Testament itself, though the
citations may extend throughout the volume, and


require hours to be consumed had they to be ,


sought without aid. These first impressions may


CONCORDANCE


lead to sustained thought or careful investigation :
indeed, the most profound study of the New Tes-
tament may, with the assistance liere provided, be
carried on with no less ease than gatisfaction, by
any one who is intent on learning ‘ the mind of
the Spirit,’ though but scantily provided with
erudition.

In consequence of the revived study of the
Bible and of the Christian fathera, as well as the
greater interest felt in religion and religious in-
quiries which the last quarter of a century has
witnessed in France, and especially in Paris, a
new Concordance to the Latin Vulgate has re-
cently been produced: ‘ Concordantia Biblior.
Sacr., Vulgate Editionis, Recensitw, multoque
prioribis auctiores, emendante, accuratius denuo
colligente et cum omnibus Bib. textibus can-
ferente T. P. Dutripon.. London, Nutt, Fleet-
street. This work is founded on that of Car-
dinal Hugo, which, though executed by tifty dif-
ferent compilers (chielly Benedictine monks), is
far from being either accurate or complete. The
editor appears to have discharged his duty with
great care and labour; and the priuter has well
performed his part. The points in which this
edition contains improvements, in comparison
with the last of those which preceded it, are
humerous and important. It may be sufticient
to state that it contains 22,000 passages not to be
found in prev: sus Concordances to the Vulgate.
Some of the additions, indeed, seem rather suited
to the peculiar condition of Biblical study in the
Catholic communion thau to the requiiemeuts of
the general theologian; nevertheless, the wark is
a valuable contribution to Biblical literature, and
must in this country be regarded with peculiar
pleasure, as both a result and an instrument of an
increase of Scriptural knowledge on the part of our
Catholic brethren. The Archbishop of Paris haa
accepted the dedication of the Concordance ts
himself; and it has been approved by most of
the archbishops and bishops ot France and Bel-
gium.

The work of Andrew Symson, Lexicon Anglo-
Greco-Latin. N. 7., London, 1658, fol., is rather
a dictionary than a concordance, and formed on
so bad a plan as to be of little service. A much
better book is A Concordance to the Greek Testa-
ment, with the English Version to each Word,
the principal Hebrew roots corresponding to the
Greek words of the Septuagint, with short Critical
Notes, and an Index, by John Williams, LL.D.,
Lond. 1767, fol.

The first concordance to the English version of
the New Testament was published without date, but
certainly before 1540, by ‘ Mr. Thomas Gybson,
being chiefly, as appears probable from the pre-
fatury epistle to the reader, the work of the famous
printer John Day. It is entitled The Concord-
ance of the New Testament, most necessary to
be had in the hands of ali soche as desire the
communication of any place contained tn the
New Testament. The first English concordance
to the entire Bible was by Jolin Marbeck—A
Concordance, that ts to saie, a Worke wherein
by the order of the letters of the A, B,C, ye
mate redely find any worde conteigned in the
tohole Bible, so often as tt ts there expressed or
mentioned, Lond. 1550, fol. Till the year 1555,
when Robert Stephens published his concordance,
it was not customary to mark the verses in books


ee


CONCORDANCE.


of this sort. At first it was thought sufficient to
specify the chapter with the letters a, b,c, d, as
marks to point out the beginning, middle, and
end of each chapter. But in 1545 Robert Ste-
phens divided the Bible into verses, thus preparing
the way for a more exact reference in concord-
ances, &c.; but Marbeck does not appear to have
been under the influence of this improvement, as
his work refers merely to the chapters. In Town-
ley's Bid. Lit. vol. iii. p. 118, may be found
some interesting particulars cting Marbeck's
condition in life, labours, and ill-treatment.

The following work, which appeared in the
same year as the last, is a translation from the
German—A Briefe and a Compendious Table,
in maner of a Concordance, openung the icaye to
the principall Histories of the whole Bible and
the most comon articles grounded and compre-
hended tn the Newe Testament and Olde, in
maner as amply as doeth the great Concordance
of the Bible. Gathered and set forth by Henry
Bullinger, Leo Jude, Conrade Pellicane, and by
the other ministers of the Church of Ligurie.
Translated from the Hygh Almayne into Eng-
lysh by Walter Lynne. To which is added, a
Translation of the Third Boke of Machabees,
8vo. 1550. Lynne, the translator, was an English
Yrinter, who flourished about the middle of the
sixteenth century, a scholar, author, and trans-
lator of several books. Bullinger, the author,
was a Swiss reformer, born near Zurich in Swit-
rerland, 1504.

Several English concordances of greater or less
value were superseded by the correct and valu-
able work of Alexander Crucen, entitled A Com-
plete Concordance to the Holy Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament, &c.; to which is added,
@ Concordance to the books called Apocrypha,
1737, 4to. Three editions were published by the
author during his life, and many have appeared
since his death. The London edition of 1810 is
the best standard edition. The work is complete,
the definitions accurate, and the references cor-
rect. Several useful editions of Cruden have
been put forth by the Messrs. Bagster, which are
worth far more than their cost. The same pub-
lishers have issued An Alpiabetical Index of the
Holy Scriptures, comprising the Names, Charac-
ters, and Subjects, both of the Old and New
Testament, in two ditlerent sizes, which the Bib-
lical student will find very serviceable. In a
‘Memvir of Mr. Alexander Cruden,’ prefixed to
an edition published in 1623, and since, are given
some interesting but painful particulars respecting
this worthy and qndknrione man, to whom the
religious world is so deeply indebted.

At a time when German theological literature
is beginning to receive some of its merited atten-
tiun, it may not be unacceptable to mention a
valuable concordance for the German Bible—
Biolische Hand-Concordanz fur Religionslehrer
und alle Freunde der Heiligen Schrift, Leipzig,
1841. The work is more comprehensive than
similar writings in the English language. It is
divided into three parts:—1. A full and com-
plete register of all the words found in the Bible;
2. An index of the most important things, sub-
jects, and ideas found in the Bible, with refer-
ences to the places where they lie in the sacred
volume ; as for instance, under the head—* Lord's
Supper—a meal commemorative of the death of


CONCUBINAGE. 463


Jesus—it brings us into intimate fellowship with
Christ ;—the worthy participation of the same ;
aes enjoyment of the flesh and blood of
hrist,, &c. The third part gives the leading
doctrines of Christianity systematically arranged,
drawn up according to Luther's Catechism, and
accompanied by Scriptural proofs. (Orme's Bib-
liotheca Biblica; Watts's Bibliotheca Britan-
nica; Winer's Handbuch; Rohbr's Kritische Pre-
diger-Bibliothek, 1841.)—J. R. B.
CONCUBINAGE, in a scriptural sense, means
the state of cohabiting lawfully with a wife of


second rank, wirbp pilgash, who enjoyed no other
conjugal right but that of cohabitation, and whom
the husband could repudiate, and send away with
a small present (Gen. xxi. 14). In like man-
ner, he could by means of presents, exclude his
children by her from the heritage (Gen. xxv. 6).


Such concubines, owadp, had Nahor (Gen. xxii.
24), Abraham (xxv. 6), Jacob (xxxv. 22), Eli-
has (xxxvi. 12), Gideon (Jug. viii. 3), Saul (2
3am. iii. 7), David (1 Sam. v. 13; xv. 16; xvi. 21),
Solomon a Kings xi. 3), Caleb (1 Chron. ii. 46),
Manasseh (26. vii. 14), Rehoboam (2 Chron. xi. 21),
Abiah (2 Chr. xiii. 21), and Belshazzar (Dan. v. 2),
To judge from the conjugal histories of Abraham
and Jacob (Gen. xvi. and xxx.}, the immediate
cause of concubinage was the barrenness of the law-
ful wife, who in that case introduced her maid-ser-
vant, of her own accord, to her husband, for the
sake of having children. Accordingly we do not
read that Isaac, son of Abraham, had any concu-
bine, Rebecca, his wife, not being barren. In
prccese of time, however, coucubinage appears to
ave degenerated into a regular custom among
the Jews, and the institutions of Moses were di-
rected to prevent excess and abuse in that respect,
by wholesome laws and regulations (Exod. xxi.
7-9; Deut, xxi. 10-14). It would seem that the
unfaithfulness of a concubine was not regarded as
an act of real adultery (Lev. xix. 0). To guard
adult male ofispring from debauchery before mar
riage, their parents, it appears, used to give them
one of their female slaves, as a concubine. She
was then considered as one of the children of the
house, and she retained her rights as a concubine,
even after the marriage of the son (Exod. xxi. 9,
19). When a son bad intercourse with the con-
cubine of his father, a sort of family punishment,
we are informed, was inflicted on him (Gen. xxxv.
22; 1 Chron. v. 1).

In the Talmnd (tit. Cetuboth), the Rabbins
differ as to what cunstitutes concubinaze; some
regarding as its distinguishing feature the absence
of the betruthing ceremonies (sponsalia), and of
the ADIN (iibellus dotis), or portion of property
allotted to a woman by special engagement, aud to
which she was eutitled on the marriage day, alter
the decease of the husband, or in case of repudia-
tion; others, again, the absence of the latter alune.

The Roman law calls concubinage, an allowed
custom (licita consuetudo), When this expres-
siou occurs in the constitutions of the Christian
emperors, it signifies what we now sometimes call
a marriage of conscience. The coucubinage tole-
rated among the Romans, in the time uf the Re-
public and of the heathen emperors, was that
between persons not capable of contracting legal
marriage. Inheritances might descend to children
that sprung from such a tolerated cohabitance.


Mbt CONFLAGRATION.


Concubinage between such persons they looked on
as a kind of marriage, and even allowed it several
privileges; but then it was confined to a single
person, and was of perpetual obligation, as much
as inarriage itself. Hottoman observes, that the
Romans had allowed coucubinage long before
Julins Cwsar enacted the law by which every one
was at liberty to marry as many wives as he
pleased. The emperor Valentinian, Socrates tells
us, allowed every man two. Concubinage is
also used to signify a marriage with a woman of
inferior condition, to whom the husband does
not convey his rank. Dajos (Paratilla) observes,
that the ancient laws allowed a man to espouse,
under the title of concubine, certain persons who
were esteemed unequal to him, on account of the
want of some qualities requisite to sustain the full
honour of marriage; and he adds, that though
such concubinage was beneath marriage both as
to dignity and civil rights, yet was concubine a
reputable title, and very different from tliat of
‘ mistress’ among us.‘ The connection was consi-
dered so lawful that the concubine might be ac-
cused of atlultery in the same manner asa wife.

This kind of concubinage is still in use in some
countries, particularly in Germany, under the
title of halb-ehe (half-marriage), or left-hand mar-
riage, in allusion to the manner of its being con-
tracted, namely, by the man giving the woman
his left hand instead of the right. This is a real
marriage, though without the usual solemnity, and
the parties are both bound to each other for ever,
though the female camot bear the husband's
name and title. —E. M.

CONEY. ([Suapnan.]

CONFLAGRATION, GENERAL. The
opinion that the end of the world is to be effected
by the agency of fire is very ancient, and was
common amongst heathen philosophers (Ovid,
Metamorph. i. 256). Other testimonies are quoted
by Grotius (De Veritate Rel. Chr., lib. i, § 22).
It is not easy to discover the origin of this opi-
nion; it can scarcely be traced to tradition de
rived from revelation, since there is no distinct
reference to such a catastrophe in the Old Testa-
ment. It is, moreover, remarkable, considering
how universal and definite is the ordinary belief
on the subject, that there is only one passage in
the New Testament, viz., 2 Pet. iii. 7-10, which
can be adduced as speaking distinctly of this
event. This passage is, indeed, very explicit,
but it should not be forgotten that some learned
and able expositors have referred it altogether to
the destruction of Jerusalem and of the Jewish
polity. Amongst those who have held this opi-
nion are Dr. Lightfoot (Hore Hebr. in Joh. 21,
22) and Dr. John Owen (@coAoyotpeva, ed. Bre-
men, 1684, p. 147, quoted by Dr. Pye Smith,
Scripture and Geology, sect. 6, p. 233, Ist ed.).
If. however, with the majority of interpreters, we
refer the prediction to the end of the world, to
which it seems most naturally to apply, we could
not have a more distinct statement of the fact
that the present order of things is to be terminated
by the world we inhabit and all the works of
man it contains being ‘burnt up.’ There is no
reason for assuming that the whole material uni-
verse isto be involved in this catastrophe; the
mention of the heavens leads our thoughts no
further than the atmosphere and vapours sur-
rounding this planet. Nor should we regard this


COPPER.


conflagration as involving the absolute destructi»n
or annihilation of the world: it is more consistent
with the narrative itself, as well as with physical
science, to consider it as introductory to a new
and better state of things—‘ new heavens and a
new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness’ (ver. 11).
By what means the conflagration is to be eflected
we are not informed, and all attempts to explain
how this is to be accomplished must be mere spe-
culation, into which we do not think it necessary
or advantageous to enter. We have only at pre-
sent to remark that such an event is not incon
sistent with physical facts. We know that the
temperature of the earth increases gradually and
with considerable regularity as we descend below
the surtace (Phillips, Geology, vol. ii. p. 232),
and have every reason to believe that the central
mass is intensely hot. We know, moreover, that
there are subterranean fires of great extent, if not
forming part of this heated central mass. The
means, therefore, of combustion are near at hand.
But even if there were no such central heat, che-
mistry points out very easy means by which the
contlagration may he effected through the acency
of various elementary substances (Phillips, Geo-
logy, vol. ii. p. 211). We find evidence also in
the pyrogenous rocks which form so large a part
of the crust of the earth, that the world has al-
ready been subjected, if not to conflagration, yet
to a more intense and general action of heat than
any which is now observed on the surface of the
earth; and it is clearly not impossible that the
action may be yet more intense and more general.
In speculating on this subject, however, the cau-
tion of Calvin should not be disregarded —‘ Mali
ergu sunt interpretes, qui in argutis speculationi-
bus multum consumunt opere, quum apostolus
totam hance doctrinam ad pias exhortationes ac-
commodet’ (Calvin, Comm. in 2 Det. iii. 10).— |

F. W.G

CONIAH. § [Jxconran.]


COOS (Kés), Cos or Co (now Stan-Co or
Stanchio), a small and fertile island in the Ezean
Sea, near the coast of Caria, in Asia Minor, al-
most between the promontories on which the cities
Cnidns and Halicarnassus were situated. It was
celebrated for its wine, silks, and cotton of a heau-
tiful texture. The island is mentioned in 1 Macc.
xv. 23; Acts xxi. 1.


COPPER (MYAN}). Tubal-cain is recorteu
as the first artificer in brass and iron (Gen. iv.
22). In the time of Solomon, Hiram of Tyre
was celebrated as a worker in brass (1 Kings vii.
14; comp. 2 Chron. ii. 14). To judge tum
Hesiod (Op. et Dies, 134), and Lucret. (v.
1285), the art of working in copper was even
prior to that in iron, probably from its beng
found in larzer masses, and from its requiring less
labour in the process of manufacture. Palestine
abounded in copper (Deut. viii. 9), and David
left behind him an immense quantity of it to be
employed in building the temple (1 Chron. xxii.
3-14), Of copper were made all sorts of vessels
in the Tabernacle and Temple (Lev. vi. 28;
Num. xvi. 39; 2 Chron. iv. 16; Ezr. viii. 27),
weapons, and more especially helmets, armour,
shields, spears, (1 Sam. xvii. 5, 6, 38; 2 Sam.
xxi. 16), also chains (Judg. xvi. 21), and mirrurs
(Exod. xxxviii. 8). The larger vessels were
moulded in founderies, as also the pillas


CORAL.


for architectural ornaments (1 Kings vii.) It
would however appear (1 Kings vii. 14) that the
art of copper-founding was, even in the time of
Solomon, but little known among the Jews, and
was peculiar to foreigners, particularly the Pheeni-
cians. Michaelis (Afos. Recht, iv. 217, 314) ob-
serves, that Moses seems to have given to cop-
per vessels the prefgrence over earthen, and on that
ground endeavours to remove the common pre-
judice against their use for culinary purposes.
From copper, also, money was coined (Matt. x.

CORAL, a hard, cretaceous marine production,
arising from the deposit of calcareous matter by a
ninute polypous animal, in order to form the cell
or polypidom into whose hollows the tenant can
wholly or partially retire. The corals thus pro-
‘luced are of various shapes, most usually branched
like a tree. The masses are often enormous in the
tropical seas, where they top the reefs and cap the
submarine mountains, frequently rising to or near
the surface so as to form what are called coral
islands and coral reefs. These abound in the Red
Sea; from which, most probably, was derived the
coral with which the Hebrews were acquainted ;
but coral is also found in the Meiliterranean. It is
of different colours, white, black, red. The red
kind was anciently, as at present, the most valued,
and was worked into various omaments. Coral is
usually understood to be denoted by the word
MON ramoth, in Job xxviii. 18; Ezek. xxvii.
16; and this interpretation is not unsuitable, al-
though the etymolozy is not well made out, and
the dialects afford little support. The ancient
translators were evidently much perplexed to deter-
mine whether the word 0°3°35 peniném (Jub.xxviii.
18; Prov. iii, 15; viii, 11; xx. 15; xxxi. 10;
Lam. iv. 7) meant corals or pearls. This will
always be doubtful: but the text in Lament. iv.
7, by describing the article as red, suggests a pre-
ference of the former. Winer indeed remarks
(Realworterburh, .0. Korallen), that it is scarcely
credible such a product should have circulated
under two different. names (if ramoth also means
coral): but surely there is no difficulty in con-
ceiving that one word may have denoted coral
generally, while another may have distinguished
that red coral, which was the most esteemed and
the most in use for ornament. :

CORBAN (]29); N. T. KopBav), a Hebrew
word employed in the Hellenistic Greek, just as
the corresponding Greek word 8apoy was em-
yloved in the Rabbinical Hebrew (Buxtorf, Lex,
Rab. col. 579) to designate an oblation of any
kind to God. It occurs only once in the New
Testament (Mark vii. 11), where it is explamed
(as also by Josephus, Antig. 1. 4, c. 4, §4, Contra
Ap.}. 1, § 22) by the word Sapov. There is
sme difficulty in the construction and exact
meaning of this passage and the corresponding
one, Matt. xv. 5. The grammatical difficulty
arises from the sentence being apparently incom-
pe This difficulty our rae re following

za, solve by supplying the words ‘he shall be
hee’ (tnsons erit). Most critics, however, regard
the following verse (Matt. xv. 6, Mark vii. 12)
asthe apodosis of the sentence, the xa) being re-
dundant ‘more Hebreo,’ according to Grotius,
or rather serving to indicate the conclusion (De
Wette, Kurze Erklarung des Ev. Matt. p. 1513
se also Winer, Gram. der N, T. Sprachidioms,


CORINTH. 463


$ 66, p- 537). The more important point, how-
ever, is to ascertain the precise meaning of the
expression xopBay (3 dori Bapor) & day ef cuod
id tae Many interpreters, at the head of
whom stands Beza, supply éor} after the word
xopBay, and suppose that a gift of the property of
the son had actually been made to the service of
God (see Olshausen, Biblischer Commentar. on
Mart. xv. 5). The sense is then, ‘Whatever of
mine might benefit thee is curban, is already de-
dicated to God, and I have therefore no power
over it.’ Others, more correctly, as we think,
supply %orw rather than éor{, and translate, ‘ Be
it corbar. (that is, devoted) whatever of mine
shall profit thee’ (Campbell's translation, see his
note on the passage).  Lightfuot (Hor. Hebr. on
Matt. xv. 5) notices a formula of frequent occur-
rence in the Talmud (in the treatises Nedarim
and Nazir) which seems to be exactly that quoted


by our Lord, Jb M393 NY JDP, * [Be it] cor-
ban, [as to] which I may be profitable to thee.’
He, as well as Grotius, shows that this and similar
formule were not used to signify that the thing
was actually devoted, but was simply intended
to prohibit the use of it from the party to whom
it was thus made corban, as though it were said,
HI give you anything or do anything for you,
may it be as though I gave you that which is de-
voted to God, and may I be accounted perjured
and sacrilegious. This view of the passage cer
tainly gives much greater force to the charge
made by our Lord that the command ‘ Whoso
cuiseth father or mother let him die the death’
was nullified by the tradition. It would, indeed,
seein surprising that such a vow as this (closely
analogous to the modern profanity of imprecating
curses on one’s self if certain conditions be not
fulfilled) should be considered to involve a reli-
gious obligation from which the party could not
be freed even if afterwaids he repented of his
rashness and sin. It appears, however, from
Rabbinical authority that anything thus devoted
was irreclaimable (Grotius, Annotationes in Matt.
xv. 5), and that even the hasty utterance of a
word implying a vow was equivalent to a vow
formally made (Lightfoot, Hor. Hebr.). This,
indeed, seems to be the force of the expression
used in Mark, nad obnérs aplere, k.7.A., ‘ye


suffer hiin no more to do aught for his father or .


his mother.’ A more gtriking instance of the sub-
version of a command of God by the tradition of
men can hardly be conceived.—F. W. G.


CORIANDER. (Gap.]


CORINTH, a Grecian city, placed on the
isthmus which joins Peloponnesus (now called
the Morea) to the continent of Greece. A lofty
rock rises’ above it, on which was the citadel, or
the Acrocorinthus (Livy, xlv. 28). It had two
harbours: Cenchrez, on the eastern side, about
70 stadia distant; and Lechzum, on the modern
Gulf of Lepanto, only 12 stadia from the city
(Strabo, viii. 6). Its earliest name, as given by
Homer, is Ephyre ; and mysterious legends con-
nect it with Lycia, by means of the hero Belle
rophon, to whom a plot of ground was consecrated
in front of the city, close to a cypress grove (Pau-
sanias, ii. 2). Owing to the great difficulty of
weathering Malea, the southern promontory of
Greece, merchandise passed through Corinth from
sea to sea; the city becoming an ennenes for the

a


.


466 CORINTH,


goods of Asia and Italy (Strabo, viii. 6). At the
same time it commanded the traffic hy land from
north to south. An attempt made to dig through
the isthmus was frustrated by the rocky nature of
the soil; at one period, however, they had an
invention for drawing galleys across from sea to
sea on trucks, With such advantages of pa,
Corinth was very early renowned for riches, and
seems to have been made by nature for the capital
of Greece. The numerous colonies which she
sent furth, chiefly to the west and to Sicily, gave
her points of attachment in many parts; and the

d will, which, as a smeecantile state, she care-
ully maintained, made her a valuable link be-
tween the various Greek tribes. The public and
foreign policy of Corinth appears to have been
generally remarkable for ae an] justice
(Herod. and Thucyd. passim) ; and the Isthmian


CORINTHIANS.


games, which were celebrated there every other
year, might have been converted into a national
congress, if the Corinthians had been less peace-
ful and more ambitious. é
When the Achwan league was rallying the
chief powers of southern Greece, Corinth became
its military centre; and as the spirit of freedom
was active in that confederacy, they were certain,
svoner or later, to give the Romans a pretence
for attacking them. The fatal blow fell on Co-
rinth (a.c. 146), when L. Mummius, by order of
the Roman Senate, barbarously destroyed that
beautiful town (Cicero, Verr. i. 21), eminent even
in Greece for painting, sculpture, and all work-


ing in metal and pottery; and as the territory
was given over to the Sicyonians (Strabo, J. ¢.),
we must infer that the whole population was sold


ite slavery,


The Corinth of which we read in the New Tes-
tament was quite a new city, having been rebuilt
and established as a Roman colony, and peopled


with freedmen P ters Rome (Pausanias aud
Strabo, u. s.) by the dictator Cxsar, a little before
his assassination. Although the soil was too
rocky to be fertile, and the territory very. limited,
Corinth again became a great and wealthy city
in a short time, especially as the Roman

consuls made it the seat of government (Acts
xviii.) for southern Greece, which was now called
the province of Achaia. In earlier times Corinth
had been celebrated for the great wealth of its
Temple of Venus, which had a gainful traffic of
a most dishonourable kind with the numerous
merchants resident there—su pplying them with
harlots under the forms of pe hig The same
phenomena, no doubt, reappeared in the later and
Christian age. The little which is said in the
New Testament seems to indicate a wealthy and


luxurious community, prone to impurity of
morals; nevertheless, all Greece was so contami-
nated, that we may easily overcharge the accusa-
tion against Corinth.

The Corinthian Church is remarkable in the
Epistles of the Apostle Paul by the variety of its
spiritual gifts, which seem for the time to have
eclipsed or superseded the office of the elder or
bishop, which in most churches became from the
begiuning so prominent. Very soon, however,
this peculiarity was lost, and the bishops of Co-
rinth take a place co-ordinate to those of other
capital cities. One of them, Dionysius, appears
to have exercised a great influence over many and
distant churches, in the latter part of the second
century (Eusebius, Hist. Eccles, iv. 23).—F. W. N.

CORINTHIANS, EPISTLES TO THE.—
Firsr Epistix. The testimony of Christian an-
tiquity is full and unanimous in ascribing this in-
spired production to the pen of the Apostle Paul


CORINTHIANS:


‘Lardner’s Credibitity. Works, vol. ii. plur. loc. ;
we also Heydenreich, Comment. in priorem D.
Pauli ad Cor. epist. Proleg. p. 30; Schott, Isagoge
in N. T. pp. 236, 239, sqq.), and with this the in-
ternal evidence arising from allusions, undesigned
coincidences, style, and tone of thought, fully
accords. The epistle seems to have been occa-
sioned partly by some intelligence received b
the Apostle conceming the Corinthian churc
from the domestics of Chloe, a pious female con-
pected with that church (i. 11), and, probably,
also from common re (dxovera:, v. i.); and
partly by an epistle which the Corinthians them-
selves had adctressed to the Apostle, asking advice
and instruction on several points ae 1), and
which probably was conveyed to him by Ste-
Fortunatus, and Achaicus (xvi. 17).
Apollos, also, who succeeded the Apostle at Co-
rinth, but who seems to have been with him at the
time this epistle was written (xvi. 12), may have
given him information of the state of things
among the Christians in that city. From these
sources the Apostle had become acquamted with
the painful fact that since he had left Corinth
(Acts xviii. 18) the church in that place had sunk
into a state of great corruption and error. One
me source of this evil state of things, and in
itself an evil of no inferior magnitude, was the
existence of schisms or party divisions in the
church. ¢ Ewery one of you, Paul tells them,
‘sith Lam of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas, and I of Christ’ (i. 12). ‘This has led to
the conclusion that four great parties had arisen
in the church, which boasted of Paul, Apollos,
Peter, and Christ, as their respective heads. By
what peculiarities of sentiment these parties may
be sa sed to have been distinguished from each
other it is not difficult, with the exception of the
to conjecture. The existence in many of
the early churches of @ strong tendency towards
the ingrafting of Judaism upon Christianity is a
fact well known to every reader of the New Tes-
tament; and though the church at Corinth was
fonded by Paul and afterwards instructed by
Apollos, yet it is extremely probable that as in
the churches of Galatia 90 in those of Achaia this
tendency may have been strongly manifested, and
an Party may have arisen in the church at
. inth opposed to the liberal and spiritual sys-
em of Paul, and more inclined to one which
Pa at fettering Christianity with the restric-
eg and outward ritual of the Mosaic dispensa-
from That this party received any countenance
but oe cannot for a moment be supposed ;
auth at they might, for the sake of giving greater
redid to their own doctrines, have made use
tition he, of the grent ‘ peer of the circum-
Y assigning it to their party, appears
Koktoed probable. f The Vehetserit apeotion of
his my to Paul, and their pointed attack upon
. pala to the Apostolic oftlce, would naturally
ue who had heen Paul’s converts and who
ly wel, formed the major part of the church to
pie srg his pretensions and the doctrines of a
Cc and spiritual Christianity which he taught.
'y allied with this party, and in some re-
yea only a sulvlivision of it, was that of
pai ce This distinguished individual was not
Pats ; rod of Paul, but had followed’ up
«aad to Persie at Corinth ina congenial spirit
onious result (iii.5, &c.). Between


CORINTHIANS. 407


the party, therefore, assuming his name and that
ranking itself under the name of the Apostle there
could be no substantial ground of difference.
Perhaps, as Apollos had the advantage of Paul
in mental polish, and especially in facility in
public speaking (Acts xviii. 24; comp. 2 Cor.
x. 10), the sole ground on which his party may
have preferred him was the higher gratification he
affoided by his addresses to their educated taste
than was derived from the simple statements of
the Apostle concerning ‘Christ and him cruci-
fied.’ Thus far all, though almost purely conjec-
tural, is easy and probable; but in relation to the
fourth party—that which said, ‘I am of Christ,’
— it has been found extremely difficult to deter-
mine by what peculiar sentiments they were dis-
tinguished. e simplest hypothesis is that of
Eichhorn (Einleit. iii. 107), Schott (Isagoge in
Nov. Test. p. 233), Pott (Nov. Test. Koppian.
vol. v. part i. p. 25), and others, viz. that this
rty was composed of the better sort in the
church, who stood neutral and did not mingle in
the contentions of the other parties. This opinion
is chiefly based on 1 Cor. iti. 22, 23, where it is
supposed the four parties are alluded to-and that of
Christ alone commended. But this seems a forced
and improbable interpretation of that passage ;
the words dueis 8& Xpiorod being much more na-
turally understood as applying to ail the Corin-
thians, than as describing only a part of them.
This opinion, moreover, hardly tallies with the lan-
guage of the Apostle concerning the Christ-party, in
1 Cor. i. 12, and 2 Cor. x. 7, where he evidently
speaks of them in terms of censure, and as guilty
of dividing Christ. Another hypothesis is that
suggested by Storr (Notitie Historice epistoll. ad
Cor. interpretationi servientes. Opusc. Acad.
vol. ii. p. 242), and which has been followed,
among others, by Hug (Introd. II. p. 371, Eng.
Tr.),, Bertholdt (Eini. s. 3320), and Krause
(PaAMi ad Cor. Epistole Grece. Perpetua an-
not. tllustr. Proleg. p. 35), viz. that the Christ-
party was one which, professing to follow James
and the other brethren of tbe Lord, as its heads,
claimed to itself, in consequence of this relation-
ship, the title of rod Xpiorov, by way of eminence.
To this it has been objected, that had the party in
question designed, by the name they assumed, to
express the relationship of their leader to Jesus
Christ, they would have employed the words of
rod xupiov, not of rod Xpurrob, the former being
more correctly descriptive of a personal, and the
latter of an officéal, relationship. Besides, as
Olshausen remarks, ‘the party of James could
not be precisely distinguished from that of Peter;
both must have been composed of strenuous Jew-
Christians. And, in fine, there is a total absence
of all positive grounds for this hypothesis. . .. .
The mere naming of “the brethren of the Lord”
in 1 Cor. ix. 5, and of James in 1 Cor. xv. 7, can
prove nothing, as this is not in connection with
any strictures on the Christ-party, or indeed on
any party, but entirely incidentally ; and the ex-
pression ywéoxew Xporrdy xara edpxa (2 Cor.
v. 16) refers to something quite different from the
family-relations of the Saviour: it is designed to
contrast the purely human aspect of his existence
with his eternal heavenly essence’ (Biblsche
Comment. bd. iii. abt. 1, 8. 457; Com: raaaetd
Commentary on the Corinthians, vol. i. p.
Eng. Tr). In an able treatise mee appeared
#


ua


468 CORINTHIANS.


in the Tibingen Zeitschrift fir Theologie for
1831, part iv. p. 61, Professor Baur has suggested
that, properly speaking, there were only treo par-
ties in the Coriuthian Church—the Pauline and
the Petrine ; and that, as that of Apollos was a
subdivision. of the former, that of Christ was a
subdivision of the latter. This subdivision, he sup-
es, arose frum the opposition offered by the
Betrine party to Paul, which led some of them to
call in question the right of the latter to the apos-
tleship, aud to claim for themselves, as followers of
Peter, a closer spiritual relationship to the Saviour,
the honour of being the alone genuine and apos-
‘ tolically-designatel disciples of Christ. This opi-
nion is followed by Billroth, and has much in
its favour; but thle remark of Neaniler, that
"according to it the Curist-party would be dis-
criminated from the Petrine only in name, which
is not in keeping with the relation of this party-
appellation to the preceding party-names,’ has
considerable weisht as an objection to it. Nean-
der himself, followed by Olshausen, supposes that
the Christ-party was composed of persons ‘who
repudiated the authority of all these teachers, and
independently of the apostles, sought to construct
for themselves a pure Christianity, out of which
probably they cast everything that too strongly
opposed their philosophical ideas as a mere
fureign addition. From the opposition of Hel-
lenism and Judaism and from the Helleno-phi-
losophical teudency at Corinth, such a party
might easily have arisen. « . . . To such the
Apostles would seem to have mixed too much that
was Jewish with their system, and not to have
presented the doctrines of Christ sufficiently pure.
To Christ alone, therefore, would they professedly
appeal, and out of the materials furnished them
by tradition, they sought, by means of their philo-
sophic criticism, to extract what sbould be the
pure doctrine of Christ’ (Apostol. Zeitalt. 8. 205;
vol. i. p. 273 of Eng. Tr.). The reasoning
of the Apostle in the Ist, 2nd, 12th, 13th, 14th,
and 15th chapters of the Ist Epistle seems
clearly to indicate that some etek hotions as
these had crept into the Church at Corinth;
and, upon the whule, this hypothesis of Nean-
der commends itself to our minds as the one
which is best maintained and most probable.
At the same time, we have seriuus doubts of the
soundness of the assumption on which all these
hypotheses proceed, viz. that there really were in
the Corinthian church sects or parties specifically
distinguished from each other by peculiarities of
doctrinal sentiment. That erroneous doctrines
were entertained by individuals in the church, and
that a schismatical spirit pervaded it, cannot be
questioned ; but that these two stood formally con-
nected with each other may fairly admit of doubt.
Schisms often arise in churches from causes which
have little or nothing to do with diversities of doc-
trinal scutiment among the members; and that
such were the sclisins which disturbed the church
at Corinth appeais to us probable, from the circum-
stance tliat tleexistence of these is condemned by the
Apostle, without reference to any doctrinal errors
out of which they might arise ; whilst, on the other
hand, the doctrinal errors condemned by him are
denounced without reference to their having led
to party strifes. From this we are inclined to the
opinion that the schisms arose merely from quar-
rele among the Corinthians as to the comparative


CORINTHIANS.


excellence of their respective teachere—those whe
had learned of Pau) buasting that he excelled all
others, and the converts of Apollos and Peter ad-
vancing asimilar claim for them, whilst a fourth
party haughtily repudiated all subordinate teach-
ing, and pretended that they derived all their
religious knowledge from the direct teaching of
Christ. The language of the Apostle in the first
four chapters, where alone he speaks directly of
these schisms, and where he resolves their cri-
minality not into their relation to fulse doctrine,
but into their having their source in a disposition
to glory in men, must be regarded as greatly
favouring this view. Comp. also 2 Cor. v. 16.

Besides the schisms and the erroneous opinions
which bad invaded the Church at Corinth, the
Apostle had learned that many immoral and dis-
orderly practices were tolerated among them, and
were in some cases defended by them. A cone
nection of a grossly incestuous character had been
formed by une of the members, and gloried in by
his brethren (v. 1, 2); law-suits before heathen
judges were instituted by one Christian against
another (vi. 1); licentious indulgence was not so
firmly denounced and so carefully avoided as the
purity of Christianity required (vi. 9-20); the
public meetings of the brethren were brought into
disrepute by the women appearing in them un-
veiled (xi. 3-10), and were disturbed by the con-
fused and disorderly manner in which the persons
possessing spiritual gifts chose to exercise them
(xiL-xiv.); and in fine the aydwa, which were
designed to be scenes of love and union, became
occasions for greater contention through the sel-
fishness of the wealthier members, who, instead of
sharing in a common meal with the poorer,
brought each his own repast, and partook of it by
himself, often to excess, while his needy brother
was left to fust (xi. 20-34). The judgment of
the Apostle had also been Jsolicited by the Co-
rinthians concerning the comparative advantages
of the married and the celibate state (vii. 1-40),
as well as, apparently, the duty of Christians
in relation to the use for food, of meat which
had been offered to idols (viii. 1°13). For
the correction of these errors, the remedying of
these disorders, and the solution of these doubts,
this epistle was written by the Apostle. It con-
sists of four parts. The first (i.-iv) is Neigesi to
reclaim the Corinthians from schismatic conten-
tions; the second (v.-vi.) is directed against the
immoralities of the Corinthians; the third (vii.-
xiv.) contains replies to the queries addressed to
Paul by the Corinthians, and strictures upon the
disorders which prevailed in their worship; and
the fourth (xv.-xvi.) contains an elaborate defence
of the Christian doctrine of the resurrection, fol-
lowed in the close of the epistle by some general
instructions, intimations, and greetings.

From an expression of the Apostle in ch. v. 9,
it has been inferred by many that the present was
not the first epistle addressed by Paul to the Co-
rinthians, but that it was preceded by one now
lost. For this opitrion, however, the words in
question aflord a very unsatisfactory basis. They
are as fullows:—&ypaypa imiv ey tip éxirreA],
«.t.A. Now these words must be rendered either
‘I have written to you in ¢his epistle,' or ‘I wrote
to yon in that epistle;’ and our choice between
these (wo renderings will depend partly on gram-
matical and partly on historical grounds, As (be ,


sae FV em De SY


FP py ee ee ee eS ee ee ee ee ee


er eo ee ee


CORINTHIANS.


‘aorist &ypapa may mean either ‘I wrote’ or ‘I
have written,’ nothing can be concluded from it
in either way. It may be doubted, however,
whether, had the Apostle intended to refer to a
former epistle, he would have used the article 77
simply, without adding xporépg; whilst on the
other hand there are cases which clearly show
that had the Apostle intended to refer to the pre-
sent epistle, it was in accordance with his practice
touse the article in the sense of ‘this’ (comp.
4 émoroah Coloss. iv. 16, rhv émor. 1 Thess.
v.27). In support of this conclusion it may be
added, Ist. that the Apostle had really in this epis-
tle given the prohibition to which he refers, viz.,
in the verses immediately preceding that under
Notice; and that his design in the verses which
follow is so to explain that prohibition as to pre-
clude the risk of their supposing that he meant by
it anything else than that in the church they
should not mingle with immoral persons ; 2nd. that
it is not a little strange that the Apostle should,
only in this cursory and incidental manner, refer,
to a circumstance so important in its bearing
psi the case of the Corinthians as his having
already addressed them on their sinful practices;
and 3rd. that had such an epistle ever existed, it
may he supposed that some hint of its existence
would have been found in the records of the pri-
mitive Church, which is not the case. On these
grounds we strungly incline to the opinion that
the present is the first epistle which Paul ad-
dressed to the Corinthians (Bloomfield, Recensio
Synopt. in loc.; Billroth’s Commentary, Eng.
Tr. vol. i. p. 4, note a).
From 2 Cor. xii. 14, and xiii. 1, compared with
2 Cor. ii. 1, and xiii. 2, it appears that before the
writing of that epistle Paul had ticice visited Co-
tinth, and that one of these visits had been after
the Church there had fallen intv an evil state; for
otherwise his visit could not have been described
asone ey Aéwn, and one during which God had
humbled him before them. Did this second visit
to Corinth precede also the writing of the first
epistle? On this point the Acts give us no help, as
he writer is totally silent concerning this second
visit of Paul to Corinth. But we may safely infer
from 2 Cor. i. 15, 16, 23, that Paul had not been
at Corinth between the writing of the first and
second epistles, so that we must place his second
Visit before the writing of the first epistle. When
this second visit tovk place we can only conjec-
ture; but Billroth’s suggestion that it was made
some time during the period of Paul's residence
of three years at Ephesus (Acts xx. 31), perhaps
on the first reception of unpleasant news from
Corinth, is extremely probable. Supposing the
Apostle to have made this short vi-it aud to have
returned to Ephesus, this first epistle may have
been written either in that city or in Macedonia,
through which Paul probab!y journeyed on his
way from Corinth to Ephesus. ‘This fatter is the
traditional opinion (see the addition to ch, xtit.
in some MSS.), and is greatly favoured by the
way in which Paul speaks of Ephesus (1 Cor. xv.
32) as a place in which he Aad 6-en rather than
one in which he teas when writing this epistle.
From the allusion tothe Passover in ch. v. 7, 8,
most have inferred that the epistle was written at
the time of Easter; but this docs not necessarily
follow from the Apostle’s allusion. As to the
year, great diversity of opiniun prevails, but most


cay


CORINTHIANS. 489


are agreed that it was not earlier than 56 nor
later than 59. .

The subscription above referred to intimates
that this epistle was conveyed to Corinth by
Stephanas, Fortunatus, Achaicus, and Timothy,
As respects the last named there is evidently a
mistake, for from ch. xvi. 10, it appears thet
Timothy's visiting Corinth was a thing not cer
tain when this letter was finished, and from
2 Cor. viii. 17, 18, it appears that Timothy did
not visit Corinth till afterwards. Comp. also Acts
xix, 22. As respects the others, this tradition is
probably correct.

Szconp Eristix. Not long after the trans
mission of the first vieme the Apostle left Ephesus
in consequence of the uproar excited against him
by Demetrius the silversmith, and betook himself
to Troas (Acts xix. 23, sq.). Here he expected to
meet Titus with intelligence from Corinth of the
state of things in that church. According to the
common opinion Titus had been sent by Paul to
Corinth, partly to collect money in aid of the
distressed Christians in Palestine, partly to ob-
serve the effect of the Apostle’s first epistle on the
Corinthians; but Billroth, Riickert, and others,
rather suppose him to have been sent before the
writing of the first epistle solely for the former af
these pu , and that he remained in Corinth
till after the reception by the church there of that
epistle, while Bleek (Studien und Kritiken,
Jahrg. 1830, s. 625; comp. Neander's Hist. of
the Apostolic Age, vol. i. p. 312, Eng. Tr.) sug-
gests that Titus may have been despatched with
an epistle nuw lost, and written between the first
and second of those still extant. This hypo-
thesis of a ‘lost epistle’ seems to be the convenient
resuurce of the German critics fur the removal of
all difliculties, but in the absence of any direct
evidence in its support, it cannot, in this case, be
admitted to be worthy of consideration. Billroth’s
hypothesis rests also upon a very unstable basis,
as Neander shows, by whom the common opinion
is espoused and defended (vol. i. p. 312). In this
expectation of meeting Titus at Troas, Paul was
disappointed. He accordingly went into Mace-
donia, where, at length, his desire was gratifi
and the wished-for information obtained (2 Cor.
ii. 13; vii. 15, sq.). :

The intelligence brought by ‘Titus concerning
the church at Corinth was on the whole favourable.
The censures of the former epistle had uced
in their minds a godly sorrow, had awakened in
them a rezard to the proper discipline of the
churen, and had Jed to the exclusion from their
fellowship of the incestuous person. This had ee
wrought on the mind of the latter that he had
repented of his evil courses, and showed such,
cantrition that the Apostle now pities him, and
exhorts the church to resture him to their come
munion (2 Cor. ii. 6-11; vii. 8, sq.). A cordial.
response liad also been given to the appeal that
had been made on behalf of the saints in Pales-
tine (ix. 2), But with all these pleasing symp-
toms there were some of a painful kind. The
anti-Pauline influence in the church bad in-
creased, or at least had become more active; and
thuse who were actuated by it had been seeking
by all means to overturn the authority of the
Apostle, and discredit his claims as an ambas-
sador of Christ.

This intelligence led the Apostle to compose


470 CORN.


his second epistle, in which the language of com-
mendation and love is mingled with that of cen-
sure, and even of threatening. This epistle may
be divided into three sections. In the first Geis)
the Apostle chiefly dwells on the effects produ
by his first epistle and the matters therewith con-
nected. In the second (iv.-ix.) he discourses on
the substance and effects of the religion which he
roclaimed, and turns from this to an appeal on
half of the claims of the poor saints on their
liberality. And in the third (x.-xiii.) he vindi-
cates his own dignity and authority as an apostle
against the parties by whom these were opposed.
The divided state of feeling in the Apostle’s
mind will account sufficiently for the diflerence
of tone perceptible between the earlier aud later
parts of this epistle, without our having recourse
to the arbitrary and capricious hypothesis of
Semler (Dissert. de duplice appendice Ep. ad
Rom. Hal. 1767) and Weber (Prog. de numero
epp. ad Cor. rectius constituendo, Vitem. 1798)
whom Paulus follows, that this epistle has been
extensively interpolated.

Besides the commentaries of Pott, Krause, Hey-
denreich, Billruth, Rickert, and Olshausen, to
which reference has already been made in this
article, that of Emmerling on the Second Enistle
(Ep. Pauli ad Cor. Posterior Greece. Perpet.
Comment. illust. Lips. 1823); that of Barnes
on the First Epistle (New York, 1838, 12mo. ;
Lond. 1841, Svo.); and that of Flatt on both
Epistles ( Vorlesungen ib. dis Br.an d. Corinther.
Tiib. 1827) deserve to be noticed.—W. L, A.

CORMORANT. [Saracu.]

CORN. The word }}7 dagan, which is ren-
dered ‘grain,’ ‘corn,’ and sometimes ‘wheat’ in
the Autinorized Version, is the most general of the
Hebrew terms representing ‘ corn,’ and is more
comprehensive than any word in our language,
seeing that it probably includes not only al] the
proper corn-grains, but also various kinds of pulse
and seeds of plants, which we never comprehend
under the name of § corn’ or even of ¢ grain.’ 37
may, therefore, be taken to represent all the com-
modities which we describe by the different words
com, grain, seeds, pease, beans. Among other

aces in which this word occurs, see Gen. xxvii.

8-37; Num. xviii. 27; Deut. xxviii. 51; Lam.
ii. 12, &e. There is another word, 93 dar, which
denotes any kind of cleansed corn, that is,
eorn purified from the chai! and fit for use (Gen.
xl. 35-49; Prov. xi. 26; Jer. iv. 11; Joel ii.
%4). The same word is more rarely used to de-
scribe corn in a growing state (Ps. Ixv. 13), in
which sense it may be compared with the Arabic


» and the Latin far, The word I3Y sheber,


which is sometimes rendered corn, denotes*in a
general sense ‘ provisions’ or ‘victuals,’ and by
consequence ‘corn,’ as the principal article in all
rovisions (Gen. xlii. 1, 2, 20; Exod. viii. 5;

eh. x. 32, &c.).

The different products coming under the de-
Nomination of corn, are noticed under the usual
heads, as Barixy, Wunat, &c.; their culture,
under Aoricu.Ture; their preparation, under
Brean, Foon, Mitt, &c.

CORNELIUS. The centurion of this name,
whose history occurs in Acts x., most probably be-
longed to the Cornelii, a uoble and distinguished


CORNELIUS.


family at Rome. He is reckoned by Julian the
Apostate as one of the few persons of distinction
sha: embeded Christianity. His station in so-
ciety will appear upon considering that the
Roman soldiers were divided into legions, each
legion into ten cohorts, each cohort into three
bands, and each band into two centuries or hun-
dreds; and that Comelius was a commander of
one of these centuries (éxarovrdpxns), belong-
ing tu the Italic band; so called from its con-
sisting chiefly of Italian soldiers, formed out of
one of the six cohorts granted to the procurators
of Judea, five of which cohorts were stationed at
Cwsarea, the usual residence of the uras
tors (Jahn, Biblische Archdologie, ii. Th., s. 215,
Wien, 1823). The religious position of Corne-
lius, before his interview with Peter, has been the
subject of much debate. On the one side it is
contended, that he waa what is called a proselyte
of the gate, or a Gentile, who, having renounced
idolatry and worshipping the true God, submitted
to the seven (supposed) precepts of Noah, fre-
alte the synagogue, and offered sacrifices by

¢ hands of the priests; but, not having received
circumcision, wa; not reckoned among the Jews.
In support of this opinion it is pleaded that Cor-
nelius is styled goBodpevos roy @edy (a man
fearing God), ver. 2, the usual appellation, it is
alleged, for a proselyte of the gate, as in chap.
xii, 16, 26, and elsewhere ; that he prayed at the
usual Jewish hours of prayer (x. 30), that he
read the Old Testament, because Peter refers him
to the prophets (x. 43), and that he gave much
alms to the Jewish people (x. 2, 22). On the
other side it is answered that the phrases poBov-
pevut Toy Gedy, and the similar phrases ebAaBeis,
and evceBeis, are used respecting any persons im-
hued with reverence towards God (x. 35; Luke i.
50; ii. 25; Col. iii. 22; Rev. xi. 18); that he is
styled by Peter GAAdpuAos (a man of another race
or nation), with whom it was unlawful fora Jew
to associate, whereas the law allowed to foreigners
@ perpetual residence among the Jews, provided
they would renounce idolatry and abstain from
blood (Lev. xvii. 10, 11, 13), and even com-
manded the Jews to love them (Lev. xix. 33, 34);
that they mingled with the Jews in the synagogue
(Acts xiv. 1), and in private life (Luke vii. 3);
that, had Cornelius been a proselyte of the gate,
his conversion to Christianity would not have
occasioned so much surprise to the Jewish Chris-
tians (Acts x. 45), nor would ‘they that were of the
circumcision’ have contended with Peter so much
on his account (xi. 2); that he is expressly classed
among the Gentiles by James (xv. 14), and by
Peter himself, when claiming the honour of having
first preached to the Gentiles (xv. 7); that the
remark of the opposing party at Jerusalem, when
convinced, ‘then hath Ged also to the Gentiles
granted repentance unto life, would have been
inapplicable upon the very principles of those
who assert that Cornelius was a proselyte, since
they argue frum the traditions of mudern Jews,
the most eminent of whom, Maimonides, admits
a@ sincere proselyte to be in a@ state of salvation.
The other arguments, derived from the observance
of the Jewish hours of prayer by Cornelius, and
his acquaintance with he Old Testament, are all
resolvable into a view of his religious position,
which will shortly be stated. The strongest ob-
jection against the supposition that Cornelius was


ve ee


eno PR QAP Re


-


oe


Se ee ae OS ee ee a a ee ee oe ee


CORNELIUS.


r of the arise from the very reason-
able mete a beliae on such distinction existed
in the time of the apostles. Maimonides, indeed,
speaks of it, but the lateness of the period at which
he flourished, a.p. 1160, and the absence of any
scriptural authority, require us to consider his
assertions as referring to a time much later than
that of the apostles. ‘According to my idea,’
says Bishop Tomline, ‘ proselytes were those, and
those only, who took upon themselves the obliga-
tion of the whole Mosaic law, but retained that
name till they were admitted into the congregation
of the Lord, as adopted children, Gentiles were
allowed to worship and offer sacrifices to the
God of Israel in the outer court of the temple ;
and some of them, persuaded of the sole and uni-
tenal sovereiguty of the Lord Jehovah, might
renounce, idolatry without embracing the Mosaic
law; but such persons appear to me never to be
called proselytes in Scripture, or in any ancient
Christian writer’ (Elements of Christian Theology,
vol. i, pp. 266, 267). Dr. Lardner has remarked
that the notion of two sorts of pruselytes is not to
be found in any Christian writer before the four-
teenth ceutury (Works, vol. vi. pp. 522-533, 8vo.
and vol. xi. pp. 313-324. See also Jennings’s
Jewish Antiquities, book i. chap. iii.) The argu-
ments on the other side are ably stated in Towns-
end's Chronological Arrangements of the New
Testament, vol. ii. p. 115, &c. London. On the
whole, the position of Cornelius, in regard to re-
ligion, appears to us to have been in the last class
of persons described by Bishop Tomline, consist-
ing of Gentiles who had so far benefited by their
contact with the Jewish people as to have become
convinced that theirs was the true religion, who
consequently worshipped the true God, were ac-
quainted with the Scriptures of the Old Testa-
ment, most probably in the Greek translation, and
observed several Jewish customs, as, for instance,
their hours of prayer, or anything else that did not
involve an act of special profession. This class
of persuns seems referred to in Acts xiii. 16, where
they are plainly distinguished from the Jewa,
thongh certainly mingled with them. To the
same class is to be referred Candace’s treasurer
(Acts viii, 27, &c.); and in earlier times, the
midwives of Egypt (Exod. i. 17), Rahab (Josh.
vi. 25), Ruth, Araunah the JeLusite (2 Sam. xxiv.
18, &c.), the persons mentioned 1 Kings viii. 41,
42, 43, Naaman (2 Kings v. 16,17). See also
Josephus, Antig. xiv. 7, § 2, and his account
of Alexander the Great guing iuto the temple,
and offering sacrifice to God, according to the
direction of the High Priest, (ibid. xi, 8, § 5);
of Antiochus the Great (ibid. xii. 3, § 3, 4), and
of Ptolemy Philadelphus, (ibid. xii. 2, § 1, &c.).
Under the influence of these facts and arguments,
we regard Cornelius as having been selected of
God to become the firstfruits of the Gentiles.
His character appears suited, as much as possible,
to abate the prejudices of the Jewish converts
agaiust what appeared to them so great an in-
Qovation. It is well observed by Theophylact,
that Cornelius, though neither a Jew nor a Chris-
tian, lived the life of a good Christian. He was
ebeeBhs, influenced by taneous reverence to
God. He practically obeyed the restraints of
religion, fr he feared Qud, and this latter part of
the description is extended to all his family or
household (ver. 2). He was liberal in alms to the


CORNELIUS. a7


Jewish people, which showed his respect for them ;
and he ‘ prayed to God always,’ at all the hours
of prayer observed by the Jewish nation. Such
piety, obedience, faith, and charity, prepared him
for superior attainments and benefits, and secured
to him their bestowment (Ps. xxv. 9; 1. 23;
Matt. xiii. 12; Luke viii. 15; John vii. 17).

The remarkable circumstances under which
these benefits were conferred upon him are too
plainly and forcibly related in Acts x. to require
much comment. While in prayer, at the ninth
hour of the day, he beheld, in waking vision, an
angel of God, who declared that ‘his prayers and
alms had come up for a memorial before God,’
and directed him to send to Joppa for Peter, who
was then abiding ‘at the house of one Simon, a
tanner.’ Cornelius sent accordingly; and when
his messenger had nearly ieacled that place,
Peter was prepared by the symbulical revelations
of a noonday ecstacy or trance, to understand that
nothing which Gud had cleansed was to be regarded
as common or unclean.

It is well remarked by Paley, that the circum-
stances of the two visions are such as to take them
entirely out of the case of momentary miracles,
or of such as may he accounted for by a false per-
ception. ‘The vision might be a dream; the
message could not. Either communication taken
separately might be a delusion; the concurrence
of the two was impossible to happen without a
supernatural cause.’ (Evidences, prop. i. chap. 2).
The inquiries of the messengers from Cornelius
suggested to Peter the application of his vision,
and he readily accompanied them to Joppa, at-
tended by six Jewish brethren, and hesitated not
to enter the house of one whom he, as a Jew,
would regard as unclean. The Apostle waived
the too fervent reverence of Comelius, which,
although usual in the East, was rendered by Ro-
mans only to their gods; and mutual explana-
tions then took place between him and the centu-
rion, After this the Apostle proceeded to address
Cornelius and his assembled friends, and expressed
his conviction that the Gentiles were no longer to
be called unclean, and stated the leading evidence
and chief doctrines of the Gospel. While he was
discoursing, the miraculous gifts of the Holy
Spirit, contrary to the order hitherto observed of
being preceded by baptism and imposition of
hands, fell on his Gentile auditors. Of this fact
Peter and his companions were convinced, for they
heard them speak with tongues, foreign and before
unknown to them, and which Peter and his com-
panions knew to be such by the aid of their own
miraculous gifts, and, under divine impulse,
glorify God as the author of the Gospel. The
Jewish brethren who accompanied Peter were
astonished upon perceiving, by these indubitable
indications, that the Holy Spirit was poured out
upon the Gentiles, as upon themselves at the
beginning (x. 45). Peter, already prepared by
his vision for the event, and remembering that
baptism was by the command of Jesus, associated
with these miraculous endowments, said, ‘Can any
man forbid water that these should be baptized, who
have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? and
yet, agreeably to the apostolic rule of committing
the administration of baptism to others, and, con-
sidering that the consent of the Jewish brethren
would be more explicit if they performed the
duty, he ordered them to baptize Comelius and


472, CORNER-STONE.


his friends, his household, whose acceptance as
Senta a the Christian church had been so
abundantly testified.—J. D. F.

CORNER-STONE. The symbolical title of
‘chief corner stone’ (Af@os Axpoywriaios) is ap-
plied to Christ in Eph. ii. 20, and 1 Pet. ii. 8, 16,
which last passage 1s a quotation from Isa. xxviii.
16, where the Septuagint has the same words for
che Hebrew 13D JIN. There seems no valid rea-
son for distinguishing this from the stone called ‘the
head of the corner’ (xepaA} -ywrlas, Matt. xxi. 42;
which is the Sept. translation of 132 WN in Ps.
exviii. 22), although some contend that the latter
is the top-stone or coping. The Al@os dxpoywr-
aios or ‘ corner-stune’ was a large and massive
stone so formed as when placed at a corner, to
bind tozether two outer walls of anedifice. This
properly makes no part of the foundation, from
which it is distinguished in Jer. li. 56; though,
as the edifice rests thereon, it may be so called.
Sometimes it denotes those massive slabs which,
being placed towards the bottom of any wall,
serve to bind the work together, as in Isa. xxviii,
16. Of these there were often two layers, without
cement or mortar (Bloomfield, Recens. Synop. on
Eph. ii. 20). This explanation will sufliciently
indicate the sense in which the title of ‘ chief
corner-stune ’ is applied to Christ.

COTTON. account of the uncertainty
attending the subject, and the difference of opi-
nion among writiers who have discussed it,
reference was made from Byssus to this article,
in order that we might proceed from a know-
ledge of the article itself to its history in early
ages, and thus endeavour to discover the names by
which it was first known. Cotton is well known
to be a wuol-like substance which envelopes the
seec|s, and is contained within the roundish-pointed
capsule or fruit of the cotton-shrub. Every one
also knows that cotton has, from the earliest ages,
been characteristic of India. Indeed, it has heen
well remarked, that as from early times sheep's wool
has been principally employed for clothing in Pa-
lestine and Syria, in Asia Minor. Grecce, Italy, and
Spain, hemp inthe northern comntries of Europe, and
flax in Egypt, so cottou has always been employed
for the same purpose in India, and silk in China,
Inthe present day, Cotton, by the aid of machinery,
has been manulactured in this country on so ex-
tensive a scale, aud sold at so cheap a rate, as to
have driven the manufacture of India almost
entirely out of the market. But still, until a very
recent period, the calicoes and chintzes of India
forned very extensive articles of commerce from
that country to Europe. For the investigation of
the early history of cotton, we are chiefly indebted
to the earliest notices of this commerce; before
adducing these, however, we may briefly notice
the particular plants and countries from which
cotton is obtained. India possesses two very dis-
tinct species: 1. K. Gossipsum herbaceum of bo-
tanists, of which there are several varieties, some
of which have spread north, and also into the south
of Europe, and into Africa. 2. Gossipium arbo-
reum, or cotton-tree, which is little cultivated on ac-
count of its small produce, but which yields a fine
kind of cotton. This must not be confounded, as
it often is, with the silk-cotton tree, or Bombyx
heptaphylium, which doves not yield a cotton tit
for spinning. Cotton is now chiefly cultivated in
Central India, from whence it is carried to and


COTTON. 6


exported from Broach. It is also largely cultivated
in the districts of the Bombay Presidency, as also
in that of Madras, but less in Bengal, except for
home manufacture, which of course requires a
large supply, where so large a population are all
clothed in cotton. The supplies of cotton which
we hina oe America are obtained from two
entirely distinct species—Gossiptum Barbadense,
of which different. varieties yield the Sea Island,
Upland, Georgian, and the New Orleans cottons;
while G. Peruvianum yields the Brazil, Pernam-
buco, and other South American cottons. These
species are original natives of America.

In the first place we must notice the names by
which cotton is known in the East.—‘ The Euro-
pean names have evidently been derived from
ys guin, kutn, or kootn, which is the most
common Arabic name, though others are assigned
it in that copious language. The other Asiatic
names do not appear to have any connection with
this, or with one another ; as Persian poombet, and
Hindee, the plant (as well as cotton with its seed),
kupas, the cotton rose; Bengalee, kapase, tula,
banga ; Sanscrit, kKarpasec. From the last, the
Hindee and Bengalee have, no doubt, had their
origin; and the resemblance between these and
the term Gossipium, which has been considered
of Egyptian origiu, from being written with so
many of the same consonants, is remarkable’
(Royle, Himal. Botany, p. 86). To these may be
added that the Tamul name of cotton is purtie,
and that at Bombay it is known as kapoos. We
may now proceed to the earliest distinct notice
of the export of cotton goods from India.


236. (Gossipium herbaceum.]


Arrian, who is sup to have been an Egyp-
tian Greek, who lived in the first or second cen-
tury of the Christian era, and who was both a mer-
chant and a navigator, gives, in his Periplus of the
Erythrean Sea, an account of the articles ot com-
merce to be met with at the different ports; and


ae gis cape he ash tea


.


‘
COTTON.


it is to be remarked, that on reaching the ports of
India and Barbarike, cotton cloths of various
Kinds (46évtov) are mentioned as articles of export.
Syrastrene, or Cutch, is described as productng
cotton for ordinary manufacture. From Ozene,
the modern Ougein, Zuddves *Ivd:xal, fine mus-
lins; wBdves ModAdxwas, muslins of the co-
low of melons; ‘Ixavdy xvdaiov d0dnov, a large
quantity of ordinary cottons (Vincent, li.
p 407; al Barygaza, ¢. e. Baroch); d0évoy wax
toy, cottons of all sorts. Both in the Peri-
plusand in the Digest of the Roman Law the
word Kapwados, or Karpasus, occurs, and is trans-
lated ‘tine muslins’ by Dr. Vincent; and there
canbe no doubt that the cloths were manufactured
of cotton then, as they are now, in India. Pliny
mentions cotton in several passages; in one §
which he says, that the inhabitants of Tylos called
their cotton-trees gossympini ; in another he gives
the Indian name, ‘ibt primum carbasis repertis ;’
and in a third he represents cotton to be the
native growth of Egypt, and says that it is called
gossipion. Mr. Yates, in his Textrinum Antiquo-
rum, adduces these passages, but doubts of their
allbeing genuine. There is uo doubt, however,
that cotton was known by its Indian name long
previously, as Mr. Yates himself’ traces it to Sta-
tius, and infers ‘that the Greeks made use of
muslins or calicoes, or at least of cotton cloths of
some kind, which were bronglit from Indiaas early
as 0 years n.c.’ (2.¢. p. 341). Subsequent to the
expedition of Alexander, the Greeks tirst became
well acquainted with the cotton plant. Near-
chus, the admiral of his fleet, reported that there
were in India trees bearing, as it were, flocks or
bunches of wool; that the natives made linen
garments of it, &c. Quintus Curtius, speaking of
the Iudians, says, ‘Corpora a pedes carbaso
velant, soleis pedes, capita linteis _vinciunt.’
Theophrastus, the disciple of Aristotle, says,—
‘The trees from which the Indians make cloths
have a leaf like that of the black mulberry ; but
the whole plant resembles the dog-rose. They
set them in rows so as to look like vines at a dis-
tance.’ In another part of the same book he thus
writes of the island of Tylos—‘ The wool-bearing
trees, which grow abundantly in this island, had
a leaf like that of the vine, but smaller; they
bore no fruit, but the capsule, containing the wool,
was, when closed, about the size ofa quince; when
Tipe, it expanded so as to emit the wool, which
Was woven into cloths, either cheap or of great
value.’ (iii. 106). .
Herodotus, however, gives the earliest notice of
the cotton of India, as he states that the wild trees
in that country bear fleeces as their fruit, surpass-
ing those of sheep in beauty and excellence; aud
that the Indiana use cloth made from those trees.
So the thorax, or cuirass, sent by Amasis, king of
Egypt, to Sparta, ‘was adorned with gold and
Tich fleeces frum trees." This probably refers to
the practice of the Iudians wearing coats, some-,
Nug of the form of trock-coats, which are padded
with cotton, so as often to be sword-proof.
tesias, who resided so long at the Persian court,
and was contemporary with Herodotus, was also
acquainted with Indian wool of trees, as he men-
hous their {awa izdria. That this was meant
to refer to cotton ‘ may bé inferred from the testi-
Tony of Varro, as we find it in Servius (Comm.
mm Virg. din. i, 649): *Ctesias ait in India


COTTON. 473


esse arbores qus lanam ferant’ (Yates, J. c. p.335).
As Herodotus and Ctesias were contem ies,
years 3.c. 400, they are not far removed si the
time when the earliest extra-Indian notice of the
name of cotton occurs, B.c. 519; and that is in
the Book of Esther, i. 6, where the word corre-
sponding to ‘ "in the Authorized Version is
DBD karpas, and which no doubt means cotton
[Karras]. (See Baines’s History of Cotton Ma-
nufacture; Yates's Textrinum Antiquorum, p.
335; Royle, Idlustr. of Himal. Bot., p. 84.)

Having thus traced cotton upwards from the
time of the Periplus of Arrian to that of Hero-
dotus and Ctesias, there is no difficulty in con-
ceiving that its Indian name (karpas) may
have reached the Persjan court of Susa in the
time of Ahasuerus, whose dominions extended to
India, and between which country and Persia there
was constant communication at a much earlier
period. Heeren has clearly shown the course of
the Indian trade, both by caravans from Northen
India, and by boats up the Euphrates, whence
the commodities of India crossed over to Syria
by Tadmor, or Palmyra (2 Chiron. viii. 4). In
like manner there was early communication by
the Red Sea between Egyptand the countriesof the
South. Among these India must be included, from
the various products which reached the West, and
which are described or clearly indicated by Greek
authors, and in the earliest parts of the Bible, as the
present writer has endeavoured to prove in his Essay
on the Antiquity of Hindoo Medicine. Inthetime
of the Periplus of Arrian, it is very evident that
the communication between India and Egypt was
frequent and extensive, and that cotton cloths at
that time formed an article of export from the
latter to the former. That they did so at still
earlier periods we canuot but believe probable ;
for the muslins of India, though stigmatized by
one as only ‘the shaduw of a commodity,’ yet
having early earned for themselves the pvetical
description of ‘ webs of woven air,’ could not have
escaped the scrutiny of those who sought in the
countries of the South for agile wood and almug
trees, and who brought from India cinmamon and
cassia, spikenard and sweet cane, all well-known
products of that far-famed country.

Though it is probable that cotton was imported
into Egypt and known to the Hebrews, it is ex-
tremely difficult to prove the fact. Thus Mr.
Yates, the most recent writer on the subject, is of
opinion, with Celsius and others, that bad, batz,
shesh, and byssos, all mean linen; while Forster,
in his work De Bysso Antiquorum, proved to the
satisfaction of many that shesh and byssus Loth in-
dicate cotton. In this discrepancy it is difficult
to come to @ satisfactory conclusion. From the
time that the mummies of Egypt were found to
be enveloped in pieces and rolls of cloth, different
authors have adduced these as evidence that the
Egyptians were acquainted with cotton. Thus
Rouelle in 1750, and Dr. Forster, with Dr. So-
lander, were of opinion that the cloth was cotton.
So also Blumenbach and others. Previous to the
time of Rouelle, and by sume subsequently, the
cloth was thought to be linen. This question was
settled by J. Thomson, Esq. of Clitheroe, who
obtained a great variety of specimens of mummy-
cloth, and employed Mr. Bauer to examine them
with his excellent microscopes, aided by his uns
rivalled skill in using them. The result was to


474 COTTON.


prove that all the specimens were of linen, and
not of cotton; and there can be no doubt
about the correctness of the text as the ultimate
fibre of cotton is a transparent flattened tube,
without joints, and twisted like a corkscrew;
whilst the fibres of linen and of the various
mummy-cloths were transparent cylinders jointed
Jike a cane, and neither flattened nor spirally
twisted. Hence, as Mr. Thomson concludes his
paper, ‘Herodotus states that the Egyptians
wrapped their dead in cloth of the byssus. It
has been shown that, without exception, every
specimen of mummy-cloth yet examined has

roved to be linen. We owe, therefore, the satis-

ctory establishment of the fact, that the byssus
of the ancients was flax, to the microscope of Mr.
Bauer.’ This might be sup) to have settled
the question for ever; but selini has since
* found the seeds of the cotton-plant in a vessel”
in the tombs of Egypt, and Dr. Bowring has
ascertained that ‘the mummy-cloth of a child
was formed of cotton, and not of linen, as is the
case with adult mummies.’ The question, there-
fore, remains still unsettled. We knew before
that the cultivation of flax and the use of linen
among the Egyptiaus were very general ; and the
doubt was whether they were acquainted with
cotton or not. Cotton is found apparently wild
in Upper Egypt; it is cultivated on the west
coast of Africa, but it has not yet been settled
whether these are indigenous or introduced plants.
If these should be proved to be African plants,
- the production of the above seeds would be easily
accounted for; and cotton might have been cul-
tivated in the remote parts of Egypt without its
being recorded by the earliest writers. That it was
not employed as mummy-cloths for adults might
have arisen from prejudice or some religious
scruple; for we are told that persons were not
allowed to be buried in the woollen cloths which
they wore outside of their linen garments.

The difficulty of ascertaining whether cotton
was known to the Egyptians having been shown
to Le snfliciently great, even when we have such a
substance as mummy-cloth to deal with, it is
hardly necessary to add that it is still more diffi-
cult to say whether it is mentioned in the Scrip-
tures elsewhere than in the Book of Esther, because
we have only the Hebrew names to assist us in
our inquiries; because the same names have
been applied by the ancients, and by writers in
later times, sometimes to cotton and sometimes tu
linen ; and becaues weare unable to ascertain whe-
ther the earlier authors were more precise than their
successors. Thus, fine linen was called 66éyy.
This is considered by Celsius and Fuister to be an
E.syptian word, and to correspond to YON athon
or efhon; which, when ‘put into Greek letters
and with Greek terminations, becomes o@dv and.
o9dvioy’ (Yates, p. 265). But we have seen that
d0dvioy was, in the time of the Periplus, applied
to what must have been cotton goods exported
from Indian ports. Sindon (ow3av) also is thought
to be of Egyptian origin, as Coptic scholars in-
form us that it is found in the modern Shento,
which has the same signification, Although
owbay originally denoted linen, we find it ap-
plied, like 6év7, to cotton-cloth likewise’ (Yates,
Zc. p. 266). Buogos or byssus, until the time of
Forster, was always considered to indicate linen.
Mr. Yates continues to be of this opinion (p. 267),


COVENANTS,


and objects to the argument of Dr. Forster (p. 274).
The passage of Julius Pollux, which states that
Byssus is a kind of flax among the Indiana,
he considers with Celsus to be an incorrect
reading; that, according to the current text,
Pollux only asserts that Blooos is a kind of flax,
without adding that it grew among the In-
dians. With respect to Philostratus, who men-
tions cotton in two passages, he admits that he
uses Bioaos to denote cotton, and says ‘ besides
its proper and original sense, this word was occa-
sionally used, as Alvoy, 40dyn, Sindon, Carbasus,
and many others were, in a looser and more gene-
ral application,’ and considers the evidence of
Philostratus as being of too late an age (the third
century), to decide the original meaning of the
term. But to us it appears equally doubtful
Whether some of the older authors did not use the
same terms in an equally loose manner, for wher-
ever the new product appeared it would be desig-
nated by an old name, as few would be able to
distinguish the material of which a mew or a
fine kind of cloth was made. This looseness of
expression has descended to modern times, as
authors might be cited who, even when writing on
the subject of cotton, sometimes use the incorrect
term of linen. Thus Orme, a writer well ac-
quainted with India, in his Hist. Frag. of the
Mogul Empire, p. 413, says ‘the rigid clumsy
fingers of an European would scarcely be able to
make a piece of canvas with the instruments which
are all that an Indian employs in making a piece of
cambric,’ where he no doubt means muslin, though
using a word which designates a manufacture of
flax. Considering, therefure, that dillerent names
are applied in the Scriptures to the finer kinds of
cloth; that cotton was certainly known in the
time of Esther (a.c. 500); that the term Butg
does uot occur until the bouk of Chronicles, at a
time when the commerce with India was well
established ; and that Byssus was undoubtedly
applied in later times to cotton-cluth; we are not
satisfied that Butz, at least, dues not signify cotton-
cloth in all the passages referred to under Byasus,
as well as those where the word Beéz occurs
[Fax and Suxsa].—J. F. R, 3

COUCH. [Bxp; Sgar.]

COVENANTS. Among other instances of
anthropomorphic forms of speech [AnTHRoPo-
monPHisa] employed in Scripture is the use
of the term cov: nant, to designate the divine
dealings with mankind, or with individuals of the
race. In all such cases, the proper idea of a cove-
nant or mutual contract between parties, each of
which is hound to render certain benetits to the
other, is obviously excluded, and one of a merely
analogical nature substituted in its place. Where
God is one of the parties, and man the other, in a
covenant, all the benefits conferred must be on the
part of the former, and all the obligations sustained
on the part of the latter. Such a definition, there-
fore, of a divine covenant as would imply that both
parties are under conditions to each other is obvi-
uusly incorrect, and incompatible with the relative
position of the parties. Even such a definition as
the following :—‘ Feedus Dei cum hominibus est
promissio bonorum cum conditione,’ which is that
given by Morus (Epitom. Theol. Christ. p. 160), is
objectionable, on the ground of its implying that
the exercise of God's grace to man is
upon something which man has to render to Gud.


COVENANTS.


We should prefer defining God's covenant with
man as B gracious engagement on the part of God
to communicate certain unmerited favours to men,
in connection with a particular constitution or
sytem, through means of which these favours are
tobe enjoyed. Hence in Scripture the covenant of
Ged is called his ‘counsel,’ his ‘oath,’ his ‘ pro-
mie’ (Pa. Ixxxix. 3, 4; cv. 811; Heb. vi.
132; Luke i. 68-75; Gal. iii. 15-18, &c.);
and it is described as consisting wholly in the
gracious bestowal of blessing on men (Is. lix. 21;
Je. xxi. 33, 34). Hence also the application of
the term covenant to designate such fixed arrange-
ments, or laws of nature, as the regular succession
of day and night (Jer. xxxiii. 20), and such reli-
fous institutions as the Sabbath (Exod. xxxi. 16);
circumcision (Gen. xvii. 9, 10) ; the Levitical in-
stitute (Lev. xxvi. 15); and in general any pre-
or ordinance of God (Jer. xxxiv. 13, 14);
such appointments forming part of that system
or arrangement in connection with which the
blessings of God's grace were to be enjoyed. In
sccordance with this is the usage of the verbs
OA, jn, and DW to denote the forming of a
divine covenant with man, all of which indicate
the perfect sovereignty of God in the matter.

The divine covenants were ratified with the
sacrifice of a piacular victim, the design of which
was to show that without an atonement there could
be no communication of blessing from God to
man. Thus when God made a covenant with
Abraham certain victims were slain and divided
into halves, between which a smoking furnace and
abuming lamp, the symbols of the divine pre-
sence, passedl, to indicate the ratification of the
promises conveyed in that covenant to Abraham;
and here it is deserving of notice, as illustrating
the definition of a divine covenant above given,
that the divine glory alone passed between the
pieces; whereas had the covenant been one of
motual stipulation, Abraham also would have
performed the same ceremony (Gen. xv. 1-18;
ef. Rosenmiiller, in loc.). In like mamner, the
Levitical covenant was ratified by sacrifice (Exod.
xxiv. 6-8); and the Apostle expressly affirms, on
this ground, the necessity of the death of Christ,
as the mediator of the new covenant; declaring
that where a covenant is, there also of necessity
must be the death of the appointed victim (Heb,
ix. 16; cf. Macknight, in loc.). With this ac-
cords the etymology of NA, the Hebrew word
for ‘covenant,’ which, by the best lexicographers,

is derived from M3 cecidit, secuit; and the
usage of the phrase M2 ND, fedus secare,
percutere (comp. Gr. Spxia réuvewv).

Of the divine covenants mentioned in Scrip-
tare the first place is due to that which is empha-
tically styled by Jehovah, ‘ My covenant.’ This
is God's gracious engagement to conter salvation
and eternal glory on all who come to him
through Jesus Christ. It is called sometimes ‘ the
everlasting covenant’ (Isa. lv. 3; Heb. xiii. 20),
to distinguish it from those more temporary ar-
Yangements which were confined to particular
individuals or classes; and the second, or neto, or
better covenant, to distinguish it from the Levitical
covenant, which was first in order of time, because
first ratitied by sacritice, and became old, and was
shown to be inferior, because on the appearance of
the Christian dispensation it was muperseded, and
pamed away (Jer. xxxi. 31; Gal. iv. 24; Heb.


CRANE. 7m


vii. 22; viii. 6-13; ix. 15-23; xii. 24). Though
this covenant was not, strictly speaking, ratified
before the death of Christ, the great sacrificial
victim (Heb. xiii. 20), yet it was revealed to the
saints who lived before his advent, and who en-
joyed salvation through the retrospective power of

is death (Rom. iii. 25; Heb. ix. 15). To the
more highly favoured of these God gave specific
assurances of his gracious pu and on such
occasions he was said to establish or make his
covenant with them. Thus he established his
covenant with Noah (Gen. ix. 8, 9); with Abra-
ham (Gen. xvii. 4, 5); and with David (Ps.
Ixxxix. 3,4). These were not distinct covenants,
so much as renewals of the promises of the ever-
lasting covenant, coupled with certain temporal
favours, as types and pledges of the fulfilment of
these promises.

The old or Sinaitic covenant was that given by
God to the Israelites through Moses. It respected
especially the inheritance of the land of Canaan,
and the temporal blessings therewith connected ;
but it stood related to the new covenant, as em-
bodying a typical representation of those great
truths and blessings which the Christian dispensa-
tion unfolds and conveys.

In the system of a certain class of theologians
great importance is attached to what they have
technically called ‘the covenant of works.’” By
this they intend the constitution established by God
with Adam, during the period of his innocence
So far as this phraseology is not understood to
imply that man, even im his sinless state, was
competent to hind Jehovah by any conditions, it
cannot be objected to. It seems also to have the
sanction of one passage of Scripture, viz. Hos. vi.
7, which Montanus, Grotius, Castalio, Burk,
Rosenmiiller, Newcome, Hitzig, and almost all the
best interpreters, agree in rendering thus: ‘ But
they like Adam have transgressed the covenant.”

Theologians have also spoken of ‘the covenant
of redemption,’ by which they mean an engage-
ment entered into between God the Father and
God the Son from all eternity, whereby the former
secured to the latter a certain number of ransomed
sinners, as his church or elect body, and the latter
engaged to become their surety and substitute.
By many the propriety of this doctrine has been
doubted ; but the references to it in Scripture are
of such a kind that it seems unreasonable to refuse
to admit it. With it stand connected the subjects
of election, predestination, the special love of
Christ to his people, and the certain salvation of
all that the Father hath given him.

Sometimes a mere human contract is called
God's covenant, in the sense of involving an
appeal to the Almighty, who, as the Judge of the
whole earth, will hold both parties bound to fulfil
their engagement. Com 1 Sam. xx. 8; Jer.

xxxiv. 18, 19; Ezek. xvii. 18, 19. (Witsius, De
Gconomid Federum; Russell, On the Old
and New Covenants, 2nd edit. 1843).—W.L.A.

CRANE (Isa. xxxviii. 14, Jer. viii. 7) DAO
sus, and 3} ‘agur, occur in these passages as
names of birds, and have been generally considered
as denoting the ‘crane’ and ‘swallow ;’ but trans-
lators are by no means agreed as to the appropria-
tion of these names to the Hebrew terms. Our
version renders sis by ‘crane,’ but Bochart, more
correctly, as we think, decides in favour of ‘swal-
low ;’ while Lather, rejecting both, prefers ‘heron.


N


476 ‘CRANE.


‘Where so much diversity of opinne reigns, it will
be most safe to search for true meaning by
examining the internal evidence furnished by the
texts in: question, the two names occurring in no
other instance. In Isaiah, allusion is made to
the voice of both the species, which is described
by the verb ‘to chatter,’ in accordance, or nearly
so, with all the critical authorities that we have
consulted. In Jeremiah, where both names occur
im the same order, the birds are ted as
‘observing the time of their coming.’ Now, if the


937, [Numidian Crane: Grus Virgo.)


‘octane’ of Europe had been meant by either deno-
mination, the clamorous habits of the ies w
not have heen e: as ‘chattering ;' and it
is most probable that the striking characteristics
of that bird, which are so elegantly and forcibly
displayed in Hesiod and Aristophanes, would have


supplied the lofty diction of prophetical inspira-*


tion with associations of a character still more ex-
alted. ‘Sus’ or ‘Sis’ is the name of a fabulous
long-legged bird in Arabian legends, but it also
indicates the expressive sound of the swallow's
voice; while ‘agur’ is transferred with slight
alteration to the stork, in those northern tongues
which have similarly altered the Chaldee version
(WINS) kurkeya, into kurg and curki (see
Nemnich, s.v. Ardea). The Teutonic Aider,
Dutch Oyevaer, Esthonian Aigr and Argro, there-
fore, support the view that, Agur is a tribal ap-
pellation of one of the great wadigg birds; but
neither the Hebrew text nor the Teutonic names
point to the crane of Europe (Ardea Grus, Linn.,
Grus Cinerea of later ornithologists); since that
pecies has a loud trumpet voice, and therefore

not ‘chatter;’ but especially, because in its
migrations it crosses the Mediterranean into
Africa, and does not appear in Palestine, unless
by accident (driven thither possibly byea western
storm of wind); and, when a troop of cranes
alight under these circumstances, it is only for
&@ moment; they do not give evidence of pur-
posely assembling like the swallow. Thus the few
characteristics indicated might seem to point out
the stork, which does assemble in Syria in
flocks, before its departure, and is not a cla-
morous bird, having little or no voice. But as
the stork is clearly designated by a different ap-
pellation in the original, we must search for
another species as the representative of agur; and
we fortunately find one which completely answers
to the conditions required; for, being neither a
genuine crane, a stork, nor a heron, having a
feeble voice, and striking but distinct manners;
it is remarkable for beauty, numbers, residence,
and periodical arrival and de . The ‘Ardea
virgo’ of Linn. the ‘Grus virgo’ of later writers,


CREATION,
and ‘ Anthropoides virgo’ of some, is the bird, we
have every reason to conclude, intended by ’agur,
though not coming from the north, but from Cen-
tral Africa, down the Nile (the very circumstance


‘which puzzled Rimagal sre , and in the Spring


arriving in Palestine, while troops of them ysroceed
Carpe tee cae Heuston
ian. They are uently found portrayed
bg asa monuments, and the naturalist just
quoted, who saw them on the Nile, afterwards shot
one near Smyrna : they visit the swamp above that
city, and the lake of Tiberias, and depart in the
fall, but do not utter the clangor of the crane, nor
i flight in two columns, forming an acute
angle, the better to cleave the air. is bird is
not more than three feet in length; it is of a
beautiful bluish , with the throat,
and tips of the long hinder feathers and
quills black, and a tuft of delicate white plumes
behind each eye. It has a peculiar dancing walk,
which gave rise to its French denomination of
‘ demoiselle.'—C. H. 8.

CREATION. In the ideas implied ty
this term a subject of vast extent and most pro-
found interest is suggested; at the same time,
one in reference to which but little can be said to
he so certainly known or distinctly understood, as


ould to afford adequate satisfaction to that curiosity


which is so naturally excited in the human mind
with respect to it, and which has evinced itself in
all ages by the discussions, whether of a theo-
logical or of a philosophical nature, which have
so largely ocoupied the attention both of reli-
gious and scientific writers.

In the present article, on a point of so much
importance in Biblical literature, we shall en-
deavour to give as comprehensive a sketch of
existing views as our limits will permit; and to
do this the more satisfactorily we must, in the
first instance, observe the due distinction between
the several branches of the inquiry, and the
attainable sources of knowledge on the subject.
These are, of course, comprised under the two
main heads of reason and revelation. We shall,
in the first instance, offer some elucidations of the
views derived from each of these sources sepa-
rately, and then advert to the degree in which
they bear upon each other, and to the connection
and degree of accordance or discordance between
them, real or apparent: and though, in so doing,
we must necessarily touch upon some points oa
which considerable and even violent controversy
has been called forth, yet we shall endeavour
most strictly to avoid all discussion in a po
lemical spirit, and to confine ourselves to the
dispassionate statement of what appears to be the
best established views of the actual facts.

In the first place, then, the doctrine of reve-
lation on this point, in the most general view, is
chiefly founded on the simple ascription of the
original formation of all things to Divine power,
and on the title of the ‘ Creator’ applied to the
Deity. This is the constant language of bio
of Scripture, both of the Old and New Testa-
ments; and in the meaning of the term ‘create
we must seek the origin of those views which corr
stitute the theological and revealed belief respect
ing the mode in which the world bad its beginning.

The meaning of this word has been commonly
associated with the idea of ‘ making out of
nothing.’ But when we come to inquire moms


FL


.CREATION.


precisely into the subject, we can of course satisfy
ourselves as to the meaning only from an exami-
nation of the origiual phrases.

Now, in the Hebrew Scriptures three distinct
verbs are in different places employed with
teference to the same divine act, viz. N13 create,
MWY make, VW form or fashion: now, though
each of these has its shade of distinction, yet the
best critics understand them as so nearly syno-
nymous that, at least in regard to the idea of
making out of nothing, little or no foundation
for that doctrine can be obtained from the use of
the first of these words. They are used tndif-
fereutly and interchangeably in many passages ;
ase.g. in Isa. xiii. 7, where they all three occur
applied to the same divine act. The Septuagint
renders ND indifferently by woseiy and «rife.
But especially in the accougt of the Creation in
Gen. i. the verbs are used irrespectively in verses
7, 16, 21, 25, &c.; and, comparing Gen. i, 27
and ii. 7, man is said to have been created, yet
he is also said to bave been formed out of the
ground, Again, in the Decalogue (Exod. xx.
UL), the verb is AVY, made, not created. In
Gen. i. the Septuagint has éxofngey throughout.

Yn such a point much weight will be ascribed
to die opinion of Dr. Pusey, professor of Hebrew
at Oxford, who has distinctly stated his view that
the word N73 implies neither positively, on the

ne hand, a formation out of nothing, nor, on the
other, positively a formation out of existing ma-
terials, but that it is absolutely indefinite and
neutral as to either of these conditions (Buck-
land's Bridyewater Treatise, note, p- 22). Thus
he observes that the original expression * let there
be light’ (Gen. i, 3), by no means necessarily
implies that light had never before existed (ibid.
note, 26). Upon the whole, he considers the only
difference between the three verbs to lie in the
degree of force in the expression; N13, create,
being simply the stronger and more emphatic
word to express more forcibly the absolute power
of the Creator.

In the New Testament we have a similar in-
diferent use of the words «ri¢ew and woeiy in a
great number of passages. The former is applied
tw the orivin of the world in Mark xiii. 19, and
to the formation of man in 1 Cor. xi. 9, and in
some other places; but most remarkably in Col.
116. The same word is also applied in a spi-
ritual sense in Eph. ii. 10 and other passages,
in which the figure clearly involves formation out
of what existed befure; as also in Eph. iv. 24,
Col. iii, 10, &c. It manifestly implies pre-
vious materials in Heb. ix. 11, as in the Septua-
gint version of the corresponding passage in
Lev. xvi. 16. But more particularly in Rom.
i. 20, the expression ta yap adpata abrod and
xtigews kécpov Tots Tomuacs yoovpeva, places in
synonym the substantives corresponding to the
verbs ‘create’ and ‘ fashion’ or ‘ form.’ This
Appears to be nearly the whole substance of what
we can collect from the Scriptures, whether
Jewish or Christian, as to the force of the verbal
expressions and the idea implied by the term
* Creation.”

If from the subject of the general idea of
creation we tum to that of the particular mode
in which the ¢ formation’ of existing things
(whether the crude material existed previously or
bot) is represented to have taken we find


CREATION. 471


more extensive and express declarations in various
parts of the Bible. It is not our purpose to far
nish a concordance of texts, nor to introduce
quotations of all that bear upon the subject, any
more than our readers jbsble would look for it.
It will suffice to observe that we have many
general statements of the kind, and one or two
very circumstantial representations. Of the
former kind we may remark that almost all refer
to the attributes and perfections of the Deity
evinced in the work of creation, rather than to
any precise explanation of how it was accom-
plished. The sacred writers also refer largely to
the Divine wild and the announcement of that
will by His word as the immediate agent, as in
Ps. xxxiii. 6, 9, and cxlviii. 5; Rev. iv. 11, and
many other places; and this reference to the
Divine word is considered by many to be in
effect the same with the more direct ascription of
the work of creation to the Divine Adyos in John
i. 3; which again is explicitly referred to the Son
of God in Eph. iii. 9, and Heb. i. 2, 3; and
again, Col. i. 16. It would lead us too far from
our immediate object here to discuss more mi-
nutely the precise doctrinal bearing of the passages
last referred to, and others of similar import; and
our readers will find full information on these
topics under other more appropriate heads. We
will merely observe further, that these general re-
presentations of the creation all agree in speaking
of it in terms of the most unbounded extent and
universality of operation: this is observable in the
last cited texts, and not less pointedly in Acts
xiv. 15, and xvii. 24; Rev. x. 6; besides many
others; but it is to be observed, it is not expressed
that this universal act took place at one and the
same time, nor whether it was tnsfantaneous or
gradual. k

We come next to those Scriptural representa-
tions of the Creation, which are more precise and
circumstantial. Of these the earliest in order of
time is that stated to have been announced by the
Divine voice from Mount Sinai, in the delivery
of the law tothe Israelites (Exod. xx. 11), where
the entire and complete work of Creation is de-
scribed as carried on and ended in six days. The
description pointedly applies to the swhole uni-
verse; and the Great Work was succeeded by a
seventh day, of rest or cessation, implying, that
is, the final perfection of the ess.

When the books of the Old Testament were
afterwards written, the Mosaic history naturally
opened with a general statement to the same effect.
It is well known to be the opinion of some of the
most learned critics, that the book of Geuesis, in
its existing form, is properly a compilation of
more than one ancient document, partiuns of each
being mixed in different parts of the narrative.
Thus the short account of the Creation in Gen.
ii. 4, is considered to have been the commencee
ment of the most ancient record, while the more
expanded and circumstantial account in Gen. i.
and ii. 1-3, was prefixed from a later document,

See Bauer's Theology of the Old Test. p. ll,

ing. Tr. 1838.] But it will not be material to
our present purpose to follow this distinction. We
are principally concerned with the ¢erms of the
description, from whatever source its materials
may have been derived.

The points most important to be noticed are
the following.—The first sentence is taken by


£18 CREATION.


many to stand distinct from what follows, as a
first general announcement, or title, as it were;
then, after a break, the account of the six days’
work is supposed to begin. The description in
the second verse (commonly conveyed by the
term Chaves) is supposed by some connected with
the first verse; by others, with the subsequent,
Either way it positively expresses a state of uni-
versal ruin, disorder, and darkness. Out of
this chaos the divine word evokes light, and, by
degrees, order and organization ; but by several
successive and beautifully appropriate stages, di-
vided into periods called nights and days; in
which first the grander distribution of the inert
materials of the universe into their respective
places occurs, and then, progressively, the stages
of organized existence from the lower up to the
higher forms: until at length the whole is crowned
by the introduction of man, who is constituted
lord of the inferior world, and the spirit of life
breathed into him: — when the majestic scene
closes with the final cessation put to the work in
the Divine rest on the seventh day, and the pro-
nouncing of a peculiar benediction and sanctifi-
cation of it.

On the sublime and unapproachable magnifi-
cence of this description it is not to our present
purpose to dilate; but there is a peculiar character
of unity of design and subordination and connec-
tion of parts observable throughout it, which, in
any human composition, we should instantly refer
to the most exalted poetical genius, and recognize
as marking the most profound skill in the com-
position and invention of the narrative, the dispo-
sition, as it were, of the whole machinery of the
great drama.

Very different is the view which some modern
commentators have beer induced to take of it.
It will neither be necessary nor pleasing to enter
into detailed descriptions of them. But the tol-
lowing very brief sketch of some of them is neces-
sary :—Some do mot make the separation of the
first verse, before alluded to, but, taking the whole
to refer to one single creative process, stretch that

ess out to a vast, and, in fact, unlimited
length of time, by interpreting each of the six
days (though most expressly described as alterna-
tions of day and night) as meaning periods of
thousands or millions of years; and alleging, as
their authority, that in certain parts of the pro-
phetic writings, the term ‘day’ is used for an in-
definitely long period, and that it is said with
God ‘a thousand years are as one day!" When,
however, they come to the seventh day at the
close (which is, nevertheless, obviously spoken of
in the very same terms), they then go back to the
ordinary sense of a natural day.

Others suppose the first verse, or the first two,
to refer to an original formation of all things, the
time, manner, and circumstances of which are
left wholly undetermined. Then, after an in-
definitely long interval, this original universe was
totally overwhelmed and destroyed; and then, in
six natural days, the whole existing world called
into being in its place, in accordance with the
literal terms of the remainder of the narrative.

A different :class of interpreters contend that
the whole account is to be taken together, as in the
Jirst of the instances just stated, but the days
understood literally; the whole however is to be
interpreted as referring to a more remote period


CREATION.


fhan is commonly imagined, aud as not intended
to describe the existing species of plants and ane
mals, but various other species, now extinct, which
have been, by subsequent convulsions of nature,
destroyed, while others have been successively,
by fresh acts of creation, introduced in their place.

We will allude only to one other interpreta-
tion, the most recent which has been proposed,
and which possesses every claim to attention
which can be commanded by piety, learning, and
devotedness to the sole cause of truth on the part
of its author, Dr. J. Pye Smith, whose volume on
the Relations of Scripture to Geology, &c., we
earnestly recommend to the attentive perusal
a}] who wish to acquire a comprehensive know-
ledge of the whole subject, as well as to be en-
lightened by the philosophical views and scrip-
tural eloquence of the venerable and excellent
writer.

His interpretation is briefly of this kind: the
separation of the first verse he adopts as above;
this refers to the original universal creation : and
in the vast undefined interval, an almost un-
limited series of changes in the structure and pro-
ducts of the earth may have taken place. After
this, at a comparatively recent epoch, a small
portion of the earth's surface was brought into a
state of disorder, ruin, and obscuration ; out of
which the creation of the existing species uf things,
with the recall of light, and the restored presence
of the heavenly bodies, took place literally, accord-
ing to the Mosaic narrative, in six natugal days.
All this is supported by profound critical distine-
tions as to the sense of the original words. The
brevity of this sketch we trust will be productive
of no misconception, as we hope all our readers
will satisty themselves out of the original work.

In this cursory review of ditlerent interpreta-
tious we have made a passing allusion to geology,
and the changes which it indicates as having taken
place at remote periods on the earth's surface.
We shall presently recur particularly to this aub-
ject. But it will be evident to most of our
readers that some consideration of these scientific
conclusions has been the main motive which sug-
gested the various interpretations, some few of
which we have mentioned. Our present concern
with them is, however, on purely critical and
philological grounds. And in this point of view,
with the utmost respect for the several authors,
without going into any details of controversy, we
would wish simply to put all such interpretations,
on their own iutrinsic merits, to the judgment of
any perfectly unbiassed inquirer. Yet for our-
selves (without wishing to press any decision), we
must confess they all appear to sugzest senses
which are of a very different nature from any
which the plain tenor of the narrative would
seem almost unavoidably to convey. We cannot
here go into details of verbal criticism: but we
are fully disposed to grant all that may be urged
as to the precise signitication of some of the terms;
which may doubtless, by long established custom
and association, have been commonly received in
senses which a more exact knowledge of the
original language may not warrant. At the same
time we do not think anything of this kind can
materially aflect the broad view of the subject.
We are disposed to look at the narrative as @
whole :—and even allowing the greatest latitude
as to the precise shades of meaning in its particulag


et sare a


e+ RFR BR EBA |


a ae ee


i


CREATION.


features, to ask whether the general impression of
its design can be rationally conceived to fall in
with these views of it? Whether, rather, any
such signification impused on it does not seem to
do palpable violence to its integrity, its distinct-
ness, its majestic sublimity, its special purport,
bearing, and manifest object ?

We will, however, add one general remark
applicable to all such interpretations in a philo-
logical point of view. In attempting to ascer-
tain the true sense of a passage in any ancient
book, we ought surely to decide in our own minds
distinctly what it is at which we aim, whether to
find some sense, to our apprehensions consistent,
and such as the terms of the passage in question
may be made to bear,—or to seek, as well as we
can, what meaning it was the probable intention
of thereriter to convey These two considerations,
it should be observed, though really very distinct,
are too often confounded together; or rather, the
latter is almost wholly lost sight of.

In the case befure us, we cannot help thinking,
there has been generally a great want of attention
to this distinction. Some of the commentators
indeed appear to allow that Moses himself may
have individually intended to convey only that
Meaning which, they seem to confess, appears
upon the face of his narrative, but at the same
time they conceive there was a hidden sense really
designed, accordant with the views they suggest,
and which hag not really been developed till the
present day. The probability of such a doctrine
in general it would be beyond our limits to dis-
cuss. But in reference tothe immediate subject,
We must confess, it appears to us yet more in-
tolved in complexity than the difliculties it is
called in to solve.

Lastly, others have thought that the whole
description must be taken literally as it stands;
but yet, if found contradicted by facts, may, with-
out vielence to its obvivus design and cunstruc-
tiun, be regarded as rather intended for a mythic
poetical composition, or religious apulogue, than
fora matter-of-fact history.

To these points we shall recur; meanwhile. to
follow the order of our discussion, we must here
advert to another question.

The idea of ‘creation,’ as meaning absolutely
‘making out of nothing,’ or calling into existence
that which did not exist before, in the strictest
sense of the terms (as we have seen), is not a doc-
trine of Scripture, but it has been held by many
on the grounds of natural theology, as enhancing
the ideas we form of the divine power, and more
no since the contrary must imply the
beliet' in the eternity and self-existence of matter.
It has hence been a point largely discussed by
those whu have gone into the metaphysical argu-
ments in support of the existence and attributes of

the Deity. Tu maintain the eternity of matter is
held to be the basis of materialism: and the sole
telf-existence of God has been upheld as essential
to our idea of divinity, and the belief ina similar
Quality in matter strenuously objected tu as either
Mvestiug matter with the attributes of Deity, and
thus involving us in Pantheismn, or else derogatory

m the divine perfections so entirely, as to leave
Th a state of epunee differing little from atheism.

ms Dr, S. Clarke has argued at length against
selfexistence of matter, on the ground that

“existence implies necessary existence; and


CREATION. 479


this again implies that it would be contradictory
to suppose the world not to exist; which it does
Not, since we can conceive the possibility of its
non-existence (see Demonstration of the Being
and Attrib. &c., prop. iii.). In general, we
would observe that the abstract belief in a crea-
tion, as a calling into existence of the material
world out of noghing, according to the definition
of the schoolmen, ‘ Dicitur aliquid esse factum de
nihil cum intelligimus esse quidem factum, sed
non ease aliquid unde sit factum' (Anselm,
Monol. c. 8), must he regarded as an opinion
which rests wholly upon arguments of a meta-
physical kind. It must, on the one hand, be dis-
tinguished clearly from the creation spoken of in
the Bible, and, onthe other, from the process by
which the present order of physical existence was
introduced, so faras it may be disclosed to us by
the evidence of physical science. The metaphysical
arguments will of course possess dillerent degrees
of weight to different minds: at all events they
should be most carefully examined. And though
Scripture and nature do not absolutely assert this
view of the matter; yet they offer nothing at vari-
ance with it. :

The creation, or origin, of the world, in a phi-
losophical sense, is a subject which, as might be
expected, has engaged the attention of philosophers
of all classes and sects from the earliest times. To
attempt to give any correct account of the in-
numerable theories and speculations which have
been started on this subject would be beyond our
design; but some few remarks by way of illustra-
tion may be desirable. .

In general, we may observe that of these theories,
many which have passed current as philosophical
speculations have been framed not on purely phi-
losophic grounds, but on a mixture of pliluso-
phical with legendary and fabulous systems
among the heathen writers of antiquity ;—and,
among the moderns, with an attempt to combine
the deductions of physical science with the real
or supposed statements of revelation. All such
speculations appear to us essentially faulty. In
all such inquiries we should preserve a distinct
idea of the ground on which we are proceeding.
In the attempt to mix up considerations of so
very different a nature in one view we shall per-
vert and injure both. Let the inductive conclu-
sions stand on their own ground, and revelation
on its proper evidence, then both will obtain their
proper and distinct authority.

Those theories in earlier times, which were pro-
fessedly based on purely philosophical grounds,
were most frequently of an extremely hypothetical
character. Such were the speculations of most
of the ancient philosophical sects; they rather
sought to make out some plausible system couched
in the technical language of their schools, than
fairly to trace what was really the order of nature,
and follow by the humble but sure path of in-
duction, the actual luws by which she is regu-
lated, and which, when diligently studied, never
fail to lead us on from one step of generalization
to another, until we arrive at the surest conviction
of that universal order and profoundly-regulated
unity and harmony of physical causes, which furm
the irresistible evidence of the all-pervading in-
fluence of the one great moral] cause of the universe.
We will, however, just mention oue or two illus-
trative instances :— >‘


480 CREATION.


Among the ancient philosophers, Plato dis-
tinctly ascribed the formation of all things to
a supreme being, but seems also to have held
the independent existence of matter; that is,
he maintained three principles—God, matter,
idea: the idea being an i: corporeal archetype
existent in the Divine mind, according to which
matter was moulded and fashioned (Plutarch,
De Placitis, i. 3). This doctrine,indeed, seems
to be nearly the same with that of Thales and
Pythagoras, from whom it was probably bor-
rowed. Cicero expressly tells us that ‘ Thales
held water to be the principle of all things;
and God, that mind which fashioned all things
out of water’ (De Nat. Deor. i.). Aristotle
held the pre-existence of matter; and observes,
It is the common opinion of naturalists that
nothing can be made out of nothing ;’ and that
it is impossible that it should be otherwise (Phys.
i. 4. 8). And further: ‘ neither can everything
be made out of everything, but ont of some
subject fitted thereto; as animals and plants out
of their seed’ (/. c.9). Here, indeed, he seems to
be approaching the argument of simple physical
induction, the legitimate result of which ought to
be to remind us of the proper boundaries of all
physica] argument, and to toe that the question
of the original constitution of matter is one which
no such induction can ever sulye. And though
probably they did not view the subject in this
philosophical light, yet some of the fathers of the
Christian Church, in their discussions of these
speculative questions, have expressed the truth in
terms exactly harmonising with the most rigid
modern philosophy. ‘It is impossible,’ says St.
Chrysostom, ‘ for man’s nature by curious inquiry
to penetrate into the workmanship of God’ (In
Gen. doy. B!): and Lactantius observes, ‘His
works are seen with the eyes, but how he made
them, the mind itself cannot see’ (§ 2). There
are those who condemn all such speculations as
evincing but the empty presumption of human
reason: but they do not perceive that the real
fault lies, not in the use of reason, but in the per-
version of it; not in trusting to its guidance, but
in refusing its cautions, and arrogantly imagining
that we can penetrate rezions where the only safe
path of induction is manifestly closed to us.

In modern times there have not been wanting
those who have pursued cosmogonical speculations
on what they considered purely philosophical
grounds: though to the adherents of strict induc-
tive science their philosophical character will ap-
pear to stand on no better ground than the reveries
of the ancients. For the sake of those readers who
may feel interested in such theories, we may just
name some of the most celebrated of these au-
thors :— Buffon, in his Histoire Naturelle; Wolfe,
in his Cosmologia; Holbach, in his Systéme de
la Nature (incorrectly ascribed to Mirabaud or
to Lagrange); and the disciples of Kant, as
Hegel, Oken, and others, among whom the most
pomnen is J. Miller. Asa specimen of the

ind of speculation pursued, we muy briefly state
that his work, Ueber die Entschung der Welt aus
Nichts, is founded on the old maxim, ‘ex nihilo
nihil fit ;’ from whence he deduces the existence
of an original governing power possessing omni-
presence and omniscience. But the production
of a world could only take place in one of two
ways, ‘either in a pantheistical or a spiritual

e


CREATION.


mode ;* that is, the original power might create a
world of which he, or an emanation from him,
is the all-pervading soul, or might part with por-
tions of his own intelligence, which might animate
portions of the creation. Miiller adopts the se-
cond of these, and contends that this distribution
of the divine intelligence is what produces dura-
tion or time: the continued existence of time is
the evidence of the continuance of divine power.
This power (if we have the least idea of the au-
thor’s meaning), by indefinite continuance alone,
becomes concentrated, as it were, in some kind of
effect, which produces, or at least brings together,
a sort of origi al matter or ether, which subse-
quently undergoes changes owing to three prin-
cipal forces or forms of power—attraction, repnl-
sion, and inertia; after which, rotation being
communicated, worlds and systems may result.
But as we cannot pretend to say that from any
statements we have seen we can render the sub-
ject at all more intelligible, we must hope this
specimen may suffice,

If we turn to the more strict and proper investi-
gation of physical science, it will be important to
inquire what amount of testimony with respect to
the origin of the world they may be able to
supply.

he science of astronomy has sometimes been
appealed to as having reference to the probable
origin and antiquity of the solar system; but on
a closer examination the degree of evidence which
it furnishes will be found little more than con-
jectural.

The most recent and complete investigations of
the theory of gravitation have totally excluded all
idea of the action of adventitious causes in sus-
taining or disturbing the system, Its apyarcut
irregularities have been all analyzed and reduced
to calculation, to system, and order, and shown
to be, in fact, but portions of the exact regularity
by which the whole fabric is sustained, and which
recur in a perfectly determinate cycle throngh
determinate periods, though some of them are of
immense length.

All this does not, however, prove that the uni-
verse has existed through those immensely long
periods: astronomical science does not show us
any commencement; but there is no evidence
whatever at variance with it

Observations on the motions of Encke’s comet
have disclosed the high probability of the exist-
ence of a certain extremely rare medium through
the celestial space, which offers a certain resist-
ance to that small comet, itself compused of ex-
tremely rarified matter. This medium, or ether,
must therefore oppose some resistance, bowever
inexpressibl y snail to the aolid planets; and the
result must be, in an inconceivably long period of
time, that they will approach, and finally fall
into, the sun.

Astronomy, then, may point to the termination
of the present order of things. It has been argued,
as a sort of analogous presumption, that that which
will have an end had also a begiurring ; but this,
considered in the light of evidence of creation, is
surely far too slight and inconclusive to be of
much value. Another argument has been some-
times dwelt on to which we must refer rather
more pcan y, This is what is termed ‘the
Nebular Hypothesis, which may be thus very
briefly explained : La Place suggested it (purely


CREATION.


asan Aypothesis), which might give a plausible
representation from analogy of the origin of the
motions of the solar system. In all parts of the
heavens powerful telescopes show us_ star-like
objects which are not, like the other stars, brilliant
luminous points, but extended bodies of compara-
tively little lustre. These are called nedute, and
manifestly appear to be in varius stages of con-
densation, from great diffuseness up to actual
stars, and many of them having within them
points of greater brightness. La Place perceived
an analogy between these and the solar system :
he conceived that our whole system was once in
the state of'a nebula; that ithas undergone gradual
condensation, the sun being the central star; and
that in this process each of the planets also formed
adistinct centre of condensation, while in and by
the process their respective motions were communi-
cated to them, supposing the whole mass to have
had originally impressed upon it a general rotatory
motion, without which, aud the centrifugal force
resulting, all its particles must at once have been
attracted together into one central mass. Thus
other planetary masses would be found revolving
round that centre at difierent distances. As the
couling and consequent condensation advanced,
similar effects on a smaller scale would take
place in each of those planetary masses, until
they furmed solid planets accompanied by rings
or satellites. The resulting motions would be
orbits not much differing from circles, and in
planes not greatly inclined to each other, which
accords generally well enough with the actual
constitution of the solar system.
All this was (a3 we have said) thrown out merely
as a mechanical hypothesis: it does not (as has
been sometimes represented) account for the crea-
tion of the solar system; but merely shows how,
an mechanical suppositions, we may explain its
possible formation, in conformity with more gene-
ral pre-existent laws. So far then as the evidence
of Creation is concerned, it amuunts to this, that
the same evidence which we have of infinite power
and wisdom in the actual adjustment of the exist
ing system, by certain fixed Jaws of inimitable
unty and simplicity, is by prodadility carried a
xep further back into past time; and the suffi-
Gency of the same unvarying principles not only
'o the preservation but to the original arranzement
af the system, may yet more widely extend and
enlarge our notions of the same sublime inferences,
which the contemplation of the system, in its exist-
Bn penis is so transcendently calculated to
teach,

While speaking of astronomical evidence we
must not omit to notice au idea, which often pre-
vails, of some connection between astronomical
*pochs and events on our globe; or, at least, a dis-
pysition to attach importance to coincidences of
tuis hind. ‘Thus some have dwelt upon the cir-
cumstance that by calculation of the motion of
‘ysides of the eartli's orbit, La Place found that the
Wee axis of the orbit coincided with the line of
i eee in the year 4004 nc. [Afec. Cel.
ae ], whic, according to Archbishop Usher's
fe uae the date assigned to the Mosaic Crea-
why Ga. : Hae difficult to see any physical reason
jain ite e obe should be more likely to be brought
dee 4 : esent state, or man placed upon it, un-

‘at particular combination of circumstances
than any other.


CREATION. 481


There is, however, another branch of science
from which information of a more pusitive kind
may be extracted.

In referring to the evidence which Grorocry
may give on the subject of the origin of the world
we must premise, Ist. That the object of this science
is not that of attempting any such discovery : the
testimony which it may afford is but incidental.
Qnd. The science itself is but of very modern ori-
gin, and its researches have as yet been carried but
a little way, compared with what we must reason-
ably expect they will be: yet to that small extent
its foundations have been laid in absolutely deter-
mined facts, and general results, which are real,
settled, inductive truths, which no subsequent in-
vestivations can overthrow; which, in fact, can
only be called in question on grounds which, if true,
must overthrow not only geology, but all induc-
tive science whatever, that is, the whole extent of
human knowledge, and render our reasoning fa-
culties useless, and all philosophy a mere illusion.
3rd. The evidence to which alone we can look on
such a question as the preseut must be restricted
to those portions of the subject which are of this
strictly inductive character, and we must not mix
up with them those conjectural hypotheses (how-
ever just and valuable for their proper purposes )
in which geologists of all schouls occasionally
indulge.

In very briefly stating the general results of this
evidence, which, little as it is, is yet undeniably
certain, we shall, of course, not attempt any thing
like geological discussion, or elementary explana-
tion: we shall presume that the reader is either
moderately acquainted with the elements of the
science, or at least can have recourse to the works
of the most eminent geolovists, in which be will
find ample proof of the assertions we bring for-
ward, which in our narrow limits, of course, pre-
tend to be no more than a recapitulation or
summary of the evidence. For our tacts then we
simply refer the reader to Mr. Lyell’s Principles
of Geology, 4 vols.; his Elements of Geology,
1 vol.; Professor Phillip’s Treatise on Geology
(extracted from the Encyclopedia Britannica) ;
Sir H. De la Beche’s Geological Manual; Dr.
Buckland’s Bridgewater Treatise ; and, for more
general discussion, to Dr. J. Pye Smith's work
before named, and to Professor Powell’s Connexion
of Natural and Divine Truth.

The pursuit of geological inquiry discloses the
evidence and monuments of successive changes
which have occurred im tne state of the carth’s
surface Cincheting under that term the solid por-
tion extending to sume depth below). In the
arreiny4 ty trace these to their causes, sound induc-
tron cocognises the one grard principle of referring
to Tuse woien are bots “tre and ‘sufficient ’ to
expra the ~Lenomena. We cannot find true
causes except in such as are really proved to exist,
and are found by experience to be in operation.
The action of the waters on the land (whether the
continual action of the rivers and the ocean, or
the occasional force of inundations and torrents),
the subterranean force of earthquakes, and the
external operations of volcanoes; the contractions
and expansions which must accompany changes
in the temperature of any considerable thickness
of the earth's crust,; the fractures, flexures, ana
varieties of form which must arise from sub-
terranean upheaving forces ;—these ~ the lixe

I


482 CREATION,


are the real causes to which alone the sound geo-
logist refers.

The accumulation of soil at the bottom of the
waters, the imbedding of animal and vegetable
remains in those depositions, the elevations of por-
tious of the land out of the sea, are operations
really and continually going on, When there-
fore we find fossil remains of organized beings
imbedded in rocks, bearing also marks of'a similar
mode of deposition, we refer to such operations as
those just mentioned as true causes to explain the
phenomena: and numerous series and succes-
sions of such depositions, containing the remains
of species now extinct, and successively, in the
order of deposition, containing fewer of recent and
more of extinct kinds, even to whole general
classes and orders of being, call for the like re-
fereuce to the continued action of similar causes
through periods of countless duration.

Numerous large districts of the earth contain
immense deposits of marine shells, which must
therefore once have formed the bed of the ocean
above which they are now elevate; and as they
exhibit an unbroken level, we infer that they were
gradually elevated without disturbance by simi-
lar slowly-acting subterranean causes, such as
have been shown to produce elevating forces now
gradually raising parts of existing continents,

Again; in other districts we trace the marks
of sudden and violent local inundations at remote
epochs: precisely such inundations have been
known to be produced by submarine volcanic
action. Such ellects may clearly be supposed to
have taken place upon a larger scale where the
phenomena indicate it, but we are still not de-
parting from just analogies.

All the changes of which we have evidence in
past epochs have been manifestly /ocal ; just as
the operation of existing causes is confined to a
series of the like partial and local alterations.
Thus no sound inductive geologist at the present
day can admit anything like a universal simul-
taneous formation, or sudden action, applying at
once to the entire surface of the present dry land.
One small portion after another has been suc-
cessively deposited, elevated, peopled with animal
and vegetable life, again in the course of pro-
foundly-adjusted changes to be obliterated and
overwhelmed, while another has been in pro-
gressive advance.

Just and sober inductive science, applied to
the examination of the actual structure of the
earth's crust, enables us with satisfaction and cer-
tainty to trace the changes which have taken
place on the surface of a globe possessing the
same general nature as the existing earth, and in
the structure and habits of organized beinis ana-
logous to those now inhabiting the world. It
investigates the alterations which have been ef-
fected by physical agents resembling those now
in operation, and in accordance with general
laws the same as those now recognised in the
economy of nature. ut it does not and cannot
rise to the disclosure of what might have occurred
under a different state of things, or owing to the
action of causes of a different order from those
now discovered by physical research. It cannot
show a chaos, or trace the evolution of a world
out of it. It cannot reason upon a supposed state
of universal confusion and ruin, and the imme-
diate reduction of it into order and arrangement.


’


CREATION.


It can investigate the changes of things, but not
their origin. In a word, sound geology will
never aspire to the character of cosmogony. Yet
geology is peculiarly distinguished from other
branches of physical science, in this, that, while
they teach us only the existing order of nature,
it carries us back in time, and shows a period
when the present races of organized beings did
not exist, and by consequence establishes the fact
of their hacing in some aay received a com-
mencement of being, and in truth the occurrence
of many such events ; and these not brought about
at any one marked period, or extending to all
animated nature at once, but by the slow and
gradual introduction of each new species while
yet the older partially remained; and each in
turn thus progressively yielding its place to be
filled up with fresh forms of organization. All
that geology establishes in respect to organized
life is the fact of the gradual origination of new
species, but by no means the particular method
or process by which it was brought about.

It is true there have not been wanting theories
to explain these processes on supposed natural
principles: yet these have not been altogether sa-
tisfactory or free from material objections. Phy-
sical research, indecd, in its nature, cannot bring
us to any distinct conception of what we term an
act of creation. If we consider the simple case
of the introduction of a single species, or even an
individual of a new species, there is an obvious
limit imposed on our speculations. On the other
hand, it is certainly quite open to the physiolo-
gical inquirer to trace, as closely as he can, the
secondary means, if any, as far as the nature of
the case admits, by which itis conceivable that such
changes may have heen brought about or moditied.
Such inquiries may produce no satisfactory re
sults, but certainly it is the only legitimate chan-
nel open to the inductive inquirer, to examine
carefully all the possible effects which different
combinations of natural conditions, as tempera
ture, domestication, crossing of breeds, and the
like, may produce. Theories, indeed, of this kind
have been proposed and carried out by some to
a most singular and preposterous extent, and a
series of transmutations of species imazined which
seem more like the hallucinations of insanity than
the sober deductions of science. Yet the broad
question respecting the immutability of species,
and the abstract possibility of a transiticn from
one into another, of the modifications of interme-
diate races being perpetuated, of new species
being thas eventually inmiroduced, have fairly
formed subjects cf debate among physiologists.
At all events, if natural science ever should be
able to conduct us to any satisfactory knawledze
on such a subject, it can only be by some such
route as this. Butin comparing what may have
ocewred in remote epochs with the analogous
facts of modern observation on the modifications
of species, there is one point most. carefully to be
remembered—the Jimited time durin which ex-
isting operations have been coutemplated—from
which it would be unsafe to argue what may have
taken place in the vast and almost unlimited
periods of past duration,

In those rocks, of whatever date, which are of
igneous origin, or show marks of having under
gone fusion, if organic remains ever existed,
it is clear they must have been destroyed, 50


to 3 fe AA


+


hae


FR


— eee,


“Fi FB


2, FR ee, BE


CREATION.


that we can argue nothing from their non-appear-
ance.

With reference to the present question, it will
be readily apparent that our knowledge of the
subject can go no higher than the evidence of
fossil remains carries us,

In the earliest rock in which any organic
remains have yet been found, these remains are
not those of plants, but of animals, and these
uot absolutely of the dowest kind; and from
this first observed origin of organic life there
is no break in the vast chain of organic deve-
lopment till we reach the existing order of things
—no one geological period, long or short—no
one series of stratified rocks everywhere devoid
of traces of life: the world, once inhabited, has
apparently never, fur any ascertainable period,
been totally despoiled of its living wonders; but
there have been many changes in individual
forms, great alterations in generic assemblages,
entire revolutions in the relative number and de-
velopment of the several classes. ‘The systems
of life have been varied from time to time, to suit
the altered condition of the globe, Lut never ex-
tinguished.

The proportionate number of species has gone
on increasing in the successive generations up
to the multitudes of existing species. The
change in organic structure also has been in
some degree proportioned to the time elapsed ;
but we cannot lay down any distinct priuciple as
to the law by which its progression, its greater or
less complexity or perfection in the scale of exist-
ence, can be decided , though generally we may
say that the higher forms of life are not found till
we come to the more recent strata.

Thronghout the whole we trace one unbroken
continuity of plan and design: different races of
animals and plants have successively arisen as
others disappeared, the disappearance of the one
and the introduction of the other being each co-
incident with changes in the state of the globe.

_ The existing forms of life resemé/e those of
times gone by, as the general aspect of the phy-
sical conditions of the world has always been
analogous; and they differ from them as. the
corlativis of life and physieil couditions aie
strict and necesary: so that all the variations
of these conditions are represented in the phases
of organic structure, while all their general agree-
ments are also represented by the conformity of
the great principles of structure in the creatures of
every geological age, and the often-repeated ana-
logies and parallelisms of series of forms between
different: geological periods, which we find as a
law of nature, when comparing the most distant
Tegions with each other. We are not then in a
different system of nature, properly so called,
frum those which have been created and have
been suffered to pass away before the origin of the
human race; but in an advanced part of the
same system, whose law of progression is fixed,
though from time to time the signification of the
term varies, The full and complete system of
organic life now on the globe includes all the
eflects of sea and land, warmth and cold, divided
regions, and all other things which are the di-
rete causes of nature; and it is no wonder
a ore the present Jand was raised trom the
cep, and the present distinction of natural re-
Bons was produced, there was not the same cx-


,


CREATION. 483


treme variety of natural productions which we
now witness, and which is not without its end in
rendering the globe a more fitting residence for
intellectual beings. .

Looking to the very latest periods to which
Geology refers, we find detached portions of the
surface composed of beds containing remains of
species nearly the same as those now existing ;
and every indication presented by the nature,
form, structure and obvious mode of formation,
deposition, and elevation of these beds, is precisely
similar to what is now found actually going on,
and especially to the results of exactly similar
modes of action which we trace in operations
which have gone on within the period of the exist-
ing order of things. The imbedding of existing
races of animals and plants in ancient peat Logs,
in dried-up lakes, in new-farmed deltas and
shoals, and the destruction of other pertions of the
actual surface and its productions, by the action
of the sea, landslips, and submerzencies; as well
as, above all, the exact identity of the action of
modern earthquakes and volcances with those of
old formations—all attest the unbroken uniform-
ity of the chain of causation which unites the
present state of things with all those varying con-
ditions which we trace in earlier epuchs, and
which have only appeared to some to present so
much more strongly-marked vicissitudes, because
we are apt to crowd those events together in the
perspective, and measnre them too much accord-
ing to our narrow ideas of duration. Thus,
whether we look at these changes in time or in’
space, we find in the one no definite assignable
period at which we can fix any one grand revolu-
tion or distinct era—no one portion of the earth's
surface which we can say was all produced, with
its organized inhabitants, at oue time. All the
epochs of change were gradual; the diflerent orders
of things passed by insensible gradations from one
into another; all parts of the globe were brought
into their present state by small local instalments.

In the tertiary strata (and to some extent in
the older also) it must be borne in mind that the
precise line of demarcation is by no means go
absolute as is often imagined, The broad classi-
fieation into different periods, according as a ma-
jority or a minority of existing species may ap-
pear in the several beds, is, in a great degree,
conventional: e.g. we cannot positively fix on
any one epoch when the meiocene period ended
aud the pleiocene began ; and as those changes or
modes of physical action which produced the
tertiary beds were manilestly of exactly the same
nature as those now ging on upon the. earth's
surface, and as those changes were at least the
accompanying conditions of the extinction of
some species and the introduction or creation of
others, so we can by no means infer that we have
now arrived at a stationary or permanent condi-
tion, whether of unorganized ur of organized exe
istence,

The more the details of the latest geological
phenomena are studied, the less shall we be able
to imagine that there has been, at any compara
tively recent period, a clearly defined epoch at
which what we call the present order of things
was completely and at once established, and a
cessation of all change has occurred; or that
further examples of creative power may not again
take place by the same slow and seine process

1


484 CREATION.


hy which they probably were carried on in past
eras. The more the examination of the most
superficial parts of the earth's surface is extended,
the more evidence is accumulated of partial and
local changes exactly similar to those which dis-
*tinguish the tertiary functions, going on uninter-
ruptedly up to the present time; and it is clearly
contradictory to all principles of inductive
analogy to assert that in the progress of these
changes new modifications of local temperature,
moisture, and other physical conditions, will not,
occur, and that their occurrence will not be ac-
companied by the extinction of races of beings to
which the localities will then be unsuited, and
that fresh instances of providential adaptation, in
the creation of new species, fitted to supply their
places, will not be displayed With regard to
the most material point, the origin of the human
race, the evidence is chiefly negative. It is
positive only thus far: that in the earlier forma-
tion the physical conditions of the globe, and
the nature of the animals which did exist on it,
concur in showing that it would have been im-
possible for the humau race to have been sustained
in life or well-being. In the latter stages of
things there is no such reason why man might not
have existed. But the fact is, no human remains
hace been found. In the tertiary strata the
nearest approach has been the distinct discovery
of remains of the monkey tribe. It is clearly
impossible, then, on geological grounds, to affirm
that human remains may uot be discovered in
the latest tertiary beds, or to place any such
positive limit of antiquity to the possible existence
of the human species. It can only be asserted,
at present, thai, as far as research has yet gone
(1843), it has detected no human remains older
than those deposits which are probably within
the period of history.

As bearing, then, on the subject of creation, or
the origin of lite and organized structures, the
whole evidence which geology furnishes is cer-
tainly irreconcilable with the idea of one simul-
taneous gencral development of organized exist-
ence. It points, indeed, to a commencement of
organized life; but shows that as successive furms
and species of organization from time to time dis-
appeared, NEw forms and NEW specirs WERE
propucsp fo supply their places; that these
changes corresponded to others in the physical
conditions of the globe; but that none of them
were at once universal in extent and simultaneous
in time; lastly, that the human race (probably)
did not come into existence till the period to
which the present state of things belongs.

In oflering this imperfect summary of the
general results derivable from geology which bear
upon the subject of creation, we conceive enough
may have been stated to enable the discerning
reader at once to perceive the nature and extent
of the discrepancy which exists between the
changes, thus incontestably disclosed to us by
the existing monuments of past ages of terrestrial
existence, and the entire character and scope of
the descriptive narrative of the Creation in the
Hebrew Scriptures. We referred to certain in-
terpretations of that narrative which have, in truth,
been framed expressly with the view of attempting
to reconcile the contradiction. After all we have
before said, we shall not think it necessary here to
prese the matter much further on the notice of our


CREATION.


readers: they have before them the materials for
forming their own judgment. We will merely
say for our own parts that we fuil to perceive how
those interpretations can be supported on any
rational basis so as really to explain the discre-
pancy, or eflectually to defend the cause to whose
aid they are summoned, since the main points uf
the discrepancy still remain untouched, viz., that
there are no traces of any such catastrophe as must
be supposed, even over a limited portion of the
earth's surface, subsequent to the lite tertiary
formation ; aud any of the other interpretatious
are absvlutely contradicted by the whole tenor of
the facts in reference to the suddenness and uni-
versality implied in the description, if natural
days are maintained, and in long periods the total
want of correspondence between those periods and
any order of succession which can be made out
from geological evidence.

With regard to the nature and extent of the dis-
crepancy thus disclosed, we would observe, that it
is not a case merely involving the question of the
literal acceptation of a word or a phrase—it is
not a parallel case (e. g.) with that of the inci-
dental scriptural expressions, implying, in their
letter, the motion of the sun, or the existence of a
solid firmament—nor is the difficulty of the
same nature with any sceptical objections to a
supernatural narration; but it is the contradiction
of existing monuments of past events with the
obvious sense of what is recorded as a part of
Divine revelation, in the form of a circumstantial
narrative of the same ‘events. And the discre-
pancy is not one with any theory, or partial dis
covery of science, which is not yet thoroughly
made out, and which future investigations may
modify or set aside; but with broad primary
facts which involve nothing hypothetical, and
which are in reality identitied as the first prin-
ciples of all inductive truth, It is also a circum-
stance which, taken any way, involves a train of
consequences. It is not an isolated dificulty
like that attaching to some single detached point,
which we can pass over and not allow to weigh
against the evidence preponderating on the other
side; but it essentially involves a broad principle,
and must allect, in its consequences, the eutire
view we take of the authority and application of
the Old Testament.

That the existence of a discrepancy or difficulty
of this kind, especially at the first announcement
of those discoveries which disclosed it, should
have been viewed by many with astonishment
and alarm, is no more than might have been
expected. That in the first instance the whole
weight of censure should have been directed
against the science of geology, is what numeruus
and somewhat parallel cases in former times
would have led us to anticipate. It would Le
improper in this place to advert even remotely to
topics of dispute or irritation. We shall merely
observe that, at the present day, a happier spint
seems beginning to prevail. There are few now
who venture upon open expreasions of hostility ;
and this is no doubt from the simple cause that
earnest attention and diligent examination Lave
been called forth: the subject is beginning to be
generally understood; misconception and acri-
mony, alarm and suspicion, have been gradnally
set to rest ; and those who feel most forcibly the
amount and nature of the contradiction are most


CREATION.


ready to confess the unsatisfactory character of
those solutions of it to which we have adverted,
and which rather gloss over and elude the real
difficulty than fairly meet it. The main source
of objection and offence has doubtless been the
ptevalence of certain views of the tenor and de-
sign of the Old Testament, which have by long
custom passed current, among certain classes of
Christians more especially, and in virtue of which
the particular points involved in the narrative of
the creation have come to bear a meaning and
application connected directly with the existing
institutions of religion. On the other hand, a
more careful view of the actual design of the
Hebrew Scriptures may do much towards remov-
-ing this source of embarrassment.
In speaking of the Scripture narrative we have
“already remarked its striking characteristics as a
composition—this of course applies in detail to
the narrative in Genesis; but the brief statement
in the Decalogue preserves also, as far as it goes,
the same features. No reader of the Scriptures,
especially of the Old Testament, can be otherwise
than aware of the entire system which pervades
all its representations, more or less, of adaptation
in the mauner of expression, form of imagery, and
the like, to the apprehensions, the prejudices, and
previous belief of the Jewish people; nay, the
Whole dispensation, in all its parts and institu-
tions, is but one grand exemplification of the
same thing. And this character in it we find
expressly recognised and dwelt upon by our Lord
and his apostles, in addressing that people, as the
very ground of argument for introducing to those
who were then living under the law a better and
more spiritual religion: ‘ Moses, because of the
hardiness of your hearts,’ gave you this precept
(Matt. xix. 8); The law was a schoolmaster to
bring them to Christ’ (Gal. iii. 24)—a scheme
of instruction and education (as it were) suited to
their capacities and accommodated to their appre-
hensions. And not to dwell on instances which
can only be accounted for as adaptations of this
kind, such as the various sanguinary enactments,
the visitation of sin on the posterity of the of-
fender, the toleration of polygamy, the extreme
facility of divorce, and the like. we cannot but
Tecugnise a similar object, as well in the general
anthrupopathisin of the Old Testament, as in
More special instances of many ‘parts of those
Compositions in which poetic imagery, parable,
and apologue were employed ; and _ it is therefore
nothing at variance with the nature or desizn of
that revelation, but rather eminently conformable
to it, to suppose that in other instances similar
forms of nariative may have been adopted in like
manner as the vehicles of religious struction;
still less to admit that they may nave long been
mistaken for historical mitter-of-fact statements.


In the present instance the adaptation to the,


People of Israel was manifestly of the greatest im-
portance, in order to secure their attention to
points of vital moment in connection with the
worship of the one true God, and their renunci-
ation of idolatrous superstition. With this end,
the first great truth with which they were to be
Impressed was the unity, omnipotence, and bene-
ficence of the Creator: but these great doctrines
Were not put before them as abstract philosophical
Propositions, which their narrow and uncultivated


minds would have been wholly incapable of


CREATION. 485


comprehending: they were therefore embodied
and illustrated in a narrative, proceeding step by
step, in a minute detail, to assert, in each indivi-
dual instance, the power and goodness which they
were thus led to recognise in every familiar de-
tail of the natural world, and which could thus
alone be effectually impressed upon their minds.

Another very material object was to remind
them, in like manner, that those very beings,
the animals which formed the objects of the
idolatry of the Egyptians, to which they were so
prone, were in truth but the creatures of the true
God: hence the importance of dwelling, with
minute particularity, on their creation and subor-
dination to man; as well as the express prohi-
bition of worshipping even the images of them, or
so much as making such images. In all this-we
cannot but trace the same wise system of exact
accommodation to the peculiar capacity and
condition of this people, so little advanced at
that time in moral or intellectual cultivation,
and even exhibiting at all times a considerable
national and constitutional incapacity tor higher
views, as the tenor of their alter-history abun-
dantly testilies. To this ‘hard-hearted and stiff
necked generation,’ then, so necessary was the
utmost condescension and adaptation of all in-
stitutions (especially of a religious nature), and
of the langnage and illustrations in which the
communication of religious truths and precepte
was to be made, that we find a reference to this
principle perpetually pressed upon us to interpret
much which otherwise seems singular in their
sacred books, and which, unless so considered, is
almost inevitably liable to be greatly misunder-
stood; and which from want of attention to this
distinction has been, and continually is, misap-
plied, and even made a ground of sceptical objec-
thon,

These remarks refer yet more directly to what
doubtless was the third and chief object in this
representation of the creation—the institution of
the Sabbath. This remarkable observanec—the
peculiar badge of the chosen people, to distinguish
them from all other nations (Exed. xxxi. 13;
Ezek. xx. 12)—was appointed them before the
delivery of the rest of the law (Exod. xvi. 25)
and as the work of creation, with reference to the
ditierent classes of beings, was associated in their
minds with each of the six days, so the Seventh
was identified, in the order of the narrative, with
the entire completion of the work, the Divine
rest and cessation from it, and the solemn sancti-
fication of it pronounced, to consist in a precise
abstinence from any kind of labour by theniselves,
their household, and even cattle. They were
thus led to adhere to this duty by reflections con-
nected with the highest truths impressed under
the most awful sanctions; and the wisdum of the
injunction, not less than the means thus taken to
promote and secure its fulfilment, cannot but the
more fully appear the more we examine the cha-
racter and genius of this singular people, fur
whom it was ordained, and to whose pecuhar con-
dition it was in every way so remarkably adapted.

The narrative. then, of six periods of creation,
followed by a seventh similar period of rest and
blessing, was clearly designed, by adaptation to
their conceptions, to enforce upon the Israelites
the institution of the Sabbath: and in whatever
way its details may be interpreted, it clearly can-


486 CREATION,


got be regarded as an historical statement of a
primeval institution of a sabbath: a supposition
which is, indeej, on other grounds, sutliciently
improbable, though often adupted. But on this
subject we refer the reader to our article ‘ San-
BATH.’

If, then, we would avoid the alternative (other-
wise inevitable) of being compelled to admit
what must amount to impugning the truth of
these portions, at least, of the Old Testament, we
surely are bound to give fuir consideration to the
only suggestion which can set us entirely free
from all the difticulties arising from the geolo-
gical contradiction which does and must exist
against. any conceivable interpretation which re-
tains the assertion of the Aéstorival character of
the details of the narrative, as referring to the dis
tinct transactions of each of the seven periods.

The one grand fact, couched in the general
assertion that all thinzs were created by the sule
power of one Supreme Being, is the whole of the
representation to which an histerical character
can be assigned. As to the particular form in
which the descriptive narrative is conveyed, we
merely affirm that it cannot be history—it may
be poetry.

But there is one consideration further, to which
we must advert in connection with this topic, viz.
that in the repetition which Moses gives of the De-
calogue (Deut. v. 14, 15), the Jatter part of the
fourth connmandmeut relative to the Creation is
omitted, and a different reason for the observance
of the sabbath inserted. This has led some com-
mentators to suppose that in neither case is that
latter clause to be considered as having really
formed a yortion of the commandment as de-
livered from Mount Sinai: but that it was in
both cases added as a sort of comment by Moses
himself. This. if it be so, will manifestly on
reflection be seen to remoye suine portion of the
dilliculty of conceiving the poefical nature of the
description. The Divine command may have
been given simply to the Israelites; and Moses
may have been authorized to recommend and
impress it further by the addition of such topics
as would best coincide with the preconceptions of
popular belief, where it was not at variance with
any real truth of religion.

In regard both to this and many other diffi-
culties of the Old Testament, there has been too
great a proneness to overlook the cousideration of
its original exclusive desiyn of adaptation to the
Purposes of a limited dispensation addressed to
one people only, When we bear this more dis-
tinctly in mind, many of those difficulties are in
a very great degree removed, And this is surely
the true view to be taken of it by Gentile Chris-
tians, to whom it is on/y a guide and instructor
second aud subordinate ta the New Testament—
a dead letter without it; but ‘able to make us
wise unto salvaticn “on ny” through faith which
is in Christ Jesus’ (2 Tim. iii. 15).

Another objection of a very different kiad has
been started with reference to this subject, which
it certainly would not have occurred to us to
notice, had it not really been entertained as a
serious difliculty by many; and so much so as
to have called forth a printed discourse from
so distinguished a person as Dr. Buckland--the
alleged objection, that the existence of death in
the animal world (of which certainly the whole


CREATION.


series of organic remains furnishes uninterrupted
evidence through all epochs) is at variance with
the Scripture doctrine that death was first intro-
duced as the penalty attached to sin in the
instance of Adam's transgression, We can only
say that to us it was a new idea that the inferior
animals were in any way involved in the conse-
quences of man’s obedience or disobedience. To
those who really feel any degree of difficulty on
the subject we can only recommend a perusal of
what Dr. Pye Smith has remarked upon it in his
work Lefore referred to (p. 286, &c.).

We must also add a brief remark on one
further point which has sometimes formed a topic
of controversy, closely connected with the subject
of Creation—the origin of the human race from a
single primeval pair.

Viewed as a question of natural history
simply, all the different races of men are but
varieties of one species; since the physivlogical
distinction of a species is that any of its varieties
are capable of producing a mired offspring which
shall be itself prolific; with the mixture of
species it is not 80. A species, therefore, however
widely spread, aud however distinct its subordi-
nate varieties, may tz theory have originated
from a single pair. Physiology, then, thus far
shows nothing at variance with the belief that the
human species did thus derive its origin.

There may, however, obvivusly be questions of

another kind, such as the existence of local
obstacles, the piobable rate of increase, and the
like, which must influence our belief as to the
Juct. These apparent difliculties, such as the
peopling of America, and of the multitudes of
Islands especially in the midst of the Pacific
Ocean, together with the length of time necessary
for the spread and growth of such immeuse
jolie us us even at very remote epocts must
ave inhabited many large districts, where we
trace remains of high civilization of unknown
antiquity, have induced many to adopt the idea
that thee must have been original creations of
man in many diflerent parts of the globe; and
this, too, subsequently to the Mosaic deluge, if
we are to understand it in a strictly universal
sense [ Deicae).

It secms also incumbent on these who adhere
so strictly to the letter of the Scriptural narrative
to bear in mind that the existence of other races
hesides the family of Adam seems to be almost
unavoidably implied in several particulars of
that narrative. Thus in Gen. iv. 14, Cain com-
plains that when he wanders forth on the earth,
‘every one that tindeth me shall slay me,’ and
accordingly a mark is set upon him, ‘lest any
finding hin should kill him.’ Again (ver. 17),
Cain, going forth with his wife and child only,
built @ cizy, which at least must imply some cole
lected number of persuus. When Cain's wile is
mentioned (ver. 17), it is without the slightest al-
lusion to her origin; and the extraordinary nature
of the vulgar belief on that subject ought certainly
(on all grounds) to be fairly balanced along with
the alleged religious necessity for imagining only
one desceut for the human race. To these may
be added the consideration of the very obscure
passage (Gen. vi. 2, 4) respecting the progeny
* the sons of God’ and ‘ the daughters of men.’

These and other topics, though we can do 20
more than thus brietlys allude to them, must


CRESCENS.


nevertheless be carefully taken into consideration
in whatever opinion we form on the subject. It
is doubtless a question of great difliculty, in
whatever light we view it; but more particularly
© from the connection which it holds in the
minds of many with the doctrine of original sin
asconnected with the fall of Adam. But fora
discussion of so very wide and important a point
we must refer the reader to other heads.—B. P.


CRESCENS (Kpfoxns), an assistant of St.
Paul's, and generally supposed to have been one of
the seventy disciples of Christ. It is alleged in
the Apostolical Constitutions (vii. 46), and by
the fathers of the church, that he preached the
Gospel in Galatia, a fact probably deduced con-
jecturally from the only text (2 Tim. iv. 10)
in which his name occurs. There is a less ancient
tradition (in Sophronius), according to which
Crescens preached, went into Gaul, and became
the founder of the church in Vienne; but it de-
serves no notice, having probably no other founda-
tion than the resemblance of the names Galatia
aud Gallia.


CRETE (Kpfirn), one of the largest islands in
the Mediterranean, now called Candia, and by the
Turks, Kirid. It is 160 miles long, but of very
unequal width—varying frei thirty-five to six
miles. It is situated at the entrance of the Archi-
pelago, having the coast of the Morea to the south-
west, that of Asia Minor to the north-east, and that
of Libya to the south. Great antiquity was
affected by the inhabitants, and it has been =p
posed by some that the island was originally
peopled from Egypt; but this is founded on
the com usion that Crete was the Caphthor of
Deut. ii. 23, &c., and the country of the Philis-
tines, waich seems more than doubtful | CarH-
THorR,;. Surrounded on ,all sides by the sea,
the Cretans were excellent sailors, and their
vessels visited all the neighbouring coasts. The
island was highly prosperous and full of people in
very ancient times: this is indicated by its
‘hundred cities’ alluded to in the epithet éxa-
téuroXs, applied to it by Homer (ii. ii. 649).
The chief glory of the island, however, lay in its

ving produced the legislator Minos, whose insti-
tutions had such important influence in softening
the manners of a barbarous ave, not in Crete only,
but also in Greece, where these institutions were
imitated, The natives were celebrated as archers.
Their character was not of the most favourable
description ; the Cretans or Kretans being, in fact,
one of the three K's agaiust whose unfaithfulness
the Greek proverb was intended as a caution—
Kappadokia, Krete, and Kilikia (tpla xdara
kaxiova, Kawwadoxia, kai Kpftn, cal Kidrckla).
In short, the ancient notices of their character
fully agree with the quotation which St. Paul
ro from ‘ one of their own poets,’ in his

pistle to Titus (i. 12), who had been left in
charge of the Christian church in the island :—
The Cretans are always liars (edoras, eternal
Kars), evil beasts (xax& Onpia, Ang). ¢ brutes’)
slow bellies’ (qaorepes dpyal, gorbellies, bellies
which take long to fill).
ally supposed to have been from Callimachus's
Ga on Jove, 8; but Callimachus was not a

Tetan, and he has only the first words of the
Verse, which Jerome says he borrowed from Epi-


menides, who was of Crete. Ample corroboration


The quotation is usu- -


CRITICISM, BIBLICAL. 48Y


of the description which it gives may be seen ig
the commentators.

Crete is named in 1 Mace. x. 67. But it de
rives its strongest scriptural interest from the cir-
cumstances connected with St. Paul's voyage to
Italy. The vessel in which he sailed, being forced
out of her course by contrary winds, was driven
round the island, instead of keeping the direct
course tov the north of it. In doing this, the
ship first made the promontory of Salmone on
the eastern side of the island, which they passed
with difficulty, and took shelter at a place called
Fair-Haveus, near to which was the city Lasea.
But after spending some time at this place, and
not finding it, as they supposed, sufficiently
secure to winter in, they resolved, contrary to the
advice of St. Paul (the season being far ad-
vanced), to make for Pheenice, a more commo-
dious harbonr on the western part of the island ;
in attempting which they were driven far out of
their course by a furious east wind called Kuro-
clydon, and wrecked on the island of Melita
(Acts xxvii).

CRIMSON. [Purp.e; Scar.et.]

CRISPUS (Kplowos), chief of the Jewish
Synagozue at Corinth (Acts xviii. 8), converted
by St. Paul (1 Cor. i. 14). According to tra-
dition (Constitut. Apost. vii. 46) he was after-
wards bishop of Aégina.

CRITICISM, BIBLICAL. This phrase is
employed in two senses. Some take it to signify
not only the restoration of the text of Scripture
to its original state, but the principles of intere
pretation. This is an extensive and improj
application. The science is strictly occupied
with the cet of the Bible. It is limited to those
principles and operations which enable the reader
to detect and remove corruptions, to decide upon
the genuineness of disputed readings, and to
obtain as nearly as possible the original words of
inspiration. Its legitimate object is to ascertain
the purity or corruption of the text. It judges
whether an alteration has been made in a pas
sage; aud when it discovers any change, it
Jabours to restore the primitive readings that
have been displaced. ‘There are ¢d7ce sources
from which Biblical criticism derives all its aid,
both in detecting the changes made upon the
original text, and in restoring genuine readings.

lst. MSS. or written copies of the Bible.

2nd. Ancient translations into various lan-
guages.

did. The writings and remains of those early
ecclesiastical writers who have quoted the Scrip-
tures.

Some add a fourth, viz., critical conjecture,
but the authority of this we are disinclined for
the most part to allow.

Criticism employs the ample materials fur-
nished by these sources. ‘To attain its end it
must work upon them with skill and discrimi-
nation. They afford wide scope for acutenesa,
sobriety, and learning; and long experience is
necessary mm order that they may be used with
elliciency and success.

The present article will contain a brief his-
torical sketch of Biblical criticism, or a history


‘of the texts of the Old and New Testaments;


the condition in which they have been at dif-
ferent periods; the evidences on which our knows
ledge of their purity or corruption rests, and the


468 CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


Giief attempts that have been made to rectify or
amend them. A history of criticism must de-
scribe the various stages and forms through which
the texts have passed. It will be expedient to
reserye an enumeration of the causes which gave
rise to various readings to a future article [Va-
grovs Reapines], and, on the present occasion,
to detail the phases which the Hebrew and Greek
texts of the Old and New Testaments have pre-
sented both in their unprinted and printed state,
in connection with the labours of scholars to
whom such texts presented an object of inter-
esting attention and diligent inquiry.

We shall commence with the text of the Old
Testament. There are four marked periods in
the history of the Hebrew text.

1. That period in the history of the unprinted
tert which preceded the closing of the canon.—
Of this we know nothing except what is contained
in Scripture itself. The Jews bestowed much
care on their sacred books. They were accus-
tomed to hold them in great veneration even in
the darkest times of national apostacy from Je-
hovah. How often the separate buoks were trans-
cribed, or with what degree of correctness, it is
impossible to tell. Many German critics sup-
pose that the Hebrew text met with very un-
favourable treatment; that it was early subjected
to the carelessness of transcribers and ofticious
critics. Hence they assume that it suffered great
alteration and corruption. Differences, however,
between parallel sections do not prove what
Neologists adduce them to demonstrate. They
show rather the genuineness and integrity of the
books in which they occur. Had such para-
graphs exactly harmonized, we might have sus-
pected design or collusion; but their variations
discover the artlessness of the writers. We dis-
agree with Eichhorn, Bauer, Gesenius, De Wette,
and others, who have given lists of parallel
passages in some bovks in order to show that
the text was early exposed to extensive altera-
tions.

The most important particular in this part of
the history is the Samaritan recension of the
Pentateuch (Pentarevcu]. This edition (if
80 it may be called) of the Pentateuch is indeed
uncritical in its character. While we freely
acquit the Jews of tampering with the text of
the Mosaic bouks, the Samaritans cannot be so
readily exonerated from the imputation. As far
as the latter are concerned, we are compelled
to believe, that the words of the Most High were
not always treated by them with sacred respect.
Additions, alterations, and transpositions, are
quite apparent in their copy of the Pentateuch.
A close alliance between the text which lies at
the basis of the Septuagint Version and that of
the Samaritan Pentateuch has been always no-
ticed. Hence some think that they flowed from
a common recension. One thing is certain, that
the Seventy agree with the Samaritan in about
2000 places in opposition to the Jewish text. In
other books, too, of the Old Testament, besides
the five books of Moses, the Seventy follow a
recension of the text considerably different from
the Jewish... Thus in Jeremiah and Daniel we
find a different arrangement of sections, as well
as adiversity in single passages. The books of
Job and Proverbs present a similar disarrange-
ment and alteration, which must be put down to


CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


the account of the Alexandrian Jews and Greek
translators. Far different was the conduct of the
Palestinian Jews in the treatment of the sacred
books. They were very scrupulous in guarding
the text from innovation, althongh it is impossible
that they could have preserved it from all cor-
Tuption.
crept into ditferent copies were rendered apparent
at the time when the canon was form We
believe with Hiivernick (Kinlettung in das Alte
Testament, p. 49) that ‘Ezra, in unison with
other distinguished men of his time, completed
the collection of the sacred writings.’ He revised
the various books, corrected inaccuracies that bad
crept into them, and rendered the Old Testament
text perfectly free from error. Thus ‘a correct
and genuine copy was furnished under the
sanction of Heaven. Ezra, Nehemiah, and those
with whom he was associated, were infallibly
guided in the work of completing the canon.

2. From the establishment of the canon to the
completion of the Talmud, i.e. the commence-
ment of the sixth century after Christ.—The
Targumists Onkelos and Jonathan closely agree
with the Masoretic text. The Greek translations
of Aquila, Symmachus, and Theodotion, belong-
ing to the second century, deviate from the form
of the text afterwards called the Masoretic much
less than the Seventy. The Hebrew column of
Origen’s Hexapla presents a text allied to the
Masoretic recension. Jerome's Latin version,
made in the fourth century, is conformed to the
same Hebrew original. In the two Gemaras,
viz. the Jerusalem and the Babylonian, belonging
to the fourth and sixth centuries respectively, we
discern many traces of critical skill applied to
the preservation of a pure text. Different read-
ings in MSS. are mentioned, precepts are given
respecting Biblical calligraphy, and true readings
are restored. By far the most important fact
which they present is the adducement of classes
of critical corrections made at an earlier period,
and which Morinus (Lrercitationes Biblica,
p. 408) justly calls the fragments or vestiges of
recensions. These are—({1) D'IDID Woy A-
latio scribarum. (2) DDD npn Correctio
scribarum. (3) Puncta extraordinaria. (A)
ana Nd) ip K'ri v'lo K'thib. (5) KV IND
WP A'thib v'lo K’ri. (6) The Talmud also men-
tions different readings which the Masoretes call
INI MP Kiri uk thib,

The writings of Jerome afford evidence, that,
in the fourth century, the Hebrew text was
without the vowel-points, and even the diacritie
signs.

3. From the sixth century, in which the Tal-
mud tcas completed, to the invention of printing.
—The leaned Jews, especially those at Tiberias,
where there was a famous school till the eleventh
century, continned to occupy themselves wi
the Hebrew langnage and the criticism of the
Old Testament. The observations of preceding
Rahbis were enlarged, new remarks were pet,
and the vowel-system was invented, the origin
which can hardly be placed earlier than ag
sixth century. The name Masora has ustally,
been applied to that grammatico-historical Hi
dition, which, having been handed down ora y
for some centuries, became afterwards 0 eX
tensive as to demand its committal to writing


But whatever errors or mistakes had -


—a ee NS RP Ree eee Te ee ee


> omer © Sere


Se ee ts eee SO SR


“CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


Much of what is contained in the Masora exists
also in the Talmud. Part of it, however, is
older than the Talmud, though not reduced to
its present form till a much later period. The
various observations comprised in the Masora
were at first written in separate books, of which
there are MSS extant. Afterwards they were
put in the margin of the Bible MSS.

When we speak of the Masoretic recension of
the text, it is not meant that the Masoretes gave
acertain form to the text itself, or that they
undertook and executed a new revision. They
made the textus receptus of that day the basis of
their remarks, and gave their sentiments con-
ceming it, Had the text been altered in every
case where they recommend; had it been made
conformable to their ideas of what it should be,
it would have been appropriate to have called it
the Masoretic recension. The designation, how-
ever, though not applicable in strictness, is cus
tomary.

The most important part of the Masora consists
of the marginal, readings or K'ris, which the
Masoretes always preferred to the textual, and
which the later Jews have adopted. The K’ris
are critical, grammatical, orthographical, expla-
natory, and euphemistic. It has been a subject
of dispute among scholars from what source
the Masoretes derived the K'ris. It is highly
Probable, that they were generally taken from
MSS. and tradition, though they may have been
in part the offspring of conjecture. It is but
reasonable to suppose that these scholars some-
times gave the result of their own judgment. In
addition to the Kris the Masora contains an
enlargement of critical remarks found in the
Talmud. Besides, the verses, words, and conso-
nants of the different books of the Bible are
counted, a task unparalleled in point of minute
labour, though comparatively unprofitable.

The application of the Masora in the criticism
of the Old Testament is difficult, because its text
has fallen into great disorder. It was printed for
the first time in the first Rabbinical Bible of
Bomberg, superintended by Felix Pratensis.
Tn the second Rabbinical Bible of Bomberg,
R. Jacob Ben Chayim bestowed considerable
care upon the printing of the Masora, At the
end of this second Rabbinical Bible there is
a collection of oriental and twestern readings,
or, in other words, Babylonian and Palestinian,
communicated by the editor, and the result of an
ancient revision of the text. The number is
about 216. Of the sources from which the col-

lection was drawn we are eutirely ignorant.
Judging by the contents, it must be older than
many observations made by the Masoretes. It
should probably be referred to a period anterior
to the introduction of the vowel system, as it
contains no allusion to the vowels. It is certainly
of considerable value, and proves that the oriental
no less than the western Jews had always at-
tended to, the state of the sacred text.

_ In addition to this list, we meet with another
in the Rabbinical Bibles of Bomberg and Buxtorf,
and in the sixth volume of the London Polyglott,
longing to the eleventh century. It owes its
Noe to the labours of Ben Asher and Ben
in prial, the Tespective presidents of academies
Pobre and Babylon. These readings, with
gle exception, refer to the vowels and accents,


CRITICISM, BIBLICAL. 489


The vowel system had, therefore, been completed
when this collection was made.

Here the history of the unprinted text may be
said to close, The old aeoeellel copies perished,
New ones furnished with points and accents came
into use. But although the ancient copies are
now irrecoverably lost, there is no reason for sup-
posing that their preservation to the present time
would have had any essential influence in altering
the form of the text. The text appears to have
been established and settled when the punc-
tuation-system was completed. The labours of
the Masoretic doctors have been of substantial
benefit in maintaining its integrity.

’ 4. From the invention of printing to the
present time.—There are three early editions from
which all others have been taken. 1. That pub-
lished at Soncino, a.p. 1488, which was the first
entire copy of the Hebrew Scriptures ever printed.
The text is furnished with the points and accents,
but we are ignorant of the MSS. employed by
the editor. 2. The second great edition was that
in the Complutensian Polyglott, 1514-17, taken
from seven MSS. 3. The third was the second
Rabbinical Bible of Bomberg, superintended b
R. Jacob Ben Chayim, Venice, 1525, 6 vols. fol.
The text is fyrmed chiefly after the Masora, but
Spanish MSS. were used. Almost all modern
printed copies have been taken from it,

The Antwerp Polyglott has a text componnded
of those in the second and third recenstons just
mentioned.

Among the editions furnished with a critical
apparatus, that of Buxtorf, published at Basel,
1619, occupies a high place. It contains the
commentaries of the Jewish Rabbis, Jarchi, Aben-
esra, Kimchi, Levi Ben Gerson, and Saadias
Haggaon. The appendix is occupied with the
Jerusalem Targum, the great Masora corrected
and amended, with the various readings of Ben
Asher and Ben ‘Naphtali.

The principal editions with various readings
are those of Seb. Miinster, Jablonski, Van der
Hooght, J. H. Michaelis, C. F. Houbigant, and
Benjamin Kennicott.

Miinster’s edition appeared at Basel in 1536,
2 vols. 4to. The text is supposed to be founded
upon that of Brescia, 1494, dto., which resolves
itself into the Soncino edition of 1483.

Jablonski'’s edition was published at Berlin in
1699, 8vo., and again at the same place in 1712,
12mo. It is founded upon the best preceding
editions, but chiefly the second edition of Leusden
(1667). The editor also collated various MSS.
The text is remarkably accurate.

Van der Hooght's edition appeared at Amster-
dam, 1705. The text is taken from Athias’
(1661 and 1667). The Masoretic readings are
given in the margin; and at the end are collected
the various readings of the editions of Bumberg,
Plantin, Athias, and others.

The edition published by J. H. Michaelis in
1720, is accompanied with the readings of twenty-
four editions which the editor examined, besides
those of five MSS. in the library at Erfurdt.
There is a want of accuracy in his collations,

In 1753, C. F. Houbigant published a new
edition in folio. The text is that of Van de
Hooght, without the points. In the margin of
the Pentatench, the Samaritan readings are added,
For it he collated, but hastily, twelve MSS. He


490 CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


has been justly blamed for his rash indulgence in
conjectural emendation.

r. Kennicott’s edition, which is the most
important hitherto published, appeared at Oxford
—the first volume in 1776, the second in 1780.
The number of MSS. collated by himself and his
associates, the chief of whom was Profes:or Bruns
of Helmstadt, amounted to 694. In addition to
his collation of MSS. and printed editions, he
followed the example of various editors of the
Greek Testament in having recourse tv Rabbinical
writings, especially the Talmud. He has given
quotations from Jewish writers. The immense
mass of various readings here collected is unim-
portant. It serves, however, to show that, under
the influence of the Masora, the Hebrew text has
attained a considerable degree of unifurmity in
all existing MSS.

In 1784-88, John Beard de Rossi published
at Parma, in 4 vols. dto.. an important supple
ment to Kennicott’s collection, These various
readings were taken from 88 MSS. used by
Kennicott, and collated anew by De Rossi, from
479 in his own possession and 110 in other hands,
from many editions and Samaritan MSS., and
also from ancient versions.

In 1793, Doederlein and Meisner published at
Leipzig an edition intended in sume measure to
supply the want of the extensive cullations of
Kennicott and De Rossi. It contains the most
important readings. The edition of Jahn, pub-
lished at Vienna in 1806, is very valuable and
convenient.

The most accurate edition of the Masoretic
text is that of Van der Hooght as lately edited by
Hahn at Leipzig, and stereotyped. The text of
Van der Hooght may now be reckoned the textus
receptus. (For accurate and complete lists of the
printed editions of the Hebrew Bible, the reader
is referred to Le Long's Aibliotheca, edited by
Masch; and to Rosenmiiller’s Handbuch fiir die

- Literatir der biblischen Kritik und Exegese,
i. RP. 189-277.)

otwithstanding all these edifions, something
is still wanted. In the best of them there are
passages requiring emendation. It is curious to
observe how contradictions are allowed to remain
on the face of the Old Testament history. It
may be that the Masora has produced sv great
uniformity, as that extaut MSS. do not sanction
any departure trom the present text ; but where

ges are manifestly corrupt, it is time that
they should be rectified. The criticism of the
Hebrew Bible is still behind that of the Gieck
Testament. The latter was earlier begun, and
has been more vigorously prosecuted. We remain
nearly in the same state with regard to the Old
Testament text in which Kennicott and De Rossi
left us, and it is time that sume advance shuuld
be made in this department.,


We shall now give a brief history of the New
Testament text in its wiprinfed and printed form.
The criticism of the New Testament is rich in
materials, especially in ancient MSS. But,
although the history of New Testament criticism
records the industrions collection uf a large
amount of materials, it is not equally abundant
in well-aceredited facts, such as might be of
essential benefit in enabling us to judge of the
changes made in the text. History is silent


CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


respecting the period when the two parts of the
New Testament, viz. the edayyéAiov and axde-
Todos, or, in other words, the four Gospels and
the Pauline and remaining epistles, were put
together, so as to form one whole. About the
bezgiming of the third century, it is certain that
all the books of the New Testament which we
now possess were acknowledged to be divine, and
regarded as canonical.

In the middle of the same century, Hesychius
and Lucian undertook to ameud the MSS. of the
New Testament. Of their critical labours Jerome
seems not to have entertained a high opinion. The
MSS. they revised did not meet with general ap-
proval, and Pope Gelasius issued a decree against
them. It is highly probable that they were not
the authors of recensions which were widely cir
culated, or generally adopted. Origen did not
revise the text of the New Testament.

At a comparatively recent period, certain in-
ternal matks were observed to belong to docu-
ments containing the same text. A similarity in
characteristic readings was noticed. Betyel ap-
pears to have been the first to whom the idea
suggested itself of dividing the materials accord-
ing to the peculiarities which he faintly perceived.
It was afterwards taken up by Semler, and highly
elaborated by Griesbach. Later editors and citics
have endeavoured to improve upon Griesbach’s
system. The different forms of text observed by
Semler and Griesbach they called revensions,
although the appellation of femily is more appro-
priate, Perhaps the data that have been so much
regarded in classifying the documents containing
the New Testament text are insufficient to establist
any system, The subject of receusions, though
frequently discussed, is not yet settled. In the
history of the unprinted text it is the chief topic
which comes before the inquirer. Reserving it
for future notice [Rgcensions]}, we pass to the
history of the printed text, and the eilorts made
to emend it.

The whole of the New Testament was firs
printed in the Complutensian Polyglott, 1514
though not published till 1517. The first pub
lished was that of Erasmus, at Basel, in 151€
Both were issued independently of one anot.e.
and constitute the basis of the received tert. Yet
the best materials were not employed i preparing
them, and on both the Vulgate was allewed te
exert an undue influence. Even critical conjecture
was resorted to by Erasmus, No less than five
impressions were published by Erasmus, iutc the
third of which 1 Jolin v. 7 was first put. In the
last two he made great use of the Complutensian
Polyglott.

The third place amoung the early editors of the
Greek Testament has Leen assigned to Rebert
Stephens, whose first edition was printed at Paris,
1516, 12mo., chietly taken from the Compluten-
sian, and generally styled the Mirifica edition,
from the cummencement of the pretace. His
second edition was published in 1519; the third
in 1550, in folio. In this last he followed the fifth
of Erasmus, with which he compared fifteen MSS.,
and the Complutensian Polyglott. | In 1551 a)
peared another edition, accompanied by the Vul-
gate and the translation of Erasmus. It is
remarkable for being the first into which the dis
Vision of verses was introduced,

The next person that contributed to the criti-


Peet KH BS


ener be AB ow BS


f
if
ry

i


CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


cm of the Greek Testament was Theodore Beza.
The text of his first edition, 1565, folio, was the
tame as that of the third of Stephens, altered in
about fifty places, accompanied with the Vulgate, a
Latin version of his own, and exegetical remarks.
Inhis second edition, 1582, he had the benetit of
the Syriac version and two ancient codices. A
third impression appeared in 1589, and a fourth
in 1598. The Elzevir editions exhibit ee the
text of the third of Stephens, and partly that of
Bea. The first appeared at Leyden in 1624.
The second edition of 1633 proclaims its text to
be the textus receptus, which it afterwards be-
came. Subsequently three other editions issued
from the same press. The editor does not appear
tohave consulted any Greek MSS. All his read-
ings are either in Beza or Stephens.

Brian Walton, the leammed editor of the London
Polyglott, gavea more copious collection of various
readings in the sixth volume of that work than had
before appeared ; which was further enlarged by
Dr. Fell, in his edition, published at Oxford in
1675, and reprinted by Gregory in 1703, folio.

Dr. John Mill, encouraged and supported by
Fell, gave to the world a new edition in 1707,
folic. The text is that of Stephens’ third edi-
tion. In it the editor exhibited, from Gregory's
MSS., a much greater number of readings than
is to be found in any former edition. He
revised and increased the extracts formerly made
from ancient versions. Nor did he neglect
quotations from the fathers, It is said that
the work contains thirty thousand various read-
ings. This important edition, so far superior to
every preceding one, cost the laborious editor
the toilsome study of thirty years, and excited the
prejudices of many who were unable to appreciate
Its excellence. It commenced a new era in the
criticism of the New Testament. Ludolph Kus-
ter reprinted Mill's Greek Testament at Amster-
dam, in 1710, enriching it with the readings of
twelve udditional MSS. The first attempt to
emend the tertus receptus was made by John
Albert Bengel. abbot of Alpirspach. His edition
appeared at Tiibingen, quarto, 1734, to which was
pretixed his “ Introductio in crisin Novi Testa-
menti.” Subjoined is an apparatus criticus, con-
taining his collection of various reading, chielly
taken from Mill, but with important additions.

Dr. Joln James Wetstein contributed, in no
small degree, to the advancement of sacred criti-

cism, by his large edition of the Greek Testament,
ublished at Amsterdam in 1751-2, 2 vols. folio.
11730 he had published prolegomena. It was
his desire to give a new and corrected text, but he
was compelled by circumstances to exhibit the
tertus receptus. Yet he noted, partly in the text
itself, partly in the inner margin, such readings
as he preferred. His collection of various read-
1ngs, with their respective authorities, far exceeds
all former works of the same kind in copiousness
and value. He collated anew many important
MSS. that had been superficially examined, gave
extracts from many for the first ti 1 mad
use of t} y for the rst time, and made
Phil of the Harclean (improperly called the
Voxenian) version, hitherto uncollated. For
Convenience he marked the uncial MSS. with the
pie _of the alphabet, and the cursive with
al letters. His exegetical notes are
ge extracts from Greek, Latin, and Jewish
nters, The edition of the Greek Testament,


‘


CRITICISM, BIBLICAL. 491


under consideration, is indispensable to every
critic, and will always be reckoned a marvellous
monument of indomitable energy and unwearied
diligence. The Prolegomena contain a treasure
of sacred learning that will always be prized by
the scholar. They were republished, with valu-
able notes, by Semler, in 1774, 8vo.

The scholar who is pre-eminently distinguished
in the history of New Testament criticism, is
Dr. John James Griesbach. He enriched the ma-
terials collected by Wetstein with new and impor-
tant additions, by collating MSS., versions, and
early ecclesiastical writers, particularly Origen,
with great labour. The idea of recenstons, re-
commended by Bengel and Semler, he adopted,
and carried out with much acuteness and
sagacity. His first edition appeared at Halle,
in 2 vols. 1774-5. The first three gospels were
synoptically arranged, but in 1777 he published
them in their natural order, The text is founded
on a comparison of the copious materials which
he possessed. Nothing was adopted from con-
jecture, and nothing received which had not the
sanction of codices as well as versions. A select
number of readings is placed beneath the text.
In his Symbole Critica, he gave an account of
his critical labours, and of the collations of new
authorities he had made. Such was the com-
mencement of Griesbach’s literary labours.

Between the years 1782-88, C. F. Matthaei pub-
lished a new edition of the Greek Testament in 12
vols. His text was founded on a collation of more
than 100 Moscow MSS., which he first examined.
It is accompanied with the Vulgate, schvita, and
excursus. He avowed himself an enemy to the
idea of recensions, despised the ancient MSS.
(especially cod. Beze), and the quotations of
the fathers, while he unduly exalted his Moscow
MSS. His chief merit lies in the careful colla-
tion he made of a number of MSS. hitherto
unknown.

Before the completion of Matthaei’s edition,
appeared that of Alter, 1786-7, 2 vols. The
text is that of the Vienna MS., with which be
collated 22 others in the Imperial library. To
these he added readings from the Coptic, Slavonian,
and Latin versions.

In 1788, Protessor Birch of Copenhagen en-
larged the province of sacred criticism by his
splendid edition of the four Gospels in folio and
quarto. The text is a reprint of Stephens’ third,
Lut the materials appended to it are highly valu-
able. They consist of extracts taken by him-
self and Moldenhauer, in their travels, from
many MSS. not examined by Wetstein, and of
Alter’s selections from the Jerusalem-Syriac
version discovered in the Vatican. Birch was
the first who carefully collated the Codex Vatica-
nus. The publication of the second volume was
prevented by a fire that destroyed many of the
materials. In 1798, he published his various
readings on the remainder of the New Testament,
except the Apocalypse. In 1800 he published
those relating to this book also.

In 1796 appeared the first volume of a new
and greatly-improved edition of Griesbach’s New
Testament. For it he mate extracts frum the
Armenian, Slavonic, Latin, Sahidic, Coptic,
and other versions, besides incorporating into his
collection the results of the labours of Mat-
thaei, Aller, and Birch. The second volume


- 492 - CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


- appeared in 1806, both published at Halle. At
the end of the second volume is a dissertation
on 1 Jon v. 7. The work was reprinted at Lon-
don in 1809, and again in 1818. The prole-
gomena are exceedingly valuable. This edition

‘cannot be too highly rated. It is indispensable
to every critic and intelligent theologian.

In 1827, many new materials having been
procured since the date of Griesbach’s last edition,
it wag thonght necessary to publish a third. It
appeared accordingly, under the superintendence
of Dr. Scholz. The first volume contains the
prolegomena, and the Gospels. It exhibits various
readings from about 20 new sources, many cor-
rections of Griesbach’s references and citations,
besides considerable improvements in other re-
spects. The second volume has not yet been
published (1843).

The editions of Knapp, Schott, Tittmann, Vater,
Naebe, and Goeschen, are chiefty founded upon
-that of Griesbach. Of these the most esteemed is
‘that of Knapp, which has passed through five
‘editions, and is characterized by sound judg-
ment, especially in the punctuation and acceuts.

In 1830 appeared the first volume of a large
critical edition, superintended by Dr. J. Martin
Augustus Scholz, professor at Bonn, containing
the Gospels. The second volume, in 1836, com-
pleted the work. Both are in quarto. The editor
spent twelve years of incessant labour in collect-
ing materials for the work, and travelled into
Many countries for the purpose of collating MSS,
The prolegomena pretixed to the first volume
occupy 172 press and contain ample information
Tespecting all the codices, versions, fathers, acts
of councils, &c. &e., which are used as authori-
ties, together with a history of the text, and an
exposition of his classification system. In the
inner margin are given the general readings cha-
racteristic of the three great families. The total
number of MSS. which he has added to those
previously collated is 606. Little reliance, how-
ever, can be placed on the accuracy of the ex-
tracts which he has given for the first time. His
researches have tended to raise the tertus receptus
higher than Griesbach placed it. In consequence
of his preferring the Constantinopolitan family,
his text comes nearer the Elzevir edition than
that of Griesbach. The merits of this laborious
editor are considerable. He has greatly enlarged
our critical apparatus. Yet in acnteness, saza-
city, and sable he is far inferior to Gries-
bach. His collations appear to have heen super-
ficial. They are not to be depended on, Hence the
text cannot command the contidence of Protestant
critics. We cannot believe, with the editor, that
the Byzantine family is equal in value or autho-
rity to the Alexandrine which is confessedly
more ancient, nor can we put his junior codices
on a level with the very valuable documents of
the Oriental recension. His text is, on the whole,
inferior to that of Grieshach. Ina few important
passages alone it is superior.

The edition of Lachmann, though small in
compass, deserves to be mentioned. It was pub-
lished in 1831, 12mo. The editor says that he
has nowhere followed his own judgment, but the
usage of the Oriental churches. The text of
Lachmann has been well received in Germany,
and much importance has been attached to it.
From the authority it has obtained, it would ap-


-


CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


pear that the Constantinopolitan text of Schols is
not very favourably regarded. De Wette, in his
Introduction to the Bible, shows a leaning to-
wards the views of Lachmann. Rinck coincides,
on the whole, with the same. The last named
scholar has enlarged the critical apparatus of the
New Testament, by collating and descrabing se
veral MSS. (Lucubratio Critica in Acta Apost.
epp. Cath. et Paulin, &c. &c., Basel, 18330, Svo.)
‘Since the appearance of Lachmann’s edition.
another has Leen published in Germany by Di,
Tischendorf, which requires some notice. It ex-
hibits a corrected text, taken from the xnost an-
cient and best MSS., with the principal various
readings, together with the readings of the Elze-
vir, Knapp, Scholz, and Lachmann _ editions.
Great pains have manifestly been bestowed an the
text and the critical apparatus subjoimed to it
The prolegomena, consisting of 85 pages, are ex-
ceedingly valuable. They treat of recensvons,
with an especial reference to Scholz’s _ system;
enumerate the readings peculiar to the third
edition of Stephens and that of Mill, to the edi-
tions of Matthaei and Griesbach; and specify the
critical materials employed in the elaboration of
a ynire text. The work under consideration ap-
peared in L841, 8vo. Leipzig. A careful perusal
of the editor's able preface, and a collation of his
text and critical apparatus beneath it, have con-
vinced us of the sound judgment, minute dili-
gence, extreme accuracy, and admirable skill by
which this edition of the Greek Testament is cha-
racterized. .

Very recently we have been favoured with the
first volume of a large edition by Lachmann
(Novum Testamentum, Greece et Latine. Carolus
Lachmannus recensuit. Philippus Butt mnannus
Ph. F. Grace lectionis auctoritates apposwt
Tomus prior. Berolini, 1842, 8vo.). ;

This is by far the most important edition that
has appeared since the days of Griesbach, and
must produce results highly favourable to the
advancement of New Testament criticism. 4h¢
principles cn which Lachmann proceeds were
expounded in the Teolog. Studien und Eeritiis
for 1830, pp. 817-845, and again in 1835, p- 97%
sq. The path which he first pursued his
smaller edition was indicated by Bent ley, 70
purposed to publish the Greek Testamer?t 00 #1
milar principles.*

In order to discover his Oriental text (a tet
which is substantially the same as the -ci/ezar
drian), Lachmann makes use of the fe] lows
authorities :—1. A. B. C. D., as also P. Q- “i a
in the Gospels, and in the Pauline epistl @S> I a
addition. 2. Latin interpretations, viz- ™
Gospels the Vercellian, Veronian, Col boeing
Cambridge; in the Acts the Cambricl ¢ ee
Laudian; in the Pauline epistles the ciem)
St. Germains, Boernerian ; in the Apocal y P* ;
Primasian. In addition to these, the West

* Hare wrote thus concerning Bentley, ™
1724:—* Ad novum Fadus ex antiq tr tm
edd. pristino nitori restituendum animunt ane
ut Grecum textum ab insand variarum™ t
tionum mole quam recentiores edd. invexerun
liberaret, et Hieronymi versionem ab pets
purgatam talem daret, qualis e doctissim? Pin
manu exiit; opus profecto grande, et tant!
diligentia, acumine, judicio imprimis dignum.


CRITICISM, BIBLICAL.


as edited by Jerome, is everywhere employed.
Of the fathers he consults Irenzus, Origen, Cy-
prian, Hilary, and Lucifer. The immense mass
of later MSS. and fathers is entirely overlooked
as useless,

The authorities for the Greek readings are
given below the text; and, when it is considered
how few materials are employed, it will be readily
supposed that the various readings noted are not
numcrous. They are, however, most valuable and
important.

In addition to the Greek text and critical
apparatus, the Hieronymian Vulgate is given, in
the same form, as nearly as possible, in which it
proceeded trom Jerome, with important readings
extracted from the Fuldensian codex, from the
same corrected by Victor bishop of Capua, and
from the Laurentian codex. The great aim of


the editor has been to exhibit a text in which |


the most ancient authorities are entirely agreed.
Wherever this cannot be done with certainty, his
critical apparatus shows the degree of probability
attached to the text as given by him. To the
volume is prefixed a preface of 55 pages (a few of
thern from Buttmann), in which the learned editor
ex) ds his mode of procedure, and the autho-
Tities consulted. Respecting the opponents of his
system, he does not speak in the most courteous
or becoming language, uor is his Latinity the
purest. Yet the preface is instructive withal,
and must be studied by him who uses Lachmann’s
text.

We are inclined to attach primary importance
to this edition, the remaining volume of which
we shall look for with anxiety. Were we disposed
to follow the text of any one editor absolutely,
we should follow Lachmann’s. But it may be
doubted whether he has not confined himself to a
range of authorities too circumscribed. By keep-
ing within the fourth century, he has been occa-
sionally compelled to rest upon one or two tes-
timonies. We should therefore like to see more
authorities consulted. We are persuaded, how-
ever, that this author has entered upon a right
path of investigation which will lead to results


both peeusnes useful and unusually suc-
cessful.
The tions of sacred criticism have esta


blished the genuineness of the Old and New Testa-
ment texts in every matter of importance. All
the doctrines and duties remain unaffected hy its
investigations. It has proved that there is no
material corruption in the inspired records. It
bas shown that during the japse of many cen-
turies the Holy Scriptures have been preserved in
a surprising degree of purity. The text is sub-
stauttally in the same condition as that in which
it was found seventeen hundred years ago. Let
the plain reader take comfort to himself when he
reflects that the received text which he is accus-
tomed to read is substantially the same as that
which men of the greatest learning and the most
unwearied diligence have elicited from an im-
mense heap of documents.

For a copious account of the various editions
of the Greek Testament the reader is referred to
Le Long’s Bibliotheca, edited by Masch; or to
Rosenmiiller’s Handbuch fiir die Literatur der
bibuschen Kritik und Exegese, i. pp 2738-422.
See also an article on the ‘Manuscripts and Edi-
tions of the New Testament,’ by Moses Stuart, in


CROCODILE. 493


Robinson's Bibliotheca Sacra, No. 2, May, 1843.
For an account of the principal authors on
Biblical criticism, see Davidson's Lectures on
Biblical Criticism, from which chiefly this article
is abridged and condensed.—S. D.
CROCODILE. Although the term xpoxé-
SetAos occurs in the Greek version, there is no
specific word in the Hebrew of which it is the
acknowledged representative. Reserving, how-
ever, our remarks on this subject for the articles


Dragoon, Leviaruan, and Wuatg, we shall in


this place confine ourselves to sume notice of cro-
codiles strictly so called, and, while we shall
endeavour to simplify the discussion as much
as possible, we shall puint out some leading cha-
racters in the animal coinciding with allusions
to it in the Scriptures, which could not be pro-
perly noticed elsewhere.


The crocodiles which we have to notice at pre-
sent consist of three varieties, or perhaps species, all
natives of the Nile, distinguishable fe the differ-
ent arrangement of the scutm or bony studs on
the neck, and the number of rows of the same pro-
cesses along the back. Their general lizard form
is too well known to need particular descrip-
tion; but it may be aaned that of the whole
family of crocodiles, comprehending the 3!
beaked gavials of India, the alligators of the
west, and the crocodiles properly so called, the
last are supplied with the most vigorous instru-
ments for swimming, both from the strength and
vertical breadth of their tails, and from the fingers
of their paws having deeper wehs. Although all
have from thirty to forty teeth in each jaw, shaped
like spikes, without breadth so as tu cut, or sur-
face so as to admit of grinding, the true crocodile
alone has one or more teeth on each side. in both
jaws, exserted, that is, not closing within but
outside the jaw. They have no external ear Leyond
a follicle of skin, and the eyes have a position
above the plane of the head, the pupils being
contractile, like those of a cat, and in some
having a luminous greenish tinge, which may
have suggested the allusion to ‘ the lids of the
morning’ (Job xli. 18). The upper jaw is not
movable, but, as well as the forehead, is ex-
tremely dense and bony ; the rest of the upper
surface being covered with several rows of bosses,
or plated ridges, which on the tail are at last re-
duced from two to one, each scale having a high
horny crest, which acts as of a great fin.
Although destitute of a real voice, crocodiles when


t


494 CROCODILE.


angry produce a snorting sound, something like
a deep growl; and occasionally they open the
mouth very wide, remain for a time thus exposed
facing the breeze, and, closing the jaws with a
sudden snap, canse a report like *the fall of a
trap-door. It is an awful sound, which we have
heard more than once in the stillness of the night
in tropical South America; and we are informed
that the same phenomenon occurs on the Ganges,
and on the west coast of Africa. The gullet of
the crocodile is very wide, the tougne being com-
pletely tied to the lower jaw ; and beneath it are
glands exuding a musky substance. On land the
crocodile, next to the gavial, is the most active,
and in the water it is also the species that most
readily frequents the open sea. Of the immense
number of gencra which we have scen or exa-
mined, none reached to 25 feet in length. and
we believe the specimen in the vaults of the
British Museum to he one of the largest. Sheep
are observed to be unmolested by these animals ;
but where they abound, no pigs can be kept,
perhaps from their frequenting the muddy shores ;
for we have known only one instance of croco-
diles being encountered in woods not immediately
close tu the water's side: usually they bask on
sandy islands. As their teeth are long, but not
fitted for cutting, they seize their prey, which they
cannot masticate, and swallow it nearly entire, or
bury it beneath the waves to macerate. Having
very smull excretory organs, their digestion re-
quires, and accordingly they are found to possess,
an immense biliary apparatus. ‘They are oviparous,
burying the exgs in their sand; and the female
remains in the vicinity to dig them out on the
day the young have broken the shell. What is
said in ancient history of the ear-rings fastened
to crocoitiles must be understood of ornaments
fixed to follicles of the skin; the Sudara-oron, or
man-crocodile of the Malays, and the sacred
otter of the ancient Irish, are described with similar
ornaments. Crocodiles are caught with hooks,
and they seldom sueceed in cutting the rope
when properly prepared. Though a bal) fired point
blank will penetrate between the scales which
cover the body, the invulnerability of these great
Sanrians is sufficiently exemplilicd by the fol-
lowing occurrence. One being brought well
bound to the bazaar at Cawnpore on the Gangps,
it was purchased by the British oflicers on the
spot, and carried farther inland, for the purpose
of bein: baited. Accordingly, the ligatures, ex-
cepting those which seenred the muzzle, being
cut asunder, the monster, though it had been
many hours exposed to the heat, and was almost
suffocated with dust, fought its way through au
immense crowd of wssailants, soldiers and natives,
armed with staves, lances, swords, and stones,
and worried by numerous terriers, hounds, and
curs; overturning all in its way, till, scenting the
river, it escaped to the water at a distance of two
miles, in spite of the most strenuous opposition !
According to Strabo, the crocodiles of Exypt
were known by the name of Suchus (Zodxos),
from an Egyptian word supposed to have been
Souch or Soncha, perhaps applied solely to the
sacred animals of the species. Spanheim, in his
remarks on the life of Isidorus by Damascius,
thinks that Sodyos may be referred to the monitor
lizard known by the name of Waran ; and it is
Dot improbable that the same laxity in the appli-


CROCODILE.


cation of proper names which is traceable in the
Oriental languages, and in the Greek, where the
original meaning of xpoxdSecAos, in the Ionic,
is ‘lizard,’ and even in modern tongues, has al-
lowed the word to be vaguely employed to denote
Sanrians. Herodotus says that the Egyptians
called crocodiles Xa@upa which, according to
Sir J. G. Wilkinson, is a corruption of 3fsaA, or
Emsooh, The Arabic retains Jemsah, and a simie
lar name, Temsche or Temesche, was anciently
applied on the Danube and the Scheldt to the
sturgeon. Kimsak is the Turkish; Kimbuta the
Ceylonese ; but the Leng of the Malays, still
venerated by them, is of the gavial sulslivision
of the genus: it is the horned crocodile, or Ma-
kaira of Budha lore; it figures in the zodiac of
the utmost east, and there becomes confounded
with the dragon—an emblem assumed by all the
nations of Mongolic origin. During the Roman
sway in Egypt, crocodiles had not disappeared in
the lower Nile, for Seneca and others allude te a
great battle fought by them and a shoal of dol-
ae in the Heracleotic branch of the Delta.
Juring the decline of the state even the hippopo-
tamus re-appcared about Pelusium, and was shot
at in the seventeenth century (Radzivil). In the
time of the Crusades crocodiles were found in the
Crocodilon river of early writers, and in the Cro-
codilorum lacus, still called Moiat al Temsah,
which appear to be the Kerseos river and marsa,
three miles south of Ciesarea, though the nature
of the locality is most appropriate at Nahr-el
Arsoof or el-Haddar.

The exploit of Dieudonné de Bozen, knight
of St. John, who, when a young man, slew the
dragon of Rhodes, must. be regarded as a combat
with a crocodile, which had probably been carried
northward by the regular current of the eastern
Mediterranean ; for so the picture still extant in
the harem of a Turkish inhabitant represents the
Hawan Kebir or Great Beast—a picture necessa-
rily painted anterior to the expulsion of the
knights in 1480. As De Bozow died Grand Mas-
ter of the Order at Rhodes in 1353, and the spoils
of the animal long remained hun up ina church,
there is not, we think, any reason to doubt the
fact, though most of the recorded cireumstances
may be fabulous.

That crocodiles and alligators take the se
and are found on islands many leazues distant
from other land, we have ourselves witnessed j au
the fact is particularly notorious at the Grand
Caymanas in the sea of Mexico, which 13 almost
destitute of fresh water. It is indeed owing to
this circumstance that the same species may free
quent all the rivers of a great extent of coast, as
is the case with some found in Africa, whence
they spread to India and the Malayart islands.
We have been thus explicit on the nattzral history
of these formidable Saurians, in order that we
may have less occasion to notice the _ mixstate-
ments of the ancients when we shall have

pene

* Other paintings hy the same artist, said to
have been Sebast. de Firenze, pupil of Cimabue,
show that he did not represent grand masters
later than Gio de Lartin, who was elected 1437,
anddied 1454. Allthe ancient Greek amd the Jater
Mediterranean dragons, as those of Naples Arley
&c., where they are not allegozical, are ne oubt
derived from crocodiles.


_ GROSS.


comment on the Hebrew words which are assumed

to indicate them. We omit for the present all

particulars respecting the crocodile divinities,

their worship and preservation in the mummy

state, which Sir J. G. Wilkinson's interesting

works have lately made known to all readers.—
' C.HLS.

CROSS. This word is derived from the Latin
cruz, Respecting the origin of its Greek repre-
sentative there is some diversity of opinion. Ac-
cordiny to Eustathius and Hesychius, the Greck
oraupds is 80 called mapa thy eis dépa ordoww,
wapa 7d eis edpos IoracOa, from its standing
erect, or from its standing with its arms horizontal.
Latin etymologists also derive the word from
Torqui, tv place. In its general acceptation the
cross is an instrument of put:ishment, and, meta-
phorically, punishment itself, as well as the pain
which it intlicts, and generally any severe suffer-
ing or heavy trial. Instead of oraupés the Greek
word cxéAow is sometimes found as equivalent to
the Latin crv. Both are in frequent use on the
put of the writers who transferred the events of
Roman history into the Greek tongue.

In its simplest form, consisting of two pieces of
wood, one standing erect, the other crossing it at
right angles, the cross was known at an early age
in the history of the world, Its use as an instru-
ment of punishment was probably suggested by
the shape so often taken by branches of trees,
which seem to have been the first crosses that were
employed, It was certainly esstomary to hang
criminals on trees—arbor infelix ; Cicero (2’ro
Robir, 3) appears to consider hanging on a tree
and crucifixion as of the same import, and Se-
neca (Ep. 101) names the cross tnfelic lignwn,
which may with no undue liberty be rendered
‘the accursed tree.’ Trees are known to have
been used as crosses (Tertull. Ap. viii. 16), and
to every kind of hanging which bore a resem-
Llince to erncifixion, such as that of Prometheus,
Andromeda, &c., the name was commonly ap-
plied. Among the Scythians, Persians, Carthagi-
nians, Greeks, Romans, and the ancient Germans,
traces are found of the cross as an instrument of
punishment. The sign of the cross is found
asa holy symbol among several ancient nations,
who may accordingly be named, in the langnage
of Tertullian, crucis religiosos, devotees of the
cross, Among the Indians and Egyptians the
cmas often appears in their ceremonies, sometimes
in the shape of the letter T, at others in this
shape +. At Susa, Ker Porter saw a stone cut
with hierozlyhics and cuneiform inscriptions,
on which in one corner was a figure of a cross,
thus fa. The cross, he says, is generally under-
stood to be symbolical of the divinity or eternal
Lite, and certainly a cross was to be seen in the
temple of Serapis as the Egyptian emblem of the
future life, as may he Jeamt in Sozomen and
Rutinns. Porter also states that the Egyptian
prie-ts urged its being found on the walls of their
temple of Serapis, a3 an argument with the vic-
torious army of Theodosius to save it from de-
struction, From the numerous writings on this
subject by La Croze, Jablonski, Zoeza, Visconti,
Pococke, Pluche, Petit Radel, and others, the
symbol of the cross appears to have been most
various in its signitications. Sometimes it is the
Phallus, sometimes the planet Venus, or the
Nilometer, or an emblem of the four elements, or


CROSS. 495


the seasons (Creuzer's Symbolik, pp. 168-S). It
is not therefore surprising that ancient and even
modern Christian writers should on this subject
have indulged in sume degree of refinement and
mysticism, Justin Martyr (Apol. i. § 72) says.
‘The sign of the cross is impressed upon the
whole of nature. There is hardly a handicrafts-
man but uses the figure of it among the imple-
ments of his industry. It forms a part of man
himself, as may be scen when he raises his hands
in prayer.’ In like manner Minatius Felix
(c. 29): ‘yen nature itself seems to have formed
this figure for us. We have a natural cross on
every ship whose sails are spread, in every yoke
that man forms, in every outspreading of his
arms in prayer. Thus is the cross found both
in the arrangements of nature, and among the
heathen.’

According to Lipsius (De Cruce, i. 5-9) and
Gretser (De Cruce Christi, wol. i. c. 1) there
were in general two kinds of crosses ;—1, crux
simplex; 2, crux composita or compacta. The
first consisted of a stake on which the criminal
was fastened or by which he was impaled. For
the first kind of punishment a tree or a specially
prepared stake was used, on which the criminal
was bound, and either left to perish, or imme-
diately put to death, For dnpaling (infixio) a
long and sharpened piece of wood (pale) was em-
ployed, on which the criminal was put as on a
spit. Seneca describes this kind of execution
(Consolat. ad Mare. c. 20): ‘1 behold these
crosses, not of one kind, but made diflerently by
different people. Some suspended the criminal
with his head turned towards the earth; others
drove a stake through his body.’ ‘This cruel
mode of execution was formerly very customary
in Russia, China, Turkey, and other countries,
and is not yet universally abolished by law.

Of the crux composita or compound cross there
were three sorts: 1, crux decussata; 2, crux
commissa; 3, crux immissa. The crux decussata
is also called Andrew's cross, because tradition
reports that on a cross of this kind the Apostle
Andrew suffered death. Jerome (Comment. on
Jerem. c. 31) describes this cross in the following
terrvs :—Deenssare est per medium secare velut
si daw regula coucturant ad speciem litere X
que fizura est crucis: saying in effect that the
name indicates two lines cutting each other after
the manner of the letter X. So Isidorus Hisp.
(Orig. 1. 1. 3) says that the letter X denotes a
cross and the number ten Gin Roman numerals).

The crux commissa, Lipsius states, was formed
hy putting a cross piece of wood on a_perpen-
dicular one, so that no part of the latter may
stand above the former. This form is found in
the figure T. Of the crux immissa, or, as others
prefer to term it, crux capitata, the following is
given as the description :—‘a cross in which the
longer piece of wood or pale stands above the
shorter piece which runs across it near the top.’
It is distingnished from the preceding by the part
of the longer beam which is above the shorter or


transverse, thus -+. This form is found in paint-


ings more frequently than any other, and on a
cross of this kind our Saviour is believed to have
sutlered death.

Of the nature of the cross on which Jesus was
crucified, and of every particular connected with


496 CROSS.


it, exact information ought to be accessible, since
four ecclesiastical historians (Socrates, i. 13, So-
zomen, ii. 1, Rufinus, i, 7, Theodoret, i. 18) con-
cur in stating that it was found by the Empress
Helena, mother of Constantine the Great. This
event is assigned to the year of our Lord 326. Eu-
sebius alone is silent on the discovery. The other
writers state that Helena, when seventy-nine years
of age, was induced by the warmth of her piety to
visit the places which the Saviour had rendered
sacred by his presence and sufferings. The
hatred of the heathen had led them to obliterate
as much as possible all traces of the memorable
events which the life and death of Jesus had hal-
lowed; and to cover Mount Calvary with stones
and earth and raise thereon a temple to the
goddess Venus. A Jew, however, had treasured
up what traditions he could gather, and was thus
enabled to point out to Helena the spot where
our Lord had been buried. The place being ex-
cavated three crosses were found, and the title
which that of Jesus bore was also found lying
apart by itself. The question arose how the cross
of Christ was to be distinguished from the other
two. Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem, suggested
that their respective efficacy should be tried as to
the working of miracles. Sick persons were
brought forward and touched by each separately.
One only wrought the desired cures, and was ac-
cordingly acknowledged to be the true cross. A
full view of all the authorities on this matter
may be seen in Tillemont (Alem. Eccles. chapter
on Helena). ;

Having built a church over the sacred syot,
Helena deposited within it the chief part of the
real cross. The remainder she conveyed to Con-
stantinople, a part of which Constantine inserted
in the head of a statue of himself, and the other
part wus sent to Rome, and placed in the church
of Sta. Croce in Gerusalemme, which was built
expressly to receive the precious relic. When sub-
sequently a festival to commemorate the discovery
had been established, the Bishop of Jerusalem,
on Easter Sunday, exhibited to the grateful eyes
of eayer pilgrims the object to see which they
had traveled so far, and endured so much. Those
who were persons of substance were further grati-
tied by obtaining, at their full price, small pieces
of the cross set in gold and gems; and that wonder
might not pass into incredulity, the proper au-
thorities gave the world an assurance that the
holy wood possessed the power of self-multiplica-
tion, and, notwithstanding the innumerable pieces
which had been taken from it for the pleasure and
service of the faithful, remained intact and entire
as at the first—ut detrimenta non  sentiret, et
quasi intacta permaneret. (Paulinus, Ep. xi. ad
Sev.)

The capture of Jerusalem by the Persians,
a.v. 614, placed the remains of the cross in the
hands of Chosroes IL, who mockingly conveyed
them to his capital. Fourteen years aflerwaris,
Heraclius recovered them, and had them carried
first to Constantinople, and then to Jerusalem, in
such pomp, that on his arrival before the latter
city, he found the gate barred, and entrance for-
bidden. Instructed as to the cause of this hin-
derance, the Emperor laid aside the trappings
of his greatness, and, barefvoted, bore on his own
shoulders the sacred relic oF to the gate, which
then opened of itsclf, and allowed him to enter,


CROSS. .


and thus place his charge beneath the dome of
the sepulchre.

From this time no more is heard of the true
cross, which may have been destroyed by the
Saracens on their conquest of Jerusalem, a.p. 637.
The wooden title, however, is said to he still pre-
served in Rome, not entire, indeed, for only dimi-
nutive fragments remain of the Hebrew letters,
go that no one can say what in reality the cha-
racters are, The Greek and Latin, excepting
the letter Z, are both written after the Eastern
manner, from right to left. This is said to have
happened either because they were written by a
Jew, following a national custom, or trom a de-
sire on the part of the writer, if a Roman, to ac-
commodate himself to what was usual among
the Jews. Nicetus (Titulus Sanct. Crucis) holds
that it is not all the work of one hand, since the
Roman letters are firmly and distinctly cut, but
the Greek letters, very badly. He thinks that a
Jew cut the Hebrew (or Aramzan) and Greek,
and a Roman the Latin. All that remains of the
Greek is Na(apevous B, of the Latin, Nazarenus,
It is somewhat extraordinary that there should
appear in the sole Greek word, what some have
thought two mistakes, namely, ¢ for 7, a short
for a long e; and the termination oys for
os. The history of the discovery of this tide


FZ sz)ISS
WYVDIAZAY
WVUIAASAY |


239,


is worthy of a brief notice. When sent by Con-
stantine to Rome, it was deposited in a leaden
chest, above the vaulted roof of the Church Sta,
Croce, in a little window, and then bricked into
the wall ; its position being recorded in a Mosaic
inscription without. Time rendered the inscrip-
tion ahnost illegible; and the window, owing to
the carelessness of workmen engayed in repuiring
the church, was accidentally bruken open, when
the holy relic was discovered. ‘This discovery,
and the genuineness of the title, Alexander HI.
authenticated by a bull. The letters found on
the title, if taken accerding to their numerical
value, make 1532, a circumstance which led
Stifelius to fix that as the year fur the termination
of the world.

Jortin has, in his own manner (Remarks, vol.
iii.), discussed the evidence which bears on the
discovery and genuineness of the cross, to which
discussion those who desire satisfaction may refer.
One or two remarks seem required in this place.
None of the authorities give a close description
of the three crosses said to have been found in the
rubbish under the temple of Venus, which is the
less surprising, since they were not eye-witnesses,
The three crosses, it appears, were very much alike,
and nothing short of miracles could distinguish
and mark that of the Saviour (owr{pioy EvAoy).
That the crosses were of wood, all declare, but no
one states the peculiar kind of wood; nor is any


CROSS.


mention found in the four historians of the tra-
dition, which may be traced back to the days of
Chrysostom, that the true cross consisted of three
kinds, cypress, pine, and cedar, or of four kinds,
cedar, cypress, palm, and olive.
Quatuor ex lignie Domini crux dicitur esse ;—
Pes crucis est cedrus; corpus tenet alta cupressus ;
Palma manus retinet ; titulo lestatur oliva.
Lipsius (De Cruce) sup, that the cross was
made of oak, since it 1s likely it would he con-
stracted of such wood as was most abundant, and
therefore probably nearest at hand, and oak grew
plentifully in Judsea: the relics too are said to
resemble oak.
According to Ambrosius ( Oratio de Obitu
_ Theodor. p. 498), the piece which bore the title
stood on the top of the cross of our Lord (John
xix. 19-22, éxt rod oravpod ; comp. Matt. xxvii.
37; Mark xv. 26; Luke xviii. 18): the form


then would be somewhat thus ® This fact


would lead to the expectation of more accurate
information from those who are said to have found
the cruss. The language of the scriptural writers
seems to imply that it was only on the cross of
Jesus that a title was placed; and it does not
therefore appear to be a case in which human sa-
gacity could have been so wholly at a loss as the
accounts imply ; yet Rufinus says, Hie yam hu-
mane ambiguitatis incertum, divinum flagitat
tcstimonium. Probably a divine testimony was
required by other considerations than such as
arose from the essential ambiguity of the case.
But the conduct of Helena in dividing the cross,
setting aside one part for Jerusalem, another for
Constantinople, aud another as a phylacterion for
her son, and the subdivisions thereof, which sub-
sequently took place, rendered it impossible to
ascertain in any satisfactory manner, not only
whether the alleged was the real cross, but also of
what wood and in what shape it had been made.

This only then as to the shape of the Saviour's
cross can be determined, that the prevalent form
was that of the crux capitata, and that this form
iz generally found on coins and in the so-called
monogram (Munter’s Sinnbilder, 1. iv).

Much time and trouble have been wasted in
disputing as to whether three or four nails were
used in fastening the Lord to his cross. Nonnus
affirms that three only were used, in which he
is followed by Gregory Nazianzen. The more
general belief’ gives four nails, an opinion which
is supported at much length and by curious argu-
ments by Curtius, an Augustine friar, who wrote
a treatise De Clavis Dominicis, in the beginning
of the seventeenth century. Others have carried
the uumber of nails so high as fourteen. Of the
four original nails, the Empress Helena is reported
to have thrown one into the Adriatic, when
furiously raging, thereby lacing an instant
calm, The second is said to have been put by
Constantine into either his helmet or crown. This
nail, however, was afterwards to be found ina
mutilated state in the church of Sta. Croce. In
the Duomo of Milan is a third nail, which Eu-
tropius affirms was driven through one of Jesus’
hands, and which Constantine used as a bit, in-
tending thereby to verify the prophecy of Zecha-
riah (xiv. 20): ‘In that day shall be upon the
bells (margin, bridles) of the horses, Holiness
nto the Lord.’ Treves possesses the fourth nail,


CROWNS. 497


which is alleged to have been driven through the
sufferer’s right foot. Those who maintain the
number of nails to have been more than four have
had no difficulty in finding as many nails as their
hypothesis in each case needed, and as many
sacred places for their safe keeping.

Another dispute has been agitated relative to
the existence of a Aypopodium or tablet whereon
the feet were supported. Gregory of Tours, who
had seen the alleged true cross, affirms that it had
such a footstool ; but his dictum has been called
in question. It is, however, doubted whether the
hands alone, without a prop beneath, could sus-
tain the weight of the body, and some have sup-
posed that a kind of seat was placed, on which
the sufferer may be said to have in some way sat.
The controversy is treated at leng-h in the first of
the four Hypomnemata de Cruce of Bartholinus.


J. RB.
CROW. [Raven.]


CROWNS are often mentioned in Scripture,
and in such a manner as in most cases to
indicate the circumstances under which, and
the persons by whom, they were worn; for crowns
were less exclusively worn by sovereigns than
among modern nations. Perhaps it would be
better to say that the term ‘crowns’ was applied
to other ornaments for the head than those exclu-
sively worn by royal and to which
modem usage would give such distinctive names
as coronet, band, mitre, tiara, garland, &c.

The royal crown originated in the diadem,
which was a simple fillet fastened round the head,
and tied behind. This obviously took its rise
among a people who wore long hair, and used a
band to prevent it from falling over the face. The
idea occurred of distinguishing kings by a fillet
of different colour from that usually wom; and
being thus éstablished as a regal distinction, it
continued to be used as such even among nations
who did not wear the hair long, or was employed
to confine the head-dress. We. sometimes see


240. (Ancient Asiatic Crowns.)


this diadem as a simple fillet, about two inches

broad, fastened round the otherwise bare head;

we then find it as a band of gold (No. 240,

figs. 2, 5). In this shape it aaa iaal forms
x


498 CROWNS.


the basis of raised ornamental work (figs. 6, 7,
8, 10), in which case 1t oecomes what we should
consider a crown ; and indeed the original diadem
may be traced in most ancient crowns. Fig. 10
is curious, not only from the simplicity of its form,
but on account of the metallic loop to be passed
under the chin—a mode of securing the crown
probably adopted in war or in the chace. Then
we find the diadem surrounding the head-dress or
cap (figs. 3, 9, 13), and when this also is orna-
mented, the diadem may be considered as having
become a crown. The word “t) nezer is sup-

to denote a diadem. It is applied to the
inscribed plate of gold in front of the high-priest's
mitre, which was tied behind by a ribbon (Exod.
xxix. 6; xxxix. 30), and which was doubtless
something of the same kind that we see in figs. 8, 11.
This word is also employed to denote the diadem
which Saul wore in battle, and which was brought
to David (2 Sam. i. 10), and also that which
was used at the coronation of the young Joash
(2 Kings xi. 12) : and, as another word is applied
elsewhere to the crown used in this ceremonial), the
probability is that the Hebrew kings wore some-
times a diadem and sometimes a crown, and that
the diadem only was accessible to the high-priest,
by whom Joash was crowned, the crown itself
being most likely in the possession of Athaliah.
As Psalm Ixxxix. was certainly com by
David, the regal use of the diadem is further
indicated in verse 39.

The more general word for a crown is T°DY
atarah ; and it is applied to crowns and head
ornaments of different sorts, including those used
by the kings. When applied to their crowns, it
appears to denote the state crown as distinguished
from the diadem. This, the Rabbins allege, was
of gold set with jewels; such was the crown
which David took from the king of the Amo-
rites (2 Sam. xii. 30), and afterwards wore him-
self, as did probably his successors. Of its shape
it is impossible to form any notion, unless by re-
ference to the examples of ancient crowns con-
tained in the preceding cut. These figures, how-
ever, bemg taken mostly from coins, are not
of that very remote antiquity which we should
desire to illustrate .matters pertaining to the
period of the Hebrew monarchies. In Egypt
and Persia there are sculptures of earlier date,
representing royal crowns in the shape of a dis-
tinguishing tiara, cap, or helmet, of metal, and of


(2)


2 8


241. (Ancient Egyptian Crowns.)


cloth, or partly cloth and partly metal. Such
are the Raspes crowns as represented in the


CROWNS.


above engraving (No. 241). Fig. 1 is the crown
of Lower, and fig. 2 that of Upper Egypt; and
when both kingdoms were under one sovereign,
the two crowns were united, as in fig. 3. Such
union of the crowns of different countries upon one
head is matter of historical record. Thus when
Ptolemy Philometer entered Antioch as a con-
queror, he placed on his head the crowns of Egypt
and of Asia. This would, in fact, form three
crowns, as his previous one was ‘oubtless the
double crown of Upper and Lower Egypt. The
diadem of two or three fillets (figs. 3, 4, No. 240)
may have been similarly significant of dominion
over two or three countries. There are allusions to
this custom in Scripture (Rev. xii. 3; xix. 12).
These Egyptian tiaras were worn in war, and on
occasions of state; but on ordinary occasions a
fillet or diadem was used, affording corroboration
of a previous remark,


- (Modern Asiatic Crowns.)


It is important to observe that the mitre of the
high-priest, which is also called a crown (Exod.
xxxix. 30), was of similar construction, if not shape,
with the addition of the golden fillet or ctiatem.
Similar also in construction and material, though
not in form, was the ancient Persian crown, for
which there is a distinct name in the book of
Esther (i.23 ii. 17; vi. 8), viz. OND ceter-, which
was doubtless the cidaris or citaris (xiBapis ©
xtrapis), the high cap or tiara, so often meeutioned
by the Greek historians. From the descriptions
given of it, this seems to have been a somewhat
conical cap, surrounded by a wreath or fold; and
this would suggest a resemblance to fig. 12, No
240; which is in fact copied from a Parthian oF
later Persian coin. This one is worthy of very
particular attention, because it forms a comnect!!
link between the ancient and modem Orien
crowns, the latter consisting either of a cap, witha
fold or turban, variously enriched with aigrettes, as


CRUCIFIXION.


this is; or of a stiff cap of cloth, studded with
precious stones. It must often occur to the
student of Biblical antiquities that the modern
usages of the East have more resemblance to the
most ancient, than have those which prevailed
during that intermediate or classical period in
which its peculiar manners and institutions were
subject to much extraneous influence from the
domination of the Greeks and Romans. So, in
the present instance, we are much impressed with
the conviction that such head tires and caps as
those represented in Nos. 241 and 242, more
correctly represent the regal ¢ crowns’ of the Old
Testament, than those figured in No. 240 (with
the exception of fig. 12, and the simple diadems) ;
which huwever may be taken to represent the style
of the crowns which prevailed in and before the
time of the New Testament.

Crowns were so olten used symbolically to ex-
press honour and power, that it is not always safe
to infer nutional usages from the passages in
which they occur. Hence we would scarcely con-
elude from Ezek. xxiii. 42, that crowns were worn
by Jewish females, although that they wore some
omament which might be so called is probable
from other sources. Mr. Lane (Arabian Nights,
i. 424) mentions that until about two centuries
ago a kind of crown was worm by Arabian females
of wealth and distinction. It was generally a
circle of jewelled guld (the lower edge of which
was straislit, and the upper fancifully heightened
to a mere joint), surmounting the lower part
of a dumne-shaped cap, with a jewel or some other
omament at the summit.

It is certain that ‘crowns’ of this or some
similar kiud were wom at marriages (Cant. iii.
11; Isa. Ixi. 10); and it would appear that at
feasts and public festivals ‘ crowns of rejoicing’
were customary. These were probably garlands
(Wisd. ii. 8; iv. 2; Ecclus. i. LL). The‘ crowns’
or garlands which were given to the victors in the
public games are more than once alluded to in
the Epistles (1 Cor. ix. 25; 2 Tim. ii. 5; iv. 8;
1 Pet. v. 4).

CROWN OF THORNS [Tnorns].

CRUCIFIXION—in Greek dvacraupoty; in
Latin cruci affigere, in crucem agere or tollere,
1n later times cruci figere, whence our crucifixion.
To describe this punisliment the Jews used the


general term nbn, for crucifixion is a kind of

ging ; whence Christ in the polemical writings
of the Jews is designated nbn, ‘the hanged one.’
Crucitixion was a most cruel and disgraceful
punishment; the terms applied to it by ancient
writers are, ‘the most cruel and disgraceful’ : Cic.
Verr. ; Lactan. Instit. iv. 26); ‘the worst possible
punishment * (Ulpian); ‘the worst punishment in
the world” (Paull. v.17). It was the punish-
ment chiefly of slaves: accordingly the word fur-
ctfer, ‘ cross-bearer,’ was a term of reproach for


- slaves, and the punishment is terined servile sup-


plicium, ‘a slave's punishment’ (De Infami quo
Chr adfectus est cru. supp., in C. H. Lange's Ob+
servatt. Sacr.). Free-born persons also suflered
erucilixion, but only Ataniles, those of low condi-
tion and provincials, Citizens could not be crus
cifiel (Cic. Verr. i. 5; Quintil. viii. 4; Suet.
Gala.). This punishment was reserved for the
greatest crimes, as robbery, piracy (Sen. Ep. vii.
Cic. Petron. 71); assassination, perjury (Firmic,


CRUCIFIXION. 409


vi. 26); sedition, treason, and (in the case of sol-
diers) desertion (Dion, v. 52; Joseph. Antig. xiii.
22; Apul. Asin. 3). Its origin is ancient In
Thucydides (i. 110)-we read of Inarus, an African
king, who was crucified by the Egyptians. The
similar fate of Polycrates, who suffered under the
Persians, is detailed by Herodotus (iii. 125), who
adds, in the same book (159), that no less than
300 persons were condemned to the cross by
Darius, after his successful siege of Babylon. Va-
lerius Maximus makes crucifixion the common
military punishment of the Carthaginians. ‘That
the Greeks adopted it is plain from the cruel exe-
cutions which Alexander ordered after the capture
of Tyre, when 2000 captives were nailed to crosses
along the sea-shore (Q. Curtius, iv. 4; Justin,
xviii. 3). With the Romans it was used under
their early monarchical government, and was the
death to which Horatius was adjudged for the stern
and savage murder of his sister (Liv. i. 26), where
the terms employed show that the punishment
was not at that time limited to any rank or condi-
tion. It appears also from the passage that scourg-
ing (verberato) then preceded crucifixion, as un-
doubtedly was custumary in later times. The
column to which Jesus was fastened during this
cruel infliction is stated by Jerome (Epist. ad
Eustach.) to have existed in his time in the por-
tico of the holy sepulchre, and to have retained
marks of his blood. The Jews received the
punishment of crucifixion from the Romans (Jo-
seph. Antig. xii. 14, 2; xx. 6. 2; De Bell. Jud. ii.
12). Though it has been a matter of debate, yet
it appears clear that crucifixion, properly sv called,
was not originally a Hebrew punishment (Bor-
mitii de cruce num Ebreeor. supp. fuerit). The
condemned, after having been scourged (Liv.
xxxvi. 26; Prud. Enchir. xli, 1), had to bear
their cross, or at least the transverse beam, to the
place of execution (Plut. De Tard, Dei Vind. 9;
Artemid. 11, 41), which was generally in sume
frequented place without the city (Cic. Verr. v.
66), The cross itself, or the upright beam, was
fixed in the ground (Cic. ad Quint. Fr. i. 2;
Pro Rat. iv. 2). Arrived at the spot the delin-
quent was supplied with an intoxicating drink,
made of myrrh and other bitter herbs (Pipping,
Exercit, Acad. lv.), and having been stript of his
clothing, was raised and affixed to the cross, by
pails driven into his hands, and more rarely into
his feet; sometimes the feet were fastened by one
nail driven through both (Tertull. Adv. Jud. x.;
Sen. De Vita Beat. 19; Lactan. iv. 13). The feet
were occasionally bound to the cross by cords,
and Xenophon asserts that it was usual among
the Egyptians to bind in this manner not only the
feet but the hands. A small tablet (¢itudus), de-
claring the crime, was placed on the top of the
cross (Sueton. Cal. 38; Dom. 10; Euseb. Hist.
Eccles. vy. 1). The body of the crucified person
rested on a sort of seat (wiyua) (Iren. Adv. Her. ii.
42). The criminal died under the most frightful
suilerings—so great that even amid the raging
passions of war pity was sometimes excited. Jo-
sephus (De Bell. Jud. y. xi, 1) narrates of captives
tke at the siege of Jerusalem, that ‘they were
first whipped, and tormented with all sorts of tor
tures,and then crucitied Lefore the walls of the city.
The soldiers, out of the wrath and hatred they
bore the Jews, nailed those they caught one after
one way and another after another, nd aa by
K


500 CRUCIFIXION, DEATH BY.


way of jest, when their multitude was so great that
room was wanting for the crosses, and crosses want-
ing for the boiies. This miserable procedure
made Titus greatly pity them.’ Sometimes the
suffering was shortened and abated by breaking
the legs of the criminal—erura fracta (Cic.
Phil. xiii. 12). After death, among the heathens,
the bodies commonly remained on the cross till
they wasted away, or were devoured by birds of
prey (Horat. Epist. i. 16, 48; Non pasers in
eruce corvos; Plaut. Mil. Glor. ii. 4,19; Plin.
Hist. Nat. xxxvi. 24). A military guard was
set near the cross, to prevent the corpse from
being taken away for burial (Plut. C/comen.
39; Petron Satyr. iii. 6; Sen. Ep. 101). But
among the Jews the dead body was customarily
taken down and buried. Josephus says (De
Bell, Jud. v. 2), ‘the Jews used to take so
much care of the burial of men that they took
down those that were condemned and crucified,
and buried them before the going down of the sun."
In order that death might be hastened, and the
law might not be violated, the Jews were accus-
tome to break the legs (John xix. 21; Dent. xxi.
22; Casaub. Exerc. Antibaron. p.537; Lipsins, De
Crue. lib. iii.). There was a bare possibility in some
cases of those who had suffered tiis punishment
recovering after being taken down, under medical
treatment. Josephus thus writes (Vit. 75), ‘I saw
many captives crucified, and I remembered three
of them as my former acquaintance. I was very
sorry at this, and went with tears in my eyes to
Titus; so he immediately commanded them to
be taken down, and to receive the greatest care in
order to their recovery ; yet twoof them died un-
der the physician's hands, while the third reco-
vered.’ Compare Lretschneider, in d. Studien wu.
Krit., 1832, vol. ii. p. 625, The execution took
place at the hands of the carnifez, or hangman, at
tended by a band of soldiers, and in Rome, under
the supervision of the Trinmviri Capitales (Tac.
Ann. xv. 60; Lactan. iv. 26), The accounts given
in the Gospels of the execution of Jesus Christ are
in entire agreement with the customs and prac.
tices of the Romans in this particular (Tholuck,
Glaubwirdigkett der Evangel. Gesch, p. 361).
The punishment continued in the Roman empire
till the time of Constantine, when it was alehen
through the influence of the Christian religion.
Examples of it are found in the early part of the
emperor's reign, but the reverence which, ata later

riod, he was led to feel for the cross, induced
Kirn to put an end to the inhuman practice. (Aur,
Vict. Cas. 41; Sozom. i. 8; Niceph. vii. 46;
Firmic. viii. 20). | There is a classical work on
the subject by Lipsins, Antwerp, 1594 and
1637. Other valuable works, besides those which
have heen named in this and the article Cross,
are by Vossius, Gretser, Calixtus, Salmasius, and
Kipping. Sagittarius, Bineeus, Dilher, &c. have
treated specially on the application of this pun-
ishment in the case of our Lord. The more
ancient literature on the subject is detailed in
Fabric. Bibliogr. Antiquar. Hamb. 1760, p. 755,
ayg.—J. R. B.

CRUCIFIXION, DEATH BY (physically
considererL}, is to be attributed to the sympathetic
fever which is excited by the wounds, and aggra-
vated by exposure to the weather, privation of
water, and the painfully constrained position of
the bu:ly. Traumatic fever corresponds, in in-


CRUCIFIXION, DEATH BY.


tensity and in character, to the local inflammation
of the wound, In the first stage, while the inflam-
mation of the wound is characterized by heat,
swelling, and great juin, the fever is highly in-
flammatory; and the sufferer complains of heat,
throbbing headache, intense thirst, restlessness,
and anxiety. As soon as suppuration sets in, the
fever somewhat abates, and gradually ceases as
suppuration diminishes aud the stage of cicatrisa-
tion approaches, But if the wound be prevented
from healing, and suppuration continue, the fever
assumes a hectic character, and will sooner or
later exhaust the powers of life. When, how-
ever, the inflammation of the wound is so intense
as to produce mortification, nervous depression
is the immediate consequence; and if the cause
of this excessive inflammation of the wound sfill
continues, as is the case in crucifixion, the sufferer
rapidly sinks. He is no longer sensible of pain,
but his anxiety and sense of prostration are ex-
cessive; hiccup supervenes, his skin is moistened
with a cold clammy sweat, and death ensues. It
is in this manner that death on the cross must
have taken place, in an ordinarily healthy con-
stitution. The wounds in themselves were not
fatal ; but, as long as the nails remained in them,
the inflammation must have increased in intensity
until it produced gangrene. De la Condamine
witnessed the crucifixion of two women of those
fanatic Jansenists called Convulsionnaires. One
of them, who had been crucified thrice before,
remained on the cross for three hours. ‘They snf-
fered most pain from the operation of extracting
the nails; and it was not until then that they lost
more than a few drops of blood from their wounds.
After they were taken down, they seemed to
suffer little, and speedily recovered (Correspond,
de Grimm et Diderot, it. 75). The probabilities
of recovery after crucifixion would of course de-
pend on the degree of constitutional irritation
that had been already excited. Josephus (Vita,
74) relates that of three of his friends, for whom
he had obtained a release from the cross, ouly
one survived. The period at which death oc-
curred was very variable, as it depended on the
constitution of the sufferer, as well as on the degree
of exposure, and the state of the weather. It may,
however, be asserted that death would not take
place until the local inflammation had run its
course; and though this process may be much
hastened by fatigue and the alternate exposure to
the rays of the sun and the cold night air, it is not
completed before forty-eight hours, under ordinary
circumstances, and in healthy constitutions; so
that we may consider thirty-six hours to be the
earliest period at which crucifixion would occasion
death in a healthy adult. Many of the wounded
at Waterloo were brought into the hospitals after
having lain three days on the field, and even then
sometimes recovered from severe operations. It
cannot be objected that the heat of an Eastern
climate may not have been duly considered in
the above estimate; for many cases are recorded
of persons having survived a much longer time
than is here mentioned, even as long as eight or
nine days. Eusebius (/list. Ercles. iii, 8) says
that many of the martyrs in Egypt, who were
crucified with their heads downwards, perished
by hunger. This assertion, however, must not
be misunderstood. It was very natural to su

pose that hunger was the cause of death, when it


e


CRUSE.


was known that no food hgd been taken, and when,
as must have happened in lingering cases of cru-
cifixion, the body was seen to be emaciated. But
it nas been shown above that the nails in the
hands and feet must ihevitably have given rise to
such a degree of inflammation as to produce mor-
tification, and ultimately death ; and it is equally
certain that food would not, under such circum-
stances, have contributed to support life. More-
over, it may be added that after the fist few
hours, as soun as fever had been fully excited,
the sufferer would lose all desire for food. The
want of water was a much more important
privation. It must have caused the sufierer in-
expressible anguish, and have contributed in no
slight degree to hasten death. As-Sujuti, a cele-
brated Arabic writer, gives an interesting account
of a young Turk who was crucified at Damascus
ap. 1247. It is particularly mentioned that his
hands and feet were nailed, and even his arms
(but not as if it was in any way remarkable).
He complained of intense thirst on the first day,
and his sufferings were greatly increased by his
continually seeing before him the waters of the
Barada, on the banks of which he was crucified.
He survived two days, from the noon of Friday
to the noon of Sunday (Kosegarten, Chrestomathia
Arabica, p. 63, sq.).—W. A. N. .

CRUSE. Three Hebrew words are thus trans-
lated in the Authorized Version (1 Sam. xxvi. 11;
1 Kings xiv. 3; 2 Kings ii, 20). This now ob-
solete English word denotes a sma)l vessel for
holding water or other liquids. Such are noticed
under Borriz, Disu, Pircusr.

CRYSTAL (mR kerach, and W323 gabish,
Loth rendered in the Sept. by xpdoraddos, which
also occurs in Rev. xxi. 11). ‘There seems to be
no doubt that crystal is intended by the Greek
word in Rev. xxi. 11, as indeed the phrase of com-
parison ‘clear as crystal’ would seem naturally to
sugzest. It is not very certain, nor very likely,
that the Hebrew word gabish (Job xxviii. 18)
means crystal; but as the uther word so rendered
(kerach) denotes ice, to which crystal bears so
much external resemblance; and as in Ezek. i. 22
it occurs with an application so similar to the
xptoraddos of Rev. xxi. 11, we may with much
confidence take this to be its meaning. Indeed, this
is the more apparent when we recollect that crystal
was anciently held to be only pure water, cun-
gealed by great length of time into ice harder
than the common (Diod. Sic. ii, 52; Plin.
Hist. Nat. xxxvii. 2), and hence the Greek
word for it, in its more proper signification, also
signifies ice. From this it necessarily ftullowed
that crystal could only be produced in the
regions of perpetual ice; and this was accord-
ingly the ancient belief; but we now know
that it is found in the warmest regions. Theo-
phrastus (54) reckons crystal among the pellucid
stones used for engraved seals. In common par-
lance we apply the term crystal (as the ancients
apparently did) to a glass-like transparent stone,
commouly ofa hexagonal form, which, from being
found in rocks, is called by mineralogists rock-
crystal. It is a stone of the flint family, the most
refined kind of quartz.

CUBIT is a word derived immediately from
the Latin cudbitus, the lower arm. The length of
the cubit has varied in diflerent nations, and at


CUBIT, 501


different times. Derived as the measure is from
a part of the human body, and as the human
stature has been of very dissimilar length, the
cubit must of necessity have been various. The
lower arm, moreover, may take in the entire
length from the elbow to the tip of the third or
longest finger, or it may be considered as extend-
ing from the elbow merely to the root of the hand
at the wrist, omitting the whole length of the
hand itself. If the definition of Celsus (viii. 1)
is taken, and the cubit is identified with the Ulna,
the under and longer of the two bones of which
the arm consists, still a fixed and invariable
Measure is not gained. That the cubit (MBM)
among the Hebrews was derived as a measure from
the human body, is clear from Deut. iii. 11—‘ after
the cubit of a man.’ But it is ditficult to deter-
mine whether this cubit was understood as ex-
tending to the wrist or the end of the third
finger. As however the latter seems most natural,
since men, when ignorant of anatomy, and seeking
in their own frames standards of measure, were
likely to take both the entire foot and the entire
fore-arm, the probability is that the longer was the
original cubit, namely, the length from the elbow
to the extremity of the longest finger. To this opi-
nion W iner (Handwcrterbuch, art. ‘ Elle’)inclines,
and he denies that they are right who make the
cubit merely four hand-breadths. He mentions
in corroboration that the Egyptian cubit, which
it is likely the Hebrews would adopt, consisting
of six hand-breadths, is found on the ruins of
Memphis (Journal des Savans, 1822, Nov. Deca
comp. Herod. ii. 149). The Rabbins also (Alischaie
Chelim. xvii. 9) assign six hand-breadths to the
Mosaic cubit. By comparing Josephus (Antig.
iii. 6. 5) with Exod. xxv. 10, it will, moreover, be
found that the weight of his authority is in the
same scale. According to him, a cubit is equal
to two spans. Now, a span is equal to three
hand-breadths (Schmidt, Bibl. Mathemat. p. 117;
Eisen-Selunidt, De Ponderibus, p. 110); a cubit
therefore is equal to six hand-breadths.

The hand-breadth (MBM) is found asa measure
in 1 Kings vii. 26, comp. Jer. lii. 21. In the lat-
ter passage, the fingerbreadth (YA¥N) is another
measure. The span (M7) also occurs Exod,
xxviii, 16. So that, it appears, measures of
length were, for the most part, borrowed by the
Hebrews from members of the human body.
Still no absolute and invariable standard presents
itself. If the question, What is a hand or a finger-
breadth? be asked, the answer can be only an
approximation to fact. It, however, the palm or
hand-breadth is taken at 34 inches, then the
cubit will amount to 21 inches.

In addition to the common cubit, the Eger
tians had a longer one of 6 palms 4 inches. The
Hebiews also have been thought to have had a
longer cubit; for, in Ezek. xl. 5, we read of a
cubit which seems to be an ordinary ‘cubit and
an hand-breadth;" see also Ezek. xhii. 13, where
it is expressly said *the cubit is a cubit and an
hand-bieadth. ‘The prophet has been supposed
to refer here to the then current Babylonian cubit
—a measure which it is thought the Jews bor
rowed during the period of their captivity. The
Rabbins make a distinction between the common
cubit of 5 hand-breadths, and the sacred cubit of
6 hand breadths, a distinction which is held to be in-


sulliciently supported both by Winer (Hand. in


003 cuckaw.


voc.) and De Wette (Archiiologie, p. 178). Consult
Lamy, De Tabernaculo, c. 8; Carpzov, Apparat.
p-676. Inthe New Testament, our Lord charac-
teristically employs the term cubit (Matt. xxvii. 6;
Luke xii. 25) for the enforcement of a moral and
spiritual lesson. The- term also occurs in John
xxi. 8, and in Rev. xxi. 17. In Lev. xix. 35,
justice in measures, as well as in weights, is
strictly enjoined.—J. R. B.

CUCKOW. 4M shachaph, occurs ouly in
Lev. xi. 16, among birds of prey not clearly iden-
tified, but declared to be unclean. Our version
and others have rendered it ‘ cuckow,’ which, if
correct, stands certainly out of the order of all
affinity with the other species enumerated ; and
although the cuckow is a winter and spring bird,
distinctly heard, it appears, by Mr. Buckingham,
early in April, while crossing the mountains
between Damascus and Sidon, at that time co
vered with snow, it could scarcely deserve to be
inoluded in the prohibited list—for the species is
every where scarce. Shachapli may be an imita-
tion of its voice, since the Arabs call it Teer-el-
Yakoud, or the bird of Jacob, because in its song
it seems to t the patriarch’s name. Bochart
and Dr. A. Clarke derive Shachaph from Sache-
peth, ‘a wasting,’ and thence apply it to the
sea-gull or sea-mew, a bird pretended to be in-
capable of becoming plump or fleshy. Etymology
thus applied cannot fail to lead to error; for the
gull tribe, so fur from being lean, are usually
voy fat, but exceedingly oily and redolent of
fish.

With regard to Dr. Shaw's proposed identifi-
cation of Shachaph with his Zaf Zaf or Rhaad,
it may be observed that hard-billed ‘species feed-
ing on grain, like all gallinacea, are also very
prone to devour reptiles, and therefore are not
necessarily clean birds; but, unfortunately, what
the Rhaad may be is a question which the cha-
racters assigned to both the species leave nndeter-
mined. The black tult of feathers beneath the
throat, the white belly, and bulk of body, seem
to imply that he alluded to two species of smaller
Bustards or Pterocles, such as the Otis Torguata
Otis Kuba, Otis Hobara, Tetrix Campestris, or the
Katta, Pterocles Alchata, all of which reside in on
near Palestine, or make their passage through that
country in the proper season (Kitto’s Pictorial
Palestine, i. 406); have a low flight with beating
wings, and voices which may have suggested the
name Rhaad. And as for ‘ Zaf Zaf, Hasselquist
notices a Salix, to which he has given the local
name of ‘ Saf Saf,’ proving that the same dis-
syllable by which Shaw designates a bird is
likewise applied to a tree of the willow genus,
and that perhaps some mistake has been made in
referring it to the Rhaad.

Upon the whole, while so much obscurity stil]
remains on the subject, the interpretation of Sha-
chaph by Cuckow should, we think, remain undis-
turbed.—C. H. S.

CUCUMBERS, [Kisnuim.]


CUMMIN (8D; N.T. «duuvov), or Kaatwon,
is au umbelliferous plant, mentioned both in the
Old and New Testaments, and which, like the
dill and the coriander, continues to he culti-
vated in modern, as it was in ancient times, in

tern countries. These are similar to, and
used for many of the same purposes as the


CUMMIN.


anise and caraway, which supply their place,
and are more common in Europe. ll these
plants produce fruits, commonly called seeds,
which abound: in essential oil of a more or leas
grateful flavour, and warm stimulating nature;
hence they were employed in ancient as in mo-
dern times, both as condiments and as medicines,
So we find the Cummin mentioned by Hippo-
crates, and also by Dioscorides, under the name
of xéimuvoy. The latter writer distinguishes several
varieties, but the principal is called fiuepoy, or ta-
tivum, which the ‘Arabs, following Dhoscorides,
describe under the name of kumoon baghee, a gare
den that cultivated cummin. The Arabic name


ws kumon, is too similar to the Hebrew


Kammon to allow us to doubt their identity,
especially as we find it, in the Greek form of
xdpuvoy, employed as early as the time of Hip-
pocrates. .


Cummin is first mentioned in Isaiah (xxviii. 25);
©When he (the plonghman) hath made plain the
face thereof, doth he not cast abroad the fitches,
and scatter the cummin ;’ showing that it was
extensively cultivated, as it is in the present day,
in Eastern countries, as far even as India. In
the south of Europe it is also cultivated to some
extent. England is chiefly supplied trom Malta
and Sicily ; 53 ewt. having been imported in the
year 1839 from these islands. In the above cha
ter of Isaiah (ver. 37) cummin is again mentioned :
‘For the fitches are not threshed with a threshing
instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about
upon the cummin; but the fitches are beaten out
with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.” This
is most applicable to the fruit of the common
cummin, which, when ripe, may be separated
from the stalk with the slightest stroke, and would
be completely destroved by the turning round of
a wheel, which, bruising the seed, would press
out the oil on which its virtues depend.

In the New Testament, cummin is mentioned
in Matt. xxiii. 23, where our Saviour denounces
the scribes and Pharisees, who paid their ‘ tithe of
mint, and anise, and cummin,’ but neglected the
weighter matters of the law. In the Talmudical
tract Demai, quoted by Celsius (i. p- 519), cum-
min is mentioned as one of the things regularly
tithed : ‘Res iste decimantur dubia omni loco:


CUSH.


latha, dactyli, silique, oryza et cuminum.’

otwithstanding the numerous distinct notices of
cummin, and its difference from caraway, it is
curious how Celsius (/. ¢. p. 516) could have ad-
duced the carum of Theophrastus and Dioscorides
as identical with the cunmnium. So in the transla-
tion of Rosenmiiller (23/5/. Bot. p. 99) we have
carum Carvi given as the systematic name of cu-
minum, making the latter the caraway plant,
which it is not.—J. F. R.

CUSH (3; Xovs), the eldest son of Ham
(Gen. x. 6; 1 Chron. i. 8), from whom seems to
have been derived the name of the land of Cush,
which is commonly rendered by the Sept.,
Al@iorla, and by the Vulgate, .Lthiopia; in
which they have been followed Ly almost all other
versions, ancient and modern. The German
translation of Luther has Mohrenland, which is
euialent to Negroland, or the Country of the
Blacks. A native was called Cushi, *Y93,
Aidiof, 7Ethiops (Jer. xiii. 23), the feminine ot
which was Cushith. WWD. Aididmioca, ALthi-
opissa (Num. og and the plural Cushiin,
DD. Aldiowes, ASthiopes (Amos ix. 7).

Tue locality of the land of Cush is a question
upon which eminent authorities haye been divided ;
for while Bochart (Phaleg, iv. 2) maintained that
it was exclusively in Arabia, Gesenius (Lez. in
voce) held with no less pertinacity that it is to be
sought for no where but in Africa. 1n this opinion
he is supported by Schulthess of Zurich, in his
‘ Paradies’ (p. 11, 101}. Others again, such as
Michaelis (Spicileg. Geogr. Heb. Ext. cap. 2, p.
237), and Rosenmiller (Bibl. Geogr. by Morren,
vol. i. p. 80; vol. iii. p. 280), have supposed that
the name Cush was applied to tracts of country
both in Arabia and Africa—a circumstance which
would easily be accounted for, on the very probable
supposition, that the descendants of the primi-
tive Cushite tribes, who had settled in the former
country, emigrated across the Red Sea to the latter
region uf the earth, carrying with them the name
of Cush, their remote progenitor. This idea had
been developed by Eichhorn, in his Dissertation
entitled Verosimilia de Cuschais, 1774.

The existence of an African Cush cannot rea-
sonably be questioned, though the term is employed
in Scripture with great latitude, sometimes deno-
ting an extensive but undetined country (Ethio-
pia), and at other times one particular kingdom
(Mervé). It is expressly described by Ezekiel as
lying to the south of Egypt beyond Syene (xxix.
10; comp. xxx. 4-6.—Strabo, xvii. p. 817; Pliny,
Hist. Nat. vi. 35; Joseph. De Bell. Jud. iv. 10, 5).
Hence we find Mizraim and Cush (2. e. Egypt
and Ethiopia) so often classed together by the pro-
phets, e. g. Ps. Ixviii, 315 Isa. xi. 115 xx. 4;
xliii, 3; xlv.14; Nahnm iii.9. The inhabitants
are elsewhere spoken of in connection with the
Lubim and Sukkiim (2 Chron. xii. 3; xvi. 8;
Jer. xlvi. 7; Dan. xi. 43), supposed to he the
Libyans and Ethiopic Troglodytes, and certainly
Nations of Africa, for they belonged to the vast
army with which Shishak, king of Egypt, ‘came
out’ of that country, against Rehoboam, king of
Judah. In these, and indeed in most, other pas-
sages where ‘Cush ” occurs, Arabia is not to be
thought of; the Ethiopia of Africa is beyond all
doubt exclusively intended, and to the article
©Eruropra’ we refer the reader for the Scriptural


Notices regarding it.


CUSH. 608


That some of the posterity of Cush settled in
the south of Arabia may readily be granted ; but
that he gave a permanent name to any portion
either of the country or people, is by no means 80
evident: it is, at least, more a matter of inferential
conjecture than of historical certainty. Almost
all the passages usually cited in support of the
averment are susceptible of a different interpreta-
tion. For eee; in Num. i. 21, Miriam
and Aaron are said to have taken offence at Moses
for having married ‘a Cushitess;' and upon the

resumption that this was the same person as
Zipporah, daughter of the priest of Midian (Exod.
ii. 16, 21), it isinferred that Midian was in Cush.
But to say nothing of Zipporah’s high rank, orof
the services of her family to Israel, there would
have been something so grossly incongruous and
absurd in Moses’ brother and sister complaining
for the first time of his selection of a wife, after
the marriage had subsisted for more than forty
years, that it is evident Zipporah was now dead,
and this second wife, thouyh doubtless a proselyte
to Judaism, was (whether Lorn in Asia or Africa)
adescendant of Cush, and therefore a Hamite,
and not one of the Midianites, who were of
Shemitic origin, being the children of Abraham
by Keturah. Others discover a supposed connec-
tion between Cush and Midian, because in Hab,
iii. 7, the clause, ‘I saw the tents of Cushan in
affliction,’ finds a parallelism in ‘the curtains
of the land of Midian did tremble '—Cushan
being held to be the poetical and high-sounding
form of Cush. But this idea is merely conjec-
tural; and while it is acknowledged that part of
the sublime description in that chapter refers to
the Exodus and the transactions at Sinai, other
portions (such as the passaye of the Jordan, verse
8, and the standing still of the sun, verse 11)
have plainly a reference to incidents in the books
of Joshua and Judges. Now’ in the latter book
(iii, 105 viii. 12) we find a record of signal
victories successively obtained by Othniel over
Cushan Rishathaim, king of Mesopotamia, and
by Gideon over the princes of Midian. Again,
it has been rashly concluded that Zerah, the
Cushite, who attacked Asa, king of Judah, with
so immense a host (2 Chron. xiv. 9), could got
have been an Ethiopian of Africa, and yet the
fact of his army having included Libyans
(xvi. 8) as well as Ethiopians, seems decisive of
the fact, that the latter were of African origin. -
Their ancestors may have belonged to the ‘ people
without number,” whom Shishak bad led forth
against Asa’s grandfather, Rehoboam (xii. 3),
aud these, their descendants, may have retained
possession of the north of Arabia Petraa, between
Palestine and Egypt (see Bruce's Z'ravels, vol. i.

. 30).
¥ ver though there is a great lack of evidence to
show that the name of Cush was ever applied to any
part of Arabia, there seems no reason to doubt that
a portion of the Cushite race did early settle there.
According to the ethnographic table in the 10th
chapter of Genesis, Cush was the father of Seba,
Havilah, Sabta, Raamah (whose suns were Sheba
and Dedan), Sabthecah, and also of Nimrod
(Gen. x. 7, 8; 1 Chron. i. 9, 10). The last men-
tioned appears to have moved northward, firet
into Babylonia, and then into Assyria, but the
others seem to have migrated to the south, though
it is impossible aeeuiaiely to trace out their settle-


504 CUSH.


ments. Yet, even if we give Seba to Africa, and
over as doubtful the names of Havilah, She-
and Dedan (for these were also the names of
Shemitic tribes, Gen. x. 28, 29; xxv. 3) still.
in Ezek. xxvii, 22, Raamah is plainly classed
with the tribes of Arabia, and nowhere are any
traces of Sabtali and Sabthecah to be found but in
the same country. By referring, however, to the
relative geographical positions of the south-west
cvast of Arabia and the east coast of Africa, it
will be seen that nothing separates them but the
Red Sea, and it is not unlikely that while a part
of the Cushite population immigrated to Africa,
others remained behind, and were occasionally
called by the same name. Thus in 2 Chron. xxi.
16, among those who were stirred up against the
Hebrews are mentioned the Philistines, and ‘the
Arals that were near, the Cushites, and the ex-
Pression ‘near’ (‘T° by) in this connection, can
scarcely apply to any but dwellers in the Arabian
ninsnla. In the fifth century of our era the
imaryites, in the south of Arabia, were styled by
Syrian writers Cushwans and Ethiopians (Asse-
manni, Bibl, Oricnt. i. 360; iii. 568). The
Chaldee Paraphrast Jonathan, at Gen. x. 6, and
another paraphrast at 1 Chron. i, 8, explain
*Cusl’ by Arabia. Niebuhr found in Yemen
a tribe called Beni Chusi. The book of Job
(xxviii. 19) speaks of the topaz (pitdah) of Cush,
and there was a Topaz Island in the Red Sea
(Diod. Sic. iii. 39; Pliny, Hist. Nat. xxxvii. 8;
Strabo, xvi. 4. 6). Yet most of these are circum-
stances upon which we can lay but little stress;
and the passage in 2 Chiron xxi. 16 is the only
direct evidence we possess of the name ¢ Cush’
being applied in Scripture to any part of Arabia,
and even that does nut amount to absolute de
monstration.

Some have sougiit for another Cush in more
northerly regions of Asia, as in the Persian pro-
vince of Chusistan or Susiana, in Cuthah, a
district of Babylonia, &c.; and as Nimrod,
the youngest son of Cush, spread his conquests
in that direction, it is, nv doubt, possible that
his father’s uname might be preserved in the
designation of some part of the territory or people,
But here again the data are very unsatisfactory ;
aml, indeed, the chief thing which led to the
supposition is the mention in the description of
the site of Paradise (Gen. ii. 13), of a land of Cush,
compassed by the river Gihon [Even]. But
even though the name of Cush were more variously
applied in Scripture than it really is, it would not
be more so than was the corresponding term
Ethiopia, among the Greeks and Romans, which
comprised a great many nations far distant, as
well as wholly distinct from each other, and
having nothing in common but their swarthy,
sun-burnt complexiun — Al@lop g. d. aidds thy
byw, te. Sburnt-black iu the face." Homer
(Odyss. i, 22) speaks of them as ‘a divided race
—the last of men—some of them at the extreme
west, and others at the exireme east.’ Strabo (i.
p. 60) describes them asa ‘two-fold people, lying
extended in a long tract from the rising to the
setting sun.” Herodotus (vii. 69,70) distinguishes
the eastern Ethiopians in Asia from tue western
Ethiopians in Africa, by the straight hair of the
former, and the curly hair of the latter. ‘The
ancients, in short, with the usual looseness of their
geographical detinitions, understued by Ethiopia


CUTTINGS IN THE FLESH.


the extreme south in all the earth’s longitude’
and which, lying, as they thought, close upon the
fiery zone, exposed the inhabitants to the sun’s
scorching rays, which bumt them black. It is
the mistaken idea of the Scriptural term ‘Cush’
being used in the same vague and indeterminate
manner, that has led to so much confusion on
this subject; and one writer (Buttmann, Ave,
Erdk. d. Morgenl. p. 40 note), in his desire to
carry out the parallel between Ethiopia and Cush,
derives the latter word from the root i313 (kava,
kau, ku) ‘to bum;’ but that is opposed to all the
rules of etymological analogy in the formation of
Hebrew proper names (comp. Ritter’s Erdkunde
Th. i. p. 222; Heeren’s African Nations, Engl.
Transl. vol. i. p. 289).—N. M.

CUTHAH, (‘IN43 ; Sept. XouGd), & district in
Asia, whence Shalmaneser transplanted certain
colonists into the land of Israel, which he had de-
solated (2 Kings xvii. 24-30). From the inter
mixture of these colonists with the remaining
natives sprung the Samaritans, who are called
Cuthites (D'M13) in the Chaldee and the Talmud,
and for the same reason a number of non-Semitic
words which occur in the Samaritan dialect are
called Cuthian. The situation of the Cuthah
from which these colonists came is altogether un-
known. Josephus places it in central Persia, and
finds there a river of the same name (Antiq. ix.
14.3; x. 9,7). Rosenmiiller and others incline
to seek it in the Arabian Irak, where AbLulfeda
and other Arabic and Persian writers place a
town of this name, in the tract near the Nahr
Malca, or royal canal, which connected the Eu
phrates and Tigris to the south of the present
Bagdad. Winer seems to prefer the conjec-
ture of Stephen Morin and Le Clerc, which
identifies the Cuthites with the Cossai in Susiana
(Arrian, Indic. xl.3 Plin. Hist. Nat. vi. 31;
Diod. Sic. xvii. 111; Mannert, ii. 493). All these
conjectures refer essentially to the same quarter,
and any of them is preferable to the one suggested
by Michaelis, that the Cuthites were Phoenicians
from the neighbourhood of Sidon, founding it upon
reasons which no one regards as satisfactory, aud
which it is therefore unnecessary to re-produce.


CUTHITES, [Samanitans.]


CUTTINGS IN THE FLESH. Amongst
the prohibitory laws which God gave the Israel-
ites there was one that expressly furbad the prac-
tice embraced in those words, viz. ‘Ye shall not
make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead’
(Lev. xix. 28). It is evident from this law
that such a species of self-inflicted torture ob-
tained amongst the nations of Canaan; and it
was, doubtless, to guard His people against the
adoption of so barbarous a habit, in its idolatrous
form, that God led Moses to reiterate the pro-
hibition: ‘They shall not make baldness upon
their heads, neither shall they shave off the corer
of their beards, nor make any cuttings in their
flush’? (Lev. xxi. 5; Deut. xiv. 1). .

_ Investing his imaginary deities with the attri
butes of cruelty, man has, at all times and ina
countries, instituted a furm of religion consisting
in ciuel rites and bloody ceremonies. If then we
lovk to the practices of the heathen world, whe-
ther of ancient or modern times, we shall find
that almost the entire of their religion consiste?
of rites of deprecation. Fear of the Divine die


CUTTINGS IN THE FLESH.


pleasure would seem to have been the leading
feature in their religious impressions. The uni-
versal prevalence of human sacrifices throughout
the Gentile world is, in itself, a decisive f of
the light in which the human a unaided by
revelation, is disposed to view the Divinity.

It ary doubtless such mistaken views of the
character of God that led the prophets of Baal
(1 Kings xviii. 28) to cut their bodies with lancets,
supposing that, by mingling their own blood with
that of the offered sacrifice, their god must be-
come more attentive to the voice of entreaty.
Agreeably to the inference which all this fur-
nishes, we find Tacitus declare (Hist. i, 4),
‘Non esse curse Diis securitatem nostram, sed
ultionem.’ In fact it was a current opinion
amongst the ancient heathen that the gods were
jealous of human happiness; and in no part of
the heathen world did this opinion more pre-
vail, according to Sanchoniathon’s account, ther
amongst the inhabitants of those very countries
which surrounded that land where Gud designed
tu place his people Israel. Hence we see why God
would lay them under the wholesome influence of
such a prohibitory law as that under consideration:
‘Ye shall not make any cutting in your flesh for
the dead.” The ancients were very violent in
their expression of sorrow. Virgil ts the
sister of Dido as tearing her face with her nails,
and beating her breast with her fists :-—

‘Unguibus ora soror foedans et pectora pugnis.’

4En. iv. 672.

The present writer has seen in India the
same wild exhibition of grief for the departed
relative or friend. Some of the learned think
that that law of Solon’s, which was transferred
by the Romans into the Twelve Tables, that
women tn mourning should not scratch ‘their
cheeks, derived its origin from this law of Moses
(Lev. xix. 28). But, however this opinion may
be questioned, it would appear that the simple
tearing of their flesh out of grief and anguish of
spirit is taken, in other of Scripture, as a
mark of affection: thus (Jer. xlviii. 37), ‘ Every
head shall be bald, every beard clipped, and
upon all cuttings. Again (ch. xvi. 6): ‘Both
the great and the small shall die in the land:
they shall not be buried, neither shall men lament
for them, nor cut themselves.’ So (ch. xli. 5):
‘There came from Samaria fourscore men having
their heads shaven and their clothes rent, and
having cut themselves, with offerings to the house
of the Lord.’

The spirit of Islam is less favourable than that
of heathenism to displays of this kind: yet ex-
amples of them are not of rare occurrence even
in the Moslem countries of Western Asia, in-
cluding Palestine itself. The annexed figure is
copied from one which is represented in many of
the bouks of travel in Egypt and Palestine which
were printed in the seventeenth century. It is
described by the missionary Eugene Roger (La
Terre Saincte, &c. 1646, p. 252) as representing
‘one of those calenders or devotees whom the
Arabs name Bulhoaua,’ and whom the simple
people honour as boly martyrs, He appears in
public with a scimitar stuck through the fleshy
part of his side, with three heavy iron spikes
thrust through the muscles of his arm, and with a
feather inserted into a cut in his forehead. He
woves about with great compvsure, and endures


CYPRUS. 605


all these sufferings, hoping for recompense in the
Paradise of Mohammed—‘ Aveuglement digne
de larmes (adds the monk), que ces misérables
commencent ici une vie pleine de souffrance,
eS continuer éternellement dedans les ge-
de I’Enfer!’ Add to this, the common


accounts of the gashes which the Persian devotees
inflict upon themselves, in the frenzy oftheir love
and grief, during the annual mourning for
Hassan and Hossein (Morier, Malcolm, &c.), and
the curious particulars in Aaron Hill’s Account
of the Ottoman Empire (ch. 13), respecting the
proceedings of young Turks in love :—‘ The most


Yidiculous and senseless method of expressing


their affection is their singing certain amurdus
and whining songs, composed on purpose for such
mad occasions, between every line whereof they
cut and slash their naked arms with daggers,
each endeavouring in this emulative madness to
exceed the other by the depth and number of the
wounds he gives himself.’

From the examples which have been produced,
we may very safely conclude that the expression
‘cuttings in the flesh,’ in these passages of Scrip-
ture, was designed, as already intimated, to
declare the feeling of strong affection; as though
the living would say, ‘ See how little we regard
the pleasures of life, since now the object of our
affection is removed from us!’ We must there-
fore come back to our former position, that it was
against those self-inflicted tortures, by which the
unhappy devotees vainly thought tv deprecate
the wrath of their angry gods towards their de<
ceased relatives and friends, this law of Moses
was especially aimed.—J. W. D.

CYMBALS. [Music.]

CYPRESS. [Bezrosu.]

CYPRUS (Kénpos), the modern Kebris, one
of the largest islands in the Mediterranean, _
and next to Sicily In importance. It is about
140 miles in length, and varies in breadth from
50 to 5 miles. From its numerous headlands
and promontories, it was called Kepaoris, Kerastis,
or the Horned ; and frum its exuberant fertility,
Maxapla, Macaria, or the blessed (beatam Cy-
prum: Hor. Carm. ii. 26. 9). Its proximity to Asia
Minor, Phenicia, and Egypt, and its numerous
havens, made it a general rendezvous for mer-
chants. ‘ Corn, wine, and oil,’ which are so often
mentioned in the Old Testament as the choicest
productions of Palestine (Deut. xii. 17; 1 Chron.
1x. 29; Neh. x. 39; Jer. xxxi. 12), were found
here in the highest perfection. The forests also
furnished large supplies of timber for ship-build-
ing, which rendered the conquest of the island a
favourite project of the Egyptian kings. It was


606 CYRENE.


the boast of the Cyprians that they could build
and complete their vessels without any aid
from foreign countries (Ammian. Marcell. xiv. 8,
§ 14). Among the mineral products were dia-
monds, emeralds, and other precious stonés, alum,
and asbestos ; besides iron, lead, zinc, with a por-
tion of silver, and, above all, copper, the far-famed
@s Cyprium. The principal mines were in the
neighbourhood of Tamassus (Strabo, xiv. 6, vol.
iii. p. 245, ed. Tauchn.). ‘In Cyproubi prima
fuit eris inventio’ (Plin. Nat. Hist. xxxiv. 2).
Cyprus was originally peopled from Phoenicia
Cuitrim]. Amasis I. king of Egypt, subdued
e whole island (Herod. ii. 182). In the time of
Herodotus the population consisted of Athenians,
Arcadians, Phenicians, and Ethiopians (vii. 90).
Under the Persians and Macedonians the whole
island was divided into nine petty sovereiynties.
After the death of Alexander the Great it fell to
the share of Ptolemy, the son of Lagus. It was
brought under the Roman dominion by Cato.
Under the Emperor Augustus it was at first an
imperial province, and afterwards, with Gallia
Narbonensis, made over to the senate (Dion Cass.
liv. iv.). When the empire was divided it fell to
the share of the Byzantine emperors. Richard I.
of England conquered it in 1191, and gave it to
Guy Lusignan, by whose family it was retained
for nearly three centuries. In 1473 the republic
of Venice obtained possession of it; but in 1571
it was taken by Selim IL, and ever since has been
under the dominion of the Turks. The majority
of the population belong to the Greek church;
the archbishop resides at Leikosia. Cyprus was
one of the tirst places out of Palestine in which
Christianity was promulgated, though at first to
Jews only (Acts xi. 19), by ¢ those who were scat-
tered abroad’ after Stephen's martyrdom. It was
visited by Barnabas and Paul on their first mis-
sionary tour (Acts xiii. 4), and subsequently by
Barnabas and John Mark (Acts xv. 39). Paul
sailed to the south of the island on his voyage
to Rome (Acts xxvii. 4). [Enysas; Parnos;
Sgraius Pautus; Savamis.| (Mannert, Geogra-
phie der Griechen und Romer, vi. 2, pp. 422-154;
Penny Cyclopedia, art. ‘Cyprus; Dr. R. Po-
eocke’s Description of the East, &e. Lond. 1745,
vol. ii. book iii. ch. i. pp. 210-235 ; Wilson's Tra-
vels in the Holy Land, Euypt, &c. Loud, 18381,
vol. ii. ch. xii. pp. 174-197).—J. E. R.
CYRENE . (Kupfvm; Ghrenna, in modern
Arabic), a city in Upper Libya, founded about
the year s.c. 632, by a colony of Greeks from
Thera (Santorini), a small island in the AZgean
sea (Thirlwall's History of Greece, vol. ii. ch. 12),
Its name is generally supposed to be derived from
a fountain (but according to Justin, Hist. xiii., o
mountain), called Kupy, Cyre, near its site. It
was built on a table-land, 1800 feet above the
level of the sea, in a region of extraordinary ferti-
lity and beauty. It was the capital of a district,
called from it Cyrenaica (Barca), which extended
from the Gulf of Platea (Bomba) to the Great
Syrtis (Gulf of Sidra). With its port Apollonia
(Musa Soosa), about 10 miles distant, and the
cities Barca, Teuchira, and Hesperis, which at a
later peril were named Ptolemais, Arsinoe, and
Berenice (Strabo, xvii. vol. iii. p.496, ed. Tauchn.),
it formed the Cyrenaic Pentapolis. For above 180
years the form of government was monarchical; it
then became republican; and at last, the country


CYRENIUS.,


became tributary to Egypt, under Ptolemy Soter.
It was bequeatiied to the Romans by Apion, the
natural son of Ptolemy Physcon, about 97 B.c.
(Tacitus, Annal. xiv. 18; Cicero, De leg. Agrar.
ii, 19), and was then formed into a province with
Crete (Strabo, xvii. 3). Strabo (quoted by Jo-
sephus, Antiq. xiv. 7) says, that in Cyrene there
were fuur classes of persons, namely citizens, hus-
bandmen, foreigners, and Jews, and that the latter
enjoyed their own customs and laws, At the
commencement of the Christian era, the Jews of
Cyrene were s0 numerous in Jerusalem that they
had a synagogue of their own (Acts ii. 10; vi. 9).
Some of the first Christian teachers were natives of
Cyrene (Acts xi. 20; xiii. 1). Simeon, who was
compelled to assist in bearing the cross of the Sa-
viour, was a Cyrenian (Matt. xxvii. 32; Mark
xv. 21; Luke xxiii. 26).

The ruins of Cyrene and the surrounding coun-
try have been diligently explored within the last
few years; in 1817 by Dr. Della Cella, in 1921-
22 by Capt. Beechey, and in 1826 by M. Pacho,
a French traveller. A very interesting account
of the results of their investigations is given in the
Penny Cyclopedia, under the article Cyrenatca.

J.E.R.

CYRENIUS (Kvuphmos, or, according to his
Latin appellation, P. Su.prt1us Qurrinivs), go-
vernor of Syria (Luke ii. 1, 2). The mention of
his name in connection with the census which was
in progress at the time of our Lord’s birth, presents
very serions dilliculties, of which, from the want
of adequate data, historical and critical inquiry
has not yet attained a satisfactory solution, The
passage is as follows: airy 4 deoypaph wpéry
é-yevero ipyeuovevovros ths Zupias Kupnviou, trans-
lated in the Authorized Version thus: * Now this
taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor
of Syria.’ Instead of ‘taxing’ it is now agreed that
the rendering should be ‘enrolment,’ or ‘ registra-
tion’ (of which use of the word droypdpecba
many examples are adduced by Wetstein), as it
is clear from Josephus that no taxing did take place
till many years after this period, The whole pas-
sage, as it now stands, may be properly read, * This
enrol ment was the first while Cyrenius was governor
of Syria.’

This appears very plain, and would suggest no
ditticulty, were it not for the knowledge which we
obtain from other quarters, which is to the etlect,
1. that there is no historical notice of any enrolment
at or near the time of our Lord's birth; and, 2.
that the enrolment which actually did take place
under Cyrenius was not uutil ten years after that
event.

The difficulty begins somewhat before the text
now cited ; for it is said that, ‘in those days there
went out a decree from Cassar Augustus that the
whole world should be taxed’ (enrolled). But since
no historian mentions any such general enrolment
of the whole empire, and since, if it had taken
place, it is not likely to have been mentioned in
connection with the governor of Syria, it is now
usually admitted that Judea only is meant by the
phrase rendered ‘the whole earth’ (but more pro-
perly ‘the whole land’), as in Luke xxi. 26;
Acts xi, 28; and perhaps in xxi. 20. The
real diilicnlties are thus reduced to the two now
stated. With regard to the enrolment, it may be
said that it was probably not deemed of sufficient
importance by the Roman historians to deserve


7
ad
a
5


Yo ee


CYRENIUS.


mention, being confined to a remote and com-
paratively unimportant province. Nor was it
perhaps of such a nature as would lead even Jo-
rephus to take notice of it, if it should appear, as
usually supposed, that no trace of it can be found
in his writings.

Of the remaining difficulties various solutions
have been offered ; and some, despairing of any
satisfactory solution, have supposed the verse in
question to have been a marginal gloss which has
crept into the text; while others have even ven-
tured to suggest that St. Luke must have been
mistaken. ‘The following explanations are, how-
ever, those which are the most generally re-
ceived.—

I. Assuming, on the authority of Luke, that
an enrolment actually did take place at the time
of our Lord's birth, the hypothesis proceeds to
make out a probability that Cyrenius was then
joint-governor of Syria along with Saturninus,
It is known that a few years previous to this date,
Volumnius had been joined with Satuminus as
the procurator of that province; and the two,
Saturninus and Volumnius, are repeatedly spoken
of together by Josephus, who styles them equally
governors of Syria (Antig. xvi. 9, 1; xvi. 9, 8).
Josephus does not mention the recall of Volum
nius; but there is certainly a possibility that
this had taken place before the birth of Christ, and
that Cyrenius, who had already distinguished
himself, had been sent in his place. He would
then have been under Satuminus, a fyeudy,
‘governor,’ of Syria, just as Volumnius had
been before, and as Pilate was afterwards, of
Judwa. That he should here be mentioned as
such by Luke, rather than Saturninus, is very
naturally accounted for by the fact, that he re-
turned, ten years afterwards, as procurator or
chief governor, and then held a second and more
important census for the purpose of registration
and taxation, when Archelaus was deposed, and
Judiea annexed to the Roman province of Syria.
The only real objection to this solution is the
silence of all other history. But although profane
history does not aflirm the fact of Cyrenius
having formerly been procurator of Syria, yet it
dors not in any way deny it; and we may there-

fore safely rest upon the authority of the sacred
writer for the truth of this fact, just as we do for the
fact of the existence of the first enrolment itself.

2. Another explanation would read the passage
thus :—* This enrolment was made before Cyre-
nius was governor of Syria.’ The a:lvocates of
this view suppose that Luke inserted this verse as
a sort of parenthesis, to prevent his readers trom con-
founding this enrolment with the subsequent cen-
sus made by Cyrenius. The positive, or rather
the superlative, xpdérn, is thus understood in the
sense of the comparative xparrépa, aud is made to
govern the following genitive. That both the
positive and superlative are sometimes used in

lace of the comparative is doubtlessly true;

at such a construction would in the present case
be very harsh, and very foreign to the usual sim-
plicity of Luke.

3. Another mode of getting over the difficulty
is sanctioned by the names of Calvin, Valesins,
Wetstein, Hales, and others. First, changing
airy into avrh they obtain the sense :—‘In those
days there went furth a decree from Augustus,


that the whole land should be enrolled; but the


CYRENIUS. 507


enrolment ttself was first made when Cyrenius
was governor of Syria.’ The supposition here is,
that the census was commenced under Saturninus,
but was not completed till two years after, under
Quirinus. Dr. Robinson (Addit. to Calmet, in
‘ Cyrenius’) objects to this view the entire absence
of any historical basis for it. But he must at
the time have been unmindful of Hales, who, .
in his Chronology, has worked out this explana-
tion with more than his usual care and success,

Hales reminds us that a little before the birth
of Christ, Herod had marched an army into Ara-
bia to redress certain wrongs which he had re-
ceived; and this proceeding had been so mis-
Tepresented to Augustus that he wrote a very harsh
letter to Herod, the substance of which was, that
Shaving hitherto treated him as a friend, he
would now treat him as a subject. And when
Herod sent an embassy to clear himself, the em-
pee repeatedly refused to hear them, and so

erod was forced to submit to all the injuries
(mapavoulas} offered to him (Joseph. Antig. xvi.
9). Now it may be collected that the chief of
these injuries was the performance of his threat
of treating him asa subject, by the degradation of
his kingdom to 2 Roman province. For soon
after Josephus incidentally mentions that ‘the
whole nation of the Jews took an oath of fidelity
to Cesar and the king jointly, except 6000 of the
Pharisees, who, through their hostility to the regal
government, refused to take it.’ The date of this
transaction is determined by its having been
shortly befure the death of Pheroras, ant coin-
cides with the time of this decree of enrolment
and of the birth of Christ. The oath which Jose-
phus mentions would be administered at the same
time, according to the usage of the Roman cen-
sus, in which a return of persons, ages, and pro-
yerties, Was required to be made upon oath, under
penalty of confiscation of goods, as we learn from
Ulpian. That Cyrenius, a Roman senator and
procurator, was employed to make this enrolment,
we learn not only fro:n St. Luke, but by the joint
testimony of Justin Martyr, Julian the Apostate,
and Eusebius; and it was made while Saturninus
was president of Syria (to whom it was attributed
by Tertullian) in the thirty-third year of Herod's
reign, corresponding to the date of Christ's birth,
Cyrenius, ate is described hy Tacitus as ‘im-
piger militia et acribus ministeriis,’ an active
soldier and rigid commissioner,’ was well quali-
fied for an employment so odious to Herod and
his subjects; and probably came to execute the
decree with an armed force. The enrolment of
the inhabitants, ‘each in his own city,’ was
in conformity with the wary policy of the Roman
jurisprudence, to prevent insurrections and to ex-

lite the business; and if this precaution was
judged prudent even in Italy, much more must
it have appeared necessary in turbulent provinces
like Judeea and Galilee.

At the present juncture, however, it appears
that the census proceeded no further than the first
act, namely, of the enrolment of persons in the
Roman register. For Herod sent his trusty mi-
nister, Nicolas of Damascus, to Rome; who, by
his address and presents, found means to mollify
and undeceive the emperor, so that he proceeded
no further in the design which he had entertained.
The census was consequently at this time sus-
pended; but it was afterwards carried into effect


,
608 CYRUS.


upon the deposal and banishment of Archelaus,
and the settlement of Judza as a Roman province.
On this occasion the trusty Cyrenius was sent
again, as president of Syria, with an armed force,
to confiscate the property of Archelaus, and to
complete the census for the purposes of taxation.
This taxation was a poll tax of two drachma
a-head upon males from fourteen, and females
from twelve to sixty-five years of age—equal
to about fifteen pence of our money. This was
the ‘tribute money’ mentioned in Matt. xvii.
24-27. The payment of it became very obnoxious
to the Jews, and the imposition of it occasioned
the insurrection under Judas of Galilee, which
Luke himself describes as having occurred ‘in
the days of the taxing’ (Acts v. 37).

By this statement, connected with the slight
emendation of the text already indicated, Hales
considers that ‘ the Evangelist is critically recon-
ciled with the varying accounts of Josephus,
Justin Martyr, and Tertullian ; and an historical
difliculty satisfactorily solved, which has hitherto
set criticism at deliance.’ This is perhaps saying
too mucli; but the explanation is undoubtedly
one of the best that has yet been given (Analysis
of Chronology, iii. 48-53; Lardner’s Credibility,
i. 248-329; Robinsun, Addit. to Calmet, in ‘Cy-
renius’; Wetstein, Kuinoel, and Campbell, on
Luke ii. 2, &c.).

CYRUS (W135 Khorcsh, Kipos), the celebrated
Persian conqueror of Babylon, who promulgated
the first edict fur the restoration of the Jews to
their own land (Ezra i. 1, &c.). We are informed
by Strabo that his original name was Agra-
dates (xv. 3, p. 520, ed. Tauchn.); but he as-
sumed that of Kouros, or Khouresh (whichever
was the most accurate Persian furm) doubtless on
ascending the throne. For Ctesias tells us (Pho-
tius, Epit. Ctes. ch. xlix.) that the word imeans the
Sun. We may perhaps compare it with the
Hebrew DIN Aheres, which bears the same sense;
and with the name of the Egyptian deity Horus,
or Apollo.

The authorities on which we have to rest for
our knowledge of the life of Cyrus are chiefly
three. First, Herodotus, who reported the tales
concerning him current in Asia a century later;
but selected from them with the taste of a Greek
epic or romance writer. Secondly, Xenophon,
who has made the lite of Cyrus the foundation of
a@ philosophical novel, written in a moral spirit,
as unhistorical as that of Fenelon’s ‘Télémaque.
Thirdly, the epitome of Ctesias, preserved for us
by the patriarch Photius. Ctesias was a Greek
physician, who stayed seventeen years at the Per-
sian court towards the end of the reign of Darius
Nothus, about s.c. 416-400. (See Buhr's Ctesias,
p- 15.) According to Diodorus, he drew his his-
tories from the royal archives; and, in part, that
may be true. Buta large number of the facts
recorded by him would certainly never have been
allowed a place in them; and several great ana-
chronisms which he commits are mistakes of a
kind which can scarcely ever occur in books
written in the form of annals. It would seem
then that his sources of knowledge were not much
better than those of Herodotus; but his length-
ened stay in Persia so familiarized him with Per-
sian institutions, and multiplied his opportunities
of access to those sources, that, ceteris paribus,
ue appears to be a Letter authority, Uniortu-


CYRUS.


nately, nothing remains to us but a mere epitome
of his work.

From these and a few subordinate authorities,
we must endeavour to give as good a reply as we
can to the chief problems concerning the life of
Cyrus.

On the parentage of Cyrus.—Herodotus and
Xenophon agree that he was son of Cambyses
prince of Persia, and of Mandane daughter of
Astyages, king of the Median empire. Ctesias de-
nies that there was any relationship at all between
Cyrus and Astyages. According to him, when
Cyrus had defeated and captured Astyages, he
adopted him asa grandfather, and invested Amytis,
or Amyntis, the daughter of Astyages (whose
name is in all probability only another form of
Mandane), with al] the honours of queen dowager.
His object in so doing was to facilitate the sub-
mission of the more distant parts of the empire,
which were not yet conquered; and he reaped
excellent fruit of his policy in winning the homage
of the ancient, Teh and remote province of
Bactria. ‘Ctesias adds, that Cyrus afterwards
married Amytis. It is easy to see that the latter
account is by far the more historical, and that the
story followed by Herodotus and Xenophon is
that which the courtiers published in aid of the
Persian prince's designs. Yet there is no reasan
fur doubting that, on the father’s side, Cyrus be-
longed to the Achwmenida, the royal clan of the
military tribe of the Persians.

On the elevation of Cyrus.—It was the fre-
quent practice of the Persian monarchs, and
probably therefore of the Medes before them, to
choose the provincial viceroys from the royal fa-
mnilies of the subject nations, and thereby to leave
to the vanquished much both of the semblance
and of the reality of freedom. This will be suffi-
cient to account for the first steps of Cyrus towards
eminence. But as the Persian armies were at
that time composed of ruder and braver men than
the Ear eieey to this day, the men of Shiraz
are proverbially braver than those of Isfahan)—
the account of Xenophon is credible, that in the
general wars of the empire Cyrus won the attach-
ment of the whole army by his bravery ; while,
as Herodotus tells, the atrocious cruelties of
Astyages may have revolted the hearts of the
Median nobility.

On the transition of the empire from the
Medes to the Persians.—Xenophon's romance
omits the fact that the transference of the empire
was effected by a civil war; nevertheless, the
same writer in his Anabasis confesses it (iii. 4,
7, 12). Herodotus, Ctesias, Isocrates, Strabo,
and, in fact, all who allude to the matter at all,
agree that it was so. In Xenophon (é. c.) we
find the Upper Tigris to have been the seat of one
campaign, where the cities of Larissa and Mes-
pila were besieged and taken by Cyrus. From
Strabo we learn that the decisive battle was
fought on the spot where Cyrus afterwards built
Pasargadm, in Persis, for his native capital.
This agrees with Herodotus’s account of two
armies being successively lost, which may mean
that the war was ended in two campaigns. Yet
Ctesias represents Astyages as finally captured in
the palace of Ecbatana. Cyrus (says Herodotus)
did Astyages no harm, but kept him by his side
to the end of his life. This is like the generosity


_ of the Persian kings to vanquished foreigners, but


CYRUS.


very unlike the conduct of fortunate usurpers,
east or west, towards a fallen superior. The tale
in Ctesias is more like the current imperial craft.
There we read that Cyrus at first made Astyages
tuler of the Barcanians (see Tzetzes, in Bihr's
Ctes. p. 222), and afterwards sent for him by the
eunuch Petisacas to visit his daughter and son-in-
law, who were longing to see him. The eunuch,
however. put him to death on the road; and
Cyrus, indignant at the deed, gave up the mur-
deter to the cruel vengeance of the queen. As-
tyages had certainly lived long enough for the
policy of Cyrus; who, by the Roman Cassius's
test of Cus bono? ‘ Who gained by it?’ cannot
be accounted innocent,

The Medes were by no means made subject to
the Persians at first. It is highly probable that, as
Herodotus and Xenophon represent, many of the
noblest Medes sided with Cyrus, and during his
reign the most trusted generals of the armies were
Medes. Yet even this hardly explains the phe-
nomenon of a Darius tle Mede, who, in the book
of Daniel, fur two years hulds tae government in
Babylon, after the capture of the city by the
Medes and Persians. Indeed, the language used
concerning the kingdom of Darius might be ex-
plained as Oriental hyperbole, and Darius be
supposed a mere satrap of Babylon, only that
Cyrus is clearly put forward as a successor to
Darius the Mede. Many have been the attempts
to reconcile this with the current Grecian ac-
Counts; but there is one only that has the least
plausibility, viz. that which, with Xenophon,
teaches that Astyages had a son still living
(whom Xenophon calls Cyaxares), and that this
ton isno other than Darius the Mede; to whom
Cyrus, by a sort of nephew's piety, conceded a
Nominal supremacy at Babylon. Objections to
this likewise are evident, but they must be dis-
cussed under ¢ Darius the Mede,’ or the book of
* Daniel.’

In the reign of the son of Cyrus the depression
of the Medes probably commenced. At his death
the Magian conspiracy took place; after the de-
feat of which the Medes doubtless sunk lower
still. Ata later time they made a general insur-
rection against the Persian power, and its sup-
Pression seems to have brought them to a level
witi Hyrcanians, Bactrians, and other vassal na-
ons which spoke the tongue of Persia; for the
hations of the poetical Zrdn had only dialectual
Variations of Janguage (Strabo, xv. 2, p. 311).

, Conquests and Wars of Cyrus.—The descrip-
Yous given us in Ctesias, and in Plutarch’'s Ar-
taxerxes (which probably are taken from Ctesias),
concerning the Persian mode of fighting, are quite
Homeric in their character. No skill seems to
be needed by the general; no tactics are thought
of: he dues his duty best by behaving as the
bravest of common soldiers, and by acting the
Part of champion, like a knight in the days of
chivalry. We cannot suppose that there was any
greater advance of the military art in the days of
Cyrus. It is agreed by all that he subdued the
Lydians, the Greeks of Asia Minor, and the
Sabylonians : we may doubtless add Susiana,
Which must have been incorporated with his em-
ie before he commenced his war with Babylon ;
Nrere also he fixed his military capital (Susa, or

tushan), as more central for the necessities of his

Tainistration than Pasargadw, Yet the latter


CYRUS. 609


city continued to be the more sacred and beloved
home of the Persian court, the place of coronation
and of sepulture (Strabo, xv. 3, p. 318 ; and Plut.
Artaz. init.). All Syria and Phoenicia appear
to have come over to Cyrus peaceably.

In regard to the Persian wars, the few facts
from Ctesias, which the ep:tomator has extracted
as differing from Herodotus, carry with them high
probability. He states that, after receiving the
submission of the Bactrians, Cyrus made war on
the Sacians, a Scythian (i. e, a Sclavonic) people, |
who seem to have dwelt, or perhaps rather roved,
along the Oxus, from Bokhara to Khiva; and, that,
after alternate successes in battle, he attached the
whole nation to himself in faithful allegiance.
Their king is called Amorges by Ctesias. They
are undoubtedly the same people that Herodotus
(vii. 64) calls Amyrgian Sacians; and it is
highly probable that they gave to the district of
Margiana its name. Their women fought in
ranks, as systematically as the meu. Strabo has
cursorily told us of a tradition (xv. 2, p. 307)
that Cyrus escaped with but seven men through
the deserts of Gedrosia, fleeing from the ‘ Indians’ —
which might denote an unsuccess{ul war against
Candahar, &c., a country which certainly was
not reduced to the Persian empire until the reign
of Darius Hystaspis.

The closing scene of the career of Cyrus was in
battle with a people living on one or both banks of
the river Iaxartes, now the Syr-deria. Herodotus
calls the enemy the Massagetans, who roamed
along the north bank of the river: according to
Ctesias it was the Derbices, who seem to have
been on the south. Both may in fact have com-
bined in the war. In other respects the narrative
of Ctesias is beyond comparison more credible,
and more agreeable with other known facts, except
that he introduces the fiction of Indians with ele-
phants aiding the enemy. Two battles were
fought on successive days, in the former of which
Cyrus was mortally wounded, but was carried
off by his people. In the next, the Sacian cavalry
and the faithful Amorges came to support him,
and the Derbices sustained a total and bloody
defeat. Cyrus died the third day after his wound :
his body. was conveyed to Pasargade, and hu-
ried in the celebrated monument, which was
broken open by the Macedonians two centuries
afterwards (Strabo, xv. 3; Arrian, vi. 29). The
inscription, reported by Aristobulus, an eye-
witness, is this:—*O man, I am Cyrus, who
acquired the empire for the Persians, and was
king of Asia. Grudge me not then this monu-
ment.’

Behaviour of Cyrus to the Jews.—The kings
of Assyria and Babylon had carried the Jews
into captivity, both to remove a disafiected nation
from the frontier, and to people their new cities.
By undoing this work, Cyrus attached the Jews
to himself, as a garrison at an important post.
But we may believe that a nobler motive con-
spired with this. The Persian religion was pri-
mitively monotheistic, and strikingly free from
idolatry ; so little Pagan in its spirit, that, what-
ever of the mystical and obscure it may contain,
not a single impure, cruel, or otherwise immoral

ractice was united to any of its ceremonies.
qt is credible, theretore, that a sincere admiration
of the Jewish faith actuated the noble Persian
when he exclaimed, in the words of the book of


610 DABERATH.


Ezra, ‘Go ye up, and build in Jerusalem the
house of Jehovah, God of Israel; He is God !'—
and forced the Babylonian temples to disgorge
their ill-gotten spoil. It is the more remarkable,
since the Persians disapproved the continement
of temples. Nevertheless, impediments to the
fortification of Jerusalem afterwards arose, even
during the reign of Cyrus (Ezra iv. 5).

Perhaps no great conqueror ever left behind
him a fairer fame than Cyrus the Great. His
mighty achievements have been borne down to
us on the voice of the nation which he elevated ;
his evil deeds had no historian to record them.
What is more, it was his singular honour and
privilege to be the first Gentile friend to the
peuple of Jehovah in the time of their sorest trouble,
and to restore them to the land whence light
was to break forth for the illumination of all
nations. To this high duty he is called by the
prophet (Isa. xliv. 28; xlv. 1), and for perform-
ing it he seems to be entitled ‘ The righteous man '
(xli. 2; xlv. 13).—F. W. N.


Dz.


DABERATH (13%; Sept. AaBipd@ and
AcBBd), a town in the tribe of Issachar, assigned
to the Levites (Josh. xix. 12; xxi. 28; 1 Chron.
vi. 72). It is probably the same as the Dabaritta,
in the great plain, of Josephus (Vita, 62; De Bell
Jud, ii, 21. 3); and the Dabira, which Eusebius
and Jerome place by Mount Tabor, in the region
of Dio-Cxsarea. It is recognised in the present
Dehirieh, a small village lying on the side of a
ledge of rocks, just at the base of Taboon on the
north-west (Robinson's Researches, iii. 210).

‘DAGAN. [Cory.]

DAGON (}137; Sept. Aaydv) is the name
of a national god of the Philistines at Gaza and
Ashdod (Judg. xvi, 21, 23; 1 Sam. v. 1 aq.;
1 Chron. x. 10). As,to the meaning of the name,
the expressions of Philo Byblius, Aayéy, 6s dors
Zitwy, and Aayay ered} cipe airoy Kal &potpov,
exahOn Zeds Apdrpios (Sanchoniathon, ed. Orelli,
p. 26, 32), show that he assumed the word to be
derived from 3%, corn. This derivation is ad-
mitted by Bocha:t, who argues that the fields of
the Philistines were laid waste by mice, in order
to show that Dagon was not the true god of agri-
culture, as he was thought to be (dieroz. ed.
Rosenm. i. 381); and by Beyer, who makes the
extraordinary assertion that we may conclude,
from the sending of the five golden mice (to tie
God of Israel! 1 Sam. vi. 4), that golden mice
were offered to Dagon as an acknowledgment of
his care in freeing their fields from mice (Ad-
diiamenta ad Selden. p. 285). Each of these
arguments is open to the objection that the five
golden piles—which were sent at the sume time,
and which, if they bore any reference to Dagon,
would possibly not be reconcilable with his cha-
acter as the god of ayriculture—are here alto-
gether disregarded; when yet it is evident that
no conclusions can be legitimately drawn from the
one unless they apply with equal force to the
other. There are much better arguments, how-
ever, for the other etymology, which deduces the
name from 3°J, fish, with the ending én (Ewald,


@ ,
DAMASCUS.


Hebr. Gram. $341). This derivation is not only
more in accordance with the principles of formas
tion (for if Dagon comes from the root 43, it
must belong to thz adjective formation in § 322,
ce, which doves not appear so suitable for the force
of a proper name), but it is most decisively esta-
blished by the terms employed in 1 Sam. v. 4.
It is there said that Dagon fell to the earth before
the ark, that his head and the palms of his hands
were broken off, and that ‘on/y Dagon was left
on him.’ If Dagon is derived from 3%, fish, and
if the idol, as there is every reason to believe, had
the body of a fish with the head and hands of a
man, it is easy to understand why a part of the
statue is there called Dagon in contradistinction
to the head and hands; but not otherwise. That
such was the figure of the idul is asserted by
Kimchi, and is admitted by most made scho-
lars. It is also supported by the analogies of
other fish deities among the Syro-Arabians. Be-
sides the Arera@atis of the Syrians, the Babylo-
nians had a tradition, according to Berosus /Be-
rosi Qua supersunt, ed. Richter, p. 48. 54). that
at the very beginning of their history an_extraore
dinary being, called Oamnes, having the entire
body of a fish, but the head, hands, feet, and voice
of a man, emerged frum the Erythraan sea, ap
peared in Babylonia, and taught the rude inha- '
bitants the use of letters, arts, religion, law, and
agriculture; that, after loug intervals between,
other similar beings appeared and communicated
the same precious lore in detail, and that the last
of these was called Odakon (’‘NSdawv). Selden is
persuaded that this Odakon is the Philistine god
Dagon (De Dits Syris, p. 265). The resemblance
between Dagon and Atergatis, or Derketo, is so
great in other respects, that Selden accounts for
the only important difference between them—that
of sex—by referring to the androgynous nature of ©
many heathen gods. It is certain, however, that
the Hebrew text, the Sept, and Philo Byblius,
make Dagon masculine. The temple of Dagon
at Ashdod was destroyed by Jonathan the brother
of Judas the Maccabee, about the year B.c. 148
(1 Mae. x. 81).—J. N.

DALMANUTHA (AaAuavovéd), a village
near Magdala (Mak viii, 10; comp. Matt. xv.
39); probably on the westert shore of the lake of
Geunesareth, a little to the north of Tiberias.

DALMATIA (AaAuartia). a province of Eu-
rope on the east of the Adriatic Sea, forming part
of Hyricum, and contiguons to Macedonia. Titus
was sent into this resion Ly Paul tu spread the
knowledge of the Gospel.

DAMARIS (Adyapis), a woman of Athens,
who was led to embrace Christianity by the
preaching of St. Panl (Acts xvii. 34). Some
suppose she was the wife of Dionysius the Areo-
pagite, who is mentioned before her; but the
construction in the Greek will not sanction this
conclusion. The name Damaris does wot vccur
elsewhere, whence some suppose it a corruption of
Damalis (Adyadis), which was not an uncommon
name; but the r and 7 are in Greek so ccn-
stantly interchanged as to render this emendation
superfluous,

DAMASCUS (PPT; Aapaskds), called by
the natives Es-Sham, a city of Syria, capital of
an important pashalic of the same name, and
indeed the chief or capital city of Syria, lies ina


a Sy:


is of


DAMASCUS. -


plain at the eastern foot of Anti-Libanus. It
was smetimes spoken of by the ancients as an
Arabian city, but in reality it belongs to Syria.
In2Sam. viii. 5, 6, ‘the Syrians of Damascus ' are
spoken of, and the words, ‘ Syria cf Damascus’
ae found in Isa. vii. 8. It is expressly said,
‘the head of Sywia is Damascus; also, Isa. xvii.
3, ‘the kingdom’ is to cease ‘from Damascus.’
So that this place was obviously the metropolis of
tian empire. It gave name (Syria Damas-
cena, Plin. I/ist. Nat. v. 13) to a district of Syria,
which, in} Chron. xix. 6, is distinguished as MIYO,
rendered ‘Syria-Maachah,’ in the Common English
Version. The plain is about 400 stadia from the
Mediterranean, and from six to eight days’ journey
from Jerusalem. It lies on the Chrysorrhoas ( Bar-
mda), by which, and its off-shoots, it is, with the
aid of canals, abundantly watered. Its celebrity


early date. Strabo (xv


i. p. 756) speaks of it


in eulogistic terms. In a religious point of view
also its repute was great. Julian (Ep. 24.)
terms it ‘the great and sacred Damascus, surpass-
ing every city both in the beauty of its temples
and the magnitude of its shrines, as well as the
timeliness of its seasons, the limpidness of its
fountains, the volume of its waters, and the rich-
ness of its soil.’ The locality would seem to have
been expressly created for a large, flourishing, and
durable city.

Damascus—by some held to be the most an
cient city in the world—is called by the Orientals,
‘a pearl surrounded by emeralds.’ Nothing can
be more beautiful than its position, whether ap-
proached from the side of Mount Lebanon, from
the Desert to the east, or by the high-road from
the uorth from Aleppo and Hamah, For many
miles the city is girdled by fertile fields, or gar-
dens, as they are called, which, being watered by
Tivers and sparkling streams, give to the veges
tation, consisting principally of olive-trees, a
temaikable freshness and beauty. Of all the
Cities of the East, Damascus is probably the most


orien!


tal.


The plain of Damascus owes its fertility and
loveliness to the river Barrada, which is supposed
to be either the Abana or Pharpar of 2 Kings v.,
and has been noticed under auother head [ApANA


The view of Damascus, when the travelle:-


emerges from Anti-Libanus, is of the most en-
chanting kind. ‘One of the most magnificent
Prospects in the world,’ says Addison (amascus


end
Bight


nance of fy


from
them:


Rtanates,
Steen,
sensat

ve th


the
and


the ¢


Palmyra, vol. ii. p. 9


2), ‘burst upon my


ht: like the first view of Constantinople, it is
unique. We were looking down from an elevation
of a thousand feet upon a vast plain, bordered in
the distance by blue mountains, and occupied by
atich, luxuriant forest of the walnut, the fig, the
pomegranate, the plum, the apricot, the citron, the
‘Cust, the pear, and the apple, forming a waving
Stove of more than fifty miles in circuit; possessing
vast variety of tint, a peculiar density and luxu


the bi
selves up above a rich


the marble minarets of
entre of all, winding t


liage, and a wildly-pictuyesque form,
ranches of the loftier trees throwing


underwood of pome-


citrons, and oranges, with their yellow,
) and brown leaves; and then conceive our
tons, to see grandly rising in the distance,
's vast superticies of rich luxuriant foliage,
swelling leaden domes,


the gilded crescents,
Damascus; while in
owards the city, ran


DAMASCUS. 611


the main stream of the river Barrada. As we
descended, here and there the openings in the
trees displayed little patches of green verdure or
a glimpse of richly-cultivated gardens: the whole
of the rich tract was surrounded by a mud-wall,
beyond which all was arid and desert.’ A more
ample description to the same eflect is given by
Lamartine (Travels in the East).

The interior of the city does not correspond
with the exquisite beauty of its environs. In the
Armenian quarter the houses are built with mud,
and pierced towards the street by a very few small
grated windows with red painted shutters. They
are low, and the flat arched doors resemble those
of stables, A filthy dunghill and a pool of
stinking water are almost invariably betore the
doors. In some of these dwellings, belonging to
the principal Armenian merchants, there is great
internal richness and elegance. The furniture
consists of magnificent Persian or Baydad car-
pets, which entirely cover the marble or cedar
floor, and of numerous cushions and mattresses,
spread in the middle of the saloon, for the mem-
bers of the family to sit or lean against. here
is a tiue wide street, formed by the palaces of the
agas of Damascus, who are the nobility of the
land. The fronts of these palaces, however, towards
the street, are like long prison or hospital walls,
mere grey mud walls, with few or no windows,
whilst at intervals is a great gate opening on a
court. But the interior is magnificent. The
ornaments of many of their saloons alone cost
upwards of 10U0/. sterling. The bazaars are very
striking. The great bazaar is about half a league
long. They are long streets covered in with
high wood-work, and lined with shops, stalls,
magazines, and cafés, The shops are narrow,
and go only a short way back. The merchant is
seated in front, with his legs doubled up below
him, and the pipe in his mouth. The magazines
are stored with merchandise of all sorta, and par-
ticularly with Indian manufactures, which are
brought in great profusion by the caravans from
Bagdad. In the midst of the bazaars stands the
finest khan in the East, that of Hassan Pasha.
It is an immense cupola, whose bold springing
arch recalls that of St. Peter at Rome; it is in
like manner borne on granite pillars. The gate
of this khan is a piece of Moorish architecture,
the richest iu detail and most imposing in effect
that can be seen in the world. The khan has
been built only about tifty years. Not far dis-
tant is the principal mosque, formerly a church
consecrated to St. John, whose skull and se-
pulchre, found in this holy place, give it such a
sanctity that it is death for even a Mohammedan
to enter the room where the relics are kept. Situ-
ated at the edge of the desert, at the mouth of the
plains of Coele-Syria and the valleys of Galilee,
of Idumza, and of the coasts of the Sea of Syria,
Damascus was needed asa resting-place for the
caravans to India. It is essentially a com-
mercial town. Two hundred merchants are per
manently settled in it. Foreign trade is carried
on by the Great Mecca caravan, the Bagdad ca-
ravan, the Aleppo, and by several small ones to
Beirout (its sea-port), Tripoli, Acre, &c. Lamar-
tine makes its population to be some 300,000, of
whom 30,000 are Christians. Another estimate
(M-Calloch, Geograph. Dict.) gives only from
120,009 to 150,000 inhabitants, comprising 12,000


NN


612 DAMASCUS.


Christians and as many Jews. Damascus is an
eminently interesting town. It is thoroughly
Oriental, though now representatives, in person
and costume, of most other distinguished coun-
tries of the world may be seen in its streets.
Its proximity to Baalbec and Palmyra, which
are mere ruins, and its still highly flourishing
condition, after having existed for perhaps a
longer period than any other city on the face of
the earth, combine, with many facts connected
with its history, to throw around St a calm and
attractive, not to say sacred, light.

Political changes and social influences have
lessened and mitigated the proverbial bigotry of
the Damascenes. The lower classes, indeed, are
still fanatical, but a better feeling on religion
prevails in the higher. All Christians in Da-
mascus were, when Lamartine visited the city,
compelled to wear black turbans. He states that
on his last day's journey towards Damascus he
and his companions assumed the complete Turk-
ish custume, to escape being recognised as Franks,
adding, ‘the fanatical population of Damascus
and the surrounding conntry render these pre-
cautions necessary. The Damascenes nourish
hatred of the European name and costume. They
alone amongst the Orientals have refused to ad-
mit consuls or even consular agents for Christian
powers. Damascus is a holy, fanatical, and free
city—nothing must pollute it.” Till within the
last few years the appearance in the city of a
Frank costume was a signal for a riot. Christians
and Jews were alike forbidden to ride any beast
but an ass. Addison, however (in 1835), found
a greatly improved state of feeling. The inso-
lence of the Damascencs was curbed. He and


his companions used horses, and saw Christians '


in great numbers mixing with others, and pur-
suing their business or taking recreation in their
own garb unmolested. ‘ Here and there,’ he
says, ‘a scowling look or a smothered cry of
Yavor, or “infidel,” after we had passed, were
all the tokens of discontent we perceived.’ The
improvement Addison ascribes in part to the re-
sidence in the place of a British consul. He
adds :—‘ As “the gate of Mecca,” the place of
rendezvous for the great caravan of pilgrims, Da-
mascus has always been considered one of the
most sacred of the Moslem cities ; and, being an-
nually filled with a vast crowd of religious fana-
tics, hurrying on to the tomb of the prophet, it is
not strance that the population has always been
so remarkable for its fanaticism and bigotry to-
wards Christians. Even now, at the period of
the assembling of the great caravan, it would
hardly be prudent for Franks to exhibit themselves
in their hats and coats before the crowd of bald-
headed wretches which then throng all the tho-
ruughfares, burning with religions zeal’ (vol. ii.
p- 449).

Mr. Addison was conducted to the spot where,
according to tradition among the Christians, Saul
saw the light from heaven. Winding round the
walls on the outskirts of the city, he and his
companions came to a point where they were
broken at the top, at which Paul is said to have
been let down in a basket, to escape the indigna-
tion of the Jews, when (Acts ix.) ‘the disciples
took him by night, and let him down by the wall
in a basket.’ From hence, passing on through
some pretty lanes, they came to an open grcen


‘ DAMASCUS.
spot, surrounded by trees, over the tops of whick


were seen the distant summits of Mount Hermon.
At this place they were ‘informed Saul bad ar-
rived when (Acts ix. 3) as he journeved he came
near Damascus, and suddenly there shined round
about him a great light from heaven.’ These
localities are pointed ont with tle greatest con-
fidence by the Damascene Christians of all sects,
and are held in great veneration ; nor is it (ifR-
cult to suppose that the true spots have been
handed down by tradition among the followers
of the cross. ‘The street which is called Straight’
(Acts ix. 11) is still found in Damascus, or at
any rate a street bearing that name. Ad:lison
says it is <a mile in length,’ and ‘so called be
cause it leads direct from the gate to the castle or
palace of the Pasha.’ The honse of Judas, alse,
to which Ananias went, is still pointed out, as
well as that of Ananias himself. How much
credulity may have had to do in fixing on and
perpetuating the recollection of these localities, it
is probably easier to suspect than to ascertain.
Of the origin of Damascus nothing certain is
known. The building of it has been ascribed
both to Abraham and to his ‘steward, Eliezer of
Damascus.’ That the city existed as early as the
days of Abraham is clear from Gen. xiv. 15;
xv. 2; but the way in which it is spoken of in
these passages shows that even at the time to
which they refer it was not a new nor an un-
known place; for Abraham's steward is charac-
terized as being of Damascne, and the locality of
another town (Hobah) is fixed by stating that it
lay ‘on the left hand of Damascus.’ L. Miiller
(Ad Orig. Reg. Damas.) has undertaken to show
that it was even then governed by its own rulers.
How long it may have retained its independence
cannot be determined; but it appears (2 Sam.
viii. 5, 6; 1 Chron. xix. 4) that its monarch having
unadvisedly attacked the victorious David, the
Hebrew sovercigzn defeated the Syrians, making
a great slaughter of them, and, in his turn, sub-
dued Damascus, and exacted tribute from its
inhabitants. This subjection was not of long
duration, for under his successor (1 Kings xi. 24)
one Rezon, a servant of Hadadezer, king of Zobah,
made himself master of Damascus, and, ruling
over Syria, ‘was an adversary to Israel all the
days of Solomon.’ After Rezon, Hezion occupied
the throne; he was succeeded by his son Tabri-
mon (1 Kings xv. 18, 19), who was in alliance
with Asa, king of Judah. Preserving the same
direct line, the crown then fell to Benhadad, who,
having been in a league with Baasha, king of
Israel, was bribed by Asa to desert his ally, and
join himself in attacking Baasha, on whom the
united forces inflicted great injury (1 Kings xv.
19, 20). In the time of Benhadad, son of the
preceding monarch, Damascus was the head of a
very powerful empire, since it appears (1 Kings
xx. 1) that ‘thirty and two kings’ (doubtless
petty princes or pashas, governors of provinces)
accompanied him in a campaign which he un-
dertook against Samaria. Of Alab, its king, he
insolently demanded, ‘ thy silver and thy gold,
thy wives also and thy children, even the goodli-
est.’ The Israelitish monarch saw no alternative
but obedience :— I am thine, and all that I have.”
This yieldingness sharpened the rapacity of Ben-
hadad, who proceeded to take the most offensive
measures, which had their natural effect in rousing


DAMASCUS.


Ahab. The king of Israel therefore took counsel
of ‘all the elders of the land,’ and, being advised
to resist, met the threats of Benhadad with these
famous words :—‘ Let not him that girdeth on
his harness boast himself as he that putteth it
of.’ The Damascene king, undismayed, gave
himself up to drinking and revelry. Ahab was
under religious influences, The battle took place ;
the Syrians were defeated, and their king effected
his retreat with difficulty. The subsequent opera-
tions of the Damascenes, under their king, have
already been stated [Bennapap]. Hazael, the
successor of Benhadad, unwilling to give up hope
of being master of Ramoth-Gilead, was attacked
by the united forces of Judah and Israel, whom
he vanquished, wounding Joram (2 Kings viii.
28); and, at a later period, under Jehu (2 Kings
x. 32), laid waste a large portion of the Israelitish
kingdom, and ‘threshed Gilead with threshing


DAMASCUS. 518


‘instruments of iron’ (Amos i. 3). Determined on
revenge (2 Kings xii. 17), Hazael marched to
Jerusalem, and was bought off by king Jehoash
by a most costly sacrifice. He, however, took
the kingdom of Israel (2 Kings xiii. 3), and,
though he treated the people oppressively, he was
able to hand them over in subjection to his son,
Benhadad IIL., who was thrice beaten (2 Kings
xiii, 24) by the Israelitish king Jehoash, and de-
prived of all his conquests. Jeroboam II. (2
Kings xiv. 28) pursued these advantages, and
captured Damascus itself. Subsequently a junc-
tion took place between Israel aud Damascus,
when (2 Kings xv. 37) Rezin, king of the latter,
and Pekah, king of the former, entered into a confe-
deracy, and undertook an expedition against Ahaz,
king of Judah (Isa. vii. 1). They succeeded in
‘recovering Elath to Syria,’ but could not prevail
against Jerusalem (2 Kings xvi. 6). Ahaz, how-


er urged by necessity, applied for aid to Tig-
lath-pileser, king of Assyria, who, being bribed
bya muniticent present, fell on Damascus, took
", carried the people of it captive to Kir (on the
rer Kur), slew Rezin, and united the Damascene
territory with his own kingdom (2 Kings xvi. 9;
full vault 43 x. 9; xvii. 1), Damascus after this
eh Under the power of the Babylonians and Per-
Gan from whom it was taken by Alexander the
see as one consequence of his victory at Issus
tian, Exped, Alex. ii. 11, 153 Curt. iii. 12).
ne it made a part of the kingdom of the
of 2 from whom it passed into the hands
Tn - omans (Flor. iii. 5; Diod. Sic. xxxix. 30).
€ time of the Apostle Paul it belouged to the
pyre kingdom of the Arabian prince Aretas.
Utieg <o, Period it was reckoned among the
eo ecapelis (Plin. Hist. Nat. v.16); then
he ac ded to the ira of Phonice (Amm.
itlan XW. &3 Tertull. Contra Mare. iii. 13); and
made a part cf the province of Phanicia Li-


banesia (Hierocles, Synec.). From the time of Hae
drian it bore the honorary title of Metropolis, with-
out enjoying the rights of a metropolis (Wesseling,
ad Hierocl.). 717). Under the Greek emperors of
Constantinople Damascus was the most celebrated
city of the East, remarkable for its wealth, luxury,
magnificence, and its numerous Christian popu-
lation. A great era in its history is its conquest
by the Saracens, of which an accouut may be
found in the Arabic historian Alwakidi (Ockley’s
Hist. of the Saracens). The war was begun
about a.p. 633, by the celebrated Abubeker, the
successor of Mohammed ; and ended in the capture
of the city, and the substitution of Islamism for
Christianity. It then became the capital of the
whole Mussulman world, till the Caliphate was
removed from it to Bagdad. The city continned
under the sway of the caliphs of Bagdad, till it
came into the hands of the Turks, and was held
and rendered famous by Noureddin and Saladin,
In 1301 Timour the Tartar captured city and
L


°


614 DAN.


barbarously treated its inhabitants. From Jo-
sephus (De Bell. Jud.i.2; xxv.2; xx.2; comp.
Acts ix. 2) it appears that its population con-
tained great numbers of Jews.

Damascus is famous in the first age of Chris-
tianity for the conversion and first preaching of
the Apostle Paul (Acts ix. 3, 20; Gal. i. 12).
The consequences might have been fatal to the
Apostle, for his life was endangered in this fana-
tical city. ‘In Damascus the governor under
Aretas, the king, kept the city of the Damascenes
with a garrison, desirous to apprehend me; and
through a window in a basket was I let down
by the wall, and escaped his hands’ (2 Cor. xi.
32-3). (Walch, Antiguitates Damas. illustrate,
1757; Phot. Bib. p. 348; Burckhardt, Aradia,
p. 194; Lamartine, Travels in the East; Ad-
dison’s Damascus and Palmyra, ii. 100; Bow-
ring’s Report on Syria.)—J. R. B.


DAN (J, a judge; Sept. Ady), son of Jacob
by the concubine Bilhah (Gen. xxx. 3; xxxv.
25), and founder of one of the tribes of Israel.
Dan had but one son, called Hushim (Gen.
xlvi. 23): notwithstanding which, when the
Israelites came out of Egypt, this tribe con-
tained 62,700 adult males (Num. i. 39), which
made it the second of the tribes in number, Ju-
dah only being above it. Its numbers were less
affected in the desert than those of many other
tribes; for at the census, before entering Canaan,
it mustered 64,100 (Num. xxvi. 43), being an
increase of 1700, which gave it still the second
rank in population. But there is nothing in the
history of the tribe corresponding to this eminence
in population: the most remarkable circum-
stance in its history, however, is counected with
this fact. The original settlement assigned to
the tribe in south-western Palestine being too
small for its large population, a body of them‘
went forth to seek a settlement in the remote
north, and seized and remained in permauent
occupation of the town and district of Laish, the
inhabitants of which dwelt in greater security
and were more easily conquered than the neigh-
bours of the tribe in its own proper territory (Josh.
xix. 47; Judg. i. 34; xviii.). The district regu-
larly allotted to the tribe, although contracted,
was very fertile. It had the country of the
Philistines on the west, part of Judah with Ben-
jamin on the east, Ephraim on the north, and
Simeon on the south. The territory proved inade-
quate chiefly from the inability of the Danites
to expel the Philistines and Amorites, who occu:
pied parts of the land assigned to them. There is
no doubt that the territory as allotted, but not
possessed, extended to the Mediterranean through
the country of the Philistines. Samson was of this
tribe, and its proximity to the Philistines explains
many circumstances in the history of that hero.
It appears from that history that there was an
under-current of private and social intercourse
between the Philistines and the Danites, notwith-
standing the public enmity between Israel aud the
former (Judy. xiii.—xvi.).

DAN, the town, anciently-called Larsn, or
Lesuem, mentioned in the preceding article as
having been conquered by a warlike colony of
Danites, who named it after their tribe. The
terms in which the condition of Laish is de-
scribed, previously to the conquest, indicate that


DANCE.


the place belonged to the Sidonians, and that the
inhabitants lived quiet and secure, * after the man-
ner of the Sidoniaus,’ enjoying abundance of all
things (Judg. xviii. 7). They seem to have de-
rived their security from the absence of any ad-
verse powers in their neighbourhood, and from con-
fidence in the protection of Sidon, which was, how-
evcr, too far off to render aid in the case of
such a sudden assault as that by which they
were overpowered. This distance of Sidon was
carefully noted by the Danite spies as a cir-
cumstance favourable to the enterprise; and it
does not appear that Sidon ever made any effurt
to dispossess the intruders. Dan afterwards be
came a chief seat of Jeroboam’s idolatry, and one
of the golden calves was set up there (1 Kings
xii. 28, 29). It was conquered, along with other
towns, hy the Syrians (1 Kings xv. 20); and the
name is familiar from the recurrence of the pro
verbial expression, ‘from Dan to Beersheba,’ to de-
note the extent of the Promised Land (Judg. xx.1;
1Sam. iii. 20; xvii. 11). Spee pmo In the
days of Eusebius, Dan was still a small village,
which is placed by him four miles from Paneas,
towards Tyre. As this distance corresponds to
the position of the fountain at Tel el-Kady,
which forms one of the sources of the Jordan, and
is doubtless that which js called Dan by Josephus
(Antig. i. 10. 2), the situation of the city of Dan
could not therefore have been that of Paneas itself,
with which it has been in later times confounded.
(Casares Puitirrr.] There are no longer any
ruins near the spring at Tel el-Kady, but at about
a quarter of an hour north, Burckhardt noticed
ruins of ancient habitations; and the hill which
overhangs the fountains appears to have been built
upon, though nothing is now visible (Burckhardt,
Syria, p. 42; Robinson, Researches, iii, 351-335).
DANCE. The words in the original, rendered
in our translation by this term, denote, properly,
to leap for joy; and this radical signification,
suguesting the idea of abrupt and boisterous gesti-
culations rather than a series of regular and taste-
ful movements, seems well to comport with what
we may suppose to have been the primitive cha-
racter of the dance. On the other hand, some
writers of great erudition have maintained that no
allusions whatever are to be found in the Old
Testament history to this kind of bodily exercise;
and that in most, if not in all the passages, where,
in our version, dancing is mentioned, the etymo-
logy of the Hebrew, supported in some places by
the stram of the context, seems to point to some
kind of musical instrument as being intended by
the inspired penmen. Thus, in Exod. xv. 20,


where the first notice is taken of dancing, 17MM,


coming as it does from bn, * to pierce’ or ‘ per-
forate,’ and applied naturally enough as the name
of any tube that may be blown by the breath, 18,
according to them, used to describe some mnstrus
ment of the pipe or flute class, as conjoined with
timbrels ; and in this interpretation they are sup-
ported by the Arabic and Persian versions. But
this word, or some derivatives from the same root,
occurs in Exod. xxxii.19; Judg. xvi. 21,23; 1Sam.
xviii. 53 Jer. xxxi. 4, 13; where dancing alone
can be intended. Moreover, in the Septuagit
xopéds, a dance, is employed in all the passages 0
the Old Testament just referred to, and in seveél
others; and it is no small collateral proof that


. ee ees


a Sar eee


ga as


ma wwe


Oe es. OR ee Oe ae


:
>
,


DANCE.


this is the right interpretation, that people in
eastertn countries are accustomed to mingle the
dance with tabrets to this day.

The character of the ancient dance was very
diferent from that of ours, as appears from the
conduct of Miriam, who ‘took a timbrel in
her hand, and all the women went out after
her with timbrels and with dances.’ Precisely
similar is the Oriental dance of the present
day, which, accompanied of course with mu-
tic, is led by the principal person of the com-
pany, the rest imitating the steps. The evolutions,
as well as the sdngs, are extemporaneous—not
confined to a fixed rule, but varied at the
pleasure of the leading dancer; and yet they are
generally executed with so much grace, and the
time so well kept with the simple notes of the
music, that the group of attendants show wonder-
ful address and propriety in fuilowing the varia-
tions of the leader's feet. The missionary Wolff
describes a festival of some Eastern Christians,
where one eminent individual, who led the song
as well as the dance, conducted through the streets
of the city a numerons band of people, who
leaped and danced in imitation of the gestures
used by him. When the late deputation of the
Church of Scotland were on their way through
Palestine, their. young Arab guides, to relieve the
tedium of the journey, sometimes ‘commenced a
Native song and dance; one of them advancing a
little befure the rest, bezan the sung, dancing for-
wari as he repeated the words; when the rest,
following him in regular order, joined in the cho-
tus, keeping time by a simultaneous clapping of
hands. ‘They sang several Arabian songs, respond-
ing to one anotier, dancing and clapping their
bands,’

At a very'early period, dancing was enlisted
into the service of religion among the heathen ;
the dance, enlivened by vocal and instrumental
Tmusic, was a usual accompaniment in all the
Processions and festivals of the gods (Strabo, x.);
and, indeed, so indispensable was this species
of violent merriment, that no ceremonial was
considered duly accomplished—no triumph rightly
celebrated, without the aid of dancing. The
Hebrews, in common with other nations, lad their
sacred dances, which were performed on their
solemn anniversaries, and other occasions of com-
Memurating some special token of the divine good-
ness and favour, as means of drawing forth, in
the liveliest manner, their expressions of joy and
thankssiving. The performers were usually a

ud of females, who, in cases of public rejoicing,
Volunteered their services (Exod. xv. 20; Sam.
xvii. 6), and who, in the case of religious observ-
ances, composed the rezular chorus of the temple
( S exlix. 35 el, 4), although there are not want-
ing instances of men also joining in the dance on

ese seasons of religious festivity. Thus David
deemed it no way derumatory to his royal dignity
es on the auspicious occasion of the ark
t ing bronght up to Jerusalem. The word used
0 describe his attitude is (DD, in the redupli-
aL prise intimating violent elforts of leaping ;
cone ee i the apparent impropriety and inde-
a y site advanced in life, above all a
ne a ibiting such freaks, with no other cover-

. a linen ephod, many learned men

© declared themselves at a loss to account for


" © strange a spectacle. It was, unquestionably,


DANCE. 518


done as an act of religious homage: and when it
is remembered that the ancient Asiatics were ac-
customed, in many of their religious festivals, to
throw off their garments even to perfect nudity, as
a symbol sometimes of penitence, sometimes of
joy, and that this, together with many other ob-
servances that bear the stamp of a remote anti-
quity, was adopted by Mahomet, who has enjoined
the pilgrims of Mecca to encompass the Kaaba,
clothed only with the thram, we may perhaps
consider the linen ephod, which David put on
when he threw off his garments and danced be-
fore the ark, to be symbolic of the same objects
as the thram of the Mahommedans (see Foster's
Mahommedanism Unveiled). The conduct of
David was imitated by the later Jews, and the
dance incorporated among their favourite usages
as an appropriate close of the joyous occasion
of the feast of Tabernacles. ‘The members
of the Sanhedrim, the rulers of the synagogues,
doctors of schools, and all who were eminent for
rank or piety, accompanied the sacred music with
their voices : and leaped and danced with torches
in their hands, fora great part of the night ; while
the women and common people looked on.’ This
strange and riotons kind of festivity was kept u
till exhaustion and sleep dismissed them to their
homes (Buxtorf, De Synag. Jud. cap. 21).

From being exclusively, or at least principally,
reserved for occasions of religious worship and
festivity, dancing came gradually to be practised
in common life on any remarkable seasons of
mirth and rejoicing (Jer. xxxi. 4; Ps. xxx. 11).
In early times, indeed, those who perverted the
exercise from a sacred use to purposes of amuse-
ment were considered profane and infamous ;
and hence Job introduces it as a distinguishing
feature in the character of the ungodly rich, that
they encouraged a taste for dancing in their fami-
hes (Job xxi. 11). During the classic ages of
Greece and Rome society underwent a complete
revolution of sentiment on this subject ; insomuch
that the Grecian poets represent the gods them-
selves as passionately fond of the diversion ed
ter’s Gree. Antig. 11. 490), and that not only at
Rome, but through all the provinces of the em-
pire, it was a favourite pastime, resorted to not
only to enliven feasts, but in the celebration of
domestic joy (Luke xy. 25; Matt. xiv.6). Note
withstanding, however, the strong partiality che
rished for this inspiriting amusement, it was con-
sidered beneath the dignity of persons of rank and
character to practise it, The well-known words
of Cicero, that ‘no one dances unless he is either
drunk or mad,’ express the prevailing sense as to
the impropriety of respectable individuals taking
part in it; and hence the gay circles of Rome
and its provinces derived all their entertainment,
as is done in the East to this day. from the exhi-
bitions of professional dancers. Under the patron
age of the empcrors, and of their Juxurions tri-
butaries, like Herod, the art was carried to the
utmost perfection, the favourite mode being pan-
tomime, which, like that of the modern Almchs,
was often of the most licentious description, A
story of love was chosen—generally an adventure
of the gods—as the plan of the dance, and the
address of the performer consisted in representing,
by the waving of his hands, the agility of his
limbs, and the innumerable attitudes into which
he threw himself, all the various pee love

L


516 DANIEL.


jealousy, disgust, that sway the human breast.
(See at large Lucian’s Treatise on Dancing.)

Amateur dancing in high life was, as that
writer informs us, by no means uncommon in
the voluptuous times of the later emperors. But
in the age of Herod it was exceedingly rare and
almost unheard of ; and therefore the condescension
of Salome, who volunteered, in honour of the
anniversary of that monarchi's birthday, to exhibit
her handsome person as she Jed the mazy dance
in the saloons of Macherus—for though she was a
child at this time, as sorne suppose (Michaelis,
Introd.), she was still a princess—was felt to be
a compliment that merited the highest reward.
The folly and rasliness of Herod in giving her an
unlimited promise, great as they were, have been
equalled and even surpassed by the munificence
which many other Eastern monarchs have lavished
upon favourite dancers. Shah Abbas (to mention
only one anecdote of the kind), having been on
a particular occasion extremely gratified with a
woman who danced before him, and being at the
time much intoxicated, made her a present of a
magnificent khan that yielded him a considerable
revenue. Next moming his minister reminded
him of his extravagant liberality, whereupon,
being now cool and ashamed of his folly, he sent
for the dancer, and obliged her to be contented
with a sum of money (‘Thevenot’s Trav. in Persia,
hi 100). It is by no means improbable that

erod, too, was flushed with wine; and that it
was from fear he should retract his promise, if
she delayed till the morning, that Herodias sent
immediately for the head of the Baptist.

It remains to notice further that the Jewish
dance was performed by the sexes separately,
There is no evidence from sacred history that the
diversion was promiscuously enjoyed, except it
might be at the erection of the deified calf, when,
in imitation of the Egyptian festival of Apis, all
classes of the Hebrews intermingled in the frantic
revelry. In the sacred dances, although both
sexes scem to have frequently borne a part in the
procession or chorus, they remained in distinct
and separate companies (Ps. lxviii. 25; Jerem.
xxxi, 13)—R. J.


DANIEL (ON'D4, i.e. God is my judge),
a celebrated prophet in the Chaldean and Persian
period. There are in the Bible two other persons
of the same name: a son of David (1 Chron. iii.
1), and a Levite of the race of Ithamar (Ezra viii.
2; Neh. x. 6). The latter has been confounded
with the prophet in the apocryphal Addenda to
the Septuagint (Dan. xiv. 1, Sept.), where he is

- called fepeds Svoua Aaa vids ABSA (Hieronym,
Prefat. in Dantel.).

Daniel was descended from one of the highest
families in Judah, if not even of royal blood (Dan.
3.3; comp. Joseph. Antig. x. 10.1). Jerusalem
was thus probably his birth-place, though the pas-
sage ‘Jan. ix. 24) quoted in favour of that opi-
nion, is considered by many commentators as nut
at all conclusive.

We find the lad Daniel, at the age of twelve or
sixteen years, already in Babylon, whither he had
been carried together with three other Hebrew
youths of rank, Ananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
at the first deportation of the people of Judah
in the fourth year of Jehoiakim. He and his com-
Pauions were obliged to enter the service of the


DANIEL.


royal court of Babylon, on which occasion he
received the Chaldean name of Belshatzar (i. e.
Beli princeps, princeps cui Belus favet), accord-
ing to eastern custom when a change taker place
in one’s condition of life, and more especially if
his personal liberty is thereby affected (comp.
2 Kings xxiii. 34; xxiv. 17; Esth. ii. 7; Ezra
v. 14).

ieee his new career, Daniel received that
thorough polish of education which Oriental eti-
quette renders indispensable in a courtier (comp.
iii.6; Plat. Alcid. § 37), aud was more especially
instructed ‘in the writing and speaking Chal-
dwan’ (Dan. i. 4), that is, in the dialect peculiar
to the Chaldwans [Cuanper Lancuaae]. In
this dialect were composed all the writings of the
ecclesiastical order, containing the substance of all
the wisdom and learning of the time, and in the
knowledge of which certainly but few favoured
laymen were initiated. That Daniel had distin-
guished himself, and already at an early period
acquired renown for high wisdom, piety, and strict
observance of the Mosaic law (comp. Ezek. xiv.
14, 20; xxviii. 3; Dan. i. 8-16), is too evident
from passages in the truly authentic Seriptures
to require any additional support from the ill-
warranted Apocryphal stories concerning the de-
livery of Susannah by the wisdom of the lad
Daniel, ete. A proper opportunity of evincing
both the acuteness of his mind, and his religious
notions, soon presented itself in the custom of the
Eastern courts to entertain the officers attached
to them from the royal table (Atheneus, iv. 10.
p. 145, ed. Casaub.). Daniel was thus exposed
to the temptation of partaking of unclean foud,
and of participating in the idolatrous ceremonies
attendant on heathen banquets. His prudent
proceedings, wise bearing, and absolute refusal
to comply with such customs, were crowned. with
the Divine blessing, and had the most splendid
results.

After the lapse of the three years fixed for his
education, Daniel was attached to the court of
Nebnchadnezzar, where, by the Divine aid, he
succeeded in interpreting a dream of that prince
to his satisfaction, by which means—as Joseph
of old in Egypt—he rose into high favour with
the king, and was entrusted with two important
oftices—the governorship of the province of Ba-
bylon, and the head-inspectorship of the sacerdotal
caste (Dan. ii.).

Considerably later in the reign of Nebuchad-
nezzar, we tind Daniel interpreting another dream
of the king's, to the effect that, in punishment
of his pride, he was to lose, for a time, his throne,
but to be again restored to it after his humiliation
had been completed (Dan. iv.). Here he dis-
eae not only the most touching anxiety, love,


loyalty, and concern for his princely benefactor, .


but also the energy and solemnity becoming his
position, pointing out with vigour and power the
only course left for the monarch to pursue for
his peace and welfare.

Under the unworthy successors of Nebuchad-
nezzar, Daniel and his deservings seem to have
been forgotten, and he was removed from his
high posts. His situation at court appears to have
been confined to a very inferior ottice (eomp.
Dan. viii. 27); neither is it likely that he should
have retained his rank as head inspector of the
order of the magians in a country where these


DANIEL.


were the principal actors in effecting changes in
the administration whenever a new succession to
the throne took place.

We thus lose sight of Daniel until the first and
third year of king Belshazzar (Dan. v. 7, 8), gene-
rally understood to have been the last king of Ba-
bylon (called by profane writers Nabonnedus), but
who—to judge from Dan. v. 11, 13, 18, 22—was,
more probably, the son and successor of Nebu-
chadnezzar, usually called Evil-Merodach, though
passing in Daniel by his Chaldwan title and
rank. After a reign of two years, this monarch
was assassinated by his brother-in-law Neri-
glissar (Berosus in Joseph. contra Apion. i. 20).

. Shortly before this event Daniel was again re-

stored to the royal favour, and became moral

er to the king, who overwhelmed him with

onours and titles in consequence of his being

able to read and solve the meaning of a sentence

miraculously displayed, which tended to rouse the
conscience of the wicked prince.

Under the same king we see Daniel both
alarmed and comforted by two remarkable visions
(Dan. vii., viii.), which disclosed to him the fu-
ture course of events, and the ultimate fate of the
must powerful empires of the world, but in parti-
cular their relations to the kingdom of God, and
its development to the great cousummation.

After the conquest of Babylon by the united

wers of Media and Persia, Daniel seriously

usied himself under the short reign (two years)
of Darius the Mede or Cyaxares II. with the
affairs of his people and their possible return from
exile, the term of which was fast approaching, ac-
coxding to the prophecies of Jeremiah. In deep
humility and prostration of spirit, he then prayed
tu the Almighty, in the name of his people, for for-
giveness of their sins, and for the Divine mercy
in their behalf: and the answering promises he
received far exceeded the tenor of his prayer, for
the visions of the Seer were extended to the end
of time (Dan. ix.).

In a practical point of view also Daniel ap-
peared at that time a highly-favoured instrument
of Jehovah. Occupying, as he did, one of the
highest posts of honour in the state, the strictness
and scrupulousness with which he fullilled his
oihcial duties could not fail to rouse envy and

qeelanity in the breasts of his colleagues, who well

knew how to win the weak monarch, whom they
at last induced to issue a decree imposing certain
acts, the performance of which, they well knew,
was altogether at variance with the creed of which
Daniel was a zealous professor. For his disobe-
dience the prophet suflered the penalty specitied
in the decree: he was thrown into a den of lions,
but was miraculously saved by the mercy of God
—a circumstance which enhanced his reputation,
and again raised him tu the highest posts of honour
under Darius and Cyrus (Dan. vi.).

He had, at last, the hgppiness to see his most
ardent wishes accomplished — to behold his people
restored to their own land. Though his advanced
age would not allow him to be among thuse who
returned to Palestine, yet did he never for a mo-
ment cease to occupy his mind and heart with his
people and their concerns (Dan. x. 12).

In the third year of Cyrus, he had a series of
visions, in which he was informed of the minutest
details respecting the future history and suilerings
of his nation, to the period of their true redemp-


,


DANIEL, BOOK OF. O17
tion through Christ, as also a consol notice
to himself to proceed calmly and eably to the


end of his days, and then await patiently the resur-
rection of the dead at the end of time.

From that period the accounts respecting him
are vague, sometimes confused, and even strange ;
and we hardly need mention the various fables
which report his death to have taken place in Pa-
lestine, Babylon, or Susa.—H. A. C. H.

DANIEL, BOOK OF. This important and
in many respects remarkable book takes its name
not only from the principal person in it, but also
and chiefly from Ti as its real author; there
being no doubt whatever that, as the book itself
testifies, it was composed by Daniel (comp. vii.
1, 28; viii. 2; ix. 2). It occupies, however, but a
third rank in the Hebrew canon; not among the
Prophets, but in the Hagtographa, owing, no
doubt, to the correct view of the composers of the
canon, that Daniel did not exercise his prophetic
office in the more restricted and proper sense of
the term ‘prophecy ;' but stood to the theocracy
in a different relation from those real prophets
whose calling and profession consisted exclusively
in declaring the messages they received, and in
the communion which they held with God. These
latter are termed, in the ancient Hebrew idiom,
D'N'D3, prophets, in contradistinction to ON,
seers, who, though they were equally favoured
with divine revelations, were nevertheless not pro-
phets by profession, a calling that claimed the
entire service of a man’s whole life.

The book of Daniel divides itself into two
parts, Aistorical (ch. ivi.) and prophetic (cb.
vii.-xii.), arranged respectively in chronological
order. Its object is by no means to give a sum-
mary historical account of the period of the
exile, or of the life of Daniel himself, since it
contains ouly a few isolated points both as to
historical facts and prophetic revelations. But
the plan or tendency which so consistently runs
through the whole book, is of a far different cha-
racter; itis toshow the extraordinary and wonder-
ful means which the Lord made use of, in a period
of the deevest misery, when the theocracy seemed
dissolved and fast approaching its extinction,
to afford assistance to his people, proving to them
that he had not entirely forsaken them, and
making them sensible of the fact, that His merciful
presence still continued to dwell with them, even
without the Temple and beyond the Land of
Promise. In this way alone was it possible to
render the time of punishment also a period of
rich blessing. ‘The manifestations of the Lord tu
that eflect consisted, among others, of the won-
ders recorded in this book, and the glorious pro-
phecies of the seer. The book thus sets forth a
series of miraculous tokens, by which God
claimed amidst the heathen world, and in a

riod of abject degradation, that Israel was still
if ple, the nation of his covenant, still
marching steadily onward to the goal marked
out for them by the Lord.

The wonders related in Daniel (ch. i.-vi.) are
thus mostly of a peculiar, prominent, and striking
character, and resemble in many respects those per-
formed of old time in Egypt. Their divine ten-
dency was, on the one hand, to lead the heathen
power, which proudly fancied itself to be the con-
queror of the theocracy, to the acknowledgment
that there was an essential difference between the


418 DANIEL, BOOK OF.


world and the kingdom of God ; and, on the other,
to impress degenerate and callous Israel with the
full cunviction, that the power of God was still the
game as it was of old in Egypt.

Neither do the prophecies contained in the book
(ch. vii.-xii.) beara less peculiar and striking cha-
racter, We cannot, indeed, fail to discover in the
writer, to a very great extent, a person of vast in-
formation, and well-versed in the management of
political affairs, these prophecies havin; for their
object—more than any other in the Old Testa-
ment—the political vicissitudes of the empires of
the world. Nor are we less reminded of Daniel's
domicile in Chaldma, by the colouring imparted

_to his visions, by their symbols, and more espe-
cially by those drawn from beasts (Dan. vii. 8),
the grotesque manner in which the figures are put
together, ail the colossal majesty imprinted on
those sketches. All these peculiarities belong to
the éndividuality of the prophet himself, which is

‘ conspicuous even in the accounts he gives of the
revelations imparted to him, though that indi-
viduality is then greatly modified by the sanc-
tilied, exalted, and glorified state of his mind.

The language of the book is partly Chaldzan
(ii. 45 vii. 28) and partly Hebrew. ‘The latter is
not unlike that of Ezekiel, though less impure
and corrupt, and not so replete with anomalous
grammatical forms. The Chaldaan is noways
that of the Chaldwans proper, but a cormpt
vernacular dialect, a mixture of Hebrew and
Aramaic, formed during the period of the exile.
It resembles mostly the Chaldaean pieces in Ezra,
but dillers greatly from the dialect of the later
Targums.

The style is, even in the prophetic parts, more
prosaic than poetical, as Lowth has already ob-
served: ¢Totum Danielis Librum e Puetico-
rum cevsu excludo.’ The historical descriptions
are usually very broad and prolix in details;
but the prophecies have a more rhetorical cha-
racter, and their delivery is frequently some-
what abrupt; their style is descriptive, painting
with tie most lively colours the still fresh impres-
sion which the vision has made on the mental eye.

The following are the essential features of the
prophetic tenor of the book of Daniel, while the
visions in ch, ii. and yii., together with their dif-
ferent symbols, may be considered as embodying
the leading notion of the whole. The development
of the whole of the heathen power, until the com-
pletion and glorification of the kingdom of God,
appeared tu the prophet in the shape of four powers
of the world, each successive power always sur-
passing the preceding in might and strength,
namely, the Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Greek, and
Roman. The kingdom of God proves itself’ con-
queror of them all ; a power which alone is ever-
lasting, and showing itself! in its utmost gloritica-
tion in the appearance of the Messiah, as Judye
and Lord of the world. Until the coming of the
Messiah, the people of God have yet to go through
a period of heavy trials. That period is particularly
described, ch. viii. and xi., in the struggles of the
Maccaban time, illustrative of the last and hea-
viest combats which the kingdom of God would
have to endure. The period until the appearance
of the Messiah is a fixed and sacred number:
seventy weeks of years (ch. ix.). Alter the lapse
of that period ensues the death of the Messiah;
the expiation of the people is realised ; true justice


DANIEL, BOOK OF.


is revealed, but Jerusalem and the Temple are
in punishment given up to destruction. The true
rise from this fall and corruption ensues ouly at
the end of time, in the general resurrection
(ch. xii.).

The unity of the book has been disputed by
several critics, and more especially by Eichhorn
and Bertholdt, who conceived it to have been
written by more than one author, on account of
some contradictions which they thought they
had discovered in it, such as in i. 21, compared
with x. 1; and in i. 5-18, compared with ii. 1,
With regard to the tirst supposed contradiction, we
consider the meaning of i. 21 to be, that Daniel
had lived to see the first year of the reign of
Cyrus, as a particularly memorable, and, for the
exiled people, a very important year. This does
Ly no means exclude the possibility of his having
lived still longer than up to that period.

Respecting the second presumed contradiction,
the matter in ch. i. 5-18 belongs properly.to the
co-regency of Nebuchadnezzar, which term is
there added to his period of government, while
in ch, ii, 1 his reign is counted only from the
year of his actual accession to the throne. These
attempts to disturb the harmony of the work are
also discountenanced by the connecting thread
which evidently runs through the whole of the
book, setting the single parts continually in
mutual relation to each other. Indeed, most
critics have now given up that hypothesis, and
look at the book as a closely connected and com-
plete work in itsell.

Much greater is the difference of opinion re
specting the authenticity uf the book. The oldest
known opponent of it is the heathen philosopher
Porphyry, in the third century of the Christian
era. ‘The greater the authority in which the book
of Daniel was held at that time by both Jews
and Christians in their various controversies, the
more was he anxious to dispute that authority,
and he did not disdain to devote one whole book
(the twelfth)—out of the fifteen which be had
composed against the Christians—to that subject
alone. He there maintains that the author of
the book of Dauiel was a Palestine Jew of the
time of Antiochus Epiphanes, that he wrote it in
Greek, aud fraudulently gave to past events the
form of prophecies. Porphyry has been answered
by Eusebius of Casarea, Methodius of Tyre,
and Apollinaris uf Lavdicea. But their works,
as well as that of Porphyry himself, are lost;
and we know the latter only from the numerous
quotations and refutations in the Commentary of
Jerome.

Porphyry found no successor in his views until
the time of the English deists, when Collins
attempted to attack the authenticity of Daniel,
as was done by Semler in Germany. After
this a few critics, such as J. D. Michaelis and
Eichhorn, disputed the authenticity of the six
first chapters. The learned Swiss, Corrodi, went
still farther, and, reviving the views of Por-
phyry, questioned the genuineness of the tehole
book. The strongest, most elaborate, and erudite
attacks against the book, came from the pens of
Berthuldt, Bleek, De Wette, Lengerke, and others.
But there have also not been wauting voices in
its defence, such as those of Liiderwald, Staiidlia,
Jahn, Lack, Steudel, Hengstenberg, Havernick,
and others,


‘ DANIEL, BOOK OF,


The arguments advanced against the genuine
cbaracter of Daniel are more directed against the
faternal than external evidence of the work.

The wonders and prophecies recorded in it are
always the foremost stumbling-block, and much
objection is made to them. The coutents of the his-
torical part is declared to be fictitious and replete
with improbabilities—nay, even with historical
inaccuracies; such as the sketches regarding the
relations of the sacerdotal order, the sages and
astrologers (ii. 2; iv. 7; v. 7-15), the mention of

* Darims the Mede (vi. 1; ix. 1; xi. 1), and the
regulations concerning the satraps (iii. 3; vi. 2,
&c.).

In the prophetic part, particular objection is
taken to the apocalyptic character of the book,
by which it differs from all the other books of the
Prophets. Not less suspicious, in their eyes, is
the circumstance that all the accounts in it re-
lating to very remote future events, and the fate
of empires which had not then yet risen into
existence, are described in so positive and exact a
manner, and with so much circumstantial detail,
even to the very date of their occurrence. Yet,
as this does not extend farther than the time of
Antiochus Epiphanes, it will naturally lead to the
conclusion of ‘ vaticinia post eventum.’ Other
objections against the genuineness of the hook
are, that Daniel is frequently spoken of in it in
high terms of respect and honour (i. 17, 19, sq.
v. ll, sq.3 vie 45 ix. 235 x. 11, &c.); that the
language, both Hebrew and Chaldean, is very
corrupt, and that the Greek words occurring in
them (iii. 5, 7, 10) naturally betray the book to
have been written in a later age, at least the
Alexandrian, when Greek words began to be
introduced into Asia; that the doctrines in the
book, the Angelology (iv. 14; ix. 21; x. 13, 21),
Christology (vii. 13, sq. 3 xii. 1, sq.), the ascetic
discipline (i. 8, 8q.), also betray a later age; that
the buok stands in the canon in the Hagio-
grapha, a proof that it had become known only
after the collection of the Prophets had been
completed ; a suspicion which is still more
strengthened by the circumstance that the name
of Daniel is wanting in the book of Sirach,
ch. xlix., probably because the book of Daniel
did not then exist.

These few objections have been variously met
and coufuted. They rest, to a great extent,
partly on historical errors, partly on the want of a
sound exeyesis, and, lastly, on the perversion of a
few passages in the text. Thus it has turned out
that several of the arzuments have led to a far
different and even opposite result from what was
originally meant, namely, to the defence of the
authenticity of the book. The existence, ex. gr., of
a king Darius of the Medians, mentioned in ch. vi.,
is a thorough historical fact; and the very circum-
tance that such an insignificant prince, eclipsed
as his mame was by the splendour of Cyrus,
and therefore unnoticed in the falulous and his-
torical chronicles of Persia, should be known and
mentioned in this book, is in itself a proof of the
high historical authority of Daniel. k or does the
whole dogmatic tenor of the book speak less in
favour of its genuineness, since the dogmatic

spirit of the Maccabzan period is essentially dif-
ie nies that ae it exhibits, as, ez. gr., in
he ristology, which f

huis of Daniel forms the substance and


DANIEL, BOOK OF. 510


The following are the more important of the
arguments which evidence the genuineness of the


1. The existence and authority of the book are
most decidedly testified by the New Testament.
Christ himself refers to it (Matt. xxiv. 15), and
gives himself (in virtue of the expression in
Dan. vii. 13) the name of Son of Man; while
the Apostles repeatedly appeal to it as an au-
thority (ex. gr 1 Cor. vi. 2; 2 Thess. ii. 35
Heh, xi, 33, #q.) To the objection that Christ
and the writers of the New Testament are here
no real authority, inasmuch as they accom-
moiate themselves to the Jewish notions and
views, we reply that the genuineness of the book
of Daniel is so closely connected with the truth
of its contents—in other words, that the authen-
ticity of the book is so immediately connected
with its avthority—that it is impossible to doubt
the genuineness, without suspecting at the same
time a wilful fraud and cheat in its contents;
so that the accommodation in this case to na-
tional views would be tantamount to wilfully
contirming and sanctioning an unpardonable
fraud.

2. The period of the exile would be altogether
incomprehensible without the existence of a man
like Daniel, exercising great intluence upon his
own people, and whose return to Palestine was
effected by means of his high station in the state,
as well as through the peculiar assistance of God
with which he was favoured. Without this as-
sumption, it is impossible to explain the con-
tinued state of independence of the people of
God during that period, or to account for the
interest which Cyrus took in their affairs. The
exile and its termination are indicative of un-
common acts of God towards highly-gifted and


favoured men; and the appearance of such a


man as Daniel is described in that book to have
been, is an indispensable requisite for the right
understanding of this portion of the Jewish
history.

3. An important hint of the existence of the
book in the time of Alexander is found in Josephus,
Antiq., xi. 8, 4, according to which the prophecies
of Daniel had been pointed out to that king on
his entrance into Jerusalem. It is trne that the
fact may have been somewhat embellished in its
details by Josephus; yet is it historically unde-
niable that Alexander did bestow great favours
on the Jews, a circumstance which is not easily
explained without granting the fact recorded by
Josephus to be true in the main.

4. The first book of the Maccabees, which is
almost contemporary with the events related in it,
not only pre-supposes the existence of the book of
Daniel, but actually betrays acquaintance with the
Alexandrian version of the same (1 Mace. i. 54;
comp. Dan. ix. 27; ii. 59; comp. Dan. iii.)}—a

proof’ that the book must have been written long
fore that period.

5. If the bovk had been written in the Mac-
cabwan period, there would probably have been
produced in that period some similar prophetic
and apocalyptic productions, composed by Pales-
tine Jews, Of such, however, not the slightest
notice can anywhere be found; so that our book
—if of the Maccabean time—thus forms an iso-
lated enigmatic phenomenon in the later Jewisb
literature.


620 ‘DANIEL, BOOK OF.


6. The reception of the book into the canon is
aleo an evidence of its authenticity. In the
Maccabean age the canon had long been com-

leted and closed; but even doubting that point,
it is not likely that, at a time when so much
scrupulous atiherence was shown towards all that
was hallowed by time and odd usage, and when
Scriptural literature was already flourishing—it
is not probable, we say, that a production then
recent should have been raised to the rauk of a
canonical book.

7. We have an important testimony for the
authenticity of the book in Ezekiel xiv. 14, 20;
xxvill, 3. Daniel is there represented as an
unusual character, as a model of justice and
wisdom, to whom had been allotted superior
divine insight and revelation, This sketch per-
fectly agrees with that contained in our book.

8. The book betrays such an intimate acquaint.
ance with Chaldaan manners, customs, history,
and religion, as none but a contemporary writer
could fairly be supposed to possess. Thus, ex. gr.,
the description of the Chaldaan magians and their
regulations perfectly agrees with the accounts
of the classics respecting them. The account
of the illness and insanity of Nebuchadnezzar is
confirmed by Berosus (in Joseph. ¢. Apion. i. 20).
The edict of Darius the Mede (Dan. v.) may be
satisfactorily explained from the notions peculiar
to the Medo-Persian religion, and the importance
attached in it to tne king, who was considered as
a sort of incarnate deity.

9. The religions views, the ardent belief in the
Messiah, the parity of that belief, the absence of
all the notions und ceremonial practices of later
Sudaisin, &c., the agreement of the book in these
respects with the genuine prophetic books, aud
more especially with the prophets in and after the
exile, —all this testities to the genuineness of
Daniel.

10. The linguistic character of the book is
most decisive for its authenticity. In the first
instance, the language in it, by turns Hebrew and
Aramaan, is particularly remarkable. In that
respect, the book bears a close analogy to that of
Ezra. The author must certainly have been equally
conversant with both languages—an attainment
exactly suited to a Hebrew living in the exile, but
Not in the least so to an author in the Maccabean
age, when the Hebrew had long since ceased to be
a living language, and had been supplanted by
the Aramwan vernacular dialect. The Hebrew
in Daniel bears, moreover, a very great affinity
to that in the other later bouks of the Old Tes-
lament ; and has, in particular, idioms in com-
mon with Ezekiel. The Aramaic, also, in the
book ditfers materially from the prevailing dialect
ot the later Chaldazan paraphrastic versions of the
Old Testament, and has much more relation to
the idiom of the book of Ezra.

With regard to the O.p Versions of the book
of Daniel, we must in the first place observe that
there is not extant, or even known ever to have
existed, any Chaldwan paraphrase (Targum) of
Daniel, any more than of Ezra. The reason of
this lies, no doubt, in the scrupulosity of the later
Jews, who believed that the Chaldaan version of
the two books might afterwards easily be con-
founded with the original texts, and thus prove
injurious to the pure preservation of the latter.
There is something peculiar and remarkable in


DANIEL, BOOK OF.


the Alexandrian version of the canonical book of
Daniel. Not only has it taken liberties with re
gard to single expressions and sentences, but has
actually dared to re-model the text altogether in
ch. iii-vi., either by numerous additions (as iii, 2,
sq., the prayer of Azariah; iii, 51, sq., the song of
the Three Children), or by omissions and deviations,
There are, besides, two great supplements to that
version—the story of Susannah (xiii.), and of Bel
and the Dragon in Babel (xiv.). Both apocryphal
stories were originally written in Greek ; a con
clusion drawn already by Porphyry from the
quibbles in xiii, 54, 55, 58, 59, who at the
same time derided the Christians for considering
those stories as genuine writings of Daniel. The
authenticity of the two stories was, however,
already before him questioned by the fathers of
the church; and a very interesting discussion
took place between Origen and Julius Africanus
regarding the autheuticity of the story of Su-
sannah, Jerome condemns the two stories in
lain terms as fables, and as additions not be-
ligeine to the Hebrew text. Some erroneously
assume that, besides our canonical text, there also
existed a sort of critical revision of the former in
the Chaldean language, which the Seventy bad
consulted in their translation. But the mistakes
in the translation, which are brought forward in
favour of that view, cannot stand a strict cri-
ticism, while the above-uamed peculiarities may
be sutisfactorily explained from the character of
that translation itself It plainly shows that the
writers had endeavoured themselves to furnish a
collection of legends, and a peculiar re-cast of the
book, in accordance with the spirit of the age and
the taste of Judaism then prevailing at Alexandria.
The wouderful character of the book, and the
many obscure and enigmatic accounts in it, were
the rocks on which the fanciful, speculative, and
refining minds of the Alexandrians ran foul.
No book was ever more favourable to the itet-
mixture of legends, disfigurations, and miscon-
ceptions of all sorts, than Daniel; while the pe-
riod of the exile was generally a favourite topic for
the fautastical enibellishments of the Alexandrian

Jews. In like matmer may also be explained the
mutilations which the books of Estherand J eremiah
have received at the hands of the Alexandnans,

to whom hermeneutic scruples were of but little
moment. The more important the book of Daniel

was to the Christian church, and the more arbi-
trary the re-modelled Sept. version of it was, the
more conceivable is it why in the old church
the version of Theodotion became more genera

than that of the Sept. It is true that some of the
fathers still made use of the Alexandrine versio}
but, in the time of Jerome, Theodotion was
already read in nearly all the churches; a

that this custom had been introduced. long be-
fore him is evident from the circumstance |
Jerome was ignorant of the historical principles
by which the church was guided in adopting that
version. For a long time it was believed that the
version of the Seventy had been lost, vantil it was
discovered at Rome, in the latter half of the last
century, in the codex Chisianus, It was pub-
lished at Rome, 1772, in folio, trom the MS. copy
of Blanchini, with a translation by P. de Magist'
which edition is, however, very defective and i
correct, though it was afterwards repeat vty
published. The version of Theedotion, genera! y


= aonmnm


a et cee ers eI, EE a


DANIEL, ADDENDA TO.


published together with that of the Septuagint,
of which it is a revision, is upon the whole
literal and correct. In the present copies of
Theodotion, however, are already found the apo-
cryphal interpolations and additions of the Sept.
This is owing to the fact that Theodotion’s ver-
sion has in later times been re-modelled, inter-
polated, and falsified after that of the Seventy, so
that it would now be altogether an idle task to
attempt to restore the original text of Theodotion.
A very useful guide for the criticism of the Greek
versions, is the Syriac Hexaplarian version, pub-
lished by Buggati, at Milan, in 1788. The Ara-
bic Polyglott version is an offspring of Theodo-
tion's, which it follows with literal exactness.

The Syriac version in the Peschito does some
good service in explaining the words in Daniel,
but is, nevertheless, not free from gross mistakes.
The apocryphal parts it has copied from the later
interpolated Theodotion. The Vulgate also has
these additions translated after Theodotion.

The most important commentators on Daniel
are, among the fathers, Ephram Syrus, Jerome,
Theodoret ; among the rabbins, Jarchi, Kimchi,
Abenezra, Joseph Jacchiades; among the Protes-
tant theologians, Melancthon, Calvin, Martin
Geier, de Dieu, Venema, Chr. Bened. Michaelis,
J.D. Michaelis. In more recent times, critical
works on Daniel have appeared by Bertholdt
(1806), Rosenmiiller (1832), Hivernick (1832),
Lengerke (1935), Maurer (1836). In English
there are many works on the prophecies and vi-
sions of Daniel, but those which take the cha-
Tacter of commentaries are, the Sir-fold Com-
mentary by Willet (1610); the Translation and
Commentary by Hugh Broughton (1611); the Ja.
Proved Version by Wintle (1807).—H. A. C. H.

DANIEL, Apocryphal Addenda to [Dru-
Tero-CanonicaL]. In the version of the Seventy,
and that of Theodotion, are found some consider-
able additions to the book of Daniel which are
wanting in the Hebrew canon. These are, -

1. The Prayer of Azarias, &c. (Dan. iii. 24-51) ;
2. The Song of the Three Children (Dan. iii. 52-90,
fe. according to Rubert Stephen's division into
verses, which has been adopted into the Latin
Vulgate). [Verses].

8. The History of Susanna (Dan. xiii.).

4. The Narrative of Bel and the Dragon (Dan. xiv.).
These are in our Authorized English Bible printed
separately, and numbered accordingly, the Prayer
of Azarias and the Sung of the Three Children
making sixty-eight verses.

St. Jerome, who translated these together with

the canonical parts of the book of Daniel from the
Greek version of Theodotion, observes : * Daniel, as
received among the Hebrews, contains neither the
History of Susana, nor the Hymn of the Three
Children, nor the Fables of Bel and the Dragon,
all of which, as they are dispersed throughout the
world, we have added, lest to the ignorant we
should seem to have cut off'a considerable part of
the book, transfixing them at the same tine with
a dagger (vern anteposito, easque jugulante).’*
* This Latin phrase is translated by the Ameri-
can editors of Jahn’s Introduction thus: ‘but we
have given the precedence in order, to that part
which is true, and evinces the falsity of these.’
They evidently mistook the word veru, an obelisk
or dagger, [+] for vero.


DANIEL, ADDENDA TO. 521


Jerome gives us the following account of these
additions to the Hebrew text :—‘ We ought to
know that Porphyry, attacking the authenticity of
the book of Daniel, maintains that it is a forge
unknown to the Hebrews, and entirely of Greel
origin, inasmuch as in the story of Susannah (fa-
hula Susanne), Daniel says to the elders, in allu-
sion to the word oxivos (lentiscus or a mastich tree),
oxloe se, &c., and to the word xpivoy (ilez, a
holm), mploa oe, which etymological allusion is
Greek and not Hebrew. To whom both Eusebius
and Apollinarius, with one voice, replied, that the
fables of Bel and the Dragon are not contained in
the Hebrew, but that they are part of the prophecy
of Habakkuk, son of Joshua, of the tribe of Levi,
as is stated in the Septuagint Version in the title to
this same fable of Bel.’ . . . ‘Therefore, when
I translated Daniel many years ago, I marked
these visions with an obelus, in order to intimate
that they are not in the Hebrew, and I am not a
little surprised that certain fanlt-finders are of-
fended with me, as if I had curtailed the book,
for both Origen, Eusebius, Apollinarius, and other
churchmen and Greek doctors, confess, as I have
said, that these visions are not in the Hebrew.” And
again—‘ I heard one of the Jewish teachers, derid-
ing the history of Susannah, and asserting it to be
the fable of some Greek, make the same objection
which was made to Origen by Africanus, namely,
that the etymulugical paronomasia between oxivos
and oxloat, mpivos and zpioa, was derived {rum
the Greek language. The objection may be
rendered intelligible to thuse acquainted culy with
the Latin language, by supposing that from the
answer of one elder under an ilex tree (sub ilice),
Daniel had taken occasion to say to him, ilico
pereas, and that to the answer of the others under
a lentisk-tree (sub lentisco), the reply had been,
in lente te comminuat angelus, or, uon lente
pereas, or lentus, id eat flexibilis, ducaris ad
mortem."

Eusebius and the others who replied to Por-
phyry, maintained that Daniel the prophet
was a different person from the Daniel of the
Seventy, which commences with the words,
‘There was a certain priest, named Daniel, son
of Abdias, who ate at the table of the king of
Babylon.”

The other objections made by the Jewish teacher
to St. Jerome consisted in his ridiculing the idea
of the three youths in the fiery furnace having
leisure to compose a metrical hymn ; in asking
what miracle or mark of inspiration it was in
Daniel to kill a serpent with a cake of pitch, or
to detect the frauds of the priests of Bel, such
sagacity being rather the effect of common pru-
dence than of a prophetic spirit, But his chief
objection referred to the idea of Habakkuk (ver,
36) being carried by an angel through the air to
Babylon, with regard to which he challenged
him to show a similar miracle recorded in the
Scriptures; and when a young man present ad-
duced the case of Ezekiel, he at once pvinted
out that this is said to have taken place in the
spirit ; and Jerome observes that he did not ven-
ture to refer to St. Paul, who would not say of
himself whether he was rapt up in the spirit or
in the body. This Jew endeavoured to main-
tain by such arguments the apocryphal character
of these portions of Daniel. Jerome further ob-
serves that the history of Susannah is considered


622 DANIEL, ADDENDA TO.


by nearly all the Hebrews asa fable; and that
it is not read in the synagogues: for who, say
they, could believe that captives had the power of
starving their princes aud judges? (Pref. ad
Danielem).

The subject of the Prayer of Azarias, und of
the Song of the three youths, Azarias, Ananias,
and Misael (the Hebrew names of Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abed-nego), consists in a petition
for deliverance from the furnace, and a hymn of
thanksgiving, on the part of the young men, for
their preservation in the midst of the flames. De
Wette (Lehrbuch) conceives that the Prayer and
the Hymn betray marks of two different authcrs
(Dan. iii, 38; comp. with 53, 55, 84, 85,
Stephen’s Division), and that the latter has the
appearauce of being written with a liturgical
object. Certain it is that, from a very early
period, it formed part of the church service (see
Rutinus, in Symbol. Apost., who observes that
this hymn was then sung thronghout the whole
church); and Athanasius (De viryinitate) ; it is
one of the canticles still sung on all festivals in
the Roman, and retained in the daily service of
the Anglican church. In its metrical arrange-
ment it resembles some of the ancient Hebrew
compositions. De Wette adduces (loc. cit.)
several proofs from the style to show that it had
a Chaldee original, and bad undergone the la-
bours of vamivus hands. It is maintained by
those who contend for the divine anthority of
this Hymn that the context requires its insertion,
as without it there would be an evident hiatus
in the narrative (Dan. iii. 23). ‘Then these
men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-neyo, fell
down bound into the midst of the burning fiery
furnace,’ after which, we tind immediately (ver.
2A, Heb.) ‘then Nebuchadnezzar was astonished,’
&c. The cause of this astonishment is said to be
supplied by the Greek translatiunn—* Aud they
walked in the midst of the fire praising God, and
blessing the Lord (ver. 1, Auth. Vers. Apucr.)
2 +. « but the angel of the Lord came tiown
into the oven,’ &c. (ver. 27). But this addition
seems by no means necessary in order to account
for Nebuchadnezzar’s astonishment, as the cause
of it is given in Daniel, ver. 92 (ver. 25 in the
Heb. and Auth. Vers.).

The History of Susanna is probably a moral
parable, founded perhaps on some fact, and af-
fording a beautiful lesson of chastity.

The object of the Jewish author of the history
of the destruction of Bel and the Dragon was,
according to Jahn, ‘to warn against the sin of
idolatry some of his brethren, who had embraced
Egyptian superstitions. The book was, therefore,
well adapted to the time, and shows that phi-
losophy was not suflicient to keep men from
apostatising into the must absurd and degrading
superstitions. The time of the writing Jahn
ascribes to the age of the Ptolemies, when ser-
pents were still worshipped at ‘Thebes.

Among the difficulties attending these Deutero-
canonical portions of Daniel, Jahn enumerates the
denominating Daniel a priest (xiv. 1), which he
conceives ty bea confounding of Daniel the prophet
with Daniel the priest (Ezra viii. 2; Neh. x. 7)3
the order of the king to destroy the idol of Bel,
and the assertion that serpents were worshipped at
Babylon; but he conceives all these dithculties
to be removed by regarding the whole as a


,
DANIEL, ADDENDA TO.


rable, pointing out the vanity of idols, and the
impostures of the priests. We are informed by
Herodotus that the temple of Bel was destroyed
by Xerxes.

De Wette ( cee while he points out some
Hebraisms in Susannah, considers the etymolo-
gical allusions already noticed as decisive of its
having been originally written in Greek. Bel
and the Dragon has no marks whatever of any
other than a Greek original. It is no doubt re
markable that we should have a version of the
deutero-canonical as well as of the canonical
portions of Daniel, from Theodotion as well as
from the Seventy. This is accounted for by sup-
posing that Theodotion only altered and corrected
the version of the Seventy in these parts. The
discrepancies are very great between these two
versions, so much so, as almost in some instances
to give the appearance of a dillerent narration.
It is well known that so early as the second cen-
tury the Septuagint version of Daniel was super-
seded by that of Theodotion, and that it was
supposed the former had been lost, until it was
discovered in Rome, and published in 1772. De
Wette considers the deutero-canonical portions
to be interpolations in Theodotion’s translation.
These additions are also found in the Syriac and
old Latin versions,

Professor Alber of Pesth (who contends against
Jahn for the historic truth of these narratives),
in reference to the term fables bestowed by Je
rome on some of the deuteru-canonical portions
of the book of Daniel, endeavours to maintain,
fiom the fact of Jerome having used the word
Jubula (a fando) of a true narrative, ‘ Tibi
fabulam referam, qua infantia mea temporibus
accidit;’ that he employs it here in the same
sense; but it is evident from the whole context
(in which he had been already speaking of
apocryphal fables), that Jerome, who alsu ap-
plies these Greek additions to the book of Daniel,
contrasts them with the authority of the canonical
Scriptures, ‘nec se debere respondere Pgrphyrio,
pro his qua unilam Scripture sacre auctor:
tatem habeant.!. (Pref. ad Daniclem.) Jerome,
however, observes, that with a due rezaid to
the order of time, Theodotion had placed the
history of Susannah at the head of the book of
Daniel, and it is thus placed in the Cud. Ales,


c.

Bel and the Dragon is read in the Roman office
on Ash-Wednesday, and in the Church of Eng-
land on the 23rd of November. Susanna is read
in the Anglican Charch on the 22nd of November,
and in the Roman on the vigil of the foarth Sune
day in Lent.

We shall conclude with the following observa-
tion of Erasmus. * It is astonishing that what
Jerome stabbed with his dagger is now every-
where read and sung in the churches; nuy, we
read, without any mark of distinction, what Je-
rome did not fear to call a fable, the history of
Bel and the Dragon, and which he would not
have added, bad be not been apprehensive of
seeming to have cut off a considerable portion of the
sacred volume. But to whom did he fear to seem
todo so? To the ignorant, as he himself observes.
Of so much more weight to the ignorant mult-
tude is custom, than the judgment of the learned!"
(Schol. super Pref. Hieron. in Daniel.) And
again, € Whether the church receives these books


DAR.


with the same authority as the others, the spirit
of the church knoweth.’ (De Symbol. et Deas)
DAR (7). This word occurs in Esth. i. 6,
th the name of one of the stones in the pavement
of the magnilicent hall in which Ahasuerus feasted
the princes of his empire. This would suggest
that it must have denoted a kind of marble.
Some take it to signify Parian marble, others
white marble; but nothing certain is known
about it. In Arabic, the word dar signities a
large pearl. Now pearls were certainly employed
by the ancients in decorating the walls of apart-
ments in royal palaces; but that pearls were also
used in the pavements of even regal dining-
rooms is improbable in itself, and unsupported
by any known example. The Septuagint refers
the Hebrew word to a stone resembling pearls
(mwvivov Al@ov); by which, as J. D. Michaelis
Conjectures, it intends to denote the Alabastrites
of Pliny (11ést. Nat. xxxvi. 7, 8), which is a kind
of alabaster with the gloss of mother-of-jearl
ALagasTER }.
DARCMONIM. [Aparconrm.]
DARICS, [Aparconi3.]


DARIUS, or rather Dansavesn (WY), is
the name under which three Medo-Persian kings
are mentioned in the Old Testament. The ori-
gina] form of the name, to which the Hebrew and
Greek words are only approximations, has been
read by Grotefend, in the cuneiform inscriptions
of Persepolis, as Darheush, or Darjeush (Heeren’s
Ideen, 1. 2. p. 350). Herodotus assigns to the
name the sense of épé(ns, or, according to another
railing, épfeins (vi. 98); the fyrmer meaning
coercitor, the latter man of yreat achievements.
The former accords with Auldixg fast, which is
the sense of Dara, the modern Persian name of

Marius,

The first Darius is ‘ Darjavesh, the son of

chashverosh, of the seed of the Medes,’ in the
book of Daniel (ix. 1). Much difference of opi-
nion has prevailed as to the person here intended ;
buta strict attention to what is cither actually
expressed in, or fairly deduced from, the terms
used in that prophet, tends to narrow the field for
Conjecture very considerably, if it dues nut decide
the question, It appears, namely, from the pas-
saves in ch. v.39, 313 vi. 28, that Darjavesh,
the Mede, obtained the dominion over Babylon on
the death of Belshazzar, who was the Jast Chaldwan

king, and that he was the immediate predecessor
of Koresh (Cyrus) yin the sovereignty. The his-
torical juncture here delined belongs, therefore, to
the period when the Medo-Persian army, led by
Cyrus, took Babylon (a.p, 538) 3 and Darjavesh,
the Mede, must denote the first king of a foreign
dynasty, who assumed the dominion over the
Babylonian empire, befure Cyrus. These indica-
tions all concur in tie person of Cyaxares the
Second, the son and successor of Astyages
Anasvencs], and the immediate predecessor of
ytus. It may be objected to this view that
ieee Ctesias, and other pagan historians
ie ae ‘aps chiefly rely on their authority, make
eh hention of any such person. But, it may be
mewered, Xenophon states that Astyages did
dace son of that name who succeeded him; by
tae him as a prince given up to sensuality,
plaius how he came to surrender all autho-


DARKNESS. 583


rity so entirely into the hands of his enterprising
son-in-law and nephew Cyrus, that his reign was
naturally sunk in that of his distinguished suc-
cessor; and he dates the commencement of the
reign of Cyrus from the death of this Cyaxares
(Cyrop. i. 5; viii, 7). Moreover, a passage in
Eschylus (Perse, 763-5), seems to bear an ob-
scure but intelligible testimony to the same ac-
count. Josephus also, when speaking of the same
person, whom he calls Darius, adds, ‘ He was the
son of Astyages, but was known to the Greeks
by another name’ (Antig. x. 11). Lastly, an
important chronological difficulty is best ad-
justed by assuming the existence and reign of
this Cyaxares, as is shown in Clinton's Fasté
Hellenict, p. 301, sq. Berthuldt has written a
satisfactory ‘ Excurs iiber den Darius Medus’
in his Commentary on Daniel.

The second ‘ Darjavesh king of Persia’ is
mentioned in the book of Ezra (iv.-vii.) in
Haggai, and in Zechariah, as the king who, in
the second year of his reign, effected the execu-
tion of those decrees of Cyrus which granted the
Jews the liberty to rebuild the temple, the fultil-
ment of which had been obstructed by the ma-
licious representations which their enemies had
made to the immediate successors of Cyrus. It
is agreed that this prince was Darius Hystaspis,
who succeeded the usurper Smerdis B.c. 521,
and reigned thirty-six years. For some argu-
ments to show that he is not mentioned in the
Old Testament by any other name than that of
Darjavesh, see the article AHASUERUS.

he third, ¢ Darjavesh the Persiun,: occurs in
Neh. xij. 22, in a passage which merely states
that the succession of priests was registered up to
his reign. The question as to the person here in-
tended bears chiefly on the authorship of the
passage. It may be briefly stated thus :—If, as
is more commonly believed, this king be Darius
Nothus, who came to the throne (n.c. 423), and
reigned nineteen years, we must (assuming that
the Jaddua here mentioned is the high-priest
who went out to meet Alexander the Great on
his entry into Jerusalem ; Josephus, Antig. xi. 8)
conceive, either that Jaddua reached an age ex-
ceeding a century—tor so long he must have
lived, if he was already hizh-priest in the reign
of Darius Nothus, and saw Alexander's entry ;
or that the Jaddua of Nehemiah and of Josephus
are nut the same person. Carpzov has tried to
show, from this very chapter, that the Jaddua
of ver. 22 was a Levite, and not the high-priest
CIntroduct, ad Ligr. bet. Test. p. 347). If,
on the other hand, this king be Darius Codo-
mannus, who came to the throne s.c. 336, and
reigned four years, then we must either assume
that Nebemiah himself attained the age of 130
years at least, or that this age is an interpola-
tion by a later haud (Berthelat, Einleit. iii.
1031). :

Darius Codomannus is evidently the Persian
king alluded to in 1 Mace. i. 1.—J. N.

DARKNESS. In the Gospels of’ Matthew
(xxvii. 45) and Luke (xxiii. 44) we read that,
while Jesus hung upon the cross, * from the sixth
hour there was darkness over all the land unto
the niuth hour.” Most of the ancient commen
tators believed that this darkness extended to the
whole world. But their arguments are now
seldom regurded as satisfactory, and their proofs


o24 DARKNESS.


even less s0. Of the latter the strongest is the
mention cf an eclipse of the sun, which is referred
to this time by Phlegon Trallianus, and, after
him, by Thallus, ap. Africanum. But even an
eclipse of the sun could not be visible to the
whole world ; and neither of these writers names
the place of the eclipse.
Rome; but it is impossible that an eclipse could
have happened from the sixth to the ninth hour
both at Rome and Jerusalem. It is, therefore,
highly probable that the statement of Phlegon,
which in the course of time has come to be quoted
as independent authority, was taken from the
relation of the Christians or from the Scriptures,
That the darkness could not have proceéded from
an eclipse of the sun is further placed beyond all
doubt by the fact that, it being then the time of
the Passover, the moon was at the full. This
darkness may therefore be ascribed to an extra-
ordinary and preternatural obscuration of the
solar light, which might precede and accompany
the earthquake which took place on the same
occasion. For it has been noticed that often
before an earthquake such a mist arises from
sulphureous vapours as to occasion a darkness
almost nocturnal (see the authors cited in
Kuinoel ad Matt. xxiv. 29, and compare Joel
iii. 3; Rev. vi. 12, 8q.). Such a darkness might
extend over Judea, or that division of Palestine
in which Jerusalem stood, to which the best
authorities agree that here, as in some other
places, it is necessary to limit the phrase racay
Thy viv, rendered ‘ all the land.’

Darkness is often used symbolically in the
Scriptures as opposed to light, which is the
symbol of joy und safety, to express misery
and adversity (Job xvii, 6; Ps. evil. 10;
exliii. 3; Isa. viii. 22; ix. 1; lix. 9,10; Ezek.
xxx. 18; xxxii. 7, 8; xxxiv. 12), ‘He...
that maketh the morning darkness,’ in Amos
iv. 13, is supposed to be an allusion to the
dense black clouds and mists attending earth-
quakes. ‘The day of darkness,’ in Joel ii. 2,
alludes to the obscurity occasioned by the flight
of locusts in compact masses [Locust]. In
Ezek. viii. 12, daslinest is described as the ac-
companiment of idolatrous rites. Darkness of
the sun, moon, and stars is used fizuratively to
denote a general darkness or deficiency in the
government or body politic (Isa. xiii. 10; Ezek.
xxxii. 7; Joel ii. 10-31). In Eph. v. U1, the
expression * works of darkness’ is applied to
the heathen mysteries, on account of the im-
pure actions which the initiated performed in
them. ‘ Outer darkness’ in Matt. viii. 12, and
elsewhere, refers to the darkness outside, in the
streets or open country, as contrasted with the
blaze of cheerful light in the house, especially
when a convivial party is held in the night time.
And it may be observed that the streets in the
East are utterly dark after nightfall, there being
no shops with lighted windows, nor even public
or private lamps to impart to them the light and
cheerfulness to which we are accustomed. This
gives the more force to the contrast of the ‘ outer
darkness’ with the inner light.

Darkness is used to represent the state of the
dead (Job x. 21; xvii. 13). It is also em-
ployed as the proper and significant emblem of
ignorance (Isa. ix. 2; lx.2; Matt. vi. 23; John
ili, 9; 2 Cor. iv. 1-6). .


Some think it was‘


DAUGHTER.


DAROM (O11). This word means ‘ the
south,’ and as a proper name is usually under-
stood to be applied to the southernmost part of
Juda, in Job xxxvii. 17; Deut. xxxiil. 23;
Eccles. i. 6; Ezek. xxi. 2; xl. 24. Hence the
name of ‘Daroma’ is given by Eusebius and
Jerome to the region which they describe as
extending about twenty miles from Eleutheropolis
on the way towaris Arabia Petrea, pe ee
east to west as far as from the Dead Sea to
Gerara and Beersheba. A little to the south of
Gaza there is now a spot called Babed-Daron,
a name probably derived from the fortress Daron,
celebrated in the time of the Crusades. That
fortress was built on the ruins of a Greek convent
of the same name, which, being traced so far back,
may well be identified with Darom as the ancient
name of this territory.

DATES, [Pata Trez.]

DATHAN (jN7, fontanus; Sept. Aafdy)
oue of the chiefs of Reuben who joined Korah in
the revolt against the authority of Moses and
Aaron (Num. xvi. 1) (Aason

DAUGHTER. In the Scriptures the word
daughter is used in a variety of senses, some of
which are unknown to our own language, or have
only become known through familiarity with
Scriptural forms of speech. This amounts to
saying that the Hebrew word M3 bath, has more
extended applications than our word daughter.
Besides its usual and proper sense of—1.A daughter
sent or adopted, we find it used to designate—
2. A uterine sister, niece, or any female descendant

Gen. xx. 12; xxiv. 48; xxviii, 6; xxxvi. 2.

um. xxv. 13 Deut. xxiii. 17).—3. Women, a
natives, residents, or professing the religion of
certain places, as ‘the daughter of Ziun’ (Isa. iii,
16); § deachias of the Philistines’ (2 Sam, i.
20); ‘daughter of a strange God’ (Mal. ii. 11);
* daughters of men,’ t. e. carnal women (Gen.
vi. 2); &c.—4. Metaphorically, small towns are
called daughters of neighbouring large cities—
metropoles, or mother cities—tu which they be
longed, or from which they were derived, as ‘ Hesh-
bon and all the dunghters [Auth. Vers. ril/ayes]
thereof’ (Num. xxi. 25); so Tyre is called the
danghter of Sidon (Isa. xxii, 12), as having been
originally a colony frum thence; and hence alss
the town of Abel is called *a mother in Israel’
(2 Sam. xx. 19); and Gath is in one place
(comp. 2 Sam. vii. 1; 1 Chron. xviii. 1) called
Gath-Ammah, or Gath the mother town, to distur
gnish it from its own dependencies, or from anuther
place called Gath. , See other instances in Num.
xxi. 32; Judg. xi. 26; Josh. xv. 45, &c.—5, The
people collectively of any place, the name of
which is given; as ‘the daughter (¢. e. the peaple)
of Jernsalem hath shaken her head at thee’ (Isa.
xxvii. 22; see also Ps. xlv. 133 exxxvii. 8;
Isa. x. 30; Jer. xlvi. 19; Lam. iv. 22; Zech.
ix. 9). This metaphor is illustrated by the
almost universal custom of representing towns
under the figure of a woman.—6, The word
‘daughter’ followed by a numeral, indicates a
woman of the age indicated by the numeral, as
when Sarah (in the original) is called ‘the
daughter of ninety years’ (Gen. xvii. 17).—7. The
word ‘danghter’ is also applied to the produce of
animals, trees, or plants. Thus, ‘ daugliter
the she-ostrich’ (supposed) for, ‘ female ostrich’


~


DAVID.


(Lev. xi. 16); Joseph is called ‘a fruitful bough
whose daugliters (branches) run over the wall,’
(Gen. xlix. 22).

The significations of the word ‘ daughter’ in its
scriptural use might be more minutely distin-
guished ; but they may all be referred to one or
other of these heads, °

Respecting the condition of daugliters in fa-
milies, see art. Women and Marriage.


DAVID (3YT5 Chron. TT; Sept. Aavid;
Now Test. Aagis. The word probably means
beloved : Gesenius). The reign of David is the
great critical era in the history of the Hebrews.
It decided that they were to have for nearly five
centuries a national monarchy, a fixed line of
priesthood, and a solemn religions worship by
music and psalms of exquisite beauty; it finally
separated Israel from the surrounding heathen,
and gave room for producing those noble monu-
ments of sacred writ, to the influence of which
over the whole world no end can be seen. His
predecessor, Saul, had many successes against
the Philistines, but it is clear that he made little
Impression on their real power; for be died tight-
ing against them, not on their own border, but at
the opposite side of his kingdom, in Mount Gilboa.
As for all the other ‘enemies on every side ’"—
Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, and the kings
of Zobah,—however much he may have ‘ vexed
then’ (1 Sam. xiv. 47), they, as well as the
Amalekites, remained unsubdued, if weakened.
The real work of establishing Israel as lord over
the whole soil cf Canaan was lett for David.

_Ample as are at first sight the materials for his
Vistory, a closer examination shows that great
jedginent and caution are needed in the use of
them. His battle with Goliath, it is well known,
involves difficulties of an embarrassing kind. In
fact, it represents Saul and Abner as unacquainted
with the person of David (1 Sam. xvii, 55-55),
while the preceding chapter makes David the
favourite attendant and musician of Saul. The
Vatican Sept. employs the bold remedy of cut-
tin; out from ch. xvii. the twenty verses, 12-31,
an the last four, 55-58, as well as the five tirst
verses of the next chapter. But even so, David's
unacquaintance with arms and preference of the
sling to the sword and spear, which remains in
vers. 33-40, is in contlict with ch. xvi. 18, which
Tepresents him as ‘a mighty valiant man, and a

mag of war,’ and Saul’s ‘ armour-bearer * (ver. 21).
It is, moreover, morally impossible that the verses
wantiug in the Vatican Sept. can have been
added to the Hebrew text after its tirst translation
into Greek, The same codex has extirpated vers.
9-11 of ch. xviii., and has re-modelled ver. 28,
obviously in order to give continuity and consist-
ency to the narrative. We must, then, look on
the text here contained in our common version as
having neither more nor less external authority
than all the rest of’ the first book of Samuel. As
a sufter remedy, mere transposition may be at-
tempted; but it will not succeed. The jealousy
instantly kindled in Saul's bosom by the songs of
the women when David was returning from slay-
ing the Philistines, is inconsistent with the unsus-
pecting affection felt by Saul towards the simple
shepherd in ch, xvi. 19-22, It has been argued
from ch, xvii. 12-14, where David is introduced
to us as if anew, that the original writer of these


DAVID. 625


words did not also pen the preceding chapter.
There is some weight in this; yet it is not so de
cisive as the contradictory representation of David
above alluded to. On the other band, ch. xvii.
15 was written by one who had ch. xvi. before
his eyes, and wished to account for David’s not
being with Saul, though he was his armour-bearer.
So, indeed, Josephus distinctly perceived. ‘Saul,’
says he, ‘sent David to his father Jesse; being
satisfied with his three sons,’ &c. &c. (Josephe
Antig. vi. 9, 2). Once more, even the Vatican
codex of the Sept. leaves, in xvii. 54, the start-
ling statement that David brought the head of the
Philistine to Jerusalem. At that time not Jeru-
salem only, but its suburbs also, were in the power
of the Jebusites, who, in 1 Chron. xi. 4, are called
Sthe inhabitants of the land.’ Now, even allow-
ing tuat in time of peace Israelites were admissible
into Jerusalem, there is no conceivable reason why
David should have carried his trophy thither,
while it was a foreign and heathenish city. On
the other hand, a late writer who was accustomed
to think of Jerusalem as the metropolis of Judea,
might easily introduce such a statement. These
difficulties, collectively, have induced some to
regard the whole seventeenth chapter as from a
later hand than the rest; but it is evident that if
we omit it, we lose the clue to the rapid elevation
of David and the jealousy of Saul, to say nothing
of ch. xix. 5 and xxi. 9. Every theory, in short,
is intrinsically unyphilosophical, which fancies
that it may cut out what it tinds to be inconsistent,
and then imagines that the authority of what is
left is unimpaired ; for the same hand which has
introduced the passages which we reject, may
have taken many liberties with that which we
teceive.

We learn from 1 Chron. xxix. 29 that the life
of David was written by Samuel, Nathan, and
Gad ; also, trom 2 Sam. i. 18 it may be probably
inferred that other information conceruing him
was contained in the poems of Jasher. None of
these works are before us in their original form.
Materials from them have, however, been worked
up by a later hand, which, it would seem, has
sometimes adopted whole passages from them,
sometimes has modified them aud added cone
necting parts and explanations. Such, at least,
is the conclusion to which every one will find
himself’ strongly pressed by a close criticism of
the whole narrative. The change of name from
Ishui to Ishbosheth (1 Sam. xiv. 49 and 2 Sam.
ii. 8, &c.) appears to indicate that compositions
by different hands have been put together. That
a duplicate account is found of the origin of the
proverb, ‘Is Saul also among the prophets?’ seems
undeniable (ch. x. 1-12 and xix. 20-24); and if
a single clear case of this sort is admitted to exist,
various others must probably fall under the same
head. On this ground, doubtless, it is, that the
Vatican Sept. has omitted ch. xviii. 10-11, since
this attack of Saul on Davia’'s life ‘on the morrow '
is hard to reconcile with all that follows, and the
verses appear to be a duplicate of ch. xix. 9, 10.
Less certain duplicates, and yet not free from
difficulty, are the following. The men of Ziph
twice betray David to Saul (ch. xxiii. 19 and
xxvi. 1); David twice spares Saul’s life under
circumstances highly unlikely to recur (ch. xxiv.
and xxvi.), and on each occasion Saul is melted
into tenderness, The former event ends with an


626 DAVID.


oath of David to Saul, which appears like a final
termination of hostility; while the opening of ch,
xxvii. embarrasses us by its extreme abruptness,
when the very opposite result might have been
expected from that which immediately precedes.
Comparing also ch. xxi. 10-15 with ch. xxvii., it
may seem that David's sojourn at Gath has been
told twice over; for though each pair of events
separately might, without physical impossibility,
happen twice, yet, viewed collectively, the repe-
tition of so many pairs surpasses all human pro-
babilities. It has been necessary to premise so
much, to show why we are disposed to be satisfied
with rough results from the accounts of David's
earlier life; which, as happens with all celebrated
men who rise from a humble station, can hardly
have been chronicled with the same precautions
as those of his reign.

Even in regard to matters properly public, ob-
scurity attaches both to the members which we
read in our text, and occasionally to the order of
events. On the difficulties found in the chrono-
logy of this period some remarks will be needed
under the article Saur. It more properly belongs
to this place to observe that David is made thirty
years old, and Ishbosheth forty, when Jonathan,
elder brother of Ishbosheth, dies (2 Sam. ii. 10,
11); which appears to make too great a disparity
of age between Jonathan and David. A sort of
fatality seems attached to the number forty, which
constantly occurs very inopportunely. In 2 Sam.
xy. 7 this number is extravagantly erroneous;
yet the reading is at Jeast older than the Sept. ver-
sion, and Van der Huoght gives no various reading
of the Hebrew. We seem justitied in doubting
whether forty years can have been the real age of
Ishbosheth : twenty would agree better with the
probabilities of the case. Again, Ishbosheth reigned
two years, though David reigned over the tribe of
Judah alone in Hebron for seven yearsand a half;
where is the interval of five years and a half to be
placed ? Since it is certain that @ part of David's
reign over all Israel was spent by him at Hebron
(for Jerusalem was not conquered by him till atter
all the tribes had joined him, 1 Chron, xi, 4). The
easiest and perhaps a necessary solution 1s this,
that the words in 2 Sam. ii. 11 and v. 3 are lax,
and ought to be re-written thus: ‘In Hebron he
reigned seven years and six months, at first over
the tribe of Judah only (viz. for two or three
years], and afterwards over all Israel.’

Three chapters in the second book of Samuel
chiefly contain the military successes of David:
but there is some reason tu believe that we cannot
adhere to the order of the events there given. The
mention of the Ammonites in ch. viii, 12 seems to
be by anticipation; for in the opening of ch, x.
we find that relations of personal friendship still
subsisted between David and the king of the Am-
monites. Reasons will shortly be stated for
thinking that his first campaign against tbe king
of Zobah has been placed too early; and the
numbers of the chariots and horsemen engaged in
the war can scarcely be defended. Of this further
notice will be taken. Again, when the tribes of
Israel came to Hebron to welcome David to the
kingdom, his own tribe of Judah, in the midst of
which Hebron lay, brought only 6800 men, less
than those of the insignilicant tribe of Simeon,
who are reckuned there at 7190 (1 Chron. xii. 24,
25), while of the equally petty tribe of Dan there


DAVID.


are 28,600. It has heen said in defence of these
numbers that Judah had been miserably reduced
by the proximity of the Philistines; but why
should Simeon and Dan have suffered less? Nor
would that account for the fact, that in the cele-
brated numbering of the people by Joab (2 Sam.
xxiv. 9) there are 800,000 warriors in Isrhel, and
500,000 in Judah alone; or, according to 1 Chron.
xxi. 5, in Israel 1,100,000, and in Judah 470,000.
The two results in Kings and in Chronicles are
here inconsistent; in both also we see the marks
of a later narrator, who is accustomed to use the
words Israel and Judah to mean the ten and the
too tribes. Abundant illustration might be ac-
cumulated to the same elfect, if this were the
proper place for it.

The lite of David naturally divides itself into
three portions :—I, The time which he lived under
Saul. II. His reign over Judah in Hebron.
IIL, His reign over all Israel.

I. In the first period we may trace the origin
of all his greatness. His susceptible temperament,
joined to his devotional tendencies, must, at a very
early age, have made him a favourite pupil of the
prophets, whose peculiar mark was the harp and
the psalm (1 Sam. x. 1-12 and xix. 20-245 see
also 2 Kings iii, 15). His hospitable reception,
whien in distress, by Ahimelech the priest, and the
atrocious massacre innocently brought by him on
Nob, the city of the priests (1 Sam. xxi. and xxii.
9-19), must have deeply affected his generous
nature, and laid the foundation of his cordial
affection for the whole priestly order, whose minie
trations he himself helped to elevate by his devo-
tional melodies. At an early period he attracted
the notice of Samuel; and if we are to arrange
events according to their probable connection, we
may believe that after David had been driven
away from Saul and his life several times at-
tempted, Samuel ventured on the solemn step of
anuinting him king. Whenever this tuck place,
it must have produced on David a profound im-
pression, and prepared him to do that in which
Saul had so emineutly failed, viz. to reconcile
his own military government with a filial respect
for the prophets and an honourable patronaze of
the priesthood. Besides this, he became knit into
a bond of brotherhood with his heroic comrades,
to whom he was eminently endeared by his per-
sonal self-denial and liberality (1 Sain. xxx.
21-31; 1 Chron. xi. 18). This, indeed, drew
atter it one most painful result, viz. the necessity
of enduring the turbulence of his violent but able
nephew Joab; nor could we expect tlat of a band
of freebooters many should be like David. Again,
during his outlawry David became acquainted
in turn not only with all the wild country in the
land, but with the strongholds of the enemy all
round. By his residence among the Philistines
he must have learned all their arts and weapons
of war, in which it is reasonable to believe the
Israclites previously inferior (1 Sam, xiii, 19-23).
With Nahash the Ammonite he was in intimate
friendship (2 Sam. x. 2): to the king of Moab
he entrusted the care of his parents (1 Sam. xxii.
3); from Achish of Gath he received the im-
portant present of the town of Ziklag (1 Sam.
xxvii. 6). It must, however, be contessed that the
details of the last passage, without professing to
be miraculeus, go beyond the limits of proba-
bility ; for if we even suppose that David could


de fet te? Ps


a moe mM Se of


hard


See: ae


DAVID.


commit the massacres there described, merely
in order to hide his own perfidy, it is still
incredible that the secret could have been kept
and Achish continue to trust him (xxviii. 2, and
xxix. 3). That Ziklag was a strong place may
be inferred from 1 Chron. xii. 1, 20. The cele-
brity acquired in successful guerilla warfare, even
in modern days, turns the eyes of whole nations
oa chieftain; and in an age which regarded
personal heroism as the first qualitication of a
general (1 Chron. xi. 6) and of a king, to triumph
over the persecutions of Saul gave David the
fairest prospects of a kingdom. That he was able
to escape the malice of his enemy was duein part
tothe direct help given him by the nations round,
who were glad to keep a thorn rankling in Saul’s
side; in part also to the indirect results of their
invasions (1 Sam. xxiii. 27).
The account transmitted to us of David's dan-
gers and escapes in this first period is too frag-
mentary to work up into a history : nevertheless,
it seems to be divisible into two parts, differing in
character. During the former he is a fugitive
and outlaw in the land of Saul, hiding in caves,
pitching in the wilderness, or occasionally with
great risk entering walled cities (1 Sam. xxiii. 7):
in the latter he abandons his native soil entirely,
and lives among the Philistines as one of their
chieftains (xxvii. 1). While a rover in the land
of Judah, his position (to our eyes) is anything
but honourable ; being a focus, to which ‘all who
were in distress, in debt, or discontented gathered
themselves’ (xxii. 2). Yet as the number of his
followers became large (six hundred, we read,
xxiii, 13), and David knew how to conciliate the
neighbouring sheep-masters by his urhanity and
kind services, he gradually felt himself to be their
Protector and to have a right of maintenance and
tribute from them. Hence he resents the refusal
of Nabal to supply his demands, as a clear
injustice; and, after David’s anger has been
turned away by the prudent policy of Abigail,
in blessing her for saving him from slaying
Nabal and every male of his family, the
thought seems not to have entered his mind
that the intention of such a massacre was more
guilty than Nabal's refusal to pay him tribute
(xxv. 34). This whole narrative is character-
istic and instructive. By his marriage with
Abigail he afterwards probably became rich (for
she seems to have been a widow at her own dis-
1), and on passing immediately after into the
nd of the Philistines, he was enabled to assume
a more dignitied place. Becoming possessed of
the stronghold of Ziklag, he now appeared like a
legitimate chieftain with fixed possessions, and no
longer a mere vagabond and freebooter. This
Was accordingly a transition-state in which David
Was prepared for assuming the kingdom over
Judah. In Ziklag he was joined, not, as before,
by mere outcasts trom Israelitish life, but by men
we considleration and tried warriors (1 Chron. xii.
~22), not only of the tribe of Judah, but from
rt > Manasseh, and even ‘from Saul's brethren
o Benjamin.’ Respecting the arins of these some
Femarks will be made at the close of this article.
tribe, Immediately upon the death of Saul the
we of Judah invited David to become their
Tear Internal probabilities lead us to believe
enn Was acceptable to the Philistines, who,
seem, must have had the means of hin-


DAVID. 537


dering it, if they had been disposed. We are not
informed why they neglected to improve the de-
cisive victory which they had gained in Mount
Gilboa. They vanish from the scene, and Abner
quietly hands over the kingdom of the eleven
tribes to Ishbosheth, son of Saul. Among many
conjectures which may be made, one is that they
despaired of keeping the whole land under sub-
jection, since their numbers were too few to keep
up all their garrisons ; and their superiority must
have been that of weapons and discipline only.
They may, therefore, have gladly acquiesced in a@
partition of the monarchy, foreseeing that the
fame and popularity of David would soon bring
on a civil oak between him and the house of
Saul; and as he was on excellent terms with
Achish, and had long been ostensibly an adherent
of the Philistine cause, it is not wonderful that
during his early reign David was able to maine
tain peace with his most dangerous neighbours.
His first step, after his election, was to fix on
Hebron as the centre of his administration—an
ancient city, honourable by its association with the
name of Abraham, and in the middle of his own
tribe. He then strengthened himself by a mare
riage with Maacah, daughter of Talmai, king of
Geshur (2 Sam. iii. 995 a petty monarch whose
dominions were near the sources of the Jourdan,
and whose influence at the opposite end of the land
must have added a great weight into David's scale.
From Abigail, widow of the churlish Nabal,
David, as we have already observed, seems to
have received a large private fortune. Concerning
his other wives we know nothing in particular ;
only it is mentioned that he had six sons by six
different mothers in Hebron. The chief jealousy
was between the two tribes of Benjamin and
Judah, as Saul had belonged to the former; and
a tournament was tumed by mutual ill-will into
a battle, in which Abner unwillingly slew young
Asahel, brother of Joab. (On the synchronism of
Abnerand Asahel, see Sau.) ‘ Long war, ‘after this,
was carried on between ‘the house of San} and the
house of David.” We may infer that the rest of
Israel took little part in the contest; and although
the nominal possession of the kingdoin enabled the
little tribe of Benjamin to struggle for some time
against Judah, the skill and age of Abner could
not: prevail against the vigour and popular fame
of David. A quartel between Abner and Ishbo-
sheth decided the former to bring the kingdom
over to David. The latter refused to treat
unless, as a preliminary proof of Abner’s sin-
cerity, Michal, daughter of Saul, was restored
to David. The possession of such a wife was
valuable to one who was aspiring to the kingdom,
Accordingly, the unhappy Michal was torn away
from a most afiectionate tusband, and passed over
into the increasing harem cf the man to whom in
his earliest youth she bad been a virgin bride;
but who now cared not for her, but for her name
and its political uses. It is not wonderful that
she could not adapt herself to her new lord, and
that as scon as he was firm in the kingdom he
disgraced her. After giving her back, Abner
roceeded to win the elders of Israel over to
avid; but Joab discerned that if this should be
so brought about, Abner of necessity would dis-
place him from his post of chief’ captain. He,
therefore, seized the opportunity of murdering
him when he was come on a peaceful embassy,


528 DAVID.


and covered the atrocity by pleading the duty
of revenging his brother's hood: This deed was
perhaps David's first taste of the miseries of royal

wer. He dared not proceed actively against

is ruthless nephew, but he vented his abhorrence
in a solemn curse on Joab and his posterity, and
followed Abner to the grave with weeping.
Anxious to purge himself of the guilt, he ordered
a public wearing of sackcloth, and refused to
touch food all the day. His sincere yet osten-
tations grief won the heart of all Israel. The
feeble Ishbosheth, left alone, was unequal to the
government, and shortly suffered the same fate of
assassination. David, following the universal
policy of sovereigns (Tac. Hist. i. 44), and his
own profound stnse of the sacredness of royalty,
took vengeance on the murderers, and buried
Ishbosheth in Abner’s tomb at Hebron. During
this period, it is not stated against what peuple
his marauding excursions were directed. It is
distinctly alleged (2 Sam. iii. 22) that his men
bronght in a great spoil at the very time at which
he had a truce with Abner; possibly it may have
been won from his old enemies the Amalekites
(1 Sam. xxx.).

3. The death of Ishbosheth gave to David
supremacy over all Israel. The kingdom was
not at first a despotic, but a constitutional one ;
for it is stated, ‘David made @ league with the
elders of Israel in Hebron before Jehovah; and
they anointed David king over Isracl’ (2 Sam. v.
3). This is marked out as the era which deter-
mined the Philistines to hostility (ver. 17), and
may confirm our idea, that their policy was to
hinder Israel from becoming united under a single
king. Two victories of David over them follow,
both near the valley of Rephaim: and these weie
aes the first battles tought by David after

ecoming king of all Israel.

Perceiving that Hebron was no longer a suit-
able capital, he resolved to fix his residence far-
ther to the north. On the very border of the tribes
of Judah and Benjamin Jay the town of Jebus,
which with its neighbourhood was occupied by
Jebusites, a remnant of the old Canaanitish na-
tion so called. In spite of the great strength of
the fort of Zion, it was captured, and the Jebusites
were entirely expelled or subdued; after which
David adopted the city as his new capital, greatly
enlarged the fortifications, and gave or restored
the name of Jerusalem [Jenusaem]. In the
account of this siege, some heve imagined the
Chronicles to contradict the book of Samuel, but
there is no real incompatibility in the two narra-
tives. Joab was, it is true, already David's chief
captain ; but David was heartily disgusted with
him, and may have sought a pretence for super-
seding him, by offering the post to the man who
should first scale the wall. Joab would be ani-
mated by the desire to retain his office, at least as
keenly as others by the desire to get it; and it is
credible that he may actually have been the suc-
cesstul hero of that sieze alsv. If this was the
case, it will further explain why David, even in
the fulness of power, made no further effort to ex-

1 him until he had slaughtered Absalom. After

ecoming master of Jerusalem, David made a
league with Hiram, king of Tyre, who supplied
him with skilful artificers to build a silenuid
palace at the new capital, That the mecha-
nical arts shoul) Lave been in a very low state


DAVID.


among the Israelites, was to be expected ; since,
betore the reign of Saul even smiths’ forges were
not allowed among them by the Philistines. No-
thing, however, could have been more protitable
for the Phoenicians than the security of cultiva-
tion enjoyed by the Israelites in the reigns of
David and Solomon, The trade between Tyre
and Israel became at once extremely lucrative to
both, and the league between the two states was
quickly very intimate.

Once settled in Jerusalem, David proceeded to
increase the number of his wives, perhaps in part
from the sume political motive that actuates other
Oriental monarchs, viz. in order to take hustages
from the chieftains round in the least offensive
mode. This explanation will not apply to tie
concubines. We know uothing further conceining
David's family relations, than the names of eleven
sons born in Jerusalem (2 Sam. yv. 14, 15), of
whom four were children of Bathsheba (1 Chiron.
iii. 5), and therefore much younger than the elder
sons.

Jerusalem, now become the civil metropolis uf
the nation, was next to be made its religious
centre; and the king applied himself to elevate the
priestly order, to swell the ranks of attending Le-
vites and singers, and to bring the ark to Jeru-
salem. The priests or Aaronites must, fur a long
time, have had little occupation in their sacred
office; for the ark was at Kirjath-jearim, under
the care of a private family. Indeed, during the
reign of Saul, we find shewbread to have becn set
forth at Nob (1 Sam. xxi. 4-6), by Ahimelech tie
priest ; and it is possible that many other cerem«-
nies were performed by them, in spite of the al-
sence of the ark, But after the dreadful massacre
perpetrated on the priestly order by Saul, few
Aaronites are likely to have felt at ease in their
vocation. To wear an ephod—the mark of a
priest who is asking counsel of Jelovah—had
almost become a crime: and even after the death
of Saul, it may seem that the Aaronites, like the
other Israelites, remained organized as bands of
soldiers. At least Jehoiada (who, according to |
Chron. xxvii. 5, was high-pricst at this time, and
joined David at Hebron with 3700 Aaronites) was
father of the celebrated warrior Benatah, after-
wards captain of David's body-guard; a man
whose qualities were anything but priest-like:
and Zadok, afterwards high-priest, who joined
David ‘with twenty-two captains of his faters
house’ at the same time as Jehvida, is desciibal
as ‘a young man mighty of valour” (1 Cimon, su.
27, 28). How long Jehuiada retained the place of
high-priest is uncertain, It is probable that nu de-
finite conception then existed of the need of having
one high-priest; and it is certain that Davids
affection for Abiathar, because of his father's fate,
maintained him in chief place through the great!
part of his reign. Not until a later tinae, it would
seem, was Zadok clevated to a co-ordinate posi-
tion. (A difticulty, indeed, exists about Abiatias,
which can hardly be removed, except by sj}
ing that ‘Ahimelech, son of Abiathar,” lus sever
times been inadvertently written for ‘Abtutiar
son of Ahimelech ;’ viz. in 2 Sam. viii. 175 I
Chron. xxiv. 3, 6, 31, A similar ervor of ‘Je
hoiada, the son of Benaiah,’ we shall afterwards
have to remark on, in 1 Chron. xxvii. 34. a
find Abiathar in the place of cliief-pricst 1
Kings i. 7, &c., without any notice of his having


DAVID.


@son called Ahimelech.) Any further remarks
concerning the orders and courses of the Prizsts
will be better reserved for the article on that
subject. It is enough here to add, that the
slaughter suffered from Saul by the Aaronites of
the line of Ithamar, whom Abiathar now repre
sented, naturally gave a great preponderance of
numbers and power to the line of Eleazar, to which
Zadok belonged. We must also refer to the ar
ticle Levires for further information concerning
them. The bringing of the ark from Kirjath-
jearim to Jerusalem established the line of high-
priests in direct service before it; and from this
time we may presume that the ceremonies of the
great day of Atonement began to be observed.
Previously, it would appear, the connection be-
tween the priesthood and the tabernacle had been
very loose. The priests fixed their abode at Nub,
when the ark was at Kirjath-jearim, a very short
distance; yet there is nothing to denote that they
at all interfered with Abinadab in his exclusive
care of the sacred deposit. (Conceming the chro-
nological difficulties involved in the stay of the
ark at Kirjath-jearim, see the article Sau...)
When the ark entered Jerusalem in triumph,
David put on a priest's ephod and danced betore
it. This proved the occasion of the rupture be-
tween him and his royal spouse, Michal, which
sooner or later was inevitable. Accustomed to
see in her father’s court a haughty pre-eminence of
the monarch over the priest, she could not sym-
pathize with the deeper piety which led the royal
Psalmist to forget his dignity in presence of the
ark. The words of David to her, ‘Jehovah chose
me before thy father and before all his house’
(2 Sam. vi. 21), sufficiently show Michal to have
felt that she had been taken from her husband
Phaltiel, merely to give colour to David's claim
to the kingdom, aud that David scorned to allow
that he was in any way indebted to her for it.
After this event, the king, contrasting his cedar
palace with the curtains of the tabernacle, was
desirous of building a temple for the ark;
such a step, moreover, was likely tu prevent any
future change of its abode. ‘The prophet Nathan,
however, forbade it, on pious and_ intelligible
grounds, The prohibition has been ascribed by
some learned men toa cunning policy in Nathan ;
but it is not clear how the building of a temple
would have injured the interest of the prophets.
There are no in«ications that the prophets as yet
regarded the priests with jealousy, nor that it was
likely to increase the king's power over both.
Great as might appear the advantage of establish-
ing the same city as the religious and civil metro-
polis, the effect was, in one respect, most unfortu-
nate; it offended the powerful and central tribe of
Ephraim. They had been accustomed to regard
Shiluh as the rightful abode of the ark. Against
Kirjath-jearim no envy was felt, especially while
the ark and its priests were in obscurity. But when
so much honour attended it; when it became a
peculiar glory to Judah and Beujamin—tribes
already too much favoured ; when a magnificent
edifice was erected to receive it; the seeds were
suwn of that disaflection which ended in a rend-
ing of the tribes apart. Nor was the argument
unreasonable, that a more central spot was needed
for Israel to assemble at year by year.
David"s further victories are narrated in the
following order—Philistines, Moab, Zobah, Edom,


DAVID. 529


Northern League stirred up by the Ammonites,
Ammon, 1. The short and dry notice concerning
the Philistines just gives us to understand that
this is the era of their decisive, though not final,
subjugation. Their towns were despuiled of their
wealth (2 Sam. viii., xii.), and doubtless all their
arms and munitions of war over into the
service of the conqueror. 2. The Moabites werea
pastoral people, whose general relations with Israel
appear to have been peaceful. The slight notice
of Saul’s hostilities with them (1 Sam. xiv. 47)
is the only breach recorded since the time of
Eglon and Ehud. In the book of Ruth we see
them as friendly neighbours, and much more re-
cently (1 Sam. xxii. 3,4) David committed his
parents to the care of the king of Moab. We know
no cause, except David's strength, which now
drew his arms upon them. A peuple long accus-
tomed to peace, in conflict win veteran army,
was struck down at unce, but the fierceness of his
triumph may surprise us. Two-thirds of the po-
pulation (if we rightly interpret the words, 2 Sam.
viii. 2) were put ‘o the sword; the rest became
tributary. 3. Who are meant by the Syrians of
Zobuh, is still a problem [Zonan]. We here
follow the-belief that it was a power of northern
Syria, then uiming at extensive empire, which had
not only defeated and humbled the king of Ha-
math, but had obtained homage beyond the Eu-
phrates. The trans-Jordanic tribes in the time of
Saul had founded a little empire for themselves by
conquering their eastern neighbours, the Hagaienes ;
and, perhaps, occasiunally overran the district on the
side of the Euphrates, which Hadadezer, king of
Zobah, considered as his own. His efforts ‘to reco-
ver his border at the river Euphrates’ first brought
him into collision with David, perhaps by an
attack which he made on the roaming Eastern
tribes. David defeated not merely his army, but
those of Damascus too, which came, too late, with
succour ; and put Israelite garrisons intu the towns
of the Damascenes. In this career of success, we
see, for the first time in history, the uniform supe-
riority over raw troops of a power which is always
fighting; whose standing army is ever gaining
experience and mutual contidence. Nevertheless,
the details of this victory over Hadadezer exceed
all ordinary possibilities, It is not easy even to
form a conception of the nature of the war. As
the Eastern tribes of Israel had camels in abun-
dance (for they are said to have taken 50,000 from
the Hagarenes, 1 Chron. v. 21), David did not
want the means of transporting an army of infantry
and its baggage (see 1 Sam. xxx. 17). But with
what troops are we tu suppose him to fight against
the powerful cavalry of the enemy? We may
imagine horsemen to have been repulsed either by
archers or by a phalanx of spearmen; of which,
however, no mention is made, nor does it appear

bable that the Israelites fought in phalanx.
But neither by these nor by a squadron of camels
— if any one supposes David to have used such a
force, as Cyrus against Craesus—can 100 cha-
riots and 700 horsemen (which the Chronicler
makes 7000, t Chron. xviii. 4) have been defeated
and captured ; to say nothing of the 20,000 ca
tive fuotmen, or of the 22,000 Damascenes slam
immediately after. 4. Another victory, gained
‘in the valley of salt,’ ought, perhaps, to be read,
as in 1 Chron. xviii. 12, and in the superscription
of Ps. Ix., ‘over the Edomites,’ mo over


630 DAVIN.


Syrians.’ The difference of the Hebrew textual
letters is very slight, DWN and DIN. The verse
which follows (2 Sam. viii. 14) seems to tell the
result of this victory, viz. the complete subjuga-
tion and garrisoning of Edom, which, like Moab,
was incorporated with David's empire. Immedi-
ately before this last conquest, as would appear,
he wrote the 60th Psalm; and as that Psalm
gives no hint of his achievements against the king
of Zubah and the Damasceues, this is a strong
ground for believing that those successes were
not gained till somewhat later in time. 5. After
David had become master of all Israel, of the Phi-
listine towns, of Edom, and of Moab, while the
Eastern tribes, having conquered the Hagarenes,
threatened the Ammonites on the north, as did
Moab on the south, the Ammonites were naturally
alarmed, and called in the powers of Syria to
their help against a foe who was growing dan-
gerons even to them. The coalition against
David is described as consisting of the Syrians
of Bethrehob and of Maacah, of Zobah and of
Tob. The last country appears to have been in
the district of Trachonitis, the two first imme-
diately on the north of Israel. In this war,
we may believe that David enjoyed the im-
 hleac alliance of Toi, king of Hamath, whi,
having suffered from Hadadezer’s hostility, courted
the friendship of the Israelitish monarch (2 Sam.
viii. 9, 10). We are barely informed that one
division of the Israelites under Abishai was posted
against the Ammonites; a second under Joab met
the confederates from the north, 30,000 strong,
and prevented their junction with the Ammonites.
In both places the euemy was repelled, though, it
would seem, with no decisive result. The spirit
of exagyeration is certainly displayed in the state-
ment—whoever is answerable fur it—(1 Chron.
xix. 7). that the Syrian confederates brought with
them 32,009 chariots, which are not noticed in
the parallel place of 2 Sam. Perhaps the text
is corrupt ; for 1000 talents of silver (ver. 6) ap-
pears a small sum to hire such a force with. A
second campaign took place. The king of Zobah
brought in an army of Mesopotamians, in addition
tohis former troops, and David found it necessary
to make a levy of all Israel to mect the pressing
danger. A pitched battle on a great scale was
then fought at Helam—far beyond the limits of
the twelve tribes—in which David was victorious.
He is said to have slain, according to 2 Sam. x.
18, the men of 700 chariots, and 40,000 horse-
men; or, according to 1 Chron. xix. 18, the men
of 7000 chariots, and 40,000 footmen. Here, as
on the former occasion, the Chronicler multiplies
by 10 the number found in the older book. If we
had access to the court-records of Hamath, we
should probably find that Toi had assembled his
whole cavalry to assist David, and that to him
was due the important service of disabling or de-
stroying the enemy's horse. Such foreign aid may
explain the general result, without our obtruding
a miracle, for which the narrative gives us not the
least warrant. The Syrians henceforth left the
Ammonites to their fate, and the petty chiefs who
had been in allegiance to Hadadezer hastened to
do homage to David. 6. Early in the neat
seasun Joab was sent to take vengeance on the
Ammonites in their own home, by attacking their
chief city, or Rabbah of Ammon. The natural
. Strength of their border could not keep out veteran


DAVID.


troops and an ienced leader; and

the siege of the city occupied many months (if,
indeed, it was not prolonged into the next year)
it was at last taken. It is characteristic of
Oriental despotism, that Joab, when the city was
nearly reduced, sent to invite David to command
the final assault in person. David gathered a
large force, easily captured the royal town, and
despoiled it of all its wealth. His vengeance
was as much more dreadful on the unfortunate
inhabitants than formerly on the Moabites, as the
danger in which the Ammonites had involved
Israel had been more imminent. The persons
captured in the city were put to death by torture;
some of them being sawed in_ pieces, others
chopped up with axes or mangled with harrovws,
while some were smothered in brick-kilns (2 Sam.
xii. 31; 1 Chron. xx. 3). This cruelty was perhaps
effectual in quelling future movements of revolt
or war; for, until insurrections in Israel embolden
them, foreign foes after this remain quiet.

During the campaign against Rabbah’of Am-
mon the painful and never-to-be-forgotten outrage
of David against Bathsheba and her husband
Uriah the Hittite took place. It is principally
through this narrative that we know the tediour
ness of that siege; since the adultery with Bath-
sheba and the birth of at least one child took
place during the course of it.

The latter years of David's reign were afflicted
by the inevitable results of polygamy and despot-
ism, viz. the quarrels of the sons of different
mothers, and their eagemess to seize the kingdom
before their father's death. Of all his sons,
Absalom had naturally the greatest pretensions,
being, by his mother’s side, grandson of Talmai,
king of Geshur; while through lis personal beauty
and winning manners he was high in popular
favour. It is evident, moreover, that he was the
darling son of his father. When his own sister
Tamar had been dishonoured by her half-brother
Amnon, the eldest son of David, Absalom slew
him in vengeance, but, in fear of his father, then
fled to his grandfather at Geshur. Joab, dis-
cerning David's longings for his son, effected his
return after three years; but the conflict in the
king’s mind is strikingly shown by his allowing
Absalom to dwell two full years in Jerusalem
hefore he would see his face. i

The insurrection of Absalom against the king
was the next important event; in the course of
which there was shown the general tendency of
men to look favourably on young and untried
princes, rather than on those whom tiey know for
better and for worse. Absalom erected his ryal
standard at Hebron first, and was fully prepared
to slay his father outright, which might prolably
have been done, if the energetic advice of Ahi-
thophel had been followed. While they delayed,
David escaped beyend the Jouan, and with all
his troop met a most friendly reception, not only
from Barzillai and Machir, wealthy chiets
pastoral Gilead, but from Shobi, the son of ot
Ammonite king Nahash, whose power he ha
destroyed, and whose people he had hewed m
pieces. We likewise learn on this occasion
that the fortimes of David had been all along
attended by 600 men of Gath, who now, under the
command of Ittai the Gittite, crossed the ba
with all their households, in spite of reamiee!
generous advice that they would retum to t


al eet. uals pe ae ae a hie ek gs She ae ae aide, eae eae ae ee odin hole? coed Magic pls hen a ey stig ea Soa ae ee Thee at ot PN a pee oe gg


ot Po BS ore a os! hU©


Tf ww SB s- pe


, te Soe ae As aed


a


:
cd
T


SO MS


DAVID.


own country. Strengthened by the warlike

eastern tribes, and surruunded by his experienced

ete the king no longer hesitated to meet

isalom in the field. A decisive victory was
won at the wood of Ephraim, and Absalom was
slain by Joab in the retreat. The old king was
heart-stricken at this result, and, ignorant of his
own weakness, superseded Joab in the command
of the host by Amasa, Absalom’s captain. Perhaps

Joab on the former occasion, when he murdered

Abner, had blinded the king by pleading re-

venge fur the blood of Asahel ; but no such pre-

tence could here avail. The king was now pro-
bably biought to his determination, partly by his
disgust at Joab, partly by his desire to give the
insurgents confidence in his amnesty. If Amasa
is the same as Amasai, David may likewise have
retained a grateful remembrance of the cordial
greeting with which he had Jed a strong band to
his assistance at the critical period of his abode
in Ziklag (1 Chron. xii. 18); moreover, Amasa,
equally with Joab, was David's nephew, their two
mothers, Abigail and Zerniah, being sisters to

David by at least one parent (2 Sam. xvii. 25;
1 Chron. ii. 13, 16). The unscrupulous Joab,
however, was not so to be set aside. Before long,
catching an opportunity, he assassinated his un-
suspecting cousin with his own hand ; and David,
who had used the instrumentality of Joab to
murder Uriah, dil not dare to resent the deed.

A quarrel which took place between the men
of Judah and those of the other tribes in bringing
the king back, had encouraged a Benjamite
named Sheba to raise a new insurrection, which
spread with wonderful rapidity. ‘ Every man of
Israel,’ are the strong words of the text, ‘went up
from after David, and followed Sheba, the son of
Bichri,) a man of whom nothing besides is
known. This strikingly shows that the later
despotism of David had already exhausted the
enthusiasm once kindled by his devotion and
chivalry, and that his throne now rested on the
rotten foundation of mere military superiority.
Amasa was collecting troops as David's general
at the tirne whew he was teacherously assassi-
nated by his cousin, who then, with his usual
energy, pursued Sheba, and blockaded him in
Beth-maachah before he could collgct his parti-
sans. Sheba's head was cut off, and thrown over
the wall; and so ended the new rising. Yet this
was not the end of trouble; for the intestine war
seems to have inspired the Philistines with the
hope of throwing off the yoke. Four successive
battles are recorded (2 Sam. xxi. 15-22), in the
first of which the aged David was nigh to being
slain. His faithful officers kept him away from
all future risks, and Philistia was once muie, and
finally, subdued.

* The last commotion recorded took place when
David's end seemed nigh, and Adonijah, one of
his eluer sons, feared that the influence of Bath-
sheba might gain the kingdom for her own son
Selomon, Adonijah’s conspiracy was joined by
Abiathar, one of the two chief priests, and by the
redoubted Joab; upon which David took the de-
cisive measure of raising Solomon at once to the
throne. Of two young monarchs, the younger
and the less known was easily preferred, when the
sanction of the existing government was thrown
intu his scale; and the cause of Adouijah imime-
diately fell to the ground. _ Amnesty was pro-


DAVID.


mised to the conspirators, it was not vi
faithfully bevel Soraueel pi

Numerous indications remain to us that, how-
ever eminently David was imbued with faith in
Jebovah as the natiunal God of Israel, and how-
ever he strove to unite all Israel in common
worship, he still had no sympathy with the later
spirit which repelled all foreigners from co-ope-
ration with Jews. In his early years necessity
made him intimate with Philistines, Moabites,
and Ammonites: policy led him into league with
the Tyriaus. He himself took in marriage a
daughter of the king of Geshur: it is the less
wonderful that we find Uriah the Hittite (2 Sam.
xi.), Gether the Ishmaelite (1 Chron. ii. 17), and
others, married to Israelitish wives. The fidelity
of Ittai the Gittite, and his six hundred men, has
been already alluded to. It would appear, on
the whole, that in tolerating foreigners Solomon
did not go beyond the principles established by
his father, though circumstances gave them a
fuller development.

It has been seen that the reign of David began,’
as that of a constitutional monarch, with a league
between him and his people: it ends as a pure
despotism, in which the monarch gives his king-
dom away to whomsoever he pleases, and his
nominee steps at once into power without entering
into any public engagements. The intensity of
the despotism is strikingly shown in the indirect
and cautious device by which alone Joab dared
to hint to the king the suitableness of recalling
Absalom from banishment, though he believed the
king himself to desire it (2 Sam. xiv.). All rose
necessarily out of the standing army which David
kept up as an instrument of conquest and of
power, by the side of which constitutional liberty
could not stand. The maintenance of this large
force perhaps was not oppressive, since rich tri-
butes were received from the surrounding nations,
and the civil government was not yet become
very expensive [So1omon]. We nevertheless
need not wonder that those who joyfully wel-
comed David as their heroic deliverer were sick
of heart when forced to address him with un-
manly adulation. é

One more dreadful tragedy is recorded in this
reign—the immolation of seven suns of Saul (2
Sam. xxi.), on the occurrence of three years’ bad
harvests. A priestly 1esponse imputed the fa-
mine to Saul’s violation of the oath of Joshua
with the Gibeonites, and used the name and au-
thority of Jehovah in proof. It bas been sus-
yected that the whole was contrived by the
revenge of the priesthood for the barbarous mas-
sacre perpetrated by Saul ou the priestly city of
Nob; and that David the more easily acquiesced,
since it was desirable, for the peace of his suc-
cessors, that the house of Saul should be extermi-
nated. Both suspicious are too probable to be
easily set aside; and the latter receives painful
contirmation from the cold injustice of David
towards Mephibosheth, son of Jonathan, whom
he first stripped of his whole patrimony, on a false
and most iinprobable accusation, and afterwards,


631


*


iustead of honourably redressing the injury, re- .


stored to him the half only of his estate (2 Sam.

xvi. 3; xix. 24-30). Such conduct proves that

he was conscious of his own wrong, but was too

desirous of weakening the house of Saul to re-

nounce entirely.the opportunity of camanine it, at
M


532 DAVID.


which he had snapt. That David did not give up
Mephibosheth to be hanged by the Gibeonites is
iraputed to the oath between him and Jonathan ;
but it does not appear that their covenant was or
could be more binding than his most explicit
vath to Saul on the very same matter (1 Sam.
xxiv. 21, 22). Five of the innocent men thus
‘hanged up befure Jehovah’ as if he had been a
Moloch, are stated in the common Hebrew and.
Greek text, and in our received version, to he
children of Michal, David's youthful sponse;
and Josephus imagines that they were burn of her
after a second divorce from David. But it is
certain, from 1 Sam. xviii. 19, that Michal is
here a mistake for Merab ; which name De Wette
has introduced into his version. The touching
description of the other bereaved mother, Rizpah,
the daughter of Aiah, is in refreshing contrast to the
rest of the history, and shows the sympathy of the
narrator's heart, while he had evidently no sus-
picion that the name of Jehovah could have been
wrongly used to command the deed. Even after
this atonement, it was thought that a thorough
cleansing of the land was not yet effected. The
bones of Saul and his three sons were <isinterred
from Jabesh-Gilead, and were buried in the sepul-
chre of Kish, in Benjainin; as if to obliterate
every monument that Saul and his eons had ever
been leaders of the hosts of Israel. Afier this the
famine was removed.

It has been seen that, on one occasion (2 Sam.
viii. 3), David fought against Hadadezer about a
«district on the river Euphrates. Yet it is not to be
imagined that he had any fixed possession of ter-
ritory sq distant, which indeed could have had no
value to him. A warrior from his youth, he seems
to have had little perception of the advantages of
commerce; and alticagi the land of Edom was
long under his power, he made no effort to use its
ports of Eziongeber and Elath for maritime traffic.
Much less was he likely to value the trade of the
Euphrates, from which river he was separated by
a tedious distance of desert land, over which,
without the possession of superior cavalry, he
could not maintain a permanent sovereignty.
No attempt seems to have been made in David's
reign to maintain horses or chariots for military
purposes. Even chieftains in battle, as Absalom
on his fatal day, appear mounted only on mules,
Yet horses were already used in state equipages,
apres as a symbol of royalty (2 Sam. xy. 1),

hat in the opening of Sanl's reign the Philis-
tines had deprived the Israelites of all the most
formidable arms, is well known. It is probable
that this may have led to a more careful practice
of the sling and of the bow, especially among the
southern tries, who were more immediately pressed
by the power of the Philistines. Such weapons
cannot be kept out of the hands of rustics, and
must have been essential against wild beasts.
But, from causes unknown, the Benjamites were
peculiarly celebrated as archers and slingers
(Judg. xx. 16; 1 Chron. viii. 40; xii. 2; 2
Chron. xiv. 8; xvii. 17), while the pastoral tribes
beyond the Jordan were naturally able to escape
all attempts of the Philistines to deprive them of
shield, spear, and sword. Hence the Gadites,
who came to David at Ziklag, are described as
formidable and full-armed warriors, ‘ with faces
like lions, and swift as mountain rves’ (1 Chron.
xii. 8).


DAVID.


The standing army which Saul had begun to
maintain was greatly enlarged by David. An
account of this is given in 1 Chron. xxvii.; from
which it would seem that 24,000 men were con-
stantly maintained on service, though there was
a relieving of guard every. month. Hence,
twelve times this number, or 288,000, were under
& permanent military organization, with a general
for each division in his month. Besides this host,
the register proceeds to recount twelve princes
over the tribes of Israel, who may perhaps be com-
re to the lord-lieutenants of English counties.

he enumeration of these great officers is remark-
able, being as fullows:—1, of the Reubenites;
2, of the Simeonites ; 3, of the Levites ; 4, of the
Aaronites; 5, of Judah; 6, of Issachar; 7, of
Zebulon; 8, of Naphthali; 9, of Ephraim; 10, of
Manasseh; 11, of Manasseh beyond the Jordan;
12, of Benjamin; 13, of Dan. Here the names
of Gad and Asher are omitted, without explana-
tion, On the other hand. the Levites and Aaran-
ites are recounted as thongh they were triles
coordinate to the rest, and Zadok is named as
prince of the Aaronites. It is not to be suppose
that the Levites or Aaronites were wholly forbid-
den from civil and military duties. It has been
already remarked that Zadok (here chief of the
Aaronites) was described, in the beginning of
David's reign, as ‘a mighty man of valour’ (1
Chron, xii. 28), and the same appellation is given
to the sons of Shemaiah, a Levite (xxvi. 6), Be-
naiah also, now captain of David's body-guart,
was son of the late high-priest Jeboiada (xxvii.
5, and xii, 27),

The body-guard of David, to which allusion has

ust been made, was an important appendage to
his state, anda formidable exhibition of the actual
despotisnf under which, in fulfilment. of the wam-
ing of Samuel, Israel had now fallen. [Cus-
ReETHITES and Prrerurrss. |

The cabinet of David (if we may use a modem
name) is thus given (1 Chron. xxvii. 32-34) with
reference to a time which preceded Absalom’s re-
volt :—1, Jonathan, David's uncle, a counsel] Jor,
wise man, and scribe; 2, Jehiel,” son of Hach-
moni, tutor (?) to the king's sons; 3, Ahithophel,
the king's counsellor; 4, Hushai, the king's com-
panion ; 5, after Ahithophel, Jehoiada, the son of
Benaiah ; 6, Abiathar the priest. It is added,
“and the general of the king’s army was Joab.
At this period Benaiah was in the early prime of
his military prowess; and it is incredible that he
can have had a son, Jehoiada, old enough to be
the second counsellor of the king, next to the
celebrated Ahithophel. If the text is here corrupt,
the corruption is older than the time of the Sept.
However, De Wette has introduced, Bevaciah the
son of Jehoiada. We cannot look on thais as cer-
tain; for Benaiah may have been the naame of the
father as well as of the sonof Jehoiada the high-
priest. Yet as it was very rare with the Hebrews
for names to recur in alternate generzations, De
Wette's reading is at least highly prok>able. If
so, it is striking to observe that Benaiah, as cap-
tain of the life-guards, is reckoned next to Alte
thophel in rank as a counsellor; while Joab,
general of the army, scarcely seems to have been
a member of the cabinet. Zadok was above named
as prince of the Aaronites; but was mot yet 60
closely connected with the administration as
Abiathar, :


DAY.


Twelve royal bailiffs are recited as a part of
David's establishment (1 Chron. xxvii. 25, 31),
having the following departments under their
c : 1, The treasures of gold, silver, &c. ;
2 the magazines; 3, the tillage (wheat, &c. #);
4, the vineyards ; 5, the wine-cellars ; 6, the olive
h sycamore trees; 7, the oil-cellars; 8, the

erds in Sharon; 9, the herds in the valleys;
10, the camels; 11, the asses; 12, the flocks.
The eminently prosperous state in which David
left his kingdom to Solomon appears to prove
that he was on the whole faithful y served, and
that his own excellent intentions, patriotic spirit,
and devout piety (measured, as it must be mea-
sured, by the standard of those ages), really made
his reign beneficial to his subjects. If it reduced
them under despotism, yet it freed them from a
foreign yoke and from intestine anarchy ; if it
hide them in severe wars, if it failed of unit-

'g them permanently as a single le, in
neither of these ‘te did it make thei state
worse than it found them. We must not exact of
David either to reign like a constitutional monarch,
to uphold civil liberty, or by any personal piety
to extract from despotism its sting. Even his
most reprobate offence has nu small palliation in
the far worse excesses of other Oriental sovereigns ;
and his great superiority to his successors justifies
the high esteem in which his memory was held.
Concerning the closing scenes of David's life no
more need here be said: the celebrated enume-
tation of the people by Joab, will be noticed
under the article Popusation.—F. W. N.
, DAY. The earliest measure of time on record
is the day :—‘ The evening and the morning were
the first day’ (Gen. i.5). Here the word ‘day’
denotes the civil or calendar day of twenty-four
hours, including ‘ the evening,’ or natural night,
and ‘the morning,’ or natural day. It is re-
markable that in this account ‘the evening,’ or
aatural night, precedes ‘the morning,’ or natural
day. Hence the Hebrew compound P2732 7Y,
‘evening-morning,’ which is used by Daniel (viii.
14) to denote a civil day. In fact, the Jewish
civil day began, as it still does, not with the
morning, but the evening—thus the Sabbath com-
mences with the sunset of Friday, and ends with
the sunset of Saturday. Indications of this pri-
meval order exist among many nations, and even
we have ‘seven-night,’ ‘fortnight,’ to signify
seven, days and fourteen days. Under this ar-
rangement the night seems to have been regarded
not as belonging to and terminating the preceding
day, but us belonging to and ushering in the day
that follows—Nox ducere diem videtur (Tacit.
Germ. ii.).

The inconveniences resulting from a variable
commencement of the civil day, earlier or later, ac-
cording to the different seasons of the year, as well
as the equally varying duration of the natural day
and night, must have been very considerable, and
are sensibly felt by Europeans when travelling in
the East, where the ancient custom in this matter
is still observed. These inconveniences must be
Jess obvious to the peuple themselves, who know
no better system ; yet they were apparent to several
ancient nations—the Egyptians (Plin. Hist. Nat.
ii. 77), the Ausonians, and others—and induced
them to reckon their civil day from midnight to
midnight, as from a fixed invariable point ; and
this usage has been ailopted by most of the modern


DEACON. 533


nations of E ' We thus realize the advantage
of having our divisions of the day, the hours, of
equal duration, day and night, at all times of the
year; whereas among the Orientals the hours, and
all other divisions of the natural day and night,
are of constantly varying duration, and the divi-
sions of the day vary from those of the night,
excepting at the equinoxes.

The natural day was at first divided into three
parts, morning, noon, ayd evening, which are
mentioned by avid as hours or times of” prayer
(Ps. lv. 17).

The natural night was also originally divided
into three parts, or watches(Ps. Ixiii. 6; xc. 4).
The first, or beginning of the toatches, is men-
tioned in Lam. ii. 19; the middle watch, in Judg.
vii. 19; and the morning watch, in Exod. xiv. 24.
Afterwards the strictness of military discipline
among the Greeks and Romans introduced an
additional night-watch. The second and third
watches of the night are mentioned in Luke xii.
38, and the fourth in Matt. xiv. 25. The four
are mentioned together by our Lord, in Mark xiii.
35, and described by the terms pd, ‘the late .
watch ;’ pecovueriov, * the midnight ;’ &dexTo-
popwvlas, < the cock-crowing ;’ and xpwt, ‘ the
morning.’ The precise beginning and ending of
each of the four watches is thus determined :

1. "Ope, the late, began at sunset and ended
with the third hour of the night, including the
evening dawn, or twilight. It was also called
ola Spa, ‘ even-tide’ (Mark xi. 11), or simply dia
‘evening’ (John xx. 19.)

2. Mecovunty, ‘the midnight, lasted from
the third hour till midnight.

3. ’Arexropog¢wwias, ‘ the cock-crowing,’ lasted
from midnight till the third hour after, or to the
ninth hour of the night. It included the two
cock-crowings, with the second of which it ended. ©

4. Mpwi, ‘ carly,’ lasted from the ninth to the
twelfth hour of the night, or sunrise, including
the morming dawn, or twilight. It was also called
*xpwia,** morning,’ or ‘ morning-tide,’ Spa being
understood (John xviii. 28). :

The division of the day into twelve hours was
common among the Jews after the captivity in
Babylon. The word hour first occurs in the
book of Daniel (iv. 19); and it is admitted by
the Jewish writers that this division of the day
was borrowed by them from the Babylonians.
Our Lord appeals to this ancient, and then long-
established, division, as a matter of public noto-
riety: ‘Are there not twelve hours in the day ?
(John xi, 9).

This, however, was the division of the natural
day into twelve hours, which were therefore vari-
able according to the seasons of the year, at all
places except the equator; and equal, or of the
mean length, only at the vernal aud autumnal
equinoxes; being longer in the summer half-year,
and shorter in the winter. The inconvenience of
this has already been intimated.

The first hour of the day began at sunrise; the
sizth hour ended at mid-day, or noon ; the seventh
hour began at noon; and the twelfth hour ended
at sunset.

The days of the week had no proper names
among the Hebrews, but were distinguished only
by their numeral order [Wzex).

DEACON. This word is derived from the
Greek term A:dxovos, and in its more extended


534 DEACON.


_sense is used, both in Scripture and in ecclesi-
astical writers, to designate any person who mi-
nisters in God's service. In 2 Cor. vi. 4, the
Apostle says, But in all things approving our-
selves as the iministers (Sidxovor, deacons) of
God.’ Again, Eph. iii. 7, ‘ Whereof I was made
a minister (8idxovos, deacon); and in Cul. i. 2,
3, he employs the same epithet to express the cha-
racter of his office. In Rom. xv. 8 St. Paul
calls our Lord didxovoy weprtouijs—t. e. deacon
of the circumcision; aml, in his Epistle to the
Philippians, he addresses himself to the beshops
and deacons (Phil. i. 1).

Chrysustom, in commenting upon these words
of the Apostle, exclaims ‘What! has a city
more bishops than one? By uo means; but when
the Apostle wrote, the terms deacon and bishop
were used indifferently the oue for the other.’
‘Hence, he adds, ‘the Apostle Paul, writing to
Timothy, who yet was a léshop, says, “ Fulfil
thy ministry (Scaxovia).”'  Theophylact, writing
upon the saine subject (p. 577), calls the bishops
presbyters ; not, however, that there were in one
city many bishops, but becanse bishops were tn-
discriminately called deacons and presbyters.

But it is in its moe confined sense, as it ex-
presses the third order of the ministry of the pri-
mitive Church, that we are to examine the mean-
ing of the word Deacon.

Somne suppose that the oflice of deacon had an
existence befure the election of the seven persons
of whom we read in Acts vi. The words Nedrepor
and Neavicxot are sometimes nsed to designate
the function as well as the age of man, by the
same rule of interpretation which diversities the
sense of the word MpeoBurepos. As, therefore,
by the title Preshyter, the head or ruler of a so-
ciety is meant, withont regard to his age; so, by

>the term young man, we are often to understand
Minister, or servant, because such persons are
usually in the Hower of youth. Christ himself
secms to attribute this sense to the word Nedtepos,
Luke xxii. 26: ‘5 weigww ev tuiv, yevérdw as 5
vedtepos.” Our Lord explains the word pelCwv
by the word jpyotucvos, which signifies a Pres-
byter or ruler. He also substitutes, a little after,
6 Siakovay in place of yewrepos, which contiims
our interpretation; so that pei(wy and vedrepos
refer not lo age, but to office. 1 Pet. v. 5 con-
firms this view very remarkably : ‘Ouolws vedre-
pa urordynre mpecBurépois— Likewise, young
men, be ye subject to the elder;’ or, ye Deacons,
be subject to the Presbyters. Now the vedrepot,
or young men (who, we are told in Acts v. 6, car-
ried out and buried the dead bodies of Ananias
and Sapphira), are supposed to Lave been the very
persons against whose partial distribution of the
Church's bounty the complaint was made to the
Apostles. ‘Tu avoid even the appearance of par-
tiality ina matter of this kind, six of the seven
newly-elected deacons were taken from amongst
the complaining Grecians. This would seem to
be sufficiently indicated by their names.

That the duties of the seven deacons were not
of an exclusively secular character is clear from
the fact that both Philip and Stephen preached,
and that oue of them also baptized. It is strange,
therefore, that the 18th Canon of the Council of
Constantinople, in ‘ Trullo,’ should declare, ree
ferring to Acts vi., that the seven deacons had no
spiritual function assigued them. CEcumenius


DEACON.


(a celebrated Greek writer of the tenth century)
gives his testimony to the same eflect (In Act.
Ap. vi. p. 433). But opposed to this opinion
is that. of some of the Fathers of the Christian
Church, Ignatius, a martyr-disciple of St. John,


-and_ bishop of Antioch, avp. 68, styles them at


ouce ‘ministers of the mysteries of Christ ;’ adding,
that they are not ministers of meats and drinks,
but of the Chureh of God (Ignat. Ep. ad Trail.
n, 2). Again, he says (lp. ad Tradl. n. 3),
‘Study to do all things in Divine concord, under
your bishup presiding in the place of God, and
the presbyters in the place of the apostolic senate,
and the deacons most dear to me, as those to whom
is committed the ministry of Jesus Christ.’

~ Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, a.v. 250 (whilst
referring their origin to Acts vi.), styles them
ministers of episcopacy and of the Church
(Cypr. Ep. 65, al. 3, ad Rogat.): at the same
time he asserts that they were called ad altaris
ministerium—to the ministry of the altar.

Tertullian, a celebrated Father of the second
century, classes them with bishops and presbyters
as guides and leaders to the ae He asks
(Tertull. De Fuga, ec. ii.): ‘Quum ipsi auctorea,
id est, ipsi Diacout, Presbyteri, et Episcopi fugi-
unt, quemodo Laicus intelligere poterit —Cum
Duces fugiunt quis de gregario numero sustis
nebit?*

Though Jerome in one place speaks of them
(Ep. ad Evang. et Com. Ezek. c. 48) as servants
of tables and widows; yet, again, he ranks them
amongst the guides of the people: still he distin-
guishes them from the priests of the second order,
that is, from the preshyters, by the title of Serviécs.
And so, frequently, in the Councils, the names
Sacerdos aud Levita are used as the distinguish-
ing titles of presbyter and deacon. The fourth
Council of Carthage expressly forbids the deacon
to assume any one function peculiar to the priest-
hood, by declaring, ‘ Diaconus non ad sacerdotium,
sed ad ministerium cunsecratus,” (See also 18th
Can. Con. Nic.)

His ordination, moreover, differed from that ot
presbyter both in its form ‘and in the powers
which it conferred. For in the ordination of @
presbyter, the presbyters who were present were
required to joiu in the imposition of hands with
the bishop; Lut the ordination of a deacon might
be performed by the bishop alone, because, as the
4th Can. of the 4th Council of Carthaze declares,
he was ordained not to the priesthood, but to the
inferior services of the Church. We now proc
to notice what these services specilically were.

1. The deacon’s more ordinary duty was to as-
sist the bishop and presbyter in the service of the
sanctuary; especially was he charged with the
care of the utensils and omaments appertaining
to the holy table (Isidurus, Epistola aa Lande-
Sredum).

2. In the administration of the Euchzarist, that
it was theits to hand the cousecrated. el erments (0
the people, is evident from Justin Mart yr (Apol.
ii, p. 192), and frum Cyprian (Serva. ve *
Lapsis"). Not, however, that the dezicon had
any authority or power to consecrate the elements;
for the 15th Can. of ‘the Council of Atrles, 4.D-
312, forbids this, And the 18th Caan. of the
Council of Nice orders the deacons not even
administer the Eucharist to priests, because
their inferiority.


DEACON,


8. Deacons had power to administer the sacra:
ment of baptism (Tertull. De Bapt. ¢. 17; also
Hieron. Dial, contr. Lucif. c. 4, p. 139). The
Council of Eliberis, Can. 77, plainly acknowledges
this right, although the author of the Apost. Con-
stitutions, and Epiphanius also, would seem to
deny it.

4. The office of the deacon was not to preach,
so much as to instruct and catechise the cate-
chumens. His part was, when the bishop or
presbyter did not preach, to read a homily from
one of the Fathers. St. Ambrose, Bishop of
Milan, a.v. 380, says expressly, that deacons, in
his time, did not preach, though he thinks that
they were all originally Evangelists, as were
Philip and Stephen.

5. It was the deacon’s business to receive the
offerings of the people; and having presented
them to the bishop or presbyter, to give expression
in a loud voice to the names of the offerers (see
Cypr. Ep. 10, al. 16, p. 37 (Hieron. Com. in
Ezek. xviii. p. 537).

6. Deacons were sometimes authorized, as the
bishops’ special delegates, to give to penitents the
solemn imposition of hands, which was the sign
of reconciliation (Cypr. Ep. 13, al. 18, ad Eter.).

7. Deacons had power to suspend the inferior
clergy; this, however, was dune only when the
bishop and presbyter were absent, and the case
urgent (Constit. Apost. viii. 28).

8. The ordinary duty of deacons, with regard
to general Conncils, was to act as scribes and
disputants according as they were directed by
their bishops. Iu sume instances they voted as
Proxies for bishops who could uot attend in per-
sou; but in no mstance do we tind them voting
in a general Council by virtue of their office.
But in Frprmeial synods the deacons were some-
times allowed to give their voice, as well as the
presbyters, in their own name.

9. The author of Apostol. Constitut. (ii. 57,
p- 875) informs us that one of the subordinate
duties of the deacon was to provide places in the
church for persous as they entered —to rebuke any
that might either whisper, talk, laugh, &c. during
divine service. This was a duty which, however,
usually devolved upon the sub-deacon.

10. But, besides the above, there were some
other offices which the deacon was called upon to
fill abroad. One of these was to take care of the
Necessituus, orphans, widows, martyrs in prison,
and all the poor and sick who had any claim
upon the public resources of the church. It was
also his especial duty to notice the spiritual, as
well as the bodily, wants of the people; and
wherever he detected evils which he could not by
his own power and authority cure, it was for him
to refer thean for redress to the bishop.

In general the number of deacons varied with
the wants of a particular church. Sozomen
(vii. 19, p. 100) informs us that the church
of Rome, after the apostulic model, never had
more than seven deacons,

It was not till the close of the third century
that deacons were forbidden to marry. The Coun-
cil of Ancyra, a.w. S44, in its 10th Can., ordains
that ifa deacon declared at the time of his ordi-
nation that he would marry, he should not be de-
prived of his function if he did marry; but that
if he married without having made such a decla-
tation, ‘he must fall into the rauk of laicks!’


DEACONESS. 535


The qualifications required in deacons by the
primitive church were the same that were re-
quired in bishops and presbyters; and the cha-
racteristics of a deacon, given by St. Paul in his
Second Epistle to Timothy, were the rule by
which a candidate was judyed fit for such an
ottice. The second Council of Carthage, 4th Can.,
forbids the ordination of a deacon before the age
of twenty-five; and both the Civil and Canon
Law, as may be seen in Justinian's Noveds, 128,
ec. 14, fixed his aye to the same period.

The Council of Laodicea, a.p. 381, forbids a
deacon to sit in the presence of a presbyter, and
the 11th Can. of the tirst Council of Carthage
regulates the number of judges to sit upon @
clergyman—three bishops upon a deacon, six
upon a presbyter, and twelve upona bishop. This
would mark the rank of each of the parties.

The primitive church had its archdeacon, though
when the ollice was first instituted is a matter of
dispute with learned men. He was not in priest’s
orders; but was selected from the deacons by the
bishop, and had considerable authority over the
other deacons and interior orders.—J. W. D.

DEACONESS. This word is derived from
Ataxémioca, or 7% Atdxovos. That the order of
Deaconess existed in the Christian church, even is
Apostolic days, is evident from Rom. xvi. 1:
© I commend unto you Phebe, our sister, which
is a servant (ofcay d:dxovoy, a deaconess) of the
church which is at Cenchrea.’

The earliest Fathers of the church, moreover,
speak of the same order of persons. Ignatius,
writing to the church at Antioch--of which be
himself was bishop—says, ‘Salute the deaconesses
in Christ Jesus.’ Some suppose that it is to such
oftices of the church that the younger Pliny
refers when he thus expresses himself in his letter
to the emperor ‘Trajan : ‘ Qui magis necessarium
credidi ex duabus ancillis que® ministraa dice
bantur, quid esset veri et per tormenta querere.’

Theodoret (Eccles. ist, iii. 14, p. 652) calls
Publia, who lived at the time of Julian, 4 Aid
xovos—deaconcss. Again, we tind Sozomen (iv.
14, p. 59) speaking of a certain deaconess who
had been excluded church fellowship because of
having broken ker vows. Theophylact intorms
us that some supposed that the TpecBiridas of
Tit. ii. 3 meant tie deaconesses. But however
this may be, we do know that the eleventh Can.
of the Council of Laodicea calls the deaconesses
of the church by the very term MpeoBurias,
iutimating that none but elderly persons were
admitted to this oflice.

Certain qualifications were uecessary in those
who were taken into this order.

1. It was necessary that she should be a
widow. On this Tertullian (Ad Uxorem, i. 7,
p. 275) thus expresses himself: ‘The discipline
of the church and apostolical usage (alluding to
1 Tim. v. 9) forbid that any widow be elected
unless she have married but one husband.’ Vir-
gins, it is true, were sometimes admitted into the
order of deaconesses ; but this was the exception,
and not the rule.

2. No widow, unless she had borne children,
could become a deaconess. ‘This rule arose out
of a Lelief that no person but a mother can
possess those sympathizing and tender feelings
which ought to animate the deaconess in the dis-
charge of her peculiar duties.


536 DEATH. —


3. The early church was very strict in exacting
the rule which prohibits the election of any to be
deaconesses who had been twice married, though
lawfully, and successively to two husbands, one
after the other. Thus Tertullian (Ad Uzorem, iv.
7) says, ‘The apostle requires them (deaconesses)
to be univire@—*‘ the wives of one man.’ Others,
however. give to these words of the apostle another
sense. They suppose the apostle to exclude only
those widows who, having divorced themselves
from their former husbands, had married again
(See Suicer's Thesaurus, tom. i. p. 866).

It is a disputed point with some learned men
whether deaconesses were ordained by imposition
of hands. However, the fifteenth Can. of the
Council of Chalcedon expressly declares that
deaconesses were so ordained, and this is fully
contirmed by the anthor of the Apost. Constitu-
tions, viii. 19. Still, deaconesses were not cone
secrated to any priestly function. Some heretics,
indeed, allowed women to teach, exorcise, and to
administer baptism; but all this he sharply re-
bukes as being contrary to the apostolic rule
(Tertullian, De Preescript. 41).

5. One of the peculiar duties, then, of the dea-
conesses was at the baptism of women. The custom
of the early church being to baptize all adult
persons by immersion (see Suicer’s Thesaur.
tom. i. p. 634), it was necessary to have the assist-
ance of this order of persons. Epiphanius speaks
of this practice in his Exp, Fid. xxi.; also Justin.
Novel. vi. p. 6.

6. Another duty the deaconesses had to per-
form was to instruct and prepare the catechu-
mens tor baptism.

7. In times of danger and persecution it was
the duty of the deaconesses to visit the martyrs
in_ prison, they could more easily gain
access to them, and with less suspicion and
hazard than the deacons.

8. The deaconesses stood at the entrance of the
church in order to direct the women as to the
place each one should occupy during divine ser-
vice. Hence Ignatius calls them poupois tay
Gyiwy ruAdvev (Epist. ad Antiochenas, p. 96).

How long this order continued in the Christian
church is not quite certain (Suicer's Thesaurus,
tom. i. p. 69). It was not however discontinued
everywhere at once. In the Greek church, up
to the time of Balsamon, ¢. ¢. to the close of the
twelfth century, deaconesses were found to mi-
nister in Constantinople (See Balsam. Tesp.
ad Interrog. Marci, Patriarche Alerandrini ;
Suicer, Thesaur. tom. i. p. 869.) In the Latin
churches, as early as the middle of the fourth
century, we tind some Councils setting the order
aside. But it was not till the tenth century
that it was wholly abrogated (See Bona, Jtep.
Liturg. i. 25, 15).—J. W. D.

DEAD SEA. Raeed

DEATH. No logical definition of death has
been generally agreed upon. This point was
much contested in the seventeenth century hy the
Cartesian and other theologians and philosophers.
Since death can be regarded in various points of
view, the descriptions of it must necessarily vary.
If we consider the state of a dead man, as it
strikes the senses, death is the cessation of natural
life. 1f we consider the cause of death, we may
place it in that permanent and entire cessation
of the feeling and motion of the body which


DEATH.


results from the destruction of the bedy. Amseng
theologians, death is commonly said to consist im
the separation of soul and body, implying that the
soul still exists when the body fen . Among
the ecclesiastical fathers, Tertullian (De Anima,
c. 27) gives this definition: Bfore—disjunctio
corporis animeque ; vita—conjunctio corporis
animeque. Cicero (Tuse. Dis. i.) defines death,
discessus animi a corpore. Heb. iv.
12, is sometimes cited on this subject, but has
nothing to do with it. Death does not consist in
this separation, but this separation is the conse-
quence of death. . As soon as the body loses feel-
ing and motion, it is henceforth useless to the soul,
which is therefore separated from it.

Scriptural representations, names, and modes
of speech respecting death :—

(a). One of the most common in the Old Tes-
tament is, to return to the dust, or to the carth,
Hence the phrase, the dust of death. It is founded
on the description Gen ii. 7, and iii. 19, and
denotes the dissolution and destruction of the
body. Hence the sentiment in Eccles. xii. 7,—
‘The dust shall return to the earth as it was, the
spirit unto God, who gave it.’

(6). A withdrawing, exhalation, or removal of
the breath of life (Ps. civ. 29). Hence the
common terms a¢hxe, wapédmxe 7d wveipa, red-
didit animam, ééxveuce, exspiravit, &c. :

(c). A removal from the body, a being absent
from the body, a departure from it, &c. This
description is founded on the comparison of the
body with a tent or lodgment in which the soul
dwells during this life. Death destroys this tent
or house, and commands us to travel on (Job
iv. 21; Isa. xxxviii. 12; Ps. liii. 7). Whence
Paul says (2 Cor. v. 1) ‘our earthly house of this
tabernacle’ will be destroyed; and Peter calls
death a ‘ putting off of this tabernacle’ (2 Peter i.
13, 14). Classical writers speak of the soul in the
same manner, as xatacxynvow év Te ompaTL
They call the hody oxjvos. So Hippocrates and
Eschines. Compare 2 Cor. v. 8, 9—dxdnuijiou
€x Tov odmatos.

(d). Paul likewise uses the term éx3veo6as, in
reference to death (2 Cor. v. 3, 4); because the
body is represented as the garment of the soul, as
Plato calls it. The soul, therefore, as long as it
is in the body, is clothed; and as soon as it is
disembodied, is naked.

(e). The terms which denote sleep are applied
frequently in the Bible, as everywhere else, to death
(Ps. Ixxvi. 55 Jer. li. 39; John xi. 13, sqq.).
Nor is this language used exclusively for the
death of the pious, as some pretend, though this is
its prevailing use. Homer calls sleep and death
twin-brothers (Jliad, xvi. 672). The terms also
which signify to lie down, to rest (e.g. JD’, oc
cumbere), also denote death.

(f). Death is frequently compared with and
named from @ departure, a going away. Hence
the verbs eundi, abeundi, discedendi, signify to
die (Job x. 21; Ps. xxxix. 4). ‘The case is the
same with dxaye and wopevoua: in the New Ter
tament (Matt. xxvi. 24), and even among the
classics. In this connection we may mention the
terms dvadvew and dydavois (Phil. 1. 23; 2 Tim.
iv. 6), which do not mean dissolution, but dis
oe (cf. Luke xii, 36). Vid. Wetstein on
Phil. i.

Death, when personitied, is described as a ruler


Ae PTL Shane ates ER SEGRE: a ee ee | ee


DEBIR.


and tyrant, having vast power and a great king-
dom, over which he reigns. ‘But the ancients also
represented it under some figures which are not
common among us. We represent it as a man
witb a scythe, or as a skeleton, &c.; but the Jews,
before the exile, frequently represented death as a
hunter, who lays snares for men (Ps. xviii. 8, 6 ;
xei. 3). After the exile, they represented him as
aman, or sometimes as an angel (the angel of
Death), with a cup of poison, which he reaches to
men. From this representation appears to have
arisen the phrase, which occurs in the New Testa-
ment, to taste death (Matt. xvi. 28; Heb. ii. 9),
which, however, in common speech, signifies merely
to die, without reminding one of the origin of the
phrase. The case is the same with the phrase to see
death (Ps. Ixxxix. 48; Luke ii. 26). See Kuapp’s
Christian Theology, by Dr. Leonard Wood.
DEBIR (137; Sept. Aafip), a city in the
tribe of Judah, about thirty miles south-west
from Jerusalem, and ten miles west of Hebron.
It was also called Kirjath-sepher (Josh. xv. 15),
and Kirjath-sannah (xv. 49). - The name Debir
means ‘a word’ or ‘oracle,’ and is applied to that
most secret and separated part of the Temple, or
of the most holy place, in which the ark of the
covenant was placed, and in which responses were
given from above the cherubim. From _ this,
coupled with the fact that Kirjath-sepher means
*book-city,’ it has been conjectured that Debir
was some particularly sacred place or seat of
leaming among the Canaanites, and a repository
of their records. ‘It is not indeed probable,’
as Professor Bush remarks, ‘that writing and
books, in our sense of the words, were very com-
mon among the Canaanites; but sume method of
recording events, and a sort of learning was,
doubtless, cultivated in those regions.’ Debir
was taken by Joshua (xi. 38); but it being after-
wards retaken by the Canaanites, Caleb, to
whom it was assigned, gave his daughter Achsah
in marriage to his nephew Othniel for bis bravery
in carrying it by storm (Josh. xv. 16). The town
was afterwards given to the priests (xxi. 15). No
trace of it is to be found at the present time.
There were two other places called Debir: one
belonging to Gad, beyond Jordan (Josh. xiii. 26) 5
the other to Benjamin, though originally in Judah.


DEBORAH (1737), a bee; Sept. AeBBapa),

a prophetess, wife of Lapidoth. She dwelt, pro-
bably, in a tent, under a well-known palm-tree
between Ramah and Bethel, where she judged
Israel (Judg. iv. 4,5). This probably means
that she was the organ of communication between
God and his people, and probably, on account of
the influence and authority of her character, was
accounted in some sort as the head of the nation,
to whom questions of doubt and difficulty were
referred fur decision. In her triumphal song she
says—
‘In the days of Shamgar, son of Anath,

In the days of Jael, the ways lay desert,
And pisewny travellers went in winding hy-


S.
Loaders failed in Israel, they fajled,
Until that I Deborah arose,
That I arose, a mother in Israel.’
From the further intimations which that song
cuntains, and from other circumstances, the people
would appear to have sunk into a state of


.


DECALOGUE. 687


total discouragement under the ion of the
Canaanites; 20 that it was difficult to rouse them
from their despondency and to induce them to
make any exertion to burst the fetters of their
bondage. From the gratitude which Deborah
expresses towards the people for the effort which
they finally made, we are warranted in drawing
the conclusion that she had long endeavoured to
instigate them to this step in vain. At length
she summoned Barak, the son of Abinoam, from
Kedesh, a city of Naphtali, on a mountain not
far from Hazor, and made known to him the will
of God that he should undertake an enterprise for
the deliverance of his country. But such was his
disheartened state of feeling, and at the same time
such his confidence in the superior character and
authprity of Deborah, that he assented to go only
on the condition that she would accompany him.
To this she at length consented. They then Te-
paired together to Kedesh, and collected there—
in the immediate vicinity of Hazor, the capital
of the dominant power—ten thousand men, with
whom they marched southward, and encamped
on Mount Tabor.  Sisera, the generul of Jabin,
king of Hazor, who was at the head of the Ca-
naanitish confederacy, immediately collected an
army, pursued them, and encamped in face of
them in the great plain of Esdraelon. Encou-
raged by Deborah, k boldly descended from
Tabor into the plain with his ten thousand men
to give battle tothe far superior host of Sisera,
which was rendered the more formidable to the
Israelites by nine hundred chariots of iron. The
Canaanites were beaten; and Barak pursued them
northward to Harosheth. Sisera himself, bei
hotly pursued, alighted from his chariot an
peat 5 on foot to the tent of Heber the Kenite,
by whose wife he was slain. This great victory
(dated about B.c. 1296), which seems to have
been followed up, broke the power of the native
princes, and secured to the Israelites a repose of
forty years’ duration. During part of this time
Deborah probably continued to exercise her for-
mer authority : but nothing more of ber history is
known.

The song of triumph, which was composed in
consequence of the great victory over Sisera, is
said to bave been ‘sung by Deborah and Barak.’
It is usually regarded as the composition of
Deborah; and was probably indited by her to be
sung on the return of Barak and his warriors
from the pursuit. Of this peculiarly fine speci-
men of the earlier Hebrew ry, there is an ex-
cellent translation by Dr. Robinson in the Ist
vol. of the American Biblical Repository, from
the introductory matter to which this notice of
Deborah is chiefly taken.

2. DEBORAH. The nurse of Rebekah,
whom she accompanied to the land of Canaan;
she died near Bethel, and was buried under an oak,
which for that reason was thenceforth called Allon-
bachuth—‘ the oak of weeping’ (Gen. xxxv. 8).


DECALOGUE (O31) MWY; Sept. of
Séxa Adyor and 1a Séxa phuara; Vulg. decem
verba, the ten words. Exod. xxxiv. 28; Deut.
iv. 13; x. 4). This (Aexadoyos) is the name
most usually given by the Greek Fathers to the
law of the two tables, given by God to Moses on
Mount Sinai. The decalogue was written on
two stone slabs (Exod. xxxi. 18), which, having


538 DECALOGUE.


been broken by Moses (xxxii. 19), were renewed
by God (xxxiv. 1, &c.). They are said (Deut.
ix. 10) to have been written by the finger of God,
an expressiun which always implies an imme
diate act of the Deity. The decalogue is five
times alluded to in the New Testament, there
called evvoAa, commandments, but ouly the
latter precepts are specifically cited, which refer
tu our duties to cach other (Matt. xvii. 18, 19, &c.;
Mark x. 19; Luke xviii, 20; Rom. xiii. 9; vii.
4, 8; Matt. v.; 1 Timi. 9, 10). Those which
refer to God are supposed by some to be omitted
from the circumstance of their containing pre-
cepts for ceremonial observances (Jeremy Taylor's
Life of Christ, and Ductor Dubitan.; Rosen-
miiller’s Scholia in Exod.) [Law].

- The circumstance of these precepts being called
the ten words has doubtless led to the belief that
the two tables contained ten distinct precepts, tive
in each table; while some have supposed that
they were called by this name to denute their per-
fection, ten being considered the must perfect of
numbers (Philv-Judaus de decalogo). This dis-
tinguished philosopher divides them into two
pees the first pentad ending with Exod, xx,

2,


‘Honour thy father and thy mother,’ &c., '


or the fifth commandment of the Greek, Re-
formed, and Anglican churches; while the more
general opinion amung Christians is that the first
table coutained our duty to God, ending with
the law to keep the sabbath holy, and the second,
our duty to our neighbour, As they are not
numerically divided in the Scriptures, so that
we cannot positively say which is the first, which
the second, &c., it may not prove uninteresting to
the student in Biblical literature, if we here give
a brief account of the diferent modes of dividing
them which have prevailed among Jews and
Christians. These may be classed as the Tal-
mudical, the Origeuian, and the two Masoretic
divisions. .
The case cannot be more clearly stated than
in the words of St. Augustin: ‘It is inquired
bow the ten commandments are to be divided ?
whether there are fuur which relate ty God, end-
ing with the precept concerning the sabbath,—and
the other six, curmencing with * Hunour thy
father and thy mother,” appertaining to man,—or
whether the former are three only, and the latter
seven. Those who say that the first table contains
Jour, separate the command “Thou shalt have
no other Gods but me” (Exod. xx. 3; Deut. v.
7), 90 as to make another precept of Thou shalt
not make to thyself an idol” (Iexod. xx. 4;
Deut. v. 8); in which imaves are forbidden to be
worshipped. But they wish “Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbour's house” (Exod. xx. 17; Deut.
vy. 21), and “ Tiou shalt not covet thy neighLour's
wife” (Exod. xx. 17; Deut. v. 21), and sv on to
the end, tobe oue. But those who say that there
are three only in the tirst table, and seven jn the
second, make one commandment of the precept of
the worship of one God, and nothing beside him
(Exod. xx. 35 Deut. v. 7), but divide these last
into tyo, so that one of them is “Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbour's wife,” and the other * Thou
shalt not covet thy neighbours house.” There is
ho question among either about the correctness of
the number ten, as for this there is the testimony
of Scripture’ (Questions on Exodus, qu. 71,
Works, vol. iii., Paris, 1679, p. 445). We shall


DECALOGUE.


hereafter give Augustin's own view of the subject,
but here we shall commence with the division
contained in the Talmud (Makkoth, xxiv. a),
which is also that of the modern Jews.

According to this division the first command-
ment consists of the words ‘I am the Lord thy
God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage’ (Exod. xx. 2; Deut.
v. 6); the second (Exod. ili. 4), ‘Thou shalt
have noue other Gods hesidle me; thou shalt not
make tu thyself any graven image,’ &c. to ver. 6;
the third, *Thou shalt not take God's name in
vain,’ &c. ; the fourth, ‘ Remember to keep huly the
sabbath day,’ &c.; the fifth, ‘ Honour thy father
and thy mother,’ &c.; the sixth, ‘Thou shalt not
kill;’ the seventh, ‘Thou shalt not commit adul-
tery ;° the eighth, ‘Thou shalt not steal;’ the
ninth, ‘Thou sbalt not bear false witness,’ &e. ;
aud the tenth, ‘Thou shalt not covet,’ &c. to the
end. This division is also supported by the
Targum of the Pseudo-Jonathan, a work of the
sixth century, by Aben Ezra, in his Commenéary,
and by Maimonides (Sepher Hammizvoth). It
has been also maintained by the learned Lutheran,
Peter Martyr (Loct Communes, Basle, 1580, loc.
14, p.684). That this was a very early mode of
dividing the decalogue is further evideut from a
pisea in Cyril of Jerusalem's treatise against

ulian, trom whom he quotes the following invec-
tive: ‘That decalogue, the law of Moses, is a
wonderful thing; thou shalt not steal ; thou shalt
not kill; thou shalt not bear false witness. But
let each of the precepts which he asserts to have
been given by God himself be written down in
the identical words, “ Iam the Lord thy God,
who brought thee out of the land of Egypt ;” the
second follows, “Thou shalt have no strange
gods beside me; thou shalt not make to thyself
an idol.” He adds the reason, “ for I, the Lord
thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the sins of the
fathers upon the children.” “Thou shalt not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain. Remem-
ber the sabbath day. Honour thy father and thy
mother. Thou shalt not commit adultery. Thou
shalt not steal. Thou shalt not bear false wit-
ness. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's
goods.” What nation is there, by the gods, if you
take away these two, “Thou shalt not adore other
Gods,” and “ Remember the sabbath,” which does
not think all the others are to be kept, and which
does not punish more or less severely those who
violate them ¥

The next division is the Origentan, or that ap-
proved by Origen, and is that in use in the Greek
and in all the Reformed Churches, except the
Lutheran.

Although Origen was acquainted with the dif-
fering opinions which existed in his time in regard
to this subject, it is evident trom his own words
that he knew nothing of that division by which
the number ten is completed by making the pro-
hibition against coveting either the Theuse or the
wife a distinct commandment, In his eiglith
Homily on Genesis, after citing the words, ‘I am
the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the
land of Eyyp%," he adds, + this is not a part of the
commandment.” ‘The first commandment is,
‘Thou shalt have no other Gods but me,’ and
then follows, ‘Thou shalt not make an iol.’
These together are thought by some to make one
commandment; but in this case the number ten


ss


DECALOGUE.


will not be complete—where then will be the
truth of the decalogue? But if it be divided as
we have done in the last sentence, the full num-
her will be evident. The first commandment
therefore is, ‘Thou shalt have no other Gods but
me,’ and the second, ‘Thou shalt not make to
thyself an idol, nor a likeness,’ &c. Origen pro-
ceeds to make a distinction between Gods, idols,
and likenesses. Of Gods, he says, ‘ it is written,
there are gods many and lords many’ (1 Cor.
viii. 5); but of idols, ‘an idol is nothing ;’ an
image, he says, of a quadruped, serpent, or bird,
in metal, wood, or stone, set up to be worshipped,
is not an idol, but a likeness. A picture made
with the same view comes under the same deno-
mination. But an idol is a representation of what
does not exist; such as the figure of a man with
two faces, or with the head of a dog, &c. The
likeness must be of something existing in heaven,
orin earth, or in the water. It is not easy to
decide on the meaning of‘ things in heaven,’ unless
it refers to the sun, moon, or stars. The design of
Moses he conceives to have been to forbid Egyptian
idolatry, such as that of Hecate, or other fancied
demons.— Opera, vol. ii. p. 156, De la Rue’s ed.
The Pseudo-Athanasius, gor the author of the
Synopsis Scriptura, who is the oracle of the Greck
church, divides the commandments in the same
manner. ‘This book [Exodus] contains these
ten commandments, on two tables: first, I am
the Lord thy God. Second, Thou shalt not
make to thyself an idol, nor any likeness......
Ninth, Thou shalt not bear false witness against
thy neighbour. Tenth, Thou shalt not covet thy
neighbour's wife, nor any thing that is thy neigh-
bour’s.,—Athanasii Opera, fol. Paris, 1698.
Gregory Nazianzen, in one of his poems, in-
scribed *The Decalogue of Moses,’ gives the
following division :
These ten laws Moses formerly engraved on
tables
Of stane; but do thou engrave them on thy
heart.
Thou shalt not know another God, since wor-
ship belongs to me.
Thou shalt not make a vain statue, a lifeless
image.
Thou shalt not call on the great God in vain.
Keep all sabbaths, the sublime and the shadowy.
Happy he who renders to his parents due honour.
Flee the crime of murder, and of a foreign
Bed ; evil-minded theft and witness
False, and the desire of another's, the seed of
death.
Opera, ed. Caillaud, Paris, 1840.
Jerome tuok the same view with Origen. In
his commentary on Ephesians vi. be thus writes:
‘Honour thy father and thy mother,’ &c. is the
fifth commandment in the decalogue. How then
are we to understand the Apostles meaning in
ealling it the first, when the tirst commandment
is * Thou shali have no Gods but me,’ where some
read thus, * which is the first commandment with
wromise,’ as if the four previous commandments
ad no promise annexed, &. . 2 . + ‘But
they do not seem to me to have observed with
sufficient accuracy that in the second command-
ment there is also a promise: ‘Thou shalt not
make to thyself an idol, nor the likeness of any
thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or
wm the water under the earth ; thou shalt not adore


DECALOGUE. 599


them, nor sacrifice to them; for I the Lord thy
God am a jeulous God, visiting the sins . . but
shewing mercy unto thousands . ." (observe these
words of promise—shewing mercy unto thousands,
&c.)—Hieronymi Opera, vol. iv. Paris, 1693.

The Pseudo-Ambrose also writes to the same
effect in his Commentary on Ephesians ; ‘ How
is this the first commandment, when the first com-
mandment says, Thou shalt have no other gods but
me? Then, Thou shalt not make a likeness of any-
thing in heaven above, or in the earth beneath, &c.
The third, Thou shalt not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain; the fourth, Keep my
sabbaths; the fifth, Honour thy father and thy
mother. As the first four appertain to God, they
are contained in the first table: the others, apper-
taining to men, are contained in the second,
such as that of honouring parents, not committing
murder, ‘adultery, theft, false witness, or concue
piscence. These six seem to be written in the
second table, the first of which is called the first
with promise’ (Ambrosii Opera, vol. ii. Paris
edition; Append. pp. 248, 249).

To these testimonies from the fathers may be
added that of Clemens Alexandrinus (Stromata,
vi. p. 809); but this writer is so confused and
contradictory in reference to the subject, that
some have supposed the text to have been cor-
rupted. ‘The first precept of the decalogue,’ he
observes, ‘shows that one God only is to be wor
shipped, who brought his people out of Ezypt ...
... and that men ought to abstain from the idol-
atry of the creature. The second, that we ought
not to transfer his name to creatures; the third
signifies that the world was made by God,
who has given us the seventh day to rest; the
Sfth follows, which commands us to honour our
parents: then fullows the precept about adultery,
after this that concerning theft; but the tenth is
concerning coveting.’

But the strongest evidence in favour of the
Origenian division is that of the learned Jews
Philo and Josephus, who speak of it as the re-
ceived division of the Jewish Church. Philo,
after mentioning the division into two pentads
already referred to, yroceeds: ‘The first pentad
is of a higher character than the second; it treats
of the monarchy whereby the whole world is go-
verned, of statues and images (fodywy Kal ayad-
pdrov), and of all corrupt reprgentations in
general (api3puudrwy); of not taking the name
of God in vain; of the religious observance of the
seventh day as a day of holy rest; of honouring
both parents. So that one table begins with God
the father and ruler of all things, and ends with
parents who emulate him in perpetuating the hu-
man race. But the other pentad contains those
commandments which forbid adultery, murder,
theft, false-witness, concupiscence’ (Je Decalogo,
lib. i.). The jirst precept, he afterwards ob-
serves, enjoins the belief and reverent worship of
one supreme God, in opposition to those who wor-
ship the sun and moon, &c. And after condemn-
ing the arts of sculpture and painting, as taking
off the mind from admiring the natural beauty of
the universe, he adds: ‘As I have said a good
deal of the second commandment, I shall now
proceed to the next, “Thou shalt not take the
name of God in vain.” .... The fourth come
mandment respects the sabbath day, to be devoted
to rest, the study cf wisdum, and the contempla-


840 DECALOGUE.


tion of nature, with a revision of our lives during
the past week, in order to the correction of our
transgressions: the fifth speaks of honouring pa-
rents. Here ends the first, or more divine pentad.
The second pentad begins with the precept re-
specting adultery ; its second precept is against
murder ; its third against stealing, the next against
false-witness, the last against coveting’ (lib. ii.).
This division seems to have been fullowed by
Ireneus: ‘In quinque libris, &c. unaqueque
tabula quam accepit a Deo precepta habet quin-
que.’ And Josephus is, if possible, still more
clear than Philo. ‘The first commandment
teaches us that there is but one God, and that we
ought to worship him only; the second com-
mands us not to make the image of any living
creature, to worship it; the third, that we must
not swear by God in a fulse matter; the fourth,
that we must keep the seventh day, by resting
from all sorts of work; the tifth, that we must
honour our parents; the sixth, that we must ab-
stain from murder ; the seventh, that we must not
commit adultery; the eighth, that we must not
be guilty of theft; the ninth, that we must not
bear false-witness; the tenth, that we must not
admit the desire of that which is another's’ (Antig.,
iii. 5. 5, Whiston’s translation).

This division, which appears to have been for-
gotten in the Western Church, was revived by
Calvin in 1536, and is also received by that sec-
tion of the Lutherans who followed Bucer, called
the Tetrapolitans. It is pasa fa by Calmet
ea of the Bible, French ed., art. Lor.)

t is supported by Zonaras, Nicephorus, and
Petrus Mogislaus among the Greeks, and is that
followed in the present Russian Church, as well
as by the Greeks in general (see the catechism
pee by order of Peter the Great, by Arch-

ishop Resensky, London, 1753). It is at the
same time maintained in this catechism that it
is not forbidden to bow before the representations
of the saints. This division, which appeared in
the Bishops’ Book in 1537, was adopted by the
Anglican Church at the Reformation (1548),
substituting seventh for sabbath-day in her for-
mularies. The same division was published with
Hpac by Bonner in his Homilies in 1555.


e shall next proceed to describe the two Ma-~


soretic divisions. The first is that in Exodus.
We call it the Masoretic division, inasmuch as
the commandments in the greater number of ma-
nuscripts and printed editions are separated by
a@ Bor D, which mark the divisions between the
smaller sections in the Hebrew. According to
this arrangement, the two first commandments
Nonenprnd to the Origenian or Greek division),

is, the commandment concerning the worship
of one God, and that concerning images, make but
one; the second is, ‘Thou shalt not take the name
of the Lord thy God in vain,’ and soon until we
arrive at the two last, the former of which is,
© Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's house,’ and
the last or tenth, ‘Thou shalt not covet thy neigh-
bour’s wife, nor his servant,’ &c., to the end.
This was the division approved by Luther, and it
has been ever since his time received by the Lu-
theran Church. The correctness of this division
has been at all times maintained by the most
learned Lutherans, not only from its agreement
with the Hebrew Bibles, but from the internal
structure of the commandments, especially from


DECALOGUE.


the fact of the two first commandments (accord.
ing to Origen’s division) forming but one subject.
If these form but one commandment, the necessity
of dividing the precept, ‘thou shalt not covet,’ &c.,
into two is obvious. (For a learned defence of
this division, see Pfeiffer's Opera, vol. i. loc. 96,
p. 125.) Pfeiffer considers the accentuation also
of the Hebrew as equally decisive in favour of
this division, notwithstanding the opposite view
is taken by many others, including the leamed
Buxtorf. This division is also fullowed in the
Trent catechism, and may therefore be called the
Roman Catholic division. The churches of this
communion have’ not, however, been consistent
in following uniformly the Tridentine division,
having revived, as in this country, the second
Masoretic division, to which we shall presently
allude. In the Trent catechism the first com-
mandment is, ‘ Ego sum Dominus Deus tuua, qui
eduxi te de terra AEgypti, de domo servitntis;
non habebis Deos alieios coram me. Non facies
tibi sculptile, &c.’ ‘ Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus,
fortis, zelotes,’ &c., to ‘preecepta mea.’ The two
last commandments (according to the Roman
division) are, however, in the same catechism,
combiued in one, thus: ‘ Non concupisces domum
proximi tui; nec desiderabis uxorem ejus, non
servum, non ancillam, non bovem, non asinum,
gec omnia qua illius sunt. In his duobus pra-
ceptis, &c. It had appeared in the same form
in England, in Marshall's and Bishop Hilsey’s
Primers, 1534, and 1539,

Those who follow this division have been accus-
tomed to give the decalogue very generally in an
abridged form ; thus the first commandment in the
Lutheran shorter catechism is simply, ‘Thou shalt
have no other gods but me;’ the second, ‘Thou
shalt not take the name of thy God in vain;’ the
third, ‘Thou shalt sanctify the sabbath-day’
(Feyertag). Asimilar practice is followed by
the Roman Catholics, although they, as well as
the Lutherans, in their larger catechisms (as the
Douay) give them at full length. This practice
has given rise to the charge made against those
denominations of leaving out the second com-
mandment, whercas it would have been more cor-
rect to say that they bad mutilated the first, or at
least that the form in which they give it has the
eflect of concealing a most important part of it
from such as had only access to their shorter cate-
chisms. ;

The last division is the second Masoretic, ot
that of Deuteronomy, sometimes called the Au-
gustinian. This division differs from the former
simply in placing the precept ‘Thou shalt not
covet thy neighbour's wife’ before ‘ Thou shalt uot
covet thy neighbour's house,’ &c.; and for this
transposition it has the authority of Deut. v. 21.
The authority of the Masorites cannot, however, be
of sufficient force to supersede the earlier traditions
of Philo and Josephus.

This division was that approved by Augustin,
who thus expresses himself on the subject,—* Fol-
lowing up what he had said (supra, p. 538), he
observes, * but to me it seems mvre congruous to
divide them into three and seven, inasmuch as
to those who diligently look into the matter, those
which appertain to God seem to insinuate the
Trinity. And, indeed, the command, ‘Thou
shalt have no other gods but me’ is more perfectly
explained when images are forbidden to be war


DECAPOLIS.


stipped. Besides, the sin of coveting another
man’s wife dillers so much from coveting his
house, that to the house was joined his field, his
servant, his maid, his ox, his ass, his cattle, and
all that is his. But it seems to divide the covet-
ing of the house from the coveting of the wife,
when each begins thus: ‘thou shalt not covet thy
neighbour's wife, thow shalt not covet thy neigh-
bour’s house,’ to which it then begins to add the
rest. For, when he bad said, ‘ thou shalt not covet
thy neighbour's wife, he did not add the rest to
this, saying, nor his house, nor his field, nor his
servant, &c., but these seem plainly to be united,
which appear to be contained in one precept, and
distinct from that wherein the wife is named.
But when it is said, ‘thou shalt bave no other gods
‘but me,’ there appears a more diligent following
up of this in what is subjoined. For to what per-
tains, ‘thou shalt not make an idol, nora like-
ness: thou shalt not adore nor serve them,’ unless
fo that which had been said, ‘thou shalt have
none other gods but me.’ The division pf Augus-
tin was followed by Bede and Peter Lombard.
The learned Sonntag has entirely followed
Augustin’s view of this subject, and has written
a dissertation in Vindication -of this division in
the Theologische Studien und Kritiken, Ham-
burg, 1836-7; to which there has been a reply
in the same miscellany from Ziillg, in vindica-
tion of what he terms the Calvinistic division,
or that of Origen, which is followed by a re-
joinder from Sonntag. Sonntag is so convinced
of the necessity of that order of the words, accord-
ing to which the precept against coveting the
wife precedes (as in Deuteronomy) that against
coveting the house, &c., that he puts down the
order of the words in Exodus as an oversight. The
order in the Septuagint version in Exodus agrees
with that in Deuteronomy. The Greek church
follows this order. : Sonntag conceives that the
Mosaic division of the decalogue was Jost in the
period between the exile and the birth of Christ.


W.wW.

DECAPOLIS (% Aexdzodis, al Séxa roves).
This appears to denote not, as is frequently
stated, a particular province or district, but
certain Ten Cities, including the adjacent vil-
lages (ras xézas abrav, Joseph. Vit. § 65), which
resembled each other in being inhabited mostly
by Gentiles, and in their civic institutions and
privileges. In Matt. iv. 25, it is said ‘ multi-
tudes followed Jesus from Galilee, and from De-
capolis, and from Jerusalem, and from Judea,
and from beyond Jordan.’ This must be con-
sidered as a popular mode of expression, just as,
in describing a public meeting in this country, it
might be said, numbers attended it from Kent
and Sussex, and from the Cinque Ports.’ We,
therefore, cannot agree With Dr. Lightfoot in
thinking it ‘absurd to reckon the most famed
cities of Galilee for cities of Decapolis, when,
both in sacred and profane authors, Galilee is
plainly distinguished from Decapolis’ (Choro-
graphical Decad. ch. vii. § 1; Works, x. p. 238).
One at least of the Decapolitan towns (Scytho-
polis, formerly Bethshan) was in Galilee, and
several, if not all the rest, were in the country
beyond Jordan. Pliny gives the following list,
but allows that a difference of opinion existed as
to its correctness (— numero oppidorum, im quo
pon omnes eadem observant, Nat. Hist, v. 16,


DEDICATION. 541


18): 1. Damascus; 2. Philadelphia; 3. Raphana;
4. Scythopolis; 5. Gadara; 6. Hippos; 7. Dion;
8. Pella; 9. Galasa; 10. Canatha. Josephus
speaks of Gadara and Hippos as Grecian cities
CEAAnv Bes cio) wédrcts, Antig. xvii. 11. §4), and
calls Scythopolis the greatest city of the De-
capolis (Bell. Jud. iii. 9. § 7), from which it may
be inferred that he exclude! Damascus from the
number. For Damascus and Raphana, Cellarius
substitutes Caesarea Philippi and Gergesa, and
Ptolemy Capitolias (Winer's Real-worterbuch,
i. 308). The name Decapolis was in course of
time applied to more than ten towns, a circum-
stance which may in part account for the discre-
pancies in the lists given by various writers.
Stephen of Byzantium, for instance, enumerates
fourteen Decapolitan cities; and thus in our own
country, as far back as the reign of Henry IIL,
the Cinque Ports included seven principal places,
besides subordinate towns. The Decapolitan towns
referred to in the Gospels were evidently situated
not far from the sea of Galilee (Mark v. 20;
vii. 31). The name Decapolis does not occur in
the Apocrypha, and, according to Manuert, it is
only found in writers of the first century; in
later times there is scarcely an allusion to it
(Geographie der Griechen und Romer, vi. 1,
p- 244).—J. E. R.


DEDAN ([TI; Sept. Aaddy). Two persons
of this name are mentioned in Scripture; one the
son of Cush (Gen. x. 7), and the other the second
son of Jokshan, Abraham's son by Keturah (Gen.
xxv. 3). Both were founders of tribes, afterwards

tedly named in Scripture; and Gesenius,
Winer, and others, are of opinion that these were
not really different tribes, but the same tribe de-
rived, according to different traditions, from dif-
ferent progenitors. It seems better, however, to
adhere to the usual view, by which they are dis-
tinguished from each other.

Of the descendants of the Cushite Dedan, very
little is known. It is sup that they settled
in southern Arabia, near the Persian Gulf; but
the existence in this quarter of a place called
Dadan or Dadena, is the chief ground for this
conclusion,

The descendants of the Abrahamite Jokshan
seem to have lived in the neighbourhood of Idu-
mea; for the prophet Jeremiah (xlix. 8) calls on
them to consult their safety, because the calamity
of the sons of Esau, ¢. ¢. the Idumeans, was at
hand. The same prophet (xxv. 23) connects them
with Thema and Buz, two other tribes of Arabia
Petra, or Arabia Deserta, as does Ezekiel (xxv.
13) with Theman, a district of Edom. It is not
always clear when the name occurs which of
the two Dedans is intended; but it is probably
the Cushite tribe, which is described as addicted
to commerce, or rather, perhaps, engaged in the
carrying-trade, Its ‘travelling companies,’ or
caravans, are mentioned by Isaiah (xxi. 13); in
Ezekiel (xxvii. 20), the Dedanites are described
as supplying the markets of Tyre with flowing
riding-cloths : and elsewhere (xxxviii. 13) the
same prophet names them along with the mer-
chants of Tarshish.

DEDICATION, a religious ceremony, where-
by anything is dedicated or consecrated to the
service of God; and it appears to have originated
in the desire to commence, with peculiar solemnity,


542 DELILA.


the practical use and application of whatever had
been set apart to the divine service. Thus Moses
dedicated the Tabernacle in the Wilderness

Exod. xl.; Num. vii.); Solomon his temple

1 Kings viii.); the returned exiles theirs (Ezra
vi. 16, 17); Herod his (Joseph. Antig. xv. 11. 6).
The Maccabees having cleansed the temple from
its pollutions under Antiochus Epiphanes, again
dedicated the altar (1 Mace. iv. 52-9), and an
annual festival was established in commemora-
tion of the event, This feast was celebrated not
only at Jerusalem, but everywhere throughout the
country ; in which respect it differed from the feasts
of the Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, which
could only be observed at Jerusalem.

In John x. 22, 23, we are told that Jesus was
at Jerusalem, walking in Solomon's porch at the
time of ‘the feast of the dedication, and it was
winter. Tuis is usually supposed to have been
the feast commemorating the dedication by Judas
Maccabaus, which was celebrated in the month
Cislev, about the winter solstice (answering to
the 15th of December). ‘There seems no reason
to disturb this conclusion; for the dedication of
Solomon's temple was in the seventh month, or
autumn; that of Zerubbabel’s temple in the
month Adar, in the spring; and, althongh that of
Herod's temple was in the winter, we kuow not
that it was celebrated by an annual feast, while
the Maccabwan dedication was a festival much
observed in the time of Christ (Joseph. Antig. xii.
7,7) Tu Joseplins, this feast is called para, since,
for eight days, lanterns and torches were lighted
up in the houses in token of joy. Many com-
mentators of reputation taxe yemey to signify,
like the Latin Acems, not merely winter, but in-
clement, rainy, wintry weather. In this latter
sense it wonld supply a reason why Jesus was
walking in the porch; but as the time of the year
would equally account tor the fact, and’ as, more-
over, there is at Jerusalem no wintry weather ex-
cept in winter, it is better to take the word in its
usual sense, and tu understand the clause ‘it was
winter’ to have been inserted for the information
of those who might not know at what season the
Jewish feast was celebrated.

Not only were sacred places thus dedicated ;
but some kind of dedicatory solemnity was ob-
served with respect to cities, walls, gates, and
even private houses (Deut. xx. 5; Ps. xxx. title ;
Neh. xii. 27). We may trace the continuance
of these usayes in the custom of consecrating
or dedicating churches and chapels; and in the
ceremonies connected with the ‘opening’ of roads,
markets, bridges, &c., and with the launching of
ships.

DEEP. [Anyss ]

DEFILEMENT. [Pots.urion.]

DEGREES, PSALMS OF. UE sire

DELILA, the woman whom Samson loved, and
who betrayed him to his enemies (Judg. xvi.)
[Samson].

DELUGE. The narrative of a flood, given in
the bock of Genesis (vii. and viil.), by which,
according to the literal sense of the description,
the whole world was overwhelmed and every ter-
restrial creature destroyed, with the exception of
one human family and the representatives of each
species of animal, supernaturally preserved in an
ark, constructed by divine appointment for the
purpose, need not here be fullowed in detail. The


DELUGE.


account furnished by the sacred historian is cir
cumstantially distinct ; and the whole is expressly

ascribed to divine agency: but, in several of the
lesser particulars, secondary causes, as rain, ‘ the
opening of the windows of Heaven’ (vii. 11), and
the ‘ breaking up or the fountains of the great deep,’
are mentioned, and again the eflect of wind in
drying up the waters (viii. 1). It is chiefly to be
remarked that the whole event is represented as
both commencing and terminating in the most
gradual and quiet manner, without anything at
all resembling the catastrophes and coravulsions
often pictured in vulgar imagination as accom-
panying it. When the waters subsided, so little
was the surface of the earth changed that the
vegetation continued uninjured: the olive-trees
remained from which the dove brought its token.

We allude particularly to these circumstances
in the narrative as being those which bleear most
upon the probable nature and extent of the event,
which it is our main object in the present article
to examine, according to the tenor of what little
evidence can be collected on the subject, whether
from the terms of the narrative or from other

‘sources of information which may be opemed to us
by the researches of science. * ;

Much, indeed, might be said on the subject ut
other points of view; and especially in a more
properly theological sense, it may be dwelt upon
as a part of the great series of divine iuterpoa-
tions and dispensations which the sacred history
discloses. But our present oliject, as well as
limits, will restrict us from enlarging on these
topics; or, again, upon the various ideas which
have prevailed on the subject apart from Seripture
on the one hand, or science on the other. Thus,
we need merely allude to the fact that in almost
all nations, from the remotest periods, there lave
prevailed certain mythological narratives 8”
Jegendary tales of similar catastrophes. Sue
narratives have formed a part of the mde belief
of the Kzyptians, Chaldaaus, Greeks, Sc ythians,
and Celtic tribes. They have also bees disco-
vered among the Peruvians and Mexicans, and the
South Sea Islanders. For details on these points
we refer our readers to the work of Biyast
(Ancient Mythology), and more especially _' the
treatise of the Rev. L. V. Harcourt on the Deluet.
who appears to have collected everything, of this
kind bearing on the subject.

With reference to our present design the moat
material question is that of the existence of ete
traces which it might be suposed would be ie
covered of the action of such a deluge OF MM
existing surface of the globe; and the conseqient
views which we must adopt according to the a
gree of accordance or discordance which suc
evidences may offer, as compared with the haute
narrative, Even in this point of view mu
speculation of a very vague aud unsat is fect
nature has been occasionally indulged in 5 ee
the most purely gratuitous speculations We™
a long time, the only attempts towards 29
qniry into the subject; nor can we say that
spirit of following them is even yet extinct

It will, however, be little to our purpose
large upon the crude conceptions and over
generalizations of the earlier cosmogon ists nN
geologists, as, besides the visionary characte! #
taching to the theories of the furmer, sever

the most eminent of the latter class have, w2


to ene
hast¥


DELUGE.


ingenuousness of true philosophers, candidly ac-
knowledged the errors into which they had once
been led, at periods when the correct nature of
inductive reasoning in geology was less attended
to than it has been of late; when the science
having settled into a more firm and compact struc-
ture, and a more rigid scrutiny having been ap-
ae to all its defective parts, its real conclusions
ve been fixed upon an enduring foundativn, and
Visionary speculation from henceforth banished
from its precincts.

The evidence which gevlogy may disclose and
which can in any degree bear on our present sub-
ject must, from the nature of the case, be confined
to indications of superficial action attributable to
the agency of water, subsequent to the latest
period of the regular geological formations, and
corresponding in character to a temporary inun-
dation of a guiet and tranquil nature, of a depth
sufficient to cover the highest mountains, and,
lastiy (as indeed this condition implies), extend-
ing over the whole globe; or, if these conditions
should not be fulfilled, then, indications of at
least something approaching to this, or with which
the terms of the description may be fairly under-
stood and interpreted to correspond,

Our object, then, will be to present, in as
brief a summary as possible, what and how much
of evidence of the kind here described geological
research does really put before us; and then to
ofier some remarks on the reference it may bear to
the terms in which the sacred narrative is con-
veyed.

Of those geological facts which seem to bear at
all upon such an inquiry, the first, perhaps, which
strikes us is the occurrence of what was formerly
all included under the common name of diluvivm,
but which more modern research has separated
into many distinct classes. The general term
may, however, not inaptly describe superficial
arcuroulations whether of soil, sand, gravel, or
loose aggregations of larger blocks, which are
found to prevail over large tracts of the earth’s
surface, and are manifestly superinduced over the
deposits of different ages, with which they have no
connection.

An examination of the contents of this accu-
mulated detritus soon showed the diversified nature
of the fragments of which it is composed in
different localities. Investigations were made by
comparing the transported fragments with the
nearest rocks from which they could have been
derived. Hence was inferred the direction of the
current which transported them, and the degree of
force necessary for such transport, according to
their size and nature and the character of the inter-
vening ground. Hence the conclusion was in-
eritable that many such currents in different
directions and acting with different degrees of
force must have occurred to produce the observed
results. It wagsoon fonnd frum the like infallible
indications that these different instances of diluvial
action were of very different ages, and none of
more than local extent, though some must have
acted over considerable tracts of country. In
some instances the. most palpable evidence has
been furnished in one such stratum crossing and
overlying another.

In other instances (perhaps the greater number)
there is equal evidence of the operation having
gone on at the bottom of deep water, as it does


DELUGE. 43


at present, by currents, eddies, tides, &c. Again,
in some cases, masses of what had once formed a
diluvium have themselves been cleared off by
some new current, and heaped up, leaving the:
substratum bare. ‘In a word, with reference to
cases of this kind, the most recent researches sim-
ply point to a continuation of the same great
series of long-sustained natural action in the de-
position of detritus and the gradual elevation of
coasts, covered with the ordinary accumulations of
mud, sand, and shingle, which have been referred
to as the analogous causes of tle earlier forma-
tions,

Geologists have collected numerous instances
in which such currents are shown to have acted
on the surface of many parts of Europe, in
different directions; and other results, such as
the transportation of blocks over intervening high
ridges, have becn referred to the floating of ise;
while other similar results have been traced up to
the action of glaciers in many instances, whatever
may be the probability of such action in others.

We will very briefly allude to another branch
of the evidence. The extinct volcanoes in the
south of France show no indications of having
been active at any period of which we can obtain
an idea from the surrounding state of things. In
several instances rivers have cut their channels
through the solid masses of lava of 100 feet in
thickness ;_ the time requisite for this is hardly cal-
culable. Other portions of these mountains con-
sist of light pumice and aggregations of cinders
which have nevertheless remained wholly undia-
turbed. The arguments for the antiquity of Etna
are of the same kind: the succession of eruptions
which have contributed to form the flanks of the
mountain by accumulations of lava must have
been carried on through an almost immeasurable
antiquity. The different numerous extinct cra-
ters on its sides present masses of loose scorie and
ashes. Precisely the same description is found to
apply to extinct volcanoes in Asia Minor and
other regions. For authorities and details we refer
our readers generally to Mr. Lyell’s Prenciples
of Geology, and the abstracts of Proceedings of
the Geological Society, especially those relating
to the researches of Messrs. Hamilton and Strick-
land, in Asia Minor; also to Sir H. de la Beche’s
Geological Manual (especially p. 172, 3rd edit.).

The general result, as bearing on our pre-
sent subject, is obviously this: the traces of
currents, and the like, which the surface of the
earth does exhibit, and which might be ascribed
to diluvial action of some kind, are certainly not
the results of one wriversal simultaneous sub-
mergence, but of many, distinct, local, aqueous
forces, for the most part continued in action for
long periods, and of a kind precisely analogous
to such agency as is now at work. While, fur-
ther, many parts of the existing surface show no
traces of such operations; and the phenomena of
the volcanic districts prove distinctly that during
the enormous periods which have elapsed since the
craters were active, no deluge could possibly have


a over them without removing all those


ighter portions of their exuvia which have evi-
dently remained wholly untouched since they
were ejected,

Upon the whole it is thns apparent, that we
have 110 evidence whatever of any great aqueous
revolution at any comparatively recent period


a44 DELUGE.


having affected the earth's surface over any con-
siderable tract: changes, doubtless, may have
been produced on a small scale in isolated dis-
tricts. The phenomena presented by caves con-
taining bones, as at Kirkdale and other localities,
are not of a kind forming any breach in the
continuity of the analogies by which all the

ges in the surface are more and more seen to
have been carried on. But a recent simultaneous
influx of water covering the globe, and ascending
- above the level of the mountains, must have left
indisputable traces of its influence, which not
only is not the case, but against which we have
seen positive facts standing out. Apart from the
testimonies of geology there are other sciences
which must be interrogated on such a subject.
These are, chiefly, terrestrial physics, to assign the
possibility of a supply of water to stand all over
the globe five iiles in depth above the level of the
ordinary sea ;—natural history, to count the my-
riads of species of living creatures to be preserved
and continued in the ark ;—mechanics, to con-
struct such a vessel; with some others not less
necessary to the ease. But we have no disposition
to enter more minutely on such points: the reader
will find them most clearly gnd candidly stated
in Dr. Pye Smith's Geology and Scripture, &c.
p. 180, 2nd edit. 7

Let us now glance at the nature and possible
solutions of the difficulty thus presented. We
believe only two main solutions have been at-
tempted. One is that proposed by Dr. Pye Smith
(ib. p. 294), who expressly contends that there is
no real contradiction between these facts and the
description in the Mosaic record, when the latter
€s correctly interpreted, This more correct inter-
pretation then refers, in the first instance, to the
proper import of the Scripture terms commonly
taken to imply the universality of the deluge.
These the author shows, by a large comparison of
similar passages, are only to be understood as
expressing @ great extent ; often, indeed, the very
same phrase is applied to a very limited region
or country, as in Gen. xli. 56; Deut. ii. 25;
Acts ii. 5, &c. Thus, so far as these expressions
are concerned, the description may apply to a
local deluge. : :

Next, the destruction of the whole existing
human race does not by any means imply this
universality, since, by ingenious considerations
as to the multiplication of mankind at the alleged
era of the deluge, the author has shown that they
probably had not extended beyond a compara-
tively limited district of the East.

A local destruction of animal life would also
allow of such a reduction of the numbers to be
included in the ark, as might obviate objections
on that score; and here again the Oriental idiom
may save the necessity of the diteral supposition
of every actual species being included.

Again, certain peculiar difficulties connected
with the resting of the ark on Mount Ararat are
combated by supposing the name incorrectly
applied to the mountain now so designated, and

ly to belong to one of much lower elevation.

Lastly, this author suggests considerations tend-
ing to fix the region which may have been the
scene of the actual inundation described by Moses,
in about that part of Western Asia where there is
a large district now considerably depressed below
the level of the sea: this might have been sub-


DELUGE.


merged by the joint action of rain, and an elevae
tion of the bed of the Persian and Indian Seas.
And, finally, he quotes the opinions of several
approved divines in confirmation of such a view,
especially as bearing upon all the essential reli-
gious instruction which the narrative is calculated
to convey. :

Other attempts have heen made with more or
Jess probability toassign particular localities as the
scene of the Mosaic deluge, if understood to have
been partial. Syme diluvial beds posterior to
the tertiary formations have been occasionally
pointed out as offering some probability of such
an origin, Thus, e.g. Mr. W. J. Hamilton,
secretary to the Geological Society, in his Tour
in Asia Minor (vol. ii. p. 386), found in the
plains of Armenia, especially in some localities
near Khorassan and on the banks of the Arpachai
or Araxes, a remarkable thin bed of marl con-
taining shells of tertiary (qu. recent?) species:
these he attributes to a local deluge occurring (as
the position of the bed indicates) after the ces-
sation of the volcanic action which has taken

lace in that district. He expressly adds that
he regards this deluge as probably coincident
with the Mosaic; understanding the latter in a


restricted or partial sense, and imagining it ex- -


plained by physical causes which migtit have
followed the volcanic action.

How far this or any such phenomenon is recon-
cilable with the terms of the Mosaic narrative,
we leave our readers to decide for themselves; for
our own part, we can see but little probability in
such suppositions.

Again, with respect to any hypothesis of local
action, we may observe that the Scripture nur-
rative dwells emphatically on the destruction of
the whole existing human race. Wherever, there-
fore, we look tor the evidences of a local deluge,
it must be shown to extend to all the then inha-
bited part of the world. This might, certainly,
be of contracted extent : but the more contracted
it might be, in proportion the more full must it
have been, of Auman remains. Now it is quite
notorious that no bed attributable to diluvial
action has ever been found containing a single
bone or tooth of the human species. We must
therefore contend that no evidence has yet been
adduced of any deposit which can be identified
with the Noachian deluge.

The only other mode of viewing the subject is
that which, accepting the letter of the Scriptural
narrative, makes the deluge strictly universal ;
and allowing (as they nrust be allowed) all the
ditticulties, not to say contradictions, in a natural
sense, involved in it, acconnts for them all by
supernatural agency. In fact, the terms of the
narrative, strictly taken, may perhaps be under-
stood throughout as representing the whole event,
from beginning to end, as entirely of a miracu-
lous nature. If so, it may be said, there is an
end to all difficulties or question, since there are
no limits to omnipotence ; and one miracle is not
greater than another. Thus, Mr. Lyell (Prin-
ciples of Geol. iv. 219. 4th ed.), after ably re-
capitulating the main points of evidence, as far
as physical causes are concerned, remarks, ‘If
we believe the flood to have been a temporary
suspension of the ordinary laws of the natural
world, requiring a miraculous intervention of the
divine power, then it is evident that the credibility


‘c


DELUGE.


of such an event cannot be enhanced by any series
of inundations, however analogous, of which the
geologist may imagine he has discovered the
proofs. For my own part, I have always consi-
dered the flood, when its universality, in the
strictest sense of the term, is insisted on, as a pre-
ternatural event far beyond the reach of philuso-
phical inquiry, whether as to the causes employed
to produce it, or the effects must likely to result
from it.’

In a word, if we suppose the flood to have been
miraculously produced, and all the difficulties
thus overcome, we must also suppose that it was
wt only miraculously terminated also, but every
trace and mark of it supernaturally effaced and
destroyed.

Now, considering the immense amount of su-
pematural agency thus rendered necessary, this
hypothesis has appeared to some quite untenable.
Dr. Pye Smith, in particular (whom no one will
suspect of any leaning to scepticism), enlarges on
the difficulty (p. 157, and note), and offers some
excellent remarks on the general question of mi-
racles (p. R4-89); and there can be no doubt that,
however plausible may be the assertion that all
miracles fre alike, yet the idea of supernatural
agency to so enormous an amount as in the pre-
sent instance, is, to many minds at least, very
staggering, if not wholly inadmissible. In fact, in
stretching the argument to such an extent, it must
be borne in mind, that we may be trenching upon
difficulties in another quarter, and not sufficiently
tegarding the force of the evidence on which any
miracles are supported [Mrracrz].

In any such discussion with regard to the

deluge, we cannot avoid taking into account its
bearing upon the early history of mankind, the
Propagation of the race, and the progress of arts
and civilization, coupled with the comparatively
Tecent date commonly assigned to this event,
viz, abut 2100 p.c. On such a subject we can
only be guided by the testimony of universal his-
tory and experience as to the rapidity of the
spread of population, and the probable causes
which could lead to advance in civilization
among some tribes, and the deterioration, or even
‘otal loss of it (as originally possessed by Noali)
among others. If, then, we are to date from the
Noachian deluge, it is evident that such con-
siderations with regard to the antiquity of the
human Tace must at least claim our serious
ah in connection with the Scripture nar-
rative,
_ ‘As to the date simply, the great discrepancy
in the chronology of the patriarchs, between the
existing Hebrew, the Samaritan, and the Septua-
Sint versions, has, with many, tended to throw
doubts upon all the computations alike, as more
or less corrupted or interpolated.

Again, there are circumstances connected with

early history of several nations, which have
appeared to some writers to demand a still greater
extension of the time. The Jesuit missionaries in
vate were so strongly impressed with the proofs
high antiquity evinced in the records of that
People, that they applied to the Pope for a dis-
Lana to adopt the Septuagint chronology
reat a ae of the Vulgate ; and even con-
with sues his would not be sufficiently consistent
te antiquity they felt obliged to assign to
history. The Jesuit Mailla enters


DELUGE. 543


most into detail on the subject, especially as
connected with their early inventions in the arts
(see Mélanges Asiatiques, tom. i.).

Other writers have dwelt upon the various
remains indicating a spread of population and a
degree of civilization at periods too carly to
be consistent with any received chronology
among the Egyptians, Mexicans, Hiudoos, and
other nations; and the probability of many
of those arta, of which they exhibit traces,
having been originally derived from a. still
more ancient, widely spread, and highly civilized
people in Central Asia. Some interesting remarks
on this subject will be found in a paper ‘ On the
History of Magnetical Discovery, by T. S. Davies,
Esq. F.R.S,’ inserted in the British Annual for
1827, p. 246. This able writer argues much from
the unequal progress made in civilization and the
arts of life under different conditions of national
existence, and contends that, in the earlier stages,
that progress must have been incalculably slow,
and the chronology, consequently, must be almost
indefinitely enlarged. Indeed, in a more gene-
ral point of view, to such an extent is this
the case, if we fullow it out in imagination to the
circumstances of the lowest state of savage life,
that others have felt obliged to adopt the supposi-
tion of a direct divine interposition to communi-
cate certain first elements of civilization, without
which no race ever rises above the savage condi-
tion (see Archbp. Whately’s Political Economy,
lect. v. p. 133).

Upon the whole, the discerning inquirer will, on
such a subject as the present, more especially, ad-
mit the reasonableness of an increasing attention
to that important branch of criticism which teaches
us to view the composition of the diflerent portions
of the sacred writings as of a kind specially adapted
to the wants and ideas of the ages to which they
respectively belong; and not to overstretch the
literal interpretation of them to meet the concep-
tions of other ages and other stages of the intel-
Tectual and moral advancement of mankiud; or,
in the judicious language of the learned Senler—
‘Jam si argumentum atque ingenium librorum
V. T. intueamur propius, facile patebit hoc, genti
Israelitarum precipue istos libros fuisse destina-
tos, et ad ecorum tempora varia et varios status
maxime respicere ; minime autem librorum isto-
Fum cunctas partes hominibus omnium temporum
idem atque equale prastare beneficium ' ( dnstit
Brev. § xxxii.).

In any point of view, it must be admitted that
the subject involves difficulties of no inconsider-
able amount; and if, after due consideration of
the suggestions offered for their solution, we should
still feel it necessary to retain a cautious suspense
of judgment on the subject, it may be also borne
in mind that such hesitation will not involve the
dereliction of any material religious doctrine.

If we look to the actual tenor of the whole nar
rative as delivered by Moses (Gen. viii. and ix.),
we shall observe that the manifest immediate
Pp of it is the same as that of the rest
of the early portion of his history, viz. as
forming part of the introduction TO THE LAW.
Tous we find in the first instance, the narrative
dwelling on the distinction of clean and un-
clean beasts (vii. 2); afterwards on the covenant
with Noah; the promise of future enjoyment of
the earth and its fruits; the patie eating

Nn


646 DEMAS.


blood ; the punishment of murder (ix. 4, &c.);
all constituting, in fact, some of the rudiments
out of which the Mosaic law was framed, and
which were thus bronght before the Israelites as
forming an anticipatory sanction for it.

If we look to any further applications of the
Narrative, we must, of course, be guided by the
express representations of the sacred writers in
regard to the tenor of such references as they may
make toit. Now the only such applications are
purely of a practical nature, in which certain
points in the narrative are introduced by way of
adaptation to the subject in hand, as belonging to
a history familiarly known, and thus made to
furnish topics of argument or admonition to those
who had always acknowledged it. Regarded in
a Christian light, the narrative is important solely
in respect to the applications made of it in the
New Testament, and these are only of the follow-
ing kind: it is referred to as u warning of Christ's
coming (Matt. xxiv. 38); Luke xvii. 27); as an
assurance of judgment on sin (2 Pet. ii. 5); and
of God's long-suffering ; while the ark is made a
type of baptism and Christian salvation (1 Pet.
ili, 20); and lastly, Noah is set forth as an ex-
ample of faith (Heb. xi. 7).

In these applications no reference is made to the
physical nature of the event, nor even to its literal
universality. They are all allusions, not to the
event abstractedly, but only in the way of argu-
ment with the parties addressed, in support of
other truths: an appeal to the Old Testament
addressed to those who already believed in it—in
the tirst of the instances cited, to the Jews—in the
others to Jetoish converts to Christianity (compare
1 Pet. i. 1 and 2 Pet. iii. 1).—B. P.

DEMAS (Afuas), a Thessalonian Christian,
who was for a time associated with St. Paul, but
who afterwards abandoned him at Rome, either
from being discouraged by the hardships and perils
of the service, or in pursuit of temporal advantages
(Col. iv. 14; Philem. xxiv.; 2Tim. iv. 10).
The usual unfavourable sense attached to the lust
text seems the just one.

DEMETRIUS (Anphrpios), a man’s name,
denoting @ votary of Ceres, awl very common
amonyz the Greeks. The persons of this name
mentioned in the history of the Maccabees, and in
the New Testament, are—

1. DEMETRIUS SOTER, king of Syria.
He was son of Seleucus IV., surnamed Philopator ;
hut, being an hostage at Rome at the time of his
father’s death, his uncle, the notorious Antiochus
Epiphanes, assumed the crown of Syria, and
retained it eleven years. After him it was held
two years by his son Antiochus Eupator, who was
put to death in s.c. 162 by Demetrius, who then
arrived in Syria and secured the royal heritage
from which he had so long been excluded. He
reigned twelve years, B.c. 162-150. The points
in which his history connects him with the Jews
are alone of interest in this work, and these points
belong to the history of the Maccabees [see art.
Maccaners]. To his time belong the latter
end of the government of Judas in Israel and the
beginning of that of Jonachan, He acted op-
pressively and unjeely towards them; but, when
a rival arose in the person of Alexander Balas,
he bade so high for the support of Jonathan as
to create a doubt of his sincerity ; for which cause,
as well as from resentment at the injuries he had


DEMON.


inflicted on them, the Jews es; the cause of
Balas, to whose success they in no slight degree
contributed (Arzxanper Baras].

2. DEMETRIUS NICATOR, orNICANOR,
son of the preceding, but who was excluded from
the throne till n.c. 146, by the success of Alex-
ander Balas, and then recovered it chiefly by the
assistance of his father-in-law Ptolemy Philo-
metor. He at first treated the Jews well, but
eventually gave them so much cause for dissatis-
faction that they readily espoused the cause of
Antiochus Theus, son of Alexander Balas. De-
metrius underwent many vicissitudes, and passed
several years (B.c. 141-135) in captivity among
the Parthians, from which he eventually returned
and recovered his throne, which he continued to
occupy till p.c. 126, when he was defeated in
battle by the pretender Alexander Zebina, and
afterwards slain at Tyre, whither he had fled
Ditcee|

3. DEMETRIUS, a silversmith at Ephesus,
who, being alarmed at the progress of the Gospel
under the preaching of Paul, assembled his fellow-
craftsmen, and excited a tumult by haranguing
them on the danger that threatened the worship of
the great goddess Diana, and consequently their
own craft as silversmiths. Their employrnent
was to make ‘silver shrines fur Diana’ (Acts
xix. 24); and it is now generally agreed that
these ‘shrines’ (vaovs) were silver models off the
temple, or of its adytum or chapel, in whict1 per-
haps a little image of the goddess was placed.
These, it seems, were purchased by foreigners,
who either could not perform their devotions at
the temple itself, or who, after having done so,
carried them away as memorials or for purposes
of worship. The continual resort of forei;rners to
Ephesus from all parts, on account of the sin-
gular veneration in which the image of the
goddess was held [Anrgsis], must have rendered
this manufacture very profitable, and sufficiently
explains the anxiety of Demetrius and his fellow-
craftsmen.

4. DEMETRIUS, a Christian, mentioned with
commendation in 3 John 12. From the con-
nection of St. John with Ephesus at the time tle
Fpistle was written, some have supposed that tis
Demetrius is the same as the preceding, and that
he had been converted to Chnistianity, But this
is a mere conjecture, rendered the more uncertain
by the commonness of the name.

DEMON. The words Saluow and d3amudviov
are used as synonymous both by profane and
sacred writers. The etymologies they respectively
assign to them, all point to some suppused cla-
racteristic of those intelligent beings to whom
the words are applied. For example. Plato, in
his Cratylus (vol. i. p. 398, ed. Serran.), derives
the word from 8ahuev, ‘knowing,’ in allusicn
to the superior intelligence, and consequent ett-
ciency, ascribed to demons; Eusebius (Prep.
Evang. iv. 5), from dealve, ‘to be territied :”
others, as Proclus (in Hesiod.), from Baiw, ‘to dis-
tribnte,’ because demons were supposed f6 assign
the lots or destinies of mankind. The words in
question are used by heathen writers with great
latitude, being apvlied by them, 1. to every
order of beings superior to man, including even
the Highest. Aristotle applies Samuéytoy to the
Divinity, Providence (Rhet. 2, 23). 2. It is
applied to any particular divinity; by Homer


DEMON.


to Venus (Iliad, iii.); and in It, xvii. 98, 99,
compared with 104, Saiuev and @eds are used
as interchangeable words; 3. to the inferior
divinities, as in the phrase @¢ol «al Salyoves ;
4 to w class of beings between gods and men:
minores dits et majores hominibus (Liv. viii. 205
Adam, dom. Antig. p. 287). Of these latter
some were Aadbitually benevolent, and others
malignant. The word demon, by itself, occurs
usually in a good sense in heathen writers; the
evil are distinguished as Sainoves xaxol or mo-
ypoi. To the former class belong the tutelary
genii of cities, and the guardian spirits of in-
dividuals, as the demon of Socrates. 5. By an
easy metonymy it is used to denote fortune,
chance, fate. In the Septuagint the word,
though comparatively of rare occurrence, is used
ina very diversified and indefinite manner : Deut.
xxxil. 17, TW, Sarudviov; Ps. xc. 6, BYP, Sarud-
moy, where it seems tu mean a pestilential blast
(comp. Isa. xxviii. 2, Heb.); Ps. xev. 5, DDN,
Bamdviov, which Symmachus renders dv’mapkrou,
and Aquila, éwimAagros; Isa. xiii, 21, WHY, Sac-
udnior, Aquila, rpixiavras; Isa. xxxiv. 14, DY,
Saudvioy; Isa. Ixv. 10, 33, Saiudvov, which seems
explained by r¥xq in the latter part of the verse;
Vulg. fortuna. In the book of Tobit (iii. 8), we
meet with wovnpdy Sadnov. Since vo distinct
ideas of the aucient Jewish doctrines concerning
demons can be obtained from the Septuagint, we
next have recourse to the heathens, and from their
writings, owing to the universal prevalence of
belief in demons, ample information may be ob-
tained. The following is oflered as a summary
of their opinions.

1. Demons, in the theology of the Gentiles, are
middle beings, between gods and mortals, This
is the judgment of Plato, which will be considered
decisive—way 7d Badvioy petatt dors @eod re
kal Omntod: § Every demon is a middle being Le-
tween God and mortal.’ He thus explains what
he means by a middle being—Oeds avOpdap ob

Biyvutat, GAA 31a Samovlay maca cory 7 Spirla
wil 4 Bidrextos Geois wpbs dvOpdmous: *God is
Not approached immediately Ly man, but all the
Commerce and intercourse between gods and men
are performed by the mediation of demons.” He
enters into further particulars—Tod daipdvidy dor
épunve vov nal Bian opOpetov Oeois Ta map’ avOpurwy,
kal GOpwmos Td nupa Oewy, Tov per Tas Seqoes
kA Ougias, réy BE tas emitd£ers oe Kal auorBas
Tey Boy: ‘Demons are reporters and carriers
from men to the gods, and again from the guds to
men, of the supplications and prayers of the one,
and of the injunctions and rewards of devotion
from the other’ (Plato, Sympos. pp. 202, 203,
tom. iti, ed. Serran.). And this,’ says the learned
Mede, ‘was the @cumenical philosophy of the
ine times, and of the tines long before
ri 2. Demons were of two kinds; the one were

#e souls of yood men, which upon their de-
rake penn the body were called herves, were
silk ards raised to the dignity of demons, and

sequently to that of gods (Plutarch, De Defect.
Sema’ Plato (Crarylus, p. 398, tom. i. edit.
aie rahe ‘the poets 5 jeak excellently who
miibae eadches ood men die they attain great
ars ignity, aud become demons.’ It is
mitted that Jambiichus, Hierocles, and


DEMON. 547


Simplicius use the words angels and demons ins
discriminately. Philo (De Gigantibus) says
that souls, demons, anid angels, are only different
names that imply one and the same substance;
and he affirms (De Somn.) that Moses calls those
angels whom the philosophers call demons. It
was also believed that the souls of bad men be-
came evil demons (Chalcid. t% Platon. Tim,
cap. 135, p. 330). Accordingly 8amudvios often
occurs in ancient authors as a term of reproach.
The other kind of demons were of more noble
origin than the human race, having never inha-
bited human bodies (Plato, Tim. pp. 41, 42, 69,
71, 75); Apuleius, De Deo Socratis, p. 690).

3. Those demons who had once been souls of
men were the objects of tmmediate torship
among the heathens (Deut. xxvi. 14; Ps. evi. 28;
Isa. vii. 19), and it is in contradistinction to
these that Jehovah is so frequently called ‘ the
living God’ (Deut. v. 6, &c. &c.; Farmer's Essay
on the Demoniacs, passim).

4. The heathens held that some demons were
malignant by nuture, aud-not merely so when
provoked and offended, Plutarch says, ‘it is a
very ancient opinion that there are certain ticked
and malignant demons, who envy goud men, and
endeavour to hinder them in the pursuit of virtue,


‘lest they should be partakers of greater happiness


than they enjoy * (Plut. Dion. p. 958, tom. i. edit.
Paris, 1624). On this passage Bishop Newton
remarks, ‘ This was the opinion of all the later
philosophers, and Plutarch undeniably affirms
it of the very ancient ones’ (Dissert. on the
Proph., Lond. 1626, p. 476). Pythagoras held
that certain demons sent diseases to men gud
cattle (Diog. Laert. Vit. Pythag. p. 514, ed.
Anstel.).  Zaleucus, in his preface to his Laws
(apud Stobeum, Serm, xlii.), supposes that an
evil demon might be present with a witness to
influence him to injustice.

In later times Josephus uses the word demon
always in a had sense, as do the writers of
the New Testament, when using it as from them-
selves, and in their own sense of it (De Bell.
Jud. vii. 6, $3). ‘Demons are uo other than
the spirits of the wicked, that enter into men
and kill them, unless they can obtain some help
against them.” For proof of the latter assertion
we must refer the reader to the contents of the
New Testament, and if necessary for a recon-
ciliation of the apparent exceptions, to Farmer's
Essay; and as the next stage of the inquiry will
usher us into the arena of controversy, ne oppor-
tunity is embraced of announcing that it is not
our intention to exhibit ourselves as partizans of
either side of any question which may be hereafter
introduced, but simply to present an impartial
view of the literature it may involve.

It is frequently supposed that the demons of
the New Testament are fallen angels: on the
contrary it is maintained by Farmer, that the
word is never applied to the Devil and his angels,
and that there is no sufficient reason for restricting
the term to spirits of a higher order than man-
kind. They who uphold the former opinion urge
that our Lord, when accused of casting out
demons by Beelzebub, the prince of demons, re-
plies, How can Satan cast out Satan (Mark iii.
23, &c.)? There is no doubt but that 6 Zaravas
and 6 8idBodos are the same, and hence Beelze-
bub and 6 8:dodos are evidently ne ane being.

nN


648 DEMONIACS.


Doddridge calls this a demonstration of the point,
and consequently maintains, that ‘Satan was con-
sidered as the prince of the demons who were cast
out by Christ, and who are elsewhere represented
as his angels (Family Expositor, i. 337, Lond.
1799). It is replied, that if this arguinent proves
anything, it proves that the word Satan is equi-
valent to 8aiméviovy, and that Satan is here only
introduced as an tl/ustration, as are the discords
of kingdoms and families (Campbell's Prelim.
Dissert. p. 190). It must be aiowel that so
important a conclusion should not be rested on a
deduction from precarious principles. It is further
urged, that it is but fair and natural to suppose
that the writers of the New Testament use the word
demons in the same sense in which it was under-
stood by their contemporaries, which, as it appears
from Josephus and other authorities, was, that of
the spirits of the wicked; and that if these
writers had meant anything else they would have
given notice of so wide a deviation from popular
usage. The writings of the Fathers show that
they sometimes understood the demons to be
fallen angels; at other times they use the word
in the same sense as the ancient philosophers.
Justin Martyr affirms (Apol. i, 2, p. 65) that
© those persons who are seized and thrown down
by the souls of the deceased are such as all men
agree in calling demoniacs, or mad,’—J. F. D.

DEMONIACS (Satpor(duevor), demonized
persons, in the New Testament, are those who were
supposed to have a demon or demons occupying
them, suspending the faculties of their minds, and
governing the members of their bodies, so that
what was said and done by the demoniacs was
ascribed to the in-dwelling demon. Plato (apud
Clem, Alex. Strom. i, 405, Oxon.) aftirms that
‘demoniaca do not use their own dialect or
tongue, but that of the demons who have entered
into them.’ Lucian says, ‘the patient is silent ;
the demon returns the answer to the question
asked.’ Apollonius thus addresses a youth sup-
a tobe possessed : ‘I am treated contumeliously
by the demon, and not by thee’ (comp. Matt.
viii, 28 and 31; Mark v. 2; ix. 12; Luke viii.
27, 32).

The correctness of the opinion respecting those
who are called Samor(duevor in the New Tes-
tament which prevailed among the Jews and
other uations in the time of our Lord and his
Apostles, has been called in question. On the
one hand it is urged that the details of the evan-
gelical history aflord decisive evidence of the truth
and reality of demoniacal possessions in the sense
already explained, at least during the commence-
ment of Christianity ; on the other hand it is con-
tended that the accounts in question may all be
understoud as the phenomena of certain diseases,
particularly hypochondria, insanity, and epilepsy ;
that the sacred writers used the popular language
in reference to the subject, but that they them-
selves understood no more than that the persons
were the subjects of ordinary diseases. Here
issue is joined—and it is to the evidence in this
cause that our attention will now be directed.

Those who contend that the demoniacs were
really possessed by an evil spirit, urge the fol-
lowing considerations :

1. The demoniacs express themselves in a way
unusual for hypochondriacal, insane, or epileptic


persons (Matt. viii. 29; Mark i. 24); they pos


DEMONIACS.


sessed supernatural strength (Mark v. 4); they
adjure Jesus not to torment them; they answet
the questions propused to them in a rational man-
ner; they are distinctly said to have ‘ come out of*
men and to have ‘entered into swine,’ and that
consequently the whole berd, amounting to about
two thousand, ran violently down a precipice
into the sea (Matt. viii. 32; Mark v. 13). The
supposition which has been maintained by Lard-
ner among others, that the swine were driren into
the sea by the demoniacs, is irreconcilable with
the language of the narrative, being also highly
imprvubable in itself: madmen do not act in con-
cert, and rarely pursue the eame train of maniacal
reasoning.

2. No mental diseases are predicated of the
dumb (Matt. ix. 32), or of the blind and dumb
(Matt. xii. 22), Do such diseases ever produce
blindness ?

3. It is admitted that the symptoms of the
youth described Matt. xvii. 15; Mark ix. 17;
Luke ix. 39, coincide precisely with those of epi-
lepsy, but they are attributed to the agency of the
demon in that very account.

4. The damsel at Philippi is said to have been
possessed with a spirit of divination, which was
the means of obtaining much gain to her masters,
and to have understood the divine commission
of Paul and his companions (Acts xvi. 17). Is
this to be ascribed merely to an aberration of
mind?

5. The demoniacs themselves confess that they
were possessed with demons (Mark v. 9): the
same is asserted of them by their relatives ( Matt.
xv. 22). The Apostles and Evangelists assert that
persons possessed with demons were brought unto
Jesus (Matt. iv. 24; Mark i. 32), or met him
(Luke viii. 27). Jesus commands them not to
make him known as the Messiah (Mark i. 34, mar-
gin); rebuked them (Matt. xvii, 18), The Evan-
gelists declare that the demons departed from
their victims at his command (Matt. xvii. 18;
Mark ix. 25, 26 ; Luke iv. 35; xi. 14); and Jesus
himself asserts it (Luke xiii. 32).

6. The writers of the New Testament make
distinctions between the diseased and the de-
moniacs (Mark i. 32; Luke vi. 17, 18); and
Jesus himself does so (Matt. x. 8, &c.).

7. The demoniacs knew Jesus tu be the Son of
God (Matt. viii, 29; Mark i. 24; v. 7), and the
Christ (Luke iv. 41).

8. Jesus addresses the demons (Matt. viii. 32;
Mark v. 18; ix. 25; Luke iv. 35): 20 does *
Paul (Acts xvi. 18). Jesus bids them be silent
(Mark i. 25); to depart, aud enter no more into
the person (Mark ix. 25).

9. In Luke x. the seventy are related to
have returned to Jesus, saying, ‘Lord, even the
demons are subject to us through thy name; and
Jesus replies, ver. 18, ‘I beheld Satans as light
ning, fall from heaven.’

10. When Jesus was accused by the Pharisees
of casting out demons by Beelzebub, € he prince
of the demons, he argued that there cou Id be no
discord among demuniacal beings (Befatt. xii
25, &c.).

11, Jesus makes certain gratuitous obsservations
respecting demons (see Matt. xii, 43, 4); which
seem like facts in their natural historw. In re
gard to the demon cast out of the youth, which the
disciples could not cast out, he says, ‘this dind


‘DEMONIACS,


(¢.¢. of demons) goeth not out but by prayer and
fasting.’ Can these words be understood other-
wise than as revealing a real and particular fact
respecting the nature of demons (Matt. xvii. 21)?

12. The woman which had a spirit of infir-
mity, and was bowed together (Luke xiii. 11), is,
by our Lord himself, said to have been bound by
Satan (v. 16). In the same way St. Peter speaks
of all the persons who were healed by Jesus, as
being ‘ oppressed of the devil ‘ (Acts x. 38).

13. It is further pleaded, that it sinks the
importance and dignity of our Saviour's miracles,
to suppose that when he is said to have cast out
devils, all that is meant is, that he healed dis-
eases, :

To these arguments the opponents of the theory
of real demoniacal possessions reply, generally,
that there can be no doubt that it was the
general belief of the Jewish nation, with the
exception of the Sadducees, and of most other
nations, that the spirits of dead men, especially of
those who had lived evil lives, and died by vio-
lent deaths, were permitted to enter the bodies of
men, and to produce the effects ascribed to them
in the popular creed ; but the fact and real state
of the case was, that those who were considered
to he possessed were afflicted with some peculiar
diseases of mind or body, which, their true
causes not being generally understood, were, as is
usual in such cases, ascribed to supernatural
powers; and that Jesus and his apostles, wishing
of course to be understood hy their contempora-
ries, and owing to other reasons which can be
pointed out, were under the necessity of express-
Ing themselves in popular language, and of seem-
ing to admit, or at least of not denying, its
correctness. They further plead that the fact,
admitted on all hands, that the demon so actu-
ated the possessed, as that whatever they did, was
Not to be distingnished from Ats agency, reduces
the question, so far as phenomena are concemed,
to one simple inquiry, namely, whether these
Phenomena ure such as can he accounted for with-
out resorting to supernatural agency. They assert
that the symptoms predicated of demoniacs cor
Tespond with the ordinary symptoms of disease,
and especially of hypochondria, insanity, and
epilepsy ; that the sacred writers themselves give
Jntimations, as plain as could be expected under
their circumstances, that they employed popular
anguage; that consequently they are not to
considered as teaching doctrines or asserting
ts when they use such language; and that the
octrine of the agency of departed spirits on the

Nes of men is inconsistent with certain pe-
culiar and express doctrines of Christ and lis
apostles,

With regard to the symptoms related of the
emoniacs, it is urged that such persons as were
called demoniacs in other countries, and who
seem to have laboured under precisely the same
*ymptoms, are recorded to have been cured by the
ne of medicines. Helleboro quoque purgatur
CpuPhaticus error (Seren. Sammon. ¢. 27. v. 507),
Ate delusion is remedied by hellebore.’ Jose-
Va the Jewish physicians speak of medi-
meal een of stones, roots, and herbs, being
a cise to demoniacs (Gittei, f. 67). The cure
is it see, by such methods is intelligible; but
me wmal to believe that the spirits of dead

were dislodged frum human bodies by medi-


fac


d


DEMONIACS, 549


cal prescriptions? Maimonides (in Sabet. ii. 5)
says, ‘all kinds of diseases which are called me-
lancholy, they call an evil spirit’ (comp. Matt.
xi. 18; John vii. 20; x. 20).

1, With regard to the two demoniacs at Gagara
(or one, according to Mark and Luke), it is con-
cluded that they were madmen, who fancied that
there were within them innumerable spirits of deasl
men, Accordingly they dwelt among the tombs,
about which the souls of the dead were believed
to hover, went naked, were ungovernable, cried
aloud, attacked passengers, beat themselves, and
had in their pbrensy broken every chain by which
they had been bound, Strength almost super-
human is a common attendant on insanity. The
subject is illustrated hy Wetstein, in extracts
from Greek medical writers. P. Aigineta, Ac-
tuarius, Cxlius Aurelianus, also tell that such
persons fancied themselves to be goda, demons,
wolves, dogs, &c.; hence the disorder was some-
times called AvxavOpwrla, or kuvavOpwria. ‘Their
question, ‘ Art thou come to torment us?’ refere
to the cruel treatment of the insane in those
times, and which they had no doubt. shared,
in the endeavours of men to ‘tame’ them,
Both Mark and Luke the physician describe
the demoniac as cwppovoiyta, in ‘his right
mind,’ when healed, which implies previous in-
sanity (see also Matt, xii, 22; xv. 28; xvii. 185
Luke vii. 21; viii. 2; ix. 42). It is tme that
these demoniacs address Jesus as the Son of God,
but they might have heard in their lucid intervals
that Jesus, whose fame was already diffused
throughout Syria, was regarded by the people as
the Messiah. They show their insanity, ‘ their
shaping fancies,’ by imagining they were demons
without number, and by requesting permission to
enter the swine. Would actual demons choose
such an habitation? They speak and answer,
indeed, in a rational manner, but agreeably to
Locke's definition of madmen, ¢ they reason right
on false principles, and, taking their fancies
for realities, make right deductions from them.
Thus you shall tind a distracted man faneying
himself a king, and with a right inference require
suitable attendance. Others, who have thought
themselves glass, take the needful care to preserve
such brittle bodies’ (Essay on Human Under-
standing, vol. i, ch. 11, §12). It is true that
Jesus commands the unclean spirit (so called
because believed to be the spirit of a dead man),
but he does this merely to excite the attention of
the people, and to give them full opportunity to
observe the miracle. It is not necessary to cH
pose that the madmen drove the swine, but merely
that, in keeping with all the circumstances, the
insanity of the demoniacs was transferred to
them, as the leprosy of Naaman was transferred
to Gehazi, for the purpose of illustrating the
miraculous power of Christ; and though this was
a punitive miracle, it might serve the good pur-
pose of discouraging the expectation of temporal
benefits from him. If the demoniac is repre-
sented as worshipping Jesus, it shonld be remem-
bered that the insane often show great respect te
particular persons.

2. The men who were dumb, and both blind and
dumb, are not said to have been disordered in their
intellects, any more than the blind man in John v.
The disease in their organs was popularly ascribed
to the influence of demons. It is observable that


550 DEMONIACS.


in the parallel passage (Matt. ix. 32), the evan-
gelist says the man was dumb.

3. The symptoms of epilepsy in the youth
described Matt. xvii. 15, are tov evident not to
be acknowledged. , If the opinion of relatives is
to be pressed, it should be noticed that in this
ease the father says his ‘son is lunatic.’ It was
most probably a case, of combined epilepsy and
lunacy, which has been common iu all ages.
Epilepsy was ascribed to the influence of the
moun in those times. The literal interpretation
of popular languaze would theiefore require us
to believe that he was ‘ moonstruck,’ as well as a
demoniac. A curigus instance of the influeuce of
popular modes of’ speech, even-on those who are
conscious of its incorrectuess, is offered in the
case of Hippocrates, who, though he wrote a book
to prove that epilepsy is not a sacred malady,
fe. influenced by some divinity, is nevertheless
in the habit of applying to it that very appel-
lation. In the same way a learned physician
still speaks of lunacy, St. Anthony's fire; and
persons of education speak of the rising and
setting of the sun, falling stars, as we all use

hrases derived trom the rites and religion of the
entiles.

4. The damsel at Philippi is said hy Luke to
nave been possessed with a mveiua Mv@wvos, a
spirit of Apollo. It was her fixed idea. The
gift of divination is said by Cicero to have
been ascribed to Apollo (De Divinat. i. 5).
Insane persons, pretending to prophesy under
the influence of Apollo, would be likely to gain
money from the credulous. A belief among
the common people that the ravings of insanity
were sacred, was not confined to Egypt. The
Jarvati, the lymphatici, the cerriti of the Romans
signify possessed persons. The apostle, who taught
that an + idol is nothing in the world,’ did not
believe in the reality of her soothsayins. Many
demoniacs are mentioned, the ecu: ay syu.ploms
of whose diseases are not stated, ax M.aiy Masda-
Jene (Mark xvi. 9), out of whom Jesus cast seven
demons, #, e. restored from an inveterate insanity
(seven being the Jewish number of perfection),
supposed to be caused by the united agency of
seven spirits of the dead. Yet she is said to have
been Acaled (Luke viii. 2).

5. If Jesus forbade the demoniacs to say he
was the Clnist, it was because the declaration of
such persons on the subject would do more harm
than good. If he rebuked them he also rebuked
the wind (Matt. viii. 26), and the fever (Luke iv.
39). If it be said of them, they departed, so it is
also said of the Jeprosy (Mark i. 42).

6. It may be questioned whether the writers of
the New Testament make a distinction between
the diseased and those possessed of demons, or
whether they specify the demoniacs by themselves,
as they specify the lunatics (Matt. iy. 24), merely
asa distinct and peculiar class of the sick. It
is, however, most important to observe that St.
Peter includes ‘all’ who were healed by Jesus,
under the phrase xataduvacrevouevous ixd tod
3caBdaou, many of whom were not described by the
Evangelists as subjects of demuniacal possession,
which is urged as a striking instance of the usus
foquendi. Sometimes the specification of the de-
moniacs is omitted in the general recitals of mira-
culous cures (Matt. xi. 5), and this, too, on the
important occasion of our Lord sending to John


DEMONIACS.


the Baptist an account of the miraculous evidence
attending his preaching (Matt. xi. 5). Does not
this look as if they were considered as included
under the sick ?

7. It cannot be proved that a/é the demoniacs
knew Jesus to be the Messiah.

8. It is admitted that Jesus addresses the de
mons, but then it may be said that his doing so
has reference partly tu the persons themselves in
whom demons were supposed to be, and paitly to
the bystanders; for the same reason that he re-
buked the winds in an audible voice, as also the
fever. It is also remarkable that in the case of the
demuniac (Mark v. 8), it is said—xal éwnpére
avrdév, the man, zl ops Gvoua, not abrd, the
Saiuovioy. The same words occur in Luke
viii. 30.

9. With regard to our Lord's reply to the seventy,
it will not Le urged that it was intended of a local
fall of Satan from heaven, unless it may be
supposed to allude to his primeval expulsion ; but
this sense is scarcely relevant tothe occasion. If,
then, the literal sense be necessarily departed
from, a choice must be made out of the various
figurative interpretations of which the words
admit; and taking the word Satan here in its
generic sense, of whatever is inimical or opposed
to the Guspel, Jesus may be understood. to say, I
foresaw the glorious results of your mission in the
triumphs which would attend it over the most
formidable obstacles. Heaven is often used in
the sense of political horizon (Isa. xiv. 12, 13;
Matt. xxiv. 29). To be cast from heaven to
hell is a phrase for total downfall (Luke x. 15;
Rev. xii. 7-9). Cicero says to Mark Antony, You
have hurled your colleagues down from heaven.
Satan is here used tropically. Our Lord does
not, therefore, assert the real operation of demons.

1U. In the refutation of the charge that he cast
out demons by Beelzebub, the prince of the
demons, he simply argues with the Pharisees
upon their oten principles, and ‘judges them out
of their own mouth,’ without assumiug the ruth
of those principles.

11. The facts he seems to assert respecting the
wandering of demons through dry places (Matt.
xii. 45). were already admitted in’ the popular
creed of the Jews. They believed that demons
wandered in desolate places (Baruch iv. 35).
Upon these ideas he founds a parable or simili«
tude, ‘without involving an opinion of their accu-
racy, to describe ‘the end of this generation.
The observations respecting prayer and fasting
seem to have relation to that faith in God which
he exhorts his apostles to obtain, Prayer aud
fasting would serve to enable them to yerceive
the divine suggestion which accompanied every
miracle, and which the apostles bad not perceived
upon this occasion, though given them, because
their animal natuge had not been sutticiently sub-
dued,

12. The application of the term Satan to the
case of the woman who had a spirit of infirmity,
is plainly an argumentum ad hominem. 1tis
intended. to heigiiten the antithesis between the
lovsing of an ox from his stall, and Zvosig the
daugliter of Abraham whom Satan, as they ber
lieved, had bound eighteen years. :

13. The objection taken from the supposed
consequence of explaining the castang out at
demons to signify no more than the cure of


DENARIUS.


eases, that it tends to lower the dignity of the
Saviour’s miracles, depends upon the reader’s com-
plexion of mind, our prior knowledge of the rela-
tive dignity of miele and some other things,
of which we are nut competent judges.

bag gaint to be observed, ray the ities? of
demoniacal ions is o to the known
and express doctrines of Christ and his Apostles.
They teach us that the spirits of the dead enter a
state ding to their character, no more to
return to this world (ale xvi. 22, &c.; xxiii.
43; 2 Cor. v. 1; Phil. i. 21). With regard to
the fallen angels, the representations of their
confinement are totally opposed to the notion of
their wandering abvut the world and tormenting
its inhabitants (2 Pet. ii. 4; Jude, ver. 6). If it
be said that Jesus did not correct the popular
opinion, still he nowhere denies that the pheno-
mena in question arose from diseases only. He
took no side; it was not his province. It was not
to attack the misconception in a formal

manner; it would be supplanted whenever his
doctrine respecting the state of the dead was em-
braced. To have done so would have engaged
our Lord in prolix arguments with a peuple in
whom the notiun was so deeply rooted, and have


led him away too much from the purposes of his:


ministry. ‘It was one of the many things he had
to say, but they could not then bear them.’ It is
finally urged that the antidemoniacal theory does
uot detract from the divine authority of the
Saviour, the reality of his miracles, or the inte-
grity of the historians. Sub judice lis est. (Sahn's
Biblisches Archaologie; Winer's Biblischcs Real-
worterbuch art. ‘Besessene ;’ Moses Stuart'sSketches
of Angelology in Bibliotheca Sacra, London and
ew York, 1813).—J. F. D.
_DENARIUS (8nvdpiov), the principal silver
coin of the Romans, which took its name from
having been originagy equal to ten ases. It was
in later times (after B.c. 217) current also among
Jews, and is the cuin which is called ‘a
peony’ in the Auth. Vers. The denarii were
first coined in w.c. 269, or four years after the
first Punic. war, and the more ancient speci-
mens are much heavier than those of later date.
coined in the early period of the common-
wealth have the average weight of 60 grains, and
those cvined under the cmpire of 52:5 grains.
With some allowance for alluy, the former would
be worth 8-6245 nce, or 84d., and the latter,
75 pence, or 74¢. It has been supposed, how-


«
a that the reduction of weight did not take
Place till the time of Nero; and in that case
denarii mentioned in the Gospels must have
of the former weight and value, although
i oe the usual computation, A denarius was
= SHES of a labourer in Palestine (Matt.
sane’ , 13); and the daily pay of a Roman
of er was less (Tacit. Ann. i. 17). In the time
the denurius bore the image of the em-


DEUTERO-CANONICAL. 551
peror (Matt. xxii. 19; Mark xii. 16), but for


oe was impressed with the symbols of the
ic.

ERBE (A¢p6n), a small town of Lycaonia,
in Asia Minor, at the foot of the Taurian moun-
tains, 60 miles south by east from Iconium, and
18 miles east of Lystra. It was the birth-place of
Gaius, the friend and fellow-traveller of Paul
(Acts xx. 4); and it was to this place that Paul
and Barnabas fled when expelled from Icunium,
av. 41 (Acts xiv. 6).

DESERTS. In the East, wide, extended
plains are usually liable to drought, and conse-
quently to barrenness. Hence the Hebrew lan-
guage describes a plain, a desert, and an unfruit-
Sul waste, by the same word, MANY arabah. The
term which is in general rendered ‘ wilderness,’
35 midbar, means, properly, a grazing tract,
uncultivated and destitute of wood, but fit for
pasture—a heath or steppe. The pastures of the
wilderness are mentioned in Ps. lxv. 13; Jvel i.
19; Luke xv. 4; and may be very well explained
by reference to the fact, that even the Desert of
Arabia, which is utterly burnt up with excessive
drought in summer, is in winter and spring co-
vered with rich and tender herbage. Whence it is
that the Arabian tribes retreat into their deserts on
the approach of the autumnal rains, and when
spring has ended and the droughts commence,
return to the lands of rivers and mountains, in
search of the pastures which the deserts no longer
afford. The same word may therefore denote a
region which is desert, and also one which, at
stated seasons, contains rich and abundant pas-
tures, But in fact the word translated in our
Bibles by ‘desert’ or ‘ wilderness’ often means no
more than the common, uncultivated grounds in
the neighbourhood of towns on which the inhabit-
ants grazed their domestic cattle. :

A great desert or wilderness is generally ex-
pressed by the wonl [3% yeshimon, from nw
yasham, ‘to be waste’ or ‘desolate’ (1 Sam. xxiii.
19, 24; Isa. xliii. 19, 20). This word is especially
applied to that desert of Stony Arabia in which the
Israelites sojourned under Moses (Num. xxi. 20;
xxiii. 28; Ps. Ixviii. 7, Ixxviii. 40, &c.). This was
the most terrible of the deserts with which the Israel-
ites were acquainted, and the only real desert in
their immediate neighbourhood. It is described
under Anasra; as is also that Eastern desert
extending from the eastern border of the country
beyond Juda to the Euphrates. It is empha-
tically called ‘the Desert,’ without any proper
name, in Exod, xxiii. 31; Deut. xi. 24.

The several deserts or wildernesses mentioned
in Scripture are the following, which will be
found under their respective names: the deserts
of Edom, Etham, Judah, Kadesh, Maon, Parao,
Shur, Sin, Sinai.

DEVIL. [Demon; Satan.]

DEUTERO-CANONICAL BOOKS, a term
applied in modern times to denote those sacred
books which, originally denominated ecclesiastical
and apocryphal, were not in the Jewish or Ilebrew
Canon, but, as being contained in the old Greek
versions, were publicly read in the early Christian
Church [Canon, ApocryPHa].

It is acknowledge: by all that these books never
had a place in the Jewish Canon. The Roman
Catholic Professor Alber, of Pesth (who considers
them as of equal authority with the received


552 DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


books of the Hebrew Canon), observes :—‘ The
Deutero-canonical books are those which the Jews
had not in their Canon, but are notwithstanding re-
ceived by the Christian Church, concerning which,
on this very account of their not having been in
the Jewish Canon, there has existed some doubt
even in the Church’ (Institut. Hermeneut. vol. i.
ch. viii. ix.). Josephus, a contemporary of the
apostles, after describing the Jewish Canon (Contr.
Ap. i. 8), which he says consists of 22 books,
remarks: © but from the reign of Artaxerxes to
within our memory there have been several things
committed to writing, which, however, have not
acquired the same degree of credit and au-
thority as the former books, inasmuch as the
tradition and succession of the prophets were
less certain.’ It has been shown by Hornemann
(Observat. ad illust. doctr. de Canon. V. T. ex
Philone) that, although Philo was acquainted
with the books in question, he has not cited any
one of them, at least with the view of establishing
any proposition.

Among the early Christian writers, Jerome,
in his Prefaces, gives us the most complete
information that we possess regarding the au-
thority of these books in his time. After enu-
merating the 22 books of the Hebrew Canon,
consisting of the Law, the Prophets, and the
Hagiographa, he adds: ‘ This prologue I write
as a preface to the bouks to be translated by us
from the Hebrew into Latin, that we may know
that all the books which are not of this number
are apocryphal ; therefore Wisdom, which is com-
monly ascribed to Solomon as its author, and
the book of Jesus the sun of Sirach, Judith, Tobit,
and the Shepherd, are not in the Canon.’ Again,
in the preface to his translation of the books
of Svlomon from the Hebrew, he observes :—
‘These three books (Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and
Cantigles) only are Sulumon’s. There is also the
Book of Jesus the son of Sirach, and another
pseud-epigraphal book, called the Wisdom of
Solomon ; the former of which I have seen in
Hebrew, called not Ecclesiasticus, as among the
Latins, but the Parables; with which likewise
have heen joined Ecclesiastes and the Sung of
Songs, that the collection might the better re-
semble the Looks of Solomon buth in matter and
design. The second is not to be found at all among
the Hebrews, and the style plainly evinces its
Greek original : some ancient writers say it is a
work of Philo the Jew. As, therefore, the Church
reads Judith and Tobit, and the books of Mac-
cabers, but docs nut receive them among the Ca-
nonical Scriptures; so likewise it may read these
two books for the edification of the people, but
not as of authority for proving any divine of
religion (ad @dificationem plebis, non ad autho-
ritatem ecclesiasticorum dogmatum confirman-
dam). Of Baruch he says, that he does ‘ not
translate it, because it was not in Hebrew, nor
received by the Jews.” He never translated Wia-
dom, Ecclesiasticus, or either of the books of
Maccabees, and observes, that ‘ such books as are
not of the twenty-four * letters are to be utterly
rejected’ (Pref. to Ezra). In his Preface to


* The variations in the numerical divisions of
these books, many of which are extremely fan-
ciful, do not affect the identity of the canon
iteelf.


DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


Judith he says, in like manner, ‘Among the He-
brews this book is read among the hagiographa
(or, according to some manuscripts, apocrypha),
whose authority is not judged sufficient to support
disputed matters.’ He adds, at the same time,
that ‘the Council of Nice is said to nave included
it in the catalogue of the holy Scriptures.’ We
have, however, no authority for supposing that
the Council of Nice ever formed such a catalogue.
There is no account of the matter in any of its
acts which have reached us. There is, indeed,
a catalogue, as is observed by Mr. Jones, at-
tributed by Pappus, in his Synodicon, to this
Council, with this relation—‘ That the bishops
there assembled were, by a very extraordinary
miracle, convinced which were inspired and
which were apocryphal books, after this manner —
Having put all the books that laid claim to inspi-
ration under the communion-table (77 6eig tpa
xé(n) in a church, they prayed to God that those
which were of divine imspiration might be found
above, or upon, the table, and those which were
apocryphal might be found under; and accord-
ingly, as they prayed, it came to This is
universally acknowledged to be a fable, and Care
dinal Bellarmine (De Verbo Dei) admits that
there could have been no canon determined on by
the Nicene Council, as in that case none would
have ventured to have rejected it; but he sup
poses that Jerome may have found in some of its
acts, now lost, some citation from the book of Ju-
dith. Bellarmine further admits that in Jerome’s
time the ecclesiastical books, although read in the
churches, were neither in the Jewish nor Christian
Canons, inasmuch as no General Council had
yet determmmed anything concerning them.

We have already noticed Jerome's remarks
respecting the additions to the book of Daniel
(DanieL, Apocryphal Additions to}. In re
ference to these it was that Jerome's coutem-
porary Rutinus, once his fitmiliar friend, but
now his bitter enemy, remarked in bis secund
invective against him—‘ Who, in that host of
leamed men, presumed to compile the divine
instrument which the Apostles delivered to the
churches, and the deposit of the Holy Spirit? Is
it not a compilation, when certain parts are al-
tered, and an error said to be corrected? for the
whole history of Susanna, which afforded such ap
example of chastity to the Church of God, bas
been cut off. Is the authority of one man now
to supersede the whole of the Seventy translators,
who, shut up in separate cells, translated the
whole Bible without differing in a single word?
es to a fable now long exploded}.

eter governed the Roman Church for twenty-
four years. It is not to be doubted that be
gave the Church the Scriptures, which were
recited while he sat and taught. What! did
Peter deceive the Church, and give false books,
. ... . knowing that the true ones were acknow-
ledged by the Jews? But he will perhaps =H
Peter was an urflettered man. What, then, will
he say of Paul? . . . . . I will receive no truth
which Peter and Paul did not teach. The fol-
lowing are your own words :— After four bun-
dred years the simple ears of the Latins are not
to be offended with new doctrine ;” but now you
say—* Every one who believes that Susanna,
miurtied or unmarried, afforded no example of
chastity, has erred,” It is not true. Andes


DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


“Every one who thought that the boy Daniel was
filled with the Holy Spirit, and convicted the
elders, has erred.” It is not true. “The Church
Universal throughout the world, consisting either
of those who are in the body or those who are in
the Lord, whether holy confessors or holy mar-
tyr, who have sung the Hymn of the Children,
have all erred, and sung falsely !” Therefore, after
four hundred years, the truth of the law, bought
at a price, proceeds from the Synagogue.”

To this angry invective Jerome replied— I
only state what the Hebrews are accustomed to
say against the history of Susanna, and the Song
of the Children, and the fable of Bel and the

which are not found in the Hebrew
Yolume. My accuser shows himself to be a silly
sycophant. I did not give my own opinion, but
what they are accustomed to say against us.’
For his own views on this subject, none of which
he retracts, he refers Rufinus to his Preface.

It will be observed that these invectives of
Rafinus have no reference to any other writings
than the history of Susanna and the Song of the
Three Children. In fact, Rufinus himself made the
same distinction in regard to the books of Scrip-
ture that Jerome did. After enumerating the
books of the Old and New Testament exactly
according to the Jewish canon, saying, ‘ These
are the volumes which the Fathers have included
in the canon, and out of which they would have
us prove the doctrines of our faith ;’ he adds —
‘bowerer, it ought to be observed, that there are
also other books which are not canonical, but have
been called by our forefathers ecclesiastical ; as
the Wisdom of Solomon, and another called the
Wisdom of the Son of Sirach, which among the
Latins is called by the general name of Eccle-
siasticus, by which title is denoted not the author
of the book, but the quality of the writing. Of
the same order is the book of Tobit, Judith, and
the books of the Maccabees. In the New Testa-
ment is the book of the Shepherd of Hermas,
which is called the ‘Two Ways, or the Judgment
of Peter;’ all which they would have to be read
im the churches, but not alleged by way of au-
thority for proving articles of faith. “Other Scri
tures they ‘call apocryphal, which they would
not have to be read in churches’ (in Symb.


There have thus been three divisions made by
the ancients, viz. the Canonical Scriptures, the
Ecclesiastical, and the Apocryphal, or otherwise,
the Canonical and the Apocryphal, of which latter

2 are two kinds, viz. those which, having
nothing contrary to the faith, may be profitably
tead, although not authentic, and those which are
injurious and contrary to the faith. It is, how-
tver, maintained by Professor Alber that, when
Jerome and Rufinus said the Ecclesiastical books
Were read for edification, but not for confirming
articles of faith, they only meant that they were
Not to be employed in controversies with the Jews,
who did not acknowledge their authority. These

Ts, however, certainly put them into the
same rank with the Shepherd of Hermas.

he earliest catalogue which we possess of the

+ of Scripture is that of Melito, Bishop of

M4, preserved by Eusebius. From his state-
ment, written in the year 170, it seems evident

there had been then no catalogue authorized
by the Church or any public body. He enume-


DEUTERO-CANONICAL, $53


mates the books of the Jewish Canon ‘only, from
which, however, he omits the book of Esther

The first catalogue of the Holy Scriptures,
drawn up by any public body in the Christian
church, which has come down to us, is that of
the Countil of Laodicea, in Phrygia, supposed to
be held about the year 365. In the two last
canons of this Council, as we now haye them, there
is an enumeration of the books of Scripture
nearly conformable, m the Old Testament, to the
Jewish canon. The canons are in these words,—

‘ That private Psalms ought not to be said in
the church, nor any books not eanonicai, but only
the canonical books of the Old and New Testa-
ment. The books of the Old Testament, which
ought to be read, are these—1. Genesis ; 2. Exodus;
3. Leviticus; 4. Numbers: 5. Deuteronomy ;
6. Joshua, son of Nun; 7. Judges, with Ruth;
8. Esther; 9. 1 and 2 Kingdoms; 10. 3 and 4
Kingdoms; 11. 1 and 2 Remains; 12. 1 and
2 Esdras; 13. the book of 150 Psalms; 14.
Proverbs; 15. Ecclesiastes; 16. Canticles; 17.
Job; 18. the Twelve Prophets; 19. Isaiah; 20.
Jeremiah and Baruch, the Lamentations and
the Epistles; 21. Ezekiel; 22. Daniel.’ We
have already given the books of the New Testa-
ment as enumerated by this Council (see ANTILE-
GOMENA).

This catalogue is not, however, universally ac-
knowledged to be genuine. ‘ Possibly leamed
men,’ says Lardner, ‘according to the different
notions of the party they have been engaged in,
have been led to disregard the last canon; some
because of its omitting the Apocryphal books of
the Old Testament, and others because it has not
the book of Revelation.’ Basnage, in his History
of the Church, observes that ‘ Protestants and
Catholics have equally disparaged this synod.’
‘It is said,’ remarks Lardner, ‘ that the canon’ of
this Council were received and adopted by some
General Cuuncils in after times; nevertheless per-
haps it would be difficult to show that those
General Councils received the last canon, and
exactly approved the catalogue of said books
therein contained, without any addition or dimi-
nution, as we now have it’ (see Mansi’s Concilia,
ii, 574),

But, besides the Hebrew canon, the reader will
have observed that there were certain other books ~
publicly read in the primitive church, and treated
with a high degree of respect, although not con-
sidered by the Hebrews, from whom they were
derived (see the passage above cited from Jose-
phus) as of equal authority with the former.
These books seem to have been included in the
copies of the Septuagint, which was generally
made use of by the sacred writers of the New
Testament. It does not appear whether the Apos-
tles gave any cautions against the reading of
these hooks; and it has been even supposed that
they have referred to them. Others, however, have
maintained that the principal passages to which
they have referred (for it is not pretended that
they have cited them) are from the canonical
books. The following are the passages here al-
luded ta:— (See nezt page.)

Some of the uncanonical books, however, had
not been extant more than a hundred and thirty
years at most at the Christian era, and could
only have obtained a place in the Greek Scrip-


554 DEUTERO-CANONICAL. DEUTERO-CAN ONICAL.
Rom. xi. 24 . . compared with Wisdomix.13  . . see Isaiah xl. 13
Heb. i. 13 °° - » vii, 26 6 6

» xi 5 ee ” » i.elO . . see Gen. v. 4
Rom. xiii] . . * » vid e « see Prov. viii. 15, 16
Se ik
Ea a . » n vWi7 e . see Deut. x. 17
Coloss. iii. 23 .
Vbcra rae med »  Keclus. xiv.17 «see Isaiah xl. 6
1Cor.x.10 . . » Judith viii. 25 =. « (Lat.) Num. xiv. 15
James ii. 230. ” » v.22 ee
Luke x. 41. ” Tobit iv. 7 oe
1 Thess. iv.3 2 ” » iv. 17 eo .
Matt. vii. 12 . . ‘3 » ive ld ee
1Cor.x.20 . . ” Baruch iv, 7 oe
Jobn x. 22 oe ” 1 Mace. iv.59 2
Heb. xi.385 «ef o 2 Mace. vi. 7 « + Ecclus. xiv. 15
Matt. ix.13 . 9 Prayer of Manasses.  .
2 Cor. xiii,6 2 9 3 Esdras iii, 12.


tures a short time before this period ; but the
enly copies of the Scriptures in existence for
the first three hundred years after Christ, either
among the Jews or Christians of Greece, Italy,
or Africa, contained these books without any
mark of distinction that we know of. ‘The He-
brew Bible and language were quite unknown
to them during this period, and the most learned
were, probably, but ill-informed on the subject,
at least befure Jerome's translation of the Scrip
tures from the original Hebrew. The Latin
versions before his time were all made from the
Septuagint. We do not, indeed, tind any cata-
logue of these writings before the Council of
Hippo, but only individual notices of separate
bouks. Thus Clement of Alexandria (Stromata,
a.p. 211), cites the Wisdom of Solomon and
Ecclesiasticus, and Origen refers to several of
these books, treating them with a nigh degree of
veneration. ‘There is,’ says Eusebius, ‘an epistle
of Alricanus, addressed to Origen, in which he
intimates his doubt on the history of Susannah in
Daniel, as if it were a spurious and fictitious
compusition; to which Origen wrote a very full
answer.’ These epistles are both extant. Origen,
at great length, vindicates these parts of the Greek
version—for he acknowledges that they were not
in the Hebrew—from the objections of Africanus,
asserting that they were true and genuine, and
maade use of in Greek amony all the churches of
the Gentiles, and that we should not attend to
the fraudulent comments of the Jews, but take
that only for true in the holy Scriptures which the
Seveuty had translated, for that this only was con-
firmed by Apostulic authority. In the same letter
he cites the book of Tobit, and in his second book
De Pricipiis, he even speaks of the Shepherd of
Hermas as divinely inspired. Origen, lowers:
uses very different language in regard to the
book of Enoch, the Testament of the Twelve
Patriarchs, and the Assumption of Moses.

The local Council of Hippo, held in the year
of Christ 393, at which the celebrated Augustine,
afterwards Bishop of Hippo, was present, formed
a catalogue of the sacred books of the Old and
New Testament, in which the ecclesiastical books
were all included. They are inserted in the fol-
lowing order in its 36th canon, viz. :—

©That nothing be read in the church besides
the Canonical Scriptures. Under the name


of Canonical Scriptures are reckoned Genesis,
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbera, Deuteronomy,
Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 4 books of Kinga, Re
mains, Job, Psalms of David, 5 books of Solumon,
12 books of the Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Daniel, Ezekiel, Tobit, vadith, Hesther, Esdras,
2 books, Maccabees, 2 bovks.’ [For the books of
the New Testament see supra, ANTILEGOMBNA.]
* But for the confirmation of this canon the
churches beyond the seas are to be consulted.’
The passions of the martyrs were also permitted
to be read on their anniversaries,

The third Council of Carthage, generally be
lieved to have been held in 397, at which Aurelius,
bishop of Carthage, presided, and at which Au
gustine was present, consisting in all of forty-four
bishops, adopted the same catalogue, which was
confirmed at the fourtt Council of Carthage, held
in the year 419. The reference said to have
been made from the third Council of Carthage,
held in 397, to Pope Boniface (Anrinecomenal],
is a manifest anachronism in the copies of the
acts of this council (see L'Abbe's Concilia), as
the pontiticate of Boniface did not commence
before 417. It has been, therefore, conjectured
that this reference belungs to the fourth council.

As St. Augustine had great influence at these
Councils, it must be of importance to ascer
tain his private sentiments on this sutject. This
eminent man, who was born in 3d, cunse-
crated bishop of Hippo (the present Bona) in
345, and died in 430, in the seventy-sixth year
of his age, writes as follows in the year 397:—
‘ The entire Canon of Scripture is comprised io
these books. There are 5 of Moses, viz. Genesis,
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Denteronomy: 1
Joshua, 1 of Judges, 1 small book called Ruth,
which seems rather to belong to the beginving of
the Kingdoms, the 4 books of the Kingdoms, and
2 of the Remains, not following one another, but
parallel to each other, ‘These are historical bovks
which contain a succession of times in the order
of events. There are others which do not observe
the order of time, and are unconnected together
as Job, Tobit, Esther, and Judith, the 2 books of
Maccabees, and the 2 books of Eaa, which last
do more observe the order of a regular succession
of events, after that contained in the Kingdoms
and Remains. Next are the Prophets, among
which is 1 book of the Psalms of David, and 8


DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


of Solomon, viz. Proverbs, Canticles, and Eccle-
siastes; for these 2 books, Wisdom and Eccle-
siasticus, are called Solomon's for no other reason
than because they have a resemblance to his
writings : for it is a very general opinion that they
were written by Jesus the son of Sirach, which
books, however, since they are admitted into
authority, are to be reckoned among prophetical
books. The rest are the books of those who are
properly called prophets, as the several books of
the 12 Prophets, which being found together, and
never separated, are reckoned 1 book. The
names of which prophets are these : Hosea, Joel,
Amos, Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Hahak-
kuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Zechariah, Malachi.
After these the four Prophets of large volumes,
Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel, Ezekiel. In these 44
books is comprised all the authority of the Old
Testament’ (De Doctr. Christ.). [For the New,
see ANTILEGOMENA : they are the same with those
now received. }

It has been, indeed, maintained that Augustine
altered his opinion on the subject of the deutero-
canonical bouks in his Retractations (see Hender-
son On Inspiration, p. 495) ; but the only passage
in this work bearing on the subject, which we can
discover, is that wherein he confesses his mistake
in terming Ecclesiasticus a prophetical book.

Augustine has been also supposed to have testi-
fied to the inferior authority of these books, from
his saying that one of them was read from the
reader's place. ‘The sentiment of the book of
Wisdom is not to be rejected, which has deserved
to be recited for such a lung course of years from
the step of the readers of the church of Christ,
and to be heard with the veneration of divine
authority from the bishop to the humblest of
the laics, faithful, penitents, and catechumens’
[Maccapegs].

What the result of the reference from Africa
to the ‘churches beyond the seas’ may have

en, we can only judge from the letter which is
said to have heen written on the subject by Inno-
cent L., bishop of Rome, to St. Exupere, bishop of
Toulouse, in the year 405. In this letter, which,
although disputed, is most probably genuine,
Innocent gives the same catalogue of the books
be eae New Testaments as those of the

uncils of Hippo and Carthage, omitting oul:
the book of Esther, = aah

The next catalogue is that of the Roman
uncil, drawn up by Pope Gelasius and seventy
bishops, The genuineness of the acts of this

council has been questioned by Pearson, Cave,
and the two Basnages, but vindicated by Pagi
and Jeremiah Jones. The catalogue is identical
ge preceding, except in the order of the


Some of the most important manuscripts of the
oly Scriptures which, have descended to us
were written soon after this period. The very
pti Alexandrian MS. now in the British
apeialsg are the following books in the
nich we here give the ther with the
annexed catalogne ais ae eae
7 ‘Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deutero-
dae” Joshua, Judges, Rath; 8 books.—King-
Petia 4; Remains, 2; 6 books,—16 Prophets, viz.,
der ge) Amos, 2; Micah, 3; Joel, 4; Oba-
rine 3 Jonah, 6; Nahum,7; Ambacum, 8; Ze-
Hanial, 9; Haggai, 10; Zechariah, 11; Malachi,


DEUTERO-CANONICAL. 535


12; Isaiah, 13; Jeremiah, 14; Ezekiel, 15; De
niel, 16; Esther; Tobit; Judith; Ezra,2; Mac-
cabees, 4; Psalter and Hymns; Job; Proverbs;
Ecclesiastes; Canticles; Wisdom; Wisdom of
Jesus Sirach; 4 Gospels: Acts, 1; 7 Catholic -
Epistles; 14 Epistles of Paul; Revelation; 2
Epistles of Clement; together * * * * books;
Psalms of Solomon.’ These books are equally
incorporated in all the manuscripts of the Latin
Vulgate (which was originally translated from
the Septuagint). Those which Jerome did not:
translate from the Hebrew or Greek, as Wisdom
and Ecclesiasticus, were adopted from the older
Latin version.

Although the Canon of Scripture seemed now
to be so far settled by the decrees of these
Councils, all did not conceive themselves bound
by them ; and it is observed by Jahn (Introd.
that they were not otherwise to be unders
than ‘that the ecclesiastical books enumerated
in this catalogue were to be held as useful for
the edification of the people, but not to be ap-
plied to the contirmation of doctrines of faith."
Such appears at least to have been the sentiment
of many eminent diviues between this period and
the sixteenth century.

Bishop Cosin, in his excellent Scholastic
History of the Canon, fumishes to this efiect
a host of quotations from writers of the middle
ages, including Ven. Bede, Julm of Damascus,
Alcuin, Peter Mauritius, Hugh de St. Victor,
Cardinal Hugo de St. Cher, the author of the
ordinary Gloss, and Nicholas Lyranus. Of
these sume cal] the Deutero-canonical books ‘ ex-
cellent and useful, but not in the canon;’ others
speak of them as ‘apocryphal, that is, doubtful
Scriptures,’ as not having been ‘ written in the
time of the prophets, but in that of the priests,
under Ptolemy,’ &c., as not ‘ equalling the sub-
lime dignity of the other books, yet deserving
reception for their laudable instruction,’ classing
them with the writings of Jerome, Augustine,
Ambrose, and Bede, and making a marked dis-
tinction not only between the Jewish and Christian
Canons, but even between parts of the Deutero-
canonical writings. Mr. Archibald Alexander
also (Canon of the Old and New Testament ascer-
tatned) cites several of the same authorities: he
has, however, in one instance, evidently mistaken
Peter Lombard fur Peter Comestor, the author of
the Scholastic History. At the era of the Reforma
tion, we find James Faber of Etaples and Car-
dinal Cajetan expressing themselves to the same
eflect, and the learned Sanctes Pagnini, in his
translation of the Bible from the original lan-
guages, published at Lyons in 1528 (the first Bible
that contained the division into verses with the
present figures), dedicated to Pope Clement VIL,
distinguished the ecclesiastical bouks, which he
says were not in the canon, by the term /agto-
grapha, Fora description of this rare woik, see
Christian Remembrancer, vol. iv. p. 419, in a
treatise ‘On the division of verses in the Bible,’
by the author of the present article.

We are now arrived at the period of the Re-
formation, when the question of the Canon of
Scripture was warmly discussed. Long before
this period (viz. in 1380), Wicliff had poe
his translation of the Bible, in which he substi-
tuted another prologue for Jerome's; wherein,
after enumerating the ‘twenty-tive’ books of the


56 DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


Hebrew Canon, he adds—* Whatever book is in
the Old Testament, besides these twenty-five,
shall be set among the Apocrypha, that is, without
authority of belief.’ He also, in order to distin-
guish the Hebrew text from the Greek interpo-
lations, inserted Jerome's notes, rubricated, into
the body of the text.

Althongh Martin Luther commenced the pub-
lication of his translation of the Bible in 1523,
yet, as it was published in parts, he had not yet
made any distinction between the two classes of
books, when Lonicer published his edition of the
Greek Septuagint at Strasburg in 1526, in which
he separated the Deutero-canonical, or Apocryphal,
books, from those of the Jewish Canon; for which
he was severely castigated by Morinus (see
Masch’s edition of Le Long's Bibliotheca Biblica,
vol. ii. p. 268). Arias Montanus went still
‘further, and rejected them altogether. In 1534
the complete edition of Luther's Bible appeared,
wherein those books which Jerome had placed
Anter apocrypha were separated, and placed by
themselves between the Old and New Testament,
under the title ‘ Apocrypha; that.is, Books which
are not to be considered as equal to holy Scrip-
ture, and yet are useful and good to read.’

A few years after, the divines of the Council of
Trent assembled; and among the earliest sub-
jects of their deliberation was the Canon of
Scripture. ‘The Canon of Augustine, says bishop
Marsh, ‘continued to be the Canon of the ruling
party. But as there were not wanting persons,
especially among the learned, who from time to
time recommended the Canon of Jerome, it was
mecessary for the Council of Trent to decide
between the contending parties’ (Comparative
View, p. 97). The Tridentine Fathers had
consequently a nice and difficult question to
determine.

On the 8th April, 1546, all who were present
at the fourth session of the Council of Trent
adopted the canon of Augustine, declaring, ‘ He
is also to be anathema who does not receive these
entire books, with all their parts, as they have
heen accustomed to be read in the Catholic
Church, and are found in the ancient editions
of the Latin Vulgate, as sacred and canonical,
and who knowingly and wilfully despises the
aforesaid traditions. ... . u

We are informed by Jahn (Jntroduction), that
this decree did not aflect the distinction which
the learned had always made between the cano-
nical and deutero-canonical books, in proof of
which he refers to the various opinions which
still prevail in his church on the subject, Ber
nard Lamy (Apparatus Biblicus, ii. 5) deny-
ing, and Du Pin (Prolegomena) asserting, that
the books of the second Canon are of equal au-
thority with those of the first. Those who desire
further information will tind it in the two ac-
counts of the controversies which took place at
the council on this subject; one from the
of Cardinal Pallavicini, the other by Father Paul
Sarpi, the two eminent historians of the Council.
Professor Alber, to whom we have already re-
ferred, having denied that any such distinction
as that maintained by his brother Professor,
Jahn, can lawfully exist among Roman Catholic
divines, insists that both canons possess one
and the same authority. The words of Bernard
Lamy, however, cited by Jahn are—‘ The books


DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


of the second Canon, although united with the
first, are not, however, of the same authority’
(Apparat. Bibl. ii. 5, p. 333). Alber endea-
vours to explain this as meaning only that these
books had not the same authority before the Ca-
non of the Council! of Trent, cites a passage
from Pallavicini to prove that the anathema was
‘directed against those Catholics who ted
the views of Cardinal Cajetan’ (vol. ii. p. 105).
But, however this may be, among other opinions
of Luther condemned by the Council was the
following :—‘ That no books should be admitted
into the Canon of the Old Testament but those
received by the Jews; and that from the new
should be excluded—the Epistle to the Hebrews,
those of James, 2 Peter, 2 and 3 John, Jude and

the Apocalypse.’ 3

The whole of the books in debate, with the
exception of 3rd and 4th Esdras, and the Prayer
of Manasses, are considered as canonical by the
Council of Trent. But it must be recollected,
that the decision of the Council of Trent is
one by no means peculiar to this council. The
third Council of Carthage had considered the
same books canonical. ‘The Council of Trent,’
says bishop Marsh, ‘declared no other books
to be sacred and canonical than such as had
existed from the earliest ages of Christianity,
not only in the Latin version of the Old Testa-
ment, but even in the ancient Greek version, which
is known by the name of the Septuagint...
the manuscripts of the Septuagint, there is the
same intermixture of canonical and apocryphal
books, as in the manuscripts of the Latin version’
{although there are in different manuscripts va-
riations in the particular arrangement of single
books}. The Hebrew was inaccessible to the
Latin translators in Europe and Africa during
the three first centuries.’

The ecclesiastical books were generally written
within a period which could not have extended to
more than two centuries before the birth of Christ.
In the choice of the places which were assigned
them by the Greek Jews resident in Alexandria
and other parts of Egypt, who probably added these
books to he Septuagint version according as they
became gradually approved of, they were directed
‘partly by the subjects, partly by their relation to
other writings, and partly by the periods in which
the reeorded transactions are supposed to have
happened.’ Their insertion shows how highly
they were esteemed by the Greek Jews of Egypt;
but whether even the Egyptian Jews ascribed to
them canonical and divine authority, it would not
be easy to prove (Marsh's Comparative View).

The following were the proceedings of the
Anglican Church in reference to this subject :—

In Coverdale’s English translation of the Bible,
printed in 1535, the deutero-canonical books
were divided from the others and printed sepa-
rately, with the exception of the book of Baruch,

‘which was not separated from the others in this
version until the edition of 1550. They had
however been separated in Matthew's Bible in
1537, prefaced with the words, ‘the volume of
the book culled Hagiographa.’ This Bible con
tained Olivetan’s preface, in which these books
were spoken of in somewhat disparaging terms.
In Cranmer’s Bible, published in 1539, the same
words and preface were continued ; but, in the
edition of 1549, the word Hagtographa was


DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


changed into Apocrypha, whica passed through
the succeeding editions into King James's Bible.
Olivetan’s preface was omitted in the Bishop's
Bible in 1568, after the framing of the canon in
the Thirty-nine Articles in 1562.

In the Geneva Bible, which was tae popular
English translation betore the present authorized
version, and which was published in 1559, these
buoks are printed separately with a preface, in
which, although not considered of themselves as
sufticient to prove any point of Christian doctrine,
they are yet treated with a high degree of vene-
ration. In the parallel passages in the margin
of this translation, references are made to the
deutero-canonical books.

In the first edition of the Articles of the Church
of England, 1552, no catalogue of the ‘ Holy
Scripture’ had yet appeared, but in the Articles
of 1562, the canon of St. Jerome was finally
adopted in the following order: 5 books of Moses,
Joshua, Judges, Ruth, 1 and 2 Samuel; 1 and 2
Kings, 1 and 2 Chronicles, 1 aud 2 Esdras, Esther,
Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Cantica,
four Prophets the Greater, twelve Prophets the
Less. In the Gth article it is declared that, ‘In
the name of the Holy Scripture we do understand
those canonical books of the Old and New Testa-
ment, of whose authority was never any doubt in
the Church,’ and that ‘the other books (as Jerome
saith) the Church doth read for example of life
and instruction of manners, but yet it doth not
apply them to establish any doctrine.” The books
which the article then enumerates are 1 and 2
3 and 4] Esdras, Tobias, Judith, the rest of
the book of Esther, Wisdom, Jesus the son of
Sirach, Baruch the Prophet, the Song of the
Children, the Story of Susanua, Bel and the
Dragon, the Prayer of Manasses, and 1 and 2
Maccabees. It is not, however, altogether correct,
in point of fact, in including in the number of
books thus referred to by Jerome as read by the
Church for edification the third and fourth books
of Esdras. These books were equally rejected by
the Church of Rome and by Luther, who did not
translate them. The Church of England further
declares, that ¢ all the books of the New Testament,
as they are commonly received, we do receive and
account them canonical.’ The Church of England
has herein followed the.Councils of Hippo and
Carthage. The plirase ‘of whose authority was
never any doubt in the Church,’ refers therefore
more strictly to the books of the Old Testament
than the New, for we have already seen that doubts
did exist respecting the ANTILEGOMENA of the
New Testament. In the first book of Homilies,
pablished in 1537, and the second in 1560, both
confirmed by the Thirty-fifth Article of 1562, the
deutero-canonical books are cited as ‘ Scripture,’
and treated with the same reverence as the other
books in the Bible; and in the preface to the book
of Common Prayer, they are alluded to as being
‘agreeable to’ the Holy Scriptures.

; The Beles piesa dated Ist March,

566, has the following expression respecting
the apocryphal books :—¢ We do not deny that
certain books of the Old Testament were named
by the ancients apocryphal, by others eccle-
siastical, as being read in the churches, but not
adduced for authority in matters of belief: as
Augustine, in the 18th book of the City of God,
ch, 38, relates, that the.names and books of cer-


DEUTERO-CANONICAL. 557


tain prophets were adduced in the books of Kings,
but adds that these were not in the Canon, and
that those we have were sufficient for piety.’
The Confession of the Dutch Churches (dated
the same year) is more full. After recounting
the canonical books, ‘respecting which no con-
troversy existed,’ it adds, ‘We make a distinction
between those and such as are called Apocryphal,
which may indeed be read in the Church, and
proofs adduced from them, so far as they agree with
the canonical books; but their authority and -
force are by no means such that any article of
faith may be certainly declared from their testi-
mony alone, still less that they can impugn or
detract from the authority of the others.’ ‘They
add, as their reason for receiving the canonical
books, that ‘it is not so much because the Church
receives them, as that the Holy Spirit testifies to
our consciences that they have come from God ;
and chiefly on this account, because they of
themselves bear testimony to their own authority
and sanctity, so that even the blind may see the
fulfilment of all things predicted in them, as it
were with the senses.’

The Westminster Confessim proceeded on the
same principle, but treated the books of the
second Canon with less ceremony. After enu-
merating the canonical books (ascribing thir-
teen epistles only to Paul), they proceed to say,
that ‘the books called Apocrypha, not being
of Divine confirmation, are no part of the Canon
of Scripture; and therefore are of no authority
in the Church of God; nor to be any otherwise
approved, or made use of, than other human
writings.” And again: ‘The authority of Holy
Scripture, for which it ought to be believed
and obeyed. depended not on the testimony of
any man or church, but wholly upon God, the
author thereof. and therefore it is to be received,
because it is the word of God. We may be
moved and induced by the Church to a high and
reverent esteem of the Holy Scriptures; and the
heavenliness of the matter, the efficacy of the
doctrine, the majesty of the style, &c. &c., are
arguments whereby it doth abundautly evidence
itself to be the word of God: yet, notwithstand-
ing, our full persuasion and assurance of the
infallible truth and Divine authority thereof is
from the inward work of the Holy Spirit, being
witness by and with the word in our hearts.’

Luther (on 1 Cor. iii. 9, 10) had declared


that the touchstone by which certain Scriptures


should be acknowledged as divine or not was the
following :—‘ Do they preach Jesus Christ or
not?’ And, among the moderns, Dr. Twesten
(Vorlesungen iiber die Dogmatik, 1829, vol. i.
p. 421, sqq.) has maintained a somewhat similar
principle (see Gaussen’s Theopneustia). The
Confession of Augsburg, dated in 1531, contains
no article whatever on the Canon of Scripture;
nor do the Lutherans appear to have any other
canon than Luther's Bible. For the sentiments
of the Greex Cuurcu, see Espras; EstHer;
Maccanegs.

We shall add a few words on the grounds and
authorities adopted by different parties for de-
ciding whether a work is canonical or not. Mr.
Jeremiah Jones furnishes us with three different
views on this subject. ‘The first,’ he says, ‘ is
the opinion of the Papists, who have generally af-
firmed, in their controversies with the Protestants,


.


558 DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


that the authority of the Scriptures depends upon,
or is derived from, the power of their Church. By
the authority of the Church, those authors plainly
mean a power Judged in the Church of Rome,
and her synods, of determination, what books are
the word of God; than which nothing can be
more absurd or contrary to common sense: for if
80, it is possible, nay, it is easy for them, to make
a book which is nut Divine to be so.’ And he
maintains that ‘it is possibie, on this principle,
that ABsop’s fables, or the infidel books of Celsus,
Julian, and Porphyry might become a part of the
New Testament.’ But the fact must not. be lost
sight of, that the Church has never pretended to
exercise a power of this description. Bishop
Marsh, referring: to this subject, observes: ‘ That
the Council of Trent assumed the privilege of
raising to the rank of canonical authority what
was generally acknowledged to have no such au-
thority, is a charge which cannot be made with-
out injustice: the power of declaring canonical
a book, which has never laid claim to that title,
is a power not exercised even by the Church of
Rome. In this respect it acts like other churches:
it sits in judgment on existing claims, and deter-
mines whether they are valid or not.’ From cer-
tain expressions of divines, who have asserted
that the Scriptures would have no authority what-
ever withuut the testimony of the Church, it has
been supposed that they ascribed to the Church
an arbitrary power over these Divine books:
Bellarmine, therefore, has drawn a distinction
between the objective and subjective authority
of the Scriptures, their authority in themselves,
and that which they have in respect to us. Thus,
Augustine said that he would not believe the
Gospel, but for the authority of the Church;
adding, however, that the invitation of the Church
was but the first step to his complete illumina-
tion by the Spirit of God (Confessions, ii. 8).
Another principle was that adopted by all the
refurmed cummunions (except the Anglican
Church), viz. to use Mr. Jones's words, that
‘ there ure inward or innate evidences in the
Scriptures, which, applied by the tlumination
or testimony of the Holy Spirit, are the only
true proofs of their being the Word of God;
or, to use the words of the French reformed com-
munion in its Cuntession, which harmonize with
the methods adopted by the Scotch and Belgian
communions, that upon the internal persuasion
of the Spirit they knew the Canonical from Eccle-
siastical, i.e. Apocryphal, books. This method
Mr. Jones thinks to be of a very extraordinary
nature. ‘Can it be supposed,’ he asks, ‘that out
of ten thousand books, private Christians, or even
our most learned reformers, should by any internal
evidence agree precisely un the number of twenty-
seven, which are now esteemed canonical, induced
thereto by some characters those books contain, of
their being written by the inspiration of the Holy
Ghost? This he conceives to be folly and mad-
ness, anil an assumption of ‘immediate inspiration.’
£It first supposes the books are inspired, and then
proves that they are so because they are sv.’ This
is only an argument, says bishop Burnet, to him
that feels it, if it be one at all. ‘For my part,’
said the celebrated Richard Baxter, ‘I confess I
could never boast of any such testimony or light
of the Spirit, nor reason neither, which, without
human testimony, would have made me believe


.


DEUTERO-CANONICAL.


that the book of Canticles is canonical and writ-
ten by Solomon, and the book of Wisdom apo-
cryphal and written by Philo. Nor could I have
known any historical books, such as Joshua,
Judges, Ruth, Samuel, Kings, Chronicles, Ezra,
Nehemiah, &c. to be written by divine inspira
tion, but by tradition,’ &c. The third method is
that approved of by Mr. Jones, viz. that tradition,
or the testimony of the ancient Christians, pre
served in their writings, is the best method of
determining this subject. ‘This,’ adds Mr. Jones,
‘is the method the first Christians constantly
made use of to prove, against the heretics, the
truth of the sacred books, viz. by appealing to
that certain and undoubted tradition which assured
them they were the writings of the persons whose
names they bear. Thus we know that Ovid,
Virgil, or Livy wrote the books under their names.’
To this, we think, might have been added intemal
evidence and the application of critical skill.
The chief objection which has been urged against
this method is, that it leaves the canonicity of
each book to the decision cf every private indi-
vidual, which is inconsistént with the idea of
acanon. Certain it is that the ancient chureb,
in deciding on the present Canon, exhibited a
wonderful theological tact, as the books which it
has handed down as canonical, and these alone, ate
generally the same which, after having undergone
the strictest ordeal that the learning and acumen
of modern times have been enabled tu apply to
them, are acknowledged by the best critics to be
authentic. In fact the Church has adopted the
same methods for this purpose which Mr. Junes
has considered to be the only ones satisfactory w
private individuals. Christians are thus in pos
session of the highest degree of satisfaction. Mr.
Gaussen (Thcopneustia, p. 340), admits that the
principle laid down by the reformed churches is
untenable, and he substitutes for it ‘for the Old
Testament, the Testimony of the Jews; and for
the New, the Testimuny of the Catholic Church;
by which he understands, the general consent, in
regard to the former, of all Jews, Egyptians and
Syrians, Asiatics and Europeans, ancieut and
modern, good and bad ;’ and by the testimony of
the Catholic Church he understands, ‘the uni-
versal consent of ancient aud moder churcies,
Asiatic and European, good and had: that is, net
only the sections which have adhered to the Re
formation, but the Greek section, the Armenian
section, the Syrian section, the Roman section,
and the Unitarian section.’ And in pp. 342, 345,
he ascribes entire infallibility to both Jewish and
Christian churches, in respect tu the Canons of
Scripture. ‘The Jews could not introduce a
human book into the Old Testament, and neither
the Council of Trent, nor even the most corrupt
and idolatrous churches, could add a single Ape-
cryphal book to the New. . . . . . It was not in
their power not to transmit them intact and com-
plete. In spite of themselves it was so ordered,’
&e.

The question, however, in dispute is not so
much with regard to the Jewish Canon, regarding
which no controversy exists, as whether there is or
is not sufficient testimony to the fact, how far our
Saviour and his Apostles gave the stamp of their
authority to any books uot contained in this canon,
We have no certain evidence as to the authority
ou which, or the time when, the Jewisn Canon


DEUTERONOMY.


was collected, or of the cause of its closing, and
oar best evidence in favour of the canonicity of
the Hebrew Scriptures rests on the authority of
Christ, as contained in the Scriptures of the New
Testamen.. ;

We shall conclude with the following metrical

eatalogue from ‘the pen of Cardinal Hugo :—

Quinque libros Moysi, Josue, Judicum, Sam-
uelem,

Et Melachim, tres precipuos bis sexque Pro-
phetas

Hebreus reliquis censet praecellere libris.

Quinque vocat legem, reliquos vult esse Pro-
phetas.

Post Agiographa, sunt Daniel, David, Esther,
et Esdras ;

Job, Paralipomenon, et tres libri Salomonis.

Lex vetus lis libris perfecté tota tenetur.

Restaut Apocrypha, Jesus, Sapientia, Pastor,

Et Machabaorum libri, Judith atque Tobias.

See, in addition to the works already cited,
Vicenzi's Introductio in Scrip. Deutero-canon.
Rome, 1842, which we had not the advantage
of seeing until this article had gone to gs

DEUTERONOMY (Aeurepovdpiov), the Greek
name given by the Alexandrian Jews to the tilth
book of Moses (a corresponding name, 1WD
MINA, is, however, also found with the Rabbins),
by whicli the general tenor of the book is very
well characterized. It comprises that series of ad-
dresses which the Lawgiver delivered (orally and
by writing, i553 xxviii. 58, etc.) to assembled
Israel in the second month of the fortieth year of
their wandering through the desert, when the se-
cond generation was about to cross the Jordan,
and when the parting-hour of Moses had nearly
arrived. The book of Deuteronomy contains an
account of the sublime and dignitied manner in
which Moses terminated that work, the accom-
plishment of which was his peculiar mission. It
forms a sacred legacy which he here bequeathed
to his a ple; and very different from those laws
which he ee announced to them at Sinai. The
tone of the dav falls here considerably in the back-
ground, and the subjectivity (individuality) of the
Lavegiver, and his peculiar relation to his people,
stands out more prorginently. A ehivrgnly
sublime and prophetic spirit pervades all these
Speeches from beginning to end. The thoughts of
the man of God are entirely taken up with the
inward concerns of his people, their relations,
future fate, and eventful vicissitudes. The Law-
giver here stands amidst Israel, warning ana
consoling, commanding and exhorting, surveying
and proclaiming the future with marvellous dis-
cernment.

The speeches begin with the enumeration of the
wonderful dealings of God with the chosen people
in the early period of their existence. Moses clearly
Proves to them the punishment of unbelief, the
obduracy of Israel, and the faithfulness of Jeho-
vah with Tegard to his promises, which were now
on the point of being accomplished. Fully aware
of the tendencies of the people, and foreseeing
their alienations, Moses conjures them most
impressively to hold fast the commands of the
Lord, and not to forget his revelations, lest
Curses should befall them instead of blessings
(ch. i-iv.). The Lawgiver then expatiates on the
spint of the law, and its reception into the hearts


- thought


DEUTERONOMY. 559


of men, both in a positive and negative way.
Fear, he says, is the primary effect of the law,
as also its aim. As Israel had once listened to
the announcement of the fundamental. laws of
the theocracy with a sacred fear, in like manner
should man also receive, through the whole system
of the law, a lively and awful impression of the
holiness and majesty of God (ch. v.). But as the -
essence and sum of the law is love to Jehovah,
the only and true Go.l, man shall by the law be
reminded of the Divine mercy, so variously mani-
fested in deeds; and this reflection is calculated
to rouse in man’s heart love tor God. This love
is the only and true source from which proper
tae and obedience to the law can proceed
ch. vi.).

There were, however, two tempting deviations,
in following which the people were sure to be led
astray. The law, in its strict rigour, was but too
apt to tempt them to desert Jehovah, and to yield
to idolatry (the very approval of which even in

luted the oe: by discontinuing to
bear the heavy yoke of the law. Hence the most
impressive warnings against Canaan's inhabitants
and idols; and hence the declarations that Israel,
in placing themselves on a par with the heathens,
should have to endure an equal fate with them,
and be repulsed from the presence of Jehovah
(ch. vii. viti.).

The other, not leas dangerous, deviation is that
of self-justificatiun—the proud fancy that all
the favours Jehovah bad shown to his people were
merely in consequence of their owrl deservings.
Therefore Jehovah tells them that it was not
through their own worthiness and purity of heart
that they inherited the land of the heathens. It
was only through his free favour; for their sins
bore tov strong and constant testimony how little
they ought to take credit to themselves for it
(ch. ix.).

The history of the people, before and after the
exile, shows these two deviations in their fullest
bearings. Idolatry we find to have been the
besetting sin before that period, and presump-
tuous pride of heart after it; a proof how inti-
mately acquainted the Lawgiver was with the
character and disposition of his people, and how
necessary therefore those warnings had been.

Therefore, adds Moses, turn to that which Je-
hovah, in giving you the tables of the law, and
establishing the Tabernacle and priesthood, has
antimated as a significant symbol, ‘to circumcise
the foreskin of your heart,’ and to cherish love
in your inward soul. Think of Jehovah, the just
and merciful, whose blessings and curses shall
be set befure your eves as a lasting monument
upon the monnts Ebal and Gerizim (ch. x., xi.).

The mention of that fact leads the Lawgiver
to the domestic and practical life of the people
when domesticated in their true home, the Land
of Promise; which he further regulates by a
fixed and solid rule, by new laws, which for this,
their new design and purport, form a sort of -
complement to the laws already given. There,
in the Jand of their forefathers, Jehovah will ap-
point one tixed place for his lasting sanctuary,
when every other place dedicated to the worship
of idols is to be destroyed. At that chosen spot
alone are the sacrifices to he killed, while cattle
in general, which are not destined fur sacred .
purposes, but merely for food, may be slaughtered


600 DEUTERONOMY.


at all places according to convenience—a regu-
lation which still leaves in full force the previous
laws concerning the eating of blood, and the
share of Jehovah in slaughtered cattle. This
sanctuary was to be considered as the central
int for all sacred objects. The whole land was,
y means of the sanctuary established in the
midst of it, consecrated and dedicated to Je-
hovah. This consecration was incompatible with
any defilement whatsoever. On that account
the Canaanites must be exterminated, and all
idolatrous abominations destroyed, since nothing
ought to be added to or taken from the laws
of God (ch. xii.). For the same reason (i. e.
for the sake of the holiness of the land, diffused
from the sacred centre), no false prophets or sooth-
sayers are to be tolerated, as they may turn the
minds of the people from the law, by establish-
ing a different oue, and therefore even a whole
town given to the worship of idols must be de-
molished by force of arms — xiii.) Neither,
in like manner, must the heathen customs of
mourning be imitated, or unclean beasts eaten;
but the people must always remain true to the
previous laws concerning food, &c., and show
their real attachment to Jehovah and his religion
by willingly paying the tithe.as ordained by the
law (ch. xiv.). To the same end likewise shall
the regulations concerning the years of release
and the festivals of Jehovah (to be solemnized in
the place of the new-chosen Sanctuary) be most
scrupulously wbserved (ch. xv., xvi.). Only un-
blemished sacrifices shall be offered, for all idol-
worshippers must irrevocably be put to death by
stoning. For the execution of due punishment,
honest judges must govern the nation, while the
highest tribunal shall exist in the place chosen
for the Sanctuary, consisting of the priests and
judges of the land. Ifa king be given by God
to the people, he shall first of all accommodate
himself.to the laws of God, and not lead a
heathen life. Next to the regal and judicial
dignities, the ecclesiastical power shall exist in
its full right; and again, next to it, the prophetic
order (ch. xvii. xviii.). Of all these institutions,
the duties of the judicial power are most clearly
defined ; for Jehovah does aa little suffer that in
his land the right of the innocent shall be turned
aside, as that indulgence shall be shown to the
evil-doer (ch. xix.). ‘The exposition of the civil law
is followed by that of the martial law, which has
some bearing upon the then impending war with
Canaan, as the most important war and represent-
ing that with the heathen nations in general (ch.
xx.). These are again followed by a series of laws
in reference to the preceding, and referring chiefl
to hard cases in the judicial courts, by whic
Moses obviously designed to exhibit the whole of
the civil lite of his people in its strict application
to the theocratic system of law and right. There-
“ore the form of prayer to be spoken at the offering
up of the tirstlings and tithe—the theocratic con-
Jfession of faith—by which every Israeliteacknow-
ledges in person that he is what God has enjoined
and called him to be, forms a beautiful con-
clusion of the whole legislation (ch. xxi.-xxvi.).
The blessings and cursea of Jehovah, the two
Opposite extremes which were to be impressed
upon the minds of the people at their entrance
into Canaan, and which have hitherto been spoken
of ouly in general terms, are now set forth in their


DEUTERONOMY.


fullest detail, picturing in the most lively colours
the delightful abundance of rich blessings on the
one hand, and the awful visitations of Heaven's
wrath on the cther. ‘The prophetic speeches
visibly and gradually increase in energy and
enthusiasm, until the perspective of the remotest
future of the people of God lics open tu the eye
of the inspired Lawgiver in all its chequered de-
tails, when his words resulve themselves into a
flight of poetical extacy, into the strains of a
splendid triumphal song in which the tone of
grief and lamentation is as heart-rending as the
announcement of divine salvation therein is jubi-
lant (ch. xxvii. xxviii.). The history of the law
concludes with a supplement conceming him
who was deemed worthy by the Lord to transmit
his law to Israel (ch. xxxiv.).

Thus much regarding the contents and con-
nection of the book of Deuteronomy.

The critics who have tried to show that the
Pentateuch is composed of miscellaneous docu-
ments and by various authors, have more diffi-
culty in applying their theory to this book than
to any other of the series (Pantarevcn]. In-
deed the most sceptical critics admit that, with
the exception of a few interpolations (comp. for
instance, De Wette, Introd. § 154, sq.), the whole
of this book was moulded, as it were, in one
single cast.

The date, however, of the composition of Deu-
teronomy, as well as its authenticity, has given
rise to a far greater variety of opinion, more
especially among those who are oppesed to the
authorship of Moses, The older critics, such
as De Wette, Gesenius, &c., considered Deu-
terouomy as the datest production of all the books
of the Pentateuch; while the more recent critics,
such as Von Bohlen, Vatke, George, &c., have
come to just the contrary opinion, and declare
it to be the earliest of the Mosaic writings. The
whole of their disputes on this head turn chiefly
on the prophetic character of Deuteronomy.
Some find that this peculiar feature characterizes
the book as contempurary with the later prophets,
and that it contains reflections on the law, as on
a thing long in existence : others, however, are of
@ quite contrary opinion, and discover in this sud-
Jective character, so predominant in Deuteronomy,
the very proof of its prior and early composition;
aud they consider, moreover, that the prophetic
enunciations contained in it were afterwanis de-
veloped into odjective, rigid, and matter-of-fact
laws, such as we find them-in Exodus and
Numbers. For this reason, they add, is the
legislative tone in Deuteronomy more simple than
in the other books, embracing merely the inci-
pient elements and suggestive notes of a complete
_code of law.

A very strong proof of the genuineness of the
book lies in its relation to the later writings of the

rophets. Of all the books of the Pentateuch,
Decteaony has been made most use of by the.
prophets, simply because it is best calculated to
serve as a model for prophetic declarations, as also
because of the inward harmony that exists be-
tween the prophecies and the laws upon which
they are based.

Deuteronomy exercised a most decisive and re-
markable influence more especially on Jeremiah,
owing not only to his priestly character, but also
and chiefly to the peculiar circumstances of his


DEUTERONOMY.


time, so admirably suited to illustrate the threats
and warnings contained in that book, in the
strongest light of sacred and immutable truth.
Deuteronomy was a book altogether written for
the times of Jeremiah, who could therefore do
‘nothing better than resume the old text, and bring
it Lome impressively to the people. The influence
which the spirit of Deuteronomy thus exercised
on that prophet, extended even to the adoption,
on his part, of a considerable number of its ex-
pressious and phrasevlogical terms. These lin-
guistical coincidences have been most erroneously
accounted for by some, by assuming the contem-
rary origin of both books, while others (Von
hlen) have gone so far in their speculations as
even to allot to Jeremiah a share in the composi-
tion, or rather interpolation, of Deuteronomy. Such
views betray total ignorance of the peculiar and
stictly defined character of Deuteronomy, so dif-
ferent in many respects, even as regards the style
and lauguage, from the book of Jeremiah, though
it cannot be denied that no prophet ever adhered
more closely to the prototypes of the earlier
periods, or ever repeated more fqvently the
earlier enunciations, than did Jeremiah.

Among the arguments advanced against the
authenticity of Deuteronomy, are:

1. The contradictions said to exist between this
and the other books of Moses ;

2. Certain anachronisms committed by the
author.

These contradictions are more especially al-
leged to exist in the festival laws, where but arbi-
trary and unwarranted views are mostly enter-
tained by such critics with regard to the nature
and original meaning of the festivals, which they
identity altogether with natural or season festi-
vals, and without Jending to them a more spi-
ritual character and signitication.

3. That the Sinai of the other books is always
called Horeb in Deuteronomy.—They forget, how-
ever, that toe is the general name of the whole
mountain, while Sinai is the special name of a
particular part of it, This distinction is, indeed,
most scrupulously observed everywhere in the
Pentateuch.

4. That Priests and Levites are used as syno-
hymous terins in , Deuteronomy (on account of
the expression OOM DNDN); while, in the
other books of the Peutateuch, they are used as
terms distinct from each another.—By that ex-
pression, liowever, can only be meant the Le-
titical priests, i. ¢. the only legitimate priests ;
this meaning is borne out by Deuteronomy xviii.
3-8, where a clear distinction is made between
Priests and Levites.

5. That in Deuteronomy i. 44, are mentioned the
Amoritcs instead of the Amalekites as in Num.
xiv. 45.—Here Also they have forgotten to notice
that, in the sequel of the very passage alluded
to in Deuteronomy, both the Asmorttes and Amale-
kites are mentioned.

6. That the cause of the punishment of Moses
is differently stated in Num. xxvii. 14, and
Neuteronomy iii. 26.—To this objection we reply,
that both the guilt and punishment of Moses are
described in both books as originating with the
people ; comp. also Deut. xxxii. 51, etc.

Among the auachronisms in Deuteronomy are
reckoned the allusions made in it tu the Temple
(xii. xvi. 1, sqq-), to the royal and prophetic


» .DEUTERONOMY. BA


powers (xiii. xviii. xviii), to the different modes
of idol-worship (iv. 19; xvii. 4), and to the
exile (xxviii. sq.). In suggesting these critical
points, however, they do not consider that all
these subjects are most closely and intimately


-connected with the oo and principles of the


law itself, ancl that all these regulations and pre-
phecies appear here in Deuteronomy, as necessary
finishing-points to the Law, eo indispensable for
the better consolidatiun of the subsequent and later
relations of the theocracy.

More anachronisms are said to be

1, The sixty dwelling-places of Jair men»
tioned Deut. iii. 14, sq. (comp, Judg. x. 3, aq.
We consider, however, that the men mention
in the two passages are evidently different persons,
though of the same name. Nor is it difficult te
prove from other sources, that there really existed
at the time of Moses a man by name Jair.

2. The notice (iii. 11) concerning king Og,
which looks more like a note of a subsequent
writer in corroboration of the story told in the
chapter. But this hypothesis falls to the ground
when we consider that Moses did not write for his
contemporaries merely, but also for late posterity.

The book contains, moreover, not a small num-
her of plain, though indirect traces, indicative of
its Mosaic origin. We thus find in it:

1, Numerous notices concerning nations with
whom the Israelites had then come in contact,
but who, after the Mosaic period, entirely dis-
appeared from the pages of history: such are the
accounts of the residences of the kings of Bashan


2 The appellation of ‘mountain of the Amo-
rites,” used throughout the whole book (i. 7, 19,
20, 44), while even in the book Joshua, svon after
the conquest of the land, the name is aiready ex-
changed for ‘mountains of Judah’ (Josh. xi.
16, 21).

3. The observation (ii. 10), that the Emim had
formerly dwelt in the plain of Moab: they were
a great people, equal to the Anakim. This ob-
servation quite accords with Genesis xiv. 5.

4. A detailed account (ii. 11) couceming the
Horim aud their relations tu the Edomites.

5. An account of the Zamzummim (ii. 20, 21),
one of the earliest races of Canaan, though men-
tioned nowhere else.

6. A very circumstantial account of the Re
phaim (iii. 3, sq.), with whose concerns the author
seems to have been well acquainted.

The standing-point also of the author of Deute-
ronomy is altugether in the Mosaic time, and had
it been assumed and fictitious, there must neces-
sarily have been moments when the spurious
author would have been off his guard, and un-
mindful of the part he had to play. But no dis-
crepancies of this kind can be traced; and this
is in itself an evidence of the genuineness of the
book.

A great number of other passages force us
likewise to the conclusion, that the whole of
Deuteronomy originated in the time of Moses.
Such are the passages where

1. A comparison is drawn between Canaan and

pt (xi. 10, sq.), with the latter of which the
author seems thoroughly acquainted.

2. Detailed descriptions are given of the fer-
fility and productious of Egypt (viii. 7, 9q.).

3. ions are given relating tothe oom

°


462 DEUTERONOMY. e


quest of Canaan (xii. 1, sq.; xx. 1, 8q.), which
cannot be understood otherwise than by assuming
that they had been framed in the Mosaic time,
since they could be of no use after that period.

Besides, whole pieces and chapters in Deutero-
nomy, such as xxxii., xxxiii., betray in form, lan-
guage, and tenor, a very early period in Hebrew
literature. Nor are the laws and regulations in
Deuteronomy less decisive of the authenticity of the
book. We are struck with the most remarkable

henomenon, that many laws from the previous
ks are here partly repeated and impressed with
more energy, partly moditied, and partly alto-
gether abolished, according to the contingencies
of the time, or as the new aspect of circum-
stances among the Jews rendered such steps ne-
cessary (comp. e.g. Deut. xv. 17 with Exod. xxi.
7; Deut. xii. with Lev. xvii). Such pretensions
to raise, or even to oppose his own private opinions
to the authority of divine law, are fuund in no
author of the subsequent periods, since the whole
of the sacred literature of the later times is, on the
contrary, rather the echo than otherwise of the
Pentateuch, and is altogether founded on it. Add
to this the fact, that the law itself forbids most
impressively to add to, or take anything from it,
a prohibition which is repeated even in Deutero-
nomy (comp. iv. 2; xii. 1); and it is but too
evident, that, if the opinion of the critics be cor-
rect, that this bovk contains nothing more than
a gradual development of the law—it clashes too
often with its own principles, and pronounces
thus its own sentence of condemnation.

The part of Deuteronomy (xxxiv.) respecting
the death of Moses requires a particular expla-
nation. That the whole of this section is to be
regarded as a piece altogether apart from what
pole it, or as a supplement from another writer,

already been maintained by the older theolo-
gians (comp. ez. gr. Carpzov, Introd. in libr. V. T.
i. p. 137); and this opinion is contirmed not only by
the contents of the chapter, but also by the express
declaration of the book itself on that event and
its relations; for chapter xxxi. contains the con-
clusion of the work, where Moses describes him-
self as the author of the previous contents, as also
of the Song (ch. xxxii.), and the blessings (ch.
xxxiii.) belonging to it. All that follows is, con-
sequently, not from Moses, the work being com-
pleted and concluded with chapter xxxiii. There
is another circumstance which favours this opi-
nion, namely, the cluse connection that exists
between the last section of Deuteronomy and the
beginning of Joshua (comp. Deut. xxxiv. 9 with
Josh. i. 1, where also the term ‘77, in the latter
passage, must not. be overlooked) plainly shows
that ch. xxxiv. of Deuteronomy is intended to
serve as a point of transition to the book of
Joshua, and that it was written by the same
author as the latter.

The correct view of this chapter, therefore, is
to consider it as a real supplement, but by no
means as an interpolation (such as some critics
erroneously suppose to exist in the Pentateuch
in general). To apply to it the term inter-
polation would be as wrung as to give that
appellation ez. gr. to the 8th book of Cesar's
work, ‘ De bello Gallico,’ simply because it was
equally written by an unknown author, for the
very purpose of serving as a supplement to the
previous books. = -


DIAL.


On the literature of Deuteronomy, compare the
ig aa een A. C. H.

EW. The various passages of Scriptare in
which dew is mentioned, as well as the iecds
of travellers, might, unless carefully considered,
convey the impression that in Palestine the dews
fall copiously at night during the height of
summer, and supply in some degree the lack of
rain. But we find that those who mention dews
travelled in spring and autumn, while those
who travelled in summer make no mention of
them. In fact, scarcely any dew does fall
during the summer months—from the middle of
May to the middle of August; but as it con-
tinues to fall for some time after the rains of spring
have ceased, and begins to fall before the rains of
autumn commence, we may from this gather the
sense in which the Scriptural references to dew
are to be understood. Without the dews con-
tinuing to fall after the rains have ceased, and
commencing before the rains return, the season
of actual drought, and the parched appearance
of the country, would be of much longer duration
than they really are. ‘The partial refreshment
thus affurded to the ground at the end of a
summer without dews or rains, is of great value
in Western Asia, and would alone explain all
the Oriental references to the effects of dew. This
explanation is of further interest as indicating the
times of the year to which the Scriptural notices
of dew refer; for as it does not, in any perceptible
degree, fall in summer, and as few would think
of mentioning it in the season of rain, we may
take all such notices to refer to the months of
April, May, part of Angust, and September.

DEXIOLABOS (dekoadBus). This is the
Greek word rendered *spearmen’ in the Auth.
Vers. of Acts xxiii. 23. As it does not occur in
the classical writers, and only this once in the
Scriptures, it is uncertain what kind of soldiers is
denoted by it. It strictly signifies one who covers
or guards the right side of any one. Hence it
has been conjectured that, in the above passage, it
denotes officers who performed the same functions
in the camp as lictors did in the city—being ap-
pointed to apprehend maletactors, and to guard
criminals when led to execution, and called
SeftoAdBor, from taking the right hand of the pri-
soner, who was bound to the left hand of the guard.
This explanation is, however, deduced entirly
from the etymology of the word, and is open to the
objection arising from the improbubility that such
a number of military lictors would be on duty
with the forces of the tribune, as that 200 of them
at a time could be ready to depart with one pri-
soner. It seems preferable, therefore, to understand
the word as denoting the guard of the tribune. Nor
is this contrary to the etymology, since guarding
the right side may be taken figuratively to mean
guarding the whole person. Nor is it strange that
these cucice troops should be employed on this
duty, since the service was important and delicate.
The guarding of prisoners to be tried betore Casar
was often, at Rome, committed to the pratorians,
Our version ‘ spearmen’ seems to have been de-
rived from the Vnigate, ‘lancearii.’

DIANDEM. [Crown.]

DIAL. The invention of the sun-dial belongs
most probably to the Babylonians. Hervdotus af-
firms, that the Greeks derived from them, the pole
(supposed to mean the diul-plate), the gnomoa,


DIAL.


and the division of day into twelve parts (ii.
109). Vifruvius also ascribes the most ancient
form of the dial, called hemicycle, to Berosus the
Chaldwan (ix. 9), though hé probably means
no more than that he introduced it into Greece.
Certainly those Greeks to whom Vitruvius as-
cribes inventions or improvements in dialling,
can all be proved to have had communica-


tion, more or less remote, with the Chaldzans.


The first mention in Scripture of the ‘hour,’ is
made by Daniel, at Babylon (ch. iii. 6). The
Greeks used the dial before the Romans; and
with regard to the Egyptians, ‘there are no indi-
cations in the Sculptures to prove the epoch when
the dial was first inawn in Egypt’ (Wilkinson,
Ane. Egyptians, vol. iii. p. 342). The circum-
stances connected with the dial of Ahaz (2 Kings
xx. 11; Isa. xxxviii. 8), which is perhaps the
earliest of which we have any clear mention, en-
tirely concur with the derivation of gnomonics
from the Babylonians. Ahaz had formed an
alliance with Tiglath-pileser, king of Assyria (2
Kings xvi. 7,9): he was a man of taste, and was
ready to adopt foreign ‘improvements, as appears
from his admiration of the altar at Damascus,
and his introduction of a copy of it into Jerusa
lem (2 Kings xvi. 10). ‘ The princes of Baby;
lon seut unto him to inquire of the wonder that
was done in the land” (2 Chron, xxxii. 31). Hence
the dial also, which was called after his name,
was probably an importation from Babylon,
Different conjectures have been formed respect-
ing the construction of this instrament. The dif-
‘culty is to understand what is meant by the
Ins mibyn, ‘the degrees or steps of Aliaz.’
They may mean lines or figures on a dial-plate,
or on a pavement, or the steps to the palace of
Abaz, or some steps or staircase he had erected
elsewhere (vid. Carpzov, Apparat. Historic. Crit.
Lips. 1748, p. 352, &c.). The Sept. in Isaiah
reads avaBaSuovs Tod oikov Tov matpés cov,
‘the steps or stairs of the house of thy father”
Josephus also says, ‘ steps or degrees in his
house’ (Antig. x. 1,91). The Chaldee renders
the passage in Kings, NYYW JI, ‘ hour-stoue,’
and gives the same meaning to ‘the stairs’
(2 Kings ix. 12), and renders Isa. xxxviii. 8
NYY JAX NAW}, by * the shadow of the stone
of hours.” Symmachus most certainly under-
stood a sun-dial : orpépo Thy oxidy Tevypaypov
i kar€Bn &v &poroyly “Axa, ‘1 will cause to
return the shadow of the degrees which (shadow )
is gone down on the dial of Ahaz:’ and so Jerome
renders it Horologium. On the whole, the dial of
Ahaz seems to have been a distinet contrivance,
rather than any part ofa house. It would also
te pig from the circumstances, that it was
of such a size, and so placed, that Hezekiah, now
convalescent (Isa. xxxviii. 21, 22), but not
perfectly recovered, could witness the miracle
from his chamber or ‘pavilion : ¢ Shall byn, the
or this shadow,’ &c. May it not have been
situate © in the middle court’ menticned 2
Kings xx, 4? The cut given below (No. 247)
aes a dial discovered in Hindostan, near

elhi, the ancient capital of the Mogul empire,
whose construction would well suit the circum-
ra iad of the dial of Ahaz. It seems to

answered the double purpose of an observa‘

and a dial—a rectangles feangie whose ad


DIAL. 563


thenuse isa staircase, apparently parallel to the
axis of the earth, and bisects a zone or coping of a
wall, which wall connects the two terminating
towers right and left. The coping itself is of a


circular form, and accurately graduated to mark,
by the shadow of the gnomon above, the sun's
rogress before and after noon ; for when the sun
is in the zenith, he shines directly on the stair:
case, and the shadow falls beyond the coping. A
flat surface on the top of the staircase, and a
gnomon, fitted the building for the purpose of an
observatory. According tothe known laws of
refraction, a cloud or body of air of different
density from the common atmosphere, inte
between the gnomon and the coping of the dial-
plate below, would, if the cloud were denser than
the atmosphere, cause the shadow to recede from
the perpendicular height of the staircase, and of
course to re-ascend the steps on the coping, by
which it had before noon gone down ; and if the
cloud were rarer, a contrary effect would take
lace. (See Bishop Stock’s Translation of Isaiah,
Bath, 1803, p. 109.) Such a building might also
be called ‘a house. It agrees also with Adam
Clarke’s supposition, that ‘the stairs’ were
really ‘a dial,’ and probably this very dial,
ou which, as being in the most public place, or
rather on the platform on the top of which they
set Jehu, while they proclaimed him king by
sound of trumpet’ (Commentary on 2 Kings ix.
13). . Bishop Stock’s speculation that the retro-
gression of the shadow mzght be effected by refrac-
tion, is supported by a natural phenomenon of
the kind on record. On the 27th of March, 1703,
P. Romauld, prior of the cloister of Metz, made
the observation that, owing to such a. refraction of
the solace rays in tae higher regions of the atmos-
phere, in connection with the appgarance of a
cloud, the shadow on his dial deviated an hour
and a half(Rosenmiiller). The phenomenon on
the dial of Ahaz, however, .was doubtless of a
miraculous nature, even should such a medixm of —
the miracle be admitted: nothing less than-a
divine communication could have enabled Isaiah
to predict its occurrence at that time and place:
besides, he gave the king his own choice whether
the shadow should advance or retire ten degrees.
There seems, however, to be no necessity for seek-
ing any medium for this miracle, and certainly
no necessity for supposing any actual interference
with the revolution of the earth, or the position of
the sun. In the more distinct and ample aecount
of it in 2 Kings, it is simply said that the Lord,
at the prayer of Isaiah, brought the shadow teu
degrees backward, The words — ah avni
°


564 DIBON.
mioyo wy in Isa. xxxviii. 8, ‘and the sun


went back ten degrees,’ are wanting in three of
Dr. Kennicott’s MSS., and originally in two of
De Rossi's; and the words ‘the shadow of the
degrees which is gone down ‘in the sun-dial of
Ahaz’ are more correctly rendered on the margin
degrees ‘by or with the sun,’ ¢. e. by means of the
progress of the sun. The first 6 #asos in this verse
1s omitted in MS. Pachom. of the Sept. Even if
the mention of the sun be retained, as in Ecclus.
xlviii. 23, it is only fair to understand the words
in their popular sense, the solar rays, or such a re-
cession of the shadow as would have been occasioned
by an actual recession of the sun. Adopting the

resent state of the text, it is observable that what
18 called the sun in one part of the verse is called
the shadow in the other. It is certainly as philo-
sophical to speak of the sun returning, as it is of
his setting and rising. Thus the miracle, from
all the accounts of it, might consist only of the
retrogression of the shadow ten degrees, by a
simple act of Almighty power, without any me-
dium, or, at most, by that of refracting those rays
only which fell upon the dial. It is not said
that any time was lost to the inhabitants of the
world at large: it was not even observed by the
astronomers of Babylon, for the deputation came
to inquire concerning the wonder that was done
in the dand. It was temporary, local, and con-
fined to the observation of Hezekiah and his court,
being designed chiefly for the satisfaction of that
monarch. It is remarkable that no instrument
for keeping time is mentioned in the Scripture
before the dial of Ahaz, s.c. 700; nor does it
appear that the Jews generally, even after this
period, divided their day into hours, The dial
of Ahaz was probably an object only of curious
recreation, or served at most to regulate the occu-
patious of the palace.—J. F. D.

DIAMOND. [Yananom; Suasir.]


DIBON (j)2"7; Sept. Aa8dév), or DIMON
(}O"F, Isa. xv. 9), called also Dibon-Gad, from
its having been rebuilt by the tribe of that name
(Num. xxxii. 34), a city on the northern bank
of the Amon, at the point where the Israelites
crossed that river on their journey to the Jordan,
and where their first. encampment was made after
having passed it. In later times we find it, with
other towns in this quarter, in the hands of the
Moabites (Jer. xlviil. 22), The site has been
recognised by Seetzen, Burckhardt, and Irby and
Manzyles, at a place which bears the name of Diban,
in a low tract of the district called the Koura,
about three miles north of the Arnon (Modjeb).
The ruins are here extensive, but offer nothing of
interest. There was another place called Dibon
in the tribe of Judah (Neh, xt. 25), perhaps the
same that is called Dimonah in Josh. xiii. 26.

DIDRACHMA (8lSpaxpov,a double drachma),
a silver coin equal to two Attic drachma, and
also to the Jewish half-shekel (Joseph. Antig. iii,
8.2). It was therefore equivalent to about Is. 4d.
of our money. By the law every Jew was re-
quired to pay half a shekel to the Temple (Exod.
xxx. 13, sy.), and this amount is represented by
the didruckina in Matt. xvii. 24, where it is used
for the ‘ tribute-money’ demanded of Christ. The
Septuagint everywhere renders the ‘shickel’ of the
Old Testament by didrachma, but as the Attic
drachma was equal to only half a shekel, it seems


DIONYSIUS.


from this probable that the drachma of Alex-
andria was equal to two Attic drachme.

DIDYMUS (AfSupos, @ twin), a surname of
the Apostle Thomas, denoting that he wasa twin,
and if translated, he would be called ‘ Thomas
the Twin’ (John xi. 16). [THomas.]

DIKE (Alxn), the heathen Goddess of Justice,
described as the daughter of Zeus and Themis
(Hesiod, Op. 266; Theog. 902). The punish-
ment of murderers is particularly ascribed to her;
and therefure, besides being the goddess of punish-
ment in a general sense, she is often to be con-
sidered the same as Nemesis or Vengeance. The
word occurs in Acts xxviii. 4, and is there ren-
dered. ‘ vengeance,’ appellatively.

DIKLAH (A997; Sept. Acad); a tribe de-
scended from Juktan (Gen. x. 27). As the name
in Aramaic and Arabic means a palim-tree, it has
heen judged necessary to seek the seat of the tribe
im some territory rich in palm-trees. Bochart
finds it in Southem Arabia, Michaelis in the
region of the Tigris (from the analogy of the
name Diglath); but where the ground of search
is so uncertain, it is impossible to obtain any satis-
factory result.

DINAH (797; Sept. Aciva), daughter of
Jacob by Leal (Gen. xxx. aK and therefore full
sister of Simeon and Levi. While Jacob's camp
was in the neighbourhood of Shechem, Dinah was
seduced by Shechem, the son of Hamor, the
Hivite chief or head-man of the town. Partly
from dread of the consequences of his misconduct,
and partly, it would seem, out of love for the
damsel, he solicited a marriage with her, leaving
the ‘marriage price’ (see Marriage) to be fixed
by her family. To this Dinah’s brothers would
only consent on the further condition that all the
inhabitants of the place should be circumcised.
Even this was yielded; and Simeon and Levi
took a most barbarous advantage of the compli-
ance by falling upon the town on the third day,
when the people were disabled by the effects of
the operation, and slew them all (Gen. xxxiv).
For this act of truly Oriental vindictiveness no
excuse can be offered, and Jacob himself repeatedly
alludes to it with abhorrence and regret (Gen.
xxxiv. 30; xlix. 5-7). To understand the act
at all, however, it is necessary to remember, that
any stain upon the honour of a sister, and espe-
cially of an only sister, is even at this day consi-
dered as an insupportable disgrace and inexpi-
able offence among all the nomade tribes of Wes-
tern Asia. If the woman be single, her brothers
more than her father, if she be married, her Lro-
thers more than her husband, are aggrieved, and
are considered bound to avenge the wrong. Hence
the active vengeance of Dinah’s full brothers,
and the comparative iveness of her father in
these transactions. Of Dinah’s subsequent lot
nothing is known,

DIONYSIUS rus AREOPAGITE, and
PSEUDO-DIONYSIUS. The name of ‘ Diony-
sius the Areopagite’ enlivens the scanty account
of success which attended the visit of Paul to
Athens (Acts xvii. 34). Nothing further is re-
lated of him in the New Testament; but ecclesi-
astical historians record some particulars concern-
ing his career, both before and after his conversion.
Suidas recounts that he was an Athenian by
birth, and eminent for his literary attainments;


DIONYSIUS.


that he studied first at Athens and afterwards at
‘Heliopolis in Egypt; and that, while in the latter
city, he beheld that remarkable eclipse of the sun,
as Jhe terms it, which took place at the death of
Ch rist, and exclaimed to his friend Apollophanes,
4 7d Oclov xdoxet, } TG zacxdvTt cupndoxel,
‘Either the Divinity suffers, or sympathises with
some sufferer.’ He further details, that after

Dionysius returned to Athens, he was admitted

into the Areopagus ; and, having embraced Chris-

tianity about a.p. 50, was constituted Bishop
of Athens by the Apostle Paul himself. Syn-
cellus and Nicephorus both record the last par-

ficular, Aristides, an Athenian philosopher,

asserts that he suffered martyrdom—a fact gene-

rally admitted by historians; but the precise

period of his death, whether under Trajan or

Adrian, or, which is most likely, under Domitian,

they do not determine. Whatever credit may be

given to these traditions, the name of Dionysius is

certainly interesting in a literary point of view,

owing to an attempt made by some writer, in

after times, to personate the Areopagite; and who

contrived to his productions on the Christian

world as of the apostolic age, and thereby greatly

influenced the spirit both of the Eastern and

Western Churches. Daillé places this Pseudo-

Dionysius a.v. 420 (vid. Dalleus de Scriptis

Dionysti Areopagite, Geneve, 1666); Pearson,

.in the latter times of Eusebius Cesariensis (vid.
Vindie. par. i. c. 10, in fine). Others have con-

Jectured that these productions were written about
A.p. 360, but not compiled till the fifth or nearly
the sixth century. They consist of a hook called
The Celestial Hierarchy ; another, Of the Evcle-

stastical Hierarchy ; A Treatise on the Divine
Names; another, Of Mystical Divinity ; and
Ten Epistles : the first four addressed to the monk

Caius, the tifth to Dositheus, the sixth to Sosipater,
the seventh to Bishop Polycarp—in which the au-
thor says he observed the eclipse at Heliopolis;
the eighth to the Monk Demophilus—in which the
writer blames him for harshness to a priest and
a layman, and relates, as if’ in contrast to his
behaviour, that when a zealous pastor, named
Carpus, grew weary in his endeavours to convert
an obdurate sinner, Christ, in a vision, remon-
trated with him, telling lim that he was ready
to die a second time for sinners ;_ the ninth epistle
is addressed to Bishop Titus, and the tei:th to St.
John. In the. book On the Celestial Hierarchy, he
delivers many subtleties respecting the angels.
In the book on the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, he
explains the ceremonies of the mass, consecration
of the holy chrism, the ordination of a bishop,
Pnest, aud deacon, the manner of blessing a
ee and the burial of the dead. In the book
a Mystical Divinity, he mingles the notions of
red Contemplatives with ideas and terms borrowed
ok, the heathen philosophers. Indeed, so deeply
ee ued are these productions with philosophical
he iE that Suidas, who takes the author of them
the hilo pennine Areopagite, conjectures that
nis tae oes referred to had borrowed from

Leas: tons, and vended them as their own.
a s evident that had these writings been genuine,
ira have been invaluable, on account of
bance eigen they would have afforded to the
ita ve and customs of the Christian Church at
see ry commencement, Still there have been
Persons who have contended that they are


‘DISEASES OF THE JEWS. 565


the real works of the Areopagite. Among these
are Claude David, a Maurist monk, in 1702;
Bernard of Sept. Fonds, under the name of Adrian,
in 1708; and F. Honoratus, of St. Mary, a Car-
melite friar, in 1720. The first uncontroverted
occasion on which these supposititious writings
are referred to, is in the conference between the
Severians (a sect of Eutychians) and the Catholics,
held in the emperor Justinian’s palace, a.p. 532, in
which they are quoted by the heretical party.
Maximus, and other writers in the following ages,
refer to them frequently. Different opinions have
been held as to the real author of these productions.
They were ascribed, at an early period, to Apolli-
naris, Bishop of Laodicea in the fourth century—
an opinion to which the learned Cave inclines,
though he thinks that Apollinaris, the son, may
have been the author. He remarks that the
culiar acquirements and tum of mind of Apoltt
naris the father, as described both by Socrates and
Sozomen, would have well qualified him to have
written the Areopagitica. There have not been
wanting instances in which supposititious works
were fathered upon great names by disciples of
the Apollinarian school (Leontius, Lib. de Sect.
act. vili. p, 527).

The resemblance between the Areopagitica and
the writings of Proclus and Plotinus is 80 obvious
as to afford great probability that the Pseudo-
Dionysius did not write much earlier than the
fifth century (Cave’s Mist. Literar. Colonia,
1720, p. 142, 143; Lardner'’s works, yol. vii. p.
371, ed. 1788; Fabric. Bib. Bibliog).—J. F. D.

DIOTREPHES (Acotpepas, Jove-nourished),
a person who seems to have been one of the false
teachers condemned by St. Jobin in his third epistle.
He appears to have been a presbyter or deacon—

robably the former. He refused to receive the
etter sent by Joln, thereby declining to submit
to his directions or acknowledge his authority
(3 John ix).

DISCERNING OF SPIRITS. This is now
usnally understood to mean a high faculty, en-
joyed by certain persons in the apostolic age, of
diving into the heart and disceining the secret
dispositions of men. It appears to have been
one of the gifts peculiar to that age, and was
especially necessary at a time when the stan-
dards of doctrine were not well established or
generally understood, and when many deceivers
were abroail (2 John ii. 7). This faculty seems
to have been exercised chiefly upon thuse who
came forward as teachers of others, and whose
real designs it was important that the infant
churches should know. -

DISCIPLE (paénrfs), a scholar or follower
of any teacher, in the general sense. It is hence
applied in the gospels not only to the followers
of Christ, but to those of John the Baptist (Matt.
ix. 14, &c.), and of the Pharisees (Matt. xxii.


16). Although used of the followers of Christ


generally, it is applied in a special manner ta
the twelve apostles (Matt. x. 1; xi. 13 xx.17;
Luke ix. 1). After the death of Christ the word
took the wider sense of a believer, or Christian 5
a. e. a follower of Jesus Christ.

DISEASES OF THE JEWS. The most
prevaleut diseases of the East aie cutaneous dis-
eases, malignant fevers, dysentery, and opbthal-
mia. Of the first of these the most remarkable
are leprosy and elephantiasis [Leprosy]. To


666 DISEASES OF THE JEWS.


the same class also belongs the singular disease
called the mal d'Aleppo, which is confiued to
Aleppo, Bagdad, Aintab, and the villages on the
Segour and Kowick. It consists in an eruption
of one or more sinall red tubercles, which give no
uneasiness at first, but, after a few weeks, become
prurient, discharge a little moisture, and some-
times ulcerate. Its duration is from a few months
toayear. It does not affect the general health
at all, and is only dreaded on account of the
sears it leaves. Foreigners who have visited
Aleppo have sometimes been affected by it several
ears after their return to their own country. — It
is a remarkable fact that dogs and cats are like-
wise attacked by it (Russell's Nat. Hist. of Aleppo,
ii, 299). The Egyptians are subject to an erup-
tion of red spots and pimples, which cause a
troublesome smarting. The eruption returns every
year towards the end of June or beginning of
July, and is on that account attribute:l to the
rising of the Nile (Voluey, i. 231). Malignant
Yevers are very frequent, and of this class is the
great scourge of the East, the plague, which sur-
asses, all others in virulence and contagiousness
Praacex], The Exyptian ophthalmia is  pre-
valent throughout Egypt and Syria, and is the
cause of blindness being so frequent in those
countries [Biinpness]. Of inflammatory dis-
eases in gencral, Dr. Ruasell (J. c.) says that at
Aleppo he has not found them more frequent, nor
More rapid in their course, than in Great Britain,
Epilepsy and diseases of the mind are communly
met with. Melancholy monomaniacs are re-
rded as sacred persons in Egypt, and are held
in the highest veneration by all Mahometans
(Prosper Alpinus, De Med. AZgypt. p. 55).

Diseases are not unfrequently alluded to in the
Old Testament; but, as no description is given
of them, except in one or two instances, it is for
the most part impossible even to hazard a con-
jecture concerning their nature. The issue men-
tioned in Lev. xv. 5 cannot refer to gonorrhaa
virulenta, as has been supposed by Michaelis and
Hebenstreit (Winer, s.v. Arankheiten); for the
person who exposed himself to infection in the
various ways mentioned was only unclean until
the evening, which is far too short a time to allow
of its being ascertained whether he had escaped
contagion or not. Either, then, the law of puri-
fication had no reference whatever to the con-
tagiousness of the disease (which is hardly admis-
sible), or the disease alluded to was really not
contagious. Joram’s disease is probably referable
to chronic dysentery, which sometimes occasions
an exudation of fibiine from the inner coats of the
intestines. The fluid fibrine thus exuded coagu-
lates into a coutinuous tubular membrane, of the
same shape as the intestine itself, and as such is
expelled, This form of the disease has been no-
ticed by Dr. Good under the name of diarrhea
tubularis (Study of Med. i. 287).
similar formation of false membranes, as they are
termed, takes place in the windpipe in severe
cases of croup.

Hezekiah suffered, according to our version,
from a boil. The term here used, }*MW, means
literally inflammation ; hut we have no means of
identifying it with what we call boil. The same
may be said of the plague of boils and blains
[Brarns], and of the names of diseases mentioned.
in the 28th chapter of Deuteronomy, such as pes-


A precisely .


DISH.


tilence, consumption, fever, botch of Egypt, itch,
scab. The case of Job, in which the term trans
lated boil also occurs, demands a separate notice
{Jon]. Nebuchadnezzar’s disease was a species
of melancholy monomania, called by authors
zoanthropia, or more commonly lycanthropia, be
cause the transformation into a wolf was the most
ordinary illusion, Esquirol considers it to have
originated in the ancient custom of sacrificing
aninals. Bat, whatever effect this practice might
have had at the time, the cases recorded are in-
dependent of any such influence; and it really
docs not seem necessary to trace this particular
hallucination to a remote historical cause, when
we remember that the imaginary transformations
into inanimate objects, such as glass, butter, &c.,
which are of every-day occurrence, are equally
irreconcilable with the natural instincts of the
mind, The same author relates that a nobleman
of the court of Louis XIV. was in the habit of
frequently putting his head out of a window, in
order to satisty the urgent desire he had to bark.
Calmet informs us that the nuns of a German
convent were transformed into cats, and went
mewinz over the whole house at a tixed hour of
the day (Ksquirol, Maladies Mentales, i. 522).
Antiochus and Herod died, like Sylla, from
phithiviasis, a disease which was well known to
the ancients. Plutarch, in his Life of SyUa,
meutjons several names of persous who had died
from it, amungst whom are Pherecydes the
Pela Aleman the poet, and Mutius the
awyer. M. Alibert was consulted by a cele-
brated French academician, who complained that
his enemies even pursued him into the academy,
and almost carried off his pen (Dermatoses, i.
585). Nothing is known respecting the imme-
diate causes of this malady ; but there is nv doubt
that it depends on the general state of the cunsti-
tution, aud must not be attributed to uncleanli-
ness. Alibert mentions the case of a person who,
as suon as these animals had been destroyed, tell
into a typhoid state, and shortly after died. The
question of alleged demoniacal possession, so
often mentioned in the New Tesiament, las been
considered under another head [Demontacs], and
need not be re-vpened in this place.—W. A. N.
DISH. Varivus kinds of dishes are mentioned
in Scripture ; but it is impossible to form any
other idea of their particular forms than may be
suggested by those of ancient Egypt and of the
modern East, which have much resemblance wo
each other. The sites of such ancient towns as
were built of sun-dried bricks are usually covered
with broken potsherds, some of them large
enough to indicate the form of the entire vessel.


These are remarkably similar to those in modern
use, and are for the most part made of a rather


- maa eee a


= - ae


SA OF GF PEARL T RMN ae RRS eo re wit


~


‘DIVINATION.


swoarse earthenware, covered with a compact and
strong glaze, with bright colours, mostly green,
‘Dhue, or yellow. Dishes and other vessels of
copper, coarsely but thickly tinned, are now
amuch use in the East; but how far this may
have been anciently the case we have not the
means of knowing. The first cut (No. 248)

ents a slave bringing dishes to table; the
dishes have covers, and the manner in which they
“are carried on the reverted hand is the mode still


249.


used by Eastern servants. The specimens in the
other cut (No. 249) are modern Oriental, and
speak for themselves.

DISPERSION OF NATIONS. [Narions,
Dispersion or.}

DIVINATION is a general term descriptive
of the various illusory arts anciently practised
for the discovery of things secret or future. The
human mind has always shown a strong curiosity
to ascertain the course of fortune, and the issue of
Present or contemplated schemes; and in those
countries and ages where ignorance of physical
laws has combined with superstition to debase it,
it bas sought to gratify this innate disposition to
bled futurity, by looking for presages in things

een which and the object of its anxiety no
connection existed but in the diviner's imagina-
tion. Scarcely a single department of nature but
was appealed to, as famohine on certain con-
ditions, good or bad omens of human destiny ;
aud the aspect of things, which, perhaps by the
most canal coincidence marked some event or
crisis in the life of one or two individuals, came
to be regarded, by blind credulity, as the fixed
and invariable precursor of a sitnilar result in the
affairs of mankind in general. By such childish
and irrational notions was the conduct of the
heathen guided in the most important, no less
than in the most ordinary occurrences of life; and
hence arose the profession of augurs, soothsayer,
et hoc genus omne of impostors, who, ingraftin
vulgar traditions on a small stock of natural
knowledge, established their claims to the posses-
sion of an occult science, the importance ‘and in-
fluence of which they dezleroualy increased by
associating it with all that was pompous and im-
posing in the ceremonies of their religion.

This science, if that can be called science
which was the eet of ignorance and frand
united, was divided into various tranches, each of
which had its separate professors. In a general
view, divination may be considered as either na-
tnral or artificial: the first being founded on the
notion that the soul possesses, from its spiritual
nature, some prescience of futurity, hick it ex-
emplifies particularly in dreams, and at the ap-

roach of death : the second, yesting ona peculiar
Interpretation of the course of nature, as well as
on such arbitrary observations and experiments
ae superstition introduced. The different systems


DIVINATION. Ca


and methods that were anciently in vogue ure
almost incredible; as, for instance, Aérumancy,
divining by the air; Arithmomancy, by means of
numbers; Capnomancy, by the smoke of sacrifices;
Chiromancy, by the lines on the palms of the
hands; Hydromancy, by water; Pyromancy, by
fire, &c. But without attempting an enumeration
and explanation of all the arts of divination that
were anciently practised, and which the reades,
curious in such inquiries, will find detailed at
length hy Cicero (De Divinatione), and Cardan
(De Sapientid), let us confine ourselves to the
mention of those which occur in sacred history.
1. DDIM (Exod. vii. 11; Isa. xliv. 25; Jer. 1. 36%
Dan. ii. 12, &c.), ‘wise men,’ and DOO IN (de
rived by Parkhurst from O°, pen, and DM, to aa-
complish), ‘drawers of astrological figures ;’ both
of these terms were applied generally to ma-
gicians, or men who were skilled in natural
science. 2. ‘3°P', § wizzards’ or wise men, and
WD, ‘a witch,’ from an Arabic verb signifying
‘to reveal,’ both practising divination by the same
arts, i. e. Aetenilinis to reveal secrets, to digcover
things lost, find hidden treasure, and interpret
dreams. 3. DCD DDI kosem kesamin, one
who foretold what was to happen by the flight of
birds, or the use of lots [Lors]. 4. J}! meonen,
one who, though rendered by our translators ‘an
observer of times,’ foretold political or physical
changes by the motion of the clouds (from

clouds), along with whom Isaiah conjoims the
D’NY YIN, &c., who made the same Poe
from eclipses, and the conjunction of the stare,
(xlvii, 13). 5. YM, in our version, ‘an en
chanter,’ was, coming as it does from WM, a
serpent, probably one who practised Ophiomancy,
or the art of charming serpents, which was, and
still is, a favourite trick of jugglery in the Kast
6. 9M 73)N, <a charmer,’ one who, as the or
ginal word implies, placed words and things ina
certain arrangement, or muttered them, as a kind


of spell. 7. DS baw, *a consulter with familiar


irits,” rendered by the Septuagint éyyacrph
Dee Sa veritelagnied was a wizzard who asked
counsel of his familiar, and gave the responses
received from him to others—the name 218 being
applied in reference to the spirit or demon ¢hat
animated the person, and inflated the belly, se
that it protuberated like the side of a bottle. The
SYN of the Hebrews was thus precisely the same
as the Pytho of the Greeks, and was used not only
to designate the performer, but the wvetpya Mvdwros,
which possessed him (see Levit. xx. 27, 218 ON2
tn eis Pytho ; 1 Sam. xxviii, 8, DW per Pytho-
nem; also Acts xvi. 16). 8. DNDN WA, Sa
necromancer,’ one who, by frequenting tombs, by
inspecting corpses, or more frequeutly, by help
of the J1&, like the witch of Endor, pretended
to evoke the dead, and bring secrets from the
invisible world (Gen. xli. 8; Exod. vii. 11
Lev. xix. 26; Deut. xviii. 10-12). 9. Be
lomancy, as it is called, a form of divination
by means of arrows (Ezek. xxi. 21; see also 2
Kings xiii. 14-19), a notable example of which
occurs in the history of Nebuchadnezzar, who,
being undecidet whether to march first against
Jerusalem or Rabbah, allowed neither his es
licy nor resentment to decide the course of bis
expedition, but was determined wholly by the
result of superstitious rites. The way of divining


066 DIVINATION.


by arrows was, having first made them bright ‘in
order the better to follow them with the eye,’ to
shoot them, and to prosecute the march according
to the direction in which the greatest number of
arrows fell; or, having ‘mixed tozether’ sume
arrows with the names of the devoted cities
marked on them, to attack that first which was
first drawn out ; or to put in a bag three arrows,
as is the practice of the Arabs (see D'Herbelots. v.
Acdah), one of which is inscribed with the words
Command me, Lord,’ the second with ‘ Forbid
me, Lord,’ while the third is left blank; so that
if the tirst is taken out, he was to go; ifthe second,
he was to desist; if the third is drawn, no deci-
sion being given, the experiment is to be re-
peated, 10. Rhabdomancy, or divination by
rods (Hos. iv. 12). This has been confounded
with the preceding, not only by Jerome, Grotiua,
and others, but even by the Septuagint, which
renders the D'SM of Ezekiel by Ad8dos, ‘a rod.’
But the instruments of divination which Hosea
alludes to are entirely diflerent from those de-
scribed by Ezekiel, O'¥NM, arrows being used by


the Jatter, whereas the former speaks of boy,


“stal.’ The form of divination by the staff was,
after placing it upright, to let it fall, and decide
by the direction in which it fell, or, according
to others, by measuring the staff with the finger,
saying at each span, ‘I will go,’ or ‘1 will not
go,’ and determining the course, according as it
happened to be the one or the other at the last
measurement. Both of these, as Jeromne infurms
us, were frequently practised by the Assyrians
and Babylonians. Herodotus (vi.) describes the
Alani women as gathering and searching an-
xiously for very smooth and straight wands to
be used in this superstitious manner. 11. Another
way of divining was by ‘images,’ DBIN (Ezek.
xxi. 21), which are generally considered talis-
mans, but which the Persian and other versions
render astrological instruments or tables. 12,
Another form of divination was, ‘hy looking into
the liver’ of a newly killed sacrifice, and by ob-
serving its state and colour according to certain
rules, to draw a favourable or unfavourable omen.
The last form which it is of consequence to notice
as alluded to in Scripture was by ‘the cup.” But
in what manner it was practised ; whether it was
by observing the appearance of some magical in-
gredients that were infused into the ve-sel; or
whether allusion ig made to a famous cup which
the immemorial tradition of the East says has
been in the possession of some great personages,
and represents the whole world ; or, finally, whe-
ther the original word Y1), ‘divineth, should be
rendered by ‘searching ’ or ‘inquiring earnestly,’
as many learned writers, anxious to save the
character of Joseph from the imputation of sor-
cery (Gen. xliv. 5), have laboured to prove, it is
absolutely impossible, and we shall not attempt,
to determine.

Egypt, the cradle of arts and sciences, if she
did not give it birth, seems to have encourazed
the practice of divination at an early age, and
whether any of its forms had become objects of
popular superstition, or were resorted to for the

rposes of gain in the days of Joseph, it is well
taees that at the time of the Hebrew Exodus
there were magicians in that country whose know-
ledge of the arcana of nature, and whose dexterity


DIVINATION.


in the practice of their art enabled them, to a cam
tain extent, to equal the miracles of Moses. By
what extraordinary powers they achieved those
feats, how they changed their rods into serpents,
the river water into blood, and introduced frogs
in unprecedented numbers, is an inquiry that has
occasioned great perplexity to many men of
learning and piety. Some have imagined that
the only way of accounting for the phenomena is
to ascribe them to jugglery and legerdemain;
the serpents, the frogs, and the other materials
requisite having been secretly provided aud dex-
terously produced at the moment their pertorm-
ances were to be exhibited. But the difficulties
attending this method of solution are so obvious
and manifold, that every reflecting mind must
allow it to be far more rational to suppose that these
conjurors were aided by familiar spirits or infernal
agents, with the Divine permission, in the per
formance of their wondertul feats. ‘ Earth, air,
and ocean,’ says a sensible writer, ‘ may contain
many things of which our philosophy has never
dreamt. If this consideration tend to humble the
pride of learning, it may remind the Christian
that secret things belong not to him, but to a
higher power.

It is reasonable to suppose that as Moses never
had been in any other civilized country, all the
allusions contained in his writings tu the various
forms of divination were those which were prac-
tised in Egypt; and, indeed, so strong a taste had
his countrymen imbibed there fur this species of
superstition, that throughout the whole course of
their history it seems to have infected the national
character and habits. The diviners, who abounded
both amongst the aborigines of Canaan and their
Philistine neighbours (1sa. ii. 6), proved a great
snare to the Israelites after their settlement in
the promised laud; and yet, notwithstanding the
stern prohibitions of the law, no vigorous efforts
were made to put an end to the crime by extir-
pating tbe practitioners of the unhallowed art,
until the days of Saul, who himself, however,
violated the statute on the night previous to his
disastrous fall ¢ Sam. xxvili.). But it was
Chaldeea to which the distinction belongs of being
the mother-country of diviners. Such a degree
of power and influence had they attained in that
country [Cua.p-xa], that they formed the highest
caste and enjoyed a place at court; nay, so indis-
pensable were they in Chaldsean society that no
step could be taken, not a relation could be
formed, a house built, a journey undertaken, a
campaign begun, until the diviners had ascer
tained the lucky day and promised a happy issue.
A great influx of these impostors had, at various
times, poured from Chaldza and Arabia into the
land of Israel to pursue their gainful occupation,
more especially during the reign of the later
kings da vill, 19), and we tind Manasseb not
only their liberal patron, but zealous to appear as
one of their most expert accomplices (2 Kings
xxi. 6; 2 Chron, xxxtii.6). The long captivities
in Babylon spread more widely than ever among
the Jews a devoted attachment to this superstition ;
for after their return to their own country, having
entirely renounced idolatry, and, at the same
time, no longer enjoying the gift of prophecy or
access to the sacred oracles, they gradually aban-
doned themselves, as Lightfoot has satisfactorily
shown, before the advent of Christ, to all the


‘DODANIM.
yrevailing forms of divination (Comment. on
Matt. :

t, cetaunniadanel this super-
Mition the sternest denunciations of the Mosaic
law were directed (Exod, xxii. 18; Lev. xix. 26,
31; xx. 27; Deut. xviii. 10, 11), as fostering a
love for unlawful knowledge and withdrawing the
mind from God only wise; while, at the same
time, repeated and distinct ises were given
that in place of diviners and all who used en-
chantments God would send them prophets, mes-
sengers of truth, who would declare the divine
will, reveal futurity, and afford them all the
useful knowledge which was vainly sought for
from those pretended oracles of wisdom. Much
discussion, however, nas been carried on by learned
men to determine the question whether the ancient
tribe of diviners merely pretended to the powers
they exercised, or were actually assisted by de-
moniacal agency. The latter opinion is embraced
by almost all the fathers of the primitive church,
who appeal, in support of their views, to the
plain language of Scripture; to the achievements
of Jannes and Jambres in the days of Moses; to
the divine law, which cannot be chargeable with
the folly of prohibiting crimes which never existed ;
and to the strong presumption that pretensions to
interpret dreams, to evoke the dead, &c., would
never have met with credit during so many ages
had there not been some known and authenticated
instances of success. On the other hand, it has
heen, with great ability and erudition, maintained
that the whole arts of divination were a system of
imposture, and that Scripture itself frequently
ridicules those who practised them as utterly help-
less and incapable of accomplishing anything
beyond the ordinary powers of nature (Isa. xlvii.
11-13; xliv. 25; Jer. xiv. 14; Jonah ii. 8: see
Faber's Origin of Pagan Idolatry ; Farmer's
Dissert. on Miracles ; Lightfoot’s Works ; Pot-
ter's Antig. i. 354; Stolberg’s Hist. of Relig. iii. ;
Selden, De diis Syris; Godwin’s Moses and
Aaron, p. 216; Rosenmiiller’s Geog. vii. 101,
102; Gesenius'’s Comment. on Isaiah, app. xi.;
Glanville's Sadducismus Triumphatus ; Richard-
son's Dissertation on the Manners of Eastern
Nations),—R. J.

DIVORCE. [Marriace.]

DODANIM (°)77; Sept. ‘Pé8:01), the de-
scendants of the fourth son of Javan (Gen, x. 4).
Bochart and other commentators on the ethno-
graphical sketch in Gen. x. suppose that the
first settlements of the Dodanim were in the south-
west part of Asia Minor; where the country
called by the Greeks Doris, with the neighbouring
isle of Rhodes, are conceived to exhibit traces of
this origin, the Hebrew letters I (d) and 9 (r)
being, from their similarity, often transposed. In
fact, some copies have the 1, and read Roda-
mim (as in the margin of the Auth. Vers.), and the
Septuagint gives the same reading both in Gen. x.
' : and 1 Chron. i. 7, where it has ‘Pé3.01. It is fur-

er supposed that settlers of this family may be
traced in Thessaly and Epirus, where the name
1s traced in the city of Dodona and in the coun-
‘ry of Doris. But there seems much of uncer-
tainty in all these ingenious speculations.

Pit prac (ANT; Sept. Awx), an Edomite, and
ief overseer of King Saul's flocks, which is
1 Important trust in Oriental courts. At Nob


.


DoG. 569


he was witness of the assistance which the high-
Sie Ahimelech seemed to afford to the fugitive
avid, by furnishing him with the sword of
Goliath, and by supplying him with bread even
from the sacred table (1 Sam. xxi. 7). Of this
he failed not to inform the king, who, regardless
of the explanaticn offered by Ahimelech, and find-
ing that the chiefs censured him, and hesitated to
Jay their hands upon a person so sacred, com-
manded Doeg to slay him and his priests—a task
which was executed with equal readiness and
cruelty by the Edomite (1 Sam. xxii. 18, sqq.).


DOG (25 keleb; Arabic, kelb) octurs in
many places of Scripture (Exod. xxii. 31 ; 1 Sam.
xvii. 43; xxiv. 14; 2 Sam. ix. 8; 2 Kings viii. 13;
Ps. lix. 6, 14, 15; Prov. xxvi. 11, 17, &c.). An
animal so well known, whose numerous varieties
come under daily observation, requires no detailed
description. There is, however, in Asia still extant
one, perhaps more than one, species, that never
have been the companions of man, and there are
races of uncertain origin, that may have been for-
merly domesticated, but which are now feral, and as
fierce as wolves; while, from the particular opinions
of Oriental nations, there are others, exceedingly
numerous, neither wild nor domesticated, bet
existing in.all the cities and towns of the Levant,
without owners ; feeding on carrion and offals, and
still having the true instinct of protecting pro-
perty, guarding the inhabitants of the district
or quarter where they are tolerated; and so far
cherished, that water and some food are not un-
usually placed within their reach,


The true wild ies of Upper and Eastern
Asia is a low, teal, reddish cur-dog, not
unlike a fox, but with less tail. In Persia and
Turkey there exists a larger dog resembling a
wolf, exceedingly savage. Both are gregarious,
hunt in packs, but are occasionally seen alone.
They are readily distinguished from a wolf by
their shorter unfurnished tails. In the time of the
sojourning of Israel in Egypt, there were already
in existence domestic dogs of the principal races
now extant—the cur-dog or fox-dog, the hound,
the greyhound, and even a kind of low-legged
turnspit. All the above, both wild and re-
claimed, there is every reason to believe, were
known to the Hebrews, and, notwithstanding the
presumed Mosaic prohibition, anterior habits, and,
in some measure, the necessity of their condition,
must have caused cattle<logs to be retained as
property (Deut. xxiii. 18); for we find one of
that race, or a house-dog, actually attending on
travellers (Tobit v. 16; xi. 4). It is to be pre-
sumed that practically the street-dogs alone were
considered as absolutely unclean ; though all, as


¢


670 DOKHAN.


is the case among Molammedans, were excluded
from familiarity.

Beside the cattle-dog, the Egyptian hound, and
one or two varieties of grey’ d were most
likely used for hunting—a pastime, however,
which the Hebrews mostly pursued on foot,

~The street-dog, without master, appareutly de-
rived from the rufous-cur, and in Egypt partaking
of the mongrel greyhound, often more or less
bare, with a mangy unctuous skin, frequently
with several teeth wanting, was, as it now is,
considered a defiling animal. It is to animals
of this class, which no doubt followed the camp
of Israel, and hung on its skirts, that allusion
is more particularly made in Exod. xxii. 31;
for the same custom exists at this day, and
the race of street-dogs still retains their ancient
habits. A portion of the Cairo packs annually
become hadgis, and go and return with the
caravan to Mecca, while others come from Da-
mascus, acting in the same manner; and it is
known that the pilgces from the banks of the
Indus are similarly attended to Kerbela : indeed,
every caravan is 80, more or less, by these poor
animals. But with regard to the dogs that
devoured Jezebel, and licked up Ahab’s blood
(1 Kings xxi. 23), they may have been of the
wild races, a species of which is reported tu have
particularly infeated the banks of the Kishon and
the district of Jezreel.

The cities of the Eust are still greatly disturbed
in the night by the howlings of street-dogs, who,
it seems, were similarly uoisy in ancient times,
the fact being noticed iu Ps. lix. 6, 14; and
dumb or silent dogs are not unfrequently seen,
such as Isaiah alludes to (Ivi. 10).

In Egypt, anterior to the Christian era, domes-
tic dogs were venerated ; they continued to be
cherished till the Arabian conquest, when they,
like the unowned street-logs, tell under the impre-
cation of Mohammed, who with reluctance, though
with guod policy, modified his denunciations and
sentence of destruction in favour of hunting-dogs,
and even permitted game killed by them to he
eaten under certain conditions. For interesting
details on the dogs of the East and their con-
geners, the wolf, Lyciscus, Thoa, and Jackal,
refereuce may be made to Sir William Jardine’s
Naturalist's Library, vols. ix. and x., which cou-
tain the Canide. We figure a specimen of Feral,
or wild dog, copied from a large Persian picture
in the library of the Hon. East India Company.
In this picture the Shah and his suns are seen
killing game, and among the rest the ‘dogs in
question.—C. H. S.


DOKHAN, or Docraw (}M3), occurs in
Ezek. iv. 9, where the Prophet is directed to take
unto him wheat, and barley, and beans, and len-
tiles, and millet (dokhkan) aud fitches, and to put
them into one vessel, and to make bread thereof fur
himself. All the grains enumerated in this verse
continue to form the chief articles of diet in the
East in the present day, as they appear to have
done in ancient times. Wheat, barley, and beans
are well known in Europe. Lentiles are less
except in the south, and fitches will be noticed
under the pead of Kusmatu. The Hebrew word


dokhun is identical with the Arabic we
dukhun, which is applied in the present day by


DOKHAN.


the Arabs to a small grain cultivated from the
middle of Europe to the most southern part of
India. This is common millet, Pazicun

bi of botanists, which is sometimes oulti-
vated in England on account of the seeds being
used for feeding birds and poultry. Bat the


231. (Millet—Panicum milisceum.)


giain is usually imported into this country from
the Mediterranean. In India it is cultivated
in the cold weather, that is, in the same season
with wheat and harley, and is an article of diet
with the inhabitants. The culms are erect, from
two to four feet high, the whole plant being very
hairy ; leaves large, with long sheaths, which in-
volve most of the culm; panicle, oblong,
much batched, bending down with the weight
of the grain; glumes cuspidate; corul, three
valved, adventitious valve emarginate ;

oval and smooth, coloured longitudinally with
five streaks. The name, miliaceum, is said to
have been applied to this plant from its producing
such a quantity of grain, as if one stalk borea
thousand seeds. Having mentioned the extreme
points where this grain is cultivated, it is hardly
Necessary to state that it is produced in the inter
mediate countries, Tournefort says that in th
Isle of Samos the inhabitauts, in preparing their
bread. knead together one half wheat and the other
half barley and millet mixed together. It is
also an article of dict both in Persia and India.


Forskul applies the name ,.-~) dubhun te
another corn-grass, which he first found in a gar


den at Rosetta, cultivated on account of its seed
being given as food to birds, Afterwards he


$0, found it commonly cultivated in Arabia. It


to a great size, being about five cubits in
height, with seeds of the size of rice. To it he
has given the name of Holcus dochna, but the
lant is as yet unknown to botanists, There i
fowever ne dnabe that the true dukhun of Arab


a


DOR. ,


authors is the above described panicum miliaceum.
This is so universally cultivated in the East as
une of their smaller corn-grasses, that it is most
likely to be the kind alluded to in the passage of
Reekiel.—J. F. R.

DOORS. [Gana]

DOPHKAH, an encampment of the Israelites
in the Wildemess (WANDERING, THE].

DOR CAT or WNT; Sept. Adpe, Adp), a town
on the border of the Mediterranean, which Jerome
places nine Roman miles north of Casarea. It
was one of the royal towns of the Canaanites
(Josh. xi. 2; xii. 23), and was included in the
heritage of Manassel (Josh. xvii. 11). The place,
or rather the region to which it gave name, occurs
again in 1 Kings iv. 11; and in the Maccabees
(I Macc. xv. 11) and Josephus (Antig. xvi. 4, i

under the name of Dora. A place stil
exists, at the distance indicated by Jerome, under
the name of Tortura, which+Buckingham de-
scribes as a small village with abovt forty or fifty
houses and five hundred inhabitants. It has a
small port, formed by a narrow range of rocky
islets, at a short distance from the sandy beach.

DOTHAN (j'N7 and }N7; Sept. Awbaely
and Aw@atz) or Doruars, the place where Joseph
found his brethren, who had wandered thither
with their flocks from Shechem, and where he was
treacherously suld by them to the Ishmaelites
(Gen. xxxvii. 17). It, was here also that the
Syrians were smitten with blindness at the word
of Elisha (2 Kings vi. 13). Dothan is placed
by Eusebius and Jerome twelve Roman miles
north of Sebaste or Samaria, and it was obviously
on the caravan track from Syria to Egypt. The
well into which Joseph was cast by his brothers,
and consequently the site of Dothan, has, how-
ever,-been placed by tradition in a very distant
quarter, namely, about three miles south-east
from Safed, where there is a khan called Khan
Jubb Yusuf, the Klan of Jacob's Pit, hecause

the well connected with it has long passed among
Christians and Moslems for the well in question.
The Bethulia of Judith has long been identified
with Safed, and as Dothan (Dothaim) is men-
tioned as being in the neighbourhood, it became
hecessary that Dothan should be found in this
jee But it is clear, from the notices in
udith (iv. 5; vii. 1, 2), that Bethulia was south,
and not north, of the plain of Esdraelon; and
Consequently we are at liberty to seek the site of
jothan also at some point more conformable to
the intimation of Eusebius and to the probabilities
Ke story than that of the alleged Juseph’s
ell.


DOVE (791° yoneh ; olvds and wepiorepd in
Greek), There 48 probably several ae of
doves or pigeons included in the Hebrew name
foneh, It may contain all those that inhabit
Palestine, exclusive of the turtle-doves properly
% called. Thus generalized, the dove is, figura-
tively, next to man, the most exalted of animals,
tymbolizing the Holy Spirit, the meekness, purity,
and splendour of righteousness, Next, it is by some
Considerea (though in an obscure ) as
Hy, atly national standard (Psa, Ixviit. 13), being
ikewise held in pagan Syria and Phaenicia to be
ee rot and a divinity, resplendent with silver
bul gold; and so vencrated as to be regarded as

Y, and forbidden as an article of food. By the


DOVE. m


Hebrew law, however, doves and turtle-doves were
the only birds that could be offered in sacrifice,
and they were usually selected for that purpose by
the less wealthy (Gen. xv.9; Lev. v.7; xii. 6;
Luke ii. a and to supply the demand for them,
dealers in these birds sat about the precincts of the
Temple (Matt. xxi. 12, &c.). The dove is the
harbinger of regonciliation with God (Gen. viii.
8, 10, &c.), and, though somewhat questionable,
the D'I)IN chirionim, ‘dung of doves’ (2 Kings
vi, 25), seems to be indicated as food in the last
degree of human suffering by famine. That this
interpretation is not forced, appears from similar
sages in Josephus (De Bell. Jud. v. 13,7). See
Jiner, Realworterbuch, s. v. Taube, where other
instances are adduceJ, and among them the fa-
mine in England, during the reign of King Ed-
ward II. ap. 1316, when ‘pigeons’ dung’ is
mentioned as being eaten by the poor. But we
take this to be a mere figure of speech copied froma
Josephus [Dovas’ Duna].


With regard to the dove as a national ensign,
it may be remarked that we have two figures where
the symbol occurs: one from a Phanician coin,
where the dove stands on a globe instead of the
usual pedestal of ancient signa, with wings closed,
and a glory of sunbeams round the head ; the other,
from a defaced bas-relief observed in the Hauran,
where the bird, with wings displayed, is seated also
on a globe, and the sunbeams, spreading behind
the whole, terminate ina circle of stars ; probably
representing Assyria, Syria, or perhaps Semiramis
(compare several passages in Jeremiah). The
brown wood-dove 18 said to be intended by the
Hebrew name; but all the sacred birds, unless ex-
pressly mentioned, were pure white, or with some
roseate feathers about the wing coverts, such as ure
still frequently bred from the carrier-pigeon of
Scandiroon. It is this kind which Tibullus notices.

* Alba Palestino sancta Columba Syro.’

The carrier-birds are represented in Egyptian
bas-reliefs, where priests are shown letting them
fly on a message ; and to them also may be referred
the black-doves, which typified or gave their name
to an order of, Gentile priests, both in Egypt and,
it would seem, in early Greece, who, under this
character, were, in the mysteries, restorers of light.
This may have had reference to the return of the
dove which caused Noah to uncover the ark. All
pigeons in their true wild plumage have iri-
descent colours about the neck, and often reflected
flashes of the same colours on the shoulders, which
are the source of the silver and gold feathers
ascribed to them in poetical diction: and thence the
epithet of purple bestowed upon them all, though


673 DOVES’ DUNG.


most applicable to the vinous and slaty-coloured
species. The coasts and territory of Syria are
noted for the great number of doves frequenting
them, though they are not so abundant there as in
the Coh-i-Suleiman chain near the Indus, which in
Sanscrit is named Arga varta, or, as it is inter-
preted, the ‘dove.’ Syria possesses several species
of pigeon: the Columba CEnas, or stock-dove,
C. Palumbus, or ring-dove, C. Domestica, Livia,
the common pigeon in several varieties, such as
. the Barbary, Turkish or Persian carrier, crisp, and
shaker. These are still watched in their flight in
the same manner as anciently their uumber, gyra-
tions, and other manceuvres were observed by sooth-
sayers. The wild species, as well as the turtle-
doves, migrate from Palestine to the south 3 but
stock and ring-doves are not long absent.
We figure above (No. 252) the more rare
ies of white and pink carrier, and the Pha.
mician sacred ensign of the dove.—C. H. S.
DOVES' DUNG. This expression occurs in
2 Kings vi. 25, as a literal translation of O°)"
chirionim or charei-yonim, which in the margin
is written DYN dib-yonim, both meaning the
same thing: and it is curious that in the Arabic


there are two words very similar to these, Foam


khureh, and je)} adil, which also signify the


same thing, that is, the dung of animals, In the
above compounds, khir and dib being prefixed
to yonim, the plural form for doves, the literal
meaning is as above translated. By many the
expression is considered to signify literally the
dung of pigeons, as in the passage of 2 Kings vi.
25: ‘ And there was a great famine in Samaria,
and behold they besieged it, until an ass's head was
sold for threescore pieces of silver, and the fourth
part of a cab of doves’ for four pieces of
silver.’ Different opinions, owever, have been
entertained respecting the meaning of the words
which are the subject of this article, namely, whe
ther they should be taken literally, or asa figura-
tive name of some vegetable substance. The
strongest point in favour of the former view is that
all ancient Jewish writers have understood the
term literally. Taking it, however, in this sense,
various explanations have been given of the use
to which the doves’ dung was applied. Some of
the rabbins were of opinion, that the doves’ dung
was used for fuel, and Josephus, that it was pur-
chased for its salt. Mr. Harmer has suggested that
it might have been a valuable article, as being of
great use for quickening the growth of esculent

ts, particularly melons; and he shows, what
is well known, that the Persians live much on
melons in the summer months, and. use pigeons’
dung in raising them. All travellers describe
the number of pigeon-houses in Persia. Mr.
Edwards, as cited by Dr. Harris, remarks that
it is not likely they had much ground to culti-
vate in so populous a city for gardens; and is
disposed therefore to understand it as meaning
the offals or refuse of all sorts of grain, which was
wont to be given to pigeons, &c. Dr. Harris,
however, observes that the stress of the famine
might have been so great as to have compelled
the poor among the besieged in Samaria to devour
either the intestines of the doves, after the more
wealthy had eaten the bodies, or, as it might
perhaps be rendered, the crops; and reference has


DOVES’ DUNG.


been made in the Edinb. Christian Instructor,
No. 122, to an abridged Chronicle of the History
of England, in which it is said that in the famine
which laid England waste in 1316 the poor ate
Pigeons’ dung. But these explanations are not
more satisfactory than the older ones.


253. (Ornithogalum umbellatum.]


Bochart, however, has shown (Hierozotcon,
ii. 37) that the term ‘ pigeons’ dung’ was applied
by the Arabs to different vegetable substances.
He quotes Avicenna as applying the term stereus
columbarum to two different plants or substances.
One of these is described by Avicenna and other
Arab authors, under the names kuz-kundem and
Joug-kundem, as a light substance like moss, Se-
condly, this name was given to the ashnan or
tusnan, which appears to be a fleshy-leaved plant,
that, like the salsolas, salicornias, or mesembryan-
themums, when burnt, yields alkali in its ashes.
From this Bochart has been led to consider it as
identical with another plant, which occurs under
the name of kali both in the Hebrew and Arabic
languages, and which was one of the pulses used in
ancient times, as at the present day, as an article
of diet [Karz]. With reference to this grain it
has been oheerved that ‘large quantities of it are
parched and dried, and stored in magazines at
Cairo and Damascus. It is much used during
iourneys, and particularly by the great pilgrim-
caravan to Mecca; and if this conjecture be cot
rect it may be supposed to have been among the
provisions stored up in the besieged city, and
sold at the extravagant price mentioned in the
text’ (Pict. Bible). The late Lady Callcott, in
her Scripture Herbal, 1842, adduces the orni-
thogalum umbellatum, or common Star of Beth-
Jehem, as the ‘doves’ dung * of Scripture, and as-
signs this, as well as ‘birds’ milk,’ as two of its
vernacular names, and infers that the pigeuns’ dung
which has been mentioned above as being eaten
in England in the famine of 1316 was the roots
of this plant. It is a native of this country, and
also of Taurus, Caucasus, and Northern Africa
Dioscorides states that its bulbs were sometimes
cooked with bread, in the same way as the me
fanthium, and also that it was eaten both raw
and roasted. The roots were also commonly
eaten in Italy and other southern countries at an
early period. Sprengel (in Diotcor. ii. 471,


DRACHMA.


with reference to the above passage of Dioscorides
on dpyi8éyador, says, ‘ Ebraice dicta fuit planta
DI MIN, stercus columbinum (2 Reg. vi. 25),
ob floris albidum cuin herbaceo mixtum colorem,
ticut in stercore plerarumque avium herbivora-
mm ea mixtio observatur. Est enim ornitho-
galunm umbellatum, quod per omuem orientem
proveniens, Lulbos habet edules, licet a pauperi-
bus quntaxat petantur. Hac Linnzi expusitio
biblici loci. multi plus valet, quam septem et
quod excedit yyjoes, quas Bochartus enu-
merat.’ ‘

Having seen that the name of pigeons’ dung
has been, and probably still is, applied by the
Arabs to different vegetable substances, we are
not disposed to adopt the literal meaning of the
term, as doves’ dung, being devoid of nutri-
ment, was not likely to have served as food, even
during the famine, especially as we find that an
ass's head was sold for sixty pieces of silver. Now
if any asses remained for sale, or ass-loads of
corn, as the expression has been interpreted, there
is no reason for sujposing, that other substances
may not have remained stored up in secret for
thuse who had money to buy. But it is not easy
to say what vegetable substance, serving as an
article of diet, is alluded to by the name of
‘doves’ dung.’ If the besieged had communication
with the exterior, or even if any of their body could
have dng in the neighbourhood of the walls, for
the kind of ¢ earth-nut ' offered by the bulbs of the
ornithogalum, or Star of Bethelem, which is said
to be abundant in the neighbourhood of Samaria,
there dues not appear any good reason why it
should not be the substance alluded to. But it
does not appear sv likely to have been stored up;
and we have been unable to discover any reference
in the Arab authors to such a plant, under the
hame of stercus columbarum. Pulse was as
Tikely to have been stored up in ancient times
as at the present day; and it may, therefore, as
shown by Bochart, have been one of the substances
to which the name was applied by the Arabs,
and have been known to the Hebrews also by a
similar name [Kaxt].—J. F. R.

DRACHMA (8paxuh) a coin of silver, the
most common among the Grecks, and which after
the Exile became also current among the Jews
(2 Mace. iv. 19; x. 20; xii, 43; Luke xv. 8, 9).
The earlier Attic drachma were of the average
weight of 66-5 grains, and in a comparison with
the shilling would be equal to 93d. But the spe-
cimens of later times are of the average weight of
nly 61 grains, and some of less. In this state
the drachma was counted equal to the denarius,
which was at first worth &4d., and afterwards only
74d. The value of the drachma of the New Tes-
tament may therefore have been about 8d. The
Yomans ‘ten pieces of silver’ (drachme) in
Luke xv. 8, would hence be equal to 6s. 8d. of
our money—that is, in nominal value, for the
teal value of money was far greater in the time
of Christ than at present, That the drachma of
Alexandria was equal to two of Greece is inferred
from the fact that the Septuagint makes the Jewish
shekel equivalent to two drachme EDIE Nes
and in fact afi Alexandrian drachma weighing 1
grains has been found.

BORAGON, in our version, is used for the
na Tt am PIN thanin, and DIN tha-

mm. It occurs principally in the plural form


DRAGON. 573


(Job xxx. 29; Ps. xliv. 19, 20; Isa. xiii. 22;
xxxiv. 13; xxxv. 7; Jer. ix. 11; xiv. 6; xlix.
33; and Micah i. 8). These texts, in general,
present pictures of ruined cities and of desolation
in the wilderness. Where Thanim are associated
with birds of the desert, they clearly indicate
serpents of various species, both small and large,
as already noticed in the article Appar. In
Jer. xiv. 6, where wild asses snufling up the wind
are compared to dragons, the image will appear
in its full strength, if we understand by dragons,
t boas and python-serpents, such as are figured
in the Prenestine mosaics. They were common
in ancient times, and are still far from rare in
the tropics of both continents. Several of the
7 eae grow to an enormous size, and, during
eir periods of activity, are in the habit of
raising a considerable portion of their length into
a vertical position, iike pillars, 10 or 12 feet
high, in order to survey the vicinity above the
surrounding bushes, while with open jaws they
drink in a quantity of the current air. The same
character exists in smaller serpents; but it is
not obvious, unless when, threatening to strike,
they stand on end nearly three-fourths of their
length. Most, if not all, of these species are mute,
or can utter only a hissing sound; and although
the malli-pambu, the great rock-snake of Southern
Asia, is said to wail in the night, we have never
witnessed such a phenomenon, nour heard it ae-
serted, that any other boa, python, or erpeton
had a real voice; but they hiss, and, like cro-
codiles, may utter sounds somewhat akin to
howling.

It is from these giant serpents which, at a
remote period, were evidently still more colossal
than that which is recorded to have opposed
a Roman army, or the skeleton of another above
100 feet in length, found more recently in India,
that those vague but universally-spread notions
must have arisen im the earliest antiquity, and
been perpetuated to our own time, which typified
the deluge and all great destructive agents under
the form of a dragon or monster serpent. We
find them embodied by the ancients in the form
of dragon temples (Dracountia), consisting of huge
stones set upright in rows, such as that of Colchis,
no doubt, was. Such temples existed in Asia
Minor, Epirus, Northern Africa, Gaul, and Bri-
tain, that at Abury, in Wiltshire, being several
miles in length; aud where their design can be
traced out sufficiently in existing remains, the
serpentine figure is ever observed tu glide through
or sustain a diagram of similar materials—e
circumstance which appears best explained by
considering them more or less astronomical, but
fundamentally reposing upon traditions concern-
ing the Ark, the preserver of animal life, in the
act of struggling with the overwhelming ele-
ment. These structures are ever connected witb
water, coming, as it were, out of the sea, or at
least intersecting a stream or rivulet; thus re-
taining both the diluvian record and the truth
of nature; for all boas and pythons enter the
water at certain seasons, pass through rivers as
if they were unconscious of the change of me-.
dium, swim with great velocity, or sojourn be-
neath the surface, some for a time, others habita-
ally. Perhaps in conjunction with the existence
of real colossal sea-serpents, but not wholly so,
nations remote from the ocean, in common witb.


om DRAGON.


the rest, have in their cosmogonies their religious
dogmas, their legends and records, both males.
volent and beneticial, giant-serpents—the Indian
nations, their kapila, cuvera, ananta, naga, sesha
naga; und the more western nations their paystha,
sogne, kater, vidhanger, and finally, the great
dragon, sometimes denoting the guide-preserver
of the ark, the monster guardian of riches, the
via lactea among the stars, or abstract powers
in Eastern demonology; at other times similar
types, but in the West more generally con-
nected with the image of the deluge, and figured
by the ancient Helio-Arkite temples of the Celta
already noticed. But the serpent. type is con-
stantly mixed up with another of the lizard
form; and as, in every quarter of the globe, the
dragon of the deluge assuiling the ark is trans-
ferred to the skies, and a celestial dragon, in Asia,
generally denominated Satan ,OW, is believed
to attack the moon, the crescent ship, during an
eclipse. Wings have been added to the monster of
the skies. Cumets have been called dragon-stars,
and the assumed figure of one has been made a
chief ensign of all the equestrian nations of
Eastern and Northern Asia. Westward the dra-
gon was the azdehac of Persia, a Roman ensign
during the empire, and one common to all the
Celtic and Gothic nations. So late as the 11th cen-
tury, Harold, the last Anglo-Saxon king, perished
at Hastings fighting between his two dragon
standards; while our Norman sovereigns had a
pennon with the dragon painted thereon, in all
the great wars, in the crusades, and even down
to Henry VIII. In Christian church ceremo-
nies the drazon image, the Zavpiwy, was carried
about, and fire was sometimes placed in its
mouth. It is necessary to bear in mind the general
tenour of these remarks, when allusion is made in
thes acred volume to the Thanim, and in the Reve-
lations especially, where the dragon is mentioned ;
for they tend to explain in what manner the exist-
ing nations of Western Asia might have viewed
the types in question at the beginning of the
Christian era.

Reverting from these symbols to the physically
existing species whence they may have been drawn,
it seems that when mentioned in connection with


rivers, innd, leviathan, gencrally applies to the


crocodile; when in connection with land, and
particularly the desert, it appears to designate
a@ waran, a species of monitor, probably the twaran-
el-hard of the Arabs, monitor-arenarius, growing
to near six feet in length; or another species of a
green shining colour, not as yet completely de-
scribed, but acquiring the length of Y feet, while
thanim is certainly used fur serpents mostly of
the larger kind. In the apocryphal history o
Bel and the Dragon, where the last-mentioned
was a living animal, by some taken for a cro-
codile, we think it more likely to have been a
great snake, such as is still fed and venerated in
Cutch, because these reptiles are safely handled
when not excited ; food may even be thrust into
their throats, and the worship of them is nut yet
extinct in the eastern provinces of Persia. But
all these animals are oviparous or ovoviviparous :
when, therefore, the same term is used for those
that draw the breast and suckle their young, which
implies a species of mammalia, they can indicate
aly cetaceans, unless it were proved that scals


DREAMS.


had at any time frequented the seas of Palestine
or of Arabia. We refer this question to the
articles LyviaTnan and Wiare.—c. H.S.

DREAMS. Of all the subjects upon which
the mind of man has speculated, there is perhaps
none which has more perplexed than that of
dreaming. :

Whatever may be the difficulties attending the
subject, still we know that it has formed a chan-
nel through which Jehovah was pleased in former
times to reveal His character and dispensations
to His people. :

In regard to the immediate cause of dreaming
the opinions of the ancients were very various,
aud some of them striking ; but they do not claim
Notice in the prevent work. We cannot, however,
omit the opinion of Aristotle, who thought that
every object of sense produces upon the human
soul a certain impression, which remains for sume
time after the object that made it is removed;
and which, being afterwards recognised by the
perceptive faculty in sleep, gives rise tu the varied
images which present themselves.

Amongst English writers on this subject, none
have written with more acuteness in support of
his theory than Baxter. He supposes that our
dreams are prompted by separate spinits—an
opinion generally entertained by the heathen, and
which opinion has given rise, in all ages and m
all countries, to much superstition and imposture
(Baxter's Essay on the Phenumenon of Dream-
tng, vol. ii. 3d edit. 1745).

Professor Dugald Stewart, in endeavouring to
reduce the phenomenon of dreaming to some es-
tablished prineiples, remarks, that in sleep those
operations of the mind are suspended which de-
pend on our tolition. He then says that, if the
suspension of our voluntary cperations in sleep
be admitted as a fact, there are only two suppo-
sitions which can be advanced concerning its
cause ;—the one is, that the power of volition is
suspended; the other, that the will loses its in-
fluence over those faculties of the mind and those
members of the body which, during our waking
hours, are subjected to its authority. Now it
may be shown that the former is not consistent
with fact, whence the latter follows as a necessary
consequence. Hence it is inferred that all our
mental operations which are independent of onr
teill may continue during sleep; and that the
phenomenon of dreaming may, perhaps, Le pro
duced by these, diversified in their apparent ellects
in consequence of the suspension of our voluntary
powers. Two obvious consequences follow :—

Ist. That when we are asleep the succession cf
our thoughts, in so far as it depents on the asso-
ciation, may be carried on by the operation of the
same unknown causes by which it is produced
while we are awake; and, 2ud. That tie orler
of our thoughts in these two states of our minds
must be very different, inasmuch as in tie one
it depends solely on the laws of assvciation, and
in the other, on those Jaws combined with our
own voluntary exertions.

If, then, the succession of our thoughts during
sleep is regulated by the same general laws of
association to which it is subjected while we are
awake, and if the circumstances which discri-
minate dreaming from our waking thoughts are
such as must necessarily arise froth the suspen-
sion of the tci//, this may account for the inaccu


DREAMS.


tate estimate we furm of time when dreaming;
the rapidity of thought is such that in the twink-
ling of an eye a‘ crowd of ideas may before
us,to which it would take a long discourse to
give utterance; and transactions may be con-
ceived which it would require days to realise.
But in sleep the conceptions of the mind are mis-
taken for realities, and therefore our estimate of
time will be found not according to our experi-
ence of the rapidity of thought, but according to
our experience of the time requisite for realising
what we conceive (Stewart's Elements of the
Philosophy of the Human Mind, pp. 328-348).

There seems a strong analogy between dream-
ing and insanity. Dr. Abercrombie defines the
difference between the two states to be, that in
the latter the erroneous impression, being perma-
nent, affects the conduct; whereas, in dreaming,
no influence on the conduct is produced, because
the vision is dissipated on awaking.

We believe that dreams are ordinarily the re-
embodiment of thoughts which have before, in
some shape or other, occupied our minds.” They
are broken fragments of our furmer conceptions
revived, and heterogeneously brought together.
If they break off from their connecting chain, and
become loosely associated, they exhibit ofttimes
absurd combinations, but the elements still sub-
sist. If, for instance, any irritation, such as
pain, fever, &c., should excite the perceptire
organs while the reflective ones are under the
influence of sleep, we have a consciousness of
objects, colours, or sounds being presented to us,
ne as if the former organs were actually stimu-
ated by having such impressions communicated
to them by the external senses; whilst, in conse-
quence of the repose of the reflecting power, we
are unable to rectify the illusion, and conceive
that the scenes passing before us, or the sounds

we hear, have a real existence. This want

of mutual co-operation between the different fa-
culties of the mind may account for the disjointed
character of dreams. This position might be fully
substantiated by an appeal to the evidence of
fact. Dr. Keattie speaks of a man who could
be made to dream anything by whispering in his
ear. Dr. Gregory relates of himself that, having
once had occasion to apply a bottle of hot water
to his own feet when he retired to bed, he dreamed
that he was ascending the side of Mount Etna,
and that he fuund the heat of the ground almost
Insuflerable. Persons who have had a. blister
applied to their head have been known to dream
of being scalped by a party of North American
Indians. Sleeping in a smoky room, we may
tlream of a house or a city being in flames. The
smell of a flower applied to the nostrils may call
forth the idea of walking in a garden; and the
sound of a flute may excite in us the most plea-
surable assuciations.

i Here, then, we discover one great sonrce of
tat class of dreams of which Solomon spcaks in
celes. y. 7.

ae only one of our mental powers which is
ot suspended while dreaming is fancy, or ima-

Aptis We often find memory and judgment

altemately suspended and exercised, Sometimes

vb fancy ourselves contemporaneous with persons
sere Ny ages before: here memory is at
pthc Judgment is set aside. We dream of

§ Ou a very connected discourse with a


DREAMS, 578


deceased friend, and are not conscious that he is
No more: here judgment is awake, but memory
suspended. These irregularities, or want of mu-
tual co-operation in the different faculties of the
mind may form, for anght we know, the plan by
which God gives health and vigour to the whole
soul.

How God revealed himself by dreams, and
raised up persons to interpret them, the Scriptures
abundantly testify. Under the three successive
dispensations we find this channel of communi-
catton with man adopted. It was doubtless in
this way that God appeared to the father of the
faithful, ordering him to forsake country, kindred,
and his father’s house, and to go into the land
that he would show him. To this divine com-
mand Abraham paid a ready obedience. It was
by a similar prompt obedience to the admonition
conveyed to ne in a dream that Abimelech
(Gen. xx. 3) himself and Abraham, tco, were
saved from the evil consequences of his meditated
act.

When Jacob was, as it were, banished from his
father’s house, in order to avvid the effects of his
brother's implacable rage, he came to a place
called Luz (Gen. xxviii. 19), and, whilst there
sleeping under the canopy of heaven, he had
communicatiun by dream, not only with angels,
but with God also :—* He dreamed, and behold
a ladder set upon the earth,’ &c. This was an
encouraging dream to Jacob, for it filled his soul
with holy and awful thoughts of God. On
awaking we do not tind this patriarch dismissing
the thought of the dream from his mind; but he
exclaims, ‘Surely the Lord was in this place, and
I knew it not! and he was afraid, and said, How
dreadful is this place! This is none other but
the house of Goud, this is the gate of heaven!’
He even set up a pillar to perpetuate its memory,
and made a solemn vow that Jehovah should be
his God. And, moreover, such was the deep im-
pression which this dream made upon his mind,
that God, who appeared many years afterwards to
him when yet in Padan-aram, aid bade him re-
turn to his fatherland, urges this as a motive :—
©T am the God of Beth-el, where thou anuintedst
the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto
me.” We are informed in the sequel how God
did falti} to him all that he had then promised,

But, though this was the first, it was not the
last time God appeared to Jacob in a dream.
In Gen, xxxi. 10, Jacob informs his wives that it
was God who saw how Laban oppressed him—
who had directed him to take the speckled, &c.
cattle for his wages, aud had ordered him to
retarn home. He obeyed; and when Laban, de- ~
signing to do Jacob some harm (Gen. xxxi. 24),

uursued, and after seven days overtook him, God,
by a dream, prevented the meditated evil.

Joseph, whilst vet a child, had dreams pre-
dictive of his future advancement (Gen. xxxvii.
6-11). These dreams are one, and were repeated
under ditlerent forms, in order, it would seem, to
express the certainty of the thing they predicted.
How they formed the first link in an extended
chain of God's providential dealings the sacred
record fully informs us. Jealous not only of


‘the partiality of their father for Joseph, but also


of that which God would evince by these dreams
for him, his brethren hated him, and sold him to
the Midianites. From their hands he was trans-


$76 DREAMS.
ferred to Potiphar, captain of Pharaoh's guard,


and from him, under the cruel and unjust accu-
sation of his vile wife, was cast into the king's
prison—alas! in this position Satan might well
wore Joseph to doubt the kind providence of the

whom he served. But no—he felt assured
that the Lord was with him, and that, in His
own time and manner, he would vindicate his
innocence, and give him his liberty. Nor was
this contidence of Joseph disappointed ; for, in
the course of time, by being able to give an
accurate interpretation of three predictive dreams,
he was raised from the prison to a participation
with King Pharaoh in the government of Egypt!
It is true that a daring infidelity has tried to
reduce the first of this series of dreams to a
natural principle—the constitutional vanity of
the dreamer’s mind—and thus to set aside its
divine character and tendency. But, granting
for a moment that Joseph vainly read in the
partial feelings of his father his own eventual
elevation over his brethren, and that by reason of
the impression which this flattering prospect made
upon his mind he was led to dream as above
noticed, still, this could not alter the predictive
character of the dream: and in proof of this we
appeal to the account of its ectual fulfilment.
It is quite clear from the inspired history that
dreams were looked upon by the earliest nations
of antiquity as premonitions from their idol gods
of future events. One part of Jehovah's great
plan in revealing, through this channel, His de-
signs toward Egypt, Joseph individually, and his
brethren generally, was to correct this notion.
Hence it was that, on Joseph being brought into
the presence of Pharaoh for the purpose of ex-
plaining his dreams, he at once says, ‘tt ts not
tn me; God shall give Pharaoh an answer of
peace.’ Such were sume of the dreams by which
God revealed himself under the patriarchal dis-
pensation, and that the same divine mode of
communicating with man was continued under
that of Muses is evident from an express word of
promise (Num. xii. 6), ‘If there be a prophet
amonz you I, the Lord, will make myself known
unto him in a vision, and will speak to him in a
dream.’ That dreams were one of the ways
whereby God was wont to signify his pleasure
to men under this dispensation is evident from
the complaint of Saul to the spirit of Samuel
(whom the witch pretended to raise up), when he
askel him, ‘Why hast thou disquieted me to
bring me up?’ Saul answered, ‘I am sore dis-
tressed ; for the Philistines make war against me,
and God is departed from me, and answers me
no more; neither by prophets, nor by dreams:
therefure I have called thee that thou mayest
make known to me what I shall do.’ And,
in order to guard against imposition, Moses

ounced a penalty against dreams which were
invented and wickedly made use of, for the pro-
motion of idolatry (Deut. xiii. 15). Thus
Zechariah (x. 2) complains: ‘The idols have
spoken vanity, and the diviners have spoken a lie,
and have told false dreams; they comfort in
vain.’ And so Jeremiah (xxiii. 25), ‘I have
heard what the prophets said that prophesy lies
in my name, saying, I have dreained, I have
dreamed,’ &c. Yet this abuse did not alter
God's plan in the right use of them; for in the
28th verse of the same chapter, it is said, ‘ the


BREAMS,


prophet that hath a dream, and he that hath my
word, let him speak my word faithfully. What
is the chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord.’

When Gideon warred with the Amalekites, and
was alarmed at their vast multitudes, he was en-
couraged to do God's will by overnearing one of
them relate his dream, and another giving the in-
terpretation (Judg. vii.). Again, it was in a
dream that God was pleased to grant Solomon a
promise of wisdom and understanding (1 Kings
ni. 5, &c.). Here we may perceive what converse
the Lord was pleased to hold with Solomon ina
dream; and the sacred record informs us how
reamed everything herein promised was ful-

But, though God speaks frequently by dreams,
yet mau is often found actually closing his ears
against such communications. Thus Job says
(xxxiii. 14), ‘God speaketh once, yea twice, yet
man perceiveth it not. Ina dream, in a vision of
the night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, in
slumbering upon the bed, then he openeth the
ears of men and sealeth their instruction.’

Sometimes those dreams and visions are of a
pleasurable and again of a frightful character :—
When I say my bed shall comfort me, my
couch shall ease me; then thou scarest me with
dreams and terrifiest me with visions’ (Job vii.


14).

he knowledge of visions and dreams is reckou-
ed amongst the principal gifts and graces some
times bestowed by God upon them that fear
him; so it is said of Daniel and his companion,
that ‘God gave them knowledge and skill in all
learning and wisdom: and Daniel had under-
standing in all visions and dreams (Dan. i. 17).
And the God who bad imparted this spirit unto his
servant Daniel soon, in the arrangement of his
promelcnes gave occasion for its exercise. Ne

uchadnezzar, king of Babylon, dreamed a dream,

and his spirit was troubled because the thing had
gone from him. Having, however, a deep im-
pression that the dream was of portentous mvan-
ing, he called together his magicians, astrologers,
and sorcerers, and commanded them to recall and
explain it to him. These reputedly wise men of
Babylon at once acknowledged that to meet the
king's wishes belonged not to the capacity of
man. Disappointed and enraged at this con-"
fessed impotency, he ordered all the wise men of
his kingdom to be put to death. Daniel being
included in this order implored God to reveal to
him the dream with its interpretation : his prayer
was graciously answered (Dan. ii. 19). Whereupon
he acquaints the king, that ‘there is a (rod in
Heaven who revealeth secrets, and maketh known
to him what shall be in the latter days;’ and
then proceeds to state the dream together with the
interpretation thereof. Satisfied with what Da
niel stated, Nebuchadnezzar said unto Daniel,
< Of a truth it is that your God is a God of gods,
and a Lord of kings; and the divine histuriau
states that in consequence of this both the prophet,
and Shadrach, Meshach, and Abeduego were pro-
moted to the highest offices of the state! In this
dream a great variety of ends were attained in
reference to Babylon, Israel, and indeed the
world—all of which were worthy of God's miracu-
lous interference,

That this method of God's revealing bimse!
was not confined to the legal dispensation, but


DRESS.


was to be extenled to the Christian, is evident
from Joel (ii. 28), ‘And afterwards (saith the
Lord) I will pour out my pnt upon all flesh ;
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy ;
your young men shall see visions, and your old
men shall dream dreams.’ In Acts ii. 17 we
find the Apostle Peter applying this to the illu-
mination of the Holy Ghost. Accordingly, we
read that when Joseph designed to put Mary
away, because he perceived her to be with child,
he was tured from his purpose by a dream, in
which an angel made the truth of the matter
known to him (Matt. i. 20). And in the follow-
ing chapter it is stated, that God, in a dream,
warned the wise men not to return to Herod.
Moreover, in verses 13 and 19, Joseph is in-
structed to flee into and return from Egypt with
the child Jesus.

Whether the dream of Pilate’s wife was a divine
intimation we cannot tell.

That divine dreams, which actually were im-
parted to God's servants, should be imitated in
fictitious representation by ancient and modern
writers, was consistent no less with the general
objects of superstition and imposture than with
those of literature. Hence divine dreams be-
came the coustant appendages of the heathen my-
thology, and accounts, real and fictitious, of com-
™municatiuns in vision, were interwoven in every
production. Information which was superior to
the vulgar philosophy of the time, intimated its
discoveries as suggestions imparted by inspira-
tion. Ifa warning wasto be conveyed, what so
affecting as the admonition of a departed friend !
Such machinery was particularly adapted to
works of imagination, and the poems of antiquity,-
as well as those of modern times, were frequently
decorated with its ornaments.

We inquire not how far God may have revealed
himself to man beyond what Holy Scripture
records. Some of the dreams, both of ancient
and modern times, which lay claim to a divine
character, are certainly striking, and may, for
aught we know, have had, and may still have, a
collateral bearing ou the development of God's
purposes.—J. W. D.


DRESS. The subject of the costume of the
ancieut Hebrews is involved in much obscurity
und doubt. Sculptured monuments and coins
afford us all needful information respecting the
dress of the ancient Egyptians, Babylonians, Per-
sians, Greeks, and Romans; and even the garb
worn by the barbarous nations is perpetuated in
the monuments of their antagonists and con-
querors. But the ancient Hebrews have left no
monuments, no figures of themselves; and the
few figures which have been supposed to represent
Jews in the monuments of Egypt and Persia are
so uncertain, that their authority remains to be
established before we can rely upon the informa-
tion which they convey. There are, however,
many allusions to dress in the Scriptures, and
these form the only source of our positive informa-
tion. They are often, indeed, obscure, and of
uncertain interpretation; but they are invaluable
in so far as they enable us to compare and verify
the information derivable from other sources.
These sources are—

1, The costume of neighbouring ancient na-

ir Monuments.


tions, as represented in their


DRESS. 877


2. The alleged costume of Jews as represented
in the same monuments.

3. The present costumes (which are known to
be ancient) of Syria and Arabia,

4. Tradition.

1. The range of inquiry into monumental
costume is very limited. It isa common mis-
take to talk of ‘Oriental costume,’ as if it were
a uniform thing, whereas, in fact, the costumes
of the Asiatic nations differ far more from one
another than do the costumes of the different na-
tions of Europe. And that this was the case
anciently, is shown by the monuments, wherein
the costumes of Egyptians, Babylonians, Per-
sian, Medes, Syrians, and Greeks, differ as much
from one another as do the costumes of the modern
Syrians, Egyptians, Arabs, Turks, and Persians.
It is therefore useless to examine the monumental
costume of any uation, remote from Palestine, for


- the purpose of ascertaining the costume of the


ancient Hebrews. Syria, Arabia, and Egypt, are
the ouly countries where monuments would be
likely to afford any useful information: but
Arabia has left no monumental figures, and
Syria none of sufficiently ancient date ; and it is
left for Egypt to supply all the information likely
to be of use. The extent and value of this in-
formation, for the particular purpose, we believe
to be far less than is usually re ted. That
we are not disposed to undervalue the informa-
tion derivable from the Egyptian monuments for
the purpose of illustrating Biblical histury and
antiquities, the pages of the present work will
sufficiently evince; and its editor may indeed
claim to have heen the first in this country to
work this mine of materials for Biblical illustra-
tion. But the rage for this kind of illustration has
been carried to such preposterous lengths, and is
so likely in its further progress to confuse our
notions of the real position which the Hebrews |
occupied, that it may not be an unwholesome
caution to remind our readers that the Egyptians
and the Hebrews were an exceedingly different
people—gs different in every respect as can well
be conceived; and that the®climates which they


‘inhabited were so very diflerent as to necessitate


a greater difference of food and dress than might
be pre-supposed of countries so near to each other.,
This consideration appears to us to render of little
value the very ingenious illustrations of Jewish
costume which have been deduced from this
source. It is true that the Jewish nation was
cradled in Egypt: and this circumstance may
have had some intluence on ceremonial dresses,
and the ornaments of women; but we do not find -
that nations circumstanced as the Jews were
readily adopt the costumes of other nations, es-
pecially when their residence in Egypt was always
regarded by them as temporary, and when their
raiment was of hume manufacture—spun and
woven by the women from the produce of their
flocks (Exod. xxxv. 25). We find also that,
immediately after leaving Egypt, the principal
article of among the Hebrews was some
ample woollen garment, fit to sleep in (Exod.
xxil. nt oe which nothing similar is to be seen
among the costumes of Egypt.

2. With respect to the supposed tion
of Jews in ancient monuments, if any authentic
examples could be found, even of asingle fi
in the ancient costume, it would aie -

®


578 DRESS.


tisfaction, as tending to elucidate many
of Scripture which cannot at present be with cer-
tainty explained. The sculptures and paintings
supposed to represent ancient Hebrews are con-
tained in— ess ‘6
a.) A painting at Beni Hassan, representing the
aint of some foreigners in Egypt, and supposed
to figure the arrival of Joseph's brethren in that
country. The accessories of the scene, the phy-
siogniomies of the persons, and the time to which
the picture relates, are certainly in unison with
that event: but other circumstances are against
the notion. Sir J. G. Wilk-nson speaks hesi-
tatingly on the subject : and, until some greater
certainty is obtained, we may admit the possible
correctness of the conjecture. The annexed cut


shows the variety of costume which this scene
displays. All the men wear sandals. Some ot
them are clad only in a short tunic or shirt, with
close sleeves (fig. 3); others wear over this a kind
of sleeveless plaid or mantle, thrown over the left
shoulder, and ing under. the right arm
(fig. 2). It is of a striped and curiously figured
pattern, and louks exceedingly like the fine grass
woven cloth of the South Sea. Others have, in-

_ stead of this, a fringed skirt of the same material
(fig. 1). All the figures are hare-headed, and
wear which are circumstances favour-
-able to the identification. The fringed skirt of
fig. 1 is certainly a remarkable circumstance.
Moses directed thatethe people should wear a
fringe at the hem of their garments (Num. xv.
38); and the probability is that this command
merely @ more ancient usage.

(8.) This fringe re-appears, much enlarged, in
the other Egyptian sculpture in which Jews are
supposed to be gana These are in a tomb
discovered by Belzoni, in the valley of Bab-el
Melook, near Thebes. There are captives of
different nations, and among them four figures,
supposed to represent Jews. The scene is ima-
gined to commemorate the triumphs of Pharaoh-


Necho in that war in which the Jews were de-
feated at Megiddo, and their king Josiah slain -


DRESS.


Kdenkain xxxt, = It will be seen that the
of these figures differs little, excepting in the
length of the fringe, from that of the skirted figure
in the earlier painting ; and so far this is a cor-
roborative circumstance in favour of both. The
band round the head is the other principal dif-
ference. These figures are manifestly in what
we would call undress, and the comparison beiug
made with the similar undress figures in the
earlier scene, the resemblance is greater than
might be expected from the distance of time and
diflerence of manners. The internal evidence is
so far good; and if the extemal evidence were
equally strong, there would uot be much ground
for hesitation.

(e.) On the face of a rock, at Besitoon, on the
Median border of the ancient Assyria, there isa
remarkable sculpture representing a number of
captives strung together by the neck, brought be
fore the king and conqueror, who seems _pro-
Nouncing sentence upon them. The venerable
antiquity of this sculpture is unquestionable ; and
Sir R. K. Porter was led to fancy that the sculp-
ture commemorates the subjugation and deporta-
tion of the ten tribes by Shalmanezer, king of
Assyria (2 Kings xvii. 6). The reasons which he
assigns for this conclusion are of little weight, and
Not worth examination. But the single fact that
the tigures are arrayed in a Poreg ane to the
ancient and present garb of the e of Syria
and Lebanon, inclines us to think that the figures
really do represent the costume of nations west of
the Euphrates, including, probably, that of the
Jews and their near neighbours. e dress here


shown is a shirt or tunic confined around the
waist by a strap or girdle; while others have a
longer and larger robe, furnished with a spacious
oe or hood, aud, probably, worn over the
other.

There is no reason to think that the dress of the.
Jews was in any important respect different from
that of the other inhabitants uf the same and im-
mediately bordering countries, It would there-
fore Le satisfactory, and would enable us to judge
better of the figures which have been noticed, if
we had representations of Canaanites, Pharnicians,
Syrians, Noabites, &c., by the Egyptian artists,
who were so exact in discriminatirag, even to
caricature, the peculiarities of nations. At p. 226
there is a supposed figure of a Canaanite warrior
from this source. The dress being military does
not afford much room for comparison in the pre-
sent instance; but we at once recognise in it most
of the articles which formed the military dress of
the Hebrews. The following figures (No. 257),
however, convey more information, as they appear
to represent inhabitants of Syria and Lebanon.
The evidence for the last (fig. 2) is as conclusive
as can be obtained, for not only is there the name
Lemanon (m being constantly interchanged with
2), but the persons thus attired are represented


257.


as inhabitating a mountainous country, and
felling Jfir-trees to impede the chariots of the
Egyptian invaders. The dresses are similar to
each other, and this similarity strengthens the
probability that the dress of the Jews was not very
different; and it is also observable that it is
similar to the full dress of some of the figures in
the sculpture at Besitoon: the figures are bearded,
and the cap, or head-dress, is bound round with
a fillet. The figures are arrayed in a long gown
reaching to the ankles, and confined around the
waist by a girdle; and the shoulders are covered
by a cape which appears to have been common to
several nations of Asia. At first view it would
seem that this dress is different from those already
figured. But in all probability this more spa-
cious robe is merely an outer garment, covering
that inner dress which is shown in the figures
that seem more scantily arrayed.

Such is the amount of the information to be
derived from ancient monuments, .


That to be obtained from tradition is embodied
—l. In the dresses of monks and pilgrims, which
may be traced to an ancient date, and which are
an intended imitation of the dresses supposed to
ry been worn by the first disciples Po § apostles
b Christ. 2. The garb conventionally assigned
°Y painters to Scriptural characters, which were
Pe oa y intended to embody the dress of the apos-
th ical period, and is corrected in some degree by
; © notions of Oriental costume which were col-

ected during the Crusades,

ane Judge of the value of these costumes, we
terial compare them, first, with the scanty ma-
dunt § already produced, and then with the mo-
of th costumes of Syria and Arabia. The result
pa dith examination will probably be that these

“ditional garbs are by no means bad remi-


DRESS, 579


niscences of Hebrew costume; and that the
dresses which the painters have introduced into
Scriptural subjects are far more near to correct-
ness than it has latterly been the fashion to sup-
pose. It is perhaps as nearly as possible a just
medium between the ecclesiastical tradition and
the practical observation. No dress more suit-
able to the dignity of the subjects could possibly
be devised ; and, sanctioned as it has been by
long usé, and rendered venerable by Scriptural as-
sociations, we should be reluctant to see it ex-
changed for the existing Oriental costumes, which.
the French artists have begun to prefer. But this


is only with regard to pictorial associations and
effects; for, in an inquiry into the costume
actually worn by the Israelites, modern sources
of illustration must be by no means overlooked.
And to that source of illustration we now turn.
The value of the modern Oriental costumes for
the purposes of Scriptural illustration arise from
the fact that the dress, like the usages, of the
people is understood to be the same, or nearly the
same, which was used in very ancient times. Of
the fact itself, nakedly taken, there is not the
least room for doubt. But this must be under-
stood with some limitations. The dress of the
Turks is distinctive and peculiar to themselves,
and has no connection with the aboriginal cos-
tumes of Western Asia. The dress of the Persians
has also been changed almost within the memory
of man, that of the ruling Tartar tribe having
Leen almost invariably adopted ; so that the pre-
sent costume is altogether different from that
which is figured by Sir Thomas Herbert, Chardin,
Le Bruyn, Niebuhr, and other travellers of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. But with
the exceptions of the foreign Turkish costume, and
the modifications thereof, and with certain local
exceptions, chiefly in mountainous regions, it may
be said that there is one prevailing costume in all
the countries of Asia between the Tigris and
Mediterranean, and throughout Northern Africa,
from the Nile to Morocco and the banks of the
Senegal. This costume is substantially Arabian,
and owes its extension to the wide conquests of
the Arabians under the first caliphs; and it is
through the Arabians—the least changed of ancient
nations, and almost the only one which has re-
mained as a nation from ancient times—that the
antiquity of this costume may be proved. This
is undoubtedly the ‘most —— of.
Pe


i
590 DRESS.


Western Asia, and while one set of proofs would
carry it up to Scriptural times, another set of strong

ilities and satisfactory analogies will take
1t back to the most remote periods of Scriptural
history, and will suggest that the dress of the
Jews themselves was very similar, without being
strictly identical. :

It would be a pleasant task to trace out these
lines of proof and analogy. This cannot here be
done ; but it may be to remark—{1. That
the usages of the Arabians in Syria and Palestine
are more in agreement with those of Scripture
than those of any other inhabitants of those coun-
tries. 2. That their costume throws more light
on the Scriptural intimations than any other now
existing, while it agrees more than any other with
the materials supplied by antiquity and by tra-
dition. 3. That the dress ie the ae
garbs ually superseded in Syria and Pales-
tine = not the ari as that vd Scriptural

i excepting, among the peasantry,
ier don Noe Lage ve then differed Tithe
from that of the Arabian conquerors. The Jews
had for above five centuries ceased to be inha-
bitants of Palestine; and it is certain that during
the intermediate period the dress of the upper
classes—the military and the townspeopl
become assimilated to that of the Greeks of the
Eastern empire. Arabia had meanwhile been
subjected to no such influences, and the dress
which it brought into Syria may be regarded as a
restoration of the more ancient costume, rather
than (as it was in many countries) the introduc-
tion of one previvusly un! 6

It is to be observed, however, that there are two
very different sorts of dresses among the Arabians.
One is that of the Bedouin tribes, and the other
that of the inhabitants of towns. The distinction
between these is seldom clearly understood, or
correctly stated ; but is of the utmost importance
fur the purpose of the present notice. Instead
therefore of speaking of the Arabian costume as
one thing, we must regard it as two things—the
desert costume, and the town costume.

If, then, our views of Hebrew costume were
based on the actual costume of the Arabians, we
should be led to, conclude that the desert costume
represented that which was worn during the pa-
triarchal period, and antil the Israelites had been
some time settled in Canaan; and the town cos-
tume that which was adopted from their neigh-
bours when they became a settled peuple.

This is a subject which, more than any other,
requires the aid of pictorial illustration to render
the details intelligible. Having provided our-
selves with these, our further observations will
most advantageously take the form of explana-
tions of them, and of comments upon them.

Under the notion that the desert costume be-
longs to the patriarchal period, the lence is
here given to it. Only the outer articles of dress
are distinctive, those which are worn underneath
being similar to other articles worn by the town
aud peasant classes, and which as such will be
hereafter noticed.

The annexed cut (Na. 260) in fig. 2,
a Bedouin, or desert Arab, in dress usually
worn in Asia; and fig. 1 ts a townsman
in a cloak of the same kind, adopted from the
Arabs, and worn very extensively as an outer-
most covering in all the countries from the Oxus


(ce even the Persians use it) to the Mediterranean
ne distinctive head~lress of the Bedouin, and
which bas nut been adopted by any other nation,
oreven by the Arabian townsmen, is a kerchief
(keffeh) folded triangularly, and thrown over the
head 0 as to fall down over the neck and shoulders,
and bound to the head by a band of twisted wool
or camel's hair. We forbear at the moment from
inquiring whether this was or was not in use
among the ancient Hebrews, The cloak is called
an abba. It is made of wool and bair, and of
various degrees of fineness. It is sometimes eu-
tirely black, or entirely white, but is more usually
marked with broad stripes, the colours of which
(never more than two, one of which is always
white) dre distinctive of the tribe by which it is
wom. The cloak is altogether shapeless, being
like a square sack, with an opening in front, and
with slits at the sides to let out the arms, The Arab
who wears it by day, sleeps in it by night, a
does often the peasant by whom it has been
adopted ; and in all probability this was the gar
ment similarly used by the ancient Hebrews, and
which a benevolent law, delivered @hile Israe!
was still in the desert, forbade to be kept in
ga bi the day, that the might not

without a covering at night (Exod. xxii. 27).
This article of dress appears to have been little
known to Biblical illustrators, although it is the
principal and most common outermost garment
in Western Asia. This singular neglect has
arisen from their information being chiefly de-
rived from Shaw and others, who describe the
costume of the Arab tribes or Moors of Northern
Africa, where the outer garment is more gene-
tally the bournocs (No. 260, fig. 3), a woollen
cloak, not unlike the abba, but furnished with
a hood, and which is sometimes strangely cou-
founded even by well informed persons with a
totally different outer-gnrment worn in the same
Tegions, usually called the Ayke, but which is
also, according to its materials, quality, or colour,
distinguished by various other names; and writers
have laced some confusion by not observing
that t names refer to an article of raiment
which under all these names is essentially the
same. Regardless of these minute distinctions,
tes vert of dress may be described as a large
woollen blanket, either white or brown, and in
summer a cotton sheet (usually blue or white, or
both colours together). Putting one corner before


over the left shoulder, the wearer brings it behind,
and then under the right arm, and so


and leaving the right arm free for action.
very picturesque mode of wearing the hyke is
shown in fig. 2 (No. 261). Another mode of wear-


ing it is shown in fig. 3. It is sometimes thrown
over the head as a protection from the sun or wind
(fig. 1), and calls to mind the various passages of
Scripture in which persons are described as cover-
ing their heads with their mantles (2 Sam. xv.
30; 1 Kings xix. 13; Esther vi. 12). This
article of dress, originally borrowed from the
is known in Arabia, and extends west-

ward to the shores of the Atlantic, being most ex-
tensively used by all classes of the population.
The seat of this dress, and of the abba
tively, is indicated by the direction of their im-
portation into Egypt. The hykes are imported
from the west (i. ¢. from North Africa), and the
abbas from Syria. The close resemblance of the
above group of real costume to those in which the
traditionary ecclesiastical and traditionary artis-
tical costumes are displayed, must be obvious to
the most cursory observer. It may also be noticed
that the hyke is not without some resemblance,
as to the manner in which it was wom, to the
outer garment of one of the figures in the Egypti
family, su to represent the arrival of
J s bre! in Egypt (No. 254, fig. 5

e now turn to the costumes which are
= in the towns and villages of south-western

ia.

In the Scriptures drawers are only mentioned
in the injunction that the high-priest should wear
them (Exod. xxviii. 42), which seems to show that
they were not generally in use; nor have we any
evidence that they ever became common. Drawers
descending to the middle of the thighs were worn
by the ancient Egyptians, and workmen often
laid aside all the rest of their dress when occu-
pied in their labours. As far as this part of dress
was used at all by the Hebrews, it was doubtless
either like this, or similar to those which are now
worn in Western Asia by all, excep: some among
the peasantry, and by many of the Bedouin
Arabs. y are of linen or cotton, of ample
breadth, tied around the body by a running string,
or band, and always wom next the skin, not over
the shirt as in Europe.

It will be asked, when the poor Isreelite had


DRESS. ‘eat

wned his 6 wherein he slept,’ what
was left to him? The recabage rage
supplied by the annexed engraving (No. 263),
which represents slightly different garments of
cotton, or woollen frocks or shirts, which often, in
warm weather, form the sole cress of the Bedouin


peasants, and the lowgr class of townspeople. To
fits the abba or hyke ss the proper outer robe (as
in fig. 1, No. 261), but is usually, in summer, dis-
pensed with in the day-time, and in the ordinary

its and occupations of life. It is sometimes
ie in No. 262, fig. 2) worn without, but more
usually with, a girdle; and it will be seen that
the shorter specimens are not unlike the dress of
Fe eter ae

subjects whi ve

The shirt worn by the superior classes is of the
apr ea ro of ‘Ne eye Hips is shown
in gure below (No. 263), which represents a
gentleman as just risen ek If we call this
a shirt, the Hebrews doubtless had it—the sole
dress (excepting the cloak) of the poor, and the
inner robe of the rich. Such, probably, were the


© sheets’ (translated ‘shirts’ in some versions), of
which Samson despoiled thirty Philistines to pa
the forfeit of his riddle (Judg. xiv. 13, 19). ht


to mw


LMM” oes


LY,
ime


is shown from the Talmud, indeed, that the He-
brews of later days had a shirt called pidn chaluk,
which it would appear was often of wool (Light-
foot, Hor. Heb. on Luke ix. 3), and which is de-
scribed as the ordinary inner-garment, the outer


‘being the cloak or mantle. This shows thet the
shirt or frock was, as in modern usage, the ordi-
nary dress of the Jews, to which a mantle (abba,
hyke, or bournoos) was the outer covering.

The Talmud enumerates eighteen several gar
ments which formed the clothing of the Jews
from head to foot (T. Hieros. Sabb. fol. 16;
T. Bah, Sabb. fol. 120), mentioning, however,

-two sandals, two buskins, &c. This shows,-at
Jeast, one thing, that they were not more sparingly
elad than the modern Orientals. This being the
case, we may be sure that although persons of the
humbler classes were content with the shirt and
the mantle, the wealthier people had other robes

" between these two, and forming a complete dress
without the mautle, which with them was pro-
bably confined to out-of-door wear, or ceremonial

‘wae. It is of course impossible to discriminate
these precisely ; but in this matter we cannot be
far wrong in trusting to the analogy of existing


usages.
. Inall the annexed figures (No. 264) representing
persons of the superior class, we observe the shirt


covered by a striped (sometimes figured) guwn or
caftan, of mingled silk and cotton. It descends
to the ankles, with long sleeves, extending a few
inches beyond the fingers’ ends, but divided from
a point a little above the wrist, so that the hand
is generally exposed, though it may be concealed
by the sleeve when necessary ; for it is customary
to cover the hands in the presence of a person of
high rank. It is very common, especially in
winter, for persons to sleep without removing this
gown, but only unlovsing the girdle by which
it is bound. It is not unusual within doors to
see persons without any article of dress outside
this; but it is considered decidedly as on un-
dress, and no respectable person is beheld out of
doors, or receives or pays visits, without an onter
covering. Hence persons clad in this alone are
said to be ‘naked’ in Scripture—that is, not in
the usual complete dress; for there can be no
manner of doubt that this, or something like this,
is the NIIND cetoneth of the Scripture (Exod.
xxviii. 40; Job xxx. 18; Isa. xxii. 21, &c.). A
“similar robe is worn by the women, as was also
the case among the Israelites (2 Sam. xiii. 18, 19;
Cant. v. 3). It is in the bosom of this robe that
various articles are carried, and hence the Scrip-
véural expression of giving things ‘into the bosom.’


The girdle worn over this, around the wast, is
usually a coloured shawl, or long piece of figured
white muslin. The girdle of the poorer classes is
of coarse stuff, and often of leather, with
This leathern girdle is ulso much used by
Arabs, and by persons of condition when equipped
for a journey. It is sometimes ornamented with
workings in coloured worsted, or silk, or with
metal studs, shells, beads, &c. Both kinds of
girdles were certainly in use among the Hebrews

2 Kings i. 8; Matt. iii. 4; Mark i.6; comp.

er. xiii 1). It is known to all readers of Scri
ture how often the ‘ girdle * and the act of ¢ gi
ing the loins’ is mentioned. It seems from 2
Sam. xx. & (comp. also the Syrian figure, No. 257,
fig. 1), that it was usual to wear a knife or po-
niard in the girdle. This custom is still general,
and denotes not any deadly disposition, but the
want of clasp-knives, Men of literary vocations
replace it hy an inkhorn, as was also the case
among the Israclites (Ezek. ix. 2).

Over the gown is worn either the short-sleeved
gidbeh (fig. 3), which is a long coat of woollen
cloth ; or the iong-sleeved benish (tig. 2), which
is also of woollen cloth, and may be worn either
over or instead of the other. The benish is, by
reason of its long sleeves (with which the hands
may be covered), the robe of ceremony, and is
worn in the presence of superiors and persons of
rank. Over one or both of these robes may be
worn the abba, bournoos, or hyke, in any of the
modes already indicated. Aged persons often
wrap up the head and shoulders with the latter,
in the mauner shown in fig 4.

This same hyke or wrapper is usually taken by
poner going on a journey, for the purpose of

ing used in the same manner as a protection
from the sun or wind. This is shown in the an-
nexed cut, representing a group of persons equi
for travel. The robe is here more eet aad
compact, and the firm manner in which the whole
dress is girded wp about the loins calls to mind
the passages of Scripture in which the action of
‘ girding up the loins’ for a journey is mentioned.


From this it is aso seen that travellers usually


DRINK, STRONG.


wear a sword, and the manner in which it is
worn is correctly shown. It would also appear
that the Jews had swords for such occasional
uses (Matt. xxvi. 51; Luke xxii. 36).

The necessity of baring the arm for any kind
of exertion, must be evident from the manner in
which it is encumbered in all the dresses we have

roduced, This action is often mentioned in
cripture, which alone proves that the arm was
in ordinary circumstances similarly encumbered
by the dress. For ordinary purposes a hasty tuck-
ing up of the sleeve of the right arm suffices;
but for a continued action special contrivances
are necessary. These are curious, as will be
seen by the cut (No. 266). The full sleeves of the


266.


shirt are sometimes drawn up by means of cords,
which pass round each shoulder, and cross be-
hind, where they are tied inaknot. This cus-
tom is particularly affected by servants and
workmen, who have constant occasion for baring
the arm; but others, whose occasions are more
incidental, and who are, therefore, unprovided
with the necessary cords, draw up the sleeves
(tn, Fy them together behind between the shoulders

g- 2). .

For the dress of females we must refer to the
article Womxn. Certain parts of dress, also,
admit of separate consideration, such as the
head-dress [Turuan], and the dress of the feet
{Sanpars].


DRINK, STRONG. The Hebrew ai
seems to demand a more particular elucidation
than it has yet received, inasmuch as it had in
all probability a much wider signification than
8 nuw couveyed by the phrase ‘ strong drink.’
Mr. Mill, in ‘guarding against the,common fal-
lacics arising from the changes and corruptions
continually going on in the meaning of terms,
by which their signitication is modified, narrowed,
or enlarged, justly observes that ‘ we continually
have cause to give up the opinions of our fore-
fathers ; but to tamper with thie language, even
to the extent of a word, is an operation of much
greater responsibility, and implies, as an indis-
pensable requisite, an accurate acquaintance with
the history uf the particular word, and of the
opinions (or objects) which, in different stages of
its progress, it served to express. Tu be qualified
to define the name, we must know all that has
ever been known of the properties of the class of
objects which are, or originally were, denoted by
it” (Logic, ii. 261). The mischiefs of an oppo-


DRINK, STRONG. 8s


site course of criticism have been but too evident
in biblical literature, but are now beginning to
be remedied and corrected. ‘Two or three au-
thors,’ observes the Abbé Renaudot, ‘who but
copy from each other, suffice to give birth to a
notion which spreads unexamined by those who
follow them: this throws a mist over history, and
gives an opportunity to confound truth with
falsehood '—an observation not inapplicable to
the word under discussion. The principle of
interpretation laid down above we have endea-
voured to keep steadily in view in treating of this
and other kindred subjects ; and with regard to
the particular word before us, it has been our
study to acquire an accurate acquaintance with
its history, as well as with that of its derivatives,
and as perfect a knowledge of the class of pro-
ducts which are, or originally were, denoted by it,
as the lapze of time and the obscurity of the
inquiry will permit. The sources open for the
illustration of the subject appear to be :—the
context of the passages in the Hebrew Scriptures
where the noun occurs, which it does twenty-three
times, twenty-one in conjunction with }%, twine;
the verbs and secomlary nouns formed from the
primordial noun, which express or imply the
quality of the original object; the affinities of
terms supplied by the kindred or derivative lan-
guages, Syro-Arabiansor Indo-Germanic ; and the
evidence of travellers and naturalists respecting
the nature of the class of objects denoted by the
original 3%, or by words analogous to it. [In
illustration of the philological changes subse-
quently noticed, we beg to refer to the principles
Jaid down and developed in the articles ALPHABET
and Arasic Lanauaae.] We shall class the
various senses of the word under three heads, in
the order in which we conceive them to have been
developed.

1. DW shechar, luscious, saccharine drink,
Or SWERT sYRuP, especially sugar or honey of
dates, or of the palm-tree (WIT debash); also,
by accommodation, occasionally the sweet fruit
itself. Herodotus, Varro, Dioscorides, lian,
Tertullian, A. Aphrodiszus, and others, speak of
saccharon, sugar, as ‘honey made by men.’ By
sugar or honey the Jews understoud not only
honey of bees, but also syrups made fiom the
fruit or juice of the palm and other trees. Hence
sugar is expressed by the Rabbins as D°)"WIt
(Joseph. De Bell. Jud. v. 4; Mishna, Tr. Nedarim,
vi. 8-10; Talmud, Tr. Berachoth, tol. 38a; Tr.
Chulin, 120 6; Terumoth, xi. 2; Maimonides,
Comment. in Tr. Biccurim, i. Mish. 3; D'Oyly's
Calmet, art. ‘Honey; Bochart, Celsius). Dr.
T. M. Harris says that ‘ it is probable that they
(the Jews) used it (3¥) to swrETen their wine,
as we [i.e. the Americans] put honey into cider
to encourage people to drink freely ’—a singular
observation, illustrating how far our conceptions
of foreign customs are moulded by those which
we witness at home. ‘In Solomon's time, and
afterwards,’ continues Dr. Harris, ‘ the wine and
sweet cordials seem generally to have been used
separately’ (Nat. Hist. of Bible). It seems more
probable, however, that the palm syrup or honey
denoted-by I2W, was used buth as a sweetmeat or
article of food, and as a drink, like the Hebrew
NID sobhe and the Roman sapa (bviled wine),
diluted with water, as with the modern grape
honey syrups or sherbets (Prov. ix. 2,6). The


664 DRINK, STRONG.


derivatives of shechar, expressive of its fist sig-
nification, are numerous. Eastward and south-
ward, following the Arabian channel and the
Saracenic conquests, we. meet with the most
obvious forms of the Hebrew word stil] expressive


of sugar. Tims we have the Arabic sakar ;


Persic and Bengali, shukker (whence our word
for sugar-candy, shukur-kund, ‘ rock-sugar’);
common Indian, yaggree or zhuggery ; Moresque,
sekkour ; Spanish, azucar; and Portuguese, as-
sucar (molasses being mel-de-assucar, ‘ honey of
sugar,’ abbreviatéd). The wave of population
has also carried the original sense and form north-
wards, embodying the word in the Grecian and
Teutonic languages. Hence Greek, odxxap ;

in, saccharum ; Italian, zucchero ; German,
sucher and juderig; Dutch, suiker; Russian,
sachar ; Danish, sukker ; Swedish, socker ; Welsh,
siwgur ; French, sucre; and our own .common
words sukkar (sweetmeat), sugar, and saccharine,
‘Sukkarke’ is also an old English word clearly
traceable in sense and sound to the same origin,
and is used by the writers of the middle ages in
the sense of dainty, dessert, or sweetmeat.

This view of the objective noun is supported by
the primary significations of the verbal noun
“DY shachar, to satisfy or satiate (whence the
sense of reward, wages, 8c., attached to other
forms of it. To satisfy or cloy is the well-known
property of sweet and luscious preparations (as
honey, Prov. xxv. 16, 27); whereas ‘ strong-
drink,’ in the modem sense of intoxicating, is
proverbial for creating an appetite which is in-
satiable. The drinkers of it ‘tarry loug at the
wine;’ they ‘rise up early in the morning and
continue until night, till wine inflames them;’
and when, after suffering its evils, they awake,
their cry still is, ‘I will seek it yet again’ (Prov.
xxiii. 30-35; Isa. v. 11, 22). It is easy to per-
ceive how the innocent sense of DW, as to eat or
drink to satiety, gradually had the idea of excess
superadded to it. The Greek neOie, frequently
used by the Septuagint translators as the repre-
sentative of TDW, is a case in point. It first sig-
nified to drink to fulness—next, to excess—and,
lastly, to intoxication. Thus the Latin glutio,
© tu swallow,’ became the parent of g/utton, ‘ one
who eats or drinks to excess.’ So drunk, the past
tense of’ the infinitive ‘ to drink,’ in like manner,
came to signify tnebriated ; and the verbal noun
to fill’ in North Britain gave rise to fou’,
meaning not merely full, but intoxicated. An
old French word, now obsolete, sacré or saker, ‘a
glutton,’ appears to have been derived frum the
Hebrew word. The Arabic has derivatives cor-


responding to those of the Hebrew, viz. »


merces, ris, pS gratias egit. The following
testimonies, explanatory of the primitive sense
and nature of 13¥, may be selected from a mul-
titude of travellers and authorities, ancient and
modern.

‘It is usual,’ says Dr. Shaw (Travels, i. 262),
‘with persons of better fashion, upon a marriage,
at the birth or circumcision of a child, or upon
any other feast or good day, to entertain their
— with the honey, or dipse, as they call it, of

palm-tree.’ This serves to explain the sense
of YI in Gen. xliii. 11. ‘From the fact that
J


DRINK, STRONG.


Egypt produces an abundance of honey, we may
be led to su the more valuable date
honey is here intended, which is rarely found in
Egypt’ (De Sola, Lindenthall, and Raphall’s note
in New Translation of the Scriptures). Vegetable
honey, or syrup of dates and of grapes (rvb-el-
aneb), is still largely imported into Egypt. ‘The
extensive importance of the date-tree,' observes
Dr. E. Clarke (Travels, v. 409), is one of the
most curious subjects to which a traveller can
direct his attention. A considerable part of the
inhabitants of Egypt, of Arabia, and of Persia,
subsist almost entirely upon its fruit. They
boast also of its medicinal virtues.’ Pliny (Hist.
Nat. xxiii. 4) says, ‘The ancients gave the
juice of them boiled, instead of hydromel, to
the sick to recruit strength and to allay thirst,
for which purpose they preferred those from
Thebais.' The cordial properties of DY are
probably referred to in Prov. xxxi.6. Another
passage in the same traveller illustrates the value
of shechar in the accommodated sense of ‘ sweet
fruit,’ when nted as tithe or offering. ‘ The
dates hung Ben these trees in such large and
tempting clusters, although not quite ripe, that
we climbed to the tops of some of them, and bore
away with us large branches with thetr fruit.
In this manner dates are sometimes sent with the
branches as presents to Constantinople. It suits
the Turks, who are fond of stweetmeats of all
kinds’ (Travels, v. 408). This reminds one of
the statement of Josephus (Antig. xiii. 13. 5),
that at the feast of Tabernacles the Jews carried
boughs of the palm-tree and the citron-tree in
their hands, and on one occasion pelted King
Alexander Jannzus with citrons. ‘ By the word
debash,' says Calmet, ‘ the rabbins and lexico-
graphers understand not only the honey of hees,
but also honey of dates, or the fruits of the palm-
tree, or the dates themselves, from which boney is
extracted; and when God enjoins the first frusts
of the honey to be offered to him, the first fruits
of dates seem to be meant; for generally the
produce only of fruits was offered.’ The Jewish
rabbins render &2 in 2 Chron. xxxi. 5, by
paTes (vid. Bagster’s Comprehensive Bible).
The Arabs also still apply p1Bs both to the dates
and the honey of dates. On the same principle
of accommodation as the sacred writers occa-
sionally employ debhash as a solid, and even
['', toine, in the sense of EYN, vintage-frust
(Dent. xxviii. 39; Ps. civ. 14-15; Jer. xl. 10-12),
it is probable that TDW shechar might also in-
clude the sense of ‘ sweet-fruit,’ as in Deut. xiv.
26, where it and } are placed amongst tithe-
offerings as solids to be eaten. The learned Dr.
Willet (1631) on Lev. x. 9, observes that ‘ this
prohibition may also be extended to the eating of
such things as may intoxicate the brain, as dates
and the fruits of the palm-tree of Egypt ; and so
D. Kimchi’ (Hezapla in Leviticum). Some sorts
of dates, if gathered too early and badly dried, do,
as Pliny observes ( Hist. Nat. xxiii. 4), cause head-
ache and quasi intoxication. It may be remarked
that Pliny (xiii. 4) speaks of a species of fine
flavoured dates as being called dabula.
Further illustrations of the nature of ‘ she-
char,' as palm honey or debhash, Abu Zeid al
Hasan, a traveller of the ninth century, writing
of the Isle of Ceylon, says, ‘ Their driuk is made
of palm honey boiled, and prepared with the tart


/ DRINK, STEONG.


@ juice which runs from the tree’ (Accownts

India ond China, by two Mohammedan Trav
las, p. 84). Sir John Maundevile, who went to
the east aew. 1322, says (Voyage and Travaile,
p- 141) that * Sarrazines, that be devout, drynken
never no wym; but sime drynken it prevyly.
For gif they dronken it openly, thei scholde ben
But thei drynken gode Beverage and
swete ond morisshynge, that is made of Gala-
melle [calamnus meli]; and that is that men
maken saegar of, that is of righte gode savour;
and it is gode for the Breest.’. He further nar-
rates(p. 18D) that ‘there ben other Trees that
Horny, gode and swete; and other Trees
that berern “Venym ; agenst the whiche there is no
Medicyne but on; for Triacle will not avaylle,
ne non Other medicyne.’ Huighen van Line
choten (158-4), in his Discours of Voyages, ch.
$6, ays of the -trees of the Canarijns, that
‘ they farme or hire those trees fur two causes, one
for the coq uaos or fruit to eat it, the other to press
wine out of them, thereof to drink. When they
desire to have no cocus or fruite thereof, they cut
the blossoxmes of the cocus away, and bind a
round potte with a narrow mouth, by them called
callao, fast wnto the tree, and stop the same close
round about with pot-earth, so that neyther wine
hor aire cam eyther enter in, or come forth, and
in that sort the pot in short space is full of water,
which they call sura, and is very pleasaut to
drink, ike sweet whay, and somewhat better.’
a sura is a form of the Arabic ae Bene
y7G OF sheer, signifying sweet liquor, milk, con-
gealed juice, Rc. "The word Cloined to some
particle, as Persic ob, ‘water or drink,’ from the


Sanserit SOEFS abhi, ‘ before,’ fig. first, better ;
whence the Latin ob; or perhaps to SE ud,
vr, fig. noble, superior) is traceable in the Arabic
Qs sherbh, whence Persian sherap and Turkish


sharrap, applied in both tongues to wine; and
— tour eherboh, ‘ lcssane lightry Italian
Lin o> and English shrub, sirop, and syrup.
jarlitee continues :—‘ Of the aforesaid sura
ee Kew ise make sugar, which is called Jaara;
ea uo the water, and set it in the sun,
of Malai becometh sugar. All along the coast
oni ae there are many thick reeds, specially
Indieae 23t Of Choromandel, which reeds by the

oe @re called Mambu, and by the Portin
ba'ss Bambu; these Mambus have a certain


fie Within them, which is (as it were) the pith


* a3 much to say, as sugar of Mambu (Bambvo],
ery medicinable thing, much esteemed

Sought for by the Arabians, Persians,
the z srpwe? that call it Tabaztir'—i. e. Tab-a-'shir,
whenes weting the same corruption as in Xerea,
Bart. ( pherries (wine). Major Sir G. T. Temple,
ond Tv 'TCursions in the Mediterranean, Algiers,
ates padaoas 1835), says that the best species of
jars, “A either preserved in cases or pressed in
Which 3 t the bottom of the jar is a cock, from
luscious drawn the juice in the form of a thick
mite 2¥rup’ (ii 185). Thus the two pri-

the os Senses of shechar would be included in

and orien ‘ to offer the first of thy ripe fruits

(Exod bat fa 2) '—literally tears or droppings


DRINK, STRONG. 885


2 DY, Date or Parse Wrre in its fresh and
unfermented state. Bishop Lowth translates Isa.
xxiv. 9 thus :—

‘With songs they shall no more drink wine


t. e. of grapes, 3
rise wine ral ee bitter to them that
drink it?— £


and observes, note in Joc., that ‘this is the proper
meaning of the word IDV, ofxepa. All enjoy-
ment shall cease; the sweetest wine shall become
bitter to their taste.’

Herodotus, in his account of Assyria, remarks
that ‘the palm is very common in this country,’
and that ‘ it uces them bread, wine, and
honey’ c 193

The Mohammedan traveller (a.. 850) says
that ‘ palm wine, if drunk fresh, is sweet like
honey ; but if kept, it turns to vinegar’ (p. 9).

Maundevile, who travelled above 500 years
ago, says, ‘Other trees there ben also, that bees
toyn of noble sentement.’ He then describes the
Jaggree or sugar palm, and adds, ‘ the hony and
the toyn and the venym ben drawen out of other
trees, in the same manere, and put in vessels for
to kepe' (p. 189).

Mandelslo ee) speaking of the village of
Damre near Surat, records thus -—‘ Terry or
Pakn Wine. Ir this village we found some
terry, which is a liquor drawn out of the palm-
trees, and drank of it in cups made of the leaves
of the same tree. To get out the juice, they go
up to the top of the tree, where they make an
incision in the bark, and fasten under it an
earthen pot, which they leave there all night, in
which time it is fill'd with a certain sweet liquor
very pleasant to the taste. They get out some
also in the day-time, but that [ewing to the great
heat] corrupts immediately, and is good only for
vinegar, which is all the use they make of it’
(Ambassador's Travels, ie 23).

Adam Fabroni, an Italian writer of celebrity,
informs us shat ‘ the palm-trees, which particu-
larly abounded in the vicinity of Jericho and
Engaddi, also served to make & very sweet wine,
which is made all over the East, being called
palm wine by the Latins, and syra in India,
from the Persian shir, which means luscious
liquor or drink’ (On the Husbandry of the
Ancient Jews).

Captain Cook says of the palm, ‘ A kind of
wine called toddy is procured from this tree; the
juice, which is collected morning and evening,
is the common drink of every individual.’ He
informs us also that the natives make a syrup
from this wine, called guia, ‘by boiling the
liquor down till it is sufficiently inspissated.’
This is evidently done as a means of preserving
the wine street and preventing its corruption.
Dr. Shaw thus describes the unfermented palm
wine :—‘ This liquor, which has a more luscious
sweetness than honey, is of the consistence of a
thin syrup, but quickly grows tart and ropy,
acquiring an intoxicating quality’ (Travels, i.
262). ,Sir G@. T. Temple says, ‘ We were daily
i rae with the sap of the date-tree, which is a
delicious and wholesome beverage when drunk
quite fresh ; but if allowed to remain for some -
hours, it acquires a sharp taste not unlike cider.
It is called leghma, and, poetically, the tears
of the date’—Jeghma being a corruption of
lachryma. The Landers inform us that ‘ Palas


/


586 DRINK, STRONG.


wine is the common and favourite drink of the
natives’ of Africa—that ‘the juice is called
wine,’ and that ‘ it is either used in this state, or
preserved till it acquires rather a BirTeR flavour’
(Expedition to the Niger, iii. 307-8). With
these facts before us, the language employed by
the prophet in the sublime chapter from which
we quoted above, becomes beautifully apposite.
His prediction is that ‘ the land shall be utterly
spoiled,’ that the light of joy shall be turned into
the gloom of sorrow, even as the sweet drink
which corrupts, grows sour and bitter to those
who drink it. ‘The passage clearly indicates the
nature of the drink to have been sweet in what
the Jews esteemed its most valuable condition,
but bitter in its fermented state. Hence the
drunkard is represented in ch. v. 20-22, as one
who ‘ puts bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter.’
This palm wine, like the honey of dates and
sugar, was much valued as a medicine and
cordial. Dr. James (1747), in his Pharma-
coperia, states that ‘ the liquor or wine of suri is
said to be highly beneficial to phthisical patients,
&c.’ (Art. ¢ Palina Indica’).

3. Saxar, in its third sense as a noun, denotes,
both in the Hebrew and the Arabic, fermented or
INTOXICATING PALM WINE. Various furms of
the noun in process of time became applied to
other kinds of intoxicating drink, whether made
from fruit or from grain. After the destruction
of Jerusalem and of the Jewish polity, almost
complete cunfusion prevailed as to its proper
signification. With the ancient Jews it was dis-
tinguished from wine; but since the Christian
era it has been frequently considered both by
Jewish and Christian writers as comprebend-
ing all intoxicating drink. Thus in Spanish
sacar siguilies to draw wine; and zicara, a cup
or dmuylit. While, however, some authors, im-
perfectly acquainted with its history and nature,
were unduly enlarging its signification, others,
from equal ignorance, were narrowing it. Thus
Wycklifle, in the fourteenth century, in trans-
lating Luke i. 15, has, ‘He schal not drinke wyn
ne sydyr.’ Phillips, in his World of Words,
however, shows that formerly cider was applied
to the fresh expressed juice of apples as well as
to the fermented. Toud’s Jonson gives the
following derivatives :—‘ Cider; sidre, Italian ;
sicera, Latin; gixepa, Greek. The word is sup-

to be originally of Egypt, and denoting an
inebriating liquor. Jhis sense is now obsolete.
In old French cisere is used for ale.’ Cervoitse,
a drink made frum herbs and grain, is the word
employed by the pastors of Geneva in their trans-
lation of the Bible. The fermented rice wine of
the Chinese is called cha, that of the Japanese
sacki; the palm wine of the Celebes is named
sachwire ; and the beer of the Kalmucks schara.
Arrack has been commonly, but erroneously, de
rived from sekar, and some, including Dr. Paxton
(Illustrations of Scripture; Nat. Hist. p. 515,
have confounded the errack with the palm wine,
forgetting that the original wine existed. long
prior to the discovery of arrack distillation. The
true palm wine aleo, the 13% of the Bible, is
exclusively the juice of the palm-tree or fruit,
whereas arrack is applied to the spirit obtained
from fermented rice and other things, and is, as
Dr. Shaw remarks, ‘the general name for all hot
liquors extracted by the alembick’ (Travels, i.


DUDAIM.
262). Such liquors furnish more powerfal means


-of intoxication than the ancients possessed, and


derive their name, we apprehend, trom a poison-
ous species of the palm-tribe, thé areca, or
“drunken date-tree,’ the nuts of which are mixed
with betel-leaf, datura, and other drugs, and
made into a confect or preserve, which the Indians
chew, or put into their drink to make it intoxi-
cating (Pomet On Drugs).

The Arabic coutirms our illustrations of the
Hebrew, not only in possessing analogous nouns,
but also verbs. Hence we have om, tntoxt-


cated, corresponding to the Hebrew shachar.

The palm wine of the East, as we have ex-
plained. is made intoxicating either by allowing
it to corrnpt and ferment, thereby losing the
sweet -luse‘ons character for which the Orientals
esteem: it. and becoming ropy, tart, and bitter;
or, in its fresh or boiled state, by*an admixture of
stimulating or stupefying ingredients, of which
there is an abundance (vid. Olearius, Mandelslo,
Linschoten, and alee Such a practice seems
to have existed amongst the ancient Jews, and to
have called down severe reprobation (comp. Prov.
xxiii, 30; Isa. i. 22; v. 11, 22, and vid. Lowth
in loc.).—¥. R. L.

DROMEDARY. (Canezz.]

DRUSILLA (Apoto.AAa), youngest daughter
of Herod Agrippa I. She was much celebrated
for her beauty, and was betrothed to Epiphanes,
prince of Commagene; but was afterwards mar-
ried to Azizas, king of Emesa, whom the procurator
Felix induced her to abandon, in order to live
with him. She is mentioned in Acts xxiv. 24
(comp. Joseph. Antig. xix. 9.1; xx. 7. 1, 2).

DUDAIM (O°). This word, in its plural
form, only occurs in two places of Scripture:
first in Genesis xxx. 14-16; and secondly, in
Canticles vii. 13. In the first passage it is
mentioned several times: * Reuben went out in
the days of wheat harvest, and found dudaim
(mandrakes) in the field, anc brought them
home to his mother Leah. Then Rachel said
to Leah, give me of thy son's dudain ;’ also
in ver. 15, and in ver. 16, it is said, ‘ And Jacob
came out of the field in the evening, and Leah
went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come
in unto me, for surely I have hired thee with
my son's dudaim; and he lay with her that
night.’ In the second passage we learn that these
dudaim, or the plants which yielded them, gave
out a peculiar odour: ‘The dudaim (mandrakes)
give a smell, and at ‘our gates are all manner of
pleasant plants." From the above passages it ia
evident that the dadaim were collected in the
fields, that they were fit for gathering in the
wheat harvest in Mesopotamia, where the first
occurrence took place; that they were found in
Palestine; that they or the plants which yielded
them diffused an odour, which Michaelis para-
phrases, ‘ Jam et somniferu odore, venereus man-
dragoras ;' and that they were supposed to be
possessed of aphrovlisiac powers, or of assisting in
producing conception.

From this it is manifest that there is little to
guide us in determining what plant is alluded
to at such early periods, especially as no similar
name has been recognised in any of the cognate
languages. Hence great diversities of opinion


I ge me eo ere om oe moe


SS wt DSP sa eae ww


Ps og


SRR FA ete ES we ot


DUDAIM.


have been entertained respecting the plant and

uce intended by the name

r. Harris: has thus summed up:

have wasted much time and
to ascertain what is inten


DUDAIM. 587


of ); 3. a kirid called mo-


dudaim. These rion. It has been inferred that this may be the

‘ Interpreters same as the mandragora of Theophrastus, which,
ins in endeavouring by some authors, has been sup
by the Hebrew word belladonna. To all of these Dioscorides ascribes


to be atropa


dudaim. Some translate it by “ violet,” others ~ narcotic properties and says of the first, that it is


EV Ps


t
ant
\


amu


267. [Atropa Mandragora.]


”


“ ilies,” << jasmins,” “truffles or mushrooms ;
and some think that the word means “flowers,” or
“fine lowers,” Bochart, Calmet, and Sir Thomas
Browne su the citron intended ; Celsius is
tine that it is the fruit of the lote-tree ;

iller that cherries are spoken of; and Ludolf
po es that it is the fruit which the Syrians
fe mauz”’ (that is the plantain), resembling in
Pose taste the Indian fig; but the generality
3 ney reters and commentators understand
Here rakes, a species of melon, by dudaim.’

tes how ever, the author has confounded the
niatidea mis dudaim’ with the mandrake or
The jeoras adopted by the generality of authors,
been eamds upon which the mandragora has
ah Preferred are, first, ‘The most ancient
Gen translator interprets the Hebrew name in
peers ne 14, by mandrake apples (uijAa pavdpa-
peer) s @nd in the Song of Solomon, by man-
Syria 5 OF pravdparydpar. Saadias Onkelos and the
yn Version agree with the Greek translators,


The first of these puts Pa laffach ; the two


latter 39;
the ake


melon ¢


yabruchin ; which names denote
and not plant’ (Rosenmiiller, Bib. Bot. p. 130,
by Hi. ©). ” The earliest notice of pavdpayépas is
(Hist Tpecrates, and the next by Theophrastus
¢ Hist feet vi. 2). Both of these C. Sprengel
atropa et Herb. i. 38, 82) supposes, intend
hinds - Weraeent Dioscorides notices three
stanis + the female, which is su to be the
mend, @gora autumnalis of Berloton; 2. the male,
Ga Tagora vernalis of the same botanist (these

are, however, usually accounted varieties


also called Circa, because it appears to be a root
which promotes venery. Pythagoras named the
mandragora anthropomorphon, and Theophrastus,
among other qualities, mentions its soporific
apt and also its tendency to excite to love.
fruits were called apples of love, and Venus
herself rites. But it is not easy to
decide whether the above all refer to the same
plant or plants. ’
Persian authors on materia medica give man-


dragoras as a synonyme for re yn yebrookh, or
yabrooz, which is said to be the root of a plant of
which the fruit is called ra loofah. This,
there is little doubt, must be the above atropa
mandragora, as the Arabs usually refer only to
the plants of Dioscorides, and, on this occasion,
they quote him as well as Galen, and ascribe
narcotic properties to both the root and the fruit.
D'Herbelot, under the article ‘ Abrousanam,’ de-
tails some of the superstitious opinions respecting
this plant, which originated in the East, but which
continued for a long time to be retailed by
authors in Europe.

By the Arabs it is said to be called ¢ufah-al-
sheitan, or devil's apple. If we look to the works
of more modern authors, we find a continuance of
the same statements. Thus Mariti, in his 7'ravels,
(vol. ii. p. 195), says that the Arabs called the
mandrake plant (yabrochak), which is, no doubt,
the same name as given above. ‘At the village of
St. John in the mountains, about 6 miles south-
west from Jerusalem, this plant is found at a
sent, as well as in Tuscany. It grows low, like
lettuce, to which its leaves have a strong resem-
blance, except that they have a dark green colour.
The flowers are purple, and the root is for the
most part forked. ‘The fruit, when ripe, in the
beginning of May, is of the size and colour of a
small apple, exceedingly ruddy, and of a most
pam odour ; our guide thought us fools for
suspecting it to be unwholesome. He ate it freely
himself, and it is generally valued by the inhabit-
ants as exhilarating their spirits and a provoca-
tive to venery.’ Maundrell was informed by the
chief priest of the Samaritans that it was still
noted for its genial virtue. Hasselquist also
seems inclined to consider it the dudaim, for,
when at Nazareth, he says, ‘what I found most
remarkable in their villages was the great quan
tity of mandrakes that grew ina vale below it.
The fruit was now (May 16) ripe. From the
season in which this mandrake blossoms and
ripens its fruit, one might form a conjecture that
it is Rachel's dudaim. These were brought her
in the wheat harvest, which in Galilee is in the
month of May, about this time, and the man-
drake was now in fruit.’

Considering therefore that the earliest transla-
tors have given mandragora and Yabrokhim as
the synonymous names for dudaim, and that the
root and fruits of atropa mandragora have, from
early times, been supposed. to be possessed of the
same properties which are ascribed to the dudaim,


88 DUKE.


there does not a) to us ahy other t,
which has been va adduced, better beraht grok
it to stand for the dudaim, But there does not
exist sufficient collateral proof to confirm the
selection by ihe Greek translator of the man-
dragora as the dudaim, in preference to some
other plants, which might be adduced, and to

- which similar properties have from ancient times
been ascribed.—J. F. R.

DUKE. This word is from the Latin duz, ‘a
_ captain or leader,’ from duco, ‘to lead.’ It thus
Corresponds with tolerable exactness to the Hebrew

see alluph, from noe alaph, to ‘ lead,’ ‘ guide.’

is word, alluph, is usually rendered by ‘prince’
or © chief;' but by ‘ duke’ in Gen. xxxvi. 15-30,

-where we find ‘ dukes of Edom.’ The translator
was doubtless seduced by the identity of signifi-
cation into the somewhat improper, although not
‘incorrect, use of a modern title.

DULCIMER. [Music.]

DUMAH (1%), a tribe and country of
the Ishmaelites in Arabia (Gen. xxv. 14; Isa.
xxi. 11). It is doubtless the same that is
still called by the Arabs Duma the Stony, and
the Syrian Duma, situated on the confines of
the Arabian and Syrian deserts, with a fortress
(Niebuhr, Beschreibung, p. 344).

DUMAH was also the name of a town in the
tribe of Judah (Josh. xv. 52), which Eusebios and
Jerome place seventeen R. miles from Eleuthero-
polis, in Daroma.

DUNG. Among the Israelites, as with the
modern Orientals, dung was used both for ma-
nure and for fuel. Ina district where wood is
scarce, dung is so valuable for the latter purpose,
that little of it is spared fur the former.

The use of dung for manure is indicated in
Isa. xxv. 10, from which we also learn that its
bulk was increased by the addition of straw,
which was of course, as with us, left to rot in
the dunghill. Some of the regulations connected
with this use of dung we learn from the Talmud.
The heaping up of a dunghill in a public place
«x the owner to the repair of any damage it
might occasion, and any one was at liberty to
take it away (Bava-kama, i. 3. 3). Another
regulation forbade the accumulation of the dung-
hill to be removed, in the seventh or sabbatic
year, to the vicinity of any ground under culture

‘Sabb. iii. 1), which was equivalent to an inter-

iction of the use of manure in that year; and
this must have occasioned some increase of labour
in the year ensuing.

The use of dung for fuel is collected inci-
dentally from the passage in which the prophet
Ezekiel, being commanded, as a symbolical
action, to bake his bread with human dung,
excuses himself from the use of an unclean
thing, and is permitted to employ cows’ dung
instead (Ezek. iv. 12-15). This shows that the
dung of animals, at Jeast of clean animals, was
usual, and that no ideas of ceremonial unclean-
ness were attached to its employment for this
purpose, The use of cow-dung for fuel is known
to our own villagers, who, at least in the west of
England, prefer it in baking their bread ‘ under
the crock,’ on account of the long-continued and

uable heat which it maintains. It is there
ibs not unusual in a summer evening to see
aged people traversing the green lanes with


EAGLE.


baskets to collect the cakes of cow-duny
have dried u the road. This helps
the ordinary fire of wood, and makes it
longer. In many thinly-wooded parts
western Asia the dung of cows,
asses, whichever may happen to be
common, is collected with great zeal and dili-
gence from the streets and highways, chi
young girls. They also hover on the skirts of
encampments of travellers, and there are often
amusing scrambles among them for the droppings
of the cattle. The dung is mixed up with
chopped straw, and made into cakes, which are
stuck up by their own adhesiveness against the
walls of the cottages, or are laid upon the de
clivity of a hill, until sufficiently dried. It is
not unusual to see a whole village with its walls
thus garnished, which has a singular and not
very agreeable appearance to a European tra-
veller. Towards the end of autumn, the result of
the summer collection of fuel for winter is shown
in large conical heaps or stacks of dried dung
upon the top of every cottage. The usages of the
Jews in thig matter were probably similar in
kind, although the extent to which they pre
vailed cannot now be estimated.

DURA (NW), the plain in which Nebu-
chadnezzar set up his golden im iii. 1
Traces of the ane have coraly ae
quarters too distant from Babylon to have been
historically possible, as it is clear from the con-
text that ‘the plain of Dura’ could be no other
than that plain (or some part of it) in which
Babylon itself was situated.

DUST. For storms of dust, &c., see Sronm
for throwing dust on the head, see Mournixe.


erie
eee pesak


E.


EAGLE ("9 nisr; Arab, nesr; Chald
nescher ; Coptic, akhom ; Exod. xix. 4; Lev.
xi. 13, &c.). The Eagle, in zoology, forms a
family of several genera of birds of prey, mostly
distinguished for their size, courage, powers
of flight, and arms for attack. The bill is
strong and bent into a plain pointed hook, with
out the notch in the inner curve which charac
terizes falcons; the nostrils are covered with
a naked cere or skin, of a yellow or a blue colour;
the eyes are lateral, sunken, or placed beneath an
overhanging brow; the head and neck covered
with abundance of longish, narrow-pointed fea-
thers; the chest broad, and the legs and thighs
exceedingly stout and sinewy. Eagles, Lead
so called, constitute the genus Agui/a, and have
the tarsi feathered down to the toes; they are
clothed in general with brownish and rum
coloured feathers, and the tail is black, grey, of
leep brown. Sea-eagles (genus Halietus) have
the tarsi or legs half bare and covered with bomy
scales; not unusually the head, back, and tail
more or less white. The larger species of both
measure, from head to tip of tail, 3 feet 6 inches
or more, and their wings above 7 feet 6
inches; but are proportionably broad to
their length : for it ia the third quill feather which
is the longest; as if the Creator intended to restram
within bounds their rapidity of flight, while by
their breadth the power of continuing on the wing


SSPRSA ATTRA Pee ee


. EAGLE.
is little or not at all impeded. The claws of the


and hind toe are perepuleny ss and
ey form more half


an inch. Under the name of nisr the Scriptures
include species of both the above, and in some
cases, also, the larger vultures, or the genus vul-
tur proper [Vutrung]. These majestic birds
have their abode in Europe, on the shores of the
Mediterranean, in Syria and Arabia, wherever
there are vast woody mountains and lofty cliffs:
they occupy each a single district, always by pairs,
excepting on, the coasts, where the le and
the osprey (Pandion halietus) may be found not
remote from the region by the rough-
legged eagles—the first because it seeks to sub-
sist on the industry of the second, and does not
interfere with the prey of the third. It is in this
last genus, most generally re ted by the
golden eagle (agutla chryseta) that the most
powerful and largest birds are found. That spe-
cies in its more juvenile plumage, known as the
pis aa eagle, the Imperial eagle, or mogil-
nick (ag. heliaca), and the booted eagle (ag. pin-
nala) is found in Syria; and at least one species
of the sea-eagles (the hal. ossifragus, albicilla, or
albicaudess) frequents the coasts, and is even of


stronger wing than the others. These build
usually in the cliffs of Phenicia, while the others
are more commonly domiciliated within the moun-
tains. According to their strength and habits the
former subsist on antelopes, hares, hyrax, bustard,
stork, tortoises, and serpents ; and the latter usual-
ly on fish; both pursue the catta (pterccles), par-
tridge, and lizard. The osprey alone being
migratory retires to Southern Arabia in winter.


sively averse to carrion as is commonly asserted :
from choice or necessity they all, but in parti-


ay
the


EARNEST. seo


eagle's eyrie, fixed in the most elevated clifts.
The swiftness of this bird, stooping among a flock
of wild geese, with the rushing sound of a whirle
wind, we have witnessed ; and all know its tower-
ing flight, suspended on its broad wings among
the clouds with little motion or effort. Thus the

ictions, in which terrible nations coming
rom afar are assimilated to eagles, have a poet-
ical and absolute truth, since there are species
like the golden, which really inhabit the whole
circumference of the earth, and the nations
alluded to bore eagles’ wings for sed
for ornaments on their shields, helmets, and shoal-
ders. In the northern half of Asia, and among
all the Turkish races, this practice is not entirely
abandoned at this day, and eagle ensigns were
constantly the companions of the dragons. China,
India, Bactria, Persia, Egypt, the successors of
Alexander, the Etruscans, the Romans, the Celts,
and the Arabs had eagle signa of carved work, of
metal, or the skins of birds stuffed, and set up
as if they were living. These, named DY ait,
derés, aquila, eryx, simurg, humma or hu-
maion, karakoosh (the birds of victory of different
nations and periods of antiquity), were always
symbolical of rapid irresistible conquest. A
black eagle was the ensign of Kalid, general of
Mohammed, at the battle of Aisnadin, and the
carved eagle still seen on the walls of the citadel
of Cairo, set up by Karakoosh, the vizir of Salah-
ed-deen, to commemorate his own name and
administration, indicates a species not here enu-
merated. Ag. heliaca, here figured, is the species
most common in Syria, and is distinguished
from the others by a spot of white feathers on
each shoulder.—C. H.S.


EARING. This word, which occurs in the
Authorized Version (Gen. xlv. 6), is very often
sup! to mean ‘ collecting the ears of corn,’
which would cote it with harvest, from whic
it is distinguished in this very ge. But the
word is radically the same with harroto, and de-
notes ploughing ; from the Anglo-Saxon erian
“to plough.’ It is also traced in arar Spanish,
aeron Dutch, aeria Swedish, er Icelandic, ori
Sclavonic, orze Polish, ardidh Gaelic, aredig
Welsh, aro Latin, dpdw Greek, charath Arabic,
and charash (U™IM) Hebrew, which is the original
word in this place (Critica Biblica, iii, 210).

EARNEST. ’Afpafdy is evidently the He-
brew }J3Y in Greek chaeacters. With a slight
alteration in the letters, but with none what-
ever in the sense, it becomes the Latin ohne
contr. arrha; French arres ; English earles
earnest. These three words occur in the He-
brew, Septuagint, and Vulgate, in Gen. xxxviii.
17, 18, and in ver. 20, with the exception that
the Vulgate there changes it to pignus. The
use of these words in this passage clearly illus-
trates their general import; which is, that of an
earnest or pledge, given and received, to assure the -
fulfilment of an engagement. Hesychius explains
425aBer by xpé8oua, somewhat given beforehand.
This idea attaches to all the particular applica-
tions of the word, as, anything given by way of
warrant or security for the ofa
mise; part of a debt paid'as an assurance of
ing the remainder; part of the price of an

id beforeband to confirm the bargain
Bayer and seller; part of a servant's weges paid


y~


600 -EAR-RINGS.


at the time of hiring, for the Lg “eh of ratifying
the engagement on both sides. idea that the
- earnest is either to be returned upon the fulfil-
ment of the engagement, or to be considered as
part of the stipulation, is also included. The
word is used three times in the New Testament,
but always in a figurative sense: in the first ad
Cor. i. 22), it is applied to the gifts of the Holy
Spirit, which God bestowed upon the apostles, and
by which he might be said to have hired them to
be the servants of his son; and which were the
earnest, assurance, and commencement of those
far superior blessings which He would bestow on
them in the life to come, as the wages of their
nae services :—in the two latter (2 Cor. v. 5;
ph. i. 13, 14), it is applied to the gifts bestowed
on Christians generally upon whom, after bap-
tism, the Apostles had laid their hands, and which
were to them an earnest of obtaining an heavenly
‘habitation and inheritance, upon the supposition
of their fidelity. This use of the term finely illus-
trates the augmented powers and additional capa-
cities promised in a future state. Jerome, in his
comment on the second , exclaims, Si
arrhabo tantus, quanta erit possessio: ‘If the
earnest was so great, how great must be the posses-
sion.’ See Kypke, Macknight, and Middleton on
passages. Le Moyne, Not. ad Var. Sacr.

pp. 460-80.—J. F. D.


EAR-RINGS. No custom is more ancient or
universal than that of wearing ear-rings, from which


it would appeur to be a very natural idea to attach ~


such an ornament to the pendulous lobe of the ear.
There are two words in Hebrew denoting ear-


rings, viz. 5°39 agit, which is applied to any kind
of ring, particularly to ear-rings (Num. xxxi.
50; Ezek. xvi. 12). The name implies round-
ness, and it is a fact that nearly all the ancient
ear-rings exhibited in the sculptures of Egypt and
Persepolis are of a circular shape. The other
word is Dt} nezem, and, as this word is also ap-
plied to a nose-jewel, we may suppose that it was
a kind of ear-ring, different from the round ¢ agil,’
and more similar to the nose-jewel. It most
certainly denotes an ear-ring in Gen, xxxv. 4:
but in Gen. xxiv. 47; Prov. xi. 22; Isa. iii. 21;
it signifies a nose-jewel ; and it is doubtful which
of the two is intended in Judy. viii. 24, 25; Job
xlii. 11, Far-rings of certain kinds were anciently,
and are still, in the East, instruments or appen-
dages of idolatry and superstition, being regarded
as talismans and amulets. Such ly were
the ear-rings of Jacob's family, which he buried
with the strange gods at Beth-el. (Gen. xxxv. 4).
No conclusion can be formed as to the shape of
the Hebrew earrings except from the signification


of the words employed, and from the analogy of j


similar omaments in ancient sculpture. Those
worn by the Egyptian ladies were large, round,
single hoops of pes from one inch and a half to
two inches and one-third in diameter, and fre-
quently of still greater size, or made of six single
rings soldered together. Such ly was the
round ‘ agil’ of the Hebrews. ng persons of
high or royal rank the ornament was sometimes
in the shape of an asp, whose body was of gold
set with precious stones [Axuners]. Silver ear-
Rings have also been found at Thebes, either plain
hoops like the earrings of gold, or simple studs.
‘Te modern Oriental ear-rings are more usually


EARTH.


jewelled drops or pendents than circlets of
gold. But the writer bas seen a small round
plate of silver or gold suspended from a small
ring inserted into the ear. This circular plate
(about the size of a halfpenny) is either marked
with fanciful figures or set with small stones.
It is the same kind of thing which, in that
country (Mesopotamia), is worn as a nose-jewel,
and in it we perhaps find the Hebrew ear-ring
which is denoted by the same word that describes
@ nose-jewel.


The use of ear-rings appears to have been con-
fined to the women among the Hebrews. That
they were not worn by men is implied in Judg.
xiv. 24, where gold ear-rings are mentioned as
distinctive of the Ishmaelite tribes. The men
of Egypt also abstained from the use of ear-rings;
but how extensively they were worn by men in other
nations is shown by the annexed group of heads
of different foreigners, collected from the Eyyptian
monuments. By this also the usual forms of the
most ancient ornaments of this description are
sufficiently displayed.

EARTH. There are two words in Hebrew
which are translated sometimes by earth, and
sometimes by land. These are eretz, and
FIDIN adamah, both of which are rendered by
yi in the Septuagint, and this + is rendered
by ‘earth,’ ‘land,’ ‘ground,’ in the New Testa-
ment. The word adamah, however, is applied
chiefly to the very substance of the earth, as soil,
ground, clay, although sometimes denoting a re-
gion, land, or country ; whereas eretz more gene-
rally denotes the surface of the earth, and is hence,
in the earlier of the Bible, opposed to DYO?
shamayim, ‘the heavens.’

Besides the ordinary senses of the word or words
rendered ‘earth’ in our translation—namely, as de
noting mould, the surface of the earth, and the ter-
restria] globe—tlrere are others in Scripture which
require to be discriminated. 1. ‘ The earth’ de-
notes ‘ the inhabitants of the earth’ (Gen. vi. 11;
xi. 1). 2. Heathen countries, as distinguished
from the land of Israel, especially during the
theocracy ; 4.6. all the rest of the world excepting
Asrael (2 Kings xviii. 25 ; 2 Chron. xiii. 9, &.
3. In the New Testament especially, ‘ the earth’
appears in our translation as applied to the land


EARTHQUAKE.


of Judea. As in many of these passages it might
wem as if the habitable globe were intended, the
we of so ambiguous a term as ‘the earth’ should
have been avoided, and the original rendered by
‘the land,’ as in Lev. xxv. 23; Isa. x. 23, and
elsewhere. This is the sense which the oriyinal
beurs in Matt. xxiii. 85; xxvii. 45; Mark xv.
33; Luke iv. 25; xxi. 23; Rom. ix. 28; James
v.17. For the cosmological uses of the term,
see GEOGRAPHY.


EARTHENWARE. [Porrzry.]


EARTHQUAKE (UY). The proximate
cause of earthquakes, though by no means accu-
rately detined, seems referable to the action of
internal heat or fire. That the earth was once
subject to the action of a vast internal power
springing probably from the development of sub-
terranean or central heat, the elevations and de-
pressions, and the generally scarred and tom
character of its exterior make sufliciently evident.
A power similar in kind, but more restricted in
degree, is still at work in the bowels of the earth,
and occasionally breaks down all barriers and
devastates certain parts of the world.

There is good reason for holding that earth-
quakes are closely comuected with volcanic
agency. Both probably spring from the same
cause; and muy be regarded as one mighty in-
fluence operating to somewhat dissimilar results.
Volcanic agency, therefore, is an indication of
garthquakes, and traces of the first may be taken
as indicatioms of the existence (either present or
past, actual or possible) of the latter.

The manifestation of these awful phenomena
is restricted in its range. Accordingly geologists
have laid down certain volcanic regions or bands
within which this manifestation takes place. Over
these regions various traces of volcanic agency
are found, such as either gaseous vapours or hot
springs, or bituminous substances, and in some
Instances (occasionally) active volcanoes. Several
sources of bitumen are found on the Tigris, in the
Persian mountains, near the Kharoon, and at Bu-
shire, as well as along the Euphrates. At Hit, espe-
cially, on the last-mentioned river, it exists on a
very large scale, and, having been much used
from the earliest times, seems inexhaustible.
Abundant traces of it are also to be seen amid the
duins and over the entire vicinity of Hillah—the
ancient Babylon. Syria and Palestine abound
in volcanic appearances. Between the river Jor-
dan and Damascus lies a volcanic tract. The
entire country about the Dead Sea presents in-
‘ubitable tokens of volcanic agency.

Accordingly these places come within one of
the volcanic regions. The chief of these are—
1. that which extends from the Caspian Sea to
the Azores; 2. from the Aleutian Isles to the
Moluccas; 3. that of the Andes; 4. the African;
5. the Icelandic. Syria and Palestine are em-
braced within the first band ; and these countries
have hot unfrequently been subject to earthquakes.
i e first visitation of the kind, recorded to have
appened to Palestine, was in the reign of Ahab
oe 918-897), when Elijah (1 Kings xix. 11,

2) was directed to go forth and stand upon the
mountain before Jehovah: ‘and behold Jehovah
passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the
jaa and brake in pieces the rocks before

ehovab ; but Jebovah was not in the wind: and


EARTHQUAKE. 691


after the wind an earthquake; but Jehovah was
not in tbe earthquake: and after the earthquake a
fire; bunt Jehovah was not in the fire: and after the
fire a still small voice.’ A terrible earthquake
took place ‘in the days of Uzziah, king of Judah”
(s.c. 811-759), which Josephus (Antig. ix. 10. 4)
says, ‘ shook the ground, and a rent was made in
the Temple, so that the rays of the sun shone
through it, which, falling upon the king's face,
struck him with the leprosy,’ a punishment which
the historian ascribes to the wrath of God conse-
quent on Uzziah’s usurpation of the priest's office.
That this earthquake was of an awful character,
may he learnt trom the fact that Zechariah (xiv.
5) thus speaks respecting it—‘ Ye shall flee as ye
fled from before the earthquake in the days of
Uzziah, king of Judah :’ and also that it appears
from Amos (i. 1) that the event was so striking,
and left such deep impressions on men's minds,
that it became a sort of epoch from which to date
and reckon; the prophet's words are, ‘two years
before the earthquake.’

That earthquakes were among the extraordi-
nary phenomena of Palestine in ancient times
is shown in their being an element in the poetical
imagery of the Hebrews, and a source of religious
admonition and devout emotion. In Psalm
xviii. 7, we read, ‘Then the earth shook and
trembled ; the foundations alse of the hills moved
and were shaken, because he was wroth’ (comp.
Hab. iii. 6; Nah. i. 5; Isa. v. 25). It was not an
unnatural transition that any signal display of the
will, sovereignty, or goodness of Providence, should
be foretold in connection with, and accompanied
as by other signs in the heavens above or on the
earth below, so by earthquakes and their fearful
concomitants (see Joel ii. 28; Matt. xxiv. 7,
29). The only earthquake mentioned in the
New Testament is that which happened at the
crucifixion of the Saviour of mankind (Matt.
xxvii, 50-1; Luke xxiii. 44-5; Mark xv. 33),
This darkness has been misunderstood, and then
turned to the prejudice of Christianity [Darx-
ness]. The obscuration was obviously an at-
tendant on the earthquake. Earthquakes are
not seldom attended by accompaniments which
obscure the light of day during: (as in this case
from the sixth to the ninth hour, that is, from 12
o'clock at noon to 3 o'clock p.m.) several hours, If
this is the fact, then the record is consistent with na-
tural phenomena, and the darkness which sceptics
have pleaded against speaks actually in favour of
the credibility of the Gospel. Now it is well known
to naturalists that: such obscurations are by no
means uncommon. It may be enough to give the
following instances. A very remarkable volcanic
eruption took place on the 19th of January, 1835,
in the volcano of Cosegiiina, situated in the Bay
of Fonseca (usually called the Coast of Concha-
gua), in Central America. The eruption was
preceded by a rumbling noise, accompanied by a
column of smoke which issued from the mountain,
increasing until it assumed the form and appear
ance of a large dense cloud, which, when viewed
at the distance of thirty miles, appeared like an
immense plume of feathers, rising with consider
able velocity, and expanding in every direction.
In the course of the two following days several
shocks of earthquakes were felt; the morning of
the 22nd rose fine and clear, but a dense cloud
ofa pyramidal form was observed in the direction


oes RARTHQUAKE.


of the-volcano. This gradually ascended, and by
11 o'clock a.m. it had spread over the whole firma-
ment, entirely obscuring the light of day, the
darkness equalling in intensity that of the most
elouded night: this darkness continued with little
intermission for three days; during the whole
time a fine black powder continued to fall. This
darkness extended over half of Central America.
The convulsion was such as to change the outline
of the coast, turn the course of a river, and form
two new islands. Precisely analogous pheuomena
were exhibited on occasions of earthquakes that
took place at Cartago, in Central America, when
there prevailed a dense black fog, which lasted for
three ra (Recreations in Physical Geography,
382,
, In the case of the volcanic eruption which over-
whelmed Herculaneum and Pompeii (a.p. 79),
we learn from the younger Pliny that a dense
column of vapour was first seen rising vertically
from Vesuvius, and then spreading itself out
laterally, so that its upper portion resembled the
head, and its lower the trunk of a pine. This
black cloud was pierced occasionally by flashes
of fire as vivid as lightning, succeeded by dark-
neas more profound than night, and ashes fell even
at Misenum. These appearances agree perfectly
with those witnessed -in more recent eruptions,
especially those of Monte Nuovo in 1538, and
Vesuvius in 182% Indeed earthquakes appear
to exert a very marked influence on our atmos-
phere: among other effects Lyell (Principles of
Geology, i. 400) enumerates sudden gusts of wind,
interrupted by dead calms, evolution of electric
matter, or of inflammable gas, from the soil, with
sulphureous and mephitic vapours; a reddening
of the aun’s disk and a haziness in the air often
continued for months (Joel ii. 30, 31).
Earthquakes, together with thunder, lightning,
and other fearful phenomena of nature, form no
small portion of the stock of materials which the
interpreters of the German rationalistic school
employ with no less liberality than confidence, in
order to explain after their manner events recorded
in the Scriptures, which have been commonly
referred to the immediate agency of God. Hezel,
Paulus, and other miracle-exploders would, but
for this resource, find their ‘ occupation gone.’
But, if there is reason for the statement that truth is
sometimes stranger than fiction, it may with equal
propriety be observed that their ‘natural * causes
are most unnatural, unlikely, and insufficient.
An earthquake devastated Judma some years
(31) before the birth of our Lord, at the time of
the battle of Actium, which Josephus (Antig. xv.
62) reports was such ‘as had not happened at any
other time, which brought great destruction upon
the cattle in that country. About ten thousand
men also perished by the fall of houses.’ Jerome
writes of an earthquake which, in the time of his
childhood (about a.p. 315), destroyed Rabbath
Moab (Jerome on Isaiah, xv.). The writers of
the middle ages also speak of earthquakes in
Palestine, stating that they were not only formi-
dable, but frequent. In 1834 an earthquake shook
Jerusalem, and injured the chapel of the nativity
at Bethlehem. As late as the year 1836 (Jan. 1)
Jerusalem and its vicinity were visited by severe
shocks of earthquake, yet the city remains without
serious injury from these subterranean ase


EAST,


EAST. This word, which is used by Englies
writers in only two senses, viz. to denote either
the quarter of the heavens where the sun ri
or the regions in the eastern part of the world,
has frequently three senses in the Authorized
Version of the Bible. Thus, it is sometimes
used to represent the Hebrew MWD, which
properly means the sun-rising (Ps. ciii. 12),
© as far as the east is from the west;’ some-
times its derivative, M710, when applied to
land lying in a true easterly direction (Josh.
iv. 19); and very frequently it corresponds to
Dp kedem, the name given by the ancient He
brews to a certain region, without any regard to
its relation to the eastern part of the heavens,
comprehending not only Arabia Deserta and the
lands of Moab and Ammon, which really lay to
the east of Palestine, but also Armenia, Assyria,
Mesopotamia, Babylonia, and Chaldea, hice
were situated rather to the north than the east of
Judza. Its geographical boundaries include
Syria, the countries beyond the Tigris and Eu-
phrates, the shores of the Indian ocean and of tbe
Arabian gulf. The name given to this entire
region by the Hebrews was D7) PW (dvaroax),
or the land of Kedem or East; by the Babylo-
nians it was called 37"Y, or ’Apafia. Its mis-
cellaneous population were called by the furmer
DTP 95, sons of the east, or orientals, and
by the latter, O'I7Y, or the people of the west.
The Jews themselves also apply to them the
Babylonian name in some of their books written
after the captivity (2 Chron. xxii. 1; Neh, ii. 9).°
The Arabs anciently denominated themselves,
and do to this day, by either, of these names. To
this region belong DUP '350, the kings of the
east (Isa. xix. 11; Jer. xxv. 19-25, Heb.). Tie
following passages may suffice as instances show-
ing the arbitrary application of the term ‘east’ to
this region. BaJaam says that Balak, king of
Moab, had brought him from the mountains of
the east (Num, xxiii. as fe. from Pethor on
the Euphrates. Isaiah places Syria in the east

ix. 11) DIP DW, ‘ the Syrians from the east’
(shop Lowth). The distinction seems evident
in Gen. xxix. 1, ‘Jacob came unto the Jand of
the children of the east. It occurs again in
Judg. vi. 3, ‘ Even the children of the east came
against them;’ Sept. of viol dyaroAwy; Vulg.
celert orientalium nationum. The preceding
facts enable us to account for the prodigious
numbers of persons sometimes assembled in war
against the Israelites (Judy. vi. 5; vii. 12), ‘and
the children of the east were like grasshoppers
for multitude,’ and for the astouishing cammage
recorded (Judg. viii, 10), ‘ there fell an hundred
and twenty thousand men that drew the sword.’
It seems that the inhabitants of this region were
distinguished for their proficiency in the arts and
sciences (comp. 1 Kings i. 4, 30), and were ad-
dicted in the time of Isaiah to superstition (Isa.
xxvi.). The wise men, who came from the east
to Jerusalem at the birth of the Saviour, no
doubt belonged to this tract of country, ‘ ying
we have seen his star in the east.’ Campbel
justly remarks that ‘to see either star or meteor
in the east,’ means, in English, to see it in the
east-quarter of the beavens, or looking eastward.
But this cannot be the evangelist's meaning. The
meaning manifestly is, that when the magians
themselves were in the east, they saw the stat.


EBAL.


So far were they from seeing the star in the east,
according to the English acceptation of the
phrase, that they must have scen it in the west,
as they were by its guidance brought out of the
east country westwards to Jerusalem. Thus the
plural of the sume word, in the preceding verse,
+ signifies ‘the countries lying east from Juda.’
See also ver. 9, where dvatoA7} means the place
where they first saw the star. Luther's trans-
lation reads im morgenlande. (Campbell's Four
Gospels translated from the Greek, 1789, vol. ii.
p- 353; Rosenmiiller On Jod, i. 3; Wesley's
Dis. Lib. Job, 1735, p. 214; Winer, Bibl. Real-
wérterbuch, art. ‘ Morgenland ;’ Spanheim’s Hist.
Jobe, c. iv. § 6, p. 8; Gesenius, Mand-wirter-
buch, &e.; Jalin, Archiiologie Bibl.)—J. F. D.

EAST WIND. [Winp.]

EBAL and GERIZIM, two mountains of Sa-
maria, forming the opposite sides of the valley
which contained the ancient town of Shechem, the
preeent Nabulus. Fiom this connection it is best
to notice then together. The valley which these
mountains enclose is about 200 or 300 paces wide,
by above 3 miles in Jength; and Mount Ebal rises
on the right hand and Gerizim on the left band

of the valley (which extends west-north-west) as a

person approaches Shechem from Jerusalem. It

was on Mount Ebal that God commanded to be
rearel up an altar, and a pillar inscribed with
the law; and the tribes were to be assembled, half
on Ehal and half on Gerizim, to hear the fearful
maledictions pronounced by the Levites upon all
who should violate the obligations of the sacred
code, and the blessings promised to those who
should obs rye them. The tribes which responded
with simultanevus * Amens’ to the curses, were to
be stationed on Mount Ebal, and those who an-
swered to the blessin zs, on Mount Gerizim. This
grand ceremony—perhaps the most grand in the
history of nations—could not have found a more
fitting sceue; and it was duly performed by
Joshna as soon as he gained possession of the Pro-
mised Land (Deut. xxvii.; Josh. viii. 30-35).
Dr. Robinson (Bib. Researches, iii. 96) says—
*Monnts Gerizim aud Ebal rise in steep, rocky
Precipices, immediately from the valley ou each
side, apparently some 8U0 feet in height. The
sides of both these mountains as here seen (i. e.
from Nabulus) were, to our eyes, equally naked
and sterile, although some travellers have chosen
to describe Gerizim as fertile, and confine the ste-
rility to Ebal. The only excejtion in favour of
the former, as far as we could perceive, is a small
ravine coming down opposite to the west end of
the town, which indeed ia full of fountains and
trees; in other respects both mountains, as here
secu, are desolate, except that a few olive-trees
ure scattered upon them. The side of the north-
ern mountain, Ebal, along the fovt, is full of
ancient excavated sepulcires, The southem
mountain is now called by the inhabitants Jebel-
et-Tar, though the name Gerizim is known, at
least, to the Samaritans. The modem appellation
of Ebal we did not leam,’

A still more recent American traveller, Dr.
Olin, ascended to the top of Gerizim, which he
States to be somewhat higher than that of Ebal.
The ascent is by an ancient road excavated in the
tide of the mountain with much labour, and in

e steeper parts of the ascent fashioned into a regu-
lar flighs of broad stone steps. This was neobably


ECCLESIASTES. 593


the principal ascent to the ancient town and for
tress, whose ruins cover the tup of the mountain,
and that pursued by the religious processions in
their way from’ the valley of Shechem to the
temple which the Samaritans built on this moun-
tain in rivalry of the orthodox Temple at Jeru-
salem [Samaniran}. The top of Gerizim affords
a commanding view cf a considerable region,
chiefly occupied with mountains of inferior eleva-
tion, but also embracing several fruitful valley:
especially those of Nabulus and of Wady Salil,
through which lies the road to Jerusalem, A
great number of villages aré seen all along its
north-eastern side, upon high and apparently pre-
cipitous spurs of the mountain which push out
into the valley from (Wady Sahl) the main ridge.
Dr. Ollin declares that the region which he over-
looked from the top of Gerizim had the appearance
of being the most populous as well as the most
fruitful which he had seen in Palestine. Culti-
vation is carried quite to the tup of the mountains,
which are adorved with plantations of fruit-trees,
while every level spot and a vast number of small
fields, supported by terraces, were sown in whiat.
A considerable portion of the table-land on the
summit of Gerizim itself exhibits marks of recent
tillage. Mount Ebual, as viewed from Gerizim,
spreads out, like the latter, into a table-land, but
is apparently rocky and more broken, and less
susceptible of cultivation. Dr. Olliu saw, or
imagined that he saw, the appearance of ruins
upun Mount Ebal, nearly opposite Nabulus, but
was unable to satisfy himself by a nearer exami-
nation (Travels in the East, ii. pp. 340-347}
If there appears any contradiction in the ac-
counts of the two American writers, it may be
removed by observing that Dr. Olliu’s visit was
in the vernal month of April; Dr. Robinson's,
in the parched month of June; that Dr. Ollin
speaks of the view from the top of Gerizim,
Tooking not ino, but out of, the valley of Na-
bulus, over the opposite slope of the mountain,
and the lower heishts and the fine plain (Wady
Sahl) below, and then turning to view that side of
Ebal which is presented to the valley of Nabulus ;
whereas the description of Dr. Robinson applies
to both mountains as seen from that narrow valley.
Many of the apparent discrepancies in the ac-
counts of travellers might be removed, and tne
bearings of the subject enlarged, by attentiun to
such differences in the peints of view.


EBEN-BOHAN., [Bonan.]
EBEN-EZEL (18%) $38, atone of depar-


ture); an old stone of testimonial, mentioned in
1 Sam. xx. 19. The circumstance which it com-
memorated is not known.


EBEN-EZER (TWiT JAN, stone of help),
the name given to a stone which Samuel set up
between Mizpeh and Shen, in witness of the
divine assistayce obtained against the Philistines
(1 Sam. vii. 12). ;

EBER [Hzser.]

EBODA, one of the stations of the Israelites
in the wilderness. [Wanpgx ING, THE. ]

EBONY. [Hasenim.j

ECBATANA. [Acumeraa.]


ECCLESIASTES (NOM Koheleth). 1. The
Hebrew Name of the Book.—This book has
obtained its Hebrew name from ms designa-

Qa


694 ECCLESIASTES,


tion of the principal nm mentioned in it,
who is thus self-styled in several passages. The
feminine termination of the name has given rise
to the opinion that Koheleth means a body or
academy of sages, whose dicta are contained in
this book ; but this opinion is contradicted by the
heading of the book itself, which thus commences :
Words of nbmp, the aon of David, the king in
Jerusalem, Hence it appears that Koheleth is
intended for an epithet of Solomon. Compare
also ch. i. 12, “J, Koheleth, was king over Israel
in Jerusalem.’ With one exception, in ch. vii. 27,
the word Koheleth is always construed as a mas-
culine noun,

The various interpreters who consider Koheleth
as expressive of a person, differ in their translation
of it in different manners. Some follow the Septu-
agint, in which it is translated ’ExxAnjotaorhs,
assembler. Others interpret it by contecror ;
.which implies, they state, that the author not
merely intended to communicate his own wis-
dom, but that he had compiled the experience


of former sages, The verb 27, however, docs
not mean to compile, but always to assemble or
to convene a meeting. It hence appears that
“the Septuagint translation, assembler, preacher,
or teacher, is correct. Still there remains to be
ial ese the feminine form of the word. The
only correct explanation of this is, that Solomon
was called Koheleth because he was personi-
fied Wisdom, MDOINA, and that Wisdom spoke
through him. St. Augustine says, ‘ Sapientia
per Salomonem cecinit.’ So, also, among the
moderns, Ewald, Grammar, p. 569; and Die
Poétischen Bicher des Alten Bundes, th. iv.p. 180.
According to this interpretation, the construction


of nbnp. both with the masculine and with the
feminine, may be equally well explained. If with
the masculine, the bearer of the name is consi-
dered; but if with the feminine, the MON,
wisdom, which animates him, is kept chietly in
view.

According to the usual opinion, which has
again lately been defended by Kuvbel, the fermi-
nine termination is to be explained by the fact
that adstracta frequently occur pro concretis ;
and that especially abstract names of offices are
transferred as titles to the office-bearers. This
explanation does not apply here, because Koheleth
is not an abstractum, like predicatio, describing
Solomon as a living preaching, but can only
mean something like concivnatriz, predicatriz,

The title of the book, however, indicates that
the author did not write only for a literary public,
but that he had in view the whole congregation of
the Lord ; and that his doctrine was not conlined
within the narrow bounds of a school, but belonged
to the church in its whole extent. Compare Ps.
xix. 24.

Il. The Author of the Book.—The circum-
stance that Solomon is introduced as the speaker
in this book has induced most of the ancient inter-
preters to consider him as its author. This opinion
was opposed by Grotius, who says, ‘Ego tamen
Salomunis esse non puto, sed scriptum serius sub
illius regis tanquam ponitentia ducti nomine.’
In support of this assertion Grotius appeals to the
peculiarities of the language,

The only argument in support of the opinion
that Solomon was the author of the book appears


ECCLESIASTES.


quite insufficient, from this single circumstance,
that the author also of the book entitled the Wis
dom of Solomon, which was written in Greek,
introduces Solomon as speaking. Hence the
question arises whether ii is not merely in form
that the author of Ecclesiastes does the same.
He certainly seems to indicate this by introducing
Solomon not by his proper name, but by the
name Koheleth; which signifies that Solomon is
not introduced in his individual capacity, but is
here rather to be cunsidered as the representative
of Wisdom.

But the greatest obstacle in the way of consi-
dering Solomon to be the author, is the character
of the language. Many opponents of the Solo-
monic authorship certainly went much too far in
their assertions. The Grecisms whidh Zirkle
thought that he had found have now generally
been given up. The Rabbinisms likewise could
not stand the proof. The words, signitications,
and forms which seem to appertain to a Jater
period of Hebrew literature, and the Chaldaisins,
an abundance of which Knobel gathered, require,


as Herzfeld has shown, to be much sifted. (nbap,


tubersetzt und erldutert, von Dr. L. Herzfeld,
Branuechweig, 1838, p. 13, sq.) According to
Herzfeld, there are in Koheleth not more than
between eleven and fifteen ‘ young Hebrew ' ex-
pressions and constructions, and between eight and
ten Chaldaisms. Nevertheless, it is certain that
the book does not belong to the productions of the
first, but rather to the second period of the Hebrew
language. This alone would not quite disprove
the authorship of Solomon, if we could produce
any weighty argument in its favour. We could
suppose that Solomon, in a philosophical work,
found the pure Hebrew language to be insufficient;
and had, therefore, recourse to the Chaldaiz'ng
popular dialect, by which, at a later period, the
book-language was entirely displaced. This sup-
position could not be rejected d priori, since
almost every one of the Hebrew authors before
the exile did the same, although in a less degree.
There exist, however, nu weiglity positive reas ns
for supposing Solomon to be the author; and the
stiiking difference between the language of Kohe-
leth and the language of the Proverls renders
that explanation quite inadmissible. This difer-
ence would prove lictle if the two books belonged
to two entirely different classes of literature ; that
is, if Koheleth bore the same relation to the Pro-
verbs as the Song of Solomon does: but since Ko-
heleth and the Proverbs belong essentially to the
same class, the argument taken from the dif-
ference of style must be admitted to be perfectly
conclusive

Among the other arguments which have been
produced against Sulomon’s authorship, the only
one which seems to have some importance, is that
the author new and then forgets his fiction; for
instance, in ch. i, 12, where he says ¢ I was king
over Israel in Jerusalem.’ But such passages are
by no means decisive. The arguments taken from
the contents, which Knobel at p. 77, sq. has
oe are quite futile, For instance, that

lomon, who was constantly prosperous, could
not have written in 80 melancholy a maur,
and could not have complained about the preva
lence of injustice without writing a satire against
himself; that he would not have written ao


ECCLESIASTES.


unfavourably about women, to whom he was so
fartial, &c. .

Supposing it now proved that Sulomon is only
introduced as the speaker, the questiun arises why
the suthor adopted this form. The usual reply is,
that Solomon among the Israelites had, as it were,
the prerogative of wisdom ; and hence the author
was induced to put into Solomon’s mouth that
wisdom which he intended to proclaim, without
the slightest intention of forging a supposititious
volume. This reply contains some truth; but it
does not exhanst the matter.

The chief object of the author was to commu-
nicate wisdom in general; but next to this, as
appears from ch. 1. 12, 8q., he intended to in-
culcate the vanity of human pursuits. Now,
from the mouth of no one could more aptly pro-
ceed the proclamation of the nothingness of all
earthly things than from the mouth of Solomon,
who had possessed them in all their fulness; at
whose command were wisdom, riches, and pleasures
in abundance; and who had therefore full oppor-
tunity to experience the nothingness of all that is
earthly. What Rambach, in his Annotationcs
Ubertores, th. ii, p. 829, says, presupposing the
authorship of Solomon, may with slight alteration
be applied to the real author: ‘ Neque vero sine
aingulae Dei providentia, ille prw reliquis divi-
nitus excitatus fuit, qui rerum hujus swculi om-
nium vanitatem doceret, ut nimirum apud omues
eo majores momenti esset testimonium ejus, cui
tantus antea rerum vanarum amor, ut nihil inex-
pertum reliquerit, tantus opum apparatus fuit, ut
voluptates ac delicias omnes gustaturus nulla
sumtuum inopia excluderetur.’

Ill. Date of the Book.—The history of the
canon fixes the time after which the book can-
not have been written. It cannot have been

’ written after the times of Ezra and Nehemiah,
ander whom the canon was completed. The
writers who asserted that Kuheleth was written at
the conclusion of the Persian and at the beginning
of the Macedonian period, or who even make it as
lute as the time of the Maccabevs, are unable to
produce any argument capable of standing proof,
and can scarcely render their assertions probable.

The style alcne furnishes the date Berorg which

the book cannot have been written; that is, not
before the time of Aramean influence. But within
these boundaries we are unable to produce any
valid reasons for fixing the date more precisely.

The language cannot be our guide, because, after

the Aramaan dialect had commenced to penetrate
into the Hebrew, the degree of its adoption de-

ded henceforth upon the peculiar character of
individual authors. The reasons deduced from
the contents, by means of which Ewald, p. 179, sq.,
has endeavoured to prove that the author lived
in the later period of the Persian government,
the contemporary of Malachi and Nehemiah, are
unimportant. A sense of the vanity of earthly
things, complaints respecting the perversion of

Justice, oppressio:., amd arbitrary government ;

admonitions to obey due magistrates ; all this is,
according to Ewald, indicative of the later period
of the Persian government, which probably be-
came at last oppressive and odious. But to all
this: there could be produced parallels from the
ancient books of Holy Writ, because these are
sentiments and facts as old and as lasting as the
world. One circumstance alone seems to indicate


‘ ECCLESIASTES. 595


that Koheleth was not written during the latter
period of the first, but rather during the time of
the second temple, since idolatry dues not occur
amongst the deviations combated by the author.
The whole book seems to presuppose that the
people were externally devoted to the Lord. The
admonitions of the author to a serene enjoyment
of life, and against murmuring; exhortations to
be contented with Divine Providence, and the
attacks upon a selfish righteousness of works, may
best be explained by supposing the author to have
lived in a period like that of Malachi, in which
there prevailed a Plurisaical righteousness of
works, and melancholy murmurings because God
would not recognise the alleged rights which they
produced before him, and refused to acknowledge
the claims they made upou him. Whoever will
compare Koheleth and Malachi will find a strike
ing similarity.

IV. Plan.—The author places the fundamental
idea of the nothingness of all earthly things both
at the beginning and at the end of his book, and
during its course repeatedly returns to the same.
This has induced many interpreters to suppose
that the purpose of the author was to demon-
strate this one idea; an opinion which, down to
the most recent times, has been untavourable to
the true interpretation of the book, because every
thing, however reluctant, has been forced into an
imaginary connection. The following is the cor-
rect view. The object of the author is not to teach
an especial tendency of wisdom, but wisdom in
general, Consequently, it is not at all surprising
if the connection suddenly ceases, and a new
subject commences, The artificial process by
which Ewald, for instance, frequently endeavours
to establish a connection, is quite inadmissible.
That the idea of the nothingness of earthly matters
should strongly predominate may easily be ex-
plained, since according to our author it forms a
very important part of wisdom. He uever, how-
ever, intended to couline himself to this one idea,
although he likes frequently to point it out in
passing, even when he is considering a matter from
another point of view. Herder, although he also
too much supposes that the author intended to
treat of a particular subject, has best explained
the plan of Koheleth (Werke zur Religion und
Theologie, th. xiii. p. 148, 1829): ‘The plan of
this book has been the subject of much investiga-
tion. It is best to consider this plan as free as
possible, and to employ its separate parts for its
support. The commencement and the conclusion
show the unity of the whole. But since King
Solomon would not write a disputatio de vanttate
rerum, the greater part consists of isolated obsere
vations concerning the course of the world, and
the experience of his life. These are connected
with general sentences; and, finally, a very simple
conclusion is deduced from the whole. It seems
to me that a more artificial texture ought not to
be sought for.’ ‘

Several interpreters have supposed that Koheleth
consists of a dialogue between a considerate sage
and a discontented sceptic. Others have thought
that not two persons, but two voices, or two moods
of the same person, are to be distinguished, whose
conflict is at the conclusion terminated in the
victory of the better part by faith. This opinion,
however, originated from an imperfect undere
standing, which seemed to ete where

e@


696 ECCLESIASTES. ,


irreconcilable contradictions. Whoever penetrates
deeper will perceive that the author remains un-
ehanged from the beginning to the end.

V. Contents and Objects of the Book.—Here
we consider only the fundamental idea, omitting
isolated sentences of wisdom, and rules for the
conduct of life. Nobody can eutertain any doubt
concerning this fundamental idea. It is con-
tained in the sentence: ¢ Vanity of vanities; all
is vanity.’ It is, however, very important that
this should be rightly understood. The question
is, What is that an. which is vanity? The author
does not mean ant in general, but only as. of a
certain genus. He himself explains this, by de-
fining this ani in numerous passages; as, ¢ all
that is under the sun;’ that is, earthly things in
their separation from the heavenly. To this leads
also the enumeration of the a1, in which occur
only those things which belong to the earth—
riches, sensual pleasure, honour, sphere of activity,
buman wisdom apart from God, self-rizhtcous-
ness. From many passages it appears that the
author was far from comprehending the fear of God
and active obedience to his laws among that aL.
which was vanity. This appears most strikingly
from the conclusion, which, as such, is of the
highest importance, and furnishes the undoubted
measure fur the correctness of the whole inter-
pretation. ‘ Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter: Fear God, and keep his command-
ments : for this is the whole duty of man [ée. in
this consists all that is incumbent upon him; and
his whole salvation depends upon it}. For God
shall bring every work into judgment, with every
secret thing, whether good, or whether evil.
(Compare ch. xii. 1: ‘Remember now thy Creatar
in the days of thy youth;’ ch, v. 5-7, ‘Fear thou
God ;° ch. vii. 18, and many other pe)
deep religions sense pervades the whole book.
In reference to the prevailing idea, Ewald
strikingly remarks, p. 182, ‘There blows through-
out this book a piercing chill against every earthly
aim, and every vain endeavour ; a contempt which
changes into a Litter sneer against every thing
which in the usual proceedings of men is one-
sided and perverse; an indefatigable penctration
in the discovery of all human vanities and fuoleries.
In no earlier writing has all cause of pride and
vain imagination so decidedly and so comprchen-,
sively been taken from man; and no book is per-
vaded by such an outcry of noble indignation
against all that is vain in this world.’ :

From the contents af the book results its object.
The author had received the mission to treat pro-
fessedly and in a concentrated manner the hably
important sentence, * Vanitas vanitatum. omniaque
vanitas,’ which pervades tlie whoie of Holy Writ;
but he is not content with the mere theoretical
demonstration, so as to leave to another teacher
its practical application, but places before us these
practical results themselves: What is incumbent
-fpon man, since every thing else is nought ?
What real good remains for us, after the appear-
ance in every seeming good has been destroyed ?
The answer is, Man shall not gain by cunning
and grasping; shall not consume himself in vain
meditations, nur in a hurried activity; he shall
not murmur about the loss of that which is naught ;
he shall not by means of a self-made righteousness
constrain God to grant him salvation ; but he shall
instead fear God (ch. xii. 13; y. 6, 7), and be


ECCLESIASTES.


mindful of his Creator (ch. xii. 1); he shall de
good as much as he is able (ch. 113. 12); and in
other passages. And all this, as it is constantly
inculcated by the author, with a contented and
grateful heart, freed from care and avarice; living
for the present moment, joyfully taking from the
hand of the Lord what he offers in a friendly
manner. Man shall not be of a sorrowful coun-
tenance, but in quiet serenity enjoy the gilts of
God. What would avail him all his cares and
all his avarice? By them he cannot tum any-
thing aside from him, or obtain any thing, since
every thing happens as it shall happen. — This
aim of the book las been Lest developed by Ewald
among the moderus; but it was already perfectly
well understood by Luther, who, in his Pre-
Jfatio in Ecclesiasten, says, ‘ Est status et consi-
lium hujas Jibelli erudire nos, ut cum gratiarum
actione utamur rebus prasentibus et creaturis Dei,
qu nobis benedictione Dei largiter dantur et
donatz sunt, sine sulicitudine futurorum, tantum
ut tranquillum et quietum cor habeamus et anj-
mum gaudii plenum, contenti scilicet verbo et
opera Dei.’

VI. Misunderstandings of this Book.—This
hook has always had many warm friends, even
among those who have not been decided believers
in revelation. Herder, for instance, p. 146, says,
*1 do not know any book in the whole of the Old
Testament that describes more fully, more con-
vincingly, or more concisely, the whole sum of
human life, with all its changes and vanities, in
occupations, plans, speculations, and pleasures;
and at the same time that which alone is real,
lasting, progressive, and rewarding.’

On the other hand, this book has excited various
doubts, and met with opposition. St. Jerome, in
his commentary on ch. xii. v. 13, relates that, ac-
cording to the statement of the Ilebrews, they
were disinclined to receive it into the canon:
Seo quod vanas assercret Dei creaturas et totum

utaret esse pro nihilo, et cibum et potum et de
icias transeuntes preferret omnibus ;’ but that
the conclusion of the yolume had saved its divine
authority. Similar doubts occur in the Talmud
and other Jewish writings. These doubts were
not, however, allowed to prevail, but were ae
pressed in deference to the cunclusion of Koheleth,

Within the Christian Church the divine inspi-
ration of Koheleth, the Proverbs, and the Song of
Solomon was denied Ly Theodorus of Mopsuestia.
In recent times, the accusers of Koheleth have
been Augusti, De Wette, and Knobel; but their
accusations are based on mere misunderstandings.
They are especially as follows:—1. The author
is said to incline towards a moral epicurism.
All his ethical admonitions and doctrines tend
to promote the comforts and a ears of life.
But let us consider above all what tendency
and disposition it is to which the author ad-
dresses la admonition, serenely aud coutentedly
to enjoy God's gifts. He addresses this admo-
nition to that speculation which will not rest
before it has penetrated the whole depth of
the inscrutable councils of God; to that mur-
muring which bewails the badness of times and
quarrels with God about the sufferings of our
terrene existence; to that gloomy piety which
wearies itself in imaginary good works and ex-
ternal strictness, with a view to wrest salvation
from God; to that avarice which gathers, not


ECCLESIASTES.


knowing for whom; making the means of exist-
ence our highest aim; building upon an uncer
tain futurity which is in the hand of God alone.
When the author addresses levity he speaks quite
otherwise. For instance, in ch. vii. 2, 4, ‘It is
better to go to the house of mourning than to the
house of feasting; for that is the end of all men;
and the living will lay it to his heart. Sorrow is
better than laughter; for by the sadness of the
countenanee the heart is made better. The heart
of the wise man is in the house of mourning; but
the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.” The
nature of the joy recommended by the author is
also misunderstood. Unrestrained merriment and
giddy sensuality belong to those vanities which
our author enumerates. He says to laughter, thoa
art mad, and to joy, what art thou duing? He
says, ch. vii. 5, 6, ‘It is better to hear the rebuke
of the wise than for a man to hear the song of
fools. For as the crackling of thorns under a
pot, so is the laughter of a fool; this also is
vanity.’ That joy which he recommends is joy
in God. It is not the opposite, but the fruit of
the fear of God. How inseparable these are is
shown in passages like ch. v. 6, vii, 18. iii, 12,
‘I know that there is no good in them, but for a
man to rejoice, and to do good in his life;’ and in
many similar ges, but especially ch. xi. 9, 10,
aud xii. 1, + Reweaier now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, &c. In reference to these
passages Ewald says, p. 186, ‘ Finally, in order to
remove every doubt, and to speak with perfect
clearness, he directs us to the eternal judgment
of God, concerning all the doings of man, and
inculcates that man, in the midst of momentary
enjoyment, should never forget the whole futurity,
the account and the consequences of his doings,
the Creator and the Judge.” Ewald adds, p. 227,
in reference to the conclusion, ‘In order tu ob-
viate every possible misunderstanding of this
writing, there is, ver. 13, once more brielly indi-
cated that its tendency is not, by the coudemna-
tion of murmuring, to recommend an unbridled
life; but rather to teach, in harmony with the
best old books, the fear of God, in which the
whole man consists; or that true singlencss of
life, satisfying the whole man, aud which com-
rebends every thing else that is truly human.
t is very necessary to limit the principle of joy
which this book recommends again and again in
various ways and in the most impressive manner ;
and to refer this joy toa still higher truth, since
it is so liable to be misunderstoud. 2. It is ob-
jected that in his views concerning the govern-
ment of the world the author was strongly in-
clined to fatalism, according to which everything
in this world progresses with an eternally uu-
changeable step; and that he by this tatalism was
(3.) misled into a moral sc@pticism, having at-
tained on his dogmatical basis the conviction of
the inability of man, notwithstanding all his efforts,
to reach his aim. However, this so-called fatalism
of our author is nothing else but what our Lord
teaches, Matt. vi. 25: * Take no thought,’ &c.
And as for the moral scepticism, our author cer-
tainly inculcates that man with all his endeavours
can do nothing; but at the same time he recom-
mends the fear of God, as the never-failing means
of salvation. Man in himself can do noting;
Sut in God he can do all. It is quite clear from
ch. vii. 16, 18, where both self-righteonsness and


EGLON. 507


wisdom, when separated from God, are described ag
equally destructive, and opposite to them is placed
the fear of God, as being their common antithesis, _
that our author, by pointing to the sovereignty of
God, did not mean to undermine morality : ‘He
that feareth God comes out from them all.’ If
our author were given to mural scepticism, it
would be impossible for him to teach retribution,
which he inculcates. in numerous passages, and
which are not contradicted by others, in which he
says that the retribution in individual circum-
stances is frequently obscure and enigmatical.
Where is that advocate for retribution who is not
compelled to confess this as well as our author?
(4.) This book has given offence also, by oh.
iii. 21, and similar passages, concerning immor-
tality. But the assertion that there is expressed
here some doubt concerning the immortality of
the soul is based on a wrong grammatical per-
ception. The 7 caunot, according to its punc-
tuation, be the interrogative, but must be the
article; and our author elsewhere asserts posi-
tively his belief in the doctrine of immortality
(ch. xii. 7). How it happens that he did not
give to this doctrine a prevailing influence upon
his mode of treating his subject has lately been
investigated by Heyder, in his essay entitled
Ecclesiaste de Immortalitate Animé Sententia,
Erlangen, 1839.—E. W. H.

ECCLESIASTICUS, [Wispomgr Sinacu.]

ECDIPPA. [Acuzis.

EDEN. [Paranisez.]

EDOM. vo

EDOMITES. [Ipumza.]

EDREI (‘YTS ; Sept. "ESpaely), one of the
metropolitan towns (Ashtaroth being the other)
of the kingdom of Bashan, beyond the Jordan.
It was here that Og, the gigantic king of Ba-
shan, was defeated by the Israelites, and lost
his kingdom (Num, xxi. 33-35; Deut. i. 435 iii.
1-3). Edrei afterwards belonged to eastern Ma-
nasseh (Josh. xiii. 31). It is mentioned in the
Onomasticon as 24-25 R. miles from Ashtaroth.
It was the seat of a bishop in the early ages of
Christianity, and a bishop of Adraa sat in the
council of Seleucia (a.p. 381), and of Chalcedon
(a.p. 451). Adraa was the name given to the
place by the Greeks: by the Crusaders it was
bien as Adratum, and also as Civitas Bernardi
de Stampia (Will. Tyr. p. 895). Abulfeda calls
it Adsraat (Tab. Syr. 79). The place now
bears the name of Draa, aud has been visited in
the present centary by most of the travellers who
have explored the country beyond the Jordan,—
Seetzen, Burckhardt, Buckingham, Richter, G.
Robinson, &c. It is situated in a deep valley,
two hours south-east from Mezareib; and the
ruins cover an extent of about two miles in cir-
cumference, the principal being an immense -
rectangular building, with a double covered colon-
nade all around, and a cistern in the middle.
This seems to have been originally a Christian
church, and afterwards a mosque. Near the town,
in the hollow of the mountains, is a large reservoir
cased with stone, near which are the ruins of a
large building, with a cupola of light materials.


EGLON (fi0Y; Sept. Eyadu), a king of
Moab, who, assisted by the Ammonities and
Amalekites, subdued the Israclites beyond the
Jordan, and the southern tribes on this side the


1


§98 EGOZ,


river, and made Jericho the seat, or one of the seats,

of his government. This subjection to a power
always present must have been more galling to
the Israelites than any they had previously suf-
fered. It Jastedt eighteen years, when (s.c. 1428)
they were delivered, through the instrumentality
of Ehud, who slew the Moabitish king (Sudg.
iii. 12-33).

EGOZ (NIN). This word occurs in the
Song of Solomon, vi. 11, ‘1 went into the garden
of nuts,’ where probably ‘ walnuts’ are intended.
The Hebrew name is evidently the same as the


Persian ie gowz, which has been converted by
the Arabs into ; [iad Jjowz, by a process common


in the case of many other words beginning with
the interchangeable letters gaf aud yen. In both
languages these words, when they stand alone,
signify the walnut, gouz-bun being the walnut-
tree: when used in composition they may signify
the nut of any other tree ;— thus jowz-i-boa is the
nutmeg, jouz-i-hindi is the Indian or cocoa-nut,
&c. So the Greeks employed xdpvoy, and the
Romans‘ nur to denote the walnut; which last
remains in modern languages, as Ital. noce, Fr.
notz, Span. nuez. and Ger. nusz. The walnut was,
however, also called xdpvoy Bacirixdy (Diosc. i.
179), royal nut, and also Meporxdy, or Persian,
from having been so highly esteemed, and trom
having beer? introduced into Greece from Persia :
the name juglans has been derived from Jovis
glans. That the walnut was highly esteemed in the
East we learn from Abulpharagius, who states that
Al Mahadi, the third caliph of the Abassides, ‘sub
juglande sub qua eedere solebat, sepultus est.’

hat it is found in Syria has been recorded by
several travellers. Thevenot found it in the
neighbourhood of Mount Sinai, and Belon says
of a village not far from Lebanon, that it was


370. [Walnut—Jugians regia.) |


©bien ombragé d'ormeaux et de noyers.’ That
it was planted at an early period is well known,
and might be easily proved from a variety of
aources.


EGYPT.


The walnut, or juglans regia of botanists, be
longs to the natural family of juglandez, of which
the species are fornd in North America and in
Northern Asia. The walnut itself extends from
Greece and Asia Minor over Lebanon and Persia,
probably all along the Hindoo Khoosh to the Hi-
malayas, and is abundant in Cashmere (Him. Bot.
if 342). The walnut-tree is well known as a
utty, wide spreading tree, affording a grateful
shade, and of which the leaves have an agreeable
odour when bruised. It seems formerly to have
been thought unwholesome to sit under its shade,
but this appears to be incorrect. The flowers begin
to open in April, and the fruit is ripe in Septem-
ber and October. The tree is much esteemed for
the excellence of its wood; and the kernel of
the nut is valued not only as an article of diet,
but for the oil which it yields. Being thus
known to, and highly valued by, the Greeks in
early times, it is mure than probable that, if not
indigenous in Syria, it was introduced there ata
still earlier period, and that therefore it may be
alluded to in the above passage, more especially
as Solomon has said, ‘1 made me gardens and
orchards, and planted trees in them of all kind
of fruits’ (Eccles. ii. 5).—J. F. R.

EGYPT (O'S, poetically WYQ; in Ps.
cv. 23, OM YON), the land of Ham, a son of
Noah, from whom was derived the ancient native
appellation of the country, Chemi. From Miz-
raim, the second son of lam, comes the ordinary
Biblical name, Mizraim, a word which properly
denotes Lower Egypt, as being that part of the
country with which the Israelites were nearest and
best, if not (in the earlier periods of their history)
solely, acquainted. This designation, however, is
sometimes used for Egypt indiscriminately, and
was by the later Arabs extended to the entire
country. Josephus (dntig. i. 6, 2) says that all
those who inhabit the country call it Mestrém, and
the Egyptians, Mestraens. The word Cherni, ac-
cording to Platarch, signities black, in allusion to
the dark colour of the water of the Nile. The Greek
and European name (4 Afyvrros), Exypt, is of
uncertain origin and signification (Champollion,
I Egypte, i. 77). In Womer, the Nile is called
Egvpt, Afyuntos.

Egypt is the land of the Nile, the country
through which that river flows from the island of
Phila, situated just above the Cataracts of Syeue,
in lat. 24° V! 36”, to Damierta, in 31° 35’ N,
where its principal stream pours itself into the
Mediterranean Sea. On the east it is bounded
by Palestine, Idumaa, Arabia Petra, and the
Arabian Gulf. On the west, the moving sands
of the wide Libyan desert obliterate the traces
of all political or physical limits. Inhabited
Ecypt, Rowers is restricted to the vailey of the
Nile, which, having a breadth of from two to three
miles, is enclosed on botn sides by a rauge of
hills: the chain on the eastern side disappears
at Mocattam; that on the west extends to the sea.
In lat. 30° 15’, the Nile divides into two prin-
cipal streams, which, in conjunction with a third
that springs somewhat higner op, forms the Delta,
so called from its resemblance to the Greek letter
A. These mountains are interesting, if for no
other reason than that tney served as the bed
whence the materials were obtained out of which
were constructed tle wondesful buildings for


,


EGYPT.

vhich Egypt is justly distinguished. The hi
ficial extent of Egypt has been estimated at
about 11,000 square miles. The svil, which
is productive, consists almost exclusively of mud
brought down and deposited by the river, whose
waters are indispensable every year for the pur-

of agriculture to such an extent that the
imits of their flow are the limits of vegetation.
The Delta owes its very existence to the deposits
of the Nile, and but for the waters of this stream,
carried over its surface by natural or artificial
means, would soon be a desert ; it was therefore
with propriety, as, indeed, was the entire country,
termed ‘the gift of the Nile.’ The agency of the
stream is the more necessary because rain very
seldom falls in Lower Egypt. The land, placed
as it ison the confines of Africa and Asia, yet so
adjacent and accessible to Eurvpe, in itself a
garden and a store-house, may well have held an
important position in the ancient world, and can
hardly fail, unless political influences are very
adverse, to rise to commanding attitude in
modem times. As to the number of its inha-
bitants, nothing very definite is known. Its fer-
tility would doubtless give birth to, and support,
a teeming population. In very remote times as
many as 8.000,000 of souls are said to have lived
on its soil, In the days of Dio lorus Siculus
they were estimated at 3,000,000. Volney made
the number 2,300,000. The present government
estimate is 3,200,000, which seems to be some-
what beyond the fact (Bowring’s Report on Egypt
and Candia, p. 4).

Egypt naturally divides itself into two great
sections at the apex of the Delta, the country
lying south of that point being designated Upper
Egypt, that north of it Lower Egypt. Upper
Egypt itself was divided into the Thebais and
the Heptanomis: the Thebais extended from
Phila to Hermopolis; Heptanomis, from Hermo-
polis to the point where the Delta begins to form
itself. Under the Ptolemies, and probably at a
very early period, the whole country was divided
into thirty-six cantous or provinces (Diod. Sic. i.
54; Strabo, xvii. 1), which division was main-
tained till the invasion of the Saracens. It is now
composed of 24 departments, which, according to
the French system of geographical arrangement,
are subdivided into arrondissements and cantons
(Bowring’s Report).

The Nile is never mentioned by name in our
translation of the Old Testament: it is always
called the river of Egypt, although the word Nile


ony) occurs in the original (Isa. xxvii. 12;


Josh. xv. 4; 2 Kings xxiv. 7). In these places
the river of Egypt, literally the Nile of the
Egyptians, is spoken of as the boundary of Pales-
tine. The desert appears to have been the natural-
boundary between Palestine and Egypt; but
map-makers, agreeably with their idea of the pas-
sages just referred to, have inserted a stream in
the desert, and called it ALgyptus. Yet there is
no difficulty in understanding the claim of the
Jewish writers to extend Palestine, say to the
Pelusian mouth of the Nile, when it is remem-
bered that Solomon had ports on the Red Sea.
Till within a few years the sources of the Nile
and the terminatign of the Niger were hid in alike
mysterious obscurity. The latter has been dis-
covered, but the former, notwithstanding many


EGYPT. 599


strenuous efforts and some pretence, remain to re-
ward the enterprise of some more fortunate travek-
ler. The various branches of the Nile have their
rise in the high lands north of the equator. The
three principal branches of the Nile are, 1. the
Bahr el Abiad, or White River, to the west, which
is now known to be the largest and longest ; 2.
the Bahr el Azrek, or Blue River, in the centre;
3. the Tacazzé, or Abara, which 33 the eastern
branch. The Nile, from its confuence with the
Tacazzé (17° 45’ north lat.) down to its entrance
into the Mediterranean (1200 geographical miles),
receives no permanent streams; but in the rainy
season it receives wadys, or torrents, from the
mountains. The annual overflow of the river,
on which the ancients wrote so obscurely, 1s known
to arise from the periodical rains which fall
within the tropics. The rich alluvial deposits
which the Nile spreads over Nubia and Egy
are mainly derived through the Blue River; the
White River, or longest stream, bringing nothing
of the kind. Owing to the yearly deposit of alluvial
matter, both the bed of the Nile and the land of
Egypt are being gradually raised. The river
proceeds in its current uniformly and quietly at
the rate of two and a half or three miles an hour,
always deep enough for navigation. Its water is
usually blue, but it becomes of a deep brick-red
during the period of its overflow. It is salubrious
when drunk, meriting the encomiums which it
has so abundantly received. On the river the
land is wholly dependent. If the Nile does not
rise a sufficient height, sterility and dearth, if not
famine, ensue. An elevation of sixteen fathoms
is essential to secure the prosperity of the country.
Such, however, is the regularity of nature, and
such the faithfulness of God, that for thousands
of years, with but few and partial exceptions,
these inundations have in essential particulars
been the same. The waters of the stream are
conveyed over the surface of the country by
canals when natural channels fail. During the
overflow the land is literally inundated, and
has the appearance of a sea dotted with islands,
Wherever the waters reach, abundance springs
forth. The cultivator has scascely more to do
than to scatter the seed. No wonder that a river
whose waters are so grateful, salubrious, and bene-
ficial, should in days of ignorance have been
regarded as an object of worship, and that it is
still revered and beloved.

Well may Egypt have been visited as a‘granary
by the needy in ancient times (Gen. xii. 10;
Exod. xvi. 3; Joseph. Antig. xv. 9,2). Besides
corn, the country produced onions, garlic, beans,
pumpkins, cucumbers, melons, flax, cotton and
wine. The acacia, sycamore, palm, and fig-tree
adored the land; but there was a want of timber.
The Nile produced the useful papyrus, and
abounded in fish. On its banks lurked the croco-
dile and hippopotamus. The Egyptian oxen were
celebrated in the ancient world (Aristot. Hist.
Anim, viii. 28), Horses abounded (1 Kings x.
28); hence the use of war-chariots in fight (Isa,
xxxi. 1; Diod. Sic. i, 45), and the celebrity of
Egyptian charioteers (Jer. xlvi. 4; Ezek. xvii. 15).
The land was not destitute of mineral treasures.
Gold mines were wrought in Upper Egypt (Diod.
Sic. iii, 12).

The climate is very regular and exceedingly
hot; the atmosphere clear and shining ; a is


600 EGYPT.


not easily found. Though rain falls even in the
winter months very rarely, it is not altogether
wanting, as wa® once believed. Thunder and
lightning are still more unfreqnent, and are so
completely divested of their terrific qualities that
the fgvitans never associate with them the idea
of destructive force. Showers of hail descending
from the hills of Syria are sometimes kuown to
reach the confines of Egypt. The formation of
ice is very uncommon. Dew is produced in great
abundance. The wind blows from the north from
May to Seytember, when it veers round to the
east, assumes a southerly direction, and fluctuates
till the close of April. The southerly vernal
winds, traversing the arid sands of Africa, are
most changeable as well as most unhealthy. They
form the simoom or samiel, and have proved
fatal to caravans and even to armies Are 0)
Ancient and Modern Egypt, Edin. Cab. Library).
Musquitos, locusts, frogs, together with the plague,
the small pox, and leprosy; are the great evils of
the country.


271. 1, Egypto-Ethiopian (the Tirhake of Scripture) ;
2, 4. Ethiopian; 3. Egyptian.


The most recent inquiries have shown that the
extreme limit at Phila was only of a political
nature; for the natives of the country below it
were of the same race as those who lived above
that spot—a tribe which passed down into the
fertile valley of the Nile from its original abode
in the south. These Ethiopians and the Egyp-
tians were not negroes, but a branch of the great
Caucasian family. Their colour—at least the
colour of the higher castes—was brown; their
frame slender, but of great strength. Their speech,
now found in the Coptic, is akin to the Shemitic
tongues. The women were very fruitful (Strabo,
xv. p. 695 ; Heeren, Jdeen, xi. 2, 10).

The mode of life of the Egyptians was influ-
enced by their locality : those who dwelt on high
lands on the east, as well as those who dwelt on
the marshy flat country in the Delta, were shep-
herds, as their land did not admit cultivation.
The people who lived along the Nile became fisli-
ermen and sailors. The cultivated part of the
natives who lived on the plains and over the sur-
face of the country diligently and most success-


EGYPT.


fully practised all the arts of life, and have left
ever-during memorials of their proficiency and
skill. :

On this natural diversity of pursuits, as well
as on a diversity of blood—for besides the master
and ruling race of Ethiopians were others who
were of nomade origin—was founded the insti-
tution of castes, which Egypt had in common
with India, and which pervaded the entire life of
the nation. These, according to Herodotus (xi.
164), were seven in number (comp. Diod. Sic. i.
73). The priestly caste was the most honoured
and influential. It had in every large city a
temple dedicated to the deity of the place, together
with a high priest, who stood next to the king and
restricted his power. The priesthood possessed
the finest portions of the country. They were the
judges, physicians, astrologers, architects,—in a
word, they united in themselves all the highest
culture and most distinguished offices of the land,
while with them alone lay tradition, literature,
and the sacred writings. This class exerted the
most decided and extensive influence on the cul-
ture not only of their own country, but of the
world; for during the brightest periods of Grecian
history the love of knowledge carried into Egypt
men who have done much to form the character
of after ages, such as Solon, Pythagoras, Archytas,
Thales, Herodotus, Plato, and others (comp. Gen.
xli. 8; Exod. vii. 11; viii, 11; xiii. 7; Joseph.
Antig. ii. 9, 2).

The peculiarities of the ancient Egyptians of the
lower castes seem to have survived best, and to be
represented, at least in some particulars, by the Fel-
lahs of the present day. These Fellahs discharge
all the duties of tilling the country and gathering
its rich abundance. They are a quiet, contented,
submissive race, always living, through an unjust
government, on the edge of starvation, yet always
happy, with no thought for the morrow, no care
for, no interest in, political changes. ¢ Of the
Fellahs it may be said, as was said by Amrou of
the ancient Egyptians: “they are bees always
toiling, always toiling for others, not themselves.”
The love of the Fellah for his country and his
Nile is an all-absorbing love. Remove him, and
Le perishes. He cannot live a year away from his
village; his grave must be where his cradle was.
But he is of all men most submissive: he will
rather die than revolt; resignation is his primary
virtue ; impatience under any yoke is unknown
to him; his life, his faith, his law is submission.
“ Allah Kerim!” is his hourly consolation, his per-
petual benediction. He was made for peace, not
for war; and, though his patriotism is intense,
there is no mingling in it of the love of glory or
the passion for conquest. His nationality is in Ins
local affections, and they are most intense. U
this race, the race of bright eyes and beautiful
forms, it is impossible to look without deep in-
terest : of all the gay, the gayest; of all the beings
made for happiness, the most excitable. If days of
peace and prosperity could be theirs, what songs,
what music, what joys’ (Bowring’s Report, p. 7).

The only other tribe we have room to notice is
that of the Copts, equally with the preceding, in-
digenous. They are Christians by hereditary
transmission, and have suffered centuries of cruel
persecutions and humiliations, though now they
seem to be rising in importance, and promise to
fill an important page in the future history of


‘


EGYPT.


In character they are amiable, pacific,
and intelligent, having of course the faults and
vices of dissimulation, falsehood, and meanness,
which slavery never fails to engender. In office
they are the seribes, the arithmeticians, the mea-
surers, the clerks,—in a word, the learned men of
the country. The language which they use in
their religious services is the ancient Egyptian, or
Coptic, which, however, is translated into Arabic
for the benefit of the laity. The Copts have been
under-estimated at 150,000 souls, divided into
twelve episcopal districts, the bishops of which
unite to elect a patriarch (Bowring’s Report).
‘The wisdom of Egypt’ was a phrase which,
at an early period, passed intu a proverb, so high
was the opinion entertained by antiquity of the
knowledge and skill of the ancient Egyptians (1
Kings iv. 30 ; Herod. ii. 160; Joseph. Antig. viii.
25; Acts vii. 22). Nor, as the sequel of this
article wil] show, were there wanting substantial
Teasons for the current estimate. If, however,
antiquity did not on this point exceed the bounds
of moderation, very certain is it that men of later
ages are chargeable with the utmost extravagance
in the terms which they employed when speaking
on the subject. It was long thought ‘as the
hieroglyphical inscriptions on the monumental
remains of Egypt contained treasures of wisdom
no less boundless than hidden ; and, indeed, hiero-
glyphics were, in the opinion of some, invented
by the priests of the land, if not expressly to con-
ceal their knowledge from the profane vulgar, yet
asa safe receptacle and convenient storehouse for
their mysterious but invaluable doctrines. Great,
consequently, was tbe expectation of the public
when it was announced that a key had been dis-
covered which opened the portal to these long-
concealed treasures. The result has not been
Correspondent. Only partial success has rewarded
the labour which has been expended on the attempt
to decypher the hieroglyphics; and what little
light has been thus obtained is neither very valu-
able in itself, nor of very high promise in regard
to what may yet be kept under clouds and sha-
dows. Men of profound learning, great acuteness
of mind, and distinguished reputation have en-
gaged and persevered in the inquiry : it is impus-
sible to study without advantage the writings of
such persons as Zoega, Akerblad, Young, Cham-
Pollion, Spohn, Seyffarth, Kosegarten, Riihle;
and equally ungrateful would it be to affirm that
DO progress been made in the undertaking ;
but, after all, the conclusions and positions which
ve been drawn and set forth are only in a few
cases (comparatively) definite and unimpeachable
(Heeren, Ideen, ii. 2, 4; Quatremére, Recherches
sur la langue et la littérature de VEgypte>.
The little that was known in classical times on
subject of the hieroglyphics is found in a few
pases. of a few Greek writers (Herod. ii. 36;
lod. Sic. Ixxxi. 3, 4; Clem. Alex. Strom. v.)
the very import of which was, if at all, very im-
Perfectly understood till recent investigations
the light of fact upon their words. A brief
*xposition wiil put the reader into possession of
oes Important truths connected with the
puvject. We premise, however, that unanimity
Y NO means prevails among the writers who have
& ngnt to be considered as authorities,
knowledge of hieroglyphics which we at


Present possess owes its origin to the Rosetta


EGYPT. 61


stone, which is now in the British Museum. This
_ stone was found by the French among the ruins
of Fort St. Julien, which is situated near the
mouth of the Rosetta branch of the Nile, and
was given up to the English in accordance with
the terms of the treaty of Alexandria. It is sup-


fo}
°
fe]
ig


Sess


Pics peo ksey
“BAS LA E Yan


272, The Rosctta Stone, with specimens of the characters.
4, 1/. Sacred; 2,2/, Enchorial; 3, 3/. Greek.
posed to have been sculptured about s.c. 195,
and contains a decree in honour of Ptolemy V.
(Epiphanes) written in three different characters.
One of these is Greek, and a part of it has been
explained to state that the decree was ordered to
be written in Sacred, Enchorial, and Greek
writing. Dr. Young was the first that attempted
to decipher this inscription ; in which he partially
succeeded by counting the recurrence of the more
marked characters in the hieroglyphics, and com-
paring them with those that occurred about the
same number of times in the Greek. Cham-

ion and Wilkinson have followed up Dr.
Voanb's discoveries with great ingenuity, and we
can now partially read inscriptions which before
were wholly unintelligible to us. Among other
obstacles, however, this remains in the way, viz.,
that the Rosetta stone was sculptured about 195
s.c. and in Lower Egypt; while the major part
of the inscriptions were written during the twelve
previous centuries, and are found in Upper Egypt.
Hieroglyphics are written either from left to
right or right to left; though sometimes ‘the
columns are so narrow that they may be almost
said to be written ftom top to bottom. They are
partly pictorial ; thus ‘ ox,’ ‘ goose,’ ‘ temple,’ are
represented by pictures or pictorial ceenbuls of an
ox, &c. At other times they are phonetic, and
written by an alphabet of about bio letters, of
which many are synonymous; some being adapted
for writing, others for scu]pture; some in use at


03 EGYPT.


an earlier period, others at a later. The powers
of these ‘iitess are determined by the names of
the kings in which they are found; but as this
cannot be done very exactly, they are generally
arranged under about twelve of our jgimary
letters. We cannot, however, distinguish accu-
rately between the vowels, or p and PH, and other
cognate letters. The names of sovereigns are
always written within a ring or cartouche : those
of any other person are distinguished by a sitting
figure fullowing them: besides these, there is
nothing to mark the difference between a letter
and a pictorial symbol. In some words the
meaning is expressed twice; once by a phonetic
combination; and again, by a picturial symbol ;
in others the more important part is symbolical,
and the grammatical termination is spelt. Some-
times also we find a species of abbreviation; thus
the word ox would be expressed by the first letter
of the Coptic word signifying ox.

It is manifest that the hieroglyphics which
were either purely pictorial or symbolic would be
inadequate to express every part of speech. Every
language must, except at its very commencement,
have sume words which. taken alone, are void of
meaning; and unless those who speak it are
entirely separated 1rom other nations, they must
have occasion to express fureign names and terms
in their own tongue, and write them iu their own
character, if they are sufficiently advanced in
Civilization to possess the art of writing. Now
the Egyptians, at the period from which their
existing monuments can be dated, were the most
civilize€ nation on earth, and, though debarred
from trading with foreigners before the time of
Psammeticus, they were often at war with their
southern and eastern neighbours, Their language
then must have possessed such terms as could be
expressed only by characters which stood for
sounds, and this necessity may be supposed to
have given rise to a third kind of hieroglyphics,
called by M. Champollion phonetic. That a
certain number were so employed is beyond a
doubt, and the principle on which these figures
were selected for that purpose has probably been
ascertained; it was apparently this, that the
names of things (#.¢. the words) suggested by
these hieroglyphics began by the sound or letter
which they were taken to represent. Thus an
eagle, which in Egyptian or Coptic is abom, ex-

the letter a; a censer, in Egyptian berde,
the letter 4, and so on. This principle being
admitted, it follows that the number of figures
used to re tt one sound might be increased
almost without 1 limit, as any hieroglyphic might
stand for the first letter of its name; but so
copious an alphabet would have been, even to a
native, a constant source of error. The clia-
racters, therefore, so employed were soon fixed ;
and, as far as bas been hitherto ascertained,
eighteen or nineteen was the largest number as-
signed to any one letter, while some have only
one or two. By this yariety the Egyptians were
able to exercise a faculty held in high esteem
among their eastern neighbours—that of convey-
ing a double meaning by the same sign, and of
expressing covert allusions not generally compre-
hensible. Thus the lion is put for the 2 in
Ptolemy and, Alexander, because they were power-
ful kings; the ram fur the 6 in Anubis, because
it was sacred to that god, &c.


EGYPT.


But for the purpose of writing, ‘strictty ‘so
called, there was a less ornamental and wore
rapid way of forming the characters, which is
always found in the MSS., and which would be
the natural consequence of using a pen or stylus.
This is called by Strabo and Pliny hieratic
writing, the hieroglypbics being, as the name
imports, peculiar to sculpture. It is chiefly by
means of the hieroglyphics that we are enabled
to read the hieratic writing, the latter being, for
the most part, an abbreviated way of writing the
former. The Rosetta stone contained the in-
scription in yet another set of characters, the
demotic or enchorial. It is to Dr. Young that
we owe the greater part of our knowledge on this
subject. He was greatly assisted by the dis-
covery of two or three papyri written in this
character with Greek translations, the earliest of
which dates in the reign of Psammeticus about
.c. 650. An alphabet has been formed from
Greek proper names; from which it appears that
the few words which we can decipher are Coptic.
In this writing the hieroglyphics have almost
wholly disappeared, though some still appear
scattered here and there.

The last statement worthy of attention which
has come under the writer's notice in connection
with hieroglyphics is that of Wathen (Arts, An-
tiguit. and Chron. of Eyypt, p. 1, -), who
thinks he has phan that ee aes of
the hieroglyphic ‘names and standards’ of the
ancient monarchs bear a resemblance to the
quartering of arms in modern heraldry. Hence


from the names and standards of a king we may
often learn his extraction, paternal and matemal,
and, when not descénded from the reigning fa-
mily, what his claim was to the throne. This
writer also holds that different physiognomies,
each characteristic of a different royal family,
are distinctly traceable in the its of the
kings preserved on the walls of the ancient mo-
numents. ‘The Egyptian physiognomy, the
Ethiopian, and the mixture of the two, may each
be plainly recognised. Even the characteristic
lineaments of the different families purely Egyp-
tian are accurately given.’ ‘ The facts,’ he con-
tinues, ‘deducible from these two sources contirm
and illustrate each other. Together, they throw
a new light on the whole period of monumental
history, commencing within a few centuries of
the flood; render plain and certain what was
before doubtful and obscure in notices of ancient
Egypt scattered @ sacred and profane history,
and furnish a clue to the mazes of the Mane-
thonian dynasties.’ :

The difficulties that oppose the formation of a


Z


BGXPT.
satisfactory Egyptian chronology are great and


numerous. e most distinguished writers differ
egregiously in their statements. Newton places
Shishak about the middle of the tenth century
before our~era; Usher fixes him at B.c. 1489.
One chronologer determines the epoch of Menes,
first king of Egypt, at about s.c. 2231; Cham-
lion deduces from the same authorities that he
ived 6000 years before Mohammed. Every
tian monarch had several names. The
which we possess on Egyptian history
are either fragments, or mutually conflicting, or
of too late a date to be of great value. The
copyists of Manetho give diverse reports of what
they profess to io from his work. Mythology
is blended with history, theory with fact, and mere
conjectures and plays of the fancy are reported
ith a gravity of manner which is su only
by the credulity to which they owe their birth and
their currency.

Various efforts, flowever, have been made to
remove difficulties, reconcile contradictions, and
harmonize dissonances. The success has been
far from distinguished. Sha in his Early
History of Egypt, has \aboured for this purpose
by contracting the ordinary chronological period,
and by the hypothesis of several contemporaneous
dynasties, ruling in Lower or in Upper Egypt.
The earliest event which he seems to admit, as
ascertained with exactness, is the capture of Jeru-
salem by Shishak, in the fifth year of king Reho-
boam, B.c. 970. Wathen (ut supra), availing
himself of the discoveries made by others and by
himself, in decyphering the sculptured language
of the ancient monuments, has, in his own opinion,
gone far to clear away previously existing dith-
culties, to bring the fragmentary accounts of
ancient writers into accordance, and to offer to
the world a definite, consistent, and trustworthy
Egyptian chronology. The author (p. 75) lays
considerable stress on the fact that, in almost
every instance, when Hebrew history is interwoven
with Egyptian, the chronology which he has de-
veloped harmonizes with that of the sacred writers
as determined by Archbishop Usher in the Eng-
lish Bible. ‘Thus Usher's date for Peleg, in
whose days the earth was divided (1 Chron. i. 19)
is B.c. 2247; that of Menes, the first king of
Exypt, is here fixed at s.c. 2222.’ Other cor-

respondencies are the Exodus, English Bible,

1491; Wathen, 1489; Shishak’s capture of Jeru-

salem, 971; his accession, according to Wathen,
990; Pharaoh-Necho slew Josiah, 610; his ac-
cession, 618. On which it seems sufficient to
remark that, even taking these and the one or
two other statements made by the author on the
point, to be as he has set them forth, they neither
do nor can effect much for fixing with certainty
historical events, so long as doubts are entertained
whether Usher's chronology itself is correct, and
so long as uncertainty prevails generally in rela-
tion to the strict chronological period of the Old
Testament history [Curonoroey].

What, however, we know to be definite, and
believe to be accurate in its disclosures, and what
we judge to be far more important in an historical
relation, is to be found in the paintings and
sculptares with which the Fgyptians left the walls
of their tombs and temples decorated in forms and
colours which have not yet faded from the sight.
It is true that these instances of real picture writ-


‘EGYPT. 603


ing may do little for fixing the epooh of the ac-
cession of a king or the termination of a dynasty.
Yet in this they are not entirely mute. Among


rjbERRLETS)


aie chp


iA G


274. [Interior of Pictured Tomb.)


the innumerable mural sculptures in the temple
at Karnak, Champollion discovered one in which
a king, Sheshonk (Shishak), is presenting captives
of various nations to his God as trophies of vic-
tory. One of these, distinguished by a long beard
and Jewish physiognomy, bears the hierog] yphical
title Youdah Malek, king of Judah. But for any
practical purpose, the determination of a date, or
the identitication of an event, is of small com
ratrve moment ; and far too much im stancots
been attached to mere chronological details. To
learn when an Egyptian or Chinese king ascended
the throne, or departed this life, may gratify the
antiquary or even reward much learned toil, but
the world at large bas an interest in history in the
main, if not exclusively, so far as it discloses what
men thought, felt, did; what they hoped, feared,
and achieved in the days of old; thereby affording
to posterity warnings, encouragement, light, and
impulse. Now for these highly important pur-
the most abundant materials are presented
in Egypt, and may be found described in the
works of Champollion, Wilkinson, and others.
Let any one visit the Egyptian gallery in the
British Museum, and he will be surprised and
delighted to find Egypt almost resuscitated. The
tombs have given up their dead. Buried trea-
sures, over whose silence centuries had rolled be-
fore our era began, crowd on the sight and gratify
the mind. And paintings, too, strike the eye,
which may not indeed conform very exactly to
the laws of perspective, but which lay open, and
set before the spectator, the Egyptian, as he was
in the days of his glory and pride. Indeed, from
the paintings and sculptures which have been dis-
covered and described, we are enabled to follow
this most singular and deeply interesting people
through all the classes of society, through all the
operations of science and husbandry, into the trans-
actions of public life, the details of house-keeping,
the achievements of war, the amusements of hunt-
ing, fishing, feasting, and the solemn rites of a
most august and imposing religious ceremonial.
Amid the various profune authors who have
written more or less in detail on Egypt (see a list
of them in Sharpe's Early History of Egypt,
London, 1836, p. 3), and after all the labour
that has been bestowed on the attempt to decypher
the hieroglyphics, the Bible remains our best
and fullest authority for the early history of the
country. This history, it is true, is not presented
in a chronological series of events, nor supplied
respecting any period with nice exactitude and
minute details. The disclosures made by in-
scriptions on public buildings, of kings, wars, and


604 - EGYPT.


conquests, may, when verified as to age, and
placed in their probable order by the aid of learn-
ing and criticism, reveal more as to the dynasties
and individual sovereigns; but on such informa-
tion, even when free from doubt, and most accu-
rate, little real value can be set; while the Bible
supplies, either by express statement or obvious
implication, facts and principles which constitute
genuine history, and go far to give the past all the
value which it can possess for the men of these
times. And what makes these disclosures the
more valuable is not only that they wear the
character of genuine and uncorrupted. history—
free from the false, deep, and unnatural colourings
of mythology ; but that they relate to the earliest
forms of civilized life, and to ages over which pro-
fane historians have left the thickest darkness.
Narrations and implications, such as the Bible
affords in regard to the early history of Egypt,
want no corroboration ; they wear in their natural-
ness, simplicity, and correspondence with what
would be expected in the ayes to which they refer,
evidence that they represent actual realities, which
uione can resist who have studied either human
nature or human society. Still it nay not be su-
pererogatory to remark that the little which learn-
ing and industry have succeeded in extracting
from the monumental inscriptions, and the very
great deal which funereal and religious paintings
have of late made known; and, indeed all, from
whatever suurce gathered, that we know of the
country and its institutions and usages, are in
entire harmony with what the Scriptures directly
or indirectly teach respecting Egypt. More than
one effort has indeed heen made to corroborate
the truth of Scriptural history, by setting forth a
certain correspondency alleged to exist between
the results of modern discovery, and dates and
events found in the sacred volume. Nor would
we deny that the time may arrive when such @
correspondency will appear to rest on the surest
vouchers, as in one or two instances it may
do even in the actual state of kuowledge. But
chronology must assume a more detinite and cer-
tain form before, whatever may be learnt from
the monuments of Egypt, any historical relation-
ship between the Bible and other sources of know-
ledge touching Egypt can be accurately ascer-
tained and satisfactorily established. Meanwhile,
by these imperfect attempts, even suspicion may
be engendered, and certainly there is a risk lest
the mind should be drawn off from a sphere of
evidence which is no less striking than it is full
and satisfactory. It is, we had almost said,
enough, it is certainly a very great puint to have
ascertained beyond doubt that the Bayete of the
Bible is Egypt indeed, not a fiction, nor an im-
posture, nor a blunder—as writers of the Voltaire
school would persuade the world—but a reality,
ia as it goes, a picture copied from actual
ie. ;

We learn from the Old Testament that while
the Jews, the earliest nation that has handed
down to us the history of its rise and civilization,
were yet a tribe of wandering shepherds, under
Abraham, depending sulely upon the unbought
gifts of nature, who, when they had exhausted
one district, instead of cultivating it, drove off
their flocks in search of a new pasture-ground,
after the manner of the American Indians; the
Egyptians were acquainted with agriculture and


EGYPT.


all those arts of civilization and gov t
which indicate a social existence, extending
backwards for at least several ages. ‘This is con-
firmed in a striking manner by architectural
remains that have survived the ravages of above
thirty centuries; for while the Israelites, under
the immediate successors of Joshua, were still
warring with the Canaanites for the possession of
the land of promise, or yet earlier, while they
were yet slaves in Egypt, that most interesting
land was distinguished for palaces, temples,
ticos, obelisks, statues, and canals, which declare
that they had been preceded by a long period of
civilization, and which still remain the admira-
tion of the world. The pyramids of Lower Egypt,
requiring for their erection the least quantity of
architectural knowledge, no elegance of design,
no taste in detail, might ibly have been the
work of men driven by task-masters to their daily
laour ; but that the palace®, tombe, and temples
of Upper Egypt, which present to us the earliest
known instances of architecture, sculpture, and
painting ; the colossal statues of Amenopb and
meses, requiring considerable anatomical know-
ledge for the original design, and a mechanical


skill in the execution, exceeding perhaps even
that of the Greeks themselves; the vast works for
irrigation; and the correct division of the calen-
dar, implying great knowledge of mathematics—
that these should have beer the works of a people
suffering under political disadvantages, and not
far advanced in all the arts and refinements of
social life, would contradict all that observatian
or history has made known. Some considerable
degree therefore of political freedom, as well asa
high cultivation, must at an early period have
been enjoyed by the Egyptians.

In Gen. x. we find the colonization of Egypt
traced up to the immediate children of Noah, for
it is there stated that Mizraim was the second son
of Ham, who was himself the second son of Noah.
Immeiliately after these genealogical statements
the sacred narrative (Gen. xii.) informs us that the
patriarch Abraham, pressed by famine, went down
(about s.c. 1920) into Egypt, where it appears be


EGYPT.


found a monarch, a court, princes and servants,
and where he fuund also those supplies of food
which the well-known fertility of the country had
led him to seek there; for it is expressly stated
that the favour which his wife had won in the
reigning Pharaoh's eyes procured him sheep and
oxen, as well as he-asses, and men-servants, and
mail-servants, and she-asses and camels. In
Gen. xxi. 9, mention is made in the case of
Ishmael, the son of Hagar the Eyyptian, whose
mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt,
of a mixed race between the Egyptians and the
Chaldeans, a race which in after times became
@ great nation. From this mixture of races it has
heen supposed the Arabs (JY, ‘mixed people")
‘ad their name (Sharpe's Early Hist. of Egypt,
“AL. In Gen, xxxix. begins the interesting
atory of Joseph's being carried down to Egypt,
with all its important consequences for the great-
grandchildren of Abraham. The productiveness
of the country is the allurement, famine the im-
pulse. Attendant circumstances show that Egypt
was then famous also fur its commercial pursuits;
and the entire narrative gives the idea of a com-
plex system of suciety (about 3.c. 1720), and a
well-constituted yet arbitrary furm of government,
As in eastern cuurts at later periods of history,
elevation to high oftices was marked and sudden.
The slave Joseph is taken from prison and from
impending death, and raised to the dignity of prime
vizier, and is entrusted with making provision for
an approaching dearth of food, which he had him-
self foretold, during which he effects in favour of
the ruling sovereign one of the greatest revolutions
of preperty which history has recorded. The
high consideration in which the priestly caste
was held is apparent. Joseph himself marries a
daughter of the priest of On. Out of respect
towards, as well as by the direct influence of, Jo-
seph, the Hebrews were well treated. The Scrip-
tural record, however, distinctly states (xlvi, 34)
that befure the descent of Israel and his sons
‘every shepherd’ was ‘an abomiration unto the
Egyptians.’ The Hebrews, whose ‘ trade had been
about cattle,’ must have been oiious in the eyes
of the Egyptians, yet are they expressly permitted
to dwell ‘in the best of the land’ (xlvii. 6), which
is identified with the land of Goshen, the place
which the Israelites had prayed might be assigned
to them, and which they obviously desired on ac-
Count of the adaptation of its soil to their way
of life as herdemen, Having settled his father
and family satisfactorily in the land, Joseph pro-
ceeded to supply the urgent wants of a hungry
nation, and at the same time converted the tenure
of all property from freehold into tenancy-at-will,
with a rent charge of one-fiftn of the produce,
leaving their lands, however, in the hands of the
Pnests; and thus he gave another evidence of the
Sreatness of their power.
ace richness of Goshen was favourable, and
€ Israelites ‘ grew and multiplied exceedingly,’
sothat the land was filled with them. But Jo-
seph was now dead ; time had passed on, and
a ere rose up a new king (probably one of a new
Ynasty) which Anew (Exod. i. 8) not Joseph,
define no personal knowledge, and it may be no
«nite information of his services: who, becom-
ing jealous of the increase of the Hebrews, set about
eens them with the avowed intention of
nishing their numbers and crippling their


EGYPT. 605


power. Severe task-masters are therefore set over
them ; heavy tasks are imposed; the Hebrews are
compelled to build ‘treasure cities; Pithom and
Raamses.' It is found, however, that they only
increase the more. In consequence, their burdens
are doubled and their lives made bitter with hard
bondage (Exod. i. 14), ¢in morter and in brick,
and in all manner of service in the field.’ Their
first-born males, moreover, are doomed to destruc-
tion the moment they cume into being. The
deepest heart-burnings ensue; hatred arises be-
tween the oppressor and the oppressed ;_ the Israel-
ites seek revenge in private and by stealth (Exod.
ii. 12). At last a higher power interferes, and
the alllicted race is permitted to quit Egypt. At
this time Egypt appears to have been a well-
peopled and well-cultivated country, with nu-
merous cities, under a despotic’ monarch, sur-
rounded by officers of his court and a life-guard.
There was a ceremonial at audience, a distinction
of ranks, a state-prison, and a prime minister.
Great buildings were carried on. ‘There was set
apart from the rest of the peo)le an order of
priests who probably tilled offices in the civil
government; the priest of Midian and the priest
of On seem to have ruled over the cities so named.
There was in the general class of priests an order
—wise men, sorcerers, and magicians—who had
charge of a certain secret knowledge ; there were
physicians or embalmers of the dead; the royal
army contained chosen captains and horsemen
and chariots. The attention which the people at
large paid to agriculture, and the fixed notions of
property which they in consequence had, made
them hold the shepherd or uomade tribes in ab-
horrence, as freebuuters only less dangerous than
hunting tribes.

Phe ill feelings which the peculiar circum-
stances connected with the exode from Egypt
had occasioned served to keep the Israelites and
the Egyptians strangers, if not enemies, one to
another during the lapse of centuries, till the
days of David and Solomon, when (1 Kings iii.,
vii, ix., xi.) friendly relations again spring up
between the two countries. Solomon marries the
daughter of a Pharaoh, who burns the city of
Gezer, and who in consequence must have been
master of Lower Egypt. ‘And Solomon had
horses brought out of Egypt, and linen yarn?
six hundred shekels of silver was the price of a
chariot, and one hundred and fifty the price of a
horse. Jeroboam, however, who ‘ had lifted up his
hand against the king,’ and become subsequently
monarch of the revolted ten tribes, found refuge
and protection in Egypt, which was then (about
B.c. 975) governed by Shishak. From 2 Chron.
xii. it appears that in the filth year of Solomon's
successor, Rehoboam, this same Shishak ‘came
against Jerusalem’ with a very large army, con-
sisting of chariots, horse and foot soldiers, besides
auxiliary foreigners, and having captured the
fortified cities which lay on his march, he entered
and plundered the metropolis. The language
which is employed in Joel (iii. 19) shows that, in
the ninth century before Christ, Egypt had, iv
conjunction with Edom, displayed both its power
and its cruelty towards the kingdom of Judah.
The rise and oppressiveness of the Assyrian power
soon, however, inclined the Egyptians and the
Israelites, from a sense of common danger, to cul-
tivate friendly relations with one another. In


606 EGYPT.


3 Kings xvii. we find that in the twelfth year of
Ahaz king of Judah (s.c. 730) Hoshea king of
Israel desisfed from paying his usual tribute to
the king of Assyria, and courted the alliance of
So, king of Egypt, who must have been a very
powerful monarch to have been thought able to
give assistance in opposition to Assyria, Against
this mere human resource the prophet Isaiah
(xxxi.) warmly protested, declaring its utter in-
efficiency, and striving to lead his countrymen
to the practice of that righteousness and piety
by neglecting which they had been forsaken of
God. Upon this act of king Hoshea, however,
the Assyrians overran Samaria and carried (2
Kings xvii. 6) Israel away into Assyria. In the
reign of Hezekiah (n.c. 726) it appears (2 Kings
xviii. 21) that the kingdom of Judah still ¢ trusted
upon the staff of this bruised reed, even Egypt,
on which if a man lean, it will go into his hand
and pierce it: so is Pharaoh king of Egypt unto
all that trust on him.’ In the last year of the
reign of Jusiah (n.c. 609) Egypt seems to have
attempted to increase its influence in Palestine,
when Pharaoh-Nechoh (2 Kings xxiii. 29) ‘went
up against the king of Assyria to the river Eu-
phrates,’ and Josiah going against him was slain
in battle. His successor, Jehoatiaz, was dethroned
after a brief reign of three mouths, and imprisoned
at Riblah by the Egyptian monarch, who imposed
on the country a heavy tribute. Pharaoh-Nechoh
then made his elder brother Eliakim king, having
changed his name to Jehoiakim. Jehoahiaz after-
wards died in Egypt. But the Egyptian influence
over Judah soon ended; for in the fourth year of
Jehoiakim (B.c. 604) Nebuchadnezzar king of Ba-
bylon marched against (Ser. xlvi., 2 Kings xxiv.)
Judea and. its allies, defeated Pharaoh-Nechuh,
-and retuok from the Egyptians Arabia Petriva
and all that belonged to them between the Eu-
phrates and the Nile. Zedekiah, the next king
of Judah, rebelling against Nebuchadnezzar,
made an alliance with Pharaoh-Hophra (Jer.
xliv.); and when Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jeru-
salem, on the march of the Egyptian army, the
Chaldees raised the siege (Jer. xxxvii. 5) and
withdrew the army. But this was the last time
that the Egyptian power was able to serve the
Jews. The Assyrian party in the state, indeed,
was in the minority, though assisted by the in-
fluence of Jeremiah and Ezekiel (Ezek. xxix.,
Jer. xxv.): yet it predominated ; the Jews were
carried captive to Babylon, and in less than a
century afterwards Egypt was made a province
of the same empire.

After the time of the exile the Egyptian Pto-
lJemies were for a long while (from u.c. 301 to
about 180) masters of Palestine, and during this
period Egypt became as of old a place of refuge
to the Jews, to whom many favours and _privi-
leges were conceded. This shelter seems not to
have been for ages withdrawn (Matt. ii. 13). Yet
it cannot be said that the Jews were held in
esteem by the Egyptians (Philo, ¢. Apion. ii. p.
52h). Indeed it was from an Egyptian, Manetho
(a.c. 300), that the most defamatory misrepresen-
tations of Jewish history were given to the world ;
and, in the days of Augustus, Chaeremon took
apecial pains to make the Jewish people appear
despicable (Joseph. c. Apion. i, 32; comp. Creuzer,
Com, Herod. i. 270).

In the reign of Ptolemy Philometor, Onias,


EGYPT.


whose father, the third high-priest of that name,
had been murdered, fled into Egypt, and rose into
high favour with the king and Cleopatra his
queen. The high-priesthood of the temple of
Jerusalem, which belonged of right to his family,
having passed from it to the family of the Mac-
cahees, a the nomination of Jonathan tu this
office (#.c, 153), Onias used his influence with
the court to procure the establishment of a temple
and ritual in Egypt which should detach the
Jews who lived there from their connectiun with
the temple at Jerusalem. The king complied
with the request. To reconcile the E,yptian
Jews to a second temple, Onias alleged Isa. xix.
18, 19. He chose for the purpose a ruined tem-
ple of Bubastis, at Leortopolis, in the Helivpolitan
nome, one hundred and fifty stadia from Memphis,
which place he converted into a sort of miniature
Jerusalem (Joseph. De Bell. Jud. i. 1), erecting an
altar in imitation of that in the temple, and con-
stituting himself high-priest. The king granted
a tract of land around the temple for the main-
tenance of the worship, and it remained in eaist-
ence till destroyed by Vespasian (Joseph. Antz,
xHii.35 xx. 95 De Bell. Jud. vii. 11). The district
in which this temple stood appears to have been,
after Alexandria, the chief seat of the Jews in
Egypt, and which from the uame of its founder
was called ’Ovicv xdpa (Joseph. Antig. xiv. 8
Helon’s Pilgrim. p. 328).

If, instead of taking the sacred volume for cur
guide, we consult profane authors, only a few
gencral conclusions can be given with any degree
of historical truth and well-grounded confidence.
‘The earliest history,’ says Winer, (Bib. Real-
wérterd, in loc.) ‘of Egypt is altogether lezen
dary till we come to the age of Sesostris, With
this monarch, who was also named Rameses, begins
the half-mythical halt-historical period of great
revolutions and angust editices (Heeren, Zdeen),
and lasts till the time of Psammeticus, about 700
years before Christ. Then, and not hefore, cre
dible history begins. Originally several sacerdotal
governments appear to have co-existed, among
which that of Memphis was, thongh not the oldest,
yet the most influential. Then Lower Egypt was
invaded by certain nomade hordes from the east,
who spread as far as Memphis, of which city they
became masters, and founded a dynasty of shep-
herd kings (Hyksos). The states of Upper Egypt
succeeded in driving these foreigners out of the
land; that of Diospolis gained the ascendancy,
whose king was the celebrated Sesostris—probably
gc. 1500-1100. In the eighth century before
Christ the Ethiopians invaded Upper Egypt, and
ruled there with mildness and wisdom, whilst two
other dynasties, a Saitic and a Tanatic, flourished
in Lower Egypt. A civil war converted Egypt
into a state under twelve princes. Psamme-
ticus, one of these twelve, supported by foreign
mercenaries, succeeded in making himself sole
monarch, and opened to strangers the hitherto
closed country. The history now becomes clear.
From 526 before our Lord Egypt became a Per-
sian province, fell (B.c. 352) into the hands of
Alexander the Great, and after his death (a.c. 323
the dynasty of the Ptolemies established itself,
which (a.v.c. 723) came to a termination at the
battle of Actium.”

The ascertained correspondencies in respect of
monarchs found alike in sacred and profane bi


* EGYPT.


tory are not numerous. The following monarchs
have been identified (Sharpe's Early Egypt, p. 26),
Shishak (2 Chron. xii.) with Sesostris (B.c. 983) ;
Pharaoh-Nechoh (2 Kings xxiii.) with Necho II.
(3.c. 616); and Pharaoh-Hophra (Jer. xliv.) with
Apries (u.c. 594).

On few historical points have more various or
conflicting opinions heen held than respecting the
Hyksos or shepherd kings. Who were they?
When did they rule? When were they expelled ?
Were they the same as the Israelites? are questions
which have received at the hands even of pro-
foundly learned men very different answers. Nor
in so debated a case should we here venture an
opinion did we not feel that the view we take has
an important bearing on the origin of some part of
the religion of the Egyptians.

Manetho makes his fifteenth dynasty to consist
of the Phoenician shepherd kings. ‘ In the reign
of King Timeus,’ he says, ‘there came up from
the east men of an igndble race, who had the con-
fidence to invade our country, and easily subdued
it without a battle, burning the cities, demolishing
the temples, slaying the men, and reducing the
women and children to slavery.” They made
Salatis, one of themselves, king: he reigned at
Memphis, and made the upper and lower region
tributary. Of his seventeenth dynasty also were
forty-three shepherd kings, called Hycsos, who
reined, perhaps contemporaneously with the pre-
ceding, at Diospolis, In the eignteenth dynasty
of Diospolis a rising took place, and the shepherd
kings were expelled out of the other parts of Egypt
into the district of Abaris, which they fortitied.
Amosis besieged and compelled them to capi-
tulate; on which they Jeft Egypt, in number
219,000, and. ‘ marched through the desert towards
Syria, and built the city of Jerusalem.’ The last
few words seem to render it probable that Manetho
confounded the Hyksos with the Israelites, which
is the less surprising since the Hyksos were, as he
nightly calls them, Phoenicians, of the ancient, if
hot original, race which inhabited Phoenicia, or
Palestine (taken in its widest sense), before the
conquest of the country by the Hebrews. Chro-
nological considerations seem to refer the time
of the dominion of the Hyksos to the period of
Abraham and Joseph (say from p.c. 2000 to 1600),
When Joseph went into the land he fuund the
name of shepherd odious—which agrees with the
hypothesis that places the irruption of the shep-
erd kings anterior to his time; and possibly both
the ease with which he rose to power, and the fact
that Jacob turned towards Egypt for a supply of
food when urged by want, may be readily ac-
counted for, on the supposition that a kindred

race held dominion in the land, which, though
hated hy the people, as being forcign in its origin
and oppressive in its character, would not he in-
disposed to show favour to members of the great
Shemitic family to which they themselves be-
longed. The irruption into Egypt, and the con-
quest of the country on the part of the Phanician
shepherds, seems to bave been a consequence of
the general pressure of population, from the north-
east towards the south-west, which led the nomade
Shemitic tribes first to overcome the original in-
habitants of Palestine, and, continuing in the
same line of advance, then to enter and subdue

egypt. The invasion of the Hyksos is indeed to

regarded as one resu!t of the movement from


EGYPT. 7


the Euphrates westward of the most powerful and
(comparatively) most civilized people then found
in Western Asia, who in their progress sutidued or
expelled in the countries through which they not
improbably were urged by a pressure from other
advancing tribes, nation and tribe one after ano-
ther, driving them down toward the sea, and
compelling those who dwelt along the shores of
the Mediterranean, to seek shelter and safety in
the islands of that sea and other distant parts,
To conquerors and aggressors of the character of
these shepherd hordes Egypt would offer special
attractions. They continued sweeping onwards,
and at last enfered and conqnered Egypt, esta-
blishing there a new dynasty, which was hateful,
because foreign, and because of a lower deyree of
culture than the Egyptians themselves had reached.
Nor would these shepherds be less odious because,
coming from the east and immediately from the
deserts of Arabia, they came from the quarter
whence the mild and cultivated Egyptians had
long been wont to sutler from the predatory incur-
sions of the wild nomade tribes (Die Ph: nizier,
von Movers, Bonn, 1841; Zur Geschichte der
Israeliten, yon E. Bertheau, Gottingen, 1842),
between whom and the agricultural natives of the
country different pursuits, habits, and tastes would
naturally engender animosities. This feeling of
alienation exists at the present day. The Arab is
still a depressed and despised being in Egypt.
Bowring, in his valuable Report on the country,
remarks, ‘It is scarcely allowable even to send a
message to a person in authority by an Arab ser-
vant.’ (p. 7. 4
The expulsion of the shepherds was strangely
confounded by Josephus or Manetho with the
Exodus of the Israelites. The shepherds were
conquerors, rulers, and oppressors; the Israelites
guests and slaves. The shepherds were ex-
pelled, the Israelites were delivered. Josephus
(ce. Apion. i.), however, gives from Manetho
a narrative of an event which wears a much
nearer likeness to the Exodus, in the case of a
King Amenophis, who was ordered by the gods
to cleanse Egypt of a multitude of lepers and
other unclean persons; many of whom were
drowned, and others sent in great numbers to
work in the quarries which are on the east side
of the Nile. After a time they were permitted
to establish themselves in Avaris, which had been
abandoned hy the shepherds. They then elected
a miler, Osarsiph, whose name was afterwards
changed to that of Moses, This chief ‘made this
law for them, that they should not worship the
Ezyptian gods, but should kill the animals held
sacred by the Egyptians; nor were they tu have
intercourse with any but such as were members
of their own body—in all respects aiming to
oppose the customs and influence of the nations.
These, sending for aid to the shepherds who had
settled in Jerusalem, and having received troops
to the number of 200,000 men, were met by
Amenophis, the king, with a yet larger force, but
not attacked. On a subsequent occasion, however,
they were assailed by the Egyptians, beaten, and
driven to the contines of Syria.’ Lysimachus gives
anaccount not dissimilar to this, adding, that
under the leadership of Moses these mixed hordes
settled in Judawa (Cory’s Ancient Fragments).
The account which Diodorus gives of the migra-
tion of the Israelites from Egypt to Palestine is


.


608 EGYPT.


of a similar tenor. The deviations from the
sacred narrative may be easily accounted for by
Egyptian ignorance, vanity, and pride.

Wathen, following his own chronology, refers
the great works existing in Egypt to three periods,
separated by intervals of several centuries. ‘The
first includes the two great dynasties of Theban
Hanes who governed Exzypt during her “ most
high and palmy state,” when Thebes sent forth her
armies to distant conquests. In the second period
is comprised the erection of the pyramids. The
third includes the reigns of the Ptolemies and
earlier Caesars, under whom Egyptian architecture
flourished in a second youth, and atmost attained
its original splendour.’ On the chronology, how-
ever, of the fine arts in Egypt, as well as on so
many other points, different, not to say opposite,
opinionsare held ; for instance, the erection of the
Prramids, which Wathen thus brings down into

is second period, others refer back to the early
dawn of its history. This is not the place to state,
much less discuss, the diversities which present
themselves to the student; our purpose will be
answered by sume general details as to the extent
and character of the sublime creations of art in
Egypt—of that wonderful country, the most won-
dertul monuments.

In regard to style, that remained essentially the
same, in principles and character, from its first
appearance (‘in the seventeenth century befure
our cra’—Wathen) to its tinal downfall, on the
introduction of Christianity; though ornamental
members were in later times modified, elaborated,
and improved, and some entirely new added.
Many of its peculiarities may have been borrowed
from large architectural excavations. One of
the most striking peculiarities of the style is the
pyramidal character of the asceuding lines, The
type of the architecture was the primitive dwelling
formed of reeds, which abounded on the banks of
the Nile. In one of the orders of the Pharaonic


columns, the original post of reeds may be said to
have heen translated into stone. If the construc-
tions were of any great height, their stability, as
being originally built of reeds, would, it is evi-
dent, require them to incline one to the other,
sloping inwards, thus forming the pyramidal out-
line to which reference has been made. The
plan of the Egyptian temple appears to have


‘ EGYPT.


originated in the practice of extending the strne-
ture by successive additions till the original form
became the mere nucleus of the whule. First, a
large pylon, consisting of two broad towering
masses of masonry, with a doorway in the middle,
was erected in advance to give greater dignity tu
the approach. This was united to the original
building by lateral walls, fronted internally by
colonnades; and thus the intermediate space was
converted into a cloisterel court, solemn and
secluded, well agreeing with the dark and mys-
terious character of the national religion. A
succeeding monarch would add a grand hall of
columns in advance of, and attached to, this court;
and a third, not less anxious to honour the gods
and immortalize his name, erected a second quad:
rangle before the hall, terminating the whole
range of buildings with a stupendous pylon which
bore his inscriptions; and, if he were a warrior,
offered a grand field for the sculptured display of
his achievements.

The most brilliant periods of Egyptian art
were the reigns of the second and third Rameses.
Most of the obelisks and colussal statues were
wrought before or during the reign of Rameses II.,
the Sesostris of the Greek writers. Under this
enterprising monarch, the ancient Theban empire
attained its highest pinnacle of prosperity and
power. Rameses III. undertook distant military
expeditions, roused the energies of the country,
encouraged art, and erected the splendid temple
of Medinet Abu. At a later age the sceptre of
Egypt was swayed by pr monarchs, who
built on a grand scale; but the seat of the govern-
ment was then in the Delta, and there remaiu
only a few obelisks.

The valley of the Nile is all along at interrals
strewed with wrecks of ancient monumental gran-
deur; at Thebes, however, they are fuund on .
both sides of the river in greatest profusion. Next
to the pyramids, the most wonderful relic of
Egyptian art is the great hall of the temple of
Carnak, on the east bank of the Nile. Its super-
ficial area is 314 feet by 164. The massive
stone roof is supported by 134 columns ranged in
sixteen rows, most of which are 9 feet in diume-
ter, and nearly 43 feet high: those of the central
avenue are not less than 11 feet 6 inches in dia-
meter, and 72 feet high; the ‘diameter of their
capitals at their widest spread is 22 fect. The
walls, columns, architraves, ceilings, every sur-
face exposed to the eye, is overspread with in-
taglio sculptures—gods, heroes, and hiervglyphics,


“painted in once vivid colours, But the hall of


columns was but a part of this wonderful fabric.
Immense pylons, half-buried quadrangles and
halls, granite obelisks, and tremendous piles of
fallen masonry once formed a range of buildings
upwards of 1200 feet in length. Au avenue of
colossal sphinxes led from the temple to Luxor,
forming a vista which extended nearly a mile
and a half, and was admirably adapted for the
igeantry of religious processions. All these
cailaiags formed parts of one magnificent whole;
all were constructed of gigantic blocks, and most
were covered with sculpture. ‘Such was the
imperial palace of the Pharaohs when Europe
was yet in primeval barbarism, ages before Romu-
lus took his omen on the Palatine hill.” Now
the ruins are strewed in chaotic confusion over a
sandy plain, broken into shapeless mounds.


EGYPT.


Among the most remarkable works of the
Egyptians must be ranked the vast sepulchres ex-
cavated in the seclusion of the Theban moun-
tains to receive their dead monarchs. ‘It was,’
says Wathen, ‘about an hour before sunset one
evening that I set out to visit this Necropolis,
intending to pass the night in one of the royal
sepulchres. On approaching the gorge, the first
thing that struck me was the quantity of bones,
fragments of mummies, rolls of mummy cloth,
and other relics of rifled (Egyptian) tombs that
strewed the ground, Princes, priests, and war-
riors, after reposing thousands of years, are now
dragged forth by poor peasants, and their bones
lie scattered before the doors of their sepulchres.
Candles were lighted: I ed the threshold,
and looked round with silent wonder on the
scene within. A large corridor or gallery ran


EGYPT. 609


back hundreds of feet into the heart of the moun-
tain, divided by lateral projections into lengthen-
ing vistas of apartments. The walls were ele
gantly adomed with columns of blue hierogly-
phics ona white ground, 3000 years old, yet re-
taining almost the freshness of yesterday. In a
large chamber at the end of the gallery was a
massive sarcophagus. Tere once lay the royal
mummy, but it had long been epen, and was
empty. There are eight or nine of these large
painted tombs in a group, besides others of less
interest. They vary in length from 100 to upwards
of 400 feet. In most, you tind on entering a long
descending corridor or gallery, running off in a
straight line into the heart of the mountain. At


its farther end the corridor expands into one or
more large apartments, whose roofs are supported
by massive piers of the living rock. Tae walls


277. (Great Hall of the


and piers throughout are generally decorated with
paintings still wonderfully retaining their fresh-
hess : the subjects are chiefly processions, religions
rites, and allegoric and enigmatical devices.’ The
object seems to have been to enshrine the corpse
deep within the earth in a mass of masonry, far
from the stir of the living world. For these royal
sepulchres of Thebes they first selected the lone-
liest ravine ; for each tomb they carried a gallery
deep into the hill, and then placed the corpse in
the remotest part. But the tumbs of the kings
form only a part of this great city of the dead.
The sides of the hills overlooking the plain and
the ravines intersecting them, contain innumerable
sepulchral excavations. One valley was appropri-
ated to the queens, and in a remote comer the apes
had a cemetery. The priests seized the best spots.

The purpose for which the pyramids were
erected was once as little known as were most


Temple of Carnak.) a


other things connected with Egypt. It now ap-
pears satisfactorily ascertained that they were
designed to be mausoleums; and what an idea
does it give us of the grandeur of conception, the
splendour in every respect of the monarchs to
whom they owe their origin, that they should have
devised and executed tombs so stupendous! ‘On
leaving the village of Gizeh, on the river bank op-
posite old Cairo (Memphis), the pyramids rise
before you glittering white against the blue sky ;
but the flatness of the plain and the purity of the
atmosphere eflectually deceive the eye as to their
distance and consequently their size: you almost
appear at their base while several miles really in-
tervene. As you advance gradually they unfold
their gigantic dimensions; but yon must have
been some time on the spot, your eye must have
repeatedly travelled along the great pyramid’s
740 feet of base, and up its steep le angles,
aR


610 EGYPT.


before you can fully understand its immensity,
and the actual amount of labour involved in
its erection’ (Wathen}. According to Pliny


366,000 men were employed for 20 years in erect-
ing the great pyramid, and Herodotus reports
from an inscription which it bore, that the ex-
pense of providing the workmen wit onions and
other roots amounted to 1600 talents.. Whole
mosques have probably been built out of spoils
from it alone. Yet the integrity of its form re-
mains substantially unimpaired, and from a dis-
tance scarcely a trace of violence or decay can
be seen. The existing masonry has been estimated
at above six millions of tons, which was raised
over an area of thirteen English acres and q half;
and, supposing the cost of the structure tb have
been one shilling a cubic foot, including carriage,
materials, and workmanship, the erection required
an outlay of nearly five millions sterling. The
original perpendicular height was 480 feet, ex-
eeeding that of St. Peter's by 43 feet, and that
of St. Paul's by 110. The huge mass equalled a
solid pile occupying the whole area of Lincoln’s-
inn-fields, and ascending to a point 100 feet
higher than the top of St. Paul's.

If, as we have some reason to believe, and as
the reader’ may see satisfactorily established in
Movers and Bertheau (ué supra), a race of the
Shemitic family, coming down from the upper
(Aram) country into the lower (Canaan), in course
of time subjugated Egypt and established their

inion, maintaining it for some five hundred
years, such an historical event must have had a
marked influence on ‘the religion of the land.
These invaders are described (Herod. ii. 128) as
enemies to the religion of Egypt, who destroyed
or clused the temples, broke in pieces the altars
and images of the gods, and killed the sacred
animals, Their influence on the Egyptian reli-
gion was, probably, not unlike that of the Persians
on the Grecian, having for its aim and effect to
discountenance and destroy a low and degrading
system of idolatry ; for the worship of the heavenly
bodies, to which the Phenician equally with the

, Persian invaders were given, was higher in its cha-
racter and effects than the service of the ordinary
gods of Greece, and still more so than the de
pete homage paid by the Egyptians to the
lowest animals, By this means the Shemitic re-
ligion exerted on the native Egyptian religion a
decided and improving influence, which may be
seen and traced in that element of the religion of
Egypt which contains and presents the worship


EGYPT.


of the heavenly bodies. The two systems, that of
the Egyptians before it received inoculation from
the East, and that of the Eastern invaders, agreed
in this, that they were both the worship of the
powers of nature; but they differed in this, and
an important difference it was, that the Egyptians
adored the brute creation, the Phoenicians, the
host of heaven. Our limits forbid details on the
subject, which, however, together with proofs and
illustrations, may be feund in the valuable works
before mentioned. On the subject of Egyptian
teligion, besides the works already referred to,
the following may be advantageously consulted.
Pauly, Real-Encylopddie, Egyptische Religion ;
Prichard’s Egyptian Mythology; Jablonski, Pen-
theon -Egyptiacum ; Bettrage zur Kentniss der
Lit. Kunst, Mythol. und Geschich. des alten
Aigyptens, yon G. Seyffarth; Untersuchung.
tiber den Mythos der beruh. Volker alter Welt ;
Creuzer, Symbolik. :
The relation in which the religion of Egypt
stands to that of Moses is one of very consider-
able interest and importance, And one which has
not yet received the kind and degree of attention
which it merits. Michaelis (Mosaisches Recht),
and others of the same school, have given valuable
aid, but they wrote with, compared with what is
now known, insufficient knowledge, if not with
somewhat too much of a foregone conclusion.
Other learned men, influenced by their philoso-
phical notions, ar prejudiced against the Hebrew
religion, have made Moses a mere copyist of in-
stitutions and retailer of ideas which he found in
Egypt. As a basis for such a view it was neces-
sarily assumed that a purer system of religion
was found in Egypt in the days of Moses than
existed in any other part of the world. In par
ticular, the Egyptian mysteries were set forth as
the depositaries of high and valuable religious doc-
trines. Scripture and history (the Acts of the
Apostles; Josephus, Philo) were adduced to show
that Moses had been instructed in this priceless
lore, and initiated into these mysteries; whence
he was declared to have drawn his system of Mo-
notheism, and even the characteristic name IAQ,
which he gave to the God whom he proclaimed,
as alone worthy of the solemn title (Plessing,
Memnonium, ii. 529; Schiller, Die Sendung
Moses ; Reinhold, Die Hebrdischen Mysterien).
These views, however, rest on no solid foundation
whatever, if, indeed, they may not be to some
extent considered as the illusory and almost
posthumous offspring of the old and exploded
notion which ascribed boundless knowledge to the
ancient Egyptians. Nor can they fur a moment
be held in these days, after the light thrown on
early Egypt by the monumental disclosures. The
brief notion given above of the general charac-
teristics of the earliest religion of the country,
shows how utterly baseless such a theory is. In
truth, the inhabitants of Palestine, so far back as
we have been able to learn anything of them,
seein to have far better and purer religious
opinions than those of the valley of the Nile, and
in all probability did something to improve and
elevate the religious system of the latter (Movers,
Phonizier), The exposure of this sceptical. hypo-
thesis, which the Bible enables the scholar to sup-
ply, may be found in Vatke, Die Religion dea
A. T. nach den Canon. Buchern entwickelt, and
Hengstenberg, Die Authentie des Pentatewch.


EHUD.


The subject of circumcision among the Egyp-
tians has already been considered (Circum-
cision]. The pages of the present work afford
ample evideuces of the relation which igypt
bears to the Biblical History, and specimens of
the light which the mainers, customs, opinions,
and buildings of the Egyptian people already
throw, and of the fuller and clearer light which,
as our knowledge advances, they are likely to
throw, on the usages of the chosen people, and the

zeg of the sacred volume.

It may be proper to add that, singe the above
was written, we have read Ancient Egypt, her
Monuments, &c. by George R. Gliddon; a work
which gives a much more favourable account of
the results of modern research into the Hierogly-
phics than this article would seem to justify. The
peculiarly advantageous position of the author of
Ancient Egypt, as having lived above twenty
years in the country, and being United States’
consul for Cairo, makes his opinions on Egyptian
antiquities worthy of great attention. Yet we
cannot deny that his work has traces of being
written in a partisan spirit. The reader, however,
will be rewarded by perusing the production, since
it presents (though not in the best style) a rapid
sketch of the entire subject of Egyptian antiqui-
ties, written by a man intimately and in part
personally acquainted with the points in question.

, JSR.

EHUD (INN; Sept. ’Awd), of the tribe of
Benjamin, one of the ‘ Judges’ of Israel, or rather
of that part of Israel which he delivered from the
dominion of the Moabities by the assassination of
their king Eglon. These were the tribes beyond
the Jordan, and the southern tribes on this side the
river, Ehud obtained access to Eglon as the
bearer of tribute from the subjugated tribes, and
being left-handed, or rather ambidextrous, he was
enabled to use witha sure and fatal aim a dagger
concealed under a part of his dress, where it was
unsuspected, because it would there have been
useless to a person employing his right hand. The
Israclites continued to enjoy for eighty years the
independence obtained through this deed of
Ehud (Judg. iii, 15-30).

EKRON (ji7P¥; Sept. "Axxapdv), the chief
ef the five Philistine states (Josh. xiii. 3), and
the northernmost of the five. In the general
distribution of territory (unconquered as well
as conquered) Ekron was assigned to Judab,
as being upon its border (Josh. xiii. 3; xv. 11,
45); but was afterwards apparently given to Dan,
although conquered by Judah (Josh. xv. 11, 49 5
xix. 43; Judg. i, 18; comp. Joseph. Antiq. v. 1,
22; v. 2, 4). In Scripture Ekron is chiefly re-
markable from the ark having been sent home
from thence, upon a new cart drawn by two milch
kine (1 Sam. v. 103 vi. 1-8). Im later days, it
is named with the other cities of the Philistines
in the denunciations of the prophets against that
people (Jer. xxv. 20; Amos i. 8; Zeph. it 4;
Zech. ix. 5). Eusebius and Jerome describe
Ekron as a village of the Jews between Azotus
and Jamnia towards the east, or eastward of a
line drawn between these two places (Onomast. in
‘Accaron’). The name of Ekron, or rather Ac-
caron, occurs incidentally in the histories of the
Crusades; and it has lately been recognised by
Dr. Robinson (Bib. Researches, iii. 24) in that of


ELAM. @iL,


Akri, in a situation corresponding to all we know
of Ekron. The radical letters of the Arabic name
are the same as those of the Hebrew, and both the
Christians and Moslems of the neighbourhood re
gard the site as that of the ancient Ekron, Akri
is a small Moslem village, tive miles south of.
Ramleh. It is built of unburnt bricks, and, as
there are no apparent ruins, the ancient town was
proweoly of the same materials. It is alleged,

owever, that cisterns and the stones of hand-mills
are often found at Akri and in the adjaceng fields.


ELAH (MD§; Sept. "Had), son of Baasha
king of Israel. After a reign of two years (B.c.
930-929) he was assassinated while drank, and
all his kinstslk and friends cut off, by Zimri,
‘the captain of half his chariots.’ He was the
last king of Baasha’s line, and by this cata-
strophe the predictions of the prophet Jehu were
accomplished (1 Kings xvi. 6-14).

ELAH, a valley in which the Israelites were
encamped when David fought Goliah (1 Sam.
xvii. 19). It doubtless received this name, which
some spell Alah (which see), from the terebinth
trees, or from some remarkable terebinth tree,
growing in it. Ecclesiastical traditions identify
it with the present valley of Beit Hanina, about
eight miles north-west from Jerusalem. In this
valley olive trees and carob trees now prevail,
and terebinth trees are few; but the brook is still
indicated whence the youthful champion selected
the ‘smooth stones’ wherewith he smote the Philis-
tine. The brook is dry in summer, but in winter
it hecomes a mighty torrent, which inundates the
vale (Pictorial Palestine, p. 121).
son, however, disputes this ancient tradition, and
finds that the conditions of the history require
him to identify the valley of Elah with the Wady
es-Sumt (acacia valley), which he crossed on the
road from Jerusalem to Gaza, about eleven miles
south-west from the former city. His reasons are
given in Biblical Researches, iii. 350; and he
remarks that the largest specimen of the terebinth
tree which he saw in Palestine still stands in the
vicinity.


Dr. Robin= ,


ELAM (DY; Sept. "EAdu), which is men- '


tioned in Gen. x. 22, as a tribe descended from
Shem, is, in ch. xiv. 1, introduced along with the
kingdom of Shinar in Babylon, and in Isa. xxi.
2, and Jer. xxv. 25, is connected with Media. In
Fzra iv. 9, the Elamites are described among the
nations of the Persian empire; and in Dan, vill. 3,
Snsa is said to lie on the river Ulai (Eulzus or.
Choaspes) in the province of Elam. These ac-
counts lead to the conclusion that Elam was the
same land which was designated by the Greeks
and Romans by the name of Elymais, and which
formed a pant of the ancient Susiana, the modern
Khusistan.


This Susiana, which may thus be ;


regarded as the Elam of Scripture, was bounded .


on the east by Persia Proper (ancient Persis, mo-
dem Fars), on the west by Babylonia (the Ara-
bian Irak), on the north by Media, and on the
south by the Pesian Gulf. This country is not


unfrequentl y regarded as a part of Persia Proper; ..


but in the division of the provinces it was con-
sidered distinct from it, and constituted a peculiar
satrapy, which was about half as large as Persis,
and not quite as large as England. Elam was
inhabited by various tribes of people. The
Elyma#i or Elamai, together a ie

R


612 ELATH.


seem to have been the oldest inhabitants not only
of Susiana Proper but a$so of Persia; whence the
sacred writers, under the name of Elam, compre-
hended the country of the Persians in general.
The Elamei dwelt partly in the north and partly
in the south of the country; and as they occupied
the greater part of it, they were able to bring into
the field a considerable body of troops, who were
chiefly archers (Strabo, xv. 3,10). It was in this
capacity, indeed, as archers, that the other inha-
biting tribes—the Uxii, the Kissi, the Cossmi—
were chiefly celebrated ; and hence the historical
propriety of the Scriptural allusion to the quiver
and the bow of the Elamites (Isa. xxii. 6; Jer.
xlix. 34). Indeed, in the latter text the bow is
distinctly mentioned as the chief instrument of
Elamite power—‘ I will break the bow of Elum,
the chief of his might.”

It would seem that Elam was very early a se-
parate state with its own kings; for in the time
of Abraham we find that Chedorlaomer king of
Elam extended his conquests west of the Eu-

brates as far asthe Jordan and the Dead Sea
Gen. xiv.); but whether he acted for himself, or
. only as the viceroy or general of the Assyrians
(as Josephus seems to intimate), must remain a
matter of doubt. Ezekiel (xxxii. 24) mentions
Elam among the mighty uncircumcised nations
which had been the terror of the world; and
about the same period (s.c. 590) Jeremiah threat-
ened it with conquest and destruction by the
Chaldwans (Jer. xlix. 30, 34, sqq.). This was
accomplished probably by Nebuchadnezzar, who
subjected Western Asia to his dominion; for we
find his successor Belshazzar residing at Susa, the
capital of Elam, a province then subject to that
monarch (Dan. viii. 1, 2; Rosenmiiller’s Biblical
Geography, &c.). With this the Scriptural no-
tices of Elam end, unless we add that Elamites are
found among those who were at Jerusalem at the
feast of Pentecost (Acts ii. 9); which implies that
Jews descended trom the exiles were settled in
that country. Here also they are mentioned next
to the ‘ Medians,’ with whom they are also coupled
by the prophets (Isa. xxi. 2; Jer. xxv. 25); for
which it does not appear necessary to seek any
further reason than that, to the Jewish writers,
Elam lay next beyond Media. :


ELATH (bX), termed in the Sept. Aiady ;
in Joseph. (Antig. viii. 6, 4) AiAavh; in Jerome,
Ailath ; by the Greeks and Romans, EAdva. It is
now called Ailah. These several names are only
variations of the original Hebrew word. It was a
city of Idumza, having a port on the eastern arm
or gulf of the Red Sea, which thence received the
name of Sinus Elaniticus (Gulf of Akaba). Ac-
cording to Eusebius, it was ten miles east from
Petra. It lies at the extremity of the valley of
Elghor, which runs at the bottom of two parallel
ranges of hills, north and south, through Arabia
Petriea, from the Dead Sea to the northern parts
of the Elanitic Gulf.

The first time that it is mentioned in the Scrip-
tures is in Deut. ii. 8, where, in speaking of the
joumey of the Israelites towards the Promised
ian, these words occur—‘ When we passed by
from our brethren the children of Esau, which
dwe]t in Seir, through the way of the plain from
Elath, and from Eziongeber.’ These two places
are mentioned together again in 1 Kings ix, 26,


ELATH.


in such a manner as to show that Elath was
more ancient than Eziongeber, and was of so
much repute as to be used for indicating the
locality of other places: the passage also fixes the
spot where Elath itseif was to be found: ‘and
King Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-
geber, which is beside Elath, on the shore (Num.
xxxiii. 35) of the Red Sea, in the land of Edo:n.’
The use which David made of the vicinity of
Elath shows that the country was at that time in
his possession. Accordingly, in 2 Sam. viii. 14,
we learn that he had previously made himself
master of Idumza, and garrisoned its strong-hulds
with his own troops. Under his suecessor, Joram
(2 Kings viii. 20), the Idumzans revolted from
Judah, and elected a king over themselves.
Joram thereupon assembled his forces, ‘and
all the chariots with him,’ and, falling on the
Idumzans by night, succeeded in defeating and
scattering their army. The Hebrews, however,
could not prevail, but ‘Edom revolted from nnder
the hand of Judah unto this day ;’ thus exempli-
fying the striking language employed (Gen. xxvii.
40) by Isaac—‘ by thy sword shalt thou live,and
shalt serve thy brother : and it shall come to pass,
when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou shalt
break his yoke from off thy neck.’ From 2 Kings
xiv. 22, however. it appears that Uzziah recovered
Elath, and, having so repaired and adorned the
city as to be said to have built, that is rebuilt,
it, he made it a part of his dominions. This
connection was not of long continuance; for in
ch. xvi. ver. 6 of the same buok, we find the
Syrian king Rerin interposing, who captured
Elath, drove out the Jews, and annexed the place
to his Syrian kingdom, and ‘the Syrians came to
Elath, and dwelt there unto this day.’ Ata
later period it fell under the power of the Romans,
and was for a time guarded by the tenth legion,
forming part of Palestina Tertia (Jerome, Onom.
s. v. Ailath ; Strabo, xxi. 4,4; Reland, p. 556). It
subsequently became the residence of a Christian
bishop. Bishops of Elath were at the council of
Chalcedon (a.p. 451), and that of Constantinople,
(a.p. 536). At the council of Chalcedon, Beryllus
thus wrote his designation as bishop "AiG ris
NaAdaorivns tpirns. In the days of its prow
perity it was much distinguished for commerce,
which continued to flourish under the auspices of
Christianity. In the sixth century it is spoken
of by Procopins as being inhabited by Jews sub-
ject to the Roman dominion (De Bell. Pers. i.
19). In a.v. 630, the Christian communities of
Arabia Petrea found it expedient to submit to
Mohammed, when John, the Christian governor of
Ailah, became hound to pay an annual tribute
of 300 gold-pieces (Abulfeda, Ann, i, 171).
Henceforward, till the present century, Ailah
lay in the darkness of Islamism. It is merely
mentioned by the supposed Ibn Hankal, perhars
in the eleventh century; and, after the middle
of the twelfth, Edrisi describes it as a small
town frequented by the Arabs, who were now its
masters, and forming an important point in the
route between Cairo and Medina. In a.p. 1116,
King Baldwin of Jerusalem took ession of
it. Again was it wrested from the hands of
the Christians by Saladin I., a.v. 1167, and
never again fully recovered by them; althongh
the reckless Rainald of Chatillon, in a.p. 1182,
scized, and for atime held, the town. In Abul


ELDAD.


' feda’s day, and before a.v. 1300, it was already
deserted. He says, ‘In our day it is a fortress,
to which a governor is sent from Egypt. It had
asmall castle in the sea, but this is now aban-
doned, and the governor removed to the fortress
on the shore.’ Such as Ailah was in the days of
Abulfeda, is Akaba now. Mounds of rubbish
alone mark the site of the town, while a fortress,
occupied by a governor and a small garrison
under the Pasha of Egypt, serves to keep the
neighbouring tribes of the desert in awe, and to
minister to the wants and protection of the annual
Egyptian Haj, or pilgrim caravan. This place
has always been an important station upon the
route of the Egyptian Haj. Such is the importance
of this caravan of pilgrims from Cairo to Mecca,
both in a religious and political point of view,
that the rulers of Egypt from the earliest period
-have given it convoy and protection. For this


purpose a line of fortresses similar to that of.


Akaba has been established at intervals along the
route, with wells of water and supplies of provisions
(Robinson's Biblical Researches, vol. i. p. 250).

The first Frank who visited this place in mo-
dern times, was Riippell, in 1822. Laborde
(Journey through Arabia Petraa, London, 1836)
was well received by the garrison and inhabitants
of the castle of Akaba, of which he has given a
view (vol. i. p. 116). The fortress, he states, is
built on a regular plan, and is in a pretty good
condition, though within several good habitations
have been sutlered to full to decay. It has ouly
two guns fit for service.—J. R. B.

ELDAD and MEDAD (710) TION; Sept.
"EAddS «Kal MwSdd), two of the seventy elders
appointed by Moses to assist him in the govern-
ment of the people. Although not present with
the others at the door of the tabernacle, they
were equally filled with the divine spirit and be-
gan to * prophesy’ inthe camp. Josliua, thinking
this irregular, requested Moses to forbid them,
and received an answer eminently characteristic
of the great lawgiver :—‘ Enviest thon for my
sake? Would to God that all the Lord's people
were prophets, and that the Lord would put his
spirit upon them’ (Num. xi. 24-29). ;

ELDER (jt; Sept. xpeoBvrepos), literally,
one of the older men, and because, in ancient
times, alder persons would naturally be selected
to hold public offices, out of regard to their pre-
sumed superiority in knowledge and experience,
the term came to be used as the designation for
the office itsel{, borne by an individual, of what-

ever age. Such is the origin of the words
yepovola (a council of elders), senatus, alder-
man, &c. But the term ‘elder’ appears to be
also expressive of respect and reverence in gene-
ral, as signore, seigneur, senor, &c. The word
occurs in this sense in Gen. 1. 7, ‘Joseph went
up to bury his father, and with him went up all
the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house,
and all the elders of the land of Egypt’; Sept.
xpecBvrepa, Vulg. senes. These elders of Egypt
were, probably, the various state-ofticers. ‘Lhe
elders of Israel, of whom such frequent mention
is made, may have been. in early times, the lineal
descendants of the patriarchs (Exod. xii. 21). To
the elders Moses was directed to open his com-
mission (Exod. iii. 16), Thy yepovclay tay vidy
"LopahaA; Aq. reads Tovs wpecBuras. They uccom-


wee ay
ELDER. 618

panied Moses in his first interview with Pharaoh,

as the representatives of the Hebrew nation (ver.


‘18); through them Moses issued his communica-


tions and commands to the whole people (Exod.
xix. 7; Deut. xxxi. 9); they were his immediate
attendants in all the great transactions in the wil-
derness (Exod. xvii. 5); seveuty of their number
were selected to attend Moses, Aaron, Nadab, and
Abibu, at the giving of the law (Exod. xxiv. 1),
on which occasion they are ed the nobles


(*S*'YR) of the children of Israel, who did eat and


drink before God, in ratification of the covenant,
ws representatives of the nation. In Num. xi.
16, 17, we meet with the appuintment of sevent
elders to hear the burdeu of the people along wi!
Moses; these were selected “by Moses out of the
whole number of the elders, and are described as
being, already, officers over the children of Israel.
It is the opinion of Michaelis, that this counoil,
chosen to assist Moses, should not be confounded
with the Sanhedrim, which, he thinks, was not
instituted till after the return from the Babylonish
captivity (Sanueprim]. He observes that these
seventy eluers were not chosen to be judges of the
people, who had already more than 60,000 judges.
e also argues that the election of seventy addi-
tional yudges would have done but little towards
suppressing the rebellion which led Moses to
adopt this proceeding; but that it seems more
likely to have been his intention to form a supreme
senate to take a shure in the government, comsist-
ing of the most respectable persons, either for
family or merit, which would materially support
his power and influence among the people in
general; would unite large and powerful families,
and give an air of aristocracy to his government,
which had hitherto been deemed too manarchical.
He further infers that this council was not per
manent, not being once alluded to from the death
of Moses till the Babylonish captivity; that
Moses did not fill up the vacancies occasioned by
deaths, and that it ceased altogether in the wilder-
ness. After the settlement in Canaan the elders
seem to have been the administrators of the laws
in all the cities (Deut. xix. 12; xxi. 3, 6, 19;
xxii. 15, 25). The ccntinuance of the oftice may
be traced during the time of the judges (Judg. ii.
7); during that of Samuel (1 Sam. xvi. 4);
under Saul (1 Sam. xxx. 26); and David (1
Chron. xxi. 16). The elders of Israel are men-
tioned during the captivity (Ezra x. 14), consist-
ing either of those who had sustained that office
iu their own land, or were permitted by the Baby-
lonians to exercise it still among their coun-
trymen. We meet with them again at the resto-
ration (Ezra y. 5), and by them the Temple was
rebuilt (vi. 14). Alter the restoration and during
the time of the Maccabees, the Sanhedrim, accord-
ing to Michaelis, was instituted, being tirst men-
tioned under Hyrcauus II. (Joseph. Antig. 9, 3);
but elders are still referred to in 1 Mace. vii. 33,
Among the members of the Sanhedrim were the
mpecBurepot. Thus we find 6 dpxsepeds or more
frequently of dpxsepeis Kai of ypaupateis cal of
xpeoBvrepar, also ‘chief priests and elders, ‘elders
and scribes,” and various other collocations. Like
the scribes, they obtained their seat in the San-
hediim by election, or nominaticn irom the execu-
tive authority. The word elder, with many other
Jewish terms, was introduced into the Christian


614 ELEALEH.


church. In the latter it is the title of inferior
‘ ministers, who were appointed overscers among
- not over the flock; Gr. ev @, Vulg. ‘in quo’

(Acts xx. 17,28; Tit.i. 5,7; 1 Pet. v. 1-5). The
term is applied even to the apostles (2 John;
3 John). So also mpeoBurépioy certainly in-
eludes even St. Paul himself (comp. 1 Tim. iv.
14 and 2 Tim. i. 6). Still the apostles are dis-
tinguished trom the elders elsewhere (Acts xv. 6).
The elder was constituted by an apostle or some
one invested with apostolic authority (Acts xiv.
23; see also the epistles to Timothy and John).
The elders preached, confuted gainsayers (Tit. 1.
9), and visited the sick (James v. 14). The
word elders is sometimes used in the sense of
ancients, ancestors, predecessors, like the word
pxaior (Matt. v. 21; Heb. xi. 2). It is used
symbolically (Rev. iv. 4, &c.). The term mpeo-
Birepos is plainly the origin of our word * priest;
Saxon, preoster aud preste, then priest; High and
Low Dutch, priester ; French, prestre and pretre ;
Ital., prete; Span., presbytero (Jahn, Biblisches
Archiol.,§ 244; Mede's Works, fol. p. 27; Gese-
ning, Worterbuch, 8. v.).—J. F. D.


ELEALEH (nbydy ; Sept. ExedAn), a town
of the Renhenites east of the Jordan (Num, xxxii.
3, 37); but which is named by the prophets asa
@ty of the Moabites (Isa. xv. 4; xvi. 9; Jer.
xlviii. 34). It is usually mentioned along with
Heshbon; and accordingly travellers find in the
neighbourhood of that city a ruined place, bear-
ing the name of El Aal, which doubtless repre-
sents Elealeh. It stands upon the summit of a
hill, and takes its name from its situation, Aal
meaning ‘high.’ It commands the whole plain,
and the view from it is very extensive. It is about
amile and a quarter north-east of Heshbon. Wi-
ner represents Burckhardt as saying that it was 64
hours tiom Heshbon; and G. Robinson, copying
Burckhnrdt, as if de-c:ibing what he himself
saw, makes the same mi-take (Trarels, ii. 193).
But the 64 hours of Burckhardt refer to the dis-
tance from his startin::-point in the morning,
which was Szalt. At 5% hours he arrived at El
aal, and at 6} hours at Heshbon, bearing south-
west trom El Aal (Syria, p. 365). This makes
the distance between them only half an hour,
corresponding with the other accounts.


ELEAZAR caryds, God the Helper ; Sept.
*EAed(ap). This was an,exceedingly common
name among the Hebrews, being borne by a con-
siderable number of persons in Scripture (as well
as in the Apocrypha and Josephus), of whom the
principal are the following.


1. ELEAZAR, eldest son of Aaron (Exod. vi.
23, 25), who acted in his father’s lifetime as chief
of the tribe of Levi (Num. iii. 32), and at his
death succeeded him in the high-priesthood
(Num. xx. 35, 8q.). His pontificate was con-
temporary with the military government of Joshua,
whom he appears to have survived. A perfectly
good understanding seems at all times to have
subsisted hetween Eleazar and Joshua, as we con-
stantly trace that co-operation and mutual sup-
port which the circumstances of the time and of
the nation renderd so necessary. Eleazar is sup-
posed to have lived twenty-five years after the
passage of the Jordan, and the book of Joshua
concludes with a notice of his death and burial.


ELECTA.


2. ELEAZAR, who was set apart to attend
upon the ark while it remained under the roof of
his father Abinadab (1 Sam. vii. 1).

3. ELEAZAR, one of the three most eminent
of David's heroes, who ‘fought till his hand was
weary’ in maintaining with David and the other


‘two a daring stand against the Philistines after


‘the men of Israel had gone away.’ He was also
one of the same three when they broke through
the Philistine host, to gratify David's longing for
a drink of water from the well of his native Beth-
lehem (2 Sam. xxiii. 9, 10, 13).

4. ELEAZAR, the fourth of the Maccabean
brothers, sons of the priest Mattathias (1 Mace.
ii. 5). He was crushed to death by the fall of
an elephant which he stabbed under the belly in
the belief that it bore the king, Antiochus Eupato
(1 Mace. vi. 43-46).

5. ELEAZAR, an aged and venerable seribe
who, ‘as became his age, and the excellency of
his ancient years, and the honour of his grey head,’
chose rather to submit to the most cruel torments
than conform to the polluting enactments of
Antiochus Epiphanes (2 Macc. vii, 18-31).

ELECTA or Ecrecta (ExAexr#). Accord-
ing to Grotius, Wetstein, and some other critics,
this word is used as a proper name in the address
of John's second epistle, ‘O peo Burepos ExAexrh
xupia—* The Presbyter to the Lady Eclecta,
This meaning is advocated by Bishop Middleton
in his treatise on the Noctrine of the Greek
Article (2nd ed. Cambridge, 1828, pp. 626-629).
He adduces in support of it several epistolary in-
scriptions from Basil, in which the name precedes,
and the rank or condition in life is subjoined,
such as Etvoralw iatpi—Acortly cogirth—
Booroply émoxdrgy—Mayrnuiave xdunti: none
of these, however, are purely honorary titles. To
meet the objection that the sister of the person
addressed is also called Eclecta in verse 13, he
suggests that the words rs ExAexrijs are a gloss,
explanatory of gov. But this is mere conjecture,
unsupported by a single manuscript; and sucha
gloss, if occasioned (as Bishop Middleton sup-
poses) by the return to the singular number, would
more naturally have been inserted after oe, im
which position, however unnecessary, it would at
least produce no ambiguity. Some writers, both
ancient and modern, have adopted a mystical in-
terpretation, though contrary to the tsus loguendi,
and to all apostolic usage, aud supposed with Je
rome tat the term éxAexr) referred to the church
in general, or with Cassiodorus, to some particular
congregation. The last named writer (bh, a.p. 470.d.
562), in his Compleziones in Epistolas, &c. (Lond.
1722, p. 136), says, ¢ Johannes—electse domine
sciibit ecclesia, tiliisque ejus, quas sacro fonte
genuerat.” Clemens Alexandrinus, in a fragment
of his Adumbrationes, attempts to combine the
literal and the mystical meanmngs— Scripta vero
est ad quandam Babyloniam Electam nomive,
signiticat autem electionem ecclesia sancte.
(Opera, ed. Klotz. iv. p. 66). The Authorized
Version translates the words in question ‘ the elect
lady, an interpretation approved by Castalio,
Beza, Mill, Wolf, Le Clerc, and Macknight.
Most modem critics. however, Schleusner and
Breitschneider in their Lexicons, Bourger (1763),
Vater (1824), Gueschen (1832), and Tischendorf
(1811), in their editions of the New Testament,
Neander (History of the Planting of the Christan


°


ELEMENTS.


Church, vol. ii. p. 71, Eng. transl.), De Wette
(Lehrbuch, p. 338) and Liicke (Commentary on
the Epistles of St. John, pp. 314-320, Eng. transl.),
agree with the Syriac and Arabic Versions in
making Kupfg a proper name, and render the
words ‘ to the elect Cyria.’ Lardner has given a
copious account of critical opinions in his History
of the Apostles and Evangelists, c. xx. Works,
vi. 28 1-288.—J. E. R.


ELEMENTS (ovo:xeia). The etymon both
of the English and Greek word conveys their


primary meaning: thus, elements, from elementa, -


the alimenta from which things are made, and
oroxeia, from orelyw, ‘to go up by steps '—
the first principles whence the subsequent parts of
things (ororxouer) proceed in order. It seems to
have been believed, from a very early period, that
all bodies consist of certain first, specific ingre-
dients (e7orxeia), into which they are all resolv-
able, although different opinions prevailed re-
specting the number and nature of these pri-
mary constituents of things. Hesychius explains
oroixeia by wip, Sdup, yi, Kal dnp, ag wy 7a
eépara—fire, water, earth, and air, of which ho-
dies are formed. This, which is the simplest, may
be called the primary sense of the word. A
secondary use of the word relates to the organized
parts of which anything is framed, as the Jetters
of the alphabet (Hesychius gives also ypdupara),
these being the elements of words; also the ele-
meuts, rudiments, or first principles of any art
or science. The word occurs in its primary
sense, Wis. vii. 17, ovoracw xédcpov Kal evép-
yeiay ororxeicy, ‘the constitution of the world and
the operation of the elements ;’ also xix.18. It is
ased in the same sense, 2 Pet. iii. 10, orosxeia
8 xavoovpeva AvOhoovra:, and ver. 12, rhxerat,
‘the elements burning will be dissolved and
melted.’ The Jews, in Peter's time, spoke of four
elements (Joseph. Antig. iii. 7. 7).

The word occurs in a secondary sense in Gal.
iv. 3-9, ra orotyeia Tod xdopou, ‘ the elements or
rudiments of the world,’ which the Apostle calls
dobern Kal wrexd oroixeia, ‘very weak and poor
elements.’ He introduces the word to preserve the
unity of his comparison of the law to a pedagogue
(iii. 24), and of persons under it, to children
under tutors; and by the elements or rudiments
of the world he evidently means that state of
religious knowledge which had subsisted in
the worll, among Jews and Gentiles, before
Christ; the weakness of which, among the Jews,
may be seen in Heb. vii. 18,19; x. 1, and among
the Gentiles, in the epistle to the Romans, passim.
‘The elements of the world’ occurs again, Col.
ii. 8-20, in the same sense, as appears from the
various allusions both to the terms used in Grecian
philosophy, and the dogmas of the Judaizers in
thesubsequent verses; the phrase being possibly sug-
gested to the Apostle by his previous use of it to
the Galatians. The word oro:xeia in Heb. v. 12
is restricted, by the addition ray Aoylwr Tod Geod,
to the rudiments of Christianity (see Rosenmiiller
and Benson on the passages) -J. F. D.

ELEPHANT (éaégas) occurs only in 1 Macc.
vi. 34. Bochart imagined DYDNIY shenhad-
bim to be a contraction of DYAMP TW shen-
kahabbim, because alikhaben is one of the Arabic
names of the elephant; and thence inferred that
echin denoting tooth, the remaining part of the


ELEPHANT. 615


word, habbim or habbehim, was in Hebrew, like
khaban in Arabic, to be referred to elephant.
However this may he, all the nations of the south
and west of Asia have for many ages generally
used the word fil, feel, pheel, phil, Op, for we
find it in the Chaldee, Syriac, Persian, Arabic,
and Turkish, extending to the east far beyond the
Ganges, where, nevertheless, in the indigenous
tongues anet, waranam, and Aatté are. existing


279. (Asiatic Elephant. ]


The animals of this genus consist at present of
two very distinct species, one a native of Southern
Asia, once spread considerably to the westward
of the Upper Indus, and the other occupying
southern and middle Africa to the edge of the
great Sahara. In a fossil state there are besides
six more species clearly distinguished. The ele-
phant is the largest of all terrestrial animals,
sometimes reaching to above eleven feet of ver-
tical height at the shoulders, and weighing from
five to seven thousand pounds: he is of a black
or slaty-ash colour, and almost destitute of hair.
The head, which is proportionably large, is pro-


vided with two broad pendulous ears, particularly
in those of the African species, which are occa-
sionally six feet in length. This species has


also two molar teeth on each side of the jaw,
both above and below, and only three tve-nails on
each of the hind-feet; whereas the Asiatic species
is provided with only one touth on each side above
and below; and though both have tusks or defences,
the last-mentioned bas them confined solely to
the males: they are never of more than seventy
unds weight, often much less, and in some
Prseds even tutally wanting ; while in the African
both sexes are armed with tusks, and in the males
they have been known seven feet in length, aud
weighing above 150 pounds each, The forehead
of the African is low; that of the Asiatic high; .
in both the eyes are comparatively small, with a
malevolent expression, and on the temples are
res which exude a viscous humour; the tail is
ong, hanging nearly to the heels, and distichous at
the end. But the most remarkable organ of the
elephant, that which equally enables the animal
to reach the ground and to grasp branches of
trees at a considerable height, is the proboscis
or trunk; a cylindrical elastic instrument, in
ordinary condition reaching nearly down to the
ground, but contractile to two-thirds of its usual


616 ELEPHANT.


length, and extensile to one-third beyond it; pro-
vided with nearly 4000 muscles crossing each other
in such a manner that the proboscis is flexible in
every direction, and so abundantly supplied with
Nerves as to render the orgin one of the most
delicate in nature. Within is the double canal
of the nostrils, and at the terminal opening a
finger-like process, with which the animal can
take up very minute objects and grasp others,
even toa writing pen, aud mark ywper with it.
‘By means of the proboscis the elepbant has a
power of suction capable of raising nearly 200
pounds weight; and with this instrument he
gathers food frum trees and from the earth, draws
up drink to squirt it down his throat, draws
corks, unties small knots, and performs number-
less other minute operations; and, if necessary,
tears down branches of trees more than five inches
in diameter with no less dexterity than strength.
The gait of an eleplant is an enormous stride,
performed with his high and ponderous legs, and
sufticiently rapid to require smart galloping on
horseback to outstrip him.

Elephants are peaceable towards all inoffensive
animals, sociable among themselves, and ready
to help each other; gregarious in grassy plains:
but more inclined to frequent densely-wooded
mountain glens: at times not unwilling to visit
the more arid wastes, but fond of rivers and pools,
where they wallow in mud and water among reeds
and under the shade -of trees. They are most
assuredly more sagacious than observers, who,
from a few visits to menageries, compre them
with dogs, are able to appreciate, for on this
question we must take into account, on the one
hand, the physical advantages of the proboscis
added to the individual experience gained by an
animal slow in growth, and of a longevity ex-
ceeding a century; but still placed in contact
with man after a birth free in every sense, where
his powers expand without human education 3
while on the other hand dogs are the offspring of
an immense nuniber of generations, all fashioned
to the will of a master, and consequently with
innate dispositions to acquire a certain education.
In Gritkth’s Cuvier are found several anecdotes,
some of them from the personal observations of
the present writer: and referring to them, we
shall add only a single one here, related by the
late Captain Hobson, R.N., as observed by himself
at Travancore, where several of these animals
were employed in stacking teak timber balk.
They had scarcely any human aid or direction,
but each beam being successively noosed and
slung, they dragged it to the stack, raised one
end up, contrived to shove it forward, nicely
watching when, being poised by its own weight,
the lower end would rise, and then, placing their
forcheads against the butt end, they pushed it
even on the stack; the sling they unfastened and
carried back to have it fitted again! Ina wild
state no other animal has the sagacity to break
off a leafy branch, hold it as a fan, and use it as
a brush to drive away flies.

The Asiatic species, carrying the head higher,
has more dignity of appearance, and is believed
to have more sagacity and courage than the
African; which, however, is not inferior in weight
or bulk, and has never been in the hands of such
experienced-managers as the Indian mohauts are,
who have acquired such deep knowledge of the


ELEPHANT.


character of these beasts that they make then
submit to almost incredible operations; such, fos
example, as suffering patiently the extraction of a
decayed part of a tooth, a kind of chisel and
mallet being the instruments used for the purpose.
This was witnessed by a medical officer, a near
relative of the present writer. Elephants walk
under water as lung as the end of the proboscis
can remain above the surface ; but when in greater
depth, they float with the head and back only
about a fuot beneath it. In this manner they swim
across the broadest streams, and guide themselves
by the sense of smelling till they reach footing to
look about them and land. They are steady,
assiduous workmen in many laborious tasks, often
using discretion when they require some dexteri
and attention in the perfurmance. Good will is
all man can trust to in directing them, for cor-
rection caunot be enforced beyond their patience;
but flattery, good treatment, kind words, pro-
mises, and rewards, even to the wear of finery,
have the desired eflect. In history they appear
most gonspicuous as formidable elements of
battle. From the remotest aves they were trained
for war by the nations of India, and_by their aid
they no doubt acquired and long held possession
of several regions of High Asia westward of the
Indus, They are noticed in the ancient Maha-
harata. According to Sauti the relative force of
elephants in an akshaushini or great army corps
was one to each chariot of war, three horsemen,
anil tive foot-soldiers, or rather archers mounted
on the animal's back within a defensible houdah
—in the west denominated a castle. Thus one
armed elephant, one chariot, and three horsemen
formed a patti or squad of at most eleven men,
and if there were other bodies of infantry in the
army they are unnoticed. This enumeration is
sulficient to show that in India, which furnished
the elephants and the model of arming them,
there were only four or five archers with or with
out the mohaut or driver, and that, consequently,
when the successors of Alexander introduced
them in their wars in Syria, Greece, and even
Italy, they could not be encumbered more than
perhaps momentarily with one or two additional
persons before a charge ; for the weight carried by
a war-elephant is less than that of one used for
burthen, which seldom equals two thousand
pounds. In order to ascend his back when sud-
denly required, the animal will hold out one
of his hind legs horizontally, allowing a person
to step upon it until he has grasped the crupper
and crept up. In the West, where they were con-
sidered for a time of great importance, no doubt
the squad or escort of each animal was more
considerable than in the East, and may have
amounted to thirty-two foot-soldiers; the number
given, by some mistake, as if actually mounted,
in 1 Macc, vi. 37.

Although red colours are offensive to many
animals, it may be observed that the use of mul-
berry juice or grapes must have been intended as
an excitement to their taste, for they are all fond
of fruit. Wine, so as to cause an approach to in
toxication, would render them ungovernable, and
more dangerous than when in a state of fear. They
do not require stimulants to urge them on ina
modern battle, with all its flashes of fire, smoke,
and explosion; and red colours usually employed
for their trappings produce more of a satisfactory


ELEUTHEROPOLIS.


feeling than rage. Judicious and long-continued
training is the only good remedy against sudden
surprises caused by objects not yet examined by
their acutely-judying senses, or conuected with
former scenes of danger, which are alone apt to
make them turn. It is likely that the dis-
ciplined steadiness of well-armed ranks tright-
ened them by their novelty more than the shouts
of Macedonian thousands, which must have been
feeble in the ears of elephants accustomed to the
roar of hundreds of thousands of Indians. It is
probable that the Carthaginians made the ex-
periment of training African elephants in imitation
of Ptolemy Philadelphus: they are noticed in
their army only in the first Punic war; and, from
what appears of the mode.of managing them,
ikere is reason to believe, as already noticed, that
they were never so thoroughly subdued as the
Indian elephants.—C. H. S. :
ELEUTHEROPOLIS (EaAevéepémrodis), a
place not named in Scripture, but which was an
episcopal city of such importance in the time of
}-usebius and Jerome that they assumed it as the
puint whence to estimate the distances and posi-
tions of other cities in Southen Palestine. It
continued to be a great city until the sixth cen-
tury : but after that we lose sight of it, and all the
attempts to recover the knowledge of a position of
such topographical importance have proceeded
upon critical conjectures and combinations. This
process sufficed to show that it lay in the south-
western plain of Judea, between Hebron and
Askelon, but not to determine the site with any
precision, Professor Robinson, when in that quar-
ter, made this long-lost and important site a
subject of particular inquiry; but no traces of
the name could be found, and Beit-Jibrin was
referred to as the only place in the neighbourhood
where any ruins of consequence existed. Of
these ruins the Arabs spoke in the most extrava-
gant terms, and the travellers were induced to
turn their steps in that direction. On approach-
ing Beit-Jibrin they were gratitied to find them-
selves surrounded by several places whose dis-
tances from Eleutheropolis are specified by Eu-
sebius and Jerome, and which might serve them
a» 2 clew in the search fur Eleutheropolis itself.
Beit-Jibrin proved to be a village of moderate
size, the capital of a district in the province of
Gaza. Ip and around this village are ruins of
different ages, more extensive and massy than any
which had beeu seen in Palestine, excepting the
substructions of the ancient temple at Jerusalem
and the Haram at Hebron. These ruins consist
principally of the remains of a fortress of immense
strength, in the midst of an irregular rounded
enclosure, encompassed by a very ancient and
strong wall. This outer wall is built of large
squared stones, uncemented. Along this wall on
the inside, towards the west and north-west, is a
row of ancient massive vaults with tine round
arches, apparently of the same age as the wall
itself, and both undoubtedly of Roman origin.
In the midst of the area stands an irregular castle,
the lower parts of which seem to be as ancient as
the exterior wall, but it has obviously been built
up again in modem times. An inscription over
the gate shows that it Was last rey by the
Turks a.H. 958 (a.p. 1551), nearly two years
after the present walls of Jerusalem were built.
Remains of ancient walls and dwellings extend


ELEUTHEROPOLIS. 67


up the valley; and at the distance of twenty
minutes from the present village are the ruins
of an ancient church, bearing the name of Santa
Hanneh (St. Anne). Only the eastern end is
now standing, including the niche of the great
altar and that of a side chapel, built of large
hewn stones of strong and beautiful masonry.

Ruins thus worthy of the Roman name and
indicative of a powerful city, seemed sufticient to
warrant the conclusion that the site was that of
the ancient Eleutheropolis; especially as it lay
within the limits to which a careful estimate of
the distances and positions in the Onomasticon
had satistied Dr. Robinson that the site must lie.
Nevertheless, he had assured himself that this
Beit-Jibrin could be no other than the Beto-
gabra of Ptolemy and the Peutinger Tables, and
the Beigeberin (an episcopal city) of the eccle-
siastical Notitie of the subsequent centuries:
and as he was not prepared to suppose that Kleu-
theropolis and Beto-gabra could be the same
place, he proceeded to look elsewhere for the
former city. Failing to discover the slightest
trace of it within the quarter in which it must
needs have lain, he again visited Beit-Jibrin, and
then arrived at the conclusion that Beto-gabra
and Eleutheropolis were indeed one and the
same, the former represented by the present Beit-
Jibrin, being the native name, kept in the back-
ground for a time by the Graeco-Roman official
title of Klentheropolis, ‘ free city,’ but reappearing
as soon as the Romans, who used that name, had
withdrawn, This explains satisfactorily the dis-
appearance of the name of so important a place as
Eleutheropolis, and affords ground for tracing its
continued existence for ages under its native name.

In the twelfth century the Crusaders found on
this spot an ancient site in ruins under the name
of Beth-Gebrim ; and here they reared again a
fortress upon the ancient foundations. This place
and fortress are often mentioned in the histories
of the Crusades, usually under the corrmpted
name of Gibelin; and it was most erroneously
confounded by the Christian writers with Beer-
sheba. By the Arabian authors it is not unfre-
quently mentioned under the names of Beit-
Jibrin and Beit-Jibril. Since the time of the
Crusades the place does not ae to have been
visited by any Christian traveller until Dr. Ro-
binson explored the neighbourhood on his route
from Jerusalem to Gaza.

Beto-Gabra, Beth-Gebrim, and Beit-Jibrin ap-
pear to be different forms of the ancient Hebrew
name. But the name itself does not occur in
Scripture. Josephus indeed mentions a large
village, Brfrapis (Betaris), in this region (De
Bell. Jud, iv. 8,1), which Rutinus reads Bfyafpis
(Begabris) in his copy; and Reland (p. 626)
suggests that this may bave been the same place,
which is not unlikely.

This short analysis of the extended observations
and discussions of Dr. Robinson ( Researches, ii.
348, 359, 398, 404-420, 642-646) will put the
reader in possession of the leading facts of this
interesting question. The result seems to be that
the identity of Beto-Gabris with Beit-Jibrin is
satisfactorily established, and that the identity of
Eleutheropolis with the same, although less cer-
tain, is rendered more than probable. Beit-Jibrin
is twenty miles east of Askelon, and thirteen miles


.east-north-east from Hebron.


618 ELI..


ELI (‘Y, raised up: Sept.'Hal), high-priest of
the Jews when the ark was in Shiloh (1 Sam. i. 3,
9). He was the first high-priest of the line of Itha-
mar, Aaron's youngest son. This is deduced from
1 Chron. xxiv. 3, 6 (comp. Joseph. Antig. v. 9,1).
It also appears from the omission of the names
of Eli and his immediate successors in the enu-
meration of the bigh-priests of Eleazar’s line in
1 Chron. vi. 4-6. Wat occasioned this remark-
able transfer is not known—most probably the
incapacity or minority of the then sole represen-
tative of the elder line; for it is very evident that
it was no unauthorized usurpation on the part of
Eli (1 Sam. ii. 27, 28). Ebi also acted as regent
or civil judge of Israel after the death of Samson.
This function, indeed, seems to have been in-
tended, by the theocratical constitution, to devolve
upon the high-priest, by virtue of his office, in the
absence of any person specially appointed by the
Divine King, to deliver and govern Israel. He
is said to have judged Israel forty years (1 Sam.
iv. 18): the Septuagint makes it twenty; and
chronologers are divided on the matter. But the
probability seems to be that the forty years com-
prebend the whole period of his administration
as high-priest and judge, including, in the first
half, the twenty years in which Samson is said to
have judged Israel (Judg. xvi. 31), when some
of his civil functions in southern Palestine may
have been in abeyance. As Eli died at the age
of ninety-eight (1 Sam. iv. ae the forty years
must have commenced when he was fifty-eight
years old.

E]i seems to have been a religious man; and
the only fault recorded of him was an excessive
easiness of temper, most unbefitting the high re-
sponsibilities df his official character. His sons,
Hophni and Phinehas, whom he invested with
authority, misconducteil themselves so outraye-
ously as to excite deep disgust among the people,
and render the services of the tabernacle odious
in their eyes. Of this misconduct Eli was aware,
but contented himself with mild and inetiectual
Temonstrances, where his station required severe
and vigorous action. For this neglect the judg-
ment of God was at length denounced upon his
house, through the young Samuel, who, under pe-
culiar circumstances (Samu. ], had been attached
from childhood to his person (1 Sam. ii. 295 iii.
18). Some years passed without any apparent
fulfilment of this denauciation—but it came at
length in one terrible crash, by which the old mau’s
heart was broken. The Philistines had gained the
upper hand over Israel, and the ark of God was
taken to the field, in the contidence of victory and
safety from its presence. But in the battle which
followed, the ark itself was taken by the Philis-
tines, and the two suns of Eli, who were in at-
tendance upon it, were slain. The high-priest,
then blind with age, sat by the way-side at
Shiloh, awaiting tidings from the war, ‘for his
heart trembled for the ark of God.’ A man of
Benjamin, with his clothes rent, and with earth
upon his head, brought the fatal news: and Eli
heard that Israel was defeated—that his sons were
slain—that the ark of God was taken—at which
last word he fell heavily from his seat, and died
(i Sam. iv). ~

The ultimate doom upon Eli's house was ac-
complished when Solomon removed Abiathar (the


ELIEZER.


last high-priest of this line) from his office, ana
sestored the line of Eleazer in the person of Zadok
[AsiatHar].

ELIAKIM. [Jznoraxim.]

ELIAS. [Enisau.

ELIEZER. This is the samename as Eleazar—
whence came the abbreviated Lazar or Lazarus
of the New Testament. It is proper to note this
here, because the parable which describes Lazarus
in Abraham's bosum (Luke xvi. 23) has beeu sup-

»sed_ to contain a latent allusion to the name of

Slezer, whom, before the birth of Ishmael and
Isaac, Abraham regarded as his heir. The pas-
sage of Scripture in which the name of Eliezer
occurs is one of some difficulty. Abraham, being .
promised a son, says :—‘I go childless, and the
steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus.
- - »- Behold, to me thou hast given no seed : and,
lo, one burn in mine house is mine heir’ (Gen. xv.
2, 3). Part of the difliculty is caused by the
translation, and part by the prevalence of no-
tions gathered from external sources, ani not
warranted by the original text. The common
Notion is that Eliezer was Abraham’s house-bom
slave, adopted as his heir, and meanwhile his
chief and contidential servant, and the same who
was afterwards sent into Mesvpotamia to seek a
wife fur Isaac. . This last point we may dismiss
with the remark, that there is not the least evi-
dence that * the elder servant of his house* (Gen.
xxiv. 2), whom Abraham charged with this mis-
sion, was the same as Eliezer: and our attention
may therefure be confined to the verses which
have been quoted.

It is obvious that the third verse is not pro-
perly a sequel to the second, but a repetitiun
of the statement contained in the second ; and,
being thus regarded as parallel passages, the two
may be used to explain each other.

¢ Eliezer of Damascus,’ or * Damascene-Eliezer,’
is the subject of both verses. The obvious mean-
ing is, that Eliezer was Lorn in Damascus: and
how is this compatible with, the nution of his
being Abraham's house-bor slave, seeing that
Abraham's household never was at Damascus?
It is true that there is a tradition, quoted by Jase-
phus from Nicolaus of Damascus (-4ntg. i. 7. 4.)
that Abraham ‘reigned in Damascus ;’ but the
tradition was probably founded on this very pas
saye, and has no claim on our belief.

The expression, ‘the steward of nine house,’ in
ver. 2, will explain the sense of ‘one born in
mine house is mine heir,” in ver. 3. The first
phrase, literally translated, is ‘the son of posses-
sion of my house,’ #. e. one who shall possess my
house, my property, after my death; and is there-
fore exactly the same as the phrase in the next
verse, ‘the son of my house (paraphrased by ‘ one
born in mine house’) is mine heir.’ This removes
every objection to Eliezer’s being of Damascus,
and enables us to dispense with the tradition; for
it is no longer necessary to suppose that kivezer
was a huuse-born slave, or a servant at all; and
leaves it more probable that he was some near
relative whom Abraham reyarded as his heir-
at-law. In this case Abraham obviously means
to say, ‘Behold, to me thon hast given no ciil-
dren, and @ot the son of my loins, but the sou of
my house (4. e. of my family—the son whom my
house gives me—the heir-at-law) is mine heir.’
It is by no means certain that ‘this Eliezer’ was


| ELIEZER.


present in Abraham's camp at all: and we, of
course, cannot kuow in what degree he stood re-
lated to Abraham, or under what circumstances
he was born at, or belonged to, Damascus. It is
possible that he lived there at the very time when
Abraham thus spoke of him, and that he is hence
called ‘Eliezer of Damascus.’
This view, that Eliezer was actually Abraham's
@ near relative and heir-at-law, removes another dif-
ficulty, which has always occasioned some embar-
rassment, and which arises from the fact, that
while he speaks of Eliezer as his heir, Ifis nephew
Lot was in his neighbourhood, and had been, until
lately, the companion of his wanderings. If
Eliezer was Abraham's servant, it might well oc-
casion surprise that he should speak of him and
not of Lot as his heir: but this surprise ceases
when we regard Eliezer as also a relative, and if
so, a nearer relative than Lot, although not, like
Lot, the companion of his journeys. Some have
supposed that Lot and Eliezer were, in fact, the
same person; and this would be an excellent
explanation if the Scriptures affurded sufficient
grounds for it.


2 ELIEZER. The second of the two sons
bom to Moses while an exile in the land of
Midian (Exod. xviii. 4). Eliezer had a son
called Rebadiah (1 Chron. viii. 17).


ELIHU (SON, God-Jehouah ;Sept. "Exiobs).
One of Jub's friends, described as ‘the son of
Barachel, a Buzite, of the kindred of Ram’ (Job
xxxii. 2). This is usually understood to imply
that he was descended frorn Buz, the son of Abra-
ham’s brother Nahor, from whose family the city
called Buz (Jer. xxv. 23) also took its name.
The Chaldee paraphrase asserts Elihu to have
been a relation of Abraham. Elihu’s name does
not aj:pear among those of the friends who came
in the first instance to condole with Job, nor is
his presence indicated till the debate between the
afflicted man and his three friends had been
brought to a conclusion. Then, finding there
was no answer to Job's last speech, he comes
forward with considerable modesty, which he
loses as he proceeds, to remark on the debate, and
to deliver his own opinion on the points at issue.
The character and scope of his orations are
described elsewhere (Jon, Boox ov]. It appears,
from the manner in which Elihu introduces him-
selt, that he was by’ much the youngest of the
Party; and it is evident that he had been pre-
seut from the commencement of the discussion, to
which he had paid very close attention. This
would sugyest that the debate between Job and
his friends was carried on in the presence of a
deeply-interested auditory, among which was this

ihu, who could not forbear from interfering
When the controversy appeared to have reached an
Unsatisfactory conclusiun.


ELIJAH (™x, God-Jehovah ; Sept. HA).
This wonder-working prophet is introduced to
Our notice like another Melchizedek (Gen. x.
4, 18; Heb. vii. 3), without any mention of
ae or mother, or of the beginning of his
oe if he had dropt out of that cloudy

‘ariot, which, after his work was done on earth,
conveyed him back to heaven. From this si-
enee of Scripture as to his parentage and birth,
Much vain speculation has arisen. Some of the


ELIJAH. 619


Rabbins have supposed that he was Phineas, the
grandson of Aaron; whilst others have thought
that he was an angel, who, for the purpose of re-
forming wicked king Ahab and his ungodly sub-
jects, assumed the form of a man. Some suppose
that Elijah is called a Tishbite from Tishbeh, a city
beyond the Jordan. Others suppose that Tishbite
means converter or reformer, deriving it from the
Hebrew radical 31%. The very first sentence that
the prophet utters is a direful denunciation against
Ahab ; and this he supports by a solemn oath, ‘As
the Lord God of Israel liveth, befure whom I
stand, there shall not be dew or rain these years
(i. e, three and a half years, Luke iv. 25; James v.
17), but according to my word’ (1 Kings xvii.
1). Before, however, he spoke thus, it would
seem that he had been warming this most wicked
king as to the fatal consequences which must
result both to himself and his people, from the
iniquitous course he was then pursuing: and this
may account for the apparent abruptness with
which he opens his commission.

We can imagine Ahab and Jezehel being greatly
incensed against Elijah for having foretold and
prayed that such calatnities might befall them.
For some time they might attribute the drought
under which the nation suffered to natural causes,
and not to the interposition of the prophet; and,
therefore, however they might despise him as a
vain enthusiast, they would not proceed im-
mediately to punish him. When, however, they
saw the denunciation of Elijah taking eflect far
more extensively than had been anticipated, they
would naturally seek to wreak their vengeance
upon him as the cause of their sufferings. But
we do not tind him taking one step for his own pre-
servation, till the God whom he served said, ‘Get
thee hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thy-
self by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan:
and it shall be that thou shalt driuk of the brook ;
and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee
there’ (1 Kings xvii. 3, 4). Other and better
means of protection from the impending danger
might seem open to him; but, regardless of these,
he hastened to obey the divine mandate, and
“went and dwelt by the brook Cherith that is be-
fore Jordan ' (1 Kings xvii. 5) [Cueriru].

Some commentators, availing themselves of the
fact that D'IWY orebim, which we translate
ravens, means, in Ezek. xxvii. 27, merchants,
have tried to explain away the miraculous cha-
racter of God's preservation of his servant at
Cherith. Others again have thought that the
original signifies Aradians, as in 2 Chron. xxi.
16; Neh. iv. 7; where the like word is used ;
or possibly the inhabitants of the city Arabah,
near Beth-shan (Josh. xv. 6, and xviii. 18, &c.).
Tn the face of such opinions as these, we still be-
lieve that ravens and not men were the instru-
ments which God, on this occasion, employed
to carry needful food to his exiled and _perse-
cuted servant; and in this he would give us a
manifest proof of His sovereignty over all crea»
tures. But, it has been inquired, how could
these birds obtain food of a proper kind, and of a
sufficient quantity, to supply the daily wants of
the prophet? The answer to this inquiry is very
simple. We cannot tell. It is enough for us to
know that God engaged to-make a provision for
him, and that He failed not to fultil his engages
ment. We need not tu speculate, as sume have

7


420 : ELIJAH.


done, as to whether this supply was taken from
Ahab's or Jehoshaphat’s table, or from that of
one of the seven thousand of Israel who had not
bowed the knee te Baal.

A fresh trial now awaits this servant of God
(2.c. 909), and in the manner in which he bears
it, we see the strength of his faith. For one year,
as sume suppose, God had miraculously provided
for his bodily wants at Cherith; but the brook
which, heretofore, had afforded him the needful
refreshment there, became dried a Encouraged
by past experience of his heavenly Father's care
of him, the prophet still waited patiently till He
said, * Arise (1 Kings xvii. 9), get thee to Zare-
phath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell
there: behold, I have commanded a widow woman
there to sustain thee.’ He then, at once, set out
on the journey, and now arrived at Zarephath, he,
in the arrangement of God's providence, met, as
he entered its gate, the very woman who was de-
puted to give him immediate support. But his
faith is again put to a sore test, for he found her
engaged in a way which was wel] calculated to
discourage all his hopes; she was gathering sticks
for the purpose, as she assured him, of cooking the
last meal, and now that the famine prevailed
there, as it did in Israel, she saw nothing before
her and her only son but starvation and death,
How then could the prophet ask for, and how
could she think of giving, a part of her last morsel?
The same Divine Spirit inspired him to assure her
that she and her child should be even miracu-
lously provided for during the continuance of the
famine; and also influenced her heart to receive,
without doubting, the assurance! The kindness
ef this widow in baking the tirst cake for Elijah
was well requited with a prophet’s reward (Matt.
x. 41, 42); oe afforded one meal to him, and God
affurded many to her (see 1 Kings xv. 16). But
uninterrupted prosperity will not do for even God's
most devoted servants. Possibly a feeling of self-
righteousness mizht, through the deceitfulness of
sin, have begun to enter their minds, seeing that,
whilst millions around them were now suffering
and dying from want, they were made the special
objects of God's providential care. Accordingly,
their heavenly Father saw fit to visit them with a
temporary calamity—a calamity as severely felt
in some respects by the one as it was by the other.
‘ And it came to pass that the son of the woman,
the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sick-
ness was so sore that there was no life left in him’
(1 Kings xvii. 17). Verse 18 contains the ex-
postulation with the prophet of this bereaved
widow; she rashly imputes the death to his

esence. She seems to have thought within

erself, that, as God had shut up heaven from
pouring down refreshing showers upon a guilty
nation, in consequence of the prophet's prayer,
so she was now suffering from a similar cause.
Elijah retaliates not, but calmly takes the dead
child out of the mother's bosom, and lays it on
his own bed (verse 19), that there he may, in pri-
vate, pray the more fervently for its restoration.
Every enithet that the prophet poured forth on this
occasion was big with meaning; his prayer was
heard, and answered by the restoration of life to
the child, and of gladness to the widow's heart.

Since now, however, the long-protracted famine,
with all its attendant korrors, failed to detach
Ahab and his guilty people from their abominable


ELIJAH.


idolatries, God mercifully gave them ecb 5
portunity of repenting and turning to Hi .
For three years and six months (James v. 17)
the destructive famine had spread its deadly in-
fluence over the whole nation of Israel. During
this time the prophet was called upon passively to
suffer God's will ; now he must once again resume
the more active duties of life; he must make one
great public effort more to reclaim his country
from apostacy and ruin. According to the word
of the Lord he returned to Israel; Ahab was yet
alive, and unreformed ; Jezebel, his impious con-
sort, was still mad upon her idols; in a word, the
prophets of Baal were prophesying lies, the priests
were bearing rule by their means, and the

loved to have tt so. Such was the state of things
in Israel when Elijah once again stood before
Ahab. Wishing not to tempt God by going un-
necessarily into danger, he first presented himself
to good Obadiah (1 Kings xviii. 7). This prin-
cipal servant of Ahab was also a true servant of
God; and on recognising the prophet he treated
him with honour and respect. Elijah requested
him to announce to Ahab that he had retumed.
Obadiah, apparently stung by the unkindness of
this request, replied, ‘ What have I sinned, that


thou shouldest thus expose me to Ahab’s rage, °


who will certainly slay me for not apprehending
thee, fur whom he has so long and so anxiously
sought in all lands and in confederate countries,
that they should not harbour a traitor whom he
looks upon as the author of the famine,’ &c.
Moreover, he would delicately intimate tw Elijah
bow he had actnally jeoparded his own life in
securing that of one hundred of the Lord's pro
phets, and whom he had fed at his own expense.
Satisfied with Elijah’s reply to this touching ap-
peal, wherein he removed all his fears about the
Spirit's carrying himself away (as 2 Kings ii. 11-
16; Ezek. iii. 4; Acts viii. 39), he resolves to be
the prophet’s messenger to Ahab. Intending to be
revenged on him, or to inquire when rain might be
expected, Ahab now came forth to meet Elijah. He
at once charged him with troubling Israel, #.¢. with
being the main cause of all the calamities which
he and the nation had suffered. But Elijah
flung back the charge upon himself, assigning
the real cause to be his own sin of idolatry.
Regarding, however, his magisterial _positiun,
while he reproved his sin, he requests him to ex-
ercise his authority in summoning an assembly
to Mount Carmel, that the controversy between
them might be decided, whether the king or the
prophet was Israel's tronbler. Whatever were the
secret motives which induced Ahab to comply
with this proposal, God directed the result.
Elijah otfered to decide this controversy between
God and Baal, uot by Scripture—for an appeal
to its authority would have fallen powerless upon
their infidel minds—but by a miracle from Hea-
ven. As tire was the element over which Baal
was supposed to preside, the prophet proposes
(wishing to give them every advantage), that, two
bullocks being slain, and laid each upon a dis-
tinct altar, the one for Baal, the other for Je
hovah, whichever should be consumed by fire
must proclaim whose the people of Israel were,
and wlio it was their duty to serve. The people
consent to this proposal, because, it may be, they
were not altogether ignorant how God had for
merly answered by fire (Gen. iv. 4; Lev. ix. 24;


ELIJAH.
Judg. vi. 21; xiii, 20; 1 Chron. xxi. 26; 2 Chron.


vii. 1). Elijah will have summoned not only
all the elders of Israel, but also the four hundred
priests of Baal belonging to Jezebel'’s court,
and the four hundred and fifty who were dis-
persed over the kingdom, The former, however,
did not attend; being, perbaps, glad to shelter
themselves under the ides that Jezebel would
not allow them to do so. Confident of success,
because doubtless God had revealed the whole
matter to him, he enters the lists of contest with the
fuur hundred ani {fifty priests of Baal. Having
reconstructed an altar which had once belonzed to
God, with twelve stoues—as if to declare that the
twelve tribes of Israel should again be united in
the service of Jehovah—and having laid thereon
his bullock, and filled the trench by which it was
surrounded with large quantities of water, lest
any suspicion of deceit might occur to any mind,
the prophet gives place to the Baalites—allows
m to make trial first. In vain did these de-
ceived and deceiving men call, from morning till
evening, upon Baal—in vain did they now mingle
their own blood with that of the sacrifice: uo
answer was given—no fire descended.
* Elijah having rebuked their folly and wicked-
ness with the sharpest irony, and it being at last
evident to all that their efforts to obtain the
wished-for fire were vain, now, at the time of the
evening sacrifice, offered up his prayer. The
Baalites’ prayer was long, that of the prophet is
short—charging God with the care of His cove-
nant, of His truth, and of His glory—when,
behold, ¢ the fire came down, licked up the water,
and cousumed not ouly the bullock, but the very
stones of the altar also.’ The eilect of this on the
mind of the people was what the prophet desired :
acknowledging the awful presence of the Godhead,
they exclaim, as with one voice, ‘The Lord He
is God; the Lord He is God!’ Seizing the oppor
tunity whilst the people's hearts were warm with
the fresh conviction of this miracle, he bade them
take those juzgling priests and kill them at
Kishon, that their blood might help to fill that
river which their idolatry had provoked God to
empty by drougit. All this Elijah might law-
fully do at God's direction, and under the sanc-
tion of His law (Deut. xiii. 5; xviii. 20) Ahab
having now publicly vindicated God's violated
law by giving his royal sanction to the execution
of Baal’s priests, Ehjah informed him that he may
go up to his tent on Carmel to take refresiment,
for God will send the desired rain. In the mean
time he prayed earnestly (James v. 17, 18) tor
this blessing: God hears and answers: a little
elgud arises out of the Mediterranean sea, in
sight of which the prophet now was, diffuses itself
gradually over the entire face of the heavens,
and now empties its refreshing waters upon the
whole Jand of Israel! Here was another proof of
the Divine mission of the prophet, from which, we
should imagine, the whole nation must have pro-
fited ; but subsequent events would seem to prove
that the impression produced by these dealings of
God. was of a very partial and temporary charac-
ter. Impressed with the hope that the report of
God's miraculous actings at Carmel might not
ouly reach the ear, but also penetrate, and soften,
the hard heart of Jezebel; and anxious that the
reformation of his country should spread in and
about Jezreel also, Elijah, strengthened, as we are


ELIJAH. ‘@1


told, from on high, now accompanies Ahab thither
on foot. How ill-founded the prophet's expecta-
tion was, subsequent events too painfully proved.
Jezebel, instead of receiving Elijah obviously as
the messenger of God for good to her nation, now
secretly conceives and openly declares her fixed
purpose to put him to death. The man whose
vayer had raised the dead, had shut and opened
eaven, he who had been s0 wonderfully pre-
served by God at Cherith and Zarephath, and who
dared to tax Ahab to his face with being Israel's
troubler, is now so terrilied by the knowledge
of this vile woman's design that he fled into the
wilderness and there longed fur death—thus af-
fording a practical evideuce of what St. James
says of him, that he was a man of like passions
with us. His now altered state of mind would
seem to have arisen out of an exaggerated expec-
tation of what God desizned to effect through the
miracles exhibited to, and the judgments poured
upon, this guilty nation, He seems to have
thought that, as complete success did not crown
the last great effort he had made to reform Israel,
there could not be the slightest use in Jabouring
for this end any longer. Alas! had he stood his
ground at Jezreel, who can tell what eflect this
might have had even upon the mind of Jezebel,
and, through her, upon the whule nation! But
no; the great opportunity of usefulness is now
lost, und he asks fur death: still God will be gra-
cious to him. He now, alone in the wilderness
and at Mount Horeb, will at once touch his heart
and correct his petulancy by the ministration of
His angel, and by a fearful exhibition of His
Divine power. And having done this, revealing
Himself in the gentle accents of'a still voice, He
announces to him that he must go and anoint
Hazael king over Syria, Jehu king over Israel,
and Elisha prophet in his own place, ere death can
put a period to his labours. These persons shall
revenge God’s quarrels; one shall begin, another
shall prosecute, and the third shall perfect the
vengeance on Israel. When God had comforted
His prophet by telling him of these three instru.
ments le had in store to vindicate his own in-
sulted honour, then he convinced him of his
mistake in saying ‘1 only am leit alone,’ &c., by
the assurance that there were seven thousand in
Israel who had not bowed the knee to Baal.

Leaving the cave of Horeb (u.c. 906), Elijah
now proceeded to the field where he found Elisha
in the act of ploughing, and, without uttering a
word, he cast his prophet’s mantle over him, which
was a symbol of his being clothed with God's
spirit. The divine impression produced upon the
mind of Elisha by this act of Elijah made him
willing to leave all things and follow him.

For about six years from this calling of Elisha
we find no notice in the sacred history of Elijah,
till God sent him once ayain to pronounce sore
judgments upon Ahab and Jezebel for the murder
of unollending Naboth (1 Kings xxi. 17. &c.).
How he and his associate in the prophetic office
employed themselves during this time we are not
told. We may conceive, however, that they were
much engaged in prayer for their country, and in
imparting knowledge in the schools of the v -
phets, which were at Jericho and Beth-el. We
need not dwell upon the complicated character
of Ahab’s wickedness (1 Kings xxi.), in winking
at the murderous means whereby Jezebel pro-


622 ELIJAH.


cured for him the inalienable property of Naboth
(Auas; Nanoru]. When he seemed to be
triumphing in the possession of his ill-obtained
gain, Elijak stood before him, and threatened
him, in the name of the Lord (2 Kings ix.
21-26 inclusive), that God would retaliate blood
for blood, and that not on himself only—‘ his
seventy sons shall die, and (2 Kings x. 6)
Jezebel shall become meat for dogs. Fearing
that these predictions would prove true, as those
about the rain and fire had done, Ahab now
assumed the manner of a penitent; and, though
subsequent acts proved the insincerity of his re-
pentance, yet God rewards his temporary abase-
ment by a temporary arrest of judgment. We
see, however, in after parts of this sacred history,
how the judgments denounced against him, his
abandoned consort, aud children, took effect to
the very letter.

Elijah again retires from the history till an
act of blasphemy on the part of Ahaziah, the son
and successor of Ahab, causes God to call him
forth. Ahaziah met with an injury, and, fearing
that it might be unto death, he, as if to prove
himself worthy of being the son of idolatrous
abab and Jezebel, sent to consult Baalzebub, the
idol-god of Ekron; but the Angel of the Lord
tells Elijah to go forth and meet the messengers
of the king (2 Kings i. 3, 4), and assure them that
he shall not recover. Suddenly reappearmg be-
fore their master, ne said unto them, ‘ Why are
ye now tamed back # when they answered, ¢ there
came a man up to meet us, and said unto us, Go,
turn again unto the king that sent you, and say
unto him, thus saith the Lord; is it not because
there is no God in Israel that thou sendest to in-
quire of Baalzebub, the god of Ekron? = Where-
fore thou shalt not come down from that bed on
which thou art gone up, but shalt surely die.’
Conscience seems to have at once whispered to
him that the man who dared to arrest his messen-
gers with such a communication must be Elijah,
the bold but unsuccessful reprover of his parents,
Determined to chastise him for such an insult, he
sent a captain and fifty armed men to bring him
into his presence; but lo! at Elijah’s word. tie
fire descends from Heaven and consumes the
whole band! Attributing this destruction of his
men to some natural cause, he sent forth another
company, on whom though the same judgment
fell, this impious king is not satisfied till another
and a similar effort is made to capture the pro-
phet. The captain of the third band implored
mercy at the hands of the prophet, and mercy
was granted. Descending at once trom Carmel,
he accompanies him to Ahaziah. Fearless of his
wrath Elijah now repeats to the king himself what
he had beture said to his messengers, and agree-
ably thereto, the sacred nairative informs us that
Ahaziah died.

* ‘The above was the last more public effort which
the prophet made to reform Israel. His warfare
being now accomplished on eartn, God, whom he
had so long and so faithfully served, will translate
aim in a chariot of fire to Heaven. Conscious of
this, he determines to spend his last moments in
imparting divine instruction to, and pronouncing
his Jast benediction upon, the students in the col-
leges of Beth-el and Jericho; accordingly, he
made a circuit from Gilgal, near the Jordan, to
Beth-el, and from thence to Jericho. Wishing


ELIPHAZ.


either to be alone at the moment of being caught
up to Heaven ; or, what is more probable, anxious
to test the affection of Elisha (as Christ did that
of Peter), he delicately intimates to him not to
accompany him in this tour. But the faithful
Elisha, to whom, as also to the schools of the pro-
phets, God had revealed his purpose to remove
Elijah, declares with an oath his fixed determina
tion not to forsake his master nuw at the close of
his earthly pilgrimage. Ere yet, however, the
chariot of Gud descended for him, he asks what he
should do for Elisha. The latter, feeling that, as the
former's successor, he was, in a sense, his son, and,
therefore, entitled to a double portion; or rather,
conscious of the complicated and difficult duties
which now awnited him, asks for a double portion
of Elijah’s spirit. Eljah, acknowledging the
magnitude of the request. yet promises to grant
it on the contingency of Elisha sceing him at the
moment of his rapture. Possibly this coutinzency
was placed before him in order to make him more
on the watch, that the glorious departure of
Elijah should not take place without his actnally
seeing it. Whilst standing on the other side of the
Jordan, whose waters were miraculously parted
for them to pass over on dry ground, and possibly
engaged in discourse about anointing Hazael king
over Syria, angels descended, as in a tiery cha-
riot, and, in the sight of fifty of the sons of the
prophets and Elisha, carried Elijah into Heaven.
Elisha, at this wonderful sizht, cries out, like a
bereaved child, “My Father, my Father, the
chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof ;’ as if
he had said, Alas! the strength and saviout of
Israel is now departed! But no; God designed
that the mantle which fell from Elijah as he as-
cended should now remain with Elisha as a
pledge that the office and spirit of the former had
now fallen upon himself.—J. W. D.


ELIM. one of the stations of the Israelites in
the route to Mount Sinai. [Exopus.]


ELIMELECH (99'S. God the King ; Sept.
"EAmeéAex). A native of Bethlehem, husband of
Naomi, and father by her of two sons, Matlon
and Chilion. Ina time of scarcity he withdrew
with his family into the land of Manb, where he
died (Ruth i. 1-3). [Naoa, Rerun.)


1. ELIPHAZ (15S. God the Strong ; Sept.
"Edipds). A son of Esau and Adah (Gen xxxvi.
10).

2. ELIPHAZ, one of the three friends who
came to condole with Job in his aflliction, and
who took part in that remarkable disenssion which
occupies the book of Job. He was of Teman in
Idumiva; and as Eliphaz the son of Esau had
a son called Teman, from whom the place took
its name, there is reason to conclude that this
Eliphaz was a descendant of the former Eliphaz.
Some, indeed, even go so far as to suprose that
the Eliphaz of Job was no other than the son of

‘sau. This view is of course confined to those
who refer the age of Job to the time of the pa-
triarchs.

Eliphaz is the first of the friends to take up the
debate, in reply to Job's passionate complaints,
The scope of his argument and the character of
his oratory are described under another head
{Jon, Boox or}. He appears to have been the
oldest of the speakers, from which circumstance,


ELISABETH.


or from natural disposition, his language is more
mild and sedate than that of any of the other
speakers. He begins his orations with delicacy,
and conducts his part of the argument with cun-
siderable address. His share in the controversy
occupies chapters iv. v. xv. xxii.

ELISABETH (EaucdBer), wife of Zacharias,
and mother of John the Baptist (Luke i. 5). The
name in this precise shape does not occur in the
Old Testament, where the names of few females
are given. But it is a Hebrew name, the same in
fact as Elisheba, which see,


ELISHA (SYN, God the Deliverer ; Sept.
‘EAioaé). The manner, and the circumstances,
in which Elisha was called to the prophetic oftice
have been noticed in the article Exzgzan.

Anxious to euter at once upon the duties of
his sacred office, Klisha determined to visit the
schools of the prophets which were on the other
side of the Jordan, Accordingly, returning to
this river, and wishing that sensible evidence
should be afforded, both to himseli’ and others, of
the spirit and power of his departed master rest-
ing upon him, he struck its waters with Elijah’s
mantle, when they parted asunder and opened a
way for him to pass over on dry land. Witness-

ing this miraculous transaction, the fifty sons of
the prophets, who had seen from the oppogite side
Elijab’s ascension, and who were awaiting Eli-
sha’s return, now, with becoming reverence, ac-
knowledged him their spiritual head.

These young prophets are not more full of re-
verence for Elisha than of zeal for Elijah: they
saw the latter carried up in the air—they knew
that this was not the first time of his miraculous
removal. Imagining it therefore possible that
the Spirit of God had cast him on some remote
mountain or valley, they ask permission to go and
seck him. Elisha, though fully aware that he
was received up into glory, but yet fearful lest it
should be conceived that he, from auy unworthy
motives, was not anxious to have him brouglit
back, yielded to their request.

The divine authority by which Elisha became
the successor of Elijah received further contirma-
tion frum the miracle whereby the bitter waters of
Jericho were made sweet, and the place thereby
rendered fit for the habitation of man (2 Kings
ii. 19-22),

As the general visitor of the schools of the pro-
phets, Elisha now passes on from Jericho to the
college which was at Beth-el. Ere, however, he
entered Beth-el, there met him from thence (2
Kings iii. 23, 24) little children, who no doubt
instizated by their idolatrous parents, tauntingly
told him to ascend into heaven, as did his master,
Elijah! There was in their expressions an ad-

mixtyre of rudeness, infidelity, and impiety. But
the inhabitants of Beth-el were to know, from bitter
experience, that to dishonour God's prophets was
to dishonour Himself; for Elisha was at the mo-
ment inspired to pronounce the judgment which
at once took eflect: God, who never wants for
instruments to accomplish his purposes, caused
two she-bears to emerge from a neighbouring
wood, and destroy the young delinquents.

Jehoram, who reigued over Israel at this time,
though not a Baelite, was yet addicted to the sin
of Jeroboam : still he inherits the friendship of

Jenoshaphat, the good King of Judica, ehiag


ELISHA. 628


counsel, possibly, under God, had detached him
from the more gross idolatry of his father Ahab.
Wishing to see the now (u.c. £95) revolted king of
Moab reduced to his wonted allegiance to Israel,
Jehoshaphat determined to go up to hattle against
him, together with Jehoram, and his own tribu-
tary the king of Edom. These combined armies
met together on the plains of Edom. Confident
in their own powers they press onward against the
enemy; but, not meeting him, another of a more
formidable character started up before them. In
the midst of the arid plains of Arabia Petraa they
conld find no water. Jehoram deplores the cala-
mity into which they had fallen, but Jehoshaphat
inquired for a prophet. On this, one of his cour-
tiers said to Jetioram, ‘ Here is Elisha, the son of
Shaphat, who poured water on the hands of Eli-
jah? No sooner were they made acquainted with
the fact that Elisha was at hand than the three
kings waited upon him. Elisha, feeling that it was
nought but superstitious fear, joined to the influ-
ence of Tehaskayhat, which led Jehoram thus to
consult him, now indignantly and tauntingly ad-
vises him to go for succour to the gods of his father
Ahab and of his mother Jezebel. The reproved
monarch was then led to acknowledge the impo-
tency of those gods in whom he had trusted, and
the power of that God whom he had nezlected.


Still the man of God, seeing the hollowness of


Jehoram’s humiliation, continues: § As the Lord
liveth, before whom I stand, surely were it not
that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat, the king
of Judah, I would not look toward thee.’ Hav-
ing thus addressed Jehoram, Elisha desired a min-
strel to be brought before him; and now when his
spirit is calmed by, perhaps, one of the songs of
Zion, Jehovah approaches His prophet in’ the
power of inspiration, as it is written, ‘The hand
of the Lord came upon him.’ The minstrel
ceases, and Elisha communicates the joyful in-
telligence that not only should water be miracu-
lously supplied, but also that Moab should be
overcome. ‘Thus saith the Lord, Make this
valley full of ditches; ye shall not see wind, nei-
ther shall ye see the rain; yet that valley shall be
filled with water that ye may drink.’ Accord-
ingly the next morning they realized the truth of
this prediction. But the same water which pre-
serves their lives becomes the source of destruction
to their enemies. The Moalites, who had received
intelligence of the advance of the allied army,
were now assembled upon their frontiers. When
the sun was up, and its rosy light first fell upon
the water, their van-guard, beholding it at a
distauce, supposed it to be blood. Thus the
hotion was rapidly spread from one end to another
that the kings were surely slain, having fallen out
amongst themselves. ence there was a univer=
sal shout, ‘Moab, to the spoil!’ and they went
forward contident of victory. But who can de-
scribe their consternation at beholding the Israel-
itish squadrons advancing to meet them sword in
hand! At once they flee in the utmost panic and
confusion; but in vain do they seek to defend
themselves, God had decreed their punishment
by, and subjugation to, Israel (2 Kings iii. 20,
&e.).

he war having terminated in the signal overs
throw ‘of the revolters, Elisha, who had returned
home, is again employed in ministering blessinys.
Auvther case arose to declare the peculiar char


694 ELISHA.


racter of his mission as messenger of mercy to
man. The widow of a pious prophet presents
herself before him (2 Kiugs iv), informs him that
her husband having died in debt, his creditors
were about to sell her two only sons, which, by an
extension of the law (Exod. xxi. 7, and Ley. xxv.
39), and by virtue of another (Exod. xxii. 3), they
had the power to do; and against this hard-
hearted act she implores the prophet's assistance.
God will not, without a cause, depart from the
general laws of His administration: Elisha
therefore inquires how far she herself had the
power to avert the threatened calamity. She re-
plies that the only thing of which she was pos-
sessed was one pot of oil. By multiplying this,
as did his predecessor Elijah in the case of the
widow of Zarephath, he enabled her at. once to
ay off her debts and thereby to preserve the
iberty of her children (2 Kings iv. 1-7).

Having thus contemplated Elisha in the act of
relieving the wants of a poor widow, we may with
the more pleasure chserve how, in the arrangement
of God's providence, his own necessities were,
in turn, supplied. In his visitations to the schools
of the prohets it would seem that his journey lay
through the city of Shunem, where lived a rich
and godly woman. Wishing that he should take
up, more than occasionally, his abode under her
roof, she proposed to her husband to construct for
him a chamber, where, far from the society of
man, he might hold solitary and sweet commu-
nion with his God. The husband at once con-
sented, and, the apartment being completed and
fitted up in a way that showed their proper concep-
tion of lis feeling, the prophet becomes its occupant.
Grateful for such disinterested kindness, Elisha
delicately inquired of her if he could prefer her
interest. before the king or the captain of his host ;
for he must have had considerable influence at
court, from the part he had taken in the late war.
But the good woman declined the prophet’s offer,
by declaring that she would rather * dwell among
her own people,’ and in the condition of life to
which she had been accustomed. Still, to crown
her domestic happiness, she lacked one thing—
she had no child , and now, by reason of the age
of her husband, she could not expect such a bless-
ing. In answer, however, to the prayer of the
prophet, and contrary to all her own conclusions,
God causes her to conceive and bring forth a son
(ic. 691). This new pledge of their affection
grows up till he is able to visit his fond father in
the harvest-field, when all the hopes they had
built up in him were overthrown by his being
suddenly laid prostrate in death.

The bereaved mother, with exquisite tenderness
towards the feelings of the father, concealed the
fact that the child was no mgre till she should see
if it might please God, throfigh Elisha, to restore
him to life. She therefore hastens to Carmel,
where she found the prophet, and informed hin
what had taken place. Conceiving probably that
it was a case of mere suspended animation, or a
swoon, the prophet sent Gehazi, his servant, to
place his staff on the face of the child, in the hope
that it might act as a stimulus to excite the ani-
mal motions. But the mother, conscious that he
was actually departed, continued to entreat that
he him»elf would come to the chamber of the
deal. He did so, and found that the suul of the
child had indeed fled from the earthly tenement.


ELISHA.


Natural means belong to man; those that are
supernatural belong to God: we should do our
part, and beg of God to do his. On this prin-
ciple the prophet on this occasion acted. God
blesses the means used, and answers the prayer
presented by Elisha, The child is raised up and
restored to the fond embrace of its grateful and
rejoicing parents,

The next remarkable event in the histery of
Elisha was the miraculous healing of the incyrable
leprosy of the Syrian general Naaman, whereby the
neighbouring nation had the opportunity of learn-
ing the beneficence of that God of Israel, wiiuse
judgments had often brought them very low.
The particulars are given under another head
[Naaaran].

Soon after this transaction we find this man
of God in Gilgal, miraculously neutralizing the
poison which had, by mistake, been mixea with the
food of the propheta, and also feeling one hun-
dred of them with twenty small loaves which bad
heen sent for his own consumption (2 Kings iv.
38, &c.). In his tender regard to the wants of
others, and in the miracles he wroaght, how like
he was to the Saviour of the woriu: —

Notwithstanding the general profligacy of Israel,
the schools of the prophets increased, nc. 89°
This was, doubtless, owing to the infiuence of
Elisha, Accompanied by their master, a party
of these young prophets, or theological students,
came to the Jordan, and whilst one of them was
‘felling a beam (for the purpose of constructing
there a honse) the axe-head fell into the water.”
This accident was the more distressing because
the axe was borrowed property. Elisha, however,
soon relieved him by causing it miraculously to
rise to the surface of the river.

The sacred record again leads us to contemplate
the propuet’s usefulness, not only in such indi-
vidual points of view, but also in reference to his
country at large. Does the king of Syria devise
well-coneerted schemes for the destruction of
Israel ¥ God inspires Elisha to detect and lay
them open to Jeioram. Benhadad, on learing
that it was he that thus caused his hostile move-
ments to be frustrated, sent an armed band to
Dothan in order to bring him bound to Damascus.
The prophet’s servant, on seeing the host of the
enemy which invested Dothan, was mucli alarmed,
but by the prayer of Elisha God reveais to vim
the mighty company of angels which were set fur
their defence. Regardless of consequences, the
prophet went forth to meet the hustile band ; and
having again prayed, God so blinded them that
they could not recognise the object of their search.
The prophet then promised to lead them to where
they might see him with the natural eye. Trust-
ing to his guidance they followed on till ther
reached the centre of Samaria, when, the optycal
illusion being removed, Elisha stands in’ his re
cognised fonm before them! Who can tell their
confusion and alarm at this moment # Tie king
is for putting them all to death; but, through tre
interposition of him whom they had just befoie
sought to destroy, they were honourably dismissed
to their own country (uc. 692). But a year had
scarcely elapsed from this time when Benbadad,
unmindful of Israel's kindness aud forbearance.
invests Samaria and reduces its inhabitants te
such a state of starvation that an ass’s head, a
proscribed animal by the Levitical law, was sold


gee Ge Bees od om Tose


ELISHA.


for fourscore pieces of silver, and the fourth part
of a cab—a quart or three pints—of dove’s dung
for five pieces of silver (Dove's Duno}. But
this was not all. Parents were found, if not
murdering, actually eating their deceased chil-
dren. These very calamities Moses had foretold
should come upon them if they forsook God
‘Deut. xxviii. 53-57). Still the king of Israel

lunges deeper and deeper into sin, for he orders
Bilisiea to be pnt to death, conceiving that it was
his prayer which brought*these sufferings upon
himself and nation. But God forewarns him of
his danger, and inspires him to predict to the
wicked king that by to-morrow ‘a measure of fine
flour should be sold for a shekel, and two mea-
sures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Sa-
maria.’ This assurance was not more comfortable
than tneredible; but when the lord on whose
hand the king leaned expressed his disbelief, he
was awfully rebuked by the assurance that he
should see but not enjoy the benefit. The next
night God caused the Syrians to hear the noise of
chariots and horses; and conceiving that Jehoram
had hired against them the kings of the Hittites
and the king of Egypt, they fled from before the
walls of Samaria—leaving their tents filled with
gold and provisions—in the utmost panic and
confusion. In this way did God, according to
the word of Elisha, miraculously deliver the inha-
bitants of Samaria from a deadly enemy without,
and from sore famine within, its walls: another
prediction moreover was accomplished; for the
distrustful lord was trampled to death by the
famished people in rushing through the gate of
the city to the fursaken tents of the Syrians
(2 Kings vii.).

We are next led, in the order of the history,
though not in that of time, to notice God's gra-
cious cae of the woman of Shunem. Having
followed the advice of her kind friend Elisha, she
resided in Philistia during the seven years’ famine
in Israel, On her return, however, she found
that her paternal estate had been seized by others.
She at once went to the hinz, who at the moment
of her approach was talking with Gehazi as to
Elisha having miraculously raised her son to life.
This was a very providential coincidence in
behalf of the Shunamite. The relation given by
Gehazi was now corruborated by the woman her-
self. The king was duly affected, and gave im-
mediate orders for the resturation of her land and
all that it had yielded during her absence. We
next find the prophet in Damascus, but are
not told what led him thither (u.c. 885). Ben-
hadad, the king, whose counsels he had so often
frustrated, rejuiced to hear of his presence; and
now, a3 if he had forgotten the attempt he once
made upon his life, dispatches a noble messen-
ger with a costly present, to consult him con-
cerning his sickness and recovery. The prophet
replied that he should then die, though his indis-
position was not of a deadly character. Seeing
moreover, in prophetic vision, that the man
Hazael, who now stood before him, should be
king in Benhadad’s stead ; and that, as such, he
would commit unheard-of cruelties upon his

country, the prophet wus moved to tears. How
these painful anticipations of Elisha were realized
the subsequent history of this man proved. Some
twenty-three years had now elapsed since Elijah


had prophesied the destruction of Ahab’s guilty


ELKANAH.


625
consort and family. But God's declared jud,
ments are sure though delayed. Not only ‘Ahab
and Jezebel had been bloody and idolatrous, but
Israel had become partakers in their crimes, and
must share in the judgment. Elijah’s complaint
in the cave now received this late answer: ‘Ha-
zael shall plague Israel: Jehu shall plague the
house of Ahab and Jezebel. How fearfully
these declared purposes of God took eflect we ma
read in 2 Kings ix. and x. ;

For a considerable time after Elisha had sent
to anoint Jehu king over Israel we find no men-
tion of him in the sacred record. We have rea-
son to suppose that he was utterly neglected by
Jehu, Jehvahaz, and Joash, whoreigned in suc-
cession. Neither the sanctity of bis lite nor the
stupendous miracles he wrought had the effect of
reforming the nation at large: much of the time
of his latter years was, doubtless, spent in the
schools of the prophets. At length, wom out by
his public and private labours, and at the age of
90—during 60 of which he is supposed to have
prophesied—he is called into etenity. Nor was
the manner of his death inglorious; though he
did not enter into rest as did Elijah (2 Kings xiii.
14, &c.). Amongst his weeping attendants was
Joash, the king of Israel. He was probably
stung with remorse fur having a0 neglected to
acknowledge hi national worth; yet, though late,
God does not suffer this public recognition of
bis aged and faithful servant to go unrequited.
The spirit of prophecy again entering the dying
Elisha, he informs Joash that he should prevail
against the Syrians. Even after death God
would put honour upon Elijah: adead body hay-
ing touched his bones came to life again! (2 Kings
xiii. 21.)

Elisha was not less eminent than his predeces-
sor Elijah. His miracles are various and stu-
pendous, and, like those which were wrought by
Christ, were on the whole of a merciful character.
In this they were remarkably distinguished, in
many instances, from the miracles of Elijah.—

. J.W. D.

ELISHAH (TY*5§ ; Sept. "Eaiod), a son of
Javan (Gen. x. 4), who seems to have given name
to ‘the isles of Elishah,’ which are descrived as
exporting fabrics of purple and scarlet to the mar-
kets of Tyre (Ezek. xxvii. 7). If the descendants
of Javan peopled Greece, we may expect to tind
Elishah in sume province of that country. The
circumstance of the puyple suits the Peloponnesus ;
for the fish affording the purple dye was caught
at the mouth of the Eurotas, and the purple of
Laconia was very celebrated. The name scems
kindred to Elis, which, in a wider sense, was ap-
plied to the whole Peloponnesus; and some iden-
tify Elishah with Hellas. The uncertainty of all
this speculation is most apparent: but it may
be added that, if probable thus far, it is equally

robable that the general name of ‘the isles of

lishah’ may alsu have been extended to the
islands of the AEyean sea; a part of which may
seem to have derived the name of Hellespont,
sea of Hellas, from the same source.

ELISHEBA way, covenant-God ; Sept.
*EAtoaBed), wife of Aaron, and hence the mother
of the priestly family (Exod. vi. 23).

ELKANAH (3) /%, God the Jealous ; Sept.


‘EAxavd). Several persons of this ar are men-
ry


“


626 ELKOSH. , y


tioned in Scripture, as a son of Korah (Exod. vi.
24; 1 Chron. vi. 23); the father of Samuel (1
Sam. i. 1, seq.; ii. 11-20; 1 Chron. vi. 27);
a friend of King Ahab (2 Chron. xxviii. 7); one
of David's heroes (1 Chron. xii. 6); Levites
(1 Chron. vi. 23, 25, 26, 27; xv. 23).
ELKOSH. The prophet Nahum is called an
Elkoshite Cwnde), that is, a native of some
place called Elkusii (Nahum i. 1). There was a
village of this name in Galilee in the time of
Jerome; but the prophet was more probably born
of Jewish exiles at Elkosh or Alkush in Assyria,
near Mosul. The Jews themselves believe that
he was born and buried there; and Jewish pil-
gtims from all parts still visit his alleged tomb.
On this Mr. Rich remarks, ‘The Jews are gene-
rally to be trusted for local antiquities. Their
ilgrimage to a spot is almost a suflicient test.
he unbruken line of tradition which may have
been handed down amouy them, and their perti-
nacions resistance of all innovation, especially in
matters of religions belief, render their testimony
very weighty in such matters’ (Itesidence in Koor-
distan, p. 111). Alkosh is thirty-four miles north
of Mosul (Nineveh), and is situated a little way
up the side of a mountain, in the range to which
it gives its name. It is entirely inhabited by
Chaldee Christians, who have a convent higher
up the mountains. ‘


ELLASAR (7098; Sept. ‘EAAaadp), a territory
in Asia, whose king, Arioch, was one of the four
who invaded Canaan in the time of Abraham
(Gen. xiv. 1). The association of this king with
those of Elam and Shinar, indicates the region in
which the kingdom should be sought ; but nothing
further is known of it, unless it be the same as
Thelassar mentioned in 2 Kings xix. 12 [Tux-
LASBAR }.

ELM. The Authorized Version has this word
in Hosea iv. 13. But the original word there is


TON, which is differently translated in every
other place [Arnaz].
ELOHIM. [Gop.]}


ELON (HON; Sept. Aladu, "EAdu), of the
‘tribe of Zebulon, who jadged Israel ten years.
He was preceded by Ibzan of Bethlehem, and suc-
ceeded by Abdon of Ephraim. The whole period
covered by their administration was twenty-five
= (from _.c. 1190 to 1174); but it is pro-
ble that they were for a part of this time con-
temporary, each exercising authority over a few
of the tribes. They appear to have overawed the
enemies of Israel by their judicious administra-
tion ; for no war is mentioned in their time (Judg.
xii. 8-15). .

ELUL (5308, Neh. vi. 15; Sept. "Enota;
the Macedonian Topmatos) is the name of that
month which was the sixth of the ecclesiastical, and
twelfth of the civil, year of the Jews, and which
began with the new moon of our September.
Several unsatisfactory attempts have been made to
find a Syro-Arabian etymology for the word.
The most recent derivation, that of Benfey, de-
duces it, through many commutations-and muti-
latious, from an original Zend form Aaurvatét
(Monatsnamen, p. 126). According to the Me-
gillat Taanith, the 17th day of this month was a
public fast for the death of the spies who bronght


ENCAMPMENTS.


back a bad report of the land (Num. xiv,

37).—J. N. i
ELYMAS (‘EaAdyas), an appellative com

mogly derived from the Arabic Aliman (4


wise man), which Luke interprets by 5 pds:
it is applied to a Jew named Bar-Jesua, mentioned
in Acts xiii. 6-11 (v. Neander’s Hist. of frst
planting of the Christian Church, i. p. 125, Eng.
transl.). A very different but less probable de
rivation of the word is given by Dr. Lightfoot in
his Hebrew and Talmudical Exercitations on the
Acts (Works, viii. p. 461), and in his Sermon
on Elymas the Sorcerer (Works, vii. p. 104).
Chrysostom observes, in reference to the blindnea
inflicted by the Apostle on Bar-Jesus, that the
limiting clause ‘ for a season,’ shows that it was
not intended so much for the punishment of the
sorcerer as for the conversion of the deputy. Ef
yap Kord(ovros Hy, Sianayrds ay aitty exoince
Tuphsy, viv BE ov Toirro, AAAd mpds Kaupdy, va
Tov avOumarov Kepddvp. Chrysost. in Acta Apost.
Homil. xxviii.; Opera, tom. ix. p. 241.—J. ER.

EMBALMING. feat

EMERALD. [Noprcs.]

EMERODS, a painful disease with which the
Philistines were afllicted (1 Sam. v. 6) [Tecuo-
Rim].

EMIM (DO'S; Sept., Ouuly), a numerous
and gigantic race of people who, in the time of
Abraham, occupied the country beyond the Jor-
dan, afterwards possessed by the Moabites (Gen.
xiv. 5; Deut. ii. 10).

EMMAUS (Expands, hot baths), a village 60
stadia, or 74 miles, from Jerusalem, noted for our
Lord’s interview with two disciples on the day of
his resurrection (Luke xxiv. 13). The same
place is mentioned by Josephus (De Bell. Jud.
vii. 6, 6), and placed at the same distance from
Jerusalem, in stating that Vespasian left 800
soldiers in Judza, to whom he gave the village of
Emmaus. The site is not vow known; tor Dr.
Robinson has shown that El Kubeibeh, which is
usually indicated, is too distant from Jerusalem ;
and that the position of Emmaus, and all correct
tradition respecting it, were lost before the time of
Eusebius and Jerome; since these writers make
it identical with the city of Emmans, or Nicopolis,
which lies not far from 160 stadia from Jerusalem.
He adds :—* There never was the slightest ground
for connecting El-Kubeibeh in any way with
Emmaus; nor is there any trace of its bavings
heen sv connected befure the fourteenth century’
(Bib. Researches, iti. 65, 66). The other Fm-
maus, also called Nicopolis, just mentioned, is
identitied with Lusiun, abont midway between
Jerusalem and Ramleh. There was another Em-
mausg, near Tiberias, on the lake of the same name,
where the hot baths which gave name to it are
still frequented, and have a temperature of 130
Fahrenheit. Here the name Emmaus is merely
preserved in that of Hammam, which the Arabs
give to hot-baths, whether natural or artificial.
Neither of these places is named in Scripture.

EN, properly Arn, a word signifying ‘ foun-
tain;’ and hence entering into the compusition
of sundry local names, which are explained
under Arn,

ENCAMPMENTS. Of the Jewish system
of encampment the Mosaic books have left a de-


ENCAMPMENTS.


EN-EGLAIM.


EAST.—FIRST DIVISION—CAMP OF JUDAH: 186,400.


IS8ACHAR
54,400.


MOSES,


NAPHTALI.
53,400.


MERARITES,
3200.

COURT OF THE

TABERNACLE,


“00r'Se
“NINVENES


g
3
3
%
A
}
7]
=
<
3

|
z
6
Ln)
wn
=
A
:
5
&

|
:
9
Zz


JUDAH,
74,600.


AND


AND THE PRIESTS.


069°
‘Sa.LINOHS&E9


anv


0¢‘0r
"NIVUHAL


ZEBULUN,
57,400.


AARON,


“0086¢
NOTRUS


°0S23
‘$.LIHLVHOX
00S‘9P
‘Nagnay


“W2'tE
HaSSVNYR


“OSP‘IST :NRaNWa 40 dWVO—NOISIAIC GNOOZS—HINOS


‘001.801 ‘AIVUHAA JO dNVO—NOISIAIC CUIHL— SAM


tailed deseription. From the period of the sojourn
in the wilderness to the crossing of the Jordan
the twelve tribes were formed into four great
armies, encamping in as many fronts, or forming
& square, with a great space in the rear, where
the tabernacle of the Lord was placed, sur-
rounded by the tribe of Levi and the bodies of
carriers, &c., by the stalls of the cattle and the
baggage: the four fronts faced the cardinal points
while the march was eastward, but as Judah con-
tinued to lead the van, it follows that when the
Jordan was to be crossed the direction became
westward, and therefore the general arrangement,
,80 far as the cardinal points were concerned,
Was reversed.* It dues not appear that, during
this time, Israel ever had lines of defence thrown
up; but in after ages, when only single armies
came into the field, it is probable that the castral
disposition was not invariably quadrangular ;
and, from the many positions indicated on the
crests of steep mountains, the fronts were clearly
adapted to the grouna and to the space which
it was necessary to occupy. The rear of such
sedge or the square camps in the plain, appear
fom the marginal reading of 1 Sam. xvii. 20,
and xxvi. 5 to have been enclosed with a line of
SU Se RE eee Ee Oe


* If the leading tribes did not thus tum with


the direction of the march, Judah and his two
bai must have formed the rear in crossing the


t


carts or chariots, which, from the remotest period,
was a practice among all the nomade nations of
the north. ‘The books of Moses are so explicit on
the subject of encampment, and the march of the
Israelites, that we deem a distinct plan of the
numbers and position of the twelve tribes, of the
various corps of Levites, &c., with the tents of
Moses and Aaron ranged about the tabernacle,
and other particulars, sufficient to give a very
clear idea of the whole, and to supersede
necessity of further description —C. H. S.

ENCHANTMENTS. [Drvrnarion.]

ENDOR (7 }'Y, Aouse-fountain ; Sept.
*Aevddp), a town of Galilee, assigned to Manasseh,
although lying beyond the limits of that tribe
(Josh. xvii. 11). It is mentioned in connection with
the victory of Deborah: and Barak (Ps. lxxxiii.
10); but is chiefly memorable as the abode of
the sorceress whom Saul consulted on the eve of
the battle in which he perished (1 Sam. xxviii. 7,

The name is not found in the New Testa-

ment; but in the time of Eusebius and Jerome
the'place still existed as a large village, four miles
auth of Mount Tabor. At this distance, on the
northern slope of the lower ridge of Hermon, a
village with this name still exists.


EN-EGLAIM (D2) PY, calves’ fountain s
Sept. "EvaryaAAc(x), a town of Moab (Ezek. xbii.
10), which Jerome places at the northern end of
the Dead Sea, at the influx lade

8


one ~


oR EN-GANNIM.


EN-GANNIM (89) }'Y, gardens’ fountain ;
t.“H»Tovin). 1. A town of Judah (Josh. xv.
84), which Jerome places near Beth-el. 2. A Le-
vitical city in Issachar (Josh. xix. 21; xxi. 29),
ly the same as the Ginaen of Josephus
(Antig. xx. 6, 1), and which Biddulph (in
Purchas, vol. ii. p. 135) identifies with the present
Jenin, a town 15 miles south of Mount Tabor,
and which he and others describe as still a place
of gardens and abundant water. He adds that
in his whole journey from Damascus to Jerusa-
lem, he nowhere saw so much fruitful ground
together, as in riding between this place and
Mount Tabor, 3. Jerome mentions another place,
called En-gannim, beyond the Jordan, near Ge-
raza; and the name seems, indeed, to have been
very common for places where water, and conse-
quently gardens, abounded.


EN-GEDI ("}29)Y, Aids' fountain ; Sept. "Ex
yed8f), a city of Judah, which gave its name to
a part of the desert to which David withdrew for
fear of Saul (Josh. xv. 62; 1 Sam. xxiv. 1-4). Its
more ancient Hebrew name was Hazezon-tamar ;
and by that name it is mentioned before the de-
struction of Sodom, as being inhabited by the
Amorites, and near the cities of the plain (Gen.
xiv. 7). In 2 Chron. xx. I, 2, bands of the Mo-
abites and Ammonites are desgribed as coming up
against king Jehoshaphat, apparently round the
south end of the Dead Sea, as far as En-gedi.
And this, as we learn frum Dr. Robinson, is the
route taken by the Arabs in their marauding ex-
peditions at the present day. According to Jo-
sephus, En-gedi lay upon the lake Asphaltites, and
was celebrated for its beautiful palm-trees and
opobalsum (Antig. ix. 1, 2); while its vineyards
are also mentioned in Sol. Song, i. 14. In the
time of Eusebius and Jerome, En-gedi was still a
large village on the shore of the Dead Sea. En-
gedi has always, until recently, been sought at
the north end of the Dead Sea. But Seetzen re-
cognised the ancient name in the Ainjidy of the
Arabs, and lays it down in his map at a point of
the western shore, nearly equidistant from both
extremities of the lake. This spot was visited by
Dr. Robinson, and he confirms the identification.
The site lies among the mountains which here
confine the lake, a considerable way down the de-
scent to its shore. Here is the beautiful fountain
of Ain-jidy, bursting forth at once in a fine stream
upon a sort of narrow terrace or shelf of the moun-
tain, above 400 feet above the level of the lake.
The stream rushes down the steep descent of the
mountain below ; and its course is hidden by aluxu-
riant thicket of trees and shrubs belonging to a
more southern clime. Near this fountain are the
remains of several buildings, apparently ancient ;
although the main site of the town seems to have
been farther below. The whole of the descent
below appears to have been once terraced for til-
lage and gardens ; and near the foot are the ruins
of a town, exhibiting nothing of particular in-
terest, and built mostly of unhewn stones. This
we may conclude to have been the town which
fook. its name from the fountain (Rodinson, ii.
209-216 ;

Tus Witpgerngss oy En-aepr is doubtless
the immediately neighbouring part of the wild
region, west of the Dead Sea, which must be tra-
versed to reach its shores, It was here that David


ENGINES OF WAR.


and his men lived among the ‘rocks of the wild
goats,’ and where the former cut off the skirts of
Saul's robe in a cave (1 Sam. xxi. 1-4). ‘On
all sides,’ says Dr. Robinson, ‘ the country is full
of caverns, which might then serve as lurking-

laces for David and his men, as they do for out-
laws at the present day.’ He adds that as he
came in sight of the ravine of the Ghar, a moun-
tain-goat started up and bounded along the face
of the rocks on the opposite side.


ENGINES OF WAR were certainly known
much earlier than the Greek writers appear to
admit, since figures of them occur in Lerptian
monuments, where two kinds of the testudo, or
pent-house, used as shelters fur the besiegen,
are represented, and a colossal lance, worked
by men who, under the cover of a testuds,
drive the point between the stones of a city
wall. The chief projectiles were the catapults
for throwing darts, and the balista for throwing
stones. Both these kinds of instruments were
prepared by Uzziah for the defence of Jerusalem
(2 Chron. xxvi. 15), and battering the wall is
mentioned in the reignof King David (2 Sam.
xx. 15); but the instrument itself for throwing it
down may have been that above-noticed, and not
the battering-ram. The ram was, however, a
simple machine, and capable of demolishing the
strongest walls, provided access to the foot was
practicable; for the mass of cast metal which
formed the head could be fixed to a beam
lengthened sufficiently to require between one and
two hundred men to lift and impel it; * and when
it was ctill heavier and hung in the lower floor
of a movable tower, or helipolis, it became a most
formidable engine of war—one used in all great


a= ‘
990, (Battering Ram.)


sieges from the time of Demetrius, about 8.c.
306, till long after the invention of gunpowder.
Towers of this kind were largely used at the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans. Of -
the balist and catapultw it may be proper to add
that they were of various powers. For battering
walls there were some that threw stones of fifty,
others of one hundred, and some of three bund
weight ; in the field of battle they were of much
inferior strength. Darts varied similarly from
small beams to large arrows, and the range
they had exceeded a quarter of a mile, or about
450 yards. All these engines were constructed
upon the principle of the sling, the bow, or the
spring, the last being an elastic bar, bent back by
ee a aa See oe tee Rg bse ee ee


* The Algerines, about two centuries ago, took
the lower mast of one of their frigates and tm
pelled it by forcing 400 slaves to use their Pet
sonal strength in the work.


. ENOCH.
ascrew or a cable of sinews, with a trigger to set


ENOCH, BOOK OF. 62
4, Its author, and the time when it was writ-


itfree, and contrived either to impel darts by its ten.


281. (Balista.]


stroke, or to throw stones from a kind of spoon
formed towards the summit of the ae:


ENGRAVING. [Seats, Waitina.]


ENOCH (73M; Sept. and New Test. "Evdx).
Four bearing this name are mentioned in
the Old Testament, the most distinguished of
whom was the son of Jared and father of Methu-
velah. According to the Old Testament, he
walked with God ; and, after 365 years, he was
not, for God took him (Gen. v.24). The inspired
writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews says, ‘ By
faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death, and was not found, because God had trans-
lated him’ tee 5.). Walking with God implies
the closest fellowship with Jehovah which it is
possible for a human being to enjoy on earth. As
a reward, therefore, of his extraordinary sanctity, he
was into heaven without the experience
of death. Elijah was in like manner translated ;
and thus was the doctrine of immortality palpably
taught under the ancient dispensation. The
traditions of the Jews have ascribed to Enoch
many fabulous qualities. They have invested
him with various attributes aud ‘excellencies for
which the Bible furnishes no foundation. Accord-
ingly, he is represented as the inventor of letters,
arithmetic, and astronomy ; as the first author,.
from whom several books emanated. "Visions and

‘es were commonly ascribed to him, which

€ 18 said to have arranged in a book. This book
was delivered to his son, and preserved by Noah
in the ark. After the flood it was made known to
the world, and handed down from one generation


to another. Hence the Arabians call him us z)


roti i.e. the learned (Koran, Sur. xix). See
Juchasin, f. 134; Eusebius, Prepar. Evang. ix.

7, and Hist. Kecles. vii. 32; Barhebr. Chron.
p-5.—S. D.

ENOCH, BOOK OF. The interest that once
attached to the apocryphal book of Enoch has now
Partly subsided. Yet a document quoted, as is
weeny believed, by an inspired apostle, can
: mpd be wholly devoid of importance or utility
rhe esis literature. We shall allude to the fol-

oe particulars relating to it :—

. a history of the book of Enoch.

= Ths language in which it was written,
- Its form and coherence,


5. The place where it was written.

6. Did Jude really quote it?

7. Its use.

In several of the fathers mention is made of
Enoch as the author, not only of a prophetic
writing, but of various productions. The book of
Enoch is alluded to by Justin nee Trenzeus,
Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, Origen, Au-
gustine, Jerome, Hilary, and Eusebius. It is also
quoted on various occasions in the Testament 9
the Twelve Patriarchs, a document which Ni
has shown to belong to the latter part of the first
century or the beginning of the second. The
passages in these ancient writings relating to our

it purpose have been carefully collected b;

‘abricius, in his Codex Pseud-epigraphus (vol. 1.
pp. 160-224); to which, and to the first Excursus
of Hoffmann, we refer our readers. In the eighth
century Georgius Syncellus, in a work entitled
Chronographia, that reaches from Adam to Dio-
cletian, made various extracts from ‘the first
book of Enoch.’ In the ninth century Nicepho-
rus, patriarch of Constantinople, at the conclusion
of Lis Chronographie Compendium, in his list of
canonical and uncanonical books, refers to the
book of Enoch, and assigns 4800 orfyor as the
extent of it. After this time little or no mention
appears to have been made of the production
until Scaliger printed the fragments of Syncellus
regarding it, which he inserted in his notes to the
Chronicus Canon of Eusebius. In consequence
of such extracts the book of Enoch excited much
attention and awakened great curiosity. At the
beginning of the seventeenth century an idea
vailed that it existed in an Ethiopic translation.
A Capuchin monk from Egypt assured Peiresc
that he had seen the book in Ethiopic, a circum-
stance which excited the ardour of the scholar of
Pisa so much, that he never rested until he ob-
tained the tract. But when Job Ludolph went
afterwards to Paris to the Royal Library, he found
it to be a fabulous and silly froduction. In conse-
quence of this disappointment the idea of recover-
ing it in Ethiopic was abandoned. At length
Bruce brought home three copies of the book of
Enoch from Abyssinia. ‘Amongst the articles,”
he states, ‘1 consigned to the library at Paris, was a
very beautiful and magnificent copy of the prophe-
cies of Enoch in large quarto. Another is amongst
the books of Scripture which I brought home, stand-
ing immediately before the book of Job, which is
its proper place in the Abyssinian Canon; and a
third copy I have ted to the Bodleian Li-
brary at Oxford by the hands of Dr. Douglas,
bisbop of Carlisle.’ As soon as it was known in
England that such a present had been made to
the Royal Library at Paris, Dr. Woide, libra-
rian of the British Museum, set ont for France
with letters from the secretary of state to the am-
bassador at that court, desiring him to assist the
learned bearer in procuring access to the work.
Dr. Woide accordingly transcribed it, and brought
back with him the copy to England. The Pari-
sian MS. was first publicly noticed by the emi-
nent Orientalist De Sacy, who teanslated into
Latin ch. i. ii. iii. iv.-xvi., also xxii. and xxxi.
These he also published in the Magasin Encyclo-
pédique, an vi. tom. i. p. 382 et seq. Mr. Murray,
editor of Bruce's Travels, gave some account of


630 ENOCH, BOOK OF.


the book from the traveller's own MS. The Bod-
Teian MS. was translated into English by Dr.
Laurence, then Professor of Hebrew in Oxford ;
and thus the public were favoured, for the first
time, with the whole book in English, a.p. 1821.
In 1833 a second, improved edition of the trans-
lation appeared ; and, in 1838, the third edition,
revised and enlarged. To the translation is pre-
fixed a preliminary dissertation of 59 pages,
giving some account of the book, its author, the
time and place of its composition, Kc. &c. It has
also been translated into German by Dr. Hoffmann
of Jena. According to Angelo Mai there is a
_MS. copy of the book of Enoch among the Ethi-
opic codices of the Vatican, which must have
been brought into Europe earlier than Bruce's
MSS. In 1834 Dr. Riippell procured another
MS, of Enoch from Abyssinia, from which Hoft-
mann made the second part of his German version,

There can be no doubt that the Ethiopic trans-
lation exhibits the identical book, which, as most
believe, Jude quoted, and which is also men-
tioned or cited by many of the fathers. The
fragment preserved by Syncellus (reprinted by
Laurence aud Hoffmann} is obviously the same as
ch. vii, &c., the deviations being of little import-
ance and probably accidental. It is manifest
also, to any one who will compare the quotations
made by the fathers with the aniveuie Version,
that both point to the same original. The ex-
tracts in question could not have been interpola-
tions, as they are essential to the connections in
which they are found.

The bovk was never received into the series
of canonical writings. The Apostolical Consti-
tutions expressly style it apocryphal (vi. 16),
while Origen (contra Celsum) aflirms that it
was not reckoned divine by the churches; al-
though in another place he hints that some of his
contemporaries were of a different opinion. In
the Synopsis of Scripture published with the
works of Athanasius, as well as in the writings of
Jerome and Augustine, its non-canonicity is dis-

“dinctly stated. The only ancient writer who
zeckoned it of divine authority was ‘Tertullian,
who undertakes to defend it against the objections
by which it was then assailed (see his treatise De
Cultu Faminarwn). Wis arguments, however,
are exceedingly puerile.

The Greek translation, in which it was known
to the fathers, appears to Le irrecoverably lost.
There is notrace of it after the eighth century,
The last remnant of it is preserved by Syncellus.

The leading object of the writer, who was mani-
festly imbued with deep piety, was to comfort and
strengthen his contemporaries. He lived in times
of distress and persecution, when the enemies of
teligion oppressed the righteous. The outward cir-
cumstances of the godly were such as to excite
doubts of the divine equity in their minds, or at
least to prevent it from having that hold on their
faith which was necessary to sustain them in the
hour of trial. In accordance with this, the writer
exhibits the reward of the righteous and the punish-
ment of the wicked. To give greater authority to
his affirmations, he puts them into the mouth of
Enoch, Thus they have all the weight belonging
to the character of an eminent prophet and saint.
Various digressions are not withuut their bearing
on the author's main purpose. ‘The narrative of the
fallen angels and their punishment, as also of the


ENOCH, BOOK OF. 7


flood, exemplifies the retributive justice of Jebo
vah; while the Jewish history, continued down to
the Maccabees, exhibits the tinal triumph of His

ple, notwithstanding all their vicissitudes.
Dowlitiesa the author lived amid fiery trial ; and,
looking abroad over the desolation, sought to cheer
the suflerers by the consideration that they should
be recompensed in another life. As for their
wicked oppressors, they were to experience terrible
judgments. The writer seems to delight in utter-
ing dire anathemas against the wicked. It is
plain that the book grew out of the time when the
author lived, and the circumstances by which he
was surrounded. It gives us a glimpse not only
of the religious c-vinions, but also of the general
features that characterized the period.

2. The language in which it was written.—
Several circumstances render it apparent that the
book before us was originally composed in the
Hebrew or Chaldee language. This was long
since perceived by Josep: Scaliger, although he
had before him nothing more than the Greek frag-
ment preserved by Syncellus, The book of Zohar,
in which are various allusions to Enoch, seems to
speak of it as an important Hebrew production
which had been handed down from generation to
generation. The Cabbalists, whose opinions are
embodied in Zohar, thought that Enoch was really
the author, a sentiment quite at variance with any
other hypothesis than that of a Hebrew original.
The names of the angels (ch. vii. viii. and ix.)
also point toa Hebrew origin, and can be most
easily derived from Hebrew roots. Thus Tamiel


(viii. 7) is compounded of OM and by, the up-


right of God ; Samyaza of DU and NYY, the name
of the strong. The same conclusion follows from
the term Ophania (Ix. 13), which is evidently
identical with the Hebrew }'JBN. It is remark-
able also, that as Ophanin occurs in connection
with the Cherubim, so the Hebrew term PION is
found in the same association (1 Kings vii. 30;
Ezek. i. 15, 16, 19, 20, 215 and x. 2, 6, 9, 10,
&e.; Murray's Enoch Mestitutus, p. 33, 6q.).
Other particulars corroborate the same inference.
Thus in ch. Ixxvi. ], it is written, * The first wind
is called the eastern, because it is the first.’ The
Jirst and the east have an aflinity in the Hebrew,
which explains the puraseology, since DI, as
well as its derivatives, signifies both the east and
the first. But neither in the Ethiopic nor in the
Greek is there such affinity. in the same man-
ner may the next sentence be explained. ‘ The
second wind is called the south, because the Most
High there descends." What is said respecting
the teestern wind, may be employed in cuntimma-
tion of the same conclusion. It is highly pro-
Luble, too, that the names of the conductors of the
month (ch. 1xxxi. 23) are pure Hebrew (Murray,
p- 46; Hofimann, p. 690). Other presumptive
evidences in favour of a Hebrew original may be
collected by the attentive reader.

The Ethiopic version was made from the Greek,
not the Hebrew,

3. Its form and coherence.—In the MSS. the
whole is divided into chapters and verses, although
they vary in their specification of such compart-
ments, There are 105 chapters of unequal length,
and often injudiciously made; while there are 19
sections or larger divisions.

The want of coherence among its several parts


-ENOCH, BOOK OF.


is obvious. Detached portions are put together
without regard to their mutual connection. The
work seems in fact to be made up of several
pieces, which, having been separately composed,
were afterwards thrown together without care.
Various chapters occupy an unsuitable position in
the MSS. Hence Laurence has been obliged in
one case to rectify what he justly conceived to be
exroneous by transferring to their proper place the
verses badly located according to the Bodleian
Ms. .
Laurence remarks, that ‘the book may have
been composed at different periods; perhaps it
might be also added, that there may have been
different tracts, as well as tracts composed by dif-
ferent authors.’ This idea has been taken up by
Murray, and expanded in a treatise of consider-
able research and great ingenuity. Proceeding
upon the hypothesis that the book consists of
various tracts on different subjects, he endeavours
to disentangle them from one another, and to class
them under their appropriate heads. In the pro-
secution of an extended inquiry he endeavours to
show, that the different parts of the present work
possess unequal authority, and belong to very dif-
ferent tines. He has therefore selected what he
conceives to be the ancient book quoted by Jude,
and attributes its origin to Enoch himself. The
later additions now incorporated with it belong to
other writings, and have been mingled together.
The ingenious author has been guided by the con-
nection of one part with another, and the similarity
or dissimilarity of subject. The ancient book,
as it is denominated by him, to which he princi-
pally confines his attention, is said to consist of
the following parts: chapters i. and ii.; xlv. 2-5;
xlvii. 1-45) xviii. 25 1535 lvi. 2-55 lx. 73 Dxi.
18; Ixviii. 34-41. The other parts he has se
lected and arranged under the heads ofa prophecy,
consisting of the xcii. chapter ; second book, imi-
tated from that which he has endeavoured to re-
store ; two books of the angels or tcatchers ; two
books concerning secret things, called visions of
wisdom ; the vision of Noah and history ; vision
of Noah ; and the book of astronomy. Such is
the mode in which the whole document before us
is separated and arranged. Yet there is much
Teason to doubt its correctness and success. If
the looseness with which the parts frequently
hang together, and the transition from one sort
of writing to another, as from the historic to
the prophetic, be reckoned a good ground for dis
memberment, the book of Daniel presents simi-
lar features. It carinot indeed be denied that
several chapters, such ag xxxvii. sq., Ixiv. sq.,
[xxi. sq., xcii. xciii. aq., cv., do not coincide with
the preceding or subsequent portions, or with
the manifest object of the writer. Some parts
again are very unsuitable, and altogether foreign
to their present position. Yet it appears to us
much more probable, that a number of tracts
embodying different traditions were put together
about the same period, and by one person. Much
may be done by transposition to restore a measure
of unity, although a disunited character will still
long to the whole. Perhaps some parts have
lost, as may be inferred from sli casos to
Enoch in early writings, The various transla-
tions through which it has passed, and the tran-
scribers by whom it has heen copied, have doubtless
contributed to its dislocation.


ENOCH, BOOK OF. 631


The mention of books of Enoch in the Testa-
ment of Judah, in the Testament of Benjamin, in
Origen (c. Cels. and Homil. in Num.), and of
the first book of Enoch in the fragment preserved
by Syncellus, is quite consistent with the idca
that the whole was then divided into different
books. Tertullian leads us to believe that it was
of the same extent in the Greek text then existing,
as it is in the present Ethiopic. Our limits for-
bid further examination of this topic. We must
refer such as are desirous of prosecuting it to
Murray's elaborate treatise, and to Hotfmann's
second Excursus where Enoch Restitutus is re-
viewed. -

4. Its author, and the time when it was writ-
ten.—The two questions respecting the age and
authorship of the book of Enoch are so intimately
connected that they must be treated together.
The opinions entertained in relation to the one
necessarily atiect our ideas of the other. Ac- .
cordingly, the same passages have been made to
bear more or Jess directly on both. If the writer
was a Christian Jew, as Liicke and Stuart are
inclined to believe, it will then behove us to bring
down the period of composition to the first century
of the Christian era; but if he was a Jew, there
is no need to bend passages into compliance with
the former hypothesis. Rather will the advocates
ofa purely Jewish authorship be disposed to refer
it back with Laurence to the reign of Herod, or
still earlier, with Hoffmann. It will not be
denied. by any reader, that the ideas, imagery, and
general complexion of the book, are essentially
Jewish. There is so mnch imitation of Daniel—-
such an exhibition of Jewish conceptions mixed
with superstition, and occasionally with cabba-
listic theology or oriental theosophy, that the
hand of a Jew cannot be mistaken. But the
question is, are there sufficient indications in the
work itself to warrant the conclusion that the
writer was acquainted with the New Testament;
that he derived various passages from the Apoca-
lypse in particular; and that, therefore, he was
probably a Jewish Christian. There is no good
ground tor supposing that the passages relating to
the Messiah were interpolated by Christians ; for,
as Hofimann well remarks, they constitute es-
sential parts of the whole, being intimately inter-
woven with the pieces to which they belong.
There is therefore no alternative between the two
hypotheses,

There are some data for determining the time
when this production first appeared. If Jude
quoted it, it must have existed in the first cen-
tury ; and asthe writer imitates the language and
imagery of Daniel, it must have been written
after the composition of that inspired book. Here
are two termini, within which we are to look.
Chapters Ixxxiv.—xc.; liv., lv., and xcii. contain.
chronological marks of a somewhat definite cha-
racter. In the first of these passages is found an
allegorical representation, exhibiting the principal
events in Jewish history, from Adam down to
seventy kings who ruled over the Israelites. These
are divided into three classes. 1. Thirty-seven
shepherds (ch. Ixxxix. 1). 2. Twenty-three ae
herds (ch. Ixxxix. 7). 3. Twelve shepherds (ch.
Ixxxix. 25). The first class consists of the kings
of Judah and Israel, twenty of the former, and
seventeen of the latter. Dr. Laurence thinks that
for thirty-seven we should read thirty-five, because


682 ENOCH, BOOK OF.


the sum of the shepherds is said to be seventy, not
seventy-two; yet we may rather suppose with
Liicke, Hoffmann, and Stuart, that seventy is a
round, prophetic number. The writer did not
ccnfine himself to minute exactness. Believing
therefore that thirty-seven is a correct exhibition
of the writers opinion, Zimri, Shallum, and
Tibni are omitted, in consequence of their very
short reign. The next twenty-three shepherds
were foreigners, who ruled over the Israelites
during and afler the Babylonish captivity.
Their names are, 1. Nebuchadnezzar. 2. Evil-
merodach, 3. Neriglissar. 4. Belshazzar. 5. Da-
rius the Mede. 6. Cyrus. 7. Cambyses. 8.
Smerdis. 9. Darius Hystaspis. 10. Xerxes,
11, Artaxerxes Longimanus, 12. Xerxes II.
13. Sogdianus. 14. Ochus (Darius Nothus). 15.
Artaxerxes Mnemon. 16. Darius Ochus. 17.
Arses. 18. Darius Codomanuus. 19, Alexander
the Great. 20. Antigonus. 21. Ptolemy Lagi.
22. Ptolemy Philadelphus. 23. Ptolemy Euer-
getes. The third class consists of twelve rulers,
who, according to Laurence, were native princes.
reckoning them he begins with Mattathias
father of Judas Maccabeeus, and ends with Herod.
Now Herod reigned thirty-four years; and, as
the author stope with him, Laurence infers that
the book was written during the reign of Herod.
Laurence makes the twelve princes to be Matta-
thias, Judas Maccabeus, Jonathan, Simon, Jobn
Hyrcanus, Aristobulua, Alexander Jannzus,
Alexandra his widow, Aristobulus, Hyrcanus,
Antigonus, and Herod. But there is good ground
for questioning this reckoning. It has been per-
tinently remarked by Stuart, that none of the
Asmonzan family were properly kings until
Simon. According to this view, the twelve
pres are, Simon, John Hyrcanus, <Aristo-
ulus I. Alexander Jannxus, Alexandra his
widow, Aristubulus II., Alexander, Hyrcanus,
Antigonus, and Herod, Archelaus and Agrippa.
Such is the computation of Professor Stuart,
more probable, as it appean to us, than that
of Laurence, but still liable to doubt and se-
rious objection. Alexander was never king of
Judea. Besides, in the book of Enoch it is stated,
in relation to the twelve, that they ‘destroyed
more than those who preceded them; an asser-
tion manifestly inconsistent with fact. The tirst
three princes, at least, were just and mild in their
administration, and several of their successors
cannot be equitably characterized as tyrants who
shed the blood of the people. Of Herod alone is
the statement cinhutienly true. To this it has
been replied, that the writer gives the general cha-
racter of the whole. Yet the expression ‘they
destroyed more tlian those who preceded them, is
not the general character of the whole, but only
of one in particular. Hence we are inclined to
accede to the opinion of Hoffmann, who refers
the twelve princes to foreign, not native, rulers.
In that case we must look for these twelve princes
in the period of the Jews’ oppressors, under the
dynasties that arose after the Jeath of Alexander
the Great. Their names, according to Holf-
mann, are Ptolemy Philopator, Ptolemy Phila-
delphue, Seleucus III. Philopatur, Antiochus 1V.,
Epiphanes, Antiochus V,, Eupator, Demetrius
Soter son of Seleucus, Alexander Balas son of
Antiochus, Demetrius Nicator, Ptolemy Philo-
metor, Demetrius Nicator II., Antiochus Theos,


ENOCH, BOOK OF.


and Tryphon. If this view be correct, we are net
bound to conclude from the passage that the
book of Enoch, or the historic portion of it, was
written during the reign of Herod the Great.

Another passage on which Laurence rests in de-
termining the time when the book was written, is
chapter liv. 9, 10, where ‘the chiefs of the east
among the Parthians and Medes’ are represented
as about to remove kings, as hurling them from
their thrones, ‘springing as lions from their dens,
and like famished wolves into the midst of the
flock. They shall go up and tread upon the land
of their elect. The land of their elect shall be
before them,’ &c., &c. In the year p.c. 41 the
Parthians invaded Syria and took possession of
the country. In the year n.c. 40 they entered
Jerusalem, drove Herod out of the country, and
raised Antigonus, the last of the Asmonsan race,
to the throne. Herod appears to be alluded to as
one in whom was the spirit of perturbation ; while
the retreat of the Parthiaus when the Romanus in-
terfered on behalf of Herod, seems to be indicated
in other language. This brings us down to the
year B.c. 40, before which the book of Enoch
could not have been written. Perhaps the book
toas written about B.c. 40.

In chap. lv. is another chronological datum
The prophet beholds ‘another army of chariots,
with men riding in them’. .... coming from the
east, the west, and the south. ‘The sound of the
noise of their chariots was heard from the ex-
tremities of the earth unto the extremities of
heaven at the same time.’ In the former chapter
the Parthian army is represented as powerful and
terrific, while here the Roman seems to be noticed.
It is ambiguous whether the language should be
referred to the interposition of the Romans on
behalf of Herod, or regarded as an expansion ef
the idea that the Roman name was powerful on
every side of Judea, or assigned, with Liicke and
Stuart, to the invasion of Judaza by the Romans
under Vespasian and Titus. The language is
poetical and glowing. There is, therefore, no ne-
cessity to refer it to the Jewish war. It is suffi-
ciently appropriate in relation to tbe interposition
of the Romans on behalf of Herod.

Chap. Ixxxix. 29, &c. and chap. xcii. are also
rested on by Liicke and Stuart in favour of the
opinion that the author was a Jew instructed in
Christianity, But their arguments are unsatis
factory, and the construction they put on the pas-
sages in question liable to uncertainty. Hoff-
mann, in his Commentary, shows that they are
either untenable or exceedingly doubtful. We
are inclined to explain them otherwise ; so that, in
our view, the observations built upon them by
Liicke fall to the ground.

Professor Stuart lays considerable weight on the
Christology of the book, as indicative of an ac

uaintance on the author's part with the New

‘estament, especially the Apocalypse. Yet the
Christological portions do not possess sufficient
distinctness to imply a knowledge of the New
Testament. The name Jesus never occurs; though
Son of man, 80 often given to the Messiah in the
Gospels, is very frequent. Neither are the appel-
lations Lord, Lord Jesus, Jesus Christ, or even
Christ employed. Is there not something unac-
countable here on the supposition that the writer
was instructed in Christianity ? After all the con-
siderations that have been adduced by Liicke and


ENOCH, BOOK OF.


Stuart, and the many coincidences between sen-
timents advanced in our book and the New Testa-
ment, we cannot suppose that it was written in
the first century by a Jewish Christian. It seems
to us to have been composed a little before Christ's
appearance by a Jew who had studied well the
book of Daniel. At the same time we freely con-
fess that the Saviour is spoken of in terms ex-
Pressive of his dignity, character, and acts, sur-
passing the descriptions which other Jewish books
present.

5. The place tohere tt was written.—The place
where the author lived and wrote is determined by
Laurence from the seventy-first chapter, where the
length of the days at various periods of the year
is given. It must have been between the 45th
and 49th degrees of north latitude, in the northern
districts of the Caspian and Euxine seas. Perhaps,
therefore, the author was one of the Jews who had
been carried away by Shulmaneser and did not
Tetum frum captivity. Yet an examination of
chap. xiii, 8-10, points to the northern part of
Palestine. Mr. Murray has also shown that one
passage favours the ide that the writer of it lived
in Abyssinia (p. 63-73). Hence he infers that
the work of ditferent authors, living in countries
removed from one another, is combined in the
book of Enoch. But De Sacy has well remarked,
that as the astronumical system of the author
appears to be in part imaginary, so his geography
may be probably visionary. Neither Egypt, nor
Chaldea, nor Palestine, suits the astronomy con-
tained in the book. It is true that there are allu-
sions to the oriental theosophy and the opinions of
Zoroaster which would appear to recommend a
Chaldean origin, at least of the astronomical part ;
but the author's predilection for the imazes of fire,
radiance, light, and other Oriental symbols, may

accounted for on some other supposition than
that of his residence in Chaldea. In what way

became acquainted with the Zend-Avesta, or
the sentiments embodied in that book, we are not
able to tell, although it is pretty obvious that
Various portions of his book are tinctured with the
Oriental philosophy of Middle Asia.

6. Did Jude really quote the book of Enoch?—
Some are most unwilling to believe that an in-
spied writer could cite an Apocryphal production.

uch an opinion destroys, in their view, the cha-

racter of the writing said to be inspired, and
reduces it to the level of an ordinary composition.
But this is preposterous. The Apostle Paul quotes
several of the heathen poets ; yet wlio ever supposed
hat by such references he sanctions the produc-
tions fram which his citations are made, or renders
then of greater value? All that can be reason-
ably inferred from such a fact is, that if the in-
*Pired writer cites a particular sentiment with
@pprubation, it must be regarded as just and right,
irespective of the remainder of the book in which
fae The Apostle’s sanction extends no
Oth than the passage to which he alludes.
_ wef portions of the original document may ex-
It . the most absurd and superstitious notions.
as always been the current opinion that Jude
eleva the book of Enoch; and there is nothing
itl hay g it. It is true that there is some varia-
wo petween the quotation and its original, but

8 Is quite usual even with the New Testament
i inciting the Old Testament.

ers, as Cave, Simon, Witsius, &c., suppose


ENOCH, BOOK OF. 638


that Jude quoted a traditional prophecy or sayin,
of Enoch, and we see no iapreebilerin tae
sumption. Others, again, believe that the words
apparently cited by Jude were suggested to him
by the Holy Spirit. But surely this hypothesis is
unnecessary. Until it can be shown that the book
of Enoch did not exist in the time of Jude, or that
his quoting it is unworthy of an Apostle, or that
such knowledge was not handed down tradi-
tionally within the Apostle’s reach, we abide by
the opinion that Jude really quoted the book of
Enoch. While there are probable grounds for
believing that Jude might have become acquainted
with the circumstance independently of inspira-
tion, we ought not to have recourse to the hy:
thesis of immediate suggestion. On the whole, it
is most likely that the book of Enoch existed be-
fore the time of Jude, and that the latter really
quoted it in accordance with the current tradition.
If so, the prophecy ascribed to Enoch was truly
ascribed to him, because it is scarcely credible
that Jude writing by inspiration would have
sanctioned a false statement.

7. Its use.—Presuming that it was written by
a Jew, the book befure us is an important docu-
ment in the history of Jewish opinions. It indi-
cates an essential portion of the Jewish creed
before the appearance of Christ; and assists us in
comparing the thevlogical views of the later with
those of the earlier Jews. It also serves to establish
the fact that some doctrines of great importance
in the eyes of evangelical Christians ought not to
be regarded as the growth of an age in which
Christianity had been corrupted by the inventions
of men. We would not appeal to it as possessing
authority. The place of authority can be as-
signed to the Bible alone No human compvsi-
tion, be it ever so valuable, is entitled to usurp
dominion over the understandings of men. But
apart from all ideas of authority, it may be
fairly regarded as an index of the state of opinion
at the time when it was written. Hence it sub-
serves the confirmation of certain opinions, pro-
vided they can be shown to have a good foundation
in the word of God. If it be conceded that certain
doctrines are contained by express declaration or
fair inference in the volume of inspiration, it is
surely some attestation of their truth that they lie
on the surface of this ancient book. Let us briefly
allude to several representations whieh occur in
its pages :—

1. Respecting the nature of the Deity.—There
are distinct allusions to a plurality in the God-
head. The doctrine of the Trinity seems to have
been received by the writer and his contem
raries, as the following quotation will prove : ‘He
shall call to every power of the heavens, to all the
holy above, and to the power of God. The Cheru-
bim, the Seraphim, and the a pergte all the
angels of power, and all the angels of the Lords,
namely, of the Elect One and of the other Power,
who was upon earth over the water on that day,
shall raise their united voice; shall bless, glorify,
praise, and exalt with the spirit of faith, with the
spirit of wisdom and patience, with the spirit of
patience, &c., &c.' (1x. 13, 14). Here the Elect
One evidently refers to the Messiah, and the ‘ other
Power who was upon earth over the water on that
day’ to the Holy Spirit.

In accordance with this passage Christ is re-
presented as (a) existing from eternity. Thus:


- 634 ENOCH, BOOK OF.


In that hour was this Son of man invoked before
the Lord of Spirits, and bis name in presence of
the Ancient of days. Before the sun and the signs
were created, before the stars of heaven were
formed, his name was invoked in the presence of
the Lord of Spirits. Therefure the Elect and the
Concealed One existed in his presence, before the
world was created, and for ever’ (xlviii. 2, 3, 5).
© Then shall the kings, the princes, and all who
possess the earth, glorify Him who has dominion
over all things, Him who was concealed ; for,
from the beginning, the Son of man existed in
secret, whom the Most High preserved in the pre-
sence of his power, and revealed to theelect. All
the kings, the princes, the exalted, and those who
rule over the earth, shall fall down on their faces
before Him, and shall worship Him. They shall
fix their hopes on this Sun of man, shall pray to
Him, and petition Him for mercy’ (1xi. 10, 12, 13).

(6) As the object of invocation and worship.
The last quotation is corroborative of this state-
ment; so also ch. xlviii, 3 and 4, ‘ Before the
sun and the signs were created, before the stars
of heaven were formed, his name was invoked
in the presence of the Lord of Spirits. All who
dwell on earth shall fall down and worship before
Him; shall bless and glorify Him, and sing
praises to the name of the Lord of Spirits.’

(c) As the supreme Judge of men and angels.
©O ye kings, O ye mighty, who inhabit the
world, you shal] behuld My Elect One sitting upon
the throne of My glory. And he shall judge’
Azazeel. all his associates, and all his hosts, in
the name of the Lord of spirits’ (liv. 5). ‘Then
the Lord of Spirits seated upon the throne of His
glory the Elect One; who shall judge all the works
of the holy in heaven above, and in a balance
shall He weigh their actions. And when he shall
litt up His countenance to judge their secret ways
in the word of the name of the Lord of spirits’
&e, &e. (Ix. 10, 11). 6 They blessed, gloritied,
and exalted, because the name of the Son of man
was revealed to them. He sat upon the throne of
His glory; and the principal part of the judg-
ment was assigned to Him, the Son of man'
(xviii. 38, 39).

2. The doctrine of a future state of retribution
is implied in many passages. Thus: ¢ You have
committed blasphemy and iniquity; and aie
destined to the day of the effusion of blood, to the
day of darkness, and tu the day of the great judg-
ment. This I declare, and point out to you, that
He who created you will destroy you’ (xciii. 8,
9). ‘Who has permitted you to hate and to
transgress? Judgment shall overtake you, ye
sinners. Wo to you who recompense your neigh-
bour with evil; for you shall be recompensed
according to your works * (x. iv. 2,43; comp. also
chapters xcv. xcvi. xcix. and ciii.).

3. The eternity of future punishment is also
contained in the book of Enoch, as the following
passages will show :—‘ Moreover, abundant is
their suffering until the time of the great judg-
ment, the castigation, and the torment of those
who eternally execrate, whose souls are punished
and bound there for ever. A receptacle of this
sort has been formed for the souls of unrighteous
men, and of siuners; of those who have com-
mitted crime, and associated with the impious
whom they resemble. Their souls shall not be
annihilated in the day of judgment, neither shall


EN-ROGEL.


they arise from this place’ (xxii. 12, 14). ‘Never
shall they obtain mercy, saith the Lord of spirits’
(xxxix. 2). ‘The countenances likewise of the
mighty shall He cast down, filling them with con-
fusion. Darkness shall be their habitation, and
worms shall be their bed; nor from that their bed
shall they hope to be again raised, because they ex-
alted not the name of the Lord of spirits’ (xvi. 4).
‘But has it not been shown tothem, that, when to
the receptacle of the dead their souls shall be made
to descend, their evil deeds shall become their
greatest torment? Into darkness, into the snare,
and into the flame which shall burn to the great
judgment, shall their spirits enter ; and the great
judgment shall take effect for ever and for ever’
(ciii. 5).

We waive all comment on these be-
cause their import is so plain, and bears so di-
rectly on the propositions in support of which
they have been adduced. Whatever value may
be attached to the theological opinions expressed
in the book of Enoch, it is apparent from the pre-
ceding extracts, that certain sentiments to which
evangelical Christians asfign a high importance,
because, in their view, they are contained in Scrip-
ture, appear to have prevailed at the commence
ment of the Christian era. To the serious in-
quirer they can never be of trifling interest.

The Bovk of Enoch the Prophet, by Richard
Laurence, LL.D., Archbishop of Cashel, third
edition, Oxford, 1838, 8vo. Das Buch Henoch
in vollstandiger Uebers:tzung mit fortlaufendem
Commentar, ausfuhrlicher Linleitung und erliw
ternden Excursen, von Andr, G. Hoffmann, Ente
Abtheilung, Jena, 183%, 8vo. Zweite Abtheilung,
Jena, 1838, 8vo. This is the fullest and best book
on the subject. Enoch Hestitutus, or an attempt
to separate from the books of Enoch the book
quoted by St. Jude, &c., by the Rev. Ed. Murray,
London, 1836, 8vo. American Biblical Repo-
sitory for 1840, in which there are two excellent
articles by Professor Stuart on the book of Enoch,

Versuch einer vollstindigen Eindeitung tn die
Offenbarung Johannus, vou Dr. F. Liicke, Bonn,
1832, 8vo. § 12, pp. 52-78. A. F. Gitorer's
tract in the Z'ubingen ‘ Zeitschrift fur Theologie,
entitled, ‘ Die Quellen cur Hentniss des Zu
standes der judischen Dogmen und der Volks
bildung im Zeitalter Jesu Christi,” 4 Heift. pp.
120, sq. for the year 1637. Silvestre de Sacy's
Notice du livre d'Enoch in Magasin Encyclo
prdique, an vi. tom. i. p. $82. This dissertation
contains a Latin version of several chapters, aud
was translated into German by F. T. Rink, Koe-
nigsberg, 1801, 8vo.  Fuabricii Codex Pseud-
epigraphus Veteris Testamenti, vol. i. yp. 160-224.
Bruce's Travels, vol. ii. 8vo. edition, The
Genuineness of the Book of Enoch Incestigated,
by Rev. J. M. Butt, M.A., London, 1827, Sve.
(The older dissertations of Drusius, Hottinger,
Pfeiffer, Van Dale, Buddeus, and Heber, are now
of little value, because the entire work had not
been brought from Abyssinia when they were
written. They are founded upon the allusiens of
the Fathers to the production in question, and
upon the fragment of Syncellus).—S. D.

ENON. (4Enon.]


EN-ROGEL (5377'Y; Sept. ‘Peryfa). The
name means Foot-fountain, and is construed by
the Targum into ‘Fuller's Fountain,’ because


EPANETUS.


the fallers trod the clothes there with their feet.
It was near Jerusalem, on the boundary-line
between the tribes of Judah and Benjamin (Josh.
Xv. 7; xviti. 6; 2 Sam. xvii. 17; 1 Kings i.
9). It has been usually supposed the same as
the Fountain of Siloam. But Dr. Robinson is
more inclined to find it in what is called by
Frank Christians the Well of Nehemiah, but
_ by the native inhabitants the Well of Job (Bir
; Hyd). There are only three sources, or rather
receptacles of living water, now accessible at
Jerusalem, and this is one of them. It is
situated just below the junction of the Valley
of Hinnom with that of Jehoshaphat. It is a
very deep well, of an irregular quadrilateral
form, walled up with large squared stones, ter-
minating above in an arch on one side, and ap-
parently of great antiquity. There is a small
rude building over it, furnished with one or two
large tronghs or reservoirs of stone, which are kept
rtially filled for the convenience of the people.
The well measures 125 feet in depth: 50 feet of
which were, at the time of Dr. Robinson’s visit (in
the middle of April), nearly full of water. The
water is sweet, but not very cold, and at the pre-
sent day is drawn up by the hand. In the rainy
season the well becomes quite full, and sometimes
overflows at the mouth. Usually, however, the
water runs otf under the surface of the ground, and
finds an outlet some forty yards below the well,
whence it is said to flow for sixty or seventy days
in winter; and the stream is sometimes large.

ENSIGNS. ([Sranparps.]

EP/ENETUS (Exalveros), a Christian resi-
dent at Rome when Paul wrote his Epistle to
the Church in that city, and one of the persons
to whom he sent special salutations (Rom. xvi.
5). In the received text he is spoken of as being
‘ the first fruits of Achaia’ (axapxh THs Axatas);
but ‘the first fruits of Asia’ (rs ’Aolas) is the
reading of the best MSS. (A BC DE F G 67)
of the Coptic, Armenian, Athiopic, Vulgate, the
Latin Fathers, and Origen (Jn Ep. ad Rom. Com-
ment. lib. x, Opera, vii. p. 431; In Numer.
Hom. xi., Opera, x. p. 109). Vater says, ‘ nisi

ferendum certe equiparandum.’ This read-

ing is preferred by Grotius, Mill, Bengel, Whitby,

Koppe. Rosenmiiller, Rickert, Olshausen, and

Tholuck; and admitted into the text by Griesbach,

Knapp,Tittmann, Scholz, Lachmann, and Tischen-

dort¥; also by Bruder, in his edition of Schmidt's

Concordance, Lips. 1842. Dr. Bloomtield, who

also adopts it in his Greek Testament (2nd ed.

1836), remarks that ‘the very nature of the term

dxapxh suggests the idea of one person only (see

1 Cor. xv. 20), and, as in 1 Cor. xvi. 15, Stephanas

is called the dwapy} ris "Axatas, Epeenetus could

have no claim to the name.’ With respect to the

former part of this statement, the learned writer

has strangely overlooked such passages as James i,

18, ‘ that we should be a kind of first fruits’

(dwapxnv Twa), and Rev. xiv. 4,‘ These were

redeerned from among men, being the first fruits’

(dxapx%) : and as to the latter part, not Stephanas
alone, but his house, is said to Le the first fruits,
and to have addicted themselves (tragay éavrovs)
to the ministry of the saints... Macknight's re-
mark im favour of the received reading, that if
Epanetus was one of that house, he was a part of
the first fruits of Achaia, seems somewhat forced.
JER


EPHESIANS. 636


EPAPHRAS (Exagpas), an eminent teacher
in the church at Colossm, denominated by Paul
‘his dear fellow-servant,’ and ‘a faithful mi-
nister of Christ’ (Coloss. i. 7; iv. 12). From
Paul's Epistle to Philemon it appears that he
suffered imprisonment with the apostle at Rome.
It has been inferred from Coloss. i. 7, that he was
the founder of the Colossian Church; and Dr.
Neander supposes that the apostle terms him imtp
iypay Bidxovos tov Xprrov (a servant of Christ
tn our stead), because he committed to him the
office of proclaiming the Gospel in the three Phry-
gian cities Colosse, Hierapolis, and Laodi
which he could not visit himself (His¢. of Planting,
&c. i. pp. 200, 373, Eng. transl.). This language,
however, is by no means decisive: yet most
probably Epaphras was one of the earliest and
most zealous instructors of the Colossian Church.
Lardner thinks that the expression respecting Epa-
phras in Coloss. iv. 12, 6 eg duady, is quite incon-
sistent with the supposition of his being the
founder of the Church, since the same phrase is
applied to Onesimus, a recent convert (Hist. o
the Apostles and Evangelists, c.xiv.; Works, vi.
153). But, in both cases, the words in question
seem intended simply to identify these individuals
as the fellow townsinen of the Colossians, and to
distinguish them from others of the same name in
Rome (v. Macknight on Coloss. iv. 2) —J. E.R.

EPAPHRODITUS (’Exappéd:r0s), a mes-
senger (axdéaroAos) of the church at Philippi to
the. Apostle Paul during his imprisonment at
Rome, who was entrusted with their contributions
for his support (Phil. ii. 25; iv. 18). Paul's
high estimate of his character is shown by an
accumulation of honourable epithets (rdy ddeA-
ody, xal cuvepydy, kal overpatiérny wow), and by
fervent expressions of gratitude for his recovery
from a dangerous illness brought on in part by a
generous disregard of his personal welfare in mi-
nistering to the Apostle Neue ii. 30). Epaphro-
ditus, on his return to Philippi, was the bearer of
the epistle which forms part of the canon, Gro-
tius and some other critics conjecture that Epa-
phroditus was the same as the Epaphras mentioned
m the Epistle to the Colossians. But though the
latter name may be a contraction of the former,
the fact that Epaphras was most probably in pri-
son at the time sufficiently marks the distinction
of the persons, The name Epaphroditus was by
no means uncommon, as Wetstein has shown by
various quotations from classical authors (Nov.
Test. Gr. tom. ii. p. 273).—J. E.R.

EPH AH, a dry measure of capacity, equivalent
to the bath for liquids. It contained three pecks
and three pints. [WxtcuTs anp Maasures. |

EPHESIANS, EPISTLE TO THE. This
Epistle expressly claims to be the production of
the Apostle Paul (i. 1; iii. 1); and this claim
the writer in the latter of these passages follows
up by speaking of himself in language such as
that apostle is accustomed to use in describing
his own position as an ambassador of Christ
(iii. 1, 3, 8, 9). The justice of this claim seems
to have been universally admitted by the early
Christians, and it is expressly sanctioned by se-
yeral of the fathers of the second and third cen-
turies (Irenzus, Adv. Her. vy. 2. 3; Clemens
Alexandr. Protrept. ix. p. 69, ed. Potter; Strom.
iv. 8, p. 592; Origen, Cont. Cels. iv. p. 211, ed.
Spencer; Tertullian, Adv. Marc. v. 11, 17; Cy-


86 - EPHESIANS.


prian, Testim. iii. 7, &c.). The Epistle is also
cited as part of sacred Scripture by Polycarp
(Ep. ad Philipp. c.1; ie and it is prohably
to it that Ignatius refers when, in writing to the
Ephesians, he calls them MatAou cupptorat +6
és dy xdon ériaroAR pynuoveter buay ev Xpiorg
"Inoov (c. 12, Conf. Cotelerii, Annot. in loc. ;
Pearson, Vind. Ignatian. Par. ii. p.119; Lardner’s
Works, vol. ii. p.70,8v0.). DeWette has attempted,
from internal evidence, to set aside this external
f of the Pauline origin of this Epistle; but
is cavils have been so fully and satisfactorily
answered by Schott (Jsag. in N. T. p. 260),
Guerike (Beitrige zur hist. krit. Einleitung ins
N. T. s. 106), Hemsen (Der Ap. Paulus, s. 130),
Riickert (Der Br. Pauli an die Epheser, u. 8. w.
s. 289), and others, that even De Wette himself
bas been constrained to admit, in the second edi-
tion of his Einleitung, that his objections are
without force. The genuineness of this book,
therefore, may be regarded as universally ad-
mitted by Biblical scholars.

It is much more difficult to determine to tchom
this Epistle was addressed. On this subject two
hypotheses have been principally entertained, be-
sides the common opinion which, following the
[disputed] reading in ch. i. ver. 1, regards the
party to whum it was sent as the church at Ephe-
sus. Grotius, reviving the opinion of the ancient
heretic Marcion, maintains that the party ad-
dressed in this Epistle was the church at Laodicea,
and that we have in this the Epistle to that
church which is commonly supposed to Lave been
Jost ; whilst others contend that this was addressed
to no church in particular, but was a sort of cir-
cular letter, intended for the use of several
churches, of which Ephesus may have been the
first o centre.

The view of Grotius, which has been followed
by some scholars of eminent name, among whom
are found Hammond, Mill, Venema, Wetstein,
and Paley, rests chiefly on two grounds; viz., the
testimony of Marcion, and the close resemblance
between this Epistle and that to the Colossians,
taken in connection with Coloss. iv. 16. With
respect to the former of these grounds, it is alleged
that, as Marciun was under no temptation to utter
a wilful falsehood in regard to the destination of
this Epistle, he probably bad the authority of the
eburch at Laodicea, and it may be the tradition
of the churches generally of Asia Minor for the
opinion which he expresses (Grotius, Proleg. ad
Ephes.; Mill, Proleg. ad N. T. p. 9, Oxon,
1707). But, without charging Marcion with
designedly uttering what was false, we may sup-
pose that, like some critics of recent times, this
view was suggested to him by the apostle’s allu-
sion, in Col. iv. 16, to an epistle addressed by
him to the Laodiceans. Nor is there the least
ground for supposing that Marcion spoke in this
instance on the authority of the Asiatic churches;
on the contrary, there is every reason to believe
the opposite, for not only do Origen and Clement
of Alexandria, who were fully acquainted with
the views of the eastern churches on such matters,
give no hint of any such tradition being enter-
tained by them, but Tertullian, to whom we are
indebted for our information respecting the opi-
nion of Marcion,* expressly says that in that


* Epiphanius also speaks of Marcion as having


EPHESIANS.


one he opposed the tradition of the orthodox
churches, and imposed upon the Epistle a false
title, through conceit of his own superior diligence
in exploring such matters (‘Ecclesi# quidem
veritate epistolam istam ad Ephesios habemus
emissam, non ad Laodicenos, sed Marcion ¢i
titulum aliquando interpolare gestiit, quasi et ia
isto diligentissimus explorator.—Adv. Mare. v.
17). It is plain that to a statement of sucha
nature no weight can be safely attached. With
regard to the other argument by which this view
is advocated, we cannot help ressing sur-
Es that such men as Mill and Paley should
ave deemed it of so much importance as to rest
upon it the chief weight of their opinion. To us
jt appears to possess no force whatever in support
of the view which they espouse. Admitting the
fact of a close resemblance between the Epistle to
the Colossians and that before us, and the fact
that Paul had, some time before sending the
former Epistle, written one to the church at Lao-
dicea, which he advises the Colossians to send
for and read, how doves it follow from all this that
the Epistle to the Laodiceans and that now under
Notice were one and the same? ‘To us it appears
more probable that, seeing the two extant Epistles
bear so close a resemblance to each other, had the
one now bearing the inscription ‘to the Ephesians’
been really the one addressed to the Laodiceans,
the apostle would not have deemed it of so much
importance that the churches of Cologse and Lao-
dicea should interchange epistles. Such being
the chief arguments in favour of this hypothesis
(for those which, in addition, Wetstein alleges
from a comparison of this Epistle with that to the
church at Laodicea, in the Apocal , are not
deserving of notice ; see Michaelis, Introd. vol. iv.
p. 137), we may venture to set it aside as without
any adequate support. It may be observed also
that it seems incompatible with what the apostle
says, Col. iv. 15, where he enjoins the church at
Culosse to send his greetings to the brethren at
Laodicea, &c. Now one sends greetings by en-


‘other only when it is impossible to express them


oneself. But if Panl wrote to Laodicea at the
same time as to Colosse, and sent both letters by
the same bearer, Tychicus, there was manifestly
no occasion whatever for his sending his saluta-
tions to the latter of these churches through the
medium of the former; it was obviously as easy,
and greatly more natural, to bave sent his salu-
tations to the church at Lamlicea in the Epistle
addressed to themselves. This seems to prove
that the Epistle to the Laodiceans had been writ-
ten some considerable time before that to the
Colossians, and therefore could not have been the
same with that now under notice.

The opinion that this epistle was a sort of cir
cular letter was first broached by Archbishop
Usher. His words are (Annal. Vet. et Nov.
Test. p. 650, Brema, 1686), ‘ Notandum, in
antiquis nonnullis codicibus (ut ex Basilii lib.
2, adv. Eunomium, et Hieronymi in hune
Apostoli locum commentario apparet) generatim
inscriptam fuisse hanc epistolam rots aylors roils
obot, wal morocs év Xp. In. vel (ut in literarom


an Epistle to the Laodiceans in his Apostolicon ;
but, as he states that he had also the Epistle to
the Ephesians, this cannot be regarded as corre
borating the testimony of Tertullian.


EPHESIANS.


encyclicarum descriptione fieri solebat) sanctis qui
sunt. .... et fidelibus in Christo Jesu; acsi
Ephesum primo, ut pracipuam Asia metropolim,
missa 6a fuisset, transmittenda inde ad reliquas
(insertis singularum nominibus) ejusdem pro-
vinci ecclesias.' To this opinion the great ma-
jority of critics have given their suffrage; indeed,
it may be regarded as the received opinion of
Biblical scholars in the present day. This may
make it apparently presumptuous in us to call it
in question ; and yet it seems to us so ill supported
by positive evidence, and exposed to so many
objections, that we cannot yield assent to it. In
the frst place it is tv be observed that it is an
hypothesis entirely of modern invention. No
hint is furnished of any such notion having been
entertained concerning the destination of this
epistle by the early church. With the solitary
exception of Marcion, so far as we know, all
parties were unanimous in assigning Ephesus as
the place to which this epistle was sent, and Mar-
cion’s view is as much opposed to the supposition
of its being a circular letter as the other. As
respects the external evidence, therefore, this
hypothesis is purely destitute of support.—2. It
is an hypothesis suggested for the purpose of
accounting for certain alleged facts, sume of
which are, to say the least, doubtful, and others
of which may be explained as well without it as
with it. These facts are, 1. The alleged omis-
sion of the name of any place at the commence-
ment of the epistle; 2. Marcion’s assertion that
this epistle was addressed to the Lawdliceans,
which, it is said, arose probably out of his having
seen that copy of this circular epistle which had
been sent to Laodicea; 3. The want of any pre-
cise allusions to personal relations subsisting be-
tween the apostle and those to whom this epistle
was addressed; and 4. The expressions of un-
acquaintedness with those to whom he wrote,
which occur in this epistle, e.g. iii. 1-4. How
these facts may be reconciled with the supposition
that this epistle was addressed to the Ephesians
will fall to be considered afterwards; at present
the question is, How do they favour the hypo-
thesis that this was a circular letter? Now,
supposing them to be unquestionable, and ad-
mitting that they are not irreconcilable with
this hypothesis, it must yet appear to all that
they go very little way towards allurding primary
evidence in its support. It is not one which
grows naturally out of these facts, or is suggested
by them ; it is plainly of foreign birth, and sug-
gested for them. Lut when it is remembered
that the jirst of these alleged facts is (to say the
least) very doubtful; that the second is made to
serve this hypothesis only by means of another
as doubtful as itself, and that, were its services
admitted, it would prove too much, for it would
go to show that, to the Laodiceans, the apostle
not only sent a peculiar epistle, mentioned Col.
iv. 16, but gave them a share also in this circular
epistle written sume time after their own; and
that the third and fourth are both either partially
or wholly questionable, it must be admitted
that this hypothesis stands upon a basis which is
little better than none. 3. Had the epistle been
addressed to a particular circle of churches, some
designation of these churches would have been
given, by which it might have been known what
churches they were to which this letter belonged.


EPHESIANS. en


When it is argued that this must bea circular
letter, because there is no church specitied to
which it is addressed, it seems to he forgotten
that the designation of a particular set of
churches is as necessary for a circular epistle, as
the designation of one church is for an epistle

ially addressed to it. Ifwe must leave out


the words éy ’Epéo in ch. i. 1, what are we to


t in their place? for if we take the passage as
p stands without them, it will follow that the
epistle was addressed to ald Christians every where,
which is more than the advocates of the h
thesis now under notice contend for. It will not
much help them to say with Usher, that the name
of the place was left blank to be filled up; for
the question irmmediately arises, By whom was it
to be filled up? If by the church at Eph to
whom the epistle was first sent, then it could not
be a circular epistle, but was a special epistle to
the church at Ephesus, which they were left to
communicate to as many or as few other churches
as they pleased; and this may be said, we sup-
pose, of all Paul's Epistles; nor is it at all im-
probable that this is exactly what the Ephesians
would have done of their own accord, without any
blank being left to give them the hint. If we
say with Michaelis that the blank was left to be
filled up by the Apostle himself, who had a num-
ber of copies written, which he thus addressed to
particular churches, the question occurs, How do
we know in that case that there ever was a blank
atall? Ifevery copy of this epistle that was sent
by the Apostle had the name of a place written
in it before it left him, there was, of cuurse, no
blank in any of them. The reasoning here in
fact is a mere petitio principii. If we ask, How
is it known that this was a circular epistle? the
answer is, Because the name of the place was
left blank to be filled in by the Apostle. If,
now, we ask, How is it known that the place was
left blank? it is answered, Because this is a
circular epistle, ‘ ut in literarum encyclicarum
descriptione hoc fieri solebat!’ Besides, it seems
hardly consistent with the Apostle’s perfect in-
tegrity of character to suppose that he would in-
sert in the copy sent to each church the name of
the place where that church was located, in such
@ way as to lead the members of that church to
suppose that the epistle they received was spe-
cially addressed to them. As an apostolic letter
was usually esteemed a treasure of no ordinary
value by the church to which it was originally
sent, we may easily suppuse that it would occa-
sion no small mortification to each of the churches
round Ephesus, to find that what each had sup-
posed to be a letter specially addressed to itself
was in fact only a copy of what had been sent to
many others. In fine, this suggestion of Michaelis
renders it very difficult to account for the pre-
vailing insertion of éy ’Epéow in the text, as
well as the universal tradition of the church, that
such was the destination of this epistle. The
solution proposed by Michaelis himsel!, viz., that
“when the several parts of the Greek Testament
were collected into a volume, the copy inserted
in this collection must have been procured from
Ephesus,’ besides being mere unsupported suppo-
sition, proceeds on the assumption that the Canon
of the New Testament was formed by authority,
which is what cannot be proved [Canon]. Hug’s
opinion that ‘ the title xpbs "Epecious-was given


,


638 EPHESIANS.


to it, either because Ephesus was the most eminent
of the Asiatic cities, or was the first which re-
ceived it,’ might account, perhaps, for a prepon-
derunce of testimony in favour of this title, but is
certainly inadequate to account for the unanimity
of testimony by which it is supported. On these
grounds the suggestion of Michaelis appears to
be inadmissible, and our objection to Usher's
hypothesis remains in full force. 4. In ch. vi.
21, 22, Paul mentions that he had sent to those
for whom this epistle was destined, Tychicus, who
should make known to them all things, that they
might know his affairs, and that he might com-
fort their hearts. From this it appears that
Tychicus was not only the bearer of this letter, but
that he was personally to visit, converse with,
and comfort those to whom it was addressed. On
the supposition that this was a circular letter, the

* following questions are naturally raised by this
statement of the Apostle: Was Tychicus to
carry this letter from church to church? or had
he a distinct copy for each church in the circle?
If the former, it will follow that no church ever
possessed this epistle, but that certain churches
around Ephesus enjoyed thd advantage of read-
ing it or hearing it read, while the bearer of it
stayed with them. If the latter, then it may be
asked, Was Tychicus, as he carried round these
copies to deliver them, bound to abide at each
church, and to answer all the demands and in-
quiries which the Apostle’s declarations in the
passage quoted wonld prompt its members to
make? To aftirm of either of these suppositions
that it is tmpossible, would be, perhaps, to go too
far; but it must be felt by every one, that, under
all the circumstances of the case, neither of them
is very probable.

The objections just stated seem to us to justify
the rejection of Usher's hypothesis respecting the
destination of this Epistle: we now turn to the
consideration of the common and, as we believe,
the true view of this matter. Here it will
be necessary to consider, in the first instance, the
objections which have been offered to this view.
These are borrowed from the Epistle itself, in
which, it is said, we not only miss those allusions
to personal relations and intercourse which we
should expect in an epistle trom Paul to a
church with which he had been 80 closely con-
nected as with that at Ephesus, but we meet with
statements which seem to imply that the parties
to whom this Epistle was written were, at the
time, strangers to the Apostle. As respects the
former of these objections, it must be admitted
that the Epistle contains no direct allusions to
previous intercourse between the writer and those
whom he addresses; but this may be partly
accounted tor by the circumstance that several
years had now elapsed since that intercourse took
place; and probably, during the interval mes-
sages had been sent by the Apostle to the Ephe-
sians which rendered it unnecessary to allude to
his earlier personal intercourse with them, in this
Epistle. It is worthy of remark, on the other
hand, that the tone and style of the Epistle are
such as of themselves to suggest the probability of
previous intercourse between the parties; such
warmth of feeling and so much of a free outpeur
ing of thought not being customary in a letter
addressed to strangers, however strong might be
the writer's general interest in their welfare.


EPHESIANS.


With regard to the passages in which it is
alleged that Paul writes as if the parties he ad-
dresses were personally unknown to him, they are
all susceptible of a very different construction,
When the Apostle says (i. 15), ‘ Wherefore also,
I having heard of your faith,’ &c., he is not neces-
sarily to be understood as intimating that this
knowledge had then for the first time been ob-
tained by him through the report of others; he
rather means that, as some years had elapsed since
he left them, he was rejoiced to hear that they
were still stedfast in the faith. Again, when he
says (iii. 2), ‘If ye have heard of the dispensa-
tion of the grace of God which is given me to
you-ward,’ &c. and (iv. 21), ‘Jf so be that ye
have heard him,’ &c., the force of the particle
elye is not adversative, but rather, according t
its proper meawing (comp. Hermann. ad Viger.
§ 512; Kiihuer’s Gram. d. Gr. Sp. § 704, th. ii. 1),
and the ordinary usage of the Apostle, concessites
it is thus equivalent to since, forasmuch as, and
expreases rather the contidence of knowledge than
the uncertainty of ignorance. To these passages,
then, no weight whatever deserves to be attached
as tending to show the erroneousness of the ordi-
nary designation of this Epistle. In favour of
this designation, on the other hand, are to be
urged the reading év Epéow (i. 1), and the unant-
mous testimony of Christian arfiqnity. This read-
ing is that supplied by all the MSS.* and ancient
versions. Krom a passage, however, in one of the
writings of Basil (Adv. Eunomium, lib. ii) it
has been inferred that in his day some MSS. were
extant in which these words were not found. In
maintaining against Eunomius, that Jesus Christ
may justly be styled 4 Sv, Basil argues that this
is the more proper from the circumstance that
Apostle, writing to the Ephesians, calls Christians
évras, absolutely and peculiarly saying rots aylas
tots oot Kal miorois év Xp. "I7., and ailds ‘for
those before us have banded down, and we have
found it in old copies.’ Now there can he no doult
that Basil here means to say that he had both
traditioual and documentary authority for ted
ing rots oda¢ absolutely without the addition
ev "Egpeoy after these words, else his whale argu
ment against Eunomius, based on this quol@
tion, must go for nothing. But in the first place,
supposing that in these MSS. to which ve
refers, the words éy "Epéaw were not found at al
in the address of the Epistle, of what weight. in &
critical point of view, is this fact? Of the 28
number, source, and general worth of these tete
monies to which Basil appeals, we know notlng,
and we must be jealous of taking a keeu contro
versialist’s authority for the value of what serve
his purpose against his antagonist. As the ca#
stands, we have on the one side the unanimous
testimony of all the extant witnesses in favour of
dv "Epéow; we have against it only the assertioa
of a writer who, to support what he considers &
good stroke at his adversary, assures us that he
had heard a tradition that these words were (0 be
omitted, and had seen some MSS. in which they
were omitted, thereby at the same time implicitly
assuring us that in his day the received reading
was the same as in ours. In such a case it is surely


* Though in the Vatican Codex it appears a
on the margin, Hug says it is inserted there by
the first hand (De Antiguitate Cod. Vat, p 2).


EPHESIANS.


‘ous to attach any weight whatever to
such a testimony. But, secondly, does Basil’s
statement necessarily deny the existence of the
words dy "Epecy in any part of this verse? Ad-
mitting that he did not read them after rots odo,
does it follow that he did not read them here at
all? May not the have stood, in the
authorities to which he appeals, thus—vois éy
‘Edda rots aylors Tots obo, Kk. 7. A.? the words
having been transposed by some transcriber whose
blunder Basil, with the blind zeal of a contro-
versialist, hailed as proving his argument? This
supposition has in its favour, 1. that Basil, in the
passage quoted, formally states that Paul wrote
thus in an Epistle to the Ephesians ; 2. that this
reading supports as well Basil's argument against
Eunomius, as if év "Epéow had been entirely
omitted; and 3. that unless we insert those or
similar words somewhere in the passage, the in-
acription of this Epistle becomes so vague and inde-
finite as to be without meaning. Some confirma-
tion of this suggestion may be drawn, perhaps,
from the place in which Jerome alludes to the
argument here urged- by Basil from this age.
After stating the argument he adds, ‘ Alii: vero
simpliciter non ad evs qui sunt, sed gui Ephesi
sancti et fideles sunt, scriptum arbitrantur,’ where
he arranges the words in the same order, substan-
tially, in which we have supposed them to have
stood in Basil's MSS. If this suggestion, how-
ever, be deemed ungrounded or improbable, we

- have still the fact that Basil's evidence is unsup-
ported to fall back upon in support of the received
reading. Stress has also been laid by Hug and
others upon the passage from Tertullian, already
quoted, in which he charges Marcion with having
altered the title of this Epistle. Had the MSS.,
it is argued, in Tertullian’s time contajned éy
*Epéow, Marcion must have had to alter not only
the title of the Epistle, but, to be consistent, the
text also of the first verse; and with this Tertul-
lian does not charge him, though ‘not accus-
tomed,’ as Hug reminds us, ‘ to overlook anything
inhim. But this, surely, is at best, very preca-
rious reasoning. Tertullian may have not deemed
it worth while to specify Marcion’s alteration of
the text just because it was rendered so obviously
necessary by his alteration of the title, that in
mentioning the latter (which was all his purpose
required), he, by implication, also intimated the
former.

From these considerations it appears that the
received reading éy Epéag is impregnable. As
a necessary consequence it follows that the title
~pbs "Egecious expresses the original and proper
destination of this Epistle.

The Epistle is so much the utterance of a mind
overflowing with thought and feeling that it does
not present any precisely marked divisions under
which its different parts may be ranked. After
the usual apostolic salutation Paul breaks forth
into an expression of thanksziving to God and
Christ for the scheme of redemption (i. 3-10),
from which he passes to speak of the privileges
actually enjoyed by himself and those to whom
he was writing, throngh Christ (i. 11-23). He
then reminds the Ephesians of their former con-
dition Lda ae gy without Christ, and of the
great change which, through divine grace, the
bad experienced (ii, 1-22). An alliarion to rand

self as enjoying by divine revelation the know-


EPHESUS. 639


ledge of the mystery of Christ leads the Arostle
to enlarge upon the dignity of his office and the
blessed results that were destined to flow from the
exercise of it to others (iii. 1-12), On this he
grounds an exhortation to his brethren not to faint
on account of his sufferings for the Gospel, and
affectionately invokes on their behalf the divine
blessing, concluding this, which may be called
the more doctrinal part of his Epistle, with a
doxology to God (iit. 13-21), What follows is
chiefly hortatory, and is directed partly to the in-
culcation of general consistency, stedfastness in
the faith, and propriety of deportment (iv. 1; v.
21), and partly to the enforcement of relative
duties (v. 22; vi. 9). The Epistle concludes
with an animated exhortation to fortitude, watch-
fulness and prayer, followed by a reference to
Tychicus as the bearer of the Epistle, and by the
usual apostolic benediction (vi. 10-24).

This Epistle was written during the earlier
part of the Apostle’s imprisonment at Rome, at
the same time with that to the Colossians (Co1os-
srans, EpisT.R TO THE].

Of commentaries specially on this Epistle, the
following deserve particular notice: Seb. Schmid.,
Paraphras. super Ep. ad Ephes., 4to., Strasburg,


1684; Riickert, Der Brief Pauli an die Ephes.


erlattert und vertheidigt, 8vo. Leipz. 1834;
Matthias, Erklarung des Br. Pauli and. Ephes.
8vo. Greifswald, 1834; Harless, Commentar. ub.
d, Br. Pauli an d. Ephes. 8vo, Erlangen, 1834.—
W.L. A.

EPHESUS (€E¢egos), an old and celebrated
city, capital of Ionia, one of the twelve Ionian
cities in Asia Minor in the Mythic times, and said
to have been founded by the Amazons, was in later
ages inhabited by the Carians and Lelezes, and
taken possession of by the Ionians, under Andro-
clus, the son of Codrus. It lay on the river Cay-
ster, not far from the coast of the Icarian sea,
between Smyrna an Miletus. It wasalso one of
the most considerable of the Greek cities in Asia
Minor; but while, about the epoch of the intro-
duction of Christianity, the other cities declined,
Ephesus rose more and more. It owed its prospe-
rity in patt to the favour of its governors, for Lysi-
machus named the city Arsinoé. in honour of his
second wile, and Attalus Philadelphus furnished
it with splendid whart's and docks; in part to the
favourable position of the place, which naturally
made it the emporium of Asia on this side the
Taurus (Strabo, xiv. pp. 6£1, 663). Under the
Romans Ephesus was the capital not only of Ionia,
but of the entire province of Asia, and bore the
honourable title ris mpaérns xal peylorns untpdro-
Aews Tis ’Agias. of the first and greatest metro-
polis of Asia, (Boeckh, Corp. Inscr. Gr. 2968-
2992). The Bishop of Ephesus in later times was
the president of the Asiatic dioceses, with the
rights and privileges ofa patriarch (Evagr. Hist.
Eccl. iii. 6). In the days of Paul Jews were
found settled in the city in no inconsiderable num-
ber (compare Joseph. Antig. xiv. 10, 11), and frond
them the Apostle collected a Christian commu-
nity (Acts xviii. 19; xix. 1; xx. 16), which, being
fostered and extended by the hand of Paul him-
self, became the centre of Christianity in Asia
Minor. On leaving the city the Apostle left
Timothy there (1 Tim, i. 3): at a later period,
according to a tradition which prevailed exten-
sively in ancient times, we find the Apostle Joun


.


60 EPHESUS.


in Epnesus, where he employed himself most dili-
geuly for the spread of the gospel, and where he
not only died, at a very old age, but was buried,
with Mary the mother of the Lord. Some make
John bishop of the Ephesian communities, while
others ascribe that honour to Timothy. In the
book of Revelations (ii. 1) a favourable testimony
is borne to the Christian churches at Ephesus.

The classic celebrity of this city is chiefly owing
to its famous temple, and the goddess in whose
honour it was built, namely, ‘ Diana of the Ephe-
sians.” This goddess has, been already noticed,
and a figure given of her famous image at Ephesus
[Arresus}.

Around the image of the goddess was afterwards
erected, according to Callimachus (Hymn, tn
Dian. 248), a large and splendid temple:

rou 3'ob 71 Oewrepov Sperar Hos

OLY dopvedrepov’ pea kev Mudava wapeAsor’
This temple was burnt down on the night in which
Alexander was born, by an obscure person of the
name of Eratostratus, who thus sought to transmit
his name to posterity ; and, as it seemed somewhat
unaccountable that the goddess should permit a
place which redounded so much to her honour to be
thus recklessly destroyed, it was given out that
Diana was s0 engaged with Olympias, in aiding to
bring Alexander into the world, that she had no time
nor thought fur any other concern. At a subse-
uent period, Alexander made an offer to rebuild
the temple, provided he was allowed to inscribe his
name on the front, which the Ephesians refused.
Aided, however,. by the whole of Asia Minor, they
succeeded in erecting a still more magnilicent
temple, which the ancients have lavishly praised
and placed among the seven wonders of the world.
It took two hundred and twenty years to complete.
Pliny (Hist. Nat. xxxvi. 21), who has given a
description of it, says it was 425 feet in length,
220 broad, and supportel by 127 columns, each
of which had been contributed by some prince, and
were 60 feet high: 36 of them were richly carved.
Chersiphron, the architect, presided over the un-
dertaking, and, being ready to lay violent hands
on himself, in consequence of his difficulties, was
restrained by the command of the goddess, who
appeared to him during the night, assuring him
that she herself had accomplished that which had
brought him to despair. The altar was the work
of Praxiteles. The famous sculptor Scopas is said
by Pliny to have chiselled one of the columns.
Apelles, a native of the city, contributed a splen-
did picture of Alexander the Great. The rights
of sanctuary, to the extent of a stadium in all di-
“rections round the temple, were also conceded,
which in consequence of abuse the Emperor Tibe-
rius abolished. The temple was built of cedar,
cypress, white marble, and even gold, with which
it glittered (Spanh. Odservat. in Hymn. in Dian.
353). Costly and maguiticent oflerings of various
kinds were mae to the goddess, and treasured in
the temple; such as paintings, statues. &c., the
value of which almost exceeded computation, The
fame of the temple, of the goddess, and of the
city itself, was spread not ouly through Asia but
the world, a celebrity which was enhanced and
diffused the more readily because sacred games
were practised there, which called competitors and
spectators from every country. Among his other
enormities Nero is said to have despoiled the temple
of Diaua of much of its treasure. It continued


EPHESUS.


to conciliate no small portion of bin a till it
was finally hunt by the Goths in reign of
Gallienus.

At Ephesus Diana was worshipped under the
name of Artemis, There was more than one di-
vinity which went by the name of Artemis, as
the Arcadian Artemis, the Taurian Artemis, as
well as the Ephesian Artemis. It will be seen,
from the figure already given, that this last differed
materially from the Diana, sister of Apollo, whose
attributes are the bow, the quiver, the girt-up robe,
and the hound; whose person is a model of
feminine strength, ease, and grace’; aud whace
delights were in the pursuits of the chace.—

Along the shady hills and breezy peaks

Rejoicing in the chace, her golden bow

She bends, her deadly arrows sending forth.
The ‘silver shrines’ of the Ephesian Artemis,
mentioned in Acts xix. 24, have been already
noticed [Dxawxrrivs, -

Among the distinguished natives of Ephesus in
the ancient world, may be mentioned Apelles and
Parrhasius, rivals in the art of painting, Hera-
clitus, the man-hating philosopher, Hipponax, a
satirical poet, Artemidorus, who wrote a history
and description of the earth, The claims of


Ephesus, however, to the praise of originality in-


the prosecution of the liberal arts, are but incon-
siderable; and it must be content with the dubious
reputation of having excelled in the refinements
of a voluptuous and artiticial civilization. With
culture of this kind a practical belief in, and a
constant use of, those arts which pretend to lay
open the secrets of nature and arm the hand of
man with supernatural powers, have generally
been found conjoined. Accordingly, the Ephe-
sian multitude were addicted to sorcery; indeed,
in the age of Jesus and his Apostles, adepts in the
occult sciences were numerous: they travelled
from country to country, and were found in great
numbers in Asia, deceiving the credulous multi-
tude and profiting by their expectations. They
were sometimes Jews, who referred their skill and
even their furms of proceeding to Solomon, who is
still regarded in the Kast as head or prince of
Magicians (Joseph. Anétq. viii. 2, 5; Acts vill
9; xiii. 6, 8). In Asia Minor Ephesus had a
high reputation for mayieal arts (Ortlob, De Ephes.
Libris combustis).

The books mentioned, Acts xix.19, were doubt-
less books of magic. How extensively they were
in use may be learnt from the fact that ‘the price
of them’ was ‘fifty thousand pieces of’ silver.’
Very celebrated were the Ephesian letters CEgeot
ypdupara), which appear to have been a sort of
magical formule written on paper or parchment,
designed to be fixed as amulets on ditferent parts
of the body, such as the hands and the head (Plut.
Sym. vii.; Lakemacher, Ods. Philol. ii, 126;
Deyling, Observ. iii. 355). Erasmus (Aduy. Cent.
ii. 57S) says that they were certain signs or marks
which rendered their possessor victurious in every-
thing. Eustathius(ad Hom. Odys. 7 694) states an
opinion that Croesua, when on his funeral pile, was
very much beuefited by the use of them; and
that when a Milesian and an Ephesian were
wrestling in the Olympic games, the former could
re no advantage, as the latter had Epliesian

etters bound round his heel; but, these being
discovered and removed, he lost his superiority


and was thrown thirty times. These passages


.ewe”™


EPHESUS.


show the feeling which prevailed respecting the
books that were brought and burned, and serve to
illustrate the remark made by the writer of the
Acts, ‘So mightily grew the word of the Lord


and prevailed.’

The ruite of Ephesus lie two short st
journey from Smyrna, in proceeding from which
bear the south-east the traveller passes the
pretty village of Sedekuy; and two hours and a

onwards he comes to the ruined village of
Danizzi, on a wide, solitary, uncultivated plain,
beyond which several burial-grounds may be
observed ; near one of these, on. an eminence,
are the sup


posed ruins of Ephesus, consisting of
shattered walls, in which some pillars, archi-
traves, and fragments of marble have been built.
The soil of the plain appears rich. It is covered
with a rank, burnt-up vegetation, and is every-
and solitary, though bordered by


where deserted


EPHESUS. 641


ue mountains. A few corn-fields are
sca along the site of the ancient city, whien
is marked by some large masses of shapcless
sagged ges Fotecrin the sea extends
patron 9 eadia ilential marsh. Al
the slope of the pict and over the sain ape
scattered fragments of masonry and detached
ruins, but nothing can now be fixed upon as the
great temple of Diana. There are some broken
columns and capitals of the Corinthian order of
white marble : » wan also ruins of a theatre,
consisting of some circular seats and numerous
arches, supposed to be the one in which Paul was
omg when interrupted by shouts of, ‘Great is
iana of the Ephesians.’ The ruins of this
theatre present a wreck of immense grandeur,
and the original must have been of the largest
and most imposing dimensions. Its form alone
can now be spoken of, for every seat is removed,


still retain the name of the parent city, Asalook—


282. [Epbesus.]
and the proscenium is a hill of ruins. A splendid
circus (Fellows’ Reports, p. 275) or stadium re-


mains tolerahly entire, and there are numerous
iles of buildings seen alike at Pergamus and
roy as well as here, by some called gymnasia,
by others temples; by others again, with more
riety, palaces. They all came with the
man conquest. No one but a Roman em

could have conceived such structures. In Italy
they have parallels in Adrian's villa near Tivoli,
and pies in the pile upon the Palatine. Many
other walls remain to show the extent of the
nuildings of the city, but no inscription or orna-
-nent is to be found, cities having been built out
of this quarry of worked marble. The ruins of
the adjoming town, which arose about four hun-
dred years azo, are entirely composed of materials
from Ephesns. There are a few huts within these
ruins (about a mile anda half from Ephesus), which


a Turkish word, which is associated with the same
idea as Ephesus, meaning the City of the Moon
(Fellows). A church dedicated to St. John is
thought to have stood near, if not on the site of,
the present mosque. Arundell (Discoveries, vol.
ii. p. 253) conjectures that the gate, called the Gate
of Pcescotice, and large masses of brick wall,
which lie beyond it, are of this celebrated
church, which was fortified during the great
Council of Ephesus. The tomb of St. John was
in or under Nis church, and the Greeks have a
tradition of a sacred dust arising every year, on
his festival, from the tomb, possessed of miracu-
lous virtues: this dust they term manna. Not far
from the tomb of St. John was that of Timothy.
The tomb of Mary and the seven madla (boys, as
the Synazaria calls the Seven Sleepers) are found
in an adjoining hill. At the back aly mosque,
iY


~


42 EPHESUS.


on the hill, is the sunk ground-plan of a small
church, still much venerated by the Greeks. The
sites of two others are shown at Asalook. There is
also a building, called the Prison of St. Paul,
constructed of large stones without cement.

Though Ephesus presents few traces of human
life, aud Jittle but scattered and mutilated remains
of its ancient grandeur, yet the environs, diversi-
fied as they are with bill and dale, and not
scantily supplied with wood and water, present
many features of great Leauty. Arundell (ii.
244) enumerates a great variety of trees, which
he saw in the neighbourhood, among which
may be specilied groves of myrtle near Ephesus.
He aleo found heath in abundance, of two vari-
eties; and saw there the common fern, which he
met with in no other part of Asia Minor.

Dr. Chaudler (p. 150, 4to) gives a striking
description of Ephesus, as he found it on his visit
in 1764:—‘Its population consisted of a few
Greek peasants, living in extreme wretchedness,
dependence, and insensibility, the representatives
of an illustrious people, and inhabiting the wreck
of their greatness—sume the substructure of the
glorions editices which they raised; some beneath
the vaults of the stadium, once the crowded scene
of their diversions; and some in the abrupt pre-
cipice, in the sepulchres which received their
ashes. Such are the present citizens of Ephesus, and
such is the condition to which that renowned city
has been reduced. It was a ruinons place when
the Emperor Justinian filled Constantinople with
its statues and raised the church of St. Sophia on
its columns. Its streets are obscured aud over-
grown, A herd of goats was driven to it for
shelter from the sun at noon, and a noisy flight
of crows from the quarries seemed to insult its
silence. We heard the partridge call in the area
of the theatre and of the stadium. The pomp of
its heathen worship is no longer remembered ; and
Christianity, bil was then nursed by apostles,
and fostered by general councils, barely lingers
on, in an existence hardly visible. However
much the Church at Ephesus may (Rey. ii. 2),
in its earliest days, have merited praise four its
© works, Jalour, and patience,’ yet it appears soon
to have ‘left its first love,’ and to have received
in vain the admonition— Remember, therefore,
from whence thou art fallen, and repent and do
the first works; or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of
his place, except thou repent.’ If any repentance
was produced by this solemn warning, its ellects
were not durable, and the place has Jong since
offered an evidence of the truth of prophecy, and
the certuinty of the divine threatenings, as well as
a melancholy subject for thought to the contem-
plative Christian. Its fate is that of the once
flourishing seven churches of Asia: its fate is
that of the entire country—a garden has become
a desert. Busy centres of civilization, spots
where the refinements and delights of the age
were collected, are now a prey to silence, destruc-
tion, and death. Consecrated first of all to the
purposes of idolatry, Ephesus next had Christian
temples almost rivalling the pagan in splendour,
wherein the image of the great Diana lay pros-
trate before the cross; and, after the lapse of sume
centuries, Jesus gives place to Mahomed, and the
crescent glittered ou the dome of the recently
Christian church. A few more scores of years,


‘EPHRAIM.


and Ephesus has neither temple, cross, crescent,
nor city, but is ‘a desolation, a dry land, aud
a wilderness.’ Even the sea has retired from the
scene of devastation, and a pestilential mons,
covered with mud and rushes, hus succeeded to the
waters which bronght up ships laden with met
chandise from every part of the known world
(Herod. i. 26, ii. 148; Liv. i. 45; Pausan. vii.
4; Philo, Byz. de 7 Orb. Mirac. Gronoy. Thesaur.
viii.; Crenzer, Symbol. ii. 13; Hass], Erdbesche.
ii. 132; for a plan of Ephesus, see Kiepert’ Atlas,
von Hellas; Arundell’s Visit to the Seven
Churches of Asia ; Fellows’ Excursion in Asa
Minor, 1839; Discoveries in Asta Minor, by
Rev. T. Arundell, 1834).—J. R. B.

EPHOD, an article of dress worn by the He-
brew priests. [Prigsrs.]

EPHRAIM (DYIDN; Sept. "Edpaiu), the
younger son of Joseph, but who received prece-
dence over the elder in and from the blessing of
Jacob (Gen. xli. 52; xlviii. 1). That blessing
was an adoptive act, whereby Ephraim and his
brother Manasseh were counted as sons of Jacob
in the place of their -father; the object being
to give to Joseph, through his sons, a double
portion in the brilliant prospects of his house.
Thus the descendants of Joseph formed tro of
the tribes of Israel, whereas every other of Jacob's
sons counted but as one. There were thus. in fact,
thirteen tribes of Israel; but the number twelve
is usually preserved, either by excluding that of
Levi (which had no territory), when Ephraim and
Manasseh are separately named, or hy counting
these two together as the tribe of Joseph, when
Levi is included in the account, The intentions
of Jacob were fulfilled, and Ephraim and Ma-
nasseh were counted as trihes of Israel at the
departure from Egypt, and as such shared in the
territorial distribution of the Promised Land
(Num. i. 33; Josh. xvii. 14; 1 Chron. vil. »)
The precise position of the immediate descend
ants of Joseph in Egypt might form an interesting
subject for speculation. Being the sous of one
in eminent place, aud through their mother oon
nected with high families in Egypt. their con
dition could not at once have been identilied with
that of the sojourmers in Goshen; and yerbays
they were not fully amalgamated with the rete
their countrymen until that king arose who knew
not Joseph. :

At the departare from Egypt, the population of
the two tribes of Ephraim and Manasseli toge
ther amounted to 72,700 men capable of baring
arms, greatly exceeding that of any single tri
except Judah, which had somewhat more. Duribg
the wandering, their number increased to 95,200,
which placed the two tribes much higher than
even Judah. At the Exode, Ephraim singly ba
40,500, and Manasseh only 32,200; but a great
change took place in their relative nea”
during the wandering. Ephraim lost 8600, am
Manasseh gamed 20.500; so. that just beiove
entering Canaan, Ephraim stood at 32,500. and
Manasseh at 52,700. At the departure fm
Egypt, Ephraim, at 40,500, was above ‘I
nasse and Benjamin in numbers; at the
of the wandering it was, at 32,5U0, above Simeon
only, which tribe had suffered a still greater Joss
of numbers (comp. Num. i. and xxvi.).

One of the finest and most fruitfal parts of


EPHRAIM.


Palestine, occupying the very centre of the land,
was assizned to this tribe. It extended from the
horders of the Mediterranean on the west to the
Jordan on the east: on the north it had the half-
tribe of Manasseh, and on the south Benjamin
and Dan (Josh. xvi. 5, sq.; xvii. 7, sq.). This
fine country included most of what was after-
wards called Samaria, as distinguished from
Judea on the one hand, and from Galilee on the
other. The tabernacle and the ark were depo-
sited within its limits, at Shiloh; and the pos-
session of the sacerdotal establishment, which was
a central object of attraction to all the other tribes,
must, in no small degree, have enhanced its
importance, and increased its wealth and po-
is The domineering and hauglity spirit
of the Ephraimites is more than once indi-
cated (Josh. xvii, 14; Judg. viii, 1-3; xii. 1)
before the establishment of the regal govern-
ment; but the particular enmity of Ephraim
against the other great tribe of Judah, and the
rivalry between them, do not come out distiuctly
until the establisltment of the monarchy. In
the election of Saul from the least considerable
tribe in Israel, there was nothing to excite the
jealousy of Ephraim ; and, after his heroie quali-
ties had cunciliated respect, it rendered the new
king true allegiance and support. But when the
great tribe of Judah produced a king in the person
of David, the pride and jealousy of Ephraim were
thoroughly awakened, and it was doubtless chiefly
through their means that Abner was enabled to
uphold for atime the house of Saul ; for there are
manifest indications that by this time Ephraim
influenced the views and feelinzs of all the other
tribes. They were at length driven by the force
of circumstances to acknowledge David upon
conditions; and were probably not without hope
that, as the king of the nation at large, he would
establish his capital in their central portion of
the land. But when he not only established his
court at Jerusalem, but proceeded to remove the
ark thither, making his native Judah the seat both
of the theocratical and civil government, the
Ephraimites became thoroughly alienated, and


longed to establish their own ascendancy. The.


building of the temple at Jerusalem, and other
measures of Solomon, strengthened this desire ;
and although the minute organization and vi-
gour of his government prevented any overt acts
of rebellion, the train was then laid, which, upon
his death, rent the ten tribes from the house of
David, and gave to them a king, a capital, and a
religion suitable to the separate views and in-
terests of the tribe. Thenceforth the rivalry of
Ephraim and Judah was merged in that Letween
the two kingdoms; although still the predomi-
nance of Ephraim in the kingdom of Israel was so
conspicuous as to occasion the whole realm to be
called by its name, especially when that rivalry
is mentioned. .
2. EPHRAIM (Eg¢paity), a city in the wilder-
ness of Judea, to which Jesus withdrew from the
ution which followed the miracle of raising
us from the dead (John xi. 54). It is
a by Eusebius (Onomast. s. v. "Egpdv) eight
Roman miles north of Jerusalem. This indica-
tion would seem to make it the same with the
Ephrain which is mentioned in 3 Chron. xiii. 19,
along with Bethel and Jeshanah, as towns taken
from Jeroboam by Abijab. And this again is


EPISTLES. 643


doubtless the same which Josephus also names
along with Bethel as ‘two small cities’ (woAlxwa),
which were taken and garrisoned by Vespasian
while reducing the country around Jerusalem
(De Bell. Jud. iv. 9, 9).

3. EPHRAIM, a mountain or group of moun-
tains in central Palestine, in the tribe of the same
name, on or towards the borders of Benjamin
(Josh. xvii. 15; xix. 60; xx. 73; Judg. vii. 24;
xvii. 1; 1 Sam. ix. 4; 1 Kings iv.8). From a
comparison of these passages it may be collected
that the name of ‘Mount Ephraim’ was gpplied to
the whole of the ranges and groups of hills which
occupy the central part of the southernmost horder
of this tribe, and which are prolonged southward
into the tribe of Benjamin. In the time of
Joshua these hills were densely covered with trees
(Josh. xvii. 18), which is by no means the case
at present. In Jer. 1. 19, Mount Ephraim is
mentioned in apposition with Bashan, on the
other side of the Jordan, as a region of rich
pastures, siggesting that the valleys among these
mountains were well watered and covered with
rich herbage, which is true at the present day.

4. EPHRAIM, rue Foresr or, in which
Absalom lost his life (2 Sam. xviii. 6-8), was in
the country east of the Jordan, not far from Ma-
hanaim. How it came to hear the name of a
tribe on the other side the river is not known.
Some think it was on account of the slaughter of
the Ephraimites heré in the time of Jephthah
(Judy. aii. 4-6); but others suppose that it was
because the Ephraimites were in the habit of
bringing their flocks into this quarter for pasture ;
for the Jews allege that the Ephraimites received
from Josliua, who was of their tribe, permission to
feed their flocks in the woodlands within the
territories of any of the tribes of Israel; and that
as this forest lay near their territories on the other
side the Jordan, they were wont to drive their
flocks over to feed there (see Jarchi, Kimchi,
Abarbanel, &c., on 2 Sam. xviii. 6).

EPHRATAH, otherwise Berunzaem, which °


see.

EPHRON, a Hittite residing in Hebron, who
sold to Abraham the cave and field of Mach-
pelah as a family sepulchre (Gen. xxiii. 6).

EPICUREANS. [Puu.osopny, Grezx.]

EPISTLES. In directing our inquiry firet
of all towards the relation in which the Epistles
stand to the other component parts of the New
Testament, we find that both the Old and New
Testament have been arranged by divine wisdom
after one and the same plan. All the revelations
of God to mankind rest upon history. Therefore
in the Old, as well as in the New Testament, the
history of the deeds of God stands rirsr, as
being the basis of holy writ; thereupon follow
the books which exhibit the doctrines and internal
life of the men of God—in the Old Testament
the Psalms, the writings of Solomon, &c., and in
the New Testament the Epistles of the Apostles ;
finally, there follow in the Old Testament the
writings of the prophets, whose visiun extends
into the times of the New Testament; and at the
conclusion of the New Testament stands its only
prophetic book, the Revelation of John.

In this also we must thaukfully adore divine
wisdom, that the Epistles, which lay down the
doctrines of the Christian religion, orgiete) not

©


644 EPISTLES.


from one apostle alone, but from all the four prin-
cipal apostles; sothat one and the same divine
truth is presented to our eyes in various forms as
it were in various mirrors, by which its richness
and manifold character are the better displayed.

The Epistles of the New Testament divide
themselves into two parts—the Paving and the
so-called Carnon.ic.

The Pauttne Epistles are thirteen in number ;
or fourteen, if we add to them the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Up to our days their genuineness has
almost unanimously been recognised in Germany,
with the exception only of the pastoral epistles, and
more especially the first letter to Timothy. Eich-
horn and Bauer have attacked the genuineness of
all the three pastoral epistles, and Schleiermacher
that of the tirst epistle to Timothy. Indeed,
the very peculiar character of the Pauline Epistles
is so striking to any one who is not ignorant
of the want of ease and originality conspicuous
in the counterfeit writings of early times, as to
leave not the least doubt of their genuineness,

# Depth of thought, tire of speech, firmness of cha-
racter—these manly features, joined withal to the
indulgence of feelings of the tnost devoted love
and affection, characterize these epistles. The
amiable-personal character of the apostle may be
most beautifully traced in his Epistles to the
Philippians and to Philemon.

All the Epistles, except the one to the Romans,
were called forth by circumstances and particular
occasions in the affairs of the communities to
which they were addressed. Not all, however,
were preserved; it is, at least, evident, from
1 Cor. v. 9, that a letter to the Corinthians has
been lost; from Col. iv. 16, it has also been con-
cluded—though probably erroneously, since there
perhaps the letter to the Ephesians is referred to—
that another letter to the community of Laodicea
has likewise been lost. Press of business usually
compelled Paul—what was, besides, not uncom-
mon in those times—to use his companions as
amanuenses. He mentions (Gal. vi. 11), as
something peculiar, that he had written this letter
with his own hand. This circumstance may
greatly have favoured the temptation to forge
letters in his name, becanse since the period of
Alexandriné literature it was not unusual to indite
spurious books, as is evident from Euschius (Hist.
Eccles. p. 23); and even Christian bishops made
complaints about the falsification of their letters.
Paul alludes to this (2 Thes. ii. 2), and therefore
writes the greeting (2 Thes. iii. 17) with his own
hand. , Paul himself exhorted the communities
mutually to impart to each other his letters to
them, and read them aloud im their assemblies
(Col. iv. 16). It is therefore probable that copies
of these letters had been early made by the several
communities, and deposited in the form of col-
lections. So loug therefore as the various com-
munities transmitted the manuscripts to each
other, no other letters, it is obvious, could come
into the collections than those to whose gennine-
ness the communities to whom they were origin-
ally addressed, bore witness. Even Peter (2 Pet.
iii. 16) seems to have had before him a number
of Paul's letters, as, about forty years later, a
number of letters of Ignatius were transmitted by
Polycarp to Smyrna, while the church of Phi-
lippi forwarded to him those directed to them
(Ep. Polic. sub fin. ; Euseb. Hist. Eccles. iii. 36).


EPISTLES.
This Pauline collection, in contra-distinction to
the gospels, parsed by the name of 6 axdoroAos.

The letters of Paul may be chronologically
arranged into those written before his Roman in-
prisonment, and those writte: during and after it:
thus beginning with his tirst letter to the Thessa-
Jonians, and concluding with his second to Timo-
thy, embracing an interval of about ten yeas
(a.p. 54-64). In our Bibles, however, the letters
are arranged according ty the pre-eminent parts
and stations of the communities to whom they
were addressed, and conclude with the epistles to
the two bishops and a private letter to Philemon.

That the Epistles offered great difficulties was
already felt in the earliest times (2 Peter iti. 16).
In the Roman Church their true understanding
was more particularly lost by the circumstance
that it understood by THE Law, only the opus
operatum of the ceremonial law; consequently
the Roman Church could not comprehend justifi-
cation by faith, and tancht instead justilication
by works; as soon, therefore, as the true under
standing of the Pauline epistles dawned upon
Luther, his breach with the Roman Church was
decided.

Among the more ancient interpreters of the
Pauline letters Chrysostom and Calvin deserve
particular distinction; though the former, with
all his zeal and psychological penetration, was
still deficient in the true hermeneutic method.

Tue Catnoric Eristies.—There. is, in the
first instance, a diversity of opiniun respecting
their name : some refer it to their waiTEKs (letters
from all the other apostles who had enteied the
stage of authorship along with Paul); some, again,
to their CONTENTS (letters of no special but general
Christian tenor) ; others, again, to the RECEIVERS
(letters addressed tu no community in particular).
None. of these views, however, is free from ditt-
culties. The first aud the second views—and more
especially the first—cannot be brought to barmo-
nize with the idiomatic expressions im the extant
pages of the ancient writers; the second is, be
sides, contradicted by the fact that the letter of
James is of a special tenor, while, on the contrary,
that to the Romans is of such a general character
as to deserve the name Cationic in that sense.
The third opinion is most decidedly justitied by
passages from the ancient writers (Euseb. Hist.
Eccles. v.18; Clem. Alex. Strom. iv. 15,ed. Potter,
p. 606 ; Orig. c. Cels. i. 63). The Pauline Epistles
had all their particular directions, while the
letters of Peter, Jumes, 1 John, and Jude were
circular epistles. The Epistles 2 and 3 Join
were subsequently added, and included on ac-
count of their shortness, and to this collection
was given the name Caruotic Letrsrs, in con-
tralistinction to the Pauninz, which were called
6 adxdotodos.—A. T.

KPISTLES OF THE APOSTOLICAL
FATHERS. Under this head we shall briefly
notice those remains of Christian antiquity which
are ascribed to the writers usually stylel the
Apostolic Fathers, from the circumstance that
they were converted to the Christian faith during
the life-time, and probably by the instrumentality,
of the Apostles. Of Barnabas and the epistle
which bears his name we have already spokea at
length [Barnanas]. il

1. Cement, or Crenens Romancs. It ¥i
probably be generally admitted that no produc


EPISTLES.


tion of the early church approaches so near the
apostolic writings, in the union of devout feeling
with justness and sobriety of thought, as that deno-
minated the ‘ First Epistle of Clement to the Corin-
thians’ but addressed in the name of ‘ the Church
sojourning at Rome ( 4 xaporxotca ‘Pduny) to the
Church of God sojourning at Corinth.’ Eusebius
terms it, ‘great and wonderful’ (neydAn Te Kal
Gavpacta), and states that in his own and former
times it was read in most churches. (Hist. Eccles.
iii. 16; iii, 38; iv. 22, 23). Irenaeus calls it
ixaveerdrny ypaphy, ‘a most powerful writing’
(Euseb. Hist. Eccles. v. 6). It is frequently
quoted by Clemens Alexandrinus (Strom. i. 7,
$38; Opera, ed. Klotz, ii. p. 29), 6 dxdoroAos
Kafuns; Strom. iv. 17, § 107; ii. p. 335;
Strom. v. 12, § 81; iii. p. 57; Strom. vi. 3,
$ 65; iii. 137. The only known manu-
script of this Epistle is that appended to the
celebrated Alexandrian Codex, which was pre-


sented to Charles I. by Cyrillus Lucaris, the ©


patriarch of Constantinople. The same manu-
script contains also a fragment of the so-called
second Epistle. They were first published at
Oxford, in 1633, by Patrick Young, the royal
Kibrarian. Sir Henry Wotton re-examined the
manuscript, amended Young's copy in above
eighty places, and published a very correct edition
at Cambridge, in 1718. Certain portions of the
first epistle have been thought to bear internal
evidence of spuriousness. Bignonius, in a letter
to Grotius, instances ch. xl., which relates to the
presentation of offerings at set times, in which the
word Aaixés occurs; and the epithet ancicnt
(épxalay) applied to the Corinthian church in ch.
xlvii. Mosheim asserts that some passages are evi-
dently taken from Clement of Alexandria (Mo-
sheim’s Commentaries, transl. by Vidal, vol. i. p.
271). The main object of this Epistle was to
allay the dissensions which had arisen in the Co-
rinthian church, and especially to repress the un-
ruly spirit shown by many against their teachers,
It is worthy of notice that Clement uniformly
speaks of the opposition of the Corinthians against
their presbyters, never of their insubordination to
their bishop: he inculcates submission to the
presbyters, but never to the bishop. Thus in ch,
xlvii., ‘It is disgraceful, beloved, and unworthy
of your training in Christ, to have it reported
that the well-established and ancient Corinthian’
church has been excited by one or two individuals
to revolt against the presbyters’ (ts priests, Abp.
Wake's transl.). Ch. liv., ‘Only let the flock of
Christ be at peace with the presbyters that are set
over it’ (ray xaSeorauevey xpecButépwy). Ch.
Avii., Do ye who laid the foundation of the dis-
sension submit to the presbyters' (priests, Abp.
Wake's transl.). In two other passages the term
mpecBurépa appears to denote simply the elder
members of the church, while the term 7yotpevoe
(Heb. xiii. 7, 17, 24) is used for their teachers or
superintendents. Ch. i., ‘ Being subject to those
that have the rule over you" (rots jyoupevos
buoy), ‘and giving due honour tothe aged among
you’ (reis ap’ iuiv xpecBurépos). Ch. xxi,
“Let us honour those that are set over us’ (robs
wporryounevous) ; ‘let us respect the aged that are
among us’ (robs xpeoBurépous) ; ‘let us instruct
the young,’ &c. In ch. xlii. he speaks of bishops
and deacons in a manner which shows that he
considered the former as synonymous with presby-


* brews.


EPISTLES. 6465


ters: ‘They (the Apostles) appointed their first-
fruits to be bishops and deacons (ministers, Abp.
Wake's transl.) of those who should believe. Nor
was this any new thing, seeing that long before
it was written concerning bishops and deacons.
For thus the Scripture, in a certain place, suith,
I will appoint their overseers (bishops, robs émi-
oxérous), and their ministers (deacons, robs 3:0
xéyous) in faith.’ It has indeed been supposed
that the bishop of the Corinthian church was de-
ceased, and that the disorders which Clement
sought to repress broke out before his successor
was appointed. But had this been the case, for
which there is not the slightest evidence, it is ”
almost incredible that no allusion should be made
to it. The only legitimate inference appears to
be, ‘ that the original constitution of the chureh
of Corinth still subsisted in Clement's time; the
government was still vested not in one man, but
in many’ (Dr. Arnold's Sermons on the Christian
Life, Introduction, p. xlvi.).

In Clement's Epistle only one book of the New
Testament is expressly named, Paul's first Epistle
to the Corinthians; but though the Evangelists
are not named, several sayings of Christ contained
in our Gospels are repeated. There are also
evident allusions to the Acts, all the Pauline
Epistles (1 Thessalonians excepted), the Epistles
of Peter and James, and the Epistle to the He-
A tabular view of these passages is given
by Dr. Lardner (Credibility of the Gospel His-
tory, pt. ii. ch. ii.; Works, vol. ii. pp. 35-53). Eu-
sebius, speaking of Clement's Epistle, says, ‘He
has inserted in it many sentiments taken from the
Epistle to the Hebrews, and sometimes makes use
of the identical expressions, from which it is evi-
dent that that composition is uot a recent one. .
Paul having addressed the Hebrews in
their native language, some say that the Evange-
list Luke, aud others that this very Clement,
translated the document; an opinion which is
supported by the fact, that the Epistle of Clement
and that to the Hebrews are marked by the same
peculiarities of style, and in both compositions the
sentiments are not unlike.’"—(Jlist. Eccles, iii. 38,
ed. Valessii, 1672, p. 110.)

As to the date of this epistle it has been fixed
by Grabe, Galland, Wotton, and Hefele about
the year 68; but Cutelerius, Tillemont, and Lard-
ner think that it was written at the close of the
Diocletian Persecution in 96 or 97, A passage
in ch. xli., in which Clement speaks in the present
tense respecting the sacrifices of the Mosaic law,
has been supposed to favour the earlier date; but.
Josephus adopts the same phraseology in his Anti-
guéties, which were not tinished till twenty years
after the destruction of Jernsalem.

The first writer that notices the second Epistle
of Clement is Eusebius, who does not absolutely
pons it spurious, but says that it was less

nown than the former, and not quoted by an-
cient writers (Hist. Eccles. iii. 38). Photius
states decidedly that it was rejected as spurious, *
It is only a fragment, and its style is rather homi-
letic than epistolary. The Gospels are quoted
several times in it, more expressly than in the
first Epistle, and there is one passage frum an
apocryphal writing called the Gospel according
to the Egyptians (Lardner’s Credibility, &c., part
ii. ch. 3; Works, ii.55). In 1752, John James
Wetstein published, at the end of his edition of


646 EPISTLES.


the Greek Testament, two epistles in Syriac (ac-
companied by a Latin translation), attributed to
Clement, which were discovered at the end of a
Manuscript of the Syriac New Testament. Im-
mediately on their publication Dr. Lardner ex-
amined the evidence for their genuineness, and
gave the result of his inquiries in a Dissertation
(Works, vol. x. pp. 186-212), to which we refer
the reader, only remarking that the whole strain
of these compositions, and the allusions to pre-
vailing practices, sufticiently indicate that they
were written long after Clement’s time.

The following works have also been attributed
to Clement, but, as they are unquestionably sup-
posititious, we shall merely give their titles. 1. The
Apostolic Constitutions, in eight books. 2. The
Apostolic Canons. 3. The Recognitions of Cle-
ment. 4, The Clementina. ‘They are all printed
in the Patres Apostolici of Cotelerius, vol. i.
(Mosheim's Commentaries, translated by Vidal,
vol. i. pp. 270-274).

2. Ia@natius, according to Ensebius (Hist. Ee-
eles. iii. 36) and Origen (Lom. vi. in Luc. ; Opera,
ed. Lommatzsch, y. 101), the second bishop, or,
aceurding to Jerome (De Vir. Lllustr. xvi), the
third bishop of Antioch in Syria. Fifteen epistles
bear his name. Three of these (one addressed to
the Virgin Mary, the other two to St. Jolm) are
preserved only in a Latin version. The rest are
extant in Greck and in an ancient Latin version,
and are addressed to Mary of Cassabolis or
Neapolis, to Hero. to the churches at Tarsus,
Antioch, Philippi, Ephesus, Maznesia, Trallinm,
Rome, Philadelphia, Smyrna, and to Polycarp.
The rst eight are unanimously allowed to be
spurious. Of the remaining seven (which were
written on his journey fiom Antiuch to Rome,
where he suflered martyrdom by exposure to wild
beasts), there are two recensions, one loner, the
other shorter. It has been warmly contioverted
whether the longer epistles are interpolations of
the shorter, or the shorter abridgments of the
longer. Mr. Whiston contended earnestly in
favour of the longer recension, including the
Epistles to Tarsus, Antioch, and Hero, and
attempted to prove that the smaller were only
heretical extracts from them made in the fourth
century. He published both recensions, with
translations and various readings, in the first
volume of his Prinutive Christianity Revived,
London, 1711, 5 vols. Svo. The same opinion
has lately been maintained by Dr. Charles Meier
_ of the University of Giessen (Studien und Kri-
tiken, 1836, p. 310), whose arguments have been


met by Dr. Richard Rothe in an essay on the .


genuineness of the Ignatian Epistles appended to
his work Die Anfunye der Christlichen Kirche
und ihrer Verfussung, Wittenberg, 1837. Lardner
and most modern critics adopt the shorter re-
cension. Mosheim expresses himself very doubt-
fully, and, while he iia the seven epistles to
have ‘somewhat of a genuine cast,’ confesses that
he is unable to determine how much may be
considered as authentic (Commentaries, trans-
lated by Vidal, vol. i. pp.276, 277). Dr. Neander,
while he allows many passages to bear the im-
press of antiquity, considers even the shorter re-
cension to be grossly interpolated. The support
which it was supposed might be drawn from
these epistles in favour of episcopacy gave, on
their publication, an exaggerated importance to


EPISTLES, SPURIOUS.


the question of their genuineness, and called- forth
the polemical skill of several distinguished theo-
logians of the seventeenth century. In 1666 a
work appeared by Dalleus (Jean Daillé), en-
titled, De Scriptis que sub Dionysit Areopagite
et Ignatit Antiocheni nominibus circumferuntur
Libri duo, in which he maintains that the Ig-
natian Epistles were forged at the close of the
third, or at the beginning of the fourth century
(c. xxxviii. p. 461). In reply to this and other
writera, Bishop Pearson published his celebrated
Vindwie Ignatiane, Cantab. 1672, which was
reprinted by Cotelerius in his edition of the
Apostolic Fathers, vol. ii. pp. 251-444. (Wake's
Genuine Epistles of the Apostolical Fathers,
London, 1737, pp. x1.-li. pp. 60-128; Campbell's
Lectures on Ecclesiastical History, London, 1800,
vol. i. pp. 189, 184-197; Dr. Amold’s Sermons
on the Christian Life, 1841, Introduction, pp.
xlvi.-xlix.; Lardner's Credibility, pt. ii, ch. 5;
Works, vol. ii. pp. 73-94; Neander's Allgemeine
Geschichte, i. Abth. ii, Band. 1140, 2nd edit.
1843).

3. Ponycanp’s Epistle to the Philippians. Ire
nus, in a letter to Florinus the Valentinian,
pteserved in part by Eusebius (Hist. Eccles. vy,
20), gives an interesting account of his early
recollections of Polycarp, and refers to the
ae which he sent to the neighbouring
churches. Only one, however, has been pre
served ; it was addressed to the Philippians, and
in Jerome's time was publicly read in the a
sembly of Asia— Scripsit ad Philippenses valde
utilem epistolam qua usque hodie in Asia con-
ventu lezitur’ (De Vir. Idustr. c. 13), It isalso
mentioned by Eusebius (dist. Eccles. iii. 36)
who cites two passages from it (§ 8 and $13)
relating to Ignatius, and remarks that it contains
several quotations from the first epistle of Peter
(Hist. Eccles. iv. 14). It is divided into fourteen
sections, of which the first nine and the thirteenth,
preserved by Eusebius, are in the original Greek,
and the rest only in an ancient Latin Version.
This version of the whole epistle was first printed
at Paris in 1498. Peter Halloix published the
Epistle in Greek and Latin in 1633, fiom a copy
seut by the Jesuit Sirmond to Turrianus,  Four-
teen years after, Archbishop Ussher obtained
another copy. from which he prepared an edition
in 1647. An excellent edition, edited by Sir
Thomas Smith, appeared in 170) (Hefele’s Pa-
trum Apostolicorun Opera, p. xviii, ; Lardner’s
Credidility, pt. ii. ch. 6).

4. The Shepherd of Hermas [Hermas] _

J. E.R.


EPISTLES, SPURIOUS [Apocrrena]. Of
the-e many are lost, but there are several still ex-
tant: the principal are

The Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans.

Tie Third Epistle of Paul to the Corinthians.

The Epistle of Peter to James.

The Epistles of Paul and Seneca.

There was an Epistle tu the Laodiceans extant
in the beginning af the secend century, which was
received by Marcion; but whether this is the same
with the one now extant in the Latin language 1s
more than doubtful. ‘There are some,’ says Je-
rome, ‘ who read the Epistle to the Laodiceans, but
it is universally rejected.’ The miginal Epistle was
most probably a forgery founded on Coloss. iv. 16,
‘And when this Epistle is read among you, cause


EPISTLES, SPURIOUS.


that it be read also in the church of the Laodi-
ceans, and that ye likewise read the Epistle from
Laodicea.’ The apparent ambiguity of these
last words has induced some to understand St.
Paul as speaking of an epistle written by him to
the Laodiceans, which he advises the Colossians
to procure from Laodicea, and read to their chupch.
‘Some,’ says Theodoret, ‘imagine Paul to bave
written an Epistle to the Laodiceans, and accord-
ingly produce a certain forged epistle; but the
Apostle does not say, the Epistle ¢o, but the
Epistle from, the Laodiceans.’ Bellarmine, among
tie Roman Catholics, and among the Protestants
Le Clere and others, suppose that the passage in
Colossians refers to an epistle of St. Paul, now
Jost, and the Vulgate aulihaene que Laodi-
censium est—seems to favour this view. Grotius,
however, conceives that the Epistle to the Ephe-
sians is here meant, and he is followed by Ham-
mund, Whitby, and Mill, and also by Arch-
bishop Wake (Epistles of the Apostolic Fathers).
Theophylact, who is followed by Dr. Lizhttvot,
conceives that the epistle alluded to is 1 Timothy.
Others hold it to be 1 John, Philemon, &c. Mr.
Jones conjectures that the epistle now passing as
that to the Laodiceans eae seems entirely com-
piled out of the Epistle to the Philippians) was
the composition of some idle monk not joa before
the Reformation ; but this opinion is scarcely
compatible with the fact mentioned by Mr. Jones
himself, that when Sixtus of Sienna published his
Biitutheca Sancta (a.v. 1560), there was a very
old manuscript of this epistle in the library of the
Sabonne. This epistle was first published by
James Le Fevre of Estaples in 1517. It was the
opinion of Calvin, Louis an and many others,
that St. Paul wiete several epistles besides those
now extant. One of the chief grounds of this
opinion is the passage 1 Cor. v. 9. Tuere is still
extant, in the Armenian language, an epistle from
the Corinthians to St. Paul, together with the
Apostle’s reply. This is considered by Mr. La
Croze to be u forgery of the tenth or eleventh
century, and he asserts that it was never cited by
any one of the early Christian writers. In this,
however, he is mistaken, for this epistle is ex-
pressly quoted as Paul’s by St. Gregory the
Vluminator in the third century, Theodore Chre-
thenor in the seventh, and St. Nierses in the
twelfth. Neither of them, however, is quoted by
any ancient Greek or Latin writer (Henderson,
On Inspiration, p. 497. The passages are cited
at Jeugth in Father Paschal Aucher’s Armenian
and English Grammar, Venice, 1819).

The é:pistle of Peter to James is a very ancient
forgery. It was tirst published by Cotelerius,
and is supposed to have been a preface to the
Preaching of Peter, which was in great esteem
amony some of the early Christian writers, and is
several times cited as a genuine work by Clement
of Alexandria, Theodotus of Byzantium, and
others. It was also made use of by the heretic
Heracleon, in the second century. Origen ob-
serves Of it, that it is not to be reckoned among
the ecclesiastical books, and that it is neither the
writing of Peter nor of any other inspired person.
Mr. Jones conceives it to be a forgery of some of
the Ebionites in the beginning of the second cen-

tury. :
The Epistles of Paul and Seneca consist of eight
pretended Latin letters from the philosopher Seneca


ERECH. ony


to St. Paul, and six from the latter to Seneca.
Their antiquity is undoubted. St. Jerome had
such an idea of the value of these letters that he
was induced to say, ‘I should not have ranked
Seneca in my catalogue of saints, but that I was
determined to it by those Epistles of Paul to Se-
neca and Seneca to Paul, which are read by
man He was slain by Nero, two years
before Peter and Paul were honoured with mar-
tyrdom.’ St. Augustine also observes (Epistle to
DMacedunius) that ‘ Seneca wrote certain epistles
to St. Paul, which are now read.’ The epistles
are ulso referred to in the spurious ‘ Acts’ of
Linus, the first bishop of Rome after the Apostles.
Bat these Acts are a manifest forgery, and were
first alluded to by a monk of the eleventh cen+
tury. The letters do not appear to have been
mentioned by any other ancient writer; but it
seems certain that those now extant! are the same
which were known to Jerome and Augustine.
The genuineness of these letters has been main-
tained by some learned men, but by far the
greater number reject them as spurious. Mr.
Jones conceives them to be a forgery of the fourth
century, founded on Philip. iv. 22. Indeed, there
are few persons mentioned in the New Testament,
as companions of the Apostle, who have not had
sume spurious piece or other fathered on them.

These are the principal of the ancient forged
epistles. Among those now universally rejected
are the well-known Epistle of Lentulus to the
Roman Senate, giving a description of the person .
of Christ (Orthodoxographia, 4 2, Basil, 1555;
Fabricii Cod. Epiz., 1719), and some pretended
epistles of the Virgin Mary. One of these is
said to be written in Hebrew, and addressed to
the Christians of Messina in Sicily, of which a
Latin translation has been, published, and_ its
genuineness gravely vindicated (Veritas Vin-
dicata, 1692, fol.). It is dated from Jerusalem,
in the 42nd year ‘of our Son,’ nones of July,
Luna 7, Feria quinta, The metropolitan church
of our Lady of the Letter, at Messina, takes its
name from the possession of this celebrated eyistle,
of which some have pretended that even the au-
tograph still exists. An epistle of the Virgin to
the Florentines has been also celebrated, and there
is extant a pretended letter from the same to St.
Ignatius, together with his reply.— W. W.

* ERASTUS (“Epactosi, a Corinthian, and one
of Paul's disciples, whose salutations he sends
from Corinth to the Church at Rome as those of
“the chamberlain of the city’ (Rom. xvi. 23).
The words go rendered (oixovduos 79s méAews 5
Vulg. arcarius civitatis) denote the city trea-
surer or steward, an ofiicer of great dignity in
ancient times (comp. Joseph. Antig. vii. 8, 2).
We find this Erastns with Paul at Ephesus,
whence he was sent along with Timothy into Ma-
cedonia (Acts xix. 22). They were both with the
apostle at Corinth when he wrote, as above, from
that city to the Romans: at a subsequent period
Erastus was still at Corinth (2 Tim. iv. 20),
which would seem to have been the usual place
cf lis abode.

ERECH (JY; Sept. "Opéx), one of the
cities which formed the beginning of Nimrod’s
kingdom in the plain of Shinar (Gen. x. 10).
It is not said that he built these cities, but that
he established his power over them; from which


Gas ERES.


we may concluie that they previously existed.
An ancient tradition, which Jerome and others
have followed, but which is against all proba-
bility, and has no foundation to rest upon, iden-
tifies Erech with Edeasa, Bochart, however. rather
seeks the name in the Aracca or Aracha of the old
geographers, which was on the ‘Tigris, upon the
borders of Babylonia aud Susiana (Ptolemy, vi.
3; Ammian. Marcell. xxxiii. 6, 26). This was
robally the same city which Herodotus (i. 185;
vi. 119) calls Arderikka, #.e, Great Erech. Ro-
senmiiller happily conjectures that Krech probably
lay nearer to Babylon than Aracca ; and this has
been lately contirmed by Col. Taylor, the British re-
sident at Bagdad, who is disposed to tind the site of
the ancient Erech in the great mounds of primitive
Tuing, indifferently called Irak, Irka, and Sen-
kerah, by the nomade Arabs; and sometimes El
Asayiah, ‘ the place of pebbles.’ Tiese mounds,
which are now surrounded by the almost perpetual
marshes and inundations of the lower Euphrates,
lie some miles east of that stream, about midway
between the site of babylon and its junction with
the Tigris, Some have thought that the name of
Erech may be preserved in that of Irak (/rak-
Arabi), which is given to the region enclosed by
the two rivers, in the lower part of their course.


ERES or Eras (TUN) occurs in numerous
places of Scripture, but authors are not agreed on
the exact meaning of the term: Celsius (Hicro-
bot. i. 106, sq.), for instance, conceives that it is a
gencral name for the pine tribe, to the exclusion
of the cedar of Lebanon, which he cousidera to be
indicated by the word Bexosu. The majority of
authors, however, are of opinion that the cedar of
Lebanon (Pinus Cedrus or Cedrus Libani of
Botanists) is alone jntended. It is unfortunate
that there should be discrepancy of opinion as to
the identification of so remarkable a tree, as it
necessarily produces a distrust in the conclusions
which are arrived at respecting, what would appear
to be, the less easily distinguished plants and trees
mentioned in the Bible. The discrepancy of
opinion has on this occasion, however, arisen from
the duubt whether Eres, in the numerous passages
of Scripture where it occurs, is always used in the
same signilication; that is, whether it is always in-
tended to specify only one particular kind of the
pine tribe, or whether it is not sometimes used
generically. In the latter case others of the pine
tribe appear to be intended along with the cedar of
Lebanon, and not to its exclusion, as advocated by
the learned Celsius. We are disposed to think that
the diflerent passages in which Eres occurs’ autho-
rize our considering it a general term, applied to
different species.

But before proceeding to compare these passages
with one another, it will be desirable to ascertain
its modern acceptation, as well as the meaning
which it bears in Arabic works on Materia Medica.
In these such terms are generally used in a more
precise sense than in general works, the authors
of which are usually unacquainted with the cor-
rect appellation of the products of nature. .

In the first place, there is no donbt that th


name arz or ars Cy) is, at the present day, ap-


plied to the cedar of Lebanon, by the Arabs in
the neighbourhood. Mr. Harmer, on Canticles vy.
13, observes that the country peuple near the


mountain call the cedar ars, which is very
nearly the original name. But the same name
appears to be applied also to others of the pine
tribe: thus ‘at Aleppo the fir-tree is included
under the name ars’ (Niebuhr, as quoted by
Rosenmiiller, Bibl. Bot. p. 246). So we tind the
term alerce, that is al-arz, applied by the Arabs
to a coniferous plant, a native of Mount Atlas,
and of other uncultivated hills on the coast of
Africa. The wood-work of the roof of the celebrated
mosque, now the cathedral, of Cordova, which
was built in the ninth century, has been proved
to be formed of the wood of this tree (Loudon's
Arbvoret. p. 2163). From alerce the English
name larch is supposed to have been derived. If
we consult Persian works on Materia Medica we
find the name aras or orus given as a synonyme
of abhul, which is a species of juniper : so, again,
ooruz is described as durukht sunodurbe bur,
that is, ‘the pine-tree without fruit ;’ sznodur
appearing as the general term for pine-trees,
which are distinguished by the name of stunobur
sughar, ‘the lesser pine,’ called also tenood, and
sunobur kubar, ‘the Jarger pines" of this are
given, as synonymes, nasov a chilghozah, whieh
is the Pinus Gerardiana of Botanists. With the


Arabs, aa quoted by Celsius, J. c. p. 107: ‘yl


(arz) nomen generale est ad pini species desig-
nandas;" and he further quotes Abu'l Fadli, a
stating, ‘Arz est arbor zananbar (pinus) cujus
qnoad omnes ejus species, mentionem faciemus
sub ‘lit. Z. si Deus volet.—Loco condicto hoc
modo pergit : Zananbar (pinus) est arbor magna.
Gignitur in’ montibus, et regionibus  frigidis.
Ejus tres sunt species, mas nempe, et fomina
major, atqne minor.’ It is not necessary for us
on the present occasion to determine wit are the
species intended by the Arabian authors. They no
doubt sometimes follow Dioscorides, and at other
times insert names and descriptions which will
apply only to the species indigenous iu the moun-
tains of Persia. Different species of pine, therefore,
will be adduced as the kinds intended, in differeut
countries. We may also remark, as stated by
Celsins, that the translators of the sacred Scrip-
tures into Arabic sometimes use the term sunodar,
sometimes arz, as the representative of eres.
Rosenmiiller states that ¢ the word eres, which
occurs so frequently in the Old Testament, is,
by the ancient translators, universally rendered
cedar’ (xe3pos). Therefore it has heen inferred by
him, as well as others, that the cedar of Lebanon
must be intended: but the name does not appear
to have been applied specially to this tree by the
ancients. ‘Thus the xé5pos uf Dioscorides is sup-
posed by Sprengel, in his edition of that author, to
be a apecies of Juniper, and Dr. Lindley, the editor
of the last numbers of Sibthorpe’s Flora Greca,
agrees with him: ¢ xé8pos, juuiperus oxycedrus,
vel potius J. Pharnicea, secundum Sprengelium,
cui assentio, xé8pos pixpa, Juniperus communis.
J. oxycedrus is the brown-lerried juniper, and
J. Phenicea is the Phanician juniper or cedar,
while J. Lycia, the Lycian juniper ar cedar, is
cedrus Phanicea altera Plinii et Theophrasti.
These have already been mentioned under the
article Brrosit. :
Pliny, speaking of the plants of Syria, says,
€ Juniperi similem habent Phonices et cedrum
minorem. Duo ejus genera, Lycia et Phesnicia


See aes See ee Ee oe OO ee ye ae


hee ee Ie ey a es ea ts Te


~


Tad


differunt folio: nam que durum, acutum, spino-
sum habet, oxycedros vocatur, ramosa et nodis
infesta: altera odore prestat. Fructum ferunt
myrti magnitudine, dulcem sapore. Et majoris
cedri duo genera: que floret, fruactum non fert.
Frugifera non floret: et in ea antecedentem fruc-
tum occupat novus. Semen ejus cupresso simile.
Quidam cedrelaten vocant. Ex hac resina lauda-
tissima’ (Hist. Nat. xiii. 11). The conclusion of


this passage, as translated by Holland, is, ‘ and*


the timber of it is everlasting: wherefore in old
time they were wont to make Har ee of oe

of this wood, as it appeareth by the statue o
A Sosianus, made of Eales wood brought from
Seleucia.’ Again (xvi. 39), ‘as for cedars, the best
simply be those that grow in Candia, Africke,
and Syrie. This vertue hath the oile of cedar,
that if any wood or timber be thoroughly anointed
therewith it is subject neither to worm nor moth,
nor yet to rottennesse.’ The greater part of this
account of the different kinds of cedar is adopted
from Th s (iii, 12); though, no doubt,
the latter was also acquainted with a large cedar,
as appears from lib. v. ¢. 9, where, speaking of
Syria, he says, ‘ I}lic enim cedri in montibus,
cum longitudine, tum crassitudine preestantissima
nascuntur.’ Quintus Curtius also uses the term
xéSpos in a general sense, when he says of the
yalace of Persepolis, * multa cedro edificata erat
regia.”


oA


283. [Cedar of Lebanon.)


If we proceed to compare the several passages


of Scripture in which the word Eres occurs, we
sliall equally find that one plant is not strictly
applicable to them all. The earliest notice of
the cedar is in Lev. xiv. 4, 6, where we are
told that Moses commanded the leper that was to
be cleansed to make an offering of two sparrows,
cedar-wood, wool dyed in scarlet, and ya0op 5
and in ver. 49, 51, 52, the houses in which the
lepers dwell are directed to be purified with
the same materials. Again, in Num. xix. 6,
Moses and Aaron are commanded to sacrifice a
red heifer: © And the priest shall take cedar-wood
and hyssop and scarlet.” As remarked by Lady


ERES. . 649


Calleott (Scrip. Herbal, p. 92), ‘The cedar was
not a native of Egypt, nor could it have been pro-
cured in the desert without great difficulty; but
the juniper is most plentiful there, and takes deep
root in the crevices of the rocks of Mount Sinai.’
That some, at least, of the cedars of the ancients
were a species of juniper is evident from the pas-
sages we have quoted; the wood of most of them
is more or less aromatic. The ancients, it may
be remarked, threw the berries of the juniper
on funeral piles, to protect the departing spirit
from evil influences, and offered its w in
sacrifice to the infernal gods, because they believed
its presence was acceptable to them. Phe also
burned it in their dwelling-houses to keep away
demons. It is curious that, in the remote

of the Himalayan Mountains, another species of
this genus is similarly employed, as the present
writer has mentioned elsewhere (Himalayan Bo-
tany, p.350): ‘ Here there is also another species,
Juniperus religiosa, Royle, called gogul by the -
natives, and employed for burning as incense in
their religious ceremonies.’

At a later period we have notices of the various
uses to which the wood of the eres was applied,
as 2 Sam. v. 11; vii. 2-7; 1 Kings v. 6, 8, 10;
vi. 9, 10, 15, 16, 18, 20; vii. 2, 3, 7, 11, 12; ix.
11; x. 27; 1 Chron. xvii. 6; 2 Chron. ii. 8; ix.
27; xxv. 18. In these passages we are informed
of the negotiations with Hiram, King of Tyre,
for the supply of cedar-trees out of Lebanon, and
of the uses to which the timber was applied in
the construction of the Temple, and of the king's

ilace: he ‘ covered the house with beams and

rds of cedar; ‘ the walls of the house within
were covered with boards of cedar;’ there were
‘ cedar pillars,’ and ‘ beams of cedar;’ and the
altar was of cedar. In all these passages the
word eres is employed, for which the Arabic
translation, according to Celsius (loc. cit.), gives
sunobar as the synonyme. There is nothing
distinctive stated respecting the character of the
wood, from which we might draw any certain
conclusion, further than that, from the selection
made and the constant mention of the material
used, it may be fairly inferred that it must have
Leen considered as well fitted, or rather, of a
superior quality, for the purpose of building the
Temple and palace. From this, however, pro-
ceeds the difficulty in admitting that what
we call the cedar of Lebanon was the only
tree intended by the name Eres. For modern
experience has ascertained that its wood is not
of a superior quality. To determine this point,
we must not refer to the statements of those
who take their descriptions from writers who, in-
deed, describe cedar-wood, but do not prove that
it was derived from the cedar of Lebanon. The
term ‘ cedar’ seems to have been as indefinite in
ancient as in modern times. Now we find it ap-
lied to the wood of Juniperus virginiana, which
is red or pencil cedar; and to that of J. Bermu-
diana or Bermuda cedar. J. oxycedrus yields the
cedar of the north of Spain and south of France,
but the term is also applied to many other wouda,
as to white cedar, that of Melia Azedarach;
and Indian cedar, that of Cedrela Toona.

Mr. Loudon, in his Arboretum £. 2417),
describes it thus: ‘The wood of the cedar is of a
reddish white, light and spongy, easily worked, but
very apt to shrink and warp, and by no means du- |


650 ERES.


rable.’ But when the tree is grown on mountains,
the annual layers of wood are much narrower and
the fibre much finer than when it is grown on
ee so much so that a piece of cedar-wood

rought from Mount Lebanon by Dr. Parisel, in
1829, and which be had made iuto a small piece
of furniture, presented a surface compact, agree-
ably veined, and variously shaded, and which, on
the whule, may be considered handsome (Hist. du
Cédre, p.43). But Dr. Pococke, who brought away’
a piece of one of the large cedars which had been
blown down by the wind, says that the wood does
not differ in appearance from white deal, and that
it does not appear to be harder. Varennes de
Feuille considers it as the lightest of the resinous
woods, and he adds that it contains very little
resin; that its grain is coarse, and that he thinks
the wuod can neither be so strong nor so durable
as it has the reputation of being. Mr. Loudon
says (loc. cit.) that a table which Sir J. Banks
had made out of the Hillingdon cedar was soft,
without scent (except that of common deal), and
possessed little variety of veining; and the same
remarks will apply to a table which Mr. L. had
made from a plank which is referred to as having
been kindly presented to him by J. Gostling,
Esq. of Whitton Park. Dr. Lindley (Gar-
dener’s Chronicle, vol. i. p. 699) calls it ‘ the
worthless, though magnificent cedar of Mount
Lebanon.’ A correspondent, however, at p. 733,
@ays, ‘Mr. Wilcox of Warwick, a most in-
genious and skilful carver (in his works little
inferior to the celebrated Gibbons), has now in his
rooms some specimens of furniture made of cedar
of Lebanon, ornamented with carved work, in
flowers, leaves, &c. &c., in the best taste, and in
sharpness and colyur so similar to box-wood
that any common observer would mistake it to
be such.’ In reply to this Dr. Lindley adds,
The fact last mentioned is the first that has
come to our knowledge of the cedar of Lebanon
having been found of important use.’ He is of
opinion that some of the cedar-trees sent hy Hiram,
king of Tyre, may have been obtained from Mount
Atlas, and may have been the produce of the
above Alerce or Al Arz—the Callitris quadri-
valvis—which no doubt furnished the ancients
with one of their most valued woods [Tuyins].
This is hard, durable and fragrant, and com-
monly used in religious buildings in the East.’
Though we have seen both temples and palaces
built entirely with one kind of cedar (that of the
Cedrus Deodara), we think it more probable that,
as the timber had to be brought from a distance,
where all the kinds of cedar grew, the common
pine-tree and the cedar of Lebanon would both fur-
nish some of the timber required for the building
of the Temple, together with juniper cedar. The
name arz, as we have seen, is applied by the Arabs
to all three; and they would give all the qualities
of timber that could be required. We have shown
that the xé3pos of the ancients was most probably
the wood of a juniper. Celsius was of qition
that the eres indicated the Pinus sylvestris or
Scotch pine, which yields the red and yellow
deals of Norway, and which is likewise found on
Mount Lebanon. This vpinion seems to be con-
firmed by Ezekiel xxvii. 5, ‘They have made all
thy ship boards of fir-trees of Senir, they have
taken cedar from Lebanon to make masts for
thee.’ For it is not probable that any otber tree


ERES.


than the common pine would be taken for masts,
when this was procurable, since even in the pre-
sent day ‘ Pallas assures us that the pine of
Livonia and Lithuania differs not from the Pinus
sylvestris; masts, he says, are not made of any
peculiar species, as foreigners, and more especially
the French, think; but they are all of the Pinus
sylvestris’ (Loudon, Arboret. p. 2158).

Though Celsius appears to us to be quite right
in concluding that eres, in some of the passages
of Scripture, refers to the pine-tree, yet it seems
equally olear that there are other passages to
which this tree will not answer. It certainly ap-
pears imprebable that a tree so remarkable for
the magniticence of its appearance as the cedar
of Lebanon should not have been noticed in the
Sacred Scriptures; and this would be the case if
we applied eres exclusively to the pine, and
berosh to the cypress. If we consider some of the
Temaining passages of Scripture, we cannot fail
to perceive that they forcibly apply to the cedar
of [clase and to the cedar of Lebanon only.
Thus, in Ps. xcii. 12, it is said, ‘ The righteous
shall flourish like a palm-tree, and spread abroad
like a cedar of Lebanon.’ It has been well] re
marked ‘that the flourishing head of the palm
and the spreading abroad of the cedar are equally
characteristic,’ But the prophet Ezekiel (ch. xxxi.)
is justly adduced as giving the most magni-
ficeut and, at the same time, the most graphic
description of this celebrated tree (ver. 3): ‘ Be-
hold, the Assyrian was a cédar in Lebanon with
fair branches, and with a shadowy shroud, and of
an high stature; and his top was among the thick
boughs : (ver. 5) ¢ Therefore his height was ex-
alted above all the trees of the field, and bis
boughs were multiplied, and his branches became
long Lecause of the multitude of waters :° (ver. 6)
All the fowls of heaven made their nests in his
boughs, and under his branches did all the beasts
of the field bring forth their young.” In this
description, Mr. Gilpin has well observed, ‘ the
principal characteristics of the cedar are marked ;
first, the multiplicity and length of its branches.
Few trees divide so many fair branches from the
main stem, or spread over so large a compass of
ground. * His boughs are multiplied,’ as Ezekiel
says, ‘and his branches become long,” which
David calls spreading abroad. His very boughs
are equal to the stem of a fir or a chestuut.
The second characteristic is what Ezekiel, with
great beauty and aptness, calls his shadowy
shroud. No tree in the furest is more remarkable
than the cedar for its close-woven leafy canopy.
Ezekiel’s cedar is marked as a tree of full and
eee growth, from the circumstance of its tup

ing among the thick boughs.” The other prin-
cipal passages in which the cedar is mentioned
are 1 Kings iv.33; 2 Kings xix.23; Job x1.17;
Pa, xxix. 53; Ixxx.10; xcii. 12; civ. 163 cxlviii.
9; Cant. 1.17; v.15; villi. 9; Isa. ii. 135 ix. S,
10; xiv. 8; xxxvii. 24; ali. 195 xliv. L453 Jer,
xxii. 7, 14, 23; Ezek. xvii. 3, 22, 235 Amas ii,
9; Zeph. ii, 14; Zech. xi. 1, 2; and im the Apo-
crypha, 1 Esdras iv. 48; v. 55; Ecclus. xxiv.
13; 1.12; but it would occupy too much space
to adduce further illustrations from them of what
indeed is the usually admitted opinion.

It is, however, necessary before concluding to
give some account of this celebrated tree, as nu=
ticed by travellers in the East, all of whom make


ESAU.


a pilgrimage to its native sites. The cedar of
Lobanon is well known to be a widely-spreading
tree, generally from 50 to 80 feet bigh, and when
standing singly, often covering a space with its
branches, the diameter uf which is much greater
than its height. The horizontal branches, when
the tree is exposed on all sides, are very large in
proportion to the trunk, being disposed in dis-
tinct layers or stages, and the distance to which
they extend diminishes as they approach the top,
where they form a pyramidal head, broad in pro-
rtion to its height. The branchlets are disposed
in a flat fan-like manner on the branches. The
leaves, produced in tufts, are straight, about one
inch long, slender, nearly cylindrical, tapering to
@ point, and are. on short footstalks. The male
catkins are single, solitary, of a reddish hue, about
two inches long, terminal and turning upwards.
The female catkins are short, erect, roundish, and
rather oval; they change alter fecundation into
oval oblong cones, which, when they approach
maturity, become from 24 inches to 5 inches long.
Every part of the cone abounds with resin, which
sometimes exudes from between the scales. Be-
lon, who travelled in Syria about 1550, found the
cedars about 28 in number, in a valley on the sides
of the mountains. Rauwolf, who visited the cedars
in 1574, ‘could tell no more but 24, that stood
round about in a circle; and two others, the
branches whereof are quite decayed from age.’ De
la Roque, in 1688, found but 20. Maundrell, in
1696, found them reduced to 16, and Dr. Pococke,
who visited Syria 1744 and 1745, discovered only
15. One of these, that had the soundest body,
though not the largest, measured 24 feet in circum-
ference, and another, with a sort of triple body,
and of a triangular figure, measured 12 feet on
each side. ‘ The woud,’ he says, ‘ dues not differ
from white deal in appearance, nor does it seem
to be harder. It has a tine smell, but is not so
fragrant as the juniper of America, which is com-
monly called cedar, and it also falls short of it in
beauty. 1 tovk a piece of the wood from a great
tree that was blown down by the wind, and left
‘there to rut: there are 15 large ones standing.’
Mr. Buckingham, in 1525, says, ‘ Leaving Bis-
kerry on our right, we ascended for an hour over
light snow, until we came to the Arz-el Libinien,
or the cedars of Lebanon.’ M. Laure, who, in
company with the Prince de Joinville, visited the
cedars in 1836, calls them El-Herzé. M. Lamar-
tine, in 1832, says, * These trees diminish in every
succeeding age. Travellers formerly counted 30 or
40; more recently, 17; more recently still, only 12,
There are now but 7, These, however, from their


size and general appearance, may be fairly pre-.


sumed to have existed in biblical times. Around
these ancient witnesses of ages long since past,
there still remains a little grove of yellow cedars,
appearing to me to form a group of from 400 to
500 trees or shrubs. Every year, in the month of
Jane, the inhabitants of Beschierai, of Eden, of
Kandbin, and the other neighbouring valleys and
villages, climb up to these cedars, and celebrate
mass at their feet. How many prayers have re-
sounded under these branches, and what more
beautiful canopy for worship can exist !'—J. F. R.
ESAR-HADDON. [Assyria]


ESAU (180; Sept. *Hoad). The origin and
meaning of the name are not quite free from am-
a


ESAU. os


biguity. Simon, deriving the word from MY,
texit, renders it piiis opertus (covered with
hair), and some such reason as this implies, seems
involved in the passage Gen. xxv. 25. Cruden,
however, explains the name as meaning one who
does (qui facit), an actor or agent. His surname
of Edum any was given him, it appears (Gen.
xxv. 30) from the red pottage which he asked
of Jacob. Esau was the eldest son of ‘1
Abraham's son’ (Gen. xxv. 19) by Rebekab, ‘ the
daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padan-aram,
the sister to Laban the Syrian.’ The marriage
remaining for some time (about 19 years; com-
pare xxv. 20, 26) unproductive, Isaac entreated
Jehovah, and she became pregnant. Led by pecu-
liar feelings ‘to inquire of Jehovah,’ Rebekah was
informed that she should give birth to twins,
whose fate would be as diverse as their character,
and, what in those days was stranger still, that
the elder should serve the younger. On occa-
sion of her delivery the child that was born
first was ‘red, all over like an hairy garment ;
and they called his name Esau.’ Immediately
afterwards Jacob was born.

In process of time the different natural end@g-
ments of the two boys began to display their
eflects in dissimilar aptitudes and pursuits.
While Jacob was led by his less robust make and
quiet disposition to fulfil the duties of a shepherd's
life, and pass his days in and around his tent,
Esau was impelled, by the ardour and lofty spirit
which agitated his bosum, to seek in the toils,
adventures, and perils of the chace, his vccupa-
tion and sustenance: and, as is gencrally the
case in natures like his, be gained higl repute by
his skill and daring.

A hunter's life is of necessity one of uncertainty
as well as hardship; days pass in which the
greatest vigilance and the most strenuous exer-
tions may fail even to find, much less capture,
game. The hunting tribes of North America often
find themselves, after severe and long-continued
labour and watching, unprovided with food, and
necessitated to a length of abstinence which
would be fatal to persons bred in towns or living
by the ordinary pursuits of the field. Esau had
on one occasion experienced such a disappwint-
ment, and, wearied with his unproductive eflorts,
exhausted for want of sustenance, and despairing
of capturing any prey, he was fain to tuin his
steps to his father’s house for succour in his ex-
tremity. On reaching home he found his brother
enjoying a carefully prepared dish of pottage:
attracted by the odour of which he besought Jacob
to allow him to share in the meal. His brother
saw the exigency in which Esau was, and deter-
mined nof to let it pass unimproved. Accod-
ingly he puts a price on the required food. Esau
was the elder, and had in consequence immuni-
ties and privileges which were of high value. The
surrender of these to himself Jacob makes the con-
dition of his complying with Esan’s petition.
Urged by the cravings of hunger, alarmed even
by the fear of instant death, Esau sold his binth-
right to his younger brother, contirming the ccn-
tract by the sanction of an oath. Jacob having
thus got his price, supplied the famishing Esau
with needful refreshments.

Arrived now at years of maturity Esau, when
40 years of age, married two wives, Judith and
Bashemoth. Some unhappy feelings appear to


58 ESAU.


have previously existed in the family; for while
Esau was a favourite with his father, in conse-

uence, it appears, of the presents of venison which

e youth gave him, Jacob was regarded with
special affection by the mother. These partiali-
ties, and their natural cousequences in unamiable
feelings, were increased’ and exaggerated by
Esau's marriage. Judith and Bashemoth were
Canaanites, and, on account of their origin, were
unacceptable to Isaac and Rebekah. The latter
was esjecially grieved. ‘I am weary,’ she said
(Gen. xxvii. 46), ‘ of my life, because of the
daugliters of Heth.’ Esau thus became alienated
from the parental home. Even his father’s pre-
ference of him may have been injuriously affected.
The way was in some measure smoothed for the
transference of the coveted birthright to the


younger sun.

The time for the fulfilment of the compact
between the brothers at length arrived. Isaac is
“sick unto death.’ His appetite, as well as his
strength, having failed, is only to be gratified
by provocatives. He desires sume savoury veni-
son, and gives the requisite instructions to Esau,
wao accordingly proceeds in quest of it. On
this Rebekah begins to feel that the critical time
has come. If the hated Hittites are not to enter
with her less favoured son into possession of the
family property, the sale of the birthright (the
original idea of which she may have suggested to
the * plain man,’ her son Jacob) must now in
some way be confirmed and consummated. One
essential particular remained—the father’s bless-
ing. If this should be given to Ksan, all hope
was gone; for this, like our modern wills, would
hand the inheritance and the accompanying
headship of the tribe to Esau and his wives.

Isaac, however, had lost his sight—indeed, all
his senses were dull and feeble. It was therefore
not very difficult to pass off Jacob upon him as
Eaau. Rebekah takes her measures, and, not-
withstanding Jacob's fears, succeeds. Isaac,
indeed, is not without suspicion, but a falsehood
comes to aid Jacob in his otherwise discreditable
personatiun of Esau. The blessing is pronounced,
and thus the coveted property and ascendancy
are secured. The atiectionate endearments which

between the deceiver and the abused old
lind father stand in ean contrast with the
base trickery by which mother and son had
accomplished their end.

Esau, however, returns from the field, ap-
proaches his decrepid and sightless father, de-
claring who he is. ‘ And Isaac trembled very
exceedingly, and said, Who? where is he that
hath taken venison and brought it me, and I
have eaten of all before thou camest, and have
blessed him ?—yea, and he shall be blessed.’
On this Esau becomes agitated, and entreats a
blessing for himself—‘ Bless me, even me also,
O my father.’ Urging this entreaty again and
again, even with tears, Isaac at length said unto
him, ‘ Behold, thy dwelling shall be the fatness
of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from
above; and by thy sword shalt thou live, and
shalt serve thy brother; and it shall come to pass
when thou shalt have the dominion that thou
shalt break his yoke from off thy neck’ (Gen.
Xxvii.).

Thus, deprived for ever of his birthright, in
virtue of the irrevocable blessing, Esau but too


ESAU.


naturally conceived and entertained a hatred of
Jacob, and even formed a resolution to seize the
opportunity for slaying him, which the days of
mourning uent on the approaching decease
of their father would be likely to afford. Words
to this effect, which Esau let drop, were repeated
to his mother, who thereupon prevailed on ber
younger son to flee to his uncle Laban, who lived
in Haran, there to remain until time, with its
usual effect, might have mitigated Esau's wrath,
Meanwhile Esau bad grown powerful in Idumza,
and when, after many years, Jacob intended to
return within the borders of the Jordan, he feared
lest his elder brother might intercept him on his
way, to take revenge for former injuries. He ac-
cordingly sent messengers to Esau in order, if pos
sible, to disarm his wrath. Esau appears to hare
announced in reply, that he would proceed to meet
his returning brother. When, therefore, Jacob
was informed that Esau was on his way for this
purpose with a band of four hundred men, he was
greatly distressed, in fear of that hostility which
his conscience told him he had done something to
deserve. What then must have been his surprise
when he saw Esau running with extended arms to
greet and embrace him? and Esau ‘fell on his
neck, and kissed him, and they wept.’ Jacob
had prepared a present for Esau, hoping thus to
conciliate his favour; but with the generous ardour
which characterizes, and somewhat of the disinter
estedness which adorns, natures like his, Esau at
first courteously refused the gift—‘ I have enough,
my brother, keep that thou hast unto thyself’
(Gen. xxxiii.).

The whole of this rencontre serves to show. that,
if Jacob had acquired riches, Esau had gained
eae and influence as well as property ; and the

jomage which is paid to him indirectly, and by
implication, on the part of Jacob, and directly,
and in the most marked and respectful manne,
by the females and children of Jacob's family,
leads to the supposition that he had made himself
supreme in the surrounding country of Idumza.

Ksau from this time appears but very little in
the sacred narrative. He was ready to accompany
Jacob, or tu send with him an escort, probably
for protection, but Jacob's fears and suspicions
induced him to decline these friendly offers; and
they separated on the same day that they met,
after an interview in which Jacob's bearing 3s
rather that of’ an inferior to his lord than that of
a brother, and Esau‘s has all the geuerousness
which a high nature feels in forgiving an injury
and aiming to do good to the injurer. The latter,
we are merely told, ‘ returned on his way to Seir
(Gen. xxxiii. 16).

Jacob and Esau appear together again at the
funeral rites which were paid to their deceased
father; but the book of Genesis furnishes no par
ticulars of what took place.

Esau is once more presented to us (Gen.
xxxvi.) in a genealogical table, in which a long
line of i]lustrious descendants is referred to ‘ Esau,
the father of the Edomites’ (Gen. xxxvi. 43).

If the historical outline now given is support
by the scriptural narrative, the character of Esau
has not ordinarily received justice at the hands
of theologians. The injurious impression against
him may be traced back to a very ancient period.
The Targum of Jonathan sanctioned and spread,
if it did not originate, the misjudgment, by un-


ESDRAS, BOOKS OF.


warrantable additions to the account given in
Genesis. The reason, it states, why Esau did not
at once slay his brother was, lest, as happened in
the case of Cain aud Abel, another man-child
might be born, and thus he should be still de-
prived of the inheritance; he, therefore, resolved:
to wait till the death of Isaac, when the murder
of Jacob would leave him in safe and undis-
puted. possession. Representations made in the
Talmud. are of a similar tendency (Winer’s
Realicorterbuch, in voc.). The fathers of the
Church, particularly Augustine, regard Esau as
the representative of the damned, while they
admire Jacob as that of the elect.—J. R. B.


ESDRAELON, PLAIN OF. [Pazestine.]


ESDRAS, BOOKS OF, (APOCRYPHA);
Gr. "EoSpas, Lat. Esdras. In several manuscripts
of the Latin Vulgate, as well as in all the printed
editions anterior to the decree of the Council of
Trent, and in many since that period, there will
be fuund four books fullowing each other, entitled
the Ist, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th books of Ezra. The
two first are the canonical books of Ezra and
Nehemiah, the 3rd and 4th form the subject of
the present article. They are the same which
are called Ist and 2nd Esdras in the English
Authorized Version.

The Tuirp Boox ov Ezra is found in all the
manuscripts of the Seventy, where it is called the
first book, and precedes the second or canonical
Ezra, which, in this version, includes the book of
Nehemiah. It contains 109 xepadaua. It is little
more than a recapitulation of the history con-
tained in the canonical Ezra, interspersed with
some remarkuble interpolations, the chief of
which are chap. i., taken from 2 Chron. xxxv.
xxxvi., part of the last chapter, from Nehem. viii.,
and the narration of the themes or sentences of
Zorvbabel and the two other young men of
Darius’s budy-guard (3 Esd. iii. 4). The book is
more properly a version than an original work.
The style is ackuowledyed to be elegant, and not
unlike that of Symmachus. This book was made
use of by Josephus, who cites it largely in his
Antiquities, but nothing further has been ascer-
tained respecting the age either of the original
or the translation. It is cited by Clemeus Alex-
andrinus (Slromata, i.), the author of the Jm-
perfect Work on Matt. (Hom, i.), Athanasius
(Orat. iii. cont. Arianos), and by Cyprian ( Lpist.
ad Pompeium).

From the circumstance of Jerome's having
declined to translate the third and fourth books of
Ezra, they are (with the exception of the book of
Job and the Psalms) the only portions either of
the canonical or apocryphal writings of the Old
Testament which have been preserved to us entire
in the old Latin translation. We have already
Noticed the contempt in which Jerume held these
books (see the extract from his letter to Vigilantius,
supra, p. 177, Avocrypua, where Athanasius isa
misprint fur Jerome). In his preface to Ezra and
Nehemiah, he observes, ‘ None should be troubled
by the circumstance that only one buok [of Ezra]
has been published by us, nor should any take plea-
sure in the dreams of the third and fourth apocry-
phal books, for, in the Hebrew, Ezra and Nehemiah
form but one volume, and what is not of the
twenty-four elders is to be utterly rejected.’
Augustine speaks of the third book with more


ESDRAS, BOOKS OF. + 3


respect, although we have already seen ([Drvrero-
CanonicaL] that be did not include it in his
catalogue. Ezra, he says (Ve Civitate Dei, lib.
xviii, cap. 36). . . . ‘who is rather to be con-
sidered a historian than a prophet, unless, indeed,
he may be understood to have prophesied, when
« « . . he demonstrates that truth ts the strongest
(alluding to 3 Ezra, ch. iii. iv.), for, m the gospel,
Christ is acknowledged to be the truth.’

This book does not, however, appear to have
been included in the catalozue of any council,
nor has any portion of it been read in the offices
of the church. Having been rejected us apocry-
phal by the Council of Trent, it has been removed,
together with the fourth book, in the Sixtine and
Clementine editions of the Vulyate, to the end of
the volume, with the observation that they are thus
retained in order to ‘ preserve from being altogether
lost books which had been sometimes cited by
some of the holy fathers. The following is the order
of the books of the Old Testament declared to be
canonical by this council :—5 of Moses; Joshua ;
Judges; Ruth; 4 of Kings; 2 of Chronicles;
2 of Ezra (viz. Ezra and Nehemiah); Tobit;
Judith; Esther; Job; Psalms; Proverbs; Ec-
clesiastes; Canticles; Wisdom ; Ecclesiasticus ;
Isaias ; Jeremias with Baruch ; Ezekiel ; Daniel ;
12 minor Prophets, viz» Hosea, Joel, Amos,
Abdias, Jonas, Micah, Nahum, Habhacuc, Ze-
vhanias, Haggai, Zecharias, Malachi, and 2 of

accabees.

The Fourrn Book or Ezra is quite of a
different character from the former, and it has
been even doubted whether it more properly be-
longs to the Apocrypha of the Old or the New
Testament, but the circumstance of the author's
personating the celebrated scribe of that name
has Leen supposed to have led to its obtaining
a place in the former. It consists of a num-
ber of similitudes or visions, resembling in
some passages the Apocalypse. The descriptions
are acknowledged to be sometimes most spirited
and sthiking, occasionally rising to great sublimity
of thought, energy of conception, and elegance of
expression (Lee's Epistulary Discourse; Lau-
rences «Ethiopic Version of Ezra). This would

robably be still more apparent liad we the book
im the original, for it seems highly probable that
this, as well as the former book, is a translation
from the Hebrew or Chaldee (Morini £zercit.
Bibl. lib, ii, p. 225; Fabricii Cod. Pseud.
VL 7. iii. 189). But neither this nor the Greek
Version, which was known to Clemens Alexan-
drinus in the second century (Stromata, iii.),
are any longer in existence, and the book was
suppose to have been preserved only in the old
Latin Ante-Hieronymian Version, uutil the middle
of the seventeenth century, when an Arabic version
was discovered in the Bodleian Library by Mr.
Gregory, a translation of which, by Simon Ockley,
the Arabic Professor at Cambridge, was published,
in 1711, by Mr. William Whiston (Primitive
Christianity, vol.iv.). Subsequently an Ethiopic
version, which, although known to Ludolf, was
concealed from the world, was published for the
first time, accompanied by a Latin and English
translation, by the late Archbishop Laurence, in
1820. It had been supposed indeed by some,
that the work was extant in Hebrew, and Arch-
bishop Laurence states, on the authority of Father
Simon, that Leo Judah's translation, which ap-


654 £SDRAS, BOOKS OF.
peared in: Robert Stephen's octavo Bible (1545 9),


was from a Hebrew manuscript, which, however,
the Archbishop asserts, was itself unquestionably
4 translation into Hebrew from the printed Vul-
gate. The truth of the matter, however, we be-
lieve to be, that Leo Judah only translated the
canonical books, while the apocryphal were done
by Cholin, who merely put such Hebrew words
in the margin as he conjectured to have been the
originals; for the translator observes in the preface
that he had ‘ never seen the book either in Greek
or Hebrew.’ It is remarked in some of Stephen’s
editions, that the prophet Ezra, who wrote this
book, was probably a diferent person from the
scribe. But, scornfully as Jerome looked upon
this book, and that probably more on dogina-
tical than purely critical grounds, it was highly
esteemed by others among the Fathers of the
Christian church. The book is ascribed to the
prophet Ezra by Clemens Alexandrinus (Strom,
b. iii.), who looked upon it as canonical and
divine, as did Ihenzus, Tertullian, and Ambrose,
who has made several quotations from this
§ prophet,’ as he also styles him (Sixtus Senensis,
Biblioth. Sanct.), and among others, one which
no longer exists in the Latin, but is found both in
the Arabic and /Ethiopic (Laurence’s £zra).
In the church of Rome the mass tor Whit-
Tuesday commences with a sentence from 4 Ezra,
ch. ii. 36, 37 (* Receive,’ &c., to‘ kingdom’), and
on the anniversary of the Martyrs, with another
from the same chapter, ver. 15,‘ Now are they
crowned and receive palms.’ Jahu observes that
the ‘catholics have made many martyrs on its
authority’? (Heb. Commonicealth, b. v.). Pico
de Mirandula considered this book as divinely ‘in-
spired, and Gaspar Zamora placed it in his Con-
cordance between Nehemiah and Maccabees.
An ‘ anonymous catholic,’ cited by Jahn, main-
tains that the Psendo-Ezra was considered as an
inspired writer until the time of the Council of
Trent; but this is scarcely consistent with the
fact, that although all the printed editions of the
Vulgate, before the time of the council, con-
tain the four books of Ezra without any mark of
doubt, very few manuscripts are known to possess
the fourth, Among modern writers, Whiston
(Authentic Records), aud others, both before and
since his time, have considered this book as an
inspired composition, and as the genuine pro-
duction of Ezra (See Prophecy that hath lain
Aid above these 2000 years ; Middle State of the
Souls Departed; the Prophecies of the Second
Book of Esdras, by Sir Jovn Floyer).

Author and Age of the Fourth Book of Ezra.—
Jahn (ut supra) supposes the author to have been
a Jew, educated in Chaldea, who borrowed his
style from Daniel, and who, having become a
Christian, still retained his reverence for Cabalistic
traditions, He places him in the first or early
in the second century (see also Vogel's Com-
mentatio de quarto lib. Lsdre, Altorf. 1793).
Archbishop Laurence, on the other hand (ut
supra), conceives that the author was a Jew
who never changed his creed, and endeavours
to destroy the two main arguments in favour of
the work having emanated frum a Christian: one
of these is founded on the remarkable fact that
the author speaks of Jesus by name (chap. vii.
28), the other on the circumstance of his being
plainly conversant with the Christian Scriptures.


ESDRAS, BOOKS OF.


As to the former, Dr. Laurence appeals to the
Ethiopic Version, where the text is (not
Son Jesus, but)‘my Bfessiah shall be revealed,
which is confirmed by the Arabic reading,
my Son Messiah, The Archbishop consider
these texts both in the Latin and Arabic to be
interpolations or explanatory glosses. The argu-
ment derived from the author's acquaintance
with the Christian Scriptures is principally
founded on the two first chapters, which ae
wanting in both the Arabic and Ethionic Ver-
sions, and in most manuscripts of the Latin
are placed at the beginning of the third look
of Ezra, or at the end of Nehemiah, where they
form a distinct Look The two last chapters are
equally wanting in these versions, and in most
Latin manuscripts form a fifth book, or are
otherwise clearly distinguished from the former
part of the book. This fitth book is in some
manuscripts divided into seven chapters, and the
whole of the fourth into thirty-nine. The division
into two chapters is erroneously ascribed by Dr.
Frank Lee to Robert Stephen, for the same di-
vision is found in the Editio Princeps by Fust
and Schoefler, priuted iu 1462, where also the
two last chapters, as well as the two lint, are
incorporated into the reat of the bouk, and have
so continued in all subsequent editions. Dr.
Laurence concludes from other internal grounds,
that the book was written before the Christian
era, after the death of Mark Anthony, and before
the accession of Augustus, or between the 25th
and 26th year before Christ. Upon this bypo-
thesis he conceives, that besides that the doe-
trine of the immortality of the soul and a se
parate state of spiritual existence between death
and judgment are distinctly described as the
general aud popular belief, the most important
use of the book consists in the testimony which it
bears to the Jewish idea of the Messiah, who is
herein clearly and familiarly denominated by the
appellation of the Son of God—as well as to the
belief that previously to his appearance on cath
he existed in heaven.

Dr. Lee (ut supra) is strongly of opinion that
the author of this book was contemyorary with
the author of the book of Enoch, or ratier that
both these books were written by one aud the same
author, It does not appear that Josephus was
aware of its existence. :

Among the most remarkable passages in ths
book is that famous one (4 Ezra xiv.) which
ascribes the recension of the entire Scriptures to
Ezva. It is well known that the Rabbins lave a
tradition, preserved in the Talmud, that on the
rebuilding of the Temple, Ezra assembled a col-
lege of 120 literati, known by the name of the
Great Synagogue, for the purpose of collecting
and arranging the Scriptures. Among the mem-
bers are enumerated Daniel, Shadrach, Mesluch,
and Abednego, Hagyai, Zechariah, Ezra, and
Nehemiah, and Simon the Just. Eara, whi, they
say, was the same with the prophet Malacia. uey
represent as the first, and Singon the Just, its latest
surviving member, as the Mak president of
college. They further represent ali these eminent
men as living at the same period, under Darius
Hystaspis, whom they suppose to be the sane
Darius who was subdued by Alexander, amd also
as that Artaxerxes who sent Ezra and Nehemiah
to Jerusalem, Daniel is thus made to have


e


* ESDRAS, BOOKS OF.


Hived to the time of Alexander the Great, and
Simon the Just they hold to be the same with
Jadduah, the high-priest, who received Alexander
in Jerusalem. To this synagogue the Rabbins
ascribe the formation of the canon, to which they
add that its members wrote Ezekiel, the twelve
minor Prophets, Daniel and Esther, while Ezra
wrote the book bearing his name, and the genea-
logies in Chronicles down to his time (Bara
Bathra). Jahn (Einleitung, 28) supposes that
as there is no authority whatever for the exist-
ence of this synagogue, all that can be meant
is, that the canon was settled by Ezra and the
others nameil as members of the synagogue, and
closed by Simon, who filled the office of high-
priest for nine years till his death, b.c. 292
(Eusebius, Chron.). But, in addition to this,
there was a current opinion among the early
Christian writers tu the eflect that the law having
been burned at the destruction of the Temple by
Nebuchadnezzar, Ezra restored the whole from
memory, or by divine inspiration, This notion
ofa revision or restoration of the Scriptures,
founded on the statement of the Pseudo-Ezra,
was looked upon as an undoubted fact by Irenaus
(Adcers. Heres. iii. 25); Tertullian (De Habit.
Mulier. cap. 1. p. 3, § 25); Clemens Alexandri-
nus (Strom. i. 329, 330, 342); Basil (Lpist. ad
Chilon. Paris, 1839, ii.’ pt. i. p. 184); Chrysostom
(Hom, viii. in Heb.); Jerome (Cont. Helvid.) ;
Augustine (De Mirabilibus Scrip. ii. 33); the
author of the Synopsis (op. Athanas. ii. p. 124);
Theodoret (Pref. Com. in Cant.); and Leontius
of Byzantium (De Sectés, p. 428). It was re-
vived by Spinoza (Tract. Theol. polit. ch. 8,
9) and other modern sceptics, who songht to
undermine the authority of the Scriptures by
ascribing their composition to Ezra (in refutation
of which opinion see the Introductions of Carpzov,
Eichhorn, Jahn, and De Wette). and who referred,
in proof of their theory, to certain passages which
seem to betray a later date than that usually
ascribed to the composition of these bucks.

Dean Prideaux, who observes (Connexion,
part i., b. v.) that ‘it would shock the faith of
the whole should it he held that it owed its
present being to such a revival. it being obvious
for sceptical persons to ubject that he who should
be said thus to revise it, then forged the whole,’
has formed out of these traditions a hypothesis,
which, although resting on no historic basis, has
Met with a favourable reception from its sup-
posed probability. He assumes that Ezra settled
the canon up to his time, and was the probable
author of Chronicles, Ezra, and Esther, which,
together with the books of Nehemiah and Malachi,
were added by Simon the Just, by whom the
canon was closed in the comtncncement of the
third century before Christ. Ag, however, men-
tion is made in Nehemiah of Darius, who lived
a century later than Ezra, and of Jadduah, who
died two years after the death of Alexander the
Great; and as the genealogy in Chronicles is
brought down to about the year n.c. 360, which
circumstances have induced some to ascribe the
wniting of these books to a peried not more an-
cient than the era cf Alexander, Prideaux looks
upon these passages as late ailditions or interpo-
ale aete ty those who completed the canon ;

ts also the opinion of Jahn (Introd.), al-
though he conceives the author not to have been


: ESHCOL, 655


Ezra. Dean Prideaux, in fine, supposes that Ezra
gave a new edition of the Scriptures, corrected
the errors of transcribers, adding what appeared
necessary for illustrating, correcting, ur com-
pleting them, changing names, and supplying
what was wanting. He further maintains that
Ezra was the author of several interpolations in
all the books which dis examination, and
Simon the Just in all the rest, which were added
afterwards (see the authorities in Buxtorf's Tibe-
rius, c. xi. p. 103). By this hypothesis, which is
a modification of the ancient idea, be endea-
vours to meet the objection raised against these
books, and to supply by ingenious cunjectures a
deticiency where Scripture and history are silent.
The reader will find sume animadversions on
Prideaux’s hypothesis by the author of the article
Thévlogie, in the Encyclopédie, who maintains
that the pretended Great Synagogue had no divine
and infallible authority to decide upon and close
the canon. Eichhorn thinks it yossible that
Simon the Just has been confounded in the Tal-
mudical fable with Simon tie Maccabee, as he
supposes that all the buoks in the canun could not
have heen written so early as the time of Simon
the Just, but that the canon may have been closed
under Sitnon the Maccabee (u.c. 141-135). St.
Jerome mistakes him for Simeon, the contemporary
of our Saviour, [Maccaugzs; Wispom oy S1-
nach; SxNaGoavg. |

Although Esdras is included in the 6th article
among the other books read for edilication, &c.
(Decrero-Canxonicat), it will be observed that
no lessons are taken from it in the offices of the
church of England. References are, however,
made fiom it in the Authorized Version to pa-
rallel passages in the Old and New Testament.
Grabe and others have conceived that this was
the book cited as the 6 iM isdom of God’ (Luc.
xi. 9, comp. with 4 Esdras i. 32).—W. W.


ESHBAAL,  [Isnsosneru.]
1. ESHCOL (D5t58; Sept. "Eexda), one of


the Amoritish chiefs with whom Abrabam was in
alliance when his camp was near Hebron, and
who joined with him in the pursuit of Chedor-
laomer and his allies, for the rescue of Lot (Gen.
xiv. 13, 24).


2. FSHCOL. The name of the valley in
which the Hebrew spies obtained the fine cluster
of grapes which they took back with them, bone
‘on astafY between two,’ asa specimen of the
fruits of the Promised Land (Num. xiii. 24). The
cluster was doubtless large; but the fact that it
was carried in this manner, does not. as usually
understood, imply that the bunch was as much
as two men could carry, seeing that it was pro-
bably so carried to prevent its being bruised in the
journey. The valley of Eshcol probably tuok its
name from the distinguished Amorite already
mentioned, and is hence to be sought in the neigh-
bouthood of Hebron. Accordingly the valley
through which lies the commencement of the road
from Hebron to Jerusalem is indicated as that of
Esheol. This valley is now full of vineyards and
olive-yards ; the former chiefly iv the valley itself,
the Jatter up the sides of the enclosing hills,
These vineyards are still very fine, and produce
the finest and largest grapes in all the country.”
(Robinson, i, 317),


656 ESHEL.


ESHEL bee), also Escuxt and Azsuax,
occurs in three places of Scripture, in one of
which, in our Reihatioes Version, it is ren-
dered grove, and in the other two tree. Celsius
(Hierodot. i. 535) maintains that has
always a general, and not a specific signifi-
cation, and that it is properly translated tree.
This, as stated by Rosenmiiller, has been satis-
factorily refuted by Michaelis in his Supplem.
p- 134. If we compare the passages in which’
the word eshel occurs, we shall see that there is
no necessity for considering it a generic term:
the more so, as we find in the Arabic a name
very similar to it, and applied to a tree of
which the character and properties would point
it out as likely to attract notice in the situa-
tions where eshel is mentioned. The first notice
of this tree is in Gen. xxi. 33, ‘ And Abraham
planted a grove (eshel) in Beersheba, and called
there on the name of the Lord.’ The’ second
Notice is in 1 Sam. xxii. 6: ‘ Now Saul abode in
Gibeah under a tree (eshel) in Ramah, having
his in his hand, and all his servants were
standing about him.’ Under such a tree also he
and his sons were buried, for it is said (1 Sam.
xxxi. 13), ‘And they took their bones, and
buried them under a tree (eshe!) at Jabesh, and
fasted seven days.’ In the parallel passage of
1 Chron. x. 12, the word alah is employed. This
signifies a ‘terebinth tree,’ but is translated ‘ oak’
in the Authorized Version : ‘ They arose, all the
valiant men, and took away the body of Saul,
and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to
Jabesh, and bummed their bones under the oak in
Jabesh, and fasted seven days.’


¢


AN


284. [Tamarisk. Tamarix orientalis.)


Celsius has quoted several authorities in sup-
port of his opinion that cshel is used in a generic
sense, as R. Davia Kimchi, who remarks, ‘ Eschel
est nomen generale omni arbori;’ and with re-
ference to the passage in Genesis, ‘ Et plantavit
Eschel, h. m. interpretatur: et plantavit plan-
tationem.’ So Rosenmiiller, though considering
the term to be specific, says, ‘ We have the testi-
mony of Rabbi Jonah or Abulwalid, in his He-
brew-Arabie Lexicon, that the Arabic term athle


ESHEL.


is not unfrequently used for any large a
was the word eshel by the later Hebrivs. ibe
word athle which is cited, is no doubt the Arabic


DN asul or athul. The letter 49 is the fourth


letter of the Arabic alphabet : its legitimate power
appears to be that of th in the English word ching;
but in the mouth of a Turk, Syrian, Egyptian,
Persian, and a native of Hindoostan, it is either
pronounced like an s lisped, or not to be distin- ”
guished from that character. In a few instances
it is pronounced like ¢ (Richardson, Persian and


Arabie Dictionary). In that work (UI ast is
translated ‘a tamarisk shrob ;’ wll asalct,


‘ large prickly tamarisks.’ In Ji/ustr. Himal. Bot.
p- 214, we have said ‘The Arabic name aaw
or atul is applied to furas (an arboreous species
of tamarisk} in India, as to T. orientalis in
Arabia and Egypt.’ So in the Ulfac Udwied,
translated by Mr. Gladwin, we have at Na 36,
(bl ussel, the tamarisk bush, with 'yhaow as the
Hindee ; and J gus as the Persian’ synonyme.
The tamarisk and its products were highly valued
by the Arabs for their medicinal properties, and
are described in several places under different
names in Avicenna; the plant being noticed
under toorfa, and the galls, which are often
found on it, under souz-al-toorfa, but which are
also called chezmezech or kuzmezech. They
adopt much of the description of Dicscorides,
though the translation of Serapion no doubt errs
in eran, per the dxaxaAis of the Greeks. But
Serapion himself, from Isaac eben Amram, says
* Athel est species tamarisci.’

If we refer to travellers in eastern countries,
we shall find that most of them mention the athul.
Thus Prosper Alpinus (De Plantis <Egypti, c.
ix. De Tamarisco atle vocata) gives a figure
which sufficiently shows that it must grow to the
size of a large tree: ‘ Alterum vero tamarisci do
mesticum genus in Egypto spectatur—quod ad
magne olivs: magnitudinem crescit;' and says
that he had heard of its attaining, in another
place, to the size of a large oak ; that its wood was
employed for making a variety of vessels, and its
charcoal used throughout Egypt and Armbia;
and that different parts of it were employed in
medicines. So Forskal, who calls the species
Tamariscus orientalis, gives, atl as its Arabic
name, and identities it with be, says, ‘Galle
Tamaricis in officinis usurpantur loco fructus.’
Belon (in his Observ. ii. 28), says, ‘Tamarices in
£gypto humidis et siccioribus locis indiffereuter
nascuntur; illarum enim silvula perinde in
aridioribus locis reperiuntur atque in humidis
littoribus. Es autem excrescentia quam Gallam
nominavimus adeo onuste sunt, ut parum absit
quin rami pre pondere rumpantur.’ In Arabia
Burckhardt found the tree called asus in the
neighbourhood of Medina, and observes that the
Arabe cultivated it on account of the hardness of
its wool. If we endeavour to trace a species of
tamarisk in Syria, we shall find some difiiculty,
from the want of precision in the information
supplied by travellers on subjects of Natural
History. But a French naturalist, M. Bové, whe
travelled from Cairo to Mount Sinai, and from


ESHEL.


thence into Syria, has given ample proofs of the
existence of species of tamarisk in these regions.
Thus neat Sinai, he says, ‘ Le lendemain, je m’a-
vancai dans la yallée el Cheick, presque entiére-
ment couverte de tamariz mannifera.’ In pro-
ceeding from Suez to Gaza, in an extensive plain
of barren sand, he again tinds a tamarisk; and
further on,‘ De ]& nous arrivames a quelques
dunes de sable, on je remarquai de trés gros
Tamarix.’ On the borders of Palestine, and the
day before reaching Gaza, he says, * Vers midi,
nous nous arrétAmes dans la vallée Lésare, bordée
de dunes de sable mouvant, et remplie de Ta-
marise qui ont trois a quatre métres de circon-
ference, et de douze a quinze métres de hauteur :’
that is, in the very country in which Beersheba is
supposed to have been situated, we have tamarisk
trees, now called asul, where the eshel is described
as having been planted.

It is very remarkable that the only tree which
is found growing among the ruins of Babylon
is a tamarisk. Thus, on the north side of the
Kast, where Ker Porter thought he saw traces
of the hanging gardens, there stands upon an
artificial eminence a tree to which the Arabs give
the name of athela. It is a species of tree alto-
gether fureign to the country. Two of the attend-
ants of Ker Porter, who were natives of Bender
Bushire, assured him that there are trees of that
kind in their country, which attain a very great
age, and are called gaz. ‘The one in question is
in appearance like the weeping-willow, but the
trunk is hollow through age, and partly shattered.
The Arabs venerate it as sacred, in consequence
of the Calif Ali having reposed under its shade
after the battle of Hillah’ (Rosenmiiller, Bibi.
Geog. ii. p. 20, from Ker Porter; comp. Ains-
worth’s Researches, p. 125). It may be observed
that the present writer has already quoted the two
names here given as applied to the tamarisk, in a
Persian work on Materia Medica, published in
India.

From the characteristics of the tamarisk-tree
of the Kast, it certainly appears as likely as any to
have been planted in Beersheba by Abraham,
becanse it is one of the few trees which will
flourish and grow to a great size even in the
arid desert. It has also a name in Arabic, asul,
very similar to the Hebrew eshcl. Besides the
advantage of aflording shade in a hot country,
it is alsu esteemed on account of the excellence
of Ms wood, which is converted into charcoal.
It is no less valuable on account of tle galls
with which its branches are often loaded, and
which are Nearly as astringent as oak-galls. It
1s also one of those trees which were esteemed by
the Ancients, being the pupicn of Theophrastus,
Dioscorides, &c. ‘Hane enim vaticinaturi manu
xestabant, ut Apollo in Lesbo, inde Alyriceus
ictus, &e.’ To this they were probably led, as
im soine other instances, by finding that it was
esteemed in those eastern countries, from which
ee of their information and opinions were, in
Hee rst instance, derived. The only difficulty

en 0 rere the exact species found in the
: ich situations we have indicated—a difticulty
es 2 arises from their similarity to one another,
then mel it almost Impossible to distinguish
eke the ee of aot Ke ie! _hvenbersi

ei _ recently investigated the species,
Bives a tamariz tetragyna asa species of Syria

”


’


ESSENES. 657


and T. orientalis of Forskal as the species found
in Arabia, Persia, and India, and 7. arborca as
a variety of 7. gallia found near Cairo. But
as they are all so similar, any of the arboreous .
species or varicties which flourish in the most
barren eituations, would have the name asul ap-
plied to it, and this name would appear to an
Arab of those regions the most appropriate trans-
lation for eshel, in the passage where Abraham is
described as planting a tree, and calling on the
name of the Lord, the everlasting God.—J. F. R.

ESSENES (Econvol), one of the three great
Jewish sects, of which the other two were the Phari-
sees and the Sadducees. The derivation of the
name Essenes is by no means certain. Philo (Quod
omnis probus liber, § 12) deduces it fiom éctos,
‘holy.’ Some have found its origin in the Chaldee
word NDR, ‘to heal ;° supporting their opinion by
reference to the fact that the Essenes were a class
of men who professed to heal buth mind and body.
De Wette gives the preference to the Syriac
ALOd, signifying ‘pious.’

These sects sprung up in the decline of the
Jewish state, after the Babylonish captivity,
influenced in their rise and spread not less by as-
cetic philosophy than by the national degradation
and the decay of morality. In all states religion
comes first, for it is spontaneous, the natural
answer of the heart to God. Philosophy is an
after-thought, an act and an achievement of the
reasoning faculty, which, if it has sometimes
puritied, has also sophisticated religion. .

While the Pharisees gave their countenance to
sustain the past, with all its transmitted influences,
indiscriminately, and the Sadducees adhered
rigidly to the ancient Mosaic institutions, to the
rejection of what was traditionary and adven-
titious, the Essenes attempted to form a third
way, which, without neglecting the past, should
bring new and powertul appliances to bear on
the actual ills of society; seeking not merely to
reform and repair, but rather to heal and revive.
For this purpose they gave themselves up to a
contemplative mode of life, as well as to those
labours by which only thought and practice can
be united in harmony, and the which Géd
designed be wrought out for man. Making small
account of the outward observances of the Plia-
risee, and standing religiously aloof from the
scepticism and narrow worldly spirit of his oppo-
nent the Sadducee, the Essenes aimed at some-
thing practical—sought to originate an influence
which should stem the advance of corruption, and
peur a savatory and life-giving power into the
veins of society. For this purpose they founded
a brotherhood, devised institutions, aud became
the earliest example, if not the actual psrent, of
all the teeming brood of hermits, monks, friars,
and nuns, which have since been scen. They
were a mural and religious order, while the Pha-
risees partook mure of the character of a party (in
the modern and political sense of the word), and
the Sadduccees exhibited not a few of he features
of a sect.

The Essenes were ascetics. The ordinary plea-
sures of life they avoided as something morally
bad, and held self-control and freedom from the
slavery of the passions to be virtue. Marriage
they despised. Selecting among the children of
others those whom they considered — pro-

u


658 ESSENES.


.


mising, they endeavoured to form them according
to their own model. In this conduct they appear
to have been influenced not so much by any ab-
solute disapproval of wedded life and its natural
fruits, as by fears and cautions, which the immoral
character of their age may in some degree have
justified. Riches, too, they held in contempt.

hatever they lad they were ready to share with
others. Superfluity was unknown in a community
where all things were held in common. As soon
ag a new-comer was received amony them, he put
his property, whatever it was, into fhe common
sticks or, if he had little or nothing. his wants
were thence gratuitonsly supplied. Neither riches
nor poverty, therefore, were known in their body.
None had lesa, none more than enough,

Stewards were appointed by them, whose busi-
ness it was to take due care of what in each case
was entrusted to them, not for their own indi-
vidual advantage, but for the common good.

Dwelling as they did in various cities, they
would from time to time have to enter places
where, as individuals, they were unknown ; but,
true to their principle of a community of goods,
the brethren in any strange city received and
entertained them the same as if they had come to
their own property. Scarcely any occasion was
there, in consequence, for making provision when
they travelled; and they appear to have taken
nothing with them except weapons of defence,
which they judged the insecurity of the country
rendered necessary. In order that travellers

. might by no possibility suffer want or experience
disappointment, there was in every city one of the
brethren, who was specially charged to provide
them with food, clothing, and other necessaries.
These duties of hospitality, however, could nut
have been so onerous then as they would under
similar circumstances be now, it what Josephus
states is to be taken literally, that the Essenes did
not change their shoes or garments till they were
worn out and tattered. Buying and selling, as
might be expected, were unknown among them :
give and take was their simple plan, which ap-
pears to have been observed no less between the
members of different communities than between
those of the same.

The account which Josephus has given of their
pious exercises, and of their daily engagements, is
no less striking than it is in strict agreement with
their ascetic character in general. Rising before
the sun, they abstained from all ordinary conver-
sation, and put up their ancestral prayers, not
forgetting to beg for a renewal of the light of day.
Then, under the supervision of curators or fore-
men, they proceetled to exercise each one the art
in which he was skilled, labouring diligently till
eleven o'clock in the forenoon. Then assembling
together, and being covered with white veils, they
bathed in cold water; after which, entering their
refectory with certain religious sulemnities, they
quietly seated themselves, when there being set
before each of them a loaf of bread and a single
plate of one sort of food, and a priest having in-
voked the divine blessing, they proceeded to take
refreshment. When the repast was over the same
Sei made an offering of thanks to the Great

nefactor of the world, and the brethren all re-
turned to their several employments. These being
terminated in the evening, another meal with simi-
lar observances was partaken by all in common.


ESSENES.


These set regulations, and their moderation ir
eating, produced a regularity and order which
appeared something mysterious to the uninitiated :
a feeling which was enhanced by the law which,
forbidding any one to speak unless in his turn,
kept their abodes free from confusion, and sus
tained a tranquillity which was eminently con-
ducive to the exercise of the head and the
heart. F

Their entire manner of life, indeed, was subject
to the strictest rule. Only in their ministrations
of charity were they left free to the spontaneous
movements and impulses of their breasts. Lest,
however, a species of nepotism should misgnide
their hand in dispensing mercy, and thus mis
apply and waste the common resources, they were
bate from giving succour to any of their

indred who might be in need, unless under the
supervision of their overseers.

Next to God, Moses was the object of their
reverent homage. To blaspheme the name of
Moses was a capital offence. As might be ex
pected, their observance of the Sabbath was more
strict than ordinary. Their food they cooked the
day before. On the Sabbath they would not re
move a vessel from its place, even for the most
pressing wants of nature.

If, indeed, all may be believed which Josephus
relates touching their opinions, a pious and self-
denying life on their part was any thing but
unnatural. According to him, they regarded the
body as frail and corruptible, but the soul as
living for ever. Ascetism was the necessary re-
sult of their conviction that souls came out of
the most subtle air, from the loftiest empyreum,
and are lodged in bodies as in prisons, from which
when once set free, they rejoice and soar away to
their native regions. After death punishment
awaits the had, blessedness the good ; each in
their own place. The fear of the one and the
hope of the other exerted, they believed, a most
salutary influence on the actions of men while
yet in this state of being. ‘These,’ adds Josenhus,
“are the divine doctrines of the Esseues about the
soul, which lay an unavoidable bait for such as
have once had a taste of their philosophy.’

They even maile pretensions to the gift of pro-
phecy, drawing their light from reading the sacred
books, especially from the stndy of the prophetic
writings, and from the careful and diligent use
of purifications. Dean Aldrich enumerates three
successful efforts of this kind, as narrated by
Josephus (note to Whiston's Transit. Jet, War, it.
12), who himself asserts ‘it is but seldom that
they miss in their predictions.” It would have
heen surprising if, aided by their scholars no less
than by ‘the chapter of accidents, they bad not
sometimes proved true prophets, especially if they
were accustomed to do as did one of them, who,
thinking he had failed in prophesying the death
of one Antigonus, thus complained toa numerous
band of pupils, who were vot likely to be deaf to
their teacher's wishes :—*Q. strange! it is good
for me to die now, since truth is dead before me,
and somewhat that I have foretuld hath proved
false; for this Amixonus is this day alive, who
ought to have died this dav; and the place where
he ought to be slain was Strato’s tower, which is
at the distance of six bundred furlongs from
where we are.’ News, however, in time arriv
which relieved the master’s dejection, and esta-


ESSENES.


blished the prophet’s—shall we say veracity, or
influence? Antigonus was dead (Joseph. De Bell.
Jud. i. 3. 5).

Their pursuits, trades, and professions were
such as conduce to human good. They tilled
the ground; they made useful articles; they bred
and pastured cattle: but in the fabrication of
arms they took no part. Even peaceful pursuits
which ministered tu vice they carefully avoided.
it must not be concealed, however, that some of
their notions bordered on extravagance, and that
some of their practices betrayed a fastidiousness
which amounts to the ridiculous,

In morals they seem to have attained no ordi-
nary excellence. Over anger they kept a guard
like just stewards. All the passions they knew
how to restrain, They were eminent for fidelity,
and ministers of peace. ‘Their word was more to
be trusted than some meu’s oaths. Swearing in-
deed they studiously avoided, alleging, with no
small reasou, that the man is already condemned
who cannot be believed without an oath,

The great aim of their inquiries, whether they
searched the books of the ancients or studied the
virtues of plants, was to gather such lessons of
wisdom as might render them able to administer,
like skilful physicians, to the maladies both of
the mind ai the body.

Persons who are convicted of heinous crimes
are expelled from their suciety. Of those thus
excommunicated, some perish miserably ; others
are received back only when they have undergone
the severest punishment which want and wretch-
edness can inflict ; for, being still under the vows
and regulations of their order, they are prohibited
from all food but such as the niggard products of
spontaneous vegetation may supply.

Admission into their communities was not easy.
A noviciate of twelve months was imposed, in
order that it might be ascertained how far the
caudidate was able to endure the rigours of the
system, At the expiration of the year those who
are approved are habited in white, and receive a
girdle and a sort of small hatchet, being made
‘partakers of the waters of puritication,’ that is,
probably, baptised. A further probation of two
years must be undergone. If the novice is then
found worthy he is admitted into the society.
Certain vows,* however, are first to be taken—a


* If the long passage in Josephus respecting
the Essenes is now as it was when it left the his
torian’s hand, there seems on the face of it a
marked contradiction in what he says about oath-
taking— making them in one instance eschew
oaths altogether, and in another take oaths of the
most solemn nature and widest application. The
rendering which we have given in the text, ‘ vow,’
seems justitied by the nature of the communities
which they formed—a sort. of monastic life; and
by usages which, at least at a later date, we know
to have been connected with such institutions,
The rendering, however, is not unaccompanied
with difficulties,

Staudlin (Sittenlehre Jesu, i. 460), referring to
the fact that it was only the novices from whom
this vow or oath was exacted, supposes that it
was truly an oath which they tock (Josephus
terms it ‘fearful oaths,” Sprous Guvuor ppiccdecs) 3
aud that this was the last vath they swore—sworu
as candidates, not as Essenes, for that thuse who


3
ESSENES. 659


proceeding which seems scarcely compatible with
what the same authority tells us regarding the
aversion of the Essenes to oaths. These vows or
oaths bind the neophyte to exercise piety towards
God and justice towards men; to hate the bad
and assist the good; to harm no one, either of his
own accord or by the command of others; to be
faithful to all men, especially to such as are in
authority; to love truth and reprove the liar; to
keep his hands clean from theft, and his soul
pure from unlawful gain; to conceal nothing
from the brotherhood, and reveal to others none of
their secrets, not even should life thereby be put
in peril; to transmit the Essene doctrines un-
changed to others; to preserve their books and
the names of their officers (dyyeAo, angels) in
strict secrecy.

When the time of their preparatory trial is
come to an end, the newly-admitted brethren are
distributed among four classes. Still a distinc-
tion is observed. If all are now Essenes, sume
are younger than others; and the distinction of
age is su rigidly observed that, if a senior do but
touch a junior brother, the first must undergo a
purification by water, as much as if he had been
in contact with a foreigner.

All events, the destiny of man not less than
other things, the Essenes referred to the ordinations
of the Divine will, without, nevertheless, attempt-
ing to deny human freedom. It is not with sie
losuphical precision that they spoke on the sub-
ject, but with a view to pious edification they
taught that everything depended on a certain
Fate, which was lord of all, without which nothing
happens to man.

They did not offer oblations in the Temple at
Jerusalem, though they sometimes sent presents
thither. A pure heart they held to be the best
offering. Religivus ablutions they considered
acts of holiness,

They had no slaves; all were free, serving one
auother. They repudiated lordship as unjust, as
destructive of natural equality, as inreligious, as
opposed to the laws of nature. Nature they held
to be the common mother and instructress of all;
and with them all men were brethren, not in
name, but in reality.

Thus, while they were careful to preserve a
practical subordination in their communities,
without which social existence is an impossibility,
those who were highest amongst them held office
merely for the common goul, and in themselves
were neither richer wor better clad than others,
nor had they any political power.

They did not admit logic among their studies,
since, in their opinion, it dves uothing for the fur-
therance of virtue. Metupliysics they avoided,
as relating to subjects which are tov high for
man; yet they made an exception in favour of
those branches which refer to the existence of God
and the creation of the world. Morality—the
morality which they by their own process learnt
from Moses—was the chief object of their studious
care.

Pliny (Hist. Nat. v. 17) seems to have been
much struck with the Essenes. ‘They dwell,’ be


were really Essences swore not at all. There
seems, however, no little inconsistenty in re-
quiring of the scholar that which the master con-


demned and shunned.
. 202


£
660 ESSENES.


says, ‘along the Dead Sea, avoiding such proxi-
mity to its waters as would be hurtful. They
are a solitary people, and more wonderful than
any other, as they are without females, emanci-
pated from sexual intercourse, having no money,
dwellers amid palm-groves. Their community
is daily renewed by new comers—persons who are
weary of life, and who flee to their retreats from
its stormy waves. Thus a people among whom
a birth is never known remains (incredible as it
may appear) unimpaired through successive aves :
so prolific tv them ig the weariness of life which
is felt by others.’

Philo (Quod omnis probus liber, § 12) agrees
with Pliny in representing them as fleeing from
the ordinary dwellings of men, and living to-
gether in villages or establishments specially erected
by and for themselves.

The same writer speaks, in terms similar to
those employed by Josephus, of their religions
views and spirit. They did not sacrifice animals.
They were very observant of institutions and prac-
tices received from their fathers, which, especially
on the seventh day, théy taught to their disciples,
who appear to have been very numerous (Joseph.
De Bell. Jud. i. 3. 5). The seventh was with
them a sacred day, on which they abstained from
all kind of labour, frequented the sacred places,
called synagogues, where the young sat arranged
in classes according to age under the eye of their
elders. Here one took and read, and another
expounded, the sacred books. A system of allego-
rical interpretation prevailed. Among their in-
structions the virtues of holiness, justice, and
economy held a prominent place; nor did they
omit the duties which men owe to the state.
Their teachings were accompanied by definitions
and rules, and were enforced by a regard to the
love of virtue, the love of man, and the love of
God. Of their love of God they gave very many
pes among which Philo reckons their life-
ong chastity, their abstaining from oaths, their
abhorrence of lying, their referring to God all the
rood and none of the evil feund in the world.

heir love of virtue they proved by their con-
tempt of wealth, honour, and pleasure, their self-
government, their patience, fortitude, the fewness
of their wants, their simple manner of life, their
modesty, their respect for the law; while in their
benevolence, their practical equality, their doing
good to all irrespectively, and their community
of gouds, they gave distinguished exemplifications
of their love of man. Every Essene was for every
other a brother, and nothing more. Their hu-
manity was specially manifested towards the sick
and the aged. The first were attended in the
most careful and loving manner. Never was old
age more honoured, or in a more felicitous con-
dition, than among the Essenes, Every one strove
to render to the old services of all kinds, and
they found themselves as if in the midst of nu-
merous tender-hearted children. Among all the
bitter, open and secret persecutors and fues of the
Jewish people, no one (so says Philo) had con-
victed, or even impeached, an Essene of any
crime. The virtue of these men cannot be de-
nied; all writers show them respect as free-born
men, who were a law to themselves, distinguish-
ing with special praise their brotherhood and
their community of goods. Even royalty has
expressed its admiration of their institutions, and


.


ESSENES.


held it an honour to show towards them marks of
its high esteem.

Some minor observances and regulations may
be mentioned. The Essenes had a peculiar liking
for white garments, not improbably because an
emblem of that purity of life to the practice of
which they were devoted.

The will of the majority was law. ¢ Accord-
ingly,’ says Josephus, ‘if ten of them be sitting
together, no one of them will speak while the
other nine are against it. They also avuid spit
ting in the midst of them, or on the right side.’

In their criminal procedures they were no less
just than accurate. o sentence could be passed
unless at Jeast a hundred voices concurred: but
the resolves of that number were unalterable.

Their manner of life was eminently conducive
to health and longevity. Many of them lived
above a hundred years.

Pain they disregarded ; the miseries of life they
held of small account; and they even preferred
death to living always.

The calm and unmoved firmness with which
they endured at the hands of the Romans, during
‘the Jewish war,’ the cruellest turtures, and death
itself, rather than be faithless to their convictions
or forswear their order, serves to show that the
ascetic spirit and the martyr-spirit have no little
in common, and exhibits within ‘the limits of
Palestine the very same results, from the very
same discipline, as Sparta was proud to call her
own.

With their ascetic notions it was natural they
should disregard the body, and the usual care
which, especially among the ancients, was taken
of it. Accordingly they considered oil a detile-
ment, and if any one was anointed contrary to
his will the body was carefully cleansed.

Josephus, in continuation of his account, makes
report of another kind of Essenes, who do not
appear to have essentially differed from those
whom we have already described. The chief
point of diversity was in regard to marriage.
This second kind entertained less unfavourable
opinions of female virtue and honour than did the
first, and, holding that marriage was a divine
ordinance for the propagation of the human spe-
cies, they did not think themselves justitied in
condemning or avoiding it, At the same time,
with a suspicion which was akin to the avoid-
ance of their brother Essenes, they used the best
precautions in their power, and specially gave
those females whom they thought of mrarrying a
trial for three years, at the expiration of which
they actually married them, provided they were
satisfied. Marriage, however, they considered
merely as a duty, and accordingly did not nez-
lect the same ascetic principles which charac-
terize the whole of the Kssene life.

In the account which has now been given we
have followed in the main the authority of Jo-
seplius and Philo. The latter speaks of a species
of Essenes under the name of Therapeuta, whom
we shall describe when we come to that word,
when we shall subjoin some general reflections on
the subject, contenting ourselves at present with
remarking that, generally excellent as were the
institutions and practices of the Essenes in their
peculiar circumstances, yet a good deal of the
warm colouring of the picture, if not some of its
objects, may have been borrowed from the ima-


ESTHER.


gination of the artists by whom it was originally
drawn. Besides Josephus and Philo the reader
may consult Stiudlin, Sittenlehre Jesu, Gotting.
1799; De Wette, Sittenlehre, Berlin, 1833; De
Wette, Archdologie, Leipzig, 1830.—J. R. B.


ESTHER (ANDN ; Sept. Eo@ip), a damsel of
the tribe of Benjamin, born during the Exile, and
whose family did not avail itself of the permission
to return to Palestine, under the edict of Cyrus.
Her parents being dead, Esther was brought up
by her uncle Mordecai. The reigning king of
Persia, Ahasuerus, haying divorced his queen,
Vashti, on account of the becoming spirit with
which she refused to submit to the indignity which
a compliance with his drunken commands in-
volved, search was made throughout the empire
for the most beautiful maiden to be her successor.
Those whom the officers of the harem deemed the
most beautiful were removed thither, the eventual
choice among them remaining with the king him-
self. That choice fell on Esther, who found favour
in the eyes of Ahasuerus, and was advanced to a
station, enviable only by comparison with that of
the less favoured inmates of the royal harem.
Her Jewish origin was at the time unknown ; and
hence, when she avowed it to the king, she seemed
to be included in the doom of extirpation which
a royal edict had pronounced ugainst all the
Jews in the empire. This circumstance enabled
her to turn the royal indignation upon Haman,
the chief minister of the king, whose resentment
against Mordecai had led him to obtain from the
king this monstrons edict. The laws of the em-
pire would not allow the king to recall a decree
once uttered; but the Jews were authorized to
stand on their defence; and this, with the known
change in the intentions of the court, averted the
worst consequences of the decree. The Jews esta-
blished a yearly feast in memory of this deliver-
ance, which is observed among them to this day

Purim]. Such is the substance of the history of
‘sther, as related in the book which bears her
tame. The details as given in that book afford a
most curious picture of the usages of the ancient
Persian court; the accuracy of which is vouched
not only by the historical authority of the book
itself, but by its agreement with the intimations
afforded by the ancient writers, as well as by the
fact that the same usages are in substance pre-
served in the Persian court at the present day.
©The objections which have been advanced
against the book of Esther on the ground of the
follies, wickedness, and crtelties narrated in it,
have been ably refuted by Jahn and other critics,
who have shown that these things are not recorded
with approbation, but simply as facts of history,
illustrative of the operations of the providence of
God, with a view to effect the deliverance of his
people’ (Henderson, On Inspiration, p. whe With
reference to the somewhat sanguinary character
of Esther and Mordecai, Jahn remaiks that uo
difficulty arises from thence, seeing that they are
not represented as saints, but as deliverers of their
nation.

It should be observed that Esther is the name
which the damsel received upon her introduction
into the royal harem, her Hebrew name having
been Hapbassan (ADIN, myrtle, Esth. ii. 7).
Esther is most probably a Persian word. Gesenius
cites from that diffuse Targum on this book which


ESTHER, BOOK OF. 66!


is known as the second Targum on Esther, the
following words: ‘She was called Esther from
the name of the star Venus, which in Greek is
Aster.’ Gesenius then points to the Persian word
Satérah, star, as that of which Esther is the
Syro-Arabian modification; and brings it, as
to signification, into connection with the planet
Venus, as a star of good fortune, and with the
name of the Syrian goddess Ashtéreth, according
to the etymology of the word, already referred to
in that article.

The difficulties of the history of the book of
Fsther, especially as regards the identity of the
king, have been examined under AnasuERus,
and are also noticed in the following article.

ESTHER, BOOK OF, one of the eleven books
styled Ketubim [Hagioararua], and of the
five Afegilloth (Cantic.es]. It is called by the
Jews Megillah Esther, and sometimes simply
Megillah, as it forms by itself a distinct roll. In
the Christian Church it has been also called Aha-
suerus, which name it bears in some copies and

rinted editions of the Vulgate. In the Hebrew
It is placed with the other Megilloth, after the
Pentateuch, between the books of Joshua and
Ecclesiastes, and sometimes among the Hagto-
grapha, between Ecclesiastes and Daniel. In
the Vulgate, Tobit and Judith are placed be-
tween Nehemiah and Esther. Luther placed it
immediately after Nehemiah, so as to make it the
last among the historical books, although the book
of Nehemiah was supposed to refer to a later Ifis-
tory. His design in this arrangement was to
pete the books of Nehemiah and Ezra from

ing disunited. It has continued to retain this
position in the Reformed versions,

The Jews hold this book in veneration next to
the books of Moses (see Carpzov’s and Eichhorn's
Introductions), and there appears to be no au-
thentic foundation for the statement of Richard
Baxter (Sainds’ Lest, part iv.), that the book of
Esther was treated so ignomintously by the Jews
that they were in the habit of throwing it on the
ground before reading it.

Sulject of Esther.—As the subject of this book
has been treated of under the article AHASUERUS,
it will be sufficient to refer to that head ; only we
may here observe that the book of Esther has this
peculiarity among the historical books, that al
though the author, a Persian Jew, records a re
markable preservation from destruction of that
portion of his countrymen which remained in
Persia after the exile, he does not refer their deli-
verance to the act of God, whose name is not even
once mentioned. This has Leen explained by
supposing that the author wished to avoid giving
offence to the Persians, or that the whole was
taken from the Persian annals, which are ap-
pealed to, ch. x. 2. (See Pareau’s Principles of
Interpretation, and Hottinger’s Zhes. Phil.

. ARS,

The historical and other difficulties of this
book have been the subject of much controversy
and embarrassment. Not the least of these has
been the solution of the question—What king of
Persia is meant by Ahasuerus? For there has
been no Persian monarch frum Astyages, who
died 8.c. 603, and his son Cyaxares, to Darius
Ochus, who died u.c. 358, or his son, who died
twenty years later, who has not been maintained


to be the husband of Esther. Those who have


’


662 ESTHER, BOOK OF.


most suffrages are Darius Hystaspis, Xerxes, and
Artaxerxes Longimanus ; for which last monarch
we have the authority of Josephus and of the Sep-
tuagint Version, wherein he is called by the name
of Artaxerxes [Anasurrvs]. Jahn (Introduction)
falls in with the view of Scaliger, who sup-
poses that Amestris, the crnel and vindictive wife
of Xerxes, is no other than Esther, as both the
name and the character of Amestris favour the
supposition that she is the Esther of the Bible.
But she is said by Herodotus to have been the
dau:thter of Otanes, a Persian, and to have been
married to Xerxes before his Grecian expedition.
Bellarmine, who adopts the view of Josephus, is
not affected by the circumstance that, in this
case, Mordecai’s aze must have excecded 165
years, as he himself had known fa hale old man
of 105, who was likely to live still many years.’

The difficulties and app rent improbabilities in
the narrative have had the etlect of iuducing some
of the leamed to consider the hook of Esther a
fiction, of which opinion is De Wette (Lehrbuch),
who conceives that this book betokens the utter
destruction of Hebrew historical writing, and that
its only historical basis is the feast of Purim;
which, however, he allows to have been ‘ occa-
sioned by an event similar to that relatel in
Esther.” Eichhorn, who is admitted by De Wette
to have solved most of the individual objections
against the credibility of the narrative, maintains
that the circumstance alone of a national festival
having been founded in commemoration of the
events described in the book of Esther, and which
had been already of long standing in the time of
Judas Maccabaus (2 Mace. xv. 36), is a snflicient
voucher for the correctness of the principal event
in the history, and that it would be absurd to
suppose that a national festival was founded
ona mere table. Pareau, who agrees with Eich-
horn in supposing Xerxes to be the husband of
Esther, and conccives that the principa! difficul-
ties are removed by this supposition, describes
the author as accurate to mmuteness, and equal
to any history, as having acquired his skill
amon the more cultivated Persians. De Wette,
also, while he describes the book as ‘breathing the
spirit of revenge and haughtiness,’ observes that it
is simple in its style, fee from declamation, and
thus advantaeous] y distinguished from the similar
stories in the apocrypha (Jntroduction, Parker's
translation, Boston, 1843).

Author and Age of Esther. —This is a question
involved in much difficulty. Of the author no-
thing is kuown, nor have we any data on which
to form a reasonable conjectare. Augustine (De
Civitate Det) ascribes the book to Ezra, Eusebius
ne xlvii, dd. 4), who observes that the
acts of the history ure posterior to the time of Ezra,
ascribes it to some later but unknown author,
Clemens Alexandrinus (Stromata, lib, i. p. 329)
assigns it, and the book of Maccabees, to Mor-
decai. The pseudo-Philo (Chronographia) and
Rabbi Azarias maintain that it was written at
the desire of Mordecai by Jehoiakim, son of
Joshua, who was high-priest in the 12th year
of the reign of Artaxerxes. The subscription to
the Alexandrian version states that the epistle
regarding the feast of Purim was brought by
Dositheus into Evypt, under Ptolemy and Cleo-
patra (z.c. cir. 160); but it is well known that
these subscriptions are of little authority. The


ESTHER, BOOK OF.


authors of the Talmud say that it was written
by the members of the Great Synagogue, who
also wrote Ezekiel and the twelve Prophets. But
the whole account of the Great Synagoyue, said
to have been instituted by Ezra, and concluded
by Simon the Just, who is said to have closed the
canon, and whose death took place n.c. 292, is
by most looked wpon as a rabbinical romance
[Espras]. De Wette (/oc. cit.) assigus it to the
age of the Ptolemies and Seleucida, whose era
commenced B.c. 312, while Jabn maintaius that
it must have been written soon after the facts
which it records, and before the destruction of the
Persian monarchy (.c. 330), to whose annals it
appeals.

Canonicity of Esther.—Some doubts have been
thrown on the canonical authority of this book
from the fuct that it is never referred to in the
New Testament, that it is not cited by Philo,
and ‘hat it is omitted in several of the ancient
catalogues, some of which expressly exclude it
from the canon, As to the New Testament,
there are several other books whose canonicity
is unquestioned which are never once referred to
therein, viz. the books of Ruth, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Canticles, Lamentations, and Ezekiel; and the
same may be said of Philo, who, although he
mentions or refers to all the other books of the
Jewish Canon, makes no reference to Ruth, Chro-
nicles, Nehemiah, Esther, Lamentations, Daniel,
Ecclesiastes, and Cauticles. Cuarpzov (Jntro-
duction) maintains that it is referred to in Matt.
i, LL, Its omission by Melito (a.v. 170) [Dgu-
TERO-cANONICAL] has been accounted for by
supposing that he included it, as well as the book
of Nehemiah, under the name of’ Ezra, and there
are, in fact, some manuscripts of the Vulgate
extant, in which Esther is called the sixth book
of Ezra (Whiston’s Josephus, b. xi. ch. 6, note.)
The other ancient writers who are said to have
omitted or excluded Esther from the canon are
Amphilochius, Leoutius, Nicephorus, Junilius,
Gregory Nazianzen, and Athanasius. The first
of these (Jambics), after giving the names of the
other books of the Hebrew canon, observes, ‘ to
these some add Esther.’ . Junilius, a.v. 560 (De
Partibus Div. Leg), who divides the books of
Scripture into beoks of perfect, of middle, and
of no authority, omits the book of Esther from
those of perfect authority; Nicephorus reckons
among the antilegomena of the Old Testament,
three books of Maccabees, Wisdom, Jesus Sirach,
the Psalms, the Hymns of Solomon, Escher,
Judith, Susannah, and Tobit.

There are two works attributed to Athanasius,
in both of which the beok of Esther is excluded
from the canon, the Festal Epistle, and the Sy-
nopsis Scripture, The genuineness of the former
of these is generally but not universally acknow-
ledged, and as to the Synopsis Scriptura, al-
though it has been by many, including the
learned Montfaucon, considered to be a genuine
work of St. Athanasius, it is now generally given up
as pseud-epigraphal, and is supposed to be about
a century posterior to the time of Athanasius,
although Whiston conceived its author to have
been contemporary with Origen, It is, however,
held in great veneration in the Greek Church, and
holds the same place in the authorized Bibles of
that communion which Jerome's prefaces «lo in the
Latin Vulgate. The canon of the Greek Church


ESTHER, BOOK OF.


geems to he chiefly founded on the authority of this
Synopsis, although it does not name the three books
of Maccabees, the Psalms, nor the twelve prophets :
which are all nevertheless contained in the autho-
rized Greek Bibles. The canon of the Greeks is.
in effect the same with the Septuagint version, with
the addition of the fourth book of Ezra, which they
have translated from the Latin [Espras]. There
is indeed no distinction made in the modern
Greek Bibles between canonical and apocryphal
books; but that such distinction actually exists
among them is evident from their authorized books
of theology. Thus in the Dogmatie Theology,
published by authority of the Theological Aca-
demy of Moscow in 1439, after giving the cata-
logue of the Looks of Holy Scripture,—thirteen
historical, five pragmatical, and 15 prophetical,—
it is added, ¢ All these books are called canonical,
from the word xaydy, because they contain the
immutable rule of faith and practice. The apo-
eryphal books are so called from the word azo-
xpbwre, inasmuch as their origin is lost in un-
certainty. These books were written after the
ppl tier age, during the last four centuries he-
fore Jesus Christ, after the completion of the
canon ; and on this account, as they formed no
part of the collection of sacred writings, they were
neither preserved in the Temple, nor read in the
synagoyues, but in the course of time they were
added to the other books as worthy of respect from
the nature of their subject and the rich store of
editication which they contained. They are as
follows :—Tobit; Judith; certain passages of the
book of Esther, which are not distinguished in
the Greek manuscripts nor in the Slavonic Bibles ;
Wisdom ; Jesus Sirach; the prophet Baruch;
the Epistle of Jeremiah, added to Lamentations ;
the Prayer of Manasses; the Song of the Three
Children (Dan. iii.); Susanna (xiii-); Bel and
the Dragon (xiv.); 2 [3] Esdras; 3 [4] Esdras;
Ist, 2nd, and 3rd Maccabees.’ The reader will
observe that, notwithstanding the authority of the
Synopsis, the book of Esther is here reckoned
among the canonical books.

It has been questioned whether Josephus consi-
dered the book of Esther as written betore or after
the close of the canon. Du Pin maintains that,
as Josephus asserts [see Devrero-canonrcat]
that the sacred books were all written between
the time of Moses and the reign (dpyjjs) of
Artaxerxes, and (Antig. xi.) places the history of
Esther in that reign, he consequently includes it
among those books which he says were of inferior
authority, as written under and since the reign of
that prince (Complete Hist. of the Canon, p. 6).
Eichhorn, or the other hand, favours the opiniou
that Josephus meant to include the reign of that
prince within the prophetical period ; and con-
cludes that this historian considered the book
of Esther as the latest of the canonical writ-
ings. All other ancient writers and catalogues
include Esther among the books of the Jewish
canon. Jerome expressly names it as the ninth
book of the Hagiographa (Prologus Galvcatus).
It has, however, Leen classed by Sixtus of Sieuna,
Bellarmine, and others of the Roman church, in
the second order of sacred bouka, or as deutero-
canonical; that is, according to these writers,
among those prophetical and apostolical books
whose authority has not been always equally
certain, in opposition to those of the first class,


1

-- ESTHER, BOOK OF. oes
respecting whose authority there has never beet
any dispute among catholics’ (Sixtus Senensis,
Bibl. Sanct. ; Bellarmine, De Verbo Dei, ch. iv.).
These writers define the ¢hird class to consist of
such books as, although sometimes received by
the learned as divine and canonical, were not
be Na by the public judgment of the whole
church. In the second order the same writers
place not only the deutero-canonical books of
the Old Testament, including that of Esther, but
also the Antilegomena of the New, including
the last chapter of St. Mark's Gospel, the nar-
rative of Christ's bloody sweat, and his conso-
lation by the angel in St. Luke (xxii. 43, 44
and the history of the adulteress (John viii.)
Eichhorn considers as conclusive of Esther's
having formed part of the Jewish canon, the fact
of its having been translated by the Seventy,
ander the reign of Ptolemy Philometor, about
the middle of the second century before Christ,
before the time usually assizned to the trans-
lation of the prophets, For this date we have
the authority of the subscription to the Septuagint
Version. ;

Luther has been accused of attacking the
canonicity of Esther, and the following passages
have been adduced from his writings, and his
Table Talk, in proof of this assertion :—‘ The
book of Esther I toss into the Elbe.’ ‘Iam so an
enemy to the book of Esther, that I would it did
not exist; for it Judaises too much, and hath in
it a great deal of heathenish naughtiness’ (see
Edinburgh Review, No. cxxi. p. 228). And in
his work, De Serv. Arbit., addressed to Evas-
mus, after saying, ‘in regard to Lcclesiasticus,
although I might justly refuse it, yet I receive
it, in order not to lose time in involving myself
in a dispute conceining the books received into
the canon of the Hebrews,’ he adds, ¢ which
canon you do not a little reproach, when you
compare the Proverbs and the Love-Song (as you
sueeringly call it) with the two books of Esdras,
and Judith, Susannah, the Dragon, and the book
of Esther; but ¢hough they have this last in
their canon, it is in my judyment more worthy
than all of being excluded from the canon
(quamvis hunc habeant in canone, dignior omni-
bus, me judice, qui extra canonem habeatur).’
Sebastian Smith, however, vindicates Luther by
observing that he only speaks of Esther compara-
tively with the books of Solomon; and Carpzov
thinks that Luther refers to the book of Esther as
it is extant in the Septuagint, with its spurious
ailditions, (See also Muller, Defens. Luthers,
p- 631.) However this may be, it is certain that
Sixtus of Sienna, one of the most learned Roman
Catholic theologians, maintained the same views
regarding the eflect of these additions [Estuer,
ApocrypuaL AppiTions To], saying that, in the
time of Gregory and the other ancient fathers who
doubted of the canonicity of Esther, ‘its autho-
rity was rendered suspected by the apocryyhal
additions which had been rashly inserted into this
book ; so that although written in Hebrew, and
received by the Hebrews, its reception in the
Christian church was very late: and it was re-
jected as spurious by Athanasius,’ that is, by the
author of the Festal Epistle, and of the Synopsis.
In the former it is said that ¢ there are other books
not in the canon, which our fathers commanded to
be read for instruction in piety by catechumens,


664 ESTHER, APOCRYPHAL.


as Wisdom, Sirach, Esther, Judith, Tobit, the
Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Shepherd ;’ and
it is stated in the Synopsis, that there are some
controverted books, as Wisdum—some apocryphal,
as Enoch; and of Esther it is observed, that ‘some
of the ancients have said that it was received by
the Hebrews.’ We have not dwelt on the circum-
stance of the book of Esther's being included in
the 59th canon of the Council of Laoilicea, as
there exist strong suspicions that this canon was
interpolated into the acts of that council in the
twelfth century. Vicenzi (Introd. in Script.
Deuterocan., p. 195) supposes that it may have
been inserted from the catalogue in the 85th of the
pretended apostolical canons, with which, how-
ever, it is far from being identical. It is observed
by Du Pin (On the Canon) that the genuineness
of these canons was first called in question by
Erasmus. But whatever doubts may have existed
among some of the Christian fathers as to the
authenticity of Esther, it does not appear that it
was ever doubted by the Jews, or by the Christian
Church in its collective capacity —_W. W.

ESTHER (Apocrypua appiT10Nns To). In
the version of theSeventy the bouk of Esther, besides
other variations, is enriched with several detached
fragments which are not found in the Hebrew.
These were also contained in the old Latin, which
was translated from the Greek, and were retained
in his own version by Jerome, who removed them
to the end of the book, in which position they are
still found in all mauuscripts and printed editions
of the Vulgate, forming the seven last chapters
according to Cardinal Hugo's division. Luther
proceecled still further, and removed them toa
separate place among the Apocrypha. They are
as follows :—

1. The Greek version commences with what
forms the 11th chapter in the Vulgate, ‘In the
fourth year of the reign of Ptolemy and Cleopatra,’
describing Mordecai’s dream of the two dragons,
and the conspiracy of the two eunuchs (Vulg. xii.).

2. The king's letter for the destruction of the
Jews (Vulg. xiii.) follows in the Greek the 13th
verse of chap. iii. to ver. 14.

3. The Prayer of Esther (Vulg. xiv.), Sept. iv.
commencing after the 17th verse in the Vulgate.

4. A detailed and embellished description of
Esther's visit to the king (Vulg. xv.), Sept. v. to
ver, 3.

6. The king's letter in favour of the Jews
(Vulg. xvi.), Sept. viii. after 13th verse.

6. The whole concludes in the Sept. with Mor-
decai's recollection of his dream of the great and
little fountain and the two dragons (VWulg. i.), after
which is the subscription, purporting that the letter
concemiug the feast of Purim was brought into
Egypt by Dositheus, and translated by Lysima-
chus in the fourth year of the reign of Ptolemy
and Cleopatra (b. c. 165).

Jerome (Preface to Esther) compares these
additions to the themes of schoolboys. Sixtus of
Sienna (Bib. Sanct. 1560) observes that these are
the work of some unknown Greek author (Jahn
adds ‘ of more than one’), and that the same are
found word for word in the 11th chap. of the
Antiquities of Josephus. The Chaldee version of
them (from the Greek), as well as the Samaritan
and Arabic, are still extant. Sixtus of Sienna
rejects them as apocryphal, notwithstanding the
decree of the council of Trent, wherein it was de-


ETAM.


clared that, ‘ He is to be anathema who does net
receive these entire books, with all thetr parts, as
they have been accustomed to be read in the
Catholic church, and are found in the ancient
editions of the Latin Vulgate, as sacred and
canonical, and who knowingly and wilfully
despises the aforesaid traditiuns. . . . -
may, therefore, understand, after the clearing up
of this foundation of the Confession of Faith, in
what order and method the Synod is to proceed,
and what evidences and guarantees it furnishes in
the confirmation of doctrines and the reformation
of manners in the church.’ ‘Sixtus maintains
that this decree includes only the genuine parts
of books, but not the additions and interpolations
of unknown writers, which are rejected from the
canon not only by Hugo, de Lyra, and other,
but utterly repelled by Jerome and exploded by
Origen in his letter to Africanus.’ Origen, bow-
ever, only asserts that they were wanting in the
Hebrew, from which he supposes they had been
lost (an opinion also held by Whiston), and Bel-
larmine maintains, in opposition to Sixtus, that
the phrase adi their parts in the decree of the
council of Trent can only refer to the portions
which were hereby declared to ‘be canonical.
This*is also maintained by Du Pin (Canon 9
Scripture), but denied by Jahn (Introduction
who further observes that they contradict the
canonicat Esther. It would appear to be the
sentiment of these divines (who denominate the
deutero-canonical portious by the title of the
Church-Canon) that these books were not obli-
gatory on Christians for the first fifteen centuries,
or before the fourth session of the council of Trent.
Bellarmine further observes that these additions
to Esther are not only contained in the editions
of the Vulgate, but that a portion of them is read
in the offices of the church; viz., part of the 13th
chap. on the Thursday after the second Sunday in
Lent, in the mass against the Pagans, and Esther's
pre (ch. xiv.) on the third Sunday after Trinity.
e Wette conceives, from the religious tone of
these additions, that they are of Hellenistic and
Alexandrian origin. [Espzas.]—W. W.


ETAM (OD'Y; Sept. Airdu), a town in the
tribe of Judah, which was decorated by Solomon
with gardens and streams of water, and fortified
by Rehoboam aloug with Bethlehem and Tekoa
(1 Chron. iv. 3, 32; 2 Chron. xi. 6; Joseph. As-
tig. viii. 7.3). From this place, according to the
Rabbins, water was carried by an aqueduct to
Jerusalem, Josephus places it at fifty stadia (in -
some copies sixty) from Jerusalem (eouthward);
and alleges that Solomon was in the habit of
taking a morning drive to this favoured spot in
his chariot. Dr. Robinsun (Researches, i. 168)
inclines to find Etam at a place about a mile
and a half south of Bethlehem, where there is a
ruined village called Urtas, at the bottom of a
pleasant valley of the same name. Here there are
traces of ancient ruins, and also a fountain, send-
ing forth a copious supply of fine water, which
forms a beautiful purling rill along the bottom of
the valley. It is usually supposed that ‘ the rock
Etam,’ to which Samson withdrew (Judg. xv. 8
11), was near the town of the same name. Urtas
seems too far inland for this; there is, however,
a little to the east, the Frank mountain, which
(this consideration apart) would have furnished


ETHAM.


just such a retreat as the hero seems to bave
found.

ETHAM, the third station of the Israelites
when they quitted Egypt [Exopus].


1. ETHAN (JIS ; Sept. Aiédu), one of four
ns (‘ Ethan the Ezrahite, and. Heman, and
Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol") who were
w renowned for their sagacity that it is mentioned
to the honour of Solomon that his wisdom ex-
celled theirs. In 1 Kings iv. 31, Ethan is dis-
tinguished as ‘the Ezralite, froin the others, who
are called ‘ sons of Mahol "—unleas, indeed, this
word Mahol be taken not as a proper name, but
appellatively, for ‘sons of music, dancing,’ &c.,
in which case it would apply to Ethan as well as to
the others. This interpretation is strengthened by
our finding the other names associated with that
of Ethan in 1 Chron. ii. 6, as ‘sons of Zerah,’ i.e.
of Ezra, the same as Ezrahites. The evidence of
identity afforded by this collocation of names is
too strong to be resisted; and we must therefore
conclude that Ethan and the others, the tradition
of whose wisdom had descended to the time of So-
lomon, are the same who, in } Chron. ii. 6, appear
as sons of Zerah, who was himself the son of the
patriarch Judah. With this agrees the Jewish
chronology, which counts them as prophets during
the sojourn in Kgypt (Seder Olam Radba, p. 52),
although the Jews lave also a tradition confound-
ing Ethan with Abraham, Heman with Moses,
and Chalcol with Joseph. (Jerome, Comment. on
2 Kings iv. 31.)

2. ETHAN, a Levite, the son of Kishi, and
one of the masters of the Temple music (1 Chron.
vi. 44; xv. 17), to whom the 89th Psalm is
ascribed, and whom some interpreters suppose to
be the Ethan of 1 Kings iv. 31, to whose wisdom
that of Solomon is compared.

ETHANIM. [Tisurz.]

ETHIOPIA (Ai@iorfa, Judith i. 10) is the
name by which the English and most other ver-
sions render the Hebrew Cusx. As used among
the Greeks and Romans, the word was employed
in all the latitude of its etymological meaning,
to denote any of the countries where the people
are of a sable, sun-burnt complexion—Aidioy
(Acts viii. 27), Ai@cdmiooa (Num. xii. 1), Aidlomes
(2 Chron. xiv. 12), from af@oua, to burn, and dh,
the face. But we have shown in the article
Ccsx (to which we refer the reader) that its use
in the language of Scripture is much more re-
stricted, and that while it may sometimes include
part of Southern Arabia, it for the most part
exclnsively designates the ‘ Ethiopia of Africa,’
which is the subject of the present article. ‘ Of
the four sons of Ham,’ says Josephus (Antig.
i. 6, 2), ‘ time bas not at all hurt the name of
Chus; for the Ethiopians over whom he reigned
are even at this day, both by themselves and by
all men in Asia, called Chusites.' The Peschito
Syriac Version of Acts viii. 27 styles both Queen
Candace and her treasurer Cusheans.

By Ethiopia, or African Cush, in the widest
acceptation of the name, the Hebrews understood
the whole of the region lying south of Egypt
above Syene,* the modern Assouan (Ezek. xxix.


* Jablonsky and Champollion both seek the
derivation of Syene in the Coptic; but the former
thinks it denotes ‘ boundary,’ the latter ‘ key,’


ETHIOPIA. 66s


10; xxx. 65 comp. Strabo, xviii. p. 817; Pliay,
Hist. Nat. v. 9; vi. 35; Joseph. De Bell. Jud. iv.
10, 5). Its limits on the west and south were
undefined; but they probably regarded it as ex-
tending eastward as far as the Red Sea, if not
as including some of the islands in that

such as the famous Topaz Isle (Job xxviii. 19;
Pliny, Hist. Nat. vi. 293 xxxvii. 8; Strabo,
xvi. 4, 6; Diod. Sic. iii. 39). It thus corre-
sponded, though only in a vague and general
sense, to the countries known to us as Nubia and


_ Abyssinia, so famous for the Nile and other great


rivers. Hence the allusions in Scripture (Isa.
xviii. 1; Zeph. iii. 11) to the far distant ‘rivers
of Ethiopia,’ a country which is also spoken of
(Isa. xviti, 2) in our version as the land ‘ which
the rivers have spoiled,’ there being a supposed
reference to the ravages committed by inunda-
tions (Bruce's Trarels, iii. p. 158, and Taylor's
Calmet, iii, pp. 593-4); but recent translators
prefer to render NT2 by ‘divide,’ g.d. ‘a land
intersected by streams.’ Isaiah likewise takes


notice of the NDS bo, or vessels of papyrus,


which the Ethiopians employed upon the waters,
a fact which is contirmed by Heliodorus in his
A thiopica (x. p. 460), and also by Bruce, who
states that the only kind of boat in Abyssinia is
that called Tancoa, which is made of reeds, ‘a
piece of the Acacia tree being put in the bottom
to serve as a keel, to which the plants are joined,
being first sewed together, then gathered up at
stem and stern, and the ends of the plants tied
fast there.’ It is to the swiftness of these papyrus
vessels that Job (ix. 26) compares the rapid
speed of his days.

But that part of the vast region of Cush
which seems chiefly intended in these and most
other passages of Scripture is the tract of country
in Upper Nubia, which became famous in an-
tiquity as the kingdom of Ethiopia, or the state
of Meroé. The Ethiopian nations generally
ranked low in the scale of civilization ; ‘never-
theless (to use the language of Heeren), there did
exist a better cultivated, and, to a certain degree,
a civilized Ethiopian people; who dwelt in cities ;
who erected temples and other editices; who,
though without letters, had hieroglypbics ; who
had government and laws; and the fame of whose
progress in knowledge and the social arts spread
in the earliest ages over a considerable part of the
earth.’ Meroé Proper lay between the river Asta-
boras (now the Atbara or Tacazzé) on the east,
and the Nile on the west. Though not completely
enclosed with rivers, it was called an island, be-
cause, as Pliny observes, the various streams
which flowed around it were all considered as
branches of the Nile; so that to it the above de-
scription of a ‘ country of rivers’ was peculiarly
appropriate. Its surface exceeded that of Sicily
more than a half, and it corresponded pretty
nearly to the present province of Atbara, between
13° and 18° N. lat. In modern times it formed
a great part of the kingdom of Sennaar, and the
southern portion belongs to Abyssinia. Upon the
istand of Merod lay a city of the same name, the
metropolis of the kingdom, the site of which has
been discovered near a place called Assur, about


te. of Egypt, It was always considered the
natural frontier towards Ethiopia.


006 ETHIOPIA.


twenty miles N. of the town of Shendy, under 17°
N. lat. The splendid ruins of temples, pyramids,
and other edifices found here and thronghout the
district have been described by Caillaud, Gau,
Riippell, Belzoni, Waddington, Hoskins, and other
travellers, and attest the high degree of civilization
and art among the ancieut Ethiopians,

Josephus, in his account of the expedition of
Moses when commander of the Egyptian army
against the Ethiopians, says that the latter ‘at
length retired to Saba, a royal city of Ethiopia
which Cambyses afterwards called Meroé, after
the name of his own sister’ (Antig. ii. 10. 2). The
same origin of the name is given both by Strabo
and Diodorus Siculus, but see Mannert's Geog.
of the Greeks and Romans, x. 199, ‘There is
still a place called Aferawé considerably north of
the island and near Mount Berkal, where Heeren
thinks there may have been a settlement of the
parent state called by the same name. The
Opinion of Josephus that Meroé was identical with
Seba accords well with the statement in Gen, x.
7, that Seba was the eldest son of Cush, and as
his name is written with a samech (SID), he is not
to be confounded with either of the Shebas (R2Y),
who are mentioned as descendants of Shem (Gen.
x. 28; xxv. 3). Now this country of African Seba
is classed with the Arabian Sheba as a rich but
far-distant land (Ps, Ixxii. 10). In Isa. xliii. 3
God says to Israel, ‘I have given Egypt for thy
ransom ; Cush and Seba in thy stead :’ and in
Isa. xlv. 14, § The wealth of Egypt and the mer-
chandise of Cush and of the Sebaim men of sta-
ture shall pass over to thee and shall be thine.’
Charles Taylor, the ingenious but fanciful editor
of Calmet, had the singular notion that by WIN
iT is meant men of skort meusure, or dwarts 5
and hence he ideutifies the Ethiopians with the
Pygmies of antiqnity (Fragments to Calmet,
ccexxii). But the Hebrew phrase plainly denotes
‘tallness of stature’ (comp. 1 Chron. xi. 23), and
the Ethiopians are described by Herodotus as
&vdpes wéyioror (iii. 114), weyioror dvOpwmey (iii.
20); and Solinus affirms that they were twelve

* feet in height (Polyhist. cap. xxx). In common
with the uther Cushite tribes of Africa the skin
was black, to which there is an obvious allusion
in Jer. xiii. 23: ‘Can the Cushite change his
skin? Bruce finds Seba in Azab, a sea-port on the
east coast of Africa near the entrance to the Red
Sea, and in this he is followed by Heeren, while
others think of a place called Subah about lat.
15° N., where are some of the most remarkable
ruins of Nubian grandeur ; but both opinious are
merely conjectural.

Among other tribes of Africa said to have
been in alliance with Egypt, the prophet Ezekiel
(xxx. 5) mentions along with Ethiopia the name
of Chub, which Michaclis connects with Aode, a
trading town described by Ptolemy as on the west
coast of the Red Sea. Bat in the Arabic transla-
tion made from the Septuagint, instead of Chub
we find ‘the people of Nubia.” The Hebrew
letters 3 and 3 might easily be confounded by a
transcriber, and in the MS. 409 of De Rossi it is
not 33D Chud, but 31) Neb, which is probably
the true reading. There are still two districts ad-
joining Meroé on the south-west, called Cuda and
Nuba, which are said to abound in gold. The
Sukkiim, who, along with the Cushites and
Lubim or Libyans, formed part of the host of


RTHIOPIA.


Shishak (2 Chron. xii. 3), are in the Sept. desig-
nated Troglodytes, s. e. cave-~lwellers, and were,
no doubt, the people known to the Greeks by the
same name as inhabiting the mountain-caverns
on the west coast of the Red Sea (Diud. Sic.
iii. 32; Strabo, xvii. p. 785). They were noted
for swiftness of foot and expertness in the use of
the sling, and hence were employed, as Heliodorus
informs us (4¢thiopica, viii. 16), as light troops.
Pliny makes mention of a town of Suche in that
rezion (Hist. Nat. vi. 29. 34), and there is still on
the same coast a place called Suakim, described by
Burckhardt in his Tracels in Nubia. If, however,
the term Sukkiim be of Hebrew derivation, it
would specially denote those who lived in booths,
#. e, tabernacles made of the boughs of trees ; and
it deserves remark that the Shangallas who im
habit that country, still dwell during the good
season in arbours fitted up for tents, repairing in
winter to their rocky caves.

In the age of Herodotus, the countries known to
us as Nubia and Sennaar were occupied by two
different races, one of whom he includes under
the general appellation of Ethiopians, the other an
immigratury Arabian race leading, for the most
part, anomadic life. This distinction has con-
tinued down to the present day. Among the
aboriginal inhabitants the first place is due to the
Nubians, who are well-formed, strong, and mas-
cular, and with nothing whatever of the negro
physiognomy. They go armed with spear, sword,
and a shield of the skin of the hippopotamus.
South of Dongola is the country of the Scheygias,
whose wartiors are horsemen, also armed with a
double-pointed spear, a sword, and a@ large shield
(comp. Jer. xlvi. 9, the ‘ Cushites who handle
the shield"). They were completely independent
till subdued by Mehemet Ali, pacha of Ezypt
It is in their country that the pyramidal monu-
ments which adored the ancient Mervé are first
met with, and even its name has been preserved
in that of their chief place, Merawé, though the
original Meroé must be sought farther south,
Next comes the territory of the Berbera, strictly
80 called, who, though speaking Arabic, evidently
belong to the Nubian race. Above these regions
beyond the Tacazzé and along the Nile the great
mass of the inhabitants, though sometimes with a
mixture of other blood, may be regarded as of
Arab origin. But between the valley of the Nile
and the Red Sea there is still, as of old, a variety
of scattered aboriginal tives, among whom the
Arabic is much less commen: they are, doubtless,
partly the descendants of the above-mentioned
Sukkiim, or Troglodytes, and of the Ichthyophagi,
or fish-eaters. Some of them spread themselves
over the plains of the Astaloras, or Tacazzé, being
compelled to remove their encampmrents, sume-
times by the inundations of the river, at other
times by the attacks of the dreaded cimb, or gad-
fly, described by Bruce, and which he supyuoses to
be the ‘fly which isin the utmost part of the rivers
of Exypt’ (Isa. vii. 18) Another remarkable
Ethiopic race in ancient times was the Aacro-
dians, so called from their supposed) longevity.
They were represented by the ambassadors of
Cambyses as a very tall race, who elected the
highest in stature as king: gold Was so abundant
that they bound their prisoners with golden fetters—
circumstances which again remind us of Isaiah's


description of Ethivpia and Seba in ch. xlv. 14.


_


ETHIOPIA.


With regard to the ancient civilization of
Ethiopia Proper, or the kingdom of Mervé, it was
closely connected with the religion of the country,
which was the worship of Ammon and his kindred
deities, and the ‘ Oracles of Ammon’ were its
main support. The government was in the hands
of a race or caste of priests, who chose from among
themselves a king; and this form continued down
to the reign in Egypt of the second Ptolemy,
when Ergamenes, at that time king, massacred
the priests in their sanctuary, and became ab-
solute monarch.

Of the history of Ethiopia, previous to that last
revolution, only scanty information has been pre-
served, but it is enough to evince its high anti-
quity and its early aggrandizement. In the Per-
sian period it was certainly au independent and
important state, which Cambyses in vain endea-
voured to subdue. But its most flourishing era was
between the years 3.c. 800 and 700, when arose
three potent kings, Sabaco, Seveclius, and Tarhako,
or Tirhakah, who extended their conquests over
a great part of Egypt. Sevechus is supposed to
have been the So or Sua king of Egypt, to whom
an embassy was sent by Hoshea, king of Israel
(2 Kings xvii. 4), whose reign ended s.c. 722,
He was thus the contemporary of Salmanassar,
king of Assyria, as was Tirhakah of the next
Assyrian monarch, Sennacherib, who (about the
year B.c. 714) was deterred from the inva-
sion of Egypt merely by the rumour that Tir-
hakah was advancing against him (2 Kings
xix. 9). There seems no reason to doubt that the
remarkable prophecy in the 16th chapter of
Isaiah was addressed to Tirhakah and his people,
to announce to them the sudden overthrow of the
Assyrian host before Jerusalem: ‘Ho! thou land
with rustling wings [i. e. armies in the clangour
of battle, as in chap. viii. 8] beyond the streams
of Cush [for the country lay south of its great
tivers], which sendest its messengers on the [Red]
sea, and in vessels of papyrus on the waters (of
the Nile]. Up! ye swilt messengers, to the na-
tion robust and valiant, the nation formidable
from the first and hitherto, the nation powerful and
all-crushing, whose country is intersected with
streams, &c. This description of the Ethiopian
Nation is repeated at verse 7 almost verbatim, and
it is intimated that, struck at the mighty deeds of
the God of Judah, this distant people should send
gifts to his dwelling-place at Zion. They were,
no doubt, among the ‘many’ who are described

in 2 Chr. xxxii. 23, as having ‘brought gifts unto
Jehovah at Jerusalem, and presents to king Heze-
kiab, so that he was magnified in the sight of all
the nations," But it is remarked by Gesenius
(Comm. on Isaiah, in loc.) that the expectation
of the entire conversion of the Ethiopians is fre-
quently expressed by the Hebrew prophets (Isa.
xlv. M45 Zeph. iii, 105 Ps. Ixviii. 325 Ixxxvii.
4); and he adds, ‘Those who take pleasure in
tracing the fulfilment of such predictions in sub-
sequent history may find it in Acts viii. 27 (the
conversion both to Judaism and Christianity of
the treasurer of Queen Candace), and still more
in the circumstance that Abyssinia is to this day
the only great Christian state in the eastern world.’
Wilkinson informs us that the figure and name
of Tirhakab, and the expedition he undertook
against Seunacherib, are recorded on the walls of
a Theban Temple. ‘It is probable,’ says he, ‘ that


ETHIOPIA. 667


in the early a of his reign Sethos divided the
kingdom with him, and ruled in Lower Egypt,
while the Ethiopian monarch possessed the domi-
nion of the upper country; and this would ac-
count for the absence of the name of Sethos on
the monuments of Thebes. Whether Tirhakah
and Sabaco’s claims to the throne of Egypt were
derived from any right acquired by intermarriage
«with the royal family of that country, and whether
the dominion wasat first confined to the Thebaid,
it is dificult to determine; but the respect paid
by their successors to the monuments they erected
argues the probability of their baving succeeded
to the throne by right rather than by usurpation
or the force of arms’ (Ancient Egyptians, vol.
i. p. 140; comp. Rosellini, mon. ii. tab. 8). Of
the military renown of Tirhakah, Megasthenes
speaks in Strabo (xv. 1. 6), where he meutions
Tedpxwva tov Alélowa along with Sesostris and
Nebuchadnezzar, as one who had peuetrated into
Europe, and advanced as far as the pillars of
Hercules—the usual limit of great conquerors.
According to Julins Africanus, Tirhakah reigned
eighteen years ; according to Eusebius twenty ; the
furmer calls him Tapxds, the latter Tapaxds.
* Contemporary with him,’ says Gesenius, * there
existed two dynasties in Sais and Tanis. and,
without doubt, his had its seat in Thebais. In
the last years of his reign falls the Dodekarchy,
at the end of which the Ethiopians withdrew into
their original kingdom (Herod. ii. 139). From
this connection we may derive a satisfactory ex-
planation of the fact, that Isaiah often mentions
Feypt and Ethiopia in so close political relation
(see especially chap. xx. 3-6). The same fact is
noticeable in the Jaiter pophets, and proves the
continuance of a friendly understanding (Ezek.
xxx. 4, sq.; Jer. xlvi. 9; Nahum iii. 9; Dan. xi.
43). In fine, Ethiopia is employed chiefly as the
name of the national and royal family that were
now in the ascendancy."

If we go back about two centuries, to the reign
of Asa, king of Judah (n.c. 950), we read of
Zerah, or rather Zerach, an Ethiopian going out
against him with a host of a thousand thousand
men and three hundred chariots (2 Chron. xiv. 9).
It is doubtful whether this was an Ethiopian
monarch or commander, or only a mere Cushite
adventurer; but that his army was mainly of Afri-
can and not Arabian original is evident from the
fact of its having included Libyans as well as
Cushites (2 Chron. xvi. 8), and from the mention of
war-chariots, which never were in use in Arabia.
Farther back than this the records of history are
silent. Pliny, indeed (Hist. Nat. vi. 35), after ob-
serving that Ethiopia was ruined. by its wars with
Egypt, which it sometimes subdued and sometimes
served, adds, that ¢ it was powerful and illustrious
even as far back as the Trojan war, when Mem-
non reigned.” Existing monuments confirm that,
high antiquity which tradition assigus to the state
of Mervé. The name of Rameses, ur Sesostris, has
been found on many of the ruins of Nubia, and
he is well known in history as its conqueror
(Herod. ii, 110). That the Pharaohs indeed
should have carried their conquests into Ethiopia,
ought not to seem strange to us in whose days the
same scene has been acted; for scarcely was
Mehemet Ali firmly possessed of Egypt than he
sent his son to subdue Ethiopia, and he not only
penetrated to Mervé, but much farther south,


668 ETHIOPIA.


The era of Rameses cannot be placed later than
1500 years B.c. But the name of Pharaoh Thut-
mosis, the expeller of the Hyksos, has been found
by Champollion on the Nubian Temple of Amada,
and the sculptures found there show a degree
of civilization that can only be ascribed to a na-
tion which had long existed. We thus approach
the age of Moses, at which Jewish tradition, as
reported by Josephus, assigns. the conquest of
Merod to Moses himself, as general of the army of
Egypt; and the traditions of the Egyptian priest-
hood also agree in this, that the Ethiopians laid
the foundation of the most ancient states of Egypt.
The state of Meroé appears to have resembled
the larger states in the interior of Africa at the
present day, comprising a number of different
races or tribes united together by no strong poli-
‘tical bond, but by a common form of worship,
which placed the rule in the hands of the priest-
hood, the dominant caste of the country. There
is every reason to conclude that the separate
colonies of the priest-caste spread from Meroé into
Egypt; and the primeval monuments in Ethiopia
stronzly confirm the native traditions reported by
Diodorus Siculus, that the worship of Ammon
and Osiris originated in Meroé, and thus render
highly probable the opinion that commerce and
civilization, science and art, descended into Egypt
from Nubia and the upper regions of the Nile.
One great cause of the early prosperity and
grandeur of Ethiopia was the carrying-trade, of
whicl it was the centre, between India and Arabia
on the one hand, and the interior of Africa, and
especially Egypt, on the other. This has been
well illustrated by Heeren in his work On the
Ancient Nations of Africa, vol. i. p. 289 sqq.
"In proportion,’ says he, ‘as we ascend into the
pee ages, the closer seems the connection
tween Egypt and Ethiopia. The Hebrew poets
seldom mention the former without the latter;
the inhabitants of both are drawn as commercial
nations. When Isaiah celebrates the victories of
Cyrus, their submission is spoken of as his most
magnificent reward (Isa. xlv. 14). When Jere-
miah extols the great victory of Nebuchadnezzar
over Pharaoh-nechoh, near Carchemish, the Ethi-
opians are allied to the Egyptians (Jer. xlvi, 9).
When Ezekiel threatens the downfal of Egypt, he
unites it with the distant Ethiopia (zek. xxx. 4),
Every page, indeed, of Egyptian history exhibits
yee of the close intimacy in which they stood,
he primitive states of Egypt derived their origin
from these remote regions. Thebes and Meroé
founded in common a colony in Libya; Ethiopian
conquerors more than once invaded Egypt ; Exyp-
tian kings in return forced their way into Ethi-
opia ; the same worship, the same manners and
customs, the same mode of writing, are found in
both countries; and, under Psammetichus, the
noble and numerous party of malecontents retired
into Ethiopia. Egypt, also, as far as history
reaches back, abounded in all the commodities
of the southern regions. Whence did she obtain
the spices and drugs with which she embalmed
her dead 2 whence the incense that burned on ber
altars? whence that immense quantity of cotton
in which her inhabitants were clad, and which
her own soil so sparingly produced? Whence
came into Egypt that early rmmour of the Ethi-
opian gold countries, which Cambyses set out to
discover, and lost half his army in the attempt ?


ETHIOPIC LANGUAGE.


Whence that profusion of ivory and ebony which
the ancient artists of Greece and Palestine em-
bellished ? Whence that general ard early spread
of the name of Ethiopia, which glimmers in the
traditional history of so many nations, and which
is celebrated as well by the Jewish poets as by the
earliest Grecian bards? Whence but from the
international commerce of which Ethiopia was
the seat and centre? Its principal route is still
pointed out by a chain of ruins, extending frm
the shores of the Indian sea to the Mediterranean.
Adule, Azab, and Axum, are links of this chain
between Arabia Felix and Meroé; Thebes and
Ammonium between Meroé, Egypt, and Ca
thage.’

Queen Candace, who is mentioned in Acts iii.
27, was doubtless the reigning sovereign of Mer
[Canpace], where it is likely a form of Judaism
was at that period professed by a portion of the
inhabitants, as seems to have been the case in the
adjacent region of Abyssinia. The prophets (e. 9.
Isa. xi. 11) sometimes allude to the Jews who
were scattered throughout Cush. Ebed-melech,
the benevolent eunuch of King Zedekiah, who
showed such kindness to the prophet Jeremiah,
was an Ethiopian (Jer. xxxviil. 7; comp. Acts
viii. 27). Josephus calls the queen of Sheba,
who visited Solomon, a queen of Egypt and Ethi-
opia, and with this agrees the tradition of the
Abyssinians, who claim her as a native queen,
give her the name of Maqueda, and maintain that
she had a son by Solomon, called Menilek, who
bore the title of David I. Yet Sheba was un-
doubtedly in Arabia Felix, though it is possible
that, in remote antiquity, the sovereignty of its
monarchs extended across the Red Sea to the
coast of Ethiopia—N. M.

ETHIOPIC LANGUAGE. As it is main-
tained by competent judges that the Ambaric and
the Tigré are really dialects of the ancient Ethi-
opic or Geez,* it may be expected, from the
recent progress of comparative grammar, that fu-
ture schulars will apply them to elucidate the
structure of the other Syro-Arabian Janguages
At present, however, as even the Amharic is not
yet able to boast of adequate and accessible
means for its study, and as neither ses any
ancient version of any part of the Bible, the Geez
is the only one which claims a particular notice
here.

The ancient Ethiopic or Geez, which is the
only one of the three dialects which either has
been, or is now, generally used in written docu-
ments of a sacred or civil kind, is to be classed as
an ancient branch of the Arabic. This affinity is
evident from the entire grammatical stracture of
the language: it is coufirmed hy the relation of
its written character to that of the Himjante
alphabet; and either supports, or is supported by,
the assumption that Habesh was actually peopled
by a colony from southern Arabia, The gram-
matical structure of the Geez shows a largely
predominant ideutity with that of Arabic; but it


* Adelung and Vater, in the Mithridates, ap-

arto be the chief authorities for doubting the
intimate affinity of the Geez and Ambaric. In
this particular, and throughout the subject, we
have followed Gesenius, in his two articles on
Ethiopic and Amharic languages in Ersch and
Gruber's Aligemeine Encyclopédie


ETHIOPIC LANGUAGE.


also possesses some traits which are in closer ac-
cordance wish the other Syro-Arabian idioms, and
tome which are peculiar to itself alone. The
main features of its structure are as follow :—The
verb possesses the first ten conjugations of the
Arabic verb, with the exception of the eighth and
ninth; besides these it has two other conjugations
which are unknown to the Arabic. The forma-
tion of nouns resembles most that of Hebrew ;
but nouns often have superfluous end-vowels,
which are modified in particular cases, and are
analogous to the Arabic nunnation. As for the
flexion of nouns, the masculine and feminine plu-
rals are either formed by aflixed syllables (dn, dt)
on the principle common to the whole Syro-Ara-
bian family ; or by changes within the compass
of the radical letters, after the manner of the so-
called broken plurals of the Arabic grammar,
The state construct, and that relation of the noun
which is equivalent to our objective case, are de-.
noted by changes in the final vowels. There is no
form for the dual number either in the verb or the
noun. With regard to the vocabulary of the
language, one-third of the roots are to be found in
the same state in Arabic. By making allowance
for commutations and transpositions, many other
roots may be identified with their Arabic corre-
spondents: some of its roots, however, do not exist
in our present Arabic, but are to be found in Ara-
maic and Hebrew. Besides this it has native
roots peculiar to itself: it has adopted several
Greek words, but shows no traces of the influence
of Coptic.

The alphabet possesses twenty-six consonants,
arranged in a peculiar order, twenty-four of
which may be rezarded as equivalents to the
sane number of letters in the Arabic alphabet
(tae ones excepted being ws, d b, and t)
The remaining two are letters adopted to express
the Greek Tl and ¥. The vowel-sounds, which are
seven, are not expressed by separable signs, as in the
Hebrew and Arabic punctuation, but are denoted
hy moditications in the original form of the con-
sonants, after the manner of the Devanagari alpha-
bet. The mode of writing is from left to right. As
for the written characters, Gesenius has traced the
relation between some of them and their equiva-
lents in the Phoenician alphabet. There is, how-
ever, the most striking resemblance between the
Geez letters generally and those in the Himjarite
inscriptions; a circumstance which accords well
with the supposed connection of Southern Arabia
and Habesh. Moreover, Lepsius, in an interesting
essay, Ueber die Anordnung und Verwandschaft
aes Semitischen, Indischen, Aethiopischen, &e.
Alphubels (in his Zwei Sprachvergleichende Ab-
handlungen, Berlin, 1836, 8vo. pp. 74-80), has
adduced some striking arguments to prove that
the Devanagari alphabet must have had some
influence on the development of the Geez.

The literature of the Geez language is very
scanty indeed, and that little is almost exclu-
sively of a Biblical or ecclesiastical character.
It possesses nothing, not even an imitation of the
national poetry, nor of the lexicographical and
grammatical works, of the Arabs. Some few his-
torical works in the shape of chronicles, and a
few medical treatises, constitute the main body
of their profane literature. The Geez has ceased,
ever since the beginning of the fourteenth century,


ETHUN. 669


to be the vernacular language of any part of the
country, having been supplanted at the court of °
the sovereign by the Amharic. It still continues,
however, to be the language used in religious
rites, in domestic affuirs of state, and in private
correspondence.—J. N.
ETHIOPIC VERSION. The libraries of
Europe contain some, although very rarely com-

lete, manuscript copies of a translation of the

ible into the Geez dialect. This version of the
Old Testament was made from the Greek of the
Septuagint, according to the Alexandrian recen-
sion, as is evinced, among other things, by the
arrangement of the Biblical books, and by the
admission of the Apocrypha without distinction.
It is divided into four parts: The Lato, or the -
Octateuch, containing the Pentateuch and the
books of Joshua, Judges, and Ruth; The Kings,
in thirteen books, consisting of two books of Sa-
muel, two of Kings, two of Chronicles, two of
Ezra (Ezra and Nehemiah), Tobit, Judith, Esther,
Jub, the Psalms; Solomon, in five books, con-
sisting of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Wis-
dom, and Sirach; Prophets, in eighteen books,
consisting of Isaiah, Jeremiah’s prophecy and
Lamentations, Baruch, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the
twelve minor prophets: lastly, they have also
two books of the Maccabees. Besides this, they
possess an apocryphal book of Enoch, which they
place next to that of Job. The critical uses of
this version are almost exclusively confined to
the evidence it gives as to the text of the Septua-
gint. The version of the New Testament was
made direct from the Greek original. It follows
the verbal arrangement of the Greek very closely,
and has mistakes which are only to be explained
by the confusion of words which resemble each
other in that language. It is difficult to deter-
mine what recension it follows; but it frequently
agrees with the Peshito and the Itala. It is im-
possible to ascertain the date of the execution of
either of these translations; but they may both
be ascribed with much probability to the begin-
ning of the fourth century. Only small portions
of the former have been printed. The whole
New Testament has, however,: appeared. The
Gospels were edited anew from MSS. by T. P.
Platt, M.A,, in 1826, in dto.—J. N.

ETHUN (3108) occurs in Prov. vii. 16, in
connection with Egypt, and as a product of that
country. It is translated sine linen in the
Authorized Version. ‘Ihave decked my hed with
coverings of tapestry, with carved works, with
fine linen (ethun) of Egypt.’ As Egypt was
from very early times celebrated for its cultiva-
tion of flax and manufacture of linen, there can
be little doubt that ethun is correctly rendered,
though some have thought that it may signity
rope or string of Egypt, ‘funis Aizvptius,’ ‘tunis
salignus v. intubaceus;’ but Celsius (Hierovot.
ii. p. 89) observes, ‘Ethun non funem, sed linum
et Minera esse, clamat graca vox 36év vel
60dviov, quam ab ethun esse deducendam.’ So
Mr. Yates, in his Textrinum Antiquorum, p.
265, says of d0dvn, that ‘it was in all probability
an Egyptiay word, adopted by the Greeks to
denote the commodity to which the Egyptians
themselves applied it.’ For }}ON, put into
Greek letters, and with Greek terminations, be-
comes d0dvm and é6évov. Hesychius states, no
doubt correctly, ‘that 66677 was applied by the


670 ETZ-ABOTH. ETZ-HADAR.


Greeks to any fine and thin cloth, though not of always to have been considered as giving an air
linen.’ Mr. Yates further adduces from ancient of mystery and devotion to religipus services
Scholia that 68éva: were made hoth of flax and of Seneca, as quoted by Dr. Carpenter, says, ‘If
wool; and also that the silks of India are called you find a grove thick set with ancient oaks that
60dvas onpixal by the author of the Periplus of have shet up to a vast height, the tallness of the
the Erythrean Sea, We lave also shown from wood, the retirement of the place, and the plea-
the same work, in the article Corton, p. 475, that santness of the shade, immediately make you
the name 60évoy was applied to cloths exported think it to be the residence of some god.’ The
from Cutch, Ougein, and Baroach, and which — prophet Hosea also gives the following description:
must have been made of cotton. Mr. Yates * They sacrilice upon the tops of the mountains,
moreover observes, that though 6@dv7, like ow8déy, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and
originally denoted lineu, yet we find them both poplars and elms, because the shadow thereof is
applied to cotton cloth. As the manufacture of good’ (Hos. iv. 18). Hence, in the above pas
linen extended itself into other countries, and as sages, it is more than probable that e¢z-abuth has
the exports of India became added to those of a general, and not a specific, signification. There
Egypt, all varieties, either of linen or cotton is no proof of the myrtle Leing intended ; in fect,
cloth, wherever woven, came to be designated by it is not likely to have been found in any part of
the originally Ezyptian names ’Oddvy and Xuw3dy. the wilderness, and no better material cun be
In the New Testament the word 68émoy occurs reqnired for the construction of booths than the
in John xix. 40—‘ Then took they the body of . boughs of thick or shady trees.—J, F. R.
Jesus and wound it in /nen clothes’ (d8oviors) ;
in the parallel passage, Matt. xxvii. AS the ay ETZ-HADAR (1}1 /'Y) occurs ouly once in
used is owwSdv, as also in Mark xv. 46, and Scripture, in Lev. xxiii. 40, where the Israelites
in Luke xxiii. 53. We meet with it again in are directed, in remembrance of their dwelling
John xx. 5, ‘and he stooping down saw the in (ents or booths when they were brouglit out of
linen clothes lying.’ It is generally used in the the land of Egypt, to leave their homes and dweil
lural to denote ‘linen bandages.’ *O@dyn occurs in booths for a season every year. * And ye
in Acts x. 11, ‘and (Peter) saw heaven opened, shall take you on the first day the douche of
and a certain vessel descending unto him, as it goodly trees (peri etz-hadar), branches of palm-
had been a great sheet knit at the fuur corners, trees, and the boughs of thick trees (efz-aiuth),
and let down to the earth,’ and also in xi. 5, and willows of the brook ; and ye shall rej-ice
where this passage is repeated. before the Lord your Gud seven days." Etz-aiuti
From the preceding observations it is evident has Leen noticed in the preceding article; e:-
that d@dviov may signify cloth made either of /adar has been variously trauslatel. The words
linen or cotton, but most probably the former, in the original, peri etz-hadar, the Septuagint
as it was more common than cotton in Syria and renders kdpwoy f¥Aov cpaioy, and the Vulzate,
Egypt [v. Corron and Linen].—J. F. R. Mie ap Behr the ‘ fructus ls
‘ honoris’ of Ursini. These translations are fvl-
ETZ-ABOTH (N3Y }'Y) occurs in Lev. lowed in many versions, as enumerated by Celsius
xxiii. 10, and Neh. viii. 15, and in both pas- (JIierobot. i. p. 252); but, as this author aco
sages is mentioned along with etz-shemen, These shows, Onkelos and others consider the phrav te
words occur also in Ezek. xx. 28, where, as well signify ¢ fructus arboris citrei so R. Alen bsra,
as in the other passages, they are translated ¢hick in Hebrew, but as translated by Celsius, ¢ Fructus
trees: * For when I had brought them into the arboris speciosw est citrus, Nam certe nulius
land, &c., then they saw every high hill and all fructus arboreus speciosiorsest illo.’ The tern
the thick trees (e¢z-aboth), and they offered there etragh or atruj is that translated citrus, Tuis
their sacrifices.’ ‘The word etz or ofz, used in interpretation has been adopted by the Jews, and
several places in Scripture to designate a tree, isthat given by Josephus. “The orange and lemon
is said to be derived from the verb otze, ‘to fix’ have sometimes been adduced as the citrus of
‘to make steady.” The word abut, according to the above passages, but boti were unknown in
Celsius (Hiervbot. i. p. 322), is by the Rabbins, those early times sv far north as Palestine; while
as well asin the Chaldee and Syriac versions, the citron seems to have Leen early introduced
understood to mean the myrtle. But Celsius from Media, and was known to the Greeks and
himself follows the Septuagint, the Vulgate, and Romans; as we shall show under the article
several other authorities, in considering the efz- Tarncan. Some again are of opinion that te
aboth to signify a shudy tree, ¢ fuliis et frondibus olive is intended by the word Aadar, as the vlive is
densa.” mentioned instead of this tree by Nehemiah (viii,
The shade of trees must always have been 15), in reference apparently to the above pasagt.
highly esteemed in eastern, or rather in warm Instead of fruit, however, some, as Tremellius and
clitnates. Tue planting of trees was early prac- Dr. Geddes, conceive that peri signities young
tised, as we have seen in the case of the eshel growing shoots or boughs, as indeed it is inte-
planted by Abraham at Beersheba, when he called preted in our authorized version, There can be
on the name of the Lord. We know also that no objection to the citron Leing considered te
among the nations of antiquity the planting of Aadar, as is done by the Jews; since we lean
groves, and their consecration to their gods, were fiom Josephus that they lad them in their hands
antecedent to the building of temples aud altars, tr festy Scenvpegiorum, when they threw them
and were of almost universal adoption; aud that at King Alexander Jannwus; and ‘they still con-
groves were the scenes of their idolatrous worship tinue to use citrons at the Feast of Tabernacles.
and licentious rites. Hence probably the Jews But this does not prove that the citron "at
were phase from planting trees around or near common in Palestine, or rather in the desert. at
tar of God. Shade and solitude seem the time of Moses. The law-giver, if he spec


ETZ-SHEMEN.


any, would no doubt direct the Israelites to take
such fruits pr branches as were procurable in the
desert; but it is probable, as maintained by
the majority of commentators, that the term is
general, rather than specific, and therefore that the
fruit or branches of any goodly tree might be
thus employed. Ursini has observed, ‘ Nam si
species aliqua defecisset, nee omnibus wque ad
manum fuisset, imposita fuisset necessitas Sceno-
pegia celebraturis, vel omittendi gestationem
horum ramusculorum, vel prevaricandi contra
legis prescriptum. Cogita, si omnibus citree
frondes fructibus suis onustm, aut oleagine, aut
myrtee gestands fuissent, quanta circa Hiero-
solymas hortorum quotannis fuisset calamitas ;
nanta frondium talium raritas et caritas’
Arboret. Bibl. p. 577).—J. F. R.


ETZ-SHEMEN (j? YY) occurs three times
in Scripture, and is differently translated in all the
three passayes in the Authorized Version, At the
institution of the Feast of Tabernacles (Lev. xxxiii.
33-34), we have seen [ Erz-napan] that the Israel-
ites were directed to make booths of the boughs of
palm-trees, of willows of the brook, of goodly trees
(etz-hadar), and of thick trees (efz-aboth). At
the rebuilding of the temple, Nehemiah (viii. 15)
directs the Israelites to go forth unto the mount
and fetch olive and pine branches (etz-shemen),
and myrtle-branches, and palm-branches, and
branches of thick trees (etz-aboth), to make booths,
as it is written.’ Thus we see that two names are
the same in both passages, viz. the pa/m and
elz-aboth ; while etz-hadar and teillows of the
brook are mentioned in the first, and myrtle
branches, olive branches, and etz-shemen in the
second.

This term occurs also in Isa. xli. 19: ¢I will
plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah-tree,
and the myrtle, and the etz-shemen [bere trans-
lated ¢ oil-tree’}: I will set in the desert the fir-tree,
and the pine, and the box-tree together.” The
third mention of etz-shemen is in 1 Kings vi. 23,
where its wood is described as being employed :
§ And within the oracle he made two cherubim of
etz-shemen (translated odire-tree], each two cubits
high.’ If we collate the several passages in which
etz-shemen occurs, we shall find reason to con-
clude that it is not the otive-tree, as it is translated
in 1 Kings vi. 23, since in Neh. viit. 15, the olive
tree (sait)is distinguished from etz-shemen, which
is there rendered pine-tree ; and that it is as little
likely to be the pinetree, since in Isa. xli, 19,
etz-shemen, ieaalitea oil-tree, is mentioned ag
distinct from both the fir and the pine.

Though the above names, occurring in the same
sentences with etz-shemen, enable us to say that
it is not likely to have been any of them, it is
not more easy to say what tree is intended. Se-
veral have been adduced in addition to those
mentioned above, as the different kinds of pine,
including the cedar of Lebanon, the cypress, the
citrus, the balsam-tree; but there is no proof in
favour of any of these. Ursini and Celsius are
both of opinion that the term is used generically,
and therefore that no particular kind of tree is
intended. This may appear to be the case in the
earlier passages; but in those of Isa. xli, 19, and

,of 1 Kings vi. 23, a specific tree seems to be
pointed out; but we have no means of deter-
mining the particular tree, though there are several


EVANGELISTS. en


in Palestine which are not noticed in our version
of the Scriptures, and though it is probable that
some even of the modem Arabic names may
bear some sinsilarity to the Hebrew. The Arabic
shamanat, signilying fragrant things, and the Per-
sian shamanah, signifying anything odoriferous,
a fragrant smell, seem to be connected with it.
But Hebrew scholars consider shemen as having
some reference to oiliness or fatness. Thus Celsius
(Hierob. i, 310) quotes R. D. Kimchi as come
menting on | Kings vi. 23, as follows: * Intel-
lige per JOU” "SP speciem aliquam pini, ex qua
manat pinguedo, unde faciunt picem; nam inde
dicitur JOY YY arbor pinguedinis.’ The objection
to etz-shemen being one of the pine tribe, is that
it is mentioned as apparently distinct from both
the pine and fir in the passage of Isaiah, while in
that of Kings a tree is required having wood fit for
making the cherubim. As no tree has yet been
pointed out having a name similar either in mean-
ing or sound to the Hebrew, and with wood of a
good quality, it is better to consider etz-shemen as
oue of those not yet ascertained, than to add one
more to the other unsatisfactory guesses.—J. F. R.
EVANGELISTS (EvayyeAtoral). This term
is applied in the New Testament to a certain class
of Christian teachers who were not fixed to any
particular spot, but travelled either aad pare
or under the direction of one or other of the Apos-
tles, for the purpose of propagating the Gospel.
Philip, one of the seven deacons, is termed the
Evangelist (Acts xxi. 8). St. Paul exhorts
Timothy ‘to do the work of an Evangelist’ (2
Tim. iv. 5); and though this name is not given to
Titus, the injunctions addressed to him, and the
services he rendered, are so similar as to render
the propriety of applying it to him unqnestion-
able. In the Epistle to the Ephesians (iv. 11) the
EvayyeAtords (Evangelists) are expressly «istin-
guished from the womévas Kal didacKndAous (pas-
tors and teachers). The chief points of difference
appear to be that the former were itinerant, the
latter stationary ; the former were employed in
introducing the Gospel where it was before un-
known; the business of the latter was to confirm
and instruct the converts statedly and perma
nently. Such is the representation given by Eu-
sebius (Hist. Eccles, iii, 37). Reterring to the
state of the church in the time of Trajan, he says,
‘ Many of the disciples of that time, whose souls
the Divine word had inspired with an ardent love
of philosophy, first fulfilled our Saviour's precept
by distributing their substance among the poor,
Then travelling abroad they performed the work
of Evangelists (épyov éxerédouv EbayyeAiorav),
being ambitious tu preach Christ, and deliver the
Scripture of the Divine Gospels, Having laid
the foundations of the faith in foreign nations,
they appointed other pastors (womévas re Kadt-
ordyres érépous), to whom they entrusted the cul-
tivation of the parts they had recently occupied,
while they proceeded to other countries and
nations. He elsewhere speaks of Pantanus and
others as Evangelists of the Word (EvayyeAorad
Tov Adyou (Hist. Eccles. v.10). In the same
writer the term Evangelist is also applied, as at
present, to the authors of the canonical gospels
(Hist. Eccles. iii. 39). ele Lectures on
Ecclesiastical History, vol. i. pp. 148-150; Nean-
der's History of the Planting of the Christian
Church, Eng. transl. vol. i. p. 173)—JeE. R.


672 EVE.


EVE, the name of the first woman. Her his-
tory is contained in that of Apam, which see.

EVENING. ([Day.]

EVIL-MERODACH (717) SYN; Sept.
Eliadpapwdéx, ObAaipaSdyap), son and successor
of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, who, on his
accession to the throne (s.c. 562), released the
captive king of Judah, Jehoiachin, from prison,
treated him with kindness and distinction, and
set his throne above the thrones of the other con-
quered kings who were detained at Babylon (2
Kings xxv. 275 Jer. lii. 31-34) [Cuatpzans].
A Jewish tradition (noticed by Jerome on Isa.
xiv. 29) ascribes this kindness to a nal
friendship which Evil-merodach had contracted
with the Jewish king, when he was himself con-
signed to prison by Nebuchadnezzar, who, on
recovering from his seven years’ monomania, took
offence at some part of the conduct of his son, by
whom the government had in the meantime been
administered. This story was probably invented
to account for the fact. Evil-merodach is donbt-
less the same as the Ilvarodam of Ptulemy’sCanon.
The duration of his reign is made out variously
by clfronoloyers, some extending it to twenty-four
years, others reducing it to two or three. Hales,
who adopts the last number, identities him with
the king of Babylon who formed a powerful con-
federacy against the Medes, which was broken up,
and the king slain by Cyrus, then acting for his
uncle Cyaxares. But this rests on the authority
of Xenophon’s Cyropxedia, the historical value of
which he estimates far too highly [Cyrus].

The latter half of the name Evil-Merodach is
that of a Babylonian god LMenovien |: Two
modes of explaining the former part of it have
been attempted. Since evil, as ai Hebrew word,
means ‘ fuolish,’ Simonis proposes to consider it the


derivative of 238, in the Arabic signification of
‘to be first,” affording the sense of ‘ prince of Me-
rodach.’ This rests on the assumption that the
Babylonian language was of Syro-Arabian origin.
Gesenius, on the other hand, who does not admit
that origin, believes that some Indo-Germanic
word, of similar sound, but reputable seuse, is
concealed under evi?/, and that the Hebrews made
some slight perversion in its furm to produce a
word of contemptuous signification in Hebrew,
just as is assumed in the case of Beelzebul,

EUNICE (Evdvixn), the mother of Timothy, a
Jewess, although married to a Greek and bearing
a Greek name, which signifies good victory, aud
is that of one of the Nercides, daughters of
Oceanus, She was a believer in Christ, and
even her mother Lois lived in the faith of the
expected Messiah, if she did not live to know that
he had come in the person of Jesus of Nazareth
(2 Tim. i. 5; Acts xvi. 1).

EUNUCIL (etvodxos). This word, which we
have adopted from the Greek, has, in its literal
sense, the harmless meaning of ‘ bed-keeper,’ i. e.
one who has the charge of beds and bed-cham-
bers; but as only persons deprived of their virility
have, from the most ancient times, been employed
in Oriental harems, and as such persous are
employed almost exclusively in this kind of ser-
vice, the word ‘ bed-keeper’ hecame synonymous
with ‘castratus.’ In fact there are few eastern
languages in which the condition of those persons
is more directly expressed than by the name of


EUPHRATES.


some post or station in which they are usually
found. The admission to the recesses of the
harem, which is in fact the domestic establish-
ment of the prince, gives the eunuchs such pe
culiar advantages of access to the royal ear and
person, as often enables them to exercise an im-
portant influence, and to rise to statiuns of great
trust and power in Eastern courts. Hence it
would seem that, in Egypt, fur instance, the word
which indicated an eunuch was applied to any
court officer, whether a castratus or not. The
word which describes Joseph's master as ‘an
officer of Pharaoh’ (Gen. xxxvii. 6; xxxix. 1) is
DD saris, which is used in Hebrew to denote an
eunuch; and in these places is rendered N32,
‘prince,’ in the Targum, and ebvotyos, * eunuch,’
in the Septuagint.

Authority would be superfluous in proof of a
matter of such common knowledge as the employ-
ment of eunuchs, and especially of black eunucis
in the courts and harems of the ancient and mo-
dern East. A noble law, which, however, evinces
the prevalence of the custom prior to Moses, made
castration illegal among the Jews (Lev. xxii.
24; Deut. xxiii. 1). But the Hebrew princes did
not choose to understand this law as interdicting
the use of those who had been made eunuchs hy
others; for that they had them, and that they
were sometimes, if not generally, blacks, and that
the chief of them was regarded as holding an
important and influential post, appears from 1
Kings xxii. 9; 2 Kings viii. 6; ix. 32, 33;
xx. 8; xxiii 11; Jer. xxxviii. 7; xxxix. 16:
xli. 16. Samuel was aware that eunucis would
not fail to be emploved in a regal court; for he
thus forewarus the people, ‘He (the kinz) will
take the tenth of your seed and of your vineyard,
and give to his eunuche (A. V. officers”) aud
to his servants’ (1 Sam. viii. 15).

Under these circumstances, the eunuchs were
probably obtained from a great distance, and at
an expense which must have limited their employ-
ment to the royal establisliment ; and this is very
much the case even at present.

In Matt. xix. 12, the term ‘eunuch’ is applied
figuratively to persons naturally impotent. Iu
the same verse mention is also made of persons
‘who have ntade themselves eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven's sake ;* which is a manifestly
hyperbolical description of such as lived in volun
tary abstinence (comp. Matt. v. 29, 30); althougi
painful examples have occurred (as in the case of
Origen) of a disposition to interpret the plirase too
Jiterallyy and thus to act upon the following in-
junction, or permission, ¢ Let him who is capable
of doing this, do it "—d duvduevos xwpeiy xcpeito.

EUODIAS (Evodias), a female member of the
church at Philippi, who seems to have been at
variance with another female member named
Syntyche. Paul describes them as women who
had ‘laboured much with him in the gospel,” atsl
implores them to be of one mind (Philip. iv.


2, 3).

PUPHRATES (Edg¢pdrns), termed in Deut. i.
7, ‘ the great river,” where it is mentioned as the
eastern boundary of the land which (ver. 8) God
gave to the descendants of Abraham, In Gen.
ii, 14, the Euphrates (MD) is stated to be the
fourth of the rivers which flowed from a commen
stream in the garden of Eden. Divines and geo-
grapbers have taken mnch trouble in order to


EUPHRATES.


learn the position of Eden from the geographical

rticulars given in the Bible, without remem-
leis that probably nothing more than a po-
pular description was intended. It is true that
wo of the rivers mentioned in the passage, namely,
the Tigris and the Euphrates, have their sources
in the same hizh lands; but scientific geography
neither sanctions nor explains the Scriptural ac-
count, if Eden is to be sought in the mountainous
rauge in different and distant parts of which they
rise.
In consequence of its magnitude and import-
ance, the Euphrates was designated and known as
“the river,” being by far the must considerable
stream in Western Asia. Thus in Exod. xxiii. 31,
we read, ‘ from the desert unto the river’ (comp.
Isa. viii. 7).

It has two sources and two arms—a western
tnd an eastern—which rise in the mountains of
Armenia. Of these streams the western is the
shorter, and is called Kara Sou, or Melas; the
eastern is itself made up of several streams, the
Jongest of which bears the name of Murad, or
Phrat. The two arms unite about three days’
joumey from Erzeroom, near which rise two of
the tributaries that concur in furming the Phrat.
Thus uniting, they give rise to the Euphrates
strictly so called, which, flowing to the south,
divides Armenia from Cappadocia; but, being
driven westward by the Auti-Taurus and Taurus
mountains, it works its circuitous way through
harrow passes and over cataracts, until, breaking
through a detile formed by the eastern extremity
of Mons Amanus (Alma Dagh), and the north-
western extremity of Mons Taurus, it reaches the
plain country not far from Samosata (Schemisat),
then winds suuth and south-east, passing the north
of Syria, and the north-east of Arabia Deserta,
and at length, after many windings, unites with
the Tigris, and thus united finds its termination
in the Persian Gulf. (Herod. i. 180; Strabo, ii.
p- 521; Ptolem. v. 13; Plin. Hest. Nat. v. 20;
Q. Curt. i. 13; Orbis Terrartwm, C. Kaercher
Auct.; Map to Report from the Select Committee
on Steam Navigation to India.) Iu conjunction
with the Tigris, it forms the rich alluvial lands of
Mesopotamia, over which it flows or is carried
by canals, and thus diffuses abrvad fertility and
beauty. At Bagdad aud Hillat (Babylon), the
Euphrates aud Tigris approach comparatively
near to each other, but separate again, forming a
kind of ample basin, till they finally become one
at Koorma., Under the Caesars the Euphrates was
the eastern boundary of the Roman empire, as
under David it was the natural limit of the
Hebrew monarchy.

Although occasionally much more, the breadth
of the Euphrates varies between 200 and 400 yards;
but for a distance of 60 miles through the Lemlun
marshes the main stream narrows to about 80 yards.
The general depth of the Upper Euphrates exceeds
8 feet. In point of current it is fur the most part
a sluggish stream ; for, except in the height of the
fluoded season, when it approaches 5 miles an hour,
it varies from 2} to 34, with a much larger por-
tion of its course under 3 than above. Its general
description for some distance below Erzingan is
that of' a river of the tirst order, struggling through
high hills, or rather low mountains, making an
exceedingly tortuous course, as it forces its way
oves @ pebbly or rocky bed, from one natural


EUPHRATES. 678


barrier to another. As it winds round ite numerous
barriers, it carries occasionally towards each of
the cardinal points a considerable body of water;
and is shallow enough in sume places for loaded
camels to pass in autumn, the water rising to
their bellies, or about 44 feet. The upper portion
of the river is enclosed between two parallel ranges
of hills, covered for the most part with high brush-
wood and timber of moderate size, having a sne-
cession of long narrow islands, on several of which
are moderate-sized towns; the borders of this
ancient stream being still well inhabited, not only
by Bedouins, but by permanent residents. The
following towns may be named: Samsat, Hao-
roum, Romkala, Bir, Giaber, Deir, Rava, Anna,
Hadisa, El Oos, Jibba, Hit, Hillah, Lemlun,
Korna, and Bussora. The scenery above Hit, in
itself’ very picturesque, is greatly heightened by
the frequent recurrence of ancient irrigating aque-
ducts, beautiful specimens of art, which are attri-
buted by the Arabs to the Persians when fire-wor-
shippers: they literally cover both banks, and prove
that the borders of the Euphrates were once thickly
inhabited by a highly civilized people. They are
of stone. Ten miles below Hit is the last of these.
The country now becomes flatter, with few hills ;
the river winds less; aud the banks are covered
with Arab villages of mats or tents, with beautiful
mares, cattle, and numerpus flocks of goats and
sheep. From Hit to Babylon the black tent of
the Bedouin is almost the only kind of habitation
to be seen. This distance is cultivated only in

3 the rest is desert, with the date-tree showing
in occasional clusters. In descending, the irri-
gating cuts and canals become more frequent.
Babylon is encircled by two streams, one above,
the other below the principal ruin; beyond which
they unite and produce abundance. For about
thirty miles below Hillah both banks have numer-
ous mud villages, imbedded in date-trees ; to these
succeed huts formed of bundles of reeds. The
country lower down towards Lemlun is level and
little elevated above the river; irrigation is there-
fore easy : in consequence, both banks are covered
with productive cultivation, and fringed with a
double and nearly continuous belt of luxuriant
date-trees, extending down to the PersianGulf. At
one mile and a half above the town of Dewania is
the first considerable deviation from this hitherto
majestic river; another takes place 22 miles lower ;
and nine miles farther—at Lemlun—it again
separates into two branches, forming a delta not
unlike that of Damietta, and when the river is
swollen, inundating the country for a space of
about 60 miles in width with a shallow sheet of
water, forming the Lemlun marshes, nearly the
whole of which is covered with rice and other
grain the mument the river recedes (in June).
Here mud villages are swept away by the water
every year.

Below Lemlun the Tigris sends a branch to the
Euphrates, which is thus increased in its volume;
and turning to the east, receives the chief branch
of the Tigris, thence running in one united stream,
uuder the name of the Shat al Arab, as far as the
sea (the Persian Gulf). In this last reach the
river las a depth of trom 3 to 5 fathoms, varies
in breadth from 560 to $00 yards, and presents
banks covered with villages and cultivation,
having an appearance at once imposing and
majestic. The length of the navigate part of

x


674 EUTYCHUS.


the river, reckoning from Bir to Bussora, is
143 miles; the length of the entire stream, 1400
mailes. It is very abundant in fish. The water is
somewhat turbid; but, when purified, is pleasant
aud salubrious. The Arabians set a bigh value
on it, and name it Morad Sou; that is, Water of
desire, or longing.

The river begins to rise in March, and con-
tinues rising till the latter end of May. The
consequent increase of its volume and rapidity is
attributable to the early rains, which, falling in
the Armenian mountains, swell its mountain tri-
butaries; and also in the main to the melting of
the winter snows in these lofty regions, About
the middle of November the Euphrates has reached
its lowest ebb, and ceasing to decrease, becomes
tranquil and sluggish.

The Euphrates is, on many accounts, an object
of more than ordinary interest. ‘The great river’
is linked with the earliest times and some of the
most signal events in the history of the world.
Appearing among the few notices we have of the
first condition of the earth and of human kind, it
continues, through the whole range of Scripture
history down to the present hour, an object of
curiosity, interest, wonder, hope, or triumph.

In ancient as well as in modem times the
Euphrates was used for navigation. Herodotus
states that boats—either coracles er rafts, floated
by inflated skins—brought the produce of Armenia
down to Babylon. The trade thus carried on was
considerable.

The Emperor Trajan constructed a fleet in the
mountains of Nisibis, and floated it down the
Euphrates. The Emperor Julian also came down
the river from the same mountains, with a fleet of
not fewer than 1100 vessels.

A great deal of navigation is still carried on
from Bagdad to Hillah, the ancient Babylon;
but the disturbed state of the country prevents
any above the latter place. In the time of Queen
Elizabeth merchants from England went by this
river, which was then the high road to India,

The prophets made use of the Euphrates as a
figurative description of the Assyrian power, as
the Nile with them represented the power of
Egypt; thus in Isa. viii. 7, ‘ The Lord bringeth
up upon them the waters of the river, strong and
many, even the king of Assyria® (Jer. ii. 18).
Wahl's Asien, p. 700; Ritter’s Erdk. ii. 120;
Trait’ Elément. Géographique, Bruxelles, 1832,
vol. ii; Mannert’s Geogr. ii. 142; Reichard’s
Ki. Geogr. Schrif. p.210; Parliam. Rep. of Steam
Navigation to India, 1831.—J. R. B.

EUROCLYDON. [Winps.|

EUTYCHUS (Eérvxos), a young man of
Troas, who sat in the open window of the third
floor while St. Paul was preaching late in the
night, and who, being overcome by sleep, fell out
into the court below. He was ‘taken up dead'
(4p8n vexpds); but the Apostle, going down, ex-
tended himself upon the body and embraced it,
like the prophets of old (1 Kings xvii. 21; 2 Kings
iv. 34); and when he felt the signs of retuming
life, restored him to his friends, with the assurance
that ‘his life was in him.’ Before Paul departed
in the morning the youth was brought to him
alive and well. It is disputed whether Eutychus
was really dead, or only in a swoon; and hence,
whether a miracle was performed or not. It is
admitted that the circumstances, and the words


EXECRATION.


of Paul himself, sanction the notion that the
young man was not actually dead; but, on the
other band, it is contended that the words of the
narrator, ‘taken up dead,’ are too plain to justify
us in receiving them in the modified sense of
‘taken up for dead,’ which that interpretation
requires (Acts xx. 5-12).

EXECRATION. : The Greek word s0 ren-
dered, xardpa, occurs in Num. xxiii. 8; xxiv. 9;
Josh. vi. 26; 1 Sam. xvii. 43. It is used
also in profane authors to denote the impreca-
tions which it was customary among anciat
nations to pronounce upon their euemies for
the purpose of calling down the divine wrath,
branding them with infamy, and exciting against
them the passions of the multitude. By this
means they also devoted their enemies to the
ruin they considered them to deserve. Thee
imprecations were chiefly pronounced by priests,
enchanters, or prophets [BaLaam]. The Athenians
made use of them against Philip of Macedon.
They convened an assembly, in which it was
decreed that all statues, inscriptions, or festivals
among them, in any way relating to him or his
ancestors, shonld be destroyed, and every other
possible reminiscence of him profaned ; and that
the priests, as often as they prayed for the success
of the Athenian aflairs, should pray for the ruin
of Philip. It was also customary, both among


the Greeks and Romans, after baving destroyed °


cities in war, the revival of whose strength they
dreaded, to pronounce execrations upon those
who should rebuild them. Strabo observes that
Agamemnon pronounced execrations on those
who should rebuild Troy, as Croesus did agaist
those who should rebuild Sidena ; and this mole
of execrating cities Strabo calls an ancient
custom (xara wadadv €os; xiii. p. 698, edit.
1707). The Romans published a decree full of
execrations against those who should rebuild Car-
thage (Zonaras, Annal.). An incident somewhat
analogous is related (Josh. vi. 26) after the taking
of Jericho. From the words ‘and Joshua ad-
jured them at that time,’ it is likely that he acted
under a divine intimation that Jericho should
continue m ruins, as a monument of the divine
displeasure and a warning to posterity. The
words * cursed be the man (the individual) beture
the Lord that riseth up and buildeth this city
Jericho,’ although transformed into an execranon
by the word supplied by the translators, amount
to no more than a prediction that ‘he shall lay the
foundation thereof in his first-born, and in his
youngest son shall he set up the gates of it,’ that ts,
he shall meet with sv many impediments to his
undertaking that he shall oug-dive all his children,
dying in the course of nature before he shall wm-
plete it. Execrations were also pronounced upon
cities and their inhabitants before uudertaking
a siege (Macrobius has preserved two of the an-
cient furms used in reference to the destruction of
Carthage, Saternal. iii. 9), and before engag-
ing with enemies in war. Tacitus relates that
the priestesses of ancient Britain devoted their
Roman invaders to destruction, with imprecations,
ceremonies, and attitudes, which for a time over-
whelmed the soldiers with terror (Annal. xiv. 29).
The execrations iv the 83rd Psalm, probably
written on the occasion of the confederacy against
Jehoshaphat, and other instances of a like nature,
partake of the execrations of the heathens i


EXODUS.
nothing Lut form, being the inspired predictions


or denunciations of divine vengeance against the
avowed enemies of the God of Israel, notwith-
standing the proofs they had witnessed of his
supremacy ; and the object of these imprecations,
as in many other instances, is charitable, namely,
their conversion to the true religion (ver. 18; see
also Ps. lix. 12).—J. F. D.

EXILE. [Carriviry.

_ EXODUS.” ‘The intention of Jchovah to de-
liver the Israelites from Egyptian bondage was
made known to Moses from the burning bush at
Mount Horeb, while he kept the flock of Jethro,
his father-in-law. Under the divine direc-
tion Moses, in conjunction with Aaron, assem-
bled the elders of the nation, and acquainted
them with the gracious design of Heaven. Alter
this they had an interview with Pharaoh, and
TequestedL permission for the people to go, in order
to hold a feast unto God in the wilderness. The
result was, not only refusal, but the doubling of
all the burdens which the Israelites had previously
had to bear. Moses hereupon, suffering reproach
from his ple, consults Jehovah, who assures
him that i would compel Pharaoh ‘to drive
them out of his land.’ ‘1 will rid you out of
their bondage, and I will redeem you with a
stretched-out arm and with great judgments’
. (Exod. iii-vi. 6). ‘Then ensue a series of mi-
racles, commonly called the plagues of Exypt
(Exod. vi.-xii.) [Pracur]. At last, overcome
by the calamities sent upon him, Pharaoh yielded
all that was demanded, saying, ‘Rise up, and get
you forth from among my people, both ye and
the children of Israel; and go serve the Lord
as ye have said; also take your flocks and your
herds, and be gone.’ Thus driven out, the Israel-
ites, to the number of about 600,000 adults, be-
sides children, left the land, attended by a mixed
multitude, with their flocks and herds, even very
much cattle (Exod. xii. 31, sg.). Being ‘ thurst
out’ of the country, they had not time to prepare
for themselves suitable provisions, and therefore
they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which
they brought forth out of Egypt.

On the night of the self-same day which ter-
minated a period of 430 years, during which they
nad been in Ezypt, were they Jed forth from
Rameses, or Goshen [Gosnen]. They are not
said to have crossed the river Nile, whence we
may infer that Goshen lay on the eastern side
of the river. Their first station was at Succoth
(Exod. xii. 37). The nearest way into the Land
of Promise was through the land of the Philis-
tines. ‘This route would have required them to
keep on in a north-east direction. It pleased
their divine conductor, however, not to take this

th, lest, being opposed by the Philistines, the

sruelites should turn back at the sight of war
into Egypt. If, then, Philistia was to be avoided,
the course would lie nearly direct east, or south-
east. Pursuing this route, ‘ the armies’ come to

Etham, their next station, ‘in the edge of the wil-
derness’ (Exod. xiii.17, sq.). Here they encamped.
Dispatch, however, was desirable. They journey
day and night, not without divine guidance,
for ‘the Lord went before them by day in a
pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way ; and by
night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; to
go by day and night. This special guidance
could not well have been meant merely to show


EXODUS. €75


the way through the desert; for it can hardly be
supposed that in so great a multitude no persons
knew the road over a country lying near to that
in which they and their ancestors lad dwelt, and
which did not extend more than some forty miles
across. The divine guides were doubtless in-
tended to conduct the Israelites in that way and
to that spot where the hand of God would be
most signally displayed in their rescue and in
the destruction of Pharaoh. ‘1 will be honoured
upon Pharaoh and upon all his host, that the
Egyptians may know that Iam the Lord.’ For
this purpose Moses is directed of God to ‘ speak
unto the children of Israel that they tern and
encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and
the sea, over against Baal-zephon ; before it shall
ye eucamp by the sea: and they did so' (Exod.
xiv. 2-4). We have already seen reason to think
that the direction of the Israelites was to the east
or south-east; this turning must have been in the
latter direction, else they would have been carried
down towards the land of the Philistines, which,
they were to avoid. Let the word ‘turn’ he
marked ; it is a strong term, and seems to imply
that the line of the march was bent considerably
towards the south, or the interior of the Jand.
The children of Israel then are now encamped
betore Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea,
also ‘by the sea.” Their position was such that
they were ‘entangled in the land, the wilderness
hath shut them in.’

A new scene is now laid open. News is carried
to Pharaoh which leads him to see that the reason
assigned (namely, a sacrifice in the wilderness) is
but a pretext; that the Israelites had really fled
from his yoke; and also that, through some (to him)
unaccountable error, they had gone towards the
south-east, had reached the sea, and were hemmed.
in on all sides. He summons his troops and sets
out in pursnit—‘ all the horses and chariots of
Pharoah, and his horsemen and his army ;’ and
he ‘ overtook them encamping by the sea, beside
Pi-hahiroth, before Baal-zephon’ (Exod. xiv. 9).
The Israelites see their pursuing enemy approach,
and are alarmed. Moses assures them of divine
aid. A promise was given as of God that the Isravl-
ites should go on dry ground through the midst
of the sea; and that the Egyptians, attempting
the same path, should be destroyed : ¢ and I will
get me honour ‘upon Pharaoh and all his host,
upon his chariots and his horsemen’ (ver. 17).
Here a very extraordinary event takes place:
* The angel of God, which went before the camp
of Israel, removed and went behind them; and
the pillar of the cloud went from before their face
and stood behind them; and it came between the
camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel ;
and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it
gave light by night to these ; 60 that the one came
not near the other all the night’ (ver. 19, 20).
Then comes the division of the waters, which we
give in the words of the sacred historian: ¢ And
Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and
the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong
east wind all that night, and made the sea dry
Jand, and the waters were divided. And the
children of Israel went into the midst of the sea
upon the dry ground; and the waters were a wall
unto them on their right hand and on their left.
And the Egyptians pursued and went in after
them to the midst of the sea, even ry eee

x


676 EXODUS.


horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.’ Delays
are now occasioned to the Egyptians; their cha-
riot-wheels are supernaturally taken off, so that
“in the moming-watch they drave them heavily.’
The Egyptians are troubled ; they urge each other
to fly from the face of ‘Israel. * Then Moses
stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea
rettirned to his strength when the morning ap-
peared ; and the Egyptians fled against it; and
the Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of
the sea. And the waters returned and covered
the chariots and the horsemen and all the host
of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them ;
there remained not as much as one of them. But
the children of Israel walked upon dry land in
the midst of the sea, and the waters were a wall
unto them on their right hand and on their left.
And Israel saw the Egyptians dead upen the sea-
shore; and the people feared the Lord, and be-
lieved the Lord anc his servant Moses’ (ver. 28-31).
From the song of triumph which Moses sang upon
this occasion we learn some other particulars, as
that ‘ the depths covered Pharaoh's host, they sank
to the bottom as a stone;’ language which, what-
ever deduction may be made for its poetic cha-
racter, implies that the miracle took place in deep
water. ‘Thou sentest forth thy wrath which con-
sumed them as stubble, and with the blast of thy
nostrils the waters were gathered together, the
flouds stood upright as an heap, and the depths
were congealed in the heart of the sca; thou
didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them ;
they sank as lead in the mighty waters "—all
which would be not poetry, but bombast, had not
the wind been as miraculous as any other part of
the event, and had not the sea been large and deep
(Exod. xv.; comp. Ps, evi. 9, sq.).

Such is the bearing and import of the sacred
narrative. If any intelligent reader, knowing
nothing of the theories of learned men, were to
peruse the account given in Exodus with a map
before him, he would, we doubt not, be led to
couclude that the route of the Israelites lay to-
wards the south-east, up the Red Sea, and that the
spot where they crossed was at a place encircled
by mountains on the side of the desert, and fronted
by deep and impassable waters: he would equally
conclude that the writer in Exodus intended to
represent the rescue as from first to last the work
of God. Had the Israelites been at a place which
was fordable under any natural influences, Pha-
raoh’s undertaking was absurd. He knew that
they were eutangled,—mountains behind and on
either hand, while the deep sea was before them.
Therefore he felt sure of his prey, and set ont in
pursuit. Nothing but the divine interposition
foiled and punished him, at the same time re-
deeming the Israelites. And this view, which the
unleamed but intelligent reader would be led to
take, involves, in fact, all that is important in the
case. But a dislike of the miraculous has had an
influence, and erudition has tried to fix the pre-
cise spot: whence have arisen views and theories
which are more or less discordant with the Serip-
ture, or are concerned with comparative trifles,
So far as aversion to miracle has had an influence
in the hypotheses which have been given, all we
shall remark is, that in a case which is so evi-
dently represented as the sphere of miracle, there
is but one alternative,—they who do not admit
tle miracle must reject the narrative; and far


EXODUS.


better would it be to do so frankly than to cor
struct hypotheses which are for the most part, if
not altogether, purely arbitrary. A narrative
obviously miraculous (in the intention of’ the
writer) can be explained satisfactorily on no m-
tionalistic principles: this is not to expound but
to ‘ wrest’ the Scriptures; a position which, in
our opinion, has been fully established, in relation
to the Gospels, against the whole of the rational.
istic school of interpretation.

The account now given must, as being derived
immediately from the Scripture, be in the main
correct. If the authority is denied, this can be
done etlectually by no other means than by dir
proving in general the authority of the books
whence it is derived; and it may with truth le
affirmed, that no view apposed to that given can
possess greater claims on our credit, while any
mere sceptical opinion must reat on its own ir
trinsic probability, contested, 80 far as it opposes
the Scripture, by scriptural authority.

When, however, we descend from generals to

rticulars, and attempt to ascertain precise

ocalities and determine details, diversity of opi-
nion may easily arise, and varying degrees of pro-
hability only are likely to attend the investigation.
For instance, the immediate spot which Moses
a ges to reach, was, we know, on the Red Sea;

ut the precise line which he took depended of
course on the place whence he set out. With dif-
ference of opinion as to the spot where the Hebrews
had their rendezvous, there cannot be agreement
as to the route they tullowed.

The position of Goshen, where the Israclites
were settled, we shall endeavour to fix in another
article. It is enough here to say, that it was oa
the eastern side of the Nile, probably in the pro-
vince of Esh-Shurkiyeh. Rameses was the place
of reudezvous. The direct route thence to the Red
Sea was along the valley of the ancient canal.
By this way the distance was about thirty-live
miles. From the vicinity of Cairo, however, there
runs a range of hills eastward to the Red Sea, the
western extremity of which, not far from Cairo, is
named Jebel-Mokattem ; the eastern extremity 18
termed Jebel-Attaka, which, with its promontory
Ras Attaka, runs into the Red Sea. ween the
two extremes, somewhere about the middle of te
range, is an opening which affords a road for cara-
vans. Two routes offered themselves here. Sup-
pesing that the actual starting point lay nearer
Cairo, the Israelites might strike in from the north
of the range of hills, at the opening just men-
tioned, aud pursue the ordinary caravan read
which leads from Cairo to Suez; or they mizit
go southward from Mokattem, throngh the Wady
él Tib, that is, the Valley of Wandering, through
which also a road, though less used, runs to Suez,
According to Niebuhr they took the first, aceord-
ing to ancient tradition, Father Sicard (Ueber der

Weg der Isracliten, Paulus, Samal. v. 211, $4.5
and others, they took the last. Sicard fowid
traces of the Israelites in the valley. He lieid
Rameses to be the starting point, and Rameses be
placed about ix miles from ancient Cairo, where
Bezatin is now found. Here is a capacivus sandy
plain, on which Sicard thinks the Israelites as
sembled on the morning when they began their
journey. In this vicinity a plain is still found,
which the Arabs call the Jews’ Cemetery, and
where, from an indefinite period, the Jews have


EXODUS.


buried their dead. In the Mokattem chain isa
hill,,a part of which is called Mejanat Musa,
* Moses’ Station.’ On another hill in the vici-
nity, ruins are found, which the Arabs name
Meravad Musa, ‘ Moses’ Delight.’ Thus several
things seem to carry the mind back to the time of
the Hebrew legislator. Through the valley which
leads from Bezatin (the Valley of Wandering) to
the Red Sea, Sicard travelled in three days. He
reckons the length to be twenty-six hours, which,
if we give two miles to each hour (Robinson),
wonld make the distance fifty-two miles. This
lenzth is also assizned by Girard (Descrip. Topo-
grap. dela Vallée de l'Egarement). The valley
running pretty much in a plain surface would
afford a convenient passage to the mixed bands of
Israelites. About eighteen miles from Bezatin
you meet with Gendelhy. a plain with a fountain.
The name signifies a military station, and in this
Sicard. finds the Succoth (tents) of Exodus, the
lirst station of Moses. The haste with which they
left (were driven out) would enable them to reach
this place at nightfall of their first day's march.
Sicard places their second station, Etham, in the
plain Ramliyeh, eighteen miles from Gendelhy
and sixteen from the sea. From this plain is a
pass, four miles in length, so narrow that not more
than twenty men can go abreast. To avoid this,
which would have caused dangerous delay, the
order was ziven to turn (Exod. xiv. 2). Etham
is said (Exod. xiii. 20) to be on the edge of the
wilderness. Jablonski says the word means ter-
minus maris, the termination or boundary of the
sea, Now, in the plain where Sicard fixes Etham
(not to be confounded with the Eastem Etham,
through which afterwards the Israelites travelled
three days, Num. xxxiii. 8), is the spot where the
waters divide which run to the Nile and to the
Gulf of Suez, and Etham is therefure truly ter-
minus maris. Here the Israelites received com-
mand to turn and encamp (Exod. xiv. 2) before
Pi-hahiroth,, between Migdol and the sea, over
ayainst Baal-zephon.  Pi-hahiroth (the mouth of
the hiding-places) Sicard ideutities with Thuarek
(small caves), which is the name still given to
three or four salt springs of the plain Baideah, on
the south side of mount Attaka, which last Si-
card identities with Baal-zephon, and which is
the northern boundary of the plain Baideah,
while Kuiabeli (Migdol) is its southern limit. The
pass which leads to Suez, between Attaka and the
sea, is very narrow, and could be easily stopped
by the Egyptians. In this plain of Baideah,
Pharaoh had the Israelites hemmed in on all sides,
This then, according to all appearance, is the
spot where the passage through the sea was
effected. Such is the judgment of Sicard and of
Raumer (Der Zug der Isracliten, Leipzig. 1837 ;
for a description of the Valley of Wandering see
also Ritter, Erdkunde, i. 858). It cannot be denied
that this route satisfies all the conditions of the
case. Equally does the spot correspond with the
miraculous narrative furmshed by holy writ. A
different route is laid down by Niebuhr (Arad.
p- 407). Other writers, who, like him, endeavour
to explain the facts without the aid of miracle,
imitate his example.

It is no small corroboration of the view now
given from Sicard and Raumer, that in substance
it has the support of Josephus, of whose account
we shall, from its importance, give an abridg-


e


EXODUS. 677


ment. The Hebrews, he says (Antig. ii. 15),
took their journey by Latopolis, where Babylon
was built afterwards when Cambyses laid Egypt
waste. As they went in haste, on the third day
they came to a place called Baal-zephon, on the
Red Sea. Moses led them this way in order that
the Egyptians might be punished should they
venture in pursuit, and also because the Hebrews
had a quarrel with the Philistines. When the
Egyptians had overtaken the Hebrews they pre-
pared to fight them, and by their multitude
drove them into a narrow place; for the number
that went in pursuit was 600 chariots, 50,000
horsemen, and 200,000 infantry, all armed. They
also scized the passages, shutting the Hebrews up
between inaccessible precipices and the sea; for
there was on each side a ridge of mountains that
terminated at the sea, which were impassable, and
obstructed their flight. Moses, however, prayed
to God, and smote the sea with his rod, when the
waters parted, and gave the Israelites free passage.
The Egyptians at first supposed them distracted ;
but when they saw the Israclites proceed in
safety, they followed. As soon as the entire
Egyptian army was in the channel, the sea
closed, and the pursuers perished amid torrents
of rain and the most terrific thunder and light-
ning.

The opposition to the scriptural account has
been of two kinds. Some writers (Wolfenb.
Fragm. yp. 64, sq.) have at once declared the
whole falulous; a course which appears to have
been taken as early as the time of Josephus
(Antig. ii. 16. 5). Others have striven to explain
the facts by the aid of mere natural causes ; for
which see Winer, Handwérterbuch, in Meer
Rothes. A third mode of explanation is pursued
by those who do not deny miracles as such, and
yet, with no small inconsistency, seek to reduce
this particular miracle to the smallest dimen-
sions. Writers who see in the deliverance of the
Hebrews the hand of God and the fulfilment of
the divine purposes, follow the account in Scrip-
ture implicitly, placing the passage at Ras
Attaka, at the termination of the Valley of Wan-
dering ; others, who go on rationalistic principles,
find the sea here too wide and too deep for their
purpose, and endeavour to fix the passage a little
to the south or the north of Suez.

The most recent advocate of the passage at or
near Suez is the learned Dr. Robinson (Bibiicad
Researches tn Palestine), from whom we hesitate
to differ, and should hesitate still more, did not
his remarks bear ubvious traces of being, however
the author may be ignorant of the fact, influenced,
if not dictated, by some foregone conclusion and
certain rationalistic habits of mind. While,
however, we pay every proper tribute of respect
to Dr. Robinsun’s learning and diligence, we
must prefer the authority of Scripture and the
obvious facts of the case to all other cousider-
ations. The route taken by Moses was, accordmg
to Robinson, from Rameses to the head of the
Arabian Gulf, through Succoth, to Etham. The
last place he fixes on the edge of the desert, on
the eastern side of the line of the gulf. Instead
of passing down the eastern side, at the top of
which they were, the Israelites thence marched
down the western side of the arm of the gulf,
stopping in the vicinity of Suez, where the passage
was effected.


678 EXODUS.


This view represents Moses as having actually
conducted his people first out of all danger, and
then led them at once into it, by placing the gulf
between them and safety. Such a proceeding ill
became a prudent leader having to do with a
self-willed and stiffnecked band. But the chief
objection to this representation of the route is, that
it does not answer to what Scripture requires; for
in Exod. xiii. 18, we are told that ‘God led the
people ahout through the wilderness of the Red
Sea.’ How, according to Robinson, did he ‘lead
them about,’ especially ‘through the wilderness
of the Red Sea, which they must merely have
touched upon ?

The passage Robinson thinks took place ‘ across
shoals adjacent to Suez on the south and south-
west, ‘where the broad shoals are still left bare
at the ebb, and the channel is sometimes forded,’
‘a distance of three or four miles from shore to
shore ;’ ur ‘it might have been effected through
the arm of the gulf above Suez.’ A simple
reference to the language of Scripture previously
cited confutes this supposition ; for where, in or
near this place, are the deep waters of which
Moses speaks? Besides, is it for a moment to be
supposed that Pharaoh was not well acquainted
with the tides of a sea which lay so near his
capital? and would he have been so infatuated
as ty remain quictly in his position (for the
Scripture shows that the two armies were some
time in sight of each other) until the Israclites
had availed themselves of the ebb, and then,
when the floal came, quietly go into the sea
and be destroyed? In order to help out. his
hypothesis, conscious, apparently, that the body
of water here was insuttcient, Dr. Robinson ad-
vances a supposition (but for suppositions his
view would look as groundless as it really is),
namely, that with the flood-tide the wind was
changed. But a perusal of his scriptural refer-
ence (Exod. xv. 8-10) shows that this allezed
change is without evidence—a pure supposition:
the language in the Sth verse has respect to the
wind which divided the sea; and the language
in the 10th verse in no way implies any change
of direction whatever; the same wind, in the hand
of God, could both divide and close the sea.

The great question, however, is the cause or
instrument employed in securing the Israelites a
Ce on dry ground, and overwhelming. the

Esyptians. On this point we complain of a want
of explicitness in Dr. Robinson. He does not
deny a miracle, but blends together the miracu-
lons and the natural, so as to confuse his own
and his reader's mind. ‘It (the miracle) was
wrought by natural means supernaturally applied.’
A north-east wind was brought of Goi to act on
the water as the sea was ebbing, which gave a
dry passage to the Israelites, We are theretine
“to look only for the natural effects arising from
the operation of such a cause.’ The sole causes
then in the case were a north-east wind, the ebb-
tide, the flood, and a change of wind to aid the
action of the flood. Of these causes, the last, the
change of wind, is, as we have seen, a gratuitous
assumption, From ‘north-east wind’ we must
strike out ‘north,’ as being another gratuitous
assumption—it is ‘a strony east wind’ of which
Moses speaks. An east wind, however, would by
no means eflect the purposes needful for Dr. Ro-
binson’s hypothesis. Of his remaining causes, the


EXODUS.


ebb and flood tide, enough has already been said;
and, so far as an east wind, acting naturally,
would have an effect, it wonld drive the waters
upon the shallows, which Dr. Robinson wants
dry. But we much question whether his as-
sumed ‘north-east wind’ would cause what be
requires, Jt would, he alleges, ‘have the effect
tu drive out the waters from the small arm of the
sea which runs up by Suez, and also from the
end of the gulf itselt, leaving the shallower por.
tions dry, while the more northern part of the
arm, which was anciently broader and deeper
than at present, would still remain covered with
water, Thus the waters would be divided, and
be a wall to the Israelites on the right hand and
on the left.’ We desire the reader to consult the
map appended to Dr. Robinson's first volume.
While considering the hypothesis in question, he
must remember that the action of ebb and flood
tide rests on no better ground than an assumption;
the Scripture says nothing thereof. Now a wind
setting 1m at the head of the gulf would com-
mence its influence of course at the end of the
arm which runs up to the east of Suez, and
would, so far as it acted, bear down the water
from the top towards the very place which the
hypothesis requires to be dry, namely, the head
of the gulf, thus covering the shallows. But if,
to avoid this difliculty, Dr. Robinson fixes the
passage in the arm itself, then how could a wind,
acting on the waters in the arm, ‘divide’ them!
Drive them out, scatter them ta some extent, it
might, but surely not divide them. Nor does
Dr. Robinson secure by his other supposition,
namely, the passage over the shallows, such a
division as the Scripture requires. Supposing the
eflect which he contemplates to be produced, then
there would be on the north side of the shallows
s0 much of the sea as the wind had left in the
arm, and so much of the sea as lingered under its
driving impulse on the south side of the shallows,
With this in his mind let the reader peruse the
scriptural account, ‘the waters were a wall to
them on the right hand and on the left.’ By
Dr. Robinson's account there was no wall at all,
but such a state of the sea and land as would
render the choice uf the language employed by
Moses most inappropriate. In truth, however, the
east wind of cl Moses speaks was precisely
the influence to bring about the effect which he
alleges to have taken place. Acting on the sea
at a right angle it would literally divide the
waters, causing the mid-way to be dry, and a
wall to stand on either side. Such obviously is
the view which Moses intended to give. In en-
deavouring to define and estimate the action of
this east wind, however, it must be bore in mind
that the Scripture represents the entire aflair as
miraculous. It was from first tu last ‘the hand
of the Lord,’—the east wind and its action, as
much as the collapse of the sea. The east wind,
indeed, is also termed ‘the blast of thy nostrils;’
and so ‘thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea
covered them,* E
The miraculous character of the transaction,
as affirmed in Scripture, takes all point from the
question of time, which Dr. Robinson says 8
fatal to the alternative hypothesis, namely, that
the Israelites crosse:l from Wady Tawarik; since
there is no occasion, in order to sustain the nar-


rative of Muses, to calculate whether the in


e


te Ra nat fe as


EXODUS,


,
between the ebb and the flow of the tide afforded
sufficient time for the Iaraclites to cross the bed
of the sea, a distauce of twelve geographical
miles. The passage did not depend on ebb or
flow. It was not a question of mere time. The
right hand of the Lord was at work.

It appears then very clear, by comparing Dr.
Robinson with Moses and with facts, that his
‘extraordinary ebb, brought about by natural
means,’ could not have produced such a state
of things as he supposes, still less such a state of
things as the miracle requires. The only resource
is to deny the miracle, and disown the eutire
account. If this bold course is declined, then
the passage at Suez or across the arm must be
given up in favour of one lying far more to the
south.

These strictures on Dr., Robinson's hypothesis
are in no way prompted by any previous leaning
toa preference in favour of the passaze at Rus
Attaka, for they were penned exclusively under
the influence of the scriptural narrative. And
if authority is needed as against one who has
been on the spot, what has already been given
from Sicard might be deemed sufficient, especially
when it so obviously agrees with the tenor of the
accounts found in Exodus and in Josephus. But
other witnesses are not wanting. Mr. Blumhardt,
in his missionary visit to Abyssinia, passed
through Suez (Oct. 1836, see Church Missionary
Record, No. 1, Jan. 1838), and furnishes some
temurks on the subject. ‘The Red Sea at Suez
is exceedingly narrow, and in my opinion it can-
not be that the Israelites here experienced the
power and love of God in their passage through
the Red Sea. The breadth of the sea is at pre-
sent scarcely a quarter of au hour by Suez. Now
if this be the part which they crossed, how is it
possible that all the army of Pharauh, with his
chariots, could have been drowned? I am rather
inclined to believe that the Israelites experienced
that wonderful deliverance about thirty miles
lower down, This opinion is also strengthened
by most of the Eastern churches, and the Arabs,
who believe that the Israelites reached the oppo-
site shore at a place called Gebel Pharaon, eek
on that account has received this name. If we
accept this opinion, it agrees very well with the
Scripture.’ Still more important is the evidence
of Dr. Olin (Travels in the East, New York,
1843). Many of his remarks we have antici-
pated in our observations on Robinson. — Dr.
Olin, however, agrees with Robinson in fixing
Etham ‘on the border of the wilderness which
stretches along the eastern shore of the arm of the
sea which runs up above Suez.’ At this point
he says the Hebrews were commanded to turn.
They turned directly southward and marched to
an exposed position, hemmed in completely by
the sea, the desert, and Mount Attaka. A false
confidence was thus excited in Pharaoh, and the
deliverance was made the more signal and the
mre impressive alike to tie Israelites and to
Egypt. Adinitting the possibility that the sea at
Suez may have been wider and deeper than it is
now, Olin remarks, ‘it must still have been very
dificult, if not impossible, for the army of Israel,
encumbered with infants and aged people, as
well as with flocks, to. pass over (near Suez) in
the face of their enemies’ (i. 346). Besides, the
peculiarities of the place must have had a ten-


EXODUS 670


dency to disgnise the character and impair the
effect of the miracle. The passage made at the
intervention of Moses was kept open all night,
The Egyptians followed the Hebrews to the
midst of the sea, when the sea engulphed them.
‘The entire night seems to have been consumed
in the passage, It is hardly credible that so
much time should have been consumed in cross-
ing near Suez, to accomplish which one or two
hours would have been sufficient.’ ‘Nor is it
conceivable that the large army of the Egyptians
should have been at once within the banks of so
narrow a channel, The more advanced troo
would have reached the opposite shore before ta
rear had entered the sea; and yet we know that
all Pharaoh's chariots and horsemen followed to
the midst of the sea, and, together with all the
host that came in after them, were covered with
the returning waves’ (i. 345). Preferring the

sitiun at Ras Attaka, Olin states that the gulf
is here ten or twelve miles wide. ‘The valley
expands into a considerable plain, bounded by
lofty precipitous mountains on the rigtt and left,
and by the sea in front, and is sufficiently ample
to accummodate the vast number of human
beings who composed the two armies.’ ‘ An east
wind would act almost directly across the gulf.
It would be unable to co-operate with an ebb tide
in removing the waters—no objection certainly
if we admit the exercise of God's miraculous
agency ;' but a very great impediment in the
way of any ratioualistic hypothesis. ‘The chan-
nel is wide enough to allow of the movements
described by Moses, and the time, which em-
braced an entire night, was sufficient for the
convenient march of a large army over such a
distance.’ § The opinion which fixes the point of
transit in the valley or wady south of Mount
Attaka derives conlirmation from the names still
attached to the principal objects in this locality.
Upon this point I acknowledge my obligations
to the Rev. Mr. Leider, of Cairo, who has spent
more than ten years in Egypt, is familiar with
the Arabic language, and has devoted much at-
tention to this vexed question. He recently
spent several days in this neighbourhood in
making investigations and inquiries in reference
to the passage of the Israelites. Jebel Attaka,
according to Mr. Leider, who only cunfirms the
statements of former travellers, means in the lan-
guage of the Arabs “the Mount of Deliverance.”
Baideah or Bedcah, the name of this part of the
valley, means “the Miraculous,” while Wady el
Tih means “the Valley of Wanderings.” Pi-
hahiroth, where Moses was commanded to encamp,
is rendered by scholars “ the mouth of Hahiroth,”
which answers well to the deep gorge south of
Attaka, but not at all to the broad plain about
Suez’ (i. 350).

Other parts of the line of march pursued by
the Israelites will be found treated of under the
heads Manna, Sinar, Wanpgxina.—J. R. B.

EXODUS (Gr. “EfoBos, in the Hebrew canon
nine! mMbw)), the second book of Moses, 60 called
from the principal event recorded in it, namely,
the departure of the Israclites from Egypt. With
this book begins the proper history of that people,
continuing it until heit arrival at Sinai, and the
erection of the sanctuary there. It transports us
in the first instance to Egypt, and the quarter in


680 EXODUS.


which the Israelites were domiciled in that coun-
try. We do not find in the Pentatench a real
history of the people of Israel during this period.
Such a history, in the more strict acceptation of
the term, has no place in an historical sketch of
the kingdom of God, where the mere description
of the situation and condition of the people is all
that is requisite. From that deerpiyg we learn
satisfactorily how the people of the Lord were
negatively prepared for the great object which
God had decreed with regard to them. This is
the important theme of the history of the Penta-
tench during the whole long period of tour hun-
dred years. Exodus is very cireumstantial in its
account of the life of Moses, which, instead of
partaking of the character of usual biography,
manifests in all its details a decided aim of
evincing how, by the miraculous dispensation of
the Lord, Moses had been even from his earliest
years prepared and reared to become the chosen
instrument of God. In this book is developed,
with particular clearness, the summons of Moses
to his sacred office, which concludes the first
important section of his life (Exod. i.-vi.). No
human choice and no self-will, but au immediate
call from Jehovah alone, could decide in so im-
pee an affair. Jehovah reveals himself to him

y his covenant-name (i711"), and vouchsafes him
the power to work miracles such as no man before
him had ever wrought. It was not the natural
disposition and bent of his mind that induced
Moses to accept the office, but solely his sub-
mission to the express will of God, his onnp1ENcR
alone, that influenced him, the Lawaiver, to
undertake the mission. The external relation of
Moses to his people is also clearly detined (comp.
ez. gr. Exod. vi. 14, sq.). This furnishes the firm
basis on which is founded his own as well as
Aaron's personal authority, and the respect for his
permanent regulations. A new section (vii.-xv.)
then gives a very detailed account of the manner
in which the Lord glorified himself in Israel, and
released the people from the land of bondage.
This forms a tuming-point in the narrative—with
it bezins the real history of the people of God.
Every day affords here an eternal demonstration
of divine grace, justice, and majesty. The rela-
tion of the theocracy to heathenism, the representa-
tive of which is Egypt, is here illustrated by facts.
The history contained in Exodus may very fairly
be described as the history of the triumph of
Israel, or rather of Israel's God, over the heathen
power, which appears here in its innermost spirit
of revolt against God. The world is conquered
prozressively and with increased force; and the
prssover manifests on the one hand the annihila-
tioa of worldly power, while on the other hand it
is the celebration of the birth-day of the people of
God. This section of the history then concludes
with a trinmphal song, celebrating the victory of
Isravl, In ch. xvi.-xviii. we find the introduction
to the second principal part of this book, in which
is sketched the marifestation of God in the midst
of Isracl, as weil as the promulgation of the law
itself, in its original and fundamental features.
Tiis preparatory section thus furnishes us with
additional proof of the special care of God for his
people; how he provided their food and water,
and how he protected them from the assaults of
the'r foes. In ch. xv. 22, sq., not all, but only the
remarkable resting-places are mentioned, where


EXODUS.


Jehovah took special care of his people. In’ the
account (aviii.) of the civil regulations framed by
the advice of Jethro, a strong line of demarcation
is drawn between the changeable institutions of
man and the divine legislation which began then
to be established, and which thenceforth claims
by far the greatest part of the work. At the com-
mencement of the legislation is a brief summary
of the laws, with the decalogue at their head (xix-
xxiii). The decalogue is the true fundamental
Jaw, bearing within itself the germ of the entire
legislation. The other legal definitions are ouly
further developments of the decalogue. These
definitions manifest the power and extent of the
law itself, showing what an abundance of new
regulations result from the simple and few words
of the decalogue. Upon this basis the covenantis
concluded with the Israelites, in which God re.
veals himself in agreement with the understanding
and the exigencies of the people. Not until this
covenant was completed did it become possible
for the Israelites to enter into a communion with
God, confirmed and consecrated by laws and offer
ings, and thereby to receive further revelations
from him (ch. xxiv.). Whatsoever after this, in
the twenty-fifth and in the following chapter, is
communicated to the people, concerns the dvell-
ing of God in the midst of Israel. By this
dwelling of God among Israel it is intended to
show, that the communion is permanent on the
part of God, and that on the part of the people it
is possible to persevere in communian with God.
Consequently there follows the description of the
ginctuary, the character of which is symbolical.
The sacred symbols are, however, not so much
expressed in formal declarations, as contained in
the whole tenor of the descriptions. The sybolics
begin with the central point, the holy of holies,
which unites in itself the impeaching law and the
redeeming symbol) of divine mercy, and thus sets
forth the reconciliation of God with the people.
This is followed by the description of the sanc-
tuary, representing those blessings which through
the holy of holies were communicated. to the sub-
jects of the theocracy, and serving as a peryetual
monument of Isracl’s exalted destiny, pointing at
the same time to the means of attaining it. Last
comes the de-cription of the fore-court, symbolising
the participation of the people in those blessings,
and their sanctitied approach to the Lord. The de-
scription then proceeds from the sanctuary to the
persons officiating in it, the priests, characterized
both by their various costumes (xxviii.), and the
manner of their inauguration (xxix.). ‘Then fol-
lows, as a matter of course, the description of the
service in that sanctuary and by those priests, but
merely in its fundamental features, confining
itself simply to the burnt and_ incense offerings,
indicating by the former the preparatory inferior
service, and by the latter the complete and higher
oftice of the sacerdotal function, But, by contn-
buting to the means of establishing public worship,
the whole nation shares in it; and therefore the
description of the officiating persous very properly
concludes with the people (xxx.). Asa suitable
sequel to the former follows the description of the
use and nature of the implements requisite for the
service of the priests, such as the brass laver for
sacred ablutions, the y:reparation of the perfume
and anointing oil (xxx. 17-38). These reg tations
being made, men endowed with the Spirit of God


EXODUS.


were also to be appointed for making the sacred
tabernacle and all its furniture (xxxi. 1-2). The
description of the sanctuary, priesthood, and
mode of worship, is next followed by that of the
sacred times and periods (xxxi. 12, sq.). Of the
sacred times there is here only appointed the Sub-
bath, in which the other regulations are contained
as in their germ. God having delivered to Moses
the tables of the law, the construction and arrange-
ment of the tabernacle might thus at once have
been begun, had its further progress not been in-
terrupted by an act of idolatry on the part of the
people, and their punishinent for that offence,
which form the subject of the narrative in ch.
xxxii.-xxxiv. Contrary and in opposition to all
that had been done by Jehovah for and in the
presence of Israel, the subjective formidable apos-
tacy of the latter manifests itself in a most
melancholy manner, as an ominously significant
Pupietic fact, which is incessautly repeated in the
history of subsequent generations, The narrative
of it is therefore closely connected with the fure-
going accounts—Jehovah’s mercy and gracious
faithfulness on the one hand, and Israel's bare-
faced ingratitude on the other, being intimately
connected. This connection furms the leading
idea of the whole history of the theocracy. It is
not till after the narrative of this momentous event
that the account of the construction and com-
pletion of the tabernacle can proceed (xxxv.-xl.),
which account becomes more circumstantial in
Proportion as the subject itself is of greater im-
portance. Above all, it is faithfully shown that
all was done according to the commands of
Jehovah.

In the descriptive history of Exodus a fixed
plan, in conformity with the principles above
stated, is consistently and visibly carried through
the whote of the book, thus giving us the surest
guarantee for the unity of buth the book and
its author. In vain have several modern critics
attempted to discover here also sundry sources and
manifold original documents, or even fragments,
but loosely connected with each other (comp. ez. gr.
De Wette, Introd. to the Old Testament, § 151).
Such an assumption proves in this case in par-
ticular to be nothing more than a last resource of
argument against the Mosaical composition of
the book. De Wette has of late been induced, in
favour of this hypothesis, to declare that in sume
portions of Exodus the source is uncertain, and
that there took place a mixture of both sources,
the Mosaical and the non-Mosaical (comp. Pgn-
ratgucnH). Nor are other modern critics more
successful in their attempts to show in this book
traces of a post-Mosaical origin. Among the
passages quoted in support of that assertion is
xxiii. 9, the law contained in which seems to imply
a later state of the people during their settled
abode in Palestine. Regulations about strangers
were, however, of importance during their abode
in tne desert, especially since a number of Egyp-
tians had joined the Israelites, and stood to them
iu the relation of strangers. Chap. xvi. 36, also,
is quoted in favour of the above opinion, because
the omer is designated therein as the tenth part
of an ephah, implying that changes had in later
times been made in the Hebrew measures. But
they forget that the Hebrew word Wp does not
at all indicate a definite measure, but merely
a vessel, the size of which it was therefore neces-


EXODUS. 681


sary to specify by giving its exact measurement.
In vi. 26, 27, also, they think they recognise the
hand of a later author, who refers to Moses and
Aaron, and describes their character. The least
attention, however, to the preceding genealogy,
and the descriptive style of the Pentateuch in
general, must soon convince them that even a
contemporary writer might have spoken in the
way which Moses does in these passages.

For neological criticism it was of the utmost
importance to stamp this book as a later pro-
duction, the miracles contained in its first part
but too manifestly clashing with the principles in
which that criticism takes its starting-point. Its
votaries therefore have endeavoured to show that
those miracles were but mythological fictions
which had been gradually developed in process of
time, so that the very composition of the book itself
must necessarily have been of a later date. Neither
do we wonder at such attempts and efforts, since
the very essence and central point of the accounts
of the miracles given in that book are altogether
at variance with the principles of rationalism
and its criticism, which can by no means admit
the rise and formation of a people under such
miraculous circumstances, such peculiar belief,
and, in a religious point of view, such an in-
dependent existence, at the side of all the other
nations of antiquity. Indeed, the spiritual sub-
stance of the whole, the divine idea which per-
yades and combines all its details, is in itself
such a miracle, such a peculiar and wondrous
phenomenon, as to lend natural support and un-
deniable confirmation to the isolated and physical
wonders themselves; so that it is impossible to
deny the latter without creating a second and
new wonder, an unnatural course in the Jewish
history. Nor is that part of the book which con-
tains the miracles deficient in numerous historicah
proofs in verification of them. As the events of
this history are laid in Egypt and Arabia, we
have ample opportunity of testing the accuracy
of the Mosaical accounts, and surely we find no-
where the least transgression against Egyptian in-
stitutions and customs; on the contrary, it is most
evident that the author had a thorough know-
ledge of the Egyptian institutions and the spirit
that pervaded them. Exodus contains a mass
of incidents and detailed descriptions whieh have
gained new force from the modern discoveries
and researches in the tield of Egyptian antiquities
(comp. Hengstenberg, Die Buches Mosis und
A2gypten, Berlin, 1841). The description of the
passage of the Israelites through the desert also
evinces such a thorough familiarity with the
localities as to excite the utmost respect of scrn-
pulous and scientitie travellers of our own time
for the authenticity of the Pentateuch (comp.
ex. gr. Raumer, Der Zug der Israeliten cus
LE gypten nach Canaan, Leipz. 1837). Nor is the
passover-festival, its rise and nature, less confirm-
atory of the incidents connected with it, ifwe have
not recourse to the desperate expedient—as ration-
alistic criticism really does—of ascribing to that
festival a quite different signification originally,
namely, a purely physical one, an opinion which
brings its advocates in contlict with the whole of
the Israelitish history. The arrangements of the
tabernacle, described in the second part of Exodus,
likewise throw a favourable light un the historical
authenticity of the preceding events; and


682 EXORCISM.


least tenable of all the objections against it are,
that the architectural arrangements of the taber-
nacle were too artificial, and the materials and
richness too costly and precious for the condition
and position of the Jews at that early period, &c.
But the critics seem to have overlooked the fact
that the Israelites of that period were a people who
had come ont from Egypt, a people possessing
wealth, Egyptian culture and arts, which we ad-
mire even now, in the works which have descended
to us from ancient Egvpt; so that it cannot
seem strange to see the Hebrews in possession of
the materials or artistical knowledge requisite for
the construction of the tabernacle. Moreover, the
establishment of a TENT as a sanctuary for the
Hebrews can only be explained from their abode in
the desert, being in perfect unison with their then
roving and numadic life; and it is therefore a
decided mistake in those critics who give to the
sacred tent a later date than the Mosaical ;
while other critics (such as De Wette, Von
Bohlen, Vatke) proceed much more consistently
with their views, by considering the narrative of
the construction of a sacred tabernacle to be a
mere fiction in Exodus, introduced for the purpose
of ascribing to the temple of Solomon a higher
antiquity and authority. However, independently
of the circumstance that the temple necessarily
presupposes the existence of a fhr older analogous
sanctuary, the whole process of such a forced
hypothesis is but calculated to strike cut a por-
tion from the Jewish history on purely arbitrary
grounds, The extremely simple and sober style
and views throughout the whole narrative afford
a sure guarantee for its authenticity and origin-
ality. Not a vestige of a poetical hand can
be discovered in Exod. xviii; not even the
most sceptical critics can deny that we tread
here on purely historical ground. The same
may fairly be maintained of ch. xx.-xxiii. How
is it then possible that one and the same book
should contain so strange a mixture of truth
and fiction as its opponents assert to be found
in it?) The most striking proofs against such an
assumption are, in particular, the accounts, such
as in Exod. xxxii. sq., where the most vehement
complaints are made against the Israelites, where
the high-priest of the covenant-people participates
most shamefully in the idolatry of his people.
All these incidents are described in plain and
clear terms, without the least vestive of later em-
bellishments and false extolling of former ages.
The Pentateuch, some critics assert, is written for
the interest and in favour of the hierarchy; but
can there be more anti-hierarchical details than
are found in that book? The whole representation
indicates the strictest impartiality and truth. On
the literature of Exodus, see Puntatsucn.—
7 H. A.C. H.

EXORCISM anv EXORCIST (éfopmiorts,
Acts xix. 13). The belief in demoniacal pos-
sessions, which may be traced in almost every
nation, has always been attended by the professed
ability, on the part of some individuals, to release
the unhappy victims from their calamity. In
Greece men of no less distinction than both Epi-
curus (Diog. Laer. x. 4) and Aischines, were sons
of women who lived by this art; and both were
bitterly reproached, the one by the Stoics, and the
other by his great rival orator Demosthenes (De
Cor.), for having assisted their parents in these


EXORCISM.


practices. The allusions to the practice of exor
cism among the Jews, contained both in their
own authors and in the New Testament, are too
well known to render quotations necessary. In
some instances this power was considered as a
divine gift; in others it was thought to be ac-
quired hy investigations into the nature of demons
and the qualities of natural productions, as herbs,
stones, &c., and of drugs compounded of them;
by the use of certain forms of adjurations, invo-
cations, ceremonies, and other observances In-
decd the various forms of exorcism, alluded to in
authors of all nations, are innumerable, varying
from the hloody human sacrifice down to the fumes
of brimstone, &c. &c. The power of expelling
demons Josephus places among the endowments
of Sulomon, and relates that he left behind
him the manner of using exorcisms by which
they drive away demons (for the pretended frag-
ments of these books see Fabric. Cod. Pseud. Ket.
Test. p. 1054). He declares that he had seena
man, named Fleazar, releasing people tlat were
demoniacal, in the presence of espeaian, his
sons, captains, and the whole multitude of his
suldiers. He describes the manner of cure thus:
‘He put a ring that had a rout of one of those
sorts mentioned by Solomon to the nostrils of the
demoniac ; after which he drew out the demon
through his nostrils, and when the man fell
down he adjured him to return no more, making
still mention of Solomon and. reciting the incan
tations he composed.’ He further adds, that when
Eleazar would persuade and demonstrate to the
spectators that he had such a power, he set a cup
or basin full of water a little way off, and com-
manded the demon as he went out of the mau to
overturn it, and thereby to let the spectators know
he had left the man (Anttg. viii. 2, § 5). He also
describes the mode of obtaining thie rot Baaras,
which, he says, ‘if it be only brought to sick per-
sons, it quickly drives away the demons, under cir
cumstances which, for their strangeness, may vie
with any prescription in the whole science of exot-
cism (De Bell. Jud. vii. 6.§3). Among all the
references to exorcism, as practised by the Jews, in
the New Testament (Matt. xii. 27; Mark ix. 38;
Luke ix. 49, 50), we find only one instance which
affords any clue to the means employed (Acts
xix. 13); from which passage it appears that certain
professed exorcists took upon them to call over a
demoniac the name of the Lord Jesus, saying,
©Weadjure you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth.’
Their proceeding seems to haye been in conformity
with the well-known opinions of the Jews in those
days, that miracles might. be wrought by invoking
the names of the Deity, or angels, or patriaichs, &¢4
as we learn from Justin Martyr, Irenaus, Origen,
&e., and Lucian (Frag. p. M1). The epithet
applied to these exorcists (aeprepxouevar, Vulg. de
circumcuniibus Jud@is) wdicates that they were
travelling mountebanks, who, beside skill in
medicine, pretended to the knowledge of magic.
It is evident that the opinion we form of exorcism
will be materially allected by our views ef de
moniacal possessions. [Dewon]. The neutral
course we have pursued in regurd to both these
subjects will be completed upon observing, that
the oflice of the exorcist is not mentioned by Paul
in his enumeration of the miraculous gifts (1 Cor.
xii. 9). though it was a power which he possessed
hinse!f, and which the Saviour bad promised


EYE.


Mark xvi. 17; Matt. x. 8). Mosheim says that
the particular order of exorcists did not exist till
the close of the third century, and he ascribes its
introduction to the prevalent fancies of the
Gnostics (Cen. iii. 11, c.4). Fairness also induces
us to notice Jahn’s remark upon the silence of
St. John himself, in his Gospel, on the subject of
possessions, although he introduces the Jews as
speaking in the customary way respecting demons
and demoniacal possessions, and although he often
speaks of the sick who were healed by the Saviour;
coupled with the fact that Jolu wrote his Gospel
in Asia Minor, where medical science was very
flourishing, and where it was generally known
that the diseases attributed to demons were merely
natural diseases (Jalin, Archdol., large German
ed. pt. i. vol. ii. 232, pp. 477-480; see also Lo-
meirus, De Vet. Gent. Lustra.; Bekker, Le
Blonde enchanté ; Whitby’s note on Matt. xii.
Peat F. D.
XPIATION, [Aronement; Sacriricz.]
EXPIATION, DAY OF. [Aronemsnr,
DAY oF.]


EYE (}'Y). In most languages this import-
ant organ is used by figurative application; as
the symbol of a large number of objects and
ideas. In the East such applications of the word
‘eye’ have always been uncommonly numerous ;
and they were so among the Hebrews. It may be
serviceable to distinguish the following uses of the
word, few. of which are common in this country,
unless so far as they have become so through the
translation of the Bible.

1. A fountain. This use of the word has
already been indicated [Ain]. It probably ori-
ginated from the eye being regarded as the foun-
tain of tears.

2. Colour, as in the phrase ‘and the eye
(colour) of the woman was as the eye (colour)
of bdellium’ (Num. xi. 7). This originated
perhaps in the eye being the part of the body
which exhibits different colours in different per-
sons.

3. The surface, as ‘the surface (eye) of the
land’ (Exod. x. 5, 15; Num. xxii. 5, 11):
the last is the passage which affords most sanction
to the notion that ]'Y ain means in some places
‘face.’ This is the sense which our own and
other versions give to ‘eye to eye’ (Num. xiv.
14, &c.), translated ‘face to face.” The phrases
are indeed equivalent in meaning ; but we are not
thence to conclude that the Hebrews meant ‘ face’
when they said ‘eye,’ but that they chose the
oppusition of the eyes, instead of that of the faces,
to express the general meaning. Hence, therefore,
we may object to the extension of the signitica-
tion in such passages as 1 Sam. xvi. 12, where
© beautiful eyes" O°3*Y 75° is rendered ‘fair coun-
tenance.’

4. It is also alleged that ‘ between (or about) the
eyes’ means the forehead, in Exod. xiii, 9, 16,
and the forepart of the head, in Deut. vi. 85
but the passages are sufficiently intelligible if un-
derstood to denote what they literally express; and
with reference to the last it may be remarked that
there is hair about the eyes as well as on the head,
the removal of which might as well be inter-
dicted as au act of lamentation.

5. In Cant. iv. 9, ‘eye’ seems to be used poet-
ically for ‘look,’ as is usual in most languages;


EYE. 683


© Thou hast stolen my heart with one of thy looks’
eyes).

: 6. Xn Prov. xxiii. 31, the term ‘eye’ is applied

to the beads or bubbles of wine, when poured out,
but our version preserves the sense of ‘ colour.’

To these some other phrases, requiring notice
and explanation, may be added :

‘Before the eyes’ of any one, meaning in his
presence ; or, as we should say, ‘before his face’
(Gen. xxiii. 11, 18; Exod. iv. 30).

‘In the eyes’ of any one, means what ap-
pears to be sv or so in his individual judgment
or opinion; and is equivalent to ‘seeming’ or
‘appearing’ (Gen. xix. 8; xxix. 20; 2 Sam.
x. li).

‘To set the eyes’ upon any one, is usually to
regard him with favour (Gen. xliv. 21; Job xxiv.
23; Jer. xxxix. 12); but it occurs in a bad
sense, as of looking with anger, in Amos ix. 8.
But anger is more usually expressed by the con-
trary action of turning the eyes away.

As many of the passions, such as envy, pride,
pity, desire, are expressed by the eye; so, in the
Scriptural style, they are often ascribed to that
organ. Hence such phrases as ‘evil eye’ (Matt.
xx. 15); ‘bountiful eye’ (Prov. xxii. 9);
‘haughty eyes’ (Prov. vi. 17); ‘wanton eyes’
(Isa. iii. 16); ‘eyes full of adultery’ (2 Pet. ii.
14); ‘the lust of the eyes’ (1 John ii. 16). This
last phrase is applied by some to lasciviousness,
by others to covetousness; but it is best to take
the’ expression in the most extensive sense, as
denoting a craving for the gay vanities of this life
(Comp. Ezek. xxiv. 25). In the same chapter
of Ezekiel (ver. 16), ‘the desire of thy eyes’ is
put not for the prophet’s wife directly, as oflen
understood, but for whatever is ones greatest
solace and delight; which in this case wis the
pee wife—but which in another case might

ve been sumething eke.

In Zech. iv. 10, the angels of the Lord are
called ‘his eyes,’ as being the executioners of his
judgments, and watching and attending for his
glory. From some such association of ideas, the
favourite ministers of state in the Persian mo-
narchy were called ‘the king's eyes.’ So, in
Num. x. 31, ‘to be instead of eyes’ is equi-
valent to being a prince, to rule and guide the
people. This occurs also in the Greek poeta,
as in Pindar (Olymp. ii. 10), where ‘ the eye of
Sicilia’ is given as a title to one of the chief
men in Sicily, showing his power. In like man-
ner, in the same poet, ‘the eye of the army’
stands for a good commander ( Olymp., vi. 16).

The expression in Psalm cxxiii. 2, ‘As the
eyes of servants look unto the hands of their mas-
ters,’ has suggested a number of curious illustra-
tions from Oriental history and customs, tending
to show that masters, especially when in the pre
sence of others, are in the habit of communicating
to their servants orders and intimations by certain
motions of their hands, which, although scarcely
Noticeable by other persons present, are clearly
understood and promptly acted upon by the at-
tendants. This custom keeps them with their
attention bent upon the hand of their master,
watching its slightest motions.

The celebrated passage ‘Why beholdest thou
the mote that is in thy brother's eye, and consi-
derest not the beam that is in thine own eye’
(Matt. vii. 3), has occasioned much waste of ex


684 EYE.


planation. It seems much better to understand
it as ah: lical proverbial expression, than to
contend that as 3oxés cannot literally mean ‘a
beam,’ it must here signify something else, a
disease, a thorn, &c. (see Doddridge and Camp-
bell, in Joc.). As a proverbial phrase, paralle
have been produced abundantly from the Rabbins,
from the fathers, and from the classics.

Respecting blinding the eyes as a punishment,
or political disqualification, see PuNisuMENT.

“PAINTING THE ErRs,’ or rather the eyelids,
is more than once alluded to in Scripture, al-
though this scarcely appears in the Authorized
Version, as our translators, unaware of the custom,
usually render ‘eye’ by ‘face,’ although ‘eye’
is still preserved in the margin. So Jezebel
‘painted her eyes,’ literally, ‘put her eyes in
paint,’ before she showed herself publicly (2 Kings
ix. 30). This action is forcibly expressed by
Jeremiah (iv. 30), ‘though thou rentest thine
eyes with painting.’ Ezekiel (xxiii. 40) also
represents this as a part of high dress—‘ For whom
thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and
deckedst thyself with ornaments.’ The custom is
also, very pussibly, alluded to in Prov. vi. 25—
§ Lust not after her beauty in thine heart, neither
let her take thee swith her eyelids.’ It certainly
is the general impression in Western Asia that
this embellishment adds much to the languishing
expression and seducement of the eyes, although
Europeans find some difficulty in appreciating
the beauty which the Orientals find in this adorn-
ment.


285.


The following description of the process is from
Mr. Lane's excellent work on the Modern Egyp-
tians (i. 41-43): ‘The eyes, with very few ex-
ceptions, are black, large, and of a long almond
form, with long and beautiful lashes and an
exquisitely soft, bewitching expression : eyes more
beautiful can hardly be conceived: their charm-
ing effect is much heightened by the concealment
of the other features (however pleasing the latter
may be), and is rendered stil] more striking by a
pace universal among the females of the

igher and middle classes, and very common
among those of the lower orders, which is that of
blackening the edge of the eyelids, both above
and below the eyes, with a black powder called
kohhl. This is a collyrium, commonly composed
of the smoke-black which is produced by burning
a kind of kd¢m—an aromatic resin—a species of
frankincense, used, I am told, in preference to
the better kind of frankincense, as being cheaper,
and equally good for the purpose. Kohhl is also
pared of the smoke-black produced from burn-
ing the shells of almonds. These two kinds,


EZEKIEL.


though believed to be beneficial to the eyes, mr
used merely for ornament; but there are seven!
kinds used for their real or supposed medical
roperties ; icularly the powder of seve
Kinds of lead ore; to which are often added sr-
cocolla, long pepper, sugar-candy, fine dust of
Venetian sequin, and sometimes powdered pearl.
Antimony, it is said, was formerly used for paint-
ing the edges of the eyelids. The kobhl is applied
with a small probe, of wood, ivory, or silver,
tapering towards the end, but blunt: this is
moistened, sometimes with rose-water, then dippel
in the powder, and drawn along the edges of the
eyelids: it is called mir’wed; and the glas
vessel in which the kohh] is kept, mook’ hhofah,
The custom of thus oramenting the eyes
vailed among both sexes in Egypt in very ancient
times: this is shown by the sculptures and paint-
ings in the ne and tombs of this country;
and kohhl-vessels, with the probes, and even with
the remains of the black powder, have often been
found in the ancient tombs. I have two inmy
possession. But, in many cases, the ancient mode
of ornamenting with the kohhl was a little dif-
ferent from the modern. I have, however, sen
this ancient mode practised in the present day in
the neighbourhood of Cairo; though I only re-
member to have noticed it in two instances. The
same custom existed among the Greek ladies,
and among the Jewish women in early times.’
Sir J. G. Wilkinson alludes to this in
Mr. Lane's book, and admits that the lengthened
form of the ancient Egyptian eye, represented in
the paintings, was probably uced by this
means. ‘Such (he adds) is the effect described
by Juvenal (Sat. ii. 93), Pliny (Ep. vi. 2), and
other writers who notice the custom among the
Romans. At Rome it was considered disgraceful
for men to adopt it, as at present in the East, ex-
cept medicinally,* but if we may judge from the
similarity of the eyes of men and women in the
intings at Thebes, it ap to have been used
y both sexes among 94 ancient Egyptians
Many of the kohl-bottles have been found in the
tombs, together with the bodkin used for appl yimg
the moistened powder. They are of various mate-
rials, usually of stone, wood or pottery ; sometimes
composed of two, sometimes of three or four sepa-
rate cells, apparently containing each a mixture,
differing slightly in its quality and hue from the
other three. Many were simple round tubes
vases, or small boxes ; come were ornamented with
the figure of an ape or monster, supposed to assist
in holding the bottle between his arma, while the
lady dipped into it the pin with which she painted
her eyes ; and others were in imitation of a column
made of stone, or rich porcelain of the choicest
manufacture’ (Ancient Egyptians, iii. 382).


EZEKIEL CONDI = DN PIM, [thom] God


will strengthen, Gesen. Thes., or by Pim, God
will prevail, Rosenm. Schol. ; Sept. "lefexchd),
one of the greater prophets, whose writings,

in the Hebrew and Alexandrian canons, are
placed next to those of Jeremiah. He was the
son of Busi the priest (ch. i, 3), and, according
to tradition, was a native of Sarera (é« 7%
a eee


* This is not altogether correct. In Persia it
is as common among the men as the women.—J-


EZEKIEL.
Zapnpd, Carpzov, Introd., pt. iii. p. 200). Of


his early history we have no authentic informa-
tion. We first find him in the country of Meso-
potamia, ‘by the river Chebar’ (ch. i. 1), now
Avhabir, a stream of considerable length flowing
into the Euphrates near Circesium, Kirkesia
(Rosenmiiller’s Bibl. Geog. of Central Asia in
Bibl. Cabinet, vol. ii. p. 180). On this river Ne-
buchadnezzar founded a Jewish colony from the
captives whom he brought from Jerusalem when
he besieged it in the eighth year of king Jchoia-
chim (2 Kinzs xxv. 14). This colony (or at
least a part of it) was settled at a place called
Tel-Abib, which has been thought by some to an-
swer to the Thallaba of D'’Anville (Rosenm., Bibl.
Geoz., Vol. ii. p. 188); and it seems to have been
here that the prophet fixed his residence. Jose-
plus (datig. x. 6. § 3) states, that he was a youth
‘mais Gv) when carried away captive; but, as
Heivernick (Commentar tuber Exechiel, Erlangen,
1843, p. vill.) justly remarks, the matured cha-
racter of a priest which appears in his writings,
and hig intimate acquaintance with the temple
service, render such a supposition highly impro-
lable. He received his commission as a prophet.
in the fifty year of his captivity (a.c. 594). Maw

critics suppose (from ch. i. 1) that this event took
place in the 30th year of his age. Thus Carpzoy
<p. 201) understands the expression. There is,
however, little reason to think that this is the
epoch intended. The more probable opinion
stems to be that the reckoning is from the com-
mencement of the reign of Nabopolassar, the father


of Nebuchadnezzar (Scaliger, De Emendatione ,


Temporum, Lug. Bat. 1598, p. 374; Rosenm,
Schol. in Ezech.; Kichhorn, Einleitung in d. A.
T., vol. iii. p. 188, 3rd edit. ; Winer, Bibl. Real-
trorterbuch, art. ‘Ezech."), Others (as Ussher, Hi-
vernick, pp. 12, 13) take the era to be that of the
finding the book of the law in the 18th year of
Josiah, which is nearly synchronous with the
former. The question is not of much importance
in a chronological point of view, since the date is
sufficiently fixed by the reference he makes to the
year of the captivity, Ezekiel is remarkably
silent respecting his personal history; the only
event which he 1ecords (and that merely in its
connection with his prophetic office) is the death
of his wife in the ninth year of the captivity (ch.
xxiv, 18). He continued to exercise the pro-
phetic office during a period of at least twenty-
two years, that is, to the 27th year of the captivity
(ch. xxix. 17); and it appears probable that he
remained with the captives by the river Chebar
dariug the whole of his life. That he exercised a
very commanding influence over the people is
manifest from the numerous intimations we have
of the elders coming to inquire of him what mes-
sage God had sent through him (ch. viii. by xiv. 1;
xx, 13 xxxili. 31, 32, &c.). Carpzov (pp. 203, 4)
relates several traditions respecting his death and
sepulchre, principally from the treatise De Vitis
Prophet., falsely attributed to Epiphanius. It is
there said that he was killed at Babylon by the
chief of the people (6 iryovpevos Tod Aaod) on ac-
count of his having reproved him for idolatry ;
that he was buried in the field of Maur (év aype
Maovp) in the tomb of Shem and Arphaxad, and
that his sepulchre was still in existence. Such
traditions are obviously of very little value.
weckiel was contemporary with Jeremiah and


EZEKIEL. 685


Daniel. The former had sustained the prophetic
office during a period of thirty-four years before
Ezekiel’s first predictions, and continued to pro-
phesy for six or seven years after. It appears
probable that the call of Ezekiel to the monies
office was connected with the communication of
Jeremiah’s predictions to Babylon (Jer. li. 59),
which took place the year preceding the first reve-
lation to Ezekiel (Hiivernick, p.ix). The greater
part of Daniel's predictions are of a later dale
than those of Ezekiel; but it appears that his
piety and wisdom had become proverbial even in
the early part of Ezekiel’s ministry (ch. xiv. 14,
16; xxviii. 3).

Most critics have remarked the vigour and sur-
passing energy which are manifest in the charac-
ter of Ezekiel. The whole of his writings show
low admirably he was fitted, as well by uatural
disposition as by spiritual endowment, tu oppose
the ‘rebellious honse,’ the * people of stubborn front
and hard heart,’ to whom he was sent. The figura-
tive representations which abound throughout his
writings, whether drawn out into lengthened alle-
gory, or expressing matters of fact by means of
symbols, or clothing truths in the garb of enigma,
all testify by their definiteness the vigour of his
conceptions. Things seen in vision are described
with all the minuteness of detail and sharpness
of outline which belong to real existences. But
this characteristic is shown most remarkably in
the entire subordination of his whole life to the
great work to which he was called. We never
meet with him as an ordinary man ; he always acts
and thinks and feelsasa prophet. This energy of
mind developed in the one direction of the pro-
pee ollice is strikingly displayed in the account
1e gives of thedeath of his wile (ch. xxiv. 15-18),
It is the only memorable event of his personal
history which he records, and it is mentioned
merely in reference to his soul-absorbing work.
There is something inexpressibly touching as well
as characteristic in this brief narrative—the ‘de-
sire of his eyes’ taken away with a stroke—the
command not to mourn—and the simple state-
ment, ‘so I spake unto the people in the morning,
and at even my wife died; and I did in the
moming as I was commanded.’ That he pos-
sessed the common sympathies and affections of
humanity is manifest from the beautiful touch of
tenderness with which the narrative is introduced.
We may even judge that a mind so earnest as
his would be more than usually alive to the
feelings of affection when once they had obtained
a place in his heart. He then, who could thus
completely subordinate the strongest interests of
his individual life to the great work of his pro-
phetic office, may well command our admiration,
and be looked upon as (to use Hiivernick’s ex-
pression) ‘a truly gigantic phenomenon.’ It is
interesting to contrast Perlial in this respect with
his contemporary Jeremiah, whose personal his-
tory is continually presented to us in the course
of his writings; and the contrast serves to show
that the peculiarity we are noticing in Ezekiel
belongs to his individual character, and was not
necessarily connected with the gift of prophecy.

That Ezekiel was a poet of no mean order is
acknowledged by almost all critics. Lowth (De
sacra Potsi Hebreorum, ed. J. D. Michaelis,
Gotting. 1770, p. 431) thus sums up his account
of him: ‘In ceteris a plerisque vatibus fortasse


686 EZEKIEL.


superatus ; sed in eo genere ad quod unice videtur
@ natura comparatus, nimirum vi, impetu, pon-
dere, granditate, nemo ex omni scriptorum nu-
Mero eum unquam exquavit.’ Michaelis and
Dathe are the only critics of any eminence (aa
far as we know) who think slightingly of his
poetical genius. The former (to whom Dathe
assents) remarks, ‘Mihi in Ezekiele non subli-
@itas Jaudanda, nedum Isaiana, videtur, ut
. potius in exornandis amplificandisque imaginibus
plus artis et luxurici eum habere dixerim, quam
cum impetu et sublimitate poématis consistere
potest. Perpetuus aliqua ex parte imitator est,
et tamen novus ac suus, non grandis, sed inge-
niosus’ (/b. p. 427). The question is altogether
one of taste, and las, we imagine, been decided
by common consent against Michaelis, He re
marks more truly that Ezekiel lived at a period
when the Hebrew language was declining in
purity, when the si/ver ave was succeeding to the
golden oue. It is, indeed, to the matter rather
than the language of Ezekiel that we are to look for
evidence of poetic genius. His style is often
simply didactic, and he abounds in peculiarities of
expression, Aramaisms, and grammatical anoma-
lies, which, while they give individuality to his
writings, plainly evince the decline of the lan-
guage in which he wrote. An extended account
of such peculiarities is given by Eichhorn (Lin-
leitung in das A. T. vol. iti, p. 196) and
Gesenius (Geschichte der Heb. Sprache u. Schrift,
. 35).
B Th genuineness of the writings of Ezekiel has
been the subject of very little dispute. According
to Jewish tradition duubts were entertained as to
the canonicity of the book on the ground of its
containing some apparent contradictions to the
law, as well as because of the obscurity of many
of its visions. These, however, were removed, it is
said, by Rabbi Hananias, who wrote a com-
mentary on the book, in which all these difficulties
were satisfactorily solved (.Wischna, ed. Surenhu-
sius, Pref. ad Part. iv. AYIY NIDD; Carpzov,
Introd. pt. iii. p. 215); but still, on account of
their obscurity, the visions at the beginning and
close of the book were forbidden to be read by those
who wereunder thirty years of age(Carpzov, p.212).
Some continental critics of the last century have
impugned the canonicity of the last nine chapters,
and have attributed them to some Samaritan or
Hebrew who had returned in later times to the
land of Judza (Oceder, reye Untersuchung uber
einige Bucher des A. T., Hal. Sax. 1771; Vogel,
in his remarks on the above; and Corrodi,
Beleuchtung des Judisch. und Christl. Bibel-
kanons, pt. i, p. 105, quoted by Rosenmuller,
Schol. in Ex. adc. x1.). These objections have
been fully answered by Eichhorn (Einleitung,
vol iii. p. 203), Jahn (Introd. in Lib. Sac. VF,
p. 356), and others. Jahn has also taken notice
of and answered some objections raised by an
anonymous writer in the Monthly Magazine,
1798, to the canonicity of ¢. xxv.-xxxii., xxxv.,
XXXxvi., XXXVili., xxxix. A translation cf Jahn's
arguments will be found in Home's Introd. vol.
iv. p. 222, These and similar objections have so
little weight or probubility that we shall content
ourselves with quoting the general remark of
Gesenius in reference to the whole of Ezekiel's
writings: ‘This book belongs to that not ve
numerous class which, from beginning to en


EZEKIEL.


maintains by means of favourite expressions and
peculiar phrases such a oneness of tone as by that
circumstance alone to prevent any suspicion that
separate portions of it are not genuine’ (Ge
schichte der Heb. Spr. p. 35). The canonicity of
the book of Ezekiel in general is satisfactorily
eStablished by Jewish and Christian authorities.
There is, indeed, no explicit reference to it, o
quotation from it, in the New Testament. Eich
hom (Einlett. p. 218) mentions the following
passages as having apparently a reference to this
book: Rom. ii. 24; comp. Ezek. xxxvi. 2l:
Rom. x. 5; Gal. iii. 12; comp. Ezek. xx. ll:
2 Pet. iii. 4; comp. Ezek. xii. 22; but none of
these are quotations. The closing visions of
Ezekiel are clearly referred to, though not quoted,
in the last chapters of the Apocalypse. The pro-
phet Ezekiel is distinctly referred to by the sen ot
Sirach, ’leCextha bs elder Spaciy BdEns, Hy weber
tev alte em) &puaros xepouBiu (Ecclus. xlix. 5)
and by Josephus (Antig. x. 5. § 1; 6. § 3;
7. § 2; 8. § 2). The book of Ezekiel is
also mentioned as forming part of the canon in
the catalognes of Melito (Eusebius, Hist. Eccles.
iv. 26), Origen (apud Euseb. 7. c. vi. 25), Jerome
(Prologus Galeatus), and the Talmud (Eichhom,
vol. iii, p. 218; vol. i. pp. 126-137). One of
the passages of Jusephus to which we have
referred has occasioned much controversy and
many conjectures, because he seems to affirm that
Ezekiel had written two books of prophecies
Having spoken of Jeremiah and his predictions
of the Babylonian captivity, Josephus adds, 03
udvov BE ovTos mpoebécmice TabTa Tois bxAOS
GAA Kal & xpophrns "leCexindros’ bs paros repl
tovrwv bb0 BiBAla ypdwas KaTéAumev (Antig. x. 0.
§ 1). According to the ordinary and, indeed, as
it would seem, necessary interpretation of this
passage, Ezekiel was the first who wrote t1o books
respecting the Babylonian captivity. The ques.
tion, then, arises, Has one of his bouks beeu lost,
or are the two now joined into one? The former
supposition has been maintained Ly some in order
to account for certain professed quotations from
the prophet Ezekiel of passages which are not
found in his writings at present. Thus Clemens
Romanus (1 Ep. ad Cor. c. 8) refers to sucha
passage, which is giveu more at length by Cle
mens Alexand. (Padagog. i. 10), Thus, again,
Tertullian (De carne Christi. c. 23, p. 394, ed.
Semler) says ‘Legimus apud Ezcchielem de
vacca illa qua peperit et non peperit.” Other
instances may be seen in Fabricius (Codex Pseud-
epigraphus V. T. ed. da. p. 1118), and quoted
from him by Carpzov (Jntrod. pt. iii. p. 20%
Both these critics, however, agree that the most
probable explanation of such references is that
they were derived from Jewish tradition. The
latter hypothesis, that our present book was orgin-
ally two, the second containing the last nine
chapters, has received the support of very many
critics (see Le Moyne, Varia Nucru, t. ii, p. 3325
Carpzov, Introd. p. 208). This view, however
is not without serious difficulties. There is uw
evidence that the book, as at present existing,
was ever considered two; and the testimony of
Josephus himself, that only twenty-two books were
received as sacred (Contr. Apion. i. 8), appear
quite opposed to such a supposition, since in what
ever way the division of the Old Testament into
twenty-two books is made there cannot be twe


ees


ere ike od A Ree | Ce Ca ae tie ee


EZEKIEL.


ont of the number left for Ezekiel. Eichhorn
EFinleitung, vol. iii. p. 146) maintains that it is
eremiah of whom Josephus speaks, a position to
which we should at once assent if we could with
him consider the words $s rp@ros as equivalent
to 8 38 xparos. If this is what Josephus meant,
we must suppose some corruption of his text.
The central point of Ezekiel’s predictions is the
destruction of Jerusalem. Previously to this
catastrophe his chief object is to call to repentance
those who were living in careless security; to warn
them against indulging in blind confidence, that
by the help of the Egyptians (Ezek. xvii. 15-17;
comp. Jer. xxxvii. 7) the Babylonian yoke would
be shaken off; and to assure them that the destruc-
tion of their city and temple was inevitable and
fast approaching. After this event his principal
care is to console the captives by promises of fu-
ture deliverance and return to their own land, and
to encourage them by assurances of future
blessings. His predictions against foreign nations
stand between tess two great divisions, and were
for the most part uttered during the interval of
suspense between the divine intimation that Nebu-
chadnezzar was besieging Jerusalem (ch. xxiv. 2),
and the arrival of the news that he had taken it
(ch. xxxiii. 24). The predictions are evidently
arranged on a plan corresponding with these the
chief subjects of them, and the time of their utter-
ance is so frequently noted that there is little
difttculty in ascertaining their chronological
order, This order is followed throughout, except
in the middle portion relating to foreign nations,
where it is in some instances departed from to
secure greater unity of subject (¢. g. ch. xxix. 17).
The want of exact chronological order in this
portion of the book, has led to various hypotheses
respecting the manner in which the collection of
the separate predictions was originally made.
Jahn C/ntrod. p. 356) supposes that the predictions
against foreign nations were placed in their pre-
sent position by some transcriber in the order in
whieh they happened to come into his hands, and
that he through forgetfulness omitted chaps. xxxv.,
Xxxviii., and xxxix. Eichhorn (/inéeit. vol iii.
p- 193} thinks it probable that the predictions
were written on several greater or smaller rolls,
which were put together in their present form
without snfficient regard to chronological accu-
racy. Bertholdt (Einleit. v. iv. p. 1487, quoted
by Hiivernick) supposes that the collector of the
whole book found two smaller collections alreatly
in existence (ch. xxv.-xxxii. and xxxiii. 21-
uaa and that he arranged the other predictions
chronologically. All such hypotheses belong, as
Havemick remarks, to a former age of criticism.
The arrangement, by whomsoever made, is very
evidently designed, and it seems ou many ac-
counts most prohable that it was made by Ezckiel
himself. This is maintained by Hiavernick on the
following grounds: 1. The arrangement proceeds
throughout on a plan corresponding with the sub-
jects of the predictions. In those against foreign
nations chronological is united with material
order, whilst in those which relate to Israel the
order of time is strictly followed. 2. The pre-
dictions stand in such connection with each other
that every part has reference to what has preceded
it. 3. Historical notices are occasionally ap-
ded to the predictions, which would scarcely
be done by a transcriber: e.g. the notice respecting


EZIONGEBER. 687


himself in chaps. xi., xxiv., xxv.,and the close of
chap..xix., which Hivernick translates ‘ This is a
lamentation and was for a lamentation.’ The
whole book is divided by Hivernick into nine
sections, as follows :—

1. Ezekiel’s cal to the prophetic office (ch.
i.-iii. 15). ;

2. Series of symbolical representations and
particular predictions foretelling the approaching
destruction of Judah and Jerusalem (ch. iii.
16-vii.).

3. Series of visions presented to the prophet a
year and two months later than the former, in
which he is shown the temple polluted by the wor-
ship of Adonis—the consequent jilgment on the
inhabitants of Jerusalem and on the priests,—and
closing with promises of happier times and a purer
worship (ch. viii.-xi.). :

4. ‘A cavies of reproofs and warnings directed
especially against the particular errors and pre-
judices then prevalent amongst his coutempo-
raries (ch. xii.-xix.).

5. Another series of warnings delivered about a
year later, announcing the coming judgments to
be yet nearer (ch. xx.-xxiii.).

6. Predictions uttered two years and five
months later, when Jerusalem was besieged, an-
nouncing to the captives that very day as the
commencement of the siege (comp. 2 Kiugs xxv.
1), and assuring them of its complete overthrow
(ch. xxiv.).

7. Predictions against foreign nations (ch.
XXV.-xxXii-.).

8. After the destruction of Jerusalem a
phetic representation of the triumph of Israe) and
of the kingdom of God on earth (ch. xxxiii.-
Xxxix.).

9. Symbolic representation of Messianic times,
and of the establishment and prosperity of the
kingdom of God (ch. x1.-xlviii.). :

The latter part of the book has always heen
regarded as very obscure. It will be seen by the
brief notices of the contents of the sections which
we have given above, that Hiivernick considers
the whole to relate to Messianic times. The pre-
dictions respecting Gog (ch. xxxviii., xxxix.) have
been referred by some to Antiochus Epiphanes ;
by others to Cambyses, to the Chaldwans, the
Scythians, the Turks, &c. Mr. Granville Penn
has interpreted them of Napoleon and the French
(The Prophecy of Ezekiel concerning Goque, &c.,
1815). ‘The description of the temple (ch.
xL-xliii.) has been thought by many to contain
an account of what Solomon's temple was; by
others, of what the second temple should be. The
difticulties of all these hypotheses seem to be in-
superable. We have only space to say that we
fully accord with the view of Hiavernick, and are
glad to take this opportunity of recommending
his Commentary to the notice of English scholars.
We do this the more readily because we believe
his book (published only this year, 1843) is very
little known at present in England. To him we
are greatly indebted for the materials of the pre
sent article, and only regret that we could not
obtain his work soon enough to make a more ex-
tended use of it.—F. W. G.


EZIONGEBER (723 }¥P; Sept. Taclow
TdBep; and Vulg. Asiongaber), a very ancient
city lying not far from Elath, on the eastern arm


688 EZRA.


of the Red Sea. It is first mentioned in Num.
xxxiii. 35, as one of the stations where the Hebrews
halted in their journeyings through the desert
(Deut. ii. 8). From its harbour it was that Solo-
mon (1 Kings ix. 26) sent the fleet which he had
there built to the land of Ophir, whence they
fetched four hundred and twenty talents of gold.
Here, also, Jehoshaphat (1 Kings xxii. 47;
2 Chron. xx. 35) built a fleet ‘to go to Ophir,’
but because he had joined himself with Ahaziah,
‘king of Israel, who did wickedly,’ ‘the ships
were broken that they were not able to go to Tar-
shish.’ Jusephus (Avtig. viii. 6. 4) says that
Eziongeber was also called Berenice, and that it
lay not far from Ailath. It is probably the same
with the once populous city Assyan (Burckhardt,
ii. 831). Robinson (Biblical Researches, i. 250)
says, ‘no trace of Eziungeber seems now to remain,
unless it bein the name of a small wady with
brackish water, el-Ghudyan opening into el-
Arabah from the western mountain, some distance
north of Akabah. However different the names
el-Ghudyan and Ezion may be in appearance,
yet the letters in Arabic and Hebrew all corre-
spond’ [Evatu].—J. R. B.


EZRA. - We shall bring the statements of this
article under the following heads :—

I. Name.

II. Parenrace.

IIT. Doinas. 1. Historical; 2. Doubtful.

IV. Wuitinas. 1. Canonical; 2. Apocryphal.

I. Name.—NWY Ezra means help; Sept.
“EoSpas. The form of the name is Chaldaic or


Aramaic; and it is equivalent in meaning to the
Hebrew uame WY, from the root NY; Arab.


»&, he surrounded, protected, helped.
aw


II. Parentage.—The celebrated Ezra was a
Jewish scribe (VHD) and priest (773), who, about
the year B.c. 458, led the second expedition of
Jews back from the Babylonian exile into Pa-
lestine. This Ezra ought to be distinguished
from the Ezra who went up as one of the chiefs
of the priests and Levites under Zerubbabel
(Neh. xi. 1, 12, 33).

Ezra was a lineal descendant from Phinelias,
the son of Aaron. He is stated in Scripture to
be the son of Seraiah, the sun of Azariah; which
Seraiah was slain at Riblah by order of Nebu-
chadnezzar, having been brought thither a captive
by Nebuzaradan. But, as 130 years elapsed be-
tween the death of Seraiah and the departure of
Ezra fiom Babylon, and we read that a grandson
of Seraiah was the high priest who accompanied
Zerubbabel on the first return to Jerusalem,
seventy years before Ezra returned thither, we
may suppose that by the term son here, as in
sume other places, the relationship of grandson,
or of a still more remote direct descendant, is in-
tended. In aidition to the information given in
the buoks of Ezra and Nehemiah, that Ezra was
a ‘ascribe,’ a ‘ready scribe of the law of Moses,’
‘a scribe of the words of the Commandments of
the Lord and of his statutes to Israel,’ ‘a scribe
of the law of the God of Heaven,’ and ‘a priest,’
we are told by Josephus that he was high-priest
of the Jews who were left in Babylon; that he
was particularly conversant with the laws of
Moses, and was held in universal esteem on ac-
count of his righteousness and virtue.


EZRA.


III. Doings of Ezra.—The rebuilding of the
temple of Jerusalem, which had been decreed
by Cys in the year n.c. 536, was, after much
powerful and vexatious opposition, completed in
the reign and by the permission of Darius Hys-
taspis, in the year u.c. 515.

n the year n.c. 457 Ezra was sent by ‘ Arta-
xerxes Longimaius and his counsellors to inquire
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to
the law of his God which was in his hand; and
to carry the silver and gold which the king and
his counsellors freely offered unto the God of
Israe].’ Permission was also granted to him to
take with him all the silver and the gold which
he could find in all the province of Babylon, to-
gether with the free-will offerings which the
people and priests offered for the house of God at
Jerusalem. Of this treasure he was directed to
employ as much as was requisite in the purchase
of offerings according to the law of Muses, and
the surplus he was to lay out according to his
discretion for the maintenance of the externals of
religion. Ezra was also charged to convey vessels
for the house of God in Jerusalem ; and, lest these
gifts should be insufficient, he was empowered to
take from the king's treasure-house as mucl: as
should be wanted to supply everything needful
for the house of the Lord. At the same time that
this commission was given to Ezra, Artaxerxes
Longimanus issued a decree to the keepers of the
king’s treasure beyond the river, to assist Ezra in
everything in which he needed help, and tosupply
him liberally with money, corn, wine, oil, and
salt. It was further enacted that it should not be
lawful to impose tribute upon any priest, Levite,
or other person concerned in ministration in the
house of God. Ezra was commissioned to appoint
*accordiug to the wisilom of God which was in
his hand,’ magistrates and judges to judge all the
people beyond the river, that kuew the laws of his
God ; and was enjoined to teach them to these
who knew them uot. The reason of the interest
for the worship of God at this time evinced by
Artaxerxes, appears to have been a fear of the
divine displeasure, for we read in the conclusion
of the decree to the treasurers Leyond the river,
‘ Whatsvever is commanded by the God of Heaven,
let it be diligently done for the house of the Gud
of Heaven ; FoR WHY SHOULD THERE BE WRATH
AGAINST THE REALM OF THE KING AND HIS
sons’ We are also told (Ezra, vii. 6) that the
king granted Ezra all his request; and Josephus
informs us that Ezra, being desirous of going to
Jerusalem, requested the king to grant him re-
commendatory letters to the governor of Syria.
We may therefore suppose that the dread which
Artaxerxes entertained of the divine judgments
was the consequence of the exposition to him by
Ezra of the history of the Jewish people. Some
writers suppose that this favour shown to the Jews
was consequent upon the marriage of Esther with
Ahasuerus; but this could not be, even if we
should grant, what is unlikely, that the Artaxerxes
of the book of Ezra and the Ahasuerus of the
hook of Esther were the same person, because
Ezra set out for Jerusalem in the frst month in
the seventh year of the reign of Artaxerxes, and
Esther was not taken into the King’s house un
til the tenth month in the seventh year of the
reign of Ahasuerus, and did not declare ber con-
nection with the Jewish people, and obtain favour


EZRA.


forthem until after the plot of Haman, in the
twelfth year of Ahasuerus.

Ezra assembled the Jews who accompanied
him on the banks of the river Ahava, where they
halted three days in tents. Here Ezra proclaimed
a fast, as an act of humiliation before God and a
season of prayer for divine direction and safe con-
duct; for, om setting out, he ‘ was ashamed to
require a band of soldiers and horsemen to help
them against the enemy by the way,’ because he
had asserted to the king that the hand of his God
is upon all them that seek him for good. Ezra
next committed the care of the treasures which he
carried with him to twelve of the chief priests,
assisted by ten of their brethren, appointing these
to take charge of the treasures by the way,
and deliver them safely in the house of the Lord
at Jerusalem. On the twelfth day from their
first. setting out Ezra and his companions left
the river Ahava, and arrived safely at Jerusalem
in the fifth month, having been delivered from
the hand of the enemy and of such as lay in wait
by the way. Three days after their arrival the
treasures were weighed and delivered into the cus-
tody of some Levites. The returning exiles offered
burnt-offerings to the Lord. They delivered also
the king’s commissions to the viceroys and gover-
nors, and gave needful help to the people and the
ministers of the Temple. When Ezra had dis-
charged the various trusts committed to him, the
princes of the Jews came to him and complained
that the Jewish people generally who had returned
from the captivity, and also the priests and Le-
vites, but especially the rulers and princes, had
not kept themselves separate from the people of the
land, but had done according to the abominations
of theremnaut of the nations whom their fore-
fathers had driven out, and married their daugh-
ters, and allowed their children to intermarry
with them. On hearing this Ezra was deeply
alflicted; and, according to the Jewish custom, he
rent his mantle and tore the hair of his head and
beard. There gathered round him all those who
still feared God, and dreaded his wrath for the
transgressicn of those whom he had brought back
from captivity. Having waited till the time of
the evening sacrifice, Ezra rose up, and, having
again rent his hair and his garments, made public
prayer and confession of sin. The assembled
people wept bitterly, and Shechaniah, one of the
sons of Elam, came forward to propose a general
covenant to put away the foreign wives and their
children. Ezra then arose and administered an
oath to the people that they would do accordingly.
Proclamation was also made that all those who
had returned from captivity should within three
days gather themselves together unto Jerusalem,
under pain of excommunication and forfeiture of
their goods. The people assembled at the time
appointed, trembling on account of their sin
and of the heavy rain that fell. Ezra addressed
them, declaring to them their sin, and exhorting
them to amend their lives by dissolving their
illegal connections. The people acknowledged
the justice of his rebukes, and promised obedience.
They then requested that, as the rain fell heavily,
and the number of transgressors was great, he
would appoint times at which they might seve-
rally come to be examined respecting this matter,

accompanied by the judges and elders of every
city. A commission was formed, con-


~ EZRA. = 689
sisting of Ezra and some others, to investigate the
extent of the evil. This investigation occupied
three months.

In Neh. viii. we read that, on the occasion of
the celebration of the feast of the seventh month,
subsequently to Nehemiah’s numbering the people,
Ezra was requested to bring the book of the ly
of Moses; and that he read therein standing
upon a pulpit of wood, which raised him above
all the people. @ 7

Josephus relates the affecting scene which oc-
curred on the reading of the law by Ezra. The
account given by Josephus agrees with that of
Nehemiah in all leading particulars, except that
Josephus places the date and occasion twelve
years afterwards.

Josephus tells us that Ezra died soon after this
celebration of the Feast of Tabernacles, and was
buried at Jerusalem with great magnificence.
According to some Jewish chroniclers he died
in the year in which Alexander came to Jerusa-
lem, on the tenth day of the month Tebeth
(that is, the lunation in December), in the same
year in which took place the death of the pro-
phets Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, and in
which prophecy became extinct. According to
other traditions Ezra returmed to Babylon and
died there at the age of 120 years.

The Talmudic statement is that he died at
Zamzumu, a town on the Tigris, while on his road
from Jerusalem to Susa, whither he was going to
converse with Artaxerxes about the affairs of the
Jews. A tomb said to be his is shown on the
Tigris, about twenty miles above its junction with


286. [Tomb of Ezra.]


the Euphrates. An interesting description and
wood-cut of this tomb are subjoined to the notes
on the book of Ezra in the ‘ Pictorial Bible.’
Some traditions assert that, Ezra was, about a.m.
3113, the president of the MOYTIN NDI, Syna-
goga Magna, and the father of all Mishnic doctors.
In piety and meekness he was like unto Moses
(Iuchasin, p. 13. See Zemach David). When
he went from Babylon to Jerusalem, he took with
him all persons whose descent was either illegi-
timate or unknown; ,so that the Jews left in
Babylon should be NOYDD ‘3, pure like flour
(Kiddushin, c. 4,1, Gem.). Ezra is said to have
introduced the present square Hebrew character,
and, in conjunction with some oe to
x


690 EZRA.


have mate the masora, the punctuatiun, and ac-
centuation of the whole Bible (Abarbanel, Prefat.
ad Nachalath Avoth; Elias, Pref. 3 Masor.).
Ezra is also said to have vigorously resisted the
sect of the Sadducees, which sprang up in his days;


and therefore to have put the words phiyn }o


pb SY, a seculo in seculum, at the head of all
prayers, as a symbol by which the orthodox could
be distinguished (Bab. Berachoth, fol. 54).
Since the le, during the Babylonian cap-
tivity or exile, Thal become accustomed to the
Aramaic language, and scarcely understood
Hebrew, Ezra established the ottice of turgoman,
INN, dragoman, or interpreter, who stood near
e public reader in the synagogue, and translated
every verse after it was read (Megillah, fol. 74).
Ezra ordained that the year of jubilee should be
reckoned from the seventh year after the rebuild-
ing of the temple (Maimon. Ial. Jobel. cap. 10).
Ecra is considered to be the author of the
canon, and worthy to have been the lawgiver,
if Moses had not preceded him (Bab. Sanhed.
c. ii, f. 215 compare the article Canon). He
is even said to have re-written the whole of
the Old Testament from memory, the copies of
which had perished by neglect. But we must
abstain from recounting all the traditional ampli-
fications of the doings of Ezra, since, if all were
to be received, it would be diflicult to say what
he did not do, so strong has been the inclination
to connect important facts with the person of
Ezra (compare 2 Fadras, xiv.; Ireneus, Adv.
Heres. iii. 25; Clem. Alex. Strom. i. p. 142;
Angustin. De Mirabil. Script. ii. 23; Hieron. ad
Halrid. p. 212; Vall. Buxtorf, Tiberias, p. 88,
sqq.; Bertholdt, Einlett. i. 69, sqq.; De Wette,
Einleit. p.17, sq.; Sauer, Diss. canonem Vet. Test.
etc. Altorf, 1792, 4to.; Sankedrin, fol. xxi. 1;
Rau, De Synag. Magna, pp. 31, 89; Hartmann,
Verbindung des Alten und Neuen Testamentes,
pp. 114, sqq. Arabian fables about Ezra are men-
tioned in Hottinger’s Thes. Philol. p. 113, and
in Herbelot, Bibl. Ortentale, p. 697, etc.).
IV. Writings—We now turn to the writings
of Ezra. The canonical writings of Ezra are,
besides the book which bears his name, most
likely the two books of the Chronicles. Esram
libros Paralipomenon lucubrasse Ebraorum om-
nium est fama consentiens’ (Huetius, Dem.
Evang. iv. 14, p. 341). But as the reasons for
ascribing the books of Chronicles to the author-
ship of Ezra have already been investigated in
the article Curonic.es, we contine ourselves here
to the book of Ezra. Some authors have ascribed
the books of Nehemiah and Esther likewise to
Ezra, although they differ in style. [Esrner;
Nenemian. |
Contents.—The book of Ezra contains arouyn-
povedipara, memorabilia, or records of events oc-
curring about the termination of the Babylonian
exile. It comprises accounts of the favours
bestowed upon the Jews by Persian kings; of


the rebuilding of the temple; of the mission of-


Ezra to Jerusalem, and his regulations and re-
forms. Such records forming the subject of the
book of Ezra, we must not be surprised that its
parts are not so intimately connected with each
other as we might have expected if the author
had set forth his intention to furnish a complete
history of his times,


EZRA.


The events narrated in the book of Ezra are
pred over a period of about 79 years, under
e reigns of a


Years. Months.
Cyrus eo © © © © © 2 0
Cambyses 2. - »- 2» « » FT 5
Magus, or Pseudo-Smerdis - O 1
Darius Hystaspis . . » . 36 O
Xerxes 2. 2 ee ee 21 0
Artaxerxes (in the eighth year
ot whose reign the records of
Ezra cease) « - »- « « 8 0
80 (0


The beginning of the book of Ezra agrees ver-
batim with the conclusion of the second book of
Chronicles, aud terminates abruptly with the
statement of the divorces eflected by his authority,
by which the marriages of Israelites with foreign
women were dissolved.

Since the book of Ezra has no marked concly
sion, it was, even in early times, considered to
form part of the book of Nehemiah, the contents
of which are of a similar description. As, how-
ever, the book of Ezra is a collection of detached
d&rouynuovedara, or records of remarkable events
occurring at the conclusion of the exile and in
the times immediately following it, attempting
no display of the art of book-making, the mere
want of an artificial conclusion cannot be cou-
sidered a sufficient reason for regarding it as the
first portion of Nehemiah. It is, however, Jikely
that the similarity of the contents of the books
of Ezra and Nehemiah was the cause of their
being placed together in the Hebrew Bible.

The arrangement of the facts in the book of Ezra
is chronological. The book may be divided into
two portions, The first consists of chapters i.-vi.,
and contains the history of the returning exiles
and of their rebuilding of the temple, and com-
prises the period from the first year of Cyrus,
B.c. 536, to the sixth year of Darius Hystaspis,
u.c. 515. In the first six chapters the use of
the third person predominates in the namutive,
except in passages where, by cuvéxSoxn, occurs
NIMON, Heb. \IWON, we said, or where the
Narrative contains abstracts from documents to
which Ezra had access. In these abstracts the
Aramaic or Chaldee language of the original
documents has been preserved from ch. iv. 8, to
vi. IS, and vii, 12-26. These portions exist in
Kennicott’s Cod. 240, in a collateral Hebrew
translation, reprinted in Kennicott’s edition of
the Hebrew Bible, and separately in Chaidai-
corum Daniclis et Esr@ capitum interpretatio
Hebraica. Primus ex codice antiquo tliam
ed. B. Kennicott. In sus eruditorum seursim
ercudi curavit, et commentationem de tndole et
usu Aujus translationis premisit Ludevicus
Schulze, Hala, 1782, 8ro.

An argument has been raised against the opi-
nion that Ezra was the author of the whole book
that bears his name, from the use of the tirst pei-
aon plural in the 4th verse of the Sth chapter,
which would seem to imply that the narrator was
present on the occasion described ; but, setting
aside other replies to this argument, it appears
that the word we refers to Tatnai and his com-
panions, and not at all to the Jews.

The second portion contains the personal
history of the migration of Ezra to Palestine,


-—


EZRA.


in the seventh year of Artaxerxes, This latter

rtiém, embracing chapters vii.-x., is an auto-

iography of Ezra during about twelve or

thirteen months, in the seventh and eighth years
of the reign of Artaxerxes Longimanus. Ezra
speaks from ch. vii. 27, to ch. ix. 15, in the first
person. . § There is an essential difference be-
tween public events which a man_ recollects,
though only as in a dream, to have heard of at the
time when they occurred, and those which pre-
ceded his birth. The former we think of with re-
ference to ourselves; the latter are foreign to us.
The epoch and duration of the former we measure
by our own life; the latter belong to a period for
which our imagination has no scale. Life and
definiteness are imparted to all that we hear or
read with respect to the events of our own life’
(Niebuhr, On the Distinction beticeen Annals
and History). These remarks, which Niebuhr
made in reference to Tacitus, are, in a great mea-
sure, applicable also to Ezra, and account for
several of those differences between the various
parts of his book, which have so much startled
some modern biblical scholars, that they have
presumptuously underfaken to show the precise
seams or sutures by means of which various frag-
ments of different authors were brought together.
In this attempt they have been especially guided
by the change of the third to the first person, for
which change we account by the above remarks
of Niebuhr.

Instances of similar change of person are so
frequent in ancient authors, that rhetoricians have
introduced it among the rhetorical figures, under
the name of enallage personarum. The prophetical
writings of the Old Testament furnish examples
of such evdadayn. For instance, Ezek, i. 1-3;
Zech. i. 13 vi. 13 vii. 1, 4,8; Jer. xx. 1, 5q.
compared with v. 7, sq. xxi. 1; xxviii. 1-5;
xxxii. 1-8; Hos. i, 2-3; iii. 1. So also in Ha-
bakkuk, Daniel, &c. The freqnency of this évda-
Aayn, especially in the prophetical parts of the
Old Testament, arises fiom either the more ob-
jective or more subjective tendency of the style,
which of course vanes in harmony with the con-
tents of the chapter. We may observe this évaa~
Aeyn even in our own writings, from which we are
certainly taught by modern scholastic usage to
eradicate it, although it would, if preserved,
frequently give greater freshness to our commu-
nications. We have made these remarks in order
to show the perfect futility of the chief’ argument
adduced by modern writers against the original


unity of the book of Ezra; some of whom, on ac--
count of the enallage personarum, assert that ch, .


vii, 1-26 was written by an author different from
that of the portion immediately following, up to
ch. ix. 15; und that, again, the subsequent portion
to the end of ghe book was indited by a still dif-
ferent writer, We pass over other still more futile
arguments against the authenticity of the book, and
express our opinion that even Hiivernick does not
rightly set forth the truth of the matter when, in
his Einlectung, he says that this évdAdayn arose
from Ezra’s imitation of the prophetic usage, and
when he approvingly quotes Schirmer’s Observa-
tiones exegctice et critice in librum Esdre, vol.
ii. p. 8 (Vratislavia, 1830): ‘ initio autem narra-
tionis rerum a se gestarum Easidra certe consulto
tertia usus est persona, rationem dicendi stilumque
prophetarum elatio-em videlicet imitaturus. Uni-


EZRACH. 691


verse non alienum videtur, sed facillime potius
animum subit, Esdram quodammodo prophetarum
imitatorem qualem seipsum ostendit, agnoscere.”
There was certainly as little rmiraTion of the
prophets in the enadlage personarum of Ezra, as
there is imrration of the prophets if we change
from the first to the third person in our own com-
munications, "EydAAayy never arises from imita-
tion, but only from the more subjective or more
objective turn of our mind, and from that vivacity
of style which renders it incumbent upon the
reader rather than upon the writer to supply that
OR", which, as in Jonah ii. 3, forms the tran-
sition from the use of the third to the adoption of
the first person.

We have spoken thus far of the canonical book
of Ezra; there are, however, four books that have
received this name, viz. the book noticed above,
the ouly one which was received into the Hebrew
canon under that name, the book of Nehemiah,
and the two apocryphal books of Esdras, concern-
ing which see Espras.—C. H. F. B.


EZRACH CATT). This word occurs only
once in Scripture, namely, in Ps. xxxvii. 35:
‘Thave seen the wicked in great power, spread-
ing himself likea green bay-tree'(ezrach). Com-
mentators and translators have diflered respecting
the meaning of this woid, some supposing it to in-
dicate a specific tree, as the laurel ; and others, sup-
ported by the Septuagint and Vulgate, the cedar
of Lebanon. It is by some considered to mean
an evergreen tree, and by others, a green tree that
grows in its native soil, or that has not suffered
by transplanting, us such a tree spreads itself luxu-
riously. Others, again, as the unknown author
of the sixth Greek edition, who is quoted by Cel-
sius (i. p- 194), consider the word as referring to
the ‘indigenous man:’ ¢ Vidi impium et impu-
dentem, in ferucia sua gloriantem, et dicentem ;
sum instar indigena, ambulanti in justitia ;’ and
this opinion is adupted by Celsius himself,

Celsius states that recent interpreters have
adopt-d the laurel or bay-tree for no other reason
than because—
viret semper laurus, nec fronde caduca

_ Carpitur. we

Sir Thomas Browne, indeed, says, ‘as the sense
of the text is sufticiently answered by this, we are
unwilling to exclude that noble plant from the
honour of having its name in Scripture.’ Isidore
de Barricre, on the contrary, concludes that the
laurel is not mentioned in Scripture because
‘non debuit cavlestis scrijtura contaminari men-
tione illius arboris, quam in tanto pretio haberent
gentiles, ad fabulas et fictiones poeticas adhi-
Lerent,’ &c. This, Celsius justly observes, is a
very insufficient reason, as the abuse of a thing
should not prevent its proper use; and if sucha
principle had been acted on, we should not have
found in Scripture mention of any trees or plants
employed by the Gentiles in their superstitious
ceremonies. He might have added, as examples,
the vine, the olive, and the cedar, which, for such
a reason, might have all been excluded.

The cause why the laurel is not more fre-
quently mentioned in Scripture, is, probably,
because it was never very common in Palestine;
as otherwise, from its pleasing appearance, grate-
fal shade, and the agreeable odour of its leaves,
it could hardly have failed to ans tga

Y


692 EZRACH.


Though Celsius and others have remarked that, if
ezrach does indeed signify a tree, it must be some
one distinct from the laurel, and one ‘que in
Judea frequens fuerit, ef altitudine, frondiumque
umbra, atque amanitate pracelluerit ceteris,’


287. [Bay-tree. Laurus nobilis.)


yet no evidence is adduced by any of the above
authors in behalf of the bay-tree, as that intended
in the referred to. It appears to us that
the Siduow word must have been derived from


the Arabic Gyte ashruk, which is described in


Arabic works on Materia Medica as a tree having
leaves like the ghar, that is, the bay-tree or Jaurus
nobilis of botanists. If ezrach, therefore, was
originally the same word as ashruk, then it
would indicate some tree resembling the bay-tree,
rather than the bay-tree itself; but, until that can
be discovered. the latter is, upon the whole, well
suited to stand as its representative.

The laurel or bay-tree, Jaurus nobilis of bo-
tanists, is well known to the Asiatics by its
Arabic name of ye ghar, under which it is men-
tioned by Serapion and Avicenna, who quote
chiefly Dioscorides and Galen, thus indicating that
they had not much original information of their
own respecting a tree which is probably not indi-
genous in the countries in which they wrote. The
leaves and berries of the laurel, as well as the
bark and the root, were employed in medi-
cine: the berries continue, even in the present
day, to be exported to India, where we found
them in che bazaars, under the name of hub-
al-ghar (Illust. Him. Bot. p. 326), being still
esteemed as a stimulant medicinal, though _
possessed of any properties superior to those o!
the laurels of wae poutecn lecbades The
Arabs give zafnee and zaknee as the Greek
names of the ghar-tree. These are corruptions,
no doubt, of ddpyn, the name by which the bay-
tree was known to the Greeks. It does not
appear to occur in Palestine, as travellers, such
as Rauwolf and Belon, do not mention it. Has-
selquist expressly states that he had not met
with it in Judea or Galilee, but had rested himself


FACE.


very comfortably under its shade near the moun
tains beyond White Cape, on the road fromyAcre
to Sidon. In the neighbourhood of Antioch bay-
trees were formerly very abundant, especially at
the village and grove of Daphne, famous for the
temple of Apollo and its licentious rites. Though
the ¢ “grove and the consecrated bay-trees
have disappeared from the immediate vicinity of
Antioch, Dr. Pococke states that they are in great
abundance at some little distance, Capts. Irby
and Mangles describe the beauty of the scenery
on the banks of the Orontes as surpassing anything
they expected to see in Syria, and the luxuriant
variety of the foliage as prodigious. The laurel,
laurestinus, bay-tree, fig-tree, wild vine, plane-
tree, English sycamore, arbutus, both common and
Andrachne, dwarf oak, &c. were scattered in all
directions. Capt. M. Kinneir describes a delight.
ful spot, called Babyle, about seven miles from
Antioch, which he was disposed to consider the
ancient Daphne. A number of fountains boil up
from amongst the rocks, and flow in different
channels through a meadow, shaded with luxu-
riant bay-trees, walnut-trees, and groves of myrtle.
The bay-tree is well known to be common in the
south of Europe, as in Spain, Italy, Greece, and
the Levant. It is usually from 20 to 30 feet in
height, often having a bushy appearance, from
throwing up so many suckers; but in England it
has attained a height of 60 feet, which is not un-
usual in warmer climates. It is unnecessary to
allude further to the celebrity which it attained
among the ancients—a celebrity which has not
yet away, the laurel-wreath being still the
symbolical crown as well of warriors as of ports.
Its ever green grateful appearance, its thick shade,
and the agreeable spicy odour of its leaves, point
it out as that which was most likely in the eye of
the Psalmist.—J. F. R.


® F.
FABLE. |[Parasre.
FACE, in Scripture, is often used to denote


presence in the general sense, and, when applied
to the Almighty, denotes such a complete mani-
festation of the divine presence, by sound or sight,
as was equivalent, in the vividness of the impres-
sion, to the seeing ofa fellow-creature ‘ face to face.’
The ‘face of God’ therefore denotes in Scripture
any thing or manner by which God is wont to
manifest himself to man. Thus, when it is said
that Adam and Eve hid themselves from ‘the face
of Jehovah,’ we understand ‘that they hid them-
selves from his presence, however manifested ; for
DID penim, not only signifies presence, as well
as (literally) face, but is the very word for pre-
sence, however manifested. Thereg is no other
word to denote presence in the Hebrew language.
Whenever ‘ presence’ occurs in our translation,
the word in the original is the same which is ren-
dered ‘ face’ in other places. This is very proper;
and the respective terms ‘face’ and ‘presence’ are
usually applied in the Authorized Version with
much propriety and discretion; the Jatter term
being daatcgee wherever the effect of the word
‘face’ might have seemed harsh or unseemly. —
It was a very ancient and common opinion
that our mortal frame could not survive the
more sensible manifestations of the divine pre-


FAIR HAVENS.


sence, or ‘see face to face and live’ (Gen.
xxxii. 30). Hence, in this passage, the gratitude
and astonishment of Jacob, that he still lived
after Ged had manifested himself to him more
sensibly than by dreams and visions. This im-
pression was confirmed to Moses, who was told,
*Thou canst not see my face: no man can see
my face and live’ (Exod. xxxiii. 20); which
clearly signities that no one can in this present
state of being endure the view of that glory which
belongs to Him. The ancient heathen enter-
tained the same notion, which is remarkably ex-
pressed in the celebrated mythological story of
Semele, who, having prevailed on the reluctant
Jove to appear to her in his heavenly splendour,
was trick dead by the lightnings of his presence
(1 Cor. xiii, 12; 1 John iii. 2; Rev. xxii. 4).

It is to be borne in mind that God is usually
represented to us in rp oe under a human
form; and it is indeed difficult for even more
Spiritualized minds than those of the Hebrews to
conceive of Him apart from the form and attri-
butes of the highest nature actually known to us.
The Scripture sanctions this concession to the
weakness of our intellect, and hence arise the an-
thropomorphous phrases which speak of the face,
the eycs, the arm of God. The appearances of
the angels in the Old Testament times were ge-
nerally in the human form (Judg. xiii. 6, &c.);
and from this cause alone it would have been
natural, in the imagination, to transfer the form of
the messengers to Him by whom they were sent
[Anraropomorpnisst].

FAIR HAVENS (Kadol Améves), a harbour
or roadstead of Crete, the unsafeness of which to
winter in occasioned that attempt to make for
Phenice, on the other side of the island, which
led to the eventual loss of the vessel in which
Paul sailed for Rome (Acts xxvii. 8). As the
name of Kalos Limenas is still preserved, there is
no difficulty in fixing the situation to a small
bay a little to the north-east of Cape Leon, the
present Cape Matala.


FALLOW DEER. [An]


FAMINE (339). Considering the early period
in the history of the world to which the Biblical
records, especially the oldest of them, refer; and
considering also how small a proportion to the
world at large, or even to the inhabited part of it,
the population bore in the primitive ages, we should
not antecedently.expect to find frequent mention
of famincs. Yet does it appear, from the testimony
of these records, that mankind sullered greatly from
dearth of food in the earliest periods of which we
have any account; and the Scriptural history in
this, as in other particulars, will be found interest-
ing and valuable to the economist and philosopher,
as well as to thedivine. In truth famine appears to
depend, not on the extent of cultivable or of cul-
tivated land, nor on the proportion which such land
bears to the actual population—though, doubt-
Jess, both these clements enter into the influences
which determine the question of abundance or
scarcity—but rather on human forethought and
thrift su applied, as, in the actual circumstances,
whatever they are, to make a suitable provision in
all cases against such contingencies as may occa-
sion dearth. In the almost entire absence of this
forethought, barbarous and half-civilized nations
bave been found, scanty though the population


FAMINE. 1083


may be in relation to the tracts of land over
which they roam, to be moet frequently on the
verge of destitution, and not seldom to suffer the
greatest privations from dearth and famine. Vain
is the almost unlimited opportunity which Nature
spreads around them for te supply of their animal
necessities, since they want either the intelligence
and skill which are necessary to turn these oppor-
tunities to account, or the moral qualities which
would spare something from actual abundance in
order to provide against coming wants.

Since the Bible gives its unquestionable evi-
dence to show that dearth was by no means an
unfrequent or an inconsiderable evil in the early
ages, it supplies a very cogent proof, in answer to
those who maintain either that the world is worse
or no better than it was in ancient times, that, at
least in those moral qualities on which man’s
physical well-being depends, mankind have made
unquestionable advances. Indeed if any large
portion of the earth now sufler from famine, the
cause may be looked for not so much in the want
of forethought and savingness as in the operation
of passions and prejudices arising from miscon-
ceived self-interest, which prevent the free inter.
change of the bounties of divine Providence,—
passions and prejudices which characterize not
mankind at large, but only certain small portions
of society, and which, in consequence, how power-
ful soever they may for a time be, have not the
vitality of vices of character that belong to a
semi-barbarous “age, and must, in a day like the
present, soon disappear before the generous and
dissolving ardour of enlightened Christian love.

The frst mention of a famine which occurs in
Scripture is in Gen. xii. 10, where we read that so
early as the days of the patriarch Abraham ‘ there
was a famine in the land,’ which is described as
80 grievous, as to compel the father of the faithfal
to quit Canaan. The country to which he resorted
was, as we might expect, the land of Egypt, the
early and lasting fertility of which is a well-
known historical fact. In Gen. xxvi. 1, this
famine is designated as ‘ the first,’ that is, the first
known, or of which there was any record. The
same passave informs us of another famine, which
aflicted ‘the land’ in the days of Isaac, who
seems tu have contemplated a descent into Egypt;
but who, being instructed of God, removed to a
part of Arabia Petraa (Gen. xxvi. 17) named.
Gerar, a city of the Philistines, whose monarch's
name was Abimelech.

Even Egypt, however, was not exempt from
the desolations of famine (Gen. xli. 30), The
ordinary cause of dearth in Egypt is connected
with the annual overtlow of the Nile. If the rise
of the waters is in any year below a certain
standard, the country atlords scanty supplies of
food, and may for the greater part remain a desert.
But more than local causes must have been in
operation in the case before us; for we are told
that ‘the famine was soe in all lands,’ that
“the famine was over all the fice of the earth.’
By the foresight and wisdom of Joseph, however,

rovision against the evil had heen made in
ypt, while other countries were left to suffer the
unmitigated consequences of their neglect. The
provision made by Joseph must have been of a
most abundant nature, since the period during
which the dearth lasted was no leas than seven
years, and the people of otber parte sought and


694 FASTS.


received supplies in Egypt—‘all countries came
into Egypt to buy corn.’ Among other lands,
Canaan suffered from the famine; which was the
immediate occasiun of Jacob's sending his sons
down into Egypt, of the discovery which they
made of their lust brother, and of the settlement
in that land of the descendants of Abraham : an
event of the highest consequence in the sequel,
and serving to illustrate the benignity and wisdom
of divine Providence in the evils with which,
under its influence, the world is aillicted.

This famine was made by Joseph the occasion
of one of the greatest social revolutions which
history records, The details may be found in
the book of Genesis; and it is enough to say here
that, as the special administrator of the affairs of
the country, Joseph got into his hands all the
property of the kingdom, including the land (ex-
cepting that which belunged to the priests), and
gave the same back to the people as tenants at will,
on condition of their paying to the king ‘ the
fifth,’ probably, of the annual produce.

From these statements it appears that three
successive generations were in these early days
visited by famine. ‘The Scriptural narrative (the
details of which may be easily ascertained by the
help of a Concordance) shows that in after ages
famines were, in ancient times, more frequent
than they are now; and this justifies the use
which is made of so terrible a scourge by the
sacred writers, and especially the prophets and
our Lord himself, in the highly figurative lan-
guage which they employ in their righteons en-
deavours to turn wicked men and wicked nations
from the evil of their ways (Ezek. vi. 11; Matt.
xxiv. 7). In Amos viii. 11, sq., a heavier woe
than even the want of bread is appropriately
spoken of under the appellation of a famine:
© Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that
I will send a famine in the land; nota famine of
bread nor @ thirst for water, but of hearing the
word of the Lorfl: and they shall wander from
sea to sea, and from the north even to the east,
they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the
Lord, and sha!) not find it: in that day shall the
fair virgins aud the young men fuint for thirst.’
The ensuing verse shows that idolatry was the
moving cause of this heavy punishment.—J. R. B.

FASTS (DVS; Anglo-Saxen festan, jejanare,
found in our present English dreak-fast) properly
denote an entire or partial abstinence from food.
In the early ages of the world, when the spon-
taneous productions of nature and the spoils of
the chace formed man's chief aliment, fasting
from time to time was compulsory, in consequence
of the uncertainty of obtaming food when wanted.
It would be easy for superstitious ignorance to
interpret this compulsion into an expression of
the divine will, and so to sanction the observance
of fasting as a religious duty. The transition
would be the easier at atime and in countries
when the office of physician was united in the
same person with that of priest; for in hot cti-
mates occasional abstinence is not without its
advantages on the health; and an abstinence
which the state of the body required, but which
the appetite shunned or refused, the authority of
the priest and the sanctions of religion would
exact at once with ease and certainty. Inthe
earlier stages of civilization no idea is more pre-
valent and operative than that the Deity is pro-


FASTS.


pitiated by voluntary sufferings an the part of his
creatures. Hence ensned all kinds of bodily
mortifications, and even the sacritice of life itself
Nay, ‘the fruit of the body '—the dear pled es of
mutual alfection, the best earthly gift trom the
Heavenly Father—children, were sacrificed in ex-
piation of ‘the sin of the soul.’ Human enjoy-
ments were held to be displeasing in the sight of
God. The notion that the gods were jealous ol
man’s happiness runs through the entire texture
of Gieck and Roman mythology; and the de
velopment of this falselood, as presented in
Greek tragedy, has given birth to some of the
finest productions of the human mind. But
what more pleasurable than food to man, espe
cially to the semi-harbarian? The denial of
such a pleasure must then be well-pleasing to the
Divinity; the rather because on occasions of
family bereavement, of national disaster, or any
great calamity, the appetite is naturally affected
under the influence of grief, and is made to loathe
the fuod which in its ordinary condition it finds
most grateful. A connection between sorrow and
fasting would thus be established which would
carry with it a sort of divine sanction in being
natural and inevitable in its origin. Aceordingly,

abstinence which seemed imposed by Provideuce,

if not in expiation of guilt, yet as an accom

paniment of sorrow, easily became regarded asa

religious dnty, when voluntarily prolonged or

assumed, and grew to be considered as an ettica-

cious means for appeasing the divine wrath and

restoring prosperity and peace.

No wonder that under influences so strong as
these the observance of religious fasts established
itself’ in the world at _a very early period, and is
found to have prevailed in most of the nations
of antiquity.

In such a religion as Moses was commissioned
by the creator of the world to offer to the chosen
people, it was not likely that an observance
which, such as fasts, seems to have had its origin
in false and heathen conceptions, should hold 3
very prominent position, or be invested with much
importance. There is but one fast enjoined by
the great Hebrew lawgiver. And this injunction
we ure disposed to place among those things
which Moses allowed rather than originated, bore
with rather than approved, in consideration of the
force of catalilishiod custom, and from a wise fear
of deteat@ his own guod ends by attempting too
much. The manner in which this observance is
spoken of in Scripture (Lev. xvi. 29; xxiii. 27)
scems to imply that it was no new institution that
the lawgiver was establishing, but merely an old
and well-known practice, to which be gave a
modified sanction. Had it been otherwise, bad
the law been a new one, details would have been
both needed and given, as is customary with
Moses in his injunctions. Instead of that the
children of Israel are required in general terms to
‘alllict their souls.’ But this language is not
only vague, it is figurative, and could have no
detinite meaning unless to persons with whom
afflicting the soul was in general use. This fact
is established by the consideration that the words
convey no definite ideas to the English reader
unless when explained in the light of Hebrew
antiquity. There seems, however, no reason {0
donbt that ‘to afflict the soul (5) 713), in the
Septuagint, rarewovr Thy ,) bore with it


FASTS.


meaning of fasting. To a mere English reader
the phrase seems to comprise all kinds of voluntary
mortifications, but ‘soul’ in Hebrew not seldom
denotes the ‘ appetite’ (Prov. xxvii. 7). Accord-
ingly the words regard immediately abstinence
from food, and most probably (so far as they go)
nothing more.

The sole fast required by Moses was on the
great day of annual atonement. This observance
seems always to have retained some prominence
as ‘the fast’ (Acts xxvii. 9). But what the ol-
servance of the enjoined duty involved we are
nowhere expressly informed, and can approximate
to a knowledge of precise details only so far as
later practices among the Jews may be considered
as aflurding a faithful picture of this divinely
sanctioned ordinance. In these remarks the
opiuion is implied that ‘the fast,’ whatever im-
portance it may have subsequently acquired, was
. Originally only an incident, not to say an acci-
dent, in the great solemnity of the annual atone-
ment. Other general fasts, however, were in
course of ages introduced, which were celebrated
at fixed times every successive year. In the
reign of Zedekiah Nebuchadnezzar besieged and
captured Jerusalem, which calamity led to the
establishment of a fast on the seventeenth day of
the fourth month (Thammuz, July), (Jer. lii.
6,7; Zech. viii. 19). In the last passage other
fasts are enumerated, namely, ‘the fast of the
fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of
the tenth.’ That of the fifth month (Ab, Au-
gust) was held on the ninth day, in mournful
commemoration of the burning of the city by
© Nebuzar-adan, a servant of the king of Babylon,’
who ‘bumt the house of the Lora, aud the king's
house, and all the houses of Jerusalem, and every
great man’s house’ (2 Kings xxv. 8, 8q.; Jer.
li, 12; Zech. vii. 3-5; viii. 19). The fast of
the seventh month (Tishri, October) was esta-
blished to bewail the murder of Gedaliah at
Mizpah (Jer. xli. 1, sq.; 2 Kings xxv. 25).
That of the tenth month (Tebeth, January) was
held on the tenth day to commemorate the com-
menceinent of the siege of Jerusalem on the part of
Nebuchadnezzar (2 Kings xxv. 1; Zech. viii. 19;
see also Hierun. ad Zech. c. viii, and IHieros.
Taanith, 68; Reland, p. 471).

_On particular and signal occasions extraor-
dinary fasts were appointed. Thus when Naboth
was condemned for blasphemy because he would
hot give up the inheritance of his fathers to Ahab,
Jezebel, as a part of her plan for gratifying
the evil desires of her 1oyal husband, ordered
a fast to be proclaimed (1 Kings xxi. 9; comp.
Jer. xxxvi, 9; 2 Chron. xx. 3). So in Judzes
xx. 26, the children of Israel ‘came unto the
house of God and wept, and sat there betore the
Lord and fasted until even, and oficred burnt-
offerings anu peaceollerings Lefure the Lord,"
when they had suffered a calamitous defeat at
the hands of the Benjamites. Other instances
of fasting om occasion of loss in battle may be
found in 1} Sam, xxxi. 11-13; Baruch i. 5. In

cel i. ii, a fast is enjoined with a view to tum
away the wrath of God as displayed in the ter-
+ rible consequences of the invasion of the land of


Judea by an army of devastating locusts (Cred-
Uer's Joel). The notion also prevailed that a
special fast


das st might have the etlect of averting the
ivine displeasure and securing the divine co-


FASTS. 695


operation in any great undertaking (Jonah iii. 5;
1 Sam. vii. 5, 6, 8, 10,12; 1 Mace. iii. 47;
2 Mace. xiii. 12; Judith iv. 115 vi. 19). Local
fasts were at a later period sometimes held in
order to avert calamity or procure a favour from
heaven: and the Sanhedrim ordered general fasts
when the nation was threatened with any great
evil, such as drought or famine (Joseph. Vit.
$56; Taanith, i. 5), as was usual with the Ro-
mans in their supplications (Liv. iii. 7; x. 23;
Smith’s Dict. of Greck and Roman Antiq.).
There were also private fasts, though the Mosaic
Jaw did not require them. They were held in
connection with individual or family incidents,
and agreed in aim and tendency with fasts of a
general and public nature. Examples may be
found in 1 Sam. i. 7; xx. 34; 1 Kings xxi. 9;
Fz. x.6; Neh. i. 4. After the exile private
fasts became very frequent (Lightfoot, p. 318),
awaiting the call of no special occasion, but en-
tering as a regular part of the current religious
worship (Suet. Aug. 76; Tacit. Hist. v. 4. 7
In Judith viii. 6, we read that Judith fasted all
the days of her widowhood, ‘save the eves of the
sabbaths, and the sabbaths, and the eves of the
new mouns, and the new moons, and the feasts and
the solemn days of the honse of Israel.’ And in
Tobit xii. prayer is declared to be good with fast-
ing; see also Luke ii. 37; Matt. ix. 14. The
parable of the Pharisee and Publican (Luke
xviii. 9; comp. Matt. ix. 14) shows how much
the Pharisees were given to voluntary and private
fasts—‘ 1 fast twice a week.’ The first was on
the fifth day of the week, on which Moses as-
cended to the top of Mount Sinai; the second
was on the second day, on which he came down —
(Taanith, ii. 9; Hicros. Megillah, 15.1). The
Essenes and the Therapeute also were much
given to such observances (Philo, Vit. Contempl.
p- 613; Euseb. Prep. Evan. ix. 3). Fasts were
considered as a uselul exercise jn preparing the
mind for special religious impressions. Thus
Dan. x. 2, sq., ‘In those days I Daniel was
mourning three full weeks. I ate no pleasant
bread, neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth.
Then I lifted up my eyes and looked, and behold
acertain man, &c. (see also Acts xiii. 3; xiv.
23). From Matt. xvii. 21, ‘ Howbeit this kind
(of demons) gveth not out but by prayer and
fasting,’ it would appear that the practice under
consideration was considered in the days of Christ
to act in certain special cases as an exorcism,
Fasting was accompanied by the ordinary signs
of grief among the Israelites, as may be seen in
] Mace. iii. 47, * Then they fasted that day and
put om sackcloth, and cast ashes upon their heads
and rent their clothes.’ The fast ordinarily lasted
from evening to evening, but was not observed
on the sabbath or on festival days (Joseph. Antig.
iti. 10.3; Judith vill. 6; Mischn. Taanith, ii.
10). The abstinence was either partial or total.
In the case of the latter food was entirely fore-
gone, but this ordinarily took place only in fasts
of short duration; aud abstinence from food in
eastern climes is more easy and less detrimental
(if not in some cases positively useful) than keep-
ing from food would be with us. in these cold,
damp, northern regions (Esther iv. 16). In the
case of partial abstinence the time was longer,
the denial in degree less. When Daniel (x. 2)
was ‘mourning full three weeks,’ he ate no ‘ plea-


006 FASTS.


sant bread, neither came flesh nor toine in my
mouth.’ There does not appear to have been
any fixed and recognised periods during which
these fasts endured. From one day to forty days
fasts were observed. The latter period appears to
have been regarded with feelings of peculiar
sanctity, owing doubtless to certain events in
Jewish history. Thus Moses ‘ was with the Lord
on Mount Sinai forty days and forty nights, he
did neither eat bread nor drink water’ (Exod.
xxxiy. 28). So Elijah (1 Kings xix. 8) ‘arose
aud did eat and drink, and went in the strength
of that meat forty days aud forty nights unto
Horeb the mount of God.’ The same was the
number of days that our Lord fasted in the desert
in connection with his temptation (Matt. iv. 1-11;
Mark i. 12, 13; Luke iv. 1-13). In the latter
case the abstinence appears to have been entire,
for Luke expressly declares he ate nuthing—xa)
oix Epayey ovdév. It does not appear to be a
necessary inference fiom the other passayes that
Moses and Elijah wholly abstained from food
during the said forty days. In Dan. i. 10-16, a
se is found which shows that abstaining
rom meat and wine did not imply total absti-
nence, fur Daniel and his friends had ¢ pulse to
eat and water to drink’ (Wetstein, p. 270; De
Wette, Aritiz der Mos. Ges. p. 245).

We have already seen how qualitied the sanc-
tion was which Moses gave tu the observance of
fasting asa religious duty. In the same spirit
which actuated him, the prophets Lore testimony
against the lamentable abuses to which the prac-
tice was turned in the lapse of time and with the
increase of social corruption (Isa. viii. 4, 8q.3
Jer. xiv. 12; Zech. vii.5). Continuing the same
species of influence and perfecting that  spirit-
uality in religion which Moses began, our Lord
rebuked the Pharisees sternly for their outward
and hypocritical pretences in the fasts which they
observed (Matt. vi. 16, sq.), and actually ab-
stained from appointing any fast whatever as a
part of his own religion. In Matt. ix. 14, the
question of the reason of this avoidance is ex-
pressly put—‘ Why do we (the disciples of John)
and the Pharisees fast oft, but thy disciples fast
not?’ The answer involvesan entire disapproval
of fasting in the Christian Church—‘Can_ the
children of the bride-chamber fast?’ It is true
that a period is alluded to when these children
‘shall fast ;’ but the general scope of the passage,
taken in connection with the fact that Christ's
disciples fasted not, and with the other fact, that
while John (Matt. xi. 18, 19) ‘came neither eat-
ing nor drinking,’ the son of man ‘came eating
and drinking,’ clearly shows that our Lord, as he
signified his disapproval of religious fasting, so by
the assertion that a time would come when, being
deprived of the (pene presence of the) bride-
groom, his disciples would fast, meant to intimate
the approach of a period of general mouming,
and employed the term ‘ fast’ derivatively to sig-
nify rather sorrow of mind than any corporeal
self-denial (Neander, Leben Jesu, pp. 231, 305).
From the passages in question this at least is
clear, that Jesus ascribed to fasts no essential
worth, nor required any such observance from his
followers. Whether and how far he allowed fast-
ing as a means of religious improvement, is a

nestion which our space does not permit us to
tee That the early Cluistians observed the


PAT.


ordinary fasts which the public practice of then
day sanctioned, is clear from more than one
sage in the New Testament Scriptures (Acts xiii
2; xiv. 23; 2 Cor. vi. 5); but in this they pro
bably did nothing more than yield obedience, ag
in general they thought themselves hound to do,
to the law of their fathers so long as the Mosaic
institutions remained entire. And though the
great body of the Christian Church held them-
selves free from all ritual and ceremonial observ-
ances when God in his providence had brought
Judaism to a termination in the rasure of the
holy city and the closing of the temple, yet the
practice of fasting thus originated might have
easily and unobservedly been transmitted from
year to year and from age to age, and that the
rather because so large a portion of the disciples
being Jews (to say nothing of the influence of the
Ebionites in the primitive church), thousands
must have been accustomed to fasting from the
earliest days of their existence, either in their own
practice or the practice of their fathers, relatives,
and associates.

Those who wish to prosecute the study of this
religious ol@ervance among other nations, may
consult Meiner, Gesch. der Relig. ii. 189; Lake-
macher, Antig. Gree. Sacr. p. 626; Wachsmath,
Hellen. Alterthum. ii. 237; Bottiger, Kunstmy-
thol. i. 132.—J. R. B.

FAT. In Lev. iii. there are minute details
of the parts of victims which were to be
cially apprupriated to the altar. Among these all
the intemal fat is minutely specified, particularly
the fat of the kidneys; and of external parts the
tail of the sheep, which, in the common species of
Western Asia, is a mass of fat (iii. 4, 9, 10, 15):
and the whole concludes with ‘ All the fat is
Lord's; ye shall eat neither fat nor blood ‘ (iii.
17). The reason assigned, namely, that the fat
was consecrated to the altar, could only apply
with respect to that of animale used in sacrifice,
which were also usually employed for food.
Accordingly, in Lev, vii. 2, we read, ‘ Ye shall eat
no manner of fat of ox, or of sheep, or of goat,’
which would seem to imply that the fat of other
animals might be eaten ; although it would appear
that the Jews interpret the prohibition absolutely,
as may be inferred trom the fact that they rarely
eat any other flesh than that of the animals tius
indicated. One point seems to have Leen very
generally overlooked, which is, that not fat abso-
lutely but particular fat parts only are interdicted.
They might eat the fat involved in the muscular
tissue—in short, fat meat; and we know that ani-
mals were actually fattened for food (1 Kings iv.
23; Jer. xlvi.21; Luke xv. 23). This was, how-
ever, not a usual practice; and even at this day
in the East, domestic cattle seldom undergo any

reparatory feeding or fattening before being killed.
Hence there is little fat in the carcase, except that
belonging to the parts specified in tke prohibition,
which is all more or less of the nature of suet.

Various reasons have been assigned for this
somewhat remarkable restriction. The secondary
cause, that the fat was consecrated to the altar,
and therefure was to be abstained from, is not all;
fur it is usually considered that it was thus conse-
crated to give a religious sanction to a prohibition
expedient on other grounds. The remark of Mai-
munides (More Nevochim), that men are generally
fond of it,’ ailords no satisfactory reason, unless it


FATHER.


were a principle of the law to forbid to men the
things which they liked. The alleged fact of this
general paseny might also be disputed: but the
remark has point when the special reference to the
fat rump of the Syrian sheep is considered, for that
is highly prized. It affords a delicate marrowy
fat, and is much used in pillaus and other messes
which require to be lubricated by animal juices.
The reason assigned by Michaelis, that the prohibi-
tion was designed to encourage the substitution of
olive-oil for animal fat, and hence to promote agri-
culture among the Hebrews, and turn them from
the habits of nomade life, is ingenious, but some-
what far-fetched. The truth probably is, that this
suet or suet-like fat is not particularly wholesome
or digestible in warm climates, if anywhere, and
is particularly unsuitable for ns subject to
cutaneous diseases, as the Israelites appear to have
been at the time of their leaving Egypt.

‘ Fatness,’ in Scripture, expresses plumpness or
exuberance, whether in men, animals, or vege-
tables ; and is hence often applied metaphorically
to any kind of abundance, as to large possessions,
or to excessive fertility in the earth.

FATHER. This word, besicles its obvious and
primary sense, bears, in Scripture, a number of


- other applications, most of which have, through


the use of the Bible, become more or less common
in all Christian countries.

1. The term Father is very often applied to
God himself (Gen. xliv. 19, 20; Exod. y. 22;
Deut. xxxii. 6; 2 Sam. vii. 44; Ps. Ixxxix. 27,
28; Iea. Ixiii. 16; lxiv. 8). Professor Lee states
that it is only applied to God as-having adopted
the chosen people as his children; and he denies,
with some harshness, that it is applied to him in
the general sense as the Creator, and thence the
Father, of all mankind (Lex. s.v. JN). Neverthe-
less, he admits that man’s creation is occasionally
mentioned in connection with this use of the word;
and this, coupled with the clearer intimations of
the New Testament, leaves little room to question
that it is the intention of the sacred record to set
God before us as the Father of all men, in the
general sense of creator and preserver of all men,
but more especially of believers, whether Jews or
Christians. Indeed the analogy of langnage would

int to this, seeing that in the Old Testament, and
in all the Syro-Arabian dialects, the originator
of anything is constantly called its father. To the
same eflect is also a passage in Josephus’ para-

hrase of the law (Deut. xxi. 18-21), respecting re-

Hious sons, cal aitds (O€ds) xarhp rod wayTds
dy Opameoy yévous, ‘ because he (God) is himself the
father of the whole human race’ (Anttg. iv. 8.24).

Without doubt, however, God is in a more
especial and intimate manner, even as by cove-
nant, the Father of the Jews (Jer. xxxi. 9; Isa.
xiii. 63. 16; Ixiv. 8; John viii. 41; v. 45; 2
Cor. vi. 18); and also of Christians, or rather of
all pivus and believing persons, who are called
“sons of God’ (John i. 12; Rom. viii. 16, etc.).
Thus Jesus, in speaking to his disciples, calls God
their Father (Matt. vi. 4, 8, 15, 18; x. 20, 29;
xiii. 43, etc.). The Apostles, also, for themselves
and other Christians, call him ‘Father’ (Rom.
i. 7; 1 Cor. i. 3; 2 Cor. i. 2; Gal. i. 4; and
many other places).

2. Father is applied to any ancestor near or
remote, or to ancestors (‘fathers *) in general.
The progenitor, or founder, or patriarch of a tribe


FEASTS. 69%


or nation, was also pre-eminently its father, as
Abraham of the Jews. Examples of this abound.
See, for instance, Deut. i. 11; 1 Kings viii. 12;
Matt. iii, 9; xxiii. 30; Mark xi. 10; Luke i.
32, 73; vi. 23, 26; John vii. 22, &c.

3. Father is also applied as a title of respect to
any head, chief, raler, or elder, and especially to
kings, prophets, and priests (Judg. xvii. 10; xviii.
19; 1 Sam. x. 123; 2 Kings ii. 12; v.13; vi.
21; xiii, 14; Prov. iv. 1; Matt. xxiii.9; Acts
vii. 2; xxii. 15 1 Cor. iv. 15, etc.).

4. The author, source, or beginner of anything
is also called the Father of the same, or of those
who follow him. Thus Jabal is called ‘the
father of those who dwell in tents, and have
cattle;’ and Jubal, ‘the father of all such as
handle the harp and the organ‘ (Gen. iv. 21, 22;
comp. Job xxxviii. 28; John viii. 44; Rom. iv.
12). This use of the word is exceedingly com-
mon in the East to this day, especially as applied
in the formation of proper names, in which, also,
the most curious Hebrew examples of this usage
occur [aah

The authority of a father was very great in
patriarchal times; and although the power of life
and death was virtually taken from the parent by
the law of Moses, which required him to bring his
cause of complaint to the public tribunals (Deut.
xxi. 18-21), all the more real powers of the pa-
ternal character were not only left unimpaired,
but were made in a great degree the basis of the
judicial polity which that law established. The
children and even the grandchildren continued
under the roof of the father and grandfather; they
laboured on his account, and were the most sub-
missive of his servants. The property of the soil,
the power of judgment, the civil rights, belonged
to him only, and his sons were merely his instru-
ments and assistants. If a family be compared
to a body, then the father was the head, and the
sons the members, moving at his will and in his
service. There were exceptions, doubtless; but
this was the rule, and, with some modifications,
it is still the rule throughout the East.

Filial duty and obedience were, indeed, in the
eyes of the Jewish legislator, of such high im-
portance that great care was taken that the paternal
authority should not be weakened by the with-
drawal of a power so liable to fatal and barbarous
abuse as that of capital punishment. Any out-
rage against a parent—a blow, a curse, or incorri-
gible profligacy—was made a capital crime (Exod.
xxi. 13, 17; Lev. xx. 9). If the offence was
public it was taken up by the witnesses as a crime
against Jehovah, and the culprit was brought be-
fore the magistrates, whether the parent consented
or not; and if the offence was hidden within the
paternal walls, it devolved on the parents to de-
nounce him and to require his punishment.

It is a beautiful circumstance in the law of
Moses that this filial respect is exacted for the
mother as well as for the futher. The threats and
promises of the legislator distinguish not the one
from the other; and the tifth commandment asso-
ciates the father and mother in a precisely equal
claim tu honour from their children. The de-
velopment of this interesting feature of the Mo-
saical Jaw belongs, however, to another head
[Women]. See Cellerier, Esprit de la Législa-
tion Mosa‘que, ii. 69, 122-129.

FEASTS. This word comes to us immediately


698 FEASTS.


from the French fete, which is an abbreviated
form of the Latin festum— Festus dies,’ holyday
or holiday. In the Greek we find éoriéy, the
original of festum ; éorigy itself is from the noun
éoria (Latin Vesta), a hearth ; so that the root-idea
of the word is to be found in what we should term
the pleasures of the table, the exercise of hospi-
tality. But in all ayes eating, drinking, and
hospitality, have been connected with religious
observances; while the meeting of friends, the
enjoyments of the palate, and the exercise of the
devotional aflections, would conspire to make
a festive holiday. In process of time some one
of these elements would, in particular cases,
be dropped. Thus the French word fete now
scarcely comprises the idea of eating and drink-
ing, and certainly involves very little of a reli-
gious nature, while with us feast denotes, at least
in ordinary usage, scarcely any thing else than the
plens which accompany the entertainments of

pitality. At an earlier period of our language,
however, it retained much more of its original
import, and is frequently used to indicate that
which is now mustly conveyed by the word fest
val. In the common translation of the Scriptures
it is repeatedly used in this manner; and accord-
ingly we read in theological works of ‘the feast of
Passover,’ ‘the feast of Pentecost,’ ‘the feast of
Lots,’ &c. But as the word feast is now generally,
if not exclusively, applied, in ordinary usage, to
hospitable entertainments, we think we consult
precision and perspicuity by speaking under the
present head solely of snch events, leaving the
religious institutions of the Jews, sometimes so
denominated, to be treated of under the now more
appropriate term Festival.

To what an early date the practices of hospi-
tality are referable may be seen in Gen. xix. 3,
where we find Lot inviting the two angels—‘ Tum
in, I pray you, into your servant's house and tarry
all night, and wash your feet; and he pressed upon
them greatly, and they entered into his house;
and he made them a feast :’ which was obviously
of a religious nature, since it is added, ‘and did
bake unleavened bread, and they did eat’ (Judg.
vi, 19; and Winer, Handworterbuch, s. v. Sauer-
teig). It was usual not only thus to receive per-
sons with choice viands, but also to dismiss them
in a similar manner; accordingly Laban, when
he had overtaken the fleeing Jacob, complains
(Gen. xxxi. 27), ‘ Wherefore didst thou steal away
from me and didst not tell me, that 1 might have
sent thee away with mirth, and with sonzs, and
with tabret, and with harp? See also 2 Sam, iii.
20; 2 Kings vi. 23; Job viii. 20; 1 Mace. xvi.
15. This practice explains the reason why the
prodigal, on his return, was welcomed by a feast
(Luke xv. 23), Occasions of domestic joy were
hailed with feasting; thus, in Gen. xxi. 8, Abra-
ham ‘made a great feast the same day that Isaac
was weaned.’ Birth-days were thus celebrated
(Gen. xl. 20), ‘Pharaoh, on his birth-day, made
a feast unto all his servants’ (Job i. 4; Matt.
xiv. 6; comp. Herod. i. 133). Marriage-feasts
were also common. Samson (Judy. xiv. 10) on
such an occasion ‘made a feast,’ and it is added,:
‘for so used the young men to do.’ So Laban,
when he gave his daughter Leah to Jacob (Gen.
xxix. 22), ‘gathered together all the men of the
place, and mace a feast.’ These festive occasions
seem originally to have answered the important


FEASTS.


purpose of serving as evidence and attestation of
the events which they celebrated, on which: account
relatives and neighbours were invited to be present
(Ruth iv. 10; John ii. 1). Those processes in
rural occupations by which the Divine bounties
are gathered into the hands of man, have in all
ages heen made seasons of festivity ; accordingly, in
2 Sam. xiii. 23, Absalom invites all the king's sons,
and even David himself, to a sheep-shearing feast,
on which occasion the guests became ‘merry with
wine’ (1 Sam. xxv. 2, sq.). The vintage was
also celebrated with festive eating and drinking
(Judg. ix. 27). Feasting at funerals existed
among the Jews (2 Sam. iti. 33). In Jer. xvi. 7,
among other funeral customs mention is made of
‘the cup of consolation, to drink for their father
or their mother,’ which brings to mind the indul-
gence in spirituous liquors to which our ancestors
were given, at interments, and which has not
yet entirely disappeared in Lancashire, nor, pro-
bably, in Ireland (Carleton’s Irish Peasantry;
England in the Nineteenth Century, vol. ii.).
To what an extent expense was sometimes carried
on these occasions, may be learned from Josephus
(De Bell. Jud. iv. 1.1), who, having remarked that
Archelaus * mourned for his father seven days, and
had given a very expensive funeral feast to the
multitude,’ states, ‘which custom is the occasion
of poverty to many of the Jews,’ adding, ‘ because
they are forced to feast the multitude, for if any
one omits it he is not esteemed a holy person.’

As among heathen nations, so also among the
Hebrews, feasting made a part of the ob:ervances
which took place on occasion of animal sacrifices,
In Deut. xii. 6, 7, after the Israelites are enjoined
to bring to the place chosen of God, their bumt-
offerings, tithes, heave-oflerings, vows, freewill-
offerings, and the firstlings of their herds and flocks,
they are told ‘there shall ye eat before the Lord
your God, and ye shall rejoice in all ye put your
hand unto, ye and your households, wherein the
Lord thy God hath blessed thee’ (1 Sam. ix.
19; xvi. 3,5; 2Sam. vi. 19). These sacrificial
meals were enjoyed in connection with peace
ofierings, whether eucharistic or votive. The kid-
neys, and all the inward fat, and the tail of the
lamb, were burnt in the daily sacrifice; the breast
and right shoulder fell to the priest ; and the rest
was to be eaten by the offerer and his friends, on
the same day if the oflering were eucharistic, on
that and the next day if it were votive (Lev. iti.
1-175 vii. 11-21; 29-36; xix. 5-8; xxii. 29, 30).
To the feast at the second tithe of the produce of the
land, which was to he made every year and eaten
at the annual festivals before Jehovah, not only
friends but strangers, widows, orphans, and Levites,
were to he invited as well as the slave. If the
tabernacles were so distant as to make it inconve-
nient to carry thither the tithe, it was to be tured
into money, which was to be spent at the place at
which the festivals were held in providing teasts
(Deut. xiv. 22-27; xii. 14; Tobit 1.6). Charitable
entertaininents were also provided, at the end of
three years, from the tithe of the increase. Tie
Levite, the stranger, the fatherless and the widow
were to be present (Deut. xii. 17-19; xiv. 26, 29;
xxvi. 12-15). At the feast of Pentecost the com-
manil is very express (Deut. xvi. Lt), ‘Thou shalt
rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou, and thy son,
and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy
maid-servant, and the Levite that is within thy


FELIX,


gates, and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the
widow, that are among you.’ Accordingly Tobit
(ii. 1, 2) affirms, ‘Now when I was come home
again, in the feast of Pentecost, when 1 saw
abundance of meat, I said to my son, go and bring
what poor man soever thon shalt tind out of our
brethren, who is mindful of the Lord.’ The
Israelites were forbidden to partake of food offered
in sacrifice to idols (Exod. xxxiv. 15), lest they
should be thereby enticed into idolatry or appear to
give a sanction to idolatrous observances ay. Cor.
x. 28) (Acapr].—J.R. B.

FELIX (¢7a:£), a Roman procurator of Judea,
befure whom Paul so ‘ reasoned of righteousness,
temperance, and judgment to come,’ that the judge
trembled, saying, ‘Go thy way for this time;
when I have a convenient season I will call for
thee’ (Acts xxiv. 25). The context states that
Felix had expected a bribe from Paul; and, in
order to procure this bribe, he appears to have had
several interviews with the Apostle. The de-
pravity which such an expectation implies is in
agreement with the idea which the historical
fragments preserved respecting Felix would lead
the student to form of the man.

The year in which Felix entered on his office
cannot be strictly determined. From the words
of Josephus (Antig. xx. 7. 1), it appears that his
appointment took place before the twelfth year of
the Emperor Claudius. Eusebius fixes the time
of his actually undertaking his duties in the
eleventh year of that monarch.

Felix was a remarkable instance of the elevation
to distinguished station of persons born and bred
in the lowest condition. Originally a slave, he
rose to little less than kingly power. For some
unknown, but probably not very creditable ser-
vices, he was manumitted by Claudius Caesar
(Sueton. Claud. 28; Tacit. Hist. v.9); on which
account he is said to have taken the prenomen of
Claudius. In Tacitus, however (We. cit.), he is
surnamed Antonius, probably because he was also
a freedman of Antonia, the emperor's mother.
He was a brother of Pallas, who had also been
set free by Antonia, and had great influence with
Claudius ; speaking of whom, in conjunction with
another freedman, namely, Narcissus, the imperial
private secretary, Suetonius (Claud, 28) says that
the emperor was eager in heaping upon them the
highest honours that a subject could enjoy, and
suffered them to carry on a system of plunder and
gain to such an extent, that, on complaining of
the poverty of his exchequer, some one had the
boldness to remark that he would abound in
wealth if he were taken into partnership by his
two favourite freedmen.

The character which the ancients have left of
Felix is of a very dark complexion. Suetonius
speaks of the military honours which the emperor
loaded him with, aud specifies his appointment as
governor of the province of Judea (Claud. 28);
adding an innuendo, which loses nothing by its
brevity, namely, that he was the husband of three
queens or royal ladies (trium reginarum maritum).
Tacitus, in his History (v. 9), declares that, during
his governorship in Judza, he indulged in all kinds
of cruelty and Just, exercising regal power with
the disposition of a slave; and, in his Annals (xii.
54), be represents Felix as considering himself
licensed to commit any crime, relying on the in-
fluence which he possessed at court. The country


FELIX. 699


was ready for rebellion, and the unsuitable re-
medies which Felix applied served only to inflame
the passions and to incite to crime. The contempt
which he and Cumanus (who, according to Tacitus,
governed Galilee while Felix ruled Samaria; but
see Joseph. Antig. xx. 7. 1) excited in the minds
of the people, encouraged them to give free scope
to the passions which arose from the old enmity
between the Jews and Samaritans, while the two
wily and base procurators were enriched by booty
as if it Had spoils of war. This so far
was a pleasant game to these men, but in the
prosecution of it Roman soldiers lost their life,
and, but for the: intervention of Quadratus,
governor of Syria, a rebellion would have been
inevitable. A court martial was held to inquire
into the causes of this disaffection, when Felix,
one of the accused, was geen by the injured Jews
among the judges, and even seated on the judg=
ment-seat, placed there by the president, Qua-
dratus, expressly to outface and deter the accusers
and witnesses. Josephus (Antig. xx. 8. 5) reports
that under Felix the afiairs of the couutry grew
worse and worse. The land was filled with rob-
bers and impostors who deluded the multitude,
Felix used his power to repress these disorders to
little purpose, since his own example gave no
sanction to justice. Thus, having got one lineas,
leader of a band of assassins, into his hands, by
a promise of impunity, he sent him to Rome
to receive his punisliment. Having a grudge
against Jonathan, the high-priest, who had expos-
tulated with him on his misrule, he made use of
Doras, an intimate friend of Jonathan, in order
to get him assassinated by a gang of villains, who
joined the crowds that were going up to the temple
worship,—a crime which led subsequently to -
countless evils, by the encouragement which it
gave to the Sicarii, or leagued assassins of the
day, to whose excesses Josephus ascribes, under
Providence, the overthrow of the Jewish state.
Among other crimes, some of these villains misled
the people under the promise of performing mi-
racles, and were punished by Felix. An Eyyptian
impostor, who escaped himself, was the occasion
of the loss of life to four hundred followers, and
of the loss of liberty to two hundred more, thus
severely dealt with by Felix (Joseph. Anstig. xx. 8.
6; De Bell. Jud. ii. 13.5; comp. Acts xxi. 38).
A serious misunderstanding having arisen between
the Jewish and the Syrian inhabitants of Cwsarea,
Felix employed his troops, and slew and plun-
dered till prevailed on to desist. His cruelty in
this affair brought on him, after he was superseded
by Festus, an accusation at Rome, which, however,
he was enabled to render nugatory by the influence
which his brother Pallas had, and exercised to
the utmost, with the emperor Nero. Jusephus,
in his Life (§ iii.), reports that ‘ at the time when
Felix was procurator of Judwa there were certain
priests of my acquaintance, and very excellent
persons they were, whom, on a smull and tiifling
occasion, he had put into bonds and sent to Rome
to plead their cause befure Caesar.’

While in his office, being inflamed by a passion
for the beautiful Drusilla, a daughter of King
Herod Agrippa, who was married to Azizus, king
of Emesa, be employed one Simon, a magician,
to use his arts in order to persuade her to forsake
her husband and marry him, promising that if
she would comply with his suit he would make


700 FESTIVALS.


FESTIVALS.


ber a happy woman. Drusilla, partly impelled by the meat-offering, a handful of which, with the


a desire to avoid the envy of her sister, Berenice,
was prevailed on to transgress the laws of her
forefathers, and consented to a union with Felix.
In this marriage a son was born, who was named
Agrippa: both mother and son aplarhe in an
eruption of Mount Vesuvius, which tuok place in
the days of Titus Cesar (Joseph. Antig. xx. 7. 2).
With this adulteress was Felix seated when Paul
reasoned before the judge, as already stated (Acts
xxiv. 24), Another Drusilla is mentioned by
Tacitus as being the wife (the first wite) of Felix.
This woman was niece of Cleopatra and Antony.
By this marriage Felix was connected with Clau-
dius. Of his third wife nothing is known.

Paul, being apprehended in Jerusalem, was sent
by a letter from Claudius Lysias to Felix at
Caesarea, where he was at first contined in Herod's
judgment-hall till his accusers came. They ar-
rived. Tertullus appeared as their spokesman,
and had the audacity, in order to conciliate the
good will of Felix, to express gratitude on the
part of the Jews, ‘seeing that by thee we enjoy
great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are
dune unto this nation by thy providence’ (Acts
xxiii. xxiv.). Paul pleaded his cause in a worthy
speech; and Felix, consigning the Apostle to the
custody of a centurion, ordered that he should
have such liberty as the circumstances admitted,
with permission that his acquaintance might see
him and minister to his wants. This imprison-
ment the Apostle suffered for a period of two years,
being left bound when Felix gave place to Festus,
as that unjust judge ‘was willing,’ not to do what
was right, but ‘to show the Jews a pleasure’

C. W. F. Walch, Diss. de Felice Jud. procur.
en. 1747).—J. R. B.


FERRET. [Lizarp.]


FESTIVALS (0°39). The Hebrew festivals
were occasions of public religions observances,
recurring at certain set and somewhat distant in-
tervals. In general they may be divided into
two kinds :—1. Those of divine institution ; 2
Those of human origin, Those which owe their
existence to the authority of God are, the seventh
day of the week, or the Sabbath; the Passover ;
Pentecost; the Feast of Trumpets; the Day of
Atonement; the Feast of Tabernacles; the New
Moon. Festivals which arose under purely human
influences are, the Feast of Lots, or Purim; the
Death of Holofernes; the Dedication; the Sacred
Fire; the Death of Nicanor.

Reserving details for separate articles on such
of these as shall seem to require and justify a dis-
tinct treatment, we confine ourselves here to a
general outline, with some remarks on the origin
and tendency of the chief festivals.

We have inserted the Sabbath for the sake of
completeness, and, with the same view, we proceed
to set down a few brief particulars respecting the
daily service, so-that we may at once present a
general ontline of the temple worship.

At the daily service two lambs of the first year
were tu be oflered at the door of the tabernacle ;
one in the morning, the other in the evening, a
continual burnt-offering. With each lamb was
to be offered one-tenth of an ephah of flour, min-
gled with one-fourth of a hin of fresh oil, for a
meat-oflering, and one-fourth of a hin of wine for a
drink-offering. Frankincense was to be placed on


frankincense, was to be bumt, and the remainder
was to he eaten by the priest in the holy place,
without leayen. The priests were to offer daily
the tenth of an ephah of fine flour, nalf in the
morning and half in the evening, for themselves,
The high-priest was to dress the lamps in the te
bernacle every moming, and light them every
evening; and at the same time burn incense on
the altar of incense. The people provided oil for
the lamps which were to burn from evening to
morning: the ashes were removed by a priest,
dressed in his linen garment and his linen drawers,
and then carried by him out of the camp, in his
common dress. Great stress was laid on the re-
gular observance of these requirements (Num.
xxviii. 1-8; Exod. xxix. 38-42; Lev. vi. 8-23;
Exod. xxx. 7-9; xxvii. 20; Lev. xxiv. I+;
Num. viii. 2).

Labour was to last not longer than six days.
The seventh was a Sabbath, a day of rest, of holy
convocation, on which no one, not even strangers
or cattle, was allowed to do any servile work.
The offender was liable to stoning.

On the Sabbath two lambs of the first year,
without blemish, were to be offered for a bumt-
offering, morning and evening, with two-tenths of
an ephah of flour, mingled with oil, for a meat-
offering, and one-half of a hin of wine for a drink-
offering, thus doubling the offering for ordinary
days. Twelve cakes of fine flour were to be placed
every Sabbath upon the table in the tabernacle, in
two piles, and pure frankincense laid on the
uppermost of each pile. These were to be fur-
nished by the people; two were offered to Jehovah,
the rest were eaten by the priests in the holy place
(Exod. xxxi. 12; Lev. xxiii. 1; xxvi. 2; Exod.
xix. 3-30; xx. 8-11; xxiii. 12; Deut. v. 12-15;
Lev. xxiii. 3; xxiv.5-9; Num. xv. 35; xxviii. 9).

At the Neto Moon festival, in the beginning of
the month, in addition to the daily sacrifice, two
heifers, one ram, and seven lambs of the first year,
were to be offered as burnt-offerings, with three-
tenths of an ephah of flour, mingled with oil, for
each heifer; two-tenths of an ephah of flour, min-
gled with oil, for the ram; and one-tenth of an
ephah of flour, mingled with oil, for every lamb;
and a drink-offering of half of a hin of wine for
a heifer, one-third of a hin for the ram, and une-
fourth of a hin for every lamb. One kid of the
gvats was also to be offered as a sin-oflering.

The first day of the seventh month was to be
a Sabbath, a holy convocation, accompanied by
the blowing of trumpets. In addition to the daily
and monthly sacrifices, one ram and seven lambs
were to be offered as burnt-offerings, with their
respective meat-ofleriugs, as at the usual New

Moon festival (Num. xxviii, 11-15; xxix. 146;
Lev. xxiii. 23-25).

Three times in the year—at the Feast of Ux
leavened Bread, inthe month Abib; at the Feast -
of Harvest, or of Weeks; and at the Feast of In-
gathering, or of Tabernacles—all the males were
to appear before Jehovah, at the place which he
should choose. None were tv come empty:
handed, but every one was to give according ss
Jehovah had blessed him; and there before Je
hovah was every one to rejoice with his family,
the Levite, the stranger, the fatherless, and the
widow (Exod. xxxiil, 14-17; xxxiv. 22043
Deut. xvi. 16, 17).


FESTIVALS.


The first of these three great festivals, that of
Unleavened Bread, called also the Passover, was
kept in the month Abib, in commemoration of the
rescue of the Israelites by Jehovah out of Egypt,
which took place in that month. The ceremonies
that were connected with it will be detailed under
the head Passover. Every one who was ritually
clean, and not on a journey, and yet omitted to
keep the Passover, was to be cut off from the
people. Any one who was disabled for the ob-
servance, either by uncleanness or being on a
joumey, was to keep the Passover on the four-
teenth day of the next month. In order to make
the season more remarkable, it was ordained that
henceforward the month in which it took place
should be reckoned the first of the national re-
ligions year (Exod. xii. 2). From this time, ac-
cordingly, the year began in the month Abib, or
Nisan (March—April), while the civil year con-
tinued to be reckoned from Tishri (September—
October) (Exod. xii. 3, 14, 27; 43-49; Lev.
xxiii. 5; Num, xxviii. 16; Deut. xvi. 1-7). The
Passover lasted one week, including two Sabbaths
(De Wette, Archdol. p. 214). The tirst day and
the Iast were holy, that is, devoted to the ob-
servances in the public temple, and to rest from
all labour (Exod. xii. 16; Lev. xxiii. 6; Num.
xxviii. 18; Deut. xvi. 8).

On the day after the Sabbath, on the Feast of
Passover, a sheaf of the first fruits of the barley
harvest was to be brought to the priest to be waved.


. before Jehovah, accompanied by a burnt-offering.


Till thia sheaf was presented, neither bread nor
parched corn, nor full ripe ears of the harvest,
could be eaten (Exod. xii. 15-20; xiii. 6-10; Lev.
xxiii, 6-8; Dent. xvi. 2-8; Num. xxviii. 17-25).

The Feast of Pentecost or of Weeks was kept
to Jehovah at the end of seven weeks from the
day of the Festival of Unleavened Bread, on
which the sheaf was presented. On the morrow
after the seventh complete week, or on the fiftieth
day, two wave loaves were presented as first fruits
of the wheat-harvest, together with a burnt-
offering, a sin-ollering, and a peace-offering, &c.
The day was a holy convocation, in which no
servile work was done. The festival lasted but
one day. It is said to have heen designed to
commemorate the giving of the law on Mount
Sinai (Brown's Antiquities of the Jews, vol. i.

. 494; Deut. xvi. 9-11; Lev. xiii, 15-21;
Num. xxviii. 26-313 xv. 17-21).

The Feast of In-gatheriug or of Tabernacles
began on the fifteenth day of the seventh month,
and continued eight days, the first and last being
Sabbaths. During the feast all native Israelites
dwelt in booths made of the shoots of beautiful
trees, paln-branclies, boughs of thick-leaved trees,
and of the willows of the bfook, when they re-
joiced with their families, with the Levite, the
stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, betore
Jehovah. Various oflerings were made. At the
eud of every seven years, in the year of release,
at the Feast of Tabernacles, the law was required
to be read by the priests in the hearing of all the
Israelites (Deut. xvi. 13-15; xxxi. 10-13; Lev.
xxiii. 39-43; 33-36; Num. xxix. 12-38, 40).

The Feast of Tabernacles was appointed partly
to be an occasion of annual habuaciving after
the in-gathering of the harvest (Exod. xxxiv. 22;
Lev. xxiii. 39; Deut. xvi. 13), and partly to
remind the Israelites that their fathers had lived


FESTIVALS, 701


in tents in the wilderness (Lev. xxiii. 40-43).
This feast took place in the end of the year,
September or October.

The tenth day of the seventh month was the
Day of Atonement—a day of abstinence, a day of
holy convocation, in which all were to afflict
themselves. Special offerings were made [ATonE-
mEnT] (Lev. xxiii. 26-32; xvi. 1, 34; Num.
xxix. 7-11; Exod. xxx. 10).

Brown, in his Antiquities (vol. i. p. 520), re-
marks that the time of the year in which the three
great festivals were observed was during the dry
season of Judea, The latter rains fell before the
Passover, the former rains after the Feast of Taber-
nacles; so that the country was in the best state
for travelling at the time of these festivals.

On these solemn occasions food came partly
from hospitality (a splendid instance of which
may be found in 2 Chron. xxxv. 7-9), partly from
the feasts which accompanied the sacrifices in the
temple, and partly also from provision expressly
made by the travellers themselves. It appears
that the pilgrims to Mecca carry with them every
kind of food that they need, except flesh, which
they procure in the city itself. Lodging, too,
was afforded by friends, or found in tents erected
for the purpose in and around Jerusalem (Helou's
Pilgrimage ; Brown's Antiquities).

The three great festivals have corresponding
events (but of far greater importance) in the new
dispensation. The Feast of Tabernacles was the
time when our Saviour was born ; he was crucified
at the Passover; while at Pentecost the effusion
of the Holy Spirit took place.

Brown (Antiquities, voi. i. p. 522) has spoken
of the defenceless state in which the country lay
when all the males were gathered together at
Jerusalem. What was to prevent an enemy from
devastating the land, and slaying women and
children? He refers the protection of the country
to the express interposition of God, citing ‘ the
promise,’ as found in Exod. xxxiv. 23, 24. He
adds, ‘ During the whole period between Moses
and Christ we never read of an enemy invading
the land at the time of the three festivals. The
first instance on record was thirty-three years
after they had withdrawn from themselves the
divine protection by imbruing their hands in the
Saviour's blood, when Cestius, the Roman ge-
neral, slew fifty of the people of Lydda, while all
the rest were gone up tu the Feast of Tabernacles,
a.v. 66 (Joseph. De Bell. Jud. ii. 19).

The objection, however, which this writer thus
meets is founded on the assumption that the law
was strictly, uniformly, and lastingly obeyed.
But the requirement that all males should appear
three times a year before Jehovah is not without
some practical difficulty. During the sojourn in
the wilderness its observance would not only
be easy, but highly useful in preventing the
dispersion of individuals or numbers from the
main body—an influence the more needful be-
cause many persons would, doubtless, stray from
time to time in search of pasture. In subsequent
and more settled times it must have been a serious
inconvenience for all the males of the nation to
leave their families unprotected and their business
neglected for so many days every year as woul
be necessary in going to and from Jerusalem, It
is true that the seasons of the festivals were well
fixed and distributed for the convenience of an_


703 FESTIVALS.


agricultural people—the Passover taking place
just before barley-harvest ; Pentecost immediately
after tie same; and Tabernacles after the wheat-
harvest ; while in winter, when travelling was very
difficult, there was no festival. Yet to have to
visit Jerusalem thrice in seven months was a
serious thing, especially in later times, when
Israelites were scattered far abroad. Even if the
expense was, as Winer thinks ({andwérterbuch),
a small consideration, yet the interruption to do-
mestic life and the pursuits of business must have
been very great; nor would it be an exaggeration
to say that the observance was an impussilility to
the Jews, for instance, who were in Babylon,
Egypt, Italy, Macedonia, Asia Minor, &c. How
far the law was rigorously enforced or strictly
obeyed at any time after the settlement in Pales-
tine, it would not be easy to say. Palfrey (Leo
tures on the Jewish Scrip. vol. i. p. 199) supposes
that ‘a man might well be said to have virtually
executed this duty who appeared before the Lord
(not in person, but) with his ollering, sent by the
hand of a friend, as a suitor is said in our com-
mon speech to appear in a court of justice, when
he is represented there by his attorney ;” a conjec-
ture which, to our mind, savours too much of
modern ideas and usages. That some relaxation
took place, at least in ‘ the latter days,’ appears
from Jolin vii. 8, in which more or leas of what is
voluutary is obviously connected in the mind and
practice of our Lord with ‘the feast,’ though, it
must be allowed that the passage is an evidence
of the general observance, not to say the universal
obligation, in his days, of at least the Feast of
Tabernacles.

If, however, there was in practice some abate-
ment from the strict requirements of the law, yet
obviously time enough was saved from labour by
the strong hand of religion, to secure to the
labourer a degree of most desirable and enviable
rest. Not, indeed, that all the days set apart
were emancipated from labour. At the Feast of
Tabernacles, fur instance, labour is interdicted
only on the first and the last day. So on other
occasions business and pleasure were pursued in
connection with religious observances. But if all
males appeared before Jehovah, even only once a
year, they must, in going and returning, as well
as in being present at the festival, have spent no
amall portion of time in abstinence from their
ordinary pursuita, and could not have failed to
derive singular advantages alike to their bodies
and their minds, 3

The rest and recreation would be the more

leasant, salutary, and beneficial, because of the
joyous nature of the religious services in which
they were, for the greater part, engaged. These
solemn festivals were not only commemorations of
great national events, but they were occasipns fur
the reunion of friends, for the enjoyment of hospi-
tality, and for the interchange of kindness. ‘The
feasts which accompanied the sacrifices opened
the heart uf the entire family to joy, and gave a
welcome which bore a religious sanction, even
to the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow
(Michaelis, Mos. Recht, art. 199).

How much, too, would these gatherings tend to
foster and sustain a spirit of nationality! By
intercourse the feelings of tribe and clan would be
worn away; men from diflerent parts became
acquainted with and attached to each other; par-


FESTIVALS.


tial interests were found to be more imaginary than
real; while the predominant idea of a common
faith and a common rallying-place at Jerusalem,
could not fail to fuse into one strong and overe
powering emotiun of national and brotherly love,
all the higher, nay, even the lower feelings, of each
Hebrew heart.

“If,” says Michaelis (Jfos. Recht, art. 19%
Smith's Transl.), ‘any of the tribes happened to
be jealous of each other or involved in civil war,
their meeting together in one place for the purposes
of religion and sociality, had a tendency to pre
vent their being totally alienated; and even
though this had happened, it gave them an oppor-
tunity of re-uniting.’ He adds that ‘the separa-
tion of the ten tribes from the tribes of Judah
under Rehoboam and Jeroboam could never have
been permanent, had not the latter abrogated one
part of the law of Moses relative to festivals.
In order to perpetuate the separation, he probi-
bited the shuuslcnilecened to Jerusalem, and
appointed two places for divine service within bis
own territories" (1 Kings xii. 27-30). ‘ He also,’
adds Michaelis, ‘transferred the celebration of the
feast of Tabernacles, and probably the other two
festivals likewise, toa different season from that
appointed by Moses’ (1 Kings xii. 33).

Another effect of these festivals Michaelis has
found in the furtherance of internal commerce.
They would give rise to something resembling our
modern fairs. Among the Mahometans similar
festivals have had this effect. ,

In Article 199, the same learned writer treats
of the important influence which the festivals
had on the Calendar, and the correction of its
errors.

These festivals, in their origin, had an obvious
connection with agriculture. Passover saw the
harvest upon the soil; at Pentecost it was ripe;
and Tabernacles was the festival of gratitude for
the fruitage and vintage (Michaelis, art. 197).
The first was a natural pause after the labours of
the field were completed; the secoud, after the
first-fruits were gathered ; and the third, a time of
rejoicing in the feeling that the Divine bounty
had crowned the year with its goodness. Spring,
summer, and autumn, which have moved alt
nations of men with peculiar and characteristic
emotions, had each its natural Janguaze and sym-
bols in the great Israelitish fesiivals, a regard to
which may well be supposed to have had an in-
fluence in the mind of the legislator, as well as in
the consuetudinary practices of the people. How
far a merely natural influence prevailed in these
observances, how far Moses found consuetudinary
usages, which, in establishing these festivals, he
adopted with such modifications and sanctions as
he judged best, and had at his command, it is at
this period impossible to determine, and uo great
aid, probably, can be derived in the case from the
practices of other nations; but the reader who
wishes to investigate the subject in this view may
consult a recent work entitled De Feriarum He-
brearum oriqine ac ratione, auctoie H. Ewald;
Gottingw, 1841; and Creuzer, Symbol. ii. 597.

The Feast of Parim or of Lots originated in the
gratitude of the Jews in escaping the plot of
Haman, designed for their destruction. te took
its name from the lots which were cast before
Haman by the astrolozers, who knew his hatred
agaist Mordecai and hia wish to destroy his


'


FESTUS.


family and nation (Esther iii. 7; ix. 2,5). The
feast was suggested by Esther and Mordecai, and
was celebrated on the 13th, 14th and 15th days
of the twelfth month (Adar). The 13th was a
fast, being the day on which the Jews were to have
ebeen destroyed; and the Lith and 15th were a
feast held in commemoration of their deliverance.
he fast is called the Fast of Esther, and the feast
still holds the name of Purim. Prideaux (Con-
nex. ; Brown, Antig. i. 575) styles it the Baccha-
nalia of the Jews.

The slaughter of Holofernes by the hand of
Judith, the consequent defeat of the Assyrians, and
the liberation of the Jews, were commemorated by
the institution of a festival (Judith xiv. xv).

The Feast of Dedication was appointed by
Judas Maccabeus, on occasion of the purification
of the temple, and reconstruction of the altar, after
they had been polluted by Antiochus Epiphanes.
The hatred of this monarch towards the Jews had
been manifested in various ways: he forbade their
children to be circumcised, restrained them in the
exercise of their religion, killed many who dis-
obeyed his mandates, burnt the books of the law,
set up idolatry, carried off the altar of incense,
the shewbread-table, and the golden candlestick,
with the other vessels and treasures of the temple;
and went to such extremes as to sacrifice a sow
upon the altar of burnt-offerings, build a heathen
altar on the top of that sacred pile, and with broth
of swine's flesh to sprinkle the courts and the
temple (1 Macc. i.; 2 Macc. v.; Prideaux,
sub a.c. 167-8, 170).

The new dedication took place on the 25th
day of the ninth month, called Chisleu, in the
year before Christ 170. This would be in De-
cember. The day was chosen as being that on
which Antiochus, three years before, had polluted
the altar by heathen sacrifices.

The joy of the Israelites must have been great
on the occasion, and well may they have prolunged
the observance of it for eight days. A general
illumination formed a part of the festival, whence
it obtained the name of the Feast of Lights.

In John x. 22 this festival is alluded to when
our Lord is said to have been present at the Feast
of Dedication. The historian marks the time by
stating ‘it was winter.’

The festival ‘of the Fire’ was instituted by
Nehemiah to commemorate the miraculous re-
kindling of the altar-tire. The circumstances
are narrated in 2 Mace. i. 18.

The deteat by Judas Maccabzeus of the Greeks
when the Jews ‘smote off Nicanor’s head and
his right hand which he stretched out so proudly,’
caused the people to ‘rejoice greatly, and they
kept that day a day of great gladness; moreover,
they ordained to keep yearly this day, being the
thirteenth day of Adar '—February or March (1
Mace. vii. 47).

Some other minor fasts and festivals may he
found noticed in Brown's Antiquities, i. 586;
and in Simon’s Dictionnaire de la Bible, art.
‘ Fétes.’—-J. R. B.

FESTUS. Porcius Festus was the successor
of Felix as the Roman governor of Judea, to the
duties of which oftice he was appuinted by the
emperor Nevo (Joseph. Antig. xx. 8.9; De Bell.
Jud. ii. 1. 1) in the first year of his reign (Winer,
Handworterbuch, in voc.). One of his tirst official
acts was hearing the case of the apostle Paul,


FIRE. 103


who had been left in prison by his predecessor.
He was at least not a thoroughly corrupt judge ;
for when the Jewish hierarchy begged him to
send for Paul to Jerusalem, and thus afford an
opportunity for his being assassinated on the road,
he gave a refusal, promising to investigate the
facts at Caesarea, where Paul was in custody,
alleging to them, ‘it is not the manner of the
Romans to deliver any man to die before that he
which is accused have the accusers face to face,
and have Jicence to answer for himself concerning
the crime laid against him’ (Acts xxv. 16). On
reaching Caesarea he sent for Paul, heard what
he had to say, and, finding that the matters which
‘his accusers had against him’ were ‘ questions
of their own superstition, and vf one Jesus which
was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive,’ he
asked the apostle whether he was willing to go to
Jerusalem, and there be tried, since Festus did
not fee] himself skilled in such an affair. Paul,
doubtless because he was unwilling to put himself
into the hands of his implacable enemies, re-
quested ‘ to Le reserved unto the hearing of
Augustus,’ and was in consequence kept in cus-
tody till Festus had an opportunity to send him -
to Cesar. Agrippa, however, with his wife Ber-
nice, having come to salute Festus on his new
appointment, expressed a desire to see and ‘ hear
the man.’ Accordingly Paul was brought before
Festus, Agrippa, and Bernice, made a famous
speech, and was declared innocent. But having
appealed to Caesar, he was sent to Rome.

Festus, on cuming into Judea, found the
country infested with robbers, who plundered the
villages and set them on fire; the Sicarii also
were numerous. Many of both classes were
captured, and put to death by Festus. He
also sent forces, both of horse and foot, to fall
upon those that had been seduced by a certain
impostor, who promised them deliverance and
freedom from the miseries they were under if
they would but follow him as far as the wilder-
ness. These troops destroyed buth the impostor
and his dupes.

King Agrippa had built himself a splendid
dining-room, which was so placed that, as he
reclined at his meals, he commanded a view of
what was done in the Temple. The priests,
being displeased, erected a wall so as to exclude
the monarch’s eye. On which Festus touk part
with Agrippa against the priests, and ordered the
wall to be pulled down. The priests appealed
to Nero, who suflered the wall to remain, being
influenced by his wife Poppea, ‘who was a
religious woman’ (Joseph. Antig. xx. 8. 11).
Festus died shortly afterwards. The manner in
which Josephus speaks is favourable to his cha-
racter as a governor (De Bell. Jud. iv. 14. 1.)—


J.R. B.

FIGS. [Fruirs.]

FIG-TREE. ([Tezenan.]

FIGURES. [Typxs.]

FIR. Papa

FIRE. Besides the ordinary senses of the word
* fire,’ which need no explanation, there are other
uses of it in Scripture which require to be dis-
criminated. The destructive energies of this
element and the torment which it inflicts, ren-
dered it a fit symbol of —1. Whatever does
damage and consumes (Prov. xvi. 27; Isa. ix.
18) ;—2, Of severe trials, vexations, and misfor-


WE FIRE.


tunes (Zech, xii. 9; 1 Cor. iii. 13, 15; 1 Pet.

i. 7) ;—3. Of the punishments beyond the grave
Matt. v. 22; Mark ix. 44; Rev. xiv. 10; xxi. 8)
Het].

‘ Fire from heaven,’ ‘fire of the Lord,’ usually
denotes lightning in the Old Testament; but,
when connected with sacrifices, the ‘tire of the
Lord’ is often to be understood as the fire of the
altar, and sometimes the holocaust itself (Exod.
xxix. 18; Lev. i. 9; ii. 33 iii, 5, 9; Num.
xxviii. 6; 1 Sam. ii. 28; Isa. xx. 16; Mal. i. 10).

The uses of fire amoug the Hebrews were
various :—

1. The domestic use, for cooking, roasting,
and baking [Breap; Foon].

2. In winter they warmed themselves and their
apartments by ‘a fire of coals’ (Jer. xxxvi. 22,
23; Luke xxii. 30). In the rooms it would
seem that a brazier with charcoal was usually
employed, as is still the case in western Asia,
although the ovens and fire-places used in baking
bread might have been, and doubtless were, as
now, often employed to keep rooms properly
warm [Breap; Coat].

3. The religious use of fire was for consuming
the victims on the altar of burnt-offerings, and in
burning the incense on the gollen altar: hence
the remarkable phrase in Isa. xxxi. 9—‘ the Lord,
whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jeru-
salem.’

4. In time of war torches were often carried by
the soldiers; which explains the use of torches in
the attack of Gideon upon the camp of the Mi-
dianites (Judg. vii. oe This military use of
torches was very general among ancient nations,
and is alluded to by many of their writers (Sta-
tius, Thed. iv. 5. 7; Stobeus, Serm. p. 194;
Michaelis, in Symbol. Liter. Bremens. iii. 251).

5. Burning criminals alive does not appear to
have been known to the Hebrews; but as an addi-
tional disgrace the bodies were in particular cases
burnt after death had been inflicted (Josh. vii.
25; compare verse 15); and it is in this sense
that the allusions to burning as a punishment are
to be understood, except when the reference is to
a foreign usage, as in Dan. iii. 22, 24, sq.

6. In time of war towns were often destroyed
by fire. This, as a war usage, belungs to all times

- and nations; but among the Hebrews there were
some particular notions connected with it, as an
act of strong abhorrence, or of devotement to
abiding desulation, The principal instances his-
torically commemorated are the destruction by
fire of Jericho (Josh. vi. 24); Ai (Josh. viii. 19);
Hazor (Jush. xi. LL); Laish (Judg. xviii. 27);
the towns of the Benjamites (Judg. xx. 48); Zik-
lag, by the Amalekites (1 Sam. xxx. 1); Jazer,
by Pharaoh (1 Kings ix. 16); and the temple
and palaces of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar
(2 Kings xxv. 9). Even the war-chariots of the
Canaanites were burut by the Israelites, probably
on the principle of precluding the possibility of
recovery, by the enemy, of instruments of strength
for which they had themselves no use. The fre-
qnency with which towns were fired in ancient
warlare is shown by the very numerous threats by
the prophets that the towns of Israel should be
burned by their foreign enemies. Some great
towns, not of Israel, are particularly named; and
it would be an interesting task to trace, as far as
the materials exist, the fulfilment of these pro-


FIRMAMENT.


phecies in those more marked examples. Among
the places thus threatened we find Damascus (Isa.
xliii. 12, 13), Gaza, Tyre, Teman (Amos 1. 7,
10, 11). The temples and idols of a conquered
town or people were very often burned by the
victors, and this was enjoined as a duty to the _
Israelites (Deut. vii. 5, 25; xii. 13; xiii. 6; Isa.
liii. 12, 13). ‘

There were some special regulations respecting
the use of fire among the Israelites. ‘Tne most
remarkable of these was the prohibition to light a
fire on the Sabbath (Exod, xxxiii. 3). As the
primary design of this law appears to have hen
to prevent the proper privileges of the Sablath-day
from being lost to any une through the care amd
time required in cooking victuals (Exod. xvi. 23),
it is doubted whether the use of fire for warmth on
the Sabbath-day was included in this interdiction.
In practice, it would appear that the tire was
never lighted or kept up for cooking ou the
Sabbath-day, and that consequently there were
no fires in the houses during the Sabbaths of the
greater part of the year; but it may be collected
that, in winter, tires for warming apartments were
kept up from the previous day. Michaelis is
very much mistaken with reapect to the climate
of Palestine, in supposing that the inhabitants
could, without much discomfort, dispense with
fires for warmth during winter ( Mosdisches Recht,
iv. 195). The modern Jews, although there is
no cooking in their houses, have tires on the
Sabbath-day, which are attended to by a Christian
servant; or a charwoman is hired to attend to the
fires of several houses, which she visits repeatedly
during the day.

Another law required the damage done bya
conflagration in the fields to be made good
by the pony through whose incaution it had been
kindled (Exod. xxii. 6). This was a most useful
and necessary law in a country where the warmth
and drought of suminer soon render the herbaze
and underwood highly combustible, so that a tire
once kindled often spreads most extensively, and
produces disastrous consequences (Judg. ix. 15;
xv.5). This law was calculated to teach caution
in the use of fire to the herdsmen in the fields,
who were the parties most concerned. And it is
to be remembered that the herdsmen were ceue-
rally substantial persons, and had their assistant
shepherds, for whose imprudence they were made
responsible. Still no inference is to be drawn
from this law with regard to fires breaking cut in
towns, the circumstances being so very ditlcrent.

In the sacerdotal services no fire but that of tie
altar of bumt-ollerings could lawfully be usd.
That fire was originally kindled supernaturally,
and was ever after kept up. From it the fire
used in the censers for buming incense was als
ways taken; and for neglecting this and using
common tire, Nadab and Abihu were struck dead
by ‘fire from heaven’ (Lev. x. 8, 8q.; Num. iii.
4, 26, 61).

Respecting ‘passing through the fire.’ sce Mo-
Locu; and tor the ¢ pillar of tire, see Exopvs.

FIRMAMENT is the translation given in the
Authorized Version and the Vulgate fur the He
brew J rakeeah (Gen. i. 6), which is more
fully detined by DVT PPI (Gen. i. 14,
15, 17), that which is distended, expanded—the
eee of heaven, ¢. e. the visible arch or vault
of heaven resting on the earth.


.


FIRST-BORN.


With some old astronomers the ment is
the orb of the fixed stars, or the highest of all
the heavens. But in Scripture, and in common
language, it is used for the middle regions, the
space or expanse appearing like an arch imme
diately above us in the heavens. Many of the
ancients, and of the moderns also, account the
firmament a fluid substance; but those who gave
it the name of ‘firmament’ must have regarded
it as solid, and so we would infer from Gen. i. 6,
where it forms the division between water and
water.

Plato, in his Timeus, makes mention of the
visible heaven under the notion of rdow (from
relvw, to extend), not unlike the Hebrew deriva-
tion.

The Hebrews seem to have considered the
firmament as transparent, like a crystal or sap-
a (Ezek. i. 22; Dan. xii. 3; Exod. xxiv. 10;

v. iy. 6), thus making it different from the
brazen or iron heaven of Homer.

In the Ptolemaic astronomy, the firmament is
ealled the eizhth heaven or sphere, with respect
to the seven spheres of the planets, which it sur-
rounds, It is supposed to have two motions,
adiumal motion imparted to it by the primum
motile, from east to west, about the poles of the
ecliptic, and another opposite motion from west to
east ; which last is completed, according to Tycho,
in 25,412 years; according to Ptolemy, in
36,000 ; and according to Copernicus, in 25,800;
in which time the fixed stars return to the same
points in which they were at the beginning. This

riod is called the Platonic, or Great Year

Astronomy ].—E. M.

FIRST-RORN. The privileges of the first-
born son, among the Hebrews, are indicated under
BirtHriaur.

FIRST-FRUITS. There are various regula-
tions in the law of Moses resnecting first-fruits,
which would be of much interest to us could we,
in every cawe, discern the precise object in view.
No doubt the leading object, as far as regards the
offeriny of the first-fruits to God, was, that all the
after-fruits and after-gatherings might”be conse-
erated in and throngh them; and it was not less
the dictate of a natural impulse that the first-
fruits should be offered to God in testimony of
thankfulness for his bounties. Hence we find some
analogous cnstom among most nations in which
material offerings were used. There are, however,
some particulars in the Mosaical regulations which
these considerations do not adequately explain,

1. First-Fruirs oy Fruittrers. It was
directed that the first-fruits of every tree whose
frit was used fur food, should, for the first three
years of bearing, be counted ‘uncircumcised,’ and
regarded as unclean (Lev. xix. 23, 24). It was
unlawful to sell them, to eat them, or to make
any benetit of them: It was only in the fourth
year of bearing that they were accounted ‘holy,’
and the fruit of that year was made an offering of
first-fruits, and was either given to the priests
(Num. xviii. 12, 13), or, as the Jews themselves
understand, was eaten by the owners of it

‘before the Lord, at Jerusalem,’ as was the
case with second tithe. After the fourth year
all fruits of trees were available for use by the
owner. As the general principle of the law was,
that only that which was perfect should be used
we offerings, it is an obvious inference that the


FIRST-FRUITS, 105


fruits of trees were considered imperfect unti) the
fourth year; and if so, the law may have had the
ulterior object of excluding from use crude, im-
mature, and therefore unwholesume fruits. “Vii-
chaelis (iii. 267-8), indeed, finds a benefit tc the
trees themselves in this regulation: ‘The erong-
mical object of the law is very striking. very
gardener will teach us not to let fruit-tree bear
in their earliest years, but to pluck off the blos-
soms; and for this reason, that they will thus
thrive the better, and bear more abundantly after-
wards, since, if we ray not taste the fruit the first
three years, we shall be the more disposed to pinch
off the blossoms, and the son will learn to ¢o this
of his father. The very expression “to regar ' them
as uncircumcised,” suggests the propriety of pinch-
ing them off; I do not say cutting them off,
because it is generally the hand and not a knife
that is employed in the operation.’

2. First-Fruits oy THE YEARLY INCREASE.


- Of these there were two kinds—1. The jirst-fruits


in the sheaf (Lev. xxiii. 10). 2. The jirst-
fruits in the two wave-loaves (Lev. xxiii. 17).
These two bounded the harvest, that in the sheaf
being offered at the beginning of the harvest, upon
the 15th of the month Nisan; the other at the end
of the harvest, on the Feast of Pentecost. These
two are both called NIDIIN tenuphoth, ‘ shake or
wave-offerings.’ 3. The first of the dough, being
the twenty-fourth part thereof, which was given to
the priests (Num. xv. 20); and this kind of
offering was not neglected even after the return
from Babylon (Neh. x. 37). 4. The first-fruits
of the threshing-floor. These two last are called
NIDOWN terumoth, or * heave-offerings ;’ the one,
the ‘heave-offering of the threshing-floor,’ the other
‘the heave-oflering of the dough.’ The words
tenuphoth and terumoth both signify ‘shake-
offering,’ ‘heave-ollering,’ or ‘wave-oflering ;’ but
with the difference that the ertemoth was oflered by
a waving of elevation, moving the oblation upward
and downward, to signify, as we are told, that
Jehovah was the God both of the heaven and earth;
but the tenuphoth was offered by waving of agita-
tion, to and fro, from the right hand to the left,
from east to west, from north to south; which is
alleged to have been in the way of an acknow-
ledgment that Jehovah was the Lord of the whole
world (See Godwyn’s A/oses and Aaron, vi. 2.
pp- 214, 215; also, Lewis's Origines, i. 143-146).
The oblation of the first-fruits of the threshing-
floor was distinguished hy the Jewish writers into
two sorts. The first of these was the first-fruits of
seven things only, namely, wheat, barley, grapes,
figs, pomegranates, olives, and dates. These the
Talmudists distinguish by the name of Bikkurim,
which signifies ‘the choicest part,’ or, what was
first ripe. The treatise or section bearing that
title in the Talmud contains all the regulations by
which practical effect was given, or sought to be
given, to the law.: It is there stated that the owner
was at liberty to bring in what quantity he pleased
as first-fruits; but in gathering, he always bound
about with rushes the portions he designed for the
riests, and said, ‘ Let this be for the first-fruits.’
he second sort consisted of corn, wine, oil, and
whatever other produce was fit for the support of
human life. Cider this class of first-fruits was
included the first of the fleece, by which the priests
were provided with clothes, as by the other offeg-
ings with food. The hair of goats, la are
z


106 FISH.
shorn in the East, was included under this deno-


mination.

The first-fraits were brought up to Jerusalem
with great pomp and ceremony. All the people
of a given district assembled on an appointed day
in one of the towns, and lodged in the streets. On
the following morning the chief of the party gave
the signal for departure in the words, ‘ Arise, let
us go tu Zion, to the house of the Lord our God!’
An ox, destinel for a thank-oilering, went before
them, with gilded homs, and an olive crown upon
his head; and a pipe was also played before them
as they marched on, laden with the tinest products
of their land. When they drew nigh to Jerusalem
they ‘crowned their first-fruits,” that is, they
adored the baskets with flowers, and arranged
their offerings so as to make the most advantageous
and imposing display un entering the city. On
coming nearer, the chief men, hish officers, and
treasurer of the temple, came forth to meet them
and receive them with honour; and as they went
by, all the workmen of the city stood up and sa-
luted them, saying, ‘O, our brethren, inhabitants
of the city N——, ye are welcome.’ The pipe
still played till the party came to the mount of
the temple; every one then, however high or
noble, took his own basket upon his shoulder, and
went forward till he came to the court of the
temple. The Levites then sang, ‘ I will extol thee,
O Lord, because thon hast exalted me, and hast
not made miue enemies to rejoice over me.’ The
offerer, having the basket still upon his shoulder,
then hegan to recite the passage, ‘I profess this
day,’ &c. (Deut. xxvi. 3-10); and when he came
to the part, ‘A Syrian ready to perish was my
fatlier,” he took down the basket from his shoulder
and paused, while the priest waved the offering
before the altar; the rest of the passage was then
recited 5 after which the offerer placed the basket of
offerings before the altar, worshipped God, and
went out. It was usual with those who were
liberally disposed to hang turtle-doves or pigeons
about their baaketa and these formed part of the
offering. As each offering was left in the basket,
that receptacle formed, in fact, a beneficial, thongh
not a ceremonial part of the offering, and the Tal-
mudists tell us of princes who, for that reason,
presented their offerings in baskets of gold. The
first-fruits became the property of the course of
priests which was in actual service. The party
who brought them was obliged to spend the uight
following his offering in Jerusalem, but was at
liberty to return home the ensuing morning.

It is obvious that this and some other of the
apparently onerous obligations of the law, cannot
be penpely appreciated or understood when re-
garded in the ‘dry light’ of abstract duties or
exactions, They were surrounded by engaging
and picturesque associations, calculated to make
their observance a matter of pride and pleasure to
all the parties concerned.

FISH (35 dag ; Gr. ix8ds, Gen. ix. 2; Num.
xi. 22; Jonah ii. 1, 10; Matt. vii. 10; xiv. 17;
xv. 34; Luke v. 6; John xxi. 6, 8,11). Fishes,
strictly so called, that is, oviparous, vertebrated,
cold-blooded animals, breathing water by means
of gills or branchiw, and generally provided with
fins, are not unfrequently mentioned in the
Bible, but never specifically. In the Mosaic law
(Lev. xi. 9-12), the species proper for food are dis-
tinguished by having scales and fins, while those


FISH.


without scales are held to be unclean, and there-
fore rejected. The law may have given rise to
some casuistry, as many fishes have scales, which,
though imperceptible when first caught, are very
apparent after the skin is in the least dried. The
species which were known to the Hebrews, or at
least to those who dwelt on the coast, may have
been very numerous, because the usual current of
the Mediterranean sets in, with a great depth
of water, at the Straits of Gibraltar, and passes
eastward on the African side until the shoals of
the Delta of the Nile begin to tum it towards the
north: it continues in that direction along the
Syrian shores, and falls into a broken course only
when turning westward on the Cyprian and
Cretan coasts. Every spring, with the sun's re-
turn towards the north, innumerable troops of
littoral species, having passed the winter in the
oftings of Western Africa, return northward for
spawning, or are impelled in that direction by
other unknown laws. A small part only ascends
along the Atlantic coast of Spain and Portugal
towards the British Channel, while the main bodies
pass chiefly into the Mediterranean, follow the
general current, and do not break into more scat-
tered families until they have swept round the
shores of Palestine. The Pelagian, or truly deep
sea fishes, in common with the indigenous species,
remain the whole year, or come about midsummer,
and follow an uncertain course more in the centre
and towards the deepest waters. Off Nice alone
Risso (Ichthyol. de Nice) found and described
315 species; and there is every reason to believe
that the coasts of Tyre and Sidon would produce
at least as great a number. The name of the
latter place, indeed, is derived from the Phaenician
word fish, and it is the oldest tishing-establishment
for commercial purposes known in history. In-
dustry and security alone are wanting to make
the same locality again a flourishing place in this
respect. The Hebrews had a more imperfect ac-
quaintance with the species found in the Red Sea,
whither, to a certain extent, the majority of fishes
found in the Indian Ocean resort. Beside these, in
Egypt th@y had anciently eaten those of the Nile;
subsequently those of the lake of Tiberias and of
the rivers falling into the Jordan; and they may
have been acquainted with species of other lakes,
of the Orontes, and even of the Euphrates. The
supply, however, of this article of food, which the
Jewish people appear to have consumed largely,
came chiefly from the Mediterranean; and we
have the authority of Neh, xiii. 16, for the fact,
that Phanicians of Tyre actually resided in
Jermsalem as dealers in fish; which must have
led to an exchange of that commodity for com
and cattle. Thuse which might be eaten, because
they had scales and fins, were among the most
nutritious and common, probably such as still
abound on the coast; being genera of Percide,
Sceenida, and other families. It is dificult to
select the most interesting of these, and to point
them out with other names than are absolutely
scientific, because many are unknown on our
coasts, and others have names indeed, but nearly
all repetitions of such as occur in England, with-
out being of the same species. The best catalogue
hitherto attempted is in Kitto’s Palestine, vol. ic;
to which numerous additions might be made, but
that it appears preferable to give here only a ge
neral outline, with some exceptions as to the most


FISH.


important species. Taking the Cuvierian system for
our guide, we have of the Percida, or perch tribes,
both in the seas and rivers of Palestine and Egypt,
several species uf perch (Perca) properly so called ;
Lates calcarifer, or perch of the Nile, once held
sacred at Latopolis; Basse (Labraz), of which the
LL. Lupus ascends the fresh water of rivers, and
anciently brought an incredible price at Rome,
if caught in the Tiber above a certain bridge,
and weighed somewhat heavy. It frequents the
whole circle of the Mediterranean and Black Sea.
Sillago sihama of the Red Sea, known by the
Orieutal Frankish name of leeche, transferred from
the Mediterranean side, where it is bestowed upon
two species of the cod-tisl family, because all
these species are of exquisite flavour; though it
may be doubted whether these, like many others
having very small scales, were considered ad-
missible in the Hebrew market. A proportion of
the eight or ten species of Merrow (Serranus) and
Barbers (Anthias) may have been held similarly
objectionable. The Sphyrena, or barracuta of
the Mediterranean ; surmullets (Audlus), several

cies of gurnard (7rigda), and of flying gurnard
Ubacla piers frequent the seas of Palestine.
But Scienoid and Sparoid genera offer the greatest
number of species, and are particularly abundant
in all parts of the Mediterranean, coming in troups
at certain seasons. They are edible, and mostly
resplendent with large scales. Scieana umbra
(Aquila?), or great sea-bream, sometimes near
seven feet long; Corvina sciana nigra, Umbrina
cirrhoga, &c. The Sparvide of the Levant con-
tain several species of Sargus (sheepsheads),
Chrysophris (giltheads), Pagrus, or rosy Sparus ;
Pagelius, among which the celebrated Pag. Mor-
myrus runs up the Nile; Dentex mahsena and
D. harak of the Red Sea; several species of
Boops and Gerres, or rock-tish; Gerres oyena,
&e.

Next we have the great tribe of Scomberida,
or mackerels, with numerous genera, and still
more abundant species, frequenting the Mediter-
ranean in prodigious numbers, and mostly excel-
lent for the table; but, beiug often without per-
ceptible scales, they may have been of question-
able use to the Hebrews. All the species resort to
the deep seas, and foremost of them is the genus
Thynnus, our tunny, a name that may be de-
rived from the Hebrew or Phenician }f than
[waste It is abundant at certain seasons in

offing of every part of the Mediterranean, but is
most successfully pursued in the western part and
about Sicily, and is frequently seen on the coasts
of Candia and Cyprus. The three or four species
which enter or remain in the seas of the Levant,
commonly called Bonnetos and Albicores, are all
observed to delight in moving against the current.
Of this family, but less frequent, is the great
sword-fish (Xiphias), oftenest seen to the eastward
of Sicily. The genus Scomber (mackerel, pro-
perly 20 called) offers two or three, and of the
Scad (Caranz) at least six species. Both are
very numerous in their seasons. Among them
Caranz petaurista (skipjack) is often seen
dancing on the calm surface of deep water, and
even in shore about Tyre and Sidon; but Seriola
speciosa belongs to tbe Red Sea. Omitting spe-
cies of the Auzis, Sarda, Cibium, and Naucrates,
ar pilot-fish, found in every sea, we may name
Vomer inus, Gimel-el-Bahr, or camel-


FISH. 707


fish of the Arabs; Stromateus fiatola, most come
mon on the Barbary aud Syrian shores; the genus
Coryphena (dolphin of seamen), whereof Cor.
Hippurus is often noticed chasing the flying-tish
(Ezocetus) off Cyprus; and there are several
other subgenera belunging to this family in every
part of the Levantine seas,

Passing without notice a great number of less
important genera, we come to the Mugiloid family
(Mugilide). The sea-mullets (Mugil, properly
so called) afford at least five species, and among
these the real Mugil Cephalus is one found all
round the coast of Africa, from the Red Sea to
Alexandria, and is valuable in every part of the
Mediterranean. There are besides several others
in both seas. Many species of other families exist
on the coast of Palestine, but are of no general
importance, excepting, perliaps, one of the genus
Lophius, or sea-devil (tishing-frog, or angler),
reaching in the Mediterranean to five feet in length;
and another species in the Red and Eastern seas,
little Jess : both are hideous monsters in appear-
ance, with the mouth of sufficient width to swal-
low their own bulk. They have tentacula or fili-
form appendages on the head; and in hot seas
they crawl over rocks and in the sands partially
above water. It seems that one of this genus, the
Kapa Moramola of Malabar, is typical of Vishnou
in his avatar of Matsya, when he is fabled, under
the form of a tish, to have drawn the ark of Noah
by the tilaments on his head to the mountain of
Nanbundana, the Ararat of Hindu legends. The
idol is still worshipped by the name of Jugger-nat,
or Somnauth, in the likeness of a Lophius, almost
obliterated in the carving so that it resembles a
human fist, having a wide mouth at the knuckles,
with a nose and eyes on the back. Such was the
image which Mahmoud, sultan of Ghizni, shattered
in 1025, and found to bea receptacleof riches. That
of Poor-Bunda bears the same shape; and the figure
at the black pagoda of Juggernauth still retains
some traits of the primitive legend, though de
formed by others still more absurd ; but they serve
to trace one of the many pagan reminiscences of
the patriarch Noah, and form another version of
the Philistine Dagon.

Among other families of fishes not yet adverted
to, the labroid (Labride, Wrasse of Pennant)
abounds in genera and species ; as also the Scarus
(parrot-fish), whereof two species at least frequent
the seas of Alexandria, Crete, and Cyprus. Scarus
viridis and Scarus Cretensts, one of which, no
doubt, was the green specimen which Dr. Clarke
did not recognise at Jatla when shown him by an
Arab: the Cretan species was once considered of
sufficient importance among Roman epicures to
cause an oflicer of high rank to be sent witha
squadron of vessels for the sole purpose of obtaining
and conveying a‘eertain number of living fish to
stock the Tyrrhenian sea. Genera of carps (Cy-
printde) are particularly abundant in the fresh
waters of Asia. It was from thence Europe and
England obtained them. Among these the orfe
is still deemed sacred at Orfah (Ur of Scripture ?),
where numbers are kept in the piscina of the
mosque dedicated to Abraham. Of pikes (Eso-
cidz) are found chietly marine genera, such as
gar-fish (Jelone), mackerel-jack (Scomber Esox),
and Balaloo (Hemiramphus), to which may be
added flying fish (Exocatus), all frequenting the
Syrian coast. After these may sia ig the

z


16 FISH.


genus Mormyrus, whereof the species, amounting
to six or seven, are almost exclusively tenants of
the Nile and the lake of Tiberias, and held among
the most palatable tish which the fresh waters pro-
duce. One species, Mormyrus Oxryrinchus, was
worshipped by the idolatrous Exyptians.

Cat or Sheat-fish (Siluride), with from two
to eight berbels at the mouth, are a family of
numerous genera, all of which, excepting the
Loricaria, ave destitute of a scaly covering, and
are consequently unclean to the Hebrews; and
some species are said to be poisonous or electrical,
Sacral of thern were held by the ancient Gentile
nations, and by some of the modern, in high esti-
mation, such as the black fish (Simak-el-asicad)
of Aleppo, probably Silurus Clarias Gronovit, the
shilbe of the Nile, and several others. Of sal-
mons (Salmonide@) Myletes dentex, or Hassel-
guisti, belongs to the best edible fishes of the
Nile; and Clupeide (herrings), beside a specie
of shad (Alosa), offer several delicate sardines
(Eugraulis), abundant on the coast of Africa;
and the tierce bechir (Polypterus) of the Nile is
praised for the table. Next follow the eed or
gadoid species (Gadide), already pareelly noticed,
being, besides several others, such as Merluccius
Lepidion, present about Tyre. Pleuronectes, or
flat-fish, found off the Egyptian coasts, and eel-
shaped genera, bred abundantly in the lakes of
the Delta. Finally, there are the cartilaginous
orders, where we find the file-tish (genus Bulistes),
having a species (B. Vetuda) in the waters of the
Nile; and true chondropterygians, containing the
sharks, numerous in genera and species, both in
the Mediterranean and Red Sea. We notice only
Carcharius Lamia, the white or raging shark,
often found of enormous size off Alexandria, and
always attended by several pilot-tish (Naucrates),
and the saw-tish (Pristis Antiquorum), most
dreaded by the pearl-fishers in the Persian Gulf,
and which has been seen in the Red Sea pursuing
its prey even into the surf, with such force and
velucity that, on one occasion, half of a fish cut
asunder by the saw flew on shore at the feet of an
officer while employed in the surveying service.
On rays we shall only add that most of the genera
are represented by species in either sea, and in par-
ticular the sting rays ( 7rigon), and electric rays
( Torpedo), with which we close our general review
of the class, although many interesting remarks
might be subjoined, all tending to clear up exist-
ing misconceptions respecting tishes in general—
such as that cetaceans, ur the whale tribe, belong
to them ; and the misapplication of the term when
tortoises and oysters are denominated fish ; for the
error is general, and the Arabs even include lizards
in the appellation.

Though the Egyptian priesthood abstained from
their use, all the other castes dweltng in the valley
of the Nile chiefly subsisted on the fish of the river,
while they capriciously abhorred those of the sea.
There was a caste of fishermen; and allusion to
the artificial reservoirs and fish-ponds of Egypt
occurs in the Prophets (Isa. xix. 8-10).

But the Hebrews could draw only a small
supply from the lake of Tiberias and the affluents
of the Jordan. On the coast the great sea-tisheries
were in the slack waters, within the dominion of
the Phoenicians, who must have eent the supply into
the interior in a cured or salted state; although the
fact involves the question how far in that condition,


FLEA.


coming out of Pagan hands, consumption by a
Hebrew was strictly lawful : perhaps it may be pre
sumed that national wants had sufficient influence
to modify the law. The art of curing fish was
well understood in Egypt, and unquestionably in
Pheenicia, since that industrious nation had early
establishments for the purpose at the Golden Hom
or Byzantium, at Portus Symbolorum in Tauric
Chersonesus, and even at Calpe (Bisepharat ?), in
the present bay of Gibraltar. With regard to the
controversy respecting the prophet Jonah having
been swallowed by a huge sea-monster [Wate],
it may be observed that great cetaceans occur in
the Mediterranean, as well as great sharks, and
that, in a case where the miraculous intervention
of Almighty power is manifest, learned trifling
about the presence of a mysticete, or the dimen-
sions of its gullet, is out of place.

The form of a tish (Notius Poseidon) was, from
remote ages, a type of protective dominion, which
the symbolizing spirit of the ancients caused to
pass into Christianity ; as appears trom Eusebius
(Life of Constantine), and St. Augustine (De
Civitate Dei). On the walls of the oldest cata-
combs of Rome the representation of the IX@TZ
is frequently discernible, and always interpreted
as an emblem of the Saviour.

Bochart’s conclusions (De pisce Tobia, p. 748),
respecting the fish which assailed Tobit, are totally
inadmissible. Stlurus Glanis is not a tish known
in South Western Asia; but it nay be worth no-
ticing that the Seesar of the Indus is a crocodile,
probably of the genus Gavial, which growe to a
great size, is eaten, and has a gall-bladder, still
used to cure obstinate wounds and defluctions.
Whether any great saurian now ascends the Ea-
phrates or Tigris may be a question; but as these
animals in the East are ranked with fish, and
pass from fresh water into salt, they are probably
still found along the whole southern coast of
Persia, and may anciently have frequented the
rivers in question. We notice these iculars
as they answer the conditions of Tobit’s fish more
completely than any other hitherto pointed out.—


C. HLS.
FITCHES. [Kersacu.]
FLAG. [Acuv.] ”


FLAGON (TY'Y; Sept. adyavov’. The
word thus rendered in the English Bibles (2 Sam.
vi. 19; 1 Chron. xvi. 3; Hos. iii. 1; Cant. ii. 5)
means rather a cake, especially of dried fizs or
raisins, pressed into a particular form [Fruits].

FLAX. (Pisursu.} .


FLEA (O93, puler trritans, Class aptera,
Linn.; siphonaptera, Latr.; aphanaptera, Kirby)
occurs only 1 Sam. xxiv. 14; xxvi. 20, where
David thus addresses his persecutor Saul at the
cave of Adullam: ‘After whom is the king of
Israel come out? after whom dost thou pursue?
—aiter a flea; ‘The king of Israel is come out
to seek a flea!’ In both these es our trans
lation omits the force of the word INN, which
is found in the Hebrew of each: thus, ‘to pursue
after, to seek one or a single flea.’ In the former

ge the Septuagint rves it—ywAdou évds 5
in the latter it omits all mention of the flea, and
reads wads xarabidxe: 5 vuxrixdpat ey ois
Spect, ‘as the owl hunteth on the mountains.’
But another Greek version in the Herapla reads


FLESH.


oe diva. The Vulgate preserves the word in
th passages, pulicem unum. David's allusion
to the flea displays great address. It is an appeal
founded upon the immense disparity between
Saul as the king of Israel, and himself as the
poor contemptible object of the monarch’s labori-
ous pursuit. Hunting a flea is a comparison, in
other ancient writings, for much labour expended
to secure a worthless result.

Although this insect has been used asa po-
pular emblem for insignificance, yet, when consi-
dered by itself, it has high claims upon the atten-
tion of the naturalist. Even to the naked eye
there is something pleasing in its appearance, and
elegant in its postures; but it is indebted to the
microscope for our acquaintance with the flexible,
highly polished, and ever clean suit of armour in
which it is encased cap-a-pie, its finely-arched
neck, large beautiful eye, antenne, muscular
jointed legs, its piercer and sucker—forming one
most complicated instrument—the two long,
hooked, sharp claws, in which its legs severally
terminate. The agility of the flea places it at the
head of all the leaping insects, when its strength
is considered in elation to its size, it being able to
leap, unaided by wings, 200 times its own length.
It was certainly with misplaced wit that Aris-
tophanes (Nub. 145) endeavoured to ridicule
Socrates for having measured yWaAAay dxdcous
BDdorro robs abrijs xédas, ‘how many of its own
lengths, at one spring, a flea can hop.’ Suchgis
the happy change in the state of science that
philosophers have since done this with impunity :
they have also traced the interesting career of this
insect from the round smooth egg deposited on
the creatures that can afford food to the larva,
falling down through the hair to the skin; the
shining pearl-coloured active larva, feeding on
the scurfy surface of the cuticle, rolling itself into
a ball when disturbed ; the cocoon or silken bag
which it spins around itself; and its re-appearance
asa perfect insect. It is more than likely that
the fea, besides participating in the happiness of
all animated nature, and supplying a link in
the universal chain of being, as well as serving
the incidental use of chastising uncleanliness, may
also, along with many other tribes of insects,
serve the purpose of the scavenger, in clearing
away some source of disease (see Cuvier's Animal
Kingdom, Lond. 1834, art. Pulex). Linneus
has assigned a personal service to mankind to
some other insects, with which popular associa-
tions are even less pleasing, but which unerringly
appear where the habits of mankind render their

resence needful. Owing to the habits of the
lower orders, fleas abound so profusely in Syria,
especially during the spring, in the streets and
dusty bazaars, that persons of condition always
change their long dresses upon returning home.
There is a popular saying in Palestine that ‘ the
king of the fleas keeps his court at Tiberias ;’
though many other places in that region might
dispute the distinction with that town (Kitto’s
Physical History of Palestine, p. 421).—J. ¥. D.


FLESH (3). This word bears a variety
of significations in Scripture :—

1. It is applied, generally, to the whole ani-
mated creation, whether man or beast; or, to all
beings whose material substance is flesh (Gen. vi.
13, 17, 19; vii. 15, &c.


FLY. 709


2. But it is more particularly applied to ‘man-
Kind’; and is, in fact, the only Hebrew word
which answers to that term (Gen. vi. 12; Ps. xlv.
3; cxlv. 21; Isa. xl. 5,6). In this sense it is
used somewhat figuratively to denote that evil
principle which is opposed to the spirit, and to
God, and which it is necessary to correct and
subdue (Gen. vi. 5; Job x. 4; Isa. xxxi. 3;
Matt. xvi. 17; Gal. i. 16, &.).

3. The word ‘flesh’ is opposed to YD3 nephesh,
‘soul,’ or ‘spirit,’ just as we oppose body and soul
(Job xiv. 22; Prov. xiv. 30; x. 18).

4. The ordinary senses of the word, namely,
the flesh of men or beasts (Gen. xli. 2, 19; Job
xxxi. 23, 25), and flesh as used for food (Exod.
xvi. 12; Lev. vii. 19), are both sufficiently ob-
vious ; and with respect to the latter see Foon.

5. The word ‘flesh’ is also used as a modest
general term for the secret parts, in such passages
as Gen. xvii. 11; Exod. xxviii. 42; Lev. xx. 2;
Ezek. xxiii. 20; 2 Peter ii. 7, 8, 10; Jude vii.
In Prov. v.11 the ‘flesh of the intemperate’ is
described as being consumed by infamous dis-


eases,
FLOCKS. Pownce
FLOOD. ELUGE. }
FLOUR. [Breap; Miz; Orrerrinas.]
FLOWERS. [Pranrs.]
FLUTE. [Music.]


FLY. This word is used in the English Version
to represent the two Hebrew words 2 and
AN}. 1. BW occurs Exod. viii. 21, 22, 24, 29,
31; Ps. Ixxviii. 45, and cv. 21; all which pas-
sages relate to the plague of flies inflicted upon
Pharaoh and his people. In the Sept. it is uni-
formly rendered xuyduua, or the dog-fly. In
Exodus Jerome renders it by the fullowing phrases
and words, omne genus muscarum, musce diversi
generis, musca hujnsmodi, musca gravissima, and
museca. In the Psalms he renders it cynomyia.
It seems most probable that a single species only
is intended, whatever it may be, from the way in
which it is introduced, ‘I will send JUYATAN,
the arob,’ compared with verses 29, 31, ‘there
remained not “MN one,’ that is, one arob, ovSeula,
nec una quidem. ‘The words, the avob, may be
substituted for ‘swarms of flies,’ throughout the
narrative, with only an apparent exception in the
2ith verse; but there, the words 733 DY, &e.
may be rendered, the arob came numerously or
grievously, (Sept. xapeyevero 7 xuvéuua wAjO0s,
‘the dog-tly arrived, a multitude’); since instances
of a similar use of the word 33 occur Gen. 1. 9;
Exod. ix. 3; x. 14, &c., where it appears to be
used like the word gravis by the Romans. It has,
however, been much debated what particular spe-
cies is meant. Nothing can be gathered from the
references to it inthe Hebrew, farther than that it
was ‘upon Pharaoh, and upon the Egyptians,’
that it filled their houses, covered the ground,
corrupted or destroyed the land (Query, the inha-
bitants, Gen, vi. 12), and devoured their persons,
(Sce also Wis. xvi. 9.) The rendering of the Sep-
tuagint, cuvduue, is entitled tomuch consideration.
It is evidently compounded of kbwv, a dog, and
pica fly; and because both the one and the
other of these creatures come uninvited, on some
occasions, and though driven away, as often return,
so the word formed of the union of the two, is used
by ancient authors, to indicate consummate tm-


‘T10 FOOD.


. Thus Homer represents Mars as ap-
plying the epithet to Minerva, for instigating the
gods to quarrel (J/. xxi. 394). It is also referred
to, as an insect, by Elian, who, in describing the
myops, tabanus, or horse-fly, says, it is similar to
what is called the xuvdéuua (Hist. Anim. iv.
$1). Philo, in his Life of Moses (i. 23, p. 401,
ed. Mangey). expressly describes it as a biting
insidious creature, which comes like a dart, with
great noise, and rushing with great impetuosity
on the skin, sticks to it most tenaciously. It
seems likely that Jerome, in translating Exodus,
derived the word from DY, ‘to mingle,’ and under-
stood by it a mixture of noxious creatures, as did
Josephus, Aquila, and all the ancient translators,
The diversity of Jerome's renderings in Exodus,
however, betokens his uncertainty, and in the
Psalms he has adopted that of the Septuagint.
More modern writers, reasoning on other senses of
the Hebrew word, and which are very numerous,
have proposed several different insects. Thus,
one of the meanings of J7Y is ‘to darken,’ aud
Mouffet observes that the name cynomyia agrees
with no kind of flies better than with those black,
large, compressed flies, which boldly beset cattle,
and not only obtain ichor, as other flies, but also
suck out blood from beneath, and occasion great
pee He observes that they have uo proboscis,

ut, instead of it, have double sets of teeth, like
wasps, which they infix deeply in the skin; and
adds that they greatly infest the ears uf dogs
(Theat. Insect. cxi.). Pliny describes an insect
of this kind (/ist. Nat. xi. 40). So also Co-
jumella (vii. 13). See Pliny by Grandsagne
and Cuvier, Parisiis, 1528, vol. ii. p. 461, note.
Others have proposed the blatta Orientalis or
AEgyptia of Linneus, as answering considerably
to the characteristics of voracity, intrusion into
houses, &c. &c. (Forskal, Descrip, Animal., Prat,
p. 22). The miracle involved in the plague of flies
consisted, partly at least, in the creature being
brought against the Egyptians in so great an
abundance during tcinter. The particular species
is, however, at present undetermined. 2. 2)37 is
ee the generic word for fly. It occurs
cles. x. 1, and Isa. vii. 18, Sept. wvia, musca.


It enters into composition in the word 3)3? bya,
fly-Baal, é. e. the god Baal (2 Kings i. 2, 3, 16),
an oracular deity of the Ekronites [Baanzenus].
The phrase hissing, or rather Aistig. for the fly
Isa. vii. 18) is explained in the article Brg.
Bochart, a Rosenmiiller ; Rosenmiiller, in loc. ;
ichaelis, Suppl. ad Hebraic. Ler. No. 1962;
Oedmann's Verm. Sammlungen, H. ii. p. 150;
Winer, Bibl. Handwort.)—J. ¥F. D.
FOLD. [Pastvuraar.]


FOOD. The necessary act of taking food was,
at a very early period of the world’s history, con-
nected immediately with religion. If regard was
had to the source whence came the means of
subsistence, it was natural that there should
be some distinct recognition of that great and
bountiful Being who gave rain from heaven,
and fruitful seasons, filling men’s hearts with joy
and gladness (Acts xiv. 17). If scope was given
to the feelings which bind man to man, and
lead him to eat and drink in communion with
his brethren, the additional pleasure hence expe-
Fenced, and a due respect for the laws of hospi-
tality, would awaken in the beart the religious


FOOD,


sympathies; and the sanctions of religion would
soon come to cement bonds which convenience
had originated, and to raise and hallow enjoy-
ments which were designed and fitted for the pre-
servation of the species. Man, too, has in all ages
been led to set apart and offer w the Divinity a
portion at least of what in each case was esteemed
of highest value. But food is of all things the
most valuable, since it is our life. In the grosser
anthropomorphitic systems of religion, the gods
would also be considered as being gratified by
food-offerings ; if, indeed, some sort of ambrosia
and nectar were not needed by them. Then those
who served at the altar seemed to have a right to
live by the altar (1 Cor. ix. 13); priests would
therefure encourage, not without a corresponding
approval on the part of the worshipper, such offer-
ings and such appropriations to themselves as
would at least supply the recurring wants of
nature. And if we look at the final cause of this
connection between the act of eating and the ser-
vices of religion, we shall find a yet deeper reason,
as well as a more powerful one, for their being
occasionally united. Eating implies not only
rsonal but social gratifications, if not of a very
1igh order, yet of a very intense degree; and the
appeal of religion to man while in the enjoyment
of these pleasures is likely to be welcomed, heard,
and obeyed. The social and the religious affec-
tions are thus aroused, made deep and intense,
and then permanently blended together. The
pleasing feelings which arise from the gratifica-
tions of the palate, and the enjoyments, if not
endearments, of social intercourse, are thus, at
least in part, transferred to religion, with which,
by the natural workings of the heart, they become
permanently and indissulubly associated.

How wise, then, was the provision which con-
nected eating with the observances of the Mosaic
religion. Especially when any signal event was
to be commemorated, what could be so effectual
as a ceremonial involving eating and drinking?
The paschal lamb, for instance, and the unlea-
vened bread, spoke in pees tones and by
striking emblems, to each successive generation,
of the great historical fact of which they were
designed to be the perpetual memento. In like
manner ‘the Lord's Supper’ (t Cor. xi. 20), the
breaking of bread from house to house (Acts iL
46), and the dydra:, or love-feasts, ‘ feasts of
charity ' (Jude 12), were all, especially the first,
both wisely designed and admirably fitted to
bring into play, in connection with religion, the
better feelings of humanity, to maintain in ever-
lasting remembrance the events which they sym-
bolized, to make eating and drinking an act of
religion, and to make religion a pleasure. Strange,
indeed, would it have been if Christianity, pro-
ceeding as it did from Him who kuew well what
was in man, and therefore knew well the powers by
which man js swayed, and being, as it is, 80 won-
derfully adapted to meet and supply our wants,
had net made, on behalf of its great purposes, ap
appeal to that appetite and to those wants and
pleasures which are not least among the great
moving powers of both individual and social
existence.

The productions of a country, at an early pe
riod of the world, necessarily determined its food.
Palestine abounded with grain and various kinds
of vegetables, as well as with animals of diffesent


Foon


species. Such, accordingly, in general, was the
sustenance which its inhabitants took.

The use of fire, and the state of the arts of
life in a country, must also have important in-
fluence on its covkery; in other words, will go
far to determine the state in which the natural
productions of the earth will be eaten. If the
grain #® to become bread, a long and by no
Means easy process has to be gone through. Skill
in preparing food is therefore held in high repute;
so that, as in Homer, princes slay the cattle, and
poetry details the process by which the carcass is
made ready for being eaten (Jiiad, i. 457).

Bread formed ‘ the stat of lite’ to the ancient
Hebrews even more tuan to ourselves; but the
modes of preparing it have been noticed under
other heads ([Brrap; Mitt}.

On a remarkable occasion a calf, tender and
good, is taken, slain, dressed (rvasted, most pro-
bably, Judg. vi. 19; Gen. xxvii. 7; 1 Sam. ii. 13;
Exod. xii, 8,93 boiling was not known till long
afterwards), and set before the guests, while the
entertainer (Abraham) respectfully stood at their
side, doubtless to render any desirable service.
The sauce or accompaniments on this occasion
were butter and milk. From ch. xix. 3, it may
be inferred that the bread was unleavened.

The cases, however, to which reference has been
made were of a special nature; and from them,
‘as well as from what is recorded touching Isaac
and Esau and Jacob, it appears that flesh meat
was reserved as food for guests, or as a dainty for
the sick ; lentils, pulse, onions, grain, honey, and
milk being the ordinary fare. :

The agreeable, and perhaps in part the salu-
brious qualities of salt, were very early known
and recognised: in Lev. ii. 13, it is expressly en-
joined, ‘ Every oblation of thy meat-ollering shalt
thou season with salt; with all thine offerings
shalt thou offer salt.’

Locusts were a permitted (Lev. xi. 22) and a
very common food. At the present day they are
gathered by the Bedouins in the beginning of
April, and being roasted on plates of iron, or
dried in the sun, are kept in large bags, and,
ries needed, eaten strewed with salt by hand-
fuls.

Of four-footed animals and birds, the favourite
food were sheep, goats, oxen, and doves. There
are few traces of the eating of fish, at least in
Palestine (Num. xi. 5; Lev. xi. 9-22). In the
last passage a distinction is made between certain
fish which might be eaten, and others which were
forbiiiden, ‘ These shall ye eat of all that are in
the waters: whatsoever hath fins and scales in the
waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, them shall
ye eat; and al] that have not fins and scales,
they shall be an abomination unto you.’

The distinction of clean and unclean animals,
and of animals which might and those which
might not be eaten, is found to have existed to a
great extent in ancient Egypt. Among fish the
oxyrinchus, the phagrus, and the lepidotus, were
sacred, and might not even be touched. The
inhabitants of Oxyrinchus objected to eat any
fish caught by a hook, lest it should have been
defiled by the blood of one they held so sacred.
The phagrus was the eel; and the reason of its
sanctity, like that of the oxyrinchus, was probably
owing to its unwholesome qualities; the most
effectual method of forbidding its use being to


FOOD. wu


assign it a place among the sacred animals of the
country.

Neither the hippopotamus nor the crocodile ap-
pears to have been eaten by the ancient Egyptians.
Some of the Egyptians considered the crocodile
sacred, while others made war upon it (Herod. ii.
69). In some places it was treated with the most
marked respect, fed, attended, adorned, and after
death embaimed. But the people of Apollinopolis,
Tentyris, Heracleopolis, and other places, held
the animal in abhorrence: how far they carried
their dislike may be seen in Juvenal (Sat. xv.);
thongh something, probably, must be deducted
from the account, in consideration of poetic
licence.

Cats as well as dogs were held in high esteem
by the ancient Egyptians. The former especially
were objects of superstitions regard. When a cat
died in a house a natural death, a general mourn-
ing throughout the family ensued; and to kill
one of these revered animals was a capital
ollence,

Though it appears that swine frequently formed
part of the stock of an Egyptian farm-yard, yet
was the animal unclean and an abomination in
the estimation of the Egyptians. Herodotus tells


_ us (ii, 47) that if any one but touched a pig im


pessing, he was compelled to bathe himself and
wash his garments; and those of the natives who
were -gwineherds were a degraded caste, with
whom thers would not intermarry. It appears,
however, from the historian’s narrative, that, at the
time when they sacrificed swine to the moon and
to Bacchus, the Egyptians were wont to eat of
their flesh, though on other occasions they scru-
pulously abstained from it.

Usages, if not laws, of a similar tendency, have
existed among all nations. In our own country
such usages are found. We abstain from some
animals, we devour others. Often it would be
very difficult to assign any reason, still more
difficult to assign a sutticient reason. The cat is
spared, the rabbit eaten. The beetle children tor-
ture, but value and preserve the lady-cow. A
Frenchman delights in a frog, but, in common
with au Englishman, loathes the idea of a rat.
Caprice, custom, and casual associations, have
often more to do in this matter than any definite
or intelligible reason.

The Mosaic laws which regulated the use of
animal food may be found in Lev. xi. and Deut,
xiv. The grounds of many of these regulations
may be ascertained with a greater or less degree
of probability, provided the student is well ac-
quainted with the mind and spirit of Hebrew
antiquity. Considerations drawn from idolatrous
usages, regard to health, the furtherance of agri-
culture, and established customs and tastes, had
in each case an influence in the promulgation of
these laws,

In the earliest times water was the common
drink. That wine of an intoxicating tendency
was drunk at a very early period appears from
what happened to Noah (Gen. ix. 20), who seems
to have made as well as drunk wine. Bread
and wine are spoken of in Gen. xiv. 18, as oflered
for refreshment to Abraham by Melchizedek, king
of Salem. Water was sometimes put to the wine;
at others a strong drink was made by mixing with
the wine aromatic herbs (Ps. Ixxv. 9; Isa. v. 23),
or a decoction derived from them; myrth was


na FOOD.


weed for this . Date-wine was in use, and
probably the ptian or malt-wine, (060s, olvos

(Otvos (Herod. it. 77). Jerome (Opp. iv. 364, ed.

ed.) says that ‘drink, called Sicera by the He-
brews (137), is every kind which can inebriate,
or that which is made from grain, or of the juice
of apples, or when the honey-comb is made (deco-
uuntur) into a sweet and barbarous beverage, or
the fruit of the palm expressed into a liquor, and
when water receives a colour and a consistency
from herbs.’ ‘The common jeoe
(Mark xii. 37) drank an acrid sort of wine,
which is rendered vinegar in our English Version
(Ruth ii. 14; Matt. xxvii. 48). The Orientals
frequently used wine in excess, so as to occasion
intoxication, whence are drawn many striking
figures in Holy Writ (Is. v. 11; xxviii. 1; xlix.
26 ; Jer. viii. 14; ix. 14; xvi. 48; Deut. xxxii.
42; Ps. Ixxviii. 65). That indulgence in wine
was practised in very ancient days is manifest
from there being in the court of Pharaoh, at the
time of Joseph, state-officers, who had charge of
the wine, and served the monarch with it when
he drank (Gen. xl. 1, 11; comp. Neh. i. 11; 1
Kings x. 5; 2 Chron. ix. 4).

For drinking-vessels there were used the cu
and the bowl (Jer. xxxv. 5; Amos vi. 6; Exod,
xxv. 33: Num. vii. 13,84). The cup was gene-
rally of brass covered with tin, in form resembling
a lily, sometimes circular. It is still used by


—.
288. (Wine-cups. Persepolis.)


travellers, and may be seen in both shapes in the
ruins of Persepolis (1 Kings vii. 26). The bowl
(Exod xxv. 33) assumed a variety of shapes, and
bears many names. Some of these * chargers’
appear, from the presents made by the princes of
Israel (Num. vii.), to have been of large size and
great splendour ; some were silver, some gold (1
Kings x. 21).

In Eastern climes the chief meal, or what we
term dinner, is, in consequence of the-heat of the
middle period of the day, deferred till towards
evening, a slight repast being taken before noon


289. (Egyptian Table with Dishes.]
(Adam, Rom. Antig. p. 377, ed. Major; Potter, ii.


625; Chardin, iv. ; i. 2). But from Gen.


FOOD.


xiii, 16, 25, it appears to have been the custom to
dine at noon in the days of the patriarchs. The same
seems to have been the case in Palestine at a later
period (1 Kings xx. 16; comp. Acts x. 10; Lake
xi. 37). Convivialities, however, were postponed
till evening, and sometimes arent to the
following morning (Isa. v. 11; Mark vi. 21;
Luke xiv. 24). The meal was led Wy wash-
ing of hands (Luke xi. 38 ; Mark vii. 2), which
the mode of eating rendered necessary ; and by
an invocation of the divine blessing (1 Sam. ix.
13), termed in Samuel 71973, and in Greek
ebroyla, eixxapioria, blessing, giving of thanks


290. [Modern Syrians at Mest.)
(Luke ix. 16; John vi. 11). Similar customs
prevailed among the Greeks and Romans. Jahn
(Be. Anttg. p. 68) has given the short prayer, as
preserved in the Talmud, which the Jews used,
as follows: ‘ Blessed he thou, O Lord our God,
King of the world, who hast produced this food
or this drink) from the earth (or the vine)’
Matt. xiv. 19; xv. 36; xxvi. 27).

The Hebrews, like the Greeks and Romans in

ir earlier history, ate sitting (Gen. xxyii. 19;
Judg. xix. 6; 1 Sam. xx. 25). A carpet was
spread, on which the meal was en, Ata
later period, however, particularly when Palestine
came under the influence of Roman manners, the
Jews reclined on cushions or couches i
6; Amos vi. 4; Luke vii. 37; dvexaléy, not
‘gat,’ as. in the common translation, but ‘ re-
clined’). The custom of giving preference in
point of seat or position to guests of high consi-
deratiun appears from 1 Sam. ix. 22, to have been
of ancient date (Amos iii. 12). In the time of
Christ (Luke xiv. 8) the Pharisees, always eager
for distinction, coveted the place of honour at
meals and feasts. Women were not admitted to
eat with the men, but had their meals supplied in
their own private apartment (Esth. i. 6-9). In
Babylon and Persia, however, females mingled
with males on festive occasions (Dan. v. 2). In
general the manner of eating was similar to what
it is in the East at the present day. Special care
was taken of eee persons (Gen. xliii. 34;
1 Sam. i. 4; ix. 22; John xiii. 26). Neither
knives, forks, or spoons were employed for eating.
The food was conveyed from the dish to the
mouth by the right hand. ‘The parties sat with
their legs bent under them round a dish placed
in the centre, and either took the flesh meat with
their fingers from the dish, or dipped bits of their
bread into the savoury mess, and conveyed them


———


2 FOOL.


to their mouths. In Ruth ii. 14, Boaz says to
Ruth, ‘ Dip thy morsel in the vinegar;’ which
explains the language of our Lord, John xiii. 26,
‘ He it is to whom I shall give a sop when I have
dipped it.’ This presenting of food'to a person is
still customary, and was designed originally as a
mark of distinction, the choice morsels being se-
lected by the head of the family for the purpose.
Drink was handed to each one of the guests in
cups or goblets, and, at a very ancient period, in
& separate cup to each person. Hence the word
cup is used as equivalent to what we term a
man’s lot or destiny (Ps. xi. 6; lxxv. 8; Isa.
li, 22; Matt. xxvi. 39).—J. R. B.

FOOL. The fool of Scripture is not an idiot,
but an absurd person; not ene who does not
reason at all, but one who reasons wrong;
also any one whose conduct is not regulated by
the dictates of reason and religion. Foolishness,
therefore, is not a privative condition, but a con-
dition of wrong action in the intellectual or
sentient being, or in both (2 Sam. xiii. 12, 13;
Ps. xxxviii.5). In the Proverbs, however, ‘ fool-
ishness ' appears to be sometimes used for lack of
understanding, although more generally for per-
verseness of will.

FOOT. Of the various senses in which the
word ‘foot’ is used in Scripture, the following are
the most remarkable. Such phrases as the ‘slip
ping’ of the foot, the ‘stumbling’ of the foot,
‘from head to foot’ (to express the entire body),
and ‘ foot-steps’ (to express tendencies, as when
we say of one that he walks in another’s footsteps),
require no explanation, being common to most
langnages, The extreme modesty of the Hebrew
language, which has perhaps seldom heen suffi-
ciently appreciated, dictated the use of the word
‘feet,’ to express the parts and the acts which it
is not allowed to name. Hence such phrases as
the ‘ hair of the feet,’ the ‘ water of the feet,’ ‘ be-
tween the feet,’ ‘to open the feet,” ‘to cover the
feet,’ all of which are sufficiently intelligible,
except perhaps the last, which certainly does not
mean ‘going to sleep ' as some interpreters sug-
gest, but ‘to dismiss the refuse of nature.’

‘To be under any one’s feet’ denotes the sub-
jection of a subject to his sovereign, or of a ser-
vant to his master (Ps. viii. 6; comp. Heb. ii, 8;
1 Cor. xv. 26); and was, doubtless, derived
from the symbolical action of conquerors, who set
their feet upon the neck or body of the chiefs whom
they had vanquished, in token of their triumph.
This custom is expressly mentioned in Scripture
(Josh. x. 23), and is tigured on the monuments
of Egypt, Persia, and Rome. See an instance
in the cut No. 256.

In like manner, ‘to be at any one’s feet,’ is
used for being at the service of any one, fol-
lowing him, or willingly receiving his instruc-
tions (Judg. iv. 10). The last passage, in which
Paul is described as being brought up ‘at the
feet of Gamaliel,’ will appear still clearer, if we
understand that, as the Jewish writers allege,
pupils actually did sit on the floor before, and
therefure at the feet of, the doctors of the law,
who themselves were raised on an elevated
seat.

* Lameness of feet’ generally denotes affliction
or calamity, as in Ps. xxxv. 15; xxxviii. 18;
Jer. xx. 10; Micahiv. 6,7; Zech. iii. 9.

« To set one's foot’ in a place signities to take


FOREHEAD. Dd


possession of it, as in Deut. i. 36; xi. 34, and
elsewhere.

‘To water with the feet’ (Deut. xi. 10) implies
that the soil was watered with as much ease as a
garden, in which the small channels for irrigation
may be turned, &c. with the foot [Ganpzw].

An elegant phrase, borrowed from the feet,
occurs in Gal. ii. 14, where St. Paul says,‘ When
I saw that they walked not uprightly’—literally,
‘not with a straight foot,’ or ‘did not foot it
straightly.’

Nakedness of feet expressed mourning (Ezek.
xxiv. 17). This must mean appearing abroad
with naked feet; for there is reason to think that
the Jews never used their sandals or shoes within
doors, The modern Orientals consider it dis
respectful to enter a room without taking off the
outer covering of their feet. It is with them
equivalent to uncovering the head among Eu-
ropeans, The practice of feet-washing implies
a similar usage among the Hebrews (Fert,
Wasuina ov]. Uncovering the feet was also a
mark of adoration. Moses put off his sandals to
approach the burning where the presence of God
was manifested (Exod. iii. 5). Among the mo-
dern Orientals it would be regarded the height of
profanation to enter a place of worship with
covered feet. The Egyptian priests officiated
barefoot ; and most commentators are of opinion
that the Aaronite priests served with bare feet in
the tabernacle, as, according to all the Jewish
writers, they did afterwards in the temple, and
as the frequent washings of their feet enjoined
by the law seem to imply [Sanpazs].

The passage, ‘ How beautiful upon the moun-
tains are the feet of him that bringeth ylad
tidings, that publisheth peace’ oe hi. 7), ape
pears to signify that, although the feet of mes-
sengers and travellers are usually rendered dis«
agreeable by the soil and dust of the way, yet the
feet of these blessed messengers seemed, notwith-
standing, even beautiful, on account of the glad
tidings which they bore.

Respecting the ‘ washing of feet,’ see ABLUTION
and Wasxina.

FOREHEAD. Marks upon the forehead, for
the purpose of distinguishing the holy from the
profane, are mentioned in Ezek. xi. 4, and again
in Rey. vii. 3. These passages may be explained
by reference to the customs of other nations.
Thus the Rev. J. Maurice, speaking of the rites
which must be performed by the Hindovs before
they can enterthe great pagoda, says, ‘dn indispen-
sable ceremony takes place, which can only be

rfurmed by the hand of a Brahmin; and that is,

e impressing of their foreheads with the tiluk,
or mark of ditierent colours, as they may belong
either to the sect of Veeshmu or Seeva. If the
temple be that of Veeshnu, their foreheads are
marked with a longitudinal line, and the colour
used is vermilion. If it be the temple of
Seeva, they are marked with a parallel line, and
the colour used is turmeric of saffron. But these
two grand sects being again sub-divided into
numerous classes, both the size and the shape of
the tiluk are varied in proportion to their superior
or inferior rank. In regard to the éi/uk I must
observe, that it was a custum of very ancient date
in Asia, to mark their servants. If is alluded to
in these words of Ezekiel, where the Almighty
commands his angels to ‘ Go through the midst


a FOREHEAD.


eof the city, and set a mark on the foreheads
the men who sigh for the abominations committed
in the midst thereof’ (ix. 4). ;


The classical idolaters used to consecrate them-
selves to particular deities on the same principle.
The marks used on these occasions were various,
Sometimes they contained the name of the god ;
sometimes his particular ensign, as the thunder-
bolt of Jupiter, the trident of Neptune, the ivy of
Bacchus, &c.; or else they marked themselves
with some mystical number whereby the god was
described. Thus, the sun, who was signified by
the number 608, is said to have been represented
by the two numeral letters XH.

If this analogy be admitted, the mark on the
forehead may be taken to be derived from the
analogous custom among the heathen of bearing
on their forehead the mark of the gods whose
Votaries they were. Some, however, would rather
understand the allusion to refer to the custom of
marking cattle, and even slaves, with the sign of
ownership (Stiamara].

There has been much ulation respecting
the mark itself. It wasa Jewish notion that it
was the letter M, because that was the first letter
of the Hebrew word MN ‘the law,’ as if it
pointed out those who were obedient to the sacred
code; or because it was the first letter of the
word 7 NN, ‘thou shalt live.’ It is indeed
alleged that the angel had orders to write this
mysterious letter with ink upon the foreheads of
the righteous, and with blood upon the foreheads
of the wicked ; in the one case signifying, ‘thou
shalt live,’ and in the other, ‘thou shalt die.” The
early Christian commentators readily adopted
the notion that the mark was the letter n, but
alleged that its form was that of a cross in the
old Samaritan alphabet, which was used in the
time of Ezekiel. Indeed both Jerome and Origen
distinctly allege that the letter still bore that
form in their time: and although the letter does
not retain that form in the present Samaritan
alphabet, there is certainly evidence of its being


Fepresented on old coins by the character T and
another proof arises from the fact of its being re-


FOREST .


by Tm the Greek alphabet, which ts

ived from the Phenician. It having bem

thus settled that the character marked on the

forehead was the letter M in its ancient cruciform

shape, it was easy to reach the conclusion that

the mark on the forehead denoted salvation by
the cross of Christ.

This is very ingenious; but there is no
that the bark wes the Later rans Lue oy
all. The word employed is 1M ¢av, and means
simply a mark or sign (not a letter), and is «

ered in the Septuagint, the Targum, and by
the best Jewish commentators. The name of the
letter FM is, however, probably from this word, and
in this fact we have perhaps the source of the
Conjecture. It is, however, a curious circum


stance that the analogous Arabic word qsy de


Notes a mark in the form of a cross, which was

branded on the flanks or necks of horses and

camels (Freytag’s Lez. Arab. s. v.). See Ht

vernick’s Commentar. tiber Ezekiel, and Gill's
ition, on Ezek. ix. 4,

FORESKIN, the prepuce, which was taken off
in Stroma! leery :

FOREST. Tracts of wood- are men-
tioned by travellers in Palestine, but rarely what
we should call a forest. The word translated by
‘forest is Y', which does not necessarily mean
more than ‘ wood-land.' There are, however, abun-
dant intimations in Scripture that the country was
in ancient times much more wooded than at
sent, and in parts densely so. The localities more
particularly mentioned as woods or forests are—

1. The forest of cedars on Mount Lebanon
(1 Kings vii. 2; 2 Kings xix. 23; Hos. xiv. 5,6),
which must have been much more extensive for
merly than at present ; although, on the assump-
tion that the eres of Scripture (U7) is the pinue
cedrus, or so-called ‘cedar of Lebanon,’ its
growth is by no means confined, among those
mountains, to the famous clump of ancient trees
which has alone engaged the attention of travellers
(Exxs]. The American missionaries and others,
travelling by unfrequented routes, have found
woods of less ancient cedar-trees in other places,

The name of ‘ House of the Forest of Le
banon' is given in Scripture (I Kings vii. 23
x. 27) to a palace which was built by Solomon
in, or not far from, Jerusalem, and which is sup-
posed to have been so called on account of the
quantity of cedar-trees employed in its con-
struction; or, perhaj because the numerous
pillars of cedar-w suggested the idea of a
forest of cedar-trees.

2. The forest of oaks, on the mountains of
Bashan. The trees of this region have been
already noticed under Aiton and Bashan.

3. The forest or wood of Ephraim, already
noticed under Erurainm, 4.

4. The forest of Hareth, in the southof Judah,
to which David withdrew to avoid the fury of
Saul (1 Sam. xxii. 5). The precise situation is
unknown.

Foxxsr is used symbolically to denote a city,
kingdom, polity, or the Like (Ezek. xiv. 26).
Devoted kingdoms are also represented under the
image of a forest, which God threatens to burn er
cut down. Sve Isa. x. 17, 18, 19, 34, where the
briers and thorns denote the common le;
‘the glory of the forest’ are die wohl aad ‘thas


FORNICATION.


-of higbest rank and importance. See also Isa.
xxxii. 19; xxxvii. 24: Jer. xxi. 14; xxii. 7;
xlvi. 23; Zech. xi. 2. (Wemyes's Clavis Sym-


en
FORNICATION. In Seripture this word
gecurs more frequently in its symbolical than in
its ordinary sense. ;

In the Prophets woman is often made the
bol of the church or nation of the Jews, which is
Yegarded as affianced to Jehovah -by the covenant
‘on Mount Sinai. In Ezek. xvi. there is a long
description of that people under the symbol of a
female child, growing up to the stature of a
woman, and then wedded to Jehovah by entering
into covenant with him. Therefore when the
Israelites acted contrary to that covenant, by
forsaking God and following idols, they were

perly represented by the symbol of a

thavlot or aitultoress offering herself to all comers
(Isa. i.2; Jer. ii. 20; Ezek. xvi.; Hos i. 23 iii.
11). And thus fornication, or adultery (which
is fornication in a married state), became, and is
used as, the symbol of idolatry iteelf (Jer. iii. 8,9
Ezek. xvi. 26, 29; xxiii. 37). See Wemyss's
Clavis Symb., art. ‘ Woman.’

FORTIFICATIONS. ‘FENCED CITIES.’
Inventions for the defence of men in social life
are older than history. The walls, towers, and


gates represented on Egyptian monuments, though
ating back to a period of fifteen centuries before the
Christian era, bear evidence of an advanced state
of fortitications—of walls built of squared stones, or


of squared timber Sagulgars y placed on the sum- .


mit of scarped rocks, or within the circumference
of one or two wet ditches, and furnished on the
summit with regular battlements to protect the
detenders. All these are of later invention than
the accumulation of unbewn or rudely chipped
uncemented stones, piled on each other in the form
of walls, in the so-called Cyclopean, Pelasgian,
Ktruscan, and Celtic styles, where there are’ no
ditches, or towers, or other gateways than mere
openings occasionally left between the enormous
blocks employed in the work. As the three first
styles occur in Etruria they show the progressive
advance of military architecture, and may be
considered as more primitive, though perhaps pos-
terior to the era when the progress of Israel, under
the guidance of Joshua, expelled several Canaan-
itish tribes, whose system of civilization, in com-
mon with that of the rest of Western Asia, bore an
Egyptian type, and whose towers and battlements
were remarkably high, or rather were erected in
very elevated situations. When, therefore, the Is-
saelites entered Palestine, we may assume that the
‘fenced cities’ they had to attack were, according
to their degree of antiquity, fortified with more or


FORTIFICATIONS.


tS
walls, like the Ktruscan. Indesd, Asia Minn,
Armenia, Syria, and even Jerusalem, still beag


203. [a. Wet ditches.]


marks of this most ancient system, notwithstand-
ing that this region, the connecting link between
Asia and Africa, between the trade of the East
and the West; and between the religious feelings
of the whole earth, has been the common battle-
field of all the great nations of antiquity, and of
modern times, where ruin and desolation, often-
times repeated, have been spread over every habit-
able place. Stones from six to fifty feet in length,
with suitable proportions, can still be detected in
many walls of the cities of those regions, wherever


quarries existed, from Nineveh, where beneath the


less of art, but all with huge stones in the lower sarface there still remain ruins and walls of buge


316 FORTIFICATIONS,


stones, sculptured with bas-reliefs, originally
painted, to Babylon, and Baseorah, where bricks,
gan-dried or baked, and stamped with letters,
are yet found, as well as in all the plains of the
Yivers where that material alone could be easily
ured. The wall, 71M choma, was sometimes
souble or triple (2 Chron. xxxii. 5), successively
girding a rocky elevation; and ‘building a city’
originally meant the construction of the wall.


Before wall-towers, MS73D migdaloth, were
introduced, the gate of a city, originally single,
formed a kind of citadel, and was the Sule ba part
of all the defences : it was the armoury of the com-
munity, and the council-house of the authorities.
‘ Sitting in the gate’ was, and still is, synonymous
with the possession of power, and even now there
is commonly in the fortified gate of a royal palace
in the East, on the floor above the door-way, a
coyncil-room with a kind of balcony, whence the
sovereign sometimes sees his people, and where he
may sit in judgment. Hence the Turkish go-
vernmeut is not unfrequently termed the Porte,
and in this sense allusion to gates often occurs in
the Scriptures. The tower, MWY tsaroch, was
another fortification of the earliest date, being
often the citadel or last retreat when a city was
taken ; or, standing alone in some naturally strong
position, was intended to protect a ftontier, com-
mand a pass, or to be a place of refuge and deposit


VULLU ALE,
aa 66m cd


of treasure in the mountains, when the plain should
be no longer defensible. Some of these are figured
among the Egyptian monuments, and in the west
of England the round towers of Launceston, Res-
tosmel, Trematon, and Plympton show that simi-
lar means of defence were once employed by the
Celtw of this island, who may have derived their
knowledge from Pheenician or Carthaginian tra-
ders. Watch-towers, MDD mizpah, and MWD te-
rah, NW teroth, used by shepherds all over Asia,
and even now built on eminences above some city
in the plain, in order to keep a look-out upon the

istant country, were already in use and occa-
sionally converted into places of defence (2 Chron.
envi. 10; xxvii. 4). The gateways were closed


FORTIFICATIONS.


by ponderous folding doors, We shaer, DY YY.
shaerim, the valves or folds, DYNO delethim,
being secured by wooden bars: both the doors
and bars were in after times plated with metal. A
ditch, bn bn hal, where the nature of the locality
required it, was dug in front of the rampart, and
sometimes there was an inner wall, with a second
ditch before it. As the experience of ages "in
creased, huge ‘ ter forts,’ double buttresses, or
masses of solid stone and masonry (not bulwarks*)
were built in particular parts to sustain the outer
wall, and afford space on the summit to place
military engines (2 Chron. xxvi. 15).

As there was no system of construction strictly
so called, but simply an application of the means
of defence to the localities, no uniformity of
adaptation existed, and, therefore, we refer to
No. 292 of our illustrations, representing some pri
meval fable of the rats besieging the cats in their
strong tower, where eee courses of stones
in the walls sbow skill in structure, and the in-
clined jambs of the door, with double impost,


experience in obviating a too from
above. In the following cut (No. 29: ), taken from
another Egyptian work, we have a series of towers,
that in the middle being evidently the citadel or
keep, and a gateway indicating that the wall is
omitted, or is intended by the lines of the oval
surrounding the whole. In No. 292 there is a
scaling-ladder. In No. 299 we see a regular laba-
rum, the most ancient example extant of this form
of ensign, and the towers are manned with armed
soldiers. In No. 293, another towered fortress,
garrisoned with troops, is surrounded by a double
ditch, and approached by bridges, both in front
and rear. is representation refers to a city
in Asia, attacked by one of the tian can-
quering kings, anterior to the rise of the Assyrian
and Babylonish power. No. 295 is taken from
a seal, and is a symbol of Babylon, where the
city, sustained by two lions, is shown standing
on both sides of the Euphrates, having an outer
wall; the inner rampart is flanked by numerous
elevated ‘and srabatiled towers. There is another,
but less antique representation of Babylon, witt
its lions and towers, &c.; but the battlements
are squared, not pointed, as in the first. Not very
different from these double walls are those repre
sented in the Egyptian painting copied in No. 296
The towers are here crowded with soldiers, some


* Bulwark, from the Dutch bolwerk, ancient)
called a mound, and in the sixteenth centui
ways referable to bastion. Buttresses of the kind
above mentioned still exist in the Celto-Roman
walls at Pevensey in Sussex.


: FORTUNATUS.


: of whom, from the form of their shields, are ob-
viously Egyptians. These are sufficient to give a


eral idea of cities fenced entirely by art ; but in

No. 297 we give the Tsaroch tower, taken from one
still extant in Persia, showing a ditch and gate-
way below in the mound or rock, its double outer
walls and inner keep, very like Launceston castle.
This was the kind of citadel which defended
passes, and in the mountains served for retreat in
times of calamity, and for the security of the royal
treasures; and it was on account of the confined
space within, and the great elevation of the ram-
parts, that private houses frequently stood upon
their summit, as was the case when the harlot
Rahab received Joshua's spies in Jericho (Josh.
ii. 1),—C. H. S.

FORTUNATUS (@ouprouvdros), a disciple of
Corinth, of Roman birth or origin, as his name
indicates, who visited Paul at Ephesus, and re-
turned, along with Stephanus and Achaicus, in,
charge of that apostle’s first Epistle togthe Corin-
thian church; 3.c. 59 (1 Cor. xvi. 17).

FOUNTAIN, a stream of ‘living’ or con-
stantly running water, in opposition to standing
or stagnant pools, whether it issues immediately
from the ground or from the bottom of a well
[Arn]. On the more remarkable natural foun-
tains of Palestine, see SpRinas; WATER.

From the value of such supplies of water in
arid countries, fountains figure much in the
poetry of the East as the natural images of peren-
nial blessings of various kinds. In the Scriptures
fountains are made the symbols of refreshment to
the weary, and alsv denote the perpetuity and in-
exhaustible nature of the spiritual comforts which
God im to his people, whether by the influ-
ences of the Spirit, or through the ordinances of
public worship. There are also various texts in
which children, or an extended posterity, are, by a
beautifully apt image, described as a fountain,
and the father or progenitor as the source or spring
from which that fountain flows (Deut. xxxiil. 28;
Ps. Ixviii. 26; Prov. v. 16, 18; xiii. 14, &c.).

FOWL [Birp; Cocx].

FOX. pee |
FRANKINCENSE [Lesonag].

FROG. YI} tzephardea ; Arab. akurrak ;
Gr. Bdérpaxos (Exod. liii. 2). Although the com-
mon frog is so well known that no description is
needed to satisfy the reader, it may be necessary
to mention that the only species recorded ag exist-
ing in Palestine is the green (Rana esculenta

. and that of all the authorities we have been able
to consult, Dr. Richardson alone refers the species
of Egypt to the green speckled grey frog (Rana
punctata). But considering the immense extent
of the Nile from south to north, and the amazing
abundance of these animals which it contains in
the state of spawn, tadpole, and complete frog, it


FROG. nq


is likely that the speckled is not the only species
found in its waters, and that different spbcies, if
they do not occur in the same locality, are at least
to be met with in different latitudes. Storks and
other waders, together with a multitude of vari-
ous enemies, somewhat restrain their increase,
which, nevertheless, at the spawning season is so
enormous that a bow] can scarcely be dipped into
the water without immediately containing a num-
ber of tadpoles. The speckled species 1s found
westward even to the north of France,-but is not
common in Europe, and doves not appear to croak
in concert on this side of the Mediterranean:
most likely it is not noisy in E since M

Sonnini, who wrote a detailed history of the
Batrachians, and was personally well acquainted
with the Nile, does not mention this species. It
is lively, but no strong swimmer, the webs on the
hinder toes extending only half their length:
hence, perhaps, it is more a terrestrial animal than
the common green frog, and, like the brown spe-
cies, is given to roam on land in moist weather.


Although it is very hazardous, in transactions
of an absolutely miraculous nature, to attempt
to point out the instruments that may have served
to work out the purposes of the Almighty, we
may conjecture that in the plague of frogs, a
species, the one perhaps we have just men-
tioned, was selected for its agility on land, and
that, although the fact is not expressly men-
tioned, the awful visitation was rendered still
more ominous by the presence of dark and rainy
weather—an at ic condition never of long
duration on the coast of Egypt, and gradually
more and more rare up the course of the river.
We have ourselves witnessed, during a storm of
rain, frogs crowding into our cabin, in the low
lands of Guiana, till they were packed up in the
corners of the a) t, and continually falling
back im their attempts to ascend above their
fellows ; and the door could not be opened with-
out others entering more rapidly than those within
could be is eae Now, as the temples, palaces
and cities of Egypt stood, in general, on ‘he


‘of the ever dry desert, and always above the level


of the highest inundations, to be there visited by
a continuation of immense number of frogs was
assuredly a most distressing calamity; and as this .

enon, in its ordinary occurrence within
the tropics, is alwsys accompanied by the storms
of the monsoon or of the setting in of the rainy
season, the dismay it must have caused may be
judged of when we reflect that the plague occurred
where rain seldom or never falls, where none of
the houses are fitted to lead off the water, and that
the animals a) in localities where they had
never before found, and where, at all other
times, the scorching sun would have destroyed


718 FRUITS. U


them in 2 few minutes. Nor was the selection of
the frog as an instrument of God’s displeasure
without portentous meaning in the minds of the
idolatrous Ezvptians, who, considered that ani-
mal a type of Pthah—their creative power—and
also an indication of man in embryo. The ma-
gicians, indeed, appeared to make trogs come up
out of the waters; but we must not understand
that to them was given aleo the power of pro-
ducing the animals. The effect which they
claimed as their own was a simple result of the
continuation of the prodigy eftected by Moses
and Aaron; for that they had no real power is
evident, not only from their inability to stop the
present plague, the contro! which even Pharaoh
discovered to be solely in the Lands of Moses, but
also the utter failure of their enchantments in that
of lice, where their artitices were incompetent to
impose upon the king and his people.—C. H. S.
FRONTLETS [Payzacrerigs].


FRUITS. "8 peri, fruit in general, vege-
table or animal (Deut. vii. 13, bis ; xxviii. 51,
bis). It originated the English word. ¢ fruit,’
by the 5 being sounded as ph, and subsequently
converted into f. Under this head may perhaps
be most appropriately noticed a classification of
produce of great importance to a right under-
standing of the Bible, since the beauty and force
of more than forty passages of the sacred record
are impaired by inattention to it. We propose
to show that the Hebrews had three generic
terms designating three great classes of the fruits
of the land, closely corresponding to what may be
expressed in English as, 1. Corn-fruit, or tield
produce; 2. Vintage-frutt ; 3. Orchard-fruit.

The term /'P Aayits, ‘ summer-fruits, appears
to denote those less important species of fruit
which were adapted only to immediate consump-
tion, or could not be easily or conveniently con-
served for winter use (Jer. xl. 10, 12). Kayits
may have been included as a species under the
head of Orchard-fruit: it would seem to indicate
either the existence of some contrasted term, as
‘ winter-fruits,’ or to imply that the products of
the class under which it ranked as a species were
generally distinguished by their capatility of
being preserved throughout the year. It is con-
ceived that the products denoted by the third
of the generic terms now to be considered, were
chiefly characterized by their capacity of being
stored up and preserved like our own orchard-
fruit; and thus their generic name might be in-
elusive of kayifs, ‘ summer-fruits,’ though mainly
and originally referring to ‘ winter-fruits.’ The
three terms spoken of as being so frequently asso-
ciated in the Scriptures, ani expressive of a most
comprehensive triad of blessings, are Dagan,
Tirosn, and YirzHar.

1. ]3 dagan, ‘ fruit of the field," or agricul-
tural produce. Under this term the Hebrews
classed almost every object of field culture [Aart-
cunturgB]. Dr. Jahn says, ‘the word is of ge-
neral signification, and comprehends in itself
different kinds of grain and pulse, such as wheat,
millet, spelt, wall-barley, barley, beans, lentils,
meadow-cumin, pepper-wort, flax, cotton, various
species of the cucumber, and perhaps rice’ (Bid.
Antig. § 58). There is now no doubt among
scholars that dagan comprehends the largest and
most valuable species of vegetable produce; and


FRUITS.


therefore it will be allowed that the rendering of
the word in the common version by ‘corn,’ and
sometimes by ‘ tcheat,’ instead of ‘ every species
of corn’ or field produce, tends to limit vur
conceptions of the Divine bounty, as weil as to
impair the beauty of the passages where it occurs,
The same objection may be urged ayainst the
ordinary rendering of the associated terms, tirosh
and yitzhar, as ‘wine and oil.’ Indeed, it is
somewhat surprising that the almost universal
acknowledgment of dagan as a very generic
term has not, ere this, induced the learned to
question the accuracy of this rendering of the
sister terms, since it is neither usual nor natural,
except by way of climax, to commingle very
generic or abstract terms with names of specific
articles, much Jess constantly to associate a ge-
neral class of natural produce with particular
articles of artificial preparation. In reading of
©a land of every specics of corn,’ we should na-
turally expect the declaration to continue con-
sisteutly, ‘ of grapes and of fruit: when, there-
fore, the transition is suddenly from growing
‘corn of every kind’ to specific and prejared
products, ‘ wine® and ‘ oil,’ a suspicion is raised
as to the correctness of the rendering, which
resolves itself into absolute certainty on con-
sulting and comparing the passages of the He
brew teat. The infrequency of the mention of
grapes and raisins, the natural or solid ¢ fruit of
the vine,’ in our version of the Scriptures, as
compared with wine, the liquid preparation, has
been a sdbject of remark. It is true that r
yayin [Wine] is sometimes employed in the
sense of grapes (as Cato and others of the Latins
use vinun), and in this use of the word ‘a land
of corn and wine’ really means, what Palestine
was, ‘a land of com and grapes;' but this se-
condary and accommodated use of the term
yayin does not supersede the necessity for a more
generic word expressive of ¢ vintage-fruit,’ viewed
not merely as the yielder of wine, but as a valu-
able possession in itself,

2. YIVN tirosh, ‘ the fruit of the vine’ in its
natural or its solid state, comprehending grates,
moist or dried, and the fruit in general, whether
in the early cluster or the mature and ripened con-
dition (Isa. Ixv. 8, which is rendered by Bérput,
grape, in the Septnagint, refers to the young
grape; while Judg. ix. 13, where ‘ the cine said,
Shall I leave my tirosh (fruit) which cheereth
God and man #’ as evidently refers to the ripened
produce which was placed on the altar as a tirst-
fruit offering in grateful acknowledgment of the
Divine goodness). ‘ Sometimes,’ says Dr. Jahn,
‘the grapes were dried in the sun and preserved in
masses, which were called DASY gnrenadbhim,
WN eshishah, DPW tzummookim, 1 Sam.
xxy. 18; 2 Sam. xvi. 1; 1 Chron, xii. 40; Has,
iii, 1? (Bi, Aatiq. § 69). Tirosh is derived
from the verbal noun UV yarash, ‘ to poasess by
inheritance’ (whence Latin Ares, English Aeir)
and was very naturally applied to desiznate the
vintage-fruit, which, next to dagan, constituted
one of the most valuable ‘ possessions’ of the
Jews.

It is aleo distinctly referred to as the yielder of
wine, and therefore was not wine itself, but the
raw material from which it was expressed or pre-
pared. Dr. Conquest’s amended translation of
Micah vi. 15, is, ‘ Thou shalt sow, but thou shalt


FRUITS.


not reap; thou shalt tread the olives, but thou
shalt not anoint thea with oil (shemen, uot
yitzhar); and the grape (tirosh), but shalt not
drink wine’ (yayin). As the treading of the
olive is represented as yielding oii, so is tirosh re-

nted as that which, being trodden in the vat,
should yield wine, which flowed out from an
opening into the Jacus or receptacle beneath.
Arctibishop Newcome, in his version of this text,
has ‘ the Grape of the choice wine ;’ while Julius
Bate, M.A. observes on this passage—‘ Hence it
is plain that tivosh is what is pressed, the grapes’
(Critica Hebreea, 1767).

_Dr. Jahn applies tirosh to the juice which flows
from the grape-vat into the lower receptacle, and
says, it is also called new wine and -yAeiKos
(Acts ii. 13). This view, however, will, on ex-
amination, be found erroneous, opposed by the
clear evidence of the context in the great bulk of
the passages where the word occurs, classed with
com, first-ftuits, tithes, and other natural pro-
duce, and countenanced only by its association
with an equivocal rendering in two places. Joel
ii. 24, the first of these texts, ¢ the flours shall be
full of wheat, and the vats shall overflow with
tirosh,’ caunot be understuod of the juice of the
grape, but must refer to the frait itself. It is
most certain that grapes were put into the vat,
not wine. The wine flowed out through an
orifice into the receiving vessel, as the grapes
were being trodden. These vats were very large,
and were the treader to be placed in one so full
that the juice would overflow the brim, he would
be incapable of treading the grapes, if not ac-
tually im danger of suffocation pal The
text presents a striking contrast to the picture of
drought and desolation described in the preceding
chapter, and represents, not only that the people
should be safisfied with dagan, tirosh, and yitzhar
(ii. 19), but more than satistied; for the doors
usually devoted to threshing corn should be
full of 3 (the best species of corn already
threshed), and the vats (vessels not designed as
stores for fruit, and which are inconvenient for
treading when oyerfilled) should be heaped up
with vintage and winter fruit so full that it would
rol] off to the ground, since they could hold no
more. In the same sense we frequently employ
the word ‘ overflow,’ as, for geunutle © The house
was filled to overflowing.’ A similar picture of
plenty occurs in Prov. ii. 9, 10, where the grape-
vats are to be filled even to bursting, whicn cer-
tainly cannot mean that the wine shall be wasted !
Isa. Ixii. 8, 9 is the second text favouring a liquid
interpretation of tirosh. The latter verse is thus
translated by Dr. Lowth—* They that reap the
harvest shall eat it, and praise Jehovah; and they
that gather the vintage shall drink it in my sacred
courts.’ He justly observes that this has reference
to the Law of Moses (Deut. xii. 17,18; Lev. xix.
23-25), which commands the Israelites to eat
(achat) the tithe of their dagan, tirosh, and yitzhar
before the Lord, and, when they have planted all
manner of trees for food, to count the frnit as un-
rcumcised for three years, then in the fourth year
ali the fruit thereof shall be holy tu praise the Lord,
and in the fifth they shall eat (achat) the fruit.
‘ This, says Dr. Lowth, ‘clearly explains the
force of the expressions, “ Shall praise Jehovah,
and shall drink it in my sacred courts.”" The
apparent opposition between the passages will he


FRUITS. 719


removed by understanding shathak, which pri-
marily signifies ‘ to drink,’ in its secondary sense
of ‘to suck.’ It is thus appropriately rendered
in the Prayer Book version of Ps. Ixxv. 8. On
a similar principle we modify the meaning of ‘to
eat,’ when we speak of ‘eating an orange ;’ thus
too the Latins derived their generic word for
fruits, pomum, from rapa, drink; and their name
for the fruit of the service-tree from sorbere, ‘to
suck.’ Dr. Lowth further, adds, that ‘ five MSS.
(one ancient) have ymbdoy fully expressed,
and 80 likewise Y)NW is found in nineteen MSS.,
three of them ancient.’ Supposing yishtoohoo to
be the original reading, the alteration to yotcch-
loohoo must have been made by the ancient
copyist under the impression which appears also
to have rested on Dr, Lowth's mind, that a mode
of consuming the fruits of the vintage different
from drinking, was here designed by the use of
shathah. This view is contirmed by the use of
the ae kabhats (the participle of which is
translated, ‘ They that have brouglit it together"),
which implies the collecting of scattered things
into a heap. :

Dr. Jahn’s definition of tirosh, as the juice
which flows from the trodden grapes, is also
negatived by the fact that another word exactly
expressive of the same thing, already exists,
namely, D°DY ausis, from ausas, ‘to tread down
together.” Neither is it likely that it should be
a generic name for wine, since such a term is
found in } yayin.

3. WY) yitzhar, ‘ orchard-fruits,’ especially
winter or keeping fruits, as dates, figs, olives,
pomegranates, citrons, nuts, &c. The etymology


of yitzhar (whence perhaps the Saxon optzeand


ortgeard, and the old English word hortsyard,
now orchard) quite accords with the claim ad-
vanced for it, as denoting a large and valuable
class of fruits. Lexiconista properly refer it to
the root IMY¥ tzhar, expressive of a bright, glow-
ing, and shining appearance. The name of the
class was obviously suggested by the bright and
glowing hue presented by many of the species,
as the olive, the citron, and the orange. The
name for the olive, Fi, sometimes called ‘the
splendour-tree,’ originated in a similar way, the
rvot being ‘?, ‘ bright,’ ‘splendid.’ The name of
another of the class, the orange, had a similar
origin, The Latin aurantium, from aurum,
‘gold,’ by a slight change of spelling became the
Italian arancia, whence, through the Provencal,
the French orange. Through the Syro-Arabian
channel we trace the Saracenic and Spanish
name for the orange-flower, azahar, which pro-
bably sprang from some common stem with the
Hebrew tzahar. Thus, too, orcrorth, ‘ pot-herbs,’
means ‘ shining things of a greenixh hue,’ from
TW, ‘light,’ * brightness ;’ whence also the Latin
name for gold, aurum, the French or, and our
word for shining metals, ore.

As we distinguish dagan from hhittahh (wheat),
and ttrosh from ausis and yayin, so must we
yitzhar from shemen, ‘oil,’ which are un-
furtunately confounded together in the common
version. Shemen, beyond question, is the proper
word for oil, not yitzhar: hence, being a specitic
thing, we find it in connection with a great
variety of specific purposes, as sacrificial and
holy uses, edibles, traffic, vessels, and used in


720 FRUITS.


illustration of taste, smoothness, plumpness, in-
sinuation, condition, fertility, and luxury. Yitz-
har, as to the mode of its use, presents a complete
contrast to shemen. It is not, even in a single
passage, employed either by way of comparison,
or in illustration of any particular alt com-
mon to it with other specific articles. In one
passage only is it joined with Mt zayith, ‘ olive,’
the oi] of which it has been erroneously sup

to signify; and even here (2 Kings xviii. 32) it
retains as au adjective the generic sense of the
noun, ‘ preserving-fruit.’ It should be read, ‘a
land of preserving-olives (zayith yitzhar) and
dates (debhash).’ Cato has a similar expression,
oleam conditivam, ‘preserving-olive-tree’ (De
Re Rust. vi.). It may be observed that the
Latin terms’malum and pomum had an ex-
tended meaning very analogous to the Hebrew
yitzhar. Thus Varro asks, ‘Non arboribus con-
sita Italia est, ut tota pomarium videatur?’ ‘ Is
not Italy so planfed with fruit-trees as to seem
one entire pomarium?’ i. e. orchard (De Re
Rustica, i. 2).

Thus the triad of terms we have been con-
sidering would comprehend every vegetable sub-
stance of necessity and Juxury commonly con-
sumed by the Hebrews, of which first-fraits were
presented or tithes paid; and this view of their
meaning will also explain why the injunctions
concerning offerings and tithes were sufficiently
expressed by these terms alone (Num. xviii. 12;
Deut. xiv. 23). Had dagan in these texts been
restricted to wheat, no obligation would thereby
have been imposed to present the first-fruits or the
tithes of barley and other grain: had tirosh sig-
nified grape-juice, then this law could have been
easily evaded by drying the fruit as raisins, or
preserving it in other ways; and had yitzhar si
nified oid, it would have been difficult at all, and
from these texts impossible, to educe the obligation
to pay tithes or present first-fruits of a large and
most valuable Ake of products, as dates, citrons,

megranates, &c. But these texts are the most

nite we cau find in relation to the subject, and
are evidently designed to be very comprehensive ;
anid, consequently, as tithes were paid of all those
fruits, the practice must interpret these expressions
as including, Ist. Fruits of the field or land ;
2nd. Fruits of the vintage; and, 3rd. Fruits of
the orchard, including both summer and pre-
serving fruits.

In conclusion, we will ‘briefly recapitulate the
results of our examinatigqn of the Scripture
sages referring to Dagan, Tirosh, and Yitshar,
and exhibit their relative positions :—

a. They are found mutually associated in nine-
teen places. Dagan occurs with tirosh alone
eleven times; with yayin only once, and there
(Lam. ii. 12) yayin is used for grapes. Tirosh
occurs thirty-eight times; in thirty places it is
associated with the confessedly generic word
dagan ; in twenty-one with yitchar; and it is
ee only six times without either dagan or
yttzhar.

5. Tirosh occurs seven times with rayshyth
or biccowr, < first-fruits;’ ten times with teroob-
hah, ‘ offerings,’ or magnasayr, ‘ tithes, which
were mainly the first of gathered fruits and grain
in their natural state.

c. Tirosh is connected with yayin in three pas-
sages only; twice by way of climax merely


FULLER.
(Hos. iv. 11; Is. xxiv. 7-10), and once (Mic.
vi. e the yielder of wine, Re wine itself.

d. Tirosh is not directly united with shemen
(oil) in a single place.

e. The three terms are constantly and closely
connected with expressions indicating increase of
vegetable produce, or the spontaneous growth of
the fruits of the earth, or the increase of objects of
culture, especially the fruits of the field and the
vineyard; they also occur in connection with
terms expressive of fruital or avimal uct,
sometimes with the vine, olive, fig, or m tre,
but scarcely ever with their specific fruit, or with
particular articles of diet ; still more rarely are
they connected with terms evincing the process of
preparing or preserving them, or the vehicle o
mode of their consumption. In all these respects
they present a complete ie to terms de
noting specific ucts or artificia tious,
as Sok Cahn cheat (oil), yayin (einer
lehhem (food or bread). ‘:

J. In the very rare instances in which they do
occur in connection with specific articles or cit-
cumstances, special reasons obviously exist for the
fact, confirmatory of the view advanced as to ther
generic signification. The exceptions prove the
Tule,

g. Lastly, though the three terms are employed
throughout a peried of one thousand years (Num.
xviii. 12, B.c. 1489, to Neh. xiii. 12, nc. 409)
by a series of fourteen authors, the bulk of whom
also use yayin and shemen, occasionally in cu-
junction, yet not in one instance have they crossed
tirosh with shemen, or yayin with yitzhar. On
the contrary, the triad of generic terms have been
cautiously and correctly discriminated from
words merely denoting some of their species, ot
artificial preparations from them.—F. R. L.

FULLER. At the transfiguration our Sa-
viour’s robes are said to have been white, ‘so as
no fuller on earth could white them’ (Mark ix.3
Elsewhere we read of ‘ fullers’ soap * (Mal. iii. 2
and of ‘the fullers’ field’ (2 Kings xviii. 17).
Of the processes followed in the art of cleaning
cloth and the various kinds of stuff among the
Jews we have no direct knowledge. In an early
part of the tion they seem to have trod the
cloths with their feet, as the Hebrew Ain Rogel,
or En-rogel, literally Foot-fountain, has been ren-
dered, on Rabbinical authority, ‘ Fullers’ foun-
tain,’ on the ground that the fullers trod the cloths
there with their feet. A subsequent operation was


probably that of rubbing the cloth on an inclined

plane, in a mode which is figured in the Egyptian

paintings, and still preserved in the East.
FULLERS' FOUNTAIN [En-Roaat].
FULLERS' SOAP [Borirs].
FUNERALS (Buriat; Movawna].


\


GAAL.


G.


GAAL oy, miscarriage ; Sept. Tada), sun
of Ebed. He went to Shechem with his brothers
when the inhabitants became discontented with
‘Abimelech, and so engaged their confidence that
they placed him at their head. At the festival at


which the Shechemites offered the first-fruits of-


their vintage in the temple of Baal, Gaal, by ap-
parently drunken bravadoes, roused the valour of
the people, and strove yet more to kindle their
wrath against the absent Abimelech. It would
seem as if the natives had been in some way inti-
mately connected with, or descended from, the
original inhabitants; for Gual endeavoured to
awaken their attachment to the ancieut family of
Hamor, the father of Shechem, which ruled the
place in the time of Abraham (Gen. xxxiv. 2, 6),
and which seems to have heen ut this time repre-
sented by Gaal and his brothers. Although de-
prived of Shechem, the family appears to have main-
tained itself in some power in the neighbourhood ;
which induced the Shechemites to look to Gaal
when they became tired of Abimelech. Whether
he succeeded in awakening among them a kind
feeling towards the descendants of the ancient
masters of the place, dues not appear; but event-
ually they went out under his command, and
assisted doubtless by his men, to intercept and
give battle to Abimelech, when he appeared before
the town. He, however, fled before Abimelech,
and his retreat into Shechem heing cut off by
Zebul, the commandant of that place, he went to
his home, and we hear of him no more. The
account of this attempt is interesting, chiefly
from the slight glimpse it affords of the position,
at this period, of what had been one of the reign-
ing families of the land Lefore its invasion by the
Istaelites (Judg. ix. 26-18) B.c. 1026.


GABBATHA occurs John xix. 13, where the
Evanyelist states that Pontius Pilate, alarmed
at lust in his attempts to save Jesus, by the art-
tal insinuation of the Jews, ‘If thou let this man
go, thou art not Cawsar's friend,’ went into the
pretorium again, and brought Jesus out to them,
and sat down ouce more upon the Biya or tribunal,
in a place called A:@éorpwroy, but in the Hebrew
Gabbatha. The Greek word, signifying literally
stone-paced, is an adjective, aud is generally used
as such by the Greek writers; but they also
sometimes use it substantively for a stone pave-
ment, when @apos may be understood. In the
Septuagint it answers to BY (2 Chron. vii. 3;
Esther i. 6). Jerome reads, ‘ Sedit pro tribunali
in loco qui dicitur Lithostrotos.’ The Greek word,

* as well as the Latin, is frequently used to denote
a pavement formed of ornamental stones of various
colours, commonly, called a tesselated or mosaic
pavement. The partiality of the Romans for this
kind of pavement is well known. It is stated by
Pliny (Hist. Nat, xxxvi. 64) that, after the time of
Sylla, the Romans decorated their houses with
such pavements. They also introduced them into
the provinces. Suetonius relates that Julius
Cesar, in his military expeditions, took with him
the materials of tesselated pavements, ready pre-
‘pared, that, wherever he encamped, they might be
fei down in the pretorium (Casaubon, ad Sueton.


GABBATHA. 731


p. 38, &c., edit. 1605). From these facts it has been
iuferred by many eminent writers, that the réxos
As0dorrpwros, or place where Pilate’s tribunal was
set on this occasion, was covered by a tesselated
pavement, which, as a piece of Roman magnifi-
cence, was appended to the praetorium at Jerusa-
lem. The emphatic manner in which St. John
speaks of it agrees with this conjecture. It further
appears from his narrative that it was outside the
pretoiinm; for Pilate is said to have ‘come out’
to the Jews, who, for ceremonial reasons, did not
go into it, on this as well as on other occasions
(Jolm xviii. 28, 29, 38; xix. 4, me Besides
which, the Roman governors, although they tried
causes, and conferred with their council (Acts xxv.
12), toithin the pretorium, always pronounced
sentence in the open air. May not then this
tesseluted pavement, on which the tribunal was
now placed, have been inlaid on some part of
the terrace, &c. running along une side of the
preturium, and overlooking the area where the
Jews were assembled, or upon a landing-place
of the stairs, immediately before the grand en-
trauce #

It has been conjectured that the pavement in
question was no other than the one refened to in
2 Chron. vii. 3, and by Josephus, De Bell. Jud. vi.
1.8, as in the outer courtof the temple; but though
it ee that Pilate sometimes sat upon his tri-
bunal in different places, as, for instance, in the
open market-place (De Bell. Jud. ii, 9. 3), yet the
supposition that he would, on this occasion, when
the Jews were pressing for a speedy judgment, and
when he was overcome with alarm, adjourn the
whole assembly, consisting of rulers of every grade,
as well as the populace, to any other place, is very
unlikely ; and the supposition that such place was
any part of the temple is encumbered with addi-
tional difficulties. The word Gabbatha remains
to be considered. It is not certain that St. John
intends A:@dorperos as a translation or interpre-
tation of Gabbatha: he may simply mean that the
same place was called by these two names in Greek
and Hebrew respectively. Yet it may ve said
that the names }YTIN and ’AroAAvwy, which he
introduces in a symilar way (Rev. ix. 11), are
synonymous; and if the word Gabbatha be de-
rived from 33, ‘a surface, it may correspond to the
idea‘of a pavement; but if, as is usual, it be derived
from 7333, ‘to be high or elevated.’ it: may refer
chiefly to the terrace, or uppermost landing of the
stairs, &c., which might have been inlaid witha
tesselated pavement. Sclileusner uiderstands an
elevated mosaic pavement, on which the Bjua was
placed, before the prtorium. ‘Ihe most natural in-
ference from St. John’s statement is, that the word


* Gabbatha is ‘ Hebrew ;’ but it has been contended


that the writers of the New Testament used this
word, by way of accommodation, to denute the
language (Syriac, or Syro-Chaldaic, it is said)
which was commonly spoken in Judwa in their
time, and that, when St. John says ‘E8paiorl, he
means in the Syro-Chaldaic ; but into the exten-
sive controversy respecting the vernacular lan-
guage of the Jews at Jerusalem, in the time of our
Saviour, this is not the place tu enter. It may
suffice for the present purpose to remark, that the
ancient Syriac verston, instead of Gabbatha, reads
Gepiptha, Dissert. De Ai€ootpdéty, a

Iken, Breme, 1725; Lightfoot’s Works, vol. ii.
pp- 614,615, Lond 1684; Reperenliae Bate Gs

A


723 GABRIEL.


Hamelsveld, Bibl. Geogr. ii. 129; Seelen, Medit.
Ereg.i. 643; Jahn's Archeol, Bib.)—J.F.D.


GABRIEL (287933, the mighty one [or hero]
of God), the heavenly messenger who was sent to

aniel to explain the vision of the ram and the he-
goat (Dan. vii.),and to communicate the prediction
of the Seventy Weeks (Dan. ix. 21-27). Under the
new dispensation he was employed to announce the
birth of Juhn the Baptist to his father Zechariah


(Luke i. 11), and that of the Messiah to the.


Virgin Mary (Lake i. 26). Both by Jewish and
Christian writers, Gabriel has been denominated
an archangel, ‘The Scriptures, however, athirm
nothing positively respecting his rank, though the
importance of the commissions on which he was
employed, and his own words ‘Iam Gabriel, that
stand in the presence of God * (Luke i. 19), are
rather in favour of the notion of his superior dig-
nity. But the reserve of the Inspired Volume on
such points strikingly distinguishes its angelology
from that of the Jews and Mohammedaus, and,
we may add, of the Fathers and some later
Christian writers. In all the solemn glimpses of
the other world which it gives, a great moral pur-
pose is kept in view. Whatever is divulged tends
to elevate and refine: nothing is said to gratily a
prurient curiosity.

In the Book of Enoch, ‘the four great archangels,
Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, and Uriel,’ are de-
scribed as reporting the corrupt state of mankind
to the Creatgr, and receiving their several com-
missions, To Gabriel he says, ‘Go, Gabriel,
against the giants, the spurious ones, the sons of
fornication, and destroy the sons of the watchers
from among the sons of men’ (Greek Frag-
ment of the Book of Enoch, preserved by Syn-
cellus in Scaliger’s notes on the Chronicon of
Eusebius, Amstel. 1658, p. 404). In the rabbi-
nical writings Gabriel is represented as standing
in front of the divine throne, near the standard of
the tribe of Judah (Buxtort, Lez. Jalmud. s. v.


ININ). The rabbins also say that he is the Prince
of Fire, and appointed to preside over the ripening
of fruit; that se was the only one of the angels
+ who understood Chaldee and Syriac, and taught
Joseph the seventy languages spoken at the dis-
persion of Babel; that he and Michael destroyed
the hust of Sennacherib, and set tire to the Temple
at Jerusalem (Eisenmenger’s Enfdecktes Juden-
thum, th. ii. ss. 365, 379, 380, 383).

By the Mobammedans Gabriel is regarded with
profound veneration. To him, it is affirmed, a
copy of the whole Koran was committed, which
he imparted in successive portions to Mohammed,
He is styled in the Koran, the Spirit of Truth, and
the Holy Spirit. In his hands will be placed
the scales in which the actions of men will be
weighed at the last day (Sales Koran; D'Herbe-
lot's Hibliothéque Ortentale).—J. E. R.

GAD (1). 1. A son of Jacob by his concue
bine Zilpah (Gen. xxx. 10, sq.), and who became
the progenitor of one of the twelve tribes. The
sons of Gad are enunterated in Gen. xlvi. 16, sq.,
and Num. i. 4, sq. At the time of the conquest
of Canaan, the tribe of Gad counted 45,650
warriors (Num. i. 24): the position of their camp
in the desert is given Num. ii. 14, and the names
of their chiefs, vii. 10, sq.

Asa reward for their having formed the van-
guard in war of the army of the tribes collectively,


GAD.


they were allowed to appropriate to their excle
sive use some pastoral districts beyond the Jordan
(Num. xxxii. 17, 8q.).

The inheritance of this tribe, called the land of
Gad (1 Sam. xiii. 7; Jer. xlix. 1), was situated
beyond the Jordan in Gilead, north of Reuten,
and separated on the east from Ammon by the
river Jabbok. According to 1 Chron. v. 11, the
Gadites had extended their possessions on the east
as far as Salcah, though the latter had been allitted
by Moses to Manasseh (Deut. iii. 10,13): a prof
how difficult it is to draw a strong line of demar
cation between the possessions of pastoral tribe.
Tue territory of Gad forms a part of the present
Belka (Burckhardt, Syria, ii. 598),

In Josh. xiii. 25, the land of Gad is called ‘half
the land of the children of Ammon :' not becaue
the latter were then in pussession of it, but probally
because the part west of the Jabbok had forme:ly
bome that name (comp. Judg. xi. 13).

The principal cities of Gad by the general
appellation of the Cities of Gilead (Josh. xii.
25).
The Gadites were a warlike people, and were
compelled to be continually armed and on the
alert against the inroads of the surrounding Arabian
hordes (comp. Gen. xlix. 19; Deut. xxxiii. 20:
1 Chron. v. 19, 8q.).—E. M.

2. GAD, a prophet contemporary with David,
and probably a pupil of Samuel, who early at-
tached himself to the son of Jesse (1 Sam. xxii. 5).
Instances of his prophetic intercourse with David
occur in 2 Sam xxiv. 11, 6q.; 1 Chiron. xxi. 9,
8q.; xxix. 25. Gad wrote a history of the reign
ot David, to which the author of the 2nd bouk of
Samuel seems to refer for further information
respecting that reign (1 Chron. xxix. 29), Bc.
1062-1017.


GAD (12; Sept. Sayudmoy, or, according to.
the reading of Jerome and of some MSS., tux7)
is mentioned in Isa. Ixv. LI. The worl admits
of two different significations. If it be derived
from ‘T"1) in the sense of to cut, it may mean a lot,


and, by a combination with the Arabic b>,


which means to be nete, to occur, to be fortunate,
may be legitimately taken to denote fortune.
Indeed, some find this ‘fortune,’ although not as
an idol, in Gen. xxx. 11, where the Sept. has
rendered the Kethib 193. by ey réyp, which is
approved by Selden, and especially by Tuch,
who does not even wish to change the punctua-
tion, but ascribes the Qametz to the intnence of
the pause (Comment. iiber die Genesis, ad loc.).
This is the sense in which Gesenius, Hitzig, and
Ewald have taken Gad in their respective vet+
sions of Isaiah. All render the claus, * who
spread a table to Fortune.’ This view, shich is
the general one, makes Fortune in this passage to
be an object of idolatrous worship. There is
great disagreengent, however, as to the power of
nature which this name was intended to denote;
and, from the scanty data, there is little else than
mere opinion on the subject. The majority.
among whom are some of the chief rabbinical
commentators, as well as Gesenins, Miinter, and
Ewald, consider Gad to be the form under which
the planet Jupiter was worshipped as the greater
star of good fortune (see esjecially Gesenius,
Comment. +ber der Iesaia, ad luc). Others,


GAD.


among whom is Vitringa, suppose Gad to have
represented the Sun ; and Movers, the latest writer
of any eminence on Syro-Arabian idolatry, takes
it to have been the planet Venus (Die PAénizier,


i, 650).

Onthe other hand, if Gad be derived from 113
in the sense of to press, to crowd, it may mean
a troop, a heap (to which sense there is an allu-
sion in Gen. xlix. 19); and Hoheisel, as cited
in Rosenmiiller’s Scholia, ad loc., as well as
Deyling, in his Observat. Miscell. p. 673, have
each attempted a mode by which the passage
might be explained, if Gad and Meni were taken
in the sense of troop and number.—J. N.


GAD (33) occurs in two places in Scripture, in
both of which it is translated coriander, viz. Exod.
xvi. 31, ‘ And it (manna) was like coriander (gad)
seed, white; and the taste of it was like wafers made
of honey ;* Num. xi. 7, ‘And the manna was as
coriander seed, and the colour thereof as the colour
of bdellium.’ The manna which fell in the desert,
and on which the Israelites were fed during their
sojourn there, is usually described, from a collation
of the different ges in which it is mentioned,
as white, round, and like gad, which last has
almost universally been considered to mean ‘ co-
riander’ seed, though some prefer other seeds.


302. (Coriandrum sativam.)


The chief, and indeed only proof of gad signify-
ing the coriander, has been adduced by Celsius
(Hierobot. vol. ii. p. 81): ‘Told, quod Africanis
coriandrum est, ut docet auctor iznotus sel
utilissimus, qui Dioscoridem synonymis exoticis
auxit et illustravit. Alydwrior, inquit, vx:ov,
Agpol yol3: coriandrum Aigyptii ockion appel-
lant, Afri goid.’ This passage Sprengel incorporates
with the eae bat Dioscorides, as well as the other
synonyms, which are supposed by others, as above,
to be qadiians by anotiee but Beta ancient
author. Rosenmiiller, referring to this passage,
observes: ‘ the Africans, 3. e, Carthaginians, whose
language, the Punic, was cognate with the Hebrew,
called the coriander Tol, which word is not at all
different from the Hebrew gad.’ Celsius states that


GADARA. 723


the coriander is frequently mentioned in the Tal-
mud. It was known toand used medicinally by
Hippocrates: it is mentioned by Theophrastus, as
well as Dioscorides, under the name of xépioy or
roptavvoy ; and the Arabs, in their works on Mate-
ria Medica, give korion as the Greek synonym of


coriander, which they call 5y\$ kuzeereh, tae


Persians kushneez, and the natives of India
dhunya. It is known throughout all these coun-
tries, in all of which it is cultivated, being uni-
versally employed as a grateful spice, and as one
of the ingredients of currie-powder. It is also com-
mon in Egypt. ‘Ubique,’ says Prosper Alpinus,
‘in viridariis coriandrum provenit copiosissimum,
quod omnes Cusbard apyellant. Herbeque
virentis usus in cibo est apud omnes A&gyptios
familiarissimus. Etenim ferculum non_parant
sine foliis coriandri’ (De Plantis 2gypti, c. xlii.
p. 61). Pliny also, long before, mentioned ‘ co~
riandrum in ASgypto precipuum.” It is now very
common in the south of Europe, and also in this
country, being cultivated, especially in Essex, on
account of its seeds, which are required by
confectioners, druggists, and distillers, in large
quantities: in gardens it is reared on acconnt of
its leaves, which are used in soups and salads.
The coriander is an umbelliferous plant, the
Coriandrum sativum of botanists. e fruit,
commonly called seeds, is globular, greyish-co-
loured, about the size of peppercom, having its
surface marked with fine striz. Both its taste
and smell are agreeable, depending on the pr
sence of a volatile oil, which is separated by dis-
tillation.—J. F. R.

GADARA was the chief city or metropolis of
Perea, lying in the district termed Gadaritis,
some small distance from the southern extremity
of the sea of Galilee, sixty stadia from Tiberias,
to the south of the river Hieromax, and also of
the Scheriat-al-Mandhur (Joseph. Antig. xiii.
13.3; Polyb. v. 71.3; Joseph. De Bell. Jud. iv.
8.3; Plin. Hist. Nat. v.15). It was fortified, and
stood on a hill of limestone. Its inhabitants were
mostly heathens. Josephus says of it, in conjunc-
tion with Gaza and Hippos, ‘they were Grecian
cities’ (Antig. xvii. 11. 4). After the place had
heen destroyed in the domestic quarrels of the
Jews, it was rebuilt by Pompey, in order to gra-
tify Demetrius of Gadara, one of his freedmen
(Joseph. De Bell. Jud. i.7.7). Augustus added
Gadara, with other places, to the kingdom of
Herod (Joseph. Antig. xv. 7. 2); from which, on
the death of that prince, it was sundered, and
joined to the province of Syria (Joseph. De Bell.
Jud. ii. 6. 3). Stephen of Byzantium reckoned
it a part of Coele- Syria, and Pliny (Hist. Nat. v.

_16) a part of the Decapolis. At a later period it
was the seat of an episcopal see in Palestina Se-
cunda, whose bishops are named in the councils
of Nice and Ephesus (Reland, Palest. pp. 176,
215, 223, 226).

Most modern authorities (Winer, Handtwirterb.,
Ranmer in his Paldstina, Burckhardt, Seetzen)
find Gadara in the present village of Om-keis.
Backingham, however, identifies Om-keis with
Gamala (Trav. in Palest.); though it may be
added that his facts, if not his reasonings, lead io
a conclusion in favour of the general opinion.
Accordingly, taking Om-keis to be the ancient
Gadara, we may avail ourselves in ce ov of

a


UA GADARA,


the descriptions of its ruins and scenery which
Buckingham hus given.

Limestone is a species of rock in which caverns
of greater or less dimensions are easily and often
naturally furmed. Accordingly the hills on which
Gadara was placed were full of caverns, which
were used for tombs. Buckingham speaks of
several grottoes, which furmed the necropolis of
the city, on the eastern brow of the bill. The
first two examined by him were plain chambers
hewn down ao as to present a perpendicular front.
The third tomb had a stone door, as pertect as on
the day of its being first hung. The last was an
excavated chamber, seven feet in height, twelve
paces long, and ten broad; within it was a
smaller room. Other tombs were discovered by
Buckingham as he ascended the hill. He entered
one in which were ten sepulchres, ranged along
the inner wall of the chamber in a line, being
pierced inward for their greateat length, and di-
vided by a thin partition left in the rock, in
each of which was cut a small niche for a lamp.
Still more tombs were found, some containing
sarcophagi, some without them; all, however,
displaying more or less of architectural ornament.

On reaching the summit of the hill, Bucking-
ham was rewarded by a very fine view. Though
the country is stony and bare, and the hills desti-
tute of wood and verdure, ‘it was impossible,’ he
says, ‘not to admire the commanding view and
the grandeur, as well as the extent of the scene.’
On the N.E. flowed the Nahr-el-Hami, the an-
cient Hieromax, coming westward, through high
cliffs on its northern bank, and a bed of verdant
shrubs on its southern, and bending its way, by
the hot springs and ruins of the Roman bath on
its edge, to increase the waters of the Jordan. On
the N.W., in a deep hollow surrounded by lofty
hills, was the still sea of Galilee or lake of Gen-
nesareth, on the southern bauk of which stood the
emall village of Samuk, and on the western the
town of Tiberias, still preserving nearly its an-
cient name. From this take the Jordan was seen
to issue and wind its southern course through a
desert plain.

The city formed nearly a square. The upper
Be of it stood on a level spot, and appears to

ave been walled all round, the acclivities of the

hill being ou all sides exceedingly steep. The
eastern gate of entrance has its portals still re-
maining. Among the ruins Buckingham found
a theatre, an Ionic temple, a second theatre, be-
sides traces and remnants of streets and houses.
The prevalent orders of architecture are the Ionic
and the Corinthian.

Burckhardt also found near Gadara warm sul-
phurous springs, They were termed Therma
Helix, and were reckoned inferior only to those
of Baiw (Euseb. Onomast.). According to Epi-

hanius (Adv. Heres. i. 131) a yearly festival was

nell at these baths (Reland, p. 775). For coins,
see Eckhel (Doctr. Num. iii, p.348). The caverns
in the rocks are also mentioned by Epiphanius
(1. c.) in terms which seem to show that they were
in his day used for dwellings as well as for tombs,

Gadara is the scene of the miracle recorded in
Matt. viii. 28; Mark v.1; Luke viii. 26. Buck-
ingham's remarks on this event are well worth
quoting :—‘ The accounts given of the habitation
of the demoniac from whom the lezion of devils
was cast out here struck us very forcibly, while


GALATIA.


we ourselves were wandering among rugged
mountains, and surrounded by tomls still used
as dwellings by individuals and whole families,
A finer subject for a masterly expression of the
passions of madness in all their violence, con-
trasted with the serenity of virtue and benevoleuce
in him who went about doing good, could hardly
be chosen for the pencil of an artist; and a faith
ful delineation of the rugged and wild majesty
of the mountain-scencry here on the one hand,
with the still calm of the waters of the Jake on
the other, would give an additional charm to the
picture.’ One of the ancient tombs was, wlien
our traveller saw it, used as a carpenter's shop,
the occupier of it being employed in constructing
a rude joist A perfect sarcophagus remained
within, which was used by the family as a pro-
vision-chest.

The text of the original narratives which record
the cure of the Gadarene demoniac, or demoniacs,
has more than its share of difficulty in regard to
the name of the locality where the event took
place. Mark and Luke indeed agree in de-
scribing it as ‘the country of the Gadarenes,” but
Matthew calls it ‘the country of the Gergesenes.’
One various reading gives ‘of the Gerasenes,
another ‘of the Gadarenes.’ But Gerasa Genass]
Jay at a wide distance from the lake of Galilee,
and possibly the difficulty which hence arose was
that which led Origen to conjecture that the
reading should be ‘of the Gergesenes,’ for with
Origen this reading tock its rise (Rosenmiiller,
ii, 2.22; Reland, pp.774, 806). Indeed to him the
place as well as the name owes its existence.
Gergesa is found in some maps, but the best au-
thorities omit it (Kieppert’s A//as); for it is not
found either in the Bible or Josephus, and Schulz
has substituted in his text Padapnvdy for Tep-
yeonvav.. These remarks and emeniations re-
move the difficulty presented in the feztus re-
ceptus and the common version.—J. R. B.

GALATIA (Laaazia, 4 Tadaruch yépa), a pro-
vince of Asia Minor, bounded on the north by
Bithynia and Paphlagonia, on the south by Ly-
caonia, on the east by Pontus and Cappadocia,
and on the west by Phrygia and Bithyuia It
derived its name from the Gallic or Keltic tribes
who, about 280 years B.c., made an irruption into
Macedonia and Thrace. At the invitation of
Nicomedes, king of Bithynia, they passed over
the Hellespont to assist that prince against his
brother Ziboeta. Having accomplished this ob-
ject, they were unwilling to retrace their steps; and
strengthened by the accession of fresh hordes from
Eurvpe, they overran Bithynia and the neigh-
bouring countries, and supported themselves by
predatory excursions, or hy imposts exacted from
the native chiefs. After the lapse of forty years,
Attalus I., king of Pergamus, succeeded in
checking their nomadic habits, and confined them
toa fixed territory. Of the three principal tribes,
the Trocmi (Tpdkor) settled in the eastem part
of Galatia near the banks of the Halys; the
Tectosages (Texrdoayes) in the country round
Ancyra; and the Tolistobogii (ToAsrroBéyios) in
the south-western parts near Pessinus, They re-
tained their independence till the year B.c. 159,
when they were brought under the power of Rome
hy the consul Cn. Manlius (Livy, xxxviii.; Poly-
dius, xxit. 24), though still governed by their own
princes. In the year B.C. 25 Galatia became &


GALATIANS.


Roman province. Under the successors of Au-
gustus boundaries of Galatia were so much
enlarged that it reached from the shores of the
Euxine to the Pisidian Taurus. In the time of
Constantine a new division was made, which re-
duced it to its ancient limits; and by Theodosius I.
or Valens it was separated into Galatia Prima,
the northern part, occupied by the Trocmi and
Tectosages, and Galatia Secunda or Salutaris:
Ancyra was the capital of the former, and Pessi-
nus of the latter. ;

From the intermixture of Gauls and Greeks
Galatia was also called Gallo-Gracia (FaAdo-
ypaixla, Strabo, xii. 5), and its inhabitants
Gallo-Greci. But even in Jerome's time they
had not lost their native language: ‘ Galatas
excejito sermone Graco, quo omnis Oriens loqui-
tur, propriam Iinguam eandem pene habere
quam Treviros, nec referre si aliqua inde corru-

int,” &e. (Prol. ad Comment. in Ep. ad Gal. ;

Wette’s Learbuch, p. 231).

The Gospel was introduced into this province
by the Apostle Paul. His first visit is recorded
in Acts xvi. 6, and his second in Acts xviii. 23.
(Penny Cyclopedia, arts. ‘Celta’ and ‘ Galatia;'
Mannert's Geographie der Griechen und Romer,
vi. 3, ch. 4; Merleker’s Lehrbuch der Historisch-
comparativen Geographie, iv.1, p 284.)—J.E. R.

GALATIANS, EPISTLE TO THE. The
Pauline origin of this epistle is attested not only
by the superscription which it bears (i. 1), but
also by frequent allusions in the course of it to
the great Apostle of the Gentiles (comp. i. 13-23;
ii. 1-14), and by the unanimous testimony of the
ancient church (Lardner, Works, vol. ii. 8vo.).
It is corroborated also by the style, tone, and con-
tents of the epistle, which are perfectly in keeping
with those of the Apostle’s other writings.

The parties to whom this epistle was addressed
are described in the epistle itself as ‘the churches
of Galatia’ (i. 2; comp. iii. 1). Into this dis-
trict the Gospel was first. introduced by Paul
himself (Acts xvi. 6; Gal. i. 8; iv. 13, 19).
Churches were then also probably formed; for
on revisiting this district some time after his
first visit it is mentioned that he ‘strengthened
the disciples’ (Acts xviii. 23). These churches
seem to have been composed principally of con-
verts directly from Heathenism, but partly, also,
of Jewish converts, both pure Jews and proselytes.
Unhappily, the latter, not thoruughly emancipated
from early opinions and prepossessiona, or probably
intluenced by Judaizing teachers who had visited
these churches, had been seized with a zealous
desire to incorporate the rites and ceremonies of
Judaism with the spiritual truths and gle
ordinances of Christianity. So active had this
pene been in disseminating their views on this
veal through the churches of Galatia, that the
Majority at least of the members had been se-
duced to adopt them (i. 6; iii, 1, &c.) To this
result it is probable that the previons relizions
conceptions of the Galatians contributed ; for,
accustomel to the worship of Cybele, which they
had learned from their neighbours the Phrygians,
and to the thepsophistic doctrines with which that
worship was associated, they would be the more
realily induced to believe that the fulness of
Christianity could alone be developed through the
symlwlical adumbrations of an elaborate ceremo-
nial (Neander, Apostol. Zeitalter, s. 400, 2te Aufi.).


GALATIANS. 725


Fyrom some passages in this epistle (e. gr. i. 11-24;
ii. 1-21) it would appear also that insinuations
had been disseminated among the Galatian
churches to the effect that Paul was not a di-
vinely-commissioned Apostle, but only a mes-
senger of the church at Jerusalem; that Peter
and he were at variance upon the subject of the
relation of the Jewish rites to Christianity; and
that Paul himself was not at all times so strenu-
ously opposed to those rites as he had chosen to be
among the Galatians. Of this state of things in-
telligence having been conveyed to the Apostle,
he wrote this epistle for the purpose of vindicating
his own pretensions and conduct, of counteracting
the influence of these false views, and of recalling
the Galatians to the simplicity of the Gospel
which they had received. The importance of the
case wus probably the reason why the Apostle put
himself to the great labour of writing this epistle
with his own hand (vi. 11).

The epistle consists of three parts. In the first
part (i.-i1.), after his usual salutations, Paul vin-
dicates his own Apostolic authority and indepen-
dence as a directly-commissioued ambassador of
Christ to men, and especially to the Geutile por-
tion of the race; asserting that the Gospel which
he preached was the only Gospel of Christ,—ex-
pressing his surprise that the Galatians had al-

owed themselves to be so soon turned from him >
who had called them to a difierent Gospel,—
denouncing all who had thus seduced them as
troublers of the church, perverters of the doctrine
of Christ, and deserving, even had they been
angels from heaven, to be placed under an ana-
thema instead of being fullowed,—maintaining
the divine origin of his Apostolic commission,
which he illustrates by the history of his conver-
sion and early conduct in the service of Christ,—
and declaring that, so far from being inferior to
the other Apostles, he had ever treated with them
on equal terms, and been welcomed by them as
an equal. Having in the close of this pait of the
epistle been Jed to refer to his zeal for the great
doctrine of salvation by the grace of God through
faith in Christ, he enters at large, in the second
part (iii.-iv.), upon the illustation and defence of
this cardinal truth of Christianity. He appeals
to the former exPerience of the Galatians as tu the
way in which they had received the Spirit, to the
case of Abraham, and to the testimony of Scrip-
ture in support of his position that it is by faith
and not by the works of the law that men are
accepted of God (iii. 1-9). He proceeds to re-
mind them that the law has brought a curse upon
men because of sin, a curse which it has no
power to remove, and from which the sinner can be
redeemed only through the substitutionary work
of Christ, by whose means the blessing of Abraham
comes upon the Gentiles. Aud Jest any should ob-
ject that the law being of more recent origin than
the covenant must supersede it, he shows that this
cannot be the case, but that the covenant must be *
perpetual, whilst the law is to be regarded only in
the light of a temporary and intercalary arrange-
ment, the design of which was to forward the fulfil-
ment of the promise in Christ (10-29). The relation
of the Jewish church to the Christian is then illus-
trated by the case of ap heir under tutors and
governors as contrasted with the case of the same
person when he is of age and has become master of
all; and the Galatians are exhorted not willingly to


.


’


126 ’ GALATIANS.


descend from the important and dignified position
of sons to that of mere servants in God's house—an
exhortation which is illustrated and enforced by
an allegorical comparison of the Jewish church to
Ishmael, the son of Hagar, and of the Christian to
Isaac, the son of Sarah, and the Child of Promise
(iv. 1-31). The third part of the Epistle (v.-vi.
is chiefly hortatory and admonitory ; it sets forth
the necessity of steadfast adherence to the liberty
of the Gospel in comection with obedience to the
moral Jaw as a rule of duty, the importance of
mutual forbearance and love among Christians,
and the desirableness of maintaining a firm adhe
rence to the doctrine of Christ and Him crucilied.
Theepistle concludes with benedictions and prayers,
Respecting the time when and the place where
this epistle was written, great diversity of opinion
revatls. Marcion held this to be the earliest of
Paul's epistles (Epiphanins, Ado. Heres. xlii. 93
and Tertullian is generally supposed to favour the
same opinion, from his speaking of Paul's zeal
against Judaism displayed in this epistle as cha-
racteristic of his being yet a neophyte (Adv.
Mare. i. 20); though, to us, it does not appear
that in this passage Tertullian is referring at
all to the writing of this epistle, but only to
Paul’s personal intercourse with Peter and other
of the Anat mentioned by him in the epistle
a 9-14). Michaelis also has given his suf:
tage in favour of a date earlier than that of
the Apostle’s second visit to Galatia, and very
shortly after that of his first. Koppe's view (Noe,
Test. vol. vi. p. 7) is the same, though he sup-
nse3. the Apostle to have preached in Galatia
efore the visit mentioned by Luke in Acts xvi.
6, and which is usually reckoned his first visit to
that district. Others, again, such as Mill (Proleg.
in Nov. Test. p. 4), Calovius (Biblia Iliust, t. iv.
p- 529), and, more recently, Schrader (Der Ap.
Paulus, th. i. s. 226), place the date of this epistle
at a late period of the Apostle’s life: the last, in-
deed, advocates the date assigned in the Greek
MSS. and in the Syriac and Arabic versions,
which announce that it was written from Rome’
during the Apostle’s imprisonment there. The
Majority, however, concur in a medium view
between these extremes, and fix the date of this
epistle at some time shortly after the Apostle’s
second visit to Galatia. This opinion appears to
us to be the only one that has any decided support
from the epistle itself. From the Apostle’s abrupt
exclamation in ch. i. 6, ¢1 marvel that ye are so
goon removed frum him that called) you,’ &c,, it
seems just to infer that he wrote this epistle not
very long after he had left Galatia. It is true, as
has been urged, that oftw raxéws in this verse
may mean ‘60 quickly’ as well us ‘80 soon ;* but
the abruptness of the Apostle’s statement appears
to us rather to favour the latter rendering: for,as a
complaint of the quickness of their change re-
spected the manner in which it had been made,


-and as the Apostle could be aware of that only by


report, and as it was a matter on which there
might be a difference of opinion between him and
them, it would seem necessary that the grounds of
such a charge should be stated; whereas if the
complaint merely related to the shortness of time
during which, after the Apostle had been among
them, they had remained steadfast in the faith, a
mere allusiou to it was suflicient, as it was a
matter not admitting of any diversity of opinidn.


GALATIANS.


We infer, then, froin this expression that this
epistle was written nut long after Paul had been
in Galatia. The question, however, still remains,
which of the two visits of Paul to Galatia men-
tioned in the Acts was it after which this epistle
was written? In reply to this Michaelis and some
others maintain that it was the first; but in
coming to this conclusion they appear to have un
accountably overlooked the Apostle’s plrasevlogy
(iv. 13), where he speaks of circumstances con
nected with his preaching the Gospel among the
Galatians, 7d xpérepor, the former time, an ex-
pression which clearly indicates that at the period
this epistle was written, Paul had been at least
twice in Galatia.* On these grounds it is probable
that the Apostle wrote and despatched this epistle
not long after he had left Galatia fur the secand
time, and, perhaps, whilst he was residing at
Ephesus (comp. Acts xviii. 23; xix. 1,sqq.). The
reasons which Michaelis urges for an earlier date
are of no weight. He appeals, in the first place,
to ch. i. 2, and asks whether Paul would have
used the vague expression, ‘all the brethren,’ with-
out naming them. had it not been that the parties
in question were those by whom he had Leen ac-
companied on his first visit to Galatia, viz. Silas
aud Timothy, and, ¢ perhaps, some others.’ The
answer to this obviously is, that had Paul referred
in this expression to these individuals, who were
known to the Galatians, he was much more likely.
on that very account to have named them than
otherwise; and besides, the expression ‘all the
brethren that are with me’ is much more naturally
understood of a cousiderable number of persons,
such as the elders of the church at Ephesus, than
of too persons, and, ‘perhaps, some others.’
Again, he urges the fact that, about the time of
Paul's first visit to Galatia, Asia Minor was full
of zealots for the law, and that consequently it is
easier to account for the seduction of the Gala-
tians at this period than at a later, But the pas
saze to which Michaelis refers in support of this as-
sertion (Acts xv. 1) simply informs us that certain
Judaizing teachers visited Antioch, and gives us D0
information whatever as to the time when such zea
lots entered Asia Minor. In fine, he lays great stress
on the circumstance that Paul in recapitulating
the history of his own life in the first and second
chapters brings the narrative down only to the
period of the conference at Jerusalem, the reason
of which is to be found, he thinks, m_ the fact that
this epistle was written so soon after that event
that nothing of moment had subsequently oc-
curred in the Apostle’s history. But even ad-
mitting that the period referred to in this secoud
chapter was that of the conference mentioned
Acts xv, (though this is much doubted hy many
writers of note), the reason assigned by Michaelis
for Paul's carrying the narrative of his life no
further than this cannot be admitted ; for it over


* Prof. Stuart says, in bar of this cunclusion,
that ‘mpérepov means only a time antecedent to
that in which he (Paul) wrote.’ (Notes to Fos-
dick’s Translation of Hug's Introd. p. 748.) But,
in making this remark, the learned professor has
not observed that Paul's expressiun is not siraply
xpérepov, but +d xpérepoy, which makes all the
difference between the rendering ‘in time past
and the rendering ‘the former time.’ The lattes
alone is proper here.


GALILEE.


looks the design of the Apostle in furnishing that
narrative, which was not certainly to deliver him-
self cf a pieve of mere autobiographical detail ;
but to show from certain leading incidents in his
early Apostolic life how from the first he had
claimed and exercised an independent Apostolic
authority, and how his rights in this respect had
been admitted by the pillars of the een Peter,
James, and John. For this purpose it was not
necessary that the narrative shontd be brought
down to a lower date than the period when Paul
went forth as the Apostle of the Gentiles, formally
recognised as such by the other Apostles of Christ.
This fact, then, isas little in favour of Michaelis's
theory as any of the other arguments which he has
adduced.

Of commentaries on this epistle the most im-
portant are the following: Borger, Inferpretatio
Ep. Pauli ad Galatas, 8vo. Lugd. Bat. 1807;
Winer, Pauii Ep. ad Gal. perpetua Annot. illus-
travit, 8vo. ed. tertia, Lipsia, 1829; Riickert,
Commentar ib. d. Brief Pauli and. Gal., 8vo.,
Leipzig, 1833; Usteri, Commentar iib. d. Br.
Pauli an d. Gal. 8vo. Ziirich, 1833; Hermann,
De Pauli Epist. ad Gal. tribus primis capitibus,
4to. Lips. 1632.—W. L. A.


GALBANUM. [Cuaxnanen.]


GALILEE (FaaiAala), the Greek form of the

e hame given to oue of the three principal divisions
of Palestine, the other two being Juda and Sama-
ria. This name of the region was very ancient. It
Occurs in the Hebrew forms of Galil and Galilah,
Josh, xx. 7; xxi. 3; 1 Kings ix. 11; 2 Kings

xv. 29; and in Isa. viii. 2 we have Dyan by
‘Galilee of the nations’ (TaAsaala Gddoptawy,
1 Macc. v. 15; Matt. iv. 15).

_ Galilee was the northernmost of the three divi-
sions, and was divided into Upper and Lower.
The former district had Mount Lebanon and

e countries of Tyre and Sidon on the north;
the Mediterranean Sea on the west; Abilene,
Iturea, and the country of Decapolis on the east ;
and Lower Galilee on the south. This was the
Portion of Galilee which was distinctively called
‘Galilee of the nations,’ or of the ‘Gentiles,’ from
its having a more mixed population, t. ¢. less purely
Jewish, than the others. Cursarea Philippi was its
Phncipal city, Lower Galilee had Upper Galilee
on the north, the Mediterranean on the west, the

of Galilee or Lake of Gennesarcth on the east,
and Samaria on the south. Its principal towns
were Tiberias, Chorazin, Bethsaida, Nazareth,
Cana, Capernaum, Nain, Cesarea of Palestine,
and Ptulemais. ‘This is the district which was of
all others the most honoured with the presence of
a Saviour. Here he lived entirely until he was

Irty years of nge; and although, after the com-
Mencement of his ministry, he frequently visited
i Other provinces, it was here that he chiefly
mL a ere also he made his first appearance
i the apostles after his resurrection; for they
zoe all of them natives of this region, and had

uned hither after the sad events at Jerusalem

att. xxviii. 7),

Hoe the disciples of Christ were called ‘Ga-
aus.’ They were easily recognised as such ;

. for the Galil : : par iveta i
Sydae di Hieans spoke a dialect of the vernacular
wai ; ifferent from that of Judea, and which
oF course accounted rude and impure, as all
Pevincial dialects are considered to be, in ouun-


- GALL. 791


parison with that of the metropolis. It was this
which occasioned the detection of St. Peter as one
of Christ's disciples (Mark xiv. 70). The Gali-
lean dialect (as we learn from Buxtorf, Lightfoot,
and others), was of a broad and rustic tone, which
affected the pronunciation not only of letters but
of words. It partook much of the Samaritan and
Syriac idiom; but, in the instance of Peter, it”
must have been the tune which bewrayed him, the +
words being seemingly too few for that effect.

The Galileans are mentioned by Josephus
(Antig. xvii. 10.2; De Bell. Jud. ii. 10.6; iii. 3.
2) as a turbulent and rebellions people, ready on
all occasions to rise against the Roman authority.
This character of them explains what is said in
Luke xiii. 1, with regard to ‘the Galileans whose
blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices.’
Josephus, indeed, does not mention any Galileans
slain in the Temple by Pilate; but the character
which ‘he gives that people sufficiently corro-
borates the statement. The tumults to which he
alludes were, as we know, chiefly raised at the
great festivals, when sacrifices were slain in great *
abundance; and on all such occasions the Galileans &
were much more active than the men of Judaa and
Jernsalem, as is proved by the history of Archelaus
(Joseph. Antig. xvii. 9. 10); which case, indeed,
furnishes an answer to those who deny that the Gali-
leans attended the feasts with the rest of the Jews,

The seditious character of the Galileans also
explains why Pilate, when sitting in judgment
upon Jesus, caught at the word Galilee when used
by the chief priests, and asked if he were a Gali-
lean (Luke xxiii. 8). To be known to belong to
that country was of itself sufficient to prejudice
Pilate against him, and to give some countenance
to the charges, unsupported by impartial evidence,
which were preferred against him, and which
Pilate himself lad, just before, virtually declared
to be false.

GALILEE, SEA OF. [Sea.]

GALL occurs in its primary and proper
meaning, as denoting the substance secreted in
the gall-Lladder of animals, commonly called
bile, in the following passages: Job xvi. 13,
‘He poureth out my gall, ‘MD; Sept. rh»
xordhy pou; Vulg. viscera mea, The metaphors
in this verse are taken from the practice of
huntsmen, who first surround the beast, then
shoot it, and next take out the entrails. The
meaning, as given by Bp. Heath, is, ‘ he entirely
destroyeth me.’ Job xx. 14 (describing the re-
morse of a wicked man), DXINB NWI, ‘the
gall of adders’ (which according to the ancients
is the seat of their poison, Plin. ist. Nad. ii. 37);
Sept. xoah donl5os; Vulg. fel aspidum. Job xx.
25, where, to describe the certainty of a wicked
man’s destruction, it is said, ‘the glittering sword
cometh out of his gall,’ MND; Sept. salts
abot, his vitals; Vulg. amaritudine sua. In
the story of Tobit the gall of a fish is said to have
been used to cure his father’s tlindness (Tobit
vi. 8; xi. 10, 13). Pliny refers to the use of the
same substance for diseases of the eye, ‘ad ocu-
lorum medicamenta utile habetur’ (J/ist. Nat.
xxviii. 10); also speaking of the fish calléonymus,
he says, ‘ Fel cicatrices sanat, et carnes oculorum
superfitias consumit’ (xxxii. 4.7). Galen and
other writers praise the use of the liver of the silue
rugs in cases of dimness of sight. For the other
senses of gall, see Rosu.—J. F. D.


T28 GALLIO.


GALLIO (Paaafey). Junius Anneus Gallio,
elder brother of Seneca the philosopher. His
name was originally M. Ann. Novatus, but
ehanged to Jun. Ann. Gallio in consequence of his
adopt‘on by Jun. Gallio the rhetorician (‘ pater
Gallio,’ Quintil. Inst. Orat. iii. 1. § 21; ix. 2.
$91). Seneca dedicated to him his treatise De

. Vita Beata, and in the preface to the fourth book
of his Naturales Questiones describes him as a
man universally beloved (‘nemo mortalinm uni
tam dulcis est, quam hic omnibus’); and who,
while exempt from all other vices, especiully
abhorred flattery (‘inexpugnabilem virum adver-
sus insidias, quas nemo non in sinum recipi’).
According to Eusebins, he committed suicide
before the death of Seneca (‘ Junius Gallio, fra-
ter Seneca, egregins declamator, propria se manu
interfecit,” Thesaurus Temporum, &c., p. 161,
Amstel. 1658); but Tacitus speaks of him as
alive after that event (Annal. xv. 73), and Dion
Cassius states that he was put to death by order
of Nero. He was Proconsul (avOuratevovros,
Tex. rec. dv6umdrov dyros, Tischendor!) of
Achaia (Acts xviii. 12) under the Emperor Clau-
dius, when Paul first visited Corinth, and nobly
refused to abet the persecution raised by the Jews
against the Apostle. Dr. Lardner has noticed
the strict accuracy of Luke in giving him this
designation, which is obscured in the Auth. Vers.
by the use of the term deputy (Credibility, part i.
book i. ch. i.; Works, i. 34).—J. E. R.


GAMALIEL yn3, God ts my retcarder),
a member of the Sanhedrim in the early times of
Christianity, who, by his favourable interference,
saved the Apostles from an ignominious death
(Acts v. 34). He was the teacher of the Apoatle
Paul before the conversion of the latter (Acts xxii.
3). He bears in the Talmud the surname of {Dt
hazoken, ‘the old man,’ and is represented as the
son of Rabbi Simeon, and grandson of the famous
Hillel: he is said to have occupied a seat, if not
the presidency, in the Sanhedrim during the reigns
of Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius, and tu have
died eighteen years after the destruction of Jeru-
salem.

There are idle traditions about his having been
converted to Christianity by Peter and John
(Phot. Cod. clxxi. p. 199); but they are altogether
irreconcilable with the esteem and respect in
which he was held even in later times by the Jew-
ish Rabbius, by whom his opinions are frequently
quoted as an all-silencing authority on points of
religivus law. Neither does his interference in
behalf’ of the Apostles at all prove—as some would
have it—that he secretly approved their doctrines,
He was a dispassionate judge, and reasoned in
that affair with the tact of worldly wisdom and

+ @Xperience, urging that religious opinions usually
gain strensth by opposition and persecution (Acts
vy. 36, 37), while, if wot noticed at all, they are
sure not to leave any lasting impression on the
minds of the people, if devoid of (ruth (ver. 38) ;
and that it is vain to contend against them, if trne
(ver. 39) That he was more enlightened and
tolerant than his colleagues and contemporaries,
is evident from the very fact that he allowed his
zealous pupil Saul to turn his mind to Greek
literature, which, in a great measure, qualitied
him afterwards to becume the Apostle of the
Gentiles; while by the Jewish Pulcstine laws,

e


GAMES.


after the Maccabean wars, even the Greek law
guage was prohibited to be taught to the Hebrew
youth (Mi FWD Sota, ix. 14).

Another proof of the high respect in which
Gamailiel stood with the Jews long after bis death,
is afforded by an anecdote told in the Talmud
respecting his tomb, to the effect that Onkelos
(the celebrated Chaldsean translator of the Old
Testament) spent seventy pounds of incense at his
grave in honour of his memory (f°DMY) Fouchsin,
59).—F. M.

GAMES. If by the word are intended mere
secular amusements, which are the natural ex-
pression of vigorous health and joyous feeling,
titted, if not designed, to promote health, hilarity,
and friendly feeling, as well as to aid in the
development of the corporeal frame, we must
Jook to other quarters of the globe, rather than to
Palestine, for their origin and encouragement.
The Hebrew temperament was too deep, too ear
nest, too full of religivus emotion, to give rise to
games having a national and permanent che
racter. Whatever of amusement, or rather of re-
creation, the descendants of Abraham
partook of that religious complexion which was
natural to them; or rather the predominant re
ligiousness of their souls gave its own hue, as to
all their engagements, so to their recreations.
The influence of religion pervaded their entire
being; so that whatever of recreation they needed .
or enjoyed is for the most part found blended
with religious exercises, Hence their great na-
tional festivals served at once fur the devout ser
vice of Almighty God, and the recreation and
tefieshment of their own minds and bodies.

Games, however, are so natural to man, espe
cially in the period of childhood, that no natiom
has been or can be entirely without them. Ac
coidingly a few traces are found in the early
Hebrew history of at least private and childish
diversions. The heat of the climate too in Syria
would indispose the mature to more bodily ex-
ertion than the duties of life imposed, while the
gravity which is characteristic of the Oriental
character might seem compromised by anything
so light as sports. Dignitied ease therefure com
responds with the idea which we form of Oriental
recreation. |The father of the family sits at the
door of his tent, or reclines on the housetop, or
appears at the city gate, and there tranquilly
enjoys repose, broken by conversation, under the
light and amid the warmth of the bright and
breezy heavens, in the cool of the retiring day, or
before the sun has assumed his burning ardours
(Deut. xvi. 14; Lam. v. 14). Even among the
active Egyptians, whose games have been figured
on their mural tablets, we find little which sug-
gests a comparison with the vigorous contests of
the Grecian games. One of the mst remarkable
is the following (No. 302), showing what appears
to be play with the single-stick.

Zechariah (viii. 5) alludes to the sportiveness
of children in the streets as a sign and conse
quence of that peace and prosperityewhich are 50
free from alarm that the young take their usual
games, and aie allowed entire liberty by their
parents :—‘and the streets of the city shall be
full of boys and girls pleging in the streets
thereof’ (comp. Jer. xxx. 19). Am interesting
passage illustrative of these street-amusements is
found in, Matt. xi. 16 :—‘ This generation is like


.


umte children sitting in the markets and calling
unto their fellows, We have piped unto you and
- ye bave not danced, we have moumed unto you
aad ye have not lamented.’


That the elegant amusement of playing with
tamed and trained birds was not unusual may
be learnt from Job xli. 5:—‘ Wilt thou play
with him (leviathan) as with a bird?’ dom-
menting on Zech. xii. 3, Jerome mentions an
amusement of the young, which we have seen
ites, in more than one part of the north of

gland. ‘It is customary,’ he says, ‘in the
cities of Palestine, and has been so from ancient
times, to place up and down large stones to serve
for exercise for the young, who, according in each
case to their degree of strength, lift these stones,
some as high as their knees, others to their middle,
others above their heads, the hands being kept
horizontal and joined under the stone.’

Music, song, and dancing were recreations re-
verved mostly for the young or for festive occa-
sions. From Lam. v. 16, ‘the crown is fallen
from our head’ (see the entire passage on the
subject of games), it might be inferred that, as
among the Greeks and Latins, chaplets of flowers
were sometimes wom during festivity. To the
amusements just mentioned frequent allusions
are found in holy writ, among which may be
Siven Ps. xxx. 11; Jer. xxxi. 13; Luke xv.
25. In Isaiah xxx. 29, a passage is found which
serves to show how much of festivity and mirth
was mingled with religious observances; the
Journey on festival occasions up to Jerusalem
was enlivened by music, if not by dancing :—
‘Ye shall have a song as in the night when a
holy solemnity is kept ; and gladness of heart, as
when one goeth with a pipe to come into the
mountain of the Lord, to the Mighty One of
Israel.’ A occurs in 2 Sam. ii. 14,
which may indicate the practice among the an-
cient Israelites of games somewhat similar to the
Jousts and tournaments of the middle ages. On
the subject of dancing see Michaelis (Mos. Recht,
art. 197). No trace is found in Hebrew antiquity
of any of the ordinary games of skill or hazard
which are so numerous in the western world,

The Grecian influence which made itself felt
after the Exile led to a great change in the man-
ners and customs of the Hebrew nation. They
Were soon an almost different people from what
we find them in the days of their national inde-

ence and primitive simplicity. In Macc. i.
14, we find evidence that the Grecian games were
Pa ea 3 and that a gymnasinm was built un-
Antiochus Epiphanes :—* They built a place
of exercise at Jerusalem, according to the custom


GAMES. ve]


of the heathen.’ 2 Mace. iv. 12, 18, 44,
where special mention is made of the alenee
of ‘Greek fashions,’ and ‘the game of Discus ;’
though, as appears clearly from the Jast passage
(v. 17), these practices were considered contrary
to the Mosaic institutions, and were hateful to
pious Israelites. The Herodian princes had the-
atres and amphitheatres built in Jerusalem and
other cities of Palestine, in which were held

lendil games, sometimes in honour of theis
Drees masters. We cite a remarkable passage
to this effect from Josephus (Antig. xv. 8. 1):—
‘ Herod revolted from the laws of his country,
and corrupted the ancient constitution by intro-
ducing foreign practices, while those religious
observances phigh Geni to lead the Sree to
piety were neglected. He appointed solemn
games to be celebrated every fifth year in honour
of Cwsar, and built a theatre at Jerusalem, as
also a very great amphitheatre in the plain—both
costly works, but contrary to Jewish customs
He also called men together out of every nation:
wrestlers and others, who strove for prizes in these
games, were invited by the hope of reward and
the glory of victory. The most eminent were got
together, for the rewards were very reat, net only
to those that performed their exercise naked, but
to rousicians also. He moreover offered no small
rewards to thuse who ran for prizes in chariot-
races, when they were drawn by two, three, or
four pairs of horses. He made also great prepara-
tion of wild beasts, and even of lions in great
abundance, and of such other Leasts as were either
of uncommon strength or rarely seen. These
fought one with another, or men condemned to
death fought with them. Above all the rest the
trophies gave most displeasure to the Jews, who
imagined them to be images.’ (See aleo Antig.
xvi. 5.13; xix. 7.4; xix. 8. 2; Eichhorn, De
Judaor. re scenica, in the-Comment. Goetting.
Rec.) The drama does not appear to have been,
introduced, but Jews were in oem countries
actors of plays (Joseph. Vita, § 3). passage
already dite (see rey original) full of evi-
dence how distasteful tliese heathenish games were
to the more sound-minded part of the natiun.

These fucts make it the less surprising that
allusions should be found in the New Testament
writings to the Grecian games, on which we
think it desirable to supply somewhat detailed
information, in order to serve as illustrations of
Scriptural language.

The fait that, as we have seen, the games of
the amphitheatre were celebrated even in Jeru-
salem, serves to make it very likely that Paul,
in 1 Cor. xv. 32; iv. 9, alludes to these detest-
able practices, though it is not probable that the
apostle was himself actually exposed to the fury
of the raging animals. Contrary to the opinion
of some writers, the reference to these combats
appears to us very clear, though it was only
metaphorically that Paul ‘ fought with beasts at
E ba


The word which the Apostle (1 Cor. xv. 32)
uses is emphatic and descriptive, ¢@npioudynoa.
The @npiopaxta or beast-tight (venatio in Latin)
custituted among the Romans a part of the
amusements of the circus or amphitheatre. It
consisted in the combat of human beings with
animals. The persons destined to this barba
rous kind of amusement were termed @npiopdxoy


390 GAMES.


bestiarii. They were generally of two classes—
1. Voluntary, that is, persons who fought either
for amusement or for pay: these were clothed and
provided with offensive and defensive weapons.


2. Condemned persons, who were mostly exposed
to the fury of the animals unclothed, unarmed,
and sometimes bound (Cic. Pro Sext. 64; Ep.
ad Quint. Frat. ii. 6; Senec. De Benef. ii.
19; Tertull. Apol. 9). As none but the vilest
of men were in general devoted to these beast-
fights, no punishment could be more condign and
cruel than what was frequently inflicted on the
primitive Christiana, when they were hurried
away,‘ to the lions’ (as the plirase was), merely
for their fidelity to conscience and to Christ, its
Lord. Ephesus appears to have had some un-
enviable distinction in these brutal exhibitions
(Schleusner, in voc.), so that there is a peculiar
propriety in the language of the Apostle.

f these beast-fights the Romans were
sionately fond. The number of animals which
appear to have been from time to time engaged
in them, is such as to excite in the reader's mind
both pity aud aversion, Sylla, during his praetor-
ship, sent into the arena no fewer than 10U lions,
which were butchered by beings wearing the
human shape. Pompey caused the destruction
in this way of 600 lions. Ongthe same occasion
there perished. nearly twenty elephants. These
numbers, however, are small compared with the
butchery which took place in later periods.
Under Titus 5000 wild and 4000 tame animals,
and in the reign of ‘Trajan 11,000 animals, are
said to have been destroyed.

The New Testament, in several places, con-
tains references to the celebrated Grecian Games,
though it may be allowed that some commenta-
tors have imagiued allusions where none were
designed. As might, from his heathen learning,
be expected, it is Paul who chielly supplies the
passages in question. In Gal. ii. 2, ‘ Lest by
any means I should run in vain;’ v. 7, ‘ Ye did
run well, who did hinder you?’ Phil. ii. 16,
6 That I may rejoice in the day of Christ that I
have not run in vain nor laboured in vain;’ Heb.
xii. 1, ‘ Run with patience the race set before us ;’
xii. 4, ‘ Ye have not resisted unto blood, striving
against sin’ (dyraywu(duevor); Phil. iii. 14,
£1 press toward the mak for the prize;) 2 Tim.
ii. 5, ‘If a man strive he is not crowned except
he strive lawfully.” The most sinal passage,
however, is fonnd in 1 Cor. ix. 24-27,‘ Know ye
not that they which run ina race run all, but one
receiveth the prize? So run that ye may obtain.
And every man that striveth for the mastery is
temperate in all things. Now they do it to obtain
@ corruptible crown; but wean incorruptible. I
therefore so run, not as uncertaiuly ; 8o tight I, not
as une that Leateth the air; but 1 keep under my


GAMES.


body, and bring it into subjection, lest that by
means, when | have preached to others, | myself
should be a castaway.’ In the Old Testament
two passages contain a clear reference to games;
Ps. xix. 5, ‘ Rejoiceth as a strong man to run a
race;’ Eccl. ix. 11, ‘I said that the race is not to
the swift.’

These Scriptural allusions are the more appro-
priate, because the Grecian games weve in their
origin and in their best days intimately connected
with religion. Games in Greece were very numer
ous. They are traceable by tradition back to the
earliest periods of Grecian civilization. Indeed,
much of the obscurity which rests on their origin
is a consequence and a sign of their high and even
mythic antiquity.

Four of these games stood far above the rest,
bearing the appellation of iepol, ‘ sacred, and de-
riving their support from the great Hellenic family
at large, though each one had special honour
in its own locality: these four were the Olympic,
Pythian, Nemean, and Isthmian. The first were
held in the highest honour. ‘The victors at the
Olympic games were accounted the noblest and
happiest of mortals, and every means was taken
that could show the respect in which they were
held. These games were celebrated every’ five
years at Olympia, in Elis, on the west side of
the Peloponnesus. Hence the epoch called the
Olympiads.

The gymnastic exercises were Jaid down in a
well-planned systematic series, beginning with
the easier (xotpa), and proceeding un to the more


difficult (Bapéa). Some of these were specially
fitted to give strength, others agility ; some edu-
cated the hands, others the feet. Among the


lighter exercises was reckoned running (Bpdu0s)y
leaping (Aya), quoiting (8icwos), hurling the


GAMES.


307.


the compound we find in the Pentathlon (the five
contests), and the Pankration (or general trial of


strength). The Pentathlon was made up of the
union of leaping, running, quoiting, wrestling,
and hurling the spear; the Pankration consisted
of wrestling and boxing. It is not necessary here
to speak in detail of the distinctions which Galen
makes between the ordinary motions of the body
and those which were required in these exercises,
since the names themselves are sufficient to make
manifest how manifold, severe, long, and difficult
the bodily discipline was, and the inference is
easy and unavoidable that the effect on the bodily
frame must have been of the most decided and
lasting kind.

Racing may be traced back to the earliest
periods of Grecian antiquity, and may be re-
garded as the first friendly contest in which men
engaged. Accordingly the Olympic and Py-
thian, probably also the other games, opened
with foot-races. Foot-racing, perfected by sys-
tematic practice, was divided into different
kinds. i you ron merely to the end of the
course (ordBiov), it was called stadium ; if you
went thither and back, you ran the double course


{Blavdos). The longest course was the ddArxos,


GAMES. 1


left in no small uncertainty. It'is sometimes
given as seven times over the stadium ; at others,
twelve times; at others again, twenty; and even
the number of four and twenty times is mentioned.
These lengths will give some idea of the severity
of the trial, and serve to illustrate the meaning of
the Apostle when be speaks of running with pa-
tience the race set before him (Swoporh, patience,
sustained effort). Indeed, one Ladas, a victor at
the Olympic games, in the 3dA:xos or long race,
was so exhausted by his efforts that, immediately
on gaining the honour and being crowned, he
yielded up his breath: a fact which also serves
to throw light on Scriptural language, as showing
with what intense eagerness these aspirants (SoAr

o8pdpzor, long-runnets) strove for perishing chap-
lets (paprdy orépayov). In the preparatory dis-
cipline every thing was done which could con-
duce to swiftness and strength. The exercises
were performed with the body naked and well
oiled. Minute directions were established in order
to prevent foul play (naxorexvla, xaxotpyia) of
any kind, so that all the competitors might start
and run on terms of entire equality—illustrating
the words of Paul on the necessity of running
lawfully.. The contest was generally most severe;
to reach the goal sooner by one fuot wus enough
to decide the victory. How true and graphic
then the descriptions given by Paul: it was, as
the Apostle states, éy oradiy, in the race-course,
that the contests took place; every cne striving
for the victory was temperate in all things; nay
more, be kept under his Body and brought it into
subjection. A passage is found in the Enchiré-
dion of Epictetus, which shows with what pro-
priety the terms which the Apostle employs were
chosen by him: ‘ You wish to conquer at the
Olympic games? so also do 1; for it is bonour-
able; but bethink yourself what this attempt im-
plies, and then begin the undertaking. You must
subject yourself to a determinate Course; must
submit to dietetic discipline (d»ayxorpopéw) 5
must pursue the established exercises at fixed
hours in heat and cold; must abstain from all
delicacies in meat and drink ; yield yourself un-
reservedly to the control of the presiding physi-
cian, and even endure flogging.’

It may well be supposed that the competitors
employed all their ability, and displayed the
greatest eagerness to gain the prize. The nearer,
too, they approached to the goal, the more did they
increase their efforts. Sometimes the victory de-
pended on a final spring; happy he that retained
power enough to leap first to the goal. The spee-
tators, also, used every encouragement in their
power, these favouring one competitor, those
another :—

* Verbaque dicentum, nunc, nunc incumbere


tempus,
Hippomene, . Nunc viribus utere totis.’
All these remarks go to show how wisely Paul


acted in selecting the figure, and how carefully
he has preserved the imagery which belongs to it,
A word employed in the Common Version,
1 Cor. ix. 27, * Lest when I have preached to
others I myself should be a castaway '—namely,
preached, mars the figure. The original is
snpitas— ‘acted the part of herald,’ whose business
it was to call the competitors to the contest and


which required extraordinary speed and power of proclaim their victory, functions which Paul


endurance. What it involved the ancients have


spent his life in performing.


33 GAMES.


Paul speaks in the same connection of ranning
not as uncertainly, of fighting not as one who
beateth the air; alluding tq the preludial exer-
Cises, trials of individual and of comparative
strength, which took place in the course of train-
ing. These runniugs and boxings had no imme-
diate aim nor result, and implied no real com-
petitor; hence the peopetety of the terms which
the sacred writer employs. Statius (Thed. vi.
587) bas given a lively picture of some of the
practices by which the runners endeavoured to
give suppleness and agility to their limbs:


tunc rite citatos
Explorant, acuuntque gradus, variasque per artes
Exstimulant docto languentia membra tumultu.
Poplite nunc flexo sidunt, nunc lubrica forti
Pectora collidunt plausu ; nunc ignea tollunt
Crura, brevemque fugam necopino fine reponunt,


After the herald had called the competitors into
the lists, they sometimes tried their strength and
exercised their frames, by running out and back
on the course. Virgil (4n. iv. 370) represents
Dares as displaying the size and flexibility of his
arms prior to his combat with Eryx:


Ostenditque humeros latos, alternaque jactat
Brachia protendens, et verberat ictibus auras,


where, in verberat ictibus auras, we have even a
verbal agreement with the Apostle’s phraseology.
(Compare En. v. 4, 46.) Among the proprieties
of language for which the passage in 1 Cor. ix. is
distinguished, may be placed the term which Paul
employs to describe the prize. It is the specitic
word used in the case, namely BpaBeioy: this
was the customary term, the employment of which
was rendered from the name of the officers,
negli who gave the conqueror his crown.
he entire passage indeed is singularly happy in
its phraseology, thereby adding confirmation to
the grounds on which the authority of the Epistle
rests. We cannot, however, think one word well
rendered iu our English version, &3dé«imuos, ‘ cast-
away ; or, if this be a good rendering, the Apostle
has at least failed in strict verbal propriety; for
who were they in connection with the games who
were, or were termed, castaway ? Aoxipacla was
the term employed to describe the severe scrutiny
which candidates for office underweut at Athens,
Persons who were found unfit were termed a3é6xi-
po, and as this verdjct was a declaration of civic
and social incapacity, not to say of moral turpi-
tude, the word came to mean ‘ dishonoured.’ This,
or the word refected, seems the proper reudering in
the last verse of the ninth chap. of 1 Corinthians.
The Apostle's fear evidently was, lest, after having
put others on this noble undertaking, he himself
should be at last found unfit to engage therein ;
for the allusion seems to be derived from the pre-
paratory exercises of which he is immediately
speaking. and not from the issue of the contest ;
and at the end of these preparatory exercises, a
very severe examination had to be undergone by
sach as wished to ‘run the race.’ This inter
pee may perhaps serve to set the Apostle’s
mility in a strong light; since he expresses his
fear lest he should not be even admitted to enter
the lists for ‘the glorious prize.’ If, however, any
one prefers referring the word to the final issue of
the contest of life, then the same meaning remains,
and the Apostle says, that, after all his striving, he


GAMES.
may Tove the crown, proving at last unequal to


the achievement of the victory.
In writing to the Christians at Corinth there
was a ial propriety, on the of the Apostle,


in making allusions to the public games. Corinth
was the place where one of the four Greek national
games was celebrated, namely, the Isthmian.
These games were so called from being held on
the isthmus which joins northern with southen
Greece—a spot of land most celebrated in Grecian
history, alike in martial and commercial matters.
No spot could well be chosen for such a purpose bet-
ter than thjs isthmus, which lay in the very centre
of Grecian civilization. In the narrowest part of
this tongtie of laud, between Lechaum and Sche-
nus, stood the famous temple, sacred to the Isth-
mian Neptune. It was shaded by a pine grove.
Here began the Isthmian games. Here also was
a splendid theatre, and a race-course adorned with
white marble. Other distinguished works of at
adorned and hallowed the vicinity.

If we attempt to trace these games to their
origin we are lost in the mists which envelope the
mythical periods of the Greek national life. They
were obviously connected with the worship of
Neptune; the wide diffusion of which tended
greatly to secure for the Isthmian games the great
celebrity which they enjoyed, calling, as they did,
competitors and spectators from all pe. The
Persian war gave a new impulse to the Isthmian
games. The Peloponnesian war, on the contrary
—as being a contest of Greek against Greek—
dimmed their glory, and abated their influence.
Even when, at a later period, Corinth became s
Roman colony, the games, so far from losing their
importance, were exhibited under the Caesars with
an increased celebrity, so that Paul, in the Br
ture which he drew, was writing to the eye of the
Corinthian Christians. And, if corroboration of
the credibility of the first letter were needed, we
might find all we could wish in antiquities yet in
existence; fur a coin of Marcus Aurelius, and
another of Commodus (and indeed others of a


310.


later period), bear each one the inscription of
IST uM 1A, the Isthmian Games.
rinthians appear to have been inordinately fond of
these amusements. They were held every thret
years. They comprised three leading divisiony—
musical, gymnastical, and equestrian con!

In the first the poet New and eae by
destroying his too highly-gifted antagon' [
eyutinatic contests were the same as those of which
we have already spoken. A few words, however,
may here bé introduced as to the horse-racing, which
has not been hitherto described. Generally the mme
kinds prevailed as at the Olympic and igen
games. Chariot-races seem to have been prac

in the earliest heroic times, since chariots were a6


ne SO a eee


GAMES.


_ early as this used in battle, and the notices which
have come down to us refer this kind of sport to
the early period now indicated. It stood pre-


Sik.


eminently before other games. The skill and
outlay which it required prevented any but
persons @f distinction—the wealthy, governors,
princes, and kings—from engaging in its enjoy-
ments. The Homeric competitors made use in
their games of their two-horsed war-chariots, which
they occupied each one’ alone, and drove them-
selves, though in battle it was not unusual for the
reins to be entrusted to a cliarioteer. In the heroic
ages these contests opened the games. To them
belonged the highest prizes. In the Olympic
games horse and chariot racing gradually branched
out into different kinds. So much importance
was attached to these games that historians have
recorded the exact time when particular kinds
were first introduced, and immortal poets sung the


praises alike of the victors and their horses, The
four-horsed chariot-race (&pua réépuroy) took its
origin in the twenty-fifth Olympiad. In the
ninety-third Olympiad was held the first contest
with two-horsed chariots. Foals were now made
use of, as well as horses. For a time mules also
were employed. Other varieties, mostly designed
for a display of skiJl and splendour, came and
went as fashion dictated. The number of chariots
that might appear on the course at once cannot
be accurately determined. Pindar (Pyth. v. 46)
raises Arkesilas of Cyrene for having calmly
Creagh off his chariot uninjured, in a contest
where no fewer than forty touk part. The course
had to be gone over twelve times. The urgency
of the drivers, the speed and exhaustion of the
horses, may easily be imagined. The greatest
skill was needed in turing the pillar which
marked the extremity of the course, especially
when the contending chariots were numerous.
How to avoid the danger of collision, how to turn
as near the pillar as possible, so as to save ground,
were points of the greatest consequence, as So-
phocles in his Electra intimates (West's Trans.) .
Th’ Athenian, with consummate art,
His course obliquely veered, and steering wide


GAMES. ‘733


With steady rein, the wild commotion pass’d

Of tumbling chariots and tumultuous steeds.

At the Olympic games the prize was simply a
chaplet made of wild olive. The crowns aie Lid
on a tripod, and placed in the middle of the
course, so as to be seen of all. On the same table
there were also exposed to view palm-branches,
one of which was given into the hand of each con-
queror at the same time with the chaplet. The
victors, having been summoned by proclamation,
were presented with the ensigns of victory, and
conducted along the stadium, preceded by a
herald, who proclaimed their honours, and an-
nounced their name, parentage, and country.

The real reward, however, was in the fame which
ensued. A chaplet won in the chariot-races at


Olympia was the highest of earthly honours. What’


congratulations from friends; how was the public
eye directed to the fortunate conqueror; what
honour had he conferred on his native city, and
for what office was such an one unfit! What
intense and deep delight must his bosom have
been filled with when the full acclaim of as-
sembled Greece fell upon his ear, coming in loud
salutations and applauses from every purt of the
crowded course ! Phen came the more private
attentions of individual friends. One brought a
chaplet of flowers; another bound his head with
ribbons. Afterwards came the triumphal sacrifice
made to the twelve gods, accompanied by sump-
tuous feasting. The poet now began his office,
gaining, in some cases, both for himself and the
happy victor, an unexpected immortality. Music
also lent her aid, and his name was sung wherever
the noble accents of the Greek tongue asserted
their supremacy. In order to perpetuate the
memory of these great men, their names and
achievements were entered into a public register,
which was under the care of suitable officers. A
no less privilege was that of having a statue of
themeelves placed either at the expense of their
country or their friends, in the sacred grove of
Jupiter. A perhaps still greater honour awaited
the victor on his return home. The conquerors at
the Isthmian games were wont to be received in
their chariots, superbly attired, amid thronging
and jubilant multitudes.

One or two other privileges belonged to these
victors, such as immunity from public offices, and
a certain yearly stipend. If to all this be added
the strict scrutiny which competitors were obliged
to undergo (in the best ages), so that none could
enter the lists but such as were of pure Greek
blood, and incorrupt in life, none but such as had
undergone the required disciplinary training, and
(in the case of the chariot and horse-races) none
but those who could afford to possess and train
horses in @ country in which, as in Greece, horses,
particularly in the earlier ages, were very scarce
and dear; it will be seen that the distinction of
the prize was not over-rated, when it was com-
pared with a Roman triumph, nor that the de-
scription of Horace is too highly coloured—

palmaque nobilis
Terrarum dominos evehit ad Deos.


At the Isthmian games the prize was parsley
during the mythic periods, In later ages the
victor was crowned with a chaplet of pine leaves.
Parsley, however, appears to have been also em-
ployed. If the conqueror bad come off victorious


TA GAMES.


* in the three great divisions—music, gymnastics,
and racing—be was in the Pythian, as well as in
the other sacred games, presented also with a
palm-branch. The names of about seventy per-
gons are preserved who gained honours at the
Isthmian games. among which occurs that of the
emperur Nero, who is recorded to have gained the
victory in the character of harper and that of
herald.

Let it not be thought that the use which espe-
cially Paul makes of the Grecian games is un-
becoming the lofty subject of religion. Such
an idea can be entertained by none but those who
have the most superficial notions on the subject,
and who possess no acquaintance with the spirit
of classical antiquity. A full vindication of
the propriety of these allusions would require
a detailed exposition of the good which the games
conferred on the Greek communities. One or two
points only can be spoken of.

These games, taken in connection with the early
and long training by which they were preceded,
and of which they were both the natural result
and reward, were a grand educational system,
bearing primarily indeed in faveur of the physical
development, but also tending directly and power-
fully to advance the highest intellectual and
moral cniture. The exercises through which the
child, the youth, and the man were stage by stage
conducted, each in succession becoming more
difficult and more complex, as the bodily powers
came into play and acquired viguur, were ad-
mirably adapted to give that union of strength
and beauty in which physical perfection consists,
and in which the Greek nations probably sur-


passed every other known people. But the
vigour and energy which cant imply health
and hilarity; hence arise humane, kind, and


generous dispositions; so that a gvod state of
the body promoted moral soundness, and moral
soundness, combined with bodily vigour, gua
ranteed intellectual activity and mental power.
The existence of these exercises and these games
in each separate state secured the development
and activity of those feelings which made his
own country to each one dear and venerable;
while a narrow and selfish patriotism was greatly
prevented, and emotions which embraced the
whole Hellenic race were enkindled and fostered
by those general meetings which, from time to
time, called together, especially at Olympia, all
who were not aliens from the Greek common-
wealth, marked out by the use of that noble in-
strument of speech, the Greek tongue.

It is impossible not to look with admiration on

wise and careful measures which were taken
in order to make the gymnasia schools of order and
of moral propriety as well as of physical beauty.
Aware of tie importance of the training, Solon
took the business under his special care, laying
down minute regulations as to time, place, and
extent, sv that nothing might be left to chance or
caprice. Then the schovl, in general, had its
presilent—gymnasiarch,—and each separate de-
partment a separate head; as in the case of the
torch-race, which had its lamparchy, or govern-
ment, charged with the office of making, in con-
nection with it, all necessary arrangements.
There were, however, two officers whose names
and functions strikingly serve to show how greatly
these Grecian institutions had a favourable in-


GAMES,


fluence on character: the first was the kosmetes,
whose name comes from a word (xézpos) signify
ing order and beauty, and whose office consisted


313. [Torch-race.]


in the special superintendence of every thin;
fitted to further these high qualities; the other
officer was termed sophronistes ; and his busines
was still more intimately conducive to inform the
mind and give shape and pressure ta the life,
since, as his designation (from odppeey) proves he
was required to guide the pupils to ov ppootrn, a
term for which we have no English equivalent,
but which may perhaps be approximately ren:lered
by ‘sound-mindedness.” The elder Athenians were
so solicitous to give a right direction to the influ.
ence of the gymnasium, the palastra, and the
stadium, that they annually elected ten >
phronists (one out of each tribe), and the honour
which was attached to the office may be leamt
from the fact that, in some inscriptions, theirname
stands before that of the gymnasiarchs (heads of
the gymnasia) themselves. The usual ney
of the sophronists extended beyond the limits of
the exercise-grounds, for they exercised over
the youth a general legal oversight. Even their
Ger be were under the eye of the sophronist.
When the young men joined in the solemn
cession of the grand national Panathenza t!
were under the guardianship of the sophronists.
Were they present at the nocturnal festival held
in honour of Hebe, they were still attended by
and subject to their wise, experienced, and judi-
ions sophronist. That something even of a
sacred character belonged to these preparatory
exercises appears from the fact that the kosmetes
bore also the designation of fepeds (priest), having
charge of certain sacrifices. :
Were there no other consideration in their
favour, yet the severe examination to which can-
didates for admission to these contests were com-
pelled to submit, would suffice to satisfy the
reader that the tendency of the games was good,
not Jess in a moral than a social point of view.
Besides being questioned as to their condition—were
they freemen or slaves ?—and as to their blood—
were they really Greeks ?—they had also to satisfy
their judges that their characters were fiee from
all moral stain. In the public stadium the
herald, laying bis hand on the head of the candi-
date, inquired with a lond voice, ‘Can any one
accuse this man of any crime? Is he a robber or
aslave? or wicked or depraved in his life?
If he successfully paseed this ordeal the candi-


#


GARDEN.


date was then conducted to the altar of Jupiter,
the punisher of the perjured, where with solemn
rites he was required to swear (if he could with
truth and safety) that he had ‘gone through the
required tory course of discipline, and
would abstain from every breach of the laws in
the contest before him. On the subject here
treated of see West's Odes of Pindar, 2nd
edit.; Potter's Antiquities of Greece. By far
the hest work, however, is Krause’s Die Gym-
nastik und Agonistik der Hellenen ; and his Die
Pythien, Nemeen und Isthmien, Leipzig, 1841.

J.R.B.


GARDEN. Several gardens are mentioned
in the Scriptures, as the garden of Eden (Gen. ii.
8, 9, 10, 15), Ahab's garden of herbs (1 Kings
xxi. 2), the royal garderi near the fortress of Zion
(2 Kings xxi. 18; xxv. 4), the royal garden of
the Persian kings at Susa (Esther i. 5; vii. 7, 8),
the garden of Joseph of Arimathea (John xix.
41), and the garden of Gethsemane (John xviii. 1).
It is clear, from Josh. v. 2, and Lam. 1i. 6, that
gardens were generally hedged or walled, as indeed
Josephus expressly states respecting the gardens
near Jerusalem (De Bell. Jud. v.71). In Neh,
ii. 5, and John xx. 15, gardeners and keepers of
gardens by occupation are indicated.

Gardens were planted not only with fragrant
and beautiful plants, but with various fruit-
bearing and other trees (Gen. ii. 9; Jer. xxix. 5;


- Amos ix. 14). Thus we find mention of nut-


gardens (Cant. vi.’ 14), pomegranate-yardens
(Cant. iv. 13), olive-gardens (Deut, viii. 8; 1
Chron. xxvii. 28), vine-gardens (Cant. iv. 2;
viii, 8). Here, however, we are not to suppose that
the gardens were exclusively occupied by these
fruits, but that they were severally predominant
in the gardens to which they gave name. The
distinction, for instance, between a vine-garden
and a vineyard would be, that, in the latter, the
vine was cultivated solely for use, whereas in the
former it was planted for solace and ornament,
to cover walls, and to be trained in arbours and
on trellises.


Gardens were, when possible, planted near’


streams, which afforded the means of easy irriga-
tion. This explains such passages as Gen. ii. 9,
sq.,and Isa. i, 30. But streams were few in Pales-
tine, at least such as afforded water in summer,
when alone water was wanted for irrigation : hence
rain-water, or water from the streams which dried
up in summer, was in winter stored up in re-
servoirs, spacious enough to contain all the water
likely to be needed during the dry season. In
fact many of our own large nurseries are watered
in the same manner from reservdlrs of rain-water.
The water was distributed through the garden in
numerous small rills, which traversed it in all
directions, and which were supplied either by a
continued stream from the reservoir, or had water
poured into them by the gardeners, in the manner
shown in the Egyptian monuments. These rills
being turned and directed by the foot, gave rise to
the phrase ‘ watering by the foot,’ as indicative of
garden irrigation (Deut. xi. 10). The following re-
presentation (No. 313) very clearly shows the way
in which water was raised, by a balanced lever,
from the stream or reservoir, and poured into a
trough, whence it flowed into the various canals
for irrigation. This method is still in use. There
is a curious account of ancient garden irrigation


GARDEN. 195
in Pliny (Hist. Nat. xix. 4), which the reader *
may t with advantage.


314. [Watering Garden.}


Gardens were dedicated to various uses among
the Hebrews, such as we still find prevailing in
the East. One most essential difference between
them and our own is that they are not attached
to or in any way connected with the residence,
but are situated in the suburbs, We have known
gardens from half a mile to a mile distant from
the houses of the persons to whom they belonged.
It is manifest that all the gardens mentioned in
Scripture were outside the several towns. This
is, however, to be understood of regular gardens,
for shrubs and flowers were often planted in the
open courts of the dwelling-houses. :

People repair to their suburban gardens to take
the air, to walk, and to refresh and solace them-
selves in various ways. For their use there is


[Garden-honses.]


garden a kind of summer-house
up with much neatness, gaily


736 GARDEN.


¢ painted, and furnished With seats, where the visit-
ants may sit and enjoy themselves. Here some-
times banquets were and are still given, attended
by singing and music (Isa. li. 3; Ixv. 3). The
eustom of burying the dead in gardens is indi-
cated in Gen. xxiii. 19,20; 2 Kings xxi. 4;
1 Sam. xxv. 1; Mark xv. 46; and still occurs
sometimes in the East, but is not very prevalent.
We tind it also among the Greeks (Heliodorus,
Ethiop. i. 2, p. 35), and the Romans (Suetonius,
Galba, 2).

It is evident that the gardens of the Hebrews
were in a very considerable degree devoted to the
culture of medicinal herbs, the preparation of
which in various ways was a matter of much
solicitude with them (Jer. viii. 22). This is still
the case iu the East, where vegetable simples are
as much employed in medicine as they were in
this country in the times of Gerarde and Cul-
pepper. E
It would seem that the Jews were much in the
habit of performing their devotions in gardens
(Gen. xxiv. 63; Matt. xvi. 30; John ii. 4a;
xviii. 1, 2). This interesting practice, however,
was idolatrously abused ; fur the worship of idols
in these shady seclusions was not of unfrequent
occurrence, and is often mentioned in Scripture
(1 Kings xiv. 23; 2 Kings xvi. 4; xvii. 10; 2
Chron. xviii. 4; Isa. Ixv. 3; Ixvi. 173 Jer. ii,
20; iii. 6; Ezek. xx. 28).

Such are the principal points of information
concerning gardens which may be collected from
Scripture, or which may be connected with the
Scriptural intimations.

The Jews. in their ceremonial treatises, have fre-
quent occasion to mention gardens, chiefly for the
purpose of showing what plants or seeds might
or might not be planted or sown together under
the law against heterogeneous propagations (Lev.
xix. 9; Deut. xxi. 9,11). From this source some
curious facts relating tu the arrangements of gar-
dens may be gleaned. The following are from
the Mishnic treatise Kilaim, which is devoted to
the general subject: * Trees must not be grafted
on trees of a different kind, nor one kind of shrub
on another kind of shrub, nor yet trees on shrubs,
nor shrubs on trees.’ Rabbi Jehudah, however,
sanctioned this last practice. ‘Shrubs must not
be planted in a sycamore-bush; rue must not be
gratted on white cassia, because that would be a
shrub on a tree; a scion of the fig-tree must not be
planted among chatzub (supposed ‘ivy *), to cool
it; a vine branch must not be sunk (trained) intoa
melon bed, to instil its juices therein, because that
isa treeona plant; pumpkin-seed must not be set
among mallow, in order that it may be preserved
therein, as that is herb in herb.’ *In a garden
bed that is six hands square five different kinds of
seeds may be sown, namely, four kinds in the four
corners of the bed, and a fifth in the centre. If
the bed has a ridge (border), thirteen different
kinds may be sown, three in each corner, and one
in the middle of the bed.’ ‘All kinds of field-
seeds must not be sown in a garden bed; bat all
kinds of herbs (yarden-seed) may be sown therein.’
A ridge (border) that had bgen one hand high,
but is decreased in height, still remains good be-
cause it had been originally of lawful height.’
This applies, of course, to the ridges by which dif-
ferent plants which might uot lawfully mingle
were separated. ‘In a trench or dry kennel, one


_ GARDEN.


hand deep, three different kinds of seeds may be
sown, namely, one kind on each side and one kind
in the middle.’

It is very evident that where such careful dis-
tinctions and rules of separation existed, great
attention must have been required to the means of
dividing the different plants from each other.
This was effected not ‘nil by ridges and trenches,
but by light fences of cane. This appears from
what follows: ‘A partition of canes is considered
a fence, provided the space between “each cane is
Jess than three hands wide, so that'a young kid
cannot pass through. If there is a breach in the
fence to the extent of ten amoth, it is considered as
a gate (entrance). Should a greater portion of
the fence be broken down, it is unlawful to sow or
plant towards the breach. If there are several
breaches in the fence, should the portion sul
standing be greater than that broken down, it is

rmitted; but should the portion broken down

greater than that standing, it is forbidden.’
These examples are selected only as specimens of
the endless modes by which the later Jews suusit
to carry out with minute and impossible exactness
the useful regulation of the Mosaical law. For
that law variuus reasons have been given, on which
we are not required to pronounce any judgment:
but it appears to us that the economical grounds
which may be collected from the eflects which
appear to result from the interdicted practices, are
quite sufficient in themselves, whether others exist
or not. Thus we find enumerated among the
radical defects of Hindu husbaudry— the bar-
barous system of sowing two or three species of
grain in one ficld....The mode of reaping is
equally defective; if two or three species of grain
are sown in the same field, the Indian hushand-
man treads down a great part. of his crop in order
to collect each kind separately ; indeed, so fond
is he of this method of proceeding that he purses
it even when the crop is all of one kind, that he
may select what he deems the ripest’ (Tennant's
Indian Recreations, in Edinb. Revie, iv. 320).

There is no reason to suppose that the gardens of
the ancient Jews differed in any material respect
from those which are still found in’ Palestine.
Such difference as did exist was doubtless oc-
casioned chiefly by the minute rules whici were
founded upon the law forbidding the intermixe
ture of diverse plants an:l seeds. The ganiens
of the Holy Land have been mentioned by
travellers in terms tuo vague and general to
aflord the basis of a satisfactory description.
Dr. Olin seems to have paid most attention to
them. Of the gardens near Shechem he says,
‘Upon turning an angle in the steep gorge we
found oursel ves, as if by enchantment, in the midst
of fruitful gardens filled with vegetables, fowers,
and fruit-trees, and all in the highest perfection of
Juxuriance and beauty. Olives, vines, acacias,
pomegranates, figs, mulberries, and several species
of trees which I did not recognise, are crowd
together in small enclosures, fuming an impet-
vious shade as well as an impenetrable thicket:
and yet the capabilities of the soil seem nut to be
overburdened. Each separate tree and plant
thrives to admiration, and seems rather to pront
than suffer from the thick dark canopy of branches
and foliage, which entirely exclusies the sun's rays
from the tangled huddle of trunks and roots. -
beautiful mountain stream runs through the midst


GARDEN.


.of this forest of gardens, in a channel mostly arti-
ficial and sometimes covered ; but the water often
Fizes into smnall fountains, and forms several cas-
cales’ (Travels in the East, ii. 350). The orange
and. ‘citron trees which abound in these gardens
near Shechem (see Schnbert, Reise ins Morgen-
dande, ii. 116) were probably those not recognised
by Dr. Olin, from their not being in fruit at the
time of his visit.

The mural paintings of the ancient Egyptians
afford us much information respecting their gar-
dens awl processes uf gardening. But the
difference of climate, soil, and produce, in Egypt
and Palestine, was too material to justify us
in expecting much information from this source
respecting the gardens of the Hebrews. As, how-
ever, some notions on this head must have been
commun to both countries, we subjoin the observa-
tions of Mr. Wathen on the gardens of Egypt
(Aris, &c. of Ancient Egypt. p. 108).

‘The ancient plans of gardens show that the
Egyptians were not less fond than our ancestors
of mathematical figures, straight walks, archi-
tectural decorations, and vegetable avenues; and
that they as thoroughly entered into the idea
of seclusion and safety suggested by enclosures
within enclosures. It bas been remarkéd that
in some old English places there were almost
as many walled compartments without, as a
ments within doors; and the same may be said of
Egyptian country-houses. This principle of se-
clusion, and an excessive love of uniform arrange-
ment, are remarkably displayed in the plan of a
large square garden given in Professor Rosellini’s
great work (J BMonumenti dell’ Egitto). Here—

‘ Grove nods at grove, each alley has a brother,

And half the platform just reflects the other.”
This royal garden must have formed a most envi-
able retreat from “ the intolerable day” of an
Egyptian summer. The whole was shut in by an
embattled wall. On one side a canal runs along
just without the walls. In the centre of the enclo-
sure is an oblong walled vineyard; the vines,
planted in rows or avenues, are trailed above on
trellis-work forming shady arched walks. The
space on one side this central vineyard exactly
corresponds to that on the other. In each there is
a row of palms, an oblong tank with water-fowl,
four flower-beds on a lawn, and an open summer-
house on the margin overlooking the pool; an
oblong walled compartment of trees; a second
tank with water-fowl and flowers; and all along
within the wall of circuit a row of- trees of three
kinds in regular alternations. At one end of the
garden next the entrance is a building containing
apparently one larze room, perhaps for the royal
entertainments; at the other end or back is a house
of three stories, which commanded a view of the
whole. This garden, with its sheltered walks, its
groves and tanks of water, its seclusion and pri-
vacy, reminds us of the ‘fair garden’ of Joacim
at Babylon, with its baths. its deep shady coverts,
and its “ privy gate,” in the apocryphal story of

Susannah.

6 Obelisks and pylons, with flagstaffs and stream-
ers, seem to have been occasionally introduced as
garden decorations. In the parched climate of
Egypt a large supply of water is absolutely neces-
sary for a thriving vegetation; hence tanks and
canals form a chief feature in these villa scenes.
With rows of palms laden with fruit on their


GATE. 787


margin, they recall Jeremiah's poetical compa-
rison of “the man that trusteth in the Lord” to “a
tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out
her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat
cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall
not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall
cease from yielding fruit,” contrasted with “the
man who trusteth in man,” who is “ like the heath
in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh;
but shall inhabit the parched places in the wil-
derness, in a salt ind and not inhabited” (Jer.
xvii, 8)."
GARLIC. [Sxom.]


GATE, DOOR (ANY; Sept. xian), the en-
trance to enclosed grounds, buildings, dwelling-
houses, towns, &c. Thus we find mentioned—
1. Gates of cities, as of Jerusalem, its sheepgate,
fish-gate, &c. (Jer. xxxvii. 13; Neh. i.3; ii. 3;
v. 3); of Sodom (Gen. xix. 1); of Gaza
Gude xvi. 3). 2. Gates of royal palaces
Neh. ii. 8). 3. Gates of the Temple. The
empl of Ezekiel had two gates, one towards the
north, the other towards the east; the latter closed
(Ezek. xliv. 1, 2), the other must have been open.
4. Gates of tombs (Matt. xxvii. 60). 5. Gates
of prisons. In Acts xii. 10, mention is made
of the iron-gate of Peter's prison (xvi. 27).
Prudentius (Nepiorep. Hymn. v. 346) speaks
of gatekeepers of prisons. 6. Gates of caverns
(1 Kings xix. 13). 7. Gates of camps (Exod.
xxxii. 26, 27; see Hebr. xiii. 12). The camps
of the Romans had generally four gates; of
which the first was called porta pretoria, the
second decumana, the third principalis, the fourth
quintana (Rosin. Antig. Rom. x. 12). The
camp of the Trojans is also described as having
had gates (Vir, i 4En. ix. 724).


We do not know of what materials the enclo-


Gates or Towns.—<As the gates of towns
served the ancients as places of security [ForTivi-
cations],a durable material was ahaa forthem,
and accordiugly we tind mentioned—1. Gates of
iron and brasa (Ps. cvii. 16; Isa. xlv.2; Acts
xii. 10). It is probable that gates thus described
were, in fact, only sheeted with plates of copper
or iron (Faber, Archeol. p. 297); and it is pro-
bably in this sense we are to interpret the hundred
brazen gates ascribed to the ancient Babylon.
Thevenot ( Voyage, p. 283) describes the six gates
of Jerusalem as covered with iron: which is pro-
bably still the case with the four eet Open.

‘ a


738 GATE.


Other iron-covered gates are mentioned by tra-
vellars, such as some of the town gutes of Algiers
gee Letter, viii. p. 10), and of the towers of

e so-called iron-bridge at Antioch (Pococke,
vol. ii. pt. 1, p. 172). The principal gates of the
great mosque at Damascus are covered with brass
‘Maundrell, p. 126). Gates of iron are also
mentioned by Hesiod (Theog. 732), by Virgil
(4en. i. 482; vii. 609), and by Ovid (Metam.
vii. 126).

2. Gates of stone, and of pearls, are men-
tioned in Isa. liv. 12, and Rev. xxi. 12, which, it
has justly been supposed, refer to such doors,
cut out of a single slab, as are occasionally
discovered in ancient countries. At Essouan
(Syene), in Upper Egypt, there is a granite
gateway bearing the name of Alexander, the son
of Alexander the Great (Wilkinson, iii, 403).
The doors leading to the several chambers of
the so-called ‘Tombs of the Kings’ near Jeru-
salem, were each formed of a single stone seven
inches thick, sculptured so as to resemble four
panels ; the styles, muntins, and other parts were
cut with great art, and exactly resembled those of
a door made by a onl er at the present day—
the whole being completely smooth and polished,
and most accurate in their proportions. The doors
turned on pivots, of the same stone of which the
rest of them were composed, which were inserted in
corresponding sockets above and below, the lower
tenon being of course short. This is one of the
modes in which heavy doors of wood are now
hung in the East. One of these doors was still
hanging in Maundrell’s time, and ‘ did not touch
its lintel by at least three inches.’ But all these
doors are now thrown down and broken (Mon-
conys, p. 308; Thevenot, p. 261; Pococke, ii.
21; Maundrell, sub March 28th; Wilde, ii. 299;
Robinson, i. 530). Similar doors are described
by Dr. Clarke (Travels, pt. ii. vol. i. p. 252) in
the remarkable excavated sepulchres at T'el messuis,
on the southern coast of Asia Minor; and others
were noticed by Irby and Mangles (T'ravels, p.
302) in the sepulchres near Bysan (Bethshan).
There are stone doors to the houses in the Haourau
beyond the Jordan (Burckhardt, p. 58); and
the present writer has repeatedly seen in the north
of Persia the street doors of superior houses com-
posed of a single slab of a kind of slate. In the
ancient s nlenre recently discovered, as described
by Dr. Wilde (Narrative, ii. 343), the outer door
is formed by a single slab, and moves on horizontal
pivots that run into sockets cut in the pilasters at
the top, in the manner of a swinging hinge.

3. Gates of wood. Of this kind were probably
the gates of Gaza (Judg. xvi. 3). They had gene-
rally two valves, which, according to Faber's
description (Arch@ol. p. 300), had sometimes
smaller doors, or wickets, to afford a when
the principal gate was closed—a fact which he
applies to the illustration of Matt. vii. 13.

Gates were generally protected by some works
against the surprises of enemies (Jer. xxxix. 4).
Sometimes two gates were constructed one behind
another, an outer and inner one; & there were
turrets on both sides (2 Sam. xvui. 24, 33;
see Faber’s Archeol. p. 301). The gates of
the ancients were generally secured with strong
heavy bolts and locks of brass or iron (Deut. iii.
5-1 Sam. xxiii. 7; 1 Kings iv. 13; 2 Chron.
vill. 5; Jer. xlv. 2; xlix. 31; Ps. cxlvii. 13).


GATE.


This was probably done with a view to the safety
of the town, and to prevent hostile inroads (Har-
mer’s Observations, vol. i. p. 188). The keys
of gates, as well as of doors, were generally of
wood; and Thevenot observes that gates might
be opened even with the finger put into the key-
hole—from which Harmer elucidates the passage
in the Song of Solomon, v. 4.

The gates of towns were kept open or shut ac-
cording to circumstances: in time of war they
were closed against the inroads of the enemy (Josh.
ii. 5), but they were opened when the enemy had
been conquered. On festive occasions they were
also thrown wide open; to which Ps. xxiv. 7
alludes. This opening of the gates, as well as
closing them, was done by means of keys.
That near the gates towers were often constructed,
serving for defence against attacks of the enemy,
may be inferred from Deut. iii. 5; 2 Sam. xviii.
21; Judg. ix. 35, comp. with 52. So Juvenal
(Sat. vi, 290) puts the towers of the gates for
the gates themselves. Virgil (En. vi. 550)
represents the infernal gate as having a tower.
Enemies, therefore, in besieging towns were
most anxious to obtain possession of the gates as
quickly as possible (Deut. xxviii. 52; Judg. ix.
40; 2Sam. x. 8; xi. 33; 1 Kings viii. 37;
Job v. 4; Isa. xxii. 7; xxviii. 6); and generally


(Gate of Konieh.]


317.
the town was conquered when its gates were
occupied by the invading troops (Deut. xxviii.
57; Judg. v. 8). This observation is made also
by several Greek and Roman authors (Herodian,
Histor. i. 12, § 14; Virgil, 42n. ii. 802, sq.).
In or near the gates, therefore, they placed
watchmen, and a sufficiently strong guard, to

eep an eye on the movements of the enemy, and
to defend the'works in case of need (Judy. xviii.
16; 2 Kings vii. 3; Neh. xiii. 22; see Herodian,
Histor, iii, 2, § 21; Virgil, 2a. ii. 265, sq.
335).
We read that some portions of the law were
to be written on the gates of towns, as well as
on the doors of houses (Deut. vi. 9; xi. 20); and


GATE.


if this is to be literally understood, it receives
illustration from the practice of the Moslems in
painting passages of the Koran on their public
and private gates. Vurious artificial figures and
inscriptions were engraved on their gates by the
Romans (Virgil, Georg. iii. 26, sq.).

Criminals were punished without the gates
Q Kings xxi. 13; Acts vii. 59), which explains
the pussaye in Heb. xiii, 12. The same custom
existed among the Romans (see Plaut. Afilit. Glo-
rios. act ii. sc. iv. 6, 7), At Rome executions
took place without the Porta Metia or Esquilina,
As to the gate through which Christ was led,
before his crucifixion, opinions differ ; some taking
it to have been the dung-zate (Lamy. Apparat.
Geograph. c. 13. § 3, p. 321); others, following
Hottinger (Cipp. Hcbr. p. 16) and Godwyn, un-
derstand it of the gate of judgment. But for all
that concerns the gates of Jerusalem, we must
refer to the article Jerusalem.

Gates are often mentioned in Scripture as places
at which were holden courts of justice, to admi-
nister the Jaw and determine points in dispute:
hence judyes in the gute are spoken of (Gen.
xix. 1; xxiii. 10, 1383 xxxiv.20; Deut. xvi. 13;
xvii. 8; xxi. 19; xxv. 6,7; Josh. xx. 4: Ruth iv.
1; 1 Sam. iv. 18; 2 Sam. xviii. 24; xix. 8;
1 Kings xxii. 10; Job xxix. 7; Prov. xxii. 22;
xxiv. 7; Lament. v. 14; Amos v. 12; Zech.
viii. 16). The reason of this custom is apparent ;
for the gates being places of great concourse and
resort, the courts held at them were of easy ac-
cess to all the people; witnesses and auditors to
all transactions were easily secured (a matter of
much importance in the absence or scanty use
of written documents); and coufidence in the
integrity of the magistrate was ensured by the
publicity of the proceedings. There was within
the gate a particular place, where the judges
sat on chairs, and this custom must Le understood
as referred to when we read that courts were held
under the gates, as may be proved from 1 Kings
xxii, 10; 2 Chron. xviii, 9. Apart from the
holding of courts of justice, the vate served for
reading the law, and for proclaiming ordinances,
&c. 2 Chron, xxxii. 6; Neh. viii 1, 3). We
see from Prov. xxxi. 23; Lam. v. Tf, that the
inferior magistrates held a court in the gates, as
well as the superior judges (Jer, xxxvi. 10); and
even kings, at least oceasicnally, did the same (1
Kings xxii. 10 comp. with Ps. xxvii. 5). The
gates at Jerusalern served the same purpose; but
for the great number of its inhabitauts, many

laces of justice were required. ‘Thus we tind that
Neherniah (iii, 32) calls a particular gate of this
city the counsel-gate, or justice-gate; which seems
to have had a preference, though not exclusive,
since courts must have been holden in the other
gates also. After the erection of the second temple,
the celebrated great Sanhedrim, indeed, assembled
in the so-called conclave cesure of the temple;
but we find that one of the Synedria of Jerusalem,
cousisting of twenty-three members, assembled
in the cast-gate, leading to the court of Israel, the
other in the gate looking to the temple mount.
The same custom prevails to the present day
among other Oriental hations, as in the kingdom
of Marocco, where courts of justice are holden in
the gate of the capital town (Dépter, Theatrum
rarum, p.9.sq.). Respecting the Abyssinians
and inhabitants of Hindustan, we are likewise


GATE. 38


assured that they employed their gates for courts
of justice. Homer (/léad, i. 198, 4.) states of
the Trojans, that their elders assembled in the
gates of the town to determine causes, and Virgil
(-n. i. 509, 8q.) says the same. Fiom Juvenal
(Satir. iii, 11) it appears that with the Romans
the porta Capena was used for this purpose
(Grav's Thesaurus Antig. Roman. tom. x. p.
179). We may refer to J. D. Jacobi’s Dissert.
de foro in portis, Leipzig, 1714, where the cus-
tom of holding courts in the gates of towns is ex-
plained at large.

In Palestine gates were, moreover, the places
where, sometimes at least, the priests delivered their
sacred addresses and discourses to the people; and
we find that the prophets often proclaimed their
warnings and prophecies in the gates (Prov. i, 21;
viii, 33 Isa. xxix. 21; Jer. xvii. 19, 20; xxvi.
10; xxxvi. 10).

Among the heathen gates were connected
with sacrifices, which were offered in their imme-
diate vicinity ; in which respect the hills near the
gates are mentioned (2 Kings xxiii. 8). In Acts
xiv. 13, the gates of Lystra are referred to, near
which sacrifice was offered; in which passage
Camerariys, Dedien, and Heinsius take xuAgvas
to mean the town-gate.

The gate was, further, a public place of meet-
ing and conversation, where the people assem-
bled in large numbers to learn the news of the
day, and by various talk to while away the too
tedious hours (Ps. Ixix. 13). It was probably
with this view that Lot sat under the gate of
Sodum (Gen. xix. 1); which is more probable
than the Jewish notion that he sat there as one
of the judges of the city.

Under the gates they used to sell various mer-
chandises, provisions, victuals, e.g. at Samaria
(2 Kings vil, 1); and for this purpose there were
generally recesses in the space under them (see
Herodian, vii. 6. $6). The same is stated by
Aristap hanes (Equit. 1243, ed. Dind.) of the gates
of the Greeks. But with respect to the markets at
gates, the present writer would note what has often
occurred to his own notice in different parts of the
East, which is, that the commodities sold at the
gates are almost exclusively country produce,
animal or vegetable, for the supply of the city,
and not manufactured goods, which are invariably
sold in the bazaars in the heart of the town, The
gate-markets also are only beld for a few hours
early in the morning.

On an uproar having broken out at Jerusalem,
the headsof the people met under the New-gate (Jer.
xxix. 26), where they were sure to tind insurgents.
The town-gates were to the ancient Orientals what
the cofiee-houses, exchanges, markets, and courts
of law, are in our large towns: and such is still
the case in a great deyree, although the introduction
of coffee-honses has in this, und other respects,
caused some alteration of Eastern manners. In
capital towns the quidnuncs occasionally sat with
the sume views near the gate of the royal palace,
where also the officers and messengers of the palace
ounged about; and where persons having suits to
offer, favours to beg, or wishing to recommend
themselves to favourable notice, would wait day
after day, in the hope of attracting the notice of
the prince or great man at his entrance or coming
forth (Esth. ii. 19. 21, iii. 2).

Gates are put figuratively for pablic places of

32


740 GATE,


towns and palaces. The gates of a town are also
put instead of the town itself (Gen. xii. 17;
xxiv. 60; Deut. xii. 12; Ps. Ixxxvii. 2).


31s. [Palace-Gate.]


The gates of death, and of hell, occur in Job
xxxviii. 17; Ps. ix. 14; Micah ii. 13. Doors
and gates of hell are chiefly introduced, Prov.
v. 5; Isa. xxxviii. 10; Matt. xvi. 19; and the
Jews go so far in their writings as to ascribe real
gates to hell (Wagenseil, Sofa, p. 220). Virgil

“En, vi. 126) also speaks uf infernal gates.

he origin of this metaphorical expression is not
dificult to explain; for it was very common
to use the word gates as an image of large


319.


s. xxiv. 7); and in pagan authors the
departed souls is represented as the


GATE.


residence of Pluto (see Virgil, En. vi. 417, sq.),
In the passage, then, Matt. xvi. 19, by ‘gates of
hell’ must be understuud all aggressions by the
infernal empire upou the Christian church.
Among the ancrent Egyptians doors were fre
uently stained so as to imitate fureign wood.
hey were either of one or two valves, turning on
pins of metal, and were secured within by bars
and bolts. Some of the bronze pins have been dis-
covered in the tombs of Thebes, and two of them,
after Wilkinson, are figued in No. 319, figs. 2,3,
They were fastened to the wood with nails of the
same metal. The stone lintels and floor behind
the threshold of the tombs and temples still ex-
hibit the holes in which the pins turned, as well
as those of the bolts and bars, and the recess for
receiving the opening valves. The fulding-doon
had bolts in the centre, sometimes above as well
as below ; a bar was placed across from one wall
to the other; and in many cases they were secured
by wooden locks passing over the centre (No. 320,
fig. 4) at the junction of the two folds. ‘It is
difficult (remarks Sir J. G. Wilkinson) to say if
these last were opened by a key, or merely slided
backward and forward like a bolt; but if they
were really locks, they were probably upon the


Principle of those now used in Egypt, which are
of wood, and opened by a key furnished with
several pins answering to a smaller number that
fall down into the hollow movable tongue, into
which the key is introduced when they open or
fasten the lock.’ For greater security they are
also occasionally sealed with a mass of clay.
This was also a custom of the ancient Egyptians,
asa from Herodotus (ii. 121); from tombs
actually so closed at Thebes ; and from the sculp-
tures, as in No. 320, fig. 3, where the door is thus
closed and sealed. To this custom there is an
allusion in Joh (C1.ay]. At a later period, when
iron came into general use, keys were made of
that metal, of the shape shown in No. 319, fig. 4.
Of the kind thus indicated were probably the
lock and key which fastened the summer-parlour
of King Eglon (Judg. iii. 23, 25). In this


GATE.


ease Ehud locked the dour, and took away the
key ; but when the servauts became alarmed, they
easily opened it with another key; which suggests
that the lock, as in ancient Egypt or the modern
East, was nothing more than ‘a peculiarly con-
structed open bolt of wood, which the wooden or
metal key was adapted to raise and thrust back.
The forms of the Egy tian doors may be seen
from the cuts. Fig. 1, No. 319, is from a curious
ancient model, in the British Museum, of a
small aucient Egyptian house, and may serve to
show very clearly how the doors of small houses
were formed, hung, and secured. The elegant
comice of the door, fig. 2, No. 320, will not
escape observation; fig. 1 is a remarkable in-
stance of a folding-door. The chief entrance to
houses was through a pyramidal pylon on a pro-
jecting porch of columns, whose capitals were
often ornamented with ribbons. Over the door-
way was sometimes a brief hieroglyphical legend
. (Wathen, p. 101). This last circumstance re-
minds one of the writing on their doors recom-
mended to the Israelites, as already noticed.


A companson of the ancient Egyptian doors with
hose now used in the East will probably suggest
ho incorrect notion of the provision among the
ancient Hebrews in this respect. A sort of in-
termediate idea arising from this comparison
will be found to furnish very satisfactory illus-
trations of most of the passages of Scripture
which relate to the subject. The present cuts
require little explanation. No. 321 is a very


usual form of the street-door of a private house,
The inscription on the central compartment is


GATH. mi


usually painted in white or black. It means,
‘ He (s.e. God) is the Creator, the Everlasting,’
and brings strongly to mind the Hebrew custom
to which we have more than once alluded. In
No. 322 (fig. 2) is another street-door of a more
simple character. Doors are generally unpainted
throughout Westen Asia and in Egypt. The
other doors shown in the cuts belong to the
internal front of the houses, and not to the ex-
ternal frontage or screen. Fig. 2, No. 322, has
an open lattice over the door, and the elegant

roportion of the whole entrance claims attention.

o. 323 shows different forms of commun doors,


and the whole piece affords an interesting illus-
tration of the basement of an Eastern house, with
the stone steps leading to the gallery, into which
all the state rooms and family rooms open. In
conclusion, we introduce an engraving intended
to illustrate the highly-enriched doorways used
in omamental buildings, such as garden-houses,


summer-houses, &c.
i
} arinnnie tii}
2


(ih


ae


In the interior of houses it is not unusual to
see curtains instead of doors, especially in sum-
mer. This helps to keep the apartment cool,
and also enables servants to enter without noise,
This custom originated in the use of tents. Ac+
cordingly we find that all the entrances of the
tabernacle had curtains, although the framework
was of wood (Exod. xxvi. 31-33, 36, 37); and
even in the temple a curtain or ‘ vail’ formed the
es igo between the Holy and the Most Holy

jace.


GATH (M3; Sept. Fé@; Joseph. Firra or
Tfrrn), one of the five princely cities of the Phi-
listines, of which mention is made iu Josh. xiii. 3


742 . GATH.


It was one of the cities upon which the ark is
said to have brought calamity (1 Sam. v. 8, 9),
and which offered in connection therewith a tres-
pass-offering, each one a golden emerod (1 Sam.
vi. 17). Goliath, of the family of giants which
Joshua spared (Josh, xi. 22), of which other
members may be found mentioned in Scripture

1 Chron. xxi. 5-8; 2 Sam. xxi. 19-22), has ren-

ered Gath a word familiar from our childhood ;
but it is not certain whether Goliath was a native
or merely a resident of Gath (1 Sam. xvii. 4). To
Achish, Lins of Gath, David fled for fear of Saul
(1 Sam, xxi. 10; xxvii. 2-7; Ps. lvi.). At his
own entreaty David received from Achish the city
of Ziklag. David dwelt in the country of the Phi-
listines ‘a full year and four months.’ David's
connection with Gath throws light on the feelings
which dictated the words (2 Sam. i. 20), ‘ Tell
it (the death of “Saul and Jonathan his son”)
not in Gath.’ Micah also (i. 10) says, ‘ declare
it (the wound come unto Judah, ver. 9) not at
Gath.’ It was conquered by David, and fortified
both by him and by Rehoboam (2 Sam. viii. 1;
1 Chron. xviii. 1; 2 Chron. xi. 8). From 2 Sam.
xv. 18, it appears that David had a band (600
men) of Gittites in his service at the time of tne
rebellion of Absalom. Their devotedness to him
under Ittai their leader forms a beautiful episode
in the history of David's varied fortune (2 Sam.
xv. 19, sq.). Shimei’s visit to Gath and its fatal
consequences to himself may be read in 1 Kings
ii. 39-46. In the reign of Solomon mention is
made of a king of Gath (1 Kings iv. 24), who
was doubtless a tributary prince, but powerful
enough to cause appreliension to Solomon, as
appears from the punishment he inflicted on
Shimei. Under Jehoash, Hazael, king of Syria,
took Gath (2 Kings xii. 17); from his successor,
Benhadad, the place was recovered (2 Kings
xiii. 24). It must, however, have soon revolted ;
for Uzziah (2 Chron. xxvi. 6), finding it necessary
to war against the Philistines, ‘ broke down the
wall of Gath.’ Probably the conquest was not
of Jong duration. This constant withstanding of
the power of Jerusalem shows that Gath was a
place of great resources and high eminence—a
conclusion which is confirmed by the language
employed by the prophets (Amos vi. 2; Micah i.
10). *Gath,’ says Jerome (on Micah i.), ‘is one
of the five Philistine cities lying near the confines
of Judah, on the road from Eleutheropolis to
Gaza; now it is a very large village.’ On
Jerem. xxv. the same authority declares that
Gath was not far from Azotus. Modern tra-
vellers give no description of the place (Reland,
Palest, p. 785, sq.).

There was a Gath-hepher belonging to the
children of Zebulun (Josh. xix. 10, sq.), the
birth-place of the prophet Jonah (2 Kings xiv.
25), lying not far from Sepphoris on the road to
Tiberias. Auother Gath (Gath-rimmon, Josh, xix.
45) lay in the territory of Dan. It was a Levite
city (Josh. xxi. 24; 1 Chron. vi. 69). In the time
of Eusebius it was a very large village, * twelve
miles from Diospolis, as you go hence to Eleu-
theropolis’ (Onomast.). The Gath-rimmon men-
ti in Josh. xxi. 25, as being in the tribe of
Manasseh, Raumer (Palistina) supposes to be
another Levite city; but Winer ( Handwirter-
buch), with more likelihood, ascribes its origin to
a mistake of the transcriber, who took the word


‘ GAZA.
from the preceding verse. The Septuagint has
Badody.—J. R. B.


GAULONITIS. [Gouan.] :

GAZA (NY; Sept. Tdga; Arabic, G:
lies on the road leading from Akabah to Hebron,
which passes alung nearly the whole length of
the great Wadly-el-Arabah. It is on the sea-
coast, in lat. 31° 29, long. 34° 29/ (Robinson),
in the country of the Philistines (Josh. xv. 47),
It is a very ancient place, as we find it men-
tioned in Gen. x. 19, where it is given as one
of the border-cities of the Canaanites. In Deut.
ii, 23, it is found as the place unto which the
Avims dwelt. Joshua smote the Canaanites as


far as Gaza (Josh. x. 41), but spared the Ana-
kims (giants) that dwelt there (Josh. xi, 21,
22). In the division of the land, Gaza fell to the
lot of Judah (Josh. xv. 47), and was taken by
him with the coast thereof (Judg. i, 18), but its
inhabitants were not exterminated (Judg. iii. 3
Gaza was one of the five Philistine cities whi
gave each a golden emerod as a trespass-offering
to the Lord (1 Sam. vi. 17). Solomon's king-
dom extended as far as Gaza (1 Kings iv. 24).
But the place appears always as a Philistine city
in Scripture (Judg. iii. 3; xvi. 1; 1 Sam. vi.
17; 2 Kings xviii. 8). Hezekiah smote the Phi-
listines as far as Gaza (2 Kings xviii, 8). Gaza
fell into the hands of the Egyptians, probably
Pharaoli-Necho (Jer. xlvii. 1; comp. Herod. i.
159). The prophets speak in severe terms against
it (Jer. xxv. 20; xl¥ii. 5; Amos i. 6,7; Zeph.
ii. 45 Zech. ix. 5). After the destruction of Tyre
it sustained a siege of two months against Alex-
ander the Great (Joseph. Antig. xi. 8. 4). Jonathan
Maccabeus (1 Mace. xi. 61) destroyed its
suburbs; Simon Maccabeus (1 Mace. xiii. 43)
took the city itself, though not without extraor-
dinary efforts. Alexander Jannaus spent a year
in besieging it and punishing its inhabitants
(Antig. xiii. 13. 3). The place was rebuilt by
Gabinius (Antig. xiv. 5. 3). It was among the
cities given by Augustus to Herod (Antig. xv.
7. 3), after whose death it was united to the pro-
vince of Syria (Antig. xvii. LL. 4).

Gaza is celebrated fur the exploit recorded of
Samson (Judg. xvi. 1-3), who ‘ took the doors of
the gate of the city, and the two posts, and went


GEBA.


away with them, bar and all, and put them on
his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of
a hill that is before Hebron.’ The Philistines
afterwards took Samson, and put out his eyes, and
brought him to Gaza, and bound him with fetters
of brass, and he did grind in the prison-house:
he, however, pulled down the temple of Dagon,
god of the Philistines, and slew, together with
himself, ‘all the lords of the Philistines,’ besides
men and women (Judg. xvi. 21-30). It was
near Gaza—on the ruad from Jerusalem to that
place—that Philip baptized the eunuch ‘of great
authority under Candace, queen of the Ethio-
pians " (Acts viii. 26, sq.).

Gaza lay some distance from the sea (Arrian,
ii, 26), though it had a port on the sea, called
Td(a xpts @dracoay, ‘Gaza on the sea, called
also Majuma (6 Maiodyas), which Constantine
called Constantia, from the name of his son,
giving it, at the same time, municipal rights.
Julian took away this name and ordered it to be
called the port of Gaza. Subsequent emyerors
restored the name and the privileges of the place.
It was afterwards called the sea-cuast of Gaza.
Further particulars may be read in Reland

Palestina, p. 791, sq.), where mention is made,
rom Pausanias, of something like a parallel to
the feat of Samson; and where, as well as in
Kuinoel (tn Joc.), and in Winer (Handw«rterbuch,
in voc.), explanatory circumstances may be found
of the Meds in Acts viii. 26—‘ Gaza, which is
desert.'—J. R. B.
GAZELLE. [Anrz.ops.]


GEBA (3); Sept. Tafad). It is often stated
that Geba and Giheah were names of the same
os The two names are indeed only mascu-
ine and feminine forms of the same word, signi-
fying ‘hill;’ but that they were two different
laces is evident from Josh. xviii. 24; comp. 28 ;
Sam. xiii. 2, comp. 3; Isa. x. 29. Gebu be-
longed to the tribe of Benjamin (Josh. xviii. 24),
and was assigned to the priests (Josh. xxi. 17;
1 Chron. vii. 40). The Philistines were smitten
from Geba unto Gazer by David (2 Sam. v. 25);
Asa rebuilt Geba and Mizpeh with the stones of
Ramah (1 Kings xv. 22; 2 Chron. xvi.6). * From
Geba (in the north) to Beersheba * (in the south)
(2 Kings xxiii. 8), expressed the whole extent of
the separate kingdom of Judah, just as ‘from
Dan to Beersheba’ expressed the whole length of
Palestine. It would seem, from the manner in
which Geba (Gaba) and Kamah are coupled in
Neh. vii. 30, that they were very near each other
but the site of Geba is now unknown.


1. GEBAL (533; Sept. PeBda), a district, or
perhaps sovereignty, south of Judea, in the land
of Edom, Gebal signifies a mountain, and ap-
parently belongs not to the most ancient times,
as it does not occur when the Israelites were actu-
ally in this quarter, but is first found in Ps.
Jaxxiii. 8, which was probably written in_ the
time of Jehoshaphat. The country south of the
Dead Sea, and on the east of the Ghor, or great
valley, bears the same name (Jebal or Djelal) at
the present day (Burckhardt, p. 401, sq.), and is
doubtless the same as the Gebal of Scripture, the
Gebalitis (or rather Gobolitis) of Josephus, and
the Gebalene of the Romans. Josephus says,
andeed, that the sons of Eliphaz, son of Esau,


GEDER. 7143.


settled in that part of Idumma which was called
Gebalitis, aud that denomiited from Amalek
Amalekitis: ‘For Idumma (le adds) was the
name of a large country, which in its several
ts retained the names of its peculiar inha-
itants’ (Antig. ii. 2. D We may therefore take
Gebal as the name of the northernmost portion of
Idumeza, which was nearest to Palestine.


2. GEBAL. ([Gisiita2s.]


GEDALIAH (79), God-educated ; Sept.
TodoAla’, son of Ahikam, and appointed by Ne-
buchadnezzar governor of Judea after the de-
struction of Jerusalem. He was probably of
the number of those who quitted the city at the
instance of the prophet, justly despairing of the
successful defence of a place which God had aban-
doned. Gedaliah had inherited his father's
respect for Jeremiah (Jer. xl. 5, sq.), and was
moreover enjoined by Nebuzaradan to look to
his safety and welfare. Gedaliah was in every
way worthy of the difficult post he had to fill;
and he adopted as the principle of his conduct
that submission to existing circumstances which
was requisite in one who believed that Judah
had, according to the declared will of God, been
justly doomed and punished for her iniquities,
and who yet believed that His loving kiudness
had not utterly departed from her. He esta-
blished the seat of his melancholy government
at Mizpah in the tribe of Benjamin: and there
the Jews, who had fled at the advance of the
Chaldean armies, or when the troops of Zedekiah
were dispersed in the plains of Jericho, quitting
their retreats, began to gather around him.
Gedaliah wisely counselled them to submission
and quietness; and he promised on that condition
to ensure them the undisturbed enjoyment of
their possessions, and of the produce of the ground.
In this hope the labours of the field were re-
sumed, and the extraordinary returns of that
geason secured as if specially given to repair the
recent injuries of war. But this calm was of
short duration. Among those who returned was
a member of the royal family, named Ishmael,
who had taken refuge with Baalis, king of the
Ammonites. He appears to have been irritated
at seeing one who was not of the house of David
seated upon even the shadow of David's throne s
and some of the friends of Gedaliah believed
him to be in a plot with Baalis to take away his
lite. But the noble-minded governor refused to
entertain such a suspicion, and rejected with
horror the proposal of an over-zealous friend, who
offered to assassinate Ishmael. The suspicion
which he thus generously repelled was, however,
correct. He was murdered in the midst of a
repast by this very Ishmael, whom he had received
asa friend. This event happened about two months
after the destruction of Jerusalem, and by it the

t ruin of Judza seemed to be consum-
mated, B.c. 588 (2 Kings xxv. 22-26 ; Jer. xxxix,
14; xl. 5; xii. 18).


GEDER (733; Sept. Padép). This word sig-
nifies a wall, enclosure, or fortified place, and
must be unierstood in this seuse in the ensuing
names, Geder itself was the name of an ancient
town of the Canaanites, in the plain country of
Judah (Josh. xii. 13), and was perhaps the same
as Gederah.


144 GEDERAH.


GEDERAH (i733; Sept. Pdénpa), a city in
the plain of Judah (Josh. xv. 36), probably the
same with the preceding Geder, and with Beth-
gader of 1 Chron. ii. 51. It seems to have be-
longed to the family of Caleb.


GEDEROTH (NiV13; Sept. red5dp), a city
in the plain country of Judah (Josh. xv. 41), and
one of those which the Philistines took from king
Abhaz (2 Chron. xxviii. 18).

GEDOR (i713; Sept. Te35ép), an ancient
city in the mountains of Judah (Josh. xv. 58),
some of whose inhabitants joined David at Ziklag
(1 Chron. xii. 7). It is donbtful whether this be
the same Gedor in whose fertile valley the Simeon-
ites found good pasture for their flocks (1 Chron.
iv. 39). Dr. Robinson, travelling from Jerusalem
to Gaza, came in sight of a place called Jedur,
with ruins, on the brow of a mountain ridge, which
he identities with Gedor.


GEHAZI (iA, vision-valley ; Tre(i), a servant
of Elisha, whose entire confidence he enjoyed.
His history is involved in that of his master
[auseh He personally appears in reminding

is master of the best mode of rewarding the kind-
ness of the Shunamite (2 Kings iv. 14). He was
present at the interview in which the Shunamite
made known to the prophet that her son was dead,
and was sent forward to lay Elisha’s staff on the
child's face, which he did without effect (2 Kings
iv. 31). The most remarkable incident in his
career is that which cansed his ruin. When
Elisha, with a noble disinterestedness, declined
the rich gifts pressed upon him by the illustrious
leper whom he had healed, Gelazi felt distressed
that so favourable an opportunity of profiting by the
gratitude of Naaman je been so wilfully thrown
away. He therefore ran after the retiring chariots,
and requested, in his master's name, a portion of
the gifts which had before been refused, on the
gronnd that visitors had just arrived tor whom he
was unable to provide. He asked a talent of
silver and two dresses; and the grateful Syrian
made him take two talents instead of one. Having
deposited this spoil in a place of safety, he
again appeared before Elisha, whose honour he
had so seriously compromised. His master asked
him where he had been? and on his answering,
© Thy servant went no whither,’ the prophet put
on the severities of a judge, and having denounced
his crime, passed upon him the terrible doom, that
the leprosy of which Naaman had been cured,
should cleave to him and his for ever. ‘ And he
went forth from his presence a leper as white as
snow ’ (2 Kings v. 20 27). nic. 894.

We afterwards find Gehazi recounting to king
Joram the great deeds of Elisha, aud, in the pro-
vidence of God, it so happened that when he was
relating the restoration to life of the Shunamite's
son, the very woman with her son appeared before
the king to claim her house and lands, which had
been usurped while she had been absent abroad
during the recent famine. Struck by the coinci-
dence, the king immediately granted Ler applica-
tion (2 Kings viii. Lae

Lepers were compelled to live apart outside the
towns, aud were not allowed to come tou near to
uninfected persons. Hence some difficulty has
arisen with respect to Gehazi's interview with
the xing. Several answers occur. ‘The interview


GENEALOGY.


may have taken place outside the town, ina gar
den or garden-house; and the king may have
kept Gehazi at a distance, with the usual precau-
tions which custom dictated. Some even suppose
that the incident is misplaced, amd actually
occurred before Gehazi was smitten with leprosy.
Others hasten to the opposite conclusion, and
allege the probability that the leper had then
repented of his crime, and had been restored 0
health by his master {Lergrs].


GEHENNA. ([Hiwnnom, Vatrzr ov.]}
GEMARA. [Ta:uvp.]


GEMARIAH (i933, God-perfected ; Sept.
Tauaplas), the son of Shaphan, and a scribe of the
temple in the time of Jehoiakim. Baruch read
aloud the prophecies of Jeremiah to the people at
the official chamber of Gemariah, which was
attached to the new gate of the temple built by
king Jotham (Jer. xxxvi. 10; comp. 2 Kings xv.
35). Gemariah’s son Michaiah having reported
this to his father, Baruch was invited to repeat the
reading at the scribes’ chamber in the palace,
befure Gemariah aud other scribes and council-
lors, who guve an account of the matter to the
king (Jer. xxxvi. 10-26). B.c. 607.

2. Gemariau, son of Hilkiah, who, with
Elasah, son of Shaphan, was sent to Babylon by
king Zedekiah with his tribute-money for Nebu-
chadnezzar. He also took charge of a letter from
Jeremiah to the Jewish captives at Babylon,
warning them against the false prophets who
deluded them by promises of a speedy return to
their own land (Jer. xxix. 3, 4). B.c. 599,

GEMS. [Sronezs, Precious.]


GENEALOGY (from the Greek yeveadcyla,
compounded of -yévos, race, and Adyos, aiscourse)
signilies a list of ancestors set down both in their
direct and collateral order.

We read of no uation which was more careful
to frame and preserve its genealogical tables than
Isracl. Their sacred writings contain genealogies
which extend through a period of mure than
3500 years, from the creation of Adam to the
captivity of Judah. Indeed, we find from the
hooks of Ezra and Nehemiah that the saine care-
fulness in this matter was observed after the
captivity; for in Ezra ii, 62 it is expressly
stated that some who had come up from Babylon
had sought their register among those that were
reckoned by genealogy, but were not found;
therefore were they, as polluted, removed from the
priesthood. The division of the whole Hebrew
nation into tribes, and the allotment to each
tribe of a specitied portion of the land of Ca-
Naan as an lcienuhle possession, rendered it in-
dispensable that they should keep genealogical
tables. God had, however, a still higher object
than that of giving stability to property in Israel,
in leading successive generations of His people
thus to keep an accurate list of their ancestry.
That they should do this was especially required
from the moment that the voice of prophecy
declared that the promised Messiah should be of
the seed‘of Abraham, of the posterity of Issac, of
the sons of Jacob, of the tribe of Judah, and of
the family of David.

The Rabbins affirm that after the Captivity the
Jews were most careful in keeping their pedi-
grees (Bahyl. Gemar. Gloss. fol. xiv. 2). Josephus


°


GENEALOGY.


(De Vita sua, p. 998, D) states that he traced his
own descent from the tribe of Levi by public
registers. And he informs us that, however dis-
persed and depressed his nation were, they never
neglected to have exact genealogical tables pre-

red from the authentic documents which were

ept at Jerusalem ; and that in all their suffer-
ings they were particularly careful to preserve
those tables, and to have them renewed from time
to time. Since, however, the period of their de-
struction as a nation by the Romans, all their
tables of descent seem to be lost, and now they
are utterly unable to trace the pedigree of any
one Israelite who might lay claim to be their
promised, and still expected, Messiah. " Hence
Christians assert, with a furce that no reasonable


GENEALOGY. 145


and candid Jew can resist, that Shiloh must have
come.

We find traces of the existence of the public
tables of descent, to which Josephus refers, in the
New Testament: the taxation spoken of by St.
Luke ii. 2, 3, would clearly indicate this; for
how could each one be able to go to his own city,
unless he knew the specific tribe to which he
belonged? Hence it was, we think. that St. Paul
was able with confidence to appeal to the He-
brews concerning the lineage of Christ; ‘for it is
evident,’ says he, ‘that our Lord sprung out of
Judah’ (Heb. vii. 14; 2 Tim. ii. 8). To evince
this beyond reasonable doubt, it pleased God to
give us by his inspired servants, St. Matthew and
St. Luke, the following genealogies :—


Marruew i. 2.


1 Abraham. . «. ©. «. 1 Solomon. «. « «© ©. 1 Jechonias, ¢ ¢. Jeboiachin.

ZIeac. « « « « « 2 Robsam. . « © .* 2 Salathiel.

3 Jacob « »« « «© « 3&8 Abia. «© «© © © © 3 Zorobabel.

4Judas . 6 « © «© 4Asa w. 6 « © © «= 4 Abiud.

5 Phares .« . . « ~ 5 Josaphat. . «© «© « 5 Eliakim.

6 Esom . - . «© « 6 Joram . 0 © « « 6 Axor.

V7 Aram . © « « © %FOzias. « «© © «© « 7 Sadoc.

8 Aminadab . «. - » 8 Joatham. -,. © « 8 Achim.

9 Naasson. . . © « 9 Achaz . »© « « «© 9 Eliud.

10 Salmon « « © © « 10 Ezekias . .« «© © « 10 Eleazar.

ll Booz. . « «© «© « 11 Manasses. . «© © © 11 Matthan.

12 Obed. « «© © «© ©’ 12 Amon . «© © «© © 12 Jacob.

13 Jesse. 2 2-26 6 « 18 ine Me Seite 8 13 Joseph.

. 14 Jechonias, . e. Jehoia-

14 David . «© 2 { kim or Eliakim . } 14 Jesus. ;

Gop. Luxs iii. 23.

1 Adam . « - %4Thara. «. . © #1 Eliakim . . . 1 Joanna
2Seth . . © « 2 Abraham. . . 2Jomane. « « . 2 Juda,

3 Enos. . 2 «06S Isaac ©. © 6) 68 Joseph =. we) 8 Joseph.

4 Cainann . . . 4 Jacob. .« © « 4 Juda e «© « 4 Semei.

5 Malelel . « « S&S Juda... . %5SSimeon . . . S&S Mattathias,
6 Jared. . « © 6 Phares. . © «© G6 Levi. « «© . 6 Maath.

7 Enoch . . © %YEsrom. « « + 7 Matthat . «. . 7 Nagge.

8 Mathunsala . . 8S Aram... . S8Jorim. . . . 8 Esli.

9 Lamech « . + 9 Aminadab. . . 9 Eliezer . . . 9 Naum.
10 Noe . »« « « 10 Nansson . « © 10 Jose ~ « «© ‘s 10 Amos.
ll Sem . . © © 11 Salmon , . . 11 Er 2. « «© «© 21 Mattathias,
12 Arplaxad, . . 12 Booz . . «. « 12 Elmodan. . . 12 Joseph.
13 Caman . . « 13 Obed « «. © © 13 Cosam 2. . . 13 Janna.
14 Sala. . ee 614 Jesse ww ew he «CK Addi fw © eS Mel chi.
15 Heber. . «© © 15 David. «© © © 15 Melchi .« «© © 15 Levi.
16 Phalec . . . 16 Nathan . © . 16 Neri. « ©. ~ 16 Matthat.
17 Ragau  . . «© 17 Mattatha . . . 17 Salathiel . . . 17 Heli.
18 Saruch . . . 18 Menan. . « « 18 Zorobabel. . « 18 Joseph.
19 Nachor . . » 19 Melea. . «. ~. 19 Rhesa. . «. «© 19 Jesus.


We do not find that there was any objection
made to these genealogies, either hy Jew or Gen-
tile, during the first century. Had any difficulty
on this head existed, we may reasonably suppose
that the Jews, of all others, would have been but
too ready to detect and expose it. We may there-
fore fairly conclude that, whatever difficulty
meets us now in harmonizing our Lord's pedigree
as given by the two Evangelists, it could have
had no place in the first age of the Christian
church. In subsequent ages, however, objections
were and stilt are made to the genealogies of
Matthew and Luke. We shall now consider
them, lst, as they apply to the Evangelists indivi-
dually; and 2ndly, as compared one with the
other.


Ist. It is objected that Jechoniah was not the son
of Josiah, but his grandson.— Answer: Matthew
does not mean to say lhe was his son; for verses 11
and 12 are obviously intended to designate two
different persons, viz. Jehotakim, and his son Je-
hoiachin, That the former is the person meant in
verse 11, is evident from the addition of ‘his bre-
thren.’ Whose brethren? Not Jehoiachin's (or
Jechonias), for he had none, but Jehoiakim’s, viz.
Jehboahaz and Zedekiah, the former of whom
reigned befure him (though a younger brother)
and the latter after him (1 Chron. iii. 15, 16, 17).
Admitting this, we see the consistency of the Evan-
gelist as to the number of generations in the second
and third series; whereas they who make Jcchonias
(verses 11, 12) to be the same person leave only


6 GENEALOGY.


thirteen in the second series, if Jechonias be added
to the third; or in the third, if he be placed to
the second. If the objection had any tiuth, the
Evangelist would be palpably inconsistent with
himself! St. Jerome (in Matthenm, cap. i.) con-
firms this view :—‘ If Jechonias be included in the
first tessarodecade there will not be fourteen gene-
rations: we may therefore assume that the first
Jechonias meant Joakim and the latter Joachin—
the one spelt with the letters k and m, the other
with ch and n; which Jetters, in the course of
time, by fault of transcribers, were confounded
by Greeks and Latins.’ Porphyry brought forward
this objection against St. Matthew's genealogy, and
we find the same Father, in his Comment. on Da-
niel, thus replying :—‘ In the Gospel of Matthew
one generation seems to be wanting, for the second
tessarodecade ends with Joakim, the son of Josiah,
and the third begins with Joachin, the son of Joa-
kim; Porphyry, ignorant of thig would exhibit
his own skill in proving the falsity of the Evan-
gelist St Matthew.’

2ud. It is objected that Matthew omits three
kings, viz. Ahaziah. Joash, and Amaziah (comp.
1 Chron, iii. and 2 Kings viii.), from his second
series. In reference to this objection it might
suffice to say that Matthew, finding fourteen
generations from Abraham to David inclusively,
coutracted, most likely in order to assist memory
and give uniformity, the second, and possibly the
last series. If we compare Ezra vii. 1-5, with
1 Chron. vi. 3-15, it will be seen that Ezra, in
detailing, with apparent particularity, his own
lineal descent from Aaron, calls Azariah, who
was high-priest at the dedication of the First
Temple, the son, not of Johanan itis father, but
of Meraioth, his ancestor at the distance of six
generations. Doubtless the desire of abridgment
Jed him to omit those names with which there
were connected no very remarkable associations,
Some of the early Fathers, however. give a different
solution of this difficulty. Hilary (in Mattheum,
cap. i.) says: ‘Three generations are designedly
castes over by Matthew; for Jaras is said to have

gotten Ozias, wheu, in fact, he was the fourth
from him, & e. Jaras begat Ochazias from the
Gentile family of Ahab, whose wife was Jezebel.’
That the omission of the three kings was a
penile inflicted upon the house of guilty

oram, to the fuurth generation, is the view yet
more pointedly put forth by St. Jerome also, and
by many of our own best commentators.

3rd. Moreover it is said that St. Matthew terms
Zorobabel the sou of Salathiel, whereas in 1 Chron.
iii. 19, he is called the son of Padaiah. How is
this? We answer that the S»ptuagint version of
1 Chron. iii. agrees with Matthew, and that this is
the manner in which Zorubabel is designated in
Ezra, Nehemiah, and Haggai. Josephus also
ealls him the son of Salathiel. Were he not the
immeiliate son of Salathiel, but of Padaiah, yet
is it suitable to the language of the Jewish
uation, to count the grandson the son of the
grandfather. Thus Laban is called the son of
Nahor (Gen. xxix. 5), as being the son of Betlinel,
who was, in fact, the son of Nahor (ch. xxiv. 47).
If, according to another manuer of rendering
ver. 17 and 18, Salathiel and Padaiah were bro-
thers, Zorobabel might have been. by the Levirate
law, the natural son of the one and the legal son
of the other.


GENEALOGY.


4th. It is again asked, if it be, as Matthew
states, that Salmon, son of Naasson, prince of
Israel, had married so remarkaule a person as
Rahab, bow then comes it that such a circum.
stance is not noticed in the book of Joshua?
This objection will have no force if we remember
that this book, full as it is in describing the par
tition of Cauaan among the several tribes, is yet
very silent concerning the expluits, and even
names, of the subordinate leaders of Israel. There
is nothing therefore surprising in the circum-
stance that it should pass over in total silence
Salmon’s marriage with Rahab. Had the matter
in question been the espousal of Rahab by Joshua
himself, the presumption against its truth would
be very different. Aud indeed Kimchi, in his
Commentary on the Book of Joshua, adduces a
tradition to this effect, taken from the Babylonian
Talmud. Every consideration, moreover, of a
chronological character is in favour of the cir-
cumstance of the son of Naasson, born to him in
the wilderness, being married to Rahab.

5th. But a far graver objection than that which
is allezed against St. Matthew for having omitted
namey, is brought against St. Luke for naving in-
serted that of Cainan, as son of Arphaxad—e
name neither to be found in the Hebrew nor
Samaritan text, nor yet in any of the Targums
or versions, save the Septuagint. We may infer
from the fact that neither Philo nor Josephus, who
in other respects followed this version, receive this
name as genuine, that it was not found in the
earlier copies of the Septuagint. And it is clear,
moreover, that Irenzeus, Alricanus, Eusebius, and
Jerome, reject it as an interpolation. See on
this subject Whitby’s Preface to the Reader, and
Lighttoot’s Harm. ; also Usher's Dissertation on
Cainan, and Kidder's Demonst. of Messiah.

We are now to compare the Evanzelists as to
the points on which they agree and differ.

It does not appear that Celsus attacked the
genealogies on the score of any tnaconsistency with
each other. Not so the Emperor Julian; he made
their discrepancies the specitic ground of attack.
Jerome (in Matt. i.) thus writes :—* Julianus Au-
gustus in this place attacks the Evangelists on the
ground of discrepancy: Matthew culls Joseph
the son of Jacob, whereas Luke calls him the son
of Heli! Had Julian been better acquainted with
the modes of speech of the Jews, he would have
seen that one Evangelist gives the natural and the
other the legal pedigree of Joseph.’ .

The first solution of the ayparent discrepancies
of the Evangelists (and to which this auctent
father obviously here alludes) is that of Africanus,
which, he informs us (Enseb. Hist. Eecles. i. 7)
he received from the relatives of our Lord, who,
because of their consanguinity to him, were called
Acondouvos. It is to the effect that Matthan, the
third in the list from Joseph, in Matthew's ge-
nealogy, and Melchi, the third in Luke's list,
married successively the same woman, by whom
the former begat Jacob, and the latter Heli. Heli
dying without issue, his maternal brother took his
widow towife, by whom hehad Joseph, who.acca
ing to law (Deut. xxv. 6), was registered by Luke
as the son of Heli, though naturally the son of
Jacob, as Matthew records him. This is the ex-
planation which was generally admitted by Kuse
bius, Nazianzen, the writer of Ad orthodozas,
others, for ages.


GENEALOGY.


Grotius, however, availing himself of the tra-
jition that Heli and Jacob were both sons of the
same mother, but of different fathers (Matthan
and Melchi), supposes that Luke traces the na-
tural pedigree of Christ, and Matthew the legal.
This he argues on two grounds. First, that
Salathiel could not have been the natural son of
Jechonias, who was childless—according to the
declaration of God by Jeremiah (xxii.)}—and
was, therefore, as Luke states, the gon, properly so
called, of Neri, of Nathan's line; and, secondly,
that the Levirate law im no necessity on
Jacol) tu marry Heli’s widow, they being only
uterine brothers. The learned commentator might
have been led to this view by St. Ambrose, who,
in his Commentary on Luke, says, ‘ Heli, fratre
sine liberis decedente, copulatus est fratris uxori,
et generavit filium Joseph, qui juxta legem
Jacobi tilius dicitur.’ But both the reasons as-
signed by Grotius for differing from the solution
of Africanus would seem to be founded on a
petitio principit. It does not appear an ascer-
tained fact that Salathiel was not the natura) son
of Jechonias, nor yet that the law which obliged
a@ man to marry the widow of his deceased bro-
ther might be departed from when they were only
maternal brethren; fur even in cases of distant
relationship the law seemed obligatory, as we see
in the case of Boaz marrying Ruth, the widow of
his distant kinsman. Whitby defends Africanus’
account; Hammond, Le Clerc, and Wetstein,
agree with Grotius.

Dr. Barrett, who, in his preliminary disserta-
tion to a curious fac-simile of a most ancient
MS. of St. Matthew's gospel, brings to bear upon
this dificult question a large share of sound
learning and correct criticism, objects to the
above theory as given by Africanus and altered
by Grotius, on the ground principally, that it
refers entirely to the descent of Joseph from David,
without attempting to prove that the son of Mary
was the son of David. Dr. Barrett then states
his own hypothesis, viz., that Matthew relates the
genealogy of Joseyh, and Luke that of Mary.
He supposes a sufficient reason, that after Mat-
thew had given his genealogical table another
should be added by St. Luke, fully to prove that
Christ, according to the flesh, derived his descent
from David, not only by his supposed father
Joseph, but also by his real mother Mary. The
writers who agree in this opinion, Dr. B. divides
into two classes. First, those who assert that the
families of Solomon and Nathan met in Salathiel
and Zorobabel, after which they separated, aud
were again re-united in Joseph and Mary: se-
condly, those who suppose that Salathiel and Zo-
robabel were distinct individuals, and deny that
any union took place between them previously to
the marriage of Joseph and Mary. He rejects
this latter opinion because it seems to contradict
the divine promise (2 Sam. vii. 12-16), which in-
timates that Christ should be dineally descended
from David through Solomon. He therefore re-
ceives the former hypothesis, and supports it by
numerous and profound arguments. (See his
Preliminary Dissertation to Codex Rescriptus ;
see also, on both hypotheses, Lightfuot’s Harmony
Ev. ; South's Sermon on Rev. xii. 16, vol. iii.;
Wetstein, ad Mattheum, i. 17; Bishop Kidder's
Demonst. of Messiah, part ii. to c. xili,; Hale's
Analysis of Chronology, vol. iii.)


GENEALOGY. mm


In constructing their ical tables, it is
well known that the Jews reckoned wholly by
males, rejecting, where the blood of the grand-
father passed to the grandson through a daughter,
the name of the daughter herself, and counting that
daughter's husband for the son of the maternal
grandfather (Num. xxvi. 33; xxvii. 4-7). On this
principle Joseph, begotten by Jacob, marries Mary,
the daugliter of Heli; and in the genealogical
register of his wife's family, is counted for Heli’s
son. Salathiel, begotten by Jeconiah, marries
the daughter of Neri, and, in like manner, is ac-
counted his son: in Zorobabel, the offspring of
Salathiel and Neri'’s daughter, the lines of Solo-
mon aud Nathan coalesce ; Joseph and Mary are
of the same tribe and family; they are both de-
scendants of David in the line of Solomon; they
have in them buth the blood of Nathan, David's
aon. Joseph deduces bis descent from Abiud
(Matt. i. 13), Mary from Rhesa (Luke iii. 27),
sons of Zorobabel. The genealogies of Matthew
and Luke are parts of one perfect whole, and
each of them is essential to the explanation of the
other. By Matthew's table we prove the descent
of Mary, as well as Joseph, from Solomon; by
Luke’s we see the descent of Joseph, as well as
Mary, from Nathan.

Bat still it is asked how know we that Mary
was the daughter of Neri ?

1. Because the angel Gabriel, at the Annuncia-
tion, told the Virgin that God would give her
divine son the throne of his father David (Luke i.
32), and thus it was necessary to prove this by
her genealogy afterwards.

2. Mary is called by the Jews byns, * the
daughter of Heli;’ and by the early Christian
writers, ‘the daughter of Joakim and Anna’
(Lightfoot, on Luke iii. 23). But Joakim and
Eliakim (as different names in Hebrew for
God) are sometimes interchanged (2 Chron.
xxxvi. 4): Eli or Heli then is the abridgment
of Eliakim.

3. The Evangelist Luke has critically distin-
guished the read from the legal genealogy by a
parenthetical remark : "Iycots dv (obs evopiero)
vids "Iwohp, rod ‘HAL, ‘ Jesus being (as was re-
met) the son of Juseph (but in reality), the son
of Heli,’ or his grandson by the mother's side, for
so the ellipsis should be supplied. Moreover, on
comparing the two tables, we find that from Abra-
ham to David they agree with each other because
they are in accordance with the genealogies of
Genesis, Ruth, and ] Chron. iii.; but from David
to Joseph they no cans distinct lines of

ligree, agreeing only in two persons, viz., Sala-
thiel and Zorobabel. . :

Again, it is objected, that there are now in
Luke's genealogy seventy-seven names; whereas
Irenzus, Africanus, and other early fathers, ace
knowledge but seventy-teo. But if, with them,
we omit the names Levi, Matthan, and Cainan,
as being interpolations, and also not count the
first and the last, then the number will be reduced
to seventy-two.

It is said that Abiud and Rhesa are called by
the Evangelists the sons of Zorobabel, though im
1 Chron. iii. 19 we have no mention of them
among his sons. We remark that it was a cuse
tom with the Jews to call the same person by
different names, and that this custom was pecue
liarly prevalent about the time of the captivity


148 GENERATION.


(an. i. 6, 7; also compare 2 Sam. iii. 3 with
1 Chron. iii. 1).

Lastly, it is inquired, whence the Evangelists
had their genealogies from Zorobabel to Christ,
there being nothing of them to be found in Scrip-
ture. We answer, from those authentic public
tables kept by the Jews, of which, as before
noticed, desectits speaks; and regarding which
also Eusebius (Hist. Eccles. i. 1) says, ‘ Omnes
Hebraorum generationes descripte in Archivis
Templi secretioribus habebantur.’ It was doubt-
Jess from this source that they had the above
named parts of our Lord's legal and natural
pedigree; for, otherwise, they would have exposed
themselves to the cavils of the Jews; nor could
the Apostles have appealed, as they did, with con-
fidence, to Christ's pedigree, as answering all the
Tequirements of prophecy.

In addition to the works already referred to on
this subject, the reader will do well to consult a
learned essay by the Rev. W. H. Mill, D.D.,
being the Christian Advocate’s publication for
1842. —J. W. D.

GENERATION. Considerable obscurity at-
tends the use of this word in the English Version,
which arises from the translators having merged
the various meanings of the same original word,
and’ even of several different words, in one com-
mon term, ‘generation.’ The remark is too just
that, in the literal translations of the Scriptures,
the word ‘ generation’ generally occurs wherever
the Latin has generatio, and the Greek yeved or
yéveots (Rees's Ency. art. Generation’). The
following instances seem to require the original
words to be understood in some or other of their
derivative senses—Gen. ii. 4, ‘These are the ge-


nerations' cmabin; Sept. % BiBAos yevévews;
Vulg. generationes), rather ‘origin,’ ‘history,’ &c.
The same Greek words, Matt. i. 1, are rendered
‘genealogy, &c. by recent translators: Campbell
haa ‘lineage.’ Gen. v. 1, ‘ The book of the genera-


tions’ cnadin “BD; Sept. as before; Vulg. liber
generationis) is properly a family register, a his-
tory of Adam. The same words, Gen. xxxvii. 2,
mean a history of Jacob and his descendants: so
also Gen. vi. 9, x. 1, and elsewhere. Gen. vii. 1,
‘Iu this generation’ (711 W713 : Sept. ev 77 yeved
rdurn, Vulg. in generatione hac) is evideutly ¢ in
this age.’ Gen. xv. 6, ‘In the fourth generation’
(WI; Sept. yeved; Vulg. generatio) is an instance
of the word in the sense of a certain assigned

riod. Ps. xlix. 19. ‘The generation of his
fathers’ (YAIIN WAY, Sept. yeveds warepwy
avrov) Gesenius renders ‘the dtoelling of his
fathers,’ 4. e. the grave, and adduces Isa. xxxviii.
12. Ps. Ixxiii. 15, ‘ The generation of thy children’
(JID W, Sept. yeved trav vidv cod) is ‘ class,’
‘order,’ ‘description ;’ as in Prov. xxx. 11, 12,
13, 14. Isa. liii. 8, ‘Who shall declare his gene-
ration ? (YT; Sept. rhy yevedy abrod rls 3inyh-
cera; Vulg. generatio) Lowth renders ‘manner of
life,’ in translation and note, but adduces no pre-
cedent. Some consider it equivalent to Y", ver.
10: yeved (Sept.) answers to YU, Esther ix. 28.
Josephus uses woddAqy yevedy, Antig. i. 10. 3
(Hengstenherg, Christology of the Old Testament,
vol. i. Washington, 1836-9; Pauli, Analect. He-
braic. p. 162, Oxford, 1839). Michaelis renders
it ‘Where was the providence that cared for his
life?’ Gesenius and Rosenmiiller, ‘ Who of his


GENESIS.


contemporaries reflected Seiler, ‘Who can
describe his length of life?’ Inthe New Testa
ment, Matt. i. 17, -yeveai is a series of persons, a
succession from the same stock ; so used by Jouse-
phus (Antig. i. 7. 2); Philo (Vit. Mos. vol. i. p.
603); Matt. iii. 7, yexvqpara exidvav, is wel
rendered by Doddridge and others ‘brood of,
vipers.” Matt. xxiv. 34, 7 veyed aivy means the
generation or persons then living contemporary
with Christ (see Macknight’s Harmony for an
illustration of this sense). Luke xvi. 8, es rhy
yeveay thy éauray, ‘in their generations,’ &c,
wiser in regard to their dealings with the mex of
their generation. Rosenmiiller gives, inter se.
I Pet. ii. 8, yévos exAexrév, is a ‘chosen people,’
quoted from Sept. Vers. of Isa. xliii. 20. The an-
cient Greeks, and, if we may credit Herodotus and
Diodorus Siculus, the Egyptians also, assigned a
certain period to a generation. The Greeks reck-
oned three generations for every hundred years,
f.e. 33} years to each. Herod. ii. 142, -yereal
Tpeis avdpayv éxardy ered eos, ‘ three generations
of men make one hundred years.’ This is nearly
the present computation. To the same effect
Clem. Alexandrinns speaks (Strom. i. 2); so also
Phavorinus, who, citing the age of Nestor from
Homer (1. i. 250), 76 8 #3 5v0 pev yereal, ‘two
generations,” says, it means that dwepéBn ra Eff-
xovta ér7, ‘he was above sixty years old.’ The
Greeks, however, assigned «different periods to a
“yeved at diflerent times (Perizonius, Orig. gypt.
p. 175, sq.; Jensius, Fercul. Literar. p. 6). The
ancient Hebrews also reckoned by the generation,
and assigned different spaces of time to it at dif-
ferent periods of their history. In the time of
Abraham it was ove hundred years (comp. Gen.
xv. 16, ‘in the fourth generation they shall come
hither’), This is explained in verse 13, and in
Exod. xii. 40, to be four hundred years.. Caleb
was fourth in descent from Judah, and Moses and
Aaron were fourth from Levi. In Deut. i. 35,
ii. 14, Moses uses the term for thirty-eight years.
In later times (Baruch vi., in the Epistle of Jere
miah, ver..2) -yeved clearly means ten years. In
Matt. i. 17, yeved means a single descent from
father to son [GeNzaLocy]. Homer uses the
word in the same sense (Ji. 1. 250); also Hero-
dotus (i. 3).—J. F. D.

GENESIS (Sept. eveors), the first book of
the Pentatench, is, in Hebrew, called NWN,
from the word with which it begins. This vene-
rable monument, with which the sacred literature
of the Hebrews commences, and which forms
its real basis, is divided into two main parts;
one universal, and one special. The most an-
cient history of the whole human race is con-
tained in chapters i-xi., and the history of Israel's
ancestors, the patriarchs, in chapters xii-l These
two parts are, however, so intimately connected
with each other that it would be erroneous to
ascrile to the first merely the aim of furnishing
a universal history. The chief aim which jer
vades the whole is to show how the theocratic
institution subsequently founded by Moses was
rendered possible and necessary. The book, there-
fore, takes its starting-poiut from the original unity
of the human race, and their original relation to
God, and proceeds thence to the interruption of
that relation by the appearance of sin, which
gradually and progressively wrought an external
and internal division in the human race for


GENESIS.


want of the principles of divine life which
originally dwelt in man in general, but which
had subsequently been preserved only among a
small and separate race—a race which in pro-
gress of time became more and more isolated
from all the other tribes of the earth, and enjoyed
for a series of generations the special care, blessing,
and guidance of the Lord. The Mosaical theo-
cracy appears, therefore, by the general tenor of
Genesis, partly as a restoration of the original re-
lation to God, of the communion of man with
God, and partly as an institution which had been
preparing by God himself through a long series
of manifestations of his power, justice, and love.
Genesis thus furnishes us with the primary view
and notion of the whole of the theocracy, and
may therefore be considered as tie historical
fonndation without which the subsequent history
of the covenant people would be incomplete and
unintelligible.

The unity and composition of the work, which is
f point in dispute among the critics in regard to ald
the books of the Pentateuch, have been particularly
questioned in the case of Genesis. The question
was raised whether the sources from which the
writer of Genesis drew his information were written
documents or oral tradition. Writers as early as
Vitringa (Obs. Sac. i. 4), Richard Simon, Cle-
ricus, aud others, though they were of opinion
that Genesis is founded on written sources, did
not undertake to describe the nature and quality
of those sources. Another opinion, advanced by
Otmar, in Henke’s Aagaz. ii., that Egyptian
pyramids and other monuments of a similar
nature were the sources of Genesis, was but
transient in the critical world; while the attempt
of some critics not only to renew the previous
assumption that Genesis is founded on written


sources, but also to determine more closely the’


character of those sources, has gained more last-
ing approval among the learned. Why different
names of God are prevalent in different portions
of Genesis is a question much discussed by early
theologians and rabbis, Astruc, a Belgian phy-
sician, in his Conjectures sur les Mémoires ori-
ginauz, &c., Bruxelles, 1753-8, was the first to
apply the two Hebrew names of God, Jehovah
and Elohim, to the subject at issue. Astruc’s
demonstration had many feeble points. He as-
sumed that there had originally existed a number
of isolated documents, which had subsequently,
by the fault of transcribers, been joined and
strung together in the present form of Genesis.
Kichhom’s critical genius procured for this hy-
pothesis a favourable reception almost through-
ont the whole of Germany. Eichhorn pruned
away its excrescences, and confined his own
view to the assumption of only two different
documents, respectively characterized by the two
names of Jehovah and Elohim. Other critics,
such as Ilgen (Urkunden des Jerusalem Tem-
pel-Archivs, 1798), Gramberg (Adumbratio libri
Geneseos secundwn fontes, 1828), and others,
went still farther, and pre-supposed three differ-
ent documents in Genesis, Vater went much
beyond Eichhorn. He fancied himself to be
able to combat the authenticity of the Penta-
teuch by producing a new hypothesis. He sub-
stituted for Eichhorn’s ¢ document-hypothesis ’
his own ‘ fragment-hypothesis,” which obtained
great authority, especially on account of its being


GENESIS. 749


adopted by De Wette. According to this opinion
Genesis, as well as the greater part of the Pen-
tateuch, consists of a great number of very small
detached fragments, internally unconnected with
each other, but transcribed seriatim, although ori-
ginating in very different times and from different
authors. This ‘ fragment-hypothesis' has now
been almost generally given up. Even its zealous
defenders, not excepting De Wette himself, have
relinquished it. In its place the former ‘ docu-
ment-hy pothesis’ has been resumed by some critics,
simplitied however, and supported by new and
better arguments. There is at present a great
variety of opinion among divines concerning this
hypothesis, The leading features of this diver-
sity may be comprised in the following sum-
mary. According to the view of Stahelin, De
Wette, Ewald, Von Bohlen, Tuch, and others,
Genesis is founded on two principal original do-
cuments. That of Elohim is closely connected
in its parts, and forms a whole, while that of
Jehovah is a mere complementary document,
supplying details at those points where the former
is abrupt and deficient, &c. These two docu-
ments are said to have been subsequently com-
bined by the hand of an editor, so ably as often
to render their separation difficult, if not alto-
gether impossible. But Ranke, Hengstenberg,
Drechsler, Havernick, and others, maintain that
Genesis is a book closely connected in all its
parts, and composed by only one author, while
the use of the two diflerent names of God is not
owing to two different sources on which Genesis
is founded, but solely to the different signitica-
tions of these two names. The use of each of
the two names, Jehovah and Elohim, is every-
where in Genesis adapted to the sense of the
passages in which the writer has purposely in-
serted the one name or the other. This point of
view is the more to be considered, as it is the pe-
culiar object of the author to point out in Genesis
the gradual and progressive development of the
divine revelations. The opponents have in vain
attempted to discover in Genesis a few contra-
dictions indicative of different documents in it;
their very admission, that a fixed plan and able
compilation visibly pervade the whole of the
book, is in itself a refutation of such supposed con-
tradictions, since it is hardly to be conceived,
that an editor or compiler who has shown so much
skill and anxiety to give unity to the book should
have cared so little about the removal of those
contradictions, The whole of Genesis is per-
vaded by such a freedom in the selection and
treatment of the existing traditions, such an ab-
sence of all trace of any previous source or docu-
ments which might in some measure have con-
fined the writer within certain limits of views and
expressions, as to render it quite impracticable to
separate and fix upon them specifically, even if
there were portions in Genesis drawn from earlier
written documents.

That first question concerning the unity of the
book is closely connected with another question,
respecting its authenticity, or whether Moses was
the author of Genesis, We confine ourselves here
to only a few remarks on the authenticity of
Genesis in particular, and refer the reader for
further information to the article Penratgucn.
Some critics have attempted to ascertain the petiod
when Genesis was composed, from a few passages


160 GENESIS,


in it, which they say must be anachronisms, if
Moses was really the author of the book (v. ex. gr.
Tuch, Commentar tiber Genesis, p. 1xxxv. sq.).
Among such passages are, in particular, Gen.
xii. 6; xiii. 7; ‘ And the Canaanite was then
in the land.’ This remark, they say, could only
have been made by a writer who lived in Pa-
lestine after the extirpation of the Canaanites.
But the sense of the passage is not that the
Canaanites had not as yet been extirpated, but
merely that Abraham, on his arrival in Canaan,
had already found there the Canaanites. This
Notice was necessary, silice the author subse-
quently describes the intercourse between Abra-
bam and the Canaanites, the lords of the country.
According to the explanation given to the passage
by the opponents, such an observation would be
quite a superfluous triviality. Also the name
Hebron (Gen. xiii. 18; xxiii, 2), they say, was
not introduced till after the time of Moses (Josh.
xiv. 15; xv. 13). This, however, does not prove
anything, since Hebron was the original Hebrew
mame for the place, which was subsequently
changed into Arba (by a man of that name),
but was restured by the Israelites on their entrance
into Canaan. The opponents also maiutain that
the name of the place Dan (Gen. xiv. 14) was
given only in the post-Mosaical period (Josh.
xix. 47; Judg. xvii. 29). But a two last
passages speak of quite a different place. There
were two Hiaces cain Dan; DaneJaas (2 Sam.
xxiv. 6), and Dan-Laish, or Leshem. In Genesis,
they further add, frequently occurs the name
Bethel (xii. 8; xxviii, 19; xxxv. 15); while even
in the time of Joshua, the place was as yet called
Luz (Josh. xviii. 13). But the name Bethel was
Not first given to the place by the Israelites in
the time of Joshua, there being no occasion for
it, since Bethel was the old patriarchal uame,
which the Israelites restored in the place of Luz,
anaie given by the Canaanites, Another pas-
sage in Genesis (xxxvi. 31), ‘ Belure there reigned
any king over the children of Isruel,’ is likewise
supposed to have been written at a period when
the Jews had already a king over them. But
the broachers of these objections forget that this
passage refers to those pone contained iv the
Pentateuch in general, and in Genesis in’ par-
ticular (comp. Gen. xxxv. 11), that there should
hereafter be kings among the Israelites as an inde-
pendent nation, In comparing Israel with Edam
(Gen. xxxvi.), the sacred writer cannot retrain
from observing that Edom, though left without
divine promises of possessing kings, nevertheless
possessed them, and obtained the glory of an inde-
pendent kingdom, long before Israel contd think of
such au independence; and a little attention to the
sense of the passage will show how admirably the
observation suits a writer in the Musaical perivd.
The passage (Gen. xv. 18) where the land of
Israel is described as extending from the river
of Egvpt (the Nile) to the great river (Euphrates),
it is alleged, could only have been penned during
the splendid period of the Jews, the times of David
and Solomon. Ltterally taken, however, the re-
mark is inapplicable to any period, since the king-
dom of the Jews at no period of their history ex-
tended so far. That promise must, therefore, be
taken in a rhetorical sense, describing the central
point of the proper country as situated between
the two rivers.


GENESIS.


The historical character of the contents of
Genesis forms a more compreliensive subject of
theological discussion. It is obvious that the
Opinions regarding it must be principally influ-
enced by the dogmatical views and principles
of the respective critics themselves. Hence the
great variety of opinion that still prevails on that
subject. Some, such as Vatke, Von Bohlen, and
others, assert the whole contents of Genesis to be
unhistorical. Tuch and others consider Genesis
to be interwoven with mythical elements, but
think that the rich historical elements, especially
in the account of the patriarchs, can be clearly
discerned. Some again limit the mythological
part to the first two chapters ogily ; while others
esa in the whole buuk a consistent and truly
historical impress. The field of controversy is
here so extensive, and the arguments on both sides
are so numerous, that we must content ourselves
in this article with a very few remarks on the sub-
ject. Genesis is a book consisting of two con-
trasting parts: the first part introduces us into
the greatest problems of the human mind, such
as the Creation and the fall of man; and the
second, into the quiet solitude of a small defined
circle of families. In the former, the must sub-
lime and wonderful events are described with
childlike simpiicity ; while, in the latter, on the
contrary, the most simple and common occurrences
are interwoven with the sublimest thoughts and
reflections, rendering the small family circle a
whole world in history, and the principal actors
in it prototypes for a whole nation, and for all
times. The contents in general are strictly
religious. Not the least trace of mythology ap
pears in it. Consequently there are no mythical
statements, because whatever is mythical belongs
to mythology, and Genesis plainly shows how
very far remote the Hebrew mode of thinking
was from mythical poetry, which might have
fonnd ample opportunity of being brought into
play when the writer began to sketch the early
times of the Creation. It is true that the nar-
Tations are fraught with wonders. But primeval
wonders, the marvellous deeds of God, are the
very subject of Genesis, None of these wonders,
however, Lear a fantastical impress, and there is
no useless prodigality of them. They are all
penetrated aud connected by one common leading
idea, aud are all related to the counsel of God
for the salvation of man. This principle sheds
its lustrous beams through the whole of Genesis;
therefore the wonders therein related are as little
to be ascribed to the invention and imagination
of man as the whole plan of God for human
salvation. The foundation of the divine theo-
cratical institution throws a strong light upon
the early patriarchal times; the reality of the one
proves the reality of the other, as described in
Genesis,

The separate accounts in Genesis also mani-
fest great internal evidence of truth if we clusely
examine them. They bear on their front the
most beautiful impress of truth, The cosmogony
in Genesis stands unequalled among all others
known in the ancient world. No mythology,
no ancient philosophy, has ever come up to the
idea of a creation out of nothing. AM the
ancient systems end iu Pantheism, Materialism,
emanation-theory, &c. But the Biblical cos-
muguny occupies a place of its own, and there-


GENESIS.


fore must not be ranked among, or confounded
with, any of the ancient systems of mythology or
philosophy. The mythological and philosophical
cosmogonies may have been derived from the Bi-
blical, as being later depravations and misrepre-
sentations of Biblical truth; but the contents of
Genesis cannot, vice versd, have been derived from
mythology or philosophy. Moreover, only with the
Biblical fundamental idea of the relation of God to
his creatures, consequently only with the doctrine
of creation out of nothing, is it possible to furnish
an historical representation of creation. Every sys-
tem deviating from this contains an internal con-
tradiction ayainst history, because it necessarily
substitutes the idea of eternity for that of time;
and consequently does not admit of any history,
but only of either mythology or abstract re-
flection. The historical delineation also of the
Creation and of the fall of man does not bear
the least natioual interest or colouring, but is of
a truly universal nature, while every mythus
bears the stamp of the national features of the
nation and country where it originated and found
development. All mythi are subject to con-
tinual development and variations, but among the
Hebrews the accounts in Genesis stand tirm and
immutable for all times, without the least thing
being added or altered in them for the purpose
of further development, even by the New Testa-
ment. What a solid guarantee must there be
in this foundation of all subsequent revelations,
since it has been admitted and maintained by
all generations with such immovable firmness !
The ancient heathen traditions coincide in many
points with the Biblical accounts, and serve to
illustrate and confirm them. This is especially
the case in the ancient traditions concerning the
Deluge (Gen, vi. 9), and in the list of nations in
the tenth chapter; fur instance (Gen. x. 4), Tar-
shish is called the son of Javan, This indicates
that the ancient inhabitants of Tarshish or Tar-
tessus in Spain were erroneously considered to
be a Phanician colony like those of other towns
in its neighbourhood, and that they sprang from
Javan, that is, Greece. That they were of Greek
origin is clear from the account of Herodotus (i.
163). Also (ver. 8), Nimrod, the ruler of Babel,
is called the son of Cush, which is in remarkable
unison with the mythological tales concerning
Bel and his Exyptian descent (comp. Diudor. Sic.
i, 28, 1; Pausan. iv. 23, 5). Sidon alone is
mentioned (ver. 15), but not Tyres (comp. xlix.
13), which arose only in the time of Joshua
(Josh. xix. 29); and that Sidon was an older
town than J'yrus, by which it was afterwards
eclipsed, is certified by a number of ancient
reports (comp. Hengstenberg, De Rebus Tyrio-
ren, pp. 6, 7).

With the patriarchal history (xii. sqq.) begins
an historical sketch of a peculiar character. The
cirenmstantial details in it allow us to examine
more closely the historical character of these
accounts. The numerous descriptions of the
mote of life in those days furnish us with a very
vivid picture, We meet everywhere a sublime
simplicity quite worthy of patriarchal life, and
never to be found again in later history. One
canmot suppose that it would have been possible
in a later period, estranged from ancient simpli-
city, to invent such a picture,

Tne authenticity of the patriarchal history


GENESIS. 76)


could be attacked only by analogy, the true
historical test of negative criticism; but the
patriarchal history has no analogy; while a
great historical fact, the Mosaical theocracy
itself, might here be adduced in favour of the
truth of Genesis. The theocracy stands without
analogy in the history of the human race, and is,
nevertheless, true above all historical doubt. But:
this theucracy cannot have entered into history
without preparatory events. The facts which led
to the introduction of the theocracy are contained
in the accounts of Genesis. Moreover, this pre-
paration of the theocracy could not consist in the
ordinary providential guidance. The race of
patriarchs advances to a marvellous destination :
the road also leading to this destination must be
peculiar and extraordinary. The opponents of
Genesis forget that the marvellous events of
patriarchal history which offend them most, par-
take of that character of the whole, by which
alone this history becomes commensurate and
possible.

There are also many separate vestiges warrant-
ing the antiquity of these traditions, and proving
that they were neither invented nor adorned ; for
instance, Jacob, the progenitor of the Israelites,
is introduced not as the firstborn, which, if au
unhistorical and merely external exaltation of
that name had been the aim of the author, would
have been more for this purpose. —-

Neither the blemishes in the history of Abra-
ham, nor the gross sins of the sons of Jacob,
among whom even Levi, the progenitor of the
sacerdotal race, forms no exception, are con-
cealed.

The same author, w!ose moral principles are
so much blamed by the opponents of Genesis, on
acconnt of the description given of the life of
Jacoh, produces, in the history of Abraham, a
picture of moral greatness which could have
originated only in facts,

The faithfulness of the author manifests itself
also especially in the description of the ex
dition of the kings from Upper to Western Asia;
in his statements concerning the person of Mel-
chizedek (Gen. xiv.); in the circumstantial
details given of the incidents occurring at the
purchase of the hereditary burial-place (ch.
xxiii.); in the genealogies of Arabian tribes
(ch, xxv.); in the genealogy of Edom (ch.
xxxvi.); and in many remarkable details which
are interwoven with the yeneral accounts. In the
history of Joseph the patriarchal history comes
into contact with Egypt; and here the accounts
given by ancient classical writers, as well as the
monuments of Egypt, frequently furnish some
splendid coutiimations. For instance, the account
given (xlvii. 13-26) ofthe manner in which the
Pharaohs became proprietors of all the lands, with
the exception of those belonging to the priests,
is confirmed by Herodotus (ii. 109), and by Dio-
dorus Siculus (i, 73). The manner of embalming
described in Gen. }. entirely agrees with the de
scription of Herodotus, ii. 84, &c. For other data
of a similar kind, compare Hengstenberg (Dee
Biicher Mosis und Acgypten, p. 21, sq.).

For the important commentaries and writings
on Genesis, see the article PeENTATRUCH.


GENNESARETH. [Cinnerers.]
GENNESARETH, LAKE OF, [Sza.]


753 GENTILES.


GENTILES (D'%3 ; Sept. £6vor), a word which,
both in the Hebrew Goyim, and in the Anglo-
Latin ‘Gentile, by which we translate it,
means literally, ‘the nations.’ It was applied
by the Hebrews to all individuals or communi-
ties not under the law—that is, all the nations
of the world excepting the Jews, But in later
times some small states, and many individuals,
embraced the law; and they were distinguished
from the Gentiles, as well as from the Jews, by
the name of Prosziytes (xpoofAvro). In
some places our authorized version has the word
‘Gentiles’ where the original has “EAAnves, which
is usually and properly rendered ‘ Greeks.


GEOGRAPHY, considered as a systematic
description of the earth, took its rise at a much
Jater period than other sciences, probably because
it is of less essential necessity to man; yet the
elements of the knowledge out of which scientitic
geography is constructed must have existed as
soon as men tured their attention to the earth on
which they dwelt, and found it necessary to
journey from one part of its surface to another.

Like most other sciences, geography owes its
elementary cultivation as a science to the Hellenic
race, who, from the mythic period of their history
down to the destruction of the Western empire
(a.v. 476), continued to prosecute the study with
more or less system, and to more or less definite
results; yet it must be added that it is only ina
qualified sense that the ancients may be said to
have known or advanced scientific geography.

It is the Hebrews who present us with the earliest
written information of a geographical kind. In
the account of creation mention is made of a spot
called Eden, out of which a river, after watering
Paradise, ran, and ¢ from thence it was parted, and
became into four heads’ (1uuntains), which sent forth
as many rivers, Pison, Gihon, Hiddekel, Phrat of
Euphrates. Of these the last is the only stream
that is identified. Joseplins, on this point, says
(Antig. i. 2), ‘The garden was watered by one
river which ran round about the whole earth and
was parted into four parts.’ Pison he identifies
with the Ganges, Gihon with the Nile, Hiddekel
with the Tigris, and the Phrat with the Euphrates.
The idea here presented is that of a vast circular
plain (the earth), with water, a river, or the sea
(@xeavds in Homer, Jd, xxi. 196) encircling it,
from which encircling body of water ran the said
four rivers. Such, whether derived from the
Hebrew Scriptures or not, was the earliest con-
ception entertained of the earth. Any attempt to
reconcile snch a view with geographical facts
must be futile. That some such idea was en-
tertained among the Hebrews, even at a later
period, appears from the words found in Ps, xxiv.
2, ‘He hath founded it (the earth) upon the seas,
and established it upon the floods * (see also Prov.
viii, 27); though Job xxvi. 7, ‘He stretcheth
out the north over the empty place, and hangeth
the earth upon nothing ' (comp. Job xxxviii. 4, 6),
would secm to intimate that the writer of that book
entertained sbngtioe notions on the point. That,
however, the general idea was that the earth
formed an immense disk (‘the circle of the
earth’), above which were the substantial and
firmly fixed heavens, the abode of God, while the
earth beueath was his fvotstool, appears from the
general phraseology employed in the sacred books,


GEOGRAPHY.


and may be found specially exhibited or implied
in the following passages :—Isa. xl. 21, sq.; Jub
xxxvii. 18; Ps. cii. 25. Of this wide circular
expanse Jerusalem was considered the centre,
Ezek. v. 5: ‘1 have set Jerusalem in the midst of
the nations and countries that are round about
her.’ See the ensuing verses. The highlands of
Armenia would appear to have been the first
known to the human family. Descending from
these some may lave gone eastward, otliers west-
ward, The latter alone are spoken of in Scrip.
ture. Coming south aud west the progenitors of
the world first became acquainted with the coun-
tries lyiug between the Euphrates and the Tigris,
roughly termed Mesopotamia, whence they ad-
vanced still more south and west into Aram or
Syria, Arabia, Canaan, and Egypt. These are
the chief countries with which the ancient
Hebrews seem to have possessed an acquaint-
ance: yet if the national genealogical table tuund
in Gen. x. is to be referred to the early period
which its position in the Bible gives it, it would
appear that the geographical knowledge of tae
Hebrews was, even belore the flood, far more ex-
tensive, embracing even ‘the isles of the Geritiles.’
Winer (Iandicurterd., note to uxt. * Erde *), bow-
ever, with others, denies its historical value, and
certainly other parts of Scripture by no means
warrant us in ascribing to the Hebrews, before the
Babylonish captivity, a wider range of knowledge
than we have indicated above. This national
calamity lad the effect of enlarging the circle of
their knowledge of the earth, or at least of making
their knowledge of Assyria, Media, and, Baby-
lonia more minute and definite. It was to ther
neighbours the Phanicians that the Israelites
owed most of their geugraphical knowledge. This
commercial people must have early acquired a
superficial acquaintance with remote regions,
while engaged in their inaritime commercial ex-
peditions. The knowledge they brought back to
Palestine would spread beyond their own borders*
and reach the Hebrews, though they may not
have been given to inquiry and study on subjects
of the kind ; nor is it safe to attempt to define at
how early a period some rough notions of the isles
of the Gentiles may, by means of the Phenician
navigators, have been spread about in the East.
According to Clemens Alexandrinus (Strom. vi.
4. 36), the Egyptians had in circulation writings
on geography. Their king Sesustris may have had
maps (Schol. ad Apoll Rhed. iv. 292; Goguet,
Orig. des Loiz, ii, 227), though probably the
first attempt to form a map (that is, a written
catalogue of places, with sumething like their
relative positions and distances roughly guessed)
is to be ascribed to the men whem Jusiiua (Jusv.
xviii.) sent with orders to‘ go through the land
and describe it ;’ and the men ‘went and passed
through the land’ and described it by cities into
seven parts in a book.

At a later period, it is unquestionable that the
Hebrews possessed a knowledge of the north-west,
and a wider knowledge of the east, and even of the
north of Asia (Ezek. xxvii; Isa. li. 27). From
the period of the Maccabees the Jews entered into
relations of a mercantile and political character.
which extended their knowledge of the earth, and
made them better acquainted with Asia Minor,
Greece, and Italy, In the time embraced by the
New Testament history they must bave been


GEOGRAPHY.


widely acquainted with the then known world,
since colonies and individuals of their nation
were spread over nearly the entire surface covered
by ancient civilization, and identified with the
Roman empire. ‘The occasional, if not periodical,
return of the Jews thus scattered abroad, or at
least the relations which they would sustain with
their mother country, must have greatly widened,
and made less inaccurate, the knowledge enter-
tained in Palestine of other parts of the world.
Accordingly we read (Acts ii. 5, sq.) that, at the
effusion of the Holy Spirit un the day of Pentecost,
‘there were dwelling at Jernsalem Jews out of
every nation under heaven.’ See the enumeration
cf the countries whence they came in the context.
For a knowledge of the commercial euterprises of
the Phenicians consult Leroy, Mém. de U Acad.
des Inscr. xxxviii. 542; Bahr, Excurs. ad Herod.
ii, 667. Information on the geographical know-
ledge of the Hebrews may be found in Huet, in
Ugolini’s Thesaurus Antig. Sacrarum, vii. 244;
d’Anville, Mémoires del Acad. des Inscr. xxx. 83;
Bredow's Untersuch. uber Gesch. und Geogr.
ii. 263; Bellermann, Bibl. Erdbeschr. i. 143;
Zeune's Erdansichten, p.2. On the history of
geography among the ancients the following
works also may be consulted: Bangondy, Essat
sur [Histoire de la Géog. Paris, 1765; Blair,
History of the Rise and Progress of Geography,
London, 1784; Sprengel, Geschichte der Wich-
tigsten Geogr. Entdeckung, Halle, 1792; Ukert,
Geogr. der Griechen urd Romer, 1816; For-
biger, Handbuch der Alten Geogr., Leipz. 1842;
as well as the standard works of Ritter and Man-
nert. Among the older works, Reland’s Palestine
(Palestina ex Monumentis Vet. illustrata, No-
timberge, 1716) continues to hold a distinguished
place. Reland was professor of Oriental languages
and ecclesiastical history at Utrecht, and died in
1718, There have been several editions of his work.
It is divided into three books: the first treats of
the names, situations, boundaries, divisions, rivers,
mountains, and plains of Palestine; the second,
of the distances of the principal places; and the
third, of the cities and villages. His diligence in
amassing information is very great. Maps, tables,
and engravings of coins, eurich the work. It
is reprinted in the sixth volume of Ugolini’s
great work, Thesaurus Antig. Sacrarum. Much
valuable, accurate, and interesting information,
brought down to a recent date, may be found
in Kitto’s Pictorial History of Palestine, 1841.
Among the maps of Palestine the following
deserve special mention :—that of Montanus, in
his Antiquitates Juduica, 1572; La Palestine,
par d’Anville, 1784; Carte Physique et Poli-
tiqgue de la Syrie, yar C. Paultre, Paris, 1803;
Palastina, von Reichardt; Carte Topographique
de L£Lqupte et de plusicurs pays limitrophes,
terée pendant U Expédition de U Armée Frangaise,
construite par Jacotin. This author accompanied
Napoleon in his expedition to Egypt, in the ca-
pacity of geographical engineer. He was aided
by other oflicers of the army. Robinson says it
* is valuable only in the parts actually visited by
the French engineers, namely, along the coast as
far as to Akka, the region of Nazareth, and around
Mount Tabor. The other parts are worthless,
being apparently mere fancy sketches’ (Palest.
Pref. p. xi.). Karte von Syrien, von H. Berghaus,
Gotha, 1835; of which Raumer (Paldstina, 2nd


GEOGRAPHY. 733
edit. p. 18) speaks in favourable terms. The I"le-


-minated Atlas of Scripture Geography, by W.


Hughes, Lond. 1840, is a useful work. The stu-
dent would do well to consult the maps in Robin-
son's Palestine.

Among the original sources of our knowledge
of biblical geography stands first and chief the
Bible itself. The value of the Bible in this respect
is incomparable, and altogether peculiar, not only
because it contains the earliest authentic history
in the world, but Lecause its statements are more
minute and more accurate than can be fuund in
other ancient authorities, The testimony of
Oriental travellers on this point, whether direct
or indirect, is full and unanimous: The more
we have come to know, by actual inspection, of the
countries and places of which the Bible speaks,
the greater reason has there been found to repose
contidence in the particulars which it supplies;
and even to the present day the best itinerary
through the Holy Land is the Bible, when ex-
pounded and applied by the aid of the native
Aramezan population (Robinson's Palestine, In-
troduction). If preference is to be given to any par-
ticular parts of the holy volume, the Pentateuch,
Joshua, the Guspels, and the Acts deserve special
mention. In the New Testament, it is to some
extent a new world that is opened out before the
geographical student. Certainly, as might be
expected, many places found in the Old Testa-
ment are sought in vain in the New; while, on
the other hand, the New Testament mentions
many hills, streams, cities, and countries, not
presented in the Old. Ina similar way, places
which hold a high importance in the one sink or
disappear in the other.

The remarks which were made under the head
AnriquiTigs, in relation to the value of the
writings of Josephus, are equally applicable in
the subject now under consideration.

Among the profane writers, Herodotus mentions
Palestine, and probably Jerusalem, which he
names Cailytis (Herod. i. 105; ii. 106, 157, 159;
iii, 5, 62, 64, 91; iv. 39). Strabo (in the time
of Augustus) treats of Palestine in the sccond
chapter of his sixteenth book on Geography, min-
gling together much truth and much error.
Ptolemeus, who died 161 years after Christ,
treats of Palestine and the neighbouring countries
in chapters xv.-xvii. of his fifth book. Dion
Cassius relates the conquest of Palestine by
Pompey (xxvii. 15-17), the siege of Jerusalem
by Titus (Ixi, 4-7), the resturation of the temple
by Hadrian, and the insurrection of the Jews
under the same emperor (lix. 12-14). Of the
Roman writers, Pliny, in his Natural History
(v. 13-19), treats of Syria, including Palestine,
and supplies much useful information. Tacitus”
History, from the first to the thirteenth chapter of
the fifth book, also relates to our subject. He
lated both Jews and Christians (Anal. xv. 44),
and in consequence gave false colourings to much
of what he said relating to them (Hist. v. 3, 4; ii.
719; Annal. ii. 42; xii. 23). Some information
may also be found in Justin (xxxvi. 2), in Sue-
tonius (Atigustus, 93; Claudius, 25, 28; Vespa-
sian, 4, 5; Titus, 4, 5), in Pomponius Mela
(i. 2), and in Ammianus Marcellinus (xiv. 85
xxiii. 1). .

Annong the Fathers of the Church much service-
able knowtedge on the subject of Bibice geo-

oO


To GEOGRAPHY.


graphy may be found in the expository writings
ot Theodoret and Jerome. The most important
work, however, is Onomasticon urbium et locorum
sacra Scriptura, seu liber de locis Hebraicis,
Grace primum ab Eusebio Cesariensi, deinde
Latine scriptus ab Hieronymo, opera J. Bon-
frerii, 1707. Living as they did for a Jong time
in Palestine, the writings both of Eusebius and
Jerome possess peculiar value, which, however,
grows less as the times of which they speak recede
from their own.

Some Arabian writers are not without value.
We have Eudrisi, Geographia Nubiensis, Paris,
1619; also Abulfeda Jubula Syria, and his
Annales Muslemici. Schultens, in his Index
Geographicus in Vitam Saladini, Lugduni
Batav. 1732, has collected many observations of
Arabian authors on Palestine. See also Rosen-
miller, Handb, Bibl. Alter. i. 34; Ritter, Erd-
kunde, ii. 478.

Certain itineraries or travelling guides are also
of value as sources of information. These itine-
raries are of two kinds: 1. Itineraria scripta;
2. Itineraria picta. The last borrowed assist-
ance from the art of drawing, and seem to have
existed in earlier times under the Greek name of
alvat yewypagixds (Strabo, i. p. 7; Ptol. i. 6, 20),
orsimply wfvag (Strabo, ii. pp. 87, 90), or the Roman
designation of tabula (Cic. ad Att. vi. 2; Propert.
iv. 3. 35): sometimes also the Greek word, in
Latin letters, pinaz, was used (Cassiod. De Inst.
Div. 25). See Reinganum, Geschichte der Erd
und Lander abbildungen der Alten, Jena, 1839,
i, 32. The first class were a kind of guide-books
which were designed chiefly fur official purposes,
and gave, without any geographical remarks, the
names of places met with on certain roads, with
the distances, and the chief stopping places.
These are collected in P. Bertii Theatrum Geogr.
Vet. (Lugd. Bat. 1618), and in Vetera Roman.
Itineraria, curante P. Wesselingio (Amstelod.
1735). We may specify, as of most service, the
Itinerarium Hierosolymitanum seu Burdigo-
lense, which belongs to the fourth century. It
was made by a Christian, and gives the route
from Bordeaux to Jerusalem, and from Heraclea
through Rome to Milan, with some fuluess and
accuracy, mentioning the smaller intervening
places where horses were changed (mutationes) or
the night passed (mansiones), with a few scattered
historical notices, and, so far as Palestine and
Jerusalem are concerned, with pretty exact state-
ments as to the localities of sacred history. The
Itinerarium Antonini, which gives the routes
throngh all the provinces of the Roman empire,
has been ascribed to the emperor Antoninus him-
self; but, though it may have taken its rise under
his patronage, it must, in its actual state, be of
a later date, since it mentions places which did
not exist till a subsequent period. Extracts and
Specimens may be seen in Reland’s Palestina,
p- 422, &c., where also (p. 421) may be found a
specimen of the J/ineraria Picta, executed in cop-
per-plate. Of the Jtineraria Picta there is a
collection which, from its first possessor, Conrad
Peutiuger of Augsburg, is commonly called
Tabula Peutingeriana, and probably comes down
from the time of Alexander Severus, about a.p.
230. There is no original of it, but only a trust-
worthy transcript, made by a monk of the thir-
teenth century, on twelve fulio parchment leaves.


GEOGRAPHY.


These tables are a sort of rough chart or map,
describing to the eye distances and direction,
without regard to the shape or size of countries or
the geographical position of places.

Of the works which have appeared treating
directly or indirectly on the geography of Pales-
tine from the eighth century downwards, the list
is far tov long to be bere admitted, though many
of them must be regarded in the light of valuable
as well as original sources. The titles of a few
we shall give, referring the reader to the works
before specitied for fuller details :—Gesta Dei per
Francos, sive Orientalium Expeditionum et regns
Francorum Hierosolymitans Historia, 1611;
Voyages de Rabbi Benjamin fils de Jona de Tu-
déle, par Baratier, Amsterd. 1734; Elucidatio
Terre Sancta Historica, auctore F. Qnaresmio,
olim T. S. Presule, Antwerp, 1639; A Journey
from Aleppo to Jerusalem at Easter, 1697, by
Henry Maundrell, sixth edit. Oxf. 1740; T.
Shaw's Travels in Barbary and the Levant,
1738; R. Pococke’s Travels tn the East, 1743;
Voyages en Syrie et en Egypte, par Volney,
4th edit., 1807,—an interesting and accurate
work, notwithstanding the peculiar opinions of
the writer; Travels in various countries of Eu-
rope, Asia, and Africa, by E. D. Clarke, 4th edit.
Lond. 1815; Seetzen, in Zach's Monatlicher
Correspondenz, 1808: Burckhardt says of him
that he was the must indefatigable traveller that
ever visited Syria; Travels in Syria and the
Holy Land, by Burckhardt, Lond. 1822; Wade
Sahrten in Morgenlande, von O. T. von Richter,
Berlin, 1823; Travels in Palestine, by Buck-
ingham, Lond. 1821; Voyage de  Arabie Pétrée,
par Léon de Laborde, Paria, 1830.

With the publication of Robinson's Biblical
Researches in Palestine (London, 1841), a new
era in some sort may be said to have commenced
in Biblical geography. We do not allude to the
preparation of mind which the author carried into
the personal inquiries and observations which he
made in the Holy Land, nor to the accuracy with
which he both conducted and recorded his inves-
tigations, so much: as to the principle on which be
was, by the course of his researches, Jed to act,
and on the recognition of which bis valuable work
is constructed, namely, the preference which he
has wisely given to popular tradition, in regard to
localities and facts, over the monkish legends that
prevailed before his visit. He lays it down asa
general principle (i. 874) ¢ that all ecclesiastical
tradition respecting the ancient places in and
around Jerusalem and throughout Palestine is of
no value, except so far as it is supported by cir-
cumstances known to us trom the Scriptures or
from other contemporary history.” The effect of
superstition has been the creation and transmission
of a vast mass of false and legendary matter.
which has imposed on the credulity of successive
travellers. ‘ Even within the last two centuries,
so far as the convents and travellers in Palestine
are concerned, I fear the cause of Biblical geo-
graphy can hardly be said to have greatly ad-
vanced’ (Robin, Pref. p. ix.). ¢ But there is in
Palestine another kind of tradition with which
the monasteries have had nothing to do, and of
which they have apparently in every age known
little or nothing—I mean the preservation of the
ancient names of places among the common
people. This is truly a natural and native tra-


GERAH.


dition, not derived in any degree from the in-
fluence of foreign convents or masters, but drawn
in by the peasant with his mother’s milk, and
deeply seated in the genius of the Semitic lan-
guage ' (Robin. Palest. i. 376). After remarking
that Seetzen and Burckhardt had pointed out a
better course by seeking information among the
Arab peasautry, Robinson says he adopted two
principles in his examination of the Holy Land:
1. To avoid contact with the convents, to exa-
mine with the Scriptures in his hands, and to
apply for information solely to the native Arab
population; 2. To leave the beaten track, and
direct attention to the least visited portions of the
country (i. 377). Three periods of foreign tra-
dition have an influence in corrupting our
knowledge of the geography of Palestine. The
first falls about a.p. 3433, when the influence of
Constantine, Helena, and their like, gave rise to
much topographical falsehood. The Onomasticon
of Eusebius and the Jerusalem Itinerary are a
record and a specimen of this period. The
second is the age of the Crusades in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries; the tradition of which
is best registered in the tract of Brocardus about
a.pD. 1283. The third period occurs at the be-
ginning of the seventeenth century, when the
volumes of Quaresmius exhibit in full the state
of the tradition then current in the convents, the
= source from which most Enropean travellers

ve drawn their information. During these three
periods the light of truth gradually became dim,
and was at length ften quenched in darkness. The
Onomasticon, however, with all its defects and
wrong hypotheses, has yet preserved much of the
tradition of the common people, and contains
many names of places never since discovered,
though still existing; while the few pages of
Brocardus are worth more, in a raphical
respect, than the unwieldy folios of Quaresmius
(Robinson, Preface) —J. R. B.

GEPHEN (&umedos). [Vinz.]

GERAH (i173; Sept. d80Ads), the smallest
piece of money among the Hebrews. Twenty
made a shekel; one of them would therefore be
worth three halfpence, according to the present
value of silver (Exod. xxx. 13).

GERAR (173; Sept. Pepdp), a town and dis-
trict on the southerumost borders of Palestine,
in the country of the Philistines, and not far
fiom Gaza, It was visited by Abraham after
the destruction of Sodom (Gen. xx. 1), and by
Isaac when there was a dearth in the rest of
Canaan (Gen. xxvi. 1). The incidents of their
sojourn show that the district was very fertile. It
was the seat of the first Philistine kingdom we read
of, and gave name to it. The intercourse, differ-
ences, and alliances of the Hebrew fathers with the
king and people of Gerar form a very curious and
interesting portion of patriarchal history. It was
still an important place in later times, as we may
gather from 1 Chron. xiv. 13, 14. According to
tue ancient accounts Gerar lay in or near a valley,
which appears to be no other than the great Wady
Sheriah (or one of the branches of it), that
comes down from Beersheba; besides we kuow
that it was in the land of the Philistines, and that
it was not far from Beersheba when Isaac resided
there (Gen. xxvi. 1, 20,23; 26-33; comp. xx. 1).
The name continued to exist (perhaps as a matter


GERASA. 7155


of tradition) for several centuries after the Chris-
tianera. Eusebins and Jerome (Onomast. 8. v.
Gerar) place it twenty-five Roman miles south-
ward from Eleutheropolis; and Sozomen (Hist.
Eccles. vi. 32; ix. 17) reports that a large and
celebrated monastery stood there near a winter
torrent. The abbot Silvanus resided there to-
wards the end of the fourth century, and the name
of Marcion, bishop of Gerar, ap) among the
signatures of the council of Chalcetion in A.D.
451. The name seems to have been afterwards
lost, and Dr. Robinson was unable to discover
any traces of it in the locality; but it is to be
hoped that some ible remains of the convent
may hereafter assist in recovering the knowledge
of the site.

GERASA, now Jzerasu (not named in the
Bible), was in the Decapolis, and formed the eastern
boundary of Pera. It lay on elevated ground,
according to Ptolemy, in 68° 15/ = 31° 45/.
Its inhabitants were mostly heathen (Joseph. De
Bell. Jud. iii. 3.3; comp. iv. 9.1; ii, 18. 55
Antiq. xiii. 15.5). Origen speaks of it asa city of
Arabia (Tpaca rijs ApaBlas eerily wdAus), which
arose from the fact that it was a border city of
Perwa, and lay next to Arabia. After the Roman
conquests in the East, the country in which
Gerasa lies became one of their favourite colonies,
and ten principal cities were built on the east
of the Jordan, giving the name of Decapolis
to the land in which they stood. Gerasa was one,
but not the greatest of these. The place was
taken by storm hy Alexander Janneus, who was
actuated by a desire of gaining a large treasure
(Joseph. De Bell. Jud. i. 4. 8; Antig. viii. 2. 3).
Alexander died near it while besieging Regaba


(Antig. xv. 5). Before the place had time to
recover from this calamity, it was included
among the number of those cities which were
burnt by the enraged Jews in their vengeance on
the Syrians, and on the Roman power generally,
for the massacre of a number of their nation at
Caesarea (Joseph. De Bell. Jud. ii. 18. 1). A ter-
rible revenge was taken by other cities, but Gerasa
is houourably excepted (De Bell. Jud. ii. 18. 5).
Annius, general under Vespasian, took the city;
‘after which he set fire to their houses,’ ‘and what
was remaining was all burnt down’ (De Bell.
Jud. iy. 9. 1). Gibbon enumerates this city
among the line of fortresses from Bosra to Petra,
which formed the frontier of the a Lane
c


756 GERSHOM.


in the lower empire. Baldwin II. of Jerusalem
destroyed its castle in the year 1122 (Will. Tyr.
p. 825; Histor. Hierosol. p. 615). This was the
native place of Nicomachus Gerasenus. Coins of
Gerasa may be seen in Eckhel (Nem. Vet. iii. 350).
Its ruins were first discovered by Seetzen, and
have often been subsequently visited. They have
been pronounced superior to thuse of Palmyra.
On approaching Gerasa on the svuthern side,
Buckingham first saw a triumphal gateway,
nearly entire, which was of the Corinthian order.
Within this gateway, on the left, he observed a
fine naumachia for the exhibition of sea-tights,
the channels fur filling which with water were
still visible. Corn was growing near it. Passing
on amid heaps of ruined fragments, he came to a
second gateway. Entering the city through this
its southern gate, he came into a large and beau-
tiful circular colonnade of the lonic order, having
ee a@ peripteral temple, above which on the
eft was an open theatre. A long averme of
columns of the Corinthian order, led through the
whole length of the city. Climbing over huge
masses of fallen columns and masonry, he noticed
four columns on each side of the way of much
greater size and height than the rest. Beyond
this he came to a square, apparently once lined
on both sides by an avenue of columns. He
afterwards came to a portion of a semi-circular
temple. A broken altar was near the ruins, on


which was made out the nume of Marcus Au- |


relius. Beyond this again were temples, colon-
nades, theatres, bridges, aqueducts, &c. These
remarks will give an idea of the magnificence of
these ruins, particularly when we add that the
northern exit is a mile apart from the southern
entrance. A necropolis lies not far from the
northern wall, in which were found nearly a
hundred sculptured sarcophagi above ground,
baving the appearance of having been ransacked
for treasure. Near the necropolis were the re-
mains of a small temple. The city stuod on the
facing slopes of two opposite hills, but, from the
neighbouring heights, it appears to be seated in
the hollow of a deep valley, encircled on all sides
by lofty and verdant mountains. Near this spot
is the modern village of Aioode. Some inscrip-
tions found on the ruins may be seen in Beck
ingham's Travels in Palestine, p. 405.—J. R. B.

GERGESENES. [Gapara.

GERIZIM, MOUNT. [Eat anp Geri-
zim.]

GERSHOM (DU. a stranger here; Pnpodu),
one of the two sons (the other was Eliezer) who were
born to Moses in the land of Midian by Zipporah
(Exod. ii. 22; xviii. 4). These sons of the great
lawgiver held no other rank than that of simple
Levites, while the sons of their uncle Aaron
enjoyed all the privileges of the priesthood
(4 Chron. xxiii, 14). The glory of being the
children of such a father doubtless availed them
more than the highest dignities; but we must
nevertheless admire the rare disinterestedness of
Moses in making no public provision—as he
might so easily have done—tor his own children,

GERSHON (}10"}, banisher ; Sept. Pnpodv),
eldest son of the patriarch Levi, born in Canaan
before the guing down into Egypt. He is only
known from his name having been given to one
of the three great branches of the Levitical tribe.


GETHSEMANE.


The office of the Gershonites, during the marches
in the wilderness, was tu carry the vails and cure
tains of the tabernacle, and their place in the
camp was west of the tabernacle (Gen. xlvi. 11;
Exod. vi. 16; Num. iii. 17).

GESHEM (0), carcase ; Sept. Pnodu), one
of the enemies of the Jews under Nehemiah
(Neh. vi. 6). He was probably a Samaritan,
although on some account or other designated an
Arabian (Neh. ii. 19), and seems to have been
a subaltern officer at Jerusalem. He oppsed tie
designs of the Jewish governor, talking of them
as seditious, and turning them into ridicale.
Eventually he took part in the plots of Tobiah
against the life of Nehemiah (Neh. ii. 19; vi.
2-9), about B.c. 445.

GESHUR (WW); Sept. Pedcovp), a district of
Syria (2 Sam. xv. 8; 1 Chron. ii. 23), which ad-
joined, on the east side of the Jordan, the northern
border of the Hebrew territory, and lay between
Mount Hermon, Maachah, and Bashan (Deut.
iii, 13, 14; Josh. xii. 5). According to the
boundaries of the Holy Land, as detined by
Moses, Geshur would have formed part of it; but
in Josh. xiii. 2, 13, it isstated that the Isravlites
had expelled neither the Geshurites nor the Maa-
chathites, but dwelt together with them. That
the Hebrews did not afterwards permanently sub-
due Geshur appears from the circumstance that,
in David's time, this district had a king of its
own, called Talmai, whose dauzhter, Maacab,
was one of the wives of David (2 Sam. iii. 3).
She was the mother of Absalom, who touk reiuge
with his grandfather after the murder of Amuon,
and remained three years in Geshur (2 Sam. xitt.
37: xv. 8). The word Geshur signities a bridge,
and corresponds with the Arabic Jésr, and in the
same region where, according to the above data,
we must fix Geshur, between Mount Hermon and
the lake of Tiberias, there stil] exists an ancient
stove bridge over the upper Jordan, called Jist-
Beni-Jakub, or ‘the bridge of the childreu of
Jacob,’ ¢. e. the Israclites. (See a figure of this
bridge .in No. 176.) The ancient cummercial
route to and from Damascus and the East seems
to have lain in this direction in the most ancient
times (Gen. xxxvii. 25); and hence the proba-
bility that there was even then a bridge over the
river, which (in times when bridges were rare)
gave its name to the adjacent district.

GESHURITES, GESHURI; 1. The inha-
hitants of tbe above region (Gesnur]. 2 A
people in the sonth of Palestine, near the Philis-
tines (Josh. xiii. 2; 1 Sam. xxvii. 8).

GETHSEMANE (Fe@onuavy, seemingly from
the Hebrew Nj, press, and NPY’, oil, i.e. oue
press), the name of a small field. or garden, just
out of Jerusalem, over the brook Kidren, and at
the foot of the Mount of Olives. That which is
now pointed out as the garden in which our Lord
underwent his agony, occupies part of a level space
between the brook and the fuot of the Mount, and
corresponds well enough in situation and distance
withall the conditions which the narrative requires.
It is about fifty paces square, and is enclosed by
a wall of no great height, formed of rough lose
stones. Eight very ancient olive-trees now occupy
this enclosure, some of which are of very large
size, and all exhibit symptoms of decay clearly


GEZER.


denoting their great age. The garden belongs to
one of the monastic establishments, and much
care has been taken to preserve the old trees from
destruction. Several young trees have been
planted to supply the place of those which have
disappeared (Olin's Travels, ii. 115). Dr. Robin-
son remarks that there is nothing particular in
this plot to mark it as the garden of Gethsemane ;
for adjacent to it are many similar enclosures,
and many olive-trees equally old (Researches, i.
346). This, however, can be no ground for the
doubt as to its identity which this learned writer
sugyests; for it is elsewhere a matter of complaint
with him that the sites of Scriptural events are
not thus left in the simplicity of their natural
state, but are over-crowded with extraneous addi-
tions. Dr. Robinson admits the probability that
this is the site which Eusebius and Jerome had
in view ; and, as no other site is suggested as pre-
ferable, we may be content to receive the tradi-
tional indication.


GEZER (13; Sept. Pa(ép and Td(apa), for-
merly a royal city of the Canaanites, and situated
in what became the western part of the tribe of
Ephraim. The Canaanites were not expelled from
it at the conquest (Josh. x. 33; xvi. 5,10; Judy.
i. 29). It was, nevertheless, assigned to the Levites
(Josh, xxi. 21). In after times, having been, on
some occasion, destroyed by the Egyptians, it was
rebuilt by Solomon.


GIANTS. The English word is derived im-
mediately from the Latin gigas, which is only
Greek in Roman letters; and yiyas itself is, in all
likelihood, made up of ywéoba and yéa or yi,
thus signifying ‘the earth-born,'’ in allusion to
classical fable.

These beings of unusual height are found in
the early history of all nations, sometimes of a
purely human origin, but more frequently sup-
posed to have partaken also, in some way, of the
supernatural and the divine.

The Scriptural history is not without its giants.
The English word has several representatives in
the original Hebrew, a consecutive notice of
which will lead us to sketch the history of Bib-
lical giants.

1. In Gen. vi. 4, we have the first mention of
giants cordp3)— There were giants in the earth
in those days ; and also after that, when the sons
of God came in unto the daughters of men, and
they bare children to them, the same became
mighty men which were of old, men of renown.’
A sumewhat similar intercourse is made mention
of in the second verse of the same chapter—‘ the
sons of God saw the daughters of men that they
were fair, and they tuok them wives of all which
they chose.” Wellbeloved (in loc.) and others
translate and interpret the passage so as to make
it speak merely of + men of violence; men who
beat down, oppressed, and plundered the weak
and defenceless.’ Doubtless this is in agreement
with the meaning of the original word. But these
giants, as in other cases, would naturally be de
signated by adescriptive name, wnd great strength
is generally accompanied by violence and oppres-
sion. In our judgment the bearing of the passage
obviously favours the common notion of giants,
and that the rather because their origin is traced
to some unexplained connection with ‘ the sons of


GIANTS. ‘957


God,’ that is, with beings of high endowments, if
not of a superior nature.

2. In Gen. xiv. 5, we meet with a race termed -
Rephaim (D°ND%), as settled on the other side of
the Jordan, in Ashteroth-Karnaim, whom Che-
dorlaomer defeated. Of this race was Og, king
of Bashan, who alone remained, in the days of
Moses (Deut. iii. 10), of the remnant of the
Rephaim. A passage, which is obviously from
a later hand, goes on to say— Behold, his coffin
(see Michaelis, Dathe, Rosenmiiller) was a coffin
of iron; is it not in Rabbath of the children of
Ammon? nine cubits is its length and four cubits
its breadth, according to the cubit of a man,’ or
the natural length of the cubit (Cusir]. It does
not appear to us to be enough to say that Og was
“no doubt a man of unusual stature, but we can-
not decide with accuracy what his stature was
from the length of the iron coffin in which he was
placed ' (Wellbeloved, in loc.). Whatever theory
of explanation may be adopted, the writer of the
passage clearly intended to speak of Og as a
giant, and one of a race of giants (comp. Josh.
xii. 4; xiii. 12). This race gave their name to
a valley near Jerusalem, termed by the Seventy,
nN owas Tay titdywy. In Jub xxvi. 5, Rephaim
is rendered, in the common version, ‘ dead
things,’ to the entire loss of the force of the ori-
ginal. The Douay Bible gives the passage with
truth as well as spirit, making it obviously refer
to the old myth of the subjugation of the earth-
born by divine power :—! Behold, the gyantes
groan under the waters, and they that dwell with
them. Hell is naked before them, and there is no
covert to perdition.’

3. The Anakim ()3} °33 or DPY). In Num.
xiii, the spies sent by Moses before his army
to survey the promised land, report among other
things—‘ The people be strong that dwell in the
land; and, moreover, we saw the children of
Anak’ (ver. 28). This indirect mention of the
children of Anak shows that they were a well-
known gigantic race. In the 32nd and 33rd
verses the statement is enhanced,—‘ It is a land
that eateth up the inhabitants ; and all the people
that we saw in it are men of great stature. And
there we saw the giants, the suns of Anak which
came of the giants ; aud we were in our own sight
as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.’
However much of exaggeration fear may have
given to the description, the passage seems beyond
a doubt to show the writer's belief in a race of
giants (Deut. ix. 2). From Deut. ii. 10, it
appears that the size of the Anakim became pro-
verbial, and was used as a standard with which
to compare others. In the time of Moses they
dwelt in the environs of Hebron (Josh. xi. 22).
They cons'sted of three branches or clans—‘ Ahi-
man, Sheshai, and Talmai—the children of Anak’
(Num. xiii. 22). They were destroyed by Joshua .
(Josh. xi. 21) ¢ from the mountains, from He-
bron, from Debir, from Anah, and from all the
mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains
of Israel: Joshua destroyed them utterly with
their cities. There was none of the Anakim left
in the land of the children of Israel: only in
Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained’
(Judg. i. 20; Josh. xiv. 12).

4. From this remnant of the Anakim thus left
in Gath of, the Philistines, proceeded the famous
Goliath (1°93), 1 Sam. xvii. 4. ‘This giant is


768 ‘GIANTS.


said to have been in height six cubits and a span.
He challenged the army of Israel, and put the
soldiers in great alarm. The army of the Phi-
listines and that of Israel were, however, on the
_point of engaging, when David, the youngest son
of Jesse, came near, bringing, at the command of
his father, a supply of provisions to his three
eldest brothers, who had followed Saul to the
battle; and, becoming aware of the defiance
which bad been again just hurled at ¢ the armies
of the living God,’ he at once went and presented
himself as a champion to the king; was offered,
but refused, a coat of mail; and arming himself
solely with a sling, smote the Philistine in his
foreliead, so that le fell npon his face to the earth,
and was decapitated by David with his own
sword, A general victory ensued. ‘This achieve-
ment is ascribed to the divine aid (v. 46, 47).
In 2 Sam. xxi. 19, ‘ Goliath the Gittite, the staif
of whose spear was like a weaver’s (eam,’ is said
to have been slain by Elhanan, a chief in David's
army. This apparent contradiction the common
version tries to get over by inserting words to
make this Goliath the brother of him whom David
puttodeath. Winer (dHandwoorterd. 8. v. Goliath)
supposes that the former was a descendent of the
latter, bearing the same, perhaps a family name.
See, however, the parallel passaze in 1 Chron.
xx.5. Other giants of the Philistines are men-
tioned in the passage before cited, 2 Sain.
xxi. 16, sq., namely :—1. * Ishbi-henob, which
was of the sons of the giant, the weiglt of
whose spear weighed theee hundred shekels of
brass, he being girded with a new sword, thought
to have slain David; but Abishai, the son of
Zeruiah, succoured him. and smote the Philistine
and killed him.’ 2. Saph, which was of the sons
of the giant who was slain by Sibbechai. 3. A man
of great stature, that had on every hand six fingers
and on every foot six toes, four and twenty in
number, aud he also was born to the giant; and
when he detied Israel, Jonathan. the son of Shi-
meah, the brother of David, slew him.’ These
four were sons of the giant in Gath, that is, pro-
bably of the Goliath of Gath whom David lew
(1 Kings xx. 8; 2 Sam. xx, 22: 1 Sam. xvii. 4),

5. Another race is mentioned in Deut. ii. 10,
the Emim (DD'S), who dwelt in the country of
the Moabites. They are described as a people
§ great and many, and tall as the Anakims, which
were also accounted giants (Gen. xiv. 5).

6. The Zamzummim also (Dt) (Dent.
xxi. 20), whose home was in the land of Ammon
—‘that also was accounted a land of giants:
giants dwelt therein of old time, and the Am-
monites called them Zamzummims, a_ people
great and many, and tall as the Anakims; but
the Lord destroyed them befure them, and they
(the Israelites) succeeded them, and dwelt in

. their stead.’

From this enumeration it is clear that the
Scriptures tell of giants in the olden time, and of
races of giants; and that, though giants are men-
tioned as something singular and consequently as
comparatively rare, they appear to have heen,
relatively to the numbers of the population, of
frequent occurrence. Whatever deduction may
be.made for the influence of the passions in the
Rarratives which have passed under review; and
though it is true that more than cne passage bears
@aces of interpolation; yet there is evidence that


GIANTS.


Scriptural writers believed in giants and races of
giants as a reality.

That the primitive races of men greatly sur-
passed others in stature is an opinion which finds
ample spree in ancient authors generally ; and
at an early period and under favourable circum-
stances, individuals and even tribes may have
reached an unusual height and been of extraor-
dinary strength, But many things concur to
show that the size of the race did not differ ma-
terially from what it is at present. This is seen
in the remains of human beings found in tombs;
especially among the mummies of Egypt. To
the same effect is the size of ancient armour, as
well as architectural dimensions, and the mea-
sures of length which have been received from
autiquity. Ancient writers who are fyee from
the influence of fable, are found to give a coun-
current testimony. ‘Homer, when speaking of
a tine man, gives him four cubits in height and
one in breadth; Vitruvius fixes the usual
standard of a man at six Roman feet ; Aristotle's
adineasurement of Leds was six feet’ (SMillingen’s
Curiosities of Medical Experience, p. 14).

That great diversity as to height and size pre
vails in the human family, is well known. What
the precise limits may be within which nature has
worked in the formation of man, it would be dif-
ficult to determine. Tie account which Aristotle
and others have given both of pigmies and of
giants may be salely treated as fables. But the
inhabitants of northern latitudes are well huowu
to be below the ordinary standard, many of tem
scarcely exceeding four feet ; while in temperate
climates the height of the human race averazes
from four feet and a half to six feet; and in-
stances are not wanting of persons who measured
eight or nine feet. Some authors go so far as ten
and eighteen, but these assertions seem tu refer to
fossil bones erroneously attributed to man. Hum-
boldt says that the Guayaquilists measure six feet
and a half, and that the Payaguas are equally
tall, while the Caribbees of Cumana are distin-
guished by their almost gigantic size from all the
other nations he had met with inthe New World.
The Patagoniaus were stated by the Spanish
early navigators to measure seven feet four incties.
This account appears to be an exaggeration ; but
more recent travellers—such as Bougainville,
Byron, Wallis, Carteret, and Falkner—atlirm that
their height ranges from six to seven feet.

Cases of great individual height and strength
are not seldom found, though now and then they
have been much exaggerated. The tallest per
sons of whom we have u trustworthy recent did
not, according to Haller, exceed nine feet.
Schreber, who has collected the description of the
principal modern giants, found few above seven
feet and a half; although he mentions a Swedish
peasant of eight feet Swedish measure; and one
of the guards of the Duke of Brunswick was
eight feet six inches Dutch. One of the best
authenticated cases in modern times is that of
Parsons, who was by trade a blacksmith, and por-
ter at Court in the early part of the 18th century.
Hakewill (Apology, iii. 4, 3), Fuller (Worthtes,
Staffordshire), and Plott (Nat. Hist. Stafford,
viii. 50) concur substantially in their accounts
respecting him. He was seven feet two inches,
and, on the authority of Fuller, ‘ he was pro-
portionable in his parts, and had strength equal


GIBBETHON.


to his height, valour to his strength, temper to
his valour; so that he disdained to do an injury
to any single person. He would make nothing
to take two of the tallest yeomen of the guards
under his arms at once, and order them as he
pleased.’ We have in existence evidence of ex-
traordinary height in the case of O'Brien, who
was exhibited throughout England about the year
1784. His skeleton, preserved in the Museum of
*the Royal College of Surgeons in London, mea-
sures seven feet eleven inches in height. If we
allow two inches for the softer parts of the body,
his stature would be eight feet one inch. Other
instances of still greater height are on record
(see art. ‘Giant,’ in the Encyclopedia Metropoli-
tana) ; but sume are evidently fabulous, some are
insulliciently authenticated, and others bear ob-
vious signs of exaggeration. Nor, after all, is it of
much consequence to what height the human
frame may, in any individual case, have ex-
tended. ‘There have been monsters of all kinds ;
and height, without health, vigour, and cor-
responding strength, is only a form of monstrosity 5
not to say that there are certain physical condi-
tions of human existence wifich, it they do not
forbid a height so great as some have fabled of,
go far to deprive any very unusual size of even
ordinary strength,

The possibility of a race of giants cannot well
ée denied. There is a known tendency in the
human frame to perpetuate peculiarities which
have been once evolved. Why not extraordinary
© procerity’ as well as any other? In fact, the
propagation of stature, whether high or low, is a

heniomenon which we all gee presented daily

fure our own eyes. Tall parents give birth to
tall children, ‘The tallness is found to remain in
families ; and, doubtless, did not circumstances
jntervene to reduce the stature by intermarriage
with short persons, the unusual height would be
perpetuated in any given line. The inhabitants
of Potsdam, descended to a great extent from the
famous regiment of tall grenadiers which Fre-
derick of Prussia took so much pains to bring
together, are said to be still remarkable for exceed-
ing the average height. The family of Scaligers
appears to have been unusually tall.

It may also be to some extent admitted that,
in the early ages, men may have surpassed the
moderns in size and strength; so that Homer's
clot vav Bporol eiciy may even then have had
some ground, which has certainly since his time
not grown less. For there are tendencies in the
culture of a high civilization which, whatever they
do for the mind, can hardly fail to reduce the
size and lessen the strength of the body. It is
a law in physiology that the exercise of any part
or organ adds at once to its size, its vigour, and
its power. In early periods the corporeal frame
was in constant play, and in some states received
especial care; while with us the body is dwarfed
by comparative inactivity, as well as by insalu-
brious air and food. ‘The natural consequence is
a general diminution of physical strength, which,
by going on for ceuturies, cannot well do otherwise


than reduce the stature, aud iinpair the effective-


ness of the race.—J. R. B. 2


GIBBETHON (}iN3); Sept. PaBabdy), a
city of the Philistines, which was included in the
territories of the tribe of Dan (Josh. xix. 44), and


GIBEON. 69


was assigned to the Levites (Josh. xxi. 23). It
was still in the hands of the Philistines in the
time of Nadab, kiug of Israel, who besieged it, and
was slain under its walls by Baasha, one of his
own officers (1 Kings xx. 273 xvi. 15) Nothing
is known of its site,

GIBEAH (‘9333 Sept. Tafad). There were
several places of this name, which, as before re-
marked [Gua], is the feminine form of the word
Gibeah, and signifies @ Add. Without doubt all
the places so named were situated upon hills,

1. Gisean ov Bengamin is historically the
most important of the places bearing this name. It
is often mentioned in Scripture. It was the scene
of that abominable transaction which involved in
its consequences almost the entire extirpation of
the tribe of Benjamin (Judg. xix. 14, sq.). It
was the birth-place of Saul, and continued to be
his residence after he became king (1 Sam. x. 263
xi. 4; xv. 33; xxiii. 19; xxvi. 1); and here was
the sceue of Jonathan's romantic exploit against
the Philistines (1 Sam. xiv.). It was doubtless
on account of this its intimate connection with
Saul, that the Gibeonites hanged up here iis seven
descendants (2 Sam. xxi. 6). Jerome s}eaks of
Gibeah as, in his time, level with the ground
(Ep. 86, ad Eustoch.), and since then it dues not
appear to have been visited by travellers till re-
cently. Dr. Robinson, who made many valuable
observations in this neighbourhood, detected Gibeah
in the small and half-ruined village of Jeba, which
lies upon a low, conical, or rather round eminence,
on the broad ridge which shelves down towards
the Jordan valley, and spreads out below the vil-
lage in a fine sloping Te, The views of the
Dead Sea and the Jordan, and of the Eastern
mountains, are here very extensive. Among
the ruins some large hewn stones, indicating
antiquity, are occasionally seen. This place is
about five miles north by east from Jerusalem,

2. Giseau in the mountains of Judah (Josh.
xv. 57), which, under the name of Gabaatha,
Eusebius and Jerome place twelve Roman miles
from Eleutheropolis, and state that the grave of
the prophet Habakkuk was there to be seen. Dr.
Robinson (Researches, ii. 327) identifies it with
the village of Jebah, which stands upon an iso-
lated hill, in the midst of Wady-el-Musurr, about
ten miles south-west of Jerusalem.

3. Ginga in Mount Epbraim, called Gibeah
of Phineas, where the high-priest Eleazar, son of
Aaron, was buried by his sou Phinegs (Jush.
xxiv, 33). The Onomasticon makes it five
Roman miles from Gophna, on the road to Nea-
polis (Shechem); which was itself fifteen Roman
miles north of Jerusalem, Dr. Robinson finds it
in a narrow valley called Wady-el-Jib, the Geeb
of Maundrell, lying just midway on the road
between Jerusalem and Shechem.

GIBEON ()\P33 ; Sept. TaBady), a town cele-
brated in the Old Testament, but not mentioned
in the New. It was ‘a great city,’ as one of the
royal cities; and to its jurisdiction originally be-
longed Beeroth, Chepbirah, and Kirjath-jearim
(Josh. ix.17; x. 2). [is first mentioned in cone
nection with the deception practised by the ine
habitants upon Joshua, by which, although Car
paanites (Hivites), they induced the Jewish lealer
not only to make a league with them, and to
spare their lives and cities, but also, in their de-


100 GIBLITES,


fence, to make war upon the five kings by whom
they were besieged. It was in the great battle
which followed, that ‘the sun stvod still upon
Gibeon * (Josh. x. 12, 1-14). The place afterwards
fell to the lot of Benjamin, and hecame a Levitical
_ city (Josh. xviii. 25; xxi. 17), where the tabernacle
‘was set up for many years under David and Sulo-
mon (1 Chron. xvi. 39; xxi. 29; 2 Chron. i. as the
ark being at the same time at Jerusalem (2 Chron.
i. 4) It was here, as being the place of the altar,
that the young Solomon offered a thousand burnt-
offerings, and was rewarded by the vision which
left him the wisest of men (1 Kings iii. 4-15;
2 Chron, i. 3-13). This was the place where
Abner’s challenge to Joab brought defeat upon
himself, and death upon his brother Ashael (2 Sam.
ii, 12-32), and where Amasa was afterwards
slain by Joab (2 Sam. xx. 8-12). None of these
passages mark the site of Gibeon; but there are
indications of it in Josephus (De Bell. Jud. ii.
19. 1), who places it fifty stadia north-west from
Jerusalem; and in Jerome (Ep. 86, ad Lustoch.):
which leave little doubt that Gibeun is to be iden-
tified with the place which still bears the name of
EI-Jib ; for Jib, in Arabic, is merely a contraction
of the Hebrew Gibeon. The name Gadaon is in-
deed mentioned by writers of the time of the
Crusades, as existing at this spot, and among the
Arabs it then already bore the name of El-Jib,
under which it is mentioned by Bohaedinn (Vita
Saladin. p. 243). Afterwards it was over-
looked by most travellers till the last century,
when the attention of Pococke was again directed
to it.

EI-Jib is a moderately sized village, seated on
the summit of a hill, tive miles north by west from
Jerusalem. The houses stand very irregularly and
unevenly, sometimes almost above one another.
They seem to be chiefly rooms in old massive ruins,
which have fallen down in every direction. One
large building still remains, probably a former
castle or tower of strength. Towards the east the
ridge of the hill sinks a little, and here, a few rods
fron the village, just below the top of the ridge
towards the north, is a fine fountain of water. It
is iu a cave, excavated in and under the high
rock, 80 as tu form a hurge subterranean reservoir.
Not far below it, among olive-trees, are the re-
mains of an open reservoir, about one hundred and
twenty feet in length by one hundred in breadth.
It was doubtless designed to receive the supertlu-
Gus waters of the cavern, and there can be little
question but that this was‘ the Pool of Gibeon'
mentioned in 2 Sam. ii. 13; and, in the whole, we
find the ‘Great [or many] waters of Gibeon’ of
Jer. xli. 12.


GIBLITES (033; Sept. B/Baio), the in-
habitants of the city and district of Gebal in
Phe aicia, 34° 7 N, lat., 35° 42/ EF. long., on the
shore of the Mediterranean, under Mount Le
banon. ‘The land of the Giblites,” with ‘all
Lebanon,’ was assigned to the Isravlites by the
original appointment (Josh, xiii. 5); but it does
not seem that they ever possessed themselves of
it. The Giblites are denoted by the word ren-
dered ‘stone-squarers’ in 1 Kings v. 18; from
which it would seem that they were then sulject
to, or in close connection with, Tyre. It is
doubtful whether this Gebal, or the one in Edom,

_ is that mentioned in Ps, Ixxxiii. 7. But in


GIDEON.


Ezek. xxvii. 9, the Phoenician Giblites are dis-
tinctly mentioned as such, and preferably em-
ployed upon the shipping which formed the glory
and strength of Tyre.

Gebal was called Byblos by the Greeks, and
so the Septuagint has it here. It was an important
place, and celebrated for the birth aud worship of
Adonis, the Syrian Thammuz. Pliny and other
Roman’ authors call it Gabale (Hist. Nat
v. 20). The town still subsists under the name
of Jebail. It is seated ona rising ground near
the sea, at the foot of Lebanon, which here ap-
proaches close to the coast. It is walled on the
three sides towards the land, and open on the west
towards the sea, being perhaps about half a mile
in circuit. Within the wall, which seems of the
age of the Crusades, the chief building is an old
castle, which has received modern repairs, and is
now used as the abude of the agha or commandant.
There are three or four open and lofty buildings
belonging to the chief people of the place, a
mosque with a low minaret, and an old Maronite
church of good masonry ; but the houses generally
are of poor construction, aud nearly half the space
within the walls is occupied with the gardens of
the inhabitants. The population is estimated at
2000. (Maundrell's Journey, p. 45; Burckhardt's
Syria, p. 180; Buckingham’s Arab Tribes, p.
455.)


GIDEON (fi1}, destroyer; Sept. Petedr),
surnamed JgerusBaaL or JERUBBRsHETH, fifth
Judge in Israel, and the first of them whose his
tory is circumstantially narrated. He was the
son of Joash, of the tribe of Manasseh, and resided
at Opbrah in Gilead beyond the Jordan.

The Midianites, in conjunction with the Ama-
lekites and other nomade tribes, invaded the
country every year, at the season of produce, in
great numbers, with their Hocks and herds. They
plundered and trampled down the fields, the
vineyards, and the gardens; they seized the
cattle, and plundered man and house, rioting in
the country, after the manner which the Bedouin
Arabs practise at this day. After Israel had been
humbled by seven years of this treatment, the
Lord raised up a deliverer in the person of
Gideon. He was threshing com by stealth, for
fear of its being taken away by the Midianites,
when an angel of God appeared before him. and
thus saluted him :—‘The Lord is with thee, thou
mighty man of valour.” Gideon expressed some
doubt whether God was still with a people sub-
ject to such affliction, and was answered by the
most unexpected commission—‘ Go in this thy
might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hand
of the Midianites: have not I sent thee! Gideon
still urged, ‘ Wherewith shall I save Israel? Be-
hold my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am
the least in my father’s house.’ The ‘Where
with’ was answered by ‘ Surely I will be with
thee.’ He then demurred no more, but pressed
his hospitality apon the heavenly stranger, who,
however, ate not of what was set before him, but
directing Gideon to lay it out upon the rock as
upon an altar, it was consumed by a supernatural
tire, and the angel disappeared. Assured by this of
his 8ommission, Gideon proceeded at once to cast
down the local image and altar of Baal; and,
when the people would have avenged this insult
to their faloe god, their anger was averted through


GIDEON.


the address of his father, who, by dwelling on the
inability of Baal to avenge himself, more than
insinuated a doubt of his competency to protect
his followers. This was a favourite argument
among the Hebrews against idolatry. It occurs
often in the prophets, and was seldom urged upon
idolatrous Israelites without some effect upon their
consciences.

Gideon svon found occasion to act upon his
high commission. The allied invaders were en-
camped in the great plain of Jezreel or Esdraelon,
when he blew the trumpet, and thus gathered
round him a daily increasing host, the summons
to arms which it implied having been transmitted
through the northern tribes by special messengers.
The inquietude connected with great enterprises is
more sensibly felt some days before than at the
moment of action; and hence the two miraculous
signs which, on the two nights preceding the
march, were required and given as tukens of vic-
tory. The first night a fleece was laid out in the
middle of an open threshing-floor, and in the
morning it was quite wet, while the soll was dry
all around. The next night the wonder wus re-
versed, the soil being wet and the fleece perfectly
dry (Judy. vii.).

Encouraged by these divine testimonies, Gideon
commence his march, and advanced to the brook
Harod, in the valley of Jezreel. He was here at
the head of 32,060 men; but, lest so large a host
should assume the glory of the coming deliver-
ance, which of right belonged to Gud only, two
operations, remarkable bot! in motive and pro-
cedure, reduced this large host to a mere handful
of men. First, by divine direction, proclama-
tion was made that all the faint-hearted mi;sht
withdraw; and no fewer than 22,000 availed
themselves of the indulgence. The remaining
10,000 were still declared too numerous: they
were therefore all taken down to the brook, when
only those who lapped the water from their hands,
like active men in haste, were reserved for the
enterprise, while all those who lay down leisurely
to drink were excluded. The former numbered
no more than 300, and these were the appointed
vanquishers of the huge host which covered the
great plain (Judg. vii. 1-8).

The overheard relation of a dream, by which
Gideon was encouraged (Judg. vii. 9-14), and the
remarkable stratagem, with pitchers and torches,
by which he overcame (ver. 15-23), are well
known.

The routed Midianites fled towards the Jordan,
but were pursued with great slaughter, the coun-
try being now roused in pursuit of the flying
oppressor. ‘Lhe Ephraimites rendered good ser-
+ vice by seizing the lower fords of the Jordan, and
cutting off all who attempted escape in that di-
rection, while Gideon himself pursued beyond
the river those who escaped by the upper fords.
Gideon crossed the Jordan a little below where it
leaves the lake of Gennesareth, in pursuit of the
Midhanitish princes Zeba and Zalmunna. On
that side the river, however, his victory was not
believed or understood, and the people still trem-
bled at the very name of the Midianites. Hence
he could obtain no succour from the places which
be passed, and town after town refused to supply
even victuals to his fatigued and hungry, but
still stout-hearted troop. He denounced ven-
geance upun them, but postponed its execution


GIDEON. * 761


an his return : and when ee did return, with the
wo princes as his prisoners, he by no means spared
those towns which, like Buecath aud Penuel, had
added insult to injury (Judg. viii. 4-17).

In those days captives of distinction taken in
war were almost invariably slain. Zeba and
Zalmunna had made up their minds to this fate;
and yet it was Gideon’s intention to have spared
them, till he learned that they had put to death
his own brothers under the same circumstances;
upon which, as the avenger of their blood, he
led ‘a captives with his own hand (Judg. viii.

Among the fugitives taken by the Ephraimites
were two distinguished emirs of Midian, named
Oreb and Zeeby whom they put to death. They
took their heals over to Gideon, which amounted
to an acknowledgment of his leadership ; but still
the always haughty and jealous Ephraimites
were greatly annoyed that they had not in the
first instance been summoned to the fleld; and
serious consequences miglit have fullowed, but for
the tact of Gideon in speaking in a lowly spirit
of his own doings in comparison with theirs (Judg.
vii. 145 viii. 4).

Gideon having thus delivered Israel from the
most aftlictive tyranny to which they had been sub-
ject since they quitted Egypt, the grateful people,
and particularly the northern tribes, made him an
offer of the crown for himself and his sons. But
the hero was too well acquainted with his true
pesition, and with the principles of the theocra-
tical government, to accept this unguarded ofler:
*1 will not rule over you,’ he said, ‘ neither shal?
my son rule over you: JeHovan, he shall rule
over you.’ He would only accept the golden
ear-rings which the victors had taken from the ears
of their slaughtered foes [Ear-ninoas]; and a
cloth being spread out to receive them, the ad-
miring Israelites threw in, not only the car-rings,
but other ornaments of gold, including the chains
of the royal camels, and added the purple robes
which the slain monarchs had wom, being the
first indication of purple as a royal colour. The
ear-rings alone weighed 1700 shekels, equal to 74
pounds 4 ounces, and worth, at the present value
of gold, about 33002. With this ‘Gideon made
an ephod, and put it in his city, even in Opirah 5
and all Israel went thither a whoring after it;
which thing became a snare unto Gideon and to
his house.” An ephod, at least that of the high-
priest, was an outer garment like a sleeveless
tunic, to which was attached the oracular breast-
plate, composed of twelve precious stones set in
gold, and graven with the names of the twelve
tribes. Another plainer description of ephod was
worn by the common priests. The object of Gi-
deon in making an pli with his treasure is not
very clear. Some suppose that it was merely
designed as a trophy of Israel’s deliverance: if so,
it was a very strange one. It is more probable
that as Gideon had, on his being first called to his
high mission, been instructed to build an altar
and offer sacrifice at this very place, he conceived
himself authorized, if not required, to have there
a sacerdotal establishment— for at least the tribes
beyond the river—where sacritices might be re-
gularly offered. In this case the worship rendered
there was doubtless in honour of Jehovah, but
was still, however well intended, highly schisma-
tical and irregular. Even in his lifetime it must


.


762 ’ @IHON.


have had the effect of withdrawing the attention
of the people east of the Jordan from the Taber-
nacle at Shiluh, and thus so far tended to facili-
tate the step into actual idolatry, which was taken
soon after Gideon’s death, The probability of
this explanation is strengthened when we recollect
the schismatical sacerdotal establishments which
were formed by Micah on Mount Ephraim, and
by the Danites at Laish (Judg. xvii. 5-135 xviii.
29-31).

The remainder of Gideon's life was peaceable.
He had seventy sons by many wives, and died at
an advanced age, after he had ‘ruled Jsrael’
(principally the northern tribes and those Leyond
the river) for forty years: ».c. 1249 to 1209. He
is mentioned in the discourse of Samuel (1 Sam.
xii. 11), and his name occurs in Heb. xi. 32,
among those of the heroes of the faith.


1. GIHON (1793; Sept. Pay), a fountain near
Jerusalem. The place outside the city to which
the young Solomon was takeu to be anointed king,
was called Gihon, but its direction is not indi-
cated (1 Kings i. 33, 38). Subsequently King
Hezekiah ‘stopped the upper water-course [or
upper out-flow of the wateri| Gihon, and brought
it straight down to the west side of the city of David
(2 Chron, xxxii. 30; xxxiii. 14). ‘This was, per-
haps, on occasion of the approach of the Assyrian
army under Senaacherilb, when, to prevent the
besiegers from tiuding water, great numbers
of the people laboured with much diligence im
stopping the water of the fountains without the
city, und in particular of ‘the brook that ran
through the midst of the land’ (2 Chron, xxxii,
3,4). The author of the book of Sirach (xiviii. 17)
also states, that ¢ Hezekiah brought water into the
midst of the city; he dug with iron into the rock,
and built fountains for the waters.’ The fountain
of Gihon is also mentioned by Josephus. Fiom a
comparison of these passages the editor of the
Pictorial Bible (on 2 Chron, xxxii.) arrived at
the conclusion, since coufirmed by Dr. Robinson
(Researches, i. 313), that there existed ancicntly
a fountain of Gihou, on the west side of the city,
which was ‘stopped’ or covered over by Hezekiah,
and its waters brought by subterraneous channels
into the city. Before that time it would natu-
rally have flowed down through the valley of
Gihon, and probably formed the brook which was
stopped atthe same time. ‘The fountain may
have been stopped, and its waters thus secured
very easily by digzing deep and erecting over it
one or more vaulted subterranean chambers.
Something of the very same kind is still seen in
the fountains near Sulumon’s pools beyoud Beth-
lehem, where the water rises in subterranean cham-
bers, to which there is no access except down a
narrow shaft like a well. In this way the waters
of Gihon would be withdrawn from the enemy
and preserved in the city, in which they would
seem to have been distributed among various re-
servoirs and fountains.’ From all these circum.
stances there seems little room to doubt that an
open fountain, called ¢ the fountain of Gihon, did
anciently exist on the west of the city, the waters of
which may still continue to ow by subterranean
channels down to the ancient temple, aud perhaps
to Siluam. = This fountain was probably ear the
eae Upper Puol, in the valley west of Jerusa-
lem. This Upper Pool is a large tank, which is


GILEAD.


dry in summer, but in the rainy season becomes
full, when its waters are conducted by a small
rude aqueduct or channel to the vicinity of the
Jatia Gate, and so to the pool of Hezekiah within
the city. (Comp. Robinson's Researches, i. 392,


512-514.)
2. GIHON ; the name of one of the rivers of
Paradise. [Parapisx.]


GILBOA (25) ; Sept. reaBoug and PeaBud),
a mountain memorable fur the defeat of Saul by the
Philistines, where his three sons were slain, and
where he himself died by his own hand (1 Sam,
xxviii, 43 xxxi. 1-8; 2 Sam. i. 6-21). The cir-
cumstances of the narrative would alone suffice to
direct our attention to the mountains which bound
the great plain of Esdraelon on the south-east, and
are interposed between it and the Jordan valley.
Here there are a number of ridges, with a general
direction from north-west to south-east, separated
by valleys running in the same direction. The
largest of these valleys is the southernmost : it is a
broad deep plain about two miles and a half wide,
and leading direct into the Jordan valley. This
is supposed to be distinctively (for the plain of
Esdraelon is sometimes 80 called) the Valley of
Jezreel. The mountains which bound it on the
north appear to be those of Little Hermon ; and
the ight mountains which bound it on the
south undoubtedly form Mount Gilboa. There
is still, indeed, an inhabited village, in whose
ane of Jelbun that of Gilboa may be recog-
nised,


GILEAD ("Y)}; Sept. Paaads). 1. A group
of mountains connected with Lebanon by means
of Mount Hermon, It begins not far trom the
latter, and extends southward to the sources of
the brooks Jabbok aml Arnon, thus enclosing the
whole eastern part of the land beyond the Jordan
(Gen. xxxi. 21; Cant. iv. 1). According to Mi-
chaelis (Afos. Reché, i. 86), this mountain, which
gave its name to the country 60 called, must be
situated beyond the region sketched in our maps,
and somewhere about the Euphrates,

Some difficulty has arisen as to its real situa-
tion from Judg. vii. 3, where it would appear that
it lay on this side of the Jordan, in the plain of
Jezreel. There is, however, no need of altering
the reading of the text, as suggested by Le Clerc
and Michaelis, since it merely implies that all those
who should not‘feel inclined to prosecute the war
against the Midianites farther than the mountain
from which the latter had emerged, were at liberty
to return home.

2. (a) The name of a large district beyond the
Jordan, continually mentioned in the Scriptures in
contradistinction te, or apart from, Basiian (Deut.
iii, 135 Josh. xii, 5; xin. LL; xviik 13 2 Kings
x. 333 1 Chron. v. 16; Mic. vii. 14); though, to
judge from its geographical position (as given
Num. xxxii. 26; Dent. iii. 12), it must have
comprised the entire possessions of the two tribes of
Gad aud Reuben, and even the southern part of
Manasseh (Deut. iii. 13; Num. xxxii. 40; Josh.
xvii, 1-6). The cities Ramoth, Jabush, and
Jazer, are usually designated as lying in
Gilead.

This region was distinguished for its rich pas-
tures (Num. xxxii. 1) and aromatic simples; from
which Jatter different sorts of balsam were
pared—facts confirmed by modem traveilers


.


GILGAL.
eaten, Burckhardt, &c.), with the addition that


whole region is covered with groups of lime-
stone mountains, intersected by fertile valleys.

(6) The name of the whole eastern part of the
Jordan (Deut. xxxiv. 1; comp. 2 Kings x. 33;
Judg. xx. 1). ”

The name Gilead continued to be used, in a
general and geographical sense, even after the
exile (1 Macc. vy. etc.). Josephus (Antig. xiii.
13. 5) designates it as a part of Arabia, while its
special and topographical name was Perea.

3. A city of this name is apparently mentioned
Hos. vi. 8; so, at least, it is given in most of the
ancient and modern versions, though the meaning
may only be that Gilead is (like) a city full of
iniquity, t. e. a union of iniquitous a


1. GILGAL (5353; Sept. réayana), the place
where the Israelites formed their first encampment
in Palestine, and which continued for some time
to be their head-quarters while engaged ia the
conquest of the land (Josh. iv. 19, 20; ix. 6; x.
6, 7, &c.). It was here that they set up the
twelve stones which they took out of the bed
of the Jordan (iv. 19), which another head will
bring under consideration [Sronrs}]. Samuel
used to visit Gilgal in his annual circuit as a
judge; and here there was a school of the pro-
phets (1 Sam. vii. 16; 2 Kings iv. 38). There
is no notice of the place after the Captivity. In-
deed, it dues not seem that the name belonged at
first to a town, although Gilgal eventually became
an inhabited place. It appears to have been early
abandoned, and Josephus does not seem to men-
tion it as existing in his time. This writer places
it on the east border of Jericho, ten stadia from
that city, and fifty from the Jordan (Antiég. v. L,
4,11). From this it would seem to have been in
the vicinity of the present village of the pseudo-
Jericho, Riha, which is about the assigned dis-
tance from the river. No trace of the name or
site can now be discovered.

2. GILGAL, a place in the region of Dor,
whose king was subdued by Joshua (Josh. xii. 23).
The Gilgal of Neh. xii. 29, and 1 Macc, ix.
is probably the same as this; as well as the ancient
Galgala, which Eusebius and Jerome place six
Roman miles north of Antipatris. In this neigh-
bourhood there is still a village called Jiljuleh,
which probably remesents the ancient site.

GIRDLE. [Anner; Armour; Diess.}

GIRGASHITES waa > Sept. Tepyecaios),
one of the families of Canaan, who are supposed
to have been settled in that part of the country
which lay to the east of the Lake of Gennesareth.
This conclusion is founded on the identity be-
tween the word Tepyecasor, which the Septuagint
gives for Girgashites, and that by which Matthew
(viii. 28) indicates the land of the Gergesenes.
But as this last reading rests on a conjecture of
Origen, ou which little reliance is now placed
[Gapara], the conclusion drawn from it has no
weight, although the fact is possible on other
grounds. Indeed, the older reading, ‘Gerasenes,’
has sufficient resemblance to direct the attention
to the country beyond the Jordan.

The Girgashites are conjectured to have been a
part of the large family of the Hivites, as they
are omitted in nine out of ten places in which
the nations or families of Cauaan are mentioned,


GLASS. 163


while in the tenth they are mentioned, and the
Hivites omitted. Josephus states that nothing
but the name of the Girgashites remuined in his
time (Antig. i. 6.2). In the Jewish Commen-
taries of R. Nachman, and elsewhere, the Gis
gashites are described as having retired into
Africa, fearing the power of God ; and Procopius,
in his History of the Vandals, mentions an
ancient inscription in Mauritania Tingitana,
stating that the inhabitants bad fled thither from
the face of Joshua the son of Nun. The fact of
such a migration is not unlikely: but we bave
very serivus doubts respecting the inscription,
mentioned ouly by Procopius, which has atlurded
the groundwork of many wonderful conclusions ;
such, for instance, as that the American Indians
were descended from these expelled Canaanites.
The notion that the Girgashites did migrate seems
to have been founded on the circumstance that,
although they are included in the list of the
seven devoted nations either to be driven out or
destroyed by the Israelites (Gen. xv. 20, 213
Deut. vii. 1; Josh. iii. 10; xxiv.11), yet they are
omitted in the list of those to be utterly destroyed
(Deut. xx. 17), and are mentioned among those
with whom, contrary to the Divine decree, the
Israelites lived and intermarried (Judg. iii. 1-6).


GITTITES (°F3; Sept. PeGaior). inhabitants
or natives of Gath (Josh. xiii. 3). Obed-edom,
although a Levite, is called a Gittite (2 Sam.
vi. 10), possibly because he had been with David
when at Gath, but much more probably frum his
being a native of Gath-rimmon, which was a city
of the Levites. There seems no reason for ex-
tending this interpretation to Ittai (2 Sam. xv.
19), seeing that David expressly calls him ‘a
stranger’ (foreigner), and, what is more, ‘an
exile.” He was at the head of 600 men, who
were also Gittites, for they are called (ver. 22)
his ‘ brethren." They appear to lave formed a
foreign troop of experienced warriors, chielly from
Gath, in the pay and service of David ; which
they had perhaps entered in the first instance for
the sake of sharing in the booty obtainable in his
wars. We can conceive that the presence of such
a troop must have been useful to the king in
giving to the Hebrew army that organization and
discipline which it did not possess befure Lis time.
As uatives of Gath they were of course Philis-
tines, and the Philistines were beyond comparison
the best soldiers in Palestine; and although they
were nationally enemies of Israel, it is easy to
conceive various partial influences which might
have drawn a troop of them into the service of
the most renowned general and successful warrior
of their time, :

GITTITH, a word which occurs in the title
of Ps, viii. Ixxxi., Ixxxiv. [Psaims].

GLASS. according to Pliny (Hist. Nat. xxxvi.
26), was discovered by what is termed accident.
Some merchants kindled a fire on that part of the
coast of Phanicia which lies near Ptolemais, be-
tween the foot of Carmel and Tyre, at a spot where
the river Belus casts the fine sand which it brings
down ; but, as they were without the usual means
of suspending their cooking vessels, they em-

loyed for that purpose logs of nitre, their vessel
peing laden with that substance: the fire fusing
the nitre and the sand produced glass. The
Sidonians, in whose vicinity the discovery was


- 964 GLASS.


made, took it up, and having in process of time
carried the art to a high degree of excellence,
gained thereby both wealth and fame. Other
nations became their pupils; the Romans espe-
cially attained to very high skill in the art of
fusing, blowing, and colouring glass. Even glass
mirrors were invented by the Sidonians—etiam
specula excog'tarerant, This account of Pliny is
in snbstance corroborated by Strabo (xvi. 15), and
by Josephus (De Bel/, Jud. ii. 9). Yet, notwith-
standing this explicit statement, it was long de-
nied that the ancients were acquainted with glass
properly so called; nor did the denial entirely
disappear even when Pompeii offered evidences
of its want of foundation. Our knowledge of
Egypt has, however, set the matter at rest—show-
ing at the same time how careful men should be
in setting up mere abstract reasonings in opposi-
tion to the direct testimony of history. Wilkin-
gon, in his Ancient Egyptians (iii. 88, sq.), has
adduced the fullest evidence that glass was
known to and made by that ingenious people at
a very early period of their national existence.
Upward of 3500 years ago, in the reign of the
first Osirtasen, they appear to have practised the
art of blowing glass. The process is represented


327.


in the paintings of Beni Hassan, executed in the
reign of that monarch. In the same age images
of glazed pottery were common. Ornaments of
glass were made by them about 1500 yeuis B.c.;
fora bead of that date has been found, being of
the same specific gravity as that of our crown
glass. Many glass bottles, &c. have been met
with in the tombs, some of very remote antiquity.
Glass vases were used for holding wine as early
as the Exodus. Such was the skill of the Egy

tians in this manufacture, that they wicecsttilly
counterfeited the amethyst, and other precious
stones. Winckelmann is of opinion that glass was
employed more frequently in ancient than in
modern times. It was sometimes used by the
Egyptians even for coftins. They also employed
it, not only for drinking utensils and ornaments
of the person, but for Mosaic work, the figures of
deities, and sacred emblems, attaining to exqui-
site workmanship, and a surprising brilliancy of
colour. The art too of cutting glass was known
to them at the most remote periods; for which
purpose, as we learn from Pliny (Hist. Nat. xxxvii.
4), the diamond was used. That the ancients had
mirrors of glass is clear from the above cited words
of Pliny; but the mirrors found in Egypt are


.


GLASS,


made of mixed metal, chiefly copper. So ad-
mirably did the skill of the Egyptians succeed in
the composition of metals, that their mirrors were
susceptible of a polish which bas been but par-
tially revived at the present day. The mirror was
nearly round, having a handle of wood, stone, or
metal. The form varied with the taste of the
owner. The same kind of metal mirror was
used by the Israelites, who, doubtless, brought it
from Egypt. In Exod. xxxviii. 8, it is expressly
said that Moses ‘made the laver of brass of the
luoking-glasses (brazen mirrors) of the women."
It would be justitiable to suppose that the He
brews brought glass, and a knowledge how to
manufacture it, with them out of Egypt, were not
the evidence of histury so explicit that it was ac-
tually discovered and wrought at their own doors.
Whether it was used by them for mirrors is ano-
ther question. That glass, however, was known
to the Hebrews appears beyond a doubt. In Job
xxvii. 17, MYDIDP is believed to mean glass,
though it is rendered ‘crystal’ in the English
version; a substance, in W iner’s opinion (Hand-
worterbuch), signitied by 23, which occurs
in the ensuing verse, while the former is the
specific name fur glass. In the New Testament
the word employed is %aAos (compare Aristuph.
Nubes, 768). In Apoc. xxi. 18, we read ‘The
city was pure gold, like unto clear giass ;’ ver.
21, ‘ as it were transparent glass’ (compare c. iv.
6). ‘Molten glass ' also occurs in Job xxxvii. 18,
but the original 85, and its corresponding word
in Exod. xxxviii. 8, authorize the translation
‘mirror '—that is of some metal. Indeed Winer,
referring to Beckman (Beitr tige zur Gesch. der
Erfindung, iii. 319), expressly deuies that glass
murors were known till the thirteenth century—
adding that they are still seldom seen in the Kast.
Mirrors of polisied metal are those that are mostly
used, formed sumetimes into such shapes as may
serve for ornaments to the person. In the East
mirrors had a connection with the observances of
religion; females held them Lefore the images of
the goddesses, thereby manifesting their own hw
mility as servauts of the divinities, and betukening
the prevalence in private life of a similar custom
(Cuilimach., Hymn. in Padlad. 21; Senec. Ep.
95; Cyril, De Adorat. in Spir. ii. G4). That in
the New Testament a mirror is intended in James
i, 23, * beholding his natural face in a glass,’
appears certain; but the signification of the other
passage in which the word &corrpoy occurs, is
by no means so clear. If by Zécomtpow a metal
mirror is to be understood, the language employed
is not without difficulties. The preposition did,
‘through,’ is in such a case improper; ‘ face to
face’ presents an equally improper contrast, for
in a mirror ‘ face answers to face’ (Prov. xxvii.
19). So the general import of the passage seems
to require a medium, and an impertectly transpa-
rent medium, through which objects are beheld.
This is continned by the words éy aiviyuari, in
enigmas, that is, with the meaning hidden or
involved in outward coverings: in this state ob-
jects are seen mediately, not immediately (see the
passages quoted by Wetstein}; in the next the veil
will be removed, and we shall see them as they
are, as when two persons behold each other with
no substance intervening. Hence the rendering
in the common version appears not unsuitable,


and the statement of the Apostle corresponds with


GLEDE.


fact and experience ; for it is ohscurely, as through
a dim medium, that we see spiritua] objects.
What the precise 8ubstance was which the Apostle
thought of when he used the words it may not he
easy to determine. It could not well be ordinary
glass, for that was transparent. It may have
been the lapis specularis, or a kind of talc, of
which the ancients made their windows. This
opinion is confirmed by Schleusner, who says that
the Jews used a similar mode of expression to
describe a dim and impertect view of mental
objects (Schottgen. Hor. Heb. in loc.) See Mi-
chaelis, Hist. Vitvi ap. Heb. in ad. Comment.
Soc. Goetting. iv. 57; also Dr. Falconer on ‘the
knowledge of the Ancients respecting Glass,’ in
the ifemoirs of the Lit. and Phil. Soc. of Man-
chester, ii. 95.—J. R. B.


GLEDE (Deut. xiv. 13) is an obsolete name
for the common kite, adopted in our version for
FIN raah, or, as Gesenius thinks, NXT daah,
there being a slight mutation in the initial letter
of the word (comp. the parallel passage in
Lev. xi. 14). The Septuagint renders it by yi),
and the Vulgate by milvus. It has by some been
taken for Percnopterus, noticed under Racnax ;
and having there shown the ies referred to
Racham, in the uncertainty which here sree
insurmountable, we can have recourse only to
the very unsatisfactory inference that may be
drawn from the rout whence raah or daah may
be derived. LEtymologists agree to connect it
with velocity or rapidity of flight; and that
quality agrees perfectly with the Greek and Vul-
gate versions, for the kite has, in comparison with
its bulk, very long wings, and a forked tail ex-
tending beyond them. It is a species that rises
to a towering height, hangs apparently motionless
in the sky, and darts down with immense ve-
locity ; but the legs and claws being weak, it is


~
328. (Milvus Ater.]


cowardly, and feeds upon carrion, fish, insects,
mice, and small birds. About Cairo kites are
particularly abundant, mixing with the carrion
vultures in their wheeling flight, and coming in
numbers to the daily distribution of food awarded
them. But the question whether the kite of Eu-
rope and that of Egypt are the same species, is not
decided, though there is no want of scientific names
for both species found in the valley of the Nile; one
of which is certainly distinct from the European,
and the other, if not 0, is still a strongly marked
variety. We find it noticed in various stages of


GLORY. 5


plumage, as Milous Ictinus, Milous Etolius, Sa-
vigny ; Falco 4igyptiacus and Falco Furskahiit,
Gmel.; Falco cinereo-ferrugineus, Forskahl ;
Falco Arda, Savigny; provably, also, Falco
parasiticus, Lath. The bill of this species: is
dark; head and throat whitish, with brown
streaks; body above dark grey brown, pale fer-
ruginous below ; tail but slightly forked ; legs
yellow. It is found in hieroglyphic paintings,
coloured with sufficient accuracy not to be mis-
taken. The other species, which we figure above
as Milvus ater, is the black kite, Falco melanop-
terus, Daudin; Elanus Casius, Savigny; Falco
Souninensis, Lath.; Le Blac, Le Vaill., and
Kouhieh of the Arabs. It has the head, neck, and
back dark rusty grey; scapulars bordered with
rusty ; wing-coverts and primaries black, the last-
mentioned tipt with white; tail rusty grey above,
white Eenesiht 3 billdark; legs yellow. The man-
ners of both species are much the same: it is
likely that they are -equally abundant at Cairo,
and spread into Palestine. [Hawx.]—C. H. S.


GLORY, in the English Version, represents the
words T1239 and 36a. The Hebrew, from 129,
‘tobeheavy,’ is susceptible of the various analogical
meanings which are derived from its root, viz.
©to be hard,’ ‘ honoured,’ ‘ rich,’ &c. In Gen.
xxxi. 1, ‘ all this glory ;' Isa. x. 3, ‘ your glory ;’
Ixvi. 12, ‘the glory of the Gentiles,’ it means
wealth, abundance. Ps. lxxix. 9, ‘ the glory of
thy name,’ j.e. honour, reputation. Isa. xxxv. 2;
1x. 13, comp. x. 18, ‘ the glory of Lebanon,' i. e.
ornament. Isa, viii. 7, ‘the king of Assyria and
all his glory,’ is rendered by Lowth ‘and all his
Sorce.' In some passages it conveys the ideas of
the ancients respecting the bodily seat of certain
passions. Among others, they thought the ver
to be the seat of anger and love. Thus Horace
(Carm. i. 13. 4), describing jealous anger or
resentment—Fervens difficili bile tumet jecur,
—‘ My burning liver swells with angry bile’
(see notes of the Delphin edition. Comp. Persius,
Sat. v. 129; Juvenal, Sat. vi. 647). Thus Ps,
xvi. 9, * My heart is glad and’ 1135, literally,
6 my liver rejoiceth.’ Gen. xlix. 6, ‘ mine bonour’
is rendered by Sept. ra fward pov, ‘my liver.’
Lam. ii. 1], is literally rendered by our translators
‘ My liver is poured upon the earth,’ indicating
violent grief. * Tobe heavy’ is the primary mean-
ing of the root; hence t}33 means ‘ the liver,’
the Aeaviest of all the viscera; just as the lungs,
the lightest of all, are in our language called the
lights (Taylor's Heb. Concord.). In some in-
stances the literal rendering of the Hebrew idiom
in our version is attended with obscurity. 1 Sam.
ij, 8, ‘throne of glory’ is ‘a glorious throne.’
Ps, xxiv. 7, 8, ‘the king of glory ' is ‘the glorious
or majestic king.’ Ps. xxix. 3, ‘the God of
glory " is ‘the glorious God,’ and is so rendered in
the Prayer-book version. In the New Testament,
Luke ii. 9, ‘ the glory of the Lord shone,’ is an
extreme splendour (see also Acts vii. 2). In
1 Cor. ii. 8, ‘ Lord of glory ' is glorious or illus-
trious Lord.’ Rom. viii. 8, ‘ spirit of God’ and
‘ spirit of Christ,’ are ‘a ly and Christian
spirit, temper, or disposition.’ Remarkable events
are a well-known cause of the introduction of new
words or new senses of words. The appearances
of what is termed 11M 7123, ‘the glory of


Jehovah,’ Sept. 36a Kuplou, ‘ the Shechinah of the


106 GNAT.


Rabbins, so often referred to in the Old Testa-
ment, scem to have orizinated certain uses of the
word, in the sense of divht, and visible splendour,
and numerous applications of these senses among


the Hellenistic writers. It is first distinctly called +


by this term in Exod. xvi. 7. 10. It is described
as being like a bright fire (Exot. xxiv. 17), and as
attended with a cloud, Exod. xl. 34, 35. It is

robuble that the tradition of these phenomena
Influenced the representations of heathen poets,
who so often describe the appearances of the deities
as altended by a clond, with a brightness in it
(see Taubmann’s Notes on Virgil). It is believed
that the classical Greek writers never use Sdéa in
the seuse of liiht or splendour. The nearest in-
stance yet adduced is from Plutarch (Nicias,
tom. i. p. 538, 15), who speaks of TMAdtwvos
enxrAdupara Sdta, ‘the glory of Plato shining forth,’
It answers very frequently, in the Sept., to TI33
(Exod. xxiv. 17, 40; xxxiv. 35; Deut. v. 24, &.)
down to the Captivity. The following instances
are ollered of the Hellenistic uses, allusions, or
applications of the word, originated hy the events
above mentioned :— Matt. vi. 29, ‘Solomon in all
his glory ;" i.e. visible magniticence, as opposed to
the clothing, called ‘ array’ of the lilies 1 Cor.
xv. 41, ‘the glory, #. e. lustre, of the sun, moon,
and stars.’ Jesus is called, Heb. i. 3, dratyaocua
ris dens, ‘the effulgence of his (the Father's)
glory,’ an evident allusion to Ezek. x. 4. Rom.
1. 23, ‘ the glory of God’ is * the glorious form of
God.’ 2 Thes. i. 9, ‘ the presence of the Lord
and the glory of his power.’ 1 Tim. vi. 16,
‘dwelling in light.’ 1 Cor. xi. 7, ‘man is the
image and glory of God,’ metonym. that which
exhibits or reflects this glory, i.e. symbol, demon-
stration. Other events would also conduce to such
peculiar uses of the word as the shining of the face
of Moses (comp. Exod. xxxiv. 29; 2 Cor. iii.
7,8; iv. 6); the splendour attending the appear-
ance of angels, especially in later axes (Matt.
xxviii. 3, &c.); the transfiguration of Jesus, in
which it is said that Peter, James, and Jolin, saw
his glory (Luke ix. 32; comp. John i, 14; 2 Pet.
i.17, 19. See Macknight on Phil. iii, 21), And
since the appearances, &c. alluded to, are con-
nected with the Deity, the Saviour, angels, &c.,
the same word is also consistently adopted to
denote the participation in the glory and blessed-
ness of these beings which is reserved for the
faithful. Col. iii. 4, 6 appear with him in glory.
2 Cor. iv. 17, 18; 2 Thess, ii. 14, the obtaining
of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.” These
senses of the word originated in the events re-
corded in the Scriptures, and are consequently
contined to the writers of Scripture, or to those
writers who adopted their ideas and Janguaze,
For the ordinary senses and applications of the
word, reference must be made to the Biblical
Lexicons, as Robinson's, by Bloomfield; Park-
burst's, by H. J. Rose, &e.—J. F. D.

GNAT (kaévwh; Vulg. culex ; Order, diptera,
Linn., culicide, Latr.; occurs Matt. xxiii. 24),
The common gnat scarcely yields to any insect in
regard to the interesting facts which it presents to
the naturalist. The following outline will recall
the chief of them to the reader :—The boat-
shaped raft of eggs, which the parent gnat forms,
and leaves upon the water, so admirably con-
structed, that, though hollow, it neither becomes
filled with water, nor sinks even under the tore


GNAT.


rents of a thunder-shower; the aquatic Jarra,
breathing, head downwards, through its tufted
spiracle; its hook with which it seizes the ani-
malcules on which it feeds; the variations and
even reverses of structure it undergoes in the
pupa state, now swimming, head upcards, by
means of its tinlike tail, and breathing through
spiracles placed behind the head; the amazing
transformation it undergoes when raising its
shoulders out of the water, and upon the bursting
of the skin which had enveloped them, the perfect
tnsect emerges, its former covering now serving as
a life-boat during those few critical moments
while it disengages and trims its wings for dight,
and commences its existence a winged creature
in a new element, and instantly bezins to suck the
juices of animals or vegetables, while ¢ its shrill
horn its fearful ‘laram rings;’ the complicated
mechanism of its tube, which serves the purposes
both of lancet and cupping-glass, and of inserting
a fluid for jiquefying the blood, and making it
flow more freely. ‘The various organs, compre-
hended in so small a structure, excited the wonder
of Pliny (dist. Nat. xi. 2), and attracted the
notice of Socrates, as we learn trom his poetical
adversary Aristophanes (Nudes, 158); but the
further discoveries of the microscope raise cur
wonder into a still higher principle. What has
been said of the naturalist generally, is pecu-
liarly true of him when examining this subject
—dum studet, orat. ‘1 dare boldly affrm,’
says Swammerdam, ‘ that the incomprehensible
greatness of Deity manifests itself in these mye
terious operations in a particular manner, and
affords an opportunity of examining, as it were
with our senses, the Divine nature,” p. 2. 52.
The word cava seems to Le the generic term for
the gnat among the ancient Greek writers, under
which they included several species, as we use the
word ‘fly, and ¢ the tly 5 though they give distinet
names to some species, as the word oépdos, &e.
Rosenmiiller observes that the xdvewes of the
Greeks seem to be the ephemere of Linnzus
(apud Bochart, vol. iii. p. 444, £to., Leips, 1793-6).
Aristotle gives the name to a species whose larva
are bred in the lees of wine, which is then called
the culex vinarius (Hist. An. 5.19). Pliny also
refers tu various species of guats : ‘varia sunt culi-
eum genera’ (Hist. Nat. x1, 35). ‘ Alii ex ticis,
Jicarii dicti’? (ibid.). Alii ex aceto nascuntur®
(ibid.) ‘Sunt etiam qui vocantur mudiones. Alii
centring’ (xvii. 27). We ourselves recoynise se
veral kinds under the common name, as gall gnats,
horse, wheat, winter (see alsu Liun. Syst, Nat.
Diptera, Culex). Qur Saviour's allusion to the
gnat is a kind of proverb, either in use in bis time,
or invented by himself, * Blind guides, who strain
out a gnat, and swallow down | Solt, as we say] @
camel.’ He adopts the antithesis of the snalicst
insect to the laryest animal, and applies it to
those who are snperstitionsly anxious in avoiding
small fanlts, yet do not scruple te commit the
greatest sins. The typographical error, ‘strain at
a gnat,” first found its way into King James's
translation, 1611. It is * strain out * in the pre
vious translations. ‘The custom of filtering wine,
among the Jews, for this purpose, was founded on
the prohibition of ‘all flying, creeping things’
being used for food, excepting the sa/tatorti (Lev.
xi. 23). The custom seems alluded to by the
Sept., which, in Amos vi. 6, reads 3:vAlopevor


GNOSTICISM.


olvoy, ‘filtered wine’—a passage having a similar
scope. According to the Talmud, eating a gnat
incurred scourging or excommunication. It is
considered that the means adopted in ancient
times to avoid the molestation of gnats, originated
our English word canopy, from xwvereioy, a bed
with hangings of gauze to keep olf gnats, or the
gauze-net itself. It occurs in the Apocrypha
(Judith x. 21), and elsewhere. In such a litter
was Cleopatra carried to the battle of Actium
(Horace, Epod. ix. 11). A curious speculation
has lately been advanced respecting the use of
net-work, found in a passage in Herodotus, which
had heretofore baffled explanation. He says (ii.
96) that ‘the people living in the marshy parts
of Egypt sleep in lofty towers, to avoid the gnats,
but that they also reside near the marshes, substi-
tute a neé with which the man catches fish in the
day, and makes the fullowing use of it a¢ night :—
Around and over the bed he sleeps on he casts the
net, creeps under, and lays himself down. The
gnats, xevwres, which, even if he was to wrap
himself in a linen cloak when in bed, would bite
through all, do not so much a@s even try the net.
Now the use of retreating to ¢owers to avoid gnats
could be understood, because it is well known
that gnats never fly beyond @ certain height.
The modern Egyptians also sleep on the roof of
their houses for the same purpose. Wilkinson
(ii. 122) gives a drawing of an ancient Egyptian
house, with a tower rising above the terrace-roof.
Such an addition is also common in modern
houses (Shaw's /ravels, p. 214). But the efficacy
of the net-work has been rendered credible by a
statement of Mr. Spence to the Entomological
Society—that the house-/ly will not enter a window
across which a ne¢ or even lines of thread are
chawn (Transact. Entomolog. Soc. yol. i. p. 8,
&c., 1834). 1f the gnats have a similar vbjection,
then this may be regarded as an additional in-
stance of the accuracy of Herodotus, when he
relates things he actually observed, having been
elucidated by modern discoveries (Vorstius, De
Adagiis, N. T., p. 771, et. Fischer; Kirby and
Spence, Jntrod. to Entomology ; Baliani Spicileg. ;
Grief, Oraculum Christi contra percolantes culi-
cem, &c., Leips. 1749).—J. F. D.

GNOSTICISM. In the whole history of the
human mind there is not a more instructive
chapter, at once strange and sad, interesting to
our curiosity and mortifying to our pride, than
the history of Platonism sinking into Gnosticism,
or, in other words, of Greek philosophy merging
in Oriental mysticism; showing, on the one
hand, the decline and fall of philosophy, and, on
the other, the rise and progress of syncretism.
Perhaps, also, it is the most remarkable instance
en record, that out of the religions, moral, and
political, in one word, the intellectual corruption
which brings on the fall of great and mighty
nations (sv it doubtless was with Babylon and
Thebes, and so we know it to have been with
Athens and Rome), God's providence educes purer
principles and higher hopes for the nations and
people that rise out of their ashes. and who, if
they will be taught wisdom and principle, righte-
ousness and peace, by the errors and suflerings of
those who have preceded them, may rise to higher
destinies in the history of man’s conduct and
God's providence.

In the Bampton lectures of Dr. Edward Burton,


.


GNOSTICISM. 10%


late Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford,
Gnosticism is attributed principally to the writings
of Plato, as studied at Alexandria. Though the
wisdom of Exypt may have influenced the Greeks
and Romans thiough the mysticism of Pythagoras,
though the Oriental doctrines of Babylon may
have made their way amongst the Jews both of
Jerusalem and Alexandria by means of tee?
Cabbala and Talmuds, and though some sects
of declared Gnostics may have gone still more
directly to the metaphysical, or rather mystical,
genealogies of the Eastern Magi, still it is the
opinion of Dr. Burton that it was the Greek
writings of Plato which gave the extraordinary
impulse of their genius, and, if we may use the
word, of their fashion, to the Jost writings of the
Gnostics, as well as to those which remain to us
of Philo and Plotinus; in a word, that Platonist,
Philonist, and Gnostic, are but emanations at
different distances from the Gnosis of Plato,
though they have drawn so deeply from some
fountains from which Plato drew more sparingly,
and with far better taste, as to have muddied the
clearer stream, and darkened the purer light
which they derived primarily from the writings
of Plato.

The character, learning, and station of Dr.
Burton, the years of study he is known to have
devoted to this subject, the judicious moderation
with which be has spoken of. tie fathers, the
general fairness and ability with which he has
examined his authorities, the mass of valuable
information he has accumulated in his nates, and,
lastly, the ably reasoned theory which he has
brought forward in his lectures, entitle his opinions
on this subject to great attention, It is our pur-
pose, therefore, in our present article on Gnosti-
cism, as well as in the article upon the Logos,
which may be considered a continuation of the
subject, to give such a series of extracts from Dr.
Burton's lectures, with references to some of the
most valuable passages in his notes, as may bring
his opinions, and the facts on which he grounds
them, most fairly b: fore the reader, adding at the
close of each article such remarks as may have
occurred to us. We take this course, as it does
not seem quite honourable towards a great scholar
and divine to present his thoughts in our own
words (a3 Protessur Matter, in his clever and
agreeable work Histoire Critique du Gnosticisme,
appears to us to have practised a little too much
towards the learned and profound work of his
great countryman Beausolie); nor, Jastly, is it
wise in one who is seeking to establish truth to
diminish one jot or one tittle from a great autho-
rity. And, let us add, that a writer who has on
the whole been so fair to his fellow labourers, to
Beansobre, Mosheim, and Brucker, to Ireneus
and Ittigius, as Professor Burton has been in his
criticisms and acknowledgments, deserves himself
to be had in remembrance, and not to be obscured
HH the wuiks of those who have borrowed from

im.

Dr. Burton states the object of his course to be
* to consider the heresies which infested the church
in the lifetime of the apostles,’ that is, as he after-
wards shows, ‘during the first century of the
Christian era; for it seems certain that St. John
survived the rest of the apostles, and the death of
St. John, according to every account, very nearly
coincided with the commencement of the secoud


168 GNOSTICISM.


century.’ Respecting the probability of our find-
ing traces of heresies in the New Testament, Dr.
Burton remarks, ‘If false doctrines were disse-
minated in the church while the apostles were
alive, it is at least highly probable that they
would allude to them in their writings. He
then proceeds to quote texts which clearly prove
“the existence of heresies in the days of the
apostles themselves’ (1 Cor. xi. 19; Gal. v. 20;
Titus iii. 10; 1 John ii, 18,19; Coloss. ii. 8;
1 Tim. vi. 20, 21; Rev. ii. 6,15; 2 Tim. xvii. 18;
1 Tim. i. 19, 20; 2 Tim. i. 15; 3 John, ver. 9).
After tracing the term heresy through its succes-
sive meanings to the present times, he adds, ‘In
the course of these lectures I shall speak of the
heresies of the apostulic age in the sense which
was attached to the term by the early fathers; and
all that I wish to be remembered at present is,
that the term is not to be understood according to
modern ideas’ (i. e. as limited to heteroduxies
about the Trinity), ‘ but that an heretic is a man
who embraces any opinion concerning religion,
that opiniou not being in accordance with the
faith of the Gospel.’ Why heresies were allowed
to arise so early, and to spread their roots so deep
and wide, Professor Burtou presumes not to
answer; but he quotes 1 Cor. xi. 19 as pointing
ont one of the principal good effects to be produced
by sucha tal of the Christian's faith, Approach-
ing still nearer to his main subject, he adds, ¢ It
will appear in the course of these lectures, that
many persons who were called heretics in the first
and second centuries had little or nothing in
common with Christianity. They took such parts
of the Gospel as suited their views or struck their
fancy; but these rays of light they mixed up and
buried in such a chaos of absurdity, that the
apostles themselves would hardly have recognised
their own doctrines. Such were most of the
heresies in the lifetime of the apostles ; and when
we come to consider the state of philosophical
opinion at that period, we shall cease to wonder
that the fathers speak of so many heresies appear-
ing in the lifetime of the apostles.’

Having thus glanced at the peculiar character
of the heresies, or rather of the heresy, of which he
is about to give an account, Dr. Burton proceeds
to attribute its early prevalence, and the conse-
quent errors it introduced into the religion of so
many Christian converts, to the length of time
(fifteen years) which Dr. Burton states to have
elapsed between the conversion of St. Paul and his
first journeying and preaching in Cilicia, Phrygia,
Macedonia, Athens, and Corinth; during the lat-
ter part of which jouney, namely whilst he was
at Corinth, he appears to have written the earliest
of his Epistles—the first Epistle to the Thessalo-
nians. ‘It appears, therefore, that seventeen years
elapsed between the first promulyation of the Gus-
pel and the date of the earliest writing which has
come alow to us. Those Epistles from which
most evidence will be drawn concerning the early
heresies, were written several years later; and I
am speaking greatly within compass in saying,
that the accounts which we have of heresies in the
first ceutury, are taken frum ducuments which
were written twenty years after the first promulya-
tion of the Gospel. I have said that this fact is
not always borne in mind by persons who ar con-
sidering the events of the first century ; and yet
this period ia unquestionably the most important


GNOSTICISM.


which ever has occurred in the annals of man-
kind.” In a subsequent passage he remarks,
respecting the period in question, ‘If it had
not been for an incidental exyression of St.
Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians we should
never have known that he passed three years in
Arabia immediately after his conversion, nor that
fourteen more years elapsed before the end of his
first journey. Whether he passed the greater part
of this period in his native city, Tarsus, and what
was the nature of his occupation, we seek im vain
to learn. We could hardly conceive that the
chosen Apostle of the Gentiles would be inclined
or permitted to delay the great work to which be
had been called, nor would it be easy to imagine
that the other Apostles were idle in spreading that
Gospel which they bad been so solemnly ordered
to preach amongst all nations. The death of St.
James, and the imprisonment of St. Peter, by order
of Herod, prove that they were not idle, and that
the Gospel made its way. But still it was not
till fourteen years after our Lord’s ascension that
St. Paul travelled for the first time, and preached
the Gospel to the Gentiles. Nor is there any evi-
dence that during that period the otier Apostles
passed the contines of Jucza.’

Professur Burton proceeds as follows with his
very striking argument: ‘During the time when
we have supposed tlie Apostles 10 have confined
themselves to Judaea, the Guspel was making rapid
progress in several parts of the world. This is the
point to which I now wish to direct your atten-
tion, and particularly to the fact that this prozress
was without co-operation and control of the Apos
tles: which may itself be sufiicient to furnish a
reason for the appearance of so many heresies, and
for such strange coriuptions of Christianity in
those early times.” He then marks, by quota-
tions from the New Testament, the times and
places when and where the Gospel must have
Leen spread by those first converts whose accounts
of what they had heard and seen preceded by so
many years the journeyings and preachings of the
Apostles (John xii. 20, 21; Acts 11.9, 113 viii. 1;
xi. 19), and concludes with the following sum-
mary of his argument : ‘The Acts of the Apostles
leave St. Paul at Tarsus, in the third year atter
his conversion (Acts ix. 30); and ten years after-
wards we find him still at Tarsus, when Barnabas
went thither, aud brought him to Antioch. Du-
ring this period the Gospel was making its way in
many parts of the three quarters of the world,
though as yet none of the Apostles had travelled
beyond Judea: and when we come to consider
the state of philosophy at that time, and the fashion
which prevailed of catching at any thing new, and
of uniting discordant elements into fanciful sys
tems, we shall not be surprised to find the duc-
trines of the Gospel disguised and altered, and
that according to the language of that age many
new heresies were furmed.’

Professor Bunton closes this striking view of the
first progiess of the Gospel through the reports of
those who were not its authorized teachers, by
pointing out what must have been the eflect of such
a state of things in Rome, Corinth, and Galatia;
and then shows that the argument applies a
Jortiori to places which had not the teaching of
the Apostles to correct this evil till a later
time. ‘How much more,’ says he, ‘ must this
have been the case in places which the Apostle


GNOSTICISM.


did not visit so soon, and where, as in Rome, the
Gospel made its way for tive-and-twenty years,
with nothing but the zeal of individuals to spread
it, and subject to all the fancies which those indi-
viduals might adopt.’

The greatest danger to which Christianity under
such circumstances was exposed arose from that
great Gnostic Heresy, which was long the rival,
and too often the corrupter, of its purer doctrines.
Simon Magus is considered by Professor Burton
to have been the leader of that large division of
the Gnostics who attempted to unite Guosticism
with Christianity; and the learned professor has
attempted the somewhat difficult task of recon-
ciling with the truth, and with one another, the
strange accounts of this Heresiarch told hy the
Fathers. When we remember the obscure claims
of one Euphrates, surnamed Persicus, to be the
Father of Gnosticism, which have been advocated
by Musheim, it will appear most prohable in itself,
and most exculpatory of the Fathers, to consider
both these personages to have been regarded in
much the same light by some of the Fathers as
€olus and Dorus are now considered in the history


of the Greek tribes; and that their learned inge- °


nuity, not unmixed with something of the udium
Theologicum, was let loose from all restraints, not
so much against the real Simon of the Scriptures,
as against Magus, who also might have been
called Persicus. The other heresiarchs, Menan-
der and his disciples Basilides and Saturninus,
and afterwards Marcion and Valentinus, were in
their turn leaders of the great Gnostic heresy, to
which also Cerinthus belonged (to combat whose
opinions St. John is said to have written his
Gospel), as did the early sect of the Nicolaitans.
©When the reader of ecclesiastical history,’ con-
tinues Dr. Burton, ‘comes to the second century,
he finds it divided into schools, as numerously
and zealously attended as any which Greece or
Asia boast in their happiest days. He meets with
names totally unknown to him before, which ex-
cited as much sensation as those of Aristotle and
Plato. He hears of volumes having been written
in support of this new philosophy, not one of which
has survived to our own day. His classical re-
collections are roused by finding an intimate con-
nection between the doctrine of the Gnostics and
of Plato: he hears of Jews who made even their
exclusive creed bend to the new system: and what
interests him most is, that in every page he reads
of the baneful eflect which Guosticism had upon
Christianity, by adopting parts of the Gospel
scheme, but adopting them only to disguise and
deform them,’

The following extracts contain Professor Bur-
ton’s view of the Gnostic doctrines, with some
remarks on the sources from which they were
derived :—

‘In attempting to give an account of these
doctrines, I must bezin with observing, what we
siall see more plainly when we trace the causes
of Gnosticism, that it was not by any means a
new and distinct philosophy, but made up of se-
Jections from almost every system, Thus we find
in it the Platonic doctrine of ideas, and the notion
that every thing in this lower world has a celestial
and immaterial archetype. We find in it evident
traces of that mystical and cabbalistic jargon which,
after their return from captivity, deformed the re-
ligion of the Jews; and many Gnustica adopted


GNOSTICISM. 769


the Oriental notion of nwo independent co-eterndl
principles, the one the author of good, and the
other of evil. Lastly, we find the Gnostic theo-
logy full of ideas and terms which must have
been taken from the Gospel: and Jesus Christ,
under some formn or other, of Eon, emanation, or
incorporeal phantom, enters into all their systems,
ancl is the means of communicating to them that
knowledge which raised them above all other
mortals, and entitled them to their peculiar
name.’

©The genius and very soul of Gnosticism was
mystery: its end and object was to purify its
followers from the corruptions of matter, and to
raise them to a higher scale of being, suited only
to those who were to become perfect by knowledye.
We have a key to many parts of their system,
when we know that they held matter to be intrin-
sically evil, of which, consequently, God could
not be the author. Hence aruse their fundamental
tenet, that the Creator of the world, or Demiurgus,
was not the same with the supreme God, the
Author of good, and the Father of Christ. Their
system allowed some of them to call the Creator
God, but the title most usually given was Demi-
urgus. Those who embraced the doctrine of two
principles supposed the world to have been pro-
duced by the evil principle; and in most systems,
the Creator of the world, and not the Father of
Christ, was looked upon as the God of the Jews,
and the author of the Mosaic law. Some, again,
believed that angels were employed in creating
the world: but all were agreed in maintaining
that matter itself was not created; that it was
eternal ; and that it remained inactive till the
world was formed out of it by the Creator.’

© The supreme God, according to the Gnostics,
had dwelt from all eternity in a pleroma of inac-
cessible light; and beside the name of first Father,
or first Principle, they called him also Bythos, as
if to denote the unfathomable nature of his per-
fections. This Being, by an operation purely
mental, or by acting upon himself, produced two
other beings of different sexes, from whom by a
series of descents, more or less numerous accord-
ing tq different schemes, several pairs of beings
were formed, who were called @ons, from the
periods of their existence before time was, or
emanations, from the mode of their production.
These successive ons or emanations appear to
have been inferior each to the preceding ; and
their existence was indispensable to the Gnostic
scheme, that they might account for the creation
of the world without making Ged the author of
evil. These wous lived through countless ages
with their first Father. But the system of emana-
tions seems to have resembled that of conceritric
circles, and they gradually deteriorated as they
approached nearer and nearer to the extremity of
the pleroma. Beyond this pleroma was matter,
inert and powerless, though cc-eternal with the
supreme God, and, like him, without beginning,
At length one of the wons passed the limits of
the pleroma, and, meeting with matter, created
the world after the form and model of an ideal
world, which existed in the pleroma, or the mind
of the supreme God.’

“Here it is that inconsistency is added to ab-
surdity in the Gnostic scheme. For, let the inter-
mediate wons be as many as the wildest imagina-
tion could devise, still God was the meniolss if not

D


hg) GNOSTICISM.


tee proximate cause of creation. Added to which,
we are to suppose that the Demiurgus formed the
world without the knowledge of God, and that,
having formed it, he rebelled against him. Here
again we find a strong resemblance to the Oriental
doctrine of two principles, good and evil, or light
and darkness. The two principles were always
at enmity with each other. God must have been
conceived to be more powerful than matter, or an
emanation from God could not have shaped or
moulded it into form: yet God was not able to
reduce matter to its primeval chaos, nor to destroy
the evil which the Demiurgus had produced,
What God could not prevent he was always en-
deavouring to cure: and here it is that the Gnos-
tics borrowed so largely from the Christian scheme.
The names, indeed, of several of their wens were
evidently taken from terms wiich they found in
the Gospel. Thus we meet with Logus, Monogenes,
Zoe, Ecclesia, all of them successive emanations
from the supreme God, and all dwelling in the

leroma. At length we meet with Christ and the

oly Ghost, as two of the last mons which were
put forth. Christ was sent into the world to re-
medy the evil which the creative aon, or De--
miurgus, had caused. He was to emancipate
men from the tyranny of matter, or the evil prin-
ciple; and by revealing to them the true God,
who was hitherto unknown, to tit them, by a per-
fection and sublimity of knowledge, to enter the
divine pleroma. To give this knowledge was the
end and object of Christ's coming upon earth:
and hence the inventors and believers of the doc-
trine assumed tu themselves the name of Gnostics.’

It was in agreement with the Gnostic doctrine
of the utter malignity of matter, which Professor
Burton considers the very corner-stone of the
Gnostic system (both as to the knowledge of
divine things to which they pretended, and as to
the morality, or, to speak more correctly, the
mortification, which they inculcated), that the
different Gnostic sects ‘ either denied that Christ
had a real body at all, and held that he was an
unsubstantial phantom ; or granting that there
was a man called Jesus, the son of human parents,
they believed that one of the eons, called Christ,
quitted the pleroma and descended upon Jesus at
his baptism.’

It was upon this belief of the utter malignity of
matter, on the one hand, and upon the elevating
nature of the divine knowledge to which they
pretended, on the other, that the morality of
Gnosticism, if it deserves to be so called, was
founded. ‘If we would know the ellect which
the doctrines of the Gnostics had upon their moral
conduct, we shall find that the same principle led
to two very opposite results. Though the Fathers
may have exaggerated the errors of their opponents,
it seems undeniable that many Gnostics Ved pto-
flizate lives, and maintained upon principle that
such conduct was not unlawful. Others, again,
are represented as practising great austerities, and
endeavouring by every means to mortify the body
and its sensual appetites. Both parties were
actuated by the same common notion, that matter
is inherently evil. The one thought that the body,
which is compounded of matter, ought to be kept
in subjection, and hence they inculcated self-
denial and the practice of maral virtue’ [if the
learned professor had said that they thought the
body ought to be mortified, and for that purpuse


‘ @NOSTICISM.


inculeated a system of asceticism, we think he
would have been more currect]; while others,
who had persuaded themselves that knowledge
was every thing, despised the distinctions of the
moral law, which was given, as they said, not by
the ee God, but by an inferior son, or a
principle of evil, who had allied himself to
matter.’ :

Professor Burton gives a brief and clear sum-
mary of the Gnostic doctrines in the following
passage, which well deserves to be retained in the
memory :— The system was stated to have begun
with Simon Magus; by which I would under-
stand that the system of uniting Christianity
with Gnosticism began with that heretic ; for the
seeds of Gnosticism, as we shall see presently,
had been suwn long before. What Simon Magus
began was brouylt to perfection by Waleutunus,
who came to Rome in the former part of the
second century ; and what we know of Gnosticism
is taken principally from writers who oppcsed
Valentinus. Contemporary with him there were
many other Gnostic leaders, who held different
opinions; but in the sketch which I have given,
Thave endeavoured to explain those principles
which, under certain modifications, were common
to all the Gnostics. That the supreme God, ar
the Good Principle, was not the creator of the
world, but that it was created by an evil, or at
least an inferior heing; that God produced from
himself a succession of sons or emanations, who
dwell with him in the Pleroma; that one of these
mons was Clirist, who came upon earth to reveal
the knowledge of the true God; that he was uot
incarnate, but either assumed an unsubstantial
body, or descended upon Jesus at his baptism;
that the God of the Old Testament was not the
father of Jesus Christ; that there was no resur-
rection or final judgiment. This is an outline of
the Gnostic ductrines as acknowledged by nearly
all of them.’

Of the erroneous and mischievous nature of the
Gnostic doctrines, and of tue ¢ opposition of
science, falsely so called,’ to the doctrines of
Christianity, we shall have to speak presently.
For the present, we must confine ourselves to the
historical pation of this curivus and importaut
subject, that is, to a statement of the facts of
Gnosticism as given in the lectures of the Regius
Professor.

Having given the above admirable outline
of the great leading doctrines of tie Gnostic
heresy, or, rather, of the Gnostic schoul, he next
proceeds to trace up Gnosticism itself to the
three sources whicl we briefly indicated at the
beginning of this article, to wit, the Oriental doe
trines of the Magi of Babylon, or the belief in
two principles, the causes of good and evil; se-
condly, the Cabbala of the Jewish doctors, who
from the time of the captivity in Babylon had
blended much of the Oriental doctrines with the
Mosaic law, namely, in that traditional wisdom,
an« secret doctrine, and mystical interpretation
which they pretended to have received; and,
lastly, the philosophy of Plato (including that of
his followers, Greek and Alexandrian, Jewish and
Oriental)—that popular philosophy, in which
Plato, following Pythagoras and deserting So-
crates, set an example of blending philosophy with
theosophy, which ended in merging the Puilo-
sophy of Greece in the Mysticism of the East


¥


GNOSTICISM.


We proceed to give Dr. Burton's very clear and
striking history of Gnosticism (or, in other words,
of eclecticism and syncretism, that is, of selecting
Opinions and uniting them together), in his own
words,

* Some persons,’ says he, ‘ have deduced Gnos-
ticism from the Easteru notiun of a good and
evil principle; some from the Jewish Cabbala,
and others from the doctrines of the later Pla-
tonista. Each of these systems is able to support
itself by alleging very strong resemblances; and
those persuns have taken the most natural and
probably the truest course, who have concluded
that all these opinions contributed to build up
the monstrous system which was known by the
name of Gnosticism.’

* We will begin with considering that which
undoubtedly was the oldest of the three, the
Eastern doctrine of a good and evil principle.
There is no fact cunnected with remote antiquity,
which seems more certainly established, than that
the Persian religion recognised two beings or
principles, which, in some way or other, exercised
an intluence over the world and its inhabitants.
To one they gave the name of Ormuad, and in-
vested him with the attributes of light and bene-
ticence: the other they called Ahreman, and
identified him with the notions of darkness and
malignity. It has often been disputed, whether
these two principles were considered as selt-
existing co-eternal gods, or whether they were
subject to a third and superior power. Plutarch
evidently considered that both of them had a
beginning, and that one of them at least world
come toan end; for he says that Ormuzd took
its rise from light, and Alreman from darkness ;
bo that light and darkness must have existed be-
fore them: he adds, that the time would come
when Ahreman would be destroyed, and an age
of pure unmixed happiness would commence.’
§Upon the whole,’ adds Prafessor Burton, * I can-
not but consider that those persons have taken a
right view of this intricate subject, who represent
the Persians as having been always worshippers
of one supreme God.

‘It is true that the simplicity of their worship
was soou corrupted; and the heavenly bodies,
particularly the great source of light and heat,
became the object of adoration. It is undoubted
that the sun, under the name of Mithra, received
from them the highest honours; and it will solve
many difficulties, if we conceive, that as their
ideas became more gross, and the exteruals of re-
ligion occupied more of their attention, they came
at length to identify the sun with the one supreme
God. There is evidence that a difference of opi-
nion existed among the Magi upon this subject.
Some of them embraced what has been called the
duali-tic system, or the notion that both principles
were uncreated and eternal; while others cun-
tinued to maintain the ancient doctrine, either
that one principle was eternal, aud the other
created, or that both proceeded from one supreme,
self-existing source. This fundamental diflerence
of opinion, together with the idolatry which was
daily gaining ground, seems to have Jed to that
reformation of religion, which, it is agreed on all
hands, was eflected in Persia by Zoroaster.’ Dr.
Barton considers this reformation of religion to
have taken place in the reign of Darius Hystaspis.
‘ There may,’ he observes, ‘ have been an ideuti-


GNOSTICISM. TH


fication of Mithra, or the sun, with the first cause:
but to bring back his countrymen to an acknow-
ledgment of a first cause is worthy the praises
which have been bestowed on the name of Zo-
roaster ’ :

He further remarks, ‘ The Oriental writers are
fond of asserting that Zorvaster conversed with
the captive Jews, and borrowed from them many
of his ideas. The fact is perhaps chronologically
possible; and Zoroaster ray well have consulted
with the Jews, if it be true that the reform which
he introduced consisted in establishing the doc-
trine’ (Dr. Burton had before stated this to be a
return to the ancient doctrine of Persia], ‘ that
the two principles were subservient to a third, or
higher piinciple, by which they were originally
created,

Prolessor Burton proceeds to consider the second
source of Gnosticism, ‘the mystical philosophy of
the Jews, which has been known by the name
Cabbala ;* and he tells us that ‘the Jewish cab-
bala may be lousely defined to be a mystical
system, affecting the theory and practice of
religion, founded upon oral tradition.’ Farther
on, in the third lecture, he gives the following
account of the origin of the cabbala, and of the
spirit in which it was composed. ‘ That efra-
ordinary and infatuated people’ [he is speakin
of the Jewish tendency to go after strange rie
‘ were from the earliest times inclined to engra'
foreign superstitions upon their national worship ;
and when their idolatries at length caused t
Almighty to destroy their city and send them
captives to Babylon, they came in contact with a
new system of superstition, different from that of .
Egypt or Canaan, which had before ensnared
them. The Jews, who returned from Babylon at
the end of their captivity, would be sure to bring
with them some of the rites and customs of the
people whom they had left: but they also found
the evil already waiting for them at their doors.
The mixed people who settled in Samaria, when
Shalmeneser hal depopulated it, set up a variety
of idolatries, and joined them to the worship of the
God of the Jews (2 Kings xvii. 24-34). Most of
the idolaters were from the nations beyond the
Euptrates ; and this heterogeneous mixture of
cieeds continued in the country when the Jews
returned from captivity. We kuow from Scrip-
ture, that of those who were the first to retum,
many formed marriages with the people of tne
netshbourbood (Ezra ix, 2); and the zeal with
which Ezia endeavotwed to prevent this intere
course showed that be considered the religion of
his country to be in danger. We learn also from
Josephus, that many Jews contiumed to live in
the countries beyond the Euphrates ; he speaks of
them as many myriads; and he shows in several
places that they kept up an intercourse with their
countrymen at Jerusalem; they attended the fes-
tivals; they paid the didrachma to the temple,
and sent their pedigrees to be registered at Jeru-
salem: all which shows that a constant comma-
nication was kept up between the Jews and those
Eastern nations, where the religion of the Magi
had lately been reformed by Zoroaster. In one
sense the Jews had greatly protited by their cap-
tivity in Babylon; and we read no more of the
whole nation falling into idolatry. The Persians,
indeed, were not idolaters ; and it was from them
that the greatest eflect was produced apa the

3D


712 GNOSTICISM.


apinions of the Jews. It seems certain that their
notions concerning angels received a considerable
-incture trom those of the Persians : and the three
principal sects of Pharisees, Sadducees, and
Essenes, show how far religious differences were
allowed among them, and yet the unity of the
faith was considered to be maintained. The Cab-
hala contains many doctrines concerning angels,
and other mystical points, which can only have
come from an Eastern quarter: and the secondary,
or allegorical interpretation of Scripture. with
which the Cabbala abounds, began soun after the
return from the captivity.’

Dr. Burton gives rather too slight a sketch of
the principles of the Cabbala, and remarks on its
resemblance to those of the Gnostics: ¢ They,’ the
Cabbalists, ‘did not hold the eternity of matter
with the Greeks ; nor, with the Persians, had they
recourse to two opposite principles: they cut the
knot which they could not sulve; and they tanght
that God being a spirit, who pervaded all space,
the universe also was not material, but spiritual,
and proceeded by emanation from God. The first
emanation was called in their languave the first
man, or the tirst begotten of God : and he was
made the medinm of producing nine other ema-
natifms, or sephiroth, from which the universe was
formed. All this is highly mystical; and it is
melancholy to see how the human mind can fall
when it attempts the highest flights. Imperfectly
as I have Gescribed the system of the Cabbalists,
it will be seen that it bears no small resemblance
to that of the Gnostics, who interposed several
wons or emanations between the supreme God
and the creation of the world.’ Respecting the
secondary and mystical interpretation of the
Scriptures introduced by the Cabbalists, and
carried so much farther by the Gnostics, he
says: * With the Gnostics, to interpret Scripture
literally was the exception ; and they only did it
when it suited their purpose: their rule was to
extort a hidden meaning frum every passage, and
to makesvevery word, and almost every letter,
contain a mystical allusion. ‘There undoubtedly
was a Cabbala, or secret doctrine, among the Jews,
before we hear anything of the Gnostic philosophy :
the Jatter, therefure, could not have contributed to
produce the former.’

It will be obvious from the above statements
that the Gnostics were as much indebted to the
Cabbala, as the Cabbala had heen to the Oriental
doctrines. 6 The notion of emanations, as has
been observed by Professor Matter, is the essential
feature of the Cabbala; and since there is no
warrant for this in the Bible, nor did it appear in
the prevailing schemes of heathen philosophy, he
very naturally deduces it from the East, where
many of the Magi taught that every thing ema-
nated from God, the fountain of light.’

Professor Burton connects the second source of
Gnosticism with the third, and, as he considers it,
the greatest, or, at least, the most immediate cause
of Gnosticism, namely Platonism, in the follow-
ing passage: ‘It is natural for us to ask, how the
Cabbala came to receive a system of philosophy
so far removed from the simplicity of the Mosaic ;
and how the opinions of the Jews, hitherto so ex-
clusive and so little known, could produce any
effect upon a system which, at the time of which
we are speaking, was spread over great part of the
world. A solution of these questions may pro-


1  GNOSTICISM.
bably be found by a consideration of the Platonie


doctrines.” These doctrines he considers to have
been ‘the principal source of Gnosticism,’ and to
have had an effect ‘upon the Cabbalistic philoso
phy of the Jews.

In the Greek philosophy, as well as in the Greek
Mythology or Cosmogony, the origin of evil was
the same stumbling-block that it appears to have
been to every system, imaginative or rational ; and
the Greeks had their own peculiar way of getting
over the difliculty. *The Grecian philosophy,’
says Professor Burton, ‘did not adopt the syatem
of emanation. They all held that matter was
eternal; and such undoubtedly was the opinion
of Plato. This was the expedient by which all
the philosophers thought to rescue God from being
the author of evil ; forgetting, as it appears, that
at the same time they limited his omnipotence,
and made him, though not the author of evil, vet
himself subject to its influence: for a being who
is all good, and yet restricted in his power, is un-
doubtedly subject to evil.—Here then was the
hasis, the false, the unphilosophical basis, on whigh
all the Grecian sages built their systems. Matter
was co-eternal with God; and the world was
formed either by matter acting upon itself, of
being acted upon by God. The school of Epicu-
rus made matter act upon itself, and the Deity
was reduced to a name. The Stoics and Peripa-
tetics believed God to have acted upon matter;
but it was from necessity, and not from choice.’

€Plato had already adopted a system tore
worthy of the Deity, and conceived that God acted
upon matter of his own free will, and by calling
order out of disorder formed the world. Plato
certainly did not believe the world to be eternal,
though such a notion is ascribed to Aristotle.
Plato held the eternity of matter ; but he believed
the arrangement and harmony of the universe to
be the work of the Deity. Here begins the pecu-
liar intricacy of the Platonic system. Every
thing, except the Deity, which exists in heaven or
in earth, whether the object of sense or purely in-
tellectual, was believed to have had a bezinuing.
There wasa time when it did not exist ; but there
never was a time, when the Jdea, ¢. e. the form or
archetype, did not exist in the mind of the Deity.
Hence we find so many writers speak of three
principles being held by Plato, the Deity, the idea,
and matter. It is difficult to explain the Platonic
doctrine of ideas, without running into mysticism
or obscurity ; but perhaps, if we lay aside for a
time the doctrines of the ancients, and take our
own notions of the Deity, we may be able to form
sume conception of Plato’s meaning.’

‘We believe that there was a time when the
world which we inhabit, and every thing which
moves upon it, did not exist; but we cannot say
that there ever wasa time when the works of crea-
tion were not present to the mind of the Deity.
There may therefore be the image of a thing,
though as yet it has received no material form ; or,
to use the illustration of the Platonists, the seal
may exist without the impression. — Plato supposed
these images to have a real existence, and gave to
them -the name of form, example, archetype, or
idea; and the use which he made of them consti-
tutes the peculiar character of the Platonic philo
sophy. He saw that these ideas not only preceded
the creation of the world, but must have been
present to the Deity from all eternity; and he


GNOSTICISM.


* could assign them no other place than the mind of
* the Deity.’

‘The Gnostics, as we have seen, agreed with
Plato in making matter co-eternal with God.
They also believed that the material world was
formed after an eternal and intellectual dea.
This peculiar and mystical notion is the very soul
of Platonism: and we learn from Irenaus that it
was held by all the Gnostics. Both parties also
believed in an intermediate order of beings be-
tween the supreme God and the inhabitants of the
earth: these beings were supposed by both to have

ed from the mind or reason of God: and
may furnish a clew to much of the Gnoftic
philosophy, if we suppose the eons of the Gnos-
tics to be merely a personification of the ideas of
Plato ; or we may say generally, that the Gnostics
formed their system of rons by combining the
intellectual beings of the Platonic philosophy
with the angels of the Jewish Scriptures,’

‘There is, indeed, one material difference be-
tween the system of Plato and that of the Gnos-
tics. According to the former, God ordered the
intellectual beings which he had produced, to
create the world; and he delegated this work to
them, that he might not be himself the author of
evil. But according to the Gnostics, the Demiur-
gus, one of the inferior seons, created the world
without the knowledge of God. This is perhaps
as rational an hypothesis as that of Plato limself;
and the one may have very naturally grown into
the other, during the frequent agitation of the
question concerning the origin of evil. It may be
observed, also, that the constant hostility which
existed between the supreme God and the creative
geon, or demiurgus, does not find any parallel in
the Platonic philosophy. This was probably bor-
rowed from the Eastern doctrine of a good and
evil principle; and what the Scriptures say of
Satan, the great adversary of man, may also have
contributed to form the same doctrine.’

Such is Professor Burton's view of the doctrines
of Gnosticism, and of the three great sources fiem
which it originated, together with some of its
effects upon Christianity, in diverting many of the
first converts from a better faith into a vain phi-
losophy, ‘profane and vain bubblings, and the
oppositions of science falsely su called?

Tt will remain for us, in the article Locos, to
lay before our readers Professor Burton's estimate
of one of the most remarkable effects of Gnosticism
upon Christianity: but as it relates to the Logos
of St. John’s Gospel, and as it ought, we think,
to have been preceded by a more cctinite, not to
say a more searching inquiry into the errors of
Plato's philosophy (which are indeed very types of
the principal faults of Gnosticism) than Dr. Bur-
ton has given tu them, we propose there to show
what were the false principles in Plato’s philo-
sophy which were propagated so widely by the
Gnostic heresy, and from which Christianity of-
fered to all who would be tanght better things a
means of escape.

We trust it has alreasly become evident to our
readers that, in presenting them with a brief’ and
clear analysis of the doctrines and origin of Gnos-
ticism in the very words of the late Regins Pro-
fessor of Divinity. we have been influenced by uo
desire to save ourselves trouble of thonght or com-

sition, The character, learning, and station of

. Burtun, and the many years of his innocent


QOAT. T13


_and useful life which he devoted to the Gnostic


heresy and the Apostolic age, must give authority
to his opinions when fairly stated.—J. P. P.

GUAT. Chaldee. tzza; Phoenician, aza;
Arabic, yidda and hedzjaz. Of the several Hebrew
denominations of this animal there is no doubt,
for the simple manners of the ancient Semitic
nations multiplied the names of the few objects
they had constantly before their eyes; and their do-
mestic animals, in particular, received abundant
genera] and distinctive appellations, according to
sex, age, race, and conditions of existence or pur-
pose. Thus we have for goat, tY ez (Gen. xxvii.
9) 5 FYWN chasiph (1 Kings xx. 27); TN attud,
‘a he-goat,’ or rather D'TINY attudim, *he-goats’
(Gen, xxxi. 10, 12); WOY¥ tzaphir, ‘a he-goat’
(Dan. viii. 5, 21); YYW sair, ‘a hairy one'
(Lev. iv. 24); 2) yaal, a kind of wild goat
(1 Sam. xxiv. 2}; IPN akko, either the same or
another species of wild goat (Exod. xxiii. 19); aud
"13 gedi, ‘a kid’ (Gen. xxxviii. 17, &c.).


329. (Syrian Goat.)


The races either known to or kept by the Hebrew

yple were puobably—1, The domestic Syrian
Tegel Liced, with horns rather small and
variously bent; the ears Jonger than the head, and
pendulous; bair long, often black ;—2. The An-
gora, or rather Anadoli breed of Asia Minor, with
long hair, more or less tine ;— 3. The Egyptian breed,
with small spiral horns, long brown hair, very long
ears;—4 A liced fiom Upyer Ez ypt, without horns,
having the nasal bones singularly elevated, the
nose contracted, with the lower jaw protruding the
incisors, and the female with udder very low and
purse-shaped, This race, the most degraded by
climate and treatment of all the domestic va-
rieties, is clad in long coarse hair, commonly
of a rufons Lrown colour, and so early distinct,
that the earlier monuments of Egypt represent it
with obvious precision. It is probable that some
of the names which now ay pear synonymous were
anciently applied to distinguish ticeds from dif-
ferent regions, Thus Tzaphir, being of Chaldee
origin, may have denoted a goat of a northern
mountainous region ; or may have been the same
as Tschiter, ‘the leader of a flock ;? while Azazel,
on the contrary, applied in the Auth, Vers. to the
scape-zoat, night seem to be derived fiom the
wandering Syrian or Phoanician breed of the
coast, were it not shown in the next article to
have a differer t reference. ;

The natural history of the domestic goat requires
no illustration in this place, and its economic uses
demand only a few words. Notwithstanding the
offensive lasciviousness which causes it to be sigs
nificantly seyarated from sheep, the goat was em-


774 GOAT.


ployed hy the people of Israel in many respects
as their representative. It was a pure animal for


sacrifice (Exod. xii. 5), and a kid might be sub-
stituted as equivalent to a lamb: it formed a
principal part of the Hebrew flocks; and both the
milk aud the young kids were daily articles of
food. Among the poorer and more sober shepherd
families, the slaughter of a kid was a token of hos-
pitality to strangers, or of unusual festivity; and
the prohibition, thrice repeated in the Mosaic law,
‘not to seethe a kid in its mother's milk * (Exod.
xxiii. 19; xxxiv. 26; and Deut. xiv. 21), may
have originated partly in a desire to recommend
abstemiousness, which the legislators and mo-
ralists of the East have since invariably enforced
with success, and partly with a view to discoun-
tenance a practice which was connected with
idvlatrous festivals, and the rites they involved.
It is from guatskins that the leathern bottles to
contain wine and other liquids are made in the
Levant. For this purpose, after the head and feet
are cut away, the case or hide is drawn off the
carcass over the neck, without opening the belly;
and the extremities being secured, it is dried with
the hair in or outside, according to the use it is
intended for. The old worn-out skins are liable
to burst: hence the obvious propriety of putting
new wine into new bottles (Matt. ix. 17). Har-
mer appears to have rightly referred the allusion
in Amos iii. 12 to the Jong-eared race of goats:
‘ As the shepherd taketh out of the mouth of the
lion two legs or a piece of ear, so shall the
children of Israel be taken out that dwell in
Samaria and damascus.’


330. [Wild Goat of Sinai.)


Beside the domestic goats, Western Asia is
possessect of one or more wild species—all large
and vigorous mountain animals, resembling the
ibex or bouquetin of the Alps. Of these, Southern
Syria, Arabia, Sinai, and the borders of the Red Sea,
contain at least one species, known to the Arabs by
the name of Beden or Beddan, and Taytal—the
Capra Jaela of Ham. Smith, and Capra Sinattica
of Ehrenberg. We take this animal to be that
noticed under the name of 93°, Jaal or Jol,
in the plural Jolim (1 Sam. xxiv. 2; Job xxxix.
1; Ps. civ. 18; Prov. v.19). The male is con-
siderably taller and more robust than the larger
he-goats, the horns forming regular curves back-
wards, and with from 15 to 24 transverse elevated
Cross ridges, being sometimes near three feet long,
and exceedingly ponderous: there is a beard under
the chin, and the fur is dark brown; but the limbs


GOAT, SCAPE.


are white, with regular black marks down the frome
of the legs, with rings of the same colour above
the knees and on the pasterns. The females are
smaller than the males, more slenderly made,
brighter rufous, and with the white and black
markings on the legs not so distinctly visible.
This species live in troops of 15 or 20, and plunge
down precipices with the same fearless impetoosity
which distinguishes the ibex. Their borns are sold
by the Arabs for knife handles, &c.; but the ani-
mals themselves are fast diminishing in number.

In Deut. xiv. 5, IPN Akko is translated ‘ wild
goat.’ Schultens( Origines Hebraica:) conjectures
that the name arose ‘ ob fugacitatem,’ from its
shyness, and consequent readiness to fly ; and Dr.
Hanis points out what he takes to be a confirma-
tion of this conjecture in Shaw's travels ; who, from
the translations of the Sept. and Vulgate, makes
it a goat-deer, or Tragelaphus, such as the Lerwee
or Fishtall, by mistake referred to Capra Mam-
brica of Linnzus; whereas that naturalist (System.
Nat. 13th ed. by Gmelin) places Lerwee among
the synonyms of Ant. Cervicapra, which dues not
suit Shaw's notice, and is not known in Westen
Asia. The Fishtall is, however, a ruminant of
the African desert, possibly one of the larger Anti
lopides, with Jong mane, but not as yet scientié-
cally described. Akko, therefore, if it be nota
second name of the Zamor, which we refer to the
Kebsch, or wild sheep (Chamois), as the species
must be sought among ruminants that were acces-
sible for food to the Hebrews, we should be iv
clined to view as the name of une of the Gazelles,
probably the Ahu (Ant. Subgutturosa), unless the
Abyssinian Ibex (Capra Walie) had formerly
extended into Arabia, and it could be shown
that it is a distinct species. We may here also
remark upon the researches of Riippell and of
Hemprich and Ehrenberg, that they naturally
sought in vain for the Abyssinian Ibex as it is
tigured in Griffiths’ Cuvier, because, by some mis
take of the letter engraver, he has affixed that name
to the representation of Ovis Tragelapbus or
Kebsch.—C. H. S.


GOAT, SCAPE. Under this head we cannot
do better than present the reader with the sub-
stance of a very ingenious article in Hengsten-
berg'’s Die Bucher Mosis und Aegypten, one of
the most interesting books on Egyptian antiqui-
ties, as applied to the illustration of Scripture,
which has yet appeared, and of which an excel-
lent translation has been prodaced in America,
by R. D.C. Robbins, under the title of Egypt
and the Books of Moses, 1843.

It appears to Dr. Hengstenherg, that an Egyp-
tian relerence must necessarily be acknuwledged
in the ceremony of the Great Atonement day :
and in order to establish this reference, be
first endeavours to substantiate his view of the


meaning of the word Srey Azazel: which is,
that it designates Satan. But this notion cam
only be placed in a right point of view by taking
a general survey of the whole rite, in order to
point out definitely the positiun which Azazel
holds in it.

The account of this remarkable ceremony is
contained in Lev. xvi.

First, in verses 1-10, the general outlines are
given; and then follows, in verses 11, aq., the ex-
planation of separate points. It is of no small


GOAT, SCAPR.


importance for the interpretation that this arrange-
ment, which has been recognised by few interpre-
ters, should be clearly unders Aaron first
offers a bullock as a sin-ollering for himself and
his house. He then takes a firepan full of coals
from the altar, with fragrant incense, and goes
within the vail. There he puts the incense on the
fire before the Lord, and ‘the cloud of the in-
cense’ (the embodied prayer) covers the mercy-
seat which is upon the ark of the covenant, that
he die not. Aaron then takes the blood of the
bullock and sprinkles it seven times before the
mercy-seat. After he has thus completed the ex-
piation for himself, he proceeds to the expiation
for the people. He takes two he-goats for a sin-
offering for the children of Israel (xvi. 5). These
he places before the Lord at the door of the ta-
hernacle (xvi. 7). He casts lots upon them; one
lot ‘ for the Lord’ and one lot ‘ for Azazel’ (xvi. 8).
The goat upon which the lot for the Lord fell
(xvi. 9) he offers for a sin-oflering, brings the
blood within the vail, and does with it as with
the blood of the bullock. In this way is the
sanctuary purified from the defilements of the
“children of Israel, their transyressions, and all
their sins, s0 that the Lord, the holy one and
pure, can continue to dwell there with them.
After the expiation is completed, the second goat,
on which fell the lot for Azazel, is brought for-
ward (xvi. 10). He is first placed before the


Lord to absolve him ody 2). Then Aaron
lays his hands upon his head, and confesses over
nim the (forgiven) iniquities, transgressions, and
sins of the children of Israel, puts them upon his
head, and gives him to a man to take away, in
order that he may bear the sins of the people into
a solitary land (xvi. 22), into the desert, for
Azazel (xvi. 10). Then Aaron offers a burnt-
offering for himself, and one for the people.

Now, in respect to language, there can be no
objection to interpreting Azazel as meaning Satan.


That the Hebrew Spy, Azal, corresponds to the
Arabic Jz was long ago asserted by Bochart
and others, and is now generally admitted ; and
rery, Azazel, belongs to the form which repeats
the second and third radicals. In reference to
this form, Ewald remarks (Gramm. § 333), that
it expresses general intension, and that the idea
of continual, regular repetition, without interrup-
tion, is also specially expressed by the repetition
of nearly the whole word. The Arabic word
Azala signities in that language ‘ semovit, di-
movit, removit, descivit ;’ in the passive it signi-
fies  remotus, depositus fuit ;? and the participle,
azul, means ‘a ceteris se sejungens.’ In like
manner azal, mazul, denote * semotus, remotus,
abdicatus.’ From this two explanations of Azazel,
as relating to Satan, may be educed; either
“the apostate’ (from God), or, ‘the one entirely
separate.’ It is in favour of the latter that the
signification ‘ descivit’ is only a derived one,
and that it is appropriate to the abode in the
desert. The goat is sent to Azazel in the desert,
in the divided land (‘terra abscissa’). How
then could he be designated by a more appro-
priate name than ‘ the separate one’?

And this explanation, as far as the facts of the
case are concerned, is, in Hengstenberg’s opinion,
equally unexposed to any well grounded objec-


GOAT, SCAPE. 115


tion, The doctrinal signification of the symbolical
action, as far as it has reference to Azazel, is this,
that Satan, the enemy of the people of God, can-
not harm those forgiven by God, but that they,
with sins forgiven of God, can go betore him with
a light heat, deride him, and triumph over him.

The positive reasons which favour this explana-
tion are the following :—


1, The manner in which the phrase brary,


* for Azazel,’ is contrasted with mind, ‘for Je-
hovah,’ necessarily requires that Azazel should
denote a personal existence, and, if so, ouly Satan
can be intended. 2. If by Azazel, Satan is not
meant, there is no ground for the lots that were
cast. We can then see no reason why the decision
was referred to God; why the high-priest did not
simply assign one goat for a sin-oflering, and the
other fur sending away into the desert. The cir-
cuistance that lots are cast implies that Jehovah
is made the antagonist of a personal existence,
with respect to which it is designed to exalt the
unlimited power of Jehovah, and to exclude all
equality of this being with Jehovah. 3. Azazel,
as a worl of comparatively unfrequent formation,
and only used here, is best fitted for the designa-
tion of Satan. In every other explanation the
question remains, ‘ Why, then (us it has every ap-
pearance of being), is the word formed for this
occasion, and why is it never fuund except here

By this explanation the third chapter of Ze
chariah comes into a relation with our passage,
entirely like that in which chap. iv. of the same
prophecy stands to Exod. xxv. 31. Here, as
there, the Lord, Satan, and the high-priest appear.
Satan wishes by his accusations to destroy the
favourable relations between the Lord and his
people. The high-priest presents himself before
the Lord, not with a claim of purity, according
to law, but laden with his own sins and the sins
of his people. Here Satan thinks to find the
safest occasion for his attacks; but he is mistaken.
Forgiveness baffles his designs, and he is compelled
to retire in confusion. It is evident that the doc-
trinal part of both passages is substantially the
same, and that the one in Zechariah may be con-
sidered the oldest commentary extant upon the
words of Moses. In substance we have the same
doctrine alsu in Rev. xii. 10, 11 * the accuser
of our brethren is cast down,-who accuses them
before our God day and night, and they overcame
him by the blood of the Lamb.’

The relation in which, according to this ex-
planation, Satan is here placed to the desert, finds
analogy in other passages of the Bible, where the
deserted and waste places appear as peculiarly
the abode of the Evil Spirit. See Matt. xii. 43,
where the unclean spirit cast out of the man is
represented as going through ‘ dry places’: also
Luke viii, 27; and Rev. xviii. 2, according to
which the fallen Babylon is to be the dwelling of
all unclean spirits.

To the reasons already given, the Egyptian re-
ference, which the rite bears according to this ex-
planation, may be added— a reference 80 remark-
able, that no rvom is left for the thought that it
bas arisen through false explanation.’

Dr. Hengstenberg then proceeds to meet the
objections which have Leen brought to bear against
the view adopted by him—‘ adopted,’ for this
explanation is by no means a new one, though he


Tit GOAT, SCAPE,
has brought it forward in greater force than be-


fore, and with new illustrations.

The most important of the objections, and the
one which has exerted the greatest influence, is
this, that it gives a sense which stands in direct
opposition to the spirit of the religion of Jehovah,
It is asked, ‘Could an offering properly be made
to the Evil Spirit in the desert, which the common
precepts of religion in the Mosaic law, as well as
the signiticance of the ceremony, entirely oppose ¥°
To this Hengstenberg answers— Were it really
necessary to connect with the explanation of
Azazel as meaning Satan, the assumption that
sacrifice was offered to him, we shvuld feel ob-
liged to abandon it, notwithstanding all the rea-
sons in its favour. But nothing is easier than to
show that this manner of understanding the ex-
planation is entirely arbitrary. The following
reasons prove that an offering made to Azazel
cannot be supposed :’—

1. Both the goats are, in verse 5, taken together
as forming unitedly one single offering, which
wholly excludes the thought that one of them was
brought as an offering to Jehovah, and the other
to Azazel. And further, an offering which is
made to a bad being can never be a sin-offering.
The idea of a sin-ollering implies holiness, hatred
of sin in the being to whom the offering is made.

2. Both the goats were first placed at the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation before the
Lord. To himytherefore, they both belong; and
when afterwards one of them is sent to Azazel,
this is dove in accordance with the wish of Je-
hovah, and also without destroying the original
relation, since the one sent to Azazel doves not
cease to belong to the Lord.

3. The casting of lots also shows that both these
goats were considered as belonging to the Lord.
The lot is never used in the Old Testament
except as a means of obtaining the decision of
Jehovah. So then, here also, Jehovah decides
which of the goats is to be offered as a sin-ollering,
and which to be offered to Azazel.

4. The goat assigned to Azazel, before he is
sent away, is absolved (xvi. 21). The act by
which the second goat is, as it were, identified
with the first, in order to transfer to the living
the nature which the dead possesed, shows to
what the phrase ‘ fur a sin-offering,’ in verse 5,
has reference. The two goats (as Spencer had
before observed) became, as it were, one goat,
and their duality rests only on the physical
impossibility of making one goat represent the
different points to be exhibited. Had it been
possible, in the circumstances, to restore life to the
goat that was sacrificed, this would have been
done. The two goats, in this connection, stand in
a relation entirely similar to that of the two birds
in the purification of the leprous person in Lev. i.
4, of which the one let go was dipped in the
blood of the one slain. As soon as the second
goat is considered au offering to Azazel, the con-
nection between it and the first ceases, and it cans
not be conceived why it was absulved before it
went away.

5. According to verse 21, the already forgiven
sins of Israel are laid upon the head of the goat.
These he bears to Azazel in the desert. But
where there is already forgiveness of sin, there is
no more offering.

The other objections which have on different


@OAT, SCAPE.


principles been made to this view are of less
weight.

One of them, which alleges the apparent
equality given under this explanation to the
claims of Jehovah and of Satan, is answered. by
showing that it is rather calculated to act against
the tendency of an ancient people to entertain
that behef. The lot is under the directiun of
Jehovah, and is a means of ascertaining his will;
and not a mediation Letween the two by an inde-
pendent third agency, which decides to which the
one and to which the other shall fall.

Another objection, founded on the belief that
Satan nowhere appears in the Pentateuch, will
not in this country be deemed to require much
answer. It is entertained chiefly by those who
believe that the presence of Satan in Scripture is
owing to the influence of a foreigu (Babylouian
and Persian) theology upon Hebrew opinions;
and it is answered by a reference to the book of
Job, in which Satan appears distinctly, while
even the objectors admit that this bouk was
written long before the assigned influence existed.
And if it were indeed necessary to refer the know-
ledge of Satan to a foreign influence, it might be
perceived that quite as much is accomplished by
referring to the Egyptian Typhon as to the Persian
Alireman. Hengstenberg also points to the in-
timations of the doctrine of Satan, which appear
in Gem iii., aud remarks —‘ From a theological
point of view, as well as from the nature of the
case, it will be found almost impossible that a
dogma which in the later period of the revelation
holds so important a place, should not at least be
referred to in the statement of the first principles
of that revelation.

After exhibiting the positive reasons for this
explanation, and disposing of the objections to it,
Hengstenberg subjects to examination those
among the various explanations that have been
given, which are vow current ; and makes out that
they are either philologically untenable with re
ference to the word Azazel, do not agree with the
context, or are unsatisfactory in the result to
which they conduct us.

If it has been thus established that Satan is to
he understood by the term Azazel, then, argues
Hengstenberg, an allusion to Egypt in the whole
rite cannot be mistaken. In that country every
bad influence or power of nature, and generally
the bad itself, in a physical or ethical respect,
was personitied under the name of Typhon. The
doctriné of a Typhon among the Egyptians is
as ol-as it is firmly established. Representa-
tions of him are found on numerous mouuments
as old as the time of the Pharauhs. Herodotus
speaks of Typhon (ii, 144. 56, and iii. 5). But
Plutarch gives the most accurate and particular
account, with, indeed, many incorrect additions.

The barren regions around Egypt generally be
longed to Typhon. The desert was especially
assiguel to him as his residence, whence he made
his wasting inroads into the consecrated land.
‘He is,’ says Creuzer, ‘ the lover of the degenerate
Nephthys, the hostile Libyan desert, and of the
seashore. There is the kingdom of Typhon. On
the contrary, Egypt the blessed, the Nilevalley
glittering with fiesh crops, is the land of Isis.’
Herodotus ascribes a similar dwelling to Typlon.

By a strange but very natural alteration, the
Egyptians sought sometimes to propitiate the god


GOAT, SCAPE.


whom they hated, but feared, by offerings, and
indeed by those which consisted of sacred animals.
Sumetimes, again, when they supposed that the
power of the gods was prevalent and sustained
them against him, they allowed themselves in
every species of mockery and abuse. ‘ The ob-
scured and broken power of Typhon,’ says Plu-
tarch, ‘even now, in the convulsions of death,
they seek sometimes to propitiate by offerings,
and endeavour to persuade him to favour them;
but at other times, on certain festival occasions,
they scoff at and insult him. Then they cast
mud at those who are of a red complexion, and
throw down an ass from a precipice, as the
Coptites do, because they suppose that Typhon
was of the colour of the fox and the ass.’

The most important ge on the worship of
Typhon is found in De Is. et Osir. p. 380: ‘ But
when a great and troublesome heat prevails, which
in excess either brings along with it destructive
sickness or other strange or extraordinary mis-
fortunes, the priests take some of the sacred ani-
mals, in profound silence, to a dark place. There
they threaten them first and terrify them; and
when the calamity continues, they offer these
animals in sacrifice there.’

Now, the supposition of a reference to these Ty-
phonia sacra Hilsius considers as a profanation.
But it is seen at once that the reference contended
for by him is materially different from that adopted
by our author. The latter is a controversial one.
In opposition to the Egyptian view, which im-
pet the necessity of yielding respect even to bad

ings generally, if men would insure themselves
against them, it was intended by this rite to bring
Israel to the deepest consciousness that all trouble
is the punishment of a just and holy God, whom
they, through their sins, have offended; that they
must reconcile themselves only with him; that
when that is done, and the furgiveness of sins is
obtained, the bad being can harm no farther.

How very natural and how entirely in accord-
ance with circumstances such a reference was, is
evident from the facts contained in other passages
of the Pentateuch, which show how severe a con-
test the religious principles of the Israelites Lad
to undergo with the religious notions imbibed in
Egypt. This is especially exhibited in the regu-
lations in Leviticus xvii., following directly upon
the law concerning the atonement-day, which prove
that the Egyptian idol-worship yet continued to
be practised among the Israelites. The same thing
is also evident from the occurrences connected with
the worship of the golden calf.

The assumption of a reference so specially con-
troversial might indeed be supposed unnecessary,
since in a religion, which teaches generally the
existence of a powerful bad being, the error here
combated, the belief that this being possesses other
than derived power, will naturally arise in those
who have not found the right solution of the riddle
of human life in the deeper knowledge of human
sinfulness.

But yet the whole rife has too direct a reference
to a prescribed practice of propitiating the bad
being, and implies that formal offerings were made
to him—a thing which could never be the natural
product of Israelitish soil, and could scarcely
spring up there, since such an embodying of error
contradicts fundamental principles among the
Israelites respecting the being of Jehovah, which,


GOD. 771


indeed, allows the existence of no other power
with itself.

And, finally, there exists here a peculiar trait,
which in Hengstenberg’s opinion makes it certain
that there is an Egyptian reference, namely, the
circumstance that the goat was sent to Azazel into
the desert. The special residence of Typhon was
in the desert, according to the Egyptian doctrine,
which is most intimately connected with the na-
tural condition of the country. There, accord-
ingly, is Azazel placed in our passage, not in the
belief that this was literally true, but merely
symbwlically.

Such is the view taken by Professor Hengsten-
berg, and which we have endeavoured with all

ible conciseness to place hefure the reader.
hose who desire to contemplate the subject in
different points of view will do well to consult the
valuable dissertation in Professor Bush’s Notes on
Leviticus xvi., and previously published by him in
the American Biblical Repository for July, 1842.
Professor Bush takes notice of the opinion that
Azazel was Satan: he shows that the Septuagint
makes Azazel a person, and that the early Chris-
tian church, and most of the Jewish writers, re-
garded him as Satan. The professor is, however,
not of this opiniun; but be had not the advantage
of having seen it as reproduced in tbe new and
strong lights thrown upon it by Hengstenberg,
whose vast erudition and soundness of theological
Opinion give great weight to any conclusion
which his judgment approves. The subject is one
of the most curious and interesting in Biblical
literature ; but it is also one on which it seems
scarcely possible to realize an implicit convic-
tion: and the present writer, in reporting the
views of another, must admit that he, fur himself,
has not been able to do so,


GOD. The two principal Hebrew names
of the Supreme Being (St. Jerome and the
Rabbins enumerate ten, but they belong rather
to his attributes) used ,in the Scriptures are
MD Jehovah, and DYMON Elohim. Dr. Hu-
vernick, in his erudite wok, Historisch-critische
Einleitung ins alte Testament, Berlin, 1839,
proposes the reading Mi}% Jahveh instead of
NY Jehovah, meaning ‘the Existing One,’
while he derives DYMSN Elohim, from an an-
cient Hebrew root, now lost, mx colutt, and
thinks that the plural is used merely to indi-
cate the abundance and super-richness contained
in the Divine Being. With him, therefore, Je-
hovah is not of the same origin as the heathen
Jove, but of a strictly peculiar and Hebrew
origin. Both names, he admirably proves, are
used by Moses discriminately, in strict con
formity with the theological idea he wished to
express in the immediate context; and, pursuing
the Pentateuch nearly line by line, it is astonish-
ing to see that Moses never uses any of the names
at mere random or arbitrarily, but is throughout
consistent in the application of the respective
terms. Elohim is the abstract expression for
absolute Deity apart from the special notions of
unity, holiness, substance, &c. It is more a phi-
losophical than devotional term, and corresponds
with our term Deity, in the same way as sate or
government is abstractedly expressive of a king
or monarch, Jehovah, however, he considers to
be the revealed Elohim, the Manifest, Only, Per-


T18 GOD.


sonal, and Holy Elohim: Elohim is the Creator,
Jehovah the Redeemer, &c.

To Elohim, in the later writers, we usually find
affixed the adjective DYM chayim ‘the living’
CJer. x. 10; Dan. vi. 20, 26; Acts xiv. 15;
2 Cor. vi. 16), probably in contradistinction to
tdols, which might be confounded in some cases
with the true God, the linguistical difference in
the Hebrew existing only in the plural, the former


Leing called mx Elilim instead of Elohim
(Lev. xix. 14; xxvi. 1; Hab. ii. 18).

The attributes ascribed to God by Moses are
systematically enumerated in Exod. xxxiv. 6-7,
though we find in isolated passages in the Pen-
tateuch and elsewhere, additional properties spe-
citied, which bear more directly upon the dog-
mas and principles of religion, such as e. g. that
he is not the author of sin (Gen. i. 31), although
since the fall, man is born prone to sin (Gen.
vi. 5; viii. 21, &c ). But as it was the avowed
design of Moses to teach the Jews the Unity of
God in opposition to the Polytheism of the other
nations with whom they were to come in contact,
he dwelt particularly and most prominently on
that point, which he hardly ever omitted when
he had an opportunity of bringing forward the
attributes of God (Deut. vi. 4; x. 17; iv. 39;
ix. 16, &c.; Num. xvi. xxii; xxxiii. 19, &c.;
Exod. xv. 11; xxxiv. 6, 7, &c.).

In the Prophets and other sacred writers of the
Old Testament, these attributes are still more fully
developed and explained by the declarations that
God is the first and the last (Is. xliv. 6), that
He changes not (Hab. iii. 6), that the earth and
heaven shall perish, but He shall endure (Ps.
cil. 26)—a distinct allusion to the last duomsday
—anil that He is Omnipresent (Prov. xv.3; Jub
xxxiv. 22, &c.).

In the New Testament also we find the attri-
butes of God systematically classitied (Rev. v.
12 and vii, 12), while the peculiar tenets of
Christianity embrace, if not a farther, still a more
develoyed idea, as presented by the Apostles and
the primitive teachers of the church (comp. Se-*
mischi's Justin Martyr, vol. ii. p. 151, sq.) trans-
lated by J. E. Ryland, oe

rod" (Job xix. 26;


The expression ‘to see
xlii. 5; Isa. xxxviii. a sometimes signities
merely to experience his help; but in the Old
Testament Scriptures it more usually denotes the
approach of death (Gen. xxxii. 30; Judg. vi. 23;
xt. 22; Isa. vi.,5).

The term DF bx 13, ‘son of God,’ applies to
Kings (Ps. ii. 7; Ixxxii. 6, 27). The usnal
notion of the ancients, that the royal dignity
was derived from God, may here be traced to its
source: hence the Homeric dioyévns Bdowdeus.
This notion, entertained by the Oriental nations
with rezard to kings, made the latter style them-
selves Gods (Ps. Ixxxii. 6).

ome *33, ‘sons of God,’ in the plural, im-
plies inferior gods, angels (Gen. vi. 2; Jub i. 6);
as alsu faithful adherents, worshippers of God
(Deut. xiv. 1; Ps, Ixxiii. 15; Prov. xiv. 26).


onbe WANK, ‘man of God,’ is sometimes ap-
plied to an angel (Judg. xiii. 6, 8); as also toa
prophet (1 Sam. ii. 275 ix. 6; 1 Kings xiii. 1).

When, in the middle ages, scholastic theology
began to speculate on the divine attributes, as the
basis of systematic aud dovmatic Christianity,


6


GoD.


the Jews, it appears, did not wish to remain be-
hind on that head, and collecting a few passages
from the Old Testament, and more epee
from Isa. xi. 2, and Chron. xxix. 11, where the
divine attributes are more amply developed and
enumerated, they strung them together in a sort
of cabbalistic tree, but in reality representiug a
human figure.


FID PN
Inscrutable,
ns
Crown.
navn
Idea.
nya. msn
Intelligence. Wisdom.
beow | | por
Left. Rig,
1 aaa nbya Jon
Force. Magnificence.
| moan
Excellense. | ——,


nN nya
Glory. Victory.
1D
Foundation.
ees
m2
Reign.


These attributes they call MIWHD Sephiroth
(numbered ones), and divide them into three up-

t (crown, wisdum, and intelligence) and seven
ower, The first constitute the being of God,
and the latter merely his virtues. Only the
first three are called inted/ects, but not attributes
(Cabbala Denudata).

Instead of giving the term Sephiroth an He
brew derivation, from “BD sopiar, ‘to count,
‘number,’ we would rather incline to assign it @
Greek etymology, from ogaipa, globe, circle, this
Sephiroth-system representing among the cabba-
lists the planetary system of ten spheres. The
plural termination in N} it has in ccmmon with
many similar words adopted hy the Rabbins from
the Greek; such as MDW, from Bidras


'


GoG.


DIDBYIDIDN from éx(rpowos, |/D1D"9 from vouds,
&e.—E. M.

GOEL. [Bz:.oop-revenar.]

GOG (33) oceurs Ezek. xxxviii. 3, 14, and
xxxix. 11, as a proper name; that of a prince of
Magog (3531D), a people that were to come from
the North to invade the Jand of Israel, and be
there defeated. In a different sense, but corre-
sponding with the assertions of other Oriental
authors, in whose traditions this people occupy an
important place, Gog occurs in Rev. xx. 8, as
the name of a country.

Interpreters have given very different explana-
tions of the terms Gog and Magog; but they
have generally understood them as symbolical
expressions for the heathen nations of Asia, or
more particularly for the Scythians, a vague
knowledge of whom seems to have reached the
Jews in Palestine about that period. Thus Jo-
sephus (Antig. i. 6. 3) has dropped the Hebrew
word Magog, and rendered it by %xd@ar: and
20 doves Jerome, while Suidas renders it by
Tépoa—a dillerence that matters but little in
the main question, since Zxv6a:, in the ancieut
authors, is but a collective name for the northern
but partially-known tribes (Cellar, Notit. ii.
753, sq.)3; and, indeed, as such a collective
name, Slagog seems also to indicate in the He-
brew the tribes about the Caucasian mountains
(comp. Jerome on Ezek, tbid.). Bochart (Phal.
iii. 13) supports the opinion of Josephus, thongh
by but very precarious etymologies. Accord-
ing to Reinegge (Descrip. of the Caucasus, ii.
79) some of the Caucasian people call their
mountains Gog, and the highest northern points
Magog. The Arabians are of opinion that the
descendants of Gog and Magog inhabit the
northern parts of Asia, beyond the Tartars and


Sclavonians, and they put cpky oor
always in conjunction, thereby indicating the
extreme points of north and north-east of Asia
(Bayer, in Comment. Acad. Petrop. i.; THer-
belot, Bibl. Orient. p.528). Nor are there wanting
interpreters who understand by the Gog of Reve-
lations the auti-Christ, and by the Gog of Ezekiel
the Goths, who invaded the Roman empire in the
5th century of the Christian era.—E, M.


GOLAN (33; Sept. Patawy) or Gauton, a
Levitical town of Bashan, in the tribe of Manasseh
(Deut. iv. 43; Josh. xx. 8; xxi. 27; 1 Chron. vi.
71). from which the small province of Gaulonitis
(Tavawviris) took its name. The word is recog-
nised in the present Jolan or Djolan, mentioned
by Burckhardt (Syria, p. 256), as giving name to
a district lying east‘of the lake of Tiberias, and
composed of the ancient Ganlonitis, with part of
Bashan and Argob. It is indeed clear, that the
Gaulonitis of the later Jewish history must have
included part of the more ancient Bashan, if
Golan gave name to the province, seeing that
Golan was certainly in Bashan. Some difliculty
has been suggested as arising from the fact, that
the Judas whom Josephus (Antig. xviii. 1. 1) calls
a Gaulonite, is called by St. Luke (Acts v. 37) a
Galilzan. This is the more remarkable, as-Jose-
phus elsewhere (ex. gr. De Bell. Jud. ii. 20. 4)
carefully distinguishes Galilee and Gaulonitis.
Yet he himself elsewhere calls this very Judas
a Galilean (Antig. xviii. 1.6; xx. 5.2; De Bell.


GOLGOTHA. TT


Jud. ii. 9.1). It is, from this, probable that
Judas had a double cognomen, perhaps because
he had been born in Gaulovitis, but had been
brought up or dwelt in Galilee; as Apollonius,
although an Egyptian, yet was, from his place


_ of residence, called Rhodius (see Kuinoel, in Act.


v. 37).

GOLD. The Helrew word JN? (sahad) is
merely the mineralogical name of this metal,
while the various kinds, in a purified state, are
called 1B, OND, prWi, &c.

Gold was known and valued in very early
times. Abraham was rich in gold (Gen. xiii. 2;
xxiv. 35); and female ornaments were made of
gold (Gen. xxiv. 22).

To judge from 1 Chron. xxii. 14; xxix. 4,
the Jews must have been, in their palmy days,
in possession of enormous quantities of this metal,
considering the many tons of gold that were spent
in the building of the temple alone, thengh the
expression, plenteous as stones (2 Chron. 7. 15),
may be considered as hyperbolica]. It is, however,
confirmed by the history of the other Asiatic na-
tions, and more especially of the Persians, that the
period referred tu really abounded in gold, which
was imported in vast masses from Africa and
the Indies (Heeren, Ideen, i. 1. 37, 8q.). The
queen of Sheba brought with her (from Arabia
Felix), among other presents, 120 talents of guld
(2 Chron. ix. 9). The technical name of gold-
smiths (‘DV zorphim) occurs for the first time
in Judg. xvii. 4; and that of the crucible (HYD
mazreph) in Prov. xvii. 3. Both names are
derived from the verb FY zoraph, to purify
(metal ).—E. M.

GOLGOTHA (in Greek letters PoA-yo0&; in


Aramazan 819353). The original word signi-
fies <a skull, as does its Latin representative, Cal-
varia, Calvary. Diflerent opinions have prevailed
as to why the place was su termed. Old fables
assign as the reason, that Adam was interred at
Golgotha, in order that where he lay who had

fiected the ruin of mankind, there also might
the Saviour of the world suffer, die, and be buried
(Reland, Palest. p. 860). Many have held that
Golgotha was the place of public execution, the
Tybuin of Jerusalem; and that hence it was
termed the ‘place of a skull.’ Another opinion
is that the place took its name frum its shape,
being a hillock of a form like a human skull.
The last is the opinion to which the writer of these
remarks inclines. That the place was of some
such shape seems to be generally agreed, and the
traditional term mount, applied to Calvary, ap-
pears to contirm this idea. And such a shape, it
mmust Le allowed, is in entire agreement with the
name—that is, ‘skull.’ To these considerations
there arc added certain difficulties which arise
from the second explanation. So far as we kuow
there is no historical evidence to show that there
was a place of public execution where Gulgotha
is commonly fixed, nor that any such place, in or
near Jerusalem, bore the name Golgotha. Nor is
the term Gulgotha descriptive of such a p'ace 3
to make it so, to any extent, the name should have
been ‘skulls,’ or tthe place of skulls.” Equally
unuapt is the manner in which the writers of the
Gospels speak of the place: Matthew calls it ‘a
place called Golgotha; that is to say, a place of
a skull;’ Mark, ‘the place Gulgotha; which is,


,


“780 GOLGOTHA.


being interpreted, the place of a skull ; Luke,
‘the place which is called Calvary; John, ‘a
place called of a skull, which is called in the
Hebrew Golgotha.’ Now, no one of these descri
tions is what would have been natural had Gol-
gotlia been a place or the place of public execu-
tion, An English writer would say, ‘they took
the criminal to Tyburn and executed him.’ In
the same manner would the biographers of Jesus
have spoken—‘ they took him toGulgotha;’ in such
@ case there was no need of explanations; what
and where Golyotha was every person would have
known. In truth, the context seems to show that
the Roman guard hurried Jesus away and put
him to death at the first convenient spot; and
that the rather because there was no small fear of
@ popular insurrection, especially as he was at-
tended by a crowd of people. But where was
the place? Not far, we may suppose from what
has been said, from the judgment-hall, which was
doubtless near the spot (Fort Antonia), where the
Roman forces in Jerusalem were concentrated.
From our plan of Jerusalem it will be seen
that Fort Antonia lay on the north-west angle
of the temple. Was it likely, then, that in
the highly excited state of the public mind the
soldiers should take Jesus southward; that is,
through the whole breadth of the city? Some-
where in the north, it is clear, they would exe-

- cute him, as thus they would most easily effect
their object. But if they chose the north, then the
road to Joppa or Damascus would be most conve-
nient ; and no spot in the vicinity would proba-
bly be so suitable as the sliyht rounded elevation
which bore the name of Calvary. That some
hillock would be preferred, it is easy to see, as
thus the exposure of the criminal aud the alleged
canse of his crucitixion would be most effectually
secured. But the particulars detailed by the
sacred historians show that our Lord was not cru-
cified un the spot, or very near the spot, where he
was condemned, but was conducted some distance
through the city. If so, this, as appears fro
our plan, must have been towards the west. Tw
points seem thus determined : the crucitixion was
at the north-west of the city.

The account, as given in the Evangelists,
touching the place of the crucifixion and burial
of our Lord, is as follows:—Having been deli-
vered by Pilate to be crucified, Jesus was led
away, followed bya great company of people and
women, who bewailed his fate. On the way the
soldiers met one Simon, a Cyrenian, coming out
of the country, who is compelled to bear Jesus’
cross. When they were come to the place which
is called Calvary, there they crucified him. This
place was nigh to the city: and, sitting down,
they watched him there. They that passed by
reviled him, wagging their heads and scothng.
Likewise also the chief priests mocked him, with
the scribes and elders; and the people stool be-
holding. The soldiers too mocked him, There
stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his
mothers sister, and Mary Magdalene. And all
bis acquaintance and the women that followed
him trom Galilee stood afar off, beholding these
things. In the place where he was crucified there
was a gardev, und in the garden a new sepulchre,
hewn out in the rock ; there laid they Jesus, and
rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulchre.
The writer of the epistle to the Hebrews adds, that


GOLGOTHA.


Jesus suffered without the gate, subdjoming, * let
us, therefore, go forth to him without the camp
(or the city) bearing his reproach’ (He. xiii. 12,
13; Matt. xxvii.; Mark xv; Luke xxiii.; John
xix.).

We thus learn, as a positive fact, that the cru-
cifixion and burial took place out of the city, and
yet nigh to the city; and the statement of the
writer to the Hebrews is confirmed by the inci-
dental remark (Mark xv. 21), that the soldiers
seized Simon, as he was ‘coming out of the
country.’ It now appears, then, that Calvary lay
at the north-west, aud at the outside, of the city.
The reader, on perusing the abstract just given of
the evangelical narrators, combined with previous
remarks, will find reason to think that Calvary
was only just on the outer side of the second wall.
It is also clear that the place was one around
which many persons could assemble, near which
wayfarers were passing, aud the sufferers in which
could be seen or addressed by persons who were
both near and remote : all which concurs in show-
ing that the spot was one of some elevation, and
equally proves that. ‘this thing was not done ina
corner,’ but at a place and under circumstances
likely to make Calvary well known and well re-
membered alike by the foes and the friends of our
Lord. Other events which took place immedi-
ately after, in connection with the resurrection,
would aid (if aid were needed) in fixing the re-
collection of the spot deep and ineffaceably in the
minds of the primitive disciples.

Was it likely that this recollection would
perish? Surely of all spots Calvary would be
come the most sacred, the most endearing, in the
primitive church. The spot where Jesus was
crucified. died, was buried, and rose again, must
have been bound to the heart of every disciple
in the strongest and most grateful bonds. We
do not need history to tell us this ; or, rather, there
is a history—the history of man, of what human
nature is, and feels, aud loves—which declares
the fact to every intelligent mind. Nor did the
Jew, with his warm gushing affections, feel on
such a point less vividly than his fellow men.
‘The tombs of the prophets, ‘the sepulchre of
David,’ were, we read (Matt. xxiii. 29; Acts ii,
29), reverentially regarded, and religiously pre-
served from age to age. That of ‘David's Lord’
would assuredly not be neglected. It was a sea-
son of public religious festivity when our Lord
suffered. Jerusalem was then crowded with
visiters from foreign parts. Such too was the
fact at the time of the effusion of the Holy Spirit.
These pilgrims, however, soon returned bome, and
wherever they went many carried with them the
news of the crucifixion of Jesus, and told of the

lace where he had been executed. When these
vad reached their homes they became, under Pro-
vidential influences and the preaching of Apostles,
in each case, a nucleus of an infant church,
which would naturally preserve embedded in its
heart the knowledge of Calvary. Perlaps uo one
spot on earth bad ever so many to remember it
and know its precise locality, as the place where
Jesus died and rose again. First in Jerusalem,
and soon in all parts of the earth, were there
hearts that held the recollection among their most
valued treasures.

We do not think these remarks need confirma-
tion; but the passage iu the Hebrews shows that


GOLGOTHA.


they are substantially correct. We there learn
that far on in the first century Calvary was well
known in the church; that the tradition was pre-
served, and preserved in so living a form as to
be made the subject of a figurative illustration of
Christian doctrine. The memory of distinguished
places is among the- least perishable of earthly
things. Thermopylw and Runnymede are yet,
and will ever be, known. With how much more
reason Calvary! At the first there were not only
in Jerusalem and Palestine, but in all pirts of
the earth, bosoms which had found for it a shrine.
Fathers would convey their knowledge and their
impressions to sons; one generation und one
church to another. The passage in the Hebrews
would tend to keep alive the recollection. And
thus from age to age there would be a regular
transmission of the essential facts of the case, till
at length the tradition became fixed in history,
and a splendid edifice was raised in perpetual
commemoration of the great events which rendered
Golgotha the most remarkable spot on the wide
earth. Before, however, we speak more of this
edifice and this record, we must add that hea-
thenism lent an aid to the Christian tradition. It
was the fate of Jerusalem, after its capture by the
Romans, to become a heathen city; even its name
was changed into Colonia /Elia Capitolina. In
the excess of their triumphant joy, the conquerors
made Jupiter its patron God, and erected statnes
of Jupiter and Venus on the place where Jesus
had been crucitied (Sozomen, xi. 1). This was
done not so much to insult as to conciliate.
New-comers in religion have always availed
themselves of established feelings, and therefore
erected their sacred edifices on places already
consecrated in the minds of the people. So was
it wien Christianity was planted in Great Britain.
Many of our old churches stand on spots where
stood before idolatrous temples. Such was the
policy of the Romans, The mere fact of a temple
to Venus standing on Calvary suffices to show
that Calvary was the place where Jesus suffered.
The temple thus takes up the tradition and ‘trans-
mits it in stone and maible to coming ages.
This continuation of the tradition is the more im-
portant because it begins to operate at a time
when the Christians were driven from Jerusalem.
But the absence of the Christians from the holy
city was not of long duration, and even early in
the third century we find pilgrimages from distant
places to the Holy Land had already bezun, for
the express purpose of viewing the spots which the
presence and sutlerings of the Saviour bad rene
dered sacred and memorable (list. Hierosol. p.
5015 Euseb, Hist. Eccles. vi. LL). A century
Jater, Eusebius (a.p. 315) informs us that Chris-
tians visited Jerusalem from all regions of the
earth for the same object. So early and so de-
cided a current towards the holy city presupposes
a strong, wide-spread, and Jong pre-eminent
feeling—an established tradition in the church
touching the most remarkable spots; a tradition
of that nature which readily links itself with the
actual record in Hebrews.

Early in the fourth century Eusebius and Je-
rome write down the tradition and fix the locality
of Calvary in their writings. Eusebius was born
at Ceasarea, in Palestine, about a.v. 270. In 315
be became a bishop in his native country, and
lied in 310, He wasa most learned man, and


GOLGOTHA. 781


wrote a history of the Christian church. About
330 he composed his Onomasticon, which was
expressly devoted to the business of determining
and recording the sites of holy and other places
in Palestine. This work of Eusebius, written in
Greek, Jerome afterwards translated into Latin,
and thus added his authority to that of Eusebius,
Jerome took up his residence in the Holy Land
in the latter part of the fourth century, and re-
mained there till his death (for an estimate of
the value of these geographical authorities see Re-
land, Palest. p. 467, sq.). Pil zrims now streamed
to Jerusalem from all parts of the world, and that
site was fixed for Golgotha which has remained
to the present hour,

This was done not merely by the testimony of
these two learned fathers, but by the acts of the
Emperor Constantine and his mother Helena.
This empress, wheu very far advanced in life,
visited Jerusalem for the express purpose uf erect-
ing a church on the spot where the Lord Jesus
had been crucitied. The preceding details show
that the preservation of the memory of the lucality
was anything but impossible. Helena would
naturally be solicitous to discover the true spot :
whence ensues the Jikel:tood that she was not
mistaken. She had previously heard that the
holy places had been heaped up and concealed
by the heathen, and resulved to attempt to bring
them to light, eis pas &yayeiv (Theoph. in Chron.
p. 18; quoted in Reland, Palest. under ‘ Gul-
gotha’) ‘On her arrival at Jerusalem she in-
quired diligently of the inhabitants. Yet the
search was uncertain and difficult, in consequence
of the obstructions by which the heathen had
sought to render the spot unknown. These being
all removed, the sacred sepu!chre was discovered,
and by its side three crosses, with the tablet bearing
the inscription written by Pilate ‘(Robinson, B1di,
Res. ii. 14; Theodoret, i. 17). This account of her

roceedings taken from one who labours to bring
into discredit the whole of Helena’s proceedings,and
who is far too indiscriminate and sweeping in his
hostility to the primitive traditions of the church,
shows sufhciently that Helena was cautious in
her proceedings, that there did exist a tradition
on the subject, that by that tradition the empress
was guided, and that she found reason to fix the
site of Calvary on the spot where the heathen had
erected their temple and set up their profane rites.
That no small portion of the ssiieh hry not to
say legendary and incredible, is mixed up in the
accounts which the ecclesiastical historians have
given, we by no means deny; but we see no rea-
son whatever, and we think such a course very
unphilosophical, to throw doubt unsparingly over
the whole, as (by no means in the best taste) does
Dr. Robinson. However, on the site thus ascere
tained, was erected, whether by Constantine or
Helena, certainly by Roman influence and _trea-
sure, a splendid and extensive Christian temple.
Socrates (Eccles. Hist. i. 17) says, ‘the em-
peror’s mother erected over the place where the
sepulchre was a most magnificent church, and
called it new Jerusalem, building it opposite to
that old deserted Jerusalem.’ This church was
completed and dedicated a.p. 335. It was a great
occasion for the Christian world. In order to give
it importance and add to its splendour, a council
of bishops was convened, by order of the emperee,
from all the provinces of the empire, which ase


182 GOLGOTHA.


sembled first at Tyre, and then at Jerusalem.
Among them was Eusebius, who took part in the
solemnities, and held several public discourses in
the holy city (Euseb. Vit. Const.; Robinson, ii.
13). The reader's attention is directed to the
words above cited from Sucrutes, by which it
Appears that the church was built not in the old
city, but opposite to it (avtimpéowmoyv). In this
description Socrates is borne out by Eusebius
(Vit. Const. iii. 33). A reference to the plan
will show that such an account of its site cor-
responds with the locality on which the cruci-
fixion and interment took place. The church of
the holy sepulchre was burnt by the Persians in
av. 614. It was shortly after rebuilt by Mo-
destus with resources supplied by Jolin Eleemor,
patriarch of Alexandria. The Basilica or Mar-
tyrion erected under Constantine remained as
before. The Mohammedans next became mas-
ters of Jerusalem. At length Harun er Rashid
made over to Charlemagne the jurisdiction of
the holy sepulchre. Palestine again became the
gcene of battles and bloodshed. Muez, of the
race of the Futimites, transferred the seat of his
empire to Cairo when Jerusalem fell into the
hands of new masters, and the holy sepulchre is
said to have been aguin set on fire. It was fully
destroyed at the command of the third of the
Fatimite kalifs in Egypt, the building being razed
to the foundations. Iu the reign of his successor
it was rebuilt, being completed a.v. 10148; but
instead of the furmer magnilicent Basilica over the
place of Golgutha, a small chapel only now graced
the spot. The crusades soon began, The crusaders
regarded the editices connected with the sepulchre
as tuo contracted, and erected a stately temple,
the walls and general form of which are admitted
to remain to the present day (Robinson, ii. 61).
So recently, however, as a.v. 1808 the church of
the holy sepulchre was partly consumed by tire;
but being rebuilt by the Greeks, it now oflers no
traces of its recent desolation.

We have thus traced down to the present day
the history, traditional and recorded, of the
buildings erected on Golgotha, and connected
these edifices with the original events by which
they are rendered memorable. To attirm that the
evidence is irresistible may be going tuo fur. Not
less blameworthy is the carping and inculpatory
tone pursued by Robinsun in his review of the
subject. Few antiquarian questions rest on an
equally solid basis, and few points of history
would remain settled were they subject to the same
sceptical, not to say unfair, scrutiny which Robin-
son has here applied.

The sole evidence of any weight in the oppusite
balance is that urged by Robinson, that the place
of the crucifixion and the sepulchre are now tound
in the midst of the modern city. But to render
this argument decisive it should be proved that
the city occupies now the same ground that it
occupted in the days of Christ. It is, at least, as
likely that the city shonld have undergone
changes as that the site of the crucifixion should
have been mistaken. The identity of such a spot
is more likely to be preserved than the size and
relative proportions of a city which has undergone
more violent changes than probably any other
place on earth. The present walls of Jerusalem
were erected so late as a.p. 1512; and Robinson
himself remarks, en passant, that a part of Ziou is


GOLGOTHA.
now left out (p. 67). If, then, the city has been


contracted on the south, and if, also, it was after
the death of Christ expanded on the north, what
should we expect hut to find Gulgotha in the
midst of the modern city ?

Jerusalem in the days of Christ had two walls,
those termed in our plan of Jerusalem <tirst’ and
‘second.’ It is with the second wall that we
are here chiefly concerned. It began at a tower,
named Gennath, of the first wall, curved out-
ward to the north, and ended at the castle of
Antonia. The third wall ran as on the plan,
embracing a wide suburb on the north and north
west. This comprehended a sort of new city, and
was built in consequence of the large population
which by degrees fixed their abode in the space
which falls between the second and third walls.
This wall was begun under Claudius, at least
forty-one years after Christ (Soseph. De Bell. Jud,
v. 4. 2; comp. Tacit. Hist. v. 12). This third
wall, then, did not exist in the time of our Lord;
and Robinson allows that if the present site of
the sepulchre fell without the second wall, all
the conditions of the general question would be
satislied. Our plan of the city shows that it
may have fallen without the second wall. The
city bulged out on the north, as it contracted on
the south, thus bringing Golgotha into its central
parts. Robinson, however, asserts that the secund
wall must either have excluded the pool of Heze-
kiah, which was in the city, or included the site
of the sepulchre, which was out of the city. In
our plan the second wall dues neither, but leaves
both where the Scriptures place them. But the
distance from the western poiut of the temple to
the present site of the sepulchre Robinson con-
siders insufficient, it being only about a quarter
of a mile. We know not that there is auything in
Scriptural account which gives support to this
notion, A distance of a quarter of a mile appears
quite enough for the recorded events, to say ne-
thing of the essential weakness of such a position ;
for how can Robinson know that his measures
extentled along the same ground as our Lord was
hurried over ¥ But reason has already been given
why the Jews should have taken no very pro-
tracted course.

Two or three additional facts in confirmation
of the identity of the present place may, finally,
be adduced. Buckingham (Palest. p. 283) saya,
‘the present rock called Calvary, and enclused
within the church of the holy sepulchre, bears
marks in every part that is naked of its having
been a round nodule of rock standing above the
common level of the surface.’ Scholz (De Gol-
gotha si’u, p. 9) states that he traced the remains
of a wall, which ran as the second wall on the
plan runs, excluding Gelgotha and taking in the
pool of Hezekiah (Ranmer, p. 352). It may also
be remarked that since the publication of Robin-
son’s work Riumer has put forth a piece (Beitrage
zur Bib. Geog. 1843) in which he revises his
Palastina so far as Robinson's ascertaived results
render necessary ; but he remains of the same
opinion in regard to the possibility of the present
church of the sepulchre being ont of the city.
At most, a very few hundred yards only can the
original Golgotha have lain from the present site;
and the evidence in favour of its identity, if nut
decisive, is far stronger than any that has been
adduced against it, At the best, then, very smal)


GOME.


is the reason for disturbing the convictions and
distressing the hearts of the sincere believers who
visit the holy sepulchre in order to give vent to
their tearful gratitude and cherish their pious
faith—J. R. B.

GOLIATH. ([Grant.]

GOME (N%))), translated ‘rush’ and ‘bul-
rush,’ is mentioned in four places of Scripture,
from which there is no donbt that it was a plant
growing in moist situations in Kgypt, and em-
poe in the construction of vessels of different

inds, intended to float upon the water, such as
the ark in which Moses was hid, and vessels for
transit (Job viii. 11; Isa. xxxv. 7; Exod. ii. 3;
Isa. xviii. 2). The name gome, according to
Celsius (Iierobot. vol. ii. p. 138), is derived from
ND) gimme, ‘ absorbere, bibere, quia in aqua
Nascitur, et aquam semper imbibit” Though
other plants are adduced by translators and com-
Mmentators as the gome of Scripture, yet it is
evident that only the papyrus can be meant, and
that it is well suited to all the passages. Being
in some respects so obvious, it could not escape the
Notice of all translators. Hence, in the Arabic
Version, and in the Annals of Eutychius, the


word $3) burdee is given as the synonym of
Sy! y


gome in Exod. ii. 3. The Sept. in Job (viii. 11)
gives wdmupos, in Isaiah (xviii. 2) BiBAlvas,
and the Vulgate, in this last passage, papyrum.
In Arabic authors on Materia Medica, we find
the papyrus mentioned under the three heads of
Fafeer, Burdee, and Chartas. Fafeer is said
to be the Egyptian name of a kind of burdee
(bur-reed) of which paper (charta) is made; and
of burdee, the word lifer (evidently a cor-
ruption of papyrus) is given as the Greek
synonym.


The papyrus is now well known: it belongs
to the tribe of sedges or cyperacea, and is not a
rush or bulrush, as in the Authorized Version. It
may be seen growing to the height of six or eight


GOME. . ves.


feet, even in tubs, in the hothonses of this country,
and is described by the ancients as growing m
the shallow parts of the Nile. The root is fleshy,
thick, and s}reading; the stems triangular, eight
or ten feet in height, of which two or so are usually
under water, thick below bat tapering towards
the apex, and destitute of leaves; those of the
base broad, straight, and sword-shaped, but much
shorter than the stem. This last is terminated by
an involucel of about eight leaves, sword-shaped
and acute, much shorter than the mauy-rayed
umbel which they support. The secondary
umbels are composed only of three or four short
rays, with an involucel of three awl-shaped
leaflets. The flowers are in a short spike at the
extremity of each ray. Cassiodorus, as quoted
by Carpenter, graphically described it as it ape
pears on the banks of the Nile, ‘ There rises to
the view this forest without branches, this thicket
without leaves, this harvest of the waters, this
ornament of the marshes.’

The papyrus was well known to the ancients as
a plant of the waters of Egypt. ¢ Papyrum nasci-
tur in palustribus Agypti, aut quiescentibus Nili
aquis, ubi evagate@ stagnant’ (Pliny, xiii. 11).
Theophrastus, at a much earlier period, described
it as growing, not in the deep parts, Lut where
the water was of the depth of two cubits, or even
less, It was found in almost every part of Egypt
inundated by the Nile, in the Delta, especially in
the Sebennytic nome, and in the neighbourhood
of Memphis, &c. By some it was thought pecu-
liar to Egypt; hence the Nile is called by Ovid
*amnis papyrifer.” So a modern author, Prosper
Alpinus (De Plant. AEgypti, c. 36) :—‘ Papyrus,
quam blerd Agyptii nomiuant, est planta fluminis
Nili.’ By others it was thought to be a native
also of India, of the Euphrates near Babylon, of
Syria, and of Sicily. The genus cyperus, indeed,
to which it is usually referred, abounds in a great
variety of large aquatic species, which it is diffi-
cult for the generality of observers to distinguish
from one another; but there is no reason why it
should not grow in the waters of hot countries, as,
for instance, near Babylon or in India. In fact,
modern botanists having divided the genus cy-
perus into several genera, one of them is called
papyrus, and the original species P. nilotica. Of
this genus papyrus there are several species in
the waters of India (Wight, Contributions to the
Botany of India, Cyperex, p. 8%).

A brief description of the uses of this plant, as-
given in the works of the ancients, is thus summed
up by Parkinson in his Herbal, p. 1207: ‘ The
plant, say the ancients, is sweete, and used by
the Egyptians, before that bread of corne was
known unto them, for their food, and in their
time was chawed, and the sweetnesse sucked
forth, the rest being spit out; the roote serveth
them not only for fewell to burne, but to make
many sorts of vessels to use, for it yielded much
matter for the purpose. Papyrus ipse (say they),
that is the stalke, is protitable to many uses, as
to make ships, and of the barke to weave, and
make sailes, mats, carpets, some kinds of gar-
ments, and ropes also.’ The construction of pa-
pyrus boats is mentioned by Theophrastus: so
Pliny (Hist. Nat. vi. 24), ‘ Papyraceis navibus
armamentisque Nili;’ and again (vii. 56),
© Naves primum repertas in AEyypto in Nilo ex
papyro.’ Plutarch, as quoted by Rosenmiiller,


14. GOMER.


says, ‘Isis circumnavigated the marshes in a
Papyrus wherry for the purpose of collecting the
pieces of Osiris’s body. From Heliodorus’s ac-
count it appears that the Ethiopians made use of
similar boats; for he relates that the Ethiopians
in reed wherries over the Astaboras; and
e adds that these reed wherries were swift sailing,
being made of a light material, and not capable
of carrying more than two or three men.’ Bruce
relates that a similar kind of boat was made in
Abyssinia even in his time, having a keel of
acacia wood, to which the papyrus plants, first
seweil together, are fastened, being gathered up
before and behind, and the ends of the plants thus
tied together. Representations of some Egyptian
boats are given in the Pictorial Bible (ii. p. 135);
where the editor remarks that when a boat is
described as being of reeds or rushes or papyrus
(as in Egypt), a covering of skin or bitumen is to
be understood. That the papyrus was employed
for making paper is also well known, and Wil-
kinson meutions that from ancient paper being
found at Thebes and elsewhere, it is evident that
this application of it was much anterior to the
time of Alexander the Great.—J. F. R.

GOMER (3). 1. The eldest son of Japhet,
son of Noah, whose descendants Bochart (Phal,
iii. 8) supposes to have settled in Phrygia (Gen.
x. 3; comp. 1 Chron. i. 5). Most of the inter-
preters take him to be the ancestor of the Celta,
and more especially of the Cimmerii, Kyupépios,
who were already known in the time of Homer
(Odyss. xi. 14). To judge from the ancient his-
torians (Herodotus, Strabo, Plutarch, &c.), they
had in early times settled to the north of the
Black Sea, and gave their name to the Crimea,
the ancient Chersonesus Taurica. But the greater
part of them were driven from their territories by
the Scythians, when they took refuge in Asia
Minor, s.c. 7.

In the Scriptures, however, the people named
Gomer imply rather an obscure and but vaguely
known nation of the barbarous north (Rusen-
miller, Alterth. i. 1. 235, sq.)

Josephus (Antig. i. 6.1) says expressly, that
the ancestor of the Galatians, a Celtic colony,
was called Gomer (Michael. Suppl. p. 335, sq.).
The Jerusalem Targum gives Gen. x. 3 with
PDN Africanus ; Arab. FAN Turca.

2. The name of the daughter of Diblaim, wife
of the prophet Hosea (Hosea i. 3).—E. M.

GOMORRIA, one of * the cities of the plain,’
destroyed along with Sodom. An account of that
catastrophe is given under Sopom.

GOPHER WOOD (183 }'2, etz-gopher) is
mentioned only once in Scripture, as the material
ot which Noah was directed to build the ark
(Gen. vi. 14), ‘ Make thee an ark of gopher wood ;
rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch
it within and without with pitch’ (AAemar, pro-
bably ‘bitumen’). In endeavouring to ascertain
the particular kind of woud which is mentioned
in the above passage, we can get assistance only
from the name, the country where the wood was
supposed to have been procured, or the traditional
opinions respecting it. That nothing very satis-
factory has been ascertained is evident from the
various interpretations that have been given of
this word, so that some have preferred, as in our
Authorized Version, to retain the original Hebrew.


GOPHER WOOD.


The Septuagint renders it ‘ squared timbers,” and
Jeroine, in the Vulgate, renders it * planed wood"
and ‘pitched wood.’ Some have adopted the
opinion that a kind of pine-tree is intended; and
others that several species may be included,
as they all yield resin, tar, and pitch. The
Persian translator has also adopted the pine;
but Celsius objects that it was never commun
in Assyria and Babylonia. The Chaldee ver-
sion and others give the cedar, because it was
always plentiful in Asia, and was distinguished
by the incorruptible nature of its wood. But
cedar is a very general term, and coriectly ap-
pies as we have seen [Enzs], only to ditierent

inds of juniper. These, though yielding ex-
cellent wood, remarkable fur its frazrance, never
grow toa large size in any warin country. En-
tychius, patriarch of Alexandria, relates in his
Annals (p. 34), as quoted by Celsins (/ierudut.
i. p. 331), that the ark was made of a wood


called sag or saj ‘eel ce we: The


sag or saj has been thought by some to be
ebony, but apparently without any foundation,
Still less is there any likelihood of its Leing a
shrub like juniperus sabina, as indicated in a
note by Rosenmiiller, Eng. transl. p. 261. It is
curious, as already alluded to in the Essay on
the Antiquity of Hindoo Medicine, as mentioned
by Forskal, that the woods imported from India
into Arabia are say, abnoos (ebony) and sissoo
(Dalbergia sissoo). Some Persian writers on
Materia Medica consider saj to be the sil (shorea
robusta), another valued and much used Indian
timber tree, but common only along the foot of
the Himalayan mountains. The teak is the
best known and the most highly valued timber
tree on the Malabar coast, and it has long been
imported into Arabia, and also into Egypt. One
of the names by which it is known in India is
sagoon. The saj is described in some Persian
works, chiefly translations from the Arabic, as
having large leaves like elephants’ ears. Th.s
applies well to the leaves of the teak tree: and
there is little doubt, therefore, that the sej of Arad
authors is the teak tree. With respect to its bemg
the gopher wood, the present writer has alrealy
remarked in the above work: The gopher wood
of Scripture is so differently translated by different
commentators, that it is dilicult to form even a
cunjecture on the subject; besides being used ct
so early a period, and mentioned only once. It
need not have been alluded to, except that the
Arabic version translates it saj, which is the teak,
and not likely to have been the wood employed.’
The Chaldee Samaritan translator, far gop-/er,
gives, as a synonym, sisam, of which Celsius
says (Iierobot. i. p. 332), 4 Vocem obscnram,
sive referas ad fvAa@ onoduwa, que ex Indiis
adferri scribit Arrianus (Pertpl. Mar. Erythr.
p. 162), et Ebeno similia perhibent alii (Salinas.
tn Solin, p. 727). The sisam is probably the
above stssoo, mentioned by Forskal as imported
in his time into Arabia, and which is a hizhly-
valued, dark-coloured wood, of which one k nd
is called blackwood (Dalbergia latifolia). Tue
greatest number of writers have been of opinion
that by the gopher wood we are to understand the
cypress; and this opinion is supported by such
authorities as Fuller in his Sacred Miscellanies;
Bochart (Geogr. Sacra); as well as by Celsius,


- GOSHEN.


Hierobot. It has been stated that the letters 7
aud ph, & and p, differ only in the soft or hard
manner ir. which they are pronounced, and there-
fore that gopher and kxpar difler very little ‘in
sound, and that iovs in the Greek xumdpiocos
is a mere addition to the root. It is argued


further that the wood of the cypress, being almost .


incormptible, was likely to be preferred; that it
was frequently employed in later ages in the
construction of temples, bridges, and even ships;
and that it was very abundant in the countries


where, according to these authors, the ark is sup-@


posed to have been built, that is, in Assyria,
where other woods are scarce. . But wherever the
ark was built, there would be no deticiency of
timber if there was a certain degree of moisture
with warmth of climate; and we know not what
change of climate may have taken place at the
Deluge. The pine tribe, including the cypress,
appears as iikely as any other to have been em-
ployed, usually growing as they do in extensive
forests, and yielding straight and easily worked
timber, calculated, from its resinous nature,
effectually to resist moisture, especially if covered
with pitch and tar, which might easily have been
prepared from the refuse branches and timber, and
used as well as the natural bitumen. But the
whole of’ these suggestiuns amount only to con-
jectures, and there seems no possibility of arriving
at a satisfactory conclusion.—J. F.


GOSHEN ({W/3; Sept. Peaév, Tecéu), @ pro-
vince or district of Egypt in which Jacob and his
family settled through the instrnmentality of his
son Joseph, and in which they and their descend-
ants remained for a period of 430 years (Gen. xlv.
10; xlvi.28; xlvii. 27; 1.83 Exod. viii. 225 ix. 26),
The Bible does not present any detinite information
as to the precise locality of Goshen, and of course
later authorities possess only an inferior value.
There are, however, incidental expressions, allu-
sions, and implications in the Scriptures, which
afford aid in determining the spot. That Goshen
lay on the eastern side of the Nile may be justi-
fiably inferred from the fact that Jacob is not
reportel to have crossed that river; nor doves it
appear that the Israelites did so in their fight out
of Egypt. With this inference all the language
employed (see the passages as given above), to
say the least, agrees, if it does not afford an in-
direct evidence in its favour. By comparing
Exod. xiii. 17 and 1 Chron, vii, 21, it appears
that Goshen bordered un Arabia (see Gen.
xlv. 10, Sept. Pecéu "ApaBias) as well as Pa-
lestine, and the passage of the Israelites out of
Exypt shows that the land was not far removed
from the Red Sea. It appears probable that we
may fix the locality of Goshen in Lower Egypt,
on the east side of the Pelusiac branch of the
Nile, in the district around Heroopolis. The
Septuagint renders the words TSUN jU'2 ¢ land
of Gusheu’ (Gen. xlvi. 28), Ka ‘Hpowy réru,
eis yn ‘Paneoos, thus identifying Goshen with
Rameses, or the district of Pithom or Heroopolis.
(See map, No. 3, in Knight's Hluminated Atlas.)
This would make Goshen correspond with one
of the divisions of what was anciently termed
the Prefectura Arabica, Ti-Arabia, the eastern
district, lying, that is, on the eastern or Arabian
side of the Nile. This division was that of
Heliopolis or On, Matariyeh, or Ain-Shems.


GOSHEN. 785


An attempt has been made to define it accurately,
so as to identify Goshen (Rosenm. Alterthum.,
iii, 246) with the Nomos Arabi (Ptol. iv. 5), or
the country of Esch-schar Kijah (the eastern
land), which stietches south from Pelusium as
far as Belbeis (north-east from Cairo), and to
the north-east borders of the desert El Dschefar.
‘Traces are found here, it is thought, of the resi-
dence of the Israelites, in large heaps of ruins, a
few hours’ journey to the north-east of Cairo,
which the Arabs call Tell ed Jhud (Jews’ hills),
or Turbeh el Jhud (Sews praves) (Niebuhr, i. 100).
Acemding to Bois Aymé (Deserip. de [ Equpte,
viii, 111) Goshen was the valley Sabal-yar,
which begins in the vicinity of Belbeis, and em-
braces the district of Heroopolis. Robinson (Pa-
lestine, i. 37) makes light of the evidence sup-
posed to be supplied by ‘the mounds ot the Jews,"
just mentioned. He says, ‘If there is any his-
torical foundation fur this name, which is doubt-
ful, these mounds can only be referred back to
the period of the Ptolemies, in the centuries im-
mediately before the Christian era, when great
numbers of Jews resorted to Egypt and erected a
temple at Leontopolis.’ This opinion, however,
appears to us somewhat arbitrary. And what-
ever the actual origin of these mounds, the ordi-
nary account of them may be the transmission
or echo of a very ancient tradition. Robinson,
however, does not deny that Goshen is to be
found about where the-best authorities ordinarily
place it, as will appear from the following quo-
tation; we regret that the wish here spoken of was
not fullilled: ‘It had been our wish to take a
more circuitous route from Suez to Cairo, de-
scending the eastern branch or canal of the Nile


beyond Belbeis, as far as to the province of


Shur-kiyeh, and thence along the valley of the
ancient canal to the head of the gulf of Suez.
Our object in taking this route would have Leen
to make inquiries and observations personally in
relation to the land of Goshen and the Excdus
of the Israelites’ (i. 54). The following pas-age,
however, will serve to prove that even the desert
is not unsuited to pastoral purposes :—‘ The desert
which we were now crossing is not sandy, but its
surface, for the most part, isa hard gravel, often
strewed with pebbles. Numerous ways, or shal-
low water-courses, intersect. its surface. In all
these wadys there are usually to be found scat-
tered tufts of herbs or shrubs, on which the camels
browse as they pass along, and which serve like-
wise as their pasturage when turncd loose at
night. During the rainy season and afterwards,
the inhabitants of Belbeis and the Shur-kiyeh, as
probably did the Israelites of old, still drive their
mingled flocks of sheep and goats for pasturage to
this quarter of the desert.”

Laborde (Arabia Petreea, p. 58) fixes Goshen
in the country around Belbeis, on the eastern side
of the Nile. Speaking of his journey trom Cairo
by Belleis to Suez, he says, ‘ This plain is the
province of Goshen, where the children of Egypt
settled and multiplied ; it was here that the meet-
ing occurred between Jacob, the patriarch, and
Joseph, the minister and master of Egypt.’ Laborde
passed the banks of the canal which formerly
united the Nile with the Red Sea, and which, he
says, Bonaparte was the first in modern times to
observe. M. Quatremére has endeavoured to de-
fine the locality, and by comparing several pas-

oz


°


786 GOSHEN.


sages collected from different writers, he infers
that the Wady Tumilat (Wady Tomlate in La-
borde) in which the canal of Cairo terminates is
the land of Goshen: such at Jeast seems to have
been the opinion of Saadias and Abu Said, the
authors of the earliest Arabic Versions of the Old
Testament—the one for the use of the Jews, and
the other for that of the Samaritans (Mém. Géogr.
sur CEgypte). J. D. Michaelis was of opinion
(Spicil. p. 371) that Goshen extended from Pales-
tine along the Mediterranean as far as the Tanitic
mouth of the Nile, and thence inland up to Helios

lis, embracing a sweep of country so as tu take
ina part of Arabia, bordering on Egypt.
various opinions that have been held on the sub-
ject may be found classilied and considered by
Pelicans in his Handb. d. Bibl. Lit. iv. 191-
220 (see also Jablonsky, Dissert. viii. de Terra
Gosen),

This district was suitable fur a nomadic people,
who would have been misplaced in the narrow
limits of the valley of the Nile. Children of the
desert, or at least used as they were to wander
freely from one fertile plain to another with
their flocks and herds, the sons of Jacob required
a spot where the advantages of an advanced civi-
lization could be united with unrestricted freedom,
and abundance be secured without the forfeiture
of early and cherished habits, The several opi-
nions which we have given substantially agree in
referring Goshen to the conutry intervening be-
tween the desert of Arabia and Palestine on the
one side, and the Pelusiac arm of the Nile on the
other, with the Mediterranean at the hase. The dis-
trict assigned to Jacob and his family was chosen
for its superiority (Gen. xlvii. 6), ‘In the best of
the land make thy father and brethren to dwell,
in the land of Goshen let them dwell ;’ and the
subsequent increase of the Israelites themselves,
as well as the multiplication of their cattle,
shows that the territory was oue of extraordinary
fertility. Time and circumstances have doubt-
less had their effect on the fertility of a country
in which the desert is ever ready to make en-
croachments so soon as the repelling hand of man
is relaxed or withdrawn. But Laborde (p. 53)
represents the vicinity of Heliopolis as still cu-
vered with palm-trees, and as having an en-
closure, comprehending a considerable space of
ground, which is covered every year by the in-
undation of the Nile to the height of five feet.
We are not, however, to expect evidences of
luxuriant fertility. The country was chosen for
its pre-eminent fitness for shepherds. Ifa nomadic
tribe had wide space and good pasture-grounda,
they would have ‘ the best (for themselves) of the
land,’ and these advantages the district in which
we have placed Goshen abundantly supplied in
ancient times, when the waters of the Nile were
more liberally dispensed than at present to the
eastern side of the country. Nothing is needed
but water to make the desert fertile. ‘The water
of the Nile soaks through the carth for some
distance under the sandy tract (the neighbour-
hood of Heliopolis), and is everywhere found on
digging’ wells eighteen or twenty feet deep.
Such wells are very frequent in parts which the
inundation does not reach. The water is raised
from them by wheels turned by oxen and applied
to the irrigation of the fields. Whenever this
takes place the desert is turned into a fruitful


The.


GOSPEL.


field. In passing to Heliopolis we saw several
such fields in the different stages of being re-
claimed from the desert; some just laid out,
others already fertile. In returning by another way
more eastward, we a succession of beauti-
ful plantations wholly dependent on this mode of
irrigation’ (Robinson's Palestine, vol. i. p. 36).—

. -RB.

GOSPEL. The Greek word ebayyéAsoy, glad
tidings, is translated in the English Version by
the word Gospel, viz., God's spell, or the Word of
God. The central point of Christian preaching
was the joyful intelligence that the Saviour had
come into the world (Matt. iv. 23; Rom. x. 15);
and the first Christian preachers, who charac-
terized their account of the person and mission
of Christ by the term edayyéAov, were themselves
called edayyeAtoral (Eph. ii. 11; Acts xxi. 8).
The former name was also prefixed to the written
accounts of Christ; and as this intelligence was
noted down by various writers in various forms,
the particle nara (e.g. evayyéAioy kata Mar-
Oaiov) was inserted. We possess four such ac-
counts; the first by Matthew, announcing the
Redeemer as the promised King of the Kingdom
of Gud; the second by Mark, declaring him ‘a
Prophet mighty in deed and word’ (Luke xxiv.
19); the third by Luke, of whom it might be
said that he represented Christ in the special cha-
racter of the Saviour of sinners (Luke vii. 36,
8y.; xv. 18-9, sq.); the fourth by John; who re
presents Christ as the Son of God, in whom
deity and huinanity became one. The ancient
church gave tu Matthew the symbol of the lion,
to Mark that of man, to Luke that of the ox, and
to John that of the eagle; these were the four
faces of the cherubim. The cloud in which the
Lord revealed himself was borne by the cheru-
Lim, and the four Evangelists were also the bearers
of that glory of God which appeared in the form
of man.

Concerning the order which they occupy in the
Sone the oldest Latin and Gothic Mae
as also the Codex Cantabrigiensis, place Mat-
thew and Jolin first, and after them Mark and
Luke, while the other MSS. and old versions
follow the order given tu them in our Bibles. As
dogmatical reasons render a dillerent order more
natural, there is much in favour of the opinun
that their usual position arose from regard to the
chronological dates of the respective composition
of the fuur gospels: this is the opinion of Origen,
Trenzus, and Eusebius. All ancient testimonies
agree that Matthew was the earliest, and John
the latest Evangelist. The relation of the Gospel
of John to the other three Gospels, and the relation
of the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke to
each other, is very remarkable. With the ex-
ception of the history of the Baptist, and that of
Christ's passion and resurrection, we find in Jonn
not only narratives of quite different events,
but also different statements even in the above
sections, the strongest of which is that relating to
the crucifixion of Christ, which—according to
the first three Gospels—took place on the first
day of the Passover, while, to judge from John xiii.
1, 29; xviii. 28; xix. 14, 31, it would appear
that it had taken place on the eve of the day on
which the passover was to be eaten, but which was
either not eaten at all by our Lord, cr was antici-


pated by him by aday. On the other hand, the


GOSPEL.


first three Evangelists not only tolerably harmo-
nize in the substance and order of the events they
relate, but correspond even sentence by sentence
in their separate narratives (comp. ez. gr. Mark i,
21-28 with Luke iv. 31-37; Matt. viii. 31-34;
Mark vi. 34; v. 17; Luke viii. 32-37, etc.).
The thought that first sugyests itself on con-
sidering this surprising harmony is, that they all
had mutually drawn their information from one
another. Thus Grotius, ex. gr., is of opinion that
Matthew was the oldest source, and that Mark
drew his information both from Matthew and
Luke; again, according to Biisching, Luke was
the oldest, and Matthew made use of Luke and
. Mark; while most critics in Germany have
adopted the view of Griesbach, that Matthew was
the oldest, and was made use of by Luke, and
that Mark derived his information both from
Matthew and Luke. Following the sugzestion
of Rore, some of the most modern critics, such
as Weisse, Wilke (in his work entitled Ur-evan-
gelist, 1838), and Bauer, are, on the other hand,
of opinion that Mark was the original evan-
gelist, and that Matthew and Luke derived
their information from him, The dillerence of
these opinions leads to the suspicion that none
of them are right, more especially when we
consider that, notwithstanding the partial har-
mony of the three evangelists in the choice of
their sentences, there is still a surprising difference
in them as resards the words of thuse sentences;
a fact which compelled the critics who suppose
that the evangelists made use of each other's
writings, to account everywhere for such devia-
tions, and frequently to have recourse to the most
trivial and pedantic arguments. To us these dif-
ferences in word and phrase would appear incon-
ceivable were we disposed to assume that the
evangelists had copied one another.

Wilke has tried, with great show of learning
and much contideuce, to defend his opinion, that
Mark's Gospel was the primitive text; but Wilke
also is obliged to have recourse to the most
artificial hypotheses; one of which is, that even
Mark has subsequently been extended by glossarial
additions, because he could account in no other
way for the omission of Matthew and Luke to
copy the seven sections peculiar to Mark. An-
other difficulty, viz. that the text of Matthew often
uarmonizes more with the text of Luke than with
that of Mark, he is obliged to meet by assuming
that Matthew reformed the text of Mark in confor-
mity with that of Luke, etc. These difficulties
led to the supposition, already brought forward by
Le Clerc, Semler, and Lessing, that there existed
originally a Protevangelium, or primitive Gospel,
composed by the Apostles in the Aramazan Jan-
guage, which was alterwards variously recast in
the Greek tongue by authors who made use of
each other. ‘This hypothesis was particularly
developed by Eichhorn and Marsh, but is now
again generally relinquished on account of the
serious objections against it.—1. By this hypo-
thesis it is assumed that the parts in which
all the three harmonize existed in the original
evangelium, while the plus consists of additions
by the separate writers. Now, how are we to
account, in a natural way, for their frequent
‘harmony in these additions also? This objection
can only be answered in a very artificial mauner.
2. The chronological order would thus remain


GOSPEL. 787


the same. 3. Luke in his. proemium does not
mention an original evangelium, but, on the con-
trary, speaks of various reports from eye-wit-
nesses. 4. It is not likely that the knowledge of
such original evangelium should not have been
preserved fur some time; but none of the ancient
writers know anything about it.

Herder suggested another hypothesis, which
has been very ably defended by Gieseler, in Lis
work Ueber die Entstchung und friihesten Schick-
sale der Evangelien, 1818; namely, that our
written gospels are founded upon a cyclus of
oral traditions; that the original witnesses of the
life of our Lord at first confined the narration of
their testimony to Jerusalem and Judwa, where
the facts which had occurred in Galilee were little
known ; and that by frequently repeating these
accounts, not only a certain sphere of facts, but
also of phrases, and partially also of words, be-
came the fixed standard for these narrations,
without, however, encroaching altogether on the
free choice of the narrator. But this assumption,
likewise, is liable to objections: —1. If the
Apostles had really fixed for the primitive oral
gospel a certain set of facts, how does it happen,
then, that the evangelists disagree so much in
their chronological arrangement? (comp. Luke
iv. 16, sq. with Matt. xiii. 53, sqq.) 2. If the
cycle of traditions was fixed by the Apostles,
why, then, does John so entirely deviate from it ?
3. According to Papias, Mark collected what
Peter preached as circumstances required. Papias
states that on this account Peter could not have
written a complete otyragis. Does it not fullow
from this that Peter had no fixed standard, or
pattern, or cycle for his preaching? 4. According
to Luke i. 1, 2, several earlier writers bad put
together (dyardaceeGa:) into a narration the facts
told to them by eye-witnesses. Dves this not
indicate that it was the writers who first brought
into connection the accounts of the eye-wituesses ?
These arguments are, however, not quite in-
contiovertible. As to John, he is, throughout,
original; and, having written at an advanced
age and far from Palestine, he may certainly
have pursued a course of his own. Papias’s_as-
sertion does not render impossible the fact that
Peter communicated a certain fixed cycle of
facts. The same reason which induced Payias
to consider the Gospel of Mark an incomplete
syntaxis, because it does not contain everything,
may also bave induced him to consider as sucn
the communications of Peter. The phrase dvarde-
ceo ban bityynow ip Luke does not precisely indicate
that the relations of the eye-witnesses had no con-
nection, Of more importance certainly is the
argument derived from the chronological position
of certain facts in Matthew and Luke. However,
as regards Luke, there cannot be the least doubt
that his Gospel, as well as the Acts, was com-
posed and arranged from already existing original
documents ; a fact contirmed among other reasuns
also by the good Greek in the preface of his
Gospel, aud in the last chapters of the Acts, where
he himself appears in his narration as the tra-
velling companion of Paul. This good Greek
style forms a striking contrast with the Hellenic
Greek used in the historical part of his Gospel,
and in the first and greater portion of the Acés.
If, therefore, he found documents an some sepa-
rate parts of the life of our Lord, be ae been

8


{ -
788 GOSPEL.


committed to writing from the oral communi-
cations of the Apostles and Evangelists, these
documents mizht certainly have been arranged
in a chronologically ditlerent manner. 1. If
we possess in the Gospel of the most ancient
Evangelist and Apustle the pattern of oral tra-
dition, how can it be that Luke compiles his
Gospel from private documents, and thus changes
the order of the arrangement ¥ and how can it he
that Mark in this respect partially follows Luke?
This different arrangement of the events is observ-
able not only in one or two isolated instances, but
the order of all the events in Matt. iv. 23; xiv.,
differs from that of Mark and Luke. 2. It cannot
be denied that though Matthew frequently adds
to his narration some expressions which indicate
the time of the events, there is also frequently
wanting all such indications, as well in Matthew
as in Luke. It has long been assumed that
Matthew, iu his narrative of the sayings of Christ,
has grouped together kindred sayings; for in-
stance, various parables (ch. xiii.) ; denunciations
against the Pharisees (ch. xxiii.) Since, there-
fure, Mattiew frequently does not connect the va-
rious events chronologically, but rather according
to their similarity, it is likely that he had no in-
tention to furnish the succession of the times, and
there is no reason to suppose that the apostles had
any definite pattern for a compendium of gospel
history. We therefore suppose it to be necessary
to limit the hypothesis of an oral protevangelum
to the fact that ceitain groups of speeches and
events in the history of our Lord were, frum the
very beginning of Curistianity, frequently nar-
rated and also written down, Hence it will be
understood why the sentences in various evange-
lists are frequently arranged in a similar manner,
and why the evangelists frequently ditler in their
phrasevlogy, in the plus or minus of their com-
munications, and in their arrangement. The
learned Schott concludes his Jsagoge with a
confession which deprives criticism of all hope
even for the future: ‘etsi lubenter largiamur
ejusmodi conjecturam cujus ope, quecunqne dis-
ceptari possint de his illisve rectioribus evange-
liorum canonicorum parallelis prorsus definiantur,
haud facile unquam prod:turam esse. ¢ Although
we would gladly allow such a conjecture, by the
aid of which any doubt concerning tiese or those
more correct parallels of the canunical gospels
may be fully determined, yet i¢ cannot easily be
ever advanced.

As the three Evangelists mutually supply and
explain each other, they were early joined to each
other, by ‘Tatian, about ap. 170, and by Am-
monius, about ap. 230,% and the discrepancies
among them early led to attempts to reconcile
them.f¢ An ingenious essay of this kind was
written by Augustine in his book De Consensu
Evangelistarum. Starting from the principle
of a verbal inspiration in the Gospels, every
difference in expressions and facts was considered
asa proof that the speeches and facts had repeat-
edly occurred. This opinion is advanced, for
instance, in Andreas Ossiander's Harmonia Evan-
gelistarum, The subject is, however, more freely
handled by Calvin, Chemuite, Kaiser, Gerhard,
and others, in their respective works, De Havr-


* Such putting together is called synopsis.
+ Harmonies.


GOSPELS, SPURIOUS.


monia Evangelistarum. Gerhard's book, in three
folio volumes, is one of the most comprelensive
exegetical works on the four Gospels. Strause
has drawn his principal argument against the
unhistorical character of the Gospels from these
discrepancies; but he is in the first instance wrong
in eupioeinns that the Evangelist had the intention
of relating the particulars of events scrupulously
in a chronological order; nor is he less wrong in
seeing in every deviation a contradiction, and in
the attempts at reconciliation, productions of mere
dogmatic prejudice, while he is hims-lf guilty of
plejudice, by the very aversion he shows against
every altempt at such reconciliation !

When we consider that one and the same
writer, namely, Luke, relates the conversion of
Paul (Acts ix. 22, 26), with diferent incidental
circumstances, after three various ducuments,
though it would have been very easy for him te have
annulled the discrepancies, we caunot help Leng
convinced that the Evangelists attached but
little weight to minute preciseness in the inci-
dents, since, indeed, the historical truth of a
Narration consists less in them, in the relation of
minute details, than in the correct conception of
the character and spirit of the event. An expo-
sition and refutation of the most recent attacks
against the truth of the Evangelical history on
account of this discrepancy, may be seen in
Tholuck’s Glaubwiirdigkeit der Evangelischen
Geschichte; and in his Review of Strauss's Lifeof
Christ iu Literarischer Anzeiyer, 1839; also in
Ebrard's Wissenschaftliche Kritik der Erange-
lischen Geschichte, 2 vols. 1842. This last work
is a compendium of all critical investigations into
the history contained in the Gospels.—A. T.


GOSPELS, SPURIOUS (Apocrypma). The
canon of the New Testament, as we have already
seen, having been finally settled before the close
of the fourth century, the rejected writings which
bore the names of the Apostles and Evangelists
soon sunk into oblivion, and few, if any, have
descended to our times in their original shape.
From the decree of Gelasius and a few other
sources we have the names and a few detaciied
notices of a good many of these productions. We
shall first speak of those which are still extant.

Tur History or Josepn rue Carpenter,
which has been preserved in the East inan Arabic
translation, was first made known in Europe in the
commencement of the sixteenth century by Isidore
de Isolanis in his Summa de donis SQ. Josephi.
He observes that the ‘Catholics of the East’ com-
memorate St. Joseph on the 19th March, and read
the legend of the saint, omitting certain parts
which are not approved in the Roman church.
This work was first published by Wallin, at Leip-
sic, in 1722, from an Arabic MS. of the thirteenth
century, in the Brbliothégue du Roi, accom-
panied with a Latin translation. It was divided
by Wallin into chapters and verses. It is also
found in Coptic, Sahiaie, and Memphic. It is
highly esteemed by the Copts. The former part,
to chap. ix., appears to have been derived from an
ancient Gospel of the Infancy, The Latin was
republished by Fabricius.

Tux Gospst. or THe Invancy was first pub-
lished by Henry Sike, at Utrecht, in 1697, from
an Arabic MS. Sike's Latin version was repub-
lished by Fabricius, who divided it into chapters,


GOSPELS, SPURIOUS.


The Arabic was divided into corresponding chap-
ters by Thilo, in 1832.

There are several MSS. of this gospel extant,
the oldest of which known is that in the Medicean
Library, written in 1299. The narratives which
it contains were current in the second century,
and the account contained in this gospel respect-
ing Christ's learning the alphabet is mentioned
by Irenzus (Adv. Heres. i. 20) as a fabrication
of the Marcosians. The Gospel of the Infancy is
found in the catalogue of Gelasius, and it is es-
pecially remarkable from the fact that it was
most probably this gospel which was known to
Mohammed, who seems to have been unacquainted
with any of the canonical Scriptures, and who
has inserted some of its narrations in the Koran,
The Sepher Toldoth Jesu, a well-known publica-
tion of the Jews, contains similar fables with
those in this gospel (Wagenseil’s Sofa). This
work was received as genuine by many of the
Eastern Christians, especially the Nesturians and
Monophysites. It was found to have been nniver-
sally read by the Syrians of St. Thomas, in Tra-
vancore, and was condemned at the Synod of
Diamper, in 1599, by Archbishop Menezes, who
describes it as ‘the book called the Gospel of the
Infancy, already condemned by the ancieuts for
its many blaspliemons heresies and fatulous his-
tories.” Wherever the name Jesus occurs in this


gospel, he is universally eutitled st, while
Christ is called Saud, This was a distinction


introduced by the Nestorians. The Blessed
Virgin is also entitled the Lady Mary. The
Persians and Copts also received this gospel (De
la Brosse’s Lezic. Pers. voc. Tinctoria ars). The
original language was probably Syriac. It is
sometimes called the Gospel of Peter; or of
Thomas.

Tus Gosper or Tuomas THE IsragLitTE
(Greek), a work which bas flowed from the same
source with the former, was first published by
Cotelerius (Notes on the Constitutions of the
Apostles, 1. vi. c. 17, tom. i. p. 348), from an
imperfect MS. of the fifteenth century. It was
republished and divided into chapters by Fabri-
cius. The most perfect edition was that of Min-
garelli, in the Nuova Raccolta d* Opusculi scien-
tifice e filosofice, Venet. 1764, from a Bologna
MS. of the fifteenth century. Mingarelli (who
believed it to have heen a forgery of the Mani-
chees) accompanied his text with a Latin trans-
lation. Thilo has given a complete edition from
a collation of Mingarelli’s work with two MSS.
preserved at Bonn and Dresden. This gospel
relates the fable of Christ's leaming the Greek
alphabet, in which it agrees with the account in
Irenzus. In other Gospels of the Tutancy (as
in that published by Sike) he is represented as
learning the Hebrewo letters. It has been ques-
ticned whether this is the same work which is
called the Gospel of Thomas, by Origen, Am-
brose, Bede, and others. This gospel probably
had. its origin among the Gnostics, and found its
way from them, through the Manichees, into the
church; but having been more generally received
amony the heretics it was seldom copied by the
monks, which accounts for the paucity of MSS.
Nicephorus says that the Gospel of ‘Thomas con-
tained 1300 orixo [Sticuomerry)}.  Tiis


GOSPELS, SPURIOUS. 785


pseud-epigraphal work is probably the foundation
of all the histories of Christ's infancy, but it is
supposed to have been recast and interpolated.
‘HE PROTEVANGELION O¥ James has de-
scended to us in the original Greek, and was first
ublished by Bibliander, at Basel, in 1552, in a
tin version by William Postel], who asserted
that it was publicly read in the Greek churchies,
and maintained that it was a genuine work of the
Apostle James, and intended to be placed at the
head of St. Mark's Gospel. These commenda-
tions provoked the wrath of the learned Henry
Stephen, who insinuated that it was fabricated
by Postell himself. whom he calls ‘a detestable
monster’ (Introduction au Traité de la Conformité
des Merveilles Anciennes avec les Modernes,
1566). It was reprinted in the Orthodorographa
of J. Herold, Basil, 1555; and again in the
Orthodoxographa, vol. i. (1569), of Jacob
Grynaus, who entertained a very favourable
opinion of it. Subsequent discoveries have proved
that, notwithstanding the absurdity of Postell’s
high pretensions in favour of the authenticity of
this gospel, Stephen's accusations against him
were all ill-founded. There had, even at the
time when Stephen wrote, been already a Greek
translation published by Neander, of which
Stephen was not aware; it appeared among the
Apocrypha annexed by Oporin to his edition of
Luther's Catechism, Basel, 1564. It was repub-
lished by Fabricius (who divided it into ag
and subsequently by Birch and Thilo. Thilo
collated for his edition six Paris MSS., the oldest
of which is of the tenth century. From the cir.
cumstance of these MSS. containing a Greek
calendar or martyrology, and from other internal
evidences, there seems little doubt that this gospel
was formerly read in the Greek church (Mout-
faucon, Pal@ogr. Gree. p. 301). There are also
extant versions of the Gospel of the Infancy in
the Arabic and other Jangnages of the Eastern
churches, among which they appear to have pus-
sessed a high degree of authority.

Although this work is styled by Postell the
Protevangelivm, there isno MS. authority for this
title, nor fur the fact of its being ascribed to St.
James the Apostle. It only appears that the
author's name is James. The narrations of this
Gospel were known to Tertullian (Adv. Gnost.
c. viii.) Origen (Com. tn Matt. p. 223), Gre-
gory Nyssen (Orat. in diem Nat. Christ. : Opp.
vol. iii. p. 346), Epiphanius (Her. 79. $ 5),
the author of the Imperfect Work on Matt.:
Chrysost. Opp. tom. vi. p. 24), aud many others
among the ancients.

Tue Gosrxt, ov THRE Nativity oy Mary
(Latin). Although the Latins never evinced the
same degree of credulity which was shown by the
Greeks and Orientals in regard to these fubulous
productions, and although they were generally
rejected by the fathers, they were again revived
about the sixth century. Notwithstanding their
contemptuons rejection by Augustine and Jerome,
and their condemnation by Popes Innocent and
Gelasius, they still found readers in abundance.
Gelasius expressly condemns the book concerning
the Nativity of St. Mary and the Midwife.

The Gospel of the Nativity of Mary, which
most probally, in its present form, dates its origin
from the sixth century, has been even recom-


mended by the pretended authority of St. Jerome


7190 GOSPELS, SPURIOUS.


There is a letter extant, said to be written by the
Bishops Chromatius and Heliodorus to Jerome,
requesting him to translate out of Hebrew into


Latin the history of the Birth of dfary, and of;


the Birth and Infancy of Christ, in order to
oppose the fabulous and heretical accounts of the
same, contained in the apocryphal books. To
this Jerome accedes, observing at the same time
that the real anthor of the book was not, as they
supposed, the Evangelist Matthew, but Seleucus
the Manichee. Jerome observes that there is
some truth in the accounts, of which he furnishes
atranslation from the original Hebrew. These
pretended letters of Jerome are now universally
acknowledged to be fabrications; but the apo-
eryphal gospel itself, which is the same in sub-
stance with the Protervangelion of James, is
still extant in Jerome's pretended Latin version.
This gospel was republished by Mr. Jones from
Jerume’s works. It is from these Gospels of the
Infancy that we have learned the names of the
yarents of the Blessed Virgin, Joachim (although
Bele reads Eli) and Anna. The narratives con-
tained in these gospels were incorporated in the
Golden Legend, a work of the thirteenth century,
which was translated into all the languages of
Europe, and frequently printed. There are extaut
some metrical accounts of the same in German,
which were popular in the era of romance. These
legends were. however, severely censured by sume
eminent divines of the Latin church, of whom it
will be sufficient to name Alcuin, in bis Homilies,
in the ninth, and Fulbert and Petrus Damianus
(bishop of Ostia) in the eleventh century. ‘Some,’
says the latter, ‘boast of being wiser than they
should be, when, with superfluous curiosity, they
inquire into the names of the parents of the
Blessed Virgin, fur the Evangelist would surely
mot have failed to have named them if it were
rofitaple to mankind ' (Sermon on the Nativity).
failmer, the monk, iu his book on the Excellence
of the Virgin, writes in a similar strain (cap. ii.
Anselm. Opp. p. 435, Paris, 1721). Luther also
inveizhs against the readers of these books (/Zomul.
- ed. Walch. tom. xi.3 and Zable-Talk, ch. vii
tom. xxii. p. 396).

There were several editions of Jerome's pre-
tended translation published in the fifteenth cen-
tury, one of them by Caxton, It is printed by
Thilo from a Paris MS. of the fourteenth ceu-
tury, and divided by him into twenty-four chap-
ters, after a MS. of the fifteenth century in the
same library. One of the chief objects of the
writer of these gospels seems to be to assert the
Davidical origin of the Virgin, in opposition to
the Manichees.

Mr. Jones conceives that the first author of
these ancient legenis was a Hellenistic Jew, who
lived in the second century, but that they were
added to and interpolated by Seleucus at the end
of the third, who became their reputed author;
and that still further additions were made by the
Nestorians, or some late Christians in India.
Lardner (Credébility, vol. viii ) so far ditfers from
Mr. Jones as to believe the author not to have
been a Jew. That these legendary accounts have
not altogether lost their authority appears from
the Life of St. Joseph, in the last number of the
Catholic Magazine (December, 1813).

The Gospel of the Nativity of Mary was re-
ceived by many of the ancient heretics, and is


GOSPELS, SPURIOUS.


mentioned by Epiphanius, St. Augustine, and
Gelasius. The Gnostics and Manichees endea-
voured to fonnd on its authority some of their
peculiar opinions (such as that Christ was not
the Soa of God before his baptism, and that he
was uot of the tribe of Judah, but of that of Levi);
as did also the Collyridians, who maintained that
too much honour could not be paid to the Blessed
Virgin, and that she was feraclt: born of a virgin,
and ought to be worshipped with sacrifices.

Although the Gospri. oy Marcion, or rather
that of St. Luke as corrupted by that heretic in
the second century, is no longer extant, Professor
Hahn has endeavoured to restore it from the ex-
tracts found in ancient writers, especially Ter
tullian and Epiphanius. This work has been
published by Thilo.

Thilo has also published a collation of a cor
rupted Greek Gosegs or Sr, Joun, found in the
archives of the Knights Templars in Paris. This
work was first noticed (in 1828) by the Danish
Bishop Muenter, as well as by Abbé Grezoire,
ex-bishop of Blois. It is a vellum MS. in
large 4to., said by persons skilled in palaoyraphy
to have been executed in the thirteenth or four-
teenth century, and to have been copied from a
Mount Athos MS. of the twelfth, The writing
is in gold letters. It is divided into nineteen
sections, which are called gospels, and is ou this
account supposed to have been designed for
liturgical use, These sections, corresponding in
Most instances with our chapters (of which, how.
ever, the twentieth and twenty-first are omitted),
are subdivided into verses, the same as those now
in use, and said to have been first invented by
Robert Stephen [Verses]. The omissions and in
terpolations (which latter are in barbarous Greek}
represent the heresies and mysteries of the Knights
Templars. Notwithstanding all this, Thilo con
siders it to be modern, and fabricated since the
commencement of the eighteenth century.

One of the most curious of the apocryphal
gospels is the Gosres. oy Nicopemus, or Acta
or Pinare. It is a kind of theological romance
partly founded on the canonical gospels, The
first part, to the end of ch. xv., is little more than
a paraphrastic account of the trial and death
of Chiist, embellished with fabulous additions.
From that to the end (ch. xxviii.) is a detailed
account of Christ's descent into hell to liberate
the spirits in prison, the history of which is said
to have been obtained from Lenthius and Cha-
rinus, sons of Simeon, who were two of those
“saints who slept.’ but were raised from the dead,
and came into the holy city after the resurrection,
This part of the history is so far valuable, that
it throws some light upon the ancient ideas
current among Christians on this subject. It is
therefore considered by Birch (Auctarium, Proleg.
p. vi.) to be as valuable in this respect as the
writings of the Fathers.

The subscription to this book states that it was
found by the emperor Theodosius among the
public records in Jerusalem, in the hall of
Pontius Pilate (a.p. 380). We read in chap.
xxvii. that Pilate himself wrote all the trans-
actions from the relation of Nicodemus, who had
taken them down in Hebrew; and we are in-
formed by Epiphanius that the Quartadecimans
appealed to the Acts of Pilate in favour of their
opinions as to the proper time of keeping Easter.


GOSPELS, SPURIOUS.


&@ was written in these Acts that our Saviour
suffered on the eighth Kal. of April, a circum-
stance which is stated in the subscription to the
present Acts. It is uncertain, however, when
this work was first called by the name of Nico-
demus.

The two ancient apologists, Justin Martyr and
Tertullian, both appeal in confirmation of our
Saviour's miracles and crucitixion to the Acés
of Pilate (Justin Martyr, Apology, pp. 76, 84;
Tertullian, Apol. c. 21, or English transl. by
Chevallier, 1833). From this circumstance it
has been generally held that such documents
must have existed, although this fact has been
called in question by Tanaquil Faber and Le
Clere (Jones, On the Canon, vol. ii. p. 282,
pt. iii. ch. 29). These appeals, however, in all
probability tirst furnished the idea of the present
saad fraud. Mr. Jones supposes that this may

ave been done in order to silence those pagans

who denied the existence of such Acts. The
citations of those Fathers are all found in the
present work.

We have already seen that a book entitled the
Acts of Pilate existed among the Quartadeci-
mans, a sect which originated at the cluse of the
third century. We are informed by Eusebins
that the heathens forged certain Acts ot Pilate
full of all sorts of blasphemy against Christ,
which they procured (a.p. 303) to be dispersed
through the empire; and that it was enjoined on
achoolmasters to put them into the hands of chil-
dren, who were to learn them by heart instead of
their lessons. But the character of the Guspel of
Nicodemus, which contains no blasphemy of the
kind, forbids us to identity it with those Acts.
This gospel probably had its origin in a later
age. From the circumstance of its containing
the names of Lenthius and Charinus, Mr. Jones
conceives it to have been the work of the cele-
brated fabricator of gospels, Lucius Charinus,
who flourished in the beginning of the fourth
century. It is certainly not later than the fifth
or sixth. During the persecution under Maxi-
min,’ says Gieseler (Eécles. Hist. vol. i. § 24,
note), ‘the heathens first brought forward certain
calumnious Acts of Pilate (Euseb. ix. 5), to
which the Christians opposed others (Epiphan.
Her. 79, § 1), which were afterwards in various
ways amended. One of these improved ver-
sions was called afterwards the Gospel of Nico-
demus.’

Beausobre suspected that the latter part of the
book (the descent into hell) was taken from’ the
Gospel of Peter, a work of Lucius Charinus
now lost. Thilo (Coder Apocryphus) thinks that
it is the work of a Jewish Christian, but it is
uncertain whether it was originally written in
Hebrew, Greek, or Latin. The only Greek
writer who cites it is the author of the Synaz-
arion, and the first of the Latins who uses it is
the celebrated Gregory of Tours (Hist, Frane. i.
20, 23).

The Gospel of Nicodemus (in Latin) was one
of the earliest books printed, and there are subse-
quent editions in 1490, 1516, 1522, and 1538,
and in 1569 in the Orthodoroyrapha of Grynzus,
It was afterwards published by Fabricius (Cod.
Apoc.), who divided it into chapters. Fabricius
gives us no information respecting the age or
eharacter of his MS., which is extremely defective


GOSPELS, SPURIOUS.


and inaccurate. Mr. Jones republished thig
with an English version.

The Greek Gospel of Nicodemus was first pub-
lished from an incorrect Paris MS. by Birch
(Auctarium), and subsequently, from a collation
of several valuable manuscripts, the most ancient
of which are of the thirteenth century, by Thilp,
with the Latin text of the very ancient MS. at
Einsidl, described by Gerbert in his Iter Ale-
mannicum. It has been shown by Smidt (Bibi.
Suir Critik und Exegese) that the present MSS,
exhibit in their citations from the canonical books
a text of the sixth century, and consequently that
this gospel is extremely useful in a critical point
of view.

The esteem in which this work was held in
the middle ages may be seen from the number
of early versions which were in popular use,
of which innumerable MSS. have descended to
our times. The earliest of these is the Anglo-
Saxon translation, printed at Oxford in 1698,
from a Cambridge MS. (Thwaites's Heptateu-
chus). This is a translation from the Latin, as
none of the Greek MSS. contain Pilate’s letter
to Claudius. ‘There are aleo MSS. of the same
in the Bodleian and Cauterbury libraries, That
in the Bodleian is divided into thirty-four chaps
ters. There are several MSS. of the English
version in the Bodleian, one in Sion College,
and one in Enylish verse in Pepys's collection.
It was also translated by Wickliffe; and there
were versions printed in London, in 1507 and
1509, by Julian Notary and Wynkyn de Worde,
which ran ‘throngh several editions (Panzi’s
Annals). The latest published before Mr. Jones's
work was by Joseph Wilson in 1767. He says
nothing of the age of his MS., but the fullowing
specimen from the prologue may not prove un-
interesting :—

‘It befel in the eighteenth year of the seigniory
of Tiberius Cxsar, Emperor of Rome, and in the
seigniory of Herod, who was King of Galilee, the
8th Kalend of April, which is the 25th day of
March, the fourth year of the son of Velom, who
was Counsellor of Rome, and Olympias had been
afore two hundred years and two; at this time
Joseph and Annas were lords above all justices of
peace, mayors and Jews. Nicodemus, who was
a worthy prince, did write this blessed history in
Hebrew, and Theodosius the emperor did trans-
late it out of Hebrew into Latin, and Bishop
Turpin did translate it out of Latin into French,
and hereafter did ensue the blessed histury called
the Gospel of Nicodemus.’ The regard, indeed,
in which this book was held in England will be
understood from the fact that, in 1524, Erasmus
acquaints us that be saw the Gospel of Nico-
demus aftixed to one of the columns of the cathe-
dral of Canterbury.

Translations were also common in French,
Italian, German, and Swedish. In the French
MSS. and editions it is united with the old
romance of Perceforest, King of Great Britain.
There was also a Welsh translation (Lhuyd’s
Archeoloyia, p. 256), and the work was known
to the Eastern Christians, and has been even
supposed to be cited in the Coptic liturgy 5 but
this has been shown by Ladolf to be a mistake, as
the lesson is from the history of Nicodemus, in
John iii.


Of the gospels no longer extant, we know


793 GOSPELS, SPURIOUS.


little more than that they once existed. We
read in Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Origen, Eusebius,
and other ecclesiastical writers, of the Gospels of
Eve or of Perfection, of Barnabas (ancient and
modern), of Bartholomew, of Busilides, of Hesy-
chins, of Judas Iscariot, of the Valentinians, of
Apollos, of Cerinthus, of the Twelve Apostles, and
several others. Sume of these were derived from
the Gnostics and other heretics; others, as: the
Gospel of Matthias, are supposed by Mill, Grabe,
*and most learned men to have been genuine gns-
pels now lost. Those of which we have the fullest
details are the Gospel of the Egyptians and that
of the Nazanenrs. This latter is most probably
the same with that of the Hebrews, which was
used by the Ebionites. It was supposed by St.
Jerome to have been a genuine Gospel of St.
Matthew, who, he says, wrote it in the Hebrew
language and letters. He copied it himself from
the original in the library of Casarea, trans-
lated it into Greek and Latin, and has given
many extracts from it. Grabe conceived this
gospel to have been composed by Jewish converts
soon after our Lord's ascension, before the com.
ition of the canonical Gospel of St. Matthew.
bana Grotius, Father Simon, and Du Pin,
Jook upon it as the Gospel of St. Matthew—inter-
polated, however, by the Nazarenes. Baronius and
Grabe think that it was cited by Ignatius, or the
author of the Epistles ascribed to him. Others
look upon it as a translation altered from the
Greck of St. Matthew. Mr. Jones thinks that
this Gospel was referred to by St. Paul in his
Fpistle tu the Galatians, It is referred to by
Hexesippns (Euseb. Eccl. Hist. iv. 22), Cle
mens Alexandrinus (Strom. ii. p. 280), Origen
(Comm. on John; Hom. viii. in Matt.), and
Eusebins (Hist. Eccl. iii, 25, 27, 39). Epipha-
nius (Her. § 29, 30) acquaints us that it was
held in great repute by the ancient Judaizing
Christians, and that it began thus: ‘ It came to
s in the days of Herod king of Judwa that
soln came baptizing with the baptisin of repent-
ance in the river Jordan, &c. It consequently
wanted the genealogy and the two first chapters.


The Gosprt or Tue Eoyprians is cited by
Clemens Alexandrinus (Strom. iii, pp. 449,
452, 153, 463), Origen (Hom. in Luc. p. 1), Am-
brose, Jerome (Pref. to his Comm. on Matt.),
and Fpiphanius (res, Ixia. § 2). Grabe, Mill,
Du Pin, and Father Simon, who thought highly
of this Gospel, Jooked upon it as one of the works
referred. to by St. Luke in the commencement of
his Gospel. Mill ascribes its origin to the Es-
sene:, and supposes this and the former Gospel to
have been composed in or a little before a.p. 58.
It is cited by the Pseudu-Clement (Second Epistle
to the Corinthians, or Chevallier’s Translat:on,
1833), who is generally supposed to have written
not before the third century. (See Car. Chr.
Schmidt's Corpus omnium vet. Apocr. extra
Biblia; Kleuker, De Apoc. N. T.~ Hencke, De
Pilati actis probab.; W.L. Brann, De indole,
@tate ct usu libr. Apocr. vulgo tnscripti Evan-
gel. Nicodemi, Berlin, 1794; Birch’s Auctariwn,
Fasc. 1, Hafn. 1804. Hone's Apocryphal N. T.,
London, 1820, which in its external form was
designed to be an imitation of the English New
Testament, is of no critical use. The Ortho-


doxographa of Grynzus, 7 vols. in 2, ful. Basil,


GREECE.


1569, of whicn there was formerly a copy im the
British Museum, which exists there no longer;
but there is a fine copy in Mr. Darling's valuable
Clerical Library.)—W. W.

GOURD. [Krxaron.]


GOZAN (j113; Sept. rw{dy), a river of
Media, to the country watered by which Tiglath-
pileser first, and afterwards Shalmaneser, trans-
ported the captive Israelites (1 Chron. v. 26;
2 Kings xvii. 6). It is unnecessary to trouble
the reader with antiquated conjectures conceming
this river, as, since the appearance of Major
Rennell’s Geography of Herodvtus, Lond. 1600
(which contains a section, xv., ‘ Concerning the
disposal of the Ten Tribes of the Jews,’ pp. 389-
407), there has been scarcely a dissenting voice
to Ais conclusion—that the Gozan is no other
than the present Ozan, or, with the prefix, Kizzil-
Ozan (Golden River), which is the principal
river of that part of Persia that answess to the
artcient Media. Everything in criticis » or travel
which has since transpired has tended to confirm
this most happy conjecture. When Major Renuell
wrote it was scarcely known a» well as it is now,
to what extent the Oriental Jews tiiemselves cou
nect the memories of the first captivity with the
country through which the Kizzil-Ozan flows.
This river rises eight or nine miles south-west of
Sennah, in Kurdistan. It runs along the north-
west frontier of Irak, and passes under the Kafu-
lan Koh, or Mountain of Tigris, where it is met
by the Karanku, ‘These two rivers combined
force a passage through the great range of Cau-
casan, and, during their course, form a junction
with the Sharood. ‘he collective waters, under
the designation of Siteed Rood or White River,
so named from the foam occasioned by the rapidity
of its current, flow in a meandering course through
Ghilan to the Caspian Sea (Sir John Macdonald
Kinneir's Geograph. Memoir of the Persian Em-
Pire, pp. 121, 122; Morier's Second Journey,
p. 208; Ker Porter's Travels, i. 207). The present
writer, in crossing the river in September, under
the Kafulan Koh, by a bridge of three arches,
found it there a low but rapid stream, flowing
hetween well wooded banks, and ina deep chanuel
which afforded manifest traces of its breadth and
impetuosity when swollen by the periodical rains
and hy the drainage of the mountains.

GRAPE. [Vine.]

GRASS. [Dxsua and Cuaztr.]

GRASSHOPPER (33F). The creature de-
noted by this Hebrew word so evidently belongs
to the class of ‘ flying creeping things‘ (Lev. xi.
21, 22), that the grasshopper, according to the
common acceptation of the word, can scarcely be
the proper translation. Other reasons render it
most probable that @ species of locust is intended.
It is, therefore, referred to the general English
word [Locust], under which the various species
will be considered which are uot already treated
of under the Hebrew names [(Cuarcox; ee


J.¥.
GRAVE. [Buriat.]


GREECE. The relations of the Hebrews with
the Greeks were always of a distant kind, until
the Macedonian conquest of the East: hence in
the Old Testament the mention of the Greeks is
naturally rare. It appears by Cruden's Concord


GREECE.


ence that § Tubal and Javan,’ in connection, are
named four times, Dan and Javan once (Ezek.
xxvii. 19), and Javan, translated by us Greece
and Greeks, five times, of which three are in the
book of Daniel. Of these passages, that which
couples Dan and Javan is generally referred to a
different tribe [see Javan]; in the rest Javan is
understood of Greece or its people. The Greek
nation had a broad division into two races,
Dorians and Ionians: of whom the furmer seem
to have long lain hid in continental parts, or on
the westem side of the country, and had a tem-
perament and institutions more approaching to
the Italic. The Ionians, on the contrary, retained
many Asiatic usages and tendencies, witnessing
that they had never been so thoroughly cut off as
the Dorians from Oriental connection. When
afterwards the Ionic colonies in Asia Minor rose
to eminence, the Ionian race, in spite of the com-
petition of the half Doric A£olians, continued to
attract most attention in Asia; and it is not
wonderfil that the Ionian name (for Javan is the
same word as Idwy) should have maintained its
extensive application in Oriental usage. Just
so in the ‘ Perse’ of the tragic poet Aschylus,
the Persians are made to style all the Greeks
Idoves, t. e. Javan.

The few dealings of the Greeks with the
Hebrews seem to have been rather unfriendly,
to judge by the notice in Zech. ix. 13. In Juel
iti. 6, the Tyrians are reproached for selling the
children of Judah and Jerusalem to the Grecians:
but at what time, and in what circumstances,
must depend on the date assigned to the book of
Joel [see rie With the Greeks of Cyprus or
Chittim, the Hebrews were naturally better ac-
quainted; and this name, it would seem, might
easily have extended itself in their tongue to
denote the whole Greek nation. Such at least is
the most plausible explanation of its use in
1 Mace. i. 1, and viii. 1.

The Greeks were eminent for their appreciation
of beauty in all its varieties; indeed their religious
creed oweil its shape mainly to this peculiarity of
their mind; for their logical acuteness was not
exercised on such subjects until quite a later
period. The puerile or indecent fables of the
old mythology may seem to a modern reader to
have been the very soul of their religion; but to
the Greek himself these were a mere accident, or
avehicle for some embodiment of beauty. He
thought little whether a legend concerning Ar-
temis or Apollo was true, but much whether the
dance and music celebrating the divinity were
solemn, beautiful, and touching. The worship
of Apollo, the god of youth and beauty, has been
regarded as characterizing the Hellenic in contrast
with the older Pelasgian times; nor is the fact
without siznilicance, that the ancient temple and
oracle of Jupiter at Dodona fell afterwards into
the shade in comparison with that of Apollo at
Delphi. Inieed the Dorian Spartans and the
Ionian Athenians alike regarded Apollo as their
tutelary god. who was "ArdAAwy mxarpgos at
Athens, and "AréAAwv Kapyeios at Amycle.
Whatever the other varieties of Greek religious
ceremonies, no violent or frenzied exhibitions arose
out of the national mind ; but all such orgies (as
they were called) were imported from the East,
and bad much difficulty in establishing themse!ves
on Greek soil. Quite ata late period the managers


GREECE. 793


of orgies were evidently regarded as mere jugglers
of not a very reputable kind (see Demosth. De
Corond, § 79, p. 313); nor do the Greek States, as
such, appear to have patronized them. On the
contrary, the solemn religious processions, the
sacred games and dances, formed a serious item
in the public expenditure; aud to be permanently
exiled trom such spectacles would have been a
moral death to the Greeks, Wherever they settled
they introduced their native institutions, and
reared temples, gymnasia, baths, porticoes, se-
puichres, of characteristic simple elegance. The
morality and the religion of such a people natu-
rally were alike superticial ; nor did the two stand
in any close union. Bloody and cruel rites
could find no place in their creed, because faith
was not earnest enough to endure much self-
abandonment. Religion was with them a senti-
ment and a taste rather than a deep-seated con-
viction, On the loss of beloved relatives they felt
a tender and natural sorrow, but unclouded with
a shade of anxiety concerning a future life.
Through the whole of their later history, during
Christian times, it is evident that they had little
power of remorse, and little natural firmness of
conscientious principle: and, in fact, at an earlier
and critical time, when the intellect of the nation
was ripening, an atrocious civil war, that lasted
for twenty-seven years, inflicted a political and
social demoralization, from the effects of which
they could never recover. Besides this, their very
admiration of beauty, coupled with the degraded
state of the female intellect, proved a frightful
source of corruption, such as no philosophy could
have adequately checked. From such a nation
then, whatever its intellectual pretensions, no
healthful influence over its neighbours could flow,
until other and higher inspiration was infused
into its sentiment.

Among the Greeks the arts of war and ‘peace
were carried to greater perfection than among
any earlier people. In navigation they were little
behind the Tyrians and Carthaginians ; in poli-
tical foresight they equalled them; in military
science, both by sea and land, they were decidedly
their superiors ; while in the power of reconciling
subject-foreigners to the conquerors and to their
institutions, they perhaps surpassed all nations of
the world. Their copious, cultivated, and flexible
tongue carried with it no smal] mental education
to all who learned it thoroughly; and so sayacious
were the arrangements of the great Alexander
throughout his rapidly acquired Asiatic empire,
that in the twenty years of dreadful war between
his generals which followed his death, no rising
of the natives against Greek influence appears to
have been thought of. Without any change of
population adequate under other circumstances
to effect it, the Greek tongue and Greek feeling
spread far and sank deep throngh the Mace-
donian dominions. Half of Asia Minor became
a new Greece; and the cities of Syria, North
Palestine, and Egypt, were deeply imbued with
the same influence. Yet the purity of the Hellenic
stream was various in various p’aces; and some
account of the mixture it underwent will be given
in the Article He.Lenists.


When a beginning had been made of preach-
ing Christianity to the Gentiles, Greece imme-
diately became a principal sphere for missionary


794 HABAKKUK. , :


exertion. The vernacular tongue of the Helle-
nistic Christians was understood over so large
an extent of country, as almost of itself to point
out in what direction they should exert them-
selves. The Grecian cities, whether in Euro)
or Asia, were the peculiar field for the Apostle
Paul; for whose labours a superintending Provi-
dence had long before been providing, in the
large number of devout Greeks who attended the
Jewish synagogues. Greece Proper was divided
by the Romans into two provinces, of which the
northern was called Macedonia, and the southern
Achaia (as in 2 Cor. ix. 2, &c.); and we learn
incidentally from Acts xviii. that the pro-consul
of the latter resided at Corinth. ‘To determine
the exact division between the provinces is diffi-
cult; nor is the question of any ce toa
Biblical student. Achaia, however, had probably
very nearly the same frontier as the kingdom of
mouern Greece, which is limited by a line reach-
ing from the gulf of Volo to that of Arta, in
great part along the chain of Mount Othrys. Of
the cities celebrated in Greek historyg none are
prominent in the early Cliristian times except
Coriuth. Laconia, and its chief town Sparta, had
ceased to be of any importance: Atheus was
never eminent as a Christian church. In Mace-
donia were the two great cities of Philippi and
Thessalonica (formerly called Therme); yet of
these the former was rather recent, being founded
by Philip the Great; the latter was uot distin-
guished above the other Grecian cities on the
same coast. Nicopolis, on the gulf of Ambracia
(or Arta), had been built by Augustus, in me-
mory of his victory at Actium, aud was, perhaps,
the limit of Achaia ou the western coast (Tacitus,
Anaal. ii. 53). It had risen into sume import-
ance in St. Paul's days, and, as many suppose,
it is tu this Nicopolis that he alludes in his
epistle to Titus. (See further under Acuaia and
Nicuniie ak W.N.

GREYHOUND. [Zarzr; Doa.]

GRINDING. (Miu1.)

GUEST. [Hoseiraity.]


H.


HABAKKUK (P4P3M), one of the most dis-
tinguished Jewish prophets, who flourished about
610 Bc. the name descending in the form of
wp, from PIN, amplecti, aud denoting, as
observed by Jerome, as well a ‘ favourite’ as a
© struggler.’ Abarbanel thinks that in the latter
sense it has allusion to the patriotic zeal of the
prophet, fervently contending fur the welfare of his
country: but other pruphets did the same; and
in the first and less distant signification, the
name would be one like Theopiilus, ‘a friend
of God,’ which his parents may have given bim
for a good omen. The Greeks, uot only the
Septnagint translators but the fathers of the
Church, probably to make it more sonorous,
corrupt it into "ApaBaxodk, "ApaBaxovpw, or as
Jerome writes, ’ABaxovpw, and cnly one Greek
copy, found in the liliary of Alcala in Spain,
has ’ABBaaovn, which secms to be a recent cor-
rection made to suit the Hebrew text. Of this
prophet’s birth-place, parentave, and life we have
ouly apocryphal and conflicting accounts, The
Peeudo-Epipbanius (De Vitis Prophet. Opp. tom.


HABAKKUK.


ii. 18, p. 247) states that he was of the tribe of
Simeon, and born in a place called ByS(oxtp
(al. Bid{exdp); that he fled to Ostrarine when
Nebuchadnezzar attacked Jerusalem, but after-
wards returned home, and died two years before
the return of his countrymen. But rabbinical
writers assert that he was of the tribe of Levi, and
mame different birth-places (Huetius, Leas.
Evang. Prop. iv. p. 508). In the apucryphal
appendix to Daniel, in the story of Bel and the
Dragon, we are told that an angel seized Habak-
kuk by the hair, when he was in Judwa carrying
food to his reapers in the field, and trausported
him through the air to the lions’ den in Batylon,
where Daniel then lay; and that, after having
provided the latter with victuals, he was the same
day carried back to his own country in like man-
ner. Eusebius notices that in his time the tomb
of Habakkuk was shown in the town of Ceila, in
Palestine; and this is repeated also by Nice-
phorns ([Hist. Eccles, xii. 48), and Sozomen (vii.
29); still there are other writers who name dif-
ferent places where, accurdiug to common opinion,
he had been busied (Carpzov, Introd. ad libros
canonicos V. I’, p. 402).

A full and trustworthy account of the life of
Habakkuk would explain his imagery, and many
of the events to which he alludes; but since we
have no information on which we cau depend,
nothing remains but to determine frum the book
itself its historical basis and its age. Now, we
find that in chap. i. the prophet sets forth a vision,
in which he discerned the injustice, vielence, and
oppression committed in his country by the rapa-
cious and terrible Chaldzans, whose oppiessivns
he announces as a divine retribution for sins com-
mitted ; consequently he wrote in the Chaldgan
period, shortly befure the invasion of Nebuchad-
nezzar which rendered Jehoiakim tributary to
the king of Babylon (2 Kings xxiv. 1). When
he wiote the first chapter of his prophecies, the
Chaldzans could not yet have invaded Palestine,
otherwise he would not have introduced Jebovah
saying (i. 5), ¢ 1 will work a work in your days,
which ye will not believe, though it be told you;’
(ver. 6) ‘for I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter
and hasty nation, which shail march through the
breadth of the land to pussess the dwelling-places
that are not theirs.’ From ver. 12 it is alsv evi-
deut that the ruin of the Jews had nop then been
eflected ; it gays, ‘the Lord ordained them for
judgment, established them for correction.” Agree-
ably to the general style of the prophets, who to
lamentations and announcements of divine pu-
nisbinent add consolations and cheering hopes
for the future, Habakkuk then proceeds in the
second chapter to foretell the future humiliation
of the conquerors, who plandered so many na-
tions. He also there promulgates a vision of
events shortly to be expected; (ver. 3) * the
visiun is yet tor an appvinted time, but at the end
st shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait
for it, because it will surely come; it will uct
tarry.” This is succeeded in the third chapter
by an ode, in which the prophet celebrates the
deliverances wrought by the Almighty for his
people in times past, and prays for a similar ine
terference now to mitigate the coming distresses
of the nation; which he gues on to describe, repre-
senting the land as already waste and desolate,
and yet giving encouragement to hope for a retum


HABAKKUK.


of better times. Some interpreters are of opinion
that ch. ii. was written in the reign at Johoaching
the son of Jehoiakim (2 Kings xxiv. 6), after
Jerusalem had been besieged and conquered by
Nebuchadnezzar, the king made a prisoner, and,
with many thousands of his subjects, carried
away to Babylon; none remathing in Jerusalem,
save the poorest class of the people (2 Kings xxiv.
14). But of all this nothing is said in the book
of Habakkuk, nor even so much as hinted at;
and what is stated of the violence and injustice
of the Chaldeans does not imply that the Jews
had already experienced it. The prophet dis-
tinctly mentions that he sets forth what he had
discerned in a vision, and he, therefore, speaks of
events to be expected and coming. It is alsoa
supposition equally gratuitous, according to which
some interpreters refer ch. iii. to the period of the
last siege of Jerusalem, when Zedekiah was taken,
his sons slain, his eyes put out, the walls of the
city broken down, and the temple burut (2 Kings
xxv. 1-10). There is not the slightest allusion
to any of these incidents in the third chapter of
Habakkuk; and from the 16th verse it appears,
‘that the destroyer is only coming, and that the

prophet expresses fears, not of the entire destruc-
tion of the city, much less of the downfall of the
state, but only of the desolation of the country.
It thus appears beyond dispute, that Habakkuk
ones: in the beginning of the reign of Je-

iakim, about the year stated ubove. Carpzov
(Introductio ad libr. canon. V’. T., pp. 79, 410)
and Jahn (Introd. in libros sacros V. T., ii.
§ 120) refer our prophet to the reign of Manasseh,
thus placing him thirty odd years earlier; but
at that time the Chaldwans had not as yet given
just ground for apprehension, and it would have
been injudicions in Habakkuk prematurely to fill
the minds of the people with fear of them. Some
additional support to our statement of the age of
this book is derived from the tradition, reported
in the apocryphal appendix to Daniel and by the
Pseudo-Epiphanius, that Habakkuk lived to see
the Babylonian exile; for if he prophesied under
Manasseh he could not have reached the exile at
an age under 9U years; but if he heli forth early
in the reign of Jehoiakim he would have been only
50 odd years old at the time of the destruction of
Jerusalem and of the exile. He was, then, a con-
temporary of Jeremiah, but much younger, as
the latter made his first appearance in public as
early as p.c. 629, in the thirteenth year of Josiah.
Ranitz (Introductio in Hab. Vatie. pp. 24, 59),
Stirkel (Prolog. ad interpr. tertii eap. Hah. pp. 22,
27), and De Wette (Lehrbuch der Historisch-
kritischen Einleit. Berlin, 1840, p. 338) justly
place the age of Habakkuk before the invasion of
Judaza by the Chaldeans.

The style of this prophet has been always much
adinirel. Lowth (De Poesi Hebreor. p. 287)
says: ‘Poeticus est Habaccuci stylus; sed maxime
in oda, quw® inter absolutissimas in eo geuere
merito numerari potest.” Eichhorn, De Wette,
and Roseumiiller’ are loud in their praise of
Habakkuk’s style; the first giving a detailed
and animated analysis of the construction of his

phecies (Eimleitung in das A. T. iii. p. 333).
He equals the most eminent prophets of the Old
Testameut—Joel, Amos, Nahum, Isaiah; and the
ode in ch, iii. may be placed in competition with
Ps. xviii. and Ixviii. for origiuality and sub-


HABOR. 795


limity. His figures are all great, happily chosen,
and properly drawn out. His denunciatiovs are
terrible, his derision bitter, his consolation cheer-
ing. Instances occur of borrowed ideas (ch. iii.
19, comp. Ps. xviii. 34; ch. ii. 6, comp. Isa.
xiv. 7; ch. ii. 14, comp. Isa, xi. 9); but he
makes them his own in drawing them out in his
peculiar manner. With all the boldness and
fervour of his imagination, his language is pure
and his verse melodious. Eichhorn, indeed, gives
a considerable number of words which he consi-
ders to be peculiar to this prophet, and supposes
him to have formed new words, or altered existing
ones, to sound more energetic or feeble, as the sen-
timents to be expressed might require: but his
list needs sifting, as De Wette observes (Einles-


tung, p. 339); and bySpro, ch. ii. 16, is the only
unexceptionable instance. The ancient catalogues
of canonical books of the Old Testament do not,
indeed, mention Habakkuk by name; but they
must have counted him in the twelve minor pro-
pee whose numbers would otherwise not be full.

u the New Testament some expressions of his are
introduced, but his vame is not added (Rom. i. 17;
Gal. iii. 11; Heb. x. 38, comp. Hab. ii. 4; Acts
xiii. 40, 41, comp. Hab. i. 5).

The best auxiliaries, ancient and modern, to the
interpretation of the book of Habakkuk are the
following:—  .

1. Introductory works: T. C. Friederich,
Historisch-kritischer Versuch uber Hab. Zeitalter
und Schriften, in Fichborn’s Allg. Biblioth. des
Bibl. Lit. x. 379-400; A. C. Ranitz, Introductio
in Hab. Vaticinia, Lipsie, 1808; Hanlein, Symb.
Crit. ad Interp. Vaticin. Had., Erlanger, 1795.

2. General commentaries: Abarbanel, Rabbi-
nicus Comment. in Hab., Latine redditus a Di-
derico Sprechero, Helmst. 1790; D. Chytrei
Lectiones in Proph. Hab., in his Opp. t. ii.3
Kofod, Commentarius crit. atque exeget., Gotting.
et Lips. 1792; I. A. Tinpstadii Animadv. phil.
et crit. Upsal. 1795 ; 4.—Rosenmiiller, Scholia in
V. T. vol. vi.

3. Translations with notes, explanatory and
critical: S. F. G. Wahl (Hanover, 1790), @.
C. Horst (Gotha, 1798), and K. M. Tusti
(Leipzig, 1721).

4. Commentaries on single chapters :—The first
and second chapters are interpreted by G. A. Ru-

yerti in the Commentatt. Theol. ed. Velthusen,
Kairie) et Ruperti, iii, 405, sq. The third
chapter is explained by G. Perschke (Frankfort,
1777), G. A. Schroeder cGreine, 1781), Oh. F.
Schnurrer (Tiib. 1786 ; also in his Dissertat. phil.
crit, p. 342), and by Moermer (Upsala, aca

.v. H.

HA-BARKANIM, or Barxani. [THorns.]

HABAZZELETH. (Cuasazzeveru.]

HABERGEON. [Arus; Arnoun.]


HABOR (130; Sept. *ABdp), or rather Cua-
BOR, a city or country of Media, to which portions
of the ten tribes were transported, first by Tiglath-
pileser, and afterwards hy Shalmaneser (2 Kings
xvii. 6; xviii. 11). It is thought by some to
be the same mountainous region between Media
and Assyria, which Ptolemy (Geog. vi. 1) calls
Chaboras (XaBdépas). This notion has the name,
and nothing but the name, in its favour. Habor
was by the river Gozan; and as we have accepted
Major Rennell's conclusion, that Gozan was the


‘ 796 " HADAD.
present Kizzil-Ozan [Gozan], we are bound to
follow him in fixing the position of Habor at the
town of Abhar, which is situated on a branch of
that river, and has the reputation of being very
ancient, At this place Mr. Morier found ruins
composed of large sun-dried bricks compacted

' with straw, like some of those found at Babylon.
As this kind of construction is an infallible sign of
remote antiquity, it so far affords a most important
corroboration of Major Rennell's conjecture.


HADAD (TID; Sept. *Add3) is equivalent
to Adad, the name of the chief deity of the
Syrians [Apap], and borne, with or without ad-
ditions, as a proper name, or more probably as a

- title, like ‘ Pharaoh’ in Egypt, by several of the
kings of Southern Syria.

1. Hapap, king of Edom, who defeated the
Midianites in the intervening territory of Moab
(Gen. xxxvi. 35; I Chron. i. 46). This is the
only one of the ancient kings of Edum whose
expluits are recorded by Moses. Another king
of Edom of the same name is mentioned in
1 Chon. i. 51.

2 Hanan, king of Syria, who reigned in Da-
mascns at the time that David attacked and
defeated Hadad-ezer, king of Zobah, whom he
marclied to assist, and shared in his defeat. This
fact is recorded in 2 Sam. viii. 5, but the name
of the king is not given. It is supplied, however,
by Josephus (Antig. vii. 5. 2), who reports, after
Nicolas of Damascus, that he carried succours to
Hadadezer as far as the Euphrates, where David
defeated them both.

3. Hapap, a young prince of the royal race
of Edom, who, when his country was conquered
by David, contrived, in the heat of the massacre
committed by Joab, to escape with some of his
father's servants, or rather was carried off by
them into the land of Midian. Thence Hadad
went into the desert of Paran, and eventually pro-
ceeded to Egypt. He was there most favourably
received by the king, who assigned him an estate
and establishment suited to his rank, and even
gave him in marriage the sister of his own consort,
by whom he had a sun, who was brought up in the

lace with the sons of Pharaoh. Hadad remained
an Egypt till after the death of David and Joab,
when he returned to his own country in the hope
of recovering his father's throne (1 Kings xi.
14-22). The Scripture does not record the result
of this attempt further than by mentioning him
as one of the troublers of Sulomon’s reign, which
implies some measure of success. After relating
these facts the text goes on to mention another
enemy of Solomon, named Rezin, and then adds
(ver. 25), that this was ‘besides the mischief that
Hadad did; and he abhorred Israel and reigned
over Syria.’ On this point the presen! writer may
quote what he has elsewhere stated—* Our version
seems to make this apply to Rezin; but the Septua-
gint reters it to Hadad, reading OY Edom, in-
‘stead of DIN Aram or Syria, aud the sense would
‘certainly be improved by this reading, inasmuch
as it supplies an apparent omission ; for without it
ave only know that Hadad left Egypt for Edom,
and not how he succeeded there, or how he was
able to trouble Solomon. The history ef Hadad
is certainly very obscure. Adopting the Septua-
gint reading, some conclude that Pharaoh used
his interest with Sulomon to allow Hadad to reign


HADAS.


‘as a tributary prince, and that he ultimately
asserted his independence. Josephus, however,
seems to have read the Hebrew as our version does,
“Syria” not “Edom.” He says that Hadad, ou his
arrival in Edom, found the territory too strongly
garrisoned hy Solomon’s troops to afford any hope
of success. He therefore proceeded with a party
of adherents to Syria, where he was well received
by Rezin, then at the head of a hand of Tubbers,
and with his assistance seized upon part of Syria
and reigned there. If this be correct, it must have
heen a different part of Syria from that in which
Rezin himself reigned, for it is certain, from verse
24, that he (Rezin) did reign in Damascus. Car-
rieres supposes that Hadad reigned in Syria after
the death of Rezin; and it might reconcile appa-
rent discrepancies, to suppose that two kingdoms
were established (there were more previously),
both of which, after the death of Rezin, were con-
solidated under Hadad. That Hadad was really
king of Syria seems to be rather corroborated by
the fact, that every subsequent king of Syria is, in
the Scripture, called Ben-Hadad, “ son of Hadad,”
and in Josephus simply Hadad; which seems to
denote that the founder of the dynasty was called
by this name. We may observe that, whether we
here read Aram or Edom, it must be understood
as applying to Hadad, not to Rezin’ (Pictorial
Bible, on 2 Kings xi. 14).

HADADEZER (WT, Hadad -helped;
Sept. "Adpaa(dp), or Hapaperzer, king of Zo-
bah, a powerful monarch in the time of David,
and the only one who seems to have been in a
condition seriously to dispute with him the pre-
dominancy in south-westem Asia. He was de
feated by the Israelites in the first campaign
(s.c. 1032) in the neighbourhood of the Eu-
phrates, with a great loss of men, war-chariots,
and horses, and was despoiled of many of his
towns (2 Sam. viii. 3; 1 Chron. xviii. 3), This
check not only impaired, but destroyed his power.
A diversion highly serviceable to him was made
by a king of Damascene-Syria (whom the Scrip-
ture does not name, but who is the same with
Hadad, 3), who, coming to his succour, com-
pelled David to tum his arms against him, and
abstain from reaping all the fruits of his victory
(2 Sam, x. 6, 8q.; 1 Chron. xix. 6, sq-}. The
breathiug-time this affurded Hadadezer was
turued by him to such guod account tiiat he was
able to accept the subsidies of Hanun, king of the
Ammonites, and to take a leading part in the
confederacy formed by that monarch against
David. The tirst army brought into the field
was beaten and put to flight by Abishai and
Joab; but Hadadezer, not yet discouraged, went
into the countries east of the Euphrates, and gut
together the forces of all his allies and tributaries,
which he placed under the command of Shop-
hach, his general. To confront so formidable an
adversary, David took the field in person, and
in one great victury 80 completely broke the
power of Hadavlezer, that all the small tributary
princes seized the opportunity of throwing off his
yoke, of abandoning the Ammonites to their fate,
and of submitting quietly to David, whose power
was thus extended to the Euphrates.

HADAR. [Erz-ttapan.|


HADAS (DN), always translated ‘myrtle,’
Occurs in several passages of the Old Testament,


HADAS.


as in Ieaiah xli.19; lv. 13; Neh. viii. 15;
Zech. i. 8, 10, 11. The Hebrew word hadas ia


identical with the Arahic (wd Aadas, which


in the dialect of Arabia Felix signifies the myrtle-
tree (Richardson's Pers. and Arabic Dict.).
The myrtle is, moreover, known throughout
Eastern countries, aud is described in Arabic works


under the name ul As. The present writer


found the berries of the myrtle sold in the bazaars
of India under this name (Jiust. Himal. Bot. p.
217). Esther is supposed by Simonis (Bibl. Cadi-
net, xi. 262) to be a compound of As and tur, and
so to mean a fresh myrtle; and hence it would
appear to be very closely allied in signification
to Hadassah, the original name of Esther. Almost
all translators unite in considering the myrtle as
intended in the above passages; the Sept. has
pupolyny, and the Vulgate myrtus.

The myrtle has from the earliest periods been
highly esteemed in all the countries of the south of
Europe, and is frequently mentioned by the
pects: thus Virgil (Ecl. ii. 54)—

Et vos, O lauri, carpam, et te, proxima myrte :

Sic posite quoniam suaves miscetis odores.

By the Greeks and Romans it was dedicated
to Venus, and employed in making wreaths to
crown lovers, but among the Jews it was the em-
blem of justice. The note of the Chaldee Targum
on the name Esther, according to Dr. Harris, is,
‘they call her Hadassah because she was just, and
those that are just are compared to myrtles.’


The repute which the myrtle enjoyed in ancient
times it still retains, notwithstanding the great ac-
cession of ornamental shrubs and flowers which
has been made to the gardens and greenhouses of
Europe. This is justly due to the rich colouring
of ite dark n» and shining leaves, con!
with the white starlike clusters of its lowers, afford-
tug in hot countries a pleasant shade under its


HADES. 7197


branches, and diffusing an agreeable odour from
its flowers or bruised leaves. It is, however, most
agreeable in ap ice when in the state of a
shrub, for when it grows into a tree, as it does in
hot countries, the traveller looks under instead of
over its leaves, and a multitude of small branches
are seen deprived of their leaves by the crowding
of the upper ones. This shrub is commun in the
southern provinces of Spain and France, as well as
in Italy and Greece; and also on the northern
coast of Africa, and in Syria. The poetical cele-
brity of this plant had, no doubt, some influence
upon its employment in medicine, and numerous
properties are ascribed to it by Divoscorides (i.
127). It is aromatic and astringent, and hence,
like many other such plants, forms a stimulant
tunic, and is useful in a variety of complaints
connected with debility. Its berries were fore
merly employed in Italy, and still are so in Tus-
cany, asa substitute for spices, now imported so
plentifully from the far East. A wine was also
pared from them, which was called myrtidanum,
and their essentia! oil is possessed of excitant pro-
poe: In many parts of Greece and Italy the
leaves are employed in tanning leather. The
myrtle, ing so many remarkable qualities,
was not likely to have escaped the notice of the
sacred writers, as it is a well-known inhabitant cf
Judwa. Hasselquist and Burckhardt both notice it
as occurring on the hills around Jerusalem. It
is also found in the valley of Lebanon. Capt.
Light, who visited the country of the Druses in
1814, says, he ‘again proceeded up the mountain
by the side of a range of hills abounding with
myrtles in full bloom, that spread their fragrance
round,’ and, further on, ‘we crossed through
thickets of myrtle.’ Irby and Mangles (p. 222)
describe the rivers from Tripoli towards Galilee
as generally pretty, their banks covered with
the myrtle, olive, wild vine, &c. Savary, as
quoted by Dr. Harris, describing a scene at the
end of the forest of Platanea, says, ‘ Myrtles, in-
termixed with laurel-roses, grow in the valleys to
the height of ten feet. Their snow-white flowers,
bordered with a purple edging, appear to peculiar
advantage under the verdant foliage. Each
myrtle is loaded with them, and they emit per-
fumes more exquisite than those of the rose itself.
They enchant every one, and the soul is filled
with the softest sensations. —J. F. R.
HADASSAH. [Esruzr.]


HADES, a Greek word (G3ys) by which the


Septuagint translates the Hebrew DiNw) sheol,
denoting the abode or world of the dead, in
which sense it occurs frequently in the New Tes-
tament, where it is usually rendered ‘hell’ in the
English version, The word hades meaus literally
that which ts in darkness. Iu the classical writers
it is used to denote Orcus, or the infernal regions.
According to the notions of the Jews, sheol or
hades was a vast receptacle where the souls of the
dead existed in a separate state until the resurrec-
tion of their bodies. The region of the blessed
during this interval, or the inferior paradise, they
sup to be in the upper part of this receptacle;
while beneath was the abyss or gehenna (Tartarus),
in which the souls of the wicked were subjected to
punishment.

The question whether this is or is not the
doctrine of the Scriptures is one of much im-


198 HADES.


portance, and has, first and Jast, excited no small
amount of discussion. It is a doctrine received
by a large portion of the nominal Christian
cnurch ; and it forms the foundation of the Ro-
man Catholic doctrine of Purgatory, for which
there would be no ground but for this interpreta-
tion of the word hades.

The question therefore rests entirely upon the
interpretation of this word. At the first view the
classical signification would seem to support the
sense above indicated. On further consideration,
however, we are referred back to the Hebrew
sheol: for the Greek term did not come to the
Hebrews from any classical source, or with any
classical meanings, but through the Septuagint
as a translation of their own word; and whether
correctly translating it or not is a matter of critical
opinion. The word hades is therefore in uowise
binding upon us in any Aassical meaning which
may be assigned to it. ‘he real question there-
fore is, what is the meaning which sheol bears in
the Old Testament, and Aades in the New? A
careful examination of the passages in which
these words occur will probably lead to the con-
clusion, that they afford no real sanction to the
_ Notion of an intermediate place of the kind indi-

cated, but are used by the inspired writers to
denote the grave—the resting place of the bodies
both of the righteous and the wicked; and that
they are also used to signify ell, the abode of
miserable spirits. But it would be difficult to
produce any instance in which they can be shown
to signify the abode of the spirits of just men made
perfect, either betore or after the resurrection.

In the great majority of instances shcol is in
the Old Testament used to signify the grave,
and in most of these cases is so translated in
the Authorized Version, It can have no other
meaning in such texts as Gen. xxxvii. 35; xlii.
38; 1 Sam. ii. 6; 1 Kings ii. 6; Job xiv. 13;
xvii. 13, 16; and in numerous other passages in
the writings of David, Solomon, and the pro-
phets. But as the grave is regarded by most
persons, and was more especially so by the an-
cients, with awe and dread, as being the region
of gloom and darkness, so the word denoting
it soon came to be applied to that more dark
and gloomy world which was to be the abiding
place of the miserable. Where our translators
supposed the word to have this sense, they ren-
dered it by ‘hell.’ Some of the passages in
which this has been doue may be doubtful;
but there are others of which a question can
scarcely be entertained. Such are those (as Job
xi. 8; Ps. cxxxix. 8; Amos ix. 3) in which the
word denotes the opposite of heaven, which can-
not be the yrave, nor the general state or region
of the dead, but hell. Still more decisive are
such passages as Ps. ix. 17; Prov. xxiii. 9;
in which sheol cannot mean any place, in this
world or the next, to which the righteous as well
as the wicked are sent, but the penal abode of
the wicked as distinguished from and opposed
to the righteous. The only case in which such
passages could by any possibility be supposed
to mean the grave, would be if the grave —that
is, extinction—were the final doom of the un-
righteous.

In the New Testament the ,word g3ns is used
in much the same sense as OYNtY in the Old,
except that in a less proportion of cases can it be


HADES.


construed to signify ‘tle grave.’ There are still,
however, instances in which it is used in this
sense, as in Acts ii. 31; L Cor. xv. 53; bat in
general the hades of the New Testament appears
to be no other than the world of future punish-
ments (e.g. Matt. xi. 23; xvi. 18; Luke xvi. 23),

The principal arguments for the intermediate
hades, as deduced from Scripture, are founded
on those passages in which things ‘ under the
earth’ are described as rendering homage to Gal
and the Saviour (Philip. ii. 10; Rev. v. 13, &c.)
If such passages, however, he compared with others
(as with Rom. xiv. 10, 11, &c.), it will appear that
they must refer to the day of judgment, in which
every creature will render some surt of homage to
the Saviour ; but then the bodies of the saints will
have been already raised, and the intermediate
region, if there be any, will have been deserted.

One of the seemingly strongest arguments for the
opinion under consideration is founded on 1 Pet.
iit. 19, in which Christ is said to have gone and
‘ preached to the spirits in prison.’ These spirits in
prison are supposed to be the holy dead—perhaps
the virtuous heathén— imprisoned in the interme-
diate place, into which the soul of the Saviour went
at death, that be might preach to them the Gosyel.
This passage must be allowed to present great
difticulties. The most intelligible meaning sug-
gested by the context is, however, that Christ by
hia spirit preached to those who in the time of
Noah, while the ak was preparing, were dis-
ubedient, and whose spirits are now in prison,
abiding the general judgment. The prison is
doubtless Aades, but what hades is must be de
termined hy other passages of Scripture; and,
whether it is the grave or hell, it is still a prison
for those who yet await the judgment-day. This
interpretation is in unison with other passages of
Scripture, whereas the other is conjecturally de-
duced from this single text.

Another argument is deduced from Rev. xx.
14, which describes ‘death and hades’ as ‘cast
into the lake of fire’ at the olose of the general
judgmeut—meaning, according to the advocates
of the doctrine in question, that Aades should then
cease as an intermediate place. But this is
also true if understood of the grave, or of the ge
neral intermediate condition of the dead, or even
of hell, as once more and for ever reclaiming
what it had temporarily yielded up for judzment
—just as we every day see criminals brought
from prison to judgment, and after judgment re-
turned to the prison from which they came.

It is further urged, in prouf of Hades being an
intermediate place other than the grave, that the
Scriptures represent the happiness of the righteous
as incomplete till ufter the resurrection. Tis
must be admitted ; but it does not thence fullow
that their souls are previously imprisoned in
the earth, or in any other place or region corre-
sponding to the Tartarus of the heathen. Although
at the moment of death the disembodied spirits
of the redeemed ascend to heaven, and continue
there till the resurrection, it is very possible that
their happiness shall be incomplete until they have
received their glorified bodies from the tomb, and
entered upon the full rewards of eternity.

A view supported by so little force of Scripture,
seems unequal to resist the contrary evidence whick
may be produced from the same source, and which
it remains briefly to indicate. The effect of thie


HADES,


is to show that the souls of the redeemed are
described as proceeding, after death, at once to
heaven—the place of tinal happiness, and those of
the unredeemed to the place of tinal wretchedness.

In Heb. vi. 12, the righteous dead are described
as being in actual inheritance of the promises
made to the fathers. Our Saviour represents the
deceased saints as already, before the resurrection
(for so the context requires), ‘ like unto the angels,’
and ‘equal to the angels’ (Matt. xxii. 30; Luke
xx. 36); which is not very compatible with their
imprisonment even in the happier region of the
supposed Hades. Our Lord's declaration to the
dying thief—‘ This day shalt thou be with me in
Paradise’ (Luke xxiii. 43), has been urged on
both sides of the argument; but the word is here
not Hades, but Paradise, and no instance can be
produced in which the paradise heyond the grave
means anything else than that ¢ third heaven,’ that
‘paradise ' into which the Apostle was cauglit up,
and where he heard ‘unutterable things’ (2 Cor.
xii. 2,4). In the midst of that paradise grows
the mystic ‘tree of life’ (Rev. ii. 7), which the
game writer represents as growing near the throne
of God and the Lamb (xxii. 2). In Eph. iii. 15,
the Apostle describes the whole church of God as
being at present in heaven or on earth. But,
according to the view under consideration, the
great body of the church would be neither in
heaven nor on earth, but in Hades—the inter-
mediate place. In Heb. xii. 21-24, we are told
that in the city of the living God dwell not
only God himself, the judge of all, and Jesus,
the mediator of the new covenant, and the in-
numerable company of angels, but also ‘ the
spirits of just men made perfect —all dwelling
together in the same holy and happy place. To
the same effect, but, if possible, still more conclu-
sive, are the various passages in which the souls
of the saints are described as being, when absent
from the body, present with Christ in heaven
(comp. 2 Cor. v. 1-8; Philip. i. 23; 1 Thess. v.
10). To this it is scarcely necessary to add the
various passages in the Apocalyptic vision, in
which St. John beheld, as inhabitants of the high-
est heaven, around the throne of God, myriads of
redeemed souls, even before the resurrection (Rev.
v.93 vi.9; vii. 9; xiv. 1,3). Now the ‘heaven’
of these passages cannot be the place to which the
term Hades is ever applied, for that word is never
associated with any circumstances or images of
enjoyment or happiness [Heaven].

As these arguments seem calculated to disprove
the existence of the more favoured region of the
alleged intermediate place, a similar conrse of
evidence militates with equal force against the
existence of the more penal region of the same
place. It is admitted by the staunchest advocates
for the doctrine of an intermediate place, that he
souls of the wicked, when they leave the body, go
immediately into punishment. Now the Scrip-
ture knows no place of punishment after death but
that which was prepared for the devil and his
angels. This place they novo inhabit; and this is
the place to which, after judgment, the souls of the
condemned will be consizned (comp. 2 Pet. ii. 43
Matt. xxv. 41). This verse of Peter is the only
one in Scripture in which any reference to the word
‘Tartarus occurs: here then, if anywhere, we should
find that intermediate place corresponding to the
Tartarus of the heathen, from whom the word is bor-


HAGAR. 799


rowed. But from the other text we can be quite
certain that the Tartarus of Peter is no other than
the hell which is to be the final, as it is, in degree,
the present doom of the wicked. That this hell is
Hades is readily admitted, for the course of the ar-
gument has been to show that Hades is hell, when-
ever it is not the grave. ‘Whether the righteous
and the wicked, after the judgment, will go literally
to the same places in which they were hefore sitna-
ted, it is not material to inquire. But, both before
and after the judgment, the righteous will be in
the same place with their gloritied Saviour and
his holy angels; and this will be heaven: and
before and atter the judgment the wicked will be
in the same place with the devil and his angels;
and this will be hell’ (Dr. Enoch Pondy On the
Intermediate Place, in American Biblical Repo-
sitory, for April, 1841, whom we have here chiefly
followed: comp. Kuapp's Christian Theology,

101; Meyer, De Notcone Orci ap. Hebraos,

ub. 1793; Bahrens, Fretmithige Unterss. iiber
d, Orkus d. Hebraer, Halle, 1786).

The notion repelled in this article was enter-
tained by Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, and
many other of the early Christian fathers. This,
however, proves nothing in its favour, as the «ame
Notion was common among the Jews themselves,
in and before the time of Christ. It may even
have been entertained by the Seventy when they
translated the Hebrew sheol by the Greek hades.
The question connected with Hades has indirectly
brought under view two of the three notions re-
specting the state of the soul after death. The
third notion is that of those who hold that the soul
is in a perfectly quiescent condition until the
resurrection. This requires notice under another
head (Sour: see also Heaven; Hews].


HAGAR (134, a stranger ; Sept. “Ayap), a
native of Egypt, and servant of Abraham; but
how or when she hecame an inmate of his family
we are not informed. The name Hagar, which is
pure Hebrew, signifying stranger, having been pro-
bably given her after her arrival, and being the one
by which che continued to be designated in the
patriarch’s household, seems to imply that her con-
nection with it did not take place till long after
this family had emigrated to Canaan; and the
presumption is that she was one of the female slaves
presented to Abraham by Pharaoh during his visit
to Egypt ‘Gen. xii. 16). But some derive the name
from “3Y, to flee; and suppose it to have been
applied to her from a remarkable incident in her
life, to be afterwards mentioned ; just as the Ma-
homedans call the flight of Mahomet by the col-
lateral term ‘ Hegira.’ Whatever were her origin
and previous history, her servile condition in the
family of Abraham must have prevented her from
heing ever known beyond the limits of her humble
sphere, had not her name, by a spontaneous act of
her mistress, become indissulubly linked with the
patriarch’s history. The long continued sterility
of Sarah suggested to her the idea (not uncommon
in the East) of becoming a mother by proxy
through her handmaid, whom, with that view, she
gave to Abraham asa secondary wile [ABRAHAM 5
Avortion ; Concunine].

The honour of such an alliance and elevation
was too great and unexpected for the weak and ill-
regulated mind of Hagar: and no sooner did she
find herself in a delicate situation, which made


800 HAGAR,


her, in the prospect of becoming a mother, an ob-
ject of increasing interest and importance to
Abraham, than she openly indulged in triumph
over her less favoured mistress, and showed by her
altered behaviour a growmg habit of disrespect
and insolence, The feelings of Sarah were se-
verely wounded, and she broke out to her husband
in Joud complaints of the servant's petulance.
‘My wrong be upon thee,’ she cried—language
which is generally considered an impassioned
burst of temper, in which she unjustly charged
Abraham with causing or encouraging, by his
marked attention to the concubine, the ill usage
she met with; but it appears susceptible of other
constructions much mure favourable to Sarah's


character. The words ‘J? Y ‘DION signify either


“My wrong be super te,’ as Cocceius and others
render it, i.e. lieth upon thee, pointing to his duty
as her protector, dad soliciting his interference,
or else ‘My wrong is propter te-—on your ac-
count. ‘I have exposed myself to these indigni-
ties solely out of my intense anxiety to gratify
you witha son and heir.’ Whichever of these
interpretations we prefer, the exclamation of Sarah
expresses bitter indignation at the misconduct of
her slave; and Abraham, whose meek and prudent
behaviour is strikingly contrasted with the vio-
lence of his wife, leaves her with unfettered power,
as mistress of his household, to take what steps
she pleases to obtain the required redress. In all
Oriental states where concubinage is legalized,
the principal wife has authority over the rest; the
secondary one, if a slave, retains her furmer con-
dition unchanged, and society thus presents the
strange anomaly of a woman being at once the
menial of her master and the partner of his bed.
In like manner Hagar, though taken into the re-
lation of concubine to Abraham, continued still,
being a dotal maid-servant, under the absolute
pore of her mistress, who, after her husband had
left her totake her own way in vindication of her
dignity as the principal wife, was neither re-
luctant nor sparing in making the minion reap
the fruits of her insolence. Sarah, indeed, uot
content with the simple exertion of her authority,
seems to have resorted even to corporal chastise-
ment, the word IPN conveying such a meaning,
and heuce Augustine has drawn an elaborate
argument for inflicting civil penalties on heretics
(Epist. xiviii.). But whether she actually in-
flicted blows, or merely threw out menaces to that
effect, cannot be determined, as the two render-
ings, ‘Sarah afflicted’ and * would afHict’ her,
have recetved equal support from respectable lex-
jeographers and versions, Sensible, at length, of
the hopelessness of getting the better of her mis-
tress, Hagar determined on flight; and having
seemingly formed the purpose of returning to her
relations in Eyvypt, she took the direction of that
country; whica led her to what was afterwards
called Shur, throuzh a long tract of sandy unin-
habited country, lying on the west of Arabia Pe-
trea, to the extent of 150 miles between Palestine
and Egypt. In that lonely region she was sitting
by a fountain to replenish her skin-bottle or re-
cruit her wearied limbs, when the angel of the
Lord, whose Janguage or this occasion bespeaks
him to have been more than a created being, ap-
peared, and in the kindliest manner remonstrated
‘with her ou the course she was pursuing, and


HAGAR.


encouraged her to return by the promise that she
would ere long have a son, whom Providence
destined to become a great man, and whose wiid
and irregular features of character would be inde-
libly impressed on the mighty nation that should
spring from him. Obedient to the heavenly visitor,
and having distinguished the place by the name
of Beer-lahai-roi, ‘the well of the visible Gud,
Hagar retraced her steps to the tent of Abraham,
where in due time she had a son; and having pro-
bably narrated this remarkable interview to Abra-
ham, that patriarch, as directed by tie angel,
called the name of the child Ishmael, ‘God hath
heard.’ —_

Fourteen years had elapsed after the birth of
Ishmael when an event occurred in the family of
Abraham, by the appearance of the long-prumised
heir, which entirely changed the prospects of that
young man, though nothing materially ailecting
him took place till the weaning of Isaac, which,
as is generally thought, was at the end of his
third year. Ishmael was then a lad of seventeen
years of age; and being fully capable of under-
standing his altered relations to the inheritance,
as well as having felt perhaps a sensible diminu-
tion of Sarah's affection towards him, it is not
wonderful that a disappointed youth should in-
considerately give vent to his feelings on a festive
occasion, when the newly-weaned child, clad ac-
cording to custom with the sacred symbolic robe,
which was the badge of the birthright, was for-
mally installed heir of the tribe (see B.blioth.
Bibl. vol. i.3 Vicasi, Annot. 32; Bush on Gen.
xxvii. 15). Our feelings of justice naturally
lead us to take part with Ishmael, as hardly dealt
with in being so unexpectedly superseded alter
having been so long the acknowledged heir. But
the procedure of Abraham in awarding the claim
to the inheritance to Isaac in preference to his
elder son was guided by the special command of
God ; and it may be remarked, moreover, that it
was in harmony with the immemorial practice of
the East, where the son of 2 slave or secondary wife
is always suppianted by that of a free woman,
even if born long after. The harmony of the
weaning feast was disturbed hy Ishmael being
discovered mocking. The Hebrew word PMyyD,
though properly signifying ‘to laugh,’ is fre
quently used to express strong derision, as in Gen,
xix. 14; Neb. it, 19; iv. 1; Ezek. xxiii. 32; ace
companied, as is probalsle on some of the occasions
referred to in these passages, with violent gestures;
and in accordance with this idea the Chaldee and
Septuagint versions render it by ‘I play, which
is used by the latter in 2 Sam. 11. 14-17, as syno-
nymous with boxing, whence it night very justly
be characterized as persecution (Gal. iv. 29).
This conduct yave mortal offence to Sarah, who
from that moment would be satistied with nothing
short of his irrevocable expulsion from the family;
and as his mother alsu was included in the same
condemnation, there is ground to believe that she
had been repeating ler former insolence, as well as
instigating her son to his improprieties of beba-
viour. Sv harsh a measure was extremely pain-
ful to the affectionate heart of Abraham ; but his
scruples were removed by the timely appearance of
his divine counsellor, who said, * Let it not be
grievous in thy sight, because of the lad, and be-
cause of thy bondwoman: in all that Sarah bath
said unto thee, hearken unto her voice ;’ ¢ for,’ agas


HAGGAI.


the Targum of Jonathan, ‘she is a prophetess.’
Accordingly, what she said is called the Scripture
(Gal. iv. 30), and the incident affords a very re-
markable iustance of an overruling Providence in
making this family fend in the tent of a pastoral
chief 4900 years ago the occasion of separating
two mighty peoples, who, according to the pro-
phecy, have ever since occupied an important
chapter in the history of man. Hagar and Ish-
mael departed early on the day fixed for their
removal, Abraham furnishing them with the ne-
cessary supply of travelling provisions. The
Septuagint, which our translators have followed,
most absordly represents Ishmael as a child,
ety along with the travelling-bags on the
reavily-loaded shoulders of Hagar. But a little
change in the punctuation, the observance of the
parenthetical clause, and the construction of the
word ‘child’ with the verb ‘took,’ remove the
whole difficulty, and the passage will then stand
thus: ‘And Abraham rose up early in the morn-
ing, and took bread, and a bottle of water (and
gave it unto Hagar, putting it on her shoulder),
and the child, and sent her away.’

In spite of their instructions for threading thé
desert, the two exiles missed their way. Over-
come by fatigue and thirst, increasing at every
step under the unmitigated rays of a vertical sun,
the strength of the young Ishmael, as was natural,
first gave way, and his mother laid him down in
complete exhaustion under one of the stunted
shrubs of this arid region, in the hope of his ob-
taining some momentary relief from smelling the
damp in the shade. The buming fever, however,
continued unabated, and the poor woman, forget-
ting her own sorrow, destitute and alone in the
midst of a wilderness, and absorbed in the fate of
her son, withdrew to a little distance, unable to
witness his lingering sufferings; and there ¢ she
lifted up her voice and wept.’ In this distress-
ing situation the angel of the Lord appeared for
the purpose of comfurting her, and directed her
to a fountain, which, concealed by the brush-
wood, had escaped her notice, and from which
she drew a refreshing-draught, that had the
effect of reviving the almost lifeless Ishmael.
This well, according to the tradition of the Arabs,
who pay great honour to the memory of Hagar, is
Zemzem, near Mecca.

Of the subsequent history of Ishmael we have
no account, further than that he established
himself in the wilderness of Paran, in the neigh-
bourhood of Sinai, was married by his mother to
@ countrywoman of her own, and maintained
both himself and family by the produce of his
bow.—R. J.

HAGARENES. [Araria.]


HAGGAT (°3%; Sept. and Joseph. "Ayyaios ;
Jerome and Valy. Aggawus or Aggeus, otherwise
Hagyivus), one of the twelve minor prophets, and
the first of the three who, after the return of the
Jews from the Babylonian exile, prophesied in
Palestine. Of the lace and year of his birth,


his descent, and the leading incidents of his life, ,


nothing is known which can be relied on. Some
assert that he was born in Babylon, and came to
Jerusalem when Cyrus, in the year B.c. 536, al-
lowed the Jews to return to their country (2 Chron.
«xxiv. 23; Ezra i. 1),—the new colony consisting


chiefly of people belonging to the tribes of Judah,


HAGGAI. Soi


Benjamin, and Levi, with a few from other tribes
The more fabulous traditions of Jewish writers,
who pass him for an Assessor of the Synagoga
Magna, and enlarge on his literary avocations, have
been collected by Carpzov (ntroductio in V. T.
iii, p. 426), This much appears from his prophe-
cies, that he flourished during the reizn of the
Persian monarch Darius Hystaspis, who ascended
the throne n.c. 521, These prophecies are com-
prised in a book of two chapters, and consist of
discourses so brief and summary asto have Jed some
German theologians to suspect that they bave not
come down to us in their original complete form,
but are only an epitome (Eichhom, Kiulettung
in das A. T. iii. § 598; Jahu, Introductio in
libros sacros Vet. Fad., edit. 2, Vienne, 1814,
§ 156). Their object generally is to urge the
rebuilding of the Temple, which had indeed been
commenced as early as n.c. 535 (Ezra iii. 10), but
was afterwards discontinued, the Samaritans hav-
ing obtained an edict from the Persian king,
which forbade further procedure, and influential
Jews pretending that the time for rebuilding the
Temple had not arrived, since the seventy years
predicted by Jeremiah applied to the Temple also,
from the time of the destruction of which it was
then only the sixty-eighth year. As on the death
of Pseudo-Smerdis, and the consequent termina-
tion of his interdict, the Jews still continued to
wait for the end of the seventy years, and were
only engaged in building splendid houses for them-
selves, Haggai began to prophesy in the second
year of Darius, u.c. 520.

His first discourse (ch. i.), delivered on the first
day of the sixth month of the year mentioned, tore-
tells that a brighter era would begin as svon as
Jehovah's house was rebuilt; and a notice is sub-
joined, stating that the address of the prophet had
been effective, the peuple having resolved on re-
suming the restoration of the Temple. The second
discourse (ch. ii. 1-9), delivered on the twenty-first
day of the seventh month, predicts that the glory
of the new Temple would be greater than that of
Solomon’s. and shows that no fear need be enters
tained of the Second Temple not equalling the first
in splendour, since, in a remarkable political
revolution, the gifts of the Gentiles would be
brought thither. The third discourse (ch. ii. 10-19),
delivered on the twenty-fourth day of the ninth
month, refers to a period when building materials
had been collected, and the workmen had begun to
put them together; for which a commencement of
the Divine blessing is promised. ‘The fourth and
Jast discourse (ch. 11, 20-23), delivered also on the
twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, is exclus
sively addressed to Zerubbabel, the political chief
of the new Jewish colony, who, it appears, had
asked for an explanation regarding the great poli-
tical revolutions which Haggai had predicted in
his second discourse; it comforts the governor by
assuring him they would not take place very soon,
and not in his lifetime. The style of the discourses
of Haggai is suitable to their contents: it is pas
thetic when he exhorts; it is vehement when he re=
proves; it is somewhat elevated when he treats of
future events; and it is not altogether destitute of @
poetical colouring, though a prophet of a higher
order would have depicted the splendour of the See
cond Temple in brighter hues. The language la-
bours under a poverty of terms, as may be observed
in the constant repetition of the same eareemrions

Fr


802 HAGIOGRAPHA.


e.g. TT WON MD (i. 2, 5, 7), 77 DRS three
times in one verse (ii. 4), with PIM three times in
the same verse, and MY three times also in one verse
(i. 14). Eichiiorn (Kindeitung, § 599) attributes
these repetitions to an attempt at ornament, ren-
dering the writer disposed to recur frequently to a
favourite expression. The prophetical discourses of
Haggai, ANGI 3 ANID, are referred to in the
Old and New Testament (Ezra v. 1; vi. 14;
Heb. xii. 26; comp. Hagy. ii. 7, 8, 22). In most
of the ancient catalogues of the canonical books of
the Old Testament, Hagyai is not, indeed, men-
tioned by name; but as they specify the twelve
minor prophets, he must have been included
among them, as otherwise their number would
not be fall. Josephus, mentioning Haggai and
Zechariah (Antig. xi. 4. $5, p. 557), calls them 300
wpopnras. (See generally Rosenmiiller, Schodia in
Vet. Test. vii. 4. p. 74; Sahu, Einleitung in die
gottlichen Bucher des Alten Bundes, ii. 2. p. 658 ;
Bertholdt, Einleitung, iv. p. 169.)—J. v. H.

HAGIUGRAPHA, Sacred Writings. The
word aydéypapa is tirst fonnd in Epiphanius
(Panarium, gp. 58), who used it, as well as
ypapeia, to denote the third division of the Scrip-
tures, called by the Jews D'IINS, or the Writings,
consisting of fire books [Mrat.oru], viz. the
three poems (MON), Job, Proverbs, and the
Paaims, and the two books of Chronicles.

These divisions are found in the Talmud
(Bava Bathra, fol. 1, ed. Amsterd.), where the
sacred bovks are classified under the Lavo,
the Prophets, and the Writings i palidanle

-The last are thus enumerated (é. ¢.):—Ruth,
the buok (sepher) of Psalms, Jub, Proverbs,
Ecclesiastes (Hoheleth), the Song of Songs, La-
mentations, Daniel, and the books (meyilloth)
of Esther, Ezra, and Chronicles. The Jewish
writers, however, do not uniformly follow this
arrangement, as they sometimes place the Psalms,
or the book of Job, as the first of the Hagio-
grapha. Jerome gives the arrangement followed
by the Jews in his time. He observes that they
divided the Scriptures into five books of Moses,
eight prophetical books (viz. 1. Joshua; 2. Judges
and Ruth; 3. Samuel; 4. Kings; 5. Isaiah;
6. Jeremiah; 7. Ezekiel; 8. The twelve pro-

hets), and nine Hagioyrapha, viz. 1. Job;
. David, five parts; 3. Solomon, three parts;
4. Koheleth; 5. Canticles; 6. Daniel; 7. Chro-
nicles; 8, Esdras, two books [viz. Ezra and Nehe
miah]; 9. Esther. ‘Some, however, he adds,
‘place Ruth and Lamentations among the Ha-
giographa rather than among the prophetical
books.’ We find a different arrangement in
Josephus, who reckons thirteen prophetical books,
and four containing hymns and moral precepts;
from which it would appear that after the time of
Josephus the Jews comprised many books among
the prophets which had previously belonged to the
Hayiographa. It has, Vcore been considered
as more probable that Josephus had no authority
from manuscripts for his classification.

The earliest notice which we tind of these divi-
sions is that contained in the prologue to the book
of Ecclesiasticus, written s.c. 130, the author of
which refers to the Law, the Prophets, and the ofher
books: by which last were most probably meant
the Hugiographa. Philo also speaks of the Laws,
the Prophets, the Hymns, and the other bouks,
but without classifying them. In the New Testa-


HAGIOGRAPHA.


ment we find three corresponding divisions men:
tioned, viz, the Law, the Prophets, and the Psalms;
which last book has been supposed to have given
its name to the third division, from the circum-
stance of its then being the first in the catalogue
(Luke xxiv. 44). Havernick, however (Handbuch,
P: 78), supposes that Luke calls the Hagiographa

y the name of Psalms, rather on account of the
poetical character of several of its parts. The
‘ book of the Prophets" is referred to in the New
Testament as a distinct volume (Acts vii. 42,
where the passage indicated is Amos y. 25, 26).
It is well known that the second class was
divided by the Jews into the early Prophets, viz.
Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings; and the
later Prophets, viz. Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel
(called the major prophets), and the bouk of the
twelve (minor) prophets.

When this division of books was first introduced
it is now impossible to ascertain, Probably it
commence alter the return from the exile, with the
first formation of the canon. Still more difficult
is it to ascertain the principle on which the clas-
sification was formed. The rabbinical writers
maintain that the authors of the Cetudim en-
joyed only the lowest degree of inspiration, as
they received no immediate communication from
the Deity, like that made to Muses, to whom God
spake face to face; and that they did not receive
their knowledge through the medium of visions and
dreams, as was the case with the prophets or the
writers of the second class; but still that they felt
the Divine Spirit resting on them and inspiring
them with suggestions. This 1s the view main-
tained by Abarbanel (Pref. in Proph. priores, fol.
20.1), Kimchi (Pref. in Psalm.), Maimonides
(More Nevochim, ii. 45, p. 317), aud Elias Levita
(Tisbi); which last writer defines the word 31N3
to mean a work written by divine inspiration.
The placing of Ruth among the Hagiographa,
and especially the separation of Lamentativus
from Jeremiah, seems, however, to be irrecon-
cilable with this hypothesis; nor is it easy to
assign a satisfactory reason why the historical
books of Jushua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings
should be placed among the Prophets, and the
book of Chronicles among the Haqivgrapha. The
reasons generally assigned for this, as well as fur

lacing in the third class the books of Psalms,
Daniel and Job, are so fanciful and onsatisfac-
tory as to have led Christian writers to form other
and more definite classitications. It will suffice
to mention the reason assigned by Rabbi Kimchi
for excluding Damel from the book of Prophets,
viz. that he has not equalled the other prophets in
his visions and dreams. Others assign the late
date of the book of Daniel as the reason for the
insertion of it, as well as of some historical
books, in the Hagiographa, inasmuch as the col-
lection of the Prophets was closed at the date of
the composition of this book (De Wette, § 255).
Bertholdt, who is of this opinion (Kindeitung,
vol. i. p. 70, sqq.), thinks that the word Cetudim
meaus * books newly introduced into the canon’
(p. 81). Hengstenberg (Authentie der Daniel,
&c., p. 25, sqq.) follows the ancient opinion of
the rabbins, and maintains that the book of
Daniel was placed in the Hagiographa in conse-
quence of the lower degree of inspiration attached
to it; but herein he is opposed by Hxvernick
(Handbuch, p. 62). De Wette (§ 13) supposes


HAGIOGRAPHA.


that the two first divisions (the Law and the Pro-
phets) were closed a little after the time of Nehe-
miah (comp. 2 Mace. ii. 13, 14), and that per-
haps at the end of the Persian period the Jews
commenced the formation of the Hagiographa,
which long remained ‘ changeable and open.’
The collection of the Psalms was not yet com-
pleted wien the two tirst parts were formed,

It has been concluded from Matt. xxiii. 35
and Luke xi. 51, comp. with Luke xxiv. 44, that
as the Psalms were the first, so were Chronjcles the
last book in the Hagiographa (Carpzov, Introd. iv.
p- 25.) If, when Jesus spoke of the righteous blood
shed from the blood of Abel (Gen. iv. 8) to that of
Zechariah, he referred, as most commentators sup-
pose, to Zechariah the son of Jehoiada (2 Chron,
xxiv. 20, 21), there appears a peculiar apposite-
ness in the appeal to tne first and the last books in
the canon. The book of Chronicles still holds the
last place in the Hebrew Bibles, which are all ar-
ranged according to the threefold division, The
late date of Chronicles may in some measure ac-
count for its separation from the book of Kings; and
this ground Rule good whether we fix the era of the
Chronicler, with Zunz, at about B.c. 260, or, with
the eminent Roman Catholic, Professor Movers,
the able defender of the antiquity and authenticity
of the bouk, we conceive him to have been a
younger contemporary of Nehemiah, and to have
written about u.c. 400 (Kritische Untersuchung
iiber de Biblische Chronik, Bonn, 1834). The
circumstance of the existence of a few acknow-
ledged later additious, such as 1 Chron. iii. 19-24,
does not militate aguinst this hypothesis. De
Wette conceives that the genealogy in this pas-
sage comes down only to the third generation
after Nehemiah.

The word Hagiographa is once used by Jerome
in a peculiar seuse. Speaking of Tobit, he asserts
that the Jews, cutting olf this book from the cata-
logue of the divine Scriptures, place it among
those books which they call Magiographa. And
again, of Judith he says, ‘by the Jews it is read
among the Hagiographa, whose authority is not
sufficient to coutirm debated points ;° but, as in
the latter instance, the greater number of mann-
scripts read Apocrypha, which is doubtless the
true reading, it is highly probable that the word
Hagivgrapha, used in reference to the book of
Tobit, has arisen from the mistake of a transcriber,
The two words were in the middle ages fequent]
used as synonymous FDeutere canunival |
Hagivgrapha has been also used by Christian
writers as synonymous with Holy Scripture.

The Alexandrian translators have not been
guided by the tlneefold division in their arrange-
ment of the books of Scripture. We have already

Deursro-canonical| given the order of the
Yodex Alexandrimms, In the Vatican Codex
Tobit and Judith are placed between Nehemiah
and Esther. Wisdom and Ecclesiasticus follow
Canticles. Baruch and Lamentations fullow
Jeremiah, and the Old Testament concludes with
the fuur books of Maccabees. Luther (who intro-
duced into the Bible a peculiar arrangement,
which in the Qld Testament has been followed in
the English Authorized Version) was the first who
separated the canonical from the other bouks.
Not only do the Alexandrian translators, the
Fathers, and Luther differ from the Jews in the
order of succession of the sacred books, but among


HAIR. 803


the Jews themselves the Talmudists and Masorites,
and the German and Spanish manuscripts follow
ach a different arrangement.—W. W.

HAI. [At] ‘

HAIR is frequently mentioned in Scripture,
and in scarcely anything has the caprice of fashion
been more strikingly displayed than in the various
forms which the taste of different countries and
ages has prescribed for disposing of this natural
covering of the head. The Greeks let their hair
grow to a great length, and their natural fondness
for this attribute of beauty has been perpetuated
not ouly by the frequently recurring epithet of
Homer, kapnxoudwvres, as descriptive of the
*Axaol, but by the circumstance of the poets
and artists of that ancient people representing
even the gods themselves with Lae hair. The
early Egyptians, again, who were proverbial for
their habits of cleanliness, removed the hair as an
incumbrance, and the almost unavoidable occa-
sion of sordid and offensive negligence. They
shaved even the heads of young children, leaving
only certain Jocks, as an emblem of youth, on the
front, the back, and the sides. In the case of
royal children those on the sides were covered and
enclosed in a bag, which hung down conspicuously
as a badge of princely rank, Al classes amongst
that people, not excepting the slaves imported
froma foreign countries, were required to submit to
the tonsure (Gen. xli. 14); and yet, what was
remarkable in the inhabitants of a hot climate,
while they removed their natural hair, they were
accustomed to wear wigs, which were so con-
structed that ‘they far surpassed,’ says Wilkinson,
“the comfort aud coolness of the modern turban,
the reticulated texture of the ground-work on which
the hair was fastened allowing the heat of the head
to escape, while the haiy effectually protected it
from the sun (Anc. Egyptians, iii. 354). Differ.
ent from the custom both of the Greeks and the
Exyptians, that of the Hebrews was to wear their
hair generally short, and to check its growth by
the application of scissors only. The priests at
their inauguration shaved off all their hair, and
when on actual duty at the temple, were in the
habit, it is said, of cutting it every fortnight.
The only exceptions to this prevailing fashion are
found in the case of the Nazarites, whose hair, from
religions duty, was noé to be cropped during the
term of their vow; of young persons who, during
their minority, allowed their hair to hang down
in luxuriant ringlets on their shoulders; of such
efleminate persous as Absalom (2 Sam. xiv. 26);
aud of Solornon’s horse-guards, whose vanity
affected a puerile extravagance, and who strewed
their heads every day with particles of gold-dust
(Josephus, Antig. viti.7). Although the Hebrews
wore their hair short, they were great admirers of
strong and thickset locks; and so high a value did
they set on the possession of a good head of hair,
that they deprecated nothing so much as baldness ;
to which, indeed, so great ignominy was attached
that, whether a man was destitute of hair or not,
bald-head became a general term expressive of
deep and malignant contempt (2 Kings ii. 23)
PBeupaee. To prevent or remedy this defect
they seem, at an early period, to have availed
themselves of the assistance of art, not only for
beautifying the hair, tut increasing its thickness;
while the heads of the priests were anointed
with an unguent of a peculiar gee ine

¥


804


gredients of which, with their various propor-
tions, were prescribed by divine authority, and
the composition of which the people were prohi+
bited, under severe penalties, from attempting to
imitate (Exod. xxx. 32). This custom spread
till anointing the hair of the head became a
general mark of gentility and an essential part of
the daily toilet; the usual cosmetics employed
consisting of the best oi] of olives mingled with
spices, a decoction of parsley-seed in wine, and
more rarely of spikemard (Ps. xxiii. 55 xlv. 75
Eccles. ix. 8; Mark xiv. 3). The prevailing
colour of hair among the Hebrews was dark;
“lucha bushy and black as @ raven,’ being men-
tioned in the description of the bridegroom as the
perfection of beauty in mature manhood (Sol.
Song, v. 11). Hence the appearance of an old
man with a sunw-white head in a company of
younger Jews, all whose heads, like those of other
Eastern people, were jet black—a most conspicu-
ous object—is Leautifully compared to an almond-
tree, which in the early yxut of the year is in full
blossom, while all the others are dark and lealless
(Eccles. xii. 5). Astory is told of Herod, that in
order to conceal bis advanced ave, he used se-
eretly to dye his gray locks with a dark pig
ment (Joseph. Antig. xvi. 8); and although the
anecdote was probably an unfounded calumny
on that prince, yet that i€ was customary with
many of his Roman contemporaries to employ
artificial means for changing or disguising the
silver hue of age, is sufficiently apparent from
the works of Martial and other satirical poets.
_ From Rome the fushion spread into Greece and
other provinces, and it appears that the members
of the church of Corinth were, to a certain extent,
captivated by the prevailing taste, some Christians
being evidently in the eye of the Apostle, who
had attracted attention by the cherislied and wo-
manly decoration of their hair (1 Cor, xi. 14-16).
To them the letter of Paul was intended to ad-
minister a timely reproof for allowing themselves
to fall in with a style of manners which, by con-
founding the distinctions of the sexes, threatened
a baveful influence on good morals: and that not
only the Christian converts in that city, but the
primitive church generally, were led by this ad-
monition to adopt simpler habits, is evident from
the remarkable fact that a criminal, who came
to trial under the assumed character of a Chris-
tian, was proved to the satisfaction of the judge to
be an impostor, by the luxuriant and frialed ap-
pearance of bis hair (Tertullian, Apol.; Fleury,
Les Mocurs des Chrétiens).

With regard to women, the possession of Jong and
luxuriant hair is allowed by Paul to be an essen-
tial attribute of the sex—a graceful and modest
covering provided by nature; and yet the same
Apostle elsewhere (1 Tim. ii. 9) concurs with
Peter (1 Pet. iii. 9) in launching severe invectives
against the ladies of his day for the pride and
passionate fondness they displayed in the elaborate
decorations of their head-dress. As the hair was pre-
eminently the ‘instrument of their pride * (Ezek.
xvi. 39, margin), all the resources of ingenuity
and art were exhausted to set it off to advantage
and Joad it with the most dazzling finery; and
many when they died caused their longest locks
to be cut off, and placed separately in an um, to
he deposited in their toml as the most precious
and valued relics. In the daily use of cusmetics


HAIR.


HALAH.


they bestowed the most astonishing pains in ar
ranging their long hair; sometimes twisting it
round on the crown of the head, where, and at the
temples, by the aid of gum, which they knew as
well as the modern belles, they wrouglit it into a
variety of elegant and fanciful devices—figures
of coronets, harps, wreaths, diadems, emblems of
public temples and conquered cities, being tormed
by the mimic skill of the ancient friseur ; or else,
plaiting it into an incredible number of tresses,
which hang down the back, and which, when ue
cessary, were lengthened by ribbons so as to reach
to the ground, and were kept at full stretch by
the weight of various wreaths of pearls and gold
fastened at intervals down tothe extremity. From
some Syrian coins in his possession Hartmann
(Die Hebrierinam Putzishe) has given this de-
scription of the style of the Hebrew cotffure; and
many ancient busts and portraits which have been
discovered exhibit 8o close a resemblance to those
of Eastern ladies in the present day, as to shew
that the same elaborate and gorgeous disposition
of their hair has been the pride of Oriental females
in every age. :

From the great value attached to a profuse head
of hair arose a variety of superstitious and emble-
matic observances, such as shaving parts of the
head, or cropping it in a particular form; parents
dedicating the hair of infants (Tertullian, De
Anima) to the gods; young women theirs at their
marriage; warriors after a successful campaign;
sailors after deliverance from a storm; hanging
it up on consecrated trees, or depositing it in
temples; burying it in the tomb of friends, as
Achilles did at the funcral of Patroclus ; besides
shaving, cutting off, or plucking it out, as some
pee did; or allowing it to grow in sordid neg-

igence, as was the practice with others, accord-

ing as the calamity that befell them was commun
or extraordinary, and their grief! was mild or
violent.

Various metaphorical allusions are made to
hair by the sacred writers, especially the prophets.
‘Cutting off the hair’ is a figure used to denote the
entire destruction of a people by the righteous
retributions of Providence (Isa. vii. 20). * Gray
hairs here and there on Ephraim" portended the
decline and fall of the kingdom of Israel (Hos
vii. 9). ‘Hair like women's’ forms part of the de-
scription of the Apocalyptic locusts, and histori-
cally points to the prevailing head-dress of the
Saracens, as well as the voluptuous efleminacy
of the Antichristian clergy (Rev. ix. 6). And,
finally, ‘hair like fine wool’ was a prominent feature
in the appearance of the deified Redeemer, em-
blematic of the majesty and wisdum that belong
to him (Rey. i. 14).


HALAH (MOM; Sept. *Aagd), or rather
Cuaxacu, a city or district of Media, upon the
river Gozan, to which, among other places, the
captives of Israel were transplanted Ly the Assy-
rian kings. Many, after Bochart (Geog. Sacra,
iii, 14. p. 220), have conceived this Halah or
Chalach to be the Calachene which Ptolemy
places in the north of Assyria. But if the river
Gozan be the Kizzil-Ozan, Halah must needs be
sought elsewhere, and near that river. Accord-
ingly Major Rennell indicates as lying aloug its
banks a district of some extent, and of great beauty
and fertility, named Chalchal, baving within it a


HALLELUJAH.


temarkably strong position of the same name,
situated on one of the hills adjoining to the
mountains Which separate it from the province
of Ghilan (Geog. of Herod. p. 396).

HALLELUJAH (A057), or Auuanura
CAAAnAovia), a word which stands at the begin-
‘ning of many of the Psalms. From its frequent
occurrence in this position it grew into a formula
of praise, and was chanted as such on solemn days
of rejoicing. This is intimated by the Aoucry-
phal book of Tobit (xiii. 18), when speaking of
the rebuilding of Jerusalem, ¢ And all her (Je-
rusalem's) streets shall sing Alleluia’ (comp.
Rev. xix. 1, 3, 4, 6). This expression of joy and
praise was transferred from the synagogue to the
church, and is still occasionally heard in devo-
tional psalmody. It is so offen found in the
beautiful hymns of John and Charles Wesley,
that the frequent use of it has almost become a
characteristic of the religiuus body named after
the former.


HAM (DM). 1. The youngest son of Noah
* (Gen. v. 32; comp. ix. 24). Having provoked
the wrath of his father by an act of indecency
towards him, the latter cursed him and his de-
acendants to be slaves to his brothers and their de-
scendants (ix. 25). To judge, however, from the
narrative, Noah directed his curse only against
Canaan (the fourth son of Ham) and his race, thus
excluding from it the descendants of Ham's three
other sons, Cush, Mizraim, and Phut (Gen. x. 6).
How that curse was accomplished is taught by
the history of the Jews, by whom the Canaanites
were subsequently exterminated. The general
opinion is, that all the Southern nations derive
their origin from Ham (to which the Hebrew root
DN, Aot, not unlike the Greek A2@fowes, lends some
force). Cush is supposed to have been the pro-
genitor of the nations of East and South Asia,
more especially of South Arabia, and also of Ethi-
opia; Mizraim, of the African nations, including
the Philistines and some other tribes which Greek
fable and tradition connect with Egypt; Phut,
likewise of some African nations; and Canaan,
of the inhabitants of Palestine and Phoenicia,
On the Arabian traditions concerning Ham, vid.
D'Herbelot (Bibl. Orient. art. ‘ Ham’).

2. A poetical name for the land of Egypt
(Ps. Ixxvili. 515; cv. 23, 27; evi. 22). In the
Egyptian language XHMI, or KHME, signifies
bluck. Plutarch also (De Isid. et Osir. 33) calls
Egypt Chemia: tiv Atyuntov ey trois pddwora
peadyyetov otcay, bonep Td ptdav Tod dpOadpod,
Xnuiay Kadrovow.

In Gen. xiv. 5 occurs a country or place
called Ham, belonging to the Zuzim, but its
geographical situation is uuknuwn.—E. M.


HAMAN (}91. a name of the planet Mercury ;
Sept. "Audy), a favourite of the king of Persia,
whose history is involved in that of Esther and
Mordecai. He is called an Agagite; and as
Agayg was a kind of title of the kings of the
Amulekites [Aaaa], it is supposed that Haman
was descended trom the royal family of that
nation. He or his parents probably found their
way to Persia as captives or hostages; and that
the foreign origin of Haman was no bar to his
advancement at court, is a circumstance quite in
union with the most ancient and still subsisting


HAMAN. 805


usages of the East. Joseph, Daniel, and Mordecai
afford other examples of the same kind.

It is unnecessary to repeat the particulars of a
story so well known as that of Haman. The cir-
cumstantial details of the height which he
attained and of his sudden downfall, afford, like
all the rest of the book of Esther, a most faithful
Picture of the customs of an Oriental court and
government, and furnish invaluable materials for
a comparison between the regal usages of ancient
and modern times. The result of such a com-
parison will excite surprise by the closeness of the
resemblance ; for there is not a single fact in the
history of Haman which might not occur at the
present day, even in its merely formal character-
istics, and which, indeed, is not of frequent occur-
rence in different combinations. The boundless
credit which Haman enjoyed with Abhasuerus ;
the homage which all the court in consequence
paid to him; the royal signet-ring, the impression
from which gave such authority to all written
orders, ant] placed the doom of nations in the hands
of its possessor ; the price of blood which Haman
offered to the king; the inquietude of that inordi-
nate power which could endure no rival, and which
the shadow of opposition offended and alarmed ;
and the form of poetical justice given to the final
retribution in the hanging of Haman upon a gal-
lows which he had prepared for another ;—all
these are traits which would at the present day
be received in Asia as the unexaggerated record
of current events.

Even the decree for the extermination of the
Jews which was granted at the request of Haman,
however startling it may appear to those whose
Notions are grounded upon European institutions,
would appear in no wise strange under an Oriental
government. Even in Europe the fanaticism and
tyranny of ancient governments often produced
similar proscriptions (sometimes with reference to
the very same people), which, under the mild-
ness and tranquillity of modern institutions,
we are as little able to comprehend. But in the
East we have still no difficulty in discovering the
traces of the same excesses of despotism, the same
blind submission in the people, the same respect
for the seal of the sovereign, and the same pas-
sive resignation to the sword which he uplifts
or to the bowstring which he sends. Even in
our own day we have seen imperial tirmauns
consign to utter destruction in the mass the
Greeks, the Druses, and the Maronites; and such
things must and will occur wherever the extermi-
nation of a people is unhappily so easy a matier
that it costs a despot no further trouble than the
drawing of a ring from his finrer. Other times
and other names make all the ditference—the man-
ners are the same. It may be well to observe that
Haman never mentions Mordecai himself to the
king; and that in speaking of the Jews he does
not name them directly, but describes them as
“a certain people’ dispersed through the king-
dom, and living separate under laws of their
own (Esth, iii. 8). That this peuple, or any
other subject to his sceptre, should require to
be thus descriptively indicated, seems to show
how little the king knew of the actual state of
his dominions, or of persons beyond the im-
mediate circle of the court. The death of
Haman appears to have taken place about the
year B.c. 510.


806 HAMATH.


HAMATH (N11; Sept. ’Eudé), one of the
smaller kingdoms of Syria, having Zubah on the
east and Rehob on the south. This last kingdom,
lying within the greater Mount Hermon, is ex-
pressly said to have been taken possession of by
the Israelites, and, like Dan or Laish, which is
represented to have been in the valley of Beth-
rehob (Judg. xviii, 28), is used to denote the
northern boundary of the Holy Land. Thus it
it is said ‘Nom. xiii, 21) that the spies ‘went up
and searched the land, from the wilderness of Zin
unto Rehob, as meu come to Hamath,’ which lay
tw the south of Rehwb, beyond Hermon. The
approach to it from the south is by an opening
or mountain-pass, called ‘the entrance of Ha-
raath,’ and ‘the enteriug in of Hamath,’ which,
being the passage from the uortheru extremity of
the land of Israel into Syria, is sometimes used
to describe the Loundary of the former in this
direction, as ‘from the entering in of Hamath to
the river of Egypt’ (1 Kings viii, 65). This
‘entering in of Hamath’ answers to the route
taken by Burckhardt (Syria, p. 249) from El-
Bekaa, or the southern part of the valley between
the two chains of Libanus and Anti-Libanus, to
Banias. As there does not appear, from his de-
scription, to be any elevated ground in this route,
there would seem to be a depression of the chain
which hears the name of Jebel es-Sheikh.

The kingdom of Hamath, or, at least, the south-
ern or ceutral paits of it, appear to have nearly
corresponded with what was atterwards denomi-
nated Cale-Syria; but northwards, it stretched
as far as the city Hamath on the Orontes, which
seems to have been the capital of the whole
country. This city was called Epiphania by the
Greeks, under which name it was known to
Josephus (Antig. i. 6. 2; comp. Michaelis, Spicdd.
ii. 52) and Jerome (Quest. in Gen. x. 15;
Comment. in Ezck. x\vii. 15, 16); but it has now
resumed its more ancient denomination, which
indeed was probably never lost among the native
population, Toi was king of Hamath at the time
when David conquered the Syrians of Zobah; and
it appears that he had reason to rejoice in, the
humiliation of a dangerous ueighbuur, as he sent
his own son Joram to congratulate the victor (2
Sam. viii. 9, he In the time of Hezekiah the
town along with its territory was conquered by
the Assyrians (2 Kings xvii. 24; xviii. $45 xix.
13; Isa. x. 9; xi. 11); and afterwards hy the
Chaldwans (Jer. xxxix, 2, 5). Abulfeda, the
Arabian geographer, who was prince of Hamath
in the fourteenth century, correctly states (Tad.
Syria, p. 108) that this city is mentioned in the
books of the Israelites. He adds, ‘It is reckoned
one of the most pleasant towns of Syria. ‘The
Orontes flows round the greater part of the city
on the east and north, It boasts a lofty and well-
built citadel. Within the town are many dams
and water-machiues, by means of which the water
is led off by canals to irrigate the gardens and
supply private houses. It is remarked of this
city and of Schiazar that they abound more in
water-machines than any other cities in Syria.’
This description still, in a great degree, applies.
Hamath is a picturesque town, of considerable
circumference, and with wide and convenient
streets. In Burckhardt’s time the attached dis-
trict contained 12U inhabited villages, and 70 or
80 that lay waste. The western part of this district


HAND.


forms the granary of Northern Syria, though the
harvest never yields more than a tenfold retum,
chietly on account of the immense numbers of
mice, which sometimes completely destruy the
crops (Pococke, YZrare/s, ii. 209; Burckhardt,
Travels in Syria, p. 249; Richter, Wadlfahkrten,
p- 231: comp. Rosenmiiller's Bib. Geography,
li, 243-246).

HANAMEEL, a kinsman of Jeremiah, to
whom, before the siege of Jerusalem, he sold a
field which he possessed in Anathoth, a town of
the Levites (Jer. xxxii. 6-12). If this field be-
longed to Hanameel as a Levite, the sale of it
would imply that an ancient law had fallen into
disuse (Lev. xxv. 34); but it is possible that
it may have been the property of Hanameel in
right of his mother. The transaction was con
ducted with all the forms of legal transfer, and
was intended to evince the certainty of restora-
tion from the approaching exile, by showing
that possessions which could be established by
documents would yet be of future value to the
possessur (B.c. 587). P

1. HANANI (920, gracious ; Sept. *Avavi),
a prophet under the reign of Asa, king of Judah,
by te re he was seized and imprisoned for an-
nouncing that he had lost, from want of due trust
in God, an advantage which he might have
gained over the king of Syria (2 Chron. xvi. 7}.
The precise occasion of this declaration is not
known. This Hanani is supposed to be the same
who was father of another prophet, named Jehu
(1 Kings xvi. 7); bui circumstances of time and
place seem adverse to this conclusion.

2. HANANI, a brother of Nehemiah, who went
from Jerusalem to Shushan, being sent most pro-
bably by Ezra, and brought that information
respecting the miserable condition of the returned
Jews which led to the mission of Nehemiab.
Hanani came back to Juda, probably along with
his brother, and, together with one Hananiah, was
appoiuted to take charge of the gates of Jerw-
salem, and see that they were opened in the
morning and closed in the evening at the ap-
pointed time, The circumstances of the time
and place rendered this an important and respon-
sible duty, not unattended with some danger (Neb.
vii. 2,3). Bc. 455. .

1, HANANIAH (GupPlak Jehovah's goodness ;
Sept. "Avavia), a false prophet of Gibeon, who, by
opposing his prophecies to those of Jeremiah,
brought upon himself the terrible sentence, ‘Thou
shalt die this year, because thou hast tanght r+
bellion against the Lord.’ He died accordingly
(Jer. xxviii. 1, sq.), Bec. 596.

2. HANANIAH. [raprct

3. HANANIAH, the person who was asso-
ciated with Nebemiah's brother Hanani in the
charge of the gates of Jerusalem. Tue high
eulogy is bestowed upon him, that ‘he was a
faithful man, and feared Gud above many‘ (Neb.
vii. 2) [Hananr 2].

HAND, the organ of feeling, rightly denomi-
nated by Galen the instrument of instruments,
since by its position at the end of the fore-arm, its
structure and its connection with the mind, the
hand admirably executes the behests uf the human
will, and acquires and imparts to man incom-
parable skill and power. By the peculiarities of


HAND.


its conformation—the inclination of the thumb to
the palm. the comparative length of the thumb
and of the fingers, ‘ the hollow of the hand,’ and

’ the fleshy protuberances by which that hollow is
mainly formed — this member is wonderfully
adapted to the purposes for which it was designed,
and serves to illustrate the wisdom and providence
of the grent Creator (The Hand, tts Mechanism,
and vital Endowments, as evincing Design, by
Sir Charles Bell). Inno one quality is the hand
more distinguished as an instrument than in the
flexibility of the parts, and the ease with which
the whole is moved—a power which is owing to
the complexity of its structure, consisting, as it
does, of no fewer than twenty-seven separate
bones, which are bound together and put in
motion by nineteen muscles.

The hand itself serves to distinguish man from
other terrestrial beings. No other animal has
any member comparable with the human hand.
The trunk of the elephant unites the attributes of
skill and power to a surprising extent, but yields

the palm to the hand. e fore-foot of the ouran-

outang, though possessed of extraordinary proper-
ties, is greatly inferior to the hand. In the chim-
panzee the thumb is so short as not to extend
further than the root of the fingers.

Of the two hands the right has a preference
derived from natural endowment. Its universal
use, as the chief instrument in acting, serves to
show that its superiority is something more than
an accident. But the preference which it holds
is only a part of the general advantage which the
right side has over the left, not only in muscular
strength, but also in its vital or constitutional
properties (Bell). ¢

Considering the multiplex efficacy of the hu-
man hand, the control which it has given man,
the conquest over the external world which it has
enabled him to achieve, and the pleasing and
useful revolutions and improvements which it
has brought about, we are not surprised to read
the glowing eulogy in which Cicero (De Nat.
Deor. ii. 60) has indulged on the subject, nor to
find how important is the part which the hand
performs in the records of divine revelation. From
the properties already described, the student of
Scripture is prepared to see the hand employed in
holy writ as a symbol of skill, strength, and effi-
cacy. Asa part ofthat general anthropomorphism,
without whose aid men in the early ages could
probably have formed no conception of God, and
which, after all, is less gross among the aucient
Hebrews than among other contemporary nations,
the Deity is frequently spoken of in the records of
revelation as if possessed of hands; though it may
be questioned if such phraseology was, even in
ptimitive times, anything more than figurative,
asetting forth of the unknown by the known, a
surt of pictorial writing in divine things. It is,
however, pretty safe to affirm, that many vulgar
errors in religion owe their origin and support to
the inaptitude of men to look through the sign tu
the thing signitied, to pass from the shadow up-
warts to the substance, to divest eternal truth of
its temporary vestments. Were this more gene-
rally effected, God would not be regarded as
seated in some part of space ona throne of gold,
with his son placed literally at his ‘right hand;’
but the scriptural representations wiuld be seen to
indicate the ceaseless providence and constant


HAND. 807


supervision of the Creator, in which the risen gad
gloritied Jesus has an intimate interest and a su-
preme share.

The ordinary usages of Scripture in regard to
Shand,’ ‘right hand,’ &c., must be familiar to the
student, and the passages on which the representa-
tions above made are founded, are too easy of
access, by means of a Concordance, to need bein;
enumerated here: it may therefore be more usefu
to contine the rest of our remarks to one or two
specitic and more important points.

The phrase ‘ sitting at the right hand of God,’
as applied to the Saviour of the world, is derived
from the fact that with earthly princes a position
on the right hand of the throne was accounted
the chief place of honour, dignity, and power:
—‘upon thy right-hand did stand the queen’
(Ps. xlv. 9; compare 1 Kings ii. 19; Ps. Ixxx.
17). The immediate passage out of which sprang
the phraseology employed by Jesus may be found
in Ps. cx. 1: ‘Jehovah said unto my Lord, sit
thou at my right hand until I make thine ene-
mies thy footstovl.? Accordingly the Saviour
declares before Caiaphas (Matt. xxvi. 64; Mark
xiv. 62), ‘Ye shall see the Son of man sitting on
the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds
of heaven; where the meaning obviously is that
the Jews of that day should have manifest proofs
that Jesus held the most eminent place in the
divine favour, and that his present humiliation
would be succeeded by glory, majesty, and power
(Luke xxiv. 26; 1 Tim. iii. 16). So when it is
said (Mark xvi.19; Rom. viii. 34; Col. iii. );
1 Pet. iti. 22; Heb. i. 3; viii. 1) that Jesus ‘sits
at the right hand of God,’ ‘at the right hand of
the Majesty on hizh,’ we are obviously to under-
stand the assertion to be that, as his Father, so he
worketh always (Jolin v. 17) for the alvancemeny
of the kingdom of heaven, and the salvation of the
world.

As the hand is the great instrument of action,
80 is it eminently fitted for affording aid to the
mind, by the signs and indications which it
makes. Thus to lay the hand on any one was a
means of pointing him out, and consequently an
emblem of setting any one apart for a particular
oftice or dignity. Imposition of hands accord-
ingly formed, at an eurly period, a part of the
ceremonial observed on the appointment and con-
secration of persons to high and holy under-
takings. In Num. xxvii. 19 Jehovah is repre-
sented as thus speaking to Moses, ‘Take thee
Joshua, the son of Nun, aman in whom is the
spirit, and Jay thine hand upon him, and set him
before Eleazar the priest, and before all the con-
gregation, and give him a charge in their sight,’
&c.: where it is obvious that the laying on of
hands did neither originate nor communicate
divine gifts; for Joshua had ‘ the spirit’ before he
received imposition of hands; but was merely an
instrumental sign for marking him out individu-
ally, and setting him apart, in sight of the congre-
gation, to his arduous work. Similar appears to
be the import of the observance in the primitive
church of Christ (Acts viii. 15-17; 1 Tim. iv.
14; 2 Tim. i.6). A corruption of this doctrine
was, that the laying on of hands gave of itself
divine powers, and on this account Simon, the
magician (Acts viii. 18), offered money, epi |
‘Give me also this power, that on whomsoever


lay hands he may receive the Holy Ghost,’ in-


808 HANDICRAFT.


tending probably to carry on a gainful trade by
communicating the gift to others.

In Col. ii. 13, 14, ‘the law of commandments
contained in ordinances’ (Ephes. ii. 15), is desig-
nated ‘the handwriting of ordinances that was
against us,’ which Jesus blotted out, and took
away, nailing it to his cross; phraseology which
indicates the abolition, on the part of the Saviour,
of the Mosaic law (Wollius, Cure Philolog. in
N. T. iii. 16).—J. R. B.

HANDICRAFT. In the early periods to
which the Scriptural history refers we do not meet
with those artilicial feelings and unreasonable
prejudices against hand-labour which prevail and
are so banefully influential in modern society.
The entire circle of achievement which man had
effected in the natural world, was, in ancient
times, too immediately and too obviously con-
nected with the labour of the hands, which is, in
truth, the great primary sonrce of wealth, for any
feeling regarding it to prevail but one of high
estimation. When hand-labourers were seen on
every side, and found in every grade of life, and
when the products of their skill and industry
were the chief, if not the sole, advantages which
civilization gave, handicraftsmen, as they were
among the great benefactors, so were they among
the ciief favourites of human kind. Accord-
ingly, even the creation of the world is spoken of

. as the work of God's hands, and the firmament is
said to show his handy-work (Ps. viii. 3; xix. 1;
Gen. ii. 2; Job xxxiv. 19). The primitive his-
tory, too, which the Bible presents is the history
of hand-labourers. Adam dressed the garden in
which God had placed him (Gen. ii. 15), Abel
was a keeper of sheep, Cain a tiller of the ground
(Gen. iv. 3), Tubal-cain a smith (Gen. iv. 22).
These references prove how soon men gave them-
selves to the labours of the hand, and these and
similar passages serve to show what were the
earliest employments, did not the nature of the
case sutlice to assure us that the most uecessary
arts would be first cultivated. The general nature
of this article does not require any extensive or
detailed inquiry into the haud-labours which the
Israclites practised before their descent into
Egypt; but the high and varied culture which
they found there, declares that any history of hand-
labour must be very defective the sourees of
which are found exclusively in the Bible. The
shepherd-life which the patriarchs previously Ted in
their own pasture-grounds, was not favourable to
the cultivation of the practical arts of life, much
less of those arts by which it is embellished.
Exzypt, in consequence, must have presented to
Joseph and his father not only a land of wonders,
but a source of rich and attractive knowledge.
And though the herdsman-sort of life which the
Hebrews continued to lead would not be con-
ducive to their advancement in either science or
art; yet it cannot be doubted that they derived
in no slight degree those advantages which have
always been reaped by a less cultured people,
when brought into proximity or contact with a
high state of civilization.

Another source of knowledge to the Hebrews
of handicrafts were the maritime and com-
mercial Phoenicians. Commerce and navigation
imply great skill in art and science; and the
pursnits to which they lead largely increase the
skill whence they emanate. It is not, therefore,


HANDICRAFT.


surprising that the origin of eo many arts has beam
referred to the north-eastern shore of the Mediter-
ranean Sea; nor is there any difficulty in under-
standing how arts and letters should be propa-
gated from the coast to the interior, conferring
high advantages on the inhabitants of Syria in
general, as well before as after the settlement
of the Hebrew tribes in the land of promise
At first the division of labour was only very
partial. The master of the family himself exercised
such arts as were found of absolute necessity.
Among these may be reckoned not only thuse
which pasturage and tillage required, but most of
those which were of that rough and severe nature
which demand strength as well as skill; such,
for instance, as the preparation of wood-work for
the dwelling, the slaying of animals for food,
which every householder understood, together
with the art of extracting the blood from the
entire carcass. The lighter labours of the hand
fell to the share of the housewife; such as
baking bread—for it was only in large towns that
baking was carried on as a trade (2 Sam. xiii.
8),—such, also, as cooking in general, supplying
the house with water, no very easy office, as the
fountains often lay at a considerable «listauce
from the dwelling: moreover, weaving, making
of clothes fur males as well as females, working
in wool, flax, hemp, cotton, tapestry, richly co-
loured hangings, and that not only for domestic
use, but for ‘ merchandise,’ were carried on within
the precincts of the house by the mistress and
her maidens (Exod. xxxv. 25; 1 Sam. ii. 19;
2 Kings xxiii. 7; Prov. xxxi.).

The skill of the Hebrews during their wander-
ings in the desert does not appear to have Leen
inconsiderable; but the pursuits of war and the
entire absorption of the energies of the natiun in
the one great work of gaining the land which
had been given to them, may have led to their
falling off in the arts of ce; and from a
passage in 1 Sam. (xiii. 20) 1t would appear that
not long after they had taken possession of the
country they were in a low condition as to the
instruments of handicraft. A comparatively
settled state of society, however, soon led to tue
revival of skill by the encouragement of industry,
A more minute diviston of labour ensued. Trades,
strictly so called, arose, carried on by persons
exclusively devoted to ove pursuit. Thus in
Judy. xvit. 4 and Jer. x. 14, ‘the founder’ is
mentioned, a trade which implies a practical
knowledge of metallurgy; the smelting and woik-
ing of metals were well known tu the Hebrews
(Job xxxvii. 18); brass was in use before irou;
arms and instruments of husbandry were made
of iron, In Exodus (xxxv. 30-35) a passage
occurs which may serve to specify many arts that
were practised among the Israelites, thouzh it
seems also to intimate that at the time to wuich
it refers artificers of the description referred to
were not numerons—‘ See, the Lord hath called
by name Bezaleel, and hath filled him with the
spirit of God, in kuowledge and all manner
of workmanship, and to devise curious works,
to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
and in the cutting of stones, to set them. and in
carving of wood, to make any manner of cunning
work ; and he hath put in his heart that he may
teach; both be and Aholiab . them hath he filled
with wisciom of heart to work all manner of work


HANDKERCHIEF,


of the engraver ; and of the cunning workman,
and of the embroiderer in blue and in purple,
in scarlet and in fine linen, and of the weaver.’
From the ensuing chapter (ver. 34) it appears that
gilding was known before the settlement in
Canaan. The ark (Exod. xxxvii. 2) was over-
laid with pure gold within and without. The
chernbim were wrought (* beaten,’ Exod.
xxxvii. 7) in gold. The candlestick was of
beaten gold (verses 17, 22). Wire-drawing
was probably understood (Exod. xxxviii. 4;
xxxix. 3). Covering with brass (Exod. xxxviii.
2) and with silver (Prov. xxvi. 23) was practised.
Architecture and the kindred arts do not appear
to have made much progress till the days of Solo-
man, who employed an incredible number of
persons to procure timber (1 Kings v. 13, sq.)3
but the men of skill for building his temple he
obtained from Hiram, king of Tyre (1 Kings v.
sq.3 1 Chron. xiv. 15 2 Chron. ii.7). Without
pursuing the subject into all its details (see Scholz,
Handb. der Bib. Archaol. p. 390, sq.; De Wette,
Lehrb. der Archaol. p. 115, as Wine Real-
wort. art. ‘Handwerke’), we remark that the inter-
course which the Babylonish captivity gave the
Jews seems to have greatly improved their know-
ledge and skill in both the practical and the fine


arts, and to have led them to hold them in very’


high estimation. The arts were even carried on
by persons of learning, who took a title of honour
from their trade (Rosenmiiller, Morgent. vi. 42).
It was held a sign of a bad education if a father
tlid not teach his sun some handicraft—quicunque
Slium suum non docet aliquid opificium est ac
si doceret eum latrocinium—‘ whoever does not
teach his son a trade, teaches him robbing’ (Light-
foot, p.616; Mish. Tr. Pirke Aboth, ii. 2; Wa-
genseil’s Sota, p. 597; Othon. Lex. Rabb. 491).
In the Apocrypha and New Testament there
are metitioned tauners (Acts ix. 43), teut-makers
(Acts xviii. 3); in Josephus (De Bell. Jud. v. 4. 1)
cheese-makers; domestics (xoupeis, Antig. xvi.
11.5); in the Talmud, with others we find tailors,
shoe-makers, blovd-letters, glaziers, goldsmiths,
plasterers. Certain handicraftsmen could never
rise to the rank of high-priest (Mish. Tr. Kid-
dush, 82. 1), such as weavers, barbers, fullers,
perfumers, cuppers, tanners; which pursuits, espe-
cially the last, were held in disesteem (Mishna,
Tr. Megillah, iii, 2; Othon, Ler. abd. 155;
Wetstein, N. 7. ii 516). In large cities particular
localities were set apart for puticular trad-s, as is
the case in the East to the present day. Thus in
Jeremiah (xxxvii. 21) we read of * the bakers’
street.” So in the Talmud (Mishna, v. 169, 225)
mention is made of a flesh-market ; in Josevlins
(De Bell. Jud. y. 4.1) of a cheese-market ; and in
the New Testament (John v. 2) we read of a sheep-
market. See Iken, Antig. Hebr. iii.-ix. p. 578, sq. 5
Bellermann, Handb. i. 22, sq. —J. R. B.
HANDKERCHIEF, NAPKIN (covddpiov;
Vulg. sudarium), occurs in Luke xix. 20; John
xi. 44; xx.7; Acts xix 12. The Greek word
is adopted from the Latin (like xjvoos, peu-
Bodva, and many others), and probably, at tirst,
had the same meaning with it, and which, being
derived from szdo, to perspire, corresponds to our
word (pocket) Aandkerchief. The Greek rheto-
rician Pollux (a.p. 18U) vemarks that the word
covddpioy had supplanted not only the ancient
Greek word for handkerchief, qyerbBioy or que


HANDKERCHIEF. 809


ropBioy, which he considers an Egyptian word,
but even the more recent term xapidparrcop
Td Be jperipBioy for: pty Kal rovro Aiyiwrioy,
ein 8 by Kata 7d ev TH eon Kwppdig, Kayidporrioy
kadotpevov, 6 viv couddpiov dvoud(era (Ono-
mast. vii, 16). The influence of the Romans
caused the introduction of this word even among
the Orientals. The rabbins have NVD. Ip
the Syriac version NV7°D answers to the Hebrew
NM}, a@ veil (margin, sheet or apron); and in
Chaldee T11D or NVND is used for a veil or
any linen cloth (Buxtorf, Lez. Chal. p. 1442). It
is deed but natural to expect that a foreign
word, introduced into any language, should be
applied by those who borrow it in a louser sense
than they do from whom it is obtained. Hence,
although the Latin word sudurium is generally
restricted to the forementioned meaning, yet in
the Greek and Syriac languages it signifies,
chiefly, napkin, wrapper, &c. These observations
prepare us for the diferent uses of the word in
Scripture. In the first instance (Luke xix. 20) it
means a wrapper, in which the ¢ wicked servant’
had laid up the pound entrusted to him by his
master. For references to the custom of laying
up money, &c. in govddpia, both in classical and
rabbiuical writers, see Wetstein's N. T. on Luke
xix. 20. In the second instance (Johu xi. 44)
it appears as a kerchief, or cloth attached to the
head of a corpse. It was perhaps brought round
the forehead and under the chin. In many
Egyptian mummies it does not cover the face.
In ancient times among the Greeks it did. Ni-
colans (De Grecor. Luctu, ¢. iii. § 6, Thiel.
1697). Maimonides, in his comparatively recent
times, describes the whole face as being covered,
and gives a reason for the custom (Tract ifel,
c. 4). The next instance is that of the covddproy
which had been * about the head’ of our Lord,
but which, after his resurrection, was found rolled
up, as if deliterately, and put in a place sepa-
rately from the linen clothes ywpls évreruArypévoy
eis va téroy. The last instance of the Bi-
blical use of the word occurs in the account of
‘the special miracles’ wrought by the hands of
Paul (Acts xix. 11); ‘80 that govddpa (hand-
kerchiefs, napkins, wrappers, shawls, &c.) were
bronght from his body to the sick; and the dis-
eases departed from them, and the evil spirits
went out of them.’ The Ephesians had not un-
naturally inferred that the apostle’s miraculous
power could be communicated by such a mode
of contact ; and certainly cures thus received by
parties at a distance, among a peuple famed for
their addictedness to ‘curious arts,’ é. e. magical
skill, &c., would serve to convince them of the
truth of the gospel, by a mode well suited to
interest their minds. The Apostle is not recorded
to have expressed any opinion respecting the
reality of this intermediate means of those mi-
racles. He had doubtless sufficiently explained
that these and all the uther miracles ‘wrought by
his hands,’ #. e. by his means, were really wrought
by God (ver. 11) in attestation of the mission of
Jesus. If he himself did no¢ entertain exactly
the same ideas upon the subject as they did, he
may be considered as conceding to, or rather not
disturbing unnecessarily, popular notions, rene
dered harmless by his previous explanation, and
aflording a very convenient medium for achieving


much higher purposes. If the connection be-


810 HANNAH.


tween the secondary cause and the effect was
weal, it reminds us of our Saviour’s expression,
*I perceive that virtue is gone out of me’ (Mark
v. 30); which is, however, regarded by many
critics as a popular mode of saying that he knew
that a miracle had been wrought by his power
and efticacy—a mode of speaking in enison at
least with the belief of the woman that she should
be healed if she could but touch the hem of his
garment unperceived by him, and perhaps even
conceded to, in accordance with the miracles
wrought through the medium of contact related
in the Old Testament (1 Kings xvii. 21; 2 Kings
iv, 29, &c.), and in order, by a superior display,
in regard both to speed and extensiveness, to
demonstrate his supremacy by a mode through
which the Jews were best prepared to perceive it
(Luke vi. 19; Schwarz, ad Olear. de Stylo N. T.
p. 129; Soler. de Pileo, p.17; Pierson, ad Meer.

. 348; Lydii Flor. Spars. ad Pass. J.C. p. 5;
Brusivg, Questt. Heb. c. 2; Roseumiiller and
Kuinoel on the passages).—J. F. D.


HANGING. ‘[Punisnaents.]


HANNAJ, properly Cuannan (7130), gra-
ciousness ; Sept. “Avva), wife of a Levite named
Elkanah, and mother of Samuel. She was very
dear to her husband, but being childless was much
aggrieved by the insults of Elkanalis other wife
Peninnah, who was blessed with children. The
family lived at Ramathaim-zophim, and, as the
law required, there was a yearly journey to offer
sacrifices at the sole altar of Jehovah, which was
then at Shiloh. Women were not bound to attend;
but pious females free from the cares of a family
often did so, especially when the husband was
a Levite. Every time that Hannah went there
childless she declined to take part in the festivities
which followed the sacrifices, being then, as it
seems, peculiarly exposed to the taunts of her
rival. At length, on one of these visits to Shiloh,
while she prayed before returning home, she
vowed to devote to the Almighty the son which
she so eamestly desired (Num. xxx. 1, sq.). It
seems to have been the custom to pronounce all
vows at the holy place in a loud voice, under the
immediate notice of the priest (Deut. xxiii. 23;
Ps. xxvi. 14); but Hannah prayed in a low
tone, so that her lips only were seen to move.
This attracted the attention of the high-priest, Eli,
who suspected that she had taken too much wine
at the recent feast. From this suspicion Hannah
easily vindicated herself, and returned home with
a lightened heart. Before the end of that year
Hannah became the rejoicing mother of a son, to
whom the name of Samuel was given, and who
was from his birth placed under the obligations
of that condition of Nazariteship to which his
mother had vowed him. B.c. 1171.

Hannah went no more to Shiloh till her child
was Old enough to dispense with her maternal
services, when she took him up with her to leave
him there, as, it appears, was the custom when one
already a Levite was placed under the additiona'
obligations of Nazariteship. When he was pre-
sented in due form to the high-priest, the mothe.
took occasion to remind him of the former trans-
action: ‘For this child,’ she said, 61 prayed,and
the Lord hath given me my petition which I
asked of him’ (1 Sam. i. 27), Hannah's glad-
ness afterwards found vent in an exulting chant,


HARAN.


which furnishes a remarkable specimer of the
early lyric poetry of the Hebrews, and of which
many of the ideas and images were in after times
repeated by the Virgin Mary on a somewhat
similar occasion (Luke i. 46, sq.

After this Hannah failed not to visit Shiloh
every year, bringing a new dress for her son, whe
remained under the eye and near the person of
the high-priest [Samuzz]. That great personage
took kind notice of Hannah on these occasions,
and bestowed his blessing upon her and her
husband. The Lord repaid her abundantly for
that which she had, to use her own expression,
‘lent to him;’ for she had three sons and two
daughters after Samuel.


HANUN (}2M, bestower ; Sept. *Avyv), son
and successor of Nahash, king of the Ammonites.
David, who had in his troubles been befriended
by Nahash, sent, with the kindest intentions, an
embassy to condole with him on the death of bis
father, and to congratulate him on his own ac-
cession, The rash young king, however, was led
to misapprehend the motives of this embassy, and
to treat with gross and inexpiable indignity the
honourable personages whom David had charged
with this mission. Their beards were half shaven,
and their robes cut short by the middle, and they
were dismissed in this shameful trim; which car
be appreciated only by those who consider how
reverently the beard has always been regarded by
the Orientals [Bzarp] (s.c. 1038). When the
news of this affront was brought to David, he sent
word to the ambassadors to remain at Jericho till
the growth of their beards enabled them to appear
with decency in the metropolis. He vowed ver-
geance upon Hanun for the insult; and the vehe
mence with which the matter wae taken up fonns
an instance, interesting from its antiquity, of the
respect expected to be paid to the person and cha-
racter of ambassadors. Hanun himself Icoked for
nothing less than war as the consequence of his
conduct; and he subsidized Hadarezer and other
Syrian princes to assist him with their armie.
The power of the Syrians was broken in two
campaigns, and the Ammonites were lett to their
fate, which was severe even beyond the usual se~
verities of war in that remote age [AmmMoniTES;
Davip] (2 Sam. x.; 1 Chron. a

HARA (N71), a Chaldee form for TW, moun-
tain (Gesenius); Vulg. Ara. One of the places
to which the tribes beyond the Jordan were carried
away by Tiglath-pileser. The word occurs only
in a single passage (1 Chron. v. 26); in the Sep-
tuagint and Syriac version it is altogether omitted,
The Chaldee Paraphrast renders it by xdap mb,
mountains of darkness. Bochart and Gesenius
eonjecture that it is a name for the northem part
of Media, which in Arabic is called Algedal, * the
mountainous region,” to which the Hebrew term
corresponds. Media, Bochart observes, is called
Aria by the Greeks, and the inhabitants are deno-
minated Arii (“Apiot) (Herod. vii. 62; Bochart,
Geog. Sacra, iii. 14. p. 1945 Gesenius, Tae
saurus, 8.v.; Michaelis, Supplementa ad Ler.
Heb., vol. i. p. 570).—J. E. R.

HARADAH, a camp or station of the Israel-
ites (Num. xxxiii, 24) [Wanperine].

HARAM. [Houss. ]

1. HARAN, eldest son of Terah, brother of


HARAN.


‘Abraham and Nahor, and father of Lot, Milcah,
and Iscah. He died hefore his father Terah;
which, frum the manner in which it is mentioned,
appears to have been a much rarer case in those
days than at present (Gen. xi. 27, sq.).

. HARAN, or rather Cuaran ([10; Sept.

, called by the Greeks Charran, and

ge an Charre. It was situated in bd
north-western part of Mesopotamia, on a river of
the same name running into the Euphrates. It
is sup to have been so called from Haran,
the father of Lot and brother of Abraham ; but
there appears no ground for this-conclusion except
the identity of names. Abraham, after he had
been called from Ur of the Chaldees, tarried here
till his father Terah died, when he proceeded to
the land of Canaan (Gen. xi. 31, 38; Acts vii.
4). The elder branch of the family still re-
mained at Haran; which led to the interesting
journeys thither described in the patriarchal his-
tory—first, that of Abraham's servant to obtain a
wife for Isaac (Gen. a ig next, that of Jacob
when he fled to evade the wrath of Esau (Gen.
xxviii. 10). The plain bordering on this town
is celebrated in history as the scene of a battle
3a which the Roman army was defeated by the


Parthians, and the Triumvir Crassus killed. .


Abulfeda (Tab. Syria, p. 164) ks of Haran
#8 formerly a great city, which lay in an arid
end barren tract of country in the province of
Var Modhar. The Sabians had a chapel there
which was dedicated to Abraham. ‘
Haran still retains its ancient name in the
form of Harran, and is only peopled by a few
families of wandering Arabs, who are led thither
ry a plentiful supply of water from several small
treams. It is situated in a flat and sandy plain
ry 36° 40/ N. lat., 39° 2/ 45” E. long.
HARE (N32 arnebeth ; Arab. arned)
seurs in Lev. xi. 6, and Deut. xiv. 7, and, in
‘wth instances, it is prohibited from being used as
ood, because it chews the cud, although it has not
he hoof divided. But the hare belongs to an order
:f mammals totally distinct from the ruminan-
‘a, which are all, without exception, bisulca, the
camel's hoof alone offering a partial modification.
they have all four stomachs; incisor teeth, with
gain some slight modification in the camel, sulely
ta the lower jaw ; molars made for grinding, and
ae lower jawbone articulated, so as to admit of
de circular action required for that purpose, when
the food, already swallowed, is forced up to be
horoughly triturated. All these characters and
faculties are wanting in the hare, which belongs
« the order rodentia; for, in common with por-
supines, squirrels, beavers, and rats, it has in-
tisor teeth above and below, set like chisels, and
salculated for gnawing, cutting, and nibbling.
The word ‘nibble’ itself shows an affinity to the
Semitic particle ned in the names above cited.)
fhe stumach of rodents is single, and the motion
af the mouth, excepting when they masticate some
anal] portion of food reserved in the hollow of the
cheek, is more that of the lips, when in a state
of repose the animals are engaged in working the
incisor teeth upon each other. This practice is a
necessary condition of existence, for the friction
keeps them fit for the purpuse of nibbling, and
vents their growing beyond a proper length.
Tis a provision of natare in the whole order of


‘animal perishes


‘“HARETH. si


rodents; and, if by any accident the four cutting
teeth be rendered inefficient by not closing upon


“each other at the exact line of contact, they grow


rapidly beyond serviceable use, exceed the open-
ing of the mouthyand impede feeding till the
from want. As hares do not sub-
sist on hard substances, like most of the genera of
the order, but on tender shoots and grasses, they
have more cause, and therefore a more constant
craving, to abrade their teeth; and this they do in
a manner which, combined with the slight ing
ration of the occasional contents of the cheeks,
even modern writers, not zoologists, have mistaken
for real rumination. In the German versions, the
expression wiederkauen, ‘to chew again,’ is much
more correct than the English phrase, ‘to chew
the cud,’ because this last implies a insscas Godashn
re-chewing does not, and which the hare not
possess.


Physiological investigation having fully deter-
mined these questions, it follows that both with
Tegard to the Bhaphan god the Hare we should «in-
derstand the original in the above passages, rendered
‘chewing the cud,’ as merely implying a second
mastication, more or less complete, and not neces-
sarily that faculty of true ruminants, which de-
Fives its name from a power to draw up aliment,
after deglutition, when worked into a ball, from
the first stomach into the mouth, and there to sub-
mit it to a second grinding process. The act of
“chewing the cud’ and ‘re-chewing ’ being con-
sidered identical by the Hebrews, the sacred law-
giver, not being occupied with the doctrines of
science, no doubt used the expression in the sense
in which it was then understood. It may be
added, that a similar opinion, and consequent re-
jection of the hare as food, pervaded many nations
of antiquity, who derived their origin, or their
doctrines, trom a Semitic source; ami that
among others it existed among the British Celts,
probably even before they had any intercourse
with Phenician merchants.

There are two distinct species of hare in Syria,
one, Lepus Syriacus, or Syrian hare, nearly equal
in size to the common European, having the fur
ochry buff, and Lepus Sinaiticus, or hare of the
desert, smaller and brownish. They reside in the
localities indicated by their trivial names, and
are distinguished from the common hure,.by a
greater length of ears, and a black tail with white
fringe. There is found in Egypt, and higher up
the Nile, a third species, represented in the outline
paintings on ancient monuments, but uot coloured
with that delicacy of tint required for distinguish-
ing it from the others, excepting that it appears to
be marked with the black speckles which charac-
terize the existing species.—C. H. S.

HARETH, a forest in Judah, to which David
fled from Saul (1 Sam. xxii. 5) [Fongsr].


ei2 HARLOT.


-BARLOT, Wuorg, Stranaz Woman, &c.
cat ; Sept. xépyn; Vulg. meretriz; TTP,
E21, WY, &c. The first of these English
words, to which various etymologies have been
assigned, signifies a prostitute for lust or gain.
The mercenary motive is more evident in ‘the
second, from the German huren, Dutch hueren,
“to hire.’ It is equally apparent in the Greek
adpvn, from xepydw, ‘to sell;’ and in the Latin
meretriz, from mereor, ‘to eam.’ Thus Ovid
(Amor. i. 10, 21) :—

‘Stat meretrix certo cuivis mercabilis zre,

Et miseras jusso corpore quarit opes.’

The first Hebrew word (i131?) occurs frequently,
and is often rendered in our version by the first
of these English words, as in Gen. xxxiv. 31, &c.,
and sometimes, without apparent reason for the
change, by the second, as in Prov. xxii. 27, and
elsewhere. The first English word is also applied
to different Hebrew words, whereby important dis-
tinctions are lost. Thus in Gen. xxxviii. 15, the
wort is 7133}, ‘harlot,’ which, however, becomes
changed to WWTP, ‘ harlot,” in vers. 21, 22, which
means, literally, a consecrated woman, a female
(perhaps priestess) devoted to prostitution in
honour of sume heathen idol. The distinction
shows that Judah supposed Tamar to be a heathen :
the facts, therefore, do not prove that prostitution
was then practised between Hebrews. The fol-
lowing elucidation is offered of the most im-
portant instances in which the several words
occur :—

First, 733t. From the foregoing account of
Judah it would appear that the ‘ veil’ was at
that time peculiar to harlots. » Judah thought
Tamar to be such, ‘ because she had covered her
face.’ Mr. Buckingham remarks, in reference
to this passage, that ‘ the Turcoman women go
unveiled to this day’ (Zravels in Mesopotamia,
i. 77). It is contended by Jahn and others
that in ancient times all females wore the veil
(Bibl. Archaol. p. 127). Possibly some pecu-
liarity in the size of the veil, or the mode of
wearing it, may have been (731 MV, Prov.
vii. 10) the distinctive dress of the harlot at that
period (see New Translation, by the Rev. A. De
Sola, &c. pp. 116, 248-9). The priests and the
high-priest were foibidden to take a wife that was
(had been, Matt. xxi. 31) a harlot. Josephus
extends the law to all the Hebrews, and seems
to ground it on the prohibition against oblations
arising from Saati Deut. xxiii. 18 (Antig.
iv. 8. 23). The celebrated case of Rahal has
been much debated. She is, indeed. called by
the word usually signifying harlot (Josh. ii. 1;
vi. 17; Sept. xdépyy; Vulg. meretriz ; and in
Heb. xi. 31; James ii. 25); but it has been
attempted to show that the word may mean an
innkeeper [Rawas]. The next instance introduces
the epithet of ‘ strange woman.’ It is the case of
Jephthah’s mother (Judg. xi. 2), who is also called
a harlot (wépyn; meretriz), but the epithet TUN
NINN, ‘strange woman, merely denvtes foreign
extraction. Josephus says {évos epi Thy unrepa,
‘a stranger by the mother's side.” The masterly
description im Prov. vii. 6, &c. may possibly be
that of an abandoned married woman (ver. 19,
20). or of the solicitations of a courtezan, ‘ fair
speech, under such a pretension, The mixture
of religious observauces (ver. 14) seems illustrated


_ (Josh. xxiii, 13).


HARLOT.


by the fact that ‘the gods are actually worshipped
in many oriental brothels, and fragments of the
offerings distributed among the frequenters* (Dr.
A. Clarke's Comment. in loc.). The representa-
tion given by, Solomon is no doubt founded upon
facts, and therefore shows that in his time pros-
titutes plied their trade in the ‘streets * (Prov. vii.
12; ix. 14, &c.; Jer, iii. 2; Ezek. xvi. 24, 25, 31).
Since the Hebrews regarded Jehovah as the hus-
band of his people, by virtue of the covenant he
had made with them (Jer. iii. 1); therefore, to
commit fornication is a very common metaphor
in the Scriptures to denote defections on their
part from that covenant, and especially by the
practice of idolatry (Fornicarion]. Hence
the degeneracy of Jerusalem is illustrated by the
symbol of a harlot (Isa. i. 21), and even that of
heathen cities, as of Ninevel (Nah. iii. 4). Under
this figure the prophet Ezekiel delivers the tre-
mendous invectives contained in ch. xvi., xxiii.
In the prophecy of Hosea the illustration is
carried to a startling extent. The prophet seems
commanded by the Lord to take ‘a wife of
whoredums and children of whoredoms’* (ch. i. 3),
and to ‘ love an adulteress* (ch. iii. 1). It has,
indeed, been much disputed whether these trans-
actions were real, or passed in visiun only;
but the idea itself, and the diversitied appli-
cations of it throughout the prophecy, render
it one of the most eflective portions of Scripture
[Hossa].

Secondly, ALP (occurs Gen. xxxviii. 15, 21,
22; Deut. xxiii. 17; Hos. iv. 14). It has been
already observed that the proper meaning of the
word is consecrated prostitute. The very early
allusion to such persons, in the first of these pas-
sages, agrees with the accounts of them in ancient
heathen writers. Herodotus refers to the ¢ abumi-
nable custom of the Babylonians, who compelled
every native female to attend the temple of
Venus once in her life, and to prostitute ber-
self’ in honour of the goddess‘ (i. 199; Baruch,
vi. 43). Strabo calls prostitutes, who, it is well
known, were at Athens dedicated to Venus,
fepddovAor yuvaixes, ‘ consecrated servants,’ * vo-
taries’ (Geog. viii. p. 378; Grotius, Annotat. on
Baruch ; Beloe’s Herodotus, Notes, vol. i. p. 272,
Lond. 1506). The transaction related in Num-
bers xv. 1-15 (comp. Ps. evi. 24) seems con-
nected with idolatry. The prohibition in Deut.
xxiii, 17, * there shall be no WWTP, “ whine.” of
the daughters of Israel," is intended to exclude
such devotees from the worship of Jehovah (see
other allusions, Job xxxvi. 14; 1 Kings xiv. 24;
xy. 12).

Thirdly, 75), ‘ the strange woman’ (1 Kings
xi. 1; Prov. v. 203 vi. 243 vii. 53 xxiii. 27;
Sept. aarorpla; Vulg. aliena, extranea). It
seems probable that sume of the Hebrews in later
times interpreted the prohibition against forni-
cation (Dent. xxii. 41) as limited to females of
their own nation, and that the ‘ stiange women’
in question were Canaanites and other Geutiles
In the case of Sulomon they
are specitied as Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites,
Zidonians, and Hittites. The passages referred
to discover the character of these temales. To
the same class belongs M7, ‘ the strange woman’
(Prov. v. 3, 205 xxii. 14: xxiii. 33 5 -yuon wdpra,
aArAoTpla; meretrir, alicna, extranea): it is
sometimes found TY AWN (Prov. ii. 16; vi. 5)


HARMONIES.


To the same class of females belongs mo
TEN, ‘the foolish woman,’ te. by a common
association of ideas in the Shemitish dialects,
sinful (Ps. xiv. 1). The description in Prov. ix.
14, &c. illustrates the character of the female so
designated. To which may be added J NWR,
“the evil woman’ (Prov. v. 24).

In the New Testament aépyy occurs in Matt.
xxi, 31, 32; Luke xv. 30; 1 Cor. vi. 15, 16;
“Heb, xi. 31; James ii. 25. In none of these
passages does it necessari/y imply prostitution for
gain, The likeliest is Luke xv. 30. It is used
symbolically for a city in Rev. xvii. 1, 5, 15, 16;
xix. 2, where the term and all the attendant
imagery are derived from the Old Testament.
It may he observed in regard to Tyre, which
(Isa, xxiii, 15, 17) is represented as ‘ committing
fornication with all the kmgdoms of the world
upon the face of the earth,’ that these words, as
indeed seems likely from those which follow,
may relate to the various arts which she had
employed to induce merchants to trade with her’
(Patrick, in loc.). So the Sept. understood it,
fora euxdpiov mdgas rais BaciAelas THs oiKov-
pevns ext rpdowmov rijs vis. Schleusner observes
that the same words in Rev, xviii. 3 may also
relate to commercial dealings. (Winer's Real-
tcorterb. 8. ve. Hure; Rauan; Fenselii Adver-
scr, Nacr. ii, 27. 1, 2; Witteb. 1650. Frisch,
De muliere peregrina ap. Hebr. Lips.

—J.F.D.

HARMONIES. The object of Harmonies is
to arrange the Scriptures in chronological order,
so that the mutual agreement of the several parts
may be rendered apparent, and the true succes-
sion of events clearly understood. With this
view various scholars have compiled harmonies of
the Old Testament, of the New, and of particular
portions of both, Harmonies of the Old Testa-
ment exhibit the books dispused in chronological
order, as is done by Lizhtfoot in his ¢ Chronicle of
the ‘Times, and the arder of the Texts of the Old
Testament ;' and by Townsend in his ‘Old Testa-
ment arranged in Historical and Chronological
order.’ Harmonies of the New Testament present
the gospels and epistles distributed in like order,
the latter being interspersed among the Acts of the
Apostles. In this way Townsend has proceeded
in his valuable work entitled, *’The New Testa-
ment arranged in Chronological and Historical
order” Books, however, of this kind are so few
in number, that the term harmony is almost ap-
propriated by usage to the gospels. It is this
yaat of the New ‘Testament which has chiefly
vccnpied the attention of those inquirers whose
object is to arrange the Scriptures in their true
order. The memoits of our Lord written by
the four Evangelists, have chietly occupied the
thoughts of those who wish to show that they all
azree, and mutually authenticate one another.
Accordingly, such compositions are exceedingly
numerous. The four gospels narrate the principal
events connected with our Lord’s abode on earth,
from his birth to his ascension. There must
therefore he a general resemblance between them,
though that of John contains little in common
with the others, bemig apparently supplementary
tothem. Yet there are considerable diversities,
both in the order in which facts are narrated, and
in the facts themselves. Hence the difficulty of
weaving the accounts of the four into a continuous


HARMONIES. 618


and chronological history. Those portions of the
Gospels that relate to the resurrection of the
Saviour have always presented the greatest ob-
stacles te the compilers of harmonies, and it must
be candidly admitted that the accounts of this
reinarkable event are not easily reconciled. Yet
the labours of West and Townson, especially the
latter, have served to remove the apparent contra-
dictions. In addition to them may be men-
tioned Cranfield and Hales, who have endeavoured
to improve upon the attempts of their prede-
cessors.

In connection with harmonies the term diates-
saron frequently occurs. It denotes a continued
narrative selected out of the four Gospels, in
which all repetitions of the same or similar words
are avoided. It is thus the resu/¢ of a harmony,
since the latter, properly speaking, exhibits the
entire texts of the four Evangelists, arrauged in
corresponding columus. 1n popular language
the two are often used synonymously.

The following questions relative to harmonies
demand attention :—

1. Have all or any of the Evangelists observed
chronological arrangement in their narratives ?

2. What was the duration of our Lord's mi-
nistry ?

1. It was the opinion of Osiander and his fol-
lowers, that all the Evangelists record the facts of
the Saviour’s history in their true order. When
therefore the same transactions are placed in a
different order by the writers, they were supposed
to have happened more than once. It was assumed
that they took place as often as they were differ
ently arranged. This principle is too improbable
to require tefutatiun. Instead of endeavouring
to solve difficulties, it boldly meets them with a
clumsy expedient. Improbable however as the
hypothesis 1s, it has been adopted by Macknight.
It is our decided conviction that a// the Evange-
lists nave not adhered to chronological arrange-
ment.

The question then arises, have all neglected
the order of time? Newcome and many others
espouse this view. ‘* Chronological order,’ says
this writer, ‘is not precisely observed by any of
the Evangelists ; St. John and St. Mark observe
it most; and St. Matthew neglects it most.”
Bishop Marsh supposes that Matthew probably
adhered to the order of time, because he.was for
the most part an eye-witness of the facts. The
others, he thinks, neglected’ the succession of
events. The reason assiyned by the learned pre-
late in favour of Matthew's order, is of no weight,
as long as the inspiration of Mark, Luke, and
Jolin, is maintained. If they were infallibly
directed in their compositions, they were in a
condition equally favourable to chronulugical
narration,

A close inspection of Matthew's Gospel will
show that he did not intend to mark the true suc-
cession of events. He gives us no definite ex-
pressions to assist in arranging his materials in their
proper order. Very frequently he passes from one
occurrence to another without any note of time;
sometimes he employs a rére, sometimes év Tals
Tuepas exeivais, ev exelvy 7G xaipg, or dv exelvp
7H Spa. Rarely is he sv minute as to use pe?
nmépas & (xvii. 1). In short, time and place seem
to have been subordinated to the grand object
which he bad in view, viz., the lively exhibition


614 HARMONIES.


of Jesus in his person, works, and discourses. In
pursuing this design, he has often brought together
similar facts and addresses. Althongh, therefore,
Kaiser founds upon the phrases we have adduced
a@ conclusion the very reverse of ours, yet we
believe that Matthew did not propose to follow
chronological order. ‘The contrary is obviously
bl te
ark again is still more indefinite than
Matthew. Even the general expressions found
in the first Gospel are wanting in his. The facts
themselves, nut their true succession, were the
object of his attention, Chronological order is
not observed in his Gospel, except in so far as that
Gospel agrees with Luke's. Yet Cartwright, in
his Harmony published about 1630, makes the
arrangement of Mark his rule for method.

With regard to Luke, it is probable that he in-
tended to arrange every thing in its true place,
because at the beginning of his work, he employs
the term xadefns. This word is often referred
to succession of events, without involving time ;
but it seems clearly to imply chronological suc-
cession (comp. Acts xi. 4). Although, therefore,
Grotius and many others oppose the latter view,
we cannot but coincide with Beza when he
says: ‘In harmonia Evangelistarum scribenda,
rectiorem ordinem servari putem si in iis que
habent communia, reliqui ad Lucam potius ac-
commodentur, qnam Lucas ad cateros’ (comp.
also Olshausen. Die Echtheit der vier Canon
Evanq., &c., Band i. ss. 82, 3, dritte Aufl.).
We may therefore conclude that this Evangelist
usually follows the chronological order, espe-
cially when such pissages as iii. 1 and iii. 23 are
considered, where exact notices of time occur.
But as the Gospel advances, those expressions
which relate to time are as indeterminate as
Matthew's and Mark's. Frequently does he pass
from one transaction to another without any note
of time; and again, he has pera raira, dv me
tav juepav. In consequence of this vagueness,
it is very difficult, if not impossible, to make out
a complete harmony of the Gospels according to
the order of Luke, because we have no precise
data to guide us in inserting the particulars re.
lated by Matthew and Mark in their proper
places. in the third Gospel. All that can be de
termined with any degree of probability is, that
Luke's order seems to have been adopted as the
true, chronological one. Whether the writer has
deviated from it in any case, may admit of
doubt. We are inclined to believe, that in ald
minute particulars chronological arrangement is
not observed. The generat body of facts and
events seems to partake of this character, not
every special circumstance noticed by the Evan-
gelist. But we are reminded that the assiqn-
ment of dates is distinct from chronological ar-
rangement. A writer may narrate all his facts
in the order in which they occurred, without
specifying the particular time at which they hap-
pened; or, on the other hand, he may mark the
dates withont arranging his narrative in chrono-
logical order. But attention to one of these will
naturally give rise to a certain opinion with
regard to the other. The more indeterminate the
Notifications of time, the Jess probable is it that
time was an element kept before the mind of the
writer. If there be a few dates assigned with
exactness, it is a presumption that the true ar


HARMONIES.


rangement is observed in oter parts where no
dates occur, In the succession of events Luke
and Mark generally agree.

With regard to John’s Gospel, it has little in
common with the rest except the two last chapters,
It is obvious, however, that bis arrangement is
chronological, He carefully marks, in general,
whether one, two, or three days happened be-
tween certain events. His Gospel is therefore
of great use in compiling a synopsis. .

On the whole, we should make the Gospel of
Luke the document to which the others should be
subordinated m point of arrangement, not neg-
lecting at the same time that of John in con-
junction with it, wherever it is possible to connect
them.

Sull it appears that there are not sufficient data
in the four Evangelists to enable the inquirer to com-
pose a harmony in exact chronological order, so
as to preclude objections to its arrangement. Since
times and places have been left so indeterminate,
it is hopeless to conceive of a diatessaron chrono-
logically accurate in all particulars. Tie problem
may continue to employ the ingenuity of in-
quirers, without affurding an adequate compensa-
tion for the learning and labour bestowed upon it.

2. What was the duration of our Lord's mi-
nistry ?

This is a question upon which the opinions of
the learned have been much divided, and which
cannot be settled with conclusive certainty. In
order to resolve it, it is necessary to mark tbe «if-
ferent Passovers which Christ attended. Looking
to the Gospels by Matthew, Mark, and Luhe, we
should infer that he was present at nu more than
two; the first at the time of his baptism, the
second immediately before his crucifixion. But
in John's Gospel three Passovers at least are
named during the period of our Lord’s ministry
(i. 13; vie 45 xi. 55). It is true that some
writers have endeavoured to adapt the Gospel of
John to the other three, by reducing the Passovers
mentioned in the former to tico. So Priestley,
Vossius, and Mann. In order to accomplish this,
it was conjectured that wdoxa, in ch. vi. 4, is an


‘interpolation, and then that éopry denctes some


other Jewish festival. Bishop Pearce went ao far
as to conjecture that the entire verse bas been in-
terpolated. For these rash speculations there is
no authority. The received reading must here be
followed (Liicke's Commentar uber Johannes,
dritte Aufl., zweiter Theil, s. 104). In addition
to these passages, it has been thought by many
that another Passover is referred to in v. 1,
where, although xdoya does not occur, 9 éopr7 is
supposed to denote the same feast. But this isa
sulject of dispute. Irenzus is the oldest authority
for explaining it of the Passover. Cyril and
Chrysostom, however. referred it to the Feast of
Pentecost ; an opinion approved of by Erasmus,
Calvin, and Beza. But Luther, Chemnitz, Ca-
lovius, Scaliger, Grotius, and Lightfoot, returned
to the ancient view of Irensus. Keppler seems
to have been the tirst who conjectured that it
meant the Feast of Purim immediately preceding
the Second Passover. He was followed by Petau,
Lamy, D'Outrein, &e. Cocceius, followed by
Kaiser, referred it to the Feast of Tabernacies ;
while Keppler and Petau intimated that it may
possthly have been the Feast of Dedication. Bengel
defended the opinion of Chrysostom ; while Hug


HARMONIES.


with much plausibility endeavours to show that
it alludes to the feast of Purim immediately before
the Passover. The latter view is adopted by Tho-
luck, Olshausen, and Clausen; thougl Greswell
maintains that the Passover is meant.

It would occupy too much space to adduce the
various considerations that have been urged for
and against the two leading opinions, viz. the
Passover and the Feast of Purim. The arguments
advanced on either side are not conclusive. There
is still room for doubt. The true meaning of
éoprh (for Lachmann has rightly expunged the
article from before it) is still indeterminate (see
especially Liicke wiber Johannes, dritte Aufl.
zweiter Theil, ss. 1-15, and Hug’s Introduction
translated by Fosdick, § 64, p. 447, sqq.). To
us it appears most probable that the most ancient
hypothesis is correct; although the circumstances
urged against it are neither few nor feeble.

Sir Isaac Newton and Macknight suppose that
five Passovers intervened between vur Lord's bap-
tism and crucifixion. This assumption rests on
no foundation. Perhaps the term éoprf in John
vii. 2 may have given rise to it; although éoprq
is explained in that passage by oxnvomryia.

It has been well remarked by Bishop Marsh,
that the Gospel of John presents almost insuper-
able obstacles to the opivion of those who conline
Christ's ministry to one year. If John mentions
but three Passovers, its duration must have ex-
ceeded two years; but if he mentions four, it
must have been longer than three years. During
the first three centuries it was commonly believed
that Christ's ministry lasted but one year, or one
year and a few months. Such was the opinion of
Clemens Alexandrinus and Origen. Eusebius
thought that it continued for above three years;
which hypothesis became general, The ancient
hypothesis, which confined the time to one year,
was revived by Mann and Priestley ; but New-
come, with more judgment, defended the common
view, and refuted Priestley’s arguments. In inter-
weaving the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, and Luke,
with that of John, the intervals between the Pass-
overs are filled up by various transactions. Were
the number of these feasts determinate and precise,
there would be a general agreement in the filling
up of the times hetween them; but in consequence
of the uncertainty attaching to the subject, har-
monies are found materially to differ in their
modes of arrangement. Que thing is evident,
that the moderns in their endeavours after a
chronological disposition of the Gospels, adypt a
far more rational course than the ancients. The
latter strangely supposed that the first six chapters
of John’s Gospel relate to a period of Christ's
ministry prior to that with which the other three
evangelists begin their accounts of the miracles.
Thus John alone was supposed to narrate the
events belonging to the earlier part of his ministry,
while Matthew, Mark, and Luke related the
transactions of the last year.

The most ancient Harmony of the Gospels of
which we have any account was compused by
Tatian of Syria in the second century; but it is
now lost ‘see H. A. Daniel's Tatianus der Apo-
loget., Halle, 1837, 8vo.). In the third century,
Ammonius* was the author of a Harmony sup-


* This Ammonius is not to be confounded with
Ammonius Saccas the philosopher, although


HARMONIES. 815


posed to be still extant. Eusebius of Caesarea also
composed a Harmony of the Gospels about a.p
315. In it he divided the Gospel history into ten
canons or tables, according as different facts are
related by one or more of the evangelists. These
aucient Harmonies, however, differ in character
from such as belong to modern times. They are
summaries of the life of Christ, or indexes tu
the four Gospels, rather than a chronological ar-
rangement of different facts, accompanied by a
reconciliation of apparent contradictions. In mo-
dem times, Andreas Osiander published his Har-
mony of the Gospels in 1537. He adopted the
principle that the evangelists constantly wrote in
chronological order, Cormelius Jausenius’ Con-
cordia Evangelica was published in 1549, Martin
Chemnitz’s Harmony was first published in 1593,
and afterwards, with the continuations of Leyser
and Gerhard, in 1628. Chemnitz stands at the
head of that class of harmonists who maintain
that in one or more of the four Gospels chronolo-
gical order has been neglected; while Osiander
is at the head of those harmonists who maintain
that all the Gospels are arranged in chronological
order. Other harmonies were published by Light-
foot (1654), Cradock (1663), Lamy (1689), Le
Clere (1699), Tuinard (1707), Whiston (1702),
Runs (1727-8-30), Bengel (1736), Hauber (1737
Doddridge (1739 and 40), Pilkington (1747
Macknight (1756), Bertling (1767), Griesbach
(1776, 97, 1809, 22), Newcome (1778), Priestley
(1777 in Greek, and 1780 in English), Michaelis

1788, in his Introduction), White (1799), De
Vette and Litcke (1818), Matthaci (1826), Kaiser
(1828), Roediger (1829), Clausen (1829), Gres-
well (1830), Carpenter (1838), Reiclel (1840),
and Overbeck (1843).

The latest work of importance which has ap-
peared in Germany on this subject is that ef
Ziegler.

In connection with Greswell’s Harmonia Evan-
gelica, the same author's Dissertations upon the
Principles and Arrangement of a Harmony of the
Gospels, of which a second edition has been pub-
lished, deserve notice. These dissertations are ex-
ceedingly elaborate, and demand a patient perusal.
The leamed writer has greatly distinguished him-
self as the most laborious of modern harmonists.
His work is the most copious that has appeared, st
least since the days of Chemnitz's folios. Some of
his fundamental principles, however, are question-
able. On the whole, were we confined to one
Harmony of the Gospels, we should prefer that of
Newcome to any other. But to adopt any one
implicitly, is more than the enlightened inquirer
can consent to do. We should therefore recom-
mend a minute examination of the works pub-
lished by Newcome, Greswell, Michaelis, De
Wette and Liicke, and Clausen.

The above list contains the bes¢ Harmonies
and Diatessarons of the Gospels. Some are written
in Greek, or Greek and Latin, others in Latin,


Eusebius and Jerome in ancient, as also Bayle
and Basnage in modern times, have fallen into
this mistake. The same blunder is committed hy
the writer of the article ‘ Ammonius Saccas' in
Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Bto-
graphy and Mythology. See Neander’s Allgem.
Geschichte, i. 3. S. 1183; Murdock's Mosheim,
vol. i. p. 174, note 18 (3rd edit. New York).


816 HAROD.


others in German and Greck, others in English,
The entire number of Harmonies is very great.
Those who wish to see lists tulerably complete
may consult Fabricit Bibliotheca Greca, vol.
iv., ed. Harles; Walchii Bibliotheca Theologica,
tom. iv.; Michaelis'’s Introd., by Marsh, vol. iii,
with the translator's very valuable notes.—S. D.


HAROD (N77); Sept. "Apd3), a brook not
far from Jezreel and Mount Gilboa. The name
means ‘ palpitation,” and it has been suggested
that it originated in consequence of the alarm
and terror of most of the men who were here
tested by Gideon (Judy. vii. 1-3); but this sup-
position seems very far-fetched, and the name
more probably arose frum seme peculiarity in
the outflow of the stream.


HAROSHETH ov tue Gentines (NQ0
DMI; Sept. "Apioda trav e@vav), a city sup-
posed to have been situated near Hazor, in the
northern parts of Canaan, called afterwards Upper
Galilee, or Galilee of the Gentiles (Gaziee].
Harosheth is said to have been the residence of
Sisera, the general of the anmies of Jabin, king
of Canaan, who reigned in Huzor. To this place
Jabin himself was pursued and defeated by De-
borah and Barak (Judg. iv. 2, 13, 16).

HARP. [Music.]

HART [Asa.3 Anrenopr]. Fallow-deer
having been omitted as a separate article, and
there being some confusion in the history of the
Asiatic and African Cervide, increased perhaps
by the remarks of Ehrenberg (Sym. Physic.
dec. i.) under the head of Ant. Leucoryx, it may
be proper tg take notice of his attempt to de-
monstrate, with the aid of Bochart and Rouseu-
miiller, who wrote when the zoology of Syria was
almost unknown, that Antholops and Jachmur
denoted fallow-deer, and particularly such as were
of a white colour! But Cuvier, in his Ossemens
Fossiles, has shown that Dama among the an-
cients was oftener intended to refer to the antelope
than to the fallow-deer, of which he had sought
the native region in vain for many years. The
Species appeared to be largest in Spain; and it was
only after the second edition of his work was in the
press that he first received a wild young specimen,
shot in the woods south of Tunis, Northern Africa,
therefure, may be the original residence of this ani-
mal; although it is found wild also in Sweden,
where palmated horns are more evidently useful
to clear the snow from autumnal verdure; and re-
cent fossil remains attest that it was a native of
the whole of western Europe. There is, however,
uo evidence that it was ever found, or that it now
exists, in Asia, or that an occasional Albino of
any species should have obtained the particular
names above cited. Neither Cuvier, nor it ap-
pears Ehrenberg, was acquainted with the existe
ence of the Cervus Barbarus of northern Africa ;
which, though allied to the Corsican stag, wants
the bisantler, has the horns somewhat flattened,
and is slightly speckled : it therefure appears to
be intermediate with fallow -deer.

This species, we are assured, has been seen east
of the Nile, in the desert of Arabia, and is there
reputed to be fond of eating fish (small Hzards)—
a propensity which impels other species to attack
even dangerous serpents; and there is on the
north of Palestine the Gewasen of Armenia, a


HAURAN.


species of stag of the Rusa group, which comes
westward into Anatolia, and is not unlikely the
real Zamor ("1) of Scripture, since the name
Saumor is still in use for the Itusa of India and
Caubul; and in that case Akko (3P8) would ua-
turally designate the Tragelophus [Goat]. Since
the discovery of gunpowder great- moditications
have taken place in the residence of the sporting
and more ferocious animals. We know, as yet,
little of thuse ranging in Southern Arabia, and
acruss the Shat-ul-Arab into Persia, and therefore
have no just right to deny that there are any spe
cies of Oryx which may occasionally still visit,
or which formerly did frequeut, the borders of the
Euplhrates.—C. H. S.


HAVILAH caban; Sept. Euud\. 1. A
district in Arabia Felix, deriving its name fiom
the second son of Cush (Gen, x. 7), or, according
to others, from the secund son of Joktan (Gen x.
29; comp. xxv. 18), There can be no doubt,
however, of the existence of a donble Havilah; one
founded by the descendant of Ham, and the other
by that of Shem. Niebuhr (Beschr. con Arad,
pp. 270, 280) actually found in Yemen two dis-
tricts called Craulan or Laulan (probably the


present Nye), one between Saana and Mecca,


and the other a few leagnes south-east from Saana;
which latter Biisching (Erdbeschr. v. i. 601} con-
siders to be the Havilah founded by the sun cf
Cush, as mentioned Gen. x. 7 (Michaelis, Spicil.
i. 149, sq.3 ii. 202), From Gen. xxv. 18, it
would appear that the land of Havilah formed the
eastern boundary of the Israelites, and so likewise
from 1 Sam, xv. 7, where it seems, more ver, to
have been a possession belonging to the Ama-
lekites. Others, however, take this Havilah also
for a district in Arabia, and understand by Shur,
the city Pelusium or Sin (Ezek. xxx. 15) in
Egypt (see Michaelis on this passage).

2. MON; Sept. Eduadz, a land rich in geld,
bdellium, and shoham, mentioned in Gen. ii. 11,
in the geographical description of Paradise.
Some identify this with the preceding; Inut others
take it to be Clacala cu the Caspian Sea, trem
whence that sea itself is said to have derived the
Russian name of Chicalinskoy more (Sea of
Chwala); and others suppose it a general name
for Ludia (7. Hicros, D157), in which case the
river Pison, mentioned as surrounding it, would
be ideutitied with the Ganges.—E. M.

JHAVOTH-JAIR (the Hebrew and Arabic
DY). Havota signities ‘cabins * or ‘huts,’ stich
as belong to the Arabians, and a collection ut
which is regarded as forming a hamlet or village.
The district of Havoth-jair (Jair's hamécts',
mentioned in Num, xxxii. dl. and Deut. ii. 1
was beyond the Jordan in the land ef Gilead, and
belonged to the half-tribe of Manasseh.

HAURAN (]119; Sept. Adpavizrs), a tract or
region of Syria, south of Damascus, which is
twice mentioned under this name in Scripture
(Ezek. xlvii. 16.18). It was probably of smail
extent originally; but received extensive ad-
ditions from the Romans under the name
of Auranitis, At present it reaches from about
twenty miles south of Damascus to a little below
Bozra, including the rocky district of E]-Ledja,
the ancient Trachonitis, and the mountainous


HAWK.


“segion of Jebel-Havuran. Within its limits are
also included, besides Trachonitis, Iturea or Ittur,
now called Jedour, and part of Batanga or
Bashan. It is represented by Burckhardt as a
volcanic region, composed of porous tufa, pumice,
and basalt, with the remains of a crater on the
Tel Shoba, which is on its eastern border. It
produces, however, crops of corn, and has many

tches of luxuriant herbage, which are frequented
in summer by the Arab tribes for pasturage. It
also abounde with interesting remains of cities,
scattere:t over its surface, among which are found
Greek inscriptions.


HAWK (/) netz; Sept. idpak; Vulg. accipiter,
an unclean bird; Lev. xi. 16; Deut. xiv. 15; Job
xxxix. 26). The English name is an altered form
of the old word fawk or falk, and in natural his-
tory represents several genera of raptorial birds;
as does the Arabic naz, and, no doubt, also the
‘Hebrew netz. Western Asia and Lower Egypt,
and ei apd the intermediate territory of
Syria and Palestine, are the habitation or tran-
sitory residence of a considerable number of
cies of the order Raptores, which, even including
the shartest-winged, have great powers of flight,
are remarkably enterprising, live tq a great age,
are migratory, or followers upon birds of passage,
or remain in a region so abundantly stocked with
. pigeon and turtle-dove as Palestine, and affording
sach a variety of ground to hunt their particular
prey—abounding as it does in mountain and forest,
oa desert, marsh, river and sea-coast. We shall

enumerate, so far as our information will per-
mit, the Falconide of this region, exclusive of those
mentioned in other articles [Azanian; Eacue;
Guizups; Krre].


‘ <


334. (Peregrine Falcon.)


Falcons, or the ‘noble ’ birds of prey used for
hawking, have for many ages been objects of
t interest, and still continue to be bought at
Fich prices, They are consequently imported from
distant countries, as central Asia, Iceland, Bar-
bary, &c. Their love of liberty often renders them
irreclaimable when once on the wing; and their
powers and boldness, inde lent of circumstances,
and the extent of range which the long-winged spe-
cies in particular can take, are exemplified by
their presence in every quarter of the glube. The
Falco communis, or Peregrine falcon, is so gene-
rally diffused as to occur even in New Holland
and South America. Asa type of the genus, we
may add that it has the two foremost quill-feathers
of almost equal length, and that when the wings


HAWK. a7


are closed they nearly reach the end of the tail.
On each side of the crooked point of the bill there
is an angle or pnimett tooth, and from the
nostrils backwards a black streak passes beneath
the eye and forms a patch on each side of the
throat, giving the bird and its congencrs a whis-
kered and menacing aspect.

Next we may place Falco Aroeris of Sir J. G.
Wilkinson, the sacred hawk of Egypt. This, if it
be not in reality the same as, or » mere variety of,
the Peregrine, should have retained the ancient
epithet of Hieraz, and the hawkers’ name of Sacre,
derived from the Arabic Sagr, which evidently
applies to it. This bird has the same moustachio
marks, and from them the old name Gemnonta,
which in base Latinity indicates whiskers, may
have been derived. Innumerable representations
of it occur in Egyptian monuments, since, in the
character of Horhat, or bird of victory, it over-
shadows kings and heroes, like the Garuda, S-
murg, and the Hummea bird of Eastern Asia; but
it is also an emblem of Re, the Sun, and numerous
other divinities ; for an aecount of which we refer
to SirJ.G. Wilkinson's Manners and Customs of
the Ancient Egyptians, 2nd Series.

The Hobby, Falco subbuteo, isno doubt a second,
or third species of sacred hawk, having similar
gernonia. Both this bird and thé tractable Mer-
lin, Faloo esalon, are used in the falconry of the
inferior Moslem landowners of Asiatic Turkey.

Besides these the Kestril, Faleo tinnunculbus,
occurs in Syria, and Falco tinnunculotdes, or
lesser Kestril, in Egypt; and it is probable that
both species visit these two territories according
to the seasons.

To the ‘noble’ birds we may add the Gerfalcon,
Falco gyrfalco, which is one-third larger than the
Peregrine: it is imported from Tartary and sold at
Constantinople, Aleppo, and Damascus. The great
birds fly at antelopes, bustards, cranes, &c. ; and
of the genus Astwr, with shorter wings than true
falcons, the Goshawk, Falco palumbarius, and the
Falcon Gentil, Falco gentilis, are either im
or taken in their nests, and used to fly at lower and
aquatic game. It is among the above that the
seven species of hunting hawks enumerated by Dr.
Tussell must be sought; though from the circum
stance that the Arabic namesof the birds alone were
known to him, it is difficult to assign their scien-
tific denominations; but the following identifica-
tion is tolerably evident—l. Al-Huz or Baraban
is the Gesfalcon; 2 Al-Saphy, the Peregrine;
3. Al-Shaheen, the Doctor himself asserts to be
the Falcon Gentil; 4. Al-Zygranuz, the Goshawk.
One of the remaining species is, no doubt, the Mer»
lin; and the last, A-Bashak, is the crested Bus
zard, Falco Bacha, which is most abundant in
Africa, and the principal enemy of the Sha
(Hyrax). The smaller and less powerful hawks of
the genus Nisus are mostly in use on account of
the sport they afford, being less fatiguing, as they
are employed to fly at pigeons, partridges, quails,
Pterocles, Katta, and other species of Ganga.
There are various other raptorial birds, not here
enumerated, found in Syria, Arabia, and Egypt.
We have at this moment before us colou

tations of three such, copied ae the

inted sculptures of ancient Egypt; and in
veatoriity with the common laws of animated
nature, the Nile cannot be without a variety of
species feeding on the produce of its — and


e


818 HAZAEL.


its visitors; but the above enumeration will be
found, we trust, sufticient for our present pur-
pose.—C. H. S.

HAY. [Cuarzir.}


HAZAEL (SN}N, cision of God; Sept.Aaha),
an officer of Benhadad, king of Syria, whose
eventual accession to the throne of that kingdom
was made known to Elijah (1 Kings xix. 15);
and who, when Elisha was at Damascus, was
sent by his master, who was then ill, to consult
the prophet respecting his recovery. He was
followed by forty camels bearing presents from
the king. When Hazael appeared belore the

rophet, he said, * Tay son Benhadad, king of

yria, hath sent me to thee, saying, Shajl -I
recover of this disease?’ The answer was, that
he might certainly recover. ‘ Howheit,’ added
the prophet, ‘the Lord hath showed me that he
shall surely die." He then looked stedfastly at
Hazael till he became confused: on which the
man of God then wept; and when Hazael re-
spectfully inquired the cause of this outburst,
Elisha replied by describing the vivid picture
then present to his mind of all the evils which
the man now before him would inflict upon
Israel. Hazael exclaimed, ‘ But what! Is thy
servant a dog that he should do this great thing ?”
The prophet explained that it was as king of Syria
he should do it. Hazael then returned, and deli-
vered tu his master that portion of the prophetic
response which was intended for him. But the
very next day this man, cool and calculating in
his cruel ambition, took a thick cloth, and,
having dipped it in water, spread it over the face
of the king, who, in his feebleness, and probably in
his sleep, was’ smothered by its weight, and died
what seemed to his people a natural death (2 Kings
viii. 8, &c.) B.c. 855. We are not to imagine
that such a project as this was conceived and
executed ina day, or that it was suggested by
the words of Elisha. His discomposure at the
earnest gaze of the prophet, and other circum-
stances, show that Hazael at that moment re-
garded Elisha as one to whom hia secret pur-
poses were known. In that case, his cry, ‘Is thy
servant a dog,’ &c., was not, as some suppose,
a cry of joy at the first view of a throne, but of
horror at the idea of the public atrocities which
the prophet described. This was likely to shock
him more than it wonld do after he had com-
mitted his first crime, and obtained possession of a
throne acquired at such a cost.

The further information respecting Hazael
which the Scriptures afford is limited to brief
notices of his wars with Ahaziah and Joash, kings
of Judah, and with Jehoram, Jehu, and Jehoahaz,
kings of Israel (2 Kings viii. 28; ix. 14; x. 32;
xii. 17; xiii. 35 2 Chron. xxii. 5). It is ditticnlt
‘to distinguish the several campaigns and victories
involved in these allusions, and spread over a
reign of forty years; but it is certain that Hazael
always had the advantage over the Hebrew
princes. He devasted their frontiers, rent from
them all their territories beyond the Jordan, tra-
versed the breadth of Palestine, and carried his
arms into the states of the Philistines; he laid
siege to Jerusalem, and only retired on receiving
the treasures of the temple and the palace. The
details of these conquests redeemed to the very
letter the appalling predictions of Elisha, This


HEAD. -


able and successful, but unprincipled usurper left
the throne at his death to his son Benhadad.

HAZARMAVETH, the third son of Joktan
(Gen. x. 26), whose name is judged to have been
preserved in the Arabian province of Hadramaut
[Arasra].

HAZE Cie

HAZEROTH, the third station of the Israelites
after leaving Sinai, and either four or five days’
march from that mountain (Num. xi. 35; xxxiii.
17; comp. x. 33) [Wanxpgrina].

HAZEZON-TAMAR. [En-oxp1.]

HAZOR (WM; Sept.’Acdp), a city near the
waters of lake Merom (Huleh), the seat of Jabin,
@ powerful Canaanitish king, as appears from
the summon sent by him to all the neighbouring
kings to assist him against the Israelites, He
and his confederates were, however, defeated and
slain by Joshua, and the city burnt to the ground
(Josh. xi, 1, 10-13; Joseph. Antig. v. 5. 1).
But by the time of Deborah and Barak the
Canaanites had recovered part of the territory
then lust, had rebuilt Hazor, and were ruled by a
king with the ancient royal name of Jabin, under
whose power the Israelites were, in punishment
for their sins, reduced. From this yoke they were
delivered by Deborah and Barak, after which
Hazor remained in quiet possession of the Israelites,
and belonged to the tribe of Naphtali (Josh. xix,
36; Judg. iv. 2). Hazor was one of the towns
rebuilt or much improved by Solomon (1 Kings
ix. 15), and was one of the fortitied places of
Galilee which the Assyrians under Tiglath-pileser
first took on invading Palestine from the north
(2 Kings xv. 29). There is 10 modern notice of
this town. Raumer, indeed, queries whether it
may not have been the ancient town of Naason,
which King Baldwin IV. passed on his way trom
Tiberias to Saphet (Will. Tyr. p. 1014); and his
reason for this conjecture is that the Vulgate gives
Waason for the Asor (‘Agdp) of Tobit i. 1 (Raumer,
Palastina, p. 126).

HEAD. WN; Greek, xepaah; Latin, caput;
Gothic, haubith ; Anglo-Saxon, heafod ; German,
kopf. The root is kep or cap, denoting that which
holds: thus the head etymologically signities the
container, the name describing the function. But
as the head is the topmost part of the human
body, it came derivatively to signify that which
is highest, chief (chef in French, from the same
kep or cap), the highest in position locally being
regarded as highest in office, rank, or dignity:
whence, as the head is the centre of the nervous
system, holds the brain, and stands above all the
other parts, Plato regarded it as the seat of the
deathless soul; and it has generally been con-
sidered as the abode of the intellect or inte!ligence
by which man is enlightened and his walk in life
directed ; while the heart, or the parts placed near
it, have been accounted the place where the affec-
tions lie (Gen. iii. 15; Ps. iti. 3; Eccles. ii. 14).
The head and the heart are sometimes taken for
the entire person (Is. i. 5). Even the bead alone,
as being the chief member, frequently stands for
the man (Prov. x. 6). The head also denotes
sovereignty (1 Cor. xi. 3). Covering the head, and
cutting off the hair, were signs of mourning and
tokens of distress, which were enhanced by throw-
ing ashes on the head, together with sackcloth
(Amos viii. 10; Job i. 20; Lev. xxi 5; Deut


ty


HEAD.


xiv. 1; 2Sam. xiii. 10; Esther iv.


v3 while
anointing the head was practised on festive oc-


casions, and considered an emblem of felicity
(Eccles. ix. 8; Ps. xxiii. 5; Luke vii. 46). It was
usual to swear by the head (Matt. v. 36).


336. 1. Ethiopian; 2. Mongolian; 3. Caucasian;
4, Malay; 5. American.


The general character of the human head is
such as to establish the identity of the human
race, and to distinguish man from every other
animal. At the same time different families of
mankind are marked by peculiarities of construc-
tion in the head, which, though in individual
cases, and when extremes are compared together,
they run one into the other to the entire loss of
distinctive lines, yet are in the general broadly
contrasted one with the other. These peculiarities
in the structure of the skull give rise to and are
connected with other peculiarities of feature and
general contour of face. In the union of cranial
peculiarities with those of the face certain clear
marks are presented, by which phssiolegins have
been able to range the individuals of our race
into a few great classes, and in so doing to aflord
an unintentional corroboration of the information
which the Scriptures atford regarding the origin
and dispersion of mankind. Camper, one of the
most learned and clear-minded physicians of the
eighteenth century, has the credit of being the first
who drew attention to the classification of the
human features, and endeavoured, by means of
what he termed the facial angle, to furnish a
method for distinguishing different nations and
races of men, which, beiug himself an eminent
limner, he designed for application chiefly in the
art of drawing, and which, though far from pro-
ducing strictly definite and scientific results, yet
affords views that are not without interest, and
approximations that at least prepared the way
for something better (see a collection of Camper's
pieces entitled Buvres gui ont pour Oljet f His-


HEART. 819


toire Naturelle, la Physiologie, et [Anatomie
comparée, Paris, 1603). It is, however, to the
celebrated J. F. Blumenbach, whose merits in the
entire sphere of natura] history are so transcend-
ent, that we are mainly indebted for the accurate
and satisfactory classifications in regard to cranial
structure which now prevail. Camper had ob-
served that the breadth of the head differs in
different nations ; that the heads of Asiatics (the
Kalmucs) have the greatest breadth; that those
of Euro; have a middle degree of breadth;
and that the skulls of the African negroes are the
narrowest of all. This circumstance was by
Blumenbach made the foundation of his arrange-
ment and description of skulls. By comparing
different forms of the human cranium together,
that eminent physiologist was led to recognise
three great types to which all others could be
referred—the Caucasian, Mongolian and Ethi-
opic. These three differ more widely from each
other than any other that can be found; but to
these three Blumenbach, in his classification of
skulls, and of the races of men to which they
belong, added two others, in many respects inter-
mediate between the three forms already men-
tioned. In this way five classes are established,
corresponding with five great families. I. The
Caucasian family, comprising the nations of Eu-
rope, some of the Western Asiatics, &c., have the
head of the most symmetrical shape, almost round,
the forehead of moderate extent, the cheek bones
rather narrow, without any projection, but a di-
rection downwards from the molar process of the
frontal bone; the alveolar edge well rounded ;
the front teeth of each jaw placed perpendicu-


‘larly; the face of oval shape, straight, features


moderately prominent; forehead arched; nose
narrow, slightly arched; mouth small; chin full
and round. 2. The second is the Mongolian
variety. 3. Ethiopian. 4. Malay and South Sca
Islanders. 5. American. The description of their
peculiarities may be found in Prichard’s Re-
searches into the Physical History of Man, Ind
edit. vol. i. p. 167, sq. The reader may also consult
Lawrence's Lectures on the Natural History
of Man; J. Muller's Handbuch der Physiologie.
But the most recent, if not the best, work on the
subject before us is Prichard’s Natural History
of Man, 1843; a work which comprises and
reviews, in the spirit of a sound philosophy, all
that has hitherto been written and discovered on
the origin, physical structure, and propagation
over the earth of the race of man., In this in-
valuable work full details may be found of the
methods of studying the human head of which we
have spoken, and of some others, not less interest-
ing in themselves, nor less valuable in their re-
sults (see particularly p. 116, sq.).—J. R. B.
HEART. All the phrases, more or less meta-
horical, in which this word occurs, are rendered
intelligible, without detailed examples, when we
are told that the heart was, among the Hebrews,
regarded pvetically not only as the seat of the pas-
sions and emotions, as of love, pleasure, and grief,
but also of the intellectual faculties—the mind,
the understanding. In the original Scriptures, as
well as in the English and other translations, the
word ‘heart,’ therefore, constantly occurs where
© mind’ is to be understood, and would be used
by a modern English writer. We say modern,
because the ancient usage of the pee word
@


.


©


820 HEAVEN.


‘heart’ was more conformable than the present to
that of the Hebrews.

HEATH. [Oror.]

HEAVEN, the state and place of blessedness
in the life to come.

Of the nature of this blessedness it is not pos-
sible that we should form any adequate concep-
tion, and, consequently, that any precise informa-
tion respecting it should be given tous, Man, in-
deed, usually conceives the joys of heaven to be the
same as, or, at least, tu resemble the pleasures of
this world ; and each one hopes to obtain with cer-
tainty and to enjoy in full measure, beyond the
grave, that which he holds most dear upon earth
* —those fuvourite employments or particular de-
lights which he ardently longs for here, but which
he can seldom or never enjoy in this world, or in
the enjoyment of which he is never fully satis-
fied. But one who reflects soberly on the subject,
will readily see that the happiness of heaven must
be a very ditlerent thing from earthly happiness.
In this world the highest pleasures of which our
nature is capable satiate by their continuance, and
soon lose the puwer of giving positive enjoyment.
This alone is sufficient to show that the bliss of
the future world must be of an entirely different
kind from what is called earthly joy and happi-
ness, if we are to be there ¢rady happy, and happy
for ever. But since we can have no distinct
conception of those joys which never have been
and never will be experienced by us here in their
full extent, we have of course no words in human
language to express them, and cannot therefore
expect any clear description of them even in the
Holy Scriptures. Hence the Bible describes this
happiness sometimes in general terms, designating
its yreatness (as in Rom, viii. 18-22; 2 Cor.
iv. 17, 18); and sometimes by various figurative
images and modes of speech, borrowed from
everything which we know to be attractive and
desirable,

The greater part of these images were already
common among the Jewish contemporaries of
Christ; but Christ and his apostles employed
them in a ymrer sense than the great multitude of
the Jews. The Orientals are rich in such figures.
They were employed by Mohammed, who carried
them, as his manner was, to an extravagant
excess, but who at the same time said expressly
that they were mere figures, although many of hia
followers afterwards understood them literally, as
has been often done in a similar way by many
Christians,

The followMig are the principal terms, both
literal and figurative, which are applied in Scrip-
ture to the condition of future happiness.

Among the literal appellations we find (wh,
(wh aidvios, which, according to Hebrew usage,
signify ‘a happy life,’ or ‘ eternal well-being,’
and are the words rendered § life,’ ‘ eternal life,’
and ‘life everlasting,’ in the Auth. Version (e. ¢.
Matt. vii. 14; xix. 16, 29; xxv. 46): Sdfa, ddta
Tov @evi, ‘ glory,’ ¢ the glory of God’ (Rom. ii.
7, 19; v. 2); and efphyn, ‘peace’ (Rom. ii. 10).
Also aidyiov Bdpos 5déns, ‘an eternal weizht of
glory’ (2 Cor. iv. 17); and owrnpia, cwrnpla
eidvios, ‘salvation,’ ‘eternal salvation’ (Heb.
v. 9), &c. :

Among the figurative representations, we may
place the word ‘heaven’ itself. The abode of de-
parted spirits, to us who live upon the earth, and


°


HEAVEN.


while we remain here, is invisible and inaccessible,
beyond the bounds of the visible world, and
entirely separated from it. There they live in
the highest well-being, and in a nearer connection
with God and Christ than here below. This
place and state cannot be designated by any more
tit and brief expression than that which is found


“in almost every language, namely, ‘ heaven,—a


word in its primary and material signitication
denoting the region of the skies, or the visible
heavens. This word, in Hebrew D°O%* sham-
mayim, in Greek ovpavds, is therefore frequently
employed by the sacred writers. It is there thut
the highest sanctuary or temple of Gud is
situated, #. e. it is there that the omnipresent God
most gloriously reveals himself. This, too, is the
abode of God's highest spiritual creation. ‘Thither
Christ was transported : he calls it the house of
his Father, and says that he has therein prepared
an abode for his followers (John xiv. 2).

This place, this ¢ heaven,’ was never conceived
of in ancient times, as it has been by some
modern writers, as a particular planet or world,
but as the wide expanse of heaven, high above
the atmosphere, or starry heavens; heuce it is
sometimes called the third heaven, as being
neither the atmosphere nor the starry heavens.

Another figurative name is ‘ Paradise,’ taken
from the abode of our tirst parents in their state of
innocence, and transferred to the abode of the
blessed (Luke xxiii. 43; 2 Cor. xii. 4; Rev. ii.
7; xxii, 2),

Again, this place is called ‘the heavenly
Jerusalem’ (Gal. iv. 26; Heb. xii. 22; Rev. iii.
12), because the earthly Jerusalem was the capital
city of the Jews, the royal residence, and tue
seat of divine worship; the ‘kingdom of heaven’

Matt. xxv. 1; Jas. ii. 5); the * heavenly king

om’ (2 Tim. iv. 18); the ‘ eternal kingdom’
(2 Pet. i. 11). It is also called an ‘ eternal
inheritance’ (1 Pet. i. 4; Heb. ix. 15), meaning
the possession and full enjoyment of happinesa,
typitied by the residence of the ancient Hebrews
in Palestine. The blessed are said ‘to sit down
at table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,’ that
is, tofpe a sharer with the saints of old in the joys
of salvation ; © to be in Abraham's bosom’ (Luke
xvi. 22; Matt. viii, 11), that is, to sit near or
next to Abraham [Bosoar] ; ‘to reign with Christ’
(2 Tim. ii. 11), ¢. e. to be distinguished, honoured,
and happy as he is—to enjoy regal felicities; w
enjoy ‘a Sabbath, or ‘rest’ (Heb. iy. 10,11), in-
dicating the happiness of pious Christians, doch in
this life and in the life to come.

All that we can with certainty know or infer
from Scripture or reason respecting the blessedness
of the life to come, may be arranged under the
following particulars:—1. We shall hereafter
be entirely freed from the sufferings and ad-
versities of this life. 2. Our future blessednes
will involve a continuance of the real happiness
of this life.

I. The entire exemption from suffering and all
that causes suffering here, is expressed in the
Scripture by words which denote rest, repose, re-
freshment, after performing labour and enduring
affliction. But all the terms which are employed
to express this condition, define (in the original)
the promised ‘rest,’ as rest after labour, and
exemption frometoil and grief; and not the ab-
sence of employment, not inactivity or indolence


HEAVEN.


(2 Thess. i. 7; Heb. iv. 9, 11; Rev. xiv. 13; comp.
vii. 17).

This deliverance from the evils of our present
life includes— s

1. Deliverance from fhis earthly body, the
seat of the lower principles of our nature and of
our sinful corruption, and the source of so many
evils and sufferings (2 Cor. vi. 1, 2;.1 Cor.
xviii, 15). e

2. Entire separation from the society of wicked
and evil-disposed persons, who, in various ways,
iujure the righteous man and embitter his life
on earth (2 Tim. iv. 18). It is hence accounted
a part of the felicity even of Christ himself in
heaven to be ‘ separate from sinners’ (Heb. vii.
26).

3. Upon this earth everything is inconstant,
and subject to perpetual change; and nothing is
capable of completely satisfying our expectations
and desires, But in_the world to come it will
be diflerent. The blis? of the saints will continue
without interruption or change, without fear of
termination, and without satiety (Luke xx. 36 ;
2 Cor. iv. 16,18; 1 Pet. i, 4; v. 10; 1 John
iii. 2, sq.).

II. Besides being exempt from all earthly
trials, and having a continuance of that happiness
which we had begun to enjoy even here, we have
good reason to expect hereafter other rewards and
joys, which stand in no natural or necessary con-
nection with the present life. For our entire
felicity would be extremely defective and scanty,
were it to be confined merely to that which we
carry with us frum the present world, to that
peace and joy of soul which result from reflecting
on what we may have done which is good and
pleasing in the sight of God; since even the best
man will always discover great imperfections in
all that he has done. Our felicity would also be
incomplete were we compelled to stop short with
that meagre and elementary knowledge which we
take with us from this world,—that knowledge so
broken up into fragments, and yielding so little
fruit, and wpich, pour as it is, many good men,
from lack of opportunity, and without any fault
on their part, never here acquire. Besides the
natural rewards of goodness, there must, therefure,
be others, which are positive, and dependent on
the will of the Supreme Legislator.

On this point almost all philosophers are, for
the above reasons, agreed—even those who will
admit of no positive punishments in the world to
come. But for waut of accurate knowledge of
the state of things in the future world, we can
say nothing definite and certain as to the nature
of the positive rewards. In the doctrine of the
New Testament, however, positive rewards are
considered most obviously as belonging to our
future felicity, and as constituting a principal
part of it. For it always represents the joys of

waven as resulting strictly trom the furour of
God, and as being wideserved hy those on whom
they are bestowed. Hence there must be some-
thing more added to the natural good consequences
of our actions, something which caunot be con-
sidered as the necessary and natural consequences
of the gcod actions we may have here per-
formed. But, on this subject, we know nothing
more in general than this, that God will so ap-
point and order our circumstances, and make
such arrangements, that the principal faculties


HEAVEN. al


of our souls—reason and affection, will be height-
ened and developed, so that we shall continually
obtain more pure and distinct knowledge of the
trutb, and make continual advances in holiness.

The following remarks may be of some use
in illustrating this subject :—

(1). In this life God has very wisely allotted
various capacities, powers, and talents, in different
ways and degrees, to different men, according to
the various ends for which he designs them, and
the business on which he employs them. Now
there is not the least reason to suppose that God
will abolish this variety in the future world; it
will rather continue there in all ‘ts extent. We
must suppose, then, that there will be, even in the
heavenly world, a diversity of tastes, of labours,
and of employments, and that to one person this,
to another that field, in the boundless kingdom of
truth and of useful occupation, will be assigned
for his cultivation, according to his peculiar
powers, qualifications, and tastes. A presenti-
ment of this truth is contained in the idea, which
was widely diffused throughout the ancient world,
viz., that the manes will continue to prosecute, in
the future life, the employments to which they had
been here accustomed. At least such arrange-
ments will doubtless be made by God in the
future life, that each individual will there deve-
lope more and more the germs implanted within
him by the hand of the Creator; and will be able,
more fully than he ever could do here, to satisfy
the wants of his intellectual nature, aud thus to
make continual progress in the knowledge of
everything worthy of being known, of which he
could only learn the simplest elements in this
world ; and he will be able to do this in such a
way that the increase of knowledge will not be
detrimental to piety, as it often proves on earth,
but rather promotive of it. To the sincere and
ardent searcher after truth it isa rejoicing and
consoling thought that he will be able hereafter
to perfect that knowledge which here bas 30 many
deficiencies (1 Cor. xiii. 9).

But there is danger of going too far on this
wae and of falling into strange misconceptions,

Various a3 the tastes and wants of men in the
future world will doubtless be, they will still
be in many respects different from what they are
here; because the whole sphere of action, and the
objects by which we shall there be surrounded,
will be different. We shall there have a changed
and more perfect body, and by this single circum-
stance shall be freed at once from many of the
wants and inclinations which have their seat in
the earthly body. And this will also contribute
much to rectify, enlarge, and perfect our know-
ledge. Many things which seem to us very im-
portant and essential during this our state of in-
fancy upon earth, will hereafter doubtless appear
ina different light : we shall look one them as
trifles and children’s play, and employ ourselves
in more important occupations, the utility and
interest of which we may have never before
imagined.

Some theologians have supposed that the saints
in heaven may be taught by immediate divine
revelations (lumen gloria); especially those who
may enter the abodes of the blessed without know-
ledge, or with only a small measure of it; ¢. g.
children and others who have died in ignorance,
for which they themselves were not to blame.


622 HEAVEN.


On this subject nothing is definitely taught in
the Scriptures; but both Scripture and reason
warrant us in believing that provision will be
made for all such persons in the world to come.
A principal part of our future happiness will con-
sist, accurding to the Christian doctrine, in the
enlarging and correcting of our knowledge ree
specting God, his nature, attributes, and works,
and in the salutary application of this knowledge
to our own moral benefit, to the increase of our
faith, love, and obedience, There has been some
controversy among theologians with regard to the
vision of God (visio Dei intuitiva, sensitiva,
beutifica, comprehensiva). The question is, whether
the saints will hereafter behold God with the eyes
of the mind, #.¢. merely know him with the
understanding.

But in the Scriptures God is always repre
sented as a being invisible by the bodily eye
(adparos), as, indeed, every spirit is. The texte
of Scripture which speak of seeing God have been
misunderstood ; they signify, sometimes, the more
distinct knowledge of God, as we speak of know-
ing by seeing, of seeing with the cyes of the mind
(John i. 185 1 Jobn iii. 2; iv. 12; comp. v. 20;
1 Tim, vi. 16); and Paul uses BAérew and yuwd-
OKew as synonymous (1 Cur. xiii, 12, 13; comp.
v.10). Again, they express the idea of feliity,
the enjoyment of God’s favour, the being thought
worthy of his friendship, &c. Still more fre-
quently are both of these meanings comprehended
under the plirase (o see God. The image is taken
from Oriental princes, to see whose face, and to

in whose presence, was esteemed a great
favour (Matt. v. 8.; Heb. vii. 14). ¢ Without
holiness, od5els SPeras Tov Kipiov.’ The opposite
of this is to be removed from God and from his
face.

But Christ is always represented as one who
will be personally visible to us, and whose per-
sonal, familiar intercourse and guidance we shall
enjoy. Herein Christ himself places a chief part
of the joy of the saints (John xiv. xvii, &c.);
and the apostles often describe the blessedness
of the pious by the phrase being with Christ.
To his guidance las God entrusted the human
race, in heaven and on eath. And Paul says
(2 Cor. iv. 6), we see ‘ the brightness of the divine
glory in the face of Christ,’ he is ¢ the visible re-
presentative of the invisible God’ (Col. i. 15).
According to the representation contained in the
Holy Scriptures, the saints will dwell together in
the future world, and form, as it were, a kingdom
or state of God (Luke xvi. xx. 38; Rom, viii.
10; Rev. vii. 9; Heb. xii. 22). They will there
partake of acommon felicity. Their enjoyment
will doubtless be very much heightened by friend-
ship, and by their confiding intercourse with each
other. We must, however, separate all earthly
imperfections from our conceptions of this hea-
venly society. But that we shall there recognise
our former friends, and shall be again associated
with them, was unifurmly believed by all an-
tiquity. And when we call to mind the aflec-
tionate manner in which Christ soothed his dis-
ciples by the assurance that they should hereafter
see him again, should be with him, and enjoy
persona] intercourse and friendship with him, in
that place to which he was going (Jol xiv. 3;
comp. 1 Pet. i. 8), we may gather just grounds
for this belief. Puul indeed says expressly that


HEBREW LANGUAGE.


we shall be with Christ, in company with our
friends who dicd before us (&ua ody aibrois,
1 Thess. iv. 17); and this presupposes that we
shall recognise them, and have intercuurse with
them, as with Christ himself.

1, HEBER (13), one of the other side ; Sept.
“EBep and “Efep), son of Salah, who became the
father of Peleg at the age of 34 years, and died
at the age of 464 (Gen. x. 2d; xi. 14; 1 Chron.
i, 25). His name occurs in the genealogy of
Christ (Luke iii. 35). ‘There is nothing to con-
stitute Heber a historical personage; but there is
a degree of interest connected with him from the
Notion, which the Jews themselves entertain, that
the name of Hebrews, applied to them, was de-
rived from this alleged ancestor of Abraham.
No historical ground appears why this name
should be derived from him rather than from
any other personage that occurs in the catalogue
of Shem’s descendants; but there are so much
stronger objections to every other hypothesis, that
this perhaps is still the most probable of any
which have yet been started.

2. HEBER (731) ; Sept. XaBe, a descendant
of Hobab, son of Jethro, and brother of the wife
of Moses. His wife was the Jael who slew Sisera,
aud he is called Heber the Kenite (Judg. iv. 11,
17; v. 24), which seems to have been a name for
the whole family (Judg. i. 16). Heber appears to
have lived separate fron the rest of the Kenites,
leading a patriarchal life. amid his tents and
flocks. He must have been a person of some
consequence, from its being stated that there was
posse between the house of Heber and the powerful

ing Jabin. At the time the history brings him
under our notice his camp was in the plain of
Zaanaim, near Kedesh im Naphtali (Jas.;
Kenites].

HEBREW LANGUAGE. The Hebrew lan-
guage is that which was the national idiom of
those descendants of “Eber which received the
distinctive name of the People of Israel, and, as
such, was that in which all the bookg of the Old
Testament (with the exception of th®few Chaldee
passages occurring in those after the Babylonian
captivity) were originally composed. It belongs
to the Semitic, or, as it is more appropriateiy
called, the Syro-Arabian family of languages;
and it occupies a central point amidst all the
branches of this family, as well with reference to
the geographical position of the country in which
it prevailed, as with reference to the degree of
development to which it attained. In point of
antiquity, however, it is the uldest form of human
speech known to us, and, from the early civili-
zation, as well as from the religious advantages
of the Hebrews, has preserved to us the oldest and
purest form of the Syro-Arabian languaze.*

If we except the terms ‘ lip of Canaan’
(YID MDW) in Tea. xix. 1S—where the diction
is of an elevated character, and is so far no evie
dence that this designation was the one commonly
employed—the only name by which the Hebrew
language is mentioned in the Old Testament is
© Jewish’ (ANTM, used adverbially, Judaice, in
Jewish, 2 Kings xviii. 26, 28; Isa. xxxvi. 11, 13;


* It may suffice here to refer generally to
Ewald’s Hebrewe Grammar, §§ 1-18, 135-160,
where the whole subject of this article is treated of.


HEBREW LANGUAGE.


2 Chron. xxxii. 18*), where the feminine may
be explained as an abstract of the last formation,
according to Ewald’s Hebr. Gram. §§ 344, 457,


or as referring to the usual gender of ner under-
stood. In a strict sense, however, ‘ Jewish’ de-
notes the idiom of the kingdom of Judah, which
became the predominant one after the deportation
of the ten tribes. It is in the Greek writings of
the later Jews that ‘ Hebrew’ is first applied to
the language, as in the éSpaiorl of the prologue
to Ecclesiasticus, and in the yAdooa TéyEBpalov
of Josephus. (The éBpats d:aréxros of the New
Testament is used in contradistinction to the
idiom of the Hellenist Jews, and does not mean
the ancient Hebrew language, but the then ver-
nacular Aramaic dialect of Palestine.) Our
title to use the designation Hebrew language is,
therefore, founded on the fact that the nation
which spoke this idiom was properly distinguished
by the ethnographical name of Hebrews.

The appellation Hebrews may, indeed, origin-
ally have embraced more tribes than the Israel-
ites, as it appears from Genesis (x. 21, 25) that
the descendants of Ioqtan had some claim to it.
Nevertheless, it was soon appropriated to the
Israelites as their distinctive name as @ nation in
the earlier periods of their history, and (after
giving place, in the intervening centuries, to that
of Israel, and, subsequently to the deportation of
the ten tribes, to that of Jews) was at length re-
vived not long betore the Christian era—when,
however, it also served to distinguish the Jews of
Palestine from the Hellenist Jews—and passed
over, together with that of Jews, to the classical
writers. As for the origin of the name, there are
two theories (besides that which makes it a patro-
nymic from ‘Eber), one of which, by deriving
‘ibri from the verb BY, to pass over, assumes the
name to have been assigned to Abraham by the
Canaanites, in consequence of his having crossed
the Euphrates, so that the word means transitor ;
while the other assumes that, as Mesopotamia is
called the country beyond the river (AMIN WY,
Jos. xxiv. 2), ’ibri is derived from the preposition
Oy in that combination, so that the word should
mean transfluvialis, one of the people who dwell
on the other side of the river. If the fact that the
Sept. translators have rendered ‘ the Hebrew,’ in
Gen. xiv. 13, by 5 wepdrns, and Aquila by é we-
patrns (from xepain, ‘ the country over the water ;’
ef. Joseph. De Bell. Jud. ii. 20. 4) may not prove
that both these upinions existed at the date of those
versions, yet they establish the existence of one of
them. However distinct these views may be,
they have frequently been confounded ; but
many early Christian writers, such as Origen
and Jerome, favoured the former theory, viz. that
‘sbri is derived from the verb. The latter
appears to have been virtually held by Dio-
dorus Tarsensis, whose words are: wepdrny kari
Toy ABpau aoavel wépay oixovvra rod “lopSdvov
(see the note of Flam. Nobilius ad doc. in Walton’s
Bibl. Polyglot. tom. vi.) ; and expressly by Chry-


* The passage in Neh. xiii. 24 is not included
here, because, as will be seen below, it is a dis-
puted point at what time the Hebrew language
ceased to be a living tongne; and it depends on
the decision of that question whether the ‘Jewish’
of Nehemiah means Hebrew or Aramaic,


‘HEBREW LANGUAGE. 58


sostom, who, in his 35th homily on Genesis, says?
éxeidh yap wépay Tot Ebppdrov thy xarolxnow
elxe, 3:4 rotro Kal repdrns eréyero. This view is
the one which has found most favour in recent
times. S. Morinus, who rejects both these views,
encounters the former with very pertinent argu-
ments; especially when he insists that, even
if there were evidence that the name Hebrew
was imposed on Abraham by the Canaanites, it
could not, in the first signification, have been a
distinctive name, at a period when so many tribes
must have recently passed westwards over the Eu-
phrates (De Ling. Primeva, p. 64). Hezel also
has stated some of the best objections to vach
theory, in his Geschichte der Heb. Sprache, § 43
and Ewald in his latest work, Geschichte des
Volkes Israel, i, 334, has briefly, though empha
tically, declared both to be untenable.

The best evidences which we possess as to the
form of the Hebrew language, prior to its first
historical period, tend to show that Abraham, on
his entrance into Canaan, found the language then

revailing among almost all the different tribes
inhabiting that country to be in at least dia-
lectual affinity with his own. This is gathered
from the following facts: that nearly all the
names of places and persons relating to those
tribes admit of Hebrew etymologies; that, amidst
all the accounts of the intercourse of the Hebrews
with the nations of Canaan, we find no hint of
a diversity of idiom; and that even the come
paratively recent remains of the Phnician and
Punic languages bear a manifest affinity to the
Hebrew. But whether the Hebrew language, as
seen in the earliest books of the Old Testament,
is the very dialect which Abraham brought with
him into Canaan; or whether it is the common
tongue of the Canaanite nations, which Abra-
ham only adopted from them, and which was
afterwards developed to greater fulness under the
culiar moral and political influences to which

is posterity were expo are questions which,
in the absence of conclusive arguments, are gene
rally discussed with some dogmatical preposses-
sions, Almost all those who support the first view
contend also that Hebrew was the primitive lan-
gnage of mankind. S. Morinus, in the work
above cited, and Lischer, in his De Causis Ling.
Hebr., are among the best champions of thie opi-
nion; but Hiivernick has recently advocated it
with such modifications as make it more accept-
able (Einleit. in das Alte Test., I. i. p. 148, sq.).
The principal argument on which they depend 1s
that, as the most important proper-names in the
first part of Genesis (as Cain, Seth, and others)
are evidently founded on Hebrew etymologies,
the essential connection of these names with their
etymological origins involves the historical credi-
bility of the records themselves, and leaves no
room for any other conclusion than that the He-
brew language is corval with the earliest history
of man. The advocates of the other opinion
attach some weiglit to the cogency with which
they infer, from the phenomena of the Hebrew
language itself, that its roots were at one period
biliteral, and were afterwards develo to the
compass of three consonants. They also rest on
the evidence which Gen. xxxi. 47 affords that the
near relatives of Abraham, residing too in the
country from which he had recently emigrated,
spoke Aramaic; and they think this warrants


e


924 HEBREW LANGUAGE.


the conclusion that Aramaic must have been the
vernacular dialect of Abraham himself. Lastly,
Gesenius lays some stress on the circumstance
that the language not only denotes test by DY,
sea, but that it does not possess any other word to
express that sense.
ie histury of the Hebrew language, as far as
we can trace its course by the changes in the dic-
tion of the documents in which it is preserved,
may be here conveniently divided into that of the
riod preceding, and that of the period succeed-
ing, the Exile. If it be a matter of surprise that
the thousand years which intervened between
Moses and the Captivity should not have pro-
duced sufficient change in the language to ware
rant its history during that time being distri-
buted into subordinate divisions, the following
considerations may excuse this arrangement. It
is one of the signal characteristics of the Hebrew
language, as seen in all the books prior to the
Exile, that notwithstanding the existence of some
isulated, Lut important, archaisms, such as in the
form of the pronoun, &c. (the best collection of
which may Le seen in Hivemick, @. c. p. 183, sq.)
it preserves an unparalleled general uniformity of
structure. The extent to which this uniformity
prevails may be estimated, either by the fact that
it has furnished many modern scholars, who rea-
sou from the analogies discovered in the chanyes
in other languages in a given period, with an ar-
gument to show that the Pentateuch could not
have Leen written at so remote a date as is genee
rally believed (Gesenius, Geseh. der Hebr. Spra-
che, § 8); or. by the conclusion,a fortiori, which
Hivernick, whose express object it is to vindicate
its received antiquity, candidly concedes that
“the books of Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah are
the earliest in which the language differs sensibly
from that in the historical portions of the Peuta-
teuch ” (Linleit. i. p. 180). We are here solely
concerned with the fact that this unifurmity of
type exists. ‘The general causes to which it is
to be ascribed are to be sought in the genius of
the language itself, as less susceptible of change ;
in the stationary civilization of the Hebrews
during the period; aud in their comparative isula-
tion, as regarded uations of forcign language (see
Ewald’s Hebr. Gram. § 7). The particular causes
depend on the age and author assigned to each
book falling within this period, and involve ques-
tions utterly alien to the scope of this article.

Tu the canonical books belonging to the first
period, the Hebrew languaye appears in a state of
mature development. Although it still preserves
the charms of freshness and simplicity, yet it has
attained great regularity of formation, and such a

evision of syntactical arrangement as ensures

th euergy and distinctness. Some common
notivus of its laxity and indetiniteness have no
other foundation than the very inadequate scholar
ship of the persons who form them. A clearer
insight into the organism of language absolutely,
joined to such a study of the cognate Syro-Arabian
idioms as would reveal the secret, but no less cer-
tain, laws of its syntactical coherence, would show
them to what degree the simplicity of Hebrew is
compatible with grammatical precision.

Oue of the most remarkable features in the
language of this period is the difference which
distinguishes the diction of poetry from that of
prose. This difference consists in the use of un-


HEBREW LANGUAGE.


usual words and flexions (many of which are coa-
sidered. to be Aramaistns or Archaisms, although
in this case these terms are nearly identical), and ig
a harmonic arrangement of thoughts, as seen both
in the parallelism of members in a single verse,
and in the strophic order of longer portions; the
delicate art of which Ewald has traced with pre
eminent success in his Poetische Bucher des Alt,
Bundes, vol. i.

The Babylonian captivity is assigned as the
commencement of that decline and corruption
which mark the second period in the history of the
Hebrew language; but the Assyrian deportation
of the ten tribes, in the year u.c. 720, was proba-
bly the first means of bringing the Aramaic idiom
into injurious proximity to it, The Exile, bow-
ever, forms the epoch at which the language shows
evident signs of that encroachment of the Aramaic
on its integrity, which afterwards ended in its
complete extinction. The diction of the different
bouks of this period discovers various grades of this
Aramaic influtnce; aud in some cases approaches
so nearly to the type of the first period, that it has
been ascribed to mere imitation.

An interesting question has been raised as to
the precise time at which the Hebrew ceased to be
the living vernacular language of the Jews. Some
learned men, among whom are Kimchi, Buxtorf,
and Walton, maintain that the Jews entirely lost
the living use of Hebrew during the Captivity,
Others, as Pfeitter and Lischer, argue that it is
quite unreasonable, considering the duration and
other circumstances of the Exile, to suppose that
the Jews did not retain the partial use of their
native tongue for some time after their return to
Palestine, and lose it by slow degrees at last. The
points on which the question chiefly turns, are the
sense in which the words 27)ED and AN, in
Neh. viii. 8; xiii. 24, are to be taken; and Heng-
stenberg, in his duthentie des Daniel, p. 299, sq.
and Gesenius, in his Gesch. d. Hebr. Sprache, § 13,
are tlie best. modern advocates of either view. Bat!
on whichever side the truth may be here, it is cer-
tain that the language continued to be understood
and used in writing by the educated, for some
time after the Exile, as is evident from the date of
the latest Biblical bouks; and it is found in the
inscriptions on the coins of the Maccabees. No
decisive evidence, however, shows at what exact
time it became a virtually dead lancuage; al-
though there is every reasun to conclude that,
more than a century before the Christian era, it
gave place altogether in writing, as before in
speech, to that corrupt Aramaic dialect, which
some have called the Syro-Chaldaic, and that it
was thenceforth solely studied, as the language of
the sacred buuks, by the leaned.

The palzographical history of the Hebrew lan-
Ruage requires a brief notice, at least as far as
regards the results of modern inquiries. The
earliest monuments of Hebrew writing which we
possess are the genuine coins of the Maccabees,
which date from the year B.c. 143. The charac-
ter in which their inscriptions are expressed bears
a vory near resemblance to the Samaritan alpha-
bet, and both are evidently derived from the Phe-
nician alphabet. The Talmud also, and Origen ¢
and Jerome, both attest the fact that an ancient
Hebrew character had fallen into diause; and, by
stating that the Samaritans employed it, and by
giving some descriptions of its form, they distinctly


HEBREW LANGUAGE.


prove that the ancient character spoken of was
essentially the same as that on the Hasmonwan
coins. It is, therefore, considered to be established
beyond a doubt that, before the exile, the Hebrews
used this ancient character (the Talmud even
calls it the ‘ Hebrew’). At what period, however,
the square Hebrew character of our printed books
was first adopted, is a matter of some dispute.
The Talmud, and Origen and Jerome ascribe the
change to Ezra; and those who, like Gesenius,
admit this tradition to be true in a limited sense,
reconcile it with the late use of the ancient letters
on the coins, by appealing to the parallel use of
the Kufic character on the Mahommedan coins, for
several centuries after the Nischi was employed
for writing; or, by supposing that the Maccabees
a mercantile interest in imitating the coinage
of the Phenicians. The other opinion is that, as
the square Hebrew character has not, to all ap-
pearance, been developed directly out of the ancient
stiff Phoenician type, but out of an alphabet bear-
ing near affinity to that found in the Palmyrene
inscriptions, a combination of this palaographical
. fact with the intercourse which took place between
the Jews and the Syrians under the Seleucid,
renders it probable that the square character was
first adopted at some inconsiderable but undetin-
able tithe before the Christian era. Either of these
theories is compatible with the suppusition that the
uare character underwent many successive mo-.
difications in the next centuries, before it attained
ita full calligraphical perfection. The passage in
Matt. v. 18 is considered to prove that the copies
of the law were already written in the square cha-
racter, as the jod of the ancient alphabet is as large
a letter as the aleph; and the Talmud and Jerome
speak as if the Hebrew MSS. of the Old Testa-
ment were, in their time, already provided with
the final letters, the Taggin, the point on the broken
horizontal stroke of FM, and other calliyraphical
minutiz.*

The origin of the vowel-points is to be ascribed
to the eflort which the Jewish leamed men made
to preserve the pronunciation of their sacred lan-
guage, at a time when its extinction as a living
tongue endangered the loss of the traditional
memory of its sound. Every kind of evidence
renders it probable that these signs for the pronun-
ciation were first introduced about the seventh
century of the Christian era, that is, after the
completion of the Talmud, and that the minute
and complex system which we possess was gra-
dually developed, from a few indispensable signs,
to its present elaborateness. The existence of the


* Some have attempted to find, in the discre-
pancies between the Septuagint and the Hebrew
text, the basis for discovering in what character
the MSS. from which they translated must
have been written, by trying to reduce these dis-
crepaucies to mistakes of one letter for another.
Eichhom favours the notion that the Septuagint
was made from MSS. in the Samaritan character;
while Gesenius decides that the letters which are
interchanged are only alike in the square charac-
ter. ‘The decision of this question would in some
degree atlect the view entertained of the anti-
quity of the square character. The latest author on
this subject, however, Frankel, asserts that the
evidence dves not preponderate on either side
(Vorstudien zu der Septuaginta, 1841, p. 213).


HEBREWS. td]


t complete system can, however, be traced
ack to the eleventh century. The skilful in-
vestigation of Hupfeld (in the Studien und Kri-
tiken for 1830) has proved that the vowel-points
were unknown to Jerome and the Talmud ; but,
as far as regards the former, we are able to
make a high estimate of the degree to which
the traditionary pronunciation, prior tu the use of
the points, accorded with our Masoretic signs :
for Jerome describes a pronunciation which agrees
wonderfully well with our vocalisation. We are
thus called on to avail ourselves thankfully of the
Masoretic punctuation, on the double ground that
it represents the Jewish traditional pronunciation,
and that the Hebrew language, unless ¢hen
read according to its laws, does not enter into
its full dialectual harmony with its Syro-A. abian
sisters,

Although it may be superfluons to enforce the
general advantages, not to say indispensable neces-
sity, of a sound scholarlike study of the Hebrew
language to the theological student, yet it may
be allowable to enumerate some of those parti-
cular reasons, incident to the present time, which
urgently demand an increased attention to this
study. First, we have an ancient honourable
name to regain. Selden, Castell, Lightfoot,
Pocock, Walton, Spencer, and Hyde, were once
contemporary ornaments of our country. We daily
see their names mentioned with deference in the
writings of German scholars; but we are forcibly
struck with the fact that, since that period, we
have hardly, with the exception of Lowth and
Kennivott, produced a single Syro-Arabian scholar
whose labours have signally advanced Biblical
philology. Secondly, the bold inquiries of the
German theologians will force themselves on our
notice. It is impossible for us much longer to be
ignorant of their existence ; for that which no Eng-
lish bookseller ventures to undertake tinds a more
enterprising publisher in America, and soon visits
our shores in an English dress. These investiga-
tions are conducted in a spirit of philological and
historical criticism which has never yet been
brought to bear, with such force, on the most im-
portant Biblical questions. The wounds which
they deal to the ancient traditions cannot be healed
by reference to commentators whose generation
knew nothing of our doubts and difficulties. The
cure must be sympathetic ; it must be etlected by
thesame weapon thatcaused the wound. Ifthemon-
strous disproportion which books relating to ecclesi-
astical antiquity Lear, in almost every theological
bookseller’s catalogue, over those relating to Bibli-
cal philology, be an evidence of the degree to which
these studies have fallen into neglect, and if the
few books in which an acquaintance with Hebrew
is necessary, which do appear, are a fair proof of
our present ability to meet the Germans with their
own weapons—then there is indeed an urgent
necessity that theological students should pre;
for the increased demands of the future.—J. N.

HEBREW OF THE HEBREWS (‘Efpaios
é ‘EBpaiwy), emphatically a Hebrew, one who
was so by both parents, and that by a long series
of ancestors, without admixture of Gentile or even
proselyte blood. Of this the Jews were as proud
as were those Christians in Spain who called theme
selves Old Christians, of having no mixture of
Moorish blood.

HEBREWS. The question as to the origin ef


626 HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


the Hebrew name is incidentally considered in
the article Heurew Lanavage.

HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE. In the
received text this composition appears as part of
the Canonical Scriptures of the New Testament,
and also as the production of the apostle Paul.
For neither of these assumptions is the evidence
allowed on all hands to be conclusive; and
hence the greatest diversity of opinion prevails
among critics as to the claims of this epistle,
some contending for its canonical authority and
Pauline origin, some denying both of these, and
some admitting the former, whilst they repudiate
the latter. As the question of its canonicity be-
comes of importance as a separate question only
where its Pauline authorship is denied, and as
on the latter of these points we mean to advocate
the side of the affirmative, it will not be necessary
to occupy space with any discussiun of the former
by itself. We shall proceed accordingly to the
consideration of the question of the authorship of
this compusition.

On no subject, perhaps, in the department of
the higher criticism of the New Testament, have
opinions been more divided and more keenly
discussed, than on this. Of those who have re-
jected the claims of the apostle Paul to the
authorship of this epistle, some have advocated
those of Barnabas, others those of Luke, others
those of Clement of Rome, others those of Silas,
others those of Apollos, others those of some un-
known Christian of Alexandria, and others those of
some ‘apostolic man,’ whose name is no less un-
kuown. Of these hypotheses some are so purely
conjectural and destitute of any basis either his-
torical or internal, that the bare mention of them
as the vagaries of learned men is almost all the
notice they deserve. ‘That which ascribes this pro-
duction to Apollos was first suggested by Luther,
and it has been in more recent times adopted
by Heumann, Bertholdt, De Wette, Bleek, and,
apparently, also Tholuck. Unsupported as this
theory is by a shadow of direct evidence either
external or internal, it would deserve only to be
passed over in silence, were it not for the great
names which have espoused it, and the ingenious
reasons they have urged in its support. As, how-
ever, it rests entirely on the bypothesis that the
author of this epistle must have been an Alexan-
drian, we shall defer any remarks upon it till we
come to examine that hypothesis. The claims
of Silas have been urged by Bobme in the intro-
duction to his commentary on this epistle (Lips.
1825), and by Mynster in the Studien und
Kritiken, bd. ii. s. 3445 but they have adduced
nothing in support of these claims which might
not with equal plausibility have been urged on
behalf of any other of the companions of Paul.
The same might almost be said regarding the
supposition that Clement is the author of this
work; for though his name is mentioned by
Origen in relation to this subject, it is only as
that of the supposed amanuensis of Paul, whom
Origen’s statement sets forth as the reputed
author of the epistle, as we shall have occasion
more fully to see afterwards; and though Jerome
and Philastrius attest that some in the Roman
Church ascribed the authorship of this epistle to
Clement, the very terms in which they give the
statement show that it is one to which they thought
mo credit was to be attached; nor does a com-


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


parison of the style and contents of this epistle
with those of Clement's extant productions tend
to any other conclusion than that the author of
the one could not have been the author of the
other. The claims of Luke apparently rise a
degree higher from the circumstance that. besides
being named by Origen, Jerome, and Piilastrius,
as dividing with Clement the bovours which, these
writers testify, were in certain quarters assigned
tothe latter, there is a character of similarity in
respect of language and style between this epistle
and the acknowledged productions of the evan-
gelist. But on this circumstance no stress can
legitimately be laid. For, Ist, where there is no
other evidence, or at least none of any weight, in
favour of identity of authorship, mere general
similarity of style cannot be allowed to

much force. 2ndly, Assuming the epistle to be
the production of Paul, it is easy to account for
the resemblance of its style to that of Luke, from
the fact that Luke was for so many years the
companion and disciple of Paul; for it is well
known that when persons for a long time associate
closely with each other, and especially when one
of the parties is an individual of powerful in
tellect whose forms of thought and modes of
speech imperceptibly impress themselves on those
with whom he associates, they fall infensibly
into a similarity of tone and style both of speak-
ing and writing. To this, indeed, Chrysostom,
whose authority in all such matters must he al-
lowed to stand very high, expressly ascribes the
similarity of Luke's style to that of Panl, when,
contrasting the language of the former with that
of Mark, he says, éxaoros 3t duoiws toy Bidde-
kadov euinhoaro: b uty (8 Aovxas| roy TMaidor
brép Tous worauobs péovra: b Be [6 Mapxos]} riv
Tlérpov Bpaxvaoylas éxipedovpevoy (dom. iv. ts
Matt., quoted by Forster, Apostolical Authority
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, p. 648). drdly.
1t is not in the epistle to the Hebrews alone that a
resemblance to the style of Luke may be detected :
the same feature pervades all Paul's epistles, ee
pecially those of a later date, as has been fre-
quently observed by critics. This argument.
then, if used against the Pauline orizin of the
epistle to the Hebrews wonld prove toe much, as
it would go to invalidate the claims of almost all
the acknowledged writings of the apostle. In fine,
whilst there are such resemblances of style, &.,
as have been referred to between this epstle and
the writings of Luke, there are differences of a
nature so weighty as completely to overbalance
these resemblances, and authorize the conclusion
that the author of the latter could not also be the
author of the former. Both Stuart (Comment.
vol. i. p. 333, Lond. 1828) and Eichhorn ( £tuieit.
bd. iii. 8. 465) justly lay stress on the greater pre-
dominance of Jewish feelings in the Epistle to the
Hebrews than in any of Luke's writings, and still
more on the marked familiarity with the pecu-
liarities of the Jewish schools displayed by the
writer of the epistle, but of which no traces
are apparent in any of the writings of the
evangelist. Both writings display the combina-
tion of the Palestinian and the Hellenistic cha-
racter on the part of their author; but in the
Epistle to the Hebrews the former so decidedly
predominates over the latter, whilst the reverse is
the case with the writings of Luke. that it seems


to the last degree improbable that the same person


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


could have written both. It appears, therefore,
that for the theory which ascribes this epistle to
Luke, there is no evidence of any kind which
will bear examination, but, on the contrary, not
a little against it. That which claims the author-
ship of this epistle for Barnabas has in its support
the testimony of Tertullian (De Pudicitia, c. 20),
with whom, as we learn from Jerome (Epist. 129,
ad Dardanum), several (plerique) among the
Latins concurred.* For this opinion Tertullian,
in the passage referred te, assigns no reasons, and
Jerome appears to have treated it as a mere con-
jecture resting upon Tertullian’s authority alone ;
for, in his catalogue of ecclesiastical writers (c. 5),
he refers tothis opinion as one ‘ juxta Tertullia-
num,’ whilst he says that the opinion that Luke
was the author was one ‘ juxta quosdam.’ Hug
is of opinion (Introd. p. 596, Fosdick’s transl.),
that in this passage we have not Tertullian’s own
view so much asa concession on his part to those
whom he was opposing, and who, because of the
very passage he is about to quote from the Epistle
to the Hebrews (vi. 4-8), were inclined to reject
the claims of that epistle to he esteemed the pro-
duction of Paul. This conjecture is of use, as it
tends to show that Tertullian might have another
reason for ascribing this epistle to Barnabas than
his total ignorance that it had ever been imputed
to Paul, as has been confidently inferred by
several writers from the fact that it was ob-
viously to the interest of his argument to uphold
the Pauline origin of this epistle had he been
aware of it. In recent times the ablest defender
of this hypothesis is Ullmann, who has devoted to
it an article in the first volume of his journal, the
Studien und Kritiken, but the evidence he adduces
in favour of it is very feeble. After enlarging on
the testimony of Tertullian, he proceeds to the
internal evidence in favour of Barnabas; but of
the ser reasons he assigus for ascribing the epistle
to him, none possesses any force. The first, viz. the
traces in the epistle of an Alexandrian education
ou the part of the author, supposing it granted,
would not apply particularly to Barnabas, who
was a native of Cyprus, and who, though Ullmann
says, She had perdaps been in Alexandria,’ for
aught we know had never seen that seat of alle-
gorical learning. The second, viz. that Barnabas
being a Levite was the more likely, on that ac-
couut, to understand the Jewish ritual, as we see
the author of this epistle did, is of no weight, for
there is nothing stated in the epistle on that head
which any intelligent Jew might not have
known, whether a Levite or not. The third, viz.
that what the author of this epistle says concern-
ing the law, divine revelation, faith, &c., is very


* Ullmann (Stud. und Krit. i, 391) has la-
boured. to show that the ¢ plerique’ in this passage
must be understood of persons belonging to the
Eastern church, the ‘ Graci sermonis scriptores,’
of whom Jerome speak? in the same sentence.
Had he read the passage attentively, however, he
would have perceived that what Jerome says is,
that though in his day ‘ plerique eam vel Bar-
nabe vel Clementis arhitrantur,’ it was viewed
as Paul's ‘non solum ab ecclesiis Orientis, sed ab
omnidus retio (i. e. antiquioribus| ecclesiasticis
Greci sermoniy scriptoribus.’ If ald the Greek
writers judged it to be Paul's, how could many
of them ascribe it to Barnabas ?


.


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE. 887


Pauline, and such as we might expect from a
companion of Paul, such as Barnahas was; the


. fourth, viz. that the tenor of the epistle is worthy


‘such aman as Barnabas; the fifth, viz. that the
writer of this epistle speaks of the Saviour v
frequently by the appellation 5 "Incods, whic
Dr. Ullmann thinks indicates that the writer must
have known our Lord during his nal ministry,
which was probably the case with Barnabas; and
the sixth, viz. that the names of persons men-
tioned in this epistle are names which Barnabas
might have referred to had he written it—are
reasons such as it would be idle to refute, and such
as fill us with surprise that a man of Ullmann’s
learning and vigour should have gravely adduced
them. With regard to the fifth also, Olshausen
has justly observed (Opusc. Theologica, p. 115
that if it were certain that Barnabas had enjoy.
the advantage of our Lord's personal ministry, it
would clearly prove that he was not the author of
this epistle, for the latter distinctly classes hime
self with those by whom this advantage had not
been enjoyed (ch. ii. 3). Stuart and some others
have laid great stress on the contrast aflorded by
this epistle to the extant epistle which ‘passes
under the name of Barnabas, in respect of style,-
tone, and general character, as supplying indubit-
able evidence that the former is the production
of a different and a far superior mind. Of this
there can be no question, and, were we quite cer-
tain that the epistle ascribed to Barnabas was
really his production, the argument would be
conclusive. But though some very distinguished
names may be cited in support of its authen-
ticity, the greater weight, both of authority and
evidence, is against it [Barnasas, Ertstie or].
The total absence of any reason in favour of im-
puting the authorship of the Epistle to the He-
brews to Bamabas affords sufficient ground for
rejecting this hypothesis without our attempt-
ing to adduce dubious and uncertain reasons
against it.

It only remains that we should consider the
alleged traces of an Alexandrian origin in this
epistle. These have been much insisted upon by
Eichhorn, Schulz, Bleek, and others; but they
are not such, we think, as will carry conviction
to any impartial inquirer. The standard of com-
parison by which the supposed Alexandrian
tone of this epistle is evinced, is supplied by the
writings of Philo, between which and this epistle
it is affirmed that there is so close a resemblance
that it can be accounted fur only on the supposi-
tion that the author of the latter was, like Philo,
an Alexandrian Jew. Now before this reasoning
can be so much as lovked at, it belioves those who
use it to point out clearly how much of Philo’s
peculiar style and sentiment was owing to his
Jewish, and how much to his Alexandrian, educa-
tion or habits of thought; because, unless this
can be done, it will be impossible to show that
any alleged peculiarity necessarily Lespeaks an
Alexandrian origin, and could not possibly have
appeared in the writings of a pure Jew of Pales-
tine. No attempt, however, of this sort has been
made; on the contrary, it has been assumed that’
whatever is Philonian is therefore Alexandrian,
and hence, all resemblances between the writings
of Philo and the Epistle to the Hebrews have
been urged as certain proofs that the latter must


_ have been written by a converted Jew of Alex-


6238 HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


andria. Such an assumption, however, we would
by no means concede; and we feel confirmed in
this by an examination of the evidence adduced
in support of the alleged Alexandrian character
of this epistle. As Stuart has, we think, clearly
shown (i. 321), and as even Tholuck, though
obviously inclining the other way, has candidly
admitted (Comment. on the Hebrews, i. p. 68,
§ 7), there is nothing in this evidence to show
* that this epistle might not have been written by
a Jew who had never left the bounds of Palestine.
It is worthy of notice that several of the points on
which Eichhorn chiefly insists as favouring his
view, such as the prevalence of typical exposi-
tions of the Mosaic ritual in this epistle, and the
ter elegance of its language and style ( Linlett.
iii. 443 f.), are given up by Bleek, and that of
the two chiefly insisted upon by the latter, viz.
the close affinity between this epistle and the
writings of Philo, and the alleged mistake in re-
gard to the furniture of the tabernacle which
Bleek charges upon the author of this epistle in
ch. ix. 3, 4, and which he thinks no Jew of
Palestine could have committed, both are relin-
* quish®d by Tholuck as untenable (comp. the
valuable remarks of Hug, Introd. p. 584, note,
Fosdick's transl.). With regard to the latter, it
may be remarked that, even supposing it proved
that the writer of this epistle had erred in assert-
ing that the pot containing the manna and
Aaron's rod were placed in the ark of the testi-
mony, and that, supposing @vutarhpioy to denote
the altar of incense, and not the censer, he had
fallen into the mistake of placing this within
instead of without the vail, nothing could be
thence deduced in favour of the Alexandrian
origin of the author. For, with regard to the
former of these it was a matter on which the Jews
of Palestine had no better means of information
than those of any other place, since, in the Temple
as then standing, none of the furniture of the
Holy of Holies had been preserved ; and with
regard to the Jatter, as it could not be the result
of ignorance either in a Jew of Palestine or in a
Jew of Alexandria, but must have been a piece
of mere tnadvertence on the part of either, it
seems rather too much to conclude that it was
such as the latter alone was capable of commit-
ting. That, however, there is no blunder in the
case, has, we think, been very satisfactorily shown
by Deyling (Obs. Sac. tom. ii. No. 47) and
others (comp. Stuart and Tholuck in Joc.).

On the alleged Alexandrian tone of this epistle
rests, as already remarked, the entire claims of
Apollos to the authorship. In setting aside the
former, therefore, we of necessity repudiate also
the latter. But it may be permitted us to re-
mark that, even supposing the former established,
the latter would by no means follow, any more
than because a work produced in Germany in the

esent day was deeply tinctured with Hegel-
anism, it would follow from that alone, that it
must be the production of Strauss rather than of
Weisse, or any other disciple of Hegel's school.
The adoption of this theory by Dr. Tholuck, after
his exposure of the unsoundness of Bleek’s reason-
ings, has filled us with surprise. ‘Still,’ says
he (i. 69), ‘could it be rendered probable that
any distinguished person having intercourse with
Paul, were an Alexandrian, and of Alexandrian
culture, we might, with the greatest appearance of


- HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


truth, regard him as the author of the epistle.
Now such an one is found in the person of
Apollos.’ What is this but to say, ‘The argu-
ments for the Alexandrian origin of this epistle,
I must confess, prove nothing ; but show me an
end to be gained by it and I will admit them to
be most conclusive!’ Such a statement affords,
we think, very clear evidence that the disposition
to ascribe this epistle to Apollos is to be traced
not to any constraining force of evidence, but ex-
clusively to what Olshausen in his strictures on
Bleek (Opusc. p. 92) justly denounces as the
main source of that able writer's errors on this
question—‘ Quod non ab omni partium studio
alienum animum servare ipsi contigit.’

We have occupied so much space in the exami-
nation of these hypotheses, partly because we wish
to make it apparent how slender and shadowy are
the grounds on which the opponents of the Pauline
origin of this epistle are content to acquiesce in the
claims of the parties who have been put forward as
the Apostle’s competitors ; and partly because, he-
fore proceeding to consider the evidence directly
for and against the claims of the Apostle, we are
desirous to make it apparent that, unless these
claims can be substantiated, we must give up as
hopeless all attempts to ascertain the author of this
epistle. Our sole choice lies here between Paul
and some unknown writer of the apostolic age.
This gives the question a character of no small
importance, for it renders it virtually a question
as to the canonical authority of this epistle. In
the formation of the New Testament Canon we
have no reason to believe that any supernaturai
aid was vouchsafed ; but each church received
or rejected books according as they were satisfied
or not with the evidence historical and internal
of their having proceeded from some apostolic
source [Canon]. The only ground, therefore,
upon which we can receive any book as canonical,
is its being shown that it was received in the pri-
mitive churches as sanctioned by apostolic au-
thority, confirmed by a comparison of its contents
with the general doctrines of the Bible, and of its
style and statements with those of the known
writings of the party to whom it is ascribed.
Where this cannot be done the mere antiquity of
the book proves nothing to the point; tbe fact
that, however ancient, the book cannot be shown
to have been received by those who alone were
qualitied to judge accurately of such matters, as
either the production of an apostle or of some
knoten individual who wrote under the sanction
and guidance of an apostle, is enough to set aside
all its claims to be reverenced asa part of the divine
word. Now if all attempts to ascribe the Epistle
to the Hebrews to the pen of any of the known
companions of Paul must be regarded as futile,
it follows that unless it can be shown to have heen
received by the early churches as the production.
of the Apostle himself, and that upon grounds
not incompatible with actual evidence to the con-
trary, it must be struck out from its place in the
sacred Canon, and, masterly as it is, be ravked
with the productions of uninspired human wis-
dom.

Referring our readers for particulars to the able
and copious discussion of this question furnished
by the works of Stuart (Commentary, vol. i.)
Forster (The Apostol. Authority of the Ep. to the
Hebrews, &c.), and Hug, we attempt to


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


present a condensed outline of the evidence, both
for and against the Pauline authorship of this
epistle. Following the example of Hug and
Forster, we shall commence with the tuternal
evidence, taking up first that in favour of the
Pauline origin of the epistle.

1. A person familiar with the doctrines on
which Paul is fond of insisting in his acknow-
ledyed epistles, will readily perceive that there is
such a correspondence in this respect between
these and the Epistle to the Hebrews, as supplies
good ground for presuming that the latter pro-
ceeded also from his pen, That Christianity as a
system is superior to Judaism in respect of clear-
ness, simplicity and moral efficiency; that the
former is the substance and reality of what the
latter had presented only the typical adumbra-
tion ; and that the latter was to be abolished to
make way for the former, are points which, ir
more fully handled in the Epistle to the Hebrews,
are familiar to hl readers of the Epistles of Paul
(comp. 2 Cor. iii. 6-18; Gal. iii. 22; iv. 1-9,
21-31; Col. ii. 16,17, &c.). The same view is
given in this epistle as in those of Paul, of the
divine glory of the Mediator, not simply as
GedvOpwros, but specifically as the eixwy rod God,
the reflection or manifestation of Deity to man
(comp. Col. i. 15-20; Phil. ii, 6 ; Heb. i, 3, &c.) ;
His condescension is described as having consisted
in an impoverishing, and lessening, and lowering
of J1imself for man’s behalf (2 Cor. viii. 9; Phil.
ii. 7,8; Heb. ii, 9); and His exaltation is set
forth as a condition of royal dignity, which shall
be consummated by all His enemies being put
under His footstool (1 Cor. xv. 25-27; Heb. ii. 8;
x. 13; xii. 2). He is represented as discharging
the office of a peoirns, a word which is never
used except by Paul and the writer of this epistle
(Gal. iii, 19, 20; Heb. viii. 6); His death
jg represented as a sacrifice for the sins of man;
and the peculiar idea is announced in connection
with this, that He was pretigured by the sacrifices
of the Mosaic dispensation (Rom, iii. 22-26;
1 Cor. v. 7; Eph. i. 7; v. 2; Heb. vii.-x.).
Peculiar to Paul aud the author of this epistle 1s
the phrase 6 6eds ris eiphyns (Rom. xv. 33, &c. 5
Heb. xiii. 20); and both seem to have conceived
of the xapiouara under the aspect of Siaipecess
and pepicpol mvetuaros (1 Cor. xii. 4; Heb.
ii. 4). It is worthy of remark also that the mo-
mentous question of a man’s personal acceptance
with God is answered in this epistle in the same
pecnliar way ag in the acksiaiedged Epistles of
Pani. All is made to depend upon the indi-
yidual’s exercising what both Paul and the author
of this epistle call wiors, and which they both
represent as a realizing apprehension of the facts,
and truths, and promises of revelation.* By both


*® Bleck and Tholuck have both endeavoured
to show that the alors of the Epistle to the
Hebrews is not the same as the xiotis of Paul's
acknowledged writings, but with singular want
of success in our view. Tholuck’s chief argu-
ment, and which he urges as of more weight than
any Bleek has advanced, is, that the writer has
not here contrasted ydyos aud alors, the épya
yduou, and the épya wiorews, as Paul would have
done. But how can this be said when the
great lesson of the epistle is, that altcays, even
under the law itself, rlotis was the medium of


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE. 820


also the power of this xlaris is frequently referred
to and illustrated by the example of those who
had distinguished themselves in the annals of the
Jewish race (comp. Rom. iii. 4; v. 2; Heb. iii. 63
Gal. iii. 5-14; Heb. x. 38; xi. 40). On all
these papts the sentiments of this epistte are so
obviously Pauline, that not only did Origen re-
mark that it contained 7&4 vohuara MavAov, but
even the most decided opponents of its Pauline
authorship in recent times have laid it down as
undeniable that it must have been written by
sume companion and disciple of Paul. 2. Some
of the figures and allusions employed in this
epistle are strictly Pauline. Thus the word of
God is compared to a stwoord (Eph. vi. 17; Heb.
iv. 12); inexperienced Christians are children
who need mi/‘, and must be instructed in the
elements, whilst those of maturer attainments are
full-grown men who require strong meat (1 Cor.
iii, 1, 23; xiv. 203 Gal. iv. 9; Col. iii. 14; Heb.
v. 12,13; vi. 1); redemption through Christ is
an introduction and an entrance with confidence
unto God (Rom. v. 2; Eph. ii. 18; ini. 125
Heb. x. 19); afflictions are a contest or strife
ayov (Phil. i. 30; Col. ii. 1; Heb. x. 32); the
Christian life is a race (1 Cor. ix. 245; Phil. iii.
14; Heb. xii. 1); the Jewish ritual is a Aatpela
(Rom. ix. 4; Heb. ix. 1, $5 @ person under
the constraint of some unworthy feeling or prin-
ciple is &voxos 8ovacias (Gal. v. 1; Heb. ii. 15),
&c. The fact that these and other such like
figurative phrases occur only in this epistle and
in the acknowledged Epistles of Paul, atlords
strong evidence that the former is his production,
for in nothing does a writer more readily betray
himself than by the use of peculiar and favourite
figures. 3. Certain marked characteristics of
Paul's style are found in this epistle. This de-
patents of the internal evidence has, more, per-

aps, than any other, been canvassed by recent
critics, and in some cases opposite conclusions
have been drawn from the same phenomena.
Thus the occurrence of Gag Acyoueva in this
epistle has been adduced by the German scholars
against the Pauline orizin of it, whilst Stuart and
Forster have both rested on this part as strongly
in favour of that conclusion ; and as it appears
to us with justice, for if it be made out from
Paul's acknowledged writings that the use of
unusual words is a characteristic of his style
(and this has been placed by ¢hese writers beyond
all question), it is obvious that the occurrence of
the same characteristic in this epistle, su far froma
being an argument against, is, as far as it goes,
an argument for our ascribing it to Puul. On
arguments, however, based on such minute phe-
nomena, we are not disposed to rest much weight
on either side. Every person must be aware that
an author's use of words is greatly modified by
the circumstances uuder which he writes or the
design. he has in writing; and the literature of
every country presents us with numerous cases of
authors, whose works, written at different periods,
and with different designs, present far greater
diversities of expression than any which have
been pointed out between the Epistle to the He-
brews and the acknowledged Epistles of Paal.
Hence cautious critics have declined to rest


acceptance and the channel of divine blessing
to men?


830 HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


much in questions of literary parentage upon
what Bentley calls (Dissert. on Phalaris, p. 19,
Lond. 1699) ¢ censures that are made from stile
and language alone,’ and which, he adds, ‘are
commonly nice and uncertain, and depend upon
slender notices.” Apart, however, ffm such
minute niceties, there are certain marked pecu-
liarities of style which attach to particular writers,
and flow so directly from the character of their
genius or education, that they can hardly express
themselves in discourse without introducing them.
Now such peculiarities the writings of Paul pre-
sent, and the occurrence of them has always been
felt to atlord no small evidence of the authenticity
of any production claiming to be his in which they
are found, Paley, in enumerating these (Hore
Pauling), has laid stress chietly on the following:
A disposition to the frequent use of a word, which
cleaves as it were to the memory of the writer, so
‘as to become a sort of cant word in his writings ;
& propensity ‘to go off at a word,’ aud enter upon
a@ parenthetic series of remarks suggested by that
word ; and a fondness for the paronomasia, or play
upon words. In the Epistle to the Hebrews these
peculiarities of Paul's style are richly exemplitied ;
an evidence in favour of its Panline origin which
can never be enfeebled by adducing words, phrases,
or features of style peculiar to this epistle, unless
it can be first shown that it was impossible tor
Paul to have used such. 4. There is a striking
analogy between Paul's use of the Old Testament
and that made by the writer of this epistle. Both
make frequent appeals to the Old Testament ;
both are in the habit of accumulating passages
from different parts of the Old Testament, and
making them bear on the point under discussion
(comp. Rom. iii. 10-18; 1x. 7-33, &c.; Heb. i.
5-145 iii; x. 5-17); both are fond of linking
quotations together by means of the expression
kal xdaw (comp. Rom. xv. 9-12; 1 Cor. iii, 19,
20; Heb. i. 5; ii, 12, 13; iv. 45 x. 30); both
make use of the same passaves, and that occa-
sionally in a seuse not naturally suggested by the
context whence they are quoted (1 Cor. xv. 27;
Eph. i. 22; Heb. ii. 8; Rom. i. 17; Gal. iii. 11;
Heb. x. 38); and both, in one instance, quote the
same passaye in the same way, but in a form in
which it does not agree with the Sept. and with
an addition of the words Aéyer kipios, not found
in the Hebrew; thereby indicating that the pas-
sage is given in both instances as it was present
to the memory of one and the same writer (comp.
Rom. xii. 19; Heb. x. 30). On the other hand,
great stress has been laid by the opponents of the
Pauline origin of this epistle on the fact, that
whilst Paul in his acknowledged writings quotes
from the Hebrew original in preference tu the
Sept. where the latter differs from the former,
the author of this epistle quotes exclusively from
the Sept., even when it departs very widely from
the Hebrew. To this it may be replied: Ist,
That both Paul and the author of this epistle
quote generally from the Sept.; 2ndly, That
where the Sept. differs from the Hebrew, Paul
does not altcays follow the Hebrew in preference
to the Sept. (comp. Rom. ii. 245 x. 11-18: xi.
27; xv. 12; 1 Cor. i. 19, &c.); and, 3rdly, That
the writer of this epistle does not altays follow
the Sept. where it differs from the Hebrew, but
occasionally deserts the former for the latter (¢. gr.
x. 30; xiii. 5). These is no ground, therefore,


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


for this objection to the Pauline origin of this
epistle. In fine: The Epistle to the Hebrews
contains some personal allusions on the part of
the writer which strongly favour the supposition
that he was Paul. These are the meution of his
intention to pay those to whom he was writing a
visit speedily, in company with Timothy, whem
he affectionately styles ‘our brother, and whom
he describes as having been set at liberty, and
expected soun to join the writer (Heb. xiit. 23);
the allusion to his being in a state of imprison-
ment at the time of writing, as well as of his
having partaken of their sympathy while formerly
in a state of bondage among them (Heb. xiii. 19;
x. 34); and the transmission to them of a saluta-
tion from the believers in Italy (Heb. xiii. 24);
all of which agree well with the supposition
that Paul wrote this epistle while a prisouer at
Rome.

Sueh is an outline of the internal evidence
furnished by this epistle of its Pauline origin.
Let us now glance at the main objections which
fagm various sources have been urged against it.

“lL. It is unaccountable that Paul, had he writ-
ten this epistle, should have withheld his name.
But is it less unaccountable that Clement, or
Apollos, or Luke, had any of them been the
author, should have withheld his name? Might
not Paul write anonymously as well as any other
man? Why he should have done so in this case
we admit our inability to say satisfactorily ; the
only apparent reason, as far as we have been able
to see, being the more rhetorical character of the
production, which might induce the author +o
waive the usual form of epistolary address. But
our inability to assign the reason why this work
should have been issued anonymously cannot
surely be held to be an argument against iu
authenticity, else it would be impossible to esta-
blish the authenticity of any anonymous produc-
tion unless we could satisfactorily show what
were the author's reasons for withholding his
name—a thing which in five casea out of six it
is impossible to do. 2. * This epistle is more
calmly and logically written than it was possible
fur the energetic Panl to have written; all the
analogies between Judaism and Christianity are
calmly investigated and calmly adduced; the
materials are arranged in the strictest order, and
carefully wrought ont according to this disposi-
tion, and couclusion follows conclusion with the
greatest regularity; the language also is rotund
and choice, and the representation unusually
clear. All this is unlike Paul’ (Eichhorm, Etn/eit.
iii, 459). It will perhaps surprise our readers to
find the author of the Epistle to the Romans pro-
nounced so utterly incapable of calm, connected,
and logical reasoning, that it is inconceivable he
should have written the Epistle to the Hebrews.
If there be one thing for which Paul's writings
are more remarkable than another, it is their
dialectic accuracy; and as for calmness, whilst
we admit that as a whole there is less of ardour
and vehemence in this epistle than in the majority
of Paul's acknowledged epistles, we think this is
to be ascribed to the fact that a large portion of
it is occupied with remarks of an explanatory
and illustrative kind—remarks which are usually
made in a calmer tone than where the desicn of
the writer is to expose error, or to exhort to duty ;
and, on the other hand, we would assert that in


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


those parts of the epistle where his subject calls
the writer to the utterance of reproof, warning, or
exhortation, the language is equally ardent with
that used in any analogous passages in the writ-
ings of Paul. This brings us to the closing part
of Eichhorn’s objection, which relates to the use
in this epistle of a more rotund, elegant, and per-
spicuous style than we find usually in the epistles
of Paul. Now it must be admitted here that this
composition does partake much more of the cha-
racter of a flowing, continuous discourse, than is
found in the apostle’s acknowledged productions.
The question, however, is not, Whether Paul
might not for some sufficient reason prefer at-
tempting such a discourse in this particular case ?
a question which it would surely be absurd to
discuss; but, Whether, supposing him to make
the attempt, it is conceivable that he should suc-
ceed in it to the extent realized by the writer of
this epistle? Eichhorn concludes in the negative;
but on what grounds? Apparently on the grounds
that the apostle’s acknowledged writings present
no specimens of such success; so that his argu-
ment is this: Supposing Paul to have attempted
to write rhetorically, it is impossible he should
have succeeded so well, because we find that,
where he makes no such attempt, his style is far
from being rhetorical! Of such reasoning we ar

content to say, ‘ Valeat quantum valere potest.

We may also hint that, in our opinion, there is no
passage in the Epistle to the Hebrews, imposing
as it is, which might not have flowed from the
same pen which composed the 8th chapter of
Romans, and the 13th of Ist Corinthians.—3,
* Whilst we occasionally meet Pauline termini,
we find precisely in the leading ideas of the
epistle a terminology different from that of Paul ’
(Tholuck, i. 39, Eng. transl.). The instances spe-
cified by Dr. Tholuck are the use of fepeds, roruhy,
and dzdoroAos, as desiznations of Christ; of duo-
Aoyia, which he says is confined to this epistle;
of eyyiCew 1G OeG 5 and of TeAciodv, with its de-
rivatives in the sense in which it is used Heb.
vii. 19. Now, with regard to this objection, it
may be observed, Ist, That supposing all the in-
stances adduced by Tholuck to be unimpeachable,
and supposing no reason could be assigned why
Paul should use such in writing to Hebrews,
when he did not use them in writing to others,
still the objection cannot have much weight with
any person accustomed to weigh evidence, because
not only is the number of Pauline termini found
in this epistle far greater than the number of ter-
mini which, according to Tholuck, are ‘ foreign
to the apostle to the Gentiles;’ but it is always
less likely ghat the peculiar phrases of a writer
should be borrowed by another, than that a writer
noted for the use of peculiar words and phrases
should, in a composition of a character somewhat
different trom his other productions, use terms not
found elsewhere in his writings, But, 2ndly, let
us examine the instances adduced by Tholuck,
and see whether they bear out his reasoning.
© Paul nowhere calls Christ priest.” Trne; but
though Paul, in writing to churches composed
more or less of Gentile converts, whuse previous
ideas of priests and priestly rites were anything
but favourable to their receiving under sacerdotal
terms right notions of Christ and his work, never
calls Christ a priest, is that any reason for our
eoncluding that in writing to Jews, who had


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE. 881


amongst them a priesthood of divine organization,
and writing for the express purpose of showing
that that priesthood was typical of Christ, it is
inconceivable that the apostle should have applied
the term priest to Christ? To us the difficulty
would rather seem to be to conceive how, in
handling such a topic, he could avoid calling
Christ a priest.—‘ Paul nowhere calls Christ a
shepherd and an apvstle, as the writer of this
epistle does.’ But the whole weight of this
objection to the Pauline origin of this epietle
must rest on the assumption that Paul never uses
figurative appellations of Christ in his writings;

for if he do, why not here as well as elsewhere ?
Now it could only be the grossest unacquainted -

ness with the apostle's writings which could lead

any to affirm this. The very opposite tendency

is characteristic of them. Thus we find Christ

termed réAos vdéuov (Rom. x. 4), 3ideovoy wepi-
Tous (xv. 18), 73 wdoxa judy (1 Cor. v. 7), 4

mérpa (x. 4), amapyh (xv. 23), év) avdol (2 Cor. ii.

2), dxpoywralov (pli. ii. 20), &c. With these

instances before us, why should it he deemed so

utterly incredible that Paul could have called

Christ axdorodos and romjy, that the occurrence

of such terms in tise epistle before us is to be held

as a reason for adjudging it not to have been writ-

ten by him? With regard to the use of duoAoyla

in the sense of religious profession, the reader

may compare the passages in which it occurs in

this epistle with Rom. x. 9; 2Cor. ix.13; 1 Tim.

vi. 12, and judge for himself how far such a usage

is foreign to the apostle. The phrase éyyi(ew 7G

6e@ occurs once in this epistle (vii. 19), and once

in the Epistle of James; Paul also once uses the

verb actively (Phil. ii. 30); and, on the other hand,

the author of this epistle once uses it intransi-

tively (x. 25). As there is thus a perfect analogy

in the usage of the verb between the two, why it

should be supposed improbable that Paul should

use it in reference to God, or why a phrase used

by James should be deemed too Alexandrian to

be used by Paul, we feel ourselves utterly ata

loss to conceive. With regard to the use of
tedeodv, Dr. Tholuck himself contends (Appen-

diz, ii, 297) that it everywhere in this epistle

retains the idea of completing; but he cannot

understand how Paul could have contemplated

the work of redemption under this term in this

epistle, since in no other of his epistles is it go -
used. This difficulty of the learned professor

may, we think, be very easily removed, by re-

marking that it does not appear to have been

Paul's design elsewhere, sv fully at least as here,

to represent the superiority of Christianity over

Judaism, as that arises from the former being suffi-

cient, whilst the latter was not sufficient, to complete

men in a religious point of view, 7. e. to supply

to them all they need, and advance them to all
of which they are capable. That this is the theme
of the writer the passages in which the word in

question occurs show ; and we see no reason why
such an idea might not have occurred to Paul as
well as to any other man.

Such are the objections on which the more re-
cent impugners of the Pauline authorship of this
epiatle seem inclined to lay most stress. A mul
titude of others have been urged by Bertholdt,
Schulz, Seyffarth, &c., which have been carefully
noticed and replied to by Stuart, but which it is
unnecessary to adduce here, as their futility seems


832 HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


very generally admitted even by those who take
the anti-Pauline side.

It appears, therefore, that from the epistle itself
nothing can be gathered materially untavourable
to the opinion that Paul was its author, whilst
there is much in it strongly tending to support
that opinion. It yet remains that we should look
at the external evidence bearing on this question.
Here we shall find the same conclusion still more
decisively supported.

Passing by, as somewhat uncertain, the alleged
testimony of Peter, who is supposed (2 Pet. ili,
15, 16) to refer to the Epistle to the Hebrews as
the composition of Paul, and passing by, also, the
testimonies of the apostolic fathers, which, though
very decisive as to the antiquity and canonical
authority of this epistle (see Forster's Znguiry,
$13), yet say nothing to guide us to the author,
we come ty the testimuny of the Eastern church
upon this subject. Here we meet the important
fact, that of the Greek fathers not one ascribes this
epistle to any but Paul. Pantamus (ap. Euseb.
Hist. Eccles. vi. 14), in the second century,
ascribes it to the apostle; and so does Clement of
Alexandria (ibid., Stromat. vi. 615, et sepe).
Origen (ap. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. vi.15), in affirming
that the Pauline authorship of this cpistle was in
his day matter of ancient tradition, assents to the
truth of this opinion, and in noticing what he
thinks the un-Pauline features of the style, men-
tions that a report was extant to tif eflect that,
whilst the ideas were Paul's, the words were those
of Clement of Rome or of Luke; though, so far
from regarding this as certain, he says that ‘God
knows who was the writer (7. ¢., as the context
shows, the amanuensis) of this epistle.” Eusebius,
whilst he places this epistle among the évr:Acyd-
peva, knowing that in the church at Rome its
claims had been questioned, nevertheless often
quotes it as Paul's (see the passages in Lardner’s
Credibility; Works, iv. 249, ed. 1788), and in-
cludes. it as received by the church generally
among the Pauline epistles (ist. Eccles. iii. 25),
A number of other testimonies from the Eastern
church may be found in Lardner (vol. vi. p. 391),
fully justifying the assertion above made. Jerome
also assures us (Ep. ad Dardanum) that it was
received as Paul's by all the Greek writers. Nor
does it appear that in any part of the Eastern
church the Pauline origin of this epistle was ever
doubted or suspected (comp. Olshausen, Opuse.
Theolog. p. 95).

In the Western church this epistle did not
meet with the same early and universal reception,
Notwithstanding the regard shown for it by Cle-
ment, the church at Rome seems to have placed
it under a ban (comp. Euseb. Hist. Eccles. iii. 3;
vi. 20, see Heinichen’s note); and hence Tertul-
lian ascribed it to Barnabgs, and others to Luke
and Clement, whilst no Latin writer is found
during the tirst three centuries who ascribed it to

' Paul. In the middle of the fourth century,
Hilary of Poictiers quotes it as Paul's; and from
that time the opinion seems to have gained ground
till the commencement of the fifth century, when
it speedily became as general in the Western as it
had been in the Eastern churches (Lardner, vol. vi.

. 393). Now, of what value is this state of opinion
in the early churches of the West in the question
of evidence now beture us? To judge of this, we
must bear in mind that the sole amount of evi-


HEBREWS, EPISTLE TO THE.


dence arising from the testimony of the Latin
churches is negative; all we can conclude from
it, at the most, is that they had no sufticient evi-
dence in favour of this epistle being Pauls; they
do not seem to have had a shadow of hi-torical
evidence against its being his, The claims of
Barnabas, Clement, and Luke, rest ujxn mere
individual conjecture, and have no historical sup-
port. Supposing, then, that the rejection of this
epistle by the Latins cannut be accounted for by
circumstances peculiar to them, still this fact
cannot diminisi the weight of evidence accruing
from the unanimity of the Greeks and Asiatics.
Had the Latins been as unanimous in favour of
Apollos or Clement as the Eastern churches were
in favour of Paul, the case would have been dif-
ferent. The value of Paul’s claims would in
that case have been equal to the difference be-
tween the value of the Eastern tradition and the
value of the Western. This would have fur-
nished a somewhat puzzling problem; thougs
even in that case the superiority of the Easiein
witnesses to the Western would have materially
advocated the claims of the apostle. As the cas?
stands, al/ the positive evidence extant is in favour
of the Pauline authorship of this epistle ; and the
only thing against it is that in the Latin churel.ca
there appears to have been no commonly received
tradition on the subject. Under such circum-
stances, the claims of the apostle are entitied to
be regarded as fully substantiated by the external
evidence.

The result of the previous inquiry may te
thus stated. 1. There is no substantial evideuce
external or internal in favour of any claimait
to the authorship of this epistle except Paul.
2. There is nothing incompatible with tue suppe-
sition that Paul was the author of it. 3. The
preponderance of the internal, and all the direct
external, evidence, go to show that it was written
by Paul.

Assuming the Pauline authorship of the cpistle,
it is not difficult to determine when and there
it was written. The allusions in ch. xiii. 19, 21,
point to the closing period of the apostle’s two
years imprisonment at Rome as the season during
‘the serene hours’ of which, as Hug describes
them (Jufrod. p. 603), he composed this noblest
production of his pen. In this opinion almost all
who receive the epistle as Paul's concur; and


“even by those who do not 80 receive it, nearly the


same time is fixed upon, in consequence of the
evidence furnished by the epistle itself of its hav-
ing been written a good while after those to whom
itis addressed had become Christians, but yet
before the destruction of the Temple.

That the parties to whom this epistle was ad-
dressed were converted Jews, the epistle itself
plainly shows. Ancient tradition points out the
church at Jerusalem, or the Christians in Pales-
tine generally, as the recipients. Stuart coiutends
for the church at Ciesarea, not without some show
of reason.

An early opinion that the epistle was first
written in Hebrew or Aramaic, and then trans-
lated into Greek, has found in Michaelis a strenu-
ous defender (Introd. iv. p, 221). The argu-
ments he adduces, however, are more specious
than sound; and it has been abundantly shown
by Lardner, Hug, Eichhorn, and others, that this
opinion is untenable. Why Paul should have


‘HEBRON,


written in Greek to persons residing in Judaa is
best. answered by the reasons which Mug (dntrod.
p- 326, sqq.) and Diodati (De Christo Greece lo-
quente exercitatio, &c., edited by UO. T. Dobbin,
LL.B., Lond. 1643) have adduced, to show that
Greek was at that time well known to the mass of
the Jews (comp. Tholuck, i. 78).

Some have doubted whether this composition
be justly termed an epistle, and have proposed to
regard it rather as ua treatise. The salutations,
however, at the cluse, seem rather to favour the
common opinion; though it is of little moment
which view we espouse.

The design of this epistle is to dissuade those to
whom it is written from relapsing into Judaism,
and to exhort them to hold fast the truths of
Christianity which they had received. For this
Piurpove the apostle shuws the superiority of the
atter over the former, in that it was introduced


salvation to the sinner than the, furmer Sea


and sacrilices were far inferior to those of Christ,
who was the substance and reality, whilst these
were but the type and shadow. He shows, also,
that by the appearance of the anti-type the type
is necessarily abolished; and adduces the im-
portant truth, that now, through Christ, the privi-
lee of personal access to God is free to all. On
all this he founds an exhortation to a life of faith
and obedience, and shows that it bas ever been
only by a spiritual recognition and worship of
God that good men have participated in his
favour (xi.). The epistle concludes, as is usual
with Paul, with a series of practical exhortations
and pious wishes (xii.-xiii.), ¥

Of Commentaries on this epistle the following
may be enumerated as ranking among the best.
Owen's Exposition of the Epistle to the Hebrews,
with preliminary exrercitations, 4 vols. folio,
Lond. 1068-84; Maclean’s Paraphrase and
Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebreus,
2 vols, Svo., Lond. 1819; Stuart's Commentary
on the Epistle to the Hebrews, 2 vols. 8vo0,
Lond. 1828; L vol. ibid. 1834; Carpzov, Sacre
Evereitt. in Pauli Ep. ad Heb. 8vo., Helmst.
1750; Storr, Pawi Brief. an d. Heb, erlantert,
Svo., Tiib. 1809; Ernesti, Lectiones Acadd. in
Ep. ad Heb. Svo., Lips. 1795; Bohme, Ep. ad
Ted, lat, vert. et comment, perpet. instrurit, &vo.,
Lips. 1825; Kuinoel, Comment. in Ep. ad eb.
Bvo., Lips. 19d13 Bleek, Der. Broan d. Lcd.
eridstert ug.wo. 2 bil, Berl. 1828-40. Tholuck,
Romnentar zum Br, an d. Heb. &vo., Hamb.
lo4U (2te. Autl.), translated into English by
James Hamilton, M.A., and J. E. Ryland, Esq.,
2 vols. s. 8vo., Edin. 1842.—W. L. A. ‘


HEBRON (]121); Sept. XeBpdy), a town in
the sonth of Palestine and in the tribe of Judah,
18 miles south trom Jerusalem, in 31° 32/ 30"N,
lat., 35° 8’ 20/ K. long. at the heizht of 26@@¢
Paris feet above the level of the sea (Schubert).
It is one of the most ancient cities existing, having,
as the sacred writer informs us, been built ‘seven
years before Zoan in Egypt,’ and being men-
tioned even prior to Damascus (Num. xiii. 22;


HEBRON. 833


Gen. xiii. 18; comp. xv. 2). Its most ancient
name was Kirjath-arba, that is, ‘the city of Arba,’
from Arba, the father of Anak and of the Anakim
who dwelt in and around Hebron (Gen, xxiii. 2;
Josh. xiv. 15; xv. 35 xxi, 11; Judy. i. 10). It
appears to have been also called Mamre, probably
from the name of Abraham's Amoritish ally
(Gen, xxiii, 19; xxxv. 27; comp. xiv. 13, 2S).
The ancient city lay in a valley; and the two
remaining pools, one of which at least existed in
the time of David, serve, with other circum-
stances, to identify the modern with the ancient
site (Gen. xxxvil. 14; 2 Sam. iv. 12). Much
of the life-time of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
was spent in this neighbourhood, where they
were all entombed; and it was from hence that
the patriarchal family departed for Egypt by the
way of Beersheba (Gen. xxxvii. 14; xlvi. 1).
After the return of the Israelites, the city was
taken by Joshua and given over to Caleb, who
expelled the Anakim from its territories (Josh. x.
36, 37; xiv. 6-15; xv. 13-14; Judg. i. 20). It
was afterwards made one of the cities of refuge,
and assigned to the priests and Levites (Josh. xx.
7; xxi. 11, 13). David, on becoming king of
Judah, made Hebron his royal residence. Here
he reigned seven years and a half; here most of
his sons were born; and here he was anointed king


.over all Israel (1 Sam. ii. 1-4, 115; 1 Kings ii.


11; 2 Sam, v. 1, 3). On this extension of his
kingdom Hebron ceased to be sufficiently central,
and Jerusalem then became the metropolis. It
is possible that this step excited a degree of discon-
tent in Hebron which afterwards encouraged Ab-
salom to raise in that city the standard of rebellion
against his father (2 Kings xv. 9, 10). Hebron was
one of the places fortified by Rehobuam (2 Chron.
xi. Y) 3; and after the exile the Jews who returned —
to Palestine occupied Hebron and the surround-
ing villages (Neh. xi. 15).

Hebron is not named by the prophets, nor in
the New Testament; but we learn from the first
book of Maccabees, and from Josephus, that it
came into the power of the Edomites, who had
taken possession of the south of Judah, and was
recovered trom them by Judas Maccabwus
(1 Macc. v. 65; Joseph. Antig. xii. 8.6). Dur-
ing the great war, Hebron was seized by the rebel
Simon Giorides, but was re-captured and burnt
by Cerealis, an officer of Vespasian (Joseph. De
Bell, Jud. iv. 9; vii. 9). Josephus describes the
tombs of the patriarchs as existing in his day;
and both Eusebius and Jerome, and all subse-
quent writers who mention Hebron down to the
time of the Crusades, speak of the place chiefly
as containing these sepulchres, In the course
of time the remarkable structure euclosing the
tombs of Abraham aud the other patriarchs was
called the ‘ Castle of Abraham; and Ly an
easy transition this name came to be applied
to the city itself; till in the time of the Crusades
the names of Hebron and Castle of Abraham were
used interchangeably. Hence, as Abrahain is
also distinguished among the Moslems by the
appellation of ed Ahudil, + the Friend’ (of God),
this latter epithet became, among them, the name
of the city ; and they now know Hebron only as
el Khulil (Robinson's Researches, ii. 456).

Svon after the Crusaders bad taken Jerusalem,
Hebron also appears to have passed into their
hands, and, in 1190, was nenowed = a fief

a


34 HEBRON.
upon Gerhard of Avennes; but two years after


it is described as being in ruins (Wilken, Gesch. .


der Krus. ii. 44; Saewulf, Percgrin. p. 269).
In 1167 Hebron was raised to the rank of a
bishopric, and the title of bishop of Hebron long
remained in the Romish church; for it occurs so
late as a.v. 1365. But it was merely nominal; for
after the capture of Jerusalem by Saladin in 1187,
Hebron also reverted to the Moslems, and has ever
since remained in their possession. In the modern
history of Hebron the most remarkable circum-
stance is the part which the inhabitants of the
town and district took in the rebellion of 1834,
and the heavy retribution which it brought down
upon them. They held out to the last, and
gave battle to Ibrahim Pasha near Sulomon’s
Pools. They were defeated; but retired and en-
trenched themselves in Hebron, which Ibrahim
carried by storm, and gave over to sack and pil-
lage. The town has not yet recovered frum the
blow it then sustained.

In the fourteenth century pilgrims passed from
Sinai to Jerusalem direct through the desert by
Beersheba and Hebron. In the following cen-
tury this route seems to have been abandoned for
that by Gaza; yet the pilgrims sometimes took
Hebron in their way, or visited it from Gaza.
The travellers of that period describe as existing
here an immense charitable establishment, or hos-
pital, where 1200 loaves of bread, besides oil and
other condiments, were daily distributed to all
comers, without distinction of age or religion, at
the annual expense of 20,000 ducats.

Hebron continued to be occasionally visited
by European travellers down to the latter part of
the seventeenth century; but from that time till
the present century it appears to have been
little frequented by them. The principal tra-
vellers who have been more recently there are
Seetzen, Ali Bey, Irby and Mangles, Poujoulat,
Monro, Stephens, Paxton, Lord Lindsay, Rus-
segger, Schubert, Dr. Robinson, and Dr. Olin.

The town of Hebron lies low down on the
sloping sides of a narrow valley (of Mamre),
chielly on the eastern side, but in the southern
part stretches across also to the western side.
The houses are al) of stone, high and well built,
with windows and flat roofs, and on these roofs
are small domes, sometimes two or three to each
nouse. This mode of building seemed to Dr.
Robinson peculiar to Judiva, as he had not ob-
served it further north than Nabulus. It is,
however, common in the countries farther east,
where wood is scarce. The strects are narrow,
seldom more than two or three yards in width;
the pavement, where one exists, is rough and
difficult. The bazaars are to a considerable
extent covered, either by some kind of awning,
or by arches springing from the tops of the houses
and spanning the street. The goods in them
are thus secured from the eflects of the sun and
rain, but the strects are rendered gloomy as well
as damp. The shops are well furnished, better
indeed than those of towns of the same class in
Egypt, and the commodities are of a very similar
description. The only display of local manu-
factures is the produce of the glass-works, for
which the place has long been celebrated in these
parts. The articles manufactured consist almost
exclusively of glass lamps, many of which are
exported to Egypt, and rings of coloured glass


HEBRON.


worn by females on the arms. Gates are placed
not only at the entrance of the city, but in dif.
ferent parts of the interior, and are closed at
night for the better preservation of order, as we!l as
to prevent communication between the different
quarters. This is a rude contrivance much re
sorted to in Eastern towns from the want of an
efficient ambulatory night-watch.

There are nine mosques in Hebron, none of
which possess any architectural or other interest,
with the exception of the massive structure which
is built over the tombs of the patriarchs. This
is esteemed by the Moslems one of their holiest
places, and Christians are rigorously excluded
from it. The only Europeans who have found
their way to the interior are Ali Bey and Gio
vanni Finati, the Italian servant of Mr. Bankes.
The best account of it, from whatever source de
rived, is that furnished by the Rev. V. Monro, who
States that ‘the mosque, which covers the cave
of Machpelah, and contains the patriarchal tombs,
is a square building with little external deco-
ration, at the south end of the town. Behind it
is a small cupola, with eight or ten windows,
beneath which ie the tomb of Esau, excluded
from the privilege of lying among the patriarchs.
Ascending from the street, at the comer of the
mosque, you pass through an arched wag by a
flight of steps to a wide platform, at the end of
which is another short ascent; to the left is the
court, out of which, to the left again, you enter
the mosque. The dimensions within are about
forty paces by twenty-five. Immediately on the
right of the door is the tomb of Sarah, and
beyond it that of Abraham, having a passage
between them into’ the court. Corresponding
with these, on the opposite side of the mosque, are
those of Isaac and Rebekah, and behind them
is a recess for prayer, and a pulpit. These tombs
resemble small huts, with a window an each
sigle and folding-doors in front, the lower parts of
which are of wood, and the upper of iron or
bronze bars plated. Within each of these is an
imitation of the sarcophagus which lies in the
cave below the mosque, which no one is allowed
to enter. Those seen above resemble coftins with
pone tops, and are covered with green silk,
lettered with verses from the Koran. The doors
of these tombs are Jeft constantly open; but no
one enters those of the women—at least, men do
not. In the mosque is a baldakin, supported by
four colimus, over an octagonal figure of black
and white marble inlaid, around a small hole in
the pavement, through which a chain passes trom
the top‘of the canopy to a lamp continually
buming to give light in the cave of Machyelah,
where the actual sarcophagi rest. At the upper
end of the court is the chief place of prayer; and
on the opposite side of the mosque are two larger
tombs, where are deposited the bodies of Jacob
and Leah’ (Summer's Ramble, i. 245). The
cave itself he dyes not describe, nor does it
appear that even Moslems are admitted to it;
for Ali Bey (a Spaniard travelling as a Moslem)
does not even mention the cave below while
describing the shrines of the masque. John San-
derson (a.p. 1601) expressly says that none migkt
enter, but that persons might view it, as far as the
lamp allowed, through the hole at the top, Mosleme
being furnished with more light for the purpose
than Jews, Atan earlier period, however, when the


HEBRON.


Holy Land was in the power of the Christians,
access was not denied ; and Benjamin of Tudela


says that the sarcophagi above ground were shown _


to the generality of pilgrims as what they de-
sired to see; Lut if a rich Jew offered an addi-
tional fee, ‘an iron door is opened, which dates
from the time of our forefathers who rest in peace,
and with a burning taper in his hands the visitor
descends into a first cave, Which is empty, tra-
verses a second in the same state, and at last
reaches a third, which contains six sepulchres,
those of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of
Sarah, Rebekah, and Leah, one opposite the
other. All these sepulchres bear inscriptions,
the letters being engraved; thus upon that of
Abraham: “ This is the sepulchre of our father
Abraham, upon whom be peace ;” even so upon
that of Isaac and all the other sepulchres. A
lamp bums in the cave and upon the sepulchres
continually, both night and day; and you there
see tubs filled with the bones of Israelites; for it
is a custom of the house of Israel to bring hither
the bones and relics of their forefathers, and
leave them there, unto this day’ (éénerary, i. 77;
ed. Asher, Berlin, 1840). The identity of this
place with the cave of Machpelah is one of the
few local traditions in Palestine which even Dr.
Robinson suflers to pass without dispute, and may
therefore he taken for granted.

The court in which the mosque stands is sur-
rounded by an extensive and lofty wall, formed
of large stones, and strengthened by square but-
tresses. This wall is the greatest antiquity in
Hebron, and even Dr. Robinson supposes that
it may be substantially the same which is men-
tioned by Josephus (Antig. 1.414; De Bell. Jud.
iv. 9.7), and by Eusebius and Jerome (Oxomase.
8. v. Arboch) as the sepulchre of Abraham. The
enclosed structure is usually ascribed to the em-

ress Helena; but Dr. Robinson thinks it more
ikely to have been erected by the Crusaders, and
that till their time no building existed within the
great wall. If, however, we rightly umdlerstand
the Rabbi Benjamin, he says there was a syna-
gogue here under the Moslems (before the Cru-
sades) ; but he certainly ascribes to the Gentiles
(Christians) the six sepulchres which appear
above ground. If this were so, they have since
been renewed by the Moslems, as those which
now exist are, as described, quite similur tu the
Moslem shrines of Jewish saints wiich the pre-
sent writer has seen in countries where Christians
never had power. A common Moslem tomb in
the neighbourhood of Hebron passes as the tomb
of Abner. He was certainly interred in this city
(2 Sam. iii. 32) ; and the head of Ishbosheth, after
his assassination, was deposited in the same se-
pul@re (2 Sam. iv. 12); but there is slight evi-
dence in favour of the tradition which professes
to point out this locality to the modern traveller,

Besides this venerable wall, there is nothing at
Hebron bearing the stamp of antiquity, save two
reservoirs for rain water outside the town. One
of these is just without the southern gate in the
bottom of the valley. It is a large basin, 133 fvet
square, and 21 feet 8 inches deep. It is built
with hewn limestone of very solid workmanship,
and obviously of ancient date. The depth of
water of course varies at different times of the
year: in May, it is 14 feet. The descent is by
flights of stens at the four corners, by which the


HEDUOSMON. 833


water is brought up in vessels and skins, and
poured out into troughs fur the flocks, or carried
away for domestic uses. Just at the north end of
the main part of the town is anothér and smaller
pool, also occupying the bed of the valley, and
measuring 85 feet by 55, with a depth of 184 feet,
containing (in May) 7 feet of water. hese cisterns,
which are connected with no perennial springs,
and which are filled only by the raina, seem (at
least in summer) to be the main dependence of
the inhabitants for water, although that of the
larger pool is neither clear nor clean. As these

ls are doubtless of high antiquity, one of them
is in all likelihood the ‘pool of Hebron’ over
which David hanged up the assassins of Ishbosheth
(2 Sam. iv. 12).

The present population of Hebron has not been
clearly ascertained. Monro heard it called 10,000,
but thought half that number more probable.
Dr. Robinson, however, was inclined to receive the «
larger number ; but Dr. Olin was assured by the
resident Jewish chief rabbi that it did not exceed
4000 or 5000; and as the Jews at Hebron are
mostly Europeans, their information is of more
value than that of Asiatics, who have a singular
vacancy of ideas im numerical computations,
Mr. Stent also states the population at 5000, on
the authority of Bishop Alexander's chaplain at
Jerusalem (Egypt and Holy Land, ii. 113).
Most of the inhabitants are Moslems, of fierce
and intolerant character. There are no resident
Christians. The Jewsamount to about onelundred
families, mostly natives of different countries of
Europe, who have emigrated to this place fur the
purpose of having their bones laid near the se-
pulchres of their illustrious ancestors. They have
two synagogues and several schools. As usual,
they have a quarter of the city to themselves,
where the streets are narrow and filthy, and the
houses mean. In a few instances, however, they
are in tolerable repair and whitewashed—a cir-
cumstance which Dr. Olin judged peculiar to
Hebron, as he had not observed it elsewhere.

The environs of Hebron are very fertile. Vine
yards and plantations of fruit-trees, chiefly olive- :
trees, cover the valleys and arable grounds; while
the tops and sides of the hills, although stony, are
covered with rich pastures, which support a great
number of cattle, sleep, aud goats, constituting an
important branch of the industry and wealth of
Hebron. The hill country of Judah, of which it
is the capital, is indeed highly productive, and
under a paternal government would be capable of
sustaining a large population, That it did so
once, is manifest from the great number and ex-
tent of ruined terraces and dilapidated towns. It
is at present abandoned, and cultivation ceases at
the distance of two miles uorth of the town. The
hills then become covered with prickly and other
stunted trees, which furnish Bethlehem and other
villages with wood. See the various travellers
above named as having visited Hebron, and in
particular, Dr. Robin:on, Dr. Olin, Rev. V. Monro,
and Schubert.

HEDUOSMON (Gr. j8d¢ocpop, ¢. e. having
a sweet smell), translated mint, is mentioned in
Matt. xxiii. 23: ‘Woe unto you, Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye pay tithe of mint
and anise (properly didZ) and cummin, and have
omitted the weightier matters of the law;’ and,
again, in Luke xi. 42: ‘ But woe unto you, Pha-

. 32


996 HEDUOSMON.


risees! for ye tithe mint and rue, and all manner
of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of
God : these ought ye to have done, and not to
leave the other undone.’ All the plants mentioned
in the above passages belung to the smaller ones
cultivated in gardens in Europe, and which
usually come under the denomination of sweet
herbs. Lady Calcott inquires whether mint was
one of the bitter herbs which the Israelites ate with
the Paschal Lamb; and infers the probability of
its being so from our own practice of eating lamb
with mint sauce. Dr. Harris argues that mint,
anise, and cummin were not titled, and that the
Pharisees only paid tithes of these plants from an
overstraiued interpretation of the law. But, in the
article ANerHon (Di1t), it may be seen that
dill was tithed, and it is one of the herbs men-
tioned along with mint. The meaning, therefore,
seems to be, that the Pharisees, while, in con-
formity with the law, they paid these minute
tithes, neglected the most important moral duties,
—truth, justice, and mercy ; for it is added, ‘these
ought ye-to have done, and not to leave the other
undone.’


336, (Mentha sylvestris.)


The plant 73vocp0s or H3vocpoy, 80 called ‘ ab

* odoris bonitate vel jucunditate,’ was also called
iva and pivOos by the Greeks, and mentha, or
menta, by the Romans. The Arabs give minthee


aa the Greek synonyme of their ‘cael nana; and


in India, Persian works give podeena as the Hindee
name of the latter. Podeena is the common name
of a species of mint cultivated in the gardens
of North-Western India. These names are in-
teresting as occurring in works on Materia Me-
dica; because both were employed by early trans-
lators as the equivalent of *3docnor in the
above passages of Matthew and Luke; and all
European translators, according to Celsius, con-
cur in considering miné as intended. The spe-
cies most common in Syria is mentha sylvestris,
found by Russell at Aleppo, and mentioned by
him as one of the herbs cultivated in the gardens


HELBON.


there. It also occurs in Greece, Taurus, Cau
casus, the Altai Range, and as far as Cashmere,
whence we have ubtained specimens, Af. arvensis,
of which Af. sativa (Linn.) is one of the varieties,
is also a widely diffused species, being found in
Greece, in parts of Caucasus, in the Altai Range,
and in Cashmere. Mint is highly esteemed in
Eastern countries, and apparently was so also by
theJews. Celsius says, ‘Patet olus fuisse inJudza
quondam notum, et Judmis ob virtutes et prestan-
tiam singularem acceptissimum.’ It was much
esteemed by the ancients, as Pliny (Hist. Nat.
xix. 47) testities: ‘ Mente nomen suavitas odaris
apud Grecos mutavit, cum alioqui mintha voca-
retur: unde veteres nostri nomen declinaverunt.
Grato menta mensas odore percurrit in rusticis
dapibus ;" and again (xx. 53), ‘ Mentz ipsius odor
animum excitat et sapor aviditatem in cibis, ideo
embammatum mixture familiaris.’ Dioscorides
also (iii. 41) mentions it as useful to the stomach,
and peculiarly grateful as a condiment. Mint was
employed by the ancients in the preparation of
many dishes. ‘Hine in Apicii libro coquinario,
singulis fere paginis menthe tam viridis, quam
aride, mentio' (Cels. Hierobot. i. p. 546). ‘Sic
apud Ebreos in cibis receptam fuisse mentham ma-
nifeste tradunt Talmudici Tract. Shem. Ve Jobel,
vii. 2; et Tract. Oketzin, i.2; Shed. vii. 1. Unde
et olerum decimationi subjecta fuit’ (Ib. p. 517).

It is difficult to determine the exact species
or variety of mint employed by the ancients.
There are numerous species very nearly allied
to one another. They usually grow in moist
situations, and are herbaceous, perennial, of

werful odour, especially when bruised, and
lage small reddish-eoloured flowers, arranged in
spikes or whorls. The taste of these plants is
bitter, warm, and pungent, but leaving a sensation
of coulness on the tongue: in their properties they
are so similar to each otler, that either in medi-
cine, or as a condiment, one species may safely be
substituted for another. But the species M. sy/-,
vestris and M. arvensis, which have been men-
tioned above, probably yielded the varieties culti-
vated in Palestine.—J. F. R.

HEIFER, RED. (Sacririce.]

HEIR. [Binruriour; Inaeaitance.}


HELBON (fi29M ; Sept. XeaBerw), or Cuka-
BON, @ name which uccurs only in Ezek. xxvii.
18, where ‘the wine of Helbon’ is named among
the commodities brought to the great market of
Tyre. The Syriac, Symmachus, the Chaldee, and
Vulgate, all regard the word as an appellative
descriptive of the quality of the wine as ‘ pingue
vinum’ or ‘vinum dulce coctum.’ But it is
better to accept the indication of the Septuagint,
which, by giving the proper name XeAfov, nmist
be supposed to have had in view that old city of
Syria which appears under the form of Chalybon
(XadvBdr) in Ptolemy (Geog. v. 15) and Strabo
(xv. p. 505). The latter author mentions this
Chalybon as a place famous for wine; and in
describing the luxury of the kings of Persia, he
says they would have wheat brought from Assos
in /£vlia, Chalybonian wine out of Syria, and
water from the Euleus (the river Ulai of Dan.
viii. 2), which was the lightest of any. Athenzus

ats the fact of the kings of Persia drinking

y the Chalybonian wine (Sympos. i. 22).

Now, it is generally agreed that the ancient


HELBON.


Chalybon is ited by the modern :
At the present time, when the prohibitions of the
Moslem religion occasion much neglect in respect
to wines, we can merely judge by comparison of
the qualities of the ancient wines in these parts.
Thevenot, however, informs us that a strong wine
is made from the grapes of Aleppo (Travels, part
i, p. 25); and Russell (Nat. Hist. of Aleppo, i.
80) states that although the white wines are thin
and poor, and difficult to keep, the red wine,


\ ‘HELL. 837


which is deep-coloured, is strong and heady, and
more apt to produce drowsiness than to raise the
spirits. But one third of the white wine
mixed with two of the red produces a liquor tole-
rably Leyes and much lighter than the red
wine by itself. This wine is preferred by the
Eu who use it when the wines of Provence
(their usual beverage) happen to be scarce.
Aleppo, styled by the natives Haleb, is situ-
ated in N. Jat. 36° 11’ 25”, E. long. 37° 9’, and


337. [Aleppo.—Helbon.]


is seventy-six miles from the sea by way of Scan-
deroon, in a straight line, and ninety miles by way
of Antioch. It is one of the few ancient cities of
these parts which have retained their ancient im-
portance; and this it owes to its happy position
upon the line of the commercial intercourse of Asia

inor and Syria with Egypt, and of Europe and
Westernmost Asia with the countries beyond the
Euphrates. It seems to have risen to commercial
importance on the decline of Palmyra, to which
it succeeded. It is indeed remarkable that the
earliest mention ol the place, in Ezekiel, occurs in
a commercial connection, and in the same con-
nection it would probably be mentioned at the
present day. As the town is only once named,
an then only with reference to its wine, and as no
Biblical interest is attacked to it, we must refer to
general or geographical dictionaries for an account
of its history and present condition. It psay suf-
fice to indicate that it has long ranked as the
capital of Syria, and as the third, if not the second
city uf the Ottoman empire. It has suffered dread-
fully from earthquakes at different times, and has
never recovered the terrible visitation of this kind
which it sustained in 1822: the population,
which was formerly reckoned above 200,000,
is uot supposed to reach half that number at
present.


HELIOPOLIS. [Oy.]


HELL. Much that belongs to this subject »
has already been considered under the head
Haves. It is there shown that hell is repre-
sented by the word Dytt¥ (Sheol) in the Old
and by &3ys (Hades) in the New Testament.
But as both these words mean also the grave or
the condition of the dead, hell, as the place of final
punishment for siuners, is more distinctively indi-
cated by the term Gehenna (yéevva), which is
the word translated ‘hell’ in Matt. v. 22, 29, 30;
x. 28; xviii. 9: xxiii. 15, 33; Mark ix. 43, 45,
47; Luke xii. 5; James iii. 6. It is also dis
tinctively indicated by such phrases as ¢ the
place of torment’ (Luke xvi. 28); ‘everlasting
fire’ (Matt. xxv. 41); ‘the hell of fire, where the
worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched’
(Mark ix. 44). The dreadful nature of the
abode of the wicked is implied in various figu-
rative expressions, such as ‘outer darkness,’ ‘I
am tormented in this flame, ‘furnace of fire,’
fungnenchable fire, ‘where the worm dieth not,’
‘the blackness of darkness,’ ‘torment in fire and
brimstone,’ ‘the ascending smoke of their tor-
ment,’ ‘the lake of fire that burneth with brim-
stone’ (Matt. viii. 12; xiii, 42; xxii. 13;
xxv. 30; Luke xvi. 24; comp. Matt. xxv. 41;


}
838 HELL.


Mark ix. 43-48; Jude 13; comp. Rev. xiv. 10,
IL; xix. 20; xx. 14; xxi. 8). The figure by
which hell is represented as burning with fire and
brimstone is probably derived from the fate of
Sodom and Gomorrah, as well as that which
describes the smoke as ascending from it (comp.
Rey. xiv. 10, 11, with Gen, xix. 24, 25). To
this coincidence of description Peter also most
probably alludes in 2 Pet. ii. 6.

The names which in many of the other instances
are given to the punishments of hell, are doubtless
in part figurative, and many of the terms which
were commonly applied to the subject by the Jews
are retained in the New Testament. The images,
it will be seen, are generally taken from death,
capital punisiments, tortures, prisons, &e. And
it is the obvions design of the sacred writers, in
using such figures, to awaken the idea of some-
thing terrible and fearful. They mean to teach
that the punishments beyond the grave will
excite the same feelings of distress as are pro-
duced on earth by the objects employed to represent
them. We are so little acquainted with the stage
in which we shall be hereafter, and with the nature
of our future body, that no strictly literal repre-
sentation of such punishments could be made
intelligible to us. Many of the Jews, indeed,
and many of the Christian fathers, took the terms
employed in Scripture in an entirely literal sense,
and supposed there wonld be actual fire, &c. in
hell. But from the words of Christ and his
apostles nothing more can with certainty be in-
ferred than that they meant to denote great and
unending miseries.

The punishments of sin may be distingnished
into two classes—1. Natural punishments, or
such as necessarily follow a life of servitude to
sin: 2, Posttive punishinents, or such as God
shall see fit, by his sovereiga will, to inflict.

1. Among the natural punishments we may
rank the privation of eternal happiness (Matt.
vii. 21, 23; xxii. 135 xxv. 413) comp. 2 Thess,
1.9); the painful sensations which are the na-
tural consequence of committing sin, and of an
impenitent heart ; the propensities to sin, the evil
passions and desires which in this world fill the
human heart, and which are doubtless carried
into the world to come. The company of fellow.
sinners and of evil spirits, as inevitably resulting
from the other conditions, may be accounted
among the natural punishments, and must prove
not the least grievous of them.

2. The positive punishments have been al-
ready indicated. It is to these chiefly that the
Scripture directs our attention, ¢There are but
few men in such a state that the merely natural
punishments of sin will appear to them terrible
enough to deter them from the commission of it,
Experience also shows that to threaten positive
“punishment has far more efect, as well upon

the cultivated as the uncultivated, in deterring
them from crime, than to annonnce, and Jead men
to expect, the mnerely natural consequences of sin,
be they ever so terrible. Hence we may see why
it is that the New Testament says so little of
natural punistiments (although these beyond ques-
tion await the wicked), and makes mention of
them in particular far less frequently than of
positive punishments; and why, in those passages
which treat of the punishments of hell, such ideas
and images are constautly employed as suggest


BELLENIST.


and confirm the idea of positive punishments’
(Knapp’s Christian Theology, § 156).

As the sins which shut out from heaven vary
so greatly in quality and degree, we should ex-
pect from the justice of God a corresponding
variety both in the natural and the positive
punishments. This is accordingly the uniform
doctrine of Christ and his apostles. The more
knowledge of the divine law a man _ possesses,
the more his opportunities and inducements to
avoid sin, the stronger the incentives to faith and
holiness set before him, the greater will be his
punishment if he fails to make a faithful use of
these advantazes. ‘The servant who knows his
lord’s will and does it not, deserves to be Leaten
with many stripes:’ ‘To whom much is giv
of him much will be required’ (Matt. x. 15;
xi, 22, 24; xxiii. 15; Luke xii. 48). Hence
St. Paul says that the heathen who acted against
the law of nature would indeed be punished; but
that the Jews would be punished more than they,
because they had more knowledge (Rom. ii. 9-29}.
In this conviction, that God will, even in hell,
justly proportion punishment to sin, we must rest
satistied. We canuot now knaw more; the precise
degrees as well as the precise nature of such
punishments are things belonging to another state
of being, which in the present we are unable to
understand (Knapp's Christian Theology, tranx
lated by Leonard Woods, Jun. DD., $9 158-
158; Storr and Flatts Biblical Theology, with
Schmucker's Additions, § iii, 58).

HELLENIST (‘EaAnnoris). This word is
derived from the Greek verb €AAnvi¢@, which in
Aristotle means ‘to talk (good) Greek’ (Rhetoric,
iii. 5.15 12. 1); but, according to the analogy of
other verbs in —({(w, it might mean ‘ to favour the
Greeks,” or ‘to imitate Greek manners.’ In the
New Testament it seems to be appropriated as the
hame of those persons who, being of Jewisi ex-
traction, nevertheless talked Greek as their mother |
tongue; which was the case generally with the
Jews in Esypt, Syria, Asia Minor, and Greege;
and in fact, through the influence of the Greek
cities in northern Palestine (Decapolis), it would
appear that the Galilwans from their childbood
learned nearly as much Greek as Hebrew. The
appellation Icllenist is opposed to that of Hebrew
in Acts vi. L: in Acts ix. 29 the reading is not
so certain, yet probably it should there also be
*Hellenists,’ meaning unconverted Jews. Modem
critics have accordingly agreed to denominate
the Jewish dialect of Greek ‘Hellenistic ;° and,
whatever name be used, the thing itself ought to
be distinetly conceived of.

The Greeks who conquered the Persian empire
spoke many diferent dialects; and the leading
nation, the Macedonians, were too deficient in
literary pretensions to give an exclusive currency
to their own idiom. A necessary result of this
was, that even in the written style the current
Gaeek becagie more or less a compound of several
dialects; aud much more must this have hap-
pened to the speech which foreigners learned to
talk as Greek. They could not discriminate
Tonic and Macedonian words and phrases from
those of Attica; and while they fused the lan-
guage into a new mould, they would also fail to
learn the niceties of Greck grammar, and the pe-
culiarities of its genius. Add to this, that each ae
parate people was of course liable to introduce its


" HELLENIST.


own idioms into the Greek—a source of corruption
less influential perhaps in the case of those lan-
guages (such as Phrygian and Persian) which
belonged to the Indo-Eurvpean stock, but which
in the case of the Jews must have been peculiarly

werful, both because of the eminent contrast

tween the genius of their tongue and that of the
Greek, and because their national literature had
taken so deep a hold. In consequenee, so similar
in style are most parts of the New Testament and
of the Apocrypha to the Old Testament, that even
the best scholar would fail of finding out froin
the English translation, close as it is, in which of
the two languages the original was written.

The last remark, however, has its exceptions;
for in the Hellenistic Greek the Jewish element
is not always equally predominant, As might
naturally be expected, it is generally found to
be most abundant in the translations from He-
brew, such as the Alexandrine Version of the Old
Testament and the first book of Maccabees. The
Apocalypse, of all original compositions in Greek,
though full of natural eloquence, is the most
thoroughly Hebraic, and most violates the laws
of Greek grammar. Next to it, the three first
Gospels and the first half of the Acts may be fitly
reckoned, and perhaps after these the Gospel and
Fpistles of Sunn. Still more vigorous and natural
Greek is found in the Catholic Epistles and in
those of Paul; better still is the latter half of the
Acts, and the preface to the third Gospel, which

- is nearly or quite on a par with the Epistle to the
Hebrews. The book called The Wisdom of So-
lomun, and the second book of Maccabees, are
likewise written in a Greek decidedly superior to
the common Hellenistic style. But from all other
Jewish writers Josephus and Philo are separated
by a long interval. Their studies led them to a
close perusal of classical autiors, whose idiom
they have anxiously imitated, and with much
success.

Every such arrangement as has been just given
must be liable to objections. We cannot, for in-
stance, draw so sharp a line between tie first and
second half of the Acts of the Apostles as may
seem to be implied. No writer of the New Tes-
tament has so great inequality of style as Luke;
of which a more striking illustration is not needed
than the sudden change from the preface of his
Gospel to the actual narrative. It seems impos-
sible to assign this to any other cause than his
having worked up into his own account the very
words and sentences of those from whom he gained
his information, though he has done this in such
a way that here and there a better Greek phraseo-
logy seems tv come out. In the latter part of the
Acts, where he is describing what he himself saw,
the style is almost free from Jewish idiom, and,
though not perfectly the language of European
Grevce, is yet deeply imbued with its spirit.
Again, it is not easy to decide in what place we
should rank the Gospel and Epistles of John, In
them we complain of meagreness of vocabulary and
general monotony. In Matthew, Mark, and Luke
the genius of the Hebrew languaze obtrades itself,
on the whole, more than in John, and yet the
style of Jolin is rather to be called less Hebraic
than more Greek. This may be plausibly ascribed
to his long absence from Palestine and from He-
brew influcnces, and to the absorption of his mind
in cuntemplations peculiarly his own, Once more,


HELLENIST. 839


the Epistles of Peter, James, and Jude contain a
profusion of Ionic or poetical words, beyond what
can have entered into the spoken tongue, and
scarcely to be paralleled in the contemporaneous
prose Greek. It might almost seem that the
writers (as often happens to foreigners learning
our language, or indeed to half-educated persons)
had never learned to feel the difference between
the poetical and the common diction. In this
respect these Epistles may be judged hardly as
good Greek as those of Paul: still they have, in
common with his, a certain freedom, fluency, and
vigour; and their differences may be ascribed to
peculiarities rather of mind than, strictly speak-
ing, of dialect.

It belongs to a grammar to detail all that dis-
tinguishes the Greek of the New Testament (see
Winer's excellent Grammatik des new-testament-
lichen Sprach-idioms). But in fact, by knowing
Hebrew and Greek, it might almost have been
predicted what sort of errors and defects would
exist in the degenerate tongue. Whafever spe-
cially characterizes the Greek would be ill-learned
or lost, such as the use of numerous particles, the
sequence of mvods and tenses, the multifarious
use of the participles, the delicate proprieties of
prepositions and their cases. It was to be ex-
pected that a part of the vocabulary would never
be learned at all, and another large part be slightly
misapplied; that Hebrew secondary and meta-
phorical senses would be obtruded on Greek
words; that various new vocables or compounds
would arise, not always generated according to a
sound analogy ; that in the structure of sentences
the tame unifurm concatenated Hebraic idiom
would, to a great extent, supersede the periodic
and varying form of the Greck sentence, flexible
for rhetorical energy or logical perspicuity; and
(as an indication of the fact) that the conjunction
and would predominate over all others. This is
exactly what has occurred. A still further step
is a neglect of the common laws of concord,
which, however, is generally restricted within
narrow limits, Only in the Apocalypse do we
meet with very gross instances of it; such as, dd
"Ingod Xpiorod, 6 paptus 6 mords (i. 5)5 vhy
yvaixa 7) A€youca (ii. 20); 7H Ayarhoavrs huas,
nal exoincey jypas, for wohoayts (i. 5,6). The
repetition also of the Pronoun, as in the last in-
stance, so natural to the Hebrew, is slavish in the
Greek. Once only (and that not without dis-
pute) is an instance found of the singular idiom
which technical grammar has denominated in
Hebrew Wau conversive; viz. kal éreddan for
TereoOhoerat (x.7). Inthe Greek of the New Tes-
tament generally the optative mood is observed
to be very rare; which appears as the first stage of
the process by which it has vanished in modem
Greek. So too, instead of the participle, the
infinitive is substituted in Hebrew fashion ; which
often gives an ungraceful stiffness to passages
otherwise well written. As a single instance, in
James iii. 3, ot, Tov ixmwv tobs xarwods eis
7h ordpara BdddAopev mpds Td welderOar abrods
iui... . down to BaddAopey the Greek is good,
and suited to the elevated tone of the writer, but
the words which follow spoil it to a classical ear.

The Epistle to the Hebrews differs from all the
other compositions of the New Testament, in being
the writing of one who has evidently spent much
pains on the cultivation of his style. With a few


840 HELLENIST.


exceptions, it is scarcely more thoroughly idiom-
atic than the 27th chapter of the Acts; but it is
full of indications that the writer had not only
moved in circles where good Greek was talked,
but had studied well-written models, and aimed
to imitate them. In point of mere style it may
be fairly compared with the Wisdom of Solomon
(although the szhject of the latter book often
throws the sentences into a more Hebrew rm)
and in fact both appear to exhibit sufficient mar!
of the Alexandrian culture.

It has been thought unnecessary here to enter
into detail concerning the old controversies be-
tween the Purists, who tried to prove that all the
Greek of the New Testament was classical, and
the Hebraists, who overdid the opposite argument
(Winer's Gram. § 1, edit. of 1836); for on this
subject there are no longer two opinions amongst
the learned.

The fact that so large ‘a portion of the Jewish
nation was Hellenistic, was destined to work great
results on the Christian cause. Indeed, in some
sense, Christianity itself may be said to have had
its human birth among Hellenists, since Jesus
himself and the majority of his disciples were
Feared in Galilee, and were probably nearly as
familiar with the Greek as with the Hebrew
tongue. Nevertheless, during the early times
which followed the day of Pentecost, no striking
result appears from this, except that it must have
facilitated communication with the Jews of the
dispersion. The important part which the Hel-
lenists were to sustain, was first indicated by the
preaching of Stephen; who discerned the lower

lace which must be assigned to the national
aw of Moses in the kingdom of Messiah.  Ste-
phen, indeed, was abruptly cut off by the odium
which his principles caused; but the same were
soon after adopted, aud yet more efficiently in-
culeated, by his persecuter Saul, to whom the
high office was allotted of establishing the pe-
culiar system of doctrine which thenceforward
distinguished the Gentile from the Jewish church.
The Epistle of James (whether written, as Neander
thinks, before the development of the Pauline
. Views or not) exhibits to us undonbtedl|y the state
of Christian doctrine in the mother-church of
Jerusalem. We see in it the higher spirit of
Christ struggling to put down the law into its
right place, but having by no. means as yet
brought out into their full clearness the distin-
guishing doctrines of the gospel. All of these
were prcestal and established by Paul in his
own churches, founded among Gentile proselytes
to Hellenistic Judaism, and from them in no
long time were imbibed by all Gentile Christen-
dom. But, simultaneously, the struggle began
within the church itself between the Hebraic and
the Hellenistic spirit. The (so-called) first coun-
cil at Jerusalem (Acts xv.) decided, for the time
at least, that the Mosaic law was not to be en-
forced upon the Gentiles, but it did not lessen
the importance of it to Jewish Christians ; and it
would appear that the Hebrew spirit became
afterwards even stronser still within the Jerusalem
church, if we may interpret literally the words
-of James (Acts xxi, 20) :—‘ Thou seest, brother,
how many thousands of Jews there are which
believe, and they are all zealous of the law.’ At
any rate it appears certain that the resistance to
the Pauline doctrine continued intense in the


HELPS.
great body of the Hebrew Christians; for they


show themselves in ecclesiastical history only
under the names of Nazarenes and Ebionites, and
are always regarded as (more or less) heretical by
the Gentile churches, since they held only the
bare rudimental creed on which the original
Pentecostal church was founded ; and pertina-
ciously rejected the distinguishing tenets of Paul,
which were contirmed by Peter, and perhaps ex-
tended by John. This first and greatest of con-
troversies ended in the extinction of the Hebrew
churches, which had refused to grow with the
growth of the Christian spirit in its highest and
most favoured leaders. But long before that event
the Hellenistic Jews had been swallowed up in
the mass of Gentile believers ; and to follow the
further development of the Grecian mind within
the bosom of Christianity, belongs, not to this
article, but to a history of Gentile Christendom.

F. W.N.

HELMET. [Arms; Armour.]

HELPS (ayriaAjyeas; Vulg. opitulationes ; 1
Cor. xii. 28). The Greek word, signifying aids
or assistances, has also this meaning, among
others, in the classical writers (e. g. Diod. Sic. i,
87). In the Sept. it answers to NY (Ps. xxii,
19), to JY (Ps. eviii. 12), and to JPW (Ps
Ixxxiii. 8). It is found in the same sense, Ecclus.
xi. 12; 2 Mace, xi. 26; and in Josephus ( De Bell.
Jud. iv. 5.1). In the New Testament it occurs
once, viz. in the enumeration of the several orders
or classes of persons possessing miraculous gifts
among the primitive Christians (ué supra), where
it seems to be used by metonymy, the abstract for
the concrete, and to mean helpers ; like the words
Suvduers, ‘ miracles,’ i. e. tcorkers of miracles;
kuBepynoes, ‘governments,’ that is, gorernors,
&c., in the same cnumeration. The Americans,
it is well known, by a similar idiom, call their
servants ‘helps.’ Great difficulty attends the
aNempt to ascertain the nature of the office so
designated among the first Christians. Theophy-
lact explains dvniaqpes by axrixécba tay aode-
vav, helping or supporting the infirm. And 60
Gennadius, in GEcumenius. But this seems like
an inference from the etymology (see Gr. of Acts
xx. 35). It has been assumed by some eminent
modern writers that the several ‘orders’ mentioned
in ver. 28, correspond respectively to the several
* gifts’ of the Spirit enumerated in ver. 8, 9. In
order, however, to make the two enumerations
tally, it is necessary to make ‘divers kinds of
tongues’ and ‘interpretation of tongues,’ in the
one, answer to ‘diversities of tongues" in the
other, which, in the present state of the received
text, dues not seem to be a complete correspond-
ence. The resit of the collation is that ax
AjWers answers to ‘prophecy ;° whence it has been
inferred that these persons were such as were
qualitied with the gift of “lower prophecy,’ to
help the Christians in the public devotions (Bar-
rington'’s Miscellanea Sacra, i. 166; Macknizht
ou 1 Cor. xii. 10-28). Another result is, that
£ governments ' answers ‘to discerning of spurits.’
To both these Dr. Hales very reasonably objects,
as unlikely, and pronounces this tabular view to
he ‘perplexed aud embarrassing * (New Analysis,
&e., Lond. 1830, iii. 289. Bishop Horsley has
adopted this classification of the gifts and office-
bearers, and points out as ‘helps,’ #. ¢. persons
gifted with ‘prophecies or predictions,’ such per-


HELPS.


sons as Mark, Tychicus, Onesimus. Vitringa,
from a comparison of ver. 28, 29, 30, infers that
the dyr:Anpeis denote those who hag the gift of
interpreting foreign languages (De Synag. Vet.
ii. 505, Franque. 1696); which, though certainly
possible, as an arbitrary use of a very significant
word, stands in need of confirmation by actual
instances. Dr. Lightfoot also, according to his
biographer, adopted the same plan and arrived at
the ‘same conclusion (Strype's Life of Lightfoot,
prefixed to his Works, p. 4, Lond. 1684). But
Lightfoot himself explains the word ‘ persons who
accompanied the apostles, baptized those who were
converted by them, and were sent to places to
which they, being employed in other things, could
not come, as Mark, Timothy, Titus.’ He ob-
serves that the Talmudists sometimes call the


Levites DYDD MYDD, ‘the helpers of the


priests’ (vol. ii. p. 781). Similar catalogues of
miraculous gifts and officers occur Rom. xii. 6-8,
and Eph. iv. 11, 12; but they neither correspond
in number nor in the order of enumeration. In
the former, ‘prophecy’ stands first, and in the
latter, second; and in the former many of the
terms are of wide import, as ‘ ministering,’ while
minute distinctions are made between others, as
between ‘teaching’ and ‘exhortation,’ ‘giving’
and ‘showing mercy.’ Other writers pursue dif-
ferent methods, and arrive at ditferent conclu-
sions. For instance, Hammond, arguing from
the etymology of the word, and from passages in
the early writers, which describe the office of re-
lieving the poor as peculiarly connected with that
of the apostles and bishops by the deacons, infers
that avriA. ‘denotes a special part of the office of
those men which are set down at the beginning
of the verse.’ He also explains xuBeprviceis as
another part of their office (Hammond, Comment.
in loc.). Schleusner understands ‘ deacons who
had the care of the sick.’ Rosenmiiller, ‘ Diaconi
qui pauperibus, peregrinis, sgrotis, mortuig, pro-
curandis preerant.’ Bishop Pearce thinks that
both these words may have been originally put in
the margin to explain bduvdues, ‘miracles or
powers,’ and urges that ayriA. is nowhere men-
tioned as a gift of the Spirit, and that it is not re-
capitulated in ver. 29, 30. Certainly the omission
of these two words would nearly produce exacti-
tude in the recapitulation. Bowyer adopts the
same conjecture; but it is without support from
MSS. or versions. He also observes that to the end
of ver. 28 some copies of the Vulgate add ‘ inter-
pretationes sermonum,’ épunvelas -yAwoomy; as
also the later Syriac, Hilary, and Ambrose. This
addition would make the recapitulation perfect.
Chrysostom and all the Greek interpreters consider
the avT:A. and xvBepy. as importing the same
thing, viz. functionaries so called with reference
tu the ¢wo different parts of their office: the ayTiA.
superintending the care of the poor, sick, and
straugers ; the xuBepy. the burial of the dead, and
the executorship of their etlects, including the
care of their widows and orphans, rather ma-
magers than governors (Blomfield’s Recensio
Synopt.). After all it must be confessed, with
Doddridge, that ‘we can only guess at the mean-
ing of the words in question, having no principles
on which to proceed in fixing it absolutely’
(Family Expositor, on 1 Cor. xii. 28). (Alberti,
Glossar. p. 123; Suicer Thesaur. in voc.; Sal-


HERAKLES.


masius, De Fenore Trapezitico, p. 409; Wolfii
Cure Philolog. Basil. 1741.)—J. F. D.


1. HEMAN (}°1; Sept. Alyoudy), a person
of the tribe of Judah, named with others cele-
brated for their wisdom, to which that of Solomon
is compared (1 Kings iv. 31; 1 Chron. ii. 6).
The considerations stated under ErHan wi
distinguish this Heman from the following, with
whom he is sometimes confounded.

2. HEMAN, a Kohathite of the tribe of Levi,
and one of the leaders of the temple-music as
organized by David (1 Chron. vi. 33; xvi. 41,
42). This, doubtless, is the Heman to whom the
88th Psalm is ascribed.

HEMLOCK. ([Rosu.]

HERAKLES (‘HpaxAjjs) is mentioned in 2
Mace. iv. 19, as the Tyrian god to whom the
Jewish high-priest Jason sent a religions embassy
(Gewpol), with the offering of 300 drachma of
silver. That this Tyrian Hercules (Herod. ii.
44) is the same as the Tyrian Baal, is evident
from a bilingual Phanician inscription found at
Malta (described by Gesenius, Monum. Ling.
Phen. i. 96), in which the Phoenician words, ‘To
our Lord, to Melkarth, the Baal of Tyre,’ are repre-
sented by the Greek ‘HpaxAet Apynyére. More~
over, Herakles and Astarte are mentioned together
by Josephus (Antig. viii. 5. 3), just in the same
manner as Baal and Ashtoreth are in the Old Tes-
tament. The further identity of this Tyrian Baal
with the Baal whom the idolatrous Israelites wor-
shipped, is evinced by the following arguments,
as stated chiefly by Movers ( Dic Phonizier, i. 178).
The worship of Baal, which prevailed in the time
of the Judges, was put down by Samuel (1 Sam.
vii. 4), and the effects of that suppression appear
to have lasted through the next few centuries, as
Baal is not enumerated among the idols of Solo-,
mon (1 Kings xi. 5-8; 2 Kings xxiii. 13), nor
among those worshipped in Judah (2 Kings xxiii,
12), or in Samaria, where we only read of the
golden calves of Seroboam (1 Kings xii. 28; xv.
26). That worship of Baal which prevailed in
the reign of Ahab, cannot, therefore, be regarded
as a mere continuation or revival of the old
Canaanite idolatry (although there is no reason
to doubt the essential identity of both Baals), but
was introduced directly from Phoenicia by Ahab's
marriage with the Sidonian princess Jezebel (1
Kings xvi. 31). In like manner, the establish-
ment of this idolatry in Judah is ascribed to the
marriage of the king with a daughter of Jezebel.
(Comp. Josephus, Antig. viii. 13. 1; ix. 6.6.)

The power of nature, which was worshipped
under the form of the Tyrian Hercules, Met-
karth, Baal, Adonis, Moloch, and whatever his
other names are, was that which originates, sus-
tains, and destroys life. These functions of the
Deity, according to the Phoenicians, were repre-
sented, although not exclusively, by the sun, the
influence of which both animates vegetation by
its genial warmth, and scorches it up by its fer-
vour.

- Almost all that we know of the worship of the
Tyrian Hercules is preserved by the classical
writers, and relates chiefly to the Phanician colo-
nies, and not to the mother-state. The eagle, the
lion, and the thunny- fish, were sacred to him, and
are often found on Phoenician coins. Pliny ex-
preasly testifies that human sacrifices were offerea


S41


842 HERMAS. :


up every year to the Carthaginian Hercules
(Hist. Nat. xxxvi. v. 12}; which coincides with
what is stated of Baal in Jer. xix. 5, and with the
acknowledged worship of Moloch.


Movers endeavours to show that Herakles and’


Hercules are not merely Greek and Latin syno-
nymes for this god, but that they are actually
derived from his true Phenician name. This
original name he supposes to have consisted of the
syllables WN (as found in RS, Zion, and in other


words), meaning strong, and 23, from 25%, to
conquer; su that the compound means Ar conquers.
This harmonizes with what he conceives to be the
idea represented by Hercules as the destroyer of
Typhonic monsters (J. c. p. 430). Melkarth, the
MeAixapOos of Sanchoniathon, occurs on coins


only in the form napon. We must in this case
assume that a kaph has been absorbed, and re-


solve the word into XN 3p, king of the city,
wodydxos. The bilingual inscription renders
it by "Apxzyerns; aud it isa title of the god as
the patron of the city—J. N.

HERMAS, ‘Epyas, one of the Christians at
Rome, to whom Paul addressed special saluta-
tions in his Epistle (Rom. xvi. 14). Of his history
and station in life nothing is known. By several
writers, ancient and modern, he has been reputed
to be the author of a work entitled The Shepherd
of Hermas, which from its high antiquity and the
supposed connection of the writer with St. Paul,
has been usually classed with the epistles of the
so-called Apostolic Fathers. It was originally
written in Greek, but we possess it only in a Latin
version (as vld as the time of Tertullian), a few
fragments excepted, which are found as quota-
tions in other ancient authors. It has been divided
by modern editors (for in the manuscript copies
there is uo such division) into three books; the
first consisting of four visions, the second of twelve
conunands, and the third of ten similitudes. It
is called the * Shepherd’ (6 Momhy, Pastor), be-
cause the Angel of Repentance (.Vundius Pent-
tentiz), at whose dictation Hermas professes that
he wrote the second and third books, appeared in
the garb of a shepherd— habitu pastorali, pallio
albo amictus, peram in humeris, et virgam in
manu gestans.’ It is doubtful whether the author
really believed thgt he saw the visions he describes,
or merely adopted the fiction to render his work
more attractive. It is frequently quoted by
Clemens Alexandrinus, eituer by the author's
name (Strom. i. 29. § 1813; Opp. ed. Klotz, it.
119; i. 1. $35 Opp. ii. 124), or by the phrase
© the Shepherd says’ (Strom. i. 17. § 85 Opp. ii.
60; ii. 12. § 55; Opp. ii. 158; ii. 9.§ 43; Opp.
ii, 150; ii 12. § 55; Opp. ii. 158; iv. 9. § 76;
Opp. ii. 3183 vi. 6. § 46; Opp. iii, 125), though
he dves not expressly identify the author as the
Hermas in Rom, xvi. Eusebius is more detinite.
In his Eccles. Hist. (iii, 3) he says, ‘ The apostle, in
the salutations at the end of his Epistle to the
Romans, makes mention among others of Hermas,
who, it is said, wrote the book called the Shep-
herd; it is to be noted that this book is called an
question (ayr:AéAexras), so that it cannot be
ranked among the books received as canonical
(ev duodoyounevors). By others it is judged to
be a most necessary book for elementary instruc-
tion. And we know that it is publicly read in
churches, and that some very ancient writers


HERMAS.


make use of it.’ Elsewhere he says, ‘ among the
spurious (éy rots yd@os) are to Le placed the
Acts of Pgul, the Book called the Shepherd, and
the Revelation of Peter’ (Hist. Eccles. iii. 25).
And ingiving an account of the opinions of Irenzeus
(Hist. Eccles. y. 8.), he remarks, ‘ the book (riy
ypaphv) of the Shepherd he not only knew, but
received with approbation, saying, Well spake
the book (4 ypapn) which says, “ first gf all
believe that there is one God.” ‘Phis passage
has been adduced, but, perhaps, improperly, to
prove that Jrenzeus regarded *‘ The Shepherd’ as
canonical : the word ypagf, by some here trans-
lated Scripture, may mean simply the book or
writing (Lardner’s Credibility, ch. xvii. ; orks,
ii, 171). Origen often quotes ‘ The Shepherd,
speaks of it as useful, and, in his opinion, in-
spired : ut puto, divinitus inspirata (Ip. ad Rom. *
Comment. lib. x.; Opera, vii. 437, ed. Lom-
matzsch). Elsewhere he describes it as * a book
circulated in the church, but not universally ac-
knowledged to be divine’ (Comment. in Evang.
Matt. Hom. xiv.; Opp. iii. 316). Jerome also states
that ‘ it was publicly read in some of the churches
of Greece, though among the Latins it was almost
unknown’ (De Illust. Vir. cap. x). The testimo-
nies of other writers are given by Cotelerius and
Fabricius. If it be admitted that ‘ The Shepherd’
was written by the Hermas of St. Paul, its date
must be fixed towards the end of the tirst century.
Some eminent critics, however, asciibe it to
Hermas, a brother of Pius, who was Bishop of
Rome about a.p. 141. Mosheim argues at some
length, and with no little vehemence, in favour of
this opinion; but the only authorities he adduces
on its behalf are some lines in a poem against the
Marcionites, falsely attributed to Tertullian, the
fragment of an anonymous work on the canon,
published by Muratori in his Antiguétates Ital.
Med. Avi, and a passage in the Liber Ponti fcalis,
respecting Easter, there said to be from a look
called the Shepherd, written by Hermas, the brother
of Pius, but not found in the work that bas come
down to us under that title (Commentaries on
the Affairs of the Christians, vol. i. pp. 180-188,
Vidal's transl). The same opinion is advocated
by Dr. Hefele, in the Tiibingen Theol. Quart.
Schrifft., 1839. Dr. Neander, while he allows
that it may be doubted whether ¢ Vhe Shepherd’
was written by the Hermas of St. Paul, seems to
consider the other supposition still more question-
able, since we cannot determine what credit is
due to the authorities adduced in its favour, and
it is dificult to reconcile with the later origina
tion of the work, the high esteem in which it was
held in the age of Irenwus and Clement of Alex-
andria (Allgemeine Geschichte, &c. Abth. i.
Band 2, p. 1139, 2nd edit.) Impartial judges
will probably agree with Mosheim, that + The
Shepherd’ contains such a mixture of folly and
superstition with piety, of egregious nonsense with
momentous truth, as to render it a matter of
astonishment that men of learning should ever
have thought of giving it a place among the in-
spired writings.

The Shepherd of Hermas was first published at
Paris in 1513, and is included in the editions of
the apostolic fathers by Cotelerius, Gall:uid, and
Hetele. FabriciuSulso published it in his Coder
Apocryphus, Hamburgi, 1719. | Archbisnop
Wake’s translation is well known.—J. E. R.


HERMES.


HERMES (‘Epyijs), the Mercurius of the Ro-
mans, was the messenger of the gods, and was
equally characterized by adroitness of action and
readiness of speech. He was alao the customary
attendant of Jupiter when he appeared on earth
(Ovid, Fast. v. 495). These circumstances ex-
plain why the inhabitants of Lystra (Acts xiv.
12), as soon as ever they were disposed to believe
that the gods had visited them in the likeness of
men, discovered Hermes in Paul, as the chief
speaker, and as the attendant of Jupiter. It
seems unnecessary to be curious whether the re-
presentations of Mercury in ancient statues accord
with the supposed personal appearance of Paul,
and especially in the matter of the beard of the
latter; for all known representations of the god
ditfer in much more important particulars from
the probable costume of Paul (e. g. in the absence
of any garment at all, or in the use of the short
chlamys merely; in the caduceus, the petasus,
&c.). It is more reasonable to suppose that those
who expected to see the gods mixing in the affairs
of this lower world, in human form, would not
look for much more than the outward semblance
of ordinary men, Comp. the ‘dissimulautque
deos' of Ovid (¢. ¢. 504.)—J.N.


HERMOGENES (‘Epyoyévms) and PHY-
GELLUS, disciples of Asia Minor, and probably
companions in labour of St. Paul. They aban-
doned him during his. second imprisonment at
Rome, doubtless from alarm at the perils of the
connection (2 Tim. i. 15). *


HERMON (177) ; Sept. "Aepudy), a moun-
tain which formed the northernmost boundary of
the country beyond the Jordan which the Hebrews
cunquered from the Amorites (Deut. iii. 8), and
which, therefure, must have belonged to Anti-
Libanus, as is, indeed, implied or expressed in
most of the other passages in which it is named.
In Deut. iii. 9 it is said to have been called by
the Sidonians Sirion (jy), and by the Amorites,
Shenir (WY), both of which words signify ‘a coat
of mail.’ In the next chapter (iv. 49) it is called
Mount Sion (JIN), meaning ‘an elevation,’
©a high mountain’—which it was well entitled to
be desiynated by way of excellence, being (if cor-
rectly identified with Jebel Es-sheikh) by far the
highest of all the mountains in or near Palestine.
In the later books of the Old Testament, however
(as in | Chron. y. 23; Sol. Song iv. 8), Shenir is
distinguished from Hermon properly so called.
Since modern travellers have made us acquainted
with the country beyond the Jordan, no doubt has
been entertained that the Mount Hermon of those
texts is no other than the present Jebel Es-sheikh,
or the Sheikh’s mountain, or, which is equivalent,
Old Man‘s Mountain, a name it is said to have
obtained from its fancied resemblance (being
topped with snow, which sometimes lies in length-
ened streaks upon its sloping ridges) to the hoary
head and beard of a venerable sheikh (Elliot, i.
317). This Jebel Es-sheikh is a south-eastern,
and in that direction culminating, branch of Anti-
Libanus. It is probably the highest of all the
Lebanon mountains, and is thought to rival Mont
Blane, though, as ENiot observes, the high ground
on which it stands detracts considerably from its
apparent altitude, and makes it a less imposing
object than that king of European mountaius as
viewed from the Italian valley of Adsta. Its top


HERODIAN FAMILY. 843


is covered with snow throughout the summer, and
must therefore rise above the point of perpetual
congelation, which in this quarter is about 11,000
feet. It might, perhaps, be safe to add another
1000 feet for the height above that point, making
in all 12,000 feet; but we must wait the result of
more accurate observations than have yet been
made. Some statements make it so low as 10,000
feet. Dr. Clarke, who saw it in the month of
July, says ‘ the summit is so lofty that the snow
entirely covered the upper part of it, not lying in
patches, but investing all the higher part with
that perfect white and smooth velvet-like appear-
ance which snow only exhibits when it is very
deep.’ Dr. Robinson only differs from the pre-
ceding by the statement that the snow is per-
petual only in the ravines, so that the top presents
the appearance of radiant stripes, around and .
below the summit (Bib. Researches, iii. 344).
The mention of Hermon along with Tabor in
Ps. Ixxxix. 12, led to its being sought near the
latter mountain, where, accordingly, travellers
and maps give us a ‘ Little Hermon.’ But that
passage, as well as Ps. cxxxiii. 3, applies better
to the great mountain already described; and
in the former it seems perfectly natural for the
Psalmist to call upon these mountains, respect-
ively the most conspicuous in the western and
eastern divisions of the Hebrew territory, to rejoice
in the name of the Lord. Besides, we are to con-
sider that Jebel Ks-sheikh is seen from Mount
Tabor, and that both together are visible frum the
plain of Esdraelon. There is no reason to suppose
that the so-called Little Hermon is at all men-
tioned in Scripture. Its actual name is Jebel
ed-Duhy ; it 1s a shapeless, barren, and unine
teresting mass of hills, in the north of the valley of
Jezreel and opposite Mount Gilboa.
HERODIAN FAMILY. Jo-ephus introduces
us to the knowledge of the Herodian family in
the fourteenth book of his Antiquities. He there
tells us (c. i. § 3) that among the chief friends
of Hyrcanus, the bigh-priest, was an Idumzan,
named Antipater, distinguished for his riches,
and no less fur his turbulent and seditious temper.
He also quotes an author who represented him as
descended from one of the best of the Jewish
families which returned from Babylon after the
captivity, but adds that this statement was
founded on no better grounds than a desire to
flatter the pride and support the pretensions of
Herod the Great. The times were favourable to
men of Antipater’s character; and, while he ob-
tained sovereign authority over his native province
of Idumea, he cuntrived to subject Hyrcanus
completely to his will, and to induce him to form
an alliauce with Aretas, from which he trusted to
secure the best means for his own aggrandize-
ment. Having so far accomplished his designs
as to make himself the favourite ally of Rome,
he obtained for his son Phaszlus the governor
ship of Jerusalem, and for Herod, then only
tifteen years old, the chief command in Galilee.
Herod svon distinguished himself by his talents
and bravery. The country was at that time in-
fested with numerous bands of robbers. These
he assailed and vanquished, and his success
was proclaimed, not only throughout Galilee,
but in Judwa and the neighbouring countries,
This increasing popularity of a member of the
family of Antipater alarmed the ruling, men at


844 HERODIAN FAMILY.


Jerusalem, and they willingly hearkened to the
complaints made against Herod by some of the
relatives of those whom he had slain. He was
accordingly summoned to take his trial before the
Sanhedrim: nor did he disobey the summons ;
but on the day of trial he appeared at the tri-
bunal gorgeously clad in purple, and surrounded
by anumerous band of armed attendants. His
acquittal was speedily pronounced. One only of
the judges ventured to speak of his guilt, and the
venerable old man prophesied that, sooner or later,
this same Herod would punish both them and
Hyrcanus for their pusillanimity.

In the events which fullowed the death of
Cesar, Herod found fresh opportunities of ac-
complishing his ambitious designs. By collect-
ing a considerable tribute for Cassius in Galilee,
he obtained the friendship of that general, and
was appointed to the command of the army in
Syria. No less successful with Mare Antony,
he overcame the powerful enemies who represented
the dangerous nature of his ambitious views, and
was exalted, with his brother Phaselus, to the
dignity of tetrarch of Judaa. They had not,
however, long enjoyed their office when the ap-
proach of Antigonus against Jerusalem compelled
them to meditate immediate flight. Phaselus
and Hyrcanus fell into the hands of the enemy ;
but Herod, making good his escape, hastened to
Rome, where he pleaded his cause and his former
+ Merits with so much skill, that he was solemnly
proclaimed king of the Jews, and endowed with
the proper ensigns and rights of royalty, Au-
gustus, three years afterwards, confirmed this act
of the senate; and Herod himself scrupled not
to perpetrate the most horrible crimes to give
further stability to his throne. The murder of
his wife Mariamne, a daughter of Hyrcanus, and
of his two sons Alexander and Aristobulus, place
him in the foremust rank of those tyrants whose
names blacken the page of history. Of the mas-
sacre at Bethlehem the Jewish historian says no-
thing; but it has been well observed that such
an event, in a reign marked by so many horrible
deeds, and occurring as it did in a small, obscure
town, was not likely to obtain a place in the na-
tional annals. As a vain attempt to set aside the
purposes of God, it affords a startling instance of
the awful follies to which the acutest and most
politic of rulers may be tempted by the love of
empire. Had Herod not proved, by the acts here
alluded to, the little contidence which he felt in
himself, or in the actual claims which his courage
and ability gave him to dominion, he might have
merited the title of Great, conferred on him by
his admirers. His reign, prolonged through thirty-
seven years, was in many respects prosperous ;
and the splendour of his designs restored to Jeru-
salem, as a city, much of its earlier magniticence.

According to the custom of the times, Herod
made his sons the heirs to his kingdom by a
formal testament, leaving its ratification to the
will of the emperor. Augustus assenting to its
main provisions, Archelans became tetrarch of
Judwa, Samaria, and Idumaa; Philip, of Tra-
chonitis and Iturma; and

Herop Anr1pas, of Galilee and Perxa. This
Herod was first married to a daughter of King
Aretas of Arabia; but forming an unholy attach-
ment for Herodias, the wife of his brother Philip,
be soon became involved in a course of guilt


HERODIAN FAMILY.


which ended in his utter ruin. Aretas, to avenge
his daughter, sent a considerable army against
Herod, whose generals in vain attempted to op-
pose its progress. The forces which they led were
totally destroyed, and instant ruin seemed to
threaten both Herod and his dominions. An
appeal to the Romans afforded the only hope of
safety. Aretas was haughtily ordered by the em-
peror to desist from the prosecution of the war;
and Herod accordingly escaped the expected
overthrow. But he was not allowed to enjoy his
prosperity long. * His nephew Agrippa having
obtained the title of King, Herodias urged him
to make a journey to Italy and demand the
same honour. He weakly assented to his wife's
ambitious representations; but the project proved
fatal to them both. Agrippa anticipated their ,
designs; and when they appeared before Caligula
they were met by accusations of hostility to Rome,
the truth of which they in vain attempted to dis-
prove. Sentence of deposition was accordingly
passed upon Herod, and both he and his wife
were sent into banishment, and died at Lyons in
Gaul.

Herop Aorrppa, alluded to above, was the
son of Aristobulus, so cruelly put to death by his
father Herod the Great. The earlier part of his
life was spent at Rome, where the magniticence
and luxury in which he indulged reduced him
to poverty. After a variety of adventures and
sufferings he was thrown into bonds by Tiberius;
but on the succession of Caligula was not only
restored to liberty, but invested with royal dig-
nity, and made tetrarch of Abilene, and of the
districts formerly pertaining to the tetrarchy of
Philip. His influence at the Roman court in-
creasing, he subsequently obtained Galilee and
Perwa, and at length Judwa and Samaria, his
dominion being thus extended over the whole
country of Palestine.

To secure the good-will of his subjects, he
yielded to their worst passions and caprices,
Memorable instances are afforded of this in the
apostolic history, where we are told that ‘ He
stretched forth his hands to vex certain of the
church, and he killed James, the brother of John,
with the sword; and because he saw it pleased
the Jews, he proceeded further to take Peter also’
(Acts xii. 1-3). His awful death, described in the
same chapter, and by Josephus almost in the same
words (Antig. xix. 8), occurred in the fifty-fourth
year of his age.

Henrop Aartrpa, the son of the above-named,
was in his seventeenth year when his father died.
The emperor Clandinsa, at whose court the young
Agrippa was then residing, purposed conferring
upon him the dominions enjoyed by his father.
From this he was deterred, says Josephus, by the
advice of his ministers, who represented the
danger of trusting an important province of the
empire to so youthful a ruler. Herod was, there-
fore, for the time, obliged to content himself with
the small principality of Chalcis, but was not
long after created sovereign of the tetrarchies
formerly belonging to Philip and Lysanias; a
dominion increased at a subsequent period by the
grant of a considerable portion of Perma. The
habits which he had formed at Rome. and his
strong attachment to the people to whose rulers
he was indebted for his prosperity, brought him
into frequent disputes with his own nation. He


HERODIANS.


died, at the age of seventy, in the early part of the
reign of Trajan.—H. S.

HERODIANS, a class of Jews that existed in
the time of Jesus Christ, whether of a political or
religious description it is not easy, for want of
materials, to determine. The passages of the
New Testament which refer to them are the fol-
lowing, Mark iii. 6; xii. 13; Matt. xxii, 16;
Luke xx. 20. 9 The particulars are these :—the
ecclesiastical authorities of Judwa having failed
to entrap Jesus by demanding the authority by
which he did his wonderful works, especially as
seen im his expurgation of the temple; and being
incensed in consequence of the parable spoken
ayainst them, namely, ‘A certain man planted a
vineyard,’ &c., held a council against him, and
associating with themselves the Herodians, sent
an embassy to our Lord with the express but
covert-design of ensnaring him in his speech,
that thus they might eompass his destruction.
The question they put to him was one of the most
difficult —* Is it lawful to pay tribute to Casar ?”
The way in which Jesus extricated himself from
the dithculty and discomfited his enemies is well
known. ° :

Do these circumstances afford any light as to
what was the precise character of the Herodians?
Whatever decision on this point may be arrived
at, the general import of the transaction is very
clear, and of a character highly honourable to
Jesus, That his enemies were actuated by bad
faith, and came with false pretences, might also
be sately inferred. Luke, however, makes an ex-
press statement to this effect, saying (xx. 18-20),
‘they sought to lay hands on him; and they
feared the people; and they watched him, and
sent fourth spies which should feign themselves
Just men, that they might take hold of his words,
that so they might deliver him unto the power
and authority of the governor. The aim, then,
was to embroil our Lord with the Romans. For
this purpose the question put had been cunningly
chosen, These appear to have been the several
feelings whose tuils were around Jesus—the hatred
of the priests, the favour of the people towards
himself, aud their aversion to the dominion of the
Romans, their half faith in him as the Messiah,
which would probably be converted into the vex-
ation and rage of disappointment, should he
approve the payment of tribute to Rome; another
element of difficulty had in the actual case been
deliberately provided—the presence of the He-
rodians. Agugether the scene was most perplex-
ing, the trial must perilous. But what additional
difficulty did the Herodians bring? Herod Atr
tipas was now Tetrarch of Galilee and Pera,
which was the only inheritance he received from
his father Herod the Great. As Tetrarch of
Galilee he was specially the ruler of Jesus, whose
home was in that province. The Herodians then
may have been subjects of Herod, Galileans,
whose evidence the priests were wishful to pro-
cure, because theirs would be the evidence of
fellow-countrymen, and of special force with
Antipas as being that of his own immediate sub-
jects (Luke xxiii. 7).

Herod's relations with Rome were in an unsafe
condition, He was a weak prince, given to ease
and luxury, and his wife’s ambition conspired
with bis own desires to make him strive to cleaiti
from the Emperor Caligula the title of king.


HERON. 845


For this purpose he took a journey to Rome, and
was banished to Lyons in Gaul.

The Herodians may have been favourers of his
pretensions : if so, they would be partial hearers,
and eager witnesses against Jesus before the Ro-
man tribunal. It would be a great service to
the Romans to be the means of enabling them to
get rid of one who aspired to be king of the Jews.
It would equally gratify their own lord, should
the Herodians give effectual aid in putting o
period to the mysterious yet formidable claims of
a rival claimant of the crown.

We do not see that the two characters here
ascribed to the Herodians are incompatible; and
if they were a Galilean political party who were
eager to procure from Rome the honour of royalty
for Herod (Mark vi. 14, the name of king is
merely as of courtesy), they were chosen as assu-
ciates by the Sanhedrim with especial propriety.

The deputation were to ‘feign themselves just
men,’ that is, men whose sympathies were entirely
Jewish, and, as such, anti-heathen : they were to
intimate their dislike of paying tribute, as being
an acknowledgment of a foreign yoke; and by
flattering Jesus, as one who loved truth, feared no
man, and would say what he thought, they meant
to inveigle him into a condemnation of the prac-
tice. In order to carry these base and hypocritical
designs into eflect, the Herodians were appro-

riately associated with the Pharisees; for as the
jatter were the recognised conservators of Judaism,
so the former were friends of the aggrandisement
of a native as against a foreign prince.

Other hypotheses may be found in Paulus on
the passage in Matt.; in Wolf, Cura PAil. i. 311,
sq.; see also J. Steuch, Diss. de Herod. Lund.
1706; J. Floder, Diss. de Herod. Upsal. 1764.—

J. R. B.

HERODIAS. [Hzropran Famty-]

HERON ("DIS anaphah, Lev. xi. 19; Deut.
xiv. 18). The original is a disputed name of an
unclean bird, which has also been translated kite,
woodcock, parrot, and crane, For the first of these


338. {Ardea Herodias.)


see GiepF; the second is rare and only a mo-
mentary visitor in Palestine; the third, surely,
required no prohibition wherest was not a resident
species, and probably not imported till the reign
of Solomon; and, as to the crane, we have
already shown it to have been likewise exotic,
making only a momentary appearance, and that
rarely, in Syria, where it is commonly represented
by the African species Grus virgo (crane). If the
Hebrew name be derived from ®3N anapA, ‘to
breathe short,’ or ‘to sniff through the nostrils with


846 HESHBON.


an irritated expression,’ the most ubvious applica-
tion would be to the guose, a bird not, pethaps,
otherwise noticed in the Hebrew Scriptures, thouglr
it was constantly eaten in Egypt, was not held
unclean by the Jews, and, at sume seasons, must
have frequented-the lakes of Palestine. The he-
ron, though not so constantly hissing, can utter a
similar sound of displeasure with much more
meaning, and the common species Ardea cinerea
~ is found in Egypt, and is also abundant in the
Hauran of Palestine, where it frequents the mar-
gins of lakes and pools, and the reedy water-
courses in the deep ravines, striking and devour-
ing an immense quantity of fish. ‘The Greek
avoraca (Hom. Odyss. i. 320), though in sound re-
sembling anaphah, is not, theretore, as Bochart
pretends, necessarily a mountain hawk ; for then
the root could not be taken from anaph, unless it
applied to one of the smaller species, such as the
Kestril or sparrow-hawk.—C. H. S.


HESHBON (})30'1); Sept. "EceBav; Euseb.
*EooeBav), a town in the southern district of the
Hebrew territory beyond the Jordan, parallel with,
and twenty-one miles east of, the point where
the Jordan enters the Dead Sea, and nearly
midway between the rivers Jabbok and Arnon,
It originally belonged to the Moabites; but
when the Israelites arrived from Eyypt, it was
found to be in the possession of the Amorites,
whose king, Sihon, is styled both king of the
Amorites and king of Heshbon, and is expressly
said to have ‘reigned in Heshbon’ (Josh. iii, 10;
comp. Num. xxi. Q6; Deut. ii. 9). It was
taken by Moses (Num. xxi. 23-26), and even-
tually became a Levitical city (Josh. xxi. 395
1 Chron. vi. 81) in the tribe of Reuben (Num.
xxxii. 37; Josh. xiii. 17); but being ou the con-
fines of Gad, is sometimes assigned to the latter
tribe (Josh. xxi. 389; 1 Chron. vi. 81). After
the ten tribes were sent into exile, Heshbon was
taken possession of by the Moabites, and hence is
mentioned by the prophets in their declarations
against Moab (Isa. xv. 45 Jer. xlviii. 2, 34, 45).
Under King Alexander Jannaus we find it again
reckoned as a Jewish city (Joseph. Antig. xiii,
15.4). In the time of Eusebius and Jerome it was
still a place of some consequence under the name of
Esbus (‘Eofovs); but at the present day it is known
by its ancient name of Heshbon, in the slizhtly
modified form of Hesban. The ruins of a consi-
derable town still exist, covering the sides of an
insulated hill, but not a single editice is lett
entire. The view from the summit is very exten-
sive, embracing the ruins of a vast number of
cities, the names of some of which bear a strong
resemblance to those mentioned in Scripture.
There are reservoirs connected with this and the
other received towns of this region. These have
been supposed to be the pools of Heshbon mentioned
by Solomon (Cant. vii. 4); but, say Irby and
Mangles, ‘The ruins are uninteresting, and the
only pool we saw was too insigniticant to be one
of those mentioned in Scripture.’ In two of the
cisterus among the ruins they found about three
dozen of human skulls and bones, which they
justly regard as an illustration of Gen. xxxvii. 20
(Travels, p. 472; see also Burckhardt, George
Robinson, Lord Lindsay, &c.).


HEZEKIAH cae ta) 3 Sept. "E(exias), son of


HEZEKIAH.


Ahaz, and thirtetnth king of Judah, who reigned
from B.c. 725 to B.c. 696.

From the commencement of his reign the efforta
of Hezekiah were directed to the reparation of the
effects of the grievous errors of his predecessurs ;
and during bis ‘time the true religion and the
theocratical policy flourished as they bad not
done since the days of David. The Temple was
cleared and puritied; the utensils and forms of
service were restored to their ancient order; all
the changes introduced by. Ahaz were abvlished ;
all the monuments of idolatry were destroyed,
and their remains cast into the brook Kedron,
Among the latter was the brazen serpent of
Moses, which had been deposited first in the
Tabernacle, and then in the Temple, as a me-
morial of the event in which it originated: and
it is highly to the credit of Hezekiah, and shows
more clearly than any other single circumstance
the spirit of his operations, that even this interest-
ing relic was not spared when it seemed in danger
of being tured to idolatrous uses. Having suc-
ceeded by his acts and words in rekindling the
zeal of the priests and of the people, the king
appointed a high festival, when, attended by his
court and people, he proceeded in high state to the
Temple, to present sacrifices of expiation fur the
past irregularities, and to commence the reor-
gauised services. A vast number of sacrifices
evinced to the people the zeal of their superiors,
and Judah, long sunk in idolatry, was at length
reconciled to Gud (2 Kings xviii. 1-84 2 Chron.
XXiX.).

The revival of the great annual festivals was
included in this refurmation. The Passover,
which was the most important of them all, had
not for a long time been celebrated according to
the rites of the law; and the day on which it
regularly fell, in the first year of Hezekiah, being
already past, the king, nevertheless, justly con-
ceiving the late observance a less evil than the
entire omission of the feast, directed that it should
be kept on the Lith day of the second month,
being one month after its proper time. Couriers
were sent from town to town, inviting the people
to attend tue solemnity; and even the ten tribes
which formed the neighbouring kingdom were
invited to share with their brethren of Judah in
a duty equally incumbent on all the children of
Abraham. Of these some received the message
gladly, and others with disdain; but a considers
able number of persons belonging to the nurtiern-
most tribes (which had more seldom tagn the others
been brought into hostile contact with Judab)
came to Jerusalem, and by their presence im-
parted a new interest to the sulemnity. A profound
and salutary impression appears to have been
made on this occasion; and so strong was the
fervour and so great the number of the assembled
people, that the festival was prolonged to twice
its usual duration; and during this time the
multitude was fed abundantly from the countless
offerings presented by the king and his uobles,
Never since the time of Solomon, when the whole
of the twelve tribes were wont to assemble at the
Holy City, had the Passover been observed with
such magnificence (2 Chron. xxx.).

The gvod elect of this procedure was seen
when the people carried back to their homes the
zeal for the Lord which had thus been kindled,
and proceeded to destroy and cast forth all the


HEZEKIAH.


abominations by which their several towns had
been detiled ; thus performing again, on a smaller
scale, the doings of the king in Jerusalem. Even
the ‘ high places,’ which the pious kings of former
days had spared, were on this occasion abolished
and overthrown; and even the men of Israel, who
had attended the feast, were carried away by the
same holy enthusiasm, and, on returning to their
homes, broke all their idols in pieces (2 Chron.
xxxi. 1).

The attention of this pious and able king was
extended to whatever concerned the interests of
religion in his dominions. He caused a new
collection of Solomon's proverbs to be made,
being the same which occupy chaps. xxv. to xxix.
of the book which bears that name. The sectional
divisions of the priests and Levites were re-esta-
blished; the perpetual sacrifices were recom-
menced, and maintained from the royal treasure;
the stores of the temple were once more filled by
the offerings of the people, and the times of Solo-
mon and Jehoshaphat seemed to have returned
(2 Chron. xxxi.). These improvements indicate
the peculiar nature of the operations required to
establish the character of a good prince under
the Hebrew theocracy. It was not necessary
that he should create new aud beneficial insti-
tutions; even from the most reforming king it
was only required that he should re-establish
the old institutions which had fallen into neglect,
and to abolish all recent innovations adverse to
their principles. Of all people the Hebrews lived
most on the memories of the past; and the re-
trospective character of all their reformations ne-
cessarily arose out of the divine authority by
which their institutions had been established, and
their perfect adaptation to their condition as a
peculiar people. :

This great work having been accomplished
and consolidated (2 Kings xvii. 7, &c.), Heze-
kiah applied himself to repair the calamities, as
he had repaired the crimes, of his father's govern-
ment. He tovk arms, and recovered the cities-
of Judah which the Philistines had seized. En-
couraged by this success, he veutured to withhold
the tribute which his father had paid to the Assy-
rian king; and this act, which the result shows
to have been imprudent, drew upon the country
the greatest calamities of his reign. Ouly a few
years before, nately, in the fourth of his reign,
the Assyrians had put an end to the kingdom of
Israel and sent the ten tribes into exile; but
had abstained from molesting Hezekiah, as he
was already their tributary. Seeing his coun-
try invaded on all sides by the Assyrian forces
under Sennacherib, and Lachish, a strong place
which covered Jerusalem, on the point of falling
into their hands, Hezekiah, not daring to meet
them in the field, occupied himself in all neces-
sary preparations for a protracted defence of Jeru-
salem, in hope of assistance trom Egypt, with which
country he had contracted an alliance (Isa. xxx.
1-7). Such alliances were not favoured by the
Divine sovereign of Israel and his prophets, and
no good ever came of them. But this alliance
did not render the good king unmindful of his
true suurce of strength; for in quieting the alarms
of the people be directed their attention to the
consideration that they in fact had more of power
and strength in the divine protection, than the
Assyrian king possessed in all his host: ‘ There


HEZEKIAH. 847


is more with us than with him: with him is an
arm of flesh, but with us is the Lord our God to
help us and fight our battles.’ Nevertheless,
Hezekiah was himself distrustful of the course
he had taken, and at length, to avert the calami-
ties of war, sent to the Assyrian. king offers of
submission. Sennacherib, who was anxious to
roceed against Egypt, consented to withdraw
nis forces on the payment of three hundred talents
of silver and thirty talents of gold; which the
king was not able to raise without exhausting
both his own treasury and that of the temple,
and stripping off the gold with which the doors
and pillars of the Lord's house were overlaid
(2 Kings xviii. 7-16). °

But after he had received the silver and gold,
the Assyrian king broke faith with Hezekiah, and
continued to prosecute his warlike operations.
While he employed himself in taking the fortresses
of Judea, which it was important to secure be-
fore he marched against Egypt, he sent three of .
his generals, Rabshakeh, Tartan, and Rabsaris,
with part of his forces, to threaten Jerusalem with
a siege unless it were surrendered, and the inha-
bitants submitted to be sent into Assyria; and
this summons was delivered in language highly
insulting not only to the king and people, but to
the God they worshipped. When the terms of
the summons were made known to Hezekiah, he
gathered courage from the conviction that God
would not fail to vindicate the honour of his in-
sulted name. In this conviction he was confirmed
by the prophet Isaiah, who, in the Lord’s name,
promised the utter discomfiture and overthrow of
the blasphemous Assyrian: ‘ Lo, I will send a
blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumour, and
shall return to his own Jand, and I will cause him
to die by the sword in his own land’ (2 Kings
xix. 7). The rumour which Sennacherib heard
was of the advance of Tirhakah the Ethiopian to
the aid of the Egyptians, with a force which the
Assyrians did not deem it prudent to meet; but,
before withdrawing to his own country, Senna-
cherib sent a threatening letter to Hezekiah,
designed to check the gladness which his retire-
ment was likely to produce. But that very night
the predicted blast—probably the hot pestilential
south wind—smote 180,000 men in the camp of
the Assyrians, and released the men of Judah
from all their fears (2 Kings xviii, 17-387; xix.
1-343 2 Chron. xxxii. 1-23; Isa. xxxvi. 37).

It was in the same year, and while Jerusalem
was still threatened by the Assyrians, that Heze-
kiah fell sick of the plague ; and the aspect which
the plague-boil assumed assured him that he must
die. In this he was confirmed by Isaiah, who
wamed him that his end approached. The love
of life, the condition of the country—the Assyrians
being present in it, and the throne of David with-
out an heir—caused him to grieve at this doom,
and to pray earnestly that he might be spared.
And his prayer was heard in heaven. The pro-
phet returned with the assurance that in three
days be should recover, and that fifteen additional
years of life should be given to him, This com-
munication was altogether so extraordinary, that
the king required some token by which his belief
might be justified ; and accordingly the ‘ sign’
which he required was granted to him. The
shadow of the sun went back upon the dial of
Ahaz, the ten degrees it had gone down (Diat.}


848 HEZEKIAH.


This was a marvel greater than that of the cure
which the king distrusted ; for there is no known
principle of astronomy or ” natural philoso; y bs by
vee such a result could be produced. cata-
lasm of figs was then spuiced to the plague-
il, under the direction of the het, and on
the third day, as foretold, the 4 recovered
(2 Kings xx. 1-11; 2 Chron. xxxii. 24-26; Isa.
mae [Praaue].
estrnction of i Assyrians drew the atten-
tion - foreign courts for a time towards Judea,


and caused the facts connected with Hezekiuh’s a


recovery, and the retrogression of the shadow on
the dial, to be widely known. Among others
Merodach Baladan, king of Babylon, sent am-
bassadors with presents to make inquiries into
those matters, and to congratulate the king on
his recovery. Since the time of Solomon the
appearance of such embassies from distant
had been rare at Jerusalem; and the king, in the
pride of his heart, made a somewhat ostentatious
display to Baladan’s ambassadors of all his
treasures, which he had bly recovered from
the Assyrians, and much increased with their
5 sen Josephus (Antig. x. 2, 2) says that one of
objects of the embassy was to form an alliance
with ezekiah against the Assyrian empire; and
if so, his readiness to enter into an alliance ad-
verse to the theocratical. policy, and his desire to
magnify his own importance in the eyes of the
no Babylon, probably furnished the ground
of the divine disapprobation with which his con-
duct in this matter was regarded. He was repri-
manded hy the prophet Isaiah, who revealed to
him the mysteries of the future, so far as to ap-
rise him that all these treasures should hereafter
in the possession of the Babylonians, and his
Pres and people exiles in the land from which
these am rs came. This intimation was


339, (fiteanaiies


HIERAPOLIS.


received by the king with his usual submission
to the will of God; and he was content to know _
that these evils were not to be inflicted in his
own days. He has sometimes been blamed for
this seeming indifference to the fate of his suc-
cessors ; but it is to be borne in mind that at»
this time he had no children. This was in
the fourteenth year of his reign, and Manas-
seh, his successor, was nut bern till three years
afterwards (2 Kings xx. 12-19; 2 Chron. xxxii.
31; Isa. xxxix.) The rest of Hezekiah’s life
a to have been peaceable and prosperous.

o man before or since ever lived under the
certain knowledge of the precise length of the

of life before him. When the titteen years

had expired, Hezekiah was gathered to his fathers,
after a reign of twenty-nine years. He lied
sincerely Jamented by all his people, and the
public respect for his character and memory was
testified by his corpse being placed in the highest
niche of the royal sepulchre (2 Kings xx. 20, 21;
2 Chron, xxxii. 32, 33).


HIEL (O€M, God liveth; Sept. "Axchd), a
native of Beth-el, who rebuilt Jericho, above 500
years after its destruction by the Israelites, and
who, in so doing, incurred the effects of the im-
precation pronounced by Joshua (1 Kings xvi.
34).
Accursed the man in the sight of Jehovah,

Who shall arise and build this city, even Jericho;

With the loss of his first-born shall he found it,

And with the loss of his youngest shall he fix its
gates (Josh. vi. 26).—J. E. R.

HIERAPOLIS (‘lepdrodis), a city of Phry-
gia, not far from Colosse and Laodicea, where
there was a Christian church under the charge of
Epaphrvs, as early as the time of St. Paul, who
commends him for his fidelity and zeal (Colos.


HIGH PLACES AND GROVES.


iv. 12, 13.) Tne place is visible from tne theatre
at Laodicea, from which it is five miles distant
northward.

Smith, in his joumey to the Seven Churches
(1671), was the first to describe the ancient sites
in this ‘neighbourhood. He was tollowed by
Pococke and Chandler; and more recently by
Richter, Cockerell, Hartley, and Arundel).

The place now bears the name of Pamluck-
kale (Cotton-castle), from the white appearance
of the cliffs of the mountain on the lower sum-
mit, or rather an extended terrace, on which the
ruins are situated. It owed its celebrity, and
probably the sanctity indicated by its ancient
name (Holy City), to its very remarkable springs
of mineral water, the singular etlects of which, in
the formation of stalactites and incrustations by
its deposits, are shown in the accounts of Pococke
(ii. pt. 2, c. 13) and Chandler (Asia Minor, c.
6S), to have been accurately described by Strabo
(xiii. p. 629). A great number and variety of
sepulchres are found in the ditlerent approaches to
the site, which on one side is sufticiently defended
by the precipices overlooking the valleys of the
Lycus and Meander, while on the other sides the
town walls are still observable. The magnificent
ruins clearly attest the ancient importance of the
place. The main street can still be traced in its
whole extent, and is bordered by the remains of
three Christian churches, one of which is up-
wards of 300 feet long. About the middle of
this street, just above the mineral springs, Po-
cocke, in 1741, thought that he distinguished
some remains of the Temple of Apollo, which,
according to Damascius, quoted by Photius
(Biblioth. p. 1054), was in this situation. But
the principal ruins are a theatre and gymnasium,
both in a state of uvcommon preservation; the
former 346 feet in diameter, the latter nearly
tilling a space of 400 feet square. Strabo (loc.
cit.) and Pliny (Hist. Nat. v.29) mention a cave
called the Plutonium, filled with pestilential va-
pours, similar to the celebrated Grotto del Cane
in Italy. High up the mountain-side is a dee
recess far into the mountain; and Mr. Arandefl
says that he should have supposed that the
mephitic cavern lay in this recess, if Mr. Cock-
erell ha { not found it near the theatre, the position
ancient] y assigned to it. He adds that the expe-
riments made in this mountain-side recess do
not ser 2 very conclusive, and conjectures that it
may be the same in which Chandler distin-
guished the area of a stadium (Arundell, Asia
Minor, ii. 210), The same writer gives, from
the Oriens Christianus, a list of the bishops of
Hierapolis down to the time of the emperor Isaac
Angelus. Fuller accounts of the ruins, &c., may
be seen in the authors named above (comp. alsu
Cal. Leake’s Geogr. of Asia Minor, pp. 202,

HIGH PLACES AND GROVES. As high
places and groves are almost constantly associated
in Scripture, it seems undesirable to separate them
in our consideration. :

By ‘high places’ (M193 bamoth) we are con
tent. to understand natural or artificial eminences,
where worship by sacrilice or offering was made,
usually upon an altar erected thereon.

By a ‘ grove’ we understand a plantation of
trees around a spot in the open air set apart for
worship and other sacred services, and therefore


.
HIGH PLACES AND GROVES. 849


around or upon the ‘high places’ which were
set apart for the same purposes.

In looking at matters of this nafure we are con-
stantly liable to error, and constantly do err, from
not taking into account the altered circumstances
under which the same subject may be brought
before us in the course of a long series of ages.
Tis, with reference to the present topic, it is
manifest that the patriarchs worshipped in groves
and upon high places; and much difficulty bas
been felt in reconciling this with the deep repro-
bation with which the practice is mentioned at a
later period. It seems to have occurred to no one
that the conditions of the question had altered in
the course of ages ; and that what was more an-
ciently an indifferent or laudable custom, had in
the lapse of time become, by abuses and corrupting
associations, criminal and dangerous. Yet we
incline to think that this is the real solution of the
difficulties by which this question has seemed to
be surrounded.

We find traces of these customs so soon after
the deluge, that it is probable they existed prior
to that event. It appears that the first altar after
the deluge was built by Noah upon the mountain
on which the ark rested (Gen. viii. 20). Abraham,
on entering the Promised Land, built an altar
upon a mountain between Beth-el and Hai (xii.
7, 8). At Beersheba he planted a grove, and
called there upon the name of the everlasting God
(Gen. xxi. 33). The same patriarch was required
to travel to the mount Moriah, and there to offer
up his son Isaac (xxii. 2, 4). It was upon a
mountain in Gilead that Jacob and Laban offered
sacrifices before they parted in peace (xxxi. 54).
In fact, such seem to have been the general
places of worship in those times; nor does any
notice of a temple, or other covered or enclosed
building for that purpose, occur. Thus far all
seems clear and intelligible. There is no reason in
the mere nature of things why a hill or a grove
should be an objectionable, or, indeed, why ix
should not be a very suitable, place for worship.
Yet by the time the Israelites returned from
Egypt, some corrupting change had taken place,
which caused them to be repeatedly and strictly
enjoined to overthrow and destroy the high
places and groves of the Canaanites wherever
they found them (Exod. xxxiv. 13; Deut. vii. 5;
xii, 2, 3). That they were not themselves to wor-
ship the Lord on high places or in groves is im-
plied in the fact that they were to have but one
altar for regular and constant sacrifice; and it
was expressly enjoined that near this sole altar no
trees should be plauted (Deut. xvi. 21).

It is evident from the prohibition itself that
other nations continued to preserve the primeval _
practice of worshipping upon bigh places and in
groves. Among them circumstances had arisen
which rendered it inexpedieut that the practice
should be continued by the chosen people. What
these circumstances were we must ascertain from
the accounts given by the heathen themselves,
for the Scripture does not explain this matter.
And it is important to observe that the heathen
writers perfectly agree with Scripture in de-
scribing Lills and groves as the eaviiest places of
worship.

It is possible that the Canaanites had not yet
fallen into rank idolatry in the time of Abraham
—at least, not into such idolatries as aia the

I


°
850 HIGH PLACES AND GROVES.


very places in which they worshipped. We know,
at all events, that their iniquity was not full in
those earlier times, but that when the Israelites
invaded the land their iniquity was full to overflow-
ing. As included in this, we may with tolerable
certainty infer that their religion had become so
grossly erroneous and impure, that it was needful
to place under ban even their places of worship,
which might otherwise bring the Israelites into
danger by the associations which had become con-
nected with them.

The great object of the law was to attach the
Israelites to the worship of the One Jehovah, the
Creator of heaven and earth, and to preserve them
from the polytheism into which the nations had
fallen. Now it is certain that the Canaanites had
become polytheistic, and, consequently, that their
high places and groves were dedicated to ditierent
gods. By continuing or adopting the use of this
custom, the Israelites would infallibly have fallen
into the same notions. They would probably have
begun by worshipping Jehovah himself under dif-
ferent names and attributes, which would even-
tually have been erected into distinct gods. There
could not be polytheism without idolatry, all but
the one God being idols. The one condition, there-
fore, involves the other; and injunctions or state-
ments beyond this apply to the forms which the
idolatry assumed, in the character and attributes
of the worshipped gods.

The information derivable from heathen writers
cannot of course ascend beyund the first forms
of idolatry ; for, as idvlaters, they had no notion or
tradition of the times when idolatry had no exist-
ence. Now, by universal consent, the earliest idol-
atry was solar and planetary ; the heavenly bodies
being worshipped at tirst in their natural appear-
ances, and at length by representative figures and
images. It is clear that this was the case among
the Canaanites and the other nations with whom
the Israelites were brought into contact. And
here much might be said of, for much is suggested
by, the sacritice of Balaam, who upon each of the
high places where lie sacrificed, built seven altars,
and offered seven bullocks and sever rams on
every altar. Here there was manifestly a poly-
theistic reference, and the number sever suyzests
a planetary one ; although Balaam certainly had
a historical knowledge at least of the true God, aud
was, after a sort, his worshipper.

As long as the nations continued to worship the
heavenly bodies themselves, they worshipped in
the open air, holding that no walls could contain
infinitude. Afterwards, when the symbol of’ fire
or of images brought in the use of temples, they
were usually built im groves and upon high places,
and sometimes without roofs. The principle on
which high places were preferred is said to have
been, that they were nearer to the gods, and that on
them prayer was more acceptable than in the val-
leys (Lucian, De Sacrif.i. 4). The ancient writers
abound in allusions to this worship of the gods
upon the hill-tops; and some of their divinities
took their distinctive names from the hill on
which their principal seat of worship stood, such
as Mercurius Cyllenius, Venus Erycina, Jupiter
Capitolinus, &c. To prove facts so well known
as this preference and special appropriation of high
places, is scarcely necessary; but among other
authorities the following may be consulted: So-
phocies, Trachin. 1207, 1208; Herod. i. 131;

a


HIGH PLACES AND GROVES.


Xenoph. Cyrop. viii. 7, p. 500 ; Strabo, xv. p. 733;
Appian, De Bello Mithrid. § 131.

The groves which ancient usage had esta
blished around the places of sacritice for the suke
of shade and seclusion, idolatry preserved not
only for the same reasons, but because they were
found convenient for the celebration of the rites
and mysteries, often obscene and abominable,
which were gradually superadded. Then the
presence of a grove of a particular species of tree at
the principal seat of the worship of a particular
god, would occasion trees of the same kind to be
planted at other seats of the same worship; whence
that kind of tree came to be regarded as specially
appropriate to the particular idol; and, in pro-
cess of time, there was no important tree which
had not become the property of some gud or
goddess, so that every stranger who passed by a
sacred grove could determine by the species of tree
of which it was composed to what God the bigh

lace, altar, or temple with which it was connected

longed. To this effect there is an interesting
passage in the beginning of Pliny’s twelfth book :
‘Trees were formerly the only temples of the gods;
and even now the simple peasantry, in imitation
of this ancient custom, dedicate to some ged the
finest tree of their district Nor do we ourselves
adore with more reverence the statues of the gods
resplendent with ivory and gold, than the sacred
groves and the holy silence whick reigns in them.
Trees were also anciently, as at present, conse-
crated to particular divinities; as the esculus to
Jove (ut Jovis esculus, which seems to have been
a kind of oak), the laurel to Apollo, the olive ta
Minerva, the myrtle to Venus, the poplar to Her-
cnles, It is also believed that as the heavens
have their proper and peculiar deities, so also
the woods have theirs, being the Fauns, the Syl
vans, and certain goddesses’ (doubtless, such
demi-goddesses as the dryades and lamadry-
ades). To this it may be added that groves
were enjoined by the Roman law of the twelve
tables a3 part of the public religion. Plutarch
(Numa, i. 61) calls such groves arom bexr,
‘groves of the gods,’ which he says Numa fre
quented, and thereby gave rise to the story of
his intercourse with the goddess Egeria. In
fact, a degree of worship was, as Pliny states,
transferred to the trees themselves. They were
sometimes decked with ribbons and rich cloths,
lamps were placed on them, the spoils of enemies
were lning from them, vows were paid to them,
and their branches were encumbered with votive
offerings. Traces of this arborolatry still exist
everywhere, both in Moslem and Christian coun-
tries; and even the Persians, who abhurred
images as much as the Hebrews ever did, ren-
dered homage to certain trees, The story is well
known of the noble plane-tree, near Sardis, before
which Xerxes halted his army a whole day, while
he rewlered Lomage to it, and hung royal offerings
upon its branches (Herod. vii. 31). There is much
curivus literature connected with this subject which
we leave untouched; but the reader may consult
Sir W. Ouseley’s learned dissertation on Sacred
Trees, appended to the first volume of his Travels
tn the Last.

This statement of the notions connected with re-
ligious worship in high places and in groves seems
amply to support the view we have taken as to the


nature of the dangers which the prohibition of it


HIGH PLACES AND GROVES.


was designed to obviate. The explanation as to
the special appropriation of trees to particular gods
alone sutlices to throw a flood of light upon the
injunction to cut down the sacred groves of the
Canaanites; seeing that while these groves re-
mained, it would be impossible to dissociate the
idea of the god to which the trees had been con-
secrated; and the disgraceful orgies which were
celebrated under their obscure shade, would alone
suftice to explain the same injunction on the
ground of the holy abhorrence with which the
scene of such abominations must be regarded by
One who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity.

The injunctions, however, respecting the high
places anit groves were very imverfectly obeyed
by the Israelites; and their inveterate attachment
to this mode of worship was such that even pious
kings, who opposed idolatry by all the means in
their power, dared not abolish the high places at
which the Lord was worshipped. And it appears
to us likely, that this toleration of an acknow-
ledged irregularity arose from the indisposition of
the people living at a distance from the temple to
be contined to the altar which existed there; to
their determination to have places nearer home fur
the chief acts of their religion—sucritice and
offering ; and to the apprehension of the kings
that if they were prevented from having places
for offerings to the Lord in their own neighbour-
hood, they would make the offerings to idols,
This view of the case seems to be strongly con-
firmed by the fact that we hear no more of this
proneness to worship in high places and in groves
after synagogues and regular religious services
had been established in the towns and gave suf-
ficient operation to the disposition among men to
create a local interest in religious observances.

It is more difficult to explain how it happens
that, in the face of the prohibition against sacrific-
ing at more than one altar, many persons of piety,
and even prophets, not only did so, but, in some in-
stances, did so4n high places: Gideon. for instance,
at Opbrah (Judg. vi. 25). Manoah in Dan (Judg.
xiii. 16-29). Samuel at Mizpeh (1 Sam vii. 10),
and at Bethlehem (xvi. 5), David in the threshing-
floor of Ornan (1 Chron. xxi. 22), and Elijah on
Mount Carmel (J Kings xviii. 30, sq.). It will,
however, be observed that in these cases the parties
either acted under an immediate command from
God, or were invested with a general commission
of similar force with reference to such transac-
tions. As this law more immediately concerned
the honour of God, and derived all its force from
his command, being based on no obvious prin-
ciple of duty, He undoubtedly had a right to
supersede it iu particular instances, in which the
attendant circumstances and the character of the
patties precluded the possibility of the abuses
against which it was framed to guard. It has
also heen suggested that greater latitude was al-
lowed in this point before the erection of the temple
gave to the ritual principles of the ceremonial
law a fixity which they had not previously pos-
sessed, This is possible; for it is certain that all
the authorized examples occur before it was built,
excepting that of Elijah; and that occurred
under circumstances in which the sacrifices could
not possibly have taken place at Jerusalem, and
in a kingdom where no authorized altar to Je-
hovah then existed.

HIGH-PRIEST. [Puarzsrs.]


HINNOM. 85]
HILKIAH (379M; Sept. Xeaxig). Several


persons of this name occur in Scripture, of whom
the following are the chief: 1. The father of Jere-
miah (Jer. i. 1). 2. A high-priest in the reign of
Josias (2 Kings xxii. 4, 8,10). 3. The father
Oh es (2 Kings xviii. 18, 26; Isa. xxii.
HIN, a Hebrew liquid measure [Wxicuts
anp Measures. ]


HIND (AD°N ajalah, Gen. xlix. 21; 2 Sam.
xxii. 34; Job xxxix. 1; Ps. xviii. 33, &c.), the


female of the hart or stag, doe being the female of
the fallow-deer, and roe being sometimes used for


that of the roebuck. All the females of the -


Cervide, with the exception of the reindeer, are
hornless. It may be remarked on Ps. xviik 33
and Hab. iii. 19, where the Lord is said to cause
the feet to stand firm like those of a hind on high
places, that this representation is in perfect har-
mony with the habits of mountain stags; but
the version of Prov. y. 19, ‘ Let the wife of
thy bosom be as the beloved hind and favourite
Tue,’ seems to indicate that here the words are
generalized so as to include under roe mono-
gumous species of untelopes, whose affections and
consortship are permanent and strong; for stags are
polygamous. Finally, the emendation of Bochart
on the version of Gen. xlix. 21, where for ‘ Naph-
thali is a hind let loose, he giveth goodly words,’
he, by a small change in the punctuation of the
original, proposes to read ‘ Naphthali is a spread-
ing tree, shooting forth beautiful branches,’ restores
the text to a consistent meaning, agreeing with the
Sept., the Chaldee paraptwase, and the Arabic ver-
sion, [AsAL, Hart].—C. H. 5.

HINNOM, or rather Ben-Hinnom (0371 ta;
Sept. viod ’Evydu),an unknown person, whose name
was given to the valley which bounds Jerusalem
on the north, below Mount Zion, and which in
Scripture is often mentioned in convection with
the horrid rites of Moloch, which under idolatrous
kings were there celebrated (Josh. xv. 8; xviii.
16; Neh. xi. 30; Jer. vii. 31; xix. 2). When
Josiah overthrew this idolatry, he defiled the
valley by casting into it the bones of the dead,
the greatest of all pollutions among the Hebrews :
and from that time it became the common jakes
of Jerusalem, into which all refuse of the city was
cast, and where the combustible portions of that

312


853 HIRAM.


refuse were consumed by fire. Hence it came to
be regarded as a sort of type of hell, the Gehenna
of the New Testament. beg no other than the
name of this valley of Hinnom (Ge-Hinnom) ;
gee Matt. vy. 22, sq.; Mark ix.43; Luke vii. 5;
John iii. 6 [Hapes; Jerusares].

1. HIRAM (OV; Sept. Xepdy), king of
’ Tyre at the commencement of David's reign.
He sent an embassy to felicitate David on his
accession, which led to an alliance, or strengthened
a previous friendship between them. It seems
that the dominion of this prince extended over
the western slopes of Lebanon; and when David
built himself a palace, Hiram materially assisted
the work by sending cedar-wood fiom Lebanon,
and able workmen to Jerusalem (2 Sam. y. 113
1 Chron. xiv. 1), B.c. 1055.

2. HIRAM, king of Tyre, son of Abibaal, and
grandson of the Hiram who was contemporary
with David,-in the last years of whose reign he
ascended the throne of Tyre. Following his
grandfather's example, he sent to Jerusalem an
embassy of condolence and congratulation when
David died and Solomon succeeded, and con-
tracted with the new king a more intimate
alliance than ever before or after existed between
a Hebrew king and a foreign prince, The alliance
seems to have been very substantially beneticial
to both parties, and without it Solomon would
scarcely have been able to realise all the great
designs he had in view. In consideration of
large quantities of corn, wine, and oil, furnished
by Solomon, the king of Tyre agreed to supply
from Lebanon the timber required for the temple,
to float it along the coast, and deliver it at Joppa,
which was the port of Jerusalem (1 Kings v. 1,
8q.3 ix. 10, 8q.; 1 Chron. ii. 3, sq.). The vast
commerce of Tyre made gold very plentiful there ;
and Hiram supplied no less than 500 talents to
Solomon for the ornamental works of the temple,
and received in return twenty towns in Galilee;
which, when he came to inspect them, pleased bim
ao little, that he applied to them a name of con-
tempt, and restored them to the Jewish king
(2 Chron, viii. 2) (Cauur]. It does not, how-
ever, appear that the good understanding between
the two kings was broken by this unpleasant cir-
cumstance ; for it was after this that Hiram sug-
gested, or at least took part in, Solomon’s trattic
to the Eastern seas—which certainly could not
have been undertaken by the Hebrew king with-
out his assistance in providing ships and expe-
rienced mariners (1 Kings ix. 27; x. 11, &c.;
2 Chron, viii. 18; ix. 10, &c.), 3.c. 1007 [Opurr;
Sonomon; PHanicians§.

3. HIRAM, or HURAM, son of a widow of
the tribe of Dan, and of a Tyrian father. He was
sent by the king of the same name to execute
the principal works of the interior of the temple,
and the various utensils required for the sacred
services. We recognise in the enumeration of
this man’s talents by the king of Tyre a character
commun in the industrial history of the ancients,
namely, a skilful artiticer, knowing all the arts,
or at least many of those arts which we practise,
in their different branches [Hanpicrarr]. It is
probable that he was selected for this purpose by
the king from among others equally gifted, in
the notion that his half Hebrew blood would
render him the more acceptable at Jerusalem.


HISTORY.
HISTORY. Under this term we here intend


to give, not a narrative of the leading events
detailed in the Bible, but such general remarks
on the Biblical history as may enable the reader
to estimate the comparative value, and apply
for information to the proper sources, of historical
knowledge, as presented in or deduced from the
sacred records. The question of inspiration we
here leave untouched, because it is one of a
dogmatical nature, which will be fully discnssed
in a separate article. The histurical books
that are contained in the Bible pass, therefore,
under review as other historical documents, and
are subjected to the same rules of criticisin as
those which are applied to the productions of
protane writers. And if the believer should, in
consequence, find himself for a moment deprived
in imagination of a basis of reliance, he will be
repaid by the fact that, while he thus meets the
unbeliever on his own ground, he is enabled. by
the Spintention of recognised principles of his-
torical criticism, to prove beyond a question that
no history in existence can compare with the
Biblical history either in age, credibility, value,
or interest,

The subject-matter contained in the Biblical
history is of a wide and most extensive nature.
In its greatest length and fullest meaning it comes
down from the creation of the world till near the
close of the first century of the Christian era, thus
covering a space of some 4000 years. The books
presenting this long train of historical details are
most diverse in age, in kind, in execution, and in
worth; nor seldom is it the fact that the modern
historian has to construct his narrative as much
out of the implications of a letter, the highly
coloured materials of poetry, the far-reaciing
visions of prophecy, and the indirect and allusive
information of didactic and moral precepts, as
from the immediate and express statements of his-
tory strictly so denominated. The history of
Herodotus, embracing as it does most of the warld
known at his time, and passing, under the leading
of a certain thread of events, from land to Jand,—
this history, with its naive, graphic, gossip, and
traveller-like narratives, interweaving in a suc-
cession of fine old tapestries many of the great
events and moving scenes which had, up to his
time, taken place on the theatre of the world,
presents to the intelligent reader a continuation
of varied gratifications. But even the history of
Herodotus must yield to that contained or implied
in the Bible, not merely in extent of compass,
but also in variety, in interest, and bevond all
comparison, in grandeur, importance, and moral
and spiritual signiticance. The children of the
faithful Abraham seem to have had one creat
work of Providence intrusted to them, namely,
the development, transmission, and infusion into
the world of the religious element of civiliza-
tion. Their history, accordingly, is the history of
the rise, progress, and diflusion of true religion,
considered in its source and its developments.
Such a history must possess large and peculiar
interest for every student of human nature, and
pre-eminently for those who love to study the un-
foldings of Providence, and desire to leam that
greatest of all arts—the art of living at once for
time and for eternity.

The Jewish history contained in the Bible em-
braces more and less than the history of the


HISTORY


Israelites ;—more, since it begins with the begin-
ning of the earth and narrates with extraordinary
brevity events which marked the period termi-
nated by the flood, going on till it introduces us
to Abraham, the primogenitor of the Hebrew race ;
less, since, even with the assistance of the poetical
books, its narratives do not come down to a later
date than some 600 years before the birth of
Christ. The historical materials furnished re-
lating to the Hebrew nation may be divided into
three great divisions: 1. The books which are
consecrated to the antiquity of the Hebrew nation
—the period that elapsed before the era of the
judges. These works are the Pentateuch and the
book of Joshua, which, according to Ewald (Ge-
schichte des Volkes Israel, i. 12), properly con-
stitute only one work, and which may be termed
the great book of original documents. 2. The
books which describe the times of the judges and
the kings up to the first destruction of Jerusalem ;
that is, Judges, Kinys, and Samuel, to which
belongs the book of Ruth: ‘all these,’ savs Ewald,
* constitute also, according to their last formation,
but one work, which may be called the Great
Book of Kings.’ 3. The third class comprises
the books included under the head of Hagio-
grapha, which are of a much later origin, Cliro-
nicles, with Ezra and Nehemiah, forming the
great book of general history reaching to the
Grecian period. After these books come those
which are classed together under the name of
Apocrypha, whose use in this country we think
unduly neglected. Then the circle of evangelical
records begins, which closed within the century
that saw it open. Other books tound in the Old
and New Testaments, which arg not properly of a
historical character, conuect themselves with one
or other of these periods, and give important aid
to students of sacred history.

Biblical histury las not hitherto been satis-
factorily treated. Particular parts of it may indeed
have received the kind and degree of attention
required, but most writers who have treated that
history as a whole have been swayed, sone by
one, some by another warping influence, so that the
Bible las been made to speak the most diverse
tongues, now in favour of a naturalism which
finds an impossibility in every miracle, and now
in favour of a mysticism which sees a great spi-
ritual secret in every fact, if not in every letter.
It is useless indeed to expect that men will not be
influenced by their preconceptions; but they
cannot be justified, when they profess to write
history, in ascribing their opinions and forcing
their views on writers who lived thousands of
years before them, and with whose modes of think-
ang and inanner of writing they have not much in
common. History and the philosophy of history,
the history of fact and the listory of opinion, the
statement of what men have done, said, and thought,
and the discussion of what is true and proper, are
two different and very distinct departments of
knowledge and art, the contounding of which must
lead to perplexity and may involve us in serious
error. The proper way to treat of biblical his-
tory is what we may term the historical (in other
words the chronological) deduction of the facts
presented, as these facts were seen, believed, and
recorded by the several writers, An historian of
the Hebrews should as far as possible place him-
self, and aim to place the mind of his readers, in


HISTORY. 853


the centre of the mind of each biblical historian,
in order that, by seeing as the Hebrew saw, he
may, aided by skill and light which the Hebrew
did not and could not possess, present a vivid
picture of the several periods that are passed in
review. These remarks are not intended to be
taken so as to exclude the exercise of criticism on
authorities and alleged facts; but it must be his-
torical not philosophical criticism—criticism
whose implements, processes, and spirit, are bor-
rowed from philology, which is the oud onal of
history, not the crucible of modern anti-super-
naturalism, which, starting from a preconceived
notion, some persons would say, a huge, dark
falsehood, tries to extinguish every ray of hea-
venly light which may struggle amid the dark-
ness of earth, and to make history as rayless
and dull as itself. Philosophy has its own
sphere, in which we have no desire to give
it disturbance, but we do object to its attempt-
ing to pass olf its own offspring as pure historical
results.

Biblical history was often treated by the older
writers as a part of church history in gene-
ral, as they considered the history given in the
Bible as presenting different and successive
phases of the church of God (Bnddei Hist. Eccles.
2 vols. 1726-29; Stolberg, Geschichte der Reli-
gion Jesu, i. 111). Other writers have viewed
this subject ina more practical light, presenting
the characters found in the Bible for imitation or
avoidance; among whom may be enumerated
Hess (Geschichte der Isracliten tor den Zeiten
Jesu). Hess also wrote a history of Jesus (Ge-
schichte Jesu; Ziivich, 1775) + but the best work
is a more recent, and a very valuable one, by
Niemeyer (Characteristik der Bibel, Halle,
1830). Among the more strictly learned writers
several have had {t in view tu supply the gaps
left in the succession of events by the Bible, out -
of sources found iu profane writers. Here the
chief authors are of English birth, namely, Pri-
deaux, Shuckford, Russell; and for the New
Testament, the learned, cautious, and fair-deal-
ing Lardner [Curononogy]. There is a valu-
able work by G. Langen: Versuch einer Harmonie
der heiligen und profan scrib. in der Geschichte
der Welt, Bayreuth, 1775-80. Jahn, in his Bib.
Archiiolome, has, according to Gesenius (art. ‘ Bib.
Geschichte’ in Erschand Gruber's Alig. Enc.), made
free use of Prideaux. Other writers have pursued
a strictly chronological method, such as Usher
(Annales Vet. N. T. London, 1650), and Des
Vignoles (Chronologie de U Hist. Sainte, Berlin,
1738). Heeren (Handb. der Geschichte, p. 50)
recommends, as containing many valuable in-
quiries on the monarchical period, the following
work: J. Bernhardi Commentatio de causis qui-
bus effectum sit ut regnum Jud@ diutius persiste-
ret quam regnum Israel, Lovanni, 1825. Heeren
also declares that Bauer's Handbuch der Ge-
schichte des H. Volks, 1S0U, is the best intro-
duction both to the history and the antiquities of
the Hebrew nation; though Gesenius complains
that he is too much given to the construction of
hypotheses. The Enylish reader will find a use-
ful but not sufticiently critical compendium in
The History of the Hebrew Commonicealth, trans+
lated from the German of Jolin Jahn, D.D.
A far more valuable as well as more interesting,
yet by .no means faultless work, is Milman’s


854 HISTORY.


History of the Jews, published originally in
Murray's Family Library. A more recent and
very valuable work, Kitto’s Pictorial History of
Palestine, 1841, combines with the Bible history
of the Jews the results of travel and antiquarian
research, and is preceded by an elaborate Intro-
duction, which forms the only Natural History
of Palestine in our language.

German theologians are strongly imbued with
the feeling that the history of the Hebrews has
yet to be written. Niebulir's mauner of treating
Roman history has had a great influence on them,
and has aroused the theological world to new
eflorts, which have by no means yet come to an
end; nor can we add that they have hitherto led
to very delinite and generally approved results,
The works of Jost (Gesch. d. Israel. s. d. Zeit.
der Maccab. 1629-9), and Nork (Das Leben
Alosis aus Astron. Stand, betrachtet, 1838). and
others, must not be overlooked by the professional
student; nor will he fail to study with care the
valuable introductions to the knowledge of the
Old Testament put forth in Germany, with which
we have nothing comparable in our language:
among these introductions we can confidently
recommend—Einlettung in das alte est. von
I. G. Eichhorn (a work which forms an epoch);
Lehrbuch der Hist. Krit. Einleit. in die Bucher
des A. Test. von W. M. L. de Wette, 5th edit.
1810: and Iandb, der Mist. Writ. Kink it. in das
alte Testament, von TH. A. Ch. Havernick, 18065
in which Jast work a more full and thorough
treatment of the subject may be found. Of the
more recent works we may mention Stilielin’s
Kritische Untersuchungen uber der Pentateuch,
&c. 1843; and H. Kwald’s Geschichte des Volkes
Asracl bis Christus, Erster Band, 1843. Some-
thing worth notice may also be found in De Anno
Hebreorum Jubileo, seripsit J.T. K. Kranold,
Ewald intends his present work to be a compiete
history of tie Israelites, and considers it as a con-
tinuation of his Lie Propheten des Alten Bundes,
1810. We have not apace to give an account
here of the views which these writers put forth, and
we mean our recommendation of them to extend
only to the calm, dignilied, and profuundly
~ Jearned manner in which they handle their sub-
ject, suljoining that works like these must even-
tually produce a great intluence in the theulogical
world.

The sources of Biblical history are chiefly the
Biblical books themselves, Any attempt to fix
the precise value of these sources in a critical
point of view would require a volume instead of
an article. Whatever hypothesis, however, may
eventually be held touching the exact time when
these books, or any uf them, were put into their
actual shape, as also touching the materials out
of which they were formed, one thing appears
very certain, that (to take an instance) Geuesis,
the earliest book (probably), contains most indu-
bitable as well as most interesting historical facts ;
for though the age, the mode of life, and the state
of cultufe difler so widely from our own, we can-
not do otherwise than feel that it is among men
and women, parents and children—beings of like
passions with ourselves—and not with mere
creations of fancy or fraud, that we converse when
we peruse the narratives which this cumposition
has so long preserved. The conviction is much
strengthened iu the minds of those who, by per-


HISTORY


sonal acquaintance with the early profane writers,
are able to compare their productions with those
of the Hebrews, which were long anterior, and
must, had they been of an equally earthly origin,
have been at least, equally defurmed by fable.
The sole comparison of the account given in
Genesis of the creation of the world with the Cos-
mogonies of heathen writers, whether Hindoo,
Greck, or Latin, is enongh to assure the impartial
reader that a purer, if not a higher influence, pre-
sided over the composition of Genesis, than that
whence proceeded the legends or the philusophies ot
heathenism ; noris the conclusion in the slightest
degree weakened in the writer's mind by any dis-
crepancy which modern science may seem to show
us between its own discoveries and the statements
in Genesis. The Biblical history, as found in its
Biblical sources, has a decided peculiarity and a
great recommendation in the fact that we can
trace in the Bible more clearly and fully than in
connection with any other history, the first crude
elements and the early materials out of which all
history must be constructed. How far the litera-
ture supplied in the Bible may be only a relic of
a literary cyclus called into being by the felici-
tous circumstances and favourable constitution of
the great Shemitic family, but which has perished
in the lapse of ages. it is now impussible to deter-
mine; but had the other portions of this imagined
literature been of equal redigious value with what
the Bible ofers, there is little risk in affirming
that mankind would scarcely have allowed it to
be lost. The Bible, however, bears traces that
its were nut the only books current iu the time
and country to which it relates; for writing,
writers, and books are mentioned without the
emphasis and distinction which always accom-
pany new discoveries or peculiar local possessions,
and as ordinary, well-known, and matter-of-course
things. And it is certain that we do not possess
all the works which were known in the eariy
periods of Israelite history, since in Numbers
xxi. La we read of ‘the book of the wars af the
Lordy and in Joshua x. 18, of ‘the book of Jasher.’
Without writing, history, properly so called, can
have no existence. Under the head Writng we
shall trace the early rudiments and progress of
that important art: here we merely remark that
an acquaintance with it was possessed by the
Hebrews at least as early as their Exodus frum
Egypt—a fact which shows at least the possibility
that the age of the Biblical records stands some
thousand years or more [Cunonxorogy } prior ta
the earliest Greek Listorian, Herodotus.

Tiere is another fact which bas an important
bearing on the worth and credibility of the Bib-
lical narratives, namely, that the people of which
they speak were a commemurative race, were, 1D.
other words, given to create aud preserve me
morials of jinportaut events, Even in the patri-
archal times we find monuments set up in order
to commemorate events, Jacob (Geu. xxviii.
18) ‘set up a pillar’ to perpetuate the memory of
the divine promise; aud that these monuments
had a religions import and sanction appears trom
the statement that ‘he ponred oil upon the top of
the pillar’ (see Gen. xxxi. 45; Josh. iv. 9; 1
Sam, vii. 12; Judy. ix. 6) Long-lived trees,
such as oak and terebiuth, were made use of as
remembraucers (Gen, xxxv. 4; Josh. xxiv. 26).
Commemorative names, also, were given to per


HISTORY.


sons, places, and things; and from the earliest
periods it was usual tu substitute a new and de-
scriptive for an old name, which may in its origin
have been descriptive too (Exod. ii. 10; Gen.
ii. 23; iv. 1). Genealogical tables appear,
moreover, to have had a very early existence
among the people of whom the Bible speaks,
being carefully preserved first memoriter, after-
wards by writing, among family treasures, and
thus transmitted from age to age. These, indeed,
as might be expected, appear to have been the first
beginnings of history—a fact which is illustrated
and confirmed by the way in which what we
should term a narrative or historical sketch is
spoken of in the Bible, that is, as ‘the book of
the generation’ (‘of Adam,’ Gen. v. 1): a mode of
speaking which is applied even to the account of
the creation (Gen. ii. 4), ‘these are the genera-
tions of the heavens and the earth when they were
created.” The genealozical tables in the Bible
(speaking generally) are not only of a very early
date, but are free from the mixtures of a theo-
gonical and cosmogonical kind which are found
in the early literature of other primitive nations,
wearing the appearance of being, so far at least
as they go, true and complete lists of individual
and family descent (Gen. v. 1). But, perhapk,
the most remarkable fact connected with this sub-
ject is the employment of poetry at a very early
period to perpetuate a knowledze of historical
events. Even in Gen. iv. 23, in the case of La-
mech, we find poetry thus employed, that is, by the
great-grandson of the primitive father. Other
instances may be found in Exot. xv.3 Judg. v.5
Josh x. 13; 2 Sam. i. 18. This early use of
poetry, which must he regarded as a consider-
able step in civilization, implies a still earlier

re-existent culture; confutes the notion that

uman society began with a period of barbarism ;
Jooks favourably on the hypothesis that language
had an immediately divine origin; explodes the
position that the Hebrews were at first an ignorant,
untutored, and unlettered race; aud creates a
presumption on behalf of their historical literature.
Poetry is a good vehicle for the transmission of
great leading facts ; for, though it may throw over
fact a colouring borrowed frum the imagination,
yet the form in which it appears gives warning
that such hues are upon its details, which hues,
besides being themselves a species of history, are
then easily removed, while the form shuts up and
holds in the facts intrusted to the custody of
verse, and so transmits them to posterity without
additions and without loss. By means of these
several forms of commemoration much knowledge
would be preserved from generation to generation,
aud to their existence from the first may we
ascribe the brief, but still valuable, notices which
the Bible presents of the primitive ages and con-
dition of the world.

Other sources for at least the early Biblical
history are comparatively of small value. Jo-
sephus has gone over the same periods as the
Bible treats of, but obviously had uo sources of
consequence relating to primitive times which
are not open to us, and in regard to those times
does little more than add here and there a patch
of a legendary or traditional hue which could
have been well spared. His Greek and Roman
predilections and his apologetical aims. detract
from his value, while in relation to the early his


HISTORY. 855


tory of his country he can be regarded in no other
light than a sort of philosophical interpreter ; nor -
is it till he comes to his own age that he has the
value of an independent (not even then an im-
atin eye-witness or well-informed reporter.

n historical criticism and linguistic knowledge
he was very insufficieutly furnished. The use of
both Josephus and Philo is far more safe for the
student of the New Testament than for the ex-
pounder of the old.

The Talmud and the Rabbins afford very little
assistance fur the early periods, but might pro-
bably be made to vender more service in behalf
of the times of the Saviour than has been gene-
rally allowed. The illustrations which Lightfoot
and Wetstein have drawn from these sources are
of great value; and Gfrorer, in his Jahrhundert
des Heils (Stuttgart, 1838), has made an ample
use of the materials they supply in order to draw
a picture of the first century, a use which the
learned author is at no small pains to justify.
The compilations of the Jewish doctors, however,
require to be employed with the greatest caution,
since the Rabbins were the depositaries, the ex-
pounders, and the apologists of that corrupt form
of the primitive faith and the Mosaic institutions
which has been called by the distinctive name of
Judaism, which comprised an heterogeneous
mass of false and true things, the colluvies of the
East as well as light from the Bible, and which,
to a great extent, lies under the express con-
demnation of Christ himself. How easy it is to
propagate fables on their authority, and todo a
disservice to the Gospel records, may be learnt
from the fact that older writers, in their undue
trust of Rabbinical authority, went so far as to
maintain that no cock was allowed to be kept in
Jerusalem because fowls scratched unclean things
out of the earth, though the authority of Scripture
(which in the case they refused to admit) is most
express and decided (Matt. xxvi. 34; Mark xiv.
30, 60, 72). On the credibility of the Rabbins
see Ravii Diss. Phil. Theol. de eo quod Fidei
merentur, etc. in Oelrich’s Collect. Opuse. Hist.
Phil. Theol.; Wolf. Bibl. Hebr. ii. 1095; Fa-
bricius, Bibliog. Antiq. i. 3,4; Brunsmann, Diss.
de Judaica levitate, Hafnie, 1705. ;

The classic authors betray the grossest igno-
rance almost in all cases where they treat of the
origin and history of the Hebrew people; and
even the most serious and generally philosophic
writers fall into vulgar errors and unaccountable
mistakes as soon as they speak on the subject.
What, for instance, can be worse than the blunder
or prejudice of Tacitus,under the influence of which
he declared that the Jews derived their origin from
Mount Ida in Crete; that by the advice of an
oracle they had been driven out of Egypt; and
that they set up in their temple at Jerusalem as
an object of worship the figure of an ass, since an
animal of that species had directed them in the
wilderness and discovered to them a fountain
(Tacit. Hist. v. 1,2). Dion Cassius (xxxvii, 17)
relutes similar fables, Plutarch (Quest. Symn-
pos, iv. 5) makes the Hebrews pay divine honours
to swine, as being their instructors in agriculture,
and atlirms that they kept the Sabbath and the
Feast of Tabernacles in honour of Bacchus. A
collection of these gross misrepresentations, to-
gether with a profound and successful inquiry
into their origin, and a full exposure of their talse-


856 HITTITES.


hood, may be found in a paper by Dr. J. G.
Miiller, recently published in the Theologische
Studien und Kritiken (1843, Viertes Heft. p.
893).—J. R. B.

HITTITES (O°; Sept. Xerrafo:), or
children of Heth, one of the tribes of Canaanites
which occupied Palestine befure the Israelites
(Gen. xv. 20; Exod. iii, 8; xxiii, 23). They
lived in and about Hebron; and Abraham, when
he abode in that neighbourhood, was treated by
them with respect and consideration (Gen. xxiii,
3-7, 11, 12). This intimacy led to Esau’s mar-
riage with two women of this nation, to the grief
and annoyance of his parents (Gen, xxvi. 34, 35;
xxxvi. 2). The Hittites are described in Num. xiii,
29, along with the Amorites, as ‘dwelling in the
mountains,’ that is in what were afterwards called
©the mountains of Judah,’ of which Hebron was
the chief town. Uriah, who had the high honour
of being one of David's thirty ‘ worthies,” and,
unhappily for him, the hushand of Bathsheba, is
called a Hittite (2 Sam. xi. 3, 6; 1 Kings ix.
made He was, doubtless, a proselyte, and pro-
bably descended trom several generations of pro-
selytes; but the fact shows that Canaanitish blood
was in itself no bar to advancement in the court
and army of David. Solomon subjected the re-
maining Hittites to the same tribute of bond-
service as the other remnants of the Canaanite
Nations (1 Kings ix. 20). Of all these the Hit-
tites appear to have been the most important,
and tu have been under a king of their own:
for ‘the kings of the Hittites’ are, in 2 Kings
x. 29, coupled with the kings of Syria as pur-
chasers of the chariots which Solomon imported
from Egypt. We might have supposed that this
was sume different division of the [ittite family
living far away somewhere in the north. But
in 2 Kings vii. 6 we find that when the Syrians,
besieging Samaria, heard the sound of advancing
chariots, they concluded that the king of Israel
* (Joram J.) had hired against them ‘the kings
of the Hittites and the kings of the Egyptians.’
Now the mention of the Ezvptians shows that
the noise came from the south, from which quarter
it seems they and the Egyptians were ‘the only
people who couhl be expected to make an attack
with chariots. This identities them with the
southern Hivites, who were subject to the sceptre
of Judah, and it shows also that it was they
who purchased Exyptian chariots from the factors
of Solomon, The Hittites were still present in
Palestine as a distinct people after the Exile,
and are named among the alien tribes with whom
the returned Israclites contracted those mar-
riages which Ezra urged, and Nehemiah com-
atte them to dissolve (Ezra ix. 1, &c.; comp.

eh. xiti. 23-28). After this wetear no more of
the Hittites, who probably lost their national
identity by intermixture with the neighbouring
tribes or nutions.


HIVITES (‘Mf1; Sept. Evafor), one of the
nations of Canaan which occupied Palestine be-
fore the Israclites (Gren. x. 17: Exod. ini. 8, 17;
xxiii, 233 Josh. iii, 10). They ocenpied the
northern and north-eastern part of the ‘country.
In Judg. iii. 3, it is stated that ‘the Hivites
dwelt in Mount Hermon, from Mount Baal-
hermon unto the entering in of Hamaths” and in
Josh. xi. 3, the Hivites are described as living


HOBAB,


© under Hermon in the land of Mizpeb.’ The
‘cities of the Hivites’ are mentioned in 2 Sam.
xxiv. 7, and, from being associated with Sidon and
Tyre, must have been in the north-west. A rem-
nant of the nation still existed in the time of
Solomon, who subjected them to a tribute of per-
sonal labour, with the remnants of other Canaani-
tish nations which the Israelites hail been unable
to expel (1 Kings ix. 20). A colomy of this tribe
was alao found in Northern Palestine, occupying
the towns of Gideon, Chephirah, Beeroth, and
Kirjath-jearim ; and these obtained from Joshua
a treaty of peace by stratagem (Josh. ix. 3-17;
xi. 19).

HUBAB, kinsman of Moses and priest or
prince (for the word }713 carries buth significa-
tions) of Midian, a tract of country in Arabia
Petrza, on the eastern border of the Red Sea, at
No great distance from Mount Sinai. The family
of this individual seems to have observed the
worship of the true God in common with the
Hebrews (Exod. xviii. 11, 12); and from this
circumstance some suppose it to have been a
branch of the posterity of Midian, fourth san of
Abraham, by Keturah; while others, on the con-
trary, maintain that the aspersion cast upon
Moses for having married a Cushite is inconsistent
with the idea of its genealogical descent from that
patriarch (see Calmet).

Considerable difficulty has been felt in deter-
mining who this person was, as well as his exact
relation to Moses; for the word JNM, which, in
Exod. iii. 1, Num. x. 29, Judg. iv. 11, is trans
lated father-in-law, and in Gen. xix. 14, son-
tn-law, is a term of indeterminate signification,
denoting simply relationship by marriage; and
besides, the transaction which in one place (Exod.
xviii. 27) is related of Jethro, is in another related
of Hobab. The probability is, that as forty years
had elapsed since Moses’ connection with this
family was formed, his father-in-law (Exod. ii. 18)
Reuel or Raguel (the same word in the original is
used in both places) was dead, or confined to his
tent by the infirmities of age, and that the person
who visited Moses at the foot of Sinai was his
brother-in-law, called Hobab in Num. x. 29,
Judy. iv. 113 Jethro in Exod. iii, 1; aud °°) in
Judg. i. 16, which, in chap. iv. 11, is rendered
improperly ‘the Kenite.’

About a year after the Exodus he paid a visit
to Moses, while the Hebrew camp was lying in
the environs of Sinai, bringing with him Zipporah,
Moses’ wife, who, together with her two sous, had
been left with her family while her husband was
abseut on his embassy to Pharach. The inter-
view was on both sides affectionate, and was cele-
brated first by the solemn rites of religion, and
afterwards by festivities, of which Aaron and the
elders of Israel were invited to partake. On the
following day, observing Moses incessantly uecu-
pied in deciding cuuses that were submitted to him
for judgment, his experienced kinsman reman
strated with him on the speedy exhaustion which
@ perseverance in such ariuous labours would
superinduce; and iu order to relieve himself, as
well as secure a due attention to every case, he
urged Moses to appoint a number of subordinate
oflicers to divide with him the duty of the judi-
cial tribunals, with power to decide in all common
affairs, while the weightier and more serious
matters were reserved to himself. This wise sug-


HOBNIM.
gestion the Hebrew legislator adopted (Exod.


viii.).

When the Hebrews were preparing to decamp
from Sinai, the kinsman of Moses announced his
intention to return to his own territury; but if
he did carry that purpose into execution, it was
in opposition to the urgent solicitations of the
Jewish leader, who entreated him, for his own ad-
vantage, to cast in his lot with the people of God ;
at all events to continue with them, and afford
them the benefit of his thorough acquaintance with
the wilderness. ‘ Leave us not, I pray thee,’ said
Moses, ‘ forasmuch as thou knowest how we are to
encamp in the wilderness, and thou mayest be to
us instead of eyes ;’ which the Septuagint has
rendered xal fo év jypiv wperBérms— and thou
abalt be an elder amongst us.’ But there can be
little doubt that the true meaning is that Hobab
might perform the office of a hybeer or guide
eat a influence as an Arab chief, his

wledge of the routes, the situation of the wells,
the places for fuel, the prognostics of the weather,
and the most eligible stations for encamping, ren-
dering him peculiarly qualified to act in that
important capacity. It is true that God was their
leader, by the pillar of cloud by day and of fire
by night, the advancement or the halting of which
regulated their journeys and fixed their encam;
ments. But beyond these general directions the
tokens of their heavenly guide did not extend.
And as smaller parties were frequently sallying
forth from the main body in quest of forage and
other necessaries, which human observation or
enterprise were sufficient to provide, so Moses dis-
covered his wisdom and good sense in enlisting
the aid of a native sheik, who, from his family
connection with himself, his powerful influence,
and his long experience, promised to render the
Israelites most important services.—R. J.


HOBNIM (D°}31M) occurs only in one pas
sage of Scripture, where the prophet Ezekiel
(xxvii. 15), referring to the commerce of Tyre,
says, ‘The men of Dedan were thy merchants;
many isles were the merchandise of thine hand:
they brought thee for a present horns of ivory and
ebony (hubnim).’ The Hebrew word is trans-
lated. ‘ Ebony’ in all the European versions ; but,
as Bochart states (Hierozoicon, i. 20, pars ii.), the
Chaldee version, followed by R. Selomo and other
Jews, as well as the Greek and Arabic versions,
render hobnim by pea-fowl (pavones): ‘ Itaque
soli veterum Symmachus et Hieronymus viderunt
(D°93M) hobnim esse hebenum.’ Some of the He-
brew critics, however, as Kimchius, also acknow-
ledge this: ‘ Hobnim lignum interpretantur, quod
Arabicé vocatur abenus.’ Of the correctness of
this opinion there can now be no doubt. In the
first place, we may allude to Dedan being consi-
dered one of the ports of Arabia onsthe Persian
Gulf, or at least to the south of the Red Sea;
and secondly, as observed by Bochart, ‘hobnim et
hkebenus sunt voces on absimiles,’ the latter word
being variously written by ancient authors, as
éBévn, eBevos, ZBevov, ebenus and hebenus, The
last form is used by Jerome inhis Latin, and &Bevos
by Symmachus, in his Greek version, The Arabs


have wp, which they apply to Ebony, and


by that name it is known in northern India at
the present day. Forskiil mentions abnoos as one


HOBNIM. 887


of the kinds of wood imported in his time from
India into Arabia. Whether the Arabic name be
a corruption of the Greek, or the Greek a modifi-
cation, as is most likely, of some Eastern name,
we require some other evidence, besides the occur-
rence of the word in Arabic works on Materia
Medica, to determine; since in these, Greek words
are sometimes employed as the principal terms
for substances with which they are not well
Pia aap eae Bardust is, however, given by some
as Arabic name; adnoos as the Persian. We
found the latter applied to ebony in North-west
India, as did Forskal in the Red Sea.

Ebony wood was highly esteemed by the an-
cients, and employed by them for a variety of pure
poses. It is very appropriately placed in juxta-
position with ivory, ‘quamvis unum ex animali,
alterum ex arbore petatur. Quippe, ut notat Ful-
lerus (Miscell. vi. 14) utrique est extremus color
eodem excellentiw gradu. Ebori videlicet pul-
cherrimi candoris, hebeno speciosissimi nigroris.
Utrumque politissimum, nitidissimum, et in-
Sonn parabily lesbee conspicuum. Unde est, quod
in eosdem usus fere adhibentur, et ex utroque
arcus fiunt, pectines, tabula lusori#, cultrorum
manubria,’ &c. (Bochart, .c.). Ivory and Ebony
are probably, however, also mentioned together
because both were obtained from the same coun-
tries—Ethiopia and India; and, among the com-
paratively few articles of ancient commerce, must,
from this cause, always have been associated to-
gether, while their contrast of colour and joint
employment in inlaid work, would contribute as
additional reasons for their being adduced as
articles characteristic of a distinct commerce.


eat. (Diospyros Ebenum.]


But it is not in Ezekiel only that ebony and
ivory are mentioned together. For Diodorus, as
quoted by Bochart, tells us that an ancient king


of Egypt imposed on the Ethiopians the payment
of a tribute of ebony, gold, and elephants’ teeth,
So Herodotus (iii. 97), as translated by Bochart,
says, ‘ Ethiopes Persis pro triennali tributo vebunt
duos chanices auri apyri (id est, ignem nondum
expert), et ducentas ebeni phalangas, et magnos


658 HOBNIM.


elephanti dentes viginti.’ Pliny, referring to this
passage, remarks, ‘ But Herodotus assigneth it
rather to Ethiopia, and saith, that every three
years the Ethiopians were wont to pay, by way
of tribute, unto the kings of Persia, 100 billets of
the timber of that tree (that is Ebene), together
with gold and yvorie;’ and, again, ‘ From Syene
(which confineth and boundeth the lands of our
empire and dominion) as farre as to the island
Mervé, tor the space of 996 miles, there is little
ebene fouud : and that in all those parts betweene
there be few other trees to be found, but date
trees, which peradyenture may be a cause, that
Ebene was counted a rich tribute and deserved
the third place, after gold and ivorie’ (Holland's
Pliny, xii. 4).

It is sometimes stated that the ancients sup-
posed ebony to come only from India. This
arose probably from the passage of Virgil (Georg.
ii, 117) —

¢ ———— sola Iniia nigrum
Fert ebenum -


But the term ‘India’ had often avery wide sig-
nification, and included even Ethiopia. Several
of the ancients, however, mention both Indian
and Ethiopian ebony, as Dioscurides and Pliny ;
while some mention the Indian, and others the
Ethiopian ouly, as Lucan (Phars. x. 304),
‘nigris Meroé fecunda colonis,
Leta comis ebeni.’

The only objection to the above conclusion
of any weight is, that Aobnim is in the plural
form. To this Bochart and others have replied,
that there were two kinds of ebony, as mentioned
by Theophrastus, Dioscorides, &c., one Ethiopian,
the other Indian, Fuller and others maintain
that the plural form is employed because the
ebony was in pieces: ‘ refert. ad ebeni palan-zas,
qu ex India et Athiopia magno numero alfere-
bantur. @dAayyas vocant Herodotus et Arrianus
in Periplo. Plinius palangas, aut phalangas,
variante scriptura, id est, fustes teretes, et qui
Mavibus suyponuntur, aut quibus idem onus
plures bajulant’ (Bochart, 2. ¢.). But the names
of other valued foreign woods, as Suirri and
Avmvuauim, are also used in the plural form,
Besides abnoos, Arab authors, as stated by Bochart
(4 ¢.), mention other woods as similar to and
substituted for ebony: one of these is called
sheez, sheezee 3 also sasem and semsem, in the
plural form semasim ; described as nigrum lig-
num ad patinas conficiendas. Hence, in the
Koran, ‘de iis, qui in gehenna torquentur,’ it
is said, * Exibunt ex igne post aliquam in
€o moram; exibunt, inquam, tanquam ligna
semasim ;’ that is, black, from being burnt in
the fire. That such a wood was known we have
the testimony of Dioscorides—’Eviot 88 7d onod-
puva. A dxdyOiva EbAa, eupeph bvra, avril eBévov
wwdrover; ‘ Nonnulli sesamina aut acanthina
ligua, quod consimilia sunt, pro ebeno vendunt.’
Some critics, and even Sprengel, in his late
edition of Dioscorides, read cuxduiva, instead of
onoduva, for no other reason apparently but be-
cause ovxduiva denotes a tree with which Eu-
Fopean scholars are acquaiuted, while sesamina is
only known to those who consult Oriental writers,
or who are acquainted with the products of the
East. Bochart rightly observes, * Cave igitur ne
quidquzm mutes. Aliud enim hic sesamina


HOBNIM.


quam vulgo. Nempe ligna illius arboris que
Arabicé sasim et semsem appellatur, et ita plurali
semasim. Itaque Dioscoridis Arabs interpres


hic recte habet, &c. eles sesama ; and 0


also ‘ Arrianus in Periplo meminit gaddyyor
oncazivey Kal éBevivwy, palangarum = sesami-
narum et ebeninarum, que ex Indie urbe Ba-
rygasis in Persidem afferuntur’ (Bochart, J. ¢.).
The above word is by Dr. Vincent translated
sesamum ; but this is an herbaceous oil plant.

If we look to the modern history of ebony, we
shall tind that it is still derived from more than
one source. Thus, Mr. Holtzappfel, in his recent
work on Turning, describes three kinds of ebony.
1. One from the Mauritius, in round sticks like
scafluld poles, seldom exceeding fourteen inches in
diameter, the blackest and finest in the grain, the
hardest and most beautiful, 2. The East Indian,
which is grown in Ceylon and the Peninsula of
India, and exported from Madras and Bombay
in logs from six to twenty and sometimes even
twenty-eight inches in diameter, and also in
planks. This is less wasteful, but of an inferior
grain and colour to the above. 3. The African,
shipped from the Cape of Good Hope in billets,
the general size of which is from three to six feet
long, three to six inches broad, and two to four
inches thick. This is the least wasteful, as all the
refuse is left behind; but it is the most porous,
and the worst in point of colour. No Abvssi-
ian ebony is at present imported : this, however,
is more likely to be owing tu the ditlerent routes
which commerce has taken, but which is again
returning to its ancient channels, than to the want
of ebony in the ancient Ethiopia. From the nature
of the climate, and the existence uf forests in
which the elephant abounds, there can be no doubt
of its being well suited to the group of plants
which have been found to yield the ebony of
Mauritius, Ceylon, and India, namely, the genus
Diospyros of botanists. Of this several species
yield varieties of ebony as their Aeart-wood,
as D. Ebenum in the Mauritins, and also in
Ceylon, where it is called kaluicara. It is de
scribed by Retz ‘ foliis ovato-lanceolatis, acumi-
natis, gemmis hirtis;’ and he quotes as identical
D. qlaberrima (Fr. Rottb. Nov. Act. Haven, ii.
p. 540, tab. 5). D. Ebenaster yields the bastard
ebony of Ceylon, and D. hirsuta, the Calamander
wood of the same island, described by Mr.
Holtzapptel as of a chocolate brown colour, with
black stripes and marks, and stated by him to te
considered a variety of ebony. D. Melanozulon
of Dr. Roxburgh is the ebony-tree of Coromandel,
and is figured among Coromandel plants (i.
No. 46): it grows to be a large tree in the moun-
tainous parts of Ceylon, and in the Peninsula
of India—in Malabar, Coromandel, and Orissa.
The black.part of the wood of this tree alone
forma ebony, and is found only in the centre
of large trees, and varies in quantity according
to the size and age of the tree. The outside wood
is white and soft, and is soon destroved by time
and insects, leaving the black untouched (Rexb.
Fl. Ind. ii, p. 530). Besides these, there is in
the Peninsula of India a wood called dleckicoud
by the English, and sét-sad by the natives: it
grows to an immense size, is heavy, close-grained,
of a greenish black colour, with lighter coloured
veins running in various directions. It is yielded


HONEY.


by the Dalbergia latifolia. To the same genus
belongs the Sissoo, one of the most valued woods
of India, and of which the tree has been called
Dalbergia Sissoo. The wood is remarkably strong,
of a light greyish hue, with darker coloured veins.
It is called Sissoo aud Sheeshum by the natives
of India. This is the name which we believe is
referred to by Arab authors, and which also appears
to have been the original of the Sesamina of Dios-
corides and of the Periplus. The name may be
applied to other nearly allied woods, and therefore,
perhaps, to that of the above D. latifolia. It isa
curious confirmation of this that Forskal mentions


that, in his time, pia shishum, with teak and


ebony, was among the woods imported from India
and Arabia. It is satisfactory to have apparently
such satisfactory confirmation of the general ac-
curacy of ancient authors, when we fully under-
stand the subjects and the products of the coun-
tries to which they allude.—J. F. R.

HOG. [Boar; Swinz.]


HONEY. In the Scripture there are three
words denoting different sweet substances, all of
which are rendered by ‘honey’ in the Authorized
Version. These it is necessary to distinguish.


1. TY! yaar, which only occurs in 1 Sam. xiv.


25, 27,29; Cant. v. 1; and denotes the honey
of bees and that only.

2. ND) nopeth, honey that drops, usually asso-
ciated with the comb, and therefore bee-honey.
This occurs in Ps. xix. 10; Prov. v.3; xxiv. 13;
xxvii. 7; Cant. iv. 11.

3. Wa" debesh. This is the most frequent
word. It sometimes denotes bee-honey, as in
Judg. xiv. 8, but more commonly a vegetable
honey distilled from trees, and called manna by
chemists ; also the syrup of dates, and even dates
themselves. It appears also sometimes to stand
as a general term for all kinds of honey.

We shall here confine our remarks to honey in
general, and that of bees in particular, referring
for the vegetable honey to Manna, and for the
date-honey to Drink, STRONG.

It is very evident that the land of Canaan
abounded in honey. It is indeed described as
“a land flowing with milk and honey’ (Exod. iii.
8, &c.); which we apprehend to refer to all the
sweet substances which the different Hebrew
words indicate, as the phrase seems too large to
be confined to the honey of bees alone. Yet the
great number of bees in Palestine has been noticed
by many travellers; and they were doubtless still
more cummon in ancient times when tbe soil was
under more general cultivation, A recent tra-
veller, in a sketch of the natural history of Pales-
tine, names bees, beetles, aud mosquitoes, as the
insects which are most common in the country
(Schubert, Heise ins Morgenlande, ii. 120).

The natural history of the bee, with illustra-
tions of the passages of Scripture in which its
name occurs, has been given under a distinct
head [Bex]; and the use of honey in food, under
another [Foon]. The principal use of the pre-
sent notice is thereture that of an index to the
other articles in which the different parts of this
large subject ure separately investigated.

The ‘wild honey’ (wéar &ypiov) which, with
locusts, formed the diet of Juhu the Baptist, was


HONEY. 859
Robebly the vegetable honey, which we refer to


ANNA.

No travellers in the East have given us much
information respecting the treatment of bees, or
any peculiar modes of preparing the honey.

Honey was not permitted to be offered on the
altar (Lev. ii. 1]). As it is coupled with leaven
in this prohibition, it would seem to amount to
an interdiction of things sour and sweet. Aben
Ezra and others allege that it was because honey
partook of the fermenting nature of leaven, and
when burnt yielded an unpleasant smell—qua-
lities incompatible with offerings made by fire of
a sweet savour unto the Lord. But Maimonides
and others think it was for the purpose of making
a difference between the religious customs of the
Jews and the heathen, in whose offerings honey
was much employed. The first-fruits of honey
were, however, to be presented, as these were dee
tined for the support of the priests, and not to be
offered upon the altar.

Under the different heads to which we have
referred, the passages of Scripture relating to
honey are explained. The remarkable incident
related in 1 Sam. xiv. 24-32, requires, however,
to be here noticed. Jonathan and his party
coming to the wood, find honey dropping from
the trees to the ground, and the prince extends
his rod to the honeycomb to taste the honey. On
this the present writer is unable to add anything
to what he has stated elsewhere (Pictorial Bible,
in loc.), which is to the following etlect :—First,
we are tuld that the honey was on the ground,
then that it dropped, and lastly, that Jonathan

ut his rod into the honeycomb. From all this
it is clear that the honey was bee-honey, and that
honey-combs were above in the trevs, from which
honey dropped upon the ground; but it is not
clear whether Jonathan put his rod into a honey-
comb that was in the trees or shrubs, or into one
that had fallen to the ground, or that had been
formed there.

Where wild bees are abundant they form their
combs in any convenient place that offers, pare
ticularly in cavities or even on the branches
of trees; nor are they 80 uice as is commonly
supposed in the choice of situations. In India
particularly, and in the Indian islands, the forests
often swarm with bees. ‘The forests,’ says Mr.
Roberts, ‘literally flow with honey; large combs
may be seen hanging on the trees, as you pass
along, full of honey’ (Oriental Illustrations).
We have goud reason to conclude, from many
allusions in Scripture, that this was also, to @
considerable extent, the case formerly in Pales-
tine. Rabbi Ben Gershom and others indeed
fancy that there were bee-hives placed ‘all of a
row’ by the wayside. If we must needs have
bee-hives, why not suppose that they were placed in
the trees, or suspended from the boughs? This is
a practice in diflerent parts where bees abound,
and the people pay much attention to realise the
advantages which their wax and honey offer.
The woods on the western coast of Africa, between
Cape Blanco and Sierra Leone, and particularly
near the Gambia, are full of bees, to which the
negroes formerly, if they do not now, paid con-
siderable attention for the sake of the wax. They
had beehives, like baskets, made of reeds and
sedge, and hung on the out-boughs of the trees,
which the bees easily appropriated for the purpose


-


860 HOOK.


of forming their combs in them. In some parts
these hives were so thickly placed that at a dis-
tance they looked like fruit. There was also
much wild honey in the cavities of the trees
(Jobson'’s Golden Trade, p. 30, in Astley’s Col-
lection). Moore contirms this account, and adds,
that when he was there, the Mandingoes sus-
pended in this way straw bee-hives not unlike
our own, boarded at the bottom, and with a hole
for the bees to go in and out (Travels into the
inland parts of Africa, Drake's Collection).
As to the other supposition, that the honeycomb
had been formed on the ground, we think the
context rather bears against it; but the circum-
stance is not in itself unlikely, of incompatible
with the habits of wild bees. For want of a
better resource they sometimes form their honey
in any tolerably convenient spot they can find in
the ground, such as small hollows, or even holes
formed by animals. Mr. Burchel, in his Travels
tn South Africa, mentions an instance in which
his party (Hottentots) obtained about three pounds
of good honey from a hole which had formerly
belonged to the weazel kind. The natives treated
this as a usual circumstance, and indeed their
experience in such affairs was demonstrated by
the facility with which they managed to obtain
the honey without being injured by the bees.
HOOK, HOOKS. The following Hebrew
words are so rendered in the English Version:
nN, M30, 1}, 2212, MN, DIABY, 3¥, WD.
The idea of a thorn enters into the etymology of
several of them, probably because a thorn, hooked
or straight, was the earliest instrument of this kind.
Tacitus thus describes the dress of the ancient
Germans, Sagum, fibula, aut si desit spina con-
sertum; a ‘ loose mantle, fastened with a clasp,
or, when that cannot be had, with a thorn’ (Germ.


17).

t MM; (2 Kings xix. 28). ‘I will put my
hook in thy nose.’ Sept. @now 7a ayriotpd pov
dy trois puxtipol cov; Vulg. circulum tn na-
ribus tuis. In the parallel passage (Isa. xxxvii.
29) the Sept. reads, wal éuBare piudy eis thy pird
oov, ‘I will put my muzzle, halter, or noose,’
&c. Jehovah here intimates his absolute con-
trol over Sennacherib, by an allusion to the prac-
tice of leading buffaloes, camels, dromedaries,
&c., by means of a cord, or of u cord attached to
a ring, passed through the nostrils (Shaw's 7'ra-
vels, pp. 167, 8, 2nd edit.); Job xli, 1 (xl. 25]
*Canst thou draw out Leviathan with a hook ?
(ASN oceurs Isa. xix. 8, and Hab. i. 15; a&yxl-
otpov, hamum) or his tongue with a cord which
thou lettest down? Canst thou place a reed-cord
(JOIN, comp. Gr. cxoivos) in his nose, or bore
through his cheek with a thorn % (clasp, or possibly
bracelet, &c.) Sept. &€es 5¢ Spdxovra ev ayniot py,
wepiOhoes Bt popBalay rep fiva abrod; } dnceas
xpixoy ev Tw wuKTHpL abTov, PeAdy BE tpumjceis
7d xeiAos airov. ¢ Wilt thou draw out a dragon
with a hook? Wilt thou bind a band about his
nose ? Wilt thou fasten a ring in his nose, or bore
his lip with a bracelet?’ (Vulg. An extrahere
poteris Leviathan hamo, et fune ligabis linguam
ejus? Nunquid pones circulum in naribus ejus,
aut armilla pertorabis maxillam ejus?) § Wilt
thow put a ring in his nostrils, or bore through his
cheek with a bracelet? This passage in Job has
undergone the following speculations “see, for


y HOOK.


instance, Harris's Nat. Hist. of the Bible, art.
Leviathan, Lond. 1825). It has been assumed,
that Bochart has completely proved the Leviathan
to mean the crocodile (Rosenmiiller on Bochart,
vol. iii. 737, &c., 769, &c., Lips. 1796). Hero-
dotus has then been quoted, where he relates that
the Egyptians near Lake Meeris select a croco-
dile, render him tame, and suspend ornaments to
his ears, and sometimes gems of great value;
his fore-feet being adorned with Bracelets (ii.
69); and the mummies of crocodiles, having
their ears thus bored, have been discovered (Ken-
rick’s Egypt of Herodotus, p. 97, Lond. 1841).
Hence it is concluded that this passage in Job
refers to the facts mentioned by Herodotus ; and,
doubtless, the terms employed, especially by the
Sept. and Vulg., and the third and following
verses, favour the supposition ; for there the cap-
tive is represented as suppliant and obsequious, in
a state of security and servitude, and the object of
diversion, ‘ played with’ as with a bird, and sery-
Ing for the sport of maidens. Herodotus is fur-
ther quoted to show that in his time the Egyptians
captured the crocodile with a hook (aya:o7pov),
with which (eeAxdo@n eis TH iv) he was drawn
ashore; and accounts are certainly given by
modern travellers of the continuance of this prac-
tice (Maillet, Descrip. d’ Egypte, tom. ii. p. 127,
ed. Hag., 1740). But does not the entire deserip-
tion go upon the supposition of the tmpossibility
of so treating Leviathan? Supposing the allu-
sions to be correctly interpreted, is it not as much
as to say, ‘Canst thou treat Aim as thou canst
treat the crocodile and other fierce creatures?
Dr. Lee has, indeed, given reasons which render it
doubtful, at least, whether the leviathan does
mean the crocodile in this passage; or whether it
does not mean some species of whale, as was
formerly supposed; the Delphinus orca com-
munis, or common grampus, found in the Medi-
terranean, the Red Sea, and also in the Nile. (See
his examination of Bochart's reasonings, &c. in
Translation and Notes on Job, pp, 197 and 529-
539, Lond. 1837) [Leviaruan]. Ezek. xxix.
4 (BYNN) ‘I will put my hooks in thy jaws,’ &c.
(mayldas eis tas ciaydvas; frenum in marillis
tuis) ; Sand I will cause thee to come up out of the
midst of thy rivers, where the prophet foretells the
destruction of Pharaoh king of Egypt, by allusions
to the destruction, possibly, of a crucudile, the
symbol of Egypt. Thus Pliny (Hist. Nag. viii.
25) states, that the Tentyrita (inhabitants of
Fgypt) followed the crocodile, swimming after
it in the river, sprung upon its back, thrust a bar
into its mouth, which being held by its two extre-
mities, serves—ut frenis in terram agant—as a
bit, enables them fo force it on shure (comp.
Ezek. xxix. 3, 4). Strabo relates that the Teu-
tyrite displayed their feats before the Romans
(xvii. p. 560, ed. Casaub.). But see Dr. Lee on
this passage, ut supra.

2. DAMN, (Exod. xxvi. 82, 37; xxxviii. 19),
Shooks,' af repadldes, capita, capita columnarun ;
where the Sept. and Jerome seem to have under
stood the capitals of the pillars; and it has been
urged that this is more likely to be the meaning
than Aooks, especially as 1775 shekels of silver
were used in making these O71) for the pillars,
overlaying the chapiters, and filleting them
(ch. xxxviili., 28); and that the Aooks are really
the "Dp, aches (Exod. xxvi. 6, 11, 33, 35,


HOPHNI AND PHINEHAS.


xxxix. 33). Yet the Sept. also renders O71",
xplrot, ‘rings,’ or ‘clasps’ (Exod. xxvii. 10, 11,
and e&yxtaa, Exod. xxxviii. 17,19); and from a
comparison of these two latter passages it would
seem that these hooks, or rather tenters, rose out
of the chapiters or heads of the pillars.

3. 91D (1 Sam. ii. 13, 14), « flesh-hook,’ xped-
pa, fuscinula, and the M adr, the flesh-hooks’
(Exod. xxvii. 3, and elsewhere). This was evi-
deutly in the first passage, a trident ¢ of three
teeth,’ a kind of fork, &c. for turning the sacrifices
on the fire, aud for collecting fragments, &c.
(3.) AYWONN (Is. ii. 4. and elsewhere) ‘ beat their
spears into pruning-hooks’ (8pérava, falces), The
Roman poets have the same metaphor (Martial,
xiv. 34, * Falx ex ense’). In Mic. iv. 3, in ligones,
weeding-hooks, or shovels, dpades, &c. Joel re-
verses the metaphor * pruning-hooks’ into spears
(iii. 10, Zigones); and so Ovid (Fasti, i. 697, in
pila ligones). (4.) DYNDY (Ezek. xl. 43), ‘hooks,’
which Gesenius explains stad/s in the courts of
the Temple, where the sacrificial victims were
fastened; our translators give in the margin
‘endirons, or the two hearth-stones.’ The Sept.
seems equally at a loss, al madatorhy efover
yeicos; as also Jerome, who renders it labia.
Schleusner pronounces -yeigos to be a barbarous
word formed from 7M, and understands episty-
lium, a little pillar set on another, and capitedlum,


columned. The Chaldee renders popay, short
posts in the house of the slaughterers on which to
suspend the sacrifices. Dr. Lightfoot, in his
chapter § on the altar, the rings, and the laver,’
observes, ‘ On the north side of the altar were six
orders of rings, each of which contained six, at
which they killed the sacrifices. Near by were low
pillars set up, upon which were laid overthwart
beams of cedar; on these were fastened rows of
hooks, on which the sacrifices were hung; and
they were flayed on marble tables, which were
between these pillars’ (See vers. 41, 42; Works,
vol. 11, ch. xxxiv., Lond. 1684-5-6.) T¥
(Amos iv. 2), ‘take you away with hooks,’ SAors,
contis, ‘poles’ or ‘spears.’ In the same verse,
MIT NYWND, ‘fish-hooks,’ efs A€Byras troxaio-
pévous éuBadrovor, eumuporAomol, et reliquias
vestras in ollis ferventibus, where both Sept. and
Vulg. seem to have taken YD in the sense of a
pot or caldron instead of a fish-hook.—J. F. D.

HOPHNI AND PHINEHAS, the sous of
Eli, whose misconduct in the priesthood (as de-
scribed in 1 Sam. ii. 12-17) brought down that
doom of ruin and degradation upon the house of
Fli which formed the first divine communication
through the young Samuel (1 Sam. iii.). Hophni
and Phinehas were slain in the battle in which
the ark of God was taken by the Philistines, .c.
1141 (1 Sam. iv. 11). [Ett]


HOPHRA QM5M; Sept. Ovagpi, or Pia
RAOH-HOPHRA), king of Egypt in the time of
Zedekiah king of Judah, and of Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon. He formed alliance with
the former against the latter, end his advance
with an Egyptian army constrained the Chal-
dzeans to raise the siege of Jerusalem (Jer. xxxvii.
5); but they soon returned and took and de-
stroyed the city. This momentary aid, and the
danger of  plectne reliance on the protection of
Hophra, led Ezekiel to compare the Egyptians to


HOR. , 961


a broken reed, which was to pierce the hand of
him that leaned upon it (Ezek. xxix. 6,7). This
alliance was, however, disapproved by God; and
Jeremiah was authorized to deliver the prophecy
contained in his 44th chapter, which concludes
with a prediction of Hophra’s death and the sub-
i ae of his country by the Chaldeans [comp.
axPT].

The! Pharaoh-hophira is identified with the
Apries or Vaphres of ancient authors, and he
may be the Psamatik LI. of the monuments.
Under this identification we may conclude that
his wars with the Syrians and Cyrengans pre-
vented him from affording any great assistance
to Zedekiah. Apries is described by Herodotus
(ii. 169) as a monarch who, in the zenith of his
glory, felt persuaded that it was not in the power
even of a deity to dispossess him of his kingdom,
or to shake the stability of his sway; and this
account of his arrogance fully accords with that
contained in the Bible. Ezekiel (xxix. 3) speaks
of this king as ‘the great dragon that lieth in the
midst of the rivers, which hath said, my river is
mine own, and I have made it for myself.’ His
overthrow and subsequent captivity and death are
foretold with remarkable precision by Jeremiah
(xliv. 30); I will give Pharaoh-hophra, king of
Egypt, into the hands of his enemies, and into
the feuds of them that seek his Kfe.’ This was
brought about by a revolt of the troops, who
placed Amasis at their head, and after various
conflicts took Apries prisoner. He was for a time
kept in easy captivity by Amasis, who wished to
spare his life; but he was at length constrained to
give him up to the vengeance of his enemies, by
whom he was strangled (Herod. ii. 169; Wilkin-
son, Anc. Eqyptians, i. 168-182),

HOR (17, 145 Sept. “Op), a mountain of
Arabia Petrwa, on the confines of Idumza, and
forming part of the mountain of Seir or Edom.
It is only mentioned in Scripture in connection
with the circumstances recorded in Num. xx.
22-29. The Israelites were encamped before it,
when Aaron was summoned to its top to die there,
in the presence of his brother and son, who alone
witnessed his final departure Pearent:

The mountain now identified with Mount Hor
is the most conspicuous in the whole range of
Mount Seir, and at this day bears the name of
Mount Aaron (Jebel Haroun). It is in N. lat.
30° 18/7 E. long. 35° 33! about mid-way between
the Dead Sea and the Elanitic Gulf. It may be
open to question if this js really the Mount Hor on
which Aaron died, seeing that the whole range of
Seir was anciently called by that name; yet, from
its height and the conspicuous manner in which it
rises among the surrounding rocks, it seems not
unlikely to have been the chosen scene of the
high-priest’s death (Kinnear, p. 127). To this may
be added that Josephus altirms Mount Hor to have


_ been near Petra; and near that place there is cer-


tainly no mountain which can contest the dis
tinction with the one now in view. The base of
the highest pinnacle of this mountain is in fact
but a little removed from the skirts of the city
to the westward. The account of it given
twenty years since by Captains Irby and Man-
gles, in their then unpublished volume of Travels,
is the best we yet possess, and we thefefore
present the substance of their description in their
own worts.


862 HOR.


We engaged an Arab shepherd as our guide,
and leaving Abou Raschid with our servants and
horses where the steepness of the ascent com-
mences, we began to mount the track, which is
extremely steep and toilsome, and affords but an
indifferent fuoting. In some parts’ the pilgrim
must pick his way as he can, and frequently on
his hands and knees. Where by nature it would
have been impassable there are flights of rude
steps or inclined planes, constructed of stones
laid together, and here and there are niches to
receive the footsteps, cut in the live rock: the
— of pilgrims’ feet are scratched in the
rock in many places, but without inscriptions.
Much juniper grows on the mountain, almost to
the very summit, and many flowering plauts
which we had not observed elsewhere; some of
these are very beautiful ; most of them are thorny.


HOR.

On the hg is an overhanging shelf in the
rock which forms a sort of cavern: here we
found a skin of extremely bad water

for drinking, and a pallet of straw, with the
pitcher and other utensils of the sheikh who
resides here. He is a decrepit old man, who has
lived lere during the space of forty years, and
occasionally endured the fatigue of descending
and re-ascending the mountain. The tomb itself
is enclosed ina small building, differing not at
all in external form and appearance from those
of Mahommedan saints common throughout
every province of Turkey. It has probably been
rebuilt at no remote period : some small columns
are bedded in the wails, and some fragments of
granite and slabs of white marble are lying
about. The door is near the south-west angle,
within which a constructed tomb, with a pall


342.


thrown over it, presents itself immediately upon
entering: it is patched together out of fragments
of stone and marble that have mace part of other
fabrics. Upon one of these are several short lines
in the Hebrew character, cut in a slovenly man-
ner: we had them interpreted at Acre, and they

ved to be merely the names of a Jew and his
family who had scratched this record. It is not
probable that any professed Jew has visited the
spot for ages past, probably not since the period
of the Mahommedan conquest; it may lay claim,
therefore, to some antiquity, and in any case is a
curious appendage to the testimony of Josephus
on the subject. There are rags and shreds of
yarn, with glass heads and paras, left as votive
offerings by the Arabs.

‘Not far from the north-west angle is a passage,
descending by steps to a vault or grotto beneath,
for we were uncertain which of the two to call it,
being covered with so thick a coat of whitewash
that it is difficult to distinguish whether it is built


(Mount Hor.)


or hollowed out. It appeared, in great part at
least, a grotto; the roof is covered, but the whole


is rude, ill-fashioned, and quite dark. The
sheikh, who was not informed that we were
Christians, furnished us with a lump of butter.
Towards the further end of this dark vault lie
the two corresponding leaves of an iron grating,
which formerly prevented all nearer approach to
the tomb; they have, however, been thrown down,
and we advanced so as to touch it; it was covered
by a ragged pall. We were obliged to descend
barefoot, and were not without some apprehension
of treading on scorpions or other rele is such
a place.’

It is highly interesting to know what view it
was which last greeted the eyes of the dying
high-priest from this lofty eminence; and it is
the more so from the fact that the regions over
which the view extends is that in which the
Israelites wandered for forty years. Our travel-
lers supply this information :—


HOR-HAGIDGAD.


* The view from the summit of the edifice is
extremely extensive in every direction, and the
eye rests on few objects which it can clearly dis-
tinguish to give a name to, although an excellent
idea is obtained of the general face and features
of the country. The chain of Idumaan moun-
tains, which form the western shore of the Dead
Sea, seem to run on to the southward, though
losiug considerably in their height. They appear
in this point of view barren and desolate. Below
them is spread out a white sandy plain, seamed
with the beds of occasional torrents, and present-
ing much the same features as the most desert
parts of the Ghor. Where this desert expanse
approaches the foot of Mount Hor, there arise out
of it, like islands, several lower peaks and ridges,
of a purple colour, probably composed of the
same kind of sandstone as that of Mount Hor
itself, which, variegated as it is in its hues, pre-
sents in the distance one uniform mass of dark
purple. Towards the Egyptian side there is an
expanse of country without features or limit, and
lost in the distance. The lofty district which we
had quitted in our descent to Wady Mousa
shuts up the prospect on the south-east side; but
there is no part of the landscape which the eye
wanders over with more curiosity and delight
than the crags of Mount Hor itself, which stand
up on every side in the most rugged and fantastic
forms, sometimes strangely piled one on the other,
and sometimes as strangely yawning in clifts
a frightful depth. .... An artist who woulc
study rock-scenery in all its wildest and most
extravagant forms would find himself rewarded
should he resort to Mount Hor for that sole
purpose.’


HOREB. [Srnat.]


HOR-HAGIDGAD, an encampment of the
Israclites during their wandering (Num. xxxiii.
32, 33) [Wanperine].

HORITES, or HORIM, the people who inha-
bited Mount Seir before the Edomites [Ipustaa].


HORN (]7}2; Gr. xépas; Lat. cornw), from its
primary use for defence in the case of horned ani-
mals (whence Anacreon’s ia:s xépata tavpois),
came to acquire several derivative meanings,
some of which are connected with the illustration
and right understanding of holy writ. As horns
are hollow and easily polished, they have in an-
cient and modern times been used for drinking-
vessels and for military purposes; and as they are
the chief source of strength for attack and defence
with the animals to which God has given them,
they serve in Scripture as emblems of power,
dominion, glory, and fierceness (Dan. viii. 5, 9 ;
1 Sam. xvi. 1, 13; 1 Kings i. 39; Josh. vi. 4, 5;
1 Sam. ii. 1; Ps. Ixxv. 5,10; Jer. xlviii. 25;
Evck. xxix. 21; Amos vi. 13). Hence to defile
the horn in the dust (Job xvi. 2), is to lower and
degrade oneself, and, on the contrary, to lift up,
to exalt the horn (Ps, xxv. 43 Ixxix.17; exlviii.
14), is poetically to raise oneself to eminent
honour or prosperity, to bear oneself proudly.
Something like this is found in classic authors ;
thus Horace (Carm. iii, 21, 18) says,

‘Tu spem reducis mentibus anxiis
Viresque, et addis cornua pauperi.’
In tue East, at present, horns are used as an orna-
ment for the head, and as a token of eminent rank


HORNET. 863


Rosenmiiller, Morg. iv. 85). The women among
the Druses on Mount Lebanon wear on their heads
silver hornsof native make, ‘ which are the dis-
tinguishing badge of wifehood’ (Bowring’s Report
on Syria, p. 8).


By an easy transition, horn came to denote an
elevation or hill (Isa. v. 1); in Switzerland
mountains still bear this name, thus, Schreckhorn,
Buchhorn, The altar of burnt-offerings (Exod.
xxvii. 2) and the altar of incense (Exod. xxx. 2),
had each at the four corners four horns of shittim-
wood, the first being overlaid with brass, the
second with gold (Exod. xxxvii. 25; xxxvili. 2;
Jer. xvii. 1; Amos iii. 14). Upon the horns of
the altar of burnt-offerings was to be smeared
with the finger the blood of the slain bullock

g (Exod. xxix. 125 Lev. iv. 7-18; viii 15; ix. 9;
xvi. 18; Ezek. xliii. 20). By laying hold of
these horns of the altar of burnt-oflering the cri-
minal found an asylum and safety (1 Kings i.
50; ii. 28). These horns are said to have
served as a means for binding the animal
destined for sacrifice (Ps. cxviii. 27); but this
use Winer (Iandworterb.) denies, asserting that
they did not and could’ not answer for such a


purpose.

‘The old painters represented the head of Moses
as having two horns proceeding from his temples,
one on either side. This practice arose from a
mis-translation on the part of the Vulgate of the
words found in Exod. xxxiv. 29—cornuta esset
facies sua, where it is said in the Common Ver-
sion ‘the skin of his face shone.’ The Septua-
gint seems to have given a good rendering—
SeddEcorat 7) OYts TOD xpwparos, ‘ the appearance
of his face wore a glory, or ‘nimbus,’ that is, rays
parting from his head as from a centre, as the
Saviour, and, in the Roman Catholic Church, the
saints, are often painted—an appearance derived
from Moses’ interview with God, and designed to
convince the Israelites (Rosenmiiller, in loc.). In
asomewhat similar manner the Deity is said
(Habak. iii. 4) to have * had horns coming out of
his hands,’ that is to say, he was made manifest
by lightning and thunder (fulmina).—J. R. B.


HORNET, WASP. (AYT3, Exod. xxiii, 28,
Deut. vii. 20; Sept. ras opnelas; Vuly. crabro-
nes; Josh. xxiv. 12, rijv opnxtay, crabronem ;
Wisd. Sol. xii. 8, opijxas, vespas, * wasps’). The
Greek words dv@phyn and oofé are given in the
lexicons as signifying both ‘homet’ and ‘wasp,’
especially the former of them (Stephens, Scapul


864 HORNET.


8. 0.) ; and the Latin vespa as denoting the ‘ wasp,’
and crabro the ‘hornet’ (Facciolati, Lez. 8. v.)
But Harduin contends that that which is vespa
with the Latins is properly with the Greeks avéphyn
(Gallicé, une guépe), and not opft, as was thought
by Gaza and Scaliger; and urges that on this
se so learned a Latin author as Pliny ought to

considered sufficient evidence; that he ascribes
to the vespe those things which Aristotle (Hist.
Anim. v.19. 6173 ix. 65. 66) ascribes to the
dvOphvat; and, further, that he also ascribes to the
crabrones those things which Aristotle ascribes to
the apices (comp. Arist. ut supra; Pliny, Hist.
Nat. xi. 24, ed. Harduin, ii. p. 1741). The word
cerabrones Harduin accordingly explains, ‘Gracis,
opixes; Gallis, des frelons, hormegs.” If this cri-
ticism be just, it vindicates both Jerome's trans-
lation of the three first words, and the English
also. Our confidence in the definiteness of the
Sept. rendering becomes increased when it is re-
membered that the Pentateuch, the most accnrate
ate of the whole version, was translated pro-

bly within fifty years after the death of Aris-
totle. Certainly the known characteristics of the
hornet agree with the descriptions given of the
ooné by Aristotle, and of the crabro by Pliny.
‘The dvOpyvas do not live by the nutriment
collected trom flowers, as the bees, but prey upon
many kinds of flesh; whence also they frequent
manure, for they pursue the great flies, and when
they have caught them, having removed the head,
they fly away, carrying the rest of the body’
(Hist. Ani. ix.). Again :—at piv dvOpiivas, em
peredpov Tivos’ of 3¢ opines, ev tpaéryAn (motodar
knpia), ‘The dv@pjvcu build their nests in some
elevated place, but the apes in a hole or cavity’
(v.19). The description of Pliny is nearly a trans-
lation of the above :—‘ Vespa in sublimi nidos
faciunt, crabrones in cavernis, aut sub terra ;’ on
which Cuvier remarks, ‘ Sepe sub tectis, aliquando
sub terra vespe; in cavis arboribus crabrones,
wedificant’ (Plin, Libri de Animal. curante J. B.
Fr. S, Ajasson De Grandsagne, cum fotis a Cu-
vier, Paris, 1838, p. 424, n. 2).

Still it must be noticed that, as Harduin re-
marks, with wonder, Pliny, when speaking of the
tchneumones, a lesser species of hornet, calls them
vespe, while Aristotle, in the corresponding descrip-
tion, calls them opaxes (N.10). It would hence
seem probable that the word vespa was sometimes
used in an analogical aud more comprehensive
sense by Pliny; which may account for a similar
variation in Jerome's rendering, ‘vespas* (Wisdom
xii. 8). Even the Greek word had already under-
gone great abuse, for Heaychius, 150 years before
Jerome, explains ayOptvn by ef5us peAloons, ‘a
species of bee’; and Suidas, in the eleventh cen-
tury, explains it as a species of wasp, and observes
that the poets misapplied the word to the bee (see

_ also Hom. /1. xiii. 167). It being upen the whole
most probable, therefore, that ‘the hornet" is the
true rendering in these pa-sazes of Scripture, the
only further question which remains is, whether the
word is tu be taken as literally meaning this well-
known and terrific insect, or whether it is to be
understood in a metaphorical and tigurative sense
for diseases, supernatural terror, &c. by which
Jehovah ‘drove out the Hivites, Canaanites and
Hittites from before Israel.". Among the modems,
Michaelis has defended the figurative sense. Inad-
dition to other reasons for it, he doubts whether the


. HORSE.


expulsion of the Canaanites could be effected by
swarms of ggmxla:, and proposes to derive the He
brew from a root signifying ‘scourges, ‘ plagues,
scutica, plage, &c. (Suppl. ad Lexic. Hebr. vi.
2154); but his reasons are ably refuted by Ro-
senmiiller, apud Bochart (Hieroz. Lips. 1796,
iii. ch. 13, p. 402, &c.). In fuvour of the pos
sibility of such an event it is observed, that
Ailian relates that the Phaselite were actually
driven from their locality by such means (¢ao7-
Aitas 5¢ opijxes x. 7. A. Hist. Anim. ix. 25 ).and
Bochart has shown that these Phaselite were a
Phenician people (ut supra, p. 412). Even Ro
senmiiller himself adopts the figurative scnse in
his Scholia on Exod. xxiii. 28; but on Jos’.
xxiv. 12 he retracts that opinion, and aroply re-
futes it. His reasonings and refutations have
been adopted by numerous writers (amony others,
see Paxtun’s Iilustrations of Scripture, i. 305,
&e.; Edin. 1819), Michaelis’s doubt of the abl-
stract possibility seems very unreasonable, when the
irresistible power of bees and wasps, &c ,, attested by
numerous modem occurrences, and the thin and
partial clothing of the Canaanites, are considered.
It is observable that the event is represented by
the author of the book of Wisdom as a mere
ful dispensation, by which the Almighty, he says,
‘spared as men, the old inhabitants of his huiy
land,’ and ¢ gave them place for repentance.’ If
the hornet, considered as a fly, was in any way
connected with their idolatry, the visitation would
convey a practical refutation of their error [see
Baalzebub, under Baar]. It may be remarked,
that the hornet, no less than the whole species
of wasps, renders an essential service, in check-
ing the multiplication of flies aud other insecta,
which would otherwise become intolerable to
man; and that in regard to their architecture,
and especially their znstincés and habits, they do
not yield to their more popular congener, the bee,
but even, in several respects, greatly excel it
(Kirby and Spence, Introduct. to Entomolozy,
8vo. Lond. 1528, i. 273, 274; Reaumur, Ws-
motre pour servir aU Histoire des Insectes, vol. vi.
Mem. 6, pour des Guespes, 4to. Par. 1734-123. —
J.¥.D.

HORSE (DAD sees ; Gr. frmos; Turkish sua;
Gen. xlvii. 17; xlix. 17; Exod. xiv. 9, 23, aud
in many other places; James iii. 3; Rev. vi.
2, &c. Other names and epithets occur in the
Hebrew, as O15 parash, a ‘saddle and chariot
horse, Isa. xxi. 7,9; DOD parashim, § Persians’
or ‘horsemen 3° W397 rechesh, the * switt,” Mic.
1.133 339 rachad, ‘cavalry, or *a group of war
chariots, Gen. 1.9; 2Sam. viii. £5 POV ranaeh,
‘a mare?) (Esth, viii, WW; and O° VAN ailoren,
‘mighty or strung ones,’ Judy. y. 223 Jer. vil.
16). In the present writer’s remarks upon the
Hebrew uames of the horse, coutained in Sir W.
Jardine’s Naturalist’s Librury (vel. xii., Intro-
duction, pp. 78-S1), several are pointed cut as of
foreign origin, By the subsequent observations
in the same work, it appears to be substantiated,
that the horse was derived from) High Asia, and
was not indigenous in Arabia, Syria, or Egypt.
They are not mentioned among the presents
which Pharaoh bestowed upon Abraham, and oc-
cur in Scripture for the first time when the patri-
arch Joseph receives them from the Egyptians in
exchange for bread (Gen. xlvii. 17}—evidently as
valuable animals, disposed of singly, and not in


HORSE.


droves or flocks, like cattle and asses. They were
sti}] sufficiently important to be reer men-
tioned in the funeral procession which accompa-
nied the body of J: to his sepulchre in Canaan
(Gen. 1. 9); and, for centuries after, it does not


344. [Egyptian Horse.)

a that, under the domestic management of
ihe Epyptions, unless the murrain had greatly re-
duced them, horses had multiplied as they would
have done in a land more congenial to their habits,
since only six hundred chariots appear to have
reued Israel (Exod. xiv. 7) ;—even admitting
That there were other chariots and horsemen not
included in that number. _ In the. sculptured
battle-ecenes, which are believed to represent
victories of Sesostris, or of Thothmes II. and III.,
over nations of Central Asia, it is evident that the
enemy's armies, as well as the foreign allies of
Egypt, are abundantly supplied with horses, both
te cheno and for riders; and in triumphal pro-
cessions they are shown as presents or tribute—
proving that they were portions of the national
wealth of conquered states sufficiently valuable
to be prized in Egypt. At a later period, the
books of Deuteronomy (xvii. 16, for the future
kings of Israel are forbidden to possess many)


and Joshua (xi. 4) furnish similar evidence of
abundance of horses in the plains of Syria ; and
in Job occurs a description of a perfect war-
horse couched in the bold figurative language of
inspiration, such as remains unequalled by any
other poet, ancient or modern. Though the
Israelites had chariots and horsemen opposed to
them in the plain country from their first entrance
into the land of promise; as in Judges iv. 15,
where we find Sisera with his chariots of war de-
feated at the foot of Mount Tabor; yet not being


HORSE. 86h


intended to make military conquests beyond the
mountain basin and the adjacent territory as-
signed them, they long remained without cavalry
or chariots themselves (Deut. xvii. 16; 2 Sam.
viii. 4): they obeyed the divine injunction to
abstain from possessing horses, and, to the time
of David, ham-strung such as they captured from
their enemies. It ap however, that a small
cavalry force was raised by him; and as, in all
the military operations of Western Asia, there
was a tendency to increase the mounted force and
neglect the infantry, on the full establisliment of
royalty, when the Hebrew government acquired a
more political structure, the reign of Solomon dis-
layed a military system which embraced a re-
gular body of horse and of chariots, evidently be-
come the more necessary, since the limits of his
sway were extended to the shores of the Arabian
Gulf, and far into the Syrian desert (1 Kings x
26). Solomon likewise acted with commercial
views in the monopolizing spirit which Eastern
sovereigns have been prone to exercise in all ages.
He bought chariots and teams of horses in Egypt,
and probably in Armenia, ‘in all lands,’ and had
them brought into Lis dominions in strings, in the
same manner as horses are stil] conducted to and
from fairs: for this interpretation, as offered b:
Professor Paxton, appears to convey the natu:
and true meaning of the text ; and not ‘ strings of
linen yarn,’ which here seem to be out of place
(2 Chron. i. 16, 17; ix. 25, 28).

The Tyrians purchased these objects from Solo-
mon, and, in the time of Ezekiel, imported horses
themselves from Togarmah or Armenia. On ré-
turning from the Babylonish captivity, the com-
mon possession of horses in Palestine was no
longer opposed; for Nehemiah numbers seven
hundred and thirty-six belonging to the liberated
Hebrews (Neh. vii. 68).

All the great original varieties or races of
horses were then known in Western Asia, and the
Hebrew prophets themselves have not unfrequently
distinguished the nations they bad in view, by
means of the predominant culours of their borses
—and that more correctly than commentators
have surmised. Taking Bochart’s application
of the Hebrew names, the bay race, DIN adom,
emphatically belonged ,to Egypt and Arabia
Felix; the white, 0925 debonim, to the regions
above the Euxinue Sea, Asia Minor, and northern
High Asia; the dun, or cream-coloured, D'pW
serukim, to the Medes; the spotted piebald, or
skewbald, DYI93 berudim, to the Macedonians,
the Parthians, aud later Tahtars; and the black,
DINY shachorin, to the Romans; but the ches-
nuts, PON amutz, do not belong to any known
historical race (Zech. i. 8; vi. 2).

Bay or red horses occur most frequently on
Egyptian painted monuments, this being the pri-
mitive colour of the Arabian stock; but white
horses are also common, and, in a few instances,
black—the last probably only to relieve the paler
colour of the one beside it in the picture. There
is also, we understand, an instance of a spotted pair,
tending to show that the valley of the Nile was
originally supplied with horses from foreign
sources, and distinct regions, as indeed the tribute
pictures further attest. The spotted, if not real,

but painted horses, indicate the antiquity of a
practice still in vogue; for staining the hair of
riding schenale wth spot ot yerar Cee, and
x


‘


866 HOSANNA.


dyeing their limbs and tails crimson, is a fp
tice of common occurrence in the East, and was
exemplified in London when the late Shah of
Persia presented the Prince Regent with several
white and grey horses, all of which were ridden
to Carlton Palace with their tails dyed crimson,
as we ourselves witnessed [ Ass].

On the natural history of the horse there is no
occasion to enter in this place; but it may he pro-
per to notice that the riding bridle was long a
mere slin-knot, passed round the under jaw into
the mouth, thus furnishing only one rein; and
that a rod was commonly added to guide the
animal with more facility. The bridle, however,
and the reins of chariot-horses were, at a very
early age, exceedingly perfect ; as the monuments
of Egypt, Etruria, and Greece, amply prove.
Saddles were not used, the rider sitting on the
bare back, or using a cloth or mat girded on the
animal. The Romans, no doubt copying the Per-
sian Cataphracte, first used pad saddles, and from
the northern nations adopted stimuli or spurs.
Stirrups were unknown. Avicenna first. mentions
the rikiad, or Arabian stirrup, perhaps the most
ancient; although in the tumuli of Central Asia,
Tahtar horse skeletons, bridles, and stirrup sad-
dies, have been found along with idols; which

ves the tombs to be more ancient than the intro-
Fiction of Islam. With regard to horse-shoeing,
Bishop Lowth and Bracy Clark were mistaken
in believing that the Roman horse or mule shoe
was fastened on without nails driven through the
horny part of the hoof, as at present. A contrary
conclusion may be inferred from several passages
in the ; and the figure of a horse in the
Pompeii battle mosaic, shod in the same manner
as is now the practice, leaves little doubt on the
question. The preceding cuts represent ancient
Persian and Egyptian horses, both taken from
antique bas-reliefs.—C. H. S.

HORSE-LEECH. [Atuxau.]


HOSANNA (§} MYYAN; New Test. ‘Qowrd),
a form of acclamatory blessing or wishing well,
which signifies, Save now! Succour now! Be
now propitious! It occurs in Matt. xxi. 9 (also
Mark xi. 9, 10; John xii. 13)—* Hosanna to the
Son of David; Blessed is he that cometh in the
name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest.’ This
was on the occasion of our Saviour’s public entry
into Jerusalem, and fairly construed, would mean,
‘ Lord, preserve this Son of David; heap favours
and blessings on him!’ It is further to be ob-
served that Hosanna was a customary form of
acclamation at the Feast of Tabernacles. This
feast was celebrated in September, just before the
commencement of the civil year; on which oc-
casion the people carried in their hands bundles
of boughs of palms, myrtles, &c. (Joseph. Antig.
xiii. 13.6; ini. 10.4). They then repeated the
25th and 26th verses of Ps. cxviii., which com-
mence with the word Hosanna; and from this
circumstance they gave the boughs, and the
rayers, and the feast itself, the name of Hosanna.
They observed the same forms also at the Enceenia
(1 Mace. x. 6,7; 2 Macc. xiii. 51; Rev. vii. 9)
and the Passover. And as they celebrated the
Feast of Tabernacles with great joy and gladness,
in like manner, on this occasion, did they hail
the coming of the Messiah, whose advent they be-
lieved to be represented in all the feasts.


HOSEA.


HOSEA (PPA), the first in order of the minor
rophets in the common editions cf the Hebrew
criptures, as well as of the Alexandrian and
Vulgate translations. The arrangement of the
other writers, in the AwSexampdprroy of the Greek
version, differs considerably from that of the
Hebrew copies. Jerome (Pref. in XII. Pro-
phetas) says, ‘ Non idem est ordo duodecim pro-

hetarum apud Hebreeos qui est apud nos.’ Both,
however, place Hosea first in the catalogue; yet
the reasons often assigned for the priority of place
which this prophet enjoys are by no means satis-
factory. They are founded on a misinterpretation
of the first clause of the second verse of his oracles,


mm-ast ndnn, § the beginning of the word of
the Lord.’ Hengstenberg (Christology, Keith's
translation, vol. ii. p. 23), denying, against Winer
and Gesenius, that 13'T is a noun, and taking it to
be the preter of pi’hel, renders the clause, ‘ the be-
ginning of the Lord hath spoken ;’ the status con-
structus of nbnn, according to him, being ex-
plained by the fact ‘ that the whole following pro-
position is treated as one substantive idea.” But
this phraseology has reference not to priority of time
in Hosea's commission as compared with other pro-
phets, but to the early period of the predictions to
which it is the thteedaetion. It 1s merely an
intimation that they were the first divine com-
munications which the son of Beeri enjoyed.
Neither did Hosea flourish earlier than all the
other minor prophets: the very early era assigned
to him by the Jewish writers and other expositors
of former times are altogether extravagant. By
the best computation he seems to have been pre
ceded by Joel, Amos, and Jonah. The prophets
are thus arranged by De Wette (Etnleitug,


Hebrew Text. Greek Text.
1. Hosea. 1. Hosea,
2. Joel. 2. Amos.
3. Amos. 3. Micah.
4. Obadiah. 4. Joel.

Chronological Order.
1. Joel, about 810 n.c.
2. Jonah ,, 810 s.c.
3. Amos ,, 790 B.c.
4. Hosea ,, 785 B.c.


The table given by Rosenmiiller (Scholia i=
Min. Proph. p. 7) differs from this only in
placing Jonah before Joel in chronological order.
Compare Newcome (Preface to Minor Prophets,
4 45). The probable causes of this location of

osea may be the thoroughly national character
of his oracles, their length, their earnest tone and
vivid representations: because he discharged the
duties of his office for a longer period than any
of his prophetic associates, is the less natural con-
jecture which has been hazarded by Rosenmiiller.
The contour of Hosea’s book has a closer resem-
blance to the greater prophets than any of the
eleven productions by dhich it is succeeded.

The name of this prophet has been varions)y in-
terpreted. Jerome erroneously renders it * Salvator.”
It may be either the intinitive absolute, ‘Salvanio,”
or the imperative, ‘Salva’ (O Deus). It is ordi-
narily written in Greek, ‘Qoné, and once with the
initial aspirate, ‘Qoné (Rom. ix. 25). The fig-
ments of Jewish writers regarding Hosea's pa-
rentage need scarcely be mentioned. His father,
N23, has been confounded with M7N3, a prince


‘ HOSEA.


of the Reubenites, 1 Chron. v. 6. So, too, Beeri
has been reckoned a prophet himself, according to
the rabbinical notion that the mention of a pro-
phet’s father in the introduction to his prophecies
1s a proof that sire as well as son was endowed
with the oracular spirit.

Whether Hosea was a citizen of Israel or Judah
has been disputed. The psendo-Epiphanius and
Dorvtheus of Tyre speak of him as being born at
Belemoth, in the tribe of Issachar (Epiphan. De
Vitis Prophet. cap. xi.; Doroth. De Proph.
cap. i.). Drusins (Critici Sacri, in loc., tom. v.)
prefers the reading ‘ Beth-semes,’ and quotes
Jerome, who says, ‘ Osee de tribu  Issachar
fuit ortus in Beth-semes.’ But Maurer contends
strenuously that he belonged to the kingdom of
Judah (Comment. Theol., ed. Roseumiilles, vol. ii.

. 391); while Jahn supposes that he exercised

is office, not, as Amos did, in Israel, but in the
principality of Judah. Maurer appeals to the su-
eit sae in Amos as a proof that prophets of

ewish origin were sometimes commissioned to
labour in the kingdom of Israel (against the
appeal to Amos, vide Credner, Joel, p. 66, and
Hitzig, Handb. Kurzge. exeget zum A. T. p. 712).
But with the exception of the case recorded in
1 Kings xiii. 1 (a case altogether too singular
and mysterious to serve as an argument), the
instance of Amos is a solitary one, and seems
to have been regarded as anomalous by his
contemporaries (Amos vii. 12). Neither can we
assent tu the other hypothesis of Maurer, that the
mention of the Jewish kings Uzziah, Jotham,
Ahaz, and Hezekiah, by Hosea in his superscrip-
tion, is a proof that the seer regarded them as his
rightful sovereigns, as monarchs of that territory
which gave him birth. Hengstenberg has well
replied, that Maurer forgets ‘the relation in which
the pious in Israel generally, and the prophets in
particular, stood to the kingdom of Judah. They
considered the whole separation, not only the
religious, but also the civil, as an apostacy from
God. The dominion of the theocracy was pro-
mised to be the throne of David.’ The lofty
Elijah, on a memorable occasion, when a direct
and solemn appeal was made to the head of the
theocracy, took ficelve stones, one for each tribe—
a proof that he regarded the nation as one in reli-
gious confederation, It was also necessary, for
correct chronology, that the kings of both natious
should be noted. Jeroboam of Israel is mentioned
as a means of ascertaining at whut period in the
long reign of Uzziah Hosea began to prophesy,
and Uzziah’'s successors are named in particular,
because the confusion and anarchy of the several
interregna in the kingdom of Israel rendered
computation by the names of Jeroboam’s succes-
sors very awkward, difficult, and uncertain.
The other argument of Maurer for Hosea’s being
a Jew, viz. because his own people are so severely
threatened in his reproofs and denunciations, im-
plies a predominance of national prepossession or
antipathy in the iuspire.t breast which is incon-
sistent with our notions of the piety and patriotism
of the prophetic commission (Knobel, Der Pro-
phetismus der Hebréer, vol. i. p. 203). So that
we accede to the opinion of De Wette, Rosen-
miiller, Hengstenberg, Eichhorn, Manger, Uhland,
and Kuinoel, that Hosea was an Israelite, a
native of that kingdom with whose sins and fates
his book is specially and primarily occupied.


HOSEA. 867


There is no reason, with De Wette, Maurer,
and Hitzig, to doubt the genuineness of the
sent superscription, or, with Rosenmiiller and Jahn,
to suplioss that it may have been added by a
later hand—though the two last writers uphold its
authenticity. The first and second verses of the
prophecy are so closely connected in the structure
of the language and style of the narration, that
the second verse itself would become suspicious,
if the first were reckoned a spurious addition.
The superscription determines the length of time
during which Hosea prophesied. That period
was both Jong and eventful, commencing in the
days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, extending
through the lives of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and
concluding in the reign of Hezekiah. Uzziah and
Jeroboam were contemporary sovereigns for a cer-
tain length of time. If we compute from the first
year of Uzziah to the last of Hezekiah, we find a
period of 113 years. Such a period appears evi-
dently to be too long, and the most probable cal-
culation is to reckon from the last years of Jero-
boam to the first of Hezekiah.


We have then at least of Uzziah’s reign 26 years.
Jotham ,,


” ” ‘- ”
” 3 Ahaz » 1,
* a Hezekiah , 2


60*

This calculation is as close an approximation
as it is now possible to obtain. At some point
within the last fourteen years of Jeroboam Hosea
began to prophesy. From the death of Jeroboam
to the beginning of Hezekiah, at an ordinary cal-
culation, are fifty-seven or fifty-eight years.
Bishop Horsley extends the period considerably
longer (Commentary on Hosea ; Works, vol. iii.
. 234). We do not understand the principle of
nmiiller’s computation, which reduces the
time between Jeroboam’s death and Hezekiah's
accession to a period of almost forty years. We
agree with Maurer’s remark (Comment. Gram.
Hist. Crit. in Prophetas Minores, Lipsie, 1840),
‘Alii annos quadraginta numerant nescio quem
computandi modum secuti.’ This long duration
of office is not improbable, and the book itself
furnishes strong presumptive evidence in support
of this chronology. The first prophecy of Hosea
foretells the overthrow of Jehu's house; and the
menace was fulfilled on the death of Jeroboam,
his great-grandsgn. ‘ This was the word of the
Lord which he spake unto Jehu, saying, Thy sons
shall sit on the throne of Israel unto the fourth
generation ; and so it came to pass’ (2 Kings
xv. 12), A prediction of the ruin which was to
overthrow Jehu’s house at Jeroboam's death, must
have been uttered during Jeroboam’s life. This
fact defines the period of Hosea’s commencement
of his labours, and verifies the inscription, which
states that the word of the Lord came to him in
the reign of Jeroboam, the son of Juash, king of
Israel. Again, in ch x. 14, allusion is made to
an expedition of Shalmanezer against Israel; and
if it was the first inroad against king Hoshea, who
began to reign in the twelfth year of Ahaz, the
event referred to by the prophet as past must have
happened close upon the beginning of the govern-
SN eles


* Maurer, in the Comment. Theol. p, 284, and
more lately in his Comment. Gram. Hist. Crit.
in Proph. Min., Lipsie, 1840. ae

x


668 HOSEA.


ment of Hezekiah (2 Kings xvii. 5). Data are
thus in like manner aflorded to corroborate the
statement that Hezekiah had ascended the throne
ere the long-lived servant of Jehovah was released
from his toils. The extended duration indicated
in the superscription is thus borne out by the
contents of the prophecy.

The years of Hosea’s life were melancholy and
tragic. The vials of the wrath of heaven were
poured out on his apostate people. The nation
suffered under the evils of that schism which was
effected by the craft of him who has been branded
with the indelible stigma —‘Jeroboam, who made
Israel to sin.” The obligations of law had been
relaxed, and the claims of religion disregarded ;
Baal became the rival of Jehovah, and in the dark
recesses of the groves were practised the impure
and murderous rites of heathen deities; peace and
prosperity fled the land, which was harassed by
foreign invasion and domestic broils; might and
murder became the twin sentinels of the throne;
alliances were formed with other natiuns, which
brought with them seductions to paganism ; cap-
tivity and insult were heaped upon Israel by
the uncircumcised; the nation was thoroughly
debased, and but a fraction of its population
maintained its spiritual allegiance (2 Kings xix.
18). The death of Jeroboam IL. was followed by
an interregnum of ten years. At the expiry of this
period, his son Zechariah assumed the sovereignty,
and was slain by Shallum, after the short space of
six months (2 Kings xv. 10). In tour weeks
Shallum was assassinated by Menahem. The
assassin, duriug a disturbed reign of ten years,
became tributary to the Assyrian Paul. His suc-
cessor, Pekahiah, wore the crown but two years,
when he was murdered by Pekah, Pekah, after
swaying his bloody sceptre fur twenty years, met
a similar fate in the conspiracy of Hoshea ; Hoshea,
the last of the usurpers, after another interregnum
of eight years, ascended the throne, and bis admi-
nistration of nine years ended in the overthrow of
his kingdom and _ the expatriation of bis people.
©The Lord was very angry with Israel, and re-
moved them ont of his sight. So was Israel
carried out of their own land to Assyria unto this
day’ (2 Kings xvii. 18, 23).

The prophecies of Hosea were directed espe-
cially against the country whose sin had brought
upon it such disasters—prolonged anarchy and
final captivity. Israel, or Ephraim, is the people
especially addressed. Their homicides and forni-
cations, their perjury and theft, their idulatry and
impiety are censured and satirised with a faithful
severity. Judah is sometimes, indeed, introduced,
warned and admonished. Bishop Horsley ¢ Works,
iii, 236) reckons it a mistake to suppose ‘that
Hosea’s prophecies are almost wholly directed
against the kingdom of Israel.’ ‘The bishop de-
scribes what he thinks the correct extent of Hosea's
commission, but has adduced no proof of his
assertion. Any one reading Hosea will at once
discover that the oracles having relation to Israel
are primary, while the references to Judah are only
incidental, Inch. i. 7, Judah is mentioned in
contrast with Israel, to whose condition the sym-
bolic name of the prophet’s son is specially appli-
cable. In ver. 1] the future union of the two
nations is predicted. The long oracle in ch. ii,
has no relation to Judah, nor the symbolic re-
presentation in ch. iii, Ch. iv. is severe upon


HOSEA.


Ephraim, and ends with a very brief exhortation
to Judah not to follow his example. In the suc-
ceeding chapters allusions to Judah do indeed
occasionally occur, when similar sins can be pre-
dicated of beth branches of the nation. The pro-
phet’s mind was intensely interested in the desti-
nies of his own people. The nations around him
are unheeded ; his prophetic eve beholds the crisis
approaching his country, and sees its cantons
ravaged, its tribes murdered or enslaved. No
wonder that his rebukes were so terrible, his me-
naces so alarming, that his soul poured ferth its
strength in an ecstasy of grief and aflection. In-
Vitationg, replete with tenderness and patlius, are
interspersed with his warnings and expostulations,
Now we are startled with a vision of the throne,
at first shrouded in darkness, and seuding forth
lightnings, thunders, and voices; but winile we
gaze, it becomes encircled with a rainbow, which
gradually expands till it is Jost in that universal
brilliancy which itself had originated (ch. xi.
and xiv.)

The peculiar mode of instruction which the
prophet details in the first and third chapters
of his oracles has given rise to many disputed
theories. We refer to the command expressed in
ch. i, 2—* And the Lord said unto Hosea, Go,
take unto thee a wife of whoredoms and childzen
of whoredoms,’ &c.; ch. iii, 1, ‘Then said the
Lord unto me, Go yet, love a woman beloved of
her friend, yet an adulteress,” &c. © What was the
precise nature of the transactions here recorded ¥
Vere they real events, the result of divine ininnc-
tions literally understood,and as literally furltilledt
or were these intimations to the prophet only in-
tended to be pictorial illustrations of the apostacy
and spiritual folly and unfaithfulness of Israel?
The former view, viz. that the prophet actually
und literally entered into this impure comubial
alliance, was advocated in ancient times by
Cyril, Theodoret, Basil, and Augustine; and
more recently has been maintained by Merver,
Grotius, Houbigant, Manger, Horsley, and Stuck.
Fanciful theories are also rife on this subject.
Luther supposed the prophet to perform a kind of
drama in view of the people, giving his lawtul
wife and children these mystical appellations.
Newcome (Min. Prophets) thinks that a wife of
fornication means merely an Israelite, a woman
of apostate and adulterous Israet. So Jac. Ca-
pellus (Jn Hoseam; Opera, p. 683). Hengsten-
berg supposes the prophet to relate actions which
happened, indeed, actually, but not outwardly.
Some, with Maimonides (Moreh Netochim, part
ii.), Imagine it to be a nocturnal vision: while
others make it wholly an allegory, as the Chaldee
Paraphrast, Jerome, Drusius, Bauer, Rosen-
miiller. Kuinoel, and Lowth. The view of
Hengstenberg, and such as have held his theory
(Markii Diatribe de urore fornicationum acei-
pienda, &c. Lugd. Batav. 1696), is nut materially
different from the last to which we have referred.
Both agree in condemning the first opinion, which
the fast and forward mind of Horsley so stre
nuously maintained, Hengstenberg, at great
length and with much force, has refuted this
strange hypothesis (Christology, ii. 11-22). Be-
sides other arguments resting on the impurity and
loathsomeness of the supine! nuptial contract, it
may be argued against the external reality of the
event, that it must have required several years


HOSEA.


for its completion, and that the impressiveness of
the symbol would therefore be weakened and obli-
terated. Other prophetic transactions of a similar
nature might be referred to. Jerome (Comment.
tr: loc.) has referred to Ezek. iv. 4. It is not to
be supposed, us has sometimes been argued, that
the prophet was commanded to commit fornica-
tion. The divine injunction was to marry—
*Scortum aliquis ducere potest sine peccato, scor-
tarinon item.’ Drusius (Comm. tn loc. in Critict
Sacri, tom. y.). Whichever way tMis question may
be solved ; whether these occurrences be regarded
as areal and external transaction, or as a piece of
spiritual scenery, or only, as is most probable
(Witsii Bzscell. Sac. p. 90), an allegorical de-
scription, it is agreed on all hands that the actions
are typical; that they are, as Jerome calls them,
sacramenta futurorum.

Expositors are not at all agreed as to the mean-
ing of the phrase ‘wife of whoredoms,’ NWN
“PN; whether the phrase refers to harlotry before
marriage, or unfaithfulness after it. It may afford
an easy solution of the difficulty, if we look at the
antitype in its history and character. Adultery
is the appellation of idolatrous apostacy. The
Jewish nation were espoused to God. The con-
tract was formed on Sinai; but the Jewish people
had prior to this period gone a-whoring. Josh.
xxiv. 2-14, ‘ Your fathers dwelt on the other side
of the flood in old time, and they served other
gods.’ Comp. Lev. xvii. 7, in which Jt is im-

lied that idolatrous propensities had also deve-
Taped themselves during the abode in Egypt: so
that D312? NWN may signify one devoted to
lasciviousness prior to her marriage. The mar-
riage must be supposed a real contract, or its
significance would be lost. Jer. ii. 2, ‘I remem-
ber thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of
thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the


wilderness, in a land that was not sown.’ oy
D'N3t, children of whoredoms, refer most na-
turally to the two sons and daughter afterwards
to he born. They were not the prophet's own, as
is intimated in the allegory, and they followed
the pernicious example of the mother. Spiritual
adultery was the debasing sin of Israel. ‘Non
dicitur,’ observes Manger, ‘ cognovit uxorem, sed


simpliciter concepit et peperit.". The children.


are not his. It is said, indeed, in verse 3, ‘She


bare him a son’ The word is wanting in
some MSS. and in some copies of the Septuagint.
If genuine it only shows the effrontery of the
adulteress, and the patience. of the husband in
receiving and educating as his own a spurious
brood. The Israelites, who had been taken into
covenant, very soon fell from their first love, and
were characterized by insatiable spiritual wanton-
ness: yet their Maker, their husband, did not at
once divorce them, but exhibited a marvellous
Jon;z-suffering.

The names of the children being symbolical,
the name of the mother has probably a similar
signification. patna 9) may have the
symbulic sense of ‘one thoronghly abandoned to
sensual delights: WO3 signifies completion
(Ewald, Gram, 228); obat-n3, ‘daughter of


grape-cakes,’ the dual form being expressive of _ po’


the mode in which these dainties were baked


in double layers. The Greek form, xaAd6n,


HOSEA. 869


is apparently a corruption of the Hebrew nba.
The names of the children are Sant, Jezreel,


mom Nd, Lo-ruhamab, and ‘oy Nd, Lo-ammi.
The prophet explains the meaning of the appella-
tions, It is generally supposed that the names
refer to three successive generations of the Israel-
itish people. Hengstenberg, on the other hand,
argues that ‘wife and children both are the peo-
ple of Israel: the three names must not be con-
sidered separately, but taken together.’ But as
the marriage is first mentioned, and the births of
the children are detailed in order, some time
elapsing between the events, we rather achere to
the ordinary exposition. Nor is it without reason
that the second child is described as a female.

The first child, Jezreel, may refer to the first
dynasty of Jeroboan: I. and his successors, which
was terminated in the blood of Ahab’s house
which Jehu shed at Jezreel. The name suggests
also the cruel and fraudulent possession of the
vineyard of Naboth, ‘ which was in Jezreel,’ where,
too, the woman Jezebel was slain so ignominionsly
(1 Kings xvi. 1; 2 Kings ix. 21). But as Jehu
and his family had become as corrupt as their

redecessors, the scenes of Jezreel were again to
enacted, and Jehu’s race must perish. Jez-
reel, the spot referred to by the prophet, is also,
according to Jerome, the place where the Assy-
rian army routed the Israelites. The name of
this child associates the past and future, symbolizes
past sins, intermediate punishments, and final
overthrow. The name of the second child, Lo-
tuhamah, ‘ not-pitied,’ the appellation of a de-
graded daughter, may refer to the feeble, effemi-
nate period which followed the overthrow of the
first dynasty, when Israel became weak and help-
less as well as sunk and abandoned. The favour
of God was not exhibited to the nation: they were
as abject as impious. But the reign of Jero-
boam II. was prosperous ; new energy was infused
into the kingdom; gleams of its former prosperity
shone upon it. This revival of strength in that
generation may be typified by the birth of a third
child, a son, Lo-ammi, ‘not-my-people ‘(2 Kings
xiv. 25). Yet prosperity did not bring with it
a revival of piety; still, although their vigour
was recruited, they were not God's people (Lec-
tures on the Jewish Antiquities and Scriptures,
by J. G. Palfrey, vol. ii: 422, Boston, N.A., 1841).
The space we have already occupied precludes
more minute criticism ; but the general principles
we have indicated may be applied to the second
and third chapters.

Recent writers, such as Bertholdt, Eichhorn,
De Wette, Stuck, Maurer, and Hitzig, have la-
houred much, but in vain, to divide the book of
Hosea into separate portions, assigning to each
the period at which it was written; but from the
want of sufficient data the attempt must rest
principally on taste and fancy. A sufficient
proof of the correctness of this opinion may be
found in the contradictory sections and allotments
of the varions writers who have engaged in the
task. Chapters i. ii. and iii. evidently form one
division: it is next to impossible to separate and
distinguish the other chapters. The form and
style are very similar throughout all the second
rtion.

The peculiarities of Hosea's style have been
often remarked. Jerome says of him, ‘ Com


870 HOSEA.


maticus est, et quasi per sententias loquens’
(Pref. ad XII. Proph.). His style, says De
Wette, ‘is abrupt, unrounded, and ebullient ; his
rhythm hard, leaping, and violent. The language
is peculiar and dillicult’ (Einleitung, § 228).
Lowth (Prelect. 21) speaks of him as the most
difficult and perplexed of the prophets. Bishop
Horsley has remarked his peculiar idioms,—his
change of person, anomalies of gender and num-
ber, and use of the nominative absolute (Works,
vol. iii.). Eichhorn’s descriptiou of his style was
probably at the same time meant as an imitation
of it (Eauleitung, § 555) :—* His discourse is like
a garland woven of a multiplicity of {lowers :
images are woven upon images, comparison wound
upon comparison, metaphor strung upon metaphor.
He plucks one flower, and throws it down that
he may directly break off another. Like a bee
he flies from one flower-bed to another, that he
may suck his honey from the most varied pieces.
It is a natural consequence that his figures sume-
times form strings of pearls. Often is he prone
to approach to allegory—often he sinks down in
obscurity’ (comp. ch. v. 9; vi. 3; vii. 8; xiii. 3,
7, 8,16). Unusual words and forms of con-
nection sometimes occur (De Wette, § 228). Of
the former, examples are to be found in ch.


viii. 13, DYINAN; xiii. 5, MBINSN; x.2, TW;
xi. 7, edn; v. 13; x 6, IV TOD; of the
latter, in ch. vii. 16, by xb; ix. 8, DY BY;
xiv. 3. na pp mnbyis. Many examples


occur of the comparatio decurtata, arising from
the peculiar abruptness of the style; the particles
of connection, causal, adversative, transitive, &c.
being frequently omitted.

Hosea, as a prophet, is expressly quoted by
Matthew (ii. 15). The citation is from the first
verse of ch, xi. Hosea vi. 6 is quoted twice by
the same evangelist (ix. 13; xii. 7). Quotations
from his prophecies are also to be found in Rom,
ix. 25, 26. References to them occur in 1 Cor.
xv. 55, and in] Pet. ii.10. Messianic references
are not clearly and prominently developed (Gram-
berg, Religionsid. 11. 298). This book, however,
is not without them; but they lie more in the
spirit of its allusions than in the letter. Hosea’s
Christology appears written not with ink, but
with the spirit of the living God, on the fleshly
tables of his heart. The future conversion of
his people to the Lord their God, and David
their king, their glorious privilege in becoming
sons of the living God, the faithfulness of the
original promise to Abraham, that the number of
his spiritual seed should be as the sand of the
sea, are amony the oracles whose fultilment will
take place only under the new dispensation.

Hengstenberg (vol. ii, 1) gives a long com-
mentary on the intruductory chapters. In his
Die authentie des Dentateuches, Ersten Band, a.
49-82, occur ulso many important remarks on this
book of prophecy, especially proving how much
its style and furm are based on the language and
peculiar idioms of the Pentateuch. The argu-
ment is triumphant and conclusive.

Of commentaries on Hosea, distinct from those
on the minor prophets gencrally, may be men-
tioned Burrough’s Exposition-of Hosea, Lond.
1643; Seb. Schmidt, Comment. in Hoseam,
Francf. 1687; Ed. Pocock, Comment. on Ilosea,


HOSPITALITY.


Oxf. 1685 ; Manger, Commentarius in Hoseam,
Campis. 1782; Chr. Fr. Kuinoel, Hosea Ora
cula, Hebr. et Lat. perpetua annotatione illu»
travit, Lipsie, 1792; V.. Jos. Ubland, Annota-
tivnes in Hoseam, Tiib. 1785-1797; Horsley,
Hosea, translated from the Hebrew, with Notes,
explanatory and critical, Lond. 1801-4; Stuck,
Hoseas Propheta, Lipsia, 1828; Schréder, Ho-
schea, Joel, und Amos, uebersetzt und erlautert,
Leipz. 1829; De Wette, Ueber die geschichtliche
Bezichung der prophetischen Reden des Hoseas,
in Theol. Stud. und Crit. 1831, s. 807; Riickert,
Die Uebraischen Propheten uebersetzt, &c., 1831;
Hitzig, Die 12 kleinen Proph. erklirt, os
J.

HOSEA, son of Elah, and last king of Israel.
He conspired against and slew his predecessor
Pekah, and seized his dominions, ‘ He did evil
in the sight of the Lord,’ but not in the same de-
gree as his predecessors: and this, by the Jewish
commentators, is understood to mean that he did
not, like former kings of Israel (2 Kings xv. 30),
restrain his subjects from going up to Jerusalem
to worship. The intelligence that Hosea had
entered into a confederacy with So, king of kgypt,
with the view of shaking off the Assyrian yuke,
caused Shalmaneser, the king of Assyria, to marca
an army into the land of Israel; and after a three
year’s siege Samaria was taken and destroyed,
and the ten triles were sent into the countries be-
yond the Euphrates, p.c. 720 (2 Kings xv. 30;
xvii. 1-6; xviii. 9-12). The chronology of this
reign is much perplexed [see Curonotocy,
Isrars.].

HOSPITALITY. The practice of receiving
strangers into one’s house and giving them suit-
able entertainment, may be traced back to the
early origin of human society. It is not, however,
confined to any age or to any country, but has
been observed in all parts of the globe wherever
circumstances have been such as to render it de-
sirable—thus affording one among many instances
of the readiness with which human nature, in its
moral as well as in its physical properties, adapts
itself to every varying condition. Hospitality
is therefore not a peculiarly Oriental virtue. It
was practised, as it still is, among the Least culti-
vated nations (Diod. Sic. v. 28, 34; Cas. Bell.
Gall, vi. 23; Tac. Germ. a It was not less
observed, in the early periods of their history,
among the Greeks and Romans. With the
Greeks, hospitality (gevia) was under the imme
diate protection of religion. Jupiter bore a name
(mos) signifying that its rights were under
his guardianship. In the Odyssey (vi. 206)
we are told expressly that all guests and poor
wople are special objects of care to the gods.

here were both in Greece and Italy two kinds
of hospitality, the one private, the other public.
The first existed between individuals, the secand
was cultivated by one state towards another.
Hence arose a new kind of social relatiun: Le
tween those who had exercised and partaken of
the rites of hospitality an intimate friendship en-
sued,—a species of freemasonry, which was called
into play wherever the individuals might after- |
wards chance to meet, and the right. duties, and
advantages of which passed from father to son,
and were deservedly held in the highest estimation.

But though not peculiarly Oriental, buspitality
bas nowhere been more early or more fully prac


HOSPITALITY.


tised than in the East. It is still honourably
observed among the Arabs, especially at the pre-
sent day. An Arab, on arriving at a village, dis-
mounts at the house of some one who is known
to him, saying to the master, ‘I am your guest.’
On this the host receives the traveller, and per-
forms his duties, that is, he sets before his guest
his supper, consisting of bread, milk, and borgul,
and, if he is rich and generous, he also takes the
necessary care of bis horse or beast af burden.
Should the traveller be unacquainted with any
person, he alights at any house, as it may happen,
fastens his horse to the same, and proceeds to
smoke his pipe until the master bids him wel-
come, and offers him his evening meal. In the
morning the traveller pursues his journey, making
no other return than ‘God be with you’ (good
bye) (Niebuhr, Reis. ii. 431, 462; D’Arvieux, iii.
152; Burckhardt, i. 69; Rosenmiiller, Morgen.
vi. 82, 257). The early existence and long con-
“tinuance of this amiable practice in Oriental
countries, are owing to the fact of their presenting
that condition of things which necessitates and
calls forth hospitality. When population is thinly
scattered over a great extent of country, and tra-
velling is comparatively infrequent, inns or
places of public accommudation are not found :
yet the travelier needs shelter, perhaps succour
and support. Pity prompts the dweller in a
house or tent to open his door tothe tired way-
farer, the rather because its master has had, and
is likely again to have, need of similar kindness.
The duty has its immeiliate pleasures and ad-
vantages; for the traveller comes full of news—
false, true, wonderful; and it is by no means
onerous, since visits from wayfarers are not very
frequent, nor are the needful hospitalities costly.
In later pedods, when population had greatly in-
creased, the establishment of inns (caravanserais)
diminished, but did by no means abolish the
practice (Joseph. Antig. v. 1.2; Luke x. 34),
Accordingly we find hospitality practised and
held in the highest estimation at the earliest pe-
riods in which the Bible speaks of human society
Gen. xviii. 35 xix. 2; xxiv. 25; Exod. ii. 20;
udg. xix. 16). | Express provision for its exercise
is made in the Mosaic law (Lev. xix. 33; Deut.
xiv. 29). Inthe New Testament also its observance
is enjoined, though in the period to which its books
refer the nature and extent of hospitality would be
changed with the change that society had under-
gone (1 Pet. iv.9; 1 Tim. iii. 2; Tit.i.8; I Tim.
v. 10; Rom. xii. 13; Heb. xiii. 2). | The reason
assigned in this last passage, ‘for thereby some
have entertained angels unawares,’ is not without
a paralle) in classical literature; for the religious
feeling which in Greece was connected with the
exercise of hospitality, was strengthened by the
belief that the traveller might be some god in
disguise (Hom. Odyss. xvii. 484). The disposition
which generally prevailed in favour of the prac-
tice was enhanced by the fear lest those who
neglected its rites should, after the example of
impious men, be subjected by the divine wrath to
frightful punishments (/Elian, Anim. xi. 19).
Even the Jews, in ‘the latter days,” laid very great
stress on the obligation ; the rewards of Paradise,
their doctors declared, were his who spontaneously
exercised hospitality (Schéttgen, Hor. Heb. i,
220 ; Kypke, Observ. Sucr. i. 129).
The guest, whoever he might be, was on his


HOURS. 871


appearing invited into the house or tent (Gen.
xix. 2; Exod. ii. 20; Judg. xiii. 15; xix. 21).
Courtesy dictated that no improper questions
should be put to him, and some days elapsed before
the name of the stranger was asked, or what object
he had in view in his journey (Gen. xxiv. 33;
Odyss. i. 123; iii. 69; Iliad, vi. 175; ix. 222;
Diod. Sic. v. 28). As svon as he arrived he was
fumished with water to wash his feet (Gen. xviii.
4; xix.2; 1 Tim. v.10; Odyss. iv. 49; xvii.
88; vi. 215); received a supply of needful food
for himself and beast (Gen. xviii. 5; xix. 3;
xxiv. 25; Exod. ii. 20; Judg. xix. 20; Odyss.
iii. 4614); and enjoyed courtesy and protection
from his host (Gen. xix. 5; Josh. ii. 2; Judg.
xix, 23). The case of Sisera, decoyed and slain
by Jael (Judg. iv. 18, sq.), was a gross infraction
of the rights and duties of hospitality. On his
departure the traveller was not allowed to go
alone or empty-handed (Judg. xix. 5; Waginseil,
ad Sot. pp. 1020, 1030; Zorn, ad Hecat. Abder.
22; Iliad, vi. 217). As-the free practice of hos-
pitality was held right and honourable, so the
neglect of it was considered discreditable (Job
xxxi. 32; Odyss. xiv. 56); and any interference
with the comfort and protection which the host
aflorded, was treated as a wicked outrage (Gen.
xix. 4, sq.). Though the practice of hospitality
was general, and its rites rarely violated, yet
national or local enmities did not fail sometimes
to interfere; and accordingly travellers avoided
those places in which they had reason to expect
an unfriendly reception. So in Judg. xix. 12,
the ‘certain Levite’ spoken of said, ‘ We will not
tum aside hither into the city of a stranger, that is
not of the children of Israel.’ The quarrel which
arose between the Jews and Samaritans after the
Babylonish captivity destroyed the relations
of hospitality between them. Regarding each
other as herctics, they sacrificed every better feel-
ing. It was only in the greatest extremity that
the Jews would partake of Samaritan food (Light-
foot, p. 993), and they were accustomed, in conse-
quence of their religious and political hatred, to
avoid passing throng’ Samaria in journeying from
one extremity of the land to the other. The ani-
mosity of the Samaritans towards the Jews appears
to have been somewhat less bitter; but they showed
an adverse feeling towards those persons who, in
going up to the annual feast at Jerusalem, had to
pass through their country (Luke ix. 53). At the
great national festivals hospitality was liberally

ractised so long as the state retained its identity.
Dn these festive occasions no inhabitant of Jerusa-
lem considered his house his own; every home
swarmed with strangers; yet this unbounded hos
vitality could not find accommodation in the
uses for all who stood in need of it, and a large
proportion of visiturs had to be content with such
shelter as tents could afford (Helon, Pilgrim. i.
228, sq. On the general subject, see Unger, de
tevoronla ejusque rite antiquo; Stuck, Antig.
Convic. i. 27; De Wette, Lehrb. der Archdo-
logie; and Scholz, Handb. der Bibl. Archio-
logie.—J. R. B.

HOURS. The ancient Hebrews, like the
Greeks (Homer, Il. xxi. 3), were unacquainted
with any other means of distinguishing the times
of day than the natural divisions of morning,
mid-day or noon, twilight, and night (Gen.
xv. 12; xviii. 1; xix. 1, 15, 23). The earliest


HOURS.


mention of hours occurs in Daniel (iii. 15; iv.
19; v. 5); and even in the Septuagint Spa inva-
riably signifies a season of the year, as in Homer
and Hesiod. As the Chaldeans claimed the honour
of inventing this system of notation (Herod. ii.
119.), it is most probable that it was during
their residence in Babylon that the Jews became
familiar with their artificial distribution of the
day. At all events no trace of it occurs hefore the
captivity of that people; while, subsequently to
their return to their own land, we find the prac-
tice adopted, and, in the time of Christ, univer-
sally established, of dividing the day and night
respectively into twelve equal portions ( Matt. xx.
3-5; John xi. 9; Actsv. 7; xix.34). The Jew-
ish horology, however, in common with that of
other Eastern nations, had this inherent defect,
that the hours, though always equal to one another,
were unequal in regard to the seasons, and that as
their day was reckoned from sunrise to sunset, and
not from the fixed period of noon, as with us, the
twelve hours into which it was divided varied, of
course, in duration according to the fluctuations
of summer and winter. The mid-day, which with
us is the twelfth hour, the Jews counted their
sixth, while their twelfth hour did not arrive till
sunset. At the equinoxes, their hours were exactly
of the same length with ours, and the time from
which they began to reckon their day at those
seasons corresponded precisely with our six o'clock
am.; their first hour being our seven o'clock, their
third (Acts ii. 15), our nine, their ninth (Acts iii.
1), our three o'clock p.x., and their eleventh
(Matt. xx. 6), our five. This equality, however,
in the duration of their hours, as-well as in their
correspondence to ours, was disturbed as the sea-
son approached towards the summer or winter
solstice. In midsummer, when sunrise in Judea
takes place at live o'clock a.m., and sunset at seven
p.u., the Jewish hours were a little longer than
ours; and the only one of their hours which
answered exactly to ours was the sixth, or twelve
o'clock, while in all the rest there was a consider-
able difference. Their third hour was shortly
before our nine, and their ninth a little after our
three. In like manner, in winter, when the sun
rises at seven and sets at five, the Jewish hour was
proportionally shorter than ours, their third hour
not occurring till a little after our nine, and their
ninth a little before our three. Hence it is evi-
dent that in order to determine exactly the dura-
tion of Daniel's silence, for instance (* he was asto-
* nied one hour,’ Dan. iv. 19), or the exact time
when the darkness at Christ's crucitixion ended, it
is necessary to ascertain the particular seasons
when these incidents occurred.

In ancient times the only way of reckoning the
progress of the day was by the length of the sha-
dow—a mode of reckoning which was both coutin-
gent on the sunshine, and served only for the guid-
ance of individuals. By what means the Jews
calculated the length of their hours—whether by
dialling, by the clepsvdra or water-clock, or by
some horological contrivance, like what. was used
anciently in Persia (Joseph. Anfig. xi. 6), and
by the Romans (Martial, viii. Epi. 67; Juv.
Sat. x. 215), and which is still used in India
(Asiat. Resear. v. 88), a servant notifying the
intervals, it is now impossible to discover. The
Chaldee word YW (Dan. iv. 16), which signifies
@nnouncer, seems to countenance the latter (us it


HOUSE.


seems to refer to the mode employed by the Par
sians, Romans, and Indians) supposition.

Besides these smaller hours, there was another
division of the day into larger hours, with refer
ence to the stated periods of prayer, viz. the third,
sixth, and ninth hours of the day (Ps. xlv. 17;
Joseph. Antig. iv. 4. 3).

The night was divided into twelve equal por-
tions or hours, in precisely the same manner as the
day. The most ancient division, however, was into
three watches (Antig. Ixiii. 6; xc. 4); the first. or
beginning of the watches, as it is called (Lament.
ii. 19); the middle-watch (Judg. vii. 19) ; and the
morning-watch (Exod. xiv. 24). When Judza
became a province of Rome, the Roman distribu-
tion of the night into four watches was introduced
{see Cock-crowina and Day]; to which divi«
sion frequeut allusions occur in the New Testa-
ment (Luke xii. 38; Matt. xiv. 25; xiii. 35), as
well as to that of hours (Matt. xxv. 13; xxvi.
40; Mark xiv. 37; Luke xvii. 59; Acts xxiii,
23; Rev. iii. 3).

It remains only to notice that the word Aour is
sometimes used in Scripture to denote some deter-
minate season, as ‘mine hour is not yet come,’
‘this is your jour, and the power of darkness,’
Sthe hour is coming,’ &c.—R. J.

HOUSE. Houses are often mentioned in
Scripture, several important passages of which
cannot be well understood without a clearer notion
of the houses in which the Hebrews dwelt, than
can be realized by such comparisons as we natu-
rally make with those in which we ourselves live,
But things so different afford no grounds for in-
structive comparison, We must therefore bring
together such facts as can be collected from the
Scripture and from ancient writers, with such
details trom modern travellers and our own ob-
servations, as may tend to illustrate these state-
ments ; for there is every reason to conclude that
little substantial difference exists between the
ancient houses and those which are at this day
found in south-western Asia.

The agricultural and pastoral forms of life are
described in Scripture as of equally ancient origin.
Cain was a husbandman, and Abel a keeper of
sheep. The former is a settled, the latter an
unsettled mode of life. Hence we find that Cain,
when the murder of his brother constrained him
to wander abroad, built a town in the land where
he settled. At the same time, doubtless, those
who followed the same mode of life as Abel,
dwelt in tents, capable of being taken from one
place to another, when the want of fresh pastures
constrained those removals which are so frequent
among people of pastoral habits. We are not
Tequired to suppose that Cain's town was more
than a collection of huts,

Our information respecting the abodes of men
in the ages before the Deluge is, however, to
scanty to atlord much ground for notice. The
enterprise at Babel, to say nothing of Egypt, shows
that the constructive arts had made considerable
progress during that obscure but interesting period ;
for we are bound in reason to conclude that the
arts possessed by man in the ages immediately
following the Deluge, existed before that great
catastrophe { ANTepILUVians].

We may, however. leave this early period, and
proceed at once to the later times in which the
Hebrews flourished.


HOUSE.


* The observations offered under Ancurrec-
TURE will preclude the expectation of finding
among this Eastern ple that accomplished
style of building which Vitruvius requires, or
that refined taste by which the Greeks and Ro-
mans excited the admiration of foreign nations.
The reason of this is plain. Their ancestors had
roved through the country as nomade shepherds,
dwelling in tents; and if ever they built huts they
were of so light a fabric as easily to be taken
down when a change of station became necessary.
In this mode of life solidity in the structure of
any dwelling was by no means required; much
_ less were regular arrangement and the other requi-
sites of a well-ordered dwelling matters of consi-
deration. Under such circumstances as these, no
improvement in the habitation takes place. The
tents in which the Arabs now dwell are in all
probability the same as those in which the Hebrew
patriarchs spent their lives. It is not likely that
what the Hebrews observed in Egypt, during their
long sojourn in that country, had in this respect
any direct influence upon their own air a
ctice in Palestine. The reasons for this have


given under ARcHITECTURE.


Nevertheless, the information which may be
derived from the figures of houses and parts of
houses in the Egyptian tombs, is not to be over-
looked or slighted. We have in them the only
representations of ancient houses in that part of
the world which now exist: and however different
may have been the state architecture of Egypt
and Palestine, we have every reason to conclude
that there was considerable resemblance in the
private dwellings of these neighbouring countries.
Such a resemblance now exists, and the causes
which produce it equally existed in ancient
times: and, which is more to the pu , the
representations to which we refer have almost the
same amount of agreement and of difference with
the present houses of Syria as with those of modern
Egypt. On these and other grounds we shall
not decline to avail ourselves of this interesting
source of illustration; but before turning to its
details, we shall give a general statement, which
may render them more intelligible.

On entering Palestine, the Israelites occupied
the dwellings of the dispossessed inhabitants; and
for a long time no new buildings would be needed.
The generation which began to build new houses
must have been born and bred in the country,
and would naturally erect buildings like those
which already existed in the land. Their mode of
building was therefore that of the Canaanites whom
they had dispossessed. Of their style of building
we are not required to form any exalted notions.
In all the history of the conquest of the country
hy the Israelites, there is no account of any large


HOUSE. 878


or conspicuous building being taken or destroyed
by them. It woul deems aloo a if there had been
no temples ; for we read not that any were de-
stroyed by the conquerors; and the command
that the monuments of idolatry should be over-
thrown, specifies only altars, groves, and high
places—which seems to lead to the same conclu-
sion; since, if there had been temples existing in
the land of Canaan, they would doubtless have
been included. It is also manifest from the his-
tory that the towns which the Hebrews found in
Palestine were mostly small, and that the largest
were distinguished rather by their number than
by the size or magnificence of their buildings.

It is impossible to say to what extent Solo-
mon’s improvements in state architecture operated
to the advancement of domestic architecture. He
built different palaces, and it is reasonable to
conclude that his nobles and great officers fol-
Jowed more or less the models which these palaces
presented. In the East, however, the domestic ar-
chitecture of the bulk of the people is little affected
by the improvements in state buildings. Men go
on building from age to age as their forefathers
built; and in all probability the houses which we
now see in Palestine are such as those in which
the Jews, and the Canaanites before them, dwelt—
the mosques, the Christian churches, and the mo-
nasteries being the only new features in the scene.

There is no reason to suppose that many houses
in Palestine were constructed with wood. A great
= of that country was always very poor in tim-

, and the middle part of it had scarcely any
wood at all. But of stone there was no want;
and it was consequently much used in the building
of houses. The law of Moses respecting leprosy in
houses (Lev. xiv. 33-40) seems to prove this, as
the characteristics there enumerated could only
occur in the case of stone walls. Still, when the
Hebrews intended to build a house in the most
splendid style and in accordance with the taste of
the age, as much wood as possible was used.
Having premised this, the principal building
materials mentioned in Scripture may be enume-
rated with reference to their place in the three
kingdoms of nature.

I. Veceras.x Supsrances :—

1. Shittim, or the timber of the acacia tree,
which grows abundantly in the valleys of Arabia
Petrea, and was therefore employed in the construc-
tion of the tabernacle. Not being, however, a tree
of Palestine, the wood was not subsequently used
in building. g

2. Shakemim ; that is, the wood of the syca-
more fig-tree, mentioned in Isa. ix. 10, as a build-
ing timber in more common use than cedar, or
perhaps than any other wood known in Palestine.

3. Eres, or cedar. As this was a wood im-
ported from Lebanon, it would only be used in
the higher class of buildings. For its quality as
a building timber, and respecting the question of
its being really what we call the cedar, see Ens.

4. Algum-wood, which, being imported from
the Eastern seas, must have been valued at a
high price. It was used by Solomon for pillars
for his own palace, and for the temple (1 Kings
x. 11, 12).

5. Berosh, or c wood. Boards of this
were used for the floor of the Temple, which may
suggest the use to which it was seins ily applied
(1 Kings vi. 15; 2 Chron. iii. 5).


874 HOUSE.


Particular accounts of all these woods, and of
the trees which afforded them, may be seen under
the tive words.

II. Mingrat Supsrances -—

1. Marble. We find the court of the king of
Persia's palace covered with marble of various
colours (Esth. i 6). David is recorded to have

abundance of marble (1 Chron. xxx.
mer Pa comp. Cant. v. 13), and it was used
y Solomon for his palace, as well as for the

Temple.

2. Porphyry and Granite are supposed to be
‘ the glistering stones, and stones of divers colours’
named in ] Chron. xxix. 2. If so, the mountains
of Arabia Petrwa furnished the nearest source of
supply, as these stones do not exist in Palestine or
Lebanon.


3. Bricks. Bricks hardened by fire were em-
loyed in the construction of the tower of Babel
Gen. xi. 3), and the hard bondage of the Israel-

ites in Egypt consisted in the manufacture of
sun-dried bricks (Exod. v. 7, 10-13). This im-
portant building-material has been noticed under
another head [Bricks]; and it only remains to
remark that no subsequent notice of bricks as
being used by the Hebrews occurs after they had
entered Palestine. Yet, judging from existing
analogies, it is more than probable that bricks were
to a considerable extent employed in their build-
ings. From the expense and labour of quarrying
and conveying stone, bricks are often extensively

in Eastern countries even where stone is
abundant; and it is not unusual to see the founda-
tions and lower parts of the house of stone, while
the superstructure is of brick.

3. Chalk and Gypsum, which the Hebrews
appear to have comprehended under the general
name of “IY sid. That the Hebrews were ac-
quainted with these materials appears from Deut.
xxvii. 2; and from Dan. v. 5; Acts xxiii. 3, it
further appears that walls were covered with them.
A highly instructive and curious account of the
plasters used in the East may be seeu in tome iv.
of Langles's edition of Chardin’s Voyages.

4. Mortar, a arse made * ee ashes, and
cho straw, or of gypsum and c straw.
mm. robably meant in Jer. eres: Ezek.
xiii. 10, 11, 20.

5. Asphaltum, or Bitumen, which is mentioned
as being used for a cement by the builders of
Babel. This must have been in the want of lime-
mortar, the country being a stoneless plain. But
the Israelites, who had no lack of the usual
cements, did not employ asphaltum [Biruxen].

6. The metals also must be, to a certain extent,
regarded as building materials: lead, iron, and
copper are mentioned ; and even silver and gold
were used in combination with wood, for various
kinds of solid, plated, and inlaid work (Exod.
xxxvi. 34, 38).

III. Anza. Susstances :—

Such substances can be but in a small degree

icable to building. Zvory houses are men-
tioned in 1 Kings xxii. 39; Amos iii, 14; most
likely from certain parts of the wood-work,
bably abvut the doors and windows, being ihlad
with this valuable substance. Solomon obtained
ivory in great quantities from Tyre (1 Kings x.
22; 2 Chron. ix. 21). [Tvouyid

In describing the houses of ancient Palestine,
there is no way of arriving at distinct notiuns but


‘HOUSE.


by taking the texts of Scripture and illustrating
them by the existing houses of those parts or
Western Asia which have been the least exposed
to the changes of time, and in which the manners
of ancient days have been the best preserved.
Writers on the subject have seen this, and have
brought together the descriptions of travellers
bearing on the subject; but these descriptions
have generally been applied with very little judg-
ment, from the want of that distinct ines leies of
the matter which only actual observation can
give. Travellers have seldom been, students of
Scripture, and students of Scripture have seldom
been travellers. The present writer, having re-
sided for a considerable time in Turkish Arabia,
where the type of Scriptural usages has been better
preserved than in Egypt, or even in Palestine
itself, is enabled to speak on this matter with
somewhat more precision. Of four houses in
which he there resided, two were first-rate, and
two were second-rate. One of the latter has
always seemed to him to suggest a more satisfac-
tory idea of a Scriptural house than any of the
others, or than any that he ever saw in other
Eastern countries. That one has therefore formed
the basis of all his ideas on this subject; and
where it seemed to fail, the others have usually
supplied the illustration he required. This course
he found so beneticial, that he will endeavour
to impart a clear view of the subject to the reader
by giving a general notion of the house referred
to, explaining any points in which the others dif-
fered from it, aa producing the passages of
Scripture* which seem to be illustrated in the


We may premise that the houses present little
more than a dead wall to the street. The privacy
of Oriental domestic habits would render our plan
of throwing the front of the houses towards the
street most repulsive. On coming to a house, one
finds a lofty wall, which would be blank but for
the low door of entrance [Gar]; over which is


usually the kiosk, or latticed window (sometimes

jecting like the huge bay windows of Eliza-
Fetkan houses), or screened balcony of the ‘sum-
mer parlour.’ Besides this, there may be a small
latticed window or two high up the wall, giving


HOUSE.


light and air to upper chambers. This
from the annexed engraving (No. 347), to have
been the character of the fronts of ancient Egyptian


houses.

The buildings which form the house front
towards an inner square or court. Small houses
have one of these courts, but superior houses
have two, and first-rate houses three, communi-
cating with eagh other; for the Orientals dislike
ascending stairs or steps, and fer to gain
room rather by the extent than height of their
habitations. It is only when the building-
ground is confined by nature or by fortifications,
that they build high houses. None of our four
houses had more than one story; but, from the
loftiness of the rooms, they were as high as houses
of three stories among ourselves. If there are three
or more courts, all except the outer one are much
alike in size and ap ce; but the outer one,
being devoted to the more public life of the
occupant, and to his intercourse with society, is
materially different from all the others. If there
are more than two, the second is devoted chiefly
to the use of the master, who is there attended
only by bis eunuchs, children, and females, and
sees only such persons as he calls from the third
or interior court in which they reside. In the his-
tory of Esther, she incurs danger by going from
her interior court to that of the king, to invite him
to visit her part of the palace; but she would not
on any account have gone to the outermost court,
in which the king held his public audiences.
When there are only two courts, the innermost is
the harem, in which the women and children


live, and which is the true domicile of the master, .


to which he withdraws when the claims of busi-
ness, of society, and of friends have been satisfied,
and where no man but himself ever enters, or
could be induced to enter, even by strong per-
suasions.

Entering at the street-door, a passage, usu-
ally sloping downward, conducts to the outer
court; the opening from the passage to this is not


Opposite the gate of entrance, but by a side turn, — | | f


to preclude any view from the street into the
court when the gate is opened. On entering the
outer court through this passage, we find op-
posite to us the public room, in which the
master receives and gives audience to his friends
and clients. This is entirely open in front, and,
being richly fitted up, has a splendid appearance
when the first view of it is obtained. A refreshing
coolness is sometimes given to this apartment
by a fountain throwing up a jet of water in front
of it. Some idea of the apartment may be formed
ftom the annexed cut ae 348). This is the
© guest-chamber’ of Luke xxii. 11. A large
portion of the other side of the court is occupied
with a frontage of lattice-work filled with co-
loured glass, belonging to a room as large as
the guest-chamber, and which in winter is used
for the same purpose, or serves as the apartment of
any visitor of distinction, who cannot of course be
admitted into the interior parts of the house. The
other apartments in this outer ‘court are compara-
tively small, and are used fur the accommodation
of visitors, retainers, and servants. These various
apartments are usually upon what we shoulil call
the first floor, or at least upon an elevated terrace.
The ground floor is in that case occupied b:

various store-rooms and servants’ offices. In ail


HOUSE.
floor,


815


cases the u containing the princi
tok


fait us frontal by a vallecy or tervaées (00
from the sun by a sort of penthouse


ported by pillars of wood.


roof sap-


In houses having but one court, the reception-
toom is on the ground floor, and the domestic
establishment in the upper part of the house.
This arrangement is shown in the annexed en-
graving (No. 349), which is also interesting from
its showing the use of the ‘ pillars’ so often men-


tioned in Scripture, particularly ‘the pillars on
which the house stood, and by which it was borne


816 HOUSE.


* (Judg. xvi. 29). Some other of the cuts
which we introduce will exhibit pillars of similar
fmportance to the support of the house.

The kiosk, which has been mentioned above
as fronting the street, over the gateway, is con-
nected with one of the larger rooms already de-
scribed, or forms a separate apartment, which is
the summer parlour of Scripture. Here, in the
heat of the afternoon, the master lounges or dozes
listlessly, refreshed by the air which circulates
between the openings of the lattice-work; and
here he can, if ne pleases, notice unobserved what
passes in the street. In this we are to seek the
summer parlour in which Ehud smote the king
of Moab (Judg. iii. 20), and the ‘ chamber on
the wall,’ which the Shunamite prepared for the

(2 Kings iv. 10). The projecting con-
struction over the reception chamber in No. 349
Js, like the kiosk, towards the street of a summer
parlour; but there it belongs to the women’s
apartments, and looks into the court, and not the
street.


It is now time to proceed to the inner court,
which we enter by a passage and door similar
to those by which we entered from the street.
This passage and door are usually at one of the
innermost corners of the outer court. Here a
much more extended prospect opens to us, the
inner court being generally much larger than the
former. The annexed cut (No. 350) will convey
some notion of it; but being a Persian house, it
somewhat differs from that which we have more
particularly in view. It is lower, the principal
apartments standing upon a terrace or bank of
earth, and not upon a basement story of offices;
and it also wants the veranda or covered gallery
in front, which we find in Syro-Arahbian houses.
The court is for the most part paved, excepting a

rtion in the middle, which is ptanted with trees
Gonally two) and shrubs, with a basin of water in

e midst. In our Arabian house the two trees
were palm-trees, in which a number of wild doves
built their nests. In the second cut (No. 347),
showing an ancient Egyptian house, we see the
same arrangement: two palm-trees growing in
the court extend their tops above, and, as it were,
aut of the house—a curious effect frequently no-


ticed in the towns of South-western Asia. That
the Jews had the like arrangement of trees in the
courts of their houses, and that the birds nested
in them, appears from Pasa. Ixxxiv. 2,3. They
had also the basin of water in the inner court, or
haram ; and among them it was used for bathing,
as is shown by David's discovering Bathsheba
bathing as he walked on the roof of his palace.
This use of the reservoir bas now been superseded


HOUSE.


by the establishment of public toarm baths in
every town, and in private mansions. Cold
bathing has all but ceased in Western Asia.

' The arrangement of the inner court is very
similar to that of the outer; but the whole is
more open and airy. The buildings usually


GAY


occupy two sides of the square, of which the one
opposite the eutrance contains the princi ae
ments. They are upon what we should the
first floor, and open into a wide gallery or ve-
randa, which in good houses is nine or ten feet
deep, and covered by a wooden penthouse sup-
ported by a row of wooden columns. This terrace,
or gallery, is furnished with a strong wooden ba-
lustrade, and is usually paved with squared stones,
or else floored with boards. Iu the centre of the
principal front is the usnal open drawing-room, on
which the best art of the Eastern decorator is ex-
pended (No. 351). Much of one of the sides of
the court front is usually occupied by the large
sitting-room, with the latticed front covered with
coloured glass, similar to that in the outer court.
The other rooms, of smaller size, are the more pri-
vate apartments of the mansion. The interior of
one oh thes is shown in the annexed cut (No.
352). There are usually no doors to the sitting or
drawing-rooms of Eastern houses: they are cl

by curtains, at least in summer, the opening and
shutting of doors being odious to most Orientals,
The same seems to have been the case among
the Hebrews, as far as we may judge from the
curtains which served instead of doors to the


HOUSE.


tabernacle, and which separated the inner and -
outer chambers of the temple. The curtained
entrances to our Westminster courts of law sup-
ply a familiar example of the same practice.


Some ideas respecting the arrangements and
architecture of the interior parts of the dwelling
may be formed from the annexed cut (No. 353),
although the house in this case, being modern
Egyptian, differs in some points of arrangement
from those on which our description is chiefly
based.


These observations apply to the principal story.
The basement is occupied by various offices,
stores of corn and fuel, places for the water-jars


HOUSE. ; 877


to stand in, places for grindin baths,
kitchens, &c. The kitchens are Rivest in this
inner court, as the cooking is performed by
women, and the ladies of the family superintend
or actually assist in the process. The kitchen,
open in front, is on the same side as the entrance
from the outer court; and the top of it forms a
terrace, which affords a communication between
the first floor of both courts by a private door,
seldom used but by the master of the house and
attendant eunuchs.

The kitchen, of which the annexed cut (No.
354) is the only existing representation, is sur-
rounded by a brick terrace, on the top of which
are the fireplaces formed in compartments, and
‘separated by little walls of fire-brick or tile. In
these different compartments the various dishes of
an Eastern feast may be at once p d at
charcoal fires. This place being wholly open
in front, the half-tame doves, which have their
nests in the trees of the court, often visit it, in
the absence of the servants, in search of crumbs,
&c. As they sometimes blacken themselves, this
een explains the obscure passage in Ps. Ixviii.

3, ‘Though ye have lien among the pots, ye
shall be as the wings of a dove covered with
silver,’ &c. In Turkish Arabia most of the
houses have underground cellars or vaults, to
which the inhabitants retreat during the mid-day
heat of summer, and there enjoy a refreshing cool-
ness. We do not discover any notice of this
usage in Scripture. But at Acre the substruc-
tions of very ancient houses were some years ago
discovered, having such cellars, which were very
probably subservient to this use. In the rest of
the year these cellars, or serdaubs, as they are
called, are abandoned to the bats, which swarm in
them in scarcely credible numbers (Isa. ii. 20).

From the court a flight of stone steps, usual]
at the comer, conducts to the gallery, from whic
a plainer stair leads to the house-top. If the
house be large, there are two or three sets of steps
to the different sides of the quadrangle, but seldom
more than one flight from the terrace to the house-
top of any one court. There is, however, a sepa-
rate stair from the outer court to the roof, and it is
usually near the entrance. This will bring to
mind the case of the paralytic, whose friends,
finding they could not get access to Jesus through
the people who crowded the court of the house in
which he was preaching, took him up to the roof, |
and let him down in his bed through the tiling, to
the place where Jesus stood (Luke v. 17-26). If
the house in which our Lord then was had more
than one court, he and the auditors were certainly
in the outer one; and it is reasonable to conclude
that he stood in the veranda addressing the crowd
below. The men bearing the paralytic therefore,
perhaps went up the steps near the door; and
finding they could not even then get near the
person of Jesus, the gallery being also crowded,
continued their course to the roof of the house,
and removing the boards over the covering of the
gallery, at the place where Jesus stood, lowered
the sick man to his feet. But if they could not
get access to the steps near the door, as is likely,
from the door beihg much crowded, their alter-
native was to take him to the roof of the next
house, and there hoist him over the parapet to the
roof of the house which they desired to enter.

The roof of the house is, of course, flat. It is


878 HOUSE. HOUSE.


formed by layers of branches, twigs, matting, and delivered. These cuts, with the one before given
earth, laid over the rafters and trodden down; (No. 347), are highly interesting, not only with
reference to this particular point, but as eleva-
tions of different styles of houses, existing in a
neighbouring country in the early ages of the
Hebrew history. One of them (Nos. 355, 356)
exhibits different forms of a peculiarity which we
have not observed in any modern example. The
top of the house is covered with a roof or awning,
supported by columns, whereby the sun was ex-
cluded, and a refreshing stream of air
through. Other Egyptian houses had merely a
parapet wall, sometimes surmounted with a row
of battlements, as in the cut here given (No. 357).
Of the inferior kinds of Oriental dwellings,
such as are met with in villages and very smal]
towns, the subjoined is not an unfayourable
cimen. In these there is no central court, but
there is generally a yard attached, either on one
side or at the rear. The shaded platform in frout
is such as is usually seen attached to coflee-
houses, which is, in fagt, the character of the
house represented in No 357. Here the cus
tomers sit and smoke their pipes, and sip their
coffee. The village cabins and abodes of the
peasantry are, of course, of a still inferior descrip-
tion; and, being the abodes of people who live
much in the open air, will not bear comparison
with the houses of the same class in Northen
Europe, where the cottage is the home of the owner.


after which it is covered with a compost which
acquires considerable hardness when dry. Such
roofs would not, however, endure the heavy and
continuous rains of our climate; and in those
parts of Asia where the climate is more than
usually moist, a stone roller is usually kept on
every roof, and after a shower a great part of the
population is engaged in drawing these rollers
over the roofs. It is now very common, iu coun-
tries where timber is scarce, to have domed roofs ;
« but in that case, the flat roof, which is indis-
ble to Eastern habits, is obtained by filling
up the hollow intervals between the several
domes, so as to form a flat surface at the top.
These flat roofs are often alluded to in Scripture ;
and the allusions show that they were made to
serve the same uses as at present. In fine weather
the inhabitants resorted much to them to breathe
the fresh air, to enjoy a fine prospect, or to witness
‘@any event that occurred in the neighbourhood
2 Sam. xi. 2; Isa. xxii. 1; Matt. xxiv. 17;
ark xiii. 15). The dryness of the summer
atmosphere enabled them, without injury to
health, to enjoy the bracing coolness of the night-
air by sleeping on the house-tops; and in order
to have the benefit of the air and prospect in the
daytime, without inconvenience from the sun,
sheds, booths, and tents, were sometimes erected
on the house-tops (2 Sam. xvi. 22).

The roofs of the houses are well protected by
walls and parapets. ‘Towards the street and
neighbouring houses is a high wall, and towards
the interior court-yard usually a parapet or
wooden rail. ‘ Battlements’ of this kind, for the = E
prevention of accidents, are strictly enjoined in =
the Law (Deut. xxii. 8); and the form of the ‘is
battlements of the Egyptian houses, as shown in F
the annexed engravings, suggest some interesting No ancient houses had chimneys. The word
analogies, when we consider how recently the so translated in Hos. xiii. 3, means a hole throu;
Israelites had quitted Egypt when that law was which the smoke escaped; and this existed only


Diatizes y GOORTe


HOUSE.


wn the lower class of dwellings, where raw wood
was employed for fuel or cooking, and where there
was an opening immediately over the hearth to
let out the smoke. In the better sort of houses
the rooms were warmed in winter by charcoal in
braziers, as is still the practice (Jer. xxxvi. 22;
Mark xiv. 54; John xviii. 18).


357.


The windows had no glass. They were only
latticed, and thus gave free passage to the air and
admitted light, while birds and bats were ex-
cluded. In winter the cold air was kept out by
veils over the windows (see cut 352), or by shut-
ters with holes in them sufficient to admit light
(1 Kings vii. 17; Cant. ii. 9).

In the East, where the climate allows the people
to spend so much of their time out of doors, the
articles of furniture and the domestic utensils


have always been few and simple. They are in
this work noticed under separate heads [Bep;
Lames; Porrerr; Seats; Tasies]. The
rooms, however, although comparatively vacant
of moveables, are far from having a naked or
unfurnished appearance. This is owing to the
high ornament given to the walls and ceilings.
The walls are broken up into various recesses,
and the ceiling into compartments. The ceiling,
if of wood and flat, is of curious and complicated
joinery ; or, if vaulted, is wrought into numerous
coves, and enriched with fret-work in stucco;
and the walls are adorned with ues, mo-
saics, mirrors, painting, and gold; which, as set
off by the marble-like whiteness of the stucco, has
a truly brilliant and rich effect. There is much
in this to remind one of such descriptions of


splendid interiors as that in Isa. liv. 11, 12.


HUNTING. 878


HULDAH or rather Cuutpan abn; Sept.
“OAba), wife of Shallum, a prophetess, who, in the
reign of Josiah, abode in that part of Jerusalem
called the Mishneh, where the book of the Law
was discovered by the high-priest Hilkiah. This
prophetess was consulted respecting the denun-
ciations which it contained. She then delivered
an oracular response of mingled judgment and
mercy ; declaring the not remote destruction of


Jerusalem, but promising Josiah that he should ©


be taken from the world before these evil days


came; 3.C. 623 (2 Kings xxii, 14-20; 2 Chron. .


xxxiv. 22-28). Huldah is only known for this
circumstance. She was probably at this time the
widow of Shallum, a name too common to sug-
gest any information; but he is said to have been
grandson of one Harhas, ‘ keeper of the wardrobe,’
but whether the priestly or the royal wardrobe is
uncertain. If former, be must have been a
Levite, if not a priest. As to her residence
TOWN, in the Mishneh, which the Auth. Vers.
renders ‘in the college,’ there is no ground to


conclude that any school or college of the pro- -


phets is to be understood. The name means
‘second’ or ‘double;’ and many of the Jews them-


selves (as Jarchi states) understood it as the name _


of the suburb lying between the inner and outer
wall of Jerusalem. It is safest to regard it as a
Proper name denoting some quarter of Jerusalem
about which we are not certain, and, accordingly,
to translate ‘ in the Mishneb ;’ for which we have
the precedent of the Septuagint which has é» rf
Magesg. The place of her residence is mentioned
potably to show why she, being at hand, was re-
sorted to on this urgent occasion, and not Jere-
miah, who was then probably away at his native
town Anathoth, or at some more distant place.
There were gates of the temple called ‘ the gates
of Huldah ' (Mishn. tit. Afiddoth, i. 3); but this
name had probably no connection with the pro-
phetess. : :


HUNTING, The pursuit and capture of beasts
of the field, was the first means of sustenance
which the human race had _ recourse to, this mode
of gaining a livelihood having naturally preceded
the engagements of agriculture, as it presented
food already provided, requiring ogly to be taken
and slaughtered; whereas tillage must have been
an afterthought, and a later resource, since it
implies accumulated knowledge, skill, and such
provision aforeband of subsistence as would enable
a clan ora family to wait till the fruits of the
earth were matured. Hunting was, therefore, a
business long ere it was a sport. And originally,
before man tad established his empire on the
earth, it must have been not only a serious but a
dangerous pursuit. In process of time, however,
when civilization had made some progress, when
cities were built and lands cultivated, hunting
was carried on not so much for the food which it
brought as for the recreation it gave and its con-
duciveness to health.

The East—the cradle of civilization—presents
us with hunting in both the characters now spoken
of, originally as a means of support, then as a
manly amusement. In the early records of his-
tory we find hunting held in high repute, partly,
no doubt, from its costlinesa, its dangers, its simi-
litude to war, its capability of combining the
energies of many, and also from the relief which


HUNTING.
it afforded to the stagnant eaten Ore a court,
inthe high and bounding spirits it called


fecth. Hunting has always borne somewhat of a
regal character, and down to the present hour has
worn an aristocratic air. In Babylon and Persia
this attribute is presented in bold relief. Im-
manse parks (wapdBeico:) were enclosed for nur-
teasing and preserving beasts of the chace. The
monarch himself led the way to the sport, uot
only in these preserves, but also over the wide
surface of the country, being attended by his
nobles, especially by the younger aspirants to
fame and warlike renown (Xen. Cyr. viii. 1. 38).

In the Bible—our chief storehouse of primitive
history and customs — we find hunting con-
nected with royalty so early as in Gen. x. The
great fqunder of Babel was in general repute as
©a mighty hunter before the Lord.’ The patri-
archs, however, are to be regarded rather as herds-
men than hunters, if respect is had to their
habitual mode of life. The condition of the
herdsman ensues next to that of the hunter in the
early stages of civilization; and so we find that
even Cain was a keeper of sheep. This and the
fact that Abel is designated ‘a tiller of the
ground,’ would seem to indicate a very rapid

rogress in the arts and pursuits of social life.
same contrast and similar hostility we find
somewhat later, in the case of Jacob and Esau;
the first, ‘a plain man dwelling in tents;’ the
second, ‘ a cunning hunter, a man of the field’
(Gen. xxv. aq.). The account given of Esau in
connection with his father seems to show that
hunting was, conjointly with tillage, pursued at
that time as a means of subsistence, and that
hunting had not then passed into its secondary
state, aud become an amusement.

In Egypt the children of Israel would be spec-
tators of hunting carried on extensively and pur-
sued in different manners, but chiefly, as appears
probable, with a view rather to recreation than
subsistence (Wilkinson's Anc. Egypt. vol. iii.).
That the land of promise into which the Hebrews
were conducted on leaving Egypt was plentifully
supplied with beasts of the chace, appears clear
from Exod. xxiii. 29, ‘I will not drive them out
in one year, lest the land become desolate and the
beast of the field multiply against thee’ (comp.
Deut. iii. 22). Mind from the regulation given
in Lev. xvii. 15, it is manifest that hunting was
practised after the settlement in Canaan, and was
pursued witn the view of obtaining food. Prov.
xii. 27 proves that hunting animals for their
flesh was an established custom among the
Hebrews, though the turn of the passage may
serve to show that at the time it was penned sport
was the chiefaim. If liunting was not forbidden
in the ‘ year of rest,’ special provision was made
that not only the cattle, but ‘ ie beast of the field’
should be allowed to eujoy and flourish on the
uneropped spontaneous produce of the land

. xxiii. 11; Lev. xxv. 7). Harmer (iv.
357) says ‘there are various sorts of creatures in
the Holy Land proper for hunting ; wild boars,
antelo hares, &c. are in considerable num-
bers dese and one of the Christian kings of
Jerusalem lost his life (Gesta Dei, p. 887) in pure
suing a hare.’ That the lion and other ra-
venous beasts of prey were not wanting in Pales-
tine, many of the Bible make obvious
(1 Sam. xvii. 34; 2 Sam. xxiii. 20; 1 Kings


HYANA.


xiii. 24; Harris, Natural History of the Bible,
Kitto’s Pictorial Palestine). The lion was even
made use of to catch other animals (Ezek,
xix. 3), and Harmer long ago remarked that as
in the vicinity of Gaza, so also in Judesa, leopards
were trai and used for the same purpose
(Harmer, iv. 358; Hab. i. 8). That lions were
taken by pitfalls as well as by nets a) from
Ezek. xix. 4, 8 (Shaw, p. 172). In the latter
verse the words of the prophet, ‘and spread their
net over him,’ allude to the custom of enclosing
a wide extent of country with nets, into which
the animals were driven by hunters (Wilkinson,
Ane. Egypt. iii. 4). The spots thus enclosed were
usually in a hilly country and in the vicinity of
water brooks; whence the propriety and force of
the language of Ps. xlii. 1, ‘ As the (hunted)
hart panteth after the water brooks.’ These places
were selected because they were those to which
the animals were in the habit of repairing in the
morning and evening. Scenes like the one now
sup are found portrayed in the Egyptian
 neisimce (Wilkinson). Hounds were used for

unting in Egypt, and, if the passnge in Jusephus
(Antig. iv. 8.9) may be considered decisive, in
Palestine as well. From Gen. xxvii. 3,‘ Now
take thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, we
learn what arms were employed at least in cap-
turing game. Bulls, after being taken, were kept
at least for a time in a net (Is. li. 20). Various
missiles, pitfalls, snares, and gins were made use of
in hunting (Ps. xci. 3; Amos iii. 5; 2Sam. xxiii.
20). ‘That hunting continued to be followed till
towards the end of the Jewish state appears from
Josephus (De Bell. Jud. i. 20. 13), where the his-
torian speaks of Herod as ‘ever a most excellent
hunter, for in one day he caught forty wild
beasts.’ The same passage makes it clear that
horses were employed in the pursuits of the chace
(comp. Joseph. Antig. xv. 7. 7; xvi. 10. 3\—


J. R. B.

HUSKS. (Ceratra.]

HYACINTH. ([Lesuen.]

HYANA (SN3¥, T=eboe ; in Syro-Hexapl.
of Aquila, Tzaba; in Arabic, Tzuba (Russell's
Aleppo); Dubba (Shaw's Travels); Tzabuon
(Bochart) ; “fave, Ecclus. xiii. 18). Excepting
in Ecclesiasticus just noted, the word does not
occur in the English Bible, although there are
several passages in the Hebrew canonical books,
where Tseboa, ‘ streaked’ or ‘ variegated,’ is as-


359.


sumed to designate the hyena. Ina work on the
Canida, the present writer formerly questioned the
presence of this animal in Egypt and Western
Asia before the Macedonian conquest, and mai-


“1. BYJENAST


«aimed. that it wis scarcely known by name even
-in.the time of Pliny. This opinion was grounded
.on the total silence of some of the writers of anti-
quity, and the absurd tales of others; although there
‘were among them natives of Asia Minor; although
others had resided in Egypt or in Palestine; and
although the whole region in question hed been
under the successive sway of the Greeks and
Romans for above three centuries and a half—the
former spreading their language, and the latter
maintaining garrisons, in every quarter. Indeed


therefore, in Ecclesiasticus xiii. 18,
bring commentators to a right understanding of
the word; although it is there placed in opposition
to the dog, and is much more iate when
taken for the true byssna than when applied to
a baboon. In the Romaic or modern

krokaloe and gianos are substituted for the an-
cient denomination


Sept.
Agov


continuator of Calmet vindicate what we take to
be the true reading, oith traboa, ‘ the striped rusher,’
se. the hyena, turning round upon his lair—in-
troduced after an allusion in the ious verse
to the lion calling to the beasts of the field (other
hb and jackals) to come and devour. This

lusion, followed up, as it is, by e natural asso-
ciation of ideas, with a description of the pastor,
feeder, or rather consumer or devourer of the
vineyard, treading down and destroying the vines,
renders the natural and poetical picture com-
plete: for the hyena seeks burrows and caverns
for a lair; like the dog it turns round to lie
down ; howls, and occasionally acts in concert ;
is luathsume, savage, insatiable in appetite, offen-
sive in smell ; and will, in the season, like canines,
devour grapes, as the writer has himeelf ascer-
tained by actual experiment.

Tzeboa, therefore, we consider proved to be,
generically, the hywna; more specifically, the
canis hyena of Linn., the hyena vulgaris of
more recent naturalists, the foodh of Barbary, the
dub, dubbah, dabah, zabah, and kaftaar of modem
Semitic nations: and, if the ancients understood
anything by the word, it was also their trochus.
The striped species is one of three or four—all, it
seems, originally African, and, by following ar
mies and caravans, gradually spread over Souther
Asia to beyond the Ganges, though not as yet to
the east of the Bramapvotra. It is now not un-
common in Asia Minor, and has extended into
Southern Tahtary; but this progress is compara-
tively so recent that no other than Semitic names
are well known to belong to it. The head and


jaws of all the species are broad and strong ; the’


muzzle truncate; the tongue like a rasp; the
teeth 34 instead of 42, as in the canide, but ro
bust, large, and eminently formed for biting, lace-
gating, and reducing tbe very bone; the neck stiff;


-a kind of semi-erectile mane along


HYMEN ZEUS. {set


the body short and conmact ; the limbs tall, with
only four toes on each foot ; the fur coarse, forming
the back ; the


tail rather short, with an im brush, and


-with a fetid pouch beneath it. In stature. the
-species varies from that of a large wolf to much


: Hyenas are not ara comparison bd
wolves, or in ion to their powers. They

not, in saat est collenicele: they prowl chiefly
in the night; attack asses, dogs, and weaker ani-
mals; feed most willingly on corrapt animal
offal, dead camels, &c.; and dig into human


moderns, or eee vale eee


The striped species is of a dirty ashy
buff, with sane chlines black streaks across the
shoulders and body, and numerous cross-bars on
the legs; the muzzle and throat are black, and
the tip of the tail white.

There is reason to believe that the deed, or Scrip-
tural wolf, when represented as carrying off a
lamb, is no other than the hysema—unless the read
wolf has been extirpated ; for zoologists have net
found the wolf in Syria, and the vague
of travellers respecting it may apply to wild
dogs, whose manners are different, or to canie
anthus or thoes anthus, whose powers are totally
inadequate to inspire fear [Worr.J—-C. H.S.

HYMEN ZUS (“tyévases)a of Christé-
anity at E, who, with Alexander(} Tim. 3. 20)
and Philetus (2 Tim. ii. 18), had departed from the
truth both in principle and practice, and led otbers
into apostacy. The chief doctrinal error of these
persons consisted in maintaining that ‘the resur
rection was past already.’ The precise meaning
of this expression is by mo means clearly ascem
tained: the most general and perhaps best founded
opinion is, that they understood the resurrection in
a figurative sense of the great change produced. by’
the Gospel dispensation. Some have suggested,
that they attempted to su their views by the
Apostle’s language in his Epistle to the Ephesians
(vexpods—owe(ewolnoer—curtryeiper, &c. ii. le
5): but this is very improbable ; for if such mis-
conception of his language had arisen, it might
easily have been corrected; not to say that one of
them appears to have been personally inimical to
St. Paul (2 Tim. iv. 14), and would scarcely have
appealed to him as an authority. Most critics
suppose that eee er to in boty
the epistles to Timothy by the name of Hymenzus,
Dr. Mosheim, however, contends that there were
two. He seems to luy great stresson the Apostle's
declaration in 1 Tim. 1. 20, ‘whom Ihave delivered
unto Satan that they may learn not to blaspheme.”
But whatever may be the meaning of this expres~
sion, the infliction was evidently designed for the
benefit and restoration of the parties (comp. 1 Cor.:
v. 5), and was therefore far from indicating their
hopeless and abandoned wickedness. Nor do the
terms employed in the second Epistle import a
less flagrant violation of the Christian profession
than those in the first. If in the ane the indivi~
duals alluded to are charged with having ‘dis-
carded a conscience’ and ‘made shipwreck
of faith,’ in the other they are described as indulg-
ing ‘in vain and profane babblings, which would
increase to more ungodliness,’ as ‘having erred
concerning the truth,’ and ‘overthrowing the faith °
of others. These can hardly be said to be ‘two
distinct characters having nothing in common but
the name’ (Mosheim's Cg 304-306),

L


fa


’.


”


erllanea Sacra, i. 2; De


1m ' HYMN, | :


{For otber interpretations of 2 Tim. ii. 18, see
Gill's Commentary, in loc., and Walchii AMiscel-
danea Sacra, i.4; de Hymenco Phileto, Amstel.


1744.—J5. E.R

HYMN cia) In the only places of the
New Testament where this word occurs, it is con-
fiected with two others of very similar i
‘* Speaking to yourselves in psalms (parpots), and
Aymns (Spvors), and spiritual songs (g8ais), sing-
ang and making melody in your heart to the
Lord’ (Rph. v. 19; Col. iii. 16). It has been
‘conjectured, that by ‘ psalms and hymns’ the
poetical compositions of the Old Testament ate
Ghiefly to be understood, and tliat the epithet ‘ spi-
aitual,' here applied to ‘ songs,’ is i led to mark
Ghose devout effusions which resulted from the spi-
vitual gifts granted to the primitive church; yet
in | Cor. xiv. 26 a production of the latter class
wealled ‘a psalm.’ Josephus, it may be remarked,
tses the terms Suvo: and ¢bai in reference te
the Psalms of David (Antig. vii. 12. 3). Our
information respecting the hymnology of the first
Christians is extremely scanty: the most distinct
notice we possess of it is that contained in Pliny’s
celebrated Epistle (Ep. x. 97): ‘Carmen Christo
quasi deo, dicere secum invicem' (Augusti;
Handbuch’ der Christlichen Archdologie, B. V.
@obet und Gesang, ii. 1-160; Walchii Mis-
Aymnis ecclesia Apos
telice, Amstel. 1744).


‘4 © Phe hymn which our Lord sung with his dis-


ciples at the Last Supper is generally supposed to
have been the latter part of the Hadlel, or series of
psalms which were sung by the Jews on the night
of the Passover, comprehending Ps. cxiii.-cxvili.;


Ps. cxiif. and oxiv being-sang before, and the rest of Canaan,


after the Passover (Buxtorfii Lex. Talm. 4. v.


mM, quoted by Kuinoel, on Matt. xxvi. 30;
Lightfoot's Heb. and Talm. Ezercitations, on
Mark xiv. 26; Works, xi. 435).—J. EB R.


..t HYPERBOLE. Any one who carefully exa-
raines the Bible must be surprised at the very few
ic ex ions which it contains, consi-
dering that it is an uriental book. Some of these
* few have occasioned so much difficulty to sincere
‘men, that we have reason to bless God that the
scene of those great events which comprise the
bintory of man’s salvation, was laid in Western,
and not in Eastern Asia, where the genius of
hyperbole reigns without limit or control. In
Kastern Asia the tone of composition is pitched
ao high as to be scarcely intelligible to the sober
intellect of Europe; while in Westen Asia a
medium seems to have been struck between the
wltra-extravagance of the far east, and the frigid
exactness of the far west.
- But even regarded as 2 book of Western Asia,
the Bible is, as compared with almost any other
Western Asiatic book, so singularly free from
hyperbolic expressions as might well excite our
surprise, did uot our knowledge of its divine
origin permit us to suppose that even the style
and mode of expression of the writers were ev far
contrulled, as to exclude from their writings
what, in other ages and countries, might excite
pain and offence, and prove an obstacle to the
reception of divine truth. Nor is it to be said
that the usage of hy le is of modern growth.
We find it in the oldest eastern writings which
now exist; and the earlier rabbinical writings


reject it accordingly. Now this is always a das-
@erous process, and net to be adopted but on such
overwhelming authority of collated manuscripts
as does not exist in the case. How much
— ia eaanrare is it.to regard the
verse simply as a so perfectly conform-
SO Ewe corp yi
at! y per which may be found i
in the sacred books, that the sole wonder really
is that, this one, should be rare eneugh to afford
gtound for objection and remazk.

This. view of the master might be illustrated
by many examples, in. which we find
and profane authors using hyperbules of the like


such a prodigious size, that they were i


up to heaven.’ In Dan. iv. 7, mention is made

a tree whereof ‘the height reached unto heaven,
and the sight thereof unto the end of all the
earth :’ and the author of Ecclesiasticus (xlvii. 15),
speaking of Solomon's wisdom, says, ‘Thy
covered the whule earth, and thou filledst it with
parables.’ As the world is here said to be filled
with Solomon’s parables; 90 in John xxi. 25, by
one degree more of hyperbole, it is said that the
world could not contain all the books that should


E


added ‘ they shall fil) the whole sea and land which
the sun shines upon.’ Wetstein, in his note on the
text in Joho, and Basnage, in his Histoire des Jusifs
(iii. 1-9; ¥v. 7), have cited from the ancient rab-
binical writers such passages as the following :—
‘If all the seas were ink, and every reed wasa
pen, and the whole heaven and earth were parch-
ment, and all the sons of men were writers, they
would not be sufficient to write all the lessons
which Jochunan composed ;’ and concerning one
Eliezer it is said, that ‘if the heavens were parch-
ment, and all the sons of men writers, and all the
trees of the forest pens, they would not be sufli-
cient for writing all the wisdom which he was


of,
Hyperboles not Jess strong than that unde
review find their-way into our own postsy, with


WYSsO0P;
ent shocking cur: jodywent dr offending ont
thus .


taste, :
6 And I: as rich in having sacha jewel
» As @fty ocas, if all their sands were pearl,
Their rivers nectar, and their rocks: pure goht.”
Homer, who if not bor in Asia Minor, had
tindoubtedly lived there, ey persons | einvet :
the hyperbolic marmer of speaking which pre
vailed se much in the Fast: thus, in Hiad xx.
246, 247, he makes /Eneas say to Achilles;
“Let us have done with reproaching one another;
for we may throw out so many repronchful words:
on one another, that a ship of a hundted oars woald:
not be able to carry the load.’ Few instances:
of this are to be found im Ocvidental writers;
yet it is observed: that Cicero (PMI, ii. 44) has’
‘ presertim quam illi eam gloriat consecuti sint,
qua viz colo capi Pome videatur,’ and that’
Livy (vii. 25) says, ‘he vires popali Romani,
vix: terrarum owpit orbis.’ See Biehop
Besroe's Commentary on. the Pour Boangelisty,
1774, &e. Pee ae 3 a
HYSSOP (58 esobA; Gr. Soowros). A great
variety of opinions have been entertained respect-
ing the plant called esodh, translated ‘hyssop’ in
the Authorized Version both of the Old and the
New Testament; but as yet no satisfactory inves-
tigation has been made, s0 as to enable us to fix with
certaitty on the plant intended. The difficulty ap-
pears tohave arisen from the similarity of the Greek
* name Sooewos to the Hebrew esobh, whence the
former seems, from an early period, to have been
considered synonymvuus with the latter, and used
for it in referring to the of the Old Tes-
tarnent where it is mentioned. As the Sccamos
of Greek authors is generally acknowledged to be
the common hyssop (Hyssopus officinalis of bota-
nista), it has been inferred that it must also be the
plant of the Old Testament, as well as that re-
ferred to in the New Testament. This inference
has not, however, been universally acquiesced in;
for Celsius enumerates, under no less y
heads, the different plants which have been ad-
duced by various authors as the hyssop of Scrip-
ture. Before mentioning these, it is desirable to
refer to the passages of the Old and New Testament
where the plant is mentioned. The first notice of it
occurs in Exod. xii. 22, where a bunch of hyssop
is directed to be dipped in blood and struck on
the lintels and the two side-posts of the doors of
the houses in which the Israelites resided. It is
next mentioned in Lev. xiv. 4, 6, 52, in the
ceremony for declaring lepers to be cleansed ;
and again, in Num. xix. 6, 18, in preparing
the water of separation. To these passages the
apostle alludes in Heb. ix. 19:—* For when
Moses ken every precept to all the
people, according to the law, he touk the blood of
calves, and of goats, with water, and scarlet wool,
and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book and all
the people.’ From this text we find that the
Gieck tani Sercerwos was cousidered synonymous
with the Hebrew esobA ; and from the preceding that
the plant must have been leafy, and large enough
to serve for the purposes of sprinkling, and that it
must have been found in Lower Egypt, as well as
in the country towards Monnt Sinai, and onwards
to Palestine. From the following passages we get
some information respecting the habits and the


supposed properties of the plant. Thus, in 1 Kings


the spange


eighipen.::


iv. 34, itrsak®, “Solomon spoke of trees, ffom thié
cedar-tree that is in Lebanon, even unto tlie hy
roa gol eat of the wall;’ and in the

tential peatm of David (li. 7), ‘Purge me with
hyseep, and'¥ shall be clean: wash me, and I shal,
be whiter than snow.’' In this passage it is,
tie dowbt, considered by some commentators that
hyseop is used! in a figurative sense; but still it ig
possible that the plant may have


some
general cleansmg properties, and thus come to be
employed: in to other plants in the cere-


monies of purification. It ought, at all events, to.
be found growing upon walls, and in Palestine..
In the account of the crucifixion of our Saviour,,
the Apostte John says (John xix. 29), ‘Now there
was set a'vessel fill Shad i a ey pied «
sponge with vinegar, tit SSOP,

t it to Wis mouth.’ Th the perattel passages of

jatthew (xvii: 48) and Mark (xv. 36), it is
stated thit! the sponge filled with vinegar was put’

a.reed or stick. fo reconcile these state-
ments, some commentators have supposed that both
and! the hyseop were tied 'to a stick, and
that one apostle mentions only the hyssop, because
he considered it as the most important; while, for
the same reason, the other two mention only the
stick ; ba the simplest mode < eaplsining o
ay t disc cy is to consider the hyssop an
the stick to te the same thing—in other oie:
that the sponge was affixed to a stick of hyssop.

A great variety of plants have been adduced by
different authors as that alluded to in the above
passages, though some do not seem to think it ne-
cessary to reconcile the plant which they prefer
to more than one or two of the and
seldom take the trouble of proving that it is found
in the localities where the hyssop is stated to have
been employed.

Celsius evumerates the several plants which
have been adduced, under eighteen different heads,
Of these some belong to the class of ferns, as
Capillus Veneris, maiden-bair, and Ruta Mu-

i aywall-rue, because they will grow upon
wale: 80 also do the Polytrichwm, or hair-moss,
the Kloster hyssops, or pearlwort, and Sagina pro-
cumbens are suggested by others, because from their
growing on rocks or walls, they will answer to the
passage in 1 Kings iv. 33, and from their small-
ness contrast well with the cedar of Lebanon,
and are a proof of the minute knowledge of Solo-
mon. Some again contend for species of worm-
wood, as being, from their bitterness, most likely
to have been added to the dre in the sponge,
that it might be more distasteful to our Saviour.
The majority, however, have selected different
kinds of fragrant plants belunging to the natural
family of Labiate, several of which are found
in dry and barren situations in Palestine, and
also in some parts of the Desert. Of these
may be mentioned the rosemary, species of la-
ventler, of mint, of marjoram, of thyme, of sa-
yory, of thymbra, and others of the same tribe,
resembling each other much in chaceciets as well
as in ies: but it does not appear that any
of tienes on walls, or are ae of cleansing
properties; and, with the exceptiun of the rosemary,
they are not capable of yiething a stick, Dor are
they found in all the required situations. If we
ak to the most recent authors, we find some other
plants adduced, though the generality adhere to
the common hyssop. Sprengel (Hist. Rei Herd.


804 HYSSOP,


4.14) seems to entertain no doubt that the Thyne-
bra spicata found by Hasselquist, on the ruins
abcut Jerusalem, is the hyssop of Solomon; though
Hasselquist himself thought that the moss called
Gymnostomum truncatum was the plant.


Lad
Calcot asks, ‘ Whether the hyssop upon which
St. John says the sponge s in vinegar was
put, to be held to the lips of Christ upon the


cross,

might not be the hyssop attached to its staff of
cedat-wood, for the purposes of sprinkling the

ple, lest they should contract defilement on
Be eve of the Sabbath, which was a high-day, by
being in the field of execution’ (Scripture Her-
. bal, p. 208). Rosenmiiller, again, thiuks that the
: iad licen fase wa ast

¢ an aromatic t resembling it, i
marjoram, which toe Germans call. Dosten, or
Woklgemuth, the Arabs Zatar, and the Greeks

Y "In the Pictorial Bible (i, 161), Mr.
Kitto observes ‘that the hyssop of the sacred
Seri has opened « wide field for conj
but in no instance has any plant been
that, at the same time, has a sufficient length of


BRUM, in
Rosenmiiller, as the Esobh of the Hebrews; but
concludes by observing that a more accurate exs-


r=


LOWER EBGYPT
} with the

PENUINSILA or MTSINAL
vad the

JOURNEYS OF THE ISKABLITES.


By WHughes.


Ow.


A fine of five cents a day is incurred b
retaining it beyond the specified time.
Please return promptly.
