George Lyman Kittredge, Witchcraft in Old and New England (1929)
==========================================================================
Kittredge's magisterial Harvard study of English and New England witchcraft — the scholarly cornerstone of Anglo-American witchcraft historiography. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

p.


It'


♦  I


REFERENCE
USE  IN  UBRARY  ONLY


»3


1-


PISL-14
SDM— .«  •


OF  PCMNP^  ^NIA


DATE  DUE

1

j

DEMCO  NO  .   38  -298

04-12-622-3


Digitized  by  tlie  Internet  Arcliive
in  2015


littps://arcliive.org/details/witclicraftinoldnOOkitt_0


WITCHCRAFT

in  Old  and  New  England


BY

GEORGE  LYMAN  OTTREDGE

^uicquid  mortale  creamur


CAMBRIDGE,  MASSACHUSETTS
HARVARD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS
Mriccc'cxxviiii


\\  Q  2  ij


PRINTED  AT  THE  HARVARD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS


PREFACE


MY  SALEM  friends  will  expect  me  to  remind  the  reader
that  the  great  outbreak  of  1692  occurred  in  Salem
Village,  now  Danvers,  though  the  trials  were  held  at  Salem.

In  view  of  some  recent  works  on  witchcraft,  it  seems  only
prudent  to  avow  that  I  have  no  belief  in  the  black  art  or  in
the  interference  of  demons  in  the  daily  life  of  mortals.

Three  of  my  eighteen  chapters  have  already  been  pub-
lished: the  first,  in  the  American  Historical  Review  for
October,  1917  (now  reprinted  by  permission  of  the  editor.
Professor  Jameson,  and  the  publishers,  the  Macmillan  Com-
pany) ;  the  seventeenth,  in  Studies  in  the  History  of  Religions
Presented  to  Crawford  Howell  Toy,  191 2  (reprinted  by  per-
mission of  the  Harvard  University  Press) ;  the  eighteenth,  in
the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Antiquarian  Society,  1907
(reprinted  by  permission  of  the  Society).  Each  of  these
chapters  has  undergone  some  slight  revision.

G.  L.  K.

Cambridge,  Massachusetts
December  28,  1928


i

I


WITCHCRAFT
IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Ms


LONDON  :  HUMPHREY  MILFORD
OXFORD    UNIVERSITY  PRESS


I.  A  Typical  Case   3         ,  ,

II.  English  Witchcraft  Before  1558     ....  23  ''cuJcc^r^

III.  Image  Magic  and  the  Like   73

IV.  Love  and  Hate   104

V.  Madness,  Curses,  and  the  Elfshot  ....  124

VI.  Venefica   136

VII.  Charms  Ghoulish  and  Profane   141

VIII.  Wind  and  Weather   152

IX.  The  Witch  in  the  Dairy   163

X.  Metamorphosis   174

XI.  Mirrors  and  Thieves   185

XII.  Treasure  Trove   204

XIII.  Haunted  Houses  and  Haunted  Men     .     .     .  214

XIV.  The  Seer   226

XV.  Cold  Water   232

XVI.  The  Compact  and  the  Witches'  Sabbath   .     .  239

XVII.  King  James  the  First   276  —

XVIII.  Witchcraft  and  the  Puritans   329

Notes   375

Index   599

\


WITCHCRAFT

IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


I


CHAPTER  I


A  TYPICAL  CASE

THE  accessible  materials  for  a  history  of  Elizabethan
witchcraft  are  scattered  and  fragmentary.  Much  is  lost,
and  much  remains  inedited.  Yet  we  cannot  hope  to  under-
stand the  prosecutions  of  the  last  sixty  years  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  whether  in  Old  England  or  in  New,  until  we
arrive  at  a  substantially  accurate  comprehension  of  what  was
thought  and  done  at  the  close  of  the  great  queen's  reign.  It  is
not  only  the  dogmas  of  the  theologians,  the  tenets  of  the  phy-
sicians, and  the  rules  of  the  law  that  we  need  to  know,  but,
above  everything  else,  the  beliefs  and  feelings  of  the  populace
—  of  the  folk  itself.  For  it  is  in  this  matter  of  witchcraft,
if  anywhere,  that  public  opinion  is  supreme.  The  populace
may,  perhaps,  be  restrained  by  the  more  enlightened  part  of
the  community,  but  the  so-called  governing  classes  cannot
prosecute  with  success  if  the  populace  does  not  approve.
^^i^cJl-4luntin^never  flourishes  unlessjhe^om^
eaggrjor  jt.  It  is  to  them  that  the  officers  of  the  law  must
look  for  testimony,  and  it  is  the  jury  of  the  vicinage  that  ren-
ders the  verdict.'  Experience  has  taught,  over  and  over  again,
how  hard  it  is  for  the  most  skeptical  judge  to  bring  about  an
acquittal  in  a  particular  case  when  the  neighborhood  from
which  the  jury  comes  is  convinced  of  the  reality  of  the  crime
in  general.

There  was  a  famous  witch-trial  at  Exeter,  England,  in
1682.  Roger  North  was  present,  and  here  is  his  account  of  the
state  of  public  opinion:

The  women  were  very  old,  decrepit,  and  impotent,  and  were  brought  to
the  assizes  with  as  much  noise  and  fury  of  the  rabble  against  them  as  could
be  shewed  on  any  occasion.  The  stories  of  their  arts  were  in  everyone's
mouth,  and  they  were  not  content  to  belie  them  in  the  country,  but  even
in  the  city  where  they  were  to  be  tried  miracles  were  fathered  upon  them,
as  that  the  judge's  coach  was  fixed  upon  the  castle  bridge,  and  the  like.  All
which  the  country  believed,  and  accordingly  persecuted  the  wretched  old


4


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


creatures.  A  less  zeal  in  a  city  or  kingdom  hath  been  the  overture  of  defec-
tion or  revolution,  and  if  these  women  had  been  acquitted,  it  was  thought
that  the  country  people  would  have  committed  some  disorder.'

This  was  a  case  in  which  it  seems  clear  that  the  judges  would
have  preferred  a  verdict  of  "not  guilty"  if  they  had  been  left
to  themselves.

Another  striking  example  is  that  of  Jane  Wenham,  who  was
condemned  to  death  for  witchcraft  in  1712.  Her  trial  is  not-
able for  its  recent  date.  By  that  time  there  was  much  in-
credulity on  the  subject  in  the  minds  of  educated  men.  Chief
Justice  Powell,  who  presided,  made  open  fun  of  the  evidence
and  summed  up  strongly  in  the  defendant's  favor,  but  in
vain.  He  was  obliged  to  sentence  the  woman  to  death  and  to
content  himself  with  procuring  her  pardon  from  the  crown.*
Nor  was  it  until  1736  that  the  English  and  Scottish  statutes
against  witchcraft  were  repealed.  In  considering  the  tena-
city of  the  popular  belief  on  this  subject,  we  should  never
forget  that  the  essence  of  witchcraft  is  maleficium.  The  hatred
and  terror  which  a  witch  evokes  is  due  to  her  will  and  her
power  to  inflict_  bodily  injury.  Compacts"  withrtter  devil,
—the  suckling  of  imps,  the  violation  of  graves,  the  abomina-
tions of  the  Witches'  Sabbath  —  these  are  mere  incidentals,
the  paraphernalia  of  the  art.  They  aggravate  the  offence,  to
be  sure,  and  proof  that  a  woman  is  implicated  in  such  horrors
may  send  her  to  the  scaffold  or  the  stake.  But,  in  the  last
analysis,  every  witch  is  prosecuted,  not  because  she  amuses
herself  with  riding  a  broomstick  or  because  she  has  taken  a
fiend  for  a  lover:  she  is  hunted  down  like  a  wolf  because  she  is
an  enemy  tqjiiankind.  Her  heart  is  full  of  malignity.  For  a
harsh  word,  or  the  refusal  of  a  bit  of  bread,  she  becomes  your
mortal  foe.  And  her  revenge  is  out  of  all  proportion  to  the
affront,  for  she  is  in  league  with  spirits  of  evil  who  are  almost
infinite  in  strength.  She  sends  blight  upon  your  crops,  the  rot
upon  your  sheep,  the  murrain  on  your  cattle;  your  house
takes  fire;  your  ship  is  cast  away.  She  visits  you  and  your
family  with  strange  wasting  diseases  —  with  palsy,  with  con-
sumption, with  raging  fever,  with  madness,  with  death.
Witch-trials  are  not  prompted  by  theological  hair-splitting,
by  systems  of  devil-lore,  by  the  text,  "Thou  shalt  not  suffer
a  witch  to  live."   T^hese  all  come  after  the  fact.    It  is  self-


CHAP,  l]


A  TYPICAL  CASE


5


protection  that  incites  the  accuser.  His  cause  is^ifiar. —  and
fear  of  bodily  harm.  The  witch  is  a  murderer,  or  may  be-
come a  murderer  on~the  slightest  provocation.  She  cannot
be  spared,  for  there  is  no  safety  for  life,  body,  or  estate  until
she  is  sent  out  of  the  world.

Now  the  mere  creed  —  the  belief  that  witches  exist  and
that  they  can  work  supernaturally-  to  the  injury  and  even'
to  the  destruction  of  their  enemies  —  is  the  heritage  of  the
human  race.  The  Englishman  of  the  sixteenth  or  seventeenth
century  did  not  excogitate  or  dream  it  for  himself,  or  borrow
it  from  the  Continent,  or  learn  it  from  his  spiritual  advisers
whether  before  the  Reformation  or  after.  He  inherited jt  in
an  unbroken  line  from  his  primeval  ancestors.  And  along
with  it  came  another  dogma,  likewise  of  abysmal  antiquity  —
the  theory  that  all  diseases  are  of  supernatural  origin.  This
dogma  had,  to  be  sure,  been  somewhatTimited  in  scope  as  the
shaman  developed  into  the  physician,  but  it  was  still  extant
and  still  vigorous.  Every  malady  that  baffled  the  doctors  was
ascribed  to  witchcraft,  often  by  the  doctors  themselves;  and
all  sudden  or  virulent  or  wasting  maladies  lay  under  suspi-
cion. These  things  are  truisms,  but  they  are  continually  lost
sight  of  by  the  investigators  of  English  witchcraft.  There
is  a  constant  assumption  that  such  beliefs  are  abnormal,  a
persistent  tendency  to  ignore  the  fact  that  it  was  rather  a
mark  of  exceptional  enlightenment  in  popular  diagnosis  to
look  to  natural  causes  than  a  mark  of  positive  credulity  or
superstition  to  look  to  supernatural  causes.  In  brief,  the
ordinary  Elizabethan,  in  this  essential  particular  —  the  doc-
trine of  maleficium  and  its  application  to  disease  ■ —  had  not
yet  emerged  from  barbarism.  And  it  was  the  doctrine  of
maleficium^  and  nothing  else,  that  made  the  witch-creed
terrible.

After  a  witch  had  been  arrested,  it  is  true,  she  often  fell
into  the  hands  of  the  learned  who  asked  her  questions  based
on  an  elaborate  system  of  demonology,  and,  when  so  inter-
rogated, she  often  confessed  strange  things,  which  the  indus-
try of  scholars  may  trace  to  foreign  creeds  or  imported
philosophies.  Some  of  this  erudite  material,  through  the
pulpit  or  otherwise,  did  certainly  attach  itself  to  the  native
and  popular  beliefs.  And  thus  we  may  easily  be  led  to  fancy


6  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

that  judges,  philosophers,  divines  —  and  even  King  James  I
—  were  to  blame  for  the  prevalence  of  English  witchcraft  in
the  seventeenth  century.  But  such  elaborations  were  merely
incidental.  They  came  into  a  particular  case,  if  at  all,  only
when  the  witch  had  once  been  cried  out  upon.  Somebody
falls  sick,  and  the  doctors  cannot  cure  him;  a  child  has  hys-
terical fits  and  is  grievously  tormented.  There  are  aged
women  in  the  village  at  whom  we  have  long  looked  askance.
They  are  foul-mouthed,  perhaps,  and  prone  to  curse  when  we
offend  them;  or  they  have  laid  claim  to  occult  power,  and
have  traded  on  the  terror  they  inspire.  They  may  even
imagine  themselves  to  hold  intercourse  with  Satan,  for  they
share  the  current  superstitions  and  are  not  veryi_  strong  in
their  wits.  One  of  these  beldames  is  mentioned  as  the  be-
witcher,  perhaps  because  the  patient's  distempered  fancy  has
seen  a  face  and  called  a  name.  Then  old  rumors  are  revived:
Smith's  cattle  died  year  before  last,  or  Jones's  little  son.  For
there  is  ever  at  hand  a  huge  mass  of  such  latent  evidence,  all
connected  with  the  primitive  doctrine  of  maleficium,  and  only
waiting  for  a  prosecution  to  bring  it  before  the  courts.  When
the  trial  begins,  we  may  hear  of  compacts  with  Satan,  of
flights  through  the  air,  of  sordid  and  hideous  revels  at  the
Witches'  Sabbath.  But  such  things  are  mere  confirmatory
details.  The  essential  point,  the  really  efficient  impulse,  is
always  maleficinyn  —  injury  to  goods  or  body  or  life  through
supernatural  means.

For  England,  the  worst  period  of  witch-prosecution  is,  by
common  consent,  the  seventeenth  century  —  the  century  of
the  Lancashire  witches,  of  Matthew  Hopkins  and  John
Stearne,  of  Glanvil's  Sadncismus  T'rinmphatus.  The  reign  of
James,  we  remember,  covers  exactly  twenty-two  years,  from
March,  1603,  to  March,  1625.  In  i6o4_Par2iament  enacted  a
famous _statute  against  witchcraft,  usually  called  the  statute
of  James  I.  The  idea  has  been  prevalent  that  the  delusion
was^  dying  out  at  the  close  of  Elizabeth's  reign,  and  that  the
advent  of  the  British  Solomon  gave  it  fresh  vigor.

My  purpose  is  to  report  an  extremely  interesting  case  of
alleged  witchcraft  which  occurred  in  Devonshire  in  1601  and
1602,  just  before  James  came  to  the  throne.  This  alone  would
make  it  significant  enough.  But  it  is  still  further  noteworthy


CHAP.  I]  A  TYPICAL  CASE  7

because  it  exhibits  the  phenomena  in  what  we  may  call  a  pure
form.  We  have  only  the  testimony  of  voluntary,  and  for  the
most  part  aggrieved,  witnesses.  There  are  no  arguments,  no
confessions,  no  comments  from  the  bench.  There  is  nothing
but  the  beliefs  and  experiences  of  the  witnesses  themselves,
honestly  detailed  according  to  their  lights.  Hence  the  docu-
ments afford  us  a  perfect  picture  of  the  witchcraft  creed  as
held  by  the  common  people.  And  we  find,  as  we  should  ex-
pect, that  the  sum  and  substance  of  it  all  was  maJe^ciurSi-^
injuryto^the  property  and  the  health  of  the  victims,  amount-
mg  even  to  ruin  and  death.  . —

The  documents  consist  of  eleven  "examinations,"  *  taken
before  a  Devon  justice  of  the  peace.  Sir  Thomas  Ridgeway,  in
1601  and  1602.  The  manuscript  was  acquired  by  the  Har-
vard College  Library,  in  loose  sheets,  in  1905.^  The  papers
are  the  original  records,  each  examination  being  written  out
by  a  clerk  and  signed  by  the  magistrate.  Most  of  them  are  in
duplicate,  both  copies  bearing  Ridgeway's  signature,  and  one
is  in  triplicate.  Such  examinations  were  regularly  taken  to
perpetuate  testimony,  and  were  offered  as  evidence  at  the
assizes.  The  method  may  be  conveniently  seen  in  Thomas
Potts's  account  of  the  Lancashire  witch- trials  of  161 2,  at
which  he  acted  as  clerk  of  the  court.''  Thus  our  Devon  record
contains  a  considerable  body  of  material  of  unquestionable
authenticity.

Sir  Thomas  Ridgeway  was  a  man  of  first-rate  intelligence,
and  is  remembered  as  one  of  the  Planters  of  Ulster.  He  was
born  about  1565.  In  1600,  shortly  before  the  date  of  our  ex-
aminations, he  was  appointed  high  sheriff  of  Devon  and  re-
ceived the  honor  of  knighthood.  In  161 6  he  was  raised  to  the
Irish  peerage  by  the  title  of  Lord  Ridgeway,  and  in  1623  he
became  Earl  of  Londonderry.

The  scene  of  the  trouble  was  Hardness,  a  village  close  to
Dartmouth.  Here  lived  Michael  Trevisard,  a  fisherman,  with
his  wife  Alice  and  his  son  Peter.  All  were  defamed  for  witch-
craft, and  suspicion  against  Michael  and  Alice  was  of  long
standing.  The  witnesses  against  them  were  persons  of  their
own  humble  condition,  belonging  in  Hardness  or  the  vicinity.

*  One  of  these  includes  the  testimony  of  a  man  and  his  wife,  so  that  we  really
have  twelve  witnesses.


8  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


There  is  no  trace  of  influence  from  the  clergy  or  the  gentry.
It  was  the  villagers  themselves  who  appealed  to  the  magis-
trate for  protection.  One  witness  speaks  of  a  number  of  them
as  going  to  Tunstall,  to  the  house  of  Sir  Thomas  Ridgeway,
to  make  a  complaint,  and  as  meeting  Alice  Trevisard  on  the
way  back.  Whether  the  accused  persons  were  ever  brought
to  trial  we  do  not  know,  but  it  is  clear  that  Ridgeway  had
these  documents  prepared  for  eventual  use  at  the  assizes.

The  whole  essential  body  of  the  witchcraft  doctrine  occurs,
in  a  highly  condensed  form,  in  the  examination  of  Alice  But-
ler, of  Hardness.  This  is  in  two  parts,  and  may  be  quoted  in
full.  The  duplicate  shows  a  number  of  variant  readings,
some  of  which  I  have  inserted  in  brackets.  I  have  modernized
the  spelling  and  regulated  punctuation  and  capitals,  and  so
elsewhere.

Devon  Th'  examination  of  Alice  Butler  of  Hardness,  in  the  County
aforesaid,  widow,  taken  before  Sir  Thomas  Ridgway,  Knight,  the  second
of  October,  1601.

1.  This  examinate  saith  that  she,  sitting  at  a  door  or  bench  in  Hardness
aforesaid  about  Christide  last  was  twelvemonth  with  one  Michael  Trevy-
sard  of  Hardness  aforesaid,  used  these  words:  "I  would  my  child  were  able
to  run  as  well  as  any  of  these  children  that  run  here  in  the  street!"  Then
said  Trevysard,  "It  shall  never  run!"  "No?  That's  hard!"  says  this  ex-
aminate again.  "No,  it  shall  never  run,"  answered  Trevysard,  "till  thou
hast  another,"  repeating  the  same  words  a  dozen  several  times  at  the  least
with  great  vehemency.  Whereupon  this  examinate,  being  much  troubled
in  mind,  especially  upon  a  fear  conceived  by  her  before  through  the  general
bad  report  that  went  of  him,  departed  from  him.  And  the  very  same  week
the  same  child  sickened,  and  consumed  away,  being  well  one  day  and  ill
another,  for  the  space  of  seventeen  weeks  or  thereabout,  and  then  died.

2.  This  examinate  further  saith,  that  Peter  Trevysard,  son  of  the  said
Michael  Trevisard,  came  to  this  examinate's  house  to  borrow  a  hatchet,
which  Alice  Beere,  servant  to  this  examinate,  denied,  to  whom  the  said
Michael  answered  [_var.  and  he  answered],  "Shall  I  not  have  it?  I  will  do
thee  a  good  turn  ere  twelvemonth  be  at  an  end."  And  shortly  the  said
Alice  Beere  sickened,  continuing  one  day  well  and  another  day  ill,  for  the
space  of  eleven  weeks,  and  then  died.  In  which  case  both  the  husband  of
this  examinate  and  a  [_var.  another]  child  of  theirs  fell  sick,  and  so  con-
tinued seventeen  or  eighteen  weeks,  and  then  died.

Th:  Ridgway.

The  regular  fashion  of  commenting  on  such  utterances  as
these  is  to  cry  out  against  the  malicious  folly  of  the  accuser
and  to  lament  the  hard  lot  of  the  accused.  May  I  be  per-


CHAP.  I]


A  TYPICAL  CASE


9


mitted,  for  once,  to  abandon  custom,  and  to  express  my
sympathy  with  poor  Alice  Butler,  who  had  lost  her  husband
and  two  of  her  children  by  some  strange  wasting  sickness,  for
which  she  had  no  name,  and  who  could  only  revert  to  the
primeval  tenets  of  savage  man  in  her  attempt  to  explain  so
dreadful  a  visitation?  Few  utterances  in  any  records  are
more  artlessly  pathetic.

To  the  student  of  English  witchcraft  the  document  is  very
valuable  on  account  of  the  purity  and  simplicity  of  type
which  it  exemplifies.  Maleficium  is  the  gist  of  the  whole  mat-
ter, and  the  process  described  is  perfectly  accordant  to  rule.
We  have  the  damnum  minatum  and  the  malum  secutum.
That  is  all.  There  are  no  complications  whatever.  There  is
not  a  trace  of  those  foreign  and  learned  elements  that  are
often  thought  to  constitute  the  bulk  of  the  English  witch-
craft doctrine  after  the  Reformation.  There  is  no  Black  Man,
no  book  to  sign,  no  compact  with  Satan.  There  are  no  infer-
nal revels,  no  fiendish  lovers.  In  short,  there  is  nothing  that
is  non-essential.  Alice  Butler's  evidence  is  precisely  the  kind
of  testimony  that  might  have  been  offered  against  a  witch  in
any  land  and  in  any  stage  of  civilization,  from  the  Stone  Age
to  day-before-yesterday.  It  would  be  quite  pertinent  at  the
trial  of  a  witch  of  Ashantee  or  Congo  or  the  Australian  bush.
It  exhibits  the  primitive  and  universal  creed  of  the  whole
human  race,  preserved  without  the  contamination  of  culture
or  education,  and  surviving  every  religious  vicissitude,  to  the
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century,  in  one  of  the  most  en-
lightened countries  in  the  world.  Incidentally,  it  was  quite
enough  to  send  Michael  Trevisard  to  the  scaffold  if  he  came
to  trial  and  the  jury  believed  Alice's  story.  Finally,  nobody
was  to  blame.  The  responsibility  lay  not  upon  the  jurists  or
the  theologians  or  the  neighborhood:  it  was  the  burden  of  the
human  race  as  a  whole.

An  equally  distressing  case  was  that  of  Joan  Baddaford.
Alice  Trevisard,  it  appears,  had  fallen  out  with  John  Badda-
ford, Joan's  husband,  and  had  "said  unto  him  that  he  should
go  to  Pursever  Wood  and  gather  up  his  wits."  The  precise
meaning  of  this  railing  speech  escapes  me,  but  I  fancy  it  was
equivalent  to  calling  John  a  scatter-brained  fool.  The  phrase
reminds  one,  though  perhaps  whimsically,  of  Pandar's  con-


lO  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


temptuous  "Yea,  hazelwood!"  in  Chaucer's  Troilus.s  We
may  also  adduce,  tentatively,  the  common  saying,  "Your  wits
are  gone  wool-gathering."  It  was  manifestly  possible,  if  the
sequel  should  warrant,  to  interpret  Alice's  jeering  words  as  a
threat  that  John  should  lose  his  mind.  The  sequel  did  so
warrant.  t

Within  three  weeks  after  [Joan  alleged],  the  said  John  Baddaford  made  a
voyage  to  Rochelle,  in  the  Hope  of  Dittsham,  and  returned  home  agaiii.out
of  his  wits,  and  so  continued  by  the  space  of  two  years,  tearing  and  renting
his  clothes,  in  such  sort  as  four  or  five  men  were  hardly  able  to  bind  him
and  keep  him  in  order.

In  like  manner,  as  we  learn  from  Potts's  WonderfuU  Dis-
coverie  of  Witches  in  the  Countie  of  Lancaster,  John  Bulcock
and  his  mother  Joan  were  indicted,  in  1612,

for  that  they  feloniously  had  practiced,  exercised,  and  used  their  divelish
and  wicked  arts,  called  witchcraft,  enchantments,  charms,  and  sorceries,
in  and  upon  the  body  of  Jennet  Deane,  so  as  the  body  of  the  said  Jennet
Deane,  by  force  of  the  said  witchcrafts,  wasted  and  consumed,  and  after
she,  the  said  Jennet,  became  mad.

But  we  must  return  to  the  testimony  of  Joan  Baddaford.

On  the  occasion  of  the  same  quarrel,  Joan  averred,  Alice
Trevisard  had  "further  threatened  this  examinate  that
within  seven  years  after  she  should  not  be  worth  a  groat,  nor
have  a  house  to  dwell  in,  nor  a  coat  to  her  back."  And  these
threats  came  true,  for  "whereas  she  had  at  that  time  the  fee
simple  of  an  house  worth  one  hundreth  pounds,  now  is  she
worth  nothing."

Let  us  bear  in  mind  that  the  things  to  which  poor  Joan
Baddaford  bore  witness  must  have  been  facts.  Her  insane
husband  and  her  fallen  fortunes  were  neither  delusions  nor
superstitions.  We  cannot  ridicule  or  denounce;  we  can  only
pity.  If  Joan  was  a  bad  logician  —  if  she  reasoned  post  hoc
ergo  propter  hoc  —  so  do  we,  every  day  of  our  lives.  And  as
to  threats,  they  are  still  admissible  as  evidence  against  an
accused  murderer.

The  next  section  of  Joan's  examination  may  seem  trivial,
but  it  was  significant  of  inveterate  malice  on  the  part  of  the
alleged  witch,  and  thus  was  clearly  pertinent.  Some  three
years  before  the  date  of  this  document,  Joan  had  asked


CHAP.  l]


A  TYPICAL  CASE


II


a  penny  of  Alice  Trevisard  "for  washing  of  clothes."  Alice
paid  the  debt,  but  added  that  the  penny  should  do  Joan
"little  good."  Joan  spent  the  coin  for  drink,  "and  when  the
drink  came,  she  had  no  power  to  drink  thereof,  but  the  same
night  fell  sick,  and  continued  so  by  the  space  of  seven  weeks
following."  This  is  an  excellent  instance  of  primeval  magic.
It  is  notoriously  dangerous  to  receive  anything  from  a  witch,
whether  by  way  of  gift  or  of  payment.  Joan's  inability  to
drink  is  a  typical  symptom.  We  meet  with  it  again  in  the
Lancashire  trials  of  1612,  as  reported  by  Thomas  Potts.  One
Peter  Chaddock,  in  testifying  against  Isabel  Robey,  deposed
that  at  one  time  he

was  very  sore  pained,  and  so  thirsty  withal,  and  hot  within  his  body,  that
he  would  have  given  anything  he  had  to  have  slaked  his  thirst,  having
drink  enough  in  the  house,  and  yet  could  not  drink  until  the  time  that
.  .  .  James  the  Glover  came  to  him;  and  this  examinate  then  said  before
the  said  Glover,  "I  would  to  God  that  I  could  drink!"  whereupon  the  said
Glover  said  to  this~exanTinate~  "Take  that  drink,  and  in  the  namejof  the
Father^  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  drink  it,"  — whereupon  this  exam-
inate then  took  the  glass  of  drink,  and  did  drink  it  all,  and  afterwards
mended  very  well.

Joan  Baddaford's  experiences,  or  some  of  them,  convinced
her  that  Alice  Trevisard  was  a  witch.  This,  indeed,  was  the
general  opinion  in  those  parts.  At  all  events,  Joan,  with  sev-
eral of  her  neighbors,  went  to  Sir  Thomas  Ridgeway's  house
at  Tunstall  to  lay  a  complaint  against  her.  On  the  way  back,
Alice  met  them.  A  dispute  ensued,  as  was  natural,  and  Alice
said  to  Joan,  "Thou  or  thine  may  be  burned  before  long  be!"
The  taunt,  we  may  conjecture,  was  in  answer  to  some  such
remark  as  that  Alice  deserved  to  be  burnt  for  a  witch.  It  is
easy  to  imagine  the  scene.  The  sharp-tongued  Alice,  a  com-
mon railer  and  brawler,  baited  by  a  group  of  villagers,  all  of
whom  believed  that  they  had  suffered  at  her  hands,  was  de-
termined to  give  as  good  as  she  got,  regardless  of  the  risk  that
anything  she  said  might  be  used  against  her.  The  encounter
was  on  a  Monday.  From  that  day  until  the  next  Thursday
Joan  Baddaford  made  no  fire  in  her  house,  whether  from  fear
or  from  poverty  we  cannot  tell.  On  Thursday,  however,  Joan
began  to  build  a  fire.  She  laid  a  few  coals  in  her  chimney  —
brought  from  a  neighbor's  cottage,  no  doubt  —  and  turned


12


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


aside  to  break  up  some  wood.  Her  child  was  sitting  upon  the
hearth.  Suddenly  she  heard  the  child  scream,  and  saw  that
the  band  about  his  neck  was  burning.  Looking  into  his  neck,
she  found  that  the  flesh  was  "burned  to  the  bone."  Yet  the
child  had  not  fallen  into  the  fire,  but  was  "sitting  on  the
hearth  as  before."  Indeed,  the  fire  was  not  kindled  at  all,  but
the  coals  lay  there  just  as  she  had  put  them  in.  These  facts
Joan  "presently  shewed  to  divers  of  the  chief  of  Dartmouth,
and  sought  the  best  remedy  she  could,  but  found  neither  salve
nor  anything  else  that  did  it  any  good,  but  within  three
weeks  after  the  child  consumed  and  died."  Here  again  is  a
grim  fact  —  superstition  or  no  superstition  —  the  child  per-
ished miserably,  and  no  one  could  understand  his  disease.

The  examination  of  William  Tompson,  of  Dartmouth,  is
uncommonly  lively  and  picturesque.  William  was  a  sailor.
Some  six  years  before,  he  and  a  comrade  (one  William  Furse-
man,  also  of  Dartmouth)  had  chanced  to  meet  Alice  Trevi-
sard  upon  the  Force  in  that  town.  It  was  about  midnight.
She  was  dressed  in  a  "long  grayish  cape  down  to  her  foot,"
and  wore  a  hood  which  covered  almost  all  her  face,  "so  that
they  took  her  for  some  Seminary  priest."  They  asked  her
what  she  was  doing  in  the  street  at  that  time  of  night.  Prob-
ably the  sailors  were  not  quite  sober.  At  any  rate,  they  were
uncivil,  and  if,  as  William  alleged,  they  mistook  Alice  for  a
priest,  we  may  be  sure  they  were  rough-handed.  An  alterca-
tion followed  —  but  we  will  let  Tompson  tell  his  own  story:

She  fell  out  with  them,  and  they  were  no  sooner  gone  from  her  than  this
examinate  fell,  and  was  in  great  danger  of  breaking  his  neck.  Whereat  the
said  Alice  laughing,  this  examinate  said  to  her,  "Dost  thou  laugh  at  a
shrewd  turn  [i. e.  a  bad  accident]?"  And  then  he  struck  her  with  a  musket
rod;  whereupon  she  threatened  this  examinate,  saying,  "Thou  shalt  be
better  thou  hadst  never  met  with  me!"

Vengeance  was  swift.  Within  three  weeks  after  the  dam-
num minatum,  William  Tompson  went  to  sea.  His  ship
caught  fire  —  none  knew  how  —  and  foundered.  Out  of
twenty-five  on  board,  only  six  were  saved.  As  for  William,  he
was  picked  up  by  a  Portuguese  vessel  ("by  a  Portingalle")
and  carried  to  Spain,  where  he  was  imprisoned  for  a  whole
year.  On  his  return  Alice  Trevisard  said  to  Elizabeth  Tomp-
son, his  wife,  "Is  he  come  home  on  life?  He  hath  better  luck


CHAP.  I]  A  TYPICAL  CASE

than  a  good  man!  But  it  is  no  matter.  He  shall  be  there
again  within  this  twelve  months."  And  the  prophecy  was
fulfilled.  In  less  than  half  a  year  William  was  captured  once
more,  this  time  by  the  Spaniards,  and  he  was  kept  in  con-
finement for  twenty-five  months.  "Elizabeth  Tompson,"
adds  the  record,  "  being  examined  upon  these  last  speeches  of
her  husband's  oath,  affirmeth  them  to  be  true."

William  Tompson's  sufferings  inevitably  bring  us  thoughts
of  a  famous  passage  in  Macbeth.  The  temptation  to  linger  a
moment  over  the  comparison  is  not  to  be  resisted.  The  witch
in  Shakspere  had  been  flouted  by  the  wife  of  the  master  of  the
Tiger.  The  ship  has  reached  Aleppo  in  safety.

But  in  a  sieve  I'll  thither  sail,
And,  like  a  rat  without  a  tail,
I'll  do,  I'll  do,  and  I'll  do!

The  horrid  vagueness  of  these  menacing  words  has  misled
many.  "She  threatens,"  runs  the  usual  note,  "in  the  shape
of  a  rat,  to  gnaw  through  the  hull  of  the  Tiger  and  make  her
spring  a  leak."  So  one  might  imagine,  were  it  not  that  the
Weird  Sister  proceeds  to  interpret  her  own  oracle  in  the
plainest  terms.

I  will  drain  him  dry  as  hay!
Sleep  shall  neither  night  nor  day
Hang  upon  his  pent-house  lid.
He  shall  live  a  man  forbid.
Weary  se'nnights  nine  times  nine
Shall  he  dwindle,  peak,  and  pine.
Though  his  bark  cannot  be  lost,
Yet  it  shall  be  tempest-tost!

Nothing  can  be  clearer  than  the  witch's  intentions.  Arrived
at  Aleppo,  she  will  take  the  shape  of  a  rat  in  order  to  slip  on
board  the  Tiger  unnoticed.  This,  and  not  to  use  her  teeth,  is
the  object  of  the  transformation.  Then  she  will  bewitch  the
craft  and  lay  a  spell  upon  the  captain.  There  is  no  question  of
scuttling  the  ship.  The  witch,  as  she  tells  us  herself,  controls
the  winds.  She  will  make  them  contrary,  so  that  the  Tiger,
though  destined  to  reach  port  at  last,  shall  be  tossed  about  in
storm  and  distress  for  nine  times  nine  weeks,  until  the  water
is  all  gone  and  the  provisions  are  exhausted.  The  master


14


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


shall  pine  away  with  hunger  and  thirst  and  lack  of  sleep,  until
the  full  measure  of  vengeance  is  exacted.  Then,  and  not  till
then,  shall  he  come  home  to  the  fat  ronyon,  his  wife,  who
denied  the  hag  a  chestnut  and  bade  her  begone  for  a  foul
witch.  Alice  Trevisard's  revenge  was  equally  swift  and  ter-
rible • —  a  fire  at  sea,  an  open  boat,  and  a  Spanish  prison.  Our
document  is  of  1601,  and  Macbeth  was  written  not  far  from
1605.  The  one  falls  just  before  the  accession  of  James  I,  the
other  shortly  after  his  accession.  Surely,  in  view  of  such
stories  as  William  Tompson's,  we  should  hesitate  to  affirm
that  the  interest  in  witchcraft  which  manifested  itself  in  Eng-
land soon  after  James  ascended  the  throne  was  due  to  the
king's  influence.  Let  us  rather  infer  that  his  accession  found
the  agitation  already  under  way  and  of  long  standing.  Such
an  inference,  by  the  way,  is  amply  supported  by  the  records
of  the  time.  But  let  us  return  to  the  sea.

A  tale  of  all  but  incomparable  wildness  concerning  a  be-
witched ship  is  reported  by  one  Captain  Silas  Taylor,  writing
from  Harwich,  in  England,  to  Joseph  Williamson,  keeper  of
state  papers.  The  letter  is  dated  November  2,  1667.

They  tell  a  strange  story  at  Ipswich  [says  the  captain]  of  one  of  their
ships  that  was  lost  in  the  late  storms;  that  another  of  the  same  town  pass-
ing by  them,  and  being  well  acquainted,  they  sent  their  remembrances  to
friends;  the  master,  Jonathan  Banticke,  to  his  parents,  one  Hornegild,  a
passenger  who  had  lost  his  ship  at  Scarborough  Road,  his  love  to  his  wife
and  children,  and  all  the  other  seamen  to  their  relations.  When  asked  the
reason,  and  whether  their  ship  was  leaky,  or  what  they  wanted,  the  first
ship  replied  that  they  had  long  labored  to  free  their  maintop,  where  sat  a
couple  of  witches,  but  by  all  that  they  could  do,  could  not  remove  nor  get
them  down,  and  so  they  were  lost  people.  The  master  named  the  two
witches  to  the  second  ship's  master  and  his  company,  insomuch  that  they
are  now  in  jail  at  Ipswich.  The  story  is  credibly  reported  by  the  second
ship,  and  generally  believed.*

Thomas  Heywood  repeats  a  story  which  he  got  from  an  old
acquaintance  ("a  woman  of  good  credit  and  reputation").
This  lady,  while  at  Amsterdam,  awaiting  passage  for  Eng-
land, lent  an  old  woman  some  money,  taking  a  brass  kettle  as
security,  "which  she  did,  knowing  it  to  be  serviceable  for  her
to  keep  a  charcoal  fire  in  at  sea,  to  comfort  her  and  her  child."
The  debtor  could  not  pay,  and  yet  objected  vigorously  to
having  the  kettle  go  out  of  the  country.  They  parted  on  ill


CHAP.  I]  A  TYPICAL  CASE  a  ; ;  ;  I5

terms:  "Carry  it  away  if  tnoa  canst!"'  cried  the  hag  defiantly.
"Marry,  and  I  will  trie  what  I  can  doe!"  replied  the  lady,
with  some  spirit.

The  Maister  called  aboord,  the  wind  stood  faire,  the  Sea  was  calme,  and
the  weather  pleasant:  but  they  had  not  beene  many  houres  at  Sea,  when
there  arose  a  suddene,  sad,  and  terrible  tempest,  as  if  the  winds  and  waters
had  beene  at  dissention,  and  the  distempered  ayre  at  warre  with  both.  A
mightie  storme  then  arose,  insomuch  that  the  Maister  protested,  that  in  his
life  he  had  not  scene  the  like,  and,  being  in  despaire  of  shipwracke,  desired
both  Saylers  and  passengers  to  betake  themselves  to  their  prayers.  This
word  came  from  them  that  laboured  above  the  Hatches  to  those  that  were
stowed  under:  their  present  feare  made  them  truly  apprehend  the  danger,
and  betake  themselves  to  their  devotions;  when  suddenly  one  casting  up
his  eyes,  espyed  an  old  woman  sitting  on  the  top  of  the  maine  Mast:  The
Maister  saw  her,  and  all  those  that  were  above,  being  at  the  sight  much
amased.  The  rumor  of  this  went  downe,  which  the  gentlewoman  hearing
(who  was  then  sitting  with  her  child  in  her  Cabbin  and  warming  it  over  a
Charcoale  fire  made  in  the  Kettle).  "O  God!"  sayth  she  (remembring  her
former  words)  "then  the  old  woman  is  come  after  me  for  her  Kettle;"  the
Maister,  apprehending  the  businesse,  "Marrie  and  then  let  her  have  it!"
saith  he,  and  takes  the  Kettle,  coales  and  all,  and  casts  them  overboord
into  the  Sea.  This  was  no  sooner  done,  but  the  Witch  dismounts  her  selfe
from  the  Mast,  goes  aboord  the  Brasse  Kettle,  and  in  a  moment  sailes  out
of  sight:  the  Ayre  cleared,  theWindes  grew  calme,  the  tempest  ceased,  and
she  had  a  faire  and  speedie  passage  into  England.

This  tough  yarn  Heywood  certifies  he  had  heard  confirmed
by  other  passengers  on  the  same  voyage.''

The  next  deposition  in  the  manuscript  is  that  of  Christian
Webbar.  We  will  pass  it  over  for  a  moment,  to  take  up  the
examination  of  Christopher  Honywell,  since  that,  like  Wil-
liam Tompson's,  has  to  do  with  the  sea.  Christopher's  deposi-
tion is  unique.  He  was  a  lad  of  thirteen,  and  seems  to  have
been  playing  about  the  harbor  with  another  boy,  Peter  Trevi-
sard,  Michael  and  AUce's  son,  when  the  strange  thing  hap-
pened which  tended  to  show  that  no  member  of  the  family
was  free  from  the  taint  of  sorcery.  The  document  is  short  and
I  shall  append  it  entire.  It  would  be  quite  charming  in  its
na'ive  wonder  if  it  were  found  in  less  sinister  company.

Th'  examination  of  Christopher  Honywell  aged  thirteen  years  or  there-
about, taken  as  aforesaid  the  2  of  October,  1601.

This  examinate  saith  that  about  Whitsuntide  last  he  was  with  Peter
Trevisard,  son  of  the  said  Michael  Trevisard,  at  a  place  at  Hardness  where
the  fishermen  use  to  hang  their  nets;  where  the  said  young  Trevisard  did


331513


l6  .WITCHCRrAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

put  ofF  his'  fatl'ier's  boat,  Sdyirig,  "  Go  chy  ways  to  New  Quay,  and  go  be-
tween the  two  lighters,  and  I  will  meet  thee  there."  And  farther  this
examinate  saith  that  he  ran  with  the  young  Trevisard  to  the  New  Quay
presently  after,  and  found  the  boat  there  between  the  two  lighters,  the  said
quay  being  distant  near  two  flight-shoots  from  the  place  where  the  boat
was  so  thrust  ofi^,  as  aforesaid,  and  not  right  against  [i.  e.  opposite]  the
same  place,  but  on  one  side,  the  said  two  lighters  also  being  so  near  to-
gether that  there  was  but  room  enough  for  the  boat  to  go  in.

Th:  Ridgway.

Enchanted  boats  that  obey  their  master's  will,  or  guide
themselves  without  the  helmsman's  touch,  are  well  known  in
the  realm  of  faery.  Here  belong  the  Argo  with  its  talking
figurehead,  and  the  ships  of  the  Phseacians,  which  knew
men's  minds  and  the  way  to  every  port;  here,  too,  the  self-
moving  ship  in  Marie's  Lai  de  Guigemar.  Frithiof  had  a  ship
which  understood  his  words  and  obeyed  them.  Svend  Ranild,
in  the  Danish  ballad,  stood  upon  the  shore  in  great  need  of  his
ship,  which  was  anchored  in  the  offing.  He  blew  such  a  blast
that  his  horn  burst  into  three  pieces:  "'Come  ye  not  in?'
quoth  Ranild."

That  was  Ranild's  golden  ship

That  heard  the  horn  so  good;
She  broke  asunder  cables  nine.

And  came  to  where  he  stood.
"Be  thou  welcome,"  quoth  Ranild.*

The  bearing  of  young  Christopher's  testimony  should  not
be  misconceived.  It  was  merely  confirmatory  of  the  general
proposition  that  the  Trevisards  possessed  uncanny  powers.
To  insist  on  its  frivolity  and  hold  up  our  hands  in  horror
at  the  criminal  folly  of  our  forefathers  in  sending  men  and
women  to  the  gallows  on  such  grounds  \s  parum  ad  rem.  No
English  witch  was  ever  convicted  on  evidence  like  this,  nor
were  such  harmless  feats  of  seamanship  punishable  at  all
under  the  law.  There  was  plenty  of  serious  evidence  against
the  Trevisards,  as  we  have  seen.  And  with  this  caveat  we
may  revert  to  the  deposition  of  Christian  Webbar,  which  is
quite  different  from  anything  we  have  had  before,  and  of  very
particular  interest.

Christian  was  a  widow  in  Hardness.  She  had  let  a  tene-
ment in  the  village  to  Michael  Trevisard  at  a  yearly  rent


CHAP.  I]  A  TYPICAL  CASE  I7

of  twenty-six  shillings  and  eightpence.  He  had  paid  only
six  and  eightpence,  and  Christian  demanded  the  pound  that
was  in  arrears.  "It  shall  be  the  worse  for  you!"  was  Alice
Trevisard's  response.  Then  followed  a  very  curious  piece  of
malignant  sorcery.  Alice  cast  water  upon  Christian's  stairs.
One  Isabel  Tozar  saw  it  done,  and  warned  Christian  to

beware  how  she  went  up  her  stairs,  which  this  examinate  refrained  accord-
ingly for  a  space,  in  which  mean  space  the  said  Alice  Trevisard  herself  hap-
pened to  pass  through  some  part  of  the  said  stairs.  And  within  one  hour
after,  the  said  Alice,  and  this  examinate  also,  fell  grievously  sick,  and  part
of  the  hands,  fingers,  and  toes  of  the  said  Alice  rotted  and  consumed  away,
as  yet  appears  by  her.

The  singularity  of  this  piece  of  sorcery  consists  in  the  fact
that  the  maleficent  magic  took  effect  on  the  witch  herself
when  she  heedlessly  came  under  its  influence.  Alice  fell  into
the  pit  which  she  had  dug  for  another.  Christian  suffered
too,  on  the  principle  of  sympathy,  but  the  virulence  of  the
infection  was  felt  chiefly  by  its  contriver.

Joan  Davye  testified  that  her  husband  George  had  a  quar-
rel with  Michael  Trevisard.  Within  a  se'nnight  thereafter
Joan  was  sitting  by  the  fire  with  a  young  child  in  her  arms
when  the  child  leapt  into  the  fire  and  was  "  very  much
scalded."  When  Trevisard  heard  of  it,  he  said  that  he  could
help  the  child  in  twenty-four  hours,  if  he  wished,  but  that  he
would  never  do  good  to  George  Davye  or  any  of  his  family.
Davye  seems  to  have  been  at  sea  at  the  time.  At  all  events,
the  very  week  after,  on  "  the  same  voyage"  (so  runs  the  testi-
mony) "  the  said  George  Davye  was  hurt  very  grievously  in
shooting  off  a  piece  for  pleasure."  Joan  also  declared  that
one  Henry  Oldreeve  had  some  differences  with  Trevisard,
and  that  soon  after  Oldreeve  lost  twenty  fat  wethers  in  one
week  and  "he  himself  languished  and  died."

William  Cozen  was  another  person  who  had  fallen  out  with
Trevisard.  In  this  case  the  vengeance,  though  deferred,  was
none  the  less  certain.  Within  a  quarter  of  a  year,  William's
daughter-in-law  was  sadly  afflicted.  Without  a  blow  or
any  visible  cause  "her  neck  shrunk  down  between  her  two
shoulders,  and  her  chin  touched  her  breast,  and  so  remaineth
still  in  a  very  strange  manner."  This  accusation,  like  some
others  that  we  have  already  looked  at,  finds  its  parallel  in


I


l8.  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

the  Lancashire  case  of  1612.  AHson  Device  was  the  grand-
daughter of  old  Elizabeth  Demdike,  who  had  been  a  devotee
of  sorcery  for  fifty  years  and  is  described  as  "a  general  agent
for  the  devil  in  those  parts."  Alison  bore  witness  against  both
her  mother  and  her  grandmother;  but  she  herself  was  im-
plicated, confessed,  and  was  hanged.  Her  offence  was  the
laming  of  Abraham  Law,  a  peddler.  Abraham  excited  the
compassion  of  the  court  by  his  miserable  plight.  Before  his
encounter  with  Alison  Device,  he

was  a  verie  able  sufficient  stout  man  of  Bodie,  and  a  goodly  man  of  Stature.
But  by  this  Devilish  art  of  Witch-craft  his  head  is  drawne  awrie,  his  Eyes
and  face  deformed,  his  speech  not  well  to  bee  understood;  his  Thighes  and
Legges  starcke  lame;  his  Armes  lame  especially  the  left  side,  his  handes
lame  and  turned  out  of  their  course,  his  Bodie  able  to  indure  no  travel!:
and  thus  remaineth  at  this  present  time.'

Alison  was  asked  if  she  could  cure  the  poor  creature,  and,
though  repentant,  insisted  that  this  was  beyond  her  power.
As  in  the  case  of  Christian  Webbar's  infected  stairs,  the  spells
acted  dynamically,  when  once  they  were  set  in  motion,  and
passed  quite  beyond  the  witch's  control.  "The  gods  them-
selves cannot  recall  their  gifts."

William  Cozen's  deposition  closes  with  a  bit  of  graphic
horror  which  defies  commentary  in  its  simple  impressiveness:
"Further  this  examinate  saith  that  Joan  Cozen,  wife  of  this
examinate,  being  in  her  deathbed,  requested  this  examinate
that  if  Alice  Trevisard,  wife  of  the  foresaid  Michael  Trevi-
sard,  did  come  to  her  grave,  he  should  beat  her  away."

The  evidence  of  Susan  Tooker  (or  Turke)  is  very  definite.
It  involves  all  three  Trevisards,  Michael  and  Alice  and  Peter
their  son.  About  four  years  ago,  she  declared,  Alice  Trevisard
threatened  her  in  plain  terms:  "I  will  not  leave  thee  worth
a  gray  groat!"  Walter  Tooker,  Susan's  husband,  was  just
starting  on  a  voyage.  He  lost  both  ship  and  goods,  though
the  weather  was  fair.  Further,  it  appears  that  young  Peter
Trevisard  had  been  refused  drink  by  Susan,  whereupon  he
said  "that  it  had  been  better  to  have  delivered  him  drink."
Next  day  Susan  sickened,  and  she  suffered  for  seven  weeks.
Finally,  averred  Susan,  Mr.  Martin,  in  the  year  of  his  mayor-
alty, set  up  a  fold,  or  pound,  at  Hardness,  to  keep  timber  in,
Michael  Trevisard  said:  "Martin,  hast  thou  made  a  fold?


CHAP.  I]


A  TYPICAL  CASE


19


Wind  and  weather  shall  tear  up  all!"  And  so  it  happened,
nor  could  Mr.  Martin  keep  his  fold  in  place.  "Since  that
time  it  hath  been  set  up  in  the  millpool,  where  no  stormy
weather  can  annoy  it.  Yet  sithence  it  hath  been  plucked  up
very  strangely,  for  it  riseth  up  altogether,  being  timber  of  an
exceeding  great  weight  and  bigness."

The  trivial  nature  of  some  of  the  charges  brought  against
alleged  witches  and  wizards  often  excites  the  contemptuous
mirth  of  the  modern.  But  there  is  no  sense  or  reason  in  such
an  attitude  of  mind.  The  importance  of  a  piece  of  evidence
should  not  be  measured  by  the  actual  importance  of  the  oc-
currence testified  to,  but  by  its  significance  with  regard  to  the
point  at  issue,  that  is,  with  regard  to  the  question  whether  the
defendant  was  or  was  not  a  practiser  of  "arts  inhibited  and
out  of  warrant."  Nobody  scoffs  at  a  prosecuting  attorney
now-a-days  for  spending  his  energies  over  scraps  of  paper  or
thumb-prints  or  scratched  hands  when  a  murder  trial  is  in
progress.  It  is  just  as  absurd  to  jeer  at  our  ancestors  for
troubling  themselves  about  exploding  ale-barrels  or  butter
that  would  not  "come."  The  malice  of  a  witch,  according  to
the  general  hypothesis,  may  show  itself  in  small  things  as  well
as  in  great.  Jeering  is  poor  business  anywhere,  but,  if  we
must  be  contemptuous,  let  us  concentrate  our  energies  on  the
doctrine  itself.  No  true  philosopher  will  see  anything  ridicu-
lous in  the  testimony  of  Joan  Laishe,  except  the  essential
absurdity  of  the  whole  underlying  thesis.

Joan,  it  seems,  had  once  refused  Alice  Trevisard  a  half-
pennyworth of  ale,  and  Alice  had  retorted  in  the  customary
fashion.  "That  shall  be  a  hard  halfpennyworth!"  and  "I
will  not  leave  you  worth  a  groat!"  Two  days  after,  one  of
Joan's  ale-casks  "on  the  sudden  leapt  up  of  itself,"  and  fell
on  the  ground.  The  cask  burst,  and  all  the  ale  was  lost.

Among  the  secondary  causes  of  witch  prosecution,  the
"healer,"  or  white  witch,  regularly  plays  a  conspicuous  role.
When  consulted  in  sickness,  she  is  quick  to  ascribe  the  ail-
ment to  evil  arts,  and  is  often  ready  enough  to  name  the  cul-
prit. There  need  be  no  malice  in  this  role  of  the  white  witch.
She  is  simply  in  the  same  primitive  stage  of  medical  science
which  ascribes  every  malady  to  the  personal  enmity  of  a
sorcerer.  As  to  designating  the  guilty  party,  that  is  of  course


20


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


requisite.  We  must  know  who  our  enemy  is  if  we  are  to  resist
or  forestall  his  assault.

I  have  said  that  our  Devon  documents  include  all  or  most
of  the  typical  features  of  an  English  witchcraft  case.  Accord-
ingly, the  wise  woman  is  not  lacking.  Her  name  was  Blach-
ford,  Mother  Blachford  of  Bridgetown.  Alice  Trevisard,  it
appears,  called  at  John  Denman's  house  in  Kingswear,  alleg-
ing that  she  had  a  letter  for  his  wife.  Mistress  Denman  was
not  at  home.  Alice  showed  a  piece  of  paper  to  Denman's
daughter,  but  the  girl  would  not  touch  it,  because  she  had
heard  that  Alice  was  a  witch.  Soon  after,  one  of  Denman's
children  fell  sick.  Mother  Blachford,  to  whom  he  resorted  for
medicine,  told  him  that  Alice  Trevisard  had  bewitched  the
child.  "When  you  go  home,"  said  Mother  Blachford,  "you
shall  find  that  Alice  was  at  your  house  this  morning  with
what  she  said  was  a  letter."  Denman  inquired  accordingly,
and  learned  what  had  happened  in  his  absence.  There  is
some  vagueness  at  this  point,  which  cross-questioning  might
have  dissipated.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  paper  was
suspected  to  be  a  charm.  At  all  events,  Denman  declared
that  he  never  heard  of  the  letter  again.  What  became  of  the
child  is  not  stated.  Probably  it  recovered,  in  spite  of  Alice's
spell  and  Mother  Blachford's  remedy.

Oddly  enough,  I  find  among  my  notes  a  fragment  of
New  England  tradition  attaching  to  a  Massachusetts  witch
named  Blatchford.  I  obtained  it,  about  forty  years  ago,
from  a  lady  of  eighty-four,  who  had  heard  the  story  from  "old
Mr.  David  Loring's  wife,"  the  victim  of  the  spell.  It  is  a
small  matter,  but  has  not  only  the  coincidence  of  name  to
excuse  one  for  telling  it,  but  also  a  certain  relation  of  locality,
Barnstable,  where  the  thing  happened,  is  named  after  the
Devonshire  Barnstaple.  It  was  settled  in  1639,  ^^'^  spell-
ing with  &  instead  of  p  was  a  common  method  of  writing  the
name  of  the  Devonian  town  in  the  seventeenth  century  and
is  still  a  common  local  pronunciation.  Some  of  the  pioneers
of  the  Old  Colony  town  were  Devon  men.  The  Indian  trail
from  Barnstable  Harbor  straight  across  Cape  Cod  is  now  a
public  highway,  known  as  Mary  Dunn's  Road,  from  an  In-
dian woman  who  once  lived  in  a  hut  near  a  pond  which  the
trail  passes.  The  pond,  too,  is  called  after  Mary  Dunn.  It  is


CHAP.  l]


A  TYPICAL  CASE


21


a  pretty  little  sheet  of  water,  lying  quite  solitary  in  the  midst
of  the  woods.  One  day,  as  Mrs.  Loring  reported,  she  was
returning  on  horseback  to  Barnstable  from  the  village  of
Hyannis,  at  the  southern  end  of  the  trail,  and,  when  she  was
nearing  the  pond,  one  Lizzie  Blatchford,  a  witch,  who  lived
on  the  margin,  bewitched  her  horse,  so  that  he  insisted  on
going  round  and  round  the  pond  for  a  long  time.  To  all  in-
tents and  purposes,  as  we  see,  old  Mrs.  Loring  was  "pixey-
led,"  and  we  have  in  her  little  anecdote  a  good  instance  of  the
connection  between  the  fairies  and  witchcraft.  Her  remedy,
if  she  had  only  known  it,  was  to  turn  her  cloak  inside  out  and
so  reverse  the  spell.  Bishop  Corbet,  best  known  to  literature
as  the  author  of  The  Fairies'  Farewell,  had  a  similar  adven-
ture not  far  from  1620,  and  has  left  us  a  humorous  account
of  it  in  his  Iter  Boreale.  Corbet,  not  yet  a  bishop,  was  lost
with  his  companions  in  Charley  Forest,  on  the  way  from
Newark  to  Bosworth.

Whilst  in  this  mill  wee  labour  and  turne  round

As  in  a  conjurers  circle,  William  found

A  menes  for  our  deliverance:  "Turne  your  cloakes,"

Quoth  hee,  "for  Puck  is  busy  in  these  oakes:

If  ever  yee  at  Bosworth  will  be  found,

Then  turne  your  cloakes,  for  this  is  Fayry-ground!"

But,  ere  this  witchcraft  was  perform'd,  wee  mett

A  very  man,  who  had  no  cloven  feete;

Though  William,  still  of  little  faith,  doth  doubt  >

'Tis  Robin,  or  some  sprite  that  walkes  about.

"Strike  him!"  quoth  hee,  "and  it  will  turne  to  ayre;

Crosse  your  selves  thrice  and  strike  it!"  "Strike  that  dare,"

Tuought  I,  "for  sure  this  massy  forrester

In  stroakes  will  prove  the  better  conjurer."

There  is  on;  more  deposition  in  our  manuscript  —  that  of
John  Galsworrhie  of  Hardness.  It  affords  no  novelties,  but
may  be  given  in  full  to  complete  the  record.

The  examination  of  John  Galsworthie  of  Hardness  in  the  County  afore-
said, husbandman,  taken  before  Sir  Thomas  Ridgway,  Knight,  the  eighth
of  April,  1602.

This  examinate  sayeth  that  about  four  years  sithence,  his  wife  de-
manded certain  money  of  Alice  Trevisard,  the  wife  of  Michael  Trevisard
of  Hardness,  which  she  owed  her;  whereunto  the  said  Alice  Trevisard
answered,  "I  pray  God  that  thou  never  prosper  in  body  nor  goods!"  And


11


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


never  si  thence  did  he,  this  examinate,  or  his  wife,  prosper  in  body  or  goods;
for  in  very  short  time  after  that  the  said  Alice  Trevisard  had  spoken  those
words,  he  was  taken  lame  in  all  his  body  and  went  by  two  crutches  twelve-
month after.  And  further  this  examinate  saith  that  his  wife  was  never  well
in  her  body,  sithence,  but  consumed  away,  and  died  at  Christmas  last  past.
And  also  this  examinate  sayeth  that  he  had  a  sow  great  with  pigs,  which
pigs  rotted  in  the  sow's  belly  within  six  weeks  after  his  wife  had  demanded
the  money  of  the  foresaid  Trevisard,  as  aforesaid.

Th:  Ridgway.

These  documents  are  interesting  enough  as  pictures  of  life
and  manners.  But,  as  already  suggested,  their  chief  claim  to
our  notice  rests  upon  their  date  and  upon  the  pure  and  un-
mixed form  in  which  they  exhibit  the  essential  element  in  all
witchcraft.  The  latter  point  needs  no  emphasis.  The  outcry
against  Michael  Trevisard  and  his  family  was  raised  by  the
people  itself —  by  the  unadulterated,  unsophisticated  "  folk,"
instigated  only  by  its  own  primeval  philosophy  of  maleficium.
There  were  no  social  or  political  or  theological  complications.
We  have  simply  an  upheaval  from  below,  from  the  abysmal
pit  of  savagery  out  of  which  the  human  race  has  had  to  strug-
gle up.  And  such  uncontaminated  testimony,  coming  at  this
particular  moment  (in  1601  and  1602),  is  of  very  special  con-
sequence. If  we  are  to  comprehend  the  history  of  witchcraft
in  England,  we  must  keep  in  mind,  for  this  exact  time,  a  clear
idea  of  the  intellectual  condition  of  just  that  class  to  which
Alice  Butler  and  Joan  Baddaford  and  William  Tompson  and
all  the  other  complainants  belonged.  Queen  Elizabeth  died  in
1603,  and  King  James's  witchcraft  act  was  passed  in  ibo^.
There  is  a  more  or  less  general  impression  that  this  act  was
momentous,  and  that  the  accession  of  James  gave  an  extra-
ordinary impulse  to  prosecution.  If,  as  all  wii'l  agree,  our
documents  are  typical  of  the  state  of  popular  feeling  in  1601
and  1602,  they  offer  an  instant  challenge  to  t\is  idea.  Any-
how, they  make  short  work  of  the  notion  that  English  witch-
craft was  a  theological  importation  from  th.i  Continent.


CHAPTER  II


ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  1558

IN  THE  present  chapter  we  shall  trace  the  history  of  Eng-
lish witchcraft  from  Anglo-Saxon  times  to  the  accession
of  Elizabeth  in  1558.  In  this  process  we  shall  convince  our-
selves, by  the  mere  logic  of  plain  facts,  that  the  Elizabethans
did  not  import  their  ideas  or  practices  in  this  regard  from  the
Continent,  as  some  scholars  have  maintained,  through  the
agency  of  the  returning  Marian  exiles,  whether  Bishop  Jewel
or  others:  on  the  contrary,  they  inherited  these  ideas  and
practices  from  their  forefathers  in  an  unbroken  line  of  tradi-
tion. Incidentally  we  shall  observe  that  the  various  articles
of  the  witch-creed  —  as  held  both  by  the  deluded  witches
themselves  and  by  their  prosecutors  —  are  identical  with  the
articles  of  the  witch-creed  of  uneducated  folk  to-day,  and
likewise  with  that  of  contemporary  savages  throughout  the
earth.  Thus  it  will  appear  beyond  question  that  the  tradition
is  continuous,  not  merely  from  the  Anglo-Saxons  to  the  pres-
ent time,  but  —  what  is  even  more  significant  —  from  remote
ages  and  from  conditions  of  all-but-primitive  barbarism.

Witches  may  be  white  or  black  —  beneficent  or  malefic — ■
and  it  is,  of  course,  only  the  latter  that  are  hated  and  feared
by  the  people  at  large,  for  white  witches,  who  heal  diseases
and  undo  the  spells  of  malignant  sorcery  —  are  regarded  as
friends  of  mankind.  But  the  distinction  is,  in  practice,  often
ignored  or  forgotten,  since  the  same  person  may  use  the  arts
of  sorcery  for  good  or  for  ill.  And  there  is  ever  a  tendency
among  theologians  to  include  both  sorts  of  witches  under  the
same  condemnation,  as  dealing  with  evil  spirits,  and  among
the  folk  to  suspect  the  white  witch  of  mischief  on  occasion.
Still,  the  driving  force  in  all  prosecution  is  the  fear  that  the
black  witch  inspires.

At  the  outset  we  must  guard  against  a  possible  misappre-
hension. "Magic  itself,"  says  a  distinguished  scholar,  "is
actual  and  universal.  But  witchcraft  never  was.  It  was  but  a
shadow,  a  nightmare:  the  nightmare  of  a  religion,  the  shadow


24


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


of  a  dogma.  Less  than  five  centuries  saw  its  birth,  its  vigor,
its  decay."  ^  This  statement  is  accurate  if  by  witchcraft  is
meant  the  fully  developed  and  highly  complicated  system  set
forth  in  the  Malleus  Maleficarum  and  Del  Rio's  Disquisi-
tiones  Magicae,  —  what  Hansen  calls  "der  verhangnisvoUe
Sammelbegriff  des  Hexenwesens,"  ^  —  which  was  not  pos-
sible until  scholasticism  had  codified  the  motley  notions
about  magic  and  demonology  and  sorcery  and  devil-worship
which  Christian  superstition  and  Christian  theology  had
derived  from  the  most  various  sources  —  from  Judaism,  clas-
sical antiquity,  Neoplatonism,  and  the  thousand-and-one
notions  of  pagan  converts.  But,  momentous  as  this  fully
developed  system  was,  —  and  true  though  it  may  be  that
without  the  schematizing  influence  of  scholastic  philosophy
the  witch-prosecution  which  was  epidemic  on  the  Continent
from  1 400  to  1700  could  hardly  have  taken  place,  —  yet  we
should  never  forget  that  the  essential  element  in  black  witch-
craft is  maleficiiim  —  the  working  of  harm  to  the  bodies  and
goods  of  one's  neighbors  by  means  of  evil  spirits  or  of  strange
powers  derived  from  intercourse  with  such  spirits.  This  belief
in  maleficiiim  was  once  universal;  it  was  rooted  and  grounded
in  the  minds  of  all  European  peoples  before  they  became
Christian;  it  is  still  the  creed  of  most  savages  and  of  mil-
lions of  so-called  civilized  men.  Throughout  the  history  of
witchcraft  (in  whatever  sense  we  understand  that  word)
it  remained  the  ineradicable  thing  —  the  solid  foundation,
unshakably  established  in  popular  belief,  for  whatever  super-
structure might  be  reared  by  the  ingenuity  of  jurisconsults,
philosophers,  theologians,  and  inquisitors.  Without  this
popular  belief  in  maleficin?n,  the  initial  suspicions  and  com-
plaints which  were  the  starting-point  of  all  prosecutions
would  have  been  impossible  and  inconceivable.  With  this
popular  belief,  the  rest  was  easy.

Besides,  we  must  make  a  sharp  distinction  between  English
witchcraft  and  Continental  witchcraft.  The  trials  of  the
Elizabethan  age,  as  we  have  noted  in  A  Typical  Case,  did  not
involve  acceptance,  either  by  the  people  or  by  the  judges,
of  the  complicated  and  systematized  doctrine  which  formed
the  basis  for  the  inquisitorial  proceedings  on  the  Continent.
For  England,  then,  we  have  to  do,  in  the  main,  with  isolated


CHAP.  II]


ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


25


phenomena,  with  concrete  facts  (or  what  were  taken  for
facts)  which  prompted  the  folk  to  defend  themselves;  not
with  theories  which  prompted  the  spiritual  guardians  of  the
people  to  eradicate  heresy.  There  was  no  Holy  Inquisition.
Scholars  might  theorize,  but  action  was  taken  because  John
Doe's  cow  had  fallen  strangely  sick  or  Richard  Roe's  child
had  languished  and  died  of  some  mysterious  ailment.   In  a
word,  Elizabethan  witchcraft  (as  brought  to  trial)  was  simple
and  primitive.  It  shows  no  trace  whatever  of  the  elaborate
abominations  of  the  Witches'  Sabbath.^  The  impulse  to  prose-
cution, in  most  instances,  came  not  from  the  learned  or  ruling
classes  but  from  humble  folk,  who  clung  tenaciously  to  their
primeval  belief  in  maleficiiim^  lived  in  constant  fear  of  it,  and
always  had  definite  persons  in  view  who  passed  for  witches
and  in  many  cases  professed  the  black  art  and  actually  sup-
posed themselves  able  (as  they  certainly  were  willing)  to
practise  it.   Scot,  though  he  directs  his  arguments  largely
against  the  bookish  witchmongers  like  Bodin  and  Dana;us
and  Institoris,  refers  clearly  to  the  ignorant  populace  as  the
source  of  such  opinions  and  insists  that  educated  men  should
free  themselves  from  the  superstition  of  the  masses.  "See
also,"  he  exclaims,  "what  persons  complaine  upon  them,
whether  they  be  not  of  the  basest,  the  unwisest,  and  most
faithles  kind  of  people";  and  he  goes  on  to  construct  a  typical
instance  of  such  a  complaint,  involving  not  only  the  damnum
minatum  and  the  malum  secutum  but  also  consultation  with  a
"wise  woman."  ^  John  Gaule,  in  1646,  distinctly  refers  to  the
"common  people"  the  impulse  to  the  prosecution  of  witches:
"Every  poore  and  peevish  olde  Creature  (such  is  their  Igno-
rance and  Uncharitablenesse)  cannot  but  fall  under  their  sus-
picion, nay  their  infamous  exprobation;  every  Accident,
(more  then  ordinary)  every  disease  whereof  they  neither  un-
derstand the  Cause,  nor  are  acquainted  with  the  Symptomes
must  bee  suspected  for  witch-craft.  His  Cow  or  his  Hog,  can-
not be  strangely  taken,  but  straight  it  must  bee  reckoned  and
rumored  for  bewitcht."  ^  As  late  as  1704  John  Toland,  in  a
striking  passage,  accounts  for  the  errors  of  the  higher  ranks
in  society  on  the  ground  of  their  contact  with  nurses  and
servants  in  childhood.   "We  are  presently  after  our  Birth
deliver 'd  to  Nurses,  ignorant  Women  of  the  meanest  Vulgar,


26


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


who  infuse  into  us  their  Errors  with  their  Milk,  frightning  us
into  quiet  with  the  menaces  of  Rawhead  and  Bloody-bones,
Bugglebows  and  Bullbeggars.  And  lest  we  shou'd  be  lost  by
wandring  abroad,  or  drop  into  Wells  or  Rivers,  they  terrify
us  with  storys  of  Spirits  and  Hobgoblins,  making  us  believe
that  all  lonesome  places  are  haunted,  and  that  the  invisible
Powers  are  principally  active  and  mischievous  in  the  night-
time. .  .  .  From  our  Nurses  we  are  brought  home,  where  we
are  still  put  into  worse  hands  among  idle  and  ignorant  Ser-
vants, whose  chiefest  Entertainments  are  Discourses  of
Fairys,  Elves,  Witchcrafts,  walking  Ghosts,  Fortune-telling,
consulting  Astrologers,  or  such  other  chimerical  Doings;  de-
lighting to  fright  and  delude  one  another,  not  seldom  to  carry
on  their  private  Intrigues:  which  things,  however  intended,
never  fail  to  make  fatal  impressions  on  the  Children:  and  for
the  most  part  our  Parents  are  not  wiser."  ^

The  general  and  specific  identity  of  the  English  witch-
creed  in  both  Elizabethan  and  pre-Elizabethan  times  with
that  of  uncivihzed  races  at  the  present  day  might  be  illus-
trated by  a  multitude  of  testimonies  from  travellers  and  an-
thropologists. Three  or  four  quotations  will  suffice.  Among
the  Bueni  of  Madagascar,  we  are  told,  "in  almost  every  vil-
lage there  is  some  old  and  very  ugly  woman  who  is  accused  of
being  a  witch.  It  is  she  who  causes  all  the  misfortunes  and  all
the  maladies.  She  is  feared  and  hated.  Children  run  away
when  she  approaches  and  adults  do  not  accost  her  without
terror."  ^  Among  the  East  African  Barundi,  in  like  manner,
witches  and  sorcerers,  old  women  for  the  most  part,  "bear  the
blame  if  a  person  falls  sick  or  dies,  if  a  storm  lays  waste  the
fields,  if  cattle  are  injured  or  plague-stricken,  if  women  are
barren,  if  children  do  not  thrive,  if  thefts  occur,  and  so  on."  *
In  Morocco  the  sorcerer  "operates  both  for  good  and  for  ill.
He  cures,  he  relieves  pain,  he  inspires  hope,  he  consoles;  he
grants  love  and  alienates  afi^ection;  he  causes  impotence  and
sterility;  he  infuses,  modifies,  or  develops  friendship;  he
makes  his  enemies  pine  away  with  debility  or  disease;  some
persons  he  corrupts,  others  he  makes  his  accomplices;  his  in-
fluence brings  into  his  service  not  only  human  beings  but
animals,  things,  and  the  elements.  He  causes  the  moon  to
descend  in  foam  upon  plants;'  he  fills  the  air  and  the  earth


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


27


with  mirages  and  the  night  with  phantoms."  Compare  the
testimony  of  the  eminent  theologian  WiUiam  Perkins,  whose
Hfe  was  almost  exactly  coincident  with  Queen  Elizabeth's
reign:  "The  wonders  done  by  Inchanters  are:  i.  The  raising
of  stormes  and  tempests;  windes  and  weather,  by  sea  and
land:  2.  The  poysoning  of  the  ayre:  3.  Blasting  of  corne:  4.
Killing  of  cattell,  and  annoying  of  men,  women,  and  children:

5.  The  procuring  of  strange  passions  and  torments  in  mens
bodies  and  other  creatures,  with  the  curing  of  the  same:

6.  Casting  out  of  deuills."  "  There  is  scarcely  a  single  item
of  malefic  witchcraft  in  Elizabethan  annals  that  cannot
be  matched  in  the  beliefs  of  the  ancient  Assyrians.  Their
witches  and  wizards  had  the  evil  eye,  controlled  demons  for
their  own  vile  purposes,  brought  on  storms,  took  away  one's
wealth,  caused  accidents,  spoiled  food  and  drink,  sent  bad
dreams,  thwarted  the  marital  relation  by  impotence  and
barrenness,  had  charms  for  both  love  and  hatred,  afflicted
their  enemies  with  disease  and  madness  even  unto  death.
They  moved  rapidly  from  place  to  place,  waylaid  travellers,
slipped  into  houses  in  strange  manner.  Their  use  of  image
magic  is  dwelt  on,  and  so  is  the  employment  of  images  in
abolishing  their  spells."

The  prevalence  of  every  form  of  witchcraft  and  sorcery  in
England  before  the  Norman  Conquest  might  be  inferred
from  the  richness  of  the  native  vocabulary,  even  if  we  had
no  other  proofs:  for  witch,  wizard,  enchanter,  seer,  diviner,  and
so  on,  there  are  more  than  thirty  Anglo-Saxon  terms."  But
there  are  other  proofs  in  abundance.  In  747  the  Council  of
Clovesho  directed  bishops  to  traverse  their  dioceses  yearly
and,  calling  the  people  together,  to  teach  the  word  of  God,
which  forbids,  among  other  sins,  pagan  observances,  defined
as  "soothsayers,  sorcerers,  auguries,  auspices,  amulets,  spells,
or  all  the  filth  of  the  impious  and  errors  of  the  heathen."
King  Alfred's  edict  merely  repeats  the  Law  of  Moses  (Exo-
dus, xxii,  18)  in  an  oddly  distorted  form:  "Those  women  who
are  wont  to  receive  enchanters  and  magicians  and  wizards  or
witches  —  thou  shalt  not  suffer  them  to  live."'^  In  the  Laws
of  Edward  and  Guthrum  (before  a.d.  940),  wizards  and
witches,  soothsayers,  perjurers,  secret  murderers,  and  har-
lots are  classed  together;'^  and  there  is  an  identical  clause  in


28  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


the  Laws  of  y?i,thelred  (1008)  —  which  adds  magicians  {scin-
crcejuan)"-^  to  the  list  —  and  of  Cnut  (ca.  1030):''  all  such
offenders  are  to  be  banished  or  destroyed  unless  they  reform
and  make  amends.  This  clause  was  a  favorite  bit  with  the
preachers  of  the  time.^"  We  may  compare  also  the  Ecclesi-
astical Law  of  King  Edmund  (ca.  942),  which  excommuni-
cates perjurers  and  those  who  practise  magic,  but  with  a
similar  proviso."  Hell,  according  to  the  tenth-century  Blick-
ling  Homilies,  is  the  destination  of  those  wizards  that  prac-
tise incantations  and  conjuring  and  thus  beguile  the  unwary
and  seduce  them  from  God  by  their  witcheries  and  illusions."
When  Antichrist  comes,  another  homilist  prophesies,  "he
shall  have  with  him  wizards  and  sorcerers  and  diviners  and
those  who  know  how  to  chant  spells;  .  .  .  and  cursed  spirits
shall  be  his  teachers  and  his  companions."  Witchcraft  or
evil  magic  is  also  mentioned  in  various  forms  of  the  Ritual  for
the  Ordeal  of  Swimming  (ninth  century  and  later),^"  and  in  a
Formula  of  Excommunication  of  the  first  half  of  the  eleventh
century. Attempts  to  frustrate  the  ordeal  of  hot  iron  or  hot
water  by  witchcraft  are  also  contemplated  in  rituals.^''

The  Secular  Laws  of  Cnut  (ca.  1030)  forbid  paganism,^^
which  they  define  as  follows:  "to  worship  the  heathen  gods,
or  sun  or  moon,  fire  or  flood,  wells  or  stones  or  trees  of  any
kind,  or  to  love  witchcraft  or  to  work  secret  murder  in  any
wise,  or  to  practise  anything  in  the  way  of  sacrifice  or  sooth-
saying or  such  delusions." This  enactment  comes  mostly
from  one  of  the  so-called  Canons  of  King  Edgar,  which  it  sub-
stantially reproduces.^'  By  secret  murder  (not  mentioned  in
the  canon),  Cnut  means  particularly  homicide  by  witch-
craft, as  the  context  indicates.^"  His  ordinance  was  in  part
repeated  in  the  Laws  of  the  Northumbrian  Priests  of  York  in
the  same  century.^'  Cnut,  by  the  way,  was  of  course  familiar
with  the  superstitions  of  his  native  Denmark,  and  Scandina-
vian wizards  and  witches,  according  to  Saxo  Grammaticus,
could  brew  poisons,  slay  by  their  curse,  take  animal  form  and
in  that  shape  kill;  they  could  procure  love  by  spell  or  philtre,
bring  mist  and  glamour  and  rain  and  bad  weather,  strike
panic  fear,  blunt  steel  weapons,  summon  a  person  against
his  will,  and  devise  protective  charms. English  witchcraft
was  equally  varied  and  comprehensive.


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  1 558


29


Homicide  by  witchcraft,  then,  came  under  the  general  head
of  secret  murder  {morS,  murdrum) but  it  is  particularly
designated  in  the  Laws  of  i^ithelstan  (ca.  930)  and  in  the
Modus  of  King  Edgar's  time  (ca.  965),^^  as  well  as  in  the  ver-
nacular Confessional  and  Penitential  "  falsely  ascribed  to
Archbishop  Ecgbert  of  York  and  in  the  Latin  penitentials
(Irish,  English,  and  Prankish)  to  which  the  names  of  Fin-
nian,  Columban,^'  Theodore,  Bede,  and  Ecgbert are  at-
tached. The  legal  treatise  of  ca.  1114  known  as  the  Leges
Henrici  pronounces  the  crime  of  homicide  by  poison  or  witch-
craft punishable  with  death;  if,  however,  the  victim  survives
but  has  suffered  sickness  or  bodily  injury,  the  offender  is  let
off  with  the  requirement  of  compensation.  This  clause  in  the
Leges  specifies  as  one  means  of  such  homicide,  a  form  of
witchcraft  known  from  very  ancient  times,  and  still  preva-
lent— ^  namely,  mvultuacio  {envoutemeni) ^  that  is,  the  mal-
treatment of  an  image  or  effigy  representing  the  person  to  be
afiiicted  or  destroyed.'''  This  occult  method  of  murder  is  also
mentioned  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  Modus  Imponendi  Poeniten-
tiam  of  King  Edgar's  period  and,  in  identical  terms,  in  the
Anglo-Saxon  Penitential  of  Pseudo-Ecgbert.''^  An  actual  case
of  the  kind,  from  the  ninth  or  tenth  century,  is  recorded
(along  with  the  witch's  punishment  by  drowning)  in  an  ac-
count of  the  title  to  a  piece  of  land  in  Northamptonshire.  We
shall  return  to  this  matter  presently.**^

That  the  Anglo-Saxons  believed  in  murderous  witches  who
could  fly  through  the  air,  would  be  probable  anyhow,  since
their  Germanic  kin  on  the  Continent  lived  in  fear  of  such
creatures  in  the  sixth,  seventh,  and  eighth  centuries  and  even
charged  them  with  cannibalism,"''  as  their  laws  demonstrate. ''^
Such  superstition  is  condemned  by  an  Irish  synod  of  about
A.D.  800,"^  and  is  mentioned  as  existent  in  full  force  by  the
tenth-century  German  penitential  known  as  the  Corrector  —
a  document  embodied  in  his  Decretum  by  Burchard  of
Worms  about  io2o.'»'  But  when  to  this  general  probability  is
added  the  use  of  the  word  walcyries  for  "witches"  in  King
Cnut's  Proclamation  of  1020,  and  in  other  texts  of  the  same
century,  the  case  must  be  taken  as  proved."**  This  word,
which  properly  designated  the  "killers"  or  winged  battle-
goddesses  of  Germanic  mythology  (originally,  no  doubt,  act-


Jo  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ing  as  independent  agencies,  but  later  reduced  to  subjection
to  Woden),'"  was  used  to  gloss  Bellona  and  Erynnis  and
AUecto  and  T'tsiphone.^"  Its  application,  therefore,  to  a  hu-
man witch  is  highly  significant.

That  madness  may  be  caused  by  witchcraft  is  one  of  the
most  persistent  of  superstitions.  It  is  not  mentioned  in  the
secular  laws  of  the  Anglo-Saxons,  but  the  Penitential  of
Pseudo-Theodore  prescribes  five  years'  penance  for  a  mathe-
maticus,  which  it  explains  as  one  who  perverts  a  man's  mind
by  invocation  of  demons;  and  the  same  provision  is  found  in
Pseudo-Cummean  and  many  other  penitentials  (with  some
variety  in  the  punishment).

For  amatory  magic  we  have  ample  evidence.  The  Anglo-
Saxon  Modus  of  about  a.d.  965  prescribes  appropriate  pen-
ances for  clerics  or  laymen  who,  to  win  love,  work  witchcraft
in  food  or  drink  or  by  spells, and  a  similar  clause  occurs
in  the  Anglo-Saxon  Penitential  of  Pseudo-Ecgbert  and  else-
where." Love  potions  are  also  denounced  by  lEUv'ic.^'^

Thrilling  stories  of  the  adventures  of  holy  men  with
heathen  wizards  formed  the  subject  matter  of  Anglo-Saxon
sermons.  Thus  in  i^^lfric  we  may  still  read,  in  our  ancient  ver-
nacular, of  St.  James's  encounter  with  Hermogenes  and  his
pupil;  55  of  St.  Matthew's  triumph  over  Zaroes  and  Arphaxat,
who,  driven  by  him  out  of  their  native  Ethiopia,^^  appeared
later  in  Persia  in  a  violent  attempt  to  thwart  the  mission  of
Sts.  Simon  and  Jude;"  and,  of  course,  of  the  vain  struggles,
historical  and  legendary,  of  Simon  Magus  against  St.  Peter
and  St.  Paul. 5*  i5ilfric  preaches  also  of  the  devils  Ashtaroth
and  Berith,  who  contended  with  St.  Bartholomew. 5'

The  church,  naturally,  has  always  forbidden  soothsaying  in
every  variety,  augury  (by  birds  or  otherwise),  sortes,  and  the
employment  of  seers  or  diviners.^"  Such  prohibitions  are  con-
spicuous in  the  laws  and  penitentials  of  the  Anglo-Saxon
period  as  well  as  in  the  homilies  of  Wulfstan,  i^ilfric,  and
ethers. "In  time  of  need  it  is  better  to  call  upon  Christ  in
,prayer  than  to  have  recourse  to  a  wizard  and  a  diviner  for
help."  «^

White  witchcraft  for  the  cure  of  disease^''  and  other  pur-
poses innocent  in  themselves,  was  of  course  rife  among  the
Anglo-Saxons  and,  equally  of  course,  it  was  condemned  as


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


31


heathenish  and  diabolical.  We  hear,  accordingly,  of  mothers
who  put  their  children  on  the  roof  or  in  the  oven  to  drive
away  fever,^=  or  who  pass  them  through  the  earth  at  the  cross-
roads (a  rite  styled  "devil's  craft"  in  one  text  and  coupled,  in
another,  with  healing  "by  any  witchcraft") of  wives  who
taste  their  husband's  blood  as  a  medicine;^'  of  misguided
Christians  who  burn  grain  {pro  sanitate  viventium  et  domus)
on  the  spot  where  a  man  has  died  or  is  buried,^*  or  who  "fast
in  honor  of  the  moon"  to  regain  their  health.*''  Here  too  be-
longs the  general  prohibition  of  women's  incantations  and
divinings  (which  are  styled  "diabolical"  but  are  not  thereby
restricted  to  black  magic),''"  for  this  ban  covers  every  kind  of
soothsaying  and  all  manner  of  spells,  whether  to  heal  the  sick,
to  ensure  or  increase  the  potency  of  herbs,''^  to  consecrate
amulets,''^  or  to  accomplish  any  other  desirable  object.  The
doctrine  was  that  to  recite  the  Pater  Noster  and  the  Creed  — ■
which  every  Christian  should  learn  "  —  is  proper,  but  that  all
other  forms  of  words  are  dangerous,  or  at  best  suspicious. ''''
St.  Cuthbert,  in  the  seventh  century  (so  Bede  informs  us),
used  to  leave  his  monastery  of  Mailros  in  times  of  pesti-
lence and  preach  to  the  people  of  the  villages  round  about,
who,  abandoning  the  sacraments,  sought  help  from  idolatrous
remedies,  as  if  "by  incantations  or  amulets  or  any  other  se-
crets of  demonic  art  they  could  check  the  plague  that  God
had  sent."  '^^  The  English  healers  and  wise  women  so  often
brought  to  book  in  the  middle  ages  were  true-bred  descend-
ants of  their  forefathers. '^^  So  intertwisted  were  Christianity
and  paganism  that  even  the  Pater  Noster  itself  was  treated
by  learned  and  pious  men  in  a  manner  that  approaches  witch-
craft. This  comes  out  grotesquely  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  "Salo-
mon and  Saturn,"  where  to  each  letter  of  the  prayer  as  writ-
ten in  runic  symbols,  is  ascribed  a  peculiar  virtue  in  grappling
with  the  fiend  —  a  manifest  transference  from  the  runic  sor-
cery of  heathen  days."  The  same  poem,  indeed,  mentions  in
plain  terms  such  sorcery  when  it  tells  how  the  fiends  "some-
times fetter  the  hands  of  a  fighting  man  and  make  them
heavy  when  he  has  to  defend  his  life  against  a  hostile  host";
how  they  "scratch  deadly  signs,  baleful  letters,  upon  his  wea-
pon, and  by  written  symbols  bewitch  his  sword  and  take
away  the  glory  of  his  blade."


32  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Charms  and  spells  in  abundance  are  preserved  to  us  from
Anglo-Saxon  England  (as  from  other  Germanic  territory)  "
—  charms  to  heal  wounds^"  and  staunch  blood, to  expel  or
ward  off  poison  and  the  venom  of  spiders  and  serpents/^  to
protect  one  against  wild  animals  and  savage  dogs/''  to  cure
ailments  (natural  or  demonic)  in  man  and  beast^^  or  to  shift
them  to  other  objects,^''  to  shield  one  from  witches  and  elves
and  goblins  and  terrors  by  night  or  day/'  to  help  in  child-
birth^^ and  prevent  barrenness  or  miscarriage/*  to  enhance
the  virtue  of  medicinal  herbs/"  to  increase  fertility  of  the  soil
and  guard  the  fields  from  blasting  witchcraft/^  to  call  down  a
swarm  of  bees/^  to  keep  one  safe  and  sound  on  a  journey  and
counteract  fatigue/''  to  calm  a  storm  and  drive  away  hail  and
control  the  winds/''  to  gain  favor/s  to  detect  or  thwart
thieves  and  recover  stolen  goods  and  strayed  or  stolen  horses
and  cattle/''  to  ensure  victory  in  fight. ''^  Witchcraft  against
men  and  cattle  is  mentioned  in  the  famous  Nine  Worts
Charm and  in  several  other  spells. *'  In  an  extremely  elabo-
rate description  of  a  remedy  for  "elf-disease"  we  find  the  pos-
sibility of  meeting  a  demon  in  the  dark  contemplated  with
calm  resolution.'  "Go  on  Thursday  evening  at  sunset  to  the
place  where  you  know  [the  herb]  helenium  grows.  Then  sing
Benedicite  and  Pater  Noster  and  a  litany;  and  stick  your
knife  into  the  plant;  let  it  stick  therein.  Go  away.  Return
when  day  and  night  are  just  dividing;  in  the  same  morning
hour  go  first  to  church  and  cross  yourself  and  commit  your-
self to  God.  Then  go  in  silence,  and  though  anything  horrible
should  come  to  meet  you ^  or  a  man,  speak  no  word  to  it  or  him
until  you  come  to  the  plant  that  you  marked  the  evening
before."""  Charms  and  recipes  for  the  bite  of  a  snake  or
other  venomous  creature  are  common  enough  in  the  Anglo-
Saxon  collections."'  One  theory  was  that  a  devil  might  enter
the  body  of  a  serpent,  or  assume  its  shape,  and  in  this  guise
might  sting  the  cattle  in  the  field. Such  spells,  mostly
remedial  {inania  carmina  as  John  of  Salisbury  called  them  in
the  twelfth  century  —  "idle  charms,  which  the  whole  medi-
cal profession  condems"),"^  occur  in  manuscript  in  every
period  from  the  Norman  Conquest  to  the  present  day,  and
there  is  plenty  of  evidence  for  their  constant  use."''  One  of
these  venerable  rigmaroles  has  run  a  career  of  triumphant


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


33


popularity  for  a  thousand  years  and  is  still  chanted  with  as
much  efficacy  as  ever — -the  famous  charm  for  toothache
which  begins  "St.  Peter  sat  upon  a  marble  stone."

To  the  general  department  of  white  witchcraft  belong  also
the  trivial  offerings  mentioned  in  the  penitentials:  "They
who  sacrifice  to  devils  in  minimis  shall  fast  for  one  year,  but
they  who  sacrifice  in  magnis  shall  fast  for  ten."  In  one  manu-
script the  trifling  sacrifices  are  explained  as  those  offered  at
well-springs  or  at  trees."*  Such  worship  of  wells,  trees,  and
stones  might  be  either  white  magic  or  black,  but  in  any  case
it  was  strictly  forbidden  as  pagan  and  devilish."^  Satan,
Wulfstan  teaches  us,  often  sends  disease  or  injury  upon  a
man  to  induce  him  to  offer  alms  at  a  well  or  a  stone  "or  some
other  lifeless  thing,"  and  then  relieves  him."^

Of  black  magic  at  wells  there  is  a  vivid  instance  in  the  saga
of  Hereward.  When  William  the  Conqueror  despaired  of
taking  the  Isle  of  Ely,  one  of  his  knights  made  a  suggestion:
"I  have  long  been  acquainted  with  an  old  woman  who,  if  she
were  with  us,  would  by  her  art  alone  deprive  the  defenders  of
their  valor  and  drive  tham  all  out  of  the  island  in  panic."
The  hag  was  summoned  and  every  precaution  was  taken  to
keep  her  presence  a  secret  from  the  garrison;  but  Hereward,
suspecting  that  something  was  in  the  wind,  went  out  to  in-
vestigate, disguised  as  a  potter.'"'  Chancing  to  spend  the
night  at  the  house  of  the  widow  where  the  witch  lodged,  he
overheard  the  two  women  conversing  in  French,  which  they
wrongly  assumed  he  could  not  understand,  about  their  sor-
cery. At  midnight  the  pair  went  down  to  springs  of  water  on
the  border  of  the  garden.  Hereward  dogged  their  steps  and
heard  them  ask  "responses"  of  the  "guardian  of  the  springs"
(obviously  a  water-demon).  When  the  enemy  made  their
next  attack,  the  witch  was  stationed  on  a  high  place  in  the
midst  of  them,  in  order  to  be  protected  while  she  plied  "her
art."  But  her  spells  were  bootless,  and  in  the  Norman  rout
that  followed  she  fell  and  broke  her  neck."°  How  she  meant
to  bewitch  the  defenders  of  Ely  is  not  disclosed,  but  mani-
festly she  was  proceeding  on  information  derived  from  the
spirit  or  elemental  demon  that  inhabited  the  springs.

Thus  witchcraft  is  combined  with  well-worship."'  Such
worship  in  varying  forms  has  maintained  itself  to  the  present


34


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


day.  Most  of  the  holy  wells  which  are  found  all  over  Bri-
tain were  originally  honored  with  pagan  ceremonies,  relics  of
which  persist  in  many  instances.  "Cursing  wells"  are  well-
known/"  and  "wishing  wells,"  which  abound,  are  available
as  well  for  banning  as  for  blessing."''  In  1410  Bishop  Robert
Mascall  of  Hereford  learned  to  his  sorrow  that,  although  the
adoration  of  wells  and  stones  is  canonically  stigmatized  as
idolatry, yet  his  subjects  resorted  in  great  numbers  to  a  certain
spring  and  stone  in  the  parish  of  Turnaston."^  Warkworth's
Chronicle  {ad  ann.  13  Ed.  IV,  1473-74)  tells  of  springs  that
give  omens  of  dearth,  pestilence,  and  battle."^  Such  were  the
"hunger  borns"  near  Rockley  which,  as  Dr.  Pocock  heard  in
1754,  " break  out "  to  "denote  an  approaching  scarcity,  and  I
was  told,"  he  adds,  "that  the  hoarders  of  corn  rejoyce  when-
ever they  rise."  One  remembers  Shakspere's  farmer  "  that
hanged  himself  on  th'expectation  of  plenty."  In  1528  we  find
among  the  York  Visitations  a  record  of  the  thrilling  half-
heathen  ceremonial  used  by  Isabel  Mvire  of  Bishopwilton:
"  Shee  took  fier  and  ij  yong  women  with  hir  and  went  to  a
rynnyng  water,  and  light  a  wyspe  of  straw  and  sett  it  on  the
water,  and  saide  thus,  'Benedicite.  Se  ye  what  I  see?  I  se
the  fier  burne  and  water  rynne  and  the  gryse  grew  and  see
flew  [i.  e.  and  the  grass  grow  and  the  sea  flow],  and  nyght
fevers  and  all  unkowth  evils  that  evil  flee,  and  all  other,  God
will,'  and  after  theis  wordes  sais  xv  Pater  noster,  xv  Ave
Maria  and  thre  credes."

We  may  linger  awhile  in  the  fifteenth  century  and  exam-
ine a  highly  significant  document  of  1538 — ^  John  Bale's
"  Comedy  concerning  Three  Laws,  of  Nature,  Moses,  and
Christ."  Bale  was  born  in  I495  and  died  in  1563.

The  character  Idolatry  is  "decked  lyke  an  olde  wytche."
Let  us  see  what  Bale's  idea  of  such  a  personage  was.  Fortu-
nately he  is  explicit  as  well  as  abundant  in  the  information  he
supplies.  The  old  witch  Idolatry  can  tell  fortunes;  by  saying
Ave  Mary  and  "by  other  charmes  of  sorcerye"  she  can  ease
men  of  the  toothache,  can  cure  the  ague  and  the  pox,  can  re-
cover lost  property,  can  fetch  the  devil  from  hell,  can  milk
cows  and  draw  drink  out  of  a  post.  She  is  a  good  midwife  and
can  charm  children  so  that  spirits  cannot  hurt  them.  She
can  work  wiles  in  war,  can  keep  corn  and  cattle  from  thriving,


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


35


can  make  the  ale  in  the  vat  lose  its  head  and  strength.  No
man  can  brew  or  bake  successfully  if  she  opposes.  She  can
dry  up  wells  and  cause  trees  and  plants  to  wither.  She  can
kill  poultry  by  her  arts.  If  she  is  favorably  disposed,  her
charms  speed  the  plough  and  make  the  cows  give  plenty  of
milk;  the  mill,  the  cradle,  and  the  mustard-quern  shall  "go
apace"  if  she  is  pleased.  She  can  play  tricks  akin  to  table-
tipping  —  can  cause  phenomena  like  those  which  we  read
of  in  many  narratives  of  poltergeister  and  haunted  houses:
merely  by  throwing  her  glove  she  makes  stools  dance  and
earthen  pots  prance.  She  knows  spells  to  protect  chickens
from  foxes  and  other  vermin  as  well  as  to  cure  sick  ducks  and
geese;  so  likewise  to  cure  colts  of  "lampes"  and  of  the  bots.
She  has  drinks  for  coughs  and  for  "hyckock"  and  the  "chy-
cock,"  and  charms  for  the  pip.  Headache  she  can  prevent,
and  insomnia  vanishes  if  you  will  follow  her  directions."'

Besydes  these  charmes  afore,
I  haue  feates  many  more
That  I  kepe  styll  in  store.

Some  of  her  curative  and  prophylactic  charms  involve  the
use  of  formulas  of  the  old  religion  or  recourse  to  certain  saints.
Such  means,  however,  become  sorcery  under  her  manipula-
tion, precisely  as  we  find  to  be  the  case  in  divers  bits  of  folk-
lore which  have  survived  to  the  present  day  and  of  which
examples  enough  occur  in  the  records  of  the  ecclesiastical
courts  in  pre-Elizabethan  times.  Bale's  description  of  the
occult  powers  of  his  Old  Witch  covers  both  beneficial  and
malefic  witchcraft:  she  is  both  a  white  witch  and  a  black
witch,  according  as  one  enjoys  her  favor  or  incurs  her  enmity,
and  this  accords  with  experience  and  with  the  everyday  creed
of  the  folk.

Nobody  who  has  even  a  superficial  acquaintance  with
popular  superstitions,  ancient  and  modern,  will  imagine  for  a
moment  that  Bale  imported  these  things  from  the  Continent
or  derived  his  knowledge  of  them  from  the  learned  tomes  of
theologians  and  demonologists.  And  the  date  of  his  scurrilous
but  for  us  invaluable  comedy  is  exactly  twenty  years  before
the  accession  of  Queen  Elizabeth.

In  the  comic  interlude  of  Thersytes,  written  in  1537,


36  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


young  Telemachus  gives  Thersites  a  letter  from  Ulysses,
which  the  recipient  reads  aloud.  It  begs  pardon  for  past
enmity  and  prays  Thersites  to  help  the  boy  to  find  a  physician

That  hym  may  wyselye  charme
From  the  wormes  that  do  hym  harme.

Ulysses  has  heard  men  say

That  better  charmer  is  no  other
Then  is  youre  owne  deare  mother.
I  praye  you  of  her  obtayne
To  charme  away  his  paine.

Thersites  assents  and  conducts  Telemachus  to  the  charmer,
assuring  him  that  he  shall  be  the  better  for  seven  years.  She
refuses:  "Charme  that  charme  wyll,  he  shal  not  be  charmed
of  me."  The  undutiful  Thersites  threatens  her  with  his  club:

Charme  olde  witche  in  the  deuils  name
Or  I  wyll  sende  the  to  him  to  be  his  dame.

After  some  acrimonious  discussion,  she  gives  way:

Come  hyther  pretye  childe

I  will  the  charme  from  the  wormes  wylde.

First  he  must  tell  her  his  name;  then  he  must  lie  down  "up-
right" (on  his  back)  on  the  ground  and  stir  not  once  for  a
thousand  pound.  Telemachus  obeys  and  the  witch  pro-
nounces a  charm  of  tremendous  length  and  amazing  bur-
lesquery.""  One  remembers  that  in  old  popular  medicine  a
large  variety  of  ailments  were  ascribed  to  worms.

No  better  commentary  on  Bale  and  Thersytes  can  be  de-
sired than  the  actual  cases  of  witchcraft  and  sorcery  recorded
in  Archdeacon  Hale's  extracts  from  the  Act-Books  of  the
Commissary  of  London."^  In  1477  John  Bere  was  before  the
Commissary  on  the  charge  of  defaming  his  neighbors  and  be-
lieving in  sorcery,  but  he  cleared  himself:  probably  this  was  a
case  of  stolen  goods. In  I480  John  Stokys  was  accused  of
"using  incantations  of  sorcery  for  fevers."  In  1527  Wil-
liam Browne,  charged  with  using  "art  magic  and  incantation
of  horses,"  confessed  that  he  cured  horses  of  "the  fasshyns"
with  herbs,  reciting  the  Lord's  Prayer  and  the  Angelic  Saluta-
tion each  five  times  and  the  Apostles'  Creed  thrice. In


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558  37

1528  Margaret  Hunt  made  a  similar  confession.  The  details
are  highly  significant.  For  a  lame  or  sore  arm  Margaret  pre-
scribed the  juice  of  certain  herbs.  The  patient  was  also  to  re-
peat the  Lord's  Prayer  and  the  Angelic  Salutation  five  times
and  the  Apostles'  Creed  once  and  then  to  apply  a  blue  clout.
So  ran  the  testimony  of  one  of  her  patients.  Margaret  herself
confessed  to  further  ceremonies.  First  she  prays  the  Blessed
Trinity  to  save  and  heal  her  patients  from  all  their  wicked
enemies.  "Then  she  techeth  them  ix  nights  for  to  sey  v
pater  nosters,  v  aves  and  a  crede,  and  iii  pater  nosters,  iii
aves  and  credes,  in  the  worshyp  of  Seynt  Spyrite;  and  when
the[y]  take  ther  chamber  and  go  to  bedde  at  night,  to  sey  one
pater,  one  ave  and  one  crede  in  the  worshypp  of  Seynt  Ive,  to
save  them  from  al  envy."  For  the  ague  "she  techeth  them  to
gether  herbe-grace  [i.  e.  rue],  peneriall,  redde  sage,  redde
fenell,  and  the  barre  rote,  before  the  son  downe,  so  that  it  be
the  last  dryncke  that  the  syke  drincketh  at  night."  For  sores
"she  techeth  them  to  gether  herbe-grace,  dyll,  verveye  [i.  e.
vervain,  verbena],  marygoldes,  put  a  lyttill  holy  water  to
them,  and  sey  sume  prayers;  and  when  she  stampethe  [i.  e.
brays  the  herbs  in  a  mortar],  to  sey  iii  pater  nosters,  iii  aves,
and  a  crede,  in  the  worshyp  of  our  Lady,  yf  it  be  a  woman
that  stampeth;  and  if  it  be  a  man,  he  must  se[y]  iii  pater
nosters,  iii  aves,  and  a  crede,  in  the  worshypp  of  Jesus."
It  is  interesting  to  note  dill  (anise)  and  vervain  among  Mar-
garet's simples.  These  plants  were f^^ga  daemonum :  they  kept
off  devils  and  "hindered  witches  of  their  will."  The  pre-
scription of  such  herbs,  as  well  as  what  Margaret  says  about
"envy"  (i.  e.  malice),  indicates  that  she  believed  the  ail-
ments were  (or  might  have  been)  caused  by  witchcraft.  She
learned  her  practice,  she  declares,  in  Wales  from  one  Mother
Emet.  In  the  same  year  (1528)  Elizabeth  Fotman  confessed
that  she  took  a  rod  "and  put  it  to  the  horse  bely  that  was
syke  of  the  botts,  and  made  crosses  on  a  caryers  horse  bely
.  .  .  and  the  horse  rose  up  by  and  by  and  was  hole."  She  was
charged  also  with  curing  toothache  and  worms. Other  pre-
Elizabethan  cases  from  similar  sources  are  not  lacking.  About
1426  the  accounts  of  Bishop  Langley  of  Durham  disclose  an
entry  of  ninepence  paid  to  Thomas  Egliston  for  "signing"
sixteen  head  of  cattle  with  St.  Wilfred's  signet  to  ward  off  the


38  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

murrain;  but  the  entry  is  crossed  out,  as  if  disapproved — •
whether  for  conscience'  sake,  or  because  the  treatment  failed,
or  because  the  fee  was  exorbitant!  The  case  of  Agnes  Han-
cok,  the  healer,  in  1438,  will  be  cited  later  (p.  I45,  below).  In
1 448  Mariot  Jacson  was  before  the  Durham  ecclesiastical
court  as  an  incantatrix;  in  1450  Agnes  Bowmer  was  arraigned
at  the  same  tribunal  for  sortilege,  and  so  in  1452  was  Alice
Davison  for  using  sorcery  "in  the  medical  art."  At  about
this  time  "sorcery  or  witchcraft"  is  mentioned  among  the
"more  greuous  defautes"  in  certain  additions  to  the  Rule  of
St.  Saviour  and  St.  Bridget."'  In  1457  Thomas  Hull  of  Hert-
ford made  his  confession  and  abjured  in  the  parish  church  in
the  presence  of  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln:  "That  I  haue  yeven
ayde,  counsell,  help,  and  fauour  vnto  oon  Thomas  Curteys,
to  thentent  that  he  exercised  and  vsed  nigromancy  and
heresy."  In  1472  William  Hull,  Vicar  of  Cawnton,  being
convicted  of  sortilege  on  abundant  testimony,  was  forced  to
swear,  on  pain  of  deprivation,  that  he  would  resign  his  cure
before  Michaelmas,  or  at  least  exchange  it.'"  In  1481  John
Parkyn  was  presented  before  the  York  ecclesiastical  court  for
"using  incantations"  for  some  purpose,  and  Agnes  Marshall
was  presented  for  the  same  offence  in  her  practice  as  a  mid-
wife."''

The  prevalence  of  wandering  practitioners  of  magic  at  the
end  of  the  fifteenth  century  is  suggested  by  an  entry  in  Bishop
Redman's  visitation  of  Sulby  monastery,  Northamptonshire,
in  1500.  One  of  the  brethren  named  Thomas  Wryght  was
presented  for  using  "books  of  experiments,"  and  besides
for  rewarding  a  certain  "vagabond"  liberally  for  teaching
him  this  science.  His  books  were  seized,  but  he  was  treated
leniently  because  he  protested  that  he  had  used  them  "for
speculation  merely  and  never  for  operation."

The  medical  act  of  Henry  VIII  was  passed  in  1511.  The
preamble  recites  that  medicine  and  surgery  are  practised  by
"a  grete  multitude  of  ignoraunt  persones,"  so  that  "common
Artificers,  as  Smythes,  Wevers,  and  Women,  boldely  and
custumably  take  upon  theim  grete  curis  and  thyngys  of  great
difficultie,  In  the  which  they  partely  use  socery  and  which-
crafte,  partely  applie  such  medicyne  vnto  the  disease  as  be
verey  noyous  and  nothyng  metely."


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


39


In  1538  (the  very  year  of  Bale's  Comedy)  Agnes  Robson
confessed  that  she  cured  little  pigs  and  other  animals  by  a
charm,  and  the  charm  itself  is  recited  at  full  length  in  the  Visi-
tation Book  of  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln:  After  a  prayer  ("God
almyghty,  god  and  saincte  charyte,  I  beseche  you  of  your
blessyd  goodnes  to  helpe  this  same  thing"),  Agnes  uttered  the
following  magic  formula:

John  is  thy  christen  name,  John,
And  thre  bytter  bytter  hathe  the  bytten,
Thre  bytter  bytter  hathe  the  nyppen,
And  thre  bytter  bytter  hathe  the  stryken,
Besechyng  almyghty  god,  whedder  itt  were  eye  or  tong  or  hert,  the  better
shall  be  your  heale  and  boote,  the  father  the  son  and  the  holy  gooste.

On  the  same  occasion  Johanna  Connyngton  confessed  to  re-
citing a  similar  spell  for  sick  children:  "Three  byttes  haue  ye
bytten  with  hert  and  tong  and  eye."  ^•'^  Almost  a  hundred
years  later  Anne  Whittle  alias  Chattox,  one  of  the  Lancashire
witches  who  were  hanged  in  161 2,  confessed  that  when  she
was  sent  for  "  to  helpe  drinke  that  was  forspoken  or  be-
witched" she  successfully  "vsed  this  Prayer  for  the  amend-
ing of  it,  viz.

"A  CHARME.

Three  Biters  hast  thou  bitten,

The  Hart,  ill  Eye,  ill  Tonge:
Three  bitter  shall  be  thy  Boote,
Father,  Sonne,  and  Holy  Ghost

a  Gods  name.
Fiue  Pater-nosters,  fiue  Auies,

and  a  Creede,
In  worship  of  fiue  woundes

of  our  Lord."

Anne's  use  of  this  old  charm  is  a  very  curious  circumstance,
for  she  had  ignorantly  perverted  its  function  from  mankind  to
malt.  In  161 6  Isobel  Harvie  at  Kirkcaldy  admitted  using  a
version  of  the  charm  which  she  had  learned  from  "  ane  way-
fairing  man"; "'other  versions  were  employed  in  Scotland  for
sick  horses  in  1641  and  1656,""*  and  still  another  is  reported
from  the  Orkneys  in  recent  days.^""

One  of  Elynour  Rummyng's  guests  in  Skelton's  poem  was  a
white  witch,  but  she  dabbled  also  in  magic  of  a  more  ques-
tionable sort:


40


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


She  semed  halfe  a  leche,
And  began  to  preche
Of  the  tewsday  in  the  weke
Whan  the  mare  doth  keke;
Of  the  vertue  of  an  vnset  leke;
Of  her  husbandes  breke;
Wyth  the  feders  of  a  quale
She  could  to  Burdeou  sayle;
And  wyth  good  ale  barme
She  could  make  a  charme
To  helpe  wythall  a  stytch.
She  semed  to  be  a  wytch."*^

Skelton  died  in  1529.

In  1549  Bishop  Hooper  registered  the  fact  that  a  few  years
before  "a  poor  man  that  erred  by  ignorance,"  had  assured
him  that  "this  medicine  could  heal  all  diseases,  '  -{-Jesus  +
Joi^  -f  habuit  +  vermes  +  Job  +  patitur  +  vermes  +  in  +
nomine  +  Patris  -\-  et  -\-  Filii  -\-  et  -\-  Spiritus  Sancti  +
Amey^  +  lama  +  zabachthani  ^'^^  Obviously  this  formula,
which  the  Bishop's  informant  regarded  as  a  panacea,  was  a
charm  for  worms. In  rationale  it  is  identical  with  the  fa-
mous charm  against  toothache,  Petrus  sedebat:  some  holy  per-
sonage, like  Job  or  St.  Peter,  has  suffered  from  the  ailment  in
question  and  has  been  cured;  to  recite  these  facts  in  proper
form  will  heal  the  patient.  The  toothache  formula,  as  we
have  seen,  has  had  a  continuous  popularity  in  Britain  for
something  like  a  thousand  years,  and  this  is  undoubtedly
true  of  many  another  charm.  The  same  principle  under-
lies one  of  the  most  precious  relics  of  Germanic  paganism  — ■
the  Second  Merseburg  Spell,  which  has  survived  to  recent
times  in  Scandinavia,  Finland,  Scotland,  England,  and  Ger-
many,'^s  The  form  is  widespread  and  very  ancient,  begin-
ning with  an  epic  portion  —  a  narrative  —  and  applying
what  happened  once  upon  a  time  to  the  remedial  purpose  in
the  present.  We  have  a  striking  example  in  the  Great  Demo-
tic Papyrus,  where  a  charm  for  wounds  tells  at  the  outset
how  the  son  of  the  goddess  Isis  was  wounded  and  how  his
mother  prepared  the  oil  of  healing.'"^

But  we  must  revert  to  chronology  and  pick  up  the  thread
of  our  discourse  at  the  beginning  of  the  Norman  period.

When  Duke  William's  lorica  was  put  on  hindside  before  at


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558  4I


Hastings,  he  said:  "If  I  believed  in  sorcery,  I  should  not  go
to  battle  to-day;  but  I  have  never  put  my  trust  in  sorceries
nor  loved  sorcerers.  For  in  every  business  —  whatever  I  had
to  do —  I  have  always  committed  myself  to  my  Maker."  '''^

In  1075  Council  of  London  forbade  the  hanging  up  of
dead  beasts'  bones  to  ward  off  the  cattle  plague;  likewise
sortes,  soothsaying,  divination,  and  all  such  works  of  the
devil. '''^  About  1 114  the  law-book  called  Quadripartitus  trans-
lated Cnut's  decree  against  paganism,  which  includes  lots  and
soothsaying,'""  and  in  11 26  a  London  synod  threatened  with
excommunication  and  everlasting  infamy  all  sorcerers,  sooth-
sayers, and  practisers  of  any  kind  of  augury,  as  well  as  all  per-
sons who  assent  to  such  acts.'^"  This  canon  was  appropriate
to  the  times,  for  not  long  before  had  flourished  Gerard  (Hugo
Gerold),  Archbishop  of  York,  who  died  in  11 08.  He  was,  we
are  told,  an  acute  and  learned  man  (homo  quidem  acutiis  el
literatus),  but  was  thought  to  be  rather  too  skilful  in  "clean-
ing out  the  purses"  of  his  subjects,  and,  as  many  did  not
scruple  to  assert,  he  practised  the  black  art.  He  died  sud-
denly, and  was  so  hated  by  the  people  that  the  boys  threw
stones  at  his  bier.'s^  An  English  homily  of  about  this  time
describes  the  Emperor  Julian  (the  Apostate)  as  believing  in
witchcraft  and  serving  the  devil,  and  tells  how  he  once  sent  a
demon  on  an  errand  to  a  foreign  shore.

In  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth  centuries,  indeed,  we  have
ample  evidence  for  the  currency  in  Britain  of  almost  every
superstitious  belief  or  practice  that  enters  into  the  witch-
creed,  be  the  witchcraft  white  or  black.  We  hear  of  charms
and  sortilege  and  soothsaying  and  divination  and  prophecy
and  necromancy,  of  detective  sorcery  for  stolen  goods,  of  mir-
ror magic  or  crystal  gazing,  of  abuse  of  the  consecrated  wafer
and  of  baptismal  water  for  good  purposes  and  bad;  of  holy
texts  repeated  backward  or  intermingled  with  profane
formulas  or  misapplied  to  occult  ends;  of  the  winning  of  love
and  favor  by  spells  or  secret  arts;  of  witchcraft  for  murder  or
bodily  harm;  of  familiar,  spirits  and  house-haunting  polter-
geister  and  serviceable  domestic  cobolds;  of  demons  of  the
storm;  of  demoniacal  possession;  of  devils  in  the  guise  of
pygmies  or  of  animals;  of  witches  in  beast-form  who,  if
wounded,  show  the  wound  when  they  return  to  humanity;  of


42


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


milk-Stealing  witchcraft;  of  spectral  evidence,  when  devils
appear  in  the  likeness  of  innocent  women ;  of  incubus  and  suc-
cubus  and  demon  offspring;  of  invocation  and  conjuration  of
evil  spirits;  of  the  diabolical  compact  and  homage  to  Satan  —
of  everything,  in  short,  except  the  Witches'  Sabbath,  and
that  is  an  institution  that  does  not  appear  at  all  in  the  trials
of  the  Elizabethan  age.  For  Germany  in  the  thirteenth  cen-
tury we  have  a  vivid  picture  of  rustic  witchcraft  in  a  sermon
of  Berthold  of  Regensburg.  "O  ye  village  folk,  many  of  you
would  go  to  heaven  but  for  that  same  little  axe  [half-heresy],
which  murders  all  that  believe  in  witchcraft  {zouberie)  and  in
divination  and  seeresses  and  in  cunning  women  and  in  night-
ladies  and  such  goblins  and  in  Robin  Goodfellow."  Some  put
their  trust  in  holy  wells  and  holy  trees.  Foolish  women  try  to
win  a  husband  by  witchcraft.  While  they  are  about  it,  why
don't  they  cast  their  spells  on  a  king  instead  of  contenting
themselves  with  a  farmer's  son  or  a  laborer?  One  woman
baptizes  an  image  of  wax,  another  an  image  of  wood,  another
a  dead  man's  bone.  One  works  witchery  with  herbs,  another
with  the  holy  chrism,  another  with  the  sacred  wafer — the
body  of  God.  They  practise  magic  when  they  get  their  hus-
bands, and  after  they  get  them;  before  childbirth;  before  the
christening  and  after  the  christening.  They  even  believe  that
they  can  take  a  man's  heart  out  of  his  body  and  replace  it
with  a  bunch  of  straw!  It  is  a  wonder  that  your  husband
does  not  become  leprous.  Fie!  do  you  really  believe  that
you  can  take  a  man's  heart  out  of  his  body  and  put  in  a
bunch  of  straw?  —  This,  in  substance,  is  Berthold's  account
of  contemporary  superstition  among  the  folk.^^''  Who  that
knows  the  middle  ages  can  doubt  that  his  homily  might  have
been  delivered  with  equal  force  in  Essex  or  Somerset  or  York-
shire? Examples  will  be  furnished  under  appropriate  heads,
but  a  few  miscellaneous  bits  of  testimony  may  here  be  cited.

Zoroaster  passed  with  our  ancestors  as  the  inventor  of
magic,  on  the  authority  of  St.  Augustine. He  was  regularly
identified  with  Noah's  wicked  son  Ham;  so  by  Capgrave,
for  example,  in  his  fifteenth-century  Chronicle.'"  Herbert  de
Losinga,  first  Bishop  of  Norwich,  who  died  in  1119,  writes,
"The  ark  was  of  small  compass;  but  yet  even  there  Ham  pre-
served the  arts  of  magic  and  idolatry."


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558  43

William  Laudun,  a  brave  English  knight,  came  to  Gilbert
Foliot,  then  Bishop  of  Hereford  (as  he  was  from  1149  to
II 62),  and  asked  counsel:  "A  Welsh  wizard  {maleficus)  re-
cently died  in  my  town.  Four  nights  later  he  came  back,  and
he  keeps  coming  every  night,  calling  by  name  certain  of  his
former  neighbors,  who  instantly  fall  sick  and  die  within  three
days,  so  that  but  few  of  them  are  left."  The  bishop  suggested
that  the  evil  angel  of  this  dead  vi-llain  had  perhaps  reani-
mated his  body,  and  advised  the  knight  to  have  it  dug  up  and
beheaded,  and  then  buried  again  after  the  grave  had  been
sprinkled  copiously  with  holy  water.  All  this  proved  of  no
avail,  and  at  length  the  name  of  Sir  William  himself  was
called.  Seizing  his  sword,  he  pursued  the  demonic  corpse  to
the  churchyard,  and,  just  as  it  was  sinking  into  the  grave,
cleft  its  head  to  the  neck.  There  was  no  further  trouble.
We  have  here,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  a  case  of  vam-
pirism, and  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  vampire  was  a  wizard  in
this  life.  Other  instances  of  vampirism  in  the  twelfth  century
are  recorded  by  William  of  Newburgh.''*"

The  thrilling  tale  of  the  Witch  of  Berkeley,  retold  in
Southey's  deservedly  famous  ballad,"''  had  a  triumphant
career  in  the  middle  ages.  We  discover  it  first  in  William  of
Malmesbury,'^^  who  appeals  for  confirmatory  evidence  to  the
Dialogues  of  the  great  Pope  Gregory,  in  whom,  says  William,
you  may  read  of  a  wicked  man  who  was  buried  in  a  church
but^was  cast  ovit  of  the  building  by  demons.'''^  William's
Berkeley  legend  was  repeated  by  one  English  historian  after
another,  and  the  marvel  found  due  recognition  in  Vincent's
Speculum  Historiale,  in  the  Northern  History  of  Olaus  Mag-
nus, in  Hartmann  Schedel's  Book  of  Chronicles,  and  in  the
Prodigies  of  Conrad  Lycosthenes.    Schedel  illustrates  the
event  with  a  terrific  woodcut  of  the  Witch  carried  oflF  on
horseback  by  Satan,  and  Olaus  and  Conrad  offer  us  a  truly
comic  delineation  of  the  same  prodigious  ride.'*'^   A  similar
horror,  perhaps  derived  from  the  Berkeley  legend  (but  with-
out mention  of  sorcery),  is  the  Priest's  Wife  Carried  off  by  the
Devil,  told  in  French  by  the  Englishman  William  (of  Wad-
dington?)  in  the  thirteenth  century  and  translated  by  Robert
of  Brunne  in  the  early  fourteenth.  She  had  four  sons,  who  all
became  priests  in  their  turn,  but  they  could  not  withhold  her


44


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


body  from  the  clutch  of  the  fiends.  The  youngest  son,  we  are
informed,  used  the  story  in  his  sermons  "in  many  places
in  England"  as  an  awful  warning  to  "prestresses."  No
wonder  it  made  its  way  to  Germany  and  Sweden  and  even  to
Iceland."*^  Such  stories  as  that  of  the  Witch  of  Berkeley  did
not  remain  buried  in  chronicles,  nor  was  their  circulation
confined  to  the  class  or  classes  of  society  that  could  read.
They  circulated  in  two  ways  —  first  by  way  of  common  talk,
until  the  thrill  of  the  original  occurrence  died  out  with  the
generations  (a  kind  of  currency  that  we  cannot  trace  but  for
which  we  should  always  make  large  allowance);  and,  sec-
ondly, they  were  embodied  in  collections  of  exempla  (illus-
trative anecdotes  for  preachers),  were  told  and  retold  in  ser-
mon after  sermon,  and  thus  became  household  words. The
Witch  of  Berkeley  finds  a  place  in  more  than  one  of  these  col-
lections: in  the  Speculum  Laicorum,  for  instance,  probably
compiled  about  1275  by  an  English  cleric;  and  in  the  Alpha-
betum  Narrationum,  whence  it  was  translated  into  our  ver-
nacular in  the  fifteenth  century.'''^  Who  can  estimate  the
influence  of  so  impressive  a  legend  in  its  demonstrable  course
of  seven  centuries?

Peter  of  Blois,  Archdeacon  of  Bath  for  twenty-six  years,
who  enjoyed  the  favor  of  Henry  II  and  Queen  Eleanor,  has
left  us  an  important  letter  on  the  superstitions  of  his  age.
One  Master  William,  when  about  to  start  on  his  day's  jour-
ney, had  chanced  to  meet  a  monk.  This  was  reputed  to  be
bad  luck,^**'  and  the  monk  himself  had  urged  him  to  return,
warning  him  that,  if  he  ventured  out,  he  would  run  a  great
risk.  But  Master  William  despised  such  vanities  and  rode
forth  unconcernedly  with  the  train  of  the  Archbishop  of
Canterbury,  to  whose  household  he  belonged.  He  had  not
gone  far,  however,  when  horse  and  rider  fell  into  a  deep  pit
full  of  water,  whence  he  was  rescued  with  great  difficulty.
One  of  the  cavalcade  was  so  impressed  that  he  consulted
Archdeacon  Peter  on  the  whole  question  of  unlucky  meetings,
dreams,  spooks,  birds,  and  sneezes.''"'  In  replying,  the  wise
Archdeacon  reminds  his  friend  that  Satan  is  always  trying  to
undermine  our  faith  by  his  wiles.  To  that  end  he  puts  fan-
tastic notions  into  our  heads,  promising  us  that  we  may  know
the  future  by  the  flight  of  birds,  by  our  meeting  with  men  or


V


CHAP.


ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


45


beasts,  by  dreams,  and  in  other  ways.  His  object  is  to  dis-
quiet our  hearts  with  idle  curiosity.  Some  men  consult  figure-
casters;  others,  astrologers;  still  others,  wizards  {pythonicos)\
and  because  their  divination  now  and  then  comes  out  right,
heedless  persons  put  confidence  in  them.  But  a  good  Chris-
tian ought  not  to  enquire  about  the  future:  he  should  leave  it
humbly  to  God.  "Then  pay  no  attention  to  dreams,''^'  my
dear  friend.  Do  not  entangle  yourself  in  the  false  opinion  of
those  who  fear  to  meet  a  hare,  or  a  woman  with  flowing
tresses,  or  a  blind  man,  or  a  lame  man,  or  a  monk,  but  who
look  forward  joyously  to  good  hospitality  on  their  journey  if
a  wolf  meets  them,  or  a  doe,  or  if  a  martin  flies  from  left  to
right,  or  if  on  setting  forth  they  hear  distant  thunder  or  meet
a  hunchback  or  a  leper.  My  own  opinion  is  that  Master  Wil-
liam would  have  been  equally  in  danger  of  drowning  if  no
monk  had  met  him!"^''^  Mandeville's  Voyage  and  Travel
comments  on  the  strange  fact  that  some  Christian  men
"seyn  that  summe  bestes  han  gode  meetynge,  that  is  to  seye
for  to  meete  with  hem  first  at  morwe,  and  summe  bestes
wykkyd  meetynge":  the  hare  and  the  swine  are  ominous;  it  is
favorable  to  armed  men  when  birds  of  prey  are  seen  to  catch
their  quarry,  unfavorable  when  the  quarry  escapes;  ravens
are  unlucky.  Is  it  any  wonder,  then,  that  the  Indians  wor-
ship idols?

Eustace  the  Monk,  a  famous  French  pirate,^'^"  was  killed  in
a  sea-fight  with  the  English  off  Sandwich  in  1 217.  The  versi-
fied narrative  of  his  career  drawn  up  by  a  lively  French  ro-
mancer in  the  same  century,''^  credits  Eustace  with  an  exten-
sive and  peculiar  knowledge  of  the  black  art.  He  had  spent
half  a  year  in  an  underground  chamber  at  Toledo  conversing
with  the  devil,  who  taught  him  all  kinds  of  nigromancy  and
predicted,  on  bidding  him  farewell  at  the  close  of  the  cur-
riculum, that  he  should  be  killed  at  sea  after  waging  war  with
kings  and  counts.  Eustace,  the  poet  assures  us,  could  prac-
tise mirror  magic  by  sword  and  basin,  and  could  divine  by
turning  the  psalter  or  by  inspecting  a  sheep's  shoulder-bone:
he  knew  a  thousand  conjurations,  a  thousand  charms,  a
thousand  "experiments."  A  prose  account  of  his  death  in  an
early  fourteenth-century  manuscript  is  marvellous  enough.
A  French  fleet  under  his  command  entered  Sandwich  harbor,


46


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


but  he  had  by  magic  rendered  his  own  ship  invisible.  One
Stephen  Crabbe,  however,  who  had  been  a  friend  of  his  and
had  learned  his  arts,  boarded  the  vessel,  attacked  the  free-
booter, and  cut  off"  his  head.  In  this  encounter  Crabbe
seemed  to  the  beholders  to  be  contending  with  an  invisible
antagonist  on  the  surface  of  the  water;  but  when  the  pirate
fell  dead,  the  glamour  came  to  an  end  and  ship  and  men  were
in  full  view.'^''  Eustace's  spells  in  this  instance  were  like
those  by  which  Chaucer's  Clerk  of  Orleans  in  The  Franklin's
Tale  made  the  rocks  vanish  on  the  Breton  coast.

In  the  Synod  of  Durham  under  Bishop  Richard  de  Marisco
(between  1217  and  1226),  sorceries  and  witchcrafts  in  cases  of
marriage  are  prohibited  under  pain  of  excommunication.^"
In  1222  at  Oxford  a  young  man  and  two  women  were  brought
before  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Stephen  Langton,  on
complaint  of  the  Archdeacon  of  Oxford.  The  man,  it  was
said,  had  let  himself  be  crucified,  was  in  the  habit  of  exhibit-
ing the  five  wounds  (still  visible),  and  was  called  Jesus^''^  by
his  two  feminine  companions.  One  of  these  women,  who  was
elderly,  had  long  been  addicted  to  witchcraft  {maleficis  incan-
tationibus)  and  had  deluded  the  young  man  by  her  magic  arts.
Both  she  and  her  dupe  were  convicted  and  were  "shut  up  be-
tween two  walls  until  they  died,"  but  the  younger  woman,  the
man's  sister,  was  set  free  because  she  had  revealed  the  im-
pious conduct  of  her  brother  and  the  witch. If  this  was  an
instance  of  the  stigmata,  it  precedes  by  two  years  the  case  of
St.  Francis  and  has  escaped  the  researches  of  Imbert-Gour-
beyre,  whose  "Liste  des  Stigmatises"  from  1224  to  1891
mounts  to  the  stupendous  total  of  three  hundred  and  twenty-
one.'^"  In  the  same  year  (i  222),  a  chronicle  declares,  a  Jewish
necromancer  purchased  a  boy  and  wrapped  him  in  the  skin
of  a  dead  man,  in  order  that  by  means  of  incantations  he
might  learn  the  future  from  the  lad's  answers  to  his  questions.
The  idea  was  that  future  events  would  be  seen  by  the  medium
as  if  they  were  taking  place  at  the  moment. This  perform-
ance combines  stark  necromancy  (in  which  the  dead  are
called  back  to  give  responses)  with  the  kind  of  incubation
described  by  Ovid  when  he  tells  how  King  Numa  sacrificed  a
sheep  to  Faunus  and  another  to  Somnus  and  slept  on  their
skins  spread  upon  the  hard  ground,  and  how  Faunus  ap-


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


47


peared  to  him  in  a  dream  and  uttered  a  dark  oracle,  which
Egeria  interpreted.'^^  This  was  an  ancient  Latin  rite,  ob-
served (so  Virgil  testifies)  with  momentous  results  by  King
Latinus  himself,  who  was  the  son  of  the  god  Faunus.'^"
Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  imitating  Virgil,  makes  Brutus  seek
Britain  in  obedience  to  an  oracle  which  Diana  had  pro-
nounced in  a  vision  as  he  slept  in  the  open  air  on  the  hide  of  a
doe/*^  One  of  the  heathenish  New  Year's  Day  rites  de-
nounced as  idolatry  in  the  penitential  known  as  the  Corrector
et  Medicus  (included  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  eleventh  cen-
tury by  Bishop  Burchard  of  Worms  in  his  Decretum  as
Book  xix)  was  to  sit  on  a  bull's  hide  at  the  crossroads  in  order
to  learn  the  future.

Often,  in  recent  days,  has  a  witch  been  violently  assaulted
by  her  victim  or  by  one  who  feared  to  become  her  victim.
Thus  in  1857  at  Wenlock  in  Shropshire  a  young  man  mur-
dered a  supposed  witch. '^'^  In  1879  in  Norfolk  a  man  accused
of  assaulting  a  girl  defended  his  action  on  the  ground  that  her
mother  had  bewitched  him  by  means  of  "  a  walking  toad."
Cases  of  scratching  or  wounding  are  common.  At  Pough-
keepsie  in  1802  Nicholas  Toncroy  was  tried  for  assaulting  an
old  woman:  he  thought  her  a  witch  and  cut  her  three  times
across  the  forehead;  for  it  is  an  old  idea  that  to  draw  the
witch's  blood  will  annul  her  spells. Examples  of  all  sorts
may  be  accumulated  ad  libitmn  from  the  nineteenth  and
twentieth  centuries;  and  such  panic  ferocity  was  of  course
no  less  common  in  early  times,  though  only  now  and  then  did
it  get  into  court  and  thus  achieve  the  dignity  and  perma-
nence of  a  record.  Of  this  we  have  a  fine  instance  as  far  back
as  1279  in  the  Assize  Roll  for  Northumberland.  "A  certain
unknown  witch  {quaedam  mulier  ignota  sortilega)  entered  the
house  of  John  de  Kerneslawe  one  evening  and  reviled  him  be-
cause he  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  over  the  lamps.  And  the
said  John,  defending  himself  as  if  from  the  devil,  struck  this
same  witch  with  a  staff  so  that  she  died.  And  afterwards,  by
the  judgment  of  the  whole  clergy,  she  was  burned.  And  the
same  John  after  that  deed  went  mad.  And  afterwards,  when
he  came  to  his  senses,  remembering  the  foresaid  deed,  for  fear
he  might  run  into  danger,  he  fled  into  the  bishopric  of  Dur-
ham. And  he  is  not  defamed  of  any  felony;  therefore  let  him


48


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


return  if  he  wishes,  but,  on  account  of  his  flight,  let  his  chat-
tels (£4,  5s.)  be  confiscated."

One  feels  sympathy  for  the  Abbot  of  Sulby,  Thomas  of
Whalley  (bad  as  he  was),  who,  after  he  had  been  at  the  head  of
that  house  for  ten  years,  was  found,  on  visitation  of  the  arch-
bishop in  1280,  to  have  squandered  a  great  sum  of  money
upon  Elias  Favelle,  incantator  and  sortilegus,  whom  he  em-
ployed to  discover  the  body  of  his  brother,  drowned  in  the
Ouse.''^  We  can  but  wonder  whether  Elias  resorted  to  the
old  method  (still  practised)  of  floating  a  loaf  of  bread  (with
or  without  a  candle,  or  ballast  of  quicksilver)  on  the  theory
that  it  will  come  to  rest  directly  over  the  corpse.'^''  At  all
events.  Abbot  Thomas  was  excommunicated  for  this  and
other  offences.

In  1286  an  apostate  Cistercian  monk  of  Rievaulx  named
Godfrey  Darel  was  reported  to  the  Archbishop  of  York  as  a
vagrant  practiser  of  witchcrafts  imaleficia)  and  wicked  in-
cantations.''^

In  the  Confessional  of  Bishop  Quivil  (Synod  of  Exeter,
1287)  various  kinds  of  sorcery  and  witchcraft  are  denounced
as  dishonorable  to  God  —  conjurations  for  detecting  theft
(by  means  of  sword  or  basin  [mirror  magic]  or  of  "names
written  and  enclosed  in  balls  of  clay  and  placed  in  holy
water"),  and  divinations  and  sortilege  such  as  "some
wretches  use  for  the  sake  of  women  with  whom  they  are
madly  in  love."

Adam  de  Stratton,  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer,  the  most
infamous  of  extortioners  and  false  stewards  in  English  annals,
was  arrested  and  tried  in  1 289  and  1 290.  Infinite  treasure  was
found  in  his  possession.  There  was  also  seized  among  his
.  chattels,  we  are  told,  a  coffer  or  silk  bag  containing  parings  of
nails,  human  hair,  the  feet  of  toads  and  moles,  and  other
"diabolical  things."  It  was  sealed  up  by  the  king's  justiciary,
but  Adam  broke  the  seal  and  threw  the  magic  objects  into  a
vault.  Therefore  he  was  accounted  a  sorcerer.'"

Adam's  magic  bag  has  excellent  parallels  in  a  French  ma-
'  gician's  bag  described  by  Gregory  of  Tours  in  the  late  sixth
century  and  in  the  negro  obeah-man's  bag  described  by  Monk
Lewis  in  his  West  Indian  journal  in  the  early  nineteenth.  The
French  sorcerer,  a  pretended  holy  man  arrested  at  Paris


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


49


about  580,  had  a  great  sack  full  of  divers  herbs  along  with
moles'  teeth,  the  bones  of  mice,  and  bears'  claws  and  fat:  all
these  things  were  at  once  recognized  as  maleficia.^'^^  Similar
magical  objects  have  been  discovered  in  Scandinavian  grave-
mounds  of  the  bronze  age.'"  The  obeah-man's  bag  contained
"thunder  stones  [i.e.  celts  or  belemnites,  famous  charms
wherever  found],^""  cats'  ears,  the  feet  of  various  animals,
human  hair,  fish  bones,  the  teeth  of  alligators,  &c."  A
hoodoo  bag,  according  to  Central  Kentucky  negroes,  must  be
made  of  red  flannel:  it  should  contain  a  pinch  of  salt,  a  red
pepper,  a  rabbit's  foot,  a  chicken's  spur,  and  some  ashes.
A  charm  left  by  hostile  natives  at  the  door  or  window  of  Mr.
Ellis  in  Madagascar  "consisted  of  a  small  basket,  ...  in
which  were  two  pieces  of  granite  stone,  called  'death  stones.'
A  hole  was  burned  in  the  basket,  which  indicated  calamity  by
fire.  Amongst  the  contents  were  hedgehog's  bristles,  parts  of
scorpions  or  centipedes,  hair,  earth  said  to  be  from  a  grave,
and  other  strange  ingredients."  Sorcerers'  bags  in  New
Guinea  contain,  among  other  miscellaneous  rubbish,  lizards'
jaws,  cassowaries'  claws,  and  alligators'  teeth. About  1863
in  Corisco  Island  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  a  missionary
heard  a  slave  girl  confess  that  she  had  killed  the  chief's
mother  by  witchcraft.  She  told  him  how  she  had  gathered
crumbs  of  the  old  woman's  food,  "strands  of  her  hair,  and
shreds  of  her  clothing;  how  she  had  mixed  these  with  other
substances,  and  had  sung  enchantments  with  drum  and
dance,  aided  by  others;  had  tied  all  these  things  together  on  a
stick  which  she  had  secretly  buried  at  the  threshold  of  the  old
woman's  door,  desiring  and  expecting  that  she  should  thereby
die.  .  .  .  The  old  woman  had  died  a  month  or  two  later;  and
the  slave  believed  that  what  she  had  done  had  been  efficient
to  accomplish  the  taking  of  life."  In  modern  England  bot-
tles are  now  and  then  dug  up  which  have  been  buried  by
some  witch  for  malefic  purposes  or  by  her  victim  as  a  coun-
ter-charm. These  contain  hair,  clippings  of  nails,  pins,  etc.^°^
Their  occurrence  shows  the  continuity  of  tradition  and
th-rows  light  on  the  purposes  of  Adam  de  Stratton.  He  wished
-to  kill  somebody  who  had  crossed  his  path  or  to  torment  an
enemy  (he  had  plenty  of  enemies)  whom  he  suspected  of  be-
witching him.


50  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Perhaps  Adam  meant  to  use  his  bag  of  tricks  in  the  manner
described  in  the  extraordinary  confession  of  Bernard  de  Vig-
nolles  in  1496.  Bernard  accused  John  Kendal  (Grand  Prior  of
the  Order  of  St.  John  of  Rhodes),  Sir  John  Thonge  or  Thweng
(knight  of  the  same  order,  and  Kendal's  nephew),  and  Wil-
liam Horsey  (Archdeacon  of  London)  of  a  plot  framed  at
Rome  to  destroy  King  Henry  VII,  his  children,  his  mother,
and  certain  of  his  favorites  or  councillors.  Bernard  was  the
agent  of  the  conspirators.  After  these  had  returned  to  Eng-
land, the  prior  and  the  archdeacon  sent  him  to  Rome  to  com-
plete their  negotiations  with  a  Spanish  astrologer.  Master
John  Disant,  who  had  already  afforded  them  a  specimen  of
his  powers  by  causing  the  death  of  "vng  Turc,  qui  estoit
seruiter  du  frere  du  Grant  Turc,  a  Rome,  au  pallays  du
pappe."  Master  John  gave  Bernard  a  little  box  of  ointment
which  was  to  be  smeared  "along  and  across"  some  door  or
gate,  so  that  the  king  might  walk  over  it:  then  those  who
now  loved  him  best  would  murder  him.   Bernard  opened  the
box,  found  the  contents  nasty  and  malodorous,  and  threw  the
whole  thing  into  a  vault.  At  Orleans,  on  his  way  home,  he
bought  of  an  apothecary  a  similar  box  and  some  quicksilver,
mixed  the  quicksilver  with  earth  and  soot  and  water,  and
thus  prepared  a  substance  of  the  same  color  as  the  ointment;
for  he  feared  the  magician  might  have  sent  a  letter  of  instruc-
tions by  another  messenger.  On  arriving  in  England,  he  de-
livered the  counterfeit;  but  the  prior  had  lost  heart:  he  dared
not  touch  the  accursed  stuff  and  bade  Bernard  throw  it  away
where  it  could  never  be  found. King  Henry,  the  "Salomon
of  England,"  must  have  read  this  strange  farrago,  for  the  doc-
ument is  endorsed  "La  confession  de  Bernart  de  Vignolles"
in  his  own  royal  handwriting;  but  he  seems  to  have  made
light  of  it.   "He  was  indeed  full  of  apprehensions  and  sus-
picions," so  Bacon  tells  us;  "  but,  as  he  did  easily  take  them,  so
he  did  easily  check  them  and  master  them."      At  all  events,
Prior  John  Kendal  received  a  general  pardon  on  June  18,

The  fourteenth  century  is  rich  in  evidence.  Much  of  this
will  be  considered  under  appropriate  heads.  A  few  specimens
of  a  miscellaneous  character  will  suffice  at  this  point.

The  records  of  the  City  Court  of  Exeter  in  1302  contain  the


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


51


complaint  of  Reginald  Kene  that  John  Mody  had  called
Kane's  wife  a  wicked  witch  and  thief.  The  same  roll  gives  the
presentation  of  the  grand  jury  to  the  effect  that  "Diony-
sia  Baldewyne  is  accustomed  to  receive  John  de  Wermhille
and  Agnes  his  wife,  and  Joan  La  Cornwalyse  [i.  e.  Cornish
woman]  of  Teignmouth,  who  are  witches  and  enchanters."  "°
"If  ever  you  have  practised  nygromauncye,"  writes  Robert
of  Brunne  in  1303,  "and  have  offered  sacrifice  to  the  devil
through  witchcraft,  or  given  reward  to  anybody  to  raise  the
devil  in  order  to  discover  lost  goods,  you  have  sinned.  If  you
have  looked  into  sword  or  basin  or  thumb  or  crystal  (or
caused  a  child  to  do  so)  —  all  that  sort  of  thing  is  called
witchcraft.  Trust  not  the  pie's  chattering  —  many  men  are
deceived  thereby;  nor  omens  from  meeting  in  the  morning,
nor  hansel,  nor  dreams.  Put  not  your  trust  in  witchcraft.
Whenever  it  is  true,  that  is  merely  through  the  devil's  craft  to
make  men  believe  what  is  hateful  to  God."  So  far  Robert
follows  his  author,  William  (conveniently  styled  "of  Wad-
dington"),  an  Englishman  who  wrote  in  French  in  the  pre-
vious century.^"  Then,  instead  of  translating  William's  story
of  a  false  dream,  Robert  illustrates  witchcraft  by  quite  a  dif-
ferent example  —  the  tale  of  the  Witch  and  her  Milk-sucking
Bag,  which  we  shall  consider  in  its  place  (p.  165).  Dan
Michel  of  Kent  (1340)  has  a  similar  passage  censuring  those
who  "for  pence"  cause  Satan  to  be  invoked  and  practise  en-
chantments; those  who  "make  to  look  in  the  sword  or  the
nail  of  the  thumb"  to  detect  thieves  or  for  other  purposes;
and  those  who  by  charms  or  by  witchcraft  cause  man  and
wife  to  hate  each  other  or  bring  about  unlawful  love  between
the  unmarried.  He  mentions  also  the  abuse  of  host,  chalice,
and  chrism  by  witches  and  evil-minded  priests.  In  another
place  he  writes  of  "  the  deuines  [diviners]  and  the  wichen  and
the  charmeresses  that  werketh  be  the  dyueles  crefte."

In  the  first  decade  of  this  century  came  the  prosecution  of
the  Templars  in  France  and  England,  involving  charges  of
Satanism  and  the  blackest  magic  which  are  too  familiar  to
need  specification.^'^  The  prevalence  of  occult  practices  at
about  this  time  is  emphasized  by  Bishop  Baldock  in  a  man-
date "against  sorcerers  and  enchanters"  addressed  to  the
official  of  the  Archdeacon  of  London  in  13 11.  He  has  learned


52  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


that  in  the  city  and  diocese  the  horrid  crime  of  sorceries,  in-
cantations, and  art  magic  has  so  increased  that  the  souls
of  the  people  are  in  peril.  Certain  persons  are  resorting  to
magic  and  spells  for  the  recovery  of  lost  property  or  for  know-
ledge of  future  events  and  secrets  in  the  past;  some  are  prac-
tising conjurations  and  divinations,  are  holding  conventicles
and  making  circles  and  invoking  demons  "by  loaves  and
knives"^'''  or  otherwise;  some  pretend  to  invoke  spirits  in
nails  and  mirrors,  in  stones  and  rings,  and  pretend  that  these
spirits  give  signs  and  responses,  and  so  on.  The  official  is  to
investigate  and  send  the  bishop  the  names  of  offenders.
The  Lollard  Apology  is  equally  emphatic.^'^  It  denounces  the
use  of  amulets  of  gospel  texts  hung  about  one's  neck  to  drive
away  fiends  or  sickness  or  to  protect  the  wearer.  "Charmis
on  no  maner  are  leful  [lawful]."  Charmers,  enchanters,  au-
gurs, necromancers,  etc.  are  defined  and  reprobated.  "God
for  his  endless  mercy  keep  us  from  the  malice  of  charmers  and
conjurers,  witches,  sorcerers,  and  others  that  are  put  in  the
general  sentence  and  cursing  of  the  kirk."

Dame  Alice  Kyteler's  case  in  1324  comprises  almost  every
superstitious  curiosity  discoverable  in  the  witch-trials  of  the
sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries:  denial  of  Christ  and
apostacy  from  his  Church;  consultation  with  demons  by  sor-
cery for  responses  and  counsel;  the  sacrifice  of  cocks  at  the
crossroads;  the  compounding  of  their  entrails,  along  with
herbs,  spiders,  black  worms  like  scorpions,  serpents,  the
brain  and  clouts  of  an  unbaptized  infant,  and  the  hair  and
nails  of  corpses  (all  boiled  together  in  the  skull  of  a  beheaded
robber),  in  the  preparation  of  drugs,  unguents,  and  powders
to  cause  love  and  hate,  disease  and  bodily  harm;  the  employ-
ment of  these  compounds  to  kill  or  infatuate  her  former  hus-
bands and  to  reduce  her  present  husband  (her  fourth)  to  a
miserable  state  of  decrepitude;  the  performance  of  a  mock
rite  of  excommunication  against  her  husbands;  carnal  copu-
lation with  her  familiar  spirit  (called  Robin  or  Robert  Artis
filius),  who  had  appeared  in  the  form  of  a  black  dwarf  with
two  similar  companions,  but  who  sometimes  took  shape  as  a
cat  or  a  shaggy  black  dog."'  These  horrors  come  from  the
contemporary  narrative,  and  their  truth  was  admitted  by  one
of  Dame  Alice's  friends  or  servants,  Petronilla  de  Midia,  who


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


53


confessed  to  sharing  in  them  by  her  instructions.  Thus  we
have  an  admirable  account  of  the  witch-creed  as  it  existed
in  the  mind  of  a  fourteenth-century  English  ecclesiastic,  the
Bishop  of  Ossory,  —  for  Richard  Ledrede,  the  prosecutor,
was  an  Englishman  —  and  in  the  minds  of  the  Anglo-Irish  of
Kilkenny.  Later  accounts  credit  Dame  Alice  with  further
acts  of  witchcraft,  which  need  not  here  occupy  us.""

One  of  the  last  crimes  of  the  tyranny  of  Roger  Mortimer
was  the  condemnation  of  Edmund,  Earl  of  Kent  (brother  of
the  murdered  Edward  II)  in  the  Winchester  Parliament  of
1330.  Kent  had  heard,  somehow,  that  Edward  was  still  alive,
and  his  consequent  activity  in  Edward's  interest  was  the  pre-
text for  his  conviction  and  execution  on  March  19."'  The
whole  affair  was  engineered  by  Mortimer,  for  the  young  Ed-
ward III  had  not  yet  got  a  free  hand.  On  the  24th  Mortimer
addressed  a  letter  to  the  Pope,  in  the  name  of  Edward  III,
explaining  and  justifying  this  crime.  To  aggravate  Edmund's
alleged  offences,  he  declares  that  Edmund  confessed  that  he
had  heard  from  a  certain  friar,  on  the  authority  of  a  demon
whom  the  friar  had  conjured,  that  the  elder  Edward  was  not
dead."^  When  Mortimer  was  condemned  in  the  Westminster
Parliament  in  the  following  November,  the  accusers  ob-
viously had  this  matter  of  the  demon  in  mind.  Among  the
charges  is  included  the  statement  that  Mortimer  had  man-
aged through  his  corrupt  agents  to  convey  to  Kent  a  report
that  Edward  was  still  living,  whereupon  (the  bill  adds)  the
Earl  investigated  the  question  "by  all  the  good  means  that  he
knew  of"  {ce.fist  espier  par  totes  les  bones  voies  qil  savoit).'^^^

In  1336  Pope  Benedict  XII  wrote  to  the  Bishop  of  Paris  to
send  to  the  papal  court  one  William  Altafex,  described  as
"nigromanticus  de  Anglia,"  and  with  him  certain  metal
plates  or  tablets  {laminas)  that  he  was  said  to  use  in  his  magi-
cal operations.

In  1355  a  wager  of  battle  between  the  hired  champions
of  the  Bishop  of  Salisbury  and  the  Earl  of  Salisbury  was  post-
poned, because,  when  the  bishop's  champion  was  searched
by  the  judges,  several  rolls  of  prayers  and  charms  were  dis-
covered in  his  coat.^^*  This  was  a  pretty  good  joke  on  the
bishop,  or  so  it  seems  to  us  when  we  reflect  that  trial  by  com-
bat was  an  ordeal  (or  judgment  of  God)  and  that  the  appel-


54  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

lant  had  to  swear  that  he  was  not  fortified  by  magic:  "that
ye  shull  have  .  .  .  nor  stone  of  vertue,  nor  hearb  of  virtue;
nor  charme,  nor  experement,  nor  none  other  enchauntment
by  you,  nor  for  you,  whereby  ye  trust  the  better  to  overcome
the  said  C.  de  D.  your  Adversarie."  Tricks  of  this  nature,
however,  must  have  been  common.  The  Arundel  Penitential
prescribes  three  years'  penance  for  one  who  attempts  by  any
witchcraft  {maleficio)  to  subvert  trial  by  combat,  or  the  or-
deal by  hot  iron  or  by  hot  or  cold  water,  or  any  kind  of  lawful
judgment;  and  Bishop  Burchard's  Decretum  prescribes
the  penance  of  a  wizard  for  him  who  eats,  drinks,  or  carries
anything  by  which  he  thinks  he  can  turn  aside  the  judgment
of  God."'  Such  attempts  are  also  contemplated  in  some  of
the  forms  of  ritual  for  the  ordeal  of  hot  iron  or  of  hot  or  cold
water  in  England  in  the  ninth  to  the  twelfth  century. The
Anglo-Saxon  Leech-Book  of  the  tenth  century  directs  a  man
who  is  to  fight  with  his  foe  to  boil  young  swallows  in  wine
or  spring  water  and  eat  them,''^'  and  another  Anglo-Saxon
treatise  declares  that  the  right  forefoot  of  a  badger  (if  sancti-
fied by  the  words  "In  the  name  of  the  living  God  I  take  thee
for  a  medicine")  is  an  amulet  that  will  ensure  victory  in
every  conflict. ^■'^  One  is  reminded  of  the  "Ephesian  letters"
of  the  ancient  Greeks,  a  charm  which  a  wrestler  from  that
city  was  detected  in  wearing  in  a  match  with  a  Milesian.
Until  the  amulet  was  removed,  the  Milesian  could  not
wrestle  at  all;  after  its  removal,  the  Ephesian  was  thrown
thirty  times!  In  an  Old  Norse  anecdote  of  a  swimming
match,  one  of  the  champions  tears  a  bag  of  charms  from  the
other's  neck,  protesting  in  extempore  verse  that  he  has  never
resorted  to  such  knavery,  "and  yet  he  is  still  alive!"

When  Sir  Robert  Tresilian,  condemned  in  1388  by  the
Merciless  Parliament,  was  mounting  the  scaff"old,  he  boasted
that  he  "could  not  die  so  long  as  he  had  some  things  about
him."  This  cryptic  utterance  was  plain  enough  to  the  officers.
They  stripped  him  accordingly,  and  found  amulets  in  which
were  depicted  astrological  signs,  a  demon's  head,  and  several
diabolical  names.  After  that,  he  was  hanged  without  diffi-
culty; but,  says  the  contemporary  writer  to  whom  we  owe  this
strange  story,  his  throat  was  cut  also,  as  a  measure  of  addi-
tional security. ^•^^  John  Heydon,  famous  in  his  day  as  a  prac-


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


55


titioner  of  occult  arts,  testifies  in  1664:  "Some  I  have  seen
Shot-free  in  the  Canaries  by  wearing  Rings,  pieces  of  gold,
^c.  Telesmatically  prepared."  Such  a  "hardman"  was
the  notorious  Croatian  adventurer,  Captain  Carlo  Fantom:
once,  when  his  colonel,  Sir  Robert  Pye,  shot  at  him  for  steal-
ing a  horse,  the  bullets  went  through  his  buff-coat  and  set  his
shirt  on  fire,  but  did  him  no  damage.  Fantom  "tooke  the
bullets,  and  sayd  to  Sir  Robert,  'Here,  take  your  bullets
again.'"  Thus  Aubrey,  most  delightful  of  gossips,  on  the  au-
thority of  an  eyewitness.

Charms,  spells,  and  amulets  to  render  one  invulnerable  or
otherwise  protect  one  in  battle  are  in  common  use  every-
where.Such  things  were  carried  by  many  soldiers  in  the
latest  of  great  wars.^^'  Charms  to  win  one's  case  in  court  or  to
silence  or  nonplus  one's  adversary  there,  are  also  common
among  savage  men  and  civilized. Trite  but  inevitable  is  a
quotation  from  Cicero's  Brutus.  In  an  important  lawsuit  in
which  he  and  Curio  were  counsel  on  opposite  sides.  Curio,
while  addressing  the  court,  "suddenly  forgot  the  whole  case"
—  a  portentous  lapse  of  memory  which  he  ascribed  to
the  "spells  and  witcheries"  of  Titinia,  Cicero's  client."  ^'^^
Charms  of  this  nature  —  to  make  an  opponent  forget  his
case  — •  are  still  practised  by  the  natives  in  Rhodesia. ^''^  In
the  Old  Norse  Havamal,  Odin,  in  the  character  of  a  Scandi-
navian wizard,  claims  to  know  spells  for  lawsuits,  as  well  as
for  almost  every  other  purpose  that  the  heart  of  man  can
devise. ^''^  Litigation  was  dogged  by  uncanny  perils  in  fif-
teenth-century Cornwall  if  we  may  lend  credence  to  the  peti-
tion which  Henry  Hoigges  of  Bodmin,  Gentleman,  addressed
to  the  Lord  Chancellor  about  1440.  The  prior  of  Bodmin  had
been  sued  by  Richard  Flamank,  and  Hoigges  was  the  plain-
tiff's attorney.  One  John  Harry,  a  priest  in  the  prior's
service,  by  "sotill  craftys  of  enchauntement  wycchecraft
&  socerye,"  plotted  to  destroy  Hoigges,  and  caused  him  to
break  his  leg  and  to  suffer  such  injuries  that  "he  was  in
despayr  of  his  lyff."  This  Harry,  moreover,  continually  from
day  to  day  was  practising  "  the  said  sotill  craft  of  enchaunte-
ment wycchecraft  and  socerye"  and  boldly  avowed  it,  as  was
notorious  in  the  county,  and  he  openly  threatened  thereby  to
break  Hoigges's  neck.  Therefore,  since  the  common  law  gave


56  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

him  no  remedy,  he  besought  the  Chancellor  to  help  him  by
forcing  Harry  to  abjure  his  wicked  arts.^''''

De  par  le  Roi  defense  au  Diable
De  faire  miracle!

To  return  to  the  fourteenth  century,  —  in  1385  two  Lon-
doners (John  Brugges,  chaplain,  and  John  Wyghton,  tailor),
convicted  of  practising  "the  prohibited  art  of  magic,"  were
by  the  king's  command  left  to  the  Bishop  of  London  "to  do
what  he  deems  fit  for  their  imprisonment"  until  they  should
submit  to  judgment  and  satisfy  Holy  Church. ^"i^

In  1396  an  Englishman,  in  preparing  a  manual  of  French
conversation,  included  in  his  dialogue  the  rumor  that  at  Or-
leans the  devil  teaches  his  disciples  "nigromancie"  in  a  head,
and  refers  to  a  great  magician  there,  an  Englishman  called
"  Colin  T.,"  who  "  knew  how  to  do  many  marvels  by  means  of
his  nigromancie.''  Professor  Royster  has  recently  identified
this  wonder-worker  with  the  Colle  Tregetour  whom  Chaucer,
in  the  House  of  Fame,  saw  carrying  a  windmill  under  the
shell  of  a  walnut  —  "an  uncouth  thing  to  telle."  ^"^

Ther  saugh  I  pleyen  iogelours,

Magiciens  and  tregetours

And  phitonesses,^''^  chermeresses,

Olde  wiches,  sorceresses,

That  use  exorsisaciouns

And  eek  thise  fumigaciouns;

And  clerkes  eek,  which  conne  wel

Al  this  magyke  naturel,

That  craftely  don  hir  ententes

To  make,  in  certeyn  ascendentes,^''*

Images  lo!  through  which  magyk

To  make  a  man  ben  hool  or  syk.^'"

So  the  Brazen  Horse  in  The  Squire's  Tale  is  explained  by
some  of  the  bystanders  as  an  "apparence  ymaad  by  som
magyke,  as  iogelours  pleyen  at  thise  festes  grete."  The
"olde  wiches,  sorceresses,"  were  not  mere  creatures  of  the
poet's  imagination.  The  archdeacon  whom  the  Friar  cele-
brates in  his  Tale  was  an  officer

That  boldely  did  execucioun

In  punisshinge  of  fornicacioun,

Of  wicchecrajt  and  eek  of  bauderye.^si


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


57


The  Parson  mentions

thilke  horrible  swering  of  adiuracioun  and  coniuracioun,  as  doon  thise
false  enchauntours  or  nigromanciens  in  bacins  ful  of  water,  or  in  a  bright
swerd,  in  a  cercle,  or  in  a  fyr,  or  in  a  shulder-boon  of  a  sheep.  I  can  nat
seye  but  that  they  doon  cursedly  and  damnably,  agayns  Crist  and  al  the
feith  of  Holy  Chirche.

What  seye  we  of  hem  that  bileven  in  divynailes,  as  by  flight  or  by  noyse
of  briddes,  or  of  bestes,  or  by  sort,  by  geomancie,  by  dremes,  by  chirkinge
of  dores,  or  crakkinge  of  houses,  by  gnawynge  of  rattes,  and  swich  manere
wrecchednesse.''  Certes,  al  this  thing  is  deffended  [i.  e.  forbidden]  by  God
and  by  al  Holy  Chirche.  For  which  they  been  acursed,  til  they  come  to
amendement,  that  on  swich  filthe  setten  hir  bileve.  Charmes  for  woundes
or  maladye  of  men,  or  of  bestes,  if  they  taken  any  effect,  it  may  be  pera-
venture  that  God  suffreth  it,  for  folk  sholden  yeve  the  more  feith  and
reverence  to  his  name.^'^

The  art  of  the  Clerk  of  Orleans  in  The  Franklin's  Tale  is
natural  magic  in  the  main,  perhaps,  but  he  cannot  be  fully
acquitted  of  demonic  invocation.

The  poet  Gower  may  be  taken  as  a  representative  of  edu-
cated opinion  among  devout  and  sober-minded  Englishmen
of  the  second  half  of  the  fourteenth  century.  Lovers,  he  tells
us,  to  win  their  desire,  do  many  strange  things  "that  were
better  to  be  left":

Among  the  whiche  is  wicchecraft,
That  som  men  clepen  sorcerie.

And  he  proceeds  to  enumerate  divers  kinds  of  this  black  art,
with  a  profusion  of  curious  lore,  some  of  which  has  not  yet
been  traced  by  the  commentators.  Geomancy,  hydromancy,
pyromancy,  and  aeromancy  he  decides  are  not  illicit,  if  prac-
tised by  way  of  nature  and  with  good  intent;  but  lovers  also
use  "nigromance"  with  incantation  and  "hot  subfumiga-
tion."  To  illustrate  sorcery  he  tells  of  Circe's  transformations
and  of  the  wiles  of  the  Egyptian  Nectanebus,  apparently  with
full  faith  in  the  possibility  of  both,  and  concludes  his  exam-
ples with  a  brief  account  of  Zoroaster,  whom  he  regards  as
the  inventor  of  magic,  and  finally  of  the  Witch  of  Endor.^^''
In  another  place  Gower  couples  Nectanebus  with  Proteus,

That  couthen  bothe  of  nigromaunce
In  what  liknesse,  in  what  semblaunce,
Riht  as  hem  liste,  hemself  transforme.^ss


58


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


And  he  relates  the  enchantments  of  Medea  as  if  they  were
plain  matters  of  fact.^^^  Other  cases  in  this  century  involving
sorcery  or  witchcraft  (for  love  or  favor;  for  the  detection  of
theft;  for  death,  by  images),  false  prophecy,  poltergeister^
demoniacal  possession,  demonic  appearances  and  storms,  the
incubus  and  his  offspring,  homage  to  Satan,  and  the  Satanic
compact,  as  well  as  one  possible  instance  of  the  swimming
ordeal,  will  be  considered  under  their  several  heads.

A  Frenchman  who  had  lived  in  England  and  who  (about
I400)  wrote  a  graphic  account  of  the  fall  of  Richard  II,  after
specifying  certain  prophecies  ascribed  to  Merlin  and  Bede
which  the  English  nobility  accepted  as  forecasting  the  king's
captivity  and  death,  described  the  English  as  "of  such  a  na-
ture that  they  put  perfect  trust  in  prophecies  and  illusions
{fantosmes)  and  sorceries  and  willingly  make  use  of  them."
"In  my  opinion,"  he  adds,  "this  is  not  well  done,  but  is  a
great  defect  in  their  [Christian]  faith."  ^"

In  the  fifteenth  century  the  evidence  is  practically  uninter-
rupted throughout:  we  have,  in  fact,  some  pertinent  item
from  more  than  fifty  several  years  of  the  hundred,  beginning
with  John  Kyme,  "soothesegger,"  in  1401,^^8  ^nd  ending
with  Thomas  Wryght  in  1500,  a  monk  of  Sulby  in  the  diocese
of  Lincoln,  who,  in  Bishop  Redman's  visitation,  was  found  to
have  used  "  books  of  experiments"  and  also  to  have  rewarded
lavishly  a  vagabond  professor  of  occult  science  for  instructing
him.  Brother  Thomas  protested  that  he  had  "speculated"
only  and  had  not  proceeded  to  "operation,"  and  his  case  was
continued. A  number  of  these  cases  have  already  been
registered  in  our  study  of  Bishop  Bale's  witch  (pp.  36-38,
above),  and  others  will  be  taken  up  when  we  come  to  special
subjects.  This  leaves,  however,  a  good  many  for  our  present
consideration.

In  the  summer  of  I402,  so  John  Capgrave  informs  us,  there
were  strange  doings  near  Bedford  and  Biggleswade.  "  Fast  by
the  townes  of  Bedforth  and  Bikilhswade,  appered  certeyn  men
of  dyvers  colouris,  renning  out  of  wodes,  and  fytyng  horribly.
This  was  seyne  on  morownyngis  and  at  midday:  and  whan
men  folowid  to  loke  what  it  was,  thei  coude  se  rite  nawt."

On  January  2,  1406,  after  due  deliberation  in  the  Privy
Council,  the  king's  writ  went  to  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln:


CHAP,  n]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


59


"Since  we  are  given  to  understand  that  there  are  in  your
diocese  very  many  sorcerers,  magicians,  enchanters,  nigro-
mancers,  diviners,  soothsayers,  and  wizards,*  who  perpetrate
from  day  to  day  divers  horrid  and  detestable  acts,  whereby
they  .  .  .  cause  very  many  of  our  people  in  the  foresaid
diocese  to  be  led  astray  by  their  malefic  arts  and  defamed
.  .  .  ,  to  the  disturbance  of  our  people,  the  scandal  of  holy
mother  church,  and  the  manifest  overthrow  of  the  Catholic
faith,  we  appoint  you  to  summon  such  persons,  examine  them,
and  imprison  them  until  they  abandon  their  arts  or  you  re-
ceive further  instructions."  ^^'^  In  the  April  following  we  have
a  remarkable  mandate  addressed  by  the  spiritual  administra-
tors of  Durham  (the  see  being  then  without  a  bishop)  to  the
Chaplain  of  the  Collegiate  Church  of  Chester-le-Street.  This
document  recites  that  by  civil  and  canon  and  divine  law  the
practice  of  sorcery  and  magic,  as  well  as  consultation  with
sorcerers  and  magicians,  is  forbidden  under  the  severest
penalties.  Therefore  the  Chaplain  is  to  warn  all  sorcerers  and
magicians,  and  all  who  resort  to  them  or  trust  them,  that
within  six  days  they  must  make  good  the  injuries  they  have
done  to  any  person,  and  must  abandon  their  evil  ways.^'^-'  At
about  this  time  a  versified  manual  for  parish  priests  instructs
the  parson  to  forbid  witchcraft,  divination,  and  charms.
When  he  examines  his  penitents'  consciences  he  must  ask
them  if  they  have  "made  any  conjuring  or  any  witchcraft "  to
recover  stolen  goods  or  for  other  purpose  or  have  practised
sorcery  to  win  women. ^''^

In  1 410  Bishop  Mascall  of  Hereford  was  grieved  to  learn
that  very  many  persons  in  the  diocese  were  resorting  with
idolatrous  practices  to  a  spring  and  a  stone  in  Turnastone
parish.  He  refers  the  matter  to  his  official  and  to  the  dean.^*'''

In  1444  a  man  was  pilloried  in  London  "the  whyche
wrought  by  a  wycckyd  spyryte,  the  whyche  was  callyd
Oberycom,  and  the  maner  of  hys  proces  and  werkyng  was
wretyn  and  hanggyd  abowte  hys  necke  whenne  he  was  in  the
pellery."

Cases  of  slander  are  particularly  interesting  since  they
show  how  common  and  easy  an  accusation  this  of  sorcery  or

*  "Sortilegi,  magici,  incantatores,  nigromantici,  divinitores,  arioli,  et  phitones"
—  a  trim  reckoning  !


6o  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

witchcraft  was.  Thus  in  1452  Johanna  Smythson  appeared
in  the  ecclesiastical  court  of  Durham  and  brought  two  wit-
nesses to  prove  that  Agnes  Thomson  had  publicly  defamed
her  for  sortilege,  and  had  also  reported  that  a  certain  chap-
lain was  her  lover  and  had  spent  so  much  for  gifts  as  to  be
imprisoned  for  debt.^^^  Agnes  was  held  to  sufficient  compur-
gation. In  1567,  on  January  26,  Margaret  Lambert  had  a
case  against  Elizabeth  Lawson  in  the  Durham  ecclesiastical
court,  and  John  Lawson,  Elizabeth's  husband,  declared  that
Margaret  was  an  exorcist  in  that  "  for  certaine  things  lackinge
she  turned  a  seve  upon  a  pair  of  sheres."  Thereupon,  nine
days  later,  Margaret  accused  John  of  slander  in  alleging  that
she  was  a  "chermer."  John  appeared  and  said  that  he  had  no
witnesses  against  Margaret,  — ■  he  had  spoken  from  hearsay.
Another  notable  instance  of  village  gossip!  ^^'^  Other  cases  of
slander  might  be  cited,^^^  but  these  will  suffice  to  define  the
category.  Meantime  let  us  take  one  instance  from  ancient
days  and  one  from  the  age  of  prose  and  reason.  A  leaden
plate  from  Cnidos  contains  a  Greek  curse  in  which  Antigone
devotes  to  the  infernal  gods  and  goddesses  the  person  who  has
falsely  accused  her  of  giving  poison  to  Asclepiades  (probably
her  husband)  and  of  employing  a  witch  to  destroy  him.  She
invokes  the  same  curse  upon  herself  if  she  is  guilty.^*^'  In  the
Norwich  Gazette  of  February  11,  1725,  Hester  Brown  Percy
prints  an  advertisement  to  the  following  effect:  She  has
charged  Mary  Parker  with  being  a  witch  and  with  being  in
great  part  the  cause  of  her  present  sufferings.  This  charge
she  wishes  now  to  retract  publicly.^""  Alter  et  idem!

On  June  13,  1483,  was  enacted  that  strange  scene  in  the
Council  when  Richard  of  Gloucester  accused  Queen  Mar-
garet ("yonder  sorceres,  my  brothers  wife")  and  Jane  Shore
of  bewitching  him.  The  locus  classlcus  is  a  racy  passage  in  the
History  of  Richard  III  which  passes  as  Sir  Thomas  More's:
"Then  said  the  protectour:  ye  shal  al  se  in  what  wise  that
sorceres  and  that  other  witch  of  her  counsel,  Shoris  wife,  with
their  affynite,  haue  by  their  sorcery  and  witchcraft  wasted
my  body.  And  therwith  he  plucked  vp  hys  doublet  sleue  to
his  elbow  vpon  his  left  arme,  where  he  shewed  a  werish  with-
ered arme  and  small,  as  it  was  neuer  other.  And  thereupon
euery  mannes  mind  sore  misgaue  them,  well  perceiuing  that


CHAP,  n]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


61


this  matter  was  but  a  quarel.  For  wel  thei  wist,  that  the
quene  was  to  wise  to  go  aboute  any  such  folye.  .  .  .  And  also
no  man  was  there  present,  but  wel  knew  that  his  harme  was
euer  such  since  his  birth."  In  this  same  year  one  of  the
accomplices  in  the  treason  of  Buckingham  when  he  "yma-
gined  and  compassed"  the  death  of  King  Richard,  was
Thomas  Nandik,  late  of  Cambridge,  "nigromansier."  ^"^

In  I486  or  1487  a  young  son  of  John  Adowne  was  afflicted
with  terrible  pains  and  could  neither  walk  nor  stand  upright.
The  most  skilful  physicians  and  surgeons  were  consulted,  —
for  the  boy's  father  was  of  Archbishop  Morton's  household,
—  but  they  were  helpless  and  some  of  them  declared  that  in
their  opinion  it  was  "nothing  natural,"  and  that  little  John
was  suffering  from  the  "venomous  touch  of  a  malign  spirit."
His  mother  commended  him  to  the  prayers  of  the  dead  King
Henry  VI,  as  to  the  intercession  of  a  saint,  and  he  soon  re-
covered.^"

A  typical  case  of  fraud  dates  from  1492,  when,  on  the  basis
of  common  rumor  {fama  publicareferente),  the  Commissary  of
the  Bishop  of  London  was  informed  that  Richard  Laukiston,
some  dozen  years  before,  had  said  to  Margaret  Geffrey,
"Thow  arte  a  poore  widow,  and  it  wer  almes  to  helpe  the  to
a  manage,  and  if  thow  wilt  do  any  cost  in  spendyng  any
money,  thow  shalt  have  a  man  worth  a  thousand  pounds."
"How  may  that  be?"  asked  the  widow.  "My  wif,"  replied
Laukiston,  "knoweth  a  connyng  man,  that  by  his  connyng
can  cause  a  woman  to  have  any  man  that  she  hath  favour
to,"  but,  he  added,  "This  shall  cost  money."  Then  said
Margaret,  "I  have  no  good  [i.  e.  goods]  save  ii  masers  for  to
fynde  me,  my  moder,  and  my  children,  and  if  thei  wer  sold
and  I  faile  of  my  purpose,  I,  my  moder,  and  my  children  wer
undoen."  Richard  reassured  his  dupe,  however,  and  she
handed  over  the  two  bowls,  valued  at  five  marks  and  ten
shillings.  Apparently  nothing  came  of  the  investment.  Both
parties  were  summoned  before  the  Commissary  and  con-
fessed. Richard  was  required  to  restore  the  bowls  or  their
value  in  money  within  eight  days  on  pain  of  the  major  ex-
communication; his  punishment  was  deferred  and  is  not  re-
corded. Margaret  was  to  do  public  penance  on  three  Sun-
days by  walking  before  the  procession  of  the  cross  barefoot,


62


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


having  her  head  covered  with  a  knotted  kirtle  of  flame  color
and  carrying  in  her  right  hand  a  candle  worth  a  penny.^^''
The  offences  of  the  two  were  regarded  as  pertaining  to  heresy
and  sorcery;  but  the  case  was  plainly  one  of  barefaced
fraud/'^^  We  should  note  that  the  accusation  arose  —  as  so
often  happened — ^from  the  common  talk  of  the  neighborhood.

About  1500  Sir  William  Tyndale,  knight,  petitioned  the
Lord  Chancellor  for  relief  against  Sir  William  Carrowe,  who
had  sued  him  at  common  law  on  a  bond  for  ten  pounds.
Tyndale  declares  that  this  bond  was  extorted  from  him  by
6  Carrowe,  who  had  maliciously  arrested  Tyndale's  wife  for
"wytchecraft  and  socery"  and  had  refused  to  release  her
until  Tyndale  had  given  him  the  bond  in  question.  While  she
was  in  Carorwe's  custody,  "  he  dyde  raunsake  hyr,  surmysyng
[i.  e.  alleging]  that  sche  hadde  on  hyr  wrytyng  of  socery  and
wytchecraft,"  and  threatened  her  so  that  she  was  in  great
fear.  Yet  no  "defawte"  had  been  found  in  her.^'^*^

In  1502  Eleanor  Dulyne  was  brought  before  the  Commis-
sary of  London  for  "devising  certain  magic  arts"  to  destroy
her  husband  and  for  plotting  his  death  by  poison.  She  cleared
herself  and  was  discharged,  but  Anna  Miller,  one  of  her  neigh-
bors, was  brought  to  book  as  a  "common  defamer"  —  and
in  particular  for  having  slandered  Mistress  Dulyne  in  this
matter.^"

In  1523  the  Earl  of  Surrey  informed  Wolsey  of  a  disastrous
stampede  of  the  horses  belonging  to  Lord  Dacre's  troop  in  the
Scottish  campaign:  "I  dare  not  write  the  wonders  that  my
Lord  Dacre  and  all  his  company  doo  saye  they  sawe  that
nyght,  vj.  tymys,  of  sprits  and  fereful  sights.  And  unyver-
sally  all  their  company  saye  playnely,  the  Devill  was  that
nyght  amongs  theym  vi.  tymys."  ^'^  Whether  Satan  was
acting  on  his  own  initiative  or  in  deference  to  witches'  incan-
tations, we  are  not  informed.

In  1532  Thomas  Sail,  precentor  of  Norwich  Priory,  was
charged  with  absenting  himself  often  from  service.  "Also,"
the  record  reads,  "he  has  places  and  houses  which  he  fre-
quents for  the  practice  of  his  arts,  on  which  account  great
infamy  and  scandal  arise  because  of  those  who  resort  to  such
places"  —  manifestly  to  consult  the  clerical  wizard.

The  troubles  of  Sir  William  Neville,  Lord  Latimer's


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558  63

brother,  in  1532  introduce  us  to  a  couple  of  wizards,  Nashe  of
Cirencester  and  Richard  Jones  of  Oxford.  Nashe  was  a  regu-
lar practitioner,  whom  Sir  William  consulted  as  to  the  where-
abouts of  some  missing  silver  spoons;  but  this  trivial  matter
was  soon  forgotten  in  the  revelations  that  ensued.  For  Nashe
assured  Sir  William  that  great  things  were  in  store  for  him:
his  wife  should  die  and  he  should  marry  an  heiress  and  suc-
ceed to  his  brother's  title.  At  Nashe's  suggestion  he  had  re-
course to  Jones,  an  operator  of  a  higher  type,  and  incidentally
an  alchemist.  In  Jones's  chamber  he  saw  "styllatoryes,
alembykes,  and  odre  instruments  of  glasse,"  also  a  sceptre
and  other  things  that  pertained  "to  the  conjuration  of  the
iiij  kyngs."  Jones  raised  four  "king  devils,"  and  these
brought  the  magician  "into  a  tower,  and  showed  him  there
the  picture  of  the  said  William  Nevyll  standing  in  a  robe  of
velvet  and  a  cronall  on  his  head,  and  said  it  was  he  that
should  be  Earl  of  Warwick."  A  friend  warned  Neville  that
demons  are  liars,  but  he  replied  that  Jones  could  "so  bind
them  that  they  shall  not  lie."  Neville  lost  his  head  com-
pletely and  indulged  in  much  wild  talk  of  his  brilliant  prefs-
pects,  mentioning  by  the  way  certain  prophecies  ^bout  the
king;  and  so  he  was  arrested,  and  the  Council  undertook  to
investigate  the  whole  affair.  Jones  was  called  to  account  and  ^
drew  up  a  confession  in  which,  of  course,  he  did  his  best  t(|^^
exculpate  himself.  Neville  had  asked  him  (so  runs  the  con-  ^■i
juror's  story)  if  it  were  not  possible  "to  have  a  ring  made
that  should  bring  a  man  in  favour  with  his  prince;  seeing  my
Lord  Cardinal  had  such  a  ring,  that  whatsomever  he  asked  of
the  King's  Grace,  that  he  had."  And,  added  Neville,  Master
Cromwell  (when  he  and  I  were  servants  in  Wolsey's  house)
"did  haunt  to  the  company  of  one  that  was  seen  in  your
faculty  [i.  e.  skilled  in  your  art];  and  shortly  after  no  man  so
great  with  my  Lord  Cardinal  as  Master  Cromwell  was!"  "I
shewed  him,"  Jones  continues,  "  that  I  had  read  many  books,
and  specially  the  works  of  Solomon,  and  how  his  ring  should
be  made,  and  of  what  metal;  and  what  virtues  they  had  after
the  canon  of  Solomon."  But  he  protests  that  he  never  made
such  a  thing  himself.  A  fortnight  later,  he  goes  on,  Neville
visited  him  at  Oxford  and  informed  him  that  he  had  at  his
house  a  person  named  Wayd,  who  "did  shew  him  that  he


64  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

should  be  a  great  lord  in  a  place  where  there  was  a  fair
castle,"  which  Neville  thought  must  be  the  Castle  of  War-
wick. Thereupon  Jones  recounted  an  alleged  dream:  "that
an  angel  took  him  [Neville]  and  me  by  the  hands,  and  led  us
to  a  high  tower,  and  there  delivered  him  a  shield,  with  sundry
arms  which  I  cannot  rehearse."  Jones  admits  that  he  "wrote
a  foolish  letter  or  two  according  to  his  [Neville's]  foolish
desire,  to  make  pastime  to  laugh  at."  In  at  least  one  of  these,
as  it  appears  from  other  evidence,  Jones  addressed  his  dupe  as
Earl  of  Warwick.  Jones  also  admits  that  he  once  made  cer-
tain "molds"  for  "Sir  Gr.  Done,  Knight,  to  the  intent  he
should  have  had  Mistress  Elizabeth's  gear,"  i.  e.  "property."
We  have  no  details  about  this  piece  of  knavery.  He  further
confesses  that  now  and  then  he  had,  at  the  request  of  friends,
"cauled  to  stone"  (that  is,  conjured  spirits  into  a  crystal)  for
the  recovery  of  stolen  goods.  He  had  often  been  asked  "by
foolish  fellows  of  the  country"  to  assist  them  in  the  search  for
treasure  trove,  but  had  "never  meddled  with  it  at  all."  One
thing,  however,  Jones  takes  seriously,  and  that  is  his  alchemi-
cal researches.  "To  make  the  philosopher's  stone  I  will
jeopard  my  life,  so  to  do  it,"  if  the  king  wishes.  He  requires
but  twelve  months  "upon  silver"  and  twelve  and  a  half
"upon  gold,"  and  is  willing  to  be  kept  in  prison  until  he  suc-
ceeds. He  makes  a  similar  offer  in  a  letter  to  Cromwell.

In  1533  and  the  following  year,  there  was  intense  excite-
ment about  the  Holy  Maid  of  Kent,  Elizabeth  Barton,  whose
visions  and  prophecies  so  alarmed  the  government  that  she
was  put  to  death  as  a  traitor  in  1534.  Some  regarded  her  as
inspired,  others  as  a  demoniac,  still  others  as  a  mere  im-
postor.By  the  violently  Protestant  author  of  The  Image
of  Ypocresye,  a  contemporary  satire,  a  la  Skelton,  she  is  styled
"this  witche"  and  is  said  to  have  been  sent  from  the  devil  — •

A  virgyne  ffayre  and  gent,
That  hath  our  yees  blent.

Certain  passages  in  her  case,  be  they  true  or  false,  excuse  this
rating  if  they  do  not  justify  it.  She  feigned,  it  was  alleged,
that  Satan  sought  to  make  her  his  wife;  and  she  certainly
told  Sir  Thomas  More  "  that  of  late  the  Devil,  in  likeness  of  a
Bird,  was  flying  and  fluttering  about  her  in  a  Chamber,  and


CHAP.  11]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


65


suffered  himself  to  be  taken;  and  being  in  hands,  suddenly
changed,  in  their  sight  that  were  present,  into  such  a  strange
ugly-fashioned  Bird,  that  they  were  all  afraid,  and  threw  him
out  at  a  Window."  Reginald  Scot  ranks  her  among  the
ventriloqui  .^'^^

In  1535  Friar  John  Colsell  was  to  be  arrested  for  practising
"  the  decitful  arte  of  magike  and  astronomye,"  and  a  priest
(not  named)  was  found  by  officers  of  Abbot  Thomas  of  Abing-
don to  have  in  his  possession  a  conjuring  book.  He  was  like-
wise apprehended.^^'

In  1537  John  Butler  wrote  to  Cranmer  from  Calais  of  a
priest,  William  Richardson  (called  Good  Sir  William)  who
was  so  ill-advised  as  to  instruct  his  parishioners  to  keep  the
day  of  St.  Thomas  the  Martyr  a  holiday,  as  of  old.  Butler
wishes  to  know  what  to  do  with  him,  for  he  is  a  great  enemy
to  the  truth.  Once  he  was  about  to  be  punished  for  sorcery,
but  "such  suit  was  made  for  him  that  nothing  was  done."
There  are  many  papers  on  file  about  Richardson,  who  was
taken  to  London  and  imprisoned  in  the  Fleet. In  1540  he
was  executed,  along  with  William  Peterson  (another  Calais
priest),  for  doubting  the  king's  supremacy  in  the  English
Church."9°

In  1538,  or  earlier,  Sir  Richard  Holonde,  of  Yatton,  Somer-
set, was  of  ill  repute  for  "nigromansy." ''''  In  1539  John
Misselden,  merchant,  along  with  his  son  Robert,  had  a  writ  of
privy  seal  to  exercise  his  "science  or  cunning"  to  transmute
base  metals  to  gold  or  silver,  provided  they  used  no  necro-
mancy, but  only  "plain  science  of  philosophy."

On  July  29,  1540,  the  notorious  Walter  Lord  Hungerford
was  executed  for  treason  along  with  Thomas  Cromwell.
Hungerford  was  somehow  involved  in  a  horrible  scandal,  into
which  we  need  not  enquire.  For  our  purpose  it  suffices  to
know  that,  according  to  the  bill  of  attainder,  he  had  "pro-
cured Sir  Hugh  Woodes,  chaplain,  Dr.  Mawdelyn,  and  one
Mother  Roche  to  conjure  and  show  how  long  the  king  should
live."  The  French  ambassador  wrote  home  that,  among
other  things,  he  was  attainted  "d'avoir  use  d'art  magique  et
invocation  de  Dyables."  One  must  not  fail  to  note  the
association  of  a  professional  witch,  for  such  Mother  Roche
undoubtedly  was,  with  the  more  exalted  practisers  of  wicked


66


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


arts.  A  certain  Mother  Huntley  was  also  involved. In  the
same  year  John  Heron's  house  in  Kent  was  searched  and  "a
sceptre  and  certain  charactes  in  a  plate  touching  conjura-
cions"  were  found.  He  confessed  to  the  Privy  Council  "his
foly  in  using  of  fantastical  practises  in  astronymye,"  and  was
released  under  bonds  not  to  "practise  use  or  exercise  any
maner  of  necromancye  astronymye  calculacions  or  other  ex-
perimentes"  and  to  inform  against  any  who  did.^'^  I  suspect
that  this  was  the  same  Heron,  a  "professor"  of  physic  and
surgery,  who  Scot  says  was  a  friend  of  Mother  Bungie,  the
great  witch  of  Rochester,  "reputed  among  all  men  for  the
cheefe  ring-leader  of  all  other  witches."  She  admitted  on  her
deathbed  "that  hir  cunning  consisted  onlie  in  deluding  and
deceiving  the  people:  saving  that  she  had  .  .  .  some  sight
[i.  e.  skill]  in  physicke  and  surgerie,  and  the  assistance  of  a
freend  of  hirs,  called  Heron,  a  professor  thereof."  ^''^  Scot  was
born  about  1538.  He  seems  to  have  known  Mother  Bungle's
husband,  and  speaks  of  her  having  practised  her  arts  "manie
yeares."  I  think  there  is  no  doubt  that  a  considerable  part  of
her  career  fell  before  the  Elizabethan  age.  Mother  Bungie
was  not  merely  a  white  witch,  for  her  curse  was  dangerous,  at
least  to  pigs.  Her  prophecies  remained  in  credit  among  the
ignorant  after  her  death.

In  1 541  Thomas  Walpole  confessed  conspiracy  with  one
Forde,  a  physician  of  East  Dereham  in  Norfolk,  "touching
certain  conjuracions,"  and  the  Council  issued  orders  to  arrest
Forde,  search  his  house,  and  send  him  up  with  his  instru-
ments of  conjuration.^"  On  October  21,  1542,  John  Morris,
yeoman,  of  Brampton,  Leicestershire,  had  a  pardon  under  the
privy  seal  for  all  felonies,  "being  crimes  of  the  magic  arts,
etc.,  committed  since  Mayday."  This  was  the  year  of  the
Witchcraft  Act  of  Henry  VIII.  In  1545,  Dr.  Nicholas  Wot-
ton.  Dean  of  Canterbury  and  York,  ambassador  to  the  Em-
peror, writes  from  Mechlin  to  Sir  William  Paget:  "rfere  is  a
strange  report  that  a  certain  hermit  confessed  to  have  by  sor-
cery procured  the  death  of  the  duke  of  Lorraine's  father  and
mother  and  the  Duke's  own  disease,  and,  being  in  prison,
promised  to  heal  the  Duke  if  he  might  have  his  pardon;  but
the  Duke  would  believe  nothing  of  it,  and  now  the  hermit  is
dead  in  prison,  so  that  there  seems  no  help  for  the  Duke."


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558  67

The  extraordinary  case  of  Harry  Lord  Nevell,  son  and  heir
of  Ralph,  Earl  of  Westmoreland,  in  1 546  merits  close  atten-
tion for  two  reasons:  first,  because  there  can  be  no  possible
doubt  as  to  the  main  facts,  since  we  have  them  in  Nevell's
own  words;  second,  because  the  affair  illustrates  the  preva-
lence of  various  kinds  of  sorcery  in  the  reign  of  Henry  VIII,
and  the  proneness  of  persons  of  high  social  position,  and  not
merely  the  humble,  to  dabble  in  these  arts,  malefic  and  other.
Nevell,  a  young  profligate  of  twenty-one,  tired  of  his  wife
(to  whom  he  was  married  when  he  was  eleven  years  old)  and
addicted  to  gaming  and  fleshly  lusts,  was  looking  forward  im-
patiently to  the  death  of  his  father.  In  1546,  before  October  i,
he  was  arrested  and  confined  in  the  Fleet,  whence  he  wrote
several  letters  of  confession  or  petition  to  the  Chief  Secre-
tary, Sir  William  Paget,  and  one  to  the  king.  To  Paget  he
professes  to  reveal  "the  whole  circumstance  of  his  grievous
offences."  The  tempter  and  chief  agent  was,  it  seems,
Ninian  Melville  (or  Menville).  About  two  years  before  (a
month  before  Christmas,  1 544)  Melville  suggested  the  prep-
aration of  a  ring  to  help  Lord  Harry  at  play,^"''  for  he  was  an
inveterate  loser,  he  tells  us,  and  was  already  in  debt.  One
Stafford,  who  was  approached,  at  first  objected,  "because  of
the  Act"  (the  Witchcraft  Statute,  then  but  two  years  old),
but  gave  way,  and  next  morning  introduced  a  man  named
Wisdom,  henceforth  the  Mephistopheles  of  the  drama.  Lord
Harry  was  impressed  by  Wisdom's  good  clothes:  he  was  "not
in  a  threadbare  coat  as  commonly  these  imperfect  multi-
pliers [alchemists]  be."  Wisdom  declared  that  he  "could
work  the  ring  by  two  ways,  by  good  or  evil  spirits,"  but  this
time  "he  would  work  it  by  the  holy  angels."  He  "only  did
such  things  for  friends,  most  of  his  practice  being  in  physic."
He  asked  an  annuity  of  twenty  pounds,  but  Lord  Harry  was
a  bargainer  and  beat  him  down  to  ten,  payable  after  the
Earl's  decease.  Thereupon  Wisdom  became  an  inmate  of
Lord  Harry's  household  for  a  month  —  till  Christmas.  We
may  infer  that  the  magic  ring  was  provided,  though  we  hear
no  more  of  it.  Wisdom  promised  to  enable  his  client  to  "play
as  well  on  the  lute  and  virginals  as  any  man  in  England.*'
This  was  to  be  effected  on  St.  Stephen's  Day  by  raising  "  the
god  Orpheus,"  who  would  appear  in  the  form  of  a  little  boy;


68  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

but  the  invocation  was  interrupted  and  came  to  naught.
Wisdom  also  told  Sir  Harry  that  he  had  learned  from  Mel-
ville (who  had  in  his  turn  learned  it  from  "  a  blind  man  which
was  a  Jew  born  and  a  practiser  of  the  same  art")  that  near  a
town  of  the  Earl's  in  the  North  there  was  a  huge  mass  of
treasure  buried  under  a  cross;  what  the  sum  was,  Wisdom
added,  he  would  that  night  enquire  of  "a  spirit  that  he  had  in
a  crystal  stone."  On  the  morrow  he  reported  that  it  was  two
thousand  pounds  "in  Portegewes."  Melville  and  Wisdom
visited  the  spot  and  overturned  the  cross,  but  found  nothing.
Somewhat  later,  they  offered  to  kill  Sir  Harry's  wife  for  him,
obviously  by  magic  and  probably  by  the  usual  trick  of  a
waxen  image.  But  this  was  too  much,  even  for  him  (so  he
avers)  and  he  refused.  Not  long  after.  Wisdom  told  him
that  "he  had  practised  the  death  both  of  his  [Sir  Harry's]
father  and  of  his  wife."  Sir  Harry  was  astonished.  He  pro-
tests, in  another  letter  to  Paget,  that  "he  never  consented  to
his  father's  destruction,  or  knew  of  it  till  the  deed  was  done."
The  Earl  did  not  die,  however,  until  some  years  after  (in
1549).  In  his  petition  to  the  king  Lord  Harry  praises  his
wife:  she  is  kind  and  good  and  will  assuredly  forgive  him.  We
are  left  to  infer  that  he  is  lying  when  he  protests  that  he  did
not  consent  to  the  attempt  upon  her  life  and  his  father's.^""*
What  became  of  Melville  and  Wisdom  we  do  not  know.  If  they
were  hanged,  as  the  statute  directs,  the  world  was  well  rid  of
a  pair  of  knaves.  But  Sir  Harry  was  spared  and  succeeded
to  the  earldom  of  Westmoreland  on  his  father's  death.

From  1550  we  have  the  testimony  of  Roger  Hutchinson  in
a  work  intended  to  instruct  the  laity:  "I  think  our  Sad-
ducees  will  be  edified  more  by  a  conjurer,  than  by  the  words
of  godliness.  Wherefore  I  send  them  to  conjurers,  sorcerers,
enchanters,  charmers,  witches;  which  will  learn  and  persuade
them  that  there  be  devils,  and  that  they  be  not  lusts  of  the
flesh,  but  spiritual  substances  and  spirits  created  for  ven-
geance; which  now,  in  the  end  of  the  world,  shall  pour  out
their  strength,  to  pluck  the  Lamb  of  God  out  of  the  minds  of
all  men."  Hutchinson  was  educated  at  St.  John's  College,
Cambridge,  where  he  was  Senior  Fellow  in  1547;  he  died  in
1555.  His  contemporary.  Dr.  John  Caius,  affords  us  similar
evidence  in  1552  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  physician.  He


CHAP,  n]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  1 558


69


warns  his  readers  to  avoid  quacks  as  they  would  the  plague.
Such  are  "simple  women,  carpenters,  pewterers,  brasiers,
sopeballesellers,  pulters,  hostellers,  painters,  apotecaries
(otherwise  then  for  their  drogges),  auaunters  themselues  to
come  from  Pole,  Constantinople,  Italic,  Almaine,  Spaine,
Fraunce,  Grece  and  Turkic,  Inde,  Egipt  or  Jury:  from  y''
seruice  of  Emperoures,  kinges  &  quienes,  promising  helpe  of  al
diseases,  yea  vncurable,  with  one  or  twoo  drinckes,  by  waters
sixe  monethes  in  continualle  distillinge,  by  Aurum  potabile^  or
quintessence^  by  drynckes  of  great  and  hygh  prices,  as  though
thei  were  made  of  the  sunne,  moone,  or  sterres,  by  blessynges
and  Blowinges,  Hipocriticalle  prayenges,  and  foolysh  smok-
ynges  of  shirtes  Smockes  and  kerchieffes,  wyth  suche  others
theire  phantasies,  and  mockeryes,  meaninge  nothinge  els  but
to  abuse  your  light  belieue,  and  scorne  you  behind  your
backes  with  their  medicines  (so  filthie,  that  I  am  ashamed  to
name  theim)  for  your  single  wit  and  simple  belief,  in  trusting
them  most,  whiche  you  know  not  at  al."  •'"^

The  Wall  Spirit  was  famous  in  London  in  1554.  Nashe
alludes  to  the  affair:  "What  a  piteous  noyse,  like  a  spirit  in  a
wal,  doth  he  here  make!"  The  medium,  a  "poore  maide"
of  sixteen  or  seventeen  named  Elizabeth  Crott,  stood  at
Paul's  Cross  as  a  penitent,  confessing  her  imposition.^"*

In  1555  Dr.  John  Dee  was  examined  by  the  Privy  Council.
He  had  been  accused  by  George  Ferrys  of  striking  one  of
Ferrys's  children  blind  by  magic  and  killing  another.  He  was
also  charged  with  directing  his  arts  against  Queen  Mary's
life.  After  a  brief  confinement  in  the  Fleet,  he  was  released
under  bonds.  Besides  Dee  there  were  involved  Sir  Thomas
Benger,  John  Field,  and  Christopher  Cary,  all  of  whom  made
some  kind  of  confession  as  to  "lewde  and  vayne  practises  of
calculing  and  conjuring."

One  of  Reginald  Scot's  helpers  in  the  search  for  material  for
The  Discoverie  of  Witchcraft  was  "T.  E.,"  Master  of  Arts,  a
physician  and  "practiser  of  certeine  vaine  sciences,"  whose
penitent  letter,  written  in  1583  under  sentence  of  death,  is
printed  in  full.  T.  E.  declares  that  he  has  associated  with
conjurors  for  twenty-six  years,  and  this  puts  his  initiation
back  into  Queen  Mary's  reign.  Some  phrases  in  the  docu-
ment suggest  that  he  had  been  employed  by  the  Earl  of


7©  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Leicester,  who  is  known  to  have  dabbled  in  the  occult.  Who
T.  E.  was  and  what  became  of  him  I  do  not  know.  When  he
wrote  to  Scot,  he  had  been  reprieved,  apparently  at  Leices-
ter's request.  He  once  had  a  book,  he  avers,  composed  "in
the  old  Saxon  toong,  by  one  Sir  John  Malborne  a  divine  of
Oxenford,  three  hundred  yeares  past;  wherein  he  openeth  all
the  illusions  &  inventions  of  those  arts  and  sciences,"  but
this  he  had  deposited  with  the  parson  of  Slangham  in  Sussex.
Scot  bestirred  himself  to  borrow  the  manuscript,  but  the  par-
son refused  to  let  it  go  out  of  his  hands. ^"

Bishop  Hooper  was  burned  for  heresy  in  1555,  so  that  he
cannot  well  be  held  to  have  brought  in  foreign  notions  from
the  Continent  at  Elizabeth's  accession  three  years  later.  Let
us  see  what  he  thought  about  witches  and  wizards.  In  1548
or  1549,  in  full  accord  with  Bishop  Quivil's  canon  of  1287
and  with  Anglo-Saxon  doctrine,^"  Hooper  reckoned  among
idolaters  "such  as  give  faith  unto  the  conjuration  or  sorcery
of  superstitious  persons" — as,  for  example,  "to  witches
or  soothsayers,  where  they  abuse  the  name  of  God  to  singe
out  the  fire  of  him  that  hath  burned  his  hand,  and  to  stanch
blood,  to  heal  man  or  beast."  •''^  Among  offences  he  specifies
"seeking  the  help  of  damned  spirits,  or  of  such  souls  as  be
departed  out  of  this  world,  as  Saul  did";  and  necromancy
pure  and  simple  —  the  attempt  "  to  resuscitate  dead  bodies,
or  call  spirits  departed  into  the  body  again."  "These  men,"
he  tells  us,  "in  English  be  called  conjurers,  who  useth  arts
forbidden  by  God's  laws,  and  also  by  the  laws  of  ethnicks,  be-
fore Christ  was  born."   He  denounces  those  "that  by  the
abuse  of  God's  name  use  superstitious  conjurations  and  en-
chantments, when  they  seek  the  truth  of  the  devil  and  dead
bodies."      He  condemns  astrology;  "over-much  faith  unto
medicines,  or  the  nature  of  stones  and  herbs";  divination  as
to  future  events,  crops,  health  or  sickness;  healing  by  the
abuse  of  God's  name  "  through  the  help  of  the  devil ";  palmis-
try and  physiognomy. one  of  his  later  writings  he  de-
nounces as  "the  greatest  and  most  abominable  evil  (one  of
them)  that  can  be  done  against  God"  —  "witchcraft,  and
calculation  by  astronomy  and  such  other  like."  ^^"^  For  all
these  crimes  he  seems  to  approve  the  punishment  of  death. ^^'^
In  his  visitation  as  Bishop  of  Gloucester  in  1551,  Hooper  in-


CHAP.  II]       ENGLISH  WITCHCRAFT  BEFORE  I558


71


eludes  among  the  enquiries  to  be  made  of  the  parishioners
concerning  the  ministers:  "Whether  any  of  them  teach,  talk,
reason,  or  defend  any  prophecies  and  lies  of  men  besides
God's  holy  word,  or  use  themselves,  or  suffer  any  other  to
use,  witchcraft,  palmistry,  and  such  other  forbidden  arts:  or
whether  any  of  them  put  their  trust  in  such  forbidden  and
damnable  crafts."  •''^  In  this  same  year  Elizabeth  Hicks,
Joan  Clerk,  and  William  Baker  were  enjoined  in  his  dioce-
san court  "not  to  use  certain  specified  sorceries."  The  two
latter  were  obliged  openly  on  Sunday  to  express  sorrow  for
their  offences.  In  the  same  year  and  court  William  Newport,
vicar  of  St.  Owen's,  was  presented  for  using  the  sorcery  of  key
and  book  for  discovery  of  theft.  On  one  occasion  he  had  prac-
tised this  form  of  divination  in  the  church  chancel!  In  his
case  a  book  of  magic  appears  —  it  belonged  to  one  Sibill,
appropriately  named.^'^  When  William  Wycherley,  tailor
and  sorcerer,  was  examined  in  1549,  he  deponed  that  "there
be  within  England  above  v  hundred  conjurers  as  he  think-
eth  .  .  .;  and  specially  in  Norfolk,  Hartfordshire,  and
Wourcestershire  and  Gloucestershire  a  great  number."
Gloucester  was  Hooper's  diocese  from  1550  to  1552,  when  he
was  created  Bishop  of  Worcester.

The  common  resort  to  sorcerers  and  white  witches  is  certi-
fied by  Latimer  in  1552.  When  we  pray  "Hallowed  be  thy
name,"  he  tells  his  congregation,  "we  require  [i.  e.  ask]  that
all  witchcrafts  be  removed;  that  art  magic  and  sorcery  be
pulled  out,  necromancy  taken  away;  and  so  nothing  be  left
but  his  holy  word,  wherewith  we  may  daily  praise  the  name  of
God.  For  I  fear  me  there  be  a  great  many  in  England  which
use  such  sorceries,  to  the  dishonour  of  God  and  their  own
damnation."  And  again,  "  Some  of  us,  when  we  be  in  trouble,
do  run  hither  and  thither  to  sorcerers  and  witches,  to  get
remedy."  And  yet  again,  Jairus  in  the  Bible  "did  not  as  a
great  many  of  us  do,  when  we  be  in  trouble,  or  sickness,  or
lose  any  thing,  we  run  hither  and  thither  to  witches  or  sor-
cerers, whom  we  call  wise  men;  when  there  is  no  man  so
foolish  and  blind  as  they  be:  for  the  devil  leadet  1  them  ac-
cording unto  his  will  and  pleasure,  and  yet  we  run  after  them,
seeking  aid  and  cure  at  their  hands."  ^"

Let  us  see  what  we  have  found  in  900-1557.  We  have


72  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

read  of  magic  books  and  amulets  and  scrolls  and  fumigations
and  potent  herbs;  of  fortune-telling  and  soothsaying  and
prophecy;  of  divination  in  great  variety  (by  geomancy  and
hydromancy,  by  birds  and  beasts  and  meetings,  by  sortes,  by
balls  of  clay,  by  bible  and  key,  by  sieve  and  shears,  by  loaf
and  knives,  by  the  shoulder  bone  of  a  sheep,  by  sleeping  in  or
on  a  hide,  by  the  promptings  of  a  familiar  spirit  or  of  a  voice
from  the  wall)  and  for  divers  purposes  (to  learn  the  secrets  of
the  past  or  future,  to  detect  thieves  and  get  back  what  is  lost
or  stolen,  to  forecast  luck  in  travel,  to  recover  a  drowned
man's  body);  of  crystal  gazing  and  the  magic  mirror  (includ-
ing the  use  of  swords  and  knives  and  basins  and  thumbnails);
of  spells  and  charms  and  incantations  —  for  the  healing  of
man  and  beast,  for  protection  against  disease  or  injury  or  the
assaults  of  demons  and  elves  or  the  depredations  of  animals,
for  abundance  of  milk  and  corn  and  mustard,  for  skill  in
music  and  luck  with  the  dice,  for  safety  at  the  ordeal  or  in  the
wager  of  battle,  for  love  or  hate,  for  finding  buried  treasure;
of  poltergeister  and  their  antics  and  of  similar  tricks  that
witches  play;  of  demon  apparitions  and  demoniacal  posses-
sion; of  evil  spells  to  hinder  corn  and  cattle  from  thriving,  to
spoil  the  ale,  to  dry  up  wells,  to  blast  plants  and  trees,  to  de-
stroy poultry;  of  milk-stealing  witchcraft;  of  witchcraft  to
bind  a  man  or  break  his  leg  or  wither  his  arm  or  strike  him
blind  or  drive  him  mad  or  cause  his  death;  of  image  witch-
craft for  love  and  murder;  of  magic  powders  and  unguents
and  the  conjure-bag;  of  mist  and  storm  brought  about  by  de-
mons with  or  without  a  witch's  agency;  of  witch-wiles  in  war;
of  vagrant  practitioners  of  magic  or  witchcraft  both  lay  and
cleric;  of  jugglers  and  tregetours  who  work  illusion  whether
by  spells  or  by  sleight  of  hand;  of  the  vampire-wizard  who
summons  men  to  the  next  world;  of  profanation  not  only  of
prayers  avid  holy  texts  but  of  the  mass,  the  font-water,  the
chrism,  the  consecrated  wafer,  and  the  wine  of  the  chalice;  of
homage  to  Satan  and  compact  with  him  and  fleshly  union
with  fiends;  of  familiar  spirits  in  the  shape  of  dwarf  and  cat
and  dog;  of  the  swimming  test  for  witchcraft;  of  the  devil's
carrying  off  the  witch's  body  when  she  dies.  Once  more  there
is  nothing  of  importance  that  does  not  come  in  except  the
Sabbath,  and  that  is  unknown  to  the  Elizabethan  cases.


CHAPTER  III


IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE

NO  DEPARTMENT  of  witchcraft  affords  more  convinc-
ing evidence  of  continuity  than  Image  Magic,  techni-
cally termed  invultuacio  or  emoutement.  From  remote  periods
of  history  in  Egypt,  Assyria,  Babylonia,^  and  India,^  from
classic  times  and  lands,^  from  the  middle  ages,  and  so  on
down  to  the  present  day,  the  practice  of  image  magic  has
been  prevalent,  and  it  is  still  common  the  world  over,  among
savage  men  and  civilized.''  It  depends,  of  course,  on  the  doc-
trine of  sympathy.  An  effigy  of  wax,  clay,  wood,  metal,  or
almost  any  substance,  is  pierced  with  nails,  pins,  or  thorns,
and  burned  or  slowly  roasted.  The  victim  suffers  correspond-
ing torments,  pines  away  as  the  puppet  melts  or  crumbles,
and  dies  when  it  is  stabbed  to  the  heart.  Sometimes  the
image  is  buried  or  drowned  instead  of  being  consumed  by  fire,
and  there  are  other  varieties  which  the  sequel  will  illustrate.
As  for  the  end  in  view,  that  may  be  either  enmity  pure  and
simple,  or  self-defence  against  a  witch.  Often,  also,  the  object
is  to  torture  a  person  with  the  pangs  of  love  or  to  recall  a
truant  sweetheart.  The  same  method  in  general  may  be  ap-
plied to  remedial  purposes  —  the  image  being  treated  in  such
a  manner  as  to  benefit  the  patient.  This  branch  of  thera-
peutics is  celebrated  by  Chaucer  in  describing  his  Doctor  of
Physic :

Wei  coude  he  fortunen  the  ascendent
Of  his  images  for  his  pacient.s

And  the  poet  knew  also  of  evil  art  in  this  kind.  Along  with
the  magicians  and  charmeresses  and  olde  wicches  in  the
House  of  Fame  he  mentions

Clerkes  eek  which  conne  wel
Al  this  magyke  nature],
That  craftely  don  her  ententes
To  make,  in  certeyn  ascendentes,
Images,  lo!  through  which  magyk
To  make  a  man  ben  hool  or  syk.^


74  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Agrippa  sums  up  malefic  image  magic  very  well.  The  figure,
he  tells  us,  is  buried  in  the  earth  or  sunk  in  a  river;  or  it  is
hung  up  in  the  chimney  or  on  a  tree,  head  down  in  some
cases;  or  it  may  be  plunged  into  hot  water  or  thrown  into  the
fire  J  Dr.  Primrose  (who  died  in  1659),  in  his  chapter  "Of  the
Weapon-salve,"  duly  ascribes  the  efficacy  of  wax  figures  to
the  principle  of  sympathy:  "As  the  Image  laid  to  the  fire,  or
exposed  to  the  frost,  doth  burn,  or  congeale  him  that  is  ab-
sent; so  doth  the  unguent  laid  upon  the  weapon."  In  neither
case  does  he  doubt  the  possibility  of  the  operation,  which  he
thinks  comes  from  the  devil.*

In  ancient  defixiones  '  it  was  sufficient  to  scratch  a  name  on
a  leaden  plate,  which  was  then  buried,  preferably  in  a  tomb  or
grave,  with  appropriate  ceremonies;  but  often  the  word  of
defixion  (/caraSco,  i.  e.  Karadeo),  "I  bind  fast")  was  added,  and
also,  frequently,  invocations  of  the  chthonic  gods  or  of  de-
mons were  engraved,  with  other  spells  to  curse  the  victim.  A
nail  might  be  driven  through  the  rolled  tablet.  At  times,  too,
a  picture  of  the  victim  was  inscribed,  or  images  were  buried
along  with  the  roll.'"  Such  a  leaden  doll  is  portrayed  by
Wiinsch:  the  head  has  been  cut  off^,  the  arms  and  legs  are
bent  backward  and  tied  with  strips  of  lead,  the  trunk  is
crossed  by  a  fetter,  there  is  an  iron  nail  in  the  breast  and  an-
other in  the  belly."  A  good  example  is  the  celebrated  find  at
Pozzuoli  —  eight  puppets  of  clay  lying  on  the  burnt  bones  in
a  tomb,  each  of  them  inscribed  with  a  name,  masculine  or
feminine,  in  Greek  letters."  A  miracle  of  Saints  Cyrus  and
John,  as  told  by  Sophronius,  deals  with  a  similar  puppet.
Theophilus,  an  Alexandrian,  disabled  in  hands  and  feet,
prayed  to  these  saints,  who  forthwith  appeared  in  a  dream
and  directed  him  to  have  himself  carried  to  the  shore,  and
there,  when  he  saw  a  fisherman  casting  nets,  to  give  him
money  to  make  a  cast  for  him:  "Whatever  the  net  brings  up
will  cure  you."  The  first  cast  brought  up  a  small  basket,
which  contained  a  bronze  figure,  like  Theophilus  in  all  re-
spects; both  feet  and  both  hands  were  pierced,  each  with  a
nail.  When  these  were  pulled  out,  Theophilus  recovered.'^  In
1903  there  was  washed  ashore  at  Calicut  a  lifesize  female
effigy  with  long  iron  nails  in  head,  body,  and  limbs.'''

The  Anglo-Saxon  Penitential  falsely  ascribed  to  Ecgbert,'^


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE  75

Archbishop  of  York,  provides  for  three  years'  fasting  (one
year  on  bread  and  water,  and  two  on  the  same  for  three  days
in  the  week)  for  this  kind  of  sorcery;  if  the  victim  dies,  the
fast  is  for  seven  years  (three  on  bread  and  water,  and  four  on
the  same  for  three  days  in  the  week),  precisely  as  for  murder
by  veneficiiim  ("mid  wicce-crsefte":  iv,  i6).  So  also  in  the
Penitential  enacted  under  King  Edgar.'^  The  twelfth-
century  Latin  compilation  known  as  the  Laws  of  Henry  I  rates
invultnacio  as  murder  (along  with  poisoning,  sorcery,  and  any
other  malefic  magic),  if  the  man  dies."  An  actual  case  of  such
murder  is  mentioned  in  an  Anglo-Saxon  charter  of  ca.  963-
975.  A  certain  widow  and  her  son  had  forfeited  an  estate
at  Ailsworth,  Northamptonshire,  "because  they  drove  iron
nails  {stacan)  into  ^Elsi,  Wulfstan's  father."  The  image  was
apparently  discovered  in  the  woman's  chamber.  She  was
drowned  at  London  Bridge,  and  her  son  fled  and  was  out-
lawed.

John  of  Salisbury  (11 20-1 180)  was  of  course  acquainted
with  image  magic.  He  speaks  of  the  use  of  figures  of  wax  or
clay  as  love-charms,  and  he  quotes  Virgil's  Eclogue,  as  well
as  Hypsipyle's  charge  against  Medea  from  Ovid's  Heroides,
which  includes  the  making  and  piercing  of  waxen  images:

Deuouet  absentes  simulacraque  cerea  fingit,
Et  miserum  tenues  in  iecur  urget  acus.''

And  Peter  of  Blois,  Archdeacon  of  Bath  in  the  latter  part  of
the  same  century,  gives  similar  evidence.^"  Giraldus  Cam-
brensis  (ca.  1146- ca.  1220)  reproves  the  abominable  con-
duct of  contemporary  priests  who  pervert  the  sacrament  of
the  altar  to  black  magic  "by  celebrating  masses  over  images
of  wax  in  order  to  curse  some  person."  There  are  others,  he
adds,  "who  sing  the  mass  Fidelium  '^^  against  a  man  ten  times
or  more,  that  he  may  die  before  the  tenth  day  or  soon  after,
and  be  buried  with  the  dead."  "

If  such  practices  had  not  been  known  to  the  Anglo-Saxons,
full  information  would  have  come  in  with  the  Norman  Con-
quest, for  they  were  familiar  to  the  French.  In  the  very  year
of  the  Battle  of  Hastings,  Evrard,  Bishop  of  Treves,  met  his
death  by  this  means.  He  had  issued  an  edict  that  all  Jews
not  baptized  by  Easter  should  be  banished  from  the  city.


76  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Certain  of  this  "evil  race"  thereupon  made  a  waxen  image  in
his  likeness,  and  bribed  a  priest  — •  "  Christian  in  name,  not  in
deed"  — ■  to  baptize  it.  On  Easter  Sunday,  when  the  bishop
was  about  to  perform  the  rites  of  baptism,  they  melted  the
image.  The  bishop  collapsed  at  the  fontstone,  was  helped
into  the  sacristy  by  attendant  priests,  and  died  there  in  his
sacred  vestments  kneeling  before  the  cross.

In  1308  Guichard,  Bishop  of  Troyes,  was  accused  of  mur-
dering Jeanne,  queen  of  Philip  IV,  by  sorcery  three  years
before.  The  details  are  thrilling.  He  consulted  a  witch  and
caused  a  demon  to  be  invoked  by  a  friar  who  was  skilful  in
this  art;  he  did  homage  to  the  demon  and  received  full  in-
structions how  to  proceed.  With  the  friar  and  the  witch  he
visited  a  hermitage  in  disguise,  and  had  a  waxen  image  made
and  baptized  by  the  name  of  Jeanne.  This  was  pierced  with
a  needle  or  stylus  in  the  head  and  other  parts  of  the  body.
Jeanne  fell  sick  then  or  soon  after,  and  no  physician  could
either  diagnose  the  case  or  find  a  remedy.  The  bishop  caused
the  figure  to  be  pierced  again  and  again  by  the  witch,  but  still
the  queen  refused  to  die.  Then  crying  out  in  anger,  "How,
devil Will  this  woman  live  forever?"  he  broke  the  limbs  of
the  image,  tore  it  into  bits,  trampled  on  it,  and  threw  it  into
the  fire,  where  it  was  consumed.  At  or  near  that  time  the
queen  died.  The  intimate  association  of  one  or  two  notorious
local  witches  with  these  and  other  diabolical  performances  is
noteworthy.^''  The  affair  must  have  been  matter  for  con-
versation in  English  court  circles,  for  the  victim  had  been  at
one  time  betrothed  to  a  son  of  Edward  I,  and  her  mother
(Blanche  d'Artois)  had  in  1275  i^iarried  Edmund  of  Lancas-
ter, brother  of  the  same  king  Edward.  The  prosecution  lasted
from  1308  to  13 13.  Even  more  closely  connected  with  Eng-
land was  the  case  of  Enguerrand  de  Marigny,  hanged  at
Paris  on  April  30,  131 5;  for  he  had  been  in  favor  with  Ed-
ward II,  to  whom  he  had  lent  much  money,  and  who  had  as-
signed him  an  interest  in  the  customs  of  the  port  of  London.^^
Enguerrand,  who  had  been  chamberlain,  chief  councillor,
and  so  special  a  favorite  of  Philip  IV  that  many  thought  he
had  bewitched  him,  was  accused  of  embezzlement  and  trea-
son, but  was  to  have  been  let  off  with  banishment  to  Cyprus
during  the  pleasure  of  Louis  X,  when  his  accuser  (Charles  de


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE  77

Valois,  the  king's  uncle)  learned  that  one  Jacobus  de  Lor  and
his  wife  and  manservant  had  (at  the  instance  of  Enguer-
rand's  wife  and  sister  and  perhaps  of  himself)  moulded  wax
images  to  effect  the  culprit's  deliverance  and  also  to  injure
the  king  and  Charles  and  others,  though  the  ladies  alleged
that  the  end  in  view  was  to  win  Louis's  favor  or  forbearance.
The  sorcerer  Jacobus  hanged  himself  in  prison,  and  his  wife
was  burned.  These  revelations  changed  Enguerrand's  sen-
tence to  one  of  death,  though  he  denied  every  accusation.  In
1317  he  was  taken  down  from  the  gallows  and  honorably
buried  — •  he  had  a  full  rehabilitation  from  Philippe  le  Long.^^
In  this  same  year  Hugues  Geraud,  Bishop  of  Cahors,  was
flayed  alive  and  burned  for  plotting  the  death  of  Pope  John
XXII  by  poison  and  image  magic.

We  may  now  return  to  England.  On  the  last  day  of  No-
vember, 1323,  so  runs  the  testimony  of  Robert  le  Mareschal
of  Leicester,  more  than  a  score  of  the  inhabitants  of  Coven-
try, most  of  them  burghers,  visited  the  house  of  Master  John
de  Notingham  in  that  town,  a  professed  magician  (rngro-
mauncer),  with  whom  Robert  was  lodging.  "Will  you  keep  a
secret  —  to  your  own  profit?"  they  asked.  The  magician  and
his  lodger  replied  that  they  would.  Then  the  visitors  de-
clared that  they  could  no  longer  endure  the  oppression  of  the
Prior  of  Coventry,  backed  as  he  was  by  the  king  and  the  two
Despensers,  father  and  son;  and  they  asked  Master  John  if  he
would  kill  the  king,  the  Despensers,  and  the  prior,  together
with  his  cellarer  and  his  seneschal,  "par  sa  nigromancie  et  ses
artz."  The  bargain  was  struck:  Master  John  was  to  receive
twenty  pounds  "et  sa  gareison"  in  any  house  of  religion  in
England  that  he  should  elect,  and  Robert  le  IVlareschal  fif-
teen. Shortly  after,  the  burghers  made  a  payment  on  account
and  delivered  seven  pounds  of  wax  and  two  ells  of  canvas.
The  miscreants  Robert  and  John  went  to  work  at  once  in  an
old  house  half  a  league  from  Coventry  and  continued  their
operations  until  almost  the  end  of  the  following  May  (1324).
They  made  six  images  of  wax,  each  to  represent  one  of  the
persons  to  be  destroyed,  and  a  seventh  image  in  the  shape
of  one  Richard  de  Sowe,  which  was  to  be  used  in  testing
the  efficacy  of  their  diabolical  attempts  ("prover  les  autres
images  s'il  furent  certeyns  ou  ne  mye").   On  the  27th  of


78  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

April,  about  midnight,  as  they  were  "about  their  work"
Master  John  gave  Robert  a  sharp  spit  of  lead  and  bade  him
stick  it  into  the  forehead  of  Richard's  image.  Next  day  he
sent  Robert  to  Richard's  house  to  see  how  he  was,  and  he
found  him  out  of  his  mind,  shrieking  and  crying  "Harrow!"
And  so  Richard  continued  to  suffer  until  Sunday,  the  2oth  of
May  (1324),  when  Master  John  pulled  out  the  spit  and  stuck
it  into  the  heart  of  the  image.  There  it  remained  until  the
following  Wednesday,  when  Richard  died.  Thus  it  appeared
that  the  experiment  was  a  complete  success.  Such  is  the  sub-
stance of  Robert  le  Mareschal's  statement  before  the  Coroner
on  November  30,  1324.  Probably  the  death  of  Richard  de
Sowe  was  being  investigated  by  this  official,  and  Robert,
finding  himself  under  suspicion,  had  decided  to  "appeal"
(i.  e.  accuse)  the  master  magician  and  the  burghers  "of  fel-
ony" —  thus  (to  use  the  nearest  modern  equivalent  in  such  a
case)  turning  king's  evidence.  At  all  events,  he  was  the  ap-
pellor both  in  the  coroner's  court  and  also  in  the  Court  of  the
King's  Bench,  to  which  the  case  was  called  up  by  a  writ  of
certiorari  (dated  Nov.  6,  18  Ed.  II  [1324]).  It  was  tried  in
June,  1325.  By  this  time  John  de  Notingham  had  died  in
prison.  The  Coventry  burghers  were  acquitted.  Robert  le
Mareschal  was  held  in  custody,  and  what  became  of  him  we
cannot  tell.^*  An  echo  of  this  case  is  a  letter  sent  in  1324  by
Pope  John  XXII  to  the  younger  Despenser  (one  of  the  in-
tended victims).  In  reply  to  Despenser's  complaint  "  that  he
is  threatened  by  magical  and  secret  dealings,  the  pope  recom-
mends him  to  turn  to  God  with  his  whole  heart,  and  make  a
good  confession  and  such  satisfaction  as  shall  be  enjoined.
No  other  remedies  are  necessary  beyond  the  general  indult
which  the  pope  grants  him."  ""^

Later  in  this  century  (1376)  a  learned  friar  in  the  service  of
Alice  Perrers  is  said  to  have  moulded  figures  of  wax  to  in-
fatuate King  Edward  (see  p.  105).

The  ordinary  mental  pabulum  of  Englishmen  in  the  four-
teenth century  may  be  illustrated  by  an  often-quoted  story
from  one  of  the  most  popular  of  all  collections  of  exempla,  the
Gesta  Romanorum.  While  a  certain  knight  was  in  Rome  on
his  way  to  the  Holy  Land,  his  wife  at  home  had  an  intrigue
with  a  clerk  skilled  in  nigromancia.  At  her  request  the  clerk


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


79


undertook  to  kill  the  husband  in  order  to  marry  her  himself.
He  prepared  an  image  of  wax  like  the  knight  and  gave  it  the
knight's  name;  then  he  fastened  it  to  the  wall.  Meanwhile,
as  the  knight  was  walking  in  a  public  square  in  Rome,  a  cun-
ning man  {magister  quidam  peritus)  accosted  him:  "This  day
you  are  a  son  of  death  unless  you  have  my  help,  for  your  wife
has  made  arrangements  to  kill  you!"  The  knight  accepted
the  friendly  offer,  whereupon  the  magister  had  him  get  into
a  bath  and  gave  him  a  polished  mirror  and  bade  him  look
therein.  He  saw  a  room  in  his  own  house,  and  there  stood  the
clerk,  ready  to  shoot  an  arrow  at  the  image.  By  the  master's
orders,  the  knight  ducked  under  at  the  moment  when  he  saw
the  arrow  leave  the  bow.  The  clerk  missed.  So,  too,  at  the
second  shot.  Then  the  clerk  was  much  distressed:  "If  I  do
not  hit  the  image  the  third  time,  I  shall  lose  my  life."  And
so  he  shot,  and  the  arrow  turned  back  and  slew  him.  All  this
was  seen  and  heard  by  the  knight  as  he  looked  in  the  mirror.
The  tale  was  deservedly  popular.  It  was  turned  to  good  ac-
count by  Holkot  and  Barham  adapted  it  as  "The  Leech  of
Folkestone"  in  his  Ingoldsby  Legends.

A  famous  case  of  the  early  fifteenth  century  probably  in-
volved image  magic,  but  the  details  are  lacking.  In  October,
I419,  Henry  V  prosecuted  his  stepmother,  Joan  of  Navarre,
for  attempting  to  kill  him  by  witchcraft.  It  was  set  forth  in
Parliament,  "on  information  given  the  king  as  well  by  rela-
tion and  confession  of  a  friar,  John  Randolf,  of  the  Order  of
Friars  Minors,  as  by  other  credible  evidences,"  that  she  "had
compassed  and  imagined  the  death  and  destruction  of  our
lord  the  king  in  the  most  horrible  manner  that  one  could  de-
vise," as  had  been  openly  published  throughout  the  realm;
and  that  the  Council  had  ordered  her  goods  and  chattels  to
be  confiscated,^^  as  well  as  the  rents  of  her  estates,  dower  and
other.  She  was  committed  to  Leeds  Castle  in  the  custody  of
Sir  John  Pelham.  The  means  used  to  destroy  King  Henry,
vaguely  expressed  in  the  parliamentary  record,  is  made  clear
by  contemporary  historians.  It  was  "sorcery  and  nigro-
mancy,"  and  Friar  Randolf,  who  had  been  her  confessor,  ad-
mitted his  guilt  in  this  regard. Singularly  enough  he  was
not  put  to  death,  but  merely  imprisoned  for  life,  or  during
the  king's  pleasure.  In  1429,  however,  he  was  murdered.  A


8o


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


priest  — •  the  "parson  of  the  Tower"  according  to  one  of  the
chroniclers  —  smashed  his  head  with  a  stone,  finished  him  off
with  a  hatchet,  and  hid  the  corpse  under  sand  and  dung.  The
priest  was  mad,  we  are  told,  but  no  doubt  he  had  long  re-
garded Brother  Randolf  as  a  servant  of  the  devil. Kii^g
Henry  died  on  the  first  of  September,  1422.  On  the  13th  of
July  he  wrote  a  letter  directing  that  Queen  Joan's  dower
should  be  restored.  She  petitioned  parliament  accordingly,
in  1423,  and  her  prayer  was  granted.

Henry  V  was  undoubtedly  worried  about  witchcraft,  and
so  were  his  prelates.  In  the  month  preceding  the  parliament
of  1419  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  ordered  prayers  and
processions  for  the  king  and  his  army  in  France,  especially  to
protect  him  against  the  operations  of  necromancers.  In  his
mandate  to  the  Bishop  of  London  he  says  that  the  king  de-
sires such  services,  in  order  that  God  may  protect  him  from
all  the  wicked,  malicious,  and  unjust  plots  of  his  enemies,  and
from  the  "superstitious  operations  of  necromancers,  espe-
cially such  as  (according  to  report)  have  lately  been  devised
by  some  persons  for  the  destruction  of  his  person."  "  And  in
the  month  following  the  parliament  we  have  the  case  of  Rich-
ard Walker,  a  chaplain,  arrested  by  the  Prior  of  Winchester
for  sorcery  and  brought  before  Convocation  by  the  Arch-
bishop of  Canterbury  on  November  8,  1419.  Among  his
paraphernalia  were  a  beryl  stone,  two  little  images  of  yellow
wax,  and  two  books  containing  conjurations  and  figures.
Richard  confessed  that  he  had  practised  art  magic  in  divers
ways  according  to  the  precepts  of  one  of  the  books,  but  he
declared  that  he  did  not  believe  in  these  things,  but  felt  sure
that  all  such  operations  were  false,  because  he  had  never  suc-
ceeded in  any  of  his  occult  experiments.  This  form  of  con-
fession of  course  cleared  him  of  heresy.

In  1 426  commissions  were  issued  to  men  of  standing  in  the
counties  of  Somerset,  Dorset,  and  Cornwall,  to  investigate
the  complaint  of  William  Lord  Botreaux  that  Sir  Ralph
Botreaux  and  William  Langkelly  had  employed  three  per-
sons (said  to  practise  "soothsaying,  necromancy,  and  art
magic")  to  "weaken  and  annihilate,  subtly  to  consume  and
altogether  to  destroy  by  the  said  arts  the  body  of  the  said
Wilham."  ^9


CHAP.  Ill]


IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


8l


Shortly  before  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth  century  we  note
a  capital  instance  of  witchcraft.  The  accident  that  it  involved
a  lady  of  rank  is  the  reason  why  we  have  so  many  details.
Such  things  must  have  been  common  enough  among  the
lowly,  but  they  either  passed  without  notice  from  the  au-
thorities or  the  records  are  lost  or  unpublished.  In  144I
Eleanor  Cobham,  Duchess  of  Gloucester,  was  accused  of
conspiring  with  Master  Roger  Bolingbroke,  clerk,  Canon
Thomas  Southwell,  and  Margery  Jourdemayne,  to  procure
the  king's  death  by  sorcery. Roger,  who  made  some  kind
of  confession  implicating  the  duchess,  was  convicted  of  high
treason  and  was  hanged,  drawn,  and  quartered;  Margery  was
burned  at  Smithfield,  either  as  a  female  traitor  or  perhaps  as
a  relapsed  heretic,''^  for  she  had  been  arrested  for  sorcery  be-
fore and  may  have  abjured;  Southwell  died  in  prison.  The
duchess  did  elaborate  public  penance  and  was  sentenced  to
imprisonment  for  life.

That  Bolingbroke  was  a  practitioner  of  sorcery  and  that  he
was  employed  by  the  duchess  to  exercise  his  art  in  some  way,
there  can  be  no  manner  of  doubt.  On  Sunday,  July  23,  1441,
his  paraphernalia  were  exhibited.  A  sermon  was  preached  at
Paul's  Cross  and  meanwhile  Master  Roger  stood  upon  a  high
stage  in  the  churchyard  "aboue  alle  mennes  heddis."  He
was  clad  in  his  conjurer's  robe:  —  "holdyng  a  suerd  in  his
right  hand  and  a  septre  in  his  lift  hand,  araid  in  a  marvaillous
aray  whereynne  he  was  wont  to  sitte  whanne  he  wroghte  his
nygromancie."  Upon  the  scaffold  was  also  "  a  chaier  ypeynt-
ed,  wherynne  he  was  wont  to  sitte  whanne  he  wroughte  his
craft,  and  on  the  iiij  corners  of  the  chaier  stood  iiij  swerdis,
and  vpon  euery  swerd  hanggyng  an  ymage  of  copir."  Be-
sides this  there  were  on  view  "meny  other  instrumentis  ac-
cordyng  to  his  said  craft."  The  copper  images  were  prob-
ably effigies  of  demons  rather  than  of  the  king;  but  one
chronicler  mentions  among  the  exhibits,  "ymages  of  siluer,
of  wexey  and  other  metalles,"  ''■^  and  here  we  have  undoubtedly
the  figure  of  the  king  which  was  to  cause  his  death.  The
same  authority  adds  that  later,  when  "all  his  [Roger's]  In-
strumentes  that  were  shewed  at  Seint  Paules  Crosse  afore-
tyme  "  were  shown  to  Dame  Eleanor,  she  "  seyd  it  was  not  so;
bot  that  she  did  it  forto  haue  borne  a  child  by  hir  lord,  the


82


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Duke  of  Gloucestre."  ''^  This  means  obviously  that  the
duchess  alleged  that  the  waxen  image  (as  well  as  other  things)
was  not  designed  to  compass  the  king's  destruction  but  to
procure  her  a  child.  Frazer  has  accumulated  from  all  over
the  world  examples  of  imitative  magic  with  a  puppet  either
for  offspring  or  for  easy  delivery. Yet  that  the  waxen  image
was  to  be  consumed  with  the  usual  result  on  the  victim's
health  and  life  is  expressly  stated  by  Fabyan  and  Hall.''^

It  may  be  that,  at  the  duchess's  request,  Roger  "  wroughte
the  said  nygromancie"  merely,  as  he  declared,  "to  knowe
what  sholde  falle  of  hir  and  to  what  astat  she  sholde  come."  ''^
Perhaps  his  denial  of  "eny  treson  ayens  the  kyngis  persone  "
was  true,  coupled  as  it  was  with  a  confession  that  "he  pre-
sumed to  fer  in  his  konnyng."  '^^  His  attempt  to  forecast
Eleanor's  future  rank  doubtless  involved  a  treasonable  calcu-
lation as  to  the  time  of  the  king's  death  (as  often  in  similar
cases),  and  this  is  probably  the  excessive  presumption  that  he
confessed.  But  the  chroniclers  are  practically  a  unit  in  assert-
ing that  the  conspirators  aimed  to  kill  the  king.  Anyhow,
I  cannot  believe  that  Roger  limited  his  experiments  to  astro-
logical mathematics.  The  function  of  Canon  Southwell  was
to  "say  massis  ...  in  the  logghe  of  Harnesey  Park  beside
London  vpon  certayn  instrumentis"  which  Roger  was  to  use
in  his  "craft  of  nygromancie"  '^^ —  and  this  kind  of  profane
rite  was  characteristic  of  the  blackest  of  black  magic. If  a
waxen  image  was  actually  fashioned,  perhaps  Southwell  was
to  baptize  it  by  the  king's  name  —  a  regular  ceremony  in
such  cases. 5'  It  is  interesting  to  read  in  William  Wyrcester  (a
competent  witness)  that  Bolingbroke  was  the  "most  famous
scholar  in  the  whole  world  in  astrology  and  magic,"  and  that
many  "lamented  him  extremely."

We  are  particularly  concerned,  however,  with  Margery
Jourdemayne,  for  she  was  a  witch  pure  and  simple  —  humble
in  station,  but  eminent  enough  in  her  profession  to  be  engaged
by  a  lady  of  high  rank.  Such  persons  were  more  than  once  in-
volved in  high-life  scandals  of  this  sort.  What  part  she  played
in  Roger's  conjurations  we  shall  never  know.  She  may  have
acted  quite  independently  —  but,  with  his  confession  to  con-
vict the  duchess  of  nigromancy,  there  would  seem  to  be  no
sense  in  pursuing  Margery  merely  because  she  had  furnished


CHAP.  Ill]


IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


83


Dame  Eleanor  with  philtres  from  time  to  time.  If  there  was  a
wax  figure  at  all,  we  must  infer  that  Margery  Jourdemayne
had  a  hand  in  its  manufacture  or  manipulation;  for  male  sor-
cerers in  other  cases  more  than  once  found  the  cooperation  of
a  witch  desirable  in  such  matters.  So  in  the  historic  prosecu-
tion of  Guichard,  Bishop  of  Troyes  (1308-13 13),  the  hermit
confessed  that,  to  procure  the  death  of  Queen  Jeanne,  the
bishop  employed  a  witch  to  torment  the  image. And  En-
guerrand  de  Marigny,  we  are  told,  in  adopting  similar  means
to  destroy  Louis  X,  employed  not  only  a  magician  but  an  old
lame  witch  as  well. 5"  Finally,  it  makes  no  difference  whether
any  of  the  charges  were  true  or  whether  the  whole  affair  was
hideous  political  chicanery.  Anyhow,  it  reveals  the  beliefs
and  the  practices  of  the  age.

Margery  Jourdemayne  had  long  been  notorious  as  "the
Witch  of  Eye" —  that  is,  of  the  manor  of  Eye-next- West-
minster.^5  Eleven  years  before,  in  1430,  she  had  been  under
arrest  for  "  sorcerye  "  along  with  Friar  John  Asshewell  of  Lon-
don and  John  Virley,  clericus,  and  was  confined  for  a  time  in
Windsor  Castle. 5''  In  1432  the  trio  were  discharged  by  the
Privy  Council:  the  two  Johns  found  security  for  their  good
behavior,  and  Margery  was  released  on  her  husband's  bond."
Both  these  years  are  rather  notable  in  the  history  of  witch-
craft. In  1 430,  a  chronicler  informs  us,  seven  witches  {male-
ficae)  from  different  parts  of  the  realm  were  apprehended  in
London  and  committed  to  the  Fleet:  they  had  plotted  King
Henry's  death. It  was  also  in  1430  that  Joan  of  Arc  was
captured  and  delivered  into  the  hands  of  the  English.  As  a
London  chronicler  has  it,  "  ther  was  a  woman  takyn  y-armed
[armed]  in  the  ffeld, . . .  the  whiche  was  called  Pucell  de  Dieux,
a  false  witche."  Compare  the  report  of  the  Duke  of  Bed-
ford in  1 428  after  the  death  of  the  Earl  of  Salisbury  at  the
Siege  of  Orleans:  "  a  Disciple  and  Lyme  of  the  Feende,  called
the  Fucelle,  that  used  fals  Enchauntements  and  Sorcerie."
The  Maid,  we  remember,  was  believed  by  her  enemies  to  have
been  trained  in  witchcraft  by  hags  of  her  neighborhood,
which  —  so  the  articles  of  accusation  aver  —  was  infamous
of  old  for  such  practices.^'  In  1432,  on  May  7,  the  king
commanded  two  officers  to  arrest  Thomas  Northfelde  of
Worcester,  a  Dominican  friar,  to  seize  his  books  of  sorcery,


84


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


and  other  suspected  materials,  and  to  bring  him  before  the
Council  to  answer  charges.

We  have  no  trace  of  Margery  Jourdemayne  between  1432
and  144I  except  the  statement  of  one  chronicler  that  Dame
Eleanor  had  for  a  long  time  (before  1441)  used  her  "sorcerie
and  wicchecraft,"  and  that  by  "suche  medicines  and  drynkis
as  the  said  wicche  made"  the  lady  had  "enforced"  the  Duke
"to  loue  her  and  to  wedde  her."  Duke  Humphrey's  mar-
riage to  Eleanor  Cobham  took  place  at  least  as  early  as  1431.
In  the  interim  Margery  had  doubtless  plied  her  trade  indus-
triously among  her  neighbors,  and  would  have  died  in  her  bed
instead  of  being  burned  at  the  stake  if  she  had  refrained  from
mingling  in  high  society.  It  is  noteworthy  that  both  in  1432
and  1441  she  was  somehow  associated  with  ecclesiastics  —
men  of  education  —  in  her  nefarious  practices.

It  is  interesting  to  note  that  Foxe  registers  Roger  (whose
surname  he  gives  as  Onley)  as  a  red-letter  martyr  in  his
Kalender,  and  Dame  Eleanor  as  a  confessor.  As  Gairdner
remarks,  "  the  fact  that  she  was  condemned  for  something  by
the  Church  of  Rome  seems  to  have  been  sufficient  in  Foxe's
eyes  to  give  her  a  place  in  the  'Kalender.'"  ^'^  Bishop  Bale
also  regards  both  Roger  and  the  Duchess  as  sufferers  for  re-
ligion's sake.^^  Anyhow  the  lady's  unquiet  spirit  haunted  her
prison,  Peel  Castle,  in  the  Isle  of  Man,  as  recently  as  the
eighteenth  century.

On  January  22,  1470,  Jacquette  de  Luxembourg,  Duchess
of  Bedford,  was  cleared  of  a  slanderous  accusation  of  witch-
craft brought  against  her  by  Thomas  Wake.  He  had  ex-
hibited an  image  of  lead,  "made  lyke  a  Man  of  Armes,  con-
teynyng  the  lengthe  of  a  mans  fynger,  and  broken  in  the
myddes,  and  made  fast  with  a  Wyre,"  which  he  asserted  she
had  fashioned;  and  he  had  also  urged  John  Daunger,  a  parish
clerk  of  Northamptonshire,  to  testify  that  the  duchess  had
manufactured  two  other  images,  one  representing  Edward  IV
and  another  Elizabeth  Grey,  whom  the  king  married.  On  the
day  mentioned,  both  Wake  and  Daunger  were  examined  be-
fore the  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  and  the  accusation  broke  down,
for  Daunger  refused  to  give  any  such  evidence.''^  The  old
scandal  was  revived  by  Richard  III  in  1483  in  his  attempt  to
show  that  there  had  never  been  a  valid  marriage  between


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


85


King  Edward  and  Queen  Elizabeth.  It  was  then  asserted
that  "the  pretensed  Mariage"  was  brought  about  "by  Sor-
cerie  and  Wichecraft"  committed  by  Elizabeth  and  her
mother,  according  to  "the  common  opinion  of  the  people
and  the  publique  voice  and  fame  thorough  all  this  Land."
Obviously  the  notion  was  that  two  of  the  figures  were  used  in
love  magic.

In  1490  Johanna  Benet  was  called  before  the  Commissary
of  London  for  sorcery  with  a  candle  of  wax:  "as  the  candle
consumes,  the  man  must  waste  away."  ^»  A  similar  story  was
told  at  Norwich  as  late  as  1843  in  the  course  of  a  prosecution
for  assault,  and  candle  witchcraft  is  still  practised  in  Eng-
land, it  seems,  to  torment  and  recall  a  truant  lover.''"  About
1500  Alice,  wife  of  John  Huntley  of  Southwark,  was  charged
with  image  magic.  She  had,  it  was  said,  long  "used  and  exer-
cised the  feetes  of  Wychecraft  and  Sorsery  ayenst  the  lawe
of  the  Chirche  and  of  the  kyng."  There  were  found  in  her
house,  according  to  the  petition  in  Chancery  filed  by  John
Knyght,  chaplain,  one  of  the  searchers,  "dyverses  mamettes
[images]  for  wychecraftes  and  enchauntementez,  with  other
stuff"e  beryed  and  depely  hydd  under  the  erthe."  What  the
outcome  was  we  cannot  tell.  Our  sole  information  is  derived
from  Knyght's  petition,  from  which  it  appears  that  he  had
been  arrested,  probably  at  Mistress  Alice's  suit,  and  was  then
in  the  Marshalsea.'''  It  was  likewise  about  the  year  1500  that
the  Bishop  of  St.  David's  undertook  to  discipline  Thomas
Wyriott,  Gentleman,  and  a  woman  named  Tanglost  for  adul-
tery. This  was  the  beginning  of  troubles.  Wyriott's  wife
died  soon  after,  and  it  was  common  fame  that  she  was  killed
by  witchcraft  worked  or  procured  by  Tanglost.  The  bishop
banished  Tanglost  from  the  diocese.  Thereupon  she  hired  a
witch  at  Bristol,  one  Margaret  Hackett,  and  brought  her  to
Wyriott's  house,  where,  in  a  room  inappropriately  styled
Paradise  Chamber,  the  two  women  made  a  pair  of  waxen
images  in  order  to  destroy  the  prelate.  Margaret  was
arrested,  and  she  confessed;  but  another  witch  was  hired  and
a  third  figure  of  wax  was  fashioned.  Tanglost  was  then  ex-
amined for  heresy  by  four  doctors  of  divinity,  who  referred
her  to  the  bishop  for  "correction."  Wyriott,  however,  kept
her  out  of  his  hands  by  legal  chicanery.  At  present  —  so  the


86


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


bishop  declares  in  his  bill  in  chancery  —  she  is  conveyed
from  place  to  place  by  Wyriott  and  his  friends  to  the  intent
that  she  may  continue  her  sorcery  against  him.  In  order,
therefore,  to  safeguard  his  life,  he  petitions  the  Lord  Chan-
cellor to  order  the  case  of  Tanglost  before  the  Court  of  Chan-
cery. In  her  answer  Tanglost  denies  the  charge  of  witchcraft
and  contends  that  the  prosecution  is  purely  malicious.  What
the  outcome  was  we  do  not  know.'^^

The  legend  of  the  Scottish  king  Duff"  turns  up  in  Hector
Boece,  whose  History  appeared  in  1527."  The  age  of  the
tradition  is  indeterminable.  Later  chroniclers  repeat  the
tale,  which  was  known  to  Shakspere.  He  did  not  utilize  this
particular  feature,  though  he  adopted  and  adapted  some  of
the  details  for  Macbeth.

In  1527  (the  year  of  John  Dee's  birth),  Dr.  Thomas  Benet
of  Salisbury,  afterwards  Precentor  and  Chancellor  of  the
cathedral,  writes  to  Wolsey.  He  is  sending  him  a  Frenchman
named  Maturyn  Bensart,  a  practitioner  of  physic  at  Sher-
borne, who  is  suspected  of  necromancy,  especially  because  his
servant  had  caused  four  metal  images  of  men  and  women  to
be  cast.  These  were  found  on  searching,  as  well  as  some  sus-
picious-looking knives  and  "divers  instruments."  Bensart
admitted  that  he  had  made  aurum  potabile  in  his  native  coun-
try.^"

In  1538  there  was  great  excitement  about  a  wax  baby  with
two  pins  stuck  in  it,  discovered  when  about  to  be  buried  in  a
London  churchyard.  A  scrivener  named  Poole,  skilled  in  sor-
cery, was  consulted.  He  declared  that  the  maker  of  the
puppet,  whoever  he  was,  "was  not  his  craft's  master,  for  he
should  have  put  it  either  in  horse  dung  or  in  a  dunghill."  The
authorities  looked  into  the  affair.  The  talk  at  Oxford  was
that  the  image  represented  Prince  Edward,  that  there  was  a
knife  through  the  head  or  heart,  and  that  as  the  image  "did
consume,  so  likewise  should  the  Prince."  The  preamble
to  the  Witchcraft  Statute  of  Henry  VIII  (1542)  expressly
notes  the  prevalent  manufacture  of  "dyvers  Images  and  pic-
tures of  men  women  childrene  Angelles  or  develles  beastes  or
fowles."^^

Reginald  Scot  tells  a  good  story  about  "Brandon  the  jug-
gler," whom  I  cannot  date.  He  "painted  on  a  wall  the  pic-
ture of  a  dove,  and  seeing  a  pigeon  sitting  on  the  top  of  a


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


87


house,  said  to  the  king;  Lo  now  your  Grace  shall  see  what  a
juggler  can  doo,  if  he  be  his  craftes  maister;  and  then  pricked
the  picture  with  a  knife  so  hard  and  so  often,  and  with  so
effectuall  words,  as  the  pigeon  fell  downe  from  the  top  of  the
house  Starke  dead."  He  was  forbidden  "  to  use  that  feat  anie
further,  least  he  should  emploie  it  in  anie  other  kind  of  mur-
ther."  "This  storie  is,"  Scot  adds,  "untill  the  dale  of  the  writ-
ing hereof,  in  fresh  remembrance,  &  of  the  most  part  beleeved
as  canonicall,  as  are  all  the  fables  of  witches."  "    Scot  also
gives  directions  for  hurting  or  killing  a  person  by  means  of  a
waxen  image  —  also  for  images  of  brass  and  of  "  the  earth  of
a  dead  man,"  and  for  waxen  images  to  procure  love.'^  He
contends  that  all  this  is  folly.  "But,"  he  adds,  "concerning
these  images,  it  is  certaine  that  they  are  much  feared  among
the  people,  and  much  used  among  cousening  witches."
In  proof  he  furnishes  details  of  an  occurrence  "not  long
sithence"  at  New  Romney  in  Kent.  A  young  woman  fell  sick
and  "a  famous  witch  called  mother  Baker"  was  consulted.
Mother  Baker,  learning  that  the  family  suspected  a  woman  of
the  neighborhood,  declared  that  this  woman  was  guilty,  for
she  had  made  a  heart  of  wax  and  pricked  it  with  pins  and
needles.    Mother  Baker,  to  support  her  fiction,  concealed
such  an  image  in  the  victim's  house.   Her  fraud  was  de-
tected."

That  image  witchcraft  went  on  through  the  reigns  of
Elizabeth  and  James  I,  was  a  matter  of  course.  Indeed,  it  has
continued  to  the  present  time  in  uninterrupted  succession
from  remote  antiquity.

In  the  examinations  of  witches  arrested  at  Windsor  in  1 579
it  appeared  that  "  they  have  made  away  and  brought  to  their
deathes  by  certen  pictures  of  waxe  certen  persons."  So  we
learn  from  the  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council  (January  16,  1578-
79),  which  go  on  to  assert  that  "there  hath  bene  latelie  dis-
covered a  practise  of  that  device  very  likelie  to  be  intended  to
the  distruction  of  her  Majesties  person."  ^°  This  lately  dis-
covered plot  is  doubtless  that  implied  in  the  letter  of  the
Privy  Council  of  August  22,  1578,  to  the  Lord  Mayor  and  the
Bishop  of  London  and  other  officials,  "advertising  them  of
the  receipt  of  their  letters  of  the  xv"^  of  this  present,  with  a
boxe  fast  sealed  wherein  weare  conteyned  three  pictures  of


88


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


waxe  and  certen  examinacions  taken  by  them  towching  the
maner  of  finding  the  said  pictures."  This  affair  is  treated
by  Scot  with  due  scorn:  "Were  there  not  three  images  of
late  yeeres  found  in  a  doonghill,  to  the  terror  &  astonishment
of  manie  thousands?  In  so  much  as  great  matters  were
thought  to  have  beene  pretended  [i.  e.  intended]  to  be  doone
by  witchcraft."  Bodin  reports  that  these  three  images  of
wax  were  found  in  the  possession  of  a  "Prestre  Sorcier"  who
was  cure  d'Istincton  (Islington),  and  were  intended  "pour
faire  mourir  la  Royne  d'Angleterre,  &  deux  autres  proches  de
sa  personne."  They  were  discovered,  he  adds,  "dedans  un
fumier"  and  the  names  of  the  queen  and  others  were  written
on  them.^-^  Mendoza,  the  Spanish  ambassador,  gives  further
details  in  a  despatch  to  his  home  government.  A  country-
man found  the  three  figures  buried  in  a  stable.  They  were
two  spans  high  and  broad  in  proportion.  "The  centre  figure
had  the  word  Elizabeth  written  on  the  forehead  and  the  side
figures  were  dressed  like  her  councillors,  and  were  covered
over  with  a  great  variety  of  different  signs,  the  left  side  of  the
images  being  transfixed  with  a  large  quantity  of  pig's  bristles
as  if  it  were  some  kind  of  witchcraft."  The  fact  is,  if  we
may  trust  Scot,  that  "an  olde  cousener,  wanting  monie,"  had
made  the  three  puppets  for  a  young  gentleman,  promising
him  that  thereby  the  love  of  three  women  might  be  gained.
Ben  Jonson,  long  afterward,  mentioned  the  business  as  some-
thing of  which  he  remembered  the  current  rumor,  "being
then  very  young."  Soon  after  the  Islington  scandal,  there
was  information  before  the  Council  (February  3,  1578-9)  of
certain  persons  in  the  bishopric  of  London  who  were  "privie
to  the  secrett  keping  of  certaine  images  which  are  reserved  to
some  ill  purpose  of  sorcerie  or  idolitrie."  The  Council  wrote
at  the  same  time  to  the  Bishop  of  Norwich  of  a  report  that
at  Thetford  and  other  places  in  his  diocese  "there  hath
bene  sene,  not  long  since,  in  some  mens  houses  certen  images  "
of  a  similarly  dubious  character.  Again,  in  1580  Nicholas
Johnson  was  accused  of  sorcery  by  "making  of  her  Majesties
picture  in  wax,"  ^'  and  five  years  later  Lord  Burghley  re-
ceived a  letter  alleging  that  William  Awder  (schoolmaster,
minister,  and  physician)  claimed  the  power  to  kill  or  cure  by
means  of  such  an  image.


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


89


In  1590  a  Mistress  Dewse  was  informed  against  for  dealing
with  a  conjurer  to  kill  her  enemies:  she  wished  their  pictures
of  wax  to  be  made  and  pricked  to  the  heart.  It  appears  that,
when  the  conjurer  said  he  was  "lame"  (in  his  hands,  I  sup-
pose) and  therefore  could  not  make  the  wax  "pictures"  for
Mrs.  Dewse,  she  made  them  herself  under  his  supervision  —
three  figures,  to  wit,  one  for  Mr.  Younge  ("&  put  a  pynne
into  his  harte"),  another  for  Sir  Rowland  Heyward  ("&  putt
a  pynne  to  his  harte  &  another  under  his  ribbes"),  and  one
for  Sye  ("&  putt  two  pynnes  in  his  eyes").  Two  of  these
images  were  found  by  the  sheriff  in  her  cupboard  and  were
at  the  date  of  the  record  (January,  1589  [-90])  in  the  custody
of  the  town  clerk  of  London.  A  point  of  particular  interest  in
Mrs.  Dewse's  case  is  her  suggestion  to  the  conjurer  that,  if  the
waxen  images  failed  to  work,  he  should  destroy  her  enemies
"in  a  dampe,"  as  she  had  heard  some  were  destroyed  at  the
Oxford  assizes.^'  Doubtless  she  had  in  mind  the  Black  As-
size of  1577,  when  typhus  (jail  fever)  killed  off  judges,  jury,
lawyers,  and  townspeople.  In  this  mortality  Catholic  writers
discerned  "a  wonderful  judgment  of  God"  upon  heretical
persecutors;  but  the  science  of  the  day  explained  it  as  due  to  a
poisonous  "damp"  (i.  e.  steam  or  vapor)  that  exhaled  from
the  prisoners  or  perhaps  from  the  soil.  The  most  popular
theory,  however,  ascribed  the  fatal  damp  to  the  sorcery  of
Roland  Jenks,  a  bookseller  tried  on  this  occasion  for  vending
Catholic  literature.  From  strange  and  frightful  materials,  it
was  said,  Jenks  had  moulded  a  candle,  which  he  lighted  "as
soon  as  ever  he  was  condemned."  '°  This  was  the  story  which
Mrs.  Dewse  had  heard.

In  1 59 1  a  surgeon  of  Burton-on-Trent  named  Richard
Batte  (or  Bate)  was  under  vehement  suspicion.  He  had
threatened  to  make  a  picture  of  wax  and  thereby  to  consume
his  mother-in-law  and  her  children.  This,  at  all  events,  was
the  allegation  of  his  wife's  brother.  Indeed,  Batte  himself
admitted  that  he  had  hired  a  painter  to  prepare  such  an
image,  averring,  however,  that  he  needed  it  to  cure  a  patient
who  suffered  from  a  sharp  attack  of  dysentery.  The  painter,
too,  deposed  to  the  same  effect.  We  do  not  know  the  out-
come.'^ In  161 1,  to  be  sure,  one  William  Bate  had  King
James's  pardon,  and  the  record  states  that  he  was  "indicted


90


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


twenty  years  since  for  practising  of  invocation  of  spirits  for
finding  treasure."  The  ground  for  this  long-deferred  grace
was  that  the  evidence  was  "found  weak."  The  date  fits,
but  the  name  and  the  offence  do  not.

In  1594  an  image  of  wax  was  found  in  the  bedroom  of  Fer-
dinando,  fifth  Earl  of  Derby,  who  had  died  suddenly.  An  old
woman  was  suspected.  One  of  her  hairs  was  "prict  directly
in  the  heart"  of  the  image,  or,  according  to  another  account,
hair  like  the  earl's  was  "  twisted  through  the  belly  thereof."
In  1596  Thomas  Lodge  teaches  the  orthodox  view  that  it  is  a
sin  to  seek  cures  by  witches  or  enchanters,  but  he  concedes
the  propriety  of  thwarting  them  by  pulling  a  needle  out  of  an
image  of  wax  if  you  find  such  a  thing.'''  About  1600,  to  round
out  the  century.  Lady  Blake's  son  was  suspected  of  "being
a  practiser"  with  one  Elkes  for  treasure,  and  for  making
images  to  procure  love.'^

Clay  figurines  played  their  part  in  the  Lancashire  witch
tragedy  of  1612;"^  image  magic  of  a  peculiar  sort  emerged  in
1 61 5  in  the  trial  of  Mrs.  Ann  Turner  for  poisoning  Sir  Thomas
Overbury;  "  and  the  English  witch  literature  of  that  century
abounds  in  material  on  the  subject.'^  Examples  from  Massa-
chusetts are  not  wanting.  The  Rev.  George  Burroughs,  it  was
testified,  "  had  been  at  Witch-Meetings,"  and  "  brought  Pop-
pets to  them,  and  thorns  to  stick  into  those  Poppets,  for  the
afflicting  of  other  People."  And  there  were  discovered  in  the
wall  of  Bridget  Bishop's  cellar  "several  Poppets,  made  up  of
Rags,  and  Hogs  Brassels,  with  Headless  Pins  in  them,  the
points  being  outward."  In  Goody  Glover's  house  were
found  and  "brought  into  Court,  several  small  Images,  or
Puppets,  or  Babies,  made  of  Raggs,  and  stufft  with  Goats-
hair,  and  other  such  Ingredients.  When  these  were  produced,
the  vile  Woman  acknowledged,  that  her  way  to  torment  the
Object  of  her  malice,  was  by  wetting  her  Finger  with  her
Spittle,  and  stroaking  of  those  little  Images."

Caroline  of  Brunswick,  when  Princess  of  Wales,  was  comi-
cally addicted  to  image  magic.  Under  date  of  1814  Lady
Charlotte  Campbell  (afterwards  Bury)  furnishes  details  in
her  diary:  "After  dinner,  her  Royal  Highness  made  a  wax
figure  as  usual,  and  gave  it  an  amiable  addition  of  large  horns;
then  took  three  pins  out  of  her  garment,  and  stuck  them


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


91


through  and  through,  and  put  the  figure  to  roast  and  melt  at
the  fire. . .  .  Lady  says  the  Princess  indulges  in  this  amuse-
ment whenever  there  are  no  strangers  at  table;  and  thinks
her  Royal  Highness  really  has  a  superstitious  belief  that  de-
stroying this  effigy  of  her  husband  will  bring  to  pass  the  de-
struction of  his  royal  person."

If  we  had  newspapers  or  folklorists  from  the  middle  ages,
such  cases  would  be  countless,  for  they  turn  up  constantly  in
recent  times  and  even  at  the  present  day,  despite  the  progress
of  science  and  what  is  called  rationalism.  One  remembers  the
experiments  of  de  Rochas  as  detailed  in  his  treatise  on  L'Ex-
teriorisation  de  la  Sensibilite,  which  are  accepted  by  Jules
Bois  as  demonstrating  the  possibility  of  envoutement,  whether
for  love  or  malignity.'"^  I  need  not  multiply  examples  of
image  witchcraft  from  modern  Britain,  where  it  is  still  going
on;  but  two  or  three  may  be  cited.  About  1861  a  Devonshire
girl,  dying  of  consumption,  believed  that  the  rival  who  had
stolen  her  sweetheart  was  so  inveterate  in  malice  as  to  make
an  image  of  her  in  wax  and  drive  pins  into  it  every  night.
More  recently  a  London  woman  made  a  wax  figure  of  her
husband's  mistress  and  set  it  inside  the  fender,  with  the
formula,  "Burn,  you  white  witch!  burn!"  In  1909,  in  a
Somerset  parish,  an  old  servant  warned  the  rector:  "Mrs.

 is  a  witch,  and  I  fear  she  will  do  you  some  harm;  she  will

make  an  image  of  you  in  wax,  or  clay,  stick  it  all  over  with
pins  and  burn  it;  you  will  have  great  trouble,  perhaps  be  very
ill  and  die."  A  West  Sussex  vicar  reports  that  a  sick
woman  among  his  parishioners,  who  suffered  from  delusions,
showed  him  in  191 6  "a  rude  figure  cut  out  of  a  turnip.  She
pointed  out  two  pins  stuck  into  that  part  which  represented
the  chest.  She  told  me  that  her  husband  had  made  it  with  the
object  of  her  suffering  in  the  same  places.  She  complained
much  of  pains  in  the  chest  and  finally  died  of  diabetes."  '"^
A  cake  stuck  with  pins  and  burned  in  a  pan  may  replace  the
witch's  image  and  make  her  appear. Image  magic  to  be-
witch one  to  death  is  known  to  our  Southern  negroes.  An
image  is  made  of  snake  oil  mixed  with  flour  or  sand;  a  name  is
given  to  the  puppet;  when  it  is  baked  at  the  fire  or  pins  are
stuck  in,  the  victim  suffers;  a  pin  in  the  heart  means  death.""
In  the  Scottish  Highlands,'"*  the  magic  figure  is  known  as  a


92  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


corp  criadhach  ("body  of  clay")/"'  Not  long  ago,  we  are
told,  a  young  woman  in  the  Western  Islands  almost  died  from
envoutement^  but  fortunately  the  image,  stuck  with  pins,  was
discovered  in  time:  it  lay  in  a  running  stream,  which  was
gradually  washing  it  away.  A  similar  case  has  recently  been
reported  from  Uist."°  At  Inverness  in  1883  a  woman  charged
with  assault  alleged,  in  her  defence,  that  the  grandmother  of
the  girl  she  had  attacked  was  a  witch,  and  she  exhibited  in  the
police  court  the  clay  puppet  used  to  bewitch  her: "The
legs  had  been  broken  off  the  image,  and  since  then  the  pris-
oner believed  that  her  own  legs  were  losing  their  strength."
A  corp  criadhach  from  Islay,  with  dozens  of  pins  in  the  breast,
is  exhibited  in  the  Museum  of  Archaeology  at  Cambridge  in
England.'"

A  recent  lawsuit  in  the  Upper  Congo  grew  out  of  image
magic.  Two  men  quarrelled.  A  had  heard  that  B  paid  a
witch-doctor  to  call  up  A'^  image,  which  was  then  repeatedly
stabbed  by  B.  But  B  insisted  that  it  was  another  person's
image,  not  yf 's,  that  the  sorcerer  had  evoked.'"  Among  the
Northern  Bantu  and  elsewhere  you  may  kill  your  enemy  by
spearing  his  shadow."^  So,  in  an  ancient  Irish  saga.  Find
"saw  before  him  Cuirrech's  shadow,  and  throughout  the
shadow  he  hurled  a  spear,  chanting  a  spell  over  its  head,  and
it  strikes  into  Cuirrech,  who  fell  thereby."  A  wizard  of
Lincoln  once  revealed  a  thief  by  making  his  shadow  appear
on  a  wall."''  In  Africa  you  may  stab  your  enemy's  outline
drawn  in  sand;  in  North  Carolina,  if  you  mark  out  his
figure  on  a  board  and  shoot  it,  he  feels  pain  in  the  correspond-
ing part  of  his  body."^  In  1903  a  mountaineer  in  that  state,
finding  that  butter  would  not  come  when  his  wife  churned,
declared  that  a  woman  of  the  neighborhood  had  bewitched
the  milk,  pinned  up  a  portrait  of  her  on  the  wall,  and  shot  a
silver  bullet  through  it."'  In  Nova  Scotia,  "if  bewitched,
draw  a  figure  of  the  witch  on  a  board  and  fire  a  charge  of  shot
into  it.  This,  done  before  sunrise,  will  break  the  spell."  "°
Henslowe,  the  Elizabethan  theatrical  manager,  jotted  down
the  following  spell  in  his  famous  Diary:  "To  make  a  fowle
fialle  downe  picture  yt  in  paper  &  when  yt  is  makinge  leat  one
say  m.a.n.  to  the  eand  with  battes  blude  behold  her  wth
thine  eies  &  pricke  the  picture  in  the  head  wth  a  pyne  &  she


CHAP.  Ill]


IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


93


will  falle  downe  Jmedyately."  '^"^  The  reluctance  of  savages
to  have  their  portraits  drawn  is  shared  by  some  civilized  per-
sons. A  Belgian  girl,  to  torment  her  faithless  lover,  sent  him
back  his  portrait  with  the  eyes  pricked  out  with  pins.'"  It
was  an  old  superstition  in  New  Hampshire  that  you  would
soon  die  if  you  allowed  yourself  to  be  photographed."^  To
break  a  mirror,  as  everybody  knows,  is  a  sign  of  death  in  the
family,  or  at  best  of  seven  years'  bad  luck.""*  Faded  almost
beyond  recognizing  was  the  image  magic  which  came  out  in
a  case  before  a  Taunton  (Somerset)  magistrate  in  1881.  A
"witch-doctor"  of  that  town  had  tapped  a  sick  woman's  palm
with  his  finger,  assuring  her  that  every  stroke  was  a  stab  in
the  witch's  heart.

To  use  an  animal  instead  of  a  figurine  as  representative  of
the  person  to  be  injured  was  common  enough  in  ancient  de-
fixiones.^^^  Thus  along  with  the  cursing  tablet  there  might  be
buried  a  cat  or  a  cock  that  had  been  tortured  or  mutilated.
The  object  was,  of  course,  to  cause  one's  enemy  to  be  afflicted
or  disabled  in  like  manner."^  So  in  the  county  of  Durham  in
1 861,  when  a  woman  was  thought  to  be  suffering  from  witch-
craft, pins  were  run  into  a  live  pigeon  by  each  member  of  her
family,  and  the  bird  was  roasted.  The  witch,  it  was  hoped,
would  feel  these  torments  and  thus  would  be  forced  to  come
and  remove  the  curse. '''^  About  1920  in  Devon  a  cockerel  was
tortured  to  death  with  pins;  then  the  feathers  were  singed  off
and  the  carcass  was  thrown  away.  A  spell  was  recited,  be-
ginning:

With  this  pin  I  thee  prick,

My  enemy's  heart  I  hope  to  stick."'

Here  we  have  a  performance  and  a  spell  precisely  like  those  of
the  ancients.  Compare  a  Latin  tablet  from  the  proconsular
Province  of  Carthage:  "This  cock's  tongue  I  have  torn  out
while  he  was  alive.  ...  So  may  the  tongues  of  my  enemies  be
made  dumb  against  me!"  and  a  Greek  tablet  from  the
same  region:  "As  this  cock  is  fast  bound  in  feet  and  hands
and  head,  so  bind  the  legs  and  the  hands  and  the  head  and
the  heart  of  Victoricus  the  charioteer."

Sometimes  the  animal  thus  maltreated  was  regarded  as  an
offering  to  the  infernal  gods;  and  this  idea  has  descended  to


94  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

our  own  times,  for  the  sacrifice  of  a  cock  is  a  recognized  fea-
ture of  ancient,  mediaeval,  and  modern  sorcery.  In  the  pro-
ceedings against  Dame  Alice  Kyteler  in  1324  it  was  alleged
that  she  had  offered  cocks  at  the  crossroads  to  a  demon,  tear-
ing them  limb  from  limb,  and  had  used  the  entrails  in  the  prep-
aration of  magical  powders  and  unguents."^  In  1879
land  a  black  cock  was  cut  into  quarters  and  offered  at  the  four
corners  of  a  field  to  bring  ill  fortune  upon  the  owners  of  the
land."^  To  baptize  a  dog  or  a  cat  was  a  powerful  rite  to  com-
mand demons,  and  sometimes,  in  such  cases,  the  creature  was
slaughtered  as  if  it  were  a  human  sacrifice. This  comes  out
unmistakably  in  the  trial  of  two  treasure-digging  sorcerers  in
I465:  they  had  promised  their  demon  "the  body  of  a  Chris-
tian man,"  but  they  cheated  him  by  offering  up  a  cock  which
they  had  baptized  by  a  Christian  name."^  "A  redd  cock
beinge  dead"  was  seized  among  the  miscellaneous  parapher-
nalia of  two  men  caught  in  the  act  of  "witchcrafte  or  con-
juringe"  in  a  field  near  London  in  1590;  presumably  it  had
been  sacrificed  to  a  demon,  for  they  also  left  behind  in  their
flight  "a  fayre  cristall  stone"  with  Sathan  written  on  it."*

With  the  sacrificial  purpose  is  sometimes  confused  the
idea  of  transferring  an  ailment.  In  former  days  persons
afflicted  with  fits  used  to  throw  money  into  St.  Tecla's  well  in
Denbighshire,  and  then  to  sleep  all  night  under  the  altar-
table  in  the  church,  holding  a  live  cock  in  their  arms.  "  In  the
morning  they  would  let  the  cock  go,  when  the  bird  took  off  all
the  fits  with  him  and  died  soon  after."  An  aged  parishioner,
about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  told  the  clerk  that  he
remembered  seeing  the  cocks  stagger  about  from  the  effects
of  the  fits."*  Transference  is  more  or  less  the  idea,  appar-
ently, in  the  common  practice  of  curing  warts  by  rubbing
them  with  a  snail  and  impaling  the  creature  on  a  thornbush."'
Similar  customs  are  —  the  enclosing  of  a  live  spider  in  a  box
or  a  hollowed  nut  for  ague  or  whooping  cough;  the  cure  of
ague  by  putting  a  live  snail  in  a  bag,  wearing  the  bag  round
the  neck  for  nine  days,  and  then  throwing  the  snail  into  the
fire;  the  burying  of  a  shrewmouse  alive  in  a  hole  in  an  ash
tree.'"^  For  whooping  cough  you  may  wear  a  live  spider  or
caterpillar  as  an  amulet:  it  wastes  away,  and  the  cough
slackens;  or  you  may  draw  a  black  ribbon  three  times


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


95


through  the  body  of  a  live  frog  and  let  the  patient  wear  the
ribbon  round  his  neck.'''^  Such  transference  to  animals,  sticks,
and  running  water  occurs  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  Leech  Book.'''''
In  1580  Mother  Gawe  undertook  to  cure  a  sow  by  shifting  the
disease  to  a  cat,  but  the  sow  died  after  all  —  thus  testifies  the
old  Chronicle  of  Shrewsbury. "'^

Here  belongs,  though  also  conceived  as  a  sacrifice,  the  an-
cient Germanic  rite  of  burying  an  animal  alive  to  check  the
cattle  plague.'"^  In  Queen  Elizabeth's  time  a  man  was
brought  before  the  Commissioners  for  Ecclesiastical  Causes
for  burying  "a  quick  dogg  and  a  quick  cowe."  A  dead
creature,  feet  up,  may  also  be  buried  under  the  threshold  of
the  stable  or  cowshed,  to  save  the  herd.''*^  In  Scotland,  in
1597,  a  cock  was  buried  alive  to  cure  insanity.'""  In  the  Heb-
rides and  the  Highlands  a  remedy  for  epilepsy  (a  demonic
affliction)  is  to  bury  a  black  cock  under  the  bed  or  the  floor,
with  clippings  of  the  patient's  hair  and  nails;  or  the  cock
may  be  buried  on  the  spot  where  the  epileptic  falls. Here
the  rationale  may  be  to  transfer  the  epilepsy  to  the  cock,  or  to
propitiate  the  demon  by  an  oblation,  or  to  torment  the  witch
until  she  reverses  the  spell.  Transference  is  frankly  the  mo-
tive in  the  Highlands  when  one  buries  in  a  neighbor's  ground
a  beast  that  has  perished  from  the  blight  of  the  evil  eye.'^^
An  English  spell  for  black  magic  is  or  was  to  hang  up  nine
living  toads  on  a  string  and  then  bury  them:  as  they  pine
away,  your  enemy  will  languish  until  death  comes.'"  In
Devonshire  it  was  once  customary  to  bury  three  live  puppies,
arranged  in  a  triangle,  in  the  corner  of  a  field  to  clear  it  of
weeds. '5-*  In  these  two  instances  the  rationale  is  plain  enough,
but  often  the  various  motives  get  confused  in  people's  minds
with  time,  and  in  the  upshot  the  process  is  merely  a  means  of
injury  or  of  remedy,  with  no  clear  notion  of  the  whys  and
wherefores.

Similarly  the  folk  do  not  always  distinguish  between  sacri-
fice and  torturing  the  witch  when  they  burn  a  live  creature  to
stop  a  pestilence  among  domestic  animals. We  have  a  fine
example  reported  by  Sir  Roger  Wilbraham  in  1 605 :  "  Har-
ley  my  host  at  Huntingdon  told  me  this  night,  supping  with
me,  that  he  being  before  a  farmer  &  24  horses  for  plows  12
horses  &  xxx  cattail  were  bewitched  &  died  in  ii  dales,  sod-


96  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

dainlie  sick,  crying  &  grynnyng  &  staringe:  in  th'end  was  ad-
vised to  burne  a  sick  horse  alive  &  so  did,  and  after  had  no
more  died:  another  did  so  by  his  shepe  by  Harley's  advise:
non  after  died:  &  Harley  said  a  knowen  witch  advised  him  to
burne  the  hart  by  rosting  on  a  spitt,  &  the  witch  wold  come  to
the  dore  before  the  hart  was  rosted."  To  burn  an  animal
alive  in  order  to  check  a  cattle  plague  or  the  like  must  have
been  a  settled  practice  in  England  long  before  Elizabeth  came
to  the  throne.  Ravens  burnt  alive  are  specified  as  a  cure  for
gout  and  the  falling  sickness  in  an  English  medical  manu-
script of  the  middle  ages.'^^  The  Essex  parson,  George  Gif-
fard,  mentions  the  custom  in  1587:  "They  take  a  Hogge  or
some  other  beast  and  burne  it  aliue  ";  and  he  returns  to  the
subject  in  his  Dialogue  (1593):  witches  can  be  baulked,  so  his
parishioners  imagined,  by  burning  "some  Hue  thing,  as  hogge
or  henne,"  for  this  drives  away  the  devils  they  send;  a  pig  was
burnt  alive  and  the  witch  said  that  her  demon  cat  would
never  go  thither  any  more;  a  woman's  "hennes  began  to  die
vp,  vntil  she  burnt  one  henne  aliue";  one  of  the  interlocu-
tors remarks  that,  to  stop  a  pestilence,  some  of  his  neighbors
wished  him  "to  burne  some  thing  aliue,  as  a  henne  or  a
hogge."  In  1624  John  Crushe  was  presented  in  the  arch-
deacon's court  of  Giffard's  county  because  he  had  burnt  on
Hawkwell  common  a  lamb  which  he  declared  was  bewitched,
and  so  had  set  fire  to  the  common,  which  was  full  of  rub-
bish.'*' In  Essex  also,  in  the  last  century,  when  a  man's  gos-
lings died,  their  death  was  ascribed  to  the  evil  eye  of  a  no-
torious witch  of  Thorpe,  and  two  live  goslings  were  baked  in
the  oven;  this  killed  the  witch,  whose  body  showed  burns. ''^^
The  same  Thorpe  witch,  a  Mrs.  Gardner,  once  "overlooked"
a  boy,  who  kept  "a-pindling  away."  His  grandmother
burned  some  of  his  hair  and  bits  of  his  nails,  and  the  witch
soon  came,  with  piteous  entreaties:  the  spell  was  broken.'''^
Early  in  the  nineteenth  century,  at  Wherstead  in  Suffolk,  a
duck  was  baked  alive  when  the  ducks  ceased  to  lay;  near
Ipswich,  in  the  same  county,  a  sheep  was  burned  in  the  eight-
eenth century,  and  thereby  the  witch  was  burned  to  death  in
her  house. In  1833  a  pig  was  roasted  to  death  in  Hunting-
donshire to  save  the  sickly  litter. '''^  Similar  cases  are  known
in  the  United  States.'*''  Less  drastic  was  the  action  of  the


CHAP.  Ill]


IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE


97


Lincolnshire  farmer  whose  pigs  were  dying:  he  scored  a  live
pig's  back  with  a  redhot  poker,  and  the  witch  died  of  a  sore
back  soon  after. In  Norfolk  it  may  suffice  to  cut  off  and
burn  a  bit  of  a  pig's  tail  and  ear.'^^  So  in  1657  a  Connecticut
colonist  whose  pigs  had  died  "in  a  strange  way,"  cut  off  the
tail  and  one  ear  of  the  last  sickly  survivor  and  threw  them
into  the  fire,  "and  after  put  the  pigg  vpon  the  fire  till  it  was
dead."  This  sorcery  with  ear  and  tail  was,  he  averred,  "a
meanes  vsed  in  England  by  some  honest  people  to  finde  out
witches."  Instead  of  a  living  animal  one  may  burn,  with
equal  efficacy,  the  carcass  of  a  creature  that  has  died  of  the
witch-sent  disease,'^"  or  the  straw  on  which  a  diseased  beast
has  been  bled  to  death. Timothy  Crowther  (1694-1760),
Yorkshire  parish  clerk  and  wizard,  had  a  "Remedy  for  a
Horse  or  Cow  that  hath  harme  dun  by  a  Witch,"  which  must
needs  be  quoted  entire:  "Take  hair  of  each  Quarter,  som  of
each  Hoof  and  horn;  sew  it  up  in  a  Cloth,  &  in  y  form  of  a
ball;  prick  it  full  of  pins  and  put  in  3  Needls.  Boil  it  in  y
afflicted  Water  til  y  pan  be  like  to  burn,  then  Throw  it  in  to
y  fire  and  say  (3  times),  'Witch,  Witch,  Witch,  thus  shalt
Thou  Burn  in  Hell.'"

It  is  even  now  a  common  practice  to  torment  an  enemy  by
sticking  pins,  needles,  or  thorns  in  an  animal's  heart  and
(often)  roasting  it  or  parching  it  in  the  chimney.  Here  the
beast's  heart  serves  your  malefic  sorcery  as  well  as  an  image
of  wax  or  the  whole  animal  would  do.  The  custom  is  mani-
festly of  immemorial  antiquity  and  differs  in  no  essential  from
the  burial  of  a  mutilated  cat  or  cock  in  the  ancient  defixiones:
indeed,  the  heart  may  be  cut  out  of  a  living  animal.''^  About
1842,  by  a  white  wizard's  directions,  six  bullocks'  hearts — ■
two  stuck  with  pins,  the  others  with  new  nails  —  were  slowly
melted,  and  thus  the  witch's  heart  was  to  be  melted  too;  then
nails  were  driven  into  a  butt  and  it  was  rolled  downhill,  to
torture  the  witch  further;  she  was  killed  by  this  treatment
and  showed  the  marks. In  Yorkshire,  in  the  eighteenth  cen-
tury, a  cow's  heart  was  boiled  and  stuck  with  pins  to  check
the  cattle  plague.'"  In  the  South  Downs,  rather  recently,
when  pigs  had  been  "overlooked"  (made  sick  by  the  evil
eye),  a  heart  was  pierced  with  nails  and  pins  and  then
roasted.'''^  A  similar  case  occurred  in  Somerset  in  1875.'^'  -'•^


98  WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Devonshire,  some  years  ago,  when  a  pony  went  lame,  an
animal's  heart  was  burned;  the  witch  came  and  tried  to  buy
apples,  which  were  refused;  the  pony  got  well.'^°  The  classic
cock  reappears  in  the  county  of  Durham:  about  1855,  to
cure  a  sick  horse,  a  black  fowl's  heart  stuck  with  pins  was
roasted/^^  In  Somerset,  in  1882,  as  a  counter-charm  when  a
woman  had  gone  mad,  an  animal's  heart  with  pins  in  it  was
to  be  roasted  and  then  put  in  the  chimney  to  waste  away  and
thus  rot  the  witch's  heart. In  South  Devon,  also  as  a  coun-
ter-charm to  avenge  the  black  witchcraft  that  had  killed
cows  or  sheep,  a  sheep's  heart  was  pierced  with  pins  and
nails. Against  bad  luck  in  fishing,  caused  by  witchcraft,  a
pigeon's  heart  was  filled  with  pins  and  roasted  in  Yorkshire.'*''
To  keep  out  Dorset  witches  a  piece  of  bacon  stuck  with  pins
used  to  be  hung  up  in  the  chimney. An  elaborate  piece  of
sorcery  to  stop  death  of  cattle  is  reported  by  the  Rev.  J.  C.
Atkinson  from  Cleveland:  an  ox-heart  was  pierced  with  nine
new  pins,  nine  new  needles,  and  nine  new  nails  and  burned  at
midnight  to  the  accompaniment  of  two  verses  of  a  [cursing]
psalm.'**  About  1897  a  Devonshire  woman,  tormented  by
witchcraft,  laid  a  sheep's  heart  stuck  with  pins  on  the  bar
that  holds  up  the  pothooks  in  the  fireplace  and  repeated  the
following  spell:

May  each  pin
Thus  stuck  in

This  poor  heart
In  hers  go
Who  hurts  me  so

Till  she  departs.

The  patient  recovered  and  the  witch  died,  so  they  say.'*^
Sometimes  the  heart,  instead  of  being  burned,  is  buried  in  the
ground  or  concealed  in  the  fabric  of  a  house  or  under  the
foundation.'**  The  process  may  be  purely  malefic  or  may
be  resorted  to  as  a  counter-spell.'^"  The  heart  may  be  ex-
tracted from  a  living  animal:  in  Yorkshire,  for  example,  to
ward  off"  witchcraft,  take  a  black  hen's  heart  out  of  the  living
bird,  stick  it  full  of  pins,  and  bury  the  hen.'"

We  must  remember  that  these  performances  are  not  ficti-
tious. A  calf's  heart,  thus  pierced,  was  exhumed  in  1827  op-
posite the  threshold  of  an  old  Dalkeith  tenement  (apparently


CHAP,  in]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE  99


under  the  flagstones  of  the  floor)  and  was  sent  to  Sir  Walter
Scott  as  a  curiosity.  Scott  sent  it  to  the  Society  of  Antiqua-
ries, in  whose  museum  it  may  still  be  seen."^  The  Taunton
Museum  shows  two  dried  pigs'  hearts,  thick  set  with  pins,
both  found  in  an  old  chimney  in  Somerset."^  In  1884  a  bul-
lock's heart  pierced  with  whitethorn  prickles,  nails,  and  pins,
was  found  in  a  Dorset  chimney."'*  In  1902  a  bullock's  heart,
with  pins  and  black  thorns,  was  discovered  tied  up  under  the
roof  of  an  outhouse  in  Devon. In  1917  there  was  exhibited
in  London  a  sheep's  heart,  prepared  in  similar  fashion  by  a
Devonshire  woman  who  had  practised  witchcraft  in  the  me-
tropolis as  recently  as  1908.''*  About  1862  a  woman  was
brought  before  the  Durham  magistrates  for  larceny:  she  had
committed  the  theft  to  cure  her  bewitched  child;  the  process
was  to  steal  a  fowl,  take  out  the  heart,  stick  this  full  of  pins,
and  roast  it  at  midnight  over  a  slow  fire.''^  In  1905  there
were  witches  in  Devon  who  professed  to  be  able  and  willing
to  torture  anybody  by  means  of  a  sheep's  heart  or  a  toad  full
of  pins  hung  up  in  the  chimney.''^

In  1 610  Joan  Bayly  of  Rye,  an  octogenarian,  deposed  that,
thinking  Thomas  Hart's  child  bewitched,  she  told  Mistress
Hart  to  get  a  piece  of  red  cloth,  sixty  needles,  and  a  half-
pennyworth of  pins.  Then,  to  force  the  witch  to  come,  Joan
stuck  the  pins  and  needles  in  the  cloth,  put  it  in  the  fire,  and
pierced  it  with  a  dagger.  After  a  long  time  the  cloth  was  con-
sumed, and,  says  Joan,  "  at  length  it  did  seem  to  be  like  unto
a  toad,  but  no  party  came  in,"  and  she  declares  that  she  does
not  know  who  bewitched  the  child.'"  Probably  the  cloth  was
cut  to  the  shape  of  a  heart.  A  corked  greybeard  jug  contain-
ing clippings  of  hair  and  of  fingernails  along  with  such  a  cloth
heart  stuck  full  of  bent  pins,  was  dug  up  at  Westminster  in
1904.^°°  In  Yorkshire  "when  a  child  was  born,  and  it  proved
either  unhealthy  or  deformed,  it  was  generally  supposed
some  evil-disposed  person  must  have  pricked  its  name  with
pins  on  a  pin-cushion.  When  such  a  discovery  was  made  by
an  expectant  wife,  nothing  was  said  to  the  person  working  the
evil,  but  the  cushion  was  stolen,  the  pins  withdrawn  one  by
one,  and  stuck  into  the  heart  of  a  calf.  This  had  to  be  buried
in  the  churchyard."

The  same  kind  of  sorcery  (with  images,  animals,  or  hearts)


lOO


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


may  be  applied  to  love  matters,  whether  for  revenge  or  to
summon  one's  sweetheart.'"'^  In  1867  a  doll  "stuck  about  the
heart  with  tin  tacks"  was  found  in  a  Lincolnshire  stable,
where  a  young  fellow  had  hidden  it  as  a  charm  to  make  a  girl
meet  him."^  In  Cambridgeshire  a  pigeon's  heart  dried  at  the
fire  and  pierced  with  redhot  pins  was  an  instrument  of  ven-
geance on  a  faithless  lover  or  a  seducer.^"''  In  Lincolnshire,  in
1890,  a  pigeon's  insides  were  taken  out  while  it  was  alive  and
were  put  over  the  house  door:  the  girl's  lover  came.^°^  A
pigeon's  heart,  taken  out  while  it  is  alive,  and  stuck  with
pins,  if  placed  under  one's  pillow  will  recall  a  faithless  sweet-
heart. A  frog  stuck  with  pins  and  buried  alive  serves  a  similar
purpose.  Sometimes  this  latter  process  is  accompanied  by  a
spell  beginning:  "I  do  not  want  to  hurt  this  frog."  In
Buckinghamshire  one  thrusts  two  pins  through  a  lighted
candle  so  as  to  pierce  the  wick  and  form  a  cross,  repeating  the
formula:

It's  not  this  candle  alone  I  stick,
But  A.  B.'s  heart  I  mean  to  prick;
Whether  he  be  asleep  or  awake,
I 'd  have  him  come  to  me  and  speak.^"'

A  Staffordshire  charm  reported  in  1902  consists  of  a  heart-
shaped  bit  of  red  flannel  stuck  with  three  pins  pointing
toward  the  centre  and  sprinkled  with  the  red  liquid  known  as
dragon's  blood.  Burn  this  on  a  Friday  at  midnight,  and  say  —

'Tis  not  this  blood  I  wish  to  burn,  j

But  's  heart  I  wish  to  turn.

May  he  neither  rest  nor  sleep
Till  he  returns  to  me  to  speak.^"^

There  are  varieties  of  the  spell:  sometimes  the  shoulder-bone
of  a  lamb  (famous  in  divination)  ^"^  is  used,  and  is  pricked
with  a  penknife.'''''  The  bladebone  of  a  rabbit  stuck  with  nine
pins  and  pvit  under  your  pillow  will  make  you  dream  of  your
sweetheart.^"  The  so-called  dragon's  blood  is,  of  course,  a
substitute  for  the  blood  of  the  bespelled  person."^  A  queer
story,  incident  to  a  trial  for  assault,  was  told  to  the  Norwich
magistrates  in  1843.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Curtis  declared  that  Mrs.
Bell  had  bewitched  them.  Mrs.  Curtis  saw  her  light  a  candle
and  fill  it  with  pins."""  She  then  put  some  dragon's  blood  and


(


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE  lOI

water  into  an  oyster  shell  and  repeated  a  form  of  words  over
it.  Instantly  Mr.  Curtis's  arms  and  legs  were  "set  fast."
Mr.  Curtis  corroborated  his  wife's  testimony,  adding  that  to
the  mixture  in  the  shell  the  witch  added  parings  of  her  own
nails  and  put  the  dish  on  the  fire."''  For  the  rhyming  spell  we
may  compare  the  incantation  that,  in  1894,  a  "wise  man"  of
Wells  taught  a  patient  as  a  means  of  breaking  a  witch's
charms:  about  the  hour  of  midnight  she  and  her  husband
were  to  sit  by  the  fire  and  burn  salt,  repeating  —

This  is  not  the  thing  I  wish  to  burn

But  Mrs.  's  heart  of  Somerset  to  turn,

Wishing  thee  neither  to  eat,  drink,  sleep,  nor  rest
Until  thou  dost  come  to  me  and  do  my  request,

Or  else  the  wrath  of  God  may  fall  on  thee  and  cause  thee  to  be  con-
sumed in  a  moment.  Amen.^s

The  Malays  have  a  similar  formula:  earth  from  an  enemy's
footprint  is  beaten  while  the  operator  chants  —

It  is  not  earth  that  I  switch,
But  the  heart  of  So-and-so.^'*

In  Somerset  an  onion  may  replace  the  puppet  or  the  heart:
write  your  enemy's  name  on  a  scrap  of  paper  and  fasten  it  to
the  onion  with  as  many  pins  as  possible;  put  it  up  the  chim-
ney; as  it  withers,  so  will  your  victim  waste  away.  Such  an
onion  was  found  in  a  chimney  about  1880.^'''  A  lemon  stuck
with  pins  was  found  some  years  ago  in  a  churchyard  in  Brad-
ford, Yorkshire. This  kind  of  substitution  occurs  in  many
countries,  civilized  and  savage."'  Neapolitan  malefic  witch-
craft is  worked  by  sticking  an  orange,  a  lemon,  or  a  potato
with  pins  and  nails. In  Sicily  an  egg,  an  orange,  or  a  lemon
is  often  used."'  In  Bombay  to  pierce  a  nut  with  needles  is  one
way  to  keep  off  a  witch. In  Fiji  a  plantain  sucker,  set  out
at  midnight  with  spells  and  curses,  is  clubbed,  speared,  and
buffeted  until  it  wilts  and  dies;  and  one's  enemy  suffers  and
dies  along  with  the  plantain. Some  Fijians  bury  a  cocoanut
(which  bears  a  grotesque  resemblance  to  a  human  head),
"with  the  eye  upward,  beneath  the  temple-hearth,  on  which
a  fire  is  kept  constantly  burning;  and  as  the  life  of  the  nut  is
destroyed,  so  the  health  of  the  person  it  represents  will  fail
till  death  ensues."      In  the  Dekkan  and  the  Konkan  there  is


I02


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Strange  black  magic  with  an  image  and  a  lime  pierced  with
pins:  the  lime  goes  to  the  victim  and  kills  him.^^s  'pj^g  Malays
pierce  a  lime  to  cause  love-pangs  in  the  heart  of  the  be-
loved."^ In  Pomerania  to  bind  an  egg  with  green  silk,  and
then  bury  it  in  hot  ashes  in  the  name  of  a  thief,  will  so  tor-
ment him  that  he  must  bring  back  the  booty. Elsewhere  on
the  Continent  similar  witchcraft  is  wrought  with  a  sod  bear-
ing the  thief's  footprint:  hang  it  up,  for  instance,  in  the  chim-
ney smoke,  and,  as  it  dries,  so  he  pines  away,  or  suffers  from  a
withered  foot."^  To  drive  a  nail  (preferably  redhot),  or  pins
or  a  knife,  into  a  person's  footmark  makes  him  lame,  and  this
means  of  detection  or  vengeance  is  often  utilized  against  a
witch."'  In  the  Scottish  Highlands  a  square  of  turf  is  pierced
with  pins  and  put  in  the  fire  to  punish  the  hag  who  has
afflicted  a  child. Burning  a  handful  of  thatch  from  a  witch's
cottage  forces  her  to  reveal  herself,  according  to  a  theory  long
accepted  by  country  people  in  England;  so,  in  Joan  Cason's
case  ( 1 586) ,  a  tile  from  the  witch's  house,  put  in  the  fire,  com-
pelled her  to  come  in  person.

A  bottle  buried,  or  put  by  the  fire,  with  pins  or  spikes  from
a  thornbush  in  it  —  or  pins,  needles  or  nails  (sometimes  also
hair,  bits  of  fingernails,  etc.)  —  will  work  malefically,  and  is
a  good  remedy,  therefore,  against  witchcraft.  In  Lincoln-
shire, jugs  called  greybeards  and  other  vessels  are  found  now
and  then  beneath  the  foundation  or  threshold  or  hearthstone
of  old  buildings;  they  may  contain  horseshoe  nails,  scraps  of
iron,  needles,  pins,  etc.^^^  In  West  Sussex  about  fifty  years
ago,  if  you  filled  a  quart  bottle  with  pins  and  heated  them
redhot,  they  would  prick  the  heart  of  the  witch  that  had
given  you  epilepsy  and  make  her  take  off  the  spell. Boiling
pins  in  urine  will  force  a  Sussex  wizard  to  come  to  your  house
(1919).^^^  'Po  bury  a  bottle  containing  the  urine  of  a  be-
witched person  or  animal  will  afflict  the  witch  with  strangury:
this  (as  well  as  to  draw  the  witch's  blood  or  hang  up  a  horse-
shoe) Increase  Mather  regards  as  an  illicit  measure  of  pro-
tection. His  son  Cotton  also  disapproves  "the  Urinary  ex-
periment" by  which  "the  Urine  must  be  bottled  with  Nails
and  Pins,  and  such  Instruments  in  it  as  carry  a  shew  of  Tor-
ture with  them,  if  it  attain  its  end."  To  ascertain  who  was
afflicting  Mr.  Parris's  children  at  Salem  Village,  it  was  said


CHAP.  Ill]  IMAGE  MAGIC  AND  THE  LIKE  IO3

that  his  "Indian  Man,  and  Woman,  made  a  Cake  of  Rye
Meal,  and  the  Childrens  water,  baked  it  in  the  Ashes,  and
gave  it  to  a  Dog,  since  when  "  (adds  Mr.  Lawson)  "  they  have
discovered,  and  seen  particular  persons  hurting  of  them."  A
similar  performance  is  reported  from  England  in  1626.^"
According  to  Drage  (1665),  "stopping  up  Bottles  of  that
Drink  that  hath  been  bewitched,  hath  made  the  Witch  able
neither  to  urine  or  deject,  until  they  were  opened."  For  be-
witched cattle,  according  to  a  "cunning  man"  cited  by  Gif-
fard,  the  Essex  parson,  in  1593,  one  may  "set  on  a  posnet  or
some  pan  with  nayles,  and  seeth  them,  and  the  witch  shal
come  in  while  they  be  in  seething,  and  within  a  fewe  dayes
after,  her  face  will  be  all  bescratched  with  the  nailes."  So
in  Nova  Scotia,  by  recent  report,  if  your  cows  are  bewitched,
you  may  boil  the  milk  with  pins:  the  witch  will  suffer  and  will
come  to  your  house  and  ask  about  the  cows.^^"

Charm  bottles  have  often  come  to  light.'-"  One  found  in
a  Wharfedale  garden  in  1845  filled  with  pins,  needles,
human  hair,  fragments  of  fingernails,  brimstone,  etc.^-*^  An-
other, buried  upside  down,'"*^  filled  with  dark  water  and  con-
taining nine  bent  pins,  was  under  the  clay  floor  of  a  cottage  in
Staffordshire.^'*'*  A  jar  containing  spikes  from  a  thornbush  as
well  as  pins  was  exhumed  in  a  Devon  churchyard  in  1895,
and  a  bottle  with  pins  in  the  cork  was  turned  up  in  1900  in
digging  a  grave  in  the  same  county .^''^  A  similar  discovery
was  made  some  sixty  or  seventy  years  ago  in  a  grave  at  Bod-
min.Tombs,  we  remember,  were  the  favorite  places  of
deposit  for  cursing  tablets  in  antiquity.  Two  large  coils  of
human  hair,  recently  deposited,  were  uncovered  about  1900
in  a  kistvaen  near  Postbridge.^'''  The  following  elaborate
recipe  comes  from  the  same  county  (Devon):  "To  destroy
the  power  of  a  witch.  Take  three  small-necked  stone  jars:
place  in  each  the  liver  of  a  frog  stuck  full  of  new  pins,  and  the
heart  of  a  toad  stuck  full  of  thorns  from  the  holy  thorn  bush.
Cork  and  seal  each  jar.  Bury  in  three  different  churchyard
paths  seven  inches  from  the  surface  and  seven  feet  from  the
porch.  While  in  the  act  of  burying  each  repeat  the  Lord's
prayer  backwards.  As  the  hearts  and  livers  decay,  so  will  the
witch's  power  vanish.  After  performing  this  ceremony  no
witch  can  have  any  power  over  the  operator."


CHAPTER  IV


LOVE  AND  HATE

WHEN  Parliament  in  1 542  made  it  felony  to  "  use  devise
practise  or  exercise,  or  cause  to  be  used  devysed  prac-
tised or  exercised,  any  invocacions  or  conjuracions  of  Sprites
wichecraftes  enchauntementes  or  sorceries,  to  thentent  .  .  .
to  provoke  any  persone  to  unlawfull  love,"  ^  the  legislators
were  merely  faithful  to  the  witch-creed  of  the  world,  ancient
and  modern,  civilized  and  savage.^  To  work  witchcraft  for
love  by  spells,  or  by  philtres  in  food  or  drink,  is  forbidden  in
an  Anglo-Saxon  penitential  of  the  tenth  century  as  well  as  in
other  kindred  documents,  insular  and  Continental,  of  the
ninth  century  or  earlier.^  Unseemly  English  nursery  jingles
about  fishes  and  cocklebread  go  back  somehow  to  strange
rites  of  love-magic  described  by  Burchard  of  Worms  about
1020  and  in  a  manuscript  written  in  England  in  the  thirteen-
hundreds.5

At  the  Synod  of  Exeter  in  1287  sorcery  for  love  was  treated
by  Bishop  Peter  Quivil  as  a  sacrifice  to  demons  in  violation  of
the  First  Commandment.^  In  an  English  fabliau,  contem-
porary with  the  bishop,  a  lecherous  cleric  calls  upon  Dame
Sirith  to  help  him  to  his  obdurate  lady,  who  is  married.  The
old  procuress  is  loud  in  her  disclaimers:  "I  am  a  holy  woman;
no  skill  have  I  in  witchcraft.  May  his  life  and  soul  be  shent
that  sent  thee  to  me  on  this  errand!"  Yet,  after  binding  him
to  secrecy,  for  she  fears  to  be  "  brought  before  the  Chapter  for
such  works,"  the  dame  wins  the  wife's  consent  by  a  wile,  per-
suading her  that  a  certain  dog  was  once  a  woman,  but  had
been  transformed  by  a  clerk's  witchery  because  she  would  not
listen  to  his  suit.  The  tale  comes  from  the  Orient,  but  is
adapted  to  English  conditions:  the  husband  has  gone  to  the
fair  at  Botolphston  (the  Lincolnshire  Boston),  the  wife  is
named  Margery,  and  the  suitor  is  called  Wilekin.''  Dame
Sirith  herself  is  precisely  the  kind  of  person  whom  moral
Gower  contemplated  when  he  described  the  bawd-witch  a


CHAP,  iv]  LOVE  AND  HATE  I05

century  later.  Such  a  witch,  he  tells  us,  is  one  "who,  in  her
old  age,  when  she  cannot  otherwise  afflict  men's  hearts  with
love,  becomes  d' amour  la  sorceresse.  She  is  a  worse  diablesse
than  the  devil  himself.  He  who  by  her  means  procures  love,
devotes  himself  to  Satan  and  renounces  his  God."  ^  Here  we
have  the  im-plicit  covenant  with  Satan  which,  as  well  as  the
definite  compact,  is  so  marked  a  feature  of  the  witch-creed  of
later  times.

England  narrowly  escaped  a  visit  from  one  powerful  sor-
cerer in  the  thirteenth  century,  —  a  Toledo  Master  of  Arts
who  seems  to  have  had  a  truant  disposition.  At  Maestricht,
after  describing  the  customary  circle,  he  skinned  a  cat  and
gave  it  to  three  anonymous  demons,  who  straightway  de-
voured it;  then  he  sacrificed  two  doves  to  the  great  fiend
Epanamon,  whom  he  conjured  into  a  vessel  of  glass  (the
Bottle  Imp!).  Thereupon  his  clients  expressed  their  wishes:
one  desired  the  favor  of  a  woman,  another  the  friendship  of
the  Duke  of  Brabant,  another  a  boon  so  foul  that  the  demon
declared  he  could  not  grant  it.  The  magician  embarked  for
England  and  was  lost  at  sea.'

The  infatuation  of  Edward  III  for  Alice  Ferrers,  which  was
of  course  ascribed  to  occult  arts,  is  learnedly  discussed  by  the
Monk  of  St.  Albans,  who  refers  to  Nectanebus,  the  famous
Egyptian  magician  (the  real  father  of  Alexander  the  Great),
and  mentions  the  Rings  of  Moses.  Alice,  it  seems,  had  in  her
service  a  friar  who  professed  to  be  a  physician  but  was  in  fact
a  sorcerer.  He  made  figures  of  wax,  representing  King  Ed-
ward and  Alice,  and,  operating  with  these  and  using  powerful
herbs  and  charms,  he  had  brought  the  king  completely  under
her  control.  He  had  also  prepared  rings  of  oblivion  and  of
memory,  as  Moses  did  in  ancient  times,  and  so  long  as  the
king  used  these  (i.  e.,  apparently,  so  long  as  he  wore  a  ring  of
memory  which  his  mistress  had  given  him),  he  could  never
forget  her."  When  this  friar  was  arrested  in  1376,  one  of
Alice's  maids  jeered  at  him:  "Could  not  you,  who  were  wont
to  prophesy  to  others,  foresee  what  was  to  happen  to  your-
self?" "I  foresaw  the  event,"  he  replied,  "but  could  not  tell
when  it  was  to  come.""  The  same  scornful  jest  —  to  all  intents
and  purposes  —  was  uttered  by  Alexander  when  he  pushed
Nectanebus  into  the  pit,"  and  by  the  Thracian  girl  (so  Plato


Io6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

tells  us)  when  Thales  tumbled  into  the  well,  and  it  became
popular  in  an  y^lsopic  fable. However,  there  is  nothing  very
brilliant  about  the  quip,  which  may  well  have  been  invented
more  than  once.  A  similar  taunt  from  a  modern  Yorkshire
farmer  has  been  noted.'''  A  wizard  in  Radnorshire  was  asked
by  a  child,  "Why  do  you  not  charm  that  lump  off  your  head,  '
as  you  are  such  a  great  conjurer?"  A  native  Tongan  magis-
trate, about  1870,  after  exposing  the  shams  of  a  witch-finder,
had  the  man  tied  up  and  laid  in  the  sun,  bidding  him  keep  off
the  flies  by  his  powerful  magic!  '"^  "Physician,  heal  thyself!"
As  for  the  Rings  of  Moses,  the  legend  runs  that,  when  the
Ethiopians  invaded  Egypt,  Tarbis,  the  daughter  of  their
king,  fell  in  love  with  Moses  and  surrendered  to  him  the  city
of  Saba  (afterwards  called  Meroe)  on  condition  that  he
should  marry  her.  When  he  wished  to  return  to  Egypt,  she
refused  to  let  him  go.  So  Moses,  who  was  skilled  in  astrology,
engraved  on  a  gem  a  figure  that  conferred  memory;  on  an-
other a  figure  that  caused  forgetfulness.  Setting  the  stones  in
rings  that  were  alike,  and  pretending  that  these  were  symbols
of  mutual  affection,  he  kept  the  ring  of  remembrance  for  him-
self but  gave  that  of  oblivion  to  the  princess.  Thus  Tarbis
forgot  her  love  for  Moses,  and  he  abandoned  her.  This  is  the
version  of  Peter  Comestor,  from  whom  the  legend  was  bor-
rowed by  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  and
others.''  Especially  important  for  England  was  its  inclusion
in  the  book  of  exempla  known  as  Convertimini  (ascribed  to
Robert  Holkot)  and  in  the  Gesta  Romanorum.  The  Gesta
transfers  the  tale  to  Vespasian  or,  in  some  texts,  to  "Frideri-
cus."  '*  Chaucer  was  aware  that  Moses,  as  well  as  Solomon,
had  the  name  of  skill  in  the  art  of  rings.

In  the  fifteenth  century.  Dame  Eleanor  Cobham  was  said
to  have  "enforced"  Duke  Humphrey  "to  loue  her  and  to
wedde  her"  by  "medicines  and  drynkis"  prepared  by  Mar-
gery Jordemayne,  the  Witch  of  Eye,  burned  as  a  relapsed
heretic  (or  perhaps  as  a  traitor)  in  1441.^°  In  1484  the  Act  of
Settlement  of  the  crown  on  Richard  III  contains  the  allega-
tion that  the  marriage  of  the  late  King  Edward  with  Eliza-
beth Grey  was  brought  about  "by  Sorcerie  and  Wichecraft,
committed  by  the  said  Elizabeth,  and  her  mother  Jaquett
Duchesse  of  Bedford,  as  [is]  the  common  opinion  of  the


CHAP.  IV]  LOVE  AND  HATE  IO7

people,  and  the  publique  voice  and  fame  thorough  all  this
Land."  In  1536  Chapuys  reported  to  his  home  govern-
ment a  rumor  that  King  Henry  declared  that  his  marriage  to
Anne  Boleyn  was  null  and  void  because  he  had  been  seduced
by  witchcraft.  The  report  came  to  Chapuys  from  two  au-
thorities unnamed  (a  lady  and  her  husband),  who  told  him
that  they  were  informed  by  an  important  person  that  the
king  had  said  this  to  somebodyl  "

So  much  for  high  life!  A  sheaf  of  humbler  testimonies  fol-
lows herewith.

In  1446  Mariot  de  Bel  ton  was  brought  before  the  Durham
ecclesiastical  court  as  a  witch  [sortilegd) ;  she  was  said  to  be  in
the  habit  of  telling  unmarried  women  that  by  her  arts  she
could  procure  whomsoever  they  desired  for  their  husbands.
Another  woman,  Isabella  Brome,  was  similarly  accused  at  the
same  time.  Both  were  admitted  to  compurgation.^^  In  1481
Johanna  Beverley  was  brought  to  bar  in  the  Commissary's
Court  of  the  diocese  of  London  as  a  sorceress  [sortilega).  She
had  induced  two  witches  to  win  her  the  love  of  Robert  Stan-
ton and  also  of  a  second  gentleman.  These  rivals,  it  was  said,
had  fought  for  her,  and  one  had  almost  killed  the  other.  Her
husband,  for  his  part,  stood  in  such  fear  of  them  that  he  durst
not  live  with  her.  She  was  likewise  a  common  harlot  and
bawd,  and  was  willing  to  use  poison  when  her  art  failed  her.^'*
In  I492,  Richard  Laukiston  confessed  that  he  had  received
two  mazers  (or  bowls),  worth  five  marks  and  more,  of  Widow
Margaret  Geffrey  on  his  promise  to  get  her  a  husband  by
means  of  "  a  connyng  man."

In  1 519  Richard  Hall,  a  chaplain  of  Alne  in  Yorkshire,
dealt  in  love  potions  {pociila  amatorid) .^^  In  1526  Margaret
Williamson  was  brought  before  the  London  Commissary  for
using  a  love  drink  {potii  amatorio)  and  possessing  suspected
books.  She  gave  information  that  a  certain  parchment  vol-
ume was  in  the  hands  of  Henry  Devell,  and  was  discharged.
In  1552  Joan  Hall  of  Norwich,  a  servant,  deposed  before  the
mayor  and  aldermen  that  she  had  been  defrauded  by  an  old
acquaintance,  Mrs.  Hudson,  a  shoemaker's  wife,  who  had  ex-
tracted from  her  more  than  twenty  shillings  on  pretence  of
consulting  a  cunning  man  in  order  to  procure  for  Joan  "a
rich  marriage."  For  a  good  while  she  was  afraid  to  make  any


I08         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


complaint,  for  she  had  been  told  that,  if  the  quest  were  aban-
doned, "the  spirit  which  the  cunning  man  had  raised  would
have  a  leg  or  an  arm  or  an  eye  from  her."

In  1582  the  Archdeacon  of  Canterbury  in  his  visitation
took  up  the  case  of  Goodwife  Swane,  "vehemently  suspected
to  be  a  witch."  "  She  herself  hath  reported  that  she  can  make
a  drink,  which  she  saith  if  she  give  it  to  any  young  man  that
she  liketh  well  of,  he  shall  be  in  love  with  her."  ^'  In  1585
John  Meere  of  Dorset,  student  of  the  Temple,  was  accused
of  using  sorceries  and  threats  to  win  the  love  of  Mistress
Edetha  Best.  In  particular  he  had  threatened  to  trouble  her,
it  was  alleged,  with  the  sight  of  the  devil  unless  she  con-
sented.^" In  1 59 1  John  Prestall  of  London,  it  was  charged,
"practised  sorcery,  witchcraft,  or  magic,  to  draw  the  affec-
tions of  men  and  women."  One  of  his  customers  was  Edmund
Carlton,  Gent.,  to  whom  he  had  promised  a  drink.

Black  magic  to  ingratiate  one's  self  with  royalty  was  an  an-
cient practice  in  France.  In  the  year  583  the  infant  son  of
King  Chilperic  died  of  dysentery.  Mummolus,  a  high  official,
was  suspected  of  procuring  his  death  at  the  hands  of  certain
witches  of  Paris.  These  confessed,  under  torture,  that  they
were  in  fact  witches  and  were  guilty  of  many  such  murders:
the  little  boy,  they  said,  they  had  "given  for  the  life  of  Mum-
molus" (that  is,  to  preserve  the  life  of  the  official  they  had
sacrificed  the  child). Mummolus  denied  this,  admitting,
however,  that  he  had  often  received  from  these  women  inunc-
tiones  et  potiones  which  were  to  procure  him  the  favor  of  the
king  and  queen. A  charge  of  sorcery  was,  indeed,  a  natural
thing  enough  for  any  courtier's  enemies  to  bring  against  him
when  he  stood  high  in  his  sovereign's  regard.  Thus  in  1232
the  Chief  Justice  Hubert  de  Burgh,  Earl  of  Kent  (Shak-
spere's  Hubert  in  King  John),  was  accused,  among  other
crimes,  of  winning  the  royal  favor  by  incantations  and  sor-
ceries.^'' Hubert  was  also  accused  of  stealing  from  the  royal
treasury  a  gem  which  made  the  wearer  invincible  and  with
giving  it  to  the  king's  enemy  Llewellyn. In  the  time  of
Edward  II  (1307-1327)  that  king's  fondness  for  his  insolent
minion  Piers  Gaveston  was  explained  by  many  as  due  to
wizardry. ^'^  Sorcery  to  win  a  prince's  favor  was  a  feature  of
French  high  life  at  the  time.  Thus,  in  1308,  Guichard,  Bishop


CHAP.  IV]  LOVE  AND  HATE  IO9

of  Troyes,  was  accused  of  consulting  a  demon  to  learn  how  he
could  either  win  the  favor  (not  love)  of  Jeanne  de  Navarre,
wife  of  Philip  IV,  or  cause  her  death;  he  was  told  by  a  witch
that  she  had  no  power  to  win  over  the  queen  but  could  de-
stroy her.^^  Magic  was  also  suspected  to  account  for  the  high
standing  of  Enguerrand  de  Marigny,  Philip's  chief  counsel-
lor, hanged  for  malefic  sorcery  in  the  next  reign  (13 15).  Both
these  cases  were  of  course  familiar  matters  to  Englishmen.

The  famous  legend  of  Charlemagne's  ring  (familiar  to  Eng-
lish readers  in  Southey's  ballad  of  "King  Charlemain")  was
known  to  the  satirist  Skelton  from  Petrarch  and  was  uti-
lized in  his  savage  attack  on  Wolsey  in  "Why  Come  Ye  Nat
to  Courte?"  Tyndale  also  tells  the  story. It  is  wonderful,
writes  Skelton,  that  the  king  is  so  fond  of  the  Cardinal  and  so
blinded  that  he  cannot  see  how  the  wily  prelate  deceives  him:

I  dought  [i.  e.  fear]  lest  by  sorsery
Or  suche  other  loselry,
As  wychecraft  or  charmyng,
For  he  is  the  kynges  derlyng,
And  his  swete  hart  rote.

I  well  know,  the  poet  continues,  that,  according  to  Francis
Petrarch,  Charlemagne  was  out  of  his  mind  with  like  dotage:

It  was  by  nycromansy,
By  carectes  *  and  coniuracyon
Vnder  a  certeyne  constellacion,
And  a  certeyne  fumygacion,
Vnder  a  stoon  on  a  golde  ryng,
Wrought  to  Charlemayn  the  king,
Whiche  constrayned  him  forcebly
For  to  loue  a  certayne  body
Aboue  all  other  inordinatly.
■  This  is  no  fable  nor  no  lye.

But  let  my  mathematical  masters  tell  you  the  rest  —

For  I  abhore  to  smatter

Of  one  so  deuyllysshe  a  matter.''''

The  innuendo  is  obvious.  Hardly  anybody  doubted  that
Wolsey  had  somehow  enchanted  his  royal  master.  He
"calked  [calculated]  the  king's  nativity  and  birth,"  writes

■*  That  is,  by  astrological  or  magical  figures.


no


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Tyndale,  and  "as  I  heard  it  spoken  of  divers,  he  made  by
craft  of  necromancy  graven  imagery  to  bear  upon  him,  where-
with he  bewitched  the  king's  mind,  and  made  the  king  to
dote  upon  him  more  than  ever  he  did  on  any  lady  or  gentle-
man, so  that  now  his  Grace  followed  him,  as  he  before  fol-
lowed the  king."  Tyndale  seems  to  think  that  this  kind  of
thing  was  a  weakness  incident  to  prelates:  in  the  time  of
Henry  VII,  he  tells  us,  "  Cardinal  Morton  had  a  licence  of  the
pope  for  fourteen  to  study  necromancy,  of  which  he  himself
was  one."  ''^

Many  supposed  that  Wolsey  had  a  familiar  demon  in  his
service.  William  Stapleton,  an  ex-Benedictine,  who  himself
possessed  at  one  time  a  little  ring  that  he  thought  might  be
useful  in  searching  for  buried  treasure,  had  heard  from  a
friend  (ca.  1527)  that  the  parson  of  Lesingham  and  another
called  up  three  spirits,  —  Andrew  Malchus,  Oberion,  and  In-
chubus,  —  but  that  Oberion  refused  to  speak,  because,  as
Andrew  Malchus  explained,  he  "was  bound  unto  my  Lord
Cardinal."  Richard  Jones,  another  dabbler  in  the  black
art,  confessed  in  1 532  that  Sir  William  Neville  asked  him  if  it
were  not  possible  "  to  have  a  ring  made  that  should  bring  a
man  in  favour  with  his  Prince;  seeing  my  Lord  Cardinal  had
such  a  ring,  that  whatsomever  he  asked  of  the  King's  Grace,
that  he  had."'"'  Neville  also  told  him  that  Cromwell  once
associated  with  a  sorcerer,  and  "shortly  after  no  man  so  great
with  my  Lord  Cardinal  as  Master  Cromwell  was ! "  Stapleton
replied  that  he  "had  read  many  books,  and  specially  the
works  of  Solomon,  and  how  his  ring  should  be  made,  and  of
what  metal;  and  what  virtues  they  had  after  the  canon  of
Solomon,"  but  that  he  never  made  one  himself  and  knew  of
their  virtues  "only  by  hearsay." A  priest  named  Dr.
Clene,  in  1538  boasted  that  he  had  lived  some  years  with
Cardinal  Wolsey  and  had  made  for  him  "a  ring  with  a  stone
that  he  wrought  many  things  with."  This  Doctor  Clene  was
also  known  as  Sir  John  Skarme,  "  because  he  can  cumber  the
devil,  as  is  said."  ''^  Skarme  should  be  Shorn.  Master  John
Shorn  (or  Schorn),  rector  of  North  Marston  in  Buckingham-
shire about  1290,  won  lasting  fame  by  conjuring  the  devil
into  a  boot.  Old  figures  of  Master  John,  boot  in  hand,  with  a
little  devil  peeping  out  at  the  top,  still  exist.''^  John  Hey-


CHAP.  IV]


LOVE  AND  HATE


III


wood's  Palmer  (in  the  interlude  of  The  Foure  PP)  mentions
his  shrine  among  many  others  that  he  has  visited  in  his  long
career  as  a  vowed  pilgrim/^

Magical  rings  are  so  abundant  in  ballads  and  romances
that  a  "valued  file,"  a  mere  catalogue  with  the  briefest  note
of  their  powers,  whether  due  to  art  magic  or  to  the  natural
virtue  of  the  stone,  would  fill  page  after  page/'  They
may  confer  invisibility  like  Gyges'  ring  in  Plato, 5°  or  ensure
the  wearer  against  discomfiture  and  his  horse's  stumbling,^'
or  make  him  invulnerable  and  fireproof,^^  or  double  his
strength, 5^  or  keep  him  in  good  health  and  spirits,^"  or  tell  him
how  another  fares  (as  whether  his  wife  is  alive  or  dead,  true
or  false). 55  When  the  Queen  of  Spain  is  about  to  restore  the
Good  Werewolf  to  his  human  figure,  she  binds  about  his  neck
a  rich  and  noble  ring  containing  a  stone  "of  so  stiff  virtue"
that  he  who  wears  it  shall  "  nevermore  be  witched  with  witch-
craft 5^  nor  perish  with  poison,  nor  wrongly  shall  he  never
wive."  "  The  hero  of  Jean  de  Conde's  Dit  dou  Levrier  has  a
ring  with  an  Indian  stone  which  changes  color  when  it  feels
poison  or  sorcery  or  treachery,  and  which  wins  favor  as  well.^*

The  admirable  novella  of  the  young  man  who  put  his  ring
on  a  finger  of  a  statue  of  Venus  and  who  found  himself  be-
trothed to  the  goddess  until  he  was  set  free  by  the  arts  of
Palumbus,  sorcerer  and  Christian  priest,  was  introduced  to
English  readers  by  William  of  Malmesbury  and  was  copied
by  chroniclers  and  others  until  it  became  an  item  of  what
we  call  general  information. It  is  best  known  to  modern
readers  from  The  Earthly  Paradise.*"

There  are  many  love-charms  —  either  for  divination  or  to
enforce  the  passion  —  still  known  to  the  English  folk,  and
some  of  them  involve  the  darkest  and  profoundest  magic.
I  do  not  think  that  these  were  imported  by  Bishop  Jewel  or
by  any  of  the  Marian  exiles!  At  all  events,  it  is  apposite  to
cite  two  or  three  ancient  examples  of  similar  superstition.  A
Jewish-Greek  love-charm,  engraved  on  a  leaden  tablet  dug
up  in  the  great  necropolis  at  Hadrumetum  in  the  Roman
province  of  Africa,  had  for  its  object  to  inspire  Urbanos  with
mad  love  for  Domitiana  and  to  force  him  to  marry  her.''^
Another  tablet  of  lead  to  procure  love,  dating  from  the  third
or  fourth  century  and  showing  a  characteristic  mixture  of


112


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Greek,  Egyptian,  and  Hebrew  elements,  not  only  invocates
gods  and  spirits  (both  celestial  and  infernal)  to  fire  the
damsel's  heart,  but  calls  particularly  upon  the  spirit  of  the
dead  man  in  whose  grave  the  spell  was  buried/^  A  leaden
tablet  from  Cnidos  in  Caria  devotes  to  the  infernal  gods  the
woman,  whoever  she  may  be,  that  estranged  Nacon  from
his  wife  Prosodion  and  his  children.*''  In  another  from  the
same  place  an  abandoned  wife  curses  her  rival,  Dorothea.^s
An  Attic  tablet  lays  a  spell  upon  Theodora  that  Callias
may  forget  her.*''^  A  Latin  tablet  found  amongst  tombs  in
a  vineyard  near  Rome  deserves  translation:  "As  the  dead
man  who  is  buried  here  can  neither  speak  nor  converse,
so  may  Rhodine  be  dead  with  regard  to  Marcus  Licinius
Faustus  and  unable  to  speak  or  converse.  And  as  this  dead
man  is  not  pleasing  to  gods  or  men,  in  the  same  way  may
Rhodine  be  pleasing  to  Marcus  Licinius  Faustus  and  may  she
have  as  much  strength  as  the  dead  man  who  is  buried  here.
Father  Dis,  to  thee  I  entrust  Rhodine,  that  she  may  always
be  hateful  to  Marcus  Licinius  Faustus."  In  a  Latin  tablet
from  Carthage  five  demons,  whose  names  are  written  in
Greek  characters  and  two  of  whom  are  styled  Egyptian,  are
called  upon  to  win  the  love  of  a  woman.  "Take  away  sleep
from  her  until  she  comes  to  me  and  satisfies  my  desire."
"Compel  her  to  come  to  me  in  love."  "Drive  her  away  from
her  parents  and  her  chamber  and  force  her  to  love  me."
One,  in  Greek  and  Latin,  from  Hadrumetum,  containing
magic  signs  and  words  (including  Sabaoth),  calls  for  the  love
of  Victoria.  It  figures  two  hearts  intertwined  and  transfixed
with  a  sword  or  a  spike.*'  In  another,  in  Latin,  from  the  same
place,  Felix  bespells  Vettia,  the  daughter  of  Optata,  that  "  for
his  love  she  may  neither  sleep  nor  eat,  and  that  she  may  for-
get her  father  and  her  mother  and  her  kindred  and  all  her
friends  and  all  other  men."

That  love-potions  are  more  likely  to  cause  madness  or
death  than  love  is  noted  by  Wier  and  after  him  by  Scot.''^  In
his  index  Wier  notes  that  "love  is  to  be  won  by  love,  not  by
philtres."  Thus  he  forecasts  the  reply  of  the  old  Aztec
woman,  reputed  to  be  wise  in  magic,  to  Senor  Casanova
when  he  asked  her  what  he  should  do  to  make  a  woman  love
him:  "Love  her!"  said  the  beldame.  "  If  you  wish  her  to  love


CHAP.  IV]  LOVE  AND  HATE  II3

you,  love  her!"  —  and  she  refused  him  any  other  charm.''^
This  is  even  better  psychology  than  Ovid's  amabilis  esto.

Impotence  could  be  induced  by  witchcraft  or  sorcery:  such
was  the  universal  belief,  which  had  often  come  before  the
ecclesiastical  courts  since  the  scandalous  divorce  proceed-
ings of  Lothaire  I  in  the  ninth  century."  It  was  of  course
shared  by  our  Anglo-Saxon  forefathers,"  is  still  an  article  of
faith  among  savages,  the  world  over,  and  holds  its  place  in
civilized  and  half-civilized  folk-lore.  By  the  middle  of  the
twelfth  century  such  a  condition,  thus  caused,  was  an  ac-
cepted ground  for  divorce,  and  for  the  next  three  hundred
years  these  cases  were  so  numerous  that  this  species  of  sor-
cery became  an  everyday  matter.  It  is  beautifully  illustrated
by  a  suit  for  defamation  before  the  Prior's  court  at  Durham
in  1435.  Margaret  Lyndyssay  accused  three  men  of  saying
that  she  was  an  incantatrix  who,  with  another  woman,  had
used  very  black  magic  of  the  sympathetic  order  to  this  end.
She  cleared  herself  with  five  compugators  (all  women),  and
the  men  were  warned,  on  pain  ot  excommunication,  not  to
repeat  the  slander. The  witchery  in  this  Durham  case  was
identical  with  that  employed  for  a  somewhat  similar  purpose
in  the  seventeenth  century,  as  recorded  by  John  Webster.''^
Both  find  a  striking  parallel  in  the  means  by  which  the
Homeric  Iphiclus  was  kept  childless,  as  told  by  Pherecydes  in
the  fifth  century  b.c."  And  so  I  may  dismiss  the  subject,  to-
gether with  that  of  barrenness,  by  referring  to  the  note,  where
is  cited  a  small  selection  from  the  superabundant  literature.''^

The  continuity  of  popular  tradition  independently  of  the
Reformation  and  of  prosecution  on  the  Continent  in  the  six-
teenth century  is  well  illustrated  in  the  ballad  of  "Willie's
Lady. "  Willie's  wife  is  not  acceptable  to  his  mother,  who  is  a
"vile  rank  witch  of  vilest  kind."  She  arrests  her  daughter-
in-law's  delivery  by  evil  spells:  —  nine  witch  knots  in  that
lady's  locks,  combs  of  care  in  her  hair,  a  bush  of  woodbine  be-
tween the  two  bowers,  etc.;  and  she  denies  her  all  relief.  Then
the  Belly  Blind,  a  serviceable  household  goblin,  shows  W'illie
how  to  balk  the  witch:  he  is  to  make  a  wax  baby  and  invite
her  to  the  christening.  The  mother,  in  anger,  calls  out

Oh,  wha  has  loosed  the  nine  witch  knots
That  was  amo'  that  ladie's  locks?


114


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


and  so  on,  revealing  the  whole  plot.  Willie  undoes  the  spells,
and  "now  he's  gotten  a  bonny  young  son."

"Willie's  Lady"  is  Scottish,  but  the  same  plot  is  preserved
in  numerous  versions  from  Scandinavia,  and  in  tales  from
Scotland,  Germany,  Italy,  and  elsewhere,*"  as  well  as  in  the
classical  legend  of  the  birth  of  Apollo.  Latona's  sufferings,
according  to  the  Homeric  Hymn,  were  prolonged  for  nine
days  and  nights  by  the  malice  of  Hera  until  Ilithyia  was  in-
duced to  relieve  them.*'  More  elaborate  is  Ovid's  account  of
the  birth  of  Hercules.  Here  Lucina,  bribed  by  Juno,  sits  be-
fore Alcmena's  door,  with  her  right  knee  crossed  over  her  left
and  her  fingers  interlocked.  At  last  Galanthis  {media  de
plebe)  suspects  the  trick,  and  calls  upon  the  stranger  to  wish
Alcmena  joy;  whereupon  Lucina  springs  up,  unclasping  her
hands,  and  Hercules  is  born.  Ovid's  tale  occurs  substantially
in  the  Metamorphoses  of  Nicander,  as  early  as  the  second
century  b.c.  There  is  further  pertinent  material  in  Pau-
sanias,  Pliny,  and  Apuleius.*^  We  observe  that  the  Greek
Ilithyia  in  this  myth  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  a  witch-
midwife  who  can  help  or  hinder*^  childbirth  by  occult  means,
precisely  like  a  modern  woman  in  the  same  profession.

Spells  and  charms  have  always  been  a  resource  on  the
part  of  midwives  to  assist  delivery,  and  the  Church  has  felt
bound  to  repress  such  practices. Midwives  had  to  receive
episcopal  license  and  were  held  strictly  accountable.  In  I481
Agnes  Marshall  was  presented  in  a  York  visitation  for  prac-
tising obstetrics  without  competent  knowledge  and  for  using
incantations.**  In  1538  Nicholas  Shaxton,  Bishop  of  Salis-
bury, cautioned  every  curate  to  charge  midwives  "to  beware
that  they  cause  not  the  Woman,  being  in  Travaile,  to  make
any  folishe  Vowe,  to  go  in  Pilgrimage  to  this  Ymage,  or  that
Ymage,  after  her  Deliveraunce,  but  only  to  call  on  God  for
Helpe.  Nor  to  use  any  Girdels,*^  Purses,  Mesures  of  our
Lady,**  or  such  other  Superstitious  Things,  to  be  occupied
about  the  Woman  while  She  laboureth,  to  make  her  beleve
to  have  the  better  Spede  by  it."  *'  In  1554  Bonner,  Bishop
of  London,  enquired  in  his  visitation  "whether  any  midwife
or  other  woman,  coming  to  the  travail  of  any  woman  with
child,  do  use  or  exercise  any  witchcraft,  charms,  sorcery,  in-
vocations or  prayers,  other  than  such  as  be  allowable,  and


\

1


CHAP.  IV]  LOVE  AND  HATE  II5

may  stand  with  the  laws  and  ordinances  of  the  Catholic
Church,"  '°  and  he  expressly  forbade  such  practices  in  his
Acts  for  the  next  year.''  Queen  Elizabeth's  Royal  Acts  of
1559  are  quite  in  accord  with  Bonner:  "Whether  you  knowe
anye  that  doe  vse  charmes,  sorcerye,  enchauntmentes,  inuo-
cations,  circles,  witchecraftes,  southsayinge,  or  any  lyke
craftes  or  ymaginations  inuented  by  the  Deuyll,  and  spe-
cyallye  in  the  tyme  of  womens  trauayle."  Much  the  same
thing  may  be  read  in  Grindal's  xActs  in  1571  and  1576,'-*  in
Parker's  in  1575,'^  and  in  Barnes's  in  1577.'^  Particularly
significant  is  the  enquiry  in  the  Visitation  of  the  Commissary
of  St.  Mary's,  Salop,  in  1 584,  because  it  actually  mentions  the
unlocking  charm:  "\Yhether  any  mydwife  within  your  par-
ishe  in  tyme  of  weomens  travill  be  knowne  or  suspected  to
use  sorcerie,  witchcrafte,  charmes,  unlockynge  of  chests  and
dores,  ...  or  to  saye  unlaweful  praiers  or  superstitious  invo-
cations." It  is  a  widespread  belief  that,  when  a  woman  is
in  labor,  all  knots  must  be  untied  and  all  locks  unlocked.'^
This  piece  of  sympathetic  magic  is  well-known  to  savage
men.  In  New  Guinea,  "should  labour  be  unduly  prolonged,
the  child's  father  is  sent  for.  He,  after  having  opened  any
boxes  there  may  be  in  the  house,  .  .  .  sits  down  near  his  wife
and  proceeds  to  untie  the  cord  which  confines  her  hair,  and  to
remove  the  gana  from  his  arms."

The  kind  of  charm  that  midwives  employed  is  exemplified
in  a  fifteenth-century  specimen.  This  recites  that  "St.  Mary
bore  Christ;  St.  /\nne  bore  Mary;  St.  Elizabeth  bore  John;
St.  Cecilia  bore  Remigius,"  and  it  summons  the  unborn  child
in  impressive  language:  "O  infans,  siue  viuus,  siue  mortuus,
exi  foras,  quia  Christus  te  uocat  ad  lucem!"  "°  A  similar
adjuration  was  in  Anglo-Saxon  times  written  on  virgin  wax
and  bound  under  the  mother's  right  foot.'"

Margery  Jourdemayne,  the  Witch  of  Eye,  doubtless  was  an
adept  in  such  practices.  There  is  some  evidence  that  Dame
Eleanor  Cobham  employed  her,  not  to  cause  the  death  of
King  Henry  VI  by  spells  with  an  image  of  wax,  but  to  make
it  possible  for  her  to  bear  a  child.

Whatever  we  may  think  of  other  elements  in  witch-lore,
there  is  at  least  one  dogma  about  which  there  can  be  no  dis-
puting —  the  dogma  of  Incubus.   That  mortals  may  have


Il6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

husbands,  wives,  or  lovers  from  the  Other  World  is  an  article
of  the  popular  creed  that  has  come  down  from  the  remotest
times  to  which  we  can  trace  history  whether  by  record  or  by
inference.  The  psychological  and  physiological  basis  for
this  notion  has  been  amply  set  forth  by  scholars  and  men  of
science  and  need  not  here  detain  us.  Theologians,  from  St.
Augustine  down,  accepted  it  (from  the  folk)  as  a  fact  of  hu-
man experience."''  No  other  view  was  possible  in  the  case  of
ancient  kings  and  notables  reputed  to  be  the  sons  of  gods  or
goddesses,  for  the  pagan  deities  were  regarded  as  devils  who
had  deceived  and  misled  mankind  in  days  of  yore  and  who
were  still  active  to  beguile  the  world.  Such  was  the  paren-
tage of  Alexander,  Seleucus,  Plato,  the  elder  Scipio,  and
Augustus, "5  to  say  nothing  of  Hercules,  the  story  of  whose
begetting  is  paralleled  or  reproduced  in  the  legend  of  King
Arthur. By  the  year  i  loo  —  to  take  a  safe  date  —  the  In-
cubus Dogma  was  solidly  established  as  an  article  of  learned
faith  throughout  Western  Europe.'"^  The  whole  race  of  Huns
was  of  demonic  ancestry  according  to  a  tradition  which,
whatever  its  origin,  became  widespread  in  the  literature  of
exempla}°^  Demons  might  be  male  or  female,  and  could
shift  their  sex  at  will.  For  Britain  we  may  instance  the  case
of  Merlin,  recorded  by  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth  and  re-
peated with  unction  by  Csesarius  of  Heisterbach  in  the  thir-
teenth century.  After  mentioning  the  "  fortissima  gens  Hun-
norum,"  descended  from  outcast  Gothic  women  and  incubi
daemones,  Caesarius  continues:  "We  read  that  Merlin,  the
prophet  of  the  Britons,  was  the  son  of  such  a  demon  and  a
nun.  So  too  the  kings  who  down  to  the  present  day  hold  sway
in  that  same  Britain,  now  styled  England,  are  reported  to  be
the  descendants  of  a  mater  phantastica.  But  Merlin  was  a
rational  man  and  a  Christian.  He  foretold  many  things  that
should  come  to  pass,  and  his  prophecies  are  fulfilled  daily.'"
Reginald  Scot,  in  one  of  his  best  arguments  ad  absurdum,
touches  up  the  Merlin  legend  which  William  of  Newburgh
had  attacked  long  before.'"  "  If  Incubus  could  beget  Merlins
among  us,  we  should  have  a  jollie  manie  of  cold  [i.  e.  false]
prophets.'"'  In  mentioning  the  English  kings  Caesarius  has
reference  to  the  family  legend  of  the  Plantagenets  —  a  tale
which  in  the  English  metrical  romance  of  Richard  Coer  de


CHAP.  IV]


LOVE  AND  HATE


117


Lion  has  resulted  in  giving  Richard  a  demon  mother  who
flies  off  through  the  roof  of  the  church  when  King  Henry  tries
to  detain  her  at  the  moment  of  the  elevation  of  the  host.
Giraldus  Cambrensis,  rehearsing  the  same  legend  of  an  un-
named Countess  of  Anjou,  avers  that  King  Richard  used  to
mention  it  in  jest."^  Such  tales  as  Robert  le  Diable  and  Sir
Gowghter,  as  well  as  the  Lai  de  Yonec,"''  belong  here  as  con-
firmatory evidence  to  the  prevalent  belief.  Merlin's  fame  as
the  son  of  a  demon,  as  Cssarius  indicates,  was  kept  alive  by
his  prophecies,  which  persisted  as  a  potent  influence  in  poli-
tics until  recent  times.

Cffisarius  registers  several  other  examples  of  incubi  or  suc-
cubae,  and  his  book  was  justly  popular,  for  he  was  a  born
raconteur. '^''^  Of  course  the  same  sort  of  thing  turns  up  in
various  collections  of  exempla,  so  that  the  matter  was  kept
steadily  before  the  popular  mind  by  the  mediaeval  preachers,
and  thus  the  folk-idea  received  the  constant  endorsement  of
the  keepers  of  the  people's  conscience.  So,  in  a  manuscript
written  in  England  in  the  thirteenth  century,  we  have  an
anecdote  of  a  woman  who  resisted  the  importunities  of  a  de-
mon wooer  so  valorously  that  he  murdered  her  husband  and
one  of  her  sons  and  smote  her  with  blindness."^  The  same
collection  informs  us  that  demons,  once  plentiful  in  Scotland,
had  been  driven  out  by  the  Dominicans,  but  this  was  an  over-
sanguine  remark,  for  Hector  Boece  chronicles  a  particularly
horrible  instance  from  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,
as  well  as  a  fairy-mistress  story  from  the  same  era.  The  hid-
eous tale  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  myth  of  Cupid  and
Psyche  fallen  upon  evil  days."^

Walter  Map  was  well  acquainted  with  the  notion  of  incubi
and  succubi  and  tells  several  stories  concerning  them,  and
Gervase  of  Tilbury  (ca.  1 21 1)  speaks  of  unions  between  women
and  demons  as  not  uncommon  in  his  day.""  In  the  Anglo-
Saxon  Leech-Book  one  may  find  the  recipe  for  a  salve
"against  elf-kin  and  night-walking  demons  and  those  persons
with  whom  a  devil  has  sexual  intercourse."  "°

In  1249  Herefordshire  was  born  a  demon's  child  who
within  six  months  had  a  full  set  of  teeth  (like  Richard  III)
and  was  as  tall  as  a  boy  of  seventeen;  his  mother  went  into  a
decline  and  died  soon  after."'  The  trial  of  Guichard,  Bishop


Il8         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

of  Troyes,  which  lasted  from  1308  to  13 13,  must  have  been
common  talk  in  English  court  circles;  for  he  had  stood  high  in
favor  with  Blanche  d'Artois,  who  had  married  Edmund  of
Lancaster,  brother  of  Edward  I,  in  1275,  with  her  daugh-
ter Jeanne,  who  was  at  one  time  betrothed  to  King  Edward's
son.  Guichard  was  accused  of  divers  sorceries.  It  was  matter
of  general  knowledge  that  he  was  the  son  of  a  demon  (there
were  twenty-seven  witnesses  on  that  point),  and  his  nick-
name at  school  had  been  fils  de  neton.^''''  In  An  Alphabet  of
Tales,  a  fifteenth-century  English  translation  of  the  Alpha-
betum  Narrationum  (a  Latin  handbook  of  exempla  compiled,
it  seems  likely,  by  Arnold  of  Liege  in  1308),  we  read  of  a
demon  who  visits  a  woman  by  night  and  gives  her  rings  and
jewels  of  gold  and  many  other  presents.  The  case  should  be
interesting  to  modern  students  of  materialization  and  ecto-
plasm, for  the  uncanny  wooer  appeared  "with  grete  lightis
aboute  hym,  so  that  all  the  chawmer  myght  be  seen  with  the
light,  and  the  droppis  of  the  seargis  [candles]  might  be
sene."  The  Alphabet  also  borrows  three  tales  of  this  class
from  Cassarius."'*  In  one  of  them  a  young  man  has  a  love-
tryst  with  a  woman  and  her  place  is  taken  by  a  fiend. A
variation  on  this  theme  occurs  in  a  frightful  story  about  a
woman  named  Joan,  living  in  1337  at  Kingsley  in  the  diocese
of  Winchester,  who  was  deceived  by  an  evil  spirit  in  the  shape
of  her  lover,  William.  Returning  from  a  tryst  in  the  forest  of
Wolmer,  she  learned  from  William  that  the  assignation  was
none  of  his  doing,  and  so  the  truth  came  to  light.  Poor  Joan
soon  died,  and  her  corpse  was  so  heavy  that  eight  men  could
hardly  bear  her  body  to  the  grave.  There  are  other  details
full  of  horror.  The  affair  was  duly  entered  in  the  chronicles,
and  Rinaldi  thought  it  notable  enough  to  deserve  a  place  in
his  Annals  of  the  Church. This  tale  makes  a  good  note  on
Chaucer,  since  the  tragedy  occurred  at  about  the  time  when
he  was  born,  and  it  well  illustrates  the  popular  creed  of  Eng-
land in  those  days  —  the  creed  so  tellingly  utilized  by  the
Wife  of  Bath  (who  was  pretty  well  emancipated)  for  a  dig  at
the  Friar  who  ventured  to  laugh  at  the  length  and  volubility
of  her  preamble:

For  then  as  wont  to  walken  was  an  elf,
Ther  walketh  now  the  limitour  him-self


CHAP.  IV]


LOVE  AND  HATE


119


In  undermeles  and  in  morweninges,
And  seyth  his  matins  and  his  holy  thinges
As  he  goth  in  his  limitacioun.
Wommen  may  go  saufly  up  and  doun
In  every  bush  or  under  every  tree;
Ther  is  noon  other  incubus  but  he."'

The  author  of  The  Pilgrim's  Tale  (ca.  1540)  adapts  Chau-
cer and  names  him.  Reginald  Scot  quotes  Chaucer,"'  and
Harsnet  follows  Scot's  example.'^"  The  Wife's  words  are
mythologically  significant,  for  they  mark  the  passage  of  the
old  Teutonic  belief  in  elves  or  trolls  or  hillmen  that  woo
or  abduct  mortal  women  into  the  theological  conception
that  explains  all  such  creatures  as  devils.  Sometimes  the
folk  clung  to  the  older  idea,  sometimes  they  accepted  the
newer.  Native  tradition  is  well  represented  in  a  number  of
our  most  famous  ballads  —  Hind  Etin  (Child,  No.  41),  for
example,  which  has  many  relatives  in  Scandinavia  and  Ger-
many, and  Lady  Isabel  and  the  Elf-Knight  (No.  4),  in  which
the  wooer  is  rather  murderous  than  lustful.  Here  too  belongs
The  Dsemon  Lover  (No.  243),  at  least  in  some  of  its  varieties.
In  one  of  the  oldest  of  these  pieces,  extant  in  a  manuscript  of
about  1450,  the  foul  fiend  promises  to  teach  a  maiden  "  all  the
wisdom  of  the  world"  if  she  will  accept  him  as  her  lover.'^^

A  Perthshire  woman  was  wooed  by  the  devil  in  recent
years,  but  she  was  rescued  in  time.'^^  A  homely  variant  of  the
fairy-mistress  motif  turns  up  in  modern  England.  A  tailor,
returning  from  his  daily  tasks,  met  a  beautiful  lady  in  a  soli-
tary place,  and  they  made  an  appointment  for  the  next  even-
ing. But  the  canny  tailor  had  his  doubts  and  consulted  the
vicar.  He  advised  him  to  keep  the  tryst,  for  the  devil  (if
devil  it  were)  might  resent  his  absence  and  work  him  harm,
but  he  was  "to  do  everything  contrary  or  crosswise"  to  the
lady's  suggestions,  whatever  they  might  be.  The  spell
worked,  and  the  tailor  was  saved."''  Meilerius  of  Caerleon  in
the  twelfth  century  was  not  so  well-advised,  and  he  went  mad
when  his  mistress  revealed  herself  in  the  shape  of  a  hideous
fiend.'^^

The  persistency  of  tradition  is  well  illustrated  by  St.
John's  wort  and  vervain.  "  I  remember,"  wrote  Walter  Scott
in  1 81 2,  "to  have  heard  a  ballad,  in  which  a  fiend  is  intro-


I20


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


duced  paying  his  addresses  to  a  beautiful  maiden;  but  dis-
concerted by  the  holy  herbs  which  she  wore  in  her  bosom,
makes  the  following  lines  the  burden  of  his  courtship:

Gin  ye  wish  to  be  layman  mine,

Lay  aside  the  St  Johns  wort  and  the  vervain."

We  have  the  same  tale  recorded  in  1625  by  a  Durham  worthy,
the  Rev.  Dr.  Thomas  Jackson  (i 579-1 640),  afterwards  Presi-
dent of  Corpus  Christi  College,  Oxford:  "I  well  remember  a
tradition,  that  was  old,  when  I  was  young,  better  believed  by
such  as  told  it,  then  if  it  had  been  Canonical  Scripture.  It
was  of  a  maid  that  liked  well  of  the  devil  making  love,  to  her
in  the  habit  of  a  gallant  young  man,  but  could  not  enjoy  his
company,  nor  he  hers,  so  long  as  she  had  Vervine  and  S.  Johns
grass  about  her:  for  to  this  effect  he  brake  his  mind  unto  her
at  last  in  rime:

If  thou  hope  to  be  Lemman  mine;

Lay  aside  the  St.  Johns  grass,  and  the  Vervine."

Our  next  step  is  back  to  the  twelfth  century  —  to  the  Great
Life  of  St.  Hugh,  Bishop  of  Lincoln  (born  ca.  1135,  died
1200).  A  certain  woman  had  long  had  an  intrigue  with  a  de-
mon who  took  the  shape  of  a  handsome  young  man.  She  had
often  confessed,  fasted,  and  done  penance,  but  could  not  be
rid  of  him.  The  bishop  prayed  for  her,  and  this  is  what  hap-
pened. One  day  another  spirit  in  the  form  of  a  fair  youth
came  and  promised  to  free  her  if  she  would  follow  his  direc-
tions. He  showed  her  an  herb  growing  near  her  house  and
bade  her  hide  some  of  it  in  her  bosom  and  scatter  some  about
her  dwelling.  By-and-by  the  demon  lover  came  in  his  accus-
tomed figure,  looked  in  at  the  window  by  which  he  was  wont
to  enter,  and  said:  "What  pray  is  that  foul  and  horrid  thing
which  you  have  scattered  about  in  the  house?  Throw  it
away  quickly!"  She  refused,  and  he  departed  with  furious
threats.  Soon  after  came  the  other  youth  and  congratulated
her;  but  he  added,  "Put  away  the  herb  now,  for  it  is  hateful
to  all  our  kind;  and,  after  I  go,  take  it  again."  She  would  not,
and  he  too  went  away  with  threats.  Thereafter  she  always
kept  the  herb  in  her  bosom,  and  she  had  no  further  trouble.
The  writer  afterwards  learned  what  the  herb  was,  for  the


CHAP.  IV]


LOVE  AND  HATE


121


woman  had  shown  it  to  a  Canterbury  monk,  who  told  him.
This  monk  said  that  he  knew  of  a  youth  and  an  Essex  girl  who
had  been  similarly  relieved.  The  Greeks  call  it  hypericon,  the
English  call  it  St.  John's  grass  {herba  Sancti  Johannis).^^^  A
similar  story  occurs  in  two  collections  of  exempla  made  in
England  in  the  thirteenth  century."'  In  the  next  century
Robert  Holkot  is  our  authority  for  the  prevalence  of  the
opinion  that  "herba  Johannis  que  dicitur  perforata  fugat
demones  per  naturam."  Drayton,  in  The  Muses  Elizium
(1630),  makes  the  hermit  Clarinax  include,  in  his  list  of
"powerfuU  simples,"

Heere  holy  Veruayne,  and  heere  Dill,
Against  witchcraft  much  auailing.'""

The  ditty

Vervain  and  Dill

Hinders  Witches  from  their  Will

is  a  rhyme  known  to  Aubrey  in  1696,  and  he  vouches  for  a
similar  efficacy  in  St.  John's  wort,  on  the  authority  of  Henry
Lawes,  Milton's  friend.'**^  The  rhyme  is  still  current  in  this
form,'"^  as  well  as  in  the  following  more  elaborate  shape:

Trefoil,  vervain,  John's  wort,  dill
Hinder  witches  of  their  will  • — •  ""i

which  was  known  to  Meg  Merrilies.^''^  According  to  some
Devon  wiseacres,  the  spirits  of  the  air  will  become  visible  if
you  anoint  your  eyes  for  three  days  with  the  mixed  juices  of
dill,  vervain,  and  St.  John's  wort.'"*^  Vervain,  then,  like  St.
John's  wort,  is  Juga  daemonum.  If  you  carry  it  about  you  by
day  or  night,  it  keeps  off  "the  deuel  of  helle"  according  to  a
mediaeval  English  poem  on  medicinal  herbs.'"*'  But  this  same
poem  informs  us  that  vervain  gathered  in  May  at  dawn,  when
pulverized  and  thrown  between  a  man  and  a  woman,  causes
dissension:  "Though  they  love  each  other  never  so  well,  they
shall  quarrel  and  strive"  —

Thow  thei  lowyn  hem  neuer  so  wel,
Thei  schul  flytyn  and  strywyn  that  sel:

queer  doctrine,  since  vervain  also  makes  a  good  charm  to  win
the  favor  of  great  lords:  "Qhwo-so  beryth  it  vp-on  hym,  he
shal  hawe  lowe  [have  love]  of  grete  maystrys,  and  thai  shal


122         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


nowth  refuse  his  askyngis  but  graunt  him  with  good  wyll  that
that  he  wele."  But  probably  the  month  of  May  has  some-
thing to  do  with  it.  "Maiae  nubunt  Maio."  It  is  significant
that  both  vervain  and  dill  were  ingredients  in  one  of  the
favorite  remedies  of  Margaret  Hunt,  who  was  called  to  ac-
count for  illicit  medical  practice  in  the  Commissary's  Court
of  London  in  1528.  "For  them  that  hath  ony  sorys  on  ther
bodys,  she  techeth  them  to  gether  herbe-grace  [i.  e.  rue],  dyll,
vervey[n]e,  marygoldes,  put  a  lyttill  holy  water  to  them,  &
sey  sume  prayers."  She  learned  her  art  in  Wales  from  a
woman  called  Mother  Emet.  From  some  phrases  in  Mar-
garet's confession  we  may  infer  that  she  believed  that  the

ailments  treated  were  or  might  have  been  induced  by  witch-
craft.

For  the  time  of  Henry  VIII  we  can  call  an  expert  witness  in
the  person  of  Andrew  Boorde,  the  distinguished  physician,
who  died  in  1549.  Boorde  is  judicial.  Though  his  own
opinion,  like  Reginald  Scot's,  is  that  the  nightmare  or  incu-
bus is  caused  by  "some  euyll  humour"  in  the  patient's  bodily
constitution,  yet  he  admits  the  alternative  that  it  may  be  a
demon,  and  cites  a  contemporary  example  —  an  anchoress  of
St.  Albans  who  (so  she  told  him)  "was  infested  of  such  a
spirite."  And,  "yfit  be  a  spirite,"  Boorde  knows  the  remedy:
St.  John's  wort,  which,  as  he  has  read,  \sfuga  daemonum  and
is  "of  that  vertue  that  it  doth  repell  suche  malyfycyousnes  of
spirites."  g^t  Harsnet,  in  1603,  inveighing  against  the
Catholic  exorcists  of  his  day,  scouts  the  demonophobic  virtue
of  St.  John's  wort:  "Whereas  your  prescript  is  compounded
of  these  delicate  simples.  Brimstone,  Assa  fcetida,  Galbanum,
S.  lohns  Wort,  and  Rue\  Porphyrie,  and  lamblichus,  men
acquainted  with  the  nature,  and  disposition  of  deuils,  afore
your  whip  had  ere  a  string  to  it,  doe  affirme,  that  those  for-
cible violent  sauours  and  stinking  odours,  are  the  very  delica-
cies for  deuils,  and  allectiues  to  their  noses."

The  Incubus  Dogma  was  brought  into  close  relation  with
witchcraft  in  the  trial  of  Dame  Alice  Kyteler  of  Kilkenny  in
1324.  This  lady,  four  times  married,  was  charged  with  killing
some  of  her  husbands  by  sorcery  and  with  so  bewitching
others  that  they  gave  all  their  property  to  her  and  to  William
Outlawe,  her  son  by  her  first  marriage.  Her  present  husband,


CHAP.  IV]


LOVE  AND  HATE


123


John  le  Poer,  she  had  afflicted  with  a  wasting  disease.  She
had  a  familiar  demon  named  Filius  Artis,  also  called  Robin
(or  Robert)  Filius  Artis,  who  showed  himself  now  as  a  cat,
now  as  a  shaggy  dog,  now  as  a  black  man.  AW  these  details
(with  a  mere  change  of  names  and  social  station)  might  be
extracted  from  the  narrative  of  the  Chelmsford  witch-trials  of
1566.  Now  this  Robin,  according  to  the  confession  of  one  of
Dame  Alice's  confederates,  was  an  incubus,  and  as  such  was
the  lady's  lover. The  Kyteler  case,  though  staged  in  Ire-
land, is  rather  English  than  Irish  in  its  connections.  The
town  of  Kilkenny  was  founded  by  Strongbow,  and  the  per-
sons concerned  were  obviously  not  Celts.  The  prosecutor,
William  Ledrede,  Bishop  of  Ossory,  was  a  Franciscan  friar  of
London,  who  addressed  the  people  in  English  and  French,^^''
and  whose  English  birth  was  more  than  once  cast  in  his
teeth:  —  "an  English  foreigner,"  "that  good-for-nothing
rustic  runaway  from  England."


\


CHAPTER  V


MADNESS,  CURSES,  AND  THE  ELFSHOT

THAT  a  witch  or  wizard  can  drive  a  man  mad,  either  by
spells  or  by  sending  a  demon  to  buffet  him,  is  an  old
article  of  faith  which  descended  as  a  matter  of  course  from
Anglo-Saxon  times  ^  to  the  Elizabethan  age.  In  and  for  itself
demoniacal  possession  is  due  to  the  immediate  action  of  an
evil  spirit  which  enters  into  the  victim  and  controls  his
thoughts,  his  speech,  and  his  deeds,  either  constantly  or  by
intermittent  attacks.^  Whether  a  witch  sent  the  demon,^  or  he
operated  without  human  initiative,  the  result  was  the  same.

In  any  given  instance  of  violent  madness  or  weird  seizure,
two  views  were  possible,  apart  from  a  strictly  medical  dia-
gnosis. The  theologians,  though  not  excluding  witchcraft  as  a
potential  factor,  were  likely  to  have  recourse  to  the  doctrine
of  possession  or  obsession.  The  difference  between  these  two
forms  of  demonic  assault,  though  plain  enough  in  words,  was
seldom  grasped,  and  is,  indeed,  rather  a  matter  of  psychical
hair-splitting  than  anything  that  could  concern  the  layman.''
People  in  general,  on  the  other  hand,  were  prone  to  think
some  witch  to  blame,  and  there  were  two  or  three  professed
or  suspected  hags  available  in  every  village.  The  whole  sub-
ject of  demoniacs,  then,  is  inseparable  from  witchcraft.  In-
stances of  possession  might  be  cited  without  limit,  for  a  mul-
titude of  saints  inherited  the  ancient  and  divine  function  of
healing,  in  this  as  in  other  departments  of  the  medical  art.^
For  our  present  purpose  a  few  such  cures  worked  by  holy  men
in  England  will  suffice.^

Benedict,  a  cleric  of  Winchester,  and  John,  a  layman  from
Ireland,  both  possessed,  were  cured  by  the  merits  of  Edward
the  Confessor  in  1267,  when  his  body  was  translated  for  the
second  time.''  The  shrine  of  St.  Cuthbert,  Bishop  of  Lindis-
farne,  was  the  scene  of  several  cases  of  this  nature.  There,
about  1 140,  one  Walter,  possessed  of  a  devil  in  the  shape  of  a
black  dog  (which  he  alone  could  see,  though  others  heard  it


CHAP.  V]


MADNESS,  CURSES,  AND  ELFSHOT


125


speak),  was  freed  by  the  saint's  merits:  the  narrative  is  de-
rived in  part  from  Walter's  brother.*  Another  patient  was  a
boy  whom  the  demons  tossed  about  at  times  (spasms!)  and  at
times  carried  through  the  air  to  distant  spots.'  Still  another
was  a  woman  whom  a  devil  buffeted  exceedingly."

St.  Hugh  of  Avalon,  Bishop  of  Lincoln  in  the  same  century,
cast  out  a  devil  in  the  cathedral.  When  the  bishop  saw  the
madman  led  towards  him,  he  sprinkled  him  with  holy  water
and  adjured  the  evil  spirit  to  come  out  of  him  and  torment
him  no  more.  The  patient  fell  to  the  ground  and  lay  as  one
dead.  St.  Hugh  poured  over  him  a  great  quantity  of  holy
water,  and  he  was  permanently  cured."  St.  Godric,  the  her-
mit of  Finchale  (who  died  in  1 170),  cured  several  demoniacs,
according  to  his  contemporary,  Reginald,  monk  of  Durham.'^
One  example  will  serve:  it  is  good  for  its  classical  touch  and
also  for  the  cooperation  of  St.  Cuthbert  and  St.  Godric.  A
woman  was  so  tormented  by  demons  for  sixteen  years  that
she  had  almost  lost  her  understanding.  She  prayed  to  St.
Cuthbert  at  Durham.  As  she  rose  from  her  knees,  she  had  a
vision  of  the  saint  walking  before  her  to  Finchale.  Thither
she  followed  him  and  there  was  freed,  as  she  merited,  from  all
diabolical  assaults  and  illusions."  A  girl  was  so  maddened  by
a  demon  that  she  scratched  and  bit  whomsoever  she  could
reach.  Her  parents  brought  her  to  the  tomb  of  St.  Oswin  the
Martyr,  remained  there  all  night  with  her  in  prayer,  and  took
her  home  cured. One  is  strongly  reminded  of  the  ancient
practice  of  incubation. Another  cure  that  suggests  incuba-
tion is  that  of  Edwin,  a  young  monk  of  Ely,  as  described  in
the  twelfth-century  Liber  Eliensis.  A  holy  man  from  Win-
chester, who  happened  to  be  present  when  Edwin  suddenly
went  mad  at  compline,  saw  what  was  invisible  to  all  others
—  a  creature  like  a  black  boy  that  kept  a  tight  grip  on  the
sufferer's  cowl.  Edwin  was  very  violent,  kicking  and  trying
to  bite  those  who  restrained  him;  but  his  faithful  brethren
watched  with  him  all  night  at  St.  /Etheldreda's  shrine.  To-
wards morning  he  fell  asleep,  and  when  he  awoke  he  was
sane.^''

In  1355,  according  to  a  brief  entry  in  the  Annals  of  Wor-
cester, "many  men  were  driven  mad  at  the  sight  of  demons."
Knighton's  chronicle  is  more  expansive:  In  this  summer


126


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


there  raged  a  strange  sickness,  as  it  were  from  the  assault  of
evil  spirits.  For  people  went  mad  in  town  and  country,
everywhere  in  the  realm.  They  ran  into  woods  and  thickets
to  hide  like  wild  beasts  —  fleeing  from  human  society.  Some
ran  from  the  fields  to  the  villages  and  from  the  villages  to  the
fields,  now  here  and  now  there,  and  could  with  difficulty  be
caught.  Many,  when  taken,  were  led  to  the  church,  and  there
they  lay  bound  until  they  received  their  enlightenment  from
God.  In  some  churches  you  might  see  ten  or  twelve  of  them
at  once,  and  it  was  great  pity  to  behold  their  possession.^''
Here  we  have  plain  demoniacal  possession,  the  devil  working
directly  upon  his  victims;  but  eleven  years  later  (in  1366)
madness  as  the  result  of  witchcraft  was  in  the  minds  of  the
mayor  and  alderman  of  London  when  they  furnished  a  kindly
Fleming  with  a  Latin  letter  to  keep  him  clear  of  possible  ac-
cusations in  this  regard.  They  certify  "that  Ortillus  Frank
van  Nerynbergh  .  .  .  having  accidentally  fallen  down  on  Sat-
urday, the  Feast  of  the  Assumption  of  the  Blessed  Virgin,
A.D.  1366,  in  an  infirmity  of  frenzy  and  lost  his  senses,  he  had
been  removed  in  that  state  out  of  the  city  by  one  Hankyn
Fleming,  who  out  of  charity  undertook  to  convey  him  to  his
own  country,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  recover  his  health,
please  God;  so  that  no  evil  suspicion  might  fall  on  the  said
Hankyn  in  respect  of  the  infirmity  aforesaid."

A  sudden  attack  of  possession  during  sermon  time  is  re-
corded in  Gregory's  London  Chronicle  under  the  year  I469.
It  was  on  a  Sunday  afternoon  in  Lent.  A  young  man  who  at-
tended one  of  the  officers  of  the  royal  household  "was  soore
vexyd  and  bound  with  the  devylle."  After  he  was  loosed,  he
lay  for  a  long  time  speechless;  "and  as  sone  as  he  myght
speke  men  of  worschippe  com  to  hym,  and  sum  grete  statys
[i.  e.  persons  of  high  position]  alle-so  com  to  hym  and  de-
syryd  hym  to  telle  hem  of  hys  syghtys  that  he  had  sene  in  hys
ferfulle  vexacyon."  He  made  known  his  vision  in  confession
to  the  Prior  of  Charterhouse  and  to  "many  dyvers  docters"
of  theology."  When  the  miracles  of  King  Henry  VI  were  col-
lected with  a  view  to  his  canonization,  there  was  turned  in  an
account  of  a  boy  named  William  Sawndie.  It  is  not  expressly
asserted  that  he  was  a  demoniac,  but  his  case  fits  one  of  the
older  instances.  He  often  lost  his  mind,  and  twisted  his  head


CHAP,  v]  MADNESS,  CURSES,  AND  ELFSHOT  IT]

completely  round  toward  his  back,  A  mere  vow  to  visit  the
holy  king's  tomb  cured  him.  The  dead  king's  merits,  how-
ever, healed  a  real  demoniac  on  another  occasion.^"

The  affliction  of  Sir  Roger  Wentworth's  children,  and  espe-
cially of  his  daughter  Anne,  as  described  by  Sir  Thomas  More,
might  be  transported  bodily  into  the  Elizabethan  age  or  even
into  the  reign  of  James  I,  without  any  anachronism.  Anne
was  "a  very  fayre  yonge  gentylwoman  of  .xii.  yeres  of  age"
when  Satan  attacked  her.  She  was  "in  merueyllous  maner
vexed  &  tourmented  by  our  gostly  enemy  y"  deuyll,  her
mynd  alyenated  &  rauyng  with  dyspysing  &  blasphemy  of
god,  and  hatred  of  all  halowed  thynges,  with  knowledge  and
perceyuynge  of  the  halowed  from  the  vnhalowed,  all  [i.  e.  al-
though] were  she  no  thynge  warned  thereof."  In  the  pres-
ence of  the  image  of  our  Lady  at  Ipswich  she  was  "so  greu-
ously  tourmented,  and  in  face,  eyen,  loke  and  countenaunce
so  grysely  chaunged,  with  her  mouthe  drawen  asyde,  and  her
eyen  layde  out  vpon  her  chekes,  that  it  was  a  terrible  syght  to
beholde."  All  the  demoniacs,  however,  were  "in  the  presence
of  all  the  company  restored  to  theyr  good  state  perfytely
cured  and  sodeynly."  Sir  Thomas  insists  that  there  was  no
chance  for  trickery  or  imposture;  the  family  was  too  respec-
table and  too  intelligent.  Besides,  "  the  mayde  her  selfe  [was]
to  yonge  to  fayne,  and  the  fassyon  it  selfe  to  straunge  for  any
man  to  fayne."  Mistress  Anne  forsook  the  world,  despite  her
father's  remonstrances,  and  when  More  wrote  (in  I5'28)  she
was  living  "  well  and  gracyously."  Some  one,  writing  under
Cranmer's  name  in  Queen  Mary's  time,  reported  the  case  in  a
hostile  spirit:  She  "told  many  men  the  secrets  of  their  hearts,
which  they  thought  no  man  could  have  told,  but  God  only.
She  cut  stomachers  in  pieces,  and  made  them  whole  again;
and  caused  divers  men  that  spake  against  her  delusion  to  go
stark  mad.  All  which  things  were  proved,  and  openly  by  her
confessed,  to  be  done  by  necromancy  and  the  deceit  of  the
devil."

Sometimes  wizardry  and  sanctity  vied  with  each  other  in
treating  demoniacs.  Gregory  the  Great  tells  a  terrifying
anecdote  of  a  possessed  lady  whose  relatives  entrusted  her  to
malifici.  These  ducked  her  in  the  river  and  tried  to  expel  the
demon  by  incantations,  with  the  result  that,  "  by  the  wonder-


128


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ful  judgment  of  God,"  when  one  devil  was  driven  out,  a  legion
took  his  place.  Bishop  Fortunatus,  however,  relieved  her  per-
manently by  assiduous  prayer.

The  ancient  Germanic  (and,  indeed,  universal)  idea  that
madness  may  be  caused  by  spells^''  coalesces  with  the  belief
in  demoniacal  possession  in  the  popular  as  well  as  the  learned
witch-creed.  So  experience  proved  that  philtres  were  quite  as
likely  to  cause  insanity  or  death  as  to  procure  love.^^

Abnormal  fasting  may  be  a  token  of  sanctity,  and  as  such
it  often  achieves  a  place  in  legend  and  chronicle.  One  of  these
fasts,  about  a.d.  824,  lasted  for  three  years. ^'^  Though  the
Fasting  Nun  of  Leicester,  who  died  in  1225,  had  taken  no
food  for  seven  years  except  the  communion  on  Sunday,  yet
her  face  was  always  like  a  white  lily  suffused  with  rosy  red.^*
A  similar  case,  that  of  Jewet  Metles  (i.  e.  Meatless),  is  re-
ported from  the  neighborhood  of  Walsingham  in  1336.^'  For-
eign tidings  of  the  kind  made  their  way  into  England,  as  in
or  about  1434,  when  the  Brut  celebrates  "an  holy  maid  in
Holand,  called  Lydwith,  which  lyued  onely  bi  miracle,  not
etynge  any  mete."  ^°  Less  marvellous,  but  more  humanly
interesting,  is  the  history  of  Cecilia  de  Rygeway,  to  whom
King  Edward  III  accorded  a  free  pardon  in  1357.  Accused  of
murdering  her  husband,  she  had  refused  to  plead,  and  had
therefore  been  committed  to  prison  to  be  starved  into  do-
cility —  a  milder  discipline  than  the  peine  forte  et  dure.  For
twoscore  days  she  had  "sustained  life  in  close  confinement
without  food  or  drink,  marvellously  and  as  it  were  against
human  nature."  "In  honor  of  the  Virgin,  from  whom  this
miracle  is  believed  to  proceed,"  so  runs  the  entry  in  the
Patent  Rolls,  "  the  king  has  granted  her  his  grace. But
Satan,  as  smiia  Dei,  is  ever  at  hand  to  deceive  the  world  by
false  miracles,  and  so,  in  1289,  we  learn  of  a  boy  who  went
without  food  for  twenty-four  months  "by  the  illusion  of
demons  of  the  incubus  sort."  It  is  a  pity  we  have  no  details,
for  these  demons  may  possibly  have  been  the  fairies,  who
enabled  a  Scottish  woman  (whom  the  Rev.  Mr.  Kirk  ex-
amined toward  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century)  to  keep
life  afoot  though  she  had  taken  "verie  little  or  no  Food  for
several  years  past."  She  was  "prettie  melanchollyous  and
silent,  hardly  ever  seen  to  laugh.  Her  natural  Heat  and  radi-


CHAP.  V]


MADNESS,  CURSES,  AND  ELFSHOT


129


cal  Moisture  seem  to  be  equally  balanced,  lyke  ane  unextin-
guished Lamp,  and  going  in  a  Circle,  not  unlike  to  the  faint
Lyfe  of  Bees,  and  some  Sort  of  Birds,  that  sleep  all  the  Winter
over,  and  revive  in  the  Spring."

All  these  curiosities,  as  well  as  many  others  that  might  be
adduced,''''  may  seem  remote  from  witchcraft,  but  we  should
remember  Mercy  Short  of  Boston  (1692).  One  of  the  "mis-
eries" with  which  she  was  afflicted  by  demonic  spectres  (sent,
it  was  inferred,  by  a  witch  of  Salem)  was  "an  Extreme  Fast-
ing for  many  Days  together." -'^  In  1701,  too,  the  London
Post-Angel  for  August  printed  an  account  of  a  man  in  Old
Street  Square,  "who  now  lives  without  Eating  and  Drinking"
and  "is  thought  to  be  Bewitch" d.''  His  fast  had  lasted  above
three  weeks,  and  he  had  "voided  several  crooked  Pins."  ^'^
At  York  in  153^  ^3.^  executed  for  treason  one  Mabel  Brigge,
who  had  performed  the  terrible  rite  of  "fasting  upon"  a  per-
son to  bring  about  his  death.  For  this  service  she  had  been
hired  by  another  woman,  and  it  was  alleged  in  extenuation
that  the  end  in  view  was  merely  to  recover  stolen  money;  but
Mabel  herself  had  declared,  according  to  one  witness,  that
"she  had  never  so  fasted  but  once  for  a  man,  and  he  brake  his
neck  or  [i.  e.  before]  it  were  well  fasted,  and  so  she  trusted
that  they  should  do  that  had  made  all  this  business,  and  that
was  the  King  and  this  false  Duke"  —  the  Duke  of  Norfolk.
So  profound  was  the  belief  in  the  hideous  spell  that  rumor  was
soon  rife  in  the  neighborhood  that  King  Henry  was  dead."
The  ceremony  (known  as  the  Black  Fast  or  St.  Trinian's
[Ninian's]  Fast,  and  manifestly  related  to  the  venerable  Irish
custom  of  fasting  upon  a  person  as  a  means  of  distress  —  to
force  him,  that  is,  to  accede  to  one's  legal  claims^^)  was  legiti-
mately practised  in  England  as  an  extreme  act  of  religious
mortification,  involving  abstinence  not  only  from  flesh  but
from  milk  and  all  food  prepared  with  milk.  To  apply  the
Black  Fast  profanely,  as  for  the  detection  of  robbers,  was
manifestly  outrageous,  but  Mabel's  crime  was  even  worse
than  that,  for  she  had  turned  the  ancient  rite  to  purposes  of
murder  and  treason.  Of  course  the  Black  Fast  was  alto-
gether prohibited  later  by  the  reforming  clergy.  Thus,  in
1577,  Bishop  Barnes  of  Durham  enjoined  "that  no  popishe
abrogated  hollydaies  be  kept  hollydaies,  .  .  .  nor  any  super-


130         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

fluous  faste  be  used  as  those  called  the  Lady  fast,  or  Saint
Trinyons  fast,  the  Blacke  fast,  Saint  Margaret  fast,  or  suche
other,  invented  by  the  devill,  to  the  dishonouringe  of  God
and  damnacion  of  the  sowles  of  idolatrous  and  supersticious
persons."

The  efficacy  of  a  witch's  imprecation  ''^  and  her  own  belief
therein  are  well  illustrated  by  the  trial  of  Elena  Dalok  in
1493.  Elena  was  clearly  a  bad  woman.  She  was  accused  not
only  of  being  a  common  slanderer  {skandilizatrix)  of  her
neighbors,  but  also  of  professing  to  own  a  book  which  told  her
all  things  that  were  to  come,  of  claiming  the  power  to  bring
rain  at  her  command,  and  of  declaring  that  whomever  she
cursed  was  sure  to  die:  —  "She  says  that  she  has  cursed  very
many  who  never  lived  in  this  world  thereafter."  *  If  she  could
have  heaven  here,  she  cared  nothing  for  heaven  in  the  world
to  come.  She  wished  that  she  might  be  in  hell  for  as  long  a
time  as  God  shall  be  in  heaven,  that  with  the  hooks  of  hell
{uncis  injernalibus)  she  might  revenge  herself  on  a  certain
John  Gybbys,  who  was  dead."'  In  1596  the  wife  of  Maurice
Jones  of  Barking  was  presented  before  the  Archdeacon's
Court  of  Essex.  One  Robgente's  wife  had  sent  to  ask  some
medicine  for  the  colic.  Instead  of  acquiescing,  Goody  Jones
"  fell  downe  upon  her  knees,  and  after  many  curses  and  evill
speches,  praied,  that  the  said  Robgentes  wife  might  never  be
cured;  but  that  she  might  abide  the  extremest  tormentes  that
ever  was  abiden:  since  which  time,  the  said  Robgentes  wife
hath  lien,  and  yet  dothe  lye  in  great  misery,  and  can  find  no
ease."

These  lurid  records  may  be  illustrated  by  the  ferocious  pic-
ture of  a  village  termagant  in  a  view  of  frank-pledge  held  at
Godmanchester,  Huntingdonshire,  in  1634.  The  bailiffs,  to
guard  against  fire,  had  thrown  out  of  several  houses  a  quan-
tity of  "  gleanes  "  and  peas  that  were  drying  "  at  the  backs  of
their  chimneys"  and  in  other  dangerous  places.  Widow
Dorothy  Walpoole  "did  take  a  fire  stick  in  her  hand  and
swore  by  God's  blood  she  would  set  the  gleans  and  peaze  the
Bailiffs  had  cast  out  of  her  house  on  fire,  and  bid  a  red  plague
of  God  light  upon  the  Bailiffes  and  all  that  came  with  them

*  "Ipsa  dicit  quod  anatimazavit  quamplurimos  qui  nunquam  postea  in  hoc
seculo  vitam  duxerunt."


CHAP.  V]


MADNESS,  CURSES,  AND  ELFSHOT


and  that  they  might  rotte  hke  dewe  against  the  sunne."  She
was  set  in  the  stocks  and  afterwards  sent  to  the  house  of  cor-
rection, "  and  ther  punished  according  to  her  deserts  and  to
the  terror  of  all  other  lewde  queanes  not  conformable  to  good
government."  ''^  Luckily  for  her,  the  Widow  Walpoole  was
not  (it  seems)  suspected  of  witchcraft,  but  she  is  a  good  wit-
ness for  the  continuity  of  tradition.  Her  curse  was  not  learned
from  Caliban,  though  it  makes  a  fine  note  on  his  outburst:  —

The  red  plague  rid  you

For  learning  me  your  language!

In  this  same  year  Isabel  Oxley  was  mildly  disciplined  by
the  Court  of  High  Commission  for  blasphemous  words.  At
divers  times,  Ralph  Fenwick  testified,  he  had  heard  her
curse  George  Fenwick  "as  followeth:  —  'Godes  curse,  Godes
plague,  light  of  the  and  all  thine.'"  And  "aboute  August  or
September  last  Isabell,  in  the  townegaite  of  Heddonn  and
neere  unto  the  doore  of  Reede,  did  revile,  and  curse,  and  said
unto  him,  'Godes  plague  and  Godes  curse  light  of  the  and
thine  beastes,  and  God  lett  never  they  nor  anie  thing  thou
hast  prosper  nor  doe  well.'  Beinge  neighbour  unto  Isabell,
hath  verie  oftenn  heard  and  observed  her  cursinges."  She
submitted  and  was  required  to  make  confession  in  Heddon
church.'''*

Still  in  1634  Thomas  Aspinwal  of  Winwick,  a  swearer,  was
brought  before  the  church  authorities  for  asserting  that  he
had  a  prayer  that  would  shorten  a  man's  life.''^  Such  ideas
are  still  cherished,  as  they  have  been  among  all  races  and  na-
tions from  the  remote  past.  In  the  fine  old  ballad  of  Robin
Hood's  Death,  Robin  and  Little  John  come  to  a  black  water,
over  which  is  laid  a  plank,  and  upon  the  plank  there  kneels
an  old  woman  who  is  "banning  Robin  Hode"  —  why,  we  do
not  know,  for  the  manuscript  is  defective,  but  his  death  en-
sues on  that  same  night. '''^  In  The  Wife  of  Usher's  Well,  the
mother,  learning  that  her  three  stalwart  sons  will  never  come
back  from  overseas,  for  they  are  dead,  curses  the  waters  for
their  sake:

I  wish  the  wind  may  never  cease,

Nor  fashes  in  the  flood,
Till  my  three  sons  come  hame  to  me

In  earthly  flesh  and  blood.


132         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

And  the  lads  come  home  from  the  grave,  only  to  return
thither  at  cockcrow.'"  In  1816  Sir  Cuthbert  Sharp  recorded
that  a  belief  in  "bad  prayers"  was  still  prevalent/^  About
1865  a  wise  woman  in  Somerset,  who  professed  to  cure  pigs,
was  summoned  as  a  cheat  and  confessed  fraud;  but  a  death
followed  her  curse.'"  Curses  have  actually  been  sold  within
man's  memory  in  Denbighshire. In  1889  a  written  curse
was  sent  anonymously  to  a  farmer  in  Devon:  such  things
differ  little  from  the  ordinary  anonymous  letter,  threatening,
abusive,  or  merely  slanderous.

Under  this  rubric,  as  another  illustration  of  traditional
tenacity,  I  may  note  that  the  story  of  The  Beggar's  Curse  has
survived  to  modern  times  among  the  people.  Sigebert  of
Gembloux  tells  it  under  date  of  606.  A  poor  man  asked  alms
of  some  sailors.  The  master  of  the  vessel  replied,  "We  have
nothing  on  board  but  stones."  "Let  everything  turn  to
stones  then!"  retorted  the  beggar.  And  this  happened  forth-
with to  all  the  articles  of  food  in  the  vessel,  though  they  re-
tained their  original  forms  and  colors.  From  Sigebert  the  tale
was  copied  into  English  chronicles,  as  well  as  into  the  Alpha-
betum  Narrationum,  and  we  find  it  still  current  in  Lincoln-
shire, with  some  variation  —  a  farmer  for  the  shipmaster,
and  wheat  for  bread.

Certain  great  stones,  —  associated,  no  doubt,  with  pagan
worship,  —  are  known  in  Wales  and  Ireland  as  "cursing
stones."  There  are  "cursing  wells,"  too,  in  Great  Britainj^i
and  "wishing  wells,"  which  abound,  are  available  for  ban-
ning as  well  as  for  blessing. Teutonic  myth  and  tradition
and  mediaeval  romance  are  crowded  with  tales  of  heroes,
and  PFeisse  Frauen^  and  treasures,  —  all  under  a  ban,  ■ —  of
accursed  castles  and  cities  and  waste  lands.

The  burial  of  metal  tablets  engraved  with  spells  against  an
enemy  is  a  learned  species  of  magic  to  which  educated  Eng-
lishmen resorted  now  and  then  in  the  sixteenth  and  seven-
teenth centuries.  In  1899  a  small  leaden  plate  was  dug  up  at
Lincoln's  Inn  which  invokes  the  spirits  of  the  moon  "That
Nothinge  maye  prosper  Nor  goe  forwarde  that  Raufe  Scrope
takethe  in  hande."  Scrope  was  admitted  to  Lincoln's  Inn  in
1543;  he  was  treasurer  for  a  year  in  1564-65,  and  one  of  the
Governors  from  1570  until  his  death  in  1572."  Similar  tab-


CHAP.  V]


MADNESS,  CURSES,  AND  ELFSHOT


lets  have  been  discovered  at  Dymock  in  Gloucestershire,^^  on
Gatherley  Moor  in  Richmondshire,^'  and  near  a  disused
burial  ground  at  Kettleby  near  Brigg.^"  In  1540  John  Heron
was  sent  to  the  Privy  Council  by  Sir  Richard  Long  with  a  let-
ter about  "  a  sceptre  and  certain  caractes  in  a  plate  touching
conjuracions"  found  in  Heron's  lodging.^'  But  these  were
probably  not  curses.

Men  or  domestic  animals  may  be  elfshot,  and  the  little  flint
arrowheads  thus  projected  are  often  found  in  field  or  byre.^^
This  method  of  injury  was  and  is  particularly  at  home  in
Ireland  and  Scotland;  and  Scottish  examples  were  of  great
interest  to  Pepys  and  Dr.  George  Hickes,  as  their  correspon-
dence shows.^^  But  a  magnificent  verse-charm  in  Anglo-
Saxon  proves  the  strength  of  this  superstition  among  our
English  ancestors.  "Out,  little  spear,  if  herein  it  be!  .  .  .  The
mighty  witch-wives  sent  shrieking  darts:  I  will  send  another
flying  arrow  back  against  them.  .  .  .  Out,  little  spear,  if
herein  it  be!  Six  smiths  sat;  deadly  spears  they  wrought.
Out,  spear  —  not  in,  spear!  If  there  be  a  bit  of  iron  herein,
the  work  of  a  witch,  it  shall  melt.  If  thou  wert  in  skin  shot,  or
wert  in  flesh  shot,  or  wert  in  blood  shot,  or  wert  in  limb  shot,
never  be  thy  life  threatened!  If  it  were  a  shot  of  the  /Es'ir,^'^
or  were  a  shot  of  elves,  or  were  a  shot  of  a  witch,  now  will  I
help  thee.  This  is  cure  for  thee  of  shot  of  ^sir,  this  is  cure
for  thee  of  shot  of  elves,  this  is  cure  for  thee  of  shot  of  a  witch.
I  will  help  thee."  "Shotten"  (i.  e.  elf-shotten)  horses  and
cattle  are  several  times  treated  in  the  Old  English  Leech-
doms:  the  cures  involve  ointment,  prayer,  masses,  holy
water,  and  magic  rites  with  knife  and  rod.''^  A  pseudo-Para-
celsan  tract  declares  that  witches  by  their  arts  insert  things
into  a  man's  body  which  must  be  extracted  if  the  patient  is
to  recover,  and  Richard  Baxter  gives  an  instance  of  such  pro-
cedure. Samuel  Rowlands  the  satirist  in  1602  knew  of  per-
sons who  pretended  to  have  the  art  of  shooting  needles  into
the  flesh.^^  Among  the  fraudulent  pretensions  of  Elizabethan
sharpers,  so  Robert  Greene  tells  us,  —  and  he  knew  if  any-
body did,  for  he  was  a  cony-catcher  himself,  —  was  the  power
"to  fill  a  Letter  full  of  Needles,  which  shall  bee  laide  after
such  a  Mathematicall  order,  that  when  hee  opens  it  to  whome
it  is  sent,  they  shall  all  spring  vp  and  flye  into  his  body  as


134


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


forceably,  as  if  they  had  beene  blowne  vp  with  gunpowder,  or
sent  from  a  Calleeuers  mouth  like  small  shotte."^^  An  evil
spirit  of  the  poltergeist  sort  in  1762  stuck  pins  galore  into
various  parts  of  the  bodies  of  Molly  and  Dobby  Giles  of  Bris-
tol —  so  Mr.  Henry  Durbin,  Chymist,  declares  in  his  circum-
stantial narrative.*"'  Wier  finds  it  necessary  to  ridicule  the
belief  of  his  time  that  witches,  by  the  devil's  aid,  send  into  the
bodies  of  their  victims  straws,  pigs'  bristles,  fish-bones,  thorns,
etc.'"  So  Malay  and  Nigerian  wizards  and  Melanesian  ghosts
shoot  darts  that  kill  unless  extracted  by  a  medicine  man.'''
Here  belongs  also  the  Australian  wizardry  with  "pointing
bones."  ''^  Very  similar  were  the  powers  claimed  by  the
Martha's  Vineyard  powwaws  and  credited  to  them  by  the
English:  "Their  Practice  was,"  writes  Matthew  Mayhew,
"either  by  desiring  the  Spirit  to  them  appearing  to  perform,
what  mischief  they  intended;  or  to  form  a  piece  of  Leather
like  an  Arrow-head,  tying  an  Hair  thereto;  or  using  some
Bone,  as  of  Fish  (that  it  might  be  known  Witchcraft,  to  the
bewitch'd)  over  which  they  perform'd  certain  Ceremonies;
and  dismiss'd  'em  to  effect  their  desire."  And  such  things,  he
adds,  have  actually  entered  the  flesh  and  been  extracted.''^
A  Melanesian  healer  used  to  cure  toothache  by  removing  a
little  maggot,'^''  which  she  would  show  to  the  sufferer.  Others,
in  stripping  off"  the  poultices  which  they  apply  to  the  sick,
profess  to  take  away  at  the  same  time  the  snake  or  lizard  that
has  caused  the  pain."  Medicine  men  among  the  Nagas  of
India  extract  from  their  patients  pebbles,  fragments  of  leaf,
scraps  of  bone,  bits  of  wood  (for  rheumatism),  a  lump  of  hair
from  the  throat  in  a  case  of  coughing. ''''  Examples  of  such
trickery  may  be  accumulated  ad  libitum?''

Witch  narratives  from  Britain  and  the  Continent  abound
in  examples  of  sufferers  who  vomited  or  voided  bones,  pins,
nails,  needles,  bits  of  lead,  farthings,  whetstones,  nutshells,
rushes,  balls  of  wool  or  hair,  and  so  on,  which  the  witch  had
somehow  conveyed  into  the  system.''^  When  Edward  Bona-
vant  of  Reading  (1634)  was  in  his  fits,  thought  to  be  caused
by  the  witchcraft  of  William  Walles  and  his  wife,  he  felt  as  it
were  a  mouse  inside  his  body."  One  of  the  Essex  witches  exe-
cuted in  1645  under  the  Hopkins  regime,  told  John  Stearne
that  if  a  certain  imp  of  hers  which  tried  to  get  into  his  mouth


CHAP,  v]  MADNESS,  CURSES,  AND  ELFSHOT


had  gone  down  his  throat  "there  would  have  been  a  feast  of
toads  in  his  belly."  Such,  at  least,  was  Stearne's  evidence.^"
To  cure  possession,  Drage  informs  us  in  his  "treatise  on  sick-
nesses and  diseases  from  witchcraft  and  supernatural  causes"
(1665),  "herbs  are  boiled  in  a  Pot,  over  which  the  bewitched
do  hold  their  heads,  when  the  fit  approaches;  Maister  Gib-
bons of  H arbor ough  cured  one  so;  and  like  a  Mouse  leaped
forth  of  her  mouth,  and  she  was  absolutely  freed;  a  Gentle-
man living  nigh  Huntingdon,  who  told  me,  was  Spectatour.
Others  were  [cured]  with  some  stinking  Suffumige  cast  on
Coals;  so  was  a  Maid  I  knew  cured,  a  Mouse  in  similitude,
leaped  from  her  Mouth,  held  open  when  the  fit  approached."

We  may  conclude  with  a  lively  anecdote  that  points  with
unmoving  finger  at  the  close  correspondence  between  Euro-
pean witchcraft  and  the  beliefs  and  practices  of  savage  life.
Dean  Granville  of  Durham  tells  the  tale  as 't  was  told  him  by
a  French  physician  of  Provence.  A  patient  suffering  from
melancholia  was  convinced  beyond  persuasion  that  he  was
possessed  of  the  devil.  The  shrewd  doctor,  falling  in  with  the
man's  humor,  visited  him  one  day  with  a  priest  and  a  sur-
geon, and  took  along  a  bat  in  a  bag.  He  explained  that  he
could  relieve  him  if  he  would  consent  to  a  slight  operation.
Prayer  was  offered,  and  the  surgeon  made  a  small  incision
in  the  man's  side.  Then  the  physician,  "having  the  bat  in
readynesse,  just  as  the  cut  was  given,  let  flye  the  bat  about
the  chamber;  crying  out,  'Behold,  there  the  divel  is  gon.'
The  man  beleived  it  and  was  cured."


CHAPTER  VI


VENEFICA


HEN  the  plague  desolated  Athens  in  the  year  430  b.c,


V  V  the  rumor  ran  that  the  Lacedaemonians  had  poisoned
the  cisterns.'  In  our  Civil  War  many  of  us  in  the  North  be-
lieved that  the  Southerners  were  trying  to  spread  yellow  fever
among  us  by  consignments  of  infected  clothes  or  bedding.  In
the  latest  of  our  wars  the  Germans  were  popularly  accused
not  only  of  well-poisoning  and  the  like  but  even  of  attempt-
ing to  ruin  the  wheat  crop  of  our  Western  states  by  shipments
of  poisonous  pollen.^  In  1920  Sir  Hamar  Greenwood,  Chief
Secretary  for  Ireland,  read  in  the  House  of  Commons  a  letter
which  he  said  had  been  captured  in  a  raid.  It  purported  to  be
from  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  Republican  army  and
contemplated  the  spreading  of  glanders  among  the  British
cavalry  horses  and  of  typhoid  by  means  of  infected  milk
among  the  troops.^  Even  in  time  of  peace  such  rumors  are
rife.  In  1 884,  during  an  outbreak  of  cholera,  there  was  rioting
in  the  country  near  Turin,  because  the  peasantry  suspected
the  upper  classes  of  endeavoring  to  poison  them."*  There  was
more  or  less  excitement  in  191 1  over  the  report  that  un-
scrupulous speculators,  to  raise  the  price  of  cotton,  were
spreading  the  boll  weevil  in  Georgia  and  the  Carolinas.^  Re-
cent newspapers  report  the  poisoning  of  a  well  used  by  Colo-
rado miners  and  the  local  suspicion  that  it  was  the  work  of  a
"strike  sympathizer."  ^

Throughout  the  years  that  intervene  between  the  Plague
at  Athens  and  our  own  enlightened  age  of  science,  this  kind  of
belief  has  been  prevalent,'  as,  for  example,  at  Rome  in  the
first  and  second  centuries  after  Christ,  when  the  pestilence
was  ascribed  to  the  activity  of  wretches  who  killed  their  vic-
tims by  pricking  them  with  sharp  instruments  smeared  with
mortal  drugs ;^  and  in  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century
(ca.  1536),  when  some  forty  Italian  conspirators  (one  of
them  a  hangman)  undertook,  it  was  said,  to  start  the  plague


CHAP.  Vl]


VENEFICA


afresh  by  means  of  a  deadly  ointment.'  A  like  outbreak  at
Milan  in  1630  has  been  immortalized  by  Manzoni.'"  In  1258
many  died  of  poison  in  England  and  a  general  plot  was
feared."  Any  unpopular  class  may  be  suspected:  in  1427  a
hundred  and  fifty  casks  of  sweet  wine  were  condemned;  the
fumes  had  a  horrible  stench;  the  Lombards  of  London  were
accused  of  poisoning  the  wine."  With  such  plots,  of  course,
the  black  art  has  often  been  associated,  for  poisoners  have  al-
ways been  suspected  of  sorcery  and  sorcerers  of  poisoning.'^
Instructed  by  the  devil  himself  or  enabled  thereto  by  their
own  diabolical  skill  (however  originating),  witches  and  wiz-
ards could  compound  actual  poisons  (as  no  doubt  they  often
did),  or  could  imbrue  harmless  things  with  noxious  quali-
ties,'" so  as  to  destroy  not  only  individual  victims,  but  whole
communities  as  well.'^  Sometimes  they  threw  their  accursed
potions  into  the  wells,'''  sometimes  they  scattered  them  in  the
air,'^  sometimes  they  daubed  them  on  walls  or  on  the  handles
of  doors. Thus  came  various  diseases,  even  the  plague.
Now  this  accusation  was  brought  against  the  Jews,  now
against  the  lepers,''  now  against  some  imagined  confederacy
of  sorcerers.  There  is  great  variety  in  details,  but  none  in  the
main  idea.^°  Veyiefica  as  a  stock  word  for  "witch"  tells  its
own  story.  Medicine  men  and  white  witches  are  the  primi-
tive physicians,  and  thus  they  may  on  fit  occasion  prove  to
be  such  practitioners  as  Dr.  Palmer  and  Dr.  Pritchard  of  in-
famous memory.

Even  Reginald  Scot  was  convinced  that  many  so-called
witches  were  in  fact  poisoners.  "It  appeareth,"  he  tells  us,
that  women  "have  been  the  first  inventers,  and  the  greatest
practisers  of  poisoning,  and  more  naturallie  addicted  and
given  thereunto  than  men."  He  quotes  many  authorities,  an-
cient and  modern.  In  particular  he  recites,  with  full  cre-
dence, the  Italian  case  in  1536,  when  forty  "  Veneficce  or
witches"  renewed  the  plague  by  smearing  the  doors  and  door-
posts with  an  ointment  and  powder  to  the  destruction  of
whole  families,  and  he  adds  two  recent  Italian  instances  of
similar  crime.  "This  art  consisteth,"  he  tells  us,  "as  well  in
poisoning  of  cattell  as  of  men:  and  that  which  is  doone  by
poisons  unto  cattell,  towards  their  destruction,  is  as  common-
lie  attributed  to  witches  charms  as  the  other.  And  I  doubt


138         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

not,  but  some  that  would  be  thought  cunning  in  incantations,
and  to  doo  miracles,  have  experience  in  this  behalf."  We
observe,  too,  that  Scot  is  convinced  that  many  pretending
witches  administer  philtres,  which  potions,  he  contends,  can-
not procure  love,  but  "are  meere  poisons,  bereaving  some  of
the  benefit  of  the  braine,  and  so  of  the  sense  and  understand-
ing of  the  mind.  And  from  some  it  taketh  awaie  life,  and  that
is  more  common  than  the  other."  And  he  declares  ex-
pressly that  in  case  persons  accused  of  witchcraft  "confesse
that,  which  hath  beene  indeed  committed  by  them,  as  poison-
ing, or  anie  other  kind  of  murther,  which  falleth  into  the
power  of  such  persons  to  accomplish;  I  stand  not  to  defend
their  cause."  He  adds,  however,  that  the  judges  should  take
care  to  ascertain  that  the  means  used  were  adequate  to  the
deed  confessed.''''

Poisoning  and  sorcery  are  both  involved  in  the  cause
celebre  of  George  of  Clarence.^''  On  the  Sunday  before  Christ-
mas, 1476,  his  wife  Isabella  died,  and  his  second  son,  Rich-
ard, followed  her  on  New  Year's  Day.  At  the  next  spring
sessions  for  Warwickshire  (1477),  the  widow  Ankerett  Twin-
newe  (or  Twynmowe  or  Twynyho),  late  servant  of  the  Duke
and  Duchess,  was  indicted  for  poisoning  her  mistress,  and  Sir
Roger  Tocotes,  Knight,  also  of  the  Duke's  household,  for
abetting.  At  the  same  time  John  Thuresby,  yeoman,  was  in-
dicted for  poisoning  Clarence's  son.  The  Duke  himself  was
prosecutor.  He  acted  with  illegal  violence  in  the  arrest  of
Ankerett  and  extorted  a  verdict  of  guilty  by  overawing  the
court.  Some  of  the  jurors  were  so  remorseful  that  they
begged  her  to  forgive  them.  The  cases  were  transferred  to
the  King's  Bench  by  writ  of  certiorari,  but  Ankerett  and
Thuresby  had  already  been  hanged.  Tocotes,  who  had
avoided  arrest,  surrendered  on  hearing  of  the  writ,  had  a  fair
trial  in  the  higher  court,  and  was  acquitted.  In  1478,  on  peti-
tion of  Ankerett's  grandson,  the  judgment  and  record  in  her
case  were  annulled. On  May  19,  1477,  soon  after  the  execu-
tion of  the  widow  Ankerett,  three  persons,  one  of  them
closely  associated  with  Clarence,  were  convicted  of  construc-
tive treason: — ^  Thomas  Burdett,  Gentleman,  Clarence's
friend;  John  Stacy,  Gentleman;  and  Thomas  Blake,  clerk.
The  indictments  make  Burdett  the  instigator.  He  employed


CHAP,  vi]  VENEFICA  I39

Stacy  and  Blake,  on  November  12,  1474,  "to  calculate  the
nativities  of  the  King,  and  of  Edward  Prince  of  Wales,"  and
"to  know  when  the  King  and  the  Prince  should  die,"  and,  on
the  sixth  of  February  following,  this  pair  "worked  and  calcu-
lated by  art  magic,  necromancy,  and  astronomy,  the  death
and  final  destruction  of  the  King  and  Prince";  and  again  on
May  20,  1475,  they  "did  falsely  and  treacherously  work  in
the  said  arts,  although  according  to  the  determinations  of
Holy  Church,  and  the  opinions  of  divers  Doctors,  it  is  for-
bidden to  any  liegeman  thus  to  meddle  concerning  Kings  and
Princes  in  manner  aforesaid,  without  their  permission."  All
were  found  guilty,  but  Blake  was  pardoned.

So  far  nothing  emerges  that  can  definitely  be  called  sor-
cery. Clarence  thought  his  wife  had  been  poisoned  —  he  may
or  may  not  have  regarded  the  widow  Twynyho  as  a  witch;
Burdett  and  his  accomplices  were  guilty  of  using  astrology
(and  possibly  incantations  in  connection  therewith)  to  find
out  when  the  king  and  the  prince  were  to  die  —  and  that  was
treason,  even  if  they  used  no  spells  to  destroy  them.  But  we
have  further  information.  Stacy,  it  appears,  was  famous  not
only  as  an  astrologer  {astronomiis)  but  as  a  great  magician
{magmis  necromanticus).  He  had  been  accused  (and  perhaps
this  was  the  primary  charge)  of  yielding  to  the  solicitation  of
the  adulterous  wife  of  Richard  Lord  Beauchamp  so  far  as  to
make  leaden  images  to  procure  the  death  of  this  nobleman,
and,  when  examined  under  torture  concerning  his  magical
practices,  he  had  confessed  "many  things"  against  himself
and  Burdett,  presumably  including  the  treasonable  calcula-
tions just  described.  At  the  foot  of  the  gallows  both  he  and
Stacy  had  declared  their  innocence  —  Stacy  feebly,  Burdett
with  many  words  and  great  spirit.  This  was  the  same  Stacy
who  had  misled  the  Duke  of  Suffolk  years  before  by  an  am-
biguous warning  to  beware  of  the  Tower. On  the  day  after
their  execution  Clarence  had  the  temerity  to  bring  Dr.  Wil-
liam Goddard  into  the  King's  Council  and  to  have  him  read
the  dying  declaration  of  Stacy  and  Burdett.  The  king  was
highly  incensed  and  ordered  Clarence's  arrest.  He  never  re-
gained his  liberty. In  the  following  February  (1478)  he  was
convicted  by  bill  of  attainder,  and  among  the  charges  in  the
bill  there  are  three  that  particularly  concern  us:  he  had


140         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

spread  the  report  that  Burdett  "was  wrongefully  putte  to
Deth";  "he  saide  and  laboured  also  to  be  noysed  by  suche  his
Servauntez,  apte  for  that  werk,  that  the  Kyng  oure  Sov-
ereigne  Lorde,  wroght  by  Nygromancye,  and  used  Crafte  to
poyson  his  Subyettes,  suche  as  hym  pleased";  he  declared
"  that  the  Kyng  entended  to  consume  hym  [Clarence]  in  like
wyse  as  a  Candell  consumeth  in  brennyng."  Perhaps  he  had
suggested  that  the  poisoning  of  his  duchess  (which  nobody
now  credits)  was  done  by  the  king's  order  or  with  the  king's
complicity.  The  reference  to  the  candle  suggests  that  he  had
charged  the  king  with  the  particular  kind  of  murderous  magic
{envoutement)  which  we  have  already  discussed.  Anyhow,  he
was  condemned,  and,  according  to  the  usual  story,  he  was
drowned  in  a  butt  of  wine.^'


CHAPTER  VII


CHARMS  GHOULISH  AND  PROFANE

FRAGMENTS  of  dead  mortality  have  been  used  in  spells
and  as  remedies  from  ancient  times.  Pliny  enumerates
such  superstitions  in  a  curious  passage.'  For  the  blackest  of
black  magic  we  have  the  testimony  of  Tacitus,  who  tells  us
that  after  the  death  of  Germanicus  there  were  found  rem-
nants of  human  bodies,  spells  and  curses  and  the  name  of
Germanicus  engraved  on  leaden  tablets,  half-burned  ashes
smeared  with  corruption,  and  other  maleficia  by  which  souls
are  believed  to  be  devoted  to  the  gods  below. ^  For  the  middle
ages  in  general  the  evidence  of  the  distinguished  Florentine
jurist  Paolo  Grillando  may  serve.  The  cool  prose  of  his  cata-
logue of  horrors  makes  the  thing  as  vivid  as  it  is  gruesome:
"Some  take  a  small  piece  of  a  buried  corpse,  —  especially  the
corpse  of  one  who  has  been  hanged  or  has  otherwise  suffered  a
shameful  death,  —  and  use,  in  compounding  their  sortilegia,
the  nails  or  teeth,  the  hair,  ears,  eyes,  beard,  hand,  foot,
finger,  .  .  .  heart,  liver,  lungs,  .  .  .  sinews,  bones,  or  flesh."  ^
"At  this  day,"  says  Bacon,  "the  mortalest  poisons  practised
by  the  West  Indians  have  some  mixture  of  the  blood  or  fat
or  flesh  of  men;  and  divers  witches  and  sorcerers,  as  well
amongst  the  heathen  as  amongst  the  Christians,  have  fed
upon  man's  flesh,  to  aid  (as  it  seemeth)  their  imagination  with
high  and  foul  vapours."  Oldham  in  his  Fourth  Satire  (1679)
mentions

Felons  Bones  from  rifled  Gibbets  torn;

Like  those,  which  some  old  Hag  at  midnight  steals,

For  Witchcrafts,  Amulets,  and  Charms,  and  Spells. 5

Savage  wizards  are  commonly  believed  to  exhume  corpses
and  eat  them.^  In  1904  three  men  were  executed  in  the  West
Indian  island  of  Saint  Lucia  for  the  murder  of  a  boy.  Their
motive  was  to  procure  his  hands  and  heart  (and  perhaps  also
his  head)  for  obeah  practice.'^


I


142.


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Remnants  of  the  dead  are  still  popular  in  spells  or  as
cures. ^  A  dead  man's  hand  (especially  if  he  has  been  hanged
or  has  met  with  any  violent  or  untimely  death)  will  cure
eczema,  wens,  tumors,  goitre,  and  the  king's  evil,  and  will
erase  unsightly  birthmarks.  The  efficacy  of  the  dead  hand
was  known  to  Pliny  and  is  derided  by  Fernel,  the  modern
Galen. 9  The  Cumberland  receipt  for  birthmarks  is  to  stroke
the  spot  with  the  hands  of  three  heads  of  families  who  died  on
the  same  day:  this  is  what  Sir  Thomas  Browne  calls  "com-
mitting any  maculated  part  unto  the  touch  of  the  dead."  ^°
You  can  cure  toothache  or  ward  it  off  by  biting  out  a  tooth
from  a  corpse  or  skull,  particularly  if  you  carry  the  tooth  in
your  pocket;  "  or  you  may  rub  the  gum  with  a  dead  finger,^^
or  "scarifie  the  gums  in  the  greefe  with  the  tooth  of  one  that
hath  beene  slaine."  Powdered  skull  is  good  for  fits. Moss
scraped  from  a  skull,  pulverized  and  taken  as  cephalic  snuff,
cures  headache.'^  Drinking  from  a  suicide's  skull  (or  from  any
human  skull  if  freshly  exhumed)  cures  epilepsy.'*'  Chronic
headache  vanishes  if  you  drive  a  nail  into  a  dead  man's  skull.'''
You  can  cure  a  corn  by  cutting  it  with  a  razor  that  has  shaved
a  corpse.'^  For  scrofula  one  should  wear  the  napkin  from  a
dead  man's  face  round  the  neck  and  then  drop  it  on  his  coffin
in  the  grave.''  For  headache  "tie  a  halter  about  your  head
wherewith  one  hath  beene  hanged"  — a  suicide's  noose,  ac-
cording to  Pliny. ^'  A  hangman's  rope  is  good  for  scrofula,"
and  a  bit  of  it  ensures  luck  in  gambling. A  piece  of  suicide's
rope  worn  as  a  girdle  protects  you  against  all  accidents.^''
Chips  from  a  gallows  on  which  several  have  been  hanged,
when  worn  in  a  bag  round  the  neck,  cure  the  ague.^^  A  frag-
ment of  a  gibbet  is  good  for  toothache.^''  Warts  disappear
when  sprinkled  with  earth  from  a  new-made  grave. ^'^  To  lay
a  child  in  such  a  grave  is  helpful  in  eye  trouble. Churchyard
grass  will  cure  the  bite  of  a  mad  dog.'^'  Bits  of  lead  cut  from
church  spouts  that  empty  in  the  churchyard  are  good  for
fits.^°  Churchyard  earth  is  good  for  stitch  in  the  side  and
consumption.^'  A  two  hours'  burial  in  the  churchyard  may
help  one's  rheumatism.''^  A  ring  made  of  a  coffin  hinge  or
handle  will  relieve  cramp. ^-^  In  some  of  these  remedies  one
recognizes  the  principle  of  transferring  the  pain  or  ailment  to
the  dead  man  and  thus  putting  an  end  to  it  along  with  the


CHAP,  vii]       CHARMS  GHOULISH  AND  PROFANE


Other  earthly  troubles  of  the  departed.^''  Similar,  perhaps,

was  the  rationale  of  the  advice  on  which  Joan  Sargeant  acted

in  1532:  "Whereas  she  had  a  child  syk  a  certen  walkynge  man

or  beggar  shewed  her  that  she  shold  cutt  her  saide  childes

gyrdill  in  fyve  peces  and  then  to  go  to  the  churche  and  say  v

Paternosters  and  fyve  aveyes  and  then  to  take  the  same  peces

of  the  gurdill  and  hide  hit  in  v  sondry  growndes  and  so  she
dyd."^s

A  grisly  act  of  black  magic  was  prescribed  in  Anglo-Saxon
times  for  a  woman  who,  having  lost  one  child,  feared  mis-
carriage or  stillbirth:  she  was  to  take  earth  from  the  grave  of
her  dead  baby,  wrap  it  in  black  wool,  and  sell  it  to  some  mer-
chant, repeating  this  spell:  "  I  sell  it  —  and  may  ye  sell  it  —
this  black  wool  and  the  grains  of  this  sorrow  !"^^  To  burn
grain  on  the  spot  where  a  man  has  died  —  the  object  being  to
cure  disease  or  ward  it  off —  is  a  custom  forbidden  along  with
other  pagan  superstitions  in  many  penitentials,  English  and
Continental,  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  age."  From  the  Visitation
Books  of  York  Cathedral  for  15 10  it  appears  that  a  woman  in
Newbald  Parish  had  recently  conducted  herself  in  a  strange
way  ("demey[n]d  hir  marvelously ").  She  had  taken  the
covering  of  the  bier,  and  a  ploughstave  that  had  killed  a  man,
and  a  cloth  from  under  a  corpse,  and  had  laid  them  upon  her
cow,  doubtless  as  a  curative  spell,  though  that  is  not  stated.^^

The  eleventh-century  Latin  paraphrase  of  ^Ethelstan's
Laws  mentions  necromancy,^'  and  so  do  the  Canons  of  Edgar,
which,  if  somewhat  later  than  that  king's  time,  still  belong  in
the  tenth  century. 4°  Nigromantia,  writes  John  of  Salisbury,
in  the  twelfth  century,  is  so  called  because  it  concerns  itself
altogether  in  mortuorum  inquisitione\  its  efficacy  seems  to
consist  in  its  power  to  wake  the  dead;  but  it  is  really  the  de-
ceit of  tricky  demons  and  the  perfidy  of  impostors.'*'  Odin  in
the  Old  Norse  Havamal,  speaking  in  the  character  of  a  wiz-
ard, declares  that  he  knows  many  spells,  and  among  them  one
that  will  call  down  a  corpse  from  the  gallows  and  force  it  to
speak. ''^  The  fourteenth-century  Apology  for  Lollard  Doc-
trines defines  "nigramauncers"  as  those  who  "by  figures  or
markings  upon  the  dead  body  of  beast  or  of  man,  operate  to
get  knowledge  or  to  work  [magic]  or  to  influence  God."  To
this  department,  then,  might  be  referred  the  divination  by


144         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

the  lines  in  a  sheep's  shoulder-bone  condemned  by  Chaucer's
Parson.''''  The  violation  of  graves  so  often  mentioned  in  old
penitentials,  was  probably  for  the  sake  of  rifling  the  dead  in
most  cases,  though  the  idea  of  obtaining  materials  for  black
magic  is  not  excluded.

In  137 1  a  Southwark  wizard  was  arrested  "with  the  head
and  face  of  a  dead  man"  in  his  possession,  as  well  as  a  book  of
sorcery.  He  was  brought  before  Justice  Knivet  in  the  King's
Bench,  but,  since  there  was  no  indictment,  he  was  discharged
after  taking  an  oath  "that  he  would  never  be  a  sorcerer."
The  head  and  the  book  were  burned  at  the  expense  of  the
prisoner!

In  1324  Dame  Alice  Kyteler,  it  was  alleged,  used,  among
other  ingredients,  the  brain  and  clouts  of  an  unbaptized  in-
fant and  the  hair  and  nails  of  corpses  (boiled  in  the  skull  of  a
beheaded  robber)  in  the  manufacture  of  the  drugs,  unguents,
and  powders  with  which  she  worked  malefic  witchcraft.  And
this  same  skull  was  the  pot  wherein  she  prepared  the  tallow
for  her  infernal  candles."^  The  Witch  of  Endor,  in  the  once-
admired  Biblical  epic  of  Du  Bartas  (i 544-1 590),  uses  in  her
necromancy  a  "  puant  Flambeau  "  made  of  the  fat  of  her  own
son.-*^  In  an  old  East  Indian  tale  a  Brahmin  carries  a  candle
of  human  fat  while  searching  for  hidden  treasure;  when  it  fell
from  his  hand,  he  knew  that  he  had  discovered  the  right
spot."*'  Such  a  candle,  according  to  a  current  belief  reported
by  Cardano,  reveals  the  whereabouts  of  secret  hoards  by  a
hissing  sound  when  near  the  place  and  by  going  out  when
very  close. 5"  According  to  Deacon  and  Walker,  distinguished
authorities  of  the  early  seventeenth  century,  "A  notable  ex-
periment of  .  .  .  deceiuing  of  senses,  may  fitly  be  found  in  a
candle  of  Adders  grease:  which  (all  the  while  it  be  burning
alone  in  the  night)  will  cause  all  the  russhes  strawed  in  the
parlour,  to  seeme  as  if  they  were  crawling  snakes."  This
quotation  dates  from  1601.  Four  years  later  one  Whitehead,
brought  before  the  Star  Chamber  for  forgery,  confessed  or
boasted  "that  he  coude  turne  all  the  rushes  in  a  Roome  into
spirites  and  serpentes."      From  Southern  India  we  learn
that  a  lighted  lamp  filled  with  oil  prepared  from  a  kind  of
tree-snake  makes  its  bearer  appear  to  be  covered  with  run-
ning serpents  of  a  green  color."  This  kind  of  witchery  is


CHAP,  vii]       CHARMS  GHOULISH  AND  PROFANE


credited  to  thieves  in  Ceylon:  they  can  make  a  house  seem  to
swarm  with  serpents  by  applying  a  little  whip-snake  oil  to  the
flame  of  a  lamp-^-*  Burglars'  use  of  the  Hand  of  Glory  —  a
dead  man's  hand  burning  as  a  candle  to  cause  sleep,  or  to  re-
veal who  is  asleep  in  the  house  and  who  is  awake  —  is  a  per-
sistent superstition  familiar  to  every  reader  of  The  Ingoldsby
Legends. 55

Throughout  the  middle  ages,  and  in  modern  times  as  well,
the  Christian  Church  has  had  to  struggle  against  the  abuse  of
its  sacraments,  ordinances,  ceremonies,  and  holy  things  for
profane  purposes, particularly  by  would-be  sorcerers,  but
also  at  the  hands  of  well-meaning  but  ignorant  persons  who
cannot  distinguish  between  a  prayer  and  a  spell  and  who
insist  on  misapplying  religious  rites  and  on  employing  holy
objects  in  unauthorized  ways  —  for  "white  magic,"  for  in-
stance, as  a  means  of  cure.^'  The  superstitious  in  Sussex  in
the  sixties  of  the  last  century  were  wont  to  take  the  com-
munion whenever  they  felt  ill.^^  This  reminds  one  of  the  de-
cree of  the  Council  of  i\rles  (ca.  450)  to  the  effect  that  bap-
tized demoniacs  should  be  admitted  to  full  communion  in
order  to  be  freed  from  the  devil  who  was  tormenting  them.^'
To  be  confirmed  over  and  over  again  is  likewise  a  common
remedy  for  ailments:  one  old  woman  is  on  record  who  was
bishopped,  as  she  called  it,  seven  times;  she  said  it  helped  her
rheumatism.^"  Reiterated  baptism  is  forbidden  in  Anglo-
Saxon  penitentials  and  denounced  by  /EUnc.^'^  When  the
famous  Celtic  scholar  Edward  Lhwyd  was  collecting  anti-
quarian material  from  different  Welsh  parishes  he  learned
that  in  one  of  them  "  the  ordinary  women  are  hardly  brought
to  look  upon  Churching  otherwise  than  as  a  charm  to  prevent
witchcraft  and  think  that  grass  will  hardly  ever  grow  where
they  tread  before  they  are  churched."

It  has  never  been  easy  —  even  for  theologians  —  to  dis-
criminate between  a  prayer  and  a  spell.  The  orthodox  view,
however,  is  plain  enovigh:  normal  prayers  are  proper  and
commendable,  but  spells  are  not  removed  from  the  category
of  illicit  magic  or  witchcraft  by  the  mere  intermingling  of
sacred  names  and  biblical  texts  (see  p.  31).  Take,  for  in-
stance, the  case  of  Agnes  Hancok  in  1438.  She  was  a  healer
who  professed,  among  other  things,  to  cure  children  afflicted


146         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

by  the  spirits  which  the  common  people  call  "  feyry  ";  but  her
practice  involved  communication  with  these  unclean  spirits,
whose  advice  she  was  said  to  seek  whenever  she  pleased.^^
Agnes  protested  that  she  used  only  medicines  and  prayers.
However,  when  she  repeated  her  prayers  by  the  bishop's
command,  he  heard  therein  "certain  strange  and  unknown
words"  which  she  could  not  interpret;  and  so  she  was  obliged
to  abjure.^''

Even  a  prayer  or  a  passage  of  scripture  might  become  a
spell  if  used  unlawfully  or  by  unauthorized  persons.  It  was
wrong,  for  instance,  to  have  recourse  to  the  bible  for  divina-
tion, or  to  wear  sacred  texts  as  amulets. ''^  Such  malfeasance
was  strictly  prohibited  by  the  Anglo-Saxon  church  (p.  30),
but  it  was  hard  to  control  and  has  persisted  in  spite  of  ec-
clesiastical denunciation.^*^  I  have  heard  an  old  man  on  Cape
Cod  —  half  in  jest,  perhaps,  but  assuredly  half  in  earnest  — ■
attempt  to  bespell  a  snake  by  reciting  over  and  over  again,  as
fast  as  he  could  speak,  "The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise
the  serpent's  head!  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the
serpent's  head!"^'  This  same  text  was  efficacious  in  the
hands  of  a  boy  at  Nottingham  in  1672.  After  reading  the
folk-book  of  Dr.  Faustus,  he  engraved  with  his  knife  on  a  pale
"the  words  of  the  contract  there  expressed,"  sprinkled  his
blood  upon  them,  and  subscribed  his  name.  The  devil  met
him  and  made  brilliant  promises;  but  the  boy  was  frightened,
"reformed  exceedingly,"  and  "prayed  much."  One  night,
while  he  was  at  prayer,  the  devil  appeared  and  bade  him  give
over;  but  "he  prayed  still,  leaning  on  his  bed-side."  Then
"the  bed  lifted  up  leisurely  till  it  was  beyond  his  reach."
Opening  his  bible  at  the  text  in  question,  he  laid  it  upon  the
bed,  which  "came  gradually  down  again."  The  hero  of  the
incident  became  a  preacher;  but  he  was  worried  about  the
contract,  for  it  remained  uncancelled  in  the  devil's  hands.^^
In  a  gross  form  we  detect  the  same  idea  in  the  mind  of  the
bewitched  Shropshire  woman  who  laid  a  leaf  of  the  bible  over
her  heart;  and  of  the  Welsh  farmer  who  read  a  chapter  to
his  sick  cow;  and  of  the  Devonshire  yeoman  who,  after  los-
ing pig  after  pig  by  witchcraft,  bought  another  and  protected
it  by  putting  a  bible  over  the  door  of  the  sty.^'  In  Yorkshire
a  certain  leaf  of  the  bible  under  the  flagstone  in  front  of  the


CHAP,  vii]       CHARMS  GHOULISH  AND  PROFANE


doorstep  makes  a  thief  stumble  when  he  enters.'^^  Giraldus
Cambrensis  records  a  case  in  which  a  sick  person  was  cured
by  the  application  of  a  copy  of  the  Gospel  of  Matthew."
Among  Cranmer's  Articles  for  visitation  in  1548  occurs  the
following  enquiry:  "Whether  any  persone  hath  abused  the
Ceremonies,  as  in  castyng  holy  Water  vpon  his  Bed,  or  bear-
yng  aboute  hym,  holy  Bread,  saincte  Jhons  Gospell,  ryngyng
of  holy  Belles,  or  kepyng  of  priuate  holy  dales,  as  Taylors,
Bakers,  Brewers,  Smithes,  Shoomakers,  and  suche  other."
According  to  an  Anglo-Saxon  Leech  Book,  to  make  a  "holy
drink"  for  a  man  afflicted  with  elf-disease  (or  nightmare)  the
first  five  verses  of  St.  John's  Gospel  and  other  texts  were  to
be  written  upon  the  housel-dish  (the  sacramental  paten);
then  five  herbs  were  to  be  soaked  in  water  that  had  been
dipped  up  (against  the  stream)  by  a  pure  person,  and  the
writing  on  the  paten  was  to  be  washed  off  into  the  mixture;
then  hallowed  wine  was  to  be  poured  in,  and  three  masses
were  to  be  sung  over  the  whole  l'^  There  is  a  similar  use  of  the
paten  in  a  medicine  for  fever.'^  William  of  Malmesbury  men-
tions the  biblical  sortes  and  also  specifies  black  magic  by  in-
version: a  psalm  sung  backward  acts  as  an  evil  spell,  and  the
woman  who  sings  it  he  styles  a  witch  {venefica)  J"^  The  Anglo-
Saxon  Leechdoms,  which  testify  abundantly  to  the  belief
that  many  ailments  come  from  demons,  elves,  or  witches,^*
make  free  use  of  holy  water  as  an  ingredient  in  herb-drinks
for  men  and  animals,^'  as  well  as  in  ointment  for  sick  or  elf-
shotten  cattle  and  horses.^"  Baptismal  water,^^  holy  salt,^^
holy  oil,^^  holy  bread, hallowed  garlic, and  lichen  from  the
rood,^*  are  likewise  utilized.  The  recipes  are  complicated  by
divers  rites,  prayers,  and  spells,  both  in  the  preparation  and
in  the  administration,  and  masses  (one,  three,  four,  seven,
nine,  or  twelve)  are  sometimes  to  be  sung  over  the  herbs  or
the  unguent.^'  Thus  the  mixture  of  paganism  and  Chris-
tianity is  strikingly  manifest.

Giraldus  also  tells  of  wicked  priests  who  pervert  the  sacra-
ment of  the  altar  to  black  magic,  celebrating  masses  over
waxen  images  for  the  sake  of  cursing  some  victim,  or  singing
the  missa  Fidelium  ten  times  or  more,  with  an  imprecation,  in
order  that  the  person  may  die  before  the  tenth  day  or  soon
after  and  be  buried  with  the  dead.^^  Here  belongs  also  the


148         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

baptism  of  a  waxen  image  by  the  name  of  the  man  or  woman
who  is  to  be  destroyed  by  melting  or  stabbing  it  (p.  76).  To
christen  a  cock  or  a  cat  seems  to  have  been  rather  common  in
magical  rites. ^'  On  April  30, 1 649,  Isabella  Billington  was  exe-
cuted at  York  for  crucifying  her  mother  and  offering  a  calf
and  a  cock  as  a  burnt  sacrifice;  her  husband,  too,  was  hanged
as  an  accomplice:  what  their  object  was,  does  not  appear.'"

A  grotesque  and  rather  horrifying  mixture  of  ancient  magic
with  Christian  superstition  is  the  Devonshire  custom  of
creeping  thrice  under  the  communion  table  at  midnight  on
Midsummer  Eve  to  be  cured  of  fits.''  Here  the  table,  replac-
ing the  altar,  is  a  substitute  for  the  cleft  ashtree  or  holed
stone  or  loop  of  turf  through  which,  in  accordance  with  pri-
meval ideas,  sufferers  creep  or  children  are  passed  for  relief
from  rickets,  hernia,  and  other  troubles  —  a  practice  for-
bidden as  devilish  in  Anglo-Saxon  times  (p.  31).  In  recent
years  in  the  Hebrides,  to  guard  against  whooping  cough,  a
boy  was  passed  three  times  over  the  back  and  under  the  belly
of  an  ass  in  the  name  of  the  Blessed  Trinity;  then  a  bit  of
bread  was  broken  in  two,  and  one  half  was  eaten  by  the  boy
and  the  other  by  the  donkey.'^  I  fear  the  bread  in  this  in-
stance was  originally  the  consecrated  host.  In  several  coun-
ties of  England  a  like  ceremony  (without  the  bread)  is  ob-
served for  various  diseases,  and  sometimes  a  piebald  or
skewbald  horse  or  a  bear  replaces  the  ass.'"*  The  ass  is  tradi-
tionally a  sacred  animal  (as  in  the  mediaeval  Feast  of  Asses)
because  of  our  Lord's  triumphal  entry  into  Jerusalem  upon
an  ass's  back,'^  —  also,  perhaps,  because  of  the  Flight  into
Egypt,  —  and  accordingly  it  has  a  cross  upon  its  neck.  Hairs
from  this  cross  are  sometimes  administered  to  a  child  between
two  slices  of  bread  as  a  cure  for  whooping  cough.

The  wine  of  the  eucharist  is  still  regarded  as  efficacious  in
disease  or  physical  weakness.*'  This  idea  is  mentioned  by
Reginald  Scot,  who  of  course  repudiates  it:  — ■'''A  charme  for
the  choine  cough  [i.  e.  whooping  cough].  Take  three  sips  of  a
chalice,  when  the  preest  hath  said  masse,  and  swallow  it
downe  with  good  devotion."  The  wine  is  particularly
valued  for  this  purpose  in  modern  England  if  it  can  be  ob-
tained from  a  Roman  Catholic  priest."  In  1538  there  was
trouble  at  Rye  because  "  the  curate,  as  a  witch,  gave  Ham-


CHAP,  vii]       charms  ghoulish  AND  PROFANE  I49


per's  child  drink  three  times  of  the  chalice  for  the  chyne
cough."""  Water  from  a  running  stream  and  "hallowed
wine"  are  used  in  an  Anglo-Saxon  recipe  for  a  "holy  drink"
to  cure  a  man  who  suffers  from  nightmare  or  other  goblin  in-
festation."^

In  1 61 2  James  Device,  one  of  the  Lancashire  group,  testi-
fied that  old  Demdike,  his  grandmother,  bade  him  take  the
communion  on  Shere  Thursday.  He  was  not  to  swallow  the
bread  but  "  to  bring  it  and  deliuer  it  to  such  a  thing  as  should
meet  him  in  his  way  homewards."  However,  James  did  swal-
low the  bread,  and  the  thing  that  met  him,  a  demon  hare,  was
very  angry. "^  Traces  of  these  ideas  persist  in  England."^
Lincolnshire  folk-lore  teaches  that,  if  a  woman  keeps  the
communion  bread  in  her  mouth  and  feeds  it  to  a  toad  which  is
waiting  in  the  churchyard,  her  man  will  consent  to  marry  her.
Similar  action  will  enable  you  to  be  a  witch  according  to
Berkshire  superstition:  the  toad  is  Satan. A  young  girl  in
Lincolnshire  was  informed  a  little  while  ago  that  when  she
went  to  her  first  communion  she  would  become  a  witch  if  she
kept  half  of  the  bread  in  her  mouth. "^  A  bit  of  the  host
has  even  been  used  as  a  charm  to  ensure  victory  in  cock-
fighting."^  The  host  as  a  love-charm  was  well-known  in  the
middle  ages  and  later.  Grillando  prosecuted  a  clerk  of  religion
who  swallowed  a  part  of  the  host  himself  and  sent  the  rest,
ground  to  powder,  to  a  woman  with  whom  he  was  in  love,
that  she  might  take  it  in  her  food  or  drink. "^  Casarius  of
Heisterbach,  whose  stories  were  extremely  popular  in  the
middle  ages,  tells  of  a  lascivious  priest  who,  after  saying  mass,
kept  the  wafer  in  his  mouth,  hoping  that,  if  he  thus  kissed  a
woman  whom  he  was  vainly  wooing,  she  would  yield.  He
found,  however,  that  he  was  miraculously  prevented  from
leaving  the  church.^"*  A  woman  who  was  a  great  sufferer  con-
fessed that  when  she  was  a  young  girl  her  garden  was  infested
with  caterpillars.  One  night  she  told  her  troubles  to  a  vaga-
bond wench  to  whom  she  had  given  lodging.  The  woman  ad-
vised her  to  pulverize  a  host  and  sprinkle  the  powder  over  the
growing  vegetables.  This  saved  the  garden,  but  she  paid  the
penalty  by  ill  health  thereafter."'  There  is  a  twelfth-century
story  of  a  peasant  who  hid  the  host  in  a  hole  in  his  pigpen  to
protect  the  swine  from  disease.'"  In  the  same  century  a  poor


150         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

rustic  had  heard  from  some  wicked  impostor  that  he  would
soon  grow  rich  if  he  carried  the  corpus  Domini  about  with  him
always:  so  he  kept  the  bread  in  his  mouth  at  communion  and
sewed  it  up  in  his  cape.'"  A  favorite  mediaeval  tale,  as  old  as
the  twelfth  century  and  told  and  retold  with  slight  variations,
is  that  of  the  man  or  woman  who  put  a  bit  of  the  consecrated
wafer  in  a  beehive  to  check  disease  or  to  increase  the  supply
of  honey;  the  pious  bees  built  a  little  church  of  wax  about  the
wafer,  with  towers,  windows,  altar,  and  all.  This  legend
turns  up  in  Giraldus  Cambrensis  and  in  several  collections  of
exempla,  some  of  them  made  in  England.'"  Dan  Michel  of
Kent,  in  1340,  writes  of  the  abuse  of  the  host  by  witches  and
evil-minded  priests.'"  In  a  fourteenth-century  collection  of
pious  tales,  made  in  England,  we  learn  of  a  sorceress  who
broke  it  into  four  parts,  meaning  to  use  it  for  incantations.""
In  1532  (and  this  is  historical  fact)  three  hosts  were  stolen
from  a  church  at  Aldgate  on  Good  Friday,  perhaps  for  magi-
cal purposes."^  In  1582  the  wife  of  Edward  Jones  was  re-
quired to  prove  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  Archdeacon  of
Lewes  "that  she  did  eat  the  Communion  bread  and  put  yt
not  in  hir  glove."  "^

The  water  of  baptism  is  still  regarded  as  efficacious  in  vari-
ous complaints  —  toothache,  for  instance,  and  somnambu-
lism —  and  for  a  charm  to  ensure  good  luck."''  This  points
back  to  an  old  malpractice,  for  water  "hallowed  with  font-
hallowing"  was  an  ingredient  in  certain  salves  of  the  Anglo-
Saxons,  the  herbs  used  in  one  of  their  fumigations  were
dipped  in  font-water,  and  this  was  an  ingredient  in  their
medicinal  draughts."^  Early  in  the  thirteenth  century,  in  a
Council  held  at  Durham  by  Bishop  Richard  de  Marisco,  it
was  ordered  that  "fonts  should  be  kept  locked  on  account  of
sorcery  {propter  sortilegia),"  and  that  chrism  and  holy  oil
should  be  likewise  guarded."'  In  1287,  at  the  Synod  of
Exeter  under  Bishop  Peter  Quivil,  it  was  ordered  that  each
church  should  have  a  stone  baptistery  well  locked  {bene  sera-
tum)  .'^"  From  this  time  down,  well  into  the  sixteenth  century,
there  is  abundant  evidence  about  font-covers,  and  many  com-
plaints turn  up  in  visitations  that  the  font  in  this  or  that
church  is  not  duly  provided  with  a  lock.'"  The  highest  Eng-
lish authority  on  canon  law.  Bishop  Lyndewoode  (who  died  in


CHAP,  vii]       CHARMS  GHOULISH  AND  PROFANE


1 446),  in  commenting  on  these  precautions,  remarks  of  the
sortilegia  that  it  is  "more  respectable  to  pass  them  over  in
silence  than  to  specify  them."'^-"  One  regrets  his  scruples,  but
we  do  not  actually  need  his  testimony.  Holy  water  from  font
or  piscina,  —  as  also  the  holy  oil  of  baptism,  of  chrism,  and  of
extreme  unction,  —  was  regarded  as  a  powerful  ingredient  in
love-potions."^  Holy  water  was  used  to  baptize  images  of
wax  that  were  employed  in  the  blackest  of  black  magic  —
amatory  or  malefic."''  Two  women  at  Rome,  whom  Grillando
saw,  confessed  that  they  had  anointed  their  lips  with  baptis-
mal oil  to  make  their  kisses  seductive.

A  silver  coin  from  the  offertory  is  good  for  sore  eyes  and
other  complaints:  if  carried  in  the  pocket,  it  keeps  off  rheu-
matism. A  ring  made  out  of  such  a  coin  cures  epilepsy,
scrofula,  paralysis,  and  fits."*"  Doubtless  gold  would  be  still
better  for  the  eyes  —  for  everybody  knows  that  gold  coins  or
gold  rings  (especially  wedding  rings)  are  good  to  rub  on  styes
or  weak  eyes  —  but  the  village  offertory  is  not  rich  in  gold.
"Do  not  all  old  people,"  wrote  the  Rev.  George  Plaxton  to
Thoresby  in  1709,  "wipe  their  eyes  with  Jacobuses  when  they
meet  with  them,  as  an  opthalmique  charm  to  mend  the
sight  ? "  A  pious  Quaker  in  1 699  bequeathed  a  gold  ring  for
poor  Friends  to  have  "to  wash  sore  eyes  with.""'  Lead
stolen  from  a  church  window  during  service  is  a  curative
amulet.""  Water  from  the  leads  or  roof  of  a  church  is  a  valu-
able remedy."^  Grease  from  the  church  bells  may  be  used  as
an  ointment  for  ringworm,  warts,  and  piles. '■'^  Here  again  we
touch  elbows  with  our  remote  ancestors:  the  Anglo-Saxon
Leech  Book  prescribes  for  a  "fiend-sick  man"  a  medicine
compounded  of  ale,  garlic,  holy  water,  church  lichen  from  a
cross,  and  ten  different  herbs,  and  directs  that  the  patient
shall  drink  it  out  of  a  church  bell.'"  It  was  rather  hard  meas-
ure to  put  English  rustics  to  their  penance  for  relying  on  the
charms  operated  by  local  healers,  and  at  the  same  time  to  bid
them  trust  the  Royal  Touch  for  the  King's  Evil  and  to  teach
them  that  consecrated  finger-rings  were  good  for  cramp. '^"^


CHAPTER  VIII


WIND  AND  WEATHER


ENTOS  abigoque  vocoque"  says  Ovid's  Medea.'  Arch-


V  bishop  Agobard  of  Lyons  (who  died  a.d.  840),  in  a
special  tract  "Against  the  FooHsh  Notions  of  the  People
about  Hail  and  Thunder,"  inveighs  against  the  tempestarii  or
weather- wizards  of  his  time:  "wretched  creatures  who  de-
clare that  they  can  not  only  bring  on  storms  but  also  can  pro-
tect the  inhabitants  from  them,"  and  who  levy  a  tariff"  on
their  clients,  far  more  punctually  paid  than  the  tithes.^  We
find,  accordingly,  that  belief  in  such  witchcraft  came  to  be
regarded  as  superstitious  and  was  treated  as  a  sin  that  de-
served a  heavy  penance.^  But  folk-lore  was  too  strong  for
the  rational  theologians;  they  had  to  swing  into  line,  and
throughout  the  middle  ages  the  old  doctrine  of  witches  (or
devils)  and  weather,  remained  in  full  force  —  a  doctrine  in-
herited from  primeval  times  and  still  shared  by  civilized  man
and  savage  the  world  over."  The  Penitential  ascribed  to
Ecgbert  (Archbishop  of  York  from  732  to  766)  assigns  seven
years'  penance  for  any  sender-forth  of  storms  {emissor  tem-
pestatum),  and  so  do  the  penitentials  of  Pseudo-Cummean
and  Pseudo-Theodore. 5  Such  tempestarii  are  similarly
treated  in  other  manuals  of  the  kind  on  the  Continent  as
early  as  the  eighth  century,^  and  are  likewise  condemned  in
the  Laws  of  the  Visigoths  and  in  Charlemagne's  Capitu-
laries.'

Bede  tells  us  that  when  St.  Germanus  and  Bishop  Lupus
were  sailing  from  France  to  Britain  to  rescue  the  land  from
the  Pelagian  heresy,  "the  hostile  violence  of  demons"  raised
a  furious  tempest.*  An  elaborate  Anglo-Saxon  charm  or
prayer  (it  may  well  be  taken  either  way)  for  safety  in  gen-
eral, and  in  particular  for  protection  and  favorable  winds  on
a  voyage,  refers  with  sufficient  clearness  to  demons: —  "the
grim  terror";  "the  great  fear  that  is  hateful  to  every  one";
"Let  no  nightmare  harm  me";  "that  I  may  be  guarded


CHAP.  VIIl]


WIND  AND  WEATHER


against  the  hateful  ones  that  pursue  my  life."  '  According  to
the  Anglo-Saxon  Herbarium,  the  castor-oil  plant  or  its  seed
protects  from  hail  and,  on  a  ship,  quells  storms;  it  should  be
gathered  with  a  prayer  or  spell  (given  in  Latin  and  English)
addressed  directly  to  the  herb."

Saint  Godric,  the  twelfth-century  hermit  of  Finchale,  once
saw  a  terrible  demon  who  vomited  black  storm  clouds  from
his  mouth  and  caused  flood  and  famine  in  all  the  region."
Two  famous  historical  events  may  be  cited  in  comparison,
both  illustrating  the  ascription  of  such  phenomena  to  the  arts
of  sorcery.  In  a  desperate  battle  with  the  Quadi  (a.d.  174)
the  army  of  Marcus  Aurelius  was  refreshed  by  a  rain  when
perishing  with  heat  and  thirst,  and  at  the  same  time  the  bar-
barians were  overwhelmed  by  a  storm  of  fire  and  hail;  and  the
rain  which  refreshed  the  Romans,  burned  like  oil  when  it  fell
upon  the  Quadi.  This  marvellous  storm  was  said  to  have
been  caused  by  the  magic  arts  of  one  Arnuphis,  an  Egyptian
in  the  service  of  the  emperor.  Christian  writers,  however,
preferred  to  ascribe  it  to  a  legion  of  Christians,  afterwards
known  as  the  Thundering  Legion.'^  Our  second  example
comes  closer  to  the  vision  of  Saint  Godric.  At  the  Battle  of
Liegnitz,  in  1241,  between  the  Poles  and  the  Mongol  invaders,
the  standard  of  the  Tartars  was  inscribed  with  the  Greek  let-
ter X,  and  on  the  tip  was  the  image  of  an  ugly  black  bar-
barian's head.  When  this  standard  was  shaken,  the  head
breathed  forth  a  smoky  mist,  dense  and  fetid,  which  not  only
concealed  the  Tartars  from  their  enemies,  but  overcame  the
Poles  by  its  stench,  so  that  they  were  defeated  with  frightful
slaughter.'^  So  at  the  Battle  of  Barnet,  in  1471,  the  Yorkist
lords  were  confused  by  a  mist,  which  was  said  to  have  been
caused  by  the  spells  of  Friar  Bungay.''*  Such  mists  are  famil-
iar in  Druidical  and  Scandinavian  wizard-lore. Mist  pro-
duced by  a  miracle  due  to  St.  Acca  scattered  King  Malcolm's
army  when  he  invaded  England  and  threatened  Durham."*

Ralph  Niger's  chronicle  tells  of  a  huge  dragon  sweeping
through  the  air  at  St.  Osyth  in  1171,  from  whose  motion  such
a  fire  was  kindled  that  it  burnt  to  ashes  a  house  with  all  the
outbuildings.  And  he  illustrates  the  incident  by  what  once
happened  at  the  monastery  of  Fossez  at  the  confluence  of  the
Marne  and  the  Seine:  in  a  terrible  thunderstorm  a  monstrous


154         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

serpent  came  flying  across  the  Marne,  spouting  fire  from
mouth  and  nostrils;  one  of  the  monks,  with  the  sacred  wafer
in  his  hand,  advanced  against  the  dragon  and  forced  it  to
plunge  into  the  river  with  a  crash  which  was  heard  for  almost
two  miles."  Some  three  hundred  years  earlier  (a.d.  857)  there
was  a  frightful  storm  at  Cologne.  The  people  took  refuge  in
St.  Peter's  Church,  the  bells  were  set  ringing,  and  all  began  to
pray  for  God's  mercy,  when  a  thunderbolt  in  the  shape  of  a
fiery  dragon  split  the  building  asunder,  and  killed  a  priest  at
the  altar  of  St.  Peter,  a  deacon  at  the  altar  of  St.  Denis,  and  a
layman  at  the  altar  of  St.  Mary;  six  others  were  severely  in-
jured by  the  same  stroke.'^

In  England  on  St.  Luke's  Day  (October  18),  1221,  a  great
northeast  wind  (the  quarter  of  evil  influences  —  ab  Aquilone
07nne  malum)  blew  down  trees,  houses,  and  church  steeples,
and  many  fiery  dragons  and  wicked  spirits  were  seen  flying
in  the  air.^'  In  1323  there  was  a  terrible  wind-storm  with
hideous  darkness  and  a  great  waterspout:  the  chronicler
attributes  the  outbreak  to  "the  evil  spirit,  the  head  of  all
iniquity."^"  In  1361  (the  year  of  the  Second  Great  Pestilence),
men,  beasts,  trees,  and  houses  were  struck  by  lightning,
"and  the  devell  in  mannes  lyknes  spak  to  men  goynge  be  the
weye."  In  December,  1365,  a  west  wind  {ventus  ille  zephy-
rus)  did  much  damage  to  the  monastery  at  Reading,  and  the
devil  appeared  in  hideous  guise  —  and  no  wonder,  the  chroni-
cler remarks,  when  we  consider  the  unseemly  costume  then  in
fashion."  On  July  15,  1441,  when  Henry  VI  passed  through
London  with  due  solemnity,  a  mighty  tempest  burst  upon  the
city;  "  and  so  it  was  spoken  emonges  the  peple,  that  ther  were
som  wikked  fendes  and  spirites  arered  out  of  helle  by  coniura-
cion,  forto  noy  the  peple  in  the  Reame,  and  to  put  theym  to
trouble,  discencion  and  vnrest."""^  Nearly  two  centuries  later
the  Londoners  held  the  same  doctrine:  in  1626  the  "vulgar"
of  the  city  ascribed  a  great  storm  to  the  conjuring  of  Dr.
John  Lambe,  who  happened  to  be  on  the  river  at  the  time,^''
and  in  1628  "Dr.  Lambe,  the  witch,  was  beaten  to  death  in
London  streets  by  the  boys  and  apprentices."

After  giving  an  account  of  the  storm  of  February  ist,  I445,
which  set  Paul's  steeple  afire,  the  chronicler  adds  a  curious
detail.  A  great  "standard "  that  had  been  set  up  in  the  pave-


CHAP.  VIIl]


WIND  AND  WEATHER


ment  at  the  Leadenhall  in  Cornhill  and  was  decked  with
holm  and  ivy  for  the  citizens'  Christmas  sports,  was  "  torne
vp  and  cast  downe  with  [i.  e.  by]  the  malign  spirite,  and  the
stones  of  the  pavement  all  about  cast  in  the  strete  to  dyuers
houses,  so  that  the  peple  were  sore  agast  of  the  grete  fervent
tempestes  that  shewed  that  tyme."  A  true-bred  weather-
witch  appears  in  1493  in  the  person  of  Elena  Dalok,  arraigned
before  the  Commissary  of  London.  "She  herself  said,"  so
runs  the  record,  "that  if  she  bids  the  rain  to  rain,  it  rains  at
her  command."

In  1 61 5  Margaret  Byx  alias  Elwin,  under  sentence  of
death  as  an  incendiary,  confessed  her  guilty  knowledge  of  a
plot  to  burn  the  town  of  Wimondham  in  Norfolk.  It  was
Ellen  Pendleton  alias  Plodder  who  broached  the  matter  to
her.  "She  sayth  that  ther  was  a  pece  of  match  placed  in  a
stable  in  length  about  thre  fathomes,  wherunto  the  said
Ellen  Pendleton  did  put  fier  and  kindled  the  same  uppon  the
Satterdaye  at  night  as  she  veryly  beleeveth,"  and  that  Ellen
told  her  that  the  town  should  be  set  on  fire  the  next  day.
"And  sayth  further  that  she  told  her  that  against  that  tyme
that  the  winde  should  by  conjuration  so  be  raysed  that  the
fier  should  not  be  staled  nor  quenched  in  hast,"  and  the  wind
did  rise  accordingly.  Incidentally  "the  aforesaid  Ellen  tould
her  that  she  would  send  out  that  which  should  breake  the
neck  of  M'  Fraunces  Tilluth  and  his  horse  neck  eyther  by
night  or  by  daye."  Ellen  too  was  condemned  and  executed.^*
We  may  note,  by  way  of  comparison,  that  the  destruction
of  St.  Paul's  steeple  by  lightning  in  1561  was  held  by  some
persons  to  have  been  "mischievously  done  by  art  magic."  ^'
Others,  on  the  contrary,  saw  in  the  catastrophe  the  just  hand
of  an  avenging  God.  "It  is  no  maruaile,"  writes  an  anony-
mous pamphleteer,  "yf  God  haue  sende  downe  fire  to  brinne
parte  of  the  Churche."  ^°

It  is  only  natural  that  the  Prince  of  the  Powers  of  the  Air
should  manifest  his  hatred  of  God  by  attacking  churches.^'
In  I402  at  Danbury  in  Essex  "the  Devill  appeared  in  like-
nesse  of  a  Gray  Fryer;  who  entring  the  Church,  put  the
people  in  great  fear,  and  the  same  hour,  with  a  Tempest  of
Whirlewinde  and  Thunder,  the  top  of  the  steeple  was  broken
down,  and  half  of  the  Chancell  scattered  abroad."  The


156         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

demon  mounted  the  altar  and  sprang  from  side  to  side
thereon.  The  church  was  filled  with  an  intolerable  stench.
In  departing  he  passed  between  the  legs  of  one  of  the  con-
gregation, who  soon  fell  sick  of  a  mortal  disease,  his  feet  and
part  of  his  legs  becoming  black. With  these  antics  of  the
devil  on  the  altar  we  may  compare  the  precisely  similar
freaks  of  the  lightning,  accompanied  by  a  dreadful  stench,^"*
in  a  church  at  Liege  in  1 1 1 8.^^  The  shape  assumed  by  the  de-
mon for  his  exploit  at  Danbury  might  well  have  been  ascribed
to  the  plots  of  certain  Friars  Minors,  for,  a  few  days  later,
eight  brothers  of  this  order  were  arrested,  convicted,  and  exe-
cuted for  treason. It  was  in  August  and  September  of  this
same  year  (1402)  that  rain,  wind,  and  hail  all  but  destroyed
the  army  of  Flenry  IV  in  his  campaign  against  "that  great
magician,  damn'd  Glendower."  On  the  eve  of  the  Nativity
of  the  Virgin  (i.  e.  on  September  8)  the  king's  tent  was
beaten  down  and  his  lance  was  torn  up  from  the  ground  and
fixed  itself  in  his  armor:  it  would  have  been  his  last  night  on
earth  if  he  had  not.  gone  to  bed  in  his  panoply.  Many  ex-
plained these  things  as  the  diabolic  arts  of  the  Friars  Minors."
Three  times,  John  Hardyng  tells  us,  King  Henry  invaded
Wales,  and  every  time  he  had  dreadful  weather,  which  every-
body ascribed  to  witches.

The  king  had  neuer,  but  tempest  foule  &  raine
As  longe  as  he  was  ay  in  Wales  grounde
Rockes  &  mystes,  windes  &  stormes  euer  certaine
All  men  trowed,  y  witches  it  made  that  stounde.^*

On  Twelfth  Day,  1534,  the  devil  appeared  "with  greate
tempest  and  darknes"  in  St.  Alkmond's  Church  at  Shrews-
bury, and  he  went  out  through  the  steeple,  carrying  a  pin-
nacle with  him  and  leaving  the  print  of  his  claws  upon  one  of
the  bells. -^^  Compare  what  happened  in  the  parish  church  at
Bungay  near  Norwich  on  Sunday,  the  fourth  of  August,  1577.
"An  horrible  shaped  thing"  like  a  black  dog  appeared  "in
a  great  tempest  of  violent  raine,  lightning,  and  thunder."
"This  black  dog,"  writes  Abraham  Fleming  in  a  contem-
porary pamphlet,  "or  the  divel  in  such  a  Likenesse  (God  hee
knoweth  al  who  worketh  all),"  wrung  the  necks  of  two  of  the
worshippers.  As  he  passed  another  man  in  the  congregation,


CHAP.  VIIl]


WIND  AND  WEATHER


he  "gave  him  such  a  gripe  on  the  back,  that  therwithall  he
was  presently  drawen  togither  and  shrunk  up,  as  it  were  a
peece  of  lether  scorched  in  a  hot  fire;  or  as  the  mouth  of  a
purse  or  bag,  drawen  togither  with  a  string."  He  left  "y^
marks  as  it  were  of  his  clawes  or  talans"  on  the  wall  and
door.  Similar  wonders  the  dog  wrought  in  the  parish  church
of  Blibery  (Bliborough)  on  the  selfsame  day,  killing  three
persons,  burning  the  hand  of  one,  and  "blasting"  several
others.""  The  Black  Dog  of  Bungay  is  familiarly  mentioned
in  John  Louthe's  Reminiscences,  1 579 :  John  Cooke,  Registrar
of  Winchester  diocese,  when  he  had  to  "preche  hys  owne
shame"  at  Paul's  Cross,  did  so  without  blushing,  "for  hys
syde  panche  and  Croydon  complexyone  wolde  not  suffer
hym  to  blushe,  more  then  the  black  dogge  of  Bungay."  '•^
The  Black  Dog  of  Bungay  had  his  prototype  in  the  year  857
at  Treves.  The  Bishop  was  holding  service  when  the  bell-
tower  was  shattered  by  lightning;  the  darkness  was  so  dense
that  the  worshippers  could  scarcely  recognize  each  other;  the
earth  yawned  asunder;  an  enormous  dog  ran  about  the  altar
in  a  circle.'''*  The  persistence  of  such  tales  is  illustrated  by
legends  current  on  Dartmoor  in  the  first  half  of  the  last  cen-
tury with  reference  to  the  dreadful  storm  of  Sunday,  October
21,  1638,  in  which  Widdicombe  church  was  struck  by  light-
ning, several  persons  being  killed  and  many  injured.''^  One
tradition  is  that  the  devil  appeared  on  a  black  horse  and  en-
quired the  way  to  the  church  just  before  the  storm;  another
that  he  entered  the  church  to  fetch  away  a  wicked  disciple  of
his  own  and  flew  off"  with  him  through  the  roof."*^  The  Rev.
John  Prince,  in  his  Worthies  of  Devon  (1701),  shows  himself
tempted  to  believe  that  evil  spirits  were  active  in  this  storm:
"There  are  some  circumstances  .  .  .  that  seem  to  confirm
this  hypothesis,  as  in  particular  the  throwing  down  stones
from  the  steeple,  so  fast  as  if  it  had  been  done  by  an  hundred
men.""''  In  1537,  Charles  Wriothesley,  Windsor  Herald,
found  an  item  of  French  news  (just  brought  to  London  from
Calais)  of  sufficient  interest  to  jot  it  down  in  his  book  of  an-
nals. On  the  Tuesday  after  Passion  Sunday,  it  seems,  the
steeple  of  Our  Lady's  Church  at  Calais  was  struck  by  light-
ning and  set  on  fire.  The  day  before,  in  the  same  vicinity,  a
spirit  in  the  likeness  of  a  man  suddenly  appeared  in  the  midst


158         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

of  a  merry-making  company,  and  as  suddenly  "vanyshed
awaye,  cariinge  a  parte  of  the  house  awaye  with  him."  ''^

Reginald  Scot,  following  Wier  as  usual,  rejects  the  notion
that  devils  or  their  disciples  control  the  weather,  but  his
testimony  is  valuable  as  to  the  prevalence  of  this  doctrine
among  the  common  sort.  Many  believe,  he  assures  us,  "that
neither  haile  nor  snowe,  thunder  nor  lightening,  raine  nor
tempestuous  winds  come  from  the  heavens  at  the  commande-
ment  of  God:  but  are  raised  by  the  cunning  and  power  of
witches  and  conjurers;  insomuch  as  a  clap  of  thunder,  or  a
gale  of  wind  is  no  sooner  heard,  but  either  they  run  to  ring
bels,  or  crie  out  to  burne  witches."  It  was  a  common  thing
in  England,  as  elsewhere,  to  ring  the  church  bells  in  a  storm,
particularly  when  it  thundered.  Cases  may  be  noted  in
1450,  1457-8,  1464,  and  1519.^'  A  York  pontifical  of  the
eighth  century  provides  a  formula  for  blessing  a  church  bell:
"Wherever  this  bell  sounds,  let  the  power  of  enemies  retire,
so  also  the  shadow  of  phantoms,  the  assault  of  whirlwinds,
the  stroke  of  lightnings,  the  harm  of  thunders,  the  injuries  of
tempests,  and  every  spirit  of  the  storm-winds.''  But  the
devil  was  sometimes  defiant,  as  when,  in  1 534  at  St.  Alk-
mond's  church  in  Shrewsbury,  he  "put  the  prynt  of  hys
clawes  uppon  the  iiij""  bell"  and  "for  the  tyme  stayed  all  the
bells  in  the  churches  within  the  sayd  towne  that  they  could
neyther  toll  nor  rynge."

Storms  often  attended  the  conjurations  of  men  who  sought
for  buried  treasure.  Thus  the  vile  weather  that  prevailed  in
Halifax  and  vicinity  in  1510  was  ascribed  by  common  fame
to  the  devil-raising  efforts  of  such  adventurers;  and  when,
about  1539,  William  Wycherley  and  others  (including  one
Thomas  Goslyngl)  undertook  to  call  up  the  "orientalle  or
septentrialle"  spirit  Baro  at  a  place  in  Sussex,  their  spells
raised  "a  terrible  wynde  and  tempest,"  though  Baro  failed  to
appear  in  person."  Meredith  Lloyd  told  Aubrey  of  the
conjuring  of  Dr.  John  Dee  and  associates  at  a  pool  in  Breck-
nockshire: "They  found  a  wedge  of  gold,"  but  "a  mighty
storme  and  tempest  was  raysed  in  harvest  time,  the  countrey
people  had  not  knowen  the  like."  The  persistency  of  these
ideas  is  notable.  Not  far  from  1800  the  scholars  of  Clitheroe
grammar  school  called  up  Satan:  a  fearful  storm  ensued,"


CHAP.  VIIl]


WIND  AND  WEATHER


and  that  storms  are  due  to  conjuring  is  a  belief  still  or  re-
cently current  in  Wilts. So  a  tempest  may  mark  the  death
of  a  witch  or  wizard,"  of  a  suicide/"  or  of  any  enormous  sin-
ner, —  when  Satan  comes  to  claim  his  own.  At  about  the
hour  of  the  death  of  King  John  there  was  a  fierce  storm  and
many  horrid  visions  were  seen.^'  A  high  wind  presaged  the
death  of  Henry  I,  and  there  were  shocking  circumstances
about  his  burial  that  suggest  diabolic  agency.^-  There  was
a  storm,  too,  in  1265,  when  Simon  de  Montfort  was  slain  at
the  Battle  of  Evesham.^^  Modern  instances  are  common
enough.''''

Higden  in  his  fourteenth-century  Polychronicon  tells  us
that  in  the  Isle  of  Man  witches  sell  sailors  wind  tied  up  under
three  knots  of  thread:  as  these  are  untied,  the  wind  freshens.^^
Similar  traffic  is  on  record  for  Lapland,  Finland,  Pembroke-
shire, the  Orkneys,  Shetland,  the  Highlands  in  general,  and
other  places  in  the  North.^*  Odin  in  a  poem  in  the  Elder
Edda,  speaking  in  the  character  of  a  wizard,  claims  to  know
spells  to  quench  fire,  to  heal  feuds,  and  to  calm  the  waves.^^
Oddo,  a  famous  pirate  among  the  Danes,  was  so  skilled  in
magic  that  he  could  traverse  the  sea  without  a  ship  and  could
wreck  the  vessels  of  his  enemies  by  storms.^^  Alexander
Roberts  in  1616  cites  "the  experience  of  our  owne  Nauiga-
tors,  who  trade  in  Finland,  Denmarke,  Lapland,  Ward-house,
Norway,  and  other  Countries  of  that  Climate,  and  haue  ob-
tained of  the  inhabitants  thereof,  a  certaine  winde  for  twenty
dayes  together."  ^'  Ady  in  1656  avers  that  "it  is  certain  that
there  are  some  people  in  Germany,  and  Polonia,  that  do  com-
monly sell  Winds  by  the  Devils  help  to  Sea-men."  The
Lapland  and  Northern  witches  and  their  traffic  in  weather
became  proverbial.''^  The  Female  Tatler  for  December  28-
30,  1709  (No.  76),  prints  a  humorous  advertisement:  "  'T'his  is
to  give  Notice  to  all  News-Writers,  that  there  is  lately  come  over  a
Laplander  that  prof  ers  to  sell  all  manner  0/ Winds  at  reasonable
Rates,  to  bring  the  Packet  Boats  in  due  time,''  etc.  Weaker
Scott  and  his  shipmates  bought  a  wind  of  Bessie  Millie  at
Stromness  in  the  Orkneys  in  1814:  they  were  joking,  of
course,  but  she  was  in  earnest."^  So  was  Henry  More  the
Platonist  when,  in  1653,  he  set  down  his  belief  in  the  sale  of
winds  as  well  as  in  the  raising  of  tempests  by  witches.  As


l6o        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


means  to  the  latter  end  he  specifies  "casting  of  Flint-Stones
behind  their  backs  towards  the  West,  or  flinging  a  little  Sand
in  the  Aire,  or  striking  a  River  with  a  Broom,  and  so  sprink-
ling the  Wet  of  it  toward  Heaven,"  the  stirring  of  Vrine  or
Water  with  their  Finger  in  a  Hole  in  the  ground,  or  boyling
of  Hogs  Bristles  in  a  Pot."  Versified  spells  for  raising  and
laying  the  wind  may  be  read  in  the  Second  Confession  of  the
famous  Scottish  witch  Isobel  Gowdie  (1662)."

Here  we  may  note  the  exploit  of  a  Swedish  fisherman,  Per
Mattsson,  with  a  wind-pipe  about  1659.  One  day,  when  the
boat  was  on  the  way  back  from  fishing,  there  was  a  stark
calm.  "We  shall  have  wind,"  said  Per,  and  he  blew  in  a  little
green  tobacco  pipe  that  he  had:  immediately  a  light  breeze
sprang  up.  Per  blew  again:  the  wind  freshened,  but  still  was
not  strong  enough  to  make  rowing  unnecessary.  Then  he
blew  the  third  time,  and  they  had  wind  enough.  Three  wit-
nesses who  were  on  board  agreed  in  this  testimony  when  the
matter  came  before  the  Swedish  Witchcraft  Commission  in
1671.7^

"To  whistle  for  a  wind"  is  a  faded  bit  of  sorcery,  and  a
whistling  woman  is  especially  dangerous  to  the  ship."  In
1 459  a  woman  of  the  Leventina  in  Switzerland  confessed  that
she  had  attended  a  witches'  assembly  where  "Lucifel"  was
present  in  the  form  of  a  black  cat.  The  hags  wished  to  cause
bad  weather,  and  the  fiend  bade  them  whistle  three  times;  a
few  days  later  came  snow  and  frost  and  cold  with  great  dam-
age to  the  crops  of  the  valley.  '^^

The  parish  register  of  Wells  in  1583  contains  a  tragic  entry:
"Decemb.  Perished  upon  the  West  coast,  coming  from  Spain,
Rich''  Waller  [and  thirteen  others,  named],  whose  deaths  were
brought  to  pass  by  the  detestable  working  of  an  execrable
witche  of  Kings  Lynn,  whose  name  was  Mother  Gabley,  by
the  boiling  or  rather  labouring  of  certayn  Eggs  in  a  payle  full
of  colde  water,  afterward  approved  sufficiently  at  the  ar-
raignement  of  y^  said  Witche."  "  Similar  is  a  tale  of  New
Hampshire  witchcraft  told  by  Mr.  Stephen  Dolloflf  (born  in
1795)  to  ^  friend  of  mine  some  years  ago.  He  had  heard  it
from  his  grandmother,  whom  Old  Aunt  Patty,  reputed  a
witch,  was  visiting  when  the  spell  was  worked.^"  Three  "big
boys,"  who  had  been  teasing  Aunt  Patty,  were  rash  enough  to


CHAP,  viii]  WIND  AND  WEATHER  l6l

attempt  to  cross  the  Squamscot  River  in  a  small  boat.
"  'Long  about  three  o'clock  in  the  a'ternoon  Patty  fetched  a
pail  of  water  and  dipped  up  the  water  and  tipped  it  over  a  lit-
tle three  times,  and  then  over  it  went,  and  she  said  '  There  you
go,  you  dogs!'  Waal,  jest  that  time  them  boys  was  a-crossin'
the  river,  an'  a  squall  struck  'em  all  of  a  suddent,  an'  the
boat  upsot,  an'  they  was  all  drownded.  'Tain't  safe  to  hector
a  witch,  noway !"

Pathetic  enough  is  the  confession  of  Elizabeth  Harris  at
Faversham  in  1645:  "She  further  saith  that  her  sonne  being
drowned  in  Goodman  Woodcots  High  [i.  e.  hoy,  a  small  ves-
sel] she  wished  that  God  might  be  her  revenger,  which  was
her  watchword  to  the  Divell,  and  the  High  was  cast  away,
and  she  conceives  that  her  wish  was  the  cause  of  its  being
cast  away."  Joan  Williford,  executed  in  this  same  year,  testi-
fied "  that  her  Divell  told  her  that  Elizabeth  Harris  about  six
or  seven  yeeres  since  curst  the  Boat  of  one  lohn  W oodcott,  and
so  it  came  to  passe."

Cases  that  illustrate  the  loss  of  ships  or  boats  by  witch-
craft may  be  accumulated  in  any  desired  quantity.^'  Pre-
eminent among  such  grisly  experiences  is  that  which  so
earnestly  occupied  the  Swedish  magistrates  in  1669.  Tomas
Andersson's  fishing  boat  had  foundered  in  a  storm  with  all  on
board;  and  the  testimony  (confession  in  part)  was  that  the
storm  was  raised  by  witchcraft,  that  a  wizard  and  some
witches  flew  out  to  the  boat  in  divers  shapes  (as  magpie,
jackdaw,  crow,  and  raven),  resumed  their  human  form  when
they  reached  her,  broke  off  the  mast,  and  threw  the  men
overboard  though  they  cried  to  God  for  help!

In  the  early  nineteenth  century  it  was  a  saying  among
New  England  mariners,  when  a  contrary  wind  detained  them
in  port,  that  "the  old  woman  has  got  the  cat  under  the  half-
bushel";  and  there  is  a  story  of  a  woman  on  Block  Island
"  who  actually  did  put  a  cat  under  a  barrel  ...  to  prevent  the
sailing  of  a  certain  schooner."  The  same  bit  of  folk-lore
turns  up  in  Ireland. To  drown  a  cat  is  to  raise  the  wind,  as
Fielding  discovered  in  his  voyage  to  Lisbon.

When  the  theory  that  storms  were  of  Satan's  raising  was
combated,  the  argument  was  likely  to  be  that  the  Almighty
sends  them  to  rebuke  and  punish  the  sins  of  the  community.


l62         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Thus,  in  1704,  Joseph  Hussey,  Pastor  of  the  Congregational
Church  at  our  Cambridge,  pubhshed  a  tract  at  London
which  tells  its  own  story  in  the  title-page:  "A  Warning  from
the  Winds.  A  Sermon  preach'd  upon  Wednesday,  January
xix.  170^.  Being  the  day  of  Publick  Humiliation,  for  the
late  terrible,  and  awakening  storm  of  wind,  sent  in  great  re-
buke upon  this  kingdom.  November  xxvi,  xxvii.  1703.  And
now  set  forth  in  some  ground  of  it,  to  have  been  inflicted  as  a
punishment  of  that  General  Contempt,  in  England  under
Gospel-Light,  cast  upon  the  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the
Third  Person  in  the  Blessed  Trinity,  as  to  his  divine  breath-
ings upon  the  souls  of  men.  To  which  is  subnected  a  Labo-
rious Exercitation  upon  Eph.  2.  2.  About  the  Airy  Oracles,
Sibyl-Prophetesses,  Idolatry,  and  Sacrifices  of  the  elder
pagan  times,  under  the  influence  of  the  God  of  this  world,
according  to  the  course  of  it,  and  as  now  indifferently  work-
ing in  the  Children  of  Disobedience  to  defend  this  text
against  the  common  mistake,  that  the  winds  are  raised  by
Satan,  under  the  divine  permission."  "Ascribe  unto  the
Lord,"  cries  the  preacher,  "  the  glory  due  unto  his  name.  Let
God  have  the  honor  of  these  blasts:  Entertain  not  a  thought
that  the  winds  were  raised  by  Satan,  Witches,  Cunning-Men,
or  Conjuration.  This  is  dishonor  to  God,  and  unworthy  of
the  Christian  name."  But,  though  theories  vary  and  star-
eyed  Science  advances,  folk-lore  is  stubborn  in  conservation
and  we  still  say  proverbially  "as  busy  as  the  Old  Harry  in  a
gale  of  wind."


CHAPTER  IX


THE  WITCH  IN  THE  DAIRY '

WHEN  cows  "go  dry"  unaccountably  or  give  bloody
milk,  witchcraft  has  always  been  an  easy  and  natural
diagnosis.  In  1909  a  woman  was  fined  and  imprisoned  in
Pennsylvania  for  "disorderly  conduct":  she  had  invaded  a
neighbor's  barn  and  had  tried  to  cast  a  spell  over  the  cow;
the  milk  stopped.^  The  witch's  motive  may  be  mere  ill-will,
but  often  she  is  herself  stealing  the  milk  in  some  occult
fashion.  Such  milk-filching  is  nearly  related  to  the  trans-
ference of  crops  forbidden  in  the  Twelve  Tables  of  the  Ro-
mans.^ An  early  witness  is  a  passage  in  the  Corrector,  a
penitential  of  the  tenth  century  which  was  taken  over  in  the
first  quarter  of  the  eleventh  by  Bishop  Burchard  of  Worms
as  the  Nineteenth  Book  of  his  famous  Decretum:  "Some
women  firmly  believe  that  by  their  charms  and  incantations
they  can  attract  their  neighbor's  milk  or  honey  to  their  own
cows  or  bees,  or  to  those  of  whomsoever  they  will."  ^  This
entry  is  highly  significant,  for  the  belief  in  question  is  not  an
article  of  the  learned  bishop's  creed:  he  mentions  it  as  a  false
opinion,  a  piece  of  censurable  folk-lore.  The  methods  fol-
lowed by  such  milk-stealers  are,  of  course,  not  specified  in  the
Corrector,  but  later  documents  describe  one  of  them  that  was
familiar  in  Germany  and  France.  A  woman  of  the  Black
Forest  confessed  in  i486,  among  other  enormities,  that  a
devil  had  taught  her  how  to  rob  people  of  their  milk:  she  was
to  strike  an  axe  into  a  post  and  milk  the  handle;  the  confes-
sion of  her  associate  witch  mentions  four  wooden  spigots  of
similar  efficacy.^  A  Tubingen  preacher,  Martin  Plantsch,  in
a  sermon  delivered  there  apropos  of  the  burning  of  a  witch  in
1505,  testifies  to  the  current  belief  that  witches  can  drain
their  neighbors'  cows  by  milking  an  image  {statua)  or  an  axe-
handle:  his  own  idea  is  that  the  devil  milks  the  cow  and  then
invisibly  brings  the  milk  to  the  object  from  which  it  appears
to  come.^  Geiler  von  Kaiserberg  (i  445-1 5 10)  offers  the  same


164         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

explanation,''  and  a  fine  woodcut  of  an  old  hag  milking  an  axe-
handle  adorns  his  page.^  Young  Robinson,  in  1634,  showed
his  familiarity  with  such  notions  when  he  testified  that  he  had
seen  some  of  his  Lancashire  neighbors  pulling  ropes  in  a  barn,
"  presently  after  which  pulling,  there  came  . . .  flesh  smoaking,
butter  in  lumps,  and  milk  as  it  were  flying  from  the  said  ropes"
(p.  270,  below).  Robert  Kirk,  in  or  about  1691,  speaking  of
contemporary  Scottish  witches,  remarks:  "What  Food  they
extract  from  us  is  conveyed  to  their  Homes  by  secret  Paths,  as
sume  skilfuU  Women  do  the  Pith  and  Milk  from  their  Neigh-
bours Cows  into  their  own  Chiese-hold  thorow  a  Hair-tedder,
at  a  great  Distance,  by  Airt  Magic,  or  by  drawing  a  spickot
fastened  in  a  Post,  which  will  bring  Milk  as  farr  as  a  Bull  will
be  heard  to  roar."  ^  This  notion  is  not  obsolete  either  on  the
Continent or  in  Great  Britain  and  Ireland,  and  it  survives
in  our  own  country.  About  1780  Ann  Allan,  a  Yorkshire
witch,  milked  one  of  the  legs  of  a  three-legged  stool.  In  Scot-
land and  the  North  of  England  witches  draw  milk  from  the
cow-tether;  in  the  Highlands  and  the  Isle  of  Skye  they  milk
the  crook  or  pothook;  in  Ireland  they  milk  a  spit;  in  Ken-
tucky they  get  butter  by  squeezing  a  fork-handle."

By  good  fortune  we  learn  —  what  would  be  inferential
anyhow  —  that  milk-stealing  witchcraft  was  common  in
England  long  before  Queen  Elizabeth  came  to  the  throne.
Bale's  witch  (1538),  who  had  charms  to  make  cows  give
plenty  of  milk,"  must  also  have  been  able  to  steal  it  by  sor-
cery, though  she  does  not  expressly  claim  this  power  —  for
she  does  assert  that  one  of  her  accomplishments  is  to  "draw
drynke  out  of  a  rotten  post."  "  Drink,"  to  be  sure,  did  not
mean  milk  or  water  in  those  days,  but  the  principle  is  the
same.  And  we  may  go  much  farther  back  than  Bale.  We
can  appeal  to  Robert  of  Brunne's  Handlyng  Synne,  freely
adapted  from  Le  Manuel  des  Pechiez,  a  poem  by  one  Wil-
liam (conventionally  styled  "of  Waddington"),  who,  though
he  wrote  in  French,  was  an  Englishman  born,  bred,  and  or-
dained. Robert  began  his  "English  rhyme"  —  so  he  tells  us
himself — in  1303,  and  he  composed  it  for  the  uneducated,
who  are  fond  of  rhymes  and  tales.''*  His  treatment  of  sor-
cery and  witchcraft  is  therefore  much  to  the  point.  If  ever
you  have  practised  nygromauncye  (he  writes)  and  offered


CHAP.  IX]  THE  WITCH  IN  THE  DAIRY  165

sacrifice  to  the  devil  through  witchcraft,  or  given  reward  to
anybody  to  raise  the  devil  in  order  to  discover  lost  goods,  you
have  sinned.  If  you  have  looked  into  sword  or  basin  or
thumb  or  crystal,  —  or  caused  a  child  to  do  so,  —  all  that
sort  of  thing  is  called  witchcraft.  Trust  not  the  pie's  chatter-
ing —  many  men  are  deceived  thereby  —  nor  omens  from
meeting  in  the  morning,  nor  hansel,  nor  dreams.  Put  not
your  trust  in  witchcraft.  Whenever  it  is  true,  that  is  merely
through  the  devil's  craft  to  make  men  believe  in  what  is  hate-
ful to  God.  So  far  Robert  follows  his  author.'^  Then,  instead
of  repeating  William's  story  of  a  deceitful  dream,  he  illus-
trates witchcraft  by  quite  a  different  example  —  the  tale  of
the  Witch  and  her  Milk-sucking  Bag  (vv.  499-562):

Lo  here  a  tale  of  a  wycche

That  leuede  no  better  than  a  bycche!

The  text  is  that  when  one  believes  in  a  false  thing  worked  by
witchcraft,  the  devil  shows  that  thing  because  of  one's  belief;
or,  in  other  words,  it  is  not  the  spell  that  does  the  work,  but
the  devil,  because  of  the  witch's  faith.

There  once  was  a  witch  who  made  a  big  leather  bag,  which
she  enchanted  so  that  it  went  and  sucked  men's  cows  in  the
pasture.  This  continued  for  a  long  time,  but  was  discovered
at  length.  All  the  goodmen  of  the  town  summoned  her  before
the  bishop  and  produced  the  bag.  The  bishop,  incredulous,
bade  the  witch  work  the  marvel  if  she  could,  and  she  began  to
recite  her  charm;  the  bag  rose  up  and  started  on  its  way;  but,
at  his  command,  she  made  it  lie  still  again.  Then  the  bishop
recited  the  charm,  saying  and  doing  exactly  what  the  witch
had  said  and  done;  but  the  bag  did  not  stir.  "Why  is  this?"
asked  he.  "Because  you  do  not  believe,"  the  witch  replied.
"If  you  would  have  faith  in  the  words  [of  the  charm]  as  I
have,  then  the  bag  would  go  and  suck  cows.  You  may  say
what  you  like,  but  your  words  are  wasted  unless  you  have
faith.  I  have  faith  in  the  words  I  uttered:  it  is  my  faith  that
did  the  deed."  The  tale  ends  rather  lamely:  "The  bishop
commanded  that  she  should  not  believe  or  work  as  she  had
wrought."  This  experiment  in  the  occult  was  more  suc-
cessful than  that  tried  by  "the  illustrious  Prince  N."  in  the
fifteenth  century  with  a  witch  who  said  she  could  fly  if  she


l66         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


smeared  herself  with  a  magic  unguent.  Her  faith,  apparently,
was  perfect;  yet,  though  anointed  again  and  again,  she  stood
motionless,  and  "nothing  unusual  happened."^''  As  for
milk-stealing  in  England,  we  can  go  much  farther  back  than
Robert  of  Brunne;  for  the  Arundel  Penitential,  a  manuscript
written  by  an  English  scribe  in  the  thirteenth  century,'^  con-
tains the  following  rule:  "Whoever  shall  work  to  take  away
or  to  acquire  for  himself  the  supply  of  any  person's  milk  or
honey  or  other  things  by  any  spell  or  witchcraft  —  let  him
do  heavy  penance  for  three  years."  And  an  identical  clause
occurs  in  the  Penitential  of  Bartholomew  Iscanus,  Bishop  of
Exeter  from  1161  to  11 84.''

A  witch,  as  we  all  know,  often  takes  the  shape  of  a  hare,^°
and  in  this  guise  she  may  suck  your  cow  dry  or  drink  up  the
milk.  This  method  of  theft,  still  credited  in  Great  Britain
and  Ireland  (as  well  as  the  Continent),^'  was  known  to  Giral-
dus  Cambrensis  in  the  twelfth  century:  "That  certain  old
women,"  he  writes,  "as  well  in  Wales  as  in  Ireland  and  Scot-
land, change  themselves  into  the  form  of  hares  in  order  the
more  secretly  to  steal  other  people's  milk  by  sucking  [cows']
udders  under  a  false  shape,  is  an  old  complaint  and  still  com-
mon.  "

Cows  may  be  dried  up  by  the  English  goblins  called  Hob-
thursts;  they  may  be  milked  by  Scottish  and  Irish  fairies,  by
hedgehogs  (a  shape  often  assumed  by  imps),  or  by  snakes,
especially  black  snakes. The  goatsucker  {caprimulgus)  car-
ries its  own  condemnation  in  its  name:  its  supposed  sin  is
duly  registered  by  Pliny. A  Yorkshire  witch  used  to  send
hedgehogs  to  suck  cows  and  even  assumed  urchin-form  her-
self with  the  same  design.  Witches  in  Iceland  have  imps  of
very  frightful  origin  whom  they  dispatch  on  the  like  errand;
in  Sweden  they  employ  "milk-hares."  An  English  witch
about  1649  ^"^^  ^^^^  have  taken  the  form  of  a  polecat  and
in  that  guise  to  have  sucked  a  brood-sow;  when  the  polecat
was  injured,  the  witch  suffered  the  hurt.^*^  The  German  vam-
pire who  so  impressed  the  imagination  of  Henry  More,  varied
his  more  ghoulish  pranks  by  draining  the  cows  dry.^'  Witches
may  take  away  the  milk  of  a  nursing  mother;  they  may  even
suck  her  breasts  till  the  blood  comes  — just  as  they  can  make
a  cow  give  bloody  milk.'^   Sometimes,  too,  they  suck  the


CHAP.  1X3


THE  WITCH  IN  THE  DAIRY


167


blood  of  infants.  Such  were  the  striges  of  antiquity,  who  were
hags  or  demons  in  bird  form.^'

As  a  witch  may  dry  up  your  cows,  so  she  may  bewitch  your
cream;  then  the  butter  "will  not  come."  Everybody  past
middle  life  remembers  this  piece  of  folk-lore  and  is  prepared
with  the  remedy:  plunge  a  redhot  iron  —  a  poker,  a  spit,  or
best  of  all  a  horseshoe  —  into  the  cream.  That  will  reverse
the  spell  and  may  burn  the  witch,  who  is  actually  or  mysti-
cally present  in  the  churn  •'^  —  in  the  form  of  a  hare,  it  may
be.  That  such  counter-magic  was  meant  to  harm  the  guilty
hag  was  the  opinion  of  Goodwife  R.  in  Giffard's  Dialogue
(1593):  "When  they  thrust  in  the  spitte  they  say.  If  thou
beest  here  haue  at  thine  eie."  The  churn  may  be  whipped,
with  good  results.  Salt  (a  sacred  substance)  is  sometimes
efficacious,  especially  if  you  throw  it  into  the  fire  as  well  as
into  the  churn.  So  also  is  rowan  (mountain  ash) :  stir  the
cream  with  a  rowan  twig,  or  throw  rowan  twigs  in,  or  bind  a
rowan  chaplet  round  the  churn,  or  put  rowan  on  top  of  it.
Again,  you  may  put  a  shilling  or  a  crooked  sixpence  in  the
churn  or  may  touch  each  corner  of  the  house  with  a  redhot
poker.^"*  Black  indeed  is  the  magic  involved  in  a  counter-
charm  from  Scotland:  to  bring  butter,  boil  a  pint  of  milk  with
seven  needles  and  nine  pins  and  pour  it  into  the  churn.  In
Nithsdale,  when  milk  went  wrong,  a  divot  from  the  witch's
roof  was  stuck  with  one  pin  for  each  cow  and  plunged  into
boiling  milk;  another  divot  was  laid  on  top  of  the  chimney:
the  witch  came.^^

Such  bewitchment  may  be  pure  malice,  as  in  the  case  of
Alse  Martyn,  arrested  in  1565.  Some  years  before,  it  was  al-
leged, she  had  entered  a  house  and  cried  "Gyve  no  melche";
and  "from  that  day  they  could  make  no  butter,  nor  chysse,
nor  have  no  melche  of  kyne."  Revenge  was  the  motive
alleged  in  the  case  of  Goodwife  Maker,  investigated  by  Sir
Thomas  Smith  in  1570.  One  witness  deposed

That  she  being  Servant  to  a  Farmer's  Wife  in  the  said  Parish  of  Theydon
Mount,  this  Goodwife  Maker  came  to  her  Mistress,  who  was  going  to  Lon-
don Market,  and  desired  her  to  bring  her  home  some  Sprats;  but  she  saying
she  came  always  loaden  from  London,  denied  her.  Upon  this,  the  De-
ponent, then  her  hired  Maid,  came  from  Milking;  and  as  she  set  her  Milk
in  the  Pan  upon  a  Loft,  there  was  a  Speckled  Bird,  as  she  thought,  which


i68


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


fluttered  among  the  Milk-Pans,  and  with  her  Feet  and  Wings  slubbered
therein:  Her  Mistress  in  the  mean  time  called  her  away.  But  she  en-
deavoured by  a  Broom  to  sweep  or  drive  away  this  Bird.  But  it  would  not
away,  but  went  fluttering  from  Pan  to  Pan;  and  could  not  fly,  but  skip  and
hop.  At  the  last,  it  went  from  the  Loft  where  the  Milk  and  Wheat  was,
into  the  Cheese  Loft.  And  then  being  often  called  by  her  Mistress  she
came  down,  and  being  blamed  for  her  long  tarrying,  she  related  how  she
was  troubled  with  such  a  Bird.  And  then  her  Mistress  came  her  self  into
the  Milk  Loft,  and  found  it  come  down  Stairs  a  very  Toad.  Which  after  it
was  once  come  into  the  Buttery,  she  could  never  see  it  more.  And  for  the
space  of  six  Weeks  after  by  no  Means,  no  Diligence,  nor  change  of  Churn,
nor  Cloths,  could  they  have  any  Butter;  until  that  her  Mistress  did  bid  her
carry  her  Milk,  and  churn  at  a  Neighbours  House;  and  there  the  Milk
made  Butter  as  it  was  wont  to  do  before,  and  in  the  same  Milk  Pans.^'

Sir  Thomas  Smith  was  born  in  151 8.  Whatever  his  opinion
may  have  been  on  the  trustworthiness  of  this  deposition,  he
can  hardly  have  acquired  his  views  on  the  general  subject
from  the  Marian  exiles  who  returned  at  Elizabeth's  acces-
sion. And  it  is  even  less  likely  that  the  village  gossip  here
recorded  was  derived  from  his  instructions  to  his  humble
Essex  neighbors.  Often,  the  witch's  intent  was  to  transfer
the  butter  to  her  own  possession.^^  As  in  the  case  of  dried-up
cows,  so  the  prevention  of  butter's  coming  is  sometimes
ascribed  to  imps  or  house  cobolds,  with  no  mention  of  a
witch.^'  One  of  Reginald  Scot's  best  touches  concerns  butter
sorcery.  After  quoting  from  the  Malleus  Maleficarum  the
general  rule  for  guarding  against  such  magic  —  neither  to
give  nor  lend  butter,  milk,  or  cheese  to  a  begging  witch  —
he  offers  a  sound  scientific  explanation  of  disasters  in  the
dairy,  adds  an  occult  receipt  to  thwart  the  butter  witch,  and
concludes  thus:  "There  be  twentie  severall  waies  to  make
your  butter  come,  which  for  brevitie  I  omit;  as  to  bind  your
cherne  with  a  rope,  to  thrust  thereinto  a  red  hot  spit,  &c:  but
your  best  remedie  and  surest  waie  is,  to  looke  well  to  your
dairie  maid  or  wife,  that  she  neither  eat  up  the  creame,  nor
sell  awaie  your  butter."  Scot  himself  had  suffered  from
thievish  maids.''"

Modern  Irish  witches  perform  diabolical  rites  for  stealing
butter.  They  sweep  dew  from  the  grass  into  their  hands  on  a
May  morning  and  thrice  chant  "Come  all  to  me!"  They  dip
a  dead  man's  hand  into  their  churn  and  bid  it  "Gather  far


CHAP.  1X3


THE  WITCH  IN  THE  DAIRY


169


and  near!  Gather  far  and  near!"  A  witch  of  Fife  on  the  last
night  of  the  year,  swinging  over  her  head  a  cow-tether  of
hair,  chanted:

Hares'  milk  and  mares'  milk
An'  a'  the  beas'  that  bears  milk,
Come  to  me!

Similar  charms  occur  on  the  Continent.  From  Switzerland
we  have  the  formula,  "Us  jedem  Hus  en  Loffel ";  from  Silesia,
"Hier  ein  Loffel,  dort  ein  wenig."  A  witch  of  Oldenburg  re-
peated "Ut  jedem  Hus  'n  Lapel  vull,  ut  Pastoren  Hus  'n
Pott  vull."  ''^  Here  we  come  close  to  a  kind  of  sorcery  used  by
Dame  Alice  Kyteler  (if  we  may  believe  Holinshed)  in  the
fourteenth  century:  "She  swept  the  streets  of  Kilkennie  be-
tweene  compleine  and  twilight,  raking  all  the  filth  towards
the  doores  of  hir  sonne  William  Outlaw,  murmuring  and  mut-
tering secretlie  with  hir  selfe  these  words:

To  the  house  of  William  my  sonne,
Hie  all  the  wealth  of  Kilkennie  towne."

The  underlying  principle  holds  good  to-day.  In  Yorkshire
"it  is  advisable  that  a  new  broom  should  sweep  something
into  the  house  before  it  is  used  in  the  contrary  direction,
otherwise  you  sweep  good  luck  away  from  your  threshold."  ''^
Dairy  magic  got  into  a  Welsh  court  in  1879,  when  Mrs.
Braithwaite's  butter  would  not  come.  She  declared  that  Mrs.
Williams's  witchcraft  was  to  blame,  and  Mrs.  Williams  ap-
pealed to  the  magistrates  for  protection:  "She  assured  the
Bench  she  was  in  danger,  as  every  one  believed  she  was  a
witch."  In  recent  years  a  Welsh  farmer  was  brought  to
trial  for  an  assault:  he  had  drawn  blood  upon  a  supposed
witch  and  had  forced  her  to  come  to  his  house  and  bless  the
churn. ''5  Old  formulae  of  blessing  are  still  in  use.  The  com-
monest of  them  all  is  —  ^

Come,  butter,  come;
Come,  butter,  come.  >
Peter  stands  at  the  gate,
Waiting  for  a  buttered  cake.
Come,  butter  come.''*

That  this  spell  is  pre-Reformation  its  very  terms  demon-
strate; but  we  need  not  take  refuge  in  mere  inference,  for


170


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


there  is  direct  testimony  that  it  was  known  in  England  in  the
days  of  Queen  Mary.''^  And  thus  the  whole  matter  of  but-
ter witchcraft  is  carried  back  to  the  age  in  which  we  wish  to
find  it.

In  old  times,  when  brewing  was  as  vital  a  domestic  busi-
ness as  butter-making,  one  of  a  witch's  malicious  tricks  was
to  thwart  fermentation  or  to  spoil  the  ale  otherwise.''^  "You
have  some  plot  now,"  says  the  Master  Devil  to  Pug  in  Ben
Jonson's  comedy  —

You  have  some  plot  now
Upon  a  tunning  of  ale,  to  stale  the  yeast,
Or  keep  the  churn  so  that  the  butter  come  not,
Spite  o'  the  housewives  cord,  or  her  hot  spit?

Mother  Waterhouse,  one  of  the  Chelmsford  witches  hanged
in  1566,  "caused  Satan  [her  imp]  to  destroye  the  brewing."  =°
In  this,  too,  Bale's  witch  was  proficient  long  before  Queen
Elizabeth's  accession,  and  she  could  likewise  thwart  the  bak-
ing, as  mediaeval  and  modern  hags  could  and  can,  by  hinder-
ing the  bread  from  rising,  and  making  it  hard.^'

Whan  ale  is  in  the  fatt,

If  the  bruar  please  me  natt,*

The  cast  shall  fall  downe  flat.s^

And  neuer  haue  any  strength.
No  man  shall  tonne  nor  bake.
Nor  meate  in  season  make.
If  I  agaynst  hym  take.

But  lose  hys  labour  at  length. 53

But  so  long  as  she  was  kept  in  good  humor,  all  would  go  well:

I  haue  charmes  for  the  plowgh.

And  also  for  the  cowgh,

She  shall  geue  mylke  ynowgh,

So  longe  as  I  am  plesed.
Apace  the  mylle  shall  go,
So  shall  the  credle  do.
And  the  musterde  querne  also,

No  man  therwith  dysesed.S''

A  blessing  for  spoiled  ale  (in  Latin  with  Anglo-Saxon  glosses)
—  that  it  may  be  rendered  sound  and  sparkling  —  with  due
citation  of  the  wedding  at  Cana  in  Galilee,  may  be  read  in  the

*  I.e.  "unless  the  brewer  gratify  me,"  "give  me  a  gratuity."


CHAP.  IX]


THE  WITCH  IN  THE  DAIRY


171


Durham  Ritual. Herrick  knew  how  to  prevent  a  witch
from  playing  tricks  with  bread-makers:

This  He  tell  ye  by  the  way,
Maidens,  when  ye  leavens  lay:
Crosse  your  dow,  and  your  dispatch
Will  be  better  for  your  batch.

This  method  of  prophylaxis  still  holds  good  both  with  dough
before  baking  and  with  malt  before  brewing."

Jennet  Device,  involved  in  the  Lancashire  prosecution  in
1 61 2,  used  as  a  "prayer"  to  get  drink  (that  is,  to  transfer
other  people's  beer  to  her  own  vessels)  the  words  "Crucifixus
hoc  signum  vitam  Eternam.  Amen."  This  her  mother
taught  her.  Her  brother  also  knew  the  spell  and  told  her
that  within  an  hour  after  its  repetition  "drinke  hath  come
into  the  house  after  a  very  strange  manner."  Here  we  have
a  witch  and  wizard  in  the  style  of  Bale's  hag  who  could  draw
drink  out  of  a  rotten  post.

That  crops  may  be  ruined  or  soil  made  barren  by  witch-
craft is  still  a  current  belief.^'  It  was  equally  current  in
Anglo-Saxon  times,  as  an  elaborate  charm  of  that  age  proves:
"Here  is  the  remedy  for  your  fields  if  they  will  not  grow  well,
or  if  any  unfit  thing  is  applied  to  them  in  sorcery  or  in  witch-
craft." This  charm  is  a  mixture  of  Christianity  and  pagan-
ism, involving  the  removal  of  four  sods  from  different  parts  of
the  farm  and  their  replacement  after  four  masses  have  been
said  over  them.  A  hole  is  also  to  be  bored  in  the  ploughbeam,
into  which  certain  herbs  with  holy  salt,  etc.,  are  to  be  put.
Seed  from  another  man's  land  must  be  acquired  from  a  farmer
who  is  in  need  of  charity,  and  two  for  one  must  be  paid  for  it.
This  seed  is  to  be  laid  upon  the  plough  with  an  appropriate
formula.  A  prayer  must  be  offered  to  God  and  his  saints  that
the  farm  may  be  protected  against  all  enemies  and  against  all
bales  that  sorceries  may  sow.  "Now  I  pray  the  Lord  who
made  the  world  that  no  woman  may  be  so  skilful  in  speech  or
no  man  so  cunning  as  to  turn  aside  the  words  thus  spoken."
Then  drive  the  first  furrow,  reciting  another  formula:  "Hale
be  thou.  Earth,  mother  of  men!  Be  thou  fertile  in  God's  pro-
tection, plenteous  in  food  for  men's  use ! "  Finally  you  must
make  a  loaf  of  different  kinds  of  meal  kneaded  with  milk  and


172         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

holy  water,  and  lay  it  under  this  first  furrow,  calling  for  God's
blessing  on  the  field  and  closing  the  whole  ceremony  with
three  pater-nosters.^'  Several  pious  spells  for  the  defence  of
crops  from  birds,  insects,  mice,  and  "venomous  animals"  oc-
cur in  the  Durham  Ritual,  and  in  some  of  these  we  find  the
devil  or  demons  associated  on  a  par  with  more  tangible
enemies  of  the  farmer.  Two  of  them  pertinently  cite  the
driving  away  of  Asmodeus  by  the  "fishy  fume,"  as  told  in  the
Book  of  Tobit.^^

We  are  now  in  a  position  to  understand  how  Bale's  witch
(1538),  when  she  claims  to  wield  both  white  magic  and  black,
is  the  legitimate  descendant  of  her  English  ancestors.  By
merely  spitting  she  can  "make  corn  and  cattle  never  thrive."
She  can  dry  up  wells  and  "cause  trees''^  and  herbs  to  die."
But,  on  the  other  hand,  she  has  good  "charms  for  the
plough"  which  ensure  abundant  crops.^'*  In  the  direct  line
also  is  the  modern  spell  which  concludes  thus:  "  By  virtue  of
this  holy  charm  I  bind  this  ground  that  no  thievery  or  work
of  darkness  may  be  committed  hereupon."

Witchcraft  that  destroys  or  steals  a  man's  crops  is  for-
bidden in  the  Twelve  Tables  of  the  ancient  Romans  and  is
too  well  known  to  need  comment.^^  Pliny  repeats  a  truly  Ro-
man anecdote  about  C.  Furius  Cresimus  and  his  exemplary
defence  when  accused  of  enriching  himself  after  this  fashion.^^
Abt  provides  abundant  references  for  Mesopotamia,  Greece,
Italy,  and  Carthage.''^  Nider,  about  1437,  knew  of  two  wiz-
ards who  had  the  power  to  transport  invisibly  from  their
neighbor's  field  to  their  own  one  third  of  dung,  hay,  grain,  or
anything  else.  Scottish  witches  were  equally  skilful.^'  As  to
magic  transference  of  grain  from  one  field  to  another  one
further  example  will  suffice.  In  the  Deccan,  when  there  is  a
known  witch  in  the  village,  the  people  are  always  anxious
about  their  crops.  They  take  care  to  harvest  a  different  kind
of  grain  from  that  which  the  witch  raises.  Then,  if  they  dis-
cover a  mixture  of  grain  in  her  field,  they  resort  to  counter-
magic.'"

A  ready  way  to  destroy  crops  is,  of  course,  to  bring  on  a
storm,  especially  a  hailstorm,  and  witches  have  vast  power
over  the  weather.''^  Another  way  is  the  production  of  ver-
min.''^ In  Guernsey  a  few  years  ago  a  witch  ruined  the  melons


CHAP.  IX]


THE  WITCH  IN  THE  DAIRY


by  means  of  a  small  black  fly  which  men  of  science  found  it
impossible  to  recognize.''^  This  scurvy  trick  of  sorcery  is  ap-
plied to  divers  ends.  About  1637  Goody  Rose  of  Bedford  was
ducked  "for  bewitching  a  Maid's  pease  (that  had  denied  her
some)  to  be  all,  and  each,  worm-eaten;  and  another  fellow  to
be  alwayes  lowsie."  In  1843  the  Norwich  police  court
a  woman  complained  that  another  wornan  had  bewitched
her  "by  sending  her  and  her  children  a  vast  number  of
vermin."

Where  fisheries  replace  agriculture  for  a  livelihood,  boats  or
nets  may  be  bewitched.'*"  Less  than  a  century  ago,  in  Nor-
folk, a  seaworthy  fishing  craft,  because  it  was  bewitched,  was
burnt  "stick  and  stem."  A  witch  can  bring  in  schools  of
fish,'^  or  can  "take  away"  fish  as  she  can  milk.'^'


CHAPTER  X

j  METAMORPHOSIS

FROM  Elizabeth's  accession  to  the  present  moment  the
witch-creed  has  cherished  the  notion  that  demons  may
have  the  form  of  animals,  and  that  in  this  guise  they  may
serve  the  witch  as  familiar  spirits  to  carry  out  her  wicked
designs.  Or  the  witch  may  transform  herself  into  beast-
shape:  then,  if  the  animal  is  wounded,  she  suffers  in  like
manner.  "When  I  goe  but  into  my  closes,"  says  the  Essex
farmer  in  Giffard's  racy  Dialogue  (1593),  "I  am  afraide,  for
I  see  nowe  and  then  a  Hare;  which  my  conscience  giueth  me
is  a  witch,  or  some  witches  spirite,  shee  stareth  so  vppon  me.
And  sometimes  I  see  an  vgly  weasell  runne  through  my  yard,
and  there  is  a  foule  great  catte  sometimes  in  my  Barne,
which  I  haue  no  liking  vnto."  ^  Of  course  these  doctrines
were  nothing  new  in  1558,  nor  were  they  imported  from  the
Continent  by  the  Marian  exiles.  Every  child  in  Britain  was
familiar  with  them,  for  they  are  primitive  and  universal,  if
anything  in  demonology  is  entitled  to  those  much-abused
adjectives.  Said  an  Australian  Blackfellow  to  Mr.  Howitt,
"If  I  saw  an  old  man  kangaroo  come  up  hopping  close  and
sit  and  stare  at  me,  I  should  keep  my  eyes  fixed  upon  him,
and  try  to  get  out  of  his  way,  lest  he  might  be  a  higin  [wiz-
ard], who,  getting  behind  me,  would  take  me  at  a  disad-
vantage." ^  In  South  Africa  in  the  fifteenth  century,  when
witches  were  much  feared  as  causing  murrain,  blighted  crops,
sickness,  and  death,  they  kept  lizards  and  moles  in  their  ser-
vice —  uncanny  creatures  still  used  (in  fragments)  for  evil
magic  among  barbarous  races.  A  famous  witch  of  Tripoli  had
for  her  familiars  a  snake,  scorpions,  and  a  hare.  Melanesian
wizards  send  snakes  or  crocodiles  to  kill  their  victims.  In
Nigeria  the  witch's  heart  flies  abroad  in  vulture  form  while
her  body  lies  unconscious  at  home;  when  the  vulture  is
killed,  she  dies  too.  Among  the  Bakongo,  insects  trapped  by
the  doctor  are  witches  who  have  caused  disease:  if  the  insect


CHAP.  X]


METAMORPHOSIS


is  hurt,  the  witch  suffers.^  Closely  connected  is  the  idea  that
witch-sent  diseases  may  be  extracted  from  the  body  in  some
bestial  form  (see  p.  135).  Thus  in  Nigeria  bats  or  frogs  are
taken  from  the  mouths  of  possessed  persons.''  As  for  Eng-
land, if  transformation  to  animal  form  is  required  as  an  ele-
ment in  the  witch-creed,  one  may  cite  the  old  Germanic  be-
hef  in  werewolves, ^  which  is  amply  certified  for  Anglo-Saxon
England.  Werewolf,  indeed,  is  on  record  as  a  proper  name,
even  (oddly  e'h'ough)  as  the  name  of  a  learned  Mercian  priest
who  assisted  King  Alfred  in  his  literary  work.  The  devil  him-
self is  called  "the  ravening  werewolf"  in  the  Laws  of  Cnut.
As  to  the  middle  ages  Gervase  of  Tilbury  is  a  sufficient  wit-
ness: such  transformations,  he  tells  us,  have  been  common
in  England.  For  Ireland  and  Wales  the  evidence  is  abundant,
and  was  well  known  to  mediaeval  Englishmen.''  Romantic
fiction,  too,  helped  to  keep  the  werewolf  tradition  alive
among  our  English  ancestors.'

At  the  moment  when  William  the  Second  was  slain  by  the
arrow  of  W^at  Tyrrel  or  another  in  New  Forest,  the  Earl  of
Cornwall  —  far  away  on  the  Bodmin  moors,  hunting  and
alone  —  met  a  huge  black  goat,  carrying  on  his  back  a  man,
black,  naked,  and  wounded  in  the  breast.  Adjured  by  the
Triune  God  to  tell  what  he  was,  the  apparition  replied:  "I
am  bearing  to  judgment  your  king,  William  Rufus  —  your
tyrant  rather.  For  I  am  an  evil  spirit,  the  avenger  of  his
malice,  which  raged  against  the  Church  of  Christ."  Direful
portents  had  forewarned  the  tyrant  of  his  end,  and  the  devil
had  appeared  visibly  to  men,  speaking  to  wayfarers  in  wood-
land glades  and  solitary  paths. ^  The  goat  is  a  favorite  form
with  Satan  —  why,  Remigius  takes  great  pains  to  elucidate.'
Goat-riding  devils  —  hideous  dwarfs  with  cowls  and  long
beards  —  haunted  a  little  island  near  Farne  when  the  pious
Bartholomew  chose  Farne  for  his  hermitage  in  the  twelfth
century.'"  To  St.  Dunstan  the  devil  showed  himself  often
—  not  only  in  his  own  hideous  shape,  as  in  the  anecdote  of
the  tongs  "  —  but  as  a  bear,  a  dog,  and  a  fox.'"*  St.  Hugh  of
Cluny  brought  a  frightful  serpent  out  of  a  woman's  body  by
means  of  holy  water  which  he  forced  thrice  into  her  mouth.
In  the  third  decade  of  the  twelfth  century  a  certain  Walter,
possessed  of  the  devil  in  the  form  of  a  black  dog  (visible  to


176         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

him  alone  but  heard  by  others),  was  cured  by  the  merits  of
St.  Cuthbert,  and  he  lived  until  1165.'"  St.  Godric,  the
twelfth-century  Hermit  of  Finchale,  was  continually  haunted
by  demons.  At  times  they  crowded  his  cell  in  the  guise  of
black  dwarfs  or  pygmies;  but  they  appeared  in  all  manner
of  shapes  —  like  a  bear,  an  eagle,  a  crow;  they  bellowed  like
oxen. '5  So  poor  Mr.  Richard  AUington,  in  the  latter  part  of
Elizabeth's  reign,  dying  of  the  smallpox  and  tormented  in
conscience  for  his  practices  of  usury,  saw  one  night  in  his
chamber  little  creatures  "like  puppets,"  which  jumped  upon
his  bed  and,  as  he  says,  "pulled,  tossed,  stirred,  teared,  and
so  vexed  mee,  as  I  was  neuer  in  all  my  lif  so  sore  vexed  and
troubled."

Owen  Glendower  possessed  a  stone  which  rendered  him
invisible.  It  had  belonged  to  the  Earl  of  Arundel  who  was
beheaded  by  Richard  II.  This  earl  had  a  pet  raven,  and
once,  when  he  was  playing  chess  in  his  garden,  the  bird  (ve/
spiritus  in  specie  corvind)  ejected  the  magic  stone.'''  Gro-
tesque was  the  apparition  that  startled  the  Isle  of  Portland
near  Weymouth  in  1456.  A  cock  of  the  hue  of  a  pheasant
came  out  of  the  sea.  He  had  legs  half  a  yard  long  and  a  red
beard,  and  upon  his  head  was  a  great  crest.  He  stood  in
the  water  and  crowed  three  times:  "and  euery  tyme  that  he
crew  he  turned  hym  rounde  aboute,  and  bekened  wyth  his
hede  towarde  the  north,  the  sou  the,  and  the  weste;  .  .  .
and  when  he  had  crowe  iij.  tymes  he  vanysshed  away."

Rural  Britain  still  swarms  with  demon-dogs  (barguests,
boggarts.  Old  Shuck,  Hairy  Jack,  and  the  rest),''  to  say
nothing  of  such  aerial  phenomena  as  Gabriel's  Hounds,  known
from  the  fifteenth  century  and  celebrated  by  Wordsworth  in
not  the  best  (or  the  worst)  of  his  multitudinous  sonnets.^"
Old  Shuck  comes  etymologically  of  an  ancient  line,  for  his
name  is  the  Anglo-Saxon  scucca,  "demon."  "  A  witch  may
masquerade  as  a  dog:"  Stearne,  Matthew  Hopkins's  lieu-
tenant, tells  of  a  hag,  wounded  in  dog  shape,  who  showed  the
injury  when  restored  to  human  form.^''  Dog-familiars  are  like-
wise common. Small  wonder,  then,  that  in  the  seventeenth
century,  when  Prince  Rupert  was  sojourning  at  Winwick,
Mr.  Charles  Herle,  the  rector,  recorded  that  a  parishioner
"maintained  that  he  saw  in  Prince  Rupert's  dog  an  en-


CHAP,  x]  !  METAMORPHOSIS  I77

chanted  Camp  Lady  of  intelligence,  that  is  to  say,  a  spy."
This  was  the  Prince's  pet  dog  Boy,  killed  on  Marston  Moor,
about  whom  there  are  exceedingly  curious  tracts. The  idea
that  Boy  was  a  familiar  spirit  was  rather  prevalent. But
we  can  go  centuries  farther  back  than  Prince  Rupert.  Jack
Cade,  in  the  proclamation  for  his  arrest  in  1450,  is  accused
rot  only  of  using  books  of  magic  but  of  having  "rered  upp
the  Divell  in  the  semblaunce  of  a  black  dogge"  in  his  lodging
at  Dertford.^^  Among  the  miracles  of  the  dead  King  Henry
VI  we  hear  of  the  rescue  of  a  midnight  wayfarer,  attacked
by  an  evil  spirit  in  the  guise  of  a  black  dog  which  was  about
to  eat  him  up.  He  called  upon  the  glorious  martyr  for  help
and  the  creature  vanished.^'  A  demon  in  animal  form  —  cat,
shaggy  black  dog  —  and  three  demons  like  black  dwarfs  oc-
cur in  the  Kyteler  case  (1324).^°  Goblin  horses  (like  Tatter-
foal  and  Shagfoal),  sometimes  demons  and  sometimes  ghosts,
are  equally  common.

Of  the  cat-witch,  injured  in  that  shape  and  suffering  the
same  wounds  in  propria  persona,  there  are  countless  modern
instances. By  this  test,  indeed,  you  may  often  prove  that
Goody  So-and-So  is  indeed  a  witch,  as  you  have  long  sus-
pected. For  the  English  middle  ages,  Gervase  of  Tilbury  may
suffice.  It  is  a  known  fact,  he  avers,  that  "women  have  been
seen  and  wounded  in  the  shape  of  cats  by  persons  who  were
secretly  on  the  watch,  and  that  the  next  day  the  women  have
shown  wounds  and  loss  of  limbs."  A  pertinent  instance
from  our  own  Cambridge  about  1660  is  recited  by  Mr.  John
Hale  in  his  Modest  Enquiry.  He  is  pleased  to  be  able  to
testify  that  the  supposed  wound  turned  out  to  be  a  boil.^'»
In  1 561  there  was  a  wild  adventure  at  Vernon  in  France.
Witches  and  wizards  used  to  assemble  by  night  in  an  "old
and  ancient"  castle  in  the  shape  of  an  infinite  number  of  cats.
Four  or  five  bold  investigators  of  psychic  phenomena  spent
the  night  there.  One  of  the  watchers  was  killed  and  all  of
them  were  soundly  clawed,  but  they  wounded  several  cats,
and  the  same  hurts  were  afterwards  discovered  on  men  and
women  of  the  neighborhood.

The  cat  appears  as  a  familiar  in  the  first  of  the  really  nota-
ble Elizabethan  witch-trials,  at  Chelmsford  in  1566.  It  was
a  white-spotted  creature  named  Sathan,  which  sucked  blood;


178


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


it  took  the  form  of  a  toad  and  caused  the  death  of  a  man  who
touched  it;  and  it  helped  its  mistress  to  an  unsatisfactory
husband.  But,  in  view  of  all  the  evidence,  I  do  not  think  the
cat  swam  the  Channel  in  1558  or  came  over  on  Bishop  Jewel's
shoulder  in  1559.  In  fact,  I  know  it  did  not.  Elizabeth
Frauncis  received  the  cat  from  her  grandmother,  kept  it  for
fifteen  or  sixteen  years,  and  then  presented  it  to  Mother
Waterhouse,  who  had  cherished  it  more  than  nine  years
when  brought  to  trial.  This  carries  the  demon  back  well  into
King  Henr)  's  days,  even  if  we  ignore  the  period  when  he
was  in  the  service  of  the  Frauncis  woman's  grandam.''''
"  Alanus  de  Insulis,  a  favorite  author  among  mediaeval  Eng-
lish readers,  derives  the  name  of  the  heretic  Cathari  from
catus,  because  they  are  said  to  worship  Lucifer  with  obscene
rites  when  he  appears  to  them  in  that  form.^^  King  Arthur's
fight  with  the  Demon  Cat  is  an  ancient  feature  of  his  adven-
turous career.^^

'"  The  tame  villatic  cat  keeps  some  of  her  devilish  traits  in
current  superstition.^'  Cats  may  suck  a  sleeping  child's
breath:  this  notion  is  still  common  in  both  Old  and  New
England. There  is  also  a  widespread  idea  that  cats  must  be
^pt  away  from  a  corpse  or  they  may  mutilate  it.  This  turns
up  in  our  own  country  in  an  enlightening  form:  "Never
take  a  cat  near  a  dead  person,  lest  the  cat  take  the  soul  of
the  dead."  The  soul,  we  remember,  often  issues  from  the
mouth  of  a  sleeping  man  in  the  shape  of  a  mouse! What
all  these  notions  have  to  do  with  the  affliction  known  as  "cat-
fear,"  I  shall  leave  to  the  psychologists  to  determine.  "There
are  some,"  writes  Increase  Mather,  "who  if  a  Cat  accident-
ally come  into  the  Room,  though  they  neither  see  it,  nor  are
told  of  it,  will  presently  be  in  a  Sweat,  and  ready  to  die
away."  On  this  head,  indeed,  there  is  literature  for  every
mood.  The  serious-minded  may  follow  the  reasoning  of
Archbishop  Bramhall,  in  his  Vindication  of  True  Liberty
against  Hobbes:  "Those  actions  which  are  altogether  un-
deliberated  and  do  proceed  from  sudden  and  violent  passions,
.  .  .  which  surprise  a  man,  and  give  him  no  time  to  advise
or  reason,  are  not  properly  and  actually  in  themselves  free,
but  rather  necessary  actions;  as  when  a  man  runs  away  from
a  cat  or  a  custard,  out  of  a  secret  antipathy."     The  amateur


CHAP.  X]


METAMORPHOSIS


179


of  robust  humor  may  recall  how  Mr.  Henry  Watson  put  to
flight  a  redoubtable  duellist  —  "one  that,"  as  he  happened
to  know,  "would  face  any  thing  upon  Earth,  except  a  Cat"
—  by  brandishing  a  pair  of  kittens.  "No  sooner,"  so  Mr.
Henry  writes  to  Bully  Dawson,  "did  he  set  eyes  upon  his
little  squawling  Adversaries,  but  away  he  scower'd,  as  if  a
Legion  of  Devils  had  been  in  pursuit  of  him.  .  .  .  Since
which  Retreat  I  have  not  yet  seen  him;  but  for  Self-preserva-
tion, which  you  know  is'  Nature's  Law,  I  have  ever  since
walk'd  Arm'd  with  a  brace  of  Kittens  in  my  Pocket,  for  fear
of  farther  danger."  ^
/  For  some  reason  or  other  the  hare  passes  for  an  uncanny
creature.''^  To  meet  or  be  crossed  by  a  hare  is  very  bad  luck.''i
Hares  may  be  employed  as  familiar  spirits,  and  as  such  ma)J
steal  milk  for  their  mistress  hags  by  sucking  a  neighbor's
cows.'*'  For  witches  in  hare-form  we  have  the  authority  c/f
Giraldus  Cambrensis  and  of  modern  folk-lore  in  profusion.'"
If  you  wound  a  witch-hare,  the  witch  herself  suffers  the  in-
jury, of  course. 5°

In  the  Chelmsford  trial  in  1566,^'  when  a  white-spotted  cat
played  a  leading  role  as  familiar  spirit,  the  Queen's  Attorney
asked  Mother  Waterhouse,  "When  dyd  thye  Cat  suck  of
thy  blood.''"  "Never!"  was  her  reply;  but  marks  were  dis-
covered on  her  face  and  nose  where  she  had  pricked  herself
to  feed  the  demon.  This  idea  —  that  witches  feed  their
familiars  with  their  blood  —  is  persistent  in  the  later  history
of  English  witchcraft.  It  is  important  to  observe,  therefore,
that  it  was  not  a  doctrine  brought  in  from  the  Continent  by
the  Marian  exiles.  Nothing  could  be  better  for  this  purpose
than  the  case  of  John  Steward,  ex-schoolmaster  of  Knares-
borough  (Yorkshire),  in  15 10.  He  was  brought  to  book  in
the  Archbishop's  Court  for  sorcery.  The  substance  of  the
charges  will  concern  us  elsewhere. Here  be  it  noted  that
one  of  the  witnesses  had  been  told  by  a  certain  Sir  Thomas
Spurret  "that  he  sawe  Stewerd  have  iij.  humble  bees,  or  like
humble  bees,  and  kepte  theyme  undir  a  stone  in  the  erth,
and  called  theyme  oute  by  oone  and  oone,  and  gave  iche  oone
of  theyme  a  drop  of  blode  of  his  fyngor.  "53  That  an  insect
should  serve  as  a  witch's  familiar  is  natural  and  proper.
Such  creatures,  therefore,  occur  in  considerable  variety


l8o         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

among  men,  savage  and  civilized;  but  the  fly  and  the  bee
are  especially  noteworthy  in  English  tradition. Scot  men-
tions as  a  ridiculous  feature  of  the  witch-creed  the  notion
that  devils  may  be  "made  tame,  and  kept  in  a  box,"  to  do
service  to  their  mistresses. Compare  what  Thomas  Nashe
wrote  of  the  Miinster  Anabaptists  in  1594:  "Verie  deuout
Asses  they  were,  for  all  they  were  so  dunstically  set  forth,
and  such  as  thought  they  knew  as  much  of  Gods  minde  as
richer  men:  why,  inspiration  was  their  ordinarie  familiar,
and  buzd  in  their  eares  like  a  Bee  in  a  boxe  euerie  hower  what
newes  from  heauen,  helle,  and  the  land  of  whipperginnie."  "
The  distinguished  Oxford  mathematician  Thomas  Allen
(1542- 1 63 2)  of  Gloucester  Hall  (now  Worcester  College),
who  passed  for  a  second  Friar  Bacon, and  who,  as  well  as
Dr.  Dee,  was  reputed  to  be  employed  by  Leicester  as  a  con-
jurer and  figure-caster,59  "had  a  great  many  mathematical!
instruments  and  glasses  in  his  chamber,"  so  Aubrey  informs
us,  "which  did  also  confirme  the  ignorant  in  their  opinion"
of  his  magical  activities,  "and  his  servitor  (to  impose  on  fresh-
men and  simple  people)  would  tell  that  sometimes  he  should
meet  the  spirits  comeing  up  his  staires  like  [i.e.  in  the  shape
of]  bees."  He  also  had  a  watch  which  was  taken  for  a  devil.*'"
When  Archbishop  Sharp  of  St.  Andrews  was  assassinated  in
1679,  "upon  the  opening  of  his  tobacco  box  a  living  hum-
ming bee  flew  out,"  which  was  regarded  as  his  familiar
demon.''^  Witches  in  bee-form  and  a  bee  as  a  witch's  emis-
sary occur  in  Scottish  trials  of  that  same  century.*'^  Here  is
another  tale  from  pre-Elizabethan  days:  At  Mailing,  in
Kent,  "one  of  Q.  Maries  justices,  upon  the  complaint  of
many  wise  men,  and  a  few  foolish  boies,  laid  an  archer  by
the  heeles;  bicause  he  shot  so  neere  the  white  at  buts.  For
he  was  informed  and  persuaded,  that  the  poore  man  plaied
with  a  flie,  otherwise  called  a  divell  or  familiar.  .  .  .  The
archer  was  severelie  punished,  to  the  great  encouragement  of
archers,  and  to  the  wise  example  of  justice;  but  speciallie  to
the  overthrowe  of  witchcraft."  Flies  of  this  demonic  nature
are  good  old  figures  in  Germanic  lore.  They  were  well-
known  in  Lappish,  Finnish,  and  Norse  sorcery.^''  The  Lom-
bard King  Kuninkpert,  while  plotting  to  murder  two  of  his
nobles,  Aldo  and  Granso,  chanced  to  see  a  big  fly  in  the


CHAP,  x]  METAMORPHOSIS  l8l

window.  He  struck  at  it  with  his  knife  and  cut  off  one  foot.
On  their  way  to  the  palace  Aldo  and  Granso  met  a  Hmping
man  who  had  lost  a  foot  and  had  a  wooden  leg.  He  warned
them  to  beware  of  the  king  and  they  took  sanctuary.  The
king  realized  that  the  fly  was  an  evil  spirit.^^  Such  stories
came  down  to  the  English  Reformers  on  their  native  soil
without  the  need  of  foreign  influences.  When  Thomas  Badby
was  examined  for  heresy  in  1409  and  "was  multiplying  words
without  knowledge"  in  his  own  defence,  a  horrible  spider
was  seen  to  creep  over  his  lips.  One  of  those  present  wished
to  remove  it,  but  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury  said:  "Let
it  alone!  Now  shall  we  see  who  teaches  him  to  speak."

Everybody,  except  here  and  there  a  sophisticated  and
supercilious  man  of  science,  agrees  with  Rosalind's  father
that  the  toad  is  ugly  and  venomous,  though  most  of  us  have
ceased  to  look  for  the  precious  jewel  in  its  head.  Toad
poison,  from  ancient  times  to  the  present,  has  been  much  in
evidence.^'''  But,  like  vipers  and  other  nauseous  and  deadly
creatures,  toads  are  also  valuable  in  medicine.  Plague-
stricken  patients  in  the  seventeenth  century  wore  round  the
neck  a  toad  (alive  or  dried),  whose  stronger  venom  drew  out
the  poison  of  the  disease. The  ashes  of  a  burnt  toad  are
good  for  dropsy  according  to  the  precepts  of  folk-medicine
in  Devonshire.'''  This  fact  makes  the  following  anecdote,
which  comes  from  about  the  middle  of  the  sixteenth  century,
as  exhilarating  to  the  student  of  the  tenacity  of  tradition  as
it  is  comforting  to  the  moralist.  A  Roman  lady,  whose  hus-
band was  in  a  desperate  state  of  health  from  dropsy,  grew
weary  of  the  trouble  and  expense  and  attempted  to  poison
him  with  a  pulverized  toad:  to  her  chagrin,  the  dose  cured
him!  King  John  was  poisoned  by  the  venom  of  a  toad  ad-
ministered by  a  tyrannicide  monk  in  a  wassail  cup,  if  we  may
believe  one  of  the  best-told  stories  in  English  chronicles.''

The  devil,  who  squat  like  a  toad  at  the  ear  of  Mother  Eve
in  Eden,  is  always  at  hand  in  the  churchyard  after  service,
waiting  in  that  guise  for  some  evil-minded  communicant  to
feed  him  with  a  bit  of  the  consecrated  wafer:  whoever  thus
sacrifices  to  Satan  will  straightway  become  a  witch  or  wiz-
ard.''^ The  relation  of  witches  to  toads  (or  frogs)  '^^  is  notori-
ous; and,  like  everything  else  in  this  department  of  super-


l82         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


stition,  it  is  founded  on  fact.  Toads  are  not  uncommon  in
earth-floored  huts,'''  and  doubtless  they  were  sometimes
petted  ''^  by  solitary  old  women  who,  esteemed  as  witches,
regarded  themselves  as  such  and  thought  the  creatures  were
really  imps  or  demons.  Anyhow,  toad-familiars  are  as  com-
monplace as  cats.'^^  The  Chelmsford  witch  of  1566,  Mother
Waterhouse,  actually  changed  her  white-spotted  cat  into
a  toad  without  impairing  its  competency. ''^  Oliffe  Barthram,
executed  at  Bury  St.  Edmunds  in  1599  for  "diuellish  and
wicked  witcheries  practized  vpon  loane  lorden,"  had  sent
three  toads  to  her  victim  "to  trouble  her  in  her  bed."  ''^  As
late  as  1879  ^  nian  charged  with  assault  excused  himself  in
a  Norfolk  court  by  declaring  that  the  woman  assaulted  was
a  witch  who  had  bespelled  him  by  means  of  a  "walking
toad."  Malefic  witchcraft  by  such  agency  was  not  obso-
lete in  Devon  in  1905.^°  When  Saubadine  de  Soubiete,  one
of  the  Labourd  witches  of  the  early  seventeenth  century,  was
thrown  into  the  fire  by  the  executioner,  "  a  whole  swarm  of
toads  came  out  of  the  top  of  her  head."  ^'  The  familiar  of
the  witch  who  tormented  Rachel  Pindar  in  1574  was  "some-
tyme  like  a  doge,  and  sometyme  like  a  tode."  In  modern
Devonshire  an  old  woman  "kept  toads  in  her  back  kitchen
for  the  purpose  of  injuring  persons  against  whom  she  had
a  grudge;  another,  who  was  bedridden,  kept  toads  in  her  bed,
and  people  used  to  come  to  have  their  fortunes  told  by
them."  Nanny  Morgan,  a  Shropshire  hag  who  was  mur-
dered in  1857,  had  a  box  full  of  live  toads  in  her  cottage.^'*  A
modern  wizard  of  Somerset  kept  toads  on  hand  in  pots:  to
make  a  person  pine  away  and  die,  he  would  stick  a  toad's
heart  full  of  pins  and  hang  it  up  in  the  chimney.^^  Bodin,
with  a  moderation  not  always  discernible  in  his  treatment
of  witchcraft,  lays  down  the  principle  that  to  keep  toads
in  pots,  though  a  suspicious  circumstance,  is  not  sufficient
ground  for  condemnation  to  death. The  frequent  confu-
sion between  the  witch  and  her  familiar  occurs  in  a  Maldon
case  in  1579  and  in  the  case  of  Mary  Smith,  executed  in  1616:
a  toad  was  burned,  and  she  suff^ered  appropriate  pains. ^'^

From  a  wild  account  of  the  murder  of  Fair  Rosamond
penned  by  an  irresponsible  chronicler  of  the  fourteenth  cen-
tury (who  refers  the  whole  affair  to  the  reign  of  Henry  III


CHAP.  X]


METAMORPHOSIS


instead  of  Henry  II)  we  learn  that  Queen  Eleanor  put  Rosa-
mond into  a  bath  and  hired  a  wicked  old  woman  to  lance
her  arms;  and  another  old  witch  {sorceresse)  brought  two
horrible  toads,  which  seized  the  damsel's  breasts  and  sucked
her  blood  while  two  more  hags  held  her  arms.  The  queen  had
the  reptiles  buried  with  the  body  in  a  foul  ditch.  One  of  the
witches  confessed  under  torture. Nothing  could  be  absurder
from  an  historical  point  of  view,  but  as  evidence  for  what  was
believed  of  witches  in  mediseval  England  the  item  is  priceless.

Why  it  should  be  good  luck  to  meet  a  toad  (though  bad
luck  to  meet  a  hare)  I  cannot  divine  except  on  the  principle
of  similia  similibus  curantur,  but  such  was  the  notion  in
fourteenth-century  England.^'

A  dim  shadow  of  the  toad-witch  haunts  the  minds  of  New
England  boys  if  they  retain  the  superstition  (current  among
them  on  Cape  Cod  in  my  youth)  that  to  kill  a  toad  brings  on
a  shower  of  rain;  for  in  this  article  of  faith  one  recognizes  the
old  notion  that  storms  attend  the  death  of  witches.'"

Of  course  a  witch  may  transform  a  man  into  an  animal  (as
in  the  case,  sometimes,  of  the  nightmare  hag).''^  The  possi-
bility was  much  debated  by  men  of  learning,  and  the  theolo-
gians were  inclined  to  hold  that  such  shifts  are  in  appear-
ance only;  but  the  people  in  general  had  (and  have)  no
doubts,  having  inherited  their  creed  from  the  beginning  of
time.  And  even  among  the  learned  elect  there  was  a  trace  — •
and  more  than  a  trace  —  of  the  old  leaven.  Besides,  there
were  special  influences  at  work.  The .  farnous  romance  of
Apuleius,  in  outline,  got  into  circulation  as  historical  fact
and  was  thus  made  current  in  twelfth-century  England
by  William  of  Malmesbury  in  his  story  of  the  Two  Witches
of  Rome,  which  subsequent  chroniclers  delighted  to  copy.
These  hags,  William  tells  us,  who  kept  a  wayside  inn,
added  to  their  gains  by  transforming  their  guests  into  do-
mestic animals  and  selling  them.  One  young  man,  a  profes-
sional entertainer,  sold  in  the  form  of  an  ass,  did  not  forfeit
his  human  intelligence  and  amused  his  master's  friends  by
clever  tricks.  At  last  he  got  into  a  pond,  and  water  restored
him  to  his  proper  shape. '^^  The  occurrence  is  assigned  to  the
eleventh  century.'^  The  starting  point .  for  this  anecdote
might  well  have  been  a  chapter  of  St.  Augustine,  who,  after


184


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


citing  Circe  and  the  classic  werewolves  of  Arcadia,'-*  repeats
a  canard  that  he  himself  heard  in  Italy  —  how  certain  old
women,  by  means  of  cheese  which  they  gave  to  travellers,
turned  them  into  beasts  of  burden,  with  the  retention,  how-
ever, of  their  human  reason,  "just  as  Apuleius  in  his  Golden
Ass  has  revealed  or  pretended  that  by  a  poison  he  was
changed  into  an  ass  with  a  human  mind."  St.  Augustine  is
skeptical  but  cautious,  and  does  not  utterly  reject  the  evi-
dence.In  Reginald  Scot  we  may  read  of  a  young  English
sailor  who  met  with  similar  treatment  at  the  hands  of  a
witch  of  Cyprus.  Scot  regards  the  tale  as  a  tough  yarn.'''
We  have  now  approached  the  widespread  marchen  "Sell  the
Steed  but  Keep  the  Bridle,"  in  which  a  magician  drives  a
good  trade  in  horses  by  this  occult  means,'^  and  we  are  not
far  from  the  Greek  myth  of  Erysichthon,  who  sold  his  daughter
over  and  over  again,  now  as  a  mare,  now  as  a  cow,  now  as  a
bird,  now  as  a  stag.'*  Once  upon  a  time  St.  Macarius  was
besought  to  help  a  girl  who  appeared  to  have  been  trans-
formed into  a  mare  "per  phantasias  magicas."  He  per-
ceived in  a  moment  that  the  metamorphosis  was  not  actual,
but  simply  due  to  demonic  illusion,  for  he  saw  the  girl  where
others  saw  the  mare.  By  prayer  and  by  anointing  he  brought
it  about  that  she  once  more  looked  to  others  and  to  herself
like  what  she  really  was.  This  anecdote  appears  in  English  in
the  fifteenth  century."  Giraldus  Cambrensis  narrates,  as  an
observed  fact  of  his  own  time,  that  some  magicians  in  Ireland
make  what  seem  to  be  pigs  out  of  any  material  that  comes
handy  and  sell  them  on  market  days.  Such  pigs,  for  what-
ever reason,  are  always  red.'""  As  soon  as  they  cross  any
body  of  water,  they  vanish,  reverting  to  the  substance  out
of  which  they  were  manufactured,  and  in  no  event  can  they
retain  their  pig-shape  for  more  than  three  days.'"'  Now  and
then  a  holy  man  may  imitate  the  witch.  Etymologizing  plays
queer  tricks,  some  of  which  are  due  to  the  primeval  idea  that
the  name  is  essentially  connected  with  the  nature,  so  that
it  is  effectual  in  spells.'"^  An  amusing  instance  is  the  Durham
monk  Reginald's  account  how  the  surname  Todd  (which
means  "Fox")  originated:  a  thievish  monk  was  transformed
into  a  fox  by  his  brethren's  prayer  to  St.  Cuthbert  —  but
was  restored  to  humanity  when  he  repented."''


CHAPTER  XI


MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES

MIRROR-MAGIC  or  crystal-gazing  in  its  several  species
(employing  variously  a  mirror,  a  beryl  or  other  stone,
a  basin  of  water,  a  swordblade,  or  a  polished  fingernail)  ^  has
a  long  history  in  England  before  we  come  to  Dr.  John  Dee,
Queen  Elizabeth's  mathematician,  who  was  beyond  ques-
tion the  most  persevering  of  all  known  experimenters  in
this  still-popular  department  of  the  occult.  The  object  was
ordinarily  to  detect  a  thief  or  to  discover  the  whereabouts
of  his  booty,  but  then  as  now  it  could  be  applied  to  any  kind
of  secret.  John  Wesley  in  1761  records  in  his  diary  the  thrill-
ing story  told  him  by  a  lad  who,  when  he  gazed  in  the  crystal
belonging  to  Timothy  Crowther  (Yorkshire  parish  clerk,
astrologer,  and  magician,  1 694-1761),  beheld  a  murder  in
the  very  act  and  saw  the  corpse  in  the  pit  where  it  was  after-
wards found:  the  boy  declared  that  he  could  identify  the
murderers  if  he  should  ever  meet  them  anywhere.^  Crow-
ther's  manuscript  charm-book,  still  in  existence,  gives  the
full  formula  for  calling  spirits  into  the  stone  or  beryl. ^  The
scryer  was  regularly  a  young  boy,  for  the  doctrine  was  that
certain  demons  or  angels  —  their  character  was  equivocal
■ —  could  not  or  would  not  manifest  themselves  except  to  the
pure  alone."

Specularii  was  the  technical  name  for  users  of  the  crystal
or  the  magic  mirror.  Such  persons,  according  to  John  of
Salisbury  (ca.  1115-1180),  defend  their  art  on  the  ground
that  "they  make  no  offerings  [to  demons],  harm  nobody,
often  do  good  service  by  revealing  thefts,  cleanse  the  world
of  evil  witchcraft  {maleficiis  purgant  orbem),  and  seek  only
truth  that  is  useful  or  necessary."  ^  These  pretexts,  however,
are  bootless,  —  so  he  contends,  —  and  we  know  well  enough
that  the  invocations  preceding  the  scryer's  vision  were  by
no  means  always  orthodox.  Chaucer's  Parson  had  no  doubt
on  this  point:  "Lat  us  go  now  to  thilke  horrible  swering  of


I


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


adiuracioun  and  coniuracioun,  as  doon  thise  false  enchaun-
tours  or  nigromanciens  in  bacins  ful  of  water,  or  in  a  bright
swerd,  in  a  cercle,  or  in  a  fyr,  or  in  a  shulder-boon  of  a  sheep.
I  can  nat  seye  but  that  they  doon  cursedly  and  damnably,
agayns  Crist  and  al  the  feith  of  holy  chirche."  ^  Robert  of
Brunne  in  the  same  century  offers  important  testimony,  ex-
panding his  source  —  the  French-writing  English  author  of
Le  Manuel  des  Pechiez  —  in  notable  fashion.  The  French
text  censures  divination  by  "turning  the  psalter"  and  by
"looking  in  sword  or  basin"  —

Si  le  sauter  feites  unques  turner,
En  espee  ou  bacin  garder.

Robert  writes:

5yf  you  yn  swerde,  other  yn  bacyn,
Any  chylde  madyst  loke  theryn,
Or  yn  thumbe,  or  yn  cristal  —
Wycchecraft  men  clepyn  hyt  alle.'

When  John  of  Salisbury  was  a  boy  he  was  entrusted  to  a
priest  to  learn  the  psalter.  This  priest  was  a  practiser  of
magic,  and  he  attempted  to  use  John  and  another  -boy  as
scryers.  After  invoking  certain  demons,  he  had  them  look
at  their  fingernails,  which  were  smeared  with  holy  oil,  and
at  a  polished  metal  bowl.  The  other  boy  saw  some  indistinct
and  cloudy  images,  but  William  could  discern  nothing  of  the
sort,  and  he  was  therefore  shut  out  whenever  his  tutor  under-
took these  experiments  in  the  black  art.  The  whole  thing
was  horrible  to  him,  he  tells  us,  and  his  horror  was  increased,
when  he  grew  up,  by  what  he  observed  of  the  fate  of  such
speculary  magicians;  for  he  knew  many,  and  all  except  two
of  them  lost  their  sight  either  from  natural  causes  or  by  the
hand  of  an  enemy.  These  two  were  the  priest,  his  former
tutor,  and  a  certain  deacon,  both  of  whom  took  warning  and
entered  religious  orders.  Yet  even  so,  they  suffered  many
misfortunes.^  John's  gratitude  to  God  for  lack  of  psychic
power  is  significant.  A  boy  scryer  was  likely  to  dabble  in
magic  when  he  grew  up.  Thus  John  Wilkynson,  canon  of
Drax,  implicated  in  a  notorious  attempt  at  treasure-digging
sorcery  in  1510,'  confessed  that,  when  a  child  of  twelve,  "he
was  at  an  invocacion  made  at  Wakefield  by  a  scholar  of


CHAP.  Xl]


MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES


187


Orlyaunce  for  a  [stolen]  pair  of  bedes  [a  rosary],  when  he  saw
in  a  glasse  a  woman  that  had  the  beides  in  her  hand,  and  a
sprite  hke  a  kyng  in  a  chare  of  gold."  ^°  The  University  of
Orleans,  by  the  way,  was  famous  for  the  study  of  the  occult.
Chaucer's  magician  in  The  Franklin's  Tale  was  a  clerk  of
that  school.

In  13 II  Ralph  Baldock,  Bishop  of  London,  sent  a  letter  to
the  Official  of  the  Archdeacon,  directing  him  to  investigate
the  matter  of  sorcery  and  magic  in  the  city  and  diocese.  He

i:     has  learned  that  these  arts  have  many  practitioners  there.

"  Among  other  abuses  it  appears  that,  for  the  recovery  of  lost
articles  or  for  revelation  of  the  future,  certain  persons  "pro-
fess that  they  invoke  spirits  in  fingernails,  mirrors,  stones,
and  rings,  or  similar  materials,  who,  as  they  pretend,  give
vain  responses  and  make  signs.""

Among  the  paraphernalia  of  Richard  Walker,  a  chaplain  of
the  diocese  of  Winchester,  brought  to  book  tor  sorcery  in
I419,  was  a  beryl  stone  hung  on  a  black  leather  strap. In
1 440  Will  am  Sadyngstone,  Abbot  of  the  house  of  Augus-
tinian  Canons  at  Leicester,  was  accused  by  his  own  brethren
of  this  kind  of  magic  as  well  as  of  multiplication  (i.  e.  al-
chemy). Some  of  his  money  had  been  stolen.  He  called  the
brethren  together  and  declared  that  some  one  of  them  must  be
the  thief,  but  nobody  would  confess,  and  so  he  had  recourse  to
sorcery.  On  the  20th  or  21st  of  September,  1439,  ^fter  certain

.  incantations,  he  anointed  the  thumbnail  of  a  boy  named
Maurice  and  bade  him  tell  what  he  saw.  As  a  result  of  the
boy's  vision,  the  abbot  accused  Brother  Thomas  Asty  of  the
theft.  Bishop  Alnwick  allowed  the  abbot  to  purge  himself  of
the  charge  of  sorcery  so/a  7na72ii.  In  the  course  of  the  same
enquiry  a  witch  appears:  William  Banastre,  the  abbot's
servingman,  took  counsel  of  an  incantatrix  for  a  lost  piece  of
money.

In  1 467  William  Byg,  alias  Lech,  was  accused  of  heresy  and
sorcery  in  the  court  ot  the  Archbishop  of  York.  He  confessed
that  for  the  past  two  or  three  years  he  had  practised  crystal
gazing  for  the  recovery  of  stolen  goods,  but  he  never  could  see
anything  in  the  crystal  himself.  His  scryer  was  a  boy  of  less
than  twelve  years.  He  put  in  the  boy's  hand  a  crystal  stone
{uniim  lapidem  cristaUiirn)  and  made  him  repeat  a  Pater


l88         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Noster,  an  Ave,  and  a  Credo,  as  well  as  the  prayer  that  fol-
lows:— ^"Lord  Jesus  Christ  send  us  three  angels  from  the
right-hand  direction  who  shall  tell  or  show  us  the  truth  about
these  things  which  we  shall  ask."  Sometimes  the  boy  saw  the
stolen  goods  in  the  crystal,  sometimes  the  thieves,  sometimes
one  or  two  angels.  When  the  boy  saw  an  angel  or  angels,  Byg
adjured  them  in  Latin  to  reveal  the  truth,  and  then  the  boy
saw  the  thieves  and  the  booty.  A  score  of  times  the  boy  had
seen  nothing.  Byg  gave  examples  of  goods  and  money  re-
covered, with  names.  He  had  learned  the  art  from  Arthur
Mitton  of  Leicester  about  1464."*

In  1475  or  1476  Nazareth  Jarbrey  confessed  to  the  Commis-
sary of  London  that  he  visited  Thomas  Barley  in  Totell
Street,  Westminster,  and  (after  certain  prayers  offered  by
Thomas)  looked  in  a  beryl  stone  and  saw  a  man  who  stole  a
casket  with  pearls  and  stones  and  other  things  from  his
mother's  house.  Again,  at  the  request  of  a  cleric  of  St.
George's  church,  he  visited  the  said  Thomas  and  saw  in  like
manner  a  man  and  a  woman  in  the  beryl.  On  describing
them,  he  was  told  by  the  cleric  that  he  knew  the  woman  and
that  her  name  was  Longbele.  In  this  case  the  client  himself
was  the  scryer,  and  it  appears  that  he  was  so  successful  that
his  fame  spread  in  the  neighborhood;  hence  the  cleric  of  St.
George's  asked  his  aid.'^

Not  far  from  I485  John  Haddon  of  Coventry,  having  been
robbed  of  forty  pounds,  consulted  certain  persons  "usyng  the
craftes  of  Sorcery,  Wychcraftes,  and  Nygromancy."  These
advised  him  to  arrest  William  Lee,  because  they  perceived
that  he  wore  such  garments  as  "  they  determyned  by  ther  un-
lawfull  wychcraftes  that  the  takers  of  the  seid  money  had  and
used  at  the  tyme  of  the  takyng  of  the  seid  money."  Lee  was
arrested,  but  was  soon  released  for  lack  of  evidence;  but  now
Haddon  is  prosecuting  him  again  in  the  Mayor's  court  at
Coventry,  and  Lee  despairs  of  justice  there,  since  he  is  poor
and  Haddon  is  "of  gret  myght  and  power  and  gret  alyaunce"
in  that  city.  And  so  Lee  petitions  in  chancery  for  a  writ  of
certiorari.  Though  the  kind  of  sorcery  used  is  not  specified,  it
seems  clear  that  crystal  gazing  was  the  method.'^

In  1509  we  have  a  case  of  defamation.  Alice  Ancetyr
slanderously  accused  Christopher  Sandon  of  stealing  a  rosary.


CHAP.  XI]  MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES  189

It  seems  that  she  visited  a  magician  who  dwelt  in  Charter-
house Ward,  and  he  told  her  that  he  beheld  in  a  mirror  the
picture  and  image  of  Christopher.  He  added  that  Chris-
topher, standing  at  a  glass  window,  had  seen  her  hiding  the
beads  in  her  bed,  and  so  had  entered  the  chamber  and  stolen
them.^^  In  1535  Thomas,  Abbot  of  Abingdon,  notified  Crom-
well of  the  arrest  by  the  abbot's  officers  of  a  priest,  in  whose
possession  were  books  of  conjurations  for  finding  hidden
treasure,  and  for  consecrating  not  only  rings  with  stones,'^
but  also  a  crystal  "wheryn  a  chylde  shall  lokke  and  se  many
thyngs."  Crystallomancy  for  the  discovery  of  treasure  or
the  recovery  of  lost  or  stolen  goods  is  plainly  enough  men-
tioned in  the  preamble  to  Henry  VIII's  statute  of  1542,^°

In  1549  William  Wycherley,  of  St.  Sepulchre's  parish,
tailor  and  conjurer,  confesses  that  he  has  "used  the  cristalle
to  invocate  the  spirit  called  Scariot,  which  he  called  dyvers
tymes  into  the  cristall,  to  have  knowledge  of  thynges  stolne,
which  spirit  hath  geven  hym  knowledge  an  C.  tymes,  and
thereby  men  have  been  restored  to  their  goodes."  "This
practise  by  the  cristalle,"  he  adds,  "he  hath  at  the  com-
maundement  of  my  lord  protector  executed  in  the  presence  of
mr.  Thynne"  and  others,  "and  by  this  meane  my  lord  pro-
tector's plate  was  founde,  where  this  deponent  told  his  grace
that  it  was  hidd."  The  Lord  Protector  Somerset  may  or  may
not  have  been  aware  that  so  humble  a  wizard  was  utilized  by
his  household.  Wycherley  was  acquainted  with  one  Robert
Bayly,  a  "scryer  of  the  cristalle  stone."  He  knew  also  that
"oneLowth,  in  Flete-streete,  a  broderer,"  used  the  crystal,
and  that  "Thomas  Malfrey  of  Goldstone  besides  Yarmouth,
[and]  a  woman  besides  Stoke  Clare"  were  "skryers  of  the
glass."

This  brings  us  within  sight  of  the  Elizabethan  age,  and  we
need  not  pursue  the  subject.  There  is  much  material  in  Regi-
nald Scot,"  and  Dr.  Dee's  elaborate  and  long-continued  experi-
ments in  crystallomancy,  published  at  great  length  by  Meric
Casaubon  in  1659,  are  matters  of  common  knowledge. One
or  more  of  Dee^s  show-stones  seem  to  be  preserved.^''  The
Oriental  use  of  a  mirror  of  Indian  ink  is  familiar  to  all  novel-
readers  from  The  Moonstone,^ ^  but  it  may  be  worth  a  note
that  in  1831  Sir  Walter  Scott  was  deeply  interested  in  a  story


190         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

from  Cairo  about  mirror  magic  by  means  of  a  black  square
traced  in  the  palm  of  a  Nubian  boy.^^  Aubrey  heard  a  similar
tale  long  ago  from  a  London  merchant  who  had  been  a  factor
in  Barbary:  "It  was  desired  to  know,  whether  a  Ship  was  in
safety,  or  no?  There  appeared  in  the  Woman's  Hand  the  per-
fect Lineaments  of  a  Ship  under  Sail."  Aubrey  adds  that  "a
Parallel  Method  to  this  is  used  in  England,  by  putting  the
White  of  a  New  laid  Egg  in  a  Beer  Glass,  and  expose  it  to  the
Sun  in  Hot  Weather,  as  August,  when  the  Sun  is  in  Leo,  and
they  will  perceive  their  Husband's  Profession."

Among  the  practical  advantages  of  witchcraft,  the  detec-
tion of  thieves  and  the  recovery  of  lost  or  stolen  goods  have
always  held  a  distinguished  position.^*  Spells  of  this  kind  are
universal  in  their  geography  and  include  many  varieties  of
occult  lore,  from  mere  clairvoyance  or  divination  (as  by  crys-
tal, bible  and  key,  sieve  and  shears)  ^'  to  the  direst  curses
upon  the  offender.  Plenty  of  records  are  preserved  in  Greek
and  Roman  tablets  devoting  to  the  infernal  gods  those  per-
sons who  have  stolen  one's  property  or  who  dishonestly  re-
tain property  lent  or  deposited.^"  Modern  magic  is  equally
ferocious  at  times:  the  thief  shall  go  blind  or  lose  an  eye,^'  or
he  shall  die  within  a  year.^^  One  of  the  uses  to  which  Mabel
Brigge,  executed  in  1539,  put  her  "  black  fast,"  we  remember,
was  to  recover  stolen  goods:  she  "fasted  against"  the  suspect,
who  was  thus  forced  to  confess  or  to  make  restitution.^^
Timothy  Crowther,  Yorkshire  parish  clerk  and  cunning  man
(1694-1761),  had  a  formula  "for  recovering  things  stolen  by
making  a  plate  of  wax."  Reginald  Scot  derisively  registers
several  charms  to  detect  or  injure  a  thief,  including  St.  Adel-
bert's  tremendous  imprecation  and  the  jocose  verses  of  Sir
John  the  priest  who  had  raided  the  miller's  fishpond:

All  you  that  have  stolne  the  millers  eeles,

Laudate  Dominum  de  coelis.

And  all  they  that  have  consented  thereto,

Benedicamus  Domino.

One  of  Scot's  spells  involves  crystallomancy  with  a  virgin  child
as  scryer.^^  Henslowe's  Diary  contains  an  innocuous  charm:
"To  know  wher  a  thinge  is  y'  Js  stolen  Take  vergine  waxe  &
write  vpon  yt  Jasper  +  melchiser  +  Balthasar  +  &  put  yt


CHAP.  Xl]


MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES


191


vnder  his  head  to  whome  the  good  partayneth  &  he  shall
knowe  in  his  sleape  wher  the  thinges  is  become."

Several  Anglo-Saxon  charms  (Latin  and  vernacular  mixed)
to  detect  thieves  and  recover  stolen  property,  are  preserved."
Three  of  these  (for  cattle,  horses,  or  household  goods)  are  dis-
tinctly Christian,  though  two  of  the  three  involve  the  magical
ceremony  of  thrice  dripping  wax  from  three  candles  into  the
hoofprints,  and  one  of  these  two  curses  the  thief  by  wishing
that  Abraham  may  shut  up  all  roads  and  paths  against  him,
that  Job  may  do  the  same  for  rivers,  and  that  he  may
be  brought  in  bonds  to  judgment.  A  fourth,  all  in  Latin,
affords  a  fuller  form  of  the  same  imprecation.^^  A  fifth,  in
Latin  glossed  in  Anglo-Saxon,  calls  upon  Abraham  to  pro-
tect the  livestock  against  robbers.^'  A  sixth  charm  (for  cat-
tle), all  in  Anglo-Saxon,  combines  Christian  and  pagan  ele-
ments, concluding  with  a  curse  upon  the  robber,  who  is  to
"waste  away  as  fire  consumes  wood."  A  seventh  (against
theft  in  general)  is  mere  gibberish:  "Luben  luben  niga,  efith
niga  efith,"  etc.''^  We  have  also  a  magic  diagram  to  be  drawn
in  silence  and  put  in  one's  left  shoe:  then  one  will  soon  dis-
cover the  whereabouts  of  the  missing  article.  Finally,  we
learn  that  madder  placed  upon  a  beehive  will  ensure  the  bees
against  being  stolen.''-  On  the  whole,  these  Anglo-Saxon
spells  differ  in  no  essential  from  the  illicit  formulas  which
white  witches  were  and  are  accustomed  to  mutter,  and  for
which  they  were  often  brought  before  the  church  courts. ''^

One  twelfth-century  culprit  is  fortunately  known  to  us  be-
cause she  happened  to  come  into  contact  with  St.  Hugh,  who
was  Bishop  of  Lincoln  from  11 86  to  1200.  A  dean  in  the
diocese  informed  the  bishop  that  this  woman  seemed  to  have
a  spirit  of  divination  {spiritum  pythonicum),  and  that  the
people  resorted  to  her  in  crowds.  A  specialty  of  hers  was  to
reveal  thefts,  by  whomsoever  committed."''  When  the  dean
or  any  other  man  of  learning  interrogated  her,  she  put  him  to
silence  by  "impudent  verbosity."  St.  Hugh  had  an  interview
with  the  seeress.  Extending  his  closed  right  hand,  with  the
edge  of  his  stole  folded  in  it,  and  addressing  not  so  much  her
as  the  demon  that  possessed  her,  he  said:  "Divine  what  this
hand  holds!"  The  evil  spirit  abandoned  her,  and  she  fell  as
it  were  lifeless  at  his  feet  and  could  not  answer.  "I  cannot


192         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

divine,"  she  cried  at  last,  "but  I  beg  the  mercy  of  this  holy
bishop."  St.  Hugh  found  her  rustic  dialect  unintelligible,  but
the  dean  acted  as  interpreter.  She  was  committed  to  the
Prior  of  Huntingdon  for  discipline,  and  she  soon  reformed. ''^

In  the  same  century  we  have  seen  that  crystal-gazers  de-
fended their  art  because  it  enabled  them  to  do  good  service
as  detectives.''^  Such  thief-catching  magic  is  condemned,  how-
ever, by  Robert  of  Brunne  in  1303:  "If  you  ever  had  to
do  with  nigromancy,  or  made  sacrifice  to  the  devil  through
witchcraft,  or  paid  any  man  to  raise  the  devil  in  order  to
disclose  anything  stolen  ('done  away'),  you  have  sinned.  If
you  have  made  any  child  look  in  sword  or  basin,  in  thumb-
[nail]  or  in  crystal  —  all  that  men  call  witchcraft."  Robert's
contemporary,  Ralph  Baldock,  Bishop  of  London,  found
various  kinds  of  sorcery  prevalent  in  the  city  and  the  diocese
in  13 II  and  issued  a  mandate  accordingly."*  One  of  the
varieties  mentioned  is  "for  the  recovery  of  lost  articles."  In
this  same  century  we  may  observe  a  familiar  type  of  religious
anecdote  as  localized  at  Exeter:  it  illustrates  the  efficacy  of
confession.  A  ditcher  had  stolen  some  food.  The  master  of
the  house  questioned  the  servants,  and,  since  they  all  denied,
he  threatened  to  consult  "a  certain  nigromantic  wizard."
The  ditcher,  alarmed,  hurried  off  to  confession  and  was
absolved.  The  wizard  anointed  a  little  boy's  nail,  and,  after
appropriate  incantations,  asked  him  what  he  could  see.  The
boy  saw  the  theft,  but  could  not  identify  the  thief."'  Of  such
mirror  magic  for  stolen  goods  we  have  already  noted  half  a
dozen  English  examples  from  1440  to  1549.5°

In  1382  the  Mayor's  Court  in  London  sentenced  Henry
Pot,  "a  Duchysman,"  to  stand  one  hour  in  the  pillory  for
"deceit  and  falsehood."  Simon  Gardiner,  it  appears,  had
missed  a  mazer  cup.  Henry  paid  him  a  call  and  promised  to
discover  the  thief;  "and  hereupon  the  same  Henry  made
thirty-two  balls  of  white  clay,  and  over  them  did  sorcery  or
his  magic  art"  and  then  declared  that  Cristina,  the  wife  of
Nicholas  Freeman,  had  stolen  the  cup,  "falsely  and  mali-
ciously lying  therein."  Pot  confessed.  He  admitted  also  that
"he  had  many  times  before  practised  divers  like  sorceries,
both  within  the  city  and  without,  through  which  various  per-
sons had  undeservedly  suffered  injury  in  their  character  and


CHAP,  xi]  MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES  I93

good  name."  The  business  of  the  clay  balls  is  partly  ex-
plained by  a  passage  in  Foxe's  Acts  and  Monuments.  He  is
censuring  Bishop  Longland  of  Lincoln  for  leaving  witchcraft
unpunished  in  1521.  John  Sparke's  wife  of  Chesham  "had
certaine  money  stolne.  For  the  whiche  the  sayd  Sparke  her
husband  sent  for  the  counsaile  of  two  Friers;  who  gaue  him
counsaile  to  make  two  balles  of  clay,  and  to  put  them  in  the
water,  and  in  the  same  balles  to  inclose  the  names  of  them
whom  he  suspected:  and  so  doyng  the  sayd  Sparke  came  to
his  money  agayne."  Bishop  Peter  Quivil  of  Exeter,  in
1287,  refers  to  this  style  of  divination  as  a  customary  thing:
"Let  the  penitent  confess  if  he  has  broken  the  First  Com-
mandment by  rendering  unto  demons  or  other  creatures  the
worship  due  to  God  alone;  to  wit,  by  performing  sleights,
that  is,  by  having  recourse  to  conjurations,  as  is  wont  to  be
done  for  theft,  in  a  sword  or  a  basin,  or  in  names  written  and
enclosed  in  clay  and  put  in  holy  water."  "  And  more  than
five  hundred  years  later  we  find  the  same  method  followed  by
country  girls  to  learn  the  names  of  their  tuture  husbands.
Our  source  of  information  this  time  is  a  vastly  entertaining
number  of  The  Connoisseur  (February  20,  1755),  which  is
crammed  with  folk-lore.

Still  in  1382  Richard  Berewold  was  prosecuted  in  the
mayor's  court  for  the  same  offence  —  "deceit  and  false-
hood." Matilda  de  Eye  had  lost  a  mazer  by  theft.  He  under-
took to  name  the  thief.  The  process  is  curious:  "He  took  a
loaf,  and  fixed  in  the  top  of  it  a  round  peg  of  wood,  and  four
knives  at  the  four  sides  of  the  same,  in  form  like  a  cross;  and
then  did  soothsaying  and  the  art  magic  over  them."  Then
he  falsely  designated  Johanna  Wolsy  as  the  guilty  person.
Berewold  was  pilloried  for  an  hour,  "the  said  loaf,  with  the
peg  and  knives  stuck  in  it,  being  hung  from  his  neck."  "
This  kind  of  divination  {per panes  et  ciiltellos)  is  mentioned  as
prevalent  in  the  diocese  of  London  by  Bishop  Baldock  in  a
mandate  of  1311.5"'

Again  in  1382  the  Mayor  and  Aldermen  sentenced  William
Norhamptone,  cobbler,  to  an  hour  in  the  pillory.  Alice  Trig's
"  Paris  kerchief  "  had  been  purloined,  and  she  suspected  xAlice
Byntham,  who  straightway  visited  the  pretended  seer  and
asked  him  to  vindicate  her.   She  gave  him  certain  private


194        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

tips  about  Mistress  Trig,  which  he  used  to  convince  the  latter
that  he  could  reveal  the  truth  about  anything  whatsoever.
Then  he  assured  her  that,  as  truly  as  these  private  matters
were  thus  and  so.  Mistress  Byntham  was  innocent,  and,  he
added,  "You  will  be  drowned  within  a  month!"  Mistress
Trig  fell  into  deep  melancholy  and  almost  died.  The  knavish
William  confessed,  as  usual,  and  "because  that  the  said  Wil-
liam pretended  to  be  a  wise  man,  and  skilled  in  such  magic
arts,  whereas  he  expressly  acknowledged  that  he  knew  noth-
ing about  them,  and  so  deceitfully  trifled  with  Alice,"  the
city  fathers  sentenced  him  to  one  hour  in  the  pillory.

This  1382  was  a  dismal  date  for  London  sharpers.  To  com-
plete the  tale  —  though  at  the  expense  of  a  digression  —  we
may  note  what  happened  to  Roger  Clerk  at  the  hands  of  the
same  court.  Roger  was  arrested  for  pretending  to  medical
skill,  although  he  was  "in  no  way  a  literate  man"  and  "alto-
gether ignorant  of  the  art  of  physic  or  of  surgery."  His
particular  offence  was  selling  to  Roger  atte  Hache  a  leaf  torn
out  of  a  book  on  which  was  written,  as  he  averred,  a  good
charm  for  fevers.  This  was  wrapped  in  cloth  of  gold.  On
examination,  no  charm  whatever  was  found  upon  the  leaf.
The  Court  told  Clerk  that  "a  straw  beneath  his  foot  would
be  of  just  as  much  avail  for  fevers  as  this  said  charm  of  his
was;  whereupon,  he  fully  granted  that  it  would  be  so."  The
punishment  was  exemplary.  On  a  horse  without  a  saddle
Clerk  was  led  through  the  midst  of  the  city  to  the  music  of
trumpets  and  pipes,  with  the  charm-packet  hung  about  his
neck,  and  also  a  whetstone  (the  sign  of  a  liar);  one  urinal  was
suspended  at  his  breast  and  another  at  his  back.^^

This  penalty  is  almost  identical  with  that  inflicted  in  the
same  month  on  another  pretender  to  medical  knowledge,  who
also  professed  astrology.  He  caused  it  to  be  proclaimed  that  a
pestilential  mist  was  to  come  upon  the  city  on  May  14th  (the
vigil  of  the  Ascension),  and  that  all  who  violated  his  direc-
tions should  die  suddenly.  These  directions  were  simple:  Do
not  leave  your  chamber  until  you  have  repeated  the  Lord's
Prayer  five  times  and  broken  your  fast.  Many  believed  him,
broke  their  fast,  and  did  not  go  to  mass.  Next  day,  when
his  lying  became  evident,  he  was  ridden  through  the  city  "in
the  sight  of  all  the  physicians  and  surgeons,"  with  his  back


CHAP.  Xl]


MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES


toward  the  horse's  head  and  the  horse's  tail  in  his  hand  for
a  bridle.  A  whetstone  was  hung  about  his  neck,  and  also
"duae  ollae,         jordanes  vulgo  vocamus."

In  1390  John  Berkyng,  a  converted  London  Jew,  got  into
serious  trouble  by  his  fraudulent  arts.  His  case,  which  also
came  before  the  Mayor  and  Aldermen,  is  notable  for  the  rank
of  his  clients.  One  of  the  complainants  was  William  Shede-
water,  a  servant  of  Edmund  Duke  of  York.  Two  silver  dishes
had  been  stolen  from  the  Duke's  house  in  Fleet  Street.  The
Duke's  Council  consulted  Berkyng,  who  was  said  to  be  skilled
in  magic,  and  he  accused  William  falsely.  Two  other  com-
plainants had  been  similarly  accused  with  regard  to  a  scarlet
mantle  of  Lady  Le  Despenser's.  Berkyng  confessed  and
begged  for  mercy.  He  was  pilloried  for  an  hour  on  Cornhill,
imprisoned  for  a  bit,  and  finally  compelled  to  abjure  the
city.^°  In  I418  Thomas  Forde  of  Canterbury,  sawyer  and
soothsayer,  was  convicted  by  the  London  court  "of  hidous
trespasses  and  disseites."  He  had  convinced  Widow  Jonet
Cook  of  Eastcheap  that  he  could  inform  her  where  a  little
coffer  containing  more  than  two  hundred  pounds  had  been
buried  by  her  husband.  She  was  to  pay  for  his  meat  and
drink  as  well  as  for  "  the  sotell  instrumentes  that  longen  to  his
craft,"  and  was  to  reward  him  also  with  her  hand  in  marriage.
The  widow  actually  paid  him  more  than  forty  shillings.  He
likewise  cajoled  another  woman  out  of  almost  a  pound  by
promising  to  recover  half  a  gown  of  cloth  of  gold  which  was
stolen.  He  was  sentenced  to  stand  on  the  pillory  for  an  hour
on  three  market  days  with  a  whetstone  about  his  neck.''^

A  bill  in  chancery  filed  by  William  Paule,  parish  priest  of
St.  Andrew's,  Holborn,  shows  the  prevalence  of  sorcery  in  the
fifteenth  century.  In  1484  or  i486  Thomas  Fereby,  a  London
goldsmith,  had  been  robbed,  and  the  thieves  had  thrown  a
bag  containing  part  of  the  booty  into  the  grounds  of  Paule's
parsonage.  Paule  had  returned  this  to  the  owner,  but  Fereby,
missing  "many  other  goodes,"  consulted  "diverse  nigro-
mansiers,"  who  decided  that  these  were  in  the  priest's  pos-
session. So  Fereby  brought  an  action  of  trespass  in  the  Com-
mon Pleas  against  Paule  with  reference  to  all  the  stolen
property,  alleging  that  the  priest  had  robbed  him  with  force
and  arms  and  fixing  the  ad  damnum  at  a  hundred  marks.


196         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Paule  petitions  for  a  writ  of  subpoena  summoning  Fereby  be-
fore the  Court  of  Chancery,  and  also  for  an  injunction  to  pre-
vent his  proceeding  further  in  the  Common  Pleas  until  the
Lord  Chancellor  has  examined  the  case.^^  At  about  the  same
time  Roger  Page  accused  John  Holond,  husbandman,  of
breaking  into  his  house  and  robbing  him.  Page  had  consulted
"negremaunsers,"  who  named  Holond  as  the  guilty  man.
On  this  charge  Holond  was  arrested  and  kept  in  prison,  al-
though he  offered  sufficient  surety.  He  petitioned  the  Chan-
cellor to  order  the  bailiffs  to  bring  him  and  his  case  before  the
Court  of  Chancery.*'^  In  1497  Sir  Robert,  Rector  of  St.  Mary
at  Nax,  was  reported  as  a  common  defamer  of  many  persons
by  means  of  his  arts  of  sorcery.  In  particular  he  had  slan-
dered Alice  Hall,  declaring  that  she  had  stolen  two  rings
belonging  to  Robert  Draper.^"*  In  this  same  year  we  have  in
the  London  Commissary's  Court  a  good  case  of  sorcery  by
psalter  and  key    —  a  practice  condemned  in  the  thirteenth
century  by  the  Englishman  William  (usually  styled  of  Wad-
dington)  in  his  Manuel  des  Pechiez.^^  John  White  of  Old-
fish  Street  was  the  culprit,  and  he  confessed. The  modus
operandi  is  briefly  described  in  the  record  and  more  fully  by
Reginald  Scot,  and  is  familiar  in  modern  divination. The
name  of  each  suspected  person  is  written  on  a  slip  of  paper.
One  of  these  slips  the  diviner  inserts  in  the  pipe  (or  hollow
end)  of  a  big  key.  Then  he  lays  the  key  upon  the  eighteenth
verse  of  the  Fiftieth  Psalm:  "When  thou  sawest  a  thief,  then
thou  consentedst  with  him,  and  hast  been  partaker  with
adulterers."  The  closed  book,  with  the  key  inside,  is  loosely
held  by  the  diviner  and  his  client,  while  the  diviner  speaks  the
fateful  verse.  If  the  name  in  the  key  is  that  of  the  thief,  the
book  and  key  will  turn  round  and  may  even  fall  to  the  floor.
White  was  accused  of  "practising  the  magic  art"  in  this  man-
ner to  discover  who  had  stolen  John  Ryan's  silver  spoon,  and
of  putting  the  guilt  upon  Elizabeth  Doland,  whose  husband
beat  her  in  consequence  and  drove  her  out  of  his  house.^'
John  Steward,  an  ex-schoolmaster  of  Knaresborough,  con-
cerned in  a  sensational  case  of  invocation  for  hidden  treasure
in  1 510,  denied  that  he  ever  called  up  demons  or  spirits,  but
admitted  that  once  upon  a  time  he  had  used  the  art  of  in-
quiry for  lost  and  stolen  articles  "  by  the  turning  of  the  key  in


CHAP.  Xl]


MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES


197


the  book,"  and  that  on  this  occasion  he  recited  the  biblical
verse  just  quoted. In  general,  Steward  confessed  himself  a
trickster,  though  he  seems  to  have  trusted  the  oracle  of  the
key.  His  case  will  occupy  us  later  (pp.  207-208).

In  1529  John  Welford  was  sentenced  by  the  Lincoln
ecclesiastical  court  to  offer  a  pound  of  wax  before  the  Blessed
Virgin  in  Liddington  church.  His  offence  was  —  consulting
(without  success)  a  man  "  that  reported  hym  self  to  be  a  doc-
tor" in  hope  to  learn  who  had  stolen  seven  pounds.  Welford
said  that  he  had  heard  at  Northampton  from  several  persons
that  this  doctor  was  able  to  "  tell  of  stoUen  guddes."  He  had
also  attempted  to  consult  another  wise  man  on  the  same  busi-
ness, but  nothing  came  of  it.''^

In  1549  William  Wycherley  of  St.  Sepulchre's  parish,  tailor,
when  examined  by  Sir  Thomas  Smith for  conjuring,  gave  a
full  account  of  the  experiment  with  psalter  and  key.  "And  he
saith  that  he  hath  used  this  practise  so  often  that  he  cannot
expresse  how  many  the  tymes;  for  people  ar  so  importune
upon  hym  dayly  for  this  purpose,  that  he  is  not  able  to
avoyde  them." "  Wycherley  declares  that  the  kingdom
abounds  in  sorcerers,  and  a  case  of  ca.  1545  tends  to  sub-
stantiate his  assertion.  The  parish  church  of  Holbeach,
Lincolnshire,  had  been  robbed  of  property  in  money  and
jewels  to  the  value  of  above  three  hundred  marks  (£200),  and
the  people  had  recourse  to  John  Lamkyn,  master  of  the  Hol-
beach grammar  school,  and  Edmund  Nasche  of  Cirencester,  a
wheeler  by  trade,  both  of  whom  called  themselves  sooth-
sayers and  claimed  skill  in  "  nigramansi."  The  result  was  the
public  defamation  of  John  Patriche  as  the  robber.  Patriche,
sorely  aggrieved,  complained  to  the  Star  Chamber,  which
took  the  matter  up,  with  what  result  we  cannot  tell.''''  Nor  do
we  know  what  species  of  "nigramansi"  Nasche  and  Lamkyn
fancied.  In  1551,  however,  it  was  for  sorcery  with  key  and
book  in  discovery  of  theft  that  William  Newport,  Vicar  of  St.
Owen's,  Gloucester,  had  to  do  humiliating  public  penance. ''^
To  consult  a  sorcerer  to  recover  church  property  seems  like
fighting  the  devil  with  fire,  but  our  ancestors  did  not  shrink
from  such  methods.  Thus  in  1583-84  the  churchwardens'  ac-
counts of  Thatcham,  Berkshire,  show  a  payment  of  one  and
fourpence  "  for  the  ingoing  to  Burfield  to  the  cunnyng  woman


198         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

for  to  make  enquire  for  the  comunione  clothe  and  the  ij
outhar  clothes  that  were  lost  out  of  the  church."  ''^  And  Gif-
fard  in  his  Dialogue  (1593)  tells  of  the  recovery  of  a  stolen
communion  cup  by  the  aid  of  a  "wise  man."  "

We  have  now  entered  the  great  queen's  reign,  and  I  need
not  continue,  for  everybody  knows  that  divination  by  bible
and  key  is  still  going  on;''^  but  I  cannot  deny  myself  the
pleasure  of  remarking  that  complaints  for  slander  or  abusive
language  or  assault,  involving  this  method  of  detecting  a
thief,  came  before  English  judges  in  Norfolk  in  1866,  at
Ludlow  in  1878,  and  in  London  (Thames  Police  Court)  in
1884.'^'  Now-a-days,  however,  the  trick  is  usually  worked
to  test  love,  or  to  learn  the  name  or  initial  of  one's  future
husband;  and  accordingly  the  Scripture  passage  is  generally
taken  from  the  book  of  Ruth  ("Whither  thou  goest,  I  will
go,"  etc.,  i,  16)  or  from  the  Canticles  ("I  am  my  beloved's,
and  my  beloved  is  mine,"  vi,  3;  or  "Many  waters  cannot
quench  love,  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it,"  viii,  7;  or  "Set
me  as  a  seal  upon  thine  heart,  as  a  seal  upon  thine  arm;  for
love  is  strong  as  death,  jealousy  is  cruel  as  the  grave:  the
coals  thereof  are  coals  of  fire,  which  hath  a  most  vehement
flame,"  viii,  6).^°  Small  blame  to  the  superstitious!  The
most  hardened  investigator  cannot  write  down  words  like
these  without  half-believing  in  their  magic  power.  But  there
is  an  anticlimax,  after  all.  With  the  ridiculous  versatility  of
the  occult,  the  verse  from  Ruth  is  sometimes  used  to  detect  a
thief!  And  (for  in  the  lowest  deep  there  is  a  lower  deep)  it
is  reported  from  the  Wye  Valley  that  the  charm  of  bible  and
key  will  cure  nosebleed,  if  followed  by  slipping  the  cold  key
down  the  back  of  your  neck.^^

A  companion  piece  to  divination  by  Bible  and  Key  is
coscinomancy  or  the  oracle  of  Sieve  and  Shears,  of  which
Wier  gives  a  good  description.  The  sieve  is  put  upon  the
opened  shears,  and  these  are  grasped  with  two  fingers  and
raised  so  that  it  balances.  An  unintelligible  charm  is  recited
{dies,  nues,  ieschet,  benedoefet,  dormina,  enitemaus).  Finally  the
names  of  suspected  persons  are  called:  if  the  sieve  trembles,
-  totters,  or  turns  at  a  name,  that  person  is  guilty. In  1554,
William  Hasylwoode,  a  cleric,  was  brought  before  the  Com-
missary's Court  of  the  Diocese  of  London  on  the  charge  that


CHAP.  XI]  MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES  I99

he  is  and  was  accustomed  to  use  "arte  magica,  seu  sortilegio,
Anglice  wytchecraft,  or  sorcery,  with  a  seve  and  a  payre  of
sheeres."  He  confessed  that  "in  July  was  twelve  monythe
last  past,  he  ...  ,  having  then  lost  his  purse,  w*^  xiiii  grootes
in  the  same,  and  thereupon  remembryng,  that  he  being  a
chylde,  dyd  hear  his  mother  declare,  that  when  any  man  hadd
I     lost  anny  thing,  then  they  wold  use  a  syve,  and  a  payre  of
f    sheeres,  to  bring  to  knowledge  who  hadd  the  thing  lost;  and
so  this  examinante  upon  occasion  thereof,  dyd  take  a  seve,
and  a  payre  of  sheeres,  and  hanged  the  seve  by  the  poynte  of
the  sheeres,  and  sayed  these  wordes  —  by  Peter  and  Paule,
he  hath  yt,  namyng  the  partye  whom  he  in  that  behalf  sus-
pected; which  thing  he  never  used  but  ones,  and  also  de-
I    clared  yt  to  one  of  his  acqueyntaunce."      This  is  highly
'f    significant,  for  Hasylwoode  learned  his  lore  not  from  books,
but  at  his  mother's  knee.   In  1549  William  Wycherley  de-
posed that  the  sieve-and-shears  oracle  was  used  by  Thomas
^  •  Shakilton,  laborer,  of  Aldersgate  Street;  by  Christopher  Mor-
gan, plasterer,  and  his  wife,  of  Beche  Lane  beside  the  Barbi-
^     can;  and  by  one  Croxton's  wife,  of  St.  Giles  parish  ("and  she
only  speaketh  with  the  fayrayes");  also  that  Sir  Robert
Brian,  formerly  a  hermit  but  then  a  Highgate  priest,  not  only
used  psalter  and  key  but  was  in  the  habit  of  conjuring  with
a  sieve  and  a  pair  of  shears,  "  invocating  saint  Paule  and  Saint
Peter."      The  full  incantation  runs  as  follows:

By  St.  Peter  and  by  St.  Paul,

If  hath  stolen  's  ,

Turn  about  riddle  and  shears  and  all.*^

A  form  of  the  spell  was  known  to  Scot  and  Aubrey,^'  and
from  a  case  in  the  Worcestershire  records  (1633)  we  learn
that  these  two  apostles  were  supposed  to  be  the  inventors  of
the  process.^*  Almost  the  same  formula  has  been  utilized  for
the  Bible  and  Key,^'  where,  indeed,  the  saints'  names  seem
more  appropriate  than  in  coscinomancy.

Elizabethan  (and  later)  examples  of  Sieve  and  Shears  are
common  enough.  One  of  them  is  rather  diverting.  In  1 573  it
was  testified  that  Thomas  Somer,  a  shoemaker  of  Morpeth,
who  had  lost  his  shirt,  was  told  by  John  Bell  "  that  yf  he  wold
geve  him  6  names  of  everye  syd  of  his  neighbours,  and  geve


200


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


him  4  d.  that  he  wold  geve  a  wyf  of  Newcastell  that  wold
turne  the  redell,  and  geat  him  the  shirt  within  a  weack;  and
the  sheart  dyd  come  within  3  dayes  after."  An  amusing
scene  in  Barten  Holyday's  comedy  The  Marriage  of  the  Seven
Arts  brought  the  sieve-and-shears  oracle  into  play  coram
populo.  Geometres  is  in  love  with  the  fair  maid  Astronomia
and  consults  Magus  to  learn  who  shall  win  her.  Magus  pro-
poses to  work  by  coscinomancy.  The  implements  are  brought
in,  and  the  spell  is  reeled  off:  Dies  mies,  leschet^  be7je  doefet,
Dowina,  Enitemaus.  "Who  shall  have  Astronomia?  Shall
Poeta?"  The  sieve  remains  quiet.  " Shall  Logicus? "  No  mo-
tion. "Shall  Geographus?"  The  sieve  barely  stirs.  "Shall
Geometres?"  The  sieve  turns  round! "'Tis  to  be  feared,"
writes  Cotton  Mather,  "The  Children  of  New-England
have  Secretly  done  many  things  that  have  been  pleasing  to
the  Devil.  They  say,  That  in  some  Towns,  it  ha's  been  an
usual  Thing  for  People  to  Cure  Hurts  with  Spells,  or  to  use
Detestable  Conjurations,  with  Sieves,  &  Keyes,  and  Pease,
and  Nails,  and  Horse-Shooes,  and  I  know  not  what  other  Im-
plements, to  Learn  the  Things,  for  which  they  have  a  For-
bidden, and  an  Impious  Curiositie.  'T  is  in  the  Devils  Name,
that  such  Things  are  done."  And  again,  "There  is  the  Witch-
craft of  them,  that  with  a  Sieve  or  a  Key,  will  go  to  discover
how  their  lost  Goods  are  disposed  of,"  and  "It  is  likewise  a
sort  of  Sorcery,  for  persons  to  let  their  Bibles  fall  open,  on
purpose  to  determine  what  the  State  of  their  Souls  is,  from
the  first  word  they  light  upon."  Divination  of  the  sieve-
and-shears  variety  or  analogous  thereto  is  in  use  in  India,  in
Africa,  among  the  Melanesians,  among  the  Malays,  and  else-
where.'-^  Some  form  of  coscinomancy  was  practised  by  the
ancients.

Spells  and  rites  to  "bind"  thieves  so  that  they  cannot  stir
or  make  off  with  their  plunder  are  a  recognized  specialty  of
both  savage  and  civilized  witchcraft.  An  Elizabethan  charm,
for  example,  cramps  the  guilty  man  and  dims  his  eyes  for
the  time  being. The  unlearned  might  well  be  pardoned  for
confusing  miracle  with  magic  when  the  relics  of  holy  men  had
the  same  effect  as  sorcery.  Gregory  the  Great  tells  of  a
thief  who  stole  a  wether  from  a  monastery  garden,  but  when
he  was  escaping,  as  he  passed  the  grave  of  a  pious  monk,  he


CHAP,  xi]  MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES  201

found  himself  rooted  to  the  'spot  and  unable  to  throw  down
his  prize,  for  he  could  not  unclasp  the  hand  that  held  it.^'^  In
like  manner  a  passer-by  who  tried  to  steal  a  staff  which  a  wor-
shipper in  St.  Cuthbert's  church  at  Durham  had  left  stuck  in
the  ground  outside,  found  that  his  hand  adhered  to  the  staff
and  that  the  staff  was  too  firmly  planted  to  be  removed.
Very  similar  was  the  experience  of  a  burglar  who  attempted
to  carry  off  an  ivory  coffer  from  the  same  church. A  rascal
who  was  rifling  the  purse  of  a  pious  man  at  his  prayers  by  St.
Ecgwin's  bier  could  not  withdraw  his  hand.'^  One  of  the
miracles  of  St.  Germanus  was  so  to  confuse  a  thief  that  he
wandered  round  and  round  (as  if  pixey-led)  and  was  unable
to  make  off  with  his  booty.''  Giraldus  Cambrensis  knew  of  a
young  man  who,  when  about  to  enter  St.  Mary's  church,  dis-
covered that  he  could  not  pass  the  portal,  though  the  doors
were  open;  he  confessed  theft,  and  the  inhibition  ceased.""
Another  of  Gerald's  examples  tells  of  a  boy  who  tried  to  rob  a
pigeon's  nest  in  Llanfaes  church:  his  hand  stuck  to  the  stone
on  which  the  nest  was  built,  and  the  marks  are  still  visible."^
In  a  diverting  but  indecorous  English  fabliau  of  the  fif-
teenth century,  the  parson,  who  is  an  injured  husband's
brother,  works  an  "experiment"  —  that  is,  a  trick  of  magic
—  with  a  basin,  so  that  it  sticks  to  a  priest's  hands:  he
thought  it  was  "sum  wychecrafte"  —  as  indeed  it  was.  And
the  wife's  hands  stick  there  too,  and  so  do  the  servant-maid's
and  the  clerk's,  and  the  carter's  shovel  sticks  to  the  maid.
Thus  the  priest's  intrigue  is  revealed  and  he  has  to  pay  a
hundred  pounds  before  the  parson  "charms  the  basin"
loose. The  same  anecdote  occurs  as  a  marchen^"^  Danish
folk-lore  is  rich  in  anecdotes  of  this  nature:  one  of  them  —  an
especial  favorite  —  keeps  the  pilferer  standing  with  a  finger
stuck  fast  in  the  tap  of  an  ale-cask. Sigrun's  nightmare
curse  in  the  Elder  Edda  takes  us  out  of  ecclesiastical  sur-
roundings: "Let  the  ship  not  stir  on  which  thou  sailest,
though  a  fair  wind  rise  astern!  Let  the  horse  not  run  on
which  thou  ridest,  though  thou  hast  need  to  escape  thy  foes!
Let  not  that  sword  cut  that  thou  dost  wield,  unless  it  sing
round  thine  own  head!"  A  magic  chair  which  holds  fast
whoever  sits  in  it,  as  in  Milton's  Comus,  occurs  in  Greek
mythology  and  is  common  enough  in  Celtic  and  Germanic


ion         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


saga."^  Witches  now-a-days  are  just  as  skilful  as  of  old
in  bespelling  men  or  horses  so  that  they  cannot  stir/"'  and
popular  tales  the  world  over  testify  to  the  universality  of  what
we  may  call  paralyzing  or  adhesive  magic.""  But  a  witch's
charm  may  loose  as  well  as  bind.  So  in  Bede's  famous  legend
of  Imma  and  Tunna.  Imma,  a  captive  taken  after  a  battle,  is
bound;  but  as  soon  as  he  is  left  alone,  his  bonds  are  loosed.
The  reason  is  that  his  brother,  finding  a  body  that  he  thought
was  Imma's,  has  had  it  honorably  buried  and  has  taken  care
that  many  masses  should  be  sung  for  the  salvation  of  his  soul.
The  earl  who  holds  Imma  prisoner,  thinks  he  must  have
charms  or  amulets  about  him,  "such  as  are  said  to  loosen
bonds."  i5ilfric,  who  repeats  the  story,  makes  the  earl  ask
Imma  if  he  broke  his  bonds  by  magic  or  by  means  of  runes.
Robert  of  Brunne,  who  also  repeats  it,  makes  him  ask  if  he  is
skilled  in  sorcery:

Sum  wycchecrafte  about  thou  doust  bere
That  thy  bondes  mow  the  nat  dere  [harm].

There  is  a  similar  tale  in  the  Dialogues  of  Gregory  the
Great.'"

The  most  amazing  of  all  spells  for  the  recovery  of  stolen
goods  comes  from  France  in  1323.  The  abbot  of  the  Cis-
tercian monastery  at  Cercanceau  (Seine-et-Marne)  had  lost
much  treasure.  He  consulted  a  sorcerer  {sortilegus),  who  en-
gaged that  by  his  arts  it  should  be  restored  and  the  names  of
the  robbers  and  their  fautors  should  be  disclosed.  The  wizard
buried  a  black  cat  in  a  chest  with  food  for  three  days  at  a
crossroads,  with  an  arrangement  of  hollow  reeds  to  give  the
creature  air.  The  food  was  bread  soaked  in  chrism,  holy  oil,
and  holy  water.  After  three  days  the  cat  was  to  be  skinned
and  its  skin  was  to  be  cut  into  strips  to  form  a  magic  circle.
Then  the  magician,  entering  the  circle,  was  to  call  up  the
demon  Berith,"^  who  would  give  the  information  desired.
However,  some  shepherds  happened  to  come  along.  Their
dogs  scratched  frantically  at  the  place  where  the  cat  was
buried,  and  the  shepherds  heard  the  animal  mewing  under-
ground. Horror-stricken,  they  carried  information  to  the  local
judge,  who  dug  up  the  box  and  saw  that  sorcery  had  been  at
work,  though  he  had  no  notion  who  was  guilty  or  what  was


CHAP,  xi]  MIRRORS  AND  THIEVES  203

the  intent.  The  carpenter  who  had  made  the  chest  told  the
name  of  his  customer,  and  so  the  truth  came  out.  The  sor-
cerer (Jean  de  Persant)  and  his  helper  (Johannes  Praepositi)
were  arrested,  and  the  helper  made  a  full  confession  and  died
in  prison.  The  abbot  was  condemned  to  life  imprisonment,
and  so  were  an  apostate  Cistercian  and  several  regular  can-
ons who  were  implicated.  The  master  wizard  was  burned.


CHAPTER  XII

TREASURE  TROVE

THE  discovery  of  Octavian's  treasures  was  registered
by  William  of  Malmesbury  in  the  twelfth  century,  and
the  tale  gained  currency  through  repetition  by  later  chroni-
clers/ Every  prehistoric  barrow  or  ancient  camp  —  British,
Roman,  or  aboriginal  —  was  and  is  a  strong  temptation.
"There  is  apon  the  tope  of  one  of  Mendipe  Hills,"  wrote
Leland  in  his  Itinerary  (ca.  1535-1543),  "a  place  encampyd
caulyd  Dolbyn,  famous  to  the  people,  thus  saynge:

If  Dolbyri  dyggyd  ware,

Of  golde  shuld  be  the  share."

This  is  Dolebury  Camp  in  Somerset.^  In  the  same  county
lies  Ruborough  Camp,  known  locally  as  the  Money  Field,
where,  beneath  the  surface,  is  an  iron  castle  full  of  gold  and
silver,  guarded  by  gnomes  and  spirits  and  containing  more
treasure  than  the  palaces  of  all  the  kings  in  the  world.  Once
a  digger  got  so  far  as  to  strike  the  door  with  his  spade;  but
horrible  groans  and  shrieks  burst  forth,  and  he  narrowly
escaped  being  carried  off  by  the  demons.  So  ran  the  tradi-
tion in  the  last  century.^

Hill-digging  had  its  peculiar  perils.  There  was  always  a
fair  chance  that  some  devil  might  be  on  hand  where  money
was  stored,  for  "Radix  malorum  est  cupiditas."  Thus  when
Edward  the  Confessor  visited  the  royal  treasury,  his  right-
eous eyes  discerned  a  fiend  that  was  sitting  on  the  chest;
and  in  the  thirteenth  century  a  famous  Kentish  divine  told
of  a  miserly  peasant  who  was  horrified  to  see  a  devil,  in  the
shape  of  a  gigantic  toad,  squatting  upon  the  hoard  that  he
had  so  painfully  accumulated. ^  In  the  reign  of  William  the
Conqueror  a  demon  clothed  with  the  body  of  the  dead  Gog-
magog  still  guarded  a  vast  hoard  that  the  giant  had  deposited
in  a  specially  constructed  vault  at  the  town  of  Chastiel  Bran;
and  the  town  was  in  ruins,  for  the  goblin  had  prevented  its
rebuilding.''  In  1344  a  Saracen  physician  applied  to  the  Earl


CHAP,  xii]  TREASURE  TROVE  205

of  Warenne  for  leave  to  capture  a  serpent  in  his  Welsh  do-
main at  a  place  called  Brunfeld.  Having  snared  the  monster
per  incantationem,  the  doctor  declared  that  there  was  a  cavern
near  by,  in  which  it  had  lived,  containing  a  great  treasure;
and  this  proved  to  be  the  fact.'^  Here  we  have,  to  all  intents
and  purposes,  the  hoard-guarding  dragon  of  Beowulf  and
Saxo  Grammaticus  and  many  a  local  legend.^  The  connec-
tion of  demons  with  treasure  trove  is  illustrated  by  certain
forms  of  blessing  in  the  Durham  Ritual  and  elsewhere,  to  be
pronounced  over  vessels  found  "in  ancient  places"  and  pre-
sumably used  by  pagans  in  days  of  yore.  One  such  formula
calls  for  the  "departure  of  the  Enemy  of  mankind"  and
prays  that  the  cups  and  jars  may  be  "free  from  all  phan-
tasmic  assault."  '

Spells  and  incantations,"  then,  are  needful  in  the  quest  for
buried  riches.  Indeed,  they  are  doubly  necessary:  first,  to
call  up  a  spirit  who  shall  disclose  the  right  spot;  and  second,
to  control  the  demon  who  keeps  the  hoard.  Such  a  demon  re-
places the  ancient  dragon,  but  he  gets  much  of  his  credibility
also  from  the  gnomes  and  dwarfs  of  Germanic  myth  —
"swart  fairies  of  the  mine,"  whose  lineal  descendants,  unaf-
fected by  science  or  theology,  are  the  "knockers"  and  their
fellows,  who  are  still  heard  (if  seldom  seen)  by  miners  and
often  warn  them  of  danger.  These  elementals,  as  we  may  call
them,  were  a  subject  of  reasonable  curiosity  to  Robert  Boyle
in  the  first  half  of  the  eighteenth  century;  he  wished  to  ascer-
tain "whether  the  diggers  do  ever  really  meet  with  any  sub-
terraneous demons;  and,  if  they  do,  in  what  shape  and  man-
ner they  appear;  what  they  portend,  and  what  they  do."  "

The  Witchcraft  Statute  of  Henry  VIII  (1542)  recites  in  the
preamble  that  divers  and  sundry  persons  have  devised  and
practised  invocations  and  conjurations  to  "get  Knowlege  for
their  own  lucre  in  what  place  treasure  of  golde  and  Silver
shulde  or  mought  be  founde  and  had  in  the  earthe  or  other
secrete  places"  and,  apparently  in  the  course  of  these  quests,"
"have  dygged  up  and  pulled  downe  an  infinite  nombre  of
Crosses  within  this  Realme,"  and  declares  that  such  invoca-
tions and  conjurations,  as  well  as  the  removal  of  any  cross,
shall  henceforth  be  punishable  as  felony. The  statute  was
repealed  in  1547;  but  the  penalty  for  invocation  and  conjura-


206         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


tion  was  revived,  though  with  no  mention  of  crosses,  by  the
Elizabethan  law  of  1563.'''

Crystallomancy  was  more  or  less  the  regular  procedure  in
searching  for  treasure.  Thus,  also  in  1465,  according  to  the
finding  of  a  jury  impanelled  by  the  king's  escheator  for  Nor-
folk, John  Cans  and  Robert  Hikkes  called  up  a  spirit  of  the
air  {spiritum  aerialem)  at  Bunwell,  and  promised  to  sacrifice
to  him  "  the  body  of  a  Christian  man"  if  he  would  disclose  the
whereabouts  of  a  hoard.  Then  the  spirit  "by  the  help  of  a
certain  crystal"  showed  them  a  "vast  treasure"  buried  in
Nonmete  Hill.  They  dug  up  more  than  a  hundred  shillings,
which  they  appropriated  without  regard  to  the  royal  rights  in
treasure  trove.  The  demon  was  certainly  justified  in  expect-
ing a  human  sacrifice,  which  would,  indeed,  have  been  quite
according  to  rule:  in  1841  some  Italian  treasure-seekers
actually  murdered  a  boy  for  this  purpose,'^^  and  similar  crimes
are  recorded  in  Serbia  in  1892  and  in  Russia  in  But  it

'is  exhilarating  to  read  how  Cans  and  Hikkes  jockeyed  the
fiend:  they  baptized  a  cock,  gave  it  a  Christian  name,  and
sacrificed  it  as  a  burnt  offering. Incidentally  we  may  recall
that  in  1595  Judith  Phillips  was  in  trouble  for  cozening  a
widow  in  a  search  for  money  supposed  to  be  concealed  in  a
house:  "She  told  the  widow  she  must  have  a  turkey  and  a
capon  to  give  to  the  queen  of  the  fairi,  which  the  widow  pro-
vided." Those  cunning  rascals.  Cans  and  Hikkes,  were  well
instructed  in  folk-lore,  for,  in  contriving  to  outwit  the  fiend,
they  followed  a  long  and  merry  line  of  precedents  that  has
continued  in  tradition,  if  not  in  practice,  to  the  present  day.
The  devil  builds  a  bridge  on  condition  that  he  is  to  have  the
first  creature  that  crosses:  he  expects  to  make  his  prey  of  a
human  being,  but  a  dog  is  driven  over  first."'  The  Devil's
Barn  was  built  by  a  fiend  who  was  scared  away,  before  he
could  claim  his  fee,  by  the  trick  of  making  a  cock  crow  when
the  work  was  not  quite  finished.^"  Still  celebrated  in  New
Hampshire  is  the  exploit  of  General  Jonathan  Moulton  of
Hampton,  who  sold  himself  to  Satan  for  a  bootfull  of  gold.
Satan  poured  the  coins  down  the  chimney;  but  the  general
had  cut  off  the  sole  of  the  boot,  and  the  fiend  gave  up  in  de-
spair, leaving  his  expected  victim  safe  and  very  rich.^'  Such
stories  conform  to  well-known  types."


CHAP.  XIl]


TREASURE  TROVE


207


In  I466  Robert  Barker  of  Babraham  was  brought  before  his
Bishop  in  the  Lady  Chapel  at  Ely.  There  had  been  found  in
his  possession  a  portentous  quantity  of  apparatus  —  "a  book,
and  a  roll  of  black  art  containing  characters,  circles,  exor-
cisms and  conjurations;  a  hexagonal  sheet  with  strange
figures;  six  metal  plates  with  divers  characters  engraved;  a
chart  with  hexagonal  and  pentagonal  figures  and  characters,
and  a  gilded  wand."  Barker  alleged  that  one  John  Hope
"had  promised  him  wealth  if  he  would  give  him  two  pounds
six  shillings  and  eightpence  for  the  books  and  instruments,
and  said  he  had  great  hopes  of  certain  spirits  appearing  to
him,  who  would  answer  his  questions,  direct  him  to  gold  and
silver  in  abundance,  and  impart  to  him  all  secrets.  To  this
end  he  found  a  secret  place  in  a  close  next  William  Clerk's
house  at  Saffron  Walden.  As  these  things  seemed  to  savour
of  idolatry  and  heresy,  the  Bishop  commanded  Robert  Bar-
ker to  abjure  them,  and  enjoined  as  a  public  penance  that
Robert  should,  on  the  next  two  Sundays,  walk  round  the  mar-
ket places  of  Ely  and  Cambridge,  with  bare  feet  and  un-
covered head,  carrying  the  said  plates  and  charts  round  his
neck,  the  wand  in  his  right  hand  and  the  books  in  his  left
hand.  Afterwards  all  the  books  and  instruments  were  to  be
burned  in  Cambridge  Market  Place.  By  way  of  private
penance  the  Bishop  ordered  that  Robert  should  fast  on  bread
and  water  the  whole  of  every  Friday  for  a  year,  and  say  the
seven  penitential  Psalms,  with  the  Litany,  every  Sunday
throughout  the  year."

In  1 5 10  there  lived  at  Knaresborough  an  ex-schoolmaster
named  John  Steward,  who  practised  conjuring  and  was  fre-
quently consulted  in  cases  of  theft.  Two  clerics,  Richard
Greenwood  (parson  of  Bingley)  and  John  Wilkinson  (canon
of  Drax)  suggested  that  he  should  join  them  in  a  treasure-
hunt  at  Mixindale  Head  (near  Halifax),  where  (according  to
local  tradition)  a  certain  Leventhorp,  then  dead,  had  once
upon  a  time  uncovered  "  the  foote  of  the  kist  [chest]  "  and  had
seen  the  devil  sitting  on  it.  Leventhorp  had  tried  to  remove
the  chest  with  a  sword,  but  the  fiend  "  nypped  it  a  soundre  in
the  myddist,  as  it  had  been  a  rish  [a  bulrush]."  Steward
agreed  to  help,  and  soon  after  mentioned  the  plan  to  one  of
his  customers,  a  priest  named  James  Richardson,  who  was


2o8


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


consulting  him  professionally,  on  behalf  of  Thomas  Jameson,
as  to  what  had  become  of  some  portable  property  and  (coin-
cidently)  of  a  runaway  servant.  Thus  Jameson,  a  leading
citizen  of  Halifax  and  formerly  Lord  Mayor,  became  likewise
interested  in  the  project.  Canon  Wilkinson  had  been  a  scryer
or  crystal-gazer  in  his  youth  and  possessed  a  book  of  magic
(sent  to  him,  he  said,  by  Steward),  which  he  gave  or  lent  to
Richardson.  Following  its  rules,  Richardson  prepared  a
leaden  tablet  and  inscribed  upon  it  the  image  of  a  certain
demon,  Oberion,  and  the  names  of  four  others,  "whereof
Storax  was  one."  The  adventurers  —  Steward,  Greenwood,
Wilkinson,  Richardson,  and  Jameson  —  agreed  to  meet  at
Mixindale  by  night  on  the  twenty-eighth  of  January.  Three
circles  of  virgin  parchment,  each  thirty  feet  in  circumference,
had  been  made  ready  in  order  to  protect  the  operators  from
the  fiends.  The  final  invocation  on  the  spot  was  to  be  ut-
tered by  Canon  Wilkinson,  who  hoped  to  raise  the  spirit
Belphares.  Unfortunately  a  dense  fog  came  up,  the  adven-
turers lost  their  way,  and  the  whole  scheme  came  to  nothing.
However,  their  proceedings  had  made  so  much  talk  in  the
neighborhood  that  Richardson  was  arrested  as  a  person
"  publicly  defamed  of  heresy  or  sorcery."  He  was  turned  over
to  the  archiepiscopal  court  of  York  and  prosecuted  by  the
Vicar  General.  All  the  persons  implicated  took  care  to  deny
the  actual  raising  of  any  devils,  but  enough  was  proved  or
confessed  to  justify  the  imposition  of  a  very  elaborate  pen-
ance. As  for  Steward,  the  professional,  he  cheerfully  con-
fessed himself  a  trickster.  When  people  applied  to  him  for
information  —  he  averred  —  his  custom  was  to  show  them  a
book  of  astrology  and  make  believe  that  he  was  a  cunning
man,  though  in  fact  "he  coude  no  thing  do,  but  some  tyme  it
hapened  as  he  said,  and  that  was  as  the  blynde  man  cast  his
staff."  Significant  as  to  the  regular  ceremonies  is  his  denial
that  he  ever  baptized  a  cock  or  a  cat  or  any  animal,  or  ever
offered  sacrifice  to  devils.  Significant,  too,  is  the  prevalent
rumor  that  explained  the  foul  weather  at  about  this  time
as  due  to  the  conjurations  of  Parson  Greenwood  and  the
Canon. Finally  we  must  not  fail  to  note  that  Steward  was
reputed  to  have  three  familiar  spirits  in  the  shape  of  humble-
bees  and  to  feed  them  with  his  blood.  This  brings  him  into


CHAP,  xii]  TREASURE  TROVE  IOC)

intimate  contact  with  the  witch-creed  of  the  Elizabethan

age/5

In  1 521  the  Mayor  and  Aldermen  of  Norwich  investigated
the  doings  of  William  Smith,  who,  with  his  two  associates
—  picturesquely  styled  Amylyon  and  Judy  —  had  extorted
money  from  several  persons  for  hill-digging  alleged  to  be  in
violation  of  exclusive  rights  for  Norfolk  and  Suffolk  granted
by  Henry  VIII  to  Lord  Corson  or  Curson  in  that  year.  They
had  also  seized  two  or  more  crystal  stones  and  some  books.
The  testimony  brought  out  a  number  of  interesting  facts.
George  Dowsing,  a  schoolmaster,  had  "  reised  a  spirett  or  ij  in
a  glass  "  or  stone  while  a  priest  "  held  the  glasse  in  his  hande."
On  that  occasion,  however,  another  priest  "began  and  reised
a  spiret  first."  Amylyon  was  present  at  the  ceremony:  "He
saieth  that  George  Dowsing  dede  areyse  in  a  glasse  a  litill
thing  of  the  length  of  an  ynche  or  ther  about,  but  whether  it
was  a  spiret  or  a  shadowe  he  can  not  tell,  but  the  seid  George
said  it  was  a  spirett."

In  the  hill-digging  case  which  came  before  the  Bishop  of
Lincoln  in  i  527,  conjuration  is  barely  hinted  at,  but  spells  are
as  obvious  to  one  who  knows  the  business  as  they  were  to
the  sixteenth-century  judge.  John  Curson  of  Kettering  had
learned  that  there  was  three  thousand  pounds  (sterling,  I
suppose)  of  gold  and  silver  buried  in  a  bank  beside  the  cross
"nygh  hand  to  Kettering"  in  two  pots.  This  knowledge  had
cost  him  twenty  nobles:  he  "  dyd  speke  with  a  lerned  man  for
the  knawledge  of  the  trueth,"  but  "  the  said  John  Curson  did
not  name  with  what  clarke  he  had  ben  withall."  The  de-
ponent as  to  the  facts,  John  Trawlove  of  Humberstone  (a  vil-
lage near  Leicester),  swore  that  he  himself  "  neuer  dyd  coun-
sell  with  bern  man  to  knaw  of  enny  mony  ther,  nor  in  non
other  place,"  and  that  "he  neuer  dyd  shoe  to  Cursont  hat  he
wold  goo  to  enny  cunyng  man  for  that  matter,  but  Curson
shoed  hym  that  he  hadd  been  at  a  Cunnyng  man  for  that
matter,  and  that  it  had  cost  him  xx"  nobles."  Curson's  story
included  some  picturesque  details.  He  had  attempted  to  dig
before,  but  had  been  frightened  away  by  a  "lumbring  within
the  ground,"'  and  he  said  "that  a  man  sprite  and  a  woman
sprite  dyd  kepe  the  said  ij  pottes."  William  Godely,  who
took  part  with  Trawlove  in  the  enterprise,  protested  "  that  he


2IO         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

was  neuer  dygging  of  cross,  nor  off  counsaill  of  diggyng  for
noo  money  but  onely  this  oon  tyme."

Between  1527  and  1530  occurred  the  treasure-hunting
efforts  of  William  Stapleton,  a  secular  priest  who  had  once
been  a  Benedictine  monk  but  had  found  the  discipline  too
rigorous.  They  involve  magic  books,  a  ring,  a  plate,  a  circle,
a  sword,  a  "shower"  or  crystallomancer  with  his  boy  scryer,
and  demons  named  Oberion,  Inchubus,  and  Andrew  Mal-
chus.  He  searched  or  planned  to  search  in  at  least  five  or  six
different  spots,  but  every  attempt  was  a  fiasco.    On  one
occasion  he  was  ordered  off  by  the  owner  of  the  land;  on
another,  the  spirit  of  the  treasure  failed  to  appear,  probably
(he  thinks)  because  "there  was  none  there."    Lord  Leonard
tested  Stapleton's  powers  by  having  a  servant  bury  some
money  in  the  garden:  "  I  shewed  [i.  e.  used  the  show-stone  or
crystal]  for  the  same,  and  one  Jackson  scryed  unto  me;  but
we  could  not  accomplish  our  pvirpose."  These  details  come
from  Stapleton's  own  narrative  in  a  letter  to  Wolsey.^*  He
admits  using  the  crystal  "for  things  stolen,"  and  spins  a
queer  yarn  about  the  Duke  of  Norfolk,  who,  it  seems,  was
sorely  troubled  by  a  demon  sent  by  Wolsey.  Stapleton,  being
urged  to  rid  him  of  this  infliction,  pretended  that  he  had
moulded  a  waxen  image  in  the  duke's  likeness  and  had  sancti-
fied it:  this  was  mere  fraud,  however,  "  to  have  promotion  and
favour  of  the  said  duke."  ^'  When  Stapleton  wrote,  he  had
been  deprived  of  his  magic  book  and  all  his  instruments.  The
book  had  been  seized  by  the  Duke  of  Norfolk  and  the  instru-
ments were  in  the  hands  of  Sir  Thomas  More.  Stapleton's
demon  Andrew  Malchus  tempts  one  to  linguistic  conjecture.
Malchus,  to  be  sure,  is  an  old  acquaintance,  being  the  High
Priest's  servant  whose  ear  was  cut  off"  by  St.  Peter  (John,
xviii,  10);  but  I  suspect  that  either  Stapleton  or  the  reporter,
yielding  to  the  spell  of  Volksetymologie,  transmogrified  into
Andrew  Malchus  the  name  of  Adram(m)elech,  one  of  the
gods  to  whom  the  Sepharvites  "burnt  their  children  in  fire"
(2  Kings,  xvii,  31).^"    The  devil  that  tormented  Molly  and
Dobby  Giles  at  Bristol  in  1762,  and  played  poltergeist  tricks
in  the  house,  was  said  by  a  cunning  woman  who  was  con-
sulted to  be  Malchi,  "  the  chief  of  the  familiar  spirits."  In-
deed, the  spirit  answered  to  that  name,  for  a  reverend  gentle-


CHAP.  XIl]


TREASURE  TROVE


211


man,  among  many  other  questions  in  Greek  and  Latin,  asked
the  imp  "if  it  would  answer  to  its  true  name,  if  he  named  it?
it  scratched  it  would.  He  then  said.  Si  nomen  tuum  Malchi
est,  ter  scalpe?  which  it  did."

Sir  William  Neville's  Oxford  consultant,  the  sorcerer  Rich-
ard Jones,  confessed  in  1532  that  "foolish  fellows  in  the  coun-
try" had  often  applied  to  him  for  assistance  in  their  search
for  treasure.^''  In  1538  a  London  scrivener  named  Pole  was
reported  to  profess  skill  in  "getting  money  hidden  under
ground."  He  and  another  Londoner  had  planned  to  visit
Yarmouth  on  such  a  quest.  Pole  had  friends  in  the  country
who  possessed  "books  enough  for  all  purposes."  ^'^

The  most  farcical  of  all  treasure-seekers  was  William
Wycherley,  of  St.  Sepulchre's  parish,  tailor  and  professional
sorcerer,  examined  at  some  length  by  Sir  Thomas  Smith  in
1549.  His  main  activity  was  in  the  detection  of  thieves  and
the  recovery  of  stolen  property  by  the  time-honored  oracle  of
the  Sieve  and  Shears,  for  some  ten  years  he  had  also  ap-
plied the  crystal  to  this  purpose,  invocating  "  the  spirit  called
Scariot."  To  the  crystal  he  had  also  resorted  in  his  quests  for
treasure,  but  always  in  vain.  About  1539,  with  four  com-
panions, he  had  used  the  Circulus  Salamonis  to  call  up  Baro,
"whom  he  taketh  [to  be]  an  orientalle  or  septentrionalle
spirit."  One  of  the  four  was  a  "scryer  of  the  cristalle  stone."
They  had  sword,  ring,  and  holy  water.  "A  terrible  wynde  and
tempest"  arose,  but  no  spirit  appeared.  On  another  occa-
sion Wycherley  used  an  unconsecrated  sword  in  his  treasure-
digging  sorcery,  but  was  scared  away  by  a  black  apparition
which  turned  out  to  be  a  blind  horse.  He  had  also  supplied
certain  persons  with  a  sword,  or  sceptre,  and  a  ring  for  a
similar  attempt.  About  nine  years  before,  he  had  practised
conjurations  in  a  great  circle  with  sword  and  ring,  in  the  pres-
ence of  a  priest,  apparently  for  buried  treasure:  his  intention
was  to  raise  a  spirit  called  Ambrose  Waterduck  ("Water-
duke"),  but  the  spirit  did  not  come  when  he  did  call  for  him.
The  comical  Wycherley  appends  to  his  personal  confession  a
list  of  about  a  dozen  conjurers,  clerics  and  laymen,  and  winds
up  as  follows:  "This  deponent  saith  that  there  be  within
England  above  v  hundred  conjurers  as  he  thinketh,  but  he
knoweth  not  their  names;  and  specially  in  Norfolk,  Hartford-


212         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


shire,  and  Wourcestershire  and  Gloucestershire  a  great  nom-
ber."  We  may  take  it  for  granted  that  Sir  Thomas  Smith,
however  devoutly  he  believed  in  magic,  had  sufficient  sense  of
humor  to  appraise  the  revelations  of  the  half-witted  South-
wark  tailor  at  their  true  value.  By  his  own  admission
Wycherley  was  guilty  of  an  offence  that  was  punishable  by
death  under  the  Statute  of  1542  —  conjuration  and  invoca-
tion of  evil  spirits;  for  Scariot,  at  least,  must  fall  within  that
category,  whatever  the  status  of  Ambrose  Waterduck!  Yet
all  we  know  of  his  fate  is  a  brief  entry  in  the  Grey  Friars
Chronicle  under  date  of  September  29,  1 549.  On  that  day  the
sermon  usually  delivered  at  Paul's  Cross  was  preached  in  the
Shrouds  (the  Chapel  of  St.  Faith  in  the  cathedral)  because  of
the  bad  weather;  and  in  front  of  the  preacher  stood  "one  that
dwellyd  in  Charterus  lane,"  with  a  paper  on  his  breast  de-
scribing him  as  a  conjurer.'''  This  must  have  been  Wycherley.
Let  us  hope  that  he  died  in  his  bed.

Satan  is  the  father  of  lies.  He  assured  Ann  Darker  that
she  should  find  money  hidden  "in  the  hall  garden,  but  she
found  none."  Katherine  Jooly  was  told  by  her  imp  Jackly
that  "there  was  a  bushell  of  rusty  mony  in  Sir  Robert
Brooks  closet  and  he  wold  fetch  her  some,"  but  he  disap-
pointed her.  The  fiend,  in  the  shape  of  a  black  boy,  met
Elizabeth  Southerne  by  a  whitethorn  and  there  he  promised
her  two  and  sixpence.  He  had  it  not  with  him,  he  added  "  but
she  shold  haue  it  at  the  next  time  she  came  that  way,  but
he  fayled  of  his  promise,  he  met  her  indeed  but  complayned
of  the  hardnes  of  the  times."  All  these  instances  of  diabolical
charlatanry  are  from  confessions  made  in  1645,^*

Whoever  is  still  desirous  of  getting  buried  treasure  away
from  the  devils  that  watch  over  it,  may  find  the  process  fully
described  in  Pseudo-Paracelsus.^'  Thus  he  may  avoid  the
contempt  of  Asmodeus,  Prince  of  Demons,  who  once  laughed
to  scorn  an  unsophisticated  wizard  who  was  sitting  upon  the
spot  where  a  king's  hoard  lay  hidden  and  never  suspected
it.''"  But  candor  prompts  me  to  cite  the  comment  of  the
learned  Florentine  jurist  Paolo  Grillando,  who  regards  the
whole  business  as  "one  of  the  fouler  illusions  which  the  devil
works  upon  men,  because,"  he  adds,  "in  truth  I  have  never
read,  seen,  or  heard  that  any  necromancer,  magician,  or  sor-


CHAP,  xn]  TREASURE  TROVE  213

cerer  of  this  kind  ever  found  any  treasures,  or  gold  or  silver;
yet  I  have  seen  a  very  great  number  of  such  searchers  who,
after  many  labors  and  diabolical  rites,  have  at  last  neither
seen  nor  found  anything  except  the  earth."  Besides,  if  one
invokes  angels  or  good  spirits,  there  is  always  the  risk  that
devils  may  appear  instead.''^

If  the  recent  excavators  at  Glastonbury,  —  who  resorted  to
what  is  called  automatic  writing  and  thus  received  (as  they
supposed)  messages  from  long-dead  monks  couched  in  im-
probable Latin  and  impossible  English,"^  —  had  practised
this  art  in  the  fifteenth  century,  their  bishop  would  un-
doubtedly have  put  them  to  their  purgation.


1


CHAPTER  XIII

HAUNTED  HOUSES  AND  HAUNTED  MEN

TO  MOLEST  a  family  by  impish  tricks  (such  as  knocking,
stone-throwing,  rattling  the  doors,  moving  furniture,
tossing  pots  and  pans  about,  twitching  off  the  bedclothes,  and
so  on)  is  a  favorite  pastime  of  goblins,  and,  like  many  other
elfish  businesses,  this  specialty  of  haunting  houses  has  often
been  brought  by  the  folk  under  the  general  head  of  witch-
craft: that  is  to  say,  the  procurer  of  the  turmoil  (whoever  the
immediate  agent)  is  held  to  be  some  witch  or  wizard  who  has
a  grudge  against  the  householder.  Historical  examples  are:
the  disturbances  at  Woodstock  in  1649;^  the  Drummer  of
Tedworth  in  Wiltshire,  who  tormented  the  Mompessons  in
1662  and  1663  and  inspired  Addison's  comedy;^  the  haunting
of  Volentine  Austin's  house  at  the  English  Cambridge  near
the  end  of  the  same  century;^  the  stone-throwing  demon  of
New  Hampshire;''  the  troubles  of  the  Wesley  family  at  Ep-
worth  parsonage  in  1716  and  1717.^  About  1662  there  was  a
poltergeist  at  Brightling  in  Sussex,  and  somehow  the  house
was  burned  down;  a  woman  was  arrested  as  a  witch.^

There  is  an  admirable  instance  of  a  poltergeist  in  the  Annals
of  Fulda,  under  the  year  858,  which  shows  how  persistent  the
type  is.  It  was  near  Bingen  on  the  Rhine.  The  demon  threw
stones,''  beat  against  the  walls  of  houses  as  with  a  hammer,
spoke  and  revealed  thefts,  and  brought  the  whole  community
into  an  uproar.^  Such  fiends  were  active  in  mediaeval  Britain.
Two  or  three  contemporary  instances  are  reported  by  Giral-
dus  Cambrensis.'  From  an  English  manuscript  of  the  four-
teenth century  we  learn  that  mugwort  prevents  elves  and
"evyll  thynges"  from  entering  a  house,  and  so  does  "herbe
Jon."  "  Similar  virtue  was  attributed  to  "rud  molin,  a  plant
that  grows  near  running  water,""  by  the  Anglo-Saxons,  who
lived  in  constant  dread  of  house-haunting  fiends.  Note,  for
instance,  the  Latin  Benediction  of  Milk  and  Honey  in  the


1


CHAP.  XIIl]


HAUNTED  HOUSES  AND  MEN


215


Durham  Ritual,  which  prays  that,  in  the  dwellings  of  the
faithful,  all  demons  may  be  put  to  rout,  and  that  all  impure
and  plague-bringing  spirits,  foes,  and  diseases  may  be  ban-
ished, and  all  vain  terrors  "  whether  of  midday  or  of  the
night.'''  This  might  well  include  Puck,  whose  name,  at  all
events,  was  familiar  in  those  days,'^  though  we  have  no  ac-
count of  his  performances  until  later.  The  German  Bilwiz,  a
domestic  demon,  though  not  avouched  for  England  in  Saxon
times,  is  active  in  several  old  ballads  under  the  alias  of  Billie
Blin  or  Bellie  Blind.'^

We  have  to  do  (really)  with  several  classes  of  imps:  house
cobolds,  stable  goblins,  lutins,  poltergeister,  fairies,  brownies,
dobbies,  hobhursts,  spirits  of  wood  and  field  —  who  are  some-
times helpful,  but  always  capricious  and  of  uncertain  temper,
and  who  shift  or  exchange  functions  in  baffling  fashion.'^
When  a  witch  is  to  blame  for  the  hubbub,  we  have  merely
that  blending  of  fairy-creed  and  witch-creed  that  is  incident
to  the  conversion  of  all  elemental  spirits  into  demons  in  the
Christian  sense:  the  goblins  that  once  acted  independently
have  become  the  witch's  familiars  or  servants.'^  To  be  pixey-
led  is  an  ordinary  experience,  especially  when  one  is  going
home  from  the  tavern; and  in  like  manner  a  witch  may  lead
you  astray  and  keep  you  wandering  about  or  travelling  in  a
circle.^"  You  can  undo  the  spell  by  turning  your  coat  inside
out,  whether  sprites  or  witches  are  to  blame. The  Will-o'-
the-Wisp  is  a  misleading  sprite  of  this  nature;  but  there  are
cases  on  record  in  which  a  sturdy  rustic  has  beaten  Will  with
his  staff"  and  then  has  boasted  that  he  has  "  killed  the  devil."  "
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  show  that  the  Elizabethans  inherited
this  lore  of  house  cobolds  and  poltergeister  and  did  not  im-
port it,  but  a  few  bits  of  testimony  may  be  entertaining.

There  was  a  house  cobold  in  the  time  of  Richard  I  in  the
mansion  of  Sir  Osbern  de  Bradewelle  at  Daghewurthe  in  Suf-
folk. His  name  was  Malekin  and  he  had  the  voice  and  shape
of  a  little  child.  Sometimes  he  spoke  English  in  the  Suffolk
dialect,  but  now  and  then  he  conversed  in  Latin  with  the
chaplain  on  Scriptural  subjects.  He  was  actually  seen  but
once  —  and  that  was  by  a  chambermaid.  He  often  asked  for
food  and  drink.  This  the  family  left  for  him  on  a  chest,  and  it
always  disappeared.^^  Giraldus  Cambrensis  in  the  twelfth


2,l6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


century  knew  of  a  demon  in  the  form  of  a  red-haired  youth
who  served  as  seneschal  in  the  house  of  a  Pembroke  gentle-
man: he  was  the  offspring  of  an  incubus  who  had  beguiled  a
woman  by  assuming  her  husband's  shape. Gerald  appends  a
similar  example  from  Denmark,  where  a  fiend  acted  as  clerk
to  an  archbishop. ^5  Foreign  examples  were  made  familiar  to
Englishmen  by  report.  About  1138  a  black  dwarf  haunted
the  cellar  in  the  Abbey  of  Priim  and  wasted  the  wine.  He  was
sent  to  school,  but  did  not  speak;  neither  would  he  eat  or
drink,  and  it  was  decided  that  he  was  a  devil.  When  stripped
of  his  monastic  attire,  he  vanished  like  smoke. This  goblin
reminds  one  of  the  Continental  Friar  Rush,  whose  diaboli-
cally entertaining  exploits  became  the  subject  of  an  English
chapbook  not  later  than  1569.^^  Captain  Cox  owned  a  copy
in  1575,^^  and  Reginald  Scot,  in  1584,  referred  to  Rush's
printed  "storie,"  styled  him  "Rush  of  England,"  and  com-
pared him  with  the  impish  Hutgin  (Hudgin)  of  Hildesheim,^'
whose  performances  are  assigned  to  the  year  ii^i.^"  Friar
Rush  was  known  to  unlearned  Englishmen  early  enough  to  be
mentioned  by  the  rustic  Hodge  in  Gammer  Gurton's  Needle,
and  that  seems  to  put  his  arrival  back  into  the  pre-Eliza-
bethan  time:

Saw  ye  neuer  Fryer  Rushe
Painted  on  a  cloth,  with  a  side  long  cowes  tayle,
And  crooked  clouen  feete,  and  many  a  hoked  nayle?^'

Another  Continental  spook  that  the  English  knew  about
was  Ginnechochet  or  Guignehochet.  Johannes  de  Garlandia,
alias  John  the  Englishman,  a  rhetorician  of  the  thirteenth
century,  tells  us  that  he  was  an  evil  spirit  in  France  who  took
up  his  abode  in  a  cistern  and  used  to  give  responses  to  passers-
by.  As  a  specimen  of  comic  dialogue,  John  furnishes  a  Con-
versation between  Ginnechochet  and  a  Countryman. Here
might  belong  also  the  enchanted  knight  Chapalu,  who  also
lived  in  a  cistern,^^  were  it  not  that  he  seems  to  be  really  a
demonic  Cat  of  high  mythological  dignity.^''  The  spirit
named  Horton  or  Orthon,  of  whom  Froissart  gives  so  lively  an
account,  was  sent  as  a  poltergeist  in  the  first  instance,  but
proved  a  highly  serviceable  creature  in  the  vipshot:  he  made
himself  visible  in  the  form  of  a  sow.^^  Gaston  Phebus,  Comte
de  Foix,  was  credited  with  a  servitor  of  the  same  type,  who,


CHAP.  XIIl]


HAUNTED  HOUSES  AND  MEN


217


like  Horton,  used  to  bring  news  from  a  distance  with  tele-
graphic speed.

To  disturb  a  night's  rest  by  twitching  off  the  bedclothes  or
throwing  one  out  of  bed  is  a  specialty  of  sportive  demons:  so
we  learn  from  Guilielmus  Alvernus  (Bishop  of  Paris  1228-
1249),  who  treats  authoritatively  of  this  subject  as  of  count-
less others  in  his  De  Universo."  Both  pranks  are  among  those
of  which  Robin  Goodfellow  boasts  in  his  ballad. We  re-
member, by  the  way,  that  the  Emperor  Otho  was  tumbled
out  of  bed  by  the  ghost  of  his  murdered  predecessor  Galba.^'
This  is  what  happened  in  1389  to  Thomas  of  Ely  and  his  son
William  at  the  hands  of  a  spirit.''"  The  Italian  Monaciello,  a
fantastic  little  creature,  plays  the  bedclothes  trick;  so  do
English  fairies  and  Highland  cobolds.'"  Sometimes  a  witch  is
responsible,  as  in  the  case  of  Oliffe  Barthram,  executed  at
Bury  St.  Edmunds  in  I599.''-'  In  Essex  not  very  long  ago  the
bedclothes  were  pulled  off  the  husband  of  a  late-dead  witch,
whether  by  her  damned  ghost  or  by  one  of  her  erstwhile
familiars  does  not  appear."''

Gervase  of  Tilbury  knew  all  about  poltergeister.  They  are
called  folleti,  he  says  (i.  e.  the  French /o/Z^'/j),  they  inhabit
peasants'  cottages,  and,  because  they  are  invisible  (though
sometimes  heard  to  speak),  they  pelt  those  who  enter,  with
sticks  of  wood,  stones,  and  household  utensils.

Saints,  monks,  and  anchorites  have  often  been  distressed
by  tricks  of  the  same  kind  among  other  molestations  from
Satan.''*  For  England  we  may  take  the  experience  of  St.
Godric  of  Finchale,  who  died  in  1170.  He  had  every  reason
to  cast  out  devils,  for  they  tormented  him  assiduously.  One
of  them  played  all  manner  of  pranks  to  disturb  him  at  his
prayers,  and  even  entered  his  oratory,  threw  the  pyx  at  him,
and  drenched  him  with  a  horn  of  wine.'"  One  day  when  he
was  gathering  apples  in  his  orchard,  a  very  tall  man  appeared
and  begged  some.  "No!"  answered  the  justly  suspicious  her-
mit, "unless  you  will  ask  for  them  for  love  of  God  {pro  cari-
tate)."  "I  beg  them  and  ask  them  ^ro  caritate,'  replied  the
stranger;  but  he  spoke  indistinctly,  saying  rather  caritat  than
caritate.  The  holy  man  gave  him  some  apples,  with  the
formula:  "Here,  take  them  ^ro  caritate,  and  return  thanks  to
God."  This  was  too  much  for  the  demon,  who  vanished,  first


!2l8         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


taking  on  his  own  hideous  form.'*^  Of  course  a  devil  once  tried
to  seduce  St.  Godric  by  tempting  him  in  the  form  of  a  fair
lady.""  Now  and  then  a  devil  threw  Godric  out  of  bed,  once
hitting  him  on  the  head  with  a  stool  besides. 5°  When  the
saint  grew  old  and  fell  sick,  the  fiend  redoubled  his  efforts.
He  showed  himself  as  a  bear,  as  an  eagle,  as  a  crow,  or  in  his
own  diabolical  image;  he  bellowed  like  an  ox.  Sometimes  a
multitude  of  demons  crowded  the  cell:  they  were  very  black,
and  short  of  stature  like  the  little  dwarfs  who  are  called
half-foot  men  or  pygmies  {Semipedales  vel  Pigmaei).  They
laughed  at  him,  hissed  at  him,  assailed  him  with  firebrands,
with  hammer,  with  pincers;  they  scattered  dust  upon  him:
but  all  was  of  no  avail. So  real  were  they  in  appearance  that
a  youthful  attendant  attacked  them  with  an  axe,  knowing
no  better. 5^  In  the  same  century  a  troublesome  poltergeist
ceased  his  antics  when  rebuked  by  Bartholomew,  the  holy
man  of  Farne.^-'

Eminent  among  haunting  creatures  is  the  nightmare  witch
or  god  or  demon,  fear  of  whom  is  conterminous  with  the  bad
dreams  of  the  human  race.''''  The  old  Greek  physicians,  as
faithful  disciples  of  Hippocrates,  combated  this  belief  of  the
folk,55  but  in  vain.  So  important  an  element  is  it  in  the  his-
tory of  man's  thought  that  Laistner  has  almost  succeeded  in
using  it  as  a  Key  to  All  the  Mythologies. There  are  plenty
of  charms  and  recipes  against  nightmares  and  nocturnal  gob-
lins among  the  Anglo-Saxon  Leechdoms,  but  some  of  them
designate  the  creature  vaguely  as  a  "walker-by-night"  {niht-
genga).^''  In  two,  however,  we  have  plain  language:  (i)  "If  a
nightmare  (mare)  ride  a  person"  —  and  directions  for  an
amulet  follow;  (2)  certain  little  stones,  found  in  the  bellies
of  young  swallows,  are  good  "for  headache  and  eye-trouble
and  the  assault  of  a  fiend  and  a  night-walker  and  tertian
ague  and  nightmare  .  .  .  and  spells."  ^'^  In  a  third,  an  obscure
spell  "against  a  dwarf,"  we  are  told  that  the  goblin  "came
walking  in,  a  spider-wight,  had  his  halter  in  his  hand,  said
that  thou  wert  his  horse,"  and  "layeth  his  rope  upon  thy
neck"  —  and  then  "  they  began  to  sail  away  from  the  land,"
through  the  air,  we  must  infer,  in  a  wild  witch-ride.^"  Some  of
the  elf-charms  may  also  refer  to  the  nightmare.''^  This,  we
should  remember,  was  a  very  terrible  hag  or  demon  to  our


CHAP,  xiii]  HAUNTED  HOUSES  AND  MEN


219


ancestors.  The  Norse  hero  Vanlandi  was  ridden  to  death  by
"the  mare"  while  his  men  stood  by  and  could  see  nothing,
though  they  did  their  best  to  help  him.*^  The  Anglo-Saxons
sometimes  identified  the  nightmare  with  the  feminine  incu-
bus (the  incuba)  or  with  the  satyr.*'-'  John  the  Carpenter  in
Chaucer's  Miller's  Tale,  after  making  the  sign  of  the  cross
over  Nicholas  to  shield  him  "  from  elves  and  fro  wightes,"  re-
peats the  "night-spell"  on  the  four  corners  of  the  house  and
on  the  threshold:

lesu  Crist  and  Seynt  Benedight
I  Blesse  this  hous  from  every  wikked  wight,

f         ■  For  nightes  verye,  the  white  Pater  Noster!

i  Where  wentestow,  Seynt  Petres  soster? '4

That  demons  or  pixies  or  cobolds  (though  sometimes  ser-
viceable in  stables)  disturb  horses  in  their  stalls,  tire  them  out
by  night-riding,  and  plait  or  tangle  their  manes,  is  a  wide-
spread modern  belief,  and  there  is  abundant  evidence  for
similar  notions  in  mediaeval  and  ancient  times.  Continuous
tradition  is  soundly  demonstrable.^^  Among  the  multitude
of  cantrips  shifted  from  cobolds  to  witches  this  horse-riding,
like  man-riding,  occurs  frequently.^^  i^^lfric  believed  and  re-
peated the  tale  of  a  cow  driven  mad  by  a  devil  that  rode  on
her  back;  and  the  Durham  Ritual  contains  a  curious  spell
in  which  Abraham  is  invoked  to  bless  our  horses,  goats,  and
swine  from  thieves,  and  the  guardian  angel  of  "our  animals"
is  called  upon  to  protect  them  so  that  "  the  devil  shall  not  be
able  to  ride  upon  them."  As  lately  as  1890  some  young
Cornishmen  were  arrested  for  threatening  a  witch  who  made
their  horses  kick  and  jib.'''  Now  and  then  a  witch  transforms
a  man  into  a  horse  by  means  of  a  magic  bridle  or  otherwise,
and  rides  him  by  night.''"  About  1780  a  young  Cape  Cod  man
was  thus  served  by  an  old  woman  whose  doughnuts  he  had
stolen.

For  pre-Elizabethan  England  one  must  not  forget  the  fine
old  epic  charm  preserved  in  King  Lear  (iii,  4) :

St.  Withold  footed  thrice  the  old;

He  met  the  nightmare  and  her  nine-fold;

Bid  her  ahght

And  her  troth  plight,

And  aroint  thee,  witch,  aroint  thee!


220         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Close  to  this  is  the  spell  for  horses  that  have  the  nightmare,
repeated  with  scorn  by  Blundevill  in  1571  as  "  a  fonde  foolishe
charme"  from  "an  olde  Englyshe  wryter": — ^  "Take  a
Flynt  Stone  that  hath  a  hole  of  hys  owne  kynde  [i.  e.  natu-
rally, not  artificially  made],  and  hang  it  over  hym  [the  hag-
ridden horse]  and  wry  te  in  a  bill.  In  nomine  patris,  &c.

Saint  George  our  Ladyes  Knight,

He  walked  day  so  did  he  night,

Untill  he  hir  found,

He  hir  beate  and  he  hir  bounde

Till  truely  hir  trouth  she  him  plyght

That  she  woulde  not  come  within  the  night.

There  as  Saint  George  our  Ladys  Knight,

Named  was  three  tymes.  Saint  George.

And  hang  this  Scripture  ouer  him,  and  let  him  alone."  "  The
same  charm  occurs  in  Scot  and  in  Fletcher's  Monsieur
Thomas,  and  a  variant  is  known  in  Shetland. ''''  The  holed
stone  as  a  stable-charm  was  familiar  to  Scot  in  the  sixteenth
century  and  to  both  Aubrey  and  Sir  Thomas  Browne  in  the
seventeenth,  and  is  still  in  common  use.  It  is  customary,
Aubrey  tells  us,  to  hang  a  holed  flint  "over  horses  that  are
hagge-ridden,"  and  Sir  Thomas  wonders  "what  natural
effects  can  reasonably  be  expected  when,  to  prevent  the
ephialtes  or  nightmare,  we  hang  up  an  hollow  stone  in  our
stables."  The  custom  must  be  somehow  related  to  the  an-
cient and  extensive  practice  of  creeping  through  prehistoric
monuments  like  the  Cornish  Men-an-Tol  or  Crickstone  in
order  to  get  rid  of  some  disease.'^  Herrick's  stable-charm  is
different,  but  was  doubtless  a  sovereign  prophylactic.

Hang  up  hooks  and  sheers  to  scare
Hence  the  hag  that  rides  the  mare
Till  they  be  all  over  wet
With  the  mire  and  the  sweat:
This  observ'd,  the  manes  shall  be
Of  your  horses  all  knot-free.

To  the  nightmare-witch  belongs  the  goblin  that  jumps
upon  your  back  —  the  Aufhock  or  Huckauf,  as  the  Germans
call  him.  He  is  no  stranger  to  modern  Englishmen.  Sussex
tradition  tells  of  a  headless  man  who  leaps  up  behind  you  as
you  ride  by.  The  Yorkshire  dobbies,  sometimes  acting  as  ser-


CHAP,  xiii]  HAUNTED  HOUSES  AND  MEN  221


viceable  house-cobolds,  may  also  play  the  Aufhock's  prank  as
you  pass  a  solitary  spot  where  they  have  their  haunt;  and  the
barghest  sits  on  a  gate  or  a  fence,  all  ready  to  mount  upon
your  shoulder.'^  We  cannot  expect  to  find  much  about  this
grotesque  yet  venerable  figure  in  the  records  of  medieval  his-
torians and  legend-writers,  but  one  precious  example  emerges
from  the  desert  of  silence.  In  the  Life  of  King  Oswin  —  a
work  dating  from  the  first  part  of  the  twelfth  century  —  we
have  an  account  of  Brother  Arkillus,  monk  of  Tynemouth,
still  living  at  the  time.  He  was  tormented  in  his  sleep  by
a  devil  in  the  form  of  a  black  dwarf  {parvulum  simulans
Aethiopem)  who  "clung  heavily  to  his  back."  After  this  in-
fliction had  gone  on  for  a  long  time,  Arkillus  dreamed  one
night  that  he  had  pulled  the  demon  off,  torn  him  in  pieces,
and  hurled  him  into  the  fire.  He  awoke,  sore  damaged  by  the
demonic  attack,  but  rejoicing  in  his  victory."

It  is  a  feature  of  many  witch-trials  that  the  afflicted  persons
see  their  tormentor,  though  she  is  invisible  to  everybody  else,
and  fall  in  convulsions  or  incur  bodily  harm  at  her  hands  in
such  a  vision.^"  If  the  spectre  is  injured,  the  witch  may  suffer
accordingly,^'  just  as  when  she  is  wounded  in  beast-shape.*^
Here  again  we  come  into  contact  with  ancient  doctrines  and
mediaeval  experience  as  well  as  with  the  witch-creed  of  mod-
ern savages.

If  a  sick  man  slept  in  a  temple  of  Asclepias  (^sculapius),
the  god  might  reveal  to  him  in  a  dream  the  means  of  heal-
ing. Sometimes,  indeed,  the  cure  actually  took  place  during
sleep:  Asclepias  appeared  to  the  patient  and  healed  him,  so
that  he  was  well  and  sound  when  he  awoke.  Thus  a  blind
man  dreamt  that  the  god  had  opened  his  eyes;  in  the  morning
he  could  see:  a  man  with  crippled  fingers  dreamt  that  his
hand  was  restored,  and  so  he  found  it  next  morning. ^■^  Similar
miracles  are  related  of  Saints  Cosmas  and  Damian,  Saints
Cyrus  and  John,  and  other  holy  men.*"*  In  Germany  in  944
a  man  whose  hand  had  been  cut  off,  had  it  suddenly  restored
fourteen  years  later  while  he  was  asleep  in  the  night,  "as
those  who  know  him  assert,"  adds  the  chronicler  cautiously.
Csesarius  of  Heisterbach  informs  us  that  once  upon  a  time  the
wounded  leg  of  a  nun  was  anointed  by  the  Blessed  Virgin  in  a
dream,  and  when  the  nun  awoke  it  was  healed.*^  In  Glaston-


222


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


bury  church  a  boy  with  a  horribly  twisted  mouth  dreamt  that
he  was  cured,  and  awoke  cured  in  fact  through  the  merits  of
St.  Peter  and  St.  Indract.*^  Through  the  merits  of  Simon
de  Montfort  a  dropsical  man  was  tapped  {scarificatus)  in  a
dream;  in  the  morning  he  was  well,  for  all  the  corrupt  matter
had  been  drawn  off".^*

Caedmon  and  Coleridge,  as  everybody  knows,  learned  or
composed  poetry  in  dreamland  which  they  remembered  on
awaking.  In  this  regard  the  experiences  of  Hesiod,  of  the
author  of  the  Old  Saxon  Heliand,  and  of  the  Icelander  Hall-
bjorn  at  the  grave-mound  of  Thorleifr  Jarlaskjald  are  often
cited.  Not  so  well-known,  apparently,  is  the  new  anthem
learned  by  St.  Dunstan  in  a  dream,  or  the  good  fortune  of
the  monk  that  Csesarius  tells  of,  who  received  in  a  dream  the
power  of  preaching  extempore  with  such  eloquence  as  to
astound  all  hearers.^'  In  node  consilium!

You  may  suffer  bodily  injury  in  a  dream  as  well  as  get  back
your  health  or  receive  the  gift  of  poesy.  So  in  one  of  the  most
famous  miracles  registered  by  the  Venerable  Bede.  When
Laurentius,  St.  Augustine's  successor  as  Archbishop  of  Can-
terbury, was  about  to  leave  England,  St.  Peter  appeared  to
him  in  a  dream,  rebuked  him  sharply  for  abandoning  his  post,
and  scourged  him  flagellis  artioribus.  Next  morning  Lauren-
tius showed  King  yEodbald  the  welts  and  wounds  left  by  St.
Peter's  whip:  "retecto  vestimento,  quantis  esset  verberibus
laceratus  ostendit."  The  king  was  converted  on  the  spot.'"
A  somewhat  similar  tale  figures  as  one  of  Lucian's  comic  mar-
vels.^' Capgrave  tells  how  Bishop  Grosseteste  appealed  from
the  Pope  to  God;  "and  in  his  deth  he  appered  to  the  Pope,
and  smet  him  on  the  side  with  a  pike  of  his  crosse  staf,  and
said  thus:  'Rise,  wrech,  and  come  to  the  dom.'  This  wordis
herd  the  cubiculeris,  and  the  strok  was  seyn  in  his  side,  for  he
deyed  anon  aftir  that."  Here  belongs,  psychologically,  the
miraculous  manner  in  which  i^iquitius,  in  a  dream,  was  per-
manently relieved  of  his  besetting  temptation,  as  recounted
by  Gregory  the  Great. Such  incidents  occur  also  in  ro-
mances. There  is  a  fine  example  in  the  Prose  Perceval.  One
of  King  Arthur's  squires  dreamed  that  a  man  stabbed  him
with  a  knife:  he  awoke,  and  there  was  the  knife  sticking  in  his
side  up  to  the  haft."*  Close  allied  to  Bede's  legend  is  an  inci-


CHAP,  xni]


HAUNTED  HOUSES  AND  MEN


223


dent  in  the  ancient  heroic  literature  of  Ireland:  Cuchulinn  in
a  dream  is  flogged  by  two  mysterious  women;  when  he  wakes
he  is  so  used  up  that  he  takes  to  his  bed  and  lies  speechless  for
a  whole  year.'^

How  closely  legends  of  this  kind  may  approximate  the
witch-creed  is  admirably  shown  in  the  Monk  Reginald's  Me-
morials of  St.  Cuthbert.  Among  the  saint's  cures  was  that  of
a  man  afflicted  with  a  constant  shaking  of  the  head.  The  pa-
tient recalled  that  once  in  his  sleep  "a  matron  blacker  than
soot"  appeared  and  twisted  his  head  violently,  telling  him
that  he  should  never  be  relieved  of  his  affliction.  On  awaking
he  found  his  head  constantly  moving. ''^  Here  we  have  some-
thing that  might  well  have  passed  for  witchcraft  if  a  village
crone  had  been  under  suspicion.  The  date  of  the  cure  is  1 172.

Such  ideas,  then,  which  are  the  basis  of  spectral  evidence,
were  not  imported  from  Strassburg  or  Zurich  when  the
Marian  exiles  came  back  to  England.  They  were  a  part  of  all
Englishmen's  inheritance  from  the  backward  and  abysm  of
time.  The  sufferer  from  witchcraft  when  the  spectral  hag
buffeted  him,  was  in  the  same  stage  of  belief  that  Mr.
im  Thurn  discovered  among  the  Indians  of  British  Guiana:
"Morning  after  morning,  the  Indians  declared  that  some  ab-
sent man,  whom  they  named,  had  visited  their  hammocks  dur-
ing the  night,  and  had  beaten  or  otherwise  maltreated  them;
and  they  always  insisted  on  much  rubbing  of  the  supposed
bruised  parts  of  their  bodies."

Walter  Map,  toward  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century,  tells  a
story  which  illustrates  the  danger  of  trusting  spectral  evi-
dence. A  certain  knight  found  his  first  three  children  with
their  throats  cut  on  the  morning  after  birth,  and  no  watching
availed.  When  a  fourth  was  expected,  he  and  his  wife  fasted,
prayed,  distributed  alms,  and  shed  many  tears.  A  boy  was
born,  and,  with  lamps  burning,  they  and  their  neighbors
watched.  A  stranger  {peregrinus)  who  asked  hospitality  for
God's  sake  and  was  devoutly  received,  stood  guard  too,  and
after  midnight,  when  all  the  rest  were  asleep,  he  remained
awake.  Suddenly  he  saw  a  reverend  matron  approaching  the
cradle  to  kill  the  child.  He  seized  her.  All  the  rest  recog-
nized her  as  the  most  noble  lady  of  the  town,  eminent  in  char-
acter as  in  position.  When  questioned,  she  stood  mute.  He


224         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


declared  that  she  was  a  demon,  held  her  firmly,  and  branded
her  in  the  face.  Next  he  bade  them  summon  the  lady.  She
came  and  was  seen  to  be  burnt  in  like  manner.  Then  the
stranger  explained  that  the  good  woman  had  angered  the  de-
mons and  that  they  had  resorted  to  this  masquerade  to  bring
her  to  shame. Thereupon  he  released  the  fiend,  who  flew
out  of  the  window  with  wails  and  shrieks. A  similar  imper-
sonation (without  tragedy)  occurs  in  Symphorien  Champier,
who  draws  from  the  Life  of  St.  Germanus  of  Auxerre.  There
are  demons  who  visit  houses  and  for  whom  food  is  left  out.""
They  are  called  "good  ladies"  ibonae  mulieres)  and  are  ob-
viously house  cobolds  or  serviceable  fairies  in  origin,  like  the
drudging  goblin  in  Milton  for  whom  the  cream-bowl  is  duly
set.  Yet  it  appears  in  Champier 's  anecdote  that  they  were
identified  as  women  of  the  neighborhood.  However,  when
this  was  investigated,  the  suspected  persons  were  found  at
home  in  bed:  the  demons  had  simply  taken  their  form.  The
same  story  may  be  read  in  the  Legenda  Aurea  and  in  the
fifteenth-century  Alphabet  of  Tales.'"

Map's  story  brings  us  to  the  subject  of  striges  — ■  demons  or
witches  that  steal  or  devour  young  children  or  (as,  in  1653,
Elizabeth  Lambe  was  accused  of  doing)  suck  their  blood.
These  go  back  to  the  remotest  ages  and  are  practically  co-
extensive with  mankind.  Sometimes  they  take  bird-form,
and  rationalists  have  always  contended  that  they  are  merely
birds  of  prey,  but  the  people  were  convinced  that  they  are
really  cannibalistic  hags  who  may  assume  bird  shape  for  con-
venience.'"^ The  lamiae  belong  to  the  same  general  category
as  the  striges,  and  the  terms  are  often  used  synonymously.
In  a  mosaic  of  about  a.d.  500  two  lamiae  (so  labelled)  are
pictured  as  birds  with  women's  faces,  like  the  Sirens.""*
The  original  Lamia  was  a  mortal  beloved  by  Zeus,  but  her
children  were  destroyed  by  jealous  Hera.  She  died  of  grief
and  now  she  slaughters  the  children  of  others  in  revenge.'"^
There  was  a  somewhat  similar  myth  about  Gello,  as  to  whom
we  have  a  proverb  involving  a  rather  savage  pun:  "Fonder  of
children  than  Gello!"  The  memory  of  both  survives  in
Greece,  where  Gilo  or  Gylou  is  a  hag  who  sucks  children's
blood  and  Lamia  is  a  demon  who  strangles  them."^  It  was
one  of  the  signs  that  Mauricius  was  destined  to  become


CHAP,  xiii]  HAUNTED  HOUSES  AND  MEN  225

Emperor  of  the  East  that,  when  he  was  a  baby,  Gilo  often
took  him  out  of  bed  as  if  to  eat  him,  but  could  do  him  no
harm.'°»

For  early  Germanic  times  from  a.d.  500  to  650  this  grisly
piece  of  folk-lore  is  proved  by  the  Prankish,  Alamannic,  and
Lombard  laws,  and  by  the  Saxon  laws  of  Charlemagne  for  the
eighth  century,  and  thereafter  evidence  abounds.""  Gervase
of  Tilbury  knew  of  lamiae  who  were  said  to  visit  houses  in  the
night,  drag  infants  from  the  cradle,  and  sometimes  torment
sleepers  (like  the  nightmare,  presumably).  John  of  Salisbury
also  bears  testimony  to  this  article  of  the  demonological  creed
but  discredits  it."'  Witches  or  female  demons  of  this  general
sort  often  deprive  nursing  mothers  of  their  milk."^  They  may
also  extract  and  feed  upon  a  person's  heart  or  entrails."^

Lamiae,  as  we  know  from  Philostratus  and  Keats,  may
seek  the  love  of  mortals,  but  they  devour  their  lovers."''  Here
we  come  close  to  the  subject  of  incubi  and  succubae.

The  witch  records  of  England  abound  in  stories  of  infanti-
cide, but  such  murders  are  usually  perpetrated  out  of  enmity
^  for  the  parents  or  in  stark  malice. "^  On  the  Continent,  how-
ever, the  motive  is  usually  that  of  sacrifice  to  demons  "^  or  of
cannibalism  "'^  or  (frequently)  the  object  is  to  use  the  blood
or  fat  or  flesh  of  the  victims  in  charms  or  unguents."*


I


CHAPTER  XIV
THE  SEER

PROPHECY'  is  not  a  department  of  witchcraft,  but  it  is
closely  allied;  for  one  of  the  prime  objects  of  magic  is  to
read  the  future,  and  a  witch  or  a  wizard  may  at  any  moment
assume  a  prophetic  role.  For  centuries  the  English  govern-
ment was  about  equally  concerned  with  sorcerers  and  with
prophets  —  with  sorcerers  because  they  might  attempt  to
kill  the  king,  with  prophets  (including  astrologers)  because
they  might  forecast  the  hour  of  his  death.  Prophecy  was  al-
ways a  strong  influence  with  the  populace  and  was  regularly
invoked  in  support  of  every  treasonable  plot  or  attempted
revolution.  We  all  remember  Owen  Glendower's  allegorical
foretellings  —  "  the  moldwarp  and  the  ant"  —  and  Hotspur's
ridicule.  The  best  comment  is  still  Sir  Francis  Palgrave's,
made  some  eighty  years  ago  in  the  Norfolk  Archeology,
where  Glendower's  imaginings  are  visibly  pictured.  "Tra-
dition in  some  cases,"  writes  Sir  Francis,  "poetry  in  others,
mere  fancy  and  fiction  in  more,  attributed  these  prophecies  to
celebrated  names  —  Marvellous  Merlin,  Venerable  Bede,  the
Hermit  of  Bridlington,  and  Thomas  the  Rhymer,  as  well  as
the  Martyrs  of  English  nationality:  Waltheof  and  Becket,
and  others,  including  even  the  Sybil."  ^  The  statute  of  Henry
VIII  against  seditious  prophecies  was  repealed  in  the  first
year  of  his  successor's  reign,  but  a  new  law  was  soon  needed.
In  the  first  and  fifth  years  of  Elizabeth,  acts  against  conjura-
tion and  prophecy  proceeded  side  by  side,  sometimes,  indeed,
in  combination  in  a  single  bill.  The  connection  is  almost
primeval,  descending  to  the  Elizabethan  age  by  every  line
along  which  we  can  trace  influences  —  English,^  Scandina-
vian, classical.  Christian.

In  1 213  King  John  hanged  a  popular  seer  —  Peter  the
Wise,  a  hermit  of  Wakefield  (or  of  Pontefract)  who  had  fore-
told the  end  of  his  reign.'*  In  1283,  when  Llewellyn's  head
was  crowned  in  mockery  and  carried  through  Westcheap  to


CHAP.  XIV]  THE  SEER  227

be  set  up  on  the  Tower,  the  people  recognized  the  fulfilment
of  the  prediction  made  by  a  certain  witch  {sortilega)  who,
when  the  Welsh  chieftain  took  up  arms,  promised  that  "he
should  ride  crowned  through  the  midst  of  Cheap."  =  Such
equivocations  of  the  fiend  ("  Aio  te,  Aeacida,  Romanes  vincere
posse")  emerge  in  all  periods:

For  goddes  speken  in  amphilologyes,
And  for  a  soth  they  tellen  twenty  lyes.^

"Consuetudo  enim  daemonis  est  semper  talibus  qui  eum  co-
lunt  amphibologice  loqui."  ^  "Your  head  shall  be  the  highest
of  the  field,"  said  the  demon  to  Provenzano  Salvani  of  Siena
before  his  battle  with  the  Florentines  in  1269;  and  so  it  was,
for  they  cut  it  off"  and  raised  it  on  the  point  of  a  lance.*

In  13 1 1  the  instructions  of  Bishop  Ralph  Baldock  to  the
Official  of  the  Archdeacon  of  London,  include  enquiry,  along
with  various  other  kinds  of  sorcery,  into  that  which  seeks  to
learn  the  future.'  This  became  the  regular  thing.  So,  for  in-
stance, in  the  Royal  Articles  of  1547;'°  in  the  Articles  of
Cranmer  in  1548,"  of  Bonner  in  1554,'^  and  of  White  as  Car-
dinal Pole's  commissioner  in  1556;^^  in  Queen  Elizabeth's
Articles  and  Injunctions  in  1559;  in  the  anonymous  Inter-
rogatories in  1560 '5  and  Parkhurst's  in  1561;'^  in  Jewel's
Articles  in  1568,'''  Sandys's  in  1569,'**  and  Whitgift's  in
1588.''

A  professed  astrologer,  who  scared  the  Londoners  in  1382
by  a  false  prophecy  about  a  pestilential  fog,  was  condignly
punished.^"  Late  in  the  reign  of  Richard  II,  John  Kyme,
"sothesegger,"  was  committed  to  the  Tower.  In  1401  two
citizens  of  London  were  his  mainpernors  to  the  Constable  to
bring  him  before  the  Council  with  a  view  to  his  release.  The
Council  required  him  to  swear  on  the  Gospels  that  "for  the
future  he  would  never  trust  false  prophecies  or  occupy  him-
self with  them  or  speak  (either  privately  or  in  public)  of  any-
thing that  may  run  counter  to  the  government  of  our  lord  the
King."  Then  he  was  discharged.^'

When,  in  1450,  William  de  la  Pole,  Duke  of  Suff^olk,  at-
tempted to  escape  to  France,  his  ship  was  captured  by  a
barque  called  the  Nicholas  of  the  Tower,  and  his  head  was
struck  off  by  a  sailor  on  the  gunwale  of  a  cockboat.  "This


228         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


duke  of  Suffolk  hadde  axed  befor  this  tyme  of  on  that  was  an
astronomer,  what  sholde  falle  of  him,  and  how  he  sholde  ende
his  lif;  and  whanne  the  said  astronomer  hadde  labourid  ther-
fore  in  his  said  craft,  he  ansuerde  to  the  duke  and  said  that  he
sholde  die  a  shameful  deth,  and  counselid  him  alwey  to  be  war
oj the  Tour.''^^  The  "  astronomer"  from  whom  Suffolk  derived
this  ambiguous  oracle  was  John  Stacy,  Gentleman,^^  whose
art,  in  the  long  run,  proved  fatal  to  the  artist.  He  was  exe-
cuted for  treason  seventeen  years  later  (1477)  because  he  —
with  Thomas  Blake,  Clerk  —  had  "worked  and  calculated
by  art  magic,  necromancy,  and  astronomy  the  death  and
final  destruction"  of  King  Edward  IV  and  the  Prince  of
Wales. In  I462  at  Cambridge  a  boy  of  eleven  years  met  in
the  street  a  spirit  in  the  form  of  an  old  man  with  a  long  beard
and  in  poor  attire,  who  foretold  pestilence  and  famine. In
1466  Robert  Barker,  a  figure-caster,  was  brought  before  the
Bishop  of  Ely  for  discipline.^''  In  the  thirteenth  year  of  Ed-
ward IV  (i 473-74)  "ther  was  a  voyce  cryenge  in  the  heyre,
betwyx  Laicetere  and  Bambury,  uppon  Dunmothe,  and  in
dyverse  othere  places,  herde  a  long  tyme  cryinge,  'Bowes!
Bowes!'  whiche  was  herde  of  xl.  menne;  and  some  menne  saw
that  he  that  cryed  soo  was  a  hedles  manne."  In  1493  Elena
Dalok,  a  professed  witch,  claimed  to  have  a  book  which  re-
vealed to  her  everything  that  was  to  come.^*

A  wild  case  is  that  of  George  Cartar,  a  thresher  attached  to
the  Abbey  of  Saltrey,  Huntingdonshire.  George  was  brought
before  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln  in  1525  because  he  had  strange
ideas  about  the  sacrament.  Clearly  he  was  of  unsound  mind.
When  once  he  began  to  confess,  he  told  a  weird  story.  Fif-
teen years  before  he  had  seen  the  heavens  open  "  the  breadth
of  ij  brode  berne  doores,"  and,  at  about  the  same  time,  he  was
in  the  Court  of  Righteousness  "  and  ther  he  hard  oon  call  for
S[ir]  John  Wed  priest  of  blakeburne  &  dean  ther,  and  then  he
[i.  e.  Sir  John]  apered  and  went  vp  a  gree  [a  flight  of  steps]  &
his  gown  was  full  of  ashes,  as  he  had  been  rolled  in  the  ashes,
and  ther  was  a  black  fello  met  hym  &  put  hym  bihynde  a
walle  &  ther  was  many  great  skrykes  and  from  them  cam
down  ashes  .  .  .  whithe  &  blak,  and  he  told  the  same  preste
was  deade  when  he  was  ten  myle  fro  hym."  In  the  trial  of
the  Duke  of  Buckingham  for  treason  in  1521  it  appeared  that


CHAP.  XIV]  THE  SEER  229

he  had  built  his  hopes  upon  a  prophecy  that  he  should  be
king,  made  by  Nicholas  Hopkins,  a  Carthusian  monk  who
claimed  to  have  "revelations."  Yet  the  duke  had  been
warned  by  a  faithful  friend  "  that  the  monk  might  be  de-
ceived by  the  devil,  and  that  it  was  bad  to  meddle  in  such
things."  ^°

Demoniacs  often  prophesied  —  as,  for  instance,  Anne,
daughter  of  Sir  Roger  Wentworth,  whose  experiences  in-
terested her  contemporary  Sir  Thomas  More  and  also  Cran-
mer.^'  They  also  revealed  secrets  of  past  and  present.  It  was
a  devil  who  spoke  through  the  possessed  person's  agency.

In  1535  Dr.  Maydland  of  the  Black  Friars  in  London  was
reported  to  have  said  that  "he  knew  by  his  science  of  necro-
mancy that  the  New  Learning  should  be  suppressed,  and  the
Old  restored  by  the  King's  enemies  from  beyond  sea."

Sir  John  Dobson,  Vicar  of  Muston,  executed  at  York  in
1538,  was  charged  with  promulgating  allegorical  prophecies
of  an  elaborate  sort  concerning  the  king,  the  pope,  the  em-
peror ("he  that  beareth  the  eagle"),  the  scallop  shells,  the
crumb,  and  the  Cock  of  the  North.  He  confessed  that  he  had
borrowed  of  Prior  Borrowby  of  Scarborough  a  prophetic  roll
"which  Merlin  and  Thomas  of  Erceldoune  made."  At  the
same  time  was  put  to  death  Mabel  Brigge,  "that  fasted  a
black  fast  to  an  abominable  intent"  against  Henry  VIII  and
the  Duke  of  Norfolk.  It  was  rumored  that  her  spell  had
killed  the  king.-'''  Robert  Allen,  a  professional  astrologer  and
conjurer  of  London,  was  in  trouble  about  the  middle  of  this
century.  He  dealt  in  love  spells,  recovered  lost  or  stolen
goods,  and  taught  his  customers  how  to  win  at  the  diceplay;
and  some  of  his  charms  are  preserved.  His  chief  offence,  how-
ever, was  his  being  the  "false  prophecyer"  who,  in  1551,
"bruted  thatt  kynge  Edward  [VI]  was  deade,  too  yeres  before
it  came  to  pas."  ^=  In  1551  William  Tassell  was  by  the  King's
Council  committed  to  the  custody  of  the  Master  of  the
Horses  "for  casting  of  figures  and  prophesieng."  In  the
next  year  a  certain  Clerke,  formerly  the  Duke  of  Norfolk's
secretary,  was  "accused  to  be  a  reporter  abrode  of  certaine
lewde  prophecies  and  other  slaunderous  matters  touching  the
Kinges  Majestic  and  dyvers  noble  men  of  his  Councell."  He
lodged,  it  seems,  with  one  Richard  Hartlepoole,  and  there


230         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

were  found  in  his  chamber  divers  "carractes"  (magical  or
astrological  figures  and  calculations)  as  well  as  "bookes  of
nigromancie  and  conjuration."  Hartlepoole's  wife  was  al-
leged to  be  Gierke's  helper  or  confederate  —  "a  doer  with
[him],"  and  the  Countess  of  Sussex  was  somehow  implicated.
All  three  were  sent  to  the  Tower.  What  became  of  Gierke,  I
cannot  say,  but  Mistress  Hartlepoole  and  the  countess  were
kept  in  prison  for  about  six  months  and  then  set  at  liberty
with  an  admonition  "to  beware  of  sorseries."  •'^  In  1554  the
justices  of  Norfolk  were  instructed  by  Queen  Mary  to  search
for  the  broachers  of  "vain  Prophesies"  and  "seditious,  false,
or  untrue  Rumours,"  which  are  "the  very  Foundation  of  al
Rebellion."  In  1556  John  Davys,  a  pretended  soothsayer,
though  he  had  given  bonds  not  to  "use  the  like  practises,"
was  in  prison  for  the  same  in  London.  His  previous  exploits
had  been  in  Wales. ^'  In  that  same  year  a  queer  case  of  com-
bined magic  and  prophecy  came  to  light  in  Cardinal  Pole's
metropolitan  visitation  of  the  diocese  of  Lincoln.  I  translate
the  Latin  record:  "Thomas  Waller  of  Alwincle  in  the  diocese
of  Peterborough,  being  informed  against  for  applying  himself
to  magic  arts  and  for  having  consulted  a  certain  William  At-
kinson of  Yardwell,  Lincolnshire,  and  John  Tassell  of  Baltis-
ham,  Cambridgeshire,  soothsayers  {homines  preficos  et  jatilo-
quos)^  confessed.  And  being  further  examined  as  to  what
these  persons  had  told  him,  he  replied  that  one  of  them  had
predicted  that  he,  the  said  Thomas  Waller,  should  be  hanged
at  the  next  Northampton  assizes;  and  the  other  had  proph-
esied that  he  should  escape  hanging,  but  narrowly  and
with  great  difficulty.  While  this  case  was  pending  before  us,
the  said  Thomas  Waller  was  convicted  of  sacrilege  at  the
assizes,  and  he  would  have  been  hanged  at  Northampton,  as
it  is  said,  if  he  had  not  absconded."

This  brings  us  to  the  threshold  of  Queen  Elizabeth's  reign.
No  wonder  a  bill  to  punish  prophecies  was  debated  in  her  first
parliament  (1559)  and  passed  in  her  second  (1563)."'

Prophets  occasionally  combined  their  business  of  vaticina-
tion with  other  profitable  trades,  as  was  the  method  of  one
Grig,  a  poulterer  in  Surrey,"*^  who  had  not  only  "  bene  a  very
great  deceiver  of  the  people  in  sellinge  of  his  ware"  (coney-
skins  and  the  like),  but  also  pretended  to  cure  the  sick  by


CHAP,  xiv]  THE  SEER  23I

merely  "speaking  prayers  on  them,  sayinge  he  tooke  noe
mony."  He  was  amazingly  popular:  the  Londoners  "would
followe  him  as  yf  he  had  bene  a  God."  In  1550,  by  order  of
the  Council,  Gryg  was  set  on  a  scaffold,  in  Surrey  and  else-
where, "with  a  paper  on  his  brest"  that  proclaimed  his  faults,
and  was  forced  to  beg  public  pardon."^


CHAPTER  XV


COLD  WATER

THE  ordeal  by  swimming  {judicium  aquae  frigidae),^
which  is  so  conspicuous  in  the  modern  history  of  witch-
craft, was  an  old  Germanic  rite.^  The  doctrine  is,  that  the
pure  element  of  water  will  reject  a  criminal,  not  suffering  him
to  sink  —  a  notion  originally  pagan,  but  reinforced  in  Chris-
tian times  by  the  vise  of  water  for  baptism.  In  this  regard
the  distinguished  Cambridge  theologian  William  Perkins  ex-
plodes it,  arguing  cogently  that  mere  water  as  water  has  no
sacred  quality  or  character.^  There  is  manifest  connection
with  the  ancient  and  all-but-universal  belief  that  water
(particularly  running  water)  dissolves  a  spell  or  interposes
an  obstacle  to  the  passage  of  uncanny  beings.''  The  general
principle  is  stated  by  William  of  Malmesbury  on  the  au-
thority of  an  old  monk  of  his  acquaintance:  "Nihil  enim  quod
per  nigromantiam  fit  potest  in  aqua  aspectum  intuentium
fallere."  ^

Pliny  reports  on  the  authority  of  the  historian  Phylarchus
(of  the  third  century  b.c.)  that  certain  persons  in  Pontus,  who
have  two  pupils  in  one  eye  and  the  figure  of  a  horse  in  the
other,  cannot  sink  in  the  water,  even  when  weighed  down  by
their  clothes.  Though  nothing  is  said  of  their  being  wizards,
their  double  pupils  look  suspicious,  and  they  were  manifestly
a  little  out  of  the  common  run  of  humanity.^  Walter  Map
had  read  of  Scythian  women  thus  provided,  who  killed  by  an
angry  look.''

The  Gauls  are  said  to  have  tested  the  legitimacy  of  their
new-born  children  by  floating  them  on  the  Rhine. ^

The  reverse  of  the  regular  swimming  ordeal  is  reported
from  ancient  Sicily,  where,  in  the  sacred  precinct  of  the  Palici,
there  was  a  spring  which  tested  oaths.  You  wrote  your  affi-
davit upon  a  tablet  (of  wood,  apparently)  and  threw  this  into
the  water;  if  you  had  sworn  truly,  it  floated;  if  falsely,  it  be-
came heavy  and  sank,  and  you  were  burnt  (by  the  holy  fire  of
the  spring,  it  would  seem).^


CHAP.  XV]


COLD  WATER


In  the  third  century  there  was  a  pool  at  Aphaca  in  Phoe-
nicia, sacred  to  Aphrodite,  into  which  offerings  were  thrown:
if  rejected,  they  floated  (even  if  made  of  gold  or  silver);  if
accepted,  they  sank,  however  light."

Adam  of  Bremen  (about  1070)  tells  us  that  there  was  a
spring  in  the  temple  precinct  at  Uppsala  in  which  men  were
drowned  as  a  sacrifice:  if  the  body  never  came  up,  that  was  a
sign  that  the  gods  accepted  the  victim."  So  the  Laconians
at  the  festival  of  Ino  threw  flour  cakes  into  Ino's  Pool  near
Epidaurus  Limera:  if  they  sank  and  did  not  emerge,  that  was
a  good  omen;  if  the  water  sent  them  back  to  the  surface,  it
was  bad  luck."

The  famous  Russian  preacher  Serapion  (who  died  in  1275)
notes  that  the  swimming  ordeal  was  practised  by  the  people,
but  he  repudiates  it  as  stark  folly. As  for  Western  Europe,
the  swimming  ordeal  was  certainly  an  old  custom  in  829.
In  that  year  it  was  prohibited  by  Louis  the  Pious;  but  there
is  evidence  enough  that  the  rite  maintained  itself  in  various
places  on  the  Continent. Hence  its  employment  at  Lemgo
in  1583,  which  struck  Scribonius  as  so  peculiar,  and  which
led  to  a  long  and  complicated  discussion  among  the  learned,
was  a  survival,  not  an  invention.'''

For  England  the  ordeal  by  swimming  is  mentioned  in  the
Laws  of  i^lthelstan  (ca.  a.d.  930)  and  of  /Ethelred  (ca.  1000)
as  well  as  in  the  so-called  Laws  of  William  the  Conqueror  (ca.
1 100),  in  the  Assize  of  Clarendon  (1166)  and  the  Assize  of
Northampton  (1176),'^  and  in  borough  charters  of  1194  and
1207.'^  Of  the  ritual  used  in  this  judicium  aquae  frigidae
several  varieties  are  preserved,  dating  from  the  tenth  to
the  twelfth  century. Some  of  these  provide  by  a  formula
against  the  evil  magic  to  which  the  culprit  might  have  re-
course to  enable  him  to  deny  his  crime  or  frustrate  the  or-
deal.^" The  swimming  test  was  used,  according  to  these
texts,  for  theft,  adultery,  homicide,  and  witchcraft.-'  The
oldest  of  them  decrees  expressly  that  the  accused  persons  shall
be  thrown  into  the  water  one  by  one:  "if  they  sink,  let  them
be  regarded  as  innocent;  if  they  float,  let  them  be  judged
guilty."  "  Another,  somewhat  later,  calls  for  a  pool  twelve
feet  deep  and  full  of  water,  describes  how  the  man  is  to  be
tied  up  (with  his  hands  under  his  bent  knees),  and  directs  that


234         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

a  cord  shall  be  bound  about  his  loins.  In  this  cord  a  knot  is  to
be  made,  a  long  hair's  length  from  the  man's  body:  if  he  sinks
to  the  knot,  he  is  innocent.

The  Great  Roll  of  the  Pipe  affords  plentiful  evidence  for
the  regular  application  of  the  cold-water  test  in  felonies
throughout  England  in  the  second  half  of  the  twelfth  century.
The  usual  entry  is  a  statement  that  "  the  sheriff  makes  return
of  the  chattels  of  fugitives  and  of  those  who  were  condemned
{perieruni)  by  (or  in)  t\vt  judicium  aquae'' \  then  follows  a  list
of  names  and  amounts.  There  are  more  than  a  score  of  these
lists  in  II 66  (the  year  of  the  Assize  of  Clarendon)  and  about
as  many  in  1176  (the  year  of  the  Assize  of  Northampton).^''
In  1 1 66  two  priests  received  ten  shillings  for  "blessing  the
pits"  at  Bury  St.  Edmunds. In  1168  three  shillings  was
paid  for  making  an  ordeal  pit  {fossa  juisii)  at  Windsor,  and  at
Colchester  five  shillings  and  fourpence  was  a  priest's  fee  "for
the  judgment  of  two  men"  and  thirteenpence  was  laid  out
"for  making  the  pits  for  the  same  judgments";  in  1169  the
cost  of  "preparing  a  judgment  pit"  in  Warwickshire  was  two
and  six.^''  Instances  of  illegal  ducking  are  of  particular  in-
terest. Thus  in  1 1 85  the  town  of  Preston  (whose  ancient  Cus-
tumale  mentions  this  kind  of  ordeal,  as  well  as  that  of  iron
and  the  wager  of  battle)  was  fined  five  marks  because  some
of  the  inhabitants  had  subjected  a  man  to  the  swimming  test
"without  warrant";  ^'  one  Silvester  Fitz-Simon  had  to  pay
forty-five  shillings  and  fourpence  for  putting  Warren,  son  of
Baldwin,  to  the  water  test  unjustly;^"  Robert  le  Heiward  was
similarly  fined  for  a  like  offence,  and  Roger  de  Chaurea  was
mulcted  in  half  a  mark  for  engaging  in  this  ceremony  without
the  supervision  of  the  king's  sergeant.''^  In  the  same  year  the
Sheriff  of  Yorkshire  paid  five  marks  as  a  penalty  for  forcing
an  alleged  thief,  who  had  stood  this  ordeal  successfully,  to  ab-
jure the  realm  without  the  consent  of  the  justices. ^-^  In  1 174  a
wealthy  Londoner,  Johannes  Senex,  convicted  of  robbery  by
the  judiciu?n  aquae,  was  executed,  though  he  offered  the  king
a  great  sum  for  a  pardon. For  the  reigns  of  Richard  I  and
John  (11 89-1 21 6)  there  are  also  many  records  of  the  swim-
ming ordeal. ^5  j^i  1219,  however,  at  the  latest,  it  was  abol-
ished in  England,^^  as  well  as  the  ordeal  by  fire,  in  deference
to  the  Fourth  Lateran  Council  (121 5),  which  forbade  all


CHAP.  XV]


COLD  WATER


clerics  to  perform  any  rite  of  blessing  or  consecration  at  the
ordeal  of  hot  or  cold  water  or  of  the  hot  iron;  "  but  Roger
Bacon,  later  in  the  same  century,  still  treats  it  with  respect.
In  1300  or  1301  the  town  of  Ipswich  gave  "the  Ordeale  pitt
in  the  suburbs"  to  one  Fabate,  having  no  further  use  for  it."

In  the  seventeenth  century  the  water  ordeal,  though  more
or  less  practised  in  England,  was  distinctly  under  suspicion.
King  James  approved  it  in  his  Daemonologie,*"'  but  I  know
no  evidence  that  he  enforced  the  principle  in  practice  after
he  succeeded  Elizabeth.  The  Cambridge  theologian  William
Perkins  exploded  the  theory  in  his  sermons.  Dr.  Cotta  re-
jected the  test  in  an  elaborate  argument  and  was  followed  by
Bernard  in  his  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  who  emphasizes  its
illegality.  Matthew  Hopkins  and  his  lieutenant  John  Stearne
swam  witches  until  they  were  forced  to  discontinue,  but
Stearne  declares  that  he  never  swam  any  "but  upon  their
owne  request."  "It  was  then,"  he  adds,  "the  desire  of  such
persons  themselves,  thinking  thereby  to  cleare  themselves."
In  1694  at  the  Wilts  Quarter  Sessions  certain  persons  were
tried  for  riotously  swimming  Margaret  Waddam,  a  suspected
witch;  ''3  in  1699  the  widow  Coman  was  swum  by  the  mob
three  times  in  July,  and  died  in  December.''''  In  New  Eng-
land there  was  some  swimming,  but  Increase  Mather  and  the
ministers  in  general  pronounced  emphatically  against  it.''^

It  cannot  be  proved  that  the  English  use  of  the  test  by
swimming  in  the  seventeenth  century  was  not  the  result  of
Continental  influence,  for  we  have  no  satisfactory  evidence
for  the  interval,  but,  in  view  of  the  other  features  of  witch-
craft and  especially  of  the  extraordinary  hold  which  this  per-
formance has  kept  upon  the  people  down  to  the  present,  it  is
reasonable  to  infer  continuity  of  belief  and  practice  from  the
pre-Elizabethan  age.  Anyhow,  there  is  no  reason  whatever  to
guess  that  the  Reformers  brought  this  ordeal  back  from  the
Continent  in  or  about  1558,  for,  on  that  theory,  one  must  ex-
plain why  we  have  no  records  of  its  practice  during  the  great
queen's  reign.  Manifestly  it  was  never  legal  after  its  abolition
by  Henry  III  in  1219.  Scot  mentions  the  swimming  ordeal
but  once  and  in  such  terms  as  demonstrate  that  he  did  not
know  of  its  employment  in  contemporary  England.''*'

I  should  like  to  think  that  a  Worcestershire  case  of  1302


1


236         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

belongs  here,  but  the  court  roll  is  indecisive.  It  informs  us
that  Roger  Ordrych  threw  Margery  la  Leche  into  a  running
stream;  "and  she  raised  the  hue  and  cry  upon  him  justly;
therefore  he  remains  in  misericordiaJ'  ''^  Perhaps  this  was
mere  assault,  though  Margery's  surname  "la  Leche"  suggests
that  she  professed  to  be  a  healer,  or  white  witch,  and  we  know
that  even  the  whitest  of  witches  might  be  tempted  into  dark
ways  or  might,  at  all  events,  be  suspected  of  such  straying.
Anyhow,  Ordrych  took  the  law  into  his  own  hands.

For  the  eighteenth  century  we  have  cases  in  plenty,  both
before  and  after  the  repeal  of  the  Witchcraft  Law  in  1736.''^
In  1701  Sarah  Morduck  was  maltreated  and  threatened  with
ducking  as  a  v/itch,  though  she  had  been  acquitted  at  the
Guildford  assizes.'"  Cases  of  swimming  are  known  in  1704
(London), 5"  1709  (a  man  and  two  women;  Leicestershire)
17 17  (three  persons;  Leicestershire), 1730  (Somerset),"  1735
(Kent),^''  1736  (Leicestershire), 55  1737  (Bedfordshire), 1748
(Norfolk), 57  1751  (Hertfordshire), 5**  1752  (Suffolk), 5"  1760
(Leicestershire),^"  1760  (attempt;  Wiltshire),*^'  1762  (threat;
Kent),*^^  1769  (Cambridgeshire),'^^  1776  (Leicestershire),'''' 1785
(Northamptonshire), 1795  (Suffolk).'"''  The  Tring  affair
(Hertfordshire)  in  1751  was  particularly  atrocious.  The  witch
died,  and  Thomas  Colley,  the  ringleader  of  the  mob,  was
hanged  for  murder:  yet  spectators  at  his  execution  were  heard
to  complain  "  that  it  was  a  hard  case  to  hang  a  man  for  de-
stroying an  old  wicked  woman  that  had  done  so  much  mischief
by  her  witchcraft."  '''  In  Virginia,  Grace  Sherwood  was  swum
in  1706.''^  A  New  Jersey  case  in  1730  is  reported.''*

In  1808  Ann  Izzard,  of  Great  Paxton  in  the  county  of
Huntingdon,  was  scratched  and  wounded  and  threatened
with  ducking  as  a  witch. In  1825  a  man  was  swum  in  Suf-
folk.''' At  the  Monmouth  assizes  in  1827  four  persons  were
found  guilty  of  assault  upon  Mary  Nicolas,  a  reputed  witch
about  ninety  years  old.  They  had  scratched  her  with  a  thorny
rosebush  to  draw  blood,'^  had  searched  her  for  a  witchteat
and  on  her  head  had  found  a  wart,  and  had  proposed  to  force
her  into  a  pool  for  the  ordeal  of  swimming.  They  had  also
taken  her  to  the  place  where  cattle  had  died,  accusing  her  of
causing  their  death."  In  1864  two  persons  were  convicted  of
assault  at  the  Chelmsford  assizes  for  swimming  a  supposed


CHAP.  XV J


COLD  WATER


wizard  in  the  previous  year.-''  At  Dunmow,  in  1880,  two
more  were  convicted  of  attempting  to  throw  a  witch  into  a
pond.''^  In  1897  a  rheumatic  old  woman  at  Lyme,  Connecti-
cut, was  ducked  by  a  mob  "  to  drive  the  devil  out  of  her."

As  Neuwald  wrote,  years  and  years  ago,  in  his  refutation  of
Scribonius:  "The  rabble,  when  once  it  takes  a  notion  (even  a
very  bad  one),  holds  it  as  tenaciously  as  a  cask  keeps  long
afterward  the  odor  of  that  with  which  it  was  first  imbued.
And  nobody  sticks  to  an  opinion,  however  foolish,  more
closely  than  the  ignorant  mob,  which  delights  in  absurdities
of  this  kind.  .  .  .  The  populace  grows  riotous  when  such
spectacles  are  abolished,  and  feels  aggrieved  at  being  de-
prived of  sights  to  which  even  witches  eagerly  resort  and  to
which  they  offer  themselves  voluntarily."  "

The  regular  swimming  ordeal  for  witchcraft  and  other  of-
fences is  known  in  India  and  Burma. A  Delhi  case  from  the
first  part  of  the  fourteenth  century  is  on  record:  a  witch  was
convicted  by  this  test  and  was  burned  alive;  she  was  a  caftan
("hyena")  and,  after  the  manner  of  caftans,  had  eaten  the
heart  of  a  child."  Other  varieties  of  the  ducking  or  diving
ordeal  occur  in  the  Orient.  Among  the  Kachins  of  Burma  the
guilty  person,  standing  in  the  water,  finds  that  he  cannot  put
his  head  under/""  Among  the  Shans  that  one  of  two  contes-
tants who  remains  under  water  for  the  longer  time  is  held  to
have  proved  his  case.^^  Elsewhere  in  India  the  defendant  is
cleared  if  he  can  remain  at  the  bottom  by  grasping  a  fixed
stake  until  an  arrow  has  been  shot  and  has  been  brought  back
to  the  bank  by  a  runner,  or  (in  the  Malay  Peninsula)  if  there
is  a  law  contest  between  two  persons,  the  party  whose  cham-
pion holds  himself  under  the  longer  is  the  winner.^-  By  the
Laws  of  Hammurabi,  King  of  Babylon  in  the  third  millen-
nium B.C.,  a  person  accused  of  witchcraft  is  to  plunge  into  the
divine  river:  if  drowned,  he  is  guilty;  if  the  river  spares  him,
his  innocence  is  established.  The  same  ordeal  is  prescribed
for  a  wife  charged  with  adultery. A  similar  reversal  of  the
usLal  swimming  test  was  reported  from  Africa  in  lyoi.^^*

When  examined  in  161 9  on  the  charge  of  murdering  the  son
and  heir  of  the  Earl  of  Rutland  by  witchcraft,  Joan  Flower
fell  down  unconscious,  "mumbling  in  her  mouth"  a  piece  of


238         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


bread  and  butter  which  she  was  vainly  trying  to  swallow
after  wishing  "  that  it  might  never  go  through  her  if  she  were
guilty,"  and  she  died  while  being  carried  to  Lincoln  jail.
1625  Mrs.  Journeman  of  Axminster,  accused  of  stealing  an
apron,  "wished  that  if  it  were  not  her  own  apron,  .  .  .  she
might  never  be  able  to  open  her  mouth  or  speak  more";  and,
so  runs  the  contemporary  record,  "since  that  time,  being
three  days  since,  she  was  never  heard  to  utter  any  word,  or  to
open  her  mouth."  This  woman  may  have  remembered  the
Psalmist's  asseveration,  "Let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of
my  mouth"  (cxxxvii,  6);  but  Joan  Flower's  voluntary  test
is  a  good  example  of  "  folk-memory,"  for  it  goes  back  to  the
venerable  ordeal  by  bread  and  cheese,  used  in  Anglo-Saxon
times  in  cases  of  theft,  homicide,  adultery,  and  witchcraft.
The  idea  was  that  no  guilty  defendant  could  swallow  the  mor-
sel without  choking. Forms  of  ritual  for  this  procedure  are
extant,  and  it  is  mentioned  in  the  Laws  of  ^^^thelred  (1014)
and  of  Cnut  (ca.  1030). In  1053  Earl  Godwine  was  choked
to  death,  we  are  told,  on  subjecting  himself  (more  or  less  in-
formally) to  the  ordeal  of  bread.'"  In  Nigeria,  as  an  oath,  a
man  "  takes  a  head  of  corn  "  and  wishes,  in  set  terms,  that  the
next  grain  he  eats  may  choke  him  if  he  swears  falsely.  There
is  a  similar  ordeal  with  small  stones  in  the  Solomon  Islands,
with  rice  in  Chittagong,  and  with  rice  or  bread  in  East
Africa. 9'


CHAPTER  XVI


THE  COMPACT  AND  THE  WITCHES'
SABBATH

THE  idea  of  a  formal  compact  with  Satan,  which  plays  so
important  a  part  in  the  history  of  witchcraft,  was  sup-
ported by  great  fathers  of  the  church.  St.  Augustine  treats  it
rather  fully.'  St.  Jerome  appears  to  have  accepted  it  to  ex-
plain a  dark  passage  in  Isaiah:  "Because  ye  have  said,  We
have  made  a  covenant  with  death,  and  with  hell  are  we  at
agreement"  {Percussimus  foedus  cum  morte  et  cum  inferno
fecimus  pactum:  xxviii,  15).  Widespread  was  the  legend  of  St.
Basil,  Bishop  of  Csesarea  (370-379),  who  recovered  from  the
fiend  a  written  contract  given  by  a  miserable  young  man  in
return  for  the  love  of  a  woman;  it  occurs  in  fifteenth-century
English  in  An  Alphabet  of  Tales. ^  Greater  still  was  the  in-
fluence exerted  by  the  legend  of  Theophilus  —  precursor  of
the  Faust  saga  —  which  was  translated  from  Greek  into
Latin  ^  in  the  ninth  century  and  has  had  a  triumphant  career
throughout  the  Occident  for  a  millennium.''  Theophilus
made  his  appearance  in  English  about  the  year  1000,  when
iElfric,  in  a  Homily  on  the  Assumption  of  the  Blessed  Mary,
summarized  the  legend  briefly  but  competently,  with  plain
mention  of  the  written  contract. ^  The  whole  story  in  English
verse  is  included  both  in  the  South  English  Legendary  (thir-
teenth century)  and  in  the  North  English  Homilies  (four-
teenth century),  and  there  is  a  third  version  extant  in  Middle
English.^  Thus  there  were  many  manuscript  copies  of  the
legend  in  circulation,  to  say  nothing  of  its  use  in  the  pulpit.
Vincent  of  Beauvais  inserted  it  in  his  Speculum  Historiale,
and  it  is  a  stock  item  in  mediaeval  collections  of  miracles  and
exempla,  appearing  for  instance  in  the  English  Alphabet  of
Tales.''  In  1572  William  Forrest  rhymed  it  afresh,*  and  a
prose  version  occurs  in  Thomas  Heywood's  Hierarchic  of  the
Blessed  Angells,  1635.'  Scenes  from  the  legend  have  been
recognized  in  sculptures  in  Beverley  Minster  and  in  the  Lady


240


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Chapel  at  Ely.'"  An  English  poem  of  the  fourteenth  century
attaches  a  similar  fiction  to  Pope  Caelestinus,  who  died  a.d.
432."

The  story  of  Gerbert  and  the  pact  with  the  devil  by  means
of  which  he  became  pope  as  Silvester  II  in  999,  has  been
familiar  to  Englishmen  ever  since  the  twelfth  century,  when
William  of  Malmesbury  embodied  it  in  his  Gesta  Regum  \  and
William  declares  expressly  that  he  is  merely  writing  things
down  which  "per  omnium  ora  volitabant."  Several  English
chroniclers  borrowed  it  from  him,  and  so  did  Robert  Holkot
and  Vincent  of  Beauvais.  It  turns  up  in  the  vernacular  in  the
fifteenth-century  Alphabet  of  Tales,"  and  is  echoed  by  Bishop
Pilkington  (i 520-1 575):  "Silvester  the  Second  and  Benet  the
Ninth  gave  themselves  to  the  devil,  and  offered  sacrifice  to
him,  that  he  would  make  them  popes,  and  promised  after
their  death  wholly  to  be  his."  To  Gerbert,  as  well  as  to
the  two  distinguished  Englishmen  Roger  Bacon  and  Bishop
Grosseteste,  was  ascribed  the  making  of  a  magical  speaking
head  of  brass.'"  In  11 8 1  Walter  Map  recounted  Gerbert's  life
in  a  richly  romantic  fashion  which  reminds  one  strongly  of
the  Lai  de  Lanval  by  the  author's  contemporary,  Marie  de
France.  In  Map,  Gerbert's  supernatural  protector  is  Meri-
diana,  a  /eV,  in  whom  we  recognize  a  feminine  form  of  the
Midday  Demon.

Among  the  good  deeds  of  St.  Wulfric,  the  hermit  of  Hasel-
bury  in  Dorset  (who  died  in  1 1 54),  we  read  of  a  Northern  man
who,  under  stress  of  poverty,  became  the  devil's  vassal  and
did  him  homage.  By-and-by  he  repented  and  had  recourse  to
the  pious  hermit,  who  compelled  the  fiend  to  relinquish  his
prey.'^

Walter  Map,  writing  in  the  same  century,  tells  of  Eudo,  a
rich  young  baron,  reduced  to  beggary  by  foolish  spending,  like
the  hero  of  Marie's  Lai  de  Lanval.  He  was  lamenting  under
a  tree  when  a  huge  man  of  ugly  countenance  appeared  and
promised  to  restore  his  prosperous  state  if  he  would  subject
himself  to  his  orders  {dummodo  se  siio  subiciat  dominio)  and
follow  his  counsels.  Eudo  knew  well  enough  that  it  was  a
devil,  nor  did  the  fiend  attempt  to  disclaim  that  character.
On  the  contrary,  he  delivered  a  long  and  instructive  lecture
on  demonology.  He  was  one  of  the  angels,  he  avowed,  who


CHAP.  XVI ]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  24I

fell  with  Lucifer:  not  one  who  had  previous  knowledge  of
Lucifer's  plans,  but  one  who  had  cast  in  his  lot  with  the  rebel-
lious archangel.  "God,  in  his  mercy,  permits  us,"  he  said,
"to  have  our  punishment  in  waste  places  as  well  as  in  those
that  are  inhabited.  Of  old  the  peoples,  deluded,  called  us
semideos  or  semideas.  To  us  belong  Monticolae,  Silvani,  Dri-
ades,  Oreades,  Fauni,  Satiri,  Nayades."  ''^  Eudo  made  his
pact  with  the  fiend  {adquiescit  in  pactis),  and  grew  rich  by
robbery  and  murder;  but  at  last,  repentant,  he  had  recourse
to  the  Bishop  of  Beauvais.  Him  he  found  outside  the  walls
by  a  great  pyre  that  the  judges  of  the  city  had  kindled  to
burn  a  witch.  The  bishop,  in  scorn  and  wrath,  imposed  upon
him  the  penance  of  leaping  upon  this  pyre.  Eudo  straight-
way obeyed  and  was  burned  to  ashes.

A  singular  case  of  alleged  homage  to  Satan  dates  from  the
reign  of  Edward  L  Sir  John  Lovetot  the  elder  was  one  of  the
scandalously  corrupt  justices  whose  misdeeds  confronted  Ed-
ward I  on  his  return  from  France  in  1289.  In  1290  he  was
fined  £3000,  but  the  next  year  he  was  pardoned  in  considera-
tion of  this  fine,  and  he  continued  to  sit  at  the  King's  Bench
until  his  death  in  1294.''  Soon  after  1286  old  Sir  John
had  married  Joan,  the  widow  of  Bartholomew  de  Brianfon
(Brianzun),^"  a  lady  who  must  have  been  many  years  his
junior.  His  son  by  a  former  marriage.  Sir  John  the  younger,
was  a  man  grown  "  and  probably  felt  aggrieved.  At  all
events,  he  hated  his  stepmother  cordially,  and  in  1301,  after
her  death,  he  showed  his  feelings  by  bringing  terrible  accusa-
tions against  Walter  de  Langton,  Bishop  of  Coventry  and
Lichfield  and  Treasurer  of  the  Realm.  Not  content  with
charging  him  with  simony  and  unlicensed  plurality,  he  al-
leged that  the  bishop  had  committed  adultery  with  the  elder
Sir  John's  wife  Joan,  and  had  kept  her  publicly  as  his  mis-
tress after  her  husband's  death.  In  order  to  carry  on  the
intrigue  more  conveniently — so  ran  the  charges  —  Bishop
Walter  had  caused  old  Sir  John  to  be  strangled  in  his  sleep.
Finally,  the  bishop  was  a  sorcerer:  he  had  often  conversed
with  the  devil,  had  done  him  homage,  and  had  kissed  him  in
tergo  —  a  regular  ceremony,  it  was  believed,  of  such  infernal
vassalage.^^  Pope  Boniface  VIII  suspended  Bishop  Walter
from  all  spiritual  and  temporal  functions,  and  referred  the


242         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


case  to  a  commission  headed  by  the  Archbishop  of  Canter-
bury; but  the  trial  was  soon  transferred  to  the  Roman  curia
itself.  King  Edward  was  furious.  He  wrote  at  least  four  let-
ters to  the  Pope,  protesting  that  the  bishop  was  a  model  of  all
the  virtues  and  that  Lovetot,  a  false  traitor,  was  persecuting
him  out  of  mere  malice,  and  he  sent  a  missive  of  similar  pur-
port to  three  cardinals.  He  even  arrested  Lovetot,  though  he
released  him  at  the  pontiff's  request.  When  the  final  hearing
came  on  (in  June,  1303),  the  bishop  was  acquitted,  but  he  was
required  to  clear  himself  with  thirty-seven  compurgators  and
he  had  to  borrow  seven  thousand  florins  to  pay  his  expenses
at  Rome.

John  Tannere  (alias  John  Canne),  who  claimed  to  be  the
son  of  Edward  I,  was  drawn  and  hanged  as  a  traitor  in  the
eighth  year  of  Edward  II  (1314-1315).  He  made  public  con-
fession that  he  had  "served  the  devell"  for  more  than  three
years,  and  said  the  fiend  had  promised  him  the  English
crown.

In  1366  there  died  a  certain  carpenter  {artijex  lignarius)
who  had  served  the  devil  for  fifteen  years  in  order  to  excel
others  of  his  trade.  He  foreknew  his  end,  and  had  his  fellow-
workmen  shut  him  up  in  a  chamber  alone.  They  heard
frightful  cries,  rushed  in,  and  found  him  tearing  out  his  own
entrails.  The  carpenter  confessed  his  sins,  both  in  private
and  publicly,  received  the  viaticum,  and  died  in  the  faith.
A  similar  tale  of  a  fiddler  was  current  in  Devon  about  ninety
years  ago.^^  Satan,  in  his  quest  for  souls,  is  no  respecter  of
persons.

Many  stories  circulated  in  the  middle  ages  about  wretches
who  did  homage  to  the  devil  or  sold  themselves  to  him.  Such
were  the  tale  of  "The  Three  Warnings"  versified  by  Mrs.
Thrale;  that  of  the  man  in  the  diocese  of  Rochester  who  did
homage  to  Satan  and  gave  him  a  silver  spoon  as  pledge;
that  of  the  man  whose  hand  was  marked  with  a  black  stain
from  the  devil's  thumb  ;^'  that  of  the  Franciscan  in  Milan  who
discovered  to  his  horror  that  his  father  worshipped  the  devil
in  the  form  of  a  golden-robed  king.''"  All  of  these  were  cur-
rent in  England.  With  the  general  run  of  English  witches,
who  belonged  to  the  illiterate  class,  the  agreement  with  Satan
was  implicit  only,  or  at  most  oral;     but  sometimes  a  docu-


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH


merit  was  drawn  up,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Nottingham  boy  in
1672,  and  in  that  of  Thomas  Browne  of  Middlesex,  acquitted
in  1643  on  an  indictment  for  seUing  himself  to  the  devil  by  a
written  compact.

The  Witches'  Sabbath  in  its  developed  form  is  a  combined
religious  service  and  business  meeting  followed  by  a  debauch
of  feasting,  dancing,  and  wild  lust.  Satan  is  visibly  present  — •
as  man,  or  monster,  or  huge  demonic  goat,  —  to  receive  hom-
age as  a  feudal  lord  and  worship  as  a  deity.  The  rites  are  in
elaborate  profanation  of  Christian  ceremonies,  which  they
reverse  or  parody  or  burlesque.  Proselytes  are  brought  in,  to
make  or  confirm  their  formal  compact  with  the  devil:  they
renounce  their  baptism  and  all  "seals  and  symbols  of  re-
deemed sin,"  abandon  their  faith  in  God  and  in  his  Church,
and  abjure  their  redemption  through  Christ.  Satan,  for  his
part,  promises  them  riches  and  pleasure  so  long  as  they  live
and  happiness  in  the  world  to  come.  To  each  is  assigned  a
familiar  demon,  who  shall  come  at  call  to  serve  as  operating
agent  in  every  malefic  design.  To  and  from  the  Sabbath  the
worshippers  are  swiftly  transported  through  the  air,  often  for
long  distances,  riding  on  staffs  or  broomsticks,  or  on  fiends  in
bestial  form;  or  they  may  fly  thither  and  home  again  by  vir-
tue of  a  magic  ointment  with  which  they  smear  themselves.
This  ointment,  which  has  other  occult  properties,  is  some-
times prepared  at  the  meetings  from  the  fat  and  marrow  of
stolen  infants  who  are  sacrificed  to  Satan  or  of  buried  infants
whom  the  hags  have  clawed  up  from  their  graves. Such
were  the  orgies  of  the  Witches'  Sabbath  as  systematized  in
the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  by  the  scholastic  in-
genuity of  devout  theologians  and  described  in  confessions  in-
numerable wrung  by  torture  from  ignorant  and  superstitious
defendants  in  response  to  leading  questions  framed  by  in-
quisitors who  had  the  whole  system  in  mind  before  the  trial
began.

Two  elements  in  the  system  are  clearly  distinguishable  —  V
the  religious  service  with  its  attendant  debauch,  and  the  de-
monic transportation.

For  the  demonic  transportation,  which  accords  in  essence
with  the  ancient  and  practically  universal  belief  in  the  power
of  witches  and  demons  to  take  various  shapes  and  to  fly


^44         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

through  the  air,  we  have  a  text  of  paramount  significance,  the
so-called  Canon  Episcopi.  This  document,  first  recorded  in
the  collection  of  ecclesiastical  decrees  made  by  the  Abbot
Regino  of  Priim  about  the  year  906,  is  of  unknown  author-
ship, but  it  is  doubtless  the  genuine  enactment  of  some  coun-
cil, and  must  be  considerably  older  than  Regino's  time,
though  it  certainly  did  not  emanate,  as  succeeding  legists  and
theologians  supposed,  from  the  Synod  of  Ancyra  (a.d.  314).
It  denounces  the  errors  of  certain  women  who  are  "seduced
by  the  illusions  and  phantasms  of  demons."  These  "believe
and  declare  that  they  ride  upon  beasts  with  Diana,  goddess
of  the  pagans,  and  a  countless  multitude  of  women,  passing
through  many  regions  in  the  dead  of  night,  and  that  on  ap-
pointed nights  they  are  called  out  to  her  service.  A  vast
number,  misled  by  this  false  opinion,  accept  these  things  as
true,  and  thus  deviate  from  the  faith,  since  they  think  that
something  of  divine  nature  and  power  exists  apart  from  the
one  true  God."  Priests  should  preach  that  such  notions  are
mere  demonic  fancies  put  into  the  mind  by  the  evil  spirit.
"For  Satan  (who  transforms  himself  into  an  angel  of  light),
when  he  has  once  taken  possession  of  a  woman's  mind  and
subjected  her  to  his  power  by  infidelity  and  wrong  belief,
straightway  changes  himself  into  the  likeness  of  divers  per-
sons and  deludes  the  minds  of  his  subjects  in  sleep,  so  that
the  victim  believes  that  these  things,  which  only  her  spirit
experiences,  she  really  experiences  in  the  body."  ^'^  This  en-
lightened canon  was  included  in  the  authoritative  collections
of  Ivo  of  Chartres  and  Gratian,  and  became  the  accepted  law
of  the  church. ^5  jf  \^  h^d  been  consistently  applied  through-
out the  witch  prosecutions  on  the  Continent,  the  whole  appa-
ratus of  the  Witches'  Sabbath  would  have  been  relegated  to
the  domain  of  disordered  intellects  and  bad  dreams,  where,  in
large  part,  it  certainly  belongs.

The  Canon  Episcopi,  we  observe,  has  in  and  for  itself  noth-
ing to  do  with  witchcraft.  The  womicn  whom  it  contemplates
are  merely  deluded  creatures  whose  sin  consists  in  their  faith
in  a  heathen  goddess,  their  willingness  to  attend  her  in  aerial
frolics,  and  their  acceptance  of  dream  phenomena,  in  this  re-
gard, as  genuine  experiences.  In  short,  they  have  relapsed  to
paganism.  But  they  are  not  witches,  even  in  intent.  Their


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  245

imagined  flight  involves  no  purpose  of  evil  magic:  they  have
neither  the  power  nor  the  wish  to  kill  their  neighbors  or
blight  their  crops  or  send  the  murrain  upon  their  cattle.  In
the  mind  of  the  folk,  however,  the  coursers  with  Diana  be-
came crossed  or  confused  with  another  breed  of  uncanny-
creatures  —  the  striges,  vampire-hags  who  ranged  the  air  by-
night  and  slaughtered  new-born  infants  or  sucked  their  blood
(p.  224).  Such  beings  were  immemorial  figures  of  the  popu-
lar creed,  and  they  have  continued  to  haunt  men's  minds  to
the  present  day.  Even  in  Regino's  book,  the  deluded  women
of  Diana  are  brought  into  close  connection  with  witchcraft;
for  in  his  rules  for  a  bishop's  visitation  we  find  a  brief  extract
from  the  Canon  Episcopi  combined  with  a  passage  which
deals  specifically  with  the  black  art:  "The  bishop  must  in-
quire whether  there  is  any  woman  [in  the  parish]  who  by  cer-
tain witcheries  and  incantations  says  that  she  can  change
men's  minds  from  hate  to  love  or  from  love  to  hate,  or  dam-
ages or  steals  their  goods;  and  whether  there  is  any  who  says
that,  with  a  horde  of  demons  in  the  likeness  of  women,  on  ap-
pointed nights  she  rides  upon  certain  beasts  and  joins  their
company."  Other  prescribed  enquiries  concern  divination,
superstitious  ceremonies  at  trees  or  springs  or  stones,  and
charms  and  rites  to  transfer  the  pestilence  from  one's  own
animals  to  the  flocks  and  herds  of  a  neighbor.^''

With  all  this,  however,  we  are  still  far  removed  from  the
Witches'  Sabbath.  For  that  we  have  to  look  in  quite  another
direction.

The  religious  meetings  of  any  body  of  Non-conformists  are
a  natural  object  of  suspicion  to  the  orthodox,  particularly  if
the  sectaries  hold  them  in  secret,  as  they  must  in  times  of
persecution,  and  very  particularly  if  the  service  involves  cere-
monies of  a  mysterious  character.  In  that  case  the  assem-
blies, however  decorous,  are  likely  to  be  regarded  by  the
uninitiated  majority  as  orgies  of  demonolatry  and  licentious-
ness. Such  were  the  conventicles  of  the  early  Christians  in
the  estimation  of  pagan  Rome;  and  such,  in  the  estimation  of
orthodox  Christianity,  were  the  conventicles  of  the  heretical
sects  that  arose  successively  as  time  went  on  —  of  the  Mani-
chseans  from  the  third  to  the  sixth  century,  of  the  Paulicians
from  the  seventh  to  the  ninth,  of  the  Cathari  and  the  Wal-


246         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


denses  in  the  middle  ages.  Nor  does  history  lack  instances  in
which  the  ill  repute  has  been  justified,  as  in  the  case  of  the
Anabaptist  disciples  of  Jan  Matthys  and  John  of  Leyden.

In  the  course  of  the  fourteenth  century  the  papal  inquisi-
tors discovered  (so  they  thought)  a  new  heretical  sect  —  the
sect  of  devil-worshipping  witches.  These,  it  logically  fol-
lowed, must  hold  meetings,  and  such  meetings  must  resemble
those  of  the  other  heretics.  The  belief  in  witchcraft  was  an-
cient, primeval,  and  of  the  folk;  but  the  folk  had  always
feared  and  hated  witches  as  individuals,  not  as  members  of  an
organized  body  or  as  adherents  to  a  system.  The  idea  of  a
Sabbath  of  Witches  was  neither  ancient  nor  of  popular  origin.
It  was  a  mere  transference.  What  was  already  established  in
the  inquisitorial  mind  with  regard  to  the  Satanic  Synagogue
of  the  Cathari  was  shifted,  as  a  matter  of  logical  course,  to  the
alleged  assemblies  of  the  new  heretical  sect,  the  devotees  of
witchcraft.  The  process  was  complete  by  the  early  fifteenth
century.

Thus  originated  the  momentous  doctrine  of  the  Witches'
Sabbath,  which  included,  from  this  time  on,  the  ancient  folk-
belief  in  the  aerial  flight,  already  emergent  now  and  then  in
cases  of  heresy.  To  be  sure,  the  Canon  Episcopi  had  to  be
explained  away;  but  this  was  no  difficult  feat  for  scholastic
reasoners.  The  Canon,  they  argued,  teaches  merely  that
certain  deluded  women  imagine  themselves  to  fly  abroad  in
troops  with  other  worshippers  of  Diana.  It  applies,  there-
fore, to  a  specific  form  of  false  belief,  which  it  condemns.
Such  delusions  are  no  dovzbt  possible.  However,  the  Canon
does  not  apply  to  the  witches  of  our  own  time,  members  of
this  strange  sect  of  demonolaters.  These  are  undoubtedly
often  transported  through  the  air  to  their  Sabbath,  where
they  do  homage  to  Satan,  render  an  account  of  their  evil
deeds,  and  dance  and  revel  with  their  demon  lovers.^''

Now  the  papal  inquisition,  as  everybody  knows,  never
gained  a  foothold  in  England.  In  the  English  middle  ages,
therefore,  no  extensive  prosecution  for  heresy  took  place;
there  was  nothing,  that  is  to  say,  at  all  comparable  to  the
pursuit  of  the  Cathari  and  Waldenses  on  the  Continent.  The
result,  with  reference  to  witchcraft,  is  a  striking  contrast  be-
tween England  and  the  Continent  not  only  in  the  number  of


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  247

cases  but  in  the  nature  of  the  several  accusations.  In  Eng-
land, when  a  witch  was  brought  to  trial,  she  was  charged  with
specific  crimes,  with  killing  men  and  cattle,  with  afflicting  her
neighbors  with  disease,  and  so  on.  She  might  have  accom-
plices, to  be  sure,  but  she  was  not  supposed  (as  on  the  Conti-
nent) to  belong  to  an  heretical  sect:  she  was  an  individual
offender  and  was  prosecuted  as  such.  There  was  no  great
central  authority  charged  with  the  sacred  duty  of  extirpating
a  new  and  dangerous  league  of  demonolaters  which  threat-
ened the  very  existence  of  the  Church.

Then  came  the  break  with  Rome,  and  when,  by  1 542,  the
king  and  his  advisers  felt  that  sorcery  and  witchcraft  re-
quired their  more  earnest  attention,  it  was  the  civil  authori-
ties that  took  charge  of  the  matter.  And  the  act  of  parlia-
ment, passed  in  that  year,  is  true  to  English  tradition.  It
penalizes  incantation  and  conjuring,  witchcraft  that  kills  or
wastes  or  maims  a  person  or  destroys  or  impairs  his  goods
and  chattels,  and  other  offences  of  kindred  nature.  It  does
not  in  the  remotest  way  recognize  the  existence  of  Satanic  as-
semblies or  of  demon-worship  en  masse.  Elizabeth's  law  of
1563  is  little  more  than  a  preciser  enactment  with  a  modifica-
tion of  penalties,  and  the  law  of  James  I  is  a  mere  revision  of
Elizabeth's.

Here,  then,  we  discern  a  fundamental  distinction  between
Elizabethan  witchcraft  in  England  and  Continental  witch-
craft during  the  same  period.  The  English  trials  conform  to
the  law.  In  no  single  recorded  witch-trial  during  the  reign  of
Elizabeth  is  there  the  slightest  trace  of  the  Witches'  Sab-
bath.^* The  charges,  the  testimony,  the  confessions  never
hint  at  such  assemblies.  The  common  people,  who  brought
the  complaints,  knew  that  some  witch  by  her  uncanny  arts
had  killed  or  injured  their  cattle  or  their  children  or  them-
selves, or  had  somehow  damaged  their  property.  The  cul-
prits confessed  that  they  had  familiar  spirits  in  the  shape  of
dogs  and  cats  and  toads.  They  admitted  the  practice  of  evil
magic.  But  neither  the  complainants  nor  the  defendants
showed  any  knowledge  of  the  Witches'  Sabbath.  And  the
judges,  however  familiar  some  of  them  may  have  been  with
Continental  matters,  never  thought  of  examining  suspects  on
that  subject,  and  consequently  never  suggested  such  notions


248


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


to  the  witches  themselves  or  to  the  people  at  large.  Through-
out the  Elizabethan  age  the  trials  proceeded  precisely  as  if  no
Witches'  Sabbath  had  ever  existed.^'  If  we  had  only  these
trials  to  go  by,  we  should  not  know  that  anybody  had  ever
believed  in  such  a  thing  at  any  period  of  the  world's  history.

Sir  Thomas  Smith,  for  example,  took  testimony  against
two  witches  in  his  own  parish  in  1570,  but  the  evidence  has  no
touch  of  the  Sabbath.'"'  The  same  is  true  of  the  Chelmsford
cases  of  1566  and  1579  and  1589,  of  the  St.  Osyth  cases  of
1582  (which  were  the  chief  cause  of  Scot's  book),  and  of  the
Warboys  cases  of  1593.  In  all  of  these  we  have  the  evidence
in  sufficient  detail  to  assure  us  that,  if  the  Sabbath  had
emerged,  we  should  find  it  in  the  record.  Take,  for  instance,
the  confession  of  Ursley  Kempe  of  St.  Osyth.  She  informed
against  Mother  Bennet  and  Alice  Hunt,  but  made  no  sug-
gestion of  being  associated  with  them  in  meetings.  On  the
contrary,  her  first  knowledge  that  each  of  them  had  a  familiar
spirit  came  from  her  looking  in  at  their  windows  when  they
were  from  home  and  seeing  an  imp  like  a  ferret  peep  out  from
under  a  cloth.  Further  information  about  her  neighbors
Ursley  derived  from  her  own  familiar,  Tyffyn,  who  "did  tell
her  alwayes  (when  she  asked)  what  the  other  wytches  had
done."  Individual  and  private  action  is  the  theme  in  this
whole  case  — •  not  concerted  villany  or  associated  devil-
worship.''^

A  witness  of  the  highest  character  is  the  Rev.  George  Gif-
fard,  whose  tract  came  out  in  1593  and  was  reissued  in  1603.
It  gives  us  a  remarkably  full  account  of  the  witch  belief  of  the
country  people  in  Essex,  but  without  any  suggestion  of  their
holding  feasts  or  conventicles.  "The  deuils,"  he  writes,
"make  the  witches  in  some  places  beleeue,  that  they  are
turned  into  the  likenesse  of  wolues,  that  they  rend  and  teare
sheepe,  that  they  meet  together  at  a  banquet,  that  some-
times they  flie  or  ride  in  the  ayre,  which  thinges  indeed  are
nothing  so,  but  they  strongly  delude  the  fantasies  of  the
witches."  '♦^  But  this  is  information  given  by  the  learned
man  in  GifFard's  dialogue  (Daniel  —  "come  to  judgment")
to  his  less  intelligent  neighbors,  and  it  is  clear  that  Daniel  is
not  speaking  of  English  conditions,  for  he  prefaces  this  item
by  the  phrase  "in  Germany  and  other  countries."


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH


Reginald  Scot's  attitude  is  especially  significant.  He  tells
much  of  witches'  assemblies,  to  be  sure,  and  derides  the
superstition  that  believes  in  their  existence;  but  his  object
in  dealing  with  them  is  to  discredit  the  absurdities  of  Con-
tinental writers,  to  whom  (in  this  matter)  he  carefully  re-
fers, especially  the  authors  of  the  Malleus  Maleficarum,  and
Bodin,  and  Danaeus.  He  nowhere  mentions  the  Sabbath  as
known  to  English  witches  or  as  alleged  against  them  by  Eng-
lish authorities,  or  even  hints  at  it.  And  he  scouts  the  idea
that  witches  are  organized  and  that  they  are  bound  by  oath
to  augment  their  fellowship.''^  He  is  manifestly  anxious  to
prevent  this  Continental  doctrine  from  getting  a  hold  upon
educated  English  belief,  and  his  treatment  of  the  subject
confirms  (if  confirmation  were  needed)  the  evidence  derived
from  the  records  of  trials,  which,  as  I  have  said,  demonstrates
that  the  creed  of  the  English  common  people  in  his  time
(with  whom  the  prosecutions  originate)  did  not  include  the
Sabbath  at  all.

The  Malleus,  we  should  remember,  was  familiar  to  edu-
cated Englishmen.  Sir  Thomas  Smith  had  a  copy  in  his
library  in  1566,  and  Dr.  Dee  lent  his  copy  to  Mr.  Edward
Hopwood  in  1597.  Bodin's  Demonomanie  was  also  familiar.
Gabriel  Harvey,  who  commends  Scot  in  the  main,  remarks
that  he  wishes  he  had  treated  Bodin  more  courteously  or  con-
futed him  more  effectually. Danaeus  appeared  in  an  Eng-
lish translation  in  1575."''  Scottish  witchcraft  included  the
Sabbath  and  it  forms  a  part  of  the  confessions  in  Newes  from
Scotland  published  in  1591.''^  These  facts  only  make  the  ab-
sence of  this  feature  from  the  Elizabethan  trials  the  more
striking  and  significant.

William  Perkins,  the  famous  Cambridge  theologian,  al-
though a  firm  believer  in  witchcraft  and  in  the  actuality  of
compacts  with  Satan,  gives  no  credence  to  the  Witches'  Sab-
bath. Those  who  deny  the  existence  of  witches,  he  informs
us,  argue  that  "  they  which  confesse  of  themselues  things
false,  and  impossible,  must  needs  be  parties  deluded,  but  our
Witches*  doe  this,  when  they  be  examined  or  consulted  with,
as  that  they  can  raise  tempests,  that  they  are  carried  through

*  By  "our  Witches"  Perkins  means  "witches  of  our  times"  (a  phrase  that  he
uses  on  p.  191),  not  "English  Witches."


250        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

the  aire  in  a  moment,  from  place  to  place,  that  they  passe
through  keyholes,  and  clifts  of  doores,  that  they  be  some-
times turned  into  catts,  hares,  and  other  creatures;  lastly,
that  they  are  brought  into  farre  countries,  to  meete  with
Herodias,  Diana,  and  the  Deuill,  and  such  like;  all  which  are
mere  fables,  and  things  impossible."  But  these  very  delu-
sions, Perkins  contends,  arise  from  the  witches'  league  with
Satan.  "Becoming  his  vassalls,  they  are  deluded,  and  so  in-
toxicated by  him,  that  they  will  run  into  thousands  of  fan-
tastical! imaginations,  holding  themselues  to  be  transformed
into  the  shapes  of  other  creatures,  to  be  transported  in  the
ayre  into  other  countries,  yea  to  do  many  strange  things,
which  in  truth  they  doe  not."  ''^  Nowhere,  however,  does  he
refer  to  the  Sabbath  as  an  English  institution.  It  is  manifest
that,  in  this  regard,  he  is  thinking  of  Continental  matters,  and
this  inference  is  clinched  by  his  marginal  citation  of  Pico
della  Mirandola  and  Remigius.  Perkins  is  a  good  witness  for
Elizabethan  times,  for  he  was  born  in  1558  and  died  in  1602,
so  that  his  life  was  almost  exactly  coincident  with  Eliza-
beth's reign.

Two  facts,  then,  are  of  immense  significance:  (i)  The
Witches'  Sabbath,  though  well-known  on  the  Continent,  is
never  mentioned  or  even  suggested  in  the  records  of  English
trials  in  the  Elizabethan  period;  and  (2)  It  is  never  men-
tioned by  the  Elizabethan  writers  on  witchcraft  unless  they
are  referring  to  Continental  beliefs  and  practices.  Add  to
these  two  facts  a  third,  of  equal  moment,  which  has  been  fully
established  in  preceding  chapters:  There  is  no  single  detail  of
witchcraft  that  emerges  in  any  Elizabethan  trial  which  was
not  an  article  of  English  belief  before  1558.  The  conclusion
is  plain  and  unescapable:  There  is  no  ground  whatever  for
imagining  that  the  Anglican  exiles  —  Jewel  and  Bentham  and
Grindal  and  Cox  and  Parkhurst  and  the  rest  —  who  returned
from  Germany  and  Switzerland  on  the  death  of  Queen  Mary,
introduced  foreign  ideas  on  witchcraft  into  their  native  coun-
try. For  the  witch-creed  of  the  English  people  throughout
the  reign  of  Elizabeth  remained  identical  with  their  witch-
creed  before  her  accession.  There  was  but  one  new  element
which  the  returning  exiles  could  have  contributed  —  the
Witches'  Sabbath;  and  this  doctrine  emerges  in  no  English


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH


251


witch-case  until  after  the  accession  of  James  I.  Indeed,  as  we
shall  see  presently,  it  is  not  until  161 2  that  the  Sabbath  is
mentioned  in  any  English  trial.

I  have  not  forgotten  Jewel's  famous  sermon  before  Queen
Elizabeth.  On  the  strength  of  a  brief  passage  in  this  dis-
course, an  eminent  authority  has  ventured  the  assertion
that  "we  have  every  right  to  believe  that  Jewel  introduced
foreign  opinion  on  witchcraft,"  and  that  "Jewel's  words  put
the  matter  formally  before  the  queen  and  her  government."
The  first  of  these  propositions  is  confuted  by  the  character  of
Jewel's  remark;  the  second  by  the  evidence  of  chronology.

On  July  19,  1559,  Jewel  had  been  appointed  on  a  commis-
sion for  the  settlement  of  church  affairs  in  the  West  and  South
of  England.  He  left  town  soon  after  the  first  of  August  and
made  a  circuit  of  about  seven  hundred  miles,  which  included
Reading,  Abingdon,  Gloucester,  Bristol,  Bath,  Wells,  Exeter,
Cornwall,  Dorchester,  and  Salisbury.  In  the  course  of  the
visitations  incident  to  this  pious  pilgrimage  he  was  horrified
by  the  prevalence  of  Romanist  practices  and  of  witchcraft.
In  a  letter  to  Peter  Martyr  of  Zurich,  written  on  Novem-
ber 2,  the  day  after  his  return  to  London,  he  remarks:  "It  is
incredible  how  great  a  crop  and  forest  of  superstitions  has
sprung  up  in  the  darkness  of  the  Marian  time.  Everywhere
we  found  relics  of  the  saints,  nails  by  which  foolish  persons
imagined  that  Christ  had  been  crucified,  and  I  know  not  what
fragments  of  the  holy  cross.  'T'he  number  of  sorceresses  and
witches  had  increased  immensely  everywhere.  The  cathedrals
were  mere  dens  of  thieves."  ^°

The  sentence  that  I  have  italicized  is  repeated,  with  expan-
sions, in  a  striking  passage  in  Jewel's  (undated)  sermon  at
court,  which  must  have  been  delivered,  therefore,  after  No-
vember I,  1559.5'  The  text  is  Luke,  xi,  15,  "But  some  of
them  said.  He  casteth  out  devils  through  Beelzebub,  the  chief
of  the  devils."  The  subject,  however,  is  neither  witchcraft
nor  demonology.  The  sermon  is  an  orderly  defence  of  the  Re-
formers against  the  Romanists,  involving,  of  course,  a  coun-
ter-attack. We  are  the  true  Christians,  Jewel  argues,  yet  they
call  us  heretics.  Such  has  always  been  the  lot  of  the  godly.
Moses,  for  the  "many  and  strange  wonders"  that  he  wrought,
was  called  a  sorcerer.  Our  Lord  himself  did  not  escape.  The


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

scribes  and  Pharisees  "made  light  of  Christ's  miracles,  and
said  to  the  people:  'He  casteth  out  devils  through  Beelze-
bub.'" His  answer  was  that  "every  kingdom  that  is  divided
in  itself  shall  be  brought  to  desolation,"  but  "all  the  angels
of  Satan  agree  and  conspire  together  to  the  upholding  of
their  kingdom":  "Therefore  must  you  needs  confess  that
I  have  removed  this  devil  by  some  other  greater  power,  and
not  by  the  power  of  Beelzebub."  "Here,"  Jewel  continues,
"perhaps  some  man  will  reply,  that  witches  and  conjurers
oftentimes  chase  away  one  devil  by  the  mean  of  another.
Possible  it  is  so;  but  that  is  wrought  not  by  power,  but  by
collusion  of  the  devils:  for  one  devil,  the  better  to  attain  his
purpose,  will  give  place,  and  make  as  though  he  stood  in  awe
of  another  devil.  And  by  the  way,  to  touch  but  a  word  or  two
of  this  matter,  for  that  the  horrible  using  of  your  poor  sub-
jects enforceth  thereunto;  it  may  please  your  grace  to  under-
stand that  this  kind  of  people  (I  mean  witches  and  sorcerers)
within  these  few  last  years  are  marvellously  increased  within
this  your  grace's  realm.  These  eyes  have  seen  most  evident
and  manifest  marks  of  their  wickedness.  Your  grace's  sub-
jects pine  away  even  unto  death,  their  colour  fadeth,  their
flesh  rotteth,  their  speech  is  benumbed,  their  senses  are  be-
reft. Wherefore,  your  poor  subjects'  most  humble  petition
unto  your  highness  is,  that  the  laws  touching  such  malefac-
tors may  be  put  in  due  execution.  For  the  shoal  of  them  is
great,  their  doings  horrible,  their  malice  intolerable,  the  ex-
amples most  miserable.  And  I  pray  God  they  never  practise
further  than  upon  the  subject.  But  this  only  by  the  way:
these  be  the  scholars  of  Beelzebub."  And  so  the  preacher,
after  this  brief  digression,  returns  to  his  argument  —  for  two-
thirds  of  the  sermon  is  yet  to  come  —  and  demonstrates  to
his  own  satisfaction  that  the  Reformers'  doctrines  are  the
doctrines  of  "  the  ancient  fathers,  the  doctors,  and  the
apostles."  Judge  us  by  our  fruits:  "Superstition  is  removed,
idolatry  is  taken  away,  the  sacraments  are  rightly  and  duly
used,  .  .  .  the  prayers  are  in  such  sort  as  the  people  may  take
profit  and  comfort  by  them.  ...  If  this  be  heresy,  then,  alas!
what  is  true  religion?  Can  these  be  done  by  the  power  of
Beelzebub  ? "  5^

I  should  perhaps  crave  pardon  for  spending  so  much  time


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH


over  the  plan  and  scope  of  Jewel's  sermon.  Not  otherwise,
however,  could  I  present  the  witchcraft  paragraph  in  its  due
relation  to  the  whole.  It  occupies  about  one  quarter  of  a  page
in  a  ten-page  sermon.  It  is  a  mere  aside,  brought  in,  as  Jewel
himself  says,  "by  the  way."  Doubtless  it  impressed  the
queen  and  the  congregation,  but  it  was  not  the  burden  of  the
prophet's  message;  it  was  not  what  they  were  to  "carry  away
with  them."

And  what  of  the  paragraph  itself?  Why,  its  bearing  is  as
clear  as  day.  It  contemplates  witchcraft  merely  in  its  primi-
tive and  fundamental  and  world-wide  aspect  —  as  maleficium
pure  and  simple,  as  the  black  art  by  which  the  people  are
daily  injured  in  life,  body,  and  estate.  It  shows  no  trace
of  Continental  influence;  it  conveys  no  suggestion  of  the
Witches'  Sabbath  and  its  enormities.  If  we  are  to  hold  that
Jewel's  imagination  had  been  inflamed  by  anything  that  he
had  heard  or  seen  during  his  exile,  then  neither  this  passage
nor  the  parallel  sentence  in  his  letter  to  Peter  Martyr  can  be
cited  in  support  of  such  a  view;  "  and  these  are  the  only  ut-
terances of  the  kind  that  have  been  discovered  in  all  Jewel's
published  works,  which  extend  to  thousands  of  pages.

In  his  three  months'  visitation  of  the  Southwest  of  Eng-
land "  (from  early  August  to  the  end  of  October,  1559)  it
was  Jewel's  duty  as  commissioner  not  only  to  establish  the
reformed  practices  in  the  church  but  to  investigate  the  morals
of  the  laity.  And  we  are  fortunate  in  having,  in  contempo-
rary print,  the  identical  Articles  of  Inquiry  which  he  was
bound  by  royal  command  to  use.  The  order  of  proceedings
was  to  summon  the  parishioners  and  churchwardens  and  to
call  upon  them  to  furnish,  under  oath,  "their  detections  and
answers."  "  One  of  the  Articles  runs  as  follows:  "Whether
you  knowe  anye  that  doe  vse  charmes,  sorcerye,  enchaunt-
mentes,  inuocations,  circles,  witchecraftes,  southsayinge,  or
any  lyke  craftes  or  ymaginations  inuented  by  the  Deuyll,  and
specyallye  in  the  tyme  of  womens  trauayle."  This  is  al-
most word  for  word  a  copy  of  the  corresponding  item  in  the
Royal  Articles  of  Edward  VI,  drawn  up  for  a  similar  visita-
tion in  1547.59  Lest  we  should  infer,  however,  that  its  tenor
was  inspired  by  Protestant  ideas,  we  must  observe  that
Bishop  Bonner's  articles  for  the  diocese  of  London  in  1554


254         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

contain  an  identical  enquiry:  "Whether  there  be  any  that  do
use  charms,  witchcraft,  sorcery,  enchantments,  false  sooth-
sayings,  or  any  such-like  thing,  invented  by  the  craft  of  the
devil."''''  And  a  similar  clause  appears  in  Bishop  White's
articles  (as  Cardinal  Pole's  commissary)  for  Lincoln  diocese
in  1556,  and  in  Pole's  own  articles  for  the  diocese  of  Canter-
bury in  1556  and  1557.^'  Other  episcopal  interrogatories,
both  before  and  after  Elizabeth,  agree  in  substance.*'^  In  this
regard,  then,  the  Reformation  made  no  difference.  In  asking
his  questions  about  witchcraft  Jewel  was  no  innovator:  he
was  following  the  regular  practice  of  the  church;  he  might
perfectly  well  have  taken  them  from  the  tenth-century  man-
ual of  Regino  (p.  245,  above).  Nor  was  he  looking  for  novel-
ties in  the  replies  of  the  laymen.  At  no  period  of  English  his-
tory from  King  Alfred  to  day-before-yesterday  would  such
questions  have  failed  to  bring  out  a  mass  of  complaints
against  the  wizards  and  witches  of  the  neighborhood.

Conjuration  and  witchcraft  were  not  absent  from  the
minds  of  the  English  administration  when  Jewel  landed.
How  could  they  be?  Only  four  years  before,  in  1555,  Sir
Thomas  Benger,  with  the  famous  Dr.  John  Dee  and  two
others,  had  been  arrested  and  examined  by  order  of  the
Privy  Council  concerning  "matters  of  conjuring  or  witch-
crafte."  Dee  was  accused  by  George  Ferrys  of  striking  one
of  Ferrys's  children  blind  and  killing  the  other  and  of  direct-
ing his  arts  against  Queen  Mary's  life.  His  reputation  was
against  him,  for  the  mass  of  the  people  were  convinced  that
he  practised  black  magic,  and  later,  we  remember,  his  library
at  Mortlake  was  burned  by  the  mob  (p.  318).  After  a  short
imprisonment,  however,  he  was  discharged  under  bonds.''''  In
the  same  year  a  picturesque  case,  involving  a  bewitched
woman  and  bewitched  cattle  and  a  white  witch  who  asso-
ciated with  the  fairies,^"  occurred  at  Taunton.  The  witch,
Joan  Tyrrye,  told  a  story  which  often  turns  up  elsewhere  in
folk-lore.  "At  one  time  she  met  with  one  of  the  '  fayre  vayres,'
being  a  man,  in  the  market  of  Taunton,  having  a  white  rod  in
his  hand,  and  she  came  to  him,  thinking  to  make  an  acquain-
tance of  him,  and  then  her  sight  was  clean  taken  away  for  a
time,  and  yet  hath  lost  the  sight  of  one  of  her  eyes."  ''^  This
was  an  experience  not  unusual.  "Mortals,"  to  quote  Child,


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH


"whose  eyes  have  been  touched  with  fairies'  salve  can  see
them  when  they  are  to  others  invisible,  and  such  persons,
upon  distinguishing  and  saluting  fairies,  have  often  had  not
simply  this  power  but  their  ordinary  eyesight  taken  away."

Queen  Mary  died  on  November  17,  1558.  Just  one  week
later  we  read  in  the  records  of  the  Council  that  John  Thirkle,
tailor,  "detected  [i.  e.  accused]  of  conjuringe,"  is  to  be  ex-
amined and  kept  in  custody,  and  that  one  Richard  Parlaben
is  to  be  similarly  treated.*'^  In  the  same  month  Sir  Anthony
Fortescue  and  two  associates,  Kele  and  Prestall,  were  also
arrested,  but  soon  released. Fortescue  and  Prestall  were
later  implicated  in  the  Pole  conspiracy  of  1562  (p.  ■260),  in  the
course  of  which,  according  to  the  indictment,  there  were  in-
cantations and  conjurations  —  Prestall  being  one  of  the  con-
jurers. Probably  something  of  the  kind  was  suspected  on  the
present  occasion.  On  December  18  the  Council  sent  "certein
examynacions  taken  of  some  that  practysed  conjuring  in  the
Cytie  of  London"  to  the  Bishop  of  London,  with  orders  "to
procede  by  such  severe  punishement  against  them  that  shalbe
proved  culpaple  herein,  according  to  thorder  of  thecclesyas-
ticall  lawes."  This  bishop  was  Bonner,  one  of  the  most
zealous  of  the  Catholic  prelates.  The  ecclesiastical  laws  were
invoked  by  the  Council  because  there  was  at  this  time  no
statute  against  conjuring  and  witchcraft,  for  the  law  of  1542
had  been  repealed  in  1547.  Here,  then,  we  find  the  adminis-
tration showing  an  active  interest  in  these  arts  for  reasons  of
state.  And  all  this  took  place  two  or  three  months  before
Jewel  reached  London  —  some  weeks,  indeed,  before  his  de-
parture from  Zurich  on  the  homeward  journey.

When  Jewel  reached  England,  shortly  before  March  20,
1559,  Elizabeth's  First  Parliament  had  been  in  session  since
the  25th  of  January.  On  March  15  "an  act  wherby  the  use
and  practice  of  enchantmentes,  witchcrafte,  and  sorcery  is
made  felonye"  had  received  its  first  reading  in  the  House  of
Commons;  on  April  4  it  was  read  for  the  second  time  and
ordered  to  be  engrossed;  on  the  25th  it  was  read  for  the  third
time  and  passed.  It  went  up  to  the  Lords  on  the  27th,  where
it  was  read  for  the  first  and  the  second  time  on  the  28th  and
the  29th;  but  it  got  no  farther.  Doubtless  it  would  have
passed  in  due  course;  but  the  main  purpose  of  the  session  was


256         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

now  achieved:  the  great  business  of  the  Supremacy  Act  and
the  Act  of  Uniformity  was  completed,  and  on  May  8th  parlia-
ment was  dissolved,  not  to  reassemble  until  1563.'''

What  had  the  returning  exiles  to  do  with  this  Witchcraft
Bill?  Nothing,  so  far  as  one  can  ascertain  or  reasonably  con-
jecture. The  dates  tell  the  story.  The  rapid  progress  of  the
bill  when  it  reached  the  upper  house  indicates  practical  un-
animity, and  we  must  infer  that  the  measure  was  acceptable
to  the  bishops.  And  who  were  the  bishops?  They  were  sur-
vivors from  the  Marian  period  —  Heath  and  Tunstall  and
Bayne  and  Bonner  and  the  rest,  the  same  prelates  who  were
soon  to  be  deprived  for  refusing  the  oath  of  supremacy.  Jewel
and  Parker  and  Bentham  and  Grindal  and  their  associates
were  not  yet  in  office  and  had  no  seats  in  parliament.  There
is  no  indication,  and  no  likelihood,  that  they  drafted  the  bill
or  felt  any  particular  interest  in  it.  In  Jewel's  case,  we  have
a  strong  argument  ex  silentio.  If  he  returned  from  Zurich
equipped  with  new  ideas  on  witchcraft  derived  from  Peter
Martyr  and  full  of  zeal  for  the  prosecution  of  witches,  why
did  he  not  mention  the  subject  in  his  long  letter  to  that  same
Peter  written  at  London  on  March  ao,  1559,  five  days  after
the  bill  was  brought  up  in  the  Commons?  This  letter,  by  the
way,  is  significant  not  only  for  what  it  does  not  contain,  but
for  what  it  does.  "The  bishops,"  Jewel  writes,  "are  a  great
hindrance  to  us.  Since  they  are,  as  you  know,  among  the
nobility  and  leaders  in  the  upper  house,  and  since  not  one  of
our  men  has  a  seat  there  who  can  refute  their  artifices  and
falsehoods  by  speaking  face  to  face  with  them,  they  reign  as
sole  monarchs,  among  men  unskilled  in  afi^airs,  and  easily
hold  our  weak  senators  in  check,  either  by  their  numbers  or
by  reputation  for  learning."  Three  more  letters  Jewel
despatched  to  Peter  Martyr  before  the  dissolution  of  parlia-
ment, and  still  there  is  no  mention  of  witchcraft."  I  need  not
continue.  There  is  not  a  particle  of  evidence  to  connect  Jewel
and  the  Marian  exiles  with  the  Witchcraft  Bill  of  1559.  Who
drafted  it  we  cannot  tell.  Probably  it  was  brought  into  the
Commons  at  the  instance  of  the  Council,  which,  as  we  have
seen,  had  been  for  some  time  active  in  the  investigation  of
conjuring  cases  and  had  felt  the  lack  of  a  statute.'^''  Clearly  it
was  not  a  party  measure.  Doubtless  it  was  as  acceptable  to


CHAP.  XVI]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  257

the  Reformers  as  it  certainly  was  to  the  Romanist  bishops,
for  there  cannot  have  been  any  difference  of  opinion  about
the  heinousness  of  witchcraft.  Anyhow,  the  bill  was  a  mere
revival  of  the  Statute  of  1542^^

Between  the  dissolution  of  parliament  on  May  8,  1559,  and
the  session  that  began  on  January  12,  1563,  cases  enough  of
witchcraft  and  conjuration  came  up  to  convince  the  queen
and  her  council  that  some  such  law  was  needed  as  that  which
had  been  on  the  point  of  passing  when  the  First  Parliament
rose.  The  evidence,  though  scattered  and  fragmentary,  is
ample.  In  August,  1559,  Lady  Chandos  was  writing  to  Secre-
tary Cecil  and  others  in  favor  of  her  daughter  Lady  Frances
Throgmorton,  who  had  been  arrested  for  bewitching  and
poisoning  her  husband,  George  Throgmorton.''''  On  Novem-
ber 26,  less  than  a  month  after  Jewel's  return  from  his  West-
ern circuit,  and  before  the  earliest  date  that  has  ever  been
suggested  for  his  sermon.  Sir  Richard  Sakevyle  and  others
by  them  of  certain  persons  accused  of  sorcery,  witchcraft,
reported  to  the  queen  the  "particulars  of  examinations  taken
poisoning,  enchantment,  etc.;  particularly  in  the  case  of
George  Throgmorton  and  Lady  Frances  Throgmorton,  his
wife,  who  was  accused  of  poisoning  her  husband."  "  In  1560
the  parishioners  of  St.  Lawrence  in  Thanet,  Kent,  reported  at
the  visitation  of  the  archdeacon  that  one  Mother  Bushe  was
"suspected  to  be  a  witch."'*  In  the  same  year  the  Court
Rolls  of  Gillingham  Manor,  Dorset,  record  the  presentation
of  Cecilia  Lambert  as  a  woman  of  ill  fame  under  grave  sus-
picion of  practising  incantations.'''  In  1561  the  Act  Book  of
the  City  of  Exeter  tells  of  Frances  Dyrim,  who  for  her  unquiet
life  among  her  neighbors  and  "  for  her  suspected  wytche-
craft "  had  already  been  punished  and  "  also  exyled  out  of  the
Citie,"  but  had  returned.^"  In  the  same  year,  when  lightning
struck  the  steeple  of  St.  Paul's,  some  persons  declared  "it  was
maliciously  done  by  art  magic."  Still  in  1561,  the  Londoner
Henry  Machyn  enters  in  his  diary  three  several  instances  of
men  pilloried  for  sorcery.  The  first,  on  February  13,  was  a
Southwark  scrivener,  "and  ther  was  a  paper  sett  ouer  ys  hed
wrytten  for  sondrys  and  practyses  of  grette  falsode  and  much
on-trowthe,  and  sett  forthe  vnder  coller  of  sowth-sayng."
Then,  on  June  23,  "was  sett  on  the  pelere  for  kungeryng  on


258         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

prest,  ys  name  ys  master  Belissun  [at]  Westmynster."  On  the
25th  "was  sett  in  Chepesyde  ij  peleres  for  vij  men  that  was
sett  on  the  pelere  at  Westmynster  on  Mydsomer  evyn  for
kungeryng,  and  odur  matters."  One  of  the  seven  was
Francis  Cox,  whose  "unfained  retractation"  is  extant  in  a
broadside,  from  which  it  appears  that  his  punishment  was  or-
dered by  the  Council  for  "the  use  of  certayne  sinistral  and
divelysh  artes."  Cox  avows  "that  from  a  child  he  began  to
practise  the  most  divelish  and  superstitious  knowledge  of
Necromancie  and  Invocations  of  Spirites,  and  curious  As-
trology." Soon  after,  he  published  "A  Short  Treatise,  de-
claringe  the  Detestable  Wickednesse  of  Magical  Sciences."
From  the  records  of  the  Queen's  Bench  we  learn  that  Francis
Cox  (Cocks)  and  Leonard  Bilson  (Machyn's  "Belissun"),
with  seven  other  men,  were  brought  to  the  bar  of  that  court
on  June  23,  1561,  by  the  warden  of  the  Fleet  in  obedience  to  a
royal  mandate.  All  nine  had  been  arrested  in  London  "for
certain  trespasses,  contempts,  conjurations,  sorceries,  and  in-
cantations practised  there  and  elsewhere"  and  had  been  im-
prisoned by  the  Council's  orders.  They  made  confession  in
open  court.  Since  there  was  no  record  in  the  case  and  no
prosecutor  appeared,  the  justices,  using  their  "discretion,"
required  them  to  abjure.  Immediately  after  the  oath  they
were  set  in  the  Westminster  pillory  by  order  of  Council.  Two
of  the  nine  were  Winchester  clerics,  one  of  them  (Bilson)  a
prebendary;  two,  a  "clerk"  and  a  miller,  were  from  Worces-
tershire; two,  an  ironmonger  and  a  yeoman  (Francis  Cox),
were  Londoners;  one  was  a  Salter  of  Middlesex,  one  a  gold-
smith of  Westminster,  one  a  merchant  of  Bristol.  The  Bristol
"merchant,"  Hugh  Draper  by  name,  was  a  prosperous  inn-
keeper. He  had  been  arrested  "  by  the  accusation  of  one  John
Man,  an  astronomer"  (i.  e.  astrologer),  who  charged  him  with
being  a  "conjurer  or  sorcerer"  and  with  directing  his  arts
"againste  S""  William  S*  Lowe  and  my  ladie."  Francis  Cox
owed  his  arrest  to  the  same  informer,  who  alleged  that  he  was
also  implicated  in  the  "practise"  (i.  e.  plot)  of  Draper  "and
others"  against  the  St.  Loes.  This  was  the  Sir  William  St.
Loe  who  was  Captain  of  the  Guard  to  the  Queen,  and  my
lady  was  his  wife  Elizabeth,  known  to  fame  as  Bess  of  Hard-
wick,  who  after  his  death  married  George  Earl  of  Shrewsbury


CHAP.  XVI ]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  259

in  1568.*^  The  plot  involved  an  attempt  to  poison  Lady
Elizabeth,  in  which  one  of  her  husband's  nieces  was  impli-
cated. Draper  and  Cox  seem  to  have  cleared  themselves  of
this  particular  crime,  but  both  were  undoubtedly  guilty  of
sorcery  and  conjuration.  The  exact  terms  of  the  oath  of  ab-
juration taken  by  the  nine  wizards  are  fortunately  preserved:

Yee  shall  sweare,  that  from  henceforth  ye  shall  not  vse,  practize,  deuise,
or  put  in  vre  or  exercise,  or  cause,  procure,  counsell,  agree,  assist,  or  consent
to  be  vsed,  deuised,  practized,  put  in  vre,  or  exercised  any  Inuocations  or
Coniurations  of  spirits,  witchcrafts,  inchantments,  or  sorceries,  or  any
thing  whatsoeuer,  touching  or  in  any  wise  concerning  the  same,  or  any  of
them,  to  the  intent  to  get  or  find  any  money  or  treasure,  or  to  wast,  con-
sume, or  destroy  any  person  in  his  members,  bodie,  or  goods,  or  to  prouoke
any  person  to  vnlawfuU  loue,  or  to  know,  tell,  or  declare,  where  goods  lost
or  stollen  be  come,  or  for  any  other  purpose,  end,  or  intent  whatsoeuer,  so
helpe  you  God,  and  the  holy  contents  of  this  booke.*^

Here  we  have  almost  the  very  words  oj  that  Witchcraft  Statute  of
Henry  VIII  which  was  to  have  been  revived  in  the  parliament  of
^559-  Note  further  that  the  proceedings  in  this  case  origi-
nated not  with  the  ecclesiastics  but  with  the  Privy  Council.
True,  Grindal,  the  Bishop  of  London,  examined  one  of  the
culprits,  a  priest  named  John  Cox  (perhaps  a  relative  of
Francis),  but  he  did  so  at  the  request  of  Secretary  Cecil,  to
whom  he  forwarded  Cox's  confession.  Grindal's  covering
letter  indicates  that  he  was  in  favor  of  legislation  against  sor-
cery,^'' but  so,  as  we  have  seen,  were  the  Romanist  bishops  in
the  First  Parliament.

Not  only  the  civil  authorities  but  the  physicians  at  about
this  time  were  troubled  by  the  prevalence  of  sorcery  and
witchcraft.  In  1562  Thomas  Gale,  Master  in  Chirurgery,
saw  in  the  two  London  hospitals  more  than  three  hundred
poor  people  in  such  a  desperate  condition  that  sixscore  of
them  could  never  recover  without  the  loss  of  a  leg  or  an
arm  or  some  other  permanent  disability.  Quacks,  male  and
female,  were  to  blame.  "I  think  there  be  not  so  few  in  Lon-
don as  three  score  women  that  occupieth  the  arte  of  Physicke
and  Chirurgerie.  These  women,  some  of  them  be  called  wise
women,  or  holie  or  good  women,  some  of  them  be  called
Witches  and  useth  to  call  on  certaine  spirits."  Dr.  William
Bullein,  writing  early  in  1563,  pays  his  respects  to  the  same


26o        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


sort  of  charlatans  who  deceive  the  people  "with  their  Knacks,
Pricks,  Domifying  and  Figuring  .  .  .  Paining,  that  they  have
Familiers  and  Glasses;  whereby  they  may  find  things  that  be
lost.  And  beside  them  are  infinite  of  old  dotish  Witches  with
Blessings  for  the  Fair,  and  conjuring  of  Cattel."  Bullein  also
mentions  some  witches  of  Suffolk  whom  he  had  known.

John  Halle,  Chyrurgyen,  is  another  witness.  One  of  his
examples  of  the  "  beastlye  Abusers,  bothe  of  Chyrurgerie,  and
Physyke,  in  oure  tyme,"  is  a  certain  Valentyne,  who  set  up
practice  in  1560  at  Staplehurst  in  Kent.  "Thys  abhominable
deceaver  made  the  people  beleve  that  he  could  tel  al  thinges
present,  past,  and  to  come;  and  the  very  thoughtes  of  men,
and  theyr  diseases,  by  onlye  lokinge  in  theyr  faces."  Some-
times, when  consulted,  he  pretended  "that  he  wente  to  aske
councel  of  the  devel,  by  going  a  litle  asyde  and  mumblynge
to  him  selfe."  He  was  imprisoned  and  whipped,  but  resumed
his  business,  whereupon  the  parson  of  Staplehurst  brought
him  before  the  ecclesiastical  court  "as  an  adulterer,  and  a
woorker  by  divlishe  and  magicall  artes,"  and  he  was  excom-
municated. In  1562  he  absconded  to  avoid  arrest  by  the  civil
authorities.^"

In  October,  1562,  Arthur  and  Edmund  Pole  (the  Cardinal's
nephews)  with  Anthony  Fortescue  (their  brother-in-law)
were  arrested,  and  on  February  19,  1563,  with  five  associates,
they  were  indicted  for  treason,  in  that  on  September  i,  1562,
at  Lambeth,  they  did  "  conspire  not  only  to  depose  the  Queen,
but  to  effect  her  death  and  total  destruction,  and  to  erect  and
place  Mary  Queen  of  Scots  in  the  Royal  authority."  Two  of
the  conspirators,  John  Prestall  and  Edward  Cosyn,  accord-
ing to  the  indictment,  had,  at  Southwark  on  September  10,
"practised  various  incantations  and  conjurations  of  evil
spirits  in  working  their  said  affairs:  and  inquired  of  an  evil
spirit  how  to  carry  their  treasons  into  effect."  Six  of  the
group  were  arraigned  on  February  26,  before  a  special  com-
mission. Fortescue  confessed,  and  the  others  were  con-
victed."Their  onely  defence,"  we  are  told,  "was  that  they
ment  to  attempte  nothing  in  the  Quenes  life  tyme,  who  by
conjuration  they  had  fownde  should  not  lyve  passinge  the
nexte  spring."  Their  lives  were  spared,  but  all  of  them
were  imprisoned  in  the  Tower.  Prestall  and  Cosyn  had  gone


CHAP.  XVI ]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  261

abroad  before  the  arrest  of  their  companions,  and  were  not
tried  with  the  others.

This  John  Prestall  was  a  gentleman  of  Surrey  and  was
somehow  of  kindred  to  the  Poles. He  was  deeply  involved
in  Scottish  and  Spanish  plots  against  Elizabeth,  in  which  he
was  closely  associated  with  Dr.  John  Story,  executed  for  high
treason  in  1571.  Though  sentenced  to  death  in  that  same
year,  Prestall  was  spared  by  the  queen.  His  contacts  with  the
occult  are  highly  curious.  He  was  one  of  the  two  conjurers
in  this  Pole  affair  of  1562.  In  1567  he  was  released  from  the
Tower  on  his  offer  to  convert  silver  into  gold.'"*  In  1569  it  was
reported  that  he  was  in  Scotland,  "daily  accompanying  the
Lord  Maxwell,  and  sometimes  .  .  .  with  the  Laird  of  Coghill,
where,  having  got  two  other  persons,  he  coins  both  gold  and
silver,"  whether  as  an  alchemist  or  as  a  counterfeiter  does  not
appear. '5  In  1578  he  informed  against  a  priest  named  Emer-
son, an  accomplice  apparently,  who  practised  conjuration.'^
In  1590  and  1591,  when  at  large  in  London  after  some  ten
years  in  the  Tower,  he  was  engaged  in  "  sorcery,  witchcraft,  or
magic,  to  draw  the  affections  of  men  and  women,"  and  it  is  on
record  that  he  had  promised  one  Edmund  Calton  "a  drink,"
manifestly  a  love  potion.'''  After  this  he  is  lost  to  view.'^

Just  before  the  Poles  and  their  accomplices  were  tried,  the
Second  Parliament  of  Elizabeth  convened,  on  January  12,
1563.  On  the  1 8th,  a  bill  to  revive  the  witchcraft  law  of
Henry  VIII  was  introduced  in  the  House  of  Commons.  On
the  21  st  it  was  read  for  the  second  time  and  was  referred  to
Sir  Henry  Sydney  for  report.  As  a  result,  a  new  bill  was
brought  in  on  the  8  th  of  February.  This  passed  the  House  on
the  nth,  and  went  up  to  the  Lords  on  the  15th,  when  it  had
its  first  reading,  but  it  did  not  pass.  On  the  9th  of  March  a
new  witchcraft  bill  was  read  in  the  Lords.  This  was  read  a
second  time  next  day  and  referred  for  report  and  advice  to
the  Lord  Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas.  It  was  passed
on  the  13th,  and  brought  down  from  the  Lords  "by  Mr.  So-
licitor" on  the  same  day.  It  passed  the  Commons  on  the
19th.''  This  act,  which  was  the  law  of  the  land  until  1604,  is
more  exact  and  detailed  than  the  statute  of  1542  which  the
Commons  had  intended  to  revive;  but  it  is  also  somewhat
milder;  it  discriminates  grades  of  offence  and  fixes  the  penal-


262        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

ties  accordingly  (see  p.  282).  Jewel  and  several  of  his  fellow-
exiles  were  bishops  by  this  time  and  sat  in  the  House  of
Lords,  but  there  is  nothing  to  indicate  that  they  were  any
more  in  favor  of  the  law  than  the  Romanist  bishops  had  been
in  favor  of  the  more  drastic  bill  that  had  come  before  them  in
1559.  Again  we  have  letters  —  three  in  number  —  from
Jewel  to  his  Zurich  friends,  written  during  this  three  months'
session,  and  there  is  no  word  of  witchcraft  in  any  of  them.'°°
From  1559  to  1602,  indeed,  we  have  in  print  about  two  hun-
dred letters  written  by  the  English  reformers  to  their  friends
on  the  Continent  and  some  fifty  letters  from  Continental  cor-
respondents to  Englishmen.  Every  conceivable  topic  is  dis-
cussed or  touched  upon,  some  of  them  again  and  again:  — ■  the
mass,  the  Royal  Visitation,  the  coinage,  the  Westminster
Conference,  the  plague,  the  wars,  vestments,  the  queen's
marriage,  the  Ubiquitarians,  Parkhurst's  epigrams,  the  state
of  the  universities,  the  silver  cross  in  Elizabeth's  chapel,  the
lightning  that  struck  the  Salisbury  steeple,  candles,  the  Ana-
baptists, organs  in  the  churches,  the  Rising  in  the  North,  the
ring  in  betrothal,  the  opposition  in  parliament,  the  murder
of  Darnley,  the  churching  of  women,  a  sheep  in  Essex  that
revealed  a  murder,'"'  monstrous  births,'"^  etc.,  etc.  But
demonology  and  witchcraft  are  barely  mentioned.  I  have
searched  these  letters  more  than  once,  and  —  except  for
Jewel's  solitary  sentence,  already  quoted  (p.  251)  —  I  have
found  but  three  instances:

(1)  1566.   Rizzio  was  "skilled  in  the  necromantic  art."  '"^

(2)  1571.  The  Papists  endeavor  to  cause  the  death  of  Elizabeth  "by
poison  and  violence  and  witchcraft  and  treason.""''

(3)  1574.  A  Dutch  girl  at  Norwich  and  the  son  of  an  M.  P.  were  pos-
sessed of  a  devil,  but  were  set  free  by  God's  help.  "5

In  two  letters  of  1563  from  Bishop  Parkhurst  to  Henry  Bul-
linger  is  this  silence  particularly  eloquent.  In  the  first,  written
shortly  after  the  prorogation  of  the  parliament  that  enacted
the  Witchcraft  Law,  he  tells  of  the  Poles'  conspiracy  but
ignores  the  sorcery  it  involved.  In  the  second,  which  dates
from  August,  he  reports  the  news  from  Scotland  just  brought
by  a  young  preacher  of  that  nation.  "They  have  decreed  in
parliament,"  so  runs  one  of  the  items,  "that  adultery  shall


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH


263


be  punished  with  death."  But  Parkhurst  neglects  to  add
that  the  same  penalty  has  been  fixed  by  the  Scottish  legisla-
tors for  practising  any  kind  of  witchcraft,  sorcery,  or  necro-
mancy, or  for  pretending  to  any  knowledge  of  such  arts,  or  for
consulting  any  person  who  thus  pretends.  Yet  this  Draconic
statute  had  been  enacted,  like  that  against  adultery,  in  the
Scottish  parliament  of  the  preceding  June,  and  precedes  it  im-
mediately in  the  record.'"'  Surely,  if  the  returning  exiles  had
been  so  eager  in  this  matter  as  some  scholars  would  have  us
believe, —  and  particularly  if  such  eagerness  had  been  due  to
their  Continental  lessons  and  experiences  in  Mary's  reign,  — ■
Bishop  Parkhurst,  one  of  the  most  eminent  of  those  exiles,
writing  to  a  Zurich  friend  in  August,  1563,  might  be  expected
to  advert  both  to  the  English  witchcraft  law  (passed  in  March
of  that  year)  and  to  the  Scottish  witchcraft  law  (passed  in
June)  as  matters  of  interest  not  only  to  himself  but  to  his  cor-
respondent. Praefulget  per  absentiaml

I  have  no  thought  of  denying  that  Jewel  and  the  other
bishops  probably  favored  the  Witchcraft  Act  of  1 563.  Indeed,
there  is  one  piece  of  evidence,  heretofore  overlooked,  which
proves  their  interest  in  that  measure.  The  Convocation  of
1563  met  on  the  same  day  as  Parliament  (January  12),  and
for  Convocation  William  Alley  (or  Allein),  Bishop  of  Exeter,
prepared  a  "Judgment  for  Doctrine  and  Discipline."  This
contains,  among  many  other  proposals,  a  recommendation
"That  there  be  some  penal,  sharp,  yea.  Capital  Pains  for
Witches,  Charmers,  Sorcerers,  Inchanters  and  such  like."
My  point  is  —  and  I  think  I  have  proved  it  amply  — •  that  the
opinions  of  Jewel  and  his  confreres  on  sorcery  and  witchcraft
did  not  differ  from  those  of  the  Romanists,  and,  further,  that
the  legislation  (abortive  in  1559,  effectual  in  1563)  was  not
due  to  their  initiative,  but  rather  to  the  general  government
as  represented  by  the  Privy  Council.  Anyhow,  it  is  per-
fectly clear  that  they  introduced  no  Continental  ideas  on  the
subject.  The  varieties  of  witchcraft  and  sorcery  specified  in
the  Statute  of  1563  are  identical  with  those  in  the  Statute  of
1542.  In  view  of  the  activity  of  the  civil  authorities  before
the  return  of  the  exiles,  of  what  was  done  by  the  parliament
of  1559,  when  the  Marian  bishops  were  still  in  the  House  of
Lords,  and  of  the  general  excitement  on  the  subject  of  con-


164         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

juring  and  witchcraft  between  the  parUament  of  1559  and
that  of  1563,  it  is  hard  to  understand  why  to  the  exiles  and  to
Jewel  in  particular  should  be  ascribed  the  bringing  forward  in
1563  of  the  same  proposition  to  revive  the  Statute  of  Henry
VIII  that  had  all  but  passed  on  the  previous  occasion.  And
it  is  still  more  difficult  to  comprehend  the  point  of  view  of
those  scholars  who  maintain  that  a  few  sentences  in  Jewel's
sermon  of  1560  made  such  an  impression  as  to  cause  the
drafting  and  passage  of  the  Witchcraft  Statute  of  1563.'°'

One  curiosity  of  learned  opinion  remains  to  be  noted  before
we  come  back  to  the  Witches'  Sabbath.  In  1582  one  W,  W.
(not  hitherto  identified)  published  Brian  Darcey's  circum-
stantial account  of  the  St.  Osyth  witchcraft  cases  of  that
year.  From  this  a  distinguished  investigator  makes  the  fol-
lowing quotation:  "There  is  a  man  of  great  cunning  and
knoweledge  come  ouer  lately  vnto  our  Queenes  Maiestie,
which  hath  aduertised  her  what  a  companie  and  number  of
Witches  be  within  Englande:  whereupon  I  and  other  of  her
lustices  haue  receiued  Commission  for  the  apprehending  of
as  many  as  are  within  these  limites."  Who  was  this  new-
comer? "Probably  Jewel"  is  the  reply  of  the  investigator,
and  he  ventures  to  suggest  that  "the  impression  produced"
by  the  appeal  in  Jewel's  sermon  "was  responsible  probably
not  only  for  the  passage  of  the  law  [of  1563I  but  also  for  the
issue  of  commissions  to  the  justices  of  the  peace  to  apprehend
all  the  witches  they  were  able  to  find  in  their  jurisdictions."  "°
Now  "lately,"  one  must  confess,  is  an  elastic  word,  but  there
must  be  some  ultimate  in  its  capabilities  in  the  way  of
stretching.  Darcey  was  writing  in  1582:  Jewel  had  come  over
twenty-three  years  before,  and,  at  the  moment  of  composition,
he  had  lain  for  eleven  years  in  his  grave,  for  he  died  in  1571.
And  that  is  not  all.  Let  us  look  at  the  context.  Ursley
Kempe  had  informed  against  Elizabeth  Bennet,  and  Eliza-
beth was  being  examined  by  Squire  Darcey.  She  made  a  gen-
eral denial.  "  Then,"  writes  Darcey,  "  I  calling  her  vnto  mee,
saide,  Elizabeth  as  thou  wilt  haue  favour  confesse  the  truth.
For  so  it  is,  there  is  a  man  of  great  cunning  and  knoweledge
come  ouer  lately  vnto  our  Queenes  Maiestie,  which  hath  ad-
uertised her  what  a  companie  and  number  of  Witches  be
within  Englande:  whereupon  I  and  other  of  her  lustices  haue


CHAP.  XVI ]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH


265


receiued  Commission  for  the  apprehending  of  as  many  as  are
within  these  limites,  and  they  which  doe  confesse  the  truth  of
their  doeings,  they  shall  haue  much  fauour:  but  the  other
they  shall  bee  burnt  and  hanged.  At  which  speeches  shee  the
saide  Elizabeth  falling  vpon  her  knees  distilling  teares  con-
fessed as  hereafter  foUoweth."  When  read  thus  in  its  con-
text, Darcey's  dictum  takes  on  a  quite  peculiar  complexion.
Falsus  in  iino,falsus  in  omyiibus.  Darcey  was  lying  when  he
promised  "favour"  in  return  for  a  full  confession,  for  Eliza-
beth Bennet  was  executed  in  due  course.'"  He  was  lying
when  he  threatened  her  with  burning,  for  he  knew  (though
she  did  not)  that  the  halter  was  the  worst  punishment  she  had
to  fear.  He  was  almost  certainly  lying  when  he  talked  of  a
special  witch-hunting  commission;  for  his  ordinary  powers  as
a  justice  of  the  peace  needed  no  such  reinforcement  to  enable
him  to  arrest  and  prosecute  witches.  The  inference  is  com-
pulsive. It  is  idle  to  guess  at  the  identity  of  the  "  man  of  great
cunning  and  knowledge."  There  was  no  such  person.  He  was
a  bugbear  of  Brian  Darcey's  own  manufacture.

But  we  must  return  to  the  Witches'  Sabbath.  No  sugges-
tion of  this  is  perceptible,  as  we  have  seen,  in  any  English
trial  during  the  Elizabethan  period,  although  the  Continen-
tal notions  about  it  are  mentioned  by  Reginald  Scot  and
other  English  writers  from  1584  on.  In  Scotland,  however,
the  famous  case  of  Dr.  Fian  and  his  associates  in  1590  and
1591  involves  the  Sabbath  system  in  an  elaborate  form  —
a  fact  which  emphasizes  once  more  the  distinction  between
England  and  the  Continent  in  this  regard.

Ben  Jonson's  Masque  of  Queens  (1609)  exhibits  the  Sab-
bath in  full  career,  but  he  got  his  material  —  so  he  says
himself — "out  of  the  fulness  and  memory  of  [his]  former
readings,"  and  in  his  erudite  notes  (written  at  Prince  Henry's
request)  he  has  exerted  himself  "to  retrieve  the  particular
authorities."  ""f

The  first  trace  of  the  Witches'  Sabbath  in  any  English  case
appears  in  the  trials  of  the  Lancashire  Witches  in  161 2.  On
May  19  in  that  year  Anne  Whittle  (alias  Chattox)  confessed
to  the  Mayor  of  Lancaster  that,  some  fourteen  years  before,
Elizabeth  Southerns  (alias  Demdike)  had  induced  her  to  be-
come a  witch.  Soon  after,  she  said,  the  devil  came  to  Dem-


266


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


dike's  house  about  midnight,  and  the  two  women  went  out  to
meet  him.  A  meal  was  served,  al fresco  apparently,  and  their
she-familiars,  Fancie  and  Tibbe,  carried  off  what  was  left.
"There  was  victuals,  viz.  Flesh,  Butter,  Cheese,  Bread,  and
Drinke  .  .  .  although  they  did  eate,  they  were  neuer  the
fuller,  nor  better  for  the  same."  Assuredly  this  is  a  faint
reflection  of  the  Sabbath,  but  there  is  more  to  come.  Among
the  accused  was  old  Demdike's  daughter,  Elizabeth  Device,
a  widow,  who  lived  with  her  mother  in  a  house  called  Malkin
Tower. Here,  on  Good  Friday  about  noon,  so  Elizabeth's
nine-year-old  daughter  Jennet  testified,  was  held  a  meeting
of  some  twenty  persons,  only  two  of  whom  were  men.  Her
mother  told  her.  Jennet  continued,  that  these  were  all  witches
and  that  they  came  "  to  giue  a  name"  to  the  familiar  spirit  of
Jennet's  elder  sister,  Alizon.  They  "had  to  their  dinners
Beefe,  Bacon,  and  roasted  Mutton."  The  mutton,  so  Jen-
net's brother  James  informed  her,  "was  of  a  Wether  of
Christopher  Swyers  of  Barley:  which  Wether  was  brought  in
the  night  before  ...  by  the  said  lames  Deuice  .  .  .:  and  in
this  Examinates  sight  killed  and  eaten."  Brother  James  in
his  examinations,  supplied  further  details.  The  meeting  had
three  objects: first,  to  christen  Alizon's  familiar  ("but  [they]
did  not  name  him,  because  shee  was  not  there");  second,  to
release  the  witches  confined  in  Lancaster  Castle  (namely,  his
sister  Alizon,  his  grandmother  Demdike,  Anne  Whittle,  and
Anne's  daughter  Redferne),  to  murder  the  jailer,  and  to  blow
up  the  castle;  third,  to  plot  the  death  of  a  certain  Master
Thomas  Lister."^  Neither  James  nor  Jennet  says  anything  of
any  demon's  actual  presence  at  the  feast.  Thus  the  affair  is
reduced  to  the  prosaic  level  of  a  noonday  dinner  of  neighbors
who  were  concerned  for  their  incarcerated  friends  and  rela-
tives. Very  likely  some  such  gathering  occurred,  and  there
may  have  been  wild  talk  among  the  guests.  The  stolen  sheep,
at  all  events,  sounds  authentic.  James  admitted  the  theft,"'
which,  by  the  way,  was  enough  to  hang  him  in  those  days
even  if  he  had  not  confessed  (as  he  did)  to  murder  by  witch-
craft."" Though  Satan  did  not  attend  this  rural  banquet,
there  were  devils  waiting  outside,  for,  James  tells  us,  all  the
witches  left  the  house  "in  their  owne  shapes  and  likenesses,"
and,  as  soon  as  they  were  "forth  of  the  dores, "  they  were  on


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH


267


horseback  —  on  creatures,  that  is  to  say,  that  had  the  form  of
"Foales,  some  of  one  colour,  some  of  another;  and  Prestons
wife  was  the  last:  and  when  shee  got  on  Horsebacke,  they  all
presently  vanished  out  of  this  Examinates  sight.  And  before
their  said  parting  away,  they  all  appointed  to  meete  at  the
said  Prestons  wiues  house  that  day  twelue-moneths;  at  which
time  the  said  Prestons  wife  promised  to  make  them  a  great
Feast.  And  if  they  had  occasion  to  meete  in  the  meane  time,
then  should  warning  be  giuen,  that  they  all  should  meete
vpon  Romleyes  Moore."  Both  James  Device  and  his  little
sister  gave  the  names  of  several  persons  present  at  the  meet-
ing, and  their  testimony  was  repeated,  in  almost  identical
terms,  at  several  trials.  On  one  of  these  occasions  Jennet
added  the  circumstance  that  John  Bulcocke  turned  the  spit
when  the  wether  was  roasted."^  Elizabeth  Device,  their
mother,  would  confess  nothing  until  she  learned  of  her  daugh-
ter's evidence,  but  by-and-by  she  admitted  the  dinner  at
Malkin  Tower.  "And  shee  also  confesseth,  in  all  things
touching  the  Christening  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  killing  of  Mas-
ter Lister  .  .  .,  as  the  said  Ia?nes  Deuice  hath  before  con-
fessed; but  denieth  of  any  talke  was  amongst  them,  ...  to
her  now  remembrance,  at  the  said  meeting  together,  touching
the  killing  of  the  Gaoler,  or  the  blowing  vp  of  Lancaster
Castle."  Old  Demdike  died  in  prison  before  trial.  Anne
Whittle  and  Anne  Redferne  were  executed.  So  were  Elizabeth
Device  (old  Demdike's  daughter)  and  Elizabeth's  children,
Alizon  and  [James,  as  well  as  five  of  the  persons  whom
James  and  Jennet  recognized  at  the  meeting.  Their  crime,  of
course,  was  not  attendance  at  this  feast,  but  murder  or  in-
jury by  witchcraft,  which  some  of  them  confessed.

In  the  same  year  (1612),  on  August  19,  the  Three  Witches
of  Salmesbury  were  arraigned  at  Lancaster  for  afflicting
Grace  Sowerbutts.  Grace,  who  was  an  hysterical  patient  of
fourteen,  swore  that  she  witnessed  a  meeting  of  the  three
(one  of  whom  was  her  grandmother  and  another  her  aunt)  at
Red  Bank  on  the  River  Ribble.  Such  meetings  were  held
after  dark  every  Thursday  and  Sunday  "by  the  space  of  a
fortnight."  "Foure  black  things,  going  vpright,  and  yet  not
like  men  in  the  face,"  carried  the  three  witches,  and  Grace
too,  across  the  river.  "And  when  they  came  to  the  said  Red


268


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Banck,  they  found  some  thing  there  which  they  did  eate.
But  this  Examinate  saith,  shee  neuer  saw  such  meate;  and
therefore  shee  durst  not  eate  thereof.  .  .  .  And  after  they  had
eaten,  the  said  three  Women  and  this  Examinate  danced,
euery  one  of  them  with  one  of  the  black  things  aforesaid,"
and  so  on.  "  Being  further  examined  touching  her  being  at  Red-
bancke,  she  saith,  .  .  .  that  at  their  said  meeting  .  .  .  ,  there
did  come  also  diuers  other  women,  .  .  .  some  old,  some
yong,"  but  these  were  mere  spectators  and  did  not  join  the
dance.  The  phrase  that  I  have  italicized  is  significant.  The
examining  magistrate,  it  is  clear,  wished  to  hear  about  a  real
Witches'  Sabbath,  not  a  mere  assignation  between  three
individuals  and  their  familiars  —  and  he  questioned  Grace
accordingly;  but  his  suggestion  elicited  nothing  that  approxi-
mates the  published  accounts  of  Satan's  Synagogues  on  the
Continent.  Still,  there  were  horrors  enough  in  Grace's  story.
On  another  occasion  (not  a  Sabbath,  however),  her  grand-
mother had  thrust  a  nail  into  a  child  and  sucked  its  blood.
The  child  languished  and  died.  Grace's  grandmother  and
aunt  dug  up  the  body  and  cooked  it,  and  ate  of  it,  but  Grace
refused.  Afterwards  they  "did  seethe  the  bones  of  the  said
child  in  a  pot,  and  with  the  Fat  that  came  out  of  the  said
bones,  they  said  they  would  annoint  themselues,  that  thereby
they  might  sometimes  change  themselues  into  other  shapes."
Altogether  we  seem  to  have  enough  in  Grace's  evidence  to
show  that  by  1612  the  main  features  of  the  Continental  Sab-
bath had  become  articles  in  the  creed  of  the  English  country
people.  But  alas  for  such  a  theory !  The  judge,  though  a  firm
believer  in  witchcraft,  was  suspicious.  He  committed  Grace
to  a  preacher  and  two  justices  for  further  examination,  and
she  finally  confessed  that  she  had  lied  from  start  to  finish,  and
that  all  she  had  testified  had  been  taught  her  by  a  Catholic
priest."''  We  need  not  share  the  judge's  indignation.  To  him
the  priest  was,  of  course,  a  deviser  of  malicious  falsehoods.
To  us,  on  the  contrary,  he  may  appear  honest  but  deluded.  In
either  case,  he  was  manifestly  familiar  with  learned  material,
and  no  good  witness,  therefore,  for  native  folk-lore.  Yet  one
must  cheerfully  admit  that  by  161 2  —  nine  years  after  Queen
Elizabeth's  death  —  the  Continental  Sabbath  had  won  a
place  —  if  a  shadowy  and  unstable  one  —  in  the  prosecution


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  269

of  English  witches.  The  account  of  the  Lancashire  witches
published  by  Thomas  Potts  in  1613  familiarized  the  public
with  all  the  details  of  the  feast  on  stolen  mutton  at  Malkin
Tower.

Dr.  Cotta  almost  ignores  the  Sabbath  in  his  elaborate
treatise,  The  Triall  of  Witch-craft  (1616).  He  mentions  the
Italian  Porta's  narrative  of  the  woman  who  declared  that  she
had  ridden  through  the  air  over  the  mountains  and  "met  in
conventicles"  with  other  hags,  though  in  fact  she  was  sound
asleep  in  her  chamber  all  the  time;  "-^^  adds  that  some  writers
"of  worthy  credit"  report  "that  the  bodies  of  Sorcerers  and
Witches  haue  beene  really  carried,  and  locally  remoued  from
one  place  into  another  by  the  Diuell,"  and  concludes  that
such  transportation  is  possible. But  he  says  nothing  of
English  witch-conventions  and  even  ignores  the  alleged  feast
of  conspirators  at  Malkin  Tower,  though  he  was  acquainted
with  the  Lancaster  prosecution  and  cites  it  as  proof  of
image  magic."'

Thomas  Cooper  in  161 7  describes  witch-meetings  in  church,
with  the  fiend  in  the  pulpit  preaching  and  divers  profane
rites. His  sources  are  mainly  King  James  and  perhaps  the
Continental  authorities,  but  he  may  intend  to  ascribe  such
services  to  the  English  disciples  of  Satan.  "Hath  not  Couen-
trie,"  he  asks,  "beene  vsually  haunted  by  these  hellish  Sor-
cerers, where  it  was  confessed  by  one  of  them,  that  no  lesse
then  three-score  were  of  that  confedracie? "

From  1 61 2  to  1634  the  English  witch-trials  are  barren  of
evidence  about  the  Sabbath.  The  witches  accused  of  tor-
menting the  Fairfax  children  from  1621  to  1623  were  thought
to  belong  to  a  band  of  seven,  and  there  is  mention  of  their
meeting  to  confer  with  their  Master  "in  what  sort  to  pro-
ceed." On  another  occasion  Helen  Fairfax  was  found  on  a
high  moor  a  good  way  from  home.  She  had  been  carried
thither,  she  said,  by  one  of  the  hags  and  a  demonic  cat,  and
there  she  saw  many  women  together  at  a  great  fire.  Again,  in
a  trance,  the  children  "were  told  that  all  the  witches  had  a
feast  at  Timble  Gill:  their  meat  was  roasted  about  midnight.
At  the  upper  end  of  the  table  sat  their  master,  viz.,  the  devil,
at  the  lower  end  Dibb's  wife,  who  provided  for  the  feast,  and
was  the  cook."       Some  of  these  details  may  have  come  be-


270         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

fore  the  York  assizes  in  April  and  August,  1622;  but  on  the
former  occasion  the  defendants  were  acquitted  and  on  the
latter  the  judge  "withdrew  the  offenders  from  trial  by  the
jury  of  life  and  death,  and  dismissed  them  at  liberty."
Fairfax's  narrative  remained  in  manuscript  until  the  nine-
teenth century.  Nothing  further  transpires  on  the  subject
of  the  Witches'  Sabbath  in  any  English  trial  until  we  reach
1634.

In  that  year,  however,  Edmund  Robinson,  a  lad  of  ten  or
eleven  who  lived  in  the  same  vicinity  as  the  Lancashire
witches  of  161 2,  told  a  weird  tale.  Goody  Dickinson,  he  testi-
fied, had  carried  him  off  on  a  white  horse  (which  was  a  boy
transformed  by  a  magic  bridle)  to  a  house  in  the  neighbor-
hood. There  he  saw  divers  persons  about  the  door,  and  others
came  riding  up  "on  Horses  of  several  colours."  About  three-
score entered,  "where  they  had  a  fire,  and  meat  roasting."
A  young  woman  "gave  him  Flesh  and  Bread  upon  a  Trencher
and  Drink  in  a  Glass,  which  after  the  first  tast  he  refused  and
would  have  no  more,  but  said,  it  was  naught."  Presently  he
followed  some  of  the  company  into  the  barn.  There  he  saw
six  of  them  pulling  six  several  ropes,  from  which  came  milk,
and  butter  in  lumps,  and  smoking  meat,  and  fell  into  basins.
"And  after  that  these  six  had  done,  there  came  other  six
which  did  so  likewise."  He  also  saw  "three  Woman  take  six
Pictures  from  off  the  beam,  in  which  Pictures  were  many
Thorns  or  such  like  things  sticked  in  them."  Scared  by  the
"ugly  faces"  made  by  the  rope-pullers,  he  ran  for  home;  but
he  had  identified  nineteen  of  the  witches  and  wizards  and
gave  their  names.

Widow  Margaret  Johnson,  examined  soon  after  young
Robinson,  declared  that  she  was  not  "at  the  greate  meet-
inge"  on  All  Saints  Day,  but  admitted  her  presence  at  a
second  meeting  of  between  thirty  and  forty  witches  on  the
following  Sunday.  The  object  of  such  gatherings  was,  she
averred,  "  to  consult  for  the  killinge  and  hurtinge  of  men  and
beastes."  Besides  the  witches  and  their  familiars  there  was
present  "one  greate  grand  Divell  or  spirit,  more  eminent  then
the  rest."  The  regular  time  for  "a  yearlie  generall  meet-
inge"  was  Good  Friday.  As  to  the  aerial  flight,  Margaret
had  things  to  tell  which  tempt  one  to  suspect  that  there  were


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  1^1

leading  questions  asked  by  the  justices.  If  the  witches  "de-
sire to  bee  in  anie  place  vpon  a  suddaine,  theire  Divell  or
spiritt  will  vpon  a  redd  dogg,  or  any  thinge  also  presentlie
convey  them  thither  yea  into  any  roome  of  a  mans  howse,  but
shee  saith,  it  is  not  the  substance  of  theire  bodies,  but  theire
spirit  assumeth  such  forme  of  shape  as  goes  into  such
roomes."  Trials  followed,  and  several  were  found  guilty.
Three  or  four  died  in  prison,  but  none  were  executed,  for
young  Robinson  soon  after  confessed  that  his  story  was  a
mere  fabrication;  "  that  he  had  heard  the  neighbours  talk  of  a
witch  feast  ...  at  Mocking  Tower  in  Pendle  Forest  about
twenty  years  since,  .  .  .  and  thereupon  he  framed  these  tales
concerning  the  persons  aforesaid,  because  he  heard  the  neigh-
bours repute  them  for  witches."  '^'^

Young  Robinson^s  lies,  however,  are  good  evidence  of  the
folk-belief  of  the  time.  What  he  told  accorded  with  his  own
notions  and  found  ready  credence  with  his  neighbors  and  the
jury.  All  the  more  striking  is  the  enormous  and  persistent
contrast  between  the  Continental  Sabbath  and  its  seven-
teenth-century English  representative.  Robinson's  romance
came  upon  the  stage  of  the  Globe  in  1634  in  the  form  of  The
Late  Lancashire  Witches,  a  comedy  by  Thomas  Heywood
and  Richard  Brome.  It  was  "well  received"  and  was  pub-
lished in  the  same  year.'^^

With  the  advent  of  Matthew  Hopkins  the  Witches'  Sab-
bath in  its  attenuated  English  form  reappears  in  the  reports
of  trials  and  achieves  a  more  or  less  permanent  status.  Hop-
kins, who  was  a  man  of  some  learning,  believed  in  it  de-
voutly. He  tells  us  that  "in  March  1644.  he  had  some  seven
or  eight  of  that  horrible  sect  of  Witches  living  in  the  Towne
where  he  lived,  a  Towne  in  Essex  called  Maningtree^  with
divers  other  adjacent  Witches  of  other  towns,  who  every  six
weeks  in  the  night  (being  alwayes  on  the  Friday  night)  had
their  meeting  close  by  his  house,  and  had  their  severall
solemne  sacrifices  there  offered  to  the  Devill."  It  was  this
experience  that  embarked  him  on  his  witch-finding  career.
The  details  are  ludicrously  meagre  in  comparison  with  the
flamboyant  debauches  of  the  hags  and  demons  of  France  and
Germany.  John  Wynick,  executed  at  Huntingdon  in  1646,
knew  of  an  assembly  of  more  than  twenty  witches  at  Til-


272


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


brooke  Bushes  in  Bedfordshire,  and  at  Burton-Old  "there
met  above  fourescore  at  a  time."  John  Stearne,  Hopkins's
lieutenant,  who  furnishes  these  statistics,'-'''  informs  us  that
Satan  binds  his  witches  "  to  imitate  Christ  in  many  things,  as
his  Assemblies  and  Sabbaths,  Baptism  and  Covenants."  All
these  Satan  has,  "after  his  manner,  as  Rebecca  West  and
Elizabeth  Clarke  confessed,  as  well  in  these  as  in  other  particu-
lars, as  you  may  finde  as  well  by  theirs  and  others  Confes-
sions, as  also  by  the  Writings  of  learned  men  who  have  writ
concerning  the  same."  Stearne's  appeal  to  scholarly  au-
thors sounds  rather  helpless:  he  realized,  I  fear,  the  jejune
character  of  the  native  evidence  about  the  Sabbath.  Re-
becca West  was  acquitted  in  1646,  despite  her  confession  that
she  and  four  other  witches  met  with  Elizabeth  Clark  at
Elizabeth's  house  in  Manningtree  (Essex),  "where  they  to-
gether spent  some  time  in  praying  unto  their  Familiars,  and
every  one  in  order  went  to  prayers;  afterwards  some  of  them
read  in  a  book,  the  book  being  Elizabeth  Clarks\  .  .  .  forth-
with their  Familiars  appeared"  and  the  several  witches  as-
signed them  tasks.  Hopkins  adds  details  from  Rebecca's  con-
fession to  him:  "The  Devill  appeared  to  them  in  the  shape
of  a  dogge;  afterwards  in  the  shape  of  two  Kidyns"  and  two
dogs;  the  familiars  kissed  all  the  witches  except  Rebecca,  and
her  the  devil  kissed  after  she  had  taken  an  oath  to  serve  him;
later,  when  she  was  alone,  he  visited  her  and  she  submitted  to
his  embraces. Joan  Cariden,  one  of  three  Kentish  witches
executed  at  Faversham  in  1645,  confessed  that  Jane  Hott,
another  of  the  three,  told  her  "  that  there  was  a  great  meeting
at  Goodwife  Panterys  house,  .  .  .  and  the  Divell  sat  at  the
upper  end  of  the  Table."

Between  the  Hopkins  cases  and  the  efflorescence  —  for
England  —  of  the  Sabbath  in  1665  we  have  one  puny  speci-
men in  1650,  when  Widow  Dorothy  Swinow  of  Chatton  in
Northumberland  was  indicted  for  witchcraft.  The  burden  of
the  complaint  was  her  alleged  afflicting  of  three  children.
Margaret  White  confessed  upon  oath  that  "Mrs.  Swinow,
and  her  sister  Jane,  and  her  selfe  were  in  the  Divels  company
in  her  sister  Janes  house,  where  they  did  eate  and  drinke  to-
gether (as  by  her  conceived)  and  made  merry."

As  to  the  Sabbath,  the  connecting  link  between  the  Hop-


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  273

kins  cases  and  the  Lancashire  trials  of  161 2  is  Richard  Ber-
nard's manual  entitled  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  which
was  published  in  1627  and  again  in  1629.  Bernard  sets  forth
in  parallel  columns  twenty-nine  points  comparing  "what  the
Lord  doth"  with  "what  Satan  doth,"  with  intent  to  exhibit
"how  Satan  obserueth  the  Lords  doeings  and  sayings,  and
therein  striues  to  bee  like  him."  Four  of  these  points  concern
the  devil's  "set  meetings  for  his  Magicians  and  Witches  to
come  together";  but  the  only  rite  he  specifies  as  there  per-
formed is  the  christening  of  the  familiar  spirit,  which  he  de-
rives from  the  Lancaster  cases. "'^  No  other  English  instance
of  a  Sabbath  is  cited  by  Bernard,  but  he  was  well  versed  in
Continental  lore.  When  persons  are  under  suspicion,  he  in-
structs us,  it  is  an  indication  of  guilt  "if  they  haue  beene
heard  to  speake  of  their  transportation  from  home  to  cer-
taine  places  of  their  meetings  with  others  there,  of  which
transportations  stories  make  mention:  and  also  the  relations
of  the  Lancashire  Witches  meeting  at  Malkin  Tower,  some
10.  together,  and  were  carried  by  spirits  in  likenesse  of
Foales,  as  those  witches  confessed."'''^  For  the  "stories"
there  is  a  marginal  reference  to  Bodin  and  Del  Rio.''*'*  And
Bernard  instructs  the  grand  jury  to  examine  witnesses  speci-
fically on  such  matters:  "Whether  they  haue  heard  the  sus-
pected to  foretell  of  mishaps  to  befal  any,  or  heard  them
speake  of  their  power  to  hurt  this  or  that,  or  of  their  transpor-
tation, to  this  or  that  place,  or  of  their  meetings  in  the  night
there?"  '''^  Now  John  Stearne's  book  is  an  outstanding  in-
stance of  extensive  and  peculiar  plagiarism.  He  copies  page
after  page  from  Bernard,  changing  the  order  at  times  but
following  the  phraseology  almost  or  quite  word  for  word.
Practically  every  item  of  his  labored  argument  (including
proof  texts  from  Scripture)  is  borrowed  without  credit;'''*  but
Stearne  enriches  the  discussion  with  a  vast  number  of  con-
crete details  drawn  from  the  great  witch-hunt  of  his  own
period.  So  in  the  matter  of  the  Sabbath.  It  is  an  indication
of  the  witches'  guilt,  writes  Stearne,  "  if  they  have  been  heard
to  speak  of  their  transportation  from  home  to  certain  places
of  their  meetings  with  others  there,  as  was  at  Manningtree,
Burton-Old,  Tilbrook-bushes,  and  other  places."  '"^  Thus
we  are  enabled  to  trace  the  antecedents  of  the  Sabbath  as  it


274         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

emerges  in  the  activities  of  Witch-finder  Hopkins  and  Lieu-
tenant Stearne.  Bernard  was  their  handbook  of  inquisition
and  Bernard's  native  material  was,  in  this  particular,  the  re-
port of  the  Lancaster  cases  of  1612  that  was  published  by-
Thomas  Potts  in  1 613.

In  1665  we  have  good  accounts  of  witch-meetings  in  the
famous  examinations  of  Elizabeth  Style  and  others  conducted
by  the  Somerset  justice,  Robert  Hunt."*^  At  some  of  these
conventicles  there  were  but  four  persons  besides  the  devil;
at  one  there  were  twelve;  at  another,  fourteen.  The  witches
were  borne  through  the  air  by  the  virtue  of  a  magic  ointment.
The  devil  was  there  in  the  form  of  a  man  in  black,  and  re-
ceived their  homage.   "They  had  Wine,  Cakes  and  Roast-
meat  (all  brought  by  the  Man  in  black)  which  they  did  eat
and  drink.  They  danced  and  were  merry."  Sometimes  the
devil  played  upon  a  pipe  or  cittern.  The  main  business,  apart
from  festivity,  was  the  baptizing  of  waxen  images.  The
witches  were  carried  "sometimes  in  their  Bodies  and  their
Clothes,  sometimes  without";  and  now  and  then  (so  Eliza-
beth believed)  their  Bodies  were  "left  behind"  at  home  and
"only  their  Spirits"  were  present.  Elizabeth's  confession  was
"drawn  from  her"  on  at  least  three  different  occasions  "by  a
gentle  Examination,  meeting  with  the  Convictions  of  a  guilty
Conscience."  Several  "grave  and  Orthodox  Divines"  were
present.   It  requires  no  great  acumen  to  perceive  the  real
source  of  some  of  these  details.  The  remark  about  bodily  or
spiritual  presence  indicates  a  distinction  which  Elizabeth
herself  could  never  have  thought  of.    It  must  have  been
elicited,  of  course,  by  a  definite  question  from  one  of  the  edu-
cated examiners  who  was  acquainted  with  the  age-old  debate
on  this  point  among  theologians,  philosophers,  and  physi-
cians.

Mr.  Hunt's  investigations  might  have  rivalled  those  of
Matthew  Hopkins  if  he  had  not  been  checked  by  the  higher
powers.  "Had  not  his  discoveries  and  endeavours,"  writes
Glanvil,  "met  with  great  opposition  and  discouragements
from  some  then  in  Authority,  the  whole  Clan  of  those  hellish
Confederates  in  these  parts  [i.  e.  Somerset]  had  been  justly
exposed  and  punished."  However,  Hunt  left  enough  on
record  to  prove  that  by  Restoration  times  the  Witches'  Sab-


CHAP,  xvi]      COMPACT  AND  WITCHES'  SABBATH  2,75

bath  had  at  length  achieved  a  place  in  the  witch-creed  of
England.'^"  Yet,  even  then,  the  English  Sabbath  was  a
feeble  reflection  of  its  foreign  original.  The  more  one  studies
its  history,  the  more  clearly  the  fact  emerges:  the  Witches'
Sabbath  was  not  at  home  on  English  soil.  Every  other  point
in  the  beliefs  and  practices,  actual  and  imagined,  of  the  Eng-
lish witches  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  can  be
traced  back  for  hundreds  of  years  in  the  island  itself.  The
doctrine  of  a  Sabbath,  on  the  contrary,  was  a  learned  impor-
tation and  made  its  way  slowly  and  with  difficulty  among  the
folk.  Opinions  will  always  differ  as  to  any  basis  of  fact  that
may  underlie  the  Continental  stories;  but  the  theory  that
English  witches  were  keeping  alive  a  pagan  ritual,  and  were
meeting  in  orgiastic  mysteries  that  had  descended  from  pre-
Christian  times,  will  not  stand  the  test  of  the  most  elemen-
tary historical  criticism.  There  is  not  the  slightest  evidence
that  they  were  ever  organized  at  all.  Some  of  the  accused
were  innocent,  some  were  guilty  in  intent.  Now  and  then,
like  other  criminals,  a  few  of  them  may  have  met  to  eat  a
stolen  wether  or  to  plot  a  murder.  But  "covens"  and  devil-
priests  and  Satanic  orgies  are,  for  England,  out  of  the  ques-
tion.


f


CHAPTER  XVII

KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST

COMMON  fame  makes  James  I  a  sinister  figure  in  the
history  of  English  witchcraft.  The  delusion,  we  are  told,
was  dying  out  in  the  later  years  of  Elizabeth,  but  James
fanned  the  embers  into  a  devouring  fire.  His  coming  was  the
signal  for  a  violent  and  long-continued  outburst  of  witch-
hunting,  for  which  he  was  personally  responsible.  He  pro-
cured the  repeal  of  the  comparatively  mild  Elizabethan  law
and  the  enactment  of  a  very  cruel  statute.  He  encouraged
and  patronized  witchfinders,  and  was  always  eager  for  fresh
victims.  His  reign  is  a  dark  and  bloody  period  in  the  annals
of  this  frightful  superstition.

Many  authorities  might  be  adduced  in  support  of  these
views,  but  I  must  rest  content  with  quoting  three  writers
who  have  had  some  influence  in  propagating  them,  —  Mrs.
Lynn  Linton,  Mr.  Robert  Steele,  and  Mr.  G.  M.  Trevelyan.'

In  1861  Mrs.  E.  Lynn  Linton  published  a  volume  of  Witch
Stories,  which  was  reissued  in  1883  and  has  met  with  de-
served favor.  Mrs.  Linton  has  no  mercy  on  James  I.  His
"name  stands  accursed  for  vice  and  cruel  cowardice  and  the
utmost  selfishness  of  fear."  ^  "Treacherous,  cruel,  narrow-
minded,  and  cowardly,"  she  calls  him,  "beyond  anything
that  has  ever  disgraced  the  English  throne  before  or  since."  ^
He  had  a  "mania  against  witches,"''  a  "lust  for  witch
blood."  ^  "There  was  no  holding  in  of  this  furious  madness
after  James  I  had  got  his  foot  in  the  stirrup,  and  was  riding
a  race  neck  and  neck  with  the  Devil."  ^  These  are  hard
words;  yet  Mrs.  Linton  knows  that  the  beliefs  which  she  has
in  mind  were  "rampant  in  England  when  good  Queen  Bess
ruled  the  land,"  and  her  own  book  contains  facts  enough  to
give  us  pause.

Let  us  take  a  leap  of  thirty-odd  years  and  read  what  Mr.
Robert  Steele  has  to  tell  us  in  his  article  on  witchcraft  in  the


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  277

fourth  volume  of  a  well-reputed  work  of  collaboration,  Social
England,  edited  by  Mr.  H.  D.  Traill:

With  the  accession  of  James  a  change  came  over  the  feelings  of  those  in
power.  During  the  later  years  of  Elizabeth  tract  after  tract  appeared,  call-
ing for  severe  punishment  upon  witches,  but  with  no  result:  the  English
trials,  up  to  now,  had  been  characterised  rather  by  folly  than  ferocity,  the
new  rule  was  marked  by  ferocious  folly.  For  forty  years  Scotland  had  been
engaged  in  witch-hunting,  with  the  result  that  8000  human  beings  are  be-
lieved to  have  been  burnt  between  1560  and  1600;  and  for  the  last  ten  years
of  the  century  the  king  had  been  at  the  head  of  the  hunt.  ...  In  the  first
Parliament  of  James  the  more  merciful  Act  of  Elizabeth  was  repealed;  a
new  and  exhaustive  one  was  enacted.  .  .  .  Under  this  Act  70,000  persons
were  executed  up  to  1680.*

I  Stand  aghast  at  these  figures.  There  is  no  sense  or  reason
in  them.  No  records  have  been  published  or  examined  which
would  justify  the  assertion  that  a  seventieth  part  of  this  mon-
strous number  met  their  death  in  the  period  named.  As  for
the  time  from  the  passage  of  the  act  of  1604  till  the  death  of
James  in  1625,  Mr.  Steele  would  find  it  hard  to  make  out  an
average  of  more  than  two  or  three  executions  a  year.  I  half
suspect  that  he  had  got  hold  of  some  statistics  of  mortality
from  the  plague.

Mr.  Trevelyan  is  vaguer,  but  no  less  emphatic:

The  skeptical  Elizabeth,  perhaps  with  some  pity  for  her  sex,  had  re-
fused to  yield  when  the  pamphlet  press  called  on  the  Government  to  enact
fiercer  laws  "not  sufi^ering  a  witch  to  live."  The  outburst  came  with  the
accession  of  a  Scottish  King,  who,  though  he  rejected  the  best  part  of  the
spirit  of  Knox,  was  crazed  beyond  his  English  subjects  with  the  witch-
mania  of  Scotland  and  the  continent.  His  first  Parliament  enacted  new
death-laws;  at  once  the  Judges  and  magistrates,  the  constables  and  the
mob,  began  to  hunt  up  the  oldest  and  ugliest  spinster  who  lived  with  her
geese  in  the  hut  on  the  common,  or  tottered  about  the  village  street
mumbling  the  inaudible  soliloquies  of  second  childhood. '

In  this  witch-hunt,  Mr.  Trevelyan  tells  us,  "learning,  headed
by  the  pedant  King,  was  master  of  the  hounds."

So  much  for  the  current  opinion."  Let  us  try  to  discover  to
what  extent  it  is  justified  by  the  facts.  And  first  we  must  con-
sider two  things  that  have  created  an  enormous  prejudice
against  King  James,  —  his  Scottish  record  and  his  author-
ship of  the  Dsemonologie.


278         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

The  history  of  witchcraft  in  Scotland  is  a  difficult  subject,
and  it  is  particularly  hard  to  determine  just  what  degree  of
responsibility  attaches  to  King  James.  To  sift  the  matter
thoroughly  would  require  much  time  and  space.  Still,  a  few
facts  are  patent,  (i)  James  did  not  make  the  Scottish  law  of
witchcraft.  The  statute  was  enacted  in  1563,  before  he  was
born.  (2)  He  did  not  teach  the  Scottish  nation  the  witch-
creed.  That  creed  was  the  heritage  of  the  human  race,  and
was  nowhere  less  questioned  by  all  classes  and  all  professions
than  in  Scotland,  where,  indeed,  it  survived  in  full  vigor  for
more  than  a  century  after  James  was  dead.  (3)  The  worst
period  of  Scottish  prosecution  does  not  fall  in  his  reign.  The
three  great  prosecutions  were  in  1 590-1 597,  in  1 640-1650,
and  in  1 660-1 663.  The  second  was  worse  than  the  first,  and
the  third  (which  began  with  the  Restoration)  was  the  worst
of  all.   (4)  James  did  not  initiate  the  prosecutions  of  1590."

Upon  this  last  point  we  must  dwell  for  a  moment.  In  1583,
when  James  was  a  boy  of  seventeen,  the  Scottish  clergy
called  for  a  sharper  enforcement  of  the  law.  In  1590  began
the  trials  of  John  Fian  and  his  associates,  with  which  the
name  of  the  king  is  indissolubly  connected.  It  seems  quite
clear  that  these  trials  were  not  James's  own  idea.  His  in-
tellectual curiosity  —  well  known  to  be  one  of  his  most  salient
characteristics  —  led  him  to  attend  the  examinations.  But
he  was  not  naturally  credulous  in  such  matters  (as  we  shall
see  later),  he  found  the  confessions  beyond  belief,  and  he
pronounced  the  witches  "extreame  lyars."  When,  however,
Agnes  Sampson,  to  convince  him,  repeated  in  his  private  ear
a  conversation  that  he  had  held  with  the  queen  on  the  mar-
riage-night, he  "  acknowledged  her  words  to  bee  most  true,
and  therefore  gaue  the  more  credit"  to  their  stories.'^  It
makes  little  difference  what  we  think  of  this  feat  of  Agnes
Sampson's:  the  value  of  the  anecdote  lies  in  the  light  it
throws  on  the  king's  skepticism.  Agnes  also  implicated  the
Earl  of  Bothwell  in  a  charge  of  witchcraft  against  the  king's
life.  James's  dislike  and  fear  of  Bothwell  are  notorious;  they
appear  in  a  striking  passage  of  the  Basilikon  Doron.'''  He
looked  on  Bothwell  as  his  evil  genius  and  was  ever  ready  to
listen  to  anything  to  his  discredit.  Chancellor  Maitland,  who
was  Bothwell's  enemy,  had  the  king's  confidence. Numer-


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  279

ous  executions  followed,  and  the  great  prosecution  of  1590-
1597  was  now  under  way.  It  had  started,  however,  not  with
James,  but,  as  usual,  among  obscure  persons.  The  king  had
simply  become  involved  in  the  affair.  No  doubt  he  counte-
nanced the  general  witch-hunt  that  followed;  but  he  cannot
be  said  to  have  encouraged  it,  for  no  encouragement  was
needed.  The  clergy  were  eager,  and  the  people  lived  in  con-
stant terror  of  witches.  If  ever  there  was  a  spontaneous  popu-
lar panic,  this  was  such  an  outbreak.  James  and  his  Council
had  only  to  let  the  forces  work.  And,  indeed,  it  seems  pretty
certain  that  they  had  no  power  to  stem  the  current.  Mr.  An-
drew Lang,  who  censures  the  king,  says  in  plain  terms  that  he
"could  not  have  controlled  the  preachers."  Add  to  this  the
testimony  of  Pitcairn,  a  hostile  witness,  that  the  period  from
1 591  to  1 596  was  distinguished  by  "  open  defiance  of  the  King
and  Parliament,  and  by  the  frequent  and  daring  conspiracies
enterprised  against  the  Royal  person."  Altogether,  it  does
not  appear  that  James  is  to  blame  for  the  events  of  1590-
1597,  or  that  the  prosecution  proves  him  either  exceptionally
credulous  or  exceptionally  devoted  to  witch-hunting.  If  a
whole  nation  believes  in  witchcraft,  outbreaks  of  prosecution
(like  other  outbreaks)  are  likely  to  happen  whenever  there
are  troublous  times.  This  has  been  seen  over  and  over  again,
• —  in  the  tumult  of  the  English  Civil  War,  for  instance,  and
just  after  the  Revolution,  and  in  our  own  Salem  at  a  critical
moment  in  New  England  history.'^  James  was  not  riding  the
storm  like  Odin.  He  was  only  a  mortal  man,  swept  off"  his  feet
by  the  tide.

Whether  these  considerations  are  just  or  not,  one  thing  is
certain  —  by  1597  James  was  convinced  that  matters  had
gone  too  far.  Indictments  were  piling  upon  indictments,
there  was  no  telling  the  innocent  from  the  guilty,  and  no  end
was  in  sight.  Commissions  of  justiciary  for  witchcraft  were
being  held  throughout  Scotland,  and  the  king,  by  a  stroke  of
the  pen,  revoked  them  all.^»  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  proxi-
mate cause  of  his  action  was  the  discovery  that  many  de-
nunciations were  fraudulent.  Compare  James's  incredulity
at  the  outset,  and  the  skill  which  he  showed  later  in  life  (as  we
shall  see  presently)  in  detecting  similar  impostures.  From
1597  to  James's  accession  to  the  English  throne  in  1603,  there


28o


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


were  abundant  witch-trials  in  Scotland,  but  the  annual  num-
ber of  executions  was  much  smaller,  and  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  king  pressed  for  more.  When  he  succeeded
to  the  English  crown,  the  intensity  of  the  Scottish  witch-
quest  had  ceased,  by  his  own  act,  and  that  period  was  asso-
ciated in  his  mind  with  a  time  of  anarchy.  England  looked  to
him  like  a  haven  of  rest.  He  was  certainly  thinking  of  other
matters  than  witches  when  he  came  into  the  promised  land.

So  much  for  the  first  of  the  two  things  that  have  led  men  to
approach  James's  English  witch  record  with  a  prejudiced
opinion.  Let  us  pass  to  the  second,  —  his  authorship  of  the
Dasmonologie.

The  importance  of  King  James's  Dasmonologie  has  been
greatly  exaggerated,  both  as  to  its  bearing  on  his  supposed
career  as  a  prosecutor  and  as  to  its  effect  on  English  senti-
ment in  his  time.  The  book  is  a  confession  of  faith,  not  an
autobiography.  It  is  proof  of  what  James  thought,  not  of
what  he  did.  The  publication  of  the  Daemonologie  did  not
cause  the  death  of  any  Scottish  witches,  either  directly  or
indirectly.  Nor  did  it  convert  a  single  Scottish  skeptic,  for
there  were  none  to  convert.  The  book  did  not  appear  until
1 597,  —  the  very  year  in  which  James,  by  a  stroke  of  the  pen,
checked  the  great  prosecution  that  had  been  going  since  1590.
As  to  England,  the  case  against  the  Daemonologie  is  pitifully
weak.  The  treatise,  though  well-constructed  and  compen-
dious, is  not  original.  It  adduces  neither  new  facts  nor  new
arguments.  Gardiner  is  perfectly  right  when  he  says  that
James  "had  only  echoed  opinions  which  were  accepted  freely
by  the  multitude,  and  were  tacitly  admitted  without  inquiry
by  the  first  intellects  of  the  day."  Certainly  there  is  no
reason  to  think  that  the  Daemonologie  had  any  appreciable
effect  on  English  sentiment.

I  am  well  aware  that  King  James's  Daemonologie  was  re-
issued in  London  in  1603.  But  this  was  a  mere  bookselling
speculation,^'  like  the  Latin  translation  by  Germberg  that
appeared  at  Hanover  in  1604."  There  is  no  parade  about  the
volume,  no  hint  that  it  was  published  at  the  king's  instance.
Contrast  the  circumstances  attending  the  publication  of  the
Basilikon  Doron  in  the  same  year.  This  had  been  privately
printed  in  1599.   When  it  came  before  the  public  in  1603,


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  28l


there  was  a  long,  defensive  preface,  entirely  new,  in  which  the
king  exerted  himself  to  stand  well  with  his  English  subjects.
James,  as  we  have  already  remarked,  had  other  things  than
witchcraft  to  occupy  his  thoughts  when  he  mounted  the  Eng-
lish throne.  If  it  can  be  shown  that  he  immediately  engaged
in  a  campaign  for  new  witch-laws  or  for  more  vigorous  prose-
cution, then  we  may  regard  the  Dsemonologie  of  1603  as  a
campaign  document.  But  first  one  must  show  that  he  did  en-
gage in  any  such  campaign;  otherwise  the  question  is  begged.
And,  as  we  shall  soon  discover,  he  did  nothing  of  the  kind.

Clearly,  then,  we  must  study  the  witch-law  and  the  witch-
trials  of  James's  English  reign  on  the  basis,  not  of  prejudice,
but  of  evidence.  And  first  we  may  consider  the  Statute  of
1604.

The  current  ideas  about  the  English  laws  against  witch-
craft are  very  inaccurate.  For  these  misapprehensions
Thomas  Wright  is  in  large  part  responsible.  His  learned  and
interesting  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  which  has  en-
joyed a  deserved  popularity  for  more  than  seventy-five  years,
is  surprisingly  loose  in  its  statements  about  legal  history.

"The  first  act  in  the  statute-book  against  witchcraft,"  says
Wright,  "was  passed  in  the  thirty-third  year  of  Henry  VIII,
A.D.  154IJ  whereby  this  supposed  crime  was  made  felony
without  benefit  of  clergy."  ^'^  So  far  he  is  quite  correct,  except
for  the  year  of  our  Lord,  which  should  be  1542.  "In  1547,"
he  adds,  "when  the  power  was  entirely  in  the  hands  of  the  re-
ligious reformers  under  Edward  VI,  his  father's  law  against
witchcraft  was  repealed."  This  assertion,  though  technically
indisputable,  is  rather  misleading.  The  act  to  which  Wright
refers  (i  Edward  VI,  c.  12)  does  not  once  mention  sorcery,
magic,  or  witchcraft.  The  third  section  wipes  out  of  the
statute-book  "all  offences  made  felony  by  any  act  or  acts  of
Parliament,  statute  or  statutes,  made  sithence  the  xxiiith  day
of  April  in  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  the  said  late  King
Henry  theight,  not  being  felony  before."  Among  these  of-
fences was  witchcraft.

Wright's  next  statement  is  highly  objectionable.  It
amounts  to  a  serious,  though  inadvertent,  suppressio  veri.
"Under  Elizabeth,"  he  avers,  "in  1562  [this  should  be  1563],
a  new  act  was  passed  against  witchcraft,  punishing  the  first


282


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


conviction  only  with  exposure  in  the  pillory."  Now  the
truth  is  that  Elizabeth's  law  was  much  severer  than  one
would  infer  from  these  words.  It  fixes  the  death  penalty
(i)  for  all  who  "use,  practise,  or  exercise  invocations  or  con-
jurations of  evil  and  wicked  spirits  to  or  for  any  intent  or
purpose,"  quite  irrespective  of  the  result  of  such  invocations
or  conjurations,  and  (2)  for  all  who  practise  witchcraft  that
causes  a  person's  death.  Under  the  former  provision  — ■  to
take  a  good  example  —  Edmund  Hartlay  lost  his  life  in  Lan-
cashire in  1597.  He  was  a  professed  conjurer,  and  had  been
employed  to  relieve  the  children  of  Mr.  Nicholas  Starkie,
who  were  thought  to  be  possessed  with  devils.  Hartlay
caught  the  hysterical  affection  himself  and  was  tormented  in
like  manner.  "The  next  day,  beinge  recouered,  he  went  into
a  little  wood,  not  farr  from  the  house,  where  he  maide  a  circle
about  a  yarde  and  halfe  wyde,  deuiding  it  into  4.  partes,
making  a  crosse  at  every  Diuision:  and  when  he  had  finished
his  worke,  he  came  to  M.  Starchie  and  desiered  him  to  go  and
tread  out  the  circle,  saying,  I  may  not  treade  it  out  my  selfe,
and  further,  I  will  meete  with  them  that  went  about  my
death,"  '^^  —  that  is,  in  effect,  I  wish  to  raise  the  devils  that
tried  to  kill  me  yesterday.  There  were  other  charges  against
Hartlay,  but  none  of  a  capital  nature.  "The  making  of  his
circle  was  chefly  his  ouerthrowe."  He  denied  the  fact,  but,
the  rope  breaking,  confessed  it  before  he  died.^^

Furthermore,  the  Elizabethan  statute  provided  that
"witchcraft,  enchantment,  charm,  or  sorcery"  which  caused
bodily  injury  to  human  beings  or  damage  to  goods  or  chattels
should  be  punished  with  a  year's  imprisonment  (with  quar-
terly exposure  in  the  pillory)  for  the  first  offence,  and  with
death  jor  the  second  ojfence.  And  finally,  the  statute  provided
imprisonment  and  the  pillory,  with  life  i?nprisonment  for  the
second  offence,  for  all  who  should  "take  upon"  themselves
to  reveal  the  whereabouts  of  hidden  treasure  or  of  lost  or
stolen  goods,  or  should  practise  witchcraft  with  intent  to  pro-
voke unlawful  love  or  to  "  hurt  or  destroy  any  person  in  his  or
her  body,  member,  or  goods."  It  must  now  be  manifest  how
unduly  Wright  extenuates  the  grimness  of  Elizabeth's  law.

Thus  we  reach  the  reign  of  James  I.  In  his  first  year  was
passed  the  statute  of  1604,  which  remained  in  force  until


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  283

1736.  The  relation  of  this  act  to  the  statute  of  Elizabeth,
which  it  repealed,  becomes  a  matter  of  great  importance  to
determine.  Here  Wright  leaves  us  in  the  lurch.  James,  he
tells  us,  "passed  a  new  and  severe  law  against  witchcraft,^'
in  which  it  now  became  almost  a  crime  to  disbelieve."  ^°  We
are  led  to  infer  that,  whereas  Elizabeth's  law  was  mild  and
hardly  objectionable,  James's  statute  was  both  novel  and
severe.  The  facts  are  quite  different.  James's  statute  follows
Elizabeth's  in  the  main,  even  in  phraseology,  (i)  The  new
statute  (like  the  old)  provides  death  as  the  penalty  for  i)7vo-
cation  or  conjuration  of  evil  spirits  for  any  purpose  and  with-
out regard  to  the  issue.  But  it  inserts  two  clauses  making  it
also  felony  to  "consult,  convenant  with,  entertain,  employ,
feed,  or  reward"  any  such  spirit  for  any  purpose,  or  to  dig  up
any  dead  body,  or  part  thereof,  for  use  in  sorcery.  (2)  For
witchcraft  that  kills ,  death  is  the  penalty  (as  in  the  Elizabethan
enactment).  (3)  For  witchcraft  that  causes  bodily  harm,  but
does  not  kill,  the  new  law  imposes  death  for  the  first  (instead
of  the  second)  offence.  (4)  For  the  minor  varieties  of  sorcery
and  witchcraft,  death  is  substituted  for  life  imprisonment  as
the  penalty  for  the  second  offence.^'  Clearly  the  statute  of
1604  is  not  so  great  a  novelty  as  we  have  been  led  to  think.
It  is,  to  be  sure,  more  severe  than  the  Elizabethan  enactment,
but  only  in  some  respects.  Let  us  study  the  two  a  little
further.

The  substitution  of  death  for  life  imprisonment  as  the  pen-
alty for  the  second  offence  in  certain  minor  grades  of  sorcery
can  hardly  be  called  an  increase  in  severity.  The  appalling
state  of  the  prisons  is  notorious.  There  was  a  dreadful  out-
break of  jail  fever  at  the  Oxford  assizes  in  1577,^^  and  another
at  the  Exeter  assizes  in  1586.^^  Prisoners  often  died  while
awaiting  trial  or  execution.  In  1608  the  Earl  of  Northamp-
ton, as  Warden  of  the  Cinque  Ports,  induced  the  mayor  of
Rye  to  admit  to  bail  a  woman  condemned  to  death  for  aiding
and  abetting  a  witch.  Her  execution  had  been  stayed,  and
it  was  feared  that  she  would  succumb  to  the  "lothsomness  of
the  prison."  ^'^  Under  such  conditions,  the  change  frOm  a  life
sentence  to  hanging  was  rather  mercy  than  rigor.

The  penalty  for  digging  up  the  dead  (unknown  to  the
Elizabethan  law)  was  not  excessive,  in  view  of  the  general


284        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

severity  of  the  penal  code.  The  thing  was  certainly  done  now
and  then.  It  was  a  real  —  not  an  imaginary  —  crime,  and
deserved  punishment.  However,  no  case  has  ever  been  cited
in  which  a  man  or  woman  was  put  to  death  for  this  offence
alone,  and  we  may  therefore  disregard  that  clause  as  of  no
practical  effect.

As  for  the  new  provision  about  consulting  or  covenanting
with  evil  spirits,  or  feeding  them,  it  was  capable  of  operating
with  great  severity.  In  fact,  however,  I  do  not  believe  that
a  single  case  can  be  found  during  James's  reign  in  which  any-
body suffered  death  under  this  clause  who  was  not  otherwise
liable  to  the  extreme  penalty.

There  remains,  then,  one  change  in  the  law,  and  only  one,
—  death  for  the  first  (instead  of  the  second)  offence  in  witch-
craft that  injures  the  body  without  killing,  —  to  justify  the
common  opinion  that  James's  statute  of  1604  was  so  stern  an
enactment  as  to  make  an  era  in  English  witch-prosecution.

At  the  outset,  candor  impels  us  to  inquire  whether  James's
statute  was  really  severe  at  all.  Our  judgment  must  be  based,
not  on  our  present  penal  code,  but  on  that  of  the  sixteenth
and  seventeenth  centuries.  When  death  was  the  penalty  for
stealing  a  sheep,  or  breaking  into  a  house,  or  taking  a  purse  on
the  highway,  or  stealing  thirteenpence,  was  it  harsh  to  hang  a
witch  for  driving  her  neighbor  mad  or  smiting  him  with
epilepsy  or  paralysis?  To  object  that  witches  could  not  do
such  things  is  no  answer.  This  objection  might  hold  against
the  passing  of  any  law  whatever^  but  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
question  of  severity.  It  is  quite  as  silly  to  fine  or  imprison  a
man  for  an  impossible  crime  as  to  hang  him  for  it.  However,
we  may  waive  this  point,  for  we  are  more  directly  concerned
with  the  question  whether  James's  law  was  so  much  severer
than  Elizabeth's  as  to  make  its  passage  a  momentous  event.
This  is  to  be  tested,  of  course,  by  observing  how  the  two  laws
worked,  not  by  weighing  their  words.

To  get  the  perspective,  let  us  look  at  one  of  the  most  no-
torious of  Elizabethan  cases,  that  of  St.  Osyth  in  Essex.  One
Ursula  (or  Ursley)  Kempe,  alias  Grey,  was  a  woman  of  ill
repute,  who  lived,  with  Thomas  Rabbet,  her  bastard  son,  in
the  little  village  of  St.  Osith's  (now  St.  Osyth),  near  Col-
chester.   She  had  long  lain  under  suspicion  of  witchcraft.


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  .  285

There  was  sickness  in  the  family  of  a  neighbor,  Grace  Thur-
lowe,  and  Grace  fancied  that  Ursula  was  to  blame.  The  local
magistrate,  Brian  Darcey,  lent  a  ready  ear  to  her  complaint.
Witnesses  came  forward  in  abundance,  and  one  revelation
led  to  another,  as  usual.  Thomas  Rabbet  gave  evidence
against  his  mother.  Ursula  confessed  her  crimes,  with  many
tears.  A  whole  nest  of  offenders  was  uncovered,  and,  in  con-
clusion, no  less  than  thirteen  witches  were  convicted.  This
was  in  1582."  The  affair  made  a  great  noise,  and  appears  to
have  been  the  chief  immediate  impulse  to  Reginald  Scot's
famous  book.  The  Discoverie  of  Witchcraft.

Of  the  thirteen  persons  convicted  on  this  occasion,  all  but
three  were  found  guilty  of  "bewitching  to  death,"  and  con-
sequently suffered  the  extreme  penalty  under  the  statute  of
Elizabeth.  James's  statute  would  have  hanged  the  other
three  as  well.  To  this  extent,  and  to  this  extent  alone,  would
it  have  operated  more  severely  than  its  predecessor.

The  St.  Osyth  tragedy  took  place  about  twenty  years  be-
fore James  I  succeeded  to  the  English  crown.  Will  it  be  be-
lieved, in  the  face  of  the  vehement  denunciation  to  which  this
king  is  traditionally  subjected  as  a  besotted  persecutor,  that
nothing  comparable  to  it  occurred  in  his  reign  until  161 2,
when  he  had  been  on  the  throne  for  nine  years?  Yet  such  is
the  indisputable  fact.

An  analysis  of  these  Lancashire  trials  of  161 2,  on  the  basis
of  Thomas  Potts's  official  narrative,  yields  the  following  re-
sults. Nineteen  persons  were  tried,  of  whom  eight  were  ac-
quitted. Of  the  eleven  convicted,  one  (whose  offence  was  the
killing  of  a  mare)  was  sentenced  to  the  pillory.  This  leaves
ten  who  were  hanged. Six  of  these  were  indicted  for  murder
by  witchcraft,  and  therefore  would  have  suffered  death  under
Elizabeth's  law  as  surely  as  under  James's.  Four,  then,  were
executed  who  might  have  got  off  with  imprisonment  if  the
older  statute  had  remained  in  force.  But  it  is  by  no  means
certain  that  all  of  the  four  would  actually  have  escaped  the
gallows.  For  there  was  evidence  of  murder  by  witchcraft
against  two  of  them,  and  they  might  have  been  tried  on  that
charge  if  the  lesser  accusation  of  driving  a  woman  insane  had
not  sufficed  to  send  them  out  of  the  world.  There  remain  but
two,  therefore,  of  the  eleven  convicted,  who,  so  far  as  we  can


286


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


see,  would  have  been  in  no  danger  of  death  under  EHzabethan
conditions.  And  one  of  these  exemptions  may  be  balanced  by
the  case  of  the  woman  sent  to  the  pillory  for  killing  a  mare,
inasmuch  as  there  was  testimony  that  she  too  had  confessed
to  a  couple  of  murders,  so  that  the  prosecutors  might  have
found  an  excuse  for  hanging  her,  even  under  Elizabeth's
statute,  if  they  had  so  desired.  In  the  same  year,  Jennet
Preston  was  hanged  at  York.  She  was  convicted  of  murder
by  witchcraft,  and  would  have  suffered  death  by  Elizabeth's
law.  Likewise  in  1612,  there  was  an  outbreak  of  prosecution
in  Northamptonshire,  which  ended  in  the  execution  of  five
persons.  Every  one  of  these,  however,  had  been  found  guilty
of  murder  by  witchcraft.^'  Hence  their  fate  under  the  statute
of  James  was  precisely  what  it  would  have  been  if  Elizabeth's
statute  of  1563  had  never  been  supplanted.

Two  facts  of  immense  significance  are  now  clear:  first,  that
James's  accession  was  not  the  signal  for  an  outbreak  of  witch-
prosecution,  for  he  had  been  on  the  throne  for  nine  years  be-
fore any  such  outbreak  occurred;  second,  that  the  statute  of
1 604  was  not  appreciably  more  severe,  in  its  practical  work-
ing in  1 61 2,  than  the  Elizabethan  statute  would  have  been  at
the  same  time  if  it  had  continued  in  force.

Before  leaving  the  events  of  161 2,  however,  we  must  in-
quire whether  James  had  any  hand  in  the  prosecutions.  The
answer  is  unequivocal.  There  is  not  a  particle  of  evidence
that  he  either  suggested  or  encouraged  the  trials,  or,  indeed,
that  he  ever  heard  of  the  cases  until  the  defendants  had  been
hanged.  A  contrary  view  is  sometimes  expressed  with  regard
to  the  Lancaster  trials,""  but  there  is  no  foundation  for  it.
The  source  of  the  error  is  nothing  more  or  less  than  William
Harrison  Ainsworth's  romance  entitled  The  Lancashire
Witches.  This  was  published  in  1849,  and  appears  to  have
proved  more  entertaining  to  some  historians  than  the  study
of  authentic  documents.

One  of  Ainsworth's  most  amusing  characters  is  Master
Thomas  Potts,  a  London  lawyer.  Potts  happens  to  be  in
Lancashire  on  legal  business,  and,  on  coming  into  contact
with  the  rumors  and  petty  intrigues  of  the  neighborhood,
grasps  the  chance  to  ingratiate  himself  with  King  James  by
gathering  evidence  and  fomenting  prosecution.    "So  there


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  287

are  suspected  witches  in  Pendle  Forest,  I  find,"  says  Master
Potts;  "  I  shall  make  it  my  business  to  institute  inquiries  con-
cerning them,  when  I  visit  the  place  to-morrow.  Even  if
merely  ill-reputed,  they  must  be  examined,  and  if  found  inno-
cent cleared;  if  not,  punished  according  to  the  statute.  Our
sovereign  lord  the  king  holdeth  witches  in  especial  abhor-
rence, and  would  gladly  see  all  such  noxious  vermin  extir-
pated from  the  land,  and  it  will  rejoice  me  to  promote  his
laudable  designs.  .  .  .  He  is  never  so  pleased  as  when  the
truth  of  his  tenets  are  proved  by  such  secret  offenders  being
brought  to  light,  and  duly  punished."''^  And  again:  —  "If
I  can  unearth  a  pack  of  witches,  I  shall  gain  much  credit  from
my  honourable  good  lords  the  judges  of  assize  .  .  .  ,  besides  -
pleasing  the  King  himself,  who  is  sure  to  hear  of  it,  and  re-
ward my  praiseworthy  zeal."

Ainsworth  is  quite  within  his  rights  as  a  novelist,  but  we
should  not  read  him  as  if  he  were  an  historian.  Potts  had
nothing  to  do  with  getting  up  the  evidence  or  fomenting  the
prosecution.  He  was  a  London  lawyer,  or  law-writer,  who
acted  as  clerk  at  the  Lancaster  assizes.  Probably  he  was  ac-
companying the  justices  on  their  circuit.  At  the  instance  of
these  justices,  as  we  know,  he  prepared  an  official  narrative,
which  was  published  in  1613  after  revision  by  one  of  them
(Sir  Edward  Bromley).  The  king  is  mentioned  only  once  in
this  tract  (except,  of  course,  in  legal  formulas),  and  that  in
passing:  "What  hath  the  Kings  Maiestie  written  and  pub-
lished in  his  Dcemonologle,  by  way  of  premonition  and  pre-
uention,  which  hath  not  here  by  the  first  or  last  beene  exe-
cuted, put  in  practise  or  discouered."  If  James  had  known
anything  about  the  case,  Potts  would  surely  have  brought
him  in.

But  we  are  not  done  with  Ainsworth's  contributions  to  his-
tory. In  the  third  volume  of  the  romance  he  introduces  King
James  in  person,  talking  broad  Scots,  profoundly  impressed
by  the  evidence,  causing  the  witches  to  be  brought  into  his
presence,  and  urging  on  the  prosecution.  These  scenes  occur
while  he  is  the  guest  of  Sir  Richard  Hoghton  at  Hoghton
Tower. 44  All  this  is  very  good  fiction  indeed.  But  it  should
not  pass  as  history.  The  Pendle  witches  were  hanged  in
August,  1 61 2.  James  made  a  progress  that  summer,  but  not


288


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


in  Lancashire.  His  visit  to  Hoghton  Tower  was  five  years
later,  in  August,  1617."^

Ainsworth  wrote  The  Lancashire  Witches  at  the  suggestion
of  Mr.  James  Crossley,  to  whom  he  dedicated  it.  Mr.  Cross-
ley  was  an  admirable  antiquary,  and  the  world  is  in  his  debt
for  a  first-rate  edition  of  Potts's  Discoverie  and  for  many
other  things.  But,  though  very  learned  in  the  literature  of
witchcraft,  he  was  far  astray  in  his  estimate  of  James's  atti-
tude and  in  other  pertinent  matters.  He  ignores  the  Eliza-
bethan statute  and  lays  stress  on  that  of  James,  "enacted,"
he  avers,  "as  the  adulatory  tribute  of  all  parties,  against
which  no  honest  voice  was  raised,  to  the  known  opinions  of
the  monarch."  Mr.  Crossley  could  not  fail  to  observe  that
the  passage  of  the  "execrable  statute"  of  1604  not  fol-
lowed by  an  instant  fury  of  prosecution.  He  knew  well  that
eight  years  elapsed  before  anything  took  place  that  was  at  all
notable.  And  this  is  how  he  expresses  himself:  the  statute,  he
suggests,  "might  have  been  sharpening  its  appetite  by  a  tem-
porary fast  for  the  full  meal  of  blood  by  which  it  was  even-
tually glutted."  ''^  This  is  not  merely  personification,  —  it  is
pure  mythology.

The  plain  and  simple  truth  is  this:  During  the  twenty-two
years  of  James's  reign  (i  603-1 625),  there  was  no  more  excite-
ment on  the  subject  of  witchcraft,  and  there  were  no  more
executions,  than  during  the  last  twenty-two  years  of  Eliza-
beth (1581-1603).'*^  James's  accession  was  not  in  any  sense
the  signal  for  an  outburst  of  prosecution.  As  we  have  just
noted,  the  first  bad  year  was  161 2,  when  he  had  been  on  the
throne  for  almost  a  decade.  It  is  certain  that  the  statute  of
1604  was  not  more  severe,  in  its  practical  workings,  than  the
statute  of  Elizabeth),"'  Nor  can  a  single  fact  be  brought  for-
ward to  prove  that  James  was  eager,  during  his  English  reign,
to  multiply  the  number  of  victims.

We  must  now  examine  the  prevalent  opinion  that  the  stat-
ute of  1604  was  passed  to  please  King  James  or  at  his  in-
stance, or,  indeed,  that  he  wrote  the  bill  himself.  Most
readers  will  be  surprised  to  learn  that  not  a  particle  of  direct
evidence  has  ever  been  adduced  in  favor  of  any  of  these  prop-
ositions. They  rest  entirely  upon  assumption  or  inference.
The  earliest  testimony  that  I  can  discover^"  is  Hutchinson's,


CHAP.  XVll]


KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST


289


in  17 1 8,  —  more  than  a  century  late;  and  Hutchinson,  more
suOy  is  commendably  cautious.  He  does  not  profess  to  have
any  authority  for  his  views.  "I  cannot  forbear  thinking"  —
such  are  his  words  —  "  that'it  was  the  King's  Book  and  Judg-
ment, more  than  any  Encrease  of  Witches,  that  influenc'd  the
Parliament  to  the  changing  the  Old  Law."  And  again,  "I
cannot  but  think,  that  if  King  James  himself  was  not  the  first
Mover  and  Director  in  this  change  of  the  Statute,  yet  there
might  probably  be  a  Design  of  making  Court  to  the  King  by
it."  =^  He  frankly  labels  his  theory  "the  best  Guess  I  can
make."  "  The  "juryman"  (his  interlocutor  in  the  dialogue)
accepts  the  theory:  "I  am  the  apter  to  believe  this  Account;
because  I  have  often  heard,  that  our  Law  did  come  from
thence,"  that  is,  from  Scotland  along  with  the  new  king. 5''
Dr.  William  Harris,  in  his  account  of  James  I  (1753),  follows
Hutchinson,  whom  he  cites,  remarking  that  the  statute  was
"formed  out  of  compliment  (as  has  been  well  conjec-
tured)." "  Scott,  in  1 8 10,  follows  Hutchinson,  remarking
that  the  statute  "probably  had  rise  in  the  complaisance  of
James's  first  Parliament."  By  182,9  the  tradition  had
hardened  considerably,  so  that  a  writer  in  the  Gentleman's
Magazine  asserted  that  James  "is  said  to  have  penned  [the
statute]  himself."  So  much  for  the  external  evidence, —
now  for  the  probabilities.

In  the  first  place,  the  text  of  the  statute  is  sufficient  proof
that  James  did  not  draft  it  himself.  For  it  is  not  a  new  law.
It  follows,  in  the  main,  the  Elizabethan  statute  word  for
word.  At  the  utmost,  James  can  be  suspected  of  penning
only  a  few  phrases.  This  part  of  the  charge  we  may  therefore
dismiss  without  ceremony.  But  what  of  the  view  that  James
fathered  or  fostered  the  bill,  that  it  was  introduced  at  his  in-
stance, or  passed  with  an  eye  to  his  favor?  Was  there,  or  was
there  not,  such  a  state  of  public  opinion  in  England  as  will  ac-
count for  the  statute  without  our  having  recourse  to  the  con-
jecture that  it  was  passed  under  James's  influence  or  out  of
complaisance  to  him?

If  this  were  merely  a  question  of  the  rank  and  file  of  the
people,  there  would  be  no  room  for  argument.  The  last  few
years  of  Elizabeth's  reign  abounded  in  witch-prosecutions
and  were  marked  by  intense  popular  excitement  on  the  sub-


290         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

ject.  A  typical  outbreak  was  that  in  Devon  in  1601  and  1602,
when  the  Trevisard  family  was  complained  of  before  Sir
Thomas  Ridgeway.^^  But  we  are  now  occupied  with  the  law-
makers, who,  though  constantly  exposed  to  pressure  from  the
populace,  may  conceivably  have  preferred  the  status  quo.
Was  there,  or  was  there  not,  before  James's  accession,  a
movement  among  the  better-educated  classes  for  a  revision  of
the  law  and  a  sharpening  of  the  penalties?  To  test  this  ques-
tion, we  may  consult  four  well-known  treatises  which  are
seldom  scrutinized  from  this  point  of  view.  We  will  begin
with  Perkins's  Discourse.

William  Perkins,  the  eminent  theologian,  born  in  1558,  was
Fellow  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge,  from  1584  to  1594.  He
died  in  1602,  leaving  behind  him  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned
Art  of  Witchcraft,  which  was  published  in  1608  by  Thomas
Pickering,  B.D.  of  Cambridge,  and  Minister  of  Finchingfield,
Essex.  Pickering  dedicated  the  volume  to  Coke.  Though  not
issued  in  the  author's  lifetime,  this  treatise  is  good  evidence
as  to  what  the  views  of  learned  Englishmen  were  at  the  turn
of  the  century.  Nor  was  it  without  influence  before  Perkins
died,  for,  as  the  title-page  sets  forth,  the  discourse  was
"framed  and  delivered"  by  him  "in  his  ordinarie  course  of
Preaching."  It  came  from  the  press  of  the  Cambridge  Uni-
versity Printer.

Perkins's  book  is  a  masterpiece.  It  is  cogently  reasoned,
and  marked  by  that  concise  and  simple  style  for  which  this
author  was  distinguished  above  his  contemporaries.  We  may
shudder  at  his  opinions,  but  are  forced  to  admire  his  candor
and  ability.  Perkins  warns  his  readers  against  convicting  on
slender  evidence.  His  virile  and  methodical  intellect  draws
the  line  sharply  between  presumptions  that  justify  suspicion,
and  proofs  that  warrant  a  verdict  of  guilty."  Certain  super-
stitious popular  tests  he  rejects  utterly,  —  such  as  scratching
the  witch,  and  firing  the  thatch  of  her  cottage,  and  the  ordeal
by  swimming. Some  of  these,  he  declares,  "if  not  all,  are
after  a  sort  practises  of  Witchcraft,  hauing  in  them  no  power
or  vertue  to  detect  a  Sorcerer,  either  by  Gods  ordinance  in  the
creation,  or  by  any  speciall  appointment  since."  In  scouting
the  water  ordeal,  Perkins  may  have  had  his  eye  upon  King
James's  defence  of  it  in  the  Dasmonologie.  "It  appeares."  the


CHAP.  XVIl]


KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST


291


king  had  written,  "that  God  hath  appointed  (for  a  super-
natural! signe  of  the  monstrous  impietie  of  Witches)  that  the
water  shall  refuse  to  receiue  them  in  her  bosome,  that  haue
shaken  off  them  the  sacred  Water  of  Baptisme,  and  wilfully
refused  the  benefite  thereof."  ^'  Note  the  brevity  and  force  of
Perkins's  refutation:  —  "To  iustifie  the  casting  of  a  Witch
into  the  water,  it  is  alledged,  that  hauing  made  a  couenant
with  the  deuill,  shee  hath  renounced  her  Baptisme,  and  here-
upon there  growes  an  Antipathic  betweene  her,  and  water.
Ans.  This  allegation  serues  to  no  purpose:  for  all  water  is  not
the  water  of  Baptisme,  but  that  onely  which  is  vsed  in  the
very  act  of  Baptisme,  and  not  before  nor  after.  The  element
out  of  the  vse  of  the  Sacrament,  is  no  Sacrament,  but  returnes
again  to  his  common  vse."  Let  us  remark,  in  passing,  that
Thomas  Pickering,  a  beneficed  clergyman,  did  not  hesitate  to
publish  this  unceremonious  denial  of  the  king's  argument  in
1608,  when  James  had  been  five  years  on  the  throne,  and  to
dedicate  the  work  which  contains  it  to  Chief  Justice  Coke.
This  may  serve  to  correct,  ^ro  tanto,  the  too  prevalent  opin-
ion that  James  I  expected  his  English  subjects  to  receive
his  Dsemonologie  as  but  little,  if  at  all,  inferior  in  authority
to  the  Holy  Scriptures.

Our  immediate  concern,  however,  is  with  the  general  ten-
dency of  Perkins's  treatise,  and  in  particular  with  his  precepts
as  to  punishment.  He  admits  the  witch-dogma  in  its  entirety.
The  ground  of  all  sorcery  is  a  league  or  covenant  with  the
devil,  which  may  be  either  express  or  implicit.  There  are  two
kinds  of  witchcraft,  —  namely,  divining  and  working.''^  The
second  class  includes  the  raising  of  storms,  the  poisoning  of
the  air  (which  brings  pestilence),  the  blasting  of  corn,  "the
procuring  of  strange  passions  and  torments  in  mens  bodies
and  other  creatures,  with  the  curing  of  the  same."  ^'^  It  is  an
error  to  hold  that  melancholia  so  deludes  women  that  they
imagine  themselves  witches  when  indeed  they  are  none.  Per-
haps, after  the  witch  has  made  her  contract  with  the  fiend,
she  may  credit  herself  with  imaginary  powers,  but  the  won-
ders already  enumerated  she  can  certainly  perform,  with
Satan's  aid.''^  Thus  Perkins  opposes  himself  squarely  to
Wierus  and  Scot.  His  refutation  of  their  theories  is  solid  and
convincing,  if  we  admit  what  nobody  dreamt  of  denying,  — •


2C)2         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

the  existence  of  evil  spirits.  His  book,  indeed,  may  be  taken
as  a  measure  of  the  slight  effect  which  these  dissentients  had
produced  on  the  minds  of  sixteenth-century  Englishmen.

As  to  the  law  against  witchcraft,  Perkins  is  an  invaluable
witness.  He  wrote  when  the  Elizabethan  statute  was  in  force,
and  he  was  of  course  not  under  the  sway  of  King  James  of
Scotland,  with  whose  theories,  indeed,  we  have  seen  him  at
outspoken  variance.  Perkins  believes  that  the  law  of  Moses
should  continue  in  force,  and  that  "all  Witches  beeing  thor-
oughly conuicted  by  the  Magistrate,"  should  be  put  to
death.**  He  expressly  declares  that  this  punishment  ought  to
be  inflicted  not  only  upon  those  who  kill  by  means  of  witch-
craft, but  upon  all  witches  without  any  exception  whatever,
—  upon  "  all  Diuiners,  Charmers,  luglers,  all  Wizzards,  com-
monly called  wise  men  and  wise  women."  He  includes  in
plain  terms  all  so-called  "good  Witches,  which  doe  no  hurt
but  good,  which  doe  not  spoile  and  destroy,  but  saue  and  de-
liuer."  Here  he  uses  a  really  unanswerable  argument,  which
shows  in  the  most  striking  fashion  how  ill-equipped  we  are,
with  our  mild  penal  laws,  to  sit  in  judgment  on  the  severity  —
whether  actual  or  comparative  —  of  the  Jacobean  statute.
"  By  the  lawes  of  England,' '  writes  Perkins,  "  the  thiefe  is  exe-
cuted for  stealing,  and  we  think  it  iust  and  profitable:  but  it
were  a  thousand  times  better  for  the  land,  if  all  Witches,  but
specially  the  blessing  Witch  might  suffer  death.  For  the
thiefe  by  his  stealing,  and  the  hurtfuU  Inchanter  by  charm-
ing, bring  hinderance  and  hurt  to  the  bodies  and  goods  of
men;  but  these  are  the  right  hand  of  the  deuill,  by  which  he
taketh  and  destroieth  the  soules  of  men.  Men  doe  commonly
hate  and  spit  at  the  damnifying  Sorcerer,  as  vnworthie  to  liue
among  them;  whereas  the  other  is  so  deare  vnto  them,  that
they  hold  themselues  and  their  countrey  blessed  that  haue
him  among  them,  they  flie  vnto  him  in  necessitie,  they  de-
pend vpon  him  as  their  god,  and  by  this  meanes,  thousands
are  carried  away  to  their  finall  confusion.  Death  therefore  is
the  iust  and  deserued  portion  of  the  good  Witch."  These  are
the  closing  words  of  Perkins's  weighty  treatise.*^

Perkins  was  a  vital  force  in  forming  English  opinion  while
he  was  alive,  especially  during  the  last  decade  of  the  sixteenth
century  and  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth.  Few  Cam-


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  293

bridge  lecturers  were  more  authoritative,  and  Cambridge  was
in  close  contact  with  public  men.  He  "was  buried  with  great
solemnity  at  the  sole  charges  of  C/irists  Co/ledge,  the  Univer-
sity and  Town  striving  which  should  expresse  mpre  sorrow  at
his  Funeral;  Doctor  MorUague  Preached  his  Funeral  Sermon
upon  that  Text,  Moses  my  Servant  is  dead."  This  was  James
Montagu,  first  Master  of  Sidney  Sussex  College,  afterwards
Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells  (1608)  and  of  Winchester  (1616).
Bishop  Hall,  who  was  at  Cambridge  while  Perkins  was  active,
commends  Perkins  warmly.  "A  worthy  divine,"  he  calls  him,
"whose  labors  are  of  much  note  and  use  in  the  Church  of
God."  Fuller  is  also  among  his  admirers.'"  How  the  Dis-
course worked  when  its  substance  was  orally  delivered  "  in  his
ordinarie  course  of  preaching"  may  be  inferred  from  the  re-
spect with  which  the  printed  book  is  continually  cited,  —  by
Cotta,  for  example,  in  his  Triall  of  Witch-craft  (1616).'''
Cotta's  treatise  is  likewise  dedicated  to  Coke.

John  Cotta  was  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  in  1590,
and  later  of  Corpus  Christi.  He  received  the  degree  of  M.A.
in  1596,  and  that  of  M.D.  in  1603.  His  first  book  appeared  in
1612.  It  contains  a  good  deal  about  witchcraft.  In  1616  he
published  a  systematic  treatise,  A  Triall  of  Witch-craft,  of
which  a  second  edition  came  out  in  1624.  The  main  object  of
this  work  is  to  prove  that  any  given  case  of  alleged  sorcery
ought  to  be  examined  by  methods  of  the  senses  and  reason,
like  other  objects  of  investigation.  Cotta,  then,  is  on  the  right
side.  He  follows  Wierus  in  maintaining  that  many  so-called
bewitched  persons  are  suffering  from  natural  disease.  When
he  wrote,  he  was  practising  at  Northampton,  where  he  had
resided  ever  since  he  took  his  medical  degree  in  1603.  His
rationalizing  attitude  was  largely  the  result  of  his  own  experi-
ence as  a  physician  during  this  interval.

The  whole  ground  of  Cotta's  argument  is  an  acceptance  of
the  traditional  witch-dogma.  He  believes  that  there  are
witches  in  plenty;  that  they  make  contracts  with  the  devil;
that  supernatural  deeds  are  performed  by  the  fiend,  in  which
the  witch  "hath  a  property  and  interest"  by  virtue  of  her
covenant  with  him;  that,  in  this  way,  witches  may  be  impli-
cated in  afflicting  their  fellow-creatures  with  diseases  or  in
causing  their  death.  As  concrete  examples,  we  may  take  the


294         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

witches  of  Warboys  (i 589-1 593)  and  the  Lancashire  witches
(161 2),  for  both  of  those  notorious  cases  are  accepted  by
Cotta  without  demur.^^  And,  just  as  he  is  confident  that  the
guilt  of  a  witch  may  be  discovered  with  certainty  by  methods
of  reason  and  perception  which  he  develops  elaborately,  so  he
is  content  to  leave  her  to  the  courts,  to  be  "arraigned  and
condemned  of  manifest  high  treason  against  Almighty  God,
and  of  combination  with  his  open  and  professed  enemy  the
Diuell."  ■'^  The  statute  of  1604  was  none  too  rigorous  for  Dr.
Cotta.  If  these  were  his  sentiments  in  161 6,  when  he  was
writing  a  cautionary  and  corrective  treatise,  we  may  be  cer-
tain that  his  views  were  quite  as  orthodox  at  the  turn  of  the
century,  when  he  was  still  at  the  University  of  Cambridge
and  subject  to  the  influence  of  Perkins,  whom  he  cites  with  so
much  respect.

From  Cambridge  we  turn  to  Oxford.  Thomas  Cooper,  of
Christ  Church,  was  A.B.  in  1590,  A.M.  in  1593,  B.D.  in  1600.
In  1 601  he  was  presented  by  his  college  to  a  living  in  Cheshire,
which  he  resigned  in  1604.  From  1604  to  1610  he  was  vicar  of
Holy  Trinity,  Coventry. ''''  His  volume  entitled  The  Mystery
of  Witch-craft  was  not  published  until  1617,  but  it  embodies
information  enough  about  the  author's  experiences  and
opinions  in  the  time  preceding  the  accession  of  James  to
make  it  available  for  our  present  purposes.  Cooper's  ac-
quaintance with  magic  began  while  he  was  a  stvident  at  Ox-
ford. There  was  a  time,  he  tells  us,  when  he  "  admired  some
in  the  Vniuersitie  famozed  in  that  skill."  "Did  not,"  he  ex-
claims,—  "did  not  the  Lord  so  dispose  of  mee,  that  my
Chamber-fellow  was  exceedingly  bewitched  with  these  faire
shewes,  and  hauing  gotten  diuers  bookes  to  that  end,  was
earnest  in  the  pursuit  of  that  glorie  which  might  redound
thereby?  Did  not  wee  communicate  our  Studies  together?
was  not  this  skill  proposed  and  canuased  in  common?  And
did  not  the  Lord  so  arme  his  vnworthy  seruant,  that  not  onely
the  snare  was  gratiously  espied;  but,  by  the  great  mercie  of
my  God,  the  Lord  vsed  mee  as  a  meanes  to  diuert  my  Cham-
ber-fellow from  these  dangerous  studies?"  ''^  Thus  we  learn
that  when  Cooper  received  his  Cheshire  living,  in  1601,  he
was  deeply  impressed  with  the  horror  of  dealing  with  devils.
Between  this  date  and  1610  he  had  several  encounters  with


CHAP.  XVII ]


KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST


witchcraft,  —  at  Northwich  (near  Chester),  in  Lancashire,
and  at  Coventry.''^  Some  of  these  are  perhaps  too  late  for  us
to  use,  but  the  Northwich  incident  falls  in  1601  and  1602."
At  all  events,  we  are  safe  in  believing  that  the  sentiments
which  Cooper  expresses  in  his  volume  do  not  differ  appre-
ciably from  those  which  he  entertained  before  James's  acces-
sion. Now  Cooper  agrees  in  all  essentials  and  in  most  particu-
lars with  Perkins,  from  whom  he  borrows  largely  without  due
acknowledgment.'^  Writing  after  the  passage  of  the  statute
of  1 604,  he  rejoices  that  the  law  has  been  made  severer. Yet
he  is  not  satisfied.  Like  Perkins,  he  holds  that  "  the  Blesser  or
good  Witch  ...  is  farre  more  dangerous  then  the  Badde  or
hurting  Witch,"  and  that  both  kinds  ought  to  be  extirpated.
Thus  it  appears  that  Cooper,  though  he  wrote  after  the  pas-
sage of  the  statute  of  1604,  may  serve  as  a  witness  to  the
opinions  that  prevailed  among  many  of  the  clergy  at  about
the  turn  of  the  century.

Our  fourth  witness  is  a  very  strong  one,  and  his  testimony
is  not  complicated  by  inferences  about  dates.  He  is  George
Giffard,  another  Oxford  man.  Giffard's  Dialogue  concerning
Witches  and  Witchcrafts  was  first  published  in  1593,  —  a
year  otherwise  notable  in  the  annals  of  English  sorcery,  as  we
shall  see  in  a  moment.  It  was  reissued  in  1603,  three  years
after  his  death.*'  Giffard  was  an  eminent  preacher  of  Mal-
don,  in  Essex.  He  passes  for  one  of  the  earliest  opponents  of
the  witchcraft  delusion,  and  with  some  reason,  for  he  held
that  sickness  and  death  ascribed  to  witchcraft  were  due  to
natural  causes,  he  repudiated  spectral  and  hearsay  evidence,
and  he  argued  against  convicting  anybody  except  on  conclu-
sive testimony.  Yet  it  never  entered  his  head  to  deny  the
existence  of  witches  or  to  doubt  that  they  have  dealings  with
the  fiend.  He  tells  us  that  the  times  were  devil-haunted.  "  It
falleth  out  in  many  places  euen  of  a  sudden,  as  it  seemeth  to
me,  and  no  doubt  by  the  heauie  iudgement  of  God,  that  the
Diuels  as  it  were  let  loose,  do  more  preuaile,  then  euer  I  haue
heard  of.  .  .  .  Satan  is  now  heard  speake,  and  beleeued.  He
speaketh  by  coniurers,  by  sorcerers,  and  by  witches,  and  his
word  is  taken.  He  deuiseth  a  number  of  things  to  be  done,  &
they  are  put  in  practise  and  followed."  Giffard  is  here
speaking  in  his  own  person.   Elsewhere  in  the  dialogue  he


296         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

gives  US  a  first-rate  account  of  the  popular  terror.  One  of  the
interlocutors  is  "Samuel,"  an  honest  and  well-to-do  good-
man.  "They  say,"  declares  Samuel,  "there  is  scarse  any
towne  or  village  in  all  this  shire,  but  there  is  one  or  two
witches  at  the  least  in  it."  And  the  annals  of  Essex  bear
out  Samuel's  views.  Thirteen  witches,  as  we  have  seen,  were
convicted  and  ten  of  them  hanged  in  that  county  in  1582,  and
there  were  other  executions  there  in  1566,  1579,  and  1589.  It
was  an  outbreak  in  that  same  county  in  1645  ^^^^  started
Matthew  Hopkins  on  his  career;  and  the  evidence  and  con-
fessions went  back,  in  some  instances,  for  twenty  and  even
thirty  years. Giffard  was  a  man  of  unusual  humanity  and
strong  common  sense,  as  his  book  shows.  Yet  he  was  heartily
in  favor  of  a  severer  law  than  the  statute  of  Elizabeth.  The
following  passage  from  his  Dialogue  is  a  precious  document
for  our  present  purposes.  "Daniel"  is  the  speaker  who  pre-
sents Giffard's  own  views;  "M.  B."  is  a  schoolmaster.

Dan.  A  witch  by  the  word  of  God  ought  to  die  the  death,  not  because
she  killeth  men,  for  that  she  cannot  (vnles  it  be  those  witches  which  kill  by
poyson,  which  either  they  receiue  from  the  diuell,  or  hee  teacheth  them  to
make)  but  because  she  dealeth  with  diuels.  And  so  if  a  lurie  doe  finde
proofe  that  she  hath  dealt  with  diuels,  they  may  and  ought  to  finde  them
guiltie  of  witchcraft.

M.  B.  If  they  finde  them  guiltie  to  haue  dealt  with  diuels,  and  cannot
say  they  haue  murdered  men,  the  law  doth  not  put  them  to  death.

Dan.  It  were  to  be  wished,  that  the  law  were  more  [p]erfect  in  that  re-
spect, euen  to  cut  off  all  such  abhominations.  These  cunning  men  and
women  which  deale  with  spirites  and  charmes  seeming  to  doe  good,  and
draw  the  people  into  manifold  impieties,  with  all  other  which  haue  famil-
iarity with  deuils,  or  vse  coniurations,  ought  to  bee  rooted  out,  that  others
might  see  and  feare.    (Sig.  K3.)

Here  we  have  a  highly  intelligent  preacher,  a  man  of  real
influence,  pressing  for  precisely  that  change  in  the  law  —  the
extension  of  the  death  penalty  to  witchcraft  that  produces
bodily  injury  without  death  —  which  was  actually  embodied
in  the  statute  of  1604.  And  GifTard,  like  Perkins,  condemns
the  "white  witch"  utterly.  The  evidence  speaks  for  itself.

Perkins's  Discourse  and  Giffard's  Dialogue  are  strongly
contrasted  works.  Gifi^ard  addresses  his  teaching  to  the  un-
learned: he  throws  his  book  into  the  form  of  a  conversation
(so  he  tells  us)  "to  make  it  fitter  for  the  capacity  of  the


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  297

simpler  sort."  Perkins,  on  the  other  hand,  writes  for  edu-
cated persons,  —  for  those  who  can  follow  a  close-knit  scho-
lastic argument.  Giffard's  aim  is  to  free  the  minds  of  the
common  people  from  needless  terrors  and  to  prevent  the
shedding  of  innocent  blood.  Perkins,  though  he  warns  his
readers  (as  Giffard  does)  against  condemning  on  slender  evi-
dence, is  chiefly  bent  on  defending  the  witchcraft  dogma
against  the  assaults  of  Wierus  and  Reginald  Scot.  Yet  both
Giffard  and  Perkins  hold  tenaciously  to  the  inherited  belief.
There  are  such  things  as  witches;  they  do  ally  themselves
with  the  devil;  they  should  be  punished.  And  in  this  matter
of  the  penalty  —  which  is  our  chief  concern  at  the  moment  —
Giffard  and  Perkins  are  in  perfect  accord.  Both  maintain
that  all  witches  ought  to  be  put  to  death,  irrespective  of  the  ques-
tion whether  they  have  killed  men  by  their  arts  or  not.  In  other
words,  the  Elizabethan  statute  seemed  to  them  insufficient,
and  they  urged  the  enacting  of  a  law  of  greater  severity.
Could  there  be  more  illuminating  evidence?  Nothing  can  be
clearer  than  that,  about  the  turn  of  the  century,  before
Elizabeth  was  dead  and  James  had  taken  her  place,  there  was
strong  pressure  for  a  revision  of  the  witchcraft  law,  and  for
revision  in  the  direction  taken  by  the  statute  of  1604.  This
was  the  kind  of  pressure  to  which  the  legislators  yielded  —
nothing  loth,  to  be  sure.  They  were  not  browbeaten  by  King
James,  nor  did  they  vote  with  an  eye  to  the  royal  favor.  They
followed  their  own  consciences,  incited  by  the  feelings  of  the
populace  and  stimulated  by  the  exhortations  of  the  gravest
counsellors  they  knew.

The  four  books  that  we  have  just  examined  would  suffice
to  prove,  even  if  there  were  no  other  evidence,  that  the  acces-
sion of  James  found  the  English  public  —  both  in  its  educated
and  its  uneducated  classes  —  deeply  impressed  with  the
actuality  of  witchcraft  as  an  ever-present  menace  to  soul  and
body,  intensely  excited  on  the  subject,  and  pressing  hard  for
the  extermination  of  witches. But  there  is  other  evidence
in  plenty.  The  records  from  1582  to  1603  abound  in  specific
cases.  Two  items  call  for  particular  notice:  the  Barrel  affair
(1586-1601),  and  the  affair  of  the  Witches  of  Warboys  (1589-
1593).  There  is  a  close  psychological  connection  between
them.


298


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


John  Barrel,  a  Cambridge  graduate,  was  a  Puritan
preacher  in  Derbyshire  when  (in  1586)  he  began  his  career
as  a  caster-out  of  devils.  In  1598  he  was  summoned  before
an  ecclesiastical  commission  over  which  Archbishop  Whitgift
presided.  Bishop  Bancroft  and  Chief  Justice  Anderson  were
members  of  the  commission.  More  than  forty  witnesses  were
called.  Some  of  the  demoniacs  confessed  fraud,  and  Barrel,
with  his  associate  George  More,  was  convicted  of  imposture
and  imprisoned. There  had  been  an  uproar  over  the  posses-
sions and  the  exorcisms,  and  popular  opinion  sided  with
Barrel.  Samuel  Harsnet,  the  cleverest  of  Bishop  Bancroft's
chaplains,  was  delegated  to  write  up  the  case.  His  famous
Biscovery  came  out  in  1599,  and  was  expected  to  overwhelm
Barrel  with  ridicule  and  odium.  In  the  long  run  it  has  had
this  result,  for  Barrel  is  usually  treated  now-a-days  as  an  im-
postor. But  it  had  no  such  effect  at  the  time.  Both  Barrel
and  More  wrote  long  replies,  and  printed  them  surrepti-
tiously in  defiance  of  the  authorities.

Bancroft  soon  discovered  that  Harsnet's  skirmishing  was
not  sufficient,  and  he  brought  his  heavy  troops  into  action.
Two  treatises,  of  unimaginable  ponderosity  in  style  and  mat-
ter, each  elaborated  in  concert  by  two  preachers,  John  Bea-
con and  John  Walker,  came  out  in  1601.^^  Harsnet  had
railed  and  ridiculed  and  "exposed,"  but  he  had  steered  clear
of  dialectics.  Beacon  and  Walker  toiled  to  supply  the  desid-
eratum. Using  all  the  scholastic  machinery,  they  tried  to
prove,  by  logic  and  Scripture,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as
demoniacal  possession  now-a-days,  and  that  Barrel's  de-
moniacs were  either  counterfeiting  or  else  afilicted  with  nat-
ural diseases.  Barrel  promptly  replied  to  both  books,  print-
ing his  answers  surreptitiously,  as  before.

Strange  as  it  may  seem.  Barrel  has  the  best  of  the  argu-
ment. For  his  opponents  admit  both  too  little  and  too  much.
They  admit  too  little,  since  they  wish  the  fits  to  appear
fraudulent,  whereas  these  were,  beyond  a  shadow  of  doubt,
genuine  hysteria,  of  which  lying  and  imposture  are  well-
recognized  symptoms.  Barrel  was  sharp  enough  to  see  that,
as  managed  by  his  opponents,  the  hypothesis  of  fraud  and
the  hypothesis  of  disease  thwarted  each  other,  and  left  some
kind  of  demonic  assault  in  possession  of  the  field.  They  ad-


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  299

mit  too  much,  because  they  themselves  grant  the  existence  of
evil  spirits  of  vast  power  (nay,  take  pains  to  demonstrate
their  existence),  and  because  they  accept  demoniacal  posses-
sion as  a  fact  in  ancient  times,  though  they  reject  it  for  the
present  age.  This  rejection  was,  of  course,  quite  arbitrary,
and  their  attempts  to  justify  it  from  Scripture  were  pitifully
weak.  Barrel  could  appeal  to  facts  and  experience.  His  pa-
tients had  manifested  the  same  symptoms  as  the  demoniacs
of  old,  and  it  was  obviously  absurd  to  force  a  distinction.  If
the  afflicted  persons  in  Bible  times  were  possessed  with  devils,
then  his  patients  were  possessed  with  devils;  and  if  he  had  re-
lieved them  (as  he  surely  had),  then  there  was  no  reason
which  Deacon  and  Walker  could  make  valid  to  reject  the
corollary  of  dispossession.

But  what  connection  has  this  strange  affair  with  witch-
craft? Here  we  must  walk  circumspectly,  for  misapprehen-
sions are  rife.  It  is  often  inferred  that  Bancroft  and  Harsnet,
because  they  denounced  Barrel  and  his  patients  as  tricksters,
had  no  belief  in  witchcraft.  This  is  a  false  conclusion.  A
demoniac  is  not  necessarily  bewitched.  He  may  owe  his  dire
condition  to  some  witch's  malice,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  the
devil  may  have  assailed  him  immediately,  without  a  witch's
agency.  Further,  there  are  many  evil  things  done  by  witches
which  have  no  reference  to  demoniacal  possession.  In  all  of
Barrel's  cases,  to  be  sure,  witches  were  accused.  To  some
extent,  then,  Bancroft  and  his  assistants  were,  in  effect,
attempting  to  discredit  the  witch-dogma,  since  they  were
attacking  the  genuineness,  or  the  diabolical  origin,  of  certain
phenomena  ascribed,  in  these  particular  instances,  to  witch-
craft. But  (and  we  cannot  be  too  careful  in  making  the  dis-
tinction) they  did  not  deny  either  the  existence  or  the  criminality
of  witches  in  general^  any  more  than  they  denied  the  existence
of  wicked  spirits.  They  strove  to  explode  the  theory  of  de-
moniacal possession;  but  they  did  not  attack  the  witchcraft
dogma.  Indeed,  they  took  care  to  avoid  committing  them-
selves on  that  head.  For,  even  if  they  had  no  faith  in  the
dogma,  they  knew  that  to  assail  it  would  throw  them  out  of
court,  inasmuch  as  the  belief  in  witchcraft  was,  in  some  form
or  other,  universal  among  all  classes  and  all  persuasions.

Further,  Bancroft  and  his  aids,  in  their  opposition  to  Bar-


3CO        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


rel,  were  not  espousing  the  cause  of  alleged  witches,  —  or,  if
so,  they  were  doing  it  in  a  purely  incidental  way.  Their  ob-
ject was  quite  definite  and  unconcealed.  They  were  warring
against  the  Puritans  and  the  Roman  Catholics,  whom  they
regarded  as  foes  to  Church  and  State.  Puritan  preachers  and
Roman  Catholic  priests  both  professed  to  cast  out  devils.  In
Bancroft's  eyes  these  were  absurd  pretensions.  Yet  the
people  and  many  of  the  clergy  were  much  impressed.  There
was  danger  ahead,  so  the  Bishop  thought.  A  vigorous  cam-
paign was  necessary.  But  the  campaign  was  political  and
ecclesiastical,  not  humanitarian.  Its  aim  was  not  to  save
witches,  but  to  crush  exorcists.^'

Here  is  a  significant  bit  of  evidence  on  this  point.  In  1602
Mary  Glover,  the  daughter  of  a  merchant  in  Thames  Street,
had  weird  seizures,  which  she  attributed  to  the  malign  spells
of  Elizabeth  Jackson.  The  neighbors  were  eager  to  prose-
cute, but  a  physician  informed  Chief  Justice  Anderson  that
"the  maid  did  counterfeit."  Anderson  directed  Sir  John
Croke  (Recorder  of  London)  to  summon  the  girl  to  his  cham-
ber in  the  Temple  and  test  the  matter.  Croke  did  so  in  1603,
having  both  the  maid  and  the  witch  present,  with  divers
neighbors  and  certain  ministers.  He  was  convinced,  by  vari-
ous drastic  tests,  that  there  was  no  imposture,  and  committed
Mother  Jackson  to  Newgate.  At  the  Recorder's  instance,
several  ministers  undertook  to  relieve  the  girl  by  fasting  and
prayer.  They  were  completely  successful.  One  of  them,
Lewis  Hughes,  was  despatched  to  Bishop  Bancroft  with  the
tidings.  He  was  not  well  received.  "I  .  .  .  could  have  no  au-
dience," he  writes,  "and  for  my  paines  I  was  called  Rascall
and  varlot,  and  sent  to  the  Gatehouse,  where  hee  kept  me
foure  moneths."  '°  But  Mother  Jackson  was  arraigned  and
convicted  in  due  course.  Bancroft,  we  observe,  was  certain
that  this  was  not  demoniacal  possession,  and  he  imprisoned
the  exorciser.  But  he  made  no  effort,  so  far  as  we  can  learn,
to  rescue  the  witch.  He  left  her  to  the  courts  with  a  good
conscience.

This  episode  fell  just  after  the  so-called  exposure  of  Barrel.
The  date  makes  it  instructive.  The  Recorder,  we  note,  was
still  a  believer  in  possession,  despite  the  arguments  of  Ban-
croft's literary  bureau,  and  so  were  many  (perhaps  most)  of


CHAP.  XVII]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  30I

the  clergy.  Indeed,  we  must  not  too  hastily  assume  that  all
the  bishops  even  were  ready  to  subscribe  to  Bancroft's  ex-
treme tenets.  Take  the  case  of  Thomas  Harrison,  the  Boy  of
Northwich,  in  Cheshire.  His  fits  began  in  1600  or  1601  and
lasted  a  year  or  two.  He  was  kept  for  ten  days  in  the  Bishop
of  Chester's  palace  and  carefully  watched,  but  no  fraud  was
detected.  The  bishop  (Richard  Vaughan)  and  three  othe"^
commissioners  issued  an  order  that,  "  for  [his]  ease  .r>:icl  de-
liverance" from  "his  grievous  afflictions,"  p.iWic  prayers
should  be  offered  for  him  in  the  parish  cbavch  "before  the
congregation  so  oft  as  the  same  ass^'^/bleth."  They  dele-
gated seven  clergymen  to  visit  nim  by  turns,  and  "  to  use
their  discretions  by  private  prayer  and  fasting,  for  the  ease
and  comfort  of  the  afflicted."  Some  held,  this  document  in-
forms us,  "  that  the  child  [was]  really  possessed  of  an  uncleane
spirit."  This  Bishop  Vaughan  and  the  other  commissioners
doubted.  But  they  did  not  think  he  was  shamming.  They
had  "scene  the  bodily  affliction  of  the  said  child,"  and  ob-
served in  sundry  fits  very  strange  effects  and  operations,  they
tell  us,  "either  proceeding  of  naturall  vnknowne  causes,  or  of
some  diabolical  practise."  And  Harvey,  one  of  the  clergy-
men appointed  by  the  bishop  to  fast  and  pray,  wrote  to  a
friend  that  nothing  like  the  "passions  [i.  e.  sufferings],  be-
hauiour,  and  speeches"  of  the  boy  had  "ever  come  under  his
observation  or  occurred  in  his  reading."  "Few  that  haue
scene  the  variety  of  his  fits,  but  they  thinke  the  diuell  hath
the  disposing  of  his  body.  Myselfe  haue  diuers  times  scene
him,  and  such  things  in  him  as  are  impossible  to  proceed  from
any  humane  creature.  The  matter  hath  affected  our  whole
countrey.  The  Diuines  with  us  generally  hold,  that  the  child
is  really  possessed."  A  contemporary  memorandum  as-
sures us  that  once,  when  the  bishop  was  praying  with  him,
"the  Boy  was  so  outragious,  that  he  flew  out  of  his  bed,  and
so  frighted  the  Bishops  men,  that  one  of  them  fell  into  a
sown,  and  the  Bishop  was  glad  to  lay  hold  on  the  boy,  who
ramped  at  the  Window  to  have  gotten  out."

Joseph  Hall,  afterwards  Bishop  of  Exeter  (1627)  and  of
Norwich  (1641),  in  disputing  with  a  Belgian  priest  in  1605,
asserted  roundly  that  "  in  our  church,  we  had  manifest  proofs
of  the  ejection  of  devils  by  fasting  and  prayer."     Hall  was  a


302         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

firm  believer  in  witchcraft  and  approved  of  the  statute  of
1604.95

And  now  we  will  go  back  a  few  years  in  order  to  see  what
the  bishops  and  the  judges  thought,  and  how  they  acted,
when  a  case  combining  demoniacal  possession  with  witch-
craft was  not  complicated  by  Puritan  or  Roman  Catholic
:xorcism.  Let  us  examine,  as  briefly  as  may  be,  the  cele-
bratec?  '^ase  of  the  Witches  of  Warboys.  The  story  has  been
told  again  ^nd  again,  but  its  actual  bearing  on  the  history  of
English  witch-prc^ecution  has  never  been  pointed  out.  The
Warboys  case  lasteo>  f'^nm  1589,  when  the  fits  of  the  afflicted
persons  began,  until  1593,  when  the  witches  were  hanged.

Robert  Throckmorton,  Esquire,  was  a  Huntingdonshire
gentleman  of  excellent  family  and  connections.  He  was  of
Ellington,  but  had  removed  to  Warboys  shortly  before  our
story  begins.  Both  these  places  are  near  the  county  town,
and  therefore  not  far  from  Cambridge.  The  disturbance  be-
gan in  November,  1589,  when  Jane,  Mr.  Throckmorton's
daughter,  a  girl  of  about  ten  years,  was  attacked  with  violent
hysteria.  In  her  fits,  she  called  out  against  Mother  Samuel,
an  aged  neighbor.  Two  first-rate  physicians  of  Cambridge
were  consulted.  Dr.  Barrow  (a  friend  of  Mr.  Throckmorton's)
and  Master  Butler.  The  latter  was  William  Butler  (1535-
161 8)  of  Clare  Hall,  of  whom  Aubrey  tells  several  amusing
anecdotes.  Aubrey  informs  us  that  he  "never  tooke  the  de-
gree of  Doctor,  though  he  was  the  greatest  physitian  of  his
time."  Both  Barrow  and  Butler  were  baffled,  and  Barrow
ascribed  the  fits  to  witchcraft,  remarking  that  he  himself
"had  some  experience  of  the  mallice  of  some  witches."
This  speech  is  worth  noting,  for  it  throws  light  on  the  state  of
mind  of  university  men.  Within  two  months.  Mistress
Jane's  four  sisters  —  ranging  in  age  from  nine  to  fifteen  years
—  were  similarly  attacked,  and  they  all  cried  out  against
Mother  Samuel.  This  affliction  lasted  until  April,  1593,  or
about  three  years  and  a  half.  In  the  interval  six  or  seven
women-servants  (for  the  Throckmorton  menage  was  of  course
somewhat  unstable)  suffered  from  just  such  fits,  —  and  also
the  wife  of  one  of  the  girls'  maternal  uncles,  Mr.  John  Picker-
ing of  Ellington.  Mother  Samuel  was  believed  to  be  the
cause  of  it  all.  Yet  the  children's  parents  acted  with  exem-


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  303

plary  caution.  They  had  no  wish  to  prosecute  Mother
Samuel,  but  treated  her  kindly  and  gave  their  attention  to
caring  for  the  girls  and  urging  her  to  confess.  Her  confession
and  repentance,  it  was  hoped,  would  put  an  end  to  the  fits.

About  Christmas,  1592,  Mother  Samuel  admitted  her
guilt.  Even  then  there  was  no  immediate  thought  of  bring-
ing her  to  justice.  She  was  in  great  distress  of  mind,  and
both  Mr.  Throckmorton  and  Dr.  Dorington,  the  parson  of
Warboys,  exerted  themselves  to  give  her  Christian  consola-
tion as  a  repentant  sinner.  However,  she  almost  immediately
retracted,  whereupon  Mr.  Throckmorton,  losing  patience  at
last,  took  her  before  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln  (William  Chader-
ton)  and  certain  justices.  She  again  made  admission  of  guilt.
Soon  after  the  girls  fell  into  their  fits  afresh,  and  they  now
accused  the  old  woman  of  the  death  of  Lady  Cromwell,  the
second  wife  of  Sir  Henry  Cromwell  of  Hinchinbrook,  the
great  landowner  of  those  parts,  known  for  his  splendor  as  the
Golden  Knight.

The  Cromwells  and  the  Throckmortons  were  friends,  and,
in  September,  1590,  Lady  Cromwell,  being  then  at  Ramsey,
only  two  miles  from  Warboys,  had  made  a  call  of  sympathy
on  the  family.  Mother  Samuel,  who  lived  next  door,  had
been  summoned.  The  Samuels  were  Sir  Henry's  tenants,  and
the  lady  spoke  roughly  to  the  old  woman,  accusing  her  of
witchcraft,  and  snatched  off  her  cap  and  clipped  off  a  lock
of  her  hair.  This  she  told  Mistress  Throckmorton  to  burn.
Mother  Samuel  uttered  some  words  which,  when  later  re-
membered, passed  for  the  damnum  minatum.  That  night
Lady  Cromwell  was  strangely  attacked,  and  she  died  after  an
illness  of  a  year  and  a  quarter,  —  that  is,  about  the  beginning
of  1592.  Nobody  appears  to  have  connected  Mother  Samuel
with  her  death  until,  in  1593,  the  afiiicted  girls  charged  her
with  it  in  their  ravings.  They  extended  the  accusation  to  John
Samuel,  her  husband,  and  Agnes,  her  daughter.  All  three  were
tried  at  Huntingdon  before  Justice  Fenner  on  April  5th,
1593.  Mother  Samuel  confessed,  and,  with  her  husband  and
daughter,  was  hanged,  according  to  the  Elizabethan  statute.
There  was  no  doubt  of  their  guilt  in  anybody's  mind.  Mother
Samuel  herself  thought  the  girls  bewitched,  and  old  Samuel
was  finally  convinced  that  his  wife  was  guilty.


304         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Several  causes  combined  to  make  this  the  most  momentous
witch-trial  that  had  ever  occurred  in  England.  The  long  con-
tinuance of  the  phenomena  and  the  station  of  the  victims
were  alone  sufficient  to  give  the  affair  wide  currency.  The
family  was  connected  with  many  persons  of  importance.  Mr.
Robert  Throckmorton  was  related  to  the  Warwickshire  and
the  Gloucestershire  Throckmortons.  One  of  his  first  cousins,
also  named  Robert,  lived  at  Brampton,  Northants,  close  by,
and  often  witnessed  the  girls'  fits.  The  girls'  maternal  uncle,
Mr.  (afterwards  Sir)  Gilbert  Pickering  of  Tichmarsh,  and  his
brothers,  John  and  Henry,  were  deeply  interested,  and  gave
evidence  at  the  assizes.  So  did  Dr.  Francis  Dorington,  the
Warboys  rector,  who  was  the  husband  of  Mr.  Throckmor-
ton's sister.  Robert  Poulter,  vicar  of  Brampton,  another  wit-
ness, was  also  connected  with  the  family.''^  Francis  Crom-
well, Sir  Henry's  brother,  was  one  of  the  justices  to  whom
Mother  Samuel  confessed.  The  Cromwells  were  among  the
best-known  commoners  in  the  kingdom.  Dr.  Dorington's
brother  John,  a  Londoner,  visited  the  children  in  their  at-
tacks, and  of  course  he  talked  of  the  affair  in  the  capital.

The  connections  with  Cambridge  were  also  very  intimate.
The  physicians  consulted  by  Mr.  Throckmorton,  as  we  have
noticed,  lived  there,  and  they  were  both  university  men.  Dr.
Francis  Dorington,  the  parson  of  Warboys,  who  had  married
Mr.  Throckmorton's  sister,  and  Thomas  Nutt,  the  vicar  of
Ellington,  were  also  Cambridge  graduates.''  Both  were
deeply  interested  in  the  case,  and  gave  evidence  at  the  trial.
Henry  Pickering,  one  of  the  children's  maternal  uncles,  was
at  Christ's  College  when  the  fits  began. "°  He  not  only  visited
the  Throckmortons  in  1590,  "being  then  a  SchoUer  of  Cam-
bridge," and  stayed  there  three  or  four  days,  but  he  took  two
other  scholars  of  his  acquaintance  to  see  the  witch,  and  we
have  a  pretty  full  account  of  the  interview.  Mr.  Pickering
was  fully  persuaded  that  Goody  Samuel  was  a  witch.  Being
somewhat  moved,  he  told  her  that  "there  was  no  way  to
preuent  the  iudgements  of  God,  but  by  her  confession  and
repentance:  which  if  she  did  not  in  time,  he  hoped  one  day  to
see  her  burned  at  a  stake,  and  he  himselfe  would  bring  fire
and  wood,  and  the  children  should  blowe  the  coales."  ^"^
This  Mr.  Henry  Pickering  became,  in  1597,  rector  of  Aid-


CHAP.  XVIl]


KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST


wincle  All  Saints,  in  Northamptonshire.  His  daughter  Mary
married  Erasmus  Dryden  (son  of  Sir  Erasmus),  and  became
the  mother  of  the  illustrious  poet,  who  was  born  at  the  par-
sonage house  of  Aldwincle  All  Saints  in  1631.'"^  Thus  it  ap-
pears that  the  five  tormented  Throckmorton  girls  were  first
cousins  of  the  poet's  mother,  and  that  Mrs.  Throckmorton
was  his  great-aunt.  We  note  that  William  Perkins,  whose
treatise  on  witchcraft  we  have  examined,  was  a  fellow  of
Christ's  College  during  most  of  the  time  when  these  fits  were
going  on.  It  is  curious,  too,  that  the  publisher  of  Perkins's
posthumous  treatise  (another  Cambridge  man)  was  Thomas
Pickering,"^  doubtless  a  relative,  though  we  cannot  be  cer-
tain of  that.  Both  Sir  Henry  Cromwell  and  his  son  Oliver
had  been  at  the  university.

The  Warboys  case,  then,  demonstrably  produced  a  deep
and  lasting  impression  on  the  class  that  made  laws.  The
gentlemen  concerned  were  not  ignorant  country  squires  in
the  remote  districts;  they  were  intelligent,  well-educated
men,  in  close  contact  with  one  of  the  universities  and  with  the
capital.

Nor  was  the  impression  allowed  to  die  out.  It  was  per-
petuated in  two  ways  —  by  a  remarkable  book  and  by  a  per-
manent foundation.  The  presiding  judge,  Edward  Fenner,
was  so  much  struck  by  what  he  had  seen  and  heard  (for  the
children  had  their  fits  in  his  presence)  that  he  joined  with
others  to  further  the  publication  of  a  narrative,  —  The  Most
Strange  and  Admirable  Discoverie  of  the  Three  Witches  of
Warboys,  —  which  was  printed  in  London  in  1593.  Full
notes  had  been  kept  from  the  outset  (as  befitted  the  intelli-
gence and  education  of  the  families  concerned)  and  these  were
used  by  the  author.  This  is  no  mere  catchpenny  tract.  It  is
a  careful  and  temperate  report  of  the  girls'  malady  from  first
to  last.  Nothing  comparable  to  it,  considered  as  a  report  on  a
long-continued  case  of  epidemic  hysteria,  had  ever  appeared
in  England.  The  details,  at  which  modern  writers  on  witch-
craft are  wont  to  jeer,  are  no  more  ridiculous  than  the  details
in  recent  and  esteemed  treatises  on  la  grande  hysterie,  or  on
multiple  personality.  That  it  kept  the  Warboys  case  alive
long  after  the  accession  of  James  I  is  certain,  for  Dr.  John
Cotta,  in  161 6  and  again  in  1624,  refers  to  the  "Treatise


3o6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


of  the  Witches  of  Warbozys"  as  authoritative.'"''  He  had
no  doubt  whatever  that  the  Throckmorton  girls  were  be-
witched.

Finally,  Sir  Henry  Cromwell  took  effectual  measures  for
perpetuating  the  impression  made  by  the  long-continued
phenomena,  the  trial,  and  the  book.  Certain  goods  and  chat-
tels of  the  executed  felons  were  forfeited  to  him  as  lord  of  the
manor.  He  disdained  to  keep  the  money  and  wished  to  de-
vote it  to  public  uses.  Hence  he  established  an  annual  sermon
at  Huntingdon,  to  be  delivered  by  a  fellow  of  his  own  college,
Queen's  of  Cambridge.  The  appointee  was  to  "preache  and
invaye  against  the  destestable  practice,  synne,  and  offence  of
witchcraft,  inchantment,  charm,  and  sorcereye."  The  ser-
mon was  maintained  until  1812,  but  toward  the  end  its  bur-
den was  turned  to  the  explosion  of  the  old  belief."*'

And  now,  when  we  come  to  apply  what  we  have  observed
of  the  state  of  educated  public  opinion  and  to  estimate  its
presumable  effect  on  the  legislators  of  1604,  who  passed  the
revised  statute,  we  are  struck  with  a  fact  which  all  investiga-
tors have  overlooked  or  ignored.  I'wo  gentlemen  were  sitting
in  the  House  of  Commons  who  had  the  strongest  personal  interest
in  the  Warboys  case.  The  Samuels  had  been  hanged,  not  for
tormenting  the  Throckmorton  girls,""  but  for  bewitching
Lady  Cromwell  to  death.  As  we  run  our  eye  down  the  list  of
Members  of  Parliament,  it  is  arrested  by  two  names,  —  Sir
Oliver  Cromwell  and  Henry  Cromwell,  —  one  the  member
for  the  County  of  Huntingdon,  the  other  for  the  borough.
These  were  sons  of  that  Sir  Henry  whose  wife  had  died  (as  all
believed)  from  Mother  Samuel's  arts,  and  who  had  founded  a
sermon  in  perpetual  memory  of  the  murder.

Both  Sir  Oliver  and  Henry  Cromwell  might  therefore  be
presumed  to  have  an  effective  knowledge  of  the  case.  But
we  are  not  left  to  conjecture.  Their  uncle,  Francis  Cromwell,
was  one  of  the  justices  to  whom  Goody  Samuel  confessed.'"*
Mr.  Henry  Cromwell  himself  had  visited  the  Throckmorton
house  with  one  of  Sir  Henry's  men  and  had  observed  two  of
the  girls  in  their  fits.""  This  was  in  1593,  shortly  before  the
actual  trial,  and  after  the  girls  had  begun  to  accuse  the
Samuels  of  Lady  Cromwell's  murder.  As  for  Sir  Oliver,  his
wife  had  accompanied  her  mother-in-law  on  the  fatal  visit  to


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  307

the  Throckmortons,  and  had  been  present  at  her  interview
with  Goody  Samuel.  That  night,  Lady  Cromwell  was
"strangly  tormented  in  her  sleep,  by  a  cat  (as  she  imagined)
which  mother  Samuel  had  sent  vnto  her."  Mistress  Oliver
Cromwell  was  sleeping  in  the  same  bed  (her  husband  being
from  home),  and  was  awakened  by  the  "strugling  and  striu-
ing  of  the  Lady  .  .  .  and  mournfuU  noise,  which  shee  made
speaking  to  the  cat,  and  to  mother  Samuel."  Mistress  Oliver
roused  her  mother-in-law,  who  told  her  all  about  her  dream.
Lady  Cromwell  had  no  more  sleep  that  night,  and  soon  after
sickened,  as  already  told."°  We  may  be  sure  that  when  Mr.
Oliver  Cromwell  returned,  he  was  put  in  full  possession  of
both  ladies'  experiences.  Surely  neither  Sir  Oliver  Cromwell
nor  his  brother  stood  in  need  of  instruction  in  the  witch-
dogma  from  James  I,  or  required  any  royal  influence  to  per-
suade them  to  vote  for  the  statute  of  1604.

It  is  worth  while  to  follow  the  clue  a  little  farther,  and  to
glance  at  the  parliamentary  history  of  the  statute.  Most
writers  have  been  quite  innocent  of  any  knowledge  that  it
even  had  such  a  history.  Yet  there  it  stands  in  the  Lords'
and  Commons'  Journals,  and  an  instructive  history  it  is.

The  bill  originated  in  the  House  of  Lords.  The  first  read-
ing took  place  on  March  27,  1604.  On  the  29th  it  was  read  a
second  time  and  referred  to  a  committee  consisting  of  six
earls,  sixteen  other  peers,  and  twelve  bishops.  The  commit-
tee was  to  have  the  most  expert  advice  conceivable,  and  to
that  end  an  imposing  array  of  legal  talent,  learning,  and
experience  was  requested  "to  attend  the  Lords"  in  their
deliberations.  Here  is  the  list:  the  Chief  Justice  of  the  Com-
mon Pleas  (Anderson),  the  Chief  Baron  of  the  Exchequer
(Sir  William  Peryam),  two  justices  of  the  King's  Bench  (Sir
Christopher  Yelverton  and  Sir  David  Williams),  Serjeant
Croke,  the  Attorney-General  (Coke),  and  Sir  John  Tindall,  a
distinguished  ecclesiastical  lawyer.  Nor  was  all  this  a  mere
flourish.  The  committee  and  its  eminent  counsel  took  their
duties  seriously.  They  rejected  the  draft  that  had  been
referred  to  them,  and,  on  the  2d  of  April,  the  committee
reported  a  new  bill,  "framed"  by  the  committee.  This  was
brought  into  the  Lords  by  the  Earl  of  Northumberland.  It
received  certain  amendments,  and,  on  May  8th,  after  the


3o8         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

third  reading,  was  passed  and  sent  to  the  House  of  Commons.
Here,  too,  there  was  careful  deliberation.  On  May  nth  the
bill  had  its  first  reading;  and  on  the  26th  it  was  read  a  second
time  and  referred  to  a  committee  of  seventeen,  including  the
Recorder  of  London  and  two  serjeants-at-law  (Hobart  and
Shirley),  which  was  directed  to  meet  on  the  first  of  June  in
the  Middle  Temple  Hall.  On  the  5th,  Sir  Thomas  Ridgeway,
for  the  committee,  reported  the  bill  "with  alterations  and
amendments."  On  June  yth  it  came  up  for  the  third  reading,
was  passed  as  amended,  and  on  the  9th  was  sent  up  to  the
Lords.'"

This  bare  statement  of  recorded  facts  disposes  of  the  myth
that  King  James  was  the  author  or  the  father  of  the  statute
which  has  so  long  been  associated  with  his  name  and  fame.
Whether  the  measure  was  good  or  bad,  —  whether  its  results
were  great  or  small,  —  the  Lords  and  Commons  of  England,
and  not  the  king,  must  shoulder  the  responsibility.'"  And  it
is  in  complete  accord  with  what  we  should  expect  from  the
caution  with  which  both  houses  proceeded  and  the  care  which
their  committees  took,  that  the  statute,  when  finally  it  left
the  hands  of  Parliament,  was  not  really  a  new  law  at  all,  but
simply  a  modification  and  extension  of  the  statute  of  Eliza-
beth.

Two  names  on  the  Lords'  Committee  catch  the  eye  imme-
diately, —  the  Earl  of  Derby  and  the  Bishop  of  Lincoln.  Ten
years  before,  in  1594,  a  short  time  after  the  witches  of  War-
boys  were  hanged,  Ferdinando,  fifth  Earl  of  Derby,  had  died
at  Latham  after  a  ten  days'  illness.  The  physicians  (he  had
four)  ascribed  his  disease  to  a  surfeit  combined  with  over-
exertion. But  there  were  grave  suspicions  of  sorcery.  The
Earl  had  dreamed  strange  dreams;  he  had  been  "crossed"  by
an  apparition  "with  a  gastly  and  threatning  countenance."
An  image  of  wax  was  discovered  in  his  bedroom.  "A
homely  Woman,  about  the  age  of  fifty  yeeres,  was  found
mumbling  in  a  corner  of  his  honours  Chamber,  but  what  God
knoweth."  Three  other  suspected  witches  appear  in  the  case
at  divers  times  and  in  sundry  manners.  The  Earl  himself
"cryed  out  that  the  Doctors  laboured  in  vaine,  because  hee
was  certainely  bewitched."  In  the  end,  the  opinion  seems  to
have  prevailed  that  he  died  from  natural  causes."^  But  it


CHAP.  XVIl]


KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST


would  be  extraordinary  if  all  the  circumstances  had  not  made
a  profound  impression  on  his  younger  brother,  who  succeeded
him,  and  this  is  the  Earl  of  Derby  whom  we  have  noted  in  the
Lords'  Committee  on  the  bill.  Another  person  who  must  also
have  been  deeply  affected  by  these  strange  happenings  was
the  Bishop  of  Chester,  who  attended  the  dying  man.  This
was  Dr.  William  Chaderton,  who  was  translated  to  Lincoln
in  1594,  and  he,  too,  sat  in  the  Lords'  Committee.

Henry  Percy,  Earl  of  Northumberland,  who  reported  the
second  draft  from  the  committee,  was  a  famous  student  of
the  occult  sciences  and  was  popularly  known  as  "  the  Wizard
Earl."  Like  Dr.  Dee,  he  believed  that  his  own  investigations
were  free  from  the  taint  of  diabolism,  but,  like  Dee,  he  must
also  have  felt  convinced  that  there  were  others  who  did  traffic
with  the  infernal  powers,  and  that  such  persons  deserved
punishment.

Henry  Howard,  Earl  of  Northampton,  another  member  of
the  Lords'  Committee,  had  the  reputation  of  being  the  most
learned  of  the  peers.  He  was  a  firm  believer  in  the  actuality
of  communication  between  mortals  and  wicked  spirits.  In
his  erudite  Defensative  against  the  Poyson  of  Supposed  Pro-
phecies, written  in  1582  and  1583,  he  declared  that  one  of  the
means  "whereby  the  contagion  of  vnlawfuU  Prophesies  is
conueyed  into  the  mindes  of  mortall  men,  is  conference  with
damned  Spirits  or  Familiars,  as  commonly  we  call  them."  "'^
And  he  unhesitatingly  ascribed  the  clairvoyance  of  cunning
men  and  women  to  such  revelations,  —  taking  as  an  example
their  disclosure  of  the  thief  in  a  case  of  cutting  a  purse.

Let  us  turn  to  the  Commons'  Committee.  Here  we  find
several  interesting  names.  Sir  Roger  Aston  had  been  English
resident  in  Scotland.  This  may  be  held  to  be  a  two-edged
argument,  but  we  do  not  need  it,  for  there  are  plenty  more.
Two  of  the  most  notoriously  witch-haunted  counties  in  Eng-
land were  Lancaster  and  Essex.  Now,  Lancashire  was  repre-
sented on  the  committee  by  Sir  Richard  Molyneux  of  Sefton.
As  for  Essex,  not  only  was  the  county  member,  Sir  Francis
Barrington,  on  the  committee,  but  also  Sir  Robert  Wroth,
who  lived  principally  at  Loughton  Hall,  in  Essex.  He  was  a
man  of  forty-odd  when  Brian  Darcey's  great  St.  Osyth  cases
were  tried  and  ten  witches  (perhaps  more)  were  hanged  in  that


3IO         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

county.  Other  executions  took  place  at  Chelmsford  in  1 579
and  1589."'  Giffard,  we  remember,  was  an  Essex  preacher,
and  his  Dialogue,  published  in  1593  and  reissued  in  1603,  had
urged  the  sharpening  of  the  statute  in  the  precise  direction
which  this  parliament  took.  Wroth  had  large  possessions  in
Middlesex  and  sat  for  that  county."^  Now  of  the  twenty-
nine  years  from  1573  to  1601  there  were  witch-records  for
thirteen.  Serjeant  Hobart  (later  Sir  Henry)  was  likewise  a
committeeman.  What  he  thought  of  witchcraft  we  may  infer
from  his  conduct  when  Lord  Chief  Baron  of  the  Exchequer
at  the  trial  of  Margaret  and  Philip  (i.  e.  Philippa)  Flower,
who  were  executed  in  161 9  for  bewitching  to  death  the  son
of  the  Earl  of  Rutland. Nobody  will  suggest  that  he
learned  his  creed  from  James  I.  If  any  should  be  so  absurd,
we  may  balance  him  by  Sir  Humphrey  Winch,  also  an  M.P.,
though  not  on  the  committee,  who,  in  1619,  incurred  the
wrath  of  the  king  by  condemning  nine  witches  to  death  in  a
case  which  James  himself  shortly  after  exposed  as  an  impos-
ture. We  shall  return  to  this  in  a  moment.""  There  was
a  Mr.  Throckmorton  on  the  committee.  This  was  John
Throckmorton,  M.P.  for  Gloucestershire.  The  Throckmor-
tops  of  that  county  were  related  to  those  of  Huntingdonshire.
It  is  likely  that  Mr.  John  had  felt  some  share  of  the  universal
interest  roused  by  the  experiences  of  his  distant  kinswomen
of  Warboys.  The  Recorder  of  London  also  sat  on  the  Com-
mons' Committee.  This  was  Henry  Montagu,'"  afterwards
Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench  (161 6)  and  Earl  of  Man-
chester (1626).  He  was  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge,
where  he  had  been  a  younger  contemporary  of  William  Per-
kins, whose  strong  advocacy  of  more  stringent  laws  against
witchcraft  we  have  already  noted.  Later,  he  was  a  patron  of
Thomas  Cooper,  whose  book  about  witchcraft  we  have  ex-
amined."^ James  Montagu,  who  preached  Perkins's  funeral
sermon,  was  his  younger  brother."^  Their  father.  Sir  Edward
Montagu,  was  likewise  on  the  Commons'  Committee.  Can
there  be  any  doubt  of  the  opinions  of  this  family  on  the  sub-
ject of  witchcraft?  Must  we  look  to  James  I  as  the  source  of
their  views?  Finally,  we  note  with  peculiar  interest  that  the
bill  was  reported,  with  amendments,  from  the  committee  to
the  House  by  Sir  Thomas  Ridgeway,  of  Devon,  before  whom,


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  3II

in  1 601  and  1602,  were  taken  an  extraordinary  series  of  ex-
aminations accusing  the  Trevisard  family  of  witchcraft."''

It  is  time  to  study  the  advisory  board  of  legal  experts  who
were  attached  to  the  Lords'  Committee  on  this  most  earnestly
debated  bill.  Three  of  these  attract  our  particular  attention,
Chief  Justice  Anderson,  Serjeant  Croke,  and  Coke,  then
Attorney-General.

Sir  Edmund  Anderson  had  been  chief  justice  for  twenty-
two  years.  He  knew  all  about  the  workings  of  the  Eliza-
bethan statute.  At  first  sight  one  might  think  him  opposed
to  witch-prosecution,  for  he  had  taken  a  leading  part  in  "ex-
posing" Barrel,  and  he  had  a  lively  sense  of  the  danger  of
popular  excitement  to  the  innocent  in  such  matters.  But  a
moment's  thought  will  set  us  right.  Perkins  and  Giffard  and
Dr.  Cotta  —  nay,  James  himself,  as  we  shall  see  presently
—  thought  that  judges  ought  to  be  very  careful  to  sift  the
evidence  and  protect  the  innocent,  but  none  of  them  doubted
that  a  witch  whose  guilt  was  proved  ought  to  be  condemned.
So  the  majority  of  civilized  men  to-day  believe  in  the  wisdom
and  righteousness  of  the  death  penalty  for  a  certain  grade  of
crime,  but  all  are  agreed  that  care  should  be  taken  to  clear  the
innocent.  An  instructive  example  of  the  distinction  that  we
must  make  may  be  seen  in  the  person  of  Sir  Edward  Bromley.
At  the  same  assizes,  in  161 2,  Bromley  presided  over  two  sets
of  witch-trials,  those  of  the  Pendle  witches  and  those  of  the
witches  of  Salmesbury.  In  the  Pendle  cases,  he  could  not
doubt  the  evidence,  and  he  condemned  ten  to  death  with
complete  assurance  that  he  was  doing  right.  Cotta,  himself,
in  1 61 6,  speaks  of  the  evidence  in  these  cases  with  regard  to
sorcery  by  means  of  "pictures"  (i.  e.  images)  as  "proued"  by
"  testimonies  beyond  exception."  In  the  Salmesbury  cases,
on  the  contrary,  Bromley  saw  reason  to  suspect  the  veracity
of  the  chief  witness  for  the  prosecution,  and  followed  up  the
clue  so  well  that  the  defendants  were  acquitted."'  Students
of  demonology  will  not  forget  that  modern  writers  have  seen
fit  to  gird  at  Bromley,  not  only  for  his  supposed  cruelty  and
superstition  in  condemning  the  witches  of  Pendle,  but  also  —
strange  to  say  —  for  the  ground  on  which  he  first  entertained
the  suspicion  that  led  to  the  acquittal  of  the  other  group.
But  it  is  hard  to  satisfy  modern  writers  on  witchcraft,  who  in-


312


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


sist  on  censuring  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  century  on  a
basis  of  modern  rationalism.  It  is  quite  certain  that  if  some
of  those  who  now  sit  in  judgment  on  the  witch-prosecutors
had  been  witch-judges,  no  defendant  would  ever  have
escaped.

But  we  must  return  to  Chief  Justice  Anderson,  who,  as
well  as  Sir  John  Croke,  sat  on  the  committee  of  advisers  to
the  Lords.  Anderson  and  Croke  had  been  associated,  in
1603,  in  the  affair  of  Mary  Glover,  which  we  have  already
considered.  This  happened  before  the  accession  of  James.
Croke  appears  therein  as  a  devout  believer  in  both  demoni-
acal possession  and  witchcraft,  and  there  is  no  reason  to  sup-
pose that  Anderson  was  in  any  way  dissatisfied  with  his  pro-
ceedings."^

Now  for  Coke,  the  Attorney  General.  There  is  a  new  pro-
vision in  the  statute  of  1604  (not  found  in  the  Elizabethan
law)  imposing  the  death  penalty  on  any  one  who  shall  "take
up  any  dead  man,  woman,  or  child  out  of  his,  her,  or  theire
grave,  or  any  other  place  where  the  dead  bodie  resteth,  or  the
skin,  bone,  or  any  other  parte  of  any  dead  person,  to  be  imi-
ployed  or  used  in  any  manner  of  Witchcrafte,  Sorcerie,
Charme,  or  Inchantment."  Hutchinson      conjectured  that
this  provision  was  due  to  King  James,  noting  that  such
ghoulish  outrages  were  a  part  of  the  confession  of  Agnes
Sampson,  one  of  the  first  Scottish  witches  examined  in  the
king's  presence  in  1590.'^°  I  am  willing  to  add  to  this  guess
whatever  support  may  be  derived  from  the  fact  that  the  king,
in  his  Dsemonologie,  more  than  once  adverts  to  the  witches'
habit  of  "  joynting,"  or  dismembering,  corpses.'^'  But,  when
all  is  said  and  done,  this  is  a  poor  refuge,  in  view  of  what  now
appears  to  be  the  history  of  the  statute,  especially  when  one
remembers  that  the  use  of  the  dead  for  purposes  of  sorcery
dates,  not  from  the  confession  of  Agnes  Sampson,  but  from
the  "backward  and  abysm  of  time."  The  lawmakers,  cleric
or  lay,  did  not  learn  of  this  habit  from  King  James,  unless
they  were  so  ignorant  as  never  to  have  heard  of  Lucan's
Erichtho,'^^  whom  Marston  actually  brought  upon  the  stage
at  about  this  very  time  in  a  tragedy  which  contains  a  speech,
in  description  of  the  sorceress,  that  out-Lucans  Lucan.'"
But  we  need  not  appeal  to  the  classics.  Sir  Edward  Kelley,


CHAP.  XVIl]


KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST


far-famed  as  Dr.  Dee's  scryer  in  crystallomancy,  had  already
emulated  Erichtho.  Years  before,  "  vpon  a  certaine  night,  in
the  Parke  of  Walton  in  le  dale,  in  the  county  of  Lancaster,
with  one  Paul  Waring,"  he  had  "inuocated  some  one  of  the
infernall  regiment,  to  know  certaine  passages  in  the  life,  as
also  what  might  bee  knowne  by  the  deuils  foresight,  of  the
manner  and  time  of  the  death  of  a  noble  young  Gentleman,
as  then  in  his  wardship."  The  black  rites  finished,  Kelley
learned  of  the  gentleman's  servant  about  a  poor  man's  corpse
that  had  been  buried  in  a  neighboring  churchyard  that  very
day.  "Hee  and  the  said  Waring  intreated  this  foresaid  ser-
uant,  to  go  with  them  to  the  graue."  The  servant  complied,
"and  withall  did  helpe  them  to  digge  up  the  carcase  of  the
poor  caitiffe,  whom  by  their  incantations,  they  made  him  (or
rather  some  euill  spirit  through  his  Organs)  to  speake,  who
deliuered  strange  predictions  concerning  the  said  Gentle-
man." All  that  we  know  of  the  prodigious  Kelley  inclines  us
to  credit  him  with  an  attempt  at  necromancy  on  this  occa-
sion. Weever,  who  told  the  tale  in  1631,  had  it  from  the  ser-
vant who  was  present,  as  well  as  from  the  young  gentleman  to
whom  the  servant  had  revealed  the  affair. It  is  safe  to  say
that  the  crime  of  violating  graves  was  as  common  in  England
as  in  Scotland.  It  surely  was  an  offence  quite  as  worthy  of  the
gallows  as  sheep-stealing,  or  theft  above  the  value  of  twelve-
pence.  And  it  was  natural  enough  to  insert  a  clause  to  cover
it  in  the  revised  law.  Now  Coke  was  just  the  man  to  do  this,
for  he  knew  of  a  fourteenth-century  case  which  showed  that
the  law  was  imperfect  in  this  very  point,  and  he  reports  the
occurrence  in  his  Institutes:

A  man  was  taken  in  Southwark  with  a  head  and  a  face  of  a  dead  man,
and  with  a  book  of  sorcery  in  his  male,  and  was  brought  into  the  king's
bench  before  Sir  John  Knevett  then  chief  justice:  but  seeing  no  indict-
ment was  against  him,  the  clerks  did  swear  him,  that  from  thenceforth  he
should  not  be  a  sorcerer,  and  was  delivered  out  of  prison,  and  the  head  of
the  dead  man  and  the  book  of  sorcery  were  burnt  at  Tuthill  at  the  costs  of
the  prisoner.  So  as  the  head  and  his  book  of  sorcery  had  the  same  punish-
ment, that  the  sorcerer  should  have  had  by  the  ancient  law,  if  he  had  by  his
sorcery  praied  in  aid  of  the  devil.'J'


Who  was  so  likely  as  Coke  to  instruct  the  Lords'  Commit-
tee as  to  the  defect  in  the  former  statute  in  this  regard?  At


314        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

all  events,  his  exposition  of  the  statute  of  1604  shows  how
thoroughly  he  believed  in  witchcraft,  and  leaves  no  doubt  as
to  the  general  bearing  of  whatever  advice  he  gave  the  com-
mittee. Nor  need  we  quote  his  celebrated  charge  to  the  jury
in  Mrs.  Turner's  trial  for  the  murder  of  Overbury,  as  we
might  otherwise  be  tempted  to  do.'-^^  Among  the  magical  ex-
hibits at  this  trial  was  a  parchment  on  which  "were  written
all  the  names  of  the  holy  'trinity;  as  also  a  figure,  in  which  was
written  this  word  Corpus,  and  upon  the  parchment  was
fastned  a  little  piece  of  the  skin  of  a  manl"  This  was,  it  ap-
pears, a  charm  of  Forman's.  He  certainly  did  not  import  it
from  Scotland!

I  think  we  may  now  regard  the  following  propositions  as
proved:  (i)  The  last  twenty  years  of  Elizabeth's  reign  were  a
time  of  intense  and  continuous  excitement  in  the  matter  of
witchcraft,  with  repeated  trials  and  a  good  many  executions,
(d)  The  doctrine  was  not  dying  out  when  James  came  to  the
throne.  It  was  held  with  great  tenacity,  not  only  by  the
masses,  but  by  a  vast  majority  of  the  educated  and  influen-
tial, — •  nobility,  country  gentry,  divines,  judges,  and  citizens.

(3)  The  Elizabethan  law  was  generally  thought  to  be  im-
perfect, and  there  was  strong  pressure  for  new  legislation.

(4)  The  statute  of  1604  was  carefully  considered  and  fully  dis-
cussed. It  was  not  a  king's  bill,  nor  was  it  rushed  through
under  royal  whip  and  spur,  or  passed  out  of  complaisance  to
the  new  sovereign.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  king  took
any  particular  interest  in  the  act.  It  reflected  the  conscien-
tious opinions  of  both  Houses  of  Parliament.""'  (5)  It  fol-
lowed the  language  of  the  Elizabethan  statute  at  almost
every  point,  though  somewhat  more  severe.  (6)  In  its  prac-
tical working,  however,  in  James's  time,  the  statute  of  1604
was  not  appreciably  severer  than  the  Elizabethan  law.

But  the  case  against  James  I  as  a  witch-hunter  during  his
English  reign  is  not  merely  destitute  of  every  kind  of  evi-
dence in  its  favor,  —  it  has  to  meet  an  overwhelming  array  of
direct  proof  on  the  other  side.  And  to  this  evidence  we  must
now  pass.  It  is  quite  conclusive.

First,  we  will  consider  certain  pardons  that  are  matters  of
record.  The  list  is  short  — ■  for  there  were  few  convictions  —
but  it  is  significant.'"'   On  April  16,  1604,  when  the  new


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  315

Statute  was  still  under  deliberation,  Christian,  the  wife  of
Thomas  Weech,  of  County  Norfolk,  received  the  royal  par-
don for  witchcraft.''*^  In  1608,  Simon  Reade  was  pardoned
for  conjuration  and  invocation  of  unclean  spirits."*^  This  case
is  mentioned  by  Ben  Jonson  in  The  Alchemist  (i6io).''''»
Reade  was  a  medical  practitioner  and  cunning  man  of  South-
wark.'-*5  One  Toby  Mathew  of  London  had  lost  £37,  10  shil-
lings, by  theft,  and  Reade  invoked  three  devils  —  Heawelon,
Faternon,  and  Cleveton  —  to  learn  the  name  of  the  thief  and
recover  the  money.  There  were  several  seances,  —  the  first
on  November  8,  1606,  the  others  before  the  loth  of  the  fol-
lowing January."**  Apparently  Mathew  blabbed,  perhaps  be-
cause the  devils  did  not  find  his  money  for  him.  No  doubt
Reade,  when  he  saw  that  his  trickery  was  to  cost  him  his  life,
confessed  that  the  conjuration  was  pure  humbug,  and  so  was
pardoned.  In  1610,  Christian  Weech  received  a  second  par-
don, this  time  for  the  murder  of  Mary  Freeston  by  witch-
craft.''*' In  1611,  William  Bate,  "indicted  twenty  years  since
for  practising  invocation  of  spirits  for  finding  treasure,"  was
pardoned."*^  In  Bate's  case  the  ground  is  expressly  stated, —
the  evidence  was  "found  weak."  Of  course  this  was  also  the
reason  for  royal  clemency  in  the  other  three  cases.  We  have
precisely  the  same  situation  that  confronts  us  in  Jane  Wen-
ham's  case,  in  171 2,  when  the  judge  was  dissatisfied  with  the
verdict  of  a  credulous  jury  and  saved  the  condemned  prisoner
in  the  only  way  open  to  him,  then  as  now,  by  procuring  the
royal  pardon.

The  bearing  of  these  records  is  unmistakable.  They  prove
both  that  James  was  no  bigoted  and  undiscriminating  witch-
finder  and  witch-prosecutor,  and  that  the  judges  tried  to  get
at  the  truth  in  this  crime  as  in  others.  Here,  then,  is  the
place  to  quote  a  passage  from  Francis  Osborne,  with  whom
King  James  was  no  favorite:  "What  his  Judgement  was  of
Witchcraft,  you  may,  in  part,  find  by  His  Treatise  on  that
Subject,  and  Charge  he  gave  the  Judges,  to  be  Circumspect
in  Condemning  those,  Committed  by  Ignorant  Justices,  for
Diabolical  Compacts.  Nor  had  he  Concluded  his  Advice  in
a  Narrower  Circle,  (as  I  have  heard)  Then  the  Denyal  of  any
such  operations,  but  out  of  Reason  of  State:  and  to  gratifie
the  Church,  which  hath  in  no  Age,  thought  fit  to  explode  out


3l6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

of  the  Common-peoples  minds,  An  Apprehension  of  Witch-
craft." The  latter  part  of  this  dictum  may  pass  for  what
it  is  worth.  The  whole  passage  is  valuable  for  the  light  it
throws  upon  the  king's  reputation  with  his  contemporaries.
They  thought  him  skeptical  rather  than  credulous.

There  is  a  close  relation  between  the  general  purport  of  Os-
borne's testimony  and  the  attitude  of  James  with  regard  to
the  curative  power  of  the  royal  touch. y[\s  incredulity  on
this  point  was  manifested  at  the  very  beginning  of  his  reign.
"The  King,"  wrote  Scaramelli  to  the  Doge  of  Venice,  in  1603,
shortly  before  the  coronation,  "says  that  neither  he  nor  any
other  King  can  have  power  to  heal  scrofula,  for  the  age  of
miracles  is  past,  and  God  alone  can  work  them.  However,"
adds  the  Venetian,  "he  will  have  the  full  ceremony  [sc.  of
coronation,  anointing  included],  so  as  not  to  lose  this  preroga-
tive [sc.  of  touching  for  the  king's  evil],  which  belongs  to  the
Kings  of  England  as  Kings  of  France."  And  we  know  that
he  actually  touched  for  the  evil  on  various  occasions,  for  rea-
sons of  state, knowing  well  that  the  ceremony  could  not
harm  the  sufferers  and  might  work  beneficially  upon  them
through  the  imagination.  "He  was  a  King  in  understand-
ing," says  Arthur  Wilson,  "  and  was  content  to  have  his  Sub-
jects ignorant  in  many  things.  As  in  curing  the  Kings-Evi/,
which  he  knew  a  Device,  to  aggrandize  the  Virtue  of  Kings,
when  Miracles  were  in  fashion;  but  he  let  the  World  believe
it,  though  he  smiled  at  it,  in  his  own  Reason,  finding  the
strength  of  the  Imagination  a  more  powerful  Agent  in  the
Cure,  than  the  Plasters  his  Chirurgions  prescribed  for  the
Sore."

Along  with  the  pardons  which  we  have  noted  may  be
classed  the  toleration  which  James  extended  to  Forman  and
Lambe  and  Dee.  This  is  a  curious  circumstance  which  has
never  received  the  attention  it  deserves.

Simon  Forman  was  undoubtedly  a  rascal. '^'^  He  seems,
however,  to  have  been  a  likeable  fellow.  Lilly's  anecdote  of
his  predicting  his  own  death  is  charming  and  proves  that
Forman  had  a  good  measure  of  bonhomie. ^^'^  It  also  goes  far
to  show  that  he  put  some  trust  in  his  own  occult  powers,
though  in  the  main  he  must  have  been  a  charlatan.  Cer-
tainly he  passed  for  a  sorcerer.  For  years  he  made  a  public


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  317

profession  of  necromancy  and  magic  at  Lambeth,  and  was
much  consulted  by  the  ladies.  On  the  26th  of  June,  1603,
Forman  was  licensed  by  the  University  of  Cambridge  to  prac-
tise medicine,  and  on  the  next  day  the  university  conferred
upon  him  the  degree  of  M.D.  How  he  contrived  to  obtain
these  certificates  of  professional  respectability  is  a  puzzle.'^^
King  James  never  molested  Forman,  and  the  Doctor  died
peacefully  in  1611.  The  full  extent  of  his  rascality  did  not
come  out  until  the  trial  of  Mrs.  Turner,  in  161 5,  for  the  mur-
der of  Overbury,^"  but  that  makes  no  difference.  He  was  a
notorious  conjurer,  and  it  would  have  been  easy  to  find  evi-
dence during  his  life  that  would  have  hanged  him  a  hundred
times.

Dr.  John  Lambe  was  in  the  same  kind  of  business  as  For-
man but  was  even  less  reputable.  He  was  convicted  at  the
Worcester  assizes  on  two  separate  indictments,  each  of  them
for  a  capital  crime.  The  first  was  for  "wasting  and  consum-
ing" Thomas  Lord  Windsor  by  witchcraft;  the  second  for
"invoking  and  entertaining"  evil  spirits. Sentence  was
suspended,  and  Lambe  was  imprisoned  in  Worcester  Castle.
Shortly  after,  he  was  removed  to  the  King's  Bench  in  Lon-
don,^^"  where  he  remained  a  long  time.  But  his  confinement
was  not  rigorous.  He  lived  in  prison  quite  at  his  ease,  receiv-
ing his  patients  and  clients  and  doing  a  thriving  business  as
physician  and  sorcerer."'  He  was  convicted  of  a  rape  com-
mitted while  in  confinement,'^^  but  the  chief  justice  reported
that  the  evidence  was  dubious,  and  in  1624  he  was  par-
doned.Soon  after,  he  was  released  from  custody  and  took
up  his  residence  near  the  Parliament  House. '^'i  In  1628  he
met  his  death  at  the  hands  of  the  London  mob  while  return-
ing from  a  play  at  the  Fortune. Lambe  was  protected  by
Buckingham,  and  was  known  as  the  "Duke's  devil."  '^*'  But
Buckingham  was  not  always  friendly.  Thus,  in  1625,  the
duke  was  clamorous  against  him  on  account  of  his  connection
with  Lady  Purbeck's  case.  "If  Lambe"  —  so  Buckingham
wrote  to  Attorney  General  Coventry  and  Solicitor  General
Heath  —  "be  allowed  to  get  off  by  saying  he  was  only  jug-
gling [i.  e.  not  really  practising  sorcery],  .  .  .  the  truth  can
never  be  known;  Lambe  has  hitherto,  by  such  shifts,  mocked
the  world  and  preserved  himself."  '''^  I  am  far  from  maintain-


3l8         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ing  that  King  James's  indulgence  to  such  scoundrels  as  For-
man  and  Lambe  was  altogether  creditable  to  him,  but  it  cer-
tainly tends  to  prove  that  he  was  not  a  rabid  prosecutor  of
witches  and  sorcerers.'''^

Dr.  Dee  is  in  a  different  category,  for  he  was  a  profound
scholar  and  a  man  of  a  sincere  and  simple  character,  whom  it
would  be  profanation  to  class  with  Lambe  and  Forman.  Yet
there  is  no  manner  of  doubt  that  his  occult  experiments  (of
which  voluminous  documentary  evidence  is  still  extant)
might  have  convicted  him  of  sorcery  on  literally  a  thousand
counts.  His  sole  defence  would  have  been  that  he  was  invok-
ing and  consulting  good  angels,  not  demons,  but  the  theo-
logians could  have  made  short  work  of  that  allegation.  True,
Dee  had  been  examined  on  a  charge  of  witchcraft  in  the  Star
Chamber  in  1555  and  acquitted.'^'  But  his  subsequent  pro-
ceedings were  enough  to  condemn  him,  and  he  constantly  had
to  protest  against  the  aspersion  of  being  "a  companion  of
Hell-hounds  and  conjuror  of  wicked  and  damned  spirits,"
and  "  the  arche  coniurer  of  this  whole  kingdom."  In  1583
the  mob  had  destroyed  his  library  at  Mortlake.'''^  Anecdotes
that  descended  to  Aubrey  give  ample  testimony  to  his  fame
as  a  conjurer.^"  Dee  seems  to  have  been  agitated  by  the  pas-
sage of  the  statute  of  1604,  for,  on  June  5  of  that  year,  while
the  act  was  still  in  debate,  he  petitioned  King  James  to  have
him  "  tryed  and  cleared  of  that  horrible  and  damnable,  and  to
him  most  grievous  and  dammageable  sclaunder,  generally,
and  for  these  many  yeares  last  past,  in  this  kingdom  raysed
and  continued,  by  report  and  print  against  him,  namely,  that
he  is  or  hath  bin  a  conjurer  or  caller  or  invocator  of  divels."
No  attention  was  paid  to  his  entreaty,  but  the  king  did  not
molest  him,  and  he  died  in  his  bed  in  1608.  James  doubtless
respected  Dee's  learning,  and  he  may  have  been  assured  of  his
innocence  by  the  aged  scholar's  friends,  who  were  numerous
and  influential,  —  Sir  Julius  Caesar,  for  instance.  Indeed,
Dee  was  styled  "the  King  his  Mathematitian,"  —  a  title
which  appears  to  imply  some  degree  of  royal  favor.

James's  pardons  and  his  toleration  of  Dee  and  Lambe  and
Forman  would  go  far  to  show  that  he  was  not  a  bigoted
witch-prosecutor.  But  there  is  evidence  of  an  unequivocal
nature.  It  concerns  the  king's  personal  activity  in  the  detec-


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  3I9

tion  of  imposture.  On  this  point  the  records  are  decisive,
and,  when  we  consider  the  prevalent  impression  as  to  James's
character  as  a  witch-finder,  they  are  nothing  less  than  as-
tounding.

First  of  all  we  have  a  charming  letter  from  James  to  the
young  Prince  Henry.  It  bears  no  date,  but  unbiassed  judges
put  it  at  the  very  beginning  of  the  reign,  and  Sir  Henry  Ellis
believes  that  it  was  written  before  the  Prince  had  left  Scotland.

My  Sonne  I  ame  glaid  that  by  youre  Letre  I  maye  persave  that  ye  make
some  progresse  in  learning.  ...  I  ame  also  glaide  of  the  discoverie  of  yone
litle  counterfitte  Wenche.  I  praye  God  ye  maye  be  my  aire  [i.  e.  heir]  in
such  discoveries.  Ye  have  ofte  hearde  me  saye  that  most  miracles  nou  a
dayes  proves  but  illusions,  and  ye  maye  see  by  this  hou  waire  judgis  should
be  in  trusting  accusations  withoute  an  exacte  tryall;  and  lykewayes  hou
easielie  people  are  inducid  to  trust  wonders.  Lett  her  be  kepte  fast  till  my
cumming;  and  thus  God  blesse  you  my  sonne."^

In  1 604  we  find  James,  in  his  Counterblast  to  Tobacco,  de-
riding exorcism  in  a  style  worthy  of  Bancroft  and  Harsnet.
"O  omnipotent  power  of  Tobacco!"  he  ejaculates.  "And  if
it  could  by  the  smoke  thereof  chace  out  deuils,  as  the  smoke
of  'Tobias  fish  did  (which  I  am  sure  could  smel  no  stronger)  it
would  serue  for  a  precious  Relicke,  both  for  the  supersti-
tious Priests,  and  the  insolent  Puritanes,  to  cast  out  deuils
withal."

Another  letter  of  the  king's  should  be  given  in  full,  if  space
allowed.  It  begins  by  reminding  the  recipient  "how  that  in
late  time  we  discovered  and  put  to  flight  one  of  those  coun-
terfeits, the  like  whereof  ye  now  advertise  us."  "By  this
bearer,"  adds  King  James,  "we  send  unto  you  instructions
suited  for  such  an  occasion,  willing  you  leave  nothing  untried
to  discover  the  imposture."  It  appears  that  the  patient  was
a  woman  who  lay  in  a  trance  and  had  supported  life  for  a  long
time  on  one  small  cup  of  wine.  The  king  gives  wise  directions
and  remarks  that  "miracles  like  those  of  which  you  give  us
notice  should  be  all  ways  and  diligently  tested."  And  he  con-
cludes with  the  words,  "It  .  .  .  becomes  us  to  lose  no  oppor-
tunity of  seeking  after  the  real  truth  of  pretended  wonders,
that  if  true  we  may  bless  the  Creator  who  hath  shown  such
marvels  to  men,  and  if  false  we  may  punish  the  impudent
inventors  of  them."


320         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

In  1605  Sir  Roger  Wilbraham  notes  in  his  Journal,  imme-
diately after  telling  a  witch-story:  —  "The  King's  maiestie,
sithence  his  happie  comyng,  by  his  owne  skill  hath  discov-
ered 2  notorious  impostures:  one  of  a  phisicion  that  made
latyne  &  lerned  sermons  in  the  slepe:  which  he  did  by  secret
premeditacion:  thother  of  a  woman  pretended  to  be  be-
witched, that  cast  up  at  her  mouth  pynnes,  &  pynnes  were
taken  by  divers  in  her  fitts  out  of  her  brest."

The  first  of  these  two  impostors  was  Richard  Haydock  of
New  College,  Oxford,  the  celebrated  Sleeping  Preacher.  He
made  a  great  noise  in  the  world.  In  1605  James  summoned
him  to  court,  where  he  preached  three  times.  The  king  felt
sure  he  was  shamming.  He  soon  fathomed  Haydock's  mys-
tery, brought  him  to  repentance,  and  treated  him  kindly
afterwards. The  doctor's  confession,  addressed  to  King
James,  is  extant  among  the  State  Papers. Though  witch-
craft was  not  involved,  the  incident  throws  light  on  the  king's
frame  of  mind.

King  James's  detection  of  Haydock  took  place  in  April,
1605.  In  November  of  the  same  year  the  Gunpowder  Plot
was  discovered.  James,  it  will  be  remembered,  boasted
rather  pedantically  in  an  address  to  Parliament  that  he  had
unriddled  a  dark  sentence  in  the  Mounteagle  letter  and  so
was  in  effect  the  discoverer  of  the  conspiracy. He  made
similar  pretensions  in  a  conversation  with  Giustinian,  the
Venetian  ambassador.'^"  There  is  a  plain  connection  between
his  pride  in  this  exploit  and  the  shrewdness  he  had  just  ex-
hibited in  the  affair  of  the  Sleeping  Preacher  and  in  that  of  the
bewitched  woman,  for  Salisbury  gave  out  that  he  and  other
Councillors  had  submitted  the  Mounteagle  letter  to  the  king
because  of  "  the  expectation  and  experience  they  had  of  His
Majesties  fortunate  Judgement  in  cleering  and  solving  of  ob-
scure Riddles  and  doubtful  Mysteries."  It  makes  no  dif-
ference whether  this  consultation  -^^.s  pro  format  mere  courtly
complaisance,  or  whether  the  Councillors  really  got  some
help  from  the  king.  On  either  hypothesis,  the  penchant  of
James  for  playing  the  detective  is  equally  clear.

The  second  case  mentioned  by  Wilbraham  was  pure  witch-
craft. The  symptom  of  vomiting  pins  was  regarded  by  most
scholars  as  decisive  against  fraud.  Thus  Cotta,  in  161 6,  in


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  32I

enumerating  various  tests  by  which  (in  contradistinction  to
swimming,  scratching,  and  other  things  that  he  repudiates)
witchcraft  may  be  recognized,  accepts  this  as  one  that  is
"palpable  and  not  obscure  to  any  eye  without  difficulty,
offering  [itself]  to  plaine  and  open  viewe."  It  now  appears
that  James,  more  than  ten  years  before  Cotta  wrote,  had  con-
futed this  infallible  test.  Yet  we  are  told  that  Cotta  "was  in
advance  of  his  age,"  that  "he  published  his  book  in  161 6,
when  King  James's  doctrines  prevailed  in  full  force,  and  it
attracted  little  attention."  I  agree  that  Cotta  was  in  ad-
vance of  his  age.  Be  it  so  —  but  what  shall  we  then  say  of
James  I?

Another  undated  example  is  preserved  by  Aubrey. A
gentlewoman  named  Katharine  Waldron,  who  "waited  on
Sir  Francis  Seymor's  lady  of  Marlborough,"  pretended  to  be
"bewitched  by  a  certain  woman."  The  phenomena  were
similar  to  those  in  the  case  of  Mary  Glover,  which  misled  the
Recorder  of  London  in  1603.'^'  The  king  "detected  the
cheat"  by  a  clever,  though  somewhat  indecorous,  device.

More  than  once,  when  James  was  unable  to  investigate
these  matters  in  person,  he  intrusted  the  business  to  some-
body else.  Thus,  in  1605,  a  warrant  was  issued  for  "such
sums  as  the  Earl  of  Salisbury  shall  require,  for  the  charges  of
two  maids  suspected  to  be  bewitched,  and  kept  at  Cam-
bridge for  trial."  'T'rial  in  this  record  of  course  does  not
mean  trial  in  court  (for  it  was  not  a  crime  to  be  bewitched),
hnt  test,  investigation.  Obviously  it  was  thought  that  the  girls
might  be  shamming.  Again,  in  1611,  instructions  were  sent
to  the  Bishop  of  Bangor  and  the  Judges  of  Assize  for  County
Carnarvon  "  to  search  out  the  truth  of  a  supposed  witchcraft
committed  on  six  young  maids."  This  was  another  cau-
tionary measure  to  prevent  false  accusation  and  the  arraign-
ment of  innocent  persons.  It  reminds  one  of  the  action  of
Charles  I  in  1634,  when  he  delegated  Bishop  Bridgman  to  in-
vestigate the  second  Pendle  case.'^^  We  shall  have  occasion
to  consider  the  attitude  of  King  Charles  presently.

A  case  in  which  we  have  a  precise  record  of  King  James's
action  is  that  of  Anne  Gunter,  a  Windsor  girl  who  was
"troubled  with  such  strange  and  unusual  symptomes,  that
she  was  generally  thought  and  reported  by  all  that  saw  her


322         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

to  be  bewitched."  The  king  summoned  Anne  and,  "pre-
tending great  pitty  to  her,  told  her,  he  would  take  care  for
her  relief."  He  entrusted  the  investigation  to  Dr.  Edward
Jorden,  a  well-reputed  London  practitioner  who  had  distin-
guished himself  by  proving  in  1602  that  young  Mary  Glover
was  not  bewitched  but  suffered  from  hysteria.  Jorden  soon
reported  that  Anne  was,  in  his  opinion,  an  impostor.  The
king,  "confirmed  in  what  he  had  suspected  before,"  urged
the  girl  to  confess;  and  she,  "upon  [his]  importunity  and
promise  to  her  of  making  up  what  damage  should  accrue  for
the  discovery,"  acknowledged  the  fraud:  she  had  acted,  she
said,  under  the  instructions  of  her  father,  who  wished  to
throw  suspicion  upon  a  woman  of  the  neighborhood  with
whom  he  had  taken  offence.  King  James  gave  Anne  a  portion
and  she  was  happily  married.''^

And  now  we  come  to  the  most  distinguished  of  all  King
James's  exploits  in  the  detection  of  fraudulent  bewitchment.
It  is  a  case  which,  even  if  it  stood  absolutely  alone,  might
suffice,  in  the  absence  of  adverse  testimony,  to  clear  his
reputation.

In  1 61 6,  on  the  i8th  day  of  July,  nine  persons  were  hanged
at  Leicester.  Their  crime  was  the  bewitching  of  a  boy  of
twelve  or  thirteen,  named  Smythe,'''*  who  suffered  from
fits  lil^e  those  of  the  Throckmorton  girls  of  Warboys."^
Indeed,  the  influence  of  that  famous  case  is  unmistakable.
Justice  Fenner,  in  1593,  made  old  Samuel  recite  a  formula
devised  by  one  of  the  hysterical  girls:  "As  I  am  a  Witch,  and
did  consent  to  the  death  of  the  Lady  Cromwell,  so  I  charge
the  deuil  to  suffer  Mistres  lane  to  come  out  of  her  fitt  at  this
present."  ''^  Thereupon  the  girl  was  instantly  relieved.  So
at  Leicester  in  161 6  the  accused  were  obliged  to  say,  "I  such
a  one  chardge  the  hors  [one  of  the  devils],  if  I  be  a  wiche,  that
thou  come  forthe  of  the  chilld,"  whereupon  young  Smythe
ceased  to  be  tormented."^  The  judges  were  Sir  Humphrey
Winch,  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  and  Sir  Randolph
Crew  (Serjeant),''' — ■  the  former  a  member  of  the  Parlia-
ment that  passed  the  Statute  of  1604.^""

About  a  month  after  the  execution  of  these  nine  witches.
King  James  chanced  to  be  at  Leicester  on  a  royal  progress.
He  stayed  there  not  more  than  twenty-four  hours. ^"^  The


CHAP.  XVII3


KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST


Smythe  boy  was  still  having  his  fits,  and  six  more  accused
persons  were  in  jail  awaiting  trial  at  the  autumn  assizes.  No-
body can  doubt  what  the  issue  would  have  been.  But  now
James  intervened.  I  will  let  Francis  Osborne  (i  593-1 659)
tell  the  story.  "The  King  being  gratified  by  nothing  more,
then  an  Opportunity  to  shew  his  Dexterity  in  Discovering  an
Imposture,  (at  which,  I  must  confess  Him,  The  Promptest
Man  Living)  upon  his  Arrival  convented  the  Boy.  Where,
before  Him,  (possibly  daunted  at  his  Presence,  or  Terrified
by  his  Words)  he  began  to  faulter,  so  as  the  King  discover'd
a  Fallacy.  And  did  for  a  further  Confirmation,  send  him  to
Lambeth;  where  the  Servants  of  George  Abbot ^"'^  did  in  a  few
Weeks  discover  the  whole  Deceit.  And  He  was  sent  back  to
his  Majesty,  before  the  end  of  the  Progress.  Where  upon  a
small  Entreaty,  He  would  repeat  all  his  Tricks  oftentimes  in
a  Day.'

The  result  we  learn  from  a  contemporary  letter  written  by
a  Leicester  alderman.^*"^  Five  of  the  six  alleged  witches  were
released  without  a  trial;  the  sixth  had  died  in  prison.  Nor
did  the  king  neglect  to  let  the  judges  see  that  he  was  not
pleased  with  their  lack  of  acumen.  "Justice  Winch,"  writes
Mr.  John  Chamberlain  to  Sir  Dudley  Carleton  on  October
12,  "and  Serjeant  Crew  are  somewhat  discountenanced  for
hanging  certain  Witches  in  their  circuit  at  Leicester;  whereas
the  King,  coming  that  way,  found  out  the  juggling  and  im-
posture of  the  boy,  that  counterfeited  to  be  bewitched."  ^"^

King  James's  action  in  the  Leicester  case  of  161 6  took  in-
stant effect.  The  clamor  of  the  populace  against  witches  was
not  silenced,  but  the  judges  henceforth  used  extraordinary
circumspection.  They  had  no  mind  to  incur  the  royal  dis-
pleasure. The  result  should  be  carefully  noted.  From  July,
1616,  until  James's  death  on  March  27,  1625,  almost  exactly
nine  years,  only  five  persons  are  known  to  have  been  exe-
cuted for  witchcraft  in  England. Two  of  these  were  hanged
at  Bristol  in  1624,  and  I  have  no  details.^"''  One  —  Elizabeth
Sawyer  of  Edmonton  —  confessed  after  conviction.^"^  The
other  two  were  Margaret  and  Philippa  Flower,  who  were  exe-
cuted at  Lincoln  on  March  11,  1619.  Their  case  is  very  re-
markable. A  bare  statement  of  facts  will  prove  how  impos-
sible it  was  for  any  jury  to  acquit  them  or  any  king  to  show


32,4         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

them  favor.  Incidentally,  we  should  observe  that  they  would
have  been  hanged  under  the  Elizabethan  statute.

Joan  Flower  was  a  foul-mouthed  old  woman,  much  given
to  cursing,  and  suspected  by  her  neighbors  of  being  a  witch.
She  was  incensed  at  the  Countess  of  Rutland  for  discharging
her  daughter,  Margaret  Flower,  from  service  at  Belvoir
Castle,  though  there  were  good  grounds  for  it,  and  though  the
countess  had  treated  the  girl  with  much  kindness.  Soon
after,  the  earl's  eldest  son  died,  and  some  years  later  his  other
son  fell  sick  and  his  daughter  as  well.  The  earl,  it  seems,  had
no  suspicion  against  the  Flowers.  Ultimately,  however,  Joan
and  her  two  daughters  were  arrested,  doubtless  as  a  result  of
local  gossip.  Joan  Flower  was  never  tried  for  the  crime.  At
the  time,  as  it  appears,  of  her  examination,  she  defiantly  sub-
jected herself  to  a  strange  test.  She  "called  for  bread  and
butter,  and  wished  it  might  neuer  goe  through  her  if  she  were
guilty  of  that  wherevpon  she  was  examined;  so  mumbling
it  in  her  mouth,  neuer  spake  more  words  after,  but  fell  downe
and  dyed  as  she  was  carried  to  Lincolne  Jaile."  Both  her
daughters  confessed  and  were  hanged.^"'  There  can  be  no
vestige  of  doubt  in  any  unprejudiced  mind  that  these  three
women  were  guilty  in  intent.  They  had  practised  what  they
supposed  to  be  witchcraft  in  order  to  destroy  the  children,
and  they  believed  they  had  succeeded.  We  may  pity  them
for  their  malicious  infatuation,  but  we  cannot  deny  that  their
fate  was  deserved.  Nor  was  it  conceivable  that  they  should
escape  it  when  God  himself  seemed  to  have  pronounced  their
guilt.

Five  executions,  then,  make  the  whole  account  for  the  last
nine  years  of  King  James's  reign,  and  with  regard  to  two  of
these,  there  could  be  no  suspicion  of  counterfeiting.  The
earl's  son  and  heir  had  really  died,  and  the  accused  had  cer-
tainly tried  to  kill  him  by  sorcery.  Here  there  was  no  ground
on  which  the  king's  acumen  in  detecting  imposture  could
work,  nor  could  any  amount  of  caution  on  the  part  of  the
judges  avoid  the  plain  conclusion.^'"

But  the  effect  of  King  James's  rebuke  of  the  Leicester  jus-
tices is  visible  not  only  (by  inference)  in  the  lack  of  execu-
tions. It  may  also  be  traced  in  more  positive  ways.  In  1620
occurred  the  notorious  fraud  of  William  Perry,  the  Boy  of


CHAP,  xvii]  KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST  325

Bilson.  The  supposed  witch  was  acquitted  at  the  Stafford
assizes,  August  10,  1620,  and  the  judges  intrusted  Perry  to
Bishop  Morton,  who  was  present.  Morton  detected  the  trick,
and  at  the  next  summer  assizes,  June  26,  1621,  the  boy  made
public  amends,  asking  forgiveness  of  the  alleged  witch,  who
was  there  to  receive  this  rehabilitation.^"  James  was  not  per-
sonally active  —  so  far  as  we  know  —  in  this  exposure,  but
that  it  was  pleasing  to  him  we  can  infer,  not  only  from  our
general  knowledge,  but  from  the  fact  that  Arthur  Wilson,  in
his  History  of  Great  Britain,  published  in  1653,  appends  to
the  story  the  following  observation:  "The  King  took  delight
by  the  line  of  his  Reaso?2  to  sound  the  depth  of  such  brutish
Impoitors,  and  he  discovered  many."  Then,  after  reporting
the  case  of  Haydock,  the  Sleeping  Preacher,  Wilson  con-
tinues: "Some  others,  both  men  and  women,  inspired  with
such  Enthusiasms,  ^nd  fanatick  fancies,  he  reduced  to  their
right  senses,  applying  his  Remedies  suitable  to  the  Distemper,
wherein  he  made  himself  often  very  merry  .  .  .  but  some  of
their  Stories  being  a  little  coarse,  are  not  so  fit  to  be  here
related."

In  1624  John  Gee,  in  a  sermon  at  Paul's  Cross  tells  of  a
young  woman  in  London  "who  pretendeth  to  be  vexed  and
possessed  by  a  Deuill."  He  concludes  his  account  with  the
significant  remark:  "I  leaue  the  examination  of  this  to  him
that  sits  on  our  Throne,  his  Maiestie,  who  hath  a  happy  gift
in  discouery  of  such  Impostures T

Tributes  to  King  James's  interest  in  detecting  fraudulent
cases  are  offered  not  only  by  Osborne  (who  speaks  of  "  the
Charge  he  gave  the  Judges,  to  be  Circumspect  in  Condemn-
ing those.  Committed  by  Ignorant  Justices,  for  Diabolical
Compacts"),^"'  but  by  Bishop  Goodman  (1583-1656),  by
Bernard,  and  by  Fuller.  Goodman's  testimony  is  brief,  but
to  the  purpose.  James,  he  says,  "was  ever  apt  to  search  into
secrets,  to  try  conclusions  [i.  e.  experiments],  as  I  did  know
some  who  saw  him  run  to  see  one  in  a  fit  whom  they  said  was
bewitched."  "Did  not  our  late  King  lames,"  writes  Ber-
nard, "by  his  wisedome,  learning  and  experience,  discouer
diuers  counterfeits? "  Fuller  provides  an  elaborate  testi-
monium.'^'^'^  After  telling  of  the  Boy  of  Bilson,  he  continues  as
follows:


326         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Indeed,  all  this  KING's  Reign  was  scattered  over  with  Cheaters  in  this
kinde.  Some  Papists,  some  Sectaries,  some  neither,  as  who  dissembled
such  possession,  either  out  of  malice  to  be  revenged  on  those  whom  they
accused  of  Witchcraft,  or  covetousnesse  to  enrich  themselves.

Then,  after  giving  several  examples,  which  he  calls  "  a  few
out  of  many,"      he  concludes  thus:  — ■

K.  James  .  .  .  was  no  lesse  dexterous  than  desirous  to  make  discovery
of  these  Deceits.  Various  were  His  waies  in  detecting  them,  awing  some
into  confession  with  His  presence,  perswading  others  by  promise  of  pardon
and  fair  usage.  He  ordered  it  so,  that  a  Proper  Courtier  made  love  to  one
of  these  bewitched  Maids,  and  quickly  Cupid  his  Arrows  drave  out  the
pretended  Darts  of  the  Devil.  Another  there  was,  the  Tides  of  whose  Pos-
session did  so  Ebbe  and  Flow,  that  punctually  they  observed  one  hour  till
the  KING  came  to  visit  her.  The  Maid  loath  to  be  so  unmannerly  as  to
make  His  MAJESTY  attend  her  time,  antedated  her  Fits  many  houres,
and  instantly  ran  through  the  whole  Zodiac  of  tricks  which  she  used  to
play.  A  third,  strangely-affected  when  the  first  verse  of  S.  Johns  Gospel
was  read  unto  her  in  our  Translation,  was  tame  and  quiet  whilst  the  same
was  pronounced  in  Greek,  her  English  Devil  belike  understanding  no  other
language.  The  frequency  of  such  forged  Possessions  wrought  such  an
alteration  upon  the  judgement  of  King  JAMES,  that  he  receding  from
what  he  had  written  in  his  Demonologie,  grew  first  diffident  of,  and  then
flatly  to  deny  the  workings  of  Witches  and  Devils,  as  but  Falshoods  and
Delusions.^''

It  seems  probable  that  Fuller  goes  too  far  in  this  last  state-
ment, though  Obsorne  says  something  to  the  same  effect.^^"
It  is  not  likely  that  King  James  ever  gave  up  his  theoretical
belief  in  witchcraft.^"  It  is  clear,  however,  that,  in  his  later
years,  he  came  close  to  the  opinion  pronounced,  in  17 11,  by
Addison  in  a  famous  passage  (echoed  by  Blackstone):  "I
believe  in  general  that  there  is,  and  has  been  such  a  thing
as  witch-craft;  but  at  the  same  time  can  give  no  credit  to
any  particular  instance  of  it."  But  we  must  return  to
King  James's  good  influence  on  the  judges.

This  influence  comes  out  very  clearly  in  the  Fairfax  case,
six  years  after  James's  rebuke  to  Justice  Winch  and  Serjeant
Crew.^^^  In  1622,  Edward  Fairfax,  the  translator  of  Tasso,
brought  six  women  before  the  York  assizes  on  the  charge  of
bewitching  his  two  daughters.  The  fits  had  lasted  for  several
months  and  were  similar  to  those  of  the  Throckmorton  girls:
the  Warboys  narrative  was  still  doing  its  work.  At  the  same


CHAP.  XVIl]


KING  JAMES  THE  FIRST


3^7


assizes,  one  of  Fairfax's  neighbors,  a  gentleman  named  John
Jeffray,  accused  the  same  defendants  of  bewitching  his
daughter  Maud.  The  grand  jury  was  exceptionally  intelli-
gent, including  six  justices  of  the  peace.  It  had  already  "re-
ceived a  good  caveat  by  a  message  from  the  judge  to  be  very
careful  in  the  matter  of  witches."  Yet  it  found  a  true  bill,
and  the  trial  began.

The  six  women  were  arraigned  on  August  9,  1622.^^5
Mark  the  course  of  proceedings.  All  three  of  the  afflicted
girls  fell  into  a  trance  in  the  presence  of  the  court  and  were
carried  out  insensible.  Sir  George  Ellis  and  some  other  jus-
tices, leaving  the  bench,  followed,  and  exerted  themselves  to
discover  the  imposture  that  they  suspected.  They  soon  re-
turned, declaring  that  the  Jeffray  girl  had  confessed  that  she
had  acted  throughout  by  the  direction  of  her  parents.  Maud
Jeffray  denied  that  she  had  made  the  alleged  admissions;  but
her  father  was  sent  to  jail  forthwith,  and  his  charge  was  dis-
missed.^-'' The  Fairfax  girls,  however,  had  not  been  found  to
be  counterfeiting,  and  the  trial  of  that  case  went  on.  But  the
court  was  determined  to  avoid  the  mistake  made  at  Leicester
in  1616.  The  presiding  justice,  after  some  witnesses  had  been
heard,  instructed  the  jury  that  the  evidence  "reached  not  to
the  point  of  the  statute,"  stopped  the  trial,  and  discharged
the  defendants. ''^^  Thereafter  it  was  "given  out,"  as  Fairfax
tells  us,  that  "Jeffray  and  his  family  devised  the  practice,  to
which  they  drew  my  eldest  daughter,  and  she  the  younger."
Fairfax  himself  was  exonerated."^

Here  we  see  the  influence  of  the  king's  precept  and  example
at  every  turn.  The  grand  jury  was  warned  to  be  careful,  the
judges  were  eager  to  discover  an  imposture,  and,  thinking
they  had  done  so,  yet  not  daring  to  trust  the  jury  to  acquit,
they  found  that  the  facts  alleged  did  not  bring  the  case  under
the  statute  and  took  it  away  from  the  jury.  And  finally  —
as  if  to  leave  to  posterity  no  doubt  whatever  of  the  first  source
of  all  this  caution  and  circumspection  —  Fairfax  mentions
King  James  in  the  most  unequivocal  way.  His  narrative  is,  in
effect,  an  appeal  from  the  judges  to  public  opinion.  His
daughters,  he  maintains,  are  certainly  no  tricksters;  they  are
in  an  altogether  different  category  from  '''those  whose  i?npos-
tures  our  wise  king  so  lately  laid  open.''


328         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Nor  did  the  good  effects  of  King  James's  skeptical  temper
and  of  the  lesson  he  taught  the  judges  cease  with  his  death.
I  can  find  but  one  execution  for  witchcraft  in  the  first  seven
years  of  Charles  I.  Then  occurred  the  famous  case  of  the
Lancashire  Witches  of  1633.  ^^^^  occasion  seventeen  per-
sons were  convicted,  but  the  judge  did  not  believe  in  their
guilt,  and  brought  the  matter  to  the  king's  attention.  A
careful  investigation  ensued,  and  none  of  the  alleged  witches
suffered  death.  Hitherto  this  case  has  been  regarded  as  mark-
ing a  contrast  between  Charles's  creed  and  practice  and  the
acts  and  belief  of  his  father.  Mr.  Crossley,  who  is  so  severe  on
King  James,  praises  King  Charles  warmly  for  thus  "dis-
tinguishing himself  ...  in  days  when  philosophy  stumbled
and  murder  arrayed  itself  in  the  robes  of  justice  —  by  an  en-
lightened exercise  of  the  kingly  prerogative  of  mercy."
Wright  remarks  that  "Charles  I  had  not  the  same  weak  pre-
judices in  these  matters  as  his  father."  It  is  well  to  ap-
prove King  Charles,  whose  personal  record  in  this  matter  of
witchcraft  is  laudable,  but  it  must  now  be  quite  clear  that  he
was  merely  following  his  father's  praiseworthy  example.

Our  scrutiny  of  King  James's  record  is  finished.  No  sum-
ming up  is  necessary.  The  defendant  is  acquitted  by  the
facts.  One  final  remark,  however,  may  be  made,  in  lieu  of  a
peroration.  Diligent  search  has  so  far  brought  to  light  less
than  forty  executions  for  witchcraft  throughout  England  in
the  reign  of  James  I,  or  an  average  of  about  two  a  year.'^^^  Con-
trast with  this  statement  the  fact  that  in  ten  years  of  the
same  reign  (6-15  James  I),  at  least  thirty-two  persons  were
pressed  to  death  in  the  single  County  of  Middlesex  for  refus-
ing to  plead  in  cases  of  felony  (not  witchcraft),  or  an  average
of  over  three  a  year^  and  that,  in  the  same  county  for  the  same
period,  at  least  seven  hundred  persons  were  hanged  for  fel-
onies other  than  witchcraft,  or  an  average  of  seventy  a  year.^^^
These  figures  call  for  no  commentary.  We  may  double  or
treble  the  number  of  witch-hangings,  if  we  will,  in  order  to
allow  for  incompleteness  in  the  published  records,  and  it  still
remains  true  that  the  reign  of  James  I  was  not,  in  this  regard,
a  dark  and  bloody  period.


CHAPTER  XVIII


WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS

WE  ARE  all  specialists  now-a-days, I  suppose.  The  good
old  times  of  the  polymath  and  the  Doctor  Universalis
are  gone  forever.  Yet  signs  are  not  wanting  that  some  of  us
are  alive  to  the  danger  of  building  our  party-walls  too  high.
In  one  respect,  at  all  events,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the
investigators  of  New  England  antiquities  are  aware  of  their
peril,  though  they  occasionally  shut  their  eyes  to  it,  —  I
mean,  the  tendency  to  consider  the  Colonists  as  a  peculiar
people,  separated  from  the  Mother  Country  not  only  geo-
graphically, but  also  with  regard  to  those  currents  of  thought
and  feeling  which  are  the  most  significant  facts  of  history.
True,  there  is  more  or  less  justification  for  that  kind  of  study
which  looks  at  the  annals  of  America  as  ends-in-themselves;
but  such  study  is  ticklish  business,  and  it  now  and  then  dis-
torts the  perspective  in  a  rather  fantastic  way.  This  is  a  rank
truism.  Still,  commonplaces  are  occasionally  steadying  to  the
intellect,  and  Dr.  Johnson  —  whose  own  truths  have  been
characterized  by  a  brilliant  critic  as  "  too  true"  —  knew  what
he  was  about  when  he  said  that  men  usually  need  not  so  much
to  be  informed  as  to  be  reminded.^

The  darkest  page  of  New  England  history  is,  by  common
consent,  that  which  is  inscribed  with  the  words  Salem  Witch-
craft. The  hand  of  the  apologist  trembles  as  it  turns  the  leaf.
The  reactionary  writer  who  prefers  iconoclasm  to  hero-wor-
ship sharpens  his  pen  and  pours  fresh  gall  into  his  inkpot
when  he  comes  to  this  sinister  subject.  Let  us  try  to  consider
the  matter,  for  a  few  minutes,  unemotionally,  and  to  that
end  let  us  pass  in  review  a  number  of  facts  which  may  help  us
to  look  at  the  Witchcraft  Delusion  of  1692  in  its  due  propor-
tions, —  not  as  an  abnormal  outbreak  of  fanaticism,  not  as
an  isolated  tragedy,  but  as  a  mere  incident,  a  brief  and  trans-
itory episode  in  the  biography  of  a  terrible,  but  perfectly
natural,  superstition.


330        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

'  In  the  first  place,  we  know  that  the  New  Englanders  did
not  invent  the  belief  in  witchcraft.^  It  is  a  universally  human
belief.  No  race  or  nation  is  exempt  from  it.  Formerly,  it  was
an  article  in  the  creed  of  everybody  in  the  world,  and  it  is
still  held,  in  some  form  or  other,  and  to  a  greater  or  less  ex-
tent, by  a  large  majority  of  mankind.^

Further,  our  own  attitude  of  mind  toward  witchcraft  is  a
very  modern  attitude  indeed.  To  us,  one  who  asserts  the
existence,  or  even  the  possibility,  of  the  crime  of  witchcraft
staggers  under  a  burden  of  proof  which  he  cannot  conceivably
support.  His  thesis  seems  to  us  unreasonable,  abnormal,
monstrous;  it  can  scarcely  be  stated  in  intelligible  terms;  it
savors  of  madness.  Now,  before  we  can  do  any  kind  of  jus-
tice to  our  forefathers,  —  a  matter,  be  it  remembered,  of  no
moment  to  them,  for  they  have  gone  to  their  reward,  but,  I
take  it,  of  considerable  importance  to  us,  —  we  must  empty
our  heads  of  all  such  rationalistic  ideas.  To  the  contempo-
raries of  William  Stoughton  and  Samuel  Sewall  the  existence
of  this  crime  was  not  merely  an  historical  phenomenon,  it  was
a  fact  of  contemporary  experience.  Whoever  denied  the  oc-
currence of  witchcraft  in  the  past,  was  an  atheist;  whoever
refused  to  admit  its  actual  possibility  in  the  present,  was
either  stubbornly  incredulous,  or  destitute  of  the  ability  to
draw  an  inference.  Throughout  the  seventeenth  century,
very  few  persons  could  be  found  —  not  merely  in  New  Eng-
land, but  in  the  whole  world  —  who  would  have  ventured  to
take  so  radical  a  position.  That  there  had  been  witches  and
sorcerers  in  antiquity  was  beyond  cavil.  That  there  were,  or
might  be,  witches  and  sorcerers  in  the  present  was  almost
equally  certain.  :The  crime  was  recognized  by  the  Bible,  by
all  branches  of  the  Church,  by  philosophy,  by  natural  science,
by  the  medical  faculty,  by  the  law  of  England.l  I  do  not  offer
these  postulates  as  novelties.  They  are  commonplaces.  They
will  not  be  attacked  by  anybody  who  has  even  a  slight
acquaintance  with  the  mass  of  testimony  that  might  be
\adduced  to  establish  them.

It  is  a  common  practice  to  ascribe  the  tenets  of  the  New
Englanders  in  the  matter  of  witchcraft  to  something  peculiar
about  their  religious  opinions,  —  to  what  is  loosely  called
their  Puritan  theology.  This  is  a  very  serious  error.  The  doc-


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  33I

trines  of  our  forefathers  differed,  in  this  regard,  from  the  doc-
trines of  the  Roman  and  the  Anglican  Church  in  no  essential,
—  one  may  safely  add,  in  no  particular.  Lord  Bacon  was  not
a  Puritan,  —  yet  he  has  left  his  belief  in  sorcery  recorded  in  a
dozen  places.''  James  I  was  not  a  Puritan,  but  his  Dsemo-
nologie  (1597)  is  a  classic  treatise,  his  zeal  in  prosecuting
Scottish  sorcerers  is  notorious,  and  the  statute  of  1604  ^  was
the  act  under  which  Matthew  Hopkins,  in  the  time  of  the
Commonwealth,  sent  two  hundred  witches  to  the  gallows  in
two  years,  —  nearly  ten  times  as  many  as  perished  in  Massa-
chusetts from  the  first  settlement  to  the  beginning  of  the
eighteenth  century.

Matthew  Hopkins,  the  Witch-Finder  General,  apparently
was  a  Puritan.  Indeed,  it  is  his  career,  more  than  anything
that  ever  happened  in  New  England,  which  has  led  to  the
reiterated  statement  that  Puritanism  was  especially  favor-
able, by  its  temper  and  its  tenets,  to  prosecution  for  witch-
craft. For  his  activity  falls  in  the  time  of  Puritan  power,  and
the  Parliament  granted  a  Special  Commission  of  Oyer  and
Terminer,  in  1645,  ^^7  some  of  the  witches  that  he  had  de-
tected, and  Edmund  Calamy  was  associated  with  the  Com-
mission. But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  noted  that  John
Gaule,  who  opposed  Hopkins  and  is  usually  credited  with
most  influence  in  putting  an  end  to  his  performances,  was
also  a  Puritan,  —  and  a  minister  likewise,  and  a  believer  in
witches  as  well.  The  Hopkins  outbreak,  as  we  shall  see,  must
be  laid  to  the  disturbed  condition  of  the  country  rather  than
to  the  prevalence  of  any  particular  system  of  theology.
Under  Cromwell's  government,  witch-trials  languished,  not
because  the  belief  in  witchcraft  changed,  but  because  there
was  order  once  more.  So  in  Scotland,  the  conquest  by  Crom-
well checked  one  of  the  fiercest  prosecutions  ever  known.
The  Restoration  was  followed,  both  in  England  and  in  Scot-
land, by  a  marked  recrudescence  of  prosecution.^

But  we  must  return  to  Matthew  Hopkins.  Let  us  see  how
his  discoveries  affected  James  Howell.  In  1647  Howell  writes
to  Endymion  Porter:  "We  have  likewise  multitudes  of
Witches  among  us,  for  in  Essex  and  Suffolk  there  were  above
two  hundred  indicted  within  these  two  years,  and  above  the
one  half  of  them  executed:  More,  I  may  well  say,  than  ever


332.         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

this  Island  bred  since  the  Creation,  I  speak  it  with  horror.
God  guard  us  from  the  Devil,  for  I  think  he  was  never  so  busy
upon  any  part  of  the  Earth  that  was  enlightned  with  the
beams  of  Christianity;  nor  do  I  wonder  at  it,  for  there 's  never
a  Cross  left  to  fright  him  away."  ^  In  the  following  year,
Howell  writes  to  Sir  Edward  Spencer  an  elaborate  defence  of
the  current  tenets  in  witchcraft  and  demonology.^  One  strik-
ing passage  demands  quotation: —f^  "Since  the  beginning  of
these  unnatural  Wars,  there  may  be  a  cloud  of  Witnesses
produc'd  for  the  proof  of  this  black  Tenet:  For  within  the
compass  of  two  years,  near  upon  three  hundred  Witches  were
arraign'd,  and  the  major  part  executed  in  Essex  and  Sufolk
only.  Scotland  swarms  with  them  now  rnore  than  ever,  and
Persons  of  good  Quality  executed  daily."

It  is  confidently  submitted  that  nobody  will  accuse  Howell
of  Puritanism.  The  letters  from  which  our  extracts  are  taken
were  written  while  he  was  a  prisoner  in  the  Fleet  under  sus-
picion of  being  a  Royalist  spy.'  His  mention  of  the  disap-
pearance of  crosses  throughout  England  will  not  be  over-
looked by  the  discriminating  reader.  It  will  be  noted  also
that  he  seems  to  have  perceived  a  connection  —  a  real  one,
as  we  shall  see  later  — between  the  increase  in  witchcraft
and  the  turmoil  of  the  Civil  War.

Jeremy  Taylor  was  surely  no  Puritan;  but  he  believed  in
witchcraft.  It  is  a  sin,  he  tells  us,  that  is  "infallibly  desper-
ate," "  and  in  his  Holy  Living  (1650)  he  has  even  given  the
weight  of  his  authority  to  the  reality  of  sexual  relations  be-
tween witches  and  the  devil.'''

It  was  not  in  Puritan  times,  but  in  1664,  four  years  after
the  Restoration,  that  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  then  Chief  Baron
of  the  Exchequer,  pronounced  from  the  bench  the  following
opinion  in  the  Bury  St.  Edmunds  case:  —  "That  there  were
such  Creatures  as  Witches  he  made  no  doubt  at  all;  For  First,
the  Scriptures  had  affirmed  so  much.  Secondly,  The  wisdom
of  all  Nations  had  provided  Laws  against  such  Persons,  which
is  an  Argument  of  their  confidence  of  such  a  Crime.  And  such
hath  been  the  judgment  of  this  Kingdom,  as  appears  by  that
Act  of  Parliament  which  hath  provided  Punishments  pro-
portionable to  the  quality  of  the  Offence.  And  desired  them
[the  jury],  strictly  to  observe  their  Evidence;  and  desired  the


CHAP.  XVIII]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  233

great  God  of  Heaven  to  direct  their  Hearts  in  this  weighty
thing  they  had  in  hand:  For  to  Condernn  the  Innocent^  and  to
let  the  Guilty  go  free,  were  both  an  Abomination  to  the  Lord^
Hale's  words  were  fraught  with  momentous  consequences,
for  he  was  "  allowed  on  all  hands  to  be  the  most  profound
lawyer  of  his  time,"  and  the  Bury  case  became  a  precedent
of  great  weight.  "It  was,"  writes  Cotton  Mather,  "a  Tryal
much  considered  by  the  Judges  of  New  England."

Hale's  conduct  on  this  occasion  has  of  course  subjected  him
to  severe  criticism.  Lord  Campbell,  for  example,  goes  so  far
as  to  declare  that  he  "  murdered  "  the  old  women,  —  a  dictum
which  shows  but  slight  comprehension  of  the  temper  of  the
seventeenth  century.  More  creditable  to  Campbell's  histori-
cal sense  is  the  following  passage:  —  "Although,  at  the  pres-
ent day,  we  regard  this  trial  as  a  most  lamentable  exhibition
of  credulity  and  inhumanity,  I  do  not  know  that  it  at  all
lowered  Hale  in  public  estimation  in  his  own  life."'^  Bishop
Burnet,  as  is  well  known,  makes  no  mention  of  the  case  in  his
Life  of  Hale.'^  One  might  surmise  that  he  omitted  it  out  of
respect  for  his  hero's  memory,  since  his  little  book  is  rather
an  obituary  tribute  than  a  biography.  More  probably,  how-
ever, Burnet  did  not  regard  the  case  as  any  more  significant
than  many  other  decisions  of  Hale's  which  he  likewise  passed
over  in  silence.  Unequivocal  evidence  that  the  Bury  trial  did
not  injure  Hale's  reputation  may  be  found  in  the  silence  of
Roger  North.  North's  elaborate  character  of  Hale,  in  his  Life
of  the  Lord  Keeper  Guilford,^'  is  notoriously  prejudiced  in  the
extreme.  Though  admitting  Hale's  legal  learning  and  many
good  qualities.  North  loses  no  opportunity  to  attack  his
record.  Besides,  North  praises  the  Lord  Keeper  for  his  con-
ducfin  procuring  the  acquittal  of  an  alleged  witch.  If,  then,
the  Bury  case  had  seemed  to  him  especially  discreditable,  or
if  he  had  thought  that  it  afforded  an  opening  for  hostile
criticism,  we  cannot  doubt  that  he  would  have  spoken  out
in  condemnation.  His  complete  silence  on  the  subject  is
therefore  the  most  emphatic  testimony  to  the  general  ap-
proval of  Hale's  proceedings.  Highly  significant,  too,  is  the
fact  that  even  Lord  Campbell  does  not  blame  Hale  for  be-
lieving in  witchcraft,  but  only  for  allowing  weight  to  the
evidence  in  this  particular  case.  "I  would  very  readily  have


334


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


pardoned  him,"  he  writes,  "  for  an  undoubting  belief  in  witch-
craft, and  I  should  have  considered  that  this  belief  detracted
little  from  his  character  for  discernment  and  humanity.  The
Holy  Scriptures  teach  us  that,  in  some  ages  of  the  world,
wicked  persons,  by  the  agency  of  evil  spirits,  were  permitted,
through  means  which  exceed  the  ordinary  powers  of  nature,
to  work  mischief  to  their  fellow-creatures.  ...  In  the  reign
of  Charles  II,  a  judge  who  from  the  bench  should  have  ex-
pressed a  disbelief  in  [magic  and  the  black  art]  would  have
been  thought  to  show  little  respect  for  human  laws,  and  to  be
nothing  better  than  an  atheist."  We  may  profitably  compare
what  Guilford  himself  (then  Francis  North,  Chief  Justice  of
the  Common  Pleas)  wrote  of  the  Devonshire  witches  in  1682,
—  nearly  twenty  years  after  the  Bury  case: — ^''We  cannot
reprieve  them,  without  appearing  to  deny  the  very  being  of
witches,  which,  as  it  is  contrary  to  law,  so  I  think  it  would  be
ill  for  his  Majesty's  service,  for  it  may  give  the  faction  oc-
casion to  set  afoot  the  old  trade  of  witch-finding,  that  may
cost  many  innocent  persons  their  lives  which  the  justice  will
prevent."

Sir  Thomas  Browne,  the  author  of  the  Religio  Medici,  was
no  Puritan,  and  he  was  one  of  the  leading  scientific  men  of  his
day.  Yet  he  gave  his  opinion,  as  an  expert,  at  the  request  of
the  Court  in  this  same  Bury  St.  Edmunds  case,  to  the  follow-
ing effect:  —  "That  the  Devil  in  such  cases  did  work  upon
the  Bodies  of  Men  and  Women,  upon  a  Natural  Foundation,
(that  is)  to  stir  up,  and  excite  such  humours  super-abound-
ing in  their  Bodies  to  a  great  excess,"  and  further,  that  "he
conceived,  that  these  swouning  Fits  were  Natural,  and  noth-
ing else  but  what  they  call  the  Mother  [i.  e.  hysteria],  but
only  heightned  to  a  great  excess  by  the  subtilty  of  the  Devil,
co-operating  with  the  Malice  of  these  which  we  term  Witches,
at  whose  Instance  he  doth  these  Villanies."

Browne  has  been  much  blamed  for  this  dictum,  but  there
is  nothing  unreasonable  or  unscientific  in  it,  if  one  merely
grants  the  actuality  of  demoniacal  obsession  and  possession,
which  was  then  to  all  intents  and  purposes  an  article  of  faith.^*
If  the  devil  can  work  upon  our  bodies  at  all,  of  course  he  can
intensify  any  natural  fits  or  spasms  from  which  we  happen  to
be  suffering.  Thus  Browne's  diagnosis  of  the  disease  in  this


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  335

case  as  hysteria,  by  no  means  excluded  the  hypothesis  of
maleficimn.  But  most  modern  writers  refuse  to  discuss  such
subjects  except  de  haut  en  has,  —  from  the  vantage-ground
of  modern  science.

Sit  Thomas  Browne's  view  was,  it  seems,  substantially
identical  with  that  of  his  predecessor,  the  famous  Robert
Burton,  —  no  Puritan  either!  —  who  has  a  whole  subsection
"Of  Witches  and  Magitians,  how  they  cause  Melancholy,"
asserting  that  what  "  they  can  doe,  is  as  much  almost  as  the
Diuell  himselfe,  who  is  still  ready  to  satisfie  their  desires,  to
oblige  them  the  more  vnto  him."

Joseph  Glanvil,  the  author  of  The  Vanity  of  Dogmatizing,
was  no  Puritan,^^  b^t  a  skeptical  philosopher,  a  Fellow  of  the
Royal  Society,  and  Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  King  Charles  11;
neither  was  his  friend.  Dr.  Henry  More,  the  most  celebrated
of  the  Cambridge  Platonists.  Yet  these  two  scholars  and
latitudinarians  joined  forces  to  produce  that  extraordinary
treatise,  Saducismus  Triumphatus:  or,  A  Full  and  Plain  Evi-
dence concerning  Witches  and  Apparitions.  This  book,  an
enlarged  form  of  Glanvil's  Philosophical  Considerations  con-
cerning Witchcraft  (1666),  was  published  in  1681,  and  went
through  no  less  than  five  editions,  the  last  appearing  as  late
as  1726.^^  It  was  thought  to  have  put  the  belief  in  appari-
tions and  witchcraft  on  an  unshakable  basis  of  science  and
philosophy.^'  No  English  work  on  the  subject  had  a  more
powerful  influence.  When  the  Rev.  John  Hale,  of  Beverley,
wrote  his  Modest  Enquiry,^*  which  deplored  the  Salem  ex-
cesses and  protested  against  spectral  evidence,  —  a  notable
treatise,  published,  with  a  prefatory  epistle  from  the  vener-
able Higginson,^'  in  1702,  —  he  was  able  to  condense  the
affirmative  part  of  his  argument,  because,  as  he  himself  says,
Glanvil  "hath  strongly  proved  the  being  of  Witches."  ^"

Dr.  Meric  Casaubon,  Prebend  of  Canterbury,  was  not  a
Puritan;  yet  the  second  part  of  his  Credulity  and  Incredulity
(i668)  contains  a  vigorous  assertion  of  demonology  and
witch-lore,  and  was  republished  in  1672  under  the  alluring
title,  A  Treatise  Proving  Spirits,  Witches  and  Supernatural
Operations  by  Pregnant  Instances  and  Evidences.^'

Ralph  Cudworth,  the  antagonist  of  Hobbes,  was  not  a
Puritan.   Yet  in  his  great  Intellectual  System  he  declares


336         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


for  the  existence  of  sorcery,  and  even  admits  a  distinction
between  its  higher  operations  —  as  in  the  deovpyia  of  Apol-
lonius  of  Tyana  —  and  the  vulgar  performances  of  every-
day wizards. There  is  some  reason,  too,  for  supposing  that
Cudworth  took  part  with  Henry  More  in  examining  certain
witches  at  Cambridge,  and  heard  one  of  them  try  to  recite
the  Creed  and  the  Lord's  Prayer,  as  she  had  offered  to  do  "  as
an  argument  she  was  no  witch."  ^'^

Robert  Boyle,  the  improver  of  the  air-pump  and  the  dis-
coverer of  Boyle's  Law,  had  "particular  and  considerable
advantages  to  persuade  [him],  upon  good  grounds,"  that
some  witch  stories  are  true,  and  he  thought  that  Glanvil's
investigations  would  do  "a  good  service  to  religion."  ^=  This
was  in  1677.  following  year  Boyle  declared  his  belief

in  the  performances  of  the  devil  of  Mascon.-'^  Boyle's  re-
ligious views  did  not  hinder  him  from  being  a  leader  in  that
fervor  of  scientific  experimentation  which  is  one  of  the  glories
of  the  latter  half  of  the  seventeenth  century.  And  he  too  was
not  a  Puritan.

Isaac  Barrow,  the  master  of  Newton,  was  not  a  Puritan.
Yet  he  left  on  record,  in  one  of  his  sermons,  one  of  the  most
powerful  and  eloquent  of  all  protests  against  disbelief  in  the
kind  of  phenomena  which  our  ancestors  are  so  often  attacked
for  crediting.  The  passage  is  long,  but  must  be  quoted  in  full,
for  every  word  is  of  weight:  —

I  may  adjoin  to  the  former  sorts  of  extraordinary  actions,  some  other
sorts,  the  consideration  of  which  (although  not  so  directly  and  imme-
diately) may  serve  our  main  design;  those  (which  the  general  opinion  of
mankind  hath  approved,  and  manifold  testimony  hath  declared  frequently
to  happen)  which  concern  apparitions  from  another  world,  as  it  were,  of
beings  unusual;  concerning  spirits  haunting  persons  and  places,  (these  dis-
cerned by  all  senses,  and  by  divers  kinds  of  effects;)  of  which  the  old  world
(the  ancient  poets  and  historians)  did  speak  so  much,  and  of  which  all  ages
have  afforded  several  attestations  very  direct  and  plain,  and  having  all  ad-
vantages imaginable  to  beget  credence;  concerning  visions  made  unto  per-
sons of  especial  eminency  and  influence,  (to  priests  and  prophets;)  concern-
ing presignifications  of  future  events  by  dreams;  concerning  the  power  of
enchantments,  implying  the  cooperation  of  invisible  powers;  concerning  all
sorts  of  intercourse  and  confederacy  (formal  or  virtual)  with  bad  spirits:  all
which  things  he  that  shall  affirm  to  be  mere  fiction  and  delusion,  must
thereby  with  exceeding  immodesty  and  rudeness  charge  the  world  with  ex-
treme both  vanity  and  malignity;  many,  if  not  all,  worthy  historians,  of


CHAP,  xvm]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


337


much  inconsiderateness  or  fraud;  most  lawgivers,  of  great  silliness  and
rashness;  most  judicatories,  of  high  stupidity  or  cruelty;  a  vast  number  of
witnesses,  of  the  greatest  malice  or  madness;  all  which  have  concurred  to
assert  these  matters  of  fact.

It  is  true,  no  question,  but  there  have  been  many  vain  pretences,  many
false  reports,  many  unjust  accusations,  and  some  undue  decisions  concern-
ing these  matters;  that  the  vulgar  sort  is  apt  enough  to  be  abused  about
them;  that  even  intelligent  and  considerate  men  may  at  a  distance  in  re-
gard to  some  of  them  be  imposed  upon;  but,  as  there  would  be  no  false
gems  obtruded,  if  there  were  no  true  ones  found  in  nature;  as  no  counter-
feit coin  would  appear,  were  there  no  true  one  current;  so  neither  can  we
well  suppose  that  a  confidence  in  some  to  feign,  or  a  readiness  in  most  to
believe,  stories  ot  this  kind  could  arise,  or  should  subsist,  without  some
real  ground,  or  without  such  things  having  in  gross  somewhat  of  truth  and
reality.  However,  that  the  wiser  and  more  refined  sort  of  men,  highest  in
parts  and  improvements  both  from  study  and  experience,  (indeed  the
flower  of  every  commonwealth;  statesmen,  lawgivers,  judges,  and  priests,)
upon  so  many  occasions  of  great  importance,  after  most  deliberate  scanning
such  pretences  and  reports,  should  so  often  suffer  themselves  to  be  deluded,
to  the  extreme  injury  of  particular  persons  concerned,  to  the  common  abus-
ing of  mankind,  to  the  hazard  of  their  own  reputation  in  point  of  wisdom
and  honesty,  seems  nowise  reasonable  to  conceive.  In  likelihood  rather  the
whole  kind  of  all  these  things,  were  it  altogether  vain  and  groundless,  would
upon  so  frequent  and  so  mature  discussions  have  appeared  to  be  so,  and
would  consequently  long  since  have  been  disowned,  exploded,  and  thrust
out  of  the  world;  for,  as  upon  this  occasion  it  is  said  in  TuUy,  "Time
wipeth  out  groundless  conceits,  but  confirms  that  which  is  founded  in
nature,  and  real."

Now  if  the  truth  and  reality  of  these  things,  (all  or  any  of  them,)  infer-
ring the  existence  of  powers  invisible,  at  least  inferior  ones,  though  much
superior  to  us  in  all  sort  of  ability,  be  admitted,  it  will  at  least  (as  removing
the  chief  obstacles  of  incredulity)  confer  much  to  the  belief  of  that  supreme
Divinity,  which  our  Discourse  strives  to  maintain.^*

Dr.  George  Hickes,  of  Thesaurus  fame,  was  one  of  the  most
eminent  scholars  of  his  time.  He  was  also  a  Non-juror,  and
titular  Bishop  of  Thetford.  In  other  words,  he  was  not  a
Puritan.  Yet  in  1678  Hickes  published  an  account  of  the  in-
famous Major  Weir,  the  most  celebrated  of  all  Scottish  wiz-
ards, which  betrays  no  skepticism  on  the  cardinal  points  of
sorcery.^9  There  is  also  an  extremely  interesting  letter  from
the  Doctor  to  Mr.  Pepys,  dated  June  19,  1700,  which  indi-
cates a  belief  in  witchcraft  and  second  sight.  The  most  curi-
ous part  of  this  letter,  however,  deals  with  Elf  Arrows.  "I
have  another  strange  story,"  writes  Dr.  Hickes,  "but  very
well  attested,  of  an  Elf  arrow,  that  was  shot  at  a  venerable


338


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Irish  Bishop  by  an  Evil  Spirit  in  a  terrible  noise,  louder  than
thunder,  which  shaked  the  house  where  the  Bishop  was;  but
this  I  reserve  for  his  son  to  tell  you,  who  is  one  of  the  deprived
Irish  Clergymen,  and  very  well  known,  as  by  other  excellent
pieces,  so  by  his  late  book,  entitled,  'The  Snake  in  the
Grass.'"  What  would  the  critics  say  if  this  passage  were
found  in  a  work  of  Cotton  Mather's?

I    Finally,  it  is  not  amiss  to  remember  that  the  tolerant,  mod-
erate, and  scholarly  John  Evelyn,  whom  nobody  will  accuse
of  being  a  Puritan,  made  the  following  entry  in  his  Diary
t  under  February  3,  1 692-1 693:  "Unheard-of  stories  of  the

universal  increase  of  Witches  in  New  England;  men,  women
and  children  devoting  themselves  to  the  devil,  so  as  to
threaten  the  subversion  of  the  government.  At  the  same
time  there  was  a  conspiracy  amongst  the  negroes  in  Barba-
does  to  murder  all  their  masters,  discovered  by  overhearing
a  discourse  of  two  of  the  slaves,  and  so  preventing  the  execu-
tion of  the  designe."  There  is  no  indication  that  Evelyn  re-
garded either  of  these  conspiracies  as  less  possible  of  occur-
rence than  the  other. ''^

Most  of  these  passages  are  sufficiently  well  known,  and
their  significance  in  the  abstract  is  cheerfully  granted,  I  sup-
pose, by  everybody.  But  the  cumulative  eff'ect  of  so  much
testimony  from  non-Puritans  is,  I  fear,  now  and  then  dis-
regarded or  overlooked  by  writers  who  concern  themselves
principally  with  the  annals  of  Npy  p-n gl an d .  Yet  the  bearing
of  the  evidence  is  plain  enough.  (The  Salem  outbreak  was  not
due  to  Puritanism;  it  is  not  assiglTable  to  any  peculiar  terhper
on  the  part  of  our  New  England  ancestors;  it  is  no  sign  of  ex-
ceptional bigotry  or  abnormal  superstition.  Our  forefathers
believed  in  witchcraft,  not  because  they  were  Puritans,  not
because  they  were  Colonials,  not  because  they  were  New
Englanders,  —  but  because  they  were  men  of  their  time.
They  shared  the  feelings  and  beliefs  of  the  best  hearts  and
wisest  heads  of  the  seventeenth  century.  What  more  can  be
asked  of  them?j£|

I  am  well  aware  that  there  are  a  few  distinguished  names
that  are  always  entered  on  the  other  side  of  the  account,  and
some  of  them  we  must  now  consider.  It  would  be  unpardon-
able to  detract  in  any  manner  from  the  dear-bought  fame  of


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


339


such  forerunners  of  a  better  dispensation.  But  we  must  not
forget  that  they  were  forerunners.  They  occupy  a  much  more
conspicuous  place  in  modern  books  than  they  occupied  in  the
minds  of  their  contemporaries. ''^  Further,  if  we  listen  closely
to  the  words  of  these  voices  in  the  wilderness,  we  shall  find
that  they  do  not  sound  in  unison,  and  that  their  testimony  is
not  in  all  cases  precisely  what  we  should  infer  from  the  loose
statements  often  made  about  them.

Johann  Wier  (1515-1588)  deserves  all  the  honor  he  has
ever  received.  He  devoted  years  to  the  study  of  demonology,
and  brought  his  great  learning,  and  his  vast  experience  as  a
physician,  to  bear  on  the  elucidation  of  the  whole  matter.''''
He  held  that  many  of  the  performances  generally  ascribed  to
devils  and  witches  were  impossible,  and  that  the  witches
themselves  were  deluded.  But  there  is  another  side  to  the
picture.  Wier's  book  is  crammed  full  of  what  we  should
now-a-days  regard  as  the  grossest  superstition.  He  credited
Satan  and  his  attendant  demons  with  extensive  powers.  He
believed  that  the  fits  of  the  so-called  bewitched  persons  were
due  in  large  part  to  demoniacal  possession  or  obsession,  and
that  the  witches  themselves,  though  innocent  of  what  was
alleged  against  them,  were  in  many  cases  under  the  influence
of  the  devil,  who  made  them  think  that  they  had  entered  into
infernal  compacts,  and  ridden  through  the  air  on  broom-
sticks, and  killed  their  neighbors'  pigs,  and  caused  disease  or
death  by  occult  means.  And  further,  he  was  convinced  that
such  persons  as  Faust,  whom  he  called  magi,  were  acquainted
with  strange  and  damnable  arts,  and  that  they  were  worthy
of  death  and  their  books  of  the  fire.  One  example  may  serve
to  show  the  world-wide  difference  between  Wier's  mental
attitude  and  our  own.

^One  of  the  best-known  symptoms  of  bewitchment  was  the
vomiting  of  bones,  nails,  needles,  balls  of  wool,  bunches  of
hair,  and  other  things,  some  of  which  were  so  large  that  they
could  not  have  passed  through  the  throat  by  any  natural
means. ''5  Such  phenomena,  Wier  tells  us,  he  bad  himself
seen.  How  were  they  to  be  explained?  Easily,  according  to
Wier's  gener?l  theory.  Such  articles,  he  says,  are  put  into
the  patient's  mouth  by  the  devil,  one  after  another,  as  fast  as
they  come  out.  We  cannot  see  him  do  this,  —  either  because


340        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

he  acts  so  rapidly  that  his  motions  are  invisible,  or  because  he
fascinates  our  sight,  or  because  he  darkens  our  eyes,  perhaps
by  interposing  between  them  and  the  patient  some  aerial
body.46

The  instability  of  Wier's  position  should  not  be  brought
against  him  as  a  reproach,  since  he  was  far  in  advance  of  his
contemporaries,  and  since  his  arguments  against  the  witch-
dogma  are  the  foundation  of  all  subsequent  skepticism  on  the
subject.'*^  Besides,  it  is  certain  that  such  a  thoroughgoing
denial  of  the  devil's  power  as  Bekker  made  a  century  later
would  have  utterly  discredited  Wier's  book  and  might  even
have  prevented  it  from  being  published  at  all."^  Yet,  when
all  is  said  and  done,  it  must  be  admitted  that  Wier's  doc-
trines have  a  half-hearted  appearance,  and  that  they  seemed
to  most  seventeenth-century  scholars  to  labor  under  a  gross
inconsistency.  This  inconsistency  was  emphasized  by  Meric
Casaubon.  "As  for  them,"  writes  Dr.  Casaubon,  "who  allow
and  acknowledge  supernatural  operations  by  Devils  and
Spirits,  as  IVierius;  who  tells  as  many  strange  stories  of  them,
and  as  incredible,  as  are  to  be  found  in  any  book;  but  stick  at
the  business  of  Witches  only,  whom  they  would  not  have
thought  the  Authors  of  those  mischiefs,  that  are  usually  laid
to  their  charge,  but  the  Devil  only;  though  this  opinion  may
seem  to  some,  to  have  more  of  charity,  than  Incredulity;  yet
the  contrary  will  easily  appear  to  them,  that  shall  look  into  it
more  carefully."  And  Casaubon  dwells  upon  the  fact  that
Wier  grants  "no  small  part  of  what  we  drive  at,  when  he
doth  acknowledge  supernatural  operations,  by  Devils  and
Spirits."'"'  Indeed,  the  apparent  contradiction  in  Wier's
theories  may  also  excuse  Casaubon  for  the  suggestion  he
makes  that  Wier's  intention  "was  not  so  much  to  favour
women,  as  the  Devil  himself,  with  whom,  it  is  to  be  feared,
that  he  was  too  well  acquainted."  ^°  This  reminds  us  of  what
King  James  had  already  written  of  "Wierus,  a  German
Physition,"  who  "sets  out  a  publike  Apologie  for  all  these
craftes-folkes,  whereby,  procuring  for  their  impunitie,  he
plainely  bewrayes  himselfe  to  have  bene  one  of  that  pro-
fession."

Reginald  Scot's  Discoverie  of  Witchcraft  appeared  in  1 584,.
Scot,  who  was  largely  indebted  to  Wier,  goes  much  farther


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  34I

than  his  Continental  predecessor.  Of  course  he  does  not  deny
the  existence  of  evil  spirits;  but  he  does  not  believe,  like
Wier,  that  evil  spirits  are  continually  occupied  in  deluding
mankind  by  all  manner  of  false  (or  praestigious)  appearances.
Such  deceits  he  ascribes  to  juggling,  and  he  accordingly  gives
elaborate  directions  for  the  performance  of  various  tricks  of
legerdemain. 53

There  seems  to  be  a  more  or  less  prevalent  impression  that
Scot's  book  explodes  witchcraft  so  thoroughly  that  the  whole
delusion  might  soon  have  come  to  an  end  in  England  if
James  I  had  not  mounted  the  throne  a  short  time  after  it  was
published.  True,  King  James's  Dsemonologie  is  expressly
directed  "  against  the  damnable  opinions"  of  Wier  and  Scot.
But,  to  tell  the  truth,  Scot's  treatise  did  not  require  a  royal
refutation.  To  us  moderns,  who  are  converted  already  and
need  no  repentance,  its  general  air  of  reasonableness,  together
with  its  humor  and  the  raciness  of  the  style,  makes  the  Dis-
coverie  seem  convincing  enough.  But  this  is  to  look  at  the
matter  from  a  mistaken  point  of  view.  The  question  is,  not
how  Scot's  arguments  affect  us,  but  how  they  were  likely  to
affect  his  contemporaries.  Now,  if  the  truth  must  be  told,  the
Discoverie  is  deficient  in  one  very  important  respect.  It
makes  no  satisfactory  answer  to  the  insistent  questions:
"What  are  these  evil  spirits  of  which  the  Bible  and  the  philos-
ophers tell  us,  and  which  everybody  believes  in,  and  always
has  believed  in,  from  the  beginning  of  time?  And  what
are  they  about?  If  they  are  powerful  and  malignant,  why  is
it  not  likely  that  the  effects  which  everybody  ascribes  to  them
are  really  their  work?  nd  if  they  are  eager  not  only  to  tor-
ment but  to  seduce  .xiankind,  why  is  it  not  reasonable  to  sup-
pose that  they  r.ccomplish  both  ends  at  the  same  time  —  kill
two  birds  with  one  stone  —  by  procuring  such  evil  effects  by
means  of  witches,  or  by  allowing  themselves  to  be  utilized  by
witches  as  instruments  of  malice?"  It  was  quite  proper  to
ask  these  questions  of  Scot.  He  admitted  the  existence  of
evil  spirits,  but  declared  that  we  know  little  or  nothing  about
them,  denied  that  they  can  produce  the  phenomena  then  gen-
erally ascribed  to  their  agency,  and  alleged  fraud  and  delu-
sion to  account  for  such  phenomena.  Even  to  us,  with  our
extraordinary  and  very  modern  incredulity  toward  super-


)


34^         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

natural  occurrences,  the  lacuna  in  Scot's  reasoning  is  clear
enough  if  we  only  look  at  his  argument  as  a  whole.  This  we
are  not  inclined  to  do;  at  least,  few  writers  on  witchcraft  have
ever  done  it.  It  is  easier  and  more  natural  for  us  to  accept
such  portions  of  Scot's  argument  as  agree  with  our  own  view,
to  compliment  him  for  his  perspicacity,  and  to  pass  on,  dis-
regarding the  inadequacy  of  what  he  says  about  evil  spirits.
Or,  if  we  notice  that  his  utterances  on  this  topic  are  halting
and  uncertain,  we  are  tempted  to  regard  such  hesitancy  as
further  evidence  of  his  rational  temper.  He  could  not  quite
deny  the  existence  of  devils,  we  feel,  —  that  would  have  been
too  much  to  expect  of  him;  but  he  waves  them  aside  like
a  sensible  man.^s  A  moment's  consideration,  however,  will
show  us  that  this  defect  in  Scot's  case,  trifling  as  it  appears  to
us  now-a-days,  was  in  fact  a  very  serious  thing.  To  us,  who
never  think  of  admitting  the  intervention  of  evil  spirits  in  the
affairs  of  this  world,  the  question  whether  there  are  any  such
spirits  at  all  has  a  purely  theoretical  interest.  Indeed,  we
practically  deny  their  existence  when  we  ignore  them  as  we
do:  de  non  apparentibus  et  non  existentibus  eadem  est  lex.  —
But  to  Scot's  contemporaries,  the  question  of  the  existence  of
evil  spirits  involved  the  whole  matter  in  debate,  —  and  Scot
granted  their  existence.

A  curious  particular  in  the  history  of  Scot's  Discoverie
should  also  be  considered  in  estimating  its  effect  on  the  seven-
teenth century.  The  appearance  of  a  new  edition  in  1665,
shortly  after  the  famous  Bury  St.  Edmunds  case,^^  may  at
first  sight  seem  to  indicate  powerful  and  continuing  influence
on  the  part  of  the  Discoverie.  When  we  observe  from  the
title-page,  however,  that  the  publisher  has  inserted  nine
chapters  at  the  beginning  of  Book  xv,  and  has  added  a  second
book  to  the  Treatise  on  Divels  and  Spirits,  (  r  curiosity  is
excited.  Investigation  soon  shows  that  these  aaditions  were
calculated  to  destroy  or  minimize  the  total  effect  of  Scot's
book.  The  prefixed  chapters  contain  directions  for  making
magical  circles,  for  calling  up  "  the  ghost  of  one  that  hath
hanged  himself,"  and  for  raising  various  orders  of  spirits.
These  chapters  are  thrust  in  without  any  attempt  to  indicate
that  they  are  not  consistent  with  Scot's  general  plan  and  his
theories.  They  appear  to  be,  and  are,  practical  directions  for


/


I  7

CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  343

magic  and  necromancy.  The  additional  book  is  even  more
dangerous  to  Scot's  design.  It  is  prefaced  by  the  remark:  —
"  Because  the  Author  in  his  foregoing  Treatise,  upon  the
Nature  of  Spirits  and  Devils,  hath  only  touched  the  subject
thereof  superficially,  omitting  the  more  material  part;  and
with  a  brief  and  cursory  Tractat,  hath  concluded  to  speak  the
least  of  this  subject  which  indeed  requires  most  amply  to  be
illustrated;  therefore  I  thought  fit  to  adjoyn  this  subsequent
discourse;  as  succedaneous  to  the  fore-going,  and  conducing
to  the  compleating  of  the  whole  work."  "

How  far  "this  subsequent  discourse"  is  really  fitted  to
complete  Scot's  work  may  be  judged  by  a  statement  which  it
makes  on  the  very  first  page,  to  the  effect  that  bad  spirits
"  are  the  grand  Instigators,  stirring  up  mans  heart  to  attempt
the  inquiry  after  the  darkest,  and  most  mysterious  part  of
Magick,  or  Witchcraft."  And  again  a  little  later:  —  "Great
is  the  villany  of  Necromancers,  and  wicked  Magicians,  in
dealing  with  the  spirits  of  men  departed;  whom  they  invo-
cate,  with  certain  f9rms,  and  conjurations,  digging  up  their
Carkasses  again,  or  by  the  help  of  Sacrifices,  and  Oblations
to  the  infernal  Gods;  compelling  the  Ghost  to  present  it  self
before  them."  All  this  is  quite  opposed  to  Scot's  view  and
the  whole  intention  of  his  book.  The  insertion  of  such  worth-
less matter  was,  of  course,  a  mere  trick  of  the  bookseller  to
make  a  new  edition  go  off  well.  But  the  fact  of  its  insertion
shows  that  Scot  was  thought  to  have  left  his  treatise  incom-
plete or  unsatisfactory  in  a  most  important  point.  And  the
inserted  matter  itself  must  have  gone  far  to  neutralize  the
effect  of  republication  in  a  witch-haunted  period.  And  so  we
may  leave  Reginald  Scot,  with  our  respect  for  his  courage
and  common  sense  undiminished,  but  with  a  clear  idea  of  the
slight  effect  which  his  treatise  must  have  had  on  the  tone  and
temper  of  the  age  that  we  are  studying.

John  Webster's  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  which
appeared  in  1677  —  the  Preface  is  dated  "February  23.
1673"  —  "^^^  particularly  directed  against  Glanvil  and
Meric  Casaubon.  It  holds  a  distinguished  place  in  the  his-
tory of  witchcraft,  and  demands  our  careful  scrutiny.  What
is  usually  thought  of  it  has  been  eloquently  expressed  by  the
late  Mr.  James  Crossley.  "In  this  memorable  book,"  writes


i


344         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Mr.  Crossley,  "he  exhausts  the  subject,  as  far  as  it  is  possible
to  do  so,  by  powerful  ridicule,  cogent  arguments,  and  the
most  varied  and  well  applied  learning,  leaving  to  [Francis]
Hutchinson,  and  others  who  have  since  followed  in  his  track,
little  further  necessary  than  to  reproduce  his  facts  and  rea-
sonings in  a  more  popular,  it  can  scarcely  be  said,  in  a  more
effective  form."

A  few  of  Webster's  opinions  must  be  specified,  that  the
reader  may  judge  how  far  The  Displaying  of  Supposed
Witchcraft  deserves  to  rank  as  a  work  of  sober  and  scientific
reason,  and  to  what  extent  the  author  merits  the  position
that  seems  to  be  traditionally  assigned  to  him  as  an  uncom-
promising assailant  of  superstition.

Angels,  good  and  bad,  are  "really  and  truly  corporeal"
and  not  spirits,  except  "in  a  relative  and  respective"  sense.'''*
Since  devils  are  corporeal,  Webster  admits  that  "they  may
move  ^nd  agitate  other  bodies."  Their  strength,  however,
is  limited,  "for  though  one  Devil  may  be  supposed  to  move
or  lift  up  that  which  would  load  an  Horse,  yet  it  will  not  fol-
low that  he  can  move  or  lift  up  as  much  as  would  load  a  Ship
of  a  thousand  Tun."  Webster  grants  that  "  God  doth  make
use  of  evil  Angels  to  punish  the  wicked,  and  to  chastise  and
afflict  the  godly,  and  in  the  effecting  of  these  things  that  they
have  a  power  given  them  to  hurt  the  earth  and  the  Sea  and
things  therein,  as  to  bring  tempests,  thunder,  lightning,
plague,  death,  drought  and  the  like.'V''

Webster  has  a  profound  belief  in  apparitions  and  tells
some  capital  ghost  stories  ^'^ — "unquestionable  testimonies,"
he  call^  them,  "either  from  our  own  Annals,  or  matters
of  fact  that  we  know  to  be  true  of  our  own  certain  know-
ledge, that  thereby  it  may  undoubtedly  appear,  that  there
are  effects  that  exceed  the  ordinary  power  of  natural  causes,
and  may  for  ever  convince  all  Atheisticall  minds."  One  of
these  tales  concerns  the  murder  of  one  Fletcher  by  Ralph
Raynard,  an  innkeeper,  and  Mark  Dunn,  a  hired  assassin.
One  day  "  the  spirit  of  Fletcher  in  his  usual  shape  and  habit
did  appear  unto  [Raynard],  and  said.  Oh  Raph,  repent,  re-
pent, for  my  revenge  is  at  hand."  The  result  was  a  full  con-
fession. "I  have  recited  this  story  punctually,"  writes  Web-
ster, "as  a  thing  that  hath  been  very  much  fixed  in  my


CHAP.  XVIIl]


WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


345


memory,  being  then  but  young,  and  as  a  certain  truth,  I
being  (with  many  more)  an  ear-witness  of  their  confessions
and  an  eye-witness  of  their  Executions,  and  likewise  saw
Fletcher  when  he  was  taken  up,  where  they  had  buried  him  in
his  cloaths,  which  were  a  green  fustian  doublet  pinkt  upon
white,  gray  breeches,  and  his  walking  boots  and  brass  spurrs
without  rowells."  The  spectre,  Webster  is  convinced,  was  an
"extrinsick  apparition  to  Raynard"  and  not  the  mere  effect
of  a  guilty  conscience  "which  represented  the  shape  of
Fletcher  in  his  fancy."  The  thing  could  not,  he  thinks  "be
brought  to  pass  either  by  the  Devil,  or  Fletchers  Soul,"  and
therefore  he  "concludes  that  either  it  was  wrought  by  the
Divine  Power,  ...  or  that  it  was  the  Astral  or  Sydereal  Spirit
of  Fletcher,  seeking  revenge  for  the  murther."

Webster  also  believes  fully  in  the  "  bleeding  or  cruentation
of  the  bodies  of  those  that  have  been  murthered,"  particu-
larly at  the  touch  of  the  murderer  or  in  his  presence,  and  he
gives  a  very  curious  collection  of  examples,  in  some  of  which
"  the  murtherers  had  not  been  certainly  known  but  by  the
bleeding  of  the  body  murthered."  The  most  probable  ex-
planation of  such  phenomena  he  finds  in  the  existence  of  the
astral  spirit,  "that,  being  a  middle  substance,  betwixt  the
Soul  and  the  Body  doth,  when  separated  from  the  Body,
wander  or  hover  near  about  it  bearing  with  it  the  irascible
and  concupiscible  faculties,  wherewith  being  stirred  up  to
hatred  and  revenge,  it  causeth  that  ebullition  and  motion  in
the  blood,  that  exudation  of  blood  upon  the  weapon,  and
those  other  wonderful  motions  of  the  Body,  Hands,  Nostrils
and  Lips,  thereby  to  discover  the  murtherer,  and  bring  him
to  condign  punishment."  In  some  cases,  however,  Webster
holds  that  the  soul  has  not  actually  departed,  "  and  God  may
in  his  just  judgment  suffer  the  Soul  to  stay  longer  in  the
murthered  Body,  that  the  cry  of  blood  may  make  known  the
murtherer,  or  may  not  so  soon,  for  the  same  reason,  call  it
totally  away."

These  specimens  of  Webster's  temper  of  mind  might  per-
haps suffice  to  show  with  what  slight  justification  he  has  been
regarded  as  a  scientific  rationalist.  We  must  not  dismiss  him,
however,  until  we  have  scrutinized  his  views  on  the  subject  of
witchcraft  itself.  He  passes  for  a  strong  denier  of  the  whole


346         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

business  of  sorcery.  We  shall  find  that  this  is  a  great  mistake.
So  far  from  denying  the  existence  of  witches,  Webster  is  in-
dignant at  the  imputation  that  his  theories  and  those  of  other
like-minded  scholars  should  be  interpreted  in  any  such  sense.
"If  I  deny  that  a  Witch  cannot  flye  in  the  air,  nor  be  trans-
formed or  transsubstantiated  into  a  Cat,  a  Dog,  or  an  Hare,
or  that  the  Witch  maketh  any  visible  Covenant  with  the
Devil,  or  that  he  sucketh  on  their  bodies,  or  that  the  Devil
hath  carnal  Copulation  with  them;  I  do  not  thereby  deny
either  the  Being  of  Witches,  nor  other  properties  that  they
may  have,  for  which  they  may  be  so  called:  no  more  than  if
I  deny  that  a  dog  hath  rugibility  (which  is  only  proper  to  a
Lion)  doth  it  follow  that  I  deny  the  being  of  a  Dog,  or  that
he  hath  latrability  ? "  This  sentence  contains,  in  effect,  the
sum  and  substance  of  Webster's  negative  propositions  on  the
subject.''''  Let  us  see  what  he  holds  as  affirmatives.

Though  rejecting  the  theory  of  an  external  covenant  be-
tween the  devil  and  a  witch,  Webster  acknowledges  "an
internal,  mental,  and  spiritual  League  or  Covenant  betwixt
the  Devil  and  all  wicked  persons."  Further,  "this  spiritual
League  in  some  respects  and  in  some  persons  may  be,  and  is
an  explicit  League,  that  is,  the  persons  that  enter  into  it,  are
or  may  be  conscious  of  it,  and  know  it  to  be  so."  Now  there
are  certain  persons,  commonly  called  witches,  who  are  full  of
"  hatred,  malice,  revenge  and  envy,"  of  which  the  devil  is  the
"author  and  causer,"'^  and  these,  by  Satan's  instigation,
"do  secretly  and  by  tradition  learn  strange  poysons,  philters
and  receipts  whereby  they  do  much  hurt  and  mischief.
Which  most  strange  wayes  of  poysoning,  tormenting,  and
breeding  of  unwonted  things  in  the  stomach  and  bellies  of
people,  have  not  been  unknown  unto  many  learned  men  and
Philosophers."  "  Among  these  effects  of  "an  art  more  than
Diabolical,"  which  has  "been  often  practised  by  most  hor-
rible, malevolent,  and  wicked  persons,"  is  the  production  of
the  plague.  There  is  no  doubt  of  the  fact.  There  are  "un-
deniable examples."  An  unguent  may  be  prepared  which  is
of  such  power  that,  when  it  is  smeared  upon  the  handles  of
doors,  "those  that  do  but  lightly  touch  them  are  forthwith
infected."  In  1536  there  was  a  conspiracy  of  some  forty  per-
sons in  Italy,  who  caused  the  death  of  many  in  this  way.'"'


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  347

To  such  arts  Webster  ascribes  the  dreadful  outbreak  of  jail-
fever  at  the  Oxford  assizes  in  1579.  This  was  not,  and  could
not  be,  the  ordinary  "prison  infection."  It  was  brought
about  by  the  contrivances  of  one  Roland  Jenks,  "  a  Popish
recusant,"  who  was  condemned  for  seditious  words  against
the  queen.  Jenks,  it  seems,  had  procured  strange  poisons  of
a  local  apothecary,  and  had  made  a  kind  of  candle  out  of
them.  As  soon  as  he  was  condemned,  he  lighted  his  candle,
from  which  there  arose  such  a  "damp,"  or  vapor,  that  the
pestilence  broke  out  as  we  have  seen.^^  It  is  manifest,  Web-
ster holds,  "  that  these  kind  of  people  that  are  commonly
called  Witches,  are  indeed  (as  both  the  Greek  and  Latin
names  doe  signifie)  Poysoners,  and  in  respect  of  their  Hellish
intentions  are  Diabolical,  but  the  effects  they  procure  flow
from  natural  Causes."  This  last  proposition  is,  indeed,  per-
haps the  chief  point  of  Webster's  book.  Witches  exist,  and
they  do  horrible  things,  but  they  accomplish  their  ends,  not
by  the  actual  intervention  of  the  devil  and  his  imps,  but  by
virtue  of  an  acquaintance  with  little-known  laws  of  nature.
Another  example,  which  cannot  be  quoted  in  detail,  will  make
Webster's  position  perfectly  clear.  A  man  was  afflicted  with
a  dreadful  disease.  The  cause  was  discovered  to  be  the  pres-
ence of  an  oaken  pin  in  the  corner  of  a  courtyard.  The  pin
was  destroyed  and  the  man  drank  birchen  ale.  He  made  a
complete  recovery.  It  is  plain,  according  to  Webster,  that
the  pulling  up  and  burning  of  the  oaken  pin  "was  with  the
help  of  the  Birchen  Ale  the  cure;  but  it  can  no  wayes  be
judged  necessary  that  the  Devil  should  fix  the  Oak  pin  there,
but  that  the  Witch  might  do  it  himself.  Neither  can  it  be
thought  to  be  any  power  given  by  the  Devil  to  the  Oaken
pin,  that  it  had  not  by  nature,  for  in  probability  it  will  con-
stantly by  a  natural  power  produce  the  same  effect;  only  thus
far  the  Devil  had  a  hand  in  the  action,  to  draw  some  wicked
person  to  fix  the  pin  there  .  .  .  ,  thereby  to  hurt  and  torture
him.""

One  is  tempted  to  still  further  quotations  from  Webster's
utterances  on  this  topic,  especially  because  his  book  has  been
much  oftener  mentioned  than  read.  But  we  must  rest  content
with  one  passage  which  sums  up  the  whole  matter:  —  "The
opinions  that  we  reject  as  foolish  and  impious  are  those  we


348         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

have  often  named  before,  to  wit,  that  those  that  are  vulgarly
accounted  Witches,  make  a  visible  and  corporeal  contract
with  the  Devil,  that  he  sucks  upon  their  bodies,  that  he  hath
carnal  copulation  with  them,  that  they  are  transubstantiated
into  Cats,  Dogs,  Squirrels,  and  the  like,  or  that  they  raise
tempests,  and  fly  in  the  air.  Other  powers  we  grant  unto
them,  to  operate  and  effect  whatsoever  the  force  of  natural
imagination  joyned  with  envy,  malice  and  vehement  desire  of
revenge,  can  perform  or  perpetrate,  or  whatsoever  hurt  may
be  done  by  secret  poysons  and  such  like  wayes  that  work  by
meer  natural  means."

It  is  true  that  Webster  opposed  some  of  the  current  witch-
dogmas  of  his  time.  There  are  passages  enough  in  his  elabo-
rate treatise  which  insist  on  the  prevalence  of  fraud  and  melan-
cholia. In  his  Epistle  Dedicatory,  which  is  addressed  to  five
Yorkshire  justices  of  the  peace,  he  lays  particular  stress  on
the  necessity  of  distinguishing  between  impostors  and  those
unfortunate  persons  who  are  "  under  a  mere  passive  delusion  "
that  they  are  witches,  and  warns  the  magistrates  not  to  be-
lieve impossible  confessions.  For  all  this  he  deserves  honor.'''
Nor  do  I  intend  for  a  moment  to  suggest  that  the  queer
things  (as  we  regard  them  now-a-days)  which  I  have  cited  are
in  any  manner  discreditable  to  Webster.  He  was  not  excep-
tionally credulous,  and  he  belonged  to  that  advanced  school
of  English  physicians  who,  in  the  second  half  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  upheld  the  general  theories  of  Paracelsus  and
van  Helmont  in  opposition  to  the  outworn  follies  of  the  Ga-
lenists  or  regulars.  He  was  a  man  of  great  erudition,  of  vast
and  varied  experience,  of  uncommon  mental  gifts,  and  of
passionate  devotion  to  the  truth.  I  admire  him,  but  I  must
be  pardoned  if  I  am  unable  to  see  how  he  can  be  regarded  as  a
tower  of  skeptical  strength  in  the  great  witchcraft  contro-
versy. Even  his  admissions  on  the  subject  of  the  fallen  angels
are  enough  to  destroy  the  efficiency  of  his  denial  of  current
notions  about  witchcraft.  Once  grant,  as  Webster  does,  that
our  atmosphere  is  peopled  by  legions  upon  legions  of  evil
angels,  delighting  in  sin,  eager  to  work  mischief,  inimical  to
God  and  man,  furnished  with  stores  of  acquired  knowledge,
and  able  to  devise  wicked  thoughts  and  put  them  into  our
minds,'*"  and  it  was  idle  to  deny  —  in  the  face  of  the  best


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


349


philosophic  and  theological  opinion  of  the  ages  —  that  these
demonic  beings  can  make  actual  covenants  with  witches  or
furnish  them  with  the  means  of  doing  injury  to  their  fellow-
creatures.

''A  Witch,"  according  to  Glanvil's  definition,  "is  one,  who
can  do  or  seems  to  do  strange  things,  beyond  the  known  Power  oj
Art  and  ordinary  Nature,  by  vertue  of  a  Confederacy  with  Evil
Spirits.  .  .  .  The  strange  things  are  real/y  performed,  and  are
not  all  Impostures  and  Delusions.  The  Witch  occasions,  but
is  not  the  Principal  Efficient,  she  seems  to  do  it,  but  the
Spirit  performs  the  wonder,  sometimes  immediately,  as  in
'Transportations  and  Possessions,  sometimes  by  applying
other  Natural  Causes,  as  in  raising  Storms,  and  inflicting
Diseases,  sometimes  using  the  Witch  as  an  Instrument,  and
either  by  the  Eyes  or  Touch,  conveying  Malign  Influences:
And  these  things  are  done  by  vertue  of  a  Covenant,  or  Com-
pact betwixt  the  Witch  and  an  Evil  Spirit.  A  Spirit,  viz.  an
Intelligent  Creature  of  the  Invisible  World,  whether  one  of  the
Evil  Angels  called  Devils,  or  an  Inferiour  Dcemon  or  Spirit,  or
a  wicked  Soul  departed;  but  one  that  is  able  and  ready  for
mischief,  and  whether  altogether  Incorporeal  or  not,  apper-
tains not  to  this  Question."  Glanvil's  book  was  well  known
to  the  Mathers.  So  was  Webster's  Displaying  of  Supposed
Witchcraft. Could  there  be  a  moment's  doubt  which  of  the
two  would  appeal  the  more  powerfully  to  their  logical  sense?
Why,  even  we  ourselves,  if  we  look  at  the  matter  fairly,  —
taking  into  consideration  Webster's  whole  case,  and  not
merely  such  parts  of  it  as  accord  with  our  preconceived
opinions,  —  are  forced  to  admit  that  Glanvil's  position  is
much  the  stronger.

In  a  well-known  passage,  in  which  the  intellectual  temper
of  Massachusetts  before  1660  is  contrasted  with  that  of  the
next  generation,^^  our  classic  New  England  essayist  remarks
that  after  1660  the  Colonists  "sank  rapidly  into  provincials,
narrow  in  thought,  in  culture,  in  creed."  "Such  a  pedantic
portent  as  Cotton  Mather,"  Lowell  continues,  "would  have
been  impossible  in  the  first  generation;  he  was  the  natural
growth  of  the  third."  To  discuss  these  epigrammatic  theses
would  take  us  far  beyond  the  limits  of  our  present  subject.
One  thing,  however,  must  be  said.  Pedantry  in  the  latter  half


350        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

of  the  seventeenth  century  was  not  confined  to  New  England,
nor  to  the  ranks  of  those  who  were  controversially  styled  the
witchmongers.  Meric  Casaubon  and  Joseph  Glanvil  were  not
pedantic,  but  John  Webster's  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witch-
craft —  which  in  some  respects  comes  very  near  to  being  a
great  book  —  is  a  monument  of  pedantry,  and  John  Webster
was  not  a  product  of  New  England.

In  Thomas  Hobbes,  whom  we  may  next  consider,  we  find  a
philosopher  who  was  altogether  incredulous  on  the  subject  of
witchcraft.  "As  for  witches,"  he  writes,  "I  think  not  that
their  witchcraft  is  any  real  power;  but  yet  that  they  are
justly  punished,  for  the  false  belief  that  they  have  that  they
can  do  such  mischief,  joined  with  their  purpose  to  do  it  if  they
can;  their  trade  being  nearer  to  a  new  religion  than  to  a  craft
or  science."  This  dictum  may  accord  with  reason,  but  one
must  admit  that  it  was  cold  comfort  for  persons  accused  of
diabolical  arts.  And  so  was  the  more  famous  remark  of  Sel-
den:  "The  Law  against  Witches  does  not  prove  there  be  any;
but  it  punishes  the  Malice  of  those  people,  that  use  such
means,  to  take  away  mens  lives.  If  one  should  profess  that
by  turning  his  Hat  thrice,  and  crying  Buz;  he  could  take
away  a  man's  life  (though  in  truth  he  could  do  no  such  thing)
yet  this  were  a  just  Law  made  by  the  State,  that  whosoever
should  turn  his  Hat  thrice,  and  cry  Buz;  with  an  intention  to
take  away  a  man's  life,  shall  be  put  to  death."  Bayle,
shortly  after  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century,  agreed
with  Selden  as  to  the  justice  of  putting  "  sorciers  imaginaires  "
to  death. Thomas  Ady,  believing  (like  Scot,  to  whom  he
often  refers)  that  the  witches  and  sorcerers  of  the  Bible  were
mere  cheats,  and  that  the  same  is  true  of  all  who  pretend  to
similar  arts  in  modern  times,  is  ready  to  admit  the  justice  of
the  death  penalty  in  cases  of  fraud.  In  describing  the  case  of
a  certain  Master  of  Arts  who  was  "condemned  only  for  using
himself  to  the  study  and  practice  of  the  Jugling  craft,"  he
concludes: —  "if  he  had  been  a  Jugler,  or  practiser  of  that
Craft  to  this  end,  to  withstand  the  Prophets  when  they
wrought  true  miracles,  as  Pharaohs  Juglers  withstood  Moses,
or  if  he  were  one  that  practised  it  to  seduce  the  people  after
lying  delusions,  to  magnifie  himself  as  a  false  Prophet,  like
Simon  Magus  in  the  ^cts,  or  to  cause  people  to  ascribe  mirac-


CHAP.  XVIIl]


WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


ulous  power  to  him,  or  to  seek  to  the  Devil  as  our  common
Deceivers,  called  good  Witches,  do,  he  was  deservedly  con-
demned."

Four  dissenters  from  the  current  witchcraft  dogma  we  must
pass  over  in  silence  —  John  WagstafFe,  Sir  Robert  Filmer,
Robert  Calef,  and  Dr.  Francis  Hutchinson.  Calef  came  too
late  to  be  really  significant  in  our  discussion;  Filmer's  tract  is
a  kind  of  jeu  d' esprit,  not  likely  to  have  had  any  influence  ex-
cept upon  lawyers;  and  Wagstaffe's  book  is  a  quite  incon-
siderable affair.  Yet,  in  parting,  we  must  not  neglect  an  odd
remark  concerning  two  out  of  the  four  —  as  well  as  one  other,
John  Webster,  whose  lucubrations  we  have  already  criticised
—  a  remark  which,  occurring  as  it  does  in  a  work  of  much
learning  and  unusual  distinction,  illustrates  in  striking  fash-
ion the  inaccuracy  which  we  have  already  had  occasion  to
notice,  now  and  again,  in  recent  writers  who  have  busied
themselves  with  the  abstruse  and  complicated  subject  of
witchcraft.  President  White,  in  his  Warfare  of  Science  with
Theology,  expresses  his  admiration  for  Webster,  Wagstaffe,
and  Hutchinson  in  the  following  terms:  —  "But  especially
should  honour  be  paid  to  the  younger  men  in  the  Church,  who
wrote  at  length  against  the  whole  system:  such  men  as  Wag-
staffe and  Webster  and  Hutchinson,  who  in  the  humbler
ranks  of  the  clergy  stood  manfully  for  truth,  with  the  cer-
tainty that  by  so  doing  they  were  making  their  own  promo-
tion impossible."  Of  the  three  men  whom  Dr.  White  thus
commends  for  renouncing  all  hope  of  ecclesiastical  prefer-
ment, the  first,  John  Webster,  was  sixty-seven  years  old
when  he  published  his  book;  he  had  long  been  a  Non-con-
formist, and  he  describes  himself  on  his  title-page  as  "Prac-
titioner in  Physick."  The  second,  John  Wagstaffe,  was  a
gentleman  of  independent  means  who  damaged  his  health  by
"continual  bibbing  of  strong  and  high  tasted  liquors"  ^°  and
who  was  not  in  orders  at  all;  the  third.  Dr.  Francis  Hutchin-
son, was  Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  King  George  I  when  he
published  his  Essay  and  was  advanced  to  a  bishopric  two
years  after  the  first  edition  of  the  book  appeared.'^

When,  in  1691  and  1693,  we  come  to  The  Enchanted  World
(De  Betoverde  Weereld)  of  the  Dutch  preacher  and  theo-
logian Balthasar  Bekker,  we  arrive  at  a  method  of  opposing


352         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

the  witch-dogma  different  from  anything  we  have  so  far  ex-
amined. Bekker  was  fully  aware  of  the  difficulties  of  his
theme,  and  he  had  an  uncommonly  logical  head.  His  method
is  perfect.  He  first  sets  forth  the  spiritual  beliefs  of  the
Greeks  and  Romans  and  their  practices  in  the  way  of  sorcery.
Then  he  shows  —  with  an  anticipation  of  the  process  so  often
used  by  the  modern  anthropological  school  —  that  the  same
doctrines  and  practices  are  found  among  "  the  pagans  of
the  present  day,"  —  in  Northern  Europe,  in  Asia,  in  Africa,
and  in  America,  as  well  as  among  the  ancient  Jews.  The
Manichsean  heresy,  he  contends,  was  a  melange  of  pagan
and  Jewish  doctrines.  These  doctrines  —  heathen,  Jewish,
and  Manichsean  —  early  became  current  among  Christians.
Hence,  Christians  in  general  now  hold  that  all  sorts  of  extra-
ordinary happenings  are  due  to  the  activity  of  the  devil.
Thus  Bekker  succeeds  in  explaining  the  primary  conceptions
of  modern  demonology  and  witchcraft  as  derived  from
heathen  sources.'^

Bekker's  next  task  is  to  define  body  and  spirit,  according
to  reason  and  the  Bible.  Both  body  and  spirit  are  creatures.
God,  being  perfect  and  increate,  is  neither  body  nor  spirit,
but  superior  to  both.  He  is  called  a  spirit  in  the  Bible,
simply  because  there  is  no  better  word  to  express  the  divine
nature,  but  that  nature  is  different  from  what  is  ordinarily
meant  by  the  term.  God  being  the  governor  of  the  world,  we
have  no  ground  for  believing  that  there  are  demigods  [dce-
mons  in  the  Greek  sense)  or  vice-gods.  Apart  from  the  Scrip-
tures, reason  affords  us  no  proof  that  there  are  any  spirits
except  men's  souls.  The  Scriptures,  however,  teach  that
there  are  good  angels,  of  whom  Michael  is  the  chief,  and  bad
angels,  whose  prince  is  the  devil.  Beyond  this,  we  learn  prac-
tically nothing  from  the  Bible  with  regard  to  a  hierarchy  of
angels  or  of  devils.  Demoniacal  possession  was  a  natural  dis-
ease: it  had  nothing  to  do  with  evil  spirits.  Such  devils  as  are
mentioned  in  Scripture  are  not  said  to  be  vassals  of  Satan;  in
many  cases  we  are  to  understand  the  word  "devil"  merely  as
a  figure  of  speech  for  a  wicked  man.  There  is  no  warrant  in
Holy  Writ  for  the  belief  that  Satan  can  appear  to  mortals
under  different  forms,  nor  lor  the  powers  vulgarly  ascribed
to  him  and  his  supposed  demonic  household.   In  particular,


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


353


there  is  no  scriptural  warrant  for  the  opinion  that  Satan  or  his
imps  can  injure  men  bodily  or  even  suggest  evil  thoughts  to
them.  The  devil  and  the  evil  angels  are  damned  in  hell;  they
have  not  the  power  to  move  about  in  this  world.  The  only
way  in  which  Satan  is  responsible  for  the  sins  which  we  com-
mit is  through  his  having  brought  about  the  fall  of  Adam,  so
that  men  are  now  depraved  creatures,  prone  to  sin.  There  is
no  place  in  the  divine  government  for  particular  suggestions
to  wickedness,  made  from  time  to  time,  since  the  Fall,  either
by  Satan  himself  or  by  any  of  his  train.  Diabolical  influence
upon  mankind  was  confined  to  the  initial  temptation  in  Eden.
Since  Adam,  neither  Satan  nor  any  evil  spirit  has  been  active
in  this  world  in  any  manner  whatever,  spiritual  or  corporeal.
God  rules,  and  the  devil  is  not  a  power  to  be  reckoned  with  at
all.  These  revolutionary  propositions  Bekker  proves,  to  his
own  satisfaction,  not  only  from  reason,  but  from  the  Word  of
God.'^

Here  at  last  we  have  a  rational  method.  Bekker  is  not
content  with  half-measures;  he  lays  the  axe  to  the  root.
There  is  a  devil,  to  be  sure,  and  there  are  fallen  angels;  but
neither  the  one  nor  the  other  can  have  anything  to  do  with
the  life  and  actions  of  mortal  men.  Practically,  then,  the
devil  is  non-existent.  We  may  disregard  him  entirely.  If
Bekker's  propositions  are  admitted,  the  stately  fabric  of
demonology  and  witchcraft  crumbles  in  an  instant.  And
nothing  less  drastic  than  such  propositions  will  suffice  to
make  witchcraft  illogical  or  incredible.  Bekker's  argument,
we  see  at  once,  is  utterly  different  from  anything  that  his  pre-
decessors had  attempted.

It  now  becomes  necessary  for  Bekker  to  proceed  to  discuss
those  passages  in  the  Bible  which  appear  to  justify  the  com-
mon beliefs  in  sorcery  and  witchcraft.  These  beliefs  are  con-
trary to  reason,  but,  if  they  rest  upon  revelation,  they  must
still  be  accepted,  for  Bekker  regards  himself  as  an  orthodox
Christian  of  the  Dutch  Reformed  Church.  Accordingly  Bek-
ker takes  up  every  scriptural  passage  which  mentions  witches,
enchanters,  diviners,  and  the  like,  and  interprets  them  all  in
such  a  way  that  they  lend  no  support  to  current  beliefs  in  the
reality  of  compacts  with  the  devil,  of  magic,  or  of  witchcraft.
Whatever  magicians  and  witches,  so-called,  may  think  of


354         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

their  own  performances,  there  is  nothing  in  Scripture,  as  in-
terpreted by  this  bold  and  expert  theologian  and  unsurpassed
dialectician,  to  warrant  us  in  believing  in  intercourse  with
Satan,  or  in  his  intervention,  with  or  without  the  mediation
of  sorcerers  and  witches,  in  human  life  as  it  is  to-day.'^

But,  Bekker  hastens  to  admit,  there  remains  a  huge  mass
of  recent  testimony  which  is  regarded  by  almost  everybody
as  sufficient  to  establish  the  existence  of  sorcery  and  witch-
craft, whether  such  things  are  recognized  in  the  Bible  or  not.
To  this  testimony  Bekker  devotes  the  Fourth  (and  last)  Book
of  his  treatise.

He  first  points  out  that  all  such  testimony  is  prejudiced,
since  it  comes  from  persons  who  have  a  fixed  and,  so  to  speak,
an  inherited  belief  in  the  truth  of  the  marvels  whose  very
existence  is  in  question.  He  then  examines  a  great  body  of
material,  with  splendid  sobriety  and  common  sense.  This  is
perhaps  the  most  interesting  part  of  his  work  to  us,  —  though
in  fact  it  is  less  original  than  much  of  what  precedes,  since  all
opponents  of  the  witch-dogma,  beginning  with  Wier,  had  at-
tacked the  evidence  in  many  particulars,  and  since  even  those
scholars  and  theologians  who  supported  the  dogma  most
effectively  —  like  Glanvil  —  had  granted  without  hesitation
that  fraud  and  delusion  played  a  large  part  in  the  accumula-
tion of  testimony.  Bekker's  treatment  of  the  subject,  how-
ever, is  better  than  anything  of  the  kind  that  had  been  writ-
ten before.  Fraud,  terror,  hysteria,  insanity,  illusion  of  the
senses,  —  due  to  disease  or  to  what  we  should  now  call  hyp-
notic or  semi-hypnotic  conditions,  —  unknown  laws  of  na-
ture —  these  are  the  sources  from  which  he  derives  his  inter-
pretation of  the  evidence.  This  part  of  his  work,  then,  has  a
singularly  modern  tone,  and  gives  the  author  a  valid  claim  to
rank  as  an  enlightened  psychologist.

It  has  seemed  advisable  to  give  particular  attention  to
Bekker's  Enchanted  World  because  of  its  singular  merits,  as
well  as  on  account  of  the  distinguished  position  which  it  de-
servedly holds  among  the  books  which  oppose  the  belief  in
witchcraft.  In  strictness,  however,  we  are  not  bound  to  in-
clude this  work  in  our  survey  of  seventeenth-century  opinion,
since  it  did  not  appear  in  season  to  exert  any  influence  on
New  England  at  the  time  of  the  Salem  prosecution.  The  first


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


355


two  Books  of  Bekker's  work  were  published  in  1691;  the
second  two,  which  deal  specifically  with  witchcraft,  in  1693.
The  trouble  in  Salem  began  in  February,  1692,  and  the  pro-
secution collapsed  in  January,  1693.  It  is  certain  that  New
England  scholars  knew  nothing  about  the  first  two  Books
when  they  were  engaged  in  witch-trials,  and  the  last  two  were
not  published  until  the  trials  had  come  to  an  end.  But  this
matter  of  dates  need  not  be  insisted  on.  Even  if  our  ances-
tors had  received  advance  sheets  of  The  Enchanted  World,
their  opinions  would  not,  in  all  probability,  have  been  in  the
slightest  degree  affected.  Indeed,  the  reception  which  Bek-
ker's treatise  met  with  in  his  own  country  is  a  plain  indication
of  the  temper  of  the  times  in  this  business  of  witchcraft.  The
publication  of  the  first  two  Books  in  1691  was  the  signal  for  a
storm  of  denunciation.  The  Dutch  press  teemed  with  replies
and  attacks.  Bekker  was  instantly  called  to  account  by  the
authorities  of  the  Reformed  Church.  Complicated  ecclesias-
tical litigation  ensued,  with  the  result  that  the  Synod  of
North  Holland  issued  a  decree  declaring  Bekker  "intolerable
as  teacher  in  the  Reformed  Church"  and  expelling  him  from
his  ministerial  office  (x^ugust  7,  1692).'''  Soon  after,  the
Church  Council  of  x^msterdam  voted  to  exclude  him  from
the  Lord's  Supper  (August  17),''''  and  he  was  never  admitted
to  communion  again.  He  died  on  June  11,  1698.''^

Another  reason  for  going  so  fully  into  Bekker's  arguments
is  that  they  give  us  an  excellent  chance  to  take  up  a  question
which  is  of  cardinal  importance  in  weighing  the  whole  mat-
ter of  witchcraft.  I  refer,  of  course,  to  the  question  of  Biblical
Exegesis.

If  we  wish  to  treat  our  forefathers  fairly,  we  are  required  to
criticise  the  few  opponents  of  the  witch-dogma  in  a  really  im-
partial way.  We  ought  not  to  commend  such  portions  of  their
argument  as  chance  to  square  with  our  own  ideas,  and  ignore
the  rest.  We  must  review  their  case  as  a  whole,  so  as  to  dis-
cover how  far  it  was  right  or  reasonable  on  the  basis  of  their
own  postulates.  We  must  test  the  correctness  of  their  prem-
ises, as  well  as  the  accuracy  of  their  logic.

This  process  we  have  gone  through  with  already  in  several
instances.  We  have  seen  that  all  the  opponents  of  witchcraft
so  far  examined  struggle  to  maintain  a  position  that  is  strateg-


356         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ically  indefensible,  either  because  they  admit  too  much,  or
because  they  ignore  certain  difficulties,  or  because  they  are
frankly  eccentric.  It  does  not  help  their  case  to  contend  that
what  they  admit  or  what  they  ignore  does  not  signify  from
our  present  scientific  point  of  view.  It  did  signify  then.  The
only  man  whose  argument  covers  the  ground  completely  and
affords  a  thorough  and  consistent  theory  on  which  a  seven-
teenth-century Christian  was  logically  justified  in  rejecting
witchcraft  and  demoniacal  possession  as  facts  of  everyday
experience  is  Balthasar  Bekker.

Now  the  truth  or  falsity  of  Bekker's  very  radical  conclu-
sions hinged  —  for  Bekker  himself  and  for  his  contemporaries
—  on  the  soundness  of  his  Biblical  exegesis.  If  his  way  of
disposing  of  those  passages  which  mention  devils  and  witches
and  diviners  and  familiar  spirits  is  not  justifiable  —  if  the
Biblical  writers  did  not  mean  what  he  thinks  they  meant  —
then  his  whole  case  goes  to  pieces.  In  discussing  the  witch-
craft dogma  of  the  seventeenth  century,  we  must  accept  the
Bible,  for  the  nonce,  as  the  men  of  the  seventeenth  century
(Bekker  included)  accepted  it  —  as  absolutely  true  in  every
detail,  as  dynamically  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  a  com-
plete rule  of  faith  and  practice.  Modern  views  on  this  subject
have  no  locus  standi.

Now,  if  we  only  keep  these  fundamental  principles  firmly
in  mind,  we  shall  have  no  doubt  as  to  the  outcome.  Beyond
question,  the  Bible  affords  ample  authority  for  belief  in  de-
moniacal possession,  in  necromancy,  in  the  ability  of  Satan
and  his  cohorts  to  cause  physical  phenomena,  and  in  the
power  of  sorcerers  to  work  miracles. True,  not  all  the  de-
tails of  the  witchcraft  dogma  rest  upon  Biblical  authority,
but  enough  of  them  do  so  rest  to  make  the  case  of  those
who  uphold  the  traditional  opinion  substantially  unassail-
able, except  upon  the  purely  arbitrary  assumption  that  all
these  wonders,  though  formerly  actual,  have  ceased  in  recent
times. Bekker's  exegesis  is  erroneous  in  countless  particu-
lars and  presents  an  altogether  mistaken  view  of  Biblical
doctrines.  As  interpreters  of  the  language  of  Scripture,  the
orthodox  theologians  of  his  time,  who  pinned  their  faith  to
witchcraft,  were  nearer  right  than  he  was.  And  what  is  true
of  Bekker's  exegesis,  is  equally  true  of  that  followed  by  all


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


357


previous  opponents  of  the  witchcraft  dogma.  My  reason  for
not  referring  to  this  point  in  criticising  their  books  is  obvious.
Bekker  has  gone  farther,  and  succeeded  better,  in  explaining
away  the  testimony  of  Scripture  than  any  of  the  others.  It  is
more  than  fair  to  them  to  rest  this  part  of  the  case  upon  his
success  or  failure.  If  Bekker  falls,  all  of  them  certainly  fall,  —
and  Bekker  falls."^

From  our  cursory  examination  of  the  works  put  forth  by
some  of  the  chief  opponents  of  the  witch-dogma,  it  must  be
evident  that  none  of  these  works  can  have  had  a  very  pro-
found influence  on  the  beliefs  of  the  seventeenth  century,  —
their  function  was  rather,  by  keeping  discussion  alive,  to
prepare  for  the  change  of  sentiment  which  took  place  soon
after  1700,  in  what  we  are  accustomed  to  call  "the  age  of
prose  and  reason."  Such  an  examination  as  we  have  given  to
these  books  was  necessary  to  establish  the  proposition  with
which  we  set  out,  —  that  our  ancestors  in  1692  were  in  accord
with  the  practically  universal  belief  of  their  day.  It  has
shown  more  than  this,  however,  —  it  has  demonstrated  that
their  position  was  logically  and  scripturally  stronger  than
that  of  their  antagonists,  provided  we  judge  the  matter  (as
we  are  in  honor  bound  to  do)  on  the  basis  of  those  doctrines
as  to  supernaturalism  and  the  inspiration  of  the  Bible  that
were  alike  admitted  by  both  sides.  We  may  repeat,  then,
with  renewed  confidence,  the  statement  already  made:  Our
forefathers  believed  in  witchcraft,  not  because  they  were
Puritans,  not  because  they  were  Colonials,  not  because  they
were  New  Englanders,  but  because  they  were  men  of  their
own  time  and  not  of  ours.

Another  point  requires  consideration  if  we  would  arrive  at
a  just  judgment  on  the  Salem  upheaval.  It  is  frequently
stated,  and  still  oftener  assumed,  that  the  outbreak  at  Salem
was  peculiar  in  its  virulence,  or,  at  all  events,  in  its  intensity.
This  is  a  serious  error,  due,  like  other  misapprehensions,  to  a
neglect  of  the  history  of  witchcraft  as  a  whole.  The  fact  is,
the  Salem  excitement  was  the  opposite  of  peculiar,  —  it  was
perfectly  typical.  The  European  belief  in  witchcraft,  which
our  forefathers  shared  without  exaggerating  it,  was  a  constant
quantity.  It  was  always  present,  and  continuously  fraught
with  direful  possibilities.  But  it  did  not  find  expression  in  a


358         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Steady  and  regular  succession  of  witch-trials.  On  the  con-
trary, it  manifested  itself  at  irregular  intervals  in  spasmodic
outbursts  of  prosecution.  Notable  examples  occurred  at
Geneva  from  1542  to  1546;"'  at  Wiesensteig,  Bavaria,  in
1562  and  i^Gj^;^"^  in  the  Electorate  of  Trier  from  1587  to
1593;'°^  among  the  Basques  of  Labourd  in  i6og;^°^  at  Mohra
in  Sweden  in  1669  and  1670.""'  In  the  district  of  Ortenau,  in
Baden,  witchcraft  prosecution  suddenly  broke  out,  after  a
considerable  interval,  in  1627,  and  there  were  seventy-three
executions  in  three  years."''  From  the  annals  of  witchcraft  in
Great  Britain  one  may  cite  the  following  cases: —  1581,  at
St.  Osyth,  in  Essex;  1590-1597,  in  Scotland; 1612,  at
Lancaster,""  and  again  in  1633; 16 16,  in  Leicestershire;
1 645- 1 647,  the  Hopkins  prosecution;  1 649-1 650,  at  New-
castle-on-Tyne;  1652,  at  Maidstone,  in  Kent;  1682,  at
Exeter."^  The  sudden  outbreak  of  witch-trials  in  the  Ber-
mudas in  1 65 1  is  also  worthy  of  attention."^

It  is  unnecessary  for  us  to  consider  how  much  of  the  evi-
dence offered  at  witch-trials  in  England  was  actually  true.
Some  of  the  defendants  were  pretty  bad  characters,  and  it
would  be  folly  to  maintain  that  none  of  them  tried  to  cause
the  sickness  or  death  of  their  enemies  by  maltreating  clay
images  or  by  other  arts  which  they  supposed  would  avail.
Besides,  now  and  then  an  injury  is  testified  to  which  may  well
have  been  inflicted  without  diabolical  aid.  Thus  Ann  Foster,
who  was  hanged  for  witchcraft  at  Northampton  in  1674,  con-
fessed that  she  had  set  a  certain  grazier's  barns  on  fire,  and
there  is  much  reason  to  believe  her,  for  she  was  under  con-
siderable provocation."*  As  to  occult  or  super-normal  powers
and  practices,  we  may  leave  their  discussion  to  the  psycholo-
gists. With  regard  to  this  aspect  of  the  Salem  troubles,  we
must  accept,  as  substantially  in  accordance  with  the  facts,
the  words  of  Dr.  Poole:  "No  man  of  any  reputation  who
lived  in  that  generation,  and  saw  what  transpired  at  Salem
Village  and  its  vicinity,  doubted  that  there  was  some  in-
fluence then  exerted  which  could  not  be  explained  by  the
known  laws  of  matter  or  of  mind."  Even  Thomas  Brattle,
in  speaking  of  the  confessing  witches,  many  of  whom  he  says
he  has  "again  and  again  seen  and  heard,"  cannot  avoid  the
hypothesis  of  demoniacal  action.  They  are,  he  feels  certain,


CHAP.  XVIIl]


WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


359


"  deluded,  imposed  upon,  and  under  the  influence  of  some  evil
spirit;  and  therefore  unfit  to  be  evidences  either  against  them-
selves, or  any  one  else."  "°

One  common  misapprehension  to  which  the  historians  of
witchcraft  are  liable  comes  from  their  failure  to  perceive  that
the  immediate  responsibility  for  actual  prosecution  rests  fre-
quently, if  not  in  the  majority  of  instances,  on  the  rank  and
file  of  the  community  or  neighborhood.  This  remark  is  not
made  in  exculpation  of  prosecutors  and  judges,  —  for  my
purpose  in  this  discussion  is  not  to  extenuate  anybody's
offences  or  to  shift  the  blame  from  one  man's  shoulders  to
another's.  What  is  intended  is  simply  to  remind  the  reader  of
a  patent  and  well-attested  fact  which  is  too  often  overlooked
in  the  natural  tendency  of  historians  to  find  some  notable
personage  to  whom  their  propositions,  commendatory  or
damaging,  may  be  attached.  A  prosecution  for  witchcraft
presupposes  a  general  belief  among  the  common  people  in  the
reality  of  the  crime.  But  this  is  not  all.  It  presupposes  like-
wise the  existence  of  a  body  of  testimony,  consisting  of  the
talk  of  the  neighborhood,  usually  extending  back  over  a  con-
siderable stretch  of  years,  with  regard  to  certain  persons  who
have  the  reputation  of  being  witches,  cunning  men,  and  so
on.  It  also  presupposes  the  belief  of  the  neighborhood  that
various  strange  occurrences,  —  such  as  storms,  bad  crops,
plagues  of  grasshoppers  and  caterpillars,  loss  of  pigs  or  cattle,
cases  of  lunacy  or  hysteria  or  chorea  or  wasting  sickness,  —
are  due  to  the  malice  of  those  particular  suspects  and  their
unknown  confederates.  These  strange  occurrences,  be  it  re-
membered, are  not  the  fictions  of  a  superstitious  or  distem-
pered imagination:  they  are  —  most  of  them  —  things  that
have  really  taken  place;  they  are  the  res  gestae  of  the  prosecu-
tion, without  which  it  could  never  have  come  about,  or,  hav-
ing begun,  could  never  have  continued.  And  further,  in  very
many  instances  of  prosecution  for  witchcraft,  there  have  been,
among  the  accused,  persons  who  believed  themselves  to  be
witches,  ■ —  or  who  had,  at  any  rate,  pretended  to  extraordi-
nary powers  and  —  in  many  instances  —  had  either  used  their
uncanny  reputation  to  scare  their  enemies  or  to  get  money  by
treating  diseases  of  men  and  cattle.  And  finally,  the  habit
of  railing  and  brawling,  of  uttering  idle  but  malignant


360        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

threats,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  habit  of  applying  vile
epithets  —  including  that  of  "witch"  —  to  one's  neighbors
in  the  heat  of  anger  —  customs  far  more  prevalent  in  former
times  than  now  —  also  resulted  in  the  accumulation  of  a  mass
of  latent  or  potential  testimony  which  lay  stored  up  in
people's  memories  ready  to  become  kinetic  whenever  the
machinery  of  the  law  should  once  begin  to  move/"

Nobody  will  ask  for  evidence  that  railing  and  brawling
went  on  in  colonial  New  England,  that  our  forefathers  some-
times called  each  other  bad  names,  or  that  slander  was  a
common  offence.'"  That  suspicion  of  witchcraft  was  rife  in
various  neighborhoods  years  before  the  Salem  outbreak,  is
proved,  not  only  by  the  records  of  sporadic  cases  that  came
before  the  courts,'^^  but  by  some  of  the  evidence  in  the  Salem
prosecution  itself.

That  the  initial  responsibility  for  prosecution  usually
rested  with  the  neighborhood  or  community  might  further
be  shown  by  many  specific  pieces  of  testimony.  The  terrible
prosecution  in  Trier  toward  the  close  of  the  sixteenth  century
is  a  case  in  point.  "Since  it  was  commonly  believed,"  writes
Linden,  an  eyewitness,  "that  the  continued  failure  of  the
crops  for  many  years  was  caused  by  witches  and  wizards
through  diabolical  malice,  the  whole  country  rose  up  for  the
annihilation  of  the  witches."  To  like  purpose  are  the  words
of  the  admirable  Jesuit,  Friedrich  Spee,  in  the  closing  chapter
of  the  most  powerful  and  convincing  protest  against  witch-
trials  ever  written  —  that  chapter  which  the  author  begged
every  magistrate  in  Germany  to  mark  and  weigh,  whether  he
read  the  rest  of  the  book  or  not:  —  "  Incredible  are  the  super-
stition, the  envy,  the  slanders  and  backbitings,  the  whisper-
ings and  gossip  of  the  common  people  in  Germany,  which  are
neither  punished  by  magistrates  nor  reproved  by  preachers.
These  are  the  causes  that  first  rouse  suspicion  of  witchcraft.
All  the  punishments  of  divine  justice  with  which  God  has
threatened  men  in  the  Holy  Scriptures  are  held  to  come  from
witches.  God  and  nature  no  longer  do  anything,  —  witches,
everything.  Hence  it  is  that  all  demand,  with  violent  outcry,
that  the  magistracy  shall  proceed  against  the  witches,  whom
only  their  own  tongues  have  made  so  numerous."

As  for  England,  the  annals  of  witchcraft  are  full  of  in-


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


361


Stances  which  show  where  the  initial  responsibility  rests  in
particular  prosecutions.  Two  examples  will  serve  as  well  as
many.

Roger  North,  the  distinguished  lawyer,  who  was  at  Exeter
in  1682,  when  a  famous  witch-trial  occurred, gives  a  vivid
account  of  the  popular  excitement: —  "The  women  were
very  old,  decrepit,  and  impotent,  and  were  brought  to  the
assizes  with  as  much  noise  and  fury  of  the  rabble  against  them
as  could  be  shewed  on  any  occasion.  The  stories  of  their  acts
were  in  everyone's  mouth,  and  they  were  not  content  to  belie
them  in  the  country,  but  even  in  the  city  where  they  were  t6
be  tried  miracles  were  fathered  upon  them,  as  that  the  judges'
coach  was  fixed  upon  the  castle  bridge,  and  the  like.  All
which  the  country  believed,  and  accordingly  persecuted  the
wretched  old  creatures.  A  less  zeal  in  a  city  or  kingdom  hath
been  the  overture  of  defection  and  revolution,  and  if  these
women  had  been  acquitted,  it  was  thought  that  the  country
people  would  have  committed  some  disorder."

Our  second  example  is  a  very  notable  case,  which  occurred
in  1712,  —  that  of  Jane  Wenham,  the  last  witch  condemned
to  death  in  England.  Jane  Wenham  had  a  dispute  with  a
neighboring  farmer,  who  called  her  a  witch.  She  complained
to  the  local  magistrate.  Sir  Henry  Chauncy.  He  referred  the
dispute  to  the  parson  of  the  parish,  who,  after  hearing  both
sides,  admonished  the  wranglers  to  live  at  peace  and  sen-
tenced the  farmer  to  pay  Jane  a  shilling.  The  old  crone  was
not  pleased.  Shortly  after,  one  of  the  clergyman's  servants,  a
young  woman,  was  strangely  afflicted.  Jane  was  brought  to
trial.  Every  effort  seems  to  have  been  made  by  the  court  to
put  a  stop  to  the  affair,  but  the  local  feeling  was  so  strong,
and  the  witnesses  and  complainants  were  so  many  (including
the  clergymen  of  two  parishes)  that  nothing  could  be  done.
The  official  who  drew  up  the  indictment  endeavored  to  make
the  whole  affair  ridiculous  by  refusing  to  use  any  other  phra-
seology in  describing  the  alleged  crime  than  "  conversing  with
the  devil  in  the  form  of  a  cat."  But  the  well-meant  device
only  intensified  the  feeling  against  the  witch.  Mr.  Justice
Powell,  who  presided,  did  what  he  could  to  induce  the  jury
to  acquit,  but  in  vain.  They  brought  in  a  verdict  of  guilty,
and  he  was  obliged  to  pass  sentence  of  death.  He  suspended


362         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

the  execution  of  the  sentence,  however,  and  secured  the  royal
pardon,  —  to  the  intense  indignation  of  the  neighborhood.
Here  we  have  a  jury  of  the  vicinage,  accurately  reflecting  the
local  sentiment,  and  insisting  on  carrying  out  its  belief  in
withcraft  to  the  bitter  end,  despite  all  that  the  judge  could
do.'^'  It  is  well  to  note  that  the  clergymen  involved  in  the
prosecution  were  not  New  England  Puritans,  and  that  the
whole  affair  took  place  just  twenty  years  after  the  last  execu-
tion of  a  witch  in  Massachusetts.  Of  itself,  this  incident
might  suffice  to  silence  those  who  ascribe  the  Salem  outbreak
to  the  influence  of  certain  distinguished  men,  as  well  as  those
who  maintain  that  the  New  Englanders  were  more  super-
stitious than  their  fellow-citizens  at  home,  that  their  Puri-
tanism was  somehow  to  blame  for  it,  and  that  witchcraft  was
practically  dead  in  the  Mother  Country  when  the  Salem  out-
break took  place.

Yet  Thomas  Wright  —  never  to  be  mentioned  without
honor  —  speaks  of  the  New  England  troubles  as  "  exemplify-
ing the  horrors  and  the  absurdities  of  the  witchcraft  persecu-
tions more  than  anything  that  had  occurred  in  the  old
world,"  and  Dr.  G.  H.  Moore,  —  in  an  important  article
on  The  Bibliography  of  Witchcraft  in  Massachusetts  —
declares  that  the  Salem  outbreak  "was  the  epitome  of  witch-
craft! whose  ghastly  records  may  be  challenged  to  produce
any  parallel  for  it  in  the  world's  history!"  In  further
refutation  of  such  reckless  statements  I  need  add  but  a  single
instance.  In  1596  there  was  an  outbreak  of  some  pestilence
or  other  in  iVberdeen.  The  populace  ascribed  the  disease  to
the  machinations  of  a  family  long  suspected  of  witchcraft.
A  special  commission  was  appointed  by  the  Privy  Council,
"and  before  April,  1597,  twenty-three  women  and  one  man
had  been  burnt,  one  woman  had  died  under  the  torture,  one
had  hanged  herself  in  prison,  and  four  others  who  were  ac-
quitted on  the  capital  charge,  were  yet  branded  on  the  cheek
and  banished  from  the  sheriffdom."

^There  was  a  very  special  reason  why  troubles  with  the
powers  of  darkness  were  to  be  expected  in  New  England,  —
a  reason  which  does  not  hold  good  for  Great  Britain  or,  in-
deed, for  any  part  of  Western  Europe.  I  refer,  of  course,  to
the  presence  of  a  considerable  heathen  population  —  the


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


Indians.  These  were  universally  supposed  to  be  devil-wor-
shippers, —  not  only  by  the  Colonists  but  by  all  the  rest  of  the
world,  ■ —  for  paganism  was  held  to  be  nothing  but  Satanism.
Cotton  Mather  and  the  Jesuit  fathers  of  Canada  were  at  one
on  this  point. The  religious  ceremonies  of  the  Indians  were,
as  we  know,  in  large  part  an  invocation  of  spirits,  and  their
powwaws,  or  medicine  men,  supposed  themselves  to  be  wiz-
ards, —  were  wizards,  indeed,  so  far  as  sorcery  is  possible.
The  Colonial  government  showed  itself  singularly  moderate,
however,  in  its  attitude  toward  Indian  practices  of  a  magical
character.  Powwawing  was,  of  course,  forbidden  wherever
the  jurisdiction  of  the  white  men  held  sway,  but  it  was  pun-
ishable by  fine  only,  nor  was  there  any  idea  of  inflicting  the
extreme  penalty  —  although  the  offence  undoubtedly
came  under  the  Mosaic  law,  so  often  quoted  on  the  title-
pages  of  books  on  witchcraft,  "Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch
to  live."

The  existence  of  all  these  devil-worshipping  neighbors  was
a  constant  reminder  of  the  possibility  of  danger  from  witch-
craft. One  is  surprised,  therefore,  to  find  that  there  was  no
real  outbreak  until  so  late  in  the  century.  It  argues  an  un-
common degree  of  steadiness  and  common  sense  among  our
forefathers  that  they  held  off  the  explosion  so  long.  Yet  even
this  delay  has  been  made  to  count  against  them,  as  if,  by
1692,  they  ought  to  have  known  better,  even  if  they  might
have  been  excusable  some  years  before.  In  point  of  fact,  the
New  Englanders,  as  we  have  seen,  made  an  end  of  trying
witches  nearly  twenty  years  earlier  than  their  English  fellow-
citizens.  But  we  shall  come  back  to  this  question  of  dates
presently.

Much  has  been  written  of  the  stupendous  and  criminal
foolishness  of  our  ancestors  in  admitting  "spectral  evidence"
at  the  Salem  trials.  Nothing,  of  course,  can  be  said  in  defence
of  such  evidence  in  itself;  but  a  great  deal  might  be  said  in
defence  of  our  ancestors  on  this  score.  The  fact  is,  —  and  it
should  never  be  lost  sight  of,  —  there  was  nothing  strange  in
their  admitting  such  evidence.  It  was  a  matter  of  course  that
they  should  admit  it.  To  do  so,  indeed,  was  one  of  the  best
established  of  all  legal  principles.  Spectral  evidence  was  ad-
mitted, for  example,  in  England,  either  in  examinations  or  in


364        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

actual  trials,  in  1593,'^*  1612/^'  i6i6/''<>  1 621/41  1633/4^
1645/43  1650/44  1653/45  1654/4'^  1658/47  i66o/4»  1661/49
1663/5"  1664/5^  1665/5'  1667/53  1670/54  1672/55  1673/56
1680/57  1682/5^  1683. '59  Even  Chief  Justice  Holt,  whose
honorable  record  in  procuring  the  acquittal  of  every  witch  he
tried  is  well-known,  did  not  exclude  spectral  evidence:  it  was
offered  and  admitted  in  at  least  two  of  his  cases,  —  in  1695
and  1696,'^"  —  both  later  than  the  last  witch-trial  in  Massa-
chusetts. In  the  1697  edition  of  that  very  popular  manual,
Michael  Dal  ton's  Country  Justice,  spectral  evidence  ("Their
Apparition  to  the  Sick  Party  in  his  Fits")  is  expressly  men-
tioned as  one  of  the  proofs  of  witchcraft. What  may  fairly
be  called  spectral  evidence  was  admitted  by  Mr.  Justice
Powell,  anxious  as  he  was  to  have  the  defendant  acquitted,
in  the  trial  of  Jane  Wenham  in  171 2. The  question,  then,
was  not  whether  such  evidence  might  be  heard,  but  what
weight  was  to  be  attached  to  it.  Thus,  in  Sir  Matthew  Hale's
case,  Mr.  Serjeant  Keeling  was  "much  unsatisfied"  with  such
testimony,  affirming  that,  if  it  were  allowed  to  pass  for  proof,
"  no  person  whatsoever  can  be  in  safety."  He  did  not  aver
that  it  should  not  have  been  admitted,  but  only  protested
against  regarding  it  as  decisive,  and  in  the  end  he  seems  to
have  become  convinced  of  the  guilt  of  the  defendants. Jt  is,
therefore,  nothing  against  our  ancestors  that  they  heard  such
evidence,  for  they  were  simply  following  the  invariable  prac-
tice of  the  English  courts.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  much  to
their  credit  that  they  soon  began  to  suspect  it,  and  that,  hav-
ing taken  advice,  they  decided,  in  1693,  to  allow  it  no  further
weight.  We  may  emphasize  the  folly  of  spectral  evidence  as
much  as  we  like. '^5  Only  let  us  remember  that  in  so  doing  we
are  attacking,  not  New  England  in  1692,  but  Old  England
from  1593  to  171 2.  When,  on  the  other  hand,  we  distribute
compliments  to  those  who  refused  to  allow  such  evidence  to
constitute  full  proof,  let  us  not  forget  that  with  the  name  of
Chief  Justice  Holt  we  must  associate  those  of  certain  Massa-
chusetts worthies  whom  I  need  not  specify.  It  is  not  permis-
sible to  blame  our  ancestors  for  an  error  of  judgment  that
they  shared  with  everybody,  and  then  to  refuse  them  com-
mendation for  a  virtue  which  they  shared  with  a  very  few
wise  heads  in  England.  That  would  be  to  proceed  on  the


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  365

principle  of  "  heads  I  win,  tails  you  lose,"  —  a  method  much
followed  by  Matthew  Hopkins  and  his  kind,  but  of  doubtful
propriety  in  a  candid  investigation  of  the  past.  We  shall
never  keep  our  minds  clear  on  the  question  of  witchcraft  in
general,  and  of  the  Salem  witchcraft  in  particular,  until  we
stop  attacking  and  defending  individual  persons.

Sir  John  Holt,  Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench  from  1682
to  1710,  has  a  highly  honorable  name  in  the  annals  of  English
witchcraft.  A  dozen  or  twenty  cases  came  before  him,  and  in
every  instance  the  result  was  an  acquittal. Chief  Justice
Holt  deserves  all  the  credit  he  has  received;  but  it  must  be
carefully  noted  that  his  example  cannot  be  cited  to  the  shame
and  confusion  of  our  ancestors  in  Massachusetts,  for  most  of
his  cases,  —  all  but  one,  so  far  as  I  can  ascertain,  —  occurred
after  the  release  of  the  New  England  prisoners  and  the  aban-
donment of  the  prosecution  here.  As  to  that  single  case  of
acquittal,  we  must  not  forget  that  there  were  also  acquittals
in  Massachusetts,  —  in  1673,  1675,  1676,  1680,  and  1683.'^'
As  to  acquittals  in  England  ajter  1693,  let  it  be  remembered
that  there  were  no  trials  at  all  for  witchcraft  in  New  England
subsequent  to  that  year.  If  Chief  Justice  Holt  is  to  be  com-
mended for  procuring  the  acquittal  of  a  dozen  witches  be-
tween 1693  and  1702,  what  is  to  be  ascribed  to  our  fore-
fathers for  bringing  no  cases  to  trial  during  that  period?

The  most  remarkable  things  about  the  New  England
prosecution  were  the  rapid  return  of  the  community  to  its
habitually  sensible  frame  of  mind  and  the  frank  public  con-
fession of  error  made  by  many  of  those  who  had  been
implicated.  These  two  features,  and  especially  the  latter,
are  without  a  parallel  in  the  history  of  witchcraft.  It  seems
to  be  assumed  by  most  writers  that  recantation  and  an  ap-
peal to  heaven  for  pardon  were  the  least  that  could  have
been  expected  of  judge  and  jury.  In  fact,  as  I  have  just  ven-
tured to  suggest,  no  action  like  Samuel  Sewall's  on  the  part  of
a  judge  and  no  document  like  that  issued  by  the  repentant
Massachusetts  jurymen  have  yet  been  discovered  in  the  witch
records  of  the  world. ^''^

But  it  is  not  for  the  sake  of  lauding  their  penitential  exer-
cises that  I  lay  stress  upon  the  unexampled  character  of  our
forefathers'  action.  There  is  another  aspect  from  which  the


366         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

outcome  of  the  Salem  trials  ought  to  be  regarded.  They  fell
at  a  critical  moment,  when  witchcraft  was,  for  whatever  rea-
son, soon  to  become  a  crime  unknown  to  the  English  courts.
They  attracted  attention  instantly  in  the  Mother  Country.'*'
Can  there  be  any  question  that  the  sensational  recovery  of
the  Province  from  its  attack  of  prosecuting  zeal,  accompanied
as  that  recovery  was  by  retraction  and  by  utterances  of  deep
contrition,  had  a  profound  effect  in  England?  The  mere
dropping  of  the  prosecution  would  not  have  had  this  effect.
In  1 597,  James  I,  alarmed  at  the  extent  to  which  witch-trials
were  going  in  Scotland,  revoked  all  the  existing  special  com-
missions that  were  engaged  in  holding  trials  for  this  offence.'^"
But  the  evil  was  soon  worse  than  ever.  What  was  efficacious
in  the  New  England  instance  was  the  unheared-of  action  of
judge  and  jury  in  recanting.  This  made  the  Salem  troubles
the  best  argument  conceivable  in  the  hands  of  those  reform-
ers who,  soon  after  1700,  began  to  make  actual  headway  in
their  opposition  to  the  witch-dogma.

I  am  not  reasoning  a  priori .  By  common  consent  one  of  the
most  effective  arraignments  of  the  superstition  that  we  are
discussing  is  the  Historical  Essay  on  Witchcraft  of  Dr.
Francis  Hutchinson,  which  appeared  in  171 8  and  again  in
1720.  Now  Hutchinson,  who  gives  much  space  to  the  New
England  trials,  refers  to  Sewall's  action,  and  prints  the  re-
cantation of  the  jurors  in  full.  Nor  does  he  leave  us  in  doubt
as  to  the  purpose  for  which  he  adduces  these  testimonies.
"And  those  Towns,"  he  writes,  "having  regained  their
Quiet;  and  this  Case  being  of  that  Nature,  that  Facts  and
Experience  are  of  more  Weight  than  meer  rational  Argu-
ments, it  will  be  worth  our  while  to  observe  some  Passages
that  happened  after  this  Storm,  when  they  had  Time  to  look
back  on  what  had  passed."

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  these  considerations,  one  fact
cannot  be  assailed.  In  prosecuting  witches,  our  forefathers
acted  like  other  men  in  the  seventeenth  century.  In  repent-
ing and  making  public  confession,  they  acted  like  them-
selves. Their  fault  was  the  fault  of  their  time;  their  merit  is
their  own.

We  must  not  leave  this  subject  without  looking  into  the
question  of  numbers  and  dates.  The  history  of  the  Salem


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


Witchcraft  is,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  the  sum  total  of
witchcraft  history  in  the  whole  of  Massachusetts  for  a  cen-
tury. From  the  settlement  of  the  country,  of  course,  our
fathers  believed  in  witchcraft,  and  cases  came  before  the
courts  from  time  to  time,  but,  outside  of  the  outbreak  in
1692,  not  more  than  half-a-dozen  executions  can  be  shown  to
have  occurred.'''^  It  is  not  strange  that  there  should  have
been  witch-trials.  It  is  inconceivable  that  the  Colony  should
have  passed  through  its  first  century  without  some  special
outbreak  of  prosecution  —  inconceivable,  that  is  to  say,  to
one  who  knows  what  went  on  in  England  and  the  rest  of
Europe  during  that  time.  The  wonderful  thing  is,  not  that
an  outbreak  of  prosecution  occurred,  but  that  it  did  not  come
sooner  and  last  longer.

From  the  first  pranks  of  the  afflicted  children  in  Mr.
Parris's  house  (in  February,  1692)  to  the  collapse  of  the  pro-
secution in  January,  1693,  was  less  than  a  year.  During  the
interval  twenty  persons  had  suffered  death,  and  two  are
known  to  have  died  in  jail."^  If  to  these  we  add  the  six
sporadic  cases  that  occurred  in  Massachusetts  before  1692,
there  is  a  total  of  twenty-eight;  but  this  is  the  whole  reckon-
ing, not  merely  for  a  year  or  two  but  for  a  complete  century.
The  concentration  of  the  trouble  in  Massachusetts  within  the
limits  of  a  single  year  has  given  a  wrong  turn  to  the  thoughts
of  many  writers.  This  concentration  makes  the  case  more
conspicuous,  but  it  does  not  make  it  worse.  On  the  contrary,
it  makes  it  better.  It  is  astonishing  that  there  should  have
been  only  half-a-dozen  executions  for  witchcraft  in  Massa-
chusetts before  1692,  and  equally  astonishing  that  the  de-
lusion, when  it  became  acute,  should  have  raged  for  but  a
year,  and  that  but  twenty-two  persons  should  have  lost  their
lives.  The  facts  are  distinctly  creditable  to  our  ancestors,  —
to  their  moderation  and  to  the  rapidity  with  which  their  good
sense  could  reassert  itself  after  a  brief  eclipse.""

Let  us  compare  figures  a  little.  For  Massachusetts  the  ac-
count is  simple  -f-  twenty-eight  victims  in  a  century..  No  one
has  ever  made  an  accurate  count  of  the  executions  in  Eng-
land during  the  seventeenth  century,  but  they  must  have
mounted  into  the  hundreds. '''^  Matthew  Hopkins,  the  Witch-
finder  General,  brought  at  least  two  hundred  to  the  gallows


368         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

from  1645  1647.'^^  In  Scotland  the  number  of  victims  was
much  larger.  The  most  conscientiously  moderate  estimate
makes  out  a  total  of  at  least  3,400  between  the  years  1580
and  1680,  and  the  computer  declares  that  future  discoveries
in  the  way  of  records  may  force  us  to  increase  this  figure  very
much.'"  On  the  Continent  many  thousands  suffered  death
in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries.  Mannhardt
reckons  the  victims  from  the  fourteenth  to  the  seventeenth
century  at  millions/''^  and  half  a  million  is  thought  to  be  a
moderate  estimate.  In  Alsace,  a  hundred  and  thirty-four
witches  and  wizards  were  burned  in  1582  on  one  occasion,  the
execution  taking  place  on  the  15th,  19th,  24th,  and  28th  of
October. Nicholas  Remy  (Remigius)  of  Lorraine  gathered
the  materials  for  his  work  on  the  Worship  of  Demons,'^"  pub-
lished in  1595,  from  the  trials  of  some  900  persons  whom  he
had  sentenced  to  death  in  the  fifteen  years  preceding.  In
1609,  de  I'Ancre  and  his  associate  are  said  to  have  con-
demned 600  in  the  Basque  country  in  four  months.'*'  The
efforts  of  the  Bishop  of  Bamberg  from  1622  to  1633  resulted
in  six  hundred  executions;  the  Bishop  of  Wiirzburg,  in  about
the  same  period,  put  nine  hundred  persons  to  death. These
figures,  which  might  be  multiplied  almost  indefinitely,'*^
help  us  to  look  at  the  Salem  Witchcraft  in  its  true  propor-
tions, —  as  a  very  small  incident  in  the  history  of  a  terrible
superstition.

These  figures  may  perhaps  be  attacked  as  involving  a  fal-
lacious comparison,  inasmuch  as  we  have  not  attempted  to
make  the  relative  population  of  New  England  and  the  several
districts  referred  to  a  factor  in  the  equation.  Such  an  objec-
tion, if  anybody  should  see  fit  to  make  it,  is  easily  answered
by  other  figures.  The  total  number  of  victims  in  Massa-
chusetts from  the  first  settlement  to  the  end  of  the  seven-
teenth century  was,  as  we  have  seen,  twenty-eight,  —  or
thirty-four  for  the  whole  of  New  England.  Compare  the
following  figures,  taken  from  the  annals  of  Great  Britain  and
Scotland  alone.  In  161 2,  ten  witches  were  executed  belong-
ing to  a  single  district  of  Lancashire.'*"'  In  1645  twenty-nine
witches  were  condemned  at  once  in  a  single  Hundred  in
Essex,'*5  eighteen  were  hanged  at  once  at  Bury  in  Suffolk
"  and  a  hundred  and  twenty  more  were  to  have  been  tried,


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  369

but  a  sudden  movement  of  the  king's  troops  in  that  direction
obliged  the  judges  to  adjourn  the  session." Under  date  of
July  26,  1645,  Whitelocke  records  that  "20  Witches  in  Nor-
folk were  executed,"  and  again,  under  April  15,  1650,  that
"at  a  little  Village  within  two  Miles  [of  Berwick],  two  Men
and  three  Women  were  burnt  for  Witches,  and  nine  more
were  to  be  burnt,  the  Village  consisting  of  but  fourteen
Families,  and  there  were  as  many  Witches, "  and  further  that
"twenty  more  were  to  be  burnt  within  six  Miles  of  that
place."  If  we  pass  over  to  the  Continent,  the  numbers  are
appalling.  Whether,  then,  we  take  the  computation  in  gross
or  in  detail,  New  England  emerges  from  the  test  with  credit.

The  last  execution  for  witchcraft  in  Massachusetts  took
place  in  1692,^^^  as  we  have  seen;  indeed,  twenty  of  the  total
of  twenty-six  cases  fell  within  the  limits  of  that  one  year.
There  were  no  witch-trials  in  New  England  after  1693.  The
annals  of  Europe  are  not  so  clear.  Six  witches  were  burned  in
Renfrewshire  in  1697.^'°  In  England,  there  were  trials,  one
or  more,  in  almost  every  year  from  1694  to  1707,  though  al-
ways with  acquittal. Then,  in  171 2  Jane  Wenham  was
condemned  to  death  for  witchcraft,  but  she  was  pardoned.
Two  clergymen  of  the  Church  of  England,  as  well  as  a  Bache-
lor of  Arts  of  Cambridge,''^  gave  evidence  against  her.  Just
before  the  arrest  of  Jane  Wenham,  Addison  in  the  Spectator
for  July  II,  171 1,  had  expressed  the  creed  of  a  well-bred  and
sensible  man  of  the  world:  "  I  believe  in  general  that  there  is,
and  has  been  such  a  thing  as  Witch-craft;  but  at  the  same
time  can  give  no  Credit  to  any  particular  Instance  of  it."
Blackstone,  it  will  be  remembered,  subscribed  to  the  same
doctrine,  making  particular  reference  to  Addison.''^  The  last
witch-trial  in  England  was  apparently  Jane  Wenham's.  In
1717  three  cases  came  before  the  grand  jury  at  Leicester,
but  no  bill  was  found.^^''  Prompted,  one  may  conjecture,  by
the  stir  which  the  Wenham  trial  made,  the  Rev.  J.  Boys,  of
Coggeshall  Magna,  in  Essex,  transcribed,  in  this  same  year,
from  his  memoranda,  A  Brief  Account  of  the  Indisposition  of
the  Widow  Coman.  This  case  had  occurred  in  his  own  parish
in  1699,  and  he  had  given  it  careful  investigation.  Both  in
1699,  when  he  jotted  down  the  facts,  and  in  171 2,  Mr.  Boys
was  clearly  of  the  opinion  that  his  unfortunate  parishioner


370        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


was  a  witch.  His  narrative,  which  remained  in  manuscript
until  1901/^5  may  be  profitably  compared  with  Cotton
Mather's  account  of  his  visit  to  Margaret  Rule  in  iSg^-^^^
Such  a  comparison  will  not  work  to  the  disadvantage  of  the
New  England  divine.  Incidentally  it  may  be  mentioned  that
the  mob  "swam"  the  widow  Coman  several  times,  and  that
"soon  after,  whether  by  the  cold  she  got  in  the  water  or  by
some  other  means,  she  fell  very  ill,  and  dyed."  Let  it  not  be
forgotten  that  this  was  six  years  after  the  end  of  the  witch-
craft prosecutions  in  Massachusetts.  In  1705,  a  supposed
witch  was  murdered  by  a  mob  at  Pittenween  in  Scotland.'"
In  1730,  another  alleged  witch  succumbed  to  the  water
ordeal  in  Somersetshire. ''''  The  English  and  Scottish  statutes
against  witchcraft  were  repealed  in  1736,'"  but  in  that  same
year  Joseph  Juxon,  vicar,  preached  at  Twyford,  in  Leicester-
shire, a  Sermon  upon  Witchcraft,  occasioned  by  a  late  Illegal
Attempt  to  discover  Witches  by  Swimming,^""  and  in  1751
Ruth  Osborne,  a  reputed  witch,  was  murdered  by  a  mob  in
Hertfordshire.^"'  The  last  execution  for  witchcraft  in  Ger-
many took  place  in  1775.  In  Spain  the  last  witch  was  burned
in  178 1.  In  Switzerland  Anna  Goldi  was  beheaded  in  1782  for
bewitching  the  child  of  her  master,  a  physician.  In  Poland
two  women  were  burned  as  late  as  1793.^"^

That  the  belief  in  witchcraft  is  still  pervasive  among  the
peasantry  of  Europe,  and  to  a  considerable  extent  among  the
foreign-born  population  in  this  country,  is  a  matter  of  com-
mon knowledge. ^"^  Besides,  spiritualism  and  kindred  delu-
sions have  taken  over,  under  changed  names,  many  of  the
phenomena,  real  and  pretended,  which  would  have  been  ex-
plained as  due  to  witchcraft  in  days  gone  by.^*"*

Why  did  the  Salem  outbreak  occur?  Of  course  there  were
many  causes  —  some  of  which  have  already  suggested  them-
selves in  the  course  of  our  discussion.  But  one  fact  should  be
borne  in  mind  as  of  particular  importance.  The  belief  in
witchcraft,  as  we  have  already  had  occasion  to  remark,  was
a  constant  quantity;  but  outbreaks  of  prosecution  came,  in
England  —  and,  generally  speaking,  elsewhere  —  spasmodi-
cally, at  irregular  intervals.  If  we  look  at  Great  Britain  for  a
moment,  we  shall  see  that  such  outbreaks  are  likely  to  coin-
cide with  times  of  political  excitement  or  anxiety.  Thus  early


CHAP.  XVIIl]


WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS


in  Elizabeth's  reign,  when  everything  was  more  or  less  un-
settled, Bishop  Jewel,  whom  all  historians  delight  to  honor,
made  a  deliberate  and  avowed  digression,  in  a  sermon  before
the  queen,  in  order  to  warn  her  that  witchcraft  was  rampant
in  the  realm,  to  inform  her  (on  the  evidence  of  his  own  eyes)
that  her  subjects  were  being  injured  in  their  goods  and  their
health,  and  to  exhort  her  to  enforce  the  law.^^^  The  initial
zeal  of  James  I  in  the  prosecution  of  witches  stood  in  close
connection  with  the  trouble  he  was  having  with  his  turbu-
lent cousin  Francis  Bothwell.'"'^  The  operations  of  Matthew
Hopkins  (in  1645 -1647)  were  a  mere  accompaniment  to  the
tumult  of  the  Civil  War;  the  year  in  which  they  began  was
the  year  of  Laud's  execution  and  of  the  Battle  of  Naseby.
The  Restoration  was  followed  by  a  fresh  outbreak  of  witch-
prosecution,  —  mild  in  England,  though  far-reaching  in  its
consequences,  but  very  sharp  in  Scotland.

With  facts  like  these  in  view,  we  can  hardly  regard  it  as  an
accident  that  the  Salem  witchcraft  marks  a  time  when  the
Colony  was  just  emerging  from  a  political  struggle  that  had
threatened  its  very  existence.  For  several  years  men's  minds
had  been  on  the  rack.  The  nervous  condition  of  public  feel-
ing is  wonderfully  well  depicted  in  a  letter  written  in  1688  by
the  Rev.  Joshua  Moodey  in  Boston  to  Increase  Mather,  then
in  London  as  agent  of  the  Colony.  The  Colonists  are  much
pleased  by  the  favor  with  which  Mather  has  been  received,
but  they  distrust  court  promises.  They  are  alarmed  by  a  re-
port that  Mather  and  his  associates  have  suffered  "  a  great
slurr"  on  account  of  certain  over-zealous  actions.  Moodey
rejoices  in  the  death  of  Robert  Mason,  "one  of  the  worst  en-
emies that  you  &  I  &  Mr.  Morton  had  in  these  parts."  Then
there  are  the  Indians: — ^"The  cloud  looks  very  dark  &
black  upon  us,  &  wee  are  under  very  awfull  circumstances,
which  render  an  Indian  Warr  terrible  to  us."  The  Colonists
shudder  at  a  rumor  that  John  Palmer,  one  of  Andros's  Coun-
cil, is  to  come  over  as  Supreme  Judge,  and  know  not  how  to
reconcile  it  with  the  news  of  the  progress  their  affairs  have
been  making  with  the  King.  And  finally,  the  writer  gives  an
account  of  the  case  of  Goodwin's  afflicted  children,  which,  as
we  know,  was  a  kind  of  prologue  to  the  Salem  outbreak:  —
"Wee  have  a  very  strange  th[ing]  among  us,  which  we  know


372         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

not  what  to  make  of,  except  it  bee  Witchcraft,  as  we  think  it
must  needs  bee."  Clearly,  there  would  have  been  small
fear,  in  1692,  of  a  plot  on  Satan's  part  to  destroy  the  Pro-
vince, if  our  forefathers  had  not  recently  encountered  other
dangers  of  a  more  tangible  kind.

In  conclusion,  I  may  venture  to  sum  up,  in  the  form  of  a
number  of  brief  theses,  the  main  results  at  which  we  appear
to  have  arrived  in  our  discussion  of  witchcraft:  ^"^
"  ■^1.,  '  The  belief  in  witchcraft  is  the  common  heritage  of
humanity.  It  is  not  chargeable  to  any  particular  time,  or
race,  or  form  of  religion.

2.  Witchcraft  in  some  shape  or  other  is  still  credited  by  a
majority  of  the  human  race.

,-  3.  The  belief  in  witchcraft  was  practically  universal  in  the
seventeenth  century,  even  among  the  educated;  with  the
mass  of  the  people  it  was  absolutely  universal.

4.  To  believe  in  witchcraft  in  the  seventeenth  century  was
no  more  discreditable  to  a  man's  head  or  heart  than  it  was  to
believe  in  spontaneous  generation  or  to  be  ignorant  of  the
germ  theory  of  disease.

5.  The  position  of  the  seventeenth-century  believers  in
witchcraft  was  logically  and  theologically  stronger  than  that
of  the  few  persons  who  rejected  the  current  belief.

;  6.  The  impulse  to  put  a  witch  to  death  comes  from  the  in-
stinct of  self-preservation.  It  is  no  more  cruel  or  otherwise
blameworthy,  in  itself,  than  the  impulse  to  put  a  murderer
to  death.

7.  The  belief  in  witchcraft  manifests  itself,  not  in  steady
and  continuous  prosecution,  but  in  sudden  outbreaks  occur-
ring at  irregular  intervals.

8.  Such  outbreaks  are  not  symptoms  of  extraordinary
superstition  or  of  a  peculiarly  acute  state  of  unreason.  They
are  due,  like  other  panics,  to  a  perturbed  condition  of  the
public  mind.  Hence  they  are  likely  to  accompany,  or  to
follow,  crises  in  politics  or  religion.

9.  The  responsibility  for  any  witch-prosecution  rests  pri-
marily on  the  community  or  neighborhood  as  a  whole,  not  on
the  judge  or  the  jury.

10.  No  jury,  whether  in  a  witch-trial  or  in  any  other  case,
can  be  more  enlightened  than  the  general  run  of  the  vicinage.


CHAP,  xviii]     WITCHCRAFT  AND  THE  PURITANS  373

-  II.  Many  persons  who  have  been  executed  for  witchcraft
have  supposed  themselves  to  be  guilty  and  have  actually
been  guilty  in  intent.

12.  Practically  every  person  executed  for  witchcraft  be-
lieved in  the  reality  of  such  a  crime,  whether  he  supposed
himself  to  be  guilty  of  it  or  not.

13.  The  witch  beliefs  of  New  England  were  brought  over
from  the  Mother  Country  by  the  first  settlers.

1 4.  Spectral  evidence  had  been  admitted  in  the  examina-
tions and  trials  of  witches  in  England  for  a  hundred  years
before  the  Salem  prosecutions  took  place.

15.  Trials  for  witchcraft,  and  one  conviction  and  death
sentence,  occurred  in  England  after  they  had  come  to  an
end  in  Massachusetts,  and  executions  occurred  on  the  Con-
tinent a  hundred  years  later  than  that  time.

1 6.  Spectral  evidence  was  admitted  in  English  witch-trials
after  such  trials  had  ceased  in  Massachusetts.

17.  The  total  number  of  persons  executed  for  witchcraft
in  New  England  from  the  first  settlement  to  the  end  of  the
century  is  inconsiderable,  especially  in  view  of  what  was
going  on  in  Europe.

18.  The  public  repentance  and  recantation  of  judge  and
jury  in  Massachusetts  have  no  parallel  in  the  history  of
witchcraft.

19.  The  repentance  and  recantation  came  at  a  time  which
made  them  singularly  effective  arguments  in  the  hands  of  the
opponents  of  the  witch-dogma  in  England.

10.  The  record  of  New  England  in  the  matter  of  witch-
craft is  highly  creditable,  when  considered  as  a  whole  and
from  the  comparative  point  of  view.

21.  It  is  easy  to  be  wise  after  the  fact,  —  especially  when
the  fact  is  two  hundred  years  old.


NOTES


CHAPTER  I
A  Typical  Case

I.  Roger  North,  Autobiography,  ed.  Jessopp,  1887,  pp.  131-132.
1.  See  p.  334,  above.

3.  The  manuscript  is  now  numbered  24241.5.  The  examinations  are
divided  into  sections,  numbered  by  a  clerk,  and  the  sheets  are  now  bound
in  the  order  thus  indicated.  The  contents  of  the  manuscript  are  as  follows
(no  folio  numbers  in  the  original):  Leaf  la:  Alyce  Butler,  October  2,  1601
(§§  I,  2).  Leaf  lb:  blank.  Leaf  2a:  Johan  Baddaford,  October  2,  1601
(§§ 3)  4)  5  begins).  Leaf  2b:  Johan  Baddaford  concluded  (§  5  ends);  William
Tompson  (§6)  and  Elizabeth,  his  wife  (§7),  October  2,  1601.  Leaf  3a:
Christian  Webbar,  October  2,  1601  (§§  8,  9);  Christofer  Honywell,  October
2,  1601  (§  10).  Leaf  3b:  blank.  Leaf  4a:  Johan  Davye,  January  20,  1601
(i.e.  1602)  (§  10  [i^z'j]).  Leaf  4b:  blank.  Leaf  5a:  William  Cozen,  October
2,  1601  (§§  II,  12);  Suzan  Tooker,  October,  1601  (§§  13,  14,  15  begins).
Leaf  5b:  Suzan  Tooker  concluded  (§  15  ends,  §  16).  Leaf  6a:  Johan
Laishe,  October  2,  1601  (§  17).  Leaf  6b:  blank.  (The  lower  half  of  leaf  6
has  been  torn  off  and  is  lost.  It  must  have  contained  another  examination
[§  18].  Johan  Laishe's  examination  is  complete.)  Leaf  7a:  John  Denman,
before  Ridgeway,  March  13,  1601  (I.  e.  1602)  (§  19).  Leaf  7b:  blank.
Leaf  8a:  John  Denman,  before  Ridgeway,  March  13,  43  Elizabeth  (i.  e.
1602)  (§  20),  duplicate  of  §  19.  Leaf  8b:  blank.  Leaf  9a:  John  Galsworthie,
April  8,  1602  (§  33).  Leaf  9b:  blank.  Leaf  loa:  Alice  Buttler,  October  2,
1601  (§  36),  duplicate  of  §§  i,  2.  Leaf  lob:  blank.  Leaf  i  la:  Johan  Badda-
ford, October  2,  1601  (§37),  duplicate  of  §§3-5.  Leaf  iib:  blank.  Leaf
I2a:  William  Tompson  and  Elizabeth,  his  wife,  October  2,  1601  (§§38,
39),  duplicate  of  §§6,7.  Leaf  12b:  blank.  Leaf  13a:  Christian  Webbar,
October  2,  1601  (§  41),  duplicate  of  §§  8,  9.  Leaf  13b:  blank.  Leaf  14a:
Johan  Davye,  October  2,  1601  (§45),  duplicate  of  §  10  [^/j].  Leaf  14b:
blank.  Leaf  15a:  John  Denman,  before  Henry  Hayward,  October  2,  1601
(see  below)  (§46),  duplicate  of  §  19  and  §  20;  Suzan  Turke,  October  2,
1601  (§  47),  duplicate  of  §§  13-16  (there  called  Suzan  Tooker).  Leaf  15b:
blank.  Leaf  i6a:  Christofer  Honywell,  October  2,  1601  (§48),  duplicate
of  §10.

Thus  it  appears  that  there  are  duplicates  of  all  the  examinations  but
three  (William  Cozen,  Johan  Laishe,  and  John  Galsworthie),  and  that
John  Denman's  testimony  appears  thrice.  Denman  appears  to  have  been
first  examined  before  Henry  Hayward,  mayor  of  Dartmouth.  This  exami-
nation is  found  on  leaf  15a  (§  46).  It  is  headed  "Thexaminacon  of  John
Denman  of  Kingsweare  taken  before  Sr.  'Thomas  Ridgwaie  Knight  the
second  daye  of  October,  1601.  et  Ao  R  Rne  Eliz  etc.  xliijmo."  But  the
words  here  italicized  are  crossed  out,  and  another  hand  has  interlined


376         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


"Henry  Heyward  Mayor  of  Dartmth."  Since  "the  second"  is  included  in
the  cancellation,  the  date  is  left  doubtful.  Ridgeway  does  not  sign  §  46,
though  his  signature  is  appended  to  §  47  (Suzan  Turke's  examination),
which  follows  on  the  same  page.  Denman  was  reexamined,  this  time  be-
fore Ridgeway,  on  March  13,  1601  (i.  e.  1602),  and  of  this  examination  we
have  two  copies,  both  signed  by  Ridgeway,  one  on  leaf  7a  (§  19),  the  other
on  leaf  8a  (§  20).  There  are  slight  variations  among  the  three  copies,  and
this  is  true  of  the  duplicates  in  the  case  of  the  other  witnesses.

The  examinations  are  in  two  clerkly  hands.  One  clerk  wrote  §  20  (Den-
man's  examination,  March  13,  1602)  and  §  33  (Galsworthie's  examination,
April  8,  1602).  Another  clerk  wrote  all  the  other  examinations.  All  are
dated  October  2,  1601,  except  §  10  [^/.f]  (Johan  Davye,  January  20,  1601
Zi.e.  16023),  and  the  two  just  noted  (§§  20,  33,  Denman  and  Galsworthie).
Johan  Davye's  duplicate  (§  45)  is  dated  October  2,  1601,  though  the  other
copy  (§  loCi^'/j])  bears  date  January  20,  1601  [1602].

That  several  examinations  are  lost  is  shown  by  the  torn  leaf  (6),  on  the
lower  half  of  which  must  have  stood  §  18  (missing  in  the  numbering),  and
also  by  the  fact  that  there  are  no  §§  21-32,  34-35,  40,  42-44.  Some  of  these
missing  sections,  however,  undoubtedly  contained  duplicates.

4.  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches  in  the  Countie  of  Lan-
caster, 1 613.

5.  Chaucer,  Troilus,  v,  505.  Cf.  iii,  890;  v,  1174.

6.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1667-1668,  p.  4.

7.  Thomas  Heywood,  TwaLKeiov  or  Nine  Bookes  of  Various  History
concerning  Women,  1624,  pp.  414-415.  Cf.  pp.  i52fF.,  above.

8.  Grundtvig,  Danmarks  Gamle  Folkeviser,  No.  28,  I,  374.  Since  my
version  is  a  trifle  free,  I  subjoin  the  original  stanza  (28):

Ded  ware  denn  for-gyldene  snecke,

der  hand  den  liud  feck:

hun  seigled  i  sender  di  acker-strenge  nie,

och  hun  thill  Ranelld  geek.

Wer  du  well-kommen!  sagde  Ranild.

9.  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  S.

CHAPTER  II

English  Witchcraft  Before  1558

1.  G.  L.  Burr,  The  Literature  of  Witchcraft,  reprinted  from  the  Papers
of  the  American  Historical  Association,  New  York,  1890,  p.  238  (38).  Cf.
the  same  scholar's  Preface  to  his  Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft  Cases  1648-
1706,  1914,  pp.  xv-xvi,  xvii,  note.  For  a  discussion  of  Jewel  and  his  as-
sumed influence  see  Chapter  XVI.

2.  Joseph  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  Inquisition  und  Hexenprozess  im  Mit-
telalter  und  die  Entstehung  der  Grossen  Hexenverfolgung,  1900,  p.  35.  On
nmleficium  see  especially  Hansen,  pp.  9-14.  Nothing  could  be  truer  than
his  words:  "  Wie  viel  auch  immer  im  Laufe  der  Zeit  in  den  Begrifi^ der  Zau-
berei  und  Hexerei  hineingetragen  worden  ist,  so  ist  doch  sein  Kern  stets  das


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


377


Maleficium  geblieben.  Aus  dieser  Vorstellung  erwachst  die  angstvolle
Furcht  der  Menschen  und  das  Verlangen  nach  gesetzlichem  Schutze  und
blutig  strenger  Strafe;  von  ihr  hat  die  strafrechtliche  Behandlung  dieses
Wahns  ihren  Ausgang  genommen"  (p.  9).  "Das  Maleficium,  mit  Aus-
nahme  des  Wettermachens,  ist  ohne  alle  Unterbrechung  von  der  kirch-
lichen  und  bis  in  das  17.  Jahrhundert  auch  von  der  staatlichen  Autoritat
als  Realitat  angenommen,  seine  Kraft  ist  nie  ernstlich  in  Abrede  gestellt
worden;  es  bildet  den  roten  Faden  auch  durch  die  Geschichte  der  straf-
rechtHchen  Verfolgung"  (pp.  13-14).  Everybody  knows  that  the  most
convincing  evidence  of  witchcraft  —  short  of  confession  or  of  denunciation
by  a  confederate  —  was  held  to  be  threats  followed  by  injury,  the  damnum
minatutn  and  the  malum  secutum.  The  difference  between  England  and  the
Continent  in  the  development  of  the  witchcraft  idea  and  in  the  history  of
prosecution  is  recognized  by  Hansen  (p.  34),  whose  treatment  of  the  whole
subject  is  limited  to  Continental  matters.  President  White  in  his  Warfare
of  Science  with  Theology,  1896, 1,  350  fF.,  also  has  his  eye  primarily  on  the
Continent,  like  Professor  Burr  in  The  Literature  of  Witchcraft  (note  i,
above).  ■  .  -  /

3.  See  Chapter  XVI.  ^  J  ^|

4.  Scot,  Dedication,  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  xiii-xiv.  Cf.  xi,  15,  pp.  203-205
(147-149),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  164-165;  xvi,  2,  pp.  471-472  (340),  ed.
Nicholson,  p.  397;  xvi,  6,  p.  483  (348),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  406.  He  thinks
that  he  has  so  thoroughly  refuted  the  writers  on  witchcraft  that  "  they  must
coine  new  stuffe,  or  go  to  their  grandams  maids  to  learne  more  old  wives
tales,  whereof  this  art  of  witchcraft  i.s  contrived"  (xvi,  i,  p.  470  [339],  ed.
Nicholson,  p.  396).  He  looks  backward  to  Catholic  times  for  the  English
witch-creed,  for  it  never  occurs  to  him  that  it  came  in  with  the  Marian
exiles!  See  i,  8;  ii,  10;  vii,  15;  xv,  39;  pp.  16  (11),  35  (24),  152-153  (112-
113),  462  (333),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  13,  27,  123,  389.  He  testifies  that  pro-
fessing witches  abound,  some  of  whom  believe  in  their  own  powers.  See  i,
3,  and  iii,  9,  pp.  7-9  (5-6),  52-53  (43),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  5-7,  41.  Cf.  i,  2,
and  xv,  i,  pp.  4  (3),  376-377  (265-266),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  3,  313.  See  also
Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark,  1656,  p.  169:  "Old  Wives  Fables,  who  sit  talk-
ing and  chatting  of  many  false  old  Stories  of  Witches,  and  Fairies,  and
Robin  Good-fellow,  and  walking  Spirits,  and  the  Dead  walking  again;  all
which  lying  fancies  people  are  more  naturally  inclined  to  listen  after  than
to  the  Scriptures."  Cf.  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,
pp.  1 1 ,  23-25,  75.  A  typical  example  may  be  seen  in  Bacon's  letter  of  May
15,  1 61 9,  in  which  he  asks  Sir  Thomas  Leigh  and  Sir  Thomas  Puckering  to
investigate  a  case:  "  Being  informed  by  the  petition  of  Mr.  Thomas  Porten,
a  poor  Yorkshireman,  of  a  heavy  accident  by  fire,  whereby  his  house,  his
wife,  and  a  child,  together  with  all  his  goods,  were  utterly  burnt  and  con-
sumed, which  misfortune  the  petitioner  suggests  (with  much  eagerness)
was  occasioned  by  the  wicked  practices  and  conjurations  of  one  John
Clarkson  .  .  .  and  his  daughter  (persons  of  a  wandering  condition);  affirm-
ing, for  instance,  that  one  Mr.  Hailes  of  Warwick  did  take  from  the  said
Clarkson  certain  books  of  conjuration  and  witchcraft,"  etc.  (Life  and  Let-
ters, ed.  Spedding,  VII,  30-31).  For  an  admirable  study  of  the  attitude  of


378


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


the  folk  toward  all  varieties  of  witchcraft  see  U.  Jahn,  Baltische  Studien,
XXXVI  (1886),  171-207.

5.  Gaule,  Select  Cases  of  Conscience  touching  Witches  and  Witchcrafts,
1646,  pp.  85-86.

6.  Toland,  Letters  to  Serena,  1704,  Letter  I,  The  Origin  and  Force  of
Prejudices,  pp.  4-5.

7.  "  II  est  rare  que,  dans  chaque  village,  on  n'accuse  pas  quelque  vieille
femme  bien  laide  d'etre  mpa?no  vavy;  c'est  elle  qui  cause  tous  les  malheurs
et  toutes  les  maladies;  elle  est  crainte  et  detestee,  les  enfants  fuient  a  son
approche  et  les  grandes  personnes  ne  I'abordent  qu'avec  terreur.  Elle  est
I'objet  de  toutes  les  haines,  mais  personne  n'ose  le  lui  faire  sentir,  par
crainte  des  ses  represailles"  (Benevent,  Etude  sur  le  Boueni,  Colonie  de
Madagascar,  Notes,  Reconnaissances  et  Explorations,  Revue  Mensuelle,
1st  Year,  1897,  II,  56).

8.  "Diesen  abarosi  .  .  .  genannten  Hexen  und  Schwartzkiinstlern  wird
zunachst  die  Schuld  zugeschoben,  wenn  ein  Mensch  erkrankt  oder  stirbt,
wenn  Unwetter  die  Felder  verwiistet,  wenn  Vieh  verungluckt  oder  von
Seuchen  befallen  wird,  wenn  Weiber  unfruchtbar  bleiben.  Kinder  miss-
raten,  Diebstahle  vorkommen  usw. "   (Hans  Meyer,  Die  Barundi,  1916,

9.  For  the  virus  lunare  see  Lucan,  Pharsalia,  vi,  669,  which  Steevens
quotes  to  illustrate  the  "vaporous  drop  profound"  in  Macbeth,  iii,  5.

10.  "Suivant  les  circonstances,  indifferemment,  il  [le  sorcier]  opere
pour  le  bien  ou  pour  le  mal,  il  guerit,  il  soulage,  il  seme  I'esperance,  dis-
pense le  dictame  de  la  consolation,  il  donne  I'amour,  et  le  rompt,  lie  les
forces  de  la  generation,  infuse  I'amitie,  la  modifie  ou  la  developpe,  des-
seche  les  adversaires  en  leur  inculquant  des  langueurs  ou  des  maux;  il  de-
prave les  uns,  rend  complices  les  autres,  influe  sur  les  gens,  les  betes,  les
choses  et  les  elements  en  les  mettant  a  son  service.  II  fait  descendre  la  lune
■ecumante  dans  les  herbes,  remplit  de  mirages  I'air  et  la  terre,  de  fantomes
la  nuit;  il  suggere,  illusionne,  il  cree  les  factices  merveilles"  (Mauchamp,
La  Sorcellerie  au  Maroc,  pp.  201-202).  Cf.  van  der  Burgt,  Un  Grand
Peuplade  de  I'Afrique  Equatoriale,  1904,  p.  55;  Claridge,  Wild  Bush  Tribes
of  Tropical  Africa,  1922,  pp.  170-185;  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of
Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  421-422;  Sir  J.  M.  Campbell,  The  Indian  Anti-
quary, XXIX  (1900),  46-56.

1 1.  Perkins,  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,  1608,  p.  128.
Cf.  Orchard,  The  Doctrine  of  Devils,  1676,  pp.  53,  63;  Nider,  Formicarius,
v,  3,  ed.  1 5 17  (15 1 6),  fol.  Ixxiii  v°;  Ulrich  Molitoris,  De  Lamiis  et  Phi-
thonicis  Mulieribus,  1489.

12.  Tallqvist,  Die  Assyrische  Beschworungsserie  Maqlij,  I,  15-19,  and
passim.  Cf.  Pike,  History  of  Crime  in  England,  I,  33-34;  Reitzenstein,
Hellenistische  Wundererzahlungen,  1906,  p.  83.

13.  See  Brie,  Englischen  Studien,  XLI  (1910),  20-27.

14.  Council  of  Clovesho  (a.d.  747),  canon  3  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  Coun-
cils, III  [1871],  363-364):  "prohibens  et  inter  caetera  peccamina  paganas
observationes,  id  est,  divinos,  sortileges,  auguria,  auspicia,  fylacteria,  in-
cantationes,  sive  omnes  spurcitias  impiorum  gentiliumque  errata."  On  the


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


379


whole  matter  of  Anglo-Saxon  witchcraft  and  magic  see  the  extensive  col-
lections of  Jente,  Die  Mythologischen  Ausdriicke  im  Altenglischen  Wort-
schatz  (Anglistische  Forschungen,  ed.  Hoops,  LVI),  1921,  pp.  235-271
("Los  und  Weissagung"),  272-338  ("Zauber").

15.  Laws  of  Alfred,  Introduction,  §  30:  "gealdorcrseftigan  and  scinlaecan
and  wiccan  "  (Liebermann,  Die  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  1, 38-39;  Thorpe,
Ancient  Laws,  folio,  1840,  p.  23).  The  word  wiccan  undoubtedly  includes
both  genders,  as  is  often  true  of  "witch"  in  later  English.

16.  Edward  and  Guthrum,  §  11  (Liebermann,  I,  134;  Thorpe,  p.  74):
"wiccan  oSSe  wigleras,  mansworan  oS6e  mor'5wyrhtan  0(5"5e  .  .  .  horcwe-
nan."  The  Quadripartitus  (ca.  11 14)  translates  by  "sortilege  ue!  incanta-
trices,  periuri  et  uenefici  uel  mortem  facientes,  .  .  .  meretrices"  (Lieber-
mann, I,  135).

17.  /Ethelred,  vi,  7:  "wiccan  o'5'5e  wigeleras,  scincrseftcan  o'S'Se  horcwe-
nan, morSwyrhtan o'5"5e mansworan"  (Liebermann,  I,  248; Thorpe,  p.  135).
The  eleventh-century  paraphrase  reads,  "  incantatores  autem,  magos,
phithonicos  et  ueneficos  necne  idolorum  cultores"  (Liebermann,  I,  249).
In  its  version  of  ^Ethelred,  vi,  28  (a  clause  which  does  not  mention  witch-
craft, unless  this  is  included  under  the  general  terms  morSweorcum  and
swiccrceftan),  the  same  paraphrase  specifies  necroinantiQ,  sortikgia,  idola-
tri^,  maleficia^  and  iieneficia  (Liebermann,  I,  254-255).

18.  For  scin,  scincrceft,  scinlceca,  etc.,  see  Jente,  pp.  155-161.

19.  Cnut,  ii,  4a:  "wiccean  o'Stie  wigleras,  mor"5wyrhtan  o"5"5e  horcwe-
nan"  (Liebermann,  I,  310;  Thorpe,  p.  162).  The  Latin  versions  (Lieber-
mann, I,  311)  have:  "sage  uel  incantatrices,  ueneficg  aut  murdri  operarii
uel  meretrices"  (Quadripartitus,  ca.  1114);  "incantatores  et  incantatrices
et  malefici  aut  .  .  .  meretrices"  (Instituta  Cnuti,  ca.  iioo);  "uenefici  aut
magi  uel  latrones  homicide  siue  meretrices"  (Consiliatio  Cnuti,  ca.  1125).
Cnut,  i,  5  (Liebermann,  I,  284;  Thorpe,  p.  155),  speaks  of  a  priest's  being
accused  of  "evil  arts"  {uncrceftum),  which  suggests  black  magic.  Here  the
Instituta  has  "de  latrocinio  aut  de  incantatione  uel  de  huiusmodi  re";  the
Consiliatio,  simply  "calumpnia  et  uicio."

20.  For  this  clause  utilized  by  preachers  see  anonymous  homilies  in
Napier's  Wulfstan,  1883,  pp.  114-115,  309;  cf.  pp.  26-27  (genuine  Wulf-
stan),  203-204,  298  (cf.  Brotanek,  Texte  und  Untersuchungen,  1913,  pp.
51-52).  See  Liebermann,  III,  175,  202.

21.  Edmund,  i,  6  (Synod  of  London) :  "  Sa  (5e  .  . .  liblac  wyrcaS"  (Lieber-
mann, I,  186;  cf.  Ill,  124,  §  9a;  Thorpe,  p.  105).  A  homilist  exhorts  us
to  beware  of  liblacas  and  attorcrcejtas  (Napier,  Wulfstan,  p.  290;  cf.  pp.  135,
253)-

22.  Blickling  Homilies,  ed.  Morris,  1880,  p.  61:  "}?a  scinlaecan  l^a  \&
galdorcrseftas  and  gedwolan  beganga}?,  and  mid  }?aem  unwaere  men  be-
swicajj  and  adwella]?,  and  hi  awenia)?  from  Godes  gemynde  mid  heora  scin-
lacum  and  gedwolcrseftum."  Cf.  p.  63:  "J^aem  mannum  Jje  gedwolcrseftas
begangajj."  See  a  similar  passage  in  Jilfric's  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  II
(1846),  330;  in  the  same  (II,  592),  drycraeft  and  wiccecraeft  are  included  in  a
list  of  chief  sins  (cf.  Napier's  Wulfstan,  pp.  135,  253,  290).


38o


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


23.  De  Antichristo  (Napier's  Wulfstan,  p.  194).  This  Anglo-Saxon
homily  is  in  the  main  translated  from  the  Libellus  de  Antichristo  written
before  954  by  Adso,  afterwards  Abbot  of  Montier-en-Der.  For  the  present
passage  (cf.  2  Thessalonians,  ii,  9-10;  Matthew,  xxiv,  24)  see  the  Libellus
in  Migne,  XL,  1132;  CI,  1293;  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,  X,  267.  Cf.  Pseudo-
Bede,  Sibyllinorum  Verborum  Interpretatio,  Migne,  XC,  1185;  Hincmar,
De  Praedestinatione  II,  cap.  27,  Opera,  1645,  I>  ^^5  (Migne,  CXXV,  280).
See  also  St.  Augustine  on  Psalm  IX,  cap.  24  (Opera,  IV  [1835],  78),  and
De  Civitate  Dei,  xx,  20  (VI  [1838],  960);  Bede,  Explanatio  Apocalypsis,  ii,
13  (Migne,  XCIII,  169).  On  Adso's  tract  (which  has  been  wrongly  as-
cribed to  Alcuin  and  Rabanus  Maurus)  see  von  Zezschwitz,  Vom  Romi-
schen  Kaisertum,  1877,  pp.  36-43,  155;  W.  Meyer,  Der  Ludus  de  Anti-
christo, 1882,  pp.  3-4;  Preuss,  Die  Vorstellungen  vom  Antichrist,  1906,  pp.
17,  277.  On  Antichrist's  magical  education,  etc.,  see  Malvenda,  De  Anti-
christo, 1604,  ii,  22,  pp.  105-106;  V,  5,  p.  249;  vi,  4,  pp.  319-320;  vii,  20,
pp.  392-393.  Adso's  Libellus  is  also  the  source  of  the  account  of  Antichrist
in  The  Prick  of  Conscience,  vv.  4047-4622,  ed.  Morris,  1863,  pp.  1 10-126
(for  his  education  by  witches  and  magicians  see  vv.  4211-4216);  also  of
that  in  the  Cursor  Mundi,vv.  21971-22426,  ed.  Morris,  pp.  1256-1283  (see
vv.  221 1 1-221 16).

24.  See  Chapter  XV,  note  21.

25.  Excommunicatio  V,  §  2  (Liebermann,  I,  435):  maleficium.

26.  Ritual  II,  §  4  (ninth  or  tenth  century),  Liebermann,  I,  407  ("aut
per  herbas  uel  quaecunque  temptamenta  siue  molimina  maleficiosa");
Ritual  IV,  §  4  (ninth  century),  I,  410-41 1  ("per  aliquid  maleficium  aut  per
herbas  maleficas  et  diabolicas";  ""Serb  hvoelc  yfelwoerc  o'6(5e  "6erh  wyrto
yfelwyrcendo  and  diovblica");  Ritual  XII,  §§  17,  19  (eleventh  or  twelfth
century),  I,  421  ("per  aliqua  maleficia  aut  per  herbas  diabolica  arte  in-
fectas";  "per  aliquod  maleficium  aut  per  herbas  terre").

27.  Good  King  Josiah,  /Elfric  tells  us  (Lives  of  Saints,  xviii,  461-465,
ed.  Skeat,  I,  41 2-413),  forsook  heathenism  "and  destroyed  the  wiccan  and
drove  out  the  wigleras  and  cast  down  drycrcejt"  (see  2  Kings,  xxiii,  24).

28.  Cnut,  ii,  5  (Liebermann,  I,  312;  Thorpe,  p.  162).  For  well-worship
and  witchcraft  at  springs  see  pp.  33-34,  above.

29.  Canons  of  Edgar,  §  16  (Thorpe,  p.  396).  See  Liebermann,  I,  313;
11,742,  s.  V.  Zauber,  §  la.  The  canon  mentions  well-worship,  stone-wor-
ship, necromancy  {licwighmga),  sortilege  {hwata),  spells  {galdra),  etc.  One
manuscript  (Thorpe,  p.  396,  note  5)  mentions  also  the  passing  of  a  child
through  the  earth  (see  p.  31,  above).

30.  Liebermann,  II,  503,  s.  v.  Heidentiim,  §  ii;  II,  587,  s.  v.  Mord,  §  4a.

31.  Laws  of  the  Northumbrian  Priests,  §48  (Liebermann,  I,  383;
Thorpe,  p.  419);  cf.  §  54  for  wells,  trees,  and  stones.

32.  See  references  in  York  Powell's  Introduction  to  Elton's  Saxo,  1894,
pp.  Ixxvii-lxxx.  For  evidence  from  the  sagas  see  The  Antiquary,  XLII
(1906),  106-110;  Folk-Lore,  XVII  (1906),  421-426.

33.  See  Liebermann,  II,  587,  s.  v.  Mord,  §§  3b-4b.  Cf.  Cnut,  ii,  56
(Liebermann,  I,  348;  Thorpe,  p.  175,  §  57),  with  Leges  Henrici,  Ixxi,  i-ia


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


381


(Liebermann,  I,  590;  Thorpe,  p.  251).  Modern  cases  of  death  ascribed  to
witchcraft  may  be  noted  from  Lincolnshire  ca.  1850  (Lincolnshire  Notes
and  Queries,  II  [1891],  233),  Devonshire  in  1875  (Transactions  Devonshire
Association,  VII  X1875],  261;  The  Rehquary,  XVIII  [1877-78],  146),
Somerset  in  1883  and  1887  (Elworthy,  The  West  Somerset  Word-Book,
p.  548),  Suffolk  in  1890  (Folk-Lore,  VI  [1895],  119),  and  Yorkshire  in  1904
(Folk-Lore,  XV  [1904],  463-464).

34.  /Ethelstan,  ii,  6:  "be  ]>a.m  wiccecrseftum  ond  be  liblacum  ond  be
morSdaedum,  gif  mon  Jjser  acweald  Wcere,"  etc.  (Liebermann,  I,  152-155;
Thorpe,  p.  86,  i,  6).

35.  Modus  Imponendi  Poenitentiam,  §37  (Thorpe,  p.  409):  "Gif  hwa
oSerne  mid  wiccecrsefte  fordo,  f^ste  .vii.  gear."  Cf.  Pseudo-Theodore,
xxvii,  9  (Thorpe,  p.  292);  Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  i  (Schmitz,  II,  626).
On  Cummean  see  Zettinger,  Archiv  fiir  Katholisches  Kirchenrecht,
LXXXII  (1902),  501-540.

36.  The  Anglo-Saxon  Confessional  of  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  §  29  (Thorpe,
p.  355),  after  prescribing  (a)  the  graduated  penance  to  be  undergone  by  a
woman  who  practises  "drycrseft  and  galdor  and  unlibban,"  goes  on  to  im-
pose (^)  seven  years'  penance  if  she  kills  anybody  "mid  hire  unlybban."
The  first  part  of  this  (a)  agrees  with  Theodore  as  represented  by  Discipulus
Umbrensium,  i,  15,  4  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  Councils,  III,  190;  Schmitz,  II,
556),  with  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  ii,  30,  2  (Schmitz,  II,  694),  and  with
Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  12  (Schmitz,  II,  627);  cf.  Schmitz,  II,  237,  496.
Both  parts  (a  and  ^)  are  found  in  Excarpsus  Ecgberti,  vii,  6-7  (Haddan
and  Stubbs,  III,  424;  Schmitz,  II,  667),  in  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  ii,  15,  3
(Schmitz,  II,  690-691),  and  (separated)  in  Pseudo-Theodore  (xxvii,  13,
and  xxi,  6,  Thorpe,  pp.  292,  288),  which  explain  arte  sua  malefica  (the
cause  of  death)  by  "id  est  per  poculum  aut  per  artem  aliquam."

37.  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Penitential,  iv,  16  (Thorpe,  p.  379),
agreeing  almost  word  for  word  with  Modus  Imponendi  Poenitentiam,  §  37
(Thorpe,  p.  409).  See  note  35,  above.

38.  The  origin  and  history  of  these  penitentials  need. not  here  detain  us.
Whether  they  developed  from  Celtic  and  Anglo-Saxon  usage  or  otherwise,
they  were  certainly  well-known  in  England  long  before  the  Norman  Con-
quest. See  also  penitentials  in  Schmitz,  I,  307,  378,  413,  429-430,  683;  II,
181,  236,  296,  320,  324,  334,  351,  360,  377.

39.  Vinnianus,  §18  (Schmitz,  I,  504);  Columbanus,  §6  (Schmitz,  I,
597)-

40.  See  notes  35  and  36,  above.

41.  Leges  Henrici,  Ixxi  (Liebermann,  I,  590;  Thorpe,  p.  251):  "Si  quis
ueneno  uel  sortilegio  uel  inuultuacione  seu  maleficio  aliquo  faciat  homici-
dium,  siue  illi  paratum  sit  siue  alii,  nichil  refert,  quin  factum  mortiferum
et  nullo  modo  redimendum  sit  .  .  .  Si  autem  insortiatus  non  fuerit  mortuus,
set  cutis  uariationem  uel  probabilem  corporis  contrahat  egritudinem,
emendetur  sapientum  antiquis  difhnicionibus,  sicut  acciderit."  This  is,  in
effect,  as  Liebermann  notes,  from  Lex  Ribuaria,  cap.  83  (Monumenta,
Leges,  V,  265).


382         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


42.  Modus  Imponendi  Poenitentiam,  §38  (Thorpe,  p.  409);  Pseudo-
Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Poenitentiale,  iv,  17  (Thorpe,  p.  379).  See  pp.
74-75,  above.

43.  See  Chapter  III.

44.  On  these  strigae  or  lamiae  see  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  pp.  58-61,
84-85,  132-140.  On  witchcraft  and  sorcery  in  old  Germanic  laws  see
Vordemfelde,  Die  Germanische  Religion  in  den  Deutschen  Volksrechten
(Religionsgeschichtliche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  XVIII,  i),  1923,
pp.  125-149.

45.  See  references  to  Prankish,  Alamannic,  and  Lombard  laws  in  Han-
sen, Zauberwahn,  pp.  58-59.

46.  Haddan  and  Stubbs,  Councils,  II,  ii  (1878),  329.

47.  Corrector,  §  170  (Schmitz,  II,  446).

48.  Cnut's  Proclamation  of  ca.  1020,  §  15,  Liebermann,  I,  274  ("morS-
slagan  and  mansworan  and  wiccan  and  wEelcyrian";  cf.  Ill,  189);  interpo-
lation (?)  in  Wulfstan's  famous  Sermo  ad  Anglos  (Napier,  p.  165:  "wiccan
and  waelcerian  ") ;  anonymous  homily  (Napier,  p.  298:  "wyccan  and  wael-
cyrian  and  unlybwyrhtan ").

49.  Cf.  Golther,  Munich  Academy,  Abhandlungen,  Philosophisch-
Philologische  Classe,  XVIII,  ii  (1889),  401-438;  the  Same,  Handbuch  der
Germanischen  Mythologie,  1895,  pp.  109-116.

50.  Wright  and  Wiilcker,  Anglo-Saxon  and  Old  English  Vocabularies,
1884, 1,  360,  3;  527,  17;  417,  12;  347,  32;  533,  26;  189,  II.  Gorgoneu5  \s  ex-
plained by  wcelkyrginc  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  De  Rebus  in  Oriente  Mirabilibus,
X,  ed.  Knappe,  1906,  p.  49.  The  name  of  the  goddess  Venus  in  Aldhelm's
"Veneris  stuprorum  amatrlcis"  (De  I.audibus  Virginitatis,  cap.  47,  ed.
Giles,  p.  62;  ed.  Ehwald,  p.  301)  is  glossed  by  gydene,  wcelcyrie  (Napier,
Old  English  Glosses,  1900,  p.  115,  line  4449).  Hcegtes{se),  the  same  word
as  the  German  Hexe,  is  used  to  gloss  striga  and  Pythonissa  and  Erinnys
and  Furia  and  Eumenides  and  Parcae  (Wright  and  Wiilcker,  I,  48,  18;
188,33;  392,  18  [cf.  19,  33];  404,33;  404,34;  533,21;  392,19;  189,12).
Parcarum  is  glossed  by  wyccena  and  wiccyna  (Napier,  p.  159,  line  137;
p.  166,  line  113).

51.  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  20  (Thorpe,  p.  293);  Pseudo-Cummean,
vii  (ix),  7  (Schmitz,  II,  626).  Cf.  Burchard,  x,  28.  See  also  Schmitz,  I,  303,
414,  683;  II,  238,  296,  322,  325,  329,  336,  343,  346,  353,  362,  496;  cf.  II,  425.

52.  Modus  Imponendi  Poenitentiam,  §39  (Thorpe,  p.  409):  "Gif  hwa
wiccige  ymbe  oSres  lufe  and  hym  sylle  on  tete  o]>\>e  on  drince  o\>])e  on  gal-
dorcraeftum."   Cf.  Cockayne,  Leechdoms,  I,  xliv-xlv.

53.  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Penitential,  iv,  18  (Thorpe,  pp.  379-
380);  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  10  (Thorpe,  p.  292:  cf.  Summa  de  Judiciis,  i,
58,  Schmitz,  II,  484);  Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  2  (Schmitz,  II,  626).  See
also  Schmitz,  I,  306,  429-430,  462,  504  (Finnian),  597  (Columban),  683;  II,
236,  296,  320,  324,  334,  342,  351,  360,  425.  For  the  use  of  semen  see  Theo-
dore as  represented  by  Discipulus  Umbrensium,  i,  14,  §  15  (Schmitz,  II,
555),  by  the  Canones  Gregorii,  §  191  (Schmitz,  II,  541),  by  the  Poeniten-
tiale Sangallense  Tripartitum,  ii,  26  (Schmitz,  II,  184),  and  by  Capitula
Judiciorum,  xxiii,  2  (Schmitz,  II,  241);  Pseudo-Theodore,  xvi,  30  (Thorpe,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


p.  282);  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Confessional,  §  29  (Thorpe,  p.  355);
Pseudo-Cummean,  i  (iii),  36  (adds  blood,  Schmitz,  II,  608).  Cf.  other
penitentials  in  Wasserschleben,  Die  Bussordnungen  der  Abenlandischen
Kirche,  1851,  pp.  560  (adds  "urinam  vel  stercus"),  692  (adds  "alia  sorti-
legia  vel  causas  illicitas");  Schmitz,  I,  314,  382,  413,  453,  683  (adds  blood),
749  (adds  blood);  II,  356,  366,  445.  For  menstrual  blood  see  Schmitz,  I,
459;  II,  448  (cf.  I,  683);  Schonbach,  Vienna  Sitzungsberichte,  Philoso-
phisch-Historische  Classe,  CXLII  (1900),  No.  7,  p.  133;  cf.  De  Groot,
The  Religious  System  of  China,  IV  (1901),  397-398.  Compare  the  tasting
of  a  husband's  blood  as  a  remedy:  Theodore  as  represented  by  Discipulus
Umbrensium,  i,  14,  §  16  (Schmitz,  II,  555),  by  the  so-called  Canones  Gre-
gorii,  §  190  (Schmitz,  II,  541),  by  the  Capitula  Judiciorum,  xxiii,  2
(Schmitz,  II,  241),  by  the  Poenitentiale  Sangallense  Tripartitum,  ii,  37
(Schmitz,  II,  184);  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Confessionale,  §31
(Thorpe,  p.  356);  Pseudo-Theodore,  Poenitentiale,  xvi,  31  (Thorpe,
p.  282);  Pseudo-Cummean,  i  (iii),  35  (Schmitz,  II,  608).  See  also  Schmitz,

I>  4i3.453>  691.

54.  ^Ifric,  Lives  of  Saints,  xvii,  157-161,  ed.  Skeat,  I,  374.

55.  ^Ifric's  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  II  (1846),  412-419.  See  Pseudo-
Abdias,  De  Historia  Certaminis  Apostolici,  iv,  2-4,  ed.  1566,  foil.  4i-47r°
(Fabricius,  Codex  Apocryphus  Novi  Testamenti,  1719,  I,  517-521).

56.  ^ifric's  Homilies,  II,  472-477.  See  Acta  Sanctorum,  September  21,
VI,  221-223.

57.  iElfric,  II,  482-491.  See  Pseudo-Abdias,  vi,  7-20,  ed.  1566,  foil.  75-
81  (Fabricius,  I,  608-629).

58.  iElfric,  I,  370-383.  See  Pseudo-Abdias,  i,  6-18,  ed.  1566,  foil.  5v°-i3
(Fabricius,  I,  411-437).  Cf.  ^Ifric's  Lives  of  Saints,  ed.  Skeat,  I,  372.

59.  Jilfric's  Homilies,  I,  454-469.  See  Pseudo-Abdias,  ed.  1566,  foil.
97-101  r°  (Acta  Sanctorum,  August  25,  V,  34-37).

60.  On  the  whole  matter  see  the  large  collections  of  Jente,  pp.  235-271.

61.  Soothsayers  (wigleras):  Laws  of  Edward  and  Guthrum,  ca.  a.d.  921-
940,  §  1 1  (Liebermann,  I,  134;  Thorpe,  p.  74) ;  ^Ethelred,  ca.  a.d.  1008,  vi,  7
(Liebermann,  I,  248;  Thorpe,  p.  135);  Cnut,  ca.  a.d.  1030,  ii,  4a  (Lieber-
mann, I,  310;  Thorpe,  p.  162).  —  So-called  Canons  of  Edgar,  §  16  (Thorpe,
p.  396:  lic-wiglunga,  htvata,  on  mislicuin  gewiglungum)\  Cnut,  ii,  5  (Lieber-
mann, I,  312;  Thorpe,  p.  162:  on  Mote  [var.  hlote']  oSSon  fyrhte),  based  on
Canons  of  Edgar,  §  16;  Law  of  Northumbrian  Priests,  ca.  a.d.  1028-1060,
§  48  (Liebermann,  I,  383;  Thorpe,  p.  419:  on  blot  oSde  on  firhte),  based  on
Cnut,  ii,  5  (cf.  Old  Norse  ganga  til Jrettar,  Gering,  Ueber  Weissagung  und
Zauber  im  Nordischen  Altertum,  1902,  pp.  7-8);  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-
Saxon  Poenitentiale,  ii,  23  (Thorpe,  p.  371:  idele  hwatunga,  tida  hwatinga),
from  Halitgar,  iv,  26,  Schmitz,  II,  285  (both  mention  astrological  observa-
tions and  the  use  of  spells  in  herb-gathering);  the  Same,  iv,  19  (Thorpe,
p.  380:  hlytas,  hwatungd)\  Dialogus  Ecgberti,  §  15  (Thorpe,  p.  323;  Haddan
and  Stubbs,  III,  410).  See  the  canon  of  the  Council  of  Clovesho,  a.d.  747
(note  14,  above).  Cf.  ^Ifric's  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  I  (1844),  100, 102;  Old
English  Homilies,  ed.  Morris,  1873,  II,  11.  Augury,  divination,  soothsay-


384         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ing,  and  consultation  of  those  who  practise  these  arts  are  forbidden  in  the
Penitential  of  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  6,  11  (agreeing  with  Pseudo-Cum-
mean,  vii  [ix],  3  and  5,  Schmitz,  II,  626)  and  23  (Thorpe,  pp.  292,  293),  and
in  a  multitude  of  other  penitentials  in  terms  that  agree  substantially  with
Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  6  and  11  (see  Schmitz,  I,  310,  414,  462;  II,  181,
236,  296,  321,  324,  328,  335,  342-343,  352-353,  361,  377,  378)-  See  also
Excarpsus  Ecgberti,  viii,  4  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  424;  Schmitz,  II,
668),  agreeing  with  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  ii,  30,  §3-'  (Schmitz,  II,  695);
Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  i,  18  (Schmitz,  II,  682).  Cf.  Capitularia  Regum
Francorum,  ed.  Boretius,  I  (1883),  25,  45;  Epistolae  Merowingici  et  Karo-
lini  Aevi,  ed.  Diimmler,  I  (1892),  351.  The  sortes  sanctorum  and  sortes  in
general  are  forbidden  in  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  12  (Thorpe,  p.  292),  in
Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  4  (Schmitz,  II,  626),  and  in  many  other  man-
uals (see  Schmitz,  I,  327-328,  379,  414,  462,  684;  II,  181,  236,  296,  321,  324,
328,  336,  343,  347,  353,  361,  37^;  cf.  Concilia  Aevi  Merovingici,  ed.  Maas-
sen,  1893,  pp.  9,  180,  Monumenta,  Leges,  Sect.  Ill,  Vol.  I;  Homilia  de
Sacrilegiis,  ed.  Caspari,  1886,  pp.  7,  21-23).  The  Arundel  Penitential,  §  91
(Schmitz,  I,  462),  styles  them  also  "so-called  sortes  patriarcharum  vel  apos-
tolorum"  (cf.  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  i,  2,  ed.  1592,  p.  2);  the  Poeniten-
tiale  Parisiense,  §  20,  mentions  their  use  in  hunting  and  fishing  (Schmitz,  I,
684).  As  from  "Theodorus"  the  Summa  de  Judiciis,  vii,  16  (Schmitz,  II,
496),  specifies  forty  days'  penance  for  those  who  seek  to  learn  the  future
"in  tabulis"  or  "in  codicibus,"  who  presume  to  use  sortes  in  the  psalter  or
the  gospel  or  otherwise,  or  to  observe  divinations,  adding,  however,  the  re-
mark "  Brocardus  x  dies."  The  passage  comes  in  the  main  from  Burchard's
Decretum,  x,  26:  see  also  x,  27,  and  Corrector,  §  67  (Schmitz,  II,  425:  cf.
Wasserschleben,  p.  707;  Schmitz,  I,  463).  For  sortes  Homericae  and  Vir-
gilianae  see  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica,  v,  24, 7,  Works,  ed.
Wilkin,  1852,  II,  97-98.  For  'Oix-qpo/xavTeia  see  British  Museum  Papyrus
CXXI  (Kenyon,  I,  83-89);  cf.  Philologus,  LXXII  (1913),  552-556.  Theo-
dore, as  represented  by  Discipulus  Umbrensium,  i,  15,  §4  (Haddan  and
Stubbs,  III,  190;  Schmitz,  II,  556:  accepted  as  genuine  by  Liebermann,  II,
728,  s.  V.  Wahrsagung),  penalizes  women's  "incantationes  vel  divinationes
diabolicas"  and  goes  on  to  quote  (inexactly)  the  24th  canon  of  the  Council
of  Ancyra  (a.d.  314),  which  imposes  heavy  penance  on  "  oi  KaTanavTevbjit-
voi  Kai  TOLS  avvrjddais  tuv  Wvoiv  k^aKoXovdovvres  rj  elaayovrks  nvas  eis
Toiis  eauTuv  olkovs  eiri  avevpeaei.  (papfxaKeiuv  r)  Kai  KadapaeL,"  or,  accord-
ing to  the  paraphrase  of  Isidorus  Mercator,  those  who  "auguria,  vel
auspicia,  sive  somnia  vel  divinationes  quaslibet  secundum  morem  Gentil-
ium  observant"  or  bring  into  their  houses  men  of  this  kind  "in  exquirendis
aliquibus  arte  malefica,  aut  ut  domos  suas  lustrent"  (Mansi,  Concilia,  II
[1759],  521,  534,  cf.  522,  275-528;  Hefele,  Conciliengeschichte,  2d  ed.,  I
[1873],  241-242).  This  canon  is  quoted  also  by  Pseudo-Theodore  (xxvii,
17,  Thorpe,  p.  293),  by  Halitgar  (iv,  25,  cf.  27,  Schmitz,  II,  284,  285),  by
Pseudo-Cummean  (Excarpsus,  vii  [ix],  16,  Schmitz,  II,  627),  and  else-
where (see  Schmitz,  I,  379,  431,  683;  II,  236,  422;  Wasserschleben,  p.  291).
The  Excarpsus  Ecgberti,  viii,  i  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  424;  Schmitz,  II,
667),  like  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  ii,  30,  §  3  (Schmitz,  II,  694),  couples  the


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


employment  of  sortes  sanctorum  with  "quarumcumque  scripturarum  in-
spectione."  On  lots  and  soothsaying  see  Jente,  pp.  235-271.

62.  Wizards  and  soothsayers  {wiccan  and  wig/eras)  are  threatened  with
hell-pains  by  Wulfstan  (ed.  Napier,  1883,  pp.  26-27).  Another  homily
copies  him  with  some  variation  (Napier,  pp.  203-204).  Still  another  (Na-
pier, p.  309)  copies  either  i^Ithelred,  vi,  7,  or  Cnut,  ii,  4a,  which  are  practi-
cally identical  (see  Liebermann,  III,  175,  202).  ^Ifric  associates  idolatry
with  witchcraft  and  soothsaying:  "to  bysmorfullum  deofolgylde  ne  to
wiccecrsefte  ne  to  wiglungum"  (Assmann,  Angelsachsische  Homilien  und
Heiligenleben,  1889,  p.  28);  cf.  an  anonymous  homily  in  Assmann,  p.  143;
Sermo  de  Baptismate,  Napier's  Wulfstan,  p.  40  ("Ne  gyman  ge  galdra  ne
idelra  hwata  ne  wigelunga  ne  wiccecrsefta;  ne  weor'Sian  ge  wyllas,"  etc.).
A  homily  ascribed  to  /Elfric  condemns  those  who  divine  in  any  way,
whether  by  animals  or  by  birds:  "\>a.  \>e  on  aenegum  )?ingum  wiglia'5,  o'5"5e
be  nytenum  o'56e  be  fugelum "  (Brotanek,  Texte  und  Untersuchungen,
1 913,  p.  20).  The  Latin  source  reads  "omnes  qui  caragios  et  di vinos
vel  praecantores  aut  propter  se  aut  propter  suos  inquirunt"  (Brotanek,
p.  107) :  it  is  a  Latin  sermon  extant  in  a  tenth-century  manuscript  written  in
England  (Brotanek,  pp.  103-104).  See  also  yElfric,  Lives  of  Saints,  xvii,
88-123,  ed.  Skeat,  I,  370-373  (auguries  from  birds,  sneezes,  horses,  dogs;  in
wiving,  travelling,  brewing,  etc.;  Jamnes  and  Mambres,  Simon  Magus:
partly  from  Pseudo-Augustine,  Sermon  278,  §  i,  Migne,  XXXIX,  2269;
cf.  Pseudo-Augustine,  De  Rectitudine  Catholicae  Conversationis,  cap.  5,
Migne,  XL,  1172).  Cf.  Excarpsus  Ecgberti,  viii,  4  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,
III,  424;  Schmitz,  II,  668),  and  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  ii,  30,  §  3  (Schmitz,
II,  695),  which  condemn  "caraios  et  divinos  praecantatores":  see  also
Schmitz  (I,  234,  568,  581),  who  cites  canon  4  of  the  Synod  of  Auxerre,  ca.
A.D.  573-603  (Concilia  Aevi  Merovingici,  ed.  Maassen,  1893,  p.  180).
Pseudo-Theodore's  Penitential,  xxvii,  24  (Thorpe,  p.  293),  mentions  "di-
vinos vel  praecantatores"  but  not  "caraios."

63.  Napier's  Wulfstan,  p.  171.  Cf.  Pseudo-Augustine,  Sermon  265,
Migne,  XXXIX,  2238-2239.

64.  ^Elfric,  Lives  of  Saints,  xvii,  75-81,  ed.  Skeat,  I  (1881),  368-370
(from  Pseudo-Augustine,  Sermon  278,  De  Auguriis,  §  i,  Migne,  XXXIX,
2269);  xvii,  124-128,  I,  372  (Sermon  278,  §  3,  XXXIX,  2270).  Cf.  Sermon
279,  §  4,  XXXIX,  2272.

65.  Theodore  as  represented  by  Discipulus  Umbrensium,  i,  15,  §2
(Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  190;  Schmitz,  II,  556),  by  the  Poenitentiale
Sangallense  Tripartitum,  ii,  34  (Schmitz,  II,  1 84),  by  the  Canones  Gregorii,
§  116  (Schmitz,  II,  535),  by  the  Capitula  Judiciorum,  xvi,  4  (Schmitz,  II,
237);  Pseudo-Theodore,  Poenitentiale,  xxvii,  14  (Thorpe,  p.  292);  Pseudo-
Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Confessionale,  §33  (Thorpe,  p.  356);  Excarpsus
Ecgberti,  viii,  2  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  424;  Schmitz,  II,  667);  Pseudo-
Bede-Ecgbert,  i,  34  (Schmitz,  II,  682);  Summa  de  Judiciis,  vii,  10  (Schmitz,
II,  496:  "Beda");  Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  14  (Schmitz,  II,  627).  See
also  Schmitz,  I,  316,  464,  684,  749;  II,  365,  430;  Wasserschleben,  Bussord-
nungen,  1851,  p.  543;  Burchard,  x,  14  (Migne,  CXL,  835:  "Beda").  Cf.
Dieterich,  Mutter  Erde,  3d  ed.,  1925,  pp.  8-12;  Samter,  Geburt,  Hochzeit


386         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


und  Tod,  191 1,  p.  55;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  XXV  (1915),
228-241  (the  roof  in  folk-lore);  Korrespondenzblatt  des  Vereins  fiir  Sie-
benburgische  Landeskunde,  XXIII  (1900),  I45  (oven).

66.  Canons  of  Edgar,  §  16  (Thorpe,  p.  396,  note  5);  Pseudo-Ecgbert,
Anglo-Saxon  Poenitentiale,  iv,  20  (Thorpe,  p.  380).  See  also  an  anonymous
sermon  in  Assmann,  Angelsachsische  Homilien  und  Heiligenleben,  1889,
p.  143;  yElfric's  Lives  of  Saints,  ed.  Skeat,  I  (1881),  374.  Cf.  Hauksbok,
ed.  1892-96,  p.  167;  Corrector,  §  179  (Schmitz,  II,  448);  Schmitz,  I,  464;
Jente,  pp.  57-58,  306-307.  Compare  the  use  of  a  bramble  of  which  both
ends  grow  in  the  ground  (Leechdoms,  II,  290,  292).  See  Chapter  VII,
note  92.

67.  See  note  53,  above.

68.  See  p.  143,  above.

69.  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  26  (Thorpe,  p.  293).

70.  Theodore  as  represented  by  Discipulus  Umbrensium,  i,  15,  §4
(Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  190;  Schmitz,  II,  556);  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,
13  (Thorpe,  p.  292);  Excarpsus  Ecgberti,  vii,  6  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,
424;  Schmitz,  II,  667);  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Confessionale,  §29
(Thorpe,  p.  355:  dry  craft,  galdor,  unlibban):  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  ii,  15,
§3,  and  30,  §2  (Schmitz,  II,  691,  694);  Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  12
(Schmitz,  II,  627).  See  also  Burchard,  x,  24;  Schmitz,  II,  237,  496;  Was-
serschleben,  p.  282.

71.  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Poenitentiale,  ii,  23  (Thorpe,  p.  371),
forbids  the  gathering  of  herbs  with  any  spell  {galdre)  except  Pater  Noster
and  Creed.  This  is  from  Halitgar,  iv,  26  (Schmitz,  II,  285);  cf.  Summa  de
Judiciis,  vii,  13  (Schmitz,  II,  496).  Cf.  ^Ifric,  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  I,
476.  See  also  Pseudo-Augustine,  De  Rectitudine  Catholicae  Conversa-
tionis,  cap.  5,  Migne,  XL,  1172;  Corrector,  §  65  (Schmitz,  II,  424);  Burc-
hard, X,  20,  Migne,  CXL,  836;  Schmitz,  II,  338,  344,  497.  For  such  spells
see  Leechdoms,  I,  120,  314;  II,  154;  III,  30-37  (cf.  I,  318;  II,  116,  138);
Marcellus  Burdigalensis,  ed.  Niedermann  (Corpus  Medicorum  Latinorum,
V),  XXV,  13,  p.  189;  cf.  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  I,
395-396,  421.  On  Anglo-Saxon  superstitions  about  plants  see  Hoops,
Ueber  die  Altenglischen  Pflanzennamen,  1889,  pp.  41-67.

72.  Ligaturae:  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  ii,  39,  §  i  (Schmitz,  II,  696);
Pseudo-Theodore,  Poenitentiale,  xxvii,  22  (Thorpe,  p.  293);  practically  the
same  (though  sometimes  corrupted)  in  Schmitz,  II,  296,  322,  325,  329,  343;
fuller  ("Si  quis  ligaturas  per  herbas  vel  quolibet  ingenio  malo  incantaverit
et  super  Christianum  ligaverit"),  Schmitz,  I,  312;  IT,  353,  362.  Cf.  Cor-
rector, §63  (Schmitz,  II,  423-424;  cf.  I,  463);  Wasserschleben,  pp.  545,
707.  On  the  custom  see  Schmitz,  I,  312-314;  II,  306-307. — Fylacteria:
Council  of  Clovesho  (a.d.  747),  §3  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  364);  Ex-
carpsus Ecgberti,  viii,  4  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  424;  Schmitz,  II,  668);
Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert  (Wasserschleben's  Pseudo-Bede,  p.  272),  ii,  30,  §  3
(Schmitz,  II,  695);  Pseudo-Theodore,  Poenitentiale,  xxvii,  8,  24  (Thorpe,
p.  293).  Cf.  Corrector,  §  92  (Schmitz,  II,  429).  See,  for  amulets,  Leech-
doms, I,  326,  328;  II,  138,  140.  Cf.  A.  Franz,  II,  435-438;  Homilia  de  Sac-
rilegiis,  ed.  Caspari,  1886,  pp.  9-10,  11,  29-30,  39-40;  /Elfric,  Homilies,  ed.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


Thorpe,  I,  476;  Pseudo-Augustine,  Sermon  265,  Migne,  XXXIX,  2239;
Pseudo-Augustine,  De  Rectitudine  Catiiolicae  Conversationis,  cap.  5,
Migne,  XL,  1172;  Eitrem,  Ein  Cliristliches  Amulett  auf  Papyrus  (For-
handlinger  i  Videnskapsselskapet  i  Kristiania,  1921).

73.  Bede,  Letter  to  Ecgbert  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  316);  Legatine
Synod,  a.d.  787  (the  same,  III,  448);  Canons  of  Edgar,  §§  17,  22  (Thorpe,
pp.  396,  397);  Ecclesiastical  Institutes  (Thorpe,  p.  477);  Napier's  Wulf-
stan,  p.  307;  Brotanek,  Texte  und  Untersuchungen,  1913,  pp.  25,  127;
Cnut,  i,  12  (Liebermann,  I,  302;  Thorpe,  pp.  159-160);  ^Elfric,  Lives  of
Saints,  ed.  Skeat,  I,  280.

74.  See  Homiha  de  Sacrilegiis,  ed.  Caspar!,  1886,  pp.  9,  27-29;  Martin
of  Bracara,  De  Correctione  Rusticorum,  ed.  Caspari,  1883,  p.  35;  Burc-
hard,  x,  49;  Schmitz,  II,  338,  344,  497.  Cf.  Klapper,  Das  Gebet  im  Zau-
berglauben  des  Mittelalters,  Mittheilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft
fiir  Volkskunde,  IX,  ii.  Heft  18  (1907),  pp.  5-41;  Lyndewoode,  Constitu-
tiones  Provinciales,  ist  ed.,  ca.  1480,  sig.  giiij.  If.  3v°.

75.  Bede,  Historia  Ecclesiastica,  iv,  25  (27),  ed.  Plummer,  I,  269;  cf.  II,
266.

76.  On  spells  see  Halsig,  Der  Zauberspruch  bei  den  Germanen,  1910.
Prayers  for  the  benediction  of  herbs  were,  of  course,  permissible,  and
we  have  several  specimens  from  Anglo-Saxon  times.  See,  for  example,
Cockayne,  Leechdoms,  III,  79-80;  Leonhardi,  Kleinere  Angelsachsische
Denkmaler,  I  (1905),  154-155.  Cf.  ISlhic,  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  I,  476:
"Ne  sceal  nan  man  mid  galdre  wyrte  besingan,  ac  mid  Godes  wordum  hi
geblestian,  and  swa  6icgan."

77.  Salomon  and  Saturn,  ed.  Kemble,  1848,  pp.  140-143;  ed.  Wiilker,
Bibliothek,  III,  ii  (1898),  63-65  (309-31 1).  Cf.  Schipper,  Germania,  XXII
(1877),  56;  von  Vincenti,  Die  Altenglischen  Dialoge  von  Salomon  und
Saturn  (Miinchener  Beitrage,  XXXI),  I  (1904),  56-58.  On  the  profane
use  of  ave,  pater,  etc.,  in  curative  spells  and  the  addition  or  intermixture  of
other  words  or  characters  see  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  i,  2,  ed.  1592,  p.  2;
vi,  21-22,  pp.  81-82.

78.  Ed.  Kemble,  p.  144;  ed.  Wiilker,  III,  ii,  66  (312).

79.  See  especially  Grendon,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXII
(1909),  105-237;  Brie,  Mitteilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fiir
Volkskunde,  VIII,  xvi  (1906),  1-36;  J.  F.  Payne,  English  Medicine  in  the
Anglo-Saxon  Times,  1904;  Singer,  Proceedings  British  Academy,  1919-
1920,  pp.  341-374.  Cf.  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909;
Kogel,  Geschichte  der  Deutschen  Literatur,  I,  i  (1894),  77-95.

80.  Leechdoms,  II,  11 2-1 15;  III,  10.

81.  Leechdoms,  I,  2,2,o-2i2>3i  394;  H)  54-  Cf.  The  Book  of  Cerne,  ed.
Kuypers,  1902,  Appendix,  pp.  207,  223;  Jorimann,  Friihmittelalterliche
Rezeptarien  (Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der  Medizin,  ed.  Sigerist,  I),  1925,
P-  13-

82.  Leechdoms,  I,  312-315.  Cf.  I,  170;  II,  154,  336;  Franz,  I,  294-334.

83.  Leechdoms,  I,  202,  312-315;  II,  112-115;  III,  10,  30-37.  Cf.  II,
142-145,  328.  For  herbs  and  other  things  that  drive  or  keep  snakes  away
or  make  one  snake-proof,  see  I,  92,  166,  198,  208,  242-245,  252,  276,  280,


388         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


338,  366.  See  also  p.  146.  Cf.  Franz,  I,  294-334;  II,  171-175;  Bang,
Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  164-16^,  168,  169,  174-17^,  527;  W.  de
Gray  Birch,  An  Ancient  Manuscript,  1889,  p.  90;  Jorimann,  p.  74.

84.  Leechdoms,  I,  312,  360,  372.  Cf.  I,  92,  170;  Franz,  II,  139-170.

85.  Leechdoms,  I,  98,  112,  120,  214,  312-315,  332,  386-389,  393-394;
II,  112,  136-141,  290-293,  322,  344-353;  III,  8-15,  24,  3c^43,  52-57,  62,
64-71,  74,  288-291,  294-295;  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,  XXXI  (1887),  45-52.
Cf.  Franz,  II,  124-140,399-615.

86.  Leechdoms,  II,  76,  104,  142,  144,  306,  318;  III,  52,  cf.  68.  See
Chapter  III,  note  144.

87.  See  pp.  133,  147,  215,  218.  For  herbs  that  thwart  evil  charms,  pro-
tect one  against  witches  and  wizards,  and  are  fuga  daemonum,  see  Leech-
doms, I,  102  (evil  eye),  176,  190,  224,  248,  312;  cf.  I,  318,  360,  364.  For
clear  mention  of  witches  and  wizards  or  their  malefic  charms  see  I,  102,
19O3  39^.  402;  II,  138,  298,  306,  342  (cf.  Grendon,  pp.  212-213,  ^3^);  HI,
36,  52,  54,  295.  Cf.  Jorimann,  pp.  28,  29,  30,  31,  53;  Revue  des  Langues
Romanes,  V,  103-105.

88.  Leechdoms,  I,  392;  III,  64.  Cf.  I,  218-221,  266.  See  Franz,  II,  186-
208.

89.  Leechdoms,  II,  328;  III,  66-69.  Cf.  I,  330;  II,  10,  114,  306.

90.  Leechdoms,  I,  314;  II,  154;  III,  30-37.  Cf.  I,  318;  II,  1 16,  138.  Cf.
Franz,  I,  393-421 ;  Corpus  Medicorum  Latinorum,  IV  (1927),  11,  166-167,
231,  295-298;  Schonbach,  Vienna  Sitzungsberichte,  Philosophisch-His-
torische  Classe,  CXLII  (1900),  No.  7,  pp.  140-148.

91.  Leechdoms,  I,  395  (cf.  Singer,  Proceedings  British  Academy,  1919-
1920,  pp.  360-363),  398-405.  Cf.  Franz,  I,  361-393.  See  pp.  171-172.

92.  Leechdoms,  I,  384;  cf.  I,  96-99,  397.  Cf.  von  Steinmeyer,  Die
Kleineren  Althochdeutschen  Sprachdenkmaler,  1916,  pp.  396-397;  Franz,
II,  135-137;  Ebermann,  Bienensegen,  Festschrift  Eduard  Hahn,  1917,  pp.
332-34^-

93.  Leechdoms,  I,  388-391 ;  II,  154.  Cf.  I,  102,  176;  Franz,  II,  261-289;
Hyde,  The  ReHgious  Songs  of  Connacht,  II,  50-55;  Ivens,  Melanesians  of
the  South-East  Solomon  Islands,  1927,  pp.

94.  Leechdoms,  I,  302,  308,  326,  390.  Cf.  Franz,  II,  1-123.

95.  Leechdoms,  I,  312-315;  III,  290.

96.  Leechdoms,  I,  384,  390-393,  396;  III,  58,  60,  286-289.  Cf.  Franz,
11,139-140.   See  Chapter  XI.

97.  Leechdoms,  I,  328;  II,  154.  Cf.  Franz,  II,  299-300.

98.  Cockayne,  III,  36  {malscrung)\  Wiilker,  Bibliothek,  I,  320-323;
Grendon,  pp.  192-193  (cf.  pp.  226-229);  Skemp,  Modern  Language  Re-
view, VI  (191 1),  300-301;  Singer,  Proceedings  British  Academy,  1919-
1920,  pp.  353-357-

99.  Cockayne,  I,  402  (witchcraft  against  crops);  Wiilker,  I,  315;
Grendon,  pp.  176-177.  —  Cockayne,  II,  138-141  {leodrune,  "sorceress,"
"witch");  Leonhardi,  p.  42;  Grendon,  pp.  202-203,  233.  —  Cockayne,  I,
190,  from  Herbarium  Apuleii  ("if  any  evil-working  person  bespells  [be-
galep]  another  through  any  malice").  —  Cockayne,  II,  298  (drycrseft);
Leonhardi,  p.  90;  Grendon,  pp.  200-201,  232.  —  Cockayne,  II,  306  (wip


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


.  .  malscra  and  yflum  gealdorcrceftum)\  Leonhardi,  p.  94;  Grendon,  pp.
200-201,  232.  —  Cockayne,  II,  342  {wi])  wijgemcedlan)\  Leonhardi,  p.  104;
Grendon,  pp.  212-213,  236.  —  Cockayne,  III,  52,  54  (Sa  mihtigan  wif;
haegtesse);  Wiilker,  I,  317-318;  Grendon,  pp.  164-165,  214-215.

100.  Cockayne,  II,  346;  Leonhardi,  p.  105.

101.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  78,  82,  92-96,  108,  and  passim;  II,
110-115  (Leonhardi,  pp.  33-35),  142-145  (Leonhardi,  p.  43;  Grendon,  pp.
199,  231),  328  (Leonhardi,  p.  100);  III,  30-37  (Wiilker,  I,  320^323;  Gren-
don, pp.  190-195).

102.  Salomon  and  Saturn,  i,  152-154,  ed.  Kemble,  1848,  pp.  143-144;
Wiilker,  III,  ii  (1898),  66  (312).

103.  Johannes  Sarisburiensis,  Policraticus,  i,  13,  Leyden  ed.,  i';95,
p.  42.  Cf.  St.  Augustine,  De  Doctrina  Christiana,  ii,  20,30:  "Ad  hoc  genus
pertinent  omnes  etiam  ligaturae  atque  remedia,  quae  medicorum  quoque
disciplina  condemnat,"  etc.

104.  Charms  and  spells.  Eleventh  century:  Napier,  Herrig's  Archiv,
LXXXIV  (1890),  323.  —  Twelfth  century:  Zupitza,  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,
XXXI  (1887),  45-52;  Priebsch,  Modern  Language  Review,  XVII  (1922),  81
(thief);  Das  Herbarium  Apuleii,  ed.  Berberich  (Anglistische  Forschungen,
ed.  Hoops,  V),  1902,  pp.  95,  118,  1 20-1 21;  M.  R.  James,  Catalogue  of
MSS.,  Gonville  and  Caius  College,  II  (1908),  431.  —  Thirteenth  century:
Yorkshire  Archsological  Journal,  XVII  (1903),  402-404,  407-408;  M.  R..
James,  Catalogue,  as  above,  II,  444  (rats  and  mice). — ^Fourteenth  cen-
tury: Henslow,  Medical  Works  of  the  Fourteenth  Century,  1899,  pp.  32-
33)  7i~72,  144-145;  Holthausen,  Anglia,  XIX  (1897),  78-85;  Harland  and
Wilkinson,  Lancashire  Folk-Lore,  1867,  p.  77;  Arderne,  Practica  de  Fistula,
ed.  Power,  1910,  pp.  102-104;  the  Same,  De  Arte  Phisicali  et  de  Cirurgia,
ed.  Power,  1922,  pp.  6,  32;  Archseologia,  XXX  (1844),  420.  —  Fifteenth
century:  Reliquiae  Antiquae,  1845,  I,  126-127,  315;  Priebsch,  Haupt's
Zeitschrift,  XXXVIII  (1894),  14;  Forster,  Anglia,  XLII  (1918),  217-219;
Ein  Mittelenglisches  Medizinbuch,  ed.  Heinrich,  1896;  Sloane  MSS.,
Scott's  Index,  s.  v.  Magic.  —  Sixteenth  century:  Holthausen,  Anglia,  XIX
(1897),  87-88;  J.  G.  Nichols,  Narratives  of  the  Days  of  the  Reformation,
pp.  326-329;  Halliwell,  Popular  Rhymes  and  Nursery  Tales,  1849,  p.  207.
—  Seventeenth  century:  Rye,  Norfolk  Archaeology,  XIV  (1901),  131-132;
McBryde,  Modern  Language  Notes,  XXI  (1906),  181-182  (thief);  Folk-
Lore,  XXI  (1910),  376-378;  Archfeological  Journal,  XXIX  (1872),  75-76
(mad  dog);  Transactions  Cumberland  and  Westmorland  Antiquarian  and
Archsological  Society,  New  Series,  XII  (1912),  82-85;  Sloane  MSS.,
Scott's  Index,  s.  v.  Magic.  —  Eighteenth  century:  Transactions  Cumber-
land and  Westmorland  Antiquarian  and  Archaeological  Society,  ist  Series,
XIV  (1897),  371-372;  The  Reliquary,  XXIII  (1882-83),  198-201;  Daw-
son, History  of  Skipton,  1882,  pp.  392-395;  Cowper,  Hawkshead,  1899,  pp.
314-315.  —  Nineteenth  century:  Transactions  Lancashire  and  Cheshire
Antiquarian  Society,  XXVII  (1910),  105-107  (cattle,  house,  nightmare,
fairies,  wealth  and  health,  etc.).

105.  I.  For  the  regular  St.  Peter  charm  for  toothache  (with  slight  varia-
tions in  some  instances,  as  "at  the  gates  of  Jerusalem"  instead  of  "on  a


390        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


marble  stone")  see  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  394;  III,  64;  Anzeiger  fiir
Deutsches  Alterthum,  XV  (1889),  145;  J.  F.  Payne,  English  Medicine  in
the  Anglo-Saxon  Times,  1904,  p.  129;  Ebermann,  Blut-  und  Wundsegen
(Palaestra,  XXIV),  1903,  pp.  19-22;  Heinrich,  Ein  Mittelenglisches  Medi-
zinbuch,  1896,  pp.  102-103;  Brie,  Mitteilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesell-
schaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  VIII,  ii  (1906),  25-26;  Halsig,  Der  Zauberspruch
bei  den  Germanen,  1910,  pp.  46-47,  79-80;  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,  XXVII
(1883),  308;  William  Carr,  The  Dialect  of  Craven,  1828,  II,  264;  Digby
MS.  86,  fol.  30,  Notes  and  Queries,  nth  Series,  XI  (1915),  294;  W.  G.
Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883,  p.  77;  Halliwell,  Popular  Rhymes  and  Nur-
sery Tales,  1849,  p.  212;  Kohler,  Germania,  XIII  (1868),  178-184  (Klei-
nere  Schriften,  III  [1900],  544-552);  Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,
1892,  p.  135;  Henderson,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  1879,
p.  172;  Harland  and  Wilkinson,  Lancashire  Folk-Lore,  1867,  pp.  75-76;
Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  p.  183;  Hewett,  Nummits  and
Crummits,  1900,  p.  67;  Baring-Gould,  Devonshire  Characters,  1908,  p.  77;
Leather,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  1912,  pp.  74-76;  E.  M.  Wright,
Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  p.  249;  Denham  Tracts,  II  (1895),  9-
10;  Hammond,  A  Cornish  Parish,  1897,  p.  353;  E.  Owen,  Welsh  Folk-Lore,
pp.  264-265;  Trevelyan,  Folk-Lore  and  Folk-Stories  of  Wales,  1909,
p.  227;  Couch,  The  History  of  Polperro,  1871,  p.  148;  A.  W.  Moore,  The
Folk-Lore  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1891,  p.  98;  Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the
North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  p.  48;  J.  G.  Campbell,  Witchcraft  and
Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland,  1902,  pp.  69-70;
Celtic  Magazine,  XIII  (1888),  40;  Alexander  Macdonald,  Story  and  Song
from  Loch  Ness-side,  191 4,  p.  181;  Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore  Heri-
tage, 1926,  p.  33;  Douglas  Hyde,  The  Religious  Songs  of  Connacht,  II,
58-61  (Patrick  for  Peter  in  one  version);  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,
VIII  (1895),  287  (Bergen,  Current  Superstitions,  1896,  p.  96;  Knortz,  Der
Menschliche  Korper  in  Sage,  Brauch  und  Sprichwort,  1909,  p.  136);  Notes
and  Queries,  ist  Series,  I  (1850),  293,  349,  397,  429;  III  (1851),  20,  259;  X
(1854),  221;  2d  Series,  XII  (1861),  501  (cf.  7th  Series,  V  [1888],  262);
Bye-Gones  for  1876-77,  pp.  300,  305,  314,  339;  for  1888,  p.  79;  for  1895-
96,  p.  438;  Journal  of  the  British  Archaeological  Association,  XXXIV
(1878),  329-330;  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  History  and  Antiquarian
Field  Club,  XIII  (1892),  50;  XXXV  (1914),  82;  Transactions  Devonshire
Association,  XXXII  (1900),  92;  Folk-Lore  Record,  I  (1878),  40;  Folk-
Lore  Journal,  II  (1884),  33,  94-95;  V  (1887),  201;  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),
203;  XV  (1904),  196-197,  350;  XVI  (1905),  167;  Mullenhoff  and  Scherer,
Denkmaler  Deutscher  Poesie  und  Prosa,  2d  ed.,  1873,  pp.  466-467  (3d  ed.,
1892,  II,  281);  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  I  (1891),  175;  VI
(1896),  91-92,  195-196;  Gaster,  Ilchester  Lectures,  1887,  pp.  85-86;  Le-
land,  Gypsy  Sorcery,  pp.  38-39;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer  og  Magiske
Opskrifter  (Videnskabssellskabet  i  Christiania),  1901,  No.  133,  p.  68  ("a
man"  instead  of  Peter).  Cf.  the  charm  in  Sloane  MS.  1580,  fol.  44  v°.

The  Virgin  Mary  may  replace  St.  Peter  in  this  or  a  similar  charm.  See
Leather,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  191 2,  pp.  75-76;  Archaeologia
Cambrensis,  7th  Series,  III  (1923),  172-173;  Mitteilungen  der  Schlesischen


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  IX,  xviii  (1907),  10;  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,
XXXVIII  (1894),  16;  The  Physicians  of  Myddvai  (Meddygon  Myddfai),
ed.  Pughe  and  Williams,  1861,  §  804,  pp.  276-277,  453-454  (Bye-Gones  for
1876-77,  p.  319).  So  may  our  Lord's  brother,  St.  James.  See  Hunt,  Popular
Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  215  (3d  ed.,  1881,  p.  414);
Black,  Folk-Medicine,  p.  77;  cf.  Courtney,  Cornish  Feasts  and  Folk-Lore,
1890,  p.  149  (Peter  is  our  Lord's  brother:  so  in  Folk-Lore  Journal,  V  [1887],
201).  Job  occurs  instead  of  Peter  in  a  Swedish  version:  Hylten-Cavallius,
Warend  och  Wirdarne,  I  (1863),  416-417;  cf.  Skrifter  utgivna  av  Svenska
Litteratursallskapet  i  Finland,  XCI  (1910),  209;  Klemming,  Lake-  och
Orte-Bocker,  1883-84,  pp.  227,  228.  The  person  afflicted  at  the  moment
supersedes  St.  Peter  in  an  English  variant:  Bye-Gones  for  1897-98,  pp.
233-234.  St.  Apollonia  is  invoked  in  like  manner  in  a  related  charm  that
occurs  frequently  in  Romance  countries.  See  Wolf,  Beitrage  zur  Deut-
schen  Mythologie,  I  (1852),  260;  Kohler,  Germania,  XIII  (1886),  180-181;
Archivio  per  lo  Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  IV  (1881;),  261  (cf.  Za-
netti.  La  Medicina  delle  Nostre  Donne,  1892,  p.  180);  Melusine,  III  (1886),
1 14;  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  I  (1886),  36;  Bulletin  de  Folklore,  II
(1893-95),  5-6;  Sauve,  Le  Folk-Lore  des  Hautes-Vosges,  1889,  pp.  35-36;
Meyrac,  Traditions  des  Ardennes,  1890,  p.  179;  Cabanes  and  Barraud,
Remedes  de  Bonne  Femme,  1907,  p.  281;  Marin,  Cantos  Populares  Espa-
noles,  I  (1882),  445.  For  her  connection  with  toothache  see:  Legenda
Aurea,  cap.  66,  ed.  Grasse,  1850,  p.  294;  Bale,  Select  W'orks  (Parker  So-
ciety), p.  498;  Munday,  The  English  Romayne  Lyfe,  1582,  p.  38  (Bodley
Head  Quartos,  XII);  Reginald  Scot,  Discourse  upon  Divels,  chap.  24,
p.  528  (378),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  443;  Archaeologia,  XXX  (1844),  397-398;
Anglia,  XIX  (1897),  84;  British  Museum  Add.  MS.  37787,  fol.  131  (Cata-
logue 1906-1910,  p.  147);  Heinrich,  as  above,  pp.  148-149;  Bang,  Norske
Hexeformularer,  1901,  No.  1087,  p.  482;  Revue  Celtique,  VI  (1883-85),
73-74;  Laisnel  de  la  Salle,  Le  Berry,  I  (1900),  391;  Zanetti,  La  Medicina
delle  Nostre  Donne,  1892,  p.  180;  Bartsch,  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche
aus  Meklenburg,  II  (1880),  427;  Fossel,  Volksmedicin  und  Medicinischer
Aberglaube  in  Steiermark,  2d  ed.,  1886,  pp.  109-110;  Baumgarten,  Aus
der  Volksmassigen  Ueberlieferung  der  Heimat,  Linz,  1864,  I,  127;  0ns
Volksleven,  III  (1891),  62;  van  Andel,  Volksgeneeskunst  in  Nederland,
1909,  pp.  232,  239;  A.  De  Cock,  Volksgeneeskunde  in  Vlaanderen,  1891,
pp.  168-169;  Archivio  per  lo  Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  V  (1886),
271;  Biblioteca  de  las  Tradiciones  Populares  Espanolas,  I  (1883),  269-270.

II.  A  related  toothache  spell,  in  which  St.  Peter  stands  (usually)  under
an  oak  and  our  Lord  bids  him  take  water  in  his  mouth,  is  common  in  Ger-
man. See  Wolf,  Beitrage  zur  Deutschen  Mythologie,  I  (1852),  255,
§  II  (cf.  §  13,  I,  255-256);  Peter,  Volksthiimliches  aus  Oesterreichisch-
Schlesien,  II  (1867),  238;  Lammert,  Volksmedizin  und  Medizinischer  Aber-
glaube in  Bayern,  1869,  p.  237;  Dunger,  Rundas  und  Reimspriiche  aus  dem
Vogtlande,  1876,  p.  277;  Neunzig  Geheimnisse,  Cologne  chapbook,  un-
dated, p.  6;  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  307-308;  Alemannia,  XV
(1887),  123;  XXV  (1898),  130;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkskunde,  I  (1889),  36-37
{Loth  for  Peter  in  one  version);  II  (1890),  201;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oester-


291         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


reichische  Volkskunde,  II  (1896),  156;  Niederlausitzer  Mittheilungen,  IV
(1896),  296;  Blatter  fur  Pommersche  Volkskunde,  V  (1897),  26;  Zeit-
schrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  VIII  (1898),  201;  Wuttke,  Der  Deut-
sche Volksaberglaube  der  Gegenwart,  ed.  Meyer,  1900,  p.  172  (cf.  p.  352:
Jol/  instead  of  Peter);  E.  H.  Meyer,  Badisches  Volksleben,  1900,  p.  571;
Kleeberger,  Volkskundliches  aus  Fischbach  i.  d.  Pfalz,  1902,  p.  53;  Zeit-
schrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,  II  (1905),
285;  IX  (1912),  150  (cf.  VIII  [191 1],  68);  Drechsler,  Sitte,  Brauch  und
Volksglaube  in  Schlesien,  II  (1906),  301-302;  E.  John,  Aberglaube,  Sitte
und  Brauch  im  Sachsischen  Erzgebirge,  1909,  p.  107;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube
und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  p.  no  (cf.  p.  in:  Jakob
cures  Joseph);  Manz,  Volksbrauch  und  Volksglaube  des  Sarganserlandes,
Schriften  der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  Xll  (1916),  57.
The  Virgin  replaces  St.  Peter  in  a  variant  in  Blatter  fiir  Pommersche
Volkskunde,  V  (1897),  25;  so  also  in  a  Norwegian  variant  in  Bang,  Norske
Hexeformularer,  1901,  No.  227,  p.  130  (other  varieties,  Nos.  214  [Job],  235
[a  sick  man],  237  [Rube],  pp.  120,  134,  135).  Job  and  Josaphat  are  the  in-
terlocutors in  a  version  in  Mitteilungen  des  Vereins  fiir  Anhaltische  Ge-
schichte  und  Altertumskunde,  VI  (1893),  599.  For  a  similar  spell  in  which
St.  Jost  is  the  sufferer  and  in  which  worms  are  mentioned  see:  Kuhn's
Zeitschrift,  XIII  (1864),  146-147;  Germania,  XIII  (1868),  182;  Bartsch,
Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  II  (1880),  427;  Der  Ur-
Quell,  Neue  Folge,  I  (1897),  281.

III.  Almost  identical  with  (2),  but  representing  Job  as  complaining  of
scurvy  or  the  like,  is  another  German  charm.  See  Rank,  Aus  dem  Bohmer-
walde,  1843,  pp.  275-276  (1851,  I,  161-162);  Wolf,  Beitrage  zur  Deutschen
Mythologie,  I  (1852),  256;  E.  Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten  und  Ge-
brauche aus  Schwaben,  1852,  pp.  523-524;  Grohmann,  Aberglaube  und
Gebrauche  aus  Bohmen  und  Mahren,  1864,  pp.  174-175;  A.  Peter,  Volks-
thiimliches  aus  Oesterreichisch-Schlesien,  II  (1867),  229;  Fossel,  Volks-
medicin  und  Medicinischer  Aberglaube  in  Steiermark,  2d  ed.,  1886,  pp.
108-109;  Am  Ur-Quell,  I  (1890),  170;  Alemannia,  XXV  (1898),  129;
Wuttke,  Der  Deutsche  Volksaberglaube  der  Gegenwart,  ed.  Meyer,  1900,
p.  173;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfalische  Volks-
kunde, VIII  (191 1),  67-68;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der
Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  p.  in  (Job's  child  for  Job).  St.  James
(Jakob)  sometimes  replaces  Job  in  this  charm.  See  Mittheilungen  der
Geschichts-  und  Alterthumsforschenden  Gesellschaft  des  Osterlandes,  VII
(1874),  450;  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  272-273;  Zeitschrift  fiir
Volkskunde,  II  (1890),  162-163;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und
Westfalische  Volkskunde,  II  (1906),  285;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zau-
berei in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  p.  m.  Cf.  Germania,  XVII
(1872),  75-76.

IV.  St.  Peter  is  the  patron  in  a  fever  charm  which  resembles  the  regu-
lar toothache  formula.  See  Archseologia,  XXX  (1844),  400-401;  Anglia,
XIX  (1897),  79-80;  Haupt's  Zeitschrfft,  XXXVIII  (1894),  16-17;  Hein-
rich,  Ein  Mittelenglisches  Medizinbuch,  1896,  pp.  166-167,  220-221 ;
Klemming,  Lake-  och  Orte-Bocker,  1883-86,  pp.  39-40;  Brie,  Mitteilungen


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


393


der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fur  Volkskunde,  VIII,  ii  (1906),  26.  For  a
similar  charm  for  !a  teigne  (St.  Paul  or  St.  Peter)  see  Revue  des  Traditions
Populaires,  I  (1886),  37;  Cabanes  and  Barraud,  Remedes  de  Bonne  Femme,
1907,  p.  277.

V.  For  a  very  curious  thief-charm  which  has  some  relation  to  this  group
see  Dunger,  Rundas  und  Reimspriiche  aus  dem  Vogtlande,  1876,  pp.  283-
284;  Knoop,  Volkssagen  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Hinterpommern,  1885,  p.  170.
Cf.  also  the  Sicilian  wolf  charm  in  Zeitschrift  fiir  Romanische  Philologie,
XXXII  (1908),  580-583.

Among  the  miracles  of  St.  Cuthbert  is  registered  the  relief  of  a  dreadful
toothache  that  had  defied  both  charms  and  medicines:  Reginald,  Libellus
de  Admirandis  S.  Cuthberti  Virtutibus,  cap.  130,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  So-
ciety, I),  pp.  278-279.

106.  Theodore  as  represented  by  Discipulus  Umbrensium,  i,  15,  §1
(Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  189;  Schmitz,  II,  556;  cf.  Burchard,  x,  12),  by
Canones  Gregorii,  §  115  (Schmitz,  II,  535),  by  Capitula  Judiciorum,  xvi,  4
(Schmitz,  II,  237:  Vatican  MS.  1349  reads  "in  minimis  causis  idest  ad
fontes  vel  ad  arbores");  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  i  (Thorpe,  p.  292);  Ecg-
bert,  Anglo-Saxon  Confessionale,  §32,  Thorpe,  p.  356  ("Gif  man  med-
mycles  hwaet-hwega  deoflum  onssegS,  fsste  he  .1.  gear;  gif  he  mycles  hwaet
onsecge,  fseste  .x.  winter");  Excarpsus  Ecgberti,  iv,  12  (Haddan  and
Stubbs,  III,  420;  Schmitz,  II,  664);  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  ii,  29  (Schmitz,
II,  694);  Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  13  (Schmitz,  II,  627).  Sacrifice  to
devils,  without  distinction  as  to  the  grade  of  the  offence,  is  punished  in  the
laws  of  King  Wihtrsed  of  Kent  (a.d.  ca.  695)  by  a  fine  {healsfang)  or  by  for-
feiture of  all  one's  cattle;  in  the  case  of  a  slave,  the  culprit  must  make
amends  to  his  lord  with  six  shillings  or  with  "his  hide,"  i.  e.  with  a  flogging
(§§  12,  13;  Liebermann,  I,  13;  cf.  II,  503,  s.  v.  Heidentum,  §  5;  II,  621,
s.  V.  Priigel;  Thorpe,  p.  18).

107.  Canons  of  Edgar,  §  16  (Thorpe,  p.  396);  Cnut,  ii,  5  (Liebermann,  I,
312;  Thorpe,  p.  162);  Laws  of  Northumbrian  Priests,  §  54  (Liebermann,  I,
383;  Thorpe,  pp.  419-420);  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Poenitentiale,  ii,
22  (Thorpe,  p.  371),  and  iv,  19  (Thorpe,  p.  380);  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  i,
18  (Schmitz,  II,  682);  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  18  (Thorpe,  p.  293);
Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  6  (Schmitz,  II,  626);  ^Elfric,  Lives  of  Saints,
xvii,  129-142,  ed.  Skeat,  I,  372-375  (Pseudo-Augustine,  Sermon  278,
Migne,  XXXIX,  2271:  cf.  Sermon  265,  XXXIX,  2239,  and  the  pseudo-
Augustinian  De  Recti tudine  Catholicae  Conversationis,  cap.  5,  Migne,  XL,
1172-1173);  i^ilfric's  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  I,  474;  homily  in  Brotanek,
Texte  und  Untersuchungen,  1913,  p.  20,  cf.  pp.  107,  125-126;  Napier's
Wulfstan,  p.  40;  anonymous  homily,  Assmann,  Angelsachsische  Homilien
und  Heiligenleben,  1889,  p.  143.  Cf.  Burchard,  x,  2,  10,  21,  32;  Schmitz,  I,
330.  379>  412,  462,  683,  748;  II,  181,  237,  296,  321,  324,  328,  335,  336,  343,
353)  361,378,  424,430;  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  I  (1875),
484-492;  Weinhold,  Die  Verehrung  der  Quellen  in  Deutschland  (Berlin
Academy,  Abhandlungen,  1898),  pp.  29-69;  Jente,  Die  Mythologischen
Ausdriicke  im  Altenglischen  Wortschatz,  1921,  pp.  56-57;  R.  M.  Garrett,
Precious  Stones  in  Old  English  Literature  (Miinchener  Beitrage,  XLVII),


394


WITCHCRA^FT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


1909,  pp.  79-82.  For  councils  see  Schmitz,  I,  330-331;  Fournier,  Revue
d'Histoire  et  de  la  Litterature  Religieuses,  VI  (1901),  307;  Concilia  Aevi
Merovingici,  ed.  Maassen,  1893,  pp.  133,  179.  Cf.  Leechdoms,  III,  74.
Compare  eating  and  drinking  juxta  fanum:  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  2,
Thorpe,  p.  292  (it  is  sacrilege  and  mensa  demoniorum);  Pseudo-Cummean,
vii  (ix),  10  (Schmitz,  II,  627;  cf.  II,  296,  354,  363);  cf.  Vordemfelde,  Die
Germanische  Religion  in  den  Deutschen  Volksrechten  (Religionsgeschicht-
liche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  XVIII,  i),  1923,  pp.  64-67.  For  festivals
"in  locis  abhominandis  gentilium"  (forbidden  by  the  Council  of  Ancyra,
A.D.  314)  see  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  5  (Thorpe,  p.  292;  cf.  xlii,  2,  p.  300),
and  cf.  Schmitz,  I,  303;  II,  296,  354,  362.

108.  Wulfstan,  ed.  Napier,  pp.  11-12;  cf.  anonymous  homily,  p.  303.

109.  Cf.  Robin  Hood  and  the  Potter,  and  parallel  stories  (Child,  The
English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  III,  108-115).

no.  Gesta  Herewardi,  in  the  Rolls  ed.  of  Gaimar,  Lestorie  des  Engles,
pp. 384-385,  388-390.

111.  Cf.  Journal  British  Archseological  Society,  XXXII  (1876),  60-64;
Papers  and  Proceedings,  Hampshire  Field  Club  and  Archseological  Society,
II  (1894),  56.

112.  Hope,  The  Legendary  Lore  of  Holy  Wells  in  England,  1893.
Cf.  The  Reliquary,  II  (1861-62),  126-136;  Proceedings  Society  of  Anti-
quaries of  Scotland,  XXVI  (1892),  63-65;  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,  ist
Series,  I  (1846),  50-54,  184,  466;  4th  Series,  III  (1872),  262;  5th  Series,
VIII  (1891),  8-16.

113.  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,  3d  Series,  III  (1857),  214;  IV  (1858),
205-206;  Bye-Gones  for  1888,  pp.  47-48,  68;  for  1899-1900,  pp.  425-426,
431;  for  1903-04,  p.  197.

114.  Hope,  pp.  71,  76,  83,  92-93,  107-108,  142,  143,  145,  185,  199.^

115.  Registrum  Roberti  Mascall,  ed.  Parry  (Canterbury  and  York
Series,  XXI),  pp.  74-75.

116.  Warkworth's  Chronicle,  ed.  Halliwell  (Camden  Society),  1839,
pp.  24-25.

117.  The  Travels  of  Dr.  Richard  Pocock  through  England,  ed.  Cart-
wright  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XLIV),  II,  54.  Cf.  Archaeologia
Cambrensis,  6th  Series,  IX  (1909),  71.

118.  Visitations,  Raine,  The  Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Minster  (Surtees
Society,  XXXV),  p.  273.  I  have  corrected  the  punctuation.

119.  Bale,  A  Comedy  concernynge  Three  Lawes,  of  Nature,  Moses,  and
Christ,  vv.  406-543,  ed.  Schroer,  Anglia,  V  (1882),  172-174.  Since  the
character  Idolatry  represents  in  Bale's  mind,  in  some  respects,  the  Roman
Catholic  Church,  he  mixes  up  a  number  of  the  rites  or  practices  of  the
old  faith  with  the  current  notions  about  witchcraft,  but  this  need  not
contuse  us.

120.  Child,  Four  Old  Plays,  1848,  pp.  74-82.  The  source  of  Thersytes  is
a  Latin  dialogue  by  Ravisius  Textor,  but  this  episode  is  not  in  the  source:
see  Holthausen,  Englische  Studien,  XXXI  (1902),  89.

121.  Leechdoms,  II,  38,  114,  120-127,  etc.;  Kuhn's  Zeitschrift,  XIII
(1864),  135-151;  Miillenhoff  and  Scherer,  Denkmaler,  3d  ed.,  1892,  II,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


395


281;  Hofler,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  II  (1899),  98-100,  155-158;
A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  402-403,  415.

122.  A  Series  of  Precedents  and  Proceedings  .  .  .  from  Act-Books  of
Ecclesiastical  Courts  in  the  Diocese  of  London,  by  Wm.  Hale  Hale,  Arch-
deacon of  London,  1847.

123.  Hale,  pp.  15-16.

124.  Hale,  p.  3:  "utitur  incantacionibus  sortilegiae  pro  febribus."

125.  Hale,  p.  102.

126.  Hale,  pp.  107-108.

127.  See  Chapter  IV,  notes  140-149.

128.  Hale,  p.  108.  Compare  the  Anglo-Saxon  method  of  curing  an  elf-
shotten  horse,  which  involves  striking  him  on  the  back  with  a  rod  (Leech-
doms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  290;  ed.  Leonhardi,  I,  88).

129.  Raine,  Historiae  Dunelmensis  Scriptores  Tres  (Surtees  Society,
IX),  Appendix,  p.  ccccxl.

130.  Durham  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  pp.  29,  33.

131.  Arundel  MS.  146,  Aungier,  The  History  and  Antiquities  of  Sion
Monastery,  1840,  p.  259.

132.  Lincoln  Diocese  Documents,  ed.  A.  Clark  (Early  English  Text
Society,  XXXV),  pp.  259,  260.  For  midwives'  charms  see  pp.  114-115,
above.

133.  Visitations  and  Memorials  of  Southwell  Minster,  ed.  Leach  (Cam-
den Society,  New  Series,  XLVIII),  p.  15.

134.  Visitations,  in  Raine,  The  Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Minster  (Surtees
Society,XXXV) ,  pp.  259, 260.  For  midwives'  charms  see  pp.  1 1 4-1 1 5,  above.

135.  Collectanea  Anglo-Premonstratensia,  ed.  Gasquet  (Royal  His-
torical Society,  Camden  Third  Series,  XII),  III,  117-118.  On  the  distinc-
tion made  cf.  Pererius,  Adversus  Fallaces  et  Superstitiosas  Artes,  i,  14,  ed.
1603,  p.  lOI.

136.  3  Henry  VIII,  chap,  xi  (Statutes  of  the  Realm,  III  [1817],  31-32).

137.  Lincoln  Episcopal  Visitations,  Peacock,  Archsologia,  XLVIII
(1885),  262.  Cf.  the  charm  "Drei  falsche  Zungen  haben  dich  geschossen,"
etc.,  well-known  on  the  Continent:  Wolf,  Beitrage  zur  Deutschen  My-
thologie,  I  (1852),  256-257;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkskunde,  II  (1890),  160-
161;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreichische  Volkskunde,  II  (1896),  149-150.

138.  Potts,  The  Wonderful  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sigg.  E2  v"-
E3  r°.   See  pp.  170-171,  above.

139.  Macbean,  Kirkcaldy  Burgh  Records,  1908,  p.  343;  County  Folk-
Lore,  VII  (1914),  109.

140.  Dalyell,  The  Darker  Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,  pp.  23,  27.

141.  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  X  (1854),  221.

142.  Skelton,  The  Tunnyng  of  Elynour  Rummyng,  vv.  447-458.  Cf.  the
celebrated  Anglo-Saxon  charm  "for  a  sudden  stitch"  in  Leechdoms,  III,

5^-55-

143.  Hooper,  A  Declaration  of  the  Ten  Holy  Commaundmentes,  Early
Writings,  ed.  Carr  (Parker  Society),  1843,  pp.  328-329.

144.  Cf.  Lammert,  Volksmedizin,  1869,  pp.  128-134;  Seyfarth,  Aber-
glaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  17-21;  Ger-


396         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


mania,  XXXII  (1887),  460;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Deutsche  Philologie,  XL  (1908),
433;  Alemannia,  XXVI  (1898),  71-72;  Halsig,  Der  Zauberspruch  bei  den
Germanen,  1910,  pp.  92-96;  von  Steinmeyer,  Die  Kleineren  Althochdeut-
schen  Sprachdenkmaler,  191 6,  pp.  370-375;  Anzeiger  fiir  Deutsches  Alter-
tum,  XL  (1921),  97;  Klemming,  Lake-  och  Orte-Bocker,  1883-86,  pp.  227,
228,  308-309;  Archivio  per  lo  Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  VII  (1888),
569.

145.  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  II,  1030-103 1;  Golther,
Handbuch  der  Germanischen  Mythologie,  1895,  pp.  382-385.  See  for
many  variants  (most  of  them  Christianized)  O.  Ebermann,  Blut-  und
Wundsegen  (Palaestra,  XXIV),  1903,  pp.  1-24.  Cf.  Christiansen,  Die  Fin-
nischen  und  Nordischen  Varianten  des  Zweiten  Merseburgerspruches  (FF
Communications,  Vol.  II,  No.  18),  1915  (cf.  Ohrt,  Danske  Studier,  XIII
[1916],  189-193);  Hastesko,  Motivverzeichnis  Westfinnischer  Zauber-
spriiche  (FF,  No.  19),  p.  5;  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XXII
(1900),  92.  I  find  it  impossible  to  accept  the  theory  that  the  Second  Merse-
burg  Spell  is  a  Christian  charm  decked  out  with  names  of  pagan  gods.
See  further,  Halsig,  Der  Zauberspruch  bei  den  Germanen,  1910,  pp.  75-79;
R.  M.  Meyer,  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,  LII  (1910),  390-396;  K.  Krohn,  Got-
tingische  Gelehrte  Anzeigen,  CLXXIV  (1912),  212-217;  von  Steinmeyer,
Die  Kleineren  Althochdeutschen  Sprachdenkmaler,  191 6,  pp.  365-370;
Grienberger,  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der  Deutschen  Sprache  und  Litera-
tur,  XLV  (1921),  232-234;  Mackel,  Jahrbuch  des  Vereins  fiir  Niederdeut-
sche  Sprachforschung,  XLVII  (1921),  54-56;  Ohrt,  Trylleord  (Danmarks
Folkeminder,  No.  25),  1922,  pp.  77-80;  Preusler,  Beitrage  zur  Deutsch-
kunde  (Siebs  Festschrift),  1922,  pp.  39-45;  Wrede,  Berlin  Academy,  Sitz-
ungsberichte,  1923,  pp.  85-90;  Mogk,  Anzeiger  fiir  Deutsches  Altertum,
XLIII  (1924),  37-38;  Hoffmann-Krayer,  the  same,  p.  178.

146.  Griffith,  The  Demotic  Magical  Papyrus,  1904,  p.  129;  new  transla-
tion by  Spiegelberg,  in  Reitzenstein,  Hellenistische  Wundererzahlungen,
1906,  pp.  103-105.  For  other  examples,  ancient  and  modern,  see  Heim,
Incantamenta  Magica  (Jahrbiicher  fiir  Classische  Philologie,  Supplement-
band,  1893,  XIX),  Nos.  104-135,  pp.  495-507;  The  [Syriac]  Book  of  Pro-
tection, ed.  H.  Gollancz,  191 2,  pp.  xxxi,  xxxviii-xxxix,  liv-lv,  Ixvii-lxxi,
Ixxxi,  Ixxxiii;  Mansikka,  Uber  Russische  Zauberformeln,  1909,  pp.  24,  34-
74,  168-276.  On  charms  and  amulets  see  the  learned  paper  of  Wordsworth,
Yorkshire  Archaological  Journal,  XVII  (1903),  377-412.  Cf.  T.  J.  Petti-
grew,  On  Superstitions  connected  with  the  History  and  Practice  of  Medi-
cine, 1844,  pp.  47-88;  O.  Ebermann,  Blut-  und  Wundsegen  (Palaestra,
XXIV),  1903;  Tavenner,  Studies  in  Magic  from  Latin  Literature,  1916,
pp.  70-123.  Sir  William  Temple  sums  up  the  subject  capitally  in  his  essay
Of  Poetry  (Works,  1757,  III,  417).  For  a  rich  collection  of  Highland
charms  see  Carmichael,  Carmina  Gadelica,  1900,  I,  231-339;  II,  1-159.
For  Irish  charms  see  Douglas  Hyde,  The  Religious  Songs  of  Connacht,

"'46-73-

147.  Brevis  Relatio  (Giles,  Scriptores  Rerum  Gestarum  Willelmi  Con-
questoris,  1845,  p.  7):  "Si  ego  in  sortem  crederem,  hodie  amplius  in  bellum
non  introirem.  Sed  ego  nunquam  sortibus  credidi,  nec  sortilegos  amavi.  In


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


397


omni  enim  negotio  quicquid  agere  debui,  creator!  meo  me  semper  com-
mendavi."

148.  Wilkins,  Concilia,  I,  363-365:  "quasi  pro  vitanda  animalium
peste."  Cf.  William  of  Malmesbury,  Gesta  Pontificum,  i,  42,  ed.  Hamilton,
p.  68.

149.  Liebermann,  I,  313.    See  p.  28,  above.

150.  Wilkins,  I,  408;  Symeon  of  Durham,  ed.  Arnold,  I,  280;  John  of
Worcester,  ed.  Weaver  (Anecdota  Oxoniensia,  XIII),  1908,  p.  21.

151.  William  of  Newburgh,  Historia  Rerum  Anglicarum,  Chronicles  of
the  Reigns  of  Stephen,  Henry  II.,  and  Richard  I.,  ed.  Hewlett,  I,  28.  Cf.
Walter  Map,  De  Nugis  Curialium,  v,  6,  ed.  Wright,  p.  224  (ed.  James,
p.  234);  Walsingham,  Historia  Anglicana,  ed.  Riley,  I,  146;  William  of
Malmesbury,  Gesta  Pontificum,  ed.  Hamilton,  p.  259,  note  6,  and  p.  260,
note  I.

152.  Twelfth-Century  Homilies,  ed.  Belfour,  I  (1909),  16:  "ilyfde  on
deofelgylde  .  .  .  and  lyfede  )>a  drycrsft  and  l^ss  deofles  Seowdom."

153.  See  p.  225,  above.

154.  Berthold  von  Regensburg  (ca.  1220-1272),  Sermon  43,  ed.  Pfeiffer
and  Strobl,  II  (1880),  70-71.  Cf.  II,  44,  147.  See  further  Kotelmann,  Ge-
sundheitspflege  im  Mittelalter,  1890,  pp.  236-242.

155.  St.  Augustine,  De  Civitate  Dei,  xxi,  14.  Cf.  Aldhelm,  De  Laudibus
Virginitatis,  cap.  43,  Opera,  ed.  Giles,  1844,  p.  57.

156.  See  Bochart,  Geographia  Sacra,  1681,  iv,  i,  pp.  231-233  (who  re-
jects the  identification);  Gaspar  Schott,  Magia  Universalis,  1677,  Part  I,
lib.  i,  cap.  3,  Vol.  I,  pp.  14-17  (who  accepts  it).

157.  Capgrave,  ed.  Hingeston,  pp.  25-26.  Capgrave  calls  him  "fynder
of  witchcraft."

158.  Letter  57,  Goulbourn  and  Symonds,  The  Life,  Letters,  and  Ser-
mons of  Herbert  de  Losinga,  1878,  I,  204.

159.  Walter  Map,  De  Nugis  Curialium,  ii,  27,  ed.  Wright,  pp.  103-104
(ed.  James,  pp.  99-100).

160.  William  of  Newburgh,  v,  22-23  (^4-)>  ed.  1610,  pp.  637-650.  Cf.
Havecost,  Die  Vampirsage  in  England,  1914,  pp.  15-18.

161.  Imitated  from  Southey  by  Jean  Moreas  in  "La  Vieille  Femme  de
Berkeley"  (Les  Cantilenes,  1886,  pp.  127-136;  1897,  pp.  97-106).

162.  Wilham  of  Malmesbury,  Gesta  Regum  Anglorum,  ii,  204,  ed.
Stubbs,  I,  253-256.

163.  Gregory,  Dialogi,  iv,  55,  ed.  Moricca,  1924,  pp.  313-314.

164.  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  I,  381-383;  Roger  of
Wendover,  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Coxe,  I,  286-288;  Flores  Historiarum,
ed.  Luard,  I,  420-422;  Knighton,  ed.  Lumby,  I,  42-43;  Radulfus  Niger,  ed.
Anstruther,  p.  158;  Eulogium  Historiarum,  ed.  Haydon,  I,  400-403;
Chronicle  in  De  Antiquis  Legibus  Liber,  ed.  Stapleton  (Camden  Society,
XXXIV),  p.  179;  Higden,  Polychronicon  (and  Trevisa's  English  transla-
tion), vi,  25,  ed.  Lumby,  VII,  194-197;  Bromton,  Twysden,  Scriptores  X,
cols.  940-941;  Speculum  Historiale,  xxv,  26,  Venice,  1494,  fol.  325  r°  (also
in  Jean  de  Vignay's  French  translation);  Olaus  Magnus,  Historia  de  Genti-
bus  Septentrionalibus,  iii,  21,  Rome,  1555,  pp.  126-127;  Schedel,  Chroni-


398         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


carum  Liber,  Nuremberg,  1493,  fol.  189  v°;  Lycosthenes,  Prodigiorum  et
Ostentorum  Chronicon,  1557,  p.  378.  See  Faligan,  Revue  des  Traditions
Populaires,  III  (1888),  487-491;  Tausserat,  the  same,  III,  643-647.  Wil-
liam Rufus  was  carried  off  to  hell  on  the  back  of  a  demon  goat  (see  p.  175,
above).

165.  William,  Le  Manuel  des  Pechiez,  vv.  6222-6304  (Handlyng  Synne,
vv.  7982-8087),  ed.  Furnivall  (Roxburghe  Club),  1862,  pp.  248-251.  Wil-
liam declares  that  he  heard  the  story  told,  and  that  the  thing  happened  in
England.  Robert  of  Brunne  refers  it  to  the  reign  of  Edward  I.

166.  Selen  Troist,  Cologne,  1484,  fol.  lix  v°;  Sjalens  Trost,  ed.  Klem-
ming,  pp.  267-268;  Gering,  Islendzk  ^^iventyri.  No.  36, 1,  124-126;  II,  100-
loi  (cf.  Kohler's  note,  II,  101-102).

167.  Cf.  Owst,  Preaching  in  Medieval  England,  1926,  pp.  60-64.

168.  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III  (1910),  403,  437;  An  Alpha-
bet of  Tales,  ed.  Banks,  No.  728,  pp.  487-488  (thence  in  Coulton,  Social
Life  in  Britain,  1918,  pp.  528-529).  See  also  Additional  MS.  6716,  Her-
bert, III,  690.  For  the  tale  of  The  Priest's  Wife  see  Herbert,  III,  501,  502
(§§285,  301);  cf.  Ill,  380  (§119),  501  (§294),  661  (§202).

169.  See  Homilia  de  Sacrilegiis,  ed.  Caspari,  1886,  pp.  8,  26.

170.  For  censure  of  those  who  trust  auguries  from  birds  and  sneezes  see
Pseudo-Augustine,  Sermon  278,  §  i  (Caesarius  of  Aries,  Migne,  XXXIX,
2269),  paraphrased  by  /Elfnc,  Lives  of  Saints,  ed.  Skeat,  I  (1881),  370;
Pseudo-Augustine,  De  Rectitudine  Catholicae  Conversationis,  cap.  5,
Migne,  XL,  1172;  Homilia  de  Sacrilegiis,  ed.  Caspari,  1886,  pp.  7,  24-25.
For  omens  from  sneezing  see,  e.  g.,  Cicero,  De  Divinatione,  ii,  40,  84;  Pliny,
ii,  7,  5,  24;  cf.  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica,  iv,  9,  Works,
ed.  Wilkin,  1852,  I,  410-413;  M^assam,  The  Cliff  Dwellers  of  Kenya,  1927,
pp.  200-201 ;  P.  Saintyves  (i.  e.  E.  Nourry),  L'Eternuement  et  le  Baillement
dans  la  Magie,  1921.

171.  "Somnia  ne  cures"  —  the  same  precept  from  Cato's  Distichs,  ii,
31,  quoted  by  Dame  Pertelote  in  The  Nonne  Prestes  Tale:  "Ne  do  no  fors
of  dremes."

172.  Petrus  Blesensis,  Epistola  65,  Opera,  ed.  Giles,  I,  187-192.  Cf.
Corrector,  §  149  (Schmitz,  II,  441-442);  Le  Manuel  de  Pechiez,  vv.  1106-
II 20,  and  Robert  of  Brunne's  Handlyng  Synne,  vv.  363-378,  ed.  Furnivall
(Roxburghe  Club),  1862,  p.  13;  Giffard,  A  Dialogue  concerning  Witches
and  Witchcraftes  (1593),  ed.  1603,  sig.  F3,  If.  2v°;  Gaule,  Uvs-idavTia,  1652,
pp.  1 80-1 81 ;  Bieber,  Kaffa,  II  (1923),  347  (meeting  as  omen).  In  the  same
letter  Archdeacon  Peter  mentions  the  fact  that  by  the  prompting  of  the
devil  certain  women  mould  images  of  wax  or  clay  to  torture  their  enemies
or  to  fire  their  sweethearts  with  love.  To  be  sure,  he  quotes  Virgil,  but  he  is
none  the  less  stating  the  belief  of  his  own  time,  and  its  practice  too.

173.  Mandeville's  Travels,  chap.  19,  ed.  Hamelius,  1919,  I,  no;  cf.  the
French  in  The  Buke  of  John  Maundeuill,  ed.  Warner  (Roxburghe  Club),
1889,  p.  83.  See  for  such  omens  Sebillot,  Le  Folk-Lore  des  Pecheurs,  1901,
pp.  176-192;  Hopf,  Thierorakel  und  Orakelthiere,  1888;  Schell,  Zeitschrift
des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,  XI  (1914),  257-
265;  The  Indian  Antiquary,  V  (1876),  21;  X  (1881),  313;  XIII  (1884),  57;


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


399


XXXII  (1903),  432;  E.  Thurston,  Omens  and  Superstitions  of  Southern
India,  1912,  pp.  15-19,  24-25;  Crooke,  Religion  and  Follclore  of  Northern
India,  1926,  pp.  311-313;  North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  IV  (1894-95),
182-183;  G.  W.  Briggs,  The  Chamars,  1920,  pp.  159-161;  Hose  and  Mc-
Dougall,  The  Pagan  Tribes  of  Borneo,  1912,  II,  55,  58-59;  I.  H.  N.  Evans,
Studies  in  Religion,  Folk-Lore,  and  Custom  in  British  North  Borneo  and
the  Malay  Peninsula,  1923,  pp.  37-38.

174.  On  Eustace  the  Monk  see  Cannon,  English  Historical  Review,
XXVII  (1912),  649-670.

175.  Roman  d'Eustache  le  Moine,  ed.  Michel,  1834;  ed.  Foerster  and
Trost  (Wistasse  le  Moine),  1891.

176.  Harleian  MS.  636,  fol.  201  (Michel,  pp.  xxxvi-xxxix;  Trost,  pp.
xviii-xix).

177.  Wilkins,  Concilia,  I,  582.

178.  Cf.  Gregory  of  Tours,  x,  25.

179.  Radulphus  de  Coggeshall,  ed.  Stevenson,  p.  191;  Holinshed,  II
(1807),  353  (from  Radulphus);  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.
Luard,  III,  71 ;  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Luard,  II,  175;  Ricardus  Argen-
tinus,  De  Praestigiis  et  Incantationibus  Daemonum  et  Necromanticorum,
1568,  p.  148.

180.  Imbert-Gourbeyre,  La  Stigmatisation,  1894, 1,  xix-xli.  Cf.  Bianchi,
Archivio  di  Antropologia  Criminale,  XLVI  (1926),  152-175.

181.  In  1286  the  Bishop  of  Hereford's  Register  contains  the  bull  of
Honorius  IV  in  which  that  pope  expresses  some  concern  about  the  Jews  and
their  study  of  "Thalmamud":  Registrum  Ricardi  de  Swinfeld  (Canterbury
and  York  Series,  VI),  pp.  139-140,  cf.  pp.  120-122.

182.  Radulphus  de  Coggeshall,  ed.  Stevenson,  p.  191.

183.  Ovid,  Fasti,  iv,  652-672.  Cf.  Nashe,  Have  with  You  to  Saffron-
Walden,  1596,  Works,  ed.  McKerrow,  III,  60-61.

184.  JEne'id,  vii,  81-106.  Cf.  Roscher,  Ephialtes,  p.  85.

185.  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  Historia  Regum  Britanniae,  i,  11,  ed.
San-Marte,  1854,  pp.  12-13.

186.  Corrector,  §  62  (Schmitz,  II,  423).

187.  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk  Lore,  p.  161;  Bye-Gones  for
1882-83,  pp.  253-254,  257.  See  the  Slavic  and  other  cases  collected  by
Lowenstimm,  Aberglaube  und  Strafrecht,  1897,  pp.  44-52,  57-58,  62-66.
An  excellent  German  case  of  assault  is  discussed  by  Hellwig,  Archiv  fiir
Strafrecht,  LIV  (1907),  132-146.

188.  Folk-Lore  Record,  II  (1879),  207-209;  Gomme,  Folklore  as  an  His-
torical Science,  pp.  203-204.

189.  Boston  Weekly  Magazine,  December  18,  1802,  I,  31.  I  owe  this
curious  reference  to  Mr.  Albert  Matthews.

190.  George  Giffard,  A  Discourse  of  the  Subtil  Practises  of  Deuilles  by
Witches  and  Sorcerers,  1587,  sig.  H3,  If.  i  v°;  the  Same,  A  Dialogue  of
Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1593,  sigg.  B  v°,  C3  r°,E3  v°,  E4r°;  i  Henry  VI,
i,  5,  6  (Talbot  to  Joan  of  Arc);  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  13th  Report,
Appendix,  Part  IV,  p.  108  (1594);  Perkins,  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art
of  Witchcraft,  1608,  pp.  206-207;  Alexander  Roberts,  A  Treatise  of  Witch-


400         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


craft,  1616,  p.  58;  Cotta,  The  Infallible  True  and  Assured  Witch,  1624,
p.  136;  Fairfax,  Daemonologia,  ed.  Grainge,  1882,  pp.  88-89;  Bernard,  A
Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  pp.  187-189;  A  True  and  Exact
Relation,  1645,  p.  18;  Gaule,  Select  Cases  of  Conscience  touching  Witches
and  Witchcrafts,  1646,  p.  144;  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Discovery  of
Witch-craft,  1648,  p.  37;  WonderfuU  News  from  the  North,  1650,  p.  10;
York  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  pp.  38,  58,  82,  247  (1651,  1653,  1660,  1680);
Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  pp.  10,  21;  Ramesey,  'EXfj.LvdoXoyLa,  1668,
p.  74.  Cf.  pp.  169,  236,  above.

191.  See,  for  example,  Mackie,  Norfolk  Annals,  1901,  II,  61-62;  Blas-
hill,  Sutton-in-Holderness,  1896,  pp.  283-284;  F.  Hancock,  The  Parish  of
Selworthy,  Somerset,  1897,  p.  233;  Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,
1900,  p.  64;  The  Reliquary,  VII  (1866),  128;  Folk-Lore  Record,  III,  ii
(1881),  292;  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XV  (1883),  102-104;
XXXI  (1899),  117-118;  The  Antiquary,  IX  (1884),  42;  Journal  of  the
British  Arch^ological  Association,  XL  (1884),  301-302  (Proceedings  Dor-
set Natural  History  and  Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XIII  [1892],  42-44);  The
Western  Antiquary,  III  (1884),  28-29;  IV  (1885),  143;  VI  (1887),  13;
Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),  111-112;  Wickwar,  Witchcraft  and  the  Black  Art,
p.  296  (a  case  in  1924);  Folk-Lore  Journal,  II  (1884),  349-350;  Lincoln-
shire Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1891),  144;  Norfolk  Archaeology,  II  (1849),
306;  Page,  An  Exploration  of  Exmoor,  4th  ed.,  1895,  pp.  33,  307;  Poison,
Our  Highland  Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  pp.  63-64;  Wallonia,  VI  (1898),
62-64;  XVI  (1908),  96-97;  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  XXV  (1910),
105-106;  Hellwig,  Verbrechen  und  Aberglaube,  1908,  pp.  14-18.

192.  Three  Early  Assize  Rolls,  ed.  Page  (Surtees  Society,  LXXXVIII),
PP-  343-344;

193.  Register  of  William  Wickwane,  Lord  Archbishop  of  York  (Surtees
Society,  CXIV),  p.  24.

194.  Child,  The  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  II,  143,  512;  III,
509;  IV,  468;  Oliver  Heywood,  Autobiography  (ca.  1664),  ed.  Turner,  III
(1883),  89;  Gentleman's  Magazine,  April,  1767,  XXXVII,  189;  Addy,
Household  Tales,  1895,  pp.  76-77;  J.  LI.  W.  Page,  An  Exploration  of  Ex-
moor,  4th  ed.,  1895,  pp.  33-34;  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  IV  (1851),
251,  297-298;  VI  (1852),  311;  4th  Series,  VIII  (1871),  395;  5th  Series,  IX
(1878),  8,  III,  478;  6th  Series,  VIII  (1883),  367,  435-436  (cf.  CXLVII
[1924],  61-62);  Journal  British  Archaeological  Association,  New  Series,  V
(1899),  339;  James  Napier,  Notes  and  Reminiscences  relating  to  Partick,
1875,  p.  226.  Cf.  Le  Braz,  La  Legende  de  la  Mort  chez  les  Bretons  Armori-
cains,  1902,  II,  5  (with  Dottin's  note);  the  same,  1922, 1,  395;  Melusine,  II
(1884-85),  252-253;  III  (1886-87),  141 J  215;  Revue  des  Traditions  Popu-
laires, I  (1886),  56;  XXIII  (1908),  391;  XXX  (1915),  100;  La  Tradition,
IV  (1890),  236,  373-374;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  255-256;  Volkskunde,  XII
(1899-1900),  173;  North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  V  (1895-96),  191.

195.  "Maleficiis  et  incantationibus  nefariis  inserviens":  The  Register
of  John  le  Romeyn  (Surtees  Society,  CXXIII),  ed.  Brown,  I,  158,  cf.  pp.
xi-xii.

196.  Modus  Exigendi  Confessiones,  Wilkins,  Concilia,  II,  162.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


401


197.  Bartholomew  de  Cotton,  Historia  Anglicana,  ed.  Luard,  p.  172
(cf.  pp.  171,  180);  Annales  de  Wigornia,  Annales  Monastici,  ed.  Luard,  IV,
499.  Cf.  Annales  de  Dunstaplia,  the  same,  III,  357;  Annales  Londonienses
(Otho  Bill),  ed.  Stubbs,  Chronicles  of  the  Reigns  of  Edward  I.  and  Ed-
ward II.,  1, 97-98.  Cf.  (though  without  mention  of  sorcery)  Annales  Mona-
stici, III,  467;  IV,  321;  Knighton,  ed.  Lumby,  I,  279;  Johannes  de  Oxe-
nedes,  ed.  Ellis,  pp.  275-276;  Rishanger,  ed.  Riley,  p.  420;  Melsa  Chronicle,
ed.  Bond,  II,  251;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1281-1292,  pp.  338,  346,  396,
473;  Calendar  of  Close  Rolls  1288-1296,  pp.  64,  340-341,  351-352;  the
same,  1 296-1302,  pp.  49,  346;  State  Trials  of  the  Reign  of  Edward  the
First,  ed.  Tout  and  Johnstone,  1906,  pp.  xiii,  85-91,  96-98;  Parliamentary
Writs,  ed.  Palgrave,  I,  14,  note  i.  See  also  Hubert  Hall,  Introduction  to
the  Rolls  ed.  of  The  Red  Book  of  the  Exchequer,  III,  cccxxii-cccxxxi;
Christobel  M.  Hoare,  The  History  of  an  East  Anglian  Soke,  1918,  pp.
441-446.

198.  Gregory  of  Tours,  ix,  6.

199.  Annaler  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed,  1848,  pp.  341-342,  347-350,
352,  and  Plate  V;  Aarb0ger  for  Nordisk  Oldkyndighed,  1889,  pp.  321-322,
334-338.  Cf.  Helm,  Altgermanische  Religionsgeschichte,  I  (1913),  165-167.

200.  Blinkenberg,  The  Thunderweapon  in  Religion  and  Folklore,  1911;
L'Anthropologie,  XX  (1909),  31-34;  Bellucci,  II  Feticismo  Primitivo  in
Italia,  1907,  pp.  17-22,  72-76;  Revista  de  Minho,  XIII  (1898),  118-119;
Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  V  (1890),  245-246;  XVI  (1901),  601-
602;  XVII  (1902),  416;  XIX  (1904),  41;  XX  (1905),  138-140;  Sir  William
Brereton's  Travels,  ed.  Hawkins  (Chetham  Society),  I  (1844),  41;  Lovett,
Magic  in  Modern  London,  1925,  pp.  49-51.

201.  M.  G.  Lewis,  Journal  of  a  West  India  Proprietor,  1834,  p.  95.

202.  Thomas,  Kentucky  Superstitions,  1920,  pp.  244-246.  In  1912  a
Louisiana  negro  got  into  trouble  by  selling  "conjure  bags"  which  ensured
immunity  from  arrest  (Cedar  Rapids,  Iowa,  Republican,  April  4,  191 2;
Boston  Transcript,  April  5,  191 2).

203.  W.  Ellis,  Madagascar  Revisited,  1867,  p.  271;  cf.  Sibree,  Mada-
gascar and  its  People,  p.  385.

204.  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  1910,  pp.
283-288,  and  figs.  29-31  (cf.  J.  H.  Holmes,  In  Primitive  New  Guinea,
1924,  pp.  203-204).  See  also  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,
III,  615;  Cross,  Studies  in  Philology  (University  of  North  Carolina),  XVI
(1919),  263-267;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.
231-238;  H.  J.  Bell,  Obeah,  2d  ed.,  1893,  pp.  15-16;  Kristensen,  Danske
Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  339;  Bentley,  Pioneering  on  the  Congo,  1900,  I,  257-
259;  K.  L.  Parker,  The  Euahlayi  Tribe,  1905,  pp.  36-37;  Journal  Anthro-
pological Institute,  XXI  (1892),  118;  XXXIII  (1903),  74-81.  Cf.  Seneca,
Medea,  731-739.

205.  Nassau,  Fetichism  in  West  Africa,  1904,  p.  131.  Cf.  Cavazzi,
Istorica  Descrizione  de'  Tre'  Regni  Congo,  Matamba,  et  Angola,  1687,,  vii,
123,  p.  857;  Kemp,  Nine  Years  at  the  Gold  Coast,  1898,  pp.  124-125;  van
der  Burgt,  Un  Grand  Peuple  de  I'Afrique  Equatoriale,  1903,  p.  55;  Talbot,
In  the  Shadow  of  the  Bush,  191 2,  p.  199  (Nigeria);  Tauxier,  Le  Noir  de


402


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Bondoukou,  1921,  pp.  180-181;  Melland,  In  Witch-Bound  Africa,  1923,
pp.  213-214;  Statham,  Through  Angola,  1922,  p.  203;  Journal  of  the  Straits
Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  LXV  (1913),  29;  Enthoven,  The
Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,  p.  239;  Home  and  Aiston,  Savage  Life  in  Cen-
tral Australia,  1924,  pp.  135-136;  Dornan,  Pygmies  and  Bushmen  of  the
Kalahari,  1925,  p.  295;  D.  R.  MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden  Konde,  1925,
pp.  258-259,  275;  Roscoe,  The  Baganda,  191 1,  pp.  344-345;  the  Same,  The
Bakitara,  1923,  p.  50;  Williams  and  Calvert,  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  New
York,  1859,  p.  195;  Deane,  Fijian  Society,  1921,  pp.  161-165;  Brewster,
The  Hill  Tribes  of  Fiji,  1922,  p.  233;  Stack,  The  Mikirs,  1908,  p.  36;  Gim-
lette,  Malay  Poisons  and  Charm  Cures,  1923,  pp.  68-69,  95?  Barnett,  Sin-
halese Folklore,  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XLV  (1916),  Supplement,  p.  79;
St.  Johnston,  The  Lau  Islands  (Fiji),  1918,  pp.  48-52,  57-60;  Crooke,  Re-
ligion and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  431-432;  Bergen,  Animal
and  Plant  Lore,  1899,  pp.  14-15;  Nider,  Formicarius,  v,  3,  ed.  1516  (1517),
fol.  Ixxiiii  r°  (T.  Heywood,  The  Hierarchic  of  the  Blessed  Angells,  1635,
p.  475);  Anania,  De  Natura  Daemonum,  1581,  p.  173;  Grillando,  De  Sorti-
legiis,  ed.  1592,  iii,  9,  15,  26,  30,  pp.  22,  26-27,  37-3^,  41-4^;  v,  7,  pp.  52-
53;  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  Ill,  267-287;  Hillebrandt  in
Biihler's  Grundriss  der  Indo-Arischen  Philologie,  III,  ii  (1897),  176;  Frisch-
bier,  Hexenspruch  und  Zauberbann,  1870,  pp.  17-18;  Journal  (Royal)
Anthropological  Institute,  XXVI  (1897),  151;  LV  (1925),  229-230,  249;
Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fur  Schleswig-Holsteinische  Geschichte,  XLV
(1915),  149-150,  199,  200,  212,  231;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in
der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  57-60;  Zeitschrift  des  Historischen
Vereins  fiir  Niedersachsen,  1878,  pp.  101-102.

206.  Bogg,  Lower  Wharfeland,  1904,  p.  346  (pins,  needles,  hair,  bits  of
fingernails,  brimstone,  etc.);  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  History  and
Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XXXVII  (1916),  59-60  (two  vipers  and  a  centi-
pede); cf.  Wilde,  Ingatestone,  1913,  p.  401.  As  to  hair,  nails,  teeth,  saliva,
etc.,  in  malefic  witchcraft  see  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  v,  11,  fol.
xxvj  v°  (ed.  1592,  V,  7,  p.  53);  Hartland,  The  Legend  of  Perseus,  II  (1895),
63-78;  Roscoe,  The  Bakitara,  1923,  p.  50  (Central  Africa);  Hans  Meyer,
Die  Barundi,  191 6,  p.  133  (German  East  Africa);  Routledge,  With  a  Pre-
historic People,  1910,  p.  276  (British  East  Africa);  Westermann,  Die  Kpelle
ein  Negerstamm  in  Liberia,  1921,  p.  206.   See  also  pp.  99-103,  above.

207.  Bernard's  deposition,  dated  at  Rouen,  March  14,  i495[-6],  is  in
Cotton  MS.  Caligula  Dvi.  It  is  printed  by  Madden,  Archseologia,  XXVII
(1838),  205-209  (cf.  pp.  171-178);  by  Gairdner,  Letters  and  Papers  Illus-
trative of  the  Reigns  of  Richard  III  and  Henry  VII,  II,  318-323;  and  by
A.  F.  Pollard,  The  Reign  of  Henry  VII,  I,  1 16-123.

208.  Bacon's  Works,  ed.  Ellis  and  Spedding,  VI,  237,  243.

209.  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1494-1509,  p.  49.

210.  Journal  British  Archaeological  Association,  XVIII  (1862),  307.

211.  Robert  of  Brunne,  Handlyng  Synne,  vv.  339-498,  ed.  Furnivall
(Roxburghe  Club),  1862,  pp.  12-17;  Le  Manuel  des  Pechiez,  vv.  1078-
1273,  ed.  Furnivall,  pp.  12-17.

212.  Dan  Michel,  Ayenbite  of  Inwit,  ed.  Morris,  1866,  pp.  40-41,  43,  19


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


(a  translation  of  the  Somme  des  Vices  et  des  Vertus  of  Frere  Lorens,  1279:
see  MS.  Harvard  College  Library,  37591.60,  fol.  30  r°,  cf.  fol.  12  v'').  Cf.
pp.  148-15 1,  above.

213.  For  England  see  the  Acta  contra  Templarios  in  Wilkins,  Concilia,

II,  329-393  ("adorabant  quendam  catum  sibi  in  ipsa  congregatione  appa-
rentem,"  art.  14,  p.  331;  the  obscene  kiss,  art.  30,  p.  331;  heads  as  idols,
art.  46-61,  p.  332);  Records  of  the  Northern  Convocation  (Surtees  Society,
CXIII),  pp.  19-48;  Register  of  John  de  Halton,  Bishop  of  Carlisle  (Canter-
bury and  York  Series,  XIII),  II,  2-9,  15-16,  21-22,  35-36;  Knighton,  ed.
Lumby,  I,  333,  407;  Adam  Murimuth,  ed.  Thompson,  pp.  13-16;  Flores
Historiarum,  ed.  Luard,  III,  143-145,  332-334;  Perkins,  English  Historical
Review,  XXIV  (1909),  432-447;  XXV  (1910),  209-230;  Ramsay,  Genesis
of  Lancaster,  1913,1,  16-20,  34-39;  Lea,  A  History  of  the  Inquisition,  1888,

III,  298-301;  Schottmiiller,  Der  Untergang  des  Templer-Ordens,  1887,  pp.
368-407;  Gmelin,  Schuld  oder  Unschuld  des  Templerordens,  1893,  pp.
453-466.  For  English  accounts  of  the  French  prosecution  see  Flores  His-
toriarum, ed.  Luard,  III,  143,  147,  331;  Anonymous  Annales  Regis  Ed-
wardi  Primi,  in  Riley's  ed.  of  Rishanger,  pp.  492-499.

214.  This  method  of  divination  was  practised  in  London  by  Richard
Berewold  about  1382.  See  p.  193,  above.

215.  Registrum  Radulphi  Baldock  (Canterbury  and  York  Series,  VII),
ed.  Fowler,  I,  144-145.

216.  The  mandate  of  Boniface  IX  directing  the  Archbishop  of  Canter-
bury to  prosecute  Lollards  (1395)  declares  that  they  assert  that  "exor-
cisms and  blessings  in  church  of  wine,  bread,  water,  oil,  salt,  wax,  incense,
the  altar  stone,  church  walls,  vestments,  mitres,  pastoral  or  pilgrims
staves,  are  practices  of  necromancy"  (Papal  Letters,  IV,  515).

217.  An  Apology  for  Lollard  Doctrines,  ed.  Todd  (Camden  Society,
XX),  pp.  90-98.  For  such  lists  and  definitions  see  also  Pollux,  Onomasti-
con,  vii,  188;  Isidore,  Origines,  viii,  9;  John  of  Salisbury,  Policraticus,  i,  12,
ed.  Webb,  I,  50-54.  The  palm  must  be  awarded  to  John  Gaule,  who,  in  his
Jlvs-jj.avTLa  the  Mag-astro-mancer  (1652),  catalogues  more  than  fifty  kinds
of-mancy  (pp.  165-166).

218.  Cf.  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  pp.  343-344.

219.  Contemporary  Narrative,  ed.  Wright  (Camden  Society,  XXIV),
pp.  1-3,  32.  This  was  in  Ireland,  but  within  the  English  Pale,  and  the
prosecuting  bishop  was  not  an  Irishman.

220.  See  p.  169,  above.

221.  Knighton,  ed.  Lumby,  I,  452;  Adam  Murimuth,  ed.  Thompson,  pp.
59-60;  Robert  of  Avesbury,  ed.  Thompson,  pp.  284-285;  Walsingham,  His-
toria  Anglicana,  ed.  Riley,  I,  192-193  (cf.  II,  351);  Hemingsburgh  (Hem-
ingsford),  ed.  Hamilton,  II,  301-302  (ed.  Hearne,  1731,  II,  271);  Annales
Paulini  (Chronicles  of  the  Reigns  of  Edward  I  and  Edward  II,  ed.  Stubbs,
I,  349);  Gesta  Edwardi  Tertii  (the  same,  II,  100);  Vita  Edwardi  Secundi
(the  same,  II,  291).  Cf.  Rymer's  Foedera,  ed.  Holmes,  IV,  430;  Pike,  His-
tory of  Crime,  I,  228-229,  471.

222.  Rymer's  Foedera,  ed.  Holmes,  IV,  424.  The  confession  is  extant  in
French,  English,  and  Latin,  and  purports  to  have  been  made  before  Robert


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Houell,  Coroner  of  the  King's  Household,  and  repeated  in  Parliament  on
March  16,  1330:  French,  Cotton  MS.  Claudius  Eviii  (Thompson's  edition
of  Adam  Murimuth,  pp.  253-255);  English,  Cotton  MS.  Julius  Cii  (Journal
of  the  British  Archaeological  Association,  VII  [1851],  140-142;  Latin,  see
Riley's  edition  of  Walsingham's  Historia  Anglicana,  II,  351-352.  Sorcery
or  conjuration  seems  to  be  hinted  by  the  phrase  "quidam  pessimi  explora-
tores"  in  the  Annales  Paulini  (ed.  Stubbs,  as  above,  I,  349).

223.  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  II,  52,  53b;  cf.  II,  33-34.

224.  Hansen,  Quellen,  p.  8.

225.  Cf.  Wm.  Brown,  Yorkshire  Archaeological  Journal,  XXIII  (191 5),
300-307.

226.  Year  Book  29  Edward  III,  ed.  1679,  p.  12  ("Les  lustices  avoient
trove  in  le  cote  Shawel  qui  fuit  le  champion  I'Evesque,  plusors  rolles  des
orisons  et  sortileges");  George  Neilson,  Trial  by  Combat,  1890,  p.  152;
Horwood,  Year  Books  of  32-33  Edward  I  (Rolls  Series),  p.  xvi,  note.

227.  Dugdale,  Origines  Juridiciales,  1671,  p.  82;  cf.  Neilson,  pp.  91,  159,
163.

228.  Arundel  Penitential,  §78  (Schmitz,  Die  Bussbucher,  I  [1883],
457).  Cf.  Fournier,  Revue  d'Histoire  et  de  Litterature  Religieuses,  IX
(1904),  97-98.  The  MS.  was  written  in  England  in  the  thirteenth  century;
the  work  itself  dates  probably  from  the  eleventh  or  twelfth.

229.  Burchard,  Decretum,  x,  25,  Migne,  CXL,  836;  Summa  de  Judiciis,
vii,  15  (Schmitz,  II,  496).  See  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,
I9°9. II> 329-330-

230.  Liebermann,  Die  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  I,  407,  410-41 1,  415,
418,  421,  423,  424;  cf.  the  Prankish  rituals  edited  by  Zeumer,  Formulae
Aevi  Merowingici  et  Karolini,  1886  (Monumenta,  Leges,  Section  V),  pp.
604-627.  Speaking  of  the  duel  between  the  Dukes  of  Hereford  and  Nor-
folk in  1398,  Adam  of  Usk  remarks  that  "quia  rex  a  sortilegio  habuerat
quod  dux  Northfolchie  tunc  prevaleret,  ducis  Herfordie  destruccionem
afFectando  multum  gaudebat"  (Thompson's  2d  ed.,  1904,  p.  24).

231.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  154  (ed.  Leonhardi,  I,  46).

232.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  328,  from  De  Taxone  Liber  (ed.
Howald  and  Sigerist,  Corpus  Medicorum  Latinorum,  IV  [1927],  230).  One
class  of  the  Latin  MSS.  has  an  unintelligible  charm:  "Butabar  torthon
hydran,"  etc.  See  also  Medicina  de  Quadrupedibus,  an  Early  M[iddle]
E[nglish]  Version,  ed.  Delcourt  (Anglistische  Forschungen,  ed.  Hoops,
XL),  1914,  pp.  2-5.  A  badger's  foot  was  one  of  the  magic  articles  in  the
collection  of  de  Rojas's  Celestina  (ed.  Cejador  y  Frauca,  1913,  I,  82).  Cf.
Pliny,  xxviii,  29,  1 16,  on  the  chameleon.  Note  also  the  favorite  negro  talis-
man, a  rabbit's  foot.

233.  Eustathius  on  Odyssey,  xix,  247,  p.  1864;  Suidas,  s.  v.  'E^ecia
yp6.iJLiJ.aT a,  ed.  Bernhardy,  I,  673;  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  1829,  pp.  1163-
II 64,  1330;  references  in  Bernhardy,  and  in  Alberti's  Hesychius,  I  (1746),
1 544-1 545.  Hesychius  gives  some  of  the  gibberish  (ed.  M.  Schmidt,  II
[i860],  240).  See  Kuhnert,  Pauly-Wissowa,  V,  x  (1905),  2771-2773.

234.  Kormaks  Saga,  chap.  12,  ed.  1832,  pp.  116-119;  Vigfusson  and
Powell,  Corpus  Poeticum  Boreale,  1883,  I,  362.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


235.  Thomas  Favent,  Historia  siue  Narracio  de  Modo  et  Forma  Mira-
bilis  Parliamenti,  ed.  McKisack  (Camden  Miscellany,  XIV),  1926,  p.  18;
Howell,  State  Trials,  I  (1816),  117.  Favent's  details  may  or  may  not  be
correct,  but  they  are  equally  good  for  our  purpose  in  either  case,  since  they
reflect  the  superstitious  beliefs  of  the  fourteenth  century.  Compare  the  use
of  charms  and  amulets  to  enable  one  to  withstand  torture  (Bouvet,  Les
Manieres  Admirables  pour  Decouvrir  toutes  Sortes  de  Crimes  et  Sortileges,
1659,  pp.  194-199).

236.  Heydon,  Psonthonphancia,  1664,  p.  86.  Cf.  Fletcher,  The  Little
French  Lawyer,  iv,  4;  Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark,  1656,  p.  56.

237.  Thoms,  Anecdotes  and  Traditions  (Camden  Society),  1839,  pp.
111-113.

238.  For  charms,  amulets,  and  girdles  that  keep  one  safe  from  weapons
see,  for  example,  Gaule,  Select  Cases  of  Conscience  touching  Witches  and
Witchcrafts,  1646,  p.  113;  [N.  Orchard,]  The  Doctrine  of  Devils,  1676,
p.  196;  Habington,  The  Queen  ofArragon,  i,  i.  Collier's  Dodsley,  IX,  342;
Train,  An  Historical  and  Statistical  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1845,  II,
177;  Carmichael,  Carmina  Gadelica,  1900,  II,  251  (girdle);  O.  Berthold,
Die  Unverwundbarkeit  in  Sage  und  Aberglauben  der  Griechen  (Reli-
gionsgeschichtliche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  XI,  i),  191 1,  pp.  56-59;
Dieterich,  Kleine  Schriften,  191 1,  pp.  234-251;  Martin  Plantsch,  Opuscu-
lum  de  Sagis  Maleficis,  1507,  sig.  b  v.  If.  i  v°;  Heinrich  von  dem  Tiirlin,
Diu  Crone,  4870-4888,  14942-14955,  ed.  Scholl,  1852,  pp.  60,  183-184
(girdle);  Scheible,  Das  Kloster,  VI  (1847),  214-216;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.
319-320;  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,  III  (1843),  42;  Germania,  XXV  (1880),  70;
XXVI  (1881),  241;  Alemannia,  XVII  (1889),  240,  242;  XIX  (1892),  136-
138;  XXXVII  (1909),  21-22;  Am  Urdhs-Brunnen,  II  (1883-85),  176;
VI  (1888-89),  93;  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  208-219,  230-232;
Kleeberger,  Volkskundliches  aus  Fischbach  i.  d.  Pfalz,  1902,  pp.  58-62;
Hessische  Blatter  fiir  Volkskunde,  I  (1902),  17-18;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins
fur  Rheinische  und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,  VIII  (191 1),  78-79;  Olbrich,
Mitteilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  X,  i,  Heft  19
(1908),  45-71 ;  Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthropologie,  III  (1900),  93-94;  XXV
(1906),  77, 159-160;  XLVII  (1912),  345-352;  Gering,  Ueber  Weissagungund
Zauber  im  Nordischen  Altertum,  1902,  pp.  16-18;  Kristensen,  Jyske  Folke-
minder,  VI  (1883),  21 1-212;  the  Same,  Danske  Sagn,  II  (1893),  325-331 ;  VI,
i  (1900),  253-254;  Wigstrom,  Folktro  ock  Sagner,  Nyare  Bidrag  till  Kanne-
dom  om  de  Svenska  Landsmal,  VIII,  iii  (1902),  299;  Capello  and  Ivens,  De
Benguella  as  Terras  de  lacca,  1881,  I,  224;  D.  Kemp,  Nine  Years  at  the
Gold  Coast,  1898,  p.  124;  Mary  H.  Kingsley,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  1897,
p.  467;  Decle,  Three  Years  in  Savage  Africa,  1898,  p.  155;  Tauxier,  Le  Noir
de  Bondoukou,  1921,  p.  180;  Hewat,  Bantu  Folk  Lore,  p.  51;  Callaway,
The  Religious  System  of  the  Amazulu,  1870,  p.  441;  E.  P.  Herrick,  The
Southern  Workman,  XXXVI  (1907),  401;  The  Antananarivo  Annual,  No.
2,  Vol.  I  (1876,  reprinted  1885),  318-319;  No.  20  (1896),  V,  421-425;  Skeat,
Malay  Magic,  1900,  p.  524;  Annales  du  Musee  Guimet,  XXVI,  iv  (1900),
79,  85,  105-106;  Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  XX  (1891),  127;
XLVI  (1916),  325;  Gillen,  Report  of  the  Horn  Expedition,  ed.  Spencer,


406         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


1896,  Part  IV,  p.  182  (Australian  girdle).  Cf.  Speed,  The  History  of  Great
Britain,  161 1,  chap.  22,  §  27,  p.  807.  See  also  the  seventeenth-century
spell  in  Sloane  MS.  631,  fol.  224  r°;  cf.  Sloane  MS.  2628,  fol.  11  r°.  In
1645  Margery  Sparam  confessed  that  she  had  sent  her  two  bl^ck  imps
"after  her  husband  beinge  a  solier  to  protect  him";  and  Ann  Smith  con-
fessed that  "her  sone  haue  one  imp  w*  him  in  the  army"  (Add.  MS.
27402,  foil.  120  v°,  121  r").

239.  Vogt,  Die  Schutzbriefe  unserer  Soldaten,  Festschrift  zur  Jahrhun-
dertfeier  der  Universitat  zu  Breslau,  ed.  Siebs,  191 1,  pp.  586-620;  Zeit-
schrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  XXV  (1915),  243-245;  Lovett,  Magic
in  Modern  London,  1925,  pp.  lo-ii,  13-15.  Cf.  Korrespondenzblatt  des
Vereins  fiir  Siebenbiirgische  Landeskunde,  XXXVIII  (191 5),  35-37;
Niederlausitzer  Mittheilungen,  VIII  (1904),  298-299;  X  (1909),  331-332.

240.  In  1620  the  luckless  schoolmaster  Peacock  was  imprisoned  (and
tortured)  for  attempting  "to  infatuate  the  king's  judgment  by  sorcery"  in
the  business  of  Sir  Thomas  Lake  (Chamberlain  to  Carleton,  February  28,
1620,  [Birch,]  The  Court  and  Times  of  James  the  First,  1848,  II,  202;
State  Papers,  Domestic,  161 9-1 623,  p.  125;  Spedding,  Bacon's  Letters  and
Life,  VII,  76-80).

241.  Cicero,  Brutus,  60,  217:  "Idque  veneficiis  et  cantionibus  Titiniae
factum  esse  dicebat."  Of  ancient  defixiones  the  four  commonest  uses  were
in  litigation,  in  theft,  in  chariot  races,  and  in  love  (Audollent,  Defixionum
Tabellae,  1904,  p.  Ixxxix).  In  1663,  John  Heydon,  a  devotee  of  astrology,
geomancy,  and  all  the  Rosicrucian  arts  of  divination,  who  practised  as  an
attorney  at  the  King's  Bench,  Westminster,  advertised  his  superiority  to
other  lawyers  in  the  following  terms:  "  By  these  Arts  we  gain  credit:  for  we
will  undertake  no  cause  that  shall  go  against  us;  let  the  Plaintiff  or  Defen-
dant pretend  what  they  will,  we  know  beforehand  what  good  or  evil  will
end  the  business;  and  so  we  (contrary  to  others)  endeavour  peace,  save
money  and  trouble"  (Theomagia:  or.  The  Temple  of  Wisdome,  1663,  Book
iii,  chap.  19,  p.  125).

242.  E.  W.  Smith  and  Dale,  The  Ila-speaking  Peoples  of  Northern
Rhodesia,  1920,  I,  264.  For  similar  witchcraft  see  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of
the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.  277-278;  Hellwig,  Verbrechen  und  Aber-
glaube,  1908,  pp.  113-118;  the  Same,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,
XVIII  (191 5),  296-300;  Lowenstimm,  Aberglaube  und  Strafrecht,  1897,
pp.  128-129;  Wolf,  Beitriige  zur  Deutschen  Mythologie,  I  (1852),  258;
Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  524-525;  Bidrag  till  Soderman-
lands  Aldre  Kulturhistoria,  I,  iv  (1883),  76-77;  Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-
Anthropologie,  III  (1900),  90-91.

243.  Havamal,  sts.  146-163  (Bugge,  Norroen  Fornkvae'Si,  1867,  pp.  62-
64;  Corpus  Poeticum  Boreale,  ed.  Vigfusson  and  Powell,  1883,  I,  26-28).

244.  Calendars  of  the  Proceedings  in  Chancery,  I  (1827),  xxiv.

245.  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1385-1389,  p.  63.

246.  La  Maniere  de  Langage,  ed.  Stengel,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Neufranzos-
ische  Sprache  und  Literatur,  I  (1879),  7;  Chaucer,  The  House  of  Fame,
vv.  1 277-1 28 1;  Royster,  Studies  in  Philology,  University  of  North  Caro-
lina, XXIII  (1926),  380-384.  On  tregetours  see  Guilielmus  Alvernus,  De


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


407


Universo,  ii,  3,  23,  Opera,  1674, 1,  1062;  cf.  W.  Hertz,  Gesammelte  Abhand-
lungen,  1905,  p.  427,  note  2.

247.  The  Witch  of  Endor  was  a  "phitonissa"  (Friar's  Tale,  D  1510).

248.  Cf.  Canterbury  Tales,  Prologue,  411-418.  See  also  Symphorien
Champier,  Dyalogus  in  Magicarum  Artium  Destructionem,  ii,  2  (Lyons,
ca.  1500,  sig.  b.  If.  2  v°),  on  golden  images  "ad  fortunandum  vel  sanandum
a  certis  morbis  vel  contraria  faciendum."

249.  House  of  Fame,  1 259-1 270.

250.  The  Squire's  Tale,  F  216-219.

251.  The  Friar's  Tale,  D  1299-1303.

252.  The  Parson's  Tale,  §§  37-38,  ed.  Skeat,  IV,  607.

253.  Tatlock,  Astrology  and  Magic  in  The  Franklin's  Tale,  Kittredge
Anniversary  Papers,  1913,  pp.  339-350-

254.  Gower,  Confessio  Amantis,  vi,  1 261-2400.

255.  The  same,  v,  6670-6675.

256.  The  same,  3559-3622,  3690-3718,  3945-4174.  See  also  what  Gower
says  of  Achelous,  "a  soubtil  man,"  who  was  able  to  deceive  "thurgh
magique  and  sorcerie"  (iv,  2075-2078).

257.  Jean  Creton,  ed.  Buchon,  Collection  des  Chroniques,  XXIV  (i  826),
413;  Archasologia,  XX  (1824),  374.

258.  Palgrave,  An  Essay  upon  the  Original  Authority  of  the  King's
Council,  1834,  pp.  87-88.

259.  Collectanea  Anglo-Premonstratensia,  ed.  Gasquet  (Camden  3d
Series,  XII),  III,  117-118.

260.  Capgrave,  Chronicle  of  England,  ed.  Hingeston,  p.  281.

261.  Rymer,  Foedera,  2d  ed.,  VIII,  427;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls
1405-1406,  p.  112;  Proceedings  and  Ordinances  of  the  Privy  Council,  ed.
Nicolas,  I,  288.

262.  Historiae  Dunelmensis  Scriptores  Tres,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  Society,
IX),  Appendix,  pp.  cxciv-cxcv.

263.  John  Mirk  (Myrc),  Instructions  for  Parish  Priests,  vv.  360-371,
969-974,  ed.  Peacock  (Early  English  Text  Society),  1868,  1902,  pp.  12,  30.

264.  Registrum  Roberti  Mascall,  ed.  Parry  (Canterbury  and  York
Series,  XXI),  pp.  74-75-.  See  pp.  33-34,  above.

265.  Gregory's  Chronicle,  ed.  Gairdner,  The  Historical  Collections  of  a
Citizen  of  London  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XVII),  p.  185.

266.  Durham  Depositions,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  Society,  XXI),  p.  33.

267.  Durham  Depositions,  p.  84.

268.  See,  for  example.  Journal  of  the  British  Archaeological  Society,
XVIII  (1862),  307  (1302);  Durham  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  pp.  27,  84,  91,
247..3i3>3i8  (i435>  1567,  I570,  157^,  I574,  1586);  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,
VI,  232  (1470);  Calendar  to  the  Records  of  Doncaster,  III,  151  (1595);
Worcester  County  Records,  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  Various  Collec-
tions, I,  293  (1617);  W.  H.  Hale,  A  Series  of  Precedents  and  Proceedings,
1847,  pp.  ^44-^45  (1619);  Municipal  Records  of  Dorchester,  Dorset,  ed.
Mayo,  1908,  p.  664  (1634);  North  Riding  Record  Society,  IV  (1886),  182
(1640);  Wilts  Quarter  Sessions,  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  Various  Col-
lections, I,  122, 127  (1650, 1653);  Somerset  Record  Society,  XXVIII  (1912),


4o8


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


362  (1658);  W.  J.  Hardy,  Hertford  County  Records,  Notes  and  Extracts
from  the  Sessions  Rolls,  1905,  I,  217  (1669);  W.  Rye,  Extracts  from  the
Court  Books  of  Norwich  1666-1688,  1905,  p.  162  (1681);  Yorkshire  Notes
and  Queries,  I  (1888),  239  (1690);  North  Riding  Record  Society,  IX  (1892),
6  (1691);  Moule,  Descriptive  Catalogue  of  the  Charters  of  Weymouth,
1883,  p.  87  (1716).  Slander  in  cases  of  alleged  theft  on  the  basis  of  a  sor-
cerer's pretended  revelations  was  also  common  (see  pp.  187-197,  above).

269.  Audollent,  Defixionum  Tabellae,  No.  i,  pp.  6-8.  Cf.  No.  4,  pp.  10-
II;  No.  8,  pp.  15-16.

270.  The  Eastern  Counties  Collectanea,  ed.  by  J.  L'Estrange,  1872-
73,  p.  207.

271.  More's  History  of  King  Richard  III,  ed.  Lumby,  pp.  46-47;
Workes,  1557,  p.  54.  Cf.  Grafton's  Chronicle,  ed.  1569,  p.  779  (II  [1809],
98);  Hall's  Chronicle,  ed.  1809,  p.  360.  See  Gairdner,  History  of  the  Life
and  Reign  of  Richard  the  Third,  2d  ed.,  1879,  PP-  80-84.

272.  Bill  of  attainder,  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  VI,  245.

273.  The  Miracles  of  King  Henry  VI,  ed.  Knox  and  Leslie,  1923,  pp.
172-176.  A  recipe  for  a  swollen  and  aching  face  (ca.  1440)  is  labelled
"Pur  le  blastyng  de  mal  esprit"  (Heinrich,  Ein  Mittelenglisches  Medizin-
buch,  1896,  p.  171).

274.  Hale,  pp.  32-33.

275.  See  John  Taylor  the  Water  Poet,  The  Water-Cormorant  his  Com-
plaint, 1622,  sig.  E,  Iff.  2  v°-F2  r",  for  the  character  of  "A  Figure  flinger,  or
a  couzning  cunning  man."

276.  Tyndale's  petition,  published  by  Martin,  Archaeologia,  LX  (1907),
376-

277.  Hale,  p.  77:  "Notatur  quod  ymaginavit  quasdam  artes  divini-
tarias,  ad  interficiendum  maritum  suum."

278.  Ellis,  Original  Letters,  2d  ed.,  I  (1825),  217.

279.  Visitations  of  the  Diocese  of  Norwich  1492-1532,  ed.  Jessopp
(Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XLIII),  pp.  269,  270.

280.  Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIII,  V,  Nos.  1679-1680,  pp.  694-696;
VI,  Nos.  257,  258,  pp.  115-116;  VII,  No.  923  (xxi),  p.  346;  Palgrave,  Nor-
folk Archseology,  I  (1847),  219-223;  Froude,  History  of  England,  II  (1856),
178-182.  Jones's  unsigned  confession  is  ascribed  to  Sir  Edward  Neville  by
Palgrave,  and,  in  Letters  and  Papers,  to  Thomas  Wood;  but  if  one  com-
pares it  with  Jones's  letter  to  Cromwell  (Letters  and  Papers,  V,  No.  1680)
and  with  Wood's  accusations  (V,  No.  1679),  the  authorship  is  clear.

281.  Statutes  of  the  Realm,  III  (1817),  446-451;  Letters  and  Papers,
VI  and  VII,  index,  s.  v.  Barton;  letter  to  Cromwell,  Three  Chapters  of
Letters  relating  to  the  Suppression  of  Monasteries,  ed.  Wright  (Camden
Society,  XXVI),  14-22;  Archaeologia  Cantiana,  I  (1853),  40;  Chronicle  of
the  Grey  Friars,  ed.  Nichols  (Camden  Society,  LIII),  p.  37;  Wriothesley's
Chronicle,  ed.  Hamilton  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XI),  I,  23,  24,  85;
Chronicle  in  Camden  Miscellany,  XII,  8,  9;  Chronicle  in  Richard  Hill's
MS.,  ed.  Dyboski,  pp.  163,  164;  Stow,  Annales,  ed.  1631,  pp.  569-570;
Cranmer,  Miscellaneous  Writings  and  Letters,  ed.  Cox  (Parker  Society),
pp.  65-66,  252,  271-274;  Harpsfield,  A  Treatise  on  the  Pretended  Divorce,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  II


ed.  Pocock  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XXI),  p.  178;  Burnet,  The  His-
tory of  the  Reformation,  I  (1679),  Collection,  pp.  123-127;  Amos,  Obser-
vations on  the  Statutes  of  the  Reformation  Parliament,  1859,  pp.  39-45;
Gairdner,  Lollardy  and  the  Reformation,  I  (1908),  453-462;  Gasquet,
Henry  VIII  and  the  English  Monasteries,  5th  ed.,  1893,  I,  1 10-150;
Cheney,  Transactions  Royal  Historical  Society,  2d  Series,  XVIII  (1904),
107-129;  Mundy,  The  Home  Counties  Magazine,  VII  (1905),  34-40;  The
Antiquary,  XLVI  (1910),  213-219;  Merriman,  Life  and  Letters  of  Thomas
Cromwell,  1902,  I,  1 18-120,  361,  371,  373-379;  II,  291.

282.  The  Image  of  Ypocresye,  vv.  1685-1706,  Furnivall,  Ballads  from
Manuscripts,  I,  233-234.

283.  Letters  and  Papers,  VII,  No.  72,  p.  29.

284.  More's  letter,  Burnet,  The  History  of  the  Reformation,  2d  ed.,  II
(1683),  Collection,  p.  289;  cf.  Letters  and  Papers,  VII,  No.  287,  p.  120.

285.  Scot,  vii,  I,  p.  126  (94),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  loi ;  cf.  vii,  3,  p.  133  (99),
ed.  Nicholson,  p.  107.

286.  Cromwell  to  the  Earl  of  Rutland,  August  9,  1535,  Merriman,  Life
and  Letters  of  Thomas  Cromwell,  1902,  I,  415.

287.  See  p.  189.

288.  Letters  and  Papers,  XII,  ii.  No.  231,  pp.  97-98.

289.  The  same,  XII,  ii.  No.  267,  pp.  112-113  (Merriman,  Life  and  Let-
ters of  Thomas  Cromwell,  1902,  II,  64-65);  No.  272,  p.  114;  No.  328,
p.  134;  No.  337,  p.  138;  No.  424,  p.  172;  No.  467,  p.  184;  No.  569,  p.  214;
Nos.  625-626,  pp.  230-232;  No.  661,  p.  241;  No.  697,  p.  251.

290.  State  Papers,  Henry  VIII,  VIII,  218,  219,  300;  Letters  and  Papers,
XIV,  ii,  No.  726,  pp.  266-267  (Merriman,  II,  243-244);  XV,  No.  37,  p.  14;
No.  217,  p.  76;  XVI,  No.  678  (23),  p.  327.

291.  Letters  and  Papers,  XIII,  ii,  No.  815,  p.  323.

292.  The  same,  XIV,  i,  No.  278,  p.  108.

293.  Parliament  Roll,  32  Henry  VIII,  Letters  and  Papers,  XV,  No.  498,
§  59,  p.  216.  Cf.  the  letter  from  Richard  Hilles  to  Bullinger,  Original  Let-
ters (Parker  Society),  I  (1846),  202.  See  also  Chronicle  of  the  Grey  Friars,
ed.  Nichols  (Camden  Society,  LIII),  p.  44;  Wriothesley's  Chronicle,  ed.
Hamilton  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XI),  I,  120;  London  Chronicle,
Camden  Miscellany,  XII,  16;  Stow,  Annales,  ed.  1631,  p.  580;  Burnet,  The
History  of  the  Reformation,  2d  ed.,  I  (1681),  361.

294.  Correspondance  Politique  de  MM.  de  Castillon  et  de  Marillac,  ed.
Kaulek,  1885,  p.  207.

295.  Letters  and  Papers,  XV,  No.  784,  p.  369.

296.  Proceedings  of  the  Privy  Council,  ed.  Nicolas,  VII,  12-14,  25,  27,
30,  38;  Letters  and  Papers,  XV,  Nos.  1006,  1008,  loii,  pp.  499,  500;  XVI,
Nos.  8,  14,  55,  pp.  3,  5,  16.

297.  Scot,  xvi,  3,  pp.  473-474  (341-342),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  398-399.

298.  Scot,  viii,  I,  pp.  157-158  (116),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  126.

299.  Proceedings  of  the  Privy  Council,  ed.  Nicolas,  VII,  106-107;  Let-
ters and  Papers,  XVI,  No.  424,  p.  214.

300.  Letters  and  Papers,  XVII,  No.  1012,  §  48,  p.  567.

301.  The  same,  XX,  i,  No.  542,  p.  256.


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


302.  Cf.  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  157-158.

303.  To  evoke  or  conjure  "the  holy  angels"  is  risky  business,  for  it  is
always  possible  that  a  demon  may  come  instead.  See  lamblichus,  De
Mysteriis,  ii,  10,  ed.  Parthey,  1857,  p.  91;  iii,  31,  p.  177;  Arnobius,  Ad-
versus  Gentes,  iv,  12,  Migne,  V,  1024,  1026;  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  1829,
p.  58.

304.  Letters  and  Papers,  XXI,  ii,  Nos.  203,  212,  417-421,  pp.  loi,  103-
104,  198-201;  Martin,  The  Archaeological  Review,  II  (1889),  280-283.

305.  Doyle,  Official  Baronage,  1886,  III,  634-635.

306.  Roger  Hutchinson,  The  Image  of  God  or  Laie  Mans  Booke,  1550,
chap.  24,  Works,  ed.  Bruce  (Parker  Society),  1842,  p.  142.

307.  John  Caius,  A  Boke  or  Counseill  against  the  Disease  commonly
called  the  Sweate  or  Sweatyng  Siknesse,  1552  (in  Works,  ed.  Roberts,  1912,
p.  26).  Compare  the  complaint  of  Antonius  Niger,  City  Physician  at
Brunswick,  in  a  letter  of  ca.  1537:  "Ita  populus  hie  deditus  est  mulierculis
medicinam  incredibili  et  periculosa  stulticia  porrigentibus,  Empyricis,
ludaeis,  Aromatarijs  et  imperitissimis  quibusque"  (Zeitschrift  des  His-
torischen  Vereins  fiir  Niedersachsen,  1903,  p.  537).  See  also  Cotta,  A  Short
Discoverie  of  the  Vnobserved  Dangers  of  Severall  Sorts  of  Ignorant  and
Vnconsiderate  Practisers  of  Physicke  in  England,  161 2.

308.  Nashe,  Have  with  You  to  Saffron-Walden,  1596,  Works,  ed.  Mc-
Kerrow,  III,  48.

309.  London  Chronicle  in  Camden  Miscellany,  XII,  36-37;  Wriothes-
ley's  Chronicle,  ed.  Hamilton  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XX),  II,  117-
118;  Chronicle  of  Queen  Jane,  etc.,  ed.  J.  G.  Nichols  (Camden  Society,
XLVIII),  p.  78;  Chronicle  of  the  Grey  Friars,  ed.  J.  G.  Nichols  (Camden
Society,  LIII),  p.  90;  Diary  of  Henry  Machyn,  ed.  J.  G.  Nichols  (Camden
Society,  XLII),  p.  66;  Holinshed,  IV  (1808),  56;  Stow,  Annales,  ed.  1631,
p.  624.

310.  See  Dee's  own  account  in  his  Compendious  Rehearsall,  1592  (Chet-
ham  Miscellanies,  Vol.  I  [1851],  Chetham  Society,  XXIV,  Autobiographi-
cal Tracts  of  Dr.  John  Dee,  ed.  Crossley,  pp.  20-21).  Cf.  Dee's  Aduertise-
ment,  prefixed  to  his  General  and  Rare  Memorials  pertaining  to  the  Perfect
Arte  of  Navigation,  1577  (Crossley,  p.  57).  See  also  Acts  of  the  Privy
Council,  New  Series,  V,  137,  139,  143,  176;  Strype,  Ecclesiastical  Me-
morials, Oxford  ed.,  Ill,  i  (1822),  348-349.

311.  Scot,  XV,  42,  pp.  466-489  (337-338),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  393-395.
The  letter  is  dated  "From  the  bench  this  8.  of  March,  1582,"  i.  e.  1583.

312.  See  pp.  27-31.

313.  Hooper,  A  Declaration  of  the  Ten  Holy  Commaundementes,  1548
(Early  Writings,  ed.  Carr,  Parker  Society),  chap.  4,  p.  308.  The  Preface  is
dated  November  5,  1549.

314.  The  same,  chap.  6,  pp.  326-327,  329.

315.  Chap.  4,  p.  308,  and  chap.  6,  pp.  328-329  (cf.  pp.  330-3:^3).

316.  Hooper,  Exposition  upon  Psalm  LXXIII  (Later  Writings,  ed.
Nevinson,  Parker  Society,  p.  294).

317.  Ten  Holy  Commaundements,  chap.  6,  pp.  329-330.

318.  Later  Writings,  p.  I45.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


411


319.  Records  of  the  Diocese  of  Gloucester,  Historical  MSS.  Commis-
sion, Various  Collections,  VII,  56,  53.

320.  Narratives  of  the  Days  of  the  Reformation,  ed.  J.  G.  Nichols,

P-  335-

321.  Latimer,  Second  Sermon  on  the  Lord's  Prayer,  i^c;2  (Works,  ed.
Corrie,  Parker  Society,  I,  349,  345);  Lincolnshire  Sermon,  1553  (1552)
(Works,  I,  534).  Wizards  may  be  the  correct  reading  instead  of  witches.

CHAPTER  III
Image  Magic  and  the  Like

1.  Budge,  Egyptian  Magic,  1901,  pp.  65-103;  the  Same,  The  Life  and
Exploits  of  Alexander  the  Great,  1896,  pp.  x-xvii;  the  Same,  Facsimiles
of  Egyptian  Hieratic  Papyri,  I  (1910),  10;  Moret,  La  Magic  dans  I'figypte
Ancienne,  Conferences  faites  au  Musee  Guimet,  1906,  pp.  264-268  (Bib-
liotheque  de  Vulgarisation,  XX);  Fossey,  La  Magie  Assyrienne,  1902,
pp.  78-81,  95,  103,  130;  Jastrow,  Die  Religion  Babylonians  und  Assyrians,
I  (1905),  285,  296-297,  304-313;  R.  C.  Thompson,  The  Devils  and  Evil
Spirits  of  Babylonia,  II  (1904),  xxxv-xxxvii,  98-11 1;  Tallqvist,  Die  As-
syrische  Beschworungsserie  Maqlu,  I,  18-19,  ^3>  3^~39>  4^~53)  ^'^"^1^  7°~
73,  78-79.  100-109.

2.  V.  Henry,  La  Magie  dans  ITnde  Antique,  1909,  pp.  169-173,  227-
230;  Hillebrandt  in  Biihler's  Grundriss  der  Indo-Arischen  Philologie,  III,
ii  (1897),  177;  Caland,  Altindischer  Zauberritual,  1900,  pp.  119,  134,  166,
184.  For  mediaeval  and  modern  India  see  Manucci,  Storia  do  Mogor,
transl.  by  Irvine,  III  (1907),  207-208,  215-216;  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,
1882,  p.  88;  Oman,  Cults,  Customs  and  Superstitions  of  India,  1908,  pp.
317-321;  The  Indian  Antiquary,  V  (1876),  21-22;  XXVIII  (1899),  82-
83;  XXXIII  (1904),  57;  XXXVI  (1907),  ao,  310;  G.  W.  Briggs,  The
Chamars,  1920,  p.  170;  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,
1926,  pp.  109,  432-433;  Ivanow,  Journal  and  Proceedings  Asiatic  Society
of  Bengal,  New  Series,  XIX  (1924),  ,43-50;  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,
I  (1883-84),  125;  II  (1884-85),  94;  North  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  IV
(1894-95),  72;  J.  H.  Hutton,  The  Angami  Nagas,  1921,  pp.  241-242;
J.  P.  Mills,TheLhotaNagas,  1922,  pp.  168-169;  the  Same,  The  Ao  Nagas,
1926,  pp.  241-242;  Hodson,  The  Naga  Tribes  of  Manipur,  191 1,  p.  142;
Shakespear,  The  Lushei  Kuki  Clans,  1912,  p.  109;  Mrs.  Leslie  Milne,
The  Home  of  an  Eastern  Clan,  1924,  p.  263;  R.  V.  Russell,  The  Tribes
and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces  of  India,  1916,  III,  562,  563;  IV,  140;
Enthoven,  The  Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,  pp.  241,  258-259;  Bombay
Gazetteer,  IX,  ii  (1894),  142  (Gujarat);  Journal  of  the  Bombay  Branch,
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  XIV  (1879-80),  202-203;  E.  Thurston,  Ethno-
graphic Notes  in  Southern  India,  1906,  pp.  328-329,  and  Plate  XIX;  the
Same,  Omens  and  Superstitions  of  Southern  India,  1912,  pp.  120,  246-254;
Journal  of  the  Ceylon  Branch  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  IV  (i86i;-66),
68-78;  VII,  ii  (1882),  116-119  (with  figure);  Hildburgh,  Journal  Royal
Anthropological  Institute,  XXXVIII  (1908),  157-161,  180-181;  Geiger,


412


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Aufsatze  zur  Kultur-  und  Sprachgeschichte  (Kuhn  Festschrift),  1916,
pp.  185-192  (Ceylon).

3.  Plato,  Laws,  xi,  p.  933  B;  Theocritus,  ii,  28-29;  Fahz,  De  Poeta-
rum  Romanorum  Doctrina  Magica  (Religionsgeschichtliche  Versuche  und
Vorarbeiten,  II,  iii),  1904,  pp.  19-23  (125-129);  Kuhnert,  Rheinisches
Museum,  XLIX  (1894),  43-58;  Dedo,  De  Antiquorum  Superstitione
Amatoria,  1904,  pp.  22-27.  See  also  note  19.

4.  For  image  witchcraft  see  Du  Cange,  s.  vv.  invultare^  vultivoli\  Han-
sen, Quellen,  1 901 ,  index,  s.  vv.  Zauberei,  Bilder\  von  Negelein,  Bild,  Spiegel
und  Schatten,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  V  (1902),  1-37;  Frazer,
The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  I  (191 1),  55-78;  Feilberg,  Sjseletro  (Danmarks
Folkeminder,  No.  10),  1914,  pp.  165-204  (also  Aarbog  for  Dansk  Kul-
turhistorie,  1896,  pp.  1-55);  Lea,  A  History  of  the  Inquisition,  1888,  III,

389-39i>  43o>  434-435>  453,  455-456,  458-459,  464,  467-468;  Nyrop,
Dania,  VII  (1900),  37-42;  Cuming,  Journal  of  the  British  Archaeological
Association,  LV  ( 1 899) ,  1 6 i-i 70;  Cabanes  and  Nass,  Poisons  et  Sortileges,
1903,  I,  197-253,  304-306;  von  Dobeneck,  Des  Deutschen  Mittelalters
Volksglauben,  1815,  II,  20-28;  Carl  Meyer,  Der  Aberglaube  des  Mittel-
alters, 1884,  pp.  261-263;  Andree,  Ethnographische  Parallelen  und  Ver-
gleiche,  II  (1889),  8-11;  Gomme,  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  1892,  pp.  51-52;
Lewin,  Die  Gifte  in  der  Weltgeschichte,  1920,  pp.  411-415;  Haddon,
Magic  and  Fetishism,  1906,  pp.  20-22;  D.  McKenzie,  The  Infancy  of
Medicine,  1927,  pp.  52-56;  Longman  and  Loch,  Pins  and  Pincushions,
191 1,  pp.  30-34;  Thoms,  Anecdotes  and  Traditions  (Camden  Society),
1839,  PP-  I0I-I02;  Hartland,  The  Legend  of  Perseus,  II  (1895),  97-100;
Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  IX  (1899),  ^ii'i^S'i  (1900),
417-420;  Alfonso  el  Sabio,  Las  Siete  Partidas,  vii,  23,  2  (ed.  1807,  III,
668);  Pseudo-Paracelsus,  De  Summis  Naturae  Mysteriis,  transl.  by  Dorn,
1584,  pp.  82,  84  (Of  the  Supreme  Mysteries  of  Nature,  transl.  by  R.  Tur-
ner, 1655,  pp.  85,  87-88);  Paracelsus,  De  Ente  Spirituali,  chaps.  7-8
(QEuvres  Completes,  transl.  by  Gillot  de  Givrey,  1913, 1,  111-114);  Nider,
Formicarius,  v,  3,  ed.  1517  (1516),  fol.  Ixxiiii  v";  Malleus  Maleficarum,
Pt.  II,  qu.  I,  cap.  5,  II,  12  (ed.  1620,  pp.  192,  223,  228);  Martin  Plantsch,
Opusculum  de  Sagis  Maleficis,  1507,  sig.  b  v.  If.  2  r°;  Paolo  Grillando,  De
Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  iii,  n,  fol.  xx  v°  (ed.  1592,  iii,  15,  p.  27);  v,  3,  xxv
v°  (v,  2-3,  pp.  48-49);  V,  11-12,  fol.  xxvij  (v,  9-10,  pp.  54-55);  vi,  14,
fol.  xxxij  r°  (vi,  18,  pp.  76-77);  x,  6,  fol.  Ij  r"  (x,  9,  p.  158);  x,  14,  foil.  Ij  v°-
lij  r°  (x,  13,  pp.  160-161);  Wier,  De  Praestigiis  Daemonum,  v,  9,  10,  12,
ed.  1568,  pp.  477,  480-481,  487-488;  Paulus  Frisius  Nagoldanus,  Dess
TeufFels  Nebelkappen,  1583,  sig.  B4  v°;  Fernel,  De  Abditis  Rerum
Causis,  ii,  16  (De  Morbis  Universalibus  et  Particularibus,  1656,  p.  517);
Boguet,  Discours  des  Sorciers,  1608,  chap.  31,  pp.  197-201;  van  Helmont,
Of  the  Magnetick  Cure  of  Wounds,  cap.  87,  transl.  Charleton,  A  Ternary
of  Paradoxes,  1650,  p.  55;  Charles  Sorel,  De  I'Vnguent  des  Armes,  ap-
pended to  Des  Talismans,  1636,  pp.  387-388;  Thiers,  Traite  des  Super-
stitions, 1741,  I,  154;  IV,  461-463;  Calmet,  Traite  sur  les  Apparitions
des  Esprits,  1751,  pp.  161-168;  Marguerite  of  Navarre,  Heptameron,  i,
I,  ed.  Frank,  I,  39-42;  Lehugeur,  Histoire  de  Philippe  le  Long,  I  (1897),


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


416,  436;  De  Cauzons,  La  Magie  et  la  Sorcellerie  en  France,  II,  310,  312,
334-335,  346-347;  Hecker,  Die  Grossen  Volkskrankheiten  des  Mittel-
alters,  ed.  Hirsch,  1865,  pp.  157-158;  Doutte,  Magie  et  Religion  dans
I'Afrique  du  Nord,  1909,  pp.  61-62,  298-300;  Mauchamp,  La  Sorcellerie  au
Maroc,  pp.  293-297;  Sudan  Notes  and  Records,  II  (1919),  133;  Farrow,
Faith,  Fancies  and  Fetich,  or  Yoruba  Paganism,  1926,  pp.  11 9-1 21;
D.  R.  MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden  Konde,  1925,  p.  258;  P.  A.  Talbot,
The  Peoples  of  Southern  Nigeria,  1926,11,  182;  Pechuel-Loesche,  Volks-
kunde  von  Loango,  1907,  p.  339;  Weeks,  Among  the  Primitive  Bakongo,
1 914,  pp.  225-226;  Decle,  Three  Years  in  Savage  Africa,  1894,  p.  153
(Matabele) ;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.  242-
245,  271-272  (U.  S.  A.);  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  1900,  pp.  45,  430-432,  569-
574  (with  figures);  Gimlette,  Malay  Poisons  and  Charm  Cures,  1923,
pp.  96,  105-106;  The  Philippine  Islands,  ed.  Blair  and  Robertson,  XLIII
(1906),  313,  317-318;  Hose  and  McDougall,  The  Pagan  Tribes  of  Borneo,
1912,  II,  117-119;  Hose,  Natural  Man,  1926,  pp.  25(^251  (Borneo);
Forgues,  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  2d  Series,  XLIII  (1863),  154  (Borneo);
The  Native  Tribes  of  South  Australia,  ed.  Woods,  1879,  PP-  '^3~^4j  135?
Howitt,  Journal  Anthropological  Institute,  XVI  (1887),  27-29;  the  Same,
The  Native  Tribes  of  South-East  Australia,  1904,  p.  363;  Eylmann,  Die
Eingeborenen  der  Kolonie  Siidaustralien,  1908,  p.  218;  Le  Clercq,  Nou-
velle  Relation  de  la  Gaspesie,  1691,  pp.  334-335;  Charlevoix,  Journal,  xxv
(1721),  Histoire  et  Description  Generale  de  la  Nouvelle  France,  1744,  VI,
88;  Alexander  Henry,  Travels  and  Adventures  in  Canada  and  the  Indian
Territories  between  1760  and  1776,  1809,  p.  121;  A  Narrative  of  the
Captivity  and  Adventures  of  John  Tanner,  1 830,  pp.  174,  341 ;  J.  G.  Kohl,
Kitchi-Gami,  i860,  pp.  281-282,  395-397;  Speck,  Memoirs  American
Anthropological  Association,  VI  (1919),  265-266;  Freeland,  University
of  California  Publications,  American  Archseology  and  Ethnology,  XX
(1923),  70;  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  26th  Report  (for  1904-05),
1908,  p.  446  (Tlingit  Indians);  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  XV
(1912),  313-318  (with  figures;  Mexico);  Journal  Ethnological  Society  of
London,  New  Series,  II  (1870),  236  (Bolivia  and  Peru);  De  Groot,  The
Religious  System  of  China,  V  (1907),  920-926;  Dennys,  The  Folk-Lore
of  China,  1876,  pp.  82-83;  Wieger,  Folk-Lore  Chinois  Moderne,  1909,
pp.  II,  96-99,  237-239,  277-283;   Revue  Scientifique,  4th  Series,  XIX

(1903)  ,  562  (China);  Batchelor,  Ainu  Life  and  Lore,  pp.  268-269;  Fritz-
ner,  Historisk  Tidsskrift,  Kristiania,  IV  (1877),  203;  Maal  og  Minne,
1921,  pp.  43-44;  Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  Schleswig-Holsteinische
Geschichte,  XXVIII  (1898),  293-297  (fifteenth  century);  Am  Ur-Quell,
VI  (1896),  12;  Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthropologie,  III  (1900),  97;  Volks-
kunde,  XII  (1899-1900),  245;  Ebel,  Hessische  Blatter  fiir  Volkskunde,
III  (1904),  130-146;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volks-
medizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  50-54;  Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fiir
Schleswig-Holsteinische  Geschichte,  XLV  (1915),  199,  211;  Chapiseau,
Le  Folk-Lore  de  la  Beauce  et  du  Perche,  1902,  I,  209;  Wallonia,  XII

(1904)  ,  6-8;  Pitre,  Usi  e  Costumi,  IV  (1889),  134;  Archivio  per  lo  Studio
delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  XVIII  (1899),  17-18;  Mansikka,  Ueber  Rus-


414         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


sische  Zauberformeln,  1909,  p.  93;  Holmberg,  Finno-Ugric,  in  The  My-
thology of  All  Races,  ed.  J.  A.  MacCulloch,  IV  (1927),  12-13;  von  Wlis-
locki,  Volksglaube  und  Religioser  Branch  der  Zigeuner,  1 891,  pp.  103-108.
Cf.  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreichlsche  Volkskunde,  III  (1897),  272;  Bon-
wick,  Daily  Life  and  Origin  of  the  Tasmanians,  1870,  p.  178;  Ribbe,  Zwei
Jahre  unter  den  Kannibalen  der  Salamo-Inseln,  1903,  p.  149.

5.  Chaucer,  Canterbury  Tales,  Prologue,  A  417-418.  For  elaborate
directions  for  making  images  to  cause  love  or  hate,  fever  or  torment,  to
win  favor,  to  bind  the  tongue,  etc.,  see  Sloane  MS.  3556,  foil.  11  v°-i5  r°.
Iron  spikes  and  thorns  are  used.  Astrology  is  taken  into  account.  Angels
and  demons  are  invoked.

6.  The  House  of  Fame,  vv.  1 266-1 270.

7.  Agrippa,  De  Occulta  Philosophia,  ii,  49,  ed.  1533,  p.  cxci.

8.  Primrose,  Popular  Errours,  translated  by  Robert  Wittie,  1651,  Book
iv,  chap.  48,  p.  428.  The  original  book,  De  Vulgi  in  Medicina  Erroribus,
appeared  in  1638,

9.  "Defigi  quidem  diris  deprecationibus  nemo  non  metuit"  (Pliny,
xxviii,  2,  4,  19).

10.  See  Audollent,  Defixionum  Tabellae,  1904,  pp.  xlix-liii,  Iv-lvi;  for
figures  on  tablets,  see  pp.  Ixxvi-lxxvii  (see  also  the  figures  on  the  Sethian-
ische  Verfluchungstafeln,  ed.  Wiinsch,  1898);  for  external  images,  pp.
Ixxvii-lxxxi.  Cf.  Wiinsch,  Defixionum  Tabellae  Atticae,  1897  (Inscrip-
tiones  Graecae,  III,  iii);  Kuhnert,  Pauly-Wissowa,  Real-Encyclopadie,
VIII  (1901),  2373-2377.  Such  pictures  may  also  be  seen  in  magical  papyri:
for  example,  in  one  found  at  Oxyrhynchus  are  depicted  three  human  heads
(like  busts),  and  between  two  of  them  stands  the  name  of  Paulus  Julianus
(Papiri  Greci  e  Latini,  No.  29,  I  [1912],  69-71,  and  facsimile).  In  modern
magic  you  may  kill  your  enemy  by  nailing  to  a  tree  a  piece  of  paper  in-
scribed with  his  name  (Manz,  Volksbrauch  und  Volksglaube  des  Sarganser-
landes,  Schriften  der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XII
[1916],  109-1 10).

11.  Wiinsch,  Eine  antike  Rachepuppe,  Philologus,  LXI  (1902),  26-31
(with  figures).  Cf.  his  references,  and  Audollent,  Defixionum  Tabellae,
pp.  Ixxv-lxxx  (see  especially  No.  17,  p.  32);  also  Nogara,  Ausonia,  IV
(1910), 31-39;  Mariani,  the  same,  IV,39-47;  Dugas,  Bulletin  de  Correspon-
dance  Hellenique,  XXXIX  (191 5),  413-423;  Cumont,  Comptes  Rendus,
Academic  des  Inscriptions,  1913,  pp.  412-421.

12.  Notizie  degli  Scavi,  1897,  pp.  529-534  (with  figures).

13.  Sophronius,  SS.  Cyri  et  Joannis  Miracula,  cap.  35,  Migne,  Patrolo-
gia  Graeca,  LXXXVII,  3541-3548.

14.  Thurston,  Ethnographic  Notes  in  Southern  India,  1906,  Plate  XIX.

15.  Poenitentiale  Ecgberti,  iv,  17,  Thorpe,  Ancient  Laws,  folio  ed.,
1840,  p.  379.

16.  Modus  Imponendi  Poenitentiam  (canons  enacted  under  Edgar),
§  38,  Thorpe,  p.  409  (Wilkins,  Concilia,  I,  274,  §  40).  Cf.  Liebermann,  Die
Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  II,  588,  743.

17.  Leges  Regis  Henrici  Primi,  cap.  71,  §  i,  p.  251  Thorpe.  See  Chap-
ter II,  note  4I.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


18.  Kemble,  Codex  Diplomaticus,  No.  591,  III,  125  (I,  lix-lx);  Thorpe,
Diplomatarium  Anglicum,  pp.  229-230;  Birch,  Cartularium  Saxionicum,
No.  1 13 1,  III,  372-373.  The  text  is  not  perfectly  clear.  Cf.  Kemble,  The
Saxons  in  England,  1 849, 1,  432,  526;  Jente,  Die  Mythologischen  Ausdriicke
im  Altenglischen  Wortschatz,  1 921,  pp.  31 1-3 13.  On  drowning  as  a  punish-
ment for  witchcraft  see  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  pp.  115,  222,  381,  383,
431.  Cf.  i^ithelstan's  Laws,  iv,  §  6,  4,  Liebermann,  I,  172  (iii,  6,  in  Thorpe,
p.  93),  and  see  Liebermann,  II,  393.

19.  Virgil,  Eclogue  viii,  80-81;  Ovid,  Heroides,  vi,  91-92;  John  of
Salisbury,  Policraticus,  i,  12,  ed.  Webb,  1909,  I,  51-52.  Such  magicians
are  called  vultiuoli,  John  tells  us.  Another  kind  of  figures  are  made  by
imaginarii:  "Imaginarii  sunt,  qui  imagines  quas  faciunt,  quasi  in  pos-
sessionem praesidentium  spirituum  mittunt,  ut  ab  eis  de  rebus  dubiis
doceantur"  (i,  12,  I,  52).

20.  Petrus  Blesensis,  Epistola  65,  Opera,  ed.  Giles,  I,  192.

21.  That  is,  the  mass  In  Commemoratione  omnium  Fidelium  Defunc-
torum,  which  begins  "Requiem  aeternam  dona  eis,  Domine"  (Missale
Romanum,  Lugduni,  1690,  pp.  Ixxxix-xci).

22.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Gemma  Ecclesiastica,  i,  49,  Opera,  ed.
Brewer,  II,  137.

23.  Gesta  Trevirensium  Archiepiscoporum,  cap.  28  (Martene,  Veterum
Scriptorum  Amplissima  Collectio,  IV,  172-173;  Recueil  des  Historiens,
XI,  194).

24.  See  Rigault,  Le  Proces  de  Guichard,  Eveque  de  Troyes,  1896,
especially  pp.  67-68,  70,  72-80,  194,  270-273.  Cf.  Johannes  a  Sancto
Victore,  Memoriale  Historiarum,  Recueil,  XXI,  644,  cf.  652.

25.  Calendar  of  Close  Rolls  1313-1318,  p.  163  (cf.  pp.  26,  64,  88);
Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1313-1317,  pp.  4,  13,  42,  44,  45,  loi,  204,  255.

26.  Continuatio  Chronici  Girardi  de  Fracheto,  Recueil,  XXI,  42-43;
Continuatio  Chronici  Guillelmi  de  Nangiaco,  the  same,  XX,  612-613,
618;  Johannes  a  Sancto  Victore,  Memoriale  Historiarum,  the  same,  XXI,
659-661;  Chroniques  de  Saint-Denis,  the  same,  XX,  693-696,  700;  Chro-
nique  Rimee,  vv.  7055-7096, 7195-7288,  cf.  vv.  7326-7327,  the  same,  XXII,
159-160;  J.  Petit,  Charles  de  Valois,  1900,  pp.  145-154,  337-338;  Le-
hugeur,  Histoire  de  Philippe  le  Long,  I  (1897),  109.  The  execution  is  re-
corded by  Adam  Murimuth,  ed.  Thompson,  p.  22.

27.  Langlois,  Le  Fin  d'Hugues  Geraud,  La  Revue  de  Paris,  13th  year,
I  (1906),  531-552.

28.  Coram  Rege  Roll,  ed.  Palgrave,  Parliamentary  Writs,  II,  ii  (1830),
Appendix,  pp.  269-271;  Wright,  Proceedings  against  Dame  Alice  Kyteler
(Camden  Society,  XXIV),  pp.  xxiii-xxix;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1324-
1327,  p.  44.

29.  Avignon,  Kal.  Sept.,  1324,  Papal  Letters,  II,  461.

30.  Gesta  Romanorum,  cap.  102  (94),  ed.  CEsterley,  pp.  428-430,  cf.
727;  ed.  Dick  (Innsbruck  MS.),  cap.  167,  pp.  139-141.

31.  Robert  Holkot,  Super  Libros  Sapientie,  Lectio  190,  Speyer,  1483,
sig.  Pj  r°  (Reutlingen,  1489,  sig.  Miiij,  If.  4  v°).

32.  Barham,  The  Ingoldsby  Legends,  ed.  1875,  I,  125-166.


4l6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


33.  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  IV,  118.  See  the  inventory  of  Friar  Ran-
dolf's  goods,  the  same,  IV,  225-226.  Cf.  Devon,  Issues  of  the  Exchequer,
pp.  368-370,  373;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1416-1422,  pp.  276,  294,  304,
362,  396,  402.

34.  Devon,  Issues  of  the  Exchequer,  p.  362;  Chronicle  of  London,  1827,
pp.  107-108;  Kingsford,  Chronicles  of  London,  pp.  73,  80,  cf.  298;  Brut,
ed.  Brie,  pp.  422-423;  Walsingham,  Historia  Anglicana,  ed.  Riley,  II,  331.

35.  Chronicle  in  MS.  Harley  3775,  in  Riley's  edition  of  John  Amundes-
ham,  Annales  Monasterii  S.  Albani,  I,  38;  Kingsford,  Chronicles  of  Lon-
don, pp.  80,  273;  Gregory's  Chronicle,  ed.  Gairdner,  p.  164;  Brut,  ed.
Brie,  p.  423;  Devon,  Issues  of  the  Exchequer,  pp.  360,  365.  For  Friar
Randolf  see  Baildon,  Archseologia,  LXI  (1908),  166-174.

36.  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  IV,  247-249;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls
1422-1429,  pp.  84, 166.

37.  Mandate  of  September  25,  141 9,  Wilkins,  Concilia,  III,  392-393.

38.  Wilkins,  Concilia,  III,  393-394.

39.  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1422-1429,  p.  363.

40.  King's  order  of  August  9,  1441  (Rymer's  Foedera,  2d  ed.,  X,  851;
Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1436-1441,  p.  559);  order  of  October  26,  1443
(Rymer,  XI,  45;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1441-1446,  p.  206);  Records
of  the  Privy  Council,  ed.  Nicolas,  VI,  51;  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  V,
135;  Devon,  Issues  of  the  Exchequer,  pp.  440-442,  447-448,  459-460;
William  Wyrcester,  Annales  (Stevenson,  Letters  and  Papers  illustrative
of  the  Wars  of  the  English  in  France,  II,  ii,  762-763);  Brut,  ed.  Brie
(Early  English  Text  Society),  pp.  477-484,  508-509;  Three  Fifteenth-
Century  Chronicles,  ed.  Gairdner  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XXVIII),
pp.  63,  149,  150;  English  Chronicle,  ed.  Davies  (Camden  Society,  LXIV),
pp.  57-60;  Gregory's  Chronicle  (Gairdner,  The  Historical  Collections  of  a
Citizen  of  London,  Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XVII),  pp.  183-184;
Chronicle  of  London,  1827,  pp.  128-130;  Chronicles  of  London,  ed.  Kings-
ford, 1905,  pp.  148-149,  154-155;  Six  Town  Chronicles,  ed.  Flenley,  191 1,
pp.  102,  115-116;  Brief  Notes  (Kingsford,  English  Historical  Literature
in  the  Fifteenth  Century,  1913,  pp.  340-341,  cf.  p.  156);  Chronicle  of  the
Grey  Friars  (ed.  Nichols,  Camden  Society,  LIII,  pp.  17-18;  ed.  Howlett,
Monumenta  Franciscana,  II,  171);  Brief  Annals  (Songs,  Carols,  etc.,  from
Richard  Hill's  Commonplace-Book,  ed.  Dyboski,  Early  English  Text
Society,  pp.  144-145);  Fabyan,  fol.  clxxxxvii,  ed.  Ellis,  181 1,  p.  614;  Hall's
Chronicle,  ed.  1809,  p.  202;  Stow,  Annales,  ed.  1631,  pp.  381-382;  poem
On  the  Mutability  of  Worldly  Changes  (Kingsford,  English  Historical
Literature,  p.  396);  Drayton,  Englands  Heroicall  Epistles  (Poems,  Part
II,  Spenser  Society,  pp.  267-284,  especially  pp.  271-272);  Mirror  for
Magistrates,  ed.  1587,  foil.  140  v°-i45  r°  (ed.  Haslewood,  1815,  II,  112-
1 25) ;  Christopher  Middleton,  The  Legend  of  Humphrey,  Duke  of  Gloces-
ter,  1600  (Harleian  Miscellany,  ed.  Park,  X  [1813],  176-179,  181-184);
Vickers,  Humphrey  Duke  of  Gloucester,  1907,  pp.  269-279,  335;  J.  W.
Flower,  Surrey  Archaeological  Collections,  II  (1864),  157-168.  For  the
poetical  Lament  of  the  Duchess  of  Gloucester  ("Thorowout  a  pales  as
I  can  passe")  see  Wright,  Political  Poems,  II,  205-208;  Fliigel,  Anglia,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


XXVI  (1903),  177-180;  Songs,  Carols,  etc.,  from  Richard  Hill's  Common-
place-Book,  ed.  Dyboski,  pp.  95-96;  Hardwick,  Cambridge  Antiquarian
Society  Communications,  I  (1859),  177-190.  See  also  the  ballad  of  "The
Lamentable  Fall  of  the  Dutchess  of  Gloster,"  T.  Evans,  Old  Ballads,  1784,
I,  317-323  (R.  H.  Evans,  Old  Ballads,  III,  1-8).  The  First  Part  of  King
'      Henry  VI  ignores  the  Witch  of  Eye  and  Canon  Southwell,  but  associates
'      Sir  John  Humm  with  Roger  Bolingbroke  and  the  Duchess.   Sir  John  is
;      mentioned,  apparently  in  connection  with  this  case,  by  Chronicle,  ed.
1827,  pp.  129-130:  "Roger  the  clerk  afornseyd  on  the  Satirday,  that  is  to
sey  the  xviij  day  of  Novembre,  was  brought  to  the  Yeldehalle,  with  Sir
John  Hom  prest,  and  William  Wodham  squyer,  the  which  S'"  John  and
William  hadden  there  chartres  [i.e.  pardons]  at  that  tyme."  Robert  Bale's
Chronicle  (Six  Town  Chronicles,  ed.  Flenley,  p.  116)  and  the  chronicle  in
Cotton  MS.  Vitellius  Axvi  (Kingsford,  Chronicles  of  London,  p.  155),
which  also  (though  not  so  clearly)  indicate  this  association,  likewise  men-
tion John  Humme  (Hum).
'         41.  This  point  of  relapse  is  expressly  mentioned  in  An  English  Chroni-
cle, ed.  Davies,  p.  59.  See  also  Coke,  Institutes,  Part  III,  chap.  6.

42.  An  English  Chronicle,  ed.  Davies,  p.  57.  Cf.  Stow,  Annales,  ed.
1631,  p.  381;  Gregory's  Chronicle,  p.  183;  A  Chronicle  of  London,  1827,
p.  128;  Kingsford,  Chronicles  of  London,  p.  148;  Robert  Bale's  Chronicle,
Flenley,  Six  Town  Chronicles,  p.  115;  William  Wyrcester,  Annales,  as
above,  II,  ii,  763;  Brut,  ed.  Brie,  p.  478.

43.  Brut  (Trin.  Coll.  Camb.  MS.  O.  9.  i),  p.  478.

44.  Brut,  p.  480.  Cf.  Kingsford,  English  Historical  Literature  in  the
Fifteenth  Century,  p.  93.  As  to  Eleanor's  declaring  that  all  she  wanted
was  to  have  a  child  by  the  Duke,  see  the  extraordinary  report  made  to
him  by  his  physician,  Gilbert  Kymer  (Dietarium,  in  Hearne's  edition  of
Liber  Niger  Scaccarii,  1728,  pp.  550-559,  especially  pp.  553-554,  557"
558).  Cf.  Etienne  de  Bourbon,  Septem  Dona  Spiritus  Sancti,  ed.  Lecoy  de
la  Marche,  1877,  pp.  318-319.

45.  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  I  (191 1),  70-74.

46.  Fabyan,  fol.  clxxxxvii,  ed.  Ellis,  181 1,  p.  614;  Hall,  ed.  1809,  p.  202.

47.  Chronicle,  ed.  Davies,  p.  58.

48.  The  same,  p.  60.

49.  The  same,  p.  57.

50.  See  pp.  76,  147-148,  151,  above.

51.  See  Lehugeur,  Histoire  de  Philippe  le  Long,  I  (1897),  416;  Hansen.
Quellen,  pp.  18,  48,  231.

52.  Stevenson,  as  above,  II,  ii,  763.  Wyrcester  mentions  no  other  ac-
complices of  Eleanor  except  the  "  Wyche  of  Eye."  His  words  are:  "Qui-
dam  clericus  famosissimus  unus  illorum  in  toto  mundo  in  astronomia  et
arte  nigromantica"  and  "notabilissimus  clericus  unus  in  toto  mundo."

53.  Rigault,  Le  Proces  de  Guichard,  Eveque  de  Troyes,  1896,  pp.  79-80.

54.  Chroniques  de  Saint-Denis,  Recueil,  XX,  696.

55.  "Mulier  magica,  vocata  vulgariter  Wyche  of  Eye  juxta  villam  West-
monasterii"  (Wyrcester,  II,  ii,  763);  "the  wicche  of  Eye  beside  West-
minster" (Brut,  p.  480);  "the  wycche  be  syde  Westemyster"  (Gregory's


4l8         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Chronicle,  p.  184);  "surnamed  the  wytche  of  Eye  besyde  Westmynster"
(Fabyan,  fol.  clxxxxvii,  ed.  1811,  p.  614);  "a  witch  of  Eye  besides  West-
minster" (Stow,  ed.  1 63 1,  p.  381).  On  "The  Manor  of  Eia,  or  Eye  next
Westminster"  see  W.  L.  Rutton,  Archseologia,  LXII  (1910),  31-58.

56.  Devon,  Issues  of  the  Exchequer,  p.  410  (Asshewell),  p.  409  ("a
certain  woman,"  clearly  Margery).  I  have  no  record  of  Virley's  arrest,
but  assume  it  took  place  about  the  same  time.

57.  Rymer,  Foedera,  2d  ed.,  X,  505;  Records  of  the  Privy  Council,  ed.
Nicolas  (May  9,  1432),  IV,  114;  Wright,  Proceedings  against  Dame  Alice
Kyteler,  p.  xii,  note.  Cf.  Tighe  and  Davis,  Annals  of  Windsor,  1858,  I,
301-302.  In  a  document  of  May  6,  1432  (printed  by  Palgrave,  An  Essay
upon  the  Original  Authority  of  the  King's  Council,  1834,  p.  89),  Asshe-
well is  described  as  "Ordinis  Sanctae  Crucis  Londoniae."  An  entry  in  a
chronicle  under  date  of  June  17,  1433,  may  throw  some  light  on  his  repu-
tation. That  afternoon  "was  the  Clipse  [eclipse]  that  Asshewell  the  white
frere,  and  other  clerkes,  spake  of  longe  tyme  before;  which  all  peple
dowted  [i.e.  dreaded]  and  were  sore  aferd  of,  thurgh  the  speche  of  the  said
frere"  (Brut,  ed.  Brie,  p.  466).

58.  Harleian  MS.  3775,  printed  in  Amundesham,  Annales  Monasterii
S.  Albani,  ed.  Riley,  I,  56-57.

59.  MS.  Julius  Bii,  Kingsford,  Chronicles  of  London,  p.  96.  Cf.  Chron-
icle in  Harleian  MS.  3775,  ed.  as  above,  I,  42:  "foemina  malitiosa  Fran-
ciae,  la  Puselle  dicta."

60.  Rymer,  Foedera,  2d  ed.,  X,  408.

61.  "Quae  Johanna  in  juventute  non  fuit  edocta  nec  instructa  in  credu-
litate  nec  primitivis  fidei;  sed  per  aliquas  vetulas  mulieres  assuefacta
et  imbuta  ad  utendum  sortilegiis,  divinationibus  et  aliis  superstitiosis
operibus  sive  magicis  artibus;  quarum  villarum  plures  habitantes  notati
fuerunt  ab  antiquo  uti  praedictis  maleficiis":  Proces  de  Condamnation  et
de  Rehabilitation  de  Jeanne  d'Arc,  ed.  Quicherat,  I  (1841),  209.  Cotta,
in  1616,  referred  to  Joan  as  "that  infamous  woman"  (The  Triall  of
Witch-craft,  p.  48).

62.  Rymer,  2d  ed.,  X,  504-505;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1 429-1 436,
p.  220;  Wright,  Kyteler,  p.  xi,  note.

63.  English  Chronicle,  ed.  Davies,  pp.  58-59.

64.  Gairdner,  Lollardy  and  the  Reformation,  I  (1908),  337-338.

65.  Bale,  Scriptorum  Illustrium  Maioris  Brytanniae  Catalogus,  viii,
4,  I  (1557),  584-585.  Bale  credits  two  books  to  Roger's  pen:  "Contra
uulgi  superstitiones,  Lib.  i  "  and  "De  sua  innocentia.  Lib.  i,"  but  I  do  not
find  his  name  in  Bale's  notebook  (Index  Britanniae  Scriptorum,  ed.  Lane
Poole  and  Bateson,  1902).

66.  Waldron,  A  Description  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  ed.  Harrison  (Manx
Society),  1865,  p.  14;  Flower,  Surrey  Archteological  Collections,  II  (1864),
166.

67.  The  Duchess's  petition,  February  10,  1470,  approved  by  the  king
on  February  16,  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  VI,  232;  also  Calendar  of  Patent
Rolls  1467-1477,  p.  190,  and  Earl  of  Leicester's  MSS.,  Historical  Manu-
scripts Commission,  9th  Report,  Appendix,  p.  367.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


419


68.  Petition  in  the  Act  of  Settlement,  1484,  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,
VI,  241 .  Cf.  Tyndale,  The  Practice  of  Prelates,  Expositions  and  Notes,  ed.
Walker,  Parker  Society,  pp.  304-305.

69.  Hale,  p.  20.  Cf.  H.  J.  Bell,  Obeah,  2d  ed.,  1893,  pp.  60-61.

70.  See  p.  100,  above.

71.  Knyght's  petition,  Archaeologia,  LX  (1907),  373-374.

72.  Petition  and  answer,  Archseologia,  LX  (1907),  374-376.

73.  Hector  Boethius,  Scotorum  Historia,  Book  xi,  Paris,  1574,  fol.  221;
William  Stewart,  The  Buik  of  the  Croniclis  of  Scotland,  or  a  Metrical  Ver-
sion of  the  History  of  Hector  Boece,  vv.  35749-35924,  ed.  Turnbull,  II,
512-517.  Cf.  Wier,  iii,  14,  ed.  1568,  pp.  250-255;  Holinshed,  V  (1808),
233-234.  On  the  whole  matter  of  such  magic  see  Dalyell,  The  Darker
Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,  pp.  328-351.

74.  Letters  and  Papers,  IV,  ii,  No.  3743,  pp.  1670-1671.  Cf.  Notes  and
Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  XVII  (1923),  291.

75.  Letters  and  Papers,  XIII,  i.  No.  41,  p.  13;  XIII,  ii.  No.  1200,  p.  505.

76.  Statute  of  33  Henry  VIII,  chap.  8,  Statutes  of  the  Realm,  III
(i8i7),837.

77.  Scot,  xiii,  13,  p.  308  (217),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  251.

78.  From  Wier,  v,  10,  ed.  1568,  pp.  480-481.

79.  Scot,  xii,  16,  pp.  257-259  (185-187),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  208-210.

80.  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  New  Series,  XI,  22.  These  were  the  four
witches  (Elizabeth  Stile  and  her  three  associates)  executed  at  Abingdon  in
February,  1578-9:  see  Stationers'  Register,  ed.  Arber,  II,  349,  352;  Scot,
Discoverie,  i,  4,  p.  10  (7),  8;  i,  8,  p.  17  (12),  13;  iii,  7-8,  p.  51  (42),  39-40;
ix,  7,  p.  176  (129),  142;  Discourse  of  Divels  (appended  to  same),  chap.  33,
P-  543  (389),  455-456;  Notestein,  pp.  27-28,  346-347,  3^7-

81.  Acts,  X,  309;  see  also  X,  322,  326.

82.  Scot,  xvi,  3,  pp.  474-475  (342-343),  399-400.  Cf.  Notestein,
p.  387.  Scot  cites  Bodin.

83.  Bodin,  De  la  Demonomanie  des  Sorciers,  1580,  Preface,  sig.  eiij,
If.  2v°  (1587,  sig.  lij  r°);  ii,  8,  1580,  foil.  116  v°-ii7  r°  (1587,  foil.  129
v°-i3or°).

84.  Mendoza  to  Zayas,  September  8,  1 578,  State  Papers,  Spanish,
1568-1579,  No.  524,  p.  611.

85.  Jonson,  The  Masque  of  Queens,  1609.  He  cites  Bodin,  ii,  8.

86.  Acts,  XI,  36-37.

87.  The  same,  XII,  251-252.

88.  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  Marquis  of  Salisbury's  MSS.,  Ill,
106.

89.  Gentleman's  Magazine,  October,  i860,  CCIX,  380-385;  Hart,
Archseologia,  XL  (1866),  395-396;  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,
1 581-1590,  p.  644.

90.  An  Epistle  of  the  Persecvtion  of  Catholickes  in  Englande,  transl.
by  G.  T.,  Douay,  [1582,]  pp.  149-150;  Rishton's  Addition  to  Nicholas
Sanders,  De  Origine  ac  Progressv  Schismatis  Anglicani,  1586,  pp.  430-
432;  Ribadeneira,  Appendix  to  Sanders's  De  Origine,  in  Vera  et  Sincera
Historia,  1628,  p.  50;  Diego  de  Yepes,  Historia  Particvlar  de  le  Persecu-


420         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

cion  de  Inglaterra,  1599,  ii,  9,  §  11,  p.  75;  Pollen,  Unpublished  Documents
relating  to  the  Catholic  Martyrs  (Catholic  Record  Society,  V),  1908,  pp.
97-99,  139;  Diarium  Secundum,  Douai,  ed.  T.  F.  Knox,  1878,  p.  127,  cf.
p.  217;  Register  of  Merton  College,  Philosophical  Transactions  for  17^8,
L,  ii  (1759),  699-702;  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  New  Series,  IX,  347,  368-
369;  Cogan,  The  Haven  of  Health,  1589,  pp.  272-276;  Stow,  Annales,  ed.
Howes,  1615,  p.  681;  Fuller,  Church-History,  1655,  Cent.  XVI,  ix,  3,
§§  23-25,  pp.  1 09-1 10;  Plot,  The  Natural  History  of  Oxford-shire,  1677,
chap.  2,  §  10,  p.  24;  Camden's  Annales,  ed.  1625,  pp.  285-286;  Baker's
Chronicle,  ed.  1660,  p.  376;  Bacon,  Sylva  Sylvarum,  x,  §914;  Wood,  The
History  and  Antiquities  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  ed.  Gutch,  II  (1796),
188-192  (cf.  the  Latin  translation,  Historia  et  Antiquitates,  1674,  of  which
Wood  complained  as  both  abbreviated  and  interpolated,  I,  294-296);  A.
Clark,  note  in  his  ed.  of  Wood,  Survey  of  the  Antiquities  of  the  City  of
Oxford  (Oxford  Historical  Society),  I  (1889),  269;  Challoner,  Memoirs  of
Missionary  Priests,  I  (1741),  Introd.,  pp.  6-10;  F.  Pollard,  The  Antiquary,
XIII  (1886),  49-54;  A.  Clark,  Register  of  the  University  of  Oxford,  II,
i  (1887),  154;  John  Webster,  The  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,
1677,  pp.  245-246.  Cf.  Nashe,  Pierce  Penilesse,  1592:  "One  bad  pam-
phlet is  enough  to  raise  a  damp  that  may  poison  a  whole  Tearme"  (Works,
ed.  McKerrow,  I,  239).

91.  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  12th  Report,  Part  IV,  Duke  of  Rut-
land's MSS.,  I,  294-297,  147.  There  is  discrepancy  in  dates.  Was  the
year  1591  or  1583,  or  were  there  two  prosecutions?

92.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1611-1618,  p.  29.

93.  On  the  case  of  the  Earl  of  Derby  see  Lodge,  Illustrations  of  British
History,  2d  ed.,  1838,  II,  459-462;  Gentleman's  Magazine,  1751,  XXI,
269-270,  398-399;  Stow,  Annales,  ed.  1631,  pp.  767-768;  Historical  MSS.
Commission,  4th  Report,  Appendix,  p.  366;  Calendar  of  the  Marquis  of
Salisbury's  MSS.,  V,  253.

94.  Lodge,  The  Divel  Coniured,  1596,  pp.  39-40  (Hunterian  Club,  No.
26,  1875,  Complete  Works,  III).  The  word  wax  is  misprinted  war.

95.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1598-1601,  p.  523.

96.  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  B3  If.  i  v°,
E,  E3  If.  I  v°-F  r°,  F3  If.  2,  G2,  N3  If.  2  v°-02  v°.  Cf.  Cotta,  the  Infallible
True  and  Assured  Witch,  1624,  p.  113.  A  lump  of  clay  stuck  full  of  pins
figured  in  the  trial  of  a  witch  acquitted  in  1682  (An  Account  of  the  Tryal
and  Examination  of  Joan  Butts,  1682).

97.  Truth  Brought  to  Light  and  Discouered  by  Time,  1651,  pp.  19-20,
43,  137;  Howell,  State  Trials,  II  (1816),  932-933;  The  Egerton  Papers,
ed.  Collier  (Camden  Society),  1840,  p.  472.  See  also,  as  to  a  waxen  image
thought  to  represent  Prince  Henry,  Spedding,  Bacon's  Letters  and  Life,
V  (1869),  289.

98.  James  I,  Dsemonologie,  ii,  5,  ed.  1597  (and  1603),  pp.  44-46;  Wil-
liam Perkins,  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,  1608,  pp.
148-149;  Cotta,  A  Short  Discoverie,  etc.,  161 2,  p.  58;  the  Same,  The
Triall  of  Witch-craft,  161 6,  p.  90;  the  Same,  The  Infallible  True  and
Assured  Witch,  1624,  p.  113;  Cooper,  The  Mystery  of  Witch-craft,  1617,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III  42I

p/2C9;  Fairfax,  Djemonologia,  ed.  Grainge,  1882,  pp.  72-75,  95-96;  Ber-
nard, A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  pp.  175-176;  The  Lawes
against  Witches,  1645,  p.  4;  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Discovery  of
Witch-craft,  1648,  pp.  53-54;  Beveridge,  Cullross  and  Tulliallan,  1885,  I,
238  (1650);  Gaule,  Ilucr-jUciJ'rta  the  Mag-astro-mancer,  1652,  pp.  174-176,
230-231;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  605,  612-613,
615-616,  618  (1662);  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  pp.  12-14;  Meric
Casaubon,  A  Treatise  proving  Spirits,  Witches  and  Supernatural  Opera-
tions, 1672  (a  reissue  of  his  Of  Credulity  and  Incredulity  in  Things  Nat-
ural and  Civil,  1668),  pp.  86-87, 92-94;  Glanvil,  SadducismusTriumphatus,
4th  ed.,  1726,  pp.  296-299,  302-303,  307,  309-311;  Wilts  Quarter  Ses-
sions, 1670,  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  Various  Collections,  I,  150-151;
Blagrave,  Astrological  Practice  of  Physick,  1671,  pp.  121-127,  135,  153;
A  True  and  Impartial  Relation  of  the  Informations  against  Three  Witches,
1682,  pp.  7-10,  18-19;  Bovet,  Pandaemonium,  1684,  pp.  227-229;  George
Sinclair,  Satans  Invisible  World  Discovered,  1685,  reprint  (1871),  pp.  1-8,
24;  Aubrey,  Remaines  of  Gentilisme  and  Judaisme  (1686-87),  ed.  Britten,
1881,  p.  61;  A  Collection  of  Modern  Relations  of  Matters  of  Fact  con-
cerning Witches  and  Witchcraft,  1693,  pp.  47-48  (case  in  1644);  Sad-
ducismus  Debellatus,  1698,  p.  39;  Boys,  The  Case  of  Witchcraft  at  Cog-
geshall,  Essex,  in  the  Year  1699  (London,  1901),  pp.  8-9,  11-13,  15-17;
Hickes  to  Pepys,  June  19,  1700,  Private  Correspondence  of  Pepys,  ed.
Tanner,  1926,  I,  370-371  (Scotland);  A  True  and  Full  Relation  of  the
Witches  of  Pittenweem,  1704,  pp.  5,  7, 10.  Cf.  Primerose,  Popular  Errours,
transl.  Wittie,  1651,  pp.  426-428;  Alexander  Ross,  The  Philosophical!
Touch-Stone,  1645,  p.  31.  Joan  Flower,  arrested  in  1619  for  murdering
the  son  and  heir  of  the  Earl  of  Rutland  by  witchcraft,  had  (her  daughters
testified)  put  a  glove  of  little  Lord  Henry's  into  boiling  water,  pricked  it
often,  and  then  buried  it  (The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  the  Witchcrafts
of  Margaret  and  Philip  Flower,  161 9,  sigg.  C3,  If.  2  v°-D  r°).  See  p.  324,
above.  Shadwell,  who  utilizes  the  pricking  of  images  of  wax  and  wool  in
his  comedy  of  The  Lancashire  Witches  (published  in  1682),  remarks  in  a
note:  "One  in  my  memory  had  this  kind  of  witchcraft  sworn  against  her
at  the  Old-Bayley,  before  Steel,  Recorder  of  London"  (The  Poetry  of
Witchcraft,  ed.  Llalliwell,  1853,  pp.  28,  35).

99.  Cotton  Mather,  The  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  W^orld,  Boston,  1693,
pp.  99,  113.  In  her  Witch-Cult  in  Western  Europe,  1921,  pp.  49,  151,  Miss
Murray  accepts  Mr.  Burroughs  as  the  actual  head  of  a  "coven"  or  witch-
conventicle,  and  so  do  Mr.  Herbert  Gorman  in  his  entertaining  novel
"The  Place  Called  Dagon"  (1927)  and  Mr.  Summers  in  his  Geography  of
Witchcraft  (1927,  p.  346).  All  three  (pardonably,  so  far  as  the  novelist  is
concerned)  overlook  or  ignore  the  fact  that  the  General  Court  in  171 1
reversed  Mr.  Burroughs's  attainder  and  awarded  damages  to  his  heirs
(Goodell,  Proceedings  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  ist  Series,  XX
[1884],  285-294,  cf.  313,  315-316,  318-319).

100.  Cotton  Mather,  Late  Memorable  Providences,  2d  impression,
London,  1691,  p.  8.  Cf.  the  Same,  A  Brand  Pluck'd  out  of  the  Burning,
1692  (Burr,  Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft  Cases  1648-1706,  1914,  p.  273);


422


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


the  Same,  Another  Brand,  in  Calef,  More  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,
1700,  p.  9.  See  also  Burr,  p.  440,  for  the  case  of  Grace  Sherwood  of  Virginia
(1706).

101.  Lady  Charlotte  Bury,  Diary,  1839,  I,  306.

102.  A.  de  Rochas,  L'Exteriorisation  de  la  Sensibilite,  6th  ed.,  1909,
pp.  85-129;  Jules  Bois,  Le  Satanisme  et  la  Magie,  1895,  pp.  291-337
(malefic),  338-362  (love).

103.  Folk-Lore,  XV  (1904),  102-103.

104.  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  XI  (1909),  328.  In
1900  it  was  reported  that  an  Italian  burned  a  pin-studded  wax  figure  of
President  McKinley  on  the  steps  of  the  American  embassy  in  London
(Boston  Herald,  March  22,  1923).  In  Norfolk,  not  long  ago,  many  pin-
studded  wax  figures  were  found  in  the  cottage  of  a  reputed  (and  profes-
sional) witch  who  had  just  died  (Harper's  New  Monthly  Magazine,
LXXXVII  [1893],  795).

105.  Sussex  Archaeological  Collections,  LIX  (1918),  130.  See  also
Wickham,  Records  by  Spade  and  Terrier,  p.  299  (Somerset);  The  Reli-
quary, XV  (1874-75),  111-113  (image  of  dough);  Folk-Lore,  XV  (1904),
103  (Cambridgeshire).

106.  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  176  (Lincolnshire).  Cf.  Harland  and  Wil-
kinson, Lancashire  Folk-Lore,  1867,  pp.  208-209;  Blakeborough,  Wit,
Character,  Folklore  and  Customs  of  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d
ed.,  191 1,  p.  191  (cake  baked  on  shovel;  witch's  name  chalked  on  shovel;
witch  made  ill;  bewitched  woman  recovered).  A  charm  on  paper  pierced
with  pins  may  torture  the  witch  and  fetch  her  (E.  Owen,  Welsh  Folk-Lore,
p.  249).

107.  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXV  (1912),  133  (Georgia);  cf.
IX  (1896),  227.  See  also  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,
1926,  pp.  242-244.

108.  See  Maclagan,  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  144-148  (with  figure);  J.  G.
Campbell,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands,
1902,  pp.  46-48;  The  Celtic  Magazine,  XII  (1887),  41;  W.  Mackay,
Urquhart  and  Glenmoriston,  1893,  p.  431;  Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore
Heritage,  1926,  pp.  35,  72-73.  Cf.  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,
1833, 1,  197,  199,  240;  III,  605,  612-613,  615-616,  618  (clay,  wax,  butter);
James  Napier,  Notes  and  Reminiscences  relating  to  Partick,  1875,  PP-
182-183;  Trotter,  Galloway  Gossip,  1901,  p.  247;  Train,  An  Historical
and  Statistical  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1845,  II,  168;  Bottrell,  Tra-
ditions and  Hearthside  Stories  of  West  Cornwall,  I  (1870),  77;  Bardan,
The  Dead-Watchers  and  Other  Folk-Lore  Tales  of  Westmeath,  1891,  pp.
60-61;  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  302  (Ireland).

109.  Gaelic  Dictionary  (Herne  Bay,  1902),  p.  254.

no.  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  144;  XIV  (1903),  373-374.

111.  Antiquarian  Magazine,  V  (1884),  104;  Folk-Lore  Journal,  II
(1884),  121.  See  also  Nicholson,  Golspie,  1897,  pp.  82  (clay  figure  in  run-
ning stream),  82-83  (rag  image  with  pins  in  it  burned).

112.  Longman  and  Loch,  Pins  and  Pincushions,  191 1,  Plate  XII,  at
p.  33;  cf.  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  147.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


113.  Folk-Lore,  XIX  (1908),  93-94.

114.  Roscoe,  The  Northern  Bantu,  1915,  p.  285.  Cf.  Caland,  Alt-
indischer  Zauberritual,  1900,  p.  166;  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of
Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  188-189;  W.  C.  Smith,  The  Ao  Naga  Tribe  of
Assam,  1925,  p.  96;  G.  W.  Briggs,  The  Chamars,  1920,  p.  169;  Sudan
Notes  and  Records,  VII  (1924),  79;  P.  A.  Talbot,  The  Peoples  of  Southern
Nigeria,  1926,  II,  183.

115.  The  Rennes  Dindsenchas,  §  49,  ed.  Stokes,  Revue  Celtique,  XV
(1894),  443-444.  Cf.  Pradel,  Mitteilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft
fur  Volkskunde,  VI,  ii  (1904),  1-36;  E.  W.  Smith  and  A.  M.  Dale,  The
Ila-Speaking  Peoples  of  Northern  Rhodesia,  1920,  I,  234.

116.  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,  pp.  36-37.

117.  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the  Bori,  p.  183.  Cf.  Archivio  per  lo  Studio
delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  XVIII  (1899),  37  (portrait);  Speck,  Penobscot
Shamanism,  Memoirs  American  Anthropological  Association,  VI,  No.  4
(1919),  265-266  (picture  outlined  in  sand  or  drawn  with  charred  stick  on
bark — ^  shot,  stabbed,  clubbed,  or  burned);  Menghi,  Flagellum  Daemo-
num.  Exorcism  6,  in  Mallei  Maleficarum,  1582,  II,  242  (demon's  painted
image  burned  as  part  of  exorcism).

118.  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  1 899,  p.  15.  Cf.  Doddridge,  Notes
on  the  Settlement  and  Indian  Wars  of  the  Western  Parts  of  Virginia  and
Pennsylvania,  1824,  p.  162.

119.  Boston  Herald,  March  22,  1923.  Cf.  Bergen,  p.  15  (Alabama).

120.  Folk-Lore,  XXXII  (1921),  125.  Cf.  Whitney  and  Bullock,  Folk-
Lore  from  Maryland,  1925,  p.  79.

121.  Henslowe's  Diary,  ed.  Greg,  1904,  p.  33.  Cf.  Sloane  MS.  3846,
fol.  95  v°.

122.  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  IX  (1894),  12.

123.  Bergen,  Current  Superstitions,  1896,  p.  144;  cf  Whitney  and
Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,  1925,  p.  79.  On  "the  perils  of  por-
traiture" see  Abbott,  Macedonian  Folklore,  1903,  pp.  300-301;  Andree,
Ethnographische  Parallelen  und  Vergleiche,  II  (1889),  18-20;  Holmberg,
Finno-Ugric,  in  The  Mythology  of  All  Races,  ed.  J.  A.  MacCulloch,  IV
(1927),  12;  Sebillot,  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  I  (1886),  349-354;
Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,
p.  54.  Cf.  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  pp.
189-190;  J.  H.  Hutton,  The  Sema  Nagas,  1921,  pp.  199-200;  W.C.Smith
and  Hutton,  The  Ao  Naga  Tribe  of  Assam,  1925,  p.  96;  Tremearne,  The
Tailed  Head-Hunters  of  Nigeria,  1912,  p.  195.

124.  Bergen,  p.  128.  Cf.  Crooke,  p.  189;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreich-
ische  Volkskunde,  XIII  (1907),  133;  Biblioteca  de  las  Tradiciones  Popu-
lares  Espanolas,  I  (1883),  237;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkerpsychologie,  XIII
(1882),  343;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.  441-
442;  Germania,  XXIX  (1884),  92.  See  Roheim,  Spiegelzauber,  1919,
Chap.  VI.

125.  Somerset  County  Gazette,  January  22,  1881,  as  quoted  by  Gomme,
Folklore  as  an  Historical  Science,  pp.  204-205.


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


126.  Compare  the  black  magic  with  a  buried  lizard  in  the  Kaugika
Sutra,  Caland,  Altindischer  Zauberritual,  1900,  pp.  164-166.  See  also
Sudan  Notes  and  Records,  II  (1919),  125;  Beaver,  Unexplored  New
Guinea,  1920,  p.  134.

127.  Audollent,  Defixionum  Tabellae,  Nos.  111-112,  pp.  167-171;
No.  222,  pp.  295-296;  No.  241,  pp.  323-324.  Cf.  No.  36,  p.  66;  No.  232,
pp.  305-306.  See  also  p.  Ixxxi.

128.  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,
1879,  pp.  223-224.  :

129.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  LVI  (1925),  308.  Cf.  Wil-
kinson, Transactions  Historic  Society  of  Lancashire  and  Cheshire,  New
Series,  I  (1861),  2-4;  Harland  and  Wilkinson,  Lancashire  Folk-Lore,  1867,
pp.  208-209;   W.  G.  Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883,  p.  73.    According  to  :
Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  12,  "some  take  a  Beast  Skin  or  Hide,  and  :
stick  it  full  of  Thornes,  or  Pins  and  call  it  such  an  ones  Skin";  and  he  de-  ^
scribes  (p.  13)  a  somewhat  similar  ceremony  in  which  a  certain  horse  is  '1
called  by  name.  Cf.  the  impaling  of  a  cat  in  order  that  a  thief  may  suffer  '
(J.  H.  Hutton,  The  Angami  Nagas,  1921,  p.  242).

130.  Audollent,  No.  222,  p.  295.

131.  The  Same,  No.  241,  p.  323.  '

132.  Proceedings  against  Dame  Alice  Kyteler,  ed.  Wright  (Camden  '}
Society,  XXIV),  pp.  2-3,  32.  Cf.  Frischbier,  Hexenspruch  und  Zauber-
bann,  1870,  pp.  20-21;  Scheftelowitz,  Das  Stellvertretende  Huhnopfer
(Religionsgeschichtliche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  XIV,  iii),  1914,  pp.
49-50;  Eitrem,  Les  Papyres  Magiques  de  Paris,  Skrifter  utgit  av  Viden-
skapsselskapet  i  Kristiania,  1923,  pp.  6-7.

133.  Folk-Lore,  XXII  (191 1),  51.  Cf.  Pliny,  x,  56,  77,  156;  Hofler,  Die
Volksmedizinische  Organotherapie,  p.  31;  De  Cock,  Volksgeneeskunde  in
Vlaanderen,  1891,  pp.  95,  107-109.  For  the  baptism  of  a  cock  see  Mr.
William  Lilly's  History  of  his  Life  and  Times,  2d  ed.,  1715,  p.  41,  and
p.  148,  above.

134.  See  cases  in  1603  and  1604  (cat:  Sussex  Archaeological  Collec-
tions, XLIX  [1906],  53-54);  1605  (John  Hawarde,  Les  Reportes  del  Cases
in  Camera  Stellata,  ed.  Baildon,  1894,  pp.  250-251);  1632  (Reports  of
Cases  in  the  Courts  of  Star  Chamber  and  High  Commission,  ed.  Gardiner,
Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XXXIX,  275-276).  Cf.  Pitcairn,  Criminal
Trials  in  Scotland,  1 833,  II,  543 ;  J.  B.  Baker,  The  History  of  Scarborough,
1882,  p.  487;  Germania,  X  (1865),  loo-ioi.

135.  See  p.  206.

136.  Document  printed  by  Hart,  Archaeologia,  XL  (1867),  397.  The
blood  of  a  black  cock  is  of  much  consequence  in  a  seventeenth-century
spell  and  ceremony  invoking  Sathan,  Barentur,  and  Barbason  for  money
(Sloane  MS.  3846,  foil.  27  v"-29  r°).

137.  Cf.  De  Cock,  Volksgeneeskunde  in  Vlaanderen,  1891,  pp.  104-109.

138.  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,  3d  Series,  II  (1856),  185.

139.  Gloucestershire  Notes  and  Queries,  I  (1881),  43;  Henderson,
Notes  on  the  Folk  Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  1866,  p.  108;  Nicholson,
Folk  Lore  of  East  Yorkshire,  1890,  p.  141;  Old  Yorkshire,  ed.  by  William


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


Smith,  II  (1881),  170;  The  Essex  Review,  V  (1896),  160;  Bye-Gones  for
1874-75,  p.  125;  for  1886-87,  pp.  465,  478;  for  1893-94,  p.  25;  Folk-Lore
Record,  I  (1878),  218;  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  121;  Leather,  The  Folk-Lore
of  Herefordshire,  1912,  p.  84;  Charles  Kent,  The  Land  of  the  "Babes  in
the  Wood,"  [1910,]  p.  86;  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  IX  (1913),
53;  Wuttke-Meyer,  p.  327;  Melusine,  II  (1884-85),  550;  III  (1886-87),
44;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,
II  (1905),  282.  Cf.  Trotter,  Galloway  Gossip,  1901,  p.  125;  Kristensen,
Jyske  Folkeminder,  IX  (1888),  64;  P.  Saintyves  (i.e.  E.  Nourry),  La
Guerison  des  Verrues,  1913,  pp.  34-37-

140.  Bye-Gones  for  1871-73,  p.  47;  Henderson,  1879,  p.  150;  C.  H.
Poole,  The  Customs,  etc.,  of  the  County  of  Somerset,  1877,  p.  52.  Cf.
Wuttke-Meyer,  p.  326;  Marcellus  Burdigalensis,  De  Medicamentis,  ed.
Niedermann  (Corpus  Medicorum  Latinorum,  V),  1916,  viii,  52,  p.  59;
xiv,  25,  p.  107;  xiv,  68,  p.  Ill;  Glyde,  The  Norfolk  Garland,  p.  31;  E.  P.
Herrick,  The  Southern  Workman  (magazine),  XXXVI  (1907),  403  (Cuba).

141.  Gloucestershire  Notes  and  Queries,  I  (1881),  43.

142.  Brockett,  A  Glossary  of  North  Country  Words,  1825,  p.  190;  Folk-
Lore  Record,  I  (1878),  42.  Cf.  Dalyell,  pp.  191-192.

143.  Folk-Lore,  XXXV  (1924),  356  ("Spider,  as  you  waste  away,
Whooping  cough  no  longer  stay";  Suffolk);  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shrop-
shire Folk-Lore,  p.  194;  Salopian  Shreds  and  Patches,  V  (1883),  79;
Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  p.  32.  Cf.  Notes  and
Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  III  (1893),  3;  Henderson,  1879,  P-  ^4^;
R.  V.  Russell,  The  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces  of  India,
1 91 6,  IV,  224.

144.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  76,  104,  142,  144,  306,  318;  III,
52;  ed.  Leonhardi,  pp.  24,  32,  43,  94,  97,  144.  Cf.  Marcellus  Burdi-
galensis, De  Medicamentis,  ed.  Niedermann  (Corpus  Medicorum  Lati-
norum, V),  1916,  viii,  50,  pp.  58-59;  viii,  64,  p.  60;  xii,  24,  p.  99;  xxii,  41,
p.  177;  xxix,  35,  p.  233.  For  ancient  spells  of  transference  see  Heim,
Incantamenta  Magica,  Nos.  69-74,  pp.  483-484.  Cf.  also  W.  G.  Black,
Folk-Medicine,  1883,  pp.  34-48;  Enthoven,  The  Folklore  of  Bombay,
1924,  p.  277;  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  IX,  1-71;  Seyfarth,
Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  191 8,  pp.  180-
205;  Blau,  Das  Altjiidische  Zauberwesen,  1898,  p.  73;  Bodin,  De  la  De-
monomanie  des  Sorciers,  iii,  2,  ed.  1587,  foil.  143  ^"-14.6  r°;  Cabanes  and
Barraud,  Remedes  de  Bonne  Femme,  1907,  pp.  229-250;  Sebillot,  Tradi-
tions et  Superstitions  de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  1882,  I,  285-286;  Stracker-
jan,  Aberglaube  und  Sagen  aus  dem  Herzogtume  Oldenburg,  2d  ed.,  1909,
1,81-88.

145.  Transactions  Shropshire  Archaeological  and  Natural  History
Society,  ist  Series,  III  (1880),  283;  cf.  VIII  (1885),  99-100.

146.  Burdick,  Magic  and  Husbandry,  1905,  p.  161;  Grimm,  Deutsche
Mythologie,  4th  ed..  Ill  (1878),  175;  U.  Jahn,  Die  Deutschen  Opferge-
brauche  bei  Ackerbau  und  Viehzucht,  1884,  pp.  14-18;  Wuttke-Meyer,
pp.  299-300,  435;  John,  Sitte,  Brauch  und  Volksglaube  im  Deutschen
Westbohmen,  Beitrage  zur  Deutsch-Bohmischen  Volkskunde,  VI  (1905),


4^6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


290;  Skattegraveren,  IX  (1888),  73-74;  Reutlinger  Geschichtsblatter,
VI  (1895),  47;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  169;  VI,  ii  (1901),
479-482;  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,
1866,  p.  117  (1879,  p.  148);  Dalyell,  pp.  loi,  185  (1629,  1643);  Wm.
Hunter,  Biggar  and  the  House  of  Fleming,  1867,  p.  390.  Cf.  Thurston,
Omens  and  Superstitions  of  Southern  India,  191 2,  p.  21 1  (pig  buried  alive),
cf.  p.  210;  Roscoe,  The  Northern  Bantu,  191 5,  pp.  136-137  (cattle  plague
transferred  to  one  cow,  which  is  then  killed).  For  the  burial  of  living  men
or  animals  in  Russia  to  check  the  cholera  see  Lowenstimm,  Aberglaube
und  Strafrecht,  1897,  pp.  11-15;  the  Same,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Socialwissen-  *•
schaft,  VI  (1903),  210.

147.  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  I  (1850),  294.

148.  Saga-Book  of  the  Viking  Club,  III  (1902-04),  50;  Thiers,  Traite
des  Superstitions,  1741,  I,  271,  378.  Cf.  Mackay,  Urquhart  and  Glen-
moriston,  1893,  p.  435;  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XLI  (191 2),  Supplement,
p.  70.   See  p.  103,  above.

149.  Dalyell,  pp.  190-191,  420.

150.  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  167;  XI  (1900),  446;  XIII  (1902),  56;
XIV  (1903),  370-371.  Cf.  Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of
Scotland,  1881,  p.  140;  W.  Mackay,  Urquhart  and  Glenmoriston,  1893,
p.  435;  Roscoe,  The  Banyankole,  1923,  p.  138  (fowl  buried  alive  with
disease  attached).

151.  Proceedings  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Scotland,  IV  (1863),  216,
note;  Henderson,  1879,  PP-  I47""i48.  Cf.  Am  Ur-Quell,  Neue  Folge,  I
(1897),  25;  Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  p.  30.

152.  Maclagan,  Evil  Eye  in  the  Western  Highlands,  1902,  pp.  217-218.

153.  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  I  (1850),  429.

154.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  IX  (1877),  90.  Cf.  Craigie,
Scandinavian  Folk-Lore,  1896,  p.  388;  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,  XXII  (1878),

155.  Rhys,  Celtic  Folklore,  1901,  pp.  304-308,  has  excellent  material
on  burning  live  animals  to  stop  a  pest  and  on  the  confusion  between  the
idea  of  bringing  the  witch  and  that  of  sacrifice.  Thus  (p.  305),  "A  .  .  .
woman  .  .  .  related  to  me  how  she  watched  while  the  carcase  of  a  be-
witched colt  was  burning,  and  how  she  saw  the  witch  coming,"  etc.  As
to  plain  sacrifice  see  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XXXVIII
(1906),  87-88;  Archteologia  Cambrensis,  4th  Series,  II  (1871),  98.

156.  Journal  of  Sir  Roger  Wilbraham,  January  18,  i6o4[-5],  Scott
(Camden  Miscellany,  X),  p.  69.

157.  Archaeologia,  XXX  (1844),  397.

158.  Giffard,  A  Discourse  of  the  Subtil  Practises  of  Deuilles  by  Witches
and  Sorcerers,  1587,  sig.  H3  r".

159.  Cf.  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  557.

160.  Gifi^ard,  A  Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1593,
sig.  G  v",  E  r",  L4  v°,  B  r";  cf.  C3  r^  H  r°,  T4  v°.  Cf.  Perkins,  A  Dis-
course of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,  1608,  p.  208;  Cotta,  A  Short
Discoverie  of  the  Vnobserved  Dangers  of  Seuerall  Sorts  of  Ignorant  and
Vnconsiderate  Practisers  of  Physicke  in  England,  1612,  p.  54;  the  Same,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


The  Triall  of  Witch-craft,  1616,  pp.  113-114;  the  Same,  The  Infallible
True  and  Assured  Witch,  1 624,  p.  136;  Fairfax,  Daemonologia,  ed.  Grainge,
i88a,  p.  31;;  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  p.  209;
Gaule,  Select  Cases  of  Conscience  touching  Witches  and  Witchcrafts,
1646,  p.  76;  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  21;  Glyde,  The  Norfolk
Garland,  p.  54.

161.  The  Essex  Review,  XXV  (191 6),  96.

162.  The  Essex  Review,  XII  (1903),  104-105.  Cf.  Wuttke-Meyer,
p.  284.

163.  The  Essex  Review,  XII  (1903),  103-104.

164.  Zincke,  Wherstead,  2d  ed.,  1893,  pp.  223-225.  See  also  The  Ex-
aminer, January  i ,  1 809, 11,6.  Cf.  Vonbun,  Die  Sagen  Vorarlbergs,  2d  ed.,
1889,  p.  153  (eggs  disappear;  a  hen  is  thrown  into  the  oven;  the  witch
is  burned).

165.  Folk-Lore  Journal,  II  (1884),  122.  See  also  Grimm,  Deutsche  My-
thologie,  4th  ed.,  I  (1875),  506-507  (1767,  Mull;  Northamptonshire);  III
(1878),  175;  Forby,  The  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia,  1830,  II,  395-396;
Hunt,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  1 865, 1,  237-239;  W.  G.
Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883,  pp.  72-74;  Dalyell,  The  Darker  Supersti-
tions of  Scotland,  1834,  pp.  184-185;  Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-
East  of  Scotland,  1881,  p.  186;  Maclagan,  Evil  Eye  in  the  Western  High-
lands, 1902,  p.  140;  Proceedings  Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Scotland,  IV
(1863),  216;  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Coun-
ties, 1879,  PP-  148-149;  Robert  Young,  Annals  of  the  Parish  and  Burgh
of  Elgin,  1876,  p.  81;  A.  W.  Moore,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  Isle  of  Man,
1891,  pp.  92-93;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fur  Volkskunde,  V  (1895),  410;
Hartland,  The  Legend  of  Perseus,  II  (1895),  109-110.  Erasmus  Francisci
(Der  Hollische  Proteus,  2d  ed.,  1695,  p.  109)  tells  of  putting  a  hare  on  the
fire  to  make  the  witch  come.

166.  Cross,  Studies  in  Philology  (University  of  North  Carolina),  XVI
(1919),  259;  Doddridge,  Notes  on  the  Settlement  and  Indian  Wars  of  the
Western  Parts  of  Virginia  and  Pennsylvania,  1824,  p.  163  (live  puppies
burned  in  glass-blowers'  furnaces;  cf.  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XXVlII
[1899],  252).

167.  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  I  (1889),  170.  Cf.  Doddridge,
Notes  on  the  Settlement  and  Indian  Wars  of  the  Western  Parts  of  Virginia
and  Pennsylvania,  1824,  p.  163.

168.  Harper's  New  Monthly  Magazine,  October,  1893,  LXXXVII,
797;  Charles  Kent,  The  Land  of  the  "Babes  in  the  Wood,"  [1910,]  p.  87.
Cf.  Henderson,  1879,  p.  149;  Cowan,  The  Ancient  Capital  of  Scotland,
1904,  II,  132.

169.  Records  of  the  Colony  or  Jurisdiction  of  New  Haven,  ed.  Hoadly,
1858,  pp.  224-225;  J.  M.  Taylor,  The  Witchcraft  Delusion  in  Colonial
Connecticut,  pp.  149-150.  Cf.  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d
ed.,  1629,  p.  209;  Pool's  narrative  (1663)  in  Glanvil,  Sadducismus  Trium-
phatus,  4th  ed.,  1726,  p.  327.  Andrew  West  had  an  ailing  pig.  Some  said
"  burne  it,  other  said,  cut  of  the  eares  and  burn  them,  and  so  they  did,  and


4^8         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


then  the  pig  amended  by  and  by"  (A  True  and  lust  Recorde,  1582,  sig.  F).
Cf.  Sloane  MS.  3846,  fol.  96  v°  (hair  and  ear-tips).

170.  The  Most  Strange  and  Admirable  Discoverie  of  the  Three  Witches
of  Warboys,  1593,  sig.  P3,  If.  i  r°;  Relation  of  the  Most  Remarkable  Pro-
ceedings at  the  Late  Assizes  at  Northampton,  1674,  pp.  4-5  [many  sheep
have  legs  broken  by  witchcraft;  one  burnt,  "for  that  (according  to  their
tradition)  would  make  the  Witch  come  to  the  place"];  Hale,  A  Modest
Enquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Witchcraft  (1697),  Boston,  1702,  pp.  78-79
(ca.  1659);  The  Reliquary,  XVIII  (1877-78),  146;  Notes  and  Queries  for
Somerset  and  Dorset,  IV  (1895),  77;  Bye-Gones  for  1882-83,  p.  335;
Gregor,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  pp.
185-186;  Train,  An  Historical  and  Statistical  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,
1845,  ^59i  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XIV  (1901),  44;  Egerton
MS.  2884,  article  11,  fol.  14,  Catalogue  of  Additions  to  the  Manuscripts
in  the  British  Museum  1906-19 10,  p.  268;  Doddridge,  as  above,  p.  163;
Whitney  and  Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,  1925,  p.  79.  Cf.  Blade,
Contes  Populaires  de  la  Gascogne,  1886,  II,  233-234;  Kristensen,  Danske
Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  296-297;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  259,  436.

171.  Hunt,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  82-
83.  Cf.  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  VII  (1853),  613;  Henderson,  1879,
p.  186  (blood  of  elfshot  cow  boiled  with  pins  brings  the  witch).  See  also
C.  J.  Palmer,  The  Perambulation  of  Great  Yarmouth,  II  (1874),  148,  note;
Bye-Gones  for  1901-02,  p.  95  (burn  hay);  Ditchfield,  The  Parson's
Pleasance,  pp.  192-193;  Whitney  and  Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,
1925,  p.  80;  Roscoe,  The  Baganda,  191 1,  p.  344.

172.  Dawson,  The  Reliquary,  XXIII  (1883),  200.  GifFard  (A  Dialogue
of  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1593,  sig.  E4  r°)  tells  of  burning  hair  of  a
sick  boy;  the  witch  came  and  said  "John,  scratch  me."  Drage  (Daimono-
mageia,  1665,  pp.  9-10)  notes  that  "  a  great  Sign  is,  If  any  thing  that  comes
from  the  Sick  be  burnt  or  harmed,  and  the  suspected  Woman  suffers  in
such  manner,  or  comes  to  the  House  "  (cf.  p.  21 :  "  burning  the  Excrements
[i.e.  hair  or  nails]  of  one  bewitched  ").  At  the  trial  of  Anne  Kerke,  hanged  at
Tyburn  in  1599,  it  was  testified  that  Mother  Gillams  of  the  Bankside  had
pronounced  the  afflicted  child  bewitched,  and  had  advised  the  parents  to
cut  off  and  burn  a  piece  of  the  witch's  coat"  togeather  with  the  childs  vnder
cloth":  this  was  done  and  the  child  was  healed  (Report,  in  The  Triall  of
Maist.  Dorrell,  1599,  p.  100).  Cf.  Festschrift  Louis  Gauchat,  1926,  p.  425;
Hartland,  The  Legend  of  Perseus,  II  (1895),  112-115;  Deutsche  Volks-
kunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,  V  (1905),  28-32;  VI  (1906),  202-
203.  See  also  Giffard,  sig.  E3  v°  (clothes  of  sick  girl  burned);  G2  v°  (nails
boiled;  witch's  face  "all  bescratched ");  The  Wonderfull  Discouerie  of
the  Witch-crafts  of  Margaret  and  Philip  Flower,  1619,  sig.  C2;  Bernard,
A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  pp.  132,  209.  For  New  England,
Hale  (1697)  remarks,  "I  observed  that  the  people  laid  great  weight  upon
this;  when  things  supposed  to  be  bewitched  were  burnt,  and  the  suspected
person  came  to  the  fire  in  the  time  of  it "  (A  Modest  Enquiry  into  the  Na-
ture of  Witchcraft,  Boston,  1702,  p.  21;  cf.  pp.  77-81).  Cf.  Cotton  Mather,
Late  Memorable  Providences,  2d  impression,  London,  1691,  p.  115.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


173.  Mathews,  Tales  of  the  Blackdown  Borderland  (Somerset  Folk
Series,  No.  13),  1923,  p.  106;  Sebillot,  Le  Folk-Lore  de  France,  III  (1906),
124  (of.  Ill,  241).

174.  Clague,  Manx  Reminiscences,  [191 1,]  p.  175;  [Trotter,]  Galloway-
Gossip,  1877,  pp.  45,  98-99  (cock's  heart  as  a  counter-charm).  For  a  wax
heart  see  Trotter,  pp.  98-99.

175.  Logan,  The  Scottish  Gael,  1831,  II,  63.  Cf.  p.  93,  above.

176.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XIV  (1882),  387-390;  cf.
XXVIII  (1896),  94-95.  For  the  spiked  barrel  see  Child,  The  English  and
Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  II,  343;  IV,  30,  note  t,  3^;  V,  48;  Train,  An
Historical  and  Statistical  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1845,  II,  167-168.

177.  Dawson,  History  of  Skipton,  1882,  p.  389.  Cf.  Transactions  Dev-
onshire Association,  XIV  (1882),  390-392.

178.  Folk-Lore,  XX  (1909),  65.

179.  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  IV  (1895),  77.  Cf.
Ill  (1893),  1-2;  Elworthy,  The  Evil  Eye,  1895,  P-  S^-

180.  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  III  (1893),  2-3.  See
also  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  X  (1878),  103  (pig).  Cf.  the
case  from  Radnorshire  in  Bye-Gones  for  1 886-1 887,  p.  310  (calves).  See
also  the  Rev.  Thomas  Jackson,  Recollections,  1873,  pp.  13-14  (woman  in
a  decline,  ox-heart  stuck  with  pins,  roasted,  to  bring  witch).

181.  Archaeologia  iEliana,  New  Series,  XXII  (1900),  113;  Folk-Lore
Journal,  I  (1883),  91.  Cf.  Longman  and  Loch,  Pins  and  Pincushions,  1911,
PP-  36-37-

182.  Wickham,  Records  by  Spade  and  Terrier,  p.  292;  Folk-Lore  Rec-
ord, V  (1882),  172.

183.  Folk-Lore,  XXVIII  (1917),  100.

184.  Folk-Lore  Journal,  III  (1885),  378.  Cf.  County  Folk-Lore,  II
(1901),  165;  Sebillot,  Le  Folk-Lore  des  Pecheurs,  1901,  p.  218.

185.  George  Roberts,  The  History  and  Antiquities  of  the  Borough  of
Lyme  Regis  and  Charmouth,  1834,  p.  262.

186.  J.  C.  Atkinson,  Forty  Years  in  a  Moorland  Parish,  2d  ed.,  1891,
pp.  104-106.

187.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XLIX  (1917),  69-71.

188.  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  176.  Cf.  Volkskunde,  XII  (1899-1900),
160.

189.  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  158  (cow's  heart  buried).

190.  Peacock,  A  Glossary  of  Words  used  in  the  Wapentakes  of  Manley
and  Corringham,  1877,  p.  193  (heart  of  bewitched  beast  stuck  full  of  pins
and  buried).  .

191.  Nicholson,  The  Folk  Lore  of  East  Yorkshire,  1890,  p.  92.  Cf.
Logan,  The  Scottish  Gael,  1831,  II,  63.

192.  Scott's  Journal,  January  31,  1827,  1890,  I,  350;  Archaeologia
Scotica,  III  (1831),  300-301;  figure  in  Longman  and  Loch,  Pins  and  Pin-
cushions, 1911,  Plate  XII,  at  p.  33  (see  p.  37).  For  a  very  curious  piece
of  imposture,  involving  the  suspension  of  a  beast's  heart  stuck  with  pins
in  a  chimney  (for  increase  of  money),  see  Folk-Lore  Journal,  I  (1883),  332.


430         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


193.  Elworthy,  The  Evil  Eye,  1895,  PP-  53-54>  ^gs-  4  and  5  (cf.  p.  55);
the  Same,  West  Somersetshire  Word-Book,  EngHsh  Dialect  Society,  1886,
pp.  572-573.  Cf.  Hancock,  The  Parish  of  Selworthy,  Somerset,  1897,
p.  239;  A.  L.  Humphreys,  The  Materials  for  the  History  of  the  Town  of
Wellington,  Co.  Somerset,  1889,  p.  239;  Mathews,  Tales  of  the  Blackdown
Borderland  (The  Somerset  Folk  Series,  No.  13),  1923,  pp.  105-106;  Trans-
actions Devonshire  Association,  XLIX  (1917),  69.

194.  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  History  and  Antiquarian  Field  Club,
XIII  (1892),  45-46  (cf.  p.  56).

195.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XXXV  (1903),  136-137.

196.  The  Times,  March  5,  1917,  p.  5.

197.  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,
1866,  pp.  186-187.

198.  The  Antiquarian,  XLI  (1905),  363  (as  the  hearts  dry  and  the  pins
drop  out,  misfortunes  come).  In  Somerset  a  toad's  heart  stuck  with  pins
serves  a  like  purpose  (Mathews,  Tales  of  the  Blackdown  Borderland,  1923,
p.  107).  In  Wales  we  hear  of  a  live  toad,  thus  pierced,  as  an  evil  charm
(Longman  and  Loch,  Pins  and  Pincushions,  p.  33).  A  cow's  heart,  pierced
with  pins,  has  been  used  to  bewitch  a  cow  (T.  and  K.  Macquoid,  About
Yorkshire,  1883,  p.  294).  Cf.  Drechsler,  Sitte,  Brauch  und  Volksglaube  in
Schlesien,  II  (1906),  107.

For  examples  of  (i)  burning  or  roasting  or  boiling  an  animal's  heart
or  hanging  it  up  to  shrivel  in  the  chimney,  or  (2)  piercing  it  (with  thorns,
pins,  nails,  or  the  like),  or  of  a  combination  of  such  rites,  the  object  being
to  torment  the  witch  and  make  her  come  and  reverse  the  spell,  or  to  thwart
or  kill  her,  or  somehow  to  stop  disease,  see  Malleus  Maleficarum,  Pt.  II,
qu.  2,  ed.  1620,  pp.  268-269;  van  Helmont,  De  Magnetica  Vulnerum
Curatione,  capp.  110,  171,  Opera,  1682,  pp.  723,  731  (transl.  Charlemont,
A  Ternary  of  Paradoxes,  1650,  pp.  63-64,  89);  Thiers,  Traite  des  Super-
stitions, 4th  ed.,  1741,  I,  155;  Burr,  Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft  Cases
1 648-1 706, 1 91 4,  p.  87  (Pennsylvania,  1684);  Notes  and  Queries,  2d  Series,
I  (1856),  415;  Mathews,  Tales  of  the  Blackdown  Borderland,  1923,  p.  1 10;
J.  Sullivan,  Cumberland  and  Westmorland,  1857,  p.  152;  Peacock,  A  Glos-
sary of  Words  used  in  the  Wapentakes  of  Manley  and  Corringham,  1877,
p.  193;  F.  K.  Robinson,  A  Glossary  of  Words  used  in  the  Neighbourhood  of
Whitby,  1876,  p.  xxii;  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  Folklore  and  Cus-
toms of  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,  1911,  pp.  158-159;  Lovett,
Magic  in  Modern  London,  1925,  pp.  67-69;  E.  Owen,  Welsh  Folk-Lore,
p.  241;  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  1911,  p.  239;
County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  156,  160;  VII  (1914),  114-115  (Fifeshire,
1743);  Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,
p.  187;  McCulloch,  Guernsey  Folk  Lore,  1903,  pp.  293,  390-394,  403-404;
Laisnel  de  la  Salle,  Le  Berry,  I  (1900),  364;  Sauve,  Le  Folk-Lore  des
Hautes  Vosges,  1889,  pp.  200-201;  Witzschel,  Sagen,  Sitten  und  Ge-
brauche  aus  Thiiringen  (Kleine  Beitrage,  II),  1 878,  p.  270;  Wuttke-Meyer,
p.  284  (cf.  p.  185);  E.  Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten  und  Gebrauche  aus
Schwaben,  1852,  p.  176;  Frischbier,  Hexenspruch  und  Zauberbann,  1870,
pp.  19-20;  Wallonia,  I  (1893),  149-15°;  XV  (1907),  104,  303;  Knoop,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


Volkssagen  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Hinterpommern,  1885,  p.  167;  Baltische
Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  339-340;  Dania,^  III  (1892-94),  p.  222.  Cf.
Folk-Lore  Journal,  VI  (1888),  116;  Cabanes  and  Nass,  Poisons  et  Sor-
tileges, 1903,  I,  225  (malefic);  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  V
(1895),  93-94;  Alemannia,  II  (1875),  135;  Volkskunde,  XII  (1899-1900),
160;  Meyrac,  Traditions  des  Ardennes,  1890,  p.  177.  Cf.  Bodin,  Demono-
manie,  1580,  iii,  5,  fol.  146  v°  (horse's  entrails  burned).

199.  Rye  MSS.,  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  13th  Report,  Appendix,
Part  IV,  p.  145.  Cf.  County  Folk-Lore,  I,  No.  2  (1893),  p.  188;  Puckett,
Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  p.  296.

200.  Proceedings  Society  of  Antiquaries,  2d  Series,  XX  (1904),  155-
156  (with  figure).

201.  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  Folklore  and  Customs  of  the
North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,  191 1,  pp.  145-146.

202.  In  Slavic  tales  of  the  type  made  famous  by  Burger's  "Lenore"  the
dead  lover  is  brought  back  by  boiling  a  dead  man's  head,  bones,  or  carcass
in  a  pot  or  by  burning  a  cat  in  a  redhot  oven  (Child,  The  English  and
Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  V,  61).

203.  Heanley,  Saga-Book  of  the  Viking  Club,  III,  i  (1902),  44.

204.  Folk-Lore,  XV  (1904),  103.  Cf.  Monseur,  Le  Folklore  Wallon,
p.  94;  Wallonia,  V  (1897),  37-38;  Sebillot,  Le  Folk-Lore  de  France,  III
(1906),  241  (cf.  Ill,  125);  Hilton-Simpson,  Among  the  Hill-Folk  of  Al-
geria, 1921,  p.  150.  Samuel  Rowlands,  satirizing  the  wizards  of  his  time,
describes  one  of  their  love-potions  (The  Letting  of  Humours  Blood  in  the
Head-vaine,  1600,  Hunterian  Club  reprint,  p.  60):

More,  he  will  teach  any  to  gaine  their  loue,

As  thus  (sales  he)  take  me  a  Turtle  Doue,

And  in  an  Ouen  let  her  lie  and  bake

So  dry,  that  you  may  pouder  of  her  make;

Which  being  put  into  a  cuppe  of  wine,

The  wenche  that  drinkes  it  will  to  loue  incline:

And  shall  not  sleepe  in  quiet  in  her  bed.

Till  she  be  eased  of  her  mayden-head.

This  \s  probatum,  and  it  hath  bin  tride,

Or  els  the  cunning  man  cunningly  lide.
The  Sunday  Observer  (London),  January  29,  1928,  reports  a  recent  case
in  Genoa:  a  girl  pierced  a  lamb's  heart  with  pins,  and  was  about  to  bury
it  in  a  churchyard  along  with  her  false  lover's  photograph,  in  order  to  en-
sure his  return.  Wax  hearts  pierced  with  needles  were  among  the  parapher-
nalia of  the  procuress  in  de  Rojas's  Celestina  (ed.  Cejador  y  Frauca,  1913,
I,  86).

205.  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1891),  41.

206.  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,  P-  79-  The  skeleton  or  one  of  the
bones  of  a  toad  or  frog  that  has  been  buried  alive  in  an  anthill  is  a  potent
love-charm:  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  1899,  p.  14;  Zeitschrift  des
Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,  III  (1906),  61-62.
Cf.  Skattegraveren,XI  (i889),  205;  Wallonia,  I]  (1894),  62-63;  V(i897),
38;  Am  Ur-Quell,  I  (1890),  19;  II  (1891),  55;  Blatter  fiir  Pommersche


432         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Volkskunde,  VI  (1898),  27;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,
1926,  p.  265;  Scipione  Mercurio,  De  gli  Errori  Popolari  d'ltalia,  1603,  iv,
14,  fol.  207  v°;  Scot,  vi,  7,  p.  124  (92),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  98.

207.  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,
1866,  p.  139  (similarly  in  Durham,  p.  138).  See  also  Journal  of  the  British
Archaeological  Association,  LV  (1899),  165.  Cf.  Clyde,  The  Norfolk  Gar-
land, p.  12;  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  191 1,  p.  10;
Monseur,  Le  Folklore  Wallon,  p.  94;  Wallonia,  V  (1897),  38;  Revue  des
Traditions  Populaires,  IX  (1894),  12;  Schonwerth,  Aus  der  Oberpfalz,  I
(1857),  127-128;  Hessische  Blatter  fiir  Volkskunde,  VI  (1907),  13-14;
Schweizer  Volkskunde,  IX  (1919),  2.

208.  Folk-Lore,  XX  (1909),  221.  Cf.  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,
p.  80;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  p.  273;  Notes
and  Queries,  ist  Series,  II  (1850),  259.

209.  See  Chapter  VII,  note  44.

210.  Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,  1892,  pp.  156-158,  has  varieties
of  the  charm  and  mentions  (p.  156)  the  bladebone.  See  also  Hewett,
Nummits  and  Crummits,  1900,  p.  69;  Addy,  pp.  73-74;  Henderson,  1866,
pp.  I40-141;  J.  C.  Davies,  p.  9;  Glyde,  The  Norfolk  Garland,  pp.  11-12.

211.  Notes  and  Queries,  1st  Series,  VI  (1852),  312.  In  Oxfordshire  a  girl
may  make  a  doughcake,  lay  it  on  the  hearthstone,  and  prick  her  initials
on  it;  her  future  husband  will  come  and  prick  his  initials:  Folk-Lore,  XXIV
(1913),  79.  This  is  a  variety  of  the  "dumb  cake":  see  Archaeologia,  XVII
(18 1 4),  166-167;  Brockett,  A  Glossary  of  English  North  Country  Words,
1825,  p.  229;  Forby,  The  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia,  1830,  II,  408;  Hal-
liwell.  Popular  Rhymes  and  Nursery  Tales,  1849,  P-  ^i^;  Glyde,  The  Nor-
folk Garland,  pp.  9-10;  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1891),  44;
Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,  1900,  pp.  11-12;  The  English  Dialect
Dictionary,  s.  v.  dumb.  Cf.  the  witch-cake,  p.  103,  above.

212.  Cf.  Lovett,  Magic  in  Modern  London,  1925,  p.  21.

213.  At  Bovey  Tracy  once  a  Devonshire  witch  gave  a  man  a  candle  to
kill  a  man  (Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,
1866,  p.  145).

214.  Norfolk  Annals,  ed.  Mackie,  I  (1901),  429-430.

215.  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  IV  (1895),  157.  Cf.
The  Spectator,  February  17,  1894,  LXXII,  232.

216.  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  1900,  pp.  568-569.

217.  Elworthy,  West  Somersetshire  Word-Book,  p.  572;  the  Same,
The  Evil  Eye,  1895,  PP-  54~55-  Cf.  Mathews,  Tales  of  the  Biackdown
Borderland  (The  Somerset  Folk  Series,  No.  13),  1923,  p.  106;  Monseur,
Le  Folklore  Wallon,  p.  94.

218.  Notes  and  Queries,  2d  Series,  I  (1856),  331.

219.  For  an  African  example  see  MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden  Konde,
1925,  p.  258.  Cf.  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,
p.  430;  Oman,  Cults,  Customs  and  Superstitions  of  India,  1908,  p.  288;
G.  W.  Briggs,  The  Chamars,  1920,  p.  169;  Hobley,  Bantu  Beliefs  and
Magic,  1922,  p.  181  (eggs);  Fossey,  La  Magie  Assyrienne,  1902,  pp.  75-
77;  Haddon,  Magic  and  Fetishism,  1906,  p.  48.


i


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


433


220.  Folk-Lore,  VIII  (1897),  6;  Elworthy,  The  Evil  Eye,  1895,  p.  57
and  fig.  6.

221.  Pitre,  Usi  e  Costumi,  IV  (1889),  129-131,  134-135.  Cf.  Giambat-
tista  Basile,  I  (1883),  68;  La  Calabria,  II,  No.  3  (1889),  p.  8.

222.  Enthoven,  The  Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,  p.  238.

223.  A.  B.  Brewster,  The  Hill  Tribes  of  Fiji,  1922,  p.  234.   Cf.  W.
Deane,  Fijian  Society,  1921,  p.  162.

224.  Williams  and  Calvert,  Fiji  and  the  Fijians,  New  York,  1859,  p.  195.

225.  Enthoven,  p.  241.  Cf.  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the  Bori,  p.  183.

226.  Winstedt,  Shaman,  Saiva,  and  Sufi,  1925,  p.  53.

227.  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  326.   Cf.  Journal  Royal  An-
thropological Institute,  XLIII  (1913),  43~44-

228.  Bartsch,  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  II
(1880),  334;  Germania,  XXXI  (1886),  346;  Am  Ur-Quell,  II  (1891),  126;

i  V  (1894),  289-290;  VI  (1896),  129;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische
und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,  IV  (1907),  222;  VII  (1910),  231.  Cf.  Bang,
Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  337-338;  Mansikka,  Ueber  Russische
Zauberformeln,  1909,  p.  93  (love-charm);  Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthro-
pologie,  XXV  (1906),  156-157  (malefic);  Folk-Lore,  XXXV  (1924),  47

;      (earth  from  footprint  heated  with  nails,  needles,  and  broken  glass,  until

[      the  pot  bursts;  Czecho-Slovak);   Shakespear,  The  Lushei  Kuki  Clans,

[      1912,  p.  109.

'  229.  Hollingsworth,  The  History  of  Stowmarket,  1844,  p.  247  (nail  or
knife);  A.  L.  Humphreys,  The  Materials  for  the  History  of  the  Town  of
WeUington,  1889,  p.  238  (redhot  nail);  Transactions  Devonshire  Associa-

I  tion,  XII  (1880),  104  (nail  in  footprint  or  threshold);  XV  (1883),  102;
Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),  216;  XV  (1904),  80  (Monmouthshire;  knife  in
heelmark);  XXV  (1914),  367  (pins);  The  Spectator,  February  17,  1894,
LXXII,  231;  J.  LI.  W.  Page,  An  Exploration  of  Exmoor,  4th  ed.,  1895,
p.  307  (place  a  nail  or  other  sharp  piece  of  metal  in  the  witch's  path  or
near  her  house);  Saga-Book  of  the  Viking  Club,  V  (1907-08),  149;  Whitney
and  Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,  1925,  p.  82;  Seyfarth,  Aber-

j,  glaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  54-57  (foot-
print nailed  or  stabbed);  American  Anthropologist,  XXIII  (1920),  442
(stabbed);  Radin,  Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  37th  Report,  pp.  268-
269  (stabbed);  Howitt,  The  Native  Tribes  of  South-East  Australia,  1904,
pp.  366-367  (sharp  fragment  of  quartz,  glass,  bone,  or  charcoal);  Burdick,
Magic  and  Husbandry,  1905,  p.  141  (nail  in  horse's  hoofprint;  so  Wuttke-
Meyer,  p.  267).  For  varieties  of  footprint  magic  see  Lucian,  Dialogi
Meretricum,  iv,  5;  Corrector,  §  175  (Schmitz,  Die  Bussbiicher,  II,  447);
Saxo  Grammaticus,  iv,  p.  177  Miiller  and  Velschow  (p.  118  Holder);
Cardano,  De  Subtilitate,  xviii.  Opera,  1663,  III,  645;  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,
Of  Bodies,  1644,  chap.  18,  ed.  1645,  p.  205;  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,
3d  ed.,  I  (191 1 ),  207-214;  Hartland,  The  Legend  of  Perseus,  II  (1895),
78-83;  Train,  An  Historical  and  Statistical  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,
1845,  II,  156-157;  A.  W.  Moore,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1891,
p.  95;  Rhys,  Celtic  Folklore,  1901,  pp.  303-304;  St.  J.  D.  Seymour,  Irish
Witchcraft  and  Demonology,  1913,  pp.  240-241;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  269,


434


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


271;  Rantasalo,  Der  Ackerbau,  IV  (1924),  159-161  (FF  Communica-
tions, XVII,  No.  55);  Tettau  and  Temme,  Die  Vollcssagen  Ostpreussens,
Litthauens  und  Westpreussens,  1837,  p.  267;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir
Volkskunde,  XV  (1905),  180-181;    Niederlausitzer  Mittheilungen,  II
(1892),  47-48;   Deutsclie  Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,  V
(1905),  41;  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  XXIII  (1908),  ii;  Zeit-
schrift fiir  Socialwissenschaft,  VI  (1903),  219-220;  Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-
Antliropologie,  XXV  (1906),  156-157,  185,  1 91-192;   Krauss,  Slavische
Volkforschungen,  1908,  p.  167;  Andree,  Ethnographische  Parallelen  und
Vergleiche,  II  (1889),  8,  11,  12;   Journal  (Royal)  Anthropological  In-
stitute, XVI  (1887),  26-27;  XXXI  (1901),  140;  XXXVIII  (1908),  160;
XLIV  (1914),  338-339;  XLIX  (1919),  293;  Caland,  Altindischer  Zau-
berritual,  1900,  p.  165;   The  Indian  Antiquary,  XXXVI  (1907),  310;
Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  422,  43;;;
Milne,  The  Home  of  an  Eastern  Clan,  1924,  p.  263;  Sibree,  Madagascar
before  the  Conquest,  1926,  p.  180;  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the  Bori,  pp.
181-182;  Gouldsbury  and  Sheane,  The  Great  Plateau  of  Northern  Rho-
desia, 191 1,  p.  90;  E.  W.  Smith  and  A.  M.  Dale,  The  Ila-Speaking  Peoples
of  Northern  Rhodesia,  1920,  II,  93;  P.  A.  Talbot,  The  Peoples  of  Southern
Nigeria,  1926,  II,  182;  A.  C.  Hollis,  The  Nandi,  1909,  p.  51;  Pechuel-
Loesche,  Volkskunde  von  Loango,  1907,  p.  339  (cf.  p.  341);  Kitching,  On
the  Backwaters  of  the  Nile,  191 2,  p.  238;  Westermarck,  Ritual  and  Belief
in  Morocco,  1926,  II,  332;  E.  C.  Parsons,  Folk-Lore  of  the  Sea  Islands,
South  Carolina,  1923,  pp.  211-212;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern
Negro,  1926,  pp.  267,  269-274;  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  1900,  pp.  155,  568-
569;  Beaver,  Unexplored  New  Guinea,  1920,  p.  133;  W.  J.  V.  Saville,  In
Unknown  New  Guinea,  1926,  p.  268;  Thurnwald,  Forschungen  auf  den
Salomo-Inseln  und  dem  Bismarck-Archipel,  I  (1912),  443;  W.  E.  Arm-
strong, Rossel  Island,  1928,  p.  175;  Spencer,  The  Native  Tribes  of  the
Northern  Territory  of  Australia,  1914,  pp.  260-261 ;   M.  Bartels,  Die
Medicin  der  Naturvolker,  1923,  pp.  32-34;  Bureau  of  American  Ethnol-
ogy, 26th  Report  (for  1904-05),  1908,  p.  446;  Leland,  Gypsy  Sorcery,
1 89 1,  p.  112;  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XL  (1927),  169  (Louisiana
negroes).

230.  Maclagan,  Evil  Eye  in  the  Western  Highlands,  1902,  p.  9.

231.  Perkins,  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,  1608,
p.  206,  disapproves  "  the  burning  of  the  thatch  of  the  suspected  parties
house,  which  is  thought  to  be  able  to  cure  the  partie  bewitched,  and  to
make  the  Witch  to  bewray  her  selfe."  Cf.  Gaule,  Select  Cases  of  Con-
science touching  Witchcrafts,  1646,  p.  76;  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and
Discovery  of  Witch-craft,  1648,  p.  34;  Blagrave,  Astrological  Practice  of
Physick,  1671,  p.  154  (thatch  or  tile  heated  in  urine);  Hartland,  The
Legend  of  Perseus,  II  (1895),  93;  Rowley,  Dekker,  and  Ford,  The  Witch
of  Edmonton,  1623,  iv,  i,  Dyce's  Ford,  1869,  III,  236-237;  Brand-Hazlitt,
111,76-77.

232.  John  Waller  in  Holinshed,  IV  (1808),  892.    Cf.  Glanvil's  Sad-
ducismus  Triumphatus,  4th  ed.,  1726,  pp.  321,  334.

233.  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  176.  Cf.  Babcock,  The  American  Journal


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  III


435


of  Insanity,  April,  1895,  p.  520  (bottle  buried  to  thwart  witch);  Whitney
and  Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,  1925,  p.  82.

234.  Folk-Lore  Record,  I  (1878),  25-26.  A  bottle  of  bent  pins  under  the
hearthstone  would  keep  witches  out  (I,  26).  Cf.  Peacock,  A  Glossary  of
Words  used  in  the  Wapentakes  of  Manley  and  Corringham,  1877,  p.  193;
Cross,  Studies  in  Philology  (University  of  North  Carolina),  XVI  (1919),
263,  note;  H.  J.  Bell,  Obeah,  2d  ed.,  1893,  pp.  4-5  (against  thieves).

235.  Sussex  Archgeological  Collections,  LX  (1919),  147.  Cf.  Durbin,
A  Narrative  of  Some  Extraordinary  Things,  1800,  pp.  39-40,  54-55;  A
Brief  Account,  prefixed  to  the  Rev.  Isaac  Nicholson's  Sermon  against
Witchcraft,  1808,  p.  iii;  W.  H.  B.  Saunders,  Legends  and  Traditions  of
Huntingdonshire,  1888,  pp.  156-157;  Forby,  The  Vocabulary  of  East
Anglia,  1830,  II,  394-395;  J.  G.  Campbell,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight
in  the  Highlands  and  Islands,  1902,  p.  14;  Alemannia,  II  (1875),  135;
Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  p.  347;  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the
Bori,  p.  184;  Mitteilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,
VII,  i  (1905),  91  (cooking  needles  makes  the  witch  come);  Deutsche  Volks-
kunde aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,  IX  (1909),  57  (cooking  pins  brings
the  tortured  witch).  In  1683,  when  Abraham  Swift,  a  child  of  twelve,
suffered  strange  fits,  the  physician  refused  to  prescribe  for  him  "until  his
water  had  been  tryed  by  fire":  the  idea  was  that,  if  this  were  done,  "the
witch  that  had  hurt  him  would  come  and  discover  all"  (The  Rev.  Oliver
Heywood  his  Autobiography,  etc.,  IV  [1885],  53-54).

236.  Aubrey,  Miscellanies,  4th  ed.,  1857,  p.  140;  Hunt,  Popular  Ro-
mances of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  210,  note  (cf.  Bottrell,  Tradi-
tions and  Hearthside  Stories  of  West  Cornwall,  I  [1870],  81-82);  Increase
Mather,  An  Essay  for  the  Recording  of  Illustrious  Providences,  1684,
pp.  265-280;  Cotton  Mather,  Late  Memorable  Providences,  2d  impres-
sion, London,  1691,  pp.  59-61.  See  also  Blagrave,  Astrological  Practice  of
Physick,  1671,  p.  154;  Glanvil's  Sadducismus  Triumphatus,  4th  ed.,  1726,
pp.  334-335;  Brand-Hazhtt,  III,  77-78.  Cf.  An  Account  of  the  Tryal
and  Examination  of  Joan  Butts,  ...  at  the  Assizes  holden  for  South-
wark,  .  .  .  May  27,  1682  (Dr.  Bourn  advised  the  afflicted  child's  parents
"to  save  the  Childs  water,  and  put  it  into  a  Bottle,  stopping  it  close,  and
bury  it  in  the  Earth,  and  to  burn  the  Childs  Clothes,  assuring  them,  that
the  Witch  .  .  .  would  come  in."  Joan  was  acquitted,  though  she  did  in
fact  come  in).  The  experiment  of  heating  urine  was  tried  in  the  Leicester-
shire cases  of  1717  (Add.  MS.  35838,  fol.  104).  For  full  directions,  as  well
as  an  elaborate  charm  or  prayer,  see  Add.  MS.  36674,  fol.  I45  r°,  or  Sloane
MS.  3706,  fol.  23  T°.  Cf.  Sloane  MS.  3846,  foil.  95  r°-96  r°.

237.  Deodat  Lawson,  A  True  Narrative,  in  Increase  Mather's  Further
Account  of  the  Tryals  of  the  New-England  Witches,  London,  1693,  p.  8;
Hale,  A  Modest  Inquiry,  Boston,  1702,  p.  23;  Alexander  Roberts,  A  Trea-
tise of  Witchcraft,  1616,  p.  53.  Cf.  Rheinische  Geschichtsblatter,  I
(1895),  348-349-  See  also  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,
1629,  p.  132.  A  versified  recipe  for  such  a  witch-cake  ("to  bring  in  the
witch")  from  Henry  Bold's  Wit  a  Sporting  in  a  Pleasant  Grove  of  New
Fancies,  1657,  pp.  76-77,  is  quoted  in  Brand-Hazlitt,  III,  78;  but  this,


436         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


like  several  poems  in  Bold's  little  volume,  is  simply  conveyed  (as  "the
wise  it  call")  from  Herrick's  Hesperides  (Riverside  edition,  II,  116).  See
also  Sloane  MS.  3846,  fol.  98  v°.

238.  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  21.

239.  Giffard,  A  Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1593,
sig.  G2  v°  (also  ed.  1603).

240.  Folk-Lore,  XXXII  (i 921),  125.  Cf.  Rochholz,  Schweizersagen  aus
dem  Aargau,  1856,  II,  167-168.

241.  See,  for  example,  Notes  and  Queries,  2d  Series,  I  (1856),  415;
Archaeologia,  XLVI  (1880),  132-134;  Devon  and  Cornwall  Notes  and
Queries,  XI  (1921),  288;  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  History  and  Anti-
quarian Field  Club,  XXXVII  (1916),  59-60  (two  vipers  and  a  centipede);
Halifax  Antiquarian  Society  Papers,  1904-05,  pp.  6-7  (cow's  hair,  parings
of  hoof,  nails,  extracts  from  the  Bible).  Cf.  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant
Lore,  1899,  PP-  14-15-

242.  Bogg,  Lower  Wharfeland,  1904,  p.  346.  Cf.  Longman  and  Loch,
Pins  and  Pincushions,  1911,  pp.  37-38.

243.  Cf.  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XXVII  (1898),  239;  Enthoven,  The
Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,  p.  239.

244.  The  Reliquary,  VII  (1866-67),  loi.

245.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XXVIII  (1896),  98-99;
XXXII  (1900),  89-90.

246.  Hunt,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  210.

247.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XXXV  (1903),  139.

248.  Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,  1900,  p.  74.  For  magic  by
inversion  see  p.  147,  above;  cf.  pp.  21,  119.

CHAPTER  IV
Love  and  Hate

1.  33  Henry  VIII,  chap.  8,  Statutes  of  the  Realm,  III  (1817),  837.

2.  For  love-magic  see,  for  example,  Fahz,  De  Poetarum  Romanorum
Doctrina  Magica,  1904,  pp.  16-37  (1^2-143);  Kuhnert,  Rheinisches  Mu-
seum, XLIX  (1894),  37-56;  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  iii,  10-19,
foil.  XX  r°-xxij  v°;  v,  3-8,  foil,  xxv  r°-xxvj  v"  (ed.  1592,  iii,  14-24,  pp.  26-
35;  V,  2-6,  pp.  47-51);  Wier,  De  Praestigiis  Daemonum,  iii,  38-39,  ed.
1568,  pp.  339-347;  V,  10,  pp.  480-481  (wax  image);  Carl  Meyer,  Der
Aberglaube  des  Mittelalters,  1884,  pp.  263-265;  Halsig,  DerZauberspruch
bei  den  Germanen,  1910,  pp.  53-54;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  365-368;  Schon-
werth,  Aus  der  Oberpfalz,  I  (1857),  125-134;  Ebel,  Hessische  Blatter
fiir  Volkskunde,  III  (1904),  130-154;  G.  F.  Abbott,  Macedonian  Folklore,
1903,  pp.  226-227;  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,
1910,  pp.  179-180,  289,  302,  645;  Ivens,  Melanesians  of  the  South-East
Solomon  Islands,  1927,  pp.  87,  280-282,  289-290,  336;  Skeat,  Malay
Magic,  1900,  pp.  568,  574-579;  J-  H.  Weeks,  Among  Congo  Cannibals,
1913,  pp.  286-287;  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the  Bori,  pp.  159-165.  The
superb  Scandinavian  ballad  of  "Ridder  Stig"  illustrates  the  potency  of


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IV


437


runes  in  love-magic  and  bears  in  some  ways  a  striking  resemblance  to
Browning's  "Mesmerism":  Grundtvig,  Danmarks  Gamle  Folkeviser,  No.
76,  II,  301-318;  Grundtvig  and  SigurSsson,  Islenzk  FornkvseSi,  I,  52-59
(cf.  I,  66-70).

3.  See  p.  30,  above.

4.  Thoms,  Anecdotes  and  Traditions  (Camden  Society),  1839,  pp.
93-96;  Hailiwell,  The  Nursery  Rhymes  of  England,  1842,  pp.  137,  183;
the  Same,  Popular  Rhymes  and  Nursery  Tales,  1849,  p.  256;  Northall,
English  Folk-Rhymes,  1892,  pp.  153-157;  English  Dialect  Dictionary,
s.v.  cockehy-bread\  Aubrey,  Remaines  of  Gentilisme  and  Judaisme,  ed.
Britten,  1881,  pp.  43-44,  96,  225;  Shadwell,  The  Lancashire  Witches,
1682,  ed.  Hailiwell,  The  Poetry  of  Witchcraft,  1853,  pp.  41,  56.

5.  Corrector  (included  in  his  Decretum  by  Burchard  as  Book  xix),
§§  172,  173  (Schmitz,  II,  447);  Arundel  Penitential,  §  81  (Schmitz,  I,  459;
cf.  Fournier,  Revue  d'Histoire  et  de  Litterature  Religieuses,  IX  [1904],  97).

6.  Bishop  Peter  Quivil's  Modus  Exigendi  Confessiones,  Wilkins,  Con-
cilia, II,  162.

7.  T.  Wright,  Anecdota  Literaria,  1844,  pp.  1-13;  McKnight,  Middle
English  Humorous  Tales  in  Verse,  [1913,]  pp.  1-24.

8.  Gower,  Mirour  de  I'Omme,  9493-9504,  Works,  ed.  Macaulay,  I
(1899),  110.  Charms  and  witchcraft  to  procure  unlawful  love  are  con-
demned by  Dan  Michel  of  Kent,  Ayenbite  of  Inwit,  ed.  Morris,  1886,
p.  43  (ca.  1340).

9.  Albericus  Trium  Fontium  (Recueil,  XXI,  609).  For  other  demons  in
the  same  chronicle  see  XXI,  615-616  (1235;  demons  as  red  dwarfs),  628
(1240,  1 241;  prophetic  and  tricksy  demons),  629  (1241;  demons  as  vul-
tures and  ravens  seen  and  heard).  Under  1233  Alberic  tells  of  the  German
Luciferians,  who  worshipped  an  image  of  the  infernal  prince  (XX,  608-
609).

10.  Samuel  Rowlands  satirizes  a  trickster  who  pretends  that  he  can
"frame  a  ring"  that  will  win  love  (Greenes  Ghost  Haunting  Conie-Catch-
ers,  1602,  Hunterian  Club,  p.  12,  Works,  I).

1 1 .  Monk  of  St.  Albans,  Chronicon  Angliae,  ed.  Thompson,  pp.  97-100,
104-105.  Cf.  the  English  chronicle,  Archaeologia,  XXII,  233-238,  241-
243-

12.  Pseudo-Callisthenes,  14.

13.  Plato,  Theaetetus,  174A;  Aesop,  ed.  Halm,  No.  72.  See  Weinreich,
Der  Trug  des  Nektanebos,  191 1,  pp.  16-17.

14.  Old  Yorkshire,  ed.  Wm.  Smith,  IV  (1883),  268-269.

15.  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  pp.  187-188.

16.  St.  Johnston,  The  Lau  Islands,  1918,  p.  59.

17.  Peter  Comestor,  Historia  Scholastica,  on  Exodus  vi  (Migne,
CXCVIII,  1 1 44);  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Otia  Imperialia,  iii,  iii  (Leibnitz,

1,  looi;  Liebrecht,  p.  49);  Vincent  of  Beauvais,  Speculum  Historiale,  ii,

2,  Venice,  1494,  fol.  16  r°;  Holkot,  Super  Libros  Sapientie,  Lectio  113,
Reutlingen,  1489,  sig.  yiij,  If.  2  v°;  Bromyard,  Summa  Predicantium,  s.v.
Caro,  C,  ii,  §  14;  Berchorius  (Berguire),  Reductorium  Morale,  xiv,  71,  3,


438


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Paris,  1521,  fol.  cccxlix  r°.  Cf.  Josephus,  De  Antiquitate  ludaeorum,  ii,
10,  252,  ed.  Nader,  I,  119.

18.  Convertimini,  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III,  130,  149;
Gesta  Romanorum,  cap.  10,  ed.  CEsterley,  pp.  287-288  (cf.  cap.  26,  p.  323,
and  note,  p.  714);  English  Gesta  Romanorum  (girdle),  ed.  Madden,  1838,
pp.  179-180,  cf.  p.  517  (ed.  Herrtage,  1879,  PP-  227-230;  cf.  Herbert,
III,  254);  Innsbruck  MS.  of  Gesta,  cap.  11,  ed.  Dick,  1890,  pp.  lo-ii
(Fridericus;  cf.  Gesta  in  MS.  Harley  5369,  Herbert,  III,  207).

19.  The  Squire's  Tale,  F  247-251.

20.  English  Chronicle,  ed.  Davies  (Camden  Society,  LXIV),  pp.  58-59,
See  p.  81,  above.

21.  Petition,  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  VI,  241.

22.  Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIII,  X,  No.  199,  pp.  69-70.

23.  Durham  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  p.  29.

24.  Hale,  p.  7.  Mary  Blandy,  hanged  at  Oxford  in  1752  for  poisoning
her  father,  alleged  that  the  arsenic  which  she  gave  him  was  furnished  by
her  lover,  Captain  Cranstoun,  as  an  innocuous  potion  to  conciliate  her
father.  See  The  Trial  of  Mary  Blandy,  ed.  Roughead,  1914.

25.  Hale,  pp.  32-33.

26.  Raine,  The  Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Minster  (Surtees  Society,  XXXV),
p.  272.

27.  Hale,  p.  102.

28.  Depositions  Taken  before  the  Mayor  and  Aldermen  of  Norwich,
ed.  Rye,  1905,  p.  34.

29.  Archffiologia  Cantiana,  XXVI  (1904),  19.  Goody  Swane  had  also
threatened  one  of  her  neighbors,  "  and  it  is  come  to  pass  this  same  woman
her  neighbour  hath  never  been  well  since."

30.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1 581-1590,  pp.  241,  246-248.

31.  The  same,  1591-1594,  pp.  17-18,  cf.  19.  See  pp.  260—261,  above.

32.  Compare  the  story  of  King  Aun  in  the  Ynglinga  Saga,  cap.  29  (25)
(Konunga  Sogur  [Heimskringla],  I  [1816],  33-35;  ed.  Jonsson,  I,  i  [1893],
45-48).

33.  Gregory  of  Tours,  vi,  34-35.  The  Norse  Grogaldr  mentions,  among
other  spells,  one  that  changes  the  hate  of  enemies  to  good  will  (st.  9,  Bugge,
Norroen  Fornkvas'Si,  1867,  p.  340).

34.  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  III,  223  ("per  incan-
tationes  et  sortilegia").

35.  Roger  of  Wendover,  ed.  Hewlett,  III,  33;  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica
Majora,  III,  222.

36.  Anonymous  Vita  Edwardi  II,  in  Hearne's  ed.  of  Johannes  de  Tro-
kelowe,  Annales,  p.  1 10.  Among  Gaveston's  treasures  were  a  silver-gilt  box
"pur  porter  eynz  un  anel  entour  le  col  de  un  homme,"  and  a  (magic?)
girdle  of  lion's  skin  adorned  with  gold  and  gems  (Rymer,  Foedera,  2d  ed..
Ill,  389,  390;  cf.  Joan  Evans,  Magical  Jewels,  1922,  pp.  112,  119).

37.  Rigault,  Le  Proces  de  Guichard,  Eveque  de  Troyes,  1896,  pp.  72,
74,271.  See  p.  76,  above.

38.  Petrarch,  Epistolae  de  Rebus  Familiaribus,  i,  3,  ed.  Fracassetti,  I,
41-42.  Cf.  Kornmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  ii,  14,  Opera  Curiosa,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IV


439


1694,  pp.  37-40;  Garmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  i,  9,  2,  p.  261 ;
Bullen,  Old  Plays,  III,  166-261  (The  Distracted  Emperor);  Pauls,  Der
Ring  der  Fastrada,  Zeitschrift  des  Aachener  Geschichtsvereins,  XVII

(1895)  ,  i~73;  G.  Paris,  L'Anneau  de  la  Morte,  1897;  Romania,  XXV

(1896)  ,  612-617.  A  similar  legend  has  attached  itself  to  Harold  Fairhair
and  to  King  Waldemar  of  Denmark:  Haralds  Saga  hins  Harfagra,  cap.  25
(Heimskringla,  ed.  Unger,  1868,  p.  67;  Flateyjarbok,  I,  567,  582;  Agrip,
Fornmanna  Sogur,  X,  379-380);  Thiele,  Danske  Folkesagn,  I  (1820),
89-90,  1 88-1 91 ;  Uhland,  Schriften  zur  Geschichte  der  Dichtung  und  Sage,
VI,  399.  Cf.  Moth,  Danske  Studier,  191     pp.  97-107.

39.  Tyndale,  The  Practice  of  Prelates,  Works,  ed.  Russell,  1 831, 1,  41 1 ;
Expositions  and  Notes,  ed.  Walter  (Parker  Society),  p.  265.

40.  Skelton,  Why  Come  Ye  Nat  to  Courte?  vv.  654-712.

41.  Tyndale,  as  above,  ed.  Russell,  I,  452-453;  ed.  Walter,  p.  308.

42.  The  same,  I,  450;  p.  305.  Of  course  Tyndale  approved  the  Mosaic
law  in  such  cases  (Prologue  to  Exodus,  Doctrinal  Treatises,  ed.  Walter,

P-  413)-

43.  Stapleton's  letter,  Norfolk  Archaeology,  I  (1847),  59.  See  p.  210,
above.

44.  Magic  rings  were  popular  in  the  reign  of  the  eighth  Henry.  A  book
of  conjuring  found  in  the  possession  of  an  Abingdon  priest  in  1535  con-
tained formulae  for  consecrating  rings  with  stones  in  them  (Ellis,  Original
Letters,  3d  Series,  III  [1846],  41-42;  Letters  and  Papers,  IX,  No.  551,
p.  182).  In  1544  a  sorcerer  named  Wisdom  made  a  ring  for  the  profligate
Lord  Harry  Nevell  to  ensure  luck  in  gambling  (Letters  and  Papers,  XXI,
ii,  No.  417,  p.  198;  see  p.  67,  above).  Cf.  Robert  Greene,  The  Blacke
Bookes  Messenger,  1592,  Bodley  Head  Quartos,  X  (1924),  24.

45.  See  p.  63,  above.  As  to  Solomon's  rings  see  Wm.  Jones,  Finger-
Ring  Lore,  1877,  1898,  pp.  91-92.

46.  Letters  and  Papers,  XIII,  i.  No.  1383,  p.  512.

47.  Norfolk  Archeology,  II  (1849),  280-290;  Notes  and  Queries,  3d
Series,  VII  (1865),  413-414;  Journal  British  Archasological  Association,
XXIII  (1867),  256-268,  33^-33^-,  370-378;  XXV  (18691,  334-344;  XLI
(1885),  262-266;  Records  oi  Buckinghamshire,  II  (1863),  60-74;  III
(1870),  76,  354-369;  Archaeologia  Cantiana,  XI  (1877),  xxxviii,  Ixi-lxii;
The  Reliquary  and  Illustrated  Archaeologist,  VII  (1901),  37-44;  Pro-
ceedings Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Scotland,  XI  (1876),  65;  Hope,  The
Legendary  Lore  of  the  Holy  Wells  of  England,  1893,  pp.  3-5.

48.  Heywood,  The  Foure  PP,  v.  45,  Manly,  Specimens  of  the  Pre-
Shaksperean  Drama,  I  (1897),  485.  Cf.  Bale's  Select  Works,  ed.  Christmas
(Parker  Society),  p.  498  ("Master  John  Shorne's  boot");  S.  R.  Maitland,
Remarks  on  the  Rev.  S.  R.  Cattley's  Defence  of  his  Edition  of  Fox's
Martyrology,  1842,  pp.  39-40.

49.  See  Joan  Evans,  Magical  Jewels  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  the  Renais-
sance, 1922;  Du  Meril,  Floire  et  Blanceflor,  1856,  pp.  clix-clxiv;  Child,  The
English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  I,  200-201;  Wm.  Jones,  Finger-
Ring  Lore,  1877,  1898,  pp.  1 21-126.  Cf.  R.  M.  Garrett,  Precious  Stones  in
Old  English  Literature  (Miinchener  Beitrage,  XLVII),  1909;  Dickman,


440        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Le  Role  du  Surnaturel  dans  les  Chansons  de  Geste,  1926,  pp.  99,  180;
J.  Kirchmann,  De  Annulis,  1672,  cap.  21,  pp.  198-218.

50.  Plato,  De  Re  Publica,  ii,  pp.  359-360.

51.  Auberi,  Tobler,  Mittheilungen  aus  Altfranzosischen  Handschriften,
I  (1870),  12.

52.  Floire  et  Blanceflor,  ed.  Du  Meril,  p.  42.  Cf.  Yvain,  ed.  Holland,
1880,  vv.  2595-2613,  pp.  III-II2;  Horn,  vv.  2051-2057,  ed.  Stengel,
1883,  pp.  108-109;  Horn,  ed.  Hall,  1901,  pp.  32-33.

53.  Wolfdietrich  D,  vili,  st.  42,  ed.  Janicke,  Deutsches  Heldenbuch,  11
(1873),  145.  _

54.  Reinfried  von  Braunschweig,  15066-15091,  ed.  Bartsch,  1871,  pp.
440-441.

55.  See  Child,  Ballads,  I,  200-201.

56.  Cf.  Roman  de  la  Charrette,  vv.  2344-2367,  ed.  Forster,  1899,  p.  88.

57.  William  of  Palerne,  4424-4431,  ed.  Skeat,  pp.  I41-142;  cf.  Guil-
laume  de  Palerne,  7731-7745,  ed.  Michelant,  1876,  pp.  224-225.  The
English  version  dates  from  ca.  1350.

58.  Jean  de  Conde,  Dit  dou  Levrier,  vv.  1326-1333,  ed.  Scheler,  II,
344;  ed.  Tobler,  pp.  137-138.

59.  William  of  Malmesbury,  Gesta  Regum  Anglorum,  ii,  205,  ed.
Stubbs,  I,  256-258;  Roger  of  Wendover,  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Coxe,  I,
498-500;  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Luard,  I,  577-578;  Eulogium  Historia-
rum, ed.  Haydon,  I,  393-395;  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.
Luard,  I,  527-528;  Bromton,  Twysden,  Scriptores  X,  cols.  950-951;  De
Antiquis  Legibus  Liber,  ed.  Stapleton  (Camden  Society,  XXXIV),  p.  179;
Vincent  of  Beauvais,  Speculum  Historiale,  xxv,  29,  Venice,  1494,  fol.  325
v°  (thence  in  Guazzo  [Guaccius],  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  ii,  4,
pp.  iio-iii);  Alphabetum  Narrationum  (Herbert,  Catalogue,  III,  437;
Toldo,  Herrig's  Archiv,  CXVIII  [1907],  76-81);  An  Alphabet  of  Tales,
No.  730,  ed.  Banks,  II  (1905),  488-489.  For  further  references  see  Baum,
Publications  Modern  Language  Association,  XXXIV  (191 9),  523-579;
XXXV  (1920),  60-62.

60.  Riegel,  Die  Quellen  von  William  Morris'  Dichtung  The  Earthly
Paradise  (Erlanger  Beitrage,  II,  ix),  1890,  pp.  63-65.

61.  See  Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,  1892,  pp.  108-123,  153-158;
Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  ed.  Hazlitt,  1870,  III,  260-263.  Cf.  p.  104.

62.  Blau,  Das  Altjiidische  Zauberwesen,  1898,  pp.  96-112,  cf.  pp.  24,
52.  Cf.  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  XXVI  (1916),  194-198.

63.  Papiri  Greci  e  Latine  (Societa  Italiana  per  la  Ricerca  dei  Papiri),
No.  28,  I  (1912),  63-69.

64.  Audollent,  Defixionum  Tabellae,  1904,  No.  5,  pp.  12-13.

65.  No.  10,  pp.  17-18.

66.  No.  68,  pp.  95-97.

67.  No.  139,  pp.  196-198.

68.  No.  230,  pp.  301-302.

69.  No.  264,  pp.  362-363.

70.  No.  266,  pp.  364-365.  Cf.  Journal  Anthropological  Institute,
XXXIV  (1904),  207-210.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IV  44I

71.  Wier,  iii,  39,  ed.  1568,  pp.  342-347;  Scot,  vi,  6-7,  pp.  1 21-124  (90-
92),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  96-99.

72.  Casanova,  La  Magia  del  xAmor  entre  los  Aztecas,  Mexican  Folk-
ways, 1925,  I,  19.

73.  Hansen,  Zauherwahn,  pp.  71-72,  88-99,  153-166,  287-289;  Parisot,
Le  Royaume  de  Lorraine  sous  les  Carolingiens,  1898,  chaps.  4-8.

74.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  330  (De  Taxone  Liber,  ed.  Howald
and  Sigerist,  Corpus  Medicorum  Latinorum,  IV  [1927],  231);  II,  10, 114,
306  (cf.  I,  xli-xliv);  ed.  Leonhardi,  pp.  4,  35,  94.  Cf.  Grendon,  Journal  of
American  Folk-Lore,  XXII  (1909),  pp.  138,  200-201,  212-213,  -3^)  ^36;
Jente,  Die  Mythologischen  Ausdriicke  im  Altenglischen  Wortschatz,  1921,
p.  310.  See  also  Corrector,  §  186,  Schmitz,  Die  Bussbiicher,  II  (1898),  450;
Arundel  Penitential,  §  85,  Schmitz,  I  (1883),  460.

71;.  Depositions  and  other  Ecclesiastical  Proceedings  from  the  Courts  of
Durham,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  Society,  XXI),  p.  27.

76.  Webster,  The  Displaying;  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  1677,  p.  260.
Cf.  Sloane  MS.  1983,  fol.  70  v°.^

77.  Pherecydes,  frag.  26,  ed.  Sturz^,  pp.  11 8-1 19  (frag.  75,  ed.  Miiller,
Fragmenta  Historicorum  Graecorum,  I,  89-90),  from  Scholium  on  Odyssey,
xi,  287  (ed.  Dindorf,  II,  499-500);  Eustathius  on  Odyssey,  xi,  292,  p.  1685;
Scholium  on  Theocritus,  iii,  43,  ed.  Diibner,  p.  31;  Apollodorus,  Biblio-
theca,  i,  4,  12,  1-8,  ed.  Heyne^  (1803),  pp.  73-76.  Cf.  Mannhardt,  Wald-
und  Feldkulte,  II,  30-31;  Frazer's  excursus  in  his  Apollodorus,  1921,  II,
350-355;  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  I  (191 1),  158-159.

78.  Tuchmann,  Melusine,  V  (1890-91),  232-236;  Hansen,  Ouellen,
index,  s.  v.  Impotenz;  Malleus  Maleficarum,  Pt.  i,  qu.  8-9,  qu.  18,  ed.
1620,  pp.  87-96,  139;  Pt.  ii,  qu.  I,  capp.  6-7,  pp.  192-200;  qu.  2,  capp.  2,
4,  pp.  276-280,  284;  Jorimann,  Friihmittelalterliche  Rezeptarien  (Bei-
trage  zur  Geschichte  der  Medizin,  ed.  Sigerist,  I),  1925,  p.  77;  Danaeus
(Daneau),  De  Veneficis,  cap.  3,  1575,  pp.  51-53  (cf.  translation,  A  Dialogue
of  Witches,  1575,  sigg.  Ev,  If.  4  r°-Fj  r°);  Corpus  Medicorum  Latinorum,

IV  (1927),  293  (fragmentary  spell  "ut  mulier  non  concipiat");  Fernel,  (
De  Abditis  Rerum  Causis,  ii,  16  (1656  ed.  of  De  Morbis  Universalibus
et  Particularibus,  p.  517);  De  I'Ancre,  L'Incredulite  et  Mescreance  du
Sortilege,  1622,  pp.  309-359,  766-767,  773;  Cardano,  De  Subtilitate,  cap.
18,  Opera,  1663,  III,  643,  646;  Wier,  iii,  34,  ed.  1568,  p.  329;  iv,  20,  pp.
409-412  (cf.  V,  9,  p.  478;  V,  19,  p.  511);  Bodin,  De  la  Demonomanie  des
Sorciers,  1587,  ii,  i,  foil.  61  v°-64  r°;  Scot,  iv,  4,  pp.  77-78  (60-61),  ed.
Nicholson,  pp.  61-62;  iv,  8,  pp.  82-83  (63-64),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  65;  Gril-
lando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  iii,  22,  fol.  xxiij  r°;  vi,  10-13,  ^^^j  (^d.
1592,  iii,  26,  pp.  37-38;  vi,  13-16,  pp.  71-75);  Guazzo  (Guaccius),  Com-
pendium Maleficarum,  1608,  ii,  4,  pp.  109-113;  Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones
Magicae,  lib.  iii,  qu.  iv,  sect.  8,  ed.  Venice,  1616,  pp.  422-426;  Garmann,
De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  i,  11,  40,  pp.  305-307;  Heywood,  The
Hierarchie  of  the  Blessed  Angells,  1635,  p.  474;  T.  Lupton,  A  Thousand
Notable  Things,  1650,  p.  20;  Webster,  The  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witch-
craft, 1677,  pp.  246-247;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  I,
206;  Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),  120-125;  XXXIII  (1922),  391-392;  Linder-


442.         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


holm,  De  Stora  Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (1918),  86,  114,  123;  Gaupp,
Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthropologie,  XXVIII  (1907),  22-48;  Seyfarth,
Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  63-64;
Manz,  Volksbrauch  und  Volksglaube  des  Sarganserlandes,  Schriften  der
Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XII  (1916),  144;  Alemannia,
II  (1875),  136-137;  VIII  (1880),  280-284;  Am  Ur-Quell,  III  (1892),  269,
276-279;  Hessische  Blatter  fiir  Volkskunde,  III  (1904),  149-153;  Baltische
Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  317;  Salgues,  Des  Erreurs  et  des  Prejuges,
2d  ed.,  I  (1811),  155-169;  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  XV  (1901),
132;  Pitre,  Usi  e  Costumi,  Credenze  e  Pregiudizi  del  Popolo  Siciliano,  IV
(1889),  127-128;  Thiers,  Traite  des  Superstitions,  1741,  IV,  567-600;
Cabanes,  Remedes  d'Autrefois,  1905,  pp.  448-474;  Scheible,  Das  Kloster,
VI  (1847),  203-214;  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed..  Taboo,  191 1,
pp.  299-301;  Lowenstimm,  Aberglaube  und  Strafrecht,  1897,  pp.  112-
113;  Samter,  Geburt,  Hochzeit  und  Tod,  191 1,  pp.  123-124;  Thorndike,
A  History  of  Magic  and  Experimental  Science,  1923,  I,  655;  von  Dobe-
neck,  Des  Deutschen  Mittelalters  Volksglauben,  1815,  II,  13-20;  George-
akis  and  Pineau,  Le  Folk-Lore  de  Lesbos,  1894,  pp.  344-345;  G.  F.  Abbott,
Macedonian  Folklore,  1903,  pp.  171,  note,  226,  232;  Gaster,  The  Exempla
of  the  Rabbis,  1924,  p.  149;  Atharva-Veda,  iv,  4,  Whitney  and  Lanman,
VII,  I49-151;  vi,  138,  VII, 384;  vii,  90,  VII,  454-455  (cf.i,  16,  VII,  17-18;
vi,  72,  VII,  335;  vi,  loi,  VII,  354-355);  The  Indian  Antiquary,  LII  (1923),
113-115  (ritual  murder  to  procure  offspring;  cases  in  1893,  1896,  and
1897);  Enthoven,  The  Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,  pp.  285-294;  De  In-
dische  Gids,  VII,  i  (1885),  54;  Skeat  and  Blagden,  Pagan  Races  of  the
Malay  Peninsula,  1906,  II,  67;  Doutte,  Magie  et  Religion  dans  I'Afrique
du  Nord,  1909,  pp.  88,  288-296;  Mauchamp,  La  Sorcellerie  au  Maroc,
pp.  201-202,  258-266;  Westermarck,  Ritual  and  Belief  in  Morocco,  1926,
I,  571-573;  II,  575-576:  Hobley,  Bantu  Beliefs  and  Magic,  1922,  pp.  196-
198;  Hans  Meyer,  Die  Barundi,  1916,  p.  133;  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the
Bori,  pp.  164,  167;  D.  R.  MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden  Konde,  1925,
pp.  103,  282;  Cardinall,  The  Natives  of  the  Northern  Territories  of  the
Gold  Coast,  p.  48;  D.  Amaury  Talbot,  Woman's  Mysteries  of  a  Primitive
People,  191 5,  pp.  145-148;  P.  A.  Talbot,  The  Peoples  of  Southern  Nigeria,
1926,  II,  181;  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  1910,
p.  288.  For  a  very  remarkable  case  see  Pauls,  Der  Exorcismus  an  Herzog
Johann  Wilhelm  von  Jiilich  1604  und  1605,  Annalen  des  Historischen
Vereins  fiir  den  Niederrhein,  LXIII  (1896),  27-53.  For  details  as  to
means  and  cure  see  Sloane  MS.  1983,  foil.  70  v°-7i  v°.  Cf.  Sloane  MS.
3529,  fol.  12.

79.  Child,  The  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  No.  6,  I,  81-88.

80.  Child,  I,  469;  V,  285;  Gonzenbach,  Sicilianische  Marchen,  1870,
I,  72-73;  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXX  (191 7),  180  (North  Caro-
lina); Didakais  and  Folk-Lore  Gazette,  I  (191 2),  17.  Cf.  Frazer,  The
Golden  Bough,  3d  ed..  Taboo,  1911,  pp.  298-299.

81.  Hymn  to  the  Delian  Apollo,  91-119.

82.  Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  ix,  281-315  (cf.  Iliad,  xix,  114-119);  Pliny,
xxviii,  6,  17,  59  (cf.  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica,  v,  23,  9,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IV


443


Works,  ed.  Wilkin,  1852,  II,  84).  See  Child,  I,  84-85,  with  special  reference
to  Bottiger,  Kleine  Schriften,  2d  ed.,  1850,  I,  61-92.  Cf.  von  Sybel  in
Roscher's  Ausfiihrliches  Lexicon  der  Griechischen  und  Romischen  My-
thologie,  s.v.  Eileithyia,  I,  1219;  Welcker,  Kleine  Schriften,  III  (1850),
190-193.

83.  See  the  truly  infernal  spell  eis  K\eL5r]jjia  ywaiKm  printed  by  Delatte,
Le  Musee  Belse,  XVIII  (1914),  85;  cf.  Jacoby,  Hessische  Blatter  fiir
Volkskunde,  XXV  (1927),  208.

84.  Cf.  D.  Amaury  Talbot,  Woman's  Mysteries  of  a  Primitive  People,
1915,  p.  22;  P.  Amaury  Talbot,  The  Peoples  of  Southern  Nigeria,  1926,  II,
169.

85.  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  207-208.

86.  Raine,  The  Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Minster  (Surtees  Society,  XXXV),
p.  260.

87.  For  girdles  see  Binsfeld,  De  Confessionibus  Maleficorum  et  Saga-
rum,  1591,  p.  146;  Folk-Lore,  IX  (1898),  79.  Agnes  Hancok  in  1438  was
convicted  cf  fortune-telling  and  incantation.  "She  used  to  assert  .  .  .
that  by  the  inspection  of  the  shirt  or  girdle  or  shoe  of  a  sick  person,  she

,  could  tell  when  the  malady  first  took  the  patient,  and  in  what  way  and  for
what  cause,  though  she  never  saw  the  sick  person.  That  by  taking  the
measurement  of  the  girdle  or  shoe  she  could  tell  whether  the  sick  person
would  live  or  die.  .  .  .  She  used  to  send  the  remedy  of  health  by  blessing
the  girdle  or  shoe  or  head-band  {tene) "  (Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset
and  Dorset,  XII  [1911],  33-34);  cf.  p.  143,  above.

88.  Cf.  Bourke,  9th  Report  Bureau  of  Ethnology  (for  1887-88),  1892,
pp.  573-575;  Simpson,  Journal  British  Archjeological  Association,  XXX
(1874),  357-374  (measure  of  the  wounds  in  Christ's  side);  Bale,  Select
Works,  ed.  Christmas  (Parker  Society),  p.  525  ("St.  John's  gospels  with
the  five  wounds  and  the  length  of  our  Lord  for  drowning");  Proceedings
Society  of  Antiquaries,  2d  Series,  XXIII  (1909-11),  340-344;  Bye-Gones
for  1901-02,  pp.  95,  III,  145;  Pradel,  Griechische  und  Siiditalienische
Gebete  (Religionsgeschichtliche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  III,  iii),  1907,
p.  383;  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  des  Niederrheins,  XIII  (1898),  234;
Durham  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  pp.  99-100;  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somer-
set and  Dorset,  XII  (191 1),  33;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,
XXI  (191 1),  151-159  (with  references);  Georgeakis  and  Pineau,  Le  Folk-
Lore  de  Lesbos,  1894,  p.  347.

89.  Burnet,  The  History  of  the  Reformation,  III  (1715),  Collection,
p.  146;  Frere  and  Kennedy,  Visitation  Articles  and  Injunctions  (Alcuin
Club),  1910,  II,  58-<;9.

90.  Cardwell,  Documentary  Annals,  1844,  I,  164;  Frere  and  Kennedy,
II,  356,  cf.  357.

91.  Frere  and  Kennedy,  II,  372.

92.  Articles  to  be  enquyred  in  the  visitation,  in  the  fyrste  yeare  of  the
raygne  of  our  moost  drad  soueraygne  Lady,  Elizabeth  (London,  Richard
lugge  and  lohn  Cawood,  1559),  §  37,  sig.  Bj  r°.  Cf.  Cardwell,  I,  246;  Frere
and  Kennedy,  III,  5.

93.  Frere  and  Kennedy,  III,  270.


444


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


94.  Cardwell,  I,  413-414.  Cf.  Transactions  Cumberland  and  West-
morland Antiquarian  Society,  New  Series,  III  (1903),  68  (midwife's  oath).

95.  Frere  and  Kennedy,  III,  383.

96.  The  Injunctions  etc.  of  Richard  Barnes,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  So-
ciety, XXII),  p.  18.  Cf.  Frere  and  Kennedy,  II,  292  (Hooper,  1551-52);
III,  221  (Horne,  1569).  Note  the  language  of  a  midwife's  license  (1675):
"You  shall  in  no  wise  exercise  any  manner  of  witchcraft,  charms,  sorcery,
invocation,  or  other  prayers,  than  such  as  may  stand  with  Gods  laws,  and
the  kings"  (Sussex  Archseological  Collections,  IV  [1851],  249).

97.  Owen  and  Blakeway,  A  History  of  Shrewsbury,  1825,  II,  364.

98.  Wuttke-Meyer,  1900,  p.  378;  Fritzner,  Historisk  Tidsskrift,
Christiania,  IV  (1877),  203-205;  Folk-Lore,  VII  (1896),  180;  Child,  I,  85;
V,  285.  On  the  magic  symbolism  of  the  key  see  Delatte,  Le  Musee  Beige,
XVIII  (1914),  75-88.  On  knots  to  hinder  birth  see  Blau,  Das  Altjiidische
Zauberwesen,  1898,  p.  53,  cf.  p.  25.  On  magic  knots  in  general  see  Heim,
Incantamenta  Magica,  Nos.  38, 75,  79,  Jahrbiicher  fiir  Classische  Philolo-
gie,  XIX  (1893),  475-476,  484,  486.

99.  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  1910,  pp.  84-
85.  See  also  A.  C.  Hollis,  The  Nandi,  their  Language  and  Folk-Lore,  1909,
p.  90.  Cf.  Pliny,  xxviii,  4,  9,  42:  "Partus  accelerat  hie  mas  ex  quo  quaeque
conceperit,  si  cinctu  suo  soluto  feminam  cinxerit,  dein  solverit  adiecta
precatione  se  vinxisse,  eundem  et  soluturum,  atque  abierit."  See  Frazer,
The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  Taboo,  191 1,  pp.  293-298;  Samter,  Geburt,
Hochzeit  und  Tod,  191 1,  pp.  121-130.  Cf.  R.  V.  Russell,  The  Tribes  and
Castes  of  the  Central  Provinces  of  India,  1916,  III,  563.

100.  Ein  Mittelenglisches  Medizinbuch,  ed.  Heinrich,  1896,  pp.  143-
144.  See  also  Vassiliev,  Anecdota  Graeco-Byzantina,  I  (1893),  339-340;
Henslow,  Medical  Works  of  the  Fourteenth  Century,  1899,  pp.  32-33;
A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  197-204;  Halsig,  Der
Zauberspruch  bei  den  Germanen,  1910,  pp.  42-44,  96-98;  Klemming,
Lake-  och  Orte-Bocker,  1883-86,  p.  213;  Anglia,  XIX  (1897),  85;  Ger-
mania,  XXIV  (1879),  3";  XXXII  (1887),  458;  Ploss,  Das  Weib  in  der
Natur-  und  Volkerkunde,  ed.  Bartels,  1897,  II,  240-267.

101.  Cockayne,  Leechdoms,  I,  392.  For  Anglo-Saxon  charms  and
ceremonies  for  facilitating  delivery  or  preventing  miscarriage  see  Leech-
doms, I,  218;  III,  64,  66-69;  Grendon,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,
XXII  (1909),  206-209,  234.  Cf.  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,
pp.  148-149.  Abortion  by  maleficium  is  penalized  in  Pseudo-Theodore,
xxvii,  10  (Thorpe,  p.  292),  in  Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  2  (Schmitz,  II,
626),  and  in  many  other  penitentials  (Schmitz,  I,  306;  II,  236,  296,  320,
324,  334,  342,  360,  484).  Cf.  Homilia  de  Sacrilegiis,  ed.  Caspari,  1886,
pp.  II,  39;  St.  Bonaventura,  Opera,  IV  (1889),  728.  See  also  the  curious
charms  for  childbirth  in  Sloane  MS.  2457,  foil.  30  r°-3i  r°.

102.  See  pp.  81-82,  above.

103.  For  a  typical  case  (15 16),  see  Zeitschrift  des  Bergischen  Geschichts-
vereins,  IX  (1873),  103-110.

104.  St.  Augustine,  De  Civitate  Dei,  xv,  23;  Isidore,  viii,  11,  103;
Guilielmus  Alvernus,  De  Universo,  ii,  3,  25,  Opera,  1674,  I,  1070-1073;


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IV


445


Kornmann,  De  Miraculis  Vivorum,  Opera  Curiosa,  1694,  pp.  169-179;
Guazzo,  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  i,  11,  pp.  34-38;  Increase
Mather,  An  Essay  for  the  Recording  of  Illustrious  Providences,  1684,
p.  138;  P.  de  I'Ancre,  Tableau  de  I'lnconstance  des  Mauvais  Anges  et  De-
mons, 1613,  pp.  214-234.  Erasmus  Francisci  has  a  very  curious  chapter
(79)  on  "Die  gespenstische  Buhlschafft"  in  Der  Hollische  Proteus,  2d  ed.,
1695,  pp.  839-867;  he  also  tells  the  story  of  the  water-spirit  who  wooed  a
girl  at  a  village  dance  (pp.  922-923).

105.  Malvenda,  De  Antichristo,  1604,  ii,  9,  pp.  77-79;  Roscher,  Ephi-
altes,  p.  35.  For  Alexander  see  especially  Weinreich,  Der  Trug  des  Nek-
tanebos,  191 1;  cf.  Reitzenstein,  Poimandres,  1900,  pp.  309-310.  See  also
Reitzenstein,  Hellenistische  Wundererzahlungen,  1906,  pp.  139-141.

106.  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  Historia  Regum  Britanniae,  viii,  19,  ed.
San-Marte,  1854,  p.  117.  Cf.  the  Latin  metrical  Gesta  Regum  Britanniae,
vv.  2918-2927,  ed.  Michel  (Cambrian  Archjeological  Association),  1862,
p.  105;  Fletcher,  The  Arthurian  Material  in  the  Chronicles  (Harvard
Studies  and  Notes,  X),  1906,  p.  167;  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,
III,  175,  §  100.

107.  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  p.  142;  cf.  pp.  83,  141-144,  179-189.  For
the  popular  origin  of  the  idea,  see  pp.  1 81-183,  187-188,  207.

108.  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III,  352.

109.  Geoffrey  of  Monmouth,  Historia  Regum,  vi,  17-18,  pp.  89-90.
Cf.  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Otia  Imperialia,  i,  17  (Leibnitz,  I,  897;  Liebrecht,
p.  6).  See  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica,  vii,  16,  Works,  ed.
Wilkin,  1852,  II,  260.

110.  Caesarius  Heisterbacensis,  Dialogus,  iii,  12,  ed.  Strange,  I,  124.

111.  William  of  Newburgh,  Historia  Rerum  Anglicarum,  Chronicles
of  the  Reigns  of  Stephen,  Henry  II.,  and  Richard  I.,  ed.  Howlett,  I,  12:
"Et  hunc  quidem  Merlinum  patre  incubo  daemone  ex  femina  natum
[Galfridus]  fabulatur."

112.  Scot,  xii,  3,  p.  219  (158),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  176.  Cf.  iii,  19,  p.  72
(56),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  56;  iv,  10,  p.  85  (65),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  67.  Belief
in  the  existence  of  "agrestes  feminae  quas  sylvaticas  vocant"  who  have
intrigues  with  mortal  men  is  penalized  in  the  Corrector,  §  152,  Schmitz,
Bussbiicher,  II,  442.

113.  Richard  Coer  de  Lion,  vv.  197-234,  ed.  Weber,  Metrical  Ro-
mances, 1 810,  II,  lo-ii;  ed.  Brunner,  Wiener  Beitrage,  XLII  (1913),
90-91;  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  De  Principis  Instructione,  iii,  27,  ed.  War-
ner, Opera,  VIII,  301.

114.  See  Cross,  Revue  Celtique,  XXXI  (1910),  413-471  (see  pp.  450-
453  for  the  shape-shifting  lover);  Bruce,  The  Evolution  of  Arthurian  Ro-
mance, 1923,  II,  1 80-1 81.  The  parents  of  Eyvindr  Kellda,  according  to
his  own  account,  being  old  and  childless,  hired  Finnish  wizards  to  procure
them  an  heir.  "Thus  an  evil  spirit  was  sent  into  my  mother's  womb,"
said  Eyvindr,  "and  that  spirit  I  am"  (Olafssaga  Tryggvasonar,  cap.  41,
Fornmanna  Sogur,  X  [1835],  3°7)-

115.  See,  for  example,  Ralph  de  Diceto,  ed.  Stubbs,  II,  64,  67,  163;
Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Luard,  III,  57;  Raynaldus,  Annales  Ecclesiastic!,


446         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ann.  1282,  cap.  33,  III  (1748),  543-544;  and  in  general  Murray's  Introduc-
tion to  the  romance  of  Thomas  of  Erceldoune.

1 1 6.  Caesarius  Heisterbacensis,  Dialogus,  iii,  6-1 1 ,  ed.  Strange,  II,  116-
124;  V,  44,  II,  328-329.

117.  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III  (1910),  496;  cf.  Ill,  636.  See
also  III,  433,  566,  700.

118.  Hector  Boethius,  Scotorum  Historia,  viii,  ed.  1574,  fol.  149.  Cf.
Holinshed,  V  (1808),  146-147.

119.  Walter  Map,  De  Nugis  Curialium,  ii,  11-13,  ed.  Wright,  pp.  77-
82  (ed.  James,  pp.  72-78);  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Otia  Imperialia,  i,  17  (Leib-
nitz, I,  897;  Liebrecht,  p.  6).

120.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  344:  "wi])  aelfcynne  and  nihtgen-
gan  and  ]>am  mannum  J)e  deofol  mid  hsemS."  Cf.  I,  xxxviii-xli.

121.  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  V,  82.  He  records
the  discovery  of  a  strange  dwarf  in  the  Isle  of  Wight  in  that  same  year
(1249).

122.  Rigault,  Le  Proces  de  Guichard  Eveque  de  Troyes,  1896,  pp.  1 10-
III,  116-119,  125-127,  283-284.

123.  An  Alphabet  of  Tales,  No.  258,  ed.  Banks,  I  (1904),  180.  Cf.
Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III,  423-426,  433.

124.  Alphabet,  No.  256,  I,  179-180  (two  stories),  from  Caesarius,  iii,
8  (I,  121),  and  iii,  10  (I,  122-123).

125.  Alphabet,  No.  257,  I,  180.

126.  Walter  de  Hemingburgh,  ed.  Hamilton,  II,  314-315;  Walsingham,
Historia  Anglicana,  ed.  Riley,  I,  199-200;  Raynaldi,  Annales  Ecclesias-
tici,  VI  (1750),  46,  ann.  133';,  cap.  58  (from  Walsingham).

127.  Canterbury  Tales,  D  873-880.

128.  The  Pilgrim's  Tale,  vv.  85-100,  ed.  Furnivall,  Thynne's  Animad-
versions, Appendix  I,  pp.  79-80.  Cf.  Spurgeon,  Five  Hundred  Years  of
Chaucer  Criticism  and  Allusion,  1925, 1,  82;  Skeat's  Chaucer,  V,  313-314.

129.  Scot,  iv,  12,  p.  88  (67-68),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  69-70.  On  incubus
see  Scot,  iii,  19-iv,  5,  pp.  71-80  (56-62),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  56-63;  iv,
9-12,  pp.  83-88  (64-68),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  66-70.

130.  Harsnet,  A  Declaration  of  Egregious  Popish  Impostures,  1603,
pp.  137-138;  cf.  Kittredge,  Publications  of  the  Modern  Language  Asso-
ciation, XV,  422-428.

131.  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  pp.  385-387,  cf.  p.  398.

132.  Riddles  Wisely  Expounded,  Child,  The  English  and  Scottish
Popular  Ballads,  No.  i,  V,  283.

133.  Folk-Lore,  XXII  (191 1),  33'=^33^-

134.  Bye-Gones  for  1897-98,  p.  437.

135.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Itinerarium  Kambriae,  i,  5,  Opera,  ed.
Dimock,  VI,  57-58.

136.  Scott,  Minstrelsy,  5th  ed.,  1812,  II,  427  (in  the  introduction  to  the
ballad  of  "The  Daemon  Lover,"  first  printed  in  that  edition).

137.  A  Treatise  containing  the  Original  of  Unbelief,  Mis-belief,  or  Mis-
perswasions  concerning  the  Verity,  Unity,  and  Attributes  of  the  Deity,
Chapter  19,  Works,  I  (1673),  915-916.  The  Dedication  is  dated  March  2,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IV


447


1624  (i.e.  1624-5).  Compare  the  devil's  rhyme  in  Freisauff,  Salzburger
Volkssagen,  1880,  p.  529  ("Kudlkraut  und  Widritat  Hab'n  mi  um  mei'
Madl  bracht!").

138.  Magna  Vita  S.  Hugonis,  v,  8,  ed.  Dimock,  pp.  269-273.

139.  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III  (1910),  495,  527.  Cf.  Zing-
erle,  Sitten,  Brauche  und  Meinungen  der  Tiroler,  2d  ed.,  1876,  p.  106.

140.  Holkot,  Super  Libros  Sapientie,  Lectio  190,  Speyer,  1483,  sig.  pj
v°  (Reutlingen,  1489,  sig.  Miiij,  If.  5  r°).  For  St.  John's  wort  {Hypericum
perforatum)  as  fuga  daemonum  see  The  Book  of  Ouinte  Essence,  ed.  Fur-
nivall,  1866,  p.  19;  Wier,  De  Praestigiis  Daemonum,  v,  18,  ed.  1568,
p.  508;  Menghi,  Flagellum  Daemonum,  Documentum  3,  in  Mallei  Male-
ficarum,  1582,  II,  106-107;  Godelmann,  Tractatus  de  Magis  Veneficis  et
Lamiis,  1591,  i,  8,  47,  pp.  94-95;  Harsnet,  A  Declaration  of  Egregious
Popish  Impostures,  1603,  pp.  41,  45;  Boguet,  Discours  des  Sorciers,  1608,
p.  287;  Mylius,  Antidotarium,  1620,  p.  69;  Baptista  Codronchus,  De
Morbis  Veneficis,  iv,  8,  161 8,  p.  241;  A  Whip  for  the  Devil,  1683,  pp.  9,
82;  Garmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  ii,  8,  85,  p.  673;  Reling
and  Bohnhorst,  Unsere  Pflanzen,  4th  ed.,  1904,  pp.  176-178;  Sloet,  De
Planten  in  het  Germaansche  Volksgeloof  en  Volksgebruik,  1890,  pp.  69-
76;  Rolland,  Flore  Populaire,  III  (1900),  169-181;  Maury,  La  Magie,
i860,  p.  164,  note  2;  Dyer,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Plants,  New  York,  1889,
p.  62,  cf.  pp.  53,  84,  286;  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  XI,  54-57
(cf.  IX,  160;  XI,  74);  Gessmann,  Die  Pflanze  im  Zauberglauben,  [1899],
pp.  49-51;  De  Gubernatis,  La  Mythologie  des  Plantes,  II  (1882),  173-
174;  Dodoens,  translated  by  Lyte,  1578,  i,  43,  p.  64;  Seligmann,  Der
Bose  Blick,  1910,  II,  68;  Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,  1900,  p.  75;
J.  G.  Campbell,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands
of  Scotland,  1902,  pp.  104-105;  Carmichael,  Carmina  Gadelica,  1900,  II,
96-97,  102-103;  Zingerle,  Sitten,  Brauche  und  Meinungen  der  Tiroler,
2d  ed.,  1 871,  p.  106;  Liitolf,  Sagen  u.s.w.  aus  den  Fiinf  Orten,  1865,
p.  377;  Kuhn,  Sagen  u.s.w.  aus  Westfalen,  1859,11,29-30;  Witzschel,  Sagen,
Sitten  und  Gebrauche  aus  Thiiringen  (Kleine  Beitrage,  II),  1878,  p.  275;
Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreichische  Volkskunde,  VI  (1900),  124;  W\ittke-
Meyer,  p.  104;  Melusine,  VII  (1894-95),  p.  253;  Blatter  fiir  Pommersche
Volkskunde,  I  (1893),  18;  V  (1897),  106;  VI  (1898),  38-40,  95;  VIII
(1900),  139-140;  IX  (1901),  123-124;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rhein-
ische  und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,  VI  (1909),  139;  Frischbier,  Hexen-
spruch  und  Zauberbann,  1870,  p.  12;  Am  Ur-Ouell,  I  (1890),  187;  Ger-
mania,  XXII  (1877),  260.  For  the  medicinal  virtues  of  St.  John's  wort  see,
for  example,  Schoffler,  Beitrage  zur  Mittelenglischen  Medizinliteratur,
^9^9>  PP-  2°7>  ^4i-  Cf.  p.  214,  above.  According  to  a  fifteenth-century
note  in  Sloane  MS.  2721,  fol.  137  v°,  you  can  handle  snakes  safely  if  your
hands  are  rubbed  with  herba  Sancti  johannis.

141 .  Spenser  Society  edition,  p.  48  (56).  For  dill  and  vervain  cf.  Drage,
Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  23.

142.  Aubrey's  Miscellanies,  2d  ed.,  pp.  146-147;  4th  edition,  1857,
PP-  ^39~i40;  Remaines  of  Gentilisme  and  Judaisme,  ed.  Britten,  1881,
pp.  82,  191,  231-232.


448         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


143.  Halliwell,  Popular  Rhymes  and  Nursery  Tales,  1849,  pp.  225-226;
Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,  1892,  p.  180.

144.  Peacock,  A  Glossary  of  Words  used  in  the  Wapentakes  of  Manley
and  Corringham,  Lincolnshire  (English  Dialect  Society),  p.  85;  Northall,
p.  180.  Similar  rhymes  are  current  in  Germany:  see,  for  example,  Kuhn,
Sagen  u.s.w.  aus  Westfalen,  1859,  IT,  29;  Kiihnau,  Schlesische  Sagen,  III
(1913),  100;  Samter,  Geburt,  Hochzeit  und  Tod,  1911,  pp.  151-152.

145.  Guy  Mannering,  chap.  3.  For  the  medical  and  anti-magical
virtues  of  vervain  see  Dioscorides,  De  Materia  Medica,  iv,  60,  ed.  Well-
mann,  II,  213-215;  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  90-95;  II,  368;  Middle
English  Medical  Poem,  vv.  775-826,  ed.  Stephens  (Archsologia,  XXX,
373-375),  vv.  315-366,  ed.  Holthausen  (Anglia,  XVIII,  315-316);  Alex-
ander Neckam,  De  Laudibus  Divinae  Sapientiae,  vv.  263-266,  ed.  Wright,
p.  478;  Boaistuau,  Histoires  Prodigieuses,  ed.  1568,  chap.  23,  fol.  107  v°
(ed.  1578,  I,  chap.  24,  fol.  95);  Dodoens,  A  Niewe  Herball,  translated  by
Henry  Lyte,  1578,  i,  86,  pp.  127-128;  Abt,  Die  Apologie  des  Apuleius,
1908,  p.  72  (146);  Wier,  v,  19,  ed.  1568,  p.  510;  Scot,  xii,  18,  p.  268  (193),
ed.  Nicholson,  p.  218;  Baxter,  The  Certainty  of  the  Worlds  of  Spirits,
1691,  p.  116;  W.  G.  Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883,  pp.  135,  153,  193-194;
Dyer,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Plants,  1889,  pp.  55-56,  282,  284-285;  Seligmann,
Der  Bose  Blick,  1910,  II,  60-61;  G.  J.  French,  Bibliographical  Notices  of
the  Church  Libraries  at  Turton  and  Gorton  (Chetham  Society,  XXXVIII),
p.  52;  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  ed.  Hazlitt,  III,  253,  255,  267;  Hen-
derson, 1879,  p.  227;  Leather,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  1912,  p.  21
(vervain  and  St.  John's  wort);  Harland  and  Wilkinson,  Lancashire  Folk-
Lore,  1867,  pp.  76,  115;  Folk-Lore  Record,  I  (1878),  38;  Folk-Lore,  XVI
(1905),  145,  150,  n.  2;  XXIII  (1912),  491;  XXV  (1914),  250-251,  266;
Clague,  Manx  Reminiscences,  [191 1],  p.  163;  Rolland,  Flore  Populaire,
VIII,  38-43;  A.  DeCock,  Volksgeneeskunde  in  Vlaanderen,  1891,  pp.
156-158;  Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  X,  162,  163,  165;  XI,  62;
De  Gubernatis,  La  Mythologie  des  Plantes,  II  (1882),  367-369;  Reling
and  Bohnhorst,  Unsere  Pflanzen,  4th  ed.,  1904,  pp.  191-193;  Wuttke-
Meyer,  p.  107;  Melusine,  VII  (1894-95),  283;  Schoffler,  Beitrage  zur
Mittelenglischen  Medizinliteratur,  1919,  p.  234;  Germania,  XXII  (1877),
258;  XXIV  (1879),  75^76-  Among  other  herbs  of  like  potency  may  be
mentioned  fennel,  because  of  the  curious  chapter  in  Gervase  of  Tilbury,
Otia  Imperialia,  iii,  83  (Leibnitz,  I,  987;  Liebrecht,  pp.  36-38,  142-143).
See  also  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  176  (mullein),  190  (wood  chervil),
224  (wood  thistle),  248  (mandrake),  312  (periwinkle);  III,  30-39  (the
Nine  Worts  charm:  cf.  Grendon,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXII
[1909],  190-195,  226-229).  Cf.  I,  318,  360,  364.  "Si  aliquis  scire  vult  quid
Jocularij  faciunt  tene  verbenam  in  manu  tua"  (Sloane  MS.  2628,  fol.  9  r°).

146.  Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,  1900,  p.  80,  cf.  p.  68.

147.  Vv.  801-804,  ed.  Stephens,  Archseologia,  XXX  (1844),  374;  vv.
341-344,  ed.  Holthausen,  Anglia,  XVIII  (1896),  315;  vv.  307-310,  ed.
Garrett,  Anglia,  XXXIV  (191 1),  172.  Several  other  herbs  are  fuga
daemoniim  if  we  may  trust  this  poem:  —  betony,  471-472  (11-12
Holthausen,  45-46  Garrett);  pimpernel,  693-696  (233-236,  215-218);


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  V


449


motherwort,  727-730,  757-760  (267-270,  297-300;  247-250,  275-278);
henbane,  1061-1064  (601-604  Holthausen;  not  in  Garrett);  affodille,
1099-1104  (639-644,  506-511);  aristologi,  1237-1238  (777-778,  579-
580);  baldmony,  1259-1262  (799-802,  595-598).

148.  Vv.  805-814  (Stephens),  345-354  (Holthausen), 311-318  (Garrett).

149.  Medical  MS.,  ed.  Stephens,  Archaeologia,  XXX  (1844),  39S~39^-

150.  Hale,  pp.  107-108.

151.  Boorde,  The  Breuyary  of  Helth,  chap.  119,  ed.  1552,  fol.  xlv,  in
Furnivall's  ed.  of  Boorde's  Introduction,  etc.,  1870,  pp.  78-79.  Of  before
spirites  is  misprinted  or.

152.  Harsnet,  A  Declaration  of  Egregious  Popish  Impostures,  1603,
p.  45.  Cf.  Porphyry,  De  Abstinentia,  ii,  42;  lamblichus,  De  Mysteriis,  v,
10-15.

153.  Proceedings  against  Dame  Alice  Kyteler,  ed.  Wright  (Camden
Society,  XXIV),  pp.  2-3,  32.

154.  Wright,  p.  15.

155.  Wright,  pp.  17  ("quidam  aliegena  de  Anglia"),  14  ("ille  vilis
rusticus  trutannus  de  Anglia").

CHAPTER  V

Madness,  Curses,  and  the  Elfshot

1.  See  p.  30.

2.  See  Tambornino,  De  Antiquorum  Daemonismo  (Religionsgeschicht-
liche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  VII,  iii),  1909  (especially  valuable  for  its
collection  of  passages);  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,
514-615-

3.  See  Thyraeus,  Daemoniaci,  1603,  cap.  xvi,  pp.  65-71;  King  James,
Daemonologie,  1597,  p.  47.

4.  See  Deacon  and  Walker,  A  Summarie  Answere  to  Al  the  Material
Points  in  any  of  Master  Darel  his  Bookes,  1601,  and  Dialogicall  Dis-
courses of  Spirits  and  Divels,  1601;  cf.  Thyraeus,  Daemonicai,  1603,
capp.  ii,  iiii.

5.  For  many  instances  from  the  Acta  Sanctorum  see  RoskofF,  Geschichte
des  Teufels,  1869,  III,  169,  170,  173,  178-180,  185-189,  191-192.  De-
moniacs are  often  mentioned  in  the  penitentials  of  the  Anglo-Saxon  time:
see  Schmitz,  II,  237,  336,  356,  366,  539,  574,  627;  Thorpe,  pp.  308,  314,
333,  392  (cf.  pp.  443,  458);  Haddan  and  Stubbs,  III,  197.  For  remedies
for  demoniacs  see  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  102,  248,  312;  II,  136,
352,  354  (cf.  334);  ed.  Leonhardi,  pp.  41,  107,  108  (cf.  102).  Cf.  Jorimann,
Friihmittelalterliche  Rezeptarien  (Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der  Medizin,
ed.  Sigerist,  I),  1925,  pp.  22,  26.

6.  On  exorcists  see  the  learned  notes  of  Christopher  Wordsworth,  York-
shire Archaeological  Journal,  XVII  (1903),  378-388.  "Exorcista  is  on
englisc  se  }?e  mid  aSe  halsaS  }?a  awyrgedan  gastas  \>t  wyllaS  menn  dreccan"
(Die  Hirtenbriefe  ^Elfrics,  i,  32,  ed.  Fehr,  1914,  p.  9;  cf.  pp.  49,  108).

7.  William  Rishanger,  Chronica,  ed.  Riley,  p.  56.


450         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

8.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Admirandis  Beati  Cuthberti  Virtutibus,  ed.
Raine  (Surtees  Society,  I),  cap.  17,  pp.  32-37.  Cf.  capp.  44,  98,  112,  114,
pp.  90-91,  217-219,  248-254,  255-259.  See  also  the  metrical  Vita  Sancti
Cuthberti,  capp.  14,  40,  in  Miscellanea  Biographica,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees
Society,  VIII),  pp.  96-97,  113-114.  For  cures  by  St.  Egwin  (died  717)
see  Chronicon  Abbatiae  de  Evesham,  ed.  Macray,  p.  50.

9.  Reginald,  cap.  122,  pp.  268-269.

10.  The  Same,  cap.  124,  p.  270  ("eum  colaphizando  consuevit  impet-
ere").  Cf.  II  Corinthians,  xii,  7:  "Datus  est  mihi  stimulus  carnis  meae
angelus  Sathanae  qui  me  colaphizet."

11.  Anonymous  Legend  of  St.  Hugh,  cap.  7  (Dimock's  ed.  of  Giraldus
Cambrensis,  VII,  179).  See  also  Magna  Vita  S.  Hugonis,  v,  9,  ed.  Dimock,
pp.  275-276.

12.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Vita  et  Miraculis  S.  Godrici,  ed.  Stevenson
(Surtees  Society,  XX),  §§  397,  456,  479,  520,  543,  pp.  383,  400,  406-407,
422,  429-430;  cf.  §  524,  p.  423.

13.  Reginald,  §  384,  p.  381.

14.  Vita  Oswini,  cap.  44,  p.  58.

15.  See  pp.  221-222,  above.

16.  Liber  Eliensis,  ii,  128,  ed.  Stewart,  1848,  I,  261-263.  Compare  the
anecdote  in  ^Elfric's  Homily  on  St.  Benedict,  ed.  Thorpe,  II  (1846),  160.

17.  Annales  de  Wigornia,  Annales  Monastici,  IV,  561;  Knighton,  ed.
Lumby,  II,  81-82.  Cf.  Anonimalle  Chronicle,  ed.  Galbraith,  1927,  p.  33.

18.  R.  R.  Sharpe,  Calendar  of  Letters  from  the  Mayor  and  Corporation
of  the  City  of  London  circa  a.d.  1350-1370,  p.  136.

19.  Gairdner,  The  Historical  Collections  of  a  Citizen  of  London,  p.  239.

20.  The  Miracles  of  King  Henry  VI,  ed.  Knox  and  Leslie,  1923,  pp.
125,  124.

21.  More,  Dyaloge  ...  of  the  Veneracyon  and  Worshyp  of  Ymages,
i,  16,  ed.  1 53 1,  foil,  xxvii  (misprinted  xxviii)  v°-xxviii  r°;  Workes,  1557,
P-  137-

22.  A  Confutation  of  Unwritten  Verities,  chap,  xi.  Remains  of  Cran-
mer,  ed.  Jenkyns,  1833,  IV,  240.

23.  Gregory,  Dialogi,  ed.  Moricca,  1924,  pp.  59-60.

24.  Saxo  Grammaticus,  iii,  p.  128  Miiller  and  Velschow  (p.  79  Holder).

25.  Wier,  iii,  39,  ed.  1568,  pp.  342-347;  Scot,  vi,  6-7,  pp.  121-124  (90-
92),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  96-99.  Cf.  Alfonso  el  Sabio,  Las  Siete  Partidas,  vii,
23,  2  (ed.  1807,  III,  668).

26.  For  some  theories  about  fasting  see  Westermarck,  Folk-Lore,  XVIII
(1907),  391-422.  On  long  fasts  see  also  the  remark  of  Joubert,  Seconde
Partie  des  Erreurs  Populaires  et  Propos  Vulgaires  touchant  la  Medecine,
1580,  pp.  244-273.

27.  Roger  of  Wendover,  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Coxe,  I,  275.  Cf.  Vita
Ludovici  Pii,  Recueil,  VI,  106.

28.  Roger  of  Wendover,  ed.  Coxe,  IV,  113;  ed.  Hewlett,  II,  294.

29.  Capgrave,  ed.  Hingeston,  p.  205.

30.  Brut,  ed.  Brie,  p.  503.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  V


31.  Rymer,  Foedera,  id  ed.,  VI,  13;  Somers  Tracts,  3d  Collection,  I
(1751),  54;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1354-1358,  p.  529;  Journal  British
Archaeological  Association,  New  Series,  XV  (1909),  164-165.

32.  "Per  fantasma  daemonum  incubarum"  (Annales  de  Dunstaplia,
Annals  Monastici,  ed.  Luard,  III,  353).

33.  Kirk,  Secret  Commonwealth,  1690,  §  15  (ed.  1815,  p.  19).  He  is
thinking  of  the  hibernation  of  swallows,  etc.:  see  Kircher,  Mundus  Sub-
terraneus,  viii,  i,  3d  ed.,  1678,  II,  92-94;  Burton,  The  Anatomy  of  Melan-
choly, Partition  II,  sect.  2,  memb.  3  (New  York,  1880,  II,  127-129);
Bewick,  The  History  of  British  Birds,  1804,  I,  258-260;  Salgues,  Des
Erreurs  et  des  Prejuges,  2d  ed.,  I  (1811),  222-228;  Drayton,  The  Muses
Elizium  (Spenser  Society),  p.  24  (32);  Fletcher,  The  Night-Walker,  i,
I,  2-3.

34.  See  Rollins,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXXIV  (1921),  357-
376;  the  Same,  The  Pack  of  Autolycus,  1927,  pp.  36-37;  Wier,  De  Com-
mentitiis  leiuniis,  being  cols.  107-134  appended  to  his  De  Lamiis,  1577;
M.  Casaubcn,  A  Treatise  Proving  Spirits,  Witches  and  Supernatural
Operations,  1672,  pp.  51-53;  Kornmann,  De  Miraculis  Vivorum,  Opera
Curiosa,  1694,  pp.  107-113.

!  35.  Cotton  Mather,  A  Brand  Pluck'd  out  of  the  Burning,  §  11  (Burr,

■      Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft  Cases,  1914,  pp.  265-266).  Cf.  the  case  of
1      Lady  Jennings's  daughter  (1622),  as  recorded  in  Add.  MS.  36674,  fol.  134.
-  ^  See  also  the  1645  case  in  Add.  MS.  27402,  fol.  109  v°.
I  36.  Dunton,  The  Post-Angel,  1701,  II,  67-68.

37.  Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIII,  XIII,  i,  Nos.  487,  705, 1282, 1350,
f      pp.  177-179,  267,  470,  502.    Cf.  the  Transylvanian  "black  fast"  (E.
i:      Gerard,  The  Land  Beyond  the  Forest,  New  York,  1888,  p.  214).
j  38.  See  Plummer,  Vitae  Sanctorum  Hiberniae,  1910,  I,  cxx-cxxi,  cxxxi;

j      Clift,  Journal  British  Archaeological  Association,  New  Series,  XV  (1909),

157-170-

39.  The  Injunctions,  etc.,  of  Richard  Barnes,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  So-
'i      ciety,  XXII),  p.  17.  For  the  use  of  the  mass  for  cursing  see  p.  147,  above.
[  40.  On  curses  see  J.  G.  Campbell,  Superstitions  of  the  Highlands  and

f,- ,  Islands,  1900,  pp.  277-281;  Gaskell,  Olcl  Wenlock  and  its  Folklore,  The
|i  Nineteenth  Century,  XXXV  (1894),  264-265;  Bye-Gones  for  1 899-1 900,
p.  43;  York  Powell  in  Elton's  Saxo,  1894,  p.  Ixxx;  Hobley,  Bantu  Beliefs
and  Magic,  1922,  pp.  145-153;  Dundas,  Kilimanjaro  and  its  People,  1924,
pp.  170-178;  MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden  Konde,  1925,  pp.  268-269;
G.  Turner,  Nineteen  Years  in  Polynesia,  1861,  p.  293;  Hanson,  The
Kachins,  1913,  pp.  145-147;  Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,
XLI  (191 1 ),  427-432;  Westermarck,  Ritual  and  Belief  in  Morocco,  1926,
I,  479-492;  Vallois,  Bulletin  de  Correspondance  Hellenique,  XXXVIII
(1914),  250-271.  For  Old  Teutonic  formulae  of  cursing  see  Weinhold,  Die
Altdeutschen  Verwiinschungsformeln,  Berlin  Academy,  Sitzungsberichte,
1895,  pp.  667-703.

41.  Hale,  pp.  36-37.  Compare  the  Highland  tinker-wife's  curse:  "I
have  made  my  wish  before  this,  and  I  will  make  it  now,  and  there  was  not
yet  a  day  I  did  not  see  my  wish  fulfilled"  (J.  G.  Campbell,  Superstitions


45^         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

of  the  Highlands  and  Islands,  1900,  p.  279).  See  also  Strype,  The  Life  of
Sir  Thomas  Smith,  1698,  pp.  131-132  (curses  that  cause  the  loss  of  an  eye,
1570);  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Discovery  of  Witch-craft,  1648,  pp.
34-35  (curses  that  kill).

42.  Hale,  p.  213.  Cf.  Philip  Henry's  Diary,  December  9,  1663:  "Mary
Powel  thought  by  some  to  bee  bewitch't,  her  dame  (cal'd  Katharin  of  ye
Pinfold)  is  said  to  have  kneel'd  down  and  curst  her;  it  seemes  shee  told
some  storyes  of  her  about  stealing  —  whether  true  or  false  doth  not  yet
appear"  (Diaries  and  Letters,  ed.  M.  H.  Lee,  1882,  p.  152).  For  effica-
cious curses  see  the  cases  of  1645  (Add.  MS.  27402,  foil.  108  r°,  iii  r",
114  r°).

43.  Robert  Fox,  The  History  of  Godmanchester,  1831,  pp.  124-125.

44.  The  Acts  of  the  High  Commission  Court  within  the  Diocese  of
Durham,  ed.  Longstaffe  (Surtees  Society,  XXXIV),  pp.  73-74.

45.  Visitation  in  Beamont,  Winwick,  2d  ed.,  p.  42.

46.  Child,  The  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  No.  120,  III,
104-105.

47.  Child,  No.  79,  II,  238-239.

48.  Sharp,  History  of  Hartlepool,  1851  (first  ed.  in  1816),  p.  176.

49.  Wickham,  Records  by  Spade  and  Terrier,  pp.  291-292.

50.  Bye-Gones  for  1886-87,  pp.  232-233.  Cf.  Orde  Browne,  The  Van-
ishing Tribes  of  Kenya,  1925,  p.  183.

51.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XXIV  (1892),  54.

52.  Sigebertus  Gemblacensis,  ed.  Schard,  Germanicarum  Rerum  Qua-
tuor  Chronograph!,  1566,  fol.  86  r°;  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,
ed.  Luard,  I,  262;  Roger  of  Wendover,  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Coxe,  I,
108;  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Luard,  I,  292;  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Ro-
mances, III  (1910),  437;  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  164-165.  Cf.  Revue  des
Traditions  Populaires,  XXVII  (1912),  325-326;  J.  W.  Wolf,  Nieder-
landische  Sagen,  1843,  pp.  254-255,  436-437.

53.  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,  6th  Series,  VII  (1907),  271;  7th  Series,  I
( 1 921),  306-307;  Folk-Lore,  XXII  (1911),  50-51;  XXXIII  (1922),  392.

54.  Archteologia  Cambrensis,  3d  Series,  III  (1857),  214;  IV  (1858),
205-206;  Bye-Gones  for  1888,  pp.  47-48,  68;  for  1 899-1 900,  pp.  425-426,
431;  for  1903^4,  p.  197.

55.  Hope,  The  Legendary  Lore  of  the  Holy  Wells  of  England,  1893,  pp.
71,  76,  83,  92-93,  107-108,  142,  143,  145,  185,  199.

56.  See  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  pp.  794-821.

57.  Baildon,  Proceedings  Society  of  Antiquaries,  2d  Series,  XVIII
(1899-1901),  140-147  (with  figures).  For  the  "magic  squares"  on  such
plates  see  The  Reliquary,  X  (1869-70),  129-134,  139;  XVII  (1876-77),
141-146;  Agrippa,  Three  Books  of  Occult  Philosophy,  transl.  by  J[ohn]
F[rench],  1651,  ii,  22,  pp.  239-252;  Bolte,  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir
Volkskunde,  XXVI  (191 6),  306-313.

58.  Hartland,  The  Reliquary  and  Illustrated  Archasologist,  III  (1897),
149-150  (with  figure).

59.  Whitaker,  A  History  of  Richmondshire,  1823,  I,  195-196;  County
Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  145-147.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  V


453


60.  Peacock,  Proceedings  Society  of  Antiquaries,  id  Series,  VIII  (1879-
1881),  355.

61.  Proceedings  of  the  Privy  Council,  ed.  Nicolas,  VII,  12;  Letters  and
Papers,  Henry  VIII,  XV,  No.  1006,  p.  499.  See  further  Nicolas,  VII,  13-
14,  24-25,  27,  30,  38;  Letters  and  Papers,  XV,  Nos.  1008,  ion,  pp.  499,
500;  XVI,  Nos.  8,  14,  55,  pp.  3,  5,  16.  _

62.  For  elfshot  see  Sir  John  Rowll's  Cursing,  v.  68,  Laing,  Select  Re-
mains, ed.  Small,  p.  213;  Logan,  The  Scottish  Gael,  1831,  I,  339-342;
Dalyell,  The  Darker  Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,  pp.  355-358;  Bur-
gess, The  Scottish  Review,  XXV  (1895),  99-102;  Munro,  Archaeology  and
False  Antiquities,  1905,  p.  242;  Walter  Johnson,  Folk-Memory,  1908,
pp.  123-124;  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk  Lore  of  the  Northern  Coun-
ties, 1879,  pp.  185-187;  Gomme,  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  1892,  pp.  54-56;
Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  etc.,  of  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d
ed.,  191 1,  p.  137;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,
pp.  210,  235;  Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,
p.  184;  J.  G.  Campbell,  Superstitions  of  the  Highlands  and  Islands,  1900,
pp.  26-27,  88-89;  Otway,  Sketches  in  Erris  and  Tyrawley,  1841,  pp.  379-
382;  The  Reliquary,  VIII  (1867-68),  207-208  (with  figures);  Folk-Lore,
XVII  (1906),  200-210  (Ireland);  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  181-182;
III  (1903),  37-42,  45;  Bishop  Nicolson's  Diary,  1712,  Transactions  Cum-
berland and  Westmorland  Antiquarian  and  Archaeological  Society,  New
Series,  IV  (1904),  58  (Bowness;  elf-arrows  valued  "for  the  Cure  of  Cattle
Elf-shot");  Carmichael,  Carmina  Gadelica,  II,  58-59;  Manninen,  Die
Damonistischen  Krankheiten  im  Finnischen  Volksaberglauben  (FF  Com-
munications, No.  45),  XII  (1922),  191-192;  Fritzner,  Historisk  Tids-
skrift,  Christiania,  IV  (1877),  182-186;  Det  Arnamagnseanske  Handskrift
Nr.  187  (Dansk  Laegebog),  ed.  Saby,  1886,  p.  47  ("Contra  sagittas  dya-
boli");  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  44-46,  60-61,  144-146,
163-164,  374-371;,  407-408;  Nyrop,  "Elverskud,"  Dania,  VIII  (1901),
211-220;  Ohrt,  Trylleord  (Danmarks  Folkeminder,  No.  25),  1922,  pp.
loo-ioi;  Lid,  Maal og Minne,  1921,  pp.  37-66;  Forsblom,  Skrifter  utgivna
av  Svenska  Litteratursallskapet  i  Finland,  CXXXV  (1917),  96-112;  F.  S.
Krauss,  Volksglaube  und  Religioser  Brauch  der  Siidslaven,  1890,  pp.  93-
95;  Neues  Archiv  fiir  Sachsische  Geschichte  und  Alterthumskuncle,  IX
(1888),  336;  M.  Hofler,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  II  (1899),
127-128;  Battels,  Die  Medicin  der  Naturvolker,  1893,  pp.  25-27.  Cf.
Schonbach,  Vienna  Sitzungsberichte,  Philosophisch-Historische  Classe,
CXLII  (1900),  No.  7,  p.  133.  For  such  arrows  used  as  amulets  see  Bel-
lucci,  II  Feticismo  Primitive  in  Italia,  1907,  pp.  45,  77-87.  For  "shotts"
by  means  of  sloe  thorns,  horseshoe  nails,  fish-hooks,  the  needle  with  which  a
corpse  has  been  sewed  "into  its  sheet,"  etc.,  see  Sloane  MS.  1983,  fol.  72 v°.

63.  The  Private  Correspondence  of  Pepys,  ed.  Tanner,  1926,  I,  368-
;      369;  II,  26,  29-30.

j  64.  The  ^sir  were  Scandinavian  and  Germanic  gods  —  Odin  (Woden),
>      Thor  (Thunor),  Tyrr  (Tiw),  etc.

65.  Cockayne,  Leechdoms,  III,  52-55;  Wiilker,  Bibliothek  der  Angel-
sachsischen  Poesie,  I,  317-319;  Grendon,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,


454        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

XXII  (1909),  164-167,  214-215;  Skemp,  Modern  Language  Review,  VI
(191 1),  289-293;  W.  Horn,  Hoops  Festschrift,  1925,  pp.  88-104.

66.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  156,  290;  III,  46,  64;  ed.  Leonhardi,
pp.  47,  88,  141,  148;  Grendon,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXII
(1909),  208-209,  235.  Cf.  Cockayne,  II,  no;  Leonhardi,  p.  34,  line  5.
See  also  Singer,  Proceedings  British  Academy,  191 9-1 920,  pp.  ^S^-^S^-
For  elves  as  the  cause  of  disease  see  also  pp.  32,  147,  above;  cf.  p.  218.

67.  Pseudo-Paracelsus,  De  Summis  Naturae  Mysteriis,  transl.  Dorn,
1584,  p.  85  (Paracelsus  Of  the  Supreme  Mysteries  of  Nature,  transl.  R.
Turner,  1655,  p.  88);  Baxter,  The  Certainty  of  the  Worlds  of  Spirits,  1691,
pp.  65-69;  Rowlands,  Greenes  Ghost  Haunting  Conie-Catchers,  1602,
p.  12  (Works,  Hunterian  Club,  I).

68.  Greene,  The  Blacke  Bookes  Messenger,  1592,  ed.  Harrison  (Bodley
Head  Quartos,  X),  1924,  p.  24.

69.  Durbin,  A  Narrative  of  Some  Extraordinary  Things,  1800,  pp.  18-
20,  27,  28,  31-32,  43-51.  Cf.  Cotton  Mather,  Another  Brand  from  the
Burning,  in  Calef,  More  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  1700,  pp.  4,  5.

70.  Wier,  iv,  i5,ed.  I568,pp.  394-395.  See  also  iii,  14,  pp.  253-254;  iv,
1-2,  pp.  352-358;  iv,  5-9,  pp.  364-374;  iv,  13-14,  pp.  385-393;  iv,  16,
pp.  395-401.  Cf.  Malleus  Maleficarum,  Pt.  Ill,  qu.  34,  ed.  1620,  pp.  448-
449;  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  iii,  22,  fol.  xxiij  (ed.  1592,  iii,

27,  pp.  38-39);  Anania,  De  Natura  Daemonum,  1581,  pp.  193-194;
Binsfeld,  Commentarius  in  Titulum  Codicis  Lib.  IX.  De  Maleficis  et
Mathematicis,  1591,  pp.  510-521;  Remy  (Remigius),  Daemonolatreia,
1595,  pp.  220,  300-307;  Boguet,  Discours  des  Sorciers,  2d  ed.,  1608,  pp.
214-221;  Burr,  Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft  Cases  1648-1706,  1914,  pp.

28,  125,  134,  247,  312,  357;  Webster,  The  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witch-
craft, 1677,  pp.  35,  242-266;  Baxter,  The  Certainty  of  the  Worlds  of
Spirits,  1 691,  pp.  65-69,  93-94;  Glanvil's  Sadducismus  Triumphatus,  4th
ed.,  1726,  pp.  291-299,  315,  329,  332;  New  York  Colonial  Documents,
IV  (1854),  689;  George  Roberts,  The  Social  History  of  the  People  of  the
Southern  Counties,  1856,  pp.  525-527;  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  His-
tory and  Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XXXIV  (1913),  22-23;  Whitney  and
Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,  1925,  p.  79;  W.  J.  V.  Saville,  In  Un-
known New  Guinea,  1926,  pp.  215-216;  W.  E.  Armstrong,  Rossel  Island,
1928,  pp.  174-175-  See  pp.  339-340,  above.

71.  Skeat  and  Blagden,  Pagan  Races  of  the  Malay  Peninsula,  1906,  11,
233-234;  Codrington,  The  Melanesians,  1891,  p.  197;  Ivens,  Melanesians
of  the  South-East  Solomon  Islands,  1927,  pp.  200-204  (with  figures);
P.  Amaury  Talbot,  The  Peoples  of  Southern  Nigeria,  1926,  II,  175.  Cf.
Kroeber,  Handbook  of  the  Indians  of  California  (Bureau  of  American
Ethnology,  Bulletin,  LXXVIII),  1925,  p.  68.

72.  Horne  and  Alston,  Savage  Life  in  Central  Australia,  1924,  pp.  149-
152  (with  figures).

73.  Matthew  Mayhew  (d.  1710),  A  Brief  Narrative,  in  Cotton  Mather's
Magnalia,  1702,  Book  vi.  Chap.  6,  section  i,  p.  52.  Cf.  Reports  Bureau
of  (American)  Ethnology,  VII  (for  1885-86),  1891,  pp.  336-337,  368,  385
(Cherokees);  XI  (for  1 889-90),  1894,  p.  418  (Siouan);  XXIII  (for  1901-02),


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  V


455


1904,  p.  396  (Zuni);  XXX  (for  1908-09),  191 5,  pp.  354-362  (Guiana);
Kroeber,  Handbook,  as  above,  pp.  136,  197;  Zeisberger,  History  of  North
American  Indians  (1779-80),  Ohio  Archaeological  and  Historical  Quarterly,
XIX  (1910),  126.

74.  Cf.  H.  W.  Bates,  The  Naturalist  on  the  River  Amazon,  1892,  pp.
244-245;  Bye-Gones  for  1901^2,  p.  68.

75.  Codrington,  The  Melanesians,  1891,  pp.  193,  199;  cf.  pp.  197  (elf-
arrow),  200  (bit  of  stone  or  bone).

76.  J.  P.  Mills,  The  Lhota  Nagas,  1922,  p.  166;  Hutton,  The  Sema
Nagas,  1921,  pp.  213-214,  231-232.

77.  Lercheimer  (Witekind),  Christlich  Bedencken  vnd  Erinnerung  von
Zauberey,  1597,  ed.  Binz,  1888,  pp.  54-55;  M.  Bartels,  Die  Medicin  der
Naturvolker,  1893,  pp.  183-189;  Maddox,  The  Medicine  Man,  1923,  pp.
79,  169,  190-195;  Tschubinow,  Beitrage  zum  Psychologischen  Verstand-
nis  des  Sibirischen  Zauberers,  191 4,  pp.  67-68,  71-75;  Charlevoix,  Jour-
nal (1721),  Histoire  et  Description  Generale  de  la  Nouvelle  France,  1744,
VI,  96;  Alexander  Henry,  Travels  and  Adventures  in  Canada  and  the
Indian  Territories  between  the  Years  1760  and  1776,  1809,  pp.  118-121;
Mooney,  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  7th  Report,  1891,  pp.  334,  336,  369;  Karl
von  den  Steinen,  Unter  den  Naturvolkern  Zentral-Brasiliens,  1894,  p.  492;
Revue  de  I'Histoire  des  Religions,  XXXII  (1895),  148;  The  Native
Tribes  of  South  Australia,  ed.  Woods,  1879,  pp.  46,  283-284;  Mrs.  James
Smith,  The  Booandik  Tribe  of  South  Australian  Aborigines,  1880,  p.  29;
Spencer  and  Gillen,  The  Northern  Tribes  of  Central  Australia,  1904,  pp.
487-488;  Howitt,  The  Native  Tribes  of  South-East  Australia,  1904,  pp.
379^380,  383-386,  393;  the  Same,  Journal  Anthropological  Institute,
XVI  (1887),  38-40;  K.  L.  Parker,  The  Euahlayi  Tribe,  1905,  p.  27;  Eyl-
mann.  Die  Eingeborenen  der  Kolonie  Siidaustralien,  1908,  pp.  224,  446-
447;  J.  Mathew,  Two  Representative  Tribes  of  Queensland,  1910,  pp.
111-113;  Spencer,  The  Native  Tribes  of  the  Northern  Territory  of  Aus-
tralia, 1914,  pp.  319-320;  Horne  and  Alston,  Savage  Life  in  Central  Aus-
tralia, 1924,  p.  122;  Basedow,  The  Australian  Aboriginal,  1925,  pp.  181-
182;  Bonwick,  Daily  Life  and  Origin  of  the  Tasmanians,  1870,  p.  177;
J.  H.  Holmes,  In  Primitive  New  Guinea,  1924,  p.  212;  Seligmann,  The
Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  1910,  pp.  167-170;  E.  B.  Riley,  Among
Papuan  Headhunters,  1925,  p.  281;  W.  J.  V.  Saville,  In  Unknown  New
Guinea,  1926,  p.  217;  Jenness  and  Ballantyne,  The  Northern  D'Entre-
casteaux,  1920,  pp.  139-140;  Hose  and  McDougall,  The  Pagan  Tribes
of  Borneo,  1912,  II,  121-122;  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  1900,  pp.  449-452;
Gimlette,  Malay  Poisons  and  Charm  Cures,  1922,  pp.  50-51;  Hewat,
Bantu  Folk  Lore,  pp.  36,  45-46;  P.  Amaury  Talbot,  The  Peoples  of
Southern  Nigeria,  1926,  II,  167,  174;  Mary  H.  Kingsley,  Travels  in  West
Africa,  1897,  pp.  469-471;  Am  Ur-Ouell,  IV  (1893),  38;  Whitney  and
Bullock,  Folk-Lore  of  Maryland,  p.  82;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the
Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.  302-304;  Sir  J.  M.  Campbell,  The  Indian
Antiquary,  XXIV  (1895),  294;  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  XIV
(1911),  204;  Journal  Anthropological  Institute,  VII  (1878),  506;  XIII
(1884),  130-131;  XVI  (1887),  24-25,  38-40,  48,  254-255;  XXI  (1892),


456


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ii6,  311;  XXXI  (1901),  290;  Sudan  Notes  and  Records,  VI  (1923),  90;
Hodson,  The  Naga  Tribes  of  Manipur,  191 1,  pp.  135-136;  J.  H.  Hutton,
The  Sema  Nagas,  1921,  pp.  213-214,  231-232;  Sapir,  Journal  of  American
Folk-Lore,  XX  (1907),  42-44;  Reports,  Bureau  of  (American)  Ethnology,
VII  (for  1885-86),  1891,  pp.  336-338;  XIV  (for  1892-93),  Part  I,  1896,
pp.  149-150;  XXIII  (for  1901-02),  1904,  pp.  393-394,  396,  399-400,  402;
XXV  (for  1903-04),  1907,  pp.  61-62;  XXVI  (for  1904-05),  1908,  pp.  261,
262,  267;  XXVII  (for  1905-06),  191 1,  p.  583;  XXX  (for  1908-09),  1915,
pp.  351,  352;  Kroeber,  Handbook  of  the  Indians  of  California  (Bureau  of
American  Ethnology,  Bulletin,  LXXVIII),  1925,  pp.  137,  150,  197,  423,
424,  472,  515-516,  627,  681,  855;  Im  Thurn,  Among  the  Indians  of  Guiana,
1883,  p. 349.

78.  S.  R.  Maitland,  Notes  on  the  Contributions  of  the  Rev.  George
Townsend,  Part  II,  1842,  p.  132  (1574);  Harsnet,  Declaration  of  Egregious
Popish  Impostures,  1603,  p.  253  (cf.  pp.  214-216);  James  Mason,  The
Anatomic  of  Sorcerie,  161 2,  p.  42;  The  Boy  of  Bilson,  pp.  48-49,  55,  62,
67;  Wonderfull  News  from  the  North,  1650,  p.  16;  Tryal  of  Witches,  1682,
pp.  21,  25-28,  31  (i664[-5]);  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  pp.  3-6;
Hansen's  letter,  March  29,  1682,  Journal  des  Sjavans,  April  13,  1682,
p.  80  (Weekly  Memorials  for  the  Ingenious,  No.  18,  July  10,  1682,  pp.  134-
135);  A  True  Account,  etc.,  1686  (case  of  John  Tonken  of  Penzance);
Sadducismus  Debellatus,  1698,  pp.  4,  33,  40,  41 ;  A  History  of  the  Witches
of  Renfrewshire,  ed.  1877,  pp.  xxvii,  75-76,  83,  109,  112,  116,  118,  121,
129  (Christian  Shaw,  1696);  Dunton,  The  Post-Angel,  1701,  II,  67.  Cf.
Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1592,  iii,  27-28,  pp.  38-40;  Bartholinus,
Historiae  Anatomicae  Rariores,  1654,  i,  52,  pp.  81-82;  Caspar  Schott,
Magia  Universalis,  1677,  IV,  506,  524-538;  T.  Willis,  An  Essay  of  the
Pathology  of  the  Brain,  transl.  S.  P.,  1684,  p.  44;  Bovet,  Pandaemonium,
1684,  pp.  168,  170-171,  193;  Baxter,  The  Certainty  of  the  Worlds  of
Spirits,  1691,  pp.  43-46,  60,  75-81,  93,  95-97,  100,  109-115;  A.  Glorez,
Neuangeordnete  Vollstandige  Haus-  und  Land-Bibliothec,  Anderes  Cabi-
net, 1719,  pp.  185-196  (also  in  Glorez,  ErofFnetes  Wunderbuch,  "1700,"
reprint,  pp.  347-393:  frogs,  toads,  lizards,  puppies,  needles,  nails,  etc.,
etc.).

79.  Reading  Records,  Diary  of  the  Corporation,  ed.  Guilding,  III
(1896),  230-233,  243;  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  nth  Report,  Ap-
pendix, Part  VII,  p.  185.  Cf.  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  20  (mouse
jumps  out  of  possessed  person's  mouth);  Jorimann,  Fruhmittelalterliche
Rezeptarien  (Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der  Medizin,  ed.  Sigerist,  I),  1925,
pp.  28,  29,  30,  cf.  pp.  25,  53  (snakes,  frogs,  lizards,  etc.,  in  one's  body  by
witchcraft);  A  True  and  Exact  Relation,  1645,  p.  4  (toads).  In  1651
Christiana  Weekes  was  brought  before  the  Wilts  quarter  sessions  for
charming  an  evil  spirit  out  of  a  man's  leg  (Historical  MSS.  Commission,
Various  Collections,  I,  120).  In  the  Life  of  St.  Waltheof,  Abbot  of  Melrose
in  the  twelfth  century,  we  read  of  a  horrible  spider  that  emerged  from  a
swelling  on  a  man's  finger  (Acta  Sanctorum,  August  3, 1,  255).  A  crippled
Louisiana  negro,  who  had  a  lump  in  his  leg,  declared  "that  it  was  a  frog
put  there  by  a  hoodoo"  (Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XL  [1927],  205).


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VI


457


80.  A  True  and  Exact  Relation,  1645,  p.  4.

81.  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  20.

82.  Remains  of  Denis  Granville,  ed.  Ornsby  (Surtees  Society,  XLVII),
p.  31.  A  similar  trick  is  recorded  by  Naude  (Naudaeus),  Uevras  Quaesti-
onum  latro-Philologicarum,  1647,  pp.  137-138.


CHAPTER  VI

VENEFICA

1.  Thucydides,  ii,  48.

2.  Boston  Transcript,  January  17,  1918.

3.  The  Times,  November  19,  1920,  p.  14.

4.  Boston  Evening  Journal,  October  3,  1884.

5.  Atlanta  Journal,  February  11,  191 1;  the  Constitution,  Atlanta,
February  12,  191 1;  Woman's  World  (magazine),  Chicago,  March,  191 1,
p.  18.

6.  Boston  Herald,  December  29,  1927.

7.  See,  for  example,  Livy,  viii,  18;  xxxix,  41;  xl,  37.

8.  Dio  Cassius,  Ixvii,  ii;  Ixxii,  14.

9.  Cardano,  De  Rerum  Varietate,  xv,  80,  Opera,  HI  (1663),  293.  Cf.
Webster,  The  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  1677,  pp.  244-245.

10.  Processo  Originale  degli  Untori  nella  Peste  del  M. DC. XXX,
Milan,  1839;  Manzoni,  I  Promessi  Sposi.

11.  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  V,  705.

12.  Anonymous  Chronicle,  Harleian  MS.  3775,  in  Riley's  ed.  of  Jo-
hannes Amundesham,  Annales  Monastici,  I,  18-19;  Gregory's  Chronicle,
Gairdner,  The  Historical  Collections  of  a  Citizen  of  London,  p.  161.

13.  Plato,  Laws,  xi,  p.  933,  brings  magic  into  connection  with  poisoning.
See  the  curious  balade  against  poisoners  by  Chaucer's  contemporary,
Eustache  Deschamps  (No.  465,  OEuvres,  HI,  283).  Cf.  the  case  of  Eleanor
Dulyne  (p.  62,  above).

14.  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ii,  3,  ed.  1592,  p.  7;  iii,  25-26,  pp.  36-38;
V,  6-8,  pp.  51-54-

15.  Garmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  i,  3,  65-67,  pp.  140-141.

16.  Garmann,  i,  3,  65,  p.  140;  Cabanes  and  Nass,  Poisons  et  Sortileges,
1903,  I,  153-170;  Enthoven,  The  Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,  pp.  258-259.

17.  Danaeus  (Daneau),  De  Veneficis,  cap.  3,  ed.  1575,  pp.  50-51.

18.  See  notes  9  and  10.  Cf.  Garmann,  i,  3,  65,  p.  140.

19.  For  Jews  and  lepers  see  Lehugeur,  Histoire  de  Philippe  le  Long,
I  (1897),  422-429;  Chroniques  de  Saint-Denis  (Recueil,  XX,  704-705);
Continuatio  Chronici  Guillelmi  de  Nangiaco  (XX,  628-629);  Adam
Murimuth,  ed.  Thompson,  p.  32;  Capgrave,  ed.  Hingeston,  p.  186;  Flores
Historiarum,  ed.  Luard,  III,  195-196;  J.  F.  C.  Hecker,  Die  Grossen  Volks-
krankheiten  des  Mittelalters,  ed.  Hirsch,  1865,  pp.  65-72,  96-100;  Gar-
mann, i,  3,  65,  p.  140.


458         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


10.  Crawfurd,  Plague  and  Pestilence  in  Literature  and  Art,  1914,  pp.
54-55,67,  112,  120-125,  156-158,  175-180,  183;  Nohl,  The  Black  Death,
transl.  C.  H.  Clarke,  1926,  pp.  172-202.

21.  Scot,  vi,  3-7,  pp.  116-124  (87-92),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  93-99.  See
Wier,  iii,  36-40,  ed.  1568,  pp.  332-348,  whom  Scot  follows  rather  closely.
Cf.  Wier,  vi,  Epilogue,  pp.  678-679.  See  also  Cardano,  De  Rerum  Varie-
tate,  XV,  80,  Opera,  III  (1663),  293;  Alfonso  el  Sabio,  Las  Siete  Partidas,
vii,  23,  2  (ed.  1807,  III,  668).

22.  Scot,  iii,  7,  p.  50  (41-42),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  38-39.

23.  On  the  whole  imbroglio  see  Scofield,  The  Life  and  Reign  of  Edward
the  Fourth,  1923,  II,  186-190,  206-209;  Pike,  History  of  Crime,  1876,  I,
360-362,  494.

24.  Indictments  in  Deputy  Keeper's  Third  Report,  Appendix  II,  p.  214;
Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  VI,  173-175;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1476-1485,
pp.  72-73;  Coram  Rege  Roll,  Vernon  Harcourt,  English  Historical  Re-
view, XXIII  (1908),  521-522,  524.

25.  Third  Report,  as  above,  pp.  213-214;  Coram  Rege  Roll,  English
Historical  Review,  XXIII,  521,  524;  Stow,  Annales,  ed.  1631,  p.  430;
Hall's  Chronicle,  ed.  1809,  pp.  326,  369;  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1476-
1485,  pp.  40,  43,  50,  102.

26.  See  pp.  227-228,  above.

27.  Continuation  of  the  Croyland  Chronicle,  Rerum  Anglicarum  Scrip-
tores  Veteres,  1684,  I,  561-562.

28.  Rotuli  Parliamentorum,  VI,  193-195;    Croyland  Continuation,

I,  562.

29.  Philippe  de  Comynes,  i,  7,  ed.  de  Mandrot,  I  (1901),  59;  ed.  Cal-
mette,  I  (1924),  53;  Autres  Nouvelles  Chroniques,  appended  to  Mon-
strelet,  Vol.  Ill  (1595),  fol.  65  v°;  Polydore  Vergil,  xxiv,  ed.  Basel,  1534,
p.  530  ("in  dolio  uini  Cretici");  Grafton,  ed.  1569,  pp.  741-742  (ed.  1809,

II,  68).

CHAPTER  VII

Charms  Ghoulish  and  Profane

1.  Pliny,  xxviii,  4,  11-12,  45-49.

2.  Tacitus,  Annales,  ii,  69.  For  other  references  see  Abt,  Die  Apologie
des  Apuleius  von  Medaura  und  die  Antike  Zauberei  (Religionsgeschicht-
liche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  IV,  ii),  1908,  pp.  141-144  (215-218).

3.  Paulus  Grillandus,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  v,  11,  foil,  xxvj  v"-xxvij
r°  (ed.  1592,  V,  8,  p.  53).  Cf.  Remigius,  Daemonolatreia,  1595,  ii,  3,  pp.
209-217;  Guaccius  (Guazzo),  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  ii,  2,  pp.
105-107;  Garmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  Dissertatio  Prooe-
mialis,  i,  172-196,  pp.  1 12-123;  Wm.  Maxwell,  De  Medicina  Magnetica,
1679,  i,  6,  p.  27  ("Notum  est  sagas  veneficas  mala  inferre,  absque  cada-
verum  partibus,  et  illius,  quern  laedere  desiderant,  excrementis  non  posse").
For  the  use  of  such  things  in  getting  rid  of  demons  see  Arnaldus  de  Villa
Nova,  Libellus  de  Improbatione  Maleficiorum,  ed.  Diepgen,  Archiv  fiir


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VII


459


Kulturgeschichte,  IX  (191 1),  400.  For  their  use  in  farm  magic  see  Ranta-
salo,  Der  Ackerbau,  IV  (1924),  25-26,  57,  64-69,  i4i-i53>  156-15?,  I59
(FF  Communications,  XVII,  No.  55).

4.  Bacon,  Natural  History,  i,  26,  Works,  ed.  Spedding,  II,  348.  Cf.
De  Groot,  The  Religious  System  of  China,  IV  (1901),  382-384.

5.  Oldham,  Satyrs  upon  the  Jesuits,  5th  ed.,  1697,  p.  81.

6.  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  1910,  p.  551;
i      Driberg,  The  Lango,  1923,  p.  242  (Uganda).

r  7.  Folk-Lore,  XXVI,  287-293.  Compare  the  vain  sacrifices  of  Gilles
l      de  Rais.

1  8.  W.  G.  Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883,  pp.  95-107;  Cabanes,  Remedes

f  -  d'Autrefois,  i90^,pp.46-65;  Folk-Lore,  XXVI  (191 5),  272;  Lowenstimm,
i  Aberglaube  und"  Strafrecht,  1897,  pp.  95,  107-126;  Hellwig,  Verbrechen
[;  und  Aberglaube,  1908,  pp.  63-78;  the  Same,  Archiv  fur  Kriminal-Anthro-
;  pologie,  XXXVII  (1910),  384-389;  Feilberg,  Totenfetische  im  Glauben
I  Nordgermanischer  Volker,  Am  Ur-Quell,  III  (1892),  1-7,  54-61,  87-91,
I  116-119;  SchifFer  and  others,  the  same.  III,  49-54,  81-86,  113-116,  126-
I;  128,  147-151,  199-202,  209-212,  238-240;  IV  (1893),  16-20,  49-53,  68-
70,  98-100;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  133-139;  Fossel,  Volksmedicin  und  Medi-
l  cinischer  Aberglaube  in  Steiermark,  1886,  pp.  90-91 ;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube
[  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  286-292;  Blatter
[  fiir  Pommersche  Volkskunde,  I  (1893),  62-64;  De  Cock,  Volksgenees-
l  kunde  in  Vlaanderen,  1891,  pp.  72-74,  9^;  F.  S.  Krauss,  Volksglaube  und
I;  Religioser  Brauch  der  Siidslaven,  1890,  pp.  134-14?;  Mansikka,  Ueber
f  Russische  Zauberformeln,  1909,  pp.  90-93;  Revue  des  Traditions  Popu-
f  laires,  XX  (1905),  251-253;  De  Groot,  The  Religious  System  of  Chma,
\  IV  (1901),  372-384;  Sebillot,L'Homme,  III  (1886),  33-40;  Doutte,  Magie
r  et  Religion  dans  I'Afrique  du  Nord,  1909,  pp.  301-303;  Roscoe,  The
I  Bagesu,  1924,  p.  108;  SeHgmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Gumea,
■       1910,  pp.  289,  302,  and  Plate  XL.

9.  Pliny,  xxviii,  4,  11,  45  ("inmatura  morte  raptorum  manu  strumas,
parotidas,  guttura  tactu  sanari  adfirmant,  quidam  vero  cuiuscumque  de-
functi,  dumtaxat  sui  sexus,  laeva  manu  aversa");  Fernel,  De  Abditis
Rerum  Causis,  ii,  16  (De  Morbis,  1656,  p.  520);  Scot,  xii,  14,  p.  244  (176),
■  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  197  (cf.  Garmann,  Dissertatio  Prooemialis,  Sect,  i,
'■  §§  174-179,  pp.  112-115);  Boyle,  Some  Considerations  touching  the  Vse-
fulness  of  Experimental  Philosophy,  2d  ed.,  1664,  p.  230;  Wheatcroft's
Autobiography,  under  i686[-7].  Journal  of  the  Derbyshire  Archseological
'  and  Natural  History  Society,  XXI  (1899),  48-49;  Letter  from  Dr.  John
Beale  to  Robert  Boyle,  November  2,  1663,  in  Boyle,  Works,  ed.  Birch,
1744,  V,  441  (the  remedy  was  used  by  the  advice  of  "Dr.  F.  CI."  and  was
completely  successful;  the  gentlewoman  who  used  it  was  a  friend  of
Beale's);  Glyde,  The  Norfolk  Garland,  p.  36;  the  Same,  A  New  Suffolk
Garland,  1866,  p.  175;  Henderson,  ed.  1879,  P-  ^54;  Notes  and  Queries,
1st  Series,  II  (1850),  36;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,
p.  202;  Elworthy,  Horns  of  Honour,  1900,  pp.  192-193;  Poole,  The  Cus-
toms, etc.,  of  Somerset,  1877,  p.  52;  Hammond,  A  Cornish  Parish,  1897,
p.  352;  Leather,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  191 2,  p.  84;  Clague,  Manx


460         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Reminiscences,  [191 1,]  p.  153  (birthmarl^);  Thomas,  Kentucky  Supersti-
tions, 1920,  pp.  94  (birthmarks),  102  (eczema),  105  (goitre),  131  (wen
cured  by  rubbing  it  against  a  dead  man's  neck);  Folk-Lore  Record,  I
(1878),  48,  227-228;  V  (1882),  174;  Folk-Lore  Journal,  V  (1887),  204-
205;  VII  (1889),  55;  Cambridge  Antiquarian  Society,  Proceedings  and
Communications,  XI  (1907),  272,  274;  Sussex  Archaeological  Collections,
XLV  (1902),  215;  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  332;  De  Cock,
Volksgeneeskunde  in  Vlaanderen,  1891,  p.  72  (birthmark);  Am  Ur-
Quell,  III  (1892),  49;  Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fur  Schleswig-Holstein-
Lauenburgische  Geschichte,  XVI  (1886),  381  (pimples,  tetter,  warts).

10.  Folk-Lore,  XX  (1909),  216;  Browne,  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica,  v,
24,  9,  Works,  ed.  Wilkin,  1852,  II,  loi.

11.  Bray,  Traditions,  Legends,  etc.,  of  Devonshire,  1838,  II,  292;
Glyde,  The  Norfolk  Garland,  p.  38;  Henderson,  ed.  1 879,  p.  145;  Hewett,
Nummits  and  Crummits,  1900,  p.  67  (Devonshire);  Transactions  Devon-
shire Association,  II  (1867-68),  39;  Folk-Lore,  XXIII  (191 2),  476-477;
Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  II  (1850),  37.  Cf.  Thomas,  Kentucky  Su-
perstitions, 1920,  p.  119;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,
1 913,  p.  249;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  p.  193;  R.  Kauf-
mann,  Pratiques  et  Superstitions  Medicales  en  Poitou,  1906,  p.  55;  Ho-
vorka  and  Kronfeld,  Vergleichende  Volksmedicin,  II  (1909),  846-847;
De  Cock,  Volksgeneeskunde  in  Vlaanderen,  1891,  p.  163;  Revue  des  Tra-
ditions Populaires,  XVI  (1901),  592;  XX  (1905),  252,  446.

12.  Folk-Lore,  XXXIII  (1922),  396  (Connacht).

13.  Scot,  xii,  1 4,  p.  244  (176),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  197,  from  Pliny,  xxviii,
I,  2,  7.  Cf.  Fernel,  De  Abditis  Rerum  Causis,  ii,  16  (De  Morbis,  1656,
p.  520);  Thiers,  Traite  des  Superstitions,  1741, 1,  375;  R.  Kaufmann,  Pra-
tiques et  Superstitions  Medicales  en  Poitou,  1906,  p.  55.

14.  Bye-Gones  for  1878-79,  p.  114;  for  1899-1900,  pp.  293-294.  For
this  remedy  see  also  Corrector,  §  177,  Schmitz,  Bussbiicher,  II  (1898),
448;  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  126  (Leonhardi,  p.  38).

15.  Boston,  Lincoln,  Louth,  and  Spalding  Herald,  February  7,  1837,
quoted  in  Folk-Lore  Journal,  VII  (1889),  54.  Earth  from  a  skull  is  a  de-
pilatory; grass  from  a  skull,  if  chewed,  makes  teeth  fall  out:  Pliny,  xxviii,
4,  II,  46.

16.  Folk-Lore,  XIV  (1903),  370  (Ross-shire);  XI  (1900),  446  (Heb-
rides).

17.  Folk-Lore,  XXII  (191 1),  56  (Ireland).

18.  Thomas,  Kentucky  Superstitions,  1920,  p.  loi.

19.  Hammond,  A  Cornish  Parish,  1897,  p.  352.

20.  Scot,  xii,  14,  p.  245  (177),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  197;  Boston,  Lincoln,
Louth,  and  Spalding  Herald,  February  7,  1837,  quoted  in  Folk-Lore
Journal,  VII  (1889),  54.  A  wen  on  the  neck  may  be  cured  by  placing  a
string  round  the  neck  of  a  dead  friend  and  then  wearing  it  round  your  own
neck  (Thomas,  p.  131).  Cf.  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  v,  11,  fol.
xxvij  r"  (ed.  1592,  v,  8,  p.  53);  Whitney  and  Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Mary-
land, 1925,  p.  92;  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  III  (1885-86),  26.  For  the
use  of  the  blood,  etc.,  of  executed  criminals  as  medicine  see  De  Groot,  The


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VII


461


Religious  System  of  China,  IV  (1901),  377-378;  for  coffin  wood  and  grave
plants  see  the  same,  IV,  405-406.

21.  Pliny,  xxviii,  4,  12,  49.  Cf.  Fernel,  De  Abditis  Rerum  Causis,  ii,  16
(De  Morbis,  1656,  p.  520).

22.  Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),  217;  XXVII  (1916),  415.  Cf.  Hansen,
Quellen,  p.  451;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin
Sachsens,  1913,  pp-  287-288.  In  1908  a  piece  of  hangman's  rope  was  begged
in  Delaware  as  a  cure  for  fits  (Chicago  Inter-Ocean,  December  27,  1908).
Cf.  de  Rojas,  Celestina,  ed.  Cejador  y  Frauca,  1913,  I,  81.

23.  Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,  1900,  p.  65  (Devonshire);  Thiers,
Traite  des  Superstitions,  1741,  I,  365.  Shadwell,  in  a  note  to  his  comedy
of  The  Lancashire  Witches  (1682),  remarks:   "The  French  gamesters

.  think  that  the  noose  of  the  rope  that  went  about  the  neck  of  one  that
was  hang'd  will  make  them  win.  And  here  old  women  will  prescribe  a
piece  of  the  gallows  for  a  cure  for  an  ague"  (ed.  Halliwell,  1853,  p.  58).

24.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  II  (1867-68),  39.

25.  Boston,  Lincoln,  Louth,  and  Spalding  Herald,  February  7,  1837,
quoted  in  Folk-Lore  Journal,  VII  (1889),  55.  Cf.  Sir  Thomas  Browne,
Pseudodoxia  Epidemica,  v,  24,  9,  Works,  ed.  Wilkin,  1852,  II,  100.

26.  Sussex  Archseological  Collections,  XVIII  (1866),  1 60-1 61;  Trans-
actions Cumberland  and  Westmorland  Antiquarian  and  Archaeological
Society,  XIV  (1897),  373;  Henderson,  1879,  p.  145.

27.  Thomas,  Kentucky  Superstitions,  1920,  p.  125.

28.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  X  (1878),  loi.  Cf.  Clyde,
The  Norfolk  Garland,  p.  31;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  IV  (1896),  581-
584;  Dieterich,  Mutter  Erde,  3d  ed.,  1925,  pp.  28-29.

29.  Bye-Gones  for  1901^2,  p.  116,  cf.  p.  99;  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant
Lore,  1898,  p.  102.  Cf.  Thiers,  Traite  des  Superstitions,  1741,  I,  370.

30.  Bray,  as  above,  II,  291,  note.

31.  County  Folk-Lore,  III  (1903),  151  (Shetland).

32.  The  same,  I,  No.  3  (1895),  p.  54.  Cf.  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in
Scotland,  1833,  I,  201-204.

33.  Boston,  Lincoln,  Louth,  and  Spalding  Herald,  February  7,  1837,
quoted  in  Folk-Lore  Journal,  VII  (1889),  54;  The  East  Anghan,  II  (1866),
216;  Clyde,  A  New  Suffolk  Garland,  1866,  p.  175;  the  Same,  The  Nor-
folk Garland,  p.  36;  Henderson,  1879,  pp.  155-156.

34.  See  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachs-
ens,  1913,  pp.  209-216;  Am  Ur-Ouell,  VI  (1896),  36-37.

35.  Wells  Diocesan  Records,  Holworthy,  Discoveries  in  the  Diocesan
Register,  Wells,  p.  7.

36.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  III,  68;  Wiilker,  Bibhothek  der  Angel-
sachsischen  Poesie,  I,  327;  Grendon,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,
XXII  (1909),  208,  234.

37.  Theodore  as  represented  by  Discipulus  Umbrensium,  1,  15,  §  3
(Haddan  and  Stubbs,  Councils,  III,  190;  Schmitz,  Bussbiicher,  II,  556),
by  Canones  Gregorii,  §  117  (Schmitz,  II,  535),  and  by  Capitula  Judiciorum,
xvi,  4  (Schmitz^  II,  237);  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxvii,  15  (Thorpe,  Ancient


462


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Laws,  pp.  292-293);  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Confessionale,  §32
(Thorpe,  p.  356:  "Jjaer  man  dead  waere";  var.,  "  ]?aer  deade  men  beo'5
bebyrigde");  Pseudo-Bede-Ecgbert,  i,  35  (Schmitz,  II,  683);  Pseudo-
Cummean,  vii  (ix),  15  (Schmitz,  II,  627);  Corrector,  §95  (Schmitz,  II,
430);  Schmitz,  I,  684,  749.  Compare  other  rites  mentioned  in  Corrector,
§§  95-97  (Schmitz,  II,  430-431).

38.  Raine,  The  Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Minster  (Surtees  Society,  XXXV),
p.  266.

39.  Liebermann,  Die  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  I,  255.

40.  Canons  of  Edgar,  §  16,  Thorpe,  p.  396  {lic-wiglunga).

41.  John  of  Salisbury,  Policraticus,  i,  12,  ed.  Webb,  I,  51.  Cf.  Isidore,
Origines,  viii,  9.

42.  Havamal,  sts.  146-163,  BuG;ge,  Norroen  FornkvseSi,  1867,  pp.  62-
64.

43.  An  Apology  for  Lollard  Doctrines,  ed.  Todd  (Camden  Society,  XX),
p.  95 :  "  Nigromauncers  are  thei  that  bi  figeris  or  markyngis  vp-on  the  dead
body  of  best  or  of  man,  thus  enforcith  to  geit  wityng,  or  to  wirk,  or  thus
to  bow  God."  John  of  Salisbury  calls  those  aruspices  who  "uaticinantur
in  ossibus  animalium  siue  sanguine"  (Policraticus,  i,  12,  ed.  Webb,  I,  51).

44.  Chaucer,  Parson's  Tale,  §  37  (Skeat,  IV,  607);  cf.  Pardoner's  Pro-
logue, vv.  22-43,  Skeat's  note,  V,  271.  See  also  Kirk,  Secret  Common-
wealth, ed.  1815,  p.  17  (ed.  Lang,  p.  31);  J.  G.  Campbell,  Superstitions  of
the  Highlands  and  Islands,  1900,  pp.  263-266;  Curtin,  Tales  of  the  Fairies
and  of  the  Ghost  World  collected  in  South-West  Munster,  1895,  pp.  84-
85;  Thorns,  Folk-Lore  Record,  I  (1878),  176-179;  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-
Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  1911,  pp.  275-276;  Folk-Lore  Journal,  II
(1884),  367-369;  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  I57>  167;  XIII  (1902),  50-51;
Beaumont,  An  Historical,  Physiological  and  Theological  Treatise  of  Spirits,
1705,  pp.  295-296;  Dalyell,  Darker  Superstitions,  1834,  pp.  515-519;
Bye-Gones  for  1889-90,  p.  19;  H.  C.  Agrippa,  De  Occulta  Philosophia,  i,
33,  ed.  1533,  p.  xxxix;  Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  1871,  I,  112-113;  Lub-
bock, The  Origin  of  Civilization,  1870,  pp.  142-143  (2d  ed.,  1870,  pp.  163-
164);  Andree,  Boas  Anniversary  Volume,  1906,  pp.  143-165;  Purchas  his
Pilgrimes,  XII  (1906),  18;  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  des  Niederrheins,  XIII
(1898),  234;  F.  S.  Krauss,  Volksglaube  und  Religioser  Brauch  der  Siid-
slaven,  1890,  pp.  169-170;  L.  de  Milloue,  Conferences  au  Musee  Guimet
(Annales,  XIV),  1903,  pp.  200-201 ;  Curtin,  A  Journey  in  Southern  Siberia,
1909,  p.  99;  Vreto  (Bretos),  Contes  et  Poemes  de  la  Grece  Moderne,  1858,
p.  22  and  note;  G.  F.  Abbott,  Macedonian  Folklore,  1903,  pp.  96-98;  Elliot
and  Dowson,  The  History  of  India  as  told  by  its  own  Historians,  I  (1867),
331;  Dornan,  Pygmies  and  Bushmen  of  the  Kalahari,  1925,  p.  158.  Cf.
The  Remains  of  Denis  Granville  (Surtees  Society,  XLVII),  ed.  Ornsby,
pp.  31-32  (breastbone  of  woodcock  or  wild  duck).

45.  See  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxiii,  14,  Thorpe,  p.  290;  Pseudo-Ecgbert,
Excerptiones,  §  75,  Thorpe,  p.  332;  Schmitz,  II,  181,  232,  321,  324,  328,
335> 342,  347.  352,  360,  378,  422,  619, 681, 696.

46.  Year  Book  45  Edward  III,  1679,  p.  17,  §7;  Coke's  Institutes,
Third  Part,  cap.  6.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VII


47.  Contemporary  Narrative,  ed.  Wright  (Camden  Society,  XXIV),
pp.  2,  32.

48.  Du  Bartas,  La  Seconde  Sepmaine,  4th  Day,  Part  i  (Qiuvres,  161 1,
p.  352);^  Sylvester,  ed.  1633,  p.  198.  ^

49.  Katha-sarit-sagara,  xxxiv,  Tawney's  translation,  I,  306;  new  ed.  by
Penzer,  III  (1925),  133.

50.  Cardano,  De  Rerum  Varietate,  xvi,  90,  Opera,  III  (1663),  310.  Cf.
Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthropologie,  XXXIX  (1910),  301 ;  Elworthy,  Horns
of  Honour,  1900,  pp.  190-191.

51.  John  Deacon  and  John  Wallvcr,  Dialogicall  Discourses,  of  Spirits
and  Divels,  1601,  p.  143.  Guilielmus  Alvernus  (Bishop  of  Paris  1228-
1249)  declares  that  a  candle  composed  "ex  cera  et  corio  serpentis  sulfu-
rato,"  if  it  burns  in  a  place  where  there  is  no  other  light,  will  make  the
straws  and  rushes  on  the  floor  seem  to  be  "serpentes  per  domum  dissili-
entes"  (De  Universe,  ii,  3,  22,  Opera,  1674, 1,  1059).  Cf.  St.  Bonaventura,
Commentaria  in  Sententias,  Lib.  ii,  dist.  8,  part.  2,  art.  i,  qu.  3  (Opera,
II  [i88;;l,  229;  cf.  II,  200-203,  436);  Ulrich  Molitoris,  De  Lamiis  et  Phi-
tonicis  Mulieribus,  cap.  8  (error  for  10),  ed.  1489,  sig.  [Di]  v°;  Le  Loyer,
Discours  et  Histoires  des  Spectres,  1605,  ii,  7,  p.  145;  Del  Rio,  Disquisi-
tiones  Magicae,  Lib.  ii,  qu.  8,  ed.  1616,  p.  107;  Thorndike,  A  History  of
Magic  and  Experimental  Science,  1923,  II,  345.

52.  John  Hawarde,  Les  Reportes  del  Cases  in  Camera  Stellata,  ed.
Baildon,  1894,  pp.  250-251.  For  a  recipe  "vt  stramen  appareat  serpens"
see  Sloane  MS.  2628,  fol.  50  r°  (cf.  fol.  10  r°).

53.  Thurston,  Omens  and  Superstitions  of  Southern  India,  191 2,  pp.
96-97.

54.  Hildburgh,  Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  XXXVIII
(1908), 165.  Cf.  Basin,  DeArtibusMagicis  acMagorumMaleficiis,  in  Mallei
Maleficarum,  1582,  II,  20:  "Est  herba  quaedam  accensa  fumigans  quae
facit  trabes  apparere  serpentes."  See  also  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,
XXXVIII  (1925),  621.

55.  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  pp.  897-898;  Remi  (Remi-
gius),  Daemonolatreia,  1595,  ii,  3,  pp.  212-215;  Gaule,  Hvs-fiavTLa  the
Mag-astro-mancer,  1652,  p.  355;  Garmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,
1709,  Dissertatio  Prooemialis,  i,  194,  pp.  122-123;  Scheible,  Das  Kloster,
VI  (1847),  216-219;  Lowes,  The  Road  to  Xanadu,  1927,  pp.  556-557;
Elworthy,  Horns  of  Honour,  1900,  pp.  178-191;  Skeat,  Philological  So-
ciety Transactions,  1888-90,  p.  295;  Taylor,  Journal  of  American  Folk-
Lore,  XXXIV  (1921),  327;  Blakeborough,  The  Hand  of  Glory,  1924,
pp.  16-23;  J-  S.  Fletcher,  A  Book  about  Yorkshire,  1908,  pp.  274-278;
Folk-Lore,  VII  (1896),  269;  XX  (1909),  219-220;  XXVI  (191 5),  293-294;
Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthropologie,  XXIV  (1906),  161 ;  XXVI  (1906),
222  (from  Carpzov);  LVI  (1914),  269;  Baring-Gould,  Strange  Survivals,
1892,  p.  244;  The  Ocean  of  Story  (Katha-sarit-sagara),  transl.  Tawney,
ed.  Penzer,  note,  III  (1925),  150-154;  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,
1899,  p.  78;  Frischbier,  Hexenspruch  und  Zauberbann,  1870,  p.  1 1 1 ;  J.  W.
Wolf,  Nederlandische  Sagen,  1843,  pp.  363-365;  Wuttke-Meyer,  p.  134;
E.  Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten  und  Gebrauche  aus  Schwaben,  1852,


464        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


pp.  175-176;  Birlinger,  Volksthiimliches  aus  Schwaben,  I  (1861),  339;
Witzschel,  Kle'me  Beitrage,  II  (1878),  283;  Bartsch,  Sagen,  Marchen  und
Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  II  (1880),  331-333,  335;  Strackerjan,  Aber-
glaube  und  Sagen  aus  dem  Herzogtum  Oldenburg,  2d  ed.,  1909,  I,  118;
Vernaleken,  Alpensagen,  1858,  p.  422;  U.  Jahn,  Volkssagen  aus  Pommern
und  Riigen,  1886,  pp.  331-332;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,
XXIII  (1913),  126,333;  Am  Ur-Quell,  III  (1892),  60-61,  92,  148,  210-
211;  V  (1894),  163;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Socialwissenschaft,  VI  (1903),  276;
Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthropologie,  XXV  (1906),  85-87;  v.  Hovorka  and
Kronfeld,  Vergleichende  Volksmedizin,  II  (1909),  537;  Seyfarth,  Aber-
glaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  288-289;
Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfiilische  Volkskunde,  VI
(1909),  64-65;  XII  (1915),  261-262;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i
(1900),  393-395;  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  330,  cf.  338;  F.  S.
Krauss,  Volksglaube  und  Religioser  Brauch  der  Siidslaven,  1890,  pp.  144-
I46;  Cosquin,  Contes  Populaires  de  Lorraine,  [1886,]  I,  178,  184;  Sebil-
lot,  L'Homme,  January  25,  1886,  pp.  33-40;  Cabanes,  Remedes  d'Autre-
fois,  1905,  p.  49;  Grohmann,  Aberglaube  und  Gebrauche  aus  Bohmen  und
Mahren,  1864,  pp.  106,  205;  Deutsche  Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen
Bohmen,  V  (1905),  48;  IX  (1909),  57;  Szulczewski,  Allerhand  Fahrendes
Volk  in  Kujawien,  1906,  pp.  27,  32;  Mansikka,  Ueber  Russische  Zau-
berformeln,  1909,  p.  91;  Wilken,  De  Indische  Gids,  VII,  i  (1885),  56;
Mannhardt,  Die  Praktischen  Folgen  des  Aberglaubens,  1878  (Deutsche
Zeit-  und  Streit-Fragen,  VII),  pp.  21-24;  Lowenstimm,  Aberglaube  und
Strafrecht,  1897,  pp.  1 13-126;  Hellwig,  Verbrechen  und  Aberglaube,  1908,
pp.  72-73,  76-78;  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk  Lore  of  the  Northern
Counties,  1866,  pp.  200-206  (ed.  1879,  pp.  239-244);  Thomas  and  Katha-
rine Macquoid,  About  Yorkshire,  1883,  pp.  65-70.  Cf.  Roscoe,  The  Ba-
ganda,  191 1,  p.  329;  Weeks,  Among  Congo  Cannibals,  1913,  p.  287;  G.  W.
Briggs,  The  Chamars,  1920,  p.  169;  Hobley,  Bantu  Beliefs  and  Magic,
1922,  pp.  192-193;  Milne,  The  Home  of  an  Eastern  Clan,  1924,  p.  266;
MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden  Konde,  1925,  p.  289;  North  Indian  Notes
and  Queries,  I  (1891-92),  103;  Journal  of  the  Royal  Anthropological  In-
stitute, XXXVIII  (1908),  164;  XL  (1910),  302-303;  XLI  (191 1),  301-
302.  It  was  a  belief  of  Chinese  bandits  centuries  ago  that  to  eat  of  human
flesh  renders  a  burglar  invisible  by  night  (De  Groot,  The  Religious  System
of  China,  IV  [1901],  364).  See  also  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XL

(1927),  305-

56.  For  such  abuses  in  great  variety  see  A.  Franz,  Die  Messe  im
Deutschen  Mittelalter,  I902,pp.  87-114.  Cf.  Kotelmann,Gesundheitspflege
im  Mittelalter,  1890,  pp.  240-242.  It  is  reported  that  "in  an  interior  city
of  Cuba  not  long  since,  a  wooden  image  of  Santa  Barbara,  known  to  the
witches  as  Chango,  was  taken  from  the  witch  house  in  solemn  procession
to  the  .  .  .  church  accompanied  by  city  officials  and  blessed  by  the  priests.
A  banquet  was  given  and  the  image  returned  to  the  temple  of  the  witches"
(E.  P.  Herrick,'The  Southern  Workman,  XXXVI  [1907],  402).

57.  See  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  139-144;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zau-
berei in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  273-275;   Manz,  Volks-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VII


465


brauch  und  Volksglaube  des  Sarganserlandes,  Schriften  der  Schweizerischen
Gesellschaft  fur  Volkskunde,  XII  (191 6),  47-52;  Revue  des  Traditions
Populaires,  XIV  (1899),  560;  XV  (1900),  475-477.

58.  Folk-Lore  Record,  I  (1878),  46.

59.  Canon  39,  Mansi,  Concilia,  VII  (1762),  883.

60.  Forby,  The  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia,  1830,  II,  406-407.  Cf.  Old
Yorkshire,  ed.  Wm.  Smith,  11  (1881),  170-171.

61.  Pseudo-Ecgbert,  Anglo-Saxon  Confessionale,  §  17  (Thorpe,  Ancient
Laws,  1840,  p.  350),  and  Poenitentiale,  Additamenta,  §  27  (Thorpe,
p.  392);  cf.  Pseudo-Theodore,  xxxviii,  1-3  (Thorpe,  p.  298).  See  Schmitz,
Bussbiicher,  II  (1898),  247,  524,  525,  635;  cf.  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  x,
18,  ed.  1592,  p.  164;  Die  Hirtenbriefe  JElfvics,  ed.  Fehr,  1914,  p.  65.

62.  Parochialia,  Part  III,  Supplement  to  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,  6th
Series,  XI  (191 1),  84.

63.  See  also  the  cases  of  Joan  Tyrrye  in  1555  (p.  254)  and  Judith  Phil-
lips in  1595  (p.  206);  cf.  p.  215.

64.  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  XII  (191 1),  33-34
(from  Bishop  Stafford's  Register,  Harleian  MS.  6966).  Cf.  Holkot,  Super
Libros  Sapientie,  Lectio  190  (Speyer,  1488,  sig.  p  ij  r°;  Reutlingen,  1489,
sig.  Miiij,  If.  5v°):  " Inuocationes  etiam  quas  vetule  per  nomina  barbarica
et  extranea  vel  obseruationes  infinitas  pro  morbis  curandis  sortilegia  sunt
quamuis  admisceantur  quedam  de  deo  uel  de  euangelio."

65.  See  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  436.

66.  The  Antiquary,  XXXII  (1896),  17-22.

67.  Cf.  Baxter,  The  Certainty  of  the  Worlds  of  Spirits,  1691,  p.  155;
Hunt,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  223-224
(Psalm  Ixviii,  1-2);  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  164-165,
168-169,  174-175,  527;  Vassiliev,  Anecdota  Graeco-Byzantina,  I  (1893),
335.  See  Chapter  II,  note  83.

68.  The  Rev.  Oliver  Heywood,  his  Autobiography,  etc.,  ed.  Turner,  I
(1882),  344-345-

69.  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  p.  i  ^o.

70.  E.  Owen,  Welsh  Folk-Lore,  p.  245;  Bye-Gones  for  1886-87,  p.  122.

71.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  X  (1878),  103-104.  Cf.
Abbott,  Macedonian  Folklore,  1903,  p.  227.

72.  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  Folklore  and  Customs  of  the  North
Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,  191 1,  p.  183.

73.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Itinerarium  Kambriae,  i,  5,  Opera,  ed.  Dim-
ock,  VI,  58-59.

74.  Articles  to  be  Inquired  Of,  No.  64  (London,  Richard  Grafton,  1548),
sig.  Biiii,  If.  i  r°.

75.  Cockayne,  III,  10,  12;  Leonhardi,  p.  126.

76.  Cockayne,  II,  136;  Leonhardi,  p.  41.  For  the  eating  or  drinking
of  magic  words  see  Pradel,  Griechische  und  Siiditalienische  Gebete  (Re-
ligionsgeschichtliche  Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  III,  iii),  1907,  pp.  380-
381;  Dieterich,  Abraxas,  i89i,p.  159.

77.  William  of  Malmesbury,  Gesta  Pontificum  Anglorum,  ed.  Hamilton,
i,  72,  p.  137;  iv,  156,  p.  295.  Cf.  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  North-


466         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ern  India,  1926,  pp.  434-435;  La  Tradition,  VI  (1892),  216-220.  See
p.  103,  above.

78.  See  Cockayne,  Leechdoms,  I,  xlvi-xlvii;  Halsig,  Der  Zauberspruch
bei  den  Germanen,  1910,  pp.  24-27.  For  devils  or  fiends  see  Cockayne,

I,  102,  248,  312,  360,  386,  394;  II,  136,  294,  306,  316,  322,  334,  342,  350,
352,  354;  III,  10,  36,  70,  80;  Kleinere  Angelsachsische  Denkmaler,  ed.
Leonhardi,  I  (1905),  41,  89,  94,  97,  98,  102,  104,  107,  108,  126,  151,  155.
Cf.  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed.  Stevenson  (Surtees  Society,  X),
pp.  1 1 5-1 1 6,  121,  129.  For  niglitmare  or  nocturnal  goblins  see  Cockayne,

II,  140,  306,  342,  344;  Leonhardi,  pp.  42,  94,  104,  105.  Cf.  Heinrich,  Ein
Mittelenglisches  Medizinbuch,  1896,  p.  166.  For  elves  see  Cockayne,  II,
138,  156,  290,  296,  334,  344,  348,  350;  III,  10,  46,  54,  64  (cf.  II,  348  [Casta-
Udes\\  III,  32);  Leonhardi,  pp.  42,  47,  88,  90,  102,  105-107,  126,  141,  148.
Cf.  Yorkshire  Archaeological  Journal,  XVII  (1903),  402-404;  The  Book
of  Cerne,  ed.  Kuypers,  1902,  Appendix,  p.  221;  Klemming,  Lake-  och
Orte-Bocker,  1883-86,  pp.  394-395.   For  dwarfs  see  Cockayne,  I,  364;

III,  38,  40,  42,  118;  Leonhardi,  p.  138;  Wiilker,  I,  326,  404;  Grendon,
pp.  166-167,  215-216;  Skemp,  pp.  293-295;  Napier,  Herrig's  Archiv,
LXXXIV  (1890),  323.  For  witches  or  wizards  see  Cockayne,  I,  190;  II,
138,^298,  306,  342;  III,  36,_p,  54  (cf-  I,  402);  Leonhardi,  pp.  42,  90,  94.
On  "  Krankheits-Damonen"  see  M.  Hofler,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissen-
schaft,  II  (1899),  86-164;  Klemming,  pp.  229-230;  Manninen,  Die
Diimonistischen  Krankheiten  im  Finnischen  Volksglauben  (FF  Communi-
cations, XII,  No.  45),  1922.  On  elves  and  dwarfs  see  Jente,  pp.  167-180.

79.  Cockayne,  I,  388;  II,  no,  136,  138,  140,  142,  334,  346,  348,  350,
352>  354;  III,  54,  56;  Leonhardi,  pp.  33,  41-43,  102,  105-108,  144.

80.  Cockayne,  III,  46  (cf.  II,  156);  Leonhardi,  p.  141  (cf.  p.  47).

81.  Cockayne,  II,  344,  346,  350;  III,  14,  24;  Leonhardi,  pp.  105,  107,
127,  132.

82.  Cockayne,  II,  296,  344,  346;  Leonhardi,  pp.  90,  ioj;,  106.

83.  Cockayne,  II,  296,  350;  Leonhardi,  pp.  90,  107.

84.  Cockayne,  II,  334;  Leonhardi,  p.  102.

85.  Cockayne,  III,  14;  cf.  II,  334;  Leonhardi,  p.  127,  cf.  p.  102.

86.  Cockayne,  II,  138,  344,  346;  Leonhardi,  pp.  42,  105,  106.

87.  Cockayne,  II,  138,  140,  142,  156,  294,  334,  344,  346,  352,  354,  356;
III,  6,  12,  28,  46,  56;  Leonhardi,  pp.  42,  43,  47,  89,  102,  105-108,  124,  126,
136,  141,  145.  Cf.  A.  Franz,  Die  Messe,  p.  87.

88.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Gemma  Ecclesiastica,  i,  49,  Opera,  ed.  Brewer,
II,  137  (from  Peter  Cantor,  Verbum  Abbreviatum,  cap.  29,  Migne,  CCV,
106).  On  priests  who  sing  masses  for  the  dead  for  a  living  man  in  order
to  kill  him,  see  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1592,  x,  12,  p.  159;  xi,  17,
p.  178.  On  those  who,  in  celebrating  mass,  repeat  evil  prayers,  naming  the
person  to  be  witched,  or  who  put  sortilegia  on  the  altar  and  offer  them  to
God,  see  Grillando,  iii,  22,  p.  33;  xvii,  i,  pp.  221-222.  See  also  A.  Franz,
Die  Messe,  pp.  87,  98-100.  Compare  the  Black  Fast  to  detect  a  thief  or
kill  an  enemy  (p.  129,  above).  Bale,  in  a  scurrilous  passage,  attacks  the
mass:  "It  serueth  all  wytches  in  their  wytcherye,  all  sorcerers,  charmers,
inchaunters,  dreamers,  sothsayers,  necromansers,  coniures,  crosse  dyggers.


I

NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VII  467

deuyll  raysers,  myracle  doers,  doggeleches,  and  bawdes.  For  without  a
masse,  they  can  not  wele  worke  their  feates"  (The  Lattre  Examinacyon
of  Anne  Askewe,  ed.  Marpurg,  January  16,  1547,  fol.  60  r°).

89.  See  pp.  93-95.  For  "christening  of  a  catt"  (1632)  see  Reports  of
Cases  in  the  Courts  of  Star  Chamber  and  High  Commission,  ed.  S.  R.
Gardiner  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XXXIX),  p.  275.

90.  Criminal  Chronology  of  York  Castle,  1867,  p.  29.  Cf.  Yorkshire
Archseological  Journal,  XIV  (1898),  115,  note;  Whitelock,  Memorials  of
English  A^ffairs,  ed.  1853,  II,  291.

91.  Bray,  Traditions,  Legends,  Superstitions,  and  Sketches  of  Devon-
shire, 1838,  II,  291.  Or  you  may  walk  thrice  round  the  communion  table
at  midnight:  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  III  (1851),  259.

92.  For  the  cleft  ash  see,  for  example,  Pengelly,  Annual  Reports  and
Transactions  of  the  Plymouth  Institution,  VII  (1881),  127-160;  Clyde,
The  New  Suffolk  Garland,  1866,  p.  171;  Gilbert  White,  The  Natural  His-
tory of  Selborne,  Part  II,  Letter  28  (1776),  Works,  ed.  1802,  I,  343-344;
Gentleman's  Magazine,  LXXIV,  ii  (1804),  909  (with  figure);  Transactions
Penzance  Natural  History  and  Antiquarian  Society,  ist  Series,  II  (1851-
55),  240;  The  East  Anglian,  II  (1866),  215-216,  250;  Transactions  Dev-
onshire Association,  Vni  (1876),  54;  IX  (1877),  94-96  (arched  bramble
or  cleft  ash);  Mead,  Somersetshire  Archaeological  and  Natural  History
Association,  XXXVIII  (1892),  362-369;  The  Western  Antiquary,  III
(1884),  38;  Notes  and  Gleanings,  Devon  and  Cornwall,  II  (1889),  79;  By-
Gones  for  1891-92,  p.  259;  Folk-Lore,  Record,  I  (1878),  40-41;  Folk-Lore,
VI  (1895),  123-124;  VII  (1896),  303-306  (with  figures);  IX  (1898),
233-334;  Clyde,  The  Norfolk  Garland,  p.  41 ;  F.  Hancock,  The  Parish  of
Selworthy,  Somerset,  1897,  p.  238;  Cecil  Torr,  Small  Talk  in  Wreyland,
1st  Series,  1918,  pp.  7-8;  Hartland,  The  Legend  of  Perseus,  II  (1895),
146-147;  A.  L.  Humphreys,  The  Materials  for  the  History  of  the  Town
of  Wellington,  1889,  pp.  244-245;  J.  Li.  W.  Page,  An  Exploration  of
Exmoor,  4th  ed.,  1895,  p.  32;  Leather,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,
1912,  pp.  80-81;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  p.  236.
For  the  practice  of  creeping  through  trees,  holed  stones,  etc.,  see  Marcellus
Empiricus,  De  Medicamentis,  cap.  33,  §  26,  ed.  Helmreich,  1889,  p.  343;
Gaidoz,  Un  Vieux  Rite  Medical,  1892  (with  addenda  in  Melusine,  VIII
[1896-97],  i74-i79>  201-208,  244-253,  282-285;  IX  [1898-99],  6-8,  33-34,
121-126,  226;  X  [1900-01],  254-255);  Pseudo-Augustine,  De  Rectitudine
Catholicae  Conversationis,  cap.  5,  Migne,  XL,  1172;  Thiers,  Traite  des
Superstitions,  174I,  I,  383-384,  387;  Liebrecht,  Gervasius,  pp.  170-171;
Frazer,  The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  XI  (1913),  Balder  the  Beautiful,  II,
168-195;  Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883,  pp.  65-70;  Seligmann,  Der  Bose
Blick,  1910,  I,  327-328;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  IV  (1896),  576-581;
Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  II  (1892),  81-82;  VII  (1897),
42-53;  XII  (1902),  110-113;  XX  (1910),  167-181;  XXIII  (1913),  288-
293;  XXIV  (1914),  201-206;  Oertel,  Studien  zur  Vergleichenden  Litera-
turgeschichte,  VIII  (1908),  iii;-ii6;  K.  Kohler,  Archiv  fiir  Religions-
wissenschaft,  XIII  (1910),  80;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,
pp.  195-198;  C.  H.  Poole,  The  Customs,  Superstitions,  and  Legends  of  the


468


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


County  of  Stafford,  pp.  81-82;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,
II,  28;  Hunt,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  212,
215-216;  Bye-Gones  for  1871-73,  p.  69;  for  1 899-1 900,  p.  268;  for  1901-
02,  p.  440;  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  I  (i  850),  397;  Folk-Lore,  XXXII
(1921),  125;  Wood-Martin,  Traces  of  the  Elder  Faiths  of  Ireland,  1902,
II,  226-243;  Cross,  Studies  in  Philology  (University  of  North  Carolina),
XVI  (1919),  260-261;  Whitney  and  Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,
1925,  pp.  93-94;  Am  Ur-Quell,  III  (1892),  9-10,  66;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.
337)  338)  3^°;  Seyfarth,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin
Sachsens,  1913,  pp.  205-209;  Schweizer  Volkskunde,  II  (1912),  79;
Knuchel,  Die  Umwandlung,  1919,  pp.  55-56  (Schriften  der  Schweizerischen
Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XV);  De  Cock,  Volksgeneeskunde  in  Vlaan-
deren,  1891,  pp.  82-83;  Skattegraveren,  II  (1884),  29;  V  (1886),  201-202;
VII  (1887),  31-32;  VIII  (1887),  116;  R.  Kaufmann,  Pratiques  et  Super-
stitions Medicales  en  Poitou,  1906,  p.  57;  Zanetti,  La  Medicina  delle
nostre  Donne,  1892,  p.  211;  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XXVII  (1898),  109.
For  the  sacred  character  of  the  ash  or  the  mountain  ash  see,  for  example.
The  Antiquary,  XLII  (1906),  367-372,  421-426;  Devon  and  Cornwall
Notes  and  Queries,  XI  (1921),  3-4,  97-100;  XII  (1923),  13-14;  Notes  and
Gleanings,  Devon  and  Cornwall,  I  (1888),  28-29;  Bye-Gones  for  1886-87,
p.  38;  Dawson,  History  of  Skipton,  1882,  pp.  388-389;  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-
Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  191 1,  pp.  240-242.

93.  Folk-Lore,  XIII  (1902),  57.

94.  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  1879,
pp.  142-143;  Nicholson,  Folk  Lore  of  East  Yorkshire,  1890,  p.  141;  Burne
and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  pp.  203-204;  Bergen,  Animal  and
Plant  Lore,  1899,  p.  20  (Newfoundland).  Cf.  Hunt,  Popular  Romances  of
the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  218-219;  Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,
1900,  p.  79;  Leather,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  I9i2,p.  82;  Blake-
borough,  Wit,  Character,  etc.,  of  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,
191 1,  p.  133;  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  I  (1850),  397;  County  Folk-
Lore,  I,  No.  2  (1893),  pp.  18-20;  Transactions  Penzance  Natural  History
and  Antiquarian  Society,  ist  Series,  II  (1851-55),  240;  Whitney  and  Bul-
lock, Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,  p.  83.

95.  For  the  ass  as  a  symbol  of  Holy  Church  see  Old  English  Homilies,
ed.  Morris,  I  (1868),  9.

96.  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  pp.  203-204,  209;  Bye-
Gones  for  1897-98,  p.  389;  Baring-Gould,  Devonshire  Characters,  1908,
pp.  76-77.  Cf.  Charles  Kent,  The  Land  of  the  "Babes  in  the  Wood,"
[1910,]  p.  86;  Lovett,  Magic  in  Modern  London,  1925,  pp.  31-33.  For  the
Asinaria  Festa  see  Chambers,  The  Mediaeval  Stage,  1903,  I,  330-334.

97.  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  III  (1851),  179;  Folk-Lore  Record,
I  (1878),  46;  Henderson,  1 879,  p.  146;  Ditchfield,  The  Parson's  Pleasance,
pp.  185-186;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  p.  180.  Cf.  A.  Franz,
Die  Messe,  p.  87.  Gregory  of  Tours  tells  of  a  "Britannorum  comes"  who,
to  cure  pains  in  his  feet,  washed  them  in  the  sacred  paten:  he  lost  the  use
of  his  legs.  A  similar  punishment  for  a  like  offence  came  upon  a  Lombard
duke  (De  Gloria  Martyrum,  cap.  85,  Migne,  LXXI,  781).


/


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VII


469


98.  Scot,  xii,  17,  p.  260  (187),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  211.

99.  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  p.  192;  Notes  and
Queries,  ist  Series,  III  (1851),  220.

100.  Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIII,  XIII,  i.  No.  11 50,  p.  430.  Cf.
Bale,  Select  Works,  ed.  Christmas  (Parker  Society),  p.  527:  "their  sipping
cups  for  the  hiccough."

101.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  III,  10-13.  Cf.  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirch-
lichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  I,  259-263,  280,  284-286.

102.  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  H  3  r°.

103.  Henderson,  1879,  p.  146.  For  various  misuses  of  the  host  see
A.  Franz,  Die  Messe,  pp.  93-98.

104.  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  168;  County  Folk-Lore,  V  (1908),  131,
cf.  64;  Folk-Lore,  XIII  (1902),  427.  Cf.  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,
p.  70;  Clague,  Manx  Reminiscences,  [191 1],  p.  173;  Agnew,  The  Heredi-
tary Sheriffs  of  Galloway,  1893,  II,  82.  See  Malleus  Maleficarum,  Part  II,
qu.  I,  cap.  5  (ed.  1620,  p.  191);  Hansen,  Quellen,  p.  166.   Seep.  181,  above.

105.  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1891),  43.  Cf.  Saga-Book  of
the  Viking  Club,  III  (1902-04),  51.

106.  The  Reliquary  and  Illustrated  Archsologist,  II  (1890),  158.  Cf.
Salopian  Shreds  and  Patches,  V  (1883),  207;  Shropshire  Notes  and
Queries,  I  (1886),  24-25,  71.

107.  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  iii,  i5,fol.  xxj  r°  (ed.  1592,  iii,
19,  p.  30).

108.  Caesarius  of  Heisterbach,  Dialogus  de  Miraculis,  ix,  6,  ed.  Strange,
1851,  II,  171;  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III  (1910),  362,  §  139;
cf.  Ill,  514,  §  39.  Cf.  Thiers,  Traite  des  Superstitions,  1741,  II,  336.  For
the  host  as  a  medicine  see  Thiers,  II,  248-252;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformu-
larer,  1901,  p.  180.

109.  Caesarius,  ix,  9,  ed.  Strange,  II,  173-174.  Cf.  Thiers,  II,  336.
no.  Herbertus  Turrium,  De  Miraculis,  iii,  28,  ed.  Chifflet,  S.  Bernardi

Genus  Illustre  Assertum,  1660,  pp.  376-377.

111.  The  same,  iii,  29,  pp.  377-378.  Cf.  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Ro-
mances, III  (1910),  448,  §  36.

112.  Herbertus  Turrium,  De  Miraculis,  iii,  30,  ed.  Chifflet,  pp.  378-379
(cf.  Petrus  Venerabilis,  De  Miraculis,  i,  i,  Migne,  CLXXXIX,  851-853);
Caesarius,  ix,  8,  ed.  Strange,  II,  172-173;  Etienne  de  Bourbon,  Septem
Dona,  ed.  Lecoy  de  la  Marche,  Anecdotes  Historiques,  1877,  pp.  266-267,
328;  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Gemma  Ecclesiastica,  i,  11,  Opera,  ed.  Brewer,
II,  42-43;  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III  (1910),  23,  388,  448,  '^17,
647;  An  Alphabet  of  Tales,  No.  69;;,  ed.  Banks,  II  (1905),  465  (from
Caesarius).  Cf.  Deecke,  Liibische  Geschichten  und  Sagen,  5th  ed.,  p.  280;
Blatter  fur  Pommersche  Volkskunde,  IX  (1901),  3.  Host  buried  in  a  gar-
den to  improve  the  crop  (1482):  Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  Schleswig-
Holsteinische  Geschichte,  XLV  (191 5),  199.

113.  Ayenbite  of  Inwyt,  ed.  Morris,  1866,  p.  40  (a  translation  of  the
Somme  des  Vices  et  des  Vertus  of  Frere  Lorens,  1279).  Abuse  of  chalices,
chrism,  etc.,  is  also  mentioned  (pp.  40-41).


470        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

114.  Herbert,  III,  643,  §  22;  cf.  Ill,  547,  §  91.  See  also  Etienne  de
Bourbon,  pp.  328-329;  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  p.  388.

115.  Chronicle  of  the  Grey  Friars,  ed.  Nicholas  (Camden  Society,  LIII),
pp.  35-36;  Grey  Friars  Chronicle,  Monumenta  Franciscana,  ed.  Hewlett,
II,  195.  Cf.  Schweizerisches  Archiv  fiir  Volkskunde,  XII  (1908),  143-148;
P.  de  I'Ancre,  L'Incredulite  et  Mescreance  du  Sortilege,  1622,  pp.  668-
672;  Summers,  The  Geography  of  Witchcraft,  1927,  pp.  184,  444-445.

116.  Act  Books  of  the  Archdeaconry  Court  of  Lewes,  Sussex  Archaeo-
logical Collections,  XLIX  (1906),  50.  Cf.  Cranmer,  Miscellaneous  Writings
and  Letters,  ed.  Cox  (Parker  Society),  1846,  p.  66.

117.  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,  6th  Series,  IX  (1909),  106;  Gloucester-
shire Notes  and  Queries,  III  (1887),  228;  Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),  444-445
Hunt,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  213.  Cf.  Sey"
farth,  Aberglaube  und  Zauberei  in  der  Volksmedizin  Sachsens,  1913,  pps
273-274.  Martin  Plantsch  (Opusculum  de  Sagis  Maleficis,  1507,  sig.  b  v,
If.  2  v°)  speaks  of  the  magical  employment  of  masses,  the  eucharist,  bap-
tismal water,  and  holy  wax.

118.  Leechdoms,  III,  14,  24;  II,  344-346,  35°-

119.  Wilkins,  Concilia,  I,  576.  Cf.  Canon  20  of  the  Fourth  Lateran
Council  (a.d.  1215),  Mansi,  Concilia,  XXII  (1778),  1007.  See  also  A.
Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  I,  53;  the  Same,  Die  Messe,
1902,  pp.  92-93.

120.  Wilkins,  II,  139.

121.  F.  Bond,  Fonts  and  Font  Covers,  1908,  pp.  281-313;  English
Historical  Review,  XXVI  (191 1),  110-116  (1342);  Peacock,  English
Church  Furniture,  1866,  pp.  178-179;  Acts  of  Chapter  of  the  Collegiate
Church  of  SS.  Peter  and  Wilfrid,  Ripon,  ed.  Fowler  (Surtees  Society,
LXIV),p.  222;  J.  C.  Cox,  Churchwardens' Accounts,  [1913,]  pp.  151-152;
records  of  visitations  in  Raine,  The  Fabric  Rolls  of  York  Minster  (Sur-
tees Society,  XXXV),  pp.  247,254,258,  260,  272,  cf.  243;  Archaeologia,
X  (1791),  206-207,  222;  XLI  (1867),  339,  note;  Archaeologia  ^liana,
3d  Series,  XVIII  (1921),  49;  Archaeologia  Cantiana,  XXXII  (1917),  148,
149,  162;  XXXIII  (1918),  73,  82,  88,  89;  Kent  Records,  [I,]  1912,  23;
The  Reliquary  and  Illustrated  Archaeologist,  XIV  (1908),  208-212,  272-
273;  The  Western  Antiquary,  II  (1883),  155;  County  Folk-Lore,  V  (1908),
127-128;  Frere  and  Kennedy,  Visitation  Articles  and  Injunctions  (Alcuin
Club,  XV),  1910,  11,387.

122.  Lyndewoode,  Constitutiones  Provinciales,  iii,  ist  ed.,  ca.  1480,  sig.
Giiij,  If.  3  r°  (ed.  1679,  iii,  25,  p.  247).

123.  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  v,  3,  ed.  1545,  fol.  xxv  v°  (ed.  1592,  pp.
47-48);  X,  16,  ed.  1545,  fol.  lij  r°  (ed.  1592,  x,  15,  pp.  161-162).

124.  See  pp.  76,  82,  147-148,  above.

125.  Grillando,  ed.  1545,  iii,  K,  fol.  xxj  v°  (ed.  1592,  iii,  20,  p.  31);  ed.
1545,  X,  18,  fol.  lij  v°  (ed.  1592,  X,  16,  p.  163).

126.  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  VIII  (1854),  617  (cf.  VI  [1852],  50);
2d  Series,  I  (1856),  331;  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,  6th  Series,  IX  (1909),
106;  3d  Series,  II  (1856),  185;  Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883,  pp.  174-175;


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VII


Hunt,  Popular  Romances  of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  212;  Hender-
son, pp.  113-114;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  pp.  192-193;
Bye-Gones  for  1 897-1 898,  p.  389;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-
Lore,  1 913,  p.  244,  cf.  p.  245;  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  etc.,  of  the
North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,  191 1,  p.  134;  Hewett,  Nummits  and
Crummits,  1900,  p.  72;  County  Folk-Lore,  I,  No.  2  (1893),  p.  18.  Cf.
W.  H.  B.  Saunders,  Legends  and  Traditions  of  Huntingdonshire,  1888,
pp.  274-275;  Chr.  Wordsworth,  Yorkshire  Arch^ological  Journal,  XVII
(1903),  386.  Cf.  A.  Franz,  Die  Messe,  p.  87.

127.  Brockett,  A  Glossary  of  English  North  Country  Words,  1825,
p.  219;  Bye-Gones  for  1903-04,  p.  46;  The  Essex  Review,  V  (1896),  160;
Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883,  p.  173;  A.  L.  Humphreys,  The  Materials  for
the  History  of  the  Town  of  Wellington,  1889,  p.  247;  County  Folk-Lore,
I,  No.  2  (1893),  p.  23;  Leather,  The  Folk-Lore  of  Herefordshire,  1912,
p.  81;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  p.  247;  Poison,
Our  Highland  Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  p.  34;  Thomas,  Kentucky  Super-
stitions, 1920,  pp.  115-116;  Clague,  Manx  Reminiscences,  [191 1,]  p.  153;
Bergen,  Current  Superstitions,  1896,  pp.  99-100;  Nicholson,  Folk  Lore
of  East  Yorkshire,  1890,  p.  88.  Cf.  Homilia  de  Sacrilegiis,  ed.  Caspari,
1886,  p.  11;  Siebourg,  Bonner  Jahrbiicher,  CIII  (1898),  130,  and  (for
eye  amulets)  CXVIII  (1909),  158-175.

128.  Letters  of  Eminent  Men  addressed  to  Ralph  Thoresby,  1832,  11,
196.  Cf.  Notes  and  Queries,  9th  Series,  V  (1900),  104.

129.  Cowper,  Hawkshead,  1899,  pp.  316-317.

130.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  X  (1878),  102.  Cf.  Bang,
Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  p.  179.

131.  F.  K.  Robinson,  A  Glossary  of  Words  used  in  the  Neighbourhood
of  Whitby,  1876,  p.  35.

132.  Bye-Gones  for  1874-75,  pp.  222,  286;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shrop-
shire Folk-Lore,  p.  191.

133.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  136,  138;  Leonhardi,  p.  42.  Cf.
Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  p.  181  (filings  from  a  church  bell).

134.  For  the  Office  for  Consecrating  Cramp  Rings  see  Burnet,  The  His-
tory of  the  Reformation,  II  (1681),  Collection,  pp.  295-297,  cf.  p.  294,
and  see  p.  321  of  the  text;  Pegge,  Curialia  Miscellanea,  1818,  pp.  164-
172;  The  Antiquarian  Magazine,  IV  (1883),  293-297.  Cf.  Archaeological
Journal,  XXI  (1864),  103-113,  188;  Archseologia,  XXI  (1827),  121-124;
Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIII,  XII,  ii,  No.  272,  p.  114;  XX,  i.  No.
542,  p.  256;  Tymms,  Wills  and  Inventories  (Camden  Society,  XLIX),
pp.  41,  248;  Collier's  Dodsley's  Old  Plays,  X,  212,  and  note;  W.Jones,
Finger-Ring  Lore,  1 877, 1 898,  pp.  1 62-1 65,  522-526;  Boorde,  Introduction
to  Knowledge,  ed.  Furnivall,  1870,  p.  121.


472         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


CHAPTER  VIII
Wind  and  Weather

1.  Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  vii,  202.  With  what  Medea  says  of  the  moon
(vii,  207-208)  compare  the  prohibition  of  attempts  by  shouts  and  sor-
ceries to  relieve  the  moon  in  eclipse:  Excarpsus  Ecgberti,  viii,  3  (Haddan
and  Stubbs,  III,  424;  Schmitz,  II,  667);  Pseudo-Theodore,  xvii,  25
(Thorpe,  p.  293).  Cf.  Schmitz,  II,  423,  496;  Homilia  de  Sacrilegiis,  ed.
Caspari,  1886,  pp.  10,  30-32.

2.  Agobard,  Opera,  ed.  Baluze,  I  (1666),  162-163.

3.  Schmitz,  Die  Bussbiicher,  I,  308-309;  II,  425,  495.  Cf.  Council  of
Paris  (a.d.  829),  iii,  2,  Mansi,  Concilia,  XIV,  595.

4.  For  wizardry  in  rain,  hail,  storm,  and  mist,  see  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirch-
lichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  12-123;  W.  J.  Humphreys,  Rain  Making
and  other  Weather  Vagaries,  1926;  Burdick,  Magic  and  Husbandry,
1905,  pp.  91-120;  Fehrle,  Antike  Hagelzauber  (from  the  Geoponica),
Alemannia,  XL  (1912),  13-27;  Seneca,  Naturales  Quaestiones,  iv,  6-7;
Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  I  (1875),  524-533;  III  (1878),  178-
183;  Uhland,  Schriften  zur  Geschichte  der  Dichtung  und  Sage,  VI  (1868),
378,  382-383,  385-386,  388,  394-395>  397,  403-404,  409,  411-413;  Frazer,
The  Golden  Bough,  3d  ed.,  I  (191 1),  247-31 1,  319-321 ;  Hansen,  Quellen,
index,  s.  v.  Welterzauher\  Weinhold,  Zur  Geschichte  des  Heidnischen  Ritus
(Berlin  Academy,  Abhandlungen,  1896),  pp.  20-26;  Soldan  and  Heppe,
Geschichte  der  Hexenprocesse,  ed.  Bauer,  index,  s.  v.  Wettermachen\  Mann-
hardt,  Wald-  und  Feldkulte,  2d  ed.,  I  (1904),  214-216,  Z'^l'Z'iZ-,  553-554;
U.  Jahn,  Die  Deutschen  Opfergebrauche  bei  Ackerbau  und  Viezucht,  1 884,
pp.  <;4-62  (especially  on  spells  against  bad  weather);  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.
159-160,  302-203;  Corrector,  §  194  (Schmitz,  II,  452);  Malleus  Malefica-
rum,  Pt.  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  11  (ed.  1620,  pp.  222-223),  ^^P-  ^3  (PP-  237-238),
and  cap.  15  (pp.  243-247);  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1592,  vi,  17,  pp.
75-76;  Boaistuau,  Histoires  Prodigieuses,  1568,  chap.  8,  fol.  29  v°;  Ulrich
Molitoris,  De  Pythonicis  Mulieribus,  cap.  7  (in  1620  ed.  of  Malleus,  II,
53-59);  B.  Pererius,  De  Magia,  i,  6,  1598,  p.  32;  Guaccius,  Compendium
Maleficarum,  1608,  i,  7,  pp.  22-24;  G.  Freygang,  Disputatio  Physica  de
Magis  Tempestates  Cientibus,  1676;  Erasmus  Francisci,  Der  Hollische
Proteus,  2d  ed.,  1695,  pp.  916-917;  Roger  Williams,  A  Key  into  the
Language  of  America,  1643,  chap.  28,  p.  170  (ed.  Trumbull,  p.  195,  and
note);  Dalyell,  The  Darker  Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,  pp.  242-
257,  574-575;  Mackinlay,  Folklore  of  Scottish  Lochs  and  Springs,  1923,
pp.  213-229  (weather  and  wells);  Temme,  Die  Volkssagen  der  Altmark,
1839,  p.  92;  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri  (Schriften  der  Schweizerischen
Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XVIII),  I  (1926),  1 10-125,  135-136,  143-
I45,  242-243;  Rosen,  Bulgarische  Volksdichtungen,  1879,  p.  53;  Archivio
per  lo  Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  XVIII  (1899),  57-63;  Rivista
delle  Tradizioni  Popolari  Italiane,  I  (1893),  75-77,  389-391;  Biblioteca  de
lasTradiciones  Populares  Espanolas,  I  (1883),  233;  Gentleman's  Magazine,
January,  1763,  XXXIII,  12-15;  Melusine,  II  (1884-85),  184-189,  205-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VIII


473


206,  237-238,  etc.;  Samter,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  XXI  (1922),
317-339  (cf.  IX  [1906],  518-520);  Codrington,  The  Melanesians,  1891,
pp.  200-202;  Ivens,  Melanesians  of  the  South-East  Solomon  Islands,  1927,
pp.  325-328;  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  1910,
pp.  119,  174,  180-181,  291,  295,  643,^  697,  735  (cf.  p.  645);  Home  and
Aiston,  Savage  Life  in  Central  Australia,  1924,  pp.  1 10-120  (with  figures),
147-148;  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  1900,  pp.  107-109;  Ribbe,  Zwei  Jahre
unter  den  Kannibalen  der  Salomo-Inseln,  1903,  pp.  173-174;  Statham,
Through  Angola,  1922,  p.  200  (with  figure);  Le  Barbier,  Bulletin  de  I'Aca-
demie  Malgache,  New  Series,  III  (1922),  85;  Pechuel-Loesche,  Volkskunde
von  Loango,  1907,  pp.  447-449;  T.  N.  Goddard,  The  Handbook  of  Sierra
Leone,  1925,  p.  56;  Capello  and  Ivens,  From  Benguella  to  the  Territory  of
Yacca,  1882,  I,  251-252;  Talbot,  In  the  Shadow  of  the  Bush,  1912,  pp.
71-73;  J.  H.  Weeks,  Among  Congo  Cannibals,  1913,  pp.  280-281;  Roscoe,
The  Northern  Bantu,  1915,  pp.  181-184;  the  Same,  The  Bakitara,  1923,
pp.  28-34;  the  Same,  The  Banyankole,  1923,  pp.  31-32;  the  Same,  The
Bagesu,  1924,  p.  60;  Hobley,  Bantu  Beliefs  and  Magic,  1922,  p.  192;
Boyes,  A  White  King  in  East  Africa,  191 2,  pp.  142-144,  155-156;  Tauxier,
Le  Noir  de  Bandoukou,  1921,  pp.  179,  184;  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the
Bori,  pp.  185-193;  Dornan,  Pygmies  and  Bushmen  of  the  Kalahari,  1925,
pp.  291-292,  300;  A.  C.  Hollis,  The  Nandi,  1909,  p.  52;  Hans  Meyer,  Die
Barundi,  1916,  p.  133;  Driberg,  The  Lango,  1923,  pp.  243-263;  Dundas,
Kilimanjaro  and  its  People,  1924,  pp.  167-169;  Meek,  The  Northern
Tribes  of  Nigeria,  1925,  II,  63-68;  D.  R.  MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden
Konde,  1925,  pp.  206-214;  Atlantis,  VII  (1924),  42-43,  131-133  (Sudan);
Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  XLIX  (1919),  52-73;  Marco
Polo,  ed.  Pauthier,  1865,  chap.  48,  I,  125-126  (Yule,  i,  31,  ed.  1903,  I,
166);  chap.  74,  I,  227-228,  231-232  (Yule,  i,  61,  I,  301-303);  chap.  184,
II,  675-676  (Yule,  iii,  32,  II,  407;  see  also  note  in  Yule,  I,  309-311);
Andrew  Battell,  Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  Glasgow  ed.,  VI  (1905),  394  (ed.
Ravenstein,  Hakluyt  Society,  2d  Ser.,  VI,  46-47);  Maddox,  The  Medicine
Man,  1923,  pp.  139-145;  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern
India,  1926,  pp.  69-80,  258,  406-407;  The  Imperial  and  Asiatic  Quarterly
Review,  3d  Series,  XIII  (1902),  353,  360;  XVII  (1904),  140;  Bureau  of
Ethnology,  Report  XI  (for  1889-90),  1894,  pp.  76-86,  91-97,  loi-iii,
113-116,  123-130;  Report  XXXV  (for  1913-14),  1921,  pp.  620-637;  von
Andrian-Werburg,  Prahistorisches  und  Ethnologisches,  1915,  pp.  160-224.

5.  Ecgbert,  iv,  14  (Haddan  and  Stubbs,  Councils,  III,  420;  Schmitz,
II,  664);  Pseudo-Cummean,  vii  (ix),  8  (Schmitz,  II,  627);  Pseudo-
Theodore,  xxvii,  21  (Thorpe,  p.  293).

6.  Schmitz,  I,  308,  460;  II,  181,  238,  296,  321,  324,  328,  335,  342,  368,
377.  Cf.  Lea,  A  History  of  the  Inquisition,  1888,  III,  414-415.

7.  Lex  Visigothorum,  vi,  2,  3  (4),  Monumenta,  Leges,  Sect.  I,  I  (1902),
259;  Capitulary  of  789,  cap.  64  (Pertz,  Leges,  I,  64).

8.  Bede,  Historia  Ecclesiastica,  i,  17.

9.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  388-391;  Wiilker,  Bibliothek,  I,  328-
330;  II,  202-203;  Schlutter,  Anglia,  XXXI  (1908),  58-62;  Grendon,
Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXII  (1909),  176-179  (cf.  220-221);


474


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Skemp,  Modern  Language  Review,  VI  (191 1),  296-298.  Cf.  A.  Franz,  Die
Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  268-271;  Leechdoms,  I,  302,  308,
326.

10.  Herbarium,  176,  Leechdoms,  I,  308;  cf.  I,  302  (peony),  326
(badger's  teeth  as  amulet).

11.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Vita  et  Miraculis  S.  Godrici,  ed.  Stevenson
(Surtees  Society,  XX),  cap.  128,  p.  253.  Compare  the  fighting  storm-
demons  in  1256:  Thomas  Cantipratensis,  Liber  Apum  aut  de  Apibus,  ii,
57,  3,  ed.  Paris,  ca.  15 10,  fol.  Ixxxi]  r°.

12.  P.  B.  Watson,  Marcus  Aurelius  Antoninus,  1884,  pp.  195-198  (with
discussion  and  full  references).

13.  Kromer,  De  Origine  et  Rebus  Gestis  Polonorum,  viii,  ed.  Basel,
1568,  p.  143  (Polonicae  Historiae  Corpus,  1582,  II,  540).  Cf.  Guagnino,
Compendium  Chronicorum  Poloniae,  Corpus,  1582,  II,  353;  Ricardus
Argentinus  (Argentine),  De  Praestigiis  et  Incantationibus  Daemonum  et
Necromanticorum,  1568,  pp.  108-109.

14.  Fabyan,  ed.  1559,  II,  ';o4  (ed.  Ellis,  p.  661):  "Of  the  mistes  and
other  impedimentes,  whiche  fell  vppon  the  lordes  partie,  by  reason  of  the
incantations,  wroughte  by  Frere  Bungey,  as  the  fame  then  wente,  me  list
not  to  write."

15.  Saxo  Grammaticus,  vii,  p.  324  Miiller  and  Velschow  (p.  219  Holder).

16.  Svmeon  of  Durham,  Historia  Regum,  ed.  Hinde  (Surtees  Society,
LI),  I,  17.

17.  Radulfus  Niger,  Chronicon  II,  ed.  Anstruther  (Caxton  Society),
P-  173-

18.  Letter  of  Bishop  Gunther  of  Cologne,  Annales  Fuldenses  (Recueil,
VII,  166);  Annales  Bertiniani  (VII,  72).

19.  Chronicle  of  the  Grey  Friars,  ed.  Nichols,  p.  3;  Grey  Friars
Chronicle,  Monumenta  Franciscana,  ed.  Howlett,  II,  146;  Kingsford,
Chronicles  of  London,  p.  3;  Chronicle  of  London,  1827,  p.  10.

20.  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Luard,  III,  216-217.

21.  Chronicle  of  London,  1827,  p.  65;  Gregory's  Chronicle,  Gairdner,
The  Historical  Collections  of  a  Citizen  of  London,  p.  86.  For  this  portent
of  the  devil's  showing  himself  to  wayfarers  ct.  Radulfus  Niger,  ed.  An-
struther, p.  163;  Eulogium  Historiarum,  ed.  Haydon,  III,  51;  Brut,  ed.
Brie,  p.  313.

22.  John  of  Reading,  ed.  Tait,  1914,  p.  167.

23.  Brut,  ed.  Brie,  pp.  477-478.  The  chronicler  goes  on  to  tell  of  the
prosecution  of  Dame  Eleanor  Cobham  (cf.  p.  482).  See  pp.  81  ff.,  above.

24.  Rushworth,  Historical  Collections,  I  (1659),  391.

25.  Diary  of  William  Whiteway,  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  History
and  Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XIII  (1892),  69.

26.  Brut,  ed.  Brie,  p.  487.

27.  Hale,  p.  37:  "Ipsa  dixit,  quod  si  mandaverit  pluviam  pluere,  ad
mandatum  ejus  pluit."

28.  The  Official  Papers  of  Sir  Nathaniel  Bacon,  ed.  H.  W.  Saunders
(Camden  3d  Series,  XXVI),  pp.  31-32.   Cf.  (for  fire)  Baxter,  The  Cer-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VIII


475


tainty  of  the  Worlds  of  Spirits,  1691,  p.  55;  Relation  of  the  Most  Remark-
able Proceedings  at  the  Late  Assizes  at  Northampton,  1674,  pp.  5-6.

29.  Fuller,  Church-History,  Bk.  ix  (1655),  i6th  Century,  i,  46,  p.  71.
See  also  W.  Sparrow  Simpson,  Documents  Illustrating  the  History  of  St.
Paul's  Cathedral  (Camden  Society,  New  Series,  XXVI),  pp.  xxxvii-
xxxix;  Strype,  Annals  of  the  Reformation,  I  (1725),  260-262,  268.

30.  An  Addicion  with  an  Appologie  to  the  Causes  of  Brinnynge  of
Paules  Church  (in  The  Burnynge  of  Paules  Church  .  .  .  in  .  .  .  i';6i,
London,  i563[-4],  sig.  Aiii  r°:  A  Confutacion  follows,  commonly  ascribed
to  Pilkington).

31.  See  Cotton  Mather,  The  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  Boston,
i693>  P-  19-

32.  Sir  Richard  Baker  (1588-1645),  Chronicle,  ed.  1653,  p.  237,  from
Walsingham,  Historia  Anglicana,  ed.  Riley,  II,  249-250.

33.  Annales  in  Riley's  ed.  of  Johannes  de  Trokelowe,  p.  340.

34.  Cf.  Sir  Thomas  Browne,  account  of  a  thunderstorm  at  Norwich  in
1665  (Works,  ed.  Wilkin,  1852,  III,  341).

35.  Chronicon  Guillelmi  de  Nangiaco,  Recueil,  XX,  726.

36.  Walsingham,  II,  250;  Annales  in  Riley's  Trokelowe,  p.  341.

37.  Walsingham,  II,  250-251 ;  Annales,  as  above,  pp.  343-344;  Cap-
grave,  Chronicle  of  England,  ed.  Hingeston,  p.  279.

38.  The  Chronicle  of  Ihon  Hardyng  in  Metre,  ed.  1543,  chap.  202,  fol.
cc  v°;  ed.  Ellis,  181 2,  pp.  359-360.

39.  Shrewsbury  Chronicle,  Transactions  Shropshire  Archaeological  and
Natural  History  Society,  ist  Series,  III  (1880),  255;  Owen  and  Blakeway,
A  History  of  Shrewsbury,  1825,  II,  269.

40.  Cf.  Remigius  (Remi),  Daemonolatreia,  i,  27,  ed.  1595,  pp.  166-168
(ed.  1596,  pp.  158-159).

41.  A  Straunge  and  Terrible  Wunder,  [1577,]  reprint  of  1820,  pp.  11-
14.  See  J.  Harvey  Bloom,  English  Tracts,  I,  80,  who  gives  a  facsimile  of
the  title-page  (with  a  picture  of  the  dog).  See  Holinshed's  Chronicle,  IV
(1808),  344,  which  ascribes  the  damage  to  lightning  and  ignores  the  ap-
parition. Cf.  Stow,  ed.  1592,  pp.  1 1 65-1 1 66.  The  parish  register,  1577,
records  the  burial  of  "John  Fuller  and  Adam  Walker  slayne  in  the  tempest,
in  the  belfry,  in  the  tyme  of  prayer,  upon  the  Lord's  day,  y^  iiij*  of  Au-
gust" (Suckling,  The  History  and  Antiquities  of  Suffolk,  I,  1 26) .

42.  That  is,  "black,  swarthy,"  like  the  charcoal-burners  of  Croydon.
Cf.  Richard  Edwards,  Damon  and  Pithias  (Collier's  Dodsley,  I,  240):

Byr  ladie,  you  are  of  good  complexion,
A  right  Croyden  sanguine.

43.  J.  G.  Nichols,  Narratives  of  the  Days  of  the  Reformation,  p.  51.

44.  Annales  Bertiniani,  Recueil,  VII,  72.

45.  A  Second  Relation,  etc.,  1638,  reprinted  in  Harleian  Miscellany,  ed.
Park,  III  (1809),  220-228;  John  Prince,  Danmonii  Orientalis  Illustres  or
The  Worthies  of  Devon,  1701  (ed.  1810,  pp.  569-572);  Increase  Mather,
Illustrious  Providences,  Boston,  1684,  pp.  123-124.

46.  Bray,  Traditions,  etc.,  of  Devonshire,  1838,  I,  310-314.  Cf.  Torr,
Small  Talk  at  Wreyland,  191 8,  pp.  12-13.


476


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


47.  Prince,  p.  570.

48.  Wriothesley's  Chronicle,  ed.  Hamilton  (Camden  Society,  New-
Series,  XI),  I,  61.

49.  Wier,  ii,  19,  ed.  1568,  p.  203;  iii,  16,  pp.  262-273;  ii',  34,  P-  329;
cf.  V,  36,  pp.  561-562.

50.  Scot,  i,  I,  pp.  1-3  (1-2),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  1-3.  Cf.  iii,  9,  p.  55
(45),  43;  iii,  13,  pp.  60-63  (48-50),  47-49.  Andrew  Borde  is  more  conser-
vative: "With  out  any  doute,  in  thunderynge  and  in  lyghtenynge  and
tempestious  wethers  many  euyl  thynges  hath  ben  sene  and  done,"  he  tells
us,  and  he  adds,  "Of  all  those  aforesayde  thynges,  a  whorlewynde  I  do
not  loue":  Breuyary  of  Helth,  chap.  183,  ed.  1 552,  fol.  Ixv  v°,  in  Furnivall's
ed.  of  Borde's  Introduction  to  Knowledge,  etc.,  1870,  p.  75.  Frederick,
Duke  of  Wiirttemberg,  who  visited  England  in  1592,  remarks  in  his  Baden-
fahrt,  1602,  "Vil  Hexen  werden  darinnen  gefunden,  und  beschicht  offter-
mahln  durch  Hagel  unnd  ander  Ungewitter  grosser  Schaden"  (W.  B.  Rye,
England  as  Seen  by  Foreigners,  1865,  p.  50).

51.  J.  Charles  Cox,  Churchwardens'  Accounts,  1913,  pp.  212-213.
bells  as  a  protection  against  demons,  witches,  lightning,  etc.,  see  Duran-
dus,  Rationale  Divinorum  Officiorum,  i,  4,  Venice,  1589,  fol.  13  v°  (he  was
Bishop  of  Metz,  1 237-1 296);  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,
1909,  II,  40-43;  Calfhill,  An  Aunswere  to  the  Treatise  of  the  Crosse,  1565,
ed.  Gibbings,  Parker  Society,  pp.  15,  17;  The  Reliquary,  XXII  (1881-82),
10;  MS.  Cotton,  Nero  Dili,  fol.  246  (quoted  by  Macray  in  his  edition  of
Chronicon  Abbatiae  de  Evesham,  p.  297,  note  i);  Hooper,  Early  Writings,
ed.  Carr  (Parker  Society),  1843,  p.  197  (cf.  p.  533);  Pilkington,  Works,
ed.  Scholefield,  Parker  Society,  1842,  pp.  177,  536;  Wier,  De  Praestigiis
Daemonum_,ed.  1568,1,  8,  pp.  53-54;  v,  3,  p.  453;  v,  19,  p.  513;  Binsfeld,
De  Confessionibus  Maleficorum  et  Sagarum,  1591,  pp.  339-346;  Guazzo
(Guaccius),  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  pp.  244-245;  Remy  (Remi-
gius),  Daemonolatreia,  1596,  i,  26,  pp.  1 51-156;  Aubrey,  Miscellanies,  4th
ed.,  1857,  p.  141;  Fuller,  Church-History,  vi,  6,  ed.  1656,  pp.  300-301  (ed.
1837,  II,  194-195);  Sir  J.  M.  Campbell,  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XXIV
(1895),  1 21-124;  Cambridge  Antiquarian  Society,  Octavo  Publications,
XVIII,  2d  ed.  (1881),  121;  William  Robinson,  The  History  and  Antiqui-
ties of  the  Parish  of  Tottenham,  2d  ed.,  1840,  II,  28;  Dawson,  History  of
Skipton,  1882,  p.  384;  FreisaufF,  Salzburger  Volkssagen,  1880,  pp.  498-
500;  Birlinger,  Volksthumliches  aus  Schwaben,  I  (1861),  146-151,  322;
Liitolf,  Sagen,  Brauche  und  Legenden  aus  den  Fiinf  Orten,  Lucern  u.s.w.,
1865,  p.  41;  Rochholz,  Schweizersagen  aus  dem  Aargau,  1856,  II,  378;
Baumgarten,  Aus  der  Volksmassigen  Ueberlieferung  der  Heimat,  Linz,
1864,  I,  67;  Chapiseau,  Le  Folk-Lore  de  la  Beauce  et  du  Perche,  1902,  I,
208-209.  Cf.  E.  von  Lasaulx,  Das  Pelasgische  Orakel  des  Zeus  zu  Dodona,
1840,  pp.  12-13;  O.  Jahn,  Ueber  den  Aberglauben  des  Bosen  Blicks  bei  den
Alten,  p.  79;  Kitching,  On  the  Backwaters  of  the  Nile,  1912,  p.  264.

52.  The  Pontifical  of  Egbert,  Archbishop  of  York,  a.d.  732-766,  ed.
Greenwell  (Surtees  Society,  XXVII),  p.  118.

53.  Shrewsbury  Chronicle,  Transactions  Shropshire  Archaeological  and
Natural  History  Society,  ist  Series,  III  (1880),  255.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VIII


477


54.  See  pp.  207-209,  above.

55.  Wycherley's  confession,  Nichols,  Narratives  of  the  Days  of  the
Reformation  (Camden  Society,  LXXVII),  pp.  332-^23-  Barron  was  one
of  the  fiends  conjured  by  Gilles  de  Rais  in  the  fifteenth  century  (Bossard
and  de  Maulde,  Gilles  de  Rais,  2d  ed.,  1886,  pp.  xxii,  xxvi,  xlvi,  li-liii,
Ixix-lxxii).

56.  Aubrey,  Brief  Lives,  ed.  Clark,  1898,  I,  212.

57.  Transactions  Lancashire  and  Cheshire  Antiquarian  Society,
XXXIV  (1917),  82-84.  Compare  the  raising  of  the  devil  at  Burnley  Gram-
mar School  (Harland  and  Wilkinson,  Lancashire  Folk-Lore,  1867,  p.  83),
as  well  as  the  experiences  of  the  schoolboys  at  Mousey  Lea  (Middleton,
Annals  of  Hyde  and  District,  1899,  p.  173)  and  of  Dr.  Lickbarrow's  ser-
vant (J.  SuUivan,  Cumberland  and  Westmorland,  1857,  pp.  150-151).
These  anecdotes  look  like  faint  reflections  of  the  folk-tale  known  as  "The
Magician's  Apprentice"  (Lucian,  Philopseudes,  34-36,  ed.  Reitz,  III,
61-63);      Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  XXVI  (1911),  6-8.

58.  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  74.  See  also  Bovet,  Pandaemonium,  1684,
pp.  89-90.

59.  John  Heydon,  Psonthonphanchia,  1664,  p.  86;  Mr.  William  Lilly's
History  of  his  Life  and  Times,  2d  ed.,  17 15,  p.  16  (storm  of  wind  after
Simon  Forman's  death);  Henry  More,  An  Antidote  against  Atheism,  iii,
9,  Philosophical  Writings,  4th  ed.,  1712,  p.  115;  Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore
of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  p.  136;  Wilkinson  and  Tattersall,
Memories  of  Hurstwood,  1889,  p.  51;  Halifax  Antiquarian  Society  Papers,
1904-5,  p.  4.

60.  Melusine,  IV  (1888-89),  13;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,
IV  (1894),  81;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreichische  Volkskunde,  IV  (1898),  151.
See  Herzog,  Hessische  Blatter  fiir  Volkskunde,  XXV  (1927),  223.

61.  Radulphus  de  Coggeshall,  ed.  Stevenson,  p.  184.

62.  Matthew  Paris,  Historia  Anglorum,  ed.  Madden,  I,  249-250.

63.  Rishanger,  ed.  Riley,  p.  35.

64.  Hancock,  The  Parish  of  Selworthy,  1897,  pp.  234,  236;  Wilkinson
and  Tattersall,  Memories  of  Hurstwood,  1889,  p.  51;  Gregor,  Folk-Lore
of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  p.  136;  F.  K.  Robinson,  A  Glossary
of  Words  used  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Whitby,  1876,  p.  xxii;  Krauss,
Slavische  Volkforschungen,  1908,  p.  70;  Fossel,  Volksmedicin  und  Medi-
cinischer  Aberglaube  in  Steiermark,  1886,  p.  171.

65.  Higden,  Polychronicon,  i,  44  (with  Trevisa's  translation),  ed.  Bab-
ington,  II,  43;  Harrison,  The  Description  of  Britaine,  in  Holinshed,  I
(1807),  66.  Cf.  Skattegraveren,  I  (1884),  24-25.

66.  Scheffer,  Lapponia,  1674,  pp.  144-145;  Fritzner,  Historisk  Tids-
skrift,  Christiania,  ist  Series,  IV  (1877),  200-202;  Krohn,  Finnisch-
Ugrische  Forschungen,  VI  (1906),  173-175;  Kalevala,  translated  by
Schiefner,  1852,  x,  159-184,  pp.  48-49;  Bugge,  The  Home  of  the  Eddie
Poems,  translated  by  Schofield,  1899,  pp.  355-357;  Blefken,Islandia,  1607,
pp.  31,  70-71  (Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  Glasgow  ed.,  XIII  [1906],  498,  518-
519);  Gomme,  Ethnology  in  Folklore,  1892,  pp.  48-49;  Uhland,  Schriften,
VI  (1868),  403-404;  Hibbert,  A  Description  of  the  Shetland  Islands,  1822,


47^         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


p.  579;  Mackinlay,  Folklore  of  Scottish  Lochs  and  Springs,  1893,  pp.  219-
220;  J.  H.  Dixon,  Gairloch,  1886,  pp.  168-169;  Celtic  Magazine,  XIII
(1888),  93-94;  Old-Lore  Miscellany  of  Orkney,  etc.,  VIII  (1920),  2-4;
Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  pp.  73,  121-122;  Melusine,
II  (1884-85),  184;  Giles  Fletcher,  Of  the  Russe  Common  Wealth,  chap.
20,  1 591,  fol.  77.  Cf.  W.  P.  Bennett,  The  Sky-Sifter,  pp.  152-153;  Lovett,
Magic  in  Modern  London,  1925,  p.  40.

67.  Havamal,  sts.  152-154  (Bugge,  Norroen  Fornkvse'Si,  1867,  pp.  62-
63).  Cf.  Grogaldr,  sts.  11-12  (Bugge,  p.  341).

68.  Saxo  Grammaticus,  bk.  v,  p.  192  Miiller  and  Velshow  (p.  128  Hol-
der); cf.  bk.  i,  p.  53  M.  and  V.  (p.  32  Holder).  There  is  a  handy  compen-
dium of  Saxo's  folk-lore  by  York  Powell  in  Elton's  translation,  1894,  pp.
xxii-xcvii.  Cf.  Cockayne,  Leechdoms,  I,  xlvii-liii;  Gering,  Ueber  Weis-
sagung  and  Zauber  im  Nordischen  Altertum,  1902,  pp.  19-20.

69.  Alexander  Roberts,  A  Treatise  of  Witchcraft,  161 6,  p.  21.

70.  Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark,  1656,  p.  116.  Cf.  [N.  Orchard,]  The
Doctrine  of  Devils,  1 676,  p.  92.

71.  See,  for  example.  The  Pedlers  Prophecie,  1595,  sig.  D3,  If.  2  r°;
Middleton  and  Rowley,  The  Spanish  Gypsy,  iv,  3,  ed.  Bullen,  VI,  204;
Middleton,  The  Changeling,  i,  i,  ed.  Bullen,  VI,  6;  Dodsley's  Old  Plays,
ed.  Collier,  IX,  342;  Dodsley's  Old  Plays,  ed.  Hazlitt,  VII,  468;  Thomas
Heywood,  Pearson  ed.,  1874,  IV,  245,  252;  Fletcher,  The  Chances,  v,  3,
34-36,  ed.  Dyce,  VII,  294;  the  Same,  The  Fair  Maid  of  the  Inn,  iv,  2,  X,
79;  Congreve,  Love  for  Love,  iii,  7,  Works,  ed.  1778,  I,  222;  Taylor  the
Water  Poet,  The  Water-Cormorant  his  Complaint,  1622,  sig.  F2  r°
(Workes,  1630,  p.  13);  John  Heydon,  Psonthonphanchia,  1664,  p.  86;
D'Avenant  and  Dryden,  The  Tempest,  iv,  3,  ed.  Scott,  III  (1808),  178;
Dryden,  An  Evening's  Love,  ii,  i,  ed.  Scott,  III,  265;  Oldham,  Satyrs
upon  the  Jesuits,  iv,  5th  ed.,  1697,  p.  79;  Increase  Mather,  An  Essay  for
the  Recording  of  Illustrious  Providences,  Boston,  1684,  pp.  127-128.  See
also  the  commentators  on  Macbeth,  i,  3.  For  winds  sold  in  Wales  see
Trevelyan,  Folk-Lore  and  Folk-Stories  of  Wales,  1909,  pp.  117-118.

72.  Scott's  Diary  in  Lockhart's  Life,  III  (1827),  203-204.

73.  Cf.  Malleus  Maleficarum,  Pt.  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  11,  ed.  1620,  pp.  222-
223;  Wier,  iii,  34,  ed.  1568,  p.  329;  Thiers,  Traite  des  Superstitions,  1741,

74.  More,  An  Antidote  against  Atheisme,  1653,  pp.  111-115.

75.  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  606-607.  Careful
directions  for  raising  whatever  wind  one  may  wish  at  sea  by  means  of  the
angels  are  found  in  a  fifteenth-century  Latin  spell  in  Sloane  MS.  75,  fol.
186  r°.

76.  Linderholm,  De  Stora  Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (191 8),  114,  202-
204,  225.

77.  J.  B.  Baker,  The  History  of  Scarborough,  1882,  pp.  474-475.

78.  Bollettino  Storico  della  Svizzera  Italiana,  VII  (1885),  170.  Cf.
Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  XVIII  (191 5),  589-593.  For  whistling
or  sticking  a  knife  in  the  mast  to  raise  the  wind  see  Gentleman's  Magazine,
January,  1763,  XXXIII,  14-15  (sailors  will  not  whistle);  Poison,  Our


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  VIII


479


Highland  Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  p.  121;  cf.  M.  H.  Bradley,  Caravans
and  Cannibals,  1927,  pp.  73-74  (whistling  for  rain).

79.  Norfolk  Archeology,  V  (1859),  87.  Cf.  Folk-Lore,  XIII  (1902),
431;  Hillen,  History  of  the  Borough  of  King's  Lynn,  II,  850.

80.  Cf.  Thorndike,  A  History  of  Magic  and  Experimental  Science,  1923,
II,  350;  Whittier,  Supernaturalism  of  New  England,  1847,  p.  64  (boats
capsized,  etc.).  In  1610  when  Prince  Henry  visited  Woolwich  to  attend  a
launching,  Mr.  Phineas  Pette,  one  of  King  James's  master  shipwrights,
records  a  shrewd  suspicion:  "The  beginning  of  the  night  was  very  fair,
and  bright  moonshine,  the  moon  being  a  little  past  full;  but  after  mid-
night the  weather  was  sore  overcast,  and  a  very  sore  gust  of  rain,  thunder,
and  lightning,  which  made  me  doubt  that  there  were  some  indirect  work-
ing among  our  enemies  to  dash  our  launching"  (Pette,  Autobiography,
Archaeologia,  XII,  2d  ed.  [1809],  263).  For  a  curious  instance  of  a  bewitched
ship  see  John  Dunton's  Athenian  Mercury,  Vol.  IV,  No.  20  (1691).

81.  The  Examination,  Confession,  Triall,  and  Execution,  of  Joane
Williford,  Joan  Cariden,  and  Jane  Hott,  1645,  pp.  5,  2.  For  the  sinking  of
the  hoy  by  witchcraft  see  A  True  and  Exact  Relation  of  the  Severall  In-
formations, etc.,  of  the  Late  Witches,  1645,  p.  5.

82.  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Discovery  of  Witch-craft,  1648,  p.  24;
Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  I,  235,  237,  254;  Folk-Lore,
XXXIII  (1922),  211  (Isle  of  Skye);  Hibbert,  A  Description  of  the  Shet-
land Islands,  1822,  p.  576.

83.  Linderholm,  De  Stora  Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (191 8),  114,  116,
142-144,  149-154,  158-159-

84.  Picked  up  by  me  on  Cape  Cod.  Cf.  Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore
Heritage,  1926,  p.  122.

85.  Folk-Lore  Record,  IV  (1881),  93.

86.  Csesar  Otway,  Sketches  in  Erris  and  Tyrawly,  1841,  pp.  387-388
(cats  confined  under  metal  pots  to  check  a  storm  or  prevent  fair  wind;
vessel  thus  held  in  port).  For  other  instances  of  ships  detained  by  witch-
craft see  Chapter  XI,  note  105.

87.  Fielding,  A  Voyage  to  Lisbon  (under  July  11),  Works,  1784,  X,  225-
226.

88.  Hussey,  p.  60.  Cf.  Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark,  1656,  p.  1 13 :  "God
claimeth  it  as  his  own  Prerogative  to  send  Lightnings  and  Thunders,  Job
38.  25,  35.  but  they  say,  when  it  Thundereth  or  Lighteneth,  that  Witches
do  sometimes  cause  it,  especially  if  it  be  at  an  Assize  time,  when  many
Witches  are  condemned;  and  what  hath  been  a  more  common  report
than  this,  when  God  hath  sent  thundring  voyces  from  Heaven  at  an  Assize
time  among  the  people,  to  warn  them,  instead  of  discerning  that  God  was
angry,  they  say,  the  Witches  and  the  Devil  was  angry,  and  have  caused
that  thunder.'"


480


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


CHAPTER  IX
The  Witch  in  the  Dairy

I.  For  witchcraft  and  magic  in  the  dairy  see,  for  example,  Hansen,
Quellen,  1901,  pp.  210,  303,  536,  570-572,  589,  597,  605,  607,  612;  Bur-
dick,  Magic  and  Husbandry,  1905,  pp.  86-88,  139-141,  I47;  Grillando,
De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  vi,  10,  foil,  xxx  v°-xxxj  r°  (ed.  1592,  vi,  13,  p.  71);
A  True  and  lust  Recorde  of  the  Information  [etc.]  of  all  the  Witches,
taken  at  S.  Oses  (London,  1582),  sigg.  C4,  If.  4  v°;  E3  v°;  Lercheimer
(Witekind),  Christlich  Bedencken  vnd  Erinnerung  von  Zauberei,  1597,
ed.  Binz,  1888,  pp.  51-52;  Boguet,  Discours  des  Sorciers,  1608,  Chap.  38,
pp.  238-241;  Bodin,  De  la  Demonomanie  des  Sorciers,  1587,  ii,  i,  fol.  59
v°;  iii,  I,  fol.  140  r°;  Carrichter,  in  Glorez,  Neuangeordnete  Vollstandige
Haus-  und  Land-Bibliothec,  Anderes  Cabinet,  1719,  p.  226;  Thiers,
Traite  des  Superstitions,  1741, 1,  153;  Grimm,  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  p.  897;
Blagrave,  Astrological  Practice  of  Physick,  1671,  p.  152;  E.  Mackenzie,
An  Historical  [etc.]  view  of  the  County  of  Northumberland,  1825,  II,  35-
36;  Brand,  Popular  Antiquities,  ed.  Hazlitt,  1870,  III,  74;  F.  K.  Robin-
son, A  Glossary  of  Words  used  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Whitby,  1876,
p.  xxii;  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  I  (1889),  170;  Blakeborough,  Wit,
Character,  Folklore  and  Customs  of  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d
ed.,  I9ii,pp.  169-170;  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  158-159;  County  Folk-Lore,
VII  (1914),  53;  Halifax  Antiquarian  Society  Papers,  1904-5,  p.  7;  Ber-
gen, Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  1899,  pp.  15,  34,  38;  Thomas,  Kentucky
Superstitions,  1920,  pp.  139,  248,  260,  272,  274;  Whitney  and  Bullock,
Folk-Lore  from  Maryland,  1925,  pp.  80-81;  Edmondston,  A  View  of  the
Ancient  and  Present  State  of  the  Zetland  Isles,  1809,  II,  74;  Dalyell,
The  Darker  Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,  pp.  261-265;  The  New
Statistical  Account  of  Scotland,  XV  (1845),  Shetland,  p.  142;  Gregor,
The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  pp.  189-195;  Bev-
eridge,  Cullross  and  Tulliallan,  1885,  II,  113;  John  Cameron,  The  Parish
of  Campsie,  1892,  pp.  82-83;  Wm.  Mackay,  Urquhart  and  Glenmoriston,
1893,  PP-  43i~432;  Nicholson,  Golspie,  1897,  pp.  80-81;  Warrick,  The
History  of  Old  Cumnock,  1899,  pp.  338-339;  Spence,  Shetland  Folk-Lore,
1899,  pp.  139-140;  Maclagan,  Evil  Eye  in  the  Western  Highlands,  1902,
passim;  J.  G.  Campbell,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands
and  Islands  of  Scotland,  1902,  pp.  7-15;  Cowan,  The  Ancient  Capital  of
Scotland,  1904,  II,  131-132;  Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore  Heritage,
1926,  pp.  64-67;  Bottrell,  Traditions  and  Hearthside  Stories  of  West
Cornwall,  1870,  p.  85;  Couch,  The  History  of  Polperro,  1871,  p.  146;
Collections  Historical  and  Archaeological  relating  to  Montgomeryshire,
XV  (1882),  134-135;  A.  W.  Moore,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  Isle  of  Man,
1891,  pp.  84,  100;  Schonbach,  Vienna  Sitzungsberichte,  Philosophisch-
Historische  Classe,  CXLII  (1900),  No.  7,  p.  132;  J.  W.  Wolf,  Nieder-
landische  Volkssagen,  1 843,  pp.  370-37 1 ;  E.  Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten
und  Gebrauche  aus  Schwaben,  1852,  pp.  177-180;  Schambach  and  Miiller,
Niedersachsische  Sagen  und  Marchen,  1855,  pp.   166-167,  175-176;


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IX


481


Schonwerth,  Aus  der  Oberpfalz,  I  (1857),  333-338;  Frischbier,  Hexen-
spruch  und  Zauberbann,  1870,  pp.  7,  8,  14-15,  18-19,  124-125;  Germania,
XXII  (1877),  260-261;  Witzschel,  Sagen,  Sitten  und  Gebrauche  aus
Thuringen  (Kleine  Beitrage,  II),  1878,  pp.  265,  271;  Liebrecht,  Zur  Volks-
kunde,  1879,  p.  353;  von  Schulenburg,  Wendische  Volkssagen  und  Ge-
brauche, 1880,  pp.  157-158,  170;  Pauls,  Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  des
Niederrheins,  XIII  (1898),  211;  Alemannia,  XI  (1883),  92-93;  Am  Urdhs-
Brunnen,  III  (1885-86),  24;  Am  Ur-Quell,  V  (1894),  281-282;  VI  (1896),
loo-ioi,  131-132,  193-194;  N.  F.,  I  (1897),  19-20;  Knoop,  Volkssagen
aus  dem  Oestlichen  Hinterpommern,  1885,  pp.  16-17,  i?!?  Blatter  fiir
Pommersche  Volkskunde,  III  (1895),  150;  IV  (1896),  17-19;  VII  (1899),
23-27;  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  179,  183,  184,  289-290,  319-
320,  340-341;  Neues  Archiv  fiir  Sachsische  Geschichte  und  Alterthums-
kunde,  IX  (1888),  336-337;  Vonbun,  Die  Sagen  Vorarlbergs,  2d  ed.,  1889,
pp.  150-153;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkskunde,  I  (1889),  311;  Zingerle,  Sagen
aus  Tirol,  2d  ed.,  1891,  pp.  234-235,  452-453,  467;  Wuttke,  Der  Deutsche
Volksaberglaube  der  Gegenwart,  ed.  Meyer,  1900,  pp.  158-159,  265-267,
444-450;  Korrespondenzblatt  des  Vereins  fiir  Siebenbiirgische  Landes-
kunde,  XXII  (1899),  63-64;  XXIII  (1900),  92,  147-148;  Deutsche
Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,  IV  (1904),  270-272;  V  (1905),

28-32, 34-35, 39-42,  149;  IX  (1909),  54-56, 61-62;  XI  (191 1),  41-43;

XII  (1912),  35;  John,  Sitte,  Brauch  und  Volksglaube  im  Deutschen  West-
bohmen,  Beitrage  zur  Deutsch-Bohmischen  Volkskunde,  VI  (1905),  321;
Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfiilische  Volkskunde,  II

(1905)  ,  84;   Drechsler,  Sitte,  Brauch  und  Volksglaube  in  Schlesien,  II

(1906)  ,  104-105,  III-II2;  Archiv  fiir  Strafrecht,  LIV  (1907),  134;  Lach-
mann,  Ueberlinger  Sagen,  Brauche  und  Sitten,  1909,  p.  393;  Hessische
Bl  atter  fiir  Volkskunde,  VIII  (1909),  48—51;  Schweizerisches  Archiv  fiir
Volkskunde,  XIV  (1910),  265-266;  Festschrift  Louis  Gauchat,  1926,  pp.
425-427;  Kiihnau,  Schlesische  Sagen,  III  (1913),  54,  57-59,  93-94;  Jeger-
lehner,  Sagen  und  Marchen  aus  dem  Oberwallis,  Schriften  der  Schweizer-
ischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  IX  (1913),  176,  203-204;  Manz,
Volksbrauch  und  Volksglaube  des  Sarganserlandes,  the  same,  XII  (1916),
107,  117;  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri,  I  (1926),  102-106,  241-243,  the
same,  XVIII;  Heberling,  Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  Schleswig-
Holsteinische  Geschichte,  XLV  (1915),  121-122;  Skattegraveren,  IV
(1885),  56;  IX  (1888),  238;  Xi(i888),  14;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,
1901,  pp.  80-81,  85,  90,  105,  132-133,  207,  281,  283-284,  319,  322-323,
3457346,  577;  Nyland,  IV  (1889),  72-73;  Dania,  II  (1892-94),  225-226;
Craigie,  Scandinavian  Folk-Lore,  1896,  pp.  377-380,  387-388;  Kristensen,
Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  94,  285,  292-293,  298,  306-307,  319,  341;  VI,
ii  (1901),  7,  133-134;  Maal  og  Minne,  1913,  p.  46;  Ohrt,  Trylleord  (Dan-
marks  Folkeminder,  No.  25),  1922,  pp.  123-124,  127-128;  Linderholm,
De  Stora  Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (191 8),  127,  229,  244-245,  256;
Hastesko,  Motivverzeichnis  Westfinnischer  Zauberspriiche  (FF  Commu-
nications, II,  No.  19),  1914,  pp.  48,  51 ;  Melusine,  I  (1877),  73;  Chapiseau,
Le  Folk-Lore  de  la  Beauce  et  du  Perche,  1902,  I,  205;  Sudan  Notes  and
Records,  II  (1919),  133;  Westermarck,  Ritual  and  Belief  in  Morocco,  1926,


482         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


I,  249-250;  II,  170;  D.  R.  MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden  Konde,  1925,
pp.  253-254,  258;  Bourke,  Scatalogic  Rites  of  All  Nations,  1891,  pp.  395-
396;  Leland,  Gypsy  Sorcery,  1891,  pp.  144-145.

2.  Boston  Herald,  May  8,  1909.

3.  Pliny,  xxviii,  2,  4,  17.  Cf.  Corrector,  §  103  (Schmitz,  Bussbiicher,  II,
432);  P.  Masse,  De  I'lmposture  et  Tromperie  des  Diables,  1579,  i,  11,  fol.
47;  Journal  and  Proceedings  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  New  Series,  X
(1918),  352;  E.  W.  Smith  and  A.  M.  Dale,  The  Ila-Speaking  Peoples  of
Northern  Rhodesia,  1920,  I,  95;  II,  91,  97.

4.  Corrector,  §  168  (Schmitz,  II,  446;  Hansen,  Quellen,  1901,  p.  42).
Cf.  Council  of  Paris  (a.d.  829),  iii,  2,  Mansi,  Concilia,  XIV  (1769),  595.

5.  Freiburger  Diocesan-Archiv,  XV  (1882),  96-97;  Hansen,  Quellen,
pp. 584-585.

6.  Plantsch,  Opusculum  de  Sagis  Maleficis,  1507,  sigg.  bv  If.  i  r°-cii  r°.
Cf.  the  Hessian  case  in  1562  (Crecelius,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Deutsche  Mytho-
logie,  II  [1855],  72).  See  also  Lercheimer  (Witekind),  Christlich  Bedencken
vnd  Erinnerung  von  Zauberey,  1587,  ed.  Binz,  1888,  p.  51.

7.  Geiler  von  Kaiserberg,  Die  Emeis,  Strassburg,  1517,  fol.  liiii.

8.  For  a  similar  cut  see  Ulrich  Tengler's  Layenspiegel  (151 1),  Hansen,
Quellen,  p.  298.  Cf.  Hans  Sachs,  Von  FiinfF  Unhulden,  ed.  Keller,  V,  286;
Malleus  Maleficarum,  Part  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  14,  ed.  1620,  p.  239;  Guaccius
(Guazzo),  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  i,  8,  p.  27;  Del  Rio,  Disquisi-
tiones  Magicae,  ii,  12,  ed.  1616,  p.  129.

9.  Kirk,  Secret  Commonwealth,  §  3,  ed.  1815,  p.  5  (ed.  Lang,  p.  11).
Cf.  Bidrag  till  Sodermanlands  Aldre  Kulturhistoria,  I,  i  (1877),  103.  For
the  belief  that  witches  divert  the  fruit  or  substance  or  profit  of  their
neighbors'  milk  see,  for  example,  J.  H.  Dixon,  Gairloch,  1886,  pp.  164-166;
James  Campbell,  Balmerino  and  its  Abbey,  i8gg,  pp.  404-405;  Hossack,
Kirkwall  in  the  Orkneys,  1900,  pp.  257-259;  Old-Lore  Miscellany  of
Orkney,  V  (1912),  132-133  (case  of  1657).  They  may  also  take  away  the
goodness  of  meal:  Transactions  Buchan  Field  Club,  III  (1892-95),  140.
For  eggs  taken  by  magic  see  Skattegraveren,  IX  (1888),  15;  XI  (1889),
205-206.  So  a  witch  or  wizard  in  East  Sussex  not  long  ago  stopped  a  wo-
man's hens  from  laying  (Sussex  Archseological  Collections,  LX  [1909],  147).

10.  For  milking  some  object  (a  broomstick,  a  chair  leg,  an  axe-handle,
a  fork,  a  knife-handle,  a  spigot,  a  rope,  etc.)  and  similar  magic  see  Kuhn
and  Schwartz,  Norddeutsche  Sagen,  1848,  pp.  24-25;  Rochholz,  Schwei-
zersagen  aus  dem  Aargau,  1856,  II,  167-168;  Peter,  Volksthiimliches  aus
Oesterreichisch-Schlesien,  II  (1867),  252;  Frischbier,  Hexenspruch  und
Zauberbann,  1870,  p.  14;  von  Schulenburg,  Wendische  Volkssagen  und
Gebrauche,  1880,  pp.  160,  167;  Gredt,  Sagenschatz  des  Luxemburger
Landes,  1883,  p.  556;  Knoop,  Volkssagen  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Hinterpom-
mern,  1885,  p.  17;  U.  Jahn,  Volkssagen  aus  Pommern  und  Riigen,  1886,
p.  335;  Blatter  fiir  Pommersche  Volkskunde,  IV  (1896),  18;  Vonbun,  Die
Sagen  Vorarlbergs,  2d  ed.,  1889,  pp.  150,  151;  Wucke,  Sagen  der  Mit-
tleren  Werra,  2d  ed.,  189T,  p.  404;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,
V  (1895),  408;  Am  Ur-Quell,  N.  F.,  I  (1897),  19;  Wuttke-Meyer,  1900,
pp.  158-159;  E.  H.  Meyer,  Badisches  Volksleben,  1900,  p.  557;  Zeitschrift


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IX


fiir  Oesterreichische  Volkskunde,  XIII  (1907),  25,  132;  XIV  (1908),  136;
Deutsche  Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,  IV  (1904),  268;  V
(i905),3i,39,cf.  34-35;  VI  (1906),  201-202;  XI  (1910,41;  XII  (1912),
35;  Lachmann,  Ueberlinger  Sagen,  Brauche  und  Sitten,  1909,  p.  393;
Kiihnau,  Schlesische  Sagen,  III  (1913),  84,  98-99,  104-105;  Josef  Miiller,
Sagen  aus  Uri,  I  (1926),  104-106  (Schriften  der  Schweizerischen  Gesell-
schaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XVIII);  De  Cock  and  Teirlinck,  Brabantsch
Sagenboek,  I  (1909),  40-44;  Kristensen,  Jyske  Folkeminder,  VIII  (1886),
260-261,  270;  the  Same,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  276;  VI,  ii  (1901),  61,
134;  Skattegraveren,  X  (1888),  14,  26-28;  Bidrag  till  Sodermanlands
Aldre  Kulturhistoria,  II,  v  (1884),  94;  Sauve,  Le  Folk-Lore  des  Hautes
Vosges,  1889,  pp.  183-184,  203-205;  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,
XXVII  (1912),  77;  Korrespondenzblatt  des  Vereins  fiir  Siebenbiirgische
Landeskunde,  XXVI  (1903),  32-33;  XXXVI  (1913),  6;  Krauss,  Slavische
Volkforschungen,  1908,  pp.  40,  76;  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  In-
stitute, XXII  (1893),  107-109;  Enthoven,  The  Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,

P-  237-

11.  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  Folklore  and  Customs  of  the  North
Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,  1911,  pp.  174-175;  Montgomerie,  Poems,  ed.
Cranstoun,  Scottish  Text  Society,  1887,  p.  75;  Minutes  of  Cupar  Presby-
tery (1649),  James  Campbell,  Balmerino  and  its  Abbey,  1899,  pp.  385-
386;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  605;  J.  G.  Campbell,
Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland,
1902,  p.  9;  James  Napier,  Notes  and  Reminiscences  relating  to  Partick,
1875,  pp.  187-188;  Denham  Tracts,  II  (1895),  83;  Folk-Lore,  V  (1894),
186;  XXXIII  (1922),  2IO-2I2;  Thomas,  Kentucky  Superstitions,  1890,
p.  279.  Cf.  Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,
p.  189;  Saga-Book  of  the  Viking  Club,  III  (1902),  51;  Doddridge,  Notes
on  the  Settlement  and  Indian  Wars  of  the  Western  Parts  of  Virginia  and
Pennsylvania,  1824,  p.  163.

12.  Bale,  A  Comedy  concernynge  Thre  Lawes,  1538,  sig.  Biiij  r°  (ed.
Schroer,  Anglia,  V  [1882],  vv.  463-466,  p.  174);  cf.  sig.  Biij  r°  (v.  414,
p.  172).

13.  Bale,  sig.  Biij  r°  (v.  419,  p.  172).

14.  Robert  of  Brunne,  Handlyng  Synne,  vv.  74-82,  ed.  Furnivall  (Rox-
burghe  Club),  1862,  pp.  3-4.  See  Paris,  Histoire  Litteraire,  XXVIII,  179-
207;  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III  (1890),  272-320;  Wells,  A
Manual  of  the  Writings  in  Middle  English,  191 6,  pp.  342-344,  816.

15.  Handlyng  Synne,  vv.  339-498  (Le  Manuel  des  Pechiez,  vv.  1078-
1273),  pp.  12-17.

16.  Handlyng  Synne,  vv.  499-562,  pp.  17-19.  James  Calfhill  refers
concisely  to  a  similar  story  in  the  Preface  to  An  Aunswere  to  the  Treatise
of  the  Crosse,  1565  (ed.  Gibbings,  Parker  Society,  p.  17):  "when  the  witch,
by  her  Pater  Noster,  made  her  pail  go  a  milking."  Cf.  Boguet,  Discours
des  Sorciers,  1608,  p.  240.

17.  Bartholomaeus  de  Spina,  Quaestio  de  Strigibus,  1523,  cap.  2  (ed.
with  Malleus,  1620,  II,  150),  following  the  report  of  an  eye-witness.


484        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

18.  Fournier,  Revue  d'Histoire  et  de  Litterature  Religieuses,  IX,
(1904),  97-

19.  Arundel  Penitential  (Arundel  MS.  201),  §  79  (Schmitz,  Bussbiicher,

I,  459:  "aliqua  incantatione  aut  maleficio");  Cotton  MS.  Faustina
Aviii,  Reliquiae  Antiquae,  1845,  I,  285;  cf.  Corrector,  §  168  (Schmitz,

II,  446).

20.  See  p.  179,  above.

21.  Atkinson,  Forty  Years  in  a  Moorland  Parish,  1891,  pp.  87-90;
Ditchfield,  The  Parson's  Pleasance,  pp.  191-192;  Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore
of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  p.  128,  cf.  p.  189;  Nicholson,  Golspie,
1897,  p.  80;  James  Campbell,  Balmerino  and  its  Abbey,  1899,  p.  387;
J.  G.  Campbell,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands,
1902,  pp.  7-8;  Folk-Lore,  XXVII  (i9i6),'"252;  XXVIII  (i9i7),2i4;  The
Celtic  Magazine,  X  (1885),  433;  Seymour,  Irish  Witchcraft  and  Demono-
logy,  1913,  p.  241;  Bardan,  The  Dead-Watchers  and  Other  Folk-Lore
Tales  of  Westmeath,  1 891,  p.  83;  MacCulloch,  Guernsey  Folk  Lore,  1903,
pp.  361-365;  Eisel,  Sagenbuch  des  Voigtlandes,  1871,  p.  140;  Wuttke-
Meyer,  p.  160;  Dykstra,  Uit  Friesland's  Volksleven,  II,  155.  Cf.  Gar-
mann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  i,  3,  23-26  and  41,  pp.  119-121,
127-128;  F.  W.  Mathews,  Tales  of  the  Blackdown  Borderland  (Somerset
Folk  Series,  No.  13),  p.  108;  Trotter,  Galloway  Gossip,  1901,  p.  247;
J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  191 1,  p.  243;  Folk-Lore
Journal,  VII  (1889),  60-61  (a  Lancashire  witch  carries  a  goose,  which  is
really  a  pitcher  of  stolen  milk).

22.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Topographia  Hibernica,  ii,  19,  Opera,  ed.
Dimock,  V,  106.

23.  Hobthursts:  The  Reliquary,  V  (1864-65),  i  i-i 2.  —  Fairies:  J.  G.
Campbell,  Superstitions  of  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland,  1900,
pp.  134-135;  Folk-Lore,  XXXIII  (1922),  396;  County  Folk-Lore,  III

(1903)  ,  Orkney  and  Shetland  Islands,  pp.  31,  34,  42;  Spence,  Shetland
Folk-Lore,  1899,  pp.  166-167;  Burgess,  The  Scottish  Review,  XXV  (1895),
96-97  (Shetland  trows);  William  Mackay,  Urquhart  and  Glenmoriston,
1893,  pp.  428-429.  —  Hedgehogs:  Folk-Lore  Record,  I  (1878),  183;
Folk-Lore,  XXVIII  (1917),  102-103,  325-326  (Hampshire  and  Lincoln-
shire); Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XV  (1883),  99;  County
Folk-Lore,  I,  No.  2  (1893),  p.  7  (Suffolk);  Notes  and  Queries,  6th  Series,
VII  (1883),  309;  VIII  (1883),  32-33,  117-118,317;  E.'M.  Wright,  Rustic
Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  p.  228.  —  Snakes:  Notes  and  Queries,  loth
Series,  X  (1908),  265,  316-317;  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  1899,
pp.  86-87;  Thomas,  Kentucky  Superstitions,  1920,  p.  274  (black  snakes:
so  also  in  New  England);  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  XVIII  (1903),
463;  Mitteilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  VI,  i

(1904)  ,  67-72;  Revue  de  I'Histoire  des  Religions,  XXXII  (1895),  149
(snakes  and  nurses).  In  Poland  toads  play  this  trick:  to  thwart  them,
burn  a  live  toad  in  a  closed  pot  (Am  Ur-Quell,  III  [1892],  272).  Cf.  Krauss,
Slavische  Volkforschungen,  1908,  pp.  76-77;  Knoop,  Sagen  und  Erzahl-
ungen  aus  der  Provinz  Posen,  1893,  p.  90  (witch  as  toad);  Mitteilungen
des  Vereins  fiir  Anhaltische  Geschichte  und  Altertumskunde,  X  (1907),


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IX


485


749;  E.  Gerard,  The  Land  Beyond  the  Forest,  New  York,  1888,  p.  196
(toad  steals  milk  for  witch).

24.  Pliny,  X,  40,  56,  115.

25.  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  Folklore  and  Customs  of  the  North
Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,  191 1,  pp.  190-191;  Arnason,  Islenzkar  J)j6(5-
sosur,  I  (1862),  430-435;  Maurer,  Islandische  Volkssagen,  i860,  pp.  93-
94;  Hylten-Cavallius,  Warend  och  Wirdarne,  I  (1863),  115,  225;  Linder-
holm,  De  Stora  Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (19 18),  224;  Jonsson,  Folktro,
Seder  ock  Bruk  i  More,  1881,  pp.  9-10  (Nyare  Bidrag  till  Kannedom  om
de  Svenska  Landsm^len,  II,  No.  5).  Cf.  Craigie,  Scandinavian  Folk-Lore,
1896,  pp.  377,  379-380;  Eisel,  Sagenbuch  des  Voigtlandes,  1871,  p.  158;
Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  p.  322.

26.  A  Collection  of  Modern  Relations,  1693,  pp.  51-52.

27.  More,  An  Antidote  against  Atheism,  iii,  9,  Philosophical  Writings,
4th  ed.,  1712,  p.  117.  Compare  the  vampire-ghosts  in  Pechuel-Loesche,
Volkskunde  von  Loango,  1907,  pp.  317-318.

28.  Skattegraveren,  IV  (1885),  56.

29.  See  pp.  224-225,  above.  Cf.  Danaeus  (Daneau),  De  Veneficis,
cap.  3,  ed.  1575,  p.  46;  Peter,  Volksthiimliches  aus  Oesterreichisch-
Schlesien,  II  (1867),  24.

30.  Good  typical  cases  are  those  of  Goody  Maker  in  1570  (Strype,
The  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  1698,  pp.  129-130)  and  Margaret  Morton
in  1651  (York  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  p.  38).  "Thou  .  .  .  art  such  a
Witch  for  a  cherne,  or  a  cheese-presse,"  says  Gabriel  Harvey,  "as  is  not
to  be  found  in  the  Mallet  of  Witches,  or  in  Monsieur  Bodines  Daemono-
mania"  (An  Aduertisement  for  Papphatchett,  1589,  in  his  Pierces  Super-
erogation, 1593,  Works,  ed.  Grosart,  II,  231).  For  a  blessing  on  milk  and
honey  see  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed.  Lindelof  (Surtees  Society,
CXL),  pp.  129-130;  cf.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  142  (ed.  Leonhardi,
p.  43);  II,  340  (Leonhardi,  p.  104).

31.  A  True  and  lust  Recorde,  of  the  Information  [etc.]  of  all  the
Witches,  taken  at  S.  Oses  (London,  1582),  sig.  E5,  If.  4  v°;  Giffard,  A
Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1593,  sig.  G  v°;  Bang,
Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  p.  346.  A  bewitched  spindle  worked  well
when  heated  redhot  and  then  cooled  (A  True  and  lust  Recorde,  1582).

32.  Cf.  Bombay  Gazetteer,  IX  (1901),  430.

33.  Giffard,  sigg.  T3-T4  (cf.  B2  v°,C3  r°,  G  r°).  See  The  Celtic  Magazine,
V  (1880),  472  (witch's  arm  in  the  churn);  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,
p.  21  (redhot  iron  in  churn  burns  witch);  Whittier,  The  Supernaturalism
of  New  England,  1847,  P-  ^3  (redhot  tongs  in  churn;  witch  burnt);
Skattegraveren,  XI  (1889),  206-207.

34.  Folk-Lore  Record,  III,  i  (1880),  134  (iron,  wizard  died  of  the  burn;
Suffolk,  1732);  Harper's  New  Monthly  Magazine,  LXXXVII  (1893),
797  (hot  iron,  witch  burnt,  Norfolk);  W.  H.  Dawson,  History  of  Skipton,
1882,  p.  389  (poker,  Yorkshire);  Bye-Gones  for  1895-96,  p.  124  (poker,
Welsh  border);  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern
Counties,  1879,  pp.  183-184  (hot  iron,  crooked  sixpence,  salt,  etc.);  Wil-


486         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


kinson  and  Tattersall,  Memories  of  Hurstwood,  1889,  p.  49  (iron);  Gregor,
The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  p.  194  (horseshoe,
crooked  sixpence,  rowan  —  under  the  churn);  E.  Owen,  Welsh  Folk-Lore,
pp.  238-239  (crowbar);  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,
191 1,  p.  238  (smoothing  iron);  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  1899,  pp.
21  (redhot  horseshoe),  22  (horseshoe  under  the  churn);  Harper's  New
Monthly  Magazine,  LXXXVII  (1893),  797  (Norfolk:  whip  and  bind  the
churn);  Thomas,  Kentucky  Superstitions,  1920,  p.  248  (whip  the  churn);
Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  173-174  (salt,  Lincolnshire;  so  Thiers,  Traite  des
Superstitions,  1741,  I,  170:  cf.  County  Folk-Lore,  V,  76,  95,  97);  Addy,
Household  Tales,  1895,  pp.  80-81  (shilling;  house  corners);  County  Folk-
Lore,  II  (1901),  155,  and  IV  (1904),  53  (crooked  sixpence)  (cf.  Bartsch,
Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  II  [1880],  137:  gold
coin  in  churn).  Cf.  Dalyell,  The  Darker  Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,
pp.  263-265;   Folk-Lore,  XV  (1904),  457-460  (Ireland);  Vonbun,  Die
Sagen  Vorarlbergs,  2d  ed.,  1889,  pp.  1 51-152  (hot  iron;  or  shoot  through
the  churn  and  thus  kill  the  witch);  Heyl,  Volkssagen,  Brauche  und  Mein-
ungen  aus  Tirol,  1897,  p.  40  (kill  the  witch  by  firing  a  gun  into  the  churn);
Kiihnau,  Schlesische  Sagen,  III  (191 3),  71-72  (iron);   Schambach  and
Miiller,  Niedersachsische  Sagen  und  Marchen,  1855,  pp.  175-176  (cream
put  on  the  fire;  witch  came);  Grohmann,  Aberglaube  und  Gebrauche  aus
Bohmen  und  Mahren,  1867,  p.  139  (hot  fork);  Dania,  II  (1892-94),  223
(hot  stone);   Hylten-Cavallius,  Warend  och  Wirdarne,  I  (1863),  192;
Bonnet,  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  XXVII  (1912),  76  and  note  2;
Wm.  Hunter,  Biggar  and  the  House  of  Fleming,  1867,  p.  390.  For  rowan
see  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  1879,
pp.  183-184;  Peacock,  A  Glossary  of  Words  used  in  the  Wapentakes  of
Manley  and  Corringham  (English  Dialect  Society),  1877,  p.  275;  H.  S.
Cowper,  Hawkshead,  1899,  pp.  309-310;  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,
p.  79;    Transactions  Cumberland  and  Westmorland  Antiquarian  and
Archaeological  Society,  XIV  (1897),  375.   For  a  queer  variety  of  butter
sorcery  see  By-Gones  for  1897-98,  p.  209;  cf.  Malleus  Maleficarum,
Part  ii,  cap.  14,  ed.  1620,  p.  240.  Soap  may  be  bewitched  in  the  manufac-
ture; a  hot  poker  acts  as  a  counter-charm  and  burns  the  witch:  Bergen,
Animal  and  Plant  Lore,  1899,  p.  21.  For  the  virtues  of  salt  see  Samter,
Geburt,  Hochzeit  und  Tod,  1911,  pp.  151-161.

35.  Old-Lore  Miscellany  of  Orkney,  etc.,  II  (1909),  107;  Wm.  Wilson,
Folk  Lore  and  Genealogies  of  Uppermost  Nithsdale,  1904,  pp.  22-24.

36.  Odd  Ways  in  Olden  Days  Down  West  or  Tales  of  the  Reformation
in  Devon  and  Cornwall,  1892,  p.  xii.

37.  Strype,  The  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  1698,  pp.  129-130.

38.  Folk-Lore,  IX  (1898),  285  (Fife);  XV  (1904),  457  (Ireland);
A.  W.  Moore,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1891,  p.  91 ;  Gredt,  Sagen-
schatz  des  Luxemburger  Landes,  1883,  p.  563;  Sebillot,  Traditions  et
Superstitions  de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  1882,  I,  276.

39.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  X  (1878),  loo-ioi;  Palmer,
Odd  Yarns  of  English  Lakeland,  191 4,  p.  73;  The  Reliquary,  V  (1864-65),
II-I2;  Wentz,  The  Fairy-Faith  in  Celtic  Countries,  191 1,  p.  43.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IX


487


40.  Scot,  xii,  21,  p.  281  (197-198),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  229;  i,  4,  p.  11
(7),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  8.

41.  Folk-Lore,  V  (1894),  184-185  (Ireland);  IX  (1898),  285  (Fife).  For
another  version  of  the  Scottish  charm  see  Robert  Chambers,  Popular
Rhymes  of  Scotland,  1826,  p.  279  (new  ed.,  [1870,]  p.  329);  Adam  Philip,
The  Parish  of  Longforgan,  pp.  188-189.  Cf.  Krauss,  Slavische  Volk-
forschungen,  1908,  p.  41.  For  dew  cf.  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore
of  the  Northern  Counties,  1879,  p.  199;  Wuttke-Meyer,  p.  266;  Kiihnau,
Schlesische  Sagen,  III  (1913),  73-74;  Schramek,  Der  Bohmerwaldbauer,
191 5  (Beitrage  zur  Deutsch-Bohmischen  Volkskunde,  XII),  p.  151;  Am
Ur-Quell,  N.  F.,  Ill  (1892),  324-325;  Deutsche  Volkskunde  aus  dem
Oestlichen  Bohmen,  VI  (1906),  199  (cf.  200);  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir
Volkskunde,  XXII  (1912),  95.  Note  the  use  of  a  supposed  dead  finger  in
Shetland  in  1616  (Dalyell,  The  Darker  Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,
pp.  264-265).

42.  Rochholz,  Schweizersagen  aus  dem  Aargau,  1856,  II,  169;  Kiihnau,
Schlesische  Sagen,  III  (1913),  48-49;  Strackerjan,  Aberglaube  und  Sagen
aus  dem  Herzogtum  Oldenburg,  2d  ed.,  1909,  I,  383-384.  Cf.  Melusine,
III  (1886-87),  194;  Am  Ur-Quell,  V  (1894),  281;  Nyare  Bidrag  till  Kan-
nedom  cm  de  Svenska  Landsmal,  IX,  i  (1900),  369;  Linderholm,  De  Stora
Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (1918),  206;  Kristensen,  Efterslset  til  Skat-
tegraveren,  1890,  pp.  195-196;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und
Westfalische  Volkskunde,  X  (1913),  267-272;  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri,
I  (1926),  102-103  (Schriften  der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volks-
kunde, XVIII);  Rantasalo,  Der  Ackerbau,  IV  (1924),  23-24  (FF  Com-
munications, XVII,  No.  55).

43.  Holinshed's  Chronicles,  VI  (1808),  252;  Wright,  Proceedings
against  Dame  Alice  Kyteler  (Camden  Society,  XXIV),  1843,  p.  46  (not
in  the  contemporary  record);  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  Folklore  and
Customs  of  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,  191 1,  p.  143.  Cf.
Bergen,  Current  Superstitions,  1896,  p.  82;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech
and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  p.  221 ;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,
1926,  pp.  395-396;  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  III  (1885-86),  p.  42;
Samter,  Geburt,  Hochzeit  und  Tod,  191 1,  pp.  29-38.

44.  Daily  Chronicle,  London,  February  15,  1879,  in  Gomme,  Folklore
as  an  Historical  Science,  1908,  pp.  202-203.

45.  Bye-Gones  for  1893-94,  p.  481.  For  drawing  blood  see  Chapter  II,
note  190;  cf.  p.  236.

46.  Sinclair,  Satans  Invisible  World  Discovered,  1685  (reprint,  1871,
p.  127);  Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,  pp.  1 50-151;  Hook's  Original
Christmas  Box,  Vol.  Ill;  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  330;  Brand-Hazlitt,
III,  268-269;  The  Reliquary,  V  (1864-65),  12  (cf.  VII  [1866-67],  ^01);
Bye-Gones  for  1901-02,  pp.  231-232;  Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,
1900,  p.  67;  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  214;  Wood-Martin,  Traces  of
the  Elder  Faiths  of  Ireland,  1902,  II,  8-9.  Cf.  Hastesko,  Motivverzeichnis
Westfinnischer  Zauberspriiche  (FF  Communications,  No.  19,  Vol.  II),
1914,  p.  51.  For  an  elaborate  churn-charm  see  Carmichael,  Carmina
GadeHca,  1900,  II,  142-151.


488         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


47.  Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark,  1659,  p.  59.

48.  A  True  and  lust  Recorde,  1582,  sigg.  D4,  If.  5  r°,  and  E5,  If.  i  v°
(beer  and  bread).  John  Carter  testified  that,  after  he  had  lost  two  brewings,
"the  third  tyme  .  .  .  his  sonne  beeing  a  tall  and  lustie  man,  of  the  age
of  xxxvi.  yeeres,  was  wished  to  take  his  Bowe  and  an  arrowe,  and  to  shoote
to  make  his  shaft  or  arrowe  to  sticke  in  the  Brewing  Fatte,  and  that  he
shotte  twise  and  coulde  not  make  the  same  to  sticke,  but  at  the  thirde
time  that  hee  shotte,  hee  made  the  same  to  sticke  in  the  brewinge  Fatte,
and  after  hee  sayth  they  coulde  brewe  as  well  as  before"  (sig.  E3  r°).

49.  Jonson,  The  Devil  is  an  Ass,  1616,  i,  i,  12-15.  Cf.  Giffard,  A  Dia-
logue concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1 593,  sigg.  H  r°,  K3  v°;  A  True
Relation,  1645,  p.  3;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  II,  525;
III,  605-606;  Hibbert,  A  Description  of  the  Shetland  Isles,  1822,  p.  575;
Hossack,  Kirkwall  in  the  Orkneys,  1900,  pp.  258-259;  De  Cock  and  Teir-
Hnck,  Brabantsch  Sagenboek,  I  (1909),  27-28;  Revue  des  Traditions
Populaires,  XXIII  (1908),  377;  Cotton  Mather,  The  Wonders  of  the  In-
visible World,  1693,  p.  130;  S.  G.  Drake,  Annals  of  Witchcraft  in  New
England,  1869,  p.  96.  For  the  cord  see  Scot,  as  quoted  above,  p.  168.

50.  The  Examination  and  Confession  of  Certaine  Wytches  at  Chens-
forde,  1566,  Philobiblon  Society  reprint,  p.  31.

51.  So  in  the  Leventina  (Switzerland)  in  1457:  Bollettino  Storico  della
Svizzera  Italiana,  VI  (1884),  234.  Cf.  A  True  and  Exact  Relation,  1645,
p.  22;  Folk-Lore,  XXV  (1914),  367  (Kent).

52.  Wier  rejects  the  notion  that  witches  spoil  ale  (vi,  9,  ed.  1568,  pp.
596-597).  Cf.  Brand-Hazlitt,  III,  271-272.  Mischievous  house-cobolds
sometimes  turn  the  beer  sour:  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  X
(1878),  loo-ioi;  cf.  County  Folk-Lore,  III  (1903),  20-21.  For  Anne
Whittle's  charm  "to  helpe  drinke  that  was  forspoken  or  bewitched"  see
p.  39,  above.

53.  Bale's  Comedy,  1538,  sig.  Biiij  r°  (vv.  447-454,  ed.  Schroer,  p.  173).

54.  The  same,  sig.  Biiij  r°  (vv.  463-470,  ed.  Schroer,  p.  174).

55.  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed.  Lindelof  (Surtees  Society,
CXL),  p.  116.  Cf.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  142;  ed.  Leonhardi,  p.  43.

56.  Herrick,  Charmes,  Riverside  ed.,  II,  177.

57.  Bye-Gones  for  1897-98,  p.  389;  Salopian  Shreds  and  Patches,
I  (1875),  121;  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  191 1,
p.  135;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  IV  (1894),  81;  Blatter
fiir  Pommersche  Volkskunde,  IV  (1896),  72;  Frischbier,  Hexenspruch  und
Zauberbann,  1870,  p.  122;  Deutsche  Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen
Bohmen,  V  (1905),  47;  Kristensen,  Jyske  Folkeminder,  IX  (1888),  72;
Archivio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  V  (1886),  285;  XIV  (1895),  283-284.
If  your  batch  of  bread  goes  wrong,  burn  a  loaf,  and  that  will  force
the  witch  to  come  (Maryland):  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XIV
(1900,43.

58.  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  K.

59.  Bye-Gones  for  1878-79,  p.  185;  Folk-Lore,  XXVI  (1915),  198-199;
A.  W.  Moore,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1891,  p.  83;  Roscoe,  The
Bagesu,  1924,  p.  108;  Orde  Browne,  The  Vanishing  Tribes  of  Kenya,  1925,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  IX


489


p.  184;  Sudan  Notes  and  Records,  II  (1919),  133.  Cf.  Scot,  xvi,  a,  p.  472
(341),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  398;  Hansen,  Quellen,  index,  s.  vv.  Zauberei,  Feld-
Jriichte;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  603;  Linderholm,
De  Stora  Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (191 8),  127.  For  garden  magic  see
Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  XLVI  (1916),  385-388,  390-395.
Cf.  also  Rantasalo,  Der  Ackerbau,  IV  (1924),  FF  Communications,  XVII,
No.  55.  One  of  the  Suffolk  witches  of  1645  confessed  that  she  "usually
bewitched  standing  corne"  (A  True  Relation,  1645,  p.  4,  cf.  p.  5).

60.  Cf.  Dieterich,  Mutter  Erde,  3d  ed.,  1925,  p.  16.

61.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  398-405;  Wiilker,  Bibliothek  der
Angelsachsischen  Poesie,  I  (1883),  312-316;  Grendon,  Journal  of  American
Folk-Lore,  XXII  (1909),  172-177,  219-220.  Bread  hallowed  on  Lammas
Day  is  to  be  crumbled  on  the  four  corners  of  the  barn  in  some  rural  emer-
gency that  remains  mysterious  (Cockayne,  III,  290).  For  "St.  Columb-
kill's  [magic]  Circle,"  to  be  scratched  with  a  knife  on  a  millstone  which  is
then  to  be  partially  buried  in  the  hedge  surrounding  one's  field,  see  Cock-
ayne, I,  395;  Grendon,  p.  205.  For  blessing  of  fields,  house,  and  barn  see
Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed.  Stevenson  (Surtees  Society,  X),  pp.
117-118.  Cf.  Bale,  Select  Works,  ed.  Christmas  (Parker  Society),  p.  528
("conjuring  of  their  ploughs").

62.  See  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  pp.  118,  145-147  (cf.  pp.  117-
"8,  130).

63.  Wizards  have  killed  trees  in  Suffolk  in  recent  times  (Zincke,  Wher-
stead,  2d  ed.,  1893,  pp.  229-230).  In  Dorset  in  1912  a  bottle  containing
two  vipers  and  a  centipede  in  spirits  of  wine  was  dug  up  near  an  apple-
tree:  it  had  caused  two  or  three  of  the  farmer's  appletrees  to  be  blown
over,  and  one  had  died;  the  farmer  himself  was  sick  (Proceedings  Dorset
Natural  History  and  Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XXXVII  [1916],  59-60).

64.  Bale,  A  Comedy  concernynge  Thre  Lawes,  1538,  vv.  444-463,  ed.
Schroer,  Anglia,  V  (1882),  173,  174.

65.  Bye-Gones  for  1 895-1 896,  p.  149.

66.  Cf.  St.  Augustine,  De  Civitate  Dei,  viii,  19.

67.  NaturaHs  Historia,  xviii,  6  (8),  41-43  (from  Piso).  Cf.  Scot,  xii,
4-5,  pp.  220-222  (158-159),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  177-178.

68.  Abt,  Die  Apologie  des  Apuleius  (Religionsgeschichtliche  Versuche
und  Vorarbeiten,  ed.  by  Dieterich  and  Wiinsch,  Vol.  IV,  Heft  2),  pp.  266-
267  (192-193).

69.  Nider,  Formicarius,  v,  4,  ed.  1516  (1517),  fol.  Ixxv  v°;  repeated  in
Malleus  Maleficarum,  Part  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  15  (ed.  1620,  p.  245),  and  thence
by  Scot,  xii,  5,  p.  222  (159),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  178.  Cf.  Pitcairn,  Criminal
Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  613,  614;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreichische
Volkskunde,  I  (1895),  303;  D.  Campbell,  In  the  Heart  of  Bantuland,
1922,  p.  240.

70.  Enthoven,  The  Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,  p.  239.

71.  See  Chapter  VIII.  Cf.  Hans  Meyer,  Die  Barundi,  1916,  p.  133.

72.  Remy,  Daemonolatreia,  i,  21,  1595,  pp.  145-146.

73.  Folk-Lore,  XXVI  (1915),  199-200.

74.  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  41.


490        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


75.  Charles  Mackie,  Norfolk  Annals,  1901,  I,  428.  Cf.  A  True  and
Exact  Relation,  1645,  p.  23;  A  Tryal  of  Witches,  1682,  p.  52  (i664[-5]);
Folk-Lore,  XXVI  (191 5),  197;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  267-268;  Josef  Miiller,
Sagen  aus  Uri  (Schriften  der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,
XVIII),  I  (1926),  106-108;  Hobley,  Bantu  Beliefs  and  Magic,  1922,  pp.
184-185;  Orde  Browne,  The  Vanishing  Tribes  of  Kenya,  1925,  pp.  201-
202;  D.  R.  MacKenzie,  The  Spirit-Ridden  Konde,  1925,  pp.  257-258.
For  charms,  etc.,  against  rats  and  mice  see  Geoponica,  xiii,  5  (with  an
amusing  skeptical  comment);  Cockayne,  Leechdoms,  I,  397  ("ut  surices
garbas  non  noceant":  cf.  Martin  of  Bracara,  De  Correctione  Rusticorum,
ed.  Caspari,  1883,  pp.  14-17);  Furnivall,  Political,  Religious  and  Love
Poems,  1866,  p.  23  (2d  ed.,  1903,  p.  43);  Noreen,  Altschwedisches  Lese-
buch,  1892-94,  pp.  97-99  (cf.  Holthausen,  Arkiv  for  Nordisk  Filologi,
XIV  [1898],  93-94);  The  Proceedings  of  the  Great  Bardic  Institution,  ed.
Connellan  (Ossianic  Society,  V),  i860,  pp.  74-79;  J.  G.  Campbell,  Super-
stitions of  the  Highlands  and  Islands,  1900,  pp.  225-226;  Trevelyan,  Folk-
Lore  and  Folk-Stories  of  Wales,  1909,  p.  230;  Notes  and  Queries,  9th
Series,  III  (1899),  395;  Boston  Evening  Journal,  February  8,  1884;  Ons
Volksleven,  X  (1898),  5-14,  66-68,  167;  Wallonia,  X  (1901),  102-108;
As  You  Like  It,  iii,  2,  186-188,  and  the  commentators,  particularly  Halli-
well,  VI  (1856),  188-189;  Newell,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  V
(1892),  23-32  (cf.  XI  [1898],  161);  F.  N.  Robinson,  Studies  in  the  History
of  Religions  presented  to  C.  H.  Toy,  1912,  pp.  95-98.  For  the  plague  of
lice  see  also  the  examinations  of  1645  in  Add.  MS.  27402,  foil.  107  r°,
1 14  r",  1 15  r".

76.  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  X  (1907),  49-50;
County  Folk-Lore,  III  (1903),  166;  VII  (1914),  124-131;  Train,  An  His-
torical and  Statistical  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1845,  II,  170-171;
Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  p.  125.

77.  Norfolk  Archeology,  II  (1849),  3°^-

78.  Torr,  Small  Talk  at  Wreyland,  2d  Series,  1921,  p.  51;  Poison,  as
above,  pp.  122-125.  Cf.  Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,  1892,  p.  149;
Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  515-518,  530;  Journal  Royal
Anthropological  Institute,  XXXVII  (1907),  172-174;  Ivens,  Melanesians
of  the  South-East  Solomon  Islands,  1927,  pp.  329-331.

79.  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  609;  Gregor,  The
Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  pp.  199-200;  Linderholm,
De  Stora  Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (1918),  93-94,  96,  230;  Sebillot,  Le
Folk-Lore  des  Pecheurs,  1901,  pp.  21 1-219;  Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fiir
die  Geschichte  der  Herzogthiimer  Schleswig,  Holstein  und  Lauenburg,  III
(1873),  51.  Cf.  Deane,  Fijian  Society,  1921,  pp.  167-168.  For  mediaeval
blessings  on  fishing  nets,  some  of  which  include  the  idea  that  evil  incanta-
tions may  interfere,  see  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,
1, 624-626.  Cf.  Zeitschrift  fiir  Romanische  Philologie,  XXXII  (1908),  575.
For  blessings  on  the  nets  of  hunters  see  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed
Stevenson  (Surtees  Society,  X),  p.  117;  cf.  Zeitschrift,  as  above,  XXXII,

584-585-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  X


491


CHAPTER  X

Metamorphosis

I.  George  Giffard,  A  Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,
1593,  sig.  A3  v°  (2d  ed.  in  1603);  cf.  B  r"  (cat,  weasel,  mouse),  B4  v°  (cat,
weasel,  toad,  mouse),  C  r°  (cat  named  Lightfoot;  toad,  Lunch;  weasel.
Makeshift),  C4  (weasel),  E  r°  (cat),  K3  v°.  Cf.  The  Wonderfull  Dis-
couerie  of  the  Witch-crafts  of  Margaret  and  Philip  Flower,  1619,  sig.  B2
r°  (rat,  cat,  toad,  bird,  cricket),  C2  (crow,  dog),  C3  (mouse,  rat,  owl,
"kitlin,"  "moldiwarp");  A  True  and  Exact  Relation,  1645,  pp.  2  (dog;
also  pp.  4,  6,  10,  14),  2  (polecat),  3  (cat),  14  ("two  Kidyns"),  19  ("gray
Kite"),  21  (rat),  27  (snake),  30  (gray  bird),  34  (mice),  35  (black  rabbits);
The  Examination,  Confession,  Triall,  and  Execution,  of  Joane  Williford,
Joan  Cariden,  and  Jane  Hott,  1645  (dog,  mouse,  hedgehog);  Cross,
Studies  in  Philology  (University  of  North  Carolina),  XVI  (1919),  244-
245  (deer);  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri  (Schriften  der  Schweizerischen
Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XVIII),  I  (1926),  156  (fox);  De  Cock  and
Teirlinck,  Brabantsch  Sagenboek,  I  (1909),  26-27  (raven);  G.  F.  Pico
della  Mirandola,  Strix,  1523,  sig.  Dii,  If.  3  v°;  Remigius,  Daemonolatreia,
1595,  ii,  5,  p.  228;  Krauss,  Slavische  Volkforschungen,  1908,  p.  60  (crow);
The  Celtic  Magazine,  X  (1885),  433-434  (otter);  Revue  des  Traditions
Populaires,  IX  (1894),  457-458;  Speck,  Memoirs  American  Anthropologi-
cal Association,  VI  (1919),  251,  260-262,  269-271;  Pechuel-Loesche,
Volkskunde  von  Loango,  1907,  pp.  343-344;  P.  A.  Talbot,  The  Peoples
of  Southern  Nigeria,  1926,  II,  213.  Verse  spells  for  transformation,  as  well
as  for  returning  to  humanity,  were  recited  by  Isobel  Gowdie  in  her  Second
Confession,  1662  (Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  607-
608).  For  shape-shifting  and  for  transformation  of  men  into  beasts  see
Gering,  Ueber  Weissagung  und  Zauber  im  Nordischen  Altertum,  1902,
pp.  12-16.  Harsnet  scouts  this  superstition:  "What  man  iudging  ac-
cording to  wit,  vnderstanding,  or  sence,  can  imagine  that  a  Witch  can
transforme  her  selfe  into  the  likenes  of  a  Cat,  a  Mouse,  or  an  Hare:  and
that  shee  being  hunted  with  Hounds,  in  the  forme  of  an  Hare,  and  pinched
by  the  breech,  or  whipped  with  scourges,  in  the  similitude  of  a  Cat,  the
same  pinch  or  marke,  shal  be  found  in  the  breech  of  the  Witch,  that  was
before  made  by  the  Hounds  in  the  breech  of  an  Hare"  (A  Declaration  of
Egregious  Popish  Impostures,  1603,  p.  iii).

2.  Journal  Anthropological  Institute,  XVI  (1887),  30.

3.  Theal,  Ethnography  and  Condition  of  South  Africa  before  a.d.  1505,
2d  ed.,  1919,  pp.  245-246;  Tremearne,  The  Ban  of  the  Bori,  p.  151;  Selig-
mann.  The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  1910,  pp.  282-284;  N.  W.
Thomas,  Anthropological  Report  on  the  Ibo-Speaking  Peoples  of  Nigeria,
I  (1913),  41;  Weeks,  Among  the  Primitive  Bakongo,  1914,  pp.  224-225.
Cf.  E.  W.  Smith  and  A.  M.  Dale,  The  Ila-Speaking  Peoples  of  Northern
Rhodesia,  1920,  II,  92;  D.  Campbell,  In  the  Heart  of  Bantuland,  1922,
p.  240;  Journal  (Royal)  Anthropological  Institute,  XVI  (1887),  34;  XLIX
(1919),  296;  Massam,  The  Cliff  Dwellers  of  Kenya,  1927,  pp.  182,  184


492         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


(snakes).  For  the  use  of  bits  of  lizards  etc.  in  black  magic  see  pp.  48-49,
above.

4.  P.  Amaury  Talbot,  In  the  Shadow  of  the  Bush,  1912,  pp.  194-195;
cf.  Revue  de  I'Histoire  des  Religions,  XXIX  (1894),  292-294.  Sometimes
the  familiars  are  nondescript:  thus  an  eighteenth-century  witch's  imps
are  noted  as  between  rats  and  bats  (Zincke,  Wherstead,  2d  ed.,  1893,  pp.
227-228).  A  rat  was  the  familiar  spirit  of  Joan  Cason  of  Kent  in  1586
(Waller,  in  Holinshed,  IV  [1808],  891-893).

5.  See  Corrector,  §  151  (Schmitz,  II,  442);  Guilielmus  Alvernus,  De
Universo,  ii,  3,  13,  Opera,  1674,  I,  1043-1044;   Vincent  of  Beauvais,
Speculum  Historiale,  ii,  64-65,  ed.  1494,  fol.  22  v°;  Bodin,  Demonomanie,
ii,  6,  ed.  1580,  foil.  94  v°-i04  r°;  Binsfeld,  De  Confessionibus  Maleficorum
et  Sagarum,  1591,  pp.  180-189;  Rerny>  Daemonolatreia,  1595,  ii,  5,  pp.
227,  229-232;  Claude  Prieur,  Dialogue  de  la  Lycanthropie,  1596;  Deacon
and  Walker,  Dialogicall  Discourses  of  Spirits  and  Divels,  1601,  pp.  158-
163;  Le  Loyer,  Discours  et  Histoires  des  Spectres,  1605,  pp.  139-145;  de
Nynauld,  De  la  Lycanthropie,  161 5;  P.  de  I'Ancre,  Tableau  de  ITncon-
stance  des  Mauvais  Anges  et  Demons,  2d  ed.,  1613,  pp.  252-326  (for  the
Arrest  of  1603,  pp.  262-305,  see  also  Bernou,  La  Chasse  aux  Sorcieres  dans
le  Labourd,  1897,  pp.  363-414);  the  Same,  LTncredulite  et  Mescreance
du  Sortilege,  1622,  pp.  785-790;  Rowlands,  The  Knave  of  Harts,  1622,
Hunterian  Club  reprint  (Works,  II),  p.  47  (case  of  Peter  Stumpe);  Ed-
ward Fairfax,  Daemonologia,  ed.  Grainge,  1882,  p.  97  (Stub  Peter,  etc.);
Burton,  The  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  i,  i,  i,  4,  ed.  1628,  p.  9;  Birch,  The
History  of  the  Royal  Society,  I  (1756),  300  (letter  from  the  Palatinate,
read  by  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  meeting  of  September  2,  1663);  Webster,  The
Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  1677,  pp.  33,  68-69,  ^6,  91-97;  In-
crease Mather,  Illustrious  Providences,  Boston,  1684,  pp.  172-174,  177-
179;  Erasmus  Francisci,  Der  HoUische  Proteus,  2d  ed.,  1695,  pp.  334-364,
378-386;  Sir  William  Temple,  Of  Poetry,  Works,  1757,  III,  418  (France
and  Ireland);  Hauber,  Bibliotheca,  Acta  et  Scripta  Magica,  chap.  243,
Stiick  29  (1742),  pp.  284-289;    The  London  Magazine,  May,  1765,
XXXIV,  215  (with  fine  plate:  the  Beast  of  Gevaudun);  Hecker,  The  Epi-
demics of  the  Middle  Ages,  transl.  Babington,  1835,  II,  55-59  (cf.  130-
131);   Bourquelot,  Recherches  sur  la  Lycanthropie,  Memoires,  Societe
des  Antiquaires  de  France,  2d  Series,  IX  (1849),  I93~"^62;  Leubuscher,
Ueber  die  Wehrwolfe  und  Thierverwandlungen  im  Mittelalter,  1850;  W.
Hertz,  Der  Werwolf,  1862;  Baring  Gould,  A  Book  of  Were-Wolves,  1865;
Tylor,  Primitive  Culture,  1871,  I,  279-284;   RoUand,  Faune  Populaire
de  la  France,  I  (1877),  153-159;  Andree,  Ethnographische  Parallelen  und
Vergleiche,  I  (1878),  62-80;  Sloet  van  de  Beele,  Le  Loup-Garou  (Extrait
de  la  Revue  Internationale,  VII),  1885;  the  Same,  De  Dieren  in  het  Ger-
maansche  Volksgeloof  en  Volksgebruik,  1887,  pp.  42-72;  U.  Jahn,  Volks-
sagen  von  Pommern  und  Riigen,  1886,  pp.  379-387;  E.  Gerard,  The  Land
Beyond  the  Forest,  New  York,  1888,  pp.  186-187;  0"s  Volksleven,  II
(1890),  I0I-I02;  IV  (1892),  150-152,  221-222;  Riezler,  Geschichte  der
Hexenprozesse  in  Bayern,  1896,  pp.  293-294  (a.d.  17 17  and  1720);  Lowen-
stimm,  Aberglaube  und  Strafrecht,  1897,  pp.  21,  182;  Richel,  Zeitschrift


<


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  X


493


fiir  Kulturgeschichte,  Erganzungsheft  III  (1898),  p.  3  (a.d.  1593);  Chapi-
seau,  Le  Folk-Lore  de  la  Beauce  et  du  Perche,  1902,  I,  217-220,  239-240;
II,  206-209;  E.  MacCulloch,  Guernsey  Folk  Lore,  1903,  pp.  230-232;
Abt,  Die  Apologie  des  Apuleius,  1908,  p.  126  (52);  Annalen  des  Histor-
ischen  Vereins  fiir  den  Niederrhein,  LXXXV  (1908),  52-53,  68;  C.  T.
Stewart,  The  Origin  of  the  Werewolf  Superstition  (University  of  Missouri
Studies,  Social  Science  Series,  II,  iii),  1909;  the  Same,  Zeitschrift  des
Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  XIX  (1909),  30-51;  Trevelyan,  Folk-Lore  and
Folk-Stories  of  Wales,  1909,  pp.  295-297;  Elliott  O'Donnell,  Werwolves,
1 91 2.  See  also  Lingua,  i,  7  (Dodsley,  Old  Plays,  ed.  Collier,  V,  117);  Dray-
ton, The  Man  in  the  Moone,  vv.  5-14;  Middleton,  The  Changeling,  iii,
3,  ed.  Bullen,  VI,  49;  Ford,  The  Lover's  Melancholy,  iii,  2,  ed.  Dyce,  I,
64;  the  Same,  Perkin  Warbeck,  v,  3,  II,  212.  Cf.  Malleus  Maleficarum,
Part  I,  qu.  10,  ed.  1620,  pp.  96-103;  Part  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  8,  pp.  200-204;
M.  G.  Lewis,  Journal  of  a  West  India  Proprietor,  1834,  p.  295  (hyena);
Granada,  Resena  Historico-descriptiva  de  Supersticiones  del  Rio  de  la
Plata,  1896,  pp.  581-627;  Ambrosetti,  La  Leyenda  del  Yaguarete-Aba,
Buenos  Aires,  1896  (also  Globus,  LXX  [1896],  272-273);  Mary  H.  Kings-
ley,  Travels  in  West  Africa,  1897,  pp.  536-539;  Basset,  Les  Apocryphes
Ethiopiens,  IV  (1894),  24;  Baissac,  Le  Folk-Lore  de  I'lle  Maurice,  1888,
pp.  146-179;  Bezemer,  Volksdichtung  aus  Indonesien,  1904,  pp.  363-365,
422-423;  Bompas,  Folklore  of  the  Santal  Parganas,  1909,  pp.  229,  256;
Wilken,  De  Indische  Gids,  1884,  pp.  945-950;  Skeat,  Fables  and  Folk-
Tales  from  an  Eastern  Forest,  1901,  p.  26;  K.  J.  Beatty,  Human  Leopards,
1915;  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  354-
355;  Willoughby-Meade,  Ghost  and  Vampire  Tales  of  China,  1925,  pp.
8-1 1 ;  Roscher,  Das  von  der  "  Kynanthropie"  handelnde  Fragment  des
Marcellus  von  Side,  Leipzig,  Gesellschaft  der  Wissenschaften,  Philologisch-
historische  Classe,  Abhandlungen,  XVII  (1897),  No.  3;  the  Same,  Die
Hundekrankheit  der  Pandareostochter  und  andere  Mythische  Krank-
heiten,  Rheinisches  Museum,  LIII  (1898),  169-204,  639-640;  G.  F.  Ab-
bott, Macedonian  Folklore,  1903,  pp.  215-218;  F.  Hamel,  Human  Animals,
1 91 5.  Werewolves,  who  in  one  interpretation  are  sorcerers,  recover  their
human  shape  when  wounded,  and  show  the  hurts  as  men  that  they  have
received  as  beasts  (Hertz,  Der  Werwolf,  1862,  pp.  69,  78-83;  Bodin,
Demonomanie,  ii,  6,  ed.  1587,  fol.  107  v°).

6.  Jente,  Die  Mythologischen  Ausdriicke  im  Altenglischen  Wortschatz,
1921,  pp.  143-144;  Asser,  De  Rebus  Gestibus  ^Ifridi,  cap.  77,  ed.  Steven-
son, 1904,  p.  62  (cf.  pp.  304-305;  Haupt's  Zeitschrift,  XII  [1865],  252);
Cnut,  i,  26  (Liebermann,  I,  306;  Thorpe,  p.  161 :  "se  wodfreca  werewulf";
cf.  Napier's  Wulfstan,  p.  191);  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Otia  Imperialia,  iii,  120
(Leibnitz,  p.  1003;  Liebrecht,  pp.  51-52,  cf.  pp.  161-163);  Giraldus  Cam-
brensis,  Topographia  Hibernica,  ii,  19,  Opera,  ed.  Dimock,  V,  101-105;
the  Same,  Expugnatio  Hiberniae,  ii,  23,  V,  356;  the  Wonders  of  Ireland,
etc.  Cf.  Kittredge,  [Harvard]  Studies  and  Notes,  VIII  (1903),  257-260;
Eriu,  V  (191 1),  203.

7.  See,  for  example,  Arthur  and  Gorlagon,  ed.  Kittredge,  as  above,
VIII,  149-275;  the  romance  of  William  of  Palerne,  ed.  Skeat,  1867  (cf.


494         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Wells,  A  Manuel  of  the  Writings  in  Middle  English,  1916,  p.  765);  Marie's
Lai  de  Bisclavret,  written  in  England  in  the  twelfth  century.  Cf.  K.  F.
Smith,  Historical  Study  of  the  Werwolf  in  Literature,  Publications
Modern  Language  Association,  IX  (1894),  1-42.

8.  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  II,  113;  Eulogium
Historiarum,  ed.  Haydon,  III,  51.

9.  Remigius  (Remy),  Daemonolatreia,  i,  23,  ed.  1595,  pp.  154-157.
Cf.  P.  de  I'Ancre,  Tableau  de  I'lnconstance  des  Mauvais  Anges  et  Demons,
1613,  pp.  67-69,  135;  Roskoff,  Geschichte  des  Teufels,  1869,  I,  358-359.
According  to  the  Anjou  Chronicle  demons  in  wolf  form,  but  with  the
voice  of  goats,  appeared  in  various  places  a.d.  965  (Recueil,  VIII,  252).

I  o.  Vita  Bartholomaei  Farnensis,  in  Arnold's  ed.  of  Symeon  of  Durham,
1,314-

11.  Memorials  of  St.  Dunstan,  ed.  Stubbs,  pp.  84-85,  262-263;  Mat-
thew Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  I,  474;  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.
Luard,  I,  520-521.

12.  Memorials  of  St.  Dunstan,  pp.  26-27,  59,  100.  Cf.  the  Life  of  St.
Waltheof,  twelfth-century  Abbot  of  Melrose,  Acta  Sanctorum,  August  3,
I,  264  (mouse,  cat,  pig,  dog,  wolf,  bull).

13.  Acta  Sanctorum,  April  29,  III,  659-660.

14.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Admirandis  Beati  Cuthberti  Virtutibus,  cap.
17,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  Society,  I),  pp.  32-37.  Cf.  Jacoby,  Archiv  fiir
Religionswissenschaft,  XXI  (1922),  219-220.

15.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Vita  et  Miraculis  S.  Godrici,  ed.  Stevenson
(Surtees  Society,  XX),  §§  187,  188,  236,  320  (Appendix,  cap.  2),  pp.  196-
198,250-251,337-338.

16.  The  Confession  of  Mr.  Richard  Allington  before  Mr.  Doctor  Calde-
well  and  Sir  John  of  the  Rolls,  The  Warwickshire  Antiquarian  Magazine,
I  (1859),  191.

17.  Joannis  Rossi  Historia  Rerum  Angliae,  ed.  Hearne,  1745,  pp.  206-
207.  A  witch  or  wizard  (or  a  familiar  spirit)  may  take  the  form  of  a  bird:
A  True  and  Exact  Relation,  1645,  pp.  30,  34  (small  gray  bird;  sparrow);
A  True  and  Impartial  Relation  of  the  Informations  against  Three  Witches,
1682,  pp.  11-12  (magpie);  see  also,  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  II
(1891),  143;  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  172;  Edmondston,  A  View  of  the
Ancient  and  Present  State  of  the  Zetland  Islands,  1809,  II,  74,  and  Gregor,
The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  pp.  135-136  (raven  or
crow);  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,  pp.  36-37  (blackbird:  cf.  Lincoln-
shire Notes  and  Queries,  II  [1891],  143);  S.  G.  Drake,  Annals  of  Witch-
craft in  New  England,  1869,  pp.  87-88,  113-114  (Andover,  deposition  of
1659;  blackbird);  yellowbird  (Deodat  Lawson,  A  Brief  and  True  Narra-
tive, 1692,  Burr,  Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft  Cases  1648-1706,  1914,  pp.
154-156).  For  a  fiend's  assuming  bird-form  see  Salomon  and  Saturn,  i,
149-151,  ed.  Kemble,  1848,  p.  143;  ed.  Wiilker,  Bibliothek,  III,  ii  (1898),
66  (312).  For  the  magpie  as  an  ominous  bird  see  Burne  and  Jackson,
Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  pp.  223-224;  Bye-Gones  for  1897-98,  p.  389;
E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  pp.  217-218.

18.  English  Chronicle,  ed.  Davies  (Camden  Society,  LXIV),  p.  74.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  X


495


19.  Wilkinson  and  Tattersall,  Memories  of  Hurstwood,  1889,  pp.  60-
61;  Halifax  Antiquarian  Society  Papers,  1904-05,  p.  4;  A.  L.  Humphreys,
The  Materials  for  the  History  of  the  Town  of  Wellington,  Co.  Somerset,
1889,  p.  243;  Speight,  Lower  Wharfedale,  1902,  p.  1 58;  Couch,  The  History
of  Polperro,  1871,  pp.  140-141 ;  Suffiing,  History  and  Legends  of  the  Broad
District,  [1890,]  pp.  106-107;  T.  and  K.  Macquoid,  About  Yorkshire,  1883,
p.  70;  Rye,  The  Norfolk  Antiquarian  Miscellany,  I  (1877),  292-293;  Nor-
folk Archeology,  II  (1849),  307;  Notes  and  Queries,  I  (1850),  468;  the
same,  9th  Series,  II  (1898),  336;  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  126-127;
V  (1908),  53-54;  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  IV  (1896),  147;  Bye-
Gones  for  1905-06,  p.  99;  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  74;  Waldron,  A  De-
scription of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1726,  ed.  Harrison  (Manx  Society),  1865,  pp.
12-13;  Folk-Lore  Journal,  VII  (1889),  287;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech
and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  pp.  193-195.   Cf.  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i

(1900)  ,  190-215.  For  a  Latin  charm  to  keep  the  hounds  of  hell  away  from
one's  cattle  see  Wiinsch,  Antikes  Zaubergerat  aus  Pergamon,  1905,  p.  43.

20.  F.  K.  Robinson,  A  Glossary  of  Words  used  in  the  Neighbourhood
of  Whitby,  1876,  p.  74;  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  71-73;  IV  (1904),
17;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  pp.  195-197;
Wordsworth,  ed.  Knight,  1896,  IV,  68-73.

P  21.  English  Dialect  Dictionary,  s.  v.  shuck;  Jente,  Die  Mythologischen
Ausdriicke  im  Altenglischen  Wortschatz,  1921,  pp.  150-153.

22.  Notes  and  Queries,  9th  Series,  II  (1898),  336;   Folk-Lore,  XII

(1901)  ,  172;  Page,  An  Exploration  of  Exmoor,  4th  ed.,  1895,  p.  308.

23.  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Discoverie  of  Witch-craft,  1648,  p.  19.

24.  The  Examination  and  Confession  of  Certaine  Wytches  at  Chens-
ford,  1566;  The  Examination,  Confession,  Triall,  and  Execution,  of  Joane
Williford,  Joan  Cariden  and  Jane  Hott,  1645,  p.  3.

25.  Beamont,  Winwick,  2d  ed.,  p.  42.

'  26.  See  Thomason  Catalogue,  I,  229,  237,  242,  243.  Cf.  Mrs.  Steuart
Erskine,  A  Royal  Cavalier,  1910,  pp.  111-112,230-231;  Cleveland's  poem
To  Prince  Rupert.  In  1645  James  More  confessed  "  that  his  sister  Euerard
required  his  imp  Nan  to  send  with  2  of  her  husbands  to  send  to  Pr.  Ru.
w"*^  accordingely  he  deliuered  and  haue  not  seene  since"  (Add.  MS.  27402,
fol.  121  r°).

27.  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  147-149.

28.  Canterbury  MS.  M295,  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  5th  Report,
Appendix,  p.  455.

29.  The  Miracles  of  King  Henry  VI,  ed.  Knox  and  Leslie,  1923,  pp.
128-129.  Cf.  Fernel,  De  Abditis  Rerum  Causis,  ii,  16  (De  Morbis,  1656,

pp.  517-518)-

30.  Contemporary  Narrative,  ed.  Wright,  pp.  3,  32.

31.  Wier,  ed.  1582,  col.  112,  1.  40;  Cranmer,  Miscellaneous  Writings
and  Letters,  ed.  Cox  (Parker  Society),  1846,  p.  66;  Harland  and  Wilkin-
son, Lancashire  Folk-Lore,  1867,  p.  59;  County  Folk-Lore,  V  (1908),  53,
55-56;  Folk-Lore  Journal,  VI  (1889),  26;  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  172;
Gregor,  The  Horse  in  Scottish  Folk  Lore,  1890,  pp.  4-5;  E.  M.  Wright,


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  p.  195;  Nicholson,  Golspie,  1897,  pp.
15-16;  James,  English  Historical  Review,  XXXVII  (1922),  414;  Etienne
de  Bourbon,  Anecdotes,  ed.  Lecoy  de  la  Marche,  1877,  pp.  32,  37;  Bosquet,
La  Normandie  Romanesque,  1845,  pp.  128-129;  Monnier  and  Vingtri-
nier,  Croyances  et  Traditions  Populaires,  1874,  pp.  696-698;  Meyrac,
Traditions  des  Ardennes,  1890,  pp.  330-331;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,
II  (1893),  370-378;  Storaker,  Historisk  Tidsskrift,  Christiania,  I  (1871),
479-480;  F.  Wolf,  Scheible's  Kloster,  XI  (1844),  1094-1095;  Bechstein,
Mythen  und  Sagen  Tirols,  1857,  pp.  210-21 1;  Birlinger,  Aus  Schwaben,
1874,  I,  194-195;  U.  Jahn,  Volkssagen  aus  Pommern  und  Riigen,  1886,
p.  304,  cf.  375.  Cf.  von  Negelein,  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,
XI  ( 1 901),  406-420;  XII  (1902),  14-25,377-390.

32.  For  witches  wounded  or  killed  in  cat  shape  see,  for  example,  Wilkinson
and  Tattersall,  Memories  of  Hurstwood,  1889,  pp.  57-58;  Transac-
tions Lancashire  and  Cheshire  Antiquarian  Society,  XXXIV  (1917),  104-
105;  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  I  (1889),  246,  247;  County  Folk-
Lore,  II  (1901),  155;  Halifax  Antiquarian  Society  Papers,  1904-05,  p.  6;
Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  IV  (1891),  324;  E.  Owen,  Welsh  Folk-
Lore,  pp.  224-226;  J.  G.  Campbell,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the
Highlands  and  Islands,  1902,  pp.  49-50;  Agnew,  The  Hereditary  Sheriffs
of  Galloway,  1893,  II,  82-83;  W.  Ross,  Aberdour  and  Inchcolme,  1885,
p.  327;  Poison,  Our  Highland  Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  p.  70;  Kristensen,
Danske  Sagn,  VI,  ii  (1901),  38-39;  Dykstra,  Uit  Friesland's  Volksleven,
II,  153-155;  0ns  Volksleven,  V  (1893),  11 5-1 16;  E.  Meier,  Deutsche
Sagen,  Sitten  und  Gebrauche  aus  Schwaben,  1852,  pp.  184-186;  Bartsch,
Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  I  (1879),  114;  Gredt,
Sagenschatz  des  Luxemburger  Landes,  1883,  p.  559;  Schambach  and
Muller,  Niedersachsische  Sagen  und  Marchen,  1855,  pp.  179-181;  Zeit-
schrift des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,  IV  (1907),
117;  Rochholz,  Schweizersagen  aus  dem  Aargau,  1856,  II,  55;  Schweizer-
isches  Archiv  fiir  Volkskunde,  II  (1898),  109;  Hertz,  Der  Werwolf,  1862,
pp.  71-74;  Archivio  per  lo  Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  V  (1886),  285;
Journal  Royal  Anthropological  Institute,  XLIV  (1914),  338;  Puckett,
Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  p.  149.  Cf.  Folk-Lore,  XII
(1901),  172.

33.  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Otia  Imperialia,  iii,  93  (Leibnitz,  Scriptores
Rerum  Brunsvicensium,  I,  992;  Liebrecht,  Gervasius,  p.  45).  Cf.  Malleus
Maleficarum,  Pt.  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  9,  ed.  1620,  pp.  208-210;  Bartholomaeus
de  Spina,  Quaestio  de  Strigibus,  cap.  19  (in  1620  ed.  of  Malleus,  II,  213-
214);  Guaccius,  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  i,  13,  pp.  61-62;  Han-
sen, Zauberwahn,  p.  350;  George  Henderson,  Survivals  in  Belief  among
the  Celts,  191 1,  pp.  107-109.

34.  John  Hale,  A  Modest  Enquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Witchcraft,  1702,
pp.  64-65.

35.  Bodin,  De  la  Demonomanie  des  Sorciers,  ii,  6,  ed.  1587,  foil.  107
v°-io8  t".  See  Chapter  XVI,  note  135.  Cf.  Mielke,  Archiv  der  Branden-
burgia,  XII  (1907),  135.  For  witch-cats  holding  a  Sabbath  see  Sebillot,
Traditions  et  Superstitions  de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  1882,  II,  44-45.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  X


497


36.  The  Examination  and  Confession  of  Certaine  Wytches  at  Chens-
ford,  1566  (Philobiblon  Society  reprint).

37.  Alanus  de  Insulis,  Contra  Haereticos,  i,  63  (Migne,  CCX,  366):
"quia,  ut  dicitur,  osculantur  posteriora  catti,  in  cuius  specie,  ut  dicunt,
apparet  eis  Lucifer."  Cf.  Reliquiae  Antiquae,  ed.  Wright  and  Hailiwell,
1845,  I,  248.

38.  See  Chapter  XIII,  note  34.

39.  A  witch-cat  caused  intense  excitement  at  Pottsville,  Pennsylvania,
in  191 1.  See  The  Pubhc  Ledger,  Philadelphia,  September  24,  27,30,  and
October  i,  1911.

40.  Clyde,  The  Norfolk  Garland,  p.  6.  Cf.  Gregor,  Folk-Lore  of  the
North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  p.  123  (with  references);  Middleton,  Any-
thing for  a  Quiet  Life,  v,  i,  ed.  BuUen,  V,  324.

41.  County  Folk-Lore,  I,  No.  2  (1893),  p.  ii;  Bergen,  Animal  and
Plant  Lore,  1899,  p.  81.  Cf.  John  Thomlinson's  Diary,  October  i,  1718
(Six  North  Country  Diaries,  ed.  Hodgson,  Surtees  Society,  CXVIII,  141);
Schonwerth,  Aus  der  Oberpfalz,  I  (1857),  247;  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,
1900,  pp.  191,  398.  For  miscellaneous  cat  magic  see  Rochholz,  Schweizer-
sagen  aus  dem  Aargau,  1856,  II,  54-56  (cat-ghost,  cat-spooks,  cat-witch,
cat  guarding  treasure  or  sacrificed  in  a  treasure  hunt);  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen
aus  Uri  (Schriften  der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,
XVIII),  I  (1926),  168-172,  176-177.  For  cats  and  storms,  see  p.  161,
above.

42.  Increase  Mather,  Illustrious  Providences,  Boston,  1684,  p.  loi.

43.  John  Bramhall,  A  Vindication  of  True  Liberty,  1655,  Works,  1844,
IV,  161.

44.  Mr.  Henry  W[atso]n's  Answer  to  Bully  Dawson  (A  Continuation  or
Second  Part  of  The  Letters  from  the  Dead  to  the  Living,  by  Tho.  Brown
and  Others,  1703,  pp.  148-149).  Cf.  John  Trenchard  (1662-1723),  The
Natural  History  of  Superstition  (Somers  Tracts,  III  [1748],  211);  Otway,
The  Soldier's  Fortune,  Works,  1728,  II,  343  ("  I  dare  swear  he  wou'd  smell
out  a  Rival  if  he  were  in  the  House,  only  by  natural  Instinct,  as  some  that
always  sweat  when  a  Cat's  in  the  Room");  Cibber,  The  Double  Gallant,
ed.  1749,  p.  58  (Works,  1754,  III).  "But  it  seemeth  not  strange,  bicause
it  is  common,"  says  Reginald  Scot,  "that  some  man  otherwise  hardie  and
stout  enough,  should  not  dare  to  abide  or  endure  the  sight  of  a  cat"
(xiii,  8,  p.  301  [212],  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  245).

45.  For  the  devil  as  a  hare  see,  for  example,  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  74;
Bygone  Lincolnshire,  ed.  W.  Andrews,  1891,  I,  84-85.  Cf.  County  Folk-

I;  Lore,  V  (1908),  53-55  (rabbits  or  hares  as  boggarts).  On  various  super-
stitions with  regard  to  hares  see  W.  G.  Black,  Folk-Lore  Journal,  I
(1883),  84-90;  The  Cornish  Magazine,  II  (1899),  267-268;  Billson,  Folk-

Ji:  Lore,  III  (1892),  441-466;  The  Essex  Review,  V  (1896),  159;  Hopf,
Thierorakel  und  Orakelthiere,  1888,  pp.  66-67;  Melusine,  III  (1886-87),
265-269;  VIII  (1896-97),  25-29;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern
Negro,  1926,  pp.  472-476.

46.  Holkot  (died  1349),  Super  Libros  Sapientie,  Lectio  190,  Reutlingen,


498         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


1489,  sig.  Miiij,  If.  4  r°  ("obuiare  lepori  est  malum,  et  obuiare  bufoni  signi-
ficat  bonum");  Ben  Jonson,  Tale  of  a  Tub,  iv,  3,  18;  Beaumont  and
Fletcher,  Thierry  and  Theodoret,  iv,  i  (Dyce,  I,  162);  Aubrey,  Remaines
of  Gentilisne  and  Judaisme,  ed.  Britten,  1881,  p.  26;  Sir  Thomas  Browne,
Pseudodoxia  Epidemica,  v,  23,  i  (Works,  ed.  Wilkin,  1852,  II,  79);  Burne
and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  p.  212;  Nicholson,  Golspie,  1897,
p.  55;  County  Folk-Lore,  IV  (1904),  9;  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,
1899,  P-  -9;  Birlinger,  Volksthiimliches  aus  Schwaben,  I  (1861),  476;
Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,  V  (1895),  411-412.  Cf.  Transac-
tions Devonshire  Association,  XXVIII  (1896),  95  (rabbit).

47.  See  p.  166.

48.  Ibid.

49.  George  Henderson,  Survivals  in  Belief  among  the  Celts,  191 1,  pp.
102-107;  Nicholson,  Golspie,  1897,  pp.  76-78;  Rhys,  Hibbert  Lectures
for  1886,  pp.  199-200;  the  Same,  Celtic  Folklore,  1901,  I,  294-296;
Bartsch,  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Maklenburg,  I  (1879),  114,
133;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  p.  156;  H.  S.  Cowper,
Hawkshead,  1899,  pp.  319-320;  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  History  and
Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XXXVII  (191 6),  60;  Notes  and  Queries  for
Somerset  and  Dorset,  IV  (1895),  77;  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  172.

50.  Harsnet,  A  Declaration  of  Egregious  Popish  Impostures,  1603,
p.  Ill;  Bray,  Traditions,  etc.,  of  Devonshire,  1838,  II,  277-278;  Walter,
Records,  Historical  and  Antiquarian,  of  Parishes  round  Horncastle,  1904,
pp.  214-216;  Monk,  History  of  Witney,  1894,  p.  53;  J.  LI.  W.  Page,  An
Exploration  of  Exmoor,  4th  ed.,  1895,  P-  3°9?  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Char-
acter, Folklore  and  Customs  of  the  North  Riding  of  Yorkshire,  2d  ed.,
1911,  pp.  170-171;  Couch,  The  History  of  Polperro,  1871,  p.  145;  Folk-
Lore,  IX  (1898),  285  (Fife);   M.  H.  Miller,  Olde  Leeke,  1891,  p.  314;
Gregor,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  pp.  128-129;
Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  1879,  pp.
201-204;   F.  W.  Mathews,  Tales  of  the  Blackdown  Borderland,  1923
(Somerset  Folk  Series,  No.  13),  pp.  103,  108;  Bye-Gones  for  1897-98,
p.  209;  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (i90i),i56;  VII  (1914),  57-58;  The  Reli-
quary, XIV  (1873-74),  pp.  253-254;  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  I
(1889),  248;  II  (1891),  233-234;  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dor-
set, III  (1893),  3;  Warrick,  The  History  of  Old  Cumnock,  1899,  p.  339;
Trotter,  Galloway  Gossip,  1901,  pp.  247-248;  W.  Wilson,  Folk  Lore  and
Genealogies  of  Uppermost  Nithsdale,  1904,  p.  20;  Poison,  Our  Highland
Folklore  Heritage,  1926,  p.  70;  E.  Owen,  Welsh  Folk-Lore,  pp.  227-230;
The  Cambrian  Journal,  II  (1855),  118;  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West
and  Mid-Wales,  191 1,  pp.  242-245;  Kristensen,  Jyske  Folkeminder,  VIII
(1886),  261-262;  the  Same,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  328;  VI,  ii  (1901),
5)  7"^>  33~37)  76-88;  Bartsch,  Sagen  aus  Meklenburg,  I  (1879),  133-
134;  Am  Urdhs-Brunnen,  I  (1881-82),  15;  MacCuUoch,  Guernsey  Folk
Lore,  1903,  pp.  360-361;  Sauve,  Le  Folk-Lore  des  Hautes-Vosges,  1889,
pp.  176-177.

51.  The  Second  Examination  and  Confession  of  Mother  Agnes  Water-
house,  1566,  Philobiblon  Society  reprint,  p.  46.  She  had  been  a  witch  for


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  X


499


fifteen  years  (The  End  and  Last  Confession  of  Mother  Waterhouse,  1566,
reprint,  p.  47).  Cf.  The  Examination  and  Confession  of  Certaine  Witches
at  Chensforde,  1566,  reprint,  p.  26.

52.  See  pp.  207-209.

53.  Document  published  by  Raine,  Archsological  Journal,  XVI  (1859),
80-81.  Cf.  Winstedt,  Shaman,  Saiva,  and  Sufi,  a  Study  of  the  Evolution
of  Malay  Magic,  1925,  p.  21  (civet-cat  fed  with  blood  from  the  finger).
The  witch  who  was  thought  to  have  afflicted  Rachel  Pindar  (1574)  was
believed  to  feed  a  demon  with  a  drop  of  blood  from  the  forefinger  of  her
left  hand  (contemporary  narrative,  The  Disclosing  of  a  Late  Counter-
fey  ted  Possession,  sig.  Aiiij,  If.  3  v°).

54.  Winstedt,  as  above,  pp.  21-22  (house  cricket);  Talbot,  In  the  Sha-
dow of  the  Bush,  191 2,  p.  195  (Nigeria;  black  butterfly);  Karsten,  The
Civilization  of  the  South  American  Indians,  1926,  pp.  292-293  (venomous
insects  sent  as  demons  by  wizards);  Dalyell,  The  Darker  Superstitions  of
Scotland,  1834,  pp.  562-565  (fiy,  wasp,  bee,  beetle);  Drage,  Daimono-
mageia,  1665,  p.  lo  (witch  as  fly  enters  the  body  of  her  victim).  In  some
parts  of  Scotland  moths  are  called  "witches"  (Gregor,  Folk-Lore  of  the
North-East  of  Scotland,  1881,  p.  147).  In  1692  Abraham  de  la  Pryme,
himself  a  student  of  the  occult,  enjoyed  a  conversation  with  a  substantial
farmer  who  had  lost  a  great  many  cattle  by  witchcraft.  About  thirteen
years  before,  the  farmer  said,  he  was  "with  several  others  set  to  keep  a
witch  in  a  room,"  when  "before  them  all  sehe  chang'd  herself  into  a
beetle  or  great  clock  [i.e.  cockchafer],  and  flew  out  of  the  chimney,  and  so
escaped"  (Diary,  ed.  Jackson,  Surtees  Society,  LIV,  pp.  22-23).

55.  For  bees  see  A  Tryal  of  Witches  at  Bury  St.  Edmonds,  i664[-5],
London,  1682,  pp.  26-28  (bee;  flies);  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  pp.
1 8-1 9  (witch  as  bumblebee) ;  York  Depositions,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  Society,
XL),  p.  67  (witch  in  shape  of  bee,  1654);  Samuel  Clarke,  A  Mirrour  or
Looking-Glasse  both  for  Saints  and  Sinners,  2d  ed.,  1654,  p.  462  (1653);
Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),  438;  Walter,  Records  of  Parishes  round  Horncastle,
1904,  p.  216.  Cf.  A  History  of  the  Witches  of  Renfrewshire,  1809,  p.  loi
(bumblebee);  Henderson,  Survivals  in  Belief  among  the  Celts,  191 1,  pp.
82-88  (bee-soul;  fly);  A  True  and  Exact  Relation,  1645,  p.  21  (hornet);
A  True  Relation,  1645,  p.  5  (hornets;  wasps).  For  flies  see  Gregory  of
Tours,  De  Gloria  Martyrum,  i,  107.  Opera,  1699,  cols.  843-844  (demon
fly);  Nider,  Formicarius,  v,  2,  ed.  1516  (1517),  fol.  Ixxii  v°  (demon  as  big
fly);  Remy  (Remigius),  Daemonolatreia,  i,  23,  pp.  152-153  (demons  as
flies);  Nashe,  Have  with  You  to  SafFron-Walden,  1596,  Works,  ed.  Mc-
Kerrow,  III  (1905),  37  (fly  in  a  box);  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Dis-
covery of  Witch-craft,  1648,  pp.  54-55;  Bartholinus,Historiae  Anatomicae
Rariores,  1654,  p.  80  (big  fly);  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  15;  Bax-
ter, The  Certainty  of  the  Worlds  of  Spirits,  1691,  p.  153  (fly  or  flea);
Glanvil's  Sadducismus  Triumphatus,  4th  ed.,  1726,  pp.  299-301  (flies,
miller);  Matthew  Mayhew,  A  Brief  Narrative,  in  Cotton  Mather's  Mag-
nalia,  1702,  Book  vi,  chap.  6,  sect,  i,  p.  52  (part  of  the  soul  of  a  person  kept
imprisoned  in  the  form  of  a  fly  by  Martha's  Vineyard  powwaws);  Archiv
fur  Kultur-Geschichte,  VII  (1909),  44  (fly).  A  Melanesian  wizard  often


500         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

comes  as  a  blowfly  to  inflict  disease  (Codrington,  The  Melanesians,  1891,
p.  207).

56.  Scot,  Dedication,  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  ix.  Odo  of  Cheriton  (Kent)  in
a  sermon  tells  about  the  Carthaginian  wizard  Cyprian,  who  kept  demons
in  a  box  and  used  to  send  them  "to  carry  out  his  business"  whenever  he
liked  (Hervieux,  Les  Fabulistes  Latins,  IV  [1896],  28 1).

57.  Nashe,  The  Unfortunate  Traveller,  1594,  Works,  ed.  McKerrow,

n,  233-

58.  Wood,  Athenae  Oxonienses,  ed.  Bliss,  II  (1815),  541-545.  Cf.
Bruce  in  his  ed.  of  Sir  Kenelm  Digby,  Journal  of  a  Voyage  into  the  Medi-
terranean (Camden  Society),  pp.  xvii-xix,  95-96.

59.  Leycester's  Commonwealth,  1641,  ed.  Burgoyne,  1904,  pp.  99-100.

60.  Aubrey,  Brief  Lives,  ed.  Clark,  1898,  I,  26-29.

61.  Account  of  the  Manner  of  the  Death  of  Mr.  J.  Sharp,  in  Kirkton,
The  Secret  and  True  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  ed.  Sharpe,  1817,
p.  421.   Cf.  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  601.

62.  Dalyell,  The  Darker  Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,  pp.  563-564.

63.  Scot,  iii,  15,  p.  65  (52),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  51.

64.  ScheflFer,  Lapponia,  1674,  pp.  146-148;  Fritzner,  Historisk  Tids-
skrift,  Kristiania,  IV  (1877),  188-190;  Lid,  Maal  og  Minne,  1921,  pp.
46-49-

65.  Paulus  Diaconus,  Historia  Lombardica,  vi,  6.

66.  Eulogium  Historiarum,  Continuatio,  ed.  Haydon,  III,  417.  Cf.
Thyraeus,  Daemoniaci,  1603,  p.  15;  the  Same,  De  Apparitionibus  (Tracta-
tus  Duo,  1600),  cap.  9,  p.  27  (" Frequentius  habitum  canis  induunt,  et
serpentis,  et  hirci,  et  capri,  et  araneae").

67.  See,  for  example,  Lewin,  Die  Gifte  in  der  Weltgeschichte,  1920,
pp.  13-14,  102,  368,  485,  573;  Kittredge,  The  Old  Farmer  and  his  Alma-
nack, 1904,  pp.  104-107,  1 14-120.  For  the  riibeta  see  Aelian,  De  Natura
Animalium,  xvii,  12;  Pliny,  viii,  31,  48, 1 10;  xxv,  10,76,  123  (cf.  xxxii,  5,
18:  frogs);  Ramesey,  Lifes  Security,  1665,  pp.  226-229.

68.  Kittredge,  as  above,  pp.  117-119;  H.  de  Rochas,  La  Physique  Re-
formee,  1647,  p.  475;  Digby,  The  Nature  of  Bodies,  chap.  18,  §  8,  ed.  1645,
p.  203;  the  Same,  Discovrs  tovchant  la  Gverison  des  Playes  par  la  Poudre
de  Sympathie,  1658,  p.  104  ("Ton  porte  autour  de  soy  de  la  poudre  des
crapeaux  ou  meme  vn  crapaut  ou  arraignee  viue,  .  .  .  ou  de  I'arsenic").
Cf.  Sussex  ArchiEological  Collections,  XXXI  (1881),  137;  Proceedings
Dorset  Natural  History  and  Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XXXV  (1914),  85;
Devon  Notes  and  Queries,  IV,  i  (1907),  124;  The  Essex  Review,  V  (1896),
160  (frog's  leg  as  charm  against  toothache).  For  frog-amulets  against  the
evil  eye  see  Elworthy,  The  Evil  Eye,  1895,  pp.  308-311,  318-319,  327;
Bellucci,  II  Feticismo  Primitivo  in  Italia,  1907,  pp.113  ""I16.

69.  Hewett,  Nummits  and  Crummits,  1900,  pp.  76-77.

70.  Wier,  De  Praestigiis  Daemonum,  iii,  36,  ed.  1568,  p.  335.

71.  Brut,  ed.  Brie,  pp.  169-170;  Eulogium  Historiarum,  ed.  Haydon,
III,  109-1 II.

72.  Cf.  Bodin,  Demonomanie,  ii,  8,  ed.  1580,  fol.  114  r°.  See  p.  149,
above.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  X


501


73.  For  a  familiar  spirit  as  a  frog  see  A  True  and  Exact  Relation,  1645,
P-  34-

74.  For  a  toad  in  the  house  taken  for  a  ghost  see  Saga-Book  of  the  Vik-
ing Club,  III  (1902),  59.

75.  A  pet  guinea  pig,  which  she  said  was  her  familiar  spirit,  was  carried
about  by  a  professed  witch,  Kilnsey  Nan,  ca.  1820  (Cobley,  On  Foot
through  Wharfedale,  [1882,]  pp.  240-241).  Cf.  Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark,
1656,  p.  135  (pet  frog  taken  for  a  devil).

76.  Strype,  The  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  1698,  p.  130  (case  in  1570);
The  Norfolk  Antiquarian  Miscellany,  I  (1877),  298-299;  George  Roberts,
The  History  and  Antiquities  of  the  Borough  of  Lyme  Regis  and  Char-
mouth,  1834,  p.  262;  Roskoff,  Geschichte  des  Teufels,  1869,  I,  346.  Cf.
Thurnwald,  Forschungen  auf  den  Salomo-Inseln  und  dem  Bismarck-
Archipel,  I  (1912),  446.

77.  The  Examination  and  Confession  of  Certaine  Wytches  at  Chens-
forde,  1566,  Philobiblon  Society,  p.  32;  The  Second  Examination,  id.,
p.  40.  _  _  _

78.  Report,  in  The  Triall  of  Maist.  Dorrell,  1599,  pp.  92-93.  Compare
the  case  of  John  Chambers,  1645,  in  Add.  MS.  27402,  foil.  108  v°-i09  r",
and  see  foil.  110  r°,  114  v°.

79.  Folk-Lore  Record,  II  (1879),  207-209.

80.  The  Antiquary,  XLI  (1901;),  363.

81.  P.  de  I'Ancre,  Tableau  de  ITnconstance  des  Mauvais  Anges  et
Demons,  1613,  sig.  o.

82.  Contemporary  narrative,  as  above  (note  53),  sig.  Aiiij,  If.  4  r°.

83.  Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),  215.

84.  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  p.  161.

85.  Mathews,  Tales  of  the  Blackdown  Borderland,  p.  107,  cf.  103.

86.  Bodin,  Demonomanie,  1580,  iv,  4,  fol.  194  v°.

87.  A  Detection  of  Damnable  Driftes,  1579;  Alexander  Roberts,  A
Treatise  of  Witchcraft,  1616,  p.  58;  State  Trials,  II  (1816),  1058.  See  also
A  Tryal  of  Witches  at  Bury  St.  Edmonds  (London,  1682),  pp.  5-8  (toad
exploded);  Marlowe,  Legends  of  the  Fenland  People,  1926,  p.  224  (toad
exploded  at  the  fire;  witch  scorched);  Skattegraveren,  IX  (1888),  239;
0ns  Volksleven,  IX  (1897),  14;  E.  John,  Aberglaube,  Sitte  und  Brauch
im  Sachsischen  Erzgebirge,  1909,  p.  134;  Wuttke-Meyer,  p.  117;  Folk-
Lore,  XII  (1901),  172;  De  Cock  and  Teirlinck,  Brabantsch  Sagenboek,  I
(1909),  30.  Cf.  Guazzo  (Guaccius),  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  i,
I3>  P-  ^3-  For  a  very  curious  example  of  charm  and  counter-charm  (a
witch  turns  a  man  into  a  fox  and  is  herself  transformed  into  a  toad)  see
the  romance  of  Walewein,  vv.  5694-5755,  ed.  Jonckbloet,  I  (1846),  189-
191.  For  toad  see  also  The  Disclosing  (as  in  note  53),  sig.  Av,  If.  2  r°.

88.  Croniques  de  London,  ed.  Aungier  (Camden  Society,  XXVIII),
PP-  3-4-

89.  Holkot  (died  1349),  Super  Libros  Sapientie,  Lectio  190,  Reutlingen,
1489,  sig.  Miiij,  If.  4  r°.

90.  See  p.  159,  above.  In  Transylvania,  if  you  kill  a  frog,  rain  ensues
(E.  Gerard,  The  Land  Beyond  the  Forest,  New  York,  1888,  p.  203).


502


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


91.  See  p.  219.  Cf.  C.  K.  Sharpe,  Historical  Account  of  the  Belief  in
Witchcraft  in  Scotland,  1884,  p.  199  (horse).

92.  See  p.  232,  above.  Compare  the  Jewish  story  in  Blau,  Das  Altjiid-
ische  Zauberwesen,  1898,  p.  158:  Zeiri  bought  an  ass  at  Alexandria,
but  when  he  wished  to  water  him,  the  spell  dissolved  and  the  ass  became
a  plank.  See  also  Dr.  Faustus,  chap.  34,  Thorns,  Early  English  Prose
Romances,  2d  ed.,  1858,  III,  259-260;  Prato,  La  Tradition,  V  (1891),
360-367;  VI  (1892),  69-72,  138-142;  VII  (1893),  295-300;  Blade,  Contes
Populaires  de  la  Gascogne,  1886,  II,  152-157.

93.  William  of  Malmesbury,  Gesta  Regum,  ii,  171,  ed.  Stubbs,  I,  201-
202;  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  I,  518-519;  Flores
Historiarum,  ed.  Luard,  I,  567-568;  Roger  of  Wendover,  Flores  Histori-
arum,  ed.  Coxe,  I,  485-486;  Bromton,  Twysden,  Scriptores  X,  col.  940;
Radulfus  Niger,  ed.  Anstruther,  pp.  155-156;  Vincent  of  Beauvais,
Speculum  Naturale,  iii,  109;  Bodin,  ed.  1587,  ii,  6,  fol.  iii;  Ulrich  Moli-
toris,  De  Pythonicis  Mulieribus,  cap.  3  (in  1620  ed.  of  Malleus,  II,  43);
A  Pleasant  Treatise  of  Witches,  1673,  pp.  22-23  (from  William).  One
manuscript  of  the  Flores  (Luard,  I,  568)  cites  St.  Augustine  and  the  Life
of  St.  Macarius  (Acta  Sanctorum,  January  1 5,  p.  1013).  On  the  popularity
of  Apuleius  in  the  middle  ages  see  Traube,  Munich  Academy,  Abhand-
lungen,  Philosophisch-Philologische  Classe,  XIX,  308.  He  does  not  men-
tion William's  story.  Neither  does  Weinhold,  Ueber  das  Marchen  vom
Eselmenschen,  Berlin  Academy,  Sitzungsberichte,  1893,  pp.  475-488.

94.  De  Civitate  Dei,  xviii,  17  (Pliny,  viii,  22,  34).

95.  De  Civitate  Dei,  xviii,  18.  Here  also  is  the  story  of  Prestantius'
father  transformed  into  a  horse  by  magic  cheese  (cf.  Cotta,  The  Infallible
True  and  Assured  Witch,  1624,  p.  37).

96.  Scot,  V,  3-5,  pp.  94-101  (72-77),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  75-80,  from
Malleus  Maleficarum  (Pt.  II,  qu.  2,  cap.  4,  ed.  1620,  pp.  285-286)  and
Bodin  (ed.  1587,  ii,  6,  fol.  no  v°);  A  Pleasant  Treatise  of  Witches,  1673,
pp.  23-24  (from  Malleus).

97.  Bolte  and  Polivka,  Anmerkungen  zu  den  Kinder-  u.  Hausmarchen
der  Brijder  Grimm,  II  (191 5),  60-69.  A  witch  in  Bohemia  had  a  magic
halter  by  means  of  which  she  transformed  a  man  into  a  horse  and  worked
him  on  her  farm;  but  the  tables  were  turned  on  her  (Deutsche  Volkskunde
aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,  IX  [1909],  61).

98.  Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  viii,  837-865;  Crusius  in  Roscher's  Lexikon
der  Mythologie,  I,  1375-1377;  Zielinski,  Philologus,  L  (1891),  137-162
(especially  pp.  139-140,  144-151).

99.  Acta  Sanctorum,  January  15,  I  (1643),  1013;  An  Alphabet  of
Tales,  No.  237,  ed.  Banks,  I  (1904),  166.  The  legend  is  often  cited,  as,
for  example,  by  Ulrich  Molitoris,  De  Pyrhonicis  Muheribus,  cap.  8  (in
1620  ed.  of  Malleus,  II,  60-61),  and  in  Malleus  Maleficarum,  Part  I,  qu.
10,  ed.  1620,  p.  99.

100.  Cf.  A  True  and  Impartial  Relation  of  the  Informations  against
Three  Witches,  1682,  p.  19.

101.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Topographia  Hibernica,  ii,  19,  Opera,  ed.
Dimock,  V,  106.  In  the  same  chapter  he  tells  of  Irish  werewolves  and  cites


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XI  503

St.  Augustine  and  his  reference  to  Apuleius.  Cf.  Kittredge,  [.larvard]
Studies  and  Notes  in  Pliilology  and  Literature,  VIII  (1903),  257-260.

102.  See  Nyrop,  Navnets  Magt,  1887.

103.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Admirandis  Beati  Cuthberti  Virtutibus,
cap.  15,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  Society,  I),  pp.  26-28.

CHAPTER  XI

Mirrors  and  Thieves

1.  For  crystallomancy  and  mirror  magic  see,  for  example,  Haberland,
Die  Spiegel  im  Glauben  und  Brauch  der  Volker,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volker-
psychologie,  XIII  (1882),  324-347;  Wm.  Jones,  Finger-Ring  Lore,  1877,
1898,  p.  loi  (figure);  Tuchmann,  Melusine,  IV  (1888-89),  278-282;
Archivio  per  lo  Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  XVI  (1897),  422-431
(hydromancy);  Alfonso  el  Sabio,  Las  Siete  Partidas,  vii,  23,  i  (ed.  1807,
III,  667);  Speculum  Morale,  Book  iii.  Part  iii,  dist.  17  (error  for  27),  1493,
fol.  190  v°;  Etienne  de  Bourbon,  Septem  Dona  Spiritus  Sancti,  ed.  Lecoy
de  la  Marche,  1877,  PP-  3i7~3i8;  Cardano,  De  Rerum  Varietate,  xvi,  93,
Opera,  III  (1663),  325-326;  Fortunatus  de  Grippis,  De  Superstitione  et
Vinculis  Daemonum,  pp.  13-15;  Ricardus  Argentinus,  De  Praestigiis  et
Incantationibus  Daemonum  et  Necromanticorum,  1568,  cap.  3,  pp.  23-27;
Rowlands,  The  Letting  of  Humours  Blood  in  the  Head-Vaine,  1600,
Hunterian  Club,  p.  60;  Giffard,  A  Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and
Witchcraftes,  1593,  sigg.  D4  v°,  E4,  F;  Wm.  Perkins,  The  Combat  be-
tweene  Christ  and  the  Devil  Displayed,  2d  ed.,  1606,  p.  37  (the  visions  in
the  mirror  are  sent  by  Satan);  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d
ed.,  1629,  p.  134;  Bower,  Doctor  Lamb  Revived,  1653,  pp.  2-3,  6;  Wm.
Turner,  A  Compleat  History  of  the  Most  Remarkable  Providences,  1697,
Part  I,  chap,  xi,  pp.  59-60;  Mr.  William  Lilly's  History  of  his  Life  and
Times,  2d  ed.,  171 5,  pp.  101-103;  Archaeologia,  XL  (1866),  396;  Hans
Sachs,  Von  Fiinff  Unhulden,  ed.  von  Keller,  V,  286;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.
245-246;  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri  (Schriften  der  Schweizerischen
Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XVIII),  I  (1926),  224-225;  Notices  et
Extraits,  XIX,  i  (1862),  221-222  (from  Ibn  Khaldun,  born  1332,  died
1406);  Mittheilungen  der  Deutschen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Natur-  und  Volker-
kunde  Ostasiens,  VI  (1893-97),  28-30  and  fig.  43  (China);  K.  L.  Parker,
The  Euahlayi  Tribe,  1905,  p.  36  (xAustralia);  Rattray,  Ashanti,  1923,
p.  163.  Much  valuable  material  (with  a  welter  of  Freudian  psychology)
may  be  found  in  Geza  Roheim,  Spiegelzauber,  1919.

2.  John  Wesley's  Journal,  July  24,  1761,  Standard  Edition,  IV,  472.

3.  Dawson,  The  Reliquary,  XXIII  (1882-83),  197-202.  See  also  his
History  of  Skipton,  1882,  pp.  390-394.

4.  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Otia  Imperialia,  i,  17  (Leibnitz,  Scriptores
Rerum  Brunsvicensium,  I,  897;  Liebrecht,  p.  6);  Guilielmus  Alvernus,
De  Universo,  ii,  2,  35,  Opera,  1674,  I,  878;  Wier,  De  Praestigiis  Dae-
monum, V,  5,  ed.  1568,  pp.  460-463;  Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicae,  iii,
2,  4,  9,  ed.  1616,  p.  475;  Cardano,  De  Subtilitate,  xix.  Opera,  III  (1663),


504        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


655-656;  P.  de  I'Ancre,  Le  Incredulite  et  Mescreance  du  Sortilege,  1622,
p.  777;  Abt,  Die  Apologie  des  Apuleius,  pp.  171-177  (245-251),  184-185
(258-259);  Alemannia,  XVII  (1889),  240-241;  McBryde,  Modern
Language  Notes,  XXI  (1906),  182;  Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  Glasgow  ed.,
V  (1905),  434;  Hopfner,  Griechisch-Agyptischer  Offenbarungszauber,  I
(Studien  zur  Palaographie  und  Papyruskunde,  ed.  Wessely,  XXI),  1891,
§  846,  p.  236;  B.  M.  Papyrus  xlvi  (fourth  century),  Kenyon,  Greek
Papyri  in  the  British  Museum,  I  (1893),  65-67.

5.  John  of  Salisbury,  Policraticus,  ii,  28,  ed.  Webb,  I,  161.

6.  Chaucer,  The  Parson's  Tale,  §  37,  ed.  Skeat,  IV,  607.  For  scapuli-
mancy  see  Chapter  VII,  note  44.

7.  Le  Manuel  des  Pechiez,  vv.  1090-1091;  Handlyng  Synne,  vv.  351-
354  (ed.  Furnivall,  Roxburghe  Club,  1862,  pp.  12-13).  Cf.  Bishop  Peter
Quivil,  Modus  Exigendi  Confessiones  (Synod  of  Exeter,  1287),  Wilkins,
Concilia,  II,  162  (p.  48,  above).  For  "turning  the  psalter"  see  pp.  196  fF.

8.  John  of  Salisbury,  Policraticus,  ii,  28,  ed.  Webb,  I,  164-165.

9.  See  p.  208.

10.  Document  printed  by  Raine,  Archaeological  Journal,  XVI  (1859),

80.

11.  Registrum  Radulphi  Baldock,  ed.  Fowler  (Canterbury  and  York
Series,  VII),  I,  144-145.

12.  Wilkins,  Concilia,  III,  394:  "Unus  lapis  de  birillo,  artificialiter  in
corio  nigro  suspensus."

13.  Visitations  of  Religious  Houses  in  the  Diocese  of  Lincoln,  ed.
Thompson  (Canterbury  and  York  Series,  XXIV),  II,  208-213.

14.  Document  printed  by  Raine,  Archseological  Journal,  XIII  (1856),

372-374-

15.  Hale,  pp.  lo-ii.

16.  Lee's  petition,  Archseologia,  LX  (1907),  377-378.

17.  Hale,  p.  84.

18.  Cf.  Letters  and  Papers,  XIII,  i.  No.  1383,  p.  512:  1538,  informa-
tion about  a  priest  who  "said  he  had  for  four  years  dwelt  with  my  Lord
Cardinal,  and  had  made  him  a  ring  with  a  stone  that  he  wrought  many
things  with."

19.  Ellis,  Original  Letters,  3d  Series,  III  (1846),  41-42;  Letters  and
Papers,  IX,  No.  551,  p.  182.

20.  Statutes  of  the  Realm,  III  (1817),  837.

21.  Wycherley's  deposition  in  J.  G.  Nichols,  Narratives  of  the  Days  of
the  Reformation  (Camden  Society,  LXXVII),  pp.  333-334..

22.  Scot,  XV,  8,  12,  16,  pp.  40i-407>  411-414,  422-423  (285-289,  293-
295)  304-305)>  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  335-340,  344-346,  354-355-

23.  A  True  and  Faithful  Relation  of  What  Passed  for  Many  Years
between  Dr.  John  Dee  and  some  Spirits,  1659.

24.  Cuming,  Journal  of  the  British  Archseological  Association,  V
(1850),  52;  Proceedings  Society  of  Antiquaries,  2d  Series,  XXI  (1906-
07),  382-383;  Horace  Walpole's  Letters,  ed.  Toynbee,  VIII,  22-23;  XII,
145.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XI  505

25.  See,  for  example,  E.  W.  Lane,  Manners  and  Customs  of  the  Modern
Egyptians,  I  (1837),  365-376;  Lefebure,  Le  Miroir  d'Encre  dans  la  Magie
Arabe,  Revue  Africaine,  XLIX  (1905),  205-227;  Doutte,  Magie  et  Re-
ligion de  I'Afrique  du  Nord,  1909,  pp.  387-394  (water,  basin,  mirror,
sword,  ink);  Westermarck,  Ritual  and  Belief  in  Morocco,  1926,  I,  353-
355  (ink);  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  1882,  p.  93  (black  paste);  The  Indian
Antiquary,  XXXIII  (1904),  56;  Bompas,  Folklore  of  the  Santal  Par-
ganas,  1919,  p.  419  (oiled  leaf);  Melland,  In  Witch-Bound  Africa,  1923,
p.  225  (water  turning  black;  Northern  Rhodesia);  E.  W.  Smith  and  Dale,
The  Ila-Speaking  Peoples  of  Northern  Rhodesia,  1920,  I,  271  (blackened
water);  P.  A.  Talbot,  The  Peoples  of  Southern  Nigeria,  1926,  II,  190
(blackened  water,  etc.);  Seligmann,  The  Melanesians  of  British  New
Guinea,  1910,  pp.  654-655  (red  juice);  Gomes,  Seventeen  Years  among
the  Sea  Dyaks  of  Borneo,  191 1,  p.  166  (crystal);  Am  Ur-Ouell,  N.  F.,
Ill  (1892),  63  (blood  on  fingernail).

26.  Scott's  Journal,  October  16,  1831,  ed.  1890,  III,  420-421.

27.  Aubrey's  Miscellanies,  2d  ed.,  1721,  p.  135;  4th  ed.,  1857,  p.  130.
For  crystal  or  beryl  see  2d  ed.,  pp.  165-168  (with  figure  opposite  p.  i);
4th  ed.,  pp.  154-157-

28.  For  thief  magic  of  one  sort  or  another  see  Middle  English  versified
Herbal,  vv.  621-626,  ed.  Stephens,  Archaeologia,  XXX  (1844),  369  (vv.
161-166,  ed.  Holthausen,  Anglia,  XVIII  [1896],  311;  vv.  181-186,  ed.
Garrett,  Anglia,  XXXIV  [191 1],  169);  Richard  Argentine  (Argentinus),
De  Praestigiis  et  Incantationibus  Daemonum  et  Necromanticorum,  1568,
pp.  180-181;  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  pp.
134-135;  Couch,  The  History  of  Polperro,  1871,  p.  126;  Old  Yorkshire,
ed.  by  WiUiam  Smith,  IV  (1883),  267-269;  The  ReHquary,  VI  (1865-66),
I4;  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  II  (1867-68),  73-74;  Bye-
Gones  for  1876-77,  pp.  112,  161-162,  170;  for  1878-79,  p.  188;  for  1905-
06,  pp.  299-300;  Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1891),  143  (figure
of  thief  on  wall);  Folk-Lore,  XV  (1904),  80-81;  J.  Hunter,  The  Diocese
and  Priory  of  Dunkeld,  11,  61-65,  67-68;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the
Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.  278-282;  The  Occult  Review,  XL  (1924),  20-
21  (Wales);  Skattegraveren,  X  (1888),  102-103;  -^^^  Arnamagnaeanske
Handskrift  Nr.  187,  ed.  Saby,  1886,  p.  97;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,
i  (1900),  70-71,  78-80,  86-87,  89-91,  271-272,  275,  285,  287-290,  301-
303,  323-327;  Ohrt,  Trylleord  (Danmarks  Folkeminder,  No.  25),  1922,
pp.  22-27;  Bidrag  till  Sodermanlands  Aldre  Kulturhistoria,  I,  iv  (1883),
74;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer  og  Magiske  Opskrifter  (Videnskabs-
sellskabet  i  Christiania),  1901,  pp.  337-338,  363-364,  407-408,  462-463,
468-469,  476,  484,  490,  493, 502-503,  510,  513-514,  532,  536-537,  571-572,
575-576,  580-582,  639-640,  647-686,  756-757;  Renvall,  Alandsk  Folktro,
1890,  pp.  35-37  (Nyare  Bidrag  till  Kannedom  om  de  Svenska  Lands-
malen,  VII,  No.  9);  Svenska  Landsmal,  1906,  i,  p.  22;  Hastesko,  Mo-
tivverzeichnis  Westfinnischer  Zauberspriiche  (FF  Communications,  II,
No.  19),  1914,  pp.  55-56;  Skrifter  utgivna  av  SvenskaLitteratursallskapet  i
Finland,  XVIII  (1891),  187;  Schonbach,  Vienna  Sitzungsberichte,  Philo-
sophisch-Historische  Classe,  CXLII  (1900),  No.  7,  p.  149;  Ons  Volksleven,


5o6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


X  (1898),  133-134;  XI  (1899),  43-44;  Am  Ur-Quell,  II  (1891),  126-127,
185-187;   III  (1892),  219-220,  232;  V  (1894),  289-290;   Beitrage  zur
Volkskunde,  1896  (Germanistische  Abhandlungen,  XII),  pp.  114-116,  118;
Reiser,  Sagen,  Gebrauche  und  Sprichworter  des  Allgaus,  I  (1895),  211-
212;  Blatter  fiir  Pommersche  Volkskunde,  IV  (1896),  119-120,  139-141;
V  (1897),  56-58;  X  (1902),  165;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreichische  Volks-
kunde, II  (1896),  151-153;   VI  (1900),  118-119;   Niederlausitzer  Mit-
theilungen,  II   (1892),  47-48;    VII  (1903),  375-376;  Schweizerisches
Archiv  fiir  Volkskunde,  I  (1897),  232-233;  XV  (191 1),  188;  Kleeberger,
Volkskundiges  aus  Fischbach  i.  d.  Pfalz,  1902,  pp.  56-58;  Zeitschrift  des
Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfalische  Volkskunde,  II  (1905),  298-299;
Mitteilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  iX,  ii  (1907),
24;  John,  Sitte,  Brauch  und  Volksglaube  im  Deutschen  Westbohmen,
Beitrage  zur  Deutsch-Bohmischen  Volkskunde,  VI  (1905),  275-278,  299-
302,  322-323;   Deutsche  Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,  IX
(1909),  57;  Schweizer  Volkskunde,  II  (1912),  lo-ii;  Manz,  Volksbrauch
und  Volksglaube  des  Sarganserlandes,  Schriften  der  Schweizerischen
Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XII  (1916),  114-116;   Knuchel,  Die  Um-
wandlung,  the  same,  XV  (1919),  85-86;  B.  M.  Papyrus  xlvi,  11.  172-201,
295-303,  Kenyon,  Greek  Papyri  in  the  British  Museum,  I  (1893),  70-71,
74  (cf.  Kuhnert,  Rheinisches  Museum,  XLIX  [1894],  38-39);  A.  Vassiliev,
Anecdota  Graeco-Byzantina,  I  (i  893),  340-341 ;  Jacoby,  Hessische  Blatter
fiir  Volkskunde,  XXV  (1927),  200-208;  Pseudo-Augustine,  Sermon  279,
§  4  (Migne,  XXXIX,  2272-2273);    Bartholomaeus  Sibylla,  Speculum
Peregrinarum  Quaestionum,  1493,  fol.  cclxxi  r°;  Germania,  I  (1856),  105-
107;  XXII(i877),  258;  XXVI  (1881),  241;  XXXI  (1886),  346;  Haupt's
Zeitschrift,  XXXV  (1891),  248-249;    Alemannia,  II  (1875),  128-129,
131-132,  134-135;  XXXI  (1903),  184;   Wolf,  Beitrage  zur  Deutschen
Mythologie,  I  (1852),  257-258;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  175-177,  254-255,
413-415;  Frischbier,  Hexenspruch  und  Zauberbann,  1870,  pp.  111-122;
Dieterich,  Kleine  Schriften,  191 1,  p.  197;  Lowenstimm,  Aberglaube  und
Strafrecht,  1897,  pp.  84-92;  the  Same,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Socialwissenschaft,
VI  (1903),  224-227;  Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthropologie,  III  (1900),  89-
90,  92,  96-97;  XIX  (1905),  294-295;  LVI  (1914),  270-273;  Seligmann,
The  Melanesians  of  British  New  Guinea,  1910,  pp.  133,  182,  654-655;
Folk-Lore,  XV  (1904),  246-248  (Basuto);  Thurston,  Omens  and  Super-
stitions of  Southern  India,  1912,  pp.  270-271,  287-288;  Crooke,  Religion
and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  p.  31 1 ;  Orde  Browne,  The  Vanishing
Tribes  of  Kenya,  1925,  pp.  185-188;  Gimlette,  Malay  Poisons  and  Charm
Cures,  1923,  pp.  61-68;  I.  H.  N.  Evans,  Studies  in  Religion,  etc.,  in  British
North  Borneo  and  the  Malay  Peninsula,  1923,  p.  26;  Bentley,  Pioneering
on  the  Congo,  1900,  I,  279;  Joao  dos  Santos,  Ethiopia  Oriental,  v,  13,  ed.
1608,  fol.  129  (Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  Glasgow  ed.,  IX  [1905],  254);  West-
ermarck,  Ritual  and  Belief  in  Morocco,  1926,  I,  353,  356;  Journal  of
the  Gypsy  Lore  Society,  2d  Series,  V  (1911-12),  275-276;  E.  W.  Smith
and  A.  M.  Dale,  The  Ila-Speaking  Peoples  of  Northern  Rhodesia,  1920, 1,
265-267;  AUdridge,  The  Sherbro  and  its  Hinterland,  1901,  pp.  162-163;
Boyes,  A  White  King  in  East  Africa,  1912,  pp.  245-247;  Journal  Royal


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XI  507

Anthropological  Institute,  XXIII  (1894),  161;  XXIV  (1890,44;  XXIX
(1899),  51-52;  XXXVIII  (1908),  164-165,  167-168;  XLi  (191 1),  303-
304;  XLV  (1915),  137;  XLVII  (1917),  157;  LV  (1925),  231,  262,  263,
462;  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1884-85),  4,  23,  78,  167-168;  Purchas
his  Pilgrimes,  XV  (1906),  351;  Mittheilungen  der  Deutschen  Gesellschaft
fiir  Natur-  und  Volkerkunde  Ostasiens,  VI  (1893-97),  28-29;  Lefevre-
Pontalis,  Annales  du  Musee  Guimet,  XXVI,  iv  (1900),  102,  104;  Mooney,
Bureau  of  Ethnology,  7th  Report  (for  1885-86),  1891,  pp.  386-387;  Le-
land,  Gypsy  Sorcery,  1891,  pp.  85-87,  108-110.

29.  See  pp.  196-200.

30.  AudoUent,  Defixionum  Tabellae,  1904,  Nos.  2-4B,  pp.  8-12;  No.
6,  pp.  13-14;  Nos.  11-12,  pp.  18-19;  No.  42,  pp.  77-78;  Nos.  74-75>  PP-
102-104;  No.  104,  pp.  156-159  (Bath);  No.  122,  pp.  177-178;  No.  212,
pp.  283-286.

31.  Wier,  V,  5,  ed.  1568,  pp.  463-464;  Godelmann,  Tractatus  de  Magis,
Veneficis  et  Lamiis,  1591,  i,  5,  7-9,  p.  42;  A.  Taylor,  Hessische  Blatter  fiir
Volkskunde,  XXII  (1924),  59-63;  cf.  XII  (1913),  139-143.  See  also  Mit-
teilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  IX,  i  (1907),  44-
45;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  70-71,  383-389;  Bang,  Norske
Hexeformularer  (Videnskabssellskabet  i  Christiania),  1901,  No.  1376,
pp.  647-655;  Wigstrom,  Folktro  ock  Sagner,  p.  302  (Nyare  Bidrag  till
Kannedom  om  de  Svenska  Landsmalen,  VIII,  No.  3,  1902);  Ohrt,  Trylle-
ord  (Danmarks  Folkeminder,  No.  25),  1922,  pp.  22-24.  Cf.  Skeat,
Malay  Magic,  1900,  pp.  155,  310;  Papyrus  xlvi  (4th  century),  Kenyon,
Greek  Papyri  in  the  British  Muesum,  I  (1893),  67-68;  A.  Vassiliev,
Anecdota  Graeco-Byzantina,  I  (1893),  341;  M.  Barrels,  Die  Medicin  der
Naturvolker,  1923,  p.  97,  cf.  98-101;  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,
XVI  (1913),  122-126;  XVIII  (1915),  585-587;  XXI  (1922),  485-491.  For
a  witch's  curse  that  makes  one  lose  an  eye  see  Strype,  The  Life  of  Sir
Thomas  Smith,  1698,  pp.  131-132;  cf.  A  True  and  Impartial  Relation  of
the  Informations  against  Three  Witches,  1682,  p.  25.  For  a  sacrilegious
thief  struck  blind  by  miracle  see  Gregory  of  Tours,  De  Gloria  Martyrum,
cap.  66  (Migne,  LXXI,  765).  In  a  very  interesting  charm  against  a  thief
(fifteenth  century),  with  directions  in  English  and  prayer  in  Latin,  a  delin-
eated eye  is  to  be  struck  out  with  a  copper  nail  and  a  copper  hammer
(Sloane  MS.  2721,  fol.  137).

32.  Archseologia  Cambrensis,  3d  Series,  II  (1856),  185;  Germania,
XXXI  (1886),  346.  Cf.  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  186-187,  413;  Schambach
and  Miiller,  Niedersachsische  Sagen  und  Marchen,  1855,  pp.  172-173;
Bartsch,  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  II  (1880),  334;
Strackerjan,  Aberglaube  und  Sagen  aus  dem  Herzogtum  Oldenburg,  2d
ed.,  1909,  I,  122-123;  Knoop,  Volkssagen  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Hinter-
pommern,  1885,  p.  169;  Am  Ur-Quell,  II  (1891),  125-126;  III  (1892),  200;
Zeitschrift  der  Gesellschaft  fiir  die  Geschichte  der  Herzogthiimer  Schles-
wig,  Holstein  und  Lauenburg,  III  (1873),  135-140;  Merker,  Die  Masai,
1904,  p.  254;  Hobley,  Bantu  Beliefs  and  Magic,  1922,  p.  171.  Cf.  Panjab
Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1884-85),  4,  23;  Ivens,  Melanesians  of  the  South-
East  Solomon  Islands,  1927,  p.  268;  W.  J.  V.  Saville,  In  Unknown  New


5o8         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Guinea,  1926,  pp.  269-270;  M.  H.  Bradley,  Caravans  and  Cannibals,

1927.  PP-  71-72-

33.  See  p.  129.

34.  Dawson,  History  of  Skipton,  1882,  pp.  392-393;  The  Reliquary,
XXIII  (1883),  198.

35.  Scot,  xii,  17,  pp.  260-266  (188-192),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  211-216.
He  is  largely  indebted  to  Wier,  v,  5-6  (ed.  1568,  pp.  460-467).

36.  Reliquiae  Antiquae,  1845,  ^>  Henslowe's  Diary,  ed.  Greg,
p.  33;  Coulton,  Social  Life  in  Britain,  1918,  p.  527.  Cf.  Bang,  Norske
Hexeformularer,  i90i,Nos.  1091,  1109,  1172,  1 173,  pp.  484,  490,  513-514.
See  also  Sloane  MS.  2628,  foil.  10  v°,  51  r°  (the  latter  is  like  Henslowe).

37.  See  Wiilker,  Bibliothek  der  Angelsachsischen  Poesie,  I,  323-325;
McBryde,  Modern  Language  Notes,  XXI  (1906),  180-183;  Grendon,
Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXII  (1909),  168-169,  178-187,  206-207,
218,  221-223,  224,  234;  Skemp,  Modern  Language  Review,  VI  (191 1),
298-299.

38.  (i)  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  I,  390-393  (practically  identical
with  III,  60).  (2)1,392.  (3)111,286-289;  McBryde,  p.  181.  (4)  McBryde,
p.  181  (cf.  a  seventeenth-century  charm,  p.  182).  For  a  twelfth-century
English  charm  against  thieves  see  Priebsch,  Modern  Language  Review,
XVII  (1922),  81.

39.  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed.  Stevenson  (Surtees  Society,  X),
p.  119.

40.  Leechdoms,  I,  384.

41.  Leechdoms,  III,  58;  Leonhardi,  Kleinere  Angelsachsische  Denk-
maler,  I  (1905),  145.

42.  Leechdoms,  I,  396,  397.

43.  An  English  protective  charm  against  thieves  (ca.  1450)  is  eminently
religious  (Ein  Mittelenglisches  Medizinbuch,  ed.  Heinrich,  1896,  p.  170).
Modernized:  "Carmen  contra  latrones.  In  Bethlehem  God  was  born.
Between  two  beasts  to  rest  he  was  laid.  In  that  place  was  neither  thief
nor  man,  but  the  Holy  Trinity.  That  same  God  that  there  was  born  de-
fend our  bodies  and  our  chattels  from  thieves  and  all  manner  of  mischiefs
and  harms  wherever  we  wend,  by  land,  by  water,  by  night  or  by  day,  by
tide  or  by  time!  Amen."  This  is  a  fuller  version  of  a  vernacular  formula
in  Leechdoms,  I,  390,  and  III,  60.  See  a  seventeenth-century  English
version  in  Sloane  MS.  2628,  fol.  6  r°  (cf.  fol.  46).

44.  Compare  a  similar  case  in  Gregory  of  Tours,  vii,  44.  See  also  Giral-
dus  Cambrensis,  Itinerarium  Kambriae,  i,  2,  Opera,  ed.  Dimock,  VI,  94-95.

45.  Magna  Vita  S.  Hugonis,  v,  8,  ed.  Dimock,  pp.  267-269.

46.  John  of  Salisbury,  Policraticus,  ii,  28,  ed.  Webb.  I,  161.

47.  Robert  of  Brunne,  Handlyng  Synne,  vv.  339-354,  ed.  Furnivall
(Roxburghe  Club),  1862,  pp.  12-13.  The  French  does  not  mention  lost
goods,  but  it  does  specify  divination  by  "turning  the  psalter,"  which  was
often  used  for  the  detection  of  a  thief.

48.  Registrum  Radulphi  Baldock,  ed.  Fowler  (Canterbury  and  York
Series,  VII),  I,  144-145.


/


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XI


49.  Royal  MS.  15.  Axx  (ca.  1400),  ed.  M.  R.  James,  English  Histori-
cal Review,  XXXVII  (1922),  420-421.

50.  See  pp.  187-189,  above.

51.  Letter-Book  H,  fol.  cxliii  (Riley,  Memorials  of  London,  pp.  462-
463;  R.  R.  Sharpe,  Calendar  of  Letter-Books,  H,  p.  181).

52.  Foxe,  Acts  and  Monuments,  ed.  1583,  II,  43  ("Ex  Regist.  Long-
land,  fol.  50").

53.  Modus  Exigendi  Confessiones,  Synod  of  Exeter,  Wilkins,  Concilia,
II,  162.  Cf.  Clyde,  The  Norfolk  Garland,  p.  13  (love  divination);  P.
Masse,  De  I'lmposture  et  Tromperle  des  Diables,  1 579,  i,  8,  fol.  32  (names
written  on  slips  of  paper  and  put  into  holy  water:  see  also  Wallonia,  I
[1893],  150);  Hessische  Blatter  fiir  Volkskunde,  XXV  (1927),  203-208;
Sloane  MS.  121,  fol.  36  v°,  and  2721,  fol.  137  r°  (both  of  fifteenth  century).

54.  The  Connoisseur,  No.  56,  I  (1755),  331-336.  See  Burne  and  Jack-
son, Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  p.  179.  Cf.  Roscoe,  The  Banyankole,  1923,
p.  29;  M.  H.  Bradley,  Caravans  and  Cannibals,  1927,  p.  67.

55.  Letter-Book  H,  fol.  civ  (Riley,  pp.  472-473;  Sharpe,  p.  198).

56.  Registrum  Radulphi  Baldock,  ed.  Fowler  (Canterbury  and  York
Series,  VII),  I,  144-145.

57.  Letter-Book  H,  fol.  clx  (Riley,  pp.  475-476;  Sharpe,  p.  207).

58.  The  same,  fol.  cxlv  (Riley,  pp.  464-466;  Sharpe,  p.  184).  For  the
whetstone  see  Riley,  pp.  316,  353,  423,  432,  477,  493,  497,  584;  Hall's
Satires,  iv,  6,  ed.  Singer,  1824,  p.  115  and  note;  Harington,  Nugae  Anti-
quae,  ed.  Park,  1804,  II,  240;  Summer's  Last  Will  and  Testament,  Col-
Her's  Dodsley,  IX,  24;  Hazlitt,  English  Proverbs,  1869,  pp.  156,  489
(1907,  pp.  181,  497,  560).

59.  Walsingham,  Historia  Anglicana,  ed.  Riley,  II,  63;  Holinshed,  II
(1807),  754.

60.  Letter-Book  H,  fol.  ccxlviii  (Riley,  pp.  518-519;  Sharpe,  p.  351).

61.  Town  Clerk's  proclamation,  Sharpe,  Calendar  of  Letter-Books,  I,
196-197.

62.  Paule's  petition,  Martin,  Archaeologia,  LX  (1907),  371-372.
Fereby's  answer  (pp.  372-373)  naturally  tells  a  different  story;  it  ignores
the  necromancers.

63.  Petition,  Archaeologia,  LX,  377.

64.  Hale,  p.  63.

65.  For  the  similar  indicium  in  psalterio  see  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen
Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  362-364,  391-392;  Zeumer,  Formulae  Aevi
Merowingici  et  Karolini,  1886  (Monumenta,  Leges,  Section  V),  pp.  636-
637;  Patetta,  Le  Ordalie,  1890,  pp.  216-217.  Compare  the  ordeal  of  the
suspended  bread  (Zeumer,  pp.  630-632;  Sloane  MS.  3846,  fol.  27  v°).

66.  Le  Manuel  des  Pechiez,  v.  1090,  ed.  Furnivall  (Roxburghe  Club),
1862,  p.  12.

67.  Hale,  p.  61.

68.  Scot,  xvi,  5,  pp.  477-478  (344),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  401-402.  Cf.
Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicae,  lib.  iv,  cap.  2,  qu.  6,  sect.  4,  §  12,  ed.
1616,  p.  545;  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  ed.  Hazlitt,  1870,  III,  302-303.
See  note  79.


5IO        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


69.  Hale,  p.  61.

70.  Document  printed  by  Raine,  Archaeological  Journal,  XVI  (1859),

81.

71.  Lincoln  Episcopal  Visitations,  Peacock,  Archseologia,  XLVIII
(1885),  262.

72.  Cf.  p.  167,  above.

73.  J.  G.  Nichols,  Narratives  of  the  Days  of  the  Reformation  (Camden
Society,  LXXVII),  p.  332.

74.  See  Patriche's  Complaint  and  Information,  with  Lamkyn's  answer,
summarized  by  W.  J.  Hardy,  The  Antiquary,  XXI  (1890),  4-6;  other
answers  in  G.  W.  Macdonald's  Historical  Notes  of  the  Parish  of  Holbeach,
1890,  pp.  104-106,  cf.  pp.  163-164.

75.  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  Various  Collections,  VII,  53.

76.  J.  C.  Cox,  Churchwardens'  Accounts,  1913,  p.  320.

77.  Giffard,  A  Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1593,
sig.  E3  v°.

78.  For  the  seventeenth  century  see,  for  example,  Dalyell,  The  Darker
Superstitions  of  Scotland,  1834,  p.  522  (1617);  Records  of  the  Borough
of  Leicester,  ed.  Stocks,  IV  (1923),  210  (1624);  County  Folk-Lore,  VII
(1914),  116-117  (1646);  William  Ross,  Aberdour  and  Inchcolme,  1885,
pp.  335-336  (1669,  1678);  Dunton,  The  Athenian  Mercury,  October  16,
1694,  Vol.  XV,  No.  13;  Gaspar  Schott,  Magia  Universalis,  1677,  IV,  557-
558.

79.  Mackie,  Norfolk  Annals,  II  (1901),  156;  The  East  Anglian,  III
(1869),  21-22;  Henderson,  1879,  pp.  235-236;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shrop-
shire Folk-Lore,  pp.  173-174;  Folk-Lore  Journal,  I  (1883),  333;  Bye-
Gones  for  1882-83,  p.  194;  Journal  of  the  British  Archaeological  Associa-
tion, XLVIII  (1892),  48-49.  Cf.  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  I  (1850),
412.  For  further  modern  evidence  see  Bray,  Traditions,  etc.,  of  Devon-
shire, 1838,  II,  294;  Mortimer  M.  Thompson,  The  Witches  of  New  York,
1859,  pp.  300-303;  Saga-Book  of  the  Viking  Club,  III  (1902-04),  54;  James
Napier,  Notes  and  Reminiscences  relating  to  Partick,  1875,  PP-  i99'"2oi;
Trotter,  Galloway  Gossip,  1901,  pp.  129-130;  Hewett,  Nummits  and
Crummits,  1900,  p.  24;  Bergen,  Current  Superstitions,  1896,  p.  144  (Lab-
rador); Transactions  Glasgow  Archaeological  Society,  I  (1868),  392-393
(theft  or  love);  Folk-Lore  Journal,  II  (1884),  380-381;  Bye-Gones  for
1888,  p.  78;  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1895),  "8  (to  detect  a  witch);  VII  (1896),
145  (Lesbos);  Transactions  Cumberland  and  Westmorland  Archaeological
Society,  XIV  (1897),  374  (malice  or  mischief);  Cowper,  Hawkshead,
1899,  pp.  317-318;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  254-255;  A.  Baumgarten,  Aus  der
Volksmassigen  Ueberlieferung  der  Heimat,  Linz,  1864,  II,  10;  Grohmann,
Aberglaube  und  Gebrauche  aus  Bohmen  und  Mahren,  1864,  p.  204;
Mannhardt,  Die  Praktischen  Folgen  des  Aberglaubens,  1878,  pp.  25-26;
Frischbier,  Hexenspruch  und  Zauberbann,  1870,  pp.  11 8-1 19;  Bartsch,
Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklenburg,  II  (1880),  333-334;
Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  336-337;  Am  Ur-Quell,  I  (1890),  47;
II  (1891),  126,  203;  Niederlausitzer  Mittheilungen,  II  (1892),  153;
Blatter  fiir  Pommersche  Volkskunde,  IV  (1896),  120;   Zeitschrift  fiir


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XI


511


Oesterreichische  Volkskunde,  VI  (1900),  118;  Alemannia,  XXXVII
(1909),  16;  E.  H.  Meyer,  Badisches  Volksleben,  1900,  p.  567;  Huss,  Von
Aberglauben,  Beitrage  zur  Deutsch-Bohmischen  Volkskunde,  IX,  ii  (1910),
24  (with  figure);  Archiv  fiir  Strafrecht,  LXII  (1916),  456  (to  detect
witch);  Dykstra,  Uit  Friesland's  Volksleven,  II,  170-171;  Kristensen,
Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  389-391 ;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,
pp.  581,  582;  H.  J.  Bell,  Obeah,  2d  ed.,  1893,  pp.  66-67  (West  Indies).

80.  Dunton,  The  Athenian  Mercury,  Vol.  IV,  No.  22  (1691);  Forby,
The  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia,  1830,  II,  398-399  (love  or  theft);  Clyde,
The  New  Suffolk  Garland,  1866,  p.  176  (Canticles,  viii,  6-7);  Henderson,
Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  2d  ed.,  1879,  pp.  236-
237;  Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,  1892,  p.  124;  Addy,  Household
Tales,  1895,  p.  74  (Ruth,  i,  16,  or  Canticles,  viii,  7);  Peacock,  A  Vocabu-
lary of  Words  used  in  the  Wapentakes  of  Manley  and  Corringham,  1877,
p.  23  (love,  theft,  strayed  cattle);  County  Folk-Lore,  I,  No.  3  (1895),
p.  58  (Canticles,  viii,  7);  V  (1908),  140;  Saga-Book  of  the  Viking  Club,
III  (1902),  54  (love  or  theft);  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  History  and
Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XIII  (1892),  55;  Folk-Lore,  XXIV  (1913),  80;
XXXV  (1924),  352;  Bergen,  Current  Superstitions,  1896,  p.  41  (Canti-
cles, vi,  3);  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  1911,  pp.
13-14;  Trotter,  Galloway  Gossip,  1901,  p.  130.

81.  Henderson,  1879,  p.  235;  Bye-Gones  for  1882-83,  p.  194;  Burne
and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  pp.  173-174;  Folk-Lore  Journal,  I

(1883),  333-

82.  Folk-Lore,  XVI  (1905),  169-170.

83.  Wier,  ii,  12,  ed.  1568,  pp.  176-177.  See  also  P.  Masse,  De  I'lm-
posture  et  Tromperie  des  Diables,  1579,  i,  6  and  9,  foil.  25  v°-26  r°,  35  r°;
Bodin,  Demonomanie,  ii,  i,  ed.  1587,  fol.  59;  Godelmann,  Tractatus  de
Magis,  Veneficis  et  Lamiis,  1591,  i,  5,  19,  pp.  45-46;  Peucer,  Commen-
tarius,  De  Praecipuis  Divinationum  Generibus,  1 593,  p.  321 ;  Lercheimer
(Witekind),  Christlich  Bedencken  vnd  Erinnerung  von  Zauberey,  1597,
ed.  Binz,  1888,  p.  17;  Gaule,  Select  Cases  of  Conscience  touching
Witchcrafts,  1646,  p.  76;  Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicae,  lib.  iv,  cap.  2,
qu.  6,  sect.  4,  §  9,  ed.  1616,  p.  544;  Prsetorius,  De  Coscinomantia,  1677
(with  a  discussion  of  all  manner  of  divining);  Gaspar  Schott,  Magia
Universalis,  1677,  IV,  556-557;  Henry  More,  Antidote  against  Atheism,
1653,  p.  109  ("that  ordinary  way  of  Divination  which  they  call  Coski-
nomancy");  Increase  Mather,  An  Essay  for  the  Recording  of  Illustrious
Providences,  1684,  p.  287;  Dunton,  The  Athenian  Mercury,  October  16,
1694,  Vol.  XV,  No.  13;  Brockett,  A  Glossary  of  English  North  Country
Words,  1825,  p.  174;  G.  Roberts,  The  Social  History  of  the  People  of  the
Southern  Counties,  1856,  p.  532;  John  Hunter,  The  Diocese  and  Priory
of  Dunkeld,  I,  loi;  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  ed.  Hazlitt,  1870,  III,
301-303;  Scheible's  Kloster,  III  (1846),  621-622  (with  figure);  Wuttke-
Meyer,  p.  255;  Am  Ur-Quell,  II  (1891),  126;  Zeitschrift  fur  Oesterreich-
ische Volkskunde,  II  (1896),  319;  VI  (1900),  118;  Huss,  Von  Aber-
glauben, Beitrage  zur  Deutsch-Bohmischen  Volkskunde,  IX,  ii  (1910),
24-25  (with  figure);  Deutsche  Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,


512


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


V  (1905),  39;  Grohmann,  Aberglaube  und  Gebrauche  aus  Bohmen  und
Mahren,  1864,  p.  204;  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  336;  Fritzner,
Historisk  Tidsskrift,  Kristiania,  IV  (1877),  192-194;  Kristensen,  Danske
Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  389-391 ;  Skattegraveren,  V  (1886),  204;  X  (1888),
33;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  580-582;  Wallonia,  I  (1893),
149;  Fehrle,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  XIX  (1919),  547-551  (cf.
Marmorstein,  the  same,  XXI  [1922],  235-238).

84.  Hale,  p.  139.

85.  J.  G.  Nichols,  Narratives  of  the  Days  of  the  Reformation  (Camden
Society,  LXXVII),  p.  334.  Cf.  Baumgarten,  Aus  der  Volksmassigen
Ueberlieferung  der  Heimat,  Linz,  1864,  II,  10;  Giambattista  Basile  (jour-
nal), II  (1884),  41.

86.  Raine,  Depositions  from  the  Castle  of  York  (Surtees  Society,  XL),
p.  82,  note.  Cf.  Notes  and  Queries,  8th  Series,  II  (1892),  305;  Henderson,
Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  1879,  P-  -3^^  Journal
of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXXI  (191 8),  140;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the
Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.  280-282.

87.  Scot,  xii,  17,  p.  262  (189),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  213;  cf.  xvi,  5,  pp.
477-478  (344),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  401-402;  Aubrey,  Remaines  of  Gentil-
isme  and  Judaisme,  ed.  Britten,  1881,  p.  25.  Cf.  Henderson,  1879,  p.  236;
H.  J.  Bell,  Obeah,  2d  ed.,  1893,  p.  64.

88.  Worcester  County  Records,  Calendar  of  Quarter  Sessions  Papers
(Worcestershire  Record  Society),  I,  492;  Historical  MSS.  Commission,
Various  Collections,  I,  307.

89.  William  Ross,  Aberdour  and  Inchcolme,  1885,  pp.  33S~33^  (1678);
Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,  1892,  p.  124.

90.  Durham  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  pp.  251-252.  See  the  same  for
1567  (p.  84),  ca.  1570  (p.  117);  for  1598  see  York  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,
p.  82,  note;  for  1602  see  Goudie,  The  Diary  of  the  Rev.  John  Mill  (Scot-
tish History  Society,  V),  1889,  pp.  185-187;  for  1603,  1604,  1619,  and
1641  see  Dalyell,  p.  521;  for  1669  see  William  Ross,  Aberdour  and  Inch-
colme, 1885,  p.  334.  Cf.  George  Giffard,  A  Discourse  of  the  Subtill
Practises  of  Deuilles  by  Witches  and  Sorcerers,  1587,  sig.  G  v°:  "The
charmer  often  times  knoeth  no  deuil;  but  with  his  charme  of  words  he
can  catch  rattes,  and  burst  snakes,  take  away  the  paine  of  the  tooth  ache,
with  a  paire  of  sheares  and  a  siue,  find  out  a  theife."  Cf.  the  Same,  A
Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1 593,  sig.  F4  v°.  See  also
Bodin,  De  la  Demonomanie  des  Sorciers,  ii,  i,  fol.  59;  iii,  5  (ed.  1587,
foil.  163  [misprinted  273]  v°-i64  [misprinted  264]  r");  Thomas  Brattle,
Letter,  1692  (Burr,  Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft  Cases  1648-1706,  1914,
p.  181);  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  pp.  208-
209  (to  discover  a  witch);  Gaule,  Select  Cases  of  Conscience  touching
Witches  and  Witchcrafts,  1646,  p.  76;  Increase  Mather,  An  Essay  for
the  Recording  of  Illustrious  Providences,  1684,  p.  287;  Brand-Hazlitt,

ni,  301-302.

91.  Holyday,  TexvoyafXLa  or  The  Marriage  of  the  Seven  Arts,  ii,  3,  ist
ed.,  1618,  sigg.  G2-G3.  Cf.  Folk-Lore,  XXXV  (1925),  254.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XI


92.  Cotton  Mather,  The  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  Boston,  1693,
pp.  66-67;  the  Same,  Late  Memorable  Providences,  2d  Impression,  Lon-
don, 1691,  p.  117.  For  a  New  England  seer  in  the  lost-and-stolen  line
see  President  Stiles's  account  of  Mr.  Stafford  of  Tiverton,  who  died  in
1773  (Literary  Diary,  ed.  Dexter,  1901,  I,  386).  See  also  Daniel  Webster,
Defence  of  the  Kennistons  (1817),  Works,  1851,  V,  455,  cf.  443.

93.  Gurdon,  The  Khasis,  2d  ed.,  1914,  p.  119;  Melland,  In  Witch-
Bound  Africa,  1923,  pp.  227-230;  Codrington,  The  Melanesians,  1891,
pp.  211-212,  223;  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  1900,  pp.  536-542.  Cf.  Hilton-
Simpson,  Land  and  Peoples  of  the  Kasai,  1911,  pp.  210-211,  329-330;
Stack,  The  Mikirs,  1908,  p.  35;  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XIV  (1885),  131;
XV  (1886),  327;  XXXIII  (1904),  58  (Ceylon);  Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,
II  (1884-85),  114;  Gouldsburg  and  Sheane,  The  Great  Plateau  of  North-
ern Rhodesia,  191 1,  p.  92;  E.  W.  Smith  and  A.  M.  Dale,  The  Ila-speaking
Peoples  of  Northern  Rhodesia,  1920,  I,  268-269;  Ivens,  Melanesians  of
the  South-East  Solomon  Islands,  1927,  pp.  346-347;  Journal  (Royal)
Anthropological  Institute,  XXXII  (1902),  326;  LIII  (1923),  73-74;
Mooney,  7th  Report,  Bureau  of  Ethnology,  1921,  pp.  386-387  (Chero-
kees).

94.  Theocritus,  iii,  31 ;  Aelian,  De  Natura  Animalium,  viii,  5;  Arte-
midorus,  Oneirocritica,  ii,  69;  Lucian,  Alexander,  9;  Philippides  in  Pol-
lux, Onomasticon,  vii,  188  (Meineke,  Fragmenta,  IV  [1841],  478).

95.  Halliwell,  Popular  Rhymes  and  Nursery  Tales,  1849,  P-  -°7'
further  examples  of  spells  and  rites  to  "bind"  thieves,  see  Hollingsworth,
The  History  of  Stowmarket,  1894,  p.  247  (thief  wanders  round  and
round);  F.  Hancock,  Parish  of  Selworthy,  1897,  p.  243  (magic  bag  in
chimney;  thief  cannot  pass  house);  Cowper,  Hawkshead,  1899,  pp.  313-
314  (thief  is  to  find  himself  on  rooftree  of  church  during  morning  service);
The  Eastern  Counties  Collectanea,  ed.  L'Estrange,  1872-73,  p.  29;  Folk-
Lore,  XXI  (1910),  377-378;  Baumgarten,  Aus  der  Volksmassigen  Ueber-
lieferung  der  Heimat,  Linz,  1864,  II,  5-9;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,
i  (1900),  265,  287,  290-291,  293,  305,  329,  331;  cf.  pp.  263-266;  Bang,
Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  337,  363-364,  462-463,  510,  532,  756-
757;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreichische  Volkskunde,  II  (1896),  151-152;
IV  (1898),  265-266;  Wuttke-Meyer,  p.  413;  Am  Ur-Quell,  II  (1891),
125-126,  185-187;  V  (1894),  289;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkskunde,  I  (1889),
346;  IV  (1892),  259;  Kleeberger,  Volkskundiges  aus  Fischbach  i.d.  Pfalz,
1902,  pp.  56-57;  Bartsch,  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche  aus  Meklen-
burg,II  (1880),  335-341;  Blatter  fiir  Pommersche  Volkskunde,  IV  (1896),
158-160,169-170;  V  (1897),  57;  Strackerj an,  Aberglaube  und  Sagen  aus
dem  Herzogtum  Oldenburg,  2d  ed.,  1909,  I,  1 19-122;  Melusine,  III
(1886-87),  1 10;  Reiser,  Sagen,  Gebrauche  und  Sprichworter  des  Allgaus,
I  (1895),  209;  Manz,  Volksbrauch  und  Volksglaube  des  Sarganserlandes,
Schriften  der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XII  (1916),
114-115;  Jegerlehner,  Sagen  aus  dem  Unterwallis,  the  same,  VI  (1909),
15,  132-133  (thief  died),  178;  the  Same,  Sagen  und  Marchen  aus  dem
Oberwallis,  the  same,  IX  (1913),  98;  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri,  I
(1926),  233-236,  the  same,  XVIII;  Schweizerisches  Archiv  fiir  Volks-


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


kunde,  XIV  (1910),  253-254;  XVI  (191 1),  116;  Festschrift  Louis  Gau-
chat,  1926,  p.  426;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fur  Rheinische  und  Westfalische
Volkskunde,  I  (1904),  151,  300-301;  VIII  (1911),  147-148;  IX  (1912),
155;  Archiv  fiir  Kriminal-Anthropologie,  III  (1900),  92,  97;  XIX  (1905),
294-295;  Grohmann,  Aberglaube  und  Gebrauche  aus  Bohmen  und
Mahren,  1864,  pp.  202-204;  Dunger,  Rundis  und  Reimspriiche  aus  dem
Vogtlande,  1876,  pp.  283-284;  Baltische  Studien,  XXXVI  (1886),  219-
227;  Knoop,  Volkssagen  aus  dem  Oestliciien  Hinterpommern,  1885,
p.  170;  Szulczewski,  Allerhand  Fahrendes  Volk  in  Kujawien,  1906,  pp.  27-
28;  Alemannia,  II  (1875),  XVI  (1888),  55-56;  Germania,  I  (1856),
106-107;  XXXVI  (1891),  404;  Gredt,  Sagensciiatz  des  Luxemburger
Landes,  1883,  p.  569;  E.  H.  Meyer,  Badisches  Volksleben,  1900,  p.  566;
P.  A.  Talbot,  The  Peoples  of  Southern  Nigeria,  1926,  II,  181;  Ivens,
Melanesians  of  the  South-East  Solomon  Islands,  1927,  pp.  358-359;
Rantasalo,  Der  Ackerbau,  IV  (1924),  140-158  (FF  Communications,
XVII,  No.  55);  Rivista  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari  Italiane,  I  (1893-94),
935  (binding  a  witch).  See  also  Sloane  MS.  3846,  foil.  26  r°-27  r°.

96.  Gregory,  Dialogi,  iii,  22,  ed.  Moricca,  1924,  pp.  190-191.  Cf.  0ns
Volksleven,  III  (1891),  76,  112.

97.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Admirandis  Beat!  Cuthberti  Virtutibus,
capp.  71,  80,  ed.  Raine  (Surtees  Society,  I),  pp.  145-146,  165-168;  cf.
cap.  81,  pp.  168-172.

98.  Chronicon  Abbatiae  de  Evesham,  ed.  Macray,  pp.  55-56.

99.  Acta  Sanctorum,  July,  VII,  214.

100.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Gemma  Ecclesiastica,  i,  32,  Opera,  ed.
Brewer,  II,  104-105.  Cf.  Caesarius  of  Heisterbach,  ix,  6  (ed.  Strange,
1851,  II,  171),  of  a  wicked  priest  who  could  not  get  out  of  his  church.

101.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Itinerarium  Kambriae,  i,  2,  Opera,  VI,
23-24.  For  similar  marvels  see  VI,  24-25.  Compare  the  tale  of  the
sacrilegious  husband  and  wife  in  Le  Manuel  des  Pechiez,  6836-6869
(Handlyng  Synne,  8939-8978),  ed.  Furnivall  (Roxburghe  Club),  1862,
pp.  277-278.  See  also  ^Ifric,  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  II  (1846),  508,  and
Lives  of  Saints,  ed.  Skeat,  II  (1900),  280-283  (miracles  of  St.  Martin).

102.  The  Tale  of  the  Basyn,  ed.  Wright,  1836;  Jamieson,  Popular
Ballads,  1806,  I,  272-282;  Hartshorne,  Ancient  Metrical  Tales,  1829,
pp.  198-208;  Hazlitt,  Early  Popular  Poetry,  1866,  III,  42-53;  Neumeister,
Der  Verzauberte  Topf,  1906.  Cf.  Dorsey,  Traditions  of  the  Osage  (Field
Columbian  Museum,  Anthropological  Series,  VII),  1904,  pp.  24-25.

103.  Kpi;7rTd5ta,  II  (1884),  62-67;  Blade,  Contes  Populaires  de  la
Gascogne,  1886,  III,  65-70;  W.  P.  Greenough,  Canadian  Folk-Life  and
Folk-Lore,  1897,  pp.  52-56.  Cf.  Grimm,  No.  64  (Die  Goldne  Gans),  with
Bolte  and  Polivka's  Anmerkungen,  II  (191 5),  39-44,  495.

104.  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  378-382;  cf.  282,  283,  294.

105.  Cf.  Agrippa,  De  Occulta  Philosophia,  i,  40,  ed.  1533,  p.  xxxvi
(misprint  for  xlvi);  Guazzo  (Guaccius),  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,
i,  8,  p.  28;  i,  13,  p.  63;  Blefken,  Islandia,  1607,  p.  32;  Lercheimer  (Wite-
kind),  Christlich  Bedencken  vnd  Erinnerung  von  Zauberey,  1597,  ed.
Binz,  1888,  p.  47;  Joao  dos  Santos,  Ethiopia  Oriental,  v,  13,  ed.  1608,  fol.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XI


128;  Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,  Glasgow  ed.,  IX  (1905),  254;  Chau  Ju-kua,
transl.  Hirth  and  Rockhill,  191 1,  p.  131;  Cordier,  Ser  Marco  Polo,  1920,
pp.  I2I-I22;  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  191 1,  pp.  236-
237;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  330.  Cf.  p.  161,  above.

106.  Helgakvi"5a  Hundingsbana  II,  sts.  32-33,  Bugge,  Norroen  Forn-
kv8e(5i,  1867,  p.  197.

107.  Von  Wilamowitz-Moellendorff,  in  the  Gottingen  Nachrichten,
1895,  pp.  217-223;  J.  F.  Campbell,  Popular  Tales  of  the  West  Highlands,
II  (i860),  170;  J.  G.  Campbell,  The  Fians,  1891,  p.  74;  P.  Kennedy,
Legendary  Fictions  of  the  Irish  Celts,  1866,  p.  208;  Curtin,  Myths  and
Folk-Lore  of  Ireland,  1890,  pp.  223,  290,  300-301 ;  Gongu-Hrolfs  Saga,
cap.  6,  Asmundarson,  Fornaldarsogur  Nor<5rlanda,  III  (1889),  157;
Fornaldar  Sogur,  ed.  Rafn,  III  (1830),  253.  See  Bolte  and  Polivka,  An-
merkungen  zu  den  Kinder-  u.  Hausmarchen,  II  (1915),  163-189.

108.  Tallqvist,  Die  Assyrische  Beschworungsserie  Maqlu,  pp.  54-55;
Pliny,  xxviii,  2,  3,  13;  Anania,  De  Natura  Daemonum,  1581,  pp.  206-
207;  JEKric,  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  II  (1846),  486;  A  True  and  lust
Recorde,  of  the  Information  [etc.]  of  all  the  Witches,  taken  at  S.  Oses
(London,  1582),  sigg.  C4,  If.  3  v°;  D4,  If.  4  r°;  A  Tryal  of  Witches  at  Bury
St.  Edmonds,  1664  (London,  1682),  pp.  48-51  (cart).  Cf.  Samuel  Clarke,
A  Mirrour  or  Looking-Glasse  both  for  Saints  and  Sinners,  2d  ed.,  1654,
p.  213;  J.  M.  Taylor,  The  Witch  Delusion  in  Colonial  Connecticut,  pp.
64-65;  Add.  MS.  27402,  fol.  109  v°  (1645).

109.  Harper's  New  Monthly  Magazine,  October,  1903,  LXXXVII,
796  (Norfolk);  Ditchfield,  The  Parson's  Pleasance,  p.  190;  Saga-Book  of
the  Viking  Club,  III  (1902-04),  47-48;  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  60;
Edmondston  and  Saxby,  The  Home  of  a  Naturalist,  2d  ed.,  1889,  p.  124;
Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  I  (1889),  249;  Salopian  Shreds  and
Patches,  V  (1883),  207;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  pp.
152-154;  Christopher  Marlowe,  Legends  of  the  Fenland  People,  1926,
pp.  223,  225;  Durbin,  A  Narrative  of  some  Extraordinary  Things,  1800,
pp.  21,  38-39,  41-42;  Nicholson,  Foj,k  Lore  of  East  Yorkshire,  1890,  pp.
94-95;  Blakeborough,  Wit,  Character,  etc.,  of  the  North  Riding  of  York-
shire, 2d  ed.,  191 1,  pp.  177-178;  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,  pp.  45-
46;  Sussex  Archaeological  Collections,  XIII  (1861),  219;  Gregor,  The
Horse  in  Scottish  Folk  Lore,  1890,  p.  5;  Dick,  Highways  and  Byways  in
Galloway  and  Carrick,  1916,  p.  371;  MacCulloch,  Guernsey  Folk  Lore,

i  1903,  p.  353;  Whittier,  The  Supernaturahsm  of  New  England,  1847,
p.  51;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  Vl,  i  (1900),  69,  133-136;  Vl,  ii  (1901),
7;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  166,  168-169,  3^3~3^4y  462-
463,  510,  532,  756-757;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  159,  267;  Witzschel,  Sagen,
Sitten  und  Gebrauche  aus  Thiiringen  (Kleine  Beitrage,  II),  1878,  pp.  290-
291;  A.  Baumgarten,  Aus  der  Volksmassigen  Ueberlieferung  der  Heimat,
Linz,  1864,  II,  3-5;  E.  Meier,  Deutsche  Sagen,  Sitten  und  Gebrauche
aus  Schwaben,  1852,  pp.  199-200;  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri  (Schriften
der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XVIII),  I  (1926),  230-
233;  Rheinische  Geschichtsblatter,  II  (1896),  156-157;  John,  Sitte,
Brauch  und  Volksglaube  im  Deutschen  Westbohmen,  Beitrage  zur  Deutsch-


5l6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Bohmischen  Volkskunde,  VI  (1905),  310-31 1;  Korrespondenzblatt  des
Vereins  fiir  Siebenbiirgische  Landeskunde,  XXII  (1899),  35;  E.  H.
Meyer,  Badisches  Volksleben,  1900,  pp.  557-558;  0ns  Volksleven,  IV
(1892),  50-51,  103-104;  Wallonia,  X  (1902),  182.  Cf.  Thiers,  Traite  des
Superstitions,  1741,  I,  43 1;  Sauve,  Le  Folk-Lore  des  Hautes-Vosges,
1889,  p.  202;  Volkskunde,  XXIV  (1913),  142-149,  207-209;  Storaker,
Historisk  Tidsskrift,  Christiania,  I  (1871),  464-465;  Baltische  Studien,
XXXVI  (1886),  179;  Zeitschrift  fur  Deutsche  Philologie,  XXXVIII
(1906),  366;  Alemannia,  XIX  (1892),  137-138;  XXVII  (1900),  106;
Gredt,  Sagenschatz  des  Luxemburger  Landes,  1883,  p.  557.

no.  See,  for  example,  Halfdanar  Saga  Bronufostra,  chap.  12,  Asmun-
darson,  Fornaldarsogur,  III  (1889),  453;  Campbell,  Popular  Tales  of
the  West  Highlands,  II  (i860),  265  (cf.  I,  215);  P.  W.  Joyce,  Old  Celtic
Romances,  1879,  P-  ^37  (^f"-  PP-  I93>  376);  Celtic  Magazine,  XII  (1887),
512;  Nicholson,  Golspie,  1897,  pp.  21-23;  Kroeber,  Cheyenne  Tales,
Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XIII  (1900),  184;  Rua,  Novelle  del
Mambriano,  1888,  p.  99;  Prato,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkskunde,  I  (1889),  113;
Revue  Celtique,  V  (1881-83),  232,  note  i;  Mabinogion  transl.  by  Loth,
1889,  I,  106-107  (2d  ed.,  1913,  I,  160-161);  MacDougall,  Folk  and  Hero
Tales,  1891,  pp.  164-165;  MacManus,  In  Chimney  Corners,  1899,  pp.  95-
98,  108-109;  H.  Parker,  Village  Folk-Tales  of  Ceylon,  III  (1914),  65-67,
69-70;  Callaway,  Nursery  Tales  of  the  Zulus,  1868,  p.  189;  Boas,  Bulle-
tin Bureau  of  American  Ethnology,  XXVII  (1902),  95;  The  Tempest,
i,  2,  466.

111.  Bede,  Historia  Ecclesiastica,  iv,  22  (20);  ^Ifric's  Homilies,  ed.
Thorpe,  II  (1846),  358  {drycraft,  runstafas);  Robert  of  Brunne,  Handlyng
Synne,  vv.  10510-10705,  ed.  Furnivall  (Roxburghe  Club),  1862,  pp.  324-
330;  Gregory,  Dialogi,  iv,  59,  ed.  Moricca,  1924,  p.  320  (repeated  in  Le
Manuel  des  Pechiez,  vv.  7535-7552,  ed.  Furnivall,  pp.  326-327).  Bede
mentions  "litteras  solutorias,  de  qualibus  fabulae  ferunt."  For  bonds
loosed  by  miracle  see  ^Jfric,  ed.  Thorpe,  II,  414  (cf.  Acts,  v,  17-23).  For
loosing  spells  see  Sloane  MS.  2628,  foil.  7  v°,  13  v°-i4  r°,  35  v°,  36  t°.

112.  Judges,  viii,  33;  ix,  46;  Wier,  i,  10,  ed.  1568,  p.  61;  Scot,  xv,  2,
p.  384  (271),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  319.

113.  Continuation  of  Chronicon  Girardi  de  Fracheto  (Recueil,  XXI,
60-61);  Chroniques  de  Saint-Denis  (Recueil,  XX,  711-712;  cf.  XXI,
680,  note  3);  Lea,  A  History  of  the  Inquisition,  1888,  III,  454-455.


CHAPTER  XII
Treasure  Trove

1.  William  of  Malmesbury,  Gesta  Regum  Anglorum,  ii,  170,  ed.  Stubbs,
I,  198-201;  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  I,  478-479;
Eulogium  Historiarum,  ed.  Haydon,  I,  396-400;  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.
Luard,  I,  526;  Radulfus  Niger,  ed.  Anstruther  (Caxton  Society),  p.  155.

2,  Leland,  Itinerary,  ed.  L.  Toulmin  Smith,  V,  85;  Wm.  Phelps,  The


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XII


History  and  Antiquities  of  Somersetshire,  Historical  Introduction  (ap-
pended to  Vol.  II),  pp.  99-100.

3.  J.  W.  Collins,  Journal  British  Archaeological  Association,  XIII
(1857),  296-297.

4.  La  Estoire  de  Seint  Aedward  le  Rei,  vv.  934-961,  ed.  Luard,  Lives  of
Edward  the  Confessor,  pp.  51-52.

5.  Odo  of  Cheriton,  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III  (1910),  70.

6.  Legend  of  Fulk  Fitz-Warin,  in  Stephenson's  ed.  of  Radulphus  de
Coggeshall,  pp.  280-286.  Cf.  Gull-poris  Saga,  end.

7.  Walsingham,  Historia  Anglicana,  ed.  Riley,  I,  264;  Monk  of  St.
Albans,  ed.  Thompson,  p.  18.

8.  Saxo  Grammaticus,  ii,  pp.  61-63  Miiller  and  Velschow  (pp.  38-39
Holder).  Cf.  Jente,  Die  Mythologischen  Ausdriicke  im  Altenglischen
Wortschatz  (Anglistische  Forschungen,  ed.  Hoops,  LVI),  1921,  pp.  132-
136.  For  a  variety  of  uncanny  creatures  guarding  treasure  (ghosts,
demons,  serpents,  dragons,  toads,  etc.)  see  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,
XII  (1855),  487;  County  Folk-Lore,  V  (1908),  339/  Folk-Lore,  XVII
(1906),  412-414;  Bye-Gones  for  1899-1900,  p.  489;  Sussex  Archaeological
Collections,  LXVI  (1925),  235;  Trevelyan,  Folk-Lore  and  Folk-Stories  of
Wales,  1909,  pp.  141-149;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  I  (1892),  369-391 ;
III  (1895),  447'  454~46°;  Sydow,  Troldesagn  og  Dunkel  Tale  (Dan-
marks  Folkeminder,  No.  17),  1917,  pp.  103-115;  Rosen,  Folkminnen  och
Folktankar,  V  (1918),  107-108;  Mannhardt,  Germanische  Mythen,  1858,
pp.  149-153;  Rochholz,  Schweizersagen  aus  dem  Aargau,  1856,  II,  49-50;
Birlinger,  Volksthiimliches  aus  Schwaben,  I  (1861),  86;  Liitolf,  Sagen,
Brauche  und  Legenden  aus  den  Fiinf  Orten,  1865,  pp.  315,  350:  Calmet,
Traite  sur  les  Apparitions,  1751,  I,  269-284;  Herbert  of  Torre,  De  Mira-
culis,  iii,  33,  Migne,  CLXXXV,  1378-1379  (ed.  Chifflet,  pp.  385-386);
The  Indian  Antiquary,  XLV  (1916),  Supplement  (Barnett),  p.  2;  Crooke,
Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  217-218;  Panjab  Notes

-  and  Queries,  I  (1883-84),  135-136;  II  (1884-85),  41-43.

9.  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed.  Lindelof  (Surtees  Society,  CXL),
pp.  97-98:  "sint  libera  ab  omni  inpugnatione  fantasmatica."  The  last
word  is  glossed  by  the  Anglo-Saxon  scinlacvm.  See  also  A.  Franz,  Die
Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  I,  621-623.

10.  Azo  of  Bologna,  the  celebrated  civilian  of  the  fourteenth  century,
lays  down  the  principle  that,  if  a  man  finds  treasure  in  his  own  ground,  it
belongs  to  him  unless  he  has  used  art  magic  in  the  discovery;  in  that  case
it  belongs  to  the  fiscus  (Select  Passages  from  the  Works  of  Bracton  and
Azo,  ed.  Maitland,  Selden  Society,  VIII  [1894],  128;  cf.  Bodin,  Demono-
manie,  ed.  1587,  fol.  151  r°).  This  is  a  variation  on  the  law  in  Justinian's
Institutes  (ii,  i,  39),  which  makes  no  mention  of  magic.

11.  Boyle,  The  General  History  of  the  Air,  Works,  ed.  Birch,  1744,  V,
197.  See  also,  for  example,  Wier,  De  Praestigiis  Daemonum,  i,  20,  ed.  1568,
pp.  iio-iii;  Anania,  De  Natura  Daemonum,  1581,  pp.  190-193;  Nashe,
Pierce  Penilesse,  1592,  Works,  ed.  McKerrow,  I,  231-232;  Kircher,  Mun-
dus  Subterraneus,  viii,  4,  3d  ed.,  1678,  II,  122-124;  Garmann,  De  Mira-
culis  Mortuorum,  1709,  i,  3,  27,  p.  122;  ii,  10,  140,  p.  795;  Georgius


5l8         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Agricola,  De  Re  Metallica,  vi,  1556,  pp.  173-174;  the  Same,  De  Ani-
mantibus  Subterraneis,  cap.  37,  1614,  pp.  77-79;  Hallywell,  Melampro-
noea,  1681,  p.  61;  Lewis  Morris,  Gentleman's  Magazine,  July,  1795,  LXV,
ii>  559^5^°;  Keys[s]ler's  Travels,  III  (1757),  377;  Hunt,  Popular  Ro-
mances of  the  West  of  England,  1865,  II,  1 18-122;  Bottrell,  Traditions
and  Hearthside  Stories  of  West  Cornwall,  I  (1870),  74-76;  II  (1873),  1^5"
190;  Hammond,  A  Cornish  Parish,  1897,  pp.  359-360;  Courtney,  Cornish
Feasts  and  Folk-Lore,  1890,  pp.  128-129;  The  Cornish  Magazine,  II
(1899),  267-273;  Bye-Gones  for  1876-77,  p.  161;  for  1907-08,  p.  294;
E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  pp.  199-200;  Folk-
Lore,  VII  (1896),  371;  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,
191 1,  pp.  136-138;  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  II  (1887),  57-58,
410-417,  472-474;  III  (1888),  498^/5-502;  V  (1890),  531-533;  VI  (1891),
487;  Wuttke-Meyer,  p.  47;  Melusine,  III  (1886-87),  469-470;  Crooke,
Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,  1926,  p.  218.

12.  Cf.  Peacock,  Archsologia,  XLVIII  (1885),  254.

13.  33  Henry  VIII,  chap.  8,  Statutes  of  the  Realm,  III  (1817),  837.
For  hill-digging  see  Jessopp,  Random  Roaming,  1894,  pp.  84-121;  Trans-
actions Shropshire  Archaeological  and  Natural  History  Society,  3d  Series,
III  (1903),  349-350  (1574);  Harsnet,  A  Declaration  of  Egregious  Popish
Impostures,  1603,  pp.  13-14  (1584);  Diary  of  William  Whiteway,  Octo-
ber 2,  1 621,  Proceedings  Dorset  Natural  History  and  Antiquarian  Field
Club,  XIII  (1892),  61;  Bye-Gones  for  1891-92,  p.  339  (ca.  1630);  Notes
and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  XV  (1917),  257-258  (1662);  Trans-
actions Shropshire  Archaeological  and  Natural  History  Society,  3d  Series,
III  (1903),  348-350  (1669);  Journal  of  the  British  Archteological  Associa-
tion, New  Series,  IX  (1903),  8-32.  Cf.  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  I  (1892),
355-391;  III  (1895),  419-491;  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri  (Schriften  der
Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XVIII),  I  (1926),  261-302.

14.  See  p.  282,  above.

15.  The  Antiquary,  XLII  (1906),  46-51.  See  also  Archivio  per  lo
Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  XVII  (1898),  113;  Hellwig,  Verbrechen
und  Aberglaube,  1908,  pp.  108-1 10;  E.  Thurston,  Omens  and  Super-
stitions of  Southern  India,  191 2,  pp.  215-220.  For  candles  made  of  human
tallow  see  p.  144,  above.

16.  Lowenstimm,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Socialwissenschaft,  VI  (1903),  215-
216.

17.  Jessopp,  Random  Roaming,  1894,  pp.  109-112.  For  the  sacrifice  of
a  cock  in  treasure-digging  see  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XXXIX  (1910),  224.
Cf.  pp.  93-94,  above.

18.  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  MSS.  at  Hatfield  House,  V,  81-83.
See  the  cases  of  Agnes  Hancok  in  1438  and  Joan  Tyrrye  in  1555  (pp.  145-
I46,  254,  above);  cf.  p.  215.

19.  Bye-Gones  for  1907-08,  pp.  5,  22;  W.  T.  Palmer,  Odd  Yarns  of
English  Lakeland,  1914,  pp.  71-72;  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  19.  Cf.
Wilkinson  and  Tattersall,  Memories  of  Hurstwood,  1899,  pp.  56-57;
Trevelyan,  Folk-Lore  and  Folk-Stories  of  Wales,  1909,  p.  153;  J.  C.
Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  191 1,  p.  179;  Baumgarten,


1


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XII


Aus  der  Volksmassigen  Ueberlieferung  der  Heimat,  Linz,  1864,  II,  43;
Zeitschrift  fiir  Volkskunde,  III  (1891),  186;  Jegerlehner,  Sagen  und
Marchen  aus  dem  Oberwallis,  Schriften  der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft
fiir  Volkskunde,  IX  (1913),  80;  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  VI  (1891),
280-282,  284-287,  403;  VIII  (1893),  422.

20.  Bye-Gones  for  1907-08,  p.  42  (Wales).  Cf.  Baumgarten,  II,  42-43;
I  Kohler,  Kleinere  Schriften,  III  (1900),  581-582;  von  Schulenburg,
f  Wendische  Volkssagen  und  Gebrauche,  1880,  p.  184;  Schambach  and
'      Miiller,  Niedersachsische  Sagen  und  Marchen,  1855,  pp.  152-154;  Kris-

tensen,  Danske  Sagn,  VI,  i  (1900),  255-256;  Revue  des  Traditions  Popu-
laires, VI  (1891),  279,  282-283,  285.

21.  S.  G.  Drake,  Annals  of  Witchcraft  in  New  England,  1869,  pp.  156-
157;  A.  F.  Moulton,  Some  Descendants  of  John  Moulton  and  William

'      Moulton,  [1893,]  p.  18;  Whittier,  The  Supernaturalism  of  New  England,
1847,  p.  31.   See  also  Mixer,  Old  Houses  of  New  England,  1927,  p.  200.
[      For  stories  of  this  kind  see  Bolte  and  PoKvka,  Anmerkungen  zu  den
\  '  Kinder-  u.  Hausmarchen  der  Briider  Grimm,  III  (1918),  421-423;  Sey-
mour, Irish  Witchcraft  and  Demonology,  1913,  pp.  132-134  (cf.  p.  83).

22.  See  in  general  A.  Wiinsche,  Der  Sagenkreis  vom  Geprellten  Teufel,
r      1905.    Cf.  Henderson,  The  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  1879,

p,  279;  Archseologia  Cambrensis,  6th  Series,  XIX  (1919),  538-540;  Bolte
and  Polivka,  III,  355-364;  Bolte,  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Volkskunde,
VIII  (1898),  21-25;  Hackman,  Skrifter  utgivna  av  Svenska  Litteratursall-
skapet  i  Finland,  CLXV  (1922),  140-170;  Aarne,  Finnische  Marchen-
varianten  (FF  Communications,  I,  No.  5),  191 1,  Nos.  1000-1199,  pp.  79-
114;  the  same  (V,  No.  33),  1920,  Nos.  1000-1191,  pp.  22-26;  the  Same,
Estnische  Marchen-  und  Sagenvarianten  (III,  No.  25),  191 8,  Nos.  1000-
II 92,  pp.  64-79;  Hackman,  Katalog  der  Marchen  der  Finnlandischen
Schweden  (I,  No.  6),  191 1,  Nos.  1000-1182,  pp.  18-22;  De  Meyer,  Les
Contes  Populaires  de  la  Flandre  (VII,  No.  37),  1921,  Nos.  1002-1184,
pp.  60-62;  Christiansen,  The  Norwegian  Fairytales  (XII,  No.  46),  1922,
Nos.  1000-1185,  pp.  32-34.

23.  Parsons,  Proceedings  Cambridge  Antiquarian  Society,  XIX  (1915),
37-38  (from  Bishop  Gray's  Register).

24.  Cf.  Mr.  William  Lilly's  History  of  his  Life  and  Times,  2d  ed.,  171 5,
pp.  32-33.  See  p.  158,  above.

25.  Original  record  from  the  Archiepiscopal  Register  of  York,  Raine,
Archaeological  Journal,  XVI  (1859),  71-81.

26.  Documents,  Norwich  Archaeology,  I  (1847),  50-57.   Cf.  Jessopp,
Random  Roaming,  1894,  pp.  103-109.

27.  Peacock,  Archa;ologia,  XLVIII  (1885),  255-256.

28.  The  letter  is  not  dated,  but  the  narrative  begins  in  the  19th  year
of  Henry  VIII  (1527-28),  and  Wolsey  died  on  November  29,  1530.

29.  Stapleton's  letter  to  Wolsey,  Norfolk  Archaeology,  I  (1847),  57~
64,  cf.  220,  note.

30.  Cf.  Wier,  i,  4,  ed.  1568,  p.  41;  Scot,  p.  519  (372),  ed.  Nicholson,
P-  435-


520         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


31.  Durbin,  A  Narrative  of  some  Extraordinary  Things,  1800,  pp.
54-55-

32.  The  same,  p.  29.  " Malchi  (that  is,  my  King)"  was  a  familiar
spirit  of  Thomas  Perkes  of  Mangotsfield.  Perkes's  devils  wore  him  out  at
last:  "They  appeared  faster  than  he  desired,  and  in  most  dismal  shapes,
like  serpents,  lions,  bears,  &c.  hissing  and  roaring,  and  attempting  to  throw
spears  and  balls  of  fire  at  him."  So  he  told  the  Rev.  Arthur  Bedford,
whose  letter  of  August  2,  1703,  is  appended  to  Durbin's  Narrative  (p.  59).

33.  See  p.  64,  above.

34.  Letters  and  Papers,  Henry  VIII,  XIII,  i.  No.  41,  p.  13.

35.  See  p.  189,  above.

36.  Deposition  (MS.  Lansdowne  2,  art.  26),  J.  G.  Nichols,  Narratives
of  the  Days  of  the  Reformation  (Camden  Society,  LXXVI),  pp.  2)2>A^23S-

37.  "Wyth  a  screpture  on  hys  brest  for  coungerynge":  Chronicle  of
the  Grey  Friars,  ed.  Nichols  (Camden  Society,  LIII),  p.  63.  I  am  confident
of  the  identification.  Wycherley  lived  in  Charterhouse  Lane,  and  his  ex-
amination took  place  in  August,  1549.  For  examples  of  later  treasure-
quests  see: — 1570:  Hart,  Archteologia,  XL  (1866),  391-394. — -1572:
T.  Wright,  Queen  Elizabeth  and  her  Times,  1838,  I,  441-442.  —  1573:
Wright,  I,  457-459  (Earl  of  Shrewsbury  to  Lord  Burghley,  January  20,
1572  [-3]);  Lodge,  Illustrations  of  British  History,  2d  ed.,  1838,  II,  3-5
(Shrewsbury  to  the  Privy  Council,  Feb.  i,  1572  [-3]);  the  same,  II,  4-5
(Sir  Thomas  Smith  to  Shrewsbury,  February  17,  1572  [-3]);  Strype,  Life
of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  1698,  pp.  170-173;  the  Same,  Annals  of  the  Refor-
mation, II  (1725),  181-182. — -1574:  pardon  to  Thomas  Heather  for
invocation  and  conjuration  (in  1573)  to  gain  great  sums  of  money  (Rymer,
Foedera,  2d  ed.,  XV,  730).  —  1 580:  Holinshed,  IV  (1808),  433;  Stow,  ed.
1631,  p.  688. —  1589:  Wright,  II,  397-398. —  1591:  The  Essex  Review,
XVI  (1907),  68-71.  — ■  1595:  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  MSS.  at  Hat-
field House,  V,  81-83.  —  Ca.  1600:  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,
1598-1601,  p.  523. —  1611:  Calendar,  as  above,  1611-1618,  p.  29. —
1692:  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  Various  Collections,  I,  160.

38.  Add.  MS.  27402,  foil.  120  v°,  121  v°,  III  v".

39.  Pseudo-Paracelsus,  De  Summis  Naturae  Mysteriis,  transl.  Dorn,
1584,  pp.  60-66  (Of  the  Supreme  Mysteries  of  Nature,  transl.  R.  Turner,
1655,  pp.  64-70).  Cf.  Archivio  per  lo  Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,
XX  (1901),  323-329,  540-550.  Whoever  wishes  to  acquire  money  by
means  of  the  spirits  Sathan,  Barentur,  and  Barbason,  may  find  the  for-
mula in  Sloane  MS.  3846,  foil.  27  v°-29  r°.

40.  Blau,  Das  Altjiidische  Zauberwesen,  1898,  p.  59,  note.

41.  Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  iii,  12,  ed.  1592,  p.  24.

42.  See  lamblichus,  De  Mysteriis,  ii,  10,  and  iii,  31  (ed.  Parthey,  1857,
pp.  91,  177);  Arnobius,  iv,  i2;  Lobeck,  Aglaophamus,  p.  58.

43.  See  F.  B.  Bond,  The  Gate  of  Remembrance,  the  Story  of  the  Psy-
chological Experiment  which  Resulted  in  the  Discovery  of  the  Edgar
Chapel  at  Glastonbury  (Oxford,  1918).


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XIII


521


CHAPTER  XIII

Haunted  Houses  and  Haunted  Men

1.  Plot,  The  Natural  History  of  Oxford-shire,  1677,  viii,  37-45,  pp.  206-
210;  E.  Marshall,  The  Early  History  of  Woodstock  Manor,  1873,  pp.
204-205.

2.  The  Kingdoms  Intelligencer,  April  20-27,  1663,  pp.  257-261;  Glan-
vil,  Palpable  Evidence  of  Spirits  and  Witchcraft,  1668;  the  Same,  Sad-
ducismus  Triumphatus,  4th  ed.,  1726,  pp.  270-285;  A  Wonder  of  Wonders
(ballad),  Rollins,  The  Pack  of  Autolycus,  1927,  pp.  114-121.  Cf.  John
Wesley's  Journal,  May  25,  1768,  Standard  Edition,  V,  266;  Webster,  The
Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  1677,  p.  ii;  Hudibras,  ii,  i,  131-132;
Oldham,  Satyrs  upon  the  Jesuits,  iv,  5th  ed.,  1697,  p.  78;  Bovet,  Pandae-
monium,  1684,  p.  61;  H.  Addington  Bruce,  Historic  Ghosts  and  Ghost
Hunters,  1905,  pp.  15-35.

3.  Diary  of  Abraham  de  la  Pryme,  ed.  Jackson  (Surtees  Society,  LIV),
1870,  pp.  39-42,  45.        _  _

4.  Richard  Chamberlaine,  Lithobolia,  1698;  reprinted  in  The  Historical
Magazine,  V  (1861),  321-327,  and  by  Burr,  Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft
Cases  1 648-1706,  pp.  58-77.

5.  Southey,  Life  of  John  Wesley,  New  York,  1847,  !>  64-68,  412-435;
H.  Addington  Bruce,  Historic  Ghosts  and  Ghost  Hunters,  pp.  36-55.  For
a  variety  of  examples  see  Nider,  Formicarius,  v,  2,  ed.  1516  (1517),  foil.
Ixxi  v°-lxxiii  v°;  Binsfeld,  De  Confessionibus  Maleficorum  et  Sagarum,
1591,  pp.  83-99;  York  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  p.  74  (1656);  Strange  and
Wonderful  News  from  Yowel  in  Surry,  1681;  Increase  Mather,  An  Essay
for  the  Recording  of  Illustrious  Providences,  1684,  pp.  142-167;  Glanvil's
Sadducismus  Triumphatus,  4th  ed.,  1726,  pp.  361-380,  412-420,  429-439;
Baxter,  The  Certainty  of  the  Worlds  of  Spirits,  1691,  passim;  Beaumont,
An  Historical,  Physiological  and  Theological  Treatise  of  Spirits,  1705,
pp.  306-312;  An  Exact  Narrative  of  Many  Surprizing  Matters  of  Fact,
1709;  New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical  Register,  XXXII  (1878),
134  (1724);  Malcolm,  Anecdotes  of  the  Manners  and  Customs  of  London
during  the  Eighteenth  Century,  2d  ed.,  1810, 1, 376-382  (1772),  402  (1716);
County  Folk-Lore,  VI  (1912),  51;  W.  V.  Ingram,  An  Authenticated  His-
tory of  the  Famous  Btell  Witch,  1924,  pp.  236-241;  P.  de  I'Ancre,  LTn-
credulite  et  Mescreance  du  Sortilege,  1622,  pp.  817-818;  Andrew  Lang,
Cock  Lane  and  Common  Sense,  1894,  pp.  127-179;  Flammarion,  Haunted
Houses,  1924;  Summers,  The  Geography  of  Witchcraft,  1927,  pp.  263-
286.  For  a  recent  American  case  see  the  New  York  Herald,  August  27,
1908.

6.  William  Hayley's  narrative,  Sussex  Archaeological  Collections,
XVIII  (1866),  ni-113.

7.  Cf.  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West  and  Mid-Wales,  191 1,  pp.  150-
152;  H.  J.  Bell,  Obeah,  2d  ed.,  1893,  pp.  93-97;  Journal  of  the  Burma
Research  Society,  II  (191 2),  45-47.


522         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


8.  Annales  Fuldenses,  Recueil,  VII,  i68.  This  case  was  known  to  Cot-
ton Mather  (The  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  Boston,  1693,  p.  61).

9.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Itinerarium  Kambriae,  i,  12,  Opera,  ed.  Dim-
ock,  VI,  93.

10.  Wright  and  Halliwell,  Reliquiae  Antiquae,  1845, 1,  53.  For  vervain
and  St.  John's  wort  as  fuga  daemonum,  see  pp.  11 9-1 22,  above.

11.  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cockayne,  II,  342;  ed.  Leonhardi,  I  104:  "If
thou  hast  it  on  thee  and  under  thy  pillow  and  over  the  doors  of  thy  house,
no  devil  can  harm  thee,  within  or  without."  Cf.  Cockayne,  I,  174-177,
248,  328-331;  Klemming,  Lake-  och  Orte-Bocker,  1883-86,  p.  438.

12.  Cf.  Cockayne,  I,  70,  176,  248,  350  {scinlac),  360,  364;  Det  Arna-
magnasanske  Handskrift  Nr.  187  (Dansk  Lsegebog),  ed.  Saby,  1886,  p.  48.

13.  The  midday  demon  (SainovLOP  ixea-qix^pivbv)  appears  in  the  Septua-
gint  version  of  Psalm  xci,  6,  for  "  the  destruction  that  wasteth  at  noon-
day." So  also  in  the  Vulgate  {daemonium  meridianum).  Cf.  Henry  How-
ard, Earl  of  Northumberland,  A  Defensative  against  the  Poyson  of  Sup-
posed Prophecies,  1583,  sig.  Yij  v°;  Pitre,  Usi  e  Costumi,  Credenze  e
Pregiudizi  del  Popolo  Siciliano  (Biblioteca,  XVII),  1889,  IV,  33,  98-100.
Cf.  J.  W.  Wolf,  Deutsche  Marchen  und  Sagen,  1845,  pp.  239,  318-321;
the  Same,  Hessische  Sagen,  1853,  pp.  32-34;  Panzer,  Beitrage  zur  Deut-
schen  Mythologie,  II  (1855),  107;  Grasse,  Der  Sagenschatz  des  Konig-
reichs  Sachsen,  1874,  II,  187-188;  U.  Jahn,  Volkssagen  aus  Pommern
und  Riigen,  1886,  pp.  142-143.

14.  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed.  Stevenson  (Surtees  Society,  X),
p.  129  (cf.  pp.  117-118);  see  also  Revue  des  Langues  Romanes,  V  (1874),
105.  For  an  interesting  essay  by  G.  Hiibener  on  "Beowulf  und  Nordische
Damonenaustreibung"  see  Englische  Studien,  LXII  (1928),  293-327.

15.  See  Jente,  Die  Mythologischen  Ausdriicke  im  Altenglischen  Wort-
schatz,  I92i,pp.  177-179.

16.  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  I,  391-392;  III,  137-138;
E.  H.  Meyer,  Germanische  Mythologie,  1891,  pp.  118-119,  121,  132,  138-
139,  232,  249;  Golther,  Handbuch  der  Germanischen  Mythologie,  1895,
pp.  157-158;  Child,  The  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  I,  67,  73,
86,466-467;  11,458,464,470,472;  IV,  494;  V,  239,  285.  The  adjective
bilewit  occurs  in  Anglo-Saxon,  but  without  mythological  significance:  see
Jente,  as  above,  p.  166.

17.  For  such  exchange  see  Kittredge,  The  Friar's  Lantern  and  Friar
Rush,  Publications  Modern  Language  Association,  XV  (1900),  430-432.
For  house-cobolds,  serviceable  or  mischievous  or  both,  see  Roscher,
Ephialtes,  pp.  74-75;  Guilielmus  Alvernus,  De  Universe,  ii,  3,  8,  Opera,
Paris,  1674,  I,  1030;  Georgius  Agricola,  De  Animantibus  Subterraneis,
cap.  37,  1614,  p.  79;  Guazzo,  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  i,  18,  pp.
89-90;  Pratorius,  Anthropodemus  Plutonicus,  Part  I,  1666,  pp.  359-378;
Erasmus  Francisci,  Der  Hollische  Proteus,  2d  ed.,  1695,  chap.  75,  pp.
790-800;  Calmet,  Traite  sur  les  Apparitions  des  Esprits,  1751,  I,  243-269,
cf.  I,  305-321;  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern
Counties,  1879,  pp.  246-280;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XIII


pp.  45-51;  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,  pp.  39-40;  Archeeologia,  XVII
(1814),  144;  Gomme,  Folk-Lore  Relics  of  Early  Village  Life,  1883,  pp.  72-
123;  Transactions  of  the  Devonshire  Association,  X  (1878),  pp.  loo-ioi;
Lincolnshire  Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1891),  146;  Folk-Lore,  VIII  (1897),
68-69;  XII  (1901),  73;  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  132,  133;  Wilkin-
son and  Tattersall,  Memories  of  Hurstwood,  1889,  pp.  62-63;  E.  M.
Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  pp.  201-202;  H.  S.  Cowper,
Hawkshead,  1899,  pp.  307,  309;  Bye-Gones  for  1876-77,  p.  43;  Transac-
tions Lancashire  and  Cheshire  Antiquarian  Society,  XXV  (1907),  69-70;
J.  G.  Campbell,  Superstitions  of  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland,
1900,  pp.  155-194;  the  Same,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight,  1902,  pp.
217-220;  Papers  of  the  Manchester  Literary  Club,  VI  (1880),  278-283;
Harland  and  Wilkinson,  Lancashire  Folk-Lore,  1867,  pp.  56-59;  Hender-
son, The  Norse  Influence  on  Celtic  Scotland,  1910,  pp.  79-84;  Proceed-
ings Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Scotland,  XXXIV  (1900),  328-330;  Bosquet,
La  Normandie  Romanesque,  1845,  pp.  126-134;  Sebillot,  Traditions  et
Superstitions  de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  1882,  I,  129-137;  Chapiseau,  Le
Folk-Lore  de  la  Beauce  et  du  Perche,  1902,  I,  248-250;  Wuttke-Meyer,
1900,  pp.  43-46;  Haag,  Baltische  Studien,  XXXII  (1882),  187-192;
Journal  Anthropological  Institute,  V  (1876),  420-422;  Zeitschrift  fiir
Volkskunde,  I  (1889),  74-78;  Holmberg,  Finno-Ugric,  Mythology  of  All
Races,  ed.  J.  A.  MacCulloch,  IV  (1927),  163,  166.

18.  See  pp.  145-146,  206,  254.

19.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XXXVJI  (1905),  112;
Hammond,  A  Cornish  Parish,  1897,  pp.  360-361.  Cf.  Bray,  Traditions,
etc.,  of  Devonshire,  1836,  I,  168-169,  175,  182-183;  Leechdoms,  ed.  Cock-
ayne, II,  290  (ed.  Leonhardi,  I,  88).

20.  J.  LI.  W.  Page,  An  Exploration  of  Exmoor,  4th  ed.,  1895,  p.  308;
The  Antiquary,  VI  (1882),  210;  Folk-Lore,  XXVI  (1915),  195-196
(Guernsey).  Cf.  Lucian,  Philopseudes,  20.  See  p.  21,  above.

21.  Bray,  I,  183;  Bye-Gones  for  1878-79,  p.  299,  cf.  348;  F.  Hancock,
The  Parish  of  Selworthy,  Somerset,  1897,  p.  248;  The  East  Anglian,  III
(1869),  22;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  p.  201;
Whittier,  Supernaturalism  of  New  England,  1847,  p.  52;  Cross,  Studies
in  Philology  (University  of  North  Carolina),  XVI  (1919),  276;  Abbott,
Macedonian  Folklore,  1903,  p.  144.  Cf.  J.  C.  Davies,  Folk-Lore  of  West
and  Mid-Wales,  1911,  p.  189;  John  Hunter,  The  Diocese  and  Priory  of
Dunkeld,  II,  59-60;  Maclagan.  Evil  Eye  in  the  Western  Highlands,  1902,
pp.  43-44,  131;  Wentz,  The  Fairy-Faith  in  Celtic  Countries,  191 1,  p.  183;
Hessische  Blatter  fiir  Volkskunde,  XX  (1921),  22-23;  Kristensen,  Danske
Sagn,  II  (1893),  487-488,  490;  Dania,  II  (1892-94),  227;  Krauss,  Slav-
ische  Volkforschungen,  1908,  p.  71;  Holmberg,  Finno-Ugric,  The  My-
thology of  All  Races,  ed.  J.  A.  MacCulloch,  IV  (1927),  186.

22.  Diary  of  Abraham  de  la  Pryme,  June  27,  1695,  ed.  Jackson  (Surtees
Society,  LIV),  pp.  63-64.  For  witches  and  wizards  as  Will-o'-the-Wisps
see  Tauxier,  Le  Noir  de  Bondoukou,  1921,  p.  195.  Cf.  Puckett,  Folk  Be-
liefs of  the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.  133-136.

23.  Radulphus  de  Coggeshall,  Chronicon  Anglicanum,  ed.  Stevenson,


524         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


pp.  120-121.  Cf.  pp.  134-135  for  mysterious  visitors  to  the  Abbey  of
Coggeshall:  they  had  caps  of  invisibility.

24.  Cf.  Champier,  Dyalogus  in  Magicarum  Artium  Destructionem,  ca.
1500,  iii,  I,  sig.  bij,  If.  4  v°.

25.  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Itinerarium  Kambriae,  Opera,  ed.  Dimock,
VI,  96-99.

26.  John  of  Worcester,  ed.  Weaver,  Anecdota  Oxonlensia,  XIII  (1908),
46-48  (Thorpe's  ed.  of  Florence  of  Worcester,  II,  102-105);  Gervase  of
Canterbury,  ed.  Stubbs,  I,  102-103.

27.  Stationers'  Registers,  ed.  Arber,  I,  389.

28.  Laneham's  Letter,  1575,  ed.  Furnivall,  Captain  Cox  (Ballad  So-
ciety), 1871,  p.  30.

29.  Scot,  A  Discourse  upon  Divels  and  Spirits,  chap.  21,  Discoverie,
1584,  p.  522  (374),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  438.

30.  Trithemius,  Chronicon  Monasterii  Hirsaugiensis,  ed.  1559,  pp.
160-162.  Cf.  Kittredge,  Publications  Modern  Language  Association,  XV
(1900),  415,  note;  Anz,  Jahrbuch  des  Vereins  fiir  Niederdeutsche  Sprach-
forschung,  XXIV  (1899),  76-112;  Priebsch,  Prager  Deutsche  Studien,
VIII  (1908),  423-434;  Danske  Studier,  1912,  pp.  15-17.

31.  Gammer  Gurton's  Needle,  iii,  2,  ed.  Manly,  Specimens  of  the  Pre-
Shaksperean  Drama,  II  (1900),  123;  ed.  Bradley,  Gayley's  Representative
Comedies,  I  (1903),  231.

32.  Poetria  Magistri  Johannis  Anglici  de  Arte  Prosayca,  Metrica,  et
Rithmica,  ed.  Mari,  Romanische  Forschungen,  XIII  (1902),  916-917.
Cf.  Haureau,  Notices  et  Extraits,  XXVII,  ii,  83-84;  Paetow,  Morale
Scolarium  (Memoirs  University  of  California,  IV),  1927,  pp.  126-127.

33.  Le  Roux  de  Lincey,  Le  Livre  des  Legendes,  1836,  pp.  251-257.

34.  Freymond,  Artus'  Kampf  mit  dem  Katzenungetiim  (Beitrage  zur
Romanischen  Philologie,  Festgabe  fiir  Gustav  Grober,  1899,  pp.  311-396);
Lot,  Romania,  XXX  (1901),  7;  Skene,  The  Four  Ancient  Books  of  Wales,
1868,  II,  460-461;  Loth,  Les  Mabinogion,  1889,  II,  249  (2d  ed.,  1913,  II,
272);  Kittredge,  A  Study  of  Gawain  and  the  Green  Knight,  1916,  p.  171;
the  Same,  [Harvard]  Studies  and  Notes,  VIII  (1903),  259;  J.  D.  Bruce,
The  Evolution  of  Arthurian  Romance  (Hesperia,  ed.  Bright),  1923,  I,  41,
note  9,  147.

35.  Froissart,  ed.  Kervyn  de  Lettenhove,  XI,  192-201;  Henry  Howard,
Earl  of  Northampton,  A  Defensative  against  the  Poyson  of  Supposed
Prophecies,  1583,  sig.  Yiii,  If.  2  v°;  A  Pleasant  Treatise  of  Witches,  1673,
pp.  49-52.

36.  Froissart,  XI,  200-201.

37.  Guilielmus  Alvernus,  De  Universe,  ii,  3,  8,  Opera,  1674,  I,  1030.
For  further  references  see  Kittredge,  Publications  Modern  Language  As-
sociation, XV  (1900),  436,  note  3.  Add  Nider,  Formicarius,  v,  2,  ed.  1517
(1516),  fol.  Ixxiii  r°;  Doctor  Lamb's  Darling,  1653,  p.  6;  Bower,  Doctor
Lamb  Revived,  1653,  p.  17;  Glanvil,  Sadducismus  Triumphatus,  4th  ed.,
1726,  p.  318;  Henry  More,  An  Antidote  against  Atheism,  iii,  9,  Philoso-
phical Writings,  4th  ed.,  17 12,  p.  116;  Ancient  Town  Records  (New
Haven),  ed.  Dexter,  I  (1917),  251;  Increase  Mather,  Illustrious  Provi-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XIII


dences,  1684,  pp.  149-151;  Bovet,  Pandaemonium,  1684,  pp.  222-225;
Baxter,  The  Certainty  of  the  Worlds  of  Spirits,  1691,  pp.  69-70;  Cotton
Mather,  Memorable  Providences,  1691,  p.  16;  Durbin,  A  Narrative  of
some  Extraordinary  Things,  1800,  pp.  10,  35-40,  42;  Harland  and  Wilk-
inson, Lancashire  Folk-Lore,  1867,  p.  61;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in
Scotland,  1833,  II,  525;  E.  M.  Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,
1913,  pp.  192-193;  Flammarion,  Haunted  Houses,  1924,  pp.  115,  119,
292;  Ingram,  An  Authenticated  History  of  the  Famous  Bell  Witch,  1924,
p.  238;  County  Folk-Lore,  II  (1901),  109;  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  73;
Basile,  Pentamerone,  i,  2,  ed.  1674,  p.  34;  iii,  7,  p.  351 ;  Kristensen,  Danske
Sagn,  V  (1897),  528;  VI,  i  (1900),  148,  209;  Archivio  per  lo  Studio  delle
Tradizioni  Popolari,  XVIII  (1899),  459-460;  Skrifter  utgivna  av  Svenska
Litteratursallskapet  i  Finland,  XVIII  (1891),  209.

38.  Roxburghe  Ballads,  ed.  Chappell,  II  (1874),  84.  Cf.  Harman,  A
Caveat  for  Common  Cursetors,  Early  English  Text  Society,  p.  36.

39.  Suetonius,  Otho,  7.

40.  James,  English  Historical  Review,  XXXVIII  (1923),  86.

41.  Kittredge,  as  above  (note  37).

42.  Addy,  Household  Tales,  1895,  p.  42;  J.  G.  Campbell,  Superstitions
of  the  Highlands  and  Islands,  pp.  159,  164,  167.

43.  Report,  in  The  Triall  of  Maist.  Dorrell,  1599,  pp.  97-98.

44.  Folk-Lore,  XXVII  (191 6),  299-300.

45.  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Otia  Imperialia,  i,  i8(  Leibnitz,  I,  897;  Lieb-
recht,  p.  6;  and  note,  pp.  74-76).

46.  There  are  good  examples  in  Roskoff,  Geschichte  des  Teufels,  1869,
II,  190-191.

47.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Vita  et  Miraculis  S.  Godrici,  ed.  Stevenson
(Surtees  Society,  XX),  cap.  38,  §§  82-84,  pp.  93-95.

48.  Cap.  135,  §  248,  pp.  261-262.

49.  Cap.  119,  §  229,  p.  242.

50.  Cap.  112,  §  218,  pp.  231-232;  cap.  165,  §§  294-296,  pp.  313-315
(repeated  by  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  II,  273).

51.  Cap.  90,  §§  187-188,  pp.  196-198.  Cf.  cap.  126,  §  236,  pp.  250-251;
Appendix,  cap.  2,  §  320,  pp.  337-338.

52.  Cap.  125,  §  225,  pp.  249-250.  For  the  normal  shape  of  demons
note  the  account  of  the  monk  who  used  to  see  them  often,  as  reported  by
Herbertus  Turrium,  Archbishop  of  Sardinia,  De  Miraculis,  i,  19  (Migne,
CLXXXV,  1294-1295).

53.  Vita  Bartholomaei  Farnensis  (born  ca.  1120),  in  Arnold's  ed.  of
Symeon  of  Durham,  I,  321.

54.  See  Jeremiae  Lossii  Curiose  Gedancken  vom  Alpe  iibersetzet  von
M.  M.,  1704;  E.  H.  Meyer,  Germanische  Mythologie,  1891,  pp.  76-79;
M.  Hofler,  Janus,  V  (1900),  512-518;  the  Same,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswis-
senschaft,  II  (1899),  86-94;  the  Same,  Deutsches  Krankheitsnamen-
Buch,  1899,  pp.  10-13,  V.  Alb\  Manninen,  Die  Damonistischen  Krank-
heiten  im  Finnischen  Volksaberglauben  (FF  Communications,  No.  45,
XII),  1922,  pp.  174-183;  Hastesko,  Motivverzeichnis  Westfinnischer
Zauberspriiche  (the  same.  No.  19,  II),  1914,  pp.  28-31;  Forsblom,  Skrifter


5^6         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


utgivna  av  Svenska  Litteratursallskapet  i  Finland,  CXXXV  (1917),  113-
130;  Kristensen,  Danske  Sagn,  II  (1893),  241-251;  De  Cock,  Volksge-
neeskunde  in  Vlaanderen,  1891,  pp.  177-183;  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  272-276,
285-286;  Schonwerth,  Aus  der  Oberpfalz,  I  (1867),  208-232;  Bieber,
KafFa,  II  (1923),  347;  Ernest  Jones,  Der  Alptraum,  transl.  Sachs  (Schrif-
ten  zur  Angewandten  Seelenkunde,  ed.  Freud,  XIV),  1912.

55.  See  references  in  Roscher,  Ephialtes,  p.  22.  Cf.  Robert  Fludd,
Microcosmi  Historia,  Tom.  II,  Tract,  i.  Sect,  i.  Lib.  x,  cap.  3,  p.  209.
King  James  pronounces  "the  Mare"  "but  a  naturall  sicknes,"  not  a
spirit  (Daemonologie,  1597,  iii,  3,  p.  69).

56.  Laistner,  Das  Ratsel  der  Sphinx,  Grundziige  einer  Mythenge-
schichte,  1889.

57.  Cockayne,  Leechdoms,  I,  70;  II,  342,  344  (where  the  incubus  is
also  mentioned);  Leonhardi,  pp.  104,  105.

58.  Cockayne,  II,  140;  Leonhardi,  p.  42.

59.  Cockayne,  II,  306;  Leonhardi,  p.  94.

60.  Cockayne,  III,  42;  Wiilker,  I,  326,  404;  Napier,  Herrig's  Archiv,
LXXXIV  (1890),  323;  Schlutter,  Anglia,  XXX  (1907),  257-258;  Gren-
don,  Journal  of  American  Folk-Lore,  XXII  (1909),  166-167,  215-216;
Skemp,  Modern  Language  Review,  VI  (191 1),  293-295;  Holthausen,
Anglia,  Beiblatt,  XXXI  (1920),  30,  118-119;  Grattan,  Modern  Language
Review,  XXII  (1927),  4-6.

61.  See  Chapter  VII,  note  78.

62.  Heimskringla,  Ynglinga  Saga,  16  (13),  Konunga  Sogur,  I  (1816),
19;  ed.  Jonsson,  I,  i  (1893),  28.

63.  The  Oldest  English  Texts,  ed.  Sweet,  1885,  pp.  71,  72.  Cf.  Wright's
Vocabularies,  ed.  Wiilcker,  1884,  I,  27,  line  34;  I,  597,  lines  35-37.  On
the  whole  matter  see  Jente,  Die  Mythologischen  Ausdriicke  im  Alteng-
lischen  Wortschatz,  1921,  pp.  124-127,  173.

64.  Canterbury  Tales,  A  3474-3486,  ed.  Skeat,  IV,  100.  See  Skeat's
note,  V,  105-106;  Folk-Lore  Record,  I  (1878),  145-154;  II  (1879),  127-
134;  Denham  Tracts,  II  (1895),  11-13;  Northall,  English  Folk-Rhymes,
1892,  pp.  144-149;  Vansittart,  The  Antiquary,  XL  (1904),  76-81;  Thiers,
Traite  des  Superstitions,  1741,  I,  97-98;  R.  Kohler,  Germania,  V  (i860),
448-456,  and  XI  (1866),  435-445  (Kleinere  Schriften,  III  [1900],  320-341);
the  Same,  Jahrbuch  fiir  Romanische  und  Englische  Literatur,  VIII  (1867),
409-417  (Kleinere  Schriften,  III,  341-351);  Meiusine,  I  (1878),  308-309;
Carnoy,  Litterature  Orale  de  la  Picardie,  1883,  p.  375.  For  the  mysterious
Paternoster  Verde  see  Rivista  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari  Italiane,  I  (1893),

75-77,389-391-

65.  Roscher,  Ephialtes,  pp.  61-62,  72-76  (Sachsische  Gesellschaft  der
Wissenschaften,  Philologisch-Historische  Classe,  Abhandlungen,  XX);
Guilielmus  Alvernus,  De  Universo,  ii,  3,  cap.  8,  24,  Opera,  Paris,  1674,  I,
1030,  1066;  Garmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  i,  3,  27,  pp.  121-
122  (cf.  i,  I,  116-119,  pp.  75-78);  Douce,  Illustrations  of  Shakspeare,
1839,  pp.  425-426  (on  A  Midsummer  Night's  Dream,  i,  4;  cf.  New  Shak-
spere  Society  Transactions,  1875-6,  pp.  191-193);  Couch,  The  History  of


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XIII  527

Polperro,  1871,  p.  133;  Burne  and  Jackson,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  pp.
149,  157;  Bye-Gones  for  1893-94,  p.  205;  for  1895-96,  pp.  72,  80,  492;
Palmer,  Odd  Yarns  of  English  Lakeland,  1914,  p.  73;  E.  M.  Wright,
Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  p.  210;  Train,  An  Historical  and
Statistical  Account  of  the  Isle  of  Man,  1845,  I53!  J-  W.  Wolf,  Nieder-
landische  Sagen,  1843,  pp.  347-348;  Sebillot,  Traditions  et  Superstitions
de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  1882,  I,  141-144;  Blade,  Contes  Populaires  de  la
Gascogne,  1886,  II,  262-263;  Grain,  Folk-Lore  de  I'lUe-et-Vilaine,  II
(1898),  179,  188-191;  La  Tradition,  III  (1889),  53-54;  Carnoy  and  Nico-
laides.  Traditions  Populaires  de  I'Asie  Mineure,  1889,  p.  364;  Schonwerth,
Aus  der  Oberpfalz,  I  (1857),  327-331 ;  Storaker,  Historisk  Tidsskrift,
Christiania,  I  (1871),  46^:^464;  Nyland,  II  (1887),  79;  IV  (1889),  67-68;
Craigie,  Scandinavian  Folk-Lore,  1896,  pp.  274-275;  Wuttke-Meyer,
p.  274;  Manz,  Volksbrauch  und  Volksglaube  des  Sarganserlandes,  Schrif-
ten  der  Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XII  (1916),  106;
Grohmann,  Aberglaube  und  Gebrauche  aus  Bohmen  und  Mahren,  1864,
p.  16;  Holmberg,  Finno-Ugric,  The  Mythology  of  All  Nations,  ed.  J.  A.
MacCulloch,  IV  (1927),  162,  166-167.  Note  also  the  actions  of  the  Buck-
inghamshire vampire  in  the  twelfth  century  (William  of  Newburgh,  v,  22,
ed.  1610,  p.  638;  cf.  Havekost,  Die  Vampirsage  in  England,  1914).

66.  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  S3,  If.  1
v";  Elworthy,  West  Somerset  Word-Book,  1886,  p.  311,  cf.  p.  578;  E.  M.
Wright,  as  above,  p.  211;  Whitney  and  Bullock,  Folk-Lore  from  Mary-
land, 1925,  p.  79.  Cf.  E.  H.  Meyer,  Badisches  Volksleben,  1900,  pp.  371,
554,  555;  Theodor  Lachmann,  Ueberlinger  Sagen,  Brauche  und  Sitten,
1909,  pp.  392-393;  Zeitschrift  des  Vereins  fiir  Rheinische  und  Westfalische
Volkskunde,  IV  (1907),  117;  Skrifter  utgiva  av  Svenska  Litteratursall-
skapet  i  Finland,  XVIII  (1891),  206;  Bergen,  Animal  and  Plant  Lore,
1899,  p.  82;  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern  Negro,  1926,  pp.  152-
153;  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  p.  336  (cf.  Samter,  Geburt,
Hochzeit  und  Tod,  191 1,  pp.  29-30,  48-52).

67.  ^Ifric,  Lives  of  Saints,  xxxi,  34,  ed.  Skeat,  II,  284-285.  See  Surius,
161 8,  De  Probatis  Sanctorum  Vitis,  November  11,  pp.  254-255  (St.  Martin
of  Tours);  cf.  ^Ifric's  Homilies,  ed.  Thorpe,  II  (1846),  514.  For  the  be-
lief that  devils  may  possess  cattle  (cf.  Mark,  v,  1-20;  Luke,  viii,  26-39)
see'  Salomon  and  Saturn,  ed.  Kemble,  1848,  p.  148.

68.  Rituale  Ecclesiae  Dunelmensis,  ed.  Stevenson  (Surtees  Society,  X),
p.  119.  Cf.  Bang,  Norske  Hexeformularer,  1901,  pp.  238,  258.

69.  Folk-Lore,  II  (1891),  248.

70.  Henderson,  Notes  on  the  Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,
1879,  pp.  190-192;  Folk-Lore,  XIII  (1902),  424-425  (Berkshire);  XXXII
(1922),  307  (Isle  of  Skye);  J.  G.  Campbell,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight,
1902,  pp.  48-49  (Perthshire).  Cf.  Puckett,  Folk  Beliefs  of  the  Southern
Negro,  1926,  pp.  151-152;  Niderberger,  Sagen,  Marchen  und  Gebrauche
aus  Unterwalden,  II  (1910),  163-164;  Gredt,  Sagenschatz  des  Luxem-
burger  Landes,  1883,  pp.  559-560;  De  Cock  and  Teirlinck,  Brabantsch
Sagenboek,  I  (1909),  46-48;  Josef  Miiller,  Sagen  aus  Uri  (Schriften  der
Schweizerischen  Gesellschaft  fiir  Volkskunde,  XVIII),  I   (1926),  91;


528         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Bombay  Gazetteer,  IX,  i  (1901),  430;  von  Sydow,  Festskrift  til  H.  F.
Feilberg,  191 1,  pp.  594-605.

71.  Boston  Herald,  February  6,  1919  (as  reported  by  the  grandson  of
one  of  the  man's  shipmates).  I  heard  a  version  of  this  story  forty-odd
years  ago  from  an  old  Provincetown  man,  a  native  of  Truro.

72.  For  the  nightmare  witch  see  also  Transactions  Lancashire  and
Cheshire  Antiquarian  Society,  XXXIV  (1910),  105-106.  Cf.  Promptorium
Parvulorum,  ed.  Way,  II  (1851),  326;  ed.  Mayhew,  1908,  col.  282:  "Mare
or  wych."

73.  Blundevill,  Fower  Chiefest  Offices  belonging  to  Horsemanship,
1 571,  as  quoted  in  Notes  and  Queries,  6th  Series,  I  (1880),  54.

74.  Scot,  iv,  II,  p.  87  (67),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  68;  Fletcher,  Monsieur
Thomas,  iv,  6;  Edmondston  and  Saxby,  The  Home  of  a  Naturalist,  2d
ed.,  1889,  pp.  186-187.

75.  Scot,  ibid.;  Aubrey,  Remaines  of  Gentilisme  and  Judaisme,  ed.
Britten,  1881,  p.  28;  Browne,  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica,  v,  24,  9,  Works,
ed.  Wilkin,  1852,  II,  100;  The  Table  Book,  ed.  Hone,  II  (1828),  583;
Boston,  Lincoln,  Louth,  and  Spalding  Herald,  February  7,  1837,  in  Folk-
Lore  Journal,  VII  (1889),  55;  J.  Sullivan,  Cumberland  and  Westmorland,
1857,  p.  153;  Glyde,  The  New  Suffolk  Garland,  1866,  pp.  175,  179;  Wil-
kinson and  Tattersall,  Memories  of  Hurstwood,  1889,  p.  49;  E.  M.
Wright,  Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  pp.  226,  233-234;  F.  K.
Robinson,  A  Glossary  of  Words  used  in  the  Neighbourhood  of  Whitby
(English  Dialect  Society),  1876,  pp.  85-86;  County  Folk-Lore,  I,  No.  2
(1893),  pp.  22,  39;  IV  (1904),  pp.  51-52;  VI  (1912),  62;  Palmer,  Odd
Yarns  of  English  Lakeland,  1914,  p.  81.  Cf.  Cuming,  Journal  British
Archaeological  Association,  XXI  (1865),  323-329;  Transactions  Lanca-
shire and  Cheshire  Antiquarian  Society,  XXVII  (1910),  108-110;  Pro-
ceedings Society  of  Antiquaries  of  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,  3d  Series,  II
(1907),  240-243  (with  figures);  Halifax  Antiquarian  Society  Papers,
1904-5,  p.  7;  Folk-Lore,  XII  (1901),  175;  XVI  (1905),  335-336;  County
Folk-Lore,  V  (1908),  99-100;  Saga-Book  of  the  Viking  Club,  III  (1902),
51-52;  Lovett,  Magic  in  Modern  London,  1925,  p.  90;  Maclagan,  Evil
Eye  in  the  Western  Highlands,  1902,  p.  169;  Warden,  Angus,  IV  (1884),
167;  Clague,  Manx  Reminiscences,  [19 11,]  p.  153;  Thiers,  Traite  des
Superstitions,  1741,  I,  384;  Seligmann,  Der  Bose  Blick,  1910,  II,  27;
Hylten-Cavallius,  Warend  och  Wirdarne,  I  (1863),  256-258;  Wallonia,  I
(1893),  106;  XIII  (1905),  49;  The  Indian  Antiquary,  XXVII  (1898),
108-109.

76.  See  Chapter  VII,  note  92.

77.  Herrick,  Another  Charme  for  Stables,  Riverside  ed.,  II,  116.  For
a  witch  that  rode  a  cow  (1650)  see  York  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  pp.  28-30.

78.  Wuttke-Meyer,  pp.  477-478,  483;  Sussex  Archaeological  Collec-
tions, XIII  (1861),  222-223;  Archseologia,  XVII  (1814),  144;  Brockett,
A  Glossary  of  English  North  Country  Words,  1825,  p.  57;  E.  M.  Wright,
Rustic  Speech  and  Folk-Lore,  1913,  pp.  193-194.  Cf.  S.  G.  Drake,  Annals
of  Witchcraft  in  New  England,  1869,  p.  279;  J.  LI.  W.  Page,  An  Ex-
ploration of  Exmoor,  4th  ed.,  1895,  p.  310;  Wm.  Mackay,  Urquhart  and


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XIII  529

Glenmoriston,  1893,  pp.  419-420;  Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,
XXIII  (1908),  II,  379;  Knoop,  Volkssagen  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Hin-
terpommern,  1885,  pp.  138-139;  Deutsche  Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oest-
lichen Bohmen,  VI  (1906),  1 81-182;  Pechuel-Loesche,  Volkskunde  von
Loango,  1907,  p.  319;  Journal  Ceylon  Branch  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  IV
(1865-66),  37.

79.  Vita  Oswini  Regis  Deirorum,  cap.  15,  Raine,  Miscellanea  Bio-
graphica  (Surtees  Society,  VIII),  p.  29.

80.  For  spectral  evidence  see  pp.  363-364.

81.  Bovet,  Pandaemonium,  1684,  p.  194;  A  Collection  of  Modern
Relations,  1693,  pp.  50-51  (1649);  Glanvil's  Sadducismus  Triumphatus,
4th  ed.,  1726,  pp.  328-329  (1663).

82.  See  pp.  174,  177,  179.  _

83.  Weinreich,  Antike  Heilungswunder,  1909  (Religionsgeschichtliche
Versuche  und  Vorarbeiten,  ed.  Wiinsch  and  Deubner,  VIII,  i),  p.  30;  cf.
pp.  80-109  ("Heilung  durch  Handlung  im  Traum"),  1 10-136  ("Heilung
durch  Weisung  im  Traum").  Cf.  Maury,  La  Magie,  i860,  pp.  236-249;
B.  Schmidt,  Das  Volksleben  der  Neugriechen,  I  (1871),  77-82;  A.  Franz,
Die  Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  405-406;  Glanvil's  Sadducismus
Triumphatus,  4th  ed.,  1726,  pp.  359-361.

84.  See  Deubner,  De  Incubatione,  1900,  pp.  56-109,  especially  pp.
59-64,  72,  82,  99;  the  Same,  Kosmas  und  Damian,  1907;  A.  Franz,  II,
44I-449;  H.  Magnus,  Der  Aberglauben  in  der  Medicin,  1903,  pp.  28-35.
Cf.  Vita  S.  Germani,  cap.  3,  §  21,  Acta  Sanctorum,  May  28,  VI  (1688),
782;  Magnuss  Saga  hin  Lengri,  Vigfusson,  Icelandic  Sagas  (Rolls  Series),
I,  273-274  (ed.  Jonsson,  1780,  pp.  514-518);  Gregory,  Dialogi,  iv,  49,  ed.
Moricca,  1924,  p.  308.  At  Clirok  in  Wales  incubation  was  practised  in
1756.  People  came  to  bathe  in  St.  Beuon's  Well,  and  rickety  children  were
left  to  sleep  on  the  saint's  tomb  after  bathing  (The  Travels  through  Eng-
land of  Dr.  Richard  Pococke,  II,  175,  Camden  Society,  N.  S.,  XLIV).  In-
cubation for  lunacy  was  practised  in  Scotland  as  late  as  1850  (Archseologia
Cambrensis,  6th  Series,  XII  [1912],  234).  Cf.  Folk-Lore,  VII  (1896),  148
(Lesbos);  XIX  (1908),  313-315  (the  Abruzzi).

85.  Chronicon  Frodoardi,  Recueil,  VIII,  198.

86.  Caesarius  Heisterbacensis,  Dialogus,  vii,  48,  ed.  Strange,  1851,  II,

68,

87.  Martyrdom  of  Indracht  (Digby  MS.  112),  Notes  and  Queries  for
Somerset  and  Dorset,  XVII  (1923),  21.

88.  Miracula  Simonis  de  Montfort,  in  Halliwell's  ed.  of  Rishanger
(Camden  Society),  1840,  p.  72.

89.  Fornmanna  Sogur,  III  (1827),  102-103;  Memorials  of  St.  Dunstan,
ed.  Stubbs,  pp.  40-42,  cf.  48-49;  Caesarius  Heisterbacensis,  x,  3,  ed.
Strange,  II,  219-220.  See  also  Weinreich,  Antike  Heilungswunder,  1909,
pp.  5-6,  91.  Compare  the  Sleeping  Preacher  (p.  320,  above).  A  story
which  shows  striking  resemblances  to  the  Csedmon  legend  occurs  in  the
Life  of  St.  Waltheof  (Acta  Sanctorum,  August  3,  I,  270-271;  noted  by
Wiist,  Anzeiger  fur  Deutsches  Altertum,  XXXV  [1912],  164-167).


530


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


90.  Bede,  Historia  Ecclesiastica,  ii,  6.  There  is  a  similar  miracle  in  St.
Peter  Damiani's  19th  Opusculum,  cap.  8  (Migne,  CXLV,  437-438).  As
St.  Paul  had  a  messenger  of  Satan  to  buffet  him,  so,  by  a  literal  interpreta-
tion, St.  Godric  of  Finchale  was  diabolically  buffeted;  for  once,  while  he
was  sitting  by  the  fire,  an  invisible  demon  dealt  him  a  blow  that  almost
dashed  him  headlong  to  the  ground:  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Vita  et  Mira-
culis  S.  Godrici,  ed.  Stevenson  (Surtees  Society,  XX),  cap.  35,  p.  88.

91.  Lucian,  Philopseudes,  20.

92.  Capgrave,  ed.  Hingeston,  p.  156.

93.  Gregory,  Dialogi,  i,  4,  ed.  Moricca,  1924,  p.  28;  Wgerferth's  Anglo-
Saxon  version,  ed.  Hecht,  1900,  p.  26.  Cf.  Nider,  Formicarius,  v,  6,  ed.
1516  (1517),  fol.  Ixxix  v°.

94.  Perceval  li  Gallois,  ed.  Potvin,  I,  7-8;  Sebastian  Evans,  The  High
Historv  of  the  Holy  Grail,  I,  13-15.

95.  Serglige  Conculaind,  8-9,  Windisch,  Irische  Texte,  I  (1880),  207-
208.

96.  Reginald,  Libellus  de  Admirandis  Beati  Cuthberti  Virtutibus,  ed.
Raine  (Surtees  Society,  I),  cap.  112,  pp.  248-254.

97.  Im  Thurn,  Journal  Anthropological  Institute,  XI  (1882),  384;
the  Same,  Among  the  Indians  of  Guiana,  1883,  p.  345.  Cf.  Krauss,  Slav-
ische  Volkforschungen,  1908,  p.  36;  Speck,  Memoirs  American  Anthro-
pological Association,  VI  (1919),  269-271.

98.  Cf.  Malleus  Maleficarum,  Pt.  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  1 1,  ed.  1620,  pp.  223-224.

99.  Walter  Map,  De  Nugis  Curialium,  ii,  14,  ed.  Wright,  pp.  82-83  (ed.
James,  pp.  78-79).  The  work  was  written  at  intervals  ca.  1181-1193:  see
Hinton,  Publications  Modern  Language  Association,  XXXII  (1917),
81-132.  The  same  story  is  told  by  Etienne  de  Bourbon  Septem  Dona
Spiritus  Sancti  (thirteenth  century),  ed.  Lecoy  de  la  Marche,  Anecdotes
Historiques,  1877,  pp.  320-322.  For  a  startling  case  of  a  boy  killed  by  a
spectral  woman  (1661)  see  Diary  and  Correspondence  of  Dr.  John
Worthington,  ed.  Crossley  (Chetham  Society,  XXXVI),  II,  66  and  note,
69;  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  p.  12.  For  spectral  evidence  see  Drage,
p.  6;  James  I,  Daemonologie,  1597  (1603),  pp.  79-80.

100.  Cf.  Corrector,  §  153  (Schmitz,  Bussbiicher,  II,  443).  For  the
dominae  nocturnae  or  bonae  res  see  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  pp.  134-140.

101.  Champier,  Dyalogus  in  Magicarum  Artium  Destructionem,
tract  iii  (ii),  chap.  3,  Lyons,  ca.  1500,  sig.  bij,  If.  2  v°-3  r".  For  the  same
legend  see  Sjalens  Trost,  ed.  Klemming,  pp.  31-32;  Nider,  Formicarius,
ii,  4,  ed.  1517  (1516),  fol.  xxvi  r°;  An  Alphabet  of  Tales,  ed.  Banks,  I,
(1904),  No.  247,  p.  173;  Bartholomaeus  de  Spina,  Quaestio  de  Strigibus,
cap.  28  (in  1620  ed.  of  Malleus  Maleficarum,  II,  243-244);  Scot,  iii,  16,
p.  66  (52-53),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  52.  The  anecdote  does  not  appear  in  the
best  accounts  of  St.  Germanus,  but  may  be  found  in  Legenda  Aurea,
Koburger,  1478,  fol.  cxxxiij  r°  (ed.  Grasse,  1850,  cap.  107  [102],  p.  449),
and  elsewhere  (see  Acta  Sanctorum,  July,  VII,  287-288).  Cf.  Schmeller,
Bayerisches  Worterbuch,  I  (1872),  270-271;  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  p.  136;
the  Same,  Quellen,  p.  235.

102.  York  Depositions,  ed.  Raine,  p.  58.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XIII


103.  For  striges  and  the  like  see,  for  example,  Gaster,  Two  Thousand
Years  of  a  Charm  against  the  Child-Stealing  Witch,  Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),
129-162;  Ovid,  Fasti,  vi,  131-168;  Pliny,  xi,  39,  95,  232;  Festus,  De
Verborum  Significatione,  p.  314  Miiller;  Petronius,  Saturae,  63;  Q.  Sere-
nus  Sammonicus,  De  Medicina,  lix,  1044-1047,  ed.  Keuchen,  1662,  p.  34;
Biicheler  and  Riese,  Anthologia  Latina,  II,  ii  (1887),  No.  987,  p.  456  (cf.
Philologus,  LXX  [1911],  507-508);  Torrentius  on  Horace,  Epodes,  v,  20
(1608,  pp.  352-353);  Isidore,  Etymologiae,  viii,  11,  102;  Guilielmus
Alvernus,  De  Universo,  ii,  3,  12,  Opera,  1674,  I,  1036;  ii,  3,  24,  I,  1066;
Archivio  Storico  Lombardo,  XVII  (1890),  881  (a.d.  1520);  Nider,  Formi-
carius,  v,  3,  ed.  1517  (1516),  fol.  Ixiiii  r°;  G.  F.  Pico  della  Mirandola,  Strix,
1523,  sigg.  B  v°-Bii  r°;  Bartholomaeus  de  Spina,  Quaestio  de  Strigibus,
capp.  2  (ed.  1620,  with  Malleus,  II,  152-153),  8  (p.  179),  18  (p.  210),  19
(pp.  212-214);  Wier,  iii,  4,  ed.  1 568,  pp.  219-220;  Ponzinibius,  De  Lamiis,
cap.  63,  ed.  1592  (in  Tractatus  Duo),  p.  279;  Cardano,  De  Rerum  Varie-
tate,  xvi,  93,  Opera,  1663,  III,  323;  Kornmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,
1610,  V,  I  (Opera  Curiosa,  1694,  pp.  193-195);  Leo  Allatius,  De  Graecorum
Hodie  quorundam  Opinationibus,  capp.  2-3  (De  Templis  Graecorum,  etc.,
1645,  pp.  115-118);  Bochart,  Hierozoicon,  vi,  9,  ed.  1675,  II,  831-833;
Bartholinus,  Historiae  Anatomicae  Rariores,  1654,  pp.  20-22;  Webster,
The  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  1677,  pp.  22-23;  Garmann,  De
Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  i,  3,  23-26,  30,  pp.  119-121,  123;  Samter,
Geburt,  Hochzeit  und  Tod,  191 1,  pp.  21-25;  Roskoff,  Geschichte  des
Teufels,  1869,  I,  146-147,  297;  B.  Schmidt,  Das  Volksleben  der  Neugrie-
chen,  I  (1871),  136-138;  Lea,  A  History  of  the  Inquisition,  1888,  III,  502;
Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  L2  r°;  Kuhn  und
Schwartz,  Norddeutsche  Sagen,  1848,  pp.  25-26;  Panzer,  Beitrage  zur
Deutschen  Mythologie,  II  (1855),  iii;  Peter,  Volksthiimliches  aus  Oester-
reichisch-Schlesien,  II  (1867),  24;  Zeitschrift  fiir  Oesterreichische  Volks-
kunde,  II  (1896),  151 ;  Schweizerisches  Archiv  fiir  Volkskunde,  XII  (1908),
7-9;  Deutsche  Volkskunde  aus  dem  Oestlichen  Bohmen,  IX  (1909),  53;
Sebillot,  Traditions  et  Superstitions  de  la  Haute-Bretagne,  1882,  I,  180;
Revue  des  Traditions  Populaires,  IX  (1894),  457-458;  Archivio  per  lo
Studio  delle  Tradizioni  Popolari,  XX  (1901),  103;  XXII  (1903),  7-9;
Zanetti,  La  Medicina  delle  Nostre  Donne,  1892,  p.  ii;  Philologus,  LXVI
(1907),  342-345;  Krauss,  Slavische  Volkforschungen,  1908,  pp.  60-66;
Panjab  Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1884-85),  6;  Journal  (Royal)  Anthropolo-
gical Institute,  XXVI  (1897),  149-150;  XL  (1910),  463;  J.  H.  Knowles,
Folk-Tales  of  Kashmir,  1888,  p.  59;  E.  Thurston,  Omens  and  Supersti-
tions of  Southern  India,  191 2,  pp.  261-262;  Crooke,  Religion  and  Folk-
lore of  Northern  India,  1926,  pp.  207-208;  Skeat,  Malay  Magic,  1900,
PP-  3-5~3^8;  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,
XXXVI  (1882),  85;  R.  Austin  Freeman,  Travels  and  Life  in  Ashanti  and
Jaman,  1898,  pp.  291-293;  T.  N.  Goddard,  The  Handbook  of  Sierra
Leone,  1925,  p.  56;  Rattray,  Ashanti,  1923,  p.  265;  P.  Amaury  Talbot,
The  Peoples  of  Southern  Nigeria,  1926,  II,  214,  222;  Oviedo,  Historia
General  y  Natural  de  Indias,  xxix,  31,  ed.  Amador  de  los  Rios,  III  (1853),
159-160.


532         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


104.  Weicker,  Der  Seelenvogel,  1902,  pp.  32-33,  308.

105.  Duris  Samius,  frag.  37,  ed.  Hulleman,  1841,  pp.  123-124  (from
scholium  on  Aristophanes,  Wasps,  1030  [1035],  where  further  references
are  given).  Cf.  WagstafFe,  The  Question  of  Witchcraft  Debated,  1669,
p.  20;  B.  Schmidt,  Das  Volksleben  der  Neugriechen,  I  (1871),  131-135;
M.  Mayer,  Archaologische  Zeitung,  XLIII  (1886),  1 19-130;  Basset,  Les
Apocryphes  fithiopiens,  IV  (1894),  18-22;  Abbott,  Macedonian  Folklore,
1903,  pp.  265-266.

106.  Zenobius,  Epitome,  iii,  3  (Paroemiographi  Graeci,  ed.  Gaisford,
1836,  p.  280;  ed.  von  Leutsch  and  Schneidewin,  1839,  I>  5^)?  Suidas,  ed.
Bernhardy,  I,  i,  1079;  Hesychius,  s.  vv.  FeXXco,  FeXXcos;  Roscher,  Ephialtes,
p.  59;  Leo  Allatius  (Allacci),  De  Psellis,  p.  41  (Fabricius,  Bibliotheca  Graeca,
Vol.  V,  171 2);  the  Same,  De  Graecorum  Hodie  Quorundam  Opinationibus,
cap.  3  (De  Templis  Graecorum,  etc.,  1645,  pp.  146-147);  Mansikka,  Ueber
Russische  Zauberformeln,  pp.  48-49,  58-59;  Gaster,  Folk-Lore,  XI  (1900),
142-148;  Wesselofsky,  Giornale  Storico  della  Letteratura  Italiana,  XI
(1888),  342-343-

107.  Rouse,  Folk-Lore,  X  (1899),  151-152;  B.  Schmidt,  I  (1871),  139-
I40;  Du  Cange,  s.  v.  FeXXco.

108.  B.  Schmidt,  I,  133.

109.  Nicephorus  Callistus,  xviii,  9  (Migne,  CXLVII,  348).  Cf.  Eva-
grius,  V,  21.  See  Delrio,  Disquisitiones  Magicae,  lib.  ii,  qu.  6,  ed.  1616,
p.  99;  qu.  27,  sect.  2,  p.  275.

110.  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  1900,  pp.  58-60;  cf.  pp.  81,  84,  132-140,

149-

111.  Gervase  of  Tilbury,  Otia  Imperialia,  iii,  85-86  (Leibnitz,  I,  987-
988;  Liebrecht,  pp.  38-40,  cf.  pp.  143-146);  John  of  Salisbury,  Policrati-
cus,  ii,  17,  ed.  Webb,  I,  loi.

112.  Garmann,  De  Miraculis  Mortuorum,  1709,  i,  3,  41,  p.  128.  Cf.
Grillando,  De  Sortilegiis,  ed.  1545,  vi,  10,  fol.  xxx  v°  (ed.  1592,  vi,  13,  p.  71).

113.  Katha  Sarit  Sagara,  ch.  32,  Tawney,  I  (1880),  288-289  fed.  Pen-
zer,  III  [1925],  102-103);  Plautus,  Pseudolus,  iii,  2,  30-32.  Cf.  Grimm,
Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  I  (1875),  226-232;  IV  (1878),  88-90;
Revue  Celtique,  XII  (1891),  84-85;  Krauss,  Slavische  Volkforschungen,
1908,  pp.  61-64;  Hofler,  Die  Volksmedizinische  Organotherapie,  pp.  233-
234;  Bompas,  Folklore  of  the  Santal  Parganas,  1909,  p.  419;  Enthoven,
The  Folklore  of  Bombay,  1924,  p.  239;  Talbot,  In  the  Shadow  of  the  Bush,
1912,  pp.  192-193;  Wilken,  Het  Animisme,  De  Indische  Gids,  VI,  i  (1884),
950-955;  Bombay  Gazetteer,  IX,  i  (1901),  429;  Tod,  Annals  and  Anti-
quities of  Rajast'han,  II  (1832),  587;  Sir  John  Malcolm,  A  Memoir  of
Central  India,  2d  ed.,  1824,  II,  212;  Silas,  A  Primitive  Arcadia,  1926,
p.  48  (Papua);  W.  J.  V.  Saville,  In  Unknown  New  Guinea,  1926,  pp.  216,
272;  Sir  George  Grey,  Journals  of  Two  Expeditions  of  Discovery  in  North-
West  and  Western  Australia,  1841,  II,  314-316,  323.  See  also  Apuleius,
Metamorphoses,  i,  12-19;  Petronius,  Saturae,  134.

114.  Philostratus,  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  iv,  25.  Cf.  Jataka,  i,  96,  Cowell,
I  (1895),  232-237;  ii,  196,  II  (1895),  89-91;  J.  H.  Knowles,  Folk-Tales
of  Kashmir,  1888,  pp.  233-239;  B.  Schmidt,  Das  Volksleben  der  Neu-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XIV


533


griechen,  I  (1871),  111-112;  Krauss,  Slavische  Volkforschungen,  1908,
pp.  61-62.

115.  The  cannibalism  and  preparation  of  ointment  in  Potts  (The  Won-
derfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  L2  r°)  are  late  and  exceptional
in  English  cases.

116.  See,  for  example,  Hansen,  Ouellen,  p.  141  (cf.  552);  Bossard
and  Maulde,  Gilles  de  Rais,  2d  ed.,  1886,  pp.  xx,  xxiv,  li-lii;  Guazzo
(Guaccius),  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608,  i,  6,  p.  16;  Boguet,  Dis-
cours  des  Sorciers,  ch.  38,  2d  ed.,  1608,  pp.  205-206.  Cf.  pp.  141,  206,  243,
above.

117.  Hansen,  Quellen,  pp.  211,  237,  308,  570  (cf.  497);  Nider,  Formi-
carius,  v,  3,  ed.  1516  (1517),  fol.  Ixxiiii;  Wier,  iii,  2,  ed.  1568,  p.  215  (cf.
iii,  4,  pp.  218-223);  Bodin,  Demonomanie,  iv,  5,  ed.  1580,  foil.  198  v°-
199  r°;  Jonson,  Masque  of  Queens,  1609.  Cf.  de  I'Ancre,  L'Incredulite  et
Mescreance  du  Sortilege,  1622,  p.  790.  See  pp.  141,  245,  above.

118.  Hansen,  Quellen,  pp.  93,  120,  233;  Nider,  v,  3,  ed.  1516  (1517),  fol.
Ixxiiii;  G.  F.  Pico  della  Mirandola,  Strix,  1523,  sigg.  E  v°,  Eii,  If.  3  v°;
Wier,  iii,  2,  ed.  1568,  pp.  214-215  (cf.  iii,  4,  pp.  218-223);  Scot,  iii,  3,  p.  44
(37),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  34;  iii,  12,  pp.  59-60  (48),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  46;
Jonson,  The  Masque  of  Queens,  1609  (with  learned  notes);  Boguet,  pp.
165-168  (cf.  pp.  204-207).  Cf.  Cardano,  De  Subtilitate,  xviii.  Opera,  1663,
III,  639;  Hansen,  p.  497.  See  also  pp.  243,  268,  above.


CHAPTER  XIV
The  Seer

1.  On  the  whole  subject  see  Rupert  Taylor,  The  Political  Prophecy  in
England,  191 1.  Cf.  Dodds,  Modern  Language  Review,  XI  (1916),  276-
284.

2.  Norfolk  Archaeology,  I  (1847),  209-216.  There  is  an  excellent  "line"
of  prophecies  in  William  of  Malmesbury's  Gesta  Pontificum  (see  Hamil-
ton's edition,  p.  570).  Cf.  A  Discovrsive  Probleme  concerning  Prophesies
by  I[ohn].  H[arvey].  Physition,  1588  (twelve  British  prophets  are  men-
tioned and  derided,  pp.  56-58).

3.  We  have  already  noted  evidence  from  the  Anglo-Saxon  age  and  from
the  eleventh,  twelfth,  and  thirteenth  centuries  (pp.  27-30,  41-48).

4.  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  II,  <;35,  541,  ^46-547;
the  Same,  Historia  Anglorum,  ed.  Madden,  II,  129,  136  (cf.  Ill,  227);  An-
nales  Monastici,  ed.  Luard,  I,  60;  11,278;  111,34;  IV,  56-58,  401;  Walter
of  Coventry,  ed.  Stubbs,  II,  208,  212;  Gaufridus  de  Coldingham,  Raine,
Historiae  Dunelmensis  Scriptores  Tres  (Surtees  Society,  IX),  pp.  27-28;
Boothroyd,  History  of  Pontefract,  1807,  pp.  73-75.

5.  Knighton,  ed.  Lumby,  I,  276-277.

6.  Chaucer,  Troilus,  iv,  1 406-1 407.  Cf.  Holkot,  Super  Libros  Sa-
pientie,  Lectio  190,  Speyer,  1483,  sigg.  oiiij,  If.  5  v°-pj  r°  (Reutlingen,  1489,
sig.  Miiij,  If.  4  v°).


534


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


7.  Guillelmus  Armoricus,  Gesta  Philippi  Augusti,  cap.  202,  GEuvres  de
Rigord  et  de  Guillaume  le  Breton,  ed.  Delaborde,  I  (1882),  295-296.

8.  Giovanni  Villani,  Storia,  vii,  31,  ed.  1587,  p.  212.

9.  Registrum  Radulphi  Baldock  (Canterbury  and  York  Series,  VII),  I,
144-145.  Cf.  Council  of  Paris,  a.d.  829,  iii,  2,  Mansi,  Concilia,  XIV,  595.

10.  Cardwell,  Documentary  Annals,  1844,1,30;  Frere  and  Kennedy,
Visitation  Articles  and  Injunctions  (Alcuin  Society),  1910,  II,  iii.

11.  Cranmer,  Miscellaneous  Writings  and  Letters,  ed.  Cox  (Parker
Society),  1846,  p.  158;  Cardwell,  I,  58;  Frere  and  Kennedy,  II,  188.  Cf.
Strype,  Memorials  of  Cranmer,  I  (1694),  183.

12.  Cardwell,  I,  161;  Frere  and  Kennedy,  II,  353.

13.  Strype,  Historical  Memorials,  III  (1721),  Appendix,  p.  183;  Frere
and  Kennedy,  II,  398.

14.  Cardwell,  I,  226,  246;  Frere  and  Kennedy,  III,  5,  20.

15.  Strype,  Annals  of  the  Reformation,  I  (1725),  Appendix,  p.  59;  Frere
and  Kennedy,  III,  92.

16.  Frere  and  Kennedy,  III,  106.

17.  The  Same,  III,  204.

18.  The  Same,  III,  227-228.

19.  Cardwell,  II,  34.

ao.  See  pp.  194-195,  above.

21.  Palgrave,  An  Essay  upon  the  Original  Authority  of  the  King's  Coun-
cil, 1834,  pp.  87-88;  Select  Cases  before  the  King's  Council,  ed.  Leadam
and  Baldwin  (Selden  Society,  XXXV),  1918,  p.  xxxiv.

22.  English  Chronicle,  ed.  Davies  (Camden  Society,  LXIV),  p.  69.  Cf.
The  First  Part  of  the  Contention  of  the  Two  Famous  Houses,  of  Yorke  and
Lancaster,  [i,  4,  and  iv,  i,]  Shakespeare's  Works,  ed.  Wright,  IX  (1895),
522,  548-550;  2  Henry  VI,  i,  4,  and  iv,  i;  Boswell-Stone,  Shakspere's
Holinshed,  1896,  pp.  252-253,  270-271.  See  also  Chronicle  of  London,
1827,  pp.  135-136;  Gregory's  Chronicle,  ed.  Gairdner,  p.  190;  Kingsford,
Chronicles  of  London,  1905,  pp.  159,  276.

23.  See  Sir  William  Lomner  to  John  Paston,  May  5,  1450,  Paston  Let-
ters, ed.  Fenn  and  Ramsay,  1840,  I,  18-19.

24.  See  pp.  138-139,  above.

25.  Gairdner,  Three  Fifteenth-Century  Chronicles,  p.  163.

26.  Cambridge  Antiquarian  Communications,  No.  67,  XIX  (191 5),

27.  Warkworth's  Chronicle,  ed.  Halliwell  (Camden  Society),  1839,  p.  24.

28.  Hale,  pp.  36-37.

29.  Lincoln  Episcopal  Visitations,  Peacock,  Archasologia,  XLVIII
(1885),  251-253.

30.  Third  Report  of  the  Deputy  Keeper,  Appendix  II,  pp.  230-232.
Cf.  Pike,  History  of  Crime,  II  (1876),  20-21,  605.

31.  See  p.  127,  above.

32.  Letters  and  Papers,  IX,  No.  846,  p.  284.  Other  friars  were  in
trouble  for  seditious  words  and  necromancy  in  1535.  See  Cromwell  to
Rutland,  August  9  (Historical  Manuscripts  Commission,  12th  Report,
Appendix,  IV,  Duke  of  Rutland's  MSS.,  I,  25);  Gervase  Tyndall  to  Crom-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XIV


535


well,  Letters  and  Papers,  IX,  No.  740,  p.  252  (cf.  No.  551,  p.  182);  Ellis,
Original  Letters,  3d  Series,  III,  41-42.

33.  Letters  and  Papers,  XII,  ii,  No.  1212,  pp.  426-428;  No.  1231,  pp.
432-433;  XIII,  i.  No.  107,  p.  37;  No.  705,  p.  267.  1535  and  1537  were  bad
years  for  prophets:  see  VIII,  Nos.  i,  327,  565,  567,  736,  771,  pp.  2,  131,
214-215,  275,  290;  XII,  i,  Nos.  318,  534,  841,  pp.  145,  248,  371-372;  XII,
ii,  Nos.  74,  80,  pp.  25,  28.  Cf.  XIV,  No.  806,  p.  382  (1539;  Leynham,  a
"mad  prophet").

34.  Letters  and  Papers,  XIII,  i,  Nos.  487,  705,  1282,  1350,  pp.  177-179,
267,47o>503-

35.  See  Underhill's  Autobiography,  J.  G.  Nichols,  Narratives  of  the
Days  of  the  Reformation,  pp.  159,  172-175,  cf.  326-330.

36.  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  New  Series,  III,  279;  Nichols,  as  above,
P-335-

37.  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  New  Series,  IV,  12-13,  20,  94,  131.

38.  Strype,  Historical  Memorials,  III  (1721),  Appendix,  p.  35.

39.  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  New  Series,  V,  362.

40.  Strype,  Historical  Memorials,  III  (1721),  Catalogue,  p.  164.

41.  Commons'  Journals,  I,  57,  59,  65,  69;  Lords'  Journals,  I,  591,  601,
602,  606;  Statutes  of  the  Realm,  IV,  i  (1819),  445-446  (5  Elizabeth,
chap.  15).

42.  "I  will  here  also  omitte  to  talke  of  Grigge  the  poulter,  with  divers
other,  whose  endes  have  made  their  doinges  knowne,"  writes  John  Halle,
Chyrurgyen,  in  An  Historiall  Expostulation:  against  the  Beastlye  Abus-
ers, both  of  Chyrurgerie,  and  Physycke,  in  Oure  Tyme,  1565,  ed.  T.  J.
Pettigrew  (Percy  Society,  XI),  1844,  p.  26.

43.  Wriothesley's  Chronicle,  ed.  Hamilton  (Camden  Society),  II,  42;
Stow,  Annales,  ed.  1631,  p.  604.  For  later  prophets,  among  a  countless
multitude,  see  Depositions  Taken  before  the  Mayor  and  Aldermen  of  Nor-
wich, ed.  Rye,  1905,  pp.  61-62  (1559);  Diary  of  Walter  Yonge,  ed.  Roberts
(Camden  Society,  XLl),  p.  38  (1621);  Diary  of  John  Rous,  ed.  Green
(Camden  Society,  LXVI),  p.  36  (1629);  Devon  and  Cornwall  Notes  and
Queries,  XIII  (1925),  312-314  (Anne  JefFeries,  1647,  instructed  by  the
fairies);  Ashmole's  Diary,  April  20,  1653,  ed.  Burman,  1774,  pp.  318-319
(ed.  Gunther,  1927,  p.  51:  Arise  Evans,  the  Welsh  seer;  cf.  Aubrey,  Mis-
cellanies, 2d  ed.,  1721,  pp.  124-128,  and  Archaeologia  Cambrensis,  4th
Series,  X  [1879],  233-234);  William  Robinson,  The  History  and  Antiquities
of  the  Parish  of  Hackney,  1842, 1,  219-220  (1654);  Diary  and  Correspon-
dence of  Dr.  John  Worthington,  ed.  Crossley  (Chetham  Society,  XIII),  I,
357  (1661).  Cf.  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  VIII  (1903),
106-108.  Henry  Howard,  Earl  of  Northampton,  published  his  laborious
work,  A  Defensative  against  the  Poyson  of  Supposed  Prophecies,  in  1583;
it  was  reissued  in  1620.


536         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


CHAPTER  XV
Cold  Water

1.  On  the  judicium  aquae  Jrigidae  see  Patetta,  Le  Ordalie,  1890,  pp.  33,
34,  41,  52,  60-61,  98,  loi,  113,  116-117,  135-137,  158-161,  191-194,  213-
214,  341,  344-345>  372,  376-378,  431;  A.  Franz,  Die  Kirchlichen  Benedik-
tionen,  1909,  II,  313-328,  355-357,  377-384;  Lea,  Superstition  and  Force,
4th  ed.,  1892,  pp.  318-334;  Thiers,  Superstitions  Anciennes  et  Modernes,
1733,  vi,  1-2,  I,  216-227;  P.  le  Brun,  Histoire  Critique  des  Pratiques  Su-
perstitieuses,  1750,  II,  240-317;  Tuchmann,  Melusine,  IV  (1888-89),  ^^4"
t88;  Soldan  und  Heppe,  Geschichte  der  Hexenprocesse,  I,  394-397  (ed.
Bauer,  I,  380-384);  Liebermann,  Die  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,  II,  530;
W.  R.  Halliday,  Greek  Divination,  1913,  pp.  109-115;  Aubrey,  Remaines
of  Gentilisme  and  Judaisme,  ed.  Britten,  1881,  p.  126;  Shirley,  The  Sisters
(licensed  1642),  ii,  i  (Works,  ed.  Gifford  and  Dyce,  V,  369);  Stearne,  A
Confirmation  and  Discovery  of  Witch-craft,  1648,  pp.  15,  18-19;  Dugdale,
Origines  Juridiciales,  1671,  pp.  86-88;  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  pp.
40-41;  Filmer,  An  Advertisement  to  the  Jury-Men  of  England  touching
Witches,  1679,  p.  327;  Train,  An  Historical  and  Statistical  Account  of  the
Isle  ofMan,i845,II,i  67-1 68 ;  Hylten-Cavallius,  Warend  och  Wirdarne,  I
(1863),  447-449;  Linderholm,  De  Stora  Haxprocesserna  i  Sverige,  I  (1918),
51-53,  79-83,  204,  etc.;  Rick,  Defensio  Compendiosa  Probae  Aquae  Fri-
gidae,  1597;  Godelmann,  Tractatus  de  Magis,  Veneficis  et  Lamiis,  1591,
iii,  5,  pp.  30-45;  Hauber,  Bibliotheca  Magica,  3.  Stuck,  1738,  pp.  147-148;
8.  Stuck,  1739,  pp.  502-506;  9.  Stiick,  1739,  pp.  567-591;  Zeitschrift  der
Gesellschaft  fiir  Schleswig-Holsteinische  Geschichte,  XLV  (1915),  183-
184,  192-193,  203,  206,  216,  221-222,  229,  232,  235,  237;  Blatter  fiir  Pom-
mersche  Volkskunde,  XI  (1902),  83-84  (ca.  1835);  Krauss,  Slavische  Volk-
forschungen,  1908,  pp.  67-68.

2.  Grimm,  Deutsche  Rechtsalterthiimer,  4th  ed.  (Heusler  and  Hiibner),
1899, II,  582-586  (923-926).

3.  See  pp.  290-291,  above.

4.  Child,  The  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  I,  338;  II,  505;  III,
505;  Laistner,  Das  Ratsel  der  Sphinx,  1889, 1,  196-197,  252-253,  257-258;
Blau,  Das  Altjudische  Zauberwesen,  1898,  pp.  158-159;  Goldziher,  Archiv
fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  XIII  (1910),  20-46;  Durham  Depositions,  ed.
Raine  (Surtees  Society,  XXI),  p.  100;  Dryden,  An  Evening's  Love,  iii,  i,
ed.  1671,  p.  35  (ed.  Scott,  1808,  III,  275);  Middleton,  Annals  of  Hyde  and
District,  1899,  P-  ^745  J-  Campbell,  Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight,  1902,
p.  184;  Torr,  Small  Talk  at  Wreyland,  1918,  p.  13;  Folk-Lore,  XIII  (1902),
428;  Dorsey,  Traditions  of  the  Arikara,  1904,  p.  132;  the  Same,  The  My-
thology of  the  Wichita,  1904,  pp.  107-108,  216;  Samter,  Geburt,  Hochzeit
und  Tod,  191 1,  pp.  85-89.

5.  William  of  Malmesbury,  Gesta  Regum,  ii,  170,  ed.  Stubbs,  I,  201.

6.  Pliny,  vii,  2,  17.   Cf.  Wier,  iii,  35,  ed.  1568,  pp.  330-331.

7.  Map,  De  Nugis  Curialium,  iii,  3,  ed.  Wright,  p.  125  (ed.  James,
p.  124).  Map  cites  Solinus  (i,  loi,  ed.  Mommsen^,  1895,  P-  ^6),  who  cites


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XV


537


Apollonides.  Cf.  Tuchmann,  Melusine,  IV  (1888-89),  33.  J- G.  Campbell
mentions  a  witch  with  eyes  of  different  colors,  one  black  or  brown  and  one
blue  (Witchcraft  and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands,  1902,  pp.
50-51).  Alexander  the  Great  had  one  blue  and  one  black  eye  according  to
Michael  Glycas,  Annales,  Byzantine  Corpus,  ed.  Bekker,  [XXVI,]  268.

8.  Anthologia  Palatina,  ix,  125  (ed.  Jacobs,  II,  42-43,  cf.  his  Animad-
versiones,  III,  i,  285;  ed.  Diibner,  II,  24-25;  ed.  Stadtmiiller,  III,  i,  97-99);
Julian,  Oratio  ii,  p.  81D  Spanheim  (ed.  Hertlein,  I,  104),  and  Epistola  xvi,
p.  383D  (II,  495  Hertlein:  rejected  as  spurious  by  Bidez,  CEuvres  Com-
pletes, I,  ii,  247  [1924];  cf.  ed.  Bidez  and  Cumont,  1922,  p.  260);  Claudian,
In  Rufinum,  ii,  112;  Nonnus,  Dionysiaca,  xxiii,  94-97;  Eustathius,  Hys-
mine  and  Hysminias,  viii,  7,  Hercher,  Erotici  Scriptores  Graeci,  II,  241-
242  (cf.  xi,  17,  Hercher,  II,  282-283);  Gregory  Nazianzen,  Carmina,  ii,  2,
4,  142-143  (Migne,  Patrologia  Graeca,  XXXVII,  1516;  xHx,  Opera,  II
[1611],  114  C);  Tzetzes,  Chiliades,  iv,  339-341,  ed.  Kiesseling,  p.  133;
Georgius  Pisida,  De  Expeditione  Heraclii  Imperatoris  contra  Persas,  i,  41
(Byzantine  Corpus,  XXXI,  ii,  5).

9.  Pseudo-Aristotle,  De  Mirabilibus  Auscultationibus,  cap.  57,  p.  834
(Didot  ed.,  IV,  83);  Stephanus  Byzantinus,  Ethnica,  s.  v.  IlaXt/cjj,  ed.
Meineke,  p.  497.  Cf.  Achilles  Tatius,  Clitophon,  viii,  12  and  14  (Hercher,
Erotici  Scriptores  Graeci,  I,  205,  207);  Diodorus  Siculus,  xi,  89;  Macro-
bius,  V,  19;  Silius  Italicus,  Punica,  xiv,  219-220;  Solinus,  4,  §§  5-7,  ed.
Mommsen,  p.  47;  Priscian,  Periegesis,  466-469,  ed.  Krehl,  p.  495;  Isidore,
Origines,  xiv,  6.  See  Glotz,  L'Ordalie  dans  la  Grece  Primitive,  1904,  pp.
80-85;  Patetta,  Le  Ordalie,  1890,  p.  135.  Cf.  Dalyell,  The  Darker  Super-
stitions of  Scotland,  1834,  pp.  513-514;  Frazer's  Pausanias,  1898,  III,  388-
389.  On  this  ordeal  and  others  in  classic  lands  see  Halliday,  Greek  Divina-
tion, 1913,  pp.  99-115.

10.  Zosimus,  Historia  Nova,  i,  58,  1-3.

11.  Gesta  Hammaburgensis  Ecclesiae  Pontificum,  iv,  26,  schol.  134
(Pertz,  Monumenta  Germaniae  Historica,  Scriptores,  VII,  379).  Compare
the  buffalo  sacrifice  (Crooke,  Religion  and  Folklore  of  Northern  India,
1926,  pp.  61-62).

12.  Pausanias,  iii,  23,  5.  Compare  the  crocodile  ordeal:  Codrington,
The  Melanesians,  1891,  p.  213;  Meek,  The  Northern  Tribes  of  Nigeria,
1925, 1,  268;  Sibree,  The  Great  African  Island,  1880,  p.  284;Osborn,  Mada-
gascar, 1924,  p.  226;  The  Antananarivo  Annual,  No.  2  (1876,  reprinted
1885),  I,  222;  No.  12  (1888),  III,  421-426.

13.  Mansikka,  Die  Religion  der  Ostslaven,  I  (1922),  218  (FF  Communi-
cations, Vol.  X,  No.  43).  Cf.  Lowenstimm,  Aberglaube  und  Strafrecht,
1897,  pp.  81-82;  the  Same,  Zeitschrift  fiir  Socialwissenschaft,  VI  (1903),
224.

14.  Capitularia  Regum  Francorum,  II  (1897),  16;  cf.  II,  7.  For  Frank-
ish  rites  see  Zeumer,  Formulae  Aevi  Merowingici  et  KaroHni,  1886  (Monu-
menta, Leges,  Section  V),  pp.  617-629.

15.  See,  for  instance,  Keutgen,  Urkunden  zur  Stadtischen  Verfassungs-
geschichte,  1901,  pp.  92,  196,  205,  453.


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


1 6.  Letter  of  Scribonius  (Wilhelm  Adolf  Schreiber),  October  4,  1580.
See  Tractatus  Duo  Singulares  de  Examine  Sagarum  super  Aquam  Frigi-
dam  Projectarum,  1686;  Hauber,  Bibliotheca,  Acta  et  Scripta  Magica,
9''^^  Stiick,  1739,  pp.  567-591 ;  Erasmus  Francisci,  Der  Hollische  Proteus,
id  ed.,  1695,  pp.  108-114.

17.  ^thelstan,  ii,  23  (Liebermann,  Die  Gesetze  der  Angelsachsen,!,  162;
i,  23,  Thorpe,  Ancient  Laws,  folio,  1840,  p.  90;  cf.  Fuller,  Church-History,
1656,  Book  ii.  Century  X,  chap.  9,  p.  127);  Be  Blaserum  ond  be  MorSslih-
tum,  of  uncertain  date,  ca.  930-975,  §  2  (Liebermann,  I,  388;  Thorpe,  as
^thelstan,  Iv,  6,  p.  95);  ^^ithelred,  iii,  6  (Liebermann,  I,  230;  Thorpe,
p.  126);  Leis  Willelme,  xv,  3  (Liebermann,  1,502-503;  Thorpe,  p.  204;
Matzke,  Lois  de  Guillaume  le  Conquerant,  p.  13);  Assize  of  Clarendon,
§§  1-2  (Benedict  of  Peterborough,  Gesta  Regis  Henrici  Secundi,  ed.  Stubbs,
Appendix,  II,  cxlix-cl);  Assize  of  Northampton  (the  same,  I,  108).  Cf.
Glanville,  Tractatus  de  Legibus,  ed.  1604,  fol.  114  r°.  In  some  of  these
cases  the  hot-water  ordeal  may  possibly  be  meant  rather  than  the  judicium
aquae Jrigidae:  see  Liebermann,  II,  530,  534.

18.  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  8th  Report,  Appendix,  Part  I,  p.  270;
Boothroyd,  History  of  Pontefract,  1807,  Appendix,  p.  ii;  Wardell,  Munici-
pal History  of  Leeds,  1846,  Appendix,  p.  vi;  Gross,  Harvard  Law  Review,
XV  (1902),  692-693.

19.  Liebermann,  I,  401-405,  413-415,  417-418,  422-424,  427.  Cf.  Tex-
tus  Roffensis,  ed.  Hearne,  1720,  pp.  19-28.

20.  Liebermann,  I,  415  (Late  West  Saxon,  scincraeft),  418  (Latin,  "per
aliquod  maleficium  uel  per  herbas  seu  per  causas  diabolicas"),  423  {male-
ficium,  praestigium),  424.  {maleficium).   Cf.  Schmitz,  Die  Bussbiicher,  I

(1883),  457-459;  II  (1898),  496.  See  p.  28,  above.

21.  For  witchcraft  {maleficium)  see  Ritual  XIII,  §7  (Liebermann,  I,
423),  in  manuscripts  of  about  1130-1150.  See  also  Ritual  I,  §  20  (Lieber-
mann, I,  404,  note  38),  in  a  manuscript  of  about  1060  {ueneficium).

11.  Ritual  I,  Liebermann,  I,  405.

23.  Ritual  X,  Liebermann,  I,  417-418.  Cf.  Hincmar,  De  Divortio  Lo-
tharii,  Responsio  to  Sixth  Question,  Opera,  Paris,  1645,  I,  604-613;  Peter
Cantor,  Verbum  Abbreviatum,  cap.  78,  Magne,  CCV,  233.

24.  Pipe  Roll,  12  Henry  II  (Pipe  Roll  Society  IX  [1888]),  pp.  5,  13,

14,  33,  etc.  (see  index,  judicium  ague);  22  Henry  II  (XXV  [1904]),  pp.

15,  26,  34,  etc.  ("per  assisam  de  Norhant'"  is  regularly  added),  198.  See
also  18  Henry  II  (XVIII  [1894]),  p.  10;  23  Henry  II  (XXVI  [1905]),  p.
79;  25  Henry  II  (XXVIII  [1907]),  p.  106  ("pro  justicia  facienda  de  Wal-
tero  qui  periit  judicio  aque");  26  Henry  II  (XXIX  [1908]),  p.  52,  and  28
Henry  II  (XXXI  [1910]),  p.  53  ("de  misericordia  pro  judicio  aque").  Cf.
13  Henry  II  (XI  [1889]),  p.  i;  16  Henry  II  (XV  [1892]),  p.  16.  See  Gross,
Harvard  Law  Review,  XV  (1902),  692-693.

25.  Pipe  Roll,  12  Henry  II  (IX  [1888]),  p.  18:  "pro  benedictione  fossa-
rum  apud  Sanctum  ^dmundum."

26.  Pipe  Roll,  14  Henry  II  (XII  [1890]),  pp.  198,  48.

27.  Pipe  Roll,  15  Henry  II  (XIII  [1890]),  p.  24.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XV


539


28.  T.  D.  Whitaker,  An  History  of  Richmondshire,  1823,  II,  422,  424;
Dobson  and  Harland,  A  History  of  the  Preston  Guild,  3d  ed.  [1862],  p.  75;
Bateson,  The  English  Historical  Review,  XV  (1900),  497.

29.  Pipe  Roll,  31  Henry  II  (XXXIV  [1913]),  p.  4;  Receipt  Roll  of  the
Exchequer,  ed.  Hall,  1899,  p.  23.

30.  Pipe  Roll,  31  Henry  II,  p.  15.

31.  The  same,  p.  17.

32.  The  same,  p.  17.  Cf.  32  and  33  Henry  II,  XXXVI  (1914),  19;
XXXVII  (1915),  2.  Cf.  the  Alverton  case  in  1167,  but  this  may  have
been  an  execution  (Pipe  Roll,  13  Henry  II,  XI  [1889],  91).

33.  Pipe  Roll,  31  Henry  II,  p.  70.

34.  Benedict  of  Peterborough,  ed.  Stubbs,  I,  156;  Roger  of  Hoveden,  ed.
Stubbs,  II,  131.  A  twelfth-century  tract  remarks  that  the  citizens  of  Lon-
don "non  lege  duelli,  non  examine  aquae  vel  ferri  candentis  se  purgabunt,
nisi  sponte  elegerint,  sed  ibi  finis  est  omnis  controversiae  sacramentum"
(Materials  for  the  History  of  Thomas  Becket,  ed.  Robertson,  IV,  148).

35.  Maitland,  Three  Rolls  of  the  King's  Court  (Pipe  Roll  Society,  XIV),
1891,  pp.  80,  86,  89,  98,  loi,  105,  143;  the  Same,  Select  Pleas  of  the  Crown
(Selden  Society,  I),  I  (1888),  pp.  i,  3-5,  8,  29,  55,  75,  79,  80;  Placitorum
Abbreviatio,  181 1,  p.  43a,  b,  68b,  90b;  Palgrave,  Rotuli  Curiae  Regis,  1835,
I,  204.

36.  Rymer,  Foedera,  2d  ed.,  I,  228;  Patent  Rolls  of  the  Reign  of  Henry
III,  1216-1225,  p.  186  (January  26,  1219);  Dugdale,  Origines  Juridiciales,
1671,  pp.  87-88.  For  William  Rufus's  angry  outburst  against  the  ordeal  by
fire  (hot  iron)  see  Eadmer,  Historia  Novorum  in  Anglia,  ed.  Rule,  p.  102.

37.  Canon  18,  Mansi,  Concilia,  XXII  (1778),  1007.

38.  Roger  Bacon,  De  Nullitate  Magiae,  cap.  2,  Opera  Inedita,  ed.
Brewer,  1859,  p.  526.

39.  Nathaniel  Bacon,  The  Annalls  of  Ipsw*^^^,  ed.  Richardson,  1884,
p.  44  (29  Edw.  I).

40.  James  I,  Daemonologie,  1597  (1603),  iii,  6,  pp.  80-81.

41.  Wm.  Perkins,  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,  1608,
p.  208;  Cotta,  The  Triall  of  Witch-craft,  1616,  pp.  104-114;  the  Same,  The
Infallible  True  and  Assured  Witch,  1624,  pp.  127-137  (cf.  his  tract,  A
Short  Discoverie  of  the  Vnobserved  Dangers  of  Seuerall  Sorts  of  Ignorant
and  Vnconsiderate  Practisers  of  Physicke  in  England,  1612,  p.  54);  Ber-
nard, A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  pp.  209-211;  Hopkins,
The  Discovery  of  Witches,  1647,  pp.  5-6  (see  also  The  Examination,  Con-
fession, Triall,  and  Execution  of  Joane  Williford,  Joan  Cariden,  and  Jane
Hott,  1645,  pp.  2,  4);  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Discovery  of  Witch-
craft, 1648,  pp.  18-19.  Cf.  Drage,  Daimonomageia,  1665,  pp.  40-41.

42.  Stearne,  p.  18.  He  remarks  that  "it  is  held  unlawfull"  and  rejects
the  test,  but  mildly  and  (as  it  were)  wistfully.

43.  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  Various  Collections,  I,  160-161.

44.  John  Bufton's  Diary,  Proceedings  Essex  Archfeological  Society,  I
(1855),  126  (cf.  New  Series,  XI  [191 1],  21 1-21 8);  Boys,  The^Case  of  Witch-
craft at  Coggeshall,  Essex,  in  the  Year  1699  (London,  1901),  p.  21.


540        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


45.  J.  M.  Taylor,  The  Witchcraft  Dekision  in  Colonial  Connecticut,  pp.

41,  65-66, 71, 73, 75;  Increase  Mather,  An  Essay  for  the  Recording  of  Illus-
trious Providences,  1684,  pp.  139,  280-287.  The  swimming  ordeal  is  also
rejected  by  Wier,  vi,  7,  ed.  1568,  pp.  588-589;  by  Binsfeld,  Tractatus  de
Confessionibus  Maleficorum  et  Sagarum,  1579,  pp.  41,  148-157;  by  Bodin,
Demonomanie,  1580,  iv,  4,  fol.  194  r°  (cf.  iv,  5,  fol.  201);  by  Godelmann,
Tractatus  de  Magis,  Veneficis  et  Lamiis,  1591,  iii,  5,  26-35,  PP-  4i~45i  by
Binsfeld,  De  Confessionibus  Maleficorum  et  Sagarum,  1591,  pp.  146,  314-
322;  by  Lercheimer  (Witekind),  Christlich  Bedencken  vnd  Erinnerung  von
Zauberey,  1597,  ed.  Binz,  1888,  pp.  105-107;  by  Purchas,  Pilgrimes,  Part  I,
Bk.  vii,  chap.  3,  §  6,  note,  Glasgow  ed.,  VI  (1905),  402  ("deceivable  super-
stition," still  practised  in  "the  East  parts");  by  P.  de  I'Ancre,  Tableau  de
I'Inconstance  des  Mauvais  Anges  et  Demons,  1613,  p.  ii;  by  Bernard,  A
Guide  to  GrandTury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  pp.  209-21 1 ;  by  Filmer,  An  Adver-
tisement to  the  Jury-Men,  1653,  p.  11;  by  Fuller,  Church-History,  1656,
Book  ii.  Century  XI,  chap.  14,  p.  141  (cf.  Book  ii,  Century  X,  chap.  9,
p.  127);  by  Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark,  1656,  pp.  7,  100-102;  by  Ramesey,
YiXnivdoXoyLa,  1668,  p.  74;  by  Orchard,  The  Doctrine  of  Devils,  1676,
p.  89;  by  Bekker,  Le  Monde  Enchante,  1694,  i,  21,  5  and  8, 1,  316-318;  by
Erasmus  Francisci,  Der  Hollische  Proteus,  2d  ed.,  1695,  p.  108;  by  Mein-
ders,  Unvorgreifliche  Bedancken  und  Monita,  1716,  pp.  121-126.  Cf.
Gaule,  Select  Cases  of  Conscience  touching  Witches  and  Witchcrafts,  1646,
p.  76;  Zeitschrift  fur  Schleswig-Holsteinische  Geschichte,  XLV  (191 5),  165-
167.  Swimming  is  approved  by  the  author  of  The  Wonderfull  Discouerie
of  the  Witch-crafts  of  Margaret  and  Philip  Flower,  1619,  sig.  D3.

46.  Scot,  xiii,  9,  p.  303  (213),  ed.  Nicholson,  p.  247.  He  cites  Wier  (see
De  Praestigiis  Daemonum,  vi,  7,  ed.  1568,  pp.  588-589).

47.  Court  Rolls  of  the  Manor  of  Hales,  ed.  Amphlett  (Worcestershire
Historical  Society),  Part  II  (1912),  p.  449.  Note  that  William  Byg,  a  fif-
teenth-century wizard,  had  the  alias  of  Lech,  doubtless  because  he  pro-
fessed the  healing  art  (see  p.  187,  above).

48.  Most  of  these  cases  are  collected  by  W.  C.  Sydney,  England  and  the
English  in  the  Eighteenth  Century,  1891, 1,  281-288;  some  appear  in  Inder-
wick,  Side-Lights  on  the  Stuarts,  2d  ed.,  1891,  pp.  185-187.  Their  refer-
ences have  required  correction  and  supplementing.  Some  cases  are  dis-
cussed in  one  of  a  good  series  of  articles  "On  the  Progress  and  Decline  of
Witchcraft,"  Gentleman's  Magazine,  January,  1830,  C,  i,  27-29.  Strutt  in
his  Horda  Angel-cynnan,  I  (1774),  20,  reports  that  the  swimming  ordeal
was  "lately  put  in  practice  on  two  poor  old  people  in  the  Hundreds  of
Essex,  by  several  stupid,  illiterate  blockheads,  who  affirmed  that  they  had
bewitched  their  cattle."

49.  The  Tryal  of  Richard  Hathaway  (London,  1702);  Howell,  State
Trials,  XIV  (18 16),  639-695;  Luttrell,  A  Brief  Historical  Relation  (under
November  15, 1701,  and  May  9,  1702),  V,  1 10,  172;  Pike,  History  of  Crime,
II,  289-290;  Inderwick,  Side-Lights  on  the  Stuarts,  2d  ed.,  1891,  pp.  180-
185.

50.  Wickwar,  Witchcraft  and  the  Black  Art,  1926,  pp.  271-272  (from  a
"leaflet"  of  1702).  I  have  not  found  this  case  elsewhere.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XV


51.  Rev.  Humphrey  Michel's  MS.  Diary,  June  11  and  17,  1709,  in
Sydney,  I,  281.

52.  Add.  MS.  35838,  fol.  404.

53.  Gentleman's  Magazine,  January,  1731,  I,  29-30,  citing  the  Daily
Journal,  January  15,  1731  (the  woman  died).

54.  Wickwar,  pp.  292-293,  from  the  Northampton  Mercury,  June  30,

1735-

55.  Rev.  Joseph  Juxon,  A  Sermon  upon  Witchcraft.  Occasion'd  by  the
Late  Illegal  Attempt  to  Discover  Witches  by  Swimming.  Preach'd  at  Twy-
ford,  in  the  County  of  Leicester,  July  11,  1736.

56.  The  Whitehall  Morning  Post,  July  19-21,  1737;  London  Magazine
for  July,  1737,  VI,  395-396;  Caledonian  Mercury,  July  26, 1737.  The  witch
floated  three  times,  but  was  subsequently  weighed  against  the  church  bible
and  outweighed  it.  See  also  (for  weighing)  Gentleman's  Magazine,  Febru-
ary, 1759,  XXIX,  93;  Strutt,  Horda  Angel-cynnan,  I  (1774),  20;  Forby,
The  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia,  1830,  II,  397;  Tuchmann,  Melusine,  IV
(1888-1889),  197-198;  Bekker,  Le  Monde  Enchante,  1694,  i,  21,  9-1 1,  I,
318-321.  Cf.  Vi§nu-Sutra,  x  (transl.  Jolly,  1880,  pp.  55-57);  Asiatick  Re-
searches, I  (1788),  389-390,  402-403;  Traill,  the  same,  XVI  (1828),  173;
J.  A.  Dubois,  Moeurs,  Institutions  et  Ceremonies  des  Peoples  de  I'lnde,
1825,  II,  550;  Stenzler,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesell-
schaft,  IX  (1855),  665-669;  Schlagintweit,  Die  Gottesurtheile  der  Indier,
1866,  pp.  31-32;  Heuen-Tsang,  transl.  S.  Beale,  Buddhist  Records  of  the
Western  World,  1884, 1,  84;  Patetta,  Le  Ordalie,  1890,  pp.  33,  97,  214-215.
On  various  magical  means  to  know  a  witch  see  Tuchmann,  Melusine,  IV
(1888-89),  251-258,  278-286,  289-295,  317-323.

57.  Parish  Register,  Monk's  Sleigh,  December  19,  1748,  in  The  East
Anglian,  I  (1864),  48.

58.  The  Tryal  of  Thomas  Colley,  at  the  Assizes  at  Hertford,  on  Tuesday
the  30th  of  July,  1751,  ...  for  the  Cruel  and  Inhuman  Murder  of  Ruth
Osborne,  Wife  of  John  Osborne,  of  Tring,  in  Hertfordshire,  by  Ducking  her
in  Marlston-Mere,  .  .  .  under  Supposition  of  her  being  a  Witch.  London,
[1751].  The  murder  occurred  on  April  22,  1751;  Colley  was  hanged  on
August  24.  Cf.  Gentleman's  Magazine,  1751,  XXI,  186,  198,  375, 378;  The
Midwife,  or  The  Old  Woman's  Magazine,  1751,  Vol.  II,  No.  2,  pp.  61-63;
The  Eastern  Counties  Collectanea,  ed.  by  L'Estrange,  1872-73,  pp.  207-
208  (from  Norwich  Gazette,  April  24,  1751).

59.  Norwich  Gazette,  September,  1752,  in  The  Eastern  Counties  Col-
lectanea, 1872-73,  p.  208.

60.  Annual  Register  for  1760,  3d  ed.,  1764,  pp.  112-113;  Gentleman's
Magazine,  July,  1760,  XXX,  346;  Leicestershire  and  Rutland  Notes  and
Queries,  III  (1895),  265-266.

61.  Public  Advertiser,  January  i,  1761,  in  Sydney,  I,  286.

62.  Gentleman's  Magazine,  December,  1762,  XXXII,  596.

63.  The  same,  August,  1769,  XXXIX,  411.

64.  The  same,  July,  1776,  XLVI,  332;  Leicester  and  Nottingham  Jour-
nal, July  6,  1776,  as  quoted  in  County  Folk-Lore,  I,  No.  3  (1895),  pp.  50-
51;  Nichols,  Leicestershire,  IV,  ii  (1811),  778.


542         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


65.  Gentleman's  Magazine,  August,  1785,  LV,  ii,  658;  Drake,  Annals  of
Witchcraft  in  New  England,  1869,  p.  125.

66.  Proceedings  Suffolk  Institute  of  Archaeology,  III  (1863),  309;  The
East  Anglian,  I  (1864),  406.  This  may  or  may  not  be  the  same  case  that  is
reported  from  1792  in  County  Folk-Lore,  I,  No.  1  (1893),  p.  185.

67.  Gentleman's  Magazine,  August,  1751,  XXI,  378.

68.  Burr,  Narratives  of  the  Witchcraft  Cases  1648-1706,  1914,  pp.  441-
442.

69.  Pennsylvania  Gazette,  October  15-22,  1730,  in  New  Jersey  Ar-
chives, 1st  Series,  XI  (1894),  220-223;  Gentleman's  Magazine,  January,

70.  A  Brief  Account,  prefixed  to  the  Rev.  Isaac  Nicholson's  Sermon
against  Witchcraft,  London,  1808;  the  Same,  An  Abstract  of  the  Proceed-
ings had  against  Joseph  Harper  [and  others]  for  assaulting  Ann  Izzard,
London, 1810.

71.  The  Times  (London),  July  19,  1825,  from  the  Suffolk  Chronicle
(newspaper).  See  also  Forby,  The  Vocabulary  of  East  Anglia,  1830,  II,
391-392-

72.  At  some  time  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  seventeenth  century  Joan
Harvye  of  Hockam,  Norfolk,  was  in  trouble  "for  scratching  of  an  old
witch  there,  nowe  dead"  (Add.  MS.  28223,  fol.  15;  Notestein,  p.  400).
Cf.  Chapter  II,  note  190.

73.  Gentleman's  Magazine,  1830,  C,  i,  107;  Bye-Gones  for  1882-83,
p.  118.

74.  Essex  Review,  XVIII  (1909),  121-129.

75.  Essex  Review,  V  (1896),  159;  Folk-Lore  Record,  III,  ii  (1881),  292
(from  the  Daily  Telegraph,  June  23,  1 880).  For  Norfolk  see  Charles  Kent,
The  Land  of  the  "Babes  in  the  Wood,"  1910,  p.  84.

76.  Boston  Herald,  March  22,  1923.

77.  Neuwald,  Exegesis  Purgationis,  etc.,  Tractatus  Duo,  1686,  p.  154.

78.  Laws  of  Manu,  viii,  114-115  (transl.  Burnell  and  Hopkins,  1884,
pp.  196-197;  transl.  Ganga-Natha-Jha,  IV,  i  [1924],  143-144);  The  Indian
Antiquary,  XIV  (1885),  132;  Tod,  Annals  and  Antiquities  of  Rajast'han,
II  (1832),  587;  R.  V.  Russell,  The  Tribes  and  Castes  of  the  Central
Provinces  of  India,  1916,11,  290  (cf.  Ill,  m);  Bombay  Gazetteer,  IX,  i
(1901),  302,  426;  Sangermano,  A  Description  of  the  Burmese  Empire,
transl.  Tandy,  1833,  p.  117.  Cf.  Sir  John  Malcolm,  A  Memoir  of  Central
India,  2d  ed.,  1824,  II,  216-217;  C.  Grant,  The  Gazetteer  of  the  Central
Provinces  of  India,  2d  ed.,  1870,  pp.  cxxxi,  39;  The  Asiatic  Journal,  XII
(1821),  404-405;  New  Series,  XXIV,  i  (1837),  64;  Panjab  Notes  and
Queries,  II  (1884-85),  6-7,  94;  Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  IV  (1886-87),
47;  Stenzler,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,  IX
(1855),  662-663;  Schlagintweit,  Die  Gottesurtheile  der  Indier,  1866,  p.  25.

79.  Voyages  d'Ibn  Batoutah,  ed.  and  transl.  by  Dufremery  and  San-
guinetti,  IV,  36-38.  Cf.  H.  Winckler,  Altorientalische  Forschungen,  I,  iv
(1896),  339,  note.

80.  O.  Hanson,  The  Kachins,  1913,  p.  143.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XV  543

81.  Mrs.  L.  Milne,  The  Shans  at  Home,  1910,  pp.  192-193.  Cf.  North
Indian  Notes  and  Queries,  II  (1892-93),  113;  Journal  of  the  Anthropologi-
cal Institute,  XXIII  (1894),  163-164  (Borneo);  Tijdschrift  voor  Indische
Taal-  Land-  en  Volkenkunde,  XIV  (1864),  506-510.

82.  Sir  H.  M.  Elliot,  The  History  of  India  as  Told  by  its  own  His-
torians, I  (1867),  330;  Sir  A.  C.  Lyall,  Asiatic  Studies,  1882,  p.  83;  Skeat,
Malay  Magic,  1900,  pp.  542-544.  Cf.  Visnu-Sutra,  xii  (transl.  Jolly,  The
Institutes  of  Vishnu,  1880,  pp.  59-60);  Asiatick  Researches,  I  (1788),  390-
391,  404;  Stenzler,  as  above,  pp.  671-674;  Schlangintweit,  p.  27;  Folk-Lore
Journal,  II  (1884),  89  (Burma);  Journal  of  the  Anthropological  Institute,
II  (1873),  241  (Burma);  Gurdon,  The  Khasis,  2d  ed.,  1914,  pp.  94-95;
E.  H.  Gomes,  Seventeen  Years  among  the  Sea  Dyaks  of  Borneo,  191 1,
pp.  316-320;  J.  A.  Dubois,  Moeurs,  Institutions  et  Ceremonies  des  Peuples
de  ITnde,  1825,  II,  553;  Traill,  Asiatic  Researches,  XVI  (1828),  173.

83.  Hammurabi,  §§  2,  132.  The  law  (§  2)  is  not  quite  clear  as  to  witch-
craft. It  reads,  "If  a  man  has  cast  a  spell  upon  a  man  and  has  not  estab-
lished it,  he  upon  whom  the  spell  was  cast  shall  go  to  the  divine  river,"  etc.
This  may  well  mean  "  If  a  man  has  accused  another  of  sorcery."  Professor
Lyon  has  kindly  helped  me  here.

84.  Van  Nyendael,  Beschryving  van  Rio  Formosa,  1701  (Bosman,
Nauwkeurige  Beschryving  van  de  Guinese  Goud-  Tand-  en  Slavekust,  ed.
1737,  Part  II,  pp.  241-242).  See  also  Bosman,  II,  131.

85.  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  the  Witch-crafts  of  Margaret  and
Philip  Flower,  1619,  Sig.  C  v°;  Damnable  Practises  (ballad),  1619,  Rollins,
A  Pepysian  Garland,  1922,  pp.  102-103.

86.  Diary  of  Walter  Yonge,  ed.  Roberts  (Camden  Society,  XLI),  pp.

87.  Cf.  Ezekiel,  iii,  26;  Lamentations,  iv,  4.

88.  On  the  bread  (or  bread-and-cheese)  ordeal  see  Jacoby,  Der  Ursprung
des  Judicium  OfFae,  Archiv  fur  Religionswissenschaft,  XIII  (1910),  525-
566;  Zeumer,  Formulae  Aevi  Merowingici  et  Karolini  (Monumenta,  Leges,
Sect.  V),  1886,  pp.  629-636  (hanging  bread,  pp.  630-632);  A.  Franz,  Die
Kirchlichen  Benediktionen,  1909,  II,  335-336,  341-34^,  358-360,  384-39°;
Recueil  des  Historiens,  IV,  604-605,  607-608;  Vassiliev,  Anecdota  Graeco-
Byzantina,  I  (1893),  340  (cf.  pp.  330,  Ixiii-lxvii) ;  Lercheimer  (Witekind),
Christlich  Bedencken  vnd  Erinnerung  von  Zauberey,  1597,  ed.  Binz,  1888,
p.  18;  Ohrt,  Trylleord  (Danmarks  Folkeminder,  No.  25),  1922,  pp.  24-27;
Mittheilungen  der  Schlesischen  Gesellschaft  fur  Volkskunde,  IX,  i.  Heft  17
(1907),  p.  45.  Cf.  B.  M.  Papyrus  XLVI,  11.  172-201,  295-303,  Kenyon,
Greek  Papyri  in  the  British  Museum,  I  (1893),  70-71,  74.  For  the  oracle
of  the  hanging  bread  to  detect  a  thief  see  Sloane  MS.  3846,  fol.  27  v°.

89.  Rituals  III  (ninth  or  tenth  century)  and  XIV  (eleventh  or  early
twelfth  century),  Liebermann,  I,  408-409,  425-427;  ^thelred,  viii,  22-24,
Liebermann,  I,  266  (Thorpe,  ix,  22-24,  P-  147);  Cnut,  i,  5,  2a-c,  Lieber-
mann, I,  286  (Thorpe,  p.  155).  The  morsel  was  styled  corsnad,  which  is
explained  in  the  Quadripartitus  by  "panis  coniuratus,"  in  the  Instituta
Cnuti  by  "panis  benedictus,"  and  in  the  Consiliatio  Cnuti  by  "offa  iudi-
cialis":  Liebermann,  I,  286,  287:  see  also  II,  472-473.  Cf.  Textus  Roffensis,


544        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ed.  Hearne,  1720,  pp.  33-37;  Patetta,  Le  Ordalie,  1890,  pp.  34,  202-203,
209-211,431.

90.  Aelred,  Vita  Sancti  Edwardi,  Twysden,  Scriptores  X,  1652,  col.  395;
Lives  of  Edward  the  Confessor,  ed.  Luard,  pp.  117-119,  372;  Henry  of
Huntingdon,  vi,  23,  ed.  Arnold,  pp.  194-195;  William  of  Malmesbury,
Gesta  Regum,  ii,  197,  ed.  Stubbs,  I,  240;  Chronica  Monasterii  de  Hida,  in
Edwards's  ed.  of  Liber  Monasterii  de  Hyda,  p.  289;  illustration  in  Cotton
MS.  Vitellius  Axiii,  reproduced  by  Strutt,  The  Regal  and  Ecclesiastical
Antiquities  of  England,  ed.  Planche,  1842,  p.  3,  plate  ii;  Freeman,  Norman
Conquest,  3d  ed.,  II  {1877),  656-661.

91.  Tremearne,  The  Tailed  Head-Hunters  of  Nigeria,  191 2,  p.  200;
Ivens,  Melanesians  of  the  South-East  Solomon  Islands,  1927,  pp.  343,  344;
Lewin,  The  Hill  Tracts  of  Chittagong,  1869,  p.  75;  Krapf,  Travels  ...  in
East  Africa,  Boston,  i860,  p.  142.  Cf.  Asiatick  Researches,  I  (1788),  391-
392;  Stenzler,  Zeitschrift  der  Deutschen  Morgenlandischen  Gesellschaft,
IX  (1855),  676;  Schlagintweit,  Die  Gottesurtheile  der  Indier,  1866,  pp.  33-
36;  Patetta,  Le  Ordalie,  1890,  pp.  50-51.  See  also  the  curious  note  of
Pseudo-Acron  on  Horace,  Epistola  i,  10,  10  (ed.  Hauthal,  II,  422;  ed.  Kell-
ner,  II,  242),  quoted  by  Patetta,  p.  140.

CHAPTER  XVI
The  Compact  and  the  Witches'  Sabbath

1.  St.  Augustine,  De  Doctrina  Christiana,  ii,  20-24;  De  Diversis  Quaes-
tionibus  LXXXIII,  79,  i  and  4.

2.  Rosweyde,  Vitae  Patrum,  2d  ed.,  1628,  pp.  156-158;  Acta  Sanctorum,
June  14,  II  (1698),  949-951;  W.  Meyer,  Munich  Academy,  Sitzungs-
berichte.  III  (1873),  50-53;  An  Alphabet  of  Tales,  No.  64,  ed.  Banks,  I
(1904),  45-47;  Sjalens  Trost,  ed.  Klemming,  pp.  26-30.  Cf.  Herbert,  Cata-
logue of  Romances,  III  (1910),  257,  440;  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  pp.  167-
168.

3.  See  the  Latin  text  in  Petsch,  Theophilus,  1908,  pp.  i-io.

4.  E.  Sommer,  De  Theophili  cum  Diabolo  Foedere,  1 844;  Dasent,  Theo-
philus, 1845;  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  1900,  pp.  167-168  (St.  Basil;  Theo-
philus); Lundgren,  Studier  ofver  Theophilus-Legendens  Romanska  Vari-
anter,  1913;  Waxman,  Chapters  on  Magic  in  Spanish  Literature  (from  La
Revue  Hispanique,  XXXVIII),  1916,  pp.  43-62;  Plenzat,  Die  Theophilus-
legende  in  den  Dichtungen  des  Mittelalters,  1926  (Germanische  Studien,
XLIII);  Beaumanoir,  La  Manekine,  vv.  5739-5756,  Qiuvres,  ed.  Suchier,
I  (1884),  177;  Grace  Frank,  ed.  of  Rutebuef's  Theophile,  1925,  Introduc-
tion.

5.  Homilies  of  /Elfric,  ed.  Thorpe,  I  (1844),  448.

6.  For  the  South  English  version  see  The  Early  South-English  Legen-
dary, ed.  Horstmann,  1887, 1,  288-293.  For  that  in  the  North  English  col-
lection see  Kolbing,  Englische  Studien,  I  (1877),  16-57,  i^^j  54°-  Fo'"  ^
third  version  see  Heuser,  Englische  Studien,  XXXII  (1903),  1-23.  Cf.
also  Kolbing,  Beitrage  zur  Vergleichenden  Geschichte  der  Romantischen


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


545


Poesie  und  Prosa  des  Mittelalters,  1876,  pp.  1-41;  Gerould,  The  North-
English  Homily  Collection,  1902,  pp.  75-79,  and  Modern  Language  Notes,

'  XVIII  (1903),  145-146;  the  Same,  Saints'  Legends,  1916,  pp.  252-253,
317-318;  The  Minor  Poems  of  the  Vernon  MS.,  xxv,  376-378,  ed.  Horst-

i      mann,  I  (1892),  130.

7.  Speculum  Historiale,  xxi,  69-70,  ed.  1494,  fol.  277;  Ward,  Catalogue
of  Romances,  II  (1893),  595,  599-600,  602,  675-677,  710,  713,  730,  735-
740;  Herbert,  the  same.  III  (1910),  454,  523,  534-535)  543>  608,  717;  An
Alphabet  of  Tales,  No.  467,  ed.  Banks,  II  (1905),  318-319.

8.  Edited  by  Ludorff,  Anglia,  VII  (1884),  60-115;      Logeman,  Anglia,

X  (1888),  533-541.

9.  Heywood,  The  Hierarchic  of  the  Blessed  Angells,  1635,  pp.  471-472.

10.  Bilson,  The  Yorkshire  Archaeological  Journal,  XXIV  (1917),  221-
225;  M.  R.  James,  The  Sculptures  in  the  Lady  Chapel  at  Ely,  1895,  p.  17.
For  the  iconography  of  the  subject  see  also  Faligan,  Revue  des  Traditions
Populaires,  V  (1890),  1-14.

11.  Celestyn,  ed.  Horstmann,  Anglia,  I  (1878),  55-85.  Cf.  Gerould,
Saints'  Lives,  1916,  pp.  228-229.

12.  William  of  Malmesbury,  Gesta  Regum,  ii,  167-169,  172,  ed.  Stubbs,
I,  193-198,  202-203;  Roger  of  Wendover,  Flores  Historiarum,  ed.  Coxe,  I,
431-434;  Radulfus  Niger,  ed.  Anstruther,  pp.  154-155;  Chronicon  Angli-
cum  Petriburgense,  ed.  Giles,  pp.  36-37;  Chronicle  in  Liber  de  Legibus
Antiquis,  ed.  Stapleton  (Camden  Society,  XXXIV),  p.  180;  Vincent  of
Beauvais,  Speculum  Historiale,  xxiv,  98,  Venice,  1494,  fol.  320  v";  Holkot,
Super  Libros  Sapientiae,  Lectio  190,  Reutlingen,  1489,  sig.  Miiij,  If.  4  v°;
An  Alphabet  of  Tales,  ed.  Banks,  No.  50,  I  (1904),  34-35;  Giraldus  Cam-
brensis.  Gemma  Ecclesiastica,  i,  9,  Opera,  ed.  Brewer,  II,  34;  Hansen,  Zau-
berwahn,  p.  169;  R.  Allen,  English  Historical  Review,  VII  (1892),  625-
668,  especially  pp.  663-668;  A.  Graf,  Miti,  Leggende  e  Superstizioni  del
Medio  Evo,  II  (1893),  1-75;  Hock,  Gerbert,  1837,  pp.  159-165,  229-238;
Picavet,  Gerbert,  1897,  pp.  197-2.17;  de  la  Salle,  Gerbert,  1914,  pp.  51-68.
Cf.  Bale's  Select  Works,  ed.  Christmas  (Parker  Society),  1849,  pp.  560,
561,  592-593 ;  Bale,  The  Pageant  of  Popes,  transl.  John  Studley,  1 574,  foil.
72-73;  Calfhill,  An  Aunswere  to  the  Treatise  of  the  Crosse,  1565,  ed.  Gib-
bings  (Parker  Society),  1846,  pp.  91-92.

13.  Pilkington,  Works,  ed.  Scholefield  (Parker  Society),  1842,  pp.  602-
603.  As  to  Benedict  IX  see  Bale,  Select  Works,  pp.  592-593;  the  Same,
The  Pageant  of  Popes,  1574,  foil.  75-76.  Cf.  Bovet,  Pandaemonium,  1684,
p.  121:  "Benedict  the  ninth,  a  Conjurer,  wont  with  Laurence  and  Gratian
(two  Conjurers)  whom  he  made  Cardinals,  to  wander  in  the  Woods,  to  in-
vocate  Devils,  and  bewitch  Women  to  follow  them."  His  source  is  Cardi-
nal Ben(n)o's  Vita  et  Gesta  Hildebrandi  (Flacius  Illyricus,  Catalos:us
Testium  Veritatis,  ed.  1556,  pp.  23^222)-  Platina  says  of  Benedict:  "  Con-
stat .  .  .  simulacrum  eius  admodum  monstruosum  post  mortem  cuidam
apparuisse"  (De  Vita  et  Moribus  Summorum  Pontificum,  1529,  cliii,  p.
129).  Cf.  Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicae,  ii,  12,  §  9,  ed.  1616,  p.  134.

14.  Kittredge,  A  Study  of  Gawain  and  the  Green  Knight,  1916,  pp.
184-185;  Nashe,  Have  with  You  to  Saffron-Walden,  1596,  Works,  ed.


546         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Grosart,  III,  42  (ed.  McKerrow,  III,  30).  Cf.  Comparetti,  Virgilio  nel
Medio  Evo,  2d  ed.,  1896,  II,  196-197,  259.

15.  Walter  Map,  De  Nugis  Curialium,  iv,  11,  ed.  Wright,  pp.  170-176;
ed.  James,  pp.  176-183.  For  the  daemonium  meridianum  see  Chapter
XIII,  note  13,  above.

16.  Matthew  Paris,  Chronica  Majora,  ed.  Luard,  II,  207-209  (from  the
Vita  Sancti  Wlfrici  by  John,  Abbot  of  Forda).

17.  Cf.  Chaucer,  Troilus,  iv,  1544-1545;  Ovid,  Metamorphoses,  i,  192-
193-

18.  Walter  Map,  De  Nugis  Curialium,  iv,  6,  ed.  Wright,  pp.  154-166
(ed.  James,  pp.  159-171).

19.  For  the  suits  against  him  see  State  Trials  of  the  Reign  of  Edward  I,
ed.  Tout  and  Johnstone,  1906,  pp.  49-51,  53-67,  cf.  p.  98  (cf.  also  Thoro-
ton.  The  Antiquities  of  Nottinghamshire,  1677,  pp.  32-33).  See  also  Cal-
endar of  Fine  Rolls,  I,  269  (arrest:  roll  of  January  21,  1290);  Palgrave,
Parliamentary  Writs,  I  (1827),  14,  note  i  (fine);  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls
1281-1292,  p.  421  (pardon,  February  12,  1291);  Calendar  of  Fine  Rolls,  I,
347  (cf.  p.  352),  and  Calendar  of  Inquisitions  post  Mortem,  III,  131-134,
No.  207  (writ  to  escheator,  November  5,  1294);  Calendar  of  Inquisitions,
III,  134,  Nos.  207,  208  (Joan's  dower,  1395;  ^f-  Calendar  of  Close  Rolls
1288-1296,  pp.  412,  413,  415,  435,  441,  459).  On  the  connection  of  the
bishop  with  the  Brianfon  property  see  Calendar  of  Patent  Rolls  1281-
1292,  pp.  362,  439;  the  same,  1301-1307,  p.  56;  cf.  Morant,  The  History
and  Antiquities  of  the  County  of  Essex,  1816  reprint,  I,  Appendix,  p.  91;
Calendar  of  Inquisitions,  V,  149,  No.  273.

20.  Bartholomew  de  Briangon  died  on  November  25,  1286  (Calendar  of
Inquisitions  post  Mortem,  II,  378,  No.  624;  cf.  Calendar  of  Fine  Rolls,  I,
233).  On  him  and  his  family  and  property  see  further  Calendar  of  Fine
Rolls,  I,  154;  II,  87,  277,  332,  348;  Calendar  of  Charter  Rolls,  III,  462;
Calendar  of  Inquisitions,  II,  78,  465,  Nos.  116,  766;  III,  342,  No.  450;  V,
149-150,  379-381,  Nos.  273,  599  (cf.  Calendar  of  Fine  Rolls,  II,  75,  78);
Calendar  of  Inquisitions  Miscellaneous  (Chancery),  I,  382,  No.  1318;
Morant,  as  above,  I,  Appendix,  pp.  77,  306.

21.  Calendar  of  Inquisitions  post  Mortem,  III,  131-134.

22.  Cf.  Roskoff,  Geschichte  des  Teufels,  1869, 1,  330,  346,  358,  359;  Se-
bastien  Champier,  Dyalogus  in  Magicarum  Artium  Destructionem,  Lyons,
ca.  1500,  iii,  3,  sig.  bij.  If.  2  r°;  Hansen,  Quellen,  p.  496;  Bodin,  ed.  1 587,  ii,
4,  foil.  91  r°,  93  r°,  95  r°,  96  r°;  ii,  5,  fol.  102  r°;  Scot,  iii,  2,  p.  42  (36),  ed.
Nicholson,  p.  32;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials  in  Scotland,  1833,  III,  613.

23.  Boniface  VIII  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  February  6,  1301
(Register  of  John  de  Halton,  Bishop  of  Carlisle,  I,  174-175,  Canterbury
and  York  Series,  XII;  Chronicon  de  Lanercost,  ed.  Stevenson,  Maitland
Club,  pp.  200-201;  same,  translated  by  Maxwell,  pp.  172-173);  the  same
to  the  same,  March  i,  1302  (Papal  Letters,  I,  607);  Boniface  VIII  to  Ed-
ward I,  April  6,  1302  (Rymer,  Foedera,  2d  ed.,  II,  900);  the  Pope  to  the
Archbishop,  April  6,  1302  (Papal  Letters,  I,  600);  Edward  I  to  the  Pope,
August  24,  1302  (Prynne,  Records,  III,  926;  Calendar  of  Close  Rolls  1296-
1302,  p.  604);  the  same  to  the  same,  August  24,  1302  (Prynne,  III,  925;


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


547


Rymer,  II,  907;  Calendar,  pp.  603-604);  Edward  I  to  three  Cardinals,
August  24,  1302  (Prynne,  III,  927;  Rymer,  II,  907-908;  Calendar,  p.  604);
Edward  I  to  the  Pope,  September  13,  1302  (Prynne,  III,  926;  Calendar,
p.  602) ;  the  Pope's  mandate  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  December  6,
1302  (Papal  Letters,  I,  605);  Edward  I  to  the  Pope,  1303  (Rymer,  II,  931-
932;  Calendar  of  Close  Rolls  1302-1307,  pp.  81-82);  Relaxation  of  Suspen-
sion, etc.,  June  8,  1303  (Papal  Letters,  I,  610),  with  concurrent  letters  to
Edward  I  (Rymer,  II,  932-934)  and  the  Chapters  of  Coventry  and  Lich-
field; the  Pope's  license  to  the  Bishop  to  borrow  7000  florins,  June  15,  1303
(Papal  Letters,  I,  610).

24.  Chronicle  of  London,  1827,  pp.  44-45;  cf.  Gregory's  Chronicle,  in
Gairdner,  The  Historical  Collections  of  a  Citizen  of  London  (Camden
Society,  XVII),  pp.  74-75.

25.  Johannes  de  Reading,  Chronicon,  ed.  Tait,  p.  176.

26.  Bray,  Traditions,  Legends,  Superstitions,  and  Sketches  of  Devon-
shire, 1838,  II,  283-284,  cf.  p.  285.  The  folk-tale  of  The  Wasted  Wishes
has  been  found  in  the  North  of  England  within  a  generation  or  so.  As
there  told,  it  involves  a  compact  signed  with  blood,  and  the  third  wish  is
used  to  cheat  the  devil  (Transactions  Lancashire  and  Cheshire  Antiquarian
Society,  XXXIV  [1917],  88-89).

27.  Thoms,  Altdeutsche  Blatter,  II  (1840),  78;  Herbert,  Catalogue  of
Romances,  III  (1910),  169,  385,  445.

28.  Thoms,  II,  76-77;  Herbert,  III,  381.

29.  Thoms,  II,  76;  Herbert,  III,  119,  138,  145,  148,  380.  For  the  devil's
mark  as  signum  pacti  see  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  pp.  442,  443,  449;  the
Same,  Quellen,  pp.  137,  155,  178,  493,  558,  582  (note  i),  600;  Danaeus
(Daneau),  De  Veneficis,  1575,  cap.  4,  pp.  58-59;  Bodin,  Demonomanie,
1587,  ii,  4,  foil.  87  r°-88  r°;  Guaccius  (Guazzo),  Compendium  Maleficarum,
1608,  i,  6,  p.  17.

30.  Herbert,  III,  448.

31.  See  Malleus  Maleficarum,  Part  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  2,  ed.  1620,  p.  164;
Perkins,  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,  1608,  pp.  51-55;
Glanvil,  A  Blow  at  Modern  Sadducism,  1668,  p.  79  (Saducismus  Trium-
phatus,  1682,  Part  I,  p.  60).

32.  Event  Book,  in  The  Rev.  Oliver  Heywood  his  Autobiography,
ed.  Turner,  I  (1882),  344-345  (see  p.  146,  above);  Middlesex  County  Rec-
ords, ed.  Jeaffreson,  III,  88.  Cf.  Rollins,  Cavalier  and  Puritan,  1923,  pp.
372-378.

33.  On  the  Witches'  Sabbath  and  transportation  see,  for  example.  Mal-
leus Maleficarum,  Part  II,  qu.  i ,  capp.  2-3  (ed.  1 620,  pp.  1 60-1 69,  compact,
meetings,  homage,  etc.;  pp.  169-177,  transportation);  Grillando,  De  Sorti-
legiis,  1545,  ii,  3,  §§  2-5,  foil,  xvij  v°-xviij  r°;  ii,  7,  §§  1-27,  foil,  xxxiiij  r°-
xliij  v°;  Daneau  (Danaeus),  De  Veneficis,  1575,  chap.  4;  cf.  chap.  2,  p.  41
(wax  candles  offered;  kiss);  English  translation,  A  Dialogue  of  Witches,
1575,  sigg.  Fiij,  If.  2  r°-Hiiij,  If.  4  v°;  cf.  Dv,  If.  2  r°,  Ei  v°;  Bodin,  De  la
Demonomanie  des  Sorciers,  1580  (dedication  dated  December  20,  1579),
ii,  4  and  5,  foil.  79  r°-93  r°  (uses  Grillando  and  Daneau);  Anania,  De  Na-
tura  Daemonum,  1581,  pp.  147-152;  Binsfeld,  De  Confessionibus  Male-


548         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ficorum  et  Sagarum,  new  ed.,  1591  (dedication  dated  1591),  pp.  34,  54-59,
221-226,  236-237,  346-364;  the  Same,  Commentarius  in  Titulum  Codicis
Lib.  IX.  De  Maleficis  et  Mathematicis  (in  same  volume),  pp.  537-553;
Remy  (Remigius),  Daemonolatreia,  1595,  i,  11-20,  pp.  98-145;  i,  22,  pp.
148-149;  i,  24,  pp.  157-158;  i,  29,  pp.  177-183  (cites  many  witch-trials  of
1581-1591,  and  one  [p.  121]  of  1574);  James  I,  Daemonologie,  1597  (1603),
i,  3-4,  pp.  35-41;  Guazzo  (Guaccius),  Compendium  Maleficarum,  1608
(dedication  dated  May,  1608),  i,  6,  pp.  13-18;  i,  7,  p.  22;  i,  8,  p.  25;  i,  12,
pp.  38-59  —  with  woodcuts  illustrating  everything  described  in  the  text;
Boguet,  Discours  des  Sorciers,  1608,  pp.  94-143;  P.  de  I'Ancre,  Tableau  de
rinconstance  des  Mauvais  Anges  et  Demons,  1613,  pp.  61-227;  Margaret
Murray,  The  Witch-Cult  in  Western  Europe,  1921;  Summers,  The  History
of  Witchcraft  and  Demonology,  1926,  pp.  1 10-172;  Gomme,  Ethnology  in
Folklore,  1 892,  pp.  57-58.  For  the  history  of  the  Sabbath,  etc.,  see  Hansen,
Zauberwahn,  Chaps,  iv-vi,  with  the  documents  in  his  Quellen.  Cf.  Lea,
History  of  the  Inquisition,  1888,  III,  493-501;  Reitzenstein,  Hellenis-
tische  Wundererzahlungen,  1906,  p.  143,  and  note  2.  For  an  emphatic
assertion  of  a  witch-epidemic  affecting  thousands  of  hysterical  women  see
J.  Kohler,  Archiv  fur  Strafrecht,  LIX  (1912),  387.  The  whole  business  of
the  Witches'  Sabbath,  or  almost  all  of  it  (involving  the  amalgamation  of
the  Diana-Herodias  idea  with  the  belief  in  child-devouring  striges)  was
known  to  John  of  Salisbury.  He  rejected  it  as  an  evil  dream:  "Qui  uel
cecus  hoc  ludifiicantium  demonum  non  uideat  esse  nequitiam?"  (Policra-
ticus,  ii,  17,  ed.  Webb,  I,  loo-ioi.)  For  a  famous  medieval  anecdote
about  a  deluded  old  woman  who  thought  she  shared  in  these  night-rides
but  was  undeceived  by  her  priest  see  Thomas  Wright,  Latin  Stories  (Percy
Society,  1842),  No.  19,  p.  21;  Crane,  The  Exempla  of  Jacques  de  Vitry,
1890,  No.  269,  pp.  II 2-1 13,  251;  Herbert,  Catalogue  of  Romances,  III
(1910),  555.  The  tale  is  very  similar  to  Porta's  account  of  an  experiment
which  he  tried  with  a  witch  (see  also  note  125,  below).  Bishop  Baldock
in  131 1  speaks  of  sorcerers  and  enchanters  in  the  diocese  of  London  as
holding  "  conventiculas"  (Registrum,  ed.  Fowler,  1,145,  Canterbury  and
York  Series).  Some  connection  might  conceivably  be  traced  between  the
witches'  sabbath  and  the  mummings,  animal  disguises.  New  Year's  rites,
revelries  at  wakes,  etc.,  so  often  denounced  by  early  councils  and  preachers
and  condemned  in  the  penitentials  of  Anglo-Saxon  times.  See,  for  example,
Schmitz,  Bussbiicher,  I,  303,  311,  379,  413,  462,  479,  480,  581,  633,  666,
749,  786, 810; II,  181,  237-238,  296,  322,  325,  329,  336,  337,  343,  347,  353,
361,  377,  423,  429,  431,  496,  627,  682;  Thorpe,  pp.  293,  298  (Pseudo-Theo-
dore, xxvii,  19;  xxxviii,  9);  so-called  Canons  of  ^Elfric  (Thorpe,  p.  448);
Wasserschleben,  p.  368;  Concilia  Aevi  Merovingici,  ed.  Maassen,  1893,
p.  179;  Pseudo-Augustine,  De  Recti tudine  Catholicae  Conversationis,  cap. 5
(Migne,  XL,  1172),  and  Sermons  129,  130,  265  (Migne,  XXXIX,  2001-
2004,  2239);  Homilia  de  Sacrilegiis,  ed.  Caspari,  1886,  pp.  lo-ii,  14,  34-
35;  Grimm,  Deutsche  Mythologie,  4th  ed.,  Ill  (1878),  401;  Kogel,  Ge-
schichte  der  Deutschen  Litteratur,  I,  i  (1894),  51-55;  Crusius,  Philologus,
LXVIII  (1909),  579;  F.  Schneider,  Archiv  fiir  Religionswissenschaft,  XX
(1920-21),  91-114,  121-122,  408;  E.  K.  Chambers,  The  Mediaeval  Stage,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


549


1903,  I,  237-238,  244-246,  258-259,  330-332;  II,  290-306;  Enid  Walford,
The  Court  Masque,  1927,  pp.  3-21;  Summers,  The  Geography  of  Witch-
craft, 1927,  pp.  89,  65, 68-71  (he  takes  the  ninth-century  Prankish  compila-
tion for  the  genuine  work  of  St.  Theodore,  the  seventh-century  Archbishop
of  Canterbury).

34.  Regino  of  Priim,  Libri  Duo  de  Synodalibus  Causis  et  DiscipHnis
Ecclesiasticis,  ii,  371,  ed.  Wasserschleben,  1840,  pp.  354-356;  cf.  ii,  5,  45,
p.  212.  See  Hansen,  Zauberwahn,  pp.  78-88,  190-209,  235.  Cf.  Kauff-
mann,  Paul  and  Braune's  Beitrage,  XVIII  (1894),  148-157;  J.  A.  Schmel-
ler,  Bayerisches  Worterbuch,  I  (1872),  270-271.

35.  Ivo  Carnotensis,  Decretum,  xi,  30  (Panormia,  viii,  75,  ed.  1499,
Furter,  fol.  clxvi).  Cf.  Corrector,  §§  70,  90,  170-171  (Schmitz,  II,  425,  429,
446-447).

36.  Regino,  ii,  5,  45,  p.  212.

37.  See  Malleus  Maleficarum,  ii,  i,  3,  ed.  1620,  p.  177;  P.  de  I'Ancre,
L'Incredulite  et  Mescreance  du  Sortilege,  1622,  pp.  523-597.

38.  Thomas  Wright  long  ago  noted  the  fact  that  English  witchcraft  in
Queen  Elizabeth's  time  "seems  to  have  been  entirely  free  from  the  roman-
tic incidents  which  form  so  striking  a  characteristic  of  the  popular  creed  in
other  countries.  We  have  no  voyages  out  to  sea  in  sieves;  no  witches'  sab-
baths" (Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  1851,1,  280-281).  On  the  Con-
tinental Sabbath  see  Wright,  I,  297-333.  For  the  Sabbath  in  Guernsey
in  1617  see  J.  L.  Pitts,  Witchcraft  and  Devil  Lore  in  the  Channel  Islands,
1886,  pp.  12-20.

39.  It  is  barely  possible  that  the  evidence  in  two  cases  mentioned  by
Henry  Holland  in  A  Treatise  against  Witchcraft  (1590)  included  some-
thing about  the  Witches'  Sabbath.  Holland  has  been  discussing  the  aerial
flight  "to  meete  with  Herodias,  Diana,  and  Minerva,"  and  has  admitted
that  "  whatsoeuer  is  saide  of  transportations,  contrarie  to  the  nature  of  our
bodies,  as  to  ride  on  the  moone  to  meete  Herodias  &c.  all  such  thinges  are
indeede  but  meere  delusions."  Yet  he  holds  that  the  transportation  of
witches  by  Satan  is  possible  in  nature  (sigg.  E3  v''-E4  r°).  So  far  he  is
merely  repeating  Continental  arguments  with  reference  to  the  magic
flight  pronounced  delusion  by  the  Canon  Episcopi,  and  is  following  Conti-
nental authorities.  He  refers,  for  example,  to  Bodin  and  Danaeus,  and  he
adds  nothing  to  the  reasoning  of  the  Malleus  Maleficarum  (Part  II,  qu.  i,
cap.  3),  which  distinguishes  between  the  imaginary  experiences  contem-
plated in  the  Canon  and  the  actual  experiences  of  more  recent  times.  Next
he  takes  up  the  formal  compact,  which  he  avers  is  made  at  the  witches'
"common  meetings,  which  they  cal  their  sabboth"  (sig.  Fi  r°).  These  he
describes,  still  using  Continental  authors.  "In  these  horrible  meetings,"
he  avers,  "Sathan  himselfe  appeares  sometime  in  one  forme,  sometime  in
another:  ...  for  somtimes  his  ministers  behould  him  in  the  likenes  of  a
man,  but  most  commonly  of  a  foule  stinking  goate,"  etc.  This  is  almost
word  for  word  from  Danaeus  (A  Dialogue,  1575,  sig.  Fiij,  If.  5  v°).  Then
comes  a  remark  which  seems,  at  the  first  blush,  to  accept  all  these  grue-
some details  as  applicable  to  English  conditions:  "See  I  pray  thee,  the  ex-


550


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


aminations,  confessions,  and  practise  of  M.  A.  of  Barking,  and  M.  B.  of
Rochester,  confirmed  by  sufficient  credible  witnesses.  Ann.  1584."  It  is
not  clear  whether  he  means  to  cite  these  two  cases  in  confirmation  of  what
he  has  said  about  the  "sabboth"  or  merely  in  support  of  the  proposition
that  witches  make  a  contract  with  Satan  and  receive  assistance  from  him.
In  the  absence  of  confirmatory  testimony,  I  am  forced  to  infer  that  he  did
not  intend  to  declare  that  these  cases  involved  evidence  about  the  "sab-
both." Indeed  Holland  himself  seems  to  exonerate  the  general  run  of  con-
temporary witches,  so  far  as  this  article  of  faith  is  concerned,  when  he
states  expressly  that  "the  common  sort  of  our  witches"  have  no  formal
covenant  with  Satan,  no  such  covenant,  that  is  to  say,  as  Danaeus  de-
scribes as  ratified  in  witch-meetings,  with  renunciation  of  one's  faith  in  God
and  definite  acceptance  of  Satan  as  God  (F  v°-F2  r°).  I  am  inclined  to  in-
terpret "M.  A.  of  Barking"  as  the  Mother  Arnold  who  seems  to  have  been
executed  at  that  place  in  1575.   Lowndes  (Bohn's  ed.,  X,  2959),  at  all
events,  registers  "The  Examination  and  Confession  of  a  notorious  Witch
named  Mother  Arnold,  alias  Whitecote,  alias  Glastonbury,  at  the  Assise  of
Burntwood  in  July,  1574;  who  was  hanged  for  Witchcraft  at  Barking.
1 1;75."  Notestein  (p.  3';o)  was  unable  to  find  this  tract,  and  I  have  had  no
better  fortune.  1 584  for  1 574  would  not  be  a  remarkable  erratum  or  slip  of
Holland's  pen.  As  to  "M.  B.  of  Rochester,"  I  have  little  doubt  that  she
was  the  famous  Mother  Bungie  of  whom  Scot  has  such  interesting  things
to  tell.  She  was,  he  says,  "a  principall  witch,  so  reputed,  and  condemned
of  all  men,  and  continuing  in  that  exercise  and  estimation  manie  yeares
(having  cousened  &  abused  the  whole  realme,  in  so  much  as  there  came  to
hir,  witchmongers  from  all  the  furthest  parts  of  the  land,  she  being  in  di-
verse bookes  set  out  with  author! tie,  registred  and  chronicled  by  name  of
the  great  witch  of  Rochester,  and  reputed  among  all  men  for  the  cheefe
ringleader  of  all  other  witches)."  She  was  found,  he  says,  "to  be  a  meere
cousener;  confessing  in  hir  death  bed  freelie,  without  compulsion  or  in-
forcement,  that  hir  cunning  consisted  onlie  in  deluding  and  deceiving  the
people:  saving  that  she  had  .  .  .  some  sight  in  physicke  and  surgerie,  and
the  assistance  of  a  freend  of  hirs,  called  Heron,  a  professor  thereof.  And
this  I  know,  partlie  of  mine  owne  knowledge,  and  partlie  by  the  testimonie
of  hir  husband,  and  others  of  credit,  to  whome  (I  sale)  in  hir  death  bed,
and  at  sundrie  other  times  she  protested  these  things;  and  also  that  she
never  had  anie  materiall  spirit  or  divell  (as  the  voice  went)  nor  yet  knew
how  to  worke  anie  supernaturall  matter,  as  she  in  hir  life  time  made  men
beleeve  she  had  and  could  doo"  (Discoverie,  xvi,  3,  pp.  473-474  [341-342],
ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  398-399).  When  she  died  we  do  not  know,  but  she  was
dead  when  Scot  wrote  the  latter  part  of  his  Discoverie  in  or  shortly  before
1584.  Nor  do  we  know  whether  she  was  ever  brought  to  trial.  Manifestly,
however,  she  was  not  hanged.  That  she  ever  made  any  revelations  about
Witches'  Sabbaths  is  to  the  last  degree  improbable.  If  she  had  pretended
to  know  something  about  such  meetings,  Scot  would  assuredly  have  said
so,  for  her  recantation  would  have  been  a  strong  argument  in  favor  of  his
thesis  that  these  are  either  imaginary  or  fictitious.

40.  Strype,  The  Life  of  Sir  Thomas  Smith,  1698,  pp.  128-132.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


41.  A  True  and  lust  Recorde,  of  the  Information,  Examination  and
Confession  of  all  the  Witches,  taken  at  S.  Osees  (London,  1582),  sig.  B2,
If.  2;  Mrs.  E.  Lynn  Linton,  Witch  Stories,  1861,  pp.  209,  220.

42.  The  English  physician  Richard  Argentine,  in  his  De  Praestigiis  et
Incantationibus  Daemonum  et  Necromanticoram  (Basel,  1568),  has  a
chapter  "De  Pactis  et  Conuentionibus  inter  incantatorem  et  Daemonem"
(cap.  5,  pp.  31-35),  but  says  nothing  of  the  Sabbath.  He  dates  his  dedica-
tion at  Exeter  "pridie  Calendas  Februarii  Anno  1563"  and  says  he  wrote
in  the  preceding  year.

43.  Giffard,  A  Dialogue  concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1593,
sig.  K  r°.

44.  Scot,  iii,  1-3  and  6,  pp.  40-44,  47-48  (35-38,  40),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.
31-34,  37.  Cf.  iii,  12  and  16,  pp.  59-60,  65-67  (48,  52-53),  ed.  Nicholson,
pp.  46-47,  51-52;  X,  8  and  9,  pp.  184-187  (135-137),  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.
I48-150.  Scot's  account  of  the  witch's  "  bargaine  or  profession"  (which  he
scouts)  is  quoted  almost  word  for  word  from  the  Malleus,  Part  II,  qu.  i,
cap.  2.

45.  Strype,  Life  of  Smith,  1598,  Appendix,  p.  139;  Dee's  Diary,  ed.
HaUiwell  (Camden  Society),  1842,  p.  59;  Gabriel  Harvey,  Pierces  Super-
erogation, 1593,  Works,  ed.  Grosart,  II,  291.

46.  Danaeus's  De  Veneficis  was  issued  in  1575  (the  address  to  the
Reader  is  dated  July  i,  1574).  The  English  translation  (1575)  is  entitled
A  Dialogue  of  Witches.  The  Sabbath  is  treated  in  Chapter  IV.

47.  Newes  from  Scotland,  [1591]  (reprinted  in  Bodley  Head  Quartos,
ed.  G.  B.  Harrison,  No.  IX,  1924).

48.  William  Perkins,  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,
1608,  pp.  194-196.  Cf.  pp.  47,  48,  193,  202-203,  250-251.  He  believes  in
Satanic  transportation  (pp.  21,  49).

49.  Notestein,  pp.  17-18.  Cf.  Summers,  The  Geography  of  Witchcraft,
1927,  pp.  115-116:  "There  is,  in  truth,  no  controversialist  of  the  day  who
exceeds  Jewel  in  the  reckless  violence  of  his  abuse.  His  impudence,  pro-
fanity, unblushing  mendacity,  and  downright  forgery  are  beyond  be-
lief ....  It  is  important  that  we  should  appreciate  a  just  character  of  the
man  to  whom  the  witch-trials  in  England  are  largely  due,  not  that  he  acted
from  any  hatred  to  Witchcraft  and  Satanists,  but  solely  from  political  mo-
tives." —  "By  my  troth.  Captain,  these  are  very  bitter  words!"

50.  Jewel  to  Peter  Martyr,  August  i,  1559  (Zurich  Letters,  No.  16,  I,
[39];  Jewel's  Works,  ed.  Ayre,  Parker  Society,  IV,  1213-1215);  Novem-
ber 2,  1559  (Zurich  Letters,  No.  19, 1, 25  [44-45];  Works,  IV,  121 6:  "Maga-
rum  et  veneficarum  numerus  ubique  in  immensum  excreverat").

51.  This  sermon  (Jewel's  Works,  II,  1025-1034)  is  undated.  Clearly,
however,  it  was  preached  after  Jewel's  return  from  his  visitation,  —  that  is,
after  November  i,  1559  (see  Works,  IV,  1216,  1221),  —  and  probably  soon
after,  while  his  experiences  were  still  fresh  in  mind  (cf.  Burr  in  Notestein,
p.  16,  note).  Doubtless  it  was  delivered  before  May  24,  1560,  when  Jewel
left  London  for  Salisbury  (Works,  IV,  1233,  1235).  There  are  strong  argu-
ments for  identifying  it  with  his  court  sermon  of  March  17,  1560  (see  I,
26):  cf.  I,  27-28,  with  II,  1030,  1031  If  2;  and  note  what  Jewel  says  in  a  let-


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


ter  of  February  8,  1566  (IV,  1266),  about  the  argument  of  his  sermon  at
court "  ante  sex  annos."  Strype  (Annals  of  the  Reformation,  I  [1725],  201)
asserts  that  the  sermon  at  Paul's  Cross  on  March  31,  1 560,  was  a  repetition
of  the  court  sermon  of  March  17,  but  I  think  he  is  mistaken.  He  cites  no
evidence.  Perhaps  he  was  inferring  such  identity  from  the  title-page  of  the
contemporary  edition  of  the  sermon  of  March  31  (Jewel's  Works,  I,  2).

52.  Jewel's  Works,  ed.  Ayre,  II,  1025-1034  (witchcraft  passage,  p.
1028).

53.  If  Jewel  had  imbibed  Continental  notions  about  the  Witches'  Sab-
bath, he  had  every  occasion  to  mention  them  (as  he  does  not)  in  this  very
sermon,  apropos  of  the  pagan  idea  of  the  early  Christians,  which  he  does
mention  in  plain  terms:  "Whereas  the  Christian  men,  soon  after  the
apostles'  time,  used  to  resort  together  in  the  night-time,  or  in  the  morning
before  day,  into  some  private  house,  there  to  call  upon  the  name  of  God,
and  to  receive  the  sacrament  together,  for  fear  of  the  cruelty  of  tyrants;
the  enemies  reported  that,  being  thus  together,  they  killed  a  child  amongst
them,  and  so  devoured  up  his  flesh,  and  drank  his  blood,  and  after  put
out  the  lights,  and  so  committed  incest  and  adultery  one  with  another"
(Works,  fl,  1026).

Jewel's  Articles  of  Enquiry  for  Salisbury  Cathedral,  1568,  include
the  following  question:  "An  aliquis  ax  predictis  prebendariis  sit  aut  fuerit
invocator  diaboli  sive  malus  divinator  aut  in  huiusmodi  diabolice  invoca-
cionis  sive  male  divinacionis  facinore  respersus  sive  notatus"  (Frere  and
Kennedy,  Visitation  Articles,  III,  204).  But  this  is  a  different  matter,  to
say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  the  date  is  about  ten  years  after  his  return
from  the  Continent.  Anyhow,  clerics  did  often  dabble  in  the  arts  here  men-
tioned. Note,  for  example,  the  case  of  Leonard  Bilson,  prebendary  of  Win-
chester, in  1 561  (p.  258,  above).  Such  references  to  sorcery  as  the  following
also  have  no  bearing  on  my  argument:  (i)  In  refuting  the  allegation  that
St.  Peter  said  mass  at  Rome,  Jewel  says,  "This  have  men  told  you,  and
with  such  things  as  they  have  found  out  themselves  they  have  infeoffed
and  fathered  the  apostles  of  Christ.  So  commonly  conjurers  and  sorcerers
make  their  vaunts,  that  they  have  all  their  books  and  their  cunning  from
Athanasius,  from  Moses,  from  Abel,  from  Raphael  the  archangel"  (Jewel's
Works,  I,  23);  (2)  "The  conjurers  and  sorcerers  say  that  their  books  of  con-
juration and  sorcery  came  from  Moses,  from  Enoch,  and  from  Abel"  (the
same,  II,  991).  As  to  the  cessation  of  the  exorcist's  office  in  the  Church,
see  III,  273.

55.  On  the  Royal  Visitations  of  1559  see  Gee,  The  Elizabethan  Clergy
and  the  Settlement  of  Religion  1558-1564,  1898,  pp.  41-129;  Birt,  The
Elizabethan  Religious  Settlement,  1907,  pp.  140-182.

56.  Zurich  Letters,  Nos.  16,  19,  23, 1,  22-23  (38-41),  25-26  (44-45),  30
(52);  Jewel's  Works,  IV,  1213-1218,  1221.

57.  Gee,  pp.  74-76.

58.  Articles  to  be  enquyred  in  the  visitation,  in  the  fyrste  yeare  of  the
raygne  of  our  moost  drad  soueraygne  Lady,  Elizabeth  (London,  Richard
lugge  and  lohn  Cawood,  1559),  §37,  sig.  Bj  r°;  Cardwell,  Documentary
Annals,  1844,  I,  246;  Frere  and  Kennedy,  Visitation  Articles  and  Injunc-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


553


tions  (Alcuin  Club),  1 910,  III,  5;  Gee,  p.  68.  On  June  13,  1559,  Cecil  wrote,
"The  Queen,  on  the  advice  of  the  Council,  is  determined  to  have  a  great
visitation;  whereupon  the  Injunctions  and  Articles  of  Inquisition  are  al-
ready formed"  (Gee,  p.  43).

59.  Articles  to  be  enquired  of,  in  the  Kynges  Maiesties  Visitacion  (Lon-
don, Richard  Grafton,  no  date),  sig.  Bj  v°:  "Whether  you  knowe  any  that
vse  Charmes,  Sorcery,  Enchauntmentes,  Witchecrafts,  sothesaiyng,  or  any
other  like  crafte  inuented  by  the  deuill."  Cf.  Frere  and  Kennedy,  II,  111.

60.  Frere  and  Kennedy,  II,  353;  cf.  II,  356,  372  (1555).

61.  The  same,  II,  398,  388,  425.

62.  See  Shaxton's  articles  for  Salisbury  in  1 538  (Frere  and  Kennedy,  II,
58);  Cranmer's  for  Canterbury  in  1548  (II,  188);  Flooper's  for  Gloucester
and  Worcester  in  1551-52  (II,  300-301);  Parker's  for  Canterbury  in  1560
and  for  Winchester  in  1 575  (III,  85,  381) ;  Parkhurst's  for  Norwich  in  1 561
and  1569  (III,  106,  214);  Sandys's  for  Worcester  in  1569  and  for  London  in
1571  (III,  227-228,  313);  Grindal's  for  York  in  1571  and  for  Canterbury  in
1576  (III,  270;  Cardwell,  I,  413-414);  Freke's  for  Rochester  in  1572  (Frere
and  Kennedy,  III,  343);  Whitgift's  for  Salisbury  in  1588  (Cardwell,  II,
34).  Sandys's  Articles  of  1569  are  interesting  for  their  details:  "Whether
any  manner  of  person  use  any  kind  of  sortilege,  that  is  to  say,  witchcraft,
enchanting,  charms  to  cure  men  or  beast,  invocations  of  wicked  spirits,
telling  where  things  lost  or  stolen  are  become,  by  key,  book,  tables,  shears,
sieves,  looking  in  crystals,  or  any  other  means  casting  of  figures. ''_J<"reke's
Rochester  Articles  of  1572  mention  maleficium  specifically.  "  Whetner  that
there  be  any  suspected  of  coining,  enchantments,  sorcery,  or  witchcraft;
and  who  they  are,  what  are  their  doings,  and  what  hurt  or  displeasure  hath
ensued  unto  any  of  your  neighbours  by  them  or  by  any  of  their  doings."
Archbishop  Abbot's  Articles  for  Canterbury  in  161 6  make  a  distinction:
"Any  which  have  used  any  enchantments,  sorceries,  incantations,  or
witchcrafts,  which  are  not  made  felony  by  the  statutes  of  this  realm"
(Cardwell,  II,  181).  Nowhere  in  the  long  list  just  cited  is  there  a  hint  of
Continental  specialties.  In  Freke,  coining  is  somebody's  misprint  for
coniuring.

63.  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  New  Series,  V,  137  (May  28,  1555),  139
(June  i),  143-144  (June  7),  176  (August  29).  John  Fielde,  one  of  the  al-
leged conspirators,  had  been  entrusted  to  the  custody  of  Bonner.  Dee,  too,
was  in  Bonner's  custody  when  discharged.  For  Benger  see  also  VI,  81,  82,
loi,  108-109,  ^9'>  connection  with  another  affair — not  conjuring,
apparently.

64.  See  the  cases  of  Agnes  Hancok  in  1438  (p.  145)  and  Judith  Phillips
in  1595  (p.  206).  For  a  fairy  "haunting"  a  woman  see  Giffard,  A  Dialogue
concerning  Witches  and  Witchcraftes,  1593,  sig.  B  v°.  Cf.  A  Pleasant
Treatise  of  Witches,  1673,  pp.  53-69;  J.  A.  MacCulloch,  The  Mingling  of
Fairy  and  Witch  Beliefs  in  Sixteenth  and  Seventeenth  Century  Scotland,
Folk-Lore,  XXXII  (1921),  227-244.  Cf.  p.  215,  above.  Miss  Murray  has
brought  together  a  good  deal  of  material  on  fairies  (The  Witch-Cult,  pp.
238-246).

65.  Holworthy,  Discoveries  in  the  Diocesan  Registry,  Wells,  p.  6.


J

554        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

66.  Child,  The  English  and  Scottish  Popular  Ballads,  I,  339.  See  also
II,  505; III,  505; V,  290.

67.  Acts,  as  above,  VII,  6,  7.

68.  Acts,  VII,  5,  7;  cf.  VII,  123,  401,  for  John  Ke(e)le.

69.  Acts,  VII,  22.  It  was  also  in  1558  that  Thomas  Lufkyn,  by  trade
a  fuller,  began  to  practise  at  Maidstone.  "He  had  by  roving  abroade,"
writes  John  Halle,  "become  a  phisician,  a  chirurgien,  an  astronomier,  a
palmister,  a  phisiognomier,  a  sothsayer,  a  fortune  devyner,  and  I  can  not
tell  what.  .  .  .  Unto  this  divell  incarnate,  resorted  all  sortes  of  vayne
and  undiscrete  persons,  as  it  were  to  a  God,  to  knowe  all  secretes,  paste
and  to  come,  specially  women,  to  know  how  manie  husbandes  and  chil-
dren they  shoulde  have,  and  whether  they  shoulde  burie  their  husbandes
then  lyving.  .  .  .  All  this  he  boasted  that  he  could  do  by  astronomie;
but  when  he  was  talked  with  of  one  that  had  but  a  yonge  and  smalle
skyll  in  that  arte,  he  coulde  make  no  directe  answere  no  more  then  puppe
my  dogge"  (An  Historiall  Expostulation:  against  the  Beastlye  Abusers,
bothe  of  Chyrurgerie,  and  Physyke,  in  Oure  Tyme,  1565,  ed.  Pettigrew,
Percy  Society,  1844,  pp.  8-9).  Cf.  note  90,  below.

70.  In  a  letter  of  March  20,  1559,  to  Peter  Martyr,  Jewel  writes,  "Tan-
dem tamen  aliquando,  quinquagesimo  videlicet  septimo  post  die  quam
solvissemus  Tiguro,  pervenimus  in  Angliam"  (Works,  ed.  Ayre,  IV,  1198;
Zurich  Letters,  I,  5  [9]).

71.  Commons'  Journals,  I,  57,  59,  60;  Lords'  Journals,  English  His-
torical Review,  XXVIII  (1913),  538,  539.

72.  Jewel's  Works,  ed.  Ayre,  IV,  1199;  Zurich  Letters,  No.  4,  I,  5:
"Magno  nobis  impedimento  sunt  episcopi"  or  (to  adopt  a  variant,  invol-
ving a  pun)  "aposcopi,"  etc.

73.  Jewel's  Works,  IV,  1 201-1209;  Zurich  Letters,  Nos.  5-7, 1, 7-12  (13-
22).

74.  Cecil's  memoranda  for  the  parliament  of  1 559  do  not  mention  witch-
craft (Marquis  of  Salisbury's  MSS.,  I,  162-165).

75.  To  avoid  the  possibility  of  misunderstanding,  I  must  add  that  the
act  of  1542  contained  a  provision  about  digging  down  crosses  (there  men-
tioned in  connection  with  treasure-digging  sorcery)  which  was  probably
omitted  from  the  bill  of  1559  as  it  was  from  the  act  of  1563.

76.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1 547-1 580,  p.  137  (August  20,
1559);  cf.  Add.  MS.  32091,  fol.  176.

77.  The  same,  p.  142.

78.  Archseologia  Cantiana,  XXVI  (1904),  31.

79.  Notes  and  Queries  for  Somerset  and  Dorset,  II  (1891),  62.

80.  Transactions  Devonshire  Association,  XLIV  (1912),  221-222.

81.  Seep.  155,  above.

82.  Diary  of  Henry  Machyn,  ed.  J.  G.  Nichols  (Camden  Society,  XLII),
pp.  251,  261.

83.  "The  unfained  retractation  of  Fraunces  Cox,  which  he  uttered  at
The  Pillery  in  Chepesyde  and  elswhere,  accordyng  to  the  Counsels  com-
maundment.  Anno  1561.  The  25  of  June"  (Lemon,  Catalogue  of  a  Col-
lection of  Broadsides  in  the  Possession  of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  1866,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


555


No.  55,  p.  19).  There  is  an  extract  in  Brand-Hazlitt,  Popular  Antiquities,
III,  114.  Cf.  Rollins,  Analytical  Index,  1924,  No.  623,  p.  59;  Notestein,
p.  31,  note.

84.  Francis  Coxe,  A  Short  Treatise  Declaringe  the  Detestable  Wicked-
nesse  of  Magicall  Sciences,  as  Necromancie,  Coniurations  of  Spirites,
Curiose  Astrologie  and  Such  lyke.  See  S.  R.  Maitland,  Notes  on  the  Con-
tributions of  the  Rev.  George  Townsend  to  the  New  Edition  of  Fox's
Martyrology,  Part  II,  1842,  pp.  104-106.  Cf.  Notestein,  p.  351.

85.  See  Joseph  Hunter,  Memoirs  of  Sir  William  Saint  Loe,  Retrospec-
tive'Review,  2d  Series,  II  (1828),  314-325;  Robert  Simpson,  A  Collection
of  Fragments  Illustrative  of  the  History  of  Derby,  1826,1,340;  S.  Rudder,
A  New  Historv  of  Gloucestershire,  1779,  p.  774;  Historical  MSS.  Commis-
sion, Marquis  of  Salisbury's  MSS.,  I,  325, 499;  III,  164-165;  Doyle,  Official
Baronage,  III,  320;  Dictionary  of  National  Biography,  XIX,  309-311.

86.  Some  of  these  details  about  Hugh  Draper  and  Francis  Cox  come
from  two  lists  of  prisoners  drawn  up  for  the  Council  by  the  Lieutenant  of
the  Tower  in  1561  (May  26  and  July  3).  Draper  had  been  committed  on
March  21  and  Cox  on  March  25.  According  to  this  document.  Draper
made  a  confession  (before  that  which  he  made  in  open  court),  and  therein
"it  aperithe  that  before  time  he  hathe  ben  busie  and  doinge  with  suche
matters;  but  he  deniethe  any  matter  of  weight  touchinge  Sr  William  Sentlo
or  my  ladie,  and  also  affirmethe  y*  longe  since  he  so  misliked  his  science
that  he  burned  all  his  bookes."  In  a  bill  for  the  diet  of  prisoners  rendered
by  the  Lieutenant  in  1562  (including  Cox's  board  from  March  25  to  De-
cember 19,  1561),  he  remarks  "This  Francis  Coxe  was  one  of  those  that
were  committed  for  s''  W'^  Seintlewes  matter,  and  was  after  found  faultie
for  conjuringe."  Ralph  Davis  is  mentioned  in  the  1561  returns  as  com-
mitted on  April  I  and  as  accused  by  "M'  Sentlo  his  daughter"  [i.  e.,  ap-
parently, by  the  daughter  of  Edward  St.  Loe,  Sir  William's  brother]  of
being  concerned  with  her  in  a  plot  "for  y''  poisoninge  of  my  ladie  Sentlo.
The  which  he  also  deniethe."  From  the  1 562  bill  we  hear  that  he  remained
in  the  Tower  until  February  11,  1562,  when  "he  was  delivered  from  the
Tower  to  the  Kings  Bench,  and  since  that  time  was  set  at  liberty  upon  sure-
ties." Davis  was  not  one  of  the  nine  pilloried  sorcerers.  See  the  docu-
ments in  John  Bayley,  The  History  and  Antiquities  of  the  Tower  of  Lon-
don, 1821,  Part  11,  Appendix,  pp.  1-hi;  Miscellanea  (Catholic  Record
Society),  I  (1905),  55,  56.  Hunter  (Retrospective  Review,  2d  Series,  II
[1828],  322-323)  prints  a  letter  from  Sir  William's  mother  to  his  wife  in
which  she  says:  "I  told  hur  [an  unnamed  lady]  I  was  suer  yow  wher  pow-
sonyd  when  I  was  at  London,  and  yff  yow  had  not  had  a  present  remedy
ye  had  dyed."  For  interesting  St.  Loe  letters  see  Hunter,  Hallamshire,  ed.
Gatty,  pp.  107-108.  One  of  them  was  written  by  Sir  William  from  the
house  of  "  Maester  Man  "  in  Redcross  Street,  London.  Draper,  while  con-
fined in  the  Salt  Tower,  whiled  away  his  time  by  engraving  astrological
figures  (reproduced  by  Bayley,  Part  I,  opp.  p.  210)  on  the  wall  with  the  in-
scription "Hew  Draper  of  Brystow  made  thys  spheer  the  30  daye  of  Maye
Anno  1561."  ^

The  case  of  the  nine  sorcerers,  with  their  oath,  is  fully  reported^  by


556         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Coke,  A  Booke  of  Entries,  1614,  fol.  i  r°,  to  whom  Francis  Hutchinson  re-
fers in  An  Historical  Essay  concerning  Witchcraft,  2d  ed.,  1720,  pp.  33-34
(not  in  1st  ed.,  1718).  Machyn  (Diary,  p.  261)  registers  on  June  20  the
arraignment  of  "seven  men"  at  Westminster  "for  kungeryng  and  odur
maters."  Seven  should  be  nine  and  the  date  should  be  the  23d,  as  the  rec-
ord in  Coke  shows.  Cf.  Strype,  Annals  of  the  Reformation,  I  (1720,  269;
Notestein,  p.  385.  Leonard  Bilson  was  installed  as  a  prebendary  of  Win-
chester on  July  7,  1551  (Le  Neve,  Fasti,  ed.  Hardy,  1854,  HI,  32).  He  suf-
fered a  long  imprisonment.  We  hear  of  him  in  the  Tower  in  1562  (Miscel-
lanea, Catholic  Record  Society,  I,  56),  1564  (Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,

VII,  163),  in  1570  (Miscellanea,  I,  57),  and  on  March  29,  1571  (Acts,

VIII,  21).  On  October  14,  1571,  he  was  transferred  to  the  Marshalsea,
whence  he  was  discharged  in  1 582  (the  same,  I,  70;  II,  231 ;  cf.  I,  60).  His
confinement  was  rather  for  recusancy  than  for  sorcery.  The  account  in
Sloane  MS.  3943,  fol.  19,  is  merely  translated  from  Coke's  Entries.

87.  Grindal's  letter  to  Cecil  (April  17,  1561)  enclosing  the  confession  of
John  Coxe  alias  Devon,  priest,  "  for  mass  matters,  taken  this  day  after  re-
ceipt of  your  letters,"  is  printed  by  Pike,  History  of  Crime,  II,  22-23.
also  enclosed  an  examination  of  Coxe  taken  by  a  justice  of  the  peace  on
April  14  (Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1547-1580,  pp.  173-174).
Grindal's  comments  are  interesting:  "  Surely  for  this  magic  and  conjuration
your  honours  the  Council  must  appoint  some  extraordinary  punishment
for  example.  My  Lord  Chief  Justice  sayeth  the  temporal  law  will  not  med-
dle with  them.  Our  ecclesiastical  punishment  is  too  slender  for  so  grievous
offences."  Neither  of  the  documents  enclosed  mentions  sorcery,  and  it  is
possible  that  by  "magic  and  conjuration"  Grindal  meant  merely  the  mass
and  other  Catholic  rites  (which  the  Reformers  often  styled  conjuration  or
the  like:  cf.  the  habitual  language  of  Bale,  as,  for  example,  in  his  Select
Works,  ed.  Christmas,  pp.  16,  259,  326,  329,  367,  381,  384,  393,  395,  423,
424,  439>,  494,  501,  536,  537,  539,  59^,  630).  Yet  the  oath  of  abjuration
which  this  John  Coxe  (Cocks)  took  on  June  23,  1561,  after  confession  in
open  court,  specifies  several  varieties  of  witchcraft  and  sorcery.  Besides,
the  Chief  Justice  to  whom  Grindal  refers  was  apparently  Sir  Robert  Catlyn
of  the  Common  Pleas,  whom  Cecil  was  consulting  about  this  time  as  to  the
state  of  the  law  on  witchcraft.  A  letter  from  Catlyn  to  Cecil  on  this  subject
(April  20,  1561)  is  preserved  (Calendar,  1547-1580,  p.  174).  Finally,  the
Midsummer  Returns,  1561,  of  prisoners  in  the  King's  Bench  mention
"John  Devon  ah  Cox,  clerke,  sent  in  the  xv  dale  of  Aprill  1561,  vpon  my
Lord  of  Londons  commaundyment  and  others  the  Quenes  comissimers,
viz:  for  saying  of  Masse  and  coniorynge"  (Miscellanea,  Catholic  Record
Society,  I,  52-53).  On  Coxe-Devon  see  also  Birt  (The  Elizabethan  Re-
ligious Settlement,  1907,  pp.  331,  440-441,  528-529),  who  does  not  discuss
the  question  of  conjuring.

88.  Thomas  Gale,  Certaine  Workes  of  Galens,  1586,  fol.  33,  quoted  in
New  Shakspere  Society  Transactions,  1877-79,  P-  459>  by  John  Timbs,
Doctors  and  Patients,  1873, 1,  243-244.  Cf.  John  Cotta,  the  Northampton
physician  (ca.  1575-1650):  "A  sort  of  practitioners,  whom  our  custome
and  country  doth  call  wisemen  and  wisewomen,  reputed  a  kind  of  good  and


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI  557

honest  harmles  witches  or  wisards,  who  by  good  words,  by  hallowed  herbes
and  salues,  and  other  superstitious  ceremonies  promise  to  allay  and  calme
diuels,  practises  of  other  witches,  and  the  forces  of  many  diseases"  (A  Short
Discoverie  of  the  Vnobserved  Dangers  of  Seuerall  Sorts  of  Ignorant  and
Vnconsiderate  Practisers  of  Physicke  in  England,  1612,  p.  71).

89.  Bulleins  Bulwarke  of  Defence  againste  all  Sicknes  (finished  in
March,  1562-3;  1st  ed.  in  that  year;  2d  ed.,  1579).  This  contains  both  The
Booke  of  Simples  and  the  Dialogue  betwene  Sorenes  and  Chyrurgi.  The
passage  here  quoted  is  given  by  Strype,  Annals,  II  (1725),  611.  Cf.  A.  H.
Bullen's  life  of  BuUein  in  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography.  For  fur-
ther items  relative  to  witchcraft  see  Bullein,  A  Dialogue  wherein  is  a
Goodly  Regimente  against  the  Feuer  Pestilence  (first  published  in  1565),
ed.  Bullen,  Early  English  Text  Society,  1888,  pp.  104,  114.

90.  John  Halle,  An  Historiall  Expostulation,  1565,  ed.  Pettigrew  (Percy
Society,  1844),  pp.  11-15.  See  also  his  account  of  Robert  Haris  (1556)
and  of  Kiterell,  "  a  physitien,  or  rather  a  detestable  decavyng  sorcerer"
(pp.  6-7,  28-29).  Halle  believes  that  some  diseases  come  "by  enchaunte-
ment"  (p.  29).  See  also  note  69,  above.  Cf.  Caius  (1552),  pp.  68-69,
above.

91.  4th  Report  of  the  Deputy  Keeper,  1843,  Appendix  II,  pp.  263-264
(indictment  and  proceedings).  Cf.  Thomas  Wright,  Queen  Elizabeth  and
her  Times,  1838, 1,  121,  127,  129;  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Spanish,  1558-
1567,  pp.  259-260,  262,  275,  278-279,  288,  292-293,  331;  Calendar  of  State
Papers,  Foreign,  1562,  pp.  423-424,  460,  480,  484,  492,  519,  551,  564,  566-
567;  the  same,  1563,  pp.  27,  191,  338.  See  also  the  articles  on  Arthur  Pole
and  Sir  Anthony  Fortescue  in  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography.

92.  Sir  John  Mason  to  Sir  Thomas  Challoner,  February  27,  1563
(Wright,  as  above,  I,  129).  Cf.  Cecil's  letter  to  Sir  Thomas  Smith  (Wright,
I,  127),  which  says  that  the  conspirators  "were  persuaded  by  one  Pres-
tall"  that  the  queen  was  to  die  soon.  Prestall  and  Comyn  embarked  on
October  10,  1562;  the  others  tried  to  follow  on  the  14th,  but  were  arrested.
See  4th  Report,  as  above.

93.  Prestall  "vaunts  himself  to  be  of  high  blood,  and  next  heir  to  the
Poles"  (Margery  Kinnersley's  declaration,  March  16,  1591,  Calendar  of
State  Papers,  Domestic,  1591-1594,  p.  19).

94.  I  cannot  be  quite  sure  of  this  item  about  Prestall's  release,  for  there
is  a  possibility  of  confusion  with  Cornelius  de  Alneto  (Lannoy),  the  no-
torious alchemist,  as  to  whom  see  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Foreign,  1564-
1565,  p.  267;  Domestic,  1547-1580,  pp.  249,  256,  275-277,  289,  292,  cf.  273;
Marquis  of  Salisbury's  MSS.,  I,  318,  3'2S~333^  33^,  337.  However,  An-
thony Spencer  and  Richard  Bingham,  two  of  the  Pole  conspirators,  were
discharged  from  the  Tower  on  May  3,  1 567  (Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  VII,
351).  For  another  alchemist,  Alexander  Bonus,  see  Marquis  of  Salisbury's
MSS.,  Ill,  414;  Acts,  XVII,  31-32.  On  August  7,  1565,  Armagill  Waade
wrote  to  Cecil  recommending  the  suit  of  Mr.  Prestoll  (Calendar,  Domestic,
1547-1580,  p.  256).

95.  Lord  Scrope  to  Cecil,  August  29,  1569,  Calendar,  Foreign,  1569-
i57i,p.  118.


558


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


96.  Acts  of  the  Privy  Council,  X,  382.

97.  See  the  interesting  examination  of  William  Kinnersley,  March  8,
1591  (Calendar,  Domestic,  1591-1594,  pp.  17-18,  cf.  p.  ig).

98.  On  November  30,  1563,  Prestall  wrote  to  Cecil  for  letters  of  protec-
tion "  that  he  may  safely  come  to  make  answer  to  certain  charges  preferred
against  him"  (Calendar,  Domestic,  1547-1580,  p.  231).  Whether  he  got
such  letters  I  do  not  know.  On  August  7,  1565,  he  was  in  the  Tower,  it
seems  (the  same,  p.  2i;6),  where  he  remained  until  1567,  when  he  was  re-
leased on  his  promise  to  turn  silver  into  gold  (note  94,  above).  Soon  after  he
must  have  absconded.  From  some  time  before  August  29,  1569,  to  March
23, 1 572 (or  later),  he  was  actively  engaged  in  plots  in  Scotland  and  Flanders;
and  towards  the  end  of  that  period  he  was  negotiating  with  John  Lee,  one
of  Cecil's  agents  at  Antwerp,  with  a  view  (so  Lee  thought)  of  becoming
reconciled  to  the  English  government  and  giving  information  against  some
of  his  fellow-conspirators  (Calendar,  Foreign,  1569-1571,  pp.  118,  217,  220,
330,  400;  1 572-1 574,  p.  223;  Calendar,  Domestic,  Addenda,  1 566-1 579,  pp.
338>  341,  348,  354,  356,  358,  372,  379,  384;  Historical  MSS.  Commission,
Marquis  of  Salisbury's  MSS.,  I,  466,  476).  Apparently  he  was  induced  to
return  to  England  by  a  letter  from  Cecil  in  1571  (see  Prestall's  own  state-
ments as  reported  by  William  and  Margery  Kinnersley:  Calendar,  Domes-
tic, 1591-1594,  pp.  17-19;  cf.  Marquis  of  Salisbury's  MSS.,  II,  552).  But
he  was  confined  in  the  King's  Bench  for  two  years,  from  1572  to  July  5,
1574,  when  he  was  released  under  bonds  (for  his  release  see  Acts  of  the
Privy  Council,  VIII,  264-265;  for  the  length  of  his  confinement  see  his  let-
ter of  1585  in  Strype,  Annals,  III  [1728],  312).  In  this  interval  Dr.  John
Story,  Prestall's  fellow-plotter,  was  kidnapped,  taken  to  England,  tried,
and  (in  June,  1571)  executed.  There  was  some  idea  of  kidnapping  Prestall
in  September,  1570  (Thomas  Wright,  Queen  Elizabeth  and  her  Times,
1838,  I,  378;  Calendar,  Foreign,  1569-1571,  p.  330).  He  was  at  liberty  in
England,  under  bonds,  on  June  11,  1576  (Acts,  IX,  138-139;  Calendar,
Domestic,  1 547-1 580,  p.  520),  but  on  December  26,  1576,  and  January  29,

1577,  we  find  his  name  in  lists  of  fugitives  beyond  the  sea  (see  Historical
MSS.  Commission,  Report  on  MSS.  of  Lord  Montagu  of  Beaulieu,  p.  83;
Calendar,  Domestic,  1547-1580,  p.  532;  Strype,  Annals,  II  [1725],  Ap-
pendix, p.  I02;  Peck,  Desiderata  Curiosa,  1779,  I,  78).  On  October  12,

1578,  however,  he  was  in  the  Tower  (Acts,  X,  344;  Calendar,  Domestic,
1 547-1 580,  p.  601),  to  which  (according  to  a  record  of  November  10,  1578)
he  had  been  "latelie  committed"  (Acts,  X,  382).  He  remained  a  prisoner
there  until  July  22,  1588.  On  this  date  his  name  occurs  in  the  bills  of  the
Lieutenant  of  the  Tower,  but  it  is  absent  from  the  next  bill  on  Lady  Day,
1589  (Miscellanea,  Catholic  Record  Society,  III  [1906],  8-28).  Presum-
ably he  was  released  in  July,  1588.  The  cause  of  his  long  confinement  ap-
pears to  be  his  conviction  for  high  treason,  for  which  he  was  indicted  in
1578  (in  13  Elizabeth  according  to  Acts,  X,  344;  "He  standeth  attainted
of  highe  treason  for  more  then  seven  yeeres  past"  according  to  documents
of  November  30,  1586,  Miscellanea,  II,  264,  cf.  238).  He  was  condemned
to  death,  but  spared  by  the  queen  (Calendar,  Domestic,  1 591-1594,  pp.
17-19).   From  various  sources  we  learn  of  his  presence  in  the  Tower  in


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


559


1579  (Acts,  XI,  102),  1585  (Strype,  Annals,  III  [1728],  312-313;  Miscel-
lanea, II,  238,  cf.  132),  1586  (Miscellanea,  II,  261,  264),  and  1587  (letter  of
the  Earl  of  Arundel:  see  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1 581-1590,
p.  419,  and  Pollen  and  MacMahon,  English  Martyrs,  II  [1919],  161,  Catho-
lic Record  Society).  For  his  continuous  imprisonment  from  June  24,  1579,
to  July  22,  1588,  we  have  the  authority  of  the  Tower  Bills  (Miscellanea,  II,
8-27).  After  his  release  from  the  Tower  we  hear  of  him  in  1590  and  1591
only  (note  97,  above);  then  he  vanishes.

99.  Commons'  Journals,  I,  63,  65,  69,  70;  Lords'  Journals,  I,  591,  600,
601,  602,  603,  606.  In  support  of  the  theory  that  the  Marian  exiles  learned
Continental  views  of  witchcraft  during  their  enforced  residence  in  Ger-
many and  Switzerland,  certain  phrases  of  the  law  of  1604  are  quoted  by
Professor  Burr  as  embodying  these  novel  ideas  (Proceedings  American
Antiquarian  Society,  New  Series,  XXI  [191 1],  196).  "To  'use,  practise,
or  exercise  any  invocations  or  conjurations  of  evil  and  wicked  spirits  to
or  for  any  intent  or  purpose,'"  he  remarks,  "is  specified  first  of  all  as
enough  by  itself  to  warrant  [the  witches']  death  as  felons;  and  to  their
witchcrafts  against  their  neighbors  are  now  assimilated  'other  lewd  intents
and  purposes  contrary  to  the  laws  of  God  and  to  the  peril  of  their  own
souls.'"  Thus,  he  argues,  the  Elizabethan  law  shows  "a  new  diction  and  a
new  spirit":  it  punishes  sin  as  well  as  crime.  This  argument  comes  to
naught  as  soon  as  one  compares  the  law  of  1603  with  the  law  of  1542.
Henry's  statute  punished  with  death  all  who  should  "use,  devise,  practise,
or  exercise,  or  cause  to  be  used,  devysed,  practised,  or  exercised,  any
Invocacions  or  conjuracions  of  Sprites"  for  any  "unlawfuU  intent  or
purpose."  And  Henry's  statute  declared  that  such  invocations  "cannot
be  used  and  exercised  but  to  the  great  Offence  of  Godes  lawe,  hurt
and  damage  of  the  Kinges  Subjectes,  and  losse  of  the  sowles  of  suche
Offenders."

100.  Zurich  Letters,  Nos.  54-56, 1,  73-76  (123-128);  Jewel's  Works,  IV,
I 257-1 262.

101.  John  Parkhurst,  Bishop  of  Norwich,  to  Josiah  Simler  and  Ludwig
Lavater,  April  29,  1562  (Zurich  Letters,  No.  47,  I,  63  [109]):  "Ovis  in
Essexia  non  ita  pridem  prodidit  homicidam,  quemadmodum  corvi  in
Helvetia."

102.  Jewel  to  Bullinger,  August  14,  1562  (Zurich  Letters,  No.  50,  I,  68-
69  [116-117]).  Cf.  Parkhurst  to  Simler,  June  30,  1574  (No.  119,  I,  179
[305]):  "Mirum  est  quod  vacca  cervum  peperit,"  etc.

103.  Parkhurst  to  Bullinger,  August  21,  1566  (No.  72,  I,  98  [164-165]):
"Vocatur  senior  David,  necromanticae  artis  peritus."

104.  Robert  Horn,  Bishop  of  Winchester,  to  Bullinger,  August  3,  1571
(No.  98, 1,  148  [282]):  "et  veneno  et  violentia  et  fascinatione  et  proditione."

105.  Parkhurst  to  Bullinger,  June  29,  1574  (No.  118,  I,  178  [303]).

106.  Parkhurst  to  Bullinger,  April  26  and  August  13,  1563  (Nos.  57,  59,
I,  76-77  [128-129],  78-79  [131-132]).  Cf.  I,  119  [201];  II,  360.

107.  The  Acts  of  the  Parliament  of  Scotland,  II  (18 14),  539  (June  4,
1563);  cf.  Ill  (1814),  38,  44.


560        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


108.  Strype,  Annals  of  the  Reformation,  I  (1725),  349,  from  Bishop
Alley's  own  copy.  To  balance  this,  I  may  quote  Cecil's  letter  to  Sir
Thomas  Smith  (January  I4,  1563),  in  which  he  mentions  as  one  of  the
"matters  of  moment  lyke  to  pass"  in  the  parliament,  "reviving  of  some
old  lawes  for  penalties  of  some  fellonyes"  (Wright,  Queen  Elizabeth,  1838,
1,121).

109.  See  Notestein,  pp.  17-18;  Summers,  The  Geography  of  Witchcraft,
1927,  p.  114.  Lecky  (History  of  the  Rise  and  Influence  of  the  Spirit  of
Rationalism  in  Europe,  New  York,  1866,  I,  121,  note  2)  misunderstands
Strype  (Annals,  I  [1725],  8),  and  so  do  Notestein  (p.  17)  and  Summers
(p.  116),  though  Notestein  gives  the  right  interpretation  in  a  note.

no.  Notestein,  p.  18;  echoed  by  Summers,  Geography,  p.  193.

111.  A  True  and  lust  Recorde,  of  the  Information,  Examination  and
Confession  of  all  the  Witches,  taken  at  S.  Oses  (London,  1582),  sig.  B5,
If.  2.

112.  Compare  Darcey's  method  in  dealing  with  Ursley  Kempe  and  its
success.  "The  saide  Brian  Darcey  then  promising  to  the  saide  Vrsley,  that
if  shee  would  deale  plainely  and  confesse  the  trueth,  that  she  should  haue
fauour:  and  so  by  giuing  her  faire  speeches  shee  confessed  as  followeth.
The  saide  Ursley  bursting  out  with  weeping,  fel  vpon  her  knees,  and  con-
fessed," etc.  (sig.  A4,  If.  4  v°).  His  fraus  pia  no  doubt  was  regarded  by
his  contemporaries  as  justifiable.  It  had  long  been  maintained  by  somz
casuists  that  an  inquisitor  in  such  cases  might  delude  an  accused  person
thus.  See  the  discussion  in  the  Malleus  Maleficarum.  "An  hie  iudex  super
delatum  infamatum,  et  per  testes,  et  indicia  facti  legitime  conuictum,  cum
nihil  desit  nisi  in  ore  proprio  crimen  fateatur,  possit  licite  conseruationem
vitae  compromittere,  cum  tamen,  si  crimen  fatetur,  vltimo  supplicio
punitur"  (Part  III,  qu.  14,  ed.  1620,  pp.  371-372).

113.  Newes  from  Scotland  (Roxburghe  Club  reprint,  18 16;  Bodley
Head  Quartos).

114.  Note  that  by  "our  witches"  Jonson  means  "modern  witches,"  not
"  those  of  our  own  country."  Shadwell,  in  his  comedy  of  The  Lancashire
Witches  (1682)  imitates  Jonson  in  supplying  a  commentary  with  a  plethora
of  references  to  classical  and  modern  Continental  authorities  —  Ovid,
Horace,  Lucan,  Del  Rio,  Remigius,  Bodin,  Guaccius,  the  Malleus,  etc.
Much  of  his  erudition  is  borrowed  from  Jonson.

115.  Thomas  Potts,  The  Wonderfvll  Discoverie  of  Witches  in  the
Covnty  of  Lancaster.  With  the  Arraignement  and  Triall  of  Nineteene  No-
torious Witches,  at  the  Assizes  and  Generall  Gaole  Deliuerie,  holden  at  the
Castle  of  Lancaster,  vpon  Munday,  the  Seuenteenth  of  August  last,  1612
(London,  1613),  sig.  B3,  If.  2  (The  Confession  and  Examination  of  Anne
Whittle  alias  Chattox,  being  Prisoner  at  Lancaster;  taken  the  19.  day  of
May,  Annoq;  Regni  Regis  lacobi  AngUae,  Decimo).

116.  "Malkin"  is  often  used  for  "hare"  and  Crossley  is  probably  right
in  interpreting  the  name  of  Mother  Demdike's  house  as  "the  Witches'
Tower"  (reprint  of  Potts  for  the  Chetham  Society,  1845,  Notes,  p.  16).
Potts  tells  us  how  the  Lancashire  prosecution  originated:  "The  lustices  of
those  partes,  vnderstanding  by  a  generall  charme  and  muttering,  the  great


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


561


and  vniuersall  resort  to  Maulking  Tower,  the  common  opinion,  with  the  re-
port of  these  suspected  people,  the  complaint  of  the  Kinges  subiectes  for
the  losse  of  their  Children,"  etc.,  "sent  for  some  of  the  Countrey,  and  took
great  paynes  to  enquire  after  their  proceedinges"  (sig.  B2).

117.  Potts,  sigg.  G3,  I3,  P,  P2,  Q,  R,  Z.

118.  Sigg.  G3,  I2,  I3,  P,Q3,  Y3.

119.  Sig.  I2  v°.

120.  Sig.  H3.

121.  Sigg.  G3, 13,  P,  Q3,  Y3  (Jennet  Preston  "  had  a  Spirit  with  her  like
vnto  a  white  Foale,  with  a  blacke-spot  in  the  forehead").

122.  Sig.  R  r°.

123.  Sigg.  F2,  F3,  G3.

124.  Potts,  sigg.  L2-N3.  Cf.  Webster,  pp.  275-276;  Notestein,  pp.  128-
129.  That  James  Mason  in  The  Anatomic  of  Sorcerie,  161 2,  has  nothing  to
say  of  the  Sabbath  is  not  necessarily  significant,  for  his  treatise  concerns
rather  divination  than  malefic  magic.

125.  Cotta,  The  Triall  of  Witch-craft,  1616,  p.  35.  Cotta  is  not  quite
accurate.  Porta  does  not  say  that  this  particular  hag  (a  strix  who  was  "in
his  hands")  imagined  that  she  had  visited  a  Witches'  Sabbath  on  this
occasion  (as  Cotta  implies);  but  he  does  bring  her  experience  into  connec-
tion with  such  imaginings,  and  it  is  clear  that  he  regards  her  as  one  of  those
who  now  and  then,  after  anointing  themselves,  fancy  that  they  are  rapt  to
such  assemblies  and  there  enjoy  "conuiuia,  sonos,  tripudia,  et  formosorum
iuvenum  concubitus"  (Magia  Naturalis,  ii,  26,  ed.  1558,  p.  102:  see  also
note  33,  above).  H.  F.  borrows  the  Porta  story  from  Cotta,  retailing  it  al-
most word  for  word  (Preface  to  A  True  and  Exact  Relation  of  the  Severall
Informations,  Examinations,  and  Confessions  of  the  late  Witches,  Ar-
raigned and  Executed  in  the  County  of  Essex,  1645).  William  Foster,  in
1631,  remarks  that  "Witches  by  annointing  themselves  with  their  veni-
ficall  ointments  are  carried  up  in  the  airy  Heaven"  (Hoplocrisma-spongus,
p.  21).  Cf.  Thomas  Wright,  Proceedings  against  Dame  Alice  Kyteler,  1843,
p.  46.

126.  Cotta,  pp.  38-40.

127.  "Some  late  Writers  haue  obserued,  that  diuers  Witches  by  such
pictures,  haue  caused  the  persons  thereby  represented  secretly  to  languish
and  consume,  as  was  lately  proued  against  some  late  famous  Witches  of
York-shire  and  Lancaster''  (Cotta,  p.  90).  Webster  in  1677  laughs  the  Lan-
cashire cases  to  scorn.  He  derides  the  notion  "  that  the  Devil  should  carry
an  old  Witch  in  the  Air  into  foraign  Regions,  that  can  hardly  crawl  with  a
staff,  to  dancing  and  banqueting,  and  yet  to  return  with  an  empty  belly,
and  the  next  day  to  be  forced,  like  old  Dembdike  or  Elizabeth  Sothernes,  and
AHzon  Denice,  to  go  a  begging  with  the  sowr-milk  Can."  Witches  who
confess  such  things  are  merely  deluded  by  Satan,  who  "doth  nothing  but
dart  and  cast  in  these  filthy  and  fond  cogitations  into  their  minds  agree-
able to  their  wicked  wills  and  corrupted  desires"  (The  Displaying  of  Sup-
posed Witchcraft,  pp.  68,  74-75).  Webster  has  no  respect  for  "that  old
Platonical  Whimsie,"  revived  of  late  by  Glanvil  and  others,  "of  the  Souls


562


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


real  egression  forth  of  the  body  into  far  distant  places,  and  its  return  again,
with  the  certain  knowledge  of  things  there  done  or  said."  See  Glanvil,
A  Blow  at  Modern  Sadducism,  1668,  pp.  15-17  (Saducismus  Triumphatus,
1681,  pp.  13-1 5).  Glanvil,  in  Webster's  opinion,  gives  "  too  much  credit  to
the  things  related  by  the  Witches  in  their  confessions,  to  be  stories  of  things
really  performed  at  a  great  distance."  "These  Relations  of  the  Witches  are
meer  lyes  and  forgeries,  and  are  but  taught  them  by  the  spiritual  craft  of
the  Devil."  Of  course  he  repeats  Porta's  story,  of  which  he  gives  a  racy
translation.  "It  appeareth,"  therefore,  "that  the  Witches  are  under  a
melancholy  and  passive  delusion,  promoted  by  the  help  of  soporiferous
Oyntments,  whereby  they  fancy  and  think  they  are  carried  into  far  remote
places,  where  they  hear  and  see  strange  things,  and  do  and  suffer  that  which
is  not  at  all  performed,  but  only  as  in  a  dream,  their  bodies  in  the  mean  time
lying  immoveable,  and  so  do  but  relate  falsities  and  lyes"  (pp.  69-70).
Webster  probably  had  no  knowledge  of  the  Somerset  cases  of  1665,  which
are  not  mentioned  in  A  Blow  at  Modern  Sadducism  (1668)  but  make  their
first  appearance  (from  Robert  Hunt's  manuscript)  in  the  enlarged  edition.
Part  II,  pp.  127-165  (^entitled  Saducismus  Triumphatus),  which  appeared
in  1681  (reprinted  in  1682,  1689,  1700,  and  1726).  The  case  of  Julian  Cox
(1663)  is  also  first  reported  in  the  volume  of  1681,  Part  II,  pp.  191-209.  On
Sad(d)ucismus  Triumphatus  see  Greenslet,  Joseph  Glanvil,  1900,  pp.  70,
144-176.  Orchard  (The  Doctrine  of  Devils,  1676,  p.  55)  explodes  the  be-
lief that  "the  Devil  out  of  a  glewish  dew,  can  and  often  doth,  mould  up
so  many  various  dishes  of  choice  Viands,  and  Butts  of  lascivious  Wines,
that  many  Thousands  may  fill,  and  feed,  and  feast  themselves  most  deli-
ciously."

128.  Thomas  Cooper,  The  Mystery  of  Witch-craft,  1617,  pp.  89-94,  cf.
pp.  1 14-1 1 5.  In  pp.  88-91  he  borrows  more  or  less  from  King  James,  whom
he  cites  (see  the  Daemonologie,  1597,  1603,  pp.  33,  36-37,  43,  44).  Note  also
his  mention  of  King  James  on  pp.  6-7.

i2q.  Cooper,  p.  16.  Just  before  (p.  15),  he  has  mentioned  "the  late
Assise  at  Lancaster"  in  1612.

130.  Edward  Fairfax,  Daemonologia,  ed.  Grainge,  1882,  pp.  86,  no,
114-115,  107-108.

131.  The  same,  pp.  94,  126-127;  cf.  p.  98,  note.

132.  Edmund  Robinson's  examination,  February  10,  1633-4,  in  Web-
ster, The  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  1677,  pp.  347-349;  cf.  an-
other text  (from  Harleian  MS.  6854)  in  Baines,  History  of  the  County
Palatine  and  Duchy  of  Lancaster,  1836,  I,  604-606.  Webster,  who  knew
the  boy,  gives  interesting  details  (pp.  276-278).

133.  Margaret  Johnson's  examination,  March,  1633-4  (Baines,  I,  607-
608).  Susanna  Edwards  "confesseth,  that  she  can  go  unto  any  place  in-
visible, and  yet  her  Body  shall  be  lying  in  her  Bed":  A  True  and  Impartial
Relation  of  the  Informations  against  Three  Witches  .  .  .  Who  were  In-
dicted, Arraigned,  and  Convicted  at  the  Assizes  holden  for  the  County  of
Devon  at  the  Castle  of  Exon,  Aug.  14.  1682  (London,  1682),  p.  37.

134.  Robinson's  examination,  July  16,  1634,  Calendar  of  State  Papers,
Domestic,  1634-1635,  p.  152;  cf.  pp.  141,  153.  On  the  whole  case  see  Web-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


ster,  pp.  276-278;  Thomas  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  1851,
II,  108-117;  Notestein,  pp.  146-157.

135.  The  plot  of  The  Late  Lancashire  Witches  includes  most  of  Robin-
son's details.  Interwoven,  as  an  episode,  is  the  celebrated  tale  of  the  brave
soldier  who  ventures  to  spend  three  nights  in  a  haunted  mill  and  on  the
third  is  well  "nipt  and  puU'd  and  pinch'd"  by  the  cat-witches,  but  cuts  off
the  paw  of  one  of  them  (Halliwell's  reprint  in  The  Poetry  of  Witchcraft,
1853,  pp.  171-174,  221-222,  225-227).  This  is  to  all  intents  and  purposes
Bodin's  narrative  of  the  witches  of  Vernon  Castle  in  1561  (see  p.  177,
above).  It  is  related  somehow  to  an  incident  in  No.  4  of  the  Grimms'
Kinder-  und  Hausmarchen  (cf.  Bolte  and  PoHvka,  Anmerkungen,  II,  165).
Cleveland  recalls  the  play  rather  than  the  case  itself  in  his  satirical  verses
in  "Upon  a  Miser":

Have  you  not  heard  th'  abominable  sport

A  Lancaster  grand-Jurie  will  report?

The  Souldier  with  his  Morglay  watch't  the  Mill,

The  Cats  they  came  to  feast,  when  lustie  Will

Whips  off  great  Pusses  leg,  which  by  some  charme

Proves  the  next  day  such  an  old  womans  arme.

136.  Matthew  Hopkins,  The  Discovery  of  Witches,  1647,  p.  2.  Gaule,
the  opponent  of  Hopkins,  seems  to  believe  that  witches  hold  meetings  by
night  (Select  Cases  of  Conscience  touching  Witchcrafts,  1646,  p.  82).  He
repeats  the  well-known  details  with  an  eye  to  Danaeus  and  especially  to  the
Malleus  (Part  II,  qu.  i,  cap.  2,  foil.  xxvi[i]  v°-xxxviii  r°,  Koelhoff  ed.,
1494).  Yet  he  derides  the  elaborate  accounts  of  the  Sabbath  (pp.  56-65).
After  mentioning  with  scorn  the  notion  that  witches  use  ointment  of  stolen
infants  or  of  dead  men's  flesh,  and  particularizing  as  an  absurdity  the  idea
that  the  devil  "oft  times  marries  them  ere  they  part,  either  to  himselfe,  or
their  Familiar,  or  to  one  another,  and  that  by  the  Book  of  Common  prayer
(as  a  pretender  to  witchfinding  lately  told  me  in  the  Audience  of  many),"
he  concludes:  "Thus  you  see  what  we  are  likely  to  attain  to,  by  searching
too  precisely  into  Diabolicall  solemnities;  among  some  probabilities  to
manifold  Impossibilities,  and  absurdities,  among  some  truths,  to  manifold
superstitions."

137.  John  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Discovery  of  Witch-craft,  1648,
p.  II.  Meetings  are  mentioned  in  The  Witches  of  Huntingdon  (Preface
signed  John  Davenport),  1646,  pp.  14,  15.

138.  Stearne,  p.  52,  cf.  p.  53.

139.  A  True  and  Exact  Relation  of  the  Severall  Informations,  Exami-
nations, and  Confessions  of  the  Late  Witches,  Arraigned  and  Executed  in
the  County  of  Essex,  1645,  pp.  12-15.  Cf.  Anne  Leech's  confession  (p.  9)
that  she  and  Elizabeth  Gooding  and  Anne  West  "  met  together  at  the  house
of  the  said  Elizabeth  Clark,  where  there  was  a  book  read,  wherein  shee
thinks  there  was  no  goodnesse."  All  three,  as  well  as  Elizabeth  Clark,  were
executed  in  1645.  Stearne  adverts  to  these  Manningtree  meetings  more
than  once  (A  Confirmation  and  Discovery  of  Witch-craft,  1648,  pp.  38,
52,  53)-


564         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


140.  The  Examination,  Confession,  Triall,  and  Execution,  of  Joane
Williford,  Joan  Cariden,  and  Jane  Hott,  1645,  p.  3,  cf.  p.  6.

141.  Wonderful]  News  from  the  North,  1650,  p.  24.

14a.  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  pp.  260-266,
cf.  pp.  no,  219.  He  adverts  to  the  Lancashire  cases  again  and  again  (pp.
88,  90,  100,  152-155,  161-162,  207,  219-220).  He  also  mentions  the  ro-
mancing of  Grace  Sowerbutts  (pp.  194-195).  On  Bernard  and  his  book  see
Notestein,  pp.  234-236,  241,  361,  401.  I  cannot  agree  with  Notestein,  that
Bernard's  main  interest  was  "to  warn  those  who  had  to  try  cases  to  be  ex-
ceedingly careful"  (p.  241).  Bernard  regards  it  as  our  duty  to  "hate
Witches"  (p.  247),  and  he  agrees  with  Perkins  (see  p.  292,  above)  in  hold-
ing that  the  white  witches  deserve  death  as  well  as  the  black  (pp.  249-254).

143.  Bernard,  pp.  216-217.

144.  "Bodin,  his  Daemono.  Delrio,  lib.  2.  q.  16.  de  disq.  magice."  See
Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicae,  ii,  16,  ed.  1616,  pp.  154-171:  "De  noc-
turnis  sagarum  conuentibus,  et  an  vera  sit  earum  translatio  de  loco  ad
locum?"

145.  Bernard,  pp.  231-232.

146.  Compare  Stearne,  pp.  3-4,  with  Bernard  (2d  ed.,  1629),  pp.  83-86;
pp.  8-9  with  pp.  240-244,  249-250;  pp.  10-12,  20,  23,  with  pp.  87-91;  pp.
25-26  with  pp.  91-95;  pp.  33-34,  36,  with  pp.  98-99,  193-197,  200-201;  p.
37  with  p.  202;  pp.  39,  40,  with  pp.  205,  212-214;  PP-  42~43  with  pp.  214-
215;  pp.  50-52  with  pp.  120-125,  260-261,  264-265;  pp.  53-57  with  pp.
216-220,  246-249,  257.  Notestein  (p.  361)  remarks  that  Bernard's  book
"had  been  used  by  Stearne  and  doubtless  by  Hopkins,"  but  he  seems  not
to  have  observed  Stearne's  enormous  plagiarism.

147.  Stearne,  p.  53.  Burton-Old  is  misprinted  "  Burton,  Old."

148.  Glanvil,  Saducismus  Triumphatus,  1681,  Part  II,  pp.  127-167.

149.  Glanvil,  p.  127.

150.  Ady,  in  1656,  makes  it  clear  that  he  derives  "from  Bodinus  and
other  Popish  Writers"  his  knowledge  of  witch-rides  by  means  of  "the
broth  of  a  sodden  Infant,"  which  he  regards  as  a  mere  superstition,  and
that  he  thinks  of  the  belief  as  especially  entertained  in  Germany  (A  Candle
in  the  Dark,  p.  iii;  cf.  pp.  122-123).  See  also  his  quotation  of  the  Canon
Episcopi  from  Scot  (whom  he  mentions)  about  the  false  belief  of  riding
with  Diana  or  Herodias  "with  an  innumerable  multitude"  (pp.  108-109).
On  this  matter  see  also  Wagstaffe,  The  Question  of  Witchcraft  Debated,
1669,  pp.  52-55;  R.  T.,  The  Opinion  of  Witchcraft  Vindicated,  1670,  pp.
53-54.  William  Drage  is  an  enlightening  witness.  In  his  "Daimonoma-
geia.  A  Small  Treatise  of  Sicknesses  and  Diseases  from  Witchcraft"  (1665)
he  refers  constantly  to  learned  Continental  authorities  and  also  cites  a
good  many  instances  of  witch-sent  ailments  or  symptoms  that  have  come
to  his  attention  in  England.  His  only  example  of  the  Sabbath  is  an  elabo-
rate account  of  the  confession  of  three  men  and  a  woman  burned  atPoitou
in  1564.  This  includes  the  journey  through  the  air,  "huge  meetings,"
homage  to  the  goat-shaped  devil,  feasting,  and  lascivious  revels  (pp.  17-18).
"Many  Histories,"  says  Drage,  "confirm  these  things;  we  make  but  a
brief  abstract  of  them,  the  foresaid  Authors  may  satisfie  the  Reader  fully


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVI


therein."  The  foresaid  authors  are  all  Continental  (Remigius,  Bodin,  Gril-
lando,  and  so  on).  No  English  evidence  is  adduced.  When  Henry  Hally-
well  (Melampronoea,  1681,  pp.  66-75)  treats  of  witches'  "Nocturnal  Con-
venticles and  Diabolical  meetings,"  he  says  not  a  word  of  such  affairs  as
held  in  England.  He  is  discussing  the  general  objection  to  the  credibility
of  witchcraft  involved  in  the  proposition  (which  he  refutes)  "That  these
Witches  are  supposed  to  be  present  at  their  Nocturnal  Conventicles  and
Diabolical  meetings,  when  their  Bodies  are  at  home;  which  is  impossible."
He  admits  (p.  70)  that  "the  Soul  may  be  rapt  from  this  Terrestrial  Body,
and  carried  to  remote  and  distant  places,  from  whence  she  may  make  a
Postliminiar  return."  He  remarks  "I  would  not  so  be  understood  as  if  I
thought  that  Witches  did  never  bodily  assist  at  the  performance  of  their
Hellish  Rites,  but  only  that  sometimes  they  may  be  present  at  them,  when
their  Bodies  are  at  home"  (pp.  74-75).  Bovet  (Pandaemonium,  1684,
p.  31)  remarks  that  "Sometimes  personally,  and  sometimes  in  a  Dream,  or
Trance  they  revel  with  the  evil  Spirit  in  nightly  Cabals  and  Consults."
Baxter,  in  his  Preface  (dated  1690)  to  Cotton  Mather's  Late  Memorable
Providences  (2d  impression,  London,  1691),  accepts  Bodin  and  Remigius
on  witches'  meetings.  The  Goodwin  girl  of  whom  Mather  tells  went  on
"Fantastick  Journeys"  to  the  witches'  " Randezvouse,"  when  in  fact  she
was  simply  riding  a  chair  (pp.  25-31).  This  is,  of  course,  the  same  sort  of
imaginary  journey  instanced  from  Porta  by  H.  F.  in  his  Preface  to  A  True
and  Exact  Relation  of  the  Severall  Informations,  Examinations,  and  Con-
fessions of  the  late  Witches  ...  in  the  County  of  Essex,  1645.

151.  For  alleged  witch-meetings  in  New  England  see,  for  example.
Cotton  Mather,  The  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  Boston,  1693,  pp.  49,
94-96,  99,  106-107,  125,  133,  137-138.  Our  scholars  were  well  acquainted
with  the  literature  of  the  subject.  For  the  influence  of  Bernard  see  The
Wonders,  sig.  bb.  If.  4  r°;  for  Anthony  Horneck's  Swedish  cases  (Glanvil's
Saducismus  Triumphatus,  1681,  Part  II,  pp.  31 1-328)  see  pp.  54,  148-149.
"In  these  Hellish  Meetings,"  writes  Mather,  "these  Monsters  have  asso-
ciated themselves  to  do  no  less  a  Thing  than.  To  destroy  the  Kingdom  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  these  parts  oj  the  World"  (p.  49).  "The  Witches  say,
that  they  form  themselves  much  after  the  manner  of  Congregational
Churches"  (p.  140).  Miss  Murray  takes  all  this  sort  of  thing  seriously  (The
Witch-Cult,  1 92 1,  pp.  151  etc.).  Mr.  Summers,  too,  believes  in  the  exist-
ence of  "a  coven  of  witches"  (The  Geography  of  Witchcraft,  1927,  p.  346).
"There  can  be  no  doubt  that  at  Salem  the  traditional  rites  of  the  hideous
black  worship  were  precisely  observed,  allowing,  of  course,  that  it  was  a
Protestant  Communion  and  not  the  Holy  Mass  which  was  the  model  of
their  helhsh  liturgy.  These  practices  must  have  been  carefully  handed
down  and  taught  to  the  New  England  representatives  of  the  witch  so-
ciety" (p.  348).


566         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


CHAPTER  XVII
King  James  the  First

1.  For  other  pronouncements  of  a  more  or  less  similar  nature,  see  Sir
Walter  Scott,  Introduction  to  Potts's  Discoverie,  Somers  Tracts,  2d  ed.,
1 8 10,  III,  95;  Mrs.  Lucy  Aitkin,  Memoirs  of  the  Court  of  King  James  the
First,  1822,  II,  166-167;  Retrospective  Review,  V  (1822),  90;  Scott,  Letters
on  Demonology  and  Witchcraft,  1830,  pp.  227,  246-247;  Crossley,  Intro-
duction to  Potts,  Chetham  Society,  1845,  pp.  xviii,  xlv;  Thomas  Wright,
Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  1851, 1,  284;  II,  143-144;  Charles  Hard-
wick,  History  of  Preston,  1857,  p.  146;  P.  Q.  Karkeek,  Transactions  of  the
Devonshire  Association,  VI  (1874),  736;  F.  A.  Inderwick,  Side-Lights  on
the  Stuarts,  2d  ed.,  1891,  pp.  154-155;  Engelbert  Horley,  Sefton,  1893,
p.  115,  note  i;  H.  M.  Doughty,  Blackwood's  Magazine,  March,  1898,
CLXIII,  388;  W.  O.  Roper,  Materials  for  the  History  of  Lancaster,  Part  I,
Chetham  Society,  1907,  pp.  26-27.

2.  Mrs.  Linton,  Witch  Stories,  1861,  p.  20.

3.  Pages  259-260.

4.  Page  259.
5  Page  261.

6.  Page  195.

7.  Page  195.

8.  R.  Steele,  in  Social  England,  ed.  H.  D.  Traill,  IV,  85-86.

9.  Trevelyan,  England  under  the  Stuarts,  [1904,]  p.  32.

10.  The  same,  p.  33.

1 1.  A  brief  but  powerful  vindication  of  King  James  was  inserted  by  Wil-
liam Gifford  in  his  edition  of  Ford  (I,  clxxi,  Dyce's  revision,  1869,  III,  276;
cf.  Quarterly  Review,  XLI  [1829],  80-82),  but  it  has  attracted  little  atten-
tion. See  also  Disraeli's  Character  of  James  the  First  (Miscellanies  of
Literature,  New  York,  1841,  III,  355-360).

12.  See  particularly  Mr.  F.  Legge's  paper  on  Witchcraft  in  Scotland,  in
The  Scottish  Review  for  October,  1891,  XVIII,  257-288.

13.  Newes  from  Scotland,  1591,  sig.  B2  (Roxburghe  Club  reprint).

14.  King  James,  Basilikon  Doron,  1599,  Roxburghe  Club  reprint,  p.  97.

15.  Spottiswood,  History  of  the  Church  of  Scotland,  Bannatyne  Club,
II,  412;  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials,  I,  230,  240,  note;  Legge,  Scottish  Review,
XVIII,  262.

16.  A.  Lang,  History  of  Scotland,  II,  353.

17.  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials,  I,  357.

18.  See  p.  371,  above.

19.  Privy  Council  Register,  V,  409-410;  Spottiswood,  III,  66-67;
Legge,  p.  264;  Lang,  History  of  Scotland,  II,  433.

20.  Gardiner,  History  of  England,  1603-1642,  VII  (1899),  322-323.

21.  John  Hawarde  (born  about  1571)  makes  a  curious  note  in  his  manu-
script, Les  Reportes  del  Cases  in  Camera  Stellata  (ed.  Baildon,  pp.  179-
180):  "Nothinge  now  was  talked  of  but  the  relligion,  vertue,  wisedome,
learninge.  Justice,  &  manye  other  most  noble  &  woorthye  prayses  of


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVII


567


K.  James,  ...  his  bookes  new  printed,  (BaztXtxo^'  Sorcov,  Free  monarchies,
Monologie,  Expositions  upon  the  Reuelacions  &  the  Kings,  the  Lepanto)."

22.  There  are  two  1603  London  editions  of  King  James's  Daemonologie.
See  the  details  in  Ferguson,  PubHcations  of  the  Edinburgh  Bibliographical
Society,  III,  51.

23.  See  the  Roxburghe  Club  reprint  of  the  1599  edition  of  the  Basilikon
Doron.  On  the  attention  which  the  book  attracted,  see  Calendar  of  State
Papers,  Venetian,  1 603-1 607,  pp.  10,  65.

24.  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  1851, 1,  279.  See  also  the
authors  cited  above  (note  i).

25.  Wright,  Narratives,  I,  279.

26.  John  Barrel,  A  True  Narration,  etc.,  1600,  p.  i.

27.  Barrel,  p.  7.

28.  Another  case  occurred  in  1580.  William  Randoll  was  hanged  for
conjuring  to  discover  hidden  treasure  and  stolen  goods.  Four  others  were
tried  for  aiding  and  abetting,  and  three  of  them  were  sentenced  to  death,
but  reprieved.  The  trial  was  held  at  the  King's  Bench  (Holinshed,  IV,
433).  An  excessively  curious  case  is  that  of  a  woman  tried  by  the  mayor  of
Faversham,  Kent,  in  1586.  The  court  and  jury  were  convinced  that  she
was  not  guilty  of  witchcraft.  In  order  to  clear  her  of  the  capital  charge,  a
verdict  of  guilty  of  invocation  and  conjuration  was  brought  in.  The  mayor
was  about  to  congratulate  the  defendant  on  escaping  with  her  life,  when  the
legal  adviser  of  the  corporation  informed  him  that  invocation  and  conjura-
tion amounted  to  felony,  and  she  was  hanged  accordingly.  Full  details  are
given  by  John  Waller  in  Holinshed,  IV,  891-893.

29.  Wright,  I,  284.

30.  As  to  this  latter  dictum,  it  is  instructive  to  observe  that  in  1578  one
Br.  Browne  was  in  trouble  because  he  "spread  misliking  of  the  laws,  by
saying  there  are  no  witches"  (Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Bomestic,  Ad-
denda, 1566-1579,  p.  551).

31.  There  is  some  difference  between  the  two  statutes  in  defining  the
minor  varieties,  but  it  is  slight  and  not  in  the  direction  of  severity.

32.  See  the  extraordinary  passage  in  Webster's  Bisplaying  of  Supposed
Witchcraft,  1677,  pp.  245-246.

33.  Walsingham  to  Leicester,  Leycester  Correspondence  (Camden  So-
ciety, XXVII),  p.  224;  Hooker  (alias  Vowell),  in  Holinshed,  IV  (1808),  868;
Thomas  Cogan,  The  Haven  of  Health,  1589,  pp.  272  ff.  See  also  an  im-
portant paper  on  the  Black  Assizes  in  the  West,  by  F.  Willcocks,  M.B.,  in
Transactions  of  the  Bevonshire  Association,  XVI,  595  if.  For  Voweli,  see
Charles  Worthy,  in  the  same  Transactions,  XIV,  631  ff.  (cf.  XI,  442  ff.).

34.  13th  Report  of  the  Commission  on  Historical  MSS.,  Appendix,
Part  IV,  pp.  139-140.

35.  A  possible  exception  is  Susan  Swapper,  of  Rye.  She  was  condemned
in  1607,  but  I  cannot  find  that  she  was  ever  executed.  The  case  is  exceed-
ingly curious  (see  Commission  on  Historical  MSS.,  13th  Report,  Appendix,
Part  IV,  pp.  136-137,  139-140,  144,  147-148).  For  what  happened  after
1643,  when  James  had  been  in  his  grave  a  score  of  years,  it  is  absurdly  cruel
to  hold  him  accountable.


568         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


36.  Cf.  the  observations  of  Mr.  J.  W.  Brodie-Innes  in  his  interesting
brochure  on  Scottish  Witchcraft  Trials,  pp.  21-24  (Privately  Printed
Opuscula  issued  to  Members  of  the  Sette  of  Odd  Volumes,  No.  25, 1891).

37.  A  True  and  lust  Recorde,  of  the  Information  [etc.]  of  all  the
Witches,  taken  at  S.  Oses  (London,  1582).  Mrs.  Linton  gives  a  good  sum-
mary in  her  Witch  Stories,  1861,  pp.  205-221.

38.  Potts,  The  WonderfuU  Discoverie  of  Witches  in  the  Countie  of  Lan-
caster. .  .  .  Together  with  the  Arraignement  and  Triall  of  lennet  Preston,
at  .  .  .  Yorke,  London,  1613.  Cf.  Farington  Papers  (Chetham  Society,
XXXIX),  1856,  p.  27.  One  other  died  before  trial.

39.  The  Witches  of  Northamptonshire,  1612  (reprint,  1867).

40.  See,  for  example,  Horley,  Sefton,  1893,  p.  115,  note  i;  Roper,
Materials  for  the  History  of  Lancaster,  Part  I,  Chetham  Society,  1907,
pp.  26-27.

41.  Ainsworth,  The  Lancashire  Witches,  1849,  I,  199-200.

42.  The  same,  I,  207  (cf.  I,  244,  247).

43.  Potts,  WonderfuU  Discoverie,  sig.  T2.

44.  Ainsworth,  III,  241  ff.

45.  Journal  of  Nicholas  Assheton,  ed.  Raines,  Chetham  Society,  1848,
pp.  32  ff.

46.  Crossley,  Introduction  to  his  reprint  of  Potts  (Chetham  Society,
VI),  p.  xviii.

47.  The  same,  p.  xlv.

48.  Exact  figures  are  unattainable,  but  the  records  are  quite  as  trust-
worthy for  1603-1625  as  for  1581-1603.  It  is  altogether  unlikely  that  a
complete  scrutiny  would  bring  to  light  more  new  cases  of  execution  for  the
later  period  than  for  the  earlier.

49.  That  is,  not  more  severe  during  James's  reign.  For  what  occurred
long  after  the  king's  death,  he  cannot  be  blamed.

50.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  what  Thomas  Cooper  says  in  The  Mysterie  of
Witch-craft,  1617,  p.  7,  will  not  be  taken  as  evidence  in  favor  of  the  current
view.  Heretofore  it  has  not  been  so  utilized.

51.  Hutchinson,  Historical  Essay  concerning  Witchcraft,  1718,  p.  179
(ed.  1720,  p.  224).

52.  The  same,  p.  180.  Here  Hutchinson  is  referring  to  a  particular  part
of  the  statute  (about  the  violation  of  graves).

53.  Page  178.

54.  The  same,  p.  180.

55.  William  Harris,  An  Historical  and  Critical  Account  of  the  Life  and
Writings  of  James  the  First,  1753,  pp.  40-41.

56.  Somers  Tracts,  2d  ed..  Ill,  95.

57.  In  a  series  of  articles  on  the  Rise  and  Progress  of  Witchcraft,  con-
taining much  valuable  material.  Gentleman's  Magazine  Library,  Popular
Superstitions,  p.  233.

58.  See  Chapter  I.

59.  Perkins,  A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,  1608,  pp.
200  ff.

60.  The  same,  pp.  206  ff.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVII


569


61.  James  I,  Dsemonologie,  London,  Printed  for  William  Apsley  and
W.  Cotton,  1603,  p.  80  (misprinted,  "64").

62.  Perkins,  p.  208.
63-  Page  55.

64.  Page  128.

65.  Pages  191-196.

66.  Page  247.

67.  Pages  256-257.  For  other  expressions  of  opinion  on  witchcraft,  see
Perkins's  Golden  Chaine,  ed.  1605,  pp.  34-36,  and  his  Combate  betweene
Christ  and  the  Diuell,  ed.  1606,  pp.  16,  25,  37.

68.  Samuel  Clarke,  Life  of  Perkins  (The  Marrow  of  Ecclesiastical  His-
tory, Part  I,  3d  ed.,  1675,  p.  416);  cf.  John  Manningham's  Diary,  ed.  Bruce,
Camden  Society,  p.  104;  Fuller,  Holy  State,  ed.  1840,  p.  71.

69.  Bishop  Hall,  Works,  Oxford,  1837,  VI,  340.

70.  See  note  68,  above.

71.  Cotta,  The  Triall  of  Witch-craft,  1616,  pp.  53,  57,  89,  91,  95.

72.  Cotta,  pp.  77,  90.

73.  Page  80.

74.  Ormerod,  County  of  Chester,  ed.  Helsby,  I,  61 1 ;  Joseph  Welch,  List
of  the  Queen's  Scholars  of  St.  Peter's  College,  Westminster,  ed.  Phillimore,
p.  59;  Foster,  Alumni  Oxonienses,  I,  325;  Dictionary  of  National  Biog-
raphy; Cooper,  The  Mystery  of  Witch-craft,  1617,  sig.  A2.

75.  Cooper,  Mystery,  pp.  12-13.

76.  The  same,  sigg.  A3,  A4,  p.  13.  ^  ^

77.  Deacon  and  Walker  refer  to  the  case  in  their  Summarie  Answere  to
Darrel,  1601,  p.  237  Darrel,  in  A  Survey  of  Certaine  Dialogical  Discourses,
1602,  p.  54,  gives  the  boy's  name  {"Tho.  Harison  of  North  Wych  in  Ches
shire"),  and  says  that  he  is  "at  this  present  very  greuously  vexed  by
Sathan."

78.  Compare,  for  instance,  Cooper,  pp.  52-55,  with  Perkins,  pp.  19-22,
26,  27,  28,  30,  31,  33,  34;  Cooper,  pp.  64-65,  with  Perkins,  pp.  41-43;
Cooper,  p.  68,  with  Perkins,  pp.  47-48;  Cooper,  pp.  128-133,  136,  with
Perkins,  pp.  55-67,  73,  92,  104.

79.  Cooper,  p.  314.

80.  Page  232.

81.  The  Dictionary  of  National  Biography  and  Dr.  Usher  date  GifFard's
death  1620.  But  he  was  doubtless  the  George  GifFard  of  Maldon  whose  will
was  proved  in  1600  (Transactions  of  the  Essex  Archaeological  Society,  New
Series,  VH,  46).  For  GifFard's  connection  with  the  Classical  Movement  of
1573-1592,  see  R.  G.  Usher,  Presbyterian  Movement,  1905,  pp.  xli,  9,  16,
19,  42,  94.  For  GifFard's  reputation  see  D'Ewes,  Autobiography,  ed.  HaUi-
well,  I,  114.

82.  Dedicatory  Epistle.

83.  GifFard,  ed.  1603,  sig.  A3.

84.  A  True  and  Exact  Relation  of  the  severall  Informations  [etc.]  of  the
late  Witches,  1645,  pp.  8,  15,  32,  34.

8 5.  The  general  anxiety  of  Englishmen  as  Elizabeth's  death  drew  nigh  is
graphically  described  by  Dekker,  The  Wonderfull  Yeare,  1603  (Works,  ed.


570


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


Grosart,  I,  94-96).  Such  crises  are  always  favorable  to  outbreaks  of  witch-
prosecution.

86.  Harsnet,  Discovery,  1599,  pp.  8-9.

87.  Deacon  and  Walker,  Summarie  Answere,  and  Dialogicall  Dis-
courses.

88.  "Phantastical  giddy-headed  Puritans"  Archbishop  Matthew  Hut-
ton  of  York  calls  them  in  a  letter  to  Whitgift,  October  i,  1603  (Strype's
Life  of  Whitgift,  1718,  p.  570).

89.  The  exorcisms  of  the  Jesuit  Edmunds  (alias  Weston)  and  his  asso-
ciates in  1585  and  1586  were  similarly  attacked  by  Bancroft  and  Harsnet.
See  Harsnet's  famous  diatribe,  A  Declaration  of  Egregious  Popish  Im-
postures, 1603  (2d  ed.,  1605).  The  Roman  Catholics  were  no  more  con-
vinced in  this  case  than  the  Puritans  were  in  that  of  Darrel  (see  the
references  to  Yepez  and  others  in  Mr.  T.  G.  Law's  article  on  Devil-Hunting
in  Elizabethan  England,  in  the  Nineteenth  Century  for  March,  1894,
XXXV,  397  ff.).  On  Sir  George  Peckham,  who  was  involved  in  this  affair,
see  Merriman,  American  Historical  Review,  XVII,  492  ff.  Compare  Sir
George  Courthop  on  the  Nuns  of  Loudun  (Memoirs,  Camden  Miscellany,
XI,  106-109);  see  also  Evelyn's  Diary,  August  5,  1670.  Darrel's  opponents
did  their  best  to  stigmatize  his  principles  and  practices  with  regard  to
demoniacal  possession  as  identical  with  those  of  the  Roman  Catholic
Church.  Thus  Deacon  and  Walker,  speaking  of  Darrel,  inform  their
readers  that  "he  hath  for  a  season  (though  feare  and  shame  enforceth  him
now  to  pluck  in  his  head)  very  prowdlie  ietted  from  countrie  to  countrie  like
a  pettie  new  Pope  among  his  owne  Cardinals;  yea  and  that  also  in  \v\sponti-
ficalities,  portrayed  and  contriued  after  the  new-found  popelike  cut"  (Sum-
marie  Answere,  1601,  Address  to  the  Reader).

90.  Lewis  Hughes,  Certaine  Grievances,  1641,  p.  20.  See  George  Sin-
clair, Satan's  Invisible  V/orld  Discovered,  1685,  Relation  XII  (reprint,
1871,  pp.  95-100;  cf.  Ferguson,  Publications  of  the  Edinburgh  Biblio-
graphical Society,  III,  56-57);  Commission  on  Historical  MSS.,  8th  Re-
port, Appendix,  Part  I,  p.  228.  An  account  of  the  affair,  by  George  Swan,
was  published  in  1603,  under  the  title,  A  True  and  Brief  Report,  etc.  On
Lewis  Hughes  see  Kittredge,  George  Stirk,  Minister  (reprinted  from  the
Publications  of  the  Colonial  Society  of  Massachusetts),  1910,  pp.  18-21;
G.  W.  Cole,  Proceedings  American  Antiquarian  Society,  New  Series,
XXXVII  (1927),  247-311  (pp.  249-257  for  the  case).

91.  Darrel,  Replie,  1602,  p.  21.

92.  Darrel,  pp.  21-22.

93.  John  Bruen's  memoranda,  in  William  Hinde's  Life  of  John  Bruen
(born  1560,  died  1625),  in  Samuel  Clarke,  The  Marrow  of  Ecclesiastical
History,  Part  II,  Book  ii,  1675,  p.  95.  Bruen  (who  was  a  Cheshire  man)
was  an  eyewitness  of  the  boy's  fits,  and  his  notes,  as  excerpted  by  Hinde,
give  a  good  idea  of  his  ravings  (pp.  94-96).  The  boy  cried  out  against  "  the
witch,"  but  I  do  not  find  that  anybody  was  brought  to  trial.

94.  Hall,  Autobiography,  Works,  ed.  Hall  (1837),  I,  xxi.  Hall  may  have
had  in  mind  the  case  reported  by  Bishop  Parkhurst  in  a  letter  to  Bullinger,


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVII


June  29,  1574  (Zurich  Letters,  I  [1842],  No.  118,  translation,  p.  303,
original,  p.  178).

95.  Hall,  Works,  VI,  136-137;  VII,  245-246;  Contemplations,  Works,
ed.  1628,  pp.  1134-1135.

96.  Aubrey,  Brief  Lives,  ed.  Clark,  1, 138.  See  also  Proceedings  Cam-
bridge Antiquarian  Society,  XV,  248  ff.;  James  Primerose,  Popular  Er-
rours,  transl.  Robert  Wittie,  1651,  Preface  by  translator;  Nashe's  Works,
ed.  McKerrow,  I,  300.

97.  The  Witches  of  Warboys,  1593,  sig.  B2  r°.

98.  See  the  Throckmorton  pedigree  (drawn  up  by  Robert  Throckmorton
himself  in  1613)  in  Charles's  Visitation  of  the  County  of  Huntingdon,  ed.
Ellis,  Camden  Society,  1849,  pp.  123-124,  and  the  Pulter  pedigree,  in  the
same,  p.  loi.  Cf.  the  Pickering  pedigree  in  Bridges,  Northamptonshire,  II,

383-385-

99.  Dorington  was  A.B.  155?,  Fellow  of  St.  Catherine's  College  1558,
A.M.  1559,  S.T.B.  Queen's  College  1565,  S.T.P.  1575.  Nutt  matriculated
at  Peterhouse  1568;  he  was  A.B.  1573,  A.M.  1577.  For  this  information,  as
well  as  the  university  record  of  Henry  and  Thomas  Pickering  (the  editor  of
Perkins's  Discourse),  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  the  Registrary,  Dr.
J.  N.  Keynes,  and  the  good  offices  of  Professor  Skeat.

100.  Henry  Pickering  was  a  younger  son  of  Sir  Gilbert  Pickering,
Knight,  of  Tichmarsh,  Northamptonshire.  He  matriculated  at  Christ's
College,  as  a  Pensioner,  March  16,  1582-3,  was  A.B.  1586,  A.M.  1590,  and
incorporated  at  Oxford  1593  (see  note  99,  above).

101.  Witches  of  Warboys,  sig.  E3.

102.  The  year  when  Pickering  became  rector  of  Aldwincle  All  Saints,
and  the  date  of  his  death  (1637,  aged  75),  were  first  correctly  given  (from
his  tombstone)  by  Mr.  W.  D.  Christie  in  the  Globe  Edition  of  Dryden's
Poetical  Works,  1870,  p.  xvi,  note  f.

103.  Thomas  Pickering  was  admitted  at  Emmanuel  College  as  a  Pen-
sioner in  1589.  He  was  A.B.  1592,  A.M.  and  Fellow  1596,  B.D.  1603.  He
became  Vicar  of  Finchingfield,  Essex,  March  9,  1605-6,  and  died  there  in
1625.  For  these  facts  I  am  indebted  to  the  Registrary  of  the  University,
Dr.  J.  N.  Keynes,  and  to  Mr.  J.  B.  Peace,  Bursar  of  Emmanuel.  His  mar-
riage license  was  issued  May  4,  161 1;  his  will  was  proved  1627,  and  ad-
ministration was  granted  March  13,  1625-6  (Transactions  of  the  Essex
Archseological  Society,  New  Series,  VI,  299).

104.  Cotta,  The  Triall  of  Witch-craft,  1616,  p.  77.

105.  Samuel  Harsnet,  when  in  full  cry  after  Darrel,  did  not  venture  to
attack  the  Warboys  case  directly.  True,  he  refers  slightingly  to  the  printed
narrative  as  a  "silly  book,"  but  in  the  same  breath  he  suggests  that  one  of
Darrel's  patients  had  taken  a  leaf  out  of  it.  And  Darrel,  in  replying,  taunts
Harsnet  with  not  daring  to  assail  the  case  openly.  That  Mr.  Throckmor-
ton's children,  says  Darrel,  "were  tormented  by  the  diuell,  even  5.  of  his
daughters,  it  is  notoriously  knowne,  and  so  generally  receaued  for  truth,  as
the  Dis[coverer].  himselfe  [i.  p.  Harsnet]  dareth  not  deny  it,  though  tayne  he
would,  as  appeareth  by  his  nibling  at  them"  (Detection  of  Harshnet,  1600,
p.  39;  cf.  pp.  20-22,  36,  40).  And  again,  he  does  not  hesitate  to  declare  that


1


572         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Harsnet  refrained  from  accusing  the  Throckmorton  girls  of  counterfeiting
because  he  did  not  dare:  "He  thought  it  best  and  meet  for  his  safety  be-
caus  they  were  the  children  of  an  Esquier,  not  to  say  so  in  plaine  tearmes"
(p.  2l).

106.  J.  H.  Gray,  Queen's  College,  1899,  pp.  128-129.

107.  That  offence,  under  the  Elizabethan  statute,  was  punishable  only
by  imprisonment  and  the  pillory,  for  none  of  the  girls  had  died.

108.  The  Witches  of  Warboys,  sig.  I  r";  cf.  sig.  P  2  v°.

109.  Sig.  N3.

1 10.  Sig.  E3  r°.

111.  Lords'  Journals,  II,  267,  269,  271,  272,  275,  276,  293,  294,  316;
Commons'  Journals,  I,  204,  207,  227,  232,  234,  236.  There  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  "attending"  on  the  king  by  a  part  of  the  Lords'  commit-
tee on  April  12  had  to  do  with  the  bill  (Lords'  Journals,  II,  276).

112.  The  object  of  the  law  was  not  to  multiply  culprits,  but  to  deter  men
from  committing  the  crime.  The  idea  that  very  great  severity  defeats  its
object  did  not  then  obtain  among  penologists.  Take  an  example  of  the
temper  of  intelligent  men  in  this  regard.  In  May,  1604,  William  Clopton
writes  to  Timothy  Hutton:  "There  is  an  act  passed  to  take  away  the
clergie  from  stealers  of  sheep  and  oxen,  which  will  do  much  good"  (Hutton
Correspondence,  Surtees  Society,  1843,  p.  195).

113.  Stow,  ed.  Howes,  1631,  pp.  767-768.

114.  Howard,  Defensative,  ed.  1620,  p.  81.

115.  The  same,  p.  85.  Bishop  Bancroft  and  the  Earl  of  Shrewsbury
were  on  the  Lords'  Committee.  The  bishop  had  been  the  leading  spirit  in
the  prosecution  of  Barrel,  and  the  earl  had  been  present  at  the  trial.  But
this  is  no  reason  why  they  should  have  opposed  the  statute.  As  we  have
seen,  Bancroft  was  a  prosecutor  of  exorcists,  not  a  protector  of  alleged
witches.  In  the  Synod  called  by  James  (which  sat  concurrently  with  Parlia-
ment, and  broke  up  on  July  9,  1604,  two  days  after  Parliament  rose)  a
canon  (written  by  Bancroft)  was  adopted,  forbidding  clergymen,  without
proper  license,  "  to  attempt  upon  any  pretence  whatsoever,  eyther  of  Pos-
session or  Obsession,  by  fasting,  and  prayers  to  cast  out  any  Devill  or
Devills"  (Canon  72,  Constitutions  and  Canons  of  the  Synod  of  1603,  ed.
1633;  cf.  J.  W.  Joyce,  England's  Sacred  Synods,  1855,  pp.  620  fF.;  Cardwell,
Synodalia,  II,  583  ff.).  This  canon  was  in  no  wise  inconsistent  with  the
statute,  nor  can  it  have  been  so  regarded  by  the  twelve  bishops  who  sat  on
the  Lords'  Committee.  At  all  events,  James  I  showed  himself  quite  as
skeptical  as  Bancroft  in  cases  of  alleged  possession  (see  pp.  318  fF.,  above).

116.  Notestein,  pp.  39-40,  347.

117.  The  Same,  pp.  40,  347-348;  Rollins,  Analytical  Index,  p.  131.

1 18.  On  the  Wroth  family  see  a  series  of  papers  by  Mr.  W.  C.  Waller  in
the  Transactions  of  the  Essex  Archseological  Society,  New  Series,  VIII,
145  ff.,  345  ff.;  IX,  I  ff.  On  Sir  Robert  Wroth  (1540-1606)  see  especially
VIII,  1 50  ff.  His  son  Robert  (i  576-1614,  knighted  in  1603)  was  one  of  Ben
Jonson's  patrons  (see  VIII,  156  fF.).

119.  See  p.  324,  above.

120.  See  pp.  322-323,  above.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVII


573


121.  Montagu  became  Recorder  in  1603  (Calendar  of  State  Papers,
Domestic,  1603-1610,  pp.  10,  14;  cf.  Foss,  Judges  of  England,  VI,  167  fF.;
Peile,  Biographical  Register  of  Christ's  College,  1910,  I,  173).

122.  Life  of  Cooper  in  Dictionary  of  National  Biography.

123.  See  p.  293,  above.  Cf.  Peile,  as  above,  I,  181.

124.  See  pp.  7-22,  above.

125.  See  pp.  315,  319,  326-327,  above.

126.  Cotta,  The  Triall  of  Witch-craft,  p.  90.

127.  Potts,  The  Wonderful!  Discoverie,  1613,  sigg.  K3-N2.

128.  See  p.  300,  above.

129.  Hutchinson,  p.  179.

130.  See  Pitcairn,  Criminal  Trials,  I,  218,  233,  237,  and  especially  239
(cf.  II,  478);  Newes  from  Scotland,  Sig.  B3.

131.  James  I,  Dccmonologie,  1603,  pp.  43,  58.

132.  Lucan,  Pharsalia,  vi,  507  ff.

133.  Marston,  Sophonisba,  act  iv,  scene  i,  vv.  99-125  (Works,  ed.  Bul-
len,  II,  290-291).

134.  John  Weever,  Ancient  Funerall  Monuments,  1631,  pp.  45-46.  Cf.
Reginald  Scot,  xv,  8,  17;  Baines,  History  of  Lancashire,  ed.  Harland,  I,  199.

135.  Sir  John  Knyvet  was  appointed  Chief  Justice  of  the  King's  Bench
in  1357  and  Lord  Chancellor  in  1372  (Campbell,  Lord  Chancellors,  1846, 1,
267-268).

136.  Coke's  Institutes,  Third  Part,  cap.  6.  See  Gentleman's  Magazine,
1829,  Part  II,  XCIX,  515.

137.  Truth  Brought  to  Light  by  Time,  1651,  p.  140;  Egerton  Papers,
Camden  Society,  pp.  472-473.

138.  Truth  Brought  to  Light,  p.  138.

139.  As  to  Forman,  see  pp.  316-317,  above.

140.  No  doubt  James  approved  of  the  statute.  He  certainly  believed  in
witchcraft  and  thought  that  proved  witches  ought  to  be  put  to  death.  In
the  Basilikon  Doron,  addressed  to  Prince  Henry,  he  mentions  witchcraft
among  the  "horrible  crymes  that  yee  are  bounde  in  Conscience  neuer  to
forgiue"  (1599,  Roxburghe  Club  reprint,  p.  37;  London  edition  of  1603,  p.
31).  But  the  question  is  not  whether  he  was  a  believer  in  the  actuality  of
such  offences,  but  whether  he  was  a  blind  and  maniacal  persecutor  who  mis-
led the  English  nation,  to  its  everlasting  disgrace.

141.  Cf.  Inderwick,  Side-Lights  on  the  Stuarts,  2d  ed.,  p.  150.

142.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1603-1610,  p.  96.

143.  Calendar,  p.  406.

144.  Jonson,  The  Alchemist,  i,  i.

145.  Reade  stood  suit  with  the  College  of  Physicians  in  1602  for  practis-
ing without  a  license  and  was  cast,  as  Whalley  remarks  in  his  note  on  the
passage  in  The  Alchemist.  In  the  pardon  he  is  stvled  "in  medicinis  pro-
fessor." Cf.  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  8th  Report,  Appendix,  Part  I,
p.  228.

146.  The  pardon,  giving  these  details,  is  printed  in  Rymer's  Foedera,  2d
ed.,  XVI,  666-667.

147.  Calendar,  1603-1610,  p.  598.


574         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


148.  Calendar,  1611-1618,  p.  29.

149.  Francis  Osborne,  Essay  i,  A  Miscellany  of  Sundry  Essayes,  etc.,
1659,  pp.  4-5.

150.  See  Manly,  Macbeth,  1900,  pp.  xvi-xviii.

151.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Venetian,  1603-1607,  pp.  44  (June  4,
1603).

152.  In  1604,  1608,  1610,  and  1617,  for  instance  (Calendar,  as  above,
1603-1607,  p.  193;  1607-1610,  pp.  116,  465;  F.  Drake,  Eboracum,  1736,
P-  134)-

153.  Arthur  Wilson,  History  of  Great  Britain,  1653,  p.  289.

154.  See  Lee's  life  of  Forman  in  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography,
XIX,  438  ff.  Cf.  the  Ashmole  MS.  quoted  by  Wood,  Athenae  Oxonienses,
ed.  Bliss,  II  (1815),  100.  The  Venns  date  the  Hcense  1604  and  ignore  the
alleged  degree:  Alumni  Cantabrigienses,  Part  I,  Vol.  II  (1922),  158.

155.  William  Lilly,  History  of  his  Life  and  Times,  2d  ed.,  1715,  p.  16.

156.  Forman  was  twice  imprisoned,  at  the  instance  of  the  Royal  College
of  Physicians,  as  an  unauthorized  and  ignorant  practitioner  (in  1595  and
1596).  In  1601  he  was  again  complained  of.  In  1606  and  1607,  after  ob-
taining his  Cambridge  degree,  he  was  cited  to  appear  before  the  College,
but  refused  to  obey.  See  the  records  in  the  8th  Report  of  the  Commission
on  Historical  MSS.,  Appendix,  Part  I,  p.  228.

157.  Truth  Brought  to  Light  by  Time,  1651,  pp.  135-138;  Letter  from
Thomas  Bone  to  Sir  John  Egerton,  November  9,  1615,  Egerton  Papers,
Camden  Society,  pp.  470-473.

158.  See  Lilly,  pp.  12-16.

159.  The  indictments  are  printed  (in  translation)  in  A  Briefe  Descrip-
tion of  the  Notorious  Life  of  lohn  Lambe,  Amsterdam,  1 628,  pp.  3-6.  They
are  not  dated.  The  bewitching  of  Lord  Windsor  is  stated  in  the  first  indict-
ment to  have  occurred  on  December  16,  5  Jac.  I  (i.  e.  1607),  and  at  divers
times  afterward;  the  second  indictment  dates  the  invocation  of  evil  spirits.
May  13,  6  Jac.  I  (i.  e.  1608),  and  before  and  after.  Lee  (Dictionary  of
National  Biography,  XXXII,  i)  shifts  the  second  of  these  dates,  inad-
vertently, from  the  offence  to  the  trial.  We  do  not,  in  fact,  know  when
Lambe  was  tried,  but  it  was  before  1617.

160.  Briefe  Description,  p.  14.

161.  The  same,  pp.  14  ff.

162.  The  indictment  dates  the  offence  June  10,  21  Jac.  I,  i.  e.  1623
(Briefe  Description,  p.  15).  The  conviction  was  in  1624  (Calendar  of  State
Papers,  Domestic,  1623-1625,  p.  485).

163.  Calendar,  1623-1625,  pp.  241,  243,  261,  266,  280.

164.  Briefe  Description,  1628,  p.  20.

165.  The  same,  pp.  20-21;  Rushworth,  Historical  Collections,  I,  618  (cf.
I,  391);  Reign  of  Charles  I,  continuation  of  Baker's  Chronicle,  ed.  1660,  p.
493;  Diary  of  William  Whiteway,  June  13,  1628  (Proceedings  Dorset  Natu-
ral History  and  Antiquarian  Field  Club,  XIII,  69);  Historical  MSS.  Com-
mission, 8th  Report,  Appendix,  Part  I,  p.  229;  Richard  Smith,  Obituary,
in  Peck,  Desiderata  Curiosa,  Vol.  II,  Book  xiv,  p.  ii;  Jupp,  Historical  Ac-
count of  the  Company  of  Carpenters,  1887,  pp.  84-85.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVII


575


166.  Continuation  of  Baker's  Chronicle,  as  above,  p.  493.  Cf.  Fairholt,
Poems  and  Songs  relating  to  George  Villiers,  Duke  of  Buckingham,  Percy
Society,  1850,  pp.  xiv-xv,  58-63,  65.

167.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1623-1625,  p.  476.  Lady  Pur-
beck  had  visited  Lambe  in  prison  to  procure  charms  from  him  (p.  474;  cf.
p.  497).

168.  Another  infamous  person  who  drove  a  thriving  trade  with  the  court
ladies  was  Mrs.  Mary  Woods,  who  practised  her  arts  at  Norwich,  and  re-
moved to  London  in  161  a.  She  was  involved  in  the  alleged  plot  of  the
Countess  of  Essex  to  poison  the  Earl.  She  was  arrested  and  examined,  but
it  does  not  appear  that  she  was  proceeded  against  under  the  statute  of
1604,  although  one  witness  declared  that  she  professed  to  have  a  familiar
spirit.  Obviously  she  was  regarded  as  a  mere  charlatan,  yet  it  would  have
been  easy  enough  to  hang  her  for  a  witch  if  the  king  had  favored  such  a
prosecution  (Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  161 1-1618,  pp.  134,  161,
173,  183,  187;  Inquiry  into  the  Genuineness  of  a  Letter,  etc.,  pp.  17-19,
Camden  Miscellany,  V;  Gardiner,  History  of  England,  1603-1642,  4th  ed.,
II  [1895],  169,  note  i).

169.  See  Dee's  own  account  of  the  affair  in  his  Compendious  Rehearsall,
1592,  printed  by  Crossley,  in  Autobiographical  Tracts  of  Dr.  John  Dee,  pp.
20-21  (Chetham  Miscellany,  I),  and  cf.  the  Necessary  Advertisement  pre-
fixed to  his  General  and  Rare  Memorials  pertayning  to  the  Perfect  Arte  of
Navigation,  1577  (Crossley,  p.  57).  See  also  Calendar  of  State  Papers,
Domestic,  1547-1550,  p.  67;  Charlotte  Fell  Smith,  John  Dee,  1909,  pp.
14-15.

170.  Dee's  Preface  to  Henry  Billingsley's  translation  of  Euclid's  Ele-
ments, 1571  (Smith,  pp.  24-28).

171.  Necessary  Advertisement,  1577  (Crossley,  p.  53).

172.  Compendious  Rehearsall,  1592  (Crossley,  pp.  27  ff.).

173.  Aubrey,  Brief  Lives,  ed.  Andrew  Clark,  I,  212-214.

174.  Smith,  John  Dee,  p.  293.  The  petition  is  printed  by  Ellis,  Original
Letters  of  Eminent  Literary  Men,  Camden  Society,  pp.  47-48.

175.  MS.  College  of  Arms  c.  37,  168,  quoted  by  F.  R.  Raines,  Rectors  of
Manchester  and  Wardens  of  the  Collegiate  Church,  Part  II,  1885,  p.  no
(Chetham  Society).

176.  James  has  been  derided  for  maintaining  the  doctrine  of  witchcraft
in  the  Essex  divorce  case  (see  his  answer  to  Archbishop  Abbot  in  Truth
Brought  to  Light  by  Time,  1651,  pp.  103  ff.).  This  discredit,  however,  such
as  it  is,  is  cancelled  by  his  conduct  in  the  case  of  Sir  Thomas  Lake  (invol-
ving a  precisely  similar  allegation  of  witchcraft),  in  which  he  showed  much
acumen  in  unravelling  a  tangled  skein  of  malice  and  perjury.  See  Gardiner,
History,  III  (1895),  189-194.  Gardiner  remarks  that  James  "prided  him-
self upon  his  skill  in  the  detection  of  imposture"  (III,  192).

177.  Harleian  MS.  6986,  art.  40  (autograph),  as  printed  by  Sir  Henry
Ellis,  Original  Letters,  ist  Series,  1824,  III,  80-81.  The  letter  may  also  be
found  in  Birch,  Life  of  Henry  Prince  of  Wales,  1760,  p.  37;  Letters  to  King
James  the  Sixth,  Maitland  Club,  1835,  p.  xxxv  (where  it  is  said,  errone-
ously, to  be  in  reply  to  an  extant  letter  of  January  i,  1603-4,  from  Prince


576         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

Henry);  Nichols,  Progresses  of  James  1,1,304;  Halliwell,  Letters  of  the
Kings,  1848,  II,  102.  Cf.  Gifford's  edition  of  Ford,  I,  clxxi  (ed.  Dyce,  1869,
III,  276);  Quarterly  Review,  XLI  (1829),  80-82.

178.  James  I,  Counterblast,  ed.  Arber,  p.  108.

179.  James  I,  letter  dated  March  5th  (no  year),  Halliwell  (from  Rawlin-
son  MS.),  Letters  of  the  Kings,  II,  124-125.  It  does  not  appear  to  whom
the  letter  was  addressed.  Such  cases  of  real  or  pretended  fasting  are  com-
mon. See,  for  example,  John  Reynolds,  A  Discourse  upon  Prodigious  Ab-
stinence: occasioned  by  the  Twelve  Moneths  Fasting  of  Martha  Taylor,  the
famed  Derbyshire  Damosell,  1669.  See  pp.  128-130,  above.

180.  Journal  of  Sir  Roger  Wilbraham,  1 593-1616,  ed.  by  H.  S.  Scott,
p.  70  (Camden  Miscellany,  X).  This  is  clearly  the  case  mentioned  by
Walter  Yonge  in  his  Diary  (ed.  Roberts,  Camden  Society,  1848,  p.  12).
If  so,  the  bewitched  person  was  "near  kinswoman  to  Doctor  Holland's
wife.  Rector  of  Exon  College  in  Oxford."  This  was  Thomas  Holland,  on
whom  see  Wood,  Athenae  Oxonienses,  ed.  Bliss,  II,  111-112;  Foster,
Alumni  Oxonienses,  II,  731.

181.  King  James  his  Apophthegmes,  1643,  pp.  8-9;  Calendar  of  State
Papers,  Domestic,  1603-1610,  pp.  212,  213;  Venetian,  1603-1607,  pp.  238,
240-241 ;  letters  in  Lodge,  Illustrations  of  British  History,  2d  ed.,  1838,  III,
143-144,  153-155,  157-160;  Arthur  Wilson,  History  of  Great  Britain,  1653,
p.  Ill;  Baker's  Chronicle,  ed.  1660,  p.  431;  Fuller,  Church-History,  Book
X,  Century  xvii,  sect.  4,  §  56,  1656,  p.  73;  Aubrey,  MS.  History  of  Wilt-
shire, pp.  362-363,  as  quoted  by  Halliwell,  Letters  of  the  Kings,  II,  124,
note;  Foster,  Alumni  Oxonienses,  II,  679;  Dictionary  of  National  Biog-
raphy.

182.  State  Papers,  James  I,  Vol.  XIII,  No.  80.  It  is  an  obscure  and
rambling  document.

183.  King  James  his  Speech  to  both  Houses  of  Parliament  on  Occasion
of  the  Gunpowder-Treason,  ed.  1679,  p.  7;  cf.  Journal  of  Sir  Roger  Wil-
braham, pp.  70-71.

184.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Venetian,  1603-1607,  p.  327  (cf.  pp.  316-

317)-

185.  Discourse,  appended  to  King  James  his  Speech  (see  note  183,
above),  pp.  28-29  (cf.  pp.  30-31).

186.  Cotta,  The  Triall  of  Witch-craft,  p.  76.

187.  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  II,  144.

188.  Aubrey,  MS.  History  of  Wiltshire,  pp.  362-363  (Halliwell,  Letters
of  the  Kings,  II,  124,  note).

189.  See  p.  300,  above.

190.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1603-1610,  p.  218.

191.  Calendar,  1611-1618,  p.  53.

192.  Calendar,  1634-1635,  pp.  26,  77-79,  98,  129-130,  141,  152-153.

193.  Thomas  Guidott,  Preface  to  his  edition  of  Jorden's  treatise,  A
Discourse  of  Natural  Bathes  and  Mineral  Waters,  1673,  as  quoted  by
Bliss  in  his  edition  of  Wood's  Athenae  Oxonienses,  II  (1817),  550.  See
G.  W.  Cole,  Lewis  Hughes,  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  Anti-
quarian Society  for  October,  1927,  New  Series,  XXXVII,  249-257.  Fuller


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVII


577


mentions  the  case,  but  without  details:  "Anne  Gunter,  a  Maid  of  Wind-
sor, gave  it  out  she  was  possessed  of  a  Deuil,  &  was  transported  with
strange  Extaticall  Phrensies.'"

194.  On  Smythe's  identity  see  Kittredge,  Modern  Philology,  IX  (191 1),
195-200.

195.  Letter  from  Alderman  Robert  Heyrick  of  Leicester  to  his  brother
Sir  William  in  London,  dated  July  18,  1616  —  the  very  day  of  the  execution
(printed  by  Nichols,  Leicestershire,  Vol.  II,  Part  II,  p.  471*).

196.  See  p.  302,  above.

197.  The  Witches  of  Warboys,  1593,  sig.  P2  r°.

198.  Heyrick's  letter.

199.  Nichols,  Progresses  of  James  I,  III,  192;  Calendar  of  State  Papers,
Domestic,  1611-1618,  p.  398.

200.  Sir  Humphrey  Winch  was  M.P.  for  the  Borough  of  Bedford  (Mem-
bers of  Parliament,  I,  442a).

201.  The  king  went  from  Nottingham  to  Leicester  on  August  15th,
spent  the  night  there,  and  proceeded  to  Dingley,  on  the  i6th  (Nichols,  Pro-
gresses, III,  180-181,  cf.  Ill,  175).  Cf.  Wm.  Kelly,  Royal  Progresses  and
Visits  to  Leicester,  1884,  pp.  365-369.

202.  Archbishop  of  Canterbury.

203.  Osborne,  Essayes,  1659,  p.  8.

204.  Robert  Heyrick's  letter,  October  15,  1616  (printed  by  Nichols,
Leicestershire,  Vol.  II,  Part  II,  p.  471*).

205.  Nichols,  Progresses,  III,  192-193;  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Do-
mestic, 1611-1618,  p.  398.  We  can  make  out  a  satisfactory  account  of  the
case  by  comparing  Osborne  with  Heyrick's  two  letters  (one  of  July  18,  the
other  of  October  15,  1616,  both  printed  by  Nichols,  Leicestershire,  Vol.  II,
Part  II,  p.  471*).  I  have  followed  Heyrick  (as  being  absolutely  contem-
porary and  on  the  spot)  wherever  he  differs  from  Osborne.  Heyrick  does
not  mention  the  king,  but  Osborne's  testimony  as  to  James's  intervention
is  corroborated  in  all  essentials  by  Chamberlain's  letter  of  October  12,  1616
(Nichols,  Progresses,  III,  192-193;  Calendar,  161 1-1618,  p.  398).  Osborne,
by  the  way,  speaks  of  his  narrative  as  follows:  "  I  will  here  relate  a  Story  of
my  own  Knowledge"  (p.  5).

206.  Mr.  William  Wheater's  statement  that  six  persons  suffered  death
for  witchcraft  at  York  in  1622  (Old  Yorkshire,  ed.  by  William  Smith,  IV,
266)  is  a  mistake.  This  was  the  Fairfax  case.  Six  persons  were  indicted,  but
all  of  them  were  discharged  without  a  complete  trial.

207.  John  Latimer,  The  Annals  of  Bristol  in  the  Seventeenth  Century,
1900,  p.  91.

208.  There  was  no  torture.  She  confessed  to  the  minister,  Henry  Good-
cole,  for  her  soul's  sake.  See  Goodcole's  narrative.  The  WonderfuU  Dis-
coverie  of  Elizabeth  Sawyer,  1621,  reprinted  in  The  Works  of  John  Ford,
ed.  1895  (Bullen),  I,  Ixxxi  ff.  Goodcole  was  the  ordinary  of  Newgate.  His
wife,  who  practised  medicine,  became  involved,  in  1622,  in  the  case  of
Lady  Jennings's  daughter,  supposed  to  be  bewitched  (Add.  MS.  36674,
foil.  134  r°-i37  r°).


578         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


209.  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  the  Witchcrafts  of  Margaret  and
PhiHp  Flower,  1619.    Cf.  pp.  237-238,  above.

210.  We  may  laugh  at  witchcraft,  but  it  by  no  means  follows  that  ail  the
afflicted  persons  were  impostors  or  that  the  defendants  were  always  guilt-
less. The  children  who  cried  out  on  the  Salem  goodwives  and  the  numerous
other  "young  liars"  (as  one  unsympathetic  writer  has  called  them)  were
really  afflicted,  though  the  cause  was  mistaken.  Much  of  their  play-acting
was  a  part  of  their  disease.  As  for  the  witches  themselves  (I  do  not  here
refer  to  Salem  in  particular),  it  is  clear  that  many  of  them  were  malignant
creatures  who  did  what  they  could  to  get  into  communion  with  the  fiend
and  thought  they  had  succeeded.  As  Mr.  Andrew  Lang  well  remarks,
"There  can  be  little  doubt  that  many  witches  were  in  intention  malevolent
enough.  Thev  believed  in  their  own  powers,  and  probably  dealt  in  poison
on  occasion  "  (History  of  Scotland,  11,352).  Others  were  precocious  experi-
menters in  supernormal  mental  states.  I  need  but  refer  to  Professor  Wen-
dell's suggestive  essay  on  the  Salem  witches  (Stelligeri,  1893;  cf.  his  Cotton
Mather,  pp.  93  fF.)  and  to  Mr.  Brodie-Innes's  paper  on  Scottish  Witchcraft
Trials,  in  which  this  fruitful  subject  of  investigation  is  broached,  with
illuminating  remarks.  Neither  professes  to  do  more  than  raise  the  question.
The  undiscovered  country  of  witch  pathology  awaits  its  trained  explorer.
Dr.  E.  W.  Taylor's  recent  paper  on  Some  Medical  Aspects  of  Witchcraft
leads  one  to  hope  that  he  will  pursue  the  subject.  Meantime  we  may  speak
respectfully  of  some  of  our  elders  —  Wierus,  Scot,  Webster,  Bekker,  and
Meric  Casaubon  (not  all  of  them  on  the  same  side)  —  who  have  made  wise
observations  needing  only  to  be  translated  from  the  obsolete  technical  lan-
guage of  their  day  in  order  to  appeal  to  the  modern  alienist.  For  cases  of
genuine  and  indubitable  attempts  at  sorcery,  see,  for  example.  Proceedings
of  the  Society  of  Antiquaries,  2d  Series,  XVIII,  140  ff.;  W.  H.  Hart,
Archaeologia,  XL,  397.  Examples  are  countless.

211.  Hutchinson,  Historical  Essay,  1718,  pp.  217  fF.  (from  the  narra-
tive). Cf.  The  Boy  of  Bilson,  1622,  pp.  55-73;  The  Second  Part  of  the
Boy  of  Bilson,  1698,  pp.  1-9;  Gee,  The  Foot  out  of  the  Snare,  1624,  pp.
53-54-

212.  A.  Wilson,  History  of  Great  Britain,  1653,  pp.  111-112.  For  Wil-
son's own  skepticism  on  the  subject  of  witchcraft,  see  his  Autobiography,
in  Peck,  Desiderata  Curiosa,  Vol.  II,  Book  xii,  pp.  26-27.

213.  John  Gee,  Hold  Fast,  a  Sermon  Preached  at  Pauls  Crosse  vpon
Sunday  being  the  XXXI.  of  October,  Anno  Domini  1624  (London,  1624),
pp.  45-46  (Kittredge,  American  Historical  Review,  XX  [191 5],  570).

214.  Osborne,  Essay  i  (A  Miscellany,  1659,  p.  4).  Cf.  p.  315,  above.

215.  Goodman,  Court  of  King  James  the  First,  ed.  Brewer,  1839,  I,  3.

216.  Bernard,  A  Guide  to  Grand-Iury  Men,  2d  ed.,  1629,  p.  34.

217.  Fuller,  Church-History,  Book  x.  Cent,  cxvii,  sect.  4,  §§  54-57, 1656,
pp.  73-74.  Cf.  GifFord's  Jonson,  VII,  140,  note  4.

218.  Fuller,  §  56.  The  only  case  that  we  can  date  is  Haydock's  (see
p.  320,  above).

219.  Fuller,  §  57.

220.  Osborne,  Essay  i.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


579


221.  The  Dsmonologie  (unmodified)  was  included  in  the  authorized
edition  of  the  king's  Works  in  1616.

222.  Spectator  for  July  14,  171 1  (No.  117);  cf.  Blackstone,  Commen-
taries, Book  iv,  chap.  4,  sect.  6  (4th  ed.,  1770,  IV,  60-61).

223.  Full  details  of  this  case  are  given  in  Fairfax's  own  narrative,  en-
titled Dsemonologia  (edited  by  William  Grainge,  Harrogate,  1882).

224.  Fairfax  says  this  message  was  delivered  to  the  grand  jury  in  his
hearing  (p.  126).

225.  Fairfax,  p.  126.

226.  Pages  123-127.

227.  Page  127.

228.  Page  124.

229.  Page  81.

230.  Crossley  in  his  edition  of  Potts's  Discoverie,  p.  Ixxviii.

231.  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  II,  117.

232.  I  do  not  include  the  Bakewell  cases,  as  to  which  the  evidence  is
too  uncertain  to  trust.  See  Notestein,  pp.  137,  384,  396.

233.  Jeaffreson,  Middlesex  County  Records,  11,  xvii-xviii,  liii.

CHAPTER  XVIII
Witchcraft  and  the  Puritans

1.  The  Rambler,  No.  2.

2.  That  the  New  Englanders  brought  their  views  on  demonology  and
witchcraft  with  them  from  the  Mother  Country  is  a  self-evident  proposi-
tion, but  it  may  be  worth  while  to  refer  to  a  striking  instance  of  the  kind.
The  Rev.  John  Higginson,  writing  from  Salem  to  Increase  Mather  in  1683,
sends  him  two  cases  for  his  Illustrious  Providences,  —  both  of  which  he
"believes  to  be  certain."  The  first  is  an  account  of  how  a  mysterious
stranger,  thought  to  be  the  devil,  once  lent  a  conjuring  book  to  "godly  Mr.
[Samuel]  Sharp,  who  was  Ruling  Elder  of  the  Church  of  Salem  allmost  30
years."  The  incident  took  place  when  Sharp  was  a  young  man  in  London.
The  second  narrative  Mr.  Higginson  "heard  at  Gilford  from  a  godly  old
man  yet  living.  He  came  from  Essex,  and  hath  been  in  N.  E.  about  50
years."  It  is  a  powerfully  interesting  legend  of  the  Faust  type,  localized  in
Essex.  In  a  postscript  Mr.  Higginson  adds,  "I  had  credible  information  of
one  in  Leicestershire,  in  the  time  of  the  Long  Parliament,  that  gave  his  soul
to  the  Divel,  upon  condition  to  be  a  Famous  Preacher,  which  he  was  for  a
time,  &c.,  but  I  am  imperfect  in  the  story"  I  (Mather  Papers,  Massachu-
setts Historical  Society  Collections,  4th  Series,  VIII,  285-287).  See  also  the
cases  of  witchcraft  before  1692  collected  in  S.  G.  Drake's  Annals  of  Witch-
craft in  New  England.  Dr.  Poole  is  far  nearer  the  truth  in  saying  that  "  the
New-England  colonists  had  no  views  concerning  witchcraft  and  diabolical
agency  which  they  did  not  bring  with  them  from  the  Old  World"  (Witch-
craft in  Boston,  in  Winsor,  Memorial  History  of  Boston,  II,  131)  than
President  White  is  when  he  remarks  that  "the  life  of  the  early  colonists  in
New  England  was  such  as  to  give  rapid  growth  to  the  germs  of  the  doctrine


580         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


of  possession  brought  from  the  mother  country"  (Warfare  of  Science  with
Theology,  11,  145).

3.  A  masterly  short  account  of  the  various  elements  which  made  up  the
fully  developed  doctrine  of  witchcraft  as  it  was  held  during  the  three  cen-
turies of  especial  prosecution  (1400-1700),  and  of  the  sources  from  which
these  elements  were  derived,  may  be  found  in  the  first  chapter  of  Joseph
Hansen's  Zauberwahn,  Inquisition  und  Hexenprozess  im  Mittelalter
(Munich  and  Leipzig,  1900).  A  learned  and  able  essay  by  Professor  George
L.  Burr,  The  Literature  of  Witchcraft,  reprinted  from  the  Papers  of  the
American  Historical  Association,  New  York,  1890,  should  also  be  consulted.

4.  See  Bacon's  Works,  ed.  Spedding,  I,  193,  498,  608-609;  II>  634,641-
642,  657-658,  664;  III,  490;  VI,  392-393,  395-396;  VII,  738;  Life  and  Let-
ters, VII,  30-31.

5.  King  James  did  not  force  this  act  through  parliament,  but  he  must
have  approved  it.    See  Chapter  XVII.

6.  See  F.  Legge,  Witchcraft  in  Scotland  (Scottish  Review,  XVIII,  267);
Thomas  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  chap.  xxv.  White-
locke,  under  date  of  October  4,  1652,  notes  "Letters  that  sixty  Persons
Men  and  Women  were  accused  before  the  Commissioners  for  Administra-
tion of  Justice  in  Scotland  at  the  last  Circuit  for  Witches;  but  they  found  so
much  Malice  and  so  little  Proof  against  them  that  none  were  condemned"
(Memorials,  1732,  p.  545).  Cf.  also  his  very  important  entry  on  the  same
subject  under  October  29,  1652  (pp.  547-548).

7.  Epistols  Ho-Elianse,  Familiar  Letters,  edited  by  Joseph  Jacobs,
1890,  Book  ii,  letter  76,  p.  506:  "To  my  Honourable  Friend,  Mr.  E.  P.,  at
Paris"  (cf.  Jacobs's  notes,  pp.  783-784).  The  letter  is  dated  "Fleet,  3  Feb.

1646.  "  This  is  certainly  Old  Style.  Howell  is  a  queer  dater,  but  a  reference
in  this  letter  to  the  departure  of  the  Scottish  army  (p.  505)  proves  that  the
letter  was  written  after  December  21,  1646.  There  is  a  similar  passage
about  witches  in  Book  iii,  letter  2,  p.  51  <;  (also  to  Porter),  dated  "  Fleet,  20
Feb.  1646."

8.  Letters,  as  above.  Book  iii.  No.  23,  pp.  547  fF.,  dated  "Fleet,  20  Feb.

1647,  "  i.  e.  doubtless  1648.

9.  See  Jacobs's  Introduction,  pp.  xlii-xliii.  The  question  whether
Howell's  letters  were  actually  sent  to  the  persons  to  whom  they  are  ad-
dressed or  whether  they  are  to  be  regarded  merely  as  literary  exercises
composed  during  his  imprisonment  (see  Jacobs,  pp.  Ixxi  fF.)  does  not  affect,
for  our  purposes,  the  value  of  the  quotations  here  made,  since  the  letters  to
which  we  now  refer  actually  purport  to  have  been  written  in  the  Fleet,  and
since  they  were  first  published  in  the  second  edition  (1650)  in  the  addi-
tional third  volume  and  from  the  nature  of  things  covild  not  have  appeared
in  the  first  edition  (1645).  They  must,  at  all  events,  have  been  composed
before  1650,  and  are  doubtless  dated  correctly  enough.

10.  See  p.  371,  above.

11.  Taylor,  Sermon  xvii  (Whole  Works,  ed.  Heeber  and  Eden,  1861,
IV,  546).

12.  Taylor,  Whole  Works,  III,  57;  cf.  Sermon  vii  (Works,  IV,  412).

13.  I.  e.  the  statute  of  1604.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


581


14.  A  Tryal  of  Witches  at  the  Assizes  held  at  Bury  St.  Edmonds  .  .
1664  (London,  1682),  pp.  55-56.  This  report  is  reprinted  in  Howell's  State
Trials,  VI,  647  ff.,  and  (in  part)  in  H.  L.  Stephen's  State  Trials  Political
and  Social  (1899),  I,  209  fi.  See  also  Hutchinson,  An  Historical  Essay  con-
cerning Witchcraft,  chap,  viii  (i 718,  pp.  109  ff.;  2d  ed.,  1720,  pp.  139  ff.);
Thomas  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  II,  261  ff.  Hale's
opinion  was  regarded  as  settling  the  law  beyond  peradventure.  It  is
quoted  in  A  True  and  Impartial  Relation  of  the  Informations  against
Three  Witches  .  .  .  Assizes  holden  for  the  County  of  Devon  at  the  Castle
of  Exon,  August  14.  1682  (London,  1682),  Address  to  the  Reader.  For
Roger  North's  comments  on  the  Exeter  case,  see  pp.  3-4,  above.  A  Collec-
tion of  Modern  Relations  of  Matters  of  Fact,  concerning  Witches  &  Witch-
craft, Part  I  (London,  1693),  contains  "A  Discourse  concerning  the  great
Mercy  of  God,  in  preserving  us  from  the  Power  and  Malice  of  Evil  Angels.
Written  by  Sir  Matt.  Hale  at  Cambridge  16  Mar.  1661.  Upon  occasion  of  a
T ryal  of  certain  Witches  before  him  the  Week  before  at  St.  Edmund's-Bury."
The  date  is  wrong  (1661  should  be  1664)  but  the  trial  is  identified  with  that
which  we  are  considering  by  the  anonymous  compiler  of  the  Collection  in
the  following  words:  "There  is  a  Relation  of  it  in  print,  written  by  his  Mar-
shal, which  I  suppose  is  very  true,  though  to  the  best  of  my  Memory,  not
so  compleat,  as  to  some  observable  Circumstances,  as  what  he  related  to
me  at  his  return  from  that  Circuit."  The  date  of  the  trial  is  given  as  "the
Tenth  day  of  March,  1664"  on  the  title-page  of  the  report  (A  Tryal  of
Witches)  and  on  page  i  as  "  the  Tenth  day  of  March,  in  the  Sixteenth  Year
of  the  Reign  of  .  .  .  Charles  II."  On  p.  57  the  year  is  misprinted  "  1662."
Howell's  State  Trials,  VI,  647,  687,  makes  it  1665,  but  16  Charles  II  cor-
responds to  January  30,  1664-January  29,  1665:  hence  1664  is  right.  The
(unfinished)  Discourse  just  mentioned  must  not  be  confused  with  Hale's
Motives  to  Watchfulness,  in  reference  to  the  Good  and  Evil  Angels,  which
may  be  found  in  his  Contemplations  Moral  and  Divine,  London,  1682
(licensed  1675-6),  Part  II,  pp.  67  ff.

15.  Roger  North,  Life  of  the  Lord  Keeper  Guilford,  ed.  1826,1,121.

16.  Cotton  Mather,  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World  (London,  1693),
p.  55.  Mather  also  reproduces  the  substance  of  the  report  above  referred
to  (note  14)  in  the  same  work.  Bragge,  too,  reproduces  it,  in  the  main,  in
his  tract,  Witchcraft  Farther  Display'd,  171 2,  in  support  of  the  accusation
against  Jane  Wenham.

17.  Campbell,  Lives  of  the  Chief  Justices,  1849,  I,  561  ff.,  chap.  xvii.
See  also  the  criticism  of  Hale  in  a  memoir  of  George  Onslow's,  1770,  14th
Report  of  the  Historical  MSS.  Commission,  Appendix,  Part  IX,  p.  480.

18.  Burnet's  Life  of  Hale  was  published  in  1682.

19.  Roger  North,  Life  of  the  Lord  Keeper  Guilford,  ed.  1826,  I,  117  ff.

20.  State  Papers  (Domestic),  1682,  August  19,  bundle  427,  No.  67,  as
quoted  by  Pike,  History  of  Crime  in  England,  II,  238.

21.  A  Tryal  of  Witches,  as  above,  p.  41.

22.  A  Tryal,  as  above,  p.  42.  Cf.  the  Supplementary  Memoir,  in  Simon
Wilkin's  edition  of  Browne's  Works,  1852,  I,  liv-lvi.

23.  See  pp.  124  ff.,  above.


582        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


24.  Burton,  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  1621,  Part  I,  section  2,  member  i,
subsection  3.  I  quote  from  the  edition  of  1624.

25.  The  following  short  character  of  Glanvil  by  Bishop  Kennet,  may  be
quoted,  not  because  it  is  just,  but  because  it  might  conceivably  be  brought
forward  by  somebody  in  rebuttal  of  this  proposition:  —  "Mr.  Joseph  Glan-
vill  of  Lincoln  College,  Oxon.  taking  the  Degree  of  M.A.  in  the  beginning
of  1658.  was  about  that  Time  made  Chaplain  to  old  Francis  Rous  one  of
Oliver's  Lords,  and  Provost  of  Eaton  College.  —  He  became  a  great  Ad-
mirer of  Mr.  Richard  Baxter,  and  a  zealous  Person  for  a  Commonwealth.
After  his  Majesty's  Restauration  he  turn'd  about,  became  a  Latitudinarian,
—  Rector  of  Bath,  Prebendary  of  Worcester,  and  Chaplain  to  the  King"
(White  Kennet,  Register,  1728,  p.  931).

26.  See  Dr.  Ferris  Greenslet's  Joseph  Glanvill,  A  Study  in  English
Thought  and  Letters  of  the  Seventeenth  Century,  New  York,  1900,  espe-
cially chap.  vi.  For  a  bibliography  of  Glanvil,  see  Emanuel  Green,  Bib-
liotheca  Somersetensis,  Taunton  (Eng.),  1902,  I,  206  ff.

27.  More's  theories  on  the  subject  of  apparitions,  demons,  and  witches
may  also  be  read,  at  considerable  length,  in  his  Antidote  against  Atheism,
Book  iii,  chaps.  2-13  (Philosophical  Writings,  2d  ed.,  1662,  pp.  89  ff.);
cf.  the  Appendix  to  the  Antidote,  chaps.  12-13  (pp.  181  ff.),  and  The  Im-
mortality of  the  Soul,  chap.  16  (pp.  129  ff.).

28.  John  Hale,  A  Modest  Enquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Witchcraft,  Bos-
ton, 1702.

29.  Mr.  Higginson's  Epistle  is  dated  1697-8.

30.  John  Hale,  A  Modest  Enquiry,  1702,  p.  12.

31.  Meric  Casaubon  was  born  in  1599  and  died  in  1671.  His  learned,
lively,  and  vastly  entertaining  work,  A  Treatise  concerning  Enthusiasme,
as  it  is  an  Effect  of  Nature:  but  is  mistaken  by  many  for  either  Divine  In-
spiration, or  Diabolicall  Possession,  appeared  in  1655,  and  in  a  "Second
edition:  revised,  and  enlarged"  in  1656.  It  shows  an  open  mind  and  a
temper  rather  skeptical  than  credulous.  Passages  of  interest  in  our  present
discussion  may  be  found  on  pp.  37-41,  44,  49,  94-95,  100,  118,  174  (Quak-
ers), 286,  of  the  second  edition.  Of  particular  significances  is  the  Doctor's
account  of  his  visit  to  a  man  who  was  thought  to  be  possessed  but  whom  he
believed  to  be  suffering  from  some  bodily  distemper  (pp.  97  ff.).  Casau-
bon's  treatise  (in  two  parts)  Of  Credulity  and  Incredulity,  in  Things  Nat-
ural, Civil,  and  Divine,  came  out  in  1668,  and  was  reissued,  with  a  new
title-page  (as  above),  in  1672.  A  third  part,  Of  Credulity  and  Incredulity
in  Things  Divine  and  Spiritual,  appeared  in  1670.  Webster's  assault  upon
Casaubon  in  his  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft  was  made  in  apparent
ignorance  of  the  fact  that  the  venerable  scholar  had  been  dead  for  some
years  (see  p.  343,  above).

32.  Compare  Reginald  Scot's  chapter  "Of  Theurgie,  with  a  confutation
thereof"  (Discoverie  of  Witchcraft,  Book  xv,  chap.  42,  pp.  466-467  [336-
337],  ed.  Nicholson,  pp.  392-393).  See  also  Henry  Hallywell,  Melampro-
noea:  or  A  Discourse  of  the  Polity  and  Kingdom  of  Darkness.  Together
with  a  Solution  of  the  Chiefest  Objections  brought  against  the  Being  of
Witches,  1681,  pp.  50-51.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


33.  Cudworth,  Intellectual  System,  Book  i,  Chap.  4,  §  15,  ed.  1678,
pp.  265-269.

34.  Sadducismus  Triumphatus,  ed.  1726,  p.  336;  see  James  Crossley's
Introduction  to  Potts,  Discoverie  (Chetham  Society,  1845),  P-  '^'j  note.  2.
This  experiment  was  twice  tried  as  late  as  1712,  in  the  case  of  Jane  Wen-
ham,  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Strutt,  once  in  the  presence  of  Sir  Henry  Chauncy,
and  again  in  the  presence  of  the  Rev.  Mr.  Gardiner.  Its  ill  success  is  re-
corded by  a  third  Anglican  clergyman,  —  Mr.  Francis  Bragge  (A  Full  and
Impartial  Account  of  the  Discovery  of  Sorcery  and  Witchcraft,  Practis'd
by  Jane  Wenham,  London,  1712,  pp.  11,  15).

35.  Boyle,  Letter  to  Glanvil,  September  18,  1677,  Works,  ed.  Birch,  V,
244.  Compare  Dr.  Samuel  Collins's  letter  to  Boyle,  September  i,  1663
(Boyle's  Works,  V,  633-634).

36.  Boyle,  letter  to  Glanvil  (Works,  V,  245).

37.  See  Demonologie  ou  Traitte  des  Demons  et  Sorciers  .  .  .  Par  Fr.
Perreaud.  Ensemble  I'Antidemon  de  Mascon,  ou  Histoire  Veritable  de  ce
qu'un  Demon  a  fait  &  dit,  il  y  a  quelques  annees,  en  la  maison  dudit  S''.
Perreaud  a  Mascon.  Geneva,  1653.

38.  Barrow,  Theological  Works,  ed.  1830,  IV,  480-482.

39.  Hickes,  Ravillac  Redivivus,  reprinted  in  the  Somers  Tracts,  2d  ed.,
VIII,  510  ff.  (see  especially  pp.  546  fF.).  Weir,  who  was  unquestionably  in-
sane, was  executed  in  1670.

40.  Diary  and  Correspondence  of  Samuel  Pepys,  London,  1885,  IV,  275.
On  elf-arrows,  see  pp.  133-134,  above.

41.  Evelyn  may  have  derived  his  information  from  Sir  William  Phips's
letter  to  the  home  government  (October  14,  1692),  as  Dr.  G.  H.  Moore  sug-
gests (Final  Notes  on  Witchcraft  in  Massachusetts,  N.  Y.,  1885,  p.  66).
For  the  letter  see  Goodell,  Essex  Institute  Collections,  2d  Series,  I,  ii,
86  ff.  Phips's  second  letter  (Feb.  21,  1692-93,  to  the  Earl  of  Nottingham)
is  printed  by  Moore,  pp.  90  ff.

42.  The  remark,  sometimes  heard,  that  Calvinism  was  especially  re-
sponsible for  witch-trials  is  a  loose  assertion  which  has  to  reckon  with  the
fact  that  the  last  burning  for  witchcraft  at  Geneva  took  place  in  1652  (see
Paul  Ladame,  Proces  Criminel  de  la  Derniere  Sorciere  Brulee  a  Geneve,
Paris,  1888).

43.  Burton,  Anatomy  of  Melancholy,  Part  I,  section  2,  member  i,  sub-
section 3:  —  "Many  deny  Witches  at  all,  or  if  there  be  any,  they  can  doe
no  harme:  of  this  opinion  is  IVierus,  lib.  3.  cap.  53,  de  prcestig.  deem.  Austin
Lerchemer,  a  Dutch  writer,  Biarmanus,  Ewichius,  Euwaldus,  our  country-
man Scot:  but  on  the  contrary  are  most  Lawyers,  Diuines,  Physitians,
Philosophers."

44.  Wier's  great  work,  De  Praestigiis  Dsemonum,  was  published  in  1563,
and  was  afterwards  much  enlarged.  It  went  through  several  editions.

45.  See  the  extraordinary  list  in  William  Drage,  Daimonomageia.  A
Small  Treatise  of  Sicknesses  and  Diseases  from  Witchcraft,  and  Super-
natural Causes,  1665.  Webster  considers  this  subject  at  length  in  chap,  xii
of  his  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  1677,  with  a  full  discussion  of


584         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


van  Helmont's  views.  Cf.  Henry  More,  Antidote  against  Atheism,  chaps.
4-5  (Philosophical  Writings,  2d  ed.,  1662,  pp.  97  fF.).  See  p.  134,  above.

46.  "Ea  dsmonis  subtilitate  uelocitateque  imperceptibili,  ori  ingesta,
nostris  ad  haec  oculis  uel  celeritate  eius  uictis,  uel  fascino  delusis,  uel  in-
teriecto  corpore  aereo  aut  aliter  motis  eo  intus  uel  foris  uel  utrinque  hu-
moribus  aut  spiritu  caligantibus."    De  Prasstigiis  Daemonum  (Basileae,

1568),  iv,  2,  pp.  352-353.

47.  Even  Bekker  (see  p.  351,  above),  who  approaches  the  subject  from
the  philosophical  direction,  and  whose  logical  process  is  different  from
Wier's,  is  greatly  indebted  to  him.

48.  Compare  the  fate  of  Bekker  in  1692  (p.  39).

49.  Meric  Casaubon,  A  Treatise  Proving  Spirits,  Witches  and  Super-
natural Operations,  1672,  p.  35.

50.  The  same,  p.  46.

51.  James  I,  Damonologie,  Workes,  161 6,  p.  92.  On  Wier  in  general,
see  Carl  Binz,  Doctor  Johann  Weyer,  ein  Rheinischer  Arzt,  der  erste  Be-
kampfer  des  Hexenwahns,  Berlin,  1896.

52.  Scot  expressly  asserts  his  belief  in  the  existence  of  evil  spirits  (A  Dis-
course upon  Divels  and  Spirits,  chap.  32,  p.  540;  cf.  chap.  16,  p.  514).

53.  Discoverie  of  Witchcraft,  xiii,  22-34,  pp.  321  fF.  (226  ff.),  ed.  Nichol-
son, pp.  262  ff.  (with  cuts).  Most  of  the  tricks  which  Scot  describes  are
identical  with  feats  of  legerdemain  that  are  the  stock  in  trade  of  every  mod-
ern juggler:  —  "To  throwe  a  peece  of  monie  awaie,  and  to  find  it  againe
where  you  list"  (p.  326);  "To  make  a  groat  or  a  testor  to  sinke  through  a
table,  and  to  vanish  out  of  a  handkercher  verie  strangelie"  (p.  327);  "How
to  deliver  out  foure  aces,  and  to  convert  them  into  foure  knaves"  (p.  333);
"To  tell  one  without  confederacie  what  card  he  thinketh"  (p.  334);
"To  burne  a  thred,  and  to  make  it  whole  againe  with  the  ashes  thereof"
(p.  341);  "To  cut  off  ones  head,  and  to  laie  it  in  a  platter,  &c.:  which  the
jugglers  call  the  decollation  of  John  Baptist"  (p.  349).  The  picture  of  the
apparatus  required  for  the  last-mentioned  trick  is  very  curious  indeed.

54.  King  James  remarks,  in  the  Preface  to  his  Daemonologie,  that  Scot
"is  not  ashamed  in  publike  Print  to  deny,  that  there  can  be  such  a  thing  as
Witch-craft:  and  so  maintaines  the  old  errour  of  the  Sadduces  in  denying  of
spirits"  (Workes,  161 6,  pp.  91-92).

55.  In  what  an  orderly  way  one  may  proceed  from  an  admission  of  the
doctrine  of  fallen  angels  to  the  final  results  of  the  witch-dogma  may  be  seen,
for  instance,  in  Henry  Hallywell's  Melampronoea:  or  A  Discourse  of  the
Polity  and  Kingdom  of  Darkness,  1681.  Hallywell  had  been  a  Fellow  of
Christ's  College,  Cambridge.

56.  See  p.  332,  above.

57.  1665  ed.  of  Scot,  p.  39  (see  Nicholson's  reprint  of  the  1584  edition,
p.  xlii).

58.  The  same,  p.  46.

59.  Crossley,  Introduction  to  the  Chetham  Society  reprint  of  Potts's
Discoverie  of  Witches,  pp.  xxxviii-xxxix.

60.  Webster,  The  Displaying  of  Supposed  Witchcraft,  1677,  p.  202.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


61.  Page  228.  Perhaps  Webster  is  merely  "putting  a  case"  here;  but
he  certainly  seems  to  be  making  an  admission,  at  least  in  theory.

62.  Page  230.

63.  Pages  294  ff.

64.  Page  294.

65.  Pages  297-298.

66.  Pages  302-310.

67.  Page  308.    On  the  astral  spirit,  see  also  pp.  312  ff.

68.  Page  310.

69.  Pages  lo-ii.

70.  See  also  pp.  267  ff.

71.  Page  73.

72.  Page  231.

73.  Pages  242-243.

74.  Page  244.

75.  Pages  245-246.

76.  Page  247.

77.  Page  260.

78.  Page  267.

79.  Note,  however,  that  the  upholders  of  the  current  beliefs  on  witch-
craft are  also  many  times  emphatic  enough  in  similar  cautionary  remarks.
A  first-rate  example  is  the  following  characteristic  passage  from  Dr.  Casau-
bon,  whom  Webster  calls  a  " witchmonger":  "And  indeed,  that  the  deny-
ing of  Witches,  to  them  that  content  themselves  in  the  search  of  truth  with
a  superficial  view,  is  a  very  plausible  cause;  it  cannot  be  denied.  For  if  any
thing  in  the  world,  (as  we  know  all  things  in  the  world  are)  be  liable  to
fraud,  and  imposture,  and  innocent  mistake,  through  weakness  and  sim-
pHcity;  this  subject  of  Witches  and  Spirits  is.  .  .  .  How  ordinary  is  it  to
mistake  natural  melancholy  (not  to  speak  of  other  diseases)  for  a  Devil?
And  how  much,  too  frequently,  is  both  the  disease  increased,  or  made  in-
curable; and  the  mistake  confirmed,  by  many  ignorant  Ministers,  who  take
every  wild  motion,  or  phansie,  for  a  suggestion  of  the  Devil?  Whereas,  in
such  a  case,  it  should  be  the  care  of  wise  friends,  to  apply  themselves  to  the
Physician  of  the  body,  and  not  to  entertain  the  other,  (I  speak  it  of  natural
melancholy)  who  probably  may  do  more  hurt,  than  good;  but  as  the
learned  Naturalist  doth  allow,  and  advise?  Excellent  is  the  advice  and
counsel  in  this  kind,  of  the  Author  of  the  book  de  morho  Sacro  attributed  to
Hippocrates,  which  I  could  wish  all  men  were  bound  to  read,  before  they
take  upon  them  to  visit  sick  folks,  that  are  troubled  with  melancholy  dis-
eases" (A  Treatise  proving  Spirits,  etc.,  1672,  pp.  29-30;  cf.  note  31,
above).

80.  Webster,  pp.  219,  220,  224.

81.  Glanvil,  Saducismus  Triumphatus,  Part  II,  ed.  1681,  p.  4  (ed.  1726,
pp.  225-226).  Glanvil  is  here  replying  to  Webster,  whose  book,  it  will  be
remembered,  appeared  in  1677.

82.  Increase  Mather's  copy  of  Webster  is  in  the  Harvard  College
Library.


586


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


83.  Lowell,  New  England  Two  Centuries  Ago,  Writings,  Riverside  edi-
tion, II,  73.

84.  Hobbes,  Leviathan,  i,  1  (English  Works,  ed.  Molesworth,  III,  9).
Compare  Hobbes's  Dialogue  between  a  Philosopher  and  a  Student  of  the
Common  Laws  of  England  (English  Works,  VI,  96) :  "  L.  I  know  not.  Be-
sides these  crimes,  there  is  conjuration,  witchcraft,  sorcery  and  enchant-
ment; which  are  capital  by  the  statute  i  James,  c.  11.  —  P.  But  I  desire
not  to  discourse  of  that  subject.  For  though  without  doubt  there  is  some
great  wickedness  signified  by  those  crimes;  yet  I  have  ever  found  myself
too  dull  to  conceive  the  nature  of  them,  or  how  the  devil  hath  power  to  do
so  many  things  which  witches  have  been  accused  of."  Wier  is  far  more
humane,  as  well  as  more  reasonable.  If  one  holds,  he  writes,  that  witches
are  to  be  severely  punished  for  their  evil  intent,  let  it  be  remembered  that
there  is  a  great  difference  between  sane  and  insane  will.  "Quod  si  quis  con-
tentiose  uoluntatem  seuerius  puniendam  defendat,  is  primum  distinguat
inter  uoluntatem  hominis  sani  perfectam,  quae  in  actum  uere  dirigi  coe-
perit:  et  inter  uitiatae  mentis  sensum,  uel  (si  uoles)  corruptam  amentis
uoluntatem:  cui  suo  opere,  quasi  alterius  esset,  colludit  diabolus,  nec  alius
insulse  uolentem  subsequitur  effectus."  De  Prsestigiis  Dsemonum,  vi,  21,
ed.  1568,  pp.  641-642.

85.  Selden,  Table-Talk,  1689,  p.  59  (the  first  edition).  Selden  died  in
1654.

86.  Soldan,  Geschichte  der  Hexenprozesse,  ed.  Heppe,  II,  243.

87.  Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark:  or,  A  Treatise  concerning  the  Nature  of
Witches  &  Witchcraft,  1656,  p.  41.

88.  Sir  Robert  Filmer's  brief  tract,  An  Advertisement  to  the  Jury-men
of  England,  touching  Witches,  was  occasioned,  according  to  the  Preface,
by  "  the  late  Execution  of  Witches  at  the  Summer  Assises  in  Kent."  It  was
first  published  in  1653,  and  may  be  found  annexed  to  the  Free-holders
Grand  Inquest,  1679.  The  case  which  elicited  Sir  Robert's  little  book  is  re-
ported in  A  Prodigious  &  Tragicall  History  of  the  Arraignment,  Tryall,
Confession,  and  Condemnation  of  six  Witches  at  Maidstone,  in  Kent,  at
the  Assizes  there  held  in  July,  Fryday  30,  this  present  year,  1652  (London,
1652,  reprinted  1837).

89.  A.  D.  White,  A  History  of  the  Warfare  of  Science  with  Theology,
1896,1,362.

90.  Wood,  Athenae  Oxonienses,  ed.  Bliss,  III,  11 14.

91.  Dr.  Hutchinson's  admirable  work,  An  Historical  Essay  concerning
Witchcraft,  which  still  remains  one  of  the  most  valuable  treatises  on  this
subject  that  we  have,  was  published  in  1718.  It  appeared  in  a  second  edi-
tion in  1720,  in  which  year  he  was  appointed  Bishop  of  Down  and  Connor.

92.  I  have  used  a  copy  of  the  French  translation,  —  Le  Monde  En-
chante,  Amsterdam,  1694.  This  was  made  by  Bekker's  direction  and  re-
vised by  him.  Each  of  the  four  volumes  has  a  separate  dedication,  and
each  dedication  (in  the  Harvard  College  copy)  is  authenticated  by  Bekker's
autograph  signature.

93.  This  concludes  Bekker's  First  Book.

94.  What  precedes  is,  in  substance,  Bekker's  Book  II.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


95.  This  is  the  substance  of  Bekker's  Third  Book.

96.  "De  Christelijke  Synodus  .  .  .  heeft,  .  .  .  met  eenparigheyd  van
stemmen,  den  selven  Dr.  Bekker  verklaart  intolerabel  als  Leeraar  in  de
Gereformeerde  Kerke;  en  vervolgens  hem  van  sijn  Predik-dienst  gere-
moveert"  (decree  in  W.  P.  C.  Knuttel,  Balthasar  Bekker  de  Bestrijder  van
het  Bijgeloof,  the  Hague,  1906,  p.  315).

97.  Knuttel,  p.  319.

98.  Knuttel,  p.  357.  Strictly  speaking,  it  was  not  for  his  denial  of  mod-
ern witchcraft  that  Bekker  was  punished,  for  it  is  in  the  last  two  books  of
his  treatise  that  he  deals  particularly  with  this  subject,  and  these  did  not
appear  until  after  he  had  been  unfrocked.  Still,  his  Second  Book,  which
got  him  into  trouble,  contains  all  the  essentials.  It  denies  the  power  of  the
devil  and  wicked  spirits  to  afflict  men,  and  holds  that  the  demoniacs  of  the
New  Testament  were  neither  possessed  nor  obsessed,  but  merely  sufferers
from  disease.  For  a  full  analysis  of  Bekker's  work  and  an  account  of  the
opposition  which  it  roused,  see  Knuttel,  chap,  v,  pp.  188  ff.;  for  the  ecclesi-
astical proceedings  against  Bekker,  see  chap,  vi,  pp.  270  ff.  The  various
editions  and  translations  of  De  Betoverde  Weereld  are  enumerated  by  van
der  Linde  in  his  Balthasar  Bekker,  Bibliografie  (the  Hague,  1869),  where
may  also  be  found  a  long  list  of  the  books  and  pamphlets  which  the  work
called  forth.  There  is  a  good  account  of  Bekker's  argument  in  Soldan's
Geschichte  der  Hexenprozesse,  neu  bearbeitet  von  Dr.  Heinrich  Heppe
(Stuttgart,  1880),  II,  233  ff.  See  also  Roskoff,  Geschichte  des  Teufels,
Leipzig,  1869,  II,  445  ff.

99.  Theologians  took  infinite  pains  to  distinguish  between  miracles
{miracula),  which  could  be  wrought  by  divine  power  only,  and  the  kind  of
wonders  (mira)  which  Satan  worked.  See,  for  example,  William  Perkins,
A  Discourse  of  the  Damned  Art  of  Witchcraft,  1608,  pp.  12  ff.,  18  ff.;
Del  Rio,  Disquisitiones  Magicse,  lib.  ii,  qusestio  7,  ed.  1616,  pp.  103  ff.  Sir
Robert  Filmer,  in  An  Advertisement  to  the  Jury-men  of  England,  Touch-
ing Witches  (appended  to  The  Free-holders  Grand  Inquest,  1679;  see
note  88,  above),  makes  merry  with  such  fine-spun  distinctions.  "Both
[Perkins  and  Del  Rio],"  he  says,  "seem  to  agree  in  this,  that  he  had  need
be  an  admirable  or  profound  Philosopher,  that  can  distinguish  between  a
Wonder  and  a  Miracle;  it  would  pose  Aristotle  himself,  to  tell  us  every  thing
that  can  be  done  by  the  power  of  Nature,  and  what  things  cannot;  for  there
be  daily  many  things  found  out,  and  daily  more  may  be,  which  our  Fore-
fathers never  knew  to  be  possible  in  Nature"  (pp.  322-323).  Cf.  Calef,
More  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  1700,  p.  35.

100.  Cf.  Soldan,  Geschichte  der  Hexenprozesse,  ed.  Heppe,  II,  243:  —
"Zu  derjenigen  freieren  Kritik  der  biblischen  Schriften  selbst  sich  zu  erhe-
ben,  welche  das  Vorhandensein  gewisser,  aus  den  Begriffen  der  Zeit  ge-
schopfter  damonologischen  Vorstellungen  in  der  Bibel  anerkennt,  ohne
daraus  eine  bindende  Norm  fiir  den  Glauben  herzuleiten,  —  diess  war
frelich  erst  einem  spateren  Zeitalter  vorbehalten.  Bekker  kannte,  um  seine
sich  ihm  aufdringende  philosophische  Ueberzeugung  mit  der  Bibel  zu  ver-
sohnen,  keinen  andern  Weg,  als  den  der  iiblichen  Exegese,  und  daher
kommt  es,  dass  diese  nicht  iiberall  eine  ungezwungene  ist."  It  is  instruc-


588         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


tive  to  note  the  pains  which  Sir  Walter  Scott  takes,  in  his  Second  Letter  on
Demonology  and  Witchcraft,  to  harmonize  the  Bible  with  his  views  on
these  subjects.

101.  To  avoid  all  possibility  of  misapprehension  I  shall  venture  to  ex-
press my  own  feelings.  The  two  men  who  appeal  to  me  most  in  the  whole
affair  of  witchcraft  are  Friedrich  Spee,  the  Jesuit,  and  Balthasar  Bekker,
the  "intolerable"  pastor  of  Amsterdam.  But  what  I J  eel,  and  what  all  of  us
feel,  is  not  to  the  purpose.  There  has  been  too  much  feeling  in  modern  dis-
cussions of  witchcraft  already.

102.  Sigmund  Riezler,  Geschichte  der  Hexenprozesse  in  Bayern,  Stutt-
gart, 1896,  p.  143.

103.  Ibid.

104.  Soldan,  Geschichte  der  Hexenprozesse,  revised  by  Heppe,  II,  37;
cf.  G.  L.  Burr,  The  Fate  of  Dietrich  Flade,  1891  (reprinted  from  the  Papers
of  the  American  Historical  Association,  V).

105.  Jean  d'Espaignet  and  Pierre  de  I'Ancre,  the  special  commissioners,
are  said  to  have  condemned  more  than  600  in  four  months  (Soldan,  ed.
Heppe,  II,  162;  cf.  Baissac,  Les  Grands  Jours  de  la  Sorcellerie,  1890,
p.  401).  I  do  not  find  that  de  I'Ancre  makes  a  distinct  statement  of  the
number  convicted.  He  makes  various  remarks,  however,  which  seem  to
show  that  600  is  no  exaggeration.  Thus  he  says  that  the  Parliament  of
Bordeaux,  under  whose  authority  he  acted,  condemned  "an  infinity"  of
sorcerers  to  death  in  1609  (Tableau  de  I'lnconstance  des  Mauvais  Anges  et
Demons,  Paris,  1613,  p.  100).  "On  fait  estat  qu'il  y  a  trente  mille  ames
en  ce  pays  de  Labourt,  contant  ceux  qui  sont  en  voyage  sur  mer,  &  que
parmy  tout  ce  peuple,  il  y  a  bien  peu  de  families  qui  ne  touchent  au  Sor-
tilege par  quelque  bout"  (p.  38).  The  commission  lasted  from  July  to  No-
vember (pp.  66,  456,  470);  besides  those  that  the  two  commissioners  tried
during  this  period,  they  left  behind  them  so  many  witches  and  wizards
that  the  prisons  of  Bordeaux  were  crowded  and  it  became  necessary  to
lodge  the  defendants  in  the  ruined  chateau  du  Ha  (pp.  144,  560).  Cf.  pp.
35  ff.,  64,  92,  114,  546.  The  panic  fear  that  witchcraft  excites  is  described
by  de  I'Ancre  in  a  striking  passage:  —  "Qu'il  n'y  ayt  qu'vne  seule  sorciere
dans  vn  grand  village,  dans  peu  de  temps  vous  voyez  tant  d'enfans  perdus,
tant  de  femmes  enceintes  perdas  leur  fruit,  tant  de  haut  mal  donne  a  des
pauures  creatures,  tant  d'animaux  perdus,  tant  de  fruicts  gastez,  que  le
foudre  ni  autre  fleau  du  ciel  ne  sont  rien  en  comparaison"  (pp.  543-544).

106.  An  Account  of  what  Happened  in  the  Kingdom  of  Sweden,  in  the
Years  1669,  1670  and  Upwards,  translated  from  the  German  by  Anthony
Horneck,  and  included  in  Glanvil's  Saducismus  Triumphatus,  ed.  1682  (ed.
1726,  pp.  474  fF.).  Horneck's  version  is  from  a  tract  entitled.  Translation
.  .  .  Der  Konigl.  Herren  Commissarien  gehaltenes  Protocol  iiber  die  ent-
deckte  Zauberey  in  dem  Dorff  Mohra  und  umbliegenden  Orten,  the  Hague,
1670.  Cf.  Thomas  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  II,  244  ff.;
Soldan,  ed.  Heppe,  II,  175  ff.;  Vilhelm  Bang,  Hexeveesen  og  Hexeforf0lgel-
ser  isser  i  Danmark,  Copenhagen,  1896,  pp.  48  ff.  This  is  what  Mr.  Upham
calls  Cotton  Mather's  "favorite  Swedish  case"  (Salem  Witchcraft  and
Cotton  Mather,  Morrisania,  1869,  p.  20).   It  was,  in  a  manner,  "Leo-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII  589

nato's  Hero,  your  Hero,  every  man's  Hero"  toward  the  end  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  since  it  was  one  of  the  most  recent  instances  of  witchcraft
on  a  large  scale.  The  good  angel  in  white  who  is  one  of  the  features  of  the
Mohra  case  appears  much  earlier  in  England:  see  Potts,  Wonderfull  Dis-
coverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  L  (a  reference  which  may  serve  as  a  note  to
Mr.  Upham's  essay,  just  cited,  p.  34).

107.  Franz  Volk,  Hexen  in  der  Landvogtei  Ortenau  und  Reichsstadt
OfFenburg,  Lahr,  1882,  pp.  24-25,  58  ff.

108.  Scot,  p.  543;  Hutchinson,  Historical  Essay,  2d  ed.,  p.  38;  A  True
and  lust  Recorde,  of  the  Information  [etc.]  of  all  the  Witches,  taken  at  S.
Oses  (London,  1582).

109.  F.  I.egge,  The  Scottish  Review,  XVIII,  261  ff.

110.  Thomas  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches  in  the
Countie  of  Lancaster  (London,  1613);  Thomas  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sor-
cery and  Magic,  Chap,  xxiii.

111.  Whitaker,  Whalley,  I  (1800),  i84ff;  Baines,  History  of  the  County
Palatine  of  Lancaster,  I  (1836),  605-606;  Crossley,  Chetham  Society  re-
print of  Potts,  pp.  lix  ff.;  Wright,  chap,  xxiii;  Heywood  and  Brome's  play.
The  Late  Lancashire  Witches,  1634;  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic
Series,  1634-1635,  pp.  77-79,  98,  129-130,  141,  152;  Historical  Manu-
scripts Commission,  loth  Report,  Appendix,  Part  IV,  p.  433;  12th  Report,
Appendix,  Part  II,  p.  53,  cf.  p.  77;  Notes  and  Queries,  3d  Series,  V,  259,

112.  Nichols,  History  and  Antiquities  of  the  County  of  Leicester,  II,
471*.

113.  See  p.  331,  above,  and  note  176,  below.

114.  Whitelocke's  Memorials,  December  13,  1649,  ed.  1732,  p.  434;
Brand,  Popular  Antiquities,  ed.  Hazlitt,  III,  80;  Ralph  Gardner,  England's
Grievance  Discovered,  in  Relation  to  the  Coal-Trade,  1655  (reprinted,
1796,  chap.  53,  pp.  114  ff.).

115.  A  Prodigious  &  Tragicall  History  of  the  Arraignment  [etc.]  of  Six
-Witches  at  Maidstone  .  .  .  Digested  by  H.  F.  Gent,  1652  (reprinted  in  an
Account,  etc.,  London,  1837).

116.  A  True  and  Impartial  Relation  of  the  Informations  against  Three
Witches,  1682.

117.  Sir  J.  H.  Lefroy,  Memorials  of  the  Discovery  and  Early  Settle-
ment of  the  Bermudas  or  Somers  Islands,  II,  601  ff.

1 18.  A  Full  and  True  Relation  of  the  Tryal  [etc.]  of  Ann  Foster,  London,
1674  (Northampton,  reprinted  by  Taylor  &  Son,  1878);  Relation  of  the
Most  Remarkable  Proceedings  at  the  late  Assizes  at  Northampton,  1674.
Cf.  W.  Ruland,  Steirische  Hexenprozesse,  in  Steinhausen's  Zeitschrift  fiir
Kulturgeschichte,  2.  Erganzungsheft,  Weimar,  1898,  pp.  45  ff.

119.  New  England  Historical  and  Genealogical  Register,  XXIV,  382.

120.  Thomas  Brattle,  Letter  of  October  8,  1692,  Massachusetts  His-
torical Society  Collections,  V,  65.  Compare,  on  the  whole  question,  the
remarks  of  Professor  Wendell  in  his  interesting  paper,  Were  the  Salem
Witches  Guiltless?  (Historical  Collections  of  the  Essex  Institute,  XXIX.


I


590        WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND

republished  in  his  Stelligeri  and  Other  Essays  concerning  America,  New-
York,  1893)  and  in  his  Cotton  Mather,  pp.  93  ff.

121.  A  long  and  curious  list  of  cases  of  defamation  may  be  seen  in  a
volume  of  Depositions  and  other  Ecclesiastical  Proceedings  from  the
Courts  of  Durham,  extending  from  131 1  to  the  Reign  of  Elizabeth,  edited
by  James  Raine  for  the  Surtees  Society  in  1845  (Publications,  XXI).  Thus,
in  1556-57,  Margaret  Lambert  accuses  John  Lawson  of  saying"  that  she
was  a  chermer"  (p.  84);  in  1569-70  Margaret  Reed  is  charged  with  calling
Margaret  Howhett  "a  horse  goodmother  water  wych"  (p.  91);  in  1572.
Thomas  Fewler  deposed  that  he  "hard  Elizabeth  Anderson  caull  .  .  .
Anne  Burden  'crowket  handyd  wytch.'  He  saith  the  words  was  spoken
audiently  there;  ther  might  many  have  herd  them,  beinge  spoken  so  neigh
the  crose  and  in  the  towne  gait  as  they  were"  (p.  247).  So  in  1691  Alice
Bovill  complained  of  a  man  who  had  said  to  her,  "Thou  bewitched  my
stot"  (North  Riding  Record  Society,  Publications,  IX,  6).  See  also  His-
torical Manuscripts  Commission,  Report  on  Manuscripts  in  Various  Col-
lections, I,  283;  Lefroy,  Bermudas  or  Somers  Islands,  II,  629  (No.  15).

122.  See,  for  example,  Mr.  Noble's  edition  of  the  Records  of  the  Court
of  Assistants,  II,  43,  72,  85,  94,  95,  104,  131,  136,  —  all  between  1633  and
1644.

123.  See  Drake's  Annals  of  Witchcraft  in  New  England;  Noble's  Rec-
ords, as  above,  I,  11,  31,  33,  159,  188,  228,  229,  233.

124.  "Quia  vulgo  creditum,  multorum  annorum  continuatam  sterilita-
tem  a  strigibus  et  maleficis  diabolica  invidia  causari;  tota  patria  in  extinc-
tionem  maleficarum  insurrexit"  (as  quoted  from  the  autograph  MS.  in  the
Trier  Stadt-Bibliothek  by  G.  L.  Burr,  The  Fate  of  Dietrich  Flade,  p.  51,
Papers  of  the  American  Historical  Association,  V).

125.  "Incredibile  vulgi  apud  Germanos,  &  maxime  (quod  pudet  dicere)
Catholicos  superstitio,  invidia,  calumniae,  detractationes,  susurrationes  &
similia,  quae  nec  Magistratus  punit,  nec  concionatores  arguunt,  suspi-
cionem  magias  primum  excitant.  Omnes  divinse  punitiones,  quas  in  sacris
literis  Deus  minatus  est,  a  Sagis  sunt.  Nihil  jam  amplius  Deus  facit  aut
natura,  sed  Sagse  omnia.  2.  Unde  impetu  omnes  clamant  ut  igitur  in-
quirat  Magistratus  in  Sagas,  quas  non  nisi  ipsi  suis  Unguis  tot  fecerunt"
(Spec,  Cautio  Criminalis,  seu  de  Processibus  contra  Sagax  Liber,  2d  ed.,
1695,  pp.  387-388;  cf.  Dubium  xv,  pp.  67-68,  Dubium  xxxiv,  pp.  231-232).
Spec's  book  came  out  anonymously  in  1631,  and,  unlike  most  works  on  this
side  of  the  question,  had  immediate  results.  Spee  had  no  doubt  of  the
existence  of  witchcraft  (Dubium  i,  pp.  i  fF.,  Dubium,  iii,  pp.  7-8);  his  ex-
perience, however,  had  taught  him  that  most  ot  those  condemned  were
innocent.

126.  The  case  is  reported  in  A  True  and  Impartial  Relation  of  the
Informations  against  Three  Witches  [etc.],  1682,  which  is  reprinted  in
Howell's  State  Trials,  VIII,  1017  ff.

127.  Roger  North,  Autobiography,  chap,  x,  ed.  Jessopp,  1887,  pp.  131-
132.  North  gives  a  similar  account  of  the  same  trial,  with  some  general  ob-
servations of  great  interest,  in  his  Life  of  the  Lord  Keeper  Guilford,  I,  267-
269  (ed.  1826).  It  is  not  clear  whether  North  was  present  at  the  trial  or  not.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


It  is  important  to  notice  that  North  wrote  his  biographies  late  in  Hfe  and
that  his  death  did  not  take  place  until  1734,  only  two  years  before  the
statute  against  witchcraft  was  repealed.

128.  North  remarks  that  Guilford  (then  Francis  North,  Chief  Justice  of
the  Common  Pleas)  "had  really  a  concern  upon  him  at  what  happened;
which  was,  that  his  brother  Raymond's  passive  behavior  should  let  those
poor  women  die"  (Life  of  the  Lord  Keeper  Guilford,  I,  267).  Raymond
was,  to  be  sure,  the  judge  who  presided  at  the  trial,  but  Francis  North  can-
not be  allowed  to  have  all  the  credit  which  his  brother  Roger  would  give
him,  for  he  refused  to  reprieve  the  convicted  witches  (see  his  letter,  quoted
at  p.  334,  above).

129.  There  was  a  fierce  war  of  pamphlets  over  Jane  Wenham's  case.
See  the  bibliography  in  Notestein,  pp.  373-375.  Cf.  Memoirs  of  Litera-
ture, 1722,  IV,  357;  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  1851,  II,
319-326.  Jane  Wenham  lived  nearly  twenty  years  after  her  trial;  she  died
in  1730  (Clutterbuck,  History  and  Antiquities  of  the  County  of  Hertford,
II,  461;  W.  B.  Gerish,  A  Hertfordshire  Witch,  p.  10).

130.  I  refer  to  such  remarks  as  the  following:  "As  the  devil  lost  his  em-
pire among  us  in  the  last  age,  he  exercised  it  with  greater  violence  among
the  Indian  Pawwaws,  and  our  New  England  colonists"  (Richard  Gough,
British  Topography,  1780,  II,  254,  note^);  "The  colonists  of  [Massa-
chusetts] appear  to  have  carried  with  them,  in  an  exaggerated  form,  the
superstitious  feelings  with  regard  to  witchcraft  which  then  [at  the  time  of
the  settlement]  prevailed  in  the  mother  country"  (Introduction  to  the
reprint  of  Cotton  Mather's  Wonders  of  the  Invisilsle  World,  in  the  Library
of  Old  Authors,  1862);  "In  the  dark  and  dangerous  forests  of  America
the  animistic  instinct,  the  original  source  of  the  superstition,  operated  so
powerfully  in  Puritan  minds  that  Cotton  Mather's  Wonders  of  the  Invisible
World  and  the  Salem  persecution  surpassed  in  credulity  and  malignity  any-
thing the  mother  country  could  show"  (Ferris  Greenslet,  Joseph  Glanvill,
New  York,  1900,  pp.  150-151);  "The  new  world,  from  the  time  of  its  settle-
ment, has  been  a  kind  of  health  resort  for  the  worn-out  delusions  of  the
old.  .  .  .  For  years  prior  to  the  Salem  excitement,  European  witchcraft  had
been  prostrate  on  its  dying  bed,  under  the  watchful  and  apprehensive  eyes
of  religion  and  of  law;  carried  over  the  ocean  it  arose  to  its  feet,  and  threat-
ened to  depopulate  New  England"  (George  M.  Beard,  The  Psychology  of
the  Salem  Witchcraft  Excitement,  New  York,  1882,  p.  i).

131.  Wright,  Narrative  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  II,  284.

132.  Proceedings  American  Antiquarian  Society,  New  Series,  V,  267.

133.  F.  Legge,  Witchcraft  in  Scotland,  in  The  Scottish  Review,  October,
1891,  XVIII,  263.

134.  On  modern  savages  as  devil-worshippers,  see,  for  example,  Henry
More,  Divine  Dialogues,  1668,  I,  404  ff.  (Dialogue,  iii,  sections  15-16).

135.  Mather,  Magnalia,  Book  i,  chap,  i,  §  2,  ed.  1853,  I,  42;  Book,  vi,
chap,  vi,  §3,  III,  436;  Jesuit  Relations,  ed.  Thwaites,  I,  286;  II,  76;  VIII,
124,  126.  See  also  Thomas  Morton,  New  EngHsh  Canaan,  1637,  chap,  ix,
ed.  Adams  (Prince  Society),  p.  150,  with  the  references  in  Mr.  Adams's
note.  Cf.  Hutchinson,  History  of  Massachusetts,  chap,  vi,  ed.  1795,  I,


592         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


419  fF.;  Diary  of  Ezra  Stiles,  June  13,  1773,  ed.  Dexter,  I,  385-386.  Cap-
tain John  Smith  says  of  the  Virginia  Indians:  "Their  chiefe  god  they  wor-
ship is  the  Diuell"  (A  Map  of  Virginia,  1612,  p.  29).

136.  Mayhew's  letter  of  October  22,  1652,  in  Eliot  and  Mayhew's  Tears
of  Repentance,  1653  (Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  3d
Series,  IV,  203-206);  Gookin,  Historical  Collections  of  the  Indians  in  New
England  (Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  I,  154).  See  the
references  in  Mr.  Adams's  note  to  Morton's  New  English  Canaan,  Prince
Society  edition,  p.  1 52,  and  compare  the  following  places  in  the  Eliot  Tracts
(as  reprinted  in  the  Massachusetts  Historical  Society,  Collections,  3d
Series,  IV),  — pp.  17,  19-20,  39,  50-51,  55-57,_77>  82,  1137I16,  i33-i34,
156,  186-187.  ^^^j  impression  that  Indian  ceremonies  made  on  a
devout  man  in  1745,  David  Brainerd's  Journal,  Mirabilia  Dei  inter  In-
dicos,  Philadelphia,  [1746,]  pp.  49-57:  —  "I  sat,"  writes  Brainerd,  "at  a
small  Distance,  not  more  than  Thirty  Feet  from  them,  (tho'  undiscover'd)
with  my  Bible  in  my  Hand,  resolving  if  possible  to  spoil  their  Sport,  and
prevent  their  receiving  any  Answers  from  the  infernal  World"  (p.  50).

137.  Gookin,  Historical  Collections  (Massachusetts  Historical  Society,
Collections,  I,  154);  Massachusetts  Records,  ed.  Shurtleff,  II,  177;  III,  98.

138.  The  Most  Strange  and  Admirable  Discoverie  of  the  Three  Witches
of  Warboys,  1593,  sigg.  B2  r°,  P  v°.

139.  Thomas  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613,  sig.  S;
The  Arraignment  and  Triall  of  lennet  Preston,  of  Gisborne  in  Craven,  in
the  Countie  of  York,  London,  161 2  (in  the  same,  sig.  Y2).

140.  Mary  Smith's  case,  Alexander  Roberts,  A  Treatise  of  Witchcraft,
1616,  pp.  52,  56,  57;  the  Husbands  Bosworth  case.  Letter  of  Alderman
Robert  Heyrick,  of  Leicester,  July  18,  1616,  printed  in  Nichols,  History
and  Antiquities  of  the  County  of  Leicester,  II,  471*.

141.  Edward  Fairfax,  Dsemonologia,  1621  (ed.  Grainge,  1882).

142.  Chetham  Society  Publications,  VI,  Ixiv.

143.  A  True  and  Exact  Relation  of  the  Severall  Informations  [etc.]  of
the  late  Witches,  London,  1645,  p.  ao;  T.  B.  Howell,  State  Trials,  IV,  846.

144.  Depositions  from  the  Castle  of  York,  [edited  by  James  Raine,]
Surtees  Society,  1861  (Publications,  XL),  pp.  28-30.

145.  The  same,  p.  58.

146.  The  same,  pp.  64-65,  67.

147.  Glanvil,  Saducismus  Triumphatus,  ed.  1682,  Relations,  pp.  96,  98,
100  (ed.  1726,  pp.  286,  288,  289).

148.  York  Depositions,  p.  82.

149.  The  same,  pp.  88-89,  9^-

150.  The  same,  pp.  112-114;  Glanvil,  ed.  1682,  pp.  160-161  (ed.  1726,
pp.  328-329).

151.  A  Tryal  of  Witches  ...  at  Bury  St.  Edmonds  .  .  .  1664,  London,
1682,  pp.  18,  20,  23,  26,  29,  34,  38  (Sir  Matthew  Hale's  case);  York  Deposi-
tions, pp.  124-125.

152.  Glanvil,  ed.  1682,  pp.  103-104,  109  (ed.  1726,  p.  291).

153.  Calendar  of  State  Papers,  Domestic,  1 667-1 668,  p.  4;  York  De-
positions, p.  154.


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


593


154.  York  Depositions,  p.  176.

155.  Ann  Tilling's  case,  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1832,  Part  I,  CII,
489  ff.;  Inderwick,  Side-Lights  on  the  Stuarts,  2d  ed.,  1891,  pp.  171-172,
191.

156.  York  Depositions,  pp.  192,  202-203.

157.  The  same,  p.  247.

158.  An  Account  of  the  Tryal  and  Examination  of  Joan  Butts,  1682.

159.  Margaret  Stothard's  case,  The  Monthly  Chronicle  of  North-Coun-
try Lore  and  Legend,  [II,]  1888,  p.  395.

160.  Hutchinson,  Historical  Essay,  1718,  pp.  44-45  (ed.  1720,  pp.  61-
62).  There  is  a  very  interesting  account  of  the  second  of  these  trials  (that
of  Elizabeth  Horner  or  Turner)  in  a  letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Exeter  from
Archdeacon  (?)  Blackburne,  who  attended  at  the  bishop's  request.  This
letter,  dated  September  14,  1696,  has  been  printed  by  Mr.  T.  Quiiler-
Couch  in  Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  XI,  498-499,  and  again  in  Brand's
Popular  Antiquities,  ed.  Hazlitt,  III,  103-104.  The  spectral  evidence
comes  out  clearly.  Of  Holt,  Blackburne  remarks:  "My  Lord  Chief  Justice
by  his  questions  and  manner  of  summing  up  the  Evidence  seem'd  to  me  to
believe  nothing  of  witchery  at  all."

161.  Dalton,  Country  Justice,  chap.  160,  §  5,  p.  384.  "The  court  justi-
fied themselves  from  books  of  law,  and  the  authorities  of  Keble,  Dalton
and  other  lawyers,  then  of  the  first  character,  who  lay  down  rules  of  con-
viction as  absurd  and  dangerous,  as  any  which  were  practised  in  New  Eng-
land" (Hutchinson,  History  of  Massachusetts,  ed.  1795,  II,  27).

162.  James  Burvile  testified  "That  hearing  the  Scratchings  and  Noises
of  Cats,  he  went  out,  and  saw  several  of  them;  that  one  of  them  had  a  Face
like  'Jane  Wenham;  that  he  was  present  several  Times  when  Anne  Thorn
said  she  saw  Cats  about  her  Bed;  and  more  he  would  have  attested,  but
this  was  thought  sufficient  by  the  Court"  ([F.  Bragge,]  A  Full  and  Im-
partial Account  of  the  Discovery  of  Sorcery  and  Witchcraft,  practis'd  by
Jane  Wenham,  London,  1712,  p.  29).  After  the  conviction  of  the  witch,
Ann  was  still  afflicted:  "Ann  Thorn  continues  to  be  frequently  troubl'd
with  the  Apparition  either  of  Jane  Wenham  in  her  own  Shape,  or  that  of  a
Cat,  which  speaks  to  her,  and  tempts  her  to  destroy  her  self  with  a  Knife
that  it  brings  along  with  it"  ([Bragge,]  Witchcraft  Farther  Display'd,
1712,  Introduction).  In  171 1  spectral  evidence  was  admitted  at  the  trial  of
eight  witches  at  Carrickfergus,  in  Ireland  (A  Narrative  of  some  Strange
Events  that  took  place  in  Island  Magee,  and  Neighbourhood,  in  171 1,  by
an  Eye  Witness,  Belfast,  1822,  Appendix,  pp.  49-50).

163.  A  Tryal  of  Witches,  as  above,  p.  40.

164.  "The  Judge  and  all  the  Court  were  fully  satisfied  with  the  Ver-
dict" (A  Tryal,  etc.,  p.  58).

165.  For  a  learned  discussion  of  spectral  evidence,  see  J.  B.  Thayer,  At-
lantic Monthly,  April,  1890,  LXV,  471  ff".

166.  Dr.  Hutchinson,  who  acknowledges  his  indebtedness  to  Holt,  men-
tions six  witches  as  tried  by  the  Chief  Justice  from  1691  to  1696,  and  adds,
"Several  others  in  other  Places,  about  Eleven  in  all,  have  been  tried  for
Witches  before  my  Lord  Chief  Justice  Holt^  and  have  all  been  acquitted.


594


WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


The  last  of  them  was  Sarah  Morduck,  accused  by  Richard  Hathaway,  and
tried  at  Guilford  Assize,  Anno  1701 "  (Historical  Essay,  2d  ed.,  pp.  58-63).
It  is  not  clear  whether  the  "eleven  in  all"  includes  the  seven  previously
mentioned.  On  the  Morduck-Hathaway  case,  cf.  Howell,  State  Trials,
XIV,  639  fF.

167.  Drake,  Annals  of  Witchcraft  in  New  England,  pp.  136,  138;  Noble,
Colonial  Society  Publications,  X  (1907),  21-23.

168.  Compare  Goodell's  remarks  on  the  reversal  of  attainder,  in  his
Reasons  for  Concluding  that  the  Act  of  171 1  became  a  Law,  1884.  I  have
not  considered  here  the  bearing  of  this  reversal,  or  of  the  attempt  to  pay
damages  to  the  survivors  or  their  heirs,  because  these  things  came  some-
what later.  It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  all  such  measures  of  repara-
tion, whatever  may  be  thought  of  their  sufficiency,  were  unexampled  in  the
history  of  witch-trials  the  world  over,  and  that  they  came  before  the  last
condemnation  for  witchcraft  in  England  (171 2).  See  the  references  ap-
pended by  Goodell  to  the  Act  of  1703  in  The  Acts  and  Resolves  of  the
Province  of  the  Massachusetts  Bay,  VI,  49-50.

169.  See  p.  338,  above.

170.  Legge,  as  above,  p.  264;  Register  of  the  Privy  Council  of  Scotland,
V  (1882),  409-410.

171.  Hutchinson,  p.  83;  2d  ed.,  p.  108.

172.  See  W.  F.  Poole  in  Winsor's  Memorial  History  of  Boston,  II,  133;
cf.  Noble,  Colonial  Society  Publications,  X  (1907),  20-23.

173.  See  Poole,  II,  133.  Dr.  Poole  finds  twelve  executions  in  New  Eng-
land before  1692.  This  makes  the  total  for  all  New  England,  from  1620  to
the  present  day,  34  (including  two  who  died  in  jail).  Cf.  C.  W.  Upham,
Salem  Witchcraft,  Boston,  1867,  II,  351;  S.  G.  Drake,  Annals  of  Witch-
craft, 1869,  pp.  191  ff.  In  this  part  of  the  chapter  I  have  made  a  few  quo-
tations from  a  book  of  my  own,  The  Old  Farmer  and  his  Almanack  (Bos-
ton, 1904).

174.  "They  were  the  first  of  all  people,"  writes  Mr.  Goodell,  "  to  escape
the  thraldom"  (Reasons  for  Concluding  that  the  Act  of  171 1  became  a
Law,  1884,  p.  21).

175.  See  Hutchinson,  Historical  Essay,  2d  ed.,  1720,  pp.  45  ff.

176.  John  Stearne,  Hopkins's  associate,  speaks  of  what  he  has  himself
"learned  and  observed  since  the  25.  of  March  1645  as  being  in  part  an
agent  in  finding  out  or  discovering  some  of  those  since  that  time,  being
about  two  hundred  in  number,  in  Essex,  Suffolke,  Northamptonshire,
Huntingtonshire,  Bedfordshire,  Norfolke,  Cambridgeshire,  and  the  Isle  of
Ely  in  the  County  of  Cambridge,  besides  other  places,  justly  and  de-
servedly executed  upon  their  legall  tryalls"  (A  Confirmation  and  Discovery
of  Witch-craft,  London,  1648,  To  the  Reader).  Stearne  wrote  his  book
after  the  death  of  Hopkins,  which  took  place  in  1647.  In  the  life  of  Hopkins
in  the  Dictionary  of  National  Biography,  the  Witch-Finder  is  said  to  have
begun  operations  in  1644.  This  is  a  manifest  error.  Hopkins  himself  (Dis-
covery of  Witches,  1647,  p.  2,  see  below)  says  that  his  experiences  began  at
Manningtree  "in  March  1644,"  but  Stearne's  statement  makes  it  clear  that
this  is  Old  Style,  for  Stearne  was  also  concerned  in  the  Manningtree  busi-


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


595


ness,  and  the  year  is  completely  established  by  the  report  of  the  proceed-
ings,—  A  True  and  Exact  Relation  of  the  severall  Informations  [etc.]  of  the
late  Witches,  London,  1645  (cf.  T.  B.  Howell's  State  Trials,  IV,  817  fF.).
The  traditional  statement  that  Hopkins  was  hanged  as  a  wizard  (cf.  Hudi-
bras,  Part  II,  canto  3,  II.  139  ff.)  is  disproved  by  the  following  passage  in
Stearne:  "  I  am  certain  (notwithstanding  whatsoever  hath  been  said  of  him)
he  died  peaceably  at  Manningtree,  after  a  long  sicknesse  of  a  Consump-
tion, as  many  of  his  generation  had  done  before  him,  without  any  trouble  of
conscience  for  what  he  had  done,  as  was  falsly  reported  of  him"  (p.  61).
For  the  record  of  his  burial,  August  12,  1647,  see  Notes  and  Queries,  ist
Series,  X,  285.  The  notion  that  Hopkins  was  "swum"  and,  since  he
floated,  was  subsequently  hanged,  most  likely  originated  in  a  document
criticising  his  performances  which  was  brought  before  the  Norfolk  judges
in  1646  or  (more  probably)  in  1647.  Hopkins  printed  a  reply  to  this  docu-
ment shortly  before  his  death,  — The  Discovery  of  Witches:  in  Answer  to
severall  Queries,  lately  delivered  to  the  Judges  of  Assize  for  the  County  of
Norfolk.  And  now  published  by  Matthew  Hopkins,  Witch-finder  (Lon-
don, 1647).  The  first  "querie,"  as  printed  by  Hopkins,  was  this:  —  "That
he  must  needs  be  the  greatest  Witch,  Sorcerer,  and  Wizzard  himselfe,  else
hee  could  not  doe  it."  Cf.  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  II,
I45  fF.;  Lives  of  Twelve  Bad  Men,  edited  by  Thomas  Seccombe,  London,
1894,  p.  64;  Ady,  A  Candle  in  the  Dark,  1656,  pp.  101-102;  James  Howell,
as  above  (note  7);  Gough,  British  Topography,  1780,  II,  254.

177.  Legge,  Scottish  Review,  XVIII,  273-274.  Ady  (A  Candle  in  the
Dark,  1656,  p.  105)  says:  "A  little  before  the  Conquest  of  Scotland  (as  is  re-
ported upon  good  intelligence)  the  Presbytery  of  Scotland  did,  by  their  own
pretended  authority,  take  upon  them  to  Summon,  Convent,  Censure,  and
Condemn  people  to  cruel  death  for  Witches  and  (as  is  credibly  reported)
they  caused  four  thousand  to  be  executed  by  Fire  and  Halter,  and  had  as
many  in  prison  to  be  tried  by  them,  when  God  sent  his  conquering  Sword
to  suppress  them."  The  "conquest"  to  which  Ady  refers  is  Cromwell's,  in
1650.  It  is  well  known  that  from  1640  to  Cromwell's  invasion,  witch  prose-
cution ran  riot  in  Scotland,  but  that  during  his  supremacy  there  were  very
few  executions  in  that  country  (see  Legge,  pp.  266-267).

178.  Mannhardt,  Die  Praktischen  Folgen  des  Aberglaubens,  p.  34.

179.  Soldan,  Geschichte  der  Hexenprozesse,  ed.  Heppe,  I,  492.

180.  Remy,  Daemonolatreia,  Lugduni,  1595.

181.  See  note  105,  above.

182.  Soldan,  Geschichte  der  Hexenprozesse,  ed.  Heppe,  II,  38  ff.

183.  See  the  extraordinary  enumeration  in  Roskoff,  Geschichte  des
Teufels,  Leipzig,  1869,  II,  293  ff.;  cf.  S.  Riezler,  Geschichte  der  Hexen-
prozesse in  Bayern,  pp.  141  ff.,  283  ff.

184.  Potts,  The  Wonderfull  Discoverie  of  Witches,  1613.

185.  Matthew  Hopkins,  Discovery  of  Witches,  1647,  p.  3.

186.  John  Stearne,  A  Confirmation  and  Discovery  of  Witch-craft,  1648,
p.  14.

187.  Wright,  Narratives  of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  chap.  xxv.

188.  Memorials,  1732,  pp.  163,  450.


596         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


189.  Hugh  Hare,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  in  his  charge  at  the  General
Quarter  Sessons  for  Surrey,  at  Dorking,  on  April  5,  1692,  spoke  as  follows:
"Besides  these  Crimes  which  are  so  frequently  and  so  imprudently  perpe-
trated, there  are  some  others  also  which  may  not  improperly  be  ranked
among  the  offences  against  Moral  Justice.  But,  Gentlemen,  the  proof  of
some  of  them  is  so  difficult,  and  they  are  so  seldom  practised,  that  I  shall
but  just  put  you  in  mind  of  them,  and  that  you  are  to  enquire  and  present
all  Persons  that  have  invocated,  entertained  or  employed  any  wicked
Spirit,  or  have  used  any  Witchcraft,  Charm,  or  Sorcery;  this  is  a  sin  of  a
very  deep  die,  being  directly  against  the  first  Commandment,  and  is
punished  with  Death  both  by  the  Law  of  God,  and  by  a  Statute  made  in  the
first  Year  of  King  James  the  First;  but  it  is  so  hard  a  matter  to  have  full
proof  brought  of  it,  that  no  Jury  can  be  too  cautious  and  tender  in  a  prose-
cution of  this  Nature.  However,  where  the  evidence  is  clear  and  undeni-
able, you  must  proceed  according  to  your  Oaths."  (Surrey  Archaeological
Collections,  XII  [1895],  128-129.)  Coincidence  in  date  justifies  the  quota-
tion.

190.  A  Relation  of  the  Diabolical  Practices  of  above  Twenty  Wizards
and  Witches,  1697;  Sadducismus  Debellatus,  1698;  A  History  of  the
Witches  of  Renfrewshire,  1877.  A  seventh  committed  suicide  in  prison.

191.  See  Inderwick,  Side-Lights  on  the  Stuarts,  2d  ed.,  1891,  pp.  193-
194;  Notestein,  pp.  Z^Z'ZZZ^  418-419.

192.  That  is,  Francis  Bragge,  who  was  also  a  clergyman,  being  Curate
of  Biggleswade  according  to  W.  B.  Gerish  (A  Hertfordshire  Witch,  p.  8).
For  details,  see  pp.  361-362,  above.

193.  Blackstone,  Commentaries,  Book  iv,  chap.  4,  sec.  6  (4th  ed.,  1770,
IV,  60-61);  cf.  Dr.  Samuel  A.  Green,  Groton  in  the  Witchcraft  Times,
1883,  p.  29.  In  1715  and  1716  there  appeared,  in  London,  A  Compleat
History  of  Magick,  Sorcery,  and  Witchcraft,  in  two  volumes,  which
asserted  the  truth,  and  gave  the  particulars,  of  a  long  line  of  such  phe-
nomena, from  the  case  of  the  Witches  of  Warboys  (in  1592)  to  the  Salem
Witchcraft  itself.  The  book  was  the  occasion  of  Dr.  Francis  Hutchinson's
Historical  Essay,  published  in  1718,  and  in  a  second  edition  in  1720.  Rich-
ard Boulton,  the  author  of  the  Compleat  History,  returned  to  the  charge  in
1722,  in  The  Possibility  and  Reality  of  Magick,  Sorcery,  and  Witchcraft,
Demonstrated.  Or,  a  Vindication  of  a  Compleat  History  of  Magick,  etc.
The  Compleat  History  came  out  anonymously,  but  Boulton,  who  describes
himself  as  "sometime  of  Brazen-Nose  College  in  Oxford,"  acknowledges
the  authorship  in  his  reply  to  Hutchinson.

194.  British  Museum,  Additional  MS.  35838,  fol.  404;  Notestein,  pp.
330-331,  419;  Summ.ers,  The  Geography  of  Witchcraft,  1927,  pp.  160-161.
I  leave  in  suspense  the  statement  that  Jane  Clarke  of  Great  Wigston  and
her  son  and  daughter  were  tried  at  Leicester  in  1717  (Leicestershire  and
Rutland  Notes  and  Queries,  I  [1891],  247).  I  suspect  this  is  the  same  case.
On  the  alleged  executions  at  Northampton  in  1705  and  Huntingdon  in  1716
see  Notestein,  pp.  375-383,  who  makes  out  a  very  strong  case  for  the  ficti-
tious character  of  the  pamphlets  that  profess  to  record  them.  In  the  Pro-
ceedings of  the  American  Antiquarian  Society,  New  Series,  XVIII  (1907),


NOTES  TO  CHAPTER  XVIII


597


206,  I  accepted  the  1705  case  and  rejected  (though  not  decidedly)  that  of
1716.

195.  The  Case  of  Witchcraft  at  Coggeshall,  Essex,  in  the  year,  1699,
being  the  Narrative  of  the  Rev.  J.  Boys,  Minister  of  that  Parish.  Printed
from  his  Manuscript  in  the  possession  of  the  Pubhsher.  London,  A.  Russell
Smith,  1901  (50  copies  only).

196.  In  Calef,  More  Wonders  of  the  Invisible  World,  1700,  pp.  3  ff.

197.  An  Answer  of  a  Letter  from  a  Gentleman  in  Fife,  1705;  cf.  also
A  Collection  of  Rare  and  Curious  Tracts  on  Witchcraft  and  the  Second
Sight,  Edinburgh,  1820,  pp.  79  ff.

198.  Daily  Journal,  January  15,  1731,  as  quoted  in  the  Gentleman's
Magazine  for  1731,  I,  29.

199.  Daines  Barrington  points  with  pride  to  this  early  abolition  of
penalties:  "It  is  greatly  to  the  honour  of  this  country,  to  have  repealed  all
the  statutes  against  this  supposed  crime  so  long  ago  as  the  year  1736,  when
laws  of  the  same  sort  continue  in  full  force  against  these  miserable  and
aged  objects  of  compassion,  in  every  other  part  of  Europe"  (Observations
on  the  More  Ancient  Statutes,  3d  ed.,  1769,  p.  367,  on  20  Henr.  VI).

200.  Gough,  British  Topography,  1780,  I,  517.

201.  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  1751,  XXI,  186,  198;  Wright,  Narra-
tives of  Sorcery  and  Magic,  II,  326  ff.;  Gough,  as  above,  I,  431.

202.  Soldan,  ed.  Heppe,  II,  314,  322,  327.

203.  See,  for  example,  A.  Lowenstimm,  Aberglaube  und  Strafrecht,  Ber-
lin, 1897;  W.  Mannhardt,  Die  Praktischen  Folgen  des  Aberglaubens,  1878
(Deutsche  Zeit-  und  Streit-Fragen,  ed.  by  F.  von  HolztendorfF,  VII,Nos.  97,
98);  Wuttke,  Der  Deutsche  Volksaberglaube  der  Gegenwart,  2d  ed.,  1869;
the  chapter  on  Hexerei  und  Hexenverfolgung  im  Neunzehnten  Jahrhun-
dert,  in  Soldan,  Geschichte  der  Hexenprozesse,  ed.  by  Heppe,  II,  330  ff.;  cf.
The  Monthly  Chronicle  of  North-Country  Lore  and  Legend,  [II,]  1888,  p.
394;  North  Riding  Record  Society,  Publications,  IV,  20,  note;  History  of
Witchcraft,  sketched  from  the  Popular  Tales  of  the  Peasantry  of  Nithsdale
and  Galloway  (R.  H.  Cromek,  Remains  of  Nithsdale  and  Galloway  Song,
1810,  pp.  272  ff.);  H.  M.  Doughty,  Blackwood's  Magazine,  March,  1898,
CLXIII,  394-395;  Brand's  Popular  Antiquities,  ed.  Hazlitt,  III,  71,  95,  96,
100  ff.;  The  Antiquary,  XLI,  363;  W.  G.  Black,  Folk-Medicine,  1883;  Miss
Burne,  Shropshire  Folk-Lore,  chap,  xiii;  W.  Henderson,  Notes  on  the
Folk-Lore  of  the  Northern  Counties,  1879,  chap,  vi;  J.  G.  Campbell,  Witch-
craft and  Second  Sight  in  the  Highlands  and  Islands  of  Scotland,  1902;
Notes  and  Queries,  ist  Series,  VII,  613,  XI,  497-498;  3rd  Series,  II,  325;
4th  Series,  III,  238,  VII,  53,  VIII,  44;  5th  Series,  V,  126,  223,  IX,  433,  X,
205,  XI,  66;  6th  Series,  II,  145,  IV,  510;  7th  Series,  IX,  425,  XI,  43;
8th  Series,  IV,  186,  192,  V,  226,  VI,  6,  VII,  246;  9th  Series,  II,  466,  XII,
187;  the  journal,  Folk-Lore,  passim.

204.  Cf.  Allen  Putnam,  Witchcraft  of  New  England  explained  by  Mod-
ern Spiritualism,  Boston,  1880.

205.  See  pp.  251  ff.,  above.  On  the  prevalence  of  occult  phenomena  in
troublous  times  cf.  Froude,  History  of  England  from  the  Fall  of  Wolsey  to
the  Death  of  Elizabeth,  II  (1856),  182-183.


598         WITCHCRAFT  IN  OLD  AND  NEW  ENGLAND


206.  Legge,  The  Scottish  Review,  XVIII,  262.  See  also  Newes  from
Scotland  declaring  the  Damnable  Life  of  Dr.  Fian,  1591  (Roxburghe  Club
reprint).

207.  Mather  Papers,  Massachusetts  Historical  Society  Collections,  4th
Series,  VIII,  366-368.  This  was  the  same  Joshua  Moodey,  it  will  be  re-
membered, who  afterwards  assisted  Philip  English  and  his  family  to  escape
from  jail  in  Boston,  and  thus  saved  them  from  being  executed  as  guilty  of
witchcraft  (Sibley,  Harvard  Graduates,  I,  376-377).

208.  Professor  G.  L.  Burr,  in  an  eloquent  essay  entitled  "New  Eng-
land's place  in  Witchcraft"  (Proceedings  American  Antiquarian  Society,
New  Series,  XXI  [1911],  185-217),  joins  issue  vigorously  on  these  theses.
But  I  let  them  stand  as  they  were  originally  printed  (in  1907),  except  with
regard  to  a  detail  in  the  fifteenth  thesis,  for  I  have  never  seen  any  reason
to  modify  them  further.


INDEX


INDEX


Aarne,  A.,  519

Abbot,  George,  323,  553,  575
Abbott,  G.  F.:  see  Macedonia
Abdias,  383

Abingdon,  419;  Thomas  of,  65,  189,  439

abortion,  32,  444,  588

Abt,  Adam,  172,  448,  458,  493,  504

Acca,St.,  153

Achelous,  407

Achilles  Tatius,  537

Acron,  544

Acta  Sanctorum,  383,  449,  456,  494,

502,  514,  529,  544
Adams,  C.  F-,  591  f.
Addicion  (1564),  An,  475
Addison,  Joseph,  214,  326,  369
Additional  mss.,  391,  406,  435,  451,  490,

495.  501.  Si5>  520,  541  f;  554,  577>
596

Addy,  S.  O.,  400,  423,  431  {.,  469,  486,

494,  5",  515,  523,  525
Adelbert,  St.,  190
Adowne,  John,  61
Adrammelech,  210
Adso,  380

Ady,  Thomas,  159,  350  f.,  377,  405,  479,

488,  501,  540,  564,  595
^Ifric,  30,  145,  202,  219,  239,  379  f.,

385  ff-,  393,  398,  449  f-,  514  f-,  548
^lian,  500,  513
^Ired,  544
JE\s\,  75
^quitius,  222
aeromancy,  57
/Esculapius,  221
/Esir,  133
.^sop,  106
j5^theldreda,  St.,  125
^thelred,  28,  233,  238,  383,  385
rEthelstan,  29,  I43,  41 5
afFodille,  449

Africa,  26  f.,  49,  55,  92  f.,  134,  172,

174  f.,  237  f.;  Notes,  passim
Agnew,  Sir  Andrew,  469,  496
Agobard,  152

Agricola,  Georgius,  517  f.,  522


agriculture:  see  Burdick;  crops;  Ran-

tasalo
Agrip,  439

Agrippa,  H.  C,  74,  452,  462,  514

ague,  34,  142,  218,  461

Ailsworth,  75

Ainsworth,  W.  H.,  286  ff.

Ainu,  413

air  poisoned,  27

Alston,  G.,  402,  454  f.,  473

Aitkin,  Lucy,  566

alchemy,  64  f.,  114,  187,  261

Aldhelm,  382,  397

Aldo,  i8of.

ale,  procured  by  witchcraft,  34,  171 ;  be-
witched: see  brewing
Alexander  the  Great,  105  f.,  116,  537
.'\lfonso  el  Sabio,  412,  450,  458,  503
Alfred,  King,  27,175
Allan,  Ann,  164
Allatius  (Allacci),  Leo,  531  f.
Alldridge,T.  J.,  506
Allein:  see  Alley
Allen,  Robert,  229;  Thomas,  180
Alley  (Allein),  William,  263
alligator,  49
Allington,  Richard,  176
Alne,  107

Alneto  (Lannoy),  Cornelius  de,  557

Alnwick,  William,  187

Alphabet  of  Tales,  44,  118,  224,  239  f.,

440,  469,  502
Alphabetum  Narrationum,  44,  118,  132,

440
Alsace,  368
Altafex,  William,  53
Alvernus:  see  Guilielmus
Alverton,  539
Alwincle,  230

Ambrose  Waterduke,  211  f,
Ambrosetti,  J.  B.,  493
Amos,  Andrew,  409
Amphlett,  John,  540
amulets,  31,  52  ff.,  146,  389,  396,  453,
471,  500

Amundesham,  John,  416,  418,  457


6o2


INDEX


Amylyon,  ,  209

Anabaptists,  180,  246
Anania,  G.  L.  d',  402,  454,  515  f.,  533,
547

Ancetyr,  Alice,  188  f.

Ancre,  Pierre  de  1',  292,  368,  441,  445,

470,  494,  501,  504,521,  540,  548  f.,  588

Ancyra,  Synod  of,  244,  384,  394

Andel,  M.  A.  van,  391

Anderson,  Sir  Edmund,  298,  300,  307,
311  f.;  Elizabeth,  590

Andover,  Mass.,  494

Andree,  R.,  412,  423,  434,  462,  492

Andrew  Malchus,  110,  210

Andrian-Werburg,  F.  von,  473

Andros,  Sir  Edmund,  371

angels,  67,  86,  240  f.,  344,  414

Anglo-Saxon  period,  27  fF.,  74  f.,  95,
104, 113,  117,  133, 143, 145  ff.,  151  ff.,
170  ff.,  175,  191,  205,  214  f.,  218  f.,
449,  530,  538.  See  Cockayne

animal  disguises,  548

animal  shape:  see  metamorphosis

animals,  demons  as,  134  f.

animals  inside  one,  134  f.

animals,  spells  against,  32

anise:  see  dill

Anjou  Chronicle,  494

Anonimalle  Chronicle,  450

Anthologia  Palatina,  537

Antichrist,  28

Anz,  H.,  524

Aphaca,  233

Apollodorus,  44I

Apollonia,  St.,  391

Apollonides,  537

ApoUonius  of  Tyana,  336

apparitions,  58,  62,  154,  175,  228,  344  f.
See  ghosts

Apuleii  Herbarium,  388  f.,  474

Apuleius,  114,  183,  448,  458,  493,  532

archery,  180

Arderne,  John,  389

Argentine,  Richard,  399,  474,  503,  505,

551
Argo,  16
aristolagi,  449
Aristophanes,  532
Aristotle,  537
Arkillus,  221

Aries,  Council  of,  145;  Ca;sarius  of,  398:

see  Augustine
Armoricus,  Guillelmus,  534
Armstrong,  W.  E.,  434


Arnason,  J.,  485

Arnobius,  410,  520

Arnold  of  Liege,  118

Arnold,  Mother,  550

Arnuphis,  1 53

Arphaxat,  30  '

arrow  turned,  79

arrowheads,  133  f.

arrows:  see  elfshot

Artemidorus,  513

Arthur,  King,  116,  178,  222,  524

Arthur  and  Gorlagon,  493

Arundel,  Earls  of:  Richard  Fitz-Alan,

176;  Philip  Howard,  559
Arundel  mss.,  395;  Penitential,  54,  166,

384,  404,  437,  441
Asclepias,  221
ash,  cleft,  etc.,  148
Ashmole,  E.,  535;  mss.,  574
Ashtaroth,  30
Asia  Minor,  527
Askewe,  Anne,  467
Asmodeus,  172,  212
Aspinwal,  Thomas,  131
ass,  148,  183

assault,  47  f.  See  scratching

Asser,  493

Asshewell,  John,  83

Assmann,B.,  385  f.,393

Assyrians,  27,  73,  432.  See  Tallqvist

Aston,  Sir  Roger,  309

astrology,  26,  45,  70,  73,  82,  226  ff.,

258  f.,  383,  414,  555
Atharva-Veda,  442
Athens,  plague  at,  136
Atkinson,  J.  C,  98,  429,  484;  W.,  230
attainder,  594
Auberi,  440

Aubrey,  John,  55,  121,  158,  190,  199,
220,  302,  318,  321,  421,  435,  437,  476,

498,  535  f-,  576
Audollent,  A.,  408,  4I4,  424,  440,  507
aufhock,  220  f.

augury,  30,  45,  51,  57,  165,  383  f.  See

divination
Augustine,  St.,  42,  116,  183  f.,  239,  380,

385  ff.,  389,  393,  398,  467,  489,  506,

548

Augustus,  116

Aun,  King,  438

aurum  potabile,  69,  86

Australia,  134,  175,  401  f.,  405  f.,  413,

433  f-,  455,  473,  503,  532
automatic  writing,  213


INDEX


603


Auvergne,  Guillaume  d':  see  Alvernus
ave,  36  f.

Avesbury,  Robert  of,  403
Awder,  William,  88
Axminster,  238
Azo,  517
Aztecs,  112

Babcock,  J.  W.,  434  f.
Babraham,  207
Babylonia,  73,  237

Bacon,  Francis,  50,  141,  331,  377,  406,
420;  Nathaniel,  539;  Sir  Nathaniel,
474;  Roger,  235,  240

Badby,  Thomas,  181

Baddaford,  John  and  Joan,  9  ff.

badger,  54

bag,  magic   (hoodoo,  conjure),  48  ff.

See  milk-sucking
Baildon,  W.  P.,  416,  452
Baines,  Edward,  562,  573,  589
Baissac,  Charles,  493;  Jules,  588
Baker,  J.  B.,  424,  478;  Mother,  87;  Sir

Richard  (chronicle),  420,  475,  574  ff.;

William,  71
Bakewell,  579
baking,  35,  170  f._  _
Baidewyne,  Dionisia,  51
baldmony,  449

Baldock,  Ralph,  51,  187,  192  f.,  227,
548

Baldwin,  J.  F.,  534

Bale,  John,  34  ff.,  58,  84,  164,  170  ff.,
39h  439.  443.  466  f.,  469,  488  f.,  545,
556;  Robert,  417

Ballantyne,  A.,  455

balls  of  clay,  48,  192  f.

Baltisham,  230

Bamberg,  368

Banastre,  William,  187

Bancroft,  Richard,  298  ff.,  572

Bang,  A.  C,  388,  390  ff.,  406,  433,  435,
444,  453,  465,  468  f.,  471,  481,  485,

490, 505, 507  f.,  511  ff.,  515, 527;  v.,

588

Banticke,  Jonathan,  14

baptism,  repeated,  145;  of  image,  76,  82,

I48,  1 51;  of  cock,  cat,  or  dog,  94,  148,

206,  208.  See  font  water
Barbason,  424,  520
Bardan,  P.,  422,  484
Barentur,  424,  520
barguests,  176
Barham,  R.  H.,  79


Baring-Gould,  S.,  390,  463,  468,  492
Barker,  Robert,  207,  228
Barking,  550
Barley,  Thomas,  188
Barnes,  Richard,  115,  129  f.
Barnet,  Battle  of,  153
Barnett,  L.  D.,  402,  517
Barnstable,  20  f.
Barnstaple,  20
Baro,  158,  211
barrel,  spiked,  97
barrenness,  26  f.,  32,  113
Barrington,  Daines,  597;  Sir  Francis,
309

Barron  (fiend),  477

Barrow,  Dr.,  302;  Isaac,  336  f.

Bartels,_M.,  434,  444,  453,  455,  507

Bartholin,  Thomas,  456,  499,  531

Bartholomew,  St.,  30

Bartholomew  of  Farne  175,  218

Barthram,  Oliffe,  182,  217

Barton,  Elizabeth,  64  f.

Bartsch,  K.,  391  f.,  433,  464,  486,  496,

498,  507,  510.  513
Basedow,  H.,  455
Basil  of  Ca;sarea,  239
Basile,  Giambattista,  525
basin,  57,  165,  186.  See  mirror
Basin,  The,  fabliau,  201
Basin,  Bernard,  463
Basques:  see  Labourd
Basset,  R.,  493,  532
bat,  135,  175,492
Batchelor,  J.,  413

Bate  (Batte),  Richard,  89  f.;  William,

89  f-,  315
Bates,  H.  W.,  455

Bateson,  M.,  539
bath,  79
Bath,  44,  75
Batte:  see  Bate
Battell,  Andrew,  473
battle  charms,  31  ff.,  53  f,
battle  maidens,  29  f.
Batutah,  Ibn,  542
Eaum,  P.  F.,  440

Baxter,  Richard,  133,  448,  454,  456,  465,

474  f-,  499,  521,  525,  565.
Bayle,  Pierre,  350
Bayley,  John,  555
Bayly,  Joan,  99;  Robert,  189
Beale,  John,  459;  S.,  541
Beamont,  W.,  452,  495
bear,  175  f.


6o4


INDEX


Beard,  G.  M.,  591
Beatty,  K.  J.,  493

Beauchamp,  Richard  Lord,  and  Lady,

139  .
Beaumanoir,  Philippe  de  Rami,  Sire  de,

544

Beaumont,  and  Fletcher,  498;  John,

462,521.    See  Fletcher
Beauvais,  Vincent  of,  43,  106,  239  f.,

440,  492,  502
Beaver,  W.  N.,  424,  434
Bechstein,  L.,  496
Becket,  Thomas,  226
bed,  throwing  out  of,  217
bedclothes  twitched  off,  217
Bede,  29,  31,  58,  152,  202,  222,  226,

380  f.,  384  ff.,  393,  462
Bedford,  Arthur,  520
Bedford,  58,  173;  John  of  Lancaster,

Duke  of,  83.  See  Jacquette
Bedfordshire,  236,  272  f.,  594
bee-charms,  32,  163,  191
Beere,  Alice,  8

bees  and  host,  150;  imps  as  bees,  179  ff.,

208
beetle,  499

Beggar's  Curse,  The,  132

Bekker,  Balthasar,  340,  351  ff.,  541,

578,  584
belemnites,  49
Belfour,  A.  O.,  397
Belgium:  see  Low  Countries
Bell  Witch,  The,  521,  525
Bell,  J.  H.,  401,  419,  435,  511  f.,  521;

John, 199
Bellie  Blind,  113,  215
bells  against  demons  and  storms,  158
Bellucci,  G.,  401,  453,  500
Belly  Blind,  113,  215
Belphares,  208
Belton,  Mariot  de,  107
Benedict  IX,  240;  XII,  53
Benet,  Johanna,  85;  Thomas,  86

Benevent,  ,  378

Benger,  Sir  Thomas,  69,  254
Bennet,  Elizabeth,  248,  264  f.
Bennett,  W.  P.,  478
Ben(n)o,  545
Bensart,  Maturyn,  86
Bentham,  Thomas,  250
Bentley,  W.  H.,  401,  506
Beowulf,  205,  522
Berfuire  (Bersuire),  Pierre,  437  f.
Bere,  John,  36


Berewold,  Richard,  193,  403

Bergen,  Fanny  D.,  390,  402,  423,  431,

436,  461,  463,  468,  471,  480,  484,

486  f.,  497  f.,  510  f.,  527
Berith,  30,  202
Berkeley,  the  Witch  of,  43  f.
Berkshire,  527
Berkyng,  John,  195
Bermuda,  358

Bernard,  Richard,  235,  273  f.,  325,  377,
400,  421,  427  f.,  435,  503,  505,  512,

536,  540, 565
Bernou,  Jean,  492
Berthold  of  Regensburg,  42
Berthold,  O.,  405
Bertiani,  Annales,  474  f.
beryl,  80,  187  f.
Best,  Edetha,  108  '
betony,  448
Beuon,  St.,  529
Beveridge,  D.,  421,  480
Beverley,  Johanna,  107
Beverley  Minster,  239
Bewick,  Thomas,  451
Bezemer,  T.  J.,493
Bianchi,  V.,  399

bible  as  charm,  146  f.;  texts  as  spells,
52,  146,  196  ff.,  436;  bible  (or  psalter)
and  key,  71,  186,  190,  196  ff.,  553

biblical  exegesis,  355  ff.

Bidez,  J.,537

Bieber,  F.  J.,  398,  526

bier,  ordeal  of  the,  345

bilewit,  522

Billie  Blin,  215

Billington,  Isabella,  148

Billson,  C.  J.,  497

Bilson,  John,  545;  Leonard,  258,  552,
556

Bilson,  the  Boy  of,  324  f.,  456,  578
Bilwiz,  215

binding  spells,  3,  31,  200  ff.,  361

Bingen,  214

Bingham,  Richard,  557

Binsfeld,  Peter,  443,  454,  476,  492,  521,

540,  547  f.
Binz,  Carl,  584

Birch,  Thomas,  406,  492,  517,  575,  583;

W.  de  G.,  388,  415
birds,  demons  and  witches  as,  64,  161 ;

167  f.,  176,  494.  See  augury,  striges
Birlinger,  A.,  464,  476,  496,  498,  517
Birt,  H.  N.,  552,  556
birthmarks,  142


INDEX


605


Bisclavret,  Lai  de,  494

Bishopwilton,  34

Blachford,  Mother,  20

Black  Assize,  283,  347

Black  Dog  of  Bungay,  156  f.

black  fast,  129  f.,  229,  466

Black,  W.  G.,  390  f.,  424  f.,  427,  448,

459>  467,  47o>  497>  597

Blackburne,  •  ,  593

Blackstone,  Sir  William,  326,  369
Blade,  J.  F.,428,  502,  514,  527
bladebone,  100.  See  scapulimancy
Blagden,  C.  O.,  442
Blagrave,  Joseph,  421,  434  f.,  480
Blair,  E.  H.,  413

Blake,  Thomas,  138  f.,  228;  Lady,  her
son,  90

Blakeborough,  R.,  422,  430  f.,  453,  465,

468,  471,  480,  483,  485,  487,  498,  515-

See  Fairfax-Blakeborough
Blakeway,^;.  B.,475
Blanche  d'Artois,  76
Blandy,  Mary,  438
Blashill,  Thomas,  400
blasting  trees,  etc.,  35.  See  crops
Blatchford,  Lizzie,  20  f.
Blau,_L.,  425,  440,  444,  502,  536
bleeding  of  corpse,  345
Blefken,  Dithmar,  477,  514
blessings,  214  f.
Blickling  Homilies,  28
blindness,  190
Blinkenberg,  C,  401
Bliss,  Philip,  576
Blois,  Peter  of,  44  f.,  75
blood,    as    medicine,    31,    383,  460;

staunching,  32;  feeding  imps  with,

177,  179,  208  f.;  sucking,  166  f.,  224,

245,  268
blooding:  see  scratching
bloody  milk,  163,  166
Bloom,  J.  H.,  475
blue,  37  ^

Blundevill,  Thomas,  220

Boaistuau,  Pierre,  448,  472

Boas,  F.,  516

boats:  see  seafaring

Bochart,  Samuel,  397,  531

Bodin,  Jean,  25,  88,  182,  249,  273,  425,

431,  441,  480,  485,  492  f-,  496,  5oo>
502,  511  f.,  517,  533,  540,  546  f.,  549,
560,  563  fF.  .

Bodmin,  55,  103,  175

Boece,  Hector,  86,  117  ■


Bottiger,  C.  A.,  443
Bogg,  Edmund,  402,  436
boggarts,  176

Boguet,  Henry,  41 2,  447,  454,  480,  483,

533,  548
Bohnhorst,  J.,  447  f.
Bois,  Jules,  91
Bold,  Henry,  435  f.
Boleyn,  Anne,  107
Bolingbroke,  Roger,  81  fF.
Bolte,  Johannes,  452,  502,  514  f.,  519,

563

Bompas,  C.  H.,  493,  505,  532

Bonavant,  Edward,  134

Bonaventura,  St.,  444,  463

Bond,  F.,  470;  F.  B.,  520

Bone,  Thomas,  574

Boniface  VIII,  241  f.;  IX,  403

Bonner,  Edmund,  1 14  f.,  227,  253  ff.,  553

Bonnet,  M.,  486

Bonus,  Alexander,  557

Bonwick,  J.,  414,  455

Book  of  Quinte  Essence,  447

books  of  magic,  38,  58,  65,  70,  80,  83,

110,  189,  207  {.,  210,  228,  552
Boorde  (Borde),  Andrew,  122,  471,  476
boot,  devil  in,  1 10
bootfull  of  gold,  206
Boothroyd,  B.,  533,  538
Borde:  see  Boorde
Borneo,  399,  413,  455,  505  f.,  543
Borrowby,  Prior,  229
Bosman,  W.,  543
Bosquet,  A.,  496,  523
Boston,  Mass.,  129
Boswell-Stone,  W.  G.,  534
Bothwell,  Francis,  278,  371
Botreaux,  William  Lord,  80;  Sir  Ralph,

80

Bottle  Imp,  105

bottles  buried  or  heated,  49,  102  f.
Bottrell,  William:  see  Cornwall
Boulton,  Richard,  596
Bourbon,  Etienne  de,  417,  469  f.,  496,

503, 530
Bourke,  J.  G.,  443,  482
Bourn,  Dr.,  435
Bourquelot,  F.,  492
Bouvet,  ,  405

Bovet,  Richard,  421,  456,  477,  521,  525,

529,  545,  565
Bovill,  Alice,  590
Bower,  Edmond,  503,  524
Bowmer,  Agnes,  38


6o6


INDEX


Boy,  Prince  Rupert's  dog,  176  f.

Boyes,  J.,  473,  506

Boyle,  Robert,  205,  336,  459

Boys,  J.,  369  f.,421,  539

Brabant:  see  Low  Countries

Bracara,  Martin  of,  490

Bradewelle,  Sir  Osbern  de,  215

Bradley,  Henry,  524;  M.  H.,  479,  508  f.

Bragge,  Francis,  581,  583,  593,  596

Brainerd,  David,  592

bramble,  386

Bramhall,  John,  178

Brampton,  66

Brand,  John,  434  f.,  440,  448, 480,  487  {.,

509,  511  f.,  555,  589,  593,  597
Brandon,  juggler,  86  f.
Brattle,  Thomas,  358  f.,  512
Bray,  Mrs.  E.  A.,  460  f.,  467,  475,  498,

5io>  523,  547
brazen  head,  240;  horse,  56
bread,  489;  ordeal  of,  237  f.;  holy  bread,

147;  loaf  burned,  488.    See  baking;

host;  loaf
Bremen,  Adam  of,  233
Brereton,  Sir  William,  401
brewing,  19,  27,  35,  39  f.,  103, 170  f.,  385
Brewster,  A.  B.,  402,  433
Brian,  Robert,  199

Brianzun  (Brianjon),  Bartholomew  de,

241 ;  Joan  de,  241
Bridgman,  John,  321
Bridlington,  the  Hermit  of,  226
Brie,  Maria,  378,  387,  390,  392  f.
Brigge,  Mabel,  129,  229
Briggs,  G.  W.,  399,  41 1,  423,  432,  464
Brightling,  214
bristles,  88,  90, 134,  160
Bristol,  134

Brockett,  J.  T.,  425,  432,  471,  511,  528
Brodie-Innes,  J.  W.,  568,  578
Brome,  Richard,  271,  589
Bromley,  Sir  Edward,  287,  311  f.
Brom(p)ton,  John,  397,  440,  502
Bromyard,  Johannes  de,  437
Brotanek,  R.,  379,  385,  387,  393
Brown,  William,  404
Browne,  Sir  Thomas,  142,  220,  334  f.,

.384,  398,  442f.,_445>  461,  475>  498;

Thomas,  243;  William,  36.  See  Orde

Brown
brownies,  215
Browning,  Robert,  437
Bruce,  H.  A.,  521;  J.  D.,  445,  524;  John,

500


Bruen,  John, 570
Brugges,  John,  56
Brun,  P.  le,  536
Brunfeld,  205

Brunne,  Robert  of,  43,  51,  164  fF.,  186,

192,202,398,514
Brunswick,  410

Brut,  128,  416  fF.,  450,  474,  500
Brutus,  47

Buckingham,  Dukes  of:  Edward,  228  f.;

George,  317;  Henry,  61
Buckinghamshire,  100,  110,  439,  527
Budge,  E.  A.  W.,411
Biicheler,  F.,  531
Euhler,  G.,  402,  4II
Biirger,  G.  A.,  431
buffalo,  537
Bufton,  John,  539
Bugge,  S.,  438,  477  f.    See  Edda
Bulcock,  John,  10;  Joan,  10
Bulgaria,  472
bull,  494

Bullein,  William,  259  f.
Bullen,  A.  H.,  557

BuUinger,  Henry,  262/.,  409,  559,  570  f.

Bullock,  C.  C:  see  Maryland

bumblebees,  179,  208

Bungay,  Friar,  153

Bungay,  156

Bungie,  Mother,  66,  550

Burchard,  29,  47,  54,  104,  163,  382,

384  ff.,  393,  404.  See  Corrector
Burden,  Anne,  590
Burdett,  Thomas,  138  ff.
Burdick,  L.  D.,  425,  433,  472,  480
Burgess,  J.  J.  H.,453,  484
Burgh,  Hubert  de.  Earl  of  Kent,  108
Burghley,  Lord,  88,  520
burglar's  magic,  144  f.,  464
Burgt,  J.  M.  M.  van  der,  378,  401
burial,  imitative,  142
Burma,  237

Burne,  C.  S.:  see  Shropshire
Burnet,  Gilbert,  333,  409,  443,  471
burning  by  witchcraft,  11  f.,  49,  155;
burning    grain,    143;    burning  be-
witched animal,  95  ff.;  burning  heart,
etc.,  97  ff.;  burning  thatch,  etc.,  102
Burnley,  477

Burnynge  of  Paules  Church,  The,  475
Burr,  G.  L.,  23  f.,  376  f.,  421  f.,  430,

45i>  454,  494,  512,  521,  542,  551.  559>
580,  588,  590,  598
Burroughs,  George,  90


INDEX


607


Burton,  Robert,  335,  451,  492,  583

Burton  Old,  272  f.

Burton-on-Trent,  89

Bury,  Lady  Charlotte,  90  f.

Bury  St.  Edmunds,  182,  217,  234,  332  ff.,

342,  364,  368,  499,  501,  515,  592
burying  alive,  95;  burying  bottles,  etc.,

102  f.
Bushe,  Mother,  257

Butler,  Alice,  8  f.;  William,  302.  See

Hudibras
butter  bewitched,  167  f.  See  dairy
butterfly,  499
Butts,  Joan,  420,  435,  590
Byg,  William,  187  f.,  540
Byntham,  Alice,  193  f.
Byx  (alias  Elwin),  Margaret,  155

Cabanes,  Auguste,  391,  393,  412,  425,

43i>  442,  457,  459)  464
Cade,  Jack,  177
Caedmon,  222
Caslestinus,  240
Caerleon,  119
Csesar,  Sir  Julius,  318
Cahors,  77

Caius,  John,  68  f.,  557
cake,  91,  103,432
Calais,  157  f.
Calamy,  Edmund,  331
Caland,  \V.,  411,  423  f-,  434
calculating  the  king's  death,  139
Calef,  Robert,  351,  422,  454,  587
calf,  148

Calfhill,  James,  476,  483,  545
Callaway,  H.,  405,  516
Callisthenes,  437
Calmet,  A.,  412,  517,  522
Calton,  Edmund,  261
Calvert,  J.,  402,  433

Cambridge,  Eng.,  61,  207,  228;  Univer-

sity,_68,  29ofr.,  304ff.,3i7
Cambridge,  Mass.,  162
Cambridgeshire,  100,  236,  422,  594
Camden,  William,  420
Cameron,  John,  480

Campbell,  Lady  Charlotte,  90  f.;  Du-
gald,  489,  491;  James,  482  ff.;  J.  F.
(of  Islay),  515  f.;  J.  G.,  422,  435,  447,
451  ff.,  462,  476,  480,  483  f.,  490,  496,
515,  523,  527,  536  f.,  597;  John  Lord,
333  f-,  573;  Sir  J.  M.,  378,  455,  476

Canada,  413,  455,  514

Canary  Islands,  55


candle,  85,  89,  100,  I40,  I44,  347,  518,

547.    See  Hand  of  Glory
Canne:  see  Tannere
cannibalism,  29,  141,  225
Cannon,  H.  L.,  399
Canon  Episcopi,  243  ff.,  246,  549,  564
Cans,  John,  206

Canterbury,  195;  Gervase  of,  524

Cantipratensis,  Thomas,  474

cap  of  invisibility,  524

Cape  Cod,  20  f.,  146,  183,  219,  479

Capello,  H.,  405,  473

Capgrave,  John,  42,  58,  222,  397,  450,

457,  475
capitularies,  384,  537
caprimulgus,  166

Cardano,  Girolamo,  144, 433,  441,  457  f.,

503  f-,  531,  533
Cardinall,  A.  W.,  442
Cardwell,  Edward,  443  f.,  534,  552  {.,  572
Cariden,  Joan,  272,  491,  495,  539
Carleton,  Sir  Dudley,  323
Carmichael,  A.,  405,  447,  453,  487
Carnavon,  321
Carnoy,  H.,  526  f.
Caroline  of  Brunswick,  90  f.
Carpzov,  B.,  463
Carr,  William,  390
Carrichter,  B.,  480
Carrowe,  Sir  William,  62
Cartar,  George,  228
Carter,  John,  488
Carthage,  112,  172,  500
Cary,  Christopher,  69
Casanova,  P.  G.,  1 12  /
Casaubon,  Meric,  189,  335,  340,  343,

350,  421,  451,  578,  585
Cason,  Joan,  102,  492
Caspari,  C.  P.:  see  Homilia;  Martin  of

Bracara
cassowary,  49
castor-oil  plant,  153

cat,  52,  93,  95,  97,  160,  174,  177  ff.,  202,
216,  403,  424,  496;  and  corpse,  178;
sucks  breath,  178

caterpillar,  94

cat-fear,  178  f.

Cathari,  245  f.

Catlyn,  Sir  Robert,  556

Catonis  Disticha,  398

cattle,  and  sheep,  4,  26  f.,  32,  41,  95  ff.,
103,  143,  146  {.,  163  ff.,  172,  174,  191,
219,  389,  495,  499,  527  f-  See  dairy;
murrain


6o8


INDEX


Cauzons,  T.  de,  413
Cavazzi,  G.  A.,  401
Cawnton,  38

Cecil,  William,  257,  259,  553  f.,  556  ff.,

560

Celtic,  92,  201,  396.  See  Cornwall;  Ire-
land; Scotland;  Wales;  Man;  Wentz
centipede,  49,  402,  436,  489
Cerne,  Book  of,  387,  466
Ceylon,  145  ^
Chaderton,  William^  308  f.
chair,  magic,  201

Challoner,  Richard,  420;  Sir  Thomas,  557
Chamberlain,  John,  323
Chamberlaine,  Richard,  521
Chambers,  Sir  E.  K.,  468,  548  f.;  John,

501;  R.,487
chameleon,  404

Champier,  Symphorien,  224,  407,  524,

546  _
champion,  53

chancery,  55  f.,  62,  S^f.,  188,  195  f.
Chandos,  Lady,  257
Chapalu,  178,  216

Chapiseau,  F.,  413,  476,  481,  493,  523

Chappell,  W.,  525

Chapuys,  Eustace,  107

Charlemagne,  109,  152,  225

Charles  1,321,328;  11,334

Charles,  Nicholas,  571

Charlevoix,  P.  F.  X.  de,  413,  455

charms,  141  ff.,  219  f.    See  spells

Charrette,  Roman  de  la,  440

Chastiel  Bran,  204

Chatton,  272

Chattox:  see  Whittle

Chaucer,  9  f.,  46,  56  f.,  73,  106,  118  f.,

144,  185  ff.,  219,  227,  398,  457,  546
Chau-Ju-Kua,  515
Chauncy,  Sir  Henry,  361,  583
cheating  the  devil,  206
cheese,  magic,  184

Chelmsford,  170,  177  ff.,  182,  236  f.,

248,  310,  495,  501
Cheney,  A.  D.,  409
Cheriton,  Odo  of,  500,  517
Chesham,  193
Cheshire,  301

child  as  scryer,  51.  See  mirror

Child,  F.  J.,  119,  254  f.,  394,  400,  429,

43i>  439  f->  442  ff-,  446,  452,  522,  536,

554

childbirth,  26,  34,  81  f.,  113  ff.,  143,  253
Chilperic,  108


China,  413,  459,  464,  493,  503.  See  De

Groot
cholera,  136,  426
chrism,  42,  51,  202
Christiansen,  R.  T.,  396,  519
Christie,  W.  D.,  571
Chronique  Rimee,  415
church  bell,  151;  rung  in  storms,  158;

blessed,  158;  church  leads,  151
churches  struck  by  lightning,  154  ff.
churching,  145
churn  magic,  167  ff.
Cibber,  Colley,  497
Cicero,  55,398
Circe,  57,  184

circle,  52,  105,  202,  208,  210  f.,  282;  St.

Columbkill's,  489
Cirencester,  63,  197
cistern,  demon  in,  216
Clague,  J.:  see  Man
Clarence,  George  of,  138  f.
Clarendon,  Assize  of,  233  f.
Claridge,  G.  C,  378

Clark,  Andrew,  395,  420;  Elizabeth,  272
Clarke,  Jane,  and  son  and  daughter,

596;  Samuel,  499,  515,  569  f.
Clarkson,  John,  377
Claudian,  537
clay  balls,  48,  192  f.
cleft  ash,  etc.,  148
Clene,  Dr.,  1 10
Clerk,  Joan,  71;  Roger,  194

Clerke,  ,  229

Cleveland,  John,  495,  563

Cleveland,  98

Cleveton,  31 5

Clifford,  Rosamond,  182  f.

Clift,J.G.N.,45i

Clitheroe,  158

Clopton,  William,  572

clothing  burned,  428

Clovesho,  Council  of,  27,  383,  386

Clutterbuck,  Robert,  591

Cnidos,  60,  112

Cnut,  28  f.,  175,  238,  383,  385,  387,  493
Cobham,  Eleanor,  81  ff.,  1 15,  474
Cobley,  F.,  501

cobolds,  house  and  stable,  215

cock,  52,  93  ff.,  97  f.,  148,  176,  206,  208,

529

Cockayne,  T.  O.,  382,  386  ff.,  394  f.,
404,  425,  441,  444,  446,  448  f.,  453  f-,
460  f.,  465  f.,  469  ff.,  473  f.,  478,  485,
488  ff.,  508,  522  f.,  526


INDEX


609


cockchafer,  499
cockfighting,  149
cocklebread,  104
Cocks:  see  Cox(e)
cocoanut,  loi

Codrington,  R.  H.,  454  f.,  473,  500,  513,
537

Codronchus,  Baptista,  447
coffin,  142

Cogan,  Thomas,  420,  567

Coggeshall,  369,  421,  539;  Radulphus

de,  399>  477>  5^3  f-
Coke,  Sir  Edward,  290,  293,  307,  311  ff.,

417,  462, 556
cold  water  ordeal,  232  fF.
Coldingham,  Gaufridus  de,  533
Cole,  G.  W.,  570,  576
Coleridge,  S.  T.,  222
Colin  T.,  56
Colle  Tregetour,  56

Collection  of  iNlatters  of  Fact  (1693),
A,  421

Collection  of  Modern  Relations  (1693),

A,  421,  485,  529,581
Colley,  Thomas,  236
Collins,  J.  W.,  517;  Samuel,  583
Cologne,  I  ';4
Colsell,  John,  65
Columban,  29,  382
Columbkill,  St.,  489
Coman,  Widow,  235,  369  f.
Commons'  Journals,  535,  554,  559,  572
communion,  145;  table,  148.  See  eucha-

rist

compact,  42,  146,  239  ff.,  346
Comparetti,  D.,  546
Comus,  201

Comynes,  Philippe  de,  458
Conde,  Jean  de,  1 1 1
confessionals,  29,  48
confirmation,  145
Congreve,  William,  478
conjure  bags,  49

Connecticut,  97,  237,  515,  524,  540
Connellan,  O.,  490
Connoisseur,  The,  193
Connyngton,  Johanna,  39
contract:  see  compact
Convertimini,  106
Cook,  Jonet,  195
Cooke,  John,  157

Cooper,  Thomas,  269,  294  {.,  310,  420  f.,
568

Corbet,  Miles,  21


Cordier,  H.,  515
corns,  1 42

Cornwall,  51,  55  f.,  80,  219  f.,  390  f.,

422,   435,  459  f.,  467  f.,  480,  495,

497  f-,  505,  518,  523,  526  f.
Cornwalyse,  Joan  La,  51
corp  criadhach,  91  f
corpse,  bits  of,  etc.,  52,  141  ff.,  225,  243,

268,  283  f.,  312  ff.,  431
Corrector,  29,  47,  163,  386,  398,  433,

437)  441,  445>  460,  462,  472,  482,  484,

492,  530, 549
corsn^d,  543

Corson  (Curson),  Lord,  209

coscinomancy:  see  sieve

Cosmas,  St.,  221

Cosquin,  E.,  464

Cosyn,  Edward,  260  f.

Cotta,  John,  235,  269,  293  f.,305  f.,311,

320  f ,  400,  410,  418,  420,  426  f.,  502,

556  f-

Cotton,  Bartholomew  de,  401
Cotton  Mss.,  402,  404,  417  f.,  476,  544
Couch,  T.  Q.,  390,  480,  495,  498,  505,
526  f.

Coulton,  G.  G.,  398,  508

councils  and  synods,  41,  46,  48,  104,

145,  150,  234  f.,  244,  384  f.,  394,  472,

482,  509,  534,  548,  572.  See  Haddan;

Wilkins
Courthop,  Sir  George,  570
Courtney,  M.  A.,  391.  See  Cornwall
Coventry,  77  f.,  188,  241,  269,  295;

Walter  of,  533
Cowan,  Samuel,  427,  480
Cowper,  H.  S.,  389,  471,  486,  498,  510,

513. 523

Cox,  J.  C,  470,  476,  510;  Julian,  562;

Richard,  250;  Captain,  216
Cox  (alias  Devon),  John,  259
Cox(e),  Francis,  258  f.
Cozen,  William,  17  f.;  Joan,  18
Crabbe,  Stephen,  46
Craigie,  W.  A.,  426,  481,  485,  527
cramp,  142;  cramp  rings,  151
Crane,  T.  F.,  548

Cranmer,  Thomas,  127,  227,  229,  408,

470, 495>  553
Crawfurd,  Raymond,  458
cream,  167  ff.
Crecelius,  W.,  482
creed,  3 1,36  f.

creeping  through,  31,  I48,  220
Cresimus,  C.  Furius,  172


6io


INDEX


Creton,  Jean,  407

Crew,  Sir  Randolph,  322  f.

cricket,  491,  499

Criclcstone,  220

crocodile,  174;  ordeal,  537

Croft,  Elizabeth,  69

Croke,  Sir  John,  300,  307,  311  f.,  321

Cromek,  R.  H.,  597

Cromwell,  Sir  Henry  and  family,  303  ff.,

322;  Oliver   (Protector),  331,  595;

Thomas,  63  ff.,  no,  189,  408  f.,  534  f.
Crooke,  W.,  378,  399,  402,  41 1,  423,

432,  434,  465  f.,  473,  493,  506,  517  f.,

531,537

crooked  sixpence,  167  -^^"^
crops,  27,  32,  34,  95,  149,  163,  171  f.,

388,459,469
cross  dug  up,  205  f.,  210,  554;  over

treasure,  209
Cross,  T.  P.,  401,  427,  435,  445,  468,

491 >  523
crossed  by  hare,  179
Crossley,  James,  288,  328,  343  f.,  410,

560,  566,  575,  583
crossroads,  31 ,  94,  202
crow,  176,  491

Crowther,  Timothy,  97,  185,  190
Croxton,  — — ,  199
Croydon  complexion,  157
Croyland  Chronicle,  458
crucifying,  148
Crushe,  John,  96
Crusius,  Otto,  502,  548
crystallomancy:  see  mirror
Cuba,  425,  464
Cuchulinn,  223,  530
Cudworth,  Ralph,  335  f.
Cuirrech,  92

Cuming,  H.  S.,  412,  504,  528
Cummean,  381  fF.,  393  f.,  444,  462,  473
Cumont,  Franz,  414,  537
Cupid  and  Psyche,  117
cures:  see  white  witchcraft
Curio,  55

curses,  28,  loi,  130  ff.,  141,  147,  507.

See  defixiones;  tablets
cursing  stones  and  wells,  34,  132
Curson,  John,  209;  Lord,  209
Cursor  Mundi,  380
Curteys,  Thomas,  38
Curtin,  Jeremiah,  462,  515
Curtis,  ■  ,  100  f.

Cuthbert,  St.,  31,  124  f.,  176,  184,  201,
223,  393


cynanthropy,  493
Cyprian,  wizard,  500
Cyrus,  St.,  74,  221
Czecho-Slovak,  433

Dacre,  Lord,  62

Daemon  Lover,  The,  119

dairy,  witchcraft  in  the,  34  f.,  42,  51,

92,  103,  163  ff.,  214  f.
Dale,  A.  M.:  see  Smith,  E.  W.
Dalok,  Elena,  130,  155,  228
Dalton,  Michael,  364
Dalyell,  J.  G.,  395,  419,  425  ff.,  453, 462,

472,  480,  486  f.,  499  f.,  510,  512,  537
Dame  Sirith,  104  f.
Damian,  St.,  221
Damiani,  St.  Peter,  530
damnum  minatum,  9
damp  (vapor),  89,  347
Danbury,  155  f.

Daneau  (Dansus),  Lambert,  25,  249,

441,  457,. 485,  547,  549,  563
Darcey,  Brian,  264  f.,  285,  309
Darel,  Godfrey,  48

Darrel,  John,  297  ff.,  311,  428,  449,  501,

525,  567,  569,  571  f-
Dartmouth,  7,  12

Dasent,  Sir  G.  W.,  544
D'Avenant,  Sir  William,  478
Davenport,  John,  563
Davies,  J.  C:  see  Wales
Davis,  J.  E.,  418;  Ralph,  5
Davison,  Alice,  38
Davye,  George  and  Joan,  17
Davys,  John,  230

Dawson,  Bully,  179;  W.  H.,  389,  428  f.,

468,  476,  485,  503,  508
Deacon,  John,  144,  298  ff.,  449,  492,

569  f.
dead  hand,  168  f.

dead  men:  see  bier;  corpse;  necromancy
Deane,  Jennet,  10;  Wallace,  402,  433,
490

death,  storms  at,  183;  death  stones,  49
Decle,  L.,405,413

De  Cock,  A.,  391,  424,  448,  459  f.,  468,

483,  488,  491,  501,  526  f.
Dedo,  R.,  412

Dee,  John,  69,  158,  180,  185,  189,  249,

254,313,318
Deecke,  E.,  469
deer,  491

defamation,  36,  51,  59  f.,  62,  188  f.,
192  f.,  196,  360,  590


INDEX


6ll


defixiones,  74,  93,  190.  See  curses;
tablets

De  Groot,  J.  J.  M.,  383,  413,  459,  464.

See  China
De  Gubernatis,  A.,  447  f.
Dekker,  Thomas,  434,  569  f.
Delatte,  A.,  443  f.
Delcourt,  Joseph,  404
Del  Rio,  Martin,  24  f.,  273,  441,  463,

482,  503,  509,  511,  532,  545,  560,  587
Demdike   (Southerns),  Elizabeth,  18,

265  fF.,  561
De  Meyer,  M.,  519
demoniacs:  see  possession
demons  of  disease,  147,  466
Denbighshire,  132

Denmark,  16,  28,  159,  216,  461,  495  ff.,
501.  See  Kristensen;  Saxo;  Scandina-
vian; Thiele

Dennys,  N.  B.,  413

Derby,  Ferdinando,  Earl  of,  90,  308  f.;

William,  Earl  of,  309
Derbyshire,  576
Deschamps,  Eustache,  457
Despensers,  77  f.

Detection  of  Damnable  Driftes  (1579),
A,  501

Deubner,  Ludwig,  529

Devell,  Henry,  107

Device  family,  18,  149,  171,  266  f.

devil:  see  compact;  possession;  appari-
tions; incubus;  weather;  cheating

devils  as  animals,  175  ff.

devil's  barn,  206

devil's  bridge,  206

devil's  mark,  242,  547

devil's  thumb,  242

Devon,  F.,  416,  418;  John  (alias  Cox),
259.556

Devonshire,  6  ff.,  91,  93,  95,  98  f.,  103,
121,  132,  146,  148,  157,  181  f.,  290,
334,  381,  390,  396,  400,  424,  429,
432  f.,  447  f.,  460  f.,  467  f.,  471,  475,
484,  486  ff.,  498,  500,  505,  510,  523,
562.    See  Bray

dew,  168

D'Ewes,  Sir  S.,  569
Dewse,  Mrs.,  89

Diana,  riding  with,  244  ff.,  250,  549,  564

Dibb,  Mrs.,  269

Diceto,  Ralph  de,  445

Dick,  C.  H.,  515

Dickman,  A.  J.,  439  f.

Dieterich,  A.,  385,  461,  465,  489,  506


Digby,  Sir  Kenelm,  433,  492,  500
Digby  Mss.,  390,  529
dill,  37,  121  f.
Dindsenchas,  423
Dio  Cassius,  457
Diodorus  Siculus,  537
Dioscorides,  448
Disant,  John,  50

disease,  174  ff.,  466.   See  white  witch-
craft; murrain
Disraeli,  I.,  566
Distracted  Emperor,  The,  439
Ditchfield,  P.  H.,  428,  468,  484,  515
divination,  30,  41,  48,  57,  70,  143  f.,
185  ff.  See  bible  and  key;  sieve  and
shears;  clay  balls;  loaf  and  knives
Dixon,  J.  H.,  478,  482
dobbies,  215,  220  f.
Dobeneck,  F.  L.  F.  von,  412,  442
Dobson,  John,  229;  William,  539
Doddridge,  J.,  423,  427  f.,  483
Dodds,  M.  H.,  533
Dodoens,  R.,  447  f.

Dodsley'sOld  Plays,  405,  471,  475,  478,
493

dog,  32,  52,  95.  123  f.,  142,  157,  175  ff.,

182,271,389,491.  See  Black  Dog
Doland,  Elizabeth,  196
Dolebury  Camp,  204
Dolloff,  Stephen,  160
Done,  Sir  G.,  64
Dorchester,  Dorset,  407
Dorington,  Francis,  303  f.;  John,  304
Dornan,  S.  S.,  402,  462,  473
Dorset,  80,  98  f.,  108,  257,  390,  402,

436,  454.  489.  498.  500,  511.  518
Dorsey,  J.  O.,  536
Dottin,  G.,  400
Douai  Diaries,  420
Douce,  F.,  526
dough, 422

Doughty,  H.  M.,  566,  597
Doutte,  E.,  413,  442,  459,  505
Dowsing,  George,  209
Dowson,  J.,  462
Doyle,  J.  L.,410,  555
Drage,  William,  103,  135,  400,  421,  424,
427  f.,  447,  456,  485,  489,  499,  530,

536,  539.  564  f-.  583
dragon,  153  f.,  205;  dragon's  blood,  100
Drake,  F.,  574;  S.  G.,  488,  494,  519,  528,

542,  579.  590.  594
Draper,  Hugh,  258  f.;  Robert,  196
Drayton,  Michael,  121,  416,  451,  493


6l2


INDEX


dream,  45,  47,  100,  165,  244;  cure  or  in-
jury in,  221  ff.;  composition  in,  222
Drechsler,  P.,  392,  430,  481
Driberg,  J.  H.,  459,  473
dropsy,  181
drowned,  48

drowning,  as  punishment,  75;  charm
against,  443;  cat  drowned,  storm,  161
Druids,  153
Drummer,  The,  214

Dryden,  Sir  Erasmus,  305;  Erasmus,

305;  John,  305,  478,  536
Du  Bartas,  144
Dubois,  J.  A.,  541,  543
Du  Cange,  412,  532
duck, 462
Duff,  King,  86
Dugas,  C.,  414

Dugdale,  Sir  William,  404,  536,  539
Dulyne,  Eleanor,  62,  457
dumb  cake,  432
Du  Meril  439
Dundas,  Sir  Charles,  473
Dunger,  H.,  391,  393,  514
Dunmow,  237

Dunn,  Mark,  344  f.;  Mary,  20
Dunstan,  St.,  175,  222
Dunstaplia,  Annales  de,  401,  451
Dunton,  John,  451,  456,  479,  510  f.
Durandus,  G.,  476

Durbin,  Henry,  134,  435,  515,  520,  525
Durham,  37  f.,  46  f.,  59  f.,  93,  98  L,  107,
113,  125,  129  f.,  135,  150,  153,  184,
201, 432,  443, 452,  512;  Ritual,  170  ff.,
205,  214  {.,  219,  466,  485,  489  (.,  508,

536,  59°
Durham,  Symeon  of,  397,  474
Duris  Samius,  532

dwarfs,  41,  52,  176,  205,  218,  221,  437,

446,  466
Dyer.T.  F.  T.,447  f.
Dykstra,  W.,  484,  496,  511
Dymock,  133
Dyrim,  Frances,  257

E.,  T.,  69  f.

Eadmer,  539
eagle,  176
Earth,  Mother,  171
East  Dereham,  66
Ebel,  K.,  413,  436
Ebermann,  O.,  388,  390,  396
Ecgbert,  29  f.,  74  f.,  152,  381  ff.,  393,
462,  465,  472,  476


Ecgwin,  St.,  201,  450
eclipse,  418,  472

Edda,  Elder,  55,  143,  159,  201,  406,  462,
478

Edgar,  King,  28  f.,  75,  143,  383,  386  f.,
393>  462

Edmondston,  Arthur,  480,  494;  Biot,

515-  528

Edmonton,  323,  434

Edmund,  King,  28;  Earl  of  Kent,  53

Edmunds:  see  Weston

Edward  and  Guthrum,  27,  383;  the
Confessor,  124,  204,  544;  I,  76,  241  f.,
403;  II,  53,  76,  108;  III,  78,  105  f.,
403;  IV,  85,  106  f.,  139,  228;  VI,  86,
229,253

Edwards,  Richard,  475;  Susanna,  562
Egeria,  47  _

Egerton,  Sir  J.,  574;  mss.,  428;  Papers,
420

eggs,  102,  160,  190,  427,  480

Egliston,  Thomas,  37

Egypt,  40,  57,  73,  105,  112,  153,  424,

505

Eisel,  R.,485
Eitrem,  S.,  387,  424
Eleanor,  Queen,  183
elf-disease,  32,  147
elfshot,  133  ff.,  147,  337  f.,  395,  428
Eliot,  John,  592;  Tracts,  592
Elizabeth,  Queen  of  Edward  IV,  85,
106  f.

Elizabeth,  Royal  Acts  of,  1559,  115,
227, 253

Elizabethan  witchcraft,  25  f.,  246  ff.

Elkes,  ,  90

Elliot,  Sir  H.  M.,  462,  543

Ellis,  Sir  Henry,  319,  408,  439,  504,  535,

575;  W.,401
Elton,  O.,  380,  451,478
elves,  32,  117  ff.,  147.  See  elfshot
Elwin:  see  Byx

Elworthy,  F.  T.,  381,  429  f.,  432  f.,  459,

463,  500,  527
Ely,  125,  207,  228;  Lady  Chapel  at,

239  f.;  siege  of,  33;  Thomas  of,  217
Emet,  Mother,  37,  122
Endor,  Witch  of,  57,  144,  407
English,  Philip,  598

Enthoven,  R.  E.,  402, 41 1, 425, 433, 436,

442,  457,  483,  489
envoutement:  see  image
Epanamon,  105
Ephesian  letters,  54


INDEX


613


epic  charms,  40

Epidaurus  Limera,  233

epilepsy,  95  f.,  102,  142

Epistle  of  the  Persecution  (1582),  419

Epworth,  214

Erceldoune:  see  Thomas

Erskine,  Mrs.  Steuart,  495

Espaignet,  Jean  d',  588

Essex,  96,  130,  134  f.,  155  f.,  217,  262,
271  f.,  284  f.,  295  f.,  309  {.,  331  f.,
358,  368,  421,  425,  471,  497,  500,  520,
539  f-,  542,  565,  579,  594.  See  Gif-
fard

Essex,  Robert,  Earl  of,  575;  Frances,

Countess  of,  575
Esthonia,  519
eucharist,  51,  148  f.
Eudo,  240  f.

Eulogium  Historiarum,  397,  440,  474,

494,  500,
Eustace  the  Monk,  45  f.
Eustathius,  404,  441 ;  romancer,  537
Evagrius,  532

Evans,  Arise,  535;  I.  H.  N.,  399,  506;
Joan,  438  f.;  R.  H.,  417;  Sebastian,
530;  Thomas,  417

Evelyn,  John,  338,  570

Evesham,  450,  514

evil  eye,  95,  232,  388,  500

Evrard  of  Treves,  75  f.

Exact  Narrative  (1709),  An,  521

Examination  and  Confession  of  a  No-
torious Witch  (1574),  The,  550

excommunication,  mock,  52

exempla,  44,  78  f.,  106,  117  f.,  239

Exeter,  3  f.,  48,  50  f.,  104,  150,  166,
192  f.,  263,  358,  361

exorcists,  449,  552,  572

explosion,  501

eye,  amulets  for  the,  471;  peculiar  eyes,
232;  loss  of  eye,  190.  See  evil  eye;
blindness

Eye-next-Westminster,  83

Eylmann,E.,4i3,455

Eyvindr  Kellda,  445

Fabate,  ,  235

Fabricius,  J.  A.,  383,  532
Fabyan,  Robert,  82,  416  ff.,  474
Fahz,  L.,  412,  436

Fairfax,  Edward,  and  his  children,  269,

326  f.,  400,  421,  427,  492,  577,  592
Fairfax-Blakeborough,  J.,  463
Fairholt,  F.  W.,  575


fairies,  26,  128,  146,  166,  199,  215,  217,

254  f.,  389,  535

Faligan,E.,398,  545

familiars,  52;  as  animals,  174  ff.;  as  in-
sects, 179  ff.;  as  toads,  181  fF.

Fantom,  Carlo,  55

Farington  Papers,  568

Farne,  175,  218

Farrow,  S.  S.,  413

fasting,  31,  128  fF.,  229;  for  distraint,

129.    See  black  fast
Fasting  Nun  of  Leicester,  the,  128
Fastrada's  ring,  439
fat,  human,  I42,  144,  518
Faternon,  315
Faunus,  46  f.

Faustus,  146,  239,  502,  579
Favelle,  Elias,  48
Favent,  Thomas,  405
Faversham,  161,  272,  567
favor,  77.    See  love
Feast  of  Asses,  148
Fehrle,  E.,  472,  512
Feilberg,  H.  F.,  412,459
Female  Tatler,  159
fennel,  448

Fenner,  Edward,  303,  305,  322

Fenwick,  George,  131;  Ralph,  131

Ferguson,  J.,  567,  570

Fernel,  Jean,  142,  441,  459  ff.,  495

Ferrys,  George,  69,  254

Festus,  531

fever,  392  f.

Fewler,  Thomas,  590

Fian,  John,  265,  278,  598

field  magic:  see  crops

Field(e),  John,  69,  553

Fielding,  Henry,  161

fight:  see  battle

figure-flinger,  408

Filmer,  Sir  Robert,  351,  536,  540,  587
Finchale,  153,  176,  217.  See  Godric
Find,  92

Finland,  40,  159,  180,  396,414,  423,445>

453,466, 481,  487,  505,519,  523,  525  ff-
Finnian,  29,  382

fire  by  witchcraft,  12,  155,  377;  quench-
ing fire,  159
fish-bones,  134
fishing,  98,  173,384
fits,  142

Fitz-Simon,  Silvester,  234
Five  Wounds,  46,  443.
Flacius  Illyricus,  545


6i4


INDEX


Flamank,  Richard,  55
Flammarion,  C,  521,  525
Flanders:  see  Low  Countries
Flateyjarbok,  439
flea,  499

Fleming,  Abraham,  156  f.
Flenley,  R.:  see  London  Chronicles
Fletcher,  ,  344  f.;  Giles,  478;  John,

220,  405,  451,  478,  498;  J.  S.,  463;

R.  H.,  445
flies,  180  f.
flints,  160

Flodder:  see  Pendleton

Floire  et  Blanceflor,  440

Flores  Historiarum,  397,  399,  403,  440,

445)  452,  457.  474,  494,  502,  516.  See

Wendover
Flower  family,  237  f.,  310,  323  f.,  421,

428,  491,  540;  J.  W.,  416
Fludd,  Robert,  526
Flugel,  E.,  416  f.

flying  witches,  29.  See  transportation
Forster,  Max,  389
Foix:  see  Gaston
Foliot,  Gilbert,  43
folleti,  217

font,  locked,  150  f.;  water  of,  147,  150  f.
footprint,  loi  f.

Forby,  Robert,  427,  432,  435,  465,  511,

541  f.
Ford,  John,  434,  493
Forda,  John  of,  546

Forde,  ,  66;  Thomas,  195

Forgues,  E.  D.,413
Forman,  Simon,  314,  316  f.,  477
Forrest,  William,  239
Forsblom,  V.  W.,  453,  525  f.
Fortescue,  Sir  Anthony,  255,  260  f.
Fortunatus,  Bishop,  128
Foss,  Edward,  573
Fossel,  V.,391  f.,  459,  477
Fossey,  Charles,  41 1,  432
Fossez,  1 53  f.

Foster,  Ann,  358;  Joseph,  569,  576;

William,  561
Fotman,  Elizabeth,  37
Fournier,  P.,  394,  404,  437,  484
fox,  175,  184
Fox,  Robert,  452
Foxe,  John,  84,  193
Fracheto,  Girardus  de,  415,  516
France,  75  ff'.,  86,  108  f.,  135,  163,  177,

182,  202  f.,  358,  368;  'Notes,  passim
Francis,  St.,  46


Francisci,  Erasmus,  427,  445,  472,  492,

522,  538,  540
Frank,  Grace,  544;  Ortillus,  126
Franz,  A.,  386  fF.,  395,  404,  443  f.,  449,

464  ff.,  468  ff.,  474,  476,  490,  509,  517,

529. 536,  543
Frauncis,  Elizabeth,  178
Frazer,  Sir  J.  G.,  82,  402,  412,  425,  433,

441  f.,  444,  447  f.,  467,  472,  537
Freeland,  L.  S.,  413
Freeman,  E.  A.,  544;  R.  A.,  531
Freeston,  Mary,  315
Freisauff,  R.,  476
Freke,  Edmund,  553
French,  G.  J.,  448

Frere,  W.  H.,  443  f.,  470,  534,  552  f.

Freygang,  G.,  472

Freymond,  E.,  524

friar,  devil  as,  155

Friar  Rush,  216.

Friday,  100

Frischbier,  H.,  402,  424,  430,  447,  463,

481  f.,  488,  506,  510
Frisians,  484,  496,  5 1 1
Frisius,  Paulus,  412

Fritzner,  J.,  413,  444,  453,  477,  500,  512
Frodoard,  529

frog,  94  f.,  100,  103,  175,  181,  501

Froissart,  Jean,  216

Froude,  J.  A.,408,  597

fuga  daemonum,  37,  119  fF.,  388

Fuldenses,  Annales,  474,  522

Fulk  Fitz-Warin,  517

Fuller,  John,  475;  Thomas,  325  f.,  420,

475  f->  540,  569,  576  f.
fumigation,  69,  135,  172,  319
furies,  30

Furnivall,  F.  J.,  409,  446  f.,  449,  471,

476,  490,  509,  516,  524.  See  Brunne
Furseman,  William,  12

Gabley,  Mother,  160
Gabriel's  Hounds,  176
Gaidoz,  H.,  467

Gairdner,  James,  84,  402,  408  f.,  416,
418,450

Galanthis,  114

Galba,  217

Gale,  Thomas,  259

gallows,  1 41  fF.

Galsworthie,  John,  21  f.

gambling  magic,  67,  142,  229,  439

games,  charms,  54;  racing,  93;  swim-
ming, 54


INDEX


615


Gammer  Gurton's  Needle,  216

garden:  see  crops

Gardiner,  S.  R.,  280,  467,  575

Gardner,  ,  the  witch  of  Thorpe,  96;

Ralph,  589
Garlandia,  Johannes  de,  216
garlic,  147,  151

Garmann,  C.  F.,  439,  441,  447,  457  ff.,

463,  484,  517,  526,  531  f-
Garrett,  R.  M.,  393  f.,  439,  448  f-,  505
Gasquet,  F.  A.,  395,  407,  409
Gaster,  M.,  390,  442,  531  f.
Gaston  Phebus,  216  f.
Gatherley  Moor,  133
Gaule,  John,  25,  398,  400,  403,  405,  421,

427,  434,  463,  511  f.,  540,  563
Gauls,  Rhine  ordeal,  232
Gaupp,  R.,442
Gaveston,  Piers,  108
Gawe,  Mother,  95
Gee,  Henry,  552  f.;  John,  325,  578
Geffrey,  Margaret,  61
Geiger,  W.,  41 1  f.
Geiler  von  Kaiserberg,  163  f.
Gello,  224  f.

Gembloux,  Sigebert  of,  132

gems,  108,  393  f.,  438.  See  rings

Geneva,  358,  583

geomancy,  57

Geoponica,  472,  490

George,  St.,  220

Georgeakis,  G.,  442  f.

Georgia,  422

Georgius  Pisida,  537

Gerard,  E.,  485,  492,  501;  or  Gerold,

Hugo,  41
Geraud,  Hugues,  77
Gerbert:  see  Silvester  II
Gering,  H.,  383,  398,  405,  478,  491
Gerish,  W.  B.,  591,  596
Germanicus,  141

Germanus,  St.,  152,  201,  224,  529
Germany,  40,  42,  44,  102,  119,  159,  163,

169,  221,  250,  358,  360,  368,  370;

Notes,  passim
Gerould,  G.  H.,  545
Gessmann,  G.  W.,  447
Gesta  Romanorum,  78  f.,  106
Gevaudun, 492

ghosts,  26,  84,  134,  177,  217,  344  f.,  377,

.501,517
Gibbons,  ,  135

Giffard,  George,  96,  103,  167,  174,  198,


248,  295  ff.,  310  f.,  398  f.,  428,  488,

503,512,553
Gifford,  William,  278,  566,  576
gift  of  witch,  1 1

Giles,  Dobby  and  Molly,  134,  210  f.
Gillams,  Mother,  428
Gillen,  F.  J.,  405  f.,455
Gilo,  224

Gimlette,  J.  D.,  402,  413,  455,  506
Ginnechochet,  216

Giraldus  Cambrensis,  75,  117,  147  f.,
150,  166,  179,  184,  201,  214  ff.,  446,

469,  493,  508,  545
girdles,  !  14,  143,  405  f.,  438
Giustinian,  G.,  320
glamour,  28
glanders,  136

Glanvil,  Joseph,  6,  274,  335,  343,  349  (.,

354,  421,  424  f-,  427,  434  f-,  454,  499,
521,  524,  529,  547,  561  f.,  565,  583,

592

Glanvill(e),Ranulf  de,  538
Glastonbury,  213,  221  f.;  Mother,  550
Glendower,  Owen,  156,  176,  226
Glorez,  A.,  456
Glotz,  G.,  537

Gloucester,  197;  Humphrey,  Duke  of,
81  ff.,  106;  Eleanor,  Duchess  of,  81  ff.,
106

Gloucestershire,  70  f.,  212,  470
Glover,  Goody,  90;  James  the,  1 1 ;  Mary,

300,  321
Glycas,  Michael,  537
Glyde,  John:  see  Norfolk;  Suffolk
Gmelin,  Julius,  403
gnomes,  205

goat,  175,  243,  398,  494,  500,  549
goatsucker,  166
goblins,  32,  176  f.,  215
Goddard,  T.  N.,  473,  531;  William,  139
Godelmann,  J.  G.,  447,  507,  511,  536,
540

Godely,  William,  209  f.
Godmanchester,  130
Godric,  St.,  125,  153,  176,  217,  530
Godwine,  Earl,  238
Gongu-Hroifs  Saga,  515
Gogmagog,  204
gold  for  eyes,  151
Goldne  Gans,  Die,  514
Goldziher,  I.,  536
Gollancz,  H.,  396
Golther,  W.,  382,  396,  522
Gomes,  E.  H.,  505,  543


6i6


INDEX


Gomme,  Sir  G.  L.,  399,  412,  423,  453,

477>  487,  523,  548
Gonzenbach,  L.,  442
Goodcole,  Henry,  577;  Mrs.,  577
Goodell,A.  C,  421,  583,  594
Gooding,  Elizabeth,  563
Goodman,  Godfrey,  325
Goodwin,  John,  his  children,  371,  565
Gookin,  Daniel,  592
goose,  484
Gorman,  H.,  421
Goslyng,  Thomas,  158
Gough,  Richard,  591,  595,  597
Gouldsbury,  C.,434,  513
Gowdie,  Isobel,  160,  491
Gower,  John,  57  f.,  104  f.
Gowghter,  117
Grasse,  J.  G.  T.,  522
Graf,  A.,  545

Grafton,  Richard,  408,  458
grain,  172;  burning  grain,  31;  grain  or-
deal, 238
Granada,  D.,  493
Granso,  1 80  f.
Grant,  C,  542
Granville,  Denis,  135,  462
Gratian,  244
Grattan,  J.  H.  G.,  526
grave  mould,  49,  142  f.
Gray,  J.  H.,  572;  William,  519
Great  Paxton,  236

Gredt,  N.,  482,  486,  496,  514,  516,  527

Greece,  54,  60,  93,  in  f.,  172,  183  f.,
190,  201,  218,  224,  378,  384,  396,  414,
442  flF.,  451,  462,  465,  506  f.,  510,  529,
531  fF.,  536  f.,  543.  See  Macedonia

Green,  Emanuel,  582;  S.  A.,  596

Greene,  Robert,  133  f.,  439

Greenough,  W.  P.,  514

Greenslet,  F.,  562,  582,  591

Greenwood,  Sir  Hamar,  136;  Richard,
207  f.

Gregor,  W.,  390,  426  fF.,  430,  453,  477,
480,  483  £,  486,  490,  494  f.,497  ff.,  515

Gregory  Nazianzen,  537

Gregory  the  Great,  43,  127  f.,  200  f.,
202,  222,  529

Gregory,  William,  126,  407,  416  f.,  457,

474,  534,  547
Grendon,  Felix,  387  fF.,  441,  444,  448,

453  f-,  461,  466,  473,  489,  508,  526
Grey  Friars  Chronicle,  408  ff.,  416,  470,

474,  520
Grey,  Sir  George,  532


Grienberger,  T.,  396
Griffith,  F.  LI.,  396
Grig,  ,  230  f.

Grillando,  Paolo,  141,  149,  151,  212  f.,

384,  387,  402,  412,  436,  441,  454>
456  fF.,  460,  465  f.,  472,  480,  520,  532,

547,  565

Grimm,  Jakob,  425,  427,  446,  452,  463,
472,  480,  514,  522,  532,  536,  548,  563;
Wilhelm,  514,  563

Grindal,  Edmund,  115,  250,  259,  553

Grippis,  Fortunatus  de,  503

Grogaldr,  438,478

Grohmann,  J.  V.,  392,  464,  486,  510,

512,  514,  527
Gross,  Charles,  538
Grosseteste,  Robert,  222,  240
Grundtvig,  S.,  376,  437
Guagnino,  A.,  474

Guazzo  (Guaccius),  F.  M.,  440  f.,  445,
458,  472,  476,  482,  496,  501,  514,  522,

533,  547  f-,  560
Guernsey,  430,  484,  515,  549
Guichard,  83,  108  f.,  117  f.
Guidott,  T.,  576
Guigemar,  16
Guignehochet,  216
Guilford,  Francis  Lord,  333  f.,  590  f.
Guilielmus  Alvernus,  217,  406  f.,  444,

463,  492,  503,  522,  526,  531
Guillaume  de  Palerne,  440;  le  Breton,

guinea  pig,  501

Gull-l^oris  Saga,  517

Gunpowder  Plot,  320

Gunter,  Anne,  321  f.,  577

Gunther,  Bishop,  474

Gurdon,  P.  R.  T.,  513,  543

Guthrum,  27,  383

Gybbys,  John,  130  ^

Gyges,  III  ■  .

Gylou,  224

Gypsies,  390,  4I4,  434,  482,  506  f.

Haag,  G.,523
Haberland,  Karl,  503
Habington,  William,  405
Hache,  Roger  atte,  194
Hackett,  Margaret,  85
Hackman,  J.,  519

Haddan,  A.  W.,  378,  381  fF.,  393,  449,

461,472  f.
Haddon,  A.  C,  412,  432;  John,  188
Hadrumetum,  iii  f.


INDEX


617


Halsig,  F.,  387,  390,  396,  436,  444,  466
Hastesko,  F.  A.:  see  Finland
hail:  see  weather

hair,  48  f.,  90,  97,  102  f.,  134,  142,  436
Hairy  Jack,  176

Hale,  John,  177,  335,  428,  435;  Sir  Mat-
thew, 332  ff.,  364,  592;  W.  H.  H.,  36  f.,
407  f.,  419,  438,  449,  451  f.,  474,  504,
509  f.,  512

Halfdanar  Saga,  516

Halifax,  207  {.,  436,  477,  480,  495  f.,  528

Halitgar,  384,  386

Hall,  Alice,  196;  Edward,  82,  408,  416  f.;
Hubert,  401;  Joan,  107;  Joseph,  293,
301  f.,  509;  Richard,  107;  Thomas,  38

Hallbjorn,  222

Halle,  John,  260,  535,  554

Halliday,  W.  R.,  536  f.

Halliwell,  J.  O.,  389  f.,  421,  437,  448,
461,  497,  513,  522,  534,  551,  563,  576

Hallywell,  Henry,  518,  565,  582,  584

halter,  1 42

Halton,  John  de,  403,  546
Ham,  42
Hamel,  F.,493

Hammond,  J.,  459  f.,  518,  522
Hammurabi,  237

Hamper,  ,  148  f.

Hampshire,  484

Hampton,  N.  H.,  206

Hancock,  F.,  400, 430,  467, 477,  513,  523

Hancok,  Agnes,  38,  145  f.,  443,  518,  553

hand  of  corpse,  142;  of  glory,  I45,  463  f.

hanged  man,  141  f.

hangman's  rope,  142

hansel,  165

Hansen,  Joseph,  24,  376  f.,  382,  403  f.,
412,  415,  417,  441,  445,  461,  469  f-,
472,  480,  482,  489,  496,  530,  532  f.,
544  ff-,  580

Hanson,  O.,  451,  542

Harcourt,  Vernon,  458

hardman,  55

Hardness,  7  fF.

Hardwick,  C,  417,  566

Hardy,  W.  J.,  407  f.,  510

Hardyng,  John,  1 56

hare,  45,  I49,  166,  174,  179,  427

Hare,  Hugh,  596

Harington,  Sir  John,  509

Haris,  Robert,  557

Harland,  John,  389  f.,  422,  424,  448,
477.  523>  525;  John  (and  Dobson,  W.),
539


Harleian  mss.,  399,  416,418,  457,  562,
575

Harley,  ,  95  f.

Harman,  Thomas,  525
Harold  Fairhair,  439
Harper,  Joseph,  542
Harpsfield,  N.,  408  f.
Harris,  Elizabeth,  161 ;  William,  289
Harrison,  Thomas,  301,  569;  William,
477

Harry,  John,  55  f.

Harsnet,  Samuel,  122,  298,  402,  412,

427  f.,  447,  456,  491,  498,  518,  571  f.
Hart,  Thomas,  99;  W.  H.,  424,  520,  578
Hartland,  E.  S.,  433  f.,  452,  467
Hartlay,  Edmund,  282
Hartlepoole,  Richard,  and  wife,  229  f.
Hartshorne,  C.  H.,  514
Harvey,  Gabriel,  249,  485;  John,  533;

— 301
Harvie,  Isobel,  39
Harvye,  Joan,  542
Hasylwoode,  William,  198  f.
hate,  51,  121.    See  love
Hathaway,  Richard,  540,  594
Hauber,  E.  D.,  492,  536,  538
Hauksbok,  386
haunted  houses,  214  ff.
Haureau,  B.,  524
Havekost,  E.,  397,  527
Hawarde,  John,  424,  463,  566
Hawkwell,  96
hay  burned, 428

Haydock,  Richard,  320,  325,  529,  578
Hay  ley,  William,  521
hazelwood,  10

Hazlitt,  W.  C,  509.    See  Brand

head  down,  74;  head  that  speaks,  240;
head  as  idol,  403

headache,  142

head-band,  443

headless  man,  220,  228

healers:  see  white  witchcraft

Heanley,  R.  M.,  431

heart  pierced  and  roasted,  97  ff.;  ex-
tracted, 42

Heather,  Thomas,  520

Heawelon,  315

Heberling,  R.,  481

Hecker,  J.  F.  C,  413,  457,  492

Heddon,  131

hedgehogs,  49,  166,  491

Hefele,  C.  J.  von,  384

Heim,  R.,  396,  425,  444


C


6i8


INDEX


Heimskringla,  438,  526
Heinrich,  Fritz,  389  ff.,  408,  444,  466,
508

Heisterbach,  Caesarius  of,  116  ff.,  149,

221  f.,  514,  529
Heiward,  Robert  le,  234
Heldenbuch,  440
helenium,  32
HelgakviSa,  515
Heliand,  222

Hellwig,  A.,  399  f.,  406,  459,  464,  518
Helmont,  J.  B.  van,  348,  412,  430,  584
Heming(s)burgh  (-ford),  Walter  of,  403,

446
henbane,  449

Henderson,  George,  496,  498  f.,  523;

William,  390,  424  f.,  426  ff.,  430,  432,

453,  459  ff-,  464,  468  f.,  485  ff-,  498,

510  ff-,  519,  522,  527,  597
Henrici,  Leges,  29,  75,  383
Henry  I,  159;  II,  183;  III,  235;  IV,  156;

V,  79,411;  VI,  61,  83, 115, 126  f.,  177;

VII,  so;  VIII,  38,  66,  86,  107  ff.,  189;

son  of  James  I,  265,  319,  479,  573
Henry,  Alexander,  413,  455;  Philip,  452
Henslow,  George,  389,  444
Henslowe,  Philip,  92  f.,  190  f.
Heppe,  H.:  see  Soldan
Herbert,  J.  A.,  398,  438,  445  ff.,  452,

469  f.,  483,  517,  544  f.,  547  f.
herbs,  spells  for,  31  f.
Hercules,  1 14,  116

Hereford,  34,  59;  Duke  of  (Henry  IV),
404

Herefordshire,  117,  390,  408,  425,  448,

459, 467  f-,47i
heresy,  38,  80  f.,  187,  245  ff.
Hereward,  33
Herle,  Charles,  176
Hermogenes,  30
Herodias,  250,  549,  564
Heron,  John,  66,  133,  550
Herrick,  E.  P.,  405,  425,  464;  Robert,

171,  220,  436
Hertford,  38

Hertfordshire,  211  f.,  236,  591
Hertz,  W.,407,  492,  496
Hervieux,  L.,  500
Hesychius,  404,  532
Heuen-Tsang,  541
Heuser,  W.,  544
Hewat,  M.  L.,  405,  455
Hewett,  S.,  390,  400,  436,  447  f.,  460  f.,
468,  471,  487,  500,  510


Heydon,  John,  54  f.,  406,  477  f.
Heyl,J.A.,486

Heyrick,  Robert,  577,  592;  Sir  William,
577

Heyward,  Sir  Rowland,  89

Heywood,  John,   iiof.;  Oliver,  400,

435,  465;  Thomas,  14  f.,  239,  271,

402,  441,  478,  589
Hibbert,  S.,  477  f.,  479,  488
hibernation,  129,  451
Hickes,  George,  133,  337  f.,  421
Hicks,  Elizabeth,  71
hide,  sleeping  on  or  in  a,  46  f.
Higden,  Ranulf,  159,  397
Higginson,  John,  335,  579
Hikkes,  Robert,  206
Hildburgh,  W.  L.,  411,463
Hill,  Richard,  408,  416  f.
hill-digging,  204  ff.
Hillebrandt,  A.,  402,  41 1
Hillen,H.  J.,  479
Hilles,  Richard,  409
hillmen,  119

Hilton-Simpson,  M.  W.,  431,  513

Hincmar,  380,  538

Hind  Etin,  119

Hinde,  William,  570

Hinton,  J.,  530

Hippocrates,  218,  585

Hoare,  Christobel  M.,  401

Hobart,  Sir  Henry,  308,  310

Hobbes,  Thomas,  178,  335,  350

Hobley,  C.  W.,  432,  442,  451,  464,  473,

490,  507
hobthursts,  166,  215
Hock,  K.  F.  von,  545
Hodson,  T.  C,  41 1 ,  456
Hofler,  M.,  395,  424,  453,  466,  532
Hoffmann-Krayer,  E.,  396
Hoghton,  Sir  Richard,  287  f.
Hoigges,  Henry,  55  f.
Holbeach,  197
holed  stones,  148,  220
Holinshed,  Raphael,  169,  399,  410,  419,

434,  446,  475,  477,  492,  509,  520,  534,
567

Holkot,  Robert,  79,  106,  121,  240,  465,

497  f.,  501,  533
Holland,  Henry,  549;  Thomas,  576
Holland:  see  Low  Countries
Hollingsworth,  A.  G.  H.,  433,  513
Hollis,  A.  C,  434,  444,  473
Holmberg,  Uno,  414,  423,  523,  527
Holmes,  J.  H.,  401,  455


INDEX


619


Holond,  John,  196

Holonde,  Richard,  65

Holt,  Sir  John,  364  f.

Holthausen,  F.,  389,  394,  448  f.,  490,

505,  526
Holworthy,  R.,  461,  553
Holy  Maid  of  Kent,  64  f.
holy  oil,  147,  151,  202;  water,  41,  48,

122,  147,  151,  202,  211;  wax,  470
Holyday,  Barten,  200
homage,  42,  240  fF.
Homer,  113  f.,  384,  441  f.
Homilia  de  Sacrilegiis,  384,  386  f.,  398,

444,  471  f->  548
Hone,  William,  528
honey,  163,  214  f.
Honeywell,  Christopher,  15  f,
Honorius  IV,  399
hoodoo  bag,  48  f.
Hooker  (alias  Vowell),  John,  567
Hooper,  John,  40,  70  f.,  476,  553
Hoops,  Johannes,  386
Hope,  John,  207;  R.  C,  394,  439,  452
Hopf,  L.,  398,  497
Hopfner,  T.,  504

Hopkins,  Matthew,  6,  134,  176,  236,
271  ff.,  296,  331  f.,  358,  367  f.,  371,
564,  594  f.;  Nicholas,  229

Horace,  531,  544,  560

Horley,  E.,  566,  568

Horn,  440

Horn,  Robert,  559;  W.,  454
Home,  G.,  402,  454  (.,  473
Horneck,  Anthony,  565,  588

Hornegild,  ,  14

Horner,  Elizabeth,  593
hornet,  499

horse,  36  f.,  95  ff.,  133,  147,  395,  431;
transformation  to,  184;  ridden  by
nightmare,  219  f.;  demon  horse,  177,
266  f.;  brazen  horse,  56

horseshoe,  167,  200

Horsey,  William,  50  '

Horstmann,  C,  544  f.

Horton  (Orthon),2i6

Horwood,  A.  J.,  404

Hose,  C,  399,  413,  455

Hossack,  B.  H.,  482, 488

host,  42,  149  f.,  181

Hott,  Jane,  272,  491,  495,  539

Houell,  Robert,  403  f.

house  cobolds,  41,  215  ff.,  221,  488

Hoveden,  Roger  of,  539

Hovorka,  O.  v.,  460,  464


Howard,  Henry:    see  Northampton;

Surrey
Howell,  James,  331  f.,  595
Howhett,  Margaret,  590
Howitt,  A.  W.,  413,  433,455
huckauf,  220  f.
Hudgin,  216
Hudibras,  521,  595
Hudson,  Mrs.,  107
Hiibener,  G.,  522
Hugh,  St.,  120,  125,  175
Hughes,  Lewis,  300
Hull,  William,  38
human  sacrifice,  206,  233,  243
bumblebees,  179,  208
Humm,  John,  417

Humphreys,  A.  L.,  430,  433,  467,  471,

495;  W.  J.,  472
hunger  borns,  34
Hungerford,  Walter  Lord,  65  f.
Huns,  116

Hunt,  Alice,  248;  Margaret,  37,  122;
Justice  Robert,  274,  562;  Robert,
391,  427  f.,  435  f.,  465,  468,  470  f.,

518

Hunter,  John,  505,  511,  523;  Joseph,

555;  William,  426,  486
hunting,  384,  490

Huntingdon,  95,  135,  271,  306,  563,  596
Huntingdonshire,  96,  228,  236,  435,  471,

594.    See  Warboys
Huntley,    Alice,    wife  of   John,  85;

Mother,  66
Huss,  K.,  511
Hussey,  Joseph,  162
Hutchinson,  Francis,  288  f.,  312,  351,

366,  556,  581,  589,  593  f.,  596;  Roger,

68;  Thomas,  591  ff.
Hutgin,  216

Hutton,  J.  H.,  411,  423  f.,  455  f.;  Mat-
thew, 570;  Timothy,  572
Hyde,  Douglas,  388,  390,  396
Hyde,  544

hydromancy,  57,  186,  503
hyena,  237,  493

Hylten-Cavallius,  G.  O.,  391,  485  {.,
528_,  536

hypericon,  1 19  ff.  '
hysteria,  267,  322,  334  f.,  354

lamblichus,  410,  449,  520
Ilithyia,  1 14

im  Thurn,  Sir  E.  F.,  223,  456


6io


INDEX


image  magic,  27,  29,  42,  56,  73  fF.,  80,
105,  113,  115,  147  f.,  270,  308,  398;
milking  an,  163

Image  of  Ypocresye,  64

Imbert-Gourbeyre,  A.,  46

Imma,  202

imposture,  61  fF.,  87,   192  fF.,  319  fF.,

341,354,429
impotence,  26  f.,  113
imps:  see  familiars
Inchubus,  no,  210
incubation,  46  f.,  94,  125,  221  f.
incubus,  42,  52,  64,  115  fF.,  219,  225,  332
Inderwick,  F.  A.,  540,  566,  573,  593,  596
India,  73  f.,  loi  f.,  134,  144,  172,  237;

Notes,  passim
Indians,  20,  103,  134,  362  f.,  371,  413,

423,  434,  454  ff-,  472  f-,  499,  50?.

513  f-,  516,  530,  536,  591
Indracht,  St.,  222
infanticide,  224  f.,  243,  245,  268
Ingram,  W.  V.,  521,  525
ink,  189  f.
Ino,  233

Inquisition,  25,  246
insects,  172  fF.,  179  fF.,  491
Institoris,  Heinrich,  25
Insulis,  Alanus  de,  178
inversion,  21,  40  f.,  74,  103,  215
invincibility,  108
invisibility,  176,  464,  524
invulnerability,  55
invultuacio:  see  image
Iphiclus,  113
Ipswich,  14,  96,  236

Ireland,  52  f.,  92,  122  fF.,  132,  136,  161,
166,  168,  175,  223;  Notes,  passim.
See  Kyteler

Iscanus,  Bartholomew,  166

Isidore,  403,  444,  462,  531,  537

Isidorus  Mercator,  384

Isis,  40

Islington,  88

Italy,  136  f.,  172,  183  f.,  206,  346  f.;

^otts,  passim
Ivanow,  W.,  41 1

Ivens,  R.,  388,  405,  436,  454,  473,  490,

507,  513  f-,  544
Ivo  of  Chartres,  244
Izzard,  Ann,  236

Jackson,  ,  210;  Elizabeth,  300;  G.  F.

(see  Shropshire);  Thomas,  120,  429
Jacobs,  F.,  537;  J.,  580


Jacoby,  A.,  443,  494,  506,  543
Jacquette  de  Luxembourg,  84,  106  f.
Jacson,  Mariot,  38

Jahn,  O.,  476;  U.,  377  f.,  425,  464,  472,

482,  492,  496,  522
jail  fever:  see  typhus
James,  St.,  30,  391  f.
James  I,  6,  14,  22,  235,  276  fF.,  331,

340  f.,  366,  406,  420,  449,  526,  530,

548,  562,  584
James,  M.  R.,  389,  496,  509,  525,  545.

See  Map
Jameson,  Thomas,  208
Jamieson,  Robert,  514
Jamnes,  385
Jane,  Queen,  410
Jaquett:  see  Jacquette
Jarbrey,  Nazareth,  188
Jastrow,  M.,  41 1
Jataka,  532

JeafFreson,  J.  C,  547,  579
Jeanne  de  Navarre,  76,  83,  109
JefFeries,  Anne,  535
JefFray,  John  and  Maud,  327
Jegerlehner,  J.,  481,  513,  519  .
Jenks,  Roland,  89,  347
Jenness,  D.,455

Jennings,  Lady,  and  daughter,  451,  577
Jente,  R.,  379,  383,  385,  393,  415,  441,

466,  493,  495,  517,  522,  526
Jerome,  St.,  239
Jessopp,  A.,  408,  518  f.,  590
Jesuit  Relations,  363,  591
Jewel,  John,  23,  227,  250  fF.,  371
Jews,  46,  68,  75  f..  Ill  f.,  137,  195,  399,

425,  440,  442,  444,  502,  520
Joan  of  Arc,  83,  399;  of  Navarre,  79  f.
Job,  40,  391  f.

Jorimann,  J.,  387  f.,  441,  449,  456
John,  St.,  74,  221
John  XXII,  77  f.
John,  King,  159,  181,  226
John,  A.,  425,  481,  506,  515  f.;  E.,  392,
501

Johnson,  Margaret,  270  f.;  Samuel,  329;

Walter,  453
Johnstone,  H.,  546

Jones,  Edward,  his  wife,  150;  Ernest,
526;  Maurice,  his  wife,  130;  Nicholas,
88;  Richard,  63  f.,  no,  211;  William,

439,  471, 503
Jonson,  Ben,  88,  170,  265,  315,  498,  533,

572

Jonsson,  M.,  485


INDEX


621


Jooly,  Katherine,  212

Jorden,  Edward,  322;  Joan,  182

Josaphat,  392

Josephus,  438

Josiah,  380

Jost,St.,392

Joubert,  Laurent,  450

Jourdemayne,  Margery,  81  fF.,  106,  115

Journeman,  Mrs.,  238

Joyce,  J.  W.,  572;  P.  W.,  516

Jude,  St.,  30

Judy,  ,  209

Jiilich,  Johann  Wilhelm,  Graf  von,  442

jugglers,  56,  86  f.,  350  f.,  448

jugs:  see  bottles

Julian,  41,  537

Jupp,  E.  B.,  574

Justinian,  517

Juxon, Joseph,  370, 541

Kaiserberg:  see  Geiler  *
Kalevala,  477
kangaroo,  174
Karkeek,  P.  Q.,  566
Karsten,  R.,  499
Katha-sarit-sagara,  463,  532
Kaugika  Sutra,  424
KaufFmann,  F.,  549
Kaufmann,  R.,  460,  468
Keats,  John,  225
Ke(e_)le,  John,  255,  554
Keeling,  Serjeant,  364
Kelley,  Sir  Edward,  312  f.
Kelly,  William,  577

Kemble,  J.  M.,  387,  389,  415,  494,  527

Kemp,  D.,  401,  405

Kempe,  Ursley,  248,  264,  284  f.,  560

Kendal,  John,  50

Kene,  Reginald,  51

Kennedy,  P.,  515;  W.  M.:  see  Frere

Kennet,  White,  582

Kenniston  trial,  513

Kent,  Charles,  425,  427,  468,  542

Kent,  51,  64,  66,  87,  108,  150,  180,  236,

257,  260,  272,  358,  393,  439,  470,  488,

492,  554,  567,  586;  Holy  Maid  of,

64  f.    See  Edmund
Kentucky,  49,  164,  401,  460  f.,  471,  480,

484,  486
Kenyon,  Sir  F.  G.:  see  papyri
Kerke,  Anne,  428
Kerneslawe,  John  de,  47  f.
Kettering,  209
Kettleby,  133


Keutgen,  F.,  537
key,  444.    See  bible
Keynes,  J.  N.,  571
Keyssler,  J.  G.,  518
Khaldun,  Ibn,  503
Kilkenny:  see  Kyteler
king  devils,  63

Kingdoms   Intelligencer   (1663),  The,

.521  ^
king's  evil,  142,  151,  316
Kingsford,  C.  L.:  see  Ixindon  Chronicles
Kingsley,  M.  H.,  405,  493;  Joan  of,  118
Kircher,  A.,  451,  517
Kirchmann,  J.,  440
Kirk,  Robert,  128  f.,  164,  462
Kirkton,  J.,  500
kiss,  241,  272,  403,  497
kistvaen,  103
Kitching,  A.  L.,  434,  476
Kiterell,  ,  557

Kittredge,  G.  L.,  446,  493,  500,  503,

522,  524  f.,  545,  570,  577  f.,  594
Klapper,  J.,  387

Kleeberger,  C,  392,  405,  506,  513
Klemming,  G.  E.,  391  f.,  396,  444,  466,
522

Knaresborough:  see  Steward
knife  in  mast,  478

Knighton,  Henry,  125  f.,  397,  401,  403,
533

Knivet  (Knevett),  Sir  John,  144,  313
knockers,  205

Knoop,  O.,  393,  430  f.,  481  f.,  484,  507,

514, 529
Knortz,  K.,  390
knots,  444

Knowles,  J.  H.,  531  f.

Knuchel,  E.  F.,  468,  506

Knuttel,  W.  P.  C.,587

Knyght,  John,  85

K6gel,R.,387,  548

Kohler,  R.,  390  f.,  398,  519,  526

Kolbing,  E.,  544  f.

Kohl,  J.  G.,413

Kohler,  J.,  548;  K.,467

Kormaks  Saga,  404

Kornmann,  H.,  438  f.,  445,  451,  531

Kotelmann,  L.,  397,  464

Krapf,  L.,  544

Krauss,  F.  S.:  see  Slavic

Kristensen,  E.  T.,  401,  405,  410,  425  f.,
428,  461,  464,  467,  483,  487  f.,  495  f.,
498,  505,  507,  £11  fF.,  515,  517  ff.,  523,
525  f.


622


INDEX


Kroeber,  A.  L.,  454  fF.,  516

Krohn,  K.,396,  477

Kromer,  M.,  474

Kronfeld,  A.,  460

Kiihnau,  R.,  448,  481,  483,  486  f.

Kuhn,  A.,447  f.,482,  531

Kuhnert,  E.,  404,  412,  436,  506

Kuninkpert,  180  f.

Kyme,  John,  58,  227

Kymer,  Gilbert,  417

Kyteler,  Alice,  52  f.,  94,  122  f.,  144,  177,

415

Labourd,  182,  358,  368
Labrador,  510

Lachmann,  T.,  481,  483,  527

Lacoiiia,  233

Ladame,  Paul,  583

Lady  fast,  the,  130

Lady  Isabel  and  the  Elf-Knight,  119

Laing,  D.,453

Laishe,  Joan,  19

Laistner,  Ludwig,  218,  536

Lake,  Sir  T.,  406,  575

Lambe,    Elizabeth,    224;    John,  154,

317  f-,  503.
Lambert,  Cecilia,  257;  Margaret,  60,
590

lameness,  18,  60  f.,  92,  loi  f.
Lamia,  224,  382
Lamkyn,  John,  197
Lammert,  G.,  391,  395
Lancashire,  7,  10  f,  17  f.,  39,  90,  149,
171,  265  fF.,  269  ff.,  273  {.,  282,  285  ff.,

294,  309.  321,  328,  358,  368,  389  f-,
421,448,484,495,523,525,561.  See
Potts

Lancre:  see  Ancre

Laneham,  Robert,  524

Lanercost,  546

Lang,  A.,  279,  521,578

Langkelly,  William,  80

Langley,  Thomas,  37

Langlois,  C.  V.,  415

Langton,  Stephen,  46;  Walter  de,  24I  f.

Lanman,  C.  R.,  442

Lannoy,  C.  de,  557

Lansdowne  mss.,  520

Lanval,  240

Lapland,  159,  180

La  Salle,  G.  L.  de,  430;  L.  F.  de,  545
Lasaulx,  E.  von,  476
Lateran  Council  (i2i5),470
Latimer,  Hugh,  71;  John,  577


Latinus,  47

Latona,  1 14

Laudun,  William,  43

Laukiston,  Richard,  61,  107

Laurentius,  222

Lavater,  L.,  559

Law,  A.,  18;  T.  G.,  570

Lawes  against  Witches  (1645),  The,  421

Lawes,  Henry,  121

laws,  4,  6,  27  ff.,  38,  66,  86,  104,  143,
152,  189,  205  f.,  212,  225  f.,  230,  236,
255  ff.,  261  ft.,  278,  281  ff.,  363,  559,

586,  596

Lawson,  Deodat,  103,  494;  Elizabeth

and  John,  60,  590
lawsuits,  55

Lea,  H.  C,  403,  412,  473,  516,  531,  536,
548

Leach,  A.  F.,  395

Leadam,  L  S.,  534

Leather,  E.  M.:  see  Herefordshire

Le  Barbier,  C,  473

Le  Braz,  A.,  400

Lech:  see  Byg

Leche,  Margery  la,  236

Lecky,  W.  E.  H.,  560

Le  Clercq,  C,  413

Lecoy  de  la  Marche,  A.:  see  Bourbon
Ledrede,  Richard,  53,  123
Lee,  John,  558;  Sir  Sidney,  574;  Wil-
liam, 188
Leech,  Anne,  563
Lefebure,  E.,  505
Lefevre-Pontalis,  P.,  507
Lefroy,  Sir  J.  H.,  589  f.
Legenda  Aurea,  224,  391,  530
Leges  Henrici,  29,  75,  383
Legge,  F.,  566,  580,  589,  591,  594  f.,  597
Legibus,  De  Antiquis,  397,  545
legitimacy,  232

Lehugeur,  P.,  412,  415,  417,  457

Leicester,  77,  188,  228,  322  ff.,  510,  592;
Robert,  Earl  of,  69  f ,  180;  the  Fast-
ing Nun  of,  128

Leicestershire,  63,  66,  236,  358,  435,
596  f.

Leigh,  Sir  T.,377

Leland,  C.  G.,  434,  482,  507;  John,  204

Le  Loyer,  P.,  463,  492

Lemgo,  233

lemon,  loi

Lemon,  R.,  554

Leonard,  Lord,  210

Leonhardi,  G.:  see  Cockayne


INDEX


623


lepers,  45, 137

Lercheimer,  A.:  see  Witekind
L'Estrange,  J.,  408,  513
letters  (Schutzbriefe),  406
Leubuscher,  R.,  492

Leventhorp,  ,  207

levitation,  146
Lewes,  150

Lewin,  L.,  412,  500;  T.  H.,  544
Lewis,  M.  G.,  48,  493
Leyden,  John  of,  246

Leynham,  ,  535

Lhwyd,  E.,  145
lice,  173
lichen,  147,  151
Lichfield,  241
Lickbarrow,  Dr.,  477
Lid,  Nils,  453,  500

Liebermann,  F.,  379  fF.,  387,  393,  397,
404,  414  {.,  462,  493,  536,  538,  543  ^

Liebrecht,  F.,  467,  481,  493.  See  Til-
bury

Liege,  156;  Arnold  of,  118

Liegnitz,  Battle  of,  153

lightning,  154  ff.,  257

Lilly,  William,  316,  424,  477,  503,  519

lime,  102

Lincey,  A.  J.  V.  Le  Roux  de,  524
Lincoln,  38  f.,  58  f.,  120,  125,  191,  193,

197,  228,  238,  323
Lincolnshire,  100,  102,  132,  149,  381,

422,  43I)  480,  484,  486,  494  fF.,  504  f.,

. 515.523
Linde,  A.  van  der,  587
Linden,  Johann,  360
Linderholm,  E.,  441  f.,  478  f.,  481,  485,

487,  489  f.,  536
Lingua,  493

Linton,  Mrs.  E.  Lynn,  276,  551,  568

Livy,  457

lizard,  49,  424

Llanfaes,  201

Llewellyn,  108,  226  f.

Lloyd,  Meredith,  158

loaf  floated,  48;  and  knives,  52,  193

Lobeck,  C.  A.,  404, 410,  520

Loch,  S.:  see  Longman

Lockhart,  J.  G.,  478

locks,  for  fonts,  etc.,  150  f.;  unlocking

charm, i 15
Lodge,  Edmund,  420,  520,  576;  Thomas,

90

Lowenstimm,  A.,  399,  406,  426,  442,
459.  464,  492,  506,  518,  537,  597


Logan,  James,  429,  453

Logeman,  W.  S.,  545

Lollard  Apology,  52,  143;  Lollards,  403

Lombards,  180  f.

Lomner,  Sir  VV.,  534

London,  36,  41,  51  f.,  56,  59,  61  f.,  69,
83,  85  ff.,  99,  107  f.,  122,  126,  132,
150,  154  f.,  187  ff.,  192  ff.,  198  f.,
211  f.,  227,  229  f.,  234,  236,  255,
257  ff-,  261,  304,  313,  315,  317,  321  f.;
^otes,  passim

London  Chronicles,  401,  409  f.,  416  ff.,

501,  534,  547,  574
Long,  Sir  Richard,  133
Longland,  John,  193
Longman,  E.  D.,  412,  422,  429  f.,  436
loosing  spells,  113,  115,  202
Lor,  Jacobus  de,  77
Lords'  Journals,  535,  554,  559,  572
Lorens,  Frere,  403,  469
Loring,  Mrs.  D.,  20  f.
Lorraine,  66
Losinga,  Herbert  de,  42
Loss,  Jeremiah,  525
lost  articles,  165.    See  thieves
Lot,  F.,  524
Loth,  J.,  516,  524
Lothaire  I,  113
lots,  385

Loudun,  the  nuns  of,  570
Louis  I,  233,  450;  X,  76,  83
Louisiana,  401,  434,  456
Louthe,  John,  1 57

love  and  hate,  26  f.,  30,  4I  f.,  48,  51  f.,
61,  77,  84  f.,  87,   90  f.,  99  f.,  102,
104  ff.,  128,  149,  151,  229,  433
Lovetot,  Sir  John,  241  f.;  Joan,  241
Lovett,  E.,  401,  406,  430,  432,  468,  47S,
528

Low  Countries,  14,  93,  128,  391,  400,

413,  424,  430  ff-,  448,  452,  459  f-,  463,
468,  480,  483  f.,  488,  490  ff.,  496,  501,
505  f.,  509,  511  (.,  514,  516,  519,
526  ff.    See  Bekker

Lowell,  J.  R.,349

Lowes,  J.  L.,463

Lowth,  ,  189

Lubbock,  Sir  John,  462

Lucan,3l2,  378,  560

Lucian,  222,  433,  477,  513,  523

Lucifel,  160

Lucifer,  178,  24I

Luciferians,  437

Lucina,  1 14


624


INDEX


LudorfF,  F.,  545

Liitolf,  A.,  447,  476,  517

Lufkyn,  Thomas,  554

lunar  venom,  26,  378

Lundgren,  H.,  544

Lupton,  T.,  441

Lupus,  Bishop,  152

lutins,  215

Luttrell,  N.,  540

Lyalt,  Sir  A.  C,  4II,  505,  543

lycanthropy:  see  werewolves

Lycosthenes,  Conrad,  43

Lydwith,  128

Lyme,  Conn.,  237

Lyndewoode,  William,  150  f.,  387

Lyndyssay,  Margaret,  113

Lyon,  D.  G.,  543

Maassen,  F.,  384  f.

Mabinogion,  516,  524

Macarius,  St.,  184

Macbean,  L.,  395

Macbeth,  13  f.,  86

McBryde,  J.  M.,  389,  504,  508

MacCuUoch,  Sir  E.   (see  Guernsey);

J.  A.,  553:  see  Holmberg
Macdonald,  A.,  390;  G.  W.,  510
MacDougall,  James,  516
McDougall,  W.,  399,  413,  455
Macedonia,  423,  436,  442,  462,  465,

493.  523. 532
Machyn,  Henry,  257  f.,  410,  556
Mackay,  W.,  422,  426,  480,  484,  528  f.
Mackel,E.,396
McKenzie,  D.,412

MacKenzie,  D.  R.,  402,  413,  432,  442,

451;  464,  473)  482,  490;  E.)  4B0
Mackie,  C,  400,  432,  490,  510
Mackinlay,  J.  M.,  472,  478
McKinley,  William,  422
McKnight,  G.  H.,  437
Maclagan,  R.  C,  422,  426  f.,  434,  480,

523, 528
MacMahon,  W.,  559
MacManus,  S.,  516
Macquoid,  T.  and  K.:  see  Yorkshire
Macrobius,  537
Madden,  Sir  F.,  402,  438
madder,  191

Maddox,  J.  C,  455,  473

madness,  10,  27,  30,  98,  112,  124  fF.,

529.    See  possession
Magician's  Apprentice,  The,  tale,  477
Magnus,  H.,  529


Magnliss  Saga,  529
magpie,  494
Maidstone,  358

Maitland,  F.  W.,  517,  539;  Sir  John
(Chancellor),  278;  S.  R.,  439,  456,
555

Malays,  loi  (.,  134,  237,  399,  402,  405,
413.  434,  442,  455,  473,  497,  499,  506,
513

Malborne,  John,  70

Malchi,  210  f.

Malchus,  1 10,  210

Malcolm,  King,  153

Malcolm,  Sir  John,  532,  542;  J.  P.,  521

Maldon,  182,  295

maleficium,  4  ff.,  22,  24  fF.,  253,  553

Malekin,  215

Malfrey,  Thomas,  189

Malkin  Tower,  271,  273

Malleus  Maleficarum,  24,  168,  249,
412,  430,  441,  454,  469,  472,  478,  482,
485  f-,  489,  493,  496,  502,  530,  547,
549,  551,  560,  563

Mailing,  180

Malmesbury,  William  of,  43,  iii,  147,

183,  204,  232,  240,  397,  533,  544
Maker,  Goodwife,  167  f.,  485
malum  secutum,  9
Malvenda,  T.,  380,  445
Mambres,  385

Man,  Isle  of,  84,  159,  390,  405,  422,

428  f.,  433,  448,  459  f-,  469,  471,  480,
486,  488,  490,  495,  527  {.,  536

Mandeville,  Sir  John,  45

mandrake,  448

Manichaeans,  245

Maniere  de  Langage,  La,  406

Manly,  J.  M.,  439,  524,  574

Mannhardt,  W.,  368,  441,  464,  472,  510,

517,  595,  597
Manninen,  L:  see  Finland
Manningham,  John,  569
Manningtree,  271,  273
Mansikka,  V.  J.:  see  Russia
Manu,  542
Manucci,  N.,  41 1

Manz,  W.,  392,  414,  442,  464  f.,  481,

506,  513,  527
Manzoni,  A.,  137

Map,  Walter,  117,  223  f.,  232,  240  f.,
397

Marcellus    Empiricus  (Burdigalensis),

386,  425,  467;  Sidetes,  493
Marco  Polo,  473,  51 5


INDEX


625


Marcus  Aurelius,  153

Mareschal,  Robert  le,  77  f.

Margaret,  Queen  of  Edward  IV,  60  f.

Marguerite  of  Navarre,  412

Marian  exiles,  250  ff.

Mariani,  L.,  414

Marie  de  France,  16,  240,  494

Marigny,  Enguerrand  de,  76  f.,  83,  109

marigold,  37,  122

Marillac,  Charles  de,  409

Marin,  F.  R.,  391

Marisco,  Richard  de,  46,  150

Marlowe,  C,  501,  515

Marmorstein,  A.,  512

marriage,  105  ff.,  in,  113,  190,  385.

See  love
Marshall,  Agnes,  38;  E.,  521
Marston,  John,  312
Martha's  Vineyard,  134,  499
Martin,  St.,  514,  527;  of  Bracara,  387
Martinj  C.  Trice,  408,  410,  509
Martyn,  Alse,  167
Martyr,  Peter,  251,  253,  256,  554
Mary,  the  Virgin,  390  ff.
Mary  I,  69,  180;  Queen  of  Scots,  260
Maryland,  423,  428,  433,  435,  454  f.,

460,  468,  480,  488,  527
Mascall,  Robert,  34,  59
Mascon,  336

Mason,  James,  456,  561;  Sir  John,  557

mass,  75,  82,  147,  451,  470

Massam,  J.  A.,  398,  491  f.

Masse,  P.,  482,  509,  511

Mather,  Cotton,  102,  200,  333,  349,  363,
370,  421  f.,  428,  451,  454,  475,  488,
499,  522,  525,  565,  578,  585,  591;  In-
crease, 102,  178,  235,  349,  371,  435,
445>  475.  478,  492,  511  f-.  521,  524  (;
579

Mathew,  J.,  455;  Toby,  315
Mathews,  F.  W.,  429  f.,  432,  484,  498,
501

Matthew,  St.,  30
Matthews,  Albert,  399
Matthys,  Jan,  246
Mattsson,  Per,  160
Matzke,  J.  E.  ,  538
Mauchamp,  E.,  378,  413,  442
Maurer,  K.,  485
Mauricius,  224  f.
Maury,  L.  F.  A.,  447,  529
Mawdelyn,  Dr.,  65
Maxwell,  W.,  458
May,  121  f.


Maydland,  Dr.,  229
Mayer,  M.,  532

Mayhew,  Matthew,  134,  499;  Thomas,
592

Mead,  F.  H.,467
measures,  1 14
Medea,  58,  75,  152

Medical  Act,  38;  treatises,  389,  404,  444.

See  Cockayne;  Heinrich;  Henslow
Medicina  de  Quadrupedibus,  404
medicine:  see  quacks;  white  witchcraft
Meek,C.  K.,  473,  537
Meere,  John,  108
meeting,  44  f.,  51,  183
Meier,  E.,  392,  430,  463  f.,  480,  496,  515
Meilerius,  119
Meinders,  H.  A.,  540
Melanesians,  134,  388,  401,  436,  442,

444,  454,  459,  473,  490  f-,  499  f-j
505  ff.,  513  f.,  537,  544

Melland,  F.  H.,  402,  505,  513

Melsa  Chronicle,  401

Melville  (Menville),  Ninian,  67  f.

Men-an-Tol,  220

Mendoza,  Bernardino,  88  '

Menghi,  Girolamo,  423,  447

menses,  383

Mercuric,  Scipione,  432
Meridiana,  240
Merker,  M.,  507
Merlin,  58,  116  f.,  226,  229
Merriman,  R.  B.,  409,  570
Merseburg  Spell,  40
Mesopotamia,  172

metamorphosis,  13,  28,  41,  57,  161,  166,

174  ff-,  248,  250,  348
Metles,  Jewet,  128
Mexico,  413

Meyer,  Carl,  412,  436;  E.  H.,  392,  482,
511,  514,  516,  522,  525,  527  (see
Wuttke);  Hans,  378,  402,  442,  473,
489;  R.  M.,  396;  W.,  380,  544

Meyrac,  A.,  391,  431,  496

Michel,  Dan,  51,  150,  437;  Humphrey,
541

midday,  58,  215,  240
Middlesex,  243,  328

Middleton,  Christopher,  416;  Thomas,
478,  493,  497;  Thomas  (of  Hyde),
477, 536

Midia,  Petronilla  de,  52  f.

Midsummer  Eve,  148

midwives,  34,  114  f.

Mielke,  R.,  496


626


INDEX


milk:  see  dairy
milk-hares,  i66

milking  an  axe-handle,  etc.,  163  f.

milk-sucking  bag,  51,  165  f.

Mill,  John,  512

Miller,  Anna,  62;  M.  H.,  498

Millie,  Bessie,  159

Milloue,  L.  de,  462

Mills,J.P.,4ll,455

Milne,  Mrs.  L.,  41 1,  434,  464,  543

Milton,  201,  224

mine-spirits,  205

miracles,  587

Mirandola:  see  Pico

Mirk,  John,  59,  407

mirror,  breaking  a,  93

mirror  magic  and  crystallomancy,  41,

48,  51  {.,  68,  79  f.,  165,  185  fF.,  206,

209  f.,  260,  313,  318,  553
Mirror  for  Magistrates,  416
Misselden,  John  and  Robert,  65
mist;  see  weather
Mitton,  Arthur,  188
Mixer,  K.,  519
Mixindale  Head,  207  f.
Mody,  John,  51
Mogk,E.,396
Mohra,  358,  565,  588
mole,  491
molin,  red,  214

Molitoris,  Ulrich,  378,  463,  472,  502
Molyneux,  Sir  R.,  309
Mompesson,  John,  214
Monaciello,  217
Money  Field,  the,  204
monk,  devil  as,  216
Monk,  W.  J.,  498

Monmouth,  236;  Geoffrey  of,  43  f.,  47,

116,  204,  232
Monmouthshire,  433
Monnier,  D.,  496
Monseur,  E.,  431  f.

Montagu,  Sir  Edward,  310;  Henry,  310;

James,  293,  310
Montfort,  Simon  de,  159
Montgomerie,  A.,  483
Moodey,  Joshua,  371
moon,  26,  31,  472

Mooney,  J.,  455.  So7.  5^3

Moonstone,  The,  189

Moore,  A.  W.  (see  Man);  G.  H.,  362,

583

Morant,  Philip,  546
mor'S,  29


Morduck,  Sarah,  236,  594

More,  George,  298;  Henry,  159  f.,  166,
335  f-,_477.  511,  524,  584,  591;  James,
495;  Sir  Thomas,  60  f.,  64,  127,  210,
229

Moreas,  Jean,  397
Moret,  A.,  41 1

Morgan,  Christopher,  199;  Nanny,  182
Morpeth,  199

Morris,  John,  66;  Lewis,  518;  William,
III

Mortimer,  Roger,  53

Morton,  Cardinal  John,  no;  Margaret,

485;  Bishop  Thomas,  325;  Thomas,

591  f.

Moses,  105  f.;  Law  of,  27,  363,  439

moss  from  skull,  142

moth,  499

Moth,  F.,  439

motherwort,  449

Moule,  H.  J.,  408

Moulton,  A.  F.,  519;  Jonathan,  206

mountain  ash,  167

mouse,  135,  389,  490  f.;  soul  as  mouse,
178

Mousey  Lea,  477

MiillenhofF,  K.,  390,  394  f.

Muller,  Josef,  472,  481,  483,  487,  490  f.,

497,  503,  5i3>  515.  518,  527;  W.:  see

Schambach
mugwort,  214
mullein,  448
mumming,  548
Mummolus,  108
Munday,  Anthony,  391
Mundy,  P.,  409
Munro,  Robert,  453
murdrum,  29
Mure,  Isabel,  34
Murimuth,  Adam,  403,  415,  457
murrain,  4,  38  f.,  41,  95  ff.,  174.  See

cattle

Murray,  Sir  J.  A.  H.,  446;  Margaret  A.,

421,  548,  553,  565  .
Myddvai,  the  Physicians  of,  391
Mylius,  J.  D.,  447
Myrc:  see  Mirk

nail  of  thumb  or  finger  in  image  magic,
51  f.,  165,  186,  192

nails,  200;  in  roll,  image,  heart,  or  skull,
73  ff.,  97  ff.,  142;  in  footprint,  102;  in
charm  bottle,  102;  boiled,  103

nails,  parings  of,  48  f.,  96,  99,  loi,  103


INDEX


627


name,  74,  99,422
Nan,  Kilnsey,  501
Nandick,  Thomas,  61
Nangiaco,  Guillelmus  de,  415,  457,  475
Napier,  A.  S.,  382,  389,  466,  526  (see
Wulfstan);  James,  400,  422,  483,  510
Naples,  loi
Nasche:  see  Nashe

Nashe,  Edmund,  63,  197;  Thomas,  69,
180,  399,  420,  499,  509,  517,  545  f.,
571

Nassau,  R.  H.,  401

Naude,  G.,  457

Neckam,  Alexander,  448

necromancy,  46,  70,  143  f.,  312  f.,  380

Nectanebus,  57,  105  f.

needles,  87,  90,  97  fF.,  133  f.,  167

Negelein,  J.  von,  412,  496

negroes,  48  f.,  91,  406,  413,  422  {.,  431  f.,

434,  455  <"•>  487,  496  f.,  505.  512,  523,

527.    See  Africa
Neilson,  George,  404
neton, 118
nets,  173

Neumeister,  R.,  514
Neuwald,  Hermann,  237
Nevell,  Lord  Harry,  67  f.,  439
Neville,  Sir  William,  62  ff.,  no,  211
New  England,  90,  93,  129,  160  f.,  178,
183,  200,  206,  214,  235,  237,  279,
331  ff.,  428,  484,  494,  521.  See  Whit-
tier

New  Guinea,  49,  115,  424,  434,  454  f.,

507  {.,  532.  See  Melanesians
New  Hampshire,  93,  160  f.,  206,  214
New  Jersey,  236
New  Romney,  87
New  Year's  Day,  47,  548
New  York,  454,  510
Newbald,  143

Newburgh,  William  of,  43,  116,  397,
527

Newcastle,  200,  358

Newell,  W.  W.,  490

Newfoundland,  468

Newport,  William,  71,  197

Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  336

Nicander,  114

Nicephorus  Callistus,  532

Nichols,  John,  541,576  f-,  589,592;  J-G.,

389,  and  Notes,  passim
Nicholson,  E.  W.  B.,  422,  480,  484,  496,

498,  516;  Isaac,  435,  542;  John,  424,

429,  468,  471,  51 5


Nicolaides,  J.,  527

Nicolas,  Mary,  236

Nicolson,  William,  453

Nider,  J.,  378,  402,  412,  499,  521,  524,

530  f.,  533
Niderberger,  F.,  527
Niger,  Antonius,  410;  Radulphus,  153,

397,  474,  502,  516,  545
nightmare,  147,  149,  183,  218  ff.,  389,

466

nihtgenga,  218

nine,  98

Nine  Worts,  32

Ninian:  see  Saint  Trinian

Noble,  John,  590,  594

Nogara,  B.,  414

Nohl,J.,4s8

Nonmete  Hill,  206

Nonnus,  537

Noreen,  A.,  490

Norfolk,  66,  97,  155,  173,  182,  198,  206,
211,  236,  315,  and  Notes,  passim;
Thomas  Howard,  Duke  of,  210;
Thomas  Mowbray,  Duke  of,  404

Norhamptone,  William,  193  ff.

north,  154

North,  Roger,  3  f.,  333,  361,  581.  See
Guilford

North  Carolina,  92,  442

North  English  Homilies,  239

North  Marston,  no

Northall,  G.  F.,  390,  432,  437,  440,  448,
487,  490,  511  f.,  526

Northampton,  197,  293,  358,  428,  475,
596  f.;  Assize  of,  233  f.;  Henry  How-
ard, Earl  of,  309,  424,  522,  535

Northamptonshire,  38,  84,  236,  286,

427,  594
Northfelde,  Thomas,  83  f.
Northumberland,    272,    480;  Henry

Percy,  Earl  of,  307,  309
Northumbrian  Priests,  28,  383
Northwich,  295;  the  Boy  of,  301
Norwich,  60,  62,  loo,  107,  173,  209,  262,

408,  535,  575
Notestein,  Wallace,  251,419,  542,  550  f.,

555  f.,  560  f.,  563  f.,  572,  579,  591,  596
Notingham,  John  de,  77  f.
Nottingham,  146,  243
Nourry,  E.,  398,  425
Nova  Scotia,  92
Numa,  46
nut,  loi

Nutt,  Thomas,  304


628


INDEX


Nyendael,  D.  van,  543
Nynauld,  J.  de,  492
Nyrop,  K.,  412,  453,  503

oak  pin,  347
oaths,  232

obeah,  48  f.,  141.  See  Bell,  H.  J.

Oberion,  110,  208,  210

Oberycom,  59

Octavian's  treasure,  204

Oddo,  159

Odin,  55,  143,  159

O'Donnell,  E.,  493

Oertel,  H.,  467

oifertory,  151

Ohrt,  F.,  396,  453,  481,  505,  507,  543

ointment,  50,  144,  166,  225,  243,  268

Olafssaga,  445

Olaus  Magnus,  43

Olbrich,  K.,  405

Old  English  Homilies,  468

Old  Norse,  54  f.,  438  f.  See  Edda;  Odin;

sagas;  Gering
Old  Shuck, 176
Oldham,  John,  141,  478,  521
Oldreeve,  Henry,  17
Oman,  J.  C,  41 1,432
omens,  44  f.,  51
onion,  loi
Onley,  Roger,  84
Onslow,  George,  581
Opinion  of  Witchcraft  Vindicated(i67o),

The,  564
oracles,  47,  227
Orain,  A.,  527
orange,  loi

Orchard,  N.,  378,  405,  478,  540,  562
Orde  Browne,  G.  St.  J.,  452,  488  ff.,  506
ordeal,  54.     See  bread;  grain;  rice;

stones;  swimming;  wager
Ordrych,  Roger,  236
Orleans,  46,  56  f.,  186  f.
Ormerod,  George,  569
Orpheus,  67
Ortenau,  358
Orthon,  216
Osborn,  C.  S.,  537

Osborne,  Francis,  315  f.,  323,  325  f.;

John,  541;  Ruth,  370,  541
Ossory,  53
Oswin,  St.,  125,  221
Otho,  217

Otway,  Csesar,  453,  479;  Thomas,  497
Outlawe,  William,  122,  169


oven, 31

Overbury,  Sir  T,,  90,  314,  317

Ovid,  46,  75,  113  f.,  152,  472,  502,  531,

546,  560
Oviedo,  G.  F.  de,  531
Oweh,  E.  (see  Wales);  H.,  475
owl,  491

Owst,G.  R.,398

Oxenedes,  Johannes  de,  401

Oxford,  46,  63,  70;  Black  Assize  at,  89;

University,  294  f.
Oxfordshire,  432
Oxley,  Isabel,  131

Paetow,  L.  J.,  524

Page,  J.  LI.  W.,  400,  433,  467,  495,  498,

523,  528;  Roger,  196
Paget,  Sir  W.,  66  f.

Palgrave,  Sir  F.,  226,  401,  407  f.,  415,

418,  534,  539.  546
Palici,  232

Palmer,  C.  T.,  428;  John,  371;  W.  T.,

486,  518,  527  f.
palmistry,  70
Palumbus,  iii
Pandareus,  493
Panter,  Goody,  272
Panzer,  F.,  522,  531

papyri,  384,  387,  41 1,  4I4,  424,  44°,  504,

506  f.,  543
Paracelsus,  212,  348,  412,  454
Parcae,  382

Paris,  Gaston,  439,  483;  Matthew,  397,

399,  438,  440,  446,  452,  457,  477,  494,

502,  516,  525,  533,  546
Paris,  Council  of  (829),  472,  482,  534
Parisot,  R.,  441

Parker,  Ann,  212;  H.,  516;  K.  L.,  401,

455,  503;  Mary,  60;  Matthew,  115
Parkhurst,  John,  227,  250,  262  f.,  553,

559,  570  f-
Parkyn,  John,  38
Parlaben,  Richard,  255
Parris,  Samuel,  102  f.,  367
Parsons,  C.  E.,  519;  E.  C,  434
Paston,  John,  534
pater  noster,  31,  36,  483
Patetta,  F.,  509,  536  f.,  54I,  543  f.
Patriche,  John,  197
Patrick,  St.,  390
Paul,  St.,  30,  393,530
Paule,  William,  195  f.
Paulicians,  245
Paulini,  Annales,  403  f.


INDEX


629


Pauls,  A.,  439;  E.,  442,  481
Paulus  Diaconus,  500
Pausanias,  1 14,  537
Payne,  J.  F.,387,  390
Peace,  J.  B.,  571

Peacock,  E.,  395,  429  f.,  435,  448,  453,

470,  486,  510  f.,  518  f.,  534;  ■  ,406

peas,  200

Pechugl-Loesche,  E.,  413,  434,  473,  485,

491,  529
Peck,  Francis,  558,  574,  578
Peckham,  Sir  George,  570
Pedlers  Prophecie,  The,  478
Pegge,  Samuel,  471
Peile,  John,  573
Pembroke,  216
Pendle:  see  Lancashire
Pendleton,  Ellen,  155
Pengelly,  W.,  467

penitentials,  29  f.,  54,  74  f.,  143,  152,

166,  383  f.,  444,  449,  548.  See  Bede;

Corrector;     Columban;  Cummean;

Finnian;  Ecgbert;  Schmitz;  Theodore;

Wasserschleben
Pennsylvania,  430,  497.  See  Doddridge
Penzance,  456
peony,  474

Pepys,  Samuel,  133,  337,  421

Perceval,  romance,  222

Percy,  H.  B.,  60

Pererius,  B.,  395,  472

periwinkle,  448

Perkes,  Thomas,  520

Perkins,  Clarence,  403;  William,  27,
232,  235,  249  f.,  290  fF.,  295  ff.,  305,
310  f.,  378,  399,  420,  426,  434,  503,

547,  564,  587
Perreaud  (Perrault),  F.,  583
Perrers,  Alice,  78,  105  f.
Perry,  William,  324  f.
Persant,  Jean  de,  203
Peryam,  Sir  W.,  307
Peter,  St.,  30,  33,  40,  222,  392  f.
Peter  Cantor,  466,  538;  Comestor,  106;

of  Wakefield,  226
Peter,  A.,  391  f.,  485,  531
Peterborough,  Benedict  of,  539
Peterson,  William,  65
Petit,  J.,  415
Petrarch,  109

Petriburgense,  Chronion,  545
Petronius,  531  f.
Petrus  Venerabilis,  469
Petsch,  R.,  544


Pette,  Phineas,  479

Pettigrew,  T.  J.,  396,  535,  554,  557

Peucer,  Kasper,  511

Phseacians,  16

Phelps,  William,  516

Pherecydes,  113

Philip  IV,  76,  109

Philip,  Adam,  487

Philippides,  513

Philippines,  413

Phillips,  Judith,  206,  465,  553

Philosophical  Transactions,  420

Philostratus,  225

philtres:  see  love

Phips,  Sir  William,  583

Phoenicia,  233

Phylarchus,  232

physiognomy,  70

Pickering,  Sir  Gilbert,  304,  571;  Henry,
304  f.;  John,  302;  Mary,  305;  Thomas,
290,  305

Pico  della  Mirandola,  G.  F.,  250,  491,

.531,533
picture,  92  f.    See  image
pigs,  96  f.,  184,  494

Pike,  L.  O.,  378,  403,  458,  534,  540,  556,
.58?

Pilgrim's  Tale,  The,  1 1 9

Pilkington,  James,  240,  475  f.

pillory,  59,  212,  257  f.,  282,  286

pimpernel,  448

Pindar,  Rachel,  182,  499

Pineau,  L.,  442  f.

pins  and  needles:  see  image

Piozzi:  see  Thrale

pipe,  160

Pipe  Roll,  234  f.,  538  f.
Piso,  489

Pitcairn,  Robert,  279,  401,  421  f.,  424,
426,  441,  461,  468,  478  f.,  483,  488  fF.,

500,  525,  546,  566,  573
Pitre,  G.,  433,  442,  522.  See  Italy
pits,  ordeal,  234  f.
Pittenweem,  421
Pitts,  J.  L.,  549

pixies,  219;  pixey-led,  20  f.,  215,  513
plague,  31,  136  ff.,  181,  346  f.
Plantagenets,  1 16  f.
plantain,  loi

Plantsch,  Martin,  163,  405,  412,  470
Platina,  B.,  545

Plato,  105  f.,  Ill,  116,  412,  457,  561
Plautus,  532
Plaxton,  George,  151


0


INDEX


Pleasant  Treatise  of  Witches  (1673),  A,

502,  524,  553
Plenzat,  Karl,  544

Pliny,  114, 141  f.,  166, 172,  232,  398, 404,
■414,  424,  444,  460,  482,  500,  502,  531

Ploss,  H.  H.,  444

Plot,  R.,  420,  521

plough,  171

ploLighstave,  143

Plummer,  Charles,  451

Pocock(e),  Richard,  34,  529

Poer,  John  le,  122  f.

pointing  bones,  134

poison,  32,  62,  90,  136,  181,  346  f.

Poland,  153,  159,370,  484

Pole,   ,  211;  Arthur  and  Edmund,

260;  Reginald,  Cardinal,  227,  230,  254,
260;  William  de  la,  Duke  of  Suffolk,
227  f.

polecat,  491

Pollard,  A.  F.,  402;  F.,  420

Pollen,  J.  H.,  420,  559

Pollux,  Julius,  403,  513

Poison,  A.,  390,  400,  422,  425  f.,  471,

478  ff.,  490,  496,498
poltergeister,  35,  41,  214  ff.
Polynesia,  451
Pontus,  232
Ponzinibius,  J.  F.,  531
pool,  233

Poole,  ,  86;  C.  H.,  467  f.  (see  Som-
erset); W.  F.,  358,  579,  594
Porphyry,  449

Porta,  G.  B.  della,  269,  548,  561  f.,  565
Porter,  Endymion,  331 ;  Thomas,  377
Portland,  176
portraits,  92  f.

possession,  demoniacal,  27, 124  ff.,  134  f.,
145,  175  f-,  229,  262,  297  ff.,  339,
352,582

Post-Angel,  129

Pot,  Henry,  192  f.

potato,  loi

Potts,  Thomas,  7,  10  f.,  269,  274,  285  ff.,
376,  395,  420,  469,  488,  527,  531,  533,
560  f.,  573,  589,  592,  595

Poughkeepsie,  47

poultry,  35,  96,  482

Powel,  Mary,  452

Powell,  F.  Y.,  380,  404,  406,  451,  478;

Sir  John,  4,  361  f.;  364
Power,  D'Arcey,  389
powwaws,  134,  363,  499,  591


Pozzuoli,  74

Pradel,  Fritz,  423,  443,  465
Praepositi,  Johannes,  203
Pratorius,  Johannes,  511,  522
Prato,  S.,  502,  516
prayers,  145  fr.,387
pressing  to  death,  328
Prestall,  John,  108,  255,  260  f.
Prestantius,  502
Preston,  234

Preston,  Jennet,  267,  286,  592
Preusler,  W.,  396
Preuss,  Hans,  380
Prick  of  Conscience,  The,  380
Priebsch,  R.,  389,  524
Priest's  Wife,  The,  tale,  43  f.
Prieur,  Claude,  492
Prim(e)rose,  James,  74,  421,  571
Prince,  John,  157
Priscian,  537

Prodigious  and  Tragical!  History  (1652),

A,  586,  589
profanation  of  host,  etc.,  41,  51,  75,  82,

145  if.  .

Promptorium  Parvulorum,  528
prophecy,  58,  63,  116  f.,  226  ff.,  309
Proteus,  57
Prum,  216,  244

Pryme,  A.  de  la,  499,  521,  523
Prynne,  William,  546  f.
psalter:  see  bible
Puck,  21,  42,  215,  217,  377
Puckering,  Sir  T.,  377
Puckett,  N.  N.:  see  negroes
Purbeck,  Lady,  317

Purchas,  Samuel,  462,  473,  477,  504,

506,  515,  540
Puritans,  329  ff.
purses,  1 14
Pursever  Wood,  9
Putnam,  Allen,  597
Pye,  Sir  Robert,  55
pygmies:  see  dwarfs
pyromancy,  57,  186
Pyrrhus,  227


quacks,  38,  68  f.,  259  f.
Quadi,  153

Quadripartitus,  41,  379  ■

Quakers,  582

Quicherat,  J.,  418

Quiller-Couch,  T.,  593

Quivil,  Peter,  48,  104,  150,  193,  504


INDEX


631


Rabbet,  Thomas,  285

rabbit,  491,  497;  foot,  49,  404.  See  hare

rabies,  389

racing,  93

Radin,  Paul,  433

Radnorshire,  106

rain:  see  weather

Raine,  James,  499,  504,  510,  590.  See

Durham;  Reginald;  York
Raines,  F.  R.,  575
Rais,  Gilles  de,  459,  477,  533
Ramesey,  W.,  400,  500,  540
Ramsay,  Sir  J.  H.,  403
Randolf,  John,  79  f.
Randoll,  William,  567
Rank,  J.,  392

Rantasalo,  A.  V.,  434,  459,  487,  489,  514

rat,  13,  389,  490  f.,  492,  512

Rattray,  R.  S.,  503,  531

raven,  95,  176,  437

Ravisius  Textor,  394

Raymond,  Thomas,  591

Raynaldus:  see  Rinaldi

Raynard,  Ralph,  344  f.

Reade,  Simon,  315

Reading,  134,  154;  John  of,  474,  547

Rebus  in  Oriente  Mirabilibus,  De,  382

red,  49,  94,  99  f.,  184,  271,  437;  red

plague,  130  f.
Redferne,  Anne,  266  f.
Redman,  Richard,  38,  58
Reed,  Margaret,  590
Reede,  131
Reformers,  250  fF.
Regensburg:  see  Berthold
Reginald  of  Durham,  125,  184,  223,  393,

474,  494,  SH,  525,  530

Regino  of  Priim,  244  f.,  254

Reinfried  von  Braunschweig,  440

Reiser,  K.  A.,  506,  513

Reitzenstein,  R.,  378,  396,  445,  522,  548

Relation  of  the  Diabolical  Practices
(1697),  A,  596

Relation  of  the  Most  Remarkable  Pro-
ceedings (1674),  428,  589

Reling,  H.,  447  f.

Reliquiae  Antiquae,  389,  484,  497,  508
Remy  (Remi,  Remigius),  Nicholas,  175,

250,  368,  454,  458,  463,  475  f.,  489,

491  f.,  499,  548,  560,  565
Renfrewshire,  456,  499,  596
Renvall,  L.  T.,  505
Reynolds,  John,  576
Rhine  ordeal,  232


Rhode  Island,  513
Rhymer:  see  Rymer
Rhys,  Sir  John,  426,  433,  498
Ribadeneira,  P.  de,  419
Ribbe,  C.,414,473
rice  ordeal,  238

Richard  III,  60  f.,  84  f.,  106  f.,  116  f.

Richardson,  James,  207  f.;  William,  65

Richel,  A.,  492  f.

Rick,  J.,  536

Ridder  Stig,  436  f.

Riddles  Wisely  Expounded,  446

Ridgeway,  Sir  Thomas,  7  fF.,  290,  308,

riding:  see  nightmare;  Diana
Riegel,  J.,  440
Riese,  A.,531
Rievaulx,  48

Riezler,  S.  von,  492,  588,  595
Rigault,  A.,  415,  417,  438,  446
Riley,  E.  B.,  455;  H.  T.,  509
Rinaldi,  O.,  118,  445  f.
rings,  52,  55,  63,  67,  105  f.,  109,  142,

151,  189,  211;  of  Moses,  105  f.
Ripon, 470

Rishanger,  William,  401,  449,  477
Rishton,  E.,  419
ritual  for  ordeal,  233  f.
Rizzio,  David,  262

Robert   (Robin)   filius  Artis,   123;  le

Diable,  117
Roberts,  Alexander,  159,  399  f.,  435,

501;  George,  429,  454,  501,  511
Robertson,  J.  A.,  413
Robey,  Isabel,  1 1

Robgente,  ,  130

Robin  Goodfellow  (see  Puck);  Hood,

131,394

Robinson,  Edmund,  164,  270  f.;  F.  K.,
430,  471,  477,  480,  495,  528;  F.  N.,
490;  William,  476,  535

Robson,  Agnes,  39

Rochas,  H.  de,  91,  500

Roche,  Mother,  65  f.

Rochester,  242,  550

Rochholz,  E.  L.,  436,  476,  482,  487,

496  f.,  517
Rockley,  34
rod,  37

Roheim,  G.,  423,  503
Rojas,  F.  de,  404,  431,  461
RoUand,  E.,  447  f.,  492
Rollins,  H.  E.,  451,  521,  543,  547,  572,
555


632


INDEX


Rome,  50,  181;  plague,  136
Romeyn,  John  le,  400
roof,  3 1

Roper,  W.  O.,  566,  568

ropes  pulled,  270.    See  tether

Rosamond,  Fair,  182  f.

Roscher,  W.  H.,  399,  443,  445,  493,  502,

522,  526, 532
Roscoe,  John,  402,  423,  426,  428,  459,

464,  473>  488,  509
Rose,  Goody,  173
Rosen,  G.,  472
Rosen,  H.,  517

RoskofF,  G.,  449,  494,  501,  525,  531,

546,  587,  595

Ross,  Alexander,  421;  John,  494;  Wil-
liam, 496,  510,  512

Rosweyde,  H.,  544

Rous,  John,  535

Rouse,  W.  H.  D.,  532

Routledge,  W.  S.,  402

rowan,  167

Rowlands,  Samuel,  133,  431,  437,  492,
503

Rowley,  Samuel,  434;  William,  478

RowU,  Sir  John,  453

Roxburghe  Ballads,  525

Royal  Mss.,  509

Royster,  J.  F.,  56

Rua,  G.,  516

Rube,  392

rubeta,  500

Ruborough,  204

Rudder,  S.,  555

rue,  122

Ruland,  W.,  589
Rule,  Margaret,  370
runes,  31,437

Rupert,  Prince,  495;  his  dog  Boy,  176  f.
Rush,  Friar,  216
Rushworth,  John,  474,  574
Russell,  R.  v.,  411,  425,  444,  542
Russia,  206,  233,  396,  413  (.,  426,  433,

459>  464,  532
Rutebuef,  544

Rutland,  Francis  Manners,  Earl  of,  310,
323  f.,  421;  Countess  of,  323  f.;
Thomas  Manners,  534

Rutton,  W.  L.,  418

Ryan,  John,  196

Rye,  W.,  389,  408,  495,  535;  W.  B.,  476
Rye,  99.  148  f.,  283,  567
Rygeway,  Cecilia  de,  128
Rymer,  Thomas  the,  226,  229,  446


Rymer's  Foedera,  403,  407,  416,  418,
438,  451,520,  539,  546  f.,  573

Saby,  U.,  453,  505,  522
Sachs,  Hans,  482,  503
sacrifice,  93  ff.,  148;  human,  93, 148,  233
Sadducismus  Debellatus,  421,  456,  596
Sadyngstone,  William,  187
sagas,  380,  516  f.,  529
sailing  in  a  kettle,  15
Saint  Albans,  Monk  of,  437,  517
Saint  Denis,  Chroniques  de,  415,  417,
457,516  ^

Saint  John's  gospel,  147,  443;  wort,
119  ff.

St.  Johnston,  T.  R.,  402,  437
Saint  Loe,  Sir  William  and  Lady  Eliza-
beth, 258  f.
Saint  Margaret's  fast,  130
Saint  Ninian's  fast,  129  f.
Saint  Osyth,  153,  248,  264  f.,  284  f.,309,

358,485,515

Saint  Paul's  steeple,  154  f.,  257

Saint  Trinian's  fast,  129  f.

Saintyves,  P.:  see  Nourry

Sakevyle,  Sir  Richard,  257

sale  of  curses,  132;  of  winds,  159;  of  ail-
ment, 143

Salem,  90,  102  f.,  129,  279,  329  ff.,  338,
578

Salgues,  J.  B.,  442,  451.

Salisbury,  86,  262;  John  of,  32,  75,  143,
185  f.,  225,  403,462,  508,548;  William
de  Montagu,  Earl  of,  53  f.;  Thomas
de  Montagu,  Earl  of,  83;  Robert
Cecil,  Earl  of,  321.  See  Wyville

saliva,  90,  402

Sail,  Thomas,  62

Salmesbury,  267  f.,  311  f.

Salomon  and  Saturn,  31,  389,  494,  527

salt,  49,  loi,  147,  167,  171

Saltrey,  228

Salvani,  Provenzano,  227

salve,  fairies',  254  f.

Sammonicus,  Q.  Serenas,  531

Sampson,  Agnes,  278,  312

Samter,  E.,  385,  442,  444,  448,  473,

486  f.,  527,  531,  536  _
Samuel,  Agnes,  303;  Alice,  302  ff.;  John,

303, 322

Sancto  Victore,  Johannes  de,  415
Sanders,  Nicholas,  419
Sandon,  Christopher,  188  f.
Sandys,  Edwin,  227,  553


INDEX


Sangermano,  V.,  542
Santos,  Joao  dos,  506,  514  f.
Sapir,  E.,456
Saracens,  204
Sargeant,  Joan,  143
Sathan,  424, 520
satyrs,  219

Saunders,  W.  H.  B.,  435,  471
Sauve,  L.  F.,  391,  430,  483,  498
SaviUe,  W.  J.  v.,  434,  455,  507  f.,  532
Sawndie,  William,  126  f.
Sawyer,  Elizabeth,  323
Saxby,  J.  M.,  515,  528
Saxo  Grammaticus,  28,  205,  433,  450,
474, 478

Scandinavia,  28,  40,  49,  119,  153,  159,
180,  201,  210,  and  Notes,  passim.
See  Bang;  Denmark;  Edda;  Old
Norse;  sagas;  Saxo;  Sweden

scapulimancy,  57,  100,  144

Scaramelli,  G.,  316

Scarborough,  229,  424

Scariot,  189,  211  f.

sceptre,  81,  211

Schambach,  G.,  480,  486,  496,  507,  519

Schedel,  Hartmann,  43

SchefFer,  J.,  500

Scheftelowitz,  I.,  424

Scheible,  J.,  405,  442,  463,  496,  511

Scherer,  W.,  390,  394  f.

Schiefner,  A.,  477

SchifFer,  B.  W.,  459

Schlagintweit,  E.,  541,  542  fF.

Schlutter,  O.  B.,  473,  526

Schmeller,  J.  A.,  530,  549

Schmidt,  B.,  529,  531  ff.

Schmitz,  H.  J.,  381  ff.,  393  f.,  404,  433,
437,  441,  444  f-,  449,  460  ff.,  465,
472  f.,  482,  484,  492,  530,  538,  548  f.

Schneider,  F.,  548

Schoffler,  H.,  447  f.

Schonbach,  A.  E.,  383, 388, 453, 480,  505

Schonwerth,  F.,  432,  481,  526  f.

Schofield,  W.  H.,  477

Schorn: see  Shorn

Schott,  Caspar,  397,  456,  510  f.

Schottmiiller,  K.,403

Schramek,  J.,  487

Schreiber,  W.  A.,  233,  237

Schroer,  A.,  394,  483,  488  f.

Schulenburg,  VV.  von,  481  f.,  519

Schwartz,  W.,  482,  531

Scofield,  C.  L.,458

scorpion,  49,  174


Scot,  Reginald,  25,  65  f.,  69  f.,  86  ff.,
112,  119,  122,  137  f.,  148,  158,  168,
180,  184,  189  f.,  196,  199,  216,  220,
235,  248  f.,  265,  285,  291,  297,  340  ff.;
'^iotes,  passim

Scotland,  39  f.,  91  f.,  95,  98  f.,  102,  113,
117,  119,  128  f.,  148,  159  f.,  164,
166  f.,  169,  172,  180,  217,  220,  249,
262  f.,  277  ff.;  312,  319,  331  f.,  358,
362,  366,  368  f.,  370;  Notes,  passim.
See  Dalyell;  James  I

Scott,  Sir  Walter,  99,  119  ff.,  289,  478,
536,566,588

scratching,  47,  169,  236,  290,  428

Scribonius:  see  Schreiber

scrofula,  I42,  151,  316

Scrope,  Lord,  557;  Ralph,  132

scryer,  51,  186  f.,  208,  210,  313.  See
mirror

scucca,  176

Scythians,  232

seafaring,  boats,  and  ships,  12  ff.,  18,

40,  152  f.,  159  ff.,  173,  190,  201
seals,  37

SebiUot,  P.,  398,  423,  425,  429,  431,  459,

464,  490,  496,  523,  531
Seccombe,  Thomas,  595
seers,  226  ff.  See  divination;  prophecy;

soothsaying
Selden,  John,  350
Selen  Troist,  398
Seleucus,  116

Seligmann,  C.  G.,  401,  436,  442,  444,
455,  459,  473,  491,  505  f-;  Siegfried,
447  f-,  467,  528

Sell  the  Horse  but  Keep  the  Bridle,  184

semen,  382  f.

semipedales,  218

Seneca,  401,  472

Senex,  Johannes,  234

Serapion,  233

Serbia,  206

Serglige  Conculaind,  530
Sewall,  Samuel,  366

Seyfarth,  C,  392,  395,  402,  413,  423,

425,  433,  442,  461,  464,  468,  470
Seymour,  St.  J.  D.,  433,  484,  519
shadow,  92

Shadwell,  Thomas,  421,  437,  461,  560
Shagfoal,  177

Shakespear,  John,  41 1,  433
Shakilton,  Thomas,  199
Shakspere,  13  f.,  34,  86, 108, 131, 181 , 219,
378,  399, 417, 478,  49°,  516,  526,  534


634


INDEX


Sharp,  Sir  Cuthbert,  132,  452;  James

(Archbishop),  180;  Samuel,  579
Sharpe,  C.  K.,  502;  R.  R.,  450,  509
Shaw,  Christian,  456
Shaxton,  Nicholas,  114,  553
Sheane,  H.,  434,  513
Shedewater,  William,  195
Sherborne,  86
Sherwood,  Grace,  236,  422
shift  of  ailment,  32,  94  f.,  142  f.,  529
ships:  see  seafaring
Shirley,  James,  536;  Serjeant,  308
shoe,  443

shooting  a  figure,  92;  the  witch  in  the

churn  or  vat,  486,  488
Shore,  Jane,  60  f.
Shorn,  John,  110  f.
Short,  Mercy,  129
shot-free,  55

shoulder-bone:  see  scapulimancy
shrewmouse,  94

Shrewsbury,  95,  156,  158;  George,  Earl
of,  258,  520;  Elizabeth,  Countess  of,
258  f.

Shrewsbury  Chronicle,  475  f.
Shropshire,  47,  115,  146,  182,  390,  425,

459,  467  f-,  469,  47i>  488,  494,  498,

509  ff.,  515,  518,  522,  527
Shuck,  Old,  176
Siberia,  455,  462
Sibley,  J.  L.,  598
Sibree,  J.,  401,  434,  537
Sibylla,  Bartholomaeus,  506
Sicily,  loi,  232
Siebourg,  Max,  471

sieve  and  shears,  60,  190,  198  ff.,  211,

553
signet,  37
Silas,  E.,  532
Silius  Italicus,  537
silver  bullet,  92
Silvester  II,  240
simia  Dei,  128
Simler,  Josiah,  559
Simon,  St.,  30
Simon  Magus,  30,  350
Simpson,  R.,  555;  W.  S.,  443,  475
Sinclair,  George,  421,  487,  570
Singer,  Charles,  387  f.,  454
Sion  Monastery,  395
Sirens,  224

Sjalens  Trost,  398,  530,  544
Skarme:  see  Shorn


Skeat,  Professor  W.  W.,  446,  462  f.,  493,
526,  571  (see  ^Ifric);  W.  W.:  see
Malays

Skelton,  John,  39  f.,  109

Skemp,  A.  R.,  388,  454,  466,  474,  508,
526

Skene,  W.  F.,  524

skull,  52,  142,  144

slander:  see  defamation

Slavic,  399,  431,  434,  453,  459,  462,  464,

477,  483  f-,  487,  49i>  523>  53off->
536  f.

sleep,  magic,  i45;sleep  charms,  145.  See

Hand  of  Glory
sleeping  on  hide,  46  f.  See  incubation
Sleeping  Preacher,  the,  320,  325,  529,

578

Sloane  mss.,  389  f.,  406,  4I4,  423  f.,  428,
435  f->  441  f-,  444,  447  f-,  453,  463,

478,  507  ff-,  514,  516,  520,  543,  556
Sloet  van  de  Beele,  L.  A.  J.  W.,  447,

492

Smith,  Ann,  406;  C.  F.,  575;  E.  W.  (and
A.  M.  Dale),  406,  423,  434,  482,  491,
505  f.,  513;  Mrs.  James,  455;  Captain
John,  592;  John,  322;  K.  F.,  494;  L.
Toulmin,  516;  Mary,  182,  592;  Rich-
ard, 574;  Sir  Thomas,  167  f.,  197,
211  {.,  248  f.,  452,  485,  501,  507,  520,
557,  560;  William,  209;  William  (edi-
tor), 433  f;,  437,  465

Smythe  (Smith),  John,  322

Smythson,  Johanna,  60

snail,  94

snakes,  32,  174,  447,  491  f.,  517;  snake
spells,  I46,  512;  snake  oil,  91,  I44  f.;
candle  makes  snake  appear,  144  f.;
suck  cows,  166

sneezing,  44,  385

soap,  486

Soldan,  W.  G.,  472,  536,  586  ff.,  595,  597
Solinus,  536  f.

Solomon,  63,  106,  no;  Solomon's  circle,

211.    See  Salomon
Solomon  Islands,  238,  414,  434,  501.

See  Ivens
Somer,  Thomas,  199  f.
Somerset,  65,  80,  97  ff.,  loi,  132,  204,

236,  274,  370,  386,  407,  422,  425,

429  f-,  433,  459,  467,  484,  495,  498,
523,  527,  562;  the  Protector,  189
Sommer,  E.,  544

soothsaying,  30  f.,  41,  226  ff.,  383  f.
See  divination;  prophecy


INDEX


Sophronius,  74
Sorel,  Charles,  412
sortes,  30,  4i,384  f.
Soubiete,  Saubadine  de,  182
soul  as  bee,  499;  as  mouse,  178
South  America,  223,  455  f.,  493,  499
South  Carolina,  434
South  English  Legendary,  239
Southerne,  Elizabeth,  212
Southerns:  see  Demdike
Southey,  Robert,  43,  109,  521
Southwell,  Thomas,  81  ff.
Southwell  Minster,  395
Sowe,  Richard  de,  77  f.
Sowerbutts,  Grace,  267  f.,  564
Spain,  370,  391,  423,  472
Sparam,  Margery,  406
Sparke,  John,  193
sparrow,  494

Speck,  F.  G.,  413,  423,  491,  530
spectral  evidence,  42,  221,  223  f.,  307,
363  f-

Speculum  Laicorum,  44;  Morale,  503
Spee,  Friedrich,  360,  588
Speed,  John,  406
Speight,  H.,  495

spells  and  charms,  31  ff.,  93,  98,  100  f.,
114  f.,  145  ff.,  160,  169  ff.,  491.  See
Bang

Spence,  John, 480, 484

Spencer,  Anthony,  557;  Baldwin,  434,

455

spiders,  32,  52,  94,  218

Spina,  B.  de,  483,  496,  530  f.

Spottiswood(e),  John,  566

springs,  232,  472.  See  wells

Spurgeon,  C.  F.  E.,  446

squares,  magic,  452

stable  goblins  and  charms,  215,  219  f.

Stack,  E.,  402,  513

Stacy,  John,  138  f.,  228

Stafford,  Bishop  Edmund,  465;  Mr.,  a

wizard,  67,  513
Staffordshire,  100,  325,  467  f.
stairs,  17
Staplehurst,  260
Stapleton,  William,  110,  210
State  Trials,  401,  405,  501,  581,  590,

592,  594  f.
Statham,  J.  C.  B.,  402,  473
Stearne,  John,  6,  134  (.,  176,  235,  272  ff.,

400,  421,  434,  452,  479,  499,  536,

594  f.
Steele,  Robert,  276  f.


Steinen,  Karl  von  den,  455
Steinmeyer,  E.  von,  388,  396
Stenzler,  A.  F.,  541  f.,  544
Stephanus  Byzantinus,  537
Stephens,  G.,  448  f.,  505;  H.  L.,  581
stercus,  383

Steward  (Styward),  John,  179,  196  (.,
207  ff.

Stewart,  C.  T.,  493;  William,  419

stigmata,  46

Stile,  Elizabeth,  419

Stiles,  Ezra,  513,  592

Stokes,  Whitley,  423

Stokys,  John,  36

stone,  magic,  176

stones,  ordeal  of,  238;  food  turned  to,
132

stone-throwing,  214,  217

stone-worship,  33

Storaker,  J.  T.,  496,  516,  527

Storax,  208

storms:  see  weather

Story,  John,  261

Stothard,  Margaret,  593

Stow,  John,  408,  410,  416  ff.,  420,  458,

475,  520,  535,  572
Strackerjan,  L.,  425,  464,  487,  507,  513
Strange  and  Wonderful  News  (1681),

521

strangury,  102

Stratton,  Adam  de,  48  ff.

striges,  167,  224,  245,  382,  548

stroking,  90,  142

Strutt,  J.,  540  f.,  544

Strype,  John,  410,  452,  475,  485  f.,  501,

507,  520,  534  f.,  550  ff.,  556  ff.,  570
Stub  Peter,  492.  See  Stumpe
Stubbs,  William:  see  Haddan
stumbling,  147

Stumpe,  Peter,  492.  See  Stub
styes,  151

Style,  Elizabeth,  274
Styward:  see  Steward
succuba:  see  incubus
sucking  breath,  178
Suckling,  A.,  475
Suetonius,  525
Suffling,  E.  R.,  495

Suffolk,  96,  215,  236,  331  f.,  368,  381,
425,  459,  461,  467,  484  f-,  489,  511,
528,  594.    See  Bury

Suffolk,  William  de  la  Pole,  Duke  of,
139,  227  f.

suicide,  142,  159


636


INDEX


Suidas,  404,  532

Sulby,38,48,s8

Sullivan,  J.,  430,  477,  528

Summers,  M.,  421,  470,  521,  548  f.,  551,

560,  565,  S96_
Surius,  Laurentius,  527
Surrey,  230  f.,  521,  596;  Henry  Howard,

Earl  of,  62
Sussex,  91,  102,  214,  424,  460  {.,  482,

500,515,  517,  528
Svend  Ranild,  16
swallows,  54,  451
Swan,  George,  570
Swane,  Goodwife,  108
Swapper,  Susan,  567
Sweden,  44,  160  f.,  358,  391,  441  f.,

489  f.,  565.  See  Linderholm
Sweet,  Henry,  526
Swift,  Abraham,  435
swimming  ordeal,  28,  232  ff.,  290  f.,  370;

match,  54

Swinefeld,  Richard  de,  Bishop  of  Here-
ford, 399

Swinow,  Dorothy,  272

Switzerland,  160,  169,  250,  370;  Notes,
passim

sword,  57,  81, 165,  186,  210  f.  See  mirror

Sybel,  L..  von,  443

Sydney,  W.  C,  540

Sydow,  C.  W.  von,  517,  528

Sylvester,  Joshua,  463

sympathetic  magic,  17,  74,  160.  See

footprint;  image;  thatch;  urine
Syriac,  396^

Szulczewski,  A.,  464,  514

tablets,  53,  60,  66,  74,  93,  132  f.,  141,

208,  210.  See  defixiones
Tacitus,  141

Talbot,  D.  Amaury,  442  f.;  P.  Amaury,

401,  4i3>  423,  434,  442  f-,  454  f-,  473,

491  f.,  499,  505,  514,  531
Tallqvist,  K.  L.,  378,  41 1,  515
Talmud,  399
Tambornino,  J.,  449

Tanglost,  ,  85  f.

Tanner,  John,  413

Tannere,  John,  242

Tarbis,  106

Tartars,  153

Tasmania,  414,  455

Tassell,  John,  230;  William,  229

Tatlock,  J.  S.  P.,  407

Tatterfoal,  177


Tattersall,  J.  F.:  see  Wilkinson,  T.

Taunton,  93,  254

Tausserat,  A.,  398

Tauxier,  L.,  401  f.,  405,  473,  523

Tavenner,  E.,  396

Taxone,  Liber  de,  441

Taylor,  Archer,  463,  507;  E.  W.,  578;
J.  M.,  427,  515,  540;  John,  the  Water
Poet,  408,  478;  Jeremy,  332;  Martha,
576;  Rupert,  533;  Silas,  14

Tecla,  St.,  94

Tedworth,  the  Drummer  of,  214
teeth, 117
Teignmouth,  51

Teirlinck,  I.,  483,  488,  491,  501,  527
Temme,  J.  D.  H.,  434,  472
tempestarii,  152  fF.
Templars,  51
Temple,  Sir  W.,  396,  492
Tengler,  Ulrich,  482
tether,  164,  169.  See  ropes
Tettau,  W.  J.  A.  von,  434
Textor:  see  Ravisius
Textus  RofFensis,  538,  543  f.
Thales,  106
thatch  fired,  102,  290
Thayer,  J.  B.,  593
Theal,G.  McC.,491
theft,  charms,  etc.,  32,  36,  41,  51  f.,  60,
71,  165,  185  ff.,  208,  214,  229,  393,

424,  435,  505  ff-,  553,  567
Theocritus,  412,  441,  513
Theodore,  St.,  29  f.,  381  ff.,  393  f.,  444,

461  f.,  465,  472,  548  f.
Theophilus,  239;  of  Alexandria,  74
Thersytes,  35  f.
Thetford,  88
theurgy,  336
Thiele,  J.  M.,  439

Thiers,  J.  B.,  412,  426,  430,  442,  460  f.,
467,  469,  478,  480,  486,  516,  526,  528,
536

Thirkle,  John,  255

Thomas  of  Erceldoune,  romance,  446
Thomas  the  R(h)ymer:  see  Rymer
Thomas,  D.  L.  and  L.  B.  (see  Ken-
tucky); N.  W.,  491
Thomlinson,  John,  497
Thompson,  M.  M.,  510;  R.  C,  41 1
Thoms,  W.  J.,  405,  412,  437,  462,  502,
547

Thomson,  Agnes,  60
Thonge,  Sir  John,  50
Thoresby,  Ralph,  151


INDEX


Thorleifr  Jarlaskjald,  222

Thorn,  Anne,  593

Thorndike,  Lynn,  442,  463,  479

thorns,  99,  103,  134

Thoroton,  Robert,  546

Thorpe,  Benjamin,  379  ff.,  393  f.,  4I4  f.,

444,  449,  461  f.,  465,  473,  493,  516,

524,  527,  538,  543  f-,  548
Thorpe,  96
Thrale,  H.  L.,  242
Three  Biters,  39  f.
Three  Warnings,  The,  242
threshold,  49,  102
Throckmorton  family,  302  fF.,  310
Throgmorton,     George,    257;  Lady

Frances,  257
Thucydides,  457
thunder  stones,  49
Thundering  Legion,  153
Thuresby,  John,  138
Thurlow,  Grace,  285
Thurnwald,  R.,  434,  501
Thursday,  32

Thurston,  E.,  399,  41 1,  426,  463,  506,

518,  531
Thyraeus,  Petrus,  449,  500
Thweng:  see  Thonge
Tighe,  R.  R.,418
Tilbrook  Bushes,  271  fF.
Tilbury,  Gervase  of,  106,  117,  175,  177,

217,  225,  445,  448,  493,  503
tile,  102,  434
Tilling,  Ann,  593
Tilluth,  Francis,  155
Timble  Gill,  269
Timbs,  John,  556
Tindall,  Sir  John,  307
Titinia,  55

-  toad  in  witchcraft,  47,  95,  99,  135,  149,
168,  178,  181  fF.,  204,  484  f.,  491;  in
medicine,  181;  guards  treasure,  517
tobacco,  319
Tobit,  172,319
Tocotes,  Sir  Roger,  138
Tod,  James,  532,  542
Todd,  1 84
Toland,  John,  25  f.
Toldo,  P.,  440
Toledo,  45,  105

Tompson,  William  and  Elizabeth,  12  f.
Toncroy,  Nicholas,  47
Tongans,  106
Tonken,  John,  456

Tooker  (Turke),  Susan,  18  f.;  Walter,  18


toothache,  30,  32  fF.,  37,  40,  142,  500,

512;  St.  Peter  charm  for,  32  f.
Torr,  C,  467,  475,  490,  536
Torre:  see  Turrium
Torrentius,  Laevinus,  531
Tours,  Gregory  of,  48  f.,  399,  438,  468,

499,  507  f.
Tout,  T.  F.,  546
To2ar,  Isabel,  17
Traill,  G.  W.,S43
Train,  J.,  422,  490^

transference  of  mjlk,  etc.,  163  fF.,  172.
See  shift

transformation:  see  metamorphosis
transportation,  magic,  29,   125,  243,

270  f.,  273.    See  Diana
Transylvania,  451,  485,  492,  501
Traube,  L.,  502

travel  charms,  32,  152  f.;  omens,  44  f.,

51,  183,385
Trawlove,  John,  209
treasure,  68,  90,  94,  132,  144,  158,  195,

204  ff-,  315,  497,  554,  567
trees  dried  up,  172
tree-worship,  33,  42
trefoil,  121

tregetours:  see  jugglers

Tremearne,  A.  J.  N.,  423,  433  fF.,  442,

473,  491,  544
Trenchard,  John,  497
Tresilian,  Sir  Robert,  54
Trevelyan,  G.  M.,  276  f.;  Marie:  see

Wales

Treves,  75  f.,  157,  358,  360,  415

Trevisa,  John,  397,  477

Trevisard,  Michael,  Alice,  and  Peter,

7  fF.,  290,  311
triangle,  95
tricksy  spirits,  215
Trier:  see  Treves
Trig,  Alice,  193  f.
Tring,  236
Trithemius,  J.,  524
Trium  Fontium,  Albericus,  437
Trokelowe,  Johannes  de,  438,  475
trolls,  119

Trotter,  R.  De  Bruce,  422,  425,  429,

484,  498,  510  f.
True  Account  (1686),  A,  456
True  and  Exact  Relation  (1645),  ^>  4°°,

456  f.,  479,  488,  490  f.,  494,  499,  501,

561,  563,  565,  569,  592,  595
True  and  Full  Relation  (1704),  A,  426


638


INDEX


True  and  Impartial  Relation  (1682),  A,
421,  494,  502,  507,  562,  581,  589  f.

True  and  lust  Recorde  (1582),  A,  428,
480,  485,  488,  515,  551,  560,  568,  589

True  Relation  (1645),  ^)  488  f-,  499

Truth  Brought  to  Light  (1651),  420,
573  ff-

Tryal  of  Witches  (1682),  A,  456,  490,

Tschubinow,  G.,  455

Tuchmann,  J.,  441,  503,  536  f.,  541

Tubingen,  163.    See  Plantsch

Tiirlln,  Heinrich  von  dem,  405

Tunna,  202

turf,  102,  167

Turke:  see  Tooker

Turnaston(e),  34,  59

Turner,  Ann,  90,  314,  317;  Elizabeth,
593;  G.,  451;  William,  503

turning  one's  coat,  etc.,  21,  215.  See  in-
version

Turrium,  Herbertus,  469,  517,  525
Twinnowe    (Twynmowe,  Twynyho),

Ankerett,  138  f.
Two  Witches  of  Rome,  183  f.
Tyffyn,  248

Tylor,  Sir  E.  B.,  462,  492
Tymms,  S.,  471

Tyndale,  William,  109  f.,  419;  Sir  Wil-
liam and  Lady,  62
Tyndall,  Gervase,  534  f.
typhoid,  136
typhus,  89,  283,  347
Tyrrel,  Wat,  175
Tyrrye,  Joan,  254,465,  518
Tzetzes,  537

Uhland,  L.,  439,  472,  477
unbaptized  infant,  52
unctores,  346  f.,  457
Underbill,  Edward,  535
unguent:  see  ointment
unlocking  charm,  115
Upham,  C.  W.,  588  f.,  594
Uppsala,  233
urine,  102  f.,  160,  383
Usher,  R.  G.,  569
Usk,  Adam  of,  404

Valentyne,  ,  260

Valkyries,  29  f.
Vallois,  R.,451
Valois,  Charles  de,  76  f.
vampires,  43, 166,  245,  527


Vanlandi,  219

Vansittart,  E.  C,  526

Vassiliev,  A.,  444,  465,  506  f.,  543

Vaughan,  Richard,  301

vehicles  stopped,  3

veneficae,  136  ff.

VennJ.  andj.  A.,574

ventriloqui,  65

Venus,  III,  382

verbena:  see  vervain

Vergil,  Polydore,  458

vermin,  172  f.

Vernaleken,  T.,  464

Vernon,  cats  of,  177,  563

Vernon  Ms.,  545

vervain,  37,  119  ff.

Vickers,  K.  H.,  416

victory,  32

Vigfusson,  G.,  404,  406,  529
Vignay,  Jean  de,  397
Vignolles,  Bernard  de,  50
Villa  Nova,  Arnaldus  de,  458  f.
Villani,  Giovanni,  534
Vincenti,  A.  von,  387
Vingtrinier,  A.,  496
Vinnianus:  see  Finnian
vipers,  181,  402,  436,  489
Virgil,  47,  75,  384,  398
virgin    parchment,    208;    scryer:  see
scryer

Virginia,  236,  422,  592.  See  Doddridge
Virley,  John,  83
Visigoths,  152

visitations,  34,  38,  114  f.,  150,  227,  251,

253  f-,  443  (;  465,  470,  504,  552  f.
Visnu-Sutra,  541,  543
Vitry,  Jacques  de,  548
Vogt,  W.  H.,  406
voice  in  the  air,  228
Volk,  Franz,  589
vomiting  pins,  etc.,  320  f.,  339  f.
Vonbun,  F.  J.,  427,  481  f.,  486
Vordemfelde,  H.,  382,  394
Vowel  1:  see  Hooker
Vreto  (Bretos),  M.,  462
vulture,  174,437

Waade,  Armagill,  557

Waddam,  Margaret,  235

Waddington,  William  of,  43,  51,  164  f.,

186,  398,  514,  516.  See  Brunne
Waerferth,  530
wager  of  battle,  53  f.
Wagstaffe,  John,  351,  532,  564


INDEX


Wake,  Thomas,  84
Wakefield,  186.    See  Peter
wakes,  548
walcyries,  29  f.
Waldemar,  439
Waldenses,  245  f.

Waldron,  G.  (see  Man);  Katharine,  321
Wales,  37,  43,  94,  122,  132,  145  f.,  156,
166,  169,  175,  201,  230;  'Notts,  passim
Walewein,  501
Walford,  Enid,  549

Walker,  Adam,  475;  John,  1 44,  298  fF.,

449,  492,  569  f.;  Richard,  80,  187
walking  toad,  182
Wall  Spirit,  69

Waller,  John,  434,  492,  567;  Richard,

160;  Thomas,  230;  W.  C.,  572
Walles,  William,  134
Walloons:  see  Low  Countries
Walpole,  Horace,  504;  Thomas,  66
Walpoole,  Dorothy,  130  f.
Walsingham,  Thomas,  397,  403,  416,

446,  47S>  S09>
Walsingham,  128
Walter,  J.  C.,498  f.
Waltheof,  St.,  226,  456,  494,  529
war:  see  battle

Warboys,  248,  294,  302  ff.,  322,  428,  592

Ward,  H.  L.  D.,  545

Warden,  J.,  538

Warden,  A.  J.,  528

Ward-house,  159

Warenne,  Earl  of,  204  f.

Waring,  P.,  313

Warkworth,  John,  34,  534

Warren,  son  of  Baldwin,  234

Warrick,  J.,  480,  498

warts,  94,  142

Warwickshire,  138,  234

wasp,  499

Wasserschleben,  H.,  383  fF.,  548  f.
waste  lands,  132
Wasted  Wishes,  The,  547
watch,  180

water  dissolves  spell,  79,  127,  183  f.,

232.   See  font;  holy
water  ordeal:  see  swimming
Waterhouse,  Agnes,  170,  178  f.,  182
Watson,  Henry,  179;  P.  B.,  474
Waxman,  S.  M.,  544

Wayd,  ,  63  f.

weapon  salve,  74
weapons,  28,  31,  53  fF.
weasel,  174


weather  (wind,  storm,  etc.)  13  fF.,  27  f.,

32,  152  fF.,  159,  183,  208
Webbar,  Christian,  15  fF.
Webster,  Daniel,  513;  John,  113,  343  fF.,

420,  441,  454,  457,  492,  521,  531,

561  fF.,  567,  578,  582  fF.
Wed,  John,  228

Weech,  Christian,  wife  of  Thomas,  315

weeds,  95

Weekfes,  Christiana,  456

Weeks,  J.  H.,  413,  436,  464,  473,  491

Weever,  John,  313

Weicker,  G.,  532

weighing,  541

Weinhold,  K.,  393,  451,  472,  502
Weinreich,  O.,  437,  445,  529
Weir,  Major  Thomas,  337
Weisse  Frauen,  132
Welch,  Joseph,  569
Weicker,  F.  G.,  443
Welford,  John,  197

wells  dried  up,  172;  worship  of,  magic  at,
3.3  ff->  42,  94,  132;  poisoning  of,  136.
See  springs

Wells,  J.  E.,  483,  494

Wells,  Norfolk,  160;  Somerset,  461

Wendell,  Barrett,  578,  585  f.

Wendover,  Roger  of,  397,  438,  440,  450,
452,  502,  545

Wenham,  Jane,  4,  315,  361  f.,  364,  369,

581,583
Wenlock,  47

wens,  142

Wentworth,  Anne,  127,  229;  Sir  Roger,
127,  229

Wentz,  W.  Y.  E.,  486,  523

were-leopards,  493

werewolves,  iii,  175,  184,  248,  503

Wermhille,  John  and  Agnes  de,  51

Wesley  family,  214;  John,  185,  521

Wesselofsky,  A.,  532

West,  Andrew,  427  f.;  Anne,  563;  Re-
becca, 272

West  Indies,  48,  141,  493,  511  f.  See
Bell,  H.  J.;  Cuba;  obeah

Westermann,  D.,  402

Westermarck,  E.,  434, 442,  450  f.,  481  (.,
505  f.

Westminster,  99

Westmoreland,  Ralph,  Earl  of,  67  f.
Weston,  William,  570
Weyer:  see  Wier
Weymouth,  408
Whalley,  Peter,  573


640


INDEX


Whalley,  Thomas  of,  48  '

Wharfedale,  103

Wheatcroft,  Leonard,  459

Wheater,  William,  577

Wherstead,  96

whetstone,  194  f.

Whip  for  the  Devil,  A,  447

whipping  the  churn,  167

whirlwind,  476

whistling,  160

Whitaker,  T.  D.,  45a,  539,  589
white  pater  noster,  219
white  witchcraft,  19  f.,  23,  27,  30  fF.,  89,
97,  132,  142  fF.,  185  ff.,  230  f.,  236,

292,  295  f.,  351.  55°
White,  A.  D.,  351,  377,  579  f.;  Gilbert,

467;  John,  196;  Bishop  John,  227,

254;  Margaret,  272
Whitecote,  Mother,  550

Whitehead,  ,  I44

Whitelocke,  Sir  B.,  467,  589
Whiteway,  William,  474,  518,  574
Whitgift,  John,  227,  298,  553,  570
Whitney,  A.  W.  (see  Maryland);  W.  D.,

442

Whittier,  J.  G.,  479,  485,  515,  519,  523
Whittle,  Anne,  39,  265  fF.,  488
whooping  cough,  94  f.,  148  f.
Wickham,  J.  D.  C.,  422,  429,  452
Wickwane,  William,  400
Wickwar,  J.  W.,  400,  540  f.
Widdicombe,  157
Wieger,  L.,413

Wier,  Johann,  112,  134,  158,  198,  291,

■^93,  297,  339  fF.,  354;  Notes,  passhn
Wiesensteig,  358

Wife  of  Usher's  Well,  The,  131  f.
Wigornia,  Annales  de,  401,  450
Wigstrom,  E.,  405,  507
Wihtrted,  King,  393
Wilamowitz-MoellendorfF,  U.  von,  515
Wilbraham,  Sir  Roger,  95  f.,  320,  576
Wilfred,  St.,  37
Wilken,  G.  A.,  464,  493,  532
Wilkin,  Simon,  581

Wilkins,  David,  397,  399,  41 1,  416,  470,
504,  509;  Simon:  see  Browne,  Sir  T.

Wilkinson,  John,  186  (.,  207  f.;  T.,  477,
485  f.,  495  f.,  518,  523,  528;  T.  T.,
389  (.,  422  fF.,  448,  477,  523,  525

Willcocks,  F.,  567

William  I,  33,  40  f.,  233;  II,  17s,  398,
539

William  of  Palerne,  440,  493


Williams,  Sir  David,  307;  Roger,  472;

Thomas,  402,  433
Williamson,  Joseph,  14
Willie's  Lady,  113  f.
Williford,  Joan,  161,  491,  495,  539
Willis,  T.,  456
Will-o'-the-Wisp,  215
Willoughby-Meade,  G.,  493
Wilson,  Arthur,  316,  325,  576;  W.,  486,

498

Wiltshire,  159,214,  235  f.,  407,  421,  456

Wimondham,  155

Winch,  Sir  Humphrey,  310,  322  f.

Winchester,  118,  125,  187

Winckler,  H.,  542

wind:  see  weather

Windisch,  E.,  530

Windsor,  87,  234,  577;  Thomas,  Lord,
317

Winsor,  Justin,  579,  594
Winstedt,  R.  O.,  433,  499
Win  wick,  131,  176

Wisdom,  ,  67  f.,  439

wishing  wells,  34,  132

Witch  of  Berkeley,  43  f.

Witches'  Sabbath,  25,  42,  go,  243  fF.;  of

cats,  496
witch-marks,  236

Witekind,  H.,  455,  480,  482,  511,  514,

540,  543  >  583
Withold,  St.,  219
Wittie,  Robert,  571
Witzschel,  A.,  430,  447,  464,  481,  515
Wlislocki,  H.  von,  414
Wodham,  William,  417
Wolf,  F.,  496;  J.  W.,  391  f.,  395,  406,

452,  480,  506,  522,  527
Wolfdietrich,  440

Wolsey,  Cardinal,  62  f.,  86,  109  f.,  210,
519

wolves,  charm  for,  393.  See  werewolves
Wonderfull  News  from  the  North(i65o),

400,  456,  564
wood  thistle,  448

Wood,  Anthony  a,  420,  500,  574,  576,

586;  Thomas,  408
woodcock,  462
Woodcott,  John,  161
Woodes,  Hugh,  65
Wood-Martin,  W.  G.,  468,  487
Woods,  J.  D.,  413,  455;  Mary,  575
Woodstock,  214
wool,  black,  143

Worcester,  83,  125;  John  of,  397,  524


INDEX


641


Worcestershire,  71,  199,  212,  235  f.,  407
Wordsworth,  Christopher,  396,  449,  471 ;

WilHam,  176
worms,  36  f.,  40
Worthington,  John,  530,  535
Worthy,  Charles,  567
Wotton,  Nicholas,  66
wounds,  32;  transferred,  176  fF.  See

Five  Wounds
wrecks:  see  seafaring
Wrede,  F.,  396

Wright,  E.  M.,  390,  453,  460,  467,  471,
484,  487,  494  ff-,  518, 523,  S^S>  5^7  f-;
Thomas,  281  fF.,  328,  362,  and  Notes,
passim:  see  Kyteler;  Map

Wriothesley,  Charles,  157  f.,  408  ff.,  535

Wroth,  Sir  Robert,  309  f.

Wryght,  Thomas,  38,  58

Wucke,  C.  L.,  482

Wiilker  (Wiilcker),  R.,  382,  387  fF.,  453,

461,  466,  473,  489,  494  f.,  508
Wiinsch,  R.,  74,  414,  495
Wiinsche,  A.,  519

Wiirttemberg,  Frederick  Duke  of,  476

Wiirzburg,  368

Wiist,  Paul,  529

Wulfric,  St.,  of  Haselbury,  240

Wulfstan,  30,  33,  379  f.,  382,  385,  387,

393  f-,  493
Wuttke,  A.,  ed.  E.  H.  Meyer,  392,  and

Notes,  passim
Wycherley,  William,  71,  158,  189,  197,

199,  211  f.
Wyghton,  John,  56
Wynick,  John,  271
Wyrcester,  William,  82,  416  f.
Wyrictt,  Thomas,  85  f.
Wyville,  Robert,  Bishop  of  Salisbury,  53


Yardwell,  230
Yarmouth,  428
Yatton,  65

Year  Books,  404,  462
yellowbird,  494

Yelverton,  Sir  Christopher,  307
Yepes,  Diego  de,  419  f.
Ynglinga  Saga,  438,  526
Yonec,  Lai  de,  117
Yonge,  Walter,  535,  543,  576
York,  34,  38,  41,  75,  114,  129,  143,  148,
152,  158,  187,  229,  270,  400,  512,  519,

^521,  528,  530,  592
Yorkshire,  97  fF.,  loi,  106  f.,  146  f.,  164,
166,   179,   185,   190,  220  f.;  Notes,
passim
Young,  Robert,  427
Yowel,  521
Yule,  Henry,  473
Yvain,  440

Zanetti,  Z.,  391,  468,  531
Zaroes,  30
Zeiri,  502

Zeisberger,  D.,  455

Zenobius,  532

Zettinger,  J.,381

Zeumer,_K.,  404,  509,  537,  543

Zezschwitz,  K.  A.  G.  von,  380

Zielinski,  T.,  502

Zincke,  F.  B.,  427,  489,  492

Zingerle,  I.  V.  von,  447,  481

Zoroaster,  42,  57

Zosimus,  537

Zurich,  251,  256,  262  {.;  Letters,  551  f.,

554,  559,  570  f-
Zulus,  516
Zupitza,  Julius,  389


i
