My Water Cure
Sebastian Kneipp
My Water Cure, as Tested through More than Thirty Years. English translation. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1892.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/b2041657x).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

J


I


\


MY  WATER-CURE


"Go,  and  ^ash  seven  times  in  tlie  Jordan,  and  thy  fl<-s''  sha'.l
recover  health,  and  thou  shalt  be  clean."  —  4.  Kings  V,  lO.


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive

in  2014


7^


am;  only  authorized  and  complete  englisr

EDITION


MY  WATER-CURE

TESTED  FOR  MORE  THAN  35  YEARS

AiO)  PUBLISHED  FOR  THE  CÜEE  OP  DISEASES
AND  THE  PRESERVATION  OP  HEALTH


BY


SEBASTIAN  KNEIPP

FAKISlt  PRIEST  OF  WÜRISHOPEN  (BAVARIA)


TRANSLATED  FROM  HIS  36^^  GERMAN  EDITION:


©life  100  lUnstrations  anb  a  "^arfrait  of  t^e  ^ul^or.


JOS.  KCESEL  PUBLISHER
KEMPTEN  (B  A  V  A  K  r  A)
M  I)  C  C  C  X  C  11.


PRINTED  BY  JOS.  KOESEI.  AT  KEMPTEN  (BAVAKIA),
I'UBLISIIER  OF  BEXi.  KNEIPPS  WORKS.


f^LLCOiviElNSlllUlt
1  \  LIBRARY

jcol!.

N^elMOmec

j  Call

No.

All  Right)  reserved.


Preface  to  the  first  Edition.


eing  a  priest,  the  salvation  of  immortal  souls
is  the  first  object  for  which  I  wish  to  live  and
f  to  die.  Daring  the  last  30  or  40  years,  however,
the  care  for  mortal  bodies  has  absorbed  a  con-
^  siderable  portion  of  my  time  and  my  strength.
This  work  I  have  never  sought  after ;  on  the  contrary
every  patient  coming  to  me  is  (naturally  speaking)
a  burden  to  me.  Only  the  thought  of  Him  who  came
down  from  Heaven  to  heal  all  our  infirmities,  and
the  remembrance  of  His  promise:  "Blessed  are  the
merciful ;  for  they  will  obtain  mercy,"  —  and  :  "Even
a  cup  of  cold  water  given  in  My  name  shall  not  be
unrewarded,"  was  able  to  detain  me  from  refusing
every  petition,  no  matter  who  the  petitioner  might  be.
The  temptation  to  do  so  was  the  more  natural,  because
not  profit,  but  incalculable  loss  of  time,  not  honour,
but  often  calumny  and  persecution,  not  gratitude,  but
in  many  cases  ingratitude,  scorn  and  insults,  were  ray
reward.  But  God  allowed  it  to  be  so,  and  I  shall  not
complain  of  it.  It  is  easy  to  be  understood  that  after
such  precedences  I  feel  not  much  inclined  to  write,
especially  now  that  I  am  feeling  the  oppression  of
old  age,  and  both  mind  and  body  long  for  rest.


vi


Preface  to  the  first  edition.


Only  the  constant  and  impetuous  urging  of  my
friends  wlio  call  it  a  sin  against  charity  if  I  do  not
write  down  before  my  death  what  I  have  learned
by  experience,  the  innumerable  petitions  of  those
who  have  been  cured,  and  most  of  all  the  entreaties
of  poor,  abandoned  patients  in  the  country,  could
induce  me  to  take  the  resolution  to  write,  almost
against  my  will.

I  have  had  a  peculiar  affection  and  care  for  the
poorer  classes,  the  sick  country-people  who  are  so
often  neglected  and  forsaken,  and  to  them  especially
[dedicate  my  little  book;  therefore  the  language  is
plain  and  clear.  I  have  purposely  tried  to  use  familiar
language,  instead  of  giving  a  dry,  inefficacious  skeleton.
If  one  or  other  story  is  somewhat  long,  or  if  repeti-
tions occur,  I  trust  the  reader  will  overlook  it  on
account  of  my  good  intention.

It  was  by  no  means  my  intention  to  oppose  any
of  the  existing  medicinal  systems ,  or  to  attack  any
individual,  or  his  science  and  reputation,  in  the
least  point.

Of  course  I  am  aware  that  only  professional  men
are  called  upon  to  publish  such  things  ;  but  I  am  sure
that  Just  such  men  will  be  glad  to  see  that  even  a
layman  imparts  his  knowledge  obtained  by  long  years'
experience.  Everyone  will  be  welcome  to  me  who
with  a  sincere  heart  wishes  to  give  corrections  or
useful  hints ;  but  I  shall  leave  unregarded  those  who
criticise  out  of  party  -  spirit ,  and  caU  me  a  bungler
and  quack.

My  earnest  wish  has  been  that  a  professional
man,  a  physician,  would  release  me  of  this  heavy
burden  and  oppressive  work,  and  I  should  feel  so


fREFÄCE  TO  TUE  FIRST  EDITION.


vii


happy  if  at  last  these  professional  men  would  begin
to  study  the  system  of  hydropathy  thoroughly  and
put  it  in  practice  under  their  inspection;  this  little
work  of  mine  could  then  be  of  some  use  to  them.
I  can  give  assurance  that  notwithstanding  my  some-
times repulsive  demeanour,  the  sick  and  suffering
people  who  came  to  me,  could  be  numbered  by  thou-
sands and  tens  of  thousands,  and  I  could  easily  have
become  rich,  and  very  rich,  if  I  had  accepted  only
part  of  the  sums  offered  to  me  for  cures.

Many  came  saying :  I  will  give  you  ^  5  or  £  10
if  you  cure  me.  The  sufferer  looks  out  for  help,
wherever  he  can  find  it,  and  he  is  happy  to  pay  the
physician  who  has  healed  him,  whether  it  be  by  the
medicine  bottle  or  by  the  water  jug.

There  have  been  celebrated  physicians  who  prac-
tised the  water-cures  with  energy  and  great  success;
but  they  died,  and  their  hints,  counsels  and  experiences
were  buried  with  them.  May  now  at  last  the  aurora
be  followed  by  a  full  and  lasting  morning!

All  names  given  or  indicated  in  this  book  I  can
answer  for,  and  on  application  will  be  ready  to  give
the  addresses  in  full.  It  may  be  that  sometimes  my  ex-
pressions are  a  little  harsh ;  but  that  springs  from  my
somewhat  austere  and  rough  disposition.  With  it  I
have  grown  old,  and  separation  or  concealment  would
be  hard  now  to  both  of  us.

I  trust  the  blessing  of  Almighty  God  may  accom-
pany my  little  book  on  its  travels.  And  when  one
day  my  friends  of  the  water-cure  are  told  that  I
have  departed  this  life,  I  beg  of  them  to  send  me
a  refreshing  "Our  Father"  to  the  place  where  the


viii


PllEFACE  TO  TUE  PlPl'H  EDITION.


physician  of  physicians  heals  and  purifies  the  souls
in  the  fire- cure  for  eternal  life.

Wörishofen,  Railway  Station  Türkheim  in  Suabia.
October  l'^',  1886.

The  Author.


Preface  to  the  5*^  Edition.

Every  father  is  glad  when  from  time  to  time  he
is  able  to  settle  a  son  or  a  daughter  in  life,  and  I
too  feel  happy  to  have  sent  out  4  editions  of  my  book
in  all  directions,  as  advisers  and  helpers  in  the  mani-
fold troubles  of  life.  Go  then  also,  ray  b^^  edition  of
6000  copies,  and  enter  the  dwellings  of  the  rich  and
the  poor  as  a  well  meaning  friend.

I  have  received  a  very  great  number  of  letters,
and  I  regret  that  I  am  unable  to  answer  them  all.  It
is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  to  me  to  find  that  many
have  chosen  themselves  the  right  remedies  out  of  my
book,  and  so  have  been  restored  to  health.  But  my
greatest  pleasure  would  be  to  find  that  physicians
practise  this  system  and  thus  help  mankind  in  such
a  simple  way.  Several  of  them  have  already  been
here  to  learn  by  experience  the  most  simple  way  of
putting  it  into  practice.  Although  it  had  never  been
advertised  that  a  medical  estabhshment  had  been
erected  here,  and  no  invitation  had  been  given  to
any  one,  many  came  from  every  direction  to  ask  for
help  which  they  also  found.  To  make  this  plain  system
as  useful  as  it  can  be,  it  is  first  of  all  necessary  to
erect  new  bathing  places.

Therefore  I  heartily  welcome  the  new  water- cure-
estabhshment  in  Jordanbad  near  Biberach  in  Württem-


PllEPACE  TO  THE  SIXTH  EDIIION.


berg-  which  is  arranged  entirely  according  to  my
system  and  will  be  opened  early  in  1889  under  the
direction  of  Sisters  of  Charity  and  of  a  practitioner,
who,  during  the  last  two  years,  has  acquired  such  a
perfect  knowledge  and  practice  of  my  system  that  I
place  ray  entire  confidence  in  him.  Therefore  I  re-
commend the  institution  in  Jordanbad  as  heartily  as
possible.

That  it  may  be  multiplied  like  my  little  book,
and  restore  to  health  many  who  are  sick  and  weary
of  life,  is  the  wish  ot  my  heart.

Wörishofen,  October  27*»,  1888.

Tlie  Author.


Preface  to  the  6*^  Edition.

To  my  great  surprise  the  5*^  edition  of  6000  copies
has  been  sold  in  5  weeks,  a  success  I  never  dreamed
of.  As  I  have  said  many  times,  both  by  word  of
mouth  and  by  letter,  it  is  always  my  greatest  delight
to  see  physicians  taking  the  trouble  of  studying  my
system,  and  I  am  always  ready  to  explain  it  to  them.

But  I  must  oppose  those  who,  without  having  ac-
quired a  thorough  knowledge  of  it,  pretend  to  be
representatives  of  my  system.  If  by  incorrect  appli-
ance of  my  remedies  the  results  are  evil  consequences,
it  is  simply  the  fault  of  misuse  and  ignorance.

I,  therefore,  embrace  this  opportunity  to  recom-
mend once  more  the  Jordanbad  near  Biberach  in
Württemberg  which  is  to  be  opened  next  May  under
the  direction  of  a  practitioner  J.  Stützle  M.  D.  who
has  acquired  a  solid  knowledge  and  experience  of
ray  system,  and  in  whom  I  have  entire  confidence.


X


PUEFACIC  '10  TUK  SEVENTH  EDITION.


I  am  quite  sure  that  such  physicians  will  obtain  their
own  satisfaction  as  well  as  the  welfare  of  their  patients
from  my  system.

Begin  then  thy  travelling  too,  thou  my  6*''  0000
fold  edition,  and  bring  to  all  poor  sufferers  advice
and  help,  and  also  kind  regards  and  best  wishes  from
their  friend,

Wörishofen,  New-year's  day  1889.

The  Author.


Preface  to  the  7*^  Edition.

The  1^*  edition  of  my  ''water-cure"  I  called  a  son
whom  I  was  sending  out  into  the  wide  world;  very
quickly  five  more  of  such  sons  followed,  and  just  now
the  is  preparing  to  go  with  the  same  intention  to
be  a  helper  in  need  to  as  many  as  possible.  —  As
the  children  who  have  left  their  home  generally  cause
parents  much  anxiety,  so  those  editions  of  my  widely
known  water-cure  published  in  so  short  a  time  are
causing  me  much  trouble  in  so  far  as  they  deprive
me  of  every  leisure  hour  from  early  morning  to  late
at  night.  I  am  deluged  with  letters  full  of  inquiries ;
every  day  30  or  40  arrive  asking  for  particulars  about
the  applications,  although  the  book  itself  gives  suffi-
cient explanations  for  most  diseases,  and  in  order
to  prevent  harm,  one  need  only  be  careful,  and  not
make  use  of  too  many  applications  at  once;  the  eff"ects
produced  by  small  applications  of  water  are  often
marvellous.  Most  of  the  letters  adressed  to  me  rela-
ting to  water-cures  are  generally  so  detailed  that  a
foui'th  or  sixth  part  of  them  would  be  sufficient;
moreover  the  hand  writing  is  sometimes  very  bad


Preface  to  tue  twelfth  edition.


and  neither  name  nor  residence  of  inquirer  written
legibly.  —  Much  as  I  should  like  to  gratify  every
sufferer  it  has  become  entirely  impossible  to  me  to
answer  all  the  inquiries  contained  in  these  letters,
and  therefore,  I  find  myself  forced  to  declare  that  I
cannot  promise  an  answer  to  any  one  writing  to  me
about  water-cure,  and  I  beg  of  them  not  to  be  dis-
pleased at  this.  So  then  I  also  sent  out  into  the
world  the  edition  of  6000  copies,  with  the  hearty
« Avish  that  God's  blessing  may  accompany  them.

Wörishofen,  April,  1889.

Tlie  Author.


Preface  to  the  12^^  Edition.

Already  11  editions  of  my  "water-cure"  have  been
sent  out  into  the  world  as  advisers  and  helpers  in
diseases  and  the  different  troubles  of  this  life,  and  it
gives  me  great  comfort  that  suffering  humanity  obtains
help  from  the  remedy  everywhere  to  be  found,  the
water.  What  gives  me  the  greatest  comfort  is  the
erection  of  new  hospitals  in  different  countries  in  order
to  spare  long  journeys  to  the  sufferers  who  wish  to
use  the  water-cure.  The  "Jordanbad"  in  Blberach
has  been  opened;  a  great  many  patients  have  gone
there,  and  the  establishment  can  show  forth  many
successful  cures.  Another  opportunity  presents  itself
at  Immenstadt;  of  this  establishment  also  honorable
reports  only  are  given,  and  therefore  we  have  a  good
prospect  that  in  future  it  will  continue  progressing
more  and  more.

The  third  institution  has  been  opened  at  Ulm.
There  the  establishment  has  begun  in  a  smaller  style,,
so  as  to  suffice  for  the  environs  of  the  town.


xii


Par  FACE  TO  THE  TWELFTH  EDITION.


In  Rosenheim  an  establishment  upon  my  system
has  been  opened  lately  at  the  general  request  of  the
citizens,  and,  as  I  have  been  informed,  with  good  suc-
cess; for  Dr.  Bcrnhuber  has  been  with  meinWöris-
hofen  as  physician  to  my  patients,  and  has  great
talent  for  his  profession.  He  is  not  only  a  good  phy-
sician, but  also  a  good  operating  surgeon.  He  has
often  declared  to  me:  ''By  apphcation  of  water,  diseases
can  be  cured  in  cases  where  other  remedies  are  of
no  avail."  Therefore  I  have  reason  to  hope  this
establishment  especially  will  be  a  source  of  blessing
to  many.

Dr.  George  Wolf  has  opened  a  new  establishment
in  Traunstein.  Dr.  Wolf  is  of  a  quiet,  thougthful  and
noble  character,  has  studied  and  practised  my  whole
system  in  Wörishofen  for  a  long  time,  and  I  am  sure
I  can  highly  recommend  this  physician  to  all  patients
Avho  wish  to  use  my  water-cure.  Thus  my  numerous
friends  and  guests  near  and  far,  especially  those  in
Austria,  have  a  favorable  opportunity  of  experiencing
the  wholesome  effects  of  my  water-cure  under  his
direction ;  for  exactly  patients  from  Austria  and  Hun-
gary, so  far  off  from  here,  have  visited  my  own  bathing-
establishment  with  great  delight,  and  after  returning
home  have  made  known  my  system  in  grateful  re-
membrance ot  the  results  produced  by  it.

It  is  a  comfort  to  me  to  give  evidence  of  the  in-
creasing number  of  physicians  favorably  disposed
towards  my  system;  by  these  means  the  whole  will
gradually  pass  over  to  profession ists,  and  this  will  be
my  greatest  consolation. Go  then  out  thou,  too,

edition,  not  Avithout  the  blessing  from  Heaven,  and
continue  the  work  of  thine  eleven  brothers,  seek  out


Preface  to  the  27  and  33 edition.


xiii


the  sick  and  bring  them  help;  but  to  the  healthy  be
a  preservative  against  sickness.

Wörishofen,  December  3^'',  1889.

  The  Author.

Preface  to  the  27^^  Edition.

The  number  of  physicians  adopting  my  method
of  curing  by  water  has  considerably  increased  during
the  two  last  years,  I  mention  especially  Dr.  Berg-
mann and  Dr.  Tacke  who  are  assisting  me  in  my
work  in  this  place.

Of  late  two  new  establishments  based  on  the
principle  of  water-cure  have  been  opened,  one  at
Aistersheim  (Upper  Austria),  and  the  other  at  Brixen
(Tyrol ).  The  former  is  under  the  direction  of  Mr.  Otto
Ebenhecht,  a  disciple  of  mine  whom  I  can  heartily
recommend  to  every  one ;  head  of  the  latter  is  Dr.  Otto
de  Guggenberg,  one  of  the  most  learned  men  whO'
ever  came  hither  to  study  the  water-cure.

In  January  1891  Dr.  Loeser  opened  an  establish-
ment conducted  according  to  my  method  at  Veits-
höchheim near  Wuerzburg.  Dr.  Lceser  is  a  quiet
thinker  and  will  certainly  do  honour  to  the  under-
taking.

Wörishofen,  February  26*^  1891.

The  Author.

Preface  to  the  33  Edition.

I  am  a  priest  and  hence  bound  to  work  for  the
salvation  of  souls.  How  happy  should  I  be  if  no  other
burden  were  weighing  on  my  shoulders!  But  com-
passion for  the  helpless  sick  has  induced  me  to  act
also  as  physician,  and  this  compassion  still  urges  me


xiv


i'llEFACE  TO  TUE  SS"-''  EDITION.


to  carry  a  double  burden  and  to  imitate  the  merciful
Samaritan  alleviating  the  sufferhigs  of  ray  fellow-men
through  word  and  deed.  I  hope  that  this  work  of
mercy  will  obtain  mercy  for  me  according  to  the
words  of  Holy  Scripture.

Of  the  book  ''My  Water-cure"  to  which  many  owe
the  restoration  of  their  health,  a  new  life,  as  it  were,
33  editions  in  German  language  have  now  been
published.  I  am  far  from  thinking  highly  of  my  book,
but  the  many  editions,  the  translation  in  several  fo-
reign languages,  the  numerous  successful  cures,  and
the  innumerable  letters  of  thanksgiving  reaching  me
every  day,  give  testimony  of  the  value  of  its  contents.
This  is  a  comfort  for  me  and,  at  the  same  time,  an
encouragement  to  make  my  simple  method  of  curing
diseases  always  more  known.

When  I  began  to  write  this  work,  my  only  mo-
tive in  doing  so  was  the  love  of  my  Creator  and  the
v\-elfare  of  my  fellow-creatures.  May  God  regard  this
edition  also  as  an  act  of  charity  for  the  performance
of  which  I  fervently  implore  His  blessing.

Wörishofen,  August  14^,  1891.


The  Author.


Translator's  Preface.


carcely  ever  has  a  book  found  its  way  through
-.^  Europe  and  the  whole  civilised  world  in  so  in-
^  credibly  short  a  time  as  the  little  volume  of  which
this  is  a  translation.

The  author  in  the  brief  and  plain  sketch  of  his
life  at  once  endears  himself  to  the  reader.  From  the
humble  place  of  his  birth  we  follow  him  through  the
toils  of  his  early  life:  with  him  we  feel  grateful  to
the  kind  friend  under  whose  hospitable  roof  the  poor
traveller  found  not  only  shelter  but  also  the  longed-
for  teacher.  We,  then,  accompany  him  through  his
college  years  and  witness  his  indefatigable  zeal  in
the  pursuit  of  his  studies,  but  alas !  when  about  to
congratulate  him  on  their  prosperous  termination,  we
are  suddenly  grieved  at  the  saddening  aspect  of  his
failing  health.  Certainly  the  shortsightedness  of  human
understanding  with  regard  to  the  plans  of  Divine  Pro-
vidence cannot  be  more  sorely  tried  than  it  was  in
the  poor  student's  case ;  but  thus  it  had  to  be  in  order
to  make  his  life  that  wonderful  illustration  of  the
Apostle's  word:  ''To  them  that  love  God,  all  things
Avork  together  unto  good." Eom.  VIII.  28.

Finding  help  nowhere  and  lacking  both  physical
and  mental  strength  to  achieve  what  he  had  com-
menced, the  young  man  was  left  to  spend  his  time
in  the  royal  library.  Here  one  day  an  old  httle
book  attracts  his  curiosity,  he  opens  it,  it  treats  of
water-cures. This  was  the  moment  was  to  be  a


XYI  Trakslator's  preface.


turning-point  in  his  life. The  contents  of  the  small
unsightly  volume  were  to  be the  rough  outline
of  a  plan  which,  in  its  completion,  has  become  a
blessing  for  numbers  of  his  fellow-creatures  who,
labouring  under  more  or  less  grievous  disease,  were
restored  to  the  full  possession  of  bodily  health  and
mental  vigour;  for  as  soon  as  the  author  in  this  early
period  of  his  life  had  experienced  the  salutary  effects
of  water,  it  seemed  but  natural  to  his  noble  heart  to
make  as  many  as  possible  partakers  of  the  benefit
he  then  enjoyed  in  the  sense  of  undisturbed  health.
Since  his  endeavours  in  this  respect  had  for  their  sole
objects  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  poor  sufferers,
since  he  sought  neither  honour  nor  any  other  earthly
reward,  he  was  well  armed  against  the  temptation
to  give  up  a  work  which,  besides  adding  considerably
to  the  exertions  imposed  on  him  by  his  sacred  office,
earned  for  him  much  contradiction  and  ingratitude.

For  many  years  had  he  continued  to  attend  to
the  cure  of  human  bodies  without  neglecting  the  least
of  his  obligations  to  the  immortal  souls,  before  he
yielded  to  the  entreaties  of  thousands  who  urged  him
to  write  down  the  results  of  his  study  and  experience
of  the  water-cure  and  render  them  thus  useful  also
to  those  who  were  unable  to  profit  by  his  oral  advice.
His  book  obtained  for  him  what  he  had  neither  aimed
at,  nor  wished  for :  his  name,  always  pronounced  with
love  and  veneration  within  the  limited  sphere  of  his
activity  as  parish-priest,  has  since  acquired  more  than
European  fame.  The  eyes  of  the  whole  civilized  world
look  with  admiration  on  the  aged  pastor  of  the  humble
Bavarian  village  and,  attracted  by  the  wisdom  of  his
counsels  and  the  kindness  of  his  heart,  numbers  of


ThANSLATOH'S  PKEFACE.  -  XVII

invalids  are  daily  seen  to  gather  round  him  for  help
and  advice.

I  myself  have  had  the  enviable  fortune  of  living-
for  nearly  two  years  on  most  confidential  terms  with
the  venerable  man.  The  look  of  his  eyes  so  penetrating-
and  yet  so  full  of  compassion,  the  unpretentiousness
and  simphcity  of  manners  displayed  in  his  personal
intercourse  with  all  classes  of  men,  the  noble  dis-
position of  his  heart,  the  disinterestedness  in  all  his
attempts  for  the  good  of  others,  act  like  as  many  charms
delighting  and  fascinating  everyone  that  approaches
him.  The  rich  and  the  poor,  the  prince  and  the  beggar,
are  all  welcomed  by  the  same  kindly  look,  the  same
loving  heart. The  artless,  I  should  almost  say,  the
rustic  style  which  characterizes  his  oral  counsels  is
a  pecuhar  feature  also  of  „My  Water-cure".  I  should
consider  it  a  want  of  fihal  piety  and  affection  for  my
fatherly  friend  and  master,  were  I  in  my  translation
to  deviate  from  his  principle  of  simplicity  by  turning
his  words  into  elegant  periods.

Moreover  was  it  expressly  desired  by  the  author
that  translations  of  his  book  should  be  complete,  cor-
rect, and,  as  much  as  possible,  literal.  He  wrote  "My
Water-cure"  chiefly  for  the  lower  classes,  for  poor
country  people  who  lack  either  means  or  convenience
to  have  recourse  to  medical  aid  in  their  maladies,
and  this  circumstance  particularly  made  him  fear  that
want  of  correctness  in  translating  might  be  of  fatal
consequences.  Since  there  has  already  been  edited
another  English  translation  which  cannot  claim  to  be
either  correct  or  complete,  I  myself  thought  it  especially
advisable  to  produce  a  literal  translation  of  the  'W^'
German  edition  which  has  been  quite  recently  tho-
roughly revised  by  the  author.

Kneipp,  Water-Cure.  -jj


XVI 11


Tkanslator's  pueface.


This  traushition  has  the  additional  advantage  of
numerous  illustrations  representing  the  medicinal  herbs
and  their  essential  parts,  which  will,  besides  imparting
knowledge  about  the  plants,  facilitate  the  work  of  the
gatherer.

The  consideration  that  the  master  having  all
means  of  ereater  elegance  at  his  command,  chose
nevertheless  simplicity  to  be  the  prominent  feature  of
his  style,  and  the  fact  that  hi  spite  of  this,  two  hundred
thousand  copies  of  his  book  have  been  published,  was
apt  to  confirm  me  in  my  resolution  at  the  risk  ot
doing  even  more  violence  to  the  English  language
than"  the  author  did  to  his  native  tongue.

These  are  the  grounds  on  which  I  base  the  hope
that  my  readers  will  judge  kindly  about  my  work.
I  shall  consider  it  the  most  desirable  compensation
for  my  toils  if  it  will  prove  of  real  and  lasting  profit
to  all  who  wish  to  follow  its  advice. If  they  are
Christians  the  venerable  person  of  the  author  wiU
increase  their  confidence  in  his  counsels ;  if  they  ai  e
not  Christians  they  may  remen.ber  that  his  hear  be.U.
warm  for  all  and  that,  by  making  "^y  wa  ei-  me
known  to  the  world,  he  wished  to  benefit  all  without

exception. ^

For  any  explanation  or  detail  respecting  the
contents  of  this  book,  apply  to  the  Editor.

St.  D«


Cont


e  n  t  s.


Prefaces v

Introduction ....  1

Part  the  First.
Applications  of  Water.

General  remarks ...  15

Means  of  liardeninsr • •  22

Applications  of  water .  34

A.  Wet  Sheets:

1.  Covering  with  wet
sheets ....  34

2.  Lying  on  wet  sheets  3.5

3.  Covering  with,  and
lying  on,  wets  heets
taken  together .  36

4.  Compress  on  the
abdomen  ....  36

B.  Bnths:

I.  Foot-Baths:

1.  The  cold  foot-bath  42

2.  Tlie  warm  foot-bath  42
JI.  Half-Baths ...  45

nr.  Sitting-Baths:

1.  The  cold  sitting-
bath 47

2  the  warm  sitting-
bath ....  49


page

IV.  AVhole-Baths:

1.  The cold  whole-
bath 50

a)  The  cold  wiiole-
bath  for  healthy
persons  ....  51

b)  The  cold  whole-
bath  tor  the  sick  57

2.  The  warm  whole-
bath GO

a)  Tiie  warm  whole-
bath  for  healthy
persons  ....  63

b  I  Tlie  warm  whole-
bath  for  the  sick  64

aa)  The  hay-flower
bath ."  . . .  65

bb)  The  oat -straw
bath ....  65

cc)  The  pine-sprig-
batii ....  ()5

dd)  Mixed  baths .  65

3.  The  mineral-baths  67

V.  Part-Baths:

1.  The  hand  and  nrm-
bath ....  70

2.  The  head-bath  . .  70

3.  The  eye-bath . .  72


XX


Contents.


page

C.  Vapours 73

1.  The  vapour  for  tlie
head  77

2.  The  vapour  foot-
bath  82

3.  The  close-stool  va-
pour bath ...  85

4.  Special  vapour  ap-
plications on  parti-
cular diseased  parts  8G

D.  Shower-Baths :

1.  The  knee  shower  87

2.  The  shower  for  the
thighs  80

3.  The  lower- shower
bath  90

4.  The  shower  for  the
back  90

5.  The  whole  shower-
bath 91

ß.  The  upper  shower-
bath 92

7.  The  arm-gusli . .  9')

8.  The  head-'gusli  . .  9ü

E.  Ablutions .....  96

1.  The  whole-ablution  97

a)  The  whole -ablu-
tion for  the  healthy  97

b)  The  whole -ablu-
tion for  the  sick  99

2.  The  part-ablution  .  101

F.  Bandages:

1.  The  head-bandage  101

2.  The  neck- bandage  102

3.  The  shawl . •  -104


4.  The  foot -bandage  iOfy

a)  The  foot-bandage
proper . . . .  10i>

b)  The  bandage  above
the  knees . . .  lOG-

5.  The  lower  bandage  107  J

6.  The  short  bandage  109  ^

7.  The  wet  sliirt  . .  110

8.  The  Spanish  mantle  111

G.  Drinking  of  water  .  .114

P  art  the  Second.
Apothcca.

General  remarks  and  divi-
sion  121

Tinctures  or  extracts  125

Teas  126

Powder  127

Oils 127

Medicines  128

Contents  of  a  little  home-

apotheca 194

Several  kinds  of  strength-
giving  food  19»

Eecipe  for  the  prepa-
ration of  bran-bread  19.'>
The  strength -giving

soup 196

Preparation  of  Honey-
wine 198

Part  the  Third.
Diseases.

Introduction  205

Complaints  in  alphabetical

Order  205

AlphabeliciU  index . .  390


Introduction.


s  on  a  tree  no  leaf  resembles  per-
fectly to  another,  so  also  do  men's
destinies  differ  one  from  the  other.
If  every  man  were  to  write  a  sketch
of  his  own  life,  we  should  have  as
many  different  biographies  as  there
are  men.  Intricate  are  the  ways
twisting  themselves  in  our  life  in  every  direction,  somethnes
like  an  inextricable  ball  of  silk,  the  threads  of  which  seem
to  be  laid  without  plan  or  purpose.  So  it  frequently  seems ;
but  it  never  is  so  in  reality.  Faith  darts  its  enlightening
beam  into  the  confused  darkness,  and  shows  how  all  these
entangled  paths  serve  wise  purposes,  and  how  all  of  them
lead  to  one  end  designed  and  fixed  by  the  all-wise  Creator
from  the  beginning.  The  ways  of  Providence  are  wonderful.

When,  from  the  high  watch-tower  of  old  age,  I  look
back  on  the  past  years  of  my  life  and  all  the  complications
of  my  paths,  they  seem  to  wind  themselves  sometimes  on  the
brink  of  the  abyss;  but  they  lead  against  all  expectation  to
the  glorious  heights  of  vocation,  and  finally  attain  them,
and  I  have  every  reason  to  praise  the  tender  and  wise  ruling
of  Providence,  the  more  so  as  the  paths  which,  according  to
human  ideas,  seemed  to  be  sad  and  leading  to  death,  showed
to  me  and  numberless  others  the  opening  to  a  new  life.

I  was  more  than  21  years  old  when  I  left  my  home  as
a  weaver  seeking  employment ;  but,  since  the  days  of  my

K  u  6  i  p  p  ,  Watsr-Cure.  1


2  Introduction.

childhood,  sonietliing  else  had  occupied  my  mind.  AVith
imspealvablB  pahi  and  longing  desire  for  the  realization
of  my  ideal,  I  had  awaited  this  departure  for  long,  long
years,  as  my  sole  wish  was  to  become  a  priest.

I  went  away  then,  not  as  was  expected  to  throw
the  weaver's  shuttle,  but  I  hurried  from  place  to  place
seeking  for  some  one  who  would  provide  me  with  the  means
for  studying. The  now  deceased  prelate  Matthias  Merkle
(t  1881)  at  that  time  chaplain  in  Grönenbach,  took  me
under  his  care,  gave  me  private  instructions  during  two
years,  and  with  indefatigable  zeal  tried  to  prepare  me  for
the  gymnasium,  so  that  I  was  able  to  be  received  there
at  the  end  of  that  tune. It  was  no  easy  task  and  its
effects  on  my  body  and  mind  seemed  to  render  all  ray
efforts  utterly  useless. After  five  years  of  the  greatest
exertions  and  privations  my  strength  both  physical  and
mental  was  broken. Once  my  father  came  to  towTi  to
fetch  me,  aud  even  now  the  words  of  the  innkeeper,  at
whose  inn  we  stopped,  seem  still  to  be  ringing  in  my
ears. „ Weaver,"  he  said,  „this  is  the  last  time  you  wiU
come  to  fetch  your  student." A  physician  in  the  army,
a  celebrated  man,  who  at  that  tune  was  known  as  a
benevolent  and  generous  helper  of  poor  patients,  visited
me  in  the  second  last  year  of  my  studies  90  tunes,  and
m  the  last  one  more  than  a  hundred. He  ^\^shed  so
much  to  help  me,  but  my  increasing  debility  rendered
his  medicinal  knowledge  and  devoted  charity  imavaüabie.
I  myself  had  given  up  all  hope  long  ago  and  was  ex-
pecting my  end  with  quiet  resignation. To  procure  a
little  amusement  and  dissipation  of  mmd,  I  used^to
run  over  the  pages  of  many  books. By  chance  i
only  use  this customary but insignificant  word,  be-
cause it is customary ;  for things  never  happen  by
chance  -  an  unsightly  little  book  fell  into  my  hands
1  opened  it;  it  treated  of  the  water-cure. I  perused  the
book  and  found  in  it  descriptions  of  various  diseases  and
the  wonderful  effects  obtained  by  the  use  of  the  water-
cure. At  last  this  was  the  thought  which  ^ti-uck  me^
ii  was;  my  state  was  represented  to  a  hair .  breadth.


Introduction.


3


What  joy! What  comfort! New  hopes  electrified  my
withered  body  and  my  still  more  withered  mind.  At
first  this  little  book  was  the  trifle  to  which  I  clung-
soon  afterwards  it  became  the  staff  which  supported  the
sufferer ;  to-day  I  acknowledge  it  to  be  the  life-boat  sent
to  me  by  a  merciful  Providence  at  the  right  time,  at
the  hour  of  extreme  need. This  little  book  treating  of
the  healing  power  of  fresh  water,  is  written  by  a  physi-
cian ;  the  applications  are  most  of  them  extremely  rugged
and  rigid. I  tried  them  for  3  months,  for  6  months ;
no  real  improvement  ensued,  but  at  the  same  time  I  did
not  grow  worse  and  that  gave  me  new  courage.  I  spent
the  winter  of  1849  m  Dillingen. Two  or  three  tunes
a  week  I  went  to  a  solitary  spot  to  bathe  in  the  Danube
for  some  moments. Quickly  I  ran  to  the  spot;  more
speedily  I  hastened  back  to  my  warm  room  at  home.
This  cold  exercise  never  hurt  me,  but,  as  I  thought,  it
was  of  no  great  use  either. In  1850  I  came  to  the
Georgianum  in  Munich. And  there  I  foimd  a  poor  stu-
dent who  was  in  a  mach  more  miserable  state  than  my-
self. The  physician  of  the  institution  refused  to  give
him  the  certificate  of  health  necessary  for  his  ordination,
declaring  that  he  would  not  live  much  longer. Now  I
had  a  dear  companion  whom  I  initiated  into  the  myste-
rie^s  of  my  little  book,  and  we  tried  to  surpass  each
other  m  the  practice  of  the  various  water  applications.
In  a  short  time  my  friend  got  the  wished  for  certificate,
and  at  the  present  day  he  is  still  alive. I  myself  grew
contmually  stronger,  became  a  priest  and  am  living  as
such  over  38  years. My  friends  tell  me  that  they  ad-
mire the  power  of  my  voice  and  are  amazed  at  the  bo-
dily strength  T  enjoy  at  the  age  of  70. The  water  re-
mained my  well  tested  friend,  and  who  can  blame  me,  if
I  remain  faithful  to  it  also?

He  who  has  been  in  want  and  misery  himself,  knows
how  to  sympathise  with  the  want  and  misery  of  his
neighbour.  ^

Not  all  patients  are  alike  unfortunate,  and  surely
reconcde  himself  with  a  short  time  of  suffering.  Such


'6-
1*


Introduction.


patients  I  have  refused  by  hundreds  and  thousands  du-
ring the  first  years.  But  the  poor  man,  who  is  iieedy
and  abandoned,  given  up  by  the  physicians  and  no
longer  helped  by  medicaments  and  remedies,  has  every
right  to  our  sympathies.  Great  numbers  of  this  kind  of
people  are  my  favourite  patients;  such  poor  and  entirely
forsaken  people  I  have  never  sent  away  It  would  seem
hard,  unconscientious,  and  ungrateful  to  shut  my  door
upon  such  poor  suöerers ,  or  to  deny  them  the  re-
sources which  brought  me  health  and  strength  m  my

''''' ThI"  great  number  of  sufferers,  the  still  greater  diffe-
rence of  their  sufferings,  urged  me  to  ^ich  my  e^^^^^^
rience  in  the  use  of  water  and  to  perfect  the  method

first  adviser,  the  well-known  little  book,  I  am
always  indebted  for  the  introductory  lessons  I  learned
from  t  but  I  soon  found  out  that  many  applications
re  too  rigid,  too  strong  and  discouraging  for  h^iman
nature  For  this  reason  people  called  at  first  tbe  water
cures  horse-cures";  and  up  to  this  day  many  who  abuse
which  they  do  not  understand,  like  to  give  the
natÄndll  and  quackery  to  everythmg  connected

"''N'wXgTg-t  that  many  applications  and  exer-
• n7+hT  nrimitive  and  still  undeveloped  water-cure

than  to  a  human  skeleton  clotnea  wnu

follo^SSn:  m^U  is  -rde^ -^^^^^^^^^

the  throat,  was  mcreasmg  on ^^.^

(he  was  a  celebrated  P^«^^^^^  London,  and  many

'office  with  ^^VO^\'^''--^fj^^^^^  wmd-
other  large  towns)  and  so°Y^,'f;^\?X;°^as  entirely  gone,
pipe  was  shnply  one  wound,  J^f^^'^ü^g)  ma  state
II  had  to  spend  ^^2^'' iXc^X'^^t  several

of  inactivity  ^^^^^ /^^^  ""f '^^301^1,  were  of  no  result,
places,  change  of  an  m  ^he  souti^  ^
In  June  1848,  F.  Ravignan  was  Innig


Intboduction.


5


R . .  in  his  country-house  in  the  vale  at  B. . .  One  morning
after  Mass,  the  doctor  looked  anxious  and  announced
to  the  assembled  family  that  F.  Ravignan  felt  worse
and  could  not  come  to  breakfast.  Then  he  himself  dis-
appeared and  went  to  the  patient  saying  :  „  Arise  and
follow  me!"  „ But  where  to  ?"  the  latter  replied.  „I  am
going  to  throw  you  into  the  water."  „Tnto  the  water?
said  Ravignan,  with  my  fever  and  my  cough  ?  But  never
mind,  I  am  in  your  hands  and  must  obey."  A  so-called
shower-bath  was  meant,  a  violent  but  efficient  remedy,
as  the  biographer  says.  The  effect  was  evident.  At  dinner
time  that  same  day^  the  doctor  triumphantly  brought  his
patient,  then  remarkably  better ;  and  he  who  was  voiceless
in  the  morning,  told  the  tale  of  his  recovery  at  night.

This,  I  too,  call  a  little  „horse-cure"  which,  notwith-
standing the  good  result,  I  should  not  like  to  imitate  or
to  recommend  for  imitation.

Here  I  must  state  that  I  do  not  approve  of  all  the
applications  now  in  use  in  the  water-cure  hospitals ;  of
some  of  them  I  even  strictly  disapprove.  They  appear
to  me  too  strong,  and,  pardon  the  expression,  too  partial.
Too  many  things  are  treated  exactly  alike,  and  much  too
little  difference  is  made,  in  my  opinion,  between  the  va-
rious patients,  their  greater  or  lesser  weakness,  their
more  or  less  obstinate  illness,  the  more  or  less  advanced
devastations  and  consequences,  etc.  etc.

It  is  just  in  the  variety  of  the  applications  and  in
their  proper  choice,  that  the  master-hand  will  and  must
be  recognised.

Patients  of  the  different  hospitals  came  to  me  com-
plaining bitterly:  „It  is  beyond  endurance,  it  is  killing
me. "  But  thus  it  ought  not  to  be.  Once  a  healthy  man
presented  himself  to  me,  asserting  that  he  had  been  injured
by  washing  himself  in  the  morning.  „How  did  you  do
that?"  I  asked  hun.  „I  put  my  head  under  the  pump,
and  let  the  icy  water  run  over  it,  for  a  quarter  of  an
hour!"  It  would  certainly  be  a  miracle  if  such  an  un-
reasonable man  did  not  entirely  ruin  hinifelf.  We  mock
and  deride  such  a  foolish  proceeding,  and  yet,  how  many
who  must  be  supposed  to  know  how  to  apply  the  water


5  iNTKODUCnON.


reasonably,  have  acted  just  as  foolishly,  in  my  opinion
even  more  foolishly,  and  thereby  made  the  patients  start
with  horror  from  the  water  for  ever.  I  could  give  nu-
merous instances  which  would  be  just  as  many  proofs
of  my  assertion.

I  warn  against  every  too strong  or  too  frequent
application  of  water,  for  that  which  otherwise  would  be
an  advantage  of  the  curhig  element,  is  thereby  turned  to
injury,  and  the  hopeful  confidence  of  the  patient  is  chan-
ged into  fear  and  horror. For  30  years,  I  have  tried
every  single  application  upon  myself. Three  times  —
this  I  acknowledge  openly  —  I  found  myself  induced  to
change  my  system,  to  loosen  the  strings,  to  descend
from  strictness  to  softness,  from  great  to  still  greater
softness. According  to  my  present  conviction,  now  fixed
for  17'  years  and  tested  by  innumerable  cures,  he  who
knows  how  to  apply  the  water  in  the  plainest,  easiest,
and  most  simple  way,  will  produce  the  most  pre  finable
effacts and  the  safest  results. The  various  mode';  m
which  I  use  the  water  as  a  remedy,  are  told  in  the  first
part  of  this  book,  treating  of  the  different  diseases.  In
the  second  part  (see  the  particular  preface),  I  have  given,
especially  for  country  people,  some  remedies  to  make  a
family  chemistry,  which,  applied  interiorly,  tend  to  the
same  purposes  as  the  water;  either  to  dissolve,  to  eva-
cuate, or  to  strengthen.

To  every  patient  consulting  me  I  put  some  questions
so  as  not  to  act  too  hastily  and  to  my  disadvantage.

In  like  manner  this  little  book  is  bound  to  answer
shortly  the  following  questions:  _

1. Wliat  is  sickness ,  and  what  is  the  common
source  of  all  sickness?  -

The  human  body  is  one  of  the  most  marvellous
structures  of  God's  creative  hand.  Every  jomt  -^««^
to  joint,  every  accurately  measured  imb  to  h  r
monious  whole,  combined  to  an  astonishing  unity.  I^iore
^markable  sti  1  is  the  conjunction  of  the  organs,  and
tS  act  vitr  within  the  body.  Even  the  most  disbeliev-
ing physician  and  naturalist,  who  „has  "ot  found  a
Zl\  CL  his  lancet  and  his  dissecting  knife,  cannot


Introduction.


7


refuse  his  most  just  and  highest  admiration  to  the  ini-
mitable wisdom  displayed  in  the  structure  of  the  human
body.  —  Tliis  euphony  and  harmony,  called  good  health,
is  disturbed  by  different  causes,  which  we  call  „diseases".
Such  diseases  of  the  body,  interior  and  exterior,  belong
to  the  daily  bread  which  most  human  creatures  must
eat,  willingly  or  unwillingly.  All  these  diseases  whatever
their  names  may  be,  have  their  cause,  origin,  root  and
their  germ  in  the  blood ,  or  rather  in  disturbances
of  the  blood,  whether  it  be  only  disturbed  in  its  circu-
lation ,  or  corrupted  in  its  ingredients  by  humours  not
belonging  to  it.  The  net  of  blood-vessels  spreads  its  red
vital  spirit  through  the  whole  body,  in  its  suitable  way.
Order  consists  in  proportion ;  every  too  much  or  too
little  in  the  tempo  of  the  circulation  of  ihe  blood,  every
penetration  of  foreign  elements,  disturbs  the  peace,  the
concord,  causes  discord,  changes  health  to  sickness.

2. How  is  the  healing  to  be  effected?

By  the  tracks  in  the  snow  the  expert  hunter  dis-
cerns the  game ;  he  follows  these  tracks  according  as  he
wishes  to  hunt  a  deer,  a  chamois,  or  a  fox.  An  able
physician  soon  knows  where  the  disease  is,  in  what  it
has  originated,  what  progress  it  has  made.  The  symp-
toms show  him  the  disease,  the  latter  indicates  the  reme-
dies to  be  chosen.  Some  would  say:  This  procedure  is
most  plain.  Yes,  sometimes  it  is,  but  sometimes  it  is
not.  If  someone  comes  to  me  with  frozen  ears,  I  directly
know  that  this  has  been  caused  by  severe  cold;  if  a
person  sittmg  at  the  millstone  suddenly  screams,  having
his  finger  crushed,  I  need  not  ask  what  is  the  matter
with  him.  But  it  is  not  so  easy  even  with  ordinary
headache  or  with  diseases  of  the  stomach,  the  nerves,
or  the  heart,  which  originate  not  only  in  several  or  ma-
nifold causes,  but  very  often  in  diseases  of  the  neigh-
bouring organs,  which  diseases  injure  the  action  of  the
stomach,  the  heart,  or  the  kidneys.  A  straw  stops  the
pendulum  of  the  largest  clock  ;  a  mere  trifle  is  able  to
disturb  the  heart  most  painfully.  But  it  is  precisely  in
finding  this  trifle  that  the  difficulty  consists,  for  thf>


g  Introduction,


examination  is  often  very  complicated  and  mistakes  of
many  kinds  are  likely  to  occur.  Many  of  such  instances
are  to  be  found  in  ihe  ihii-d  part  of  this  book.

If  I  str.ke  the  trunk  cf  a  young  oak-tree  with  my
foot  or  an  axe,  it  will  tremble  ;  every  branch,  every  leaf
moves.  How  mistaken  I  should  be,  if  I  were  to  conclude
that  because  the  leaf  trembles,  it  must  have  been  attacked,
touched  by  something.  No,  it  is  because  the  trunk
trembles,  that  the  branch  and  the  leaf,  as  part  and
particle  of  the  trunk,  do  the  same.  The  nerves  are  such
branches  on  the  trunk  of  our  body.  „He  suffers  with
his  nerves;  the  nerves  are  attacked."  What  does  this
mean?  No,  the  whole  organism  has  received  a  shock,
has  been  weakened,  therefore  the  nerves  are  tremblmg  too.

Cut  one  thread  of  the  dvilful  cobweb  of  a  spider,
running  from  the  centre  to  the  periphery  very  cautiously,
a'ld  the  whole  net  shrinks,  the  quadrangles  and  triangles,-
spun  with  a  wonderful  accuracy  and  seeming  to  be  mea-
sured out  with  compasses,  suddenly  form  the  most  irre-
o-ular  and  inordinate  figures. How  foohsh  it  would_  be
to  think  that  this  time  the  spider  must  have  mads  im-
portant mistakes  in  weaving  its  silken  house. Fut  ttie
little  thread  in  its  place  again,  and  instantly  the  former
wonderful  order  is  restored. The  art  consists  m  finduig
out  this  single  diminutive  thread ;  to  fumble  about  in
the  cobweb,  would  be  to  destroy  it  entirely. I  leave  it
to  everyone  to  make  the  application  himself^  and  conclude
with  the  true  answer  to  our  question:  How  plam,  un-
complicated, and  easy  the  cure  is,  how  it  ^Irnost  exclu-
des every  possibility  of  mistake,  as  soon  as  I  kno^^  that
every  Please  is  caused  by  disturbances  of  the  bloody
The  work  of  healirg  can  only  consist  in  one  of  thej.vo
tasks  :  either  to  lead  the  irregularly  civculatmg  blood  to
\t  Tinrmal  course, or  endeavour  to  evacuate  the  bad

I  nuorthe  moiSd  matter,  which  disturb  the  right  com-
hquois,  tne  ^oiu  ^^^^^^  ^^^^^

bmation  Jren-thening  of  the  enfeebled  organism.

done  except  ttie  stienguicniug  ui  mre'
3  In  what  way  does  the  water  effect  ^^"^J*
The  ink-blot  on'yourhand  is  q-ckly  wasW  off  by

the  water ;  the  bleeding  wound  is  cleansed  by  it.  It


iNsTlODUCTIOII.


9


summer-time  after  the  day's  exertions  you  wash  the
sweat  off  your  forehead  with  fresh  water,  you  feel  quite
revived ;  it  refreshes,  strengthens,  and  does  you  good.
The  mother  perceiving  scurf  on  her  baby's  little  head  takes
warm  water,  and  by  it  the  scurf  is  dissolved.

Dissolving,  evacuating  (washing  off,  as  it  were)
strengthening,  these  three  qualities  of  the  water  are
sufficient  for  us,  and  we  make  the  assertion  :

The  water,  in  particular  our  water-cure,  heals  all
diseases  in  any  way  curabla  ;  for  the  various  applications
of  water  tend  to  remove  the  roots  of  the  disease ;  they
are  able ;

a)  To  dissolve  the  morbid  matters  in  the  blood,

b)  to  evacuate  what  is  dissolved,

c)  to  make  the  cleansed  blood  circulate  rightly
again.

d)  finally,  to  harden  the  enfeebled  organism,  i.  e.
to  strengthen  it  for  new  activity.

4.  What  is  the  cause  of  the  sensibility  of  the  present
generation,  of  the  stril^ing  susceptibility  for  all  possible
diseases,  of  which  even  the  names  were  scarcely  known
in  former  days  ?

Of  course,  many  people  would  like  to  dispense  me
from  this  question.  Nevertheless  it  appears  to  me  to  be  of
great  importance,  and  I  state,'  without  hesitation,  that
these  evils  arise  from  a  want  of  hardening.  The  effe-
mination  of  the  people  living  now-a-days  has  reached
a  high  degree.  The  weak  and  delicate,  the  poor  of  blood
and  nervous,  the  sick  of  heart  or  stomach,  almost  form
the  rule ;  the  strong  and  vigorous  are  the  exception.
People  are  affected  by  every  change  of  weather ;  the
turn  of  seasons  does  not  pass  by  without  colds  in  the
head  and  chest ;  even  the  too  quickly  entering  a  warm
room,  when  coming  from  the  cold  street,  does  not  re-
main unrevenged,  etc.  etc.  50 — 60  years  ago  it  was
quite  different,  and  where  shall  we  come  to,  if,  according
to  the  general  complaint  of  the  thoughtful,  mankind's
strength  and  life  are  decreasing  so  rapidly,  if  decay
begins  even  before  man  has  reached  maturity?  It  is
high  time  to  see  what  is  wanting. As  a  small  contri-


10


Intkoduction.


bution  towards  remedying  such  distress  we  offer  the  f  iW
simple  and  safe  remedies  for  hardening  the  skin,  tlie
whole  body  and  single  parts  of  the  body.  These  may
be  added  to  the  water-applications.  These  remedies  have
already  been  accepted  by  numbers  of  persons  of  all  con-
ditions, first  by  some  of  them  with  ridicule,  but  after-
wards practised  with  trust  and  with  visible  success.
Vivant  sequentes !

Treatises,  as  important  as  that  about  hardening,  could
be  written  on  food,  clothing  and  airing ;  this  will  per-
haps be  done  later  on.  I  am  quite  aware  that  my  par-
ticular opinions  will  be  strongly  contradicted  ;  neverthe-
less I  keep  to  them  ;  for  they  have  been  ripened  by  an
experience  of  long  years.  They  are  not  mushrooms  sprung
up  in  my  brain  during  the  night ;  they  are  precious
fruits,  hard  and  severe  perhaps  to  incarnate  prejudices,
but  extremely  relishing  to  a  sound  mental  digestion.  I
only  want  to  give  some  hints  regarding  the  food.

My  chief  rule  is :  Dry,  simple,  nourishmg  household-
fare  not  spoiled  by  art  or  by  strong  spices;  the  drink
should  be  the- genuine  beverage  offered  by  God  in  every
well.  Both  taken  moderately  are  the  best  and  most
wholesome  nourishment  for  the  human  body.  (I  am  not
a  Puritan  and  allow  gladly  a  glass  of  wme  or  beer,  but
without  regxrding  them  as  important  as  they  are  com-
monly beheved  to  be.)  From  a  medicinal  view,  after
illness  for  instance,  these  beverages  may  sometimes  play
a  part ;  but  for  healthy  people  I  prefer  fruits.

As  regards  clothing^  I  follow  the  maxun  of  our  tore-
fathers  :  (Self-spun  and  self-made  is  the  best  country  garb.)
First  I  oppose  the  striking  inequality  or  rather  unequal
distribution  of  clothing,  especially  in  winter  tune  wliicü
is  a  great  injury  to  health.  The  head  has  its  fur  cap,
the  neck  its  tight  collar,  covered  with  a  woolen  scart  a
yard  long;  the  shoulders  wear  a  3  or  4  fold  cover ;  for
walks  a  wadded  cloak  or  even  a  fur-cape ;  only  the  teet,
the  poor  neglected  feet,  are  covered  as  in  ^"""l^«;'; ;™
socks  or  stockings,  with  shoes  or  boots.  What  are  t  ie
consequences  of  such  an  unreasonable  partiality  .  ihe
upper  girdings  and  wrappers  draw  up  blood  and  warmth


Jntroduction.


11


to  the  upper  stoiy,  while  the  lower  parts  are  suffering
from  want  of  blood  and  from  cold  ;  head-ache,  congestions,
enlargement  of  the  arteries  of  the  head,  hundreds  of
indispositions  and  miseries  become  solved  problems.

Further  I  oppose  thick  woollen  clothing  worn  next
to  the  skin,  but  I  approve  of  the  clothing  made  of  firm,
dry,  strong  linen,  or  hemp-cloth.  The  latter  is  to  me
the  best  skin  on  the  skin  which  never  effeminates  it,
but  does  the  good  service  of  a  rubber.  The  many-
branched,  hairy  greasy  texture  of  the  wool  on  the  bare
body  (how  the  wool  serves  my  purposes,  is  said  in  the
general  explanations  of  my  water  applications)  I  look
upon  as  a  sucker  of  fluids  and  warmth,  as  a  concurring
cause  of  the  dreadfully  spreading  want  of  blood  in  our
weak  miserable  generation.  The  newest  method  of  wool-
wearing  in  the  revised  style  will  not  remedy  this  want
nor  aid  the  blood  either.  Younger  people  may  live  to
experience  this  and  to  outlive  the  method.  —

Now  to  the  airing.  —  We  prefer  by  far  fish  obtained
from  spring-water,  or  trout  from  the  mountain  streams,
to  all  others  ;  fish  from  rivulets  are  inferior  ;  those  from
ponds  in  moors  and  marshes,  with  their  disgusting  taste,
we  leave  to  any  one.  There  is  likewise  moor  and  marsh
air,  and  whoever  inhales  it,  feeds  his  lungs  with  pesti-
lential vapour.  A  celebrated  physician  says  that  the  air^
when  inhaled  for  the  third  time  has  the  effect  of  poison.
Indeed,  if  people  would  understand  how  to  provide  their
sittings  and  especially  their  bed-rooms,  with  pure,  fresh
an-,  they  would  prevent  many  indispositions  and  many
diseases.  The  pure  air  is  spoiled  mostly  by  breathing.
We  know  very  well  that  1  or  2  grains  of  incense  strewn
on  the  glowing  fire,  fill  a  whole  room  with  perfume,  and
we  know  likewise  that  15—20  puffs  from  a  cigar  or
pipe  are  sufficient  to  make  a  large  room  smell  of  the
smoke.  Often  the  most  insignificant  thing  is  enough  to
spoil  the  pure  air  in  one  way  or  the  other,  agreeably  or
disagreeably.  Is  not  breathing  similar  to  such  a  smoke?
How  many  breaths  do  we  take  in  a  minute,  in  an  hour,
during  the  day,  the  night?  How  much  must  the  air
become  spoded,  though  we  do  not  see  the  vapour  ?  And


12


Introduction.


if  I  do  not  air,  i.  e.  purify  the  bad  atmosphere  spoiled
bv  carbonic  acid,  what  infected  air,  what  miasms,  are
streamhig  into  the  lungs?  The  consequences  cannot,
and  will  not,  be  other  than  injurious. ,  ^ ^  .

Like  breathing  and  exhalation,  too  much  heat  is  pre-
iudicial  to  the  wholesome  pure  vital  air,  especially  too
much  heating  of  rooms.  By  it  the  air  becomes  bad,  as
they  consume  and  destroy  the  oxygen,  they  render  it  unfit
for  maintaining  life  and  therefore  irjurious  to  breathmg.
12-14  degrees  B.  are  sufficient,  15  degrees  should  never

^"Care^'stould  be  taken  to  air  thoroughly  all  the  sit-
tiii-  and  bed-rooms,  day  by  day,  in  such  a  way  that
without  trouble  to  anyone  each  one's  health  may  draw
benefit  from  it.  Above  all  great  attention  must  be  given
+n  the  airing  of  the  beds.  . , -,  j.«

Now  I  have  stated  what  I  considered  necessary  to
K  on  these  noints. It  is  sufficient  to  give  a  picture

0?  the  stranger  Äocks  at  your  door,  and  whether  you
fdmit  Sndly  or  dismiss  him  -heard  he  is  prepared
for  both,  and  shall  be  contented  with  eithei.


Part  the  first.

Applications  of  water.


Aquae  oiiines  .  .  .  landent  nomen  Domini.
All  the  waters  . . .  praise  the  name  of  the  Lord.


General  remarks.


||lie  applications  of  water  used  in  ray  establishment

Wet  sheets,
Baths,

^  Vapour  baths,

Shower  baths,
Ablutions,
Water  bandages.
Drinking  of  water.

The  subdivisions  of  each  appHcation  are  given  in  the
first  nidex.  The  name  and  the  meaning  of  strange
soundmg  practices  are  explained  in  their  proper  plac°e.

According  to  the  nature  of  all  diseases  by  which
they  origmate  m  a  disordered  circulation  of  the  blood,
or  in  corrupted  and  heterogeneous  ingredients  mixed  with
the  blood,  and  m  morbid  matters,  the  applications  of
water  tend  to  the  triple  aim:

To  dissolve,

to  evacuate  the  morbid  matters,  and
to  strengthen  the  organism.

In  general  it  may  be  said  that  the  dissolving  is
brought  about  by  the  vapours  and  the  hot  baths  of
medicma  herbs ;  the  evacuation  by  the  water  bandages
and  partly  by  the  shower  baths  and  wet  sheets  ;  the
strengthening  by  the  cold  baths,  the  shower  baths,  partly

hardening  ^""'"^  '""^^^  '^'^'^  of


IQ  Part  1.  Applications  op  watee.


I  cannot  and  will  not  give  particulars  here  in  order
to  avoid  misunderstanding.

As  every  disease  originates  in  the  above  named
disorders  of  the  blood,  it  is  evident  that  in  every  case
of  disease  all  the  respective  applications  must  be  used
more  or  less  dissolving, evacuating  and  strengthening  •,
further,  that  not  only  the  suff.^rmg  part,  foot,  or  hand,
or  head,  as  the  case  may  be,  is  to  be  treated  but  al-
ways the  whole  body  through  every  part  of  which  the
bad  blood  is  flowmg :  of  course  the  diseased  part  with
preference,  the  rest  of  the  body  only  as  fellow-sufferer
It  would  be  partial  and  wi-ong  to  act  otherwise  with
regard  to  these  two  important  points. Many  instances
in  the  third  part  will  justify  my  statement.

Whoever  uses  the  water  as  a  remedy,  accordmg  to
my  ideas  and  wishes,  will  never  think  the  applications
to  be  for  his  own  whims,  i.  e.  he  never  wdl  use  an  ap-
plication just  because  he  likes  to  do  so  ;  he  will  never
Uke  a  fool,  take  pleasure  in  being  able  to  handle,  and
oast  of,  and  to  rave  about  many  things,  about  vapours
and  shower-baths  and  bandages."  To  a  sensible  man
the  applications  will  always  be  only  the  means  for  the
nurnose  and  if  he  can  attain  it  by  the  mildest  water-
TppS'ion,  he  will  be  happy;  if  ^^o^^'^^^

to  help  nature  strugghng  for  health  i.  e.  ^^f/^

aUv  t  inS  tt  wlte healing  element  into  m,s-
indiscreet  way  without  measure  and  «ason^^a  sharp  st«  ^

rugged  proceedmg. Those f  d  ;^^^^^^^

repeat  it  enough,  who  consider  ♦''™''f  ;°  f  .„^jj„  „cry

tit  in  the  system  of  water-cures but  £u

patient  by  ^"I  faukna  fte  greatest  harm,

driving  out  the  Wood,  etc  aje jrg  the  g  ^^^^
which  it  is  very  difficult  to  amena.


General  eemarks.


17


using  the  water  for  healing,  but  such  outrages  —  I  beg
pardon  for  the  expression  —  I  call  putting  the  water  to
shame.

Whoever  has  a  knowledge  of  the  effects  of  water,
and  knows  how  to  use  it  in  its  extremely  manifold  ways,
is  in  possession  of  a  remedy  which  cannot  be  surpassed
by  any  other,  whatever  its  name  may  be.  There  is  no
remedy  more  manifold  in  its  effects,  or  as  it  were  more
extensible  than  the  water.  In  creation  it  begins  in  the
invisible  globule  of  air  or  steam,  continues  in  the  drop,
and  finally  forms  the  ocean  filling  up  the  greater  part  of
the  earth.

This  ought  to  serve  as  a  hint  to  every  hydropathist,
to  show  him  that  every  application  of  water,  whether  it
be  in  a  dropping  or  extensibL:!  form,  can  be  raised  from
the  gentlest  to  the  highest  degree,  and  that  in  each  case
it  is  not  the  patient  who  ought  to  accommodate  himself
to  the  bandage,  the  vapour,  etc.,  but  every  application
is  to  be  accommodated  to  the  patient.

It  is  in  the  selection  of  the  applications  to  be  used
that  the  masterhand  shows  itself. The  one  who  under-
takes the  cure  will  carefully  examine  the  patient,  but
not  in  a  startling  way. At  first  the  subordinate  sufferings
will  come  under  his  notice,  i.  e.  those  diseases  which
like  toad -stools  spring  up  from'  the  interior  ground  of
disease. By  them  one  can,  in  most  cases,  easily  con-
clude, where  the  hearth  of  the  disease,  the  principal  evil,
IS  to  be  found. By  means  of  questioning  and  searching
he  will  find  what  progress  the  disease  has  aheady  made,
what  mischief  it  has  done;  then  it  must  be  taken  into
consideration,  whether  the  patient  is  old  or  young,  weak
or  strong ,  thin  or  stout ,  poor  of  blood ,  nervous ,  etc.
AH  these  points,  and  others  besides,  give  to  the 'mind
of  him  who  undertakes  the  cure,  the  right  picture  of  the
diseased;  and  it  is  only  then,  when  this  is  clear  and
complete,  that  he  goes  to  the  water-apotheca  and  pre-
sparing,  —  the  better  and  more  effective.

A  few  general  remarks  may  be  given  hera,  regard-
ing the  whole  of  the  water-applications.  —

Kneipp,  Wator-Cure.  o


18


Part  1. Applications  of'  water.


No  application  whatever  can  cause  the  least  harm,
if  it  is  made  according  to  the  directions  given.

Most  of  them  are  to  be  made  with  cold  water,  either
spring ,  pump ,  or  river  water ,  etc.  In  all  cases  where
means  cold  water.  I  follow  my  principle  founded  on
experience:  The  colder,  the  better.  In  winter -time  I
mix  snow  with  the  water  for  shower-baths  when  they
are  for  healthy  people.  Do  not  accuse  me  of  rugged-
ness ;  for,  think  of  the  very  short  duration  of  my  cold-
water-applications.  He  who  has  once  ventured  to  make
a  trial  has  conquered  for  ever ;  all  his  prejudices  are
entirely  removed.

But  I  am  not,  nevertheless,  inexorable.  To  beginners
in  the  water-cure,  to  weak  persons,  especially  very  young
or  very  old  ones,  to  sick  people  who  are  afraid  of  cold,
such  as  have  not  much  warmth  in  their  blood,,  whose
blood  is  poor,  or  who  are  nervous,  I  gladly  allow,  espe-
cially in  winter-time,  a  warm  room  for  their  baths  and
shower-baths  (14 — 15  degr.  R.)  for  the  beginning,  and
lukewarm  water  for  every  application.  Flies  are  to  be
attracted  not  by  salt  and  vinegar,  but  by  honey.

There  are  special  prescriptions  for  every  warm-water
application  respecting  the  degree  of  warmth ,  the  time,
etc. The  degrees  marked  R.  are  according  to  Reaumur.

Regarding  the  eold  -  water  applications ,  we  must
briefly  give  some  hints  for  regulating  the  course  of  action
observed  before,  during,  and  after  the  application.  (In
the  third  part  this  point  is  often  dwelt  upon  and  dis-
cussed.)

No  one  should  venture  to  make  any  cold  application,
whatever,  when  feeling  cold,  shivering,  etc.  unless  it  is
expressly  allowed  in  the  prescription  relating  to  his  case.
The  applications  are  to  be  made  as  quickly  as  possible,
but  without  agitation  and  haste ;  also  with  dressing  and
undressing  no  delay  should  be  caused  by  slowness  in
buttoning  or  tying  up,  etc.  All  this  secondary  work  can
be  done,  when  the  whole  body  is  properly  covered.  To
give  an  instance  :  a  cold  whob-bath,  including  undressing,
bathing  and  redressing,  should  not  exceed  4 — 5  minutes.


General  eemaeks.  '


19


It  only  needs  a  little  practice  to  accomplish  this.  If  with
an  application  the  time  „one  minute"  is  given,  the  shor-
test time  possible  is  meant ;  if  it  is  said  2  — 3  minutes,
the  cold  is  intended  to  be  more  enduring,  but  not  of
longer  influence.

After  a  cold  application  the  body  must  never  be
v^iped  dry,  except  head,  and  hands  as  far  as  the  wrist
(the  latter  in  order  not  to  wet  the  clothes  when  dressing).
The  wet  body  is  at  once  covered  with  dry  underlinen
and  other  articles  of  clothing ;  this  is  to  be  done  quickly,
as  before  remarked,  so  that  as  soon  as  possible  all  wet
spots  may  be  closed  hermetically.  This  proceeding  w^ill
seem  strange  to  many,  even  to  most  people,  because  they
will  imagine  that  {hey  are  thereby  obliged  to  remain  wet
all  the  day  long ;  but  let  them  try  it  only  once  before
judging,  and  they  will  soon  experience  what  this  not-
wiping  is  good  for.  Wiping  is  rubbing,  and,  as  it  cannot
be  done  quite  equally  on  every  spot,  it  produces  dispro-
portionate natural  w^armth,  which  is  not  of  much  conse-
quence with  healthy  people,  but  of  very  great  moment
with  sick  and  weak  ones.  The  not-wiping  helps  to  the
most  regular,  most  equal,  and  most  speedy  natural  warmth.
It  is  like  sprinkling  water  into  the  fire ;  the  interior
warmth  of  the  body  uses  the  water  clinging  to  the  ex-
terior as  material  for  speedily  bringing  forth  greater  and
more  intense  warmth.  As  bafore  said ,  it  all  depends
upon  a  trial.

be  taken  (either  by  working  or  walking)  as  soon  as  the
patient  is  dressed  after  the  application,  and  this  must
be  continued,  until  all  parts  of  the  body  are  perfectly
dry  and  in  normal  warmth.  At  the  beginning  one  may
walk  somewhat  swiftly,  but  the  speed  must  be  slackened
when  the  patient  gets  warm.  Every  one  feels  best  him-
self when  the  bodily  w^armth  has  become  normal,  and
when  the  exercise  may  cease.  People  who  easily  become
hot  and  perspire  freely,  ought  to  walk  more  slowly  from
the  beginning,  and  for  them  it  is  better  to  walk  a  little
longer,  but  by  no  means  to  sit  down  in  perspiration  or

2*


20  Paut  1.  Applications  op  wateb.


when  overheated,  even  in  a  warm  room ;  a  catarrh  would
be  the  inevitable  consequence.  , ,  , .  j.

As  a  rule  for  all  it  may  be  said  that  the  shortest
time  for  exercise  after  an  application  ought  to  be  at
least  15  minutes.  The  kind  of  exercise  taken,  whether
working,  walking,  etc.,  is  of  no  consequence.

Concerning  those  apphcations  which  require  the  pa-
tient to  be  in  bed,  especiaUy  the  wet  sheets  and  bandagcn,
instructions  are  given  in  their  proper  place,  as  well  as
particulars  for  every  special  practice.  If  a  patient  tall.
Lleep  during  such  an  application  he  should  not  be  dis-
herself  is  the  best  and  most  exact  alarm  here,  as  in  every
other  great  or  small  need.  4- -hp  nf

If  sheets  are  ordered,  they  are  not  meant  to  be  ot
fine  linen,  but  strong,  and  if  P^ssiWe  of  coarse  hempen
cloth.  Poor  people  might  use  mstead  of  these  a  worn
out  bed-tick,  a  hempen  fiour-sack,_  or  «^^1^  ^^^^  „

best  thing  is  also  a  rather  coarse  piece  of  Imen  or  hemp.

For  reasons  which  I  have  mentioned  briefly  m  the
introduction,  I  oppose  woollen  clothing  next  to  the  to^
but  I  nrefer  woollen  material  for  covermg,  with  tHe  icy
tti-Wages,  for  example. It  produces  jeedy  and


^-ÄÄ  .rushing  is  ^^^^

from  my  system ;  its  first  purpose,  with  the  P^o^ucmg  ot
ZZnZ  is  accomplished  in  a  more  f'oP^^tionate  and  equal
way  by  the  not-wiping;  its  sesond  pui-pose  th^P^^^«
Tthe'pores,  the  increasing ^he  ^^^^^^^^^^
is  effected  by  the  coarse  Imen  ^J^^utes  lüceT  brush,

mention  here. Most  people  do  not  like  the  appii


Cteneral  remarks.  ~  21

at  night  before  going  to  sleep,  because  they  get  excited,
and,  as  it  were,  roused  from  the  first  sleep  by  them;
others,  on  the  contrary,  feel  as  if  rocked  to  sleep  by  gentle
applications.  In  general,  I  do  not  recommend  such  appli-
cations, but  would  advise  every  one  to  act  in  this  respect
according  to  his  own  discretion  and  experience,  because
every  one  has  to  hear  the  consequences  himself.

Regarding  the  particular  instructions  for  every  kind
of  application ,  reference  may  be  made  to  the  first  part
of  this  book ,  and  for  the  use  of  them  in  special  cases
to  the  third  part.  It  is  also  said  there  which  applications
are  complete  in  themselves,  and  which  are  only  part-
apphcations,  i.  e.  to  be  used  in  connection  with  others :
likewise  which  of  the  applications  (vapours)  are  to  be
used  with  great  precaution.

I  conclude  these  general  remarks  with  the  wish  that
by  the  applications  of  water  many  healthy  people  mav
become  more  healthy  still,  and  many  who  are  sick  be
restored  to  health.  I  will  now  proceed  to  give  a  short
list  ot  the  means  of  hardening,  and  then  a  short  treatise
on  the  applications  of  water  I  use  with  my  patients


Means  of  hardening.


As  means  of  hardening  we  name :

1.  Walking  barefooted,

2.  „  „in  wet  grass,
3_  „  on  wet  stones,

4_  ^  in  newly  fallen  snow,

5^  in  cold  water,

6.  Cold  baths  for  arms  and  legs,

7.  The  knee -shower  (with  or  without  upper  -  shower).


1.  The  most  natural  and  most  simple  means  of  har-
dening is  walking  barefookd.

This  can  be  practised,  according  to  the  different  con-
ditions of  life  and  ag in  the  most  manifold  ways

Babies,  who  are  still  entirely  dependent  on  others
who  are  always  shut  up  in  the  rooms o^^S^^  JP^^j^^^J
Dossible  always  without  shoes  or  stockmgs.  Would  that
I  could  imprint  this  as  a  settled,  irrefragable  rule  on  al
parent;  esp'e cially  on  the  all  too  anxious  -«^hers  Parent.
w>in  arP  too  strongly  prejudiced  to  agree  with  this,  ma),
Tt'L:"  ha^:  merV'  f  Ihe  Uttle  ^-JP^-  -eaUu.,  an
provide  for  them  such  coverings  for /^^\f  '
permit  the  fresh  air  to  penetrate  easily  to  the  skm.


Means  op  habdenikg. Walking  bauefooted.


23


Children  who  are  able  to  stand  and  walk  know  well
how  to  manage  for  themselves.  Heedless  of  all  human
respect  they  throw  away  the  troublesome ,  tormenting
shoes  and  stockings  and  are  quite  in  their  delight,  parti-
cularly at  spring  time,  if  they  are  allowed  to  run  about
freely  without  them.  Sometimes  a  toe  is  hurt ;  but  never
mind ,  that  does  not  prevent  them  from  trying  againl
Children  do  this  quite  by  instinct,  following  a  cerlain
natural  impulse,  which  grown-up  people  also  would  feelj
if  the  over-polished,  moulded,  nature-destroying  civilisa-
tion, had  not  oftentimes  deprived  them  of  all  common
sense.

The  children  of  the  poor  are  seldom  disturbed  in  their
pleasure ;  but  the  children  of  parents  who  are  rich,  or  of
rank,  are  less  fortunate,  and  yet  they  feel  the  want  no
less  than  the  poor  ones.  Once  I  watched  the  boys  of  a
high  stationed  and  distinguished  officer,  and  saw  how,  as
soon  as  they  thought  themselves  out  of  range  of  the
penetrating  eyes  of  their  strict  Papa ,  the  elegant  little
shoes  and  stockings  were  thrown  over  the  hedges ,  and
away  they  ran  galloping  over  the  green  meadow.  Their
Mamma,  a  sensible  lady,  was  not  displeased  at  their
proceedings,  but  if,  by  chance,  papa  saw  his  little  lords  m
such  an  unbecommg  attire,  at  once  long  lectures  were
given  about  duties  of  rank,  about  refinement  and  unrefine-
ment,  about  feeling  and  behaving  in  a  manner  conformable
to  one's  rank.  The  children  were  so  deeply  impressed  by
these  lectures  that  the  next  day  they  were  jumping  bare-
footed in  the  grass  more  lively  than  ever.  Once  more  1
say:  at  least,  let  the  children  who  are  not  yet  spoilt  by
refinement,  have  their  enjoyment!

Sensible  parents  who  would  willingly  allow  this  to
their  children,  but  who,  living  in  town,  have  no  remote
garden  or  lawn,  may  sometimes  allow  them  to  walk  bare-
footid  in  a  room  or  in  a  passage ,  if  only  their  feet  as
well  as  their  face  and  hands  may  sometimes  be  exposed
to  the  fresh  air  to  their  feet's  content,  and  to  move
about  in  their  element.

Grown-up  people  of  the  poorer  classes,  especially  in,
the  country,  do  not  want  any  admopition  ;  they  are  used


24  Part  1. Applications  of  water.


to  going  barefooted  and  do  not  envy  the  richest  towns-
man his  elegant,  high,  or  low,  varnished,  buttoned  boots,
torturing ,  pinching  and  fettering  his  feet ,  nor  his  fine
stockings  either.

Foolish  country- people  with  townish  manners,  who
are  ashamed  to  do  the  same  as  their  equals,  punish  them-
selves enough  by  their  self-conceit ;  let  the  old-fashioned
conservatives  cling  firmly,  to  the  good  traditions.  In  my
youth  every  one  in  the  country  went  barefooted :  children
"and  adults,  father  and  mother,  brother  and  sister.  We
had  to  waUc  miles  to  school  and  church ;  our  parents  gave
lis  a  piece  of  bread  and  some  apples  to  eat  on  the  way,
and  also  shoes  and  stockings  for  our  feet ;  but  these  were
lianging  on  our  arms  or  over  our  shoulders,  until  we  ar-
rived at  school  or  at  church,  not  only  in  summer,  but
also  in  the  colder  season.  No  sooner  had  spring  arrived,
and  the  snow  had  begun  to  disappear  from  the  hills,  than
our  bare  feet  trod  the  ground  soaked  with  its  water,  and
we  felt  merry,  bright,  and  healthy  in  our  exercise.

Grown-up  people  in  towns,  especially  those  who  be-
long to  the  better,  or  even  to  the  highest  classes,  cannot
make  use  of  this  practice,  -  that  is  quite  clear,  and  if
their  prejudices  have  reached  such  a  degree  that  they
would  draw  rheumatism,  catarrh,  sore  throat  or  such  like
upon  themselves,  if  for  a  moment,  when  dressmg,  their
tender  feet  should  stand  on  the  bare  floor  instead  of  on
warm  soft  carpets,  I  shall  not  trouble  them  at  all.  But
if  any  really  wish  to  do  somethmg  in  the  way  of  hardening,
what  is  there  to  prevent  them  from  taking  such  a  prome-
nade in  their  room,  for  10,  15,  or  30  mmutes  at  nght
before  going  to  sleep,  or  in  the  morning  when  ri.ing.

Atfirs^  tf  begin  gently,  they  ^^nl^  ^^Yl.^'l'^Z
stockings  on,  then  barefooted,  and  at  last,  after  dipping
their  S  up  to  the  ankles  in  cold  water  for  some  moments
before  the  walk.

Every  one,  even  the  highest  in  rank,  the  most  occu-
pied in  his  office,  could  with  good  arrangement  good

and  true  care  for  the  P--7'^^7^  ^^^^^
•  ave  time  enough  to  bestow  such  a  benefit  upon  hmiselt.


Means  of  HAUDExiNa.  Walking  barefooted.


25


I  knew  a  priest  who  went  every  year  to  stay  for  a
few  days  with  a  friend  who  owned  a  large  garden ,  and
there  his  morning  walk  was  always  taken  barefooted  in
the  wet  grass.  He  has  many  times  spoken  in  glowing
terms  of  the  excellent  effects  of  this  kind  of  promenade ;
and  I  could  name  a  number  of  persons  of  the  higher  and
highest  ranks  of  society ,  who  did  not  despise  his  well-
meant  advicQ,  but  tried  to  harden  themselves  in  the  better
season ,  by  going  barefooted  during  their  morning  walks
in  the  solitary  wood,  or  on  a  remote  meadow.

One  of  this  comparatively  still  small  number ,  has
owned  to  me  that  in  former  times  he  seldom  spent  a  week
without  a  catarrh ,  if  it  were  only  a  slight  one ,  but  this
simple  practice  had  entirely  cured  him  of  this  susceptibility.

One  word  I  dedicate  to  mothers  in  particular.  I  need
not  say  much ;  for  I  have  already  promised  them  to  give
some  particular  hints  for  a  good  education  chiefly  con-
cerning the  body,  if  God  spares  me  life  and  health.  It
is  mothers,  before  all,  who  are  charged  v^ith  the  bringing
up  of  a  stronger  generation  capable  of  greater  endurance,
and  with  helping  to  remove  the  ever  increasing  eff^mi-
nation,  debility,  poverty  of  blood,  nervousness,  and  all
such  miseries,  which  enervate  and  shorten  life,  and  make
such  great  gaps  in  the  human  race.  This  is  to  be  done
by  hardening ,  by  making  the.  child  accustomed  to  har-
dening from  its  tenderest  years.  Air,  food,  clothes,  are
necessaries  for  the  suckling  as  well  as  for  the  old  man  ;
they  form  the  territory  for  hardening.  The  purer  the  air
which  the  child  inhales,  the  better  the  blood.  In  order
to  accustom  the  frail  little  creature  as  soon  as  possible
to  stayiiig  in  the  fresh  air,  those  mothers  do  well,  who,
after  the  daily  warm  bath,  dip  the  baby  in  colder  water,
at  such  a  warmth  as  if  it  had  been  warmed  by  the  sun,
or  wash  it  quickly  with  cold  water.  The  warm  water  in
itself  relaxes  and  effeminates;  the  cold  washing  at  the
conclusion  of  the  bath  strengthens ,  hardens  and  secures
a  healthy  development  of  the  body.  The  first  signs  of  an
mclination  to  cry  will  cease  of  themselves  at  the  third  or
fourth  application.  This  kmd  of  hardening  protects  the
babies  from  frequent  colds  and  their  consequences,  and


26


Pabt  I.  Applications  op  water.


is  a  relief  to  mothers  who  are  anxious  to  prevent  these
miseries  by  muffling  and  wapping  the  little  creatures  in
woollen  or  other  hermetical  materials,  which  are  enough
to  terrify  all  reasonable  people. In  this  way  dreadful
harm  is  done  to  the  health  of  the  little  ones.  The  deli-
cate little  body  is  inclosed,  as  it  were,  in  burning  wool-
ovens,  and  gasps  under  the  burden  of  bandages  and  cover-
ings ;  the  little  head  is  wi'apped  up  in  such  a  way  that
hearing  and  seeing  is  impossible ;  the  neck  which,  above
all,  ought  to  be  hardened,  wears  in  addition  to  the  others,
its  own  special  means  of  warming,  and  is  by  them  quite
closed  to  the  outer  air.  Even  then,  when  nurse  is  ready
to  take  baby  out  for  a  walk,  properly  wrapped  up,  faddling
Mamma  comes  to  examine,  if  not  a  little  corner  still  re-
mains to  be  closed  to  the  air. Is  it  to  be  wondered
at  under  these  circumstances ,  with  this  want  of  every
particle  of  understanding  for  rational  hardening,  that  the
number  of  feeble  little  creatures  snatched  away  every  year
by  croup ,  etc.  is  innumerable  ?  that  many  families  are
crowded  with  weaklings?  that  mothers  are  deploring  the
hectic,  spasmodic,  or  other  complaints  formerly  not  knmvn,
even  by  name,  but  now  so  common  especially  with  girls  ?
And  who  could  number  all  the  mental  infirmities,  these
empty  blossoms  and  rotten  fruits  of  a  body  which  begins
its  slow  decay  even  before  it  has  attained  its  normal
development  and  strength. Mens  sana  in  corpore  sano.
A  heal  hy  soul  resides  only  in  a  healthy  body. A  prm-
cipal  condition  for  the  development  of  enduring  health,
is  hardening  in  the  earliest  age. Would  that  mothers
would  understand  early  enough  and  profoundly  enough
this  their  task  and  responsibility,  and  then  not  neglect
any  opportunity  of  taking  good  advice  from  good  sources  I

2  A  special  and  extremely  efficacious  kind  of  walking
barefooted  is  the  walking  in  the  grass,*  no  matter  if
it  be  wet  with  dew,  rain,  or  watering.  In  the  thu-d  part


*  "Walking  in  wet  grass  is  far  preferable  to  walking
wet  stones.


iMeaks  of  hardening. Walking  on  wet  stones.  27


this  means  of  hardening  is  mentioned  very  often,  and  I
can  highly  recommend  it  to  young  and  old,  healthy  and
sick,  no  matter  what  other  applications  they  may  be
using.  The  wetter  the  grass,  the  longer  one  perseveres
in  the  exercise,  and  the  oftener  it  is  repeated,  the  more
perfect  will  be  the  success.

This  exercise  is .  generally  taken  for  15  to  45  minutes.

After  the  promenade  all  tha  improper  adherents,  such
as  leaves  or  sand,  are  quickly  wiped  off  the  feet ;  yet  the
feet  are  not  to  be  dried,  but  in  statu  quo  i.  e.  as  wet  as
they  are,  at  once  provided  with  dry  stockings  and  shoes.
The  walking  in  the  grasig  is  followed  by  walking  with
covered  feet  on  a  dry  path,  first  more  quickly,  by  and  by
in  the  ordinary  measure.  The  time  of  so  walking  depends
on  the  feet  becoming  d.y  and  warm,  but  should  not  be
less  than  15  minutes.  I  urgently  call  attention  to  the
words  „dry  stockmgs  and  shoes  ;"  for  wet  or  damp  stockings
must  never  be  worn  after  an  appHcation.  The  conse-
quences would  soon  be  felt  in  head  and  neck ;  this  would
not  be  buildmg  up,  but  pulling  down.  It  may  not  be  out
of  place  tor  emind  young,  quick,  and  thoughtless  people,
not  to  throw  their  shoes  or  stockings'  into  the  wet  grass,
when  they  take  them  off,  but  to  secure  a  dry  spot  for
them,  in  order  that  they  may  bring  the  damp  and  cold
feei.  to  their  proper  warmth,  later  on.  This  exercise,  like-
wise the  walking  barefooted  generally,  may  be  taken  even
when  the  feet  are  cold.

3.  About  the  same  effect  as  that  produced  by  the
walking  in  wet  grass,  is  produced  by  walking  on  wet
stones,  which  is  more  convenient  and  easy  for  many
people.  Every  house  or  cottage  has,  either  on  the  ground
floor  in  an  upper  story,  in  the  wash-house,  or  in  the  bake-
house, etc.  a  more  or  less  spacious  pavement ;  which  will
be  sufficient  for  our  barefooted  promenade  on  wet  stones.
In  a  stone  passage  of  good  length  one  can  run  quickly
to  and  fro ;  on  a  little  spot  of  4  —  5  stone  squares  one
must  tread  the  stanes  like  the  vine-dresser  does  the  grapes,
or  like,  at  some  places,  the  bakers  apprentice  treads  tHe
dough.  The  main  point  consists  m  the  stones  being  wet,


28


Part  I.  Applica'iions  of  water.


and  the  patient  not  standing  quietly  on  them,  but  walking
at  a  rather  quick  rate.  To  wet  the  stones,  it  is  best  to
take  a  watering-can,  or  a  jug,  and  make  a  water-line
which  is  then  extended  by  treading.  If  the  stones  dry
too  quickly,  the  watering  is  so  be  repeated  once  or  even
oftener ;  the  coldest  water  is  the  best.

In  cases  where  this  means  of  hardening  is  employed
as  a  remedy ,  it  ought  not  to  exceed  3  to  15  minutes ;
but  the  condition  of  the  patient  must  decide  the  length
of  time,  whether  he  is  stronger  or  weaker,  poor  of  blood,
etc. ;  generally  3  —  5  minutes  will  be  sufficient.  When
taken  simply  as  a  means  of  h^dening  by  healthy  people,
this  exercise  can  be  extended  to  30  minutes  and  longer
still,  without  doing  any  harm,  and  I  can  sincerely  recom-
mend it  to  all  those  who  wish  to  begin  a  solid  hardening.
.Even  the  weakest  and  most  sensitive  need  not  be  afraid
to  try  it.

Persons  who  are  suffering  from  cold  feet,  who  are
inclined  to  sore  throat,  catarrh,  congestion  in  the  head,
and  head-ache  caused  by  it,  may  try  this  promenade  on
wet  stones.  It  would  be  advisable  to  mix  a  little  vinegar
with  the  water  to  be  used.

As  regards  shoes  and  stockings ,  and  exercise ,  the
same  rules  are  to  be  observed  as  with  the  walking  in  the
grass.  Lilte  the  latter,  it  can  also  be  undertaken  even
when  the  feet  are  cold  before  beginnmg  the  exercise.

4.  Walking  in  newly  fallen  snow  produces  even
greater  effect  than  that  of  the  two  preceding  practices.
We  distinctly  remark  in  newly  fallen,  fresh  snow,  which
forms  into  a  ball  or  clings  to  the  feet  like  dust,  not  in
old,  stiff,  frozen  snow,  which  almost  freezes  the  feet  and
is  of  no  use  whatever.  Moreover  this  promenade  must
never  be  made  in  cold,  cutting  winds,  but  in  spring  when
the  snow  is  being  melted  by  the  sun.  I  know  many  people
who  have  walked  through  such  snow-water  for  lialf  an
hour,  an  hour,  even  l\  hours  with  the  best  result.  The
first  minutes  only  caused  a  little  struggle ;  later  on  they
felt  no  uneasiness  or  special  cold.  The  regular  duration
of  such  a  walk  in  the  snow  is  3  —  4  mmutes. I  em-


Means  of  habdening.  Walking  in  newly  fallen  snow.  29


phatically  remark,  there  must  be  no  stand-still  but  cons-
tant walking.

Sometimes  it  happens  that  all  too  tender  toes,  which
are  quite  unaccustomed  to  outer  air ,  cannot  baar  the
snowy  cold  and  get  snow-fever,  i.  e.  become  dry  and  hot^
burning  and  painful,  and  swell.  But  there  is  no  cause
for  fear,  it  is  of  no  consequence  if  the  diy  toes  are  bathed
in  snow-water  or  rubbed  with  snow,  they  will  heal  directly.

In  autumn  the  snow-walk  can  be  replaced  by  walk-
ing in  the  grass  covered  with  hoar-frost.  The  fe 'ling  of
cold  is  much  more  painful  then,  because  at  that  time,  at
the  change  of  season,  the  body  is  still  accustomed  to  the
warmth  of  summer.  Even  in  winter  the  snow-w^alk  is
replaced  by  walking  on  stone-squares,  soaked  with  snow-
water. The  rules  for  covering  the  feet,  and  exercise  are
the  same  as  in  the  preceding  numbers.

Generally,  the  verdict  upon  this  means  of  hardening
is:  „Nothing  but  folly  and  nonsense",  —  because  people
are  afraid  of  catching  colds,  of  rheumatics,  sore  throat,
catarrh,  and  every  possible  complamt.  Everything  depends
on  a  trial  and  a  little  self-conquest ;  one  will  soon  become
convinced  how  groundless  prejudices  are ;  and  that  the
dreadful  snow-walk,  instead  of  causing  any  harm,  brings
great  advantage.*

Many  years  ago,  I  became  acquainted  with  the  wife
of  a  higher  officer.  This  energi^tic  mother  set  a  high
value  on  the  hardening  of  her  children ;  daintiness  in  eat-
ing and  drinking  was  by  no  means  tolerated ;  complaints-
about  the  weather,  heat,  cold,  etc.  were  always  censured.
As  soon  as  the  first  snow-fall  came ,  she  promised  her
boys  a  reward,  if  they  ventured  to  go  in  the  snow  bare-
footed. This  she  did  for  many  years  ;  her  children ,  in
consequence,  became  strong  and  vigorous,  and  all  their  l.'f  >
long  they  were  grateful  for  this,  by  no  means  soft  way
of  education.  That  mother  was  fully  expert  in  her  task.


I  know  many  physicians  who  approve  entirely  of  Üua
practice,  provided  that  it  is  done  with  due  precaution.  Those
who  are  inclined  to  call  it  too  rugged,  I  wish  to  remind  of  the
niucu  more  rugged  use  of  ice.


Pakt  I. Applications  op  water.


This,  then,  is  the  snow-walk  for  healthy  people ;  we
shall  mention  two  cases  to  show  with  what  success  it  can
be  practised  in  many  complaints.

A  person  was  suffering  for  many  years  from  chilblains,
which  opened,  formed  ulcers  and  gave  her  great  pain.
According  to  my  advice  she  began  her  snow-walks  with
the  first  snow-fall  in  autumn,  repeated  them  frequently,
and  the  troublesome  tumours  ceased  to  torment  her.

Not  long  ago  a  girl  of  seventeen  came  to  me  com-
plaining of  dreadful  tooth-ache.  „If  you  would  go  througTi
the  newly  -  fallen  snow  for  5  minutes  , "  I  said  to  her ;
„your  tooth-ache  would  soon  vanish."  She  followed  my
advice  instantly ,  went  to  the  garden ,  and  10  minutes
afterwards  she  came  back,  joyfully  exclaiming  that  her
tooth-ache  was  gone.

The  snow-walk  ought  never  to  take  place,  unless  the
whole  body  be  perfectly  warm.  When  feeling  cold  or
shivering,  it  is  necessary  to  procure  normal  warmth,  by
working  or  exercise.  Persons  who  are  suffering  from
perspiring  feet,  wounded  feet,  open  or  suppurating  chil-
blains, are,  of  course  never  allowed  to  walk  in  the  snow
until  the  feet  have  first  been  healed.  (See  foot-baths
or  foot-vapours.)

5.  Walking  in  water.  As  simple  as  it  may  appear
to  walk  in  water  reaching  as  far  as  the  calf  of  the  leg,
yet  even  this  application  serves  as  a  means  of  hardening ;
it  has  influence  on  the  whole  body,  and  strengthens  the
whole  system;  (b)  it  operates  on  the  kidneys;  by  this
many  complaints,  orighiating  in  the  kidneys,  the  bladder
and  the  bowels,  are  prevented,  (c)  it  operates  powerfully
on  the  chest,  facilitates  breathing  and  carries  gases  out
of  the  stomach,  (d)  it  operates  especially  against  head-
achej  congestion,  and  other  sufferings  of  the  head.  This
means  of  hardening  can  be  employed  by  moving  the  feet
in  a  bath  of  cold  water,  reaching  over  the  ankles.  It  is
more  efficacious  for  hardening,  if  one  goes  into  the  water
up  to  the  shins,  and  mo.st  efficacious  of  all,  if  the  water
reaches  the  knees.  .


Means  op  HAEDENixa.  Walking  in  water.


31


• As  to  the  duration,  one  can  begin  with  1  minute,
then  longer,  up  to  5  or  6  minutes.  The  colder  the  water,
the  better.  After
such  a  practice  exer-
cise is  necessary,  in
winter  time  in  a
warm  room,  in  sum-
mer in  the  open  air,
until  the  body  is
completely  warm.
In winter,  snow
may  be  mixed  with
the  water.  With
weaklings ,  warm
water  may  be  used
in  the  beginning,
then by and  by,
colder,  and  lastly  \
quite  cold  water.  \  ^>s.
(See  fig.  1.)


6.  For  the  special  hardening  of  the  extremities,
arms  and  logs,  the  following  practice  is  excellent:  To
stand  in  cold  water  up  to  th-e  knees  or  over  them,  for
not  longer  than  one  minute ;  then ,  when  the  feet  have
been  covered,  to  put  the  bare  arms  up  to  the  shoulders
in^  cold  water  for  the  same  length  of  time.  It  is  better
stih  to  put  arms  and  leg?  into  the  water  together;  in
a  larger  bath,  this  is  easily  done.  But  one  can  just  as
easily  stand  in  the  bath  and  put  the  bare  arms  and  hands
in  another  vessel,  standing  on  a  chair.  I  like  to  pre-
the  flow  of  the  blood  to  the  extremities.

To  those  who  are  suffering  from  chilblains  and  cold
hands,  this  dipping  in  of  the  arms  is  of  very  good  ser-
vice ;  but  one  has  to  be  careful,  that  the  hands  (not  arms)
be  du-ectly  well  dried,  as  they  are  exposed  to  the  air.

It  is  essential  that  before  this  practice  the  be  dy  be
ni  normal  warmth  (not  shivering). If  the  feet  are  cold


32


Part  I. Applications  op  water.


up  to  the  ankles  (but  not  the  shins),  the  arms  up  to  the
elbows,  this  need  not  prevent  the  application.

7.  As  a  last  means  of  hardening  I  name  the  knee
sliOTTcr.  How  it  is  to  be  applied,  can  be  seen  where
the  shower-baths  are  spoken  of.  It  is  of  especial  service
to  the  feet,  inducing  the  blood  to  come  to  their  bloodless
veins.  *

Here  I  have  only  to  say  that  the  shower-bath  on
the  knees  is  to  be  given  in  a  stronger  way,  if  healthy
people  use  it  for  hardening.  This  can  be  done,  e.  g.  by
the  water-jet  coming  from  a  height,  by  mixing  snow  and
ice  with  the  water  in  winter  time,  etc.

This  practice  can  only  be  undertaken,  if  the  body  is
warm  (not  shivering) ;  but  cold  feet  up  to  the  ankles  are
no  impediment.  The  shower-bath  on  the  knees  ought
not  to  be  used  for  more  than  3  or  4  days,  unless  it  is
taken  in  connection  with  other  practices.  If  undertaken
for  a  longer  time,  it  must  be  used  alternately  with  the
upper-shower-bath,  or  the  dipping  in  of  the  arms  (No.  6),
the  one  in  the  morning,  the  other  in  the  afternoon.

The  means  of  hardening  here  mentioned,  may  suffice.
They  can  be  practised  at  every  season,  and  contmued  in
winter  and  summer.  In  vpinter,  it  would  be  well  to  shorten
the  application  itself  a  little,  but  to  prolong  the  exercise
after  it  somewhat.  For  those  who  are  unaccustomed  to
them,  it  would  be  well  not  to  begin  with  them  in  winter,
more  especially  those  who  are  suffering  from  poverty  of
blood,  interior  cold,  and  who  are  faddled,  effeminated,  and
made  sensitive  by  woollen  clothmg.  I  do  not  say  this,
as  if  I  were  afraid  of  any  harm,  but  only  to  prevent  people
from  becoming  frightened  of  such  an  exceUent  remedy.

Healthy,  as  well  as  weak  people,  may  without  hesi-
tation make  use  of  all  the  applications;  both  of  them  ob-
serving care  and  following  strictly  the  du-ections  given.

*  With  a  centleman  of  high  condition  instead  of  nails
on  the  toes  a  soft  mass  had  formed  itself  The  shower-baths
on  the  knees  were  sufficient  to  induce  the  blood  to  give  to
the  nails  what  belonged  to  them;  they  became  as  firm  as  they
had  been  before.


Meaks  of  haudening.  Knee  shower.  33


If  bad  consequences  ensue,  they  are  never  to  be  attributed
to  the  applications,  but  always  to  some  greater  or  lesser
imprudence. Even  to  consumptive  people,  with  whom
the  disease  had  made  considerable  progress,  I  have  applied
No.  1,  2,  3,  6  with  great  success.  Those  people  to  whom
my  little  book  is  especially  dedicated,  need  not  to  be  en-
couraged to  hardenmg. Their  state  in  life,  their  daily
duties,  bring  of  themselves,  every  day,  and  in  many  cases
every  hour,  one  or  other  of  the  means  of  hardening  here
mentioned,  besides  numerous  others. They  may  persevere
quietly  and  not  envy  others  who  seem  to  be  more  for-
tunate than  they  are  ;  for  these  are  iUusions ,  and  very
often,  even  mostly,  great  illusions.

I  invite  those  of  my  honoured  readers  who  perhaps
have  never  yet  heard  even  the  name  of  these  things,  to
give  them  a  small,  the  very  smallest,  trial  before  con-
demnmg  them.  If  it  turns  out  in  my  favour,  I  shall  be
glad,  not  for  my  own  sake,  but  on  account  of  the  im-
portance of  the  matter.  Many  storms  break  out  in  hfe
upon  mans  health;  happy  he  who  has  its  (the  health's)
roots  well  fastened,  deepened  and  grounded  by  hardening


K  n  0 ;  p  p ,  Water-Cur».


3


Applications  of  water.


The  water -applications  whicli  I  make  use  of  are
divided  in:

A.  Wet  sheets.

B.  Baths.

C.  Vapours.

D.  Shower  baths.

E.  Ablutions.

F.  Water  bandages.

G.  Drinking  of  water.


A.  Wet  sheets.

1.  Covering  with  wet  sheets.

A  large,  coarse  piece  of  Huen  (such  f  used  for
straw-mattresses  does  very  well)  is  folded  3  4,  6,  8,  or  10
times  lengthwise,  wide  and  long  enough  to  cover  the
whole  body,  beginning  at  the  neck.  The  sheet  ought  not
to  end  on  both  sides  as  if  cut  off,  but  hang  down  a  little
on  the  right  and  left  of  the  body.  The  so  prepared  sheet
is  dipped  in  cold  water  (in  winter,  warm  water  may  be
iLd)  well  wrung  out  and  then  put  on  the  pat^enUy^^S
"  a  piece  of  ImeJ  doubled  2  or  3  times,  -  laid  upon
it in  order  to  close  the  wet  covermg  hermetically,  to


Wet  shee'is. Lying  on  wet  sheets.


35


thoroughly  prevent  the  entry  of  the  air ;  the  whole  is
covered  with  a  feather -quilt.  As  a  rule  I  lay  a  rather
large  piece  of  woollen  material  round  the  neck,  to  prevent
the  air  entering  from  above.  Care  must  be  taken  about
the  covering,  otherwise  the  patient  would  easily  take  cold.

The  wet  sheet  is  apphed  from  forty-five  minutes  to
operate  by  cold,  the  sheet  having  become  warm,  must  be
wetted  again  in  cold  water.

sheets  are  taken  away ;  the  patient  dresses  himself  and
takes  some  exercise,  or  remains  in  bed  for  a  short  time.

This  application  operates  especially  on  the  expelling
of  gases  shut  up  in  stomach  and  bowels.

This  practice,  like  the  followmg  ones,  demands  that
the  body  be  warm.

2.  Lying  on  wet  sheets.

To  the  covering  Avith  wet  sheets  corresponds  the  lying
on  wet  sheets,  which,  in  case  both  apphcations  are  used
alternately,  must  be  apphed  fu-st.  The  following  remarks
are  to  be  made  regarding  it.

As  this  application  is  also  to  be  made  in  bed,  a  piece
of  Imen,  and  over  it  a  woollen  blanket,  are  laid  upon  the
mattress,  to  prevent  it  from  getting  wet.  Then  the  same
piece  of  coarse  linen,  as  used  for  the  preceding  application
(doubled  3  or  4  times),  dipped  in  water  and  wrung  out,
IS  placed  lengthwise  upon  the  woollen  blanket,  so  that  it
reaches  from  the  last  cervical-vertebra  to  the  end  of  the
back-bone,  i.  e.  the  whole  length  of  the  back.  The  patient
hes  down  on  his  back ,  wi-aps  himself  in  the  extended
blanket  from  both  sides,  in  order  to  prevent  the  air  coming
m,  and  then  covers  himself  with  a  blanket  and  feather-
quilt.  This  lying  on  wet  sheets  is  also  to  be  applied  for
three  quarters  of  an  hour  ;  if  longer,  the  wetting  of  sheets
with  cold  water  must  be  repeated,  because  its  effect,  like
tHat  ot  the  covering  with  wet  sheets ,  is  produced  only
Dy  cold, ihe  same  rules  as  given  above  are  to  be  followed

ihis  application  is  especially  efficacious  for  strengthen-
ing the  back -bone  and  the  spinal -marrow,  for  pain

3*


36


Part  I.  Applications  op  -water.


in  the  back  and  for  lumbago.  I  know  many  cases  in  which
lumbago  was  entirely  removed  by  two  applications  of  wet
sheets  made  on  the  same  day.

Also  against  congestions , "in  the  heat  of  fever,  this
lying  on  wet  sheets  is  of  very  good  effect.  In  which  in-
dividual cases  it  is  to  be  used,  and  how  often  it  is  to  be
repeated,  is  said  where  the  diseases  are  spoken  of.

3.  Covering  with,  and  lying  on  wet  sheets  taken

together.

The  two  applications  can  be  taken  one  after  the
other  or  both  together.

The  sheet  for  lying  on  is  prepared  as  given  in  No.  2  ;
that  for  covering,  likewise  prepared,  is  laid  at  the  bed-
side. The  patient  hes  down  undressed  on  the  one  wet
sheet  and  covers  himself  with  the  other.  The  covering
with  blanket  and  feather-bed  is  easily  done.  If  there  is
another  person  attending,  it  is  well  to  tuck  m  both
blanket  and  feather-bed  on  both  sides,  to  prevent  any  entry
of  the  outer  ah-.  It  is  important  that  the  blanket  lymg
under  the  wet  sheet  broadwise,  be  large  enough  to  wrap
up  both  the  wet  sheets  like  a  bandage.

The  duration  of  this  apphcation  ought  not  to  be  less
than  three  quarters  of  an  hour,  and  not  more  than  an  hour.

Against  great  heat,  gases,  congestions,  hypochon-
driasis, and  other  sufferings  it  is  of  very  great  service.

4.  Compress  on  the  abdomen.

The  patient  lies  in  bed.  A  piece  of  linen,  folded
4  to  6  times,  dipped  in  water,  and  thoroughly  wrung
out,  is  laid  upon  the  abdomen  (from  the  stomach  down-
wards) and  covered  carefully  with  blanket  and  feather-bed^

The  application  may  be  made  for  three  quarters  of
an  hour  to  2  hours  ;  in  the  latter  case,  it  must  be  renewed
after  an  hour,  i.  e.  wetted  anew.  _

This  application  is  of  good  service  against  indigestion,
cramps,  also  where  the  blood  is  to  be  led  away  from
the  chest  and  heait.


Wet  sheets.  Coveuikg  with  wet  shee'i  s.  Covering  with  ice.  37


For  wetting  the  linen  vinegar  is  very  often  used
instead  of  water,  also  decoctions  of  liay-blossoms,  shave-
grass,  oat-straw,  etc.

In  order  to  save  the  vinegar,  a  twofold  piece  of  linen
may  be  dipped  in  a  mixture  of  vinegar  and  water  and
laid  on  the  body,  and  over  it  another  piece  of  linen  dou-
bled 2  or  4  times,  which  is  dipped  only  in  water.  The
covering  is  done  as  given  above.

I  have  been  asked  many  times  what  principles  I
followed  with  regard  to  coverings  with  ice,  bleeding,  etc.
These  I  will  briefly  state.

Whoever  wishes  to  reconcile  himself  with  an  enemy,
and  for  this  pm-pose  offers  him  his  hand  with  knitted
brows,  will  find  greater  difficulty  in  succeeding  than  if  he
met  him  with  a  bright  face  and  a  joyful  heart.  It  is
something  similar  to  this  with  ice  and  water.  I  have
always  esteemed  the  application  of  ice,  especially  on  the
nobler  parts  of  the  body,  (head,  eyes,  ears,  etc.)  to  be
among  the  most  rugged  and  violent  remedies  ever  used.
They  do  not  help  nature  to  recommence  her  work ;  they
force  her  with  violence  to  do  so,  and  that  must  revenge
itself.  Ice-cloth  and  ice-bag,  or  whatever  the  names  of
those  things  may  be,  are  entirely  excluded  from  my  de-
partment. Only  imagine  these  colossal  counter-parts :  in-
side the  body  a  burning  heat,  outside  a  mountain  of  ice,
and  between  them  a  suffering  member,  the  organ  of  tender
flesh  and  blood,  worked  on  by  both.  Thave  always
waited  with  great  anxiety  for  the  result  of  such  work,
and  in  most  cases  my  anxiety  was  justified.

I  know  a  gentleman  who  was  ordered  to  have  ice
laid  upon  one  of  his  feet  day  and  night,  for  a  whole  year
long,  without  any  interruption.  It  would  surely  take  noth-
mg  less  than  a  mh-acle  to  prevent  this  flake  of  ice  from
taking  away  not  only  all  heat,  but  also  the  indispens-
able natural  warmth!  Nothing  was  to  be  seen  of  the
healing  of  the  foot.

But,  some  one  will  reply,  in  many  cases  it  has  really
done  good.  Yes,  for  it  may  be  that  the  disease  could
not  Withstand  the  means  of  compulsion.  However,  what


38  Part  I. Applications  of  wateu.

were  the  consequences?  Innumerable  persons  have  come
to  me  who  had  partly  lost  their  eye-sight,  become  more
or  less  deaf,  others  with  rheumatics  of  every  kind,  espe-
cially in  the  head,  or  with  great  sensibility  of  the  head,
etc.  Wliat  was  the  cause  of  all  this?  „Yes,  there,  and
then,"  I  was  answered,  „the  tiresome  ice-bag  did  it;
I  have  been  burdened  with  this  complaint  for  so  and  so
many  years. "  Certainly,  and  most  of  them  will  be  burdened
with  it  to  their  last  breath.

I  repeat  again  that  I  oppose  absolutely  any  appli-
cation of  ice,  and  I  assert,  on  the  contrary,  that  water,
applied  in  the  right  way,  is  able  to  soften  and  to  extin-
guish any  heat  even  the  most  violent,  in  whatever  part  or
organ  of  the  body  it  may  be  raging.  If  a  fire  can  no
longer  be  extinguished  by  water,  ice  will  do  just  as  little
for  it;  that  is  easily  understood  by  every  one.

I  said  just  now  that  a  regular  application  of  water
will  bring  help.  But  I  do  not  mean  that,  e.  g.  with  an
inflammation  on,  or  in  the  head ,  it  would  be  advisable
to  use  as  many  wet  bandages  as  there  were  ice-bags  for-
merly used;  100  ice-bags  and  bandages  will  not  stop
the  blood  streaming  to  the  inflamed  spot  and  thereby
inereaskg  the  heat.  I  must  try  to  lead  the  blood  away,
to  distribute  it  to  the  different  parts ,  i.  e.  I  must  use
applications  on  the  whole  body ,  besides  those  on  the
suffering  part.  I  shall  e.  g.  attack  the  enemy  m,  or  on
the  head,  first  of  all  at  the  patient's  feet,  and  then  grad-
ually proceed  to  the  whole  body.

Nevertheless,  the  ice  is  of  good  service  to  my  water-
cure  by  mdirect  use.  In  summer  it  cools  the  water,  when
it  is  about  to  get  luke-warm.

What  is  my  opinion  with  regard  to  bleedmg,  leeches,
and  all  the  different  kinds  of  blood  -  extractions  titty,
fortv  thirtv  Years  ago  there  was  seldom  a  woman  who
w^ Äd  I  3  or  f  times  a  year ;  the  ^f;l^f}^y!^^:^;
of  course,  the  most  favorable  signs  were  f^^^^^f^^l^y  ,f  °
for  this  end  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  and  marked  m  the
calendar  with  red  or  blue  strokes  The  country-ph>s^cu^^^^^
the  surgeons  and  barbers,  themselves,  called  their  o^vn  work


Bleeding,  Leeches,  Scarifying;  Formation  of  blood.  39

in  this  way,  a  real  butchery.  Institutions  and  convents,
too,  had  their  appointed  time  for  bleeding  and  the  strictly
regulated  diet  above  all.  Congratulations  were  made  to
one  another  after  having  endured  the  bloody  toils,  _  which
may  have  been  no  small  ones  sometimes.  A  priest  of
that  time  assured  me  that  he  had  undergone  this  bleeding
for  32  years,  the  process  being  repeated  4  times  every
year,  and  each  time  he  lost  8  oz.  of  blood,  making  irx
aU  8  X  4  X  32  =  1024  oz.

Besides  this  bleeding,  leeches  were  used,  and  scari-
fying and  other  processes  practised.  Young  and  old,  high
and  low,  men  and  women,  were  all  well  provided  for.

How  times  are  changing  !  For  a  long  time  these  doings
were  looked  upon  as  the  only  and  absolutely  necessary
means  of  being  and  remaining  healthy  !  And  what  is
thought  of  them  now-a-days  ?  We  smile  at  and  ridicule
this  false  opinion  of  the  old,  this  false  natural-science,  to
imagine  that  any  man  should  have  too  much  blood.  About
two  years  ago  a  foreign  physician ,  who  was  also  an
active  literary  man,  and  who  was  following  a  new  school,
told  me  that  he  had  never  in  his  life  seen  leeches.

Many  physicians  attribute  the  poverty  of  blood  in  the
present  time,  to  the  former  misuse  of  bleeding.  They  may
be  right ;  however  this  is  not  the  only  cause  of  it.

But  to  the  subject !  My  conviction  is  this :  In  the
human  body  everything  corresponds  so  wonderfully,  the
particle  to  the  part,  and  every  part  to  the  whole,  that  one
caimot  help  calling  the  organism  of  the  body  an  incom-
parable work  of  art,  the  idea  of  which  could  only  origi-
nate ia  the  creative  mind  of  God,  and  the  execution  of
which  was  only  possible  to  the  creative  power  of  God.
The  same  order,  the  same  measure,  the  same  harmony
exists  between  increase  and  consumption  of  the  ingre-
dients necessary  to  the  support  of  the  body,  provided  man
himself,  reasonable  and  independent  as  he  is,  co-operates
with  the  will  of  God  by  rightly  using  what  is  given  to
him,  provided  he  does  not  overturn  the  order  by  misusing
it,  and  so  bringing  dissonances  into  the  harmony.  As  this
is  the  state  of  the  case,  I  cannot  imagine  how  the  for-


40


Part  I.  Applications  op  water.


mation  of  blood  alone,  this  most  important  of  all  processes
in  the  human  body,  should  go  on  without  order,  without
number  and  measure,  unarranged  and  immoderately.

Every  child,  so  I  imagine,  receives  as  a  heritage  from
its  mother,  together  with  the  life,  a  quantity  of  stuff  for
formation  of  blood ,  call  it  what  you  will ,  which  is  ,  as
it  were,  the  essence  without  which  no  blood  can  be  pre-
pared. If  this  essence  is  exhausted,  the  formation  of  blood,
and  with  it  life  itself,  ceases.  Fading  away,  decaying,  I  do
not  call  „living".  By  every  loss  of  blood,  however,  whether
it  be  caused  by  a  fall,  an  accident,  or  by  bleeding,  leeches,
or  scarifying,  a  particle  or  part  of  this  substance  of  blood,
of  this  essence  of  life,  is  lost,  and  in  the  same  measure
the  body's  life  is  shortened.  Every  extraction  of  blood
means  nothing  less  than  a  shortening  of  life ;  for  life
resides  in  the  blood.

The  objection  to  this  will  be :  Nothing  is  more  speedily
accomplished  than  the  formation  of  blood;  losing  blood
and  gaining  blood  is  almost  one  and  the  same  thing.

Yes,  the  formation  of  blood  is  done  with  an  incre-
dibly wonderful  speed ;  I  quite  agree  with  this  argument.
But  excuse  me,  if  I  give  another  one  based  on  exper-
ience ;  it  will  interest  my  readers  who  are  engaged  in
farming,  and  they  will  be  obliged  to  confirm  it.  If  a
farmer  wishes  to  fatten  cattle  quickly,  he  draws  a  good
quantity  of  blood  from  them,  and  after  having  done  so,
he  feeds  them  well.  In  a  short  time  plenty  of  fresh  new
blood  is  formed,  and  the  cattle  progresses  and  fattens.
After  three  or  four  weeks,  the  bleeding  is  repeated,  then
good  and  nourishing  food,  as  well  as  many  strengthening
potions,  are  given.  The  progress  is  excellent,  and  even
with  old  cattle,  as  much  and  as  nice  blood  will  be  found
when  the  animal  is  killed,  as  with  young  cattle.  But
let  us  look  more  closely  at  this  blood.  The  blood  pro-
duced artificially,  is  only  watery,  weak  bbod  without
vitality.  The  cattle  has  no  longer  any  strength  or  power
of  endurance,  and  if  not  soon  killed,  will  get  dropsy.

Should  it  be  othermse  with  man?  Having  lived
more  than  70  years  and  gained  some  experience  and  know-
ledge of  human  life,  I  know  that  precisely  the  hnmoder-


Bleeding.


41


ate  bleeding  of  our  ancestors  has  influenced  the  capa-
cities, talents,  and  duration  of  life,  of  their  posterity.  The
gentleman  mentioned  in  the  beginning  of  our  treatise,  who
had  lost  so  many  ounces  of  blood,  died  in  the  best  years
of  manhood,  of  dropsy.  And  if  a  woman  (I  state  facts
only)  had  been  bled  150,  another  200  times,  and  had
thereby  become  unspeakably  weak  and  ill,  must  not  the
following  generation  be  sickly  and  frail,  inclined  to  cramps,
and  other  sufferings?

I  willmgly  acknowledge  that  there  can  be  cases,  but  only
exceptional  ones,  where  an  immediate  danger  is  removed  by
bleeding,  other  quickly  operating  remedies  not  being  at  hand.

But  otherwise  I  ask  every  reasonable,  impartial  per-
son: mich  is  preferable,  to  have  the  thread  of  life  ex-
torted from  you  piece  by  piece,  or  to  have  the  blood
distributed  by  proper  watsr-applications ,  in  such  a  way
that  even  the  most  full-blooded  has  not  a  too  great
quantity  of  blood  ?  How,  and  by  which  applications,  this
distubuting  is  to  be  done,  I  have  discussed  several  times
in  the  proper  place.

It  is  generally  said  that  in  cases  of  impending  strokes,
bleeding  is  the  only  means  of  escape. But  I  remember,
just  now,  a  case  in  which  a  stroke  had  taken  place ;  the
first  physician  quickly  bled  the  patient ;  the  second  one,
however,  declared  that  precisely  in  consequence  of  this
bleedmg  the  patient  would  die,  which  indeed  was  verified.
It  IS  not  fuhiess  or  profusion  of  blood  which  generally
leads  to  a  stroke,  as  people  erroneously  think,  but  po-
verty of  blood. „He  died  of  a  stroke"  generaUy  means
that  the  blood  bemg  consumed,  life  was  consumed  also,
ihe  oil  ceased  its  flowing  and  nourishing;  therefore  the
glunmermg  wick  was  extinguished. Of  what  useful  service
the  water  is  immediately  after  strokes,  can  be  seen  in  the
third  part  of  this  book. I  will  only  state  here  that  my
predecessor  m  the  office  of  curate ,  had  a  stroke  three
times and  after  the  third  thne ,  the  physician  declared
that  he  could  not  live  any  longer ;  but  the  water  has  not
only  saved  his  life  for  the  moment,  but  it  has  preserved
liun  to  his  congregation  for  several  years.


42


Part  I.  AppiICAtions  of  water.


B.  Baths.
I.  Fool-baths.

The  foot-bath  can  be  taken  cold  or  warm.

1.  The  cold  foot-bath

consists  in  standing  in  the  cold  water  as  far  as  thfe
calves  of  the  legs  or  higher,  for  1  to  3  minutes. ^

In  diseases  they  serve  principally  for  leading  the
blood  do^vn  from  head  and  chest ;  but  they  are  generaUy
taken  in  connection  with  other  applications,  sometmiesin
cases  m  which  whole  or  half-baths  cannot  be  endured  by
the  patient  for  different  reasons.

When  taken  by  healthy  people,  they  ahn  at  giving
freshness,  and  strength;  they  are  especially  advisable  tor
country-people  m  summer-time,  if  after  a  hard  and  fatigumg
day's  work,  they  are  unable  to  sleep  at  night.  These
baths  take  away  weariness,  bring  on  rest  and  good  sleep.

2.  The  warm  foot-batU

can  be  taken  m  different  ways.

A.  handful  of  salt  and  twice  as  much  wood-ashes
are  mied  "arm  water  of  25  to  26«  R  Then  tüe
foot-bath  is  taken  for  about  12  to  15  minutes.

Sometimes,  but  always  by  special  order  I  give_  such
a  foot-bath  with  a  temperature  as  high  as  30  K. ,  but
then  a  cold  foot-bath  of  half  a  mmute's  duration  must
always  follow.  .

The  foot-baths  are  very  useful  in  all  cases  where  vi-
gorous android  remedies  -nnot  well  be  used  on  accoun^^
of  weakness,  fragility,  want  of  vital  warm  ,  «t«^'  ^^J^^^^^^
or  no  reaction  takes  place  i.  e.  ^he  co  d  water  camiot
produce  sufficient  warmth  for  want  of  blood.

These  foot-baths  are  suitable  for  weak,  nervous  people


Baths.  The  warm  foot-bath.


43


They  lead  the  blood  to  the  feet,  and  have  an  appeasing
effect.  But  I  do  not  recommend  them  to  people  who
suffer  from  sweating  feet.

With  our  country-people  these  warm  foot-baths  are
well  noted,  and  their  effect  acknowledged  by  the  general
use  of  them.

b)  A  sanative  foot-bath  is  that  made  from  hay-flowers.
Take  about  3  to  5  handfals  of  hay-flowers,*  pour

boiling  water  upon  them ,  cover  the  vessel ,  and  let  the
whole  mixture  cool  to  the  warmth  of  25  to  26*^  R.,  the
most  comfortable  for  a  foot-bath.

It  is  of  no  consequence,  whether  the  hay-flowers  re-
main in  the  foot-bath,  or  whether  the  decoction  only  is
used.  Poorer  people  use  the  whole  to  save  time  and  trouble.

These  foot-baths  operate  by  dissolving,  evacuating^
and  strengthening ;  they  are  of  good  service  for  diseased
feet,  especially  sweating  feet,  open  wounds,  contusions  of
every  kmd  (whether  arising  from  a  blow,  a  fall,  etc.  or
whether  bleeding  or  black  and  blue  with  blood),  for  tu-
mours, gout  in  the  feet,  gristle  on  the  toes  or' putridity
between  them,  for  whitlows  and  hurts,  caused  by  too
narrow  shoes,  etc.  In  general,  it  may  be  said  that  these
foot-baths  are  of  excelbnt  service  for  all  feet  the  juices
of  which  are  more  morbid,  and  more  inclined  to  putridity,
than  safe  and  sound.

A  gentleman  suffermg  to  a  great  extent  from  gout
in  his  feet,  was  freed  from  paui  in  an  hour  by  one  of
these  foot-baths,  together  with  a  foot-bandage  dipped  m
the  decoction.

c)  The  foot-bath  with  oat-straw  is  closely  connected
with  the  preceding  one.

The  oat-straw  is  boiled  for  half  an  hour  in  a  kettle,
and  a  foot-bath  of  25  to  26"  R.  is  prepared  with  the
decoction,  which  is  to  be  taken  for  20  to  30  minutes.

According  to  my  experience  these  foot-baths  are  un-
surpassed as  regards  the  dissolving  of  every  possible  ob-
duration  on  the  feet. They  are  useful  against  gristle,

«n.i *  /  '^^^^  hay-flowers  are  all  the  remains  of  hav

sacli  as  stalks,  leaves,  blossoms  and  sneds,  even  the  hay  itself.


44  PAßT  I.  Applications  of  watee.


knots  etc.-,  against  results  of  gout,  articular  disease,
podagra,  corns,  nails  grown  in  and  putrid,  and  against
blisters  caused  by  walking.  Even  sore  and  suppurating  feet,
or  toes  wounded  by  too  sharp  foot-sweat,  can  be  treated
with  these  foot-baths.

A  gentleman  had  cut  his  corn,  and  the  toe  became
inflamed;  a  poisonous  ulcer  seemed  to  threaten  with  pi-
aemie.  The  foot  was  healed  in  four  days  by  taking  daily
3  foot-baths  with  oat-straw,  and  applying  bandages,  dipped
in  the  decoction,  reaching  to  above  the  ankles.

A  patient  was  in  danger  of  having  all  his  toes  rotted
off;  they  were  swollen  and  of  a  dark  blue  colour;  he,
too,  got  frightened  about  piaemie  ;  but  the  foot-bath  and
foot-bandages  cured  hun  in  a  short  time.

like  the  warm  whole  baths,  (See  respective  passage  on
„The  warm  whole-bath"  page  60)  changmg  three  tunes,
aiid  concluding  with  the  cold  bath.

A  constant  exception  to  this  rule,  however,  is  made
with  regard  to  the  „warm  foot-bath"  of  25  to  26"  R.
with  admixture  of  ashes  and  salt,  (mentioned  under  a).
The  object  of  this  is,  to  draw  the  blood  more  powertuUy
downwards,  and  there  to  distribute  it.  But,  if/™r  ^^^^
warm  foot-bath  a  person  were  to  apply  a  cold  bath  or
ablution,  to  end  with,  he  woiüd  thereby  drive  the  blood
which  had  been  strongly  led  down  to  the  feet,  back  again;
and  it  would  by  no  means  flow  agam  so  plentüully  to
the  feet  as  it  had  done  by  means  of  the  wai;m  water
with  ashes  and  salt.  The  first  desired  effect  would  m  this
manner  be,  at  least  partly,  destroyed,  and  the  aim  irus-
trated.  Therefore  the  warm  foot-bath  with  ashes  and
salt  is  never  followed  by  a  cold  one.

d)  I  wish  to  mention  here  a  special  kind  ot  toot-
baths  which  are  more  of  a  solid  tha.i  a  fluid  ."^tu^e  Jf
there  is  a  possibility  of  using  them,  do  not  reject  the^m
1  have  used  them  'often,  very  often,  with  S^^^  ^"^^^^^^^^
Take  malt  grains,  when  still  warm,  and  put  them  into
a  foot-bath.'  The  feet  penetrate  easily  mto  them  and  soon
last  for  15  to  30  minutes.  Those  who  are  suffeiing  trom


Baths.  Half  baths.


45


rheumatism,  gout,  and  such  like,  will  best  find  out  its  sani-
tary power.

There  is  one  remark  to  be  made  concerning  all  the
foot-baths.  For  persons  affected  with  varixes,  the  foot-
bath ought  never  to  reach  higher  than  the  beginning  of
the  calf,  and  never  exceed  the  temperature  of  25°  R.

Foot-baths  with  warm  water  only,  without  anything

II.  Half-baths.

In  general  when  speaking  of  half-baths,  I  mean  such
as  wash  the  body,  at  the  utmost,  up  to  the  stomach,  but
very  often  do  not  go  so  far.  I  wanted  to  have  something
between  the  whole-baths  which  offer  too  much,  and  the
foot-baths  which  offer  too  little.  I  take  the  liberty  of  call-
ing them  half-baths.

Their  application  is  threefold:

1.  To  stand  in  the  water  so  that  it  reaches  above
the  calves  or  above  the  knees ;

2.  To  kneel  in  the  water  so  that  the  whole  of
the  thighs  is  are  covered  with  it;

3.  To  sit  in  the  water.  This  third  application  alone
fully  deserves  the  name  of  half  bath ;  it  reache.i
to  about  the  navel.

These  three  appUcations,  which  are  always  made  with
cold  water,  rank  first  among  the  means  of  hardening.
They  are,  therefore,  suitable  for  healthy  persons  who  wish
to  become  stronger  still,  for  weaklings  who  wish  to  be-
come strong,  and  for  those  in  a  state  of  convalescence
who  desire  to  get  entirely  well  and  strong.

In  diseases  they  should  only  be  taken  when  especially
with  them  ;  for  in  some  circumstances  they  might  do  harm.

Whenever  they  are  apphed,  be  it  by  healthy  or  sick
people,  it  must  be  always  in  connection  with  other  appli-
cations, and  they  should  never  be  taken  for  longer  than
from  one  half  minute  to  3  minutes.

I  have  practised  No.  1  and  2,  standing  and  kneeling
m  the  water,  and  always  with  great  success,  upon  such
persons  who,  from  different  causes,  were  in  thorough  de-


46


Pakt  I.  Applications  of  wateu.


cline ;  with  this  apphcation  they  hegan  the  water-cure.
I  will  not  name  these  causes,  but  only  indicate  that  thero
are  many  who,  in  the  beginning,  cannot  bear  the  pressure
of  the  water  in  whole  baths,  without  the  most  disagree-
able consequences.  It  is  just  such  patients  as  these  that
have  led  me  (by  their  great  weakness  and  wretchedness)
to  these  two  applications;  their  condition  required  this
discrete,  moderate  and  considerate  application  of  water,
sometimes  for  long  weeks,  until  they  got  stronger  and
were  able  to  endure  more.

With  these  two  practices  the  dipping  in  of  the  arnis
up  to  the  shoulders  (see  means  of  hardening  page  31),  is
generally  connected,  as  a  second  means  of  hardening.  But
in  addition  to  this  manner  of  hardening,  I  use  this  whole
application  (consisting  of  two  part-apphcations)  especially
against  cold  feet.

No.  3,  the  real  half-bath,  is  well  worthy  of  attention ;
I  recommend  it  most  impressively  to  all  healthy  persons.
The  disorders  and  diseases  of  the  lower  part  of  the  body
—  and  their  number  is  legion ;  their  cause  in  reality  but
one,  want  of  hardenmg,  effemination  —  are  by  this  bath
suffocated  in  the  germ,  or  removed  where  they  are  al-
ready settled.  These  half-baths  strengthen  the  bowels,  and
preserve  and  increase  their  strength.  Thousands  and  thou-
sands of  persons  wear  one,  two,  or  even  more  bandages
and  similar  things.  Do  they  get  help  from  them  ?  Many
times  quite  the  contrary ;  by  them  the  eifemination  the
fragility,  is  even  as  it  were,  forced  hito  the  poor  bcdy.

Only  once  try  our  half-baths,  slowly,  but  decidedly,
and  the  complaints  of  hemorrhoids,  wmd-colic,  hj^ochon-
dria,  hysteria,  will  soon  greatly  diminish ;  _  these  diseases
which  now  make  their  bewildering  sport  m  the  diseased
and  weakened  body.

I  should  advise  healthy  people  to  wash  the  upper
part  of  their  body  when  rising  in  the  marnmg  and  then
in  the  afternoon  or  evening  to  take  our  half- bath.  U
there  is  no  time  for  the  early  washmg,  they  may  wash
their  chest  and  back  in  the  half-bath

A  few  incidents  may  show  how  the  one  or  the  other
of  these  three  applications  is  to  be  made  m  diseases.


Baths.  Sitting-baths.


47


A  young  man  had  been  so  much  weakened  by  typhus,
that  he  was  quite  unable  to  work.  He  tried  the  kneel-
ing in  the  water  every  second  or  third  day,  first  for  1
minute,  later  on  for  2  or  3  minutes  After  having  done  so
for  some  time,  he  improved  from  week  to  week,  and  be-
came as  strong  as  he  had  been  before.

A  person  was  suffering  from  violent  congestions,  which
originated  in  the  body  (as  is  often  the  case).  The  upper
part  of  the  body  was  washed  one  day ,  and  the  next
day  the  kneeling  in  the  water  was  undertaken.  This
was  repeated  for  some  time,  and  the  congestions  ceased.

Pains  in  the  stomach,  caused  by  retained  wind,  are
cured  in  the  same  way.

The  evacuation  of  such  gases,  which  are  so  very
troublesome  after  diseases,  is  quite  a  special  effect  of  our
half-bath.

III.  Sitting-baths.

The  sitting-baths  are  taken  both  cold  and  warm.
1.  Tlie  cold  sitliiis:-batli

is  taken  as  follows.  The  vessel  made  expressly  for  these

baths  (fig.  2)  or  in  default  of
it,  the  wide,  but  not  deep
vessel  of  wood,  tin  or  zinc
(fig.  3)  is  filled  to  the  fourth
or  fifth  part  with  cold  water.
The  patient  sits  down  un-
dressed in  this  bath  as  on  a
chair ;  the  lower  part  of  the
body  up  to  the  kidneys,  and
the  upper  part  of  the  leg.5
being  in  the  water  (fig.  4).

It  is  not  necessary  to
undress  entirely. This  bath
u  to  be  taken  for  half  a
i'ik's.  minute  to  three  minutes.


48  Paut  I.  AppucA-noNS  op  wateh.


These  cold  sitting-baths  belong,  next  to  the  half-
baths,  to  the  most  important  and  efficacious  apy)lication3
for  the  bowels. They  eva-  ^
cuate the  gases ,  help  the
weak  digestion,  regulate  the
circulation  of  the  blood,  and
strengthen, ;  therefore  they
cannot  be  sufficiently  recom-
mended against  green -sick-
ness, fluxes  of  blood  and  such

like  complaints,  against  dis-

orders  in  the  lower  j^art  of  *
the  body  of  the  most  delicate  kind. No  one  need  be
frightened  at  the  cold  application  lasting  only  for  one  to
two  minutes.  If  done  well  and  according  to  prescription,
it  can  never  do  any  harm.  j
To  prevent  colds,  to  become  steeled  and  strengthened
against  the  change  of  temperature,  often  so  hurtful,  it  is
advisable  to  take  such  sitting -baths  often,  but  best  ot
all  at  night.  When  awakening  at  any  hour,  sprmg  quH-kly
from  bed  and  into  the  sitting-bath,  then  at  once  ^vltllout
di-ying  go  back  to  bed  again.  I  wish,  however,  to  caution
against  a  too  frequent  repetition  ot  this  sitting-bath,  be-
cause by  it  the  blood  is  too  strongly  led  to  the  lower
parts,  and  hemorrhoids  are  caused  thereby  ;  i  or  6  times
a  week  may  be  allowed.

Whoever  is  in  want  of  a  sound,  quiet  sleep  at  the
begmning  of  the  night,  who,  suddenly  awakening  at  night,
caSnot  go  to  sleep  again,  every  one  S^^^^^^l'
suffering  with  sleeplessness,  may  frequently  use  this  sitt-
ing-bath, taking  it  for  one  to  two  mmutes.  It  removes
excitement  and  produces  agreeable  repose.

A  patient,  for  a  long  time,  could  seldom  sleep  for
more  than  1  or  2  hours,  and  tossing  about  m  bed  he  be.an  e
more  and  more  excited  with  thougths  of  e;eiT  kind.  These
baths  brought  back  to  him  the  longed  for  S^;;^^*

This  application  is  especially  recommended  to  lio.e
who  rfse  in'the  morning  with  a  confused  and  hoa^T^^^^^^^^
or  more  tii-ed  than  when  they  lay  down;  ^^^^  ^o  ^^'^^'^^
persons  it  is  once  more  recommended  most  heartil).


Bates.  The  Waum  sitting-bath.


49


2.  The  warm  sitting:- bnlh

is  never  prepared  only  with  warm  water;  it  is  always
made  either  with

a.  Shave-grass,

b.  Oat-straw,  or

c.  Hay-flowers.

All  these  baths  are  prepared  in  the  same  way ;  boiling
water  is  poured  upon  the  h&rbs,  and  the  mixture  is  put
on  the  fire  to  boil  for  some  time ;  then  the  vessel  is  taken
away,  and  the  mixture  allowed  to  cool  to  the  temperature
of  24  —  26"  R.  (in  few  cases  30«) ,  when  the  whole  is
poured  into  the  prepared  bath.  Such  a  bath  may  last
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour ;  in  order  not  to  waste  the  herbs,
I  use  them  for  two  more  applications.  The  one  is  made
3  to  4  hours  after  the  first,  the  other  an  hour  after  the
second,  but  both  in  the  cold  mixture,  for  1  to  2  minutes
each.

Such  sitting-baths  with  herbs  I  allow  2  to  3  times
a  week  at  the  utmost,  many  times  only  alternately  with
cold  baths,  in  cases  where  a  deep-rooted  complaint  is  to
be  cured,  e.  g.  bad  hemorrhoids ,  fistulas  at  the  rectum
disorder  of  the  blind  gut  and  such  like.  Those  who  are
troubled  with  ruptures,  need  not  be  prevented  from  the
use  of  these  baths  on  their  account.

a  The  sitting-bath  with  shave-grass  serves  especially
and  chiefly  for  spasmodic ,  rheumatic  disorders ,  of  the
kidneys  and  the  bladder,  and  for  gravel  and  stone
complamts.

v  .1,^^  wi^-ii  oat-straw  is  an  excellent

bath  tor  all  complaints  of  gout.

c.  The  sitting -bath  with  hay -flowers  is  of  more
general  influence  and  may  be  used  instead  of  the  two
others  agamst  all  the  complamts  named  above ,  but
with  less  effect.  It  has  always  been  of  good  service  to
me  tor  the  evacuation  of  stagnant  matters  in  the  bowels
bp'r.!  '^^^^"^S^'.  ^Ice^s  (erysipelas),  constipation,'

by  wb5). '  "

Kneipp,  Water-Cure.


5Q  Part  I. Applications  of  water.


IV.  Whole-baths.

These  baths  also  are  divided  into  cold  and  warm
whole-baths.  Both  kinds  are  useful  for  healthy  as  well
as  for  sick  persons.

1.  The  cold  whole-hath

can  be  taken  in  two  different  ways,  either  by  the  patient
standing  or  lying  with  his  whole  body  under  the  water ;
or ,  to  prevent  the  perceptible  pressure  of  the  water  on
the  lungs,  (although  there  is  never  any  danger  attached
to  it )  he  may  go  into  the  water  up  to  the  armholes,  so
that  'the  top  of  the  lungs  remains  free ;  then  the  upper
part  of  the  body  is  quickly  washed  with  the  hand  or
with  a  coarse  towel.

The  shortest  time  for  such  a  cold  whole-bath  is  half
a  minute,  the  longest,  which  should  not  to  be  exceeded,
3  minutes.

I  shall  be  obliged  to  speak  of  this ,  my  particular
view ,  several  times  hereafter.  Here  I  wül  only  remark
that,  about  20  years  ago,  I  was  of  another  opmion  myseli,
that  I  advised  baths  of  a  longer  duration,  and  supposed
that  water-cure-institutions  could  not  deviate  from  the
best  method.

My  experience  of  long  years  and  my  dady  practice
upon  myself  and  others  have  long  smce  taught  me  better
These,  my  teachers,  brought  me  to  the  firm  convict  on
that  r;garding  cold-water-baths  the  right  and  true  pim-

ciple  is  this:  on  i.  t

The  shorter  the  bath,  the  better  the  effect.  _  io  re-
mam  one  minute  in  the  cold  -  water -  bath  is  mser  and
safer  than  to  remain  there  for  5  minutes.

Whether  it  be  for  the  use  of  healthy  or  sick  persons,
I  reject  every  bath  of  more  than  3  minutes  duration.

This  conviction  to  which  i™^^^^^^,
brought  me,  and  which  have  since  then  confirmed  me  in
it X  lains  my  own  opinion  on  the  rugged  applications
u;ed  in  hychopathic  establishments,  as  well  as  on  the
oft:entimes  thoughtless  bathing  in  summer  time.


Baths.  The  cold  whole-bath  foe  healthy  persons.  51


As  regards  the  latter  point ,  there  are  people  who
once,  or  even  twice  a  day,  remain  for  half  an  hour  and
more  in  the  water.  If  this  is  done  by  able  swimmers
who  move  about  vigorously  during  the  time ,  and  who
can  take  good,  nourishing  food  after  bathing,  I  have  less
objection.  Their  robust  nature  will  soon  make  up  for
that  which  the  bath  has  taken.  But  to  land-rats,  who,
without  real  movement,  creep  about  in  the  water  for
half  an  hour  lilce  toilsomely  moving  tortoises,  such  a  tor-
menting bath  is  not  only  of  no  use,  but  it  injures ,  and
if  often,  too  often  repeated,  it  injures  much ;  such  baths
are  relaxing  and  fatiguing.  Instead  of  being  useful  to
nature,  to  the  organism,  they  harm  it ;  mstead  of  streng-
thening and  nourishing,  they  consume.

a.  The  cold  whole-bath  for  healthy  persons.

I  have  many  times  received  admonitions  from  known
and  unknown  hands,  telling  me  that  I  ought  to  consider
how  the  applications  of  cold  water  were  synonimous  with
extraction  of  warmth,  how  such  an  extraction  was  very
hurtful  to  persons  who  are  poor  of  blood,  and  how  much
nervousness  was  being  increased  by  it.

I  agree  with  every  word,  if  the  too  rugged  appli-
of  which  we  are  now  speaking,  the  cold- water-baths ,  I
recommend  to  all  healthy  persons  at  every  season,  summer
and  winter,  and  I  assert  that  precisely  these  baths  con-
tribute in  a  substantial  manner  to  the  maintaining  and
strengthening  of  health ;  they  purify  the  skin ;  they  in-
crease the  action  of  the  skin ;  they  refresh ,  vivify  and
strengthen  the  whole  organism.  In.  winter  these  baths
ought  not  to  exceed  the  number  of  two  a  week;  one
is  sufficient  every  week,  in  some  circumstances,  every
fortnight.

There  are  still  two  more  points  to  be  mentioned  here.

The  hardening  against  the  different  influences,  the
changes  of  temperature,  (weather,  seasons),  plays  an  im-
portant part  in  keeping  healthy.  Unhappy  he  whose
lungs,  neck  or  head  are  injured  by  every  wind  every
breeze,  who  is  obliged  to  consult  the  vane  the  whole  year

4*


52  Pakt  I.  Applications  of  wa-i'er.


round,  to  see  what  kind  of  wind  is  about.  It  is  a  matter
of  indifference  to  the  tree  in  the  open  air,  whether  there
is  storm  or  calm,  heat  or  cold.  It  braves  wind  and
weather ;  it  is  hardened.  Let  a  healthy  man  try  our  bath,
and  he  will  resemble  the  strong  tree.

One  cause  of  fear  and  anxiety  on  account  of  Ihe
cold-water-appUcations,  cannot  easily  be  taken  away  from
many ;  I  am  inclined  to  call  it  a  fixed  idea  of  extraction
of  warmth. The  cold  weakens  and  must  weaken ,  they
say unless  a  feeling  of  warmth  immediately  follows  the
application.  Quite  true ;  I  agree  with  them But  on  the
other  hand  I  assert  that,  not  to  speak  of  the  amount  of
exercise,  which  according  to  our  principles  is  regularly  and
our  cold-water-baths  do  not  deprive  nature  of  warmth,
but  on  the  contrary  they  support  and  foster  it. Let  me
only  ask  one  question :  If  a  weak  man,  effemmated  by  a
continual  sedentary  life,  and  afraid  to  venture  out  in
winter  time  except  in  case  of  utmost  need,  is  by  the
baths  and  ablutions  all  at  once  so  hardened ,  that  he
takes  walks  in  every  weather  without  fear ü  he  scar-
cely feels  even  the  sharpest  cold,  must  not  the  nat^ural
warmth  have  increased  in  him  ? Should  all  that  be  nothmg
but  imagination  and  deception?

One  instance  out  of  many  may  be  given  here.
A  gentleman  of  high  position,  who  was  more  than
60  years  of  age,  had  an  excessive  aversion  for  water
When  going  out,  every  care  was  taken  not  to  forget  one
of  Ms  indispensable  wrappers;  all  possible  and  impossible
colds  etc  could  of  course  be  the  consequences  of  such
a  forgetfulness.  ,

But  above  all  other  parts  of  his  body tMs  gentle-
man's neck  was  so  sensitive,  that  he  scarcely  knew  how


Baths.  The  cold  whole-bath  for  healthy  persons,  53


followed  the  first,  and  by  and  by  the  woollen  wrappers
for  the  neck  shared  the  same  fate.  He  felt  himself  so
steeled  against  climate  and  weather  by  these  baths,  that
the  day  on  which  he  was  prevented  from  taking  one
seemed  to  him  but  incomplete.  And  he  took  them  not
only  in  a  non-heated  room,  but,  even  in  October,  during
his  daily  walk,  he  took  them  in  a  river,  the  cold  water
of  which  was  more  welcome  to  him  than  that  in  the  bath
prepared  for  him  at  home.

The  chief  questions  we  have  to  answer  are  these:

1.  In  what  condition,  in  what  disposition  must  a  healthy
person  be,  to  make  use  of  such  cold  whole-baths  with
good  effect  ?

2.  How  long  is  a  healthy  person  allowed  to  remain  in
the  bath?

S.  Which  season  is  the  best  to  begin  this  cure  for  har-
dening ?

The  good  disposition  for  the  cold  whole-bath  requires
chiefly  that  the  whole  body  be  perfectly  warm.  There-
fore a  person ,  who ,  by  staying  in  a  warm  room ,  by
working  or  walking  is  thoroughly  warmed,  is  in  the  right
condition.

The  cold  whole-bath  should  never  be  taken  when  a
person  is  cold,  suffering  from  cold  feet,  or  shivering;  he
must  beforehand  thoroughly  vs^arm  himself  by  walking  etc.
On  the  c®ntrary,  when  in  a  state  of  perspiration,  when
heated  (I  am  speaking  of  healthy  persons,)  as  it  were
bathed  in  the  greatest  sweat,  our  whole -iDath  may  be
taken  without  the  least  fear.*

There  is  scarcely  anything  so  much  feared,  even  by
quiet,  thoughtful  and  intelligent  men,  as  going  into  the
cold  water,  when  heated  or  perspiring  freely.  And  yet,
nothing  is  more  harmless.  Yea,  I  venture  deliberately  to
assert ,  according  to  my  experience  of  long  years ,  that
the  greater  the  perspiration,  the  better,  the  more  effi-
cacious the  bath.

*  Whoever  is  wet  through  rain,  oii<?ht  not  to  have
anything  to  do  with  water;  it  would  do  him  harm.  I  also
warn  against  putting  on  wet  clothes  after  such  a  bath:  thev
must  be  quite  dry.


54  Pakt  I.  Applications  op  water.


Countless  persons,  who  beforehand  had  thought  that
with  such  a  „horse-cure"  they  must  immediately  get  a
stroke ;  have  lost  all  fear,  all  anxiety,  all  prejudice  after
the  first  trial.*

What  man,  when  coming  home  from  work  with  his
face  and  hands  bathed  in  perspiration,  would  object,  or
fear  to  wash  them,  perhaps  even  his  chest  and  feet  as
well?  Everyone  does  so;  for  it  is  very  refreshing  and
comforting.  Should  not  the  effect  on  the  whole  body,
as  a  necessary  conclusion,  be  the  same  ?  Should  a  thing
which  is  of  excellent  effect  for  single  parts  of  the  body,
which  is  a  benefit  to  them,  be  a  disadvantage,  an  injury

to  the  whole  ?  - n  , .  i,

I  believe  that  the  fear  of  the  bad  effect  of  cold  baths
when  taken  in  perspiration,  proceeds  from  the  facts  that
many  persons,  who,  bathed  in  sweat,  have  suddenly  come
into  the  cold,  or  into  the  fresh  air,  especially  into  draught,
have  sometimes  entirely  ruined  their  health  for  life.

That  is  quite  true. I  own  still  more,  namely  that
many  persons  in  a  state  of  perspiration ,  have  got  the
o-erms  of  serious  sufferings  by  the  cold  water.  But  which
was  to  blame,  the  perspiration  or  the  water  ? Neither !
As  with  everything  else  in  life,  here  also  it  depends  be-
fore all  not  upon  the  „What",  but  upon  the  „How  ,  i.  e.
in  our  case,  how  people  in  perspiration  use  the  cold  water.
A  delirious  man  can  do  unspeakable  harm  with  a  simple
knife. Unreasonable  application  can  turn  the  best  girt
to  the  greatest  evil. It  is  only  remarkable  that  m  such
cases,  it  is  always  the  good  gift  which  is  condemned
and  not  the  blamable  misuse  made  of  it. The  whole
then  depends  upon  the  „How«  in  application.  If  any  one
is  headstrong  in  this  matter,  he  may  also  bear  the  con-
sequences, which  he  has  frivolously  caused.

^  Now  we  come  to  the  reply  to  the  second  question
How  long  may  a  healthy  person  remam  m  the  cold

"^''I'gentleman  to  whom  I  had  ordered  two  such  baths
a  weok came  to  me  a  fortnight  afterwards ,  lamenting

' *  See  the  treatise  on  „Perspiration"  in  the  third  part.


Batds.  The  cold  whole-bath  for  healthy  peesons.  55


that  his  state  had  become  much  worse  ;  he  was  lUce  a
lump  of  ice.  His  appearance  was  that  of  a  great  sufferer,
and  I  could  not  understand  how  the  water  should,  all  at
once,  have  left  me  in  the  lurch.  I  asked  him,  if  he  made
the  application  strictly  according  to  my  prescription.  His
answer  was :  „Most  strictly ;  I  have  even  done  more  than
what  you  ordered  me  to  do ;  instead  of  one  minute ,  I
have  remained  in  the  water  for  five  minutes;  but  then
I  could  not  possibly  get  warm  again. "  During  the  follow-
ing weeks  he  made  use  of  the  baths  in  the  right  man-
ner, and  soon  got  back  his  former  natural  warmth  and
freshness.

This  smgle  case  represents  all  the  cases  in  which  it
is  supposed  that  the  water  has  done  harm.  It  is  not
the  water,  but  the  application,  which  plays  its  part  badly ;
it  is  the  careless  and  inaccurate  people  who  are  the  cul-
prits. But,  as  is  usually  the  case,  the  iimocent  water
must  bear  the  guilt.

The  person  who  is  about  to  take  the  cold  whole-
bath,  undresses  quickly  and  lies  down  in  the  prepared
bath  for  one  minute.  Should  he  be -perspiring ,  he  sits
down  in  the  bath,  i.  e.  he  goes  into  the  water  only  up
to  the  stomach  and  washes  the  upper  part  of  his  body
quickly  and  vigorously.  Then  he  dips  under  up  to  the
neck  for  a  moment,  goes  out  of  the  water  immediately,
and  redresses  without  drying,  as  quickly  as  possible.  A
labourer  may  take  up  his  work  again ;  others  must  (at
least  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour)  take  exercise ,  until  the
body  is  thoroughly  dry  and  properly  warmed.  It  is  quite
a  matter  of  indifference  whether  that  be  done  in  a  room,
or  in  the  open  air;  for  my  part  I  alwajs  prefer  the  open
air,  even  in  autumn  and  winter.

Whatever  you  do,  my  dear  reader,  do  it  rationally,
and  never  transgress  the  right  measure !  Moreover  the
number  of  applications  of  a  whole-bath  should  not,  as  a
rule,  surpass  that  of  three  a  week.

When  should  I  best  begin  with  these  whole-baths  ?
The  important  work  of  hardening  the  body,  or  which
is  the  same  thing,  of  protecting  it  against  diseases,  of


56


Pakt  T. Applications  op  watee.


making  it  able  to  resist  them,  can  never  begin  too  early.
Begin  at  once  —  to-day ;  —  but  begin  with  easier  prac-
tices (see  means  of  hardening).  Otherwise  you  would
probably  lose  courage!  You  may  begin  with  our  cold
whole-bath,  as  soon  as  you  are  strong  enough,  perhaps
after  a  short  preparation ;  if  you  are  weak,  after  a  longer
preparation,  according  to  circumstances.

This  is  a  very  important  chapter.  Be  careful  not  to
try  to  force  anything,  immediately,  suddenly,  with  the
strongest  remedies ;  this  would  be ,  at  least ,  an  act  of
imprudence.

A  man,  ill  with  typhus,  was  advised  by  his  doctor
to  go  into  cold  water  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  He  did
so,  but  got  such  a  chill  afterwards  that  he  naturally
would  have  nothing  to  do  with  such  a  bath  in  future.
He  cursed  such  a  remedy.  The  decision  of  the  competent
judge  was  shnply,  that  after  such  an  experience,  appli-
cations of  watei  could  not  be  used  by  that  patient  any
more ;  besides  the  patient  was  already  lost.  With  this
sentence  of  death  they  came  to  me.  I  advised  them  to
try  the  water  again,  but  instead  of  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
to  let  the  patient  remain  in  for  10  seconds  only  (in  and
out)  ;  the  effect  must  be  different.  No  sooner  said  than
done,  and  in  a  few  days  the  patient  was  well  agam.

On  such  occurrances,  I  have  always  to  struggle  mth
the  temptation,  that  the  water  is  purposely  applied  in  such
a  rugged,  incomprehensibly  violent  way,  in  order  to  make
people  frightened  at  this  wet  were -wolf,  mstead  of  in-
.spiring  them  with  confidence  in  the  water.  I  am  a  strange
man,  I  know;  therefore  such  fancies  will,  I  trust,  be
pardonable  in  me.

Those  who  are  in  earnest,  may  after  the  application
of  means  of  hardening,  begin  with  the  ablutions  of  the
whole  body  (see  ablutions),  and  make  them,  provided  the
washing  does  not  agitate  them,  at  night  before  going  to
sleep,  or  in  the  morning  when  rising.  At  night  no  tune
is  lost,  and  also  in  the  morning  all  is  done  in  a  minute.
Those  who  cannot  take  some  exercise  either  by  workmg


Bates.  Tde  hold  whole-bath  for  the  sick.


57


or  walking  directly  after  the  application ,  ought  to  lie
down  again  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  to  get  dry  and  warm
again.  This  practice  undertaken  from  2  to  4  times
a  week,  which  is  sufficient,  or  daily,  is  the  best  pre-
paration for  our  cold  whole-bath.  Only  try  it !  The  first
unpleasantness  will  soon  be  followed  by  a  feeling  of  com-
fort and  ease,  and  that  of  which  they  were  afraid  before,
will  soon  become  almost  a  necessity  to  them.

A  gentleman  of  my  acquaintance  took  his  whole-bath
every  night  for  18  years.  I  had  not  ordered  him  to  do
so ,  but  he  would  by  no  means  give  up  this  practice.
During  these  18  years  he  did  not  have  an  hour's  illness.
Others  who  went  into  the  bath  2  or  3  times  a  night,
had  to  be  detained  from  it ;  T  had  to  forbid  it  to  them.
If  the  practice  had  been  hard  or  insupportable,  as  people
often  cry  out,  they  would  surely  have  omitted  it.

Those  who  are  in  earnest  about  hardening  them-
selves, about  preserving  and  increasing  their  strength,
should  fix  theü'  attention  on  the  cold  whole-bath;*  but
they  must  not  let  it  rest  simply  with  the  resolution.

Vigorous  nations,  generations,  families,  have  always
been  true  friends  of  the  cold  water ;  and  precisely  of  our
whole-bath.  The  more  the  present  age  gets  the  character
and  name  of  effeminate ,  the  higher  tune  is  it  to  turn
back  to  the  sound,  natural  views  and  principles  of  old.

There  are  still  many  families,  especially  such  of  high
rank,  distinguished  men ,  who  keep  our  water-cures  as  a
family  tradition,  as  it  were,  and  a  means  of  education,
exceedingly  important  in  the  care  of  health,  and  who
wish  to  secure  it  to  their  race,  to  their  posterity.  We
need  not  therefore  be  ashamed  of  our  business. .

b.  The  cold  wbolc-bath  for  the  sick.

It  is  carefully  mentioned  in  the  third  part  with  the
special  diseases,  when  and  how  often  thi^  bath  is  to  be
used.  A  few  remarks  of  a  more  general  character  may
find  place  here.


*  For  detailed  effects  see  tliird  part  on  „Perspiration".


58  Part  I.  Applications  of  water.


A  strong  nature,  a  healthy  organism,  is  able  of  itself
to  evacuate  the  morbid  matters  which  try  to  settle  in
the  body.  But  the  diseased  body,  weakened  by  illness,
must  be  helped,  in  order  to  enable  it  to  do  its  work  by
itself  again.

This  assistance  is  often  given  by  the  cold  whole-
bath,  which  in  such  a  case  serves  as  an  excellent  crutch
or  staff,  as  a  means  of  strengthening.

Its  chief  application,  however,  is  found  with  the  so
called  „hot  diseases",  i.  e.  with  all  those  diseases  which
have  violent  fevers  as  their  forerunners  and  companions.
The  most  dangerous  ones  are  those  of  39  to  40°  and
above;  they  take  away  all  strength,  burn  down,  as  it
were,  the  cottage  of  the  human  body. Many  a_  pa-
tient, whom  the  illness  has  spared,  becomes  a  victim
to  weakness. To  look  on,  to  wait  for  what  may  come
of  this  terrible  fire,  seems  to  me  to  be  dangerous  and
of  grave  consequences. Of  what  good  are  „a  spoonful
every  hour",  or  the  expensive  quinine,  the  cheap  an-
tipyrin,  or  the  poisonous  mixture  of  digitalis,  the  conse-
quences of  which,  for  the  stomach,  all  of  us  know  f  With
such  fires  all  medicaments  are,  and  always  will  be  very
insignificant  remedies  and  febrifuges.  Of  what  use  lastly
are  all  those  artificial  intoxicating  physics  which  are  ad-
ministered to,  or  injected  into  the  patient,  which  really
intoxicate  him,  so  that  he  no  longer  knows,  teels  or
perceives  anything?

Apart  from  moral  and  rehgious  views,  it  is  indeed
a  miserable  sight  to  see  a  patient  lying  haK  asleep,  or
rather  half  tipsy,  with  disfigured  features,  ^vith  distorted
eyes!  Can  that  do  any  good?  Against  such  fever-fires
nothing  can  help  but  extinguishing  Fire  is  extmgmshed
by  water,  and  so  also  the  fire  in  the _  whole  body  ^vhere
al  it  wei'e,  everything  is  in  flames,  is  best  extmguished
by  the  whole-bath.  If  it  is  repeated  at  every  blazing  up
i.%.  as  often  as  the  heat,  the  agitation  increases  n  the
beginning  of  the  fever,  perhaps  every  half  hour)  it  ^^  Ü1
with  early  application,  soon  master  the  fire  (see  mflam
mations,  scarlatme,  typhus  etc.)


Baths.  The  cold  wnor.E-BATH  for  the  sick.  59


I  was  told  some  time  ago  that  in  large  public  hos-
pitals the  bath  was  often  applied  to  poor  patients  who
could  not  afford  the  expensive  quinine ;  I  was  glad  to  see
in  the  news-papers  lately  that,  especially  in  large  military
hospitals,  in  Austria,  people  had  begun  again  to  treat
certain  diseases  like  typhus  with  water.  But  why  only
typhus  ?  I  should  like  to  ask.  Why  not ,  with  logical
necessity,  all  those  diseases,  which  grow  up  like  poisonous
fruits,  out  of  the  mushrooms  of  fever?

Many  are  in  great  expectation  to  see  this  going  on,
among  them  also  professional  men.

One  remark  which  perhaps  belongs  more  to  the  ab-
lutions, may  find  place  here.  All  patients  are  not  able
to  use  the  whole-bath  ;  many  of  them  are,  perhaps,  already
so  much  weakened,  that  they  can  neither  move  nor  turn
themselves,  nor  be  lifted  out  of  bed;  but  must  they  on
this  account  resign  the  application  of  cold  water  ?  By
no  means.  Our  applications  are  so  manifold,  and  every
kind  of  application  has  so  many  degrees  or  steps,  that
those  who  are  most  healthy,  as  well  as  those  grievously
ill,  can  easily  find  what  is  suitable  for  them.  The  only
thing  is  to  make  a  good  selection.

Those  who  are  afflicted  with  serious  illness,  who,  on
account  of  excessive  weakness  are  unable  to  use  the  cold
whole-bath,  may  take  the  whole-ablution  as  a  substitute  ;
and  this  can  easily  be  done  in  bed  by  every  patient,  even
the  weakest.  How  to  make  it,  is  explained  where  the
ablutions  are  spoken  of.  Like  the  whole -bath  they  are
to  be  repeated  as  often  as  the  heat  or  agitation  reaches
a  high  degree.

It  is  precisely  with  such  grievously  affected  patients,
who  are,  as  it  were,  chained  to  the  bed,  that  doubly
great  care  must  be  taken  not  to  make  the  great  mistake
of  a  too  rugged  application ;  it  would  always  increase  the-
evil.  I  could  name  a  person  who  was  bed -ridden  for
eleven  years,  and  who  during  the  whole  time,  was  attended
by  a  physician.  Water-cures  too,  had  been  tried,  but  all
in  vain.  The  physician,  when  he  found  that  this  person
had  been  cured  by  me  in  six  weeks,  declared  that  it  seemed
to  him  like  a  miracle. He  came  to  see  me  and  wished


60  Patit  I.  Applications  of  water.


to  know  what  had  been  done.  The  whole  proceeding
was  the  more  incomprehensible  to  him,  as  in  his  opinion
there  was  not  the  least  activity  in  the  body,  and  all  his
applications  of  water  had  remained  unsuccessful.  I  told
the  gentleman  how  simple  the  proceeding  was,  and  how
still  more  simple  the  water-applications  were.  We  both
acknowledged  that  a  glimmering  pine-torch  was  not  to
be  extinguished  by  a  fire-engine ;  his  water-cure  had  been
too  rugged,  mine  was  mild,  slow  and  according  to  the
capability  of  endurance  of  the  wretched  body.

It  has  often  excited  my  pity  to  hear,  or  to  read,
how  in  many  institutions  and  homes,  people  are  fastened
to  their  beds  for  ten,  or  twenty  and  more  years.  They
are  indeed  worthy  of  pity!

But  I  cannot  understand  it  and  never  could,  except
in  some  few  very  rare  cases.  The  bible,  too,  has  its  patient
of  38  years.  l"  am  quite  sure  that  very  many  of  the
bed -keepers,  could  be  helped  out  of  it  by  the  simplest
water -applications,  if  only  conthmed  with  perseverance
and  punctuality.

2.  The  Wiivm  whole-bath
like  the  cold  one  is  useful  both  for  the  healthy  and  the  sick.
The  manner  of  taking  is  twofold.
The  one  bath  (a)  is  sufficiently  filled  with  warm  water
to  cover  the  whole  of  the  body,  and  in  this  the  person
.  remains  for  25  to  30  minutes.  At  the  end  of  that  time
the  other  bath  (b) ,  filled  with  cold  water,  is  quickly
entered,  the  person  dipping  in  up  to  the  head,  but  not
with  the  head. K  no  second  bath  is  there,  the  whole
iDody  is  washed  as  quickly  as  possible  with  cold  water.
This  cold  bath,  or  cold  washing,  must  be  finished  in  one
minute. The  clothes  are  then  put  on quickly,  mthout
drying,  and  exercise  taken  for  at  least  half  an  hour,  either
in  thf  room  or  in  the  open  air,  until  one  feels  quite  dry
and  warm. Country  people  may  immediately  return  to
?heir  :ork. The  wVer  for  this  first  bath  ^f^J^,^-
temperature  of  26  to  28«,  tor  aged  persons  ^8  «  30
It  is  advisable  to  measure  careful^  and  acc"vat^lj  ^^  th
a  thermometer,  which  is  easily  obtained. But  it  is  not


Baths.  The  warm  whole-bath.


62


sufficient  to  put  the  quicksilver-tube  into  the  warm  water,
and  take  it  out  again  at  once;  it  must  remain  in  the
water  for  a  while.  It  is  only  by  the  standing  still  of  the
quicksilver  that  it  can  be  decided,  whether  a  sufficient
length  of  time  has  been  taken  for  the  measurement,  and
if  the  latter  is  correct.  Those  who  prepare  a  bath,  should
do  it  earnestly,  being  aware  of  their  responsibility.  In-
difference and  carelessness  are  nowhere  less  pardonable
than  with  such  important  services  of  charity.

The  second  way  to  take  this  bath,  is  the  following.


i  F-^


Fi-.  5.

The  bath  is  filled  as  mentioned  before ;  but  the
water  has  the  temperature  of  30  to  35".  With  these
baths  35°  should  never  be  exceeded,  (when,  and  in  which
cases,  they  are  to  be  applied,  must  always  be  said  ex-
pressly,) but  also  no  lower  temperature  taken  than  28°;
on  the  average  I  advise  and  prepare  them  myself  with
31  to  33°  K

Those  who  take  this  bath  go  into  the  warm  water
not  once,  but  three  times,  and  also  into  the  cold  water
three  times.  This  is  the  so-called  warm  whole-bath  with
threefold  change.  The  whole  bath  takes  precisely  33
minutes;  the  different  changing  is  done  as  follows:


62


Part  1.  Applications  of  watee.


10  minutes  in  the  warm  bath,

1 „  „ „ cold  „

10 „  „ „ warm  „

1 „  „ „ cold  „

10 „  „ „ warm  „

Without  exception  the  proceeding  must  always  be
concluded  by  the  cold  bath.  Healthy,  strong  people  sit
down  in  the  cold-water-bath,  and  dip  in  slowly  up  to  the
head.  Sensitive  persons  sit  down  and  quickly  wash  chest
and  back*  without  dipping  under.  A  whole  ablution
answers  the  same  purpose  for  those  who  are  too  much
afraid  of  the  cold  bath.  The  head  is  never  wetted ;  if  it
has  become  wet,  it  must  be  dried.  Lilcewise  after  the
last  cold  bath  no  other  part  of  the  body  is  to  be  dried
except  the  hands ,  and  these  in  order  not  to  wet  the
clothes  when  redressing.

For  the  rest,  especially  as  regards  the  necessary  exer-
cise after  the  bath,  the  same  rules  are  to  be  observed
as  regarding  the  first  baths.

I  owe  a  few  remarks  here.

Warm  baths  alone,  i.  e.  without  subsequent  cold
higher  degree  of  warmth,  especially  if  it  lasts  and  operates
for  a  longer  time,  does  not  strenghten,  but  it  weakens
and  relaxes  the  whole  organism ;  it  does  not  harden,  but
makes  the  skin  still  more  sensitive  to  the  cold;  it  does
not  protect,  but  it  endangers.  .i  ij

The  warm  water  opens  the  pores,  and  lets  the  cola
air  in,  the  consequences  of  which  are  to  be  seen  even
in  the  following  hours.  The  cold  baths  or  cold  ablutions
following  the  warm  ones,  act  as  a  remedy  to  the  latter ;
(I  do  not  allow  any  application  of  warm  water  without
the  following  cold  one,)  the  fresh  water  strengthens,  by
lowering  the  higher  temperature  of  the  body  ;  it  refreshes
by  washing  off,  as  it  were,  the  superfluous  heat ;  it  pro-
tects by  closing  the  pores,  and  making  the  skin  more  hrm.

*^They  throw  as  much  water  over  their  shoulders  as  is
sufficient  to  "wash  the  back.


Baths.  Tde  warm  whole  bath  for  healthy  persons.  63

The  same  prejudice  against  the  sudden  cold  following
the  warmth,  meets  us  again  here.  It  is  precisely  on  account
of  the  cold  baths  following,  that  the  warm  ones  can,  and
must  be  given  at  a  higher  temperature  than  is  usual,  or
than  I  myself  would  agree  to  generally.  The  body  is
filled  with  so  much  warmth,  armed  as  it  were,  that  it
is  able  to  stand  well  the  shock  of  the  penetrating  cold.

Those  who  are  too  much  afraid  of  the  cold  bath  at
first,  may  take  a  whole  ablution;  they  will  thereby  get
courage.  It  depends  entirely  upon  the  first  trial.  Those
who  have  once  tried  it ,  will  never  take  a  warm  bath
again  without  the  following  cold  one,  if  only  on  account
of  the  comfort  it  gives.  To  many  who  at  first  trembled
with  fear,  but  later  on  became  used  to  the  strange  chang-
ing and  liked  it,  I  was  obliged  to  trace  strict  limits  to
prevent  the  excess  of  good  from  turning  to  evil.

The  pricklmg  and  crawling  sensation  on  the  skin,
which  is  strongly  felt  upon  going  back  to  the  warm  bath,
after  the  cold  one,  especially  on  the  feet,  need  not  frighten
any  one ;  later  on  it  will  seem  lüce  an  agreeable  rubbing.

For  these  two  kinds  of  whole  baths  there  is  no
necessity  of  preparations,  e.  g.  to  bring  the  body  to  the
right  temperature.

Here,  as  for  all  the  warm  baths,  I  never,  or  at  least
very  seldom  use  warm  water  alone ;  decoctions  of  different
herbs  are  always  mixed  with'  them.

a.  The  warm  whole-bath  for  healthy  persons.

If  I  order  warm  whole -baths  for  healthy  persons,
i.  e.  comparatively  healthy,  (healthy,  but  weak  persons,)
I  do  so  only  in  case  where  such  weakened  people  cannot
make  up  their  minds  to  take  cold  baths,  and  solely  for
the  purpose  of  preparing  and  ripening  them  by  this
warm  whole -bath  with  the  cold  one  following  for  the
fresh  cold  bath.

My  principles,  and  my  practice,  with  reference  to  this
are  as  follows :

I  seldom,  or  almost  never,  order  warm  baths  for
quite  healthy  and  strong  natures,  whose  fresh,  rosy  com-
plexion sparkles,  as  it  were,  with  warmth  and  vital  fire.


64


Paet  1.  Applications  op  watek.


Nor  do  they  desire  them  either,  for  they  long  for  the
cold  water  like  a  fish.

But  I  recommend  them  for  younger  people  who  are
weak,  poor  of  blood,  and  nervous,  especially  those  who
are  inclined  to  cramps ,  rheumatism  and  such  like  com-
plaints ;  and  before  all  others  to  the  mothers  of  families,
who  are  worn  out  so  early  by  every  possible  hardship.
Such  a  bath  with  28"  R.  and  subsequent  cold  ablution,
taken  for  25  to  30  minutes,  every  month,  would  be  suffi-
cient for  them.

For  those  who  are  inclined  to  articular  disease,
gout,  podagra,  two  such  baths  a  month  would  be  better
than  one.

Younger  persons  should  try  the  cold  whole-bath  in
summer  time.

To  aged,  weak  people  I  recommend  at  least  one  warm
whole-bath  every  month  of  28  to  30°  E,.,  taken  for  the
space  of  25  minutes  and  concluding  with  a  cold  ablution,
for  cleanliness  of  the  skin,  for  refreshment  and  for
strengthening.  They  will  feel  quite  renewed  after  each
bath  on  account  of  the  greater  perspiration  (activity  of
the  skm)  and  the  more  vivid  circulation  of  the  blood.

b.  The  -warm  whole-hath  for  sick  people.

In  which  cases  of  illness  the  warm  whole-bath  is  to
be  taken,  is  said  where  the  various  diseases  are  spoken  of.

Both  kinds  are  in  use,  and  with  due  precaution  and
exactness  there  is  nothing  whatever  to  be  feared.  These
baths  aim  at  a  twofold  purpose:  In  the  one  case  they
increase  the  bodily  warmth,  by  a  new  supply  of  warmth ;
in  the  other  they  operate  the  evacuating  and  dissolving
of  materials  which  cannot  be  removed  by  the  diseased
body  itself.

The  warm  whole-baths  are  prepared  as:
Hay-flower  baths,
Oat-.straw  .,
Pine-sprig  „
Mixed  „


Baths.  'J'he  warm  whole-bath  for  the  sick.


65


The  manner  of  preparing  as  well  as  the  eifect  of  the
two  first  kinds  of  baths,  have  already  been  mentioned  in
the  description  of  the  warm  sitting-bath.

I  only  wish  to  repeat  a  few  points  for  precaution's
sake :

aa.  The  hay-flower  bath.

A  small  bag  filled  with  hay-flowers  is  put  in  a  kettle
full  of  hot  water  and  boiled  with  it  for  at  least  a  quarter  of
an  hour.  Afterwards  the  whole  decoction  is  poured  into  the
prepared  warm  bath,  which  is  then  filled  up  with  warm
perature. This  bath,  the  easiest  to  prepare  and  the  most
frequently  used,  is  indeed  the  most  harmless,  the  normal
bath  for  the  warming  of  the  body.  Healthy  people,  too,
may  take  it  whenever  they  like.  In  my  country  there
are  many  such  water-men  gomg  about,  surrounded  by  the
odour  of  such  hay -flowers.  The  coffee -brown  water
thoroughly  opens  the  pores,  and  dissolves  materials  shut
up  in  ihe  body.

bb.  The  oat-straw  bath.

A  good  bunch  of  oat-straw  is  boiled  in  a  kettle  of
water  for  half  an  hour,  then  the  decoction  is  used  as
above  said.*

cc.  The  pine-sprig  bath.

It  is  prepared  as  follows :  The  sprigs  (the  fresher  the
better;,  small  branches,  even  very  resinous  pine-cones,  all
cut  m  pieces,  are  thrown  into  hot  water  and  boiled  for
half  an  hour ,  the  rest  as  above  said.  This  bath ,  too
IS  of  good  effect  against  diseases  of  the  kidneys  and
bladder,  but  not  so  strong  as  the  bath  of  oat-straw.  Its
chief  effect  is  on  the  skin,  which  is  brought  to  activity
by  it  and  on  the  interior  vessels  which  it  strengthens.
I  his  fragrant  and  strengthening  bath,  is  the  proper  bath
tor  more  aged  people,  as  mentioned  under  a.)

dd.  Mixed  baths.

Mixed  baths,  I  call  those,  which  are  made  with  de-
coctions_o^  several  herbs,  when  the  due  quantity  of  any

hnth  oIa'^^^^^  ^n^^  ''i^^  stronger  effects  than  the  hay -flower

also stonf  f  r?iP'^^^"*^ ^1'^  kidneys  and  bladder-

also  toi  stone  and  gravel  diseases  and  for  rheumatism.

Kneipp,  Wator-Cure.  e


66  Part  I.  Applications  of  water.


of  them  cannot  be  had.  I  have  mixed  them  mostly  with
decoctions  of  hay  -  flowers  and  oat  -  straw  ,  having  them
boiled  together. The  oat-straw  bath  becomes  the  more
fragrant  for  it. I  know  it  will  be said:  The  baths
would  be  good,  but  the  whole  affair  is  too  expensive  and
too  troublesome. This  objection  of  one  of  my  readers,
would  be  a  just  one,  if  I  were  to  send  him  to  Reichen-
hall, Carlsbad  or  any  other  bathing-place,  or  if  I  were  to
order  him  to  buy  the  expensive  black  little  bottles  with
extract  of  pine  sprigs,  and  to  pour  out  the  half  or  third
of  the  contents  into  every  bath. But,  as  it  is,  nobody
has  the  least  reason  to  complain,  to  make  an  excuse,  or
even  to  object. Even  the  very  poorest ,  -  can  easily  pre-
pare all  the  baths,  and  in  every  case  he  will  have  the
purest  extract,  which  is  nowhere  to  be  had  more  genume
and  unadulterated.

It  was  just  for  the  good  of  poorer,  and  not  wealthy
people,  that  I  have  been  looking  out  for  these  baths,  in
order  that  they  should  not  be  deprived  of  the  benefit  ot
a  bath  which  is  of  so  great  influence  on  health  m  many
cases.  There  is  no  necessity  for  journeys,  out  only  a  wait
to  the  hay-rick,  or  barn,  or  at  the  utmost  to  the  neigh-
bouring wood. Nor,  are  there,  for  the  baths,  other  ex-
penses to  be  made  than  a  few  steps  or  a  good  word
Every  farmer  willingly  gives  hay-flowers  and  a  bunch  ot
oat-straw  to  the  poor;  no  fir-tree  refuses  to  give  him
its  cones  and  twigs;  a  wooden  tub  is  among  the  house-
hold farniture  of  every  one,  or  m  case  of  need  a  neigH-
bour  would  lend  it  willmgly. This  will  be  sufficient  as
regards  the  expense.

With  regard  to  the  trouble,  I  simply  ask :  Is  it  less
troublesome  to  yourself  and  your  relations ,  if,  you  are
thrown  on  your  sick-bed  for  weeks,  or  if  your  neglected
excel^vely  weakened,  and  never  refreshed  body  slowly
Ss  awly?  There  can  be  no  question  about  trouble
Äo^  If  any  one  thinks  it  too  much  to  fulfi  the
least  of  my  prescriptions,  I  can  only  caU  l^^^^^^lent  and
lazy.  People  of  this  kmd  would  not,  indeed,  deserve
such  a  bath.


BaTDS. 'IIIE  MINERAL-BATHS.  67


3.  The  mineral-baths.

Here  I  must  say  a  word  about  mineral-baths,  as  I
have  been  asked  to  do  so  very  often.  My  humble  opinion
on  that  point  is  this :

According  to  all  the  principles  of  my  water-cure,  I
cannot  agree  with  them ,  because  I  do  not  approve  of
anything  forced  and  violent,  whether  effected  from  out-
ward to  inward,  or  directly  to  the  inward. My  verdict
is,  and  always  will  be; The  gentlest  apphcation  is  the
be.st,^  let  it  relate  to  the  water-cures,  or  to  medicines,  etc.,
and  if  I  can  obtain  my  purpose  by  one  application  only,  I
ought  not  to  make  use  of  a  second  one. We  must  help
nature,  help  the  diseased,  or  weakened  organism  gently,
not  rigidly  and  impetuously; we  must,  as  it  were,  lead
the  sick  body  softly  and  gently  by  the  hand,  sometunes
assist  and  support  it  more  firmly,  but  not  urge  it  too
much,  not  drag  and  push  it; we  must  not  insist  abso-
lutely upon  obtaining  a  certain  thing  by  our  remedies,
but  only  co-operate  with  the  body  in  accomplishing  its  work,
and  then  give  up  this  gentle,  and  gentlest  co-operation,  as
soon  as  ever  the  body  is  able  to  help  itself  to  proceed  alone.

To  give  an  instance  of  my  system :  no  doubt  it  has
not  escaped  any  one's  notice,  that  the  everywhere  known
root  and  wire  brushes,  the  rubbing  cloth,  etc.,  have  no  place
in  my  water-cure.  In  former  times,  I  used  these  things,
though  only  in  single  cases,  but  I  have  smce  learnt  that
the  water,  by  itself,  without  these  more  or  less  violent
manipulations,  (with  them,  the  poor  body  has,  besides  all
its  work,  also  the  trouble  of  bringing  the  kneaded,  and
brushed  muscles,  and  the  likewise  worked  skin,  to  order
again)  brnigs  on  the  best  effect,  provided  that  it  is  applied
rightly Accordmg  to  my  system  the  rubbing  is  done  the
whole  cay,  and  the  whole  night,  by  the  rough  linen  or
hemp  shirt,  which,  once  more,  I  heartily  recommend
A  n  I ^^^^  »mineral  bath"  already  indicates  a  rigid  effect
All  these  waters,  whatever  they  are  called,  or  wherever
they  are  running,  contam  more  or  less,  softer  or  sharper
salts,  buch  salt-waters,  used  interiorly,  appear  to  me  —
ple^ase  pardon  the  expression  —  like  using  a  rough  brush
and  granulous  sand  to  cleanse  or  to  polish  silver  or  stiU

5*


68  Part  I.  Applications  of  wateh.


nobler  metal.  Silver  and  gold  are  delicate  and  tender.
But  is  it  not  the  same  with  the  interior  organs?  One
breath  darkens  the  silver;  rough  means  of  cleansing  hurt,
injure  it.  Under  such  treatment  it  may  become  shining,
for  the  brush  and  sand  take  away  dust  and  dirt.  Yes,
only  too  thoroughly,  and  the  silver  vessels  will  not  stand
such  treatment ,  or  to  speak  more  correctly  such  mis-
use for  a  long  time.  I  need  not  explain  further,  nor  say
with  what  sensitive,  soft,  exceedingly  noble  metal  such
waters  undertake  their  cleansing  work.

And  what  does  experience  say  to  my  assertion  f
In  large  bathing -places  the  deceased  are,  for  the
most  part,  brought  to  the  cemetery,  to  theh  last  restmg-
place  not  at  day  time  but  at  night;  not  with  smgmg  and
music,  but  quite  silently  in  order  not  to  alarm,  or  to  hurt
the  feelings  of  the  other  poor  sufferers. But  there  are
many,  very  many,  carried  there.  Every  year  a  considerable
number  of  persons  die  in  most  of  the  different  bathmg-
places.  „He  or  she,  came  here  for  the  fii;st  tmie  in  such
and  such  a  year;  it  did  him  much  good." But  the  old
complamt  came,  and  she  or  he  went  _  there  again  ,in
that  year  he  was  there  for  the  second  time,  _  his  relations
say,  „but  it  did  him  less  good.  The  complaint  came  back

in  a  higher  degree,  and  ^ev^^-^l^^^l^^  j^!- ^^^^^H^Lme
dissuaded  from  going  there  for  a  third  time.  He  came
back  visibly  stronger;  he  seemed  tobe  quite  cm  ed.  But
he  only  cam'e  back  to  die  at  home."  To  many  the  expens^
of  travelling  are  spared  by  an  early  death  at  l^ome.  TMs
story,  and  other  similar  ones,  I  have  been  told  m-
numl  able  times.  He  who  only  goes  to  such  pla^ej
entertainment's,  and  for  pleasure's  sake,  need  not  be  aW
about  the  above  said,  he  only  needs  to  ^^nsuf  las  Pm^^^^
which  is  subjected  to  a  mercüess  cure,  and  most  thorou^liiy

^^ventmmon  people,  country  people  whose  head  no
longer  stands  on  the' right  place  i.  e.  on  t^^e  humb^  ^^^^^^^
who  try  to  imitate,  the  better,  the  learned,  the  «d^^^^^^^^^
Ind  advanced  men,  do  not  go  to  a  ^^thmg-p  a  e  fo
Wtelv  thev  are  prevented  from  doing  so  by  he  lig^riess
oHSpursrbut'they  attempt  many  stupid  things.  Once


Baths. The  mineral-baths.


69


a  peasant  came  to  me  saying:  „Well  now,  I  have  found
out  the  best  means  of  purifying  the  body;  it  is  a  kind
of  medicinal  water,  and  I  take  it  often."  —  „But  what
is  it?"  I  asked  him.  With  some  hesitation  he  owned,
that  he  dissolved  a  spoonful  of  salt  in  water  and  took
this  salt-water  before  breakfast.  It  did  him  good,  he  said,
and  he  liked  it  better  than  the  best  mineral-water.  (Of  course,
he  was  an  enlightened  man  with  a  consumptive  purse !)
I  admonished  him ;  but  he  would  not  part  with  his  self-
invented  cure.  He  continued  to  drhxk  the  salt-water  for
a  while ;  but  then  he  got  disorder  of  the  stomach  and
indigestion,  poverty  of  blood,  and  at  last  he  died,  worn
out  and  exhausted,  in  the  best  years  of  manhood.

So  then,  be  always  contented  and  reasonable,  and
never  envy  the  rich  and  noble  man,  who  seems  to  be
in  a  better  state  and  to  have  everything  he  wishes  for.
That  would  be  foolish  and  not  christian  like.

Neither  ought  you  to  be  jealous,  if  you  see  weak  or
consumptive  people  etc.  go  for  a  so-called  change  of  climate
to  certain  places,  to  Meran,  South  of  France,  Italy,  or
even  to  Africa,  I  always  think  that  the  best  place  for  a
fish  is  the  water ,  the  most  splendid  home  for  a  bird  is
the  open  air,  and  the  fresh  nature.  To  me  the  most  ad-
vantageous, the  most  favourable  climate  is  the  place  and
the  country  where  God's  creative  power  has  formed  me.
Should  the  air  become  too  sharp  for  me,  well,  then  I
will  try  to  harden  myself ;  if  I  fall  ill,  the  water  at  home
■ndll  serve  me  just  as  well  as  that  of  foreign  countries.
Is  it  God's  will  that  I  shall  die,  well,  sooner  or  later
it  must  come  for  all  of  us ;  and,  as  people  say,  the  earth
of  the  native  country  is  less  heavy,  and  in  it  the  repose
is  better  and  more  peaceful  than  elsewhere.

What,  then,  does  experience  tell  us,  concerning  such
mild  and  highly  situated,  airy  places,  experience  which
is  every  year  proved  anew  ?  I  simply  put  two  questions  :
How  many  of  those  who,  being  really  ill,  fled  there,  have
come  back  quite  cured  ?  How  many  have  remamed  in  the
warmer  climates,  and  have  been  buried  there?

Therefore  remain  in  your  own  country,  support  your-
self honestly,  and  wash  yourself  daily !


70


Pakt  I. Applications  of  water.


V.  Part-baths.

To  the  following  baths  I  give  the  common  name  of
part -baths,  because  they  relate  to  single  parts  of  the
body,  but  chiefly  in  order  not  to  be  obliged  to  make  still
more  divisions.

1.  The  hand  and  arm-bath.

The  name  itself  explains  sufficiently,  and  with  the
complaints  concerning  them,  it  will  be  said  when  and  in
which  cases  these  baths  are  to  be  applied,  if  cold  or
warm,  for  how  long  a  time,  if  2  or  3  minutes  or  a  quar-
ter of  an  hour ;  how  often  they  are  to  be  repeated,  with
which  decoction  of  herbs  etc.

One  remark  about  the  application  will  suffice.  —
Some  one  has,  for  example,  a  bad  finger.  I  do  not  operate
on  the  finger  only,  but  also  on  the  hand,  the  arm,  the
whole  body.  The  bad  finger  is  only  a  bad  fruit  of  a  bad
sprig,  a  bad  branch,  a  bad  trunk.  If  the  trunk  is  in
good  order,  it  will  supply  sufficient  and  good  sap,  and
consequently  the  fruit  must  be  good.

The  apphcations,  or  the  improvements  of  the  sprigs
and  branches,  i.  e.  of  hand  and  arm,  are  to  be  accom-
plished by  the  hand  and  arm  baths,  together  with  the

bandages.  ,  ^

2.  The  head-hath.*

The  head-bath  belongs  to  the  most  important  part-
baths. It  is  best  taken,  cold  or  warm,  in  the  follow-


ing way  :


i'ig.  0.


A  vessel  with  water  is  put  on  a
chair ,  and  the  upper  part  of  the
head  (see  fig.  6),  the  proper  soil
of  the  hair,  is  put  into  the  cold-
water  for  about  one  mmute,  but  if
it  is  taken  in  warm  water,  for  5  to
7  minutes.  Where  the  water  does
not  reach  the  hair,  it  may  be
supplied  with  the  hand,  m  order
to  wet  all  the  hair.


*~Itlns  receatedlv  been  said  in  different  places,  that
the  head  ought  no't  to  be^vetted.  The  reason  is  that  country


Baths.  Tue  head-bath.


71


After  the  bath,  the  hah-  must  be  very  carefully  dried.
And  this  should  never  be  omitted  whether  the  hair  has
become  wet  through  the  shower  or  through  the  vapour.
Great  care  and  exactness  should  be  observed;  otherwise
serious  complaints  of  the  head,  such  as  rheumatism,  would
likely  ensue.  After  the  drying  one  remains  in  the  room,
or  puts  on  a  cap  or  bonnet  large  enough  to  cover  the
whole  of  the  wet  hair,  until  the  skin  of  the  head  and
the  hah  are  perfectly  dry.

Many,  especially  young  country  people,  do  it  in  a
shorter  way.  They  sunply  dip  their  head  several  times
into  the  trough  of  a  pump,  like  a  duck  on  a  pond,  or
they  hold  their  head  under  the  water-pipe.  It  does  them
good.  Quite  right!  Only  do  not  go  to  any  excess  (too
long  or  too  often)  and  keep  to  the  rules  of  thorough
drymg !

This  bath  is  very  good  for  those  with  short  hair.
"With  long  hair*  the  water  cannot  penetrate  to  the  skin
so  easily,  which  is  the  real  purpose  of  the  bath,  and  the
drying  takes  more  time.  To  such  persons  I  advise  the
warm  head-bath  on  account  of  its  longer  duration.

Sometimes  I  order  the  head-baths  agahist  complaints
of  the  head,  —  but  then  always  cold  and  short  ones,  —
yet  mostly  to  such  people  with  whom  the  roots  of  the
hair  are  the  wrestling  -  place  of  all  possible  smaller  or
larger  ulcers,  tetters  and  dry  pimples,  a  real  mine  of  scurf
and  dust,  if  not  of  worse  things,  which,  indeed,  ought
better  to  be  concealed  under  the  cloak  of  night,  but  by
no  means  under  the  hair.


people  in  particular  are  not  careful  enough  about  the  drying,
and  are  therefore  likely  to  injure  themselves.  As  for  the  rest,
it  is  just  the  head  that  is  one  of  the  most  hardened  parts  of
the  body,  particularly  with  men  on  account  of  its  being  ex-
posed to  every  weather.

*  Short  hair  is  a  great  advantage  to  health,  e.  g.  with
a  disposition  to  complaints  of  the  head,  also  for  the  care  of
the  skin.  Long  hair  is  a  nice  ornament,  a  nice  gift  of  the
Creator;  but  it  should  always  be  well  cared  for,  kept  clean;
brush  and  comb  ought  not  to  be  spared.  Every  mother  knows
what,  otherwise,  would  ensue.


72  Part  1.  Applications  op  water.


To  such  I  also  give  warm  head-baths  occasionally
of  longer  duration,  concluded  by  cold  ablutions.

I  wish  to  draw  special  attention  to  these  head-baths.
If  in  the  country,  in  a  small  house  and  in  a  still  smaller
room,  the  little  holes  for  light  and  air  called  windows,
are  never  opened  the  whole  winter  long ,  the  air  must
become  at  last  so  thick  that  it  could  be  cut  through,
and  every  stranger  coming  into  the  room  starts  back
with  horror.

And  if  a  room  is  never  cleaned,  never  scoured,  what
an  appearance  must  the  floor  have  at  last?

Can  it  be  otherwise  with  the  soil  of  the  hair,  if  the
long  hair  or  the  two  or  threefold  wrappers  on  the  head
for  half  a  year  or  more,  never  allow  a  breeze  or  a  .sun-
beam to  penetrate  to  the  skin  of  the  head,  which  apart
•  from  this,  is  naturally  concealed?

And  if  water  or  soap  never  do  their  work  there
thoroughly,  very  thoroughly,  what  must  it  become  like
at  last?  There  also  can  arise  a  morass  of  crusts  etc.,  a
rottenness,  and  many  a  mother  could  relate  the  conse-
quences of  it.

It  is  only  too  true,  alas !  that  the  care  of  the  head
is  often  much  neglected.  The  face  is  washed  every
morning  the  whole  year  long,  and  many  people  think  that
nothing  else  is  required.  But  it  is  by  no  means  all.  1
particularly  recommend  the  care  of  the  h  ad,  both  to
young  and  old,  but  more  especially  to  mothers,  for  the
sake  of  cleanliness  and  health.

S.  The  eye-bath.

This  may  be  taken  either  warm  or  cold.  In  both
cases  it  is  applied  as  follows:

The  face  is  dipped  into  the  water,  the  eyes  opened,
a 3  it  were ,  bathed  for  a  quarter  of  a  minute.  After  a
pause  of  ^4  to  %  minute,  forehead  and  eyes  are  dipped
in  again.  This  may  be  repeated  4  or  5  tunes.  The  warm
eye-bath  (24  to  26 «  R.)  should  always  be  concluded  with
cold,  either  by  taking  the  last  bath  with  cold  water,  or
by  washing  the  eyes  with  fresh  water.  The  bathing  water
ought  not  to  be  warm  water  alene,  but  mixed  with  herbs;


Vapours.


73


half  ca  spoonful  of  ground  fennel  or  a  decoction  of  eye-
briglit  has  always  served  me  well.

a.  The  cold  eye-bath  has  an  excellent  effect  on  healthy,
but  weak  eyes ;  it  strengthens  and  refreshes  the  whole
seeing-apparatus  in  its  interior  and  exterior  parts.

b.  The  warm  (lukewarm)  eye-bath  is  applied  to  moisten
tumours  on  the  exterior  eye,  and  to  dissolve  and  draw
out  all  kinds  of  thick,  purulent  fluids  of  the  interior  eye.

C.  Vapours.

The  vapours  like  all  our  water-applications,  operate
in  the  gentlest  manner  and  therefore  entirely  without
harm  and  danger.  Nevertheless  the  application  of  vapours
requires  great  precaution.  That  which  cures  a  sick  per-
son, if  applied  rightly  and  according  to  the  prescription,
may  make  a  healthy  person  ill,  if  done  with  negligence
and  indifference.  For  example,  if  a  person  immediately
after  a  vapour-bath,  goes  out  into  the  open  air  without
having  taken  the  preceding  cooling,  he  may  not  only  be-
come ill,  but  mortally  ill:  The  application  itself  has  not
done  any  harm  in  such  a  case.  I  mention  this  first,  not
to  make  people  anxious ,  but  careful ,  and  repeat  that
rightly  used,  there  is  never  the  least  danger  in  the  vapours.

Are  vapours  in  general  necessary  for  cure  ?

A  woman  when  cleansmg  her  linen ,  uses  warm
and  cold  water.  The  warm  water  is  intended  to  dissolve
what  is  to  be  removed,  the  cold  water  to  float  away  the
dissolved  stuff.  A  similar  process  is  going  on  with  the
cure.  With  diseases,  too,  several  things,  such  as  accu-
mulations of  blood,  corrupted  juices  etc.  must  be  dissolved
and  evacuated;  this  is  done  by  warmth.  Then  the  body
must  be  strengthened  and  enabled  to  offer  resistance;
this  is  done  by  cold.

Every  body  must,  therefore,  possess  a  certain  quantity,
a  certain  measure  of  warmth,  if  its  work  is  to  be  done
rightly.

The  healthy  body  possesses  natural  warmth  in  itself,
and  does  not  want  any  supplement.


74


Part  I.  Applications  of  water.


Every  sickly  body  very  soon  feels  the  want  of  the
natural  interior  warmth  ;  therefore  a  compensation  of  some
kind  must  be  given.  With  many  patients  the  bandages
are  sufficient ;  with  others  the  vapours ,  these  artificial
importations  of  warmth,  as  I  like  to  call  them,  of  better
service.

In  what  does  the  right  application  of  vapours  consist  ?

This  question  is  not  easy  to  answer;  I  will  merely
give  my  experience  and  acknowledge  at  the  same  time
that  I  have  changed  my  method  very  often.

At  first  I  favoured  the  general  practice  which  gave
preference  to  the  whole  vapour-baths,  and  this  I  followed
for  13  years.  As,  however,  during  the  course  of  these
years,  I  did  not  see  the  expected  effects  I  changed  my
proceedings.  Within  3  years  this  occurred  even  three
times,  until  at  last  I  recognised  the  present  method  as
the  most  excellent  and  most  advantageous  ;  and  for  many
years  I  have  practised  it  with  the  best  results.  It  is  an
extremely  mild  method,  very  carefully  avoiding  all  rugged-
ness,  by  which  the  vapour  is  made  to  operate  not  simul-
taneously, upon  the  whole  body,  but  only  upon  parts  of  it.

But  here  I  must  go  back  a  little.

About  30  years  ago  the  Eussian  vapour-baths  began
to  be  put  in  practice  in  the  South  of  Germany;  but  as
many  families  were  not  able  to  use  these  medicmal  baths,
at  that  time  only  known  in  large  towns,  a  compensation
was  invented  for  them,  (so  I  think  it  was)  in  the  form
of  the  well  known  sweating-closets,  which  were  to  serve
in  a  similar  way  as  sudorifics.

I,  too,  had  such  a  made,  with  a  closing  door  and  an
openhig  at  the  top ,  through  which  I  could  easily  put
my  head.  The  supply  of  vapour  was  given  from  without ;
the  patient  or  sweat-wanter  sat  or  stood  inside  the  closet,
looking  with  silent  resignation  upon  the  thermometer
placed  before  him.

A  dry  cloih  was  wrapped  round  his  neck,  to  prevent
the  vapour  escaping;  wet  compresses  covered  the  head
in  order  to  keep  it  cool,  while  the  whole  body  was  in
the  highest  degree  of  sweating,  which  took  place  even


Vapouks.


75


after  10  to  15  minutes.  The  vapour-bath  was  concluded
by  a  whole  shower-bath  (a  watering  can  of  water)  or  a
whole-bath.  As  often  as  greater  perspiration  was  desired,
I  ordered  the  patient  to  go  into  the  closet  twice,  for  15
minutes  each  time,  and  to  conclude  each  tune  with  a
quick  ablution  of  half  a  minute's  duration.

The  manner  of  preparing  these  whole  vapour -baths
seemed  to  me  incomparable ;  but  I  could  not  understand
how  it  was  that  the  results  were  not  equally  excellent.
In  winter -time  especially  there  were  great  difficulties.
Within  a  few  minutes  the  whole  body,  being  completely
enveloped  by  the  hottest  vapour ,  and  attacked  on  all
sides  with  the  same  violence,  was  put  to  the  greatest  sweat-
ing, and  thereby  acquired  a  great  sensitiveness  to  cold.
To  me,  at  least,  is  was  always  very  difficult  after  such
a  bath,  so  to  protect  the  whole  surface  of  the  skin
against  the  fresh ,  cold  winter-air ,  that  some  spot  of  it
did  not  suffer  and  so  bring  on  complaints,  and  sometimes
even  sharp  pains  for  a  longer  time.

I  tried  hard  to  remedy  this  defect,  and  I  reflected
upon  it  a  great  deal.

Just  about  that  time  I  had  reason  to  go  to  Munich.
It  was  winter ,  and  I  was  suffering  from  a  rather  bad
catarrh.  By  chance  I  found  a  paper  in  which  the  almost
marvellous  effects  of  the  Russian  vapour  -  baths  were
exceedingly  praised.  It  was  there  said:  „Only  try;  one
single  vapour -bath  is  able  to  cure  the  worst  catarrh."
—  I  resolved  to  make  the  trial ,  so  went  to  the  insti-
tution, took  such  a  bath,  and  really,  having  done  so,  I
no  longer  felt  any  trace  of  my  catarrh.  But  wait  f
Scarcely  5  or  6  hours  had  elapsed,  when  a  fresh  catarrh,
doubly  as  bad  as  the  old  one  which  I  had  left  in  the
Russian  bath,  took  hold  of  my  whole  body.

»Why,"  I  thought  and  whispered  in  my  own  ear,
„_this  way  of  taking  vapour -baths  surely  cannot  be  the
right  one."  „Not  to  speak  of  myself,  how  could  a  weak,,
sick  person,  perhaps  one  dangerously  ill,  make  use  of  such
a  thing  which  makes  a  strong,  healthy  man  shudder?  No,
for  such  people  there  must  be  another  kind  of  treatment."


76  Part  I.  Applications  of  watee.


All  my  further  investigations  and  experiments  led
me  to  the  conviction  that  the  same  principle  adopted
for  all  my  water  -  applications ,  is  also  to  be  followed
with  the  vapours ;  namely,  that  the  gentlest  application
is  always  the  best.  The  gentlest  appHcation  I  call  that
which  is  the  most  simple  and  the  most  indulgent  towards
the  body.  I  should  never  use  any  vapour  (to  increase  the
natural  warmth  for  example,)  where  a  small  water-appli-
cation, a  shower-bath  or  a  half-bath  is  sufficient.  I  should
never  torment  and  enervate  the  whole  body  by  »  whole
vapour-bath  in  cases  where  part-vapour-baths  may  suffice.
Ne  quid  nimis,  i.  e.  I  remain  even  with  the  application  of
vapour  in  the  golden  mean ;  do  not  force  nature  to  any-
thhig,  but  help  her,  support  her  kindly,  and  invite  her  by
small  remedies  to  do  her  work  herself,  alone  and  freely.

All  my  vapours  are  in  truth,  only  part-vapours,  i.  e.
they  operate  direcily  on  parts  of  the  body  only;  neverthe-
less ,  none  of  them  are  without  influence  on  the  whole
body.  It  is  precisely  this,  which  seems  to  me,  the  great
advantage.  The  vapours  touch,  or  weaken  the  suffering
part  only,  and  leave  the  whole  body  untouched  and
unimpaired.  The  latter  remains  in  its  whole  vigoui-,  and
while  the  suffering  part,  attacked  by  vapour,  is  in  full
labour,  the  body  is  at  rest  for  a  while,  in  order  after  a
short  time  to  impart  some  of  its  vigour  to  its  weakened
companion.

Many  of  my  vapour-applications  are  taken  simply  as
a  preparation  for  the  water-applications,  to  make  them
practicable  and  perhaps  more  effective,  or  to  co-operate
with  the  interior  of  the  body  (e.  g.  with  dissolving  m
the  wind -pipe  and  the  lungs)  by  the  of  exterior  apph-
■cation  of  water.  It  is  very  seldom  indeed  that  one  ot
the  vapours  is  used  by  itself  as  a  separate  whole
.application.

The  necessary  precautions  with  regard  to  coolmg,
dressing,  and  movement,  are  given  with  the  description
of  the  single  vapours.  .

I  must  here  caution  against  an  illusion.

It  very  often  happens  that  one  of  the  different  va-
pours, especiaUy  that  for  head  or  feet,  operates  in  a  most


Vapours  :  The  vapour  for  the  head.


77


favourable  way.  These  vapours,  because  they  are  strongly
dissolving  and  evacuating,  make  the  patient  feel  easy,
comfortable,  and  most  cheerful  and  happy;  consequently
there  arises  a  danger  of  misusing  that  which  is  good  in
itself,  of  repeating  the  vapours  too  frequently,  and  by
this  of  doing  great  harm  to  the  health  by  imprudence.

Modus  est  in  rebus !  Only  make  it  a  rule  and  a  duty
to  keep  to  the  right  measure!

For  good  advice  I  will  mention  some  particular
cases.

A  person  recovering  from  typhus ,  or  some  other
serious  illness,  has  still  on,  or  in  his  head  or  elsewhere
great  accumulations.  Vapours  would  be  of  great  service,
of  course,  but  only  very  few,  and  these  lighter  hand  or
foot-vapours;  for  we  have  to  do  with  an  individual  poor
of  blood  and  juices.  To  extinguish  a  match,  I  do  not
require  a  smith's  bellows;  a  soft  breath  is  sufficient.

It  is  the  same  with  all  persons  who  are  poor  of  blood.
The  warm  vapours  give  them  comfort ;  but  too  many  of
them  would  be  as  so  many  blood-,  warmth-  and  life-suckers.

But  stout,  corpulent  persons  can  certainly  support  a
great  many  vapours  and  much  sweating?

It  is  very  often  just  this  kind  of  people  who  can
endure  them  least  of  all,  for  the  reason  that  they  are
poor  of  blood.  With  such  individuals  I  am  most'  sparing
with  vapours ,  and  prepare  the  bandages  to  operate  for
good  transpiration  of  the  skin.  Wliere  the  skin  is  in
good  order,  there  is  no  want  of  much  sweating.

A  patient  complaints  of  violent  pain  in  his  feet.  H&
wishes  to  apply  foot-vapours  to  his  emaciated ,  spindle-
like legs.  How  foolish  it  would  be  to  grant  his  request!
Such  a  poor  skinny  creature  has  nothing  more  to  spend
in  perspiring.  Give  him  instead  of  vapours,  half-baths
and  frequent  shower-baths  on  his  knees.

The  vapours  I  apply  are  the  following.

1.  The  vapour  for  the  head.

The  application  of  head-vapouxs  requires  some  little
preparations. There  must  be  a small  wooden  tub  (see


78


Part  I.  Applications  of  wateu.


fig.  7),  more  deep  than  wide,  with  handles  on  which
the  hands  can  lean,  and  a  well  closing  cover;  moreover,

two  chairs,  a  lower  one  f©r  the  tub
and  a  higher  one  to  sit  upon,  and
a  rather  large  blanket  to  cover  the
patient.

The  said  articles  being  ready,
the  tub  is  placed  on  the  lower  chair
and  three  parts  filled  with  boiling
water,  then  well  closed  with  the  cover  and  a  damp  cloth,
in  order  to  keep  the  vapour  inside  until  it  is  to  be  used.
The  patient  has  the  whole  upper  part  of  his  body  bare
and  a  dry  cloth  round  his  waist  to  prevent  the  garments
from  becoming  wet  by  the  perspiration  as  it  flows  down.
He  sits  on  the  higher  chair,  and  leans  the  palms  of  his
hands  on  the  handles  of  the  tub,  the  upper  body  bent

over  the  tub  (see
fig.  8);  then  both
he  and  the  tub  are
enveloped  with  a
large  blanket,  ligh-
tly, but  on  every
side,  and  in  such  a
way  that  there  is
not  the  least  ope-
ning left  through
which  the  vapour
may  escape.  ^Mien
this  is  done,  the
attendant  stands
opposite  the  patient,  and  lifting  the  blanket  from  below,
takes  away  the  closing  cover  and  the  wet  cloth;  then
the  vapour  comes  forth  like  a  glowing  stream  and  pene-
trating to  head,  chest,  back,  and  to  the  whole  upper  body,
begins  its  dissolving  work.

The  attendant  must  be  careful  that  weaker  patients
who  are  subject  to  pain  in  their  back,  are  seated  comfor-
tably, have  good  support  for  their  back  etc.  On  the  other
hand  he  should  not  take  any  notice  of  complamts  and


Vapours  :  Te  vapour  for  the  head.


79


manifold  exclamations,  such  as:  I  cannot  bear  it  any
longer!  I  shall  get  a  stroke!  etc.

In  the  first  moment  one  may  be  frightened  by  the
unusual  glowing  temperature ;  but  they  soon  get  used  to
the  tropical  climate,  and  quickly  find  some  little  advan-
tage. At  the  first  shock  of  the  hot  clouds  it  is  well  to
take  a  more  upright  position,  to  raise  the  head,  to  turn
to  different  dhections,  etc.  Wlien  the  patient  is  more
accustomed  to  it,  and  the  heat  is  diminishing,  the  body

There  is  absolutely  nothing  to  be  feared.  Not  one
case  has  come  to  my  knowledge,  in  which  the  head-va-
harm.  I  have  applied  it  to  the  most  different  persons,
with  the  most  different  complaints,  but  always  with  a
good  result.  The  vapours  have  never  hurt  anyone,  but
those  self-wise  people  have  hurt  themselves,  who  without
any  precaution  or  rule,  did  what  they  liked,  not  what
nutes. During  the  whole  of  this  time  the  patient  ought
not  only  to  hold  his  head  over  the  vapour,  but  also  to
open  his  eyes,  nose  and  mouth  as  much  as  possible,  and
let  the  vapour  stream  in  as  much  as  he  can  bear.

"When  the  elapse  of  20  —  24  minutes ,  the  blanket
is  taken  away  and  the  whole  upper  body  quickly  washed
with  fresh  water.  In  winter  time  the  patient  takes  exer-
cise in  his  room,  in  summer  in  the  open  air,  until  the
skin  is  properly  dried  and  in  a  normal  temperature  of
warmth.

Here  I  am  obliged  to  give  some  important  remarks,
which  should  not,  by  any  means,  be  overlooked.

The  vapour  of  pure  water  is  not  quite  favourable  to
the  eyes  of  some  persons,  or  to  the  stomach  by  inhaling
it. Therefore  I  always  mix  herbs  with  the  water.

First  of  all  I  recommend  fennel,  which  has  proved
its  excellent  effect.

One  spoonfid  of  ground  fennel  is  sufficient  for  an
application.  Also  herbs  of  sage,  common  yarrow,  mint,
eldjr,  ribwort,  and  linden-bbssom,  are  of  very  good  ser-


80


Part  I.  Appmcations  op  wateh.


vice.  Should  you  not  be  able  to  get  any  of  these,  take
a  handful  of  nettles  or  hay-flowers  and  mix  them  witji
the  water ;  these  herbs  may  be  despised,  but  nevertheless
they  are  of  good  use.

In  general  the  vapour  works  its  effect  quickly ;  vntla.
most  persons  the  drops  of  sweat  begin  rolling  down  the
forehead  even  after  the  first  5  minutes;  but  after  8  or
10  minutes  they  come  forth  from  all  the  pores.

But  there  are  patients,  generally  those  who  are  poor
of  blood ,  with  little  vital  heat ,  with  whom  the  va-
pour has  not  such  an  easy  task.  Here  assistance  may  be
given  by  taking  about  the  sixth  part  of  a  brick,  made
red-hot,  and  putting  it  into  the  water  about  10  minutes
after  the  beginning  of  the  application  It  gives  a  violent
roar,  and  the  clouds  of  vapour  arise  anew  more  thickly
and  lively.

Directly  after  a  vapour-bath  (which,  as  well  as  the
following  cooling,  is  always  to  be  taken,  in  winter,  in  a
heated  room),  the  patient  should  not  venture  to  go  into
the  open  air,  without  a  previous  cold  ablution,  by  which
the  pores  opened  by  the  vapour  are  closed  again.

In  winter  it  is  well  to  walk  up  and  down  in  a  hea-
ted room  for  about  half  an  hour,  before  going  out  into
the  open  air.  Without  this  precaution  not  only  a  catarrh,
but,  according  to  circumstances,  even  a  serious,  mortal
illness  could  be  caused.  The  said  cold  ablution  may  be
made  in  different  ways.  The  simplest  way,  which  I  espe-
cially recommend  to  weaker  persons  who  depend  on  the
assistance  of  others,  is  to  wash  the  patient  quickly  with
a  towel  and  fresh  water.  With  tumours  and  pustules  on
the  head,  eruptions  out  on  the  head,  runnmg  ears,  in
general  with  complaints  which  require  much  evacuation
from  the  head,  this  kind  of  ablution  is  to  be  applied  with
the  first  and  second  head- vapours.  Has  this  been  neglected,
the  consequences,  such  as  a  violent  hummhig  in  the  ears  etc.
will  be  disagreeable,  though  not  exactly  dangerous.  With  the
following  applications,  when  the  evacuation  has  been  effec-
ted in  a  greater  measure,  the  second  kind  of  ablution,
the  real  upper  shower-bath,  may  be  used. The  upper


Vapours  :  The  head-vapour.


81


shower  is  given  by  slowly  pouring  1  or  2  watering-cana
of  cold  water  over  the  vapoured  parts,  Avith  the  exception
of  the  head,  i.  e.  the  hair ;  the  chest  is  to  be  well  washed.
The  farther  rules  are  the  same  as  for  tha  showers,  i.  e.
after  having  dried  face  and  hair  carefully,  the  clothes  ars
put  on  quickly  without  drying  the  other  parts  of  the  body ;
then  exercise  is  to  be  made  either  by  walking  or  woiking,
until  the  body  is  entirely  dry  and  in  normal  warmth.

If  after  the  head -vapour  bath  an  opportunity  pre-
sents itself  of  taking  a  cold  whole-bath  for  one  minute
at  the  utmost,  it  will  be  well  to  make  use  of  it.

The  effects  of  this  application  are  very  important;
they  extend  to  the  whole  surface  of  the  skin  of  the  upper
body,  the  pores  of  which  are  opened  by  them ;  then  they
act  upon  the  internal  organs  by  the  dissolving  and  eva-
cuating of  matters  in  the  nose,  the  wind-pipe,  the  lungs
etc.  Against  colds  caused  by  getting  wet,  or  by  a  sudden
change  of  temperature ,  against  complaints  of  the  head,
humming  in  the  ears,  rheumatic  and  spasmodic  complaints
in  the  nape  and  the  shoulders,  against  asthma,  against
mucous  fever  not  yet  advanced,  all  the  be  being  companions
of  the  different  catarrhs,  the  head-vapour  is  of  excellent
service.  Two  applications  within  three  days  are  generally
sufficient  for  a  complete  cure.  If  the  catarrh  is  only  be-
ginning ,  one  single  vapour  will  remove  it ,  no  matter
where  it  may  reside.

Whoever  has  an  inflated  head,  a  disproportionately
thick  neck,  or  swollen  jugular  glands,  may  take  two  or
three  of  such  vapours  a  week.  In  cases  of  inflammation
of  the  eyes,  caused  by  colds,  etc.  or  of  blear  eyes,  do  the
same.  The  latter  patient  may  expect  a  still  greater  suc-
cess,  if  in  the  evening  of  the  day  on  which  the  head-
vapour  has  been  used,  a  warm  foot-bath  with  wood-ashes
and  salt  is  taken  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.

I  have  applied  the  head-vapour  with  the  best  result
in  cases  of  congestions  or  even  after  strokes.  In  such
undoubtedly  critical  cases,  people  are  apt  to  be  deceived
and  to  get  frightened  by  assuming  that  such  a  vapoüi'
will  draw  every  drop  of  blood  to  the  head. This  fear

Kneipp,  Water-Cura.  a


82


Part  I.  Applications  op  water.


is  entirely  groundless.  Nevertheless  I  myself  keep  to  the
practice  —  which  in  the  two  above  named  cases  I  recom-
mend to  every  one  —  of  always  reducing  the  time  of  appli-
cation to  15  or  20  minutes,  and  of  ordering  a  vapour  foot-
bath to  follow  the  head-vapour  as  soon  as  possible.

As  a  head-vapour  bath  has  a  strongly  dissolving  effect,
and  as  too  copious  perspiration  would  likely  bring  on
great  weakness ,  this  application  ought  not  to  be  used
too  frequently.  As  a  rule  the  number  of  two  a  week
should  not  be  exceeded.  In  rare  cases  where  special  dissolv-
ing and  evacuating  are  necessary,  the  head -vapour  may
be  used  for  one  week  every  second  day,  but  with  re-
duced duration,  the  minimum  15  minutes,  the  maximum
20  minutes.

2.  The  vapour  foot-bath.

The  same  service  which  the  head -vapour  bath  ren-
ders to  the  upper  part  of  the  body,  vapour  foot-bath
renders  to  the  lower  part.  The  application  is  made  as
follows :

A  rather  wide  and  thick  blanket  is  placed  lengthwise
on  a  chair,  upon  which  the  patient  sits  down  mth  bare
feet  and  legs. A  wooden  foot-bath  (fig.
9a)  is  a  little  more  than  half  filled  with
boiling  water  and  put  before  hhn.  On  the
upper  edge  of  the  bath  at  the  handles,
two  small  pieces  of  wood  are  fastened,
:  on  which  the  patient  can  easily  put  his
Fig  9 feet,  or  instead  of  these  one  piece  (fig.  10b)
may  be  put  from  handle  to  handle.  Great  care  must  be
taken  however  about  secure  fastening,  in  order  to  prevent
the  danger  of  their  givhig  way  and  scalding  the  patient  s
feet The  most  simple  contrivance  would  be  pei'liap^  to
put 'in  the  bath  a  small  foot-stool  reaching  to  the  edge.
Uen  the  patient  is  ready  with  his  feet  over  the  steam-
ing water,  the  thick  blanket  is  laid  round  his  feet  and
^ ^ the  tub  in  such  a  way  as  to  entirel>
prevent  the  steam  from  escaping ,  and
Fig.  10. by  this  proceeding  the  warm  element  as-


Vapours:  The  foot-vapoue.


83


cends,  to  the  feet ,  to  the  bowels ,  and  higher.  (See
fig.  10.)

For  these  vapours  I  usually  take  lighter,  boiling
decoctions  of  hay-flowers.  The  effect  of  this  application,
as  well  as  that  of  the  head-vapour,  can  be  increased  by
putting  a  hot  piece  of  brick  slowly  and  carefully  into  the
water  every  5  or  10  minutes.
I  say  slowly  and  carefully  ;  for
it  must  never  be  allowed  to  fall
into  the  water ;  the  latter  would
splash  and  scald  the  feet.
The  number  of  hot  bricks  as
well  as  the  duration  of  the
vapour-bath,  depends  on  the
higher  or  lesser  degree  of  the
intended  effect.  Often  it  is
only  the  soles  of  the  feet  which
are  to  be  brought  into  per-
spiration, e.  g.  in  the  case
•  of  sweating  feet ;  but  in  some
cases  the  vapour  is  used  to
bring  the  whole  of  the  legs,"
the  thighs  included ,  some-
times the  abdomen,  and  sometimes  the  whole  body  into
perspiration.

I  have  seen  many  who  by  this  very  simple  and  pri-
mitive apphcation  were  bathed  in  sweat ,  as  when  sub-
jected to  the  most  violent  sweating  apparatus  with  2  or
3  feather-beds.  The  mildest  application  is  with  one  red-
hot  brick  and  a  duration  of  from  15  to  20  minutes;
but  to  produce  the  highest  effects  of  a  real  vapour -bath,
it  will  be  necessary  to  renew  the  glowing  brick  every
5  to  10  minutes,  and  to  extend  the  time  of  the  appli-
cation to  25  or  30  minutes.

The  vapour -bath  is  always  followed  by  a  cooling
application  which  depends  on  the  extension  of  the  parts
bathed  in  perspiration:  If  only  the  feet  and  legs  as  far
as  the  knees  are  sweating,  a  quick  cold  ablution  with  a

6*


84


Part  I.  Applications  of  wateb.


towel  will  suffice;  stronger" persons  may  take  a  knee-gush.
If  the  thighs  and  abdomen  are  in  perspiration,  a  half-hath
is  sufficient;  bat  if  the  whole  body  too,  is  seized  with
perspiration ,  then  the  whole  body  must  also  be  cooled,
either  by  a  half-bath  with  washing  of  the  upper  body,  or
by  a  whole-bath,  or  a  whole  ablution.  The  rules  regard-
ing these  applications,  are  to  be  found  in  the  passages
concerning  tlaem  (baths  and  ablutions) ;  the  rules  con-
cerning the  proceeding  after  the  vapour  foot-bath  are  the
same  as  those  for  the  head-vapour.

The  vapour  foot-bath  is  mostly  applied  for  the  mani-
fold sufferings  of  the  feet,  e.  g.  in  cases  of  great,  badly
smellmg  perspiration  where  a  dissolving  of  foul  juices  is
required ;  of  swollen  feet,  probably  caused  by  accumula-
tions of  juices  and  blood;  in  cases  of  cold  feet,  whose  tem-
perature of  warmth  is  at  zero ,  and  to  which  the  blood
can  no  longvir  find  its  way,  as  it  were.  By  these  vapours
new  activity  is  awakened  and  new  life  inspired;  some-
times, however,  they  only  serve  against  the  different  com-
plaints,  as  necessary  preparations  for  other  applications
and  as  means  for  theh  success.

Persons  suffering  from  whitlows,  nails  growmg  in
etc.  who  are  in  danger  of  blood  poisoning,  on  account  ot
wrong  treatment  of  corns,  tearing  out  of  naihoots,  tor
example,  should  quickly  apply  this  vapour.

More  increased  apphcations,  which  are  intended  to
operate  more  or  less  on  the  whole  body,  are  undertaken
in  cases  of  spasmodic  complaints  of  the  bowels,  especuiUy
when  caused  by  colds,  and  against  head-ache  origmatmg
in  determination  of  blood  to  the  head.

To  individuals  poor  of  blood,  who  need  more  warmth
pumped  into  them,  before  any  cold  water  apphcation  is
Undertaken,  slight  foot-vapours  have  very  often  been  of
good  service.

As  a  rule  regarding  the  repetition  of  ^PPl;^^^^^^^^^
the  same  must  be  observed  as  respec  mg  J^^f  ^^^^^^^^^
i.  e.  it  must  be  given  very  sparingly. Once  or  twice  a


Vapours  :  The  close  stool  vapour.


85


for  various  special  cases.

Only  one  more  remark !  Many  times  people  have
complained  of  the  great  trouble  of  preparing  and  taking
well-meaning  person :  which  is  the  more  simple,  my  foot-
vapour  or  a  sweating  bath  after  having  taken  so  many
cups  of  hot  tea ,  a  torture  of  so  many  hours  duration,
under  so  many  feather-beds  ?  —  a  sweating-bath,  which
is  seldom  or  never  taken  without  the  most  violent  head-
ache and  other  pains !

3.  The  clo.se-stool  vapour  bath.

This  vapour  bath  is  of  excellent  service,  on  account
of  its  easy  preparation ,  convenient  application  and  ex-
ceedingly dangerless  effects.  Even  those,  who  are  seriously
ill,  and  whom,  on  account  of  their  weakness,  it  is  very
difficult ,  to  bring  to  the  desired  perspiration ,  may  be
brought  to  it  very  easily  by  this  vapour.

The  boiling  mixture  is  poured  into  the  pan  of  the
close-stool  and  the  patient  sits  down  on  the  latter;  the
attendant  taking  care  that  the  beneficial  steam  does  not
escape.  The  hot  steam  ascends  quickly  to  the  body  and
soon  produces  more  or  less  profuse  perspiration ,  which
often  increases  to  a  real  sweating  -  bath ,  i.  e.  to  a
general  sweating  of  the  whole  body.  The  application  is
made  for  15  to  20  minutes.  If  it  seems  desirable
to  keep  the  patient  perspiring  for  a  longer  time,  he  is
laid  down  in  bed  (because  sitting  could  be  trouble-
some, and  the  effect  of  the  vapour  would  perhaps  not
last  long  enough);  the  sweating  will  continue  without
any  special  covering.  After  the  vapour  a  whole  ablation,
a  half-bath  with  washing  of  the  upper  body  or  a  whole-
bath  according  to  the  condition  of  the  patient,  must
conclude  this  application.

For  persons,  who  are  seriously  ill,  the  easiest  and
least  dangerous  will  be  a  whole-ablution.

The  effect  of  this  vapour-bath  is  of  course  to  dissolve
and  to  evacuate. The  evacuations  are  accomplished  in


86


Part  1. Applications  of  water.


the  form  of  perspiration.  I  never  use  water  alone  for
this  vapour;  the  well  known  herbs  of  hay-flower,  oat-
straw  ,  but  fii-st  of  all  shave-grass  (horse  tail)  are  always
mixed  with  it.

Against  diseases  of  the  kidneys  or  stone  I  use  vapours
of  oat-straw;  against  spasmodic  or  rheumatic  conditions
of  the  bowels,  against  ulcers  on  the  bladder,  in  the
first  stages  of  dropsy,  such  of  hay-flower  decoction.

The  manner  in  which  the  vapour  is  to  be  used
alternately  with  the  cold-water  application  is  explained
in  the  III.  part,  where  the  different  diseases  are  spoken  of.

.1  have  used  the  vapoirr  with  shave -grass  decoction
with  the  most  striking  and  astonishing  results  in  all  those
most  painful  cases  where  the  urine  could  not  be  dis-
charged, and  consequently  the  poor  patient  was  tormented
and  almost  driven  to  madness  and  despair  by  the  most
dreadful  pam.  The  morbid  conditions  of  the  bladder,  mostly
caused  by  colds  and  inflammation,  were  removed  by  the
hot  shave -grass  vapour  in  a  proportionally  short  time,
and  the  organ  did  its  purifying  work  as  before.

4.  Special  vapour  applieations  on  particular  diseased  parts.

In  many  cases  the  vapours,  alternately  with  other
water-applications,  are  of  very  good  service  agamst  com-
plaints of  the  eyes,  the  ears,  the  mouth,  the  fingers,  the
hands,  the  arms,  the  toes,  the  feet  etc. Some  mstances

may  explain  this.  xi  r

A  poisonous  insect  stings  a  hand,  an  arm;  the  Imib
begins  to  swell  and  to  cause  violent  p^in,  the  mflammation
threatens  to  spread  about,  etc.  Bandages  on  hand  and
arm  together  with  vapour  on  the  suffering  part  will  soon
sooth  the  pain  and  bring  help.  For  this  purpose  tlie  hand
or  the  arm  is  held  over  the  vessel  contammg  the  boü-

ing  water.  .  , ,

A  wound  has  been  polluted  by  poisonous  matter,
and  blood-poisoning  threatens  to  set  in;  no  time  is  to  be
lost.  Quickly  prepare  a  hand  or  foot-vapour  for  dissolving

and  evacuating.  j. +^  v.^

Someone  has  been  bitten  by  a  dog  suspected  to  be
mad. Before  a  physician  and  other  help  is  at  hand,  a


Showeu-batus  :  The  kkee-shower.


87


vapour  will  bring  at  least  a  provisory  help  to  the  endan-
gered person.

Violent  cramps  are  tormenting  a  patient  on  certam
spots  on  arms  or  feet.  Do  not  delay  treating  them  with

vapour.  11-1

For  exterior  applications  of  the  above  named  kinds
I  usually  take  decoctions  of  hay-flowers.

For  eye-vapours  a  decoction  of  ground  fennel,  eye-
bright,  or  shave-grass,  does  very  well ;  for  vapours  for  the
ears,  decoctions  of  blind-nettles,  stinging-nettles,  or^  com-
mon yarrow;  for  phlegm  in  the  throat,  a  decoction  of
yarrow,  ribwort,  or  nettles.

As  regards  the  time  of  duration,  an  application  should
never  exceed  20  minutes ;  the  shortest  duration  is  10
minutes.

Those  vapours  which  are  taken  by  inhaling ,  and
which  are  calculated  for  interior  operation,  or  which
concern  the  eyes  or  ears,  ought  to  be  taken  carefully,  never
excessively  warm,  or  least  of  all,  hot.

D.  Shower-baths.

The  shower-baths  I  apply  are  the  following :

1.  The  knee  shower.

The  legs  being  un-
covered to  the  knees  and
the  clothes  kept  back  as
far  as  possible  to  prevent
their  getting  wet,  the  pa-
tient sits  down  on  a  chair,
both  his  feet  standing  in
a  prepared  vessel  as  if  to
take  a  foot-bath.

The  shower  is  given
by  means  of  a  small  water-
ing-can (such  as  is  used  in
a  green-house,  which  can
easily  be  managed  with
one  hand). The  first  can


Tig.


88


Part  I.  Applications  of  water.


is  to  be  poured  out  more  fully  and  abundantly,  and  applicid
to  both  feet  from  the  toes  up  to  the  knees.  The  following
cans  are  directed  in  a  less  strong  jet,  now  higher,  then
lower,  to  particular  parts  of  the  feet  and  legs,  especially
to  the  knee-pans  (in  the  middle,  and  on  the  right  and
left  of  them)  and  the  calfs  of  the  legs  in  such  a  way  that
the  water  runs  down  rather  proportionately.  The  contents
of  the  last  can  are  emptied  over  the  feet  like  a  wash-
ing off,  not  being  poured  out  from  the  small  opening,
but  from  the  large  one.  The  number  of  cans  used  for  a
knee -shower  differs  from  2  to  10,  each  containing  from
13  to  15  quarts.  ,

Weak  and  invalid  people  experience  great  difficulty
in  bearing  this  shower  at  first.  It  is  not  quite  easy  to
any  beginner.  I  have  seen  men  who,  at  first  thinking
one  was  making  fun  about  this  trifle,  began  to  tremble
like  aspen-leaves  and  in  vain  tried  to  disguise  the  pene-
trating pain  caused  by  this  water  gash,  which  came  on
them  like  electric  shocks.  This  is  the  best  proof  of  the
electrifying ,  refreshing  and  strenghtening  power  of  this
shower-bath.

For  those  recovering  from  illness ,  for  persons  poor
of  blood,  all  those  whose  feet-bones  do  not  wear  solid  mus-
cles ,  but  only  thin,  miserable  flesh- wrappers ,  I  never
mencement ;  also  for  every  beginner  the  first  application
should  not  exceed  2  cans.  On  the  following  day  they  may
increase  them  from  4  to  6,  by  and  by  from  8  to  10.  ihe
painful  feeling  will  disappear  after  8  to  10  shower ;  the
next  jet  is  expected  with  pleasure,  with  a  kind  of  long-
ing, for  the  patient  feels  what  a  remarkably  streng-
thening effect  it  has  on  the  effeminate  feet.

The  knee-shower  is  given,  as  a  rule,  in  connection
with  the  upper  shower-bath.  This  will  be  explained  where
the  upper  shower-bath  is  spoken  of.  It  is  not  meant,
however,  that  the  knee-gush  must  always  be  taken  mi-
mediately  after  the  upper-shower.


Showee-ba'i  HS :  The  shower  for  the  thighs.  89


2.  The  shower  for  the  thighs


rig.  13.


i'ig  14.


forms  a  continuation  of  the  knee-shower  towards  the
abdomen,  but  as  thigh-gush  proper  it  excludes  the  watering
of  -the  abdomen.  With  this  shower  the  thigs  as  well  as
the  lower  parts
of  the  body,
are  brought
under  ■  treat-
ment. The  firat
can  of  water  is
poured  rather
quickly  over
the  whole  of
the  legs  from
the  toes  to  the
upper  thighs
abdomen ;  the
rfollowing  ones
-may  flow  over
them  in  a  nearly
equal  manner.  Patients  who  still  possess  the  power,  would
do  better  by  taking  this  shower  (as  well  as  every  other)
in  a  standing  position ;  they  have  thereby  the  advantage
of  the  calves  and  shins  being  watered  in  an  equal  and
simultaneous  manner  by  the  water  flowing  down  on  them  ;
for  an  equal  and  simultaneous  watering  is  always  looked
upon  by  me  as  one  of  the  good  qualities  of  a  shower.

The  effect  of  the  thigh-gush  is  the  heightened  effect
of  the  knee-gush;  it  could,  therefore,  always  supply  the
place  of  the  latter.  But  as  substitute  it  fares  as  the
reservemen  do  in  public  offices;  it  is  seldom  applied  in
my  water  department.  It  forms  the  most  natural  brigde,
the  natural  transition  from  the  knee-gush  to  the  lower-
shower,  the  heightened,  increased  thigh-gush,  thigh-gash
in  the  widest  sense  of  the  word.  As  often  as  the  name
thigh -gush  appears  in  the  following  pages,  it  is  to  be
understood  (I  .should  like  to  say  always)  as  the  in-
creased thigh-gush.


90


Pakt  1, Applications  op  water.


rig.  15.


3.  The  lower -slio-Her  toath

(heightened,  increased  thigh-gush)  is  taken  by  pouring  the
first  can  of  water  on  the  lower  part  of  the  back,  beginning
at  the  feet  and  continuing  to  above  the  hips,  the  follow-
ing 3,  4  or  even  6  cans  being
poured  in  an  equal  manner  over
the  whole  of  the  lower  part  of
the  body  (from  the  front  as  well),
but  especially  about  the  loins
and  hips.  As  it  extends  to  the
whole  of  the  lower  part  of  the
body,  it  has  received  the  name
of  „lower-shower". Like  the
thigh -gush  it  is  more  advan-
tageously taken  standing.  (See
fig.  15.)  This  gush  must  regularly
follow  the  foot- vapour,  unless
the  half-bath  or  standing  in  the
water  is  preferred. The  more
water  is  used,  and  the  higher
the  jet  is  allowed  to  fall,  the  greater  are  the  effects  of
this  shower. As  a  rule  the  jet  should  not  fall  from  a
greater  height  than  8  or  9  mches.

4.  The  shoTTcr  for  the  hack

forms  a  continuation  of  the  lower-
shower.  It  is  given  in  such  a  man-
ner that  the  whole  back,  from
the  neck  to  the  heels,  of  the  person
taking  the  shower,  is  wetted  with
the  first  can  of  water ;  the  contenls
of  the  following  3  to  5  cans  are
poured  out  in  an  equal  stream  be-
ginning at  the  neck  and  continuing
down  to  the  coccyx,  and  then  from
the  left  to  the  right  shoulder-blade.
The  jet  may  fall  higher  or  lower,
stronger  or  weaker.  The  whole  of
the  spine  is  rather  plentifully  co-
vered, hut  it  may  be  remarked  that


fig.  1Ü.


SCHOWER  BATHS  : ThE  WHOLE  SHOWER-BATH.


91


with  very  sensitive  and  excitable  persons  the  spine  should
be  spared  as  much  as  possible,  particularly  in  the  be-
ginning. A  quick  ablution  of  the  chest,  abdomen  and  arms
should  always  accompany  or  conclude  the  shower  for  the
back.  I  say  accompany  or  conclude  as  the  former  may
be  effected  as  an  ablution  by  using  the  water  which,
when  poured  out  on  the  back,  flows  off  to  the  front.

When  this  is  not  done ,  the  ablution  is  taken  im-
mediately after  the  shower.  The  washing  may  be  spared
to  the  legs  by  standing  during  the  application,  in  which
case  the  water  flowing  downwards  serves  as  an  ablution.

The  shower  for  the  back  works  with  special  streng-
thening effect  on  the  spine,  and  aids  the  circulation  of  the
blood  more  favourably  and  powerfully  than  the  preceding
showers.

5.  The  whole  shower-balli.

It  extends,  as  the  name  indicates,  to  the  whole  body
from  the  neck  to  the  feet  bo1h  sides.
It  is  to  be  applied  as  follows :

The  patient  sits  in  the  bath,  or  in  a  wide  wooden,
or  tin  vessel,  on  a  small  board,  dressed  in  bathing-
trousers  or  a  bathing-shirt.
The  shower  is  given  part'
on  the  back,  partly  o..
the  front ,  with  about  4
cans  of  water.  The  first
must  wet  the  whole  body.
The  following  three  or  more
cans  are  given  in  such  a
way,  that  the  jet  is  directed
to  all  parts  of  the  body,
especially  to  the  spinal  mar-
row and  the  chief  sympa-
thetics,  i.  e.  to  the  nape
and  both  sides  of  it,  then  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach.

This  shower  may  be  recommended  to  healthy,  espe-
cially corpulent  persons.

It  hardens ,  increases  the  circulation  of  the  blood,
strengthens  and  raises  these  individuals  poor  of  blood
and  shy  of  water,  from  their  excessive  sensitiveness.


92


Part  I. Applications  of  water.


A  person  feeling  cold  and  shivering,  should  not  take
any  shower,  until  the  proper  natural  warmth  has  been
restored,  either  by  exercise  or  by  artificial  assistance,  e.  g.
by  the  foot  or  head-vapour.  It  may  be  taken  in  summer
and  winter  time ;  in  winter,  of  course,  in  a  heated  room.

For  sickly  and  weakly  people  the  water  not  only  may,
but  must  be  tempered,  at  least  to  the  temperature  which
the  water  in  bathing  places  has  in  summer  time  (15  to  18").

Along  with  the  statements  of  the  different  diseases
it  will  be  explained  in  which  cases,  and  how  often,  the
whole  shower  is  to  be  applied.  I  often  prefer  it  to  the  whole
bath  and  order  it  in  those  cases  where  I  advise  to  operate
in  a  more  effective  way,  e.  g.  to  persons  who  suffer  from
rheumatics,  by  showering  on  some  specially  afflicted  part.

To  patients  who  require  a  particularly  strong  dissolv-
ing and  evacuating  process,  I  give  the  following  appli-
cation after  the  whole  shower.  The  shirt  which  has  be-
come wet  by  the  shower,  is  wrung  out  quickly  and  well,
and  then  put  on  as  a  bandage  (see  bandages)  in  which
the  patient  remains  for  an  hour  or  an  hour  and  a  half.

In  other  cases  it  is,  of  course,  taken  off  and  fresh
linen  put  on.  The  patient  takes  exercise  until  he  feels
quite  dry  and  warm.

Only  one  slight  remark  more.  I  neither  apply  nor
approve  of  the  showers  coming  from  a  height,  and  there-
fore falling  with  force,  which  are  used  in  many  places,
or  the  violent  douches.  I  absolutely  camiot  understand
what  may  be  intended  by  such  vigorous  blows  with
healthy,  much  less  with  sick  people.  To  wash  the  body,
we  do  not  use  a  fire-engine  ;  who  should  thmk  of  such
a  thing?

For  showering  these  real  water-storms  are  not  neces-
sary ;  because  a  disease  is  either  curable,  and  then  gentler
application  will  bring  on  the  desired  effect,  or  it  is  in-
curable, in  which  case  this  rugged  treatment  would  not
only  brmg  no  help,  but  very  likely  harm.

6.  The  npper  sliowcr-bath.

The  patient  takes  off  all  the  clothing  of  the  upper
body,  and,  to  prevent  the  remainder  getting  wet,  puts


Shower-ba'jhs  :  The  upper  skowek-batd.


93


a  cloth  round  his  waist.  The  tub  into  which  the  water
is  to  run  off,  may  stand  on  a  low  chair  or  foot -stool,
instead  of  on  the  floor,  in  order  to  make  the  bending
down  easier ;  it  serves
also  to  spare  the  head,
i.  e.  to  diminish  by  a  more
upright  position,  the
determination  of  blood
to  it.  The  patient  leans
both  his  hands  on  the
bottom  of  the  tub  in
such  a  way  that  the
upper  body  takes  a  hori-
zontal position,  and  the
water  poured  on  it  can
flow  down  into  the
tub. (See  fig.  18.)

The  first  can  extends
to  the  whole  back,  beginning  on  the  right  arm  and  right
shoulder ,  and  continuing  to  the  left  shoulder ,  and  left
upper  arm.  (a.)  It  serves  principally  to  wet  the  whole
part  where  the  shower  is  to  be  given.  The  second  can  (b.)
as  well  as  the  third  (c.)  are  poured  chiefly  over,  the  great
sympathetic  on  both  sides  of  the  7*^  cervical  vertebra,
then  over  the  whole  back  and  the  spine,  always  conclud-
ing on  part  of  one.  of  the  upper  arms.  The  whole  pait
under  treatment  must  be  showered  proportionately  3  or
4  times,  the  patient  receiving,  as  it  were,
3  or  4  editions  of  water,  which  flow  over
the  upper  body  and  the  chest  down  to
the  tub.  I  advise  those  who  are  un-
experiences  in  this,  to  simply  pour  th^
water  in  an  equal  manner  upon  the  back
of  the  patient  so  that  it  forms ,  as  it
were,  a  covering  for  the  back  and  the
latter  appears  as  if  covered  with  a  cloth.
The  head  is  to  be  spared  as  much  a.3
possible ;  but  the  neck  must  get  a  strong
shower.  If  a  person  has  long  hair,  the  head  is  not  to  be


94


Part  I.  Applications  op  water.


touched  at  all ;  if  the  hah-  is  short,  a  gentle  and  sparing
shower  on  the  head  is  given.  With  nervous  people  care
must  be  taken  that  the  spine  is  not  watered  too  strongly
or  for  too  long  a  time.  The  gush  would  be  felt  like  a
piercing  knife,  and  the  patient  would  not  be  able  to  bear
it,  although  there  is  no  danger  whatever.  The  attendant
gives  the  jet  of  water  more  or  less  fully,  higher  or
lower ,  i.  e.  stronger  or  weaker ,  according  to  want  or
purpose.  At  the  same  time  he  must  give  heed,  if  the  pa-
tient complains  of  special  pains  at  some  single  spot,  and
he  must  see,  if,  perhaps,  there  are  symptoms  of  pimples
anywhere,  of  ulcers,  accumulations  of  blood  (blue  stains),
tumours  etc.

The  more  proportionately  the  water  flows  over  the
watered  parts,  the  easier  it  is  to  stand  the  gush,  and
the  quicker  an  equal  warmth  on  all  spots  will  be  produced.

There  are  people  (especially  those  who  are  al-
ready corpulent  or  inclined  to  stoutness)  with  whom
the  reaction  does  not  take  place  for  a  long  time.  This
is  to  he  perceived  by  the  skin  remaining  without  colour,
just  as  it  was  before  the  shower,  not  reddened  by  the
returning  blood  streaming  to  the  watered  parts.  In  such
cases  it  will  be  good  to  wash  the  wetted  back  slightly
with  the  hand  after  the  first  can,  by  this  little  rubbmg
the  skin  is  incited  to  activity.  As  a  rule  at  the  third
or  fourth  gush  the  entire  reaction  takes  place.

For  weakly  persons  one  can  is  sufficient.  To  begin-
ners 1  or  2  may  be  given,  to  those  more  advanced  2  or  3,
to  healthy  and  strong  persons  5  or  6  cans.  But  the
feeling  of  comfort  must  by  no  means  lead  to  excess.

After  the  shower  the  chest  is  quickly  washed,  tace
and  hands  dried,  the  clothes  put  on  without  drying,  and  _
exercise  taken  either  by  walking  or  working.

The  upper  shower-bath  (if  an  ablution  is  ^lot  given)
must  invariably  succeed  the  head  vapour-bath.  Besides  this
it  is  regularly  taken  in  connection  with  the  knee-shower
in  which  cases  it  is  taken  first,  the  knee-shower  fo  lowmg
after  the  entire  re-dressing  of  the  upper  body.  But  again
I  distinctly  say  that  the  knee -shower  is  not  bound  to
follow  the  upper  shower.


Shower-baths:  The  upper  shower-bath.


95


Both  shower -baths  take  a  most  prominent  place
amongst  the  means  of  hardening;  and  may  be  applied
to  persons  of  both  sexes  without  the  least  fear  of  harm.

I  know  people
who  apply  both
showers  to  them-
selves every  morn-
ing when  rising.

First  they  take
the  upper-shower
by  pouring  water
down  their  back
by  means  of  a
clever  handling  of
a  small  can,  or
better  still ,  by
turning  on  the
water  -  tap  in  a
wash  -  house  or
bath  -  room  and
letting  the  moder-
a-te  jet  of  water
play  upon  their
"back.  They  move
under  the  flowing
water  just  as  they
please  and  as  it
best  suits  their  purpose.  Afterwards  they  direct  the
stream  of  water  to  their  knees  in.  the  same  way.  In
5  minutes  time  it  is  done  and  a  great  benefit  bestowed
upon  the  whole  body.

Those  who  object  to  have  the  shower-bath  given  by
another  person,  and  yet  cannot  well  do  it  themselves,  may
wash  the  upper  part  of  the  body  with  very  cold  water,
then  putting  feet  and  legs  into  a  vessel  partly  filled
with  water,  they  may  take  some  water  and  let  it  slowly
run  down  the  knees  and  feet.  Even  with  this  primitive
self- application  of  both  showers  the  good  effect  will  be
obtained.


Fig.  20.


96


Part  I.  Applications  op  water.


7.  The  arin-gu8h.

As  the  legs  receive  special  treatment  by  the  knee
and  thigh  gashes,  so  likewise  it  can  often  be  of  very
good  service  to  give  the  arms  a  special  watering,  too.

The  gush  begins  at  the  hands  and  is  directed  up-
wards to  the  shoulders;  it  is  always  given  from  both
sides ,  and  generally  one  can  of  water  suffices  for  one
arm.  Sometimes  this  gush  is  ordered  and  taken  simply
as  a  hardening  means  for  the  arms,  sometimes  it  is  useful
for  dissolving  accumulations  of  matter  in  the  arms,
sometimes  to  allay  inflammations  and  to  ease  the  pain
caused  by  them,  and  soraetunes  to  banish  rheumatism
from  the  arms.  It  is  a  great  benefit  for  those  who  are
poor  of  blood,  and  for  chlorotic  people.  Those  who  have
a  running  spring,  at  their  command  may  hold  both  arms
under  it  for  one  minute,  and  they  would  surely  not
be  reproached  by  me  with  not  having  chosen  a  proper
arm  gush.

8.  The  head-ffush.

If  I  were-  to  pass  by  this  gush  in  silence  I  should
not  be  doing  justice  to  an  application  which  has  been
of  great  service  to  me  in  cases  of  complaints  of  the  eyes
and  ears.  This  gush  is  taken  by  pourmg  the  water  over
the  head  and  letting  the  jet  play  about  the  ears,  on  the
cheeks  and  even  for  two  seconds  on  the  closed  eyes.  At
first  one  can  of  water  is  used,  afterwards  two.  It  wiU
not  be  unnecessary  to  msist  again  on  the  thorough  drymg
of  the  hah  after  the  head-gash.


E.  Ablutions.

The  ablutions  are  divided  into  whole  and  part  ab-
lutions. We  shall  here  speak  of  both  kinds.  The  prin.-
ciples  regarding  the  rubbing  and  not -drying  are  ad-
mitted here  also.  The  chief  thing  with  every  ablution
is  that  the  water  should  uniformly  and  as  much  as
possible  eqaally  be  appUed  to  body  or  to  the  V^^}^
part  to  .  be  treated.  Rubbing  or  kneadmg  are  entirely
ont  of  the  question. If  sometimes  a  vigorous  washmg


Ablutions:  The  w^0LI^ABLUTI0N  rou  tue  healthy.  97

Those  whole  or  part  ablations  are  the  best  which  are
done  the  most  proportionately  and  the  quickest;  none
should  last  more  than  one  or,  at  the  utmost,  two  minutes.

This,  I  think,  sufficiently  demonstrates,  how  greatly
my  system  differs  pour  that  of  similar  institutions ,  in
which  patients  are  often  subjected  to  a  treatment  with
cold  water  for  an  excessive  length  of  time.

Let  me  once  more  repeat  the  fundamental  and  uni-
versal rule  to  be  strictly  observed  without  exception  in
every  one  of  my  water-departments.  No  one  whose  body
is  not  sufficiently  warm ,  who  is  shivering  with  cold,
should  take  any  cold  water  application.  A  transgression
of  this  rule  must  have  fever,  catarrh  and  other  complaints
in  its  train.

1.  The  whole-ablution.

a.  The  whole-ablution  for  the  healthy.

The  whole-ablution  extends,  as  the  name  indicates,
to  the  whole  body  (except  the  head)  which  is  to  bo
waslied  in.stantaneously.

It  is  done  in  the  easiest  way  as  follows :
Take  a  coarse,  rough  towel,  (with  the  small  bathing
sponge  it  cannot  be  done  quickly  enough),  dip  it  in  cold
v/ater  and  begin  by  washing  chest  and  abdomen.  Then
the  back  is  washed  which  is  more  difficult  to  reach ;  but
every  one  will  soon  find  out  the  easiest  and  quickest  way
of  doing  so.  The  ablution  is  concluded  by  the  washmg  of
arms  and  legs.

The  whole  application  must  be  finished  in  one,  or
at  the  most  in  two  minutes.  Every  ablution  of  longer
duration  can  be  of  bad  effect.  Moreover,  care  must  be
taken  not  to  make  this  application  in  a  draughty  place.

Without  drying,  the  clothes  are  put  on  as  quickly
as  possible ,  and  exercise  taken  either  by  working  or
walking  until  the  skin  is  perfectly  warm  and  dry  again.

When  and  how  often  may  healthy  people  take  the
whole  abhition?

K  n  e  i  p  1) ,  Water-Cure.  17


98


Part  I.  Applications  of  water.


Whßii  rising,  in  the  morning,  every  one  washes  his
face  and  hands,  and  at  this  time  the  whole  ablution  would
be  exceedingly  suitable.  The  natural  warmth  is  then
the  strongest,  because  the  lying  in  bed  has  increased  it ;
the  washing  would  be  an  agreeable  cooling,  would  be
refreshing,  would  drive  away  sleepiness  and  mak«  one
A-igourous,  lively  and  fresh  for  the  day's  work  from  the
first  beginnmg.  There  is  no  question  of  loss  of  time;  for
the  whole  ablution  takes  but  one  mmute,  and  then  work
may  be  taken  up  without  delay.

How  many  people  living  in  town  take  a  morning
walk  in  spring  and  in  summer  !  Let  them  once  try  the
whole -ablution  before  doing  so.  I  am  quite  sure,  they
will  not  need  a  second  recommendation.

It  would  not  be  wise,  if  those  who  cannot  go  for  a
walk,  or  to  work  immediately  after  the  whole -ablution,
would  on  that  account  omit  it ;  for  if  they  were  do  he
down  again  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  after  having  taken
the  application,  this  would  answer  exactly  the  same  purpose.

If  you  can  make  up  your  mind  to  undertake  this
little  exertion  every  day,  or  at  least  every  second  or  third
day  for  some  time,  you  will  soon  experience,  what  great
benefit  you  thereby  have  rendered  your  body.

If  you  have  no  spare  time  early  in  the  morning,  any
hour  of  the  day  will  be  suitable  for  the  ablution.  Go  to
your  bedroom,  to  the  wash-house  etc.  for  2  or  3  minutes,
and  the  beneficial  work  is  done.  If  only  we  were  not
so  comfort-loving  and  shy  of  water!

The  black-smith,  having  finished  his  work,  washes
his  face  to  cleanse  it  from  soot  and  coal-dust ;  the  peasant
coming  home  from  the  field,  washes  his  hands,  and  in  the
hot  summer-time  before  every  other  refreshment,  he  takes
a  mouthful  of  water,  to  rinse  his  mouth  and  palate  How
wkely  both  of  them  would  act  if,  after  their  fa  iguing
dav's  work  they  were  to  wash  away  the  last  drop  ot
'rpiSu  in  a'whole  abtation  !  Would  that  tins  re-
freshing and  Btrengthenmg  practice  were  better  kno«n.


Ablutions  :  The  whole-abliitton  for  toe  sick. '  99


But  not  every  one  will  derive  the  aforesaid  benefit
from  this  ablution  at  night,  for  with  many  it  causes  a
rather  unduly  exciting  of  the  nervous  system.  Therefore,
try  a  few  times  to  find  out,  if  you  are  able  to  bear  it,
in  which  case  bedtime  will  be  found  the  most  convenient
for  such  applications.

I  have  recommended  the  whole-ablution,  which  is  a
milder  application,  instead  of  the  whole -bath  against
sleeplessness  with  the  last  result.

In  winter  time  I  always  advise  people  first  to  lie  in
bed  for  about  10  minutes,  and  only  then  when  the  whob
body  has  become  thoroughly  warm  to  undertake  the
ablution.

b.  The  whole-ablution  for  the  sick.

It  is  precisely  with  sick  people  that  I  have  learnt
not  only  how  little  profit  is  derived  from  rubbing,  brushing,
etc.,  but  moreover,  how  much  harm  is  done  through  it
by  disproportionate  warming,  by  excitement,  etc.

Kegardmg  the  whole  -  ablution  for  sick  people  the
main  point  to  be  well  observed  is,  that  no  part  of  the
body,  even  including  the  soles  of  the  feet,  be  neglected,
but  that  the  intire  surface  of  the  body  very  quickly  and
as  equally  as  possible  be  touched  by  the  water.

Foi  sick  psople  I  always  order  the  ablution  to  be
taken  as  follows :

The  patient  sits  up  in  bed,  or,  in  case  of  great
weakness,  is  supported  by  someone.

The  back  is  quickly  washed,  along  the  whole  of  the
spine ;  this  is  done  in  half  a  minute,  and  the  patient  can
lie  down  again.  Then  chest  and  abdomen  are  wa.shed;
those  who  are  not  excessively  weak,  generally  do  this
themselves.  In  one  minute  or  less,  this  also  is  accom-
plished; in  the  same  manner  the  arms,  and  lastly  the
legs.  In  3  or  4  minutes,  all  is  over,  and  the  patient
feels  as  if  beginning  a  new  life.  With  good  will  and
kmd  care  this  benefit  may  be  afforded  to  one  who  is
seriously  ill  as  easily  as  the  washing  of  hands  and  face.

7*


100  Paht  T.  Applications  of  water.


After  a  few  application!?,  the  person  administering  it  will
find  the  proceeding  an  easy  one.

Should  the  whole-ablution  really  be  too  much  for  a
person  who  is  seriously  ill,  2  or  3  part-ablutions  may  be
apphed  mstead.  In  the  morning  chest,  abdomen  and  arms
are  washed ,  in  the  afternoon ,  back  and  feet.  Or  chest
and  abdomen  may  be  washed  in  the  morning,  the  back
in  the  middle  of  the  day,  and  the  arms  and  legs  in
the  afternoon.

A  carefal ,  quick  ablution  can  never  do  any  harm,
even  if  it  is  done  with  the  freshest  water,  which  is
always  the  best.

When,  and  how  often,  the  whole-ablution  is  to  be
taken  by  patients,  is  said  where  the  different  diseases  are
spoken  of.

I  only  wish  to  observe  here ,  that  especially  in
violent  fever,  and  also  m  cases  of  diseases  accompanied
by  such  fever,  e.  g.  typhus  and  small-pox,  the  whole-
ablutions  play  a  chief  part  and  are  always  taken  mstead
of  the  cold  whole-baths,  when  the  latter  for  some  reason
or  other  camiot  be  taken.

The  time  for  the  repetition  of  the  ablution  is  indi-
cated by  the  increasing  heat  and  the  agitation  connected
with  it ;  according  to  circumstances  it  may  be  repeated
every  half  hour.

I  have  cured  many  diseases  like  catarrh ,  mucous
fever,  small- pox,  typhus  etc.  solely  by  the  use  of  the
whole-ablution.  j-i  j.  j

For  weak  natures  I  very  often  use  vinegar  diluted
with  water  instead  of  water  for  the  ablution  not  to
speak  of  its  more  thoroughly  cleansmg  the  skm,  and
opening  the  pores,  it  has  also  a  strengthenmg  effect.

It  is  very  often  said  that  the  ablutions  with  wme,
spirit,  etc.  (I  except  the  vinegar)  are  of  extraordinary  good
effect.  I  have  tried  such  ablutions  very  of^em  and  scm
tinised  them ;  but  the  effect  was  always  but  the  ordmary
one,  sometimes  less  than  that.


Bandages:  The  head  bakdage.


101


Years  ago  the  French  brandy  was  considered  as  ihe
„Non  phs  ultra"  of  all  means  of  washing;  thousands  of
bottles  were  sold  and  bought;  but  then  for  some  years
it  was  no  longer  spoken  of,  and  it  is  only  lately  that
this  spirit  is  again  making  a  tour  round  the  world.

Such  remedies  have  appeared  at  different  times  like
the  comets.  Oftentimes  they  drag  a  big  tail  after  them ;
but  then  they  disappear  for  ever.  Thjy  are  no  regular,
ordmary  stars,  shniing  quietly  night  after  night  without
interruption  and  without  ceasing.  I  should  like  to  com-
pare the  water  with  the  latter.  It  operates ,  and  its
application  will  remain,  when  such  „extraordmary"  streams
have  long  ceased  flowing,  partly  because  they  did  not
stand  the  test.

My  most  sincere  wish  is  that  the  water  may  open
its  path  everywhere,  but  especially  into  those  circles  which
could  do  so  much  to  make  its  beneficial  effects  known
to,  and  appreciated  by,  all  others.

2.  The  part-Jiblution

does  not  relate  to  the  whole  body,  but  to  certain  parts
of  it.  It  is  done  with  the  hand,  or  vdth  a  coarse  towel,
dipped  in  water.  For  the  rest  the  rules  are  the  same
as  above.

If  a  finger  or  a  toe,  a  foot  or  a  hand,  or  any  other
part  of  the  body  be  inflamed  —  then  use  the  water  to
extinguish  whenever  and  wherever  there  is  fire.

Detailed  particulars  regarding  the  time  when  such
part  -  ablutions  may  be  necessary,  are  given  with  the
special  cases  of  diseases.


P.  Bandages.

In  the  first  place  we  name

1.  The  head-bandage.

This  can  be  applied  in  a  twofold  way.


102


Part  I. Applications  of  wa'jer.


The  whole  head ,  face  and  hair  is  entirely  wetted,
so  that  the  water  penetrates  to  the  skin  ;  but  the  hair  must
not  drip  with  water ;  that  would  be  too  much  of  a  good
thing.  A  dry  cloth  is  put  closely  round  the  head,  so  as
to  prevent  the  air  from  entering,  leaving  only  half  the
forehead  and  the  eyes  visible.  In  less  than  one  hour,
even  in  half  an  hour  the  hair  will  be  dry.

This  ablution  and  covering  of  the  head,  may  be
repeated  once,  twice  or  even  three  times.  Only  be  careful
that  the  cloth  covering  the  wet  head  is  quite  dry  when
put  on.  The  second  and  third  application  should  each
last  half  an  hour ;  but  before  every  fresh  application  the
hair  must  be  thoroughly  dry.

At  the  end  of  the  last  application  accustom  yourself
to  the  practice  of  washing  neck  and  head  quickly  with
cold  water,  and  of  drying  them  as  after  the  morning
washing.

A  still  better  way  of  application  is  the  following,
especially  in  cases  where  strong  secrition  of  unhealthy
matter  is  intended.

The  head  is  washed  as  above  said.  This  tune  the
bandaging  is  done  with  two  cloths,  first  with  the  her-
metically closing  one,  as  in  the  first  application,  and  then
with  a  lighter  woolen  cloth  likewise  closely  fitting.  Should
the  heat  in  the  head  be  very  intense,  the  under  cloth  as
well  as  the  hair  might  be  wetted.

If  the  application  is  to  be  made  for  a  longer  tune,
the  renewing  of  the  wet  cloth  must  not  be  delayed,  at
the  utmost  for  no  longer  than  25  to  30  minutes.

The  application  is  concluded  as  above  said.

Complaints  of  the  head,  especially  rheumatic  ones,
originating  in  colds  or  sudden  change  of  temperature ;  scurfs,
dry  eruptions,  small  ulcers  on  the  skm  of  the  head  may
be  treated  successfully  with  the  head-bandage.

2.  The  neck-bandage.

The  milder  form  of  the  neck -bandage  consists  in
wetting  the  whole  neck  with  the  hand  or  a  towel ,  and


Bandages  :  The  neck-eandage.


103


then  bandaging  it  carefully,  but  not  too  tightly,  with  a
ciry  coarse  linen  cloth,  going  3  or  4  tunes  round  the
nock,  to  prevent  thereby  the  entrance  of  the  fresh  av'
to  the  wetted  spot.

The  second  way  of  applying  the  bandage  is  by  dip-
ping a  soft  towel  in  fresh  water  and  putting  it  round  the
neck.  The  wet  towel  is  covered  with  a  dry  one,  and  both
of  them  with  a  woollen  or  flannel  bandage,  or  any  dry
woollen  material ;  but  always  be  careful  about  the  her-
metical  closing.

My  entire  experience  compels  me  to  disapprove  i:i
general  of  applications  of  long  duration ;  they  very  often
bring  about  the  contrary  of  what  was  intended  :  Impair-
ment instead  of  improvement ,  which  very  often  is  the
only  reason  why  the  applications  lose  their  credit,  the
conhdence  of  the  public.  A  patient  who  is  thus  frightened
and  disappointed  will  scarcely  ever  be  reconciled  to  the
water-applications ;  all  the  powers  of  persuasion  and  con-
viction will  be  useless.

I  wish  to  extend  this  general  remark  to  all  ihe
bandages.

The  bandages  all  together  are  especially  intended  tO'
prevent  excessive  and  irregular  streaming  of  the  blood  to
any  particular  spot,  to  draw  away  the  blood  from  a
particular  spot ,  and  take  away  excessive  heat ,  but  if
the  bandages  are  allowed  to  remain  too  long,  the  whole
night  for  instance  on  the  diseased  spot ,  this  spot  will
become  warmer  and  warmer ;  more  blood  will  flow  towards
it;  at  last  the  heat  will  become  exceedingly  great,  and
by  this  the  inflammation  must  get  worse.

I  entirely  disapprove  of  applications  of  many  hours'
duration,  more  particularly  of  whole  nights'.  According
to  my  system  a  complete  application  lasts  for  one  hour,
at  the  most  one  hour  and  a  half:  and  every  half  hour^
according  to  circumstances  every  20  minutes ,  the  wet
bandage  is  to  be  renewed,  i.  e.  re-dipped  in  water  and  put
round  the  neck  again.  This  re -dipping  may  take  place
from  2  to  4  times  during  an  application. It  is  not  the


104


Part  I.  Appi.icatioks  of  watek.


same  with  evuiy  patient,  but  depends  on  the  more  or
less  intense  heat  which  is  felt.  The  feeling  of  a  certain
uneasiness  and  agitation  may  be  the  guide  as  to  when
the  time  for  changing  is  come.

Against  inflammations  of  the  throat,  against  difficulty
in  swallowing,  against  many  complaints  of  the  head,  the
to  assist  its  effects  by  apphcations  on  other  parts  of  the
body  e.  g.  on  the  feet  (wet  socks)  or  on  the  whole  body.


3.  The  sliawl.

The  shawl  is  a  special  application  for  the  chest  and
the  upper  part  of  the  back.  For  this  a  piece  of  coarse
linen,  one.  or  one  and  a  half  yard  sqare,  is  used.  The  linen
is  folded  in  a  trian-  '  ~

gular  form,  dipped
in water ,  wrung
^  out,  and  put  on  next
to  the  skin  as  an
ordinary  shawl.  (See  ^'^J-
fig.  23  and  24.)  It  is  then  covered  her-
metically with  a  dry  wrapper  of  linen
rig.  21-  or  woollen  mateiial. The  patient  soon

perceives  an  agreeable  warmth,  the  shawl  becomes  warm,
and  by  and  by  even  hot.

The  duration  of  this  appli-
cation may  be  from  half  an  hour
to  one  hour  and  a  half,  in  rare
eases  for  two  hours,  the  latter
when  a  stronger  effect  is  wished
for.

In  cases  of  longer  duration
he  renewing,  i.  e.  the  dipping
Fig.  23, of  the  bandage ,  ought  not  to  Fig.
be  overlooked. It  should  be  done  after  half,  or
quarters  of  an  hour,  usually  then  when  the  heat  is
and  the  bandage  becomes  warm  or  hot.


24.

three
great,


Bandages:  The  foot-bandage.


105


This  perfectly  harmless  bandage  operates  in  a  dissolv-
congestions,  in  the  first  stages  of  inflammations  on,
or  in  the  head,  feverish  catarrhs,  phlegm  in  the  throat,
in  the  wind-pipe,  or  on  the  chest.

It  has  always  been  of  the  greatest  service  to  females
who  were  suffering  from  melancholy,  or  whose  mmd  was
disturbed.  In  connection  with  another  equally  slight  appli-
cation the  sliawl  was  quite  sufficient  to  draw  the  blood
away  from  the  overfilled  head.

This  second  application  was  generally  wet  socks,
foot-bandages,  or  a  warm  foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt.

4.  Tlie  foot-l)aiKing:e.

This  bandage  is  always  an  important  auxiliary  appli-
cation, i.  e.  it  is  used  to  assist  other  applications.  We
have  two  kinds  of  foot-bandages,  namely :

a.  The  foot-bandage  proper.

Country  people  whose  time  and  means  are  limited,
take  this  bandage  in  the  simplest  way,  by  putting  on  at
night  a  pair  of  wet  socks,  and  over  them  dry  woollen
stockmgs,  and  during  the  time  of  application  they  may
lie  in  bed  under  a  good  covering.

If  you  object  to  this,  you  may  dip  coarse  pieces  of
linen,  or  a  linen -bandage  into  a  mixture  of  half  water
and  half  vinegar,  swathe  the  feet  with  them  to  above
the  ankles ,  put  a  dry  covering  around  (a  flannel  ban-
dage is  the  best,)  and  then  -^^-ap  yourself  well  up  in  bed.

The  application  lasts  for  one  hour,  one  and  a  half
or  two  hours,  and  this  time  must  be  spent  in  bed.

In  case  of  great  heat  (the  application  is  chiefly
intended  for  the  removing  of  heat,  as  for  instance  in  case
of  inflammation  of  the  lungs ,  or  pectoral  fever ,  or  in-
flammation of  the  bowels)  the  bandage  must  be  renewed,
at  every  increase  of  heat.  .

In  all  cases  where  morbid  juices  are  to  be  drawn
away  from  the  feet,  where  the  heat  is  to  be  taken  away,
where  the  blood  is  to  be  drawn  down  from  the  upper
part  of  the  body,  this  foot-bandage  is  of  excellent  service.


106


Part  I. Appmcations  op  wateii.


Do  not  confound,  it  however,  with  the  foot-bath  and
its  efl'ects !  The  duration  of  the  foot-bath  is  much  shorter,
and  therefore  its  effect  is  more  Umited.  It  indeed  leads
the  warmth ,  the  blood ,  to  the  feet ;  but  a  purification,
an  evacuation  of  morbid  juices  cannot  be  effected  by
either  a  cold  or  a  warm  foot-bath.

I  must  not  forget  one  application  of  this  foot- ban-
dago.  If  you  are  able  to  bear  the  water  -  applications  at
night,  put  on  wet  socks  before  going  to  sleep ;  of  course
dry  ones  over  thsm.  By  so  doing  you  will  lose  no  time;
you  will  sleep  exceedingly  well,  and  need  not  trouble
about  the  time  of  duration.  But  remember  that  when
awakening  in  the  right,  or  early  in  the  morning,  the
wet  socks  must  be  put  off  at  once.

To  country  people,  who  are  very  tired  at  night,  this
foot -bandage  gives  great  relief,  even  more  thoroughly
than  the  cold  foot-bath.

If  you  are  suffering  from  cold  feet,  only  try  this  foot-
bandage  at  night.

I  also  have  often  recommended  it  with  success  to
people  with  sweating  feet,  but  only  after  they  had  taken
several  foot-vapours.

b.  The  bandage  above  the  knees.

The  bandage  reaching  above  the  knees  operates  in
strongly  than  the  foot-bandage  proper.

The  wet  Hnen  bandage  which,  when  used  as  foot-
bandage,  reaches  above  the  ankles,  here  extends  to  above
the  knees,  and  is  well  covered  with  dry,  if  possible,  woolljn
wrappers.

The  time  of  duration,  as  well  as  the  other  rules,  are
the  same  as  for  the  foot-bandage  a. , ,  .

I  strongly  recommend  this  bandage,  for  drawing  ott
heat  from  the  upper  body,  for  removing  great  wearmess,
and  especially  for  the  loosening  of  tormentmg  ga?es.

It  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  „standing  in
v.-ater  to  above  the  knees",  which  is  spoken  of  with  the
half  baths. That  application  is  only  of  a  strengthenmg


Bandages  :  The  lower  bandage.


107


nature,  but  is  powerless  to  secrete  or  draw  out  unhealthy
matter.

5.  The  lower  bandag'O

is  thus  called,  because  it  is  principally  employed  againsi
complaints  of  the  legs  and  the  lower  part  of  the  body.
It  begins  under  the  arms  and  reaches  down  over  the  feet.
Shoulders  and  arms  are  not  touched  and  must,  when  the
patient  lies  in  bed,  be  well  covered  with  the  shirt  or
better  still  with  warmer  clothing ,  in  order  to  keep
them  warm.

The  lower  bandage  is  prepared  and  applied  as  follows :
A  woollen  blarket,  as  wide  as  possible,  is  extended
lengthwise  on  the  sheet  which  covers  the  mattress  or  the
straw-bed.  The  linen  prepared  for  the  bandage  must  be
large  enough  to  go  round  the  body  twice,  in  many  cases
3  to  4  tunes ,  and  to  reach  down  over  the  feet.  It
is  doubled,  then  dipped  in  cold  water,  well  wrung  out
so  as  no  longer  to  drip ,  and  laid  in  the  form  of  a
rectangle  in  the  bed  upon  the  prepared  blanket.  The


Fig  25

patient  lies  down  on  the  wet  sheet,  tucks  it  in  on  the
right  and  left  side,  but  in  such  a  way  that  wet  comes
on  wet,  and  no  part  of  the  body  remains  uncovered.  The
blanket,  which  was  laid  under  the  wet  linen  is  then  drawn
together  over  this  as  a  protecting  and  hermetical  wrapper ;
the  whole  is  carefully  covered  wi^h  a  feather -quilt.  In
most  cases,  an  extra  covering  will  be  required  for  the
feet. (See  fig.  25.)

The  matter  is  not  as  complicated  as  it  may  appear
when  readmg.  The  whole  can  be  facilitated  in  this  way  :


108  Part  I. Applications  of  water.


The  patient  being  still  out  of  bed,  dressed  perhaps  with
batliing  trousers ,  m-aps  himself  up  in  the  wet  bandaga
according  to  the  prescription,  and  then  Ues  down  on  the
extended  blanket.  In  order  to  accomplish  all  as  quickly
as  possible  and  to  prevent  him  from  being  unduly  exposed
to  the  air,  some  one  else  may  easily  help  him  to  smoothe
the  wet  bandage,  to  put  it  right,  to  fasten  the  edges,
and  lastly  to  cover  the  patient  carefdly.

I  know  many  persons  who  can ,  without  trouble
and  in  the  shortest  time  (that  is  the  main  point),  pre-
pare and  apply  all  the  larger  bandages  without  any
assistance.

One  remark  may  find  place  here,  to  take  away  the
horror  which  may  have  seized  many  when  readmg  this.

If  you  cannot  ovprcome  your  aversion  to  the  cold
water,  if  you  have  little  natural  warmth,  tender  nerves,
etc.,  you  may  simply  dip  the  bandage  in  hot  water.

For  weakly  people,  for  those  who  are  poor  of  blood,
and  especially  for  the  aged,  I  do  not  exactly  order  the
dipping  into  hot  water,  but  I  always  prefer  it.

The  application  of  the  lower  bandage  lasts  one.  one
and  a  half,  sometimes  two  hours.  The  feeling  of  cold  which
is  experienced  at  first,  will  soon  give  way  to  an  agreeable
warmth.

Poor  country  people  make  a  much  shorter  proceeding
of  it.  They  take  an  old,  rather  worn  out,  and  therefore
less  stiff  flour-sack,  dip  it  into  the  water,  wring  it  out
thoroughly,  and  then  slip  into  it  to  under  the  arms.
In  this  comical  attire  they  lie  down  on  the  extended  blanket
in  the  bed,  and  wrap  themsilvas  well  up  with  this  and
the  feather -quilt.  Hundreds  have  tried  this  kmd  ot
„sacking".  Don't  be  ashamed  of  it;  the  sack  will  agree
very  well  with  you!

The  effects  of  the  lower  bandage  which  is  always
tak-n  in  connection  with  other  applications  are  various:
Warming,  dissolving,  and  evacuating.  It  produces  these
<-.ffjcts,  as  has  already  been  said,  particularly  on  the
bowels Against  swollen  feet,  rheumatics  and  gout,  against


Bakdagf.s:  The  short  bandage.


109


complaints  of  the  kidneys,  flatulence,  cramps  etc.  it  is
always  used  as  a.  valuable  auxiliary.

Instead  of  simple  cold  or  vparm  water,  I  very  often
use  decoctions  of  hay  flowers,  sour  hay,  oat-straw^,  pine-
twigs  for  wetting  the  bandages.  The  sour  hay  is  a  sub-
stitute for  hay -flowers;  both  of  them  are  good  against
urinary  diseases,  and,  in  a  subordinate  way,  against  gravel
and  stone  complaints.

A  decoction  of  oat-straw  has  always  proved  of  good
effect  against  gout  and  gravel ;  decoctions  of  pine-twig?,
for  weakly  constitutions ,  for  leading  out  gases  and  for
removing  spasms  of  the  bowels.

6.  The  short  bnudag-e

is  the  one  most  universally  applied.  It  forms  a  separate
application  of  itself,  i.  e.  it  operates  on  the  whole  body
without  any  connexion  with  other  water  -  applications.
It  raises  the  natural  warmth,  and  on  the  other  hand  takes
away  the  too  great  heat,  according  as  its  application  lasts
for  a  longer  or  shorter  time.

„This  bandage  is  worth  everything,"  some  one  used
to  say;  „it  is  among  the  bandages  what  the  thiller  ij
among  the  other  horses."

The  advantage  that  every  one  can
apply  it  to  himself,  easily  and  conveniently,
has  much  contributed  to  its  being  liked
as  a  general  favourite.  The  short  ban-
dage begins  its  wrappings  like  the  lower
bandage,  under  the  arms,  and  ends  above
the  knees.  A  course  piece  of  linen  of
such  a  breadth  is  wetted,  wrung  out  and
put  round  the  body  closely.  A  blanlcet  1
closes  the  wrapper  hermetically,  and  the '
feather  -  quilt  brings  on  the  necessary
warmth. (See  fig.)

Weak and aged persons and  in
general  all  those  of  poor  blood,  mt  only
may,  but  ought  to  apply  the  bandage Fig.  26
warm.


110  Paiit  I. Applications  op  water.

The  whole  application  lasts  according  to  prescription,
one,  one  and  a  half,  som'itimes  two  hours.

If  healthy  people  would  take  a  short  bandage  every
week,  or  at  least  every  fortryght,  they  would  entirely
prevent  a  great  number  of  diseases.  It  also  operates
favorably  and  in  a  purifying  manner,  on  the  kidneys,  the
liver,  and  especially  on  the  bowels,  which  it  purifies  from
shut  up  winds,  troublesome  gases,  retained  matters,  and
superfluous  water.  Dropsy,  complaints  of  the  heart  and
stomach,  very  often  originating  in  a  pressure  of  gases  up-
wards ,  and  ceasing  as  soon  as  the  latter  are  removed,
are  unknown  guests  to  the  friends  of  the  short  bandage.
I  know  a  number  of  such  true  friends,  who  sleep  many
a  night  enveloped  in  it,  and  enjoy  thereby  an  excellent
rest  until  morning.

Agamst  phlegm  of  the  stomach,  diseases  of  the  heart
and  lungs,  against  various  complaints  of  the  head  and
thj-oat,  the  short  bandage  finds  its  manifold  applications.
Further  particulars  are  to  be  found  in  the  third  part
with  a  list  of  diseases.

Whenever  I  am  in  doubt  about  a  complaint,  or  if
I  want  to  ascertain  the  exact  seat  of  a  disease,  the  short
bandage  is  always  my  truest  and  best  adviser.

Patients  whose  bowels  are  weakened  no  matter  by
what  cause,  I  advice  to  rub  the  abdomen  either  imme-
diately before  or  after  the  short  bandage,  with  lard  or
camphor-oil.

Against  cramps,  I  sometimes  order  a  single  piece  of
linen  to  be  dipped  in  vinegar  and  put  under  the  bandage,
next  to  the  skin.  For  cramps  accompanied  by  a  feeling
of  cold,  warm  bandages  are  more  suitable.

7.  The  wet  slnrt

is  an  often  used  and  much  liked  application  which  by
its  very  name  sufficiently  indicates  what  is  meant  by  it.

An  ordinary  linen  shirt  is  dipped  in  water,  wrung
out  thoroughly,  and  put  on  as  usual. The  patient  lies


Bandagt.s:  The  Spanish  mantle.


Ill


down  in  bed  upon  an  extended  blanket,  wraps  himself  up
well,  or  is  wrapped  up  by  some  one  else,  and  then  covered
with  a  feather-quilt.

I  know  a  gentleman  who  found  even  this  too  com
plicated.  He  stood  in  a  bath ,  covered  with  his  shirt
and  had  a  can  of  water  poured  over  his  whole  body.  Then
he  was  wi'apped  in  the  woolen  covers.  He  could  not
praise  highly  enough  this  „fir.st  and  best  application,"
and  spoke  in  glorious  terms  of  how  it  brought  on  good
sbep,  and  a  happy  cheerfulness,  made  the  mind  brisk,
and  refreshed  the  body.

The  patient  remains  in  the  wet  shirt  for  one,  one
and  a  half,  or  at  the  most  two  hours.  With  regard  to
its  effects,  I  have  made  the  experience  chat  it  opens  the
pores  and  extracts,  like  a  not  too  stroug  vesicatory:  that
it  appeases,  removes  congestions  and  spasms,  brings  on
proportionate  natural  warmth,  and'liighly  improves  the
general  health,  by  its  distinguished  effects  on  the  skin.  I
have  applied  it ,  with  very  great  success ,  agamst  dis-
temper of  the  mind,  to  children  suffering  from  St.  Vitus's-
dance,  and  such  like  cases,  and  especially  against  diseases
of  the  skin.  If,  in  the  latter  cases,  strong  evacuations
were  wished  for,  eruptions  such  as  scarlatina  etc.  to  be
brought  out,  I  ordered  the  shirt  to  be  dipped  in  salt-
water, or  in  water  mixed  with  vinegar.

8.  The  Spanish  mantle

This  strange  appellation  is  not  of  my  invention  but,
being  now  universally  in  use  amongst  the  water-friends
of  mine,  I  have  no  reason  to  look  for  an  other  name.

The  Spani=?h  mantle,  called  also  the  large  bandage,
is  a  whole  application  of  itself,  like  the  whole-bath  and
the  short-bandage,  because  its  effects  extend  to  the  whole
organism.  Nevertheless  in  serious  and  dangerous  illnesses
it  is  always  used  only  alternately  with  other  water-
applications.

In  what  does  this  greatest  bandage  consist  ?


1.12


Part  I.  Applications  of  water.


A  kind  of  mantle  is  made  of  coarse
linen. It  resembles  a  wide  shirt,  open  in
front ,  and  reacliing  down  over  the  toes ;
it  could  also  be  called  a  wide,  long,  linen
night-gown. (See  fig.) This  mantle  is
dipped  into  cold  water,  wrung  out  and
put  on  like  a  shirt,  one  part  folding  well
over  the  other  in  front. For  weaker  people,
for  the  aged,  for  those  poor  of  blood,  or
afraid  of  water,  the  mantle  may  be  dipped
into  hot  water. The  bed  must  be  pre-
pared beforehand,  so  that  the  woollen  cover.s
are  ready  to  receive  the  cloaked  patient.
The  best  way  is  to  spread  a  very  wide
blanket,  or  two  smaller  ones,  broadwise
^on  the  mattress  or  straw-bed. The  patient
hes  down  on  them,  and  is  then  closely
wrapped  in  the  blankets  and  covered  with  a  feather-quilt.
(See  fig.) It  is  important  that  the  putting  on  of  the
wet  mantle  and  the  wrapping  up  in  wool,  are  done  as
quickly  as  possible,  in  order  that  the  exposure  to  the
fresh  air  be  Ihnited  to  the  shortest  space  of  time  possible.


i-  g.  28.

Once  a  patient  came  to  me  who  was  sufPering  from
every  possible  infirmity.  Congestions,  hemorrhoid.s.  tor-
mented him,  and  a  fattiness  of  the  heart  caused  hnn
great  anguish.  He  made  it  a  rule  to  put  on  the  Spam.h
mantle  once,  or  twice,  a  week;  and  a^ei-  havmg  d^e
so  for some  time,  all  the  above  named  complamts,


Bandages:  Tee  Spanish  mantle.  113


together  with  others  were,  as  he  called  it,  blown  away.
From  that  time  up  to  this  day  the  gentleman  uses  the
Spanish  mantle  as  a  universal  remedy;  and  as  he  has
not  much  spare  time,  he  puts  it  on  when  he  goes  to  bed,
and  only  takes  it  off  when  awakening  during  night,  or
early  in  the  morning.  He  had  a  second  Spanish  mantle
made,  of  strong  woollen  material,  which  served  him
instead  of  the  blankets ,  and  which  made  the  help  of
others,  for  the  application,  unnecessary.

The  time  of  duration  of  an  application  is  one,  one
and  a  half,  or  at  the  most,  two  hours.  It  depends  on
the  strength  of  the  individual,  but  especially  on  the  cor-
pulence. For  a  weakly  country-man  one  hour,  or  one  hour
and  a  half,  will  be  sufficient;  for  a  brewer,  two  hours

If  you  wish  to  know  in  what  manner ,  and  how
strongly  the  Spanish  mantle  operates,  simply  inspect  the
water  m  - which  the  bandage,  after  the  application,  must
always  be  washed  most  carefully.  You  will  find  it  quite
5  Ji  ^s^o^ished,  and  think  it  almost  in-

credible, that  this  bandage  is  able  to  extract  such  dirt.
I  remember  cases  where  the  white  linen  of  the  mantle
seemed  to  be  dyed  yellow,  and  no  lather,  but  only  the
coloä'"^  °^ g^^ss ,  could  give  it  back  its  former

nf  .J^^^p^^V'^^mantle  thoroughly  opens  the  chief  pores
of  the  whole  body  m  the  mildest  (by  no  means  rugged)
form ,  it  evacuates  all  dirt,  phlegm  etc.  I  need  not  say
how  beneficially  it  must,  therefore,  operate  on  the  normal
temperature  0  the  body,  and  on  th.  'general  good  SeZ'
1  especially  apply  this  great  bandage  in  cases  of
rather  general  catarrhs,  affectmg,  more  or  less,  the  who^
body,  mucous  fever,  gout,  articdar  disease ,  small-pox
typhus  ;  to  prevent  strokes  etc. You  will  find  t  vTiy  often

.artpoken^of.^'^  ''^^'^  '^''^  ^^^^'^  variourcfset^
If  the  mantle  is  dipped  in  decoctions  of  hay-flowers
afainsr''' •  ^  f^^'^^  ' '^'''-^'■^  exceedingly  3

)>  n  e  1  pp.  Watflr-Cure

s


114  Part  1.  Applications  of  water.


G.  Drinking  of  water.


KeRarding  this  1  can  be  very  brief.  I  caution  against
two  extremes,  i.  e.  against  two  views,  transgressing  tli3
rio-ht  measure.  Some  decennaries  ago,  there  were  water-
ddnking  tournaments. He  who  could  master  the  highest
number  of  pints  ("Masserl"),  was  the
ouantitv  of  4,  6,  8,  10  pints  daily  was  not  at  all  a  raritj.
Up  to  this  day  the  thought  is  haunting  about many  ^
mind,  that  much  water-drinking  must  make  healthy,  let
?Ms dea  is  to  be  preferred  to  the  other,  which  whispers
to  the  glowing  brin  that  3,  4,  5  pints  of  brown  barley-
water  (beer)  ^ould  not  be  too  much  fluid  for  the  quantity
of  solid  food  which  a  person  consumes  daily !

To  people  of  the  second  kind  it  seems  that  just  ta3
contrary  of  the  above  said  is  right;  they  do  not  drink  any
watei  for  weeks,  even  for  months  ;  for  in  their  ojmion  th
tokh  °  of  water  does  no  good;  they  shun  the  beer ;  still

^"^^^i^^e^^^^  the  two  extremes.
^ Some  minutes  before  the  clock  strikes,  it  gives
Wn«  +bMi  the  sreat  Workmaster,  our  Creator,

whether  he  be  healthy  or  sick.


DlUNKING  OF  WATER.  115


Therefore  our  special  and  liighest  principle  on  this
point,  a  golden  principle,  which  ought  to  be  observed  by
every  one,  is  this :

Drink  as  often  as  you  are  thirsty,  and  never  drmk
much '

I  know  people  who,  the  whole  week  long,  perhaps,
do  not  drink  one  drop  of  water ;  others  who,  at  breakfast'
take  the  usual  glass  and  are  satisfied  for  the  whole  day
They  never  feel  thirst ;  the  reason  is  that  by  our  manner
of  preparing  food,  a  good  quantity  of  water  is  conveyed
to  the  body  dady. Except  when  cau.'^jd  by  great  heat
in  summer,  or  by  such  heat  as  is  generally  the  forerunner
ot  an  illness,  the  real  thirst  is  a  rare  guest  with  many
people;  and  to  me,  at  least,  it  is  always  a  puzzle,  how
nevertheless, so  many  people  occasion  such  real  inun-
dations to  their  poor stomach  without  any  necessity
buch  doings  cannot,  of  course,  remain  unrevenged.*

during  ^■w[-°'pI''^  about  . drinking- at  table,  chiefly

aunng:  dii  nei.  By  country  people  it  is  scarcely  done  at
east,  not  in  any  great  measure.  "^The  matter  rather  concerns
town  people  and  those  of  higher  standing.  To  drhik  between
eat  ng  is  not  good,  people  say.  I  know  many  physicia^^^^^^
pec  ally  such  ot  the  ancient  school,  who  advise  liealäv  ^pnnlp
""^  ^'"'"^  to' their  pSits  wLLeTe?

who  like  mSSin"/  T'  ^^P^rience:  knows  that  aU  those
>vao  iiite  much  drinking,  always  complain  of  bad  digestion
That  cannot  be  otherwise. But  why?

be  Itw'^'te ';wl,:e°orb™  IfitH  'T'

trated  hv  fliTm,. .  • ^  •  'OO"!  is  no  longer  Dene-


8*


HQ  Part  1.  Appmcations  of  water.

Drink  as  often  as  you  are  thirsty,  and  never  drink

much !  , ,  I  f  •

Country  people  do  not  hke  the  heavy  shower  ot  ram ;
they  assert  that  it  is  not  fertilizing,  and  does  more  harm
than  good  to  the  fields.  On  the  other  hand,  they  assure
us  that  those  great  morning  fogs  which  wet  the  peasant  s
hat  until  it  drips,  are  their  dear  friends,  because  they
bring  and  promote  the  "best  fertility". _ n  -i  •

The  body,  especially  the  stomach,  requires  fluids,  m
order  to  dilute  its  gastric  juice,  from  tune  to  time  to
augment  it,  and  to  become  master  over  all  the  sohd  m-
habitants. It  announces  itself  every  time  it  is  m  need;
sometimes  it  knocks  gently  by  a  mild  desire  for  water
sometimes  it  calls,  and  shouts  loudly  by  a  violent  thi  st
Then  you  should  always  listen  to  it,  let  the  shoutmg
come  from  a  healthy,  or  from  a  sick  stomach ;  but  never
gre  it  more  than  is  wholesome  for  it  ; small  quantifies
at  regalar  intervals;  in  diseases  especially, ^1^«  ^^f^
of  fefer,  rather  take  oftener,  e.  g.  every  5  to  10  mmu  es
one  spoonful  than  a  glassful  at  once. The  latter  would
not  appease  the  thirst,  but  add  a  new  complaint  to  the
existing  one.

 IfTVerson  applies  this  overponring  to  his  stomach  6  or

■iSV:  Sh^Ä^  eis  MS  to  be  «,,ed  or

are  thick  and  want  a  «lHunon.  . ^^^^^  that

the  ''''

the  last  mouthful. oMood^^

some  fluid  fo  help  the  stomach  to  di^^^^^^

after  1,  2  or  3  hours  you  are  thubty,  ^ou  u.  j

moderately. .  . .  . I  have  consulted  many

It  is  precisely  on  this  point  u^^^^^^^  ^^„,1.

able  physicians;  they  aU  Pf  /^^^^^^^^  a  sroat


JDUINKTNa  OF  WATER.


117


One  example  of  my  proceeding  may  conclude  this
passage.  A  person  is  suffering  from  costiveness  ;  the
bowels  are  tormented  with  great  heat,  and  the  poor
patient  with  a  violent  thirst.  He  thinks  he  could  drink
2,  3  or  4  glasses  of  water,  one  after  the  other ;  it  seems
to  him  as  if  it  were  poured  into  a  burning  furnace.  That
I  believe;  the  mass  of  water  goes  to  the  stomach,  and
then,  without  touclung  the  suffering  part,  or  influencing
it  favorably,  makes  a  quick  travel  through  the  body,  until
it  comes  out  entire,  and  even  floats  away  with  it  a  good
quantity  of  the  indispensable  gastric  juice.  Instead  of
the  many  glasses  of  water,  let  the  patient  take  only  one
spoonful  every  half  hour  during  one  day.  He  will  ex-
perience quite  another  effect  an  ^.ffect  which  must  neces-
sarily be  the  result  of  a  rational  treatment.

The  small  quantity  of  water  is  soon  taken  up  by
the  gastric  juice,  and  easily  mixed  with  it.  The  repetition
following  every  half  hour,  gives  more  copious  juices,  which,
flowing  through  the  body  and  the  bowels,  in  anormal  way,
cooling,  softening  and  dissolving,  soon  put  as  end  to  all
stagnation  and  constipation.  Numberless  persons  have
followed  my  advice  in  this  point,  and  they  quickly  found
helo. Probatum  est!

Much  has  been  said  and  written  lately  about  the
effects  of  drinking  hot  water  (30  to  35*  K.  as  coffee  or
tea),  especially  on  chronical  diseases.  I  myself  have,  years
ago,  obtained  good  results  when  prescribing  it  to  my
patients.  Who  would  blame,  or  condemn  a  person  for
prefermg  the  warm  water  to  the  cold  fresh  element !  That
is  simply  a  matter  of  taste.  I  have,  however,  found  by
experience  that  cold,  living  water,  does  the  same,  or
even  better  service.  For  myself  I  prefer  it  to  all  lukewarm
or  hot  water. Let  everyone  chose  what  he  likes  best!


Part  the  second.

Apotheca.


„Benedicite  universa  ^errninantia  in  terra  Domino !"
„Let  every  herb  of  tlie  earth  praise  the  Lord!"


General  remarks  and  division.


Ijmong  all  the  things  which  I  abhor  and  hate,  the
proprietary  drugs,  the  trading  with  remedies
which  are  kept  as  a  secret  by  their  inventors,
hold  a  prominent  place.

_  No  one  shall  ever  reproach  me  with  such  a
thing.  Therefore  in  this  second  part,  I  open  all
the  drawers  and  cases  of  my  apotheca,  and  let  every  one
look  mto  them,  even  to  the  last  little  tea-box  and  the
smallest  oil-bottle.*
_  Every  chemist's  shop  contains  a  great  many  expen-
sive things ;  but  in  mine,  there  is  not  much  of  the  extra-
ordmary  to  be  found.  This  I  own  quite  willingly,  and
instead  of  a  defect,  I  consider  it  a  great  recommendation
lor  my  apotheca.

Nearly  all  my  teas,  extracts,  oils,  and  powders  are
prepared  from  medicinal  herbs,  which  were  formerly
esteemed,  but  are  now  very  often  despised;  herbs  which
are  to  be  had  for  a  trifle,  and  which  our  dear  Lord  has
planted  mj)ur  own  garden,  in  the  fields,  many  of  them

external  Ji'  lllfi^J  ?^  ^^'^  secretive  oil  which  is  used

exiernally  in  special  cases  (npver  interiinlly)  has  been  respr-
ved  to  prevent  misuse. Even  if  I  were  to  make  it  \m  wn


122


round  our  houses,  many  on  remote,  unfrequented  spots,  so
that  we  can  gather  them  free  of  cost.

I  have  written  my  little  book  first  of  all  for  poor
sick  people,  for  whose  benefit,  keeping  before  my  eyes  the
heavenly  reward,  I  also  carry  on  this  troublesome  business,
or,  if  you  like  to  put  it  so,  to  spoil  other  people's  trade.
It  was  for  them  that  I  purposely  inquired  after  the  hke-
wise  poor  old  acquaintances,  setting  aside  many  other
things.  For  long  years,  I  have  examined  and  experimented,
dried  and  cut  up,  boiled  and  tasted.  There  is  not  one
little  herb  ,  or  powder  ,  which  I  have  not  myself  tried
and  found  good.  My  only  wish  is  that  my  old  acquain-
tances may  be  respected  again,  at  least  by  one  class  of

people.  jj  it,-

I  have  long  deliberated  before  I  resolved  to  add  this
apotheca  to  the  appKcations  of  water,  which  in  themselves
are  sufficient,  lest  this  index  of  remedies  which  assist
the  water  by  operating  inwardly,  could  be  looked  upon
as  a  vote  of  mistrust  in  the  water.

But  there  are  patients  who,  from  unconquerable  tear
of  water,  would  have  great  difficulty  in  resolving  to  make
a  course  of  water-applications,  often  necessary  for  some
considerable  time.  I  wished  to  facilitate  the  cure  for
them  in  other  words,  to  reduce  the  water-apphcations,
to  sii^plify  them,  and  shorten  their  duration.  This  can
and  will  be  done  by  giving  assistance  to  the  exterior  cure
(with  water)  by  an  interior  cure  (with  remedies).

Those  who  inspect  all  the  articles  of  my  apotheca,
will  see  at  once  that  they,  like  the  water  -  applications
themselves,  have  a  threefold  aim,  i.  e.  to  dissolve  morbid
matters  in  the  interior,  to  evacuate  them  and  then  to
strengthen  the  organism.  Regarding  this,  I  believe  I  may
justly'  affirm ,  that  both  cures ,  the  interior  and  the  ex-
terior, harmonize  and  work  together  with  perfect  unity.
I  caution  people  against  an  illusion.

Whoever  thinks  that  the  water  -  applications  are  to
be  used  very  rigidly  and  harshly,  is  mistaken.

Whoeve^r  is  of  the  opinion  that  he  ought  to  use  m-
terior  remedies  often  and  in  great  quantities,  is  lüve^v,,e
mistaken. Always  and  in  all  cases,  keep  to  the  golden


123


principle  :  the*  gentlest  application ,  be  it  exterior  or  in-
terior, is  the  best.*

Plants  with  doubtful  effect,  like  althea,  liquorice
wood  etc. ;  with  the  least  unfavourable  effects ,  e.  g.  on
the  stomach,  like  senna-leaves,  hops,  etc.,  above  all,
poisonous  plants,  I  have  put  aside  on  principle.**

How  good  is  God !  —  I  cannot  help  saymg  it  from  my
inmost  heart.  He  not  only  makes  the  earth  bring  forth
all  that  is  necessary  for  the  support  of  life,  for  our  daily
bread,  He  who  in  His  infinite  wisdom  has  created  everything
according  to  measure,  number  and  weight ;  makes  in  His
paternal  love  numberless  little  herbs  spring  up  from  tha
earth  in  order  to  bring  comfort  to  man  in  days  of  sickness,
mitigation,  and  healing  to  his  body  convulsed  with  pain.

How  good  is  God!  Oh,  that  we  could  recognize  it!
Let  us  search  for  the  little  herbs  which  announce  them-
selves by  the  smelling  bottles  attached  to  them  by  the
Creator,  the  aromatic  wholesome  scent ;  and  let  us  when
gathering  them,  glorify  with  filial  gratitude  our  infinitely
lovmg  Father,  who  is  in  Heaven!


There  are  many  patients  who  thnik  that  a  great  nnmher
ot  raedicines,  pills  etc.  must  cure  them. I  remember  well  a
very  able  physician  who  ordered  as  little  medicines  as  possible
and  often  complained  of  the  foolishness  of  persons  wbo^against

Jie.  '7f^nlK'-%P^'VT".'  ^'■^  ^1^''''^^  ^''^"'^  fm- medi-
cines, n  such  mtolerable.  fools  cams  and  tormented  me  "  he

once  said,  „I  gave  them  pills  made  of  bread  with  a  small,  [n-

Tlr?lv't.'''''-n'"'P^^/°,^'^'  s™*^'!  of  chemistry.

Ihey  took  the  pills,  and  when  I  saw  them  ae:ain,  I  was  sure

i.Te!'hi3  'Sä;«'"'  "^'^

**  One  word  about  sweets  and  dainties.  When  I  hear
of  men  tending  to  sucli  childish  things,  it  makes  me  feel  onite
annoyed ;  if  I  hear  tho  same  of  chilclren,  I  pify  tS  poor  n  el
tures,  and  deplore  the  shortsightedness  or  wLt  of  watcl  M-
ness  of  the  parents.  To  offer  such  things  tu  a  si c.k  pe,
would  be  an  inexcusable  offence.  1  absolutely  and  de^fde  v
condemn  all  these  dainties,  whatever  their  name  or  repu^

ÄdÄm  ""^  be n  i  SV


124:  Pai^'"^  II-  Apotheca.


Our  house -apotheca  must  consist  of  four  chief  divi-
sions, and  some  smaller  compartments.
In  the  cliief  divisions  we  put
In  the  1'' the  tinctures,

2""^ (the  largest) :  the  different  teas,
„ „ 3''^  :  the  powders,
„ „ 4*^ :  the  oils.
In  the  smaller  compartments  everything  not  belonging
to  one  of  the  said  four  divisions,  is  to  he  arranged  m

^°°*^Also^the  linen  pieces  for  handages  (always  clean  and
fresh),  the  cotton  wool,  etc.  may  he  put  m  one  ot  the

smaller  compartments.  ,• v,  4.4.1  .4.1.^

The  tinctures  and  oils  must  he  kept  m  bottles ,  the
different  teas  and  powders  either  in  strong  paper  bags
or,  which  is  hetter,  in  boxes.  (If  you  ^/^er  new  ojs  let
them  be  oval  and  proportionate,  though  of  different  size,
and  put  them  in'ranks  like  soldiers. This  makes  the
apotheca  a  pleasure  to  look  at,  and  gives  it  a  good  ap
pearance,  and  that  is  due  to  it  too. Keep  all  in  a  cool
but  not  damp  place  (to  prevent  mouldering),  and  not  m
a  too  remote  part  of  the  house.  4-  v.^a  +>ip

Every  bottle,  every  box,  or  paper  bag  ^IJ^^  have  the
name  of  its  contents  written  very  legibly  it.  IT^  be  t
way  is  to  put  the  different  medicmes  of  every  division  m

'Sf  all°;tt  order  is  to  be  kept  in  the  apotheca.
Ä^Äf  HS:rtraryisthecase,aless


Genet^al  remarks.


125


favourable  judgement  on  the  mliabitants  of  tlie  house

must  be  given.  ,  . t  n

Will  you  know  what  things  1  mean  r*

They  are:  Apotheca  and  closet.

The  best  way  to  keep  the  apotheca  in  good  order
will  be  for  the  mother  or  a  diligent  son ,  or  the  most
cleanly  and  orderly  daughter  to  take  the  care  and  respon-
sibility of  it.

They  will  look  upon  it  as  a  matter  of  honour  to  keep
the  strictest  and  most  conscientious  cleanliness,  and  will
always  have  a  duster  close  at  hand.  If  they  hold  this
office  well,  which  will  be  a  benefit  to  the  whole  house,
to  all  its  members,  they  may  joyfully  remember  the  words
of  our  Saviour :  "Inasmuch  as  you  have  done  it  unto  one
of  the  least  of  my  brethren,  you  have  done  it  unto  Me."

At  the  end  of  this  second  part,  I  have  mentioned
what  should  generally  be  found  in  such  a  small  apotheca.  *
Do  not  keep  unnecessary  things;  by  and  by  one  or  the
other  remedy  may  be  added.

Here  I  wish  to  say  a  word  about  the  preparation  of
tinctures,  teas,  and  powders.

Tinctures  or  extracts.

The  interior  virtue,  the  healing  juices  of  a  plant  can
be  drawn  out  in  various  ways.  We  get  the  best  and
strongest  in  the  real  so-called  extract.

It  is  prepared  as  follows :

Choose  from  the  herbs,  berries,  etc.  of  which  you
wish  to  get  an  extract,  the  very  best,  the  ripest,  the
most  perfect  ones,  and  dry  them  on  a  wooden  board  in
the  open  air,  but  (remember  this  well)  always  in  the
shade ,  never  in  the  sun.  The  drying  will  show  you
which  are  not  quite  perfect  for  use.

After  having  well  dried  the  herbs,  berries,  etc.,  cut
them  in  pieces ,  if  necessary ,  and  put  them  in  a  bottle
(wine-bottle).  This  is  to  be  filled  with  real  corn-brandy
—  which  I  prefer  to  everythhig  else  —  or  if  you  cannot


*  Witli  every  medicine  it  is  precisely  said  in  which
form  it  may  be  used,  wliether  as  extract,  powder,  tea,  oil,  etc.


126


get  it,  with  pure  spirit  or  other  brandy,  closed  hermeti-
cally, and  kept  for  some  time  on  a  moderately  warm  spot.*
I  have  sometimes  kept  such  bottles  standing  for  a
year  and  longer  still,  and  only  then  poured  off  the  juice
of  the  herbs  soaked  with  the  spirit  as  extract.  In  case
of  necessity,  you  may  use  it  even  if  it  has  only  been
mixed  a  few  days  before.

The  tinctures  are  taken  by  drops,  in  some  cases  (it
is  always  expressly  said)  a  tea -spoonful  is  given  as  the
smaller  dose,  and  a  table-spoonful  as  the  greater  one.

Teas.

The  weather  being  dry,  you  may  perhaps  on  your
way  home  from  the  fields,  or  when  going  out  to  look  at
your  standing  crops ,  take  a  ramble  to  gather  here  one
medicinal  herb ,  and  there  another.  Those  growing  on
dry  ground,  or  on  the  sunny  hill-side,  are  to  be  preferred  ;
the  plants  gathered  in  their  best  blossom,  will  bring  you
the  most  excellent,  and  in  your  sufferings  the  mo.st  benefi-
cial fruit.  Many  of  the  herbs  are  growing  in  your  meadow
or  kitchen-garden,  near  your  house  or  your  barn.  You
need  only  show  your  ten  years  old  boy  or  your  little  gui
what  to  do,  then  you  will  not  lose  any  time  by  gather-
ing the  heri)s,  and  will  give  pleasure  to  your  children.

The  garden  and  field  herbs  are  to  be  renewed  every
year,  i.  e.  fresh  ones  gathered  and  the  old  ones  thrown
away.

Every  mother  knows  how  to  prepare  tea.  For  one
cup  she  takes  as  much  of  the  dried  herbs  as  she  can
hold  with  three  fingers,  pours  boiling  water  into  the  little
pan  upon  the  tea -leaves  or  blossoms,  and  lets  it  boil
for  some  minutes,  then  she  pours  out  the  prepared  tea.

Prepared  in  this  way  tea  has  the  finest  taste  with
the  best  aroma  peculiar  to  every  plant;  but  it  is  not
the  strongest  tea.

*  All  the  herbs,  berries,  etc.  used  for  extracts  may  also
be  put  in  wine,  as  is  said  at  the  place  relating  to  them.  lh\s
wiue,  however,  is  only  fit  for  immediate  use,  not  for  long  keeping.


Powders.  —  Oils.


127


In  my  own  apotheca,  the  herbs  are  really  decocted
fiv  a  longer  time,  thoroughly  stewed  so  that  not  a  par-
ticle of  the  healing  power  is  lost,  but  all  is  caught  in
the  water.

How  it  is  to  be  taken,  either  by  cupMs  or  spoonfals,
io  said  with  every  disease.

Powders.

The  powders  are  prepared  by  grinding,  or  by  crushing
in  a  mortar  the  dry  roots,  leaves,  grains,  or  berries  of
the  medicinal  herbs.

Many  patients  find  it  easier  to  take  the  powders
spice  (pepper,  cinnamon,)  on  the  food,  or  mixed  with  a
di'ink,  so  that  the  patient  does  not  perceive  it.

The  vessels  in  which  the  different  powders  are
preserved ,  must  be  very  carefully  closed  in  order  to
prevent  the  dust  from  getting  in.

Oils.

The  preparation  of  oils  which  are  not  bought  at  the
chemist's,  is  specially  given  with  every  disease  for  which
they  are  to  be  used.

It  is  precisely  by  the  clean  appearance  of  the  oil-
bottles  that  the  sense  for  order,  cleanluiess  etc.  makes
itself  known.


Medicines.


The  medicines*  of  which  I  make  use  arranged  in  alpha-
betical order,  are  the  following :

1.  Almond-oil.
The  sweet  almond-oil  deserves  one  of  the  first  places
among  the  oils  in  the  apotheca. It  operates  on  various

infirmities  and  com-
plaints ,  interior  as
well  as  exterior  ones,
in  a  softening,  cool-
ing and  dissolving
manner.

It  dissolves  phlegm
in  the  wind-pipe,  or
in  the  stomach,  and
in  the  latter  case  it
restores  appetite  and
digestion.

In  inflammations,
especially  in  the  drea-
ded inflammation  of
the  lungs,  it  cools.
Such  patients  ought
to  take  one  tea-
spoonful  of  almond-
oil,  three  or  four  times


Almond  oil.

(Amyft-dalns  communis  L.)


-  All  medicaments  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  »[.e  to
rnnnd  in  two  enlurKed  editions  with  illustrations,  published  in
E  dish  lanpnage  by  the  E.litor  (Kösel,;Kempien)  and  entitled :
^ An  Athis  of  Plants  for  Sab.  Kneipp's  "Water-Ciure  .
A  -  edition  with  phototypies.
B -edition  with  coloured  phototypies;
and  sold  by  all  booksellers.  Apply  for  a  prospect  to  be  sent
post-free.


129


a  clay.  When  applied  externally,  this  oil  is  of  especial  ser-
vice to  those  who  suffer  frcm  various  diseases.  The  almond
oil  is  to  my  knowledge  the  best  anodyne  and  dissolving  re-
medy for  such  complaints  as  humming  in  the  ears,  sharp
pains  in  the  ears,  cramps  in  the  ears,  obdurate  ear-wax.
Pour  six  or  eight  drops  into  the  suffering  ear  and  stop
it  with  cotton-wool.

If  your  hearing  is  becoming  difficult  through  cold,
draught,  or  rheumatism,  pour  seven  or  eight  drops  into  one
ear,  and  on  the  next  day  pour  the  same  quantity  into  the
other  ear  each  time  stopping  the  ear  with  cotton -wool.
After  a  few  days  you  may  wash  the  interior  of  the  ear
with  hike -warm  water,  and  you  will  see  the  result.  It
would  be  better  to  let  a  competent  man  syringe  the  ear
with  an  ear-syringe.

Tumours  with  great  heat  (inflammation)  should  be
rubbed  softly  with  almond-oil ;  it  will  ease  the  piercing
pain  and  cool  the  burning  heat.

The  so-called,  often  so  painful  „ chinks"  of  country
people,  wounds  oiginating  from  sitting,  lying  or  riding,
etc., no  matter  on  what  part  of  the  body,  they  may

be  exceedingly  well  treat-
ed by  a  soft  nibbing  with
sweet  almond-oil.

If  you  cannot  get  this
oil,  take  salad-oil  instead
(see  page  76).

2.  Althea.

(Althea  officinalis.)

It  is  much  used  as  tea
for  colds.  I  do  not  like  it
very  much,  because  it  ihas
proved  deficient  to  my  ex-
pectations. Already  when
boiling  it,  you  get  a  clammy
Althen.  (Althea  officinalis  L.). "^^ss  which  in  a  compara-

a.  Top  of  the  blanch  (three  eights  of  its  natural  tively  short  time  beCOmeS

b.  fruit  seen  from  thi?  back,

slimy  and  thereby  —  which

c.  fruit  seon  from  the  front.  often OCCUrs —  mUst  de-

Kneipp Water-Cure.  f ,


130


Part  II.  Apotheca.


bad  wounds


prive  the  patient  of  all  appetite.  I  never  recommend  such
medicaments.  To  speak  mildly,  herb  and  root  of  this  althea
are  somewhat  suspicious  to  me.  Therefore  I  always  choose
herbs  which  do  the  same  services  without  any  doubt.

3.  Alum.

Alum  is  corrosive ;  therefore  it  is  suitable  for  foul  and
I  have  seen  how  it  even  prevented  a  not
too far advanced cancer  from
spreading.

Suppurated,  grown-in  nails  ought
to  be  treated  with  alum.

The  application  is  as  follows:
Alum  is  either  pulverized,  i.  e.
pounded  to  a  fine  dust  and  directly
strnwn  on  the  wound,  or  it  is  dissol-
ves! in  water,  and  this  solution  used
in  the  form  of  ablutions,  or  Imen
wetted  with  it,  is  laid  on  the  wound.

When  the  wounds  are  quite  clean-
se 1  from  matter  and  putrid  flesh,  the
alum  operates  inacontractmg,  drying,
and  speedily  healing,  manner.

Diluted  alum  water  is  a  proved
remedy  for  teeth  on  which  putrid
flesh  with  stagnant  blood  has  grown.

It  is  also  already  known  and  used
for  washing  mouth  and  teeth,  or  as
a  gargarism.

4.  Anise.  (Pimpinella  anisum.)
Anise  like  fennel  is  to  ba  recom-
mended highly.  Its  operation  on
gases  (winds)  is  far  superior  to  that
of  fennel.  In  most  cases  both  remedies
are  mixed  together.

The  oils  of  anise  and  fennel  can
rPimpinella  Anisum  L  ).  obtained  at  a  chemist's  shop.

-  Against  the  above  named  complaint

b.  top  of  the  blossom,  sufficient  to  take  four  to  seven

?i.  cross-soction  of  tho  fruit  (six  J  ..Q^g sugar  oucc  or  twicc  a  dav.

times  magnified).  "  f


Anis.


Medicaments:  Baubadoes  aloüs.


131


5.  Barbadoes  Aloes. (Aloe  vulgaris.)

Barbadoes  aloes  (the  powder  is  bought  at  the  che-
mist's) is  of  good  effect  both  for  mterior  and  exterior  use.


Aloe

(Aloe  vulgaris  Lam.)

9*


;132  Part  II.  Apotheca.

One  to  two  pinches  of  aloe  -  powder ,  boiled  with  a
teaspoonful  of  honey,  thoroughly,  purify  the  stomach  with-
out the  least  trouble.  If  the  aloe-powder  is  mixed  with
that  of  other  herbs  and  prepared  as  tea,  its  effects  are
stiU  more  lasting.  The  mixture  is  generally  prepared
as  follows:  One  pinch  of  aloe,  sufficient  elder  -  flowers ,
for  two  cups  of  tea;  a  small  tea  t  spoonful  of  Foenum
graecum,  one  teaspoonful  of  fennel:  These  two  cups  of
tea  are  to  be  taken  within  two  days.  The  effects,  which
do  not  consist  in  violent  purging,  but  only  in  a  copious
evacuation  of  the  bowels ,  appear  only  after  twelve  to
thirty  hours.

An  application  of  aloe  with  S'  John's  wort  and
common  yarrow,  will  be  mentioned  later  on.

Aloe  shows  the  same  cleansing  power  for  exterior
application,  as  it  does  when  used  interiorly.  An  excellent
eye-water  may  also  be  prepared  from  it  for  diseased,  dun,
red-edg.^.d,  blear  eyes,  which  discharge  matter-  and  other
dirt. A  good  pmch  of  this  powder  is  put  mto  a  medi-
cine-glass, hot  water  poured  upon  it,  then  shaken,  and
the  eye-water  is  ready  for  use.  Three  or  four  tnnes  a  day
the  eyes  are  washed  with  it,  both  withm  and  without.
The  irritation  and  burning  which  is  felt  at  first  is  of  no
consequence.  Old  wounds,  putnfied  flesh,  are  exceedingly
well  cleansed  and  healed  by  such  water.  A  piece  of  linen
is  for  this  purpose  dipped  in  the  aloe-water  and  put  on
the  suffering  part.

If  ulcers,  or  rather  the  sharp  fluids  running  from
them  prevent  the  formation  of  new  skin  on  any  part^  of
tRody,  aloe  powder  is  strewn  on  the  place  of  the  ulcer
thick  enough  to  cover  the  whole  open  wound  which  is
then  tied  up  with  dry  hnen.  This  is  repeated  dady.  The
We  by  absorbing  the  morbid  matters  forms  a  solid
Lusr  Jer  which  the  new  skin  will  soon  appear.

Fre'^h  wounds,  as  well  as  old  ones,  are  very  quickly

ei  he in  an  eye  or  a  wound.


]^1edicauents:  Bark  of  oak.  —  Bilberry.  133


6.  Bark  of  oak.

Are  we  then  to  use  even  t}>e  bark  of  oak  as  a  medi-
cine ? Certainly,  be  it  fresh  from  the  tree,  or  dried.

Young  bark  of  oak,  boil-
ed for  about  half  an  hour,
gives  a  sanative  decoction.
A  small  towel  is  dipped
into  it  and  tied  as  a  ban-
dage round  the  neck ;  such
bandages  give  great  help
to  people  afllicted  with
thick  throats ,  and  even
with  a  wen  on  the  throat,
if  it  has  not  yet  grown
too  large  and  firm ,  this
decoction  operates  as  a
most  effective  and  harm-
less remedy.  Complaints
of  the  glands  are  removed
just  as  thoroughly  by  these
bandages.

Whoever  is  troubled  with
prolapses  of  the  rectum,
may  often  take  sitting-
baths  with  a  decoction  of
oak-bark,  and  also  from
time  to  time  an  enema  of
a  diluted  decoction.

The  troublesome  and  often  dangerous  fistules  on  the
rectum  are  dissolved  and  h-^aled  by  the  decoction.

Also  hard  tumours,  if  they  are  not  inflamed,  may
be  treated  and  dissolved  in  th^^  same  way.

Tea  made  of  oak -bark  operates  like  resin  in  a
strengthening  way  on  the  inner  vessels.

7.  Bilberry. (Yaccinium  myrtillus.)
About  the  end  of  July  it  is  the  children's  delight
to  go  to  the  woods;  for  then  the  bilberries  are  ripe,  a
favourite  fruit with little  people. Old  children,  too,
are  fond  of  these  berries. In  large  towns,  in  the  fruit


Oak.

(Quercus  pedunculata  L.)

-  a  Branch  with  male  blossoms,
».  fruit-beariiijr  branch,

c.  crus.s-sectiiin  of  the  germ,

d.  germ  out  lengthwise.


134


Part  II.  Apo'iiieca.


markets ,  this  black  fruit  is  to  be  found  in  basketfuls.
Many  a  student's  thoughts  wander  back  to  the  happy
years  when  lie  used  to  gather  bilberries  with  his  little
sister.

No  house  should  be  without  a  good  .supply  of  bil-
berries, dried  and  put  by  for  the  year.  They  are  of  mani-
fold use.

Two  or  three  handfuls  of  bilberries  are  put  into  a
bottle,  and  good,  real  brandy  poured  upon  them.  The

longer  they  stand  (even
for  years)  i.  e.  the  better
they  are  extracted,  the
more  powerful  a  medicine
will  this  berry-spirit  be.
If  you  are  suffering  from
slight  diarrhoea  take  from
time  to  time  some  dried,
raw  berries, chew  and
swallow  them.  Very  often
this  mild  remedy  is  suffi-
cient. In  large  bathing
places  I  have  seen  pa-
tients ,  who ,  to  prevent
disagreeable  sui'prises  on
their  walk,  were  provided
by  the  experienced  and
thoughtful  landlady  with
such  little  diarrhoea-stop-
ping pills.

Violent,  continuous
diarrhoea ,  accompanied
by  great  pains,  some-
times with  loss  of  blood,


Bilberry.

(Vaccinium  myrtillus.)


a.  Flowering  plant,  .  i ,  .

b.  branch  bearinir  fruit  (toth  one  tUiid  of  their stopped by  taking  a

c "etVtaolfwiiÄamen,  the  eoroUa  being  re- ^. j^f^lgfljiUjorry  brandy
moved  (twice  the  natural  growth),  »  „,  .  ^  j.  „ „f „  ,-,;r,f

d.  cross-section  of  the  seed  (4  times  the  natural  ^ ^ quarter Ot a  pint

groyth^  , of  ^varm  water.  The  same

medicine  may  be  repeated  after  8  or  10  hours.  Another
repetition  will  scarcely  be  needed. Show  me  a  more


Medicaments:  Bitter  Aloe.


135


harmless,  and  at  the  same  time  more  effective  remedy  in  a
chemist's  shop.

The  same  bilberry  spirit,  when  taken  in  cases  of  dan-
gerous dysentery,  assists  in  a  most  effective  manner  the
exterior  application  of  water  (warm  compresses  of  water
and  vinegar  on  the  abdomen).

The  tincture  of  bilberries  is  the  first  and  most  in-
dispensible  among  the  tinctures  of  our  apotheca.  It  is  of
good  effect  in  all  the  above  named  cases,  and  is  always
the  best  helper  of  the  bowels.

The  dose  depends  upon  the  degree  of  the  disease ;
the  smallest  is  10  to  12  drops  on  sugar,  the  greater
about  30  drops ,  the  greatest  a  tea-spoonful ,  taken  in
warm  water  or  in  wine.

8.  Bitter  Aloe. (Agave  Americana  L.)

This  plant's  home  is  far'  away  in  America.  Thence
it  has  been  brought  to  us ;  and  it  is  not  seldom  tc
be  seen  in  the  windows  of  the  friends  of  flowers,  stand-
ing prominent  among  all  the  other  plants.  It  is  con-
spicuous and  easily  recognized  by  its  very  thick,  pulpous,
and  rather  long,  sea-green  and  thorny  leaves.  Blossoms
are  seldom  to  be  seen  on  it ;  but  if  the  effects  of  the  fleshy
leaves  were  known,  no  flourist  would  certainly  let  this
exotic  plant  be  wanting  among  his  flowers.

The  effects  are  these :

One  of  these  leaves  boiled  in  water  and  a  cupful  of
the  decoction  taken ,  purges  stomach  and  bowels.  This
plant  is  also  a  remedy  for  liver  complaints  and  for  jaun-
dice ,  if  it  is  pulverized  and  a  pinch  of  it  taken  twice
a  day.

A  leaf  boiled  with  a  tea -spoonful  of  honey  in  half
a  pint  of  water  and  taken  in  small  quantities ,  will  take
away  interior  heat,  and  will  prove  especially  serviceably
in  eases  where  there  are  blisters  on  the  palate,  or  a
Vfhooping  -  cough  has  arisen  from  the  interior  heat.  A
small  particle  of  the  leaf,  boiled  with  an  egg-spoonful
of  honey,  takes  away  the  heat  from  the  eyes,  if  they  are


136


I^AllT  II.  ApOTHECA,


i


thoroughly-
washed  with  it.
If  you  have
hurt  yourself, or
have  got  an  ul-
cer on  any  part
of  your  body,
the  application
of  this  leaf  will
relieve  you,  for
it  is  an  ex-
cellent remedy.

Worm-wood,
boiled  with
aloe  ,  drives
out  the  bad
watery  mat-
ters ,  from
which  dropsy
*•  is  likely  to  ori-
ginate ;  more-
over it  impro-
ves the  sto-
mach.

On  account
of  its  many
good  qualities
I  advice  every
lover  of  flowers
to  give  this
plant  a  place
«s-  among  his  flo-
wer-pots.

9.  Black-thorn-blossoms. (Prunus  spinosa.)

Black-thorn-blossoms  are  the  most  harmless  purga-
tive, and  should  be  found  in  every  apotheca  m  the  hrst
and' most  easily  accessible  row.  , , .„1,  +u„

How  often  one  feels  in  the  stomach  the  bowels,  ihe
whole  body,  that  a  speedy  purgative  would  be  good,  even


a.  Flower,


Bitter  Aloe.

(A^ave  Americana  L.)

b  roceptaclo  after  tlie  time  of  flowering,
sectiutt  (less  than  its  natural  growth).


Medi'jaments  :  Black-thorn-blossoms.  —  Bog-bean.  137


necessary ;  one  looks  and  sighs  for  an  easy  remedy,  and
it  could  be  so  easily  found.


Black-thorn-blossoms.

(Prunns  spinosa  L.)

a.  Flowenntr  tranch,  b.  fruit-bearine  branch  (|  of  its  natural  growth),  c.  part  of
the  calyi,  d.  sepal  of  the  same,  e.  stamen ;  f.  pistil, g.  stone  fruit  cut  lengthwiee

in  its  natural  jjrowth.

Take  some  black-thorn-blossoms,  boil  them  for  one
minute,  and  take  one  cupful  of  this  tea  daily,  for  3  or  4
days  together.  It  operates  gently,  without  any  disa-
greeableness  and  trouble,  but  nevertheless  thoroughly.  I
can  strongly  recommend  this  tea  as  a  purifying  and
strengthening  remedy  for  the  stomach.

10.  Bog-bean  (Menyanthes  trifoliata)
is  a  plant  growing  on  marshy  soil  and  generally  near
flowing  water.  Where  the  water  cannot  find  an  outlet  and


Paiit  II.  Apotheca.


Bog-bean.

(Menyanthes  trifoliata  L.)


138

forms  smaller  or  larger  puddles,  this  marsh-plant  grows

among  other
sour  grasses.
It has  three
leaves and  a
very  bitter  ta-
ste ;  therefore
it  is  called  in
German  :  Bit-
terklee or  bit-
ter-clover. This
herb  gives  an
excellent  tea  for
the stomach ;
it  operates  well
on  the  diges-
tion and  pre-
pares good  gas-
^^v.xaj-  -  --  trie  juices.

=^--^Si£Ä^lÄ^-^"'"^^"distme!  with
brandy,  produces  the  so-called  bitter-spirit,  which  has
the  same  good  effects.

11  Bone-dust. (See  chalk  dust.)
I  always"  prepare  three  kmds  of  powder  from  this  ,
bone-dust. The  first  is  the  so-called:

a.  Black  powder.

I  take  the  sound  bones  of  healthy  killed  cattle,  and
expose  them  to  red  heat  untü  they  are  burnt  to  coals.
These  bla  k  bone-coals  are  finely  pounded,  and  the  ex-
leedCly  simple  and  harmless  black  powder  is  readj .  The
second  kind  I  keep,  is  the  so-called

b.  White  powder.

I  tarn  the  bones  to  chalk i-  Lted
have  the  appearance  of  fresh  burnt  chalL It  .»  »^^^^^^^

chiefty  chalk  that  I  8»\ '''''"J,,  ^L^IU  Th^


Medicaments:  Gkey  powder.


139


sembling  chalk -dust;  it  is  the  so-called  white  powder.
The  third  kind  I  call

c.  Grey  powder.

One  part  of  white,  one  of  black  powder,  one  part  of
triturated  white  incense  -  grains  mixed  together  make  a
powder  of  a  greyish  colour ;  hence  the  name.

If  you  read  my  remarks  about  chalk-dust ,  you  will
understand  why  the  powder  of  bone-coals  plays  a  part,
and  a  very  important  one,  in  my  apotheca.

Its  effects  are  most  striking  if  it  is  used  after  serious
illnesses  or  by  patients  who  are  much  weakened,  whose
strength  is  in  a  very  low  state.  In  many  cases  I  myself
have  been  astonished  at  the  results.

Perhaps  you  may  wonder  why  I  prepare  three  different
kinds  of  powder  from  the  same  bones.  These  three  kinds
of  powder  correspond  to  the  different  degrees  of  weakness
from  which  the  patients  are  suffering.

Convalescent  people  whose  whole  organism  needs
strengthening,  even  children  who ,  like  crippled  little
forest-trees  live  a  miserable  existence,  and  whose  strength,
no  one  knows  why,  is  not  increasing  according  to  their
age  (to  this  class  belong  especially  those  children  who  are
suffermg  from  the  so-called  rickets,)  take  the  black  powder
every  day,  either  in  water  or  in  their  food,  one  or  two
pinches  of  it.

I  give  the  white  powder  to  patients  with  whom  it  is
evident  that  the  machine  works  but  slowly  or  lazily,  that
the  digestion  and  the  formation  of  blood  are  out  of  order,
that  many  parts  of  the  body  get  but  sparingly  and  irre-
gularly what  is  necessary  to  them  for  growth  and  deve-
lopment, that  particularly  the  skeleton  is  shaking  like  a
decayed  brickwork  and  threatening  to  tumble  down.  Like
a.  mother  who  gives  the  baby  such  food  as  is  suitable  to
its  mouth  and  stomach,  I  serve,  so  to  speak,  the  poor
hungry  bones  with  bone-dust,  in  order  to  keep  them
together.  The  grey  powder,  as  the  admixture  of  incense
shows,  IS  especially  to  be  given  to  such  patients  or  con-
valescent people,  whose  interior  vessels  are  in  a  state  of
great  weakness.


140


Part  II.  Apotheca.


Now,  my  dear  reader,  you  know  the  secret  of  the  black,
white  and  grey  powders,  of  which  many,  very  many  pa-
tients could  tell  you ,  and  about  which  there  has  been
so  much  guessing  and  disputing.

Believe  me,  by  tliese  powders  alone  I  could  have
become  a  rich  man !  I  abhor  and  condemn  by  principle
the  secrecy  with  remedies ,  and  I  fully  agree  with  those
who  brand  and  condemn  it  as  a  sham  and  quackery.

My  remedies  have  no  need  to  shun  the  brightest  day-
light. Let  every  one  examine  and  choose  the  best!

12.  Bran.

How  incomprehensibly  we  act  in  many  points,  is  to
be  seen  clearly  by  our  treatment  of  the  bran.  Every  ser-
vant girl  gives  the  bran  to  the  pigs,  the  bran,  which,  I
should  like  to  say,  is  more  wholesome  and  nourishing
than  the  flour  itself.  A  housewife  would  act  much  more
reasonably ,  if  she  would  keep  in  her  own  custody  the
nourishing  and  wholesome  bran,  and  impart  this  precious,
nutritious  and  healthy  remedy  to  her  weak  children.

Weak,  convalescent  people  and  children,  like  besi
the  food  which  is  easily  digested.  The  weakest  nature
will  be  able  to  digest  a  decoction  of  bran,  the  extract,  as
it  were,  of  the  fruit  itself.

Take  bran  from  wheat  or  rye  and  boil  it  for  three
quarters  of  an  hour  in  water.  Then  squeeze  out  the  bran,
mix  honey  with  the  decoction  and  boil  this  mixture  agam
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  The  patient  takes  half  a  pint
of  this  drink  twice  a  day.  White  bread,  dipped  mto
this  sweet  juice,  will  be  found  very  enjoyable.

I  scarcely  know  a  better  drink  for  chddren  and  old
people ;  they  will  always  be  thankful  for  the  refreshment.

Would  that  all  of  us  tried  to  become  more  simple,
more  natural  and  more  easily  satisfied !  May  God  g.ant
it.  for  much  depends  upon  it!

13.  Brier.

A  mother  who  takes  care  of  her  apotheca  not  only
picks  the  pretty  roses  from  the  wild  rose  tree  (Rosa
knina),  but  she  also  carefully  gathers  the  so-called  hips,


Medicaments  :  Camomile.


141


and  this  not  only  for  making  sauces,  but  also  for  sana-
tive purposes.  She  will  search  with  still  greater  zeal  in  her
own  garden  or  elsewhere,  if  there  is  any  one  in  the  family
suffering  from  gravel  or  stone  in  the  kidneys  or  bladder,
these  dreadful  and  painful  diseases.  She  knows  that  brier-
tea  will  ease  the  pain  and  purify  the  affected  parts.

I  know  a  very  old
gentleman  who  in  former
years  had  suffered  much
from  gravel  and  stone,
and  often  did  not  know
what  to  do,  or  where  to
seek  for  help.  This  tea
was  recommended  to
hün ,  and  he  got  so
accustomed  to  it  and
so  fond  of  it ,  that  for
years  past,  the  usual
cup  is  never  allowed  to
fail  at  night  before
going  to  bed;  he  likes
it  better  than  a  glass  of
the  best  wine.

„These  are  my  spiri-
tons  liquors, "  he  said  ;
„this  is  the  oil  which
keeps  the  almost  stopp-
ing machine  of  my  old
body  working  from  day  to  day."

The  husks  are  taken  from  the  hips;  then  dried  and
the  tea  prepared  from  them.

14.  Camomile. (Matricaria  chamomilla.)

Camomile  tea  is  used  for  colds,  especially  if  they
are  attended  by  fever,  for  gripes,  cramps,  strong  con-
gestions, etc.

The  little  bags  with  camomiles,  which  are  so  useful
tor  warmmg  m  various  cases,  are  so  well  known  and


Brier.

(Eosa  canina  L.)


142


Part  II.  Apotheca.


liked  in  every  house,  that  it  seems  quite  unne:;es3ary  to
say  anything  further  about  them.


Camomile.

(Matricaria  Chainoinilla  L.)

. „pver  and  lower  part  uf  the  P'-t/half  'ts  natural^g^^^^^^^^ central  relW

15.  Camphor. (Laurus  Camphora.)
The  application  of  camphor  is  generally  known  and
used. It  operates  in  a  softening,  alleviatmg  and  lenitive

manner.  .  ^^

It  is  used  as  camphor-spirit  and  camphor-oil.

Camphor-spint  is  prepared  by  t^,"^^^'"^^  \P^;^fi  -f
camphor,  as  large  as  a  haz.dnut,  m  half  a  pint  of  spiut
and  is  only  used  externally  as  embrocation for  con
tusions,  sprains,  rheumatic,  and  spasms.


Medicaments:  Camphor.  —  Caraway.  —  Centaury.  143


Many  people  use
it  as  a  strengthen-
ing remedy  for  the
limbs,  they  are  quite
right  in  doing  so.

Camphor,  poun-
ded with  olive -oil,
salad-oil  or  almond-
oil  until  it  is  dis-
solved , is  called
camphor -oil.  It  is
an  excellent  remedy
for  rheumatism  and
pains  in  the  back ;
it  also  soothes  the
violent  pains,  cau-
sed by  the  various
kinds of  rheuma-
tism and  similar


Camphor,

(Laurus  Camphora  L.)

tumours and car- a.  stem  tone  third  of  its  natural  growth), h.  coroll


tilages.


(3  times  its  natural  growth, c.  corolla  extended  (3
times  its  natural  growtli),  d.  stamen times  the  na-
tural size).


Caraway  (Carum  carvi)  see  Fennel. Page  155.
16.  Centaury. (Erythraea  centaurium.)  *

What  remarkable  names  were  given  by  our  forefathers
to  many  herbs!  And  this  was  because  they  well  knew
their  value.  Our  herb  therefore,  must  have  been  highly
valued  by  them.  Its  use  is  already  indicated  by  its  very
bitter  taste.

Tea  from  centaury  evacuates  the  gases  retained  in
the  stomach ,  drives  away  useless  and  unhealthy  acids
assists  and  improves  the  gastric  juices,  and  operates  ad-
vantageously on  the  kidneys  and  liver. It  is  the  best
remedy  agamst  heart-burn.


means  I  trhlT^I^'^  ^^"'^d.  "^^^"sendguldenkraut" 5  that
means  a  Herb  ot  a  thousand  florins  worth.


L44


Part  11.  Apo-iheca.


Whosoever  is  sufFeiirig  from  disturbances  in  the  blood,
Bspecially  from  poverty  of  blood,  or  too  strong  circulation,
stc,  will  obtain  relief  from  the  centaury.


Centaury;

(Erythraea  Centaurium  L.)

a  Flowers,  b.  cut  and  unruUed  flower,  c.  young  stamen,  d.  old  stamen,  e.  pistil,
*  f.  ripe  fruit

17.  Chalk-dust. (See  bone-dust.)

Who  has  not  noticed  how  foals  and  other  domestic
animals  swallow  grains  of  chalk  or  mortar?

And  who  has  not  heard  how  it  is  necessary  to  hide
the  chalk  in  school,  as  many  a  child  would  take  it  away
and  eat  it  like  sugar,  with  a  passionate  delight.

Should  not  the  chalk  indeed  be  useful  to  man  in
TTianv  cases'?  The  above  mentioned  occurrences  lead  to
3re  "  iiections.  1  have  used  great  quantities  of  chalk


Medicaments  :  Cloves.  145


myself  and  advised  others  to  use  it ;  and  the  results  were
remarkable,  i.  e.  extremely  favourable.

The  chalk  contains  lime,  sulphur,  and  other  sub-
stances, or  rather  let  us  say  building  materials,  which  are
necessary  to  the  human  body  especially  for  building  up  the
skeleton,  this  splendid  and  wondrous  building  of  the  most
able  architect.

With  weak  people  the  building  might  perhaps  be  a
failure  or  be  wanting  in  solidity ;  there  is,  as  it  were,  no
good  lime  to  join  sand,  stones,  and  everything  else  together.

To  such  persons,  even  to  very  weak  children,  I  give
a  pinch  of  chalk-dust  once  a  day,  in  water,  or  in  their
food.  The  dust  having  neither  taste  nor  smell,  can  be
taken  \vithout  difficulty.

AVhoever  is  suffering  from  a  weak  digestion,  who  in
general  cannot  grow  and  thrive  properly  in  .spite  of  every
care  bestowed  upon  him,  may  try  every  day  the  indicated
pmch  of  chalk-dust.

"Here  gypsum  has  been  strewn,"  was  written  by
franklin  m  large  letters  on  his  splendidlv  flourishing  clover-
held  with  such  or  at  least  similar  chalk -dust.  Such  or
such  a  person  has  been  chalked,  I  could  say  of  manv
patients  who  fell  into  my  hands.

But  before  all  other  patients  I  recommend  this  white
dust  to  chloroties  ;  they  ought  to  take  daily  not  only  one,
but  two  pmches  of  dust,  one  early  in  the  morning,  the
other  at  night.  By  this  white  powder  their  own  white
colour  will  soon  be  transformed  into  a  healthy,  bright  red

Still  more  effective  than  chalk-dust  is  bone-dust.

18.  Cioves.

.nlo.i^^?^"°i°Pl'''^''' ^  "^^^^er  as  almond  and

salad-oil,  with  which  it  is  also  frequently  mixed.

Rases^^nd' b  of  especial  service  to  me  against  foul

gases,  and  bad,  foul  juices  in  the  stomach.

As  a  rule  four  to  six  drops  of  clove -oil  are  taken
on  sugar  once  or  twice  a  day. (See  page  146  )

10


146


Part  II.  Apotheca.


19.  Coal-dust.

Coal-dust  is  always  made  of  charcoal.  The  finest
and  best  is  that  obtained  from  linden-wood,  which  is  pre-
pared even  by  many  chemists.  If  linden-wood  cannot  be
had,  any  other  charcoal  will  do.  The  coal  just  taken  out
of  the  fire,  is  the  most  effective.  To  obtain  the  above-
named  coal-dust,  it  must  be  thoroughly  pounded.

After  diseases  which  have
strongly  affected  the  digastive
organs,  this  coal  facilitates
the  work  of  convalescence  a
great  deal.  It  may  sound
strange,  but  it  is  true  !  The
easiest  way  to  take  it  in  such
cases,  is  with  milk  and  a  little
sugar.  The  quantity  may_  be
a  small  tablespoonful  daily,
it  can  be  taken  all  at  once
or  in  two  portions.

Consumptive  persons  may
take  daily  at  different  times,

two  pints  of  milk,  with  a

tablespoonful  of  coal- dnst  ("E^igeniacaryopliyllataThnnb.)
mixed  with  each  pint.

It  is  of  special  effect  against  diseases  of  the  liver.
The  powder  is  then  also  taken  with  milk.

This  powder  strewn  on  suppurating,  discharging  ul-
cers, once  or  twice  a  day,  dries  the  mup,  and  thus  assists
and  hastens  the  formation  of  a  new  skm.

20.  Cod-liver  oil.

An  able  physician  of  the  army  once  expressed  liim-
oif  fn  me  thus  - "With  cod- liver  oil  great  mischief  is
doL and  b!^  cod-liver  oil  has  often  been  followed  by
ven  gdevous  consequences.  There  are  islands  where  it  s
of  us?  aTa  remedy  for  scrofulous  complaints,  but  on  the

one  is  bound  by  this  opinion.  For  n^
riri^Ä--Äol'^


CIOTCS.


Medicaments  :  Colt's  foot.


147


oil  as  food,  I  replace  it  by  other  kinds  of  nourishment,
which  are  far  more  effective.

21.  Colt's-foot. (Tussilago  Farfara.)

The  creator  has  made  many  plants,  which  are  so
little  esteemed  or  even  despised  by  man,  that  every  one
seems  to  find  pleasure  in  treading  them  under  foot.
This  is  the  fate  of  the  colt's-foot,  because  it  is  generally
looked  upon  simply  as  a  weed.  But  those  who  know
this  plant,  esteem  it  highly,  and  take  care  of  it  as  an
excellent  remedy.


CoJt's  foot.
(Tussilaf^o  Farfara  L.)

drinl-^^?or/'^^  f ^^'^  ^^^S'"^' i«  MhMb  to

ünnk  tea  from  colt's-foot. Asthma  and  coughs  can  be

lemoved  very easüy  by  the  remedy, especLly  i^  an

10*


;148  Part  II.  Apotueca.


inclination  to  consumption  exists.  You  may  put  these  leaves
on  the  chest ,  either  in  a  piece  of  linen  or  without  it.
They  extract  the  heat,  stop  feebleness,  and  remove  fevers.
They  have  an  especially  good  effect  on  open  wounds  :  they
remove  the  heat,  the  redness,  and  draw  out  the  m-
jurious  matters.

The  leaves  are  most  effective  against  sore  feet,  when
the  spots  look  black  and  blue,  and  are  srongly  inflamed ;
they  take  away  the  heat  and  the  pains ;  af  laid  on  the
sores  repeatedly,  they  are  an  excellent  remedy.  Theretore
the  colt's  foot  is  a  superior  remedy  for  mflamed  wounds,
erysipelas,  and  similar  complaints.  These  leaves  can  also
be  used  interiorly,  if  dried  in  the  shade  pulverized  and
taken  two  or  three  times  a  day.  A  small  salt-spoontal  is
a  dose ;  it  may  also  be  taken  with  the  food.

22.  Common  Elder.

In  the  good  old  times  the  elder-bush  stood  nearest
to  the  house,  but  now  it  is  in  many  ways  disp.aced  and
rooted  up.  It  ought  to  stand  near  every  house  as  pa,  t
of  the  household,  as  it  were ;  or  if  cast  aside  it  should
be  brought  back  to  its  post  of  honour,  for  every  part  of
the  elder-tree,  leaves,  blossoms,  berries,  bark  and  roots  are
all  efficacious  remedies.  In  spring  time,  J^go^-^^^^^^  jj^^^
strives  to  throw  off  matters  that  have  gathered  together
n  the  body  during  winter.  Who  does  not  know  these
spates,  the  so-called  "spring  diseases",  such  as  eruptions,
fliarrhfipa  colic,  and  such  like?

Wl^ever  ;ishes  to  purify  juices  and  blood  by  a  sprmg

course  of  medicine,  and  to  get  rid  of  j^J^^  v^take  sk  Tr
the  easiest  and  most  natural  way,  let  hmi
eiRht  leaves  of  the  elder-tree,  cut  them  up  small,  like  one
S  tobacco,  and  let  tlie  tea  boü  for  about  ten  —
Then  take  daily  during  the  whole  course,  one  cup  ot  tins
+pa fasting,  an  hour  before  breaktast.

'  Thi fnost  simple  blood- purifying  tea  cleanses  the


149


This  course  may  also  be  undertaken  at  any  other  time
of  the  year.  Even  the  withered  leaves  make  a  good  puri-
fying tea.


Comuioii  Elder.

(Sambucus  nigra  L.)
Who  has  not  eaten  cakes  made  with  elder-flowers,
the  Suabian  so-called  "little  cakes"?  Many  people  bake
them  just  at  the  time  when  the  tree  is  shining  in  ils
white  sprmg-adornments,  and  they  say  these  flower-cakes
are  a  protection  against  fever.  I  know  a  place  which
IS  often  visited  with  the  ague,  and  there  in  spring  you
will  see  these  elder-flower  or  fever-cakes  on  every  table,
i  have  never  examined  this  minutely  and  critically;  let
those  people  remain  in  their  faith,  for  such  fare  is  good
and  wholesome.


15(0  Paut  II.  Apotueca.


Elder-flowers  also  purify,  and  it  would  be  good  if  in
every  home-dispensary  a  box  of  dried  flowers  were  kept.
Winter  is  long ,  and  cases  can  occur  in  which  such  a
dissolving  and  sudorific  little  remedy  may  prove  of  ex-
cellent service. Harm  can  never  be  done  by  it.

From  organisms  in  which  dropsy  has  commenced,
elder-root  prepared  as  tea,  di-ives  out  the  water  so  power-
fully, that  it  is  scarcely  excelled  by  any  other  medicament.

The  berries  which  in  autumn  are  often  boiled  and
eaten  as  porridge  or  marmalade,  were  highly  esteemed  by
our  forefathers  as  a  blood-purifying  remedy.  My  departed
mother  undertook  such  an  elder-flower  course  every  year
for  a  fortnight  to  three  weeks.  This  was  the  chief  reason
why  our  ancestors  forty  or  fifty  years  ago,  had  at  least
two  elder-trees  planted  before  their  houses.  As  the  higher
classes  now-a-days  travel,  and  often  to  distant  lands,  to  make
use  of  the  expensive  grape  cure,  so  our  parents  and  grand-
parents used  to  go  to  the  elder-tree  which  was  close  at
hand,  and  which  served  them  so  cheaply  and  often  much
better  than  the  expensive  grapes. Some  years  ago,  I  was
among  the  Austrian  Alps,  and  saw  there  to  my  great  joy
how  the  elder -tree  was  still  honoured. "Of  that,  said
on  old  peasant  to  me,  "we  do  not  let  a  smgle  berry  go
to  waste." How  simple,  how  sensible! Even  the  birds
before  they  commence  their  autumnal  travels  seek  out
everywhere  the  elder-trees  in  order  to  purify  their  blood
and  strengthen  their  nature  for  their  long  journey.  What
a  pity  that  man ,  on  account  of  art  and  affectation  no
longer  feels  or  takes  notice  of  all  these  natural  mstmcts,

"the  sound  mind!"

If  the  berries  are  boiled  down  with  sugar,  or  better
still  with  honey,  they  will  prove  especially  good  in  winter
time  for  people  who  have  but  little  exercise  and  are
condemned  to  a  sedentary  mode  of  life.  A  spoonfu  of  he
above  preserve  stirred  in  a  glass  of  water,  makes  the
most  splendid  cooling  and  refreshing  drink,  o^^^^^es  on
the  secretion  of  the  urine,  and  has  a  good  effect  on  the

^"^"^Many  country  people  dry  the  berries.  But  whether
these  dried  berries  are  boiled  as  porridge,  or  stewed  to


Medicaments  :  Common  Nettle.


151


eat,  or  eaten  dry,  in  all  forms  tliey  are  an  excellent  re-
medy against  violent  diarrhoea.

Because  the  exceedingly  good  services  rendered  by
the  elder-tree,  are  no  longer  remembered ;  this  faithful  and
formerly  so  highly  esteemed  house-hold  friend  is  in  many
ways  rejected.  May  the  old  friend  be  brought  once  more
to  honour !

23.  Common  Nettle.  (Urtica  doica  L.)
The  common  nettle  is  the  most  despised  among  the
plants.  Many  delicately  nerved  souls  are  stung  and  burnt
on  hearing  the  mere  name  of  it.  Are  they  right?  I
heard  lately  that  a  herbalist,  I  believe  in  Bohemia,  wrote
a  whole  pamphlet  on  nettles  and  their  importance.  He
starts  on  the  right  path  again,  I  perfectly  agree  with
him !  Nettles  are  indeed  for  the  connoisseur  of  the
greatest  value.


Common  Nettk.

(Urtica  dioica  L.)

a.  male  plant,  t.  female  plant  (half  iU  natural  growthi,  c.  male  flower,  d.  fomale
flower,  a.  tlie  latter  open  (magnified).


152


Par'I'  II.  Apotheca.


Fresh  nettles  just  gathered,  dried  and  made  into
tea  loosen  the  phlegm  in  the  chest  and  lungs,  cleanse
the  stomach  from  matters  gathered  there,  which  they
expftl  chiefly  by  means  of  the  kidneys.

The  roots  of  the  nettle  operate  even  more  power-
fully than  the  leaves,  whether  they  are  used  freshly  dug
vip  in  summer  or  dried  in  winter.  Dropsy  in  its  first  stages
can  be  cured  by  tea  made  from  nettle  roots.

Those  who  have  bad  blood,  should  in  summer  eat
frequently  nettles  boiled  like  spinach.  In  Italy  the  people
are  especially  fond  of  herb  soups.  Herb  dumplings  made
with  nettles  are  nourishing  and  wholesome.  Let  those  who

are  suffering  from
rheumatism  and
who  can  no  longer
find  any  remedy  for
it,  rub  or  strike  the
suffering  part  with
fresh  nettles  for  a
few  minutes  daily.
The  fear  of  the  un-
accustomed rod  will
soon  give  way  to  joy
at  its  remarkable
healing  efficacy.

24.  Cowslips.  (Pri-
mula officinalis  L.)

Only  the  dark
yellow  cowslips  are
valuable  for  the
house  apotheca.
Their  perfume  al-
ready betrays  that
a  special  healing
fluid  must  be  hid-
den in  each  tiny
.  r  .  chalice.  Ifyoucliew

(Pnmula  othcn.ahs  L.  ^^^^ ^r three  of

Con,p>ete  K  <.,yx.^._.na^^  corCa.  c.  p.ül.  ^.^^^^  ^^^^^^^^


Medicaments:  Dwakf  Elder.  —  Eyebhight.  153


you  will  soon  feel  what  medicinal  contents  they  hide.  Wlio-
ever  has  an  inclination  to  articular  diseases  or  is  already
afflicted  with  this  infirmity  should  drink  daily,  for  some
considerable  time,  one  cupful  of  cowslip  tea.  The  violent
pains  will  give  way,  and  gradually  disappear  altogether.

25.  Dwarf  Elder. (Sambucus  ebulus  L.)

On  the  borders  of  woods,  especially  in  parts  which
have  been  thmned,  the  dwarf  elder  may  be  seen  stand-
ing above  three  feet  high,  bearing  in  July  the  great  white
umbellar  blossoms,  and  in  autumn  the  splendid,  heavv
and  bright  umbellar  grapes.

Tea  prepared  from  such
roots,  expels  the  water,  and
purifies  the  kidne5's,  it  is  there-
fore of  extraordinary  effect  in
cases  of  dropsy.  I  know  se-
veral cases  in  which  the  rather
advanced  disease  has  been
entii-ely  cured  by  such  tea.

Also  against  other  com-
plaints in  the  abdomen,  spring-
ing from  bad  juices,  it  operates
well;  it  removes  the  juices
through  the  urine.

Dwarf-elder  tea  prepared '
from  the powder  has  the
same  effect.

For  one  cup  of  tea,  which


Dwarf  Elder.

(Sambucus  Ebulus  L.)


day"  a  Dinch^'?  .1"  t'^'  -f.^  ^^^^^'^"^  P^^"*^  «f  ^he
aay,  a  pinch  of  thi.s  powder  will  be  sufficient.

dried  hi  t^P  ^^^^^'^^  thoroughly

dried  m  the  air,  and  then  the  dried  roots  themselves  or

dteCrt.^"  ""'^"^  ^^P^  -

26.  Eyebright. (Euphrasia  officinalis  L.)

vices^ouV'Sl'"^ of  gratitude  for  its  faithful  sei-

of


154


Part  II.  Apotheca.


fort).  Often  when  no  other  remedy  would  help,  this  little
flower  gave  to  the  eyes  the  last  comfort.  1  hive  very
often  recommended  it,  and  with  good  results.

When  the  aftermath  harvest  is  half-ripe  about  August,
you  will  find  this  salubrious  little  herb  on  almost  every
meadow.  It  is  often  disliked  by  the  farmers  on  account
of  its  crowding  out  the  forage  plants  with  its  plentiful

growth. Both  the  dri-d
and  the  pulverized  leaves
are  used  as  tea  and  as
powder. The  eyes  are
well  washed  with  the  tea
two  or  three  times  daily,
or  little  pieces  of  Unen
are  dipped  into  it,  and
fastened  over  the  eyes
by  means  of  a  bandag3
during  the  night.  It  will
cleanse  the  eyes,  m;ki
them  clear,. and  strenge  hen
the  sight.

According  to  my  prac-
tice, I  let  the  patient  make
mterior  use  of  the  pow-
der at  the  same  time,  by
taking  daily  a  pinch  of
it  in  a  spoonful  of  soup
or  water.  But  this  does
not  exhaust  the  healing
power  of  the  little  herb.
It  might  also  be  called
the  stomach  comfort.  On
„  . .  account of its  innate

bitterness,  its  tea  is  good as stomachic bitters  for
regulating  the digestion  and  improvmg  the  Juices  ot
hf stomach.  Just\.ive  it  a  trial,  dear  reader;  the  httle
herb  will  not  be  niggardly  with  its  comfort  to  you.
27 Fennel. (Foeniculum  officinale  All.)
The  fennel  corns  must  not  be  wanting  in  any  hrme-
dispensary  as  the  complaint  for  which  they  brmg  help  so


Eyel)riglit.

(Euphrasia  officinalis  L.)

a.  Flowor  seen  from  the  front,
b!  flowor  seen  from  one  side,  .  „„+^,,i

c!  fruit  in  the  calyx  (three  times  their  natural
prowth,

d.  a  stamen,  I times  their  natural  growth.

e.  a  seed,  (


Medicaments  :  Fennel.


155


frequently  occurs ;  I  mean  tlie  colic  wiih  its  attendants,
the  spasms.  The  mother  quickly  boils  a  spoonful  of
fennel  in  a  cup  of  milk  from  five  to  ten  minutes,  and
gives  the  potion  to  the  patient  as  warm  as  possible  (never
too  hot  that  the  inside  may  not  be  burnt).

Its  effects  are  mostly  very  good  and  very  quick.
The  quickly  spreading  warmth  eases  the  spasms,  the
colic  abates,  and  disappears.

Exteriorly  there  should  be,  as  is  given  in  other  places,
a  warm  compress  of  water  and  vinegar  (in  equal  quan-
tities) laid  on  the  abdomen.

Fennel-powder,
s][Trinkled  as  spice
on  the  food,  remo-
ves the  gases  from
the  stomach  and  the
lower  regions.

The  powder  is
made  by  roasting
(drying)  the  corns,
and  then  grinding
thsm  in  an  ordinary  ^
coffee  mill.  Fennel  -
oil  is  obtained  at
the  chemist's.  Fen-
nel, used  as  eye-
water, does  not  ap-
pear  as  anything
new to many  a
reader who  ha'
been  cured  by  it.

Half a table-  p

spoonful  of  fennel-  (Foeniculum  officinale  All.)

powder is boiled a*  ,

with  water,  and  the  "  'e.  tZ-stÄ/  oSr hai'/o/lf

eyes  are  washed  with  the  decoction  about  three  times
a  clay.

The  eye -vapours  operate  in  a  still  more  cleansing
and  strengthening  manner.


156


Part  II.  Apotiieca.


T  always  add  one  or  at  least  one  half  spoonful  of
fennel -powder  to  the  water  used  for  the  head- vapour ;
in  this  manner  every  head-vapour  serves  as  an  eye-vapour
■at  the  same  time.

Similar  effects  as  from  fennel  are  obtained  from  anise
and  caraway.  Oftentimes  two  or  even  all  of  these  three
medicinal  corns  are  mixed,  ground  together  and  used.

28.  Fenugreek. (Foenum  grtecum.)

Of  the  seed  of  this  plant  a  powder  is  prepared  with
which  many  of  those  who  use  my  water-applications  are
well  acquainted.  They  appreciate,  and  make  use  of  it.
The  powder  is  quite  harmless,  and  may  be  used  without
the  least  fear.


\

Fenugreek.  (Fcenum  graecum.)


Medicaments:  Gentian.


157


On  the  inside  it  works  as  a  cooling  remedy  in  fever.
In  throat  complaints  with  great  heat  in  the  throat,  thft
tea  affords  a  good  gargle.  A  teaspoonful  of  the  powder
is  sufficient  for  a  middle-sized  cup  of  tea,  which  is  either
drunk  or  used  as  gargle  during  the  day  (every  hour  or
oftener,  one  tablespoonful.)

As  to  exterior  application,  Fenugreek  is  the  best
of  all  remedies  for  dissolving  tumours  that  I  know  oL
It  works  slowly,  painlessly,  but  lastingly  and  thoroughly.
It  is  applied  in  a  manner  similar  to  linseed ;  the  powder
mixed  with  water  is  boiled  to  a  paste,  and'  put  on  the-
suffering  part  in  linen  rags.

In  cases  of  wounds  on  feet  these  poultices  heal  the
inflamed  margin  of  the  wound,  and  prevent  the  formation
of  putrid  flesh  as  well  as  blood-poisoning.

Fcenum  graecum  can  be  bought  at  every  chemist's,

29.  Gentian,  (Gentiana  lutea  L.)
The  yellow  gentian  is
found  particularly  on  the
montains,  but  you  can  easily
and  with  very  little  cost  get
trustworthy  people  to  gather
it  for  you.  Before  all,  I  ad-
vise you  to  prepare  extract
of  gentian.  The  gentian
roots  are  for  this  purpose
well  dried,  cut  small,  and
th,m  put  into  bottles  with
brandy  or  spirit.

This  extract  is  one  of
the  best  stomachics.  Put
six  to  eight  table-spoonfals
of  water  into  a  glass,  and
pour  in  twenty  to  thirty
drops  of  extract ;  take  this  Gentian,
mixture  daily  for  some  time  (Gentiana  lutea  L.)

The  good  digestion  will  soon  Ä^^Ä  o'Trl\P\f,L''

be mdlCated bv a no less "^"«rouud  stem  (very  mnch  smallor  than
J  u ioo.:)  natural  growth).


158


Pakt  II.  Apotheca.


good  appetite.  If  the  food  is  felt  to  lie  heavy  in  the
stomach,  and  is  troublesome,  a  little  cordial  made  with  a
teaspoonful  of  extract  in  half  a  glass  of  water,  will  soon
stop  the  disorder.

Gentian  is  likewise  very  good  for  cramp  in  the  stomach.
When,  after  a  long  journey,  during  which  for  days  together
eating  fares  badly  and  drinking  still  worse,  people  arrive
at  their  destination  dead  tired  and  almost  ill,  a  tiny  bottle
of  gentian  tincture  taken  by  drops  on  sugar,  will  render
excellent  services.

Nausea  and  attacks  of  faintness  are  removed  by  takmg
a  teaspoonful  of  tincture  in  water;  it  warms,  enlivens,
and  brings  body  and  mind  to  peace  again.

Gentian  utilized  as  tea  ren-
ders similar  services.  Either  the
cut  up  roots  or  the  gentian  pow-
der itself ,  are  boiled  and  the
decoction  taken  as  tea.

30.  German  Leopard's-bane.

(Arnica  montana  L.)
Arnica  is  renowned  throughout
the  world  as  a  superior  medi-
cinal plant.  It  is  beyond  my
comprehension  why  this  fact  is
disputed  by  so  many  who  could
testify  its  truth,  or  ought  to  do  so.

As  tincture  of  arnica  is  so
well  known,  and  in  such  general
use  for  the  washing  of  wounds,
for  compresses,  etc.  it  does  not
seem  necessary  for  me  to  say
anything  further  about  it.  liie
tincture  is  not  expensive,  but
any one can easily  prepare
it  himself. The  blossoms  are
gathered  at  the  end  of  June  or
the  beginning  of  July,  and  put
in  brandy  or  spirit. In  about
-three  days,  the  tincture  may  be  used.


Gefiuiui  Leoiinnrs-biine.

(Arnica  montana  L.;


Medicaments  :  Grains  of  resin  or  incense.  —  Honey.  159


31.  Grains  of  resin  or  incense.

As  the  drops  fall  from  a  burning  candle ,  so  resin
often  drips  from  the  bark  of  the  fir  or  the  pine  tree.
Any  one  going  into  the  woods  in  summer  or  autumn,  can
see  these  drops,  looking  like  suspended  tears,  white  as
wax,  clear  as  honey,  and  fresh  as  spring  water.

Resin  is  the  blood  of  the  fir  and  pine ,  and  when
such  powerful  trees  are  wounded,  they  often  bleed  profusely.

This  resin  which  adheres  so  firmly,  and  to  all  appea-
i-ance  contains  precious  granulous  matter,  must  surely
have  a  special  healing  power.  Five  to  six  of  such  resin
globules  or  resin-tears  about  the  size  of  a  pea,  taken  daily
for  some  time  as  pills,  strengthen  the  chest  and  operate
in  a  remarkably  strengthening  manner  on  the  interior  ves-
sels. I  knew  a  very  weak  priest  who  used  to  take  a
good  quantity  of  this  resin  fluid  every  day.  "I  owe  the
strength  of  my  chest,"  he  often  said,  "to  this  strong
syrup."

Those  who  do  not  live  where  these  resin  pills  can
be  obtained,  may  take  instead  of  them  grains  of  incense
of  the  white  kind.  Incense  is  only  a  superior  resin.  Six
to  eight  of  such  grains  are  a  good  cure  for  the  chest.  The
fear  of  not  being  able  to  digest  these  little  resin  stones,
as  a  high  imagination  might  call  them,  must  not  alarm
you;  nature  can  work  such  goods  very  well  indeed.

32.  Honey.

The  former  generations  maintained  that  young  people
should  by  no  means  take  much  honey,  it  being  too  strong
for  them;  on  the  contrary,  old  people  were  "helped  oii
their  legs  again"  by  it.

I  have  made  manifold  use  of  honey,  and  have  always
lound  its  effects  excellent. It  operates  in  a  dissolving
purilymg  and  strengthening  manner.

It  has  long  been  used  as  an  admixture  with  tea  for
catarrh  and  obstructions  of  phlegm.

Country  people  know  well  how  to  apply  honey  oint-
ment tor  exterior  sores  or  ulcers.  I  strongly  advise  those
who  are  not  .skilful  enough  to  treat  such  sores  with  water


150  Part  11.  ApfiTHECA.


to  make  use  of  this  simple,  harmless  and  effective  remedy
rather  than  of  any  other  smearing  stuff.  The  preparation
is  most  simple.  Take  equal  portions  of  honey  and  white
flour,  and  stir  them  well  together  by  means  of  a  little
water.  Proper  honey  ointment  should  be  solid,  not  liquid.
Honey  is  also  a  good  interior  remedy  for  different  lesser
complaints.  Smaller  ulcers  in  the  stomach  are  quickly
contracted,  broken,  and  healed  by  it.  I  would  not  advise
honey  to  be  taken  by  itself,  but  I  strongly  recommend
it  taken  mixed  with  a  suitable  tea.  Without  admixture
this  superior  extract  operates  too  strongly ;  before  it  has
passed  the  throat,  it  has  made  it  already  quite  "rough".

If  on  account  of  catarrh,  or  any  other  similar  com-
plaint, swallowing  becomes  difficult,  let  a  teaspoonfui  of
honey  be  boiled  in  a  cup  of  water;  by  so  doing,  every
singer  will  obtain  the  best  and  sweetest  gargle.

Even  if  a  drop  happens  to  go  down,  there  is  no  need
to  be  afraid  of  injuring  the  stomach,  or  of  poisoning.

The  purifying  and  strengthening  honey-water  for  the
eyes  is  well  known.  Boil  a  teaspoonfui  of  honey  m  a
cup  of  water  for  five  minutes,  and  it  is  ready  for  dipp-
ing in  th?.  linen  for  the  eyes.

I  know an  old gentleman above sixty years  ot
age,  who  prepares his  daily table -wine. He  P"*^^
tablespoonful  of  pure  honey  into  boilmg  water  and  let^
it  boil  for  a  while,  and  the  drink  is  ready, it  is  saitt
to  be  wholesome,  strengthening,  and  relishing,  owe
my  health  and  my  vigorousness  m  my  old  age ,  saia
he,  "to  this  honey-wine." May  be! This  much  I  know
from  my  own  experience  (I  have  prepared  a  great  deal  ot
honey-wine,  seen  a  great  deal  of  it  drunk  and  sometimes
drunk  a  glass  of  it  myself):  this  is  dissolvmg,  purifying
nourishing,  and  strengthening;  and  it  is  good  "ot  only
for  the  weak  sex,  but  for  the  strong  sex  too It  ahN  a)  ^
reminds  me  of  the  honey-mead  of  the  ^"^^^.^J^^^^Xe  '
To  these  unadulterated  beers, as  Tacitus  relates,
they  attributed  their  health  and  their  great  age W  ho-
ever  as  a  true  son  of  our  ancient  fathers  feels  so  in
dined,  can  find  the  recipe  for  this  now  unused  druik  on
page  198.


Medicaments  :  Juniper-berry.


161


33.  Juniper. (Jnniperus  communis  L.)

Who  does  not  know  the  Juniper-berry?
Juniper,  when  used  for  fumigation,  spreads  an  agree-
able odour  through  tlie  rooms  and  passages,  and  improves

the  air. I  am  no  friend  of  the  so-called  "fumigation"

with  sugar,  vinegar,

etc.  for  I  do  not  see

how  one  can  speak  of

fresh  air  there.  But

if  it  is  a  question  of

disinfecting  a  room  in

which  a  patient  with

an  infectious  disease,

or  a  corpse  has  been

lying,  or  at  the  time

of  infectious  illnesses

to  purify  the  air  by

fumigating,  then  I  al-
ways like  such  juniper-
vapour. It  thoroughly

destroys  all  fungi,  and
whatever  the  volatile
infection  and  disease-
bringer  may  be  called.

Juniper  works  with
similar  effects  upon
the  interior  of  the
human  organism.  The
berries  fumigate,  as  it
were,  the  mouth  and
stomach,  and  ward  off
contagion.

Those  wlio  are  nurs-  Junipsr-bcrry.

nous  Illnesses,  as  scar-  Slu„b  or  tree  3  to  2s  foet

typhus, cholera eto.^^^^  ^^^^'^^^^t^I^^^^
and  are  exposed  to  contagion  by  raising,  carrying,  or  serv-
ing the  patient,  or  by  speaking  with  him,  should  alwavs


11


^ß2  Pakt  II.  Apotiieca.


chpw  a  few  juniper-berries  (six  to  ten  in  a  day).  They
give  a  pleasant  laste  in  the  mouth,  and  are  of  good  ser-
vice to  the  digestion.  They  burn  up ,  as  it  were  ,  the
harmful  miasms,  exhalations,  etc.  when  these  seek  to
enter  through  the  mouth  or  nostrils.

Those  who  are  suffering  from  a  weak  stomach,  may
try  the  following  little  course  with  juniper-berries.

The  first  day  they  should  begin  with  4  berries  the
second  day  take  5  berries,  the  third  day  6  the  iomih  l,
and  so  increase  by  one  berry  every  day  until  the  twelfth,
on  which  they  will  take  15  berries;  then  they  may  con-
tinue for  five  days  longer  taking  each  day  one  berry  less^
I  hnow  many  whose  stomach,  filled  with  gases  and  thereby
weakened,  has  been  purified  and  strengthened  by  his
simple  berry-cure.  Juniper  berries  have  been  noted  since
olden  times  as  a  remedy  for  stone  and  gravel,  and  foi
complaints  of  the  kidneys  and  liver;  also  m  all  case
wheL  foul  gases,  foul,  watery  and  slimy  matter  are  to  be
emoved  from  the  body. Not  only  the  berries,  but  a  so
IZ  young  shoots  of  the  juniper  bush  are  made  use  of  foi
tea,  Ü1  the  first  stages  of  dropsy,  and  also  as  purifymg
medicine.

The  oil  is  best  bought  from  the  chemist.  The  tincture
can  be  made  at  home  with  wine,  brandy,  or  spirit.

I  would  not  praise  the  father  or  mother  of  a  family^
^ho  wire  certainly  very  careful  and  ^il^gent  -  F-em^^^^
fhpir  meat  and  vegetables  with  berries  from  the  jumper

dw!mng,  at  least  a  few  times  in  the  year.

34.  Knot-grass. (Polygonum  aviculare  L.)
' There  grows  a  little  plant  quite  unnoticed,  generally
near  but  e^ecia%  f--^^


Medicaments:  Knot-guass.  —  Lavender-oil.  163


This  herb,  the  stem  of  which  has  many  sprouts,  reaching
a  length  of  twenty  inches,  or
even  more,  works  with  gre.ai
effect  on  stone-disease,  if  one
or  two  small  cupfuls  are
taken  daily.

A  gentleman  had  for  years
together, great  pams  in  his
kidneys , and  from  time  to
time  sand  and  gravel  came
away. He  drank  this  tea  for
several  days,  and  related  that
hundreds  of  larger  and  smaller
stones  were  discharged,  and
thereby  the pain  also  dis-
appeared. As  this  plant  ex-
pels gravel  from  the  kidneys
and  bladder,  it  also  operates
in  a  purifying  manner  on  the
liver, stomach, and  chest.
This  little  herb cannot  be
sufficiently  recommended.


Knot-grass.

(Polygonuii)  avicnlare  L.)


35.  Lavender-oil.

Lavender-oil  is  sold  at  any  chemist's.  It  should  not  be
wanting  among  the  home-remedies.

_  Five  drops  taken  on  sugar  assist  the  digestion,  and
give  a  good  appetite:

Those  who  are  troubled  with  wind,  with  headache
caused  by  rismg  gases,  or  with  nausea,  take  this  oil  as
given  above^  I  have  often  used  it  with  the  best  results
lor  those  afflicted  with  mental  derangement,  and  I  main-
tain that,  m  very  many  cases,  the  cure  depends  upon  the
removal  of  ihe  gases,  which  have  especially  bad  effects
on  the  brain.  In  my  opinion  much  too  little  attention
IS  generally  paid  to  these  gases  in  the  treatment  of  such
patients.

Those  who  have  ever  suffered  from  flatulency  know
what  a  dreadful  part  these  raging  winds  play  in  the  body.

11*


Pabt  II.  Apotheca.


LavMider. (Lavandula  vera  DC.)


„.  riant  in  natural  P'-»«*;^-. (^^^^  times  its  natural
b.  ca\yx  seon  from  tbe  bauK  u»"

growth),  \
^.  S^Ätbo  front.  openoa ,  t^^^

e.  stamen.  I  uaiuni  b

f.  stamen.  )
^:?;:;7co"Ä  natural  growth).


Against  loss  of
appetite  ,  conges-
tions, giddiness,  and
all  the  many  diffe-
rent sufferings  of  tlie
head,  the  dose  in-
dicated in  the  be-
ginning of  this  para-
graph  will  afford
great  relief.

36.  Limetree-blos-
soms.

(Tilia  grandifolia
and  parvifolia
Ehrh.)

It  is  alniost  solely
the  elderly  people
of  the  old  school
^A?ll0 still  gather
4ie  once so  weD
iked  liinetree-blos-
;ioms. They  are
quite right,  and
need only  remain
conservative  with
regard  to  thek  old

custom.
Lime-blossom-tea.

together  with  elder-
blossom-tea  are  the
best  known  teas  for
producing  perspi-
ration. Concerning
perspiring,  as  it  is
usually  carried  on,
I have my  own
particular  opinion,
which  is  not  at  all


Medicaments:  Limetree-blossoms.  — Linseed. —Mallow.  165


in  its  favour.  On  the  other  hand,  I  willingly  use  the  blos-
soms for  the  vapours  which
produce , and supply  the
place  of  perspiration.

Lime-blossom-tea  has  ex-
cellent effects  on  such  com-
plaints as  old  coughs,  ob
structions  of  the  lungs  and
wind-pipes,  troubles  of  the
abdomen  which  have  their
origin  in  obstructions  of
phlegm  in  the  kidneys.

Instead  of  the  limetree-
blossoms,  I  use  the  St.
John'.s-wort  with  or  without

admixture  of  common  yar-  ,  .,.

vr^Txr.  Q4- T  1,  ' i.  (Tilia  t^randirolia  and  parvirolia

row;  see  bt.  Johns -wort  ^ ^ Ehrh  )

page  182.


Lim  etree-  blossoms.


37.  Linseed. (Linum  usitatissimum  L.)

Linseed  poultices  are  everywhere  known,  and  in  ge-
neral use.  The  effects  obtained  by  it  (cooling,  softening,
dissolving,)  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  Foenum  graecum.
I  prefer  the  latter  as  it  seizes  the  enemy  with ,  more  vigour
and  energy. (See  page  166.)  -


38.  Mallow. (Althaea  rosea  L.)

Among  the  flowers  in  the  garden,
mallow  must  not  be  missing.  When  th '
good  creator  painted  their  blossoms,  so
pleasing  to  the  eye,  he  poured  a  drop  of
medicinal  sap  into  the  paint  for  everv
little  leaf.

Mallow -blossoms,  especially  those  of
the  black  mallow  prepared  as  tea,  cure
throat  infirmities,  and  loosen  the  phlegm
on  the  chest.  These  blossoms  are  gene-
rally mixed  with  those  of  the  mullein.


MiUow.

(Altliiea  roseaL.)


166


Part  II.  Apotheca.


For  vapours,
whether  it  be  for
inhaling,  or  parti-
cularly for  ear-va-
pours, the  mallow
proves  of  great
service.


Flax. (Liiuim  nsii  atisslniam  L)


39.  Mint.

(Mentha  piperita
L. , and  Mentha
aquatica  L.)

Peppermint  and
water  -  mint  are
both  fit  for'  use,
and  have  very
little  difference  in
their  effects.  I
prefer  the  water-
mint  whose  effects

ted among the  -s«»^.  -  "»'-^S££°  "-■
rri«  the  .tomach  a„d  ^^^^^

It  those  who  are  suflermg  from  violent  headache
bind  mint  "cross  their  forehead-,  they  wjl  soon  experience
relief  and  ease.

A  cupful  of  mint-tea  taken  every  morning  and  eve-
ning, asSSs  the  digestion  and  gives  a  fresh  and  healthy
appearance.

The  powder  renders  the  same  service  if  one  or  two
pinches  are  taken  daily  in  the  food  or  m  water.

People  weakened  by  illness,  seized  with  paVtation
at  e.e7triflZ  suffermg'much  f.om  nausea  and  frequent


Medicaments  :  Peppermint.


167


vomiting,  should  frequently  make  use  of  mint -tea  and
mint-powder.

Mint-tea  prepared  with  half  water  and  half  wine,
and  a  cupful  taken  daily  for  several  days,  takes  away  a
bad  breath.


Mint,  prepared  in  milk  or  tea,  and  drunk  warm,  re-
moves abdominal  pains.


Part  II.  Apotheca.


168

Would  that  every  house -wife  would  give  this  ucblft
little  plant,  (together  with  the  rue)  a  corner  in  tjie
garden!  They  would  reward  the  little  trouble  by  the
refreshing  perfume  which  they  so  generously  exhale  at
every  touch.

40.  Mistletoe. (Viscum  album  L )

This  parasite,  which  thrives  particularly  well  on  old
trees,  is  nevertheless  an  excellent  medicinal  plant.  1  cannot
impress  it  strongly  a^^^
enough  upon  mothers
to  make  acquaintance
with  this  plant.

It  is  of  especially
good  effect  on  the
blood.  Flux  of  blood
is  stopped  by  the  tea
from  mistletoe.  I  could
give  a  list  of  cases  in
which  a  single  cup
has  been  sufficient  for
this  purpose.

Also  for  other  dis-
turbances in  the  cir-
culation of  the  blood,
this  plant  and  its  per-
fectly harmless  tea


Mistletoe.

rViscum  album  L.)

a  branch  fhalf  its  natural  size],  b.  flo»or  [masmifiedl,
a.  Dra  iLu  i  ea,.«nn  nf  herrv.  smaMcr  thaa


leCtiV UaiJUieftS  a  liranch  rhalf  Its  natural  sizoj,  u.  I'""--"'

•^v,  Ar. .^co  nf  c'  seed  Imagnineai,  d.  section  of  herry,  smaMcr  than

may  be  made  use  ot.  c.  seea  im^u .i,^  ^^^^^^^^

?have- grass  may  be  mixed  with  mistletoe  in  equal
quaniit;,  'also  santlla,  a  red  powder,  serves  well  for
admixture;  see  "Santala"  page  17b.

41  Mullein. (Verbascum  Schräder!  Meyer.)
The'blossoms  of  the  mullein,  ^Y'^'^fo^.r^ythtv

breathmg.


Medicaments  .-  Mullein.  —  Oats.


169


I  once  again  warmly  recommend  such  tea.


Mullein.

(Verbascum  Schraderi  Meyer.)

a.  and  b.  Parts  of  the  stem  [one  third  of  their  natural  growth], e.  extended  fio-n-or,
<1.  stamen  with  declinatn  filament,  e.  the  same  seen  from  a  side,  f.  stamen  wilh  regu-
lar, erect  filament,  s:-  the  same  seen  from  a  side,  h.  hairs  of  the  villous  filament  i20
times  their  natural  growth],  i.  section  of  the  seed  [15  times  its  natural  growth]."

As  a  rule  I  mix  the  blossoms  of  the  black  mallow
with  the  blossoms  of  this  plant  (in  equal  quantities) ;
such  tea  works  in  a  still  more  powerful  and  dissolving
manner  on  the  loosening  of  the  phlegm.

42.  Oats. (Avena  sativa  L.)

A  thorough  boiling  extracts  the  strengthening  sub-
stance of  the  oat-grain;  barley  may  also  be  treated  and
used  in  the  same  manner.  Such  a  drink,  nourishing,  easily
digested,  and  cooling  for  interior  heat,  is  an  excellent
nutrient,  a  real  cordial  for  convalescent  persons  who  have


170


Part  II.  Apotheca.


been  excessively  weakened  and  exhausted  by  small- pox,
typhus,  and  other  similar  diseases.  Plow  often  do  I  lament
that  just  for  such  poor  creatures ,  (who  need  before  all
new,  healthy  blood.)  every  possible  kind  of  drink  is  pre-
pared, except  such  drinks  as  these!


Oats.

(Avena  sativa  L.)

a.  Panicle  fon^  half  to  one  third  of  Us  natural  .rowth],  ^V^^  ^^^^
c.  Klumo  fhalf  agam  i  s  «™V  fruit  encCd  by  the  (rlume,  t'.  in>i<l«  «f  the

e.  iTisti,  IÖ  times  its  n«t"ral.gro«thl  f-  f™'V  vertical  section  of  tho  same,  j.  cross-
fru'it  without  glumo,  h.  outside  of  t^-^-^^^J- J^«.

The  preparation  is  simple.  A  pint  of  oats  are  washed
• +n  Pi Jht  times  with  fresh  water,  then  put  mto  a
:lr^^wl^  a^^^^  down  to  a  pint.  Two^P--

fSs  of  honey  are  afterwards  mixed  with  it,  and  the  mix-
ture is  again  boiled  for  two  minutes.


MplDICAMENf  l  S  :  EinWOUT.


171


43.  Ribwort. (Plantago  lanceolata  L.)

When  the  country  people  have  wounded  themselves
at  their  work,  they  seek  quickly  for  ribwort  leaves,  and
do  not  cease  squeezing  until  they  have  forced  a  few  drops
out  of  the  rather  stubborn  leaf.  This  sap  they  either  put
directly  on  the  fresh  wound,  or  else  they  moisten  a  little
rag  with  it,  and  place  it  on  the  wounded  part.

If  the  leaf  refuses  its  medicinal  sap,  and  only  becomes
soft  and  rather  moist  with  rubbing,  they  place  the  soft
leaf  itself  on  the  wound.  Is  there  any  danger  thereby  of
blood-poisoning  in  this  proceeding  ?  The  ribwort  knows
nothing  of  that.  Such  a  dressing  is  the  first,  but  some-
times the  best  necessity-
dressing  ;  for  the  healing
of  such  wounds  pro-
gresses rapidly.  The
plant  sews  the  gaping
wound  together  as  with
a  golden  thread,  and
like  rust  never  gathers
on  gold,  so  all  putrid-
ness  and  proud  flesh
flies  from  the  ribwort.

The  efFects  of  this
plant  on  mterior  parts
are  not  less  advanta-
geous. Would  that  hun-
dreds of  people  would
gather  these  medicinal
leaves  in  spring  or
summer ,  crush  them,
press  the  sap  out  of
them,  and  drink  it !
Numberless  interior  ^i^'^o^t*  (Plantago  lanceolata  L.)
complaints,  which  shoot  up  like  poisonous  mushrooms
out  of  the  impure  blood  and  the  impure  juices,  would
not  arise.  Those  are  wounds  which,  truly,  do  not  bleed,
but  which  are  in  many  ways  more  dangerous  than
bloody  ones.


172


Part  11.  Aro-riiECA.


The  dried  leaves  of  ribwort  yield  likewise  a  splendid
tea  against  interior  phlegm  -  ob.structions.  The  news-
papers often  bring  us  long  praises  about  the  excellent
effects  of  ribwort,  and  still  longer  ones  on  the  ribwort-
juices  prepared  in  this,  or  in  that  place.

Many  buy  such  things  at  a  dear  price.  My  dear
reader !  be  your  own  gatherer,  preparer,  and  apothecary !
You  need  have  no  fear.  Of  one  thing  you  are  certain:
you  will  get  genuine  wares.

With  the  dried  leaves  of  ribwort,  lungwort  (i  ul-
monaria  officinalis  L.)  can  be  well  used  in  equal  quantities.
44.  Rosemary. (Rosmarinus  officinalis  L.)

Would  it  not  be  a  shame  if  this  spicy  herb  escaped
the  attention  of  the  gatherer  for  the  household  apotheca?

Rosemary  is  an  p.xcellent  stomachic.


Roiemary.

(Rosmarinus  officinalis  L.)


Medicam EN-is :  Rosemary.  —  Eue.


173


Prepared  as  tea,  it  cleanses  the  stomach  from  phlegm,
gives  a  good  appetite  and  good  digestion.  Whoever  likes
to  see  the  medicine  glass,  this  comforter  in  illness,  shining
on  his  table,  let  him  fill  it  with  rosemary-tea,  and  take
from  two  to  four  tablespoonfuls  morning  and  evening.
The  stomach  will  soon  become  sensible,  i.  e.  will  not  stick
fast  much  longer  in  phlegm.

Kosemary-wine,  taken  in  small  doses,  has  also  proved
an  excellent  remedy  against  heart- infirmities.  It  operates
in  a  sedative  manner ,  and  in  cases  of  heart  -  dropsy  it
works  strongly  on  removal  through  the  urine.  Such  wine
renders  the  same  service  in  dropsy  in  general.

Against  both  complaints,  three  or  four  tablespoon-
fnls,  or  a  small  wine-glassfnl,  of  this  pleasant  drink  are
taken  daily,  morning  and  evening.

The  preparation  of  this  wine  is  exceedingly  simple.
A  handful  of  rosemary  is  cut  up  as  small  as  possible,  put
into  a  bottle,  and  good,  well-kept  wine  poured  upon  it ;
white  wine  is  preferable.

Even  after  half  a  day's  standing ,  it  may  be  used  as
rosemary-wine.

The  same  leaves  may  be  used  a  second  time.

45.  Rue. (Ruta  graveolens  L.)

The  excellent  effects  of  this  noble  sanative  plant  is
unfortunately  by  far  too  little  known.  The  plants  speak
to  us  through  their  scent.  How  clearly  and  impressively
does  the  rue  announce  its  good  will  to  man,  for  whom
it  was  created  in  order  to  help,  to  ease  different  suffe-
rmgs;  just  as  if  each  little  leaf  were  a  little  tongue.

Would  that  we  always  understood  this  speaking  I
The  rue  operates,  no  matter  how  and  where  applied,  in
a  powerful  and  strengthening  mannei-.

If  only  a  httle  leaf  is  chewed,  its  effects  are  at  once
felt  on  the  tongue.  Its  taste  also  refreshes  the  whole
mouth ;  this  effect  of  it  is  lasting  like  that  of  sweet-
smelling  incense  filling  a  house.  Against  congestions  of
blood  in  the  head,  feelings  of  pressure  on  the  head,  and
giddiness,  tea  made  from  rue  acts  in  an  excellent  manner  ;


174


Paut  II.  Apotueca.


it  is  not  less  efficacious  against  difficulties  of  respiration,
palpitation,  and  all  abdominal  complaints  (cramps  etc.),
which  have  their  origin  in  the  weakness  of  the  whole
body,  or  in  particular  organs  of  the  body.  I  particularly
recommend  this  tea  to  all  those  who  have  an  inclination
to  the  above  named  weaknesses,  to  cramps,  hysteria  etc.


Hue.

(Ruta  fjraveolens  L.)

. ». ........  s-!r,j.r  ■  - '  ■""

KUB  put  i.  spirit,  may  be  tak.n  of  tea

for  the  complamts  mentioned,  ten  to  twehe  d.op»
sugar,  twice  (at  the  utmost)  a  clay.


Medicaments  :  Sage.


175


Rue-oil  is  lilcewise  taken.  The  preparation  of  the
latter  is  as  follows  :  the  dried  leaves  of  the  rue  are  crushed
and  put  into  a  glass;  then  fine  salad-oil  is  poured
upon  them,  and  the  glass  is  put  in  a  warm  place  for
some  time.

Afterwards  the  oil  is  poured  off  and  taken  in  drops,
the  dose  being  the  same  as  for  the  spirit.

46.  Sage. (Salvia  officinalis  L.)

Tho.'^e  who  have  a  garden  near  the  house,  will  not
forget  when  replanting  it, the  pretty  ornamental  sage


a


Sage.

(Salvia  oflicinalis  L.)

a.  Stora,  b.  fructiferous  stamen,  c.  extended  flower,  d.  ovary  with  stylo,  e.  flower  seea

from  a  side.


;176  Pakt  IL  Apotueca.


plant.  I  have  often  seen  the  passers-by  take  a  leaf  and
rub  their  black  teeth  with  it.  This  proves  that  sage  has
a  cleansing  power.

Old,  suppurating  wounds,  if  washed  with  a  decoction
of  sage,  will  quickly  heal.

Sage-tea  will  remove  phlegm  from  the  palate,  throaty
or  stomach.

Sage  boiled  as  tea  in  wine  and  water,  purifies  the
liver  and  kidneys.

The  said  effects  are  stronger  when  wormwood  is
mixed  with  sage  (in  equal  quantities),  and  the  mixture
prepared  as  tea.

Powder  from  this  medicinal  plant,  sprnikled  on  the
food  like  pepper,  sugar  or  cinnamon,  operates  against
the  given  complaints  in  the  same  manner  as  the  tea.

47.  Salad-oil.

Salad-oil  is  that  kind  of  oil  which  is  used  in  the
preparation  of  food,  especially  salad.  It  is  generally  called
either  sweet-oil  or  salad-oil.  The  pure,  fine  olive-od  is  a
superior  kind  of  the  same  oil.

Read  over  what  has  been  said  about  almond-oil;
only  when  this  cannot  be  had,  salad-od  may  be  used
instead.  If  there  is  only  a  small  supply  of  ahnond-oü,
salad-oil  may  be  mixed  wiih  it.

The  here  named  salad-oil  ought  to  be  pure  Pro-
vence-oil, or  at  least  pure  rape-oil.  The  mam.er  of
using  it  (how  and  where)  is  the  same  as  that  tor  al-
mond-oil.

48.  Santala.

Santala  or  sandal  is  a  red  powder  from  the  sandal-
wood tree,  serving  for  red  dye;  it  can  be  bought  f.om
every  chemist.  .  ,

I  always  mix  this  P^^ectly  harmless  ijiedy  with

mistletoe-ti,  by  adding  two  pinches  ^^"f ^cL
spoonful  of  mistletoe  leaves,  thus  mcreasing  the  cttect^
of  the  mistletoe-tea. See  "Mistle-toe '  page  16b.


4


Medicaments:  Saueboaut.  —  Secretive  oil.  177


49.  Sauerkraut.

Sauerkraut  is  well  known  to  every  German  as  pickled
cabbage. It  may  also  find  its  place  here  as  a  remedy.

In  cases  of  hurts,  burns,  and  such  like  accidents,
against  great  heats,  etc.  a  poultice  of  fresh  sauerkraut
(just  taken  from  the  tub)  will  be  of  excellent  service.

Kefer  to  the  disease  in  question.


Sandal. (Pteiocarpiis  santalinus  L.)

a.  Branch  (one  third  of  its  natural  size),  b.  corolla,  exteiuled,  o.  nistil.

The  remedy  is  the  more  noteworthy,  particularly
for  country  people,  the  easier  and  quicker  they  have  it
at  hand.

50.  Secretive  oil.

There  are  cases  where  so  many  morbid  matters  have
gathered  in  the  body  that  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to

Kneipp,  Water-Cure.  ,  y


178  Taut  11.  Apotheca.

dissolve  them  entirely  and  lead  them  out.  The  difficulty
does  not  consist  in  the  doubtful  capabilities  of  the  water
or  of  the  different  applications,  but  rather  in  the  que.s-
and  the  tediousness  of  such  a  course  frighten  away  such
patients,  especially  those  of  a  weak  nature,  and  thus  frus-
trate all  endeavours  ?  This  thought  has  occupied  my  mind
very  much,  and  my  experience  has  constantly  urged  me
on  to  new  and  earnest  consideration.

It  then  occured  to  me  that  many  an  interior  com-
plaint suddenly  disappeared,  as  soon  as  an  eruption  showed
itself  on  the  exterior.

Could  not,  so  I  asked  myself,  such  an  eruption  be
brought  about  by  artificial  means  ?  In  other  words,  could
it  not  be  possible  by  some  means  or  other  to  help  the
morbid  matters,  concealed  in  the  interior  of  the  body,  to
break  through,  to  entice  them  out  on  the  surface  of
the  skin,  and  so  relieve  the  water-cure  of  a  good  deal
of  its  work?*

After  long  seeking,  I  found  an  oil  which  renders  this
service  in  an  excellent  manner,  in  many  cases  with  remark-
able results.  It  is  not,  as  has  been  said,  absolutely
necessary  for  cure,  it  is  no  "conditio  sine  qua  non" ;  the
water  can  do  the  work  alone.  But  the  od  aids  and
furthers  considerably  the  often  very  difficult  work  of  the
water.  The  oil  is  only  used  exteriorly,  and  solely  m  those
cases  in  which  by  this  means  the  morbid  matters  can  be
led  out  in  the  easiest  and  most  advantageous  manner.
The  effects  are  entirely  harmless ,  but  thorough ,  pene-
trating to  the  very  interior.  •„  ^  .  j  u
The  manner  of  application  may  be  dlustrated  by

a  few  examples.

Someone  complaints  about  his  eyes;  they  are  in-
flamed; they  run  a  great  deal,  and  cause  acute  pain.  In
this  case,  I  gently  rub  the  surface  of  the  skin  behind  the
ears ,  in  order  to  warm  it  a  little ,  and  then  softly  put
three  or  four  drops  oi  such  oil  on  the  warmed  spots.

*~Räients  who  hav«  visited  bydropalhic  institiuions
assure  us  that  the  appearance  of  an  eruption  is  regarded  as
a  sign  that  the  whole  course  will  have  the  desired  effect.


Medicaments:  Shave-grass.  179

After  half  an  hour  the  patient  ah-eady  feels  the  effect,  a
slight  stretchmg  of  the  skin  and  burning ;  after  about
twenty-four  hours  innumerable  little  pustules  filled  with
matter  appear,  which  increase  according  to  the  quantity
of  morbid  matter  to  be  extracted.  They  afterwards  dry
up  and  fall  off  in  crusts.  If  the  first  attempt  fails,  i.  e.
if  the  oil  does  not  act  within  the  space  of  thirty  hours,
the  next  day  a  few  more  drops  are  put  on  the  red  places.
The  effect  will  surely  not  fail,  and  the  poisonous  matter,
which  caused  the  inflammation  in  the  eyes,  will  be  secreted
at  once.  To  many  persons  afflicted  with  eye-infirmities,
the  said  oil  has  brought  relief  within  one  to  two  hours,
and  within  a  short  time  the  eyes  were  clear  and  healthy.

Violent  tooth  -  ache  torments  another  patient :  the
gums  are  swollen,  the  jaw  pains  as  if  it  were  broken,
the  most  painful  excitement  tortures  the  whole  head.  As
in  the  first  case,  a  few  drops  of  our  oil  are  rubbed  behind
the  ears,  or  on  the  back  of  the  neck.  The  result  mast
be  a  favourable  one.

It  is  a  peculiarity  of  the  oil  that  in  the  first  and
more  distinguished  task  of  extracting,  it  wounds  the  oiled
spots,  but  as  soon  a  sit  has  done  its  duty,  it  heals  them
quickly  and  well.

I  do  not  in  the  least  consider  the  oil  a  secret  remedy ;
I  have  communicated  its  ingredients  to  many  a  trusty
friend.  But  in  order  to  prevent  misuse  or  mistakes  of
different  kinds,  I  have  thought  it  better  not  to  publish
the  receipt.  Persons  not  being  in  possession  of  this  oil
may  use  salad-oil  instead. (See  remarks  p.  176.)

5i.  Shave-grass. (Equisetiun  arvense  L.)

The  manifold  and  excellent  effects  of  this  medicinal
herb  cannot  be  too  highly  estimated.  It  not  only  cleanses
the  house-utensils,  for  which  it  is  considered  a  first  class
polisher  by  all  house-wives,  but  it  also  heals  the  interior
and  exterior  infirmities  of  the  human  body.

On  old  injuries,  putrid  wounds,  on  all,  even  gan-
grenous ulcers,  or  caries,  shave-grass  operates  in  an  ex-
traordmary  manner.  It  washes  away,  dissolves,  burns
out,  as  it  were,  all  that  is  injurious. The  herb  is  used

12*


180


PAirr  IL  Apotheca.


either  as  decoction  for  ablutions,  bandages,  vapours,  and
compresses,  or  it  is  wrapped  up  in  wet  clotiis  and  laid
on  the  suffering  part.


Medicaments:  Silver-weed,  181

Further  particulars  are  given  in  Part  III.  The  ser-
vices rendered  to  the  interior  parts  by  the  shave -grass,
are  still  more  manifold.

Its  tea  purifies  the  stomach.  A  cupful  is  taken  from
time  to  time  (not  daily).  It  eases  the  pains  caused  by
gravel  and  stone-disease,  and  above  all  relieves  the  sufferers
who  have  difficulty  in  discharging  their  urine.  For  this
it  stands  alone,  is  not  to  be  replaced,  and  is  invaluable.

Shave -grass  vapours,  specially  for  this  disease,  are
here  only  just  hinted  on.  Exactly  such  diseases  are
frightfully  painful  —  and  so  frequent!  Take  p^-ticular
notice  of  Ihe  simple  herb,  which  may  be  had  without  any
trouble  whatever !  Such  patients  should  take  daily  a  cup-
ful of  shave-grass-tea,  together  with  the  required  exterior
application.

For  bleedings,  blood-vomiting,  it  counts  among  the
first  and  best  teas.  Those  who  vomit  blood  should  take
it  without  delay.  I  know  cases  in  which  after  four  mmutes
even  a  perfect  cessation  took  place.

In  cases  of  violent  bleeding  at  the  nose,  such  tea  is
drawn  up  through  the  nostrils.  It  operates  in  a  contracting
manner,  and  its  effect  is  soon  felt.  Such  as  are  visited
with  hemorrhages,  I  recommend  to  drink  daily  one  or  two
cupful  of  this  tea.

There  should  be  a  sufficient  supply  of  shave -grass
kept  m  every  home-dispensary,  so  that  intimes  of  need,
which  often  occur  suddenly,  it  may  be  quickly  at  hand.

52.  Silver-weed. (Potentilla  anserina  L.)
/n- ^^^y^^-weed  grows  best,  as  its  German  name
(bansefingeikraut)  implies,  where  the  geese  like  best  to
be. It  is  found  m  the  vicinity  of  houses,  on  commons,
and  along  the  roads.  '

People  have  named  it,  after  its  mode  of  operating
cramp- herb.  ^  ^'

Tea  made  from  silver-weed  is  an  excellent  remedy  in
attacks  of  cramp,  in  the  stomach,  abdomen,  or  elsewhere
ii^ven  in  cases  of  tetanus  -  in  so  far  as  this  can  be

7ice A?T  ^''^  ^^"^^^--^  Sood  ser-

vice. At  the  commencement  of  the  attack,  or  better


182


•  Pakt  II.  Apotueca.


still,  when  symptoms  of  the  cramp  first  appear,  the  patient
should  be  given  three  times  daily,  very  warm  milk  (as

warm  as  possible)  in  which
such  herbs  (as  much  as  can
be  taken  with  three  fingers)
have  been  boilr;d  as  for  tea.

A  greater  effect  may  be
obtained  if  at  the  same  time
as  the  tea  is  taken,  a  poul-
tice is  made  of  the  boiled
herbs  and  laid  upon  the  afflic  -
ted part.

No  mother  of  a  family
should  omit  to  gather  and
dry  a  sufficient  supply  of  such
herbs.  She  knows  herself  how
painful  such  frequently  occur-
ring spasmodic  attacks  are,
and  how  it  gives  still  greater
pain  if  she  sees  her  dear
ones  suffering  without  being
able  to  help  them.


Silver-weed.

(Potentilla  anserina  L.)


53.  St.  John's-wort. (Hypericum  perforatum  L.)

St  John's-wort,  on  account  of  its  great  effects,
formerly  bore  the  name  of  witch' s-herb.  Now-a-days  both
itself  and  its  services  are  quite  forgotten. _

This  medicmal  herb  has  a  particular  influence  on  the
liver;  its  tea  is  an  excellent  remedy  for  it.  A  small  ad-
mixture of  aloe -powder  increases  the  effect,  which  can
be  observed  chiefly  in  the  urme ,  whole  flakes  of  morbid
matters  are  sometimes  washed  away  with  it.

Head  complaints  arising  from  watery  matters  or  ob-
structions of  phlegm  in  the  head,  or  from  the  gases
rising  to  the  head!  stomach  spasms,  slight  obstructione
of  phlegm  on  the  chest  and  lungs  are  healed  at  once  b>
tea  made  of  St.  John's-wort.  ,  . i .  ond

Mothers,  who  are  caused  a  great  deal  of  tiouble  an
anxiety  by  their  little  bed-wetters,  could  tell  us  much
about  the  strong  effects  of  such  tea.


Medicaments  :  Strawberries.


183


Tf  St.  John's-wort  is  not  to  be  had,  common-yarrow
(Achillea  millefolium  L.)  may  be  used  in  all  the  given
cases.

54.  Strawberries. (Fragaria  vesca  L.)

What  joy  for  children  when  they  bring  the  first
basket  of  straw-bsrries  to  their  parents,  their  pastor,  or
their  teacher !  What  enjoyment  when  the  first  dish  of
strawberries  (with  or  without  wine)  is  brought  on  the
table  as  dessert !

Not  only  the  fruit
of  this  little  plant,  but
the  leaves  also  are
gathered  by  many  a
mother  returning  from
her  hard  work,  full  of  ^^j,^^
care  for  her  weak  little  "Mi^!^
ones ;  for  tea  from
strawberry-leaves,  that
she  knows  well ,  is  an
exceedingly  good  and
cheap  nourishment.

How  does  she  pre-
pare this  tea  ?  She
takes  as  many  dried
strawberry-leaves  as  she
can  pick  up  with  three
or  four  fingers,  pours
about  half  a  pint  of  boil-
ing water  on  them,  and
then  covers  the  infusion
closely.  After  fifteen
minutes,  she  pours  the
tea  off,  and  she  has
pure  strawberryleaf-tea.
Then  she  mixes  with  it  hot  milk,  a  little  sugar,  and  the
drmk  is  ready.

If  the  mother  were  to  take  wood-roof  (Asperula  ado-
rata  L.)  instead  of  the  third  or  fourth  part  of  straw-
berry leaves,  the  tea  would  gain  in  taste  and  value.


St.  ooliu's-AVort.
(Hypericum  perforatum  L.)


184


Part  II.  Apotueca.


Strawberries.

(Fragaria  vesca  L.)


The  strawberries  themselves  as  a  strengthening
remedy  are  by  no  means  to  be  dispised.  To  convales-
cent persons ,  who  feel  great
weakness  and  enervation  after
serious  diseases,  they  are  given
together  with  other  nourish-
ment.

Those  who  in  summer  take
daily  for  some  time ,  e.  g.  half
a  pint  of  milk  mixed  with  a
quarter  of  a  pint  of  strawberries
[tii  is  often  done  in  the  South
of  Germany,)  or  a  piece  of  good
rye-bread  with  a  quarter  of  a
pint  of  strawberries ,  twice  a
day,  will  soon  feel  their  excee-
dingly benificial  effect.  If  the
strawberries  are  preserved  like
cherries  etc. ,  the  above  course
may  be  undertaken  with  the  best  results  even  in  winter.

In  cases  of  great  interior  heat,  strawberries  render
great  service  even  to  invalids  in  summer.  What  a  splei  did
refrigerant,  can  be  prepared  with  them  for  the  poor
sufferer  parched  with  thirst!

Similar  portions  of  strawberries  are  often  recommended
-to  those  afflicted  with  gravel  and  stone  -  disease ;  those
suffering  from  liver  complaints  could  even  take  as  much
as  a  pint  daily  at  different  times,  and  such  as  are  affected
with  an  eruption  arising  from  morbid  blood,  half  a  pmt
laoÜi  morning  and  afternoon.

It  is  remarkable  how  the  earth  offers  to  m.an  just
this  fruit  in  such  abundance.  Would  that  our  under-
standing and  gratitude  corresponded  at  aU  tunes  to  the
loving  bounty  fo  our  Creator !

55.  Succory  or  Chicory. (Cichorium  intybus  L.)

The  succory  (Wegwart  in  German)  waits  on  every
path  for  him  who  desires  to  gather  it  for  his  dispensary.
It  is  also  called  -sun-whirl"  as  its  leaves  are  always  turned


Medicaments  :  Succory.


185


to  the  sun.  When  you  look  at  it,  the  good  succory,  with
its  half-starved  looking  stalks  and  entangled  leave?,  it
seems  like  a  "rough -head"  among  all  the  other  plants.
Only  the  colour  of  its  blossom,  rather  brighter  than  that
of  the  corn-flower,  brings  it  in  some  degree  into  repu-
tation and  respect  again.

Appearances  are
often  deceptive ;  and
so  it  is  with  the
succory,  for  its  in-
teror  is  golden.

Tea  made  from


succory ,  removes
phlegm from  the
stomach ,  takes
away the  super-
fluous gall,  purifies  f
liver,  milt  and  kid-  ,
neys,  and  leads  out  //^
the  morbid  matters  '
through  the  urine.
For  this  end  two
cups of tea  are
taken daily ,  for
three  or  four  days,
the one  before
breakfast,  the  other
in  the  evening.  The  Succory  or  Cliicory

same  may  also  be  tlomplete  plant,  b.  undarffruimd  stem,  c.  flower  (natural
taken in order to  f^-^tL),  d.  pistU,  e.  f.ait  .magnified).

restore  the  stomach  when  it  has  been  upset  by  any  kind
of  food  etc.,  and  to  assist  the  digestion.

For  cramps  in  the  stomach,  also  for  painful  inflam-
mation on  the  body,  a  poultice  made  by  boiling  the  herbs
and  flowers  and  then  wrapping  them  up  in  a  cloth  is
laid  on  the  stomach  or  painful  places.  This  is  renewed
two  or  three  times  daily.

The  herbs  are  very  often  put  in  spirit.  Decaying
limbs  are  restored  by  this  spirit  when  rubbed  well  with
It  about  twice  a  day.


(Cinhoduiu  Tntybus  L.)


186


Pakt  11.  Apotiieca.


The,  roots  as  well  as  the  other  parts  of  the  plant  are
useful  for  the  given  medicinal  purposes.  They  are  rooted
\ip  most  easily  in  rainy  weather.

56.  Tonic  laxative  1  and  II.

Forty  or  fifty  years  ago  it  was  customary  at  ar»
e.\actly  given  time  to  be  bled,  at  another,  a  term  care-
fully noted  in  the  aimanach  (a  certain  quarter  of  the
moon),  to  take  the  yearly  or  half-yearly  purgative.  How
times,  opinions,  and  people  who  form  them,  change !

Even  in  our  days  many  people  will  not  give  up  the
idea  that,  from  time  to  time,  the  stomach  needs  a  thorough
mustering  and  clearing  away.

One  could  laugh  if  it  were  not,  in  all  earnestness,
most  lamentable.  In  truth,  if  those  of  a  regular,  shnple,
and  healthy  mind  reflect  on  the  conduct  of  certain  people,
I  feel  almost  tempted  to  say,  of  whole  classes  of  society,
and  on  the  food  and  drink  which  they  take,  then  indeed
the  above  idea  is  not  unfounded.

If  the  dreadfully  tormented  and  sinfully  overstramed
(because  over-loaded)  stomach  could  give  a  sound,  it  would
cry  out  and  call  for  help  against  that  kind  of  unreasonable
malefactors!  But  as  it  is,  it  must  "swallow'  all,  and
thereby  certainly  be  miserably  ruined.

Therefore,  first  of  all  I  recommend  a  reasonable  mode
of  life  a  worthy  treatment  of  the  labourer  which  lays
the  mdispensable  foundations  for  all  further  work.  Thus
only  will  and  can  this  faithful  and  diligent  worker,  the
stomach  remain  healthy.

Should  unexpectedly  —  it  may  easily  occur  —  a  mis-
fortune happen  to  it  also,  I  advise  most  decidedly  agamst
drastic  (too  strong)  purging;  I  reject  all  purgatives  which
operate  violently,  let  them  be  called  whatever

By  purging  surely  nothing  else  is  understood ,  than
striving  to  produce  a  more  coiiious  evacuation  of  the
bowels  without  injurmg  the  health  and  bodily  strength
But  this  can  be  done  in  so  simple  and  harmless  a  manner
The  herbal  remedies  do  not,  so  to  speak,  seize  the  stoi:^a.-h
as  an  enemy,  but  as  true  friends  they  walk  arm  ui  arm


JfEÜICAMENTS: ToNlC  LAXATIVE  I  AND  II.


187


with  it  supporting  it  and  raising  it  to  projDer  activity.
They  only  offer  it  their  juices  as  means  to  assist  its  own
means  of  digestion  (juices  of  the  stomach).

For  a  long  time  I  have  selected  from  among  the
different  plants ,  those  which  having  the  most  excellent
particular  effects ;  still  only  when  their  particular  healing:
virtues  act  collectively  "viribus  unitis"  (with  united  powers,)
they  efficaciously  assist  the  stomach,  i.  e.  when  weakening
it  by  thoroughly  dissolving  and  removing  all  morbid  sub-
stances, they  strengthen  it  at  the  same  time  that  it  not
only  does  not  suspend  its  work  for  a  single  hour ,  but
does  not  even  grumble  and  complain  about  it.

I  think  I  have  found  the  remedies  and  their  mixture.
Both  kinds  of  tea  shall  be  no  secret ;  on  the  contrary,  I
wish  that  very  many  may  use  them,  and  prepare  them  for
the  relief  of  others.

The  first  receipt  is  this :

Take  two  tablespoonfuls  of  pounded  fennel,  two  table-
spoonfnls  of  crushed  juniper-berries,  one  tablespoonful  of
Foenum_  graecum,  one  tablespoonful  of  a,loe-powcler ;  mix
them  all  well  together,  put  them  in  a  box,  and  keep  them
in  a  dry  place.  The  remedy  operates  after  twelve  to  thirty
hours.  The  tea  is  taken  generally  at  night  before  going-
to  bed ;  a  small  cupful  is  a  dose.  One  teaspoonful  of  the
mixture  is  sufficient  for  a  cupful ;  it  is  boiled  for  a  quarter
of  an  hour,  then  poured  off  and  drunk  either  cold  or
warm,  with  or  without  sugar.

Strong  persons  may  drink  a  cup  of  the  tea  on  two-
succeeding  days.

Weaker  patients  would  do  better  to  divide  the  cupful
for  two  or  three  days,  so  that  they  take  four  to  sbc
tablespoonfuls  like  medicine  every  evening.  Without  any
uncomfortable  feeling,  they  will  experience  its  effects.

With  many  who  make  use  of  this  tea,  it  will  be  en-
tirely without  result,  although  they  feel  its  active  work
in  the  interior.  The  police  seek,  but  sometimes  find  n'o
thief.  The  tea  seeks ;  but  where  there  is  nothing  to  find
and  remove,  it  leaves  all  else  in  peace,  and  thereby  does
not  cause  that  great  and  lamentable  weakne.ss ,  which
otherwise  always  follows  purging.


188  Part  II.  Apotheca.


In  ttie  same  manner  as  upon  the  evacuation  of  the
bowels,  this  tea  operates  also  on  the  urine.  Even  great
obstructions  of  phlegm  on  the  chest  are  removed  by  it.

Cases  have  often  occurred  to  me  in  which  after  tedious
diarrhoea,  difficult  to  stop,  this  tea  has  removed  the  re-
mainder of  the  impurities ,  and  the  deepest  and  most
lasting  peace  followed  the  interior  revoluiion.  One  small
■cupful  drunk  daring  the  day  in  three  portions,  is  quite
sufficient.

The  second  receipt  for  this  tea  is  the  following:
Two  tablespoonfuls  of  pounded  fennel,  three  table-
spoonfuls  of  crushed  juniper-berries,  three  tablespoonfuls
■of  powder  from  dwarf-ekler-roots ,  one  tablespoonful  of
Fcenum  grsecum,  one  tablespoonful  of  aloe-powder.

This  tea  does  not  exclude  purgmg  effects;  still  its
districts  are  (instead  of  the  stomach  and  bowels,)  more
the  kidneys  and  bladder  ;  it  drives  the  morbid  matters  out
through  the  urine.  Those  who  feel  uneasiness  in  the  ab-
domen (in  the  vicinity  of  the  bladder)  or  difficulty  in
making  urine,  burning  in  the  bladder  and  the  kidneys,
those  who  are  in  the  first  stages  of  dropsy,  may  calmy
use  Ihis  second  tea.  In  the  application  the  same  rules
^re  to  be  observed  as  with  regard  to  the  first  receipt.

57.  Valerian,  common. (Valeriana  officinalis  L.)

That  something  especial  must  be  hidden  in  valerian,
is  proved  to  us  by  the  cats,  which  are  so  attracted  by
it  that  they  roll  themselves  among  it.

We  use  only  the  roots,  which  are  either  cut  up  tor
tea  or  pounded  for  powder,  and  which  ^both  as  tea  and
as  powder)  are  taken  in  small  quantities  only.

Valerian-root  relieves  head  complaints,  and  removes
spasms  in  a  similar  manner  to  rue ;  it  operates  upon  both
complaints  as  it  removes  their  principal  cause,  viz.  the
gases. (See  page  189.)

58.  Violet. (Viola  odorata  L.)
This  pretty  little  fragrant  spring-flower  shall  fill  our
apotheca  also  with  its  salutary  perfume.


Medicaments:  Violet.


189


"WTien,  in  the  beginning  of  spring-time,  the  children
get  bad  conghs  in  consequence  of  the  frequent  changes
in  the  weather,  the  anxious  mother  boils  a  handful  of
green  or  dried  violet  leaves  in  half  a  pint  of  water,  and
gives  the  children  two  or  three  spoonfuls  of  such  tea
every  two  or  ihree  hours.  (The  roots  of  the  plant  may-
be used  too ;  biit  they  must  be  crushed  before  boiling.)
Adults  are  cured  of  whooping-cough  by  taking  a  cup  of
this  tea  three  times  a  day.

It  likewise  relieves
the  cough  of  consump-
tive people  and  assists
in  loosening  thf>
phlegm.  It  serves  as
a  medicine  and  should
be  taken  as  such,  i.  e.
three  to  five  table-
spoonfuls  every-  two  or
three  ht  ur.?.


This  tea  serves
further  against  head-
ache and  great  heat
in  the  head.  A  piece
of  linen  is  moistened
with  violet-leaf-tea  and
bound  across  the  fore-
head ;  or  better  still,
the  head ,  especially
the  back  of  the  head,
is  washed  with  such
a  decoction.

For  a  swollen  throat
this  tea  is  a  tested
gargle;  at  the  samr^
time  the  throat-ban-
dage may  be  applied
dipped  in  the  decoc-
tion instead  of  pure
water.


Valerian

(Valeriana  officinalis  L.)


190


Part  II.  AroTiiEOA.


Those  who  suffer  from  difficulty  in  breathing,  which,
however,  is  more  the  result  of  gath(!red  gases  and  morbid
matters  in  the  stomach  and  Ijowels,  should  undertake  a
little  course  of  violet-tea,  i.  e.  they  should  drink  daily
for  some  time  two  larger  or  smaller  cups  of  this  tea.

Crushed  violet -leaves  bound  as  a  compress  on  in-
flamed tumours  have  a  cooling  effect;  if  boiled  in  vinegar,
thev  will  heal  gout.


Tiolct.

(Viola  odorata  L-)

..  plant  in  natural  growth,  b.  flo.er.  .  flower  fr.u,  a  side,  a,  .nd  ..  fruit

«ince  faded!


MeDICAMEN'I  S  :  WiLÜ  Angklica.


191


59.  Wild  Angelica. (Angelica  silvestris  L.)

There  grows  on  damp  meadows,  or  wet  woody  places
a  plant  with  a  stalle  from  about  twenty  to  forty  inches
high.  The  stalks  are  hollow,  and  the  lads  like  to  make
whistles  of  them.  This  plant  bears  the  name  of  Angelica.
It  is,  like  many  others,  not  known  in  its  salutary  eii'ects
on  the  human  body.

If  any  one  has  taken  unwholesome  or  half-poisonous

food,  tea  made  by  boiling  its  roots,  seeds  and  leaves,  is

an  excellent  remedy  for  removing  these  injurious  matters.
As  the  blood  is  prepared

from  the  different  kinds  of  food,

and  as  these  are  not  all  good

and  wholesome  for  the  system,

this  tea  leads  the  bad  matters

out  of  the  blood  again.

How  often  does  it  happen
that  an  uncomfortable  coldness
takes  possession  of  the  stomach !
A  cup  of  tea  made  from  such
roots,  brings  more  warmth  to
the  stomach  agam.  It  is  best
to  divide  such  a  cup  of  tea
into  three  parts,  and  to  take
the  first  m  the  morning,  the
second  at  noon,  and  the  th'vA .
in  the  evening.

If  there  are  morbid  matters
m  the  stomach  and  bowels,
or  if  gripes  are  caused  by
gases,  this  tea  is  again  an  effi-
cacious remedy  especially  if  half  wine  and  half  water  are
taken  for  the  tea.

n>.1  Phl^g^, ^he  lungs  and  chest,  heart-burn,

phlegm  m  the  wmd-pipes,  are  by  this  tea  e,specially,  most
easily  removed.

The  angelica  can  be  highly  recommended  as  an  ex-
cellent home-remedy,  and  counti-y  people  ought  to  gather
.  good  quantity  of  it  for  the  whole  yea'  in  their  meadow.'


Wild  Angelica.

(Angelica  silvestris  L.)


192


Paiit  11.  Apoiueca.


and  woods,  dry  it  in  the  air,  and  keep  it  in  a  dry  place.
These  roots,  seeds,  and  leaves,  well  dried,  may  also  be
made  into  powder ,  and  a  good  pinch  of  such  powder
taken  twice  or  three  times  daily  will  supply  the  place
of  Ihe  tea.

I  caution  those  who  have  little  knowlegde  of  plants,
against  gathering  angelica  lest  they  should  carry  home
hemlock  (poisonous  plant)  instead.  I  was  urged  to  give
Ihis  warning  by  the  fact  that  cases  of  such  most  dan-
gerous mistakes  have  repeatedly  occurred.

60.  Wormwood. (Artemisia  absmthium  L.)

Wormwood  ranks  among  the  best  known  stomachics.
Tt  leads  the  v.'iud  oat  of  the  stomach ,  improves  the

stomach  juices,  and  so
*  effects  a  good  appetite

,4^  and  good  digestion,
whether  it  is  taken  as
tea  or  as  powder.

.  For  a  bad  smell  from

the  mouth,  if  it  proceeds
from  the  stomach,  worm-
wood is  of  excellent  effect.

Whoever  is  suffering
from  liver  complaint  (me-
lancholy), let  him  take  the
little  box  of  wormwood-
powder instead of  his
snuff-box, and'  put  a
pinch  of  its  contents  into
his  first  spoonful  of  soup,
or  sprinkle  it  like  pepper
on  his  food  once  or  twice
a  day. The  decreasing
yellowness  of  the  skin
will  soon  show  the  im-
provement of  the  gall,
and  the  patient,  whose
breath  has  heen ,  as  it  were ,  laced  up  by  the  foul  air


Wormwood.

'Artemisia  Absiuthium  L.)


Medicaments  :  Wormwood.


193


and  often  still  more  foul  juices  —  real  dung-hills  of  the
stomach  —  will  breathe  more  freely  again.

Wormwood  can  also  be  used  as  a  tincture,  which
may  be  preserved  for  a  long  time.  As  a  single  little  corn
of  incense  glimmering  on  the  charcoal  will  fill  a  whole  room
with  perfume,  so  a  little  leaf  of  worrawoctl  is  sufficient
to  give  a  bitter  taste  to  the  contents  of  a  whole  spirit-
bottle,  —  a  sign  of  the  virtue  of  the  tincture  and  its
effects.

Travellers  who  are  much  troubled  with  indigestion
and  nausea,  should  never  forget  to  take  with  them  as  a
faithful  companion  their  little  bottle  of  wormwood-tincture.

Wormwood-tea,  used  as  eye-water,  has  often  rendered
the  best  services  in  eye-complaints.


Knei  pp,  Watpr-Ouro.


13


Contents  of  a  little  home-apotheca.


I.  Tinctures
of

Arnica

Bilberry

Gentian

Juniper-berries

Rosemary

Succory  orChicory

Wormwood.

IL  Tea

from

Althea
Bark  of  oak
Bog-bean
Brier

Blackthorn -  blos-
soms
Camomile
Centaury
Colt's-foot
Common-elder
Common-nettle
Common  yarrow
Cowslip
Dwarf-elder
Eyebright
Juniper-berries


Lime  -  tree  -  blos-
soms
Lungwort
Mallow

Mistletoe  '

Mullein

Mint

Ribwort

Rosemary

Rue

Sage

St  John's-wort
Shave-grass
Silver-weed
Strawberries
Succory  orChicory
Sweet  wood-ruff
Tonic  laxative
Valerian
Violet

Wild  angelica
Wormwood.

III.  Powders

from

Alum
Aloes
Colt's-foot
Dwarf-elder


Eyebright .

Fennel

Fenugreek

Linseed

Mint

Sage

Sandal

Valerian

Wormwood

Wild  angelica

further

Bone-dust

Chalk-dust

Coal-dust.

lY.  Oil

of

Anise

Camphor

Fennel

Juniper-berry
Rue

further

Almond-oil
Oil  of  Cloves
Lavender-oil
Salad-oil.


Several  kinds  of  strength-giving  food.


Recipe  for  the  preparation  of  bran-bread.

Get  your  miller  to  grind  your  wlieat  together  with
the  bran.  Millers,  as  a  rule,  do  not  like  to  do  this  for
well  known  reasons;*  therefore  the  flour  returned  from
the  mill  should  be  well  inspected.

Of  this  flour  take  2,  4,  6,  or  8  lbs.  (according  to
the  number  of  persons  for  .  whom  the  bread  is  going  to
be  made) ,  put  it  in  a  kneading  pan ,  and  make  it  into
dough  with  hot  water.  Put  the  dough  in  a  rather  warm


*  Those  who  ou  account  of  larger  consumption  of  bran-
bread,  are  able  to  buy  one  of  the  {rrinding-machines  especially
made  for  this  purpose,  will  be  best  off;  they  can  never  be  cheated.
—  I  knew  a  professor  in  the  Tyrol,  who  had  a  serious  stomach
complaint,  and  as  he  could  only  take  the  smallest  quantity  of
food,  his  strength  became  very  much  reduced.  He  was  advised
to  get  such  a  little  machine  and  take  bran-bread.  He,  at  once,
ordered  one  from  Vienna,  and  w^as  himself  the  miller  and  the
donkey  too  !  He  ground  his  own  wheat,  and  his  wife  baked  the
bread  for  him.  He  became  so  healthy  and  his  stomach  with
him,  that  the  latter  henceforth  refused  its  services  to  no  kind
of  food  whatever.

13*


196


Pakt  II.  Apoiiir.CA.


place,  where  it  should  remain  during  ihe  night.  Neither
leaven,  nor  salt,  nor  any  other  spice  may  be  mixed  with  it.

The  next  day  little  loaves,  or  rolls,  are  formed  out
of  the  dongh,  and  baked  in  an  oven  heated  as  for  ordinary
bread ;  they  are  left  in  the  heat  for  an  hour  and  a  quarter
to  an  hour  and  a  half.

As  soon  as  the  bread  is  taken  from  the  oven,  it  is
thrust  into  boiling  water  for  3  or  4  seconds,  then  put
at  once  into  the  oven  again  for  a  short  time  to  dry.

I  learnt  this  latter  manipulation  from  a  Tra])pist
prior,  who  said  that  he  had  long  tested  the  baking  of
such  bread  in  different  ways ,  and  had  found  that  this
manner  of  baking  was  the  best,  as  thereby  all  the
nourishing  substance,  in  particular  the  sugar  substance
is  drawn  from  the  bran.

I  know  many  who  have  eaten  this  bread  with  par-
ticular liking,  who  eat  it  still,  and  say  thai:  it  renders
excellent  and  special  service  for  complaints  of  the  stomach,
digestion,  and  particularly  for  hemorrhoidal  complaints.

There  are  others  whom  I  have  kno\vn,  who  at  first
found  this  tasteless  and  unspiced  bread  remarkably  insipid,
but  afterwards  they  have  taken  it  with  an  ahnost  passionate
liking.

The  bread  is  kept  in  a  cool  place  and,  should  the
crust  be  too  hard,  covered  with  a  damp  cloth.


The  strength-giving  soup.

Of  this  I  am  convinced :  if  the  soup  is  known  and
used,  a  groat  number  of  miserable  people  can  be  made
happy.

The  strength -giving  soup  is  not  only  to  be  recom-
mended on  account  of  its  extraordinarily  good  nutritious
substances,  but  also  because  it  is  very  cheap  and  easily

prepared.  .  ,

A  gentlmnan  of  position,  who  became  acquauited  willi
it,  bought  of  a  farmer  two  great  loaves  of  black  bread


NouinsHiNG  rooD.  197


(The  black  bread ,  as  is  well  known,  is  prepared  only
from  rye-flour,  so  carefully  ground  for  Ü19.  country  people,
that  only  a  little  of  th?,  bran  is  left,  and  consequently  all
the  nourishing  substances  of  the  rye  are  used.)  This
gentleman  ordered  the  two  loaves  of  bread  to  be  cut  up
in  small  slices,  put  on  tin  plates,  and  placed  upon  the
hot  hearth,  in  order  to  dry  them  as  much  as  possible.
Dried  quite  hard  they  were  pounded  in  a  mortar  to  a
coarse  powder.  If  he  wanted  a  strength-giving  soup,  he
stirred  two  or  three  spoonfuls  of  this  bread -powder  in
boiling  broth,  and  put  in  very  little,  or  no  spice ;  he  also
used  but  little  salt.  In  two  minutes  the  soup  was  ready.
It  has  a  pleasant  taste,  gives  good  nourishment,  and
causes  no,  or  at  least,  not  much  gases.  —  Instead  of
broth,  the  gentleman  often  took  milk,  and  when  this  was
boiling,  he  stirred  in  the  bread-powder.  In  two  minutes
this  soup,  too,  was  ready.  The  latter  soup  is  even  greatly
superior  to  the  former,  because  milk  contains  more  nou-
rishing substances  than  even  broth.

If  the  gentleman  happened  to  have  neither  milk  nor
broth,  he  ordered  water  to  be  boiled,  and  stirred  the
l)read-powder  in  it  wliile  boiling ,  then  a  little  spice  and
beef- dripping  was  added.  This  soup  also  deserves  the
name  of  strength-giving  soup.

One  day  this  gentleman  entered  a  house  where  the
farmer's  wife  was  baking  bread  made  out  of  spelt,  which
IS  similar  to  wheat.  (This  grain,  too,  is  ground  by  the
country-people  with  all  possible  care.)  He  bought  two  such
loaves,  and  procaeded  a  swith  the  black  bread.  Then  the
bread-powder  obtained  was  mixed  with  that  before  named,
and  he  had  soup  made  from  this  admixture  in  the  same
way,  as  was  explained  before.  He,  thereby,  obtained  six
different  kinds  of  soup,  which  are  also  different  in  strength-
giving  property.

This  strength  -  giving  soup  is  particularly  excellent
tor  very  weak  children,  because  it  is  easily  digested
very  nourislung,  and  causes  no  gases. It  is  also  to  be
recommended  to  young  growing  people,  to  improve  the'
blood  through  the  poverty  from  which  the  body  suffers
so  much.


198


Paut  II.  Apotheca.


This  strength-giving  soup  is,  further,  good  for  inva-
lids because  it  brings  much  nourishing  substance  to  the
weakened  system.  Lastly,  it  is  especially  to  be  recommended
to  the  aged.  When  the  teeth  fail  for  well  masticat-
ing solid  food,  one  should  keep  to  this  soup.  There  ought
to  be  no  family  into  which  this  strength-giving  soup  is
not  introduced.  I  once  recommended  it  to  a  person  in
high  office,  who  afterwards  assured  me  that  he  knew  no
more  wholesome,  or  more  nourishing  soup.


Preparation  of  Honey-wine.

(Very  recommendable  for  the  healthy,  and  the  sick.)
The  ancient  Germans  had  little  or  no  wine.  The
brown  beer  was  unknown  to  them,  because  ^f^y^^  l^
such  thing. Their  food  was  very  smiple,  and  yet  never-
h  Äy  were  a  powerful  race they  attamed^^^^^^^^^
aee  and  enioyed  an  extraordmary  health They  attnbutea
S  gÄ  and  this  extraordinary  healt^  mead
rhnnev-wine). It  is  a  great  pity  that  this  gooa  ürinK

spoiled  L  wgex  works  on  the  breedmg  of

follow  these  recipes,  but  Has  nevei

""^I  generally  prepare  it  as  follows :  I  have  from  60  to

65  .Jaftrjf wLr  put  in  a  l^J^-^  ^^^,

this  has  hecorne  ™- tft  J  hoil  quite  gently

are  stirred  m  it, I'^^i!  to  time,  the  scum  is

for  an  hour  and  a  half.  F^om  tmie  to^^  ^^.^.^^

removed  from  the  top.  ^^^^n  u  earthen
expired,  «>«  l^XrlttV^oÄ"^^^^^^  ^,  httie
Sgher'tran  tTof  wairheate'd  by  the  sun),  .t  >s  put


PllEPARATlON  OF  HONEY-WINE.  199


into  a  thoroughly  clean  cask. The  bung  is  put  on,  but
ot  fastened If  the  cellar  is  rather  warm  Ihe  fermen-
ation  Cgts  after  five  to  fifteen  days After  about
fo mteen  dtys  fermentation,  this  new  fermented  honey-wme
UrZn  off  mto  another  cask The  dregs,  of  course  are
left  behind. In  the  second  cask,  the  fermentation  lasts
from  ten  to  fourteen  days,  and  when  the  wine  becomes
quite  calm,  so  that  nothing  more heard  m  the  cask,
then  the  bung-hole  is  closed.  After  three  or  tour  weeks,
it  will  be  clear,  and  fit  for  drinking.  If  it  is  then  drawn
off  into  bottles,  and  these  well  corked  and  put  into  sand,
it  will  effervesce  in  a  few  days  rather  strongly.  ilus
beverage  is  very  cooling,  and  is  therefore  liked  by  those
ill  with  fever.  AVhen  sick  people  cannot  drink  either  beer
or  wine,  such  honey-wine  is  a  cordial  for  them. But  it
is  also  a  good  drink  for  the  healthy;  it  ought,  however,
to  be  drunk  m  small  quantities  only,  otherwise  it  causes
disgust.


I

I


Part  the  third.

Diseases.


Introduction.


Ihe  following  cases  are  no  imaginary  ones.  They
tare  tales  of  human  misery  which  rest  on  facts,
_ jand  I  am  ready  to  guarantee  for  every  name
mentioned.

"^-^I^ It  is  perfectly  well  known  to  myself  that
^ this  part  of  my  book  has  many  defects,  and  that
' my  list  of  diseases  is  by  no  means  a  complete
one. This  must  be  attributed  in  part  to  want
of  time;  in  part  to  my  intention  to  give  hints  and  in-
structions on  symptoms  of,  and  remedies  for,  diseases  in
an  entertaining  manner,  certainly  the  most  suitable  one  for
those  readers  to  whom  I  wish  to  address  myself  before
all  others.

I  selected  among  the  various  diseases  those  by  which
we  are  visited  most  frequently,  and  the  individual  cases
of  the  different  illnesses  were  again  chosen  with  a  view
to  make  this  part  of  the  book  as  instructive  as  possible.
Whether  the  execution  of  my  plan  quite  answers  my  in-
tention, I  will  not  decide  myself ;  but  1  think  that  who-
ever reads  the  book  with  good  will  and  without  preju-
dice will  be  able  to  discover  at  least  some  grains  of
gold  in  it.


204.


Part  Iii.  Intkoduciion.


With  regard  to  the  repetitionp,  wliich  occur  freque.iitly
in  thi'^  part  of  the  book,  I  must  add  that  they  were  made
for  the  sake  of  clearness  whicli,  ali hough  always  of  im-
portance, is  particularly  so,  when  the  various  applications
are  spoken  of.

Diseases  are  crosses,  dear  reader !  Every  one  of  us
will  sooner  or  later  have  to  bear  one  of  these  crosses,
perhaps  unto  death.  We  are  allowed  to  lessen  the  weight
of  these  our  crosses,  or  did  not  the  Prophet  tell  Naaniaii.
ihe  Syrian,  to  go  and  wash  seven  tiinii.s  in  tlie  Jorda:i
that  he  might  be  cleansed  from  his  leprosy?

May  the  Lord  bless  my  intention  to  alleviate  the
burden  of  many  -a  cross-bearer !


Complaints  in  alphabetical  Order.


Abscesses.

nflammation  is  an  inseparable  companion  of  the
various  sores.  Wherever  fire  breaks  out,  people
li'-^J'ry  to  the  place.  A  somewhat  similar  gather-

fä-f^Sl ^'^^"^^'^  P^*^^  smallest  spot  on

^CT^  fli«  surface  of  our  body  is  inflamed.  One  blood
globule  tells  the  other  and  the  curious  ones  that
Y obey  the  calling,  are  soon  burnt  themselves.  If
a  small  ulcer  has  formed  on  the  toe,  be  it  not
larger  than  a  hmtil,  the  pain  of  it  is  felt  not  only  in
the  whole  toe,  but  in  the  foot  and  the  leg.  These  pain-
ful uiflammations  always  remind  me  of  a  match  which
when  lighted  iji  the  dark,  sheds  brightness  over  a  large
space.

Ann  has  a  very  bad  thumb.  There  is  little  to  be
seen;  the  thumb  is  swollen  a  little  and  is  of  a  darker  red
hue  than  the  other  fingers.  Not  only  the  thumb,  but  even
the  shoulder,  pains  dreadfully.  Mind,  in  a  short  time
your  whole  body  will  be  suffering.  Ann's  father  thinks
that  somethmg  must  be  the  matter.  Yes,  certainly  there
IS  somethmg  the  matter.


206  Part  III.  Diseases.


The  girl  wraps  her  thumb  well  up,  and  has  now  been
waiting  3  to  6  days  for  what  might  ensue.  The  thumb
swells,  the  hand  too.  A  big  abscess  begins  to  form ;  the
girl  feels  acute  pain  in  her  finger,  arm,  and  body:  it  is
as  if  a  comediant  were  playing  at  ball  with  knives.  Only
after  a  long  time,  the  matter  ^vill  be  entirely  removed,  and
the  thumb  healed.

What  ought  the  girl  to  have  done  ?  As  soon  as  she
felt  the  pain,  not  caused  by  any  accident,  she  ought  to
have  done  what  her  mother  uses  to  do  when  she  wishes
to  put  out  a  small  flame  on  the  hearth.  A  gentle  appli-
cation of  water  might  have  suppressed  the  evil  in  its  germ.

If  it  is  not  the  hand  only  but  also  the  arm  that
pains,  the  inflammation  can  no  longer  be  compared  to  a
small  flame  which  may  be  extinguished  by  a  mere  sprink-
ling of  water.  May  the  girl  now  hold  her  arm  under  the
spout  of  the  well  to  put  out  the  fire?  By  no  means!
There  is  not  only  heat  to  be  cooled,  there  are  also  poi-
sonous matters  to  be  dissolved  and  thrown  out.

The  suffering  part  is  wrapped  up  in  an  arm-bandage
(piece  of  linen  dipped  in  cold  water),  and  this  bandage
is  to  be  renewed  viz.  to  be  re-dipped  in  water  every  tune
it  begins  to  be  hot.  The  finger  must  indeed  become  "a
bad  finger",  viz.  the  abscess  must  burst,  but  all  that  has
been  extracted  by  the  bandage  need  not  turn  into  matter
and  it  is,  no  doubt,  a  great  advantage  if  the  abscess  only
swells  to  the  size  of  a  hazelnut  instead  of  that  of  a  walnut.

If  the  feeling  of  uneasiness  extends  to  the  whole
of  the  Spanish  mantle,  and  the  general  health  will  soon
be  restored.

One  kind  of  abscesses  is  well  known  under  the  name
of  whitlow.  The  ill  treatment  to  which  such  fingers  are
frequently  exposed,  affords  new  proofs  for  the  foolishness
of  men.  They  behave  as  if  they  had  completely  lost  their
common  sense.  Every  one  knows  a  new  ointment  which
will  infallibly  cure  the  finger,  and  where  the  ointments
end,  superstition  begins  to  do  its  part  of  the  work.  1
know  of  people  who  use  as  a  remedy  m  such  cases  a
living  mole  which  they  keep  in  their  hands  until  it  dies,


Abscesses.


207


believing  that  their  whitlow  will  cease  to  torment  them
as  soon  as  the  poor  animal's  life  is  gone.  After  much
ointing,  smearing,  talking,  and  lying,  the  healing  process
ends  with  the  bursting  of  the  abscess  and  a  profuse
discharge  of  matter  which  is,  of  course,  nothing  but  the
happy  result  of  the  omtments  used  and  of  the  death  of
the  mole.

Can  there  be  greater  foolishness  than  this?

What  is  a  whitlow?  Nothing  else  than  an  abscess,
tioned girl.  Since  this  kind  of  abscesses  generally  appears
when  much  unhealthy  matter  has  accumulated  in  the
body,  the  cure  ought  to  extend  to  the  whole  system.  The
local  treatment  consists  in  the  hand-  and  arm-bandage.

The  finger  is  swathed  in  a  threefold  piece  of  linen
previously  dipped  in  a  decoction  of  shave-grass  to  prevent
the  affection  of  the  bone ;  hand  and  arm  are  wrapped  in
a  twofold  bandage  dipped  in  a  decoction  of  hay-flowers.
This  bandage  is  to  be  renewed  as  often  as  increased  pain,
or  heat  is  felt.  The  whole  body  is  worked  upon  by  the
Spanish  mantle  and  the  short -bandage  which  should  be
alternately  applied ,  every  day  for  one  hour.  After  the
first  week,  the  application  of  bandages  may  take  place
every  second  or  third  day.  I  recommend  cautiousness
with  regard  to  upper  and  lower  showers  which  ought  not
to  be  applied,  before  much  dissolving  and  evacuating  has
been  effected.  As  soon  as  the  finger  is  "mature",  viz.
shows  a  bluish  hue  and  becomes  soft  on  one  side ,  it
should  be  opened  at  once,  and  there  is  no  reason  for  fear
if  blood  flows  out  along  with  the  matter.  This  blood
would  otherwise  have  turned  into  matter  and  if  it  is
spared  this  process,  the  healing  of  the  finger  is  accele-
rated. Fear  about  opening  an  absce.ss  too  soon,  is  out  of
place  where  water -applications  are  used;  it  may  be
well  founded,  however,  when  an  abscess  is  treated  with
ointments.

There  is  still  another  way  of  healing  whitlows  which,
for  the  sake  of  its  being  shorter ,  I  have  often  applied
myself.  The  hand  and  the  arm  up  to  the  elbow,  are
bathed  in  an  infusion  of  hay-flowers,  2  or  3  times  daily


208


Part  111.  Diskasfs.


for  half  an  liour.  The  ba^h  slioiild  he  warm,  but  by  no
means  hot.  The  above  mentioned  bandages  for  finger,
arm  and  body  are  applied  in  addition  to  tlie  batlis.

The  thumb  of  Andrew,  a  gardener,  was  in  a  terrible
fetate.  Dreadfully  swollen,  the  whole  finger  was  without
skin  resembling  a  mass  of  raw  flesh  covered  with  matter.
The  bone  was  to  be  seen  in  several  places.

The  physician  had  declared  that  amputation  would
be  inevitable.  I  examined  the  hand  and  said  to  myself :
If  I  could  only  save  that  poor  man's  hand.

Then  I  reflected  and  came  to  the  following  con-
clusions. The  visible  bone  (and  that  was  the  principal
thing)  has  an  appearance  of  soundness  and  seems  in  no
way  affected.  The  dreadfully  swollen  disgusting  thumb
is  like  a  cess-pool  in  which  the  body  pours  its  good-for-
nothing  juices.  These  acrimonious  matters  increase  the
suppuration,  destroy  the  flesh  and  poison  everything.
Therefore,  I  must  work  on  the  half  corrupted  thumb,  and
still  more  on  the  body  that  it  may  cease  to  kill  its  own
member.  My  reflections  were  followed  by  action.  The
thumb  and  the  whole  hand  were  wrapped  in  a  bandage
dipped  in  hay-flower  and  shave-grass  infusion  (both  kinds
of  herbs  were  boiled  together) ;  this  bandage  was  renewed
4  or  5  times  a  day.  The  sick  body  received  daily  a  short
bandage  and,  3  times  a  week,  the  Spanish  mantle.  To  the
finger,  I  applied  daily  diluted  alum-water  to  wash  away
matter  and  dirt.

Four  weeks  had  not  past,  when  finger  and  hand  were
saved.  A  new  thumb  began  to  form  round  the  bone
which  was ,  indeed  ,  not  affected.  The  new  thumb  had,
the  nail  excepted,  an  entirely  normal  appearance,  llie
man  could  attend  to  his  work  as  formerly  and  lived  many
a  year  after.

Apoplexy.

Paul  has  been  stricken  by  apoplexy.  The  right  side
of  his  upper  body  is  paralysed,  his  mouth  dreadfully  dis-
t-orted,  his  right  eye  sunk  in,  the  eye-lid  stiff,  his  voice
broken,  all  his  courage  gone.  The  physician,  who  had
been  called  immediatelly ,  declared  that  nothing  could


Apoplexy.


209


be  done  and  that  the  patient  should  daily  drink  some
"Bitterwasser"  (mineral  water  impregnated  with  some
neutial  salt).  This  prescription  did  not  satisfy  the  pa-
tient, he  began  directly  to  try  water-applications,  and  in
12  days  he  was  well  again.  This  happened  13  years  ago,
and  the  robust,  although  elderly,  gentleman  delivered  his
lectures  for  many  a  year  after.
How  was  this  cure  effected  ?

As  soon  as  the  woik  of  a  watch  is  disturbed  in  its
order  by  a  fall  or  a  shock,  a  stand-still  takes  place.  May
be  none  of  the  little  wheels  is  injured,  but  perhaps  there
is  something  between  them  that  hinders  their  course,  or
they  press  and  prevent  each  other  from  keeping  their  re-
gular pace.  The  disturber  ought  to  be  expelled,  the  little
workers  reconciled  in  order  to  make  every  part  serve  the
purpose  of  the  whole.  In  the  same  way  the  human  body
is  sometimes  troubled  by  inward  disturbers  of  peace,  per-
haps by  one  of  those  conglomerations  which  occur  espe-
cially in  advanced  years,  when  the  wheels  of  the  work
viz.  the  organs  are  rather  worn  out.  Mouth,  eye,  or
tongue ,  these  delicate  wheels ,  are  not  injured  but  have
been  pushed,  as  it  were,  out  of  their  proper  place.  Expel
the  disturber,  and  order  and  peace  will  soon  be  restored.
1  mil  try  to  assist  you  in  the  proceeding.

A  head -vapour  followed  by  a  shower,  will  do  its
dissolving  work  in  the  upper  part  of  i  he  body,  a  foot-
vapour  will  produce  the  same  effect  in  the  lower  part.
The  patient  should  then  take  a  warm  bath  followed  by
a  cold  one,  or  by  a  cold  ablution.  This  application,  be-
sides working  in  a  dissolving  manner,  will  diminish  the
determination  of  blood  to  the  head.  As  soon  as  the  con-
glomerations are  thus  removed  and  the  circulation  regu-
lated,  it  will  be  good  to  proceed  to  the  oiling  of  the
machine  which  is  done  by  a  nourishing  strengthening
fare  —  not  too  much  at  a  time,  however  — .  Strong
wines,  spirits,  and  spices  ought  to  be  avoided  as  well  as
mental  exertion  and  agitation.

A  pastor  was  stricken  by  apoplexy. One  hand,  one
foot ,  one  whole  side  of  his  body  was  totally  paralysed,  <
voice  and  consciousness  were  also  gone. Remedies  were

Kneipp,  Water-Cure.  1  i


210


Part  III.  I'iskasks.


appliRcl  for  several  days,  but  without  success.  The  physi-
cian declared  that  the  one  side  would  remain  paralysed
as  it  was  and  that  a  second  stroke  was  likely  to  follow
the  first  and  put  an  end  to  the  poor  gentleman's  life.  I
thought  that,  in  this  case,  an  experiment  with  water  could
do  no  harm. The  cold  foot  and  arm  were  vigorously
washed  with  cold  water ;  two  warm  foot-baths  with  vi-
gorous washing  of  the  feet  and  4  ablutions  of  the  upper
parts  of  the  body  were  the  applications  of  the  second  day.
On  the  third  day  we  perceived  that  there  was  still  feel-
ing and  life  in  the  two  paralysed  limbs. This  gave  us
cou]-age.  On  the  fourth  day  we  applied  a  lower  bandage
to  the  awkward  body  and  put  the  feet  twice  into  a  warm
bath  with  salt  and  ashes. We  continued  in  the  same
manner  for  a  fortnight.  Then  the  patient  began  to  assist
us  with  the  healthy  hand  and  foot  and  showed  to  his
own  great  satisfaction  that  he  was  able  to  lift  the  para-
lysed hand  a  little.  For  the  following  three  weeks  whole-
ablutions  were  applied  alternately  with  head-  and  foot-
vapours,  weekly  one  of  the  vapours  and  daily  one  ablu-
tion of  the  upper  and  lower  body. New  life  seemed  to
animate  the  body  that  had  been  so  suddenly  struck  down;
the  appetite  increased. The  applications  for  the  next  3
weeks  were :  every  week  one  warm  bath  followed  by  a
cold  one,  one  head-vapour,  one  foot-vapour,  and  3  half-
baths  with  ablution  of  the  upper  body  (during  1  minute).
The  cure  was  concluded  by  upper  and  lower  showers
applied  alternately  with  the  Spani.sh  mantle. It  was  in-
deed no  easy  work,  but  the  gentleman  recovered  hi.s  former
health  insomu-ch  as  to  be  able  to  say  Mass  daily,  and
to  sing  it  occa.sionally ,  to  visit  the  sick,  and  to  attend
to  his  correspondence. His  tongue,  however,  had  been
fff.cted  so  much  that  a  difficulty  in  pronouncing  certain
words  always  remained  and  rendered  him  unable  to  preach.
It  is  now  10  years  since,  and  the  pastor  still  lives  and

enjoys  good  health.  .  , , ,  m

A  man,  45  years  old,  was  stricken  by  palsy,  i he
right  hand  and  foot  were  completely  paralysed  and  with-
out any  feeling;  appetite  was  wanting  entirely.  1  he  pa-
tient took  daily  ablutions  of  the  upper  body  and  the  feet:


Apoplexy.


211


the  water  used  was  warm  and  mixed  (in  equal  quantities)
with  vinegar.  Three  times  a  day  he  took  30  drops  of
extract  from  wormwood,  sage,  and  bog -bean.  After  a
fortnight,  normal  warmth  and  feeling  had  returned  to  hand
and  foot,  and  the  man  was  able  to  walk  in  the  room.
Thj  appetite  increased,  the  paralysed  side  recovered  its
strength,  and  after  a  few  days  more,  the  man  was  per-
fectly well  again.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  this  man
had  indulged  in  the  drinking  of  brandy,  and  that  the  stroke
must  be  attributed  to  this  cause.  To  secure  a  complete
cure  and  recovery  of  strength  8  to  10  baths  of  a  decoction
from  oat-straw  or  pine-twig.s  should  be  taken,  the  tem-
perature of  the  bath  being  30—32"  R.,  the  duration  of
it  20  minutes.  As  usual  the  warm  bath  is  to  be  followed
by  a  vigorous  cold  whole -ablution,  or  a  half-bath  with
washing  of  the  upper  body.

Some  general  remarks  about  strokes  may  find  a
place  here.  Wlienever  a  person  has  been  stricken  by  apo-
plexy and  is  partly  paralysed,  recourse  should  be  had  to
cold  washings  immediately.  Back,  chest,  and  abdomen
should  be  vigorously  washed  twice  to  four  times  daily.
Salt  or  vinegar  may  be  mixed  with  the  water.  In  the
same  way  feet  and  arms  must  be  washed  in  order  to
distribute  the  blood  equally  to  all  parts  and  produce  suffi-
cient warmth  in  them.  All  ablutions  must  be  performed
as  quickly  as  possible,  their  duration  should  never  exceed
1  minute.

If  the  effects  of  the  stroke  are  only  slight  ones,  and
the  patient  is  able  to  sit,  the  best  application  will  be  a
head -vapour  (for  20  minutes)  succeeded  by  a  vigorous
washing  of  the  upper  body.  After  an  interval  from  4
to  6  hours,  a  foot-vapour  (also  for  20  minutes)  should  be
applied,  followed  by  an  ablution  or  lower  shower.  Then,
th3  above  mentioned  ablations  may  be  made  use  of.

I  caution  against  the  application  of  the  larger  ban-
dages in  such  cases  ,  the  natural  warmth  is  too  weak  and
cannot  be  roused  by  these  stronger  remedies.  I  know  of
a  case  in  which  a  physician  attempted  to  cure  the  patient
by  swathing^.  The  first  bandage  did  good ;  but  after  the
second  one  had  been  applied,  the  person  remained  cold,

14*


212


Part  III.  Diseases.


and  the  whole  body  assumed  a  bhii'jh  hue.  Only  appli-
cation of  warmth  could  bring  him  round  again.

A  man  is  stricken  by  apoplexy. One  side  is  com-
pletely paralysed  as  well  as  the  tongue. The  patient  Ls
unconscious.  So  he  remains  for  ten  days.  The  physician
who  attended  him,  declared  that  nothing  could  be  done,
and  that  a  second  stroke  would  soon  follow. The  first
vapour. The  sick  man  was  lying  in  bed ;  a  basin  half
filled  with  boiling  water  (a  few  handfuls  of  hay -flowers
had  been  added),  was  placed  on  a  stool  near  the  bed;  the
patient  was  laid  near  the  edge  of  the  bed  and  his  upper
body,  which  was  exposed  to  the  vapour,  covered  with  a
blanket.  In  10  minutes  the  man  was  bathed  in  perspira-
tion and  continued  so  for  15  to  20  minutes,  the  water
running  down  in  drops. Thereupon,  the  upper  body  and
the  head  were  vigorously  washed  with  fresh  water  and
vinegar  and  laid  to  rest.  On  the  same  day  the  washing
was  once  repeated  but  without  vapour  -  application.  On
the  second  day  a  foot-vapour  was  applied  (for  25  minutes),
the  patient  being  still  unconscious. Profuse  perspiration
of  the  whole  body  was  effected  by  this  vapour,  which
was  followed  by  a  whole  -  ablution. On  the  third  and
fourth  day  respectively,  we  applied  head-vapour  and  foot-
vapour ;  on  the  fifth  day  consciousness  returned  and  the
patient  was  able  to  move  his  paralyzed  limbs. On  the
next  three  days  a  whole  ablution  with  water  and  vinegar
was  taken  twice  a  day.  Then  the  patient  partly  recovered
his  voice,  but  three  weeks  passed,  before  he  could  speak
freely  again.

From  this  time  the  patient  began  to  make  use  of
3  applications:  a)  whole-ablution,  b)  covering  with  wet
sheets  and  c)  lying  on  wet  sheets,  alternately  in  the  mor-
ning and  in  the  afternoon.  In  a  few  days  the  patient  felt
so  much  stronger  that  a  knee -shower  could  be  applied
every  morning,  and  an  upper-shower  every  afternoon.
Besides  these  applications  whole-ablutions  were  taken  and
as  soon  as  the  patient  could  walk,  this  application  was
substituted  by  half-baths,  and  upper-shower  with  knee-
shower.


AS'l'HMA.


213


The  effsct  of  the  cure  was  so  good  that  the  man,
even  now  after  twelve  years,  is  perfectly  able  to  attend
to  his  business.

Asthma.

A  gsntleman  relates:  "I  am  46  years  old.  For  20
years  I  have  suffered  from  asthma.  I  had  recourse  to
several  physicians;  they  declared  my  disease  to  be  in-
but  without  any  result.  I  thought  myself  dooined  to  bear
this  heavy  cross  to  the  end  of  my  life.  Especially  during
the  night  my  difficulty  in  breathing  reached  somethnes
such  a  degree  that  I  spent  whole  nights  at  the  open
window,  exposed  to  the  cold  of  winter.  Such  attacks
lasted  several  days.  To  add  to  my  affliction,  I  lost  all
appetite  and  felt  my  strength  go  so  fast  that  I  could  not
but  expect  to  be  soon  delivered  from  all  earthly  suffer-
ings. At  last  God  had  mercy  on  me.  The  book  "My
Water-cure"  came  into  my  hands  as  a  helper  in  great
need.  In  8  days  I  was  cured.  It  is  hardly  to  be  believed
how  water  can  effect  so  great  a  change  in  a  man's  system
in  the  brief  space  of  8  days. The  applications  were :

1)  Upper  shower ,  then  knee-shower ,  walking  in  water ;

2)  shower  for  the  back,  thigh-shower;  3)  sitting-bath,
upper  shower,  half-bath;  4)  upper  shower,  shower  for
the  back,  walking  in  water ;  5)  half-bath,  upper  shower,
sitting-bath ;  6)  whole  bath,  upper  shower ;  7)  thigh-
shower,  upper  shower.  Moreover  I  waU^ed  barefoot  in
the  grass,  daily  for  1  to  2  hours.  It  was  summer,  and
I  felt  better  from  hour  to  hour."

A  priest  makes  the  following  statements  :  "I  am  well
built  and  have  always  been  healthy  and  strong ;  for  nine
months,  however,  I  have  been  so  obstructed  with  phlegm
that  I  have  great  difficulty  in  breathing,  and  when  I  have
to  cough,  I  fear  to  suffocate.  I  had  formerly  an  excellent,
sonorous  voice,  and  now  I  can  scarcely  make  myself  under-
stood ;  I  feel  also  so  tired  that  I  am  hardly  able  to  walk.
Several  physicians  whom  I  consulted  declare  my  disease
to  be  catarrh  of  the  wind-pipe  or  catarrh  of  the  chest."


214


Part  111.  Diseases.


Applications :  Daily  three  or  four  times  an  upper
shower  and  twice  daily  walking  in  water  to  above  the
calves  of  the  legs  this  to  be  continued  for  4  days.  During
the  5  following  days,  2  upper  showers,  1  shower  for  the
back  and  1  half-bath  daily ;  besides  these  applications,
the  shawl  was  used  3  times  a  week,  and  walking  in  water
took  place  daily.  After  these  5  days,  the  patient  took  a
half-hath,  a  shower  for  the  back,  an  upper  shower  and  a
knee-shower  daily.  These  applications  were  continued  for
a  short  time  and  effected  the  secretion  of  a  great  quan-
tity of  matter.  Day  by  day,  the  patient's  appearance  im-
proved,  his  breath  became  easier,  his  voice  clearer,  his
temper  more  cheerful.  His  complaint  had  been  chiefly
brought  on  by  too  warm  clothing  and  want  of  exercise.

Bed-welting.

Not  only  children  of  both  sexes,  but  also  grown  up
people  are  often  afflicted  with  this  complaint.  It  is  a
pity  that  such  unfortunate  children  are  often  treated  with
cruelty  or  that  remedies  are  applied  such  as  those  adver-
tised in  almost  every  newspaper.  I  was  once  told  that
in  an  institution  for  children  the  bed-wetters  were  punisliad
every  night  before  going  to  bed.  No  wonder,  if  fear  and
anxiety  prevents  the  poor  creatures  thus  treated  from
falling  asleep  immediately ;  but  this  is  not  all  they  will  after-
wards fall  into  a  faster  sleep,  and  the  dreaded  accident
is  sure  to  happen.  The  cause  of  this  unpleasant  complamt
is  weakness  of  the  system;  if  the  latter  is  braced,  the
former  will  soon  disappear.

I  advised  6  children,  from  8  to  13  years  old,  to  walk
for  3  to  5  minutes  in  a  bath  with  so  much  water  as  to
reach  the  calves  of  the  legs  and  then  to  take  brisk  exercise
either  in  the  room  or  the  open  air.  After  5  days  only
2  of  the  6  children  wetted  their  bed,  in  a  few  more  days
these  also  were  cured.  After  the  walking  m  water
they  made  every  time  use  of  the  arm -bath  holduig
their  arms  in  cold  water  which  was  of  great  efficacy  not
only  against  the  defect  in  question  but  also  agamst  their
children  will  suffice  for  adults  as  well. Only  when  the


Bed-wetting.  -  Births.  -  Bladder,  cxvAnm  of  the.  215


iuices  or  the  blood  are  much  affected  through  weakness,
it  is  advisable  to  take  a  cupful  of  tea  from  CDmmon
Yarrow,  half  of  it  in  the  morning,  the  rest  in  the  evening.

For  the  applications  the  coldest  water  proved  the
best  I  made  an  attempt  with  warm  water  m  such  a
case,  and  the  result  was  increase  of  the  complaint.

Births.

A  young  wom'iii  had  given  birth  to  3  dead  children.
Her  sadness  and  discouragement  became  extreme  '^^hen
the  physician  declared  that  she  would  never  be  able  to
bear  a  child  alive.  I  consoled  her  and  gave  her  hope  if
she  would  make  use  of  water  -  applications  ui  order  to
strengthen  her  system.  She  began  with  the  easiest  means
of  hardening,  accustomed  herself  by  and  by  to  stronger
ones,  until  she  kept  at  last  to  half-  and  whole -baths.
Within  three  years  she  bore  the  happy  father  3  healthy
and  strong  children.

A  woman  was  ill  of  typhus ;  the  headache  made  her
almost  despair.  Her  relations  brought  her  from  the  town
to  the  country  that  she  might  there  die  quietly.  The
poor  woman  was  about  to  become  mother.  I  was  con-
directly.  The  headache  abated.  For  the  sake  of  security
the  relations  of  the  patient  sought  the  advice  of  the
physician,  who  had  attended  her,  about  the  short  ban-
dage. His  verdict  was  that  the  first  bandage  would  cause
an  untimely  birth.  Unfortunately  for  his  advice,  six
bandages  had  already  been  applied ,  when  the_  message
reached  us.  The  patient  became  quite  well  again  herself
and  gave  birth  to  a  healthy  child.

Bladder,  catarrh  of  the.

A  gentleman  relates:  "I  am  30  years  old,  for  3  years
I  have  been  afflicted  with  a  catarrh  of  the  bladder;  I
attribute  this  complaint  to  over-exertion  and  especially
to  undue  retention  of  the  urine.  In  the  beginning  I  still
attended  to  my  ordinary  occupation,  although  under  great
pain,  until  I  broke  suddenly  down  at  table  with  weakness
and  pain.  For  4  months  I  kept  my  bed  and  became  so
miserable  that  I  resembled  a  skeleton;  the  weight  of  my


216


Part  JH.  Diseases.


Wildungerwa.^er  (mineral  water),  of  which  I  drunk  no
less  than  1ÜÜ  bottles,  and  sitting-baths.  A  violent  catarrh
of  the  stomach  and  bowels  added  to  my  snffürings.  In
spring  things  went  on  better.  In  summer  my  pain  was
baarable,  although  very  great  at  times;  my  urine  was  very
often,  almost  daily,  of  a  dull  colour.  In  winter  my  pains
always  increased  and  in  summer  I  became  better  again.

In  the  winter  of  1887,  the  pain  in  the  bladder  grew
more  violent,  the  urine  became  always  more  scanty  and
dull,  and  I  had  to  keep  my  bad  for  3  weeks.  My  strength
was  going  so  fast  that  it  was  believed  consumption  would
soon  bring  me  to  my  grave.  The  lower  parts  of  my  body
were  always  cold,  and  I  was  shivering  in  a  very  well
warmed  room  dressed  as  I  was  in  5  pair  of  trowsers  and
warm  and  several  kinds  of  mineral  water  of  which  I  took
150  bottles.  At  last,  encouraged  by  many,  I  resolved  to
go  to  Woerishofen,  as  soon  as  the  weather  would  permit."

The  patient  looked  very  ill  and  emaciated,  but  he
did  not  cough.  I  gave  him  hope  for  recovery.  On  the
third  day  already  the  colour  of  his  face  had  improved,
the  pain  decreased,  the  urine  became  profuse  and  clear  and
after  4  weeks  the  patient  declared:  "Now  I  am  again
the  cheerful  and  healthy  man  I  was  formerly  —  this  has
been  effected  by  the  water."

The  result  was  extremely  good.  A  physician  who  had
made  bladder  complaints  his  special  study,  declared  the
gentleman  completely  recovered  and  was  greatly  astonished
on  seeing  the  result  of  the  cure.

The  applications  were :  In  the  beginning  some  times
a  nightstool-vapour  with  a  decoction  of  shave-grass;  then
for  3  weeks,  upper  shower  and  walking  in  water  in  the
morning  and  in  the  afternoon ;  later  on,  daily  sitting-baths
and  upper  showers  alternately;  besides  this,  tea  from
shave-grass  and  juniper-berries.

Bladder,  complaint  of  the.

A  teacher  says :  My  disease  has  been  declared  by
physicians  to  be  "nervous  irritation  of  the  bladder  and


Bladder,  complaint  of  the.  —  Blood,  decomp.  of  the.  217


the  bowels."  For  15  years  I  have  suffered  more  or  less
from  difficulty  in  making  water.  In  spring  this  year  the
disease  appeared  in  an  unusually  high  degree.  Sometimes
I  had  to  discharge  my  water  15  to  20  times  a  night.
The  considerable  sediment  contained  salt-crystals  and  later
on  mucus.  I  was  also  afflicted  with  winds,  costipation,
a  feeling  of  chill  and  trembling  (especially  of  the  lower
body)  during  the  night,  sometimes  with  convulsions  m  the
legs.  Complete  loss  of  appetite  and  sleeplessness  rendered
me  very  weak.

The  applications  were  the  following  ones:

1)  every  night  whole-ablution  (for  which  the  patient
got  up  after  lying  in  bed  for  some  time);

2)  one  day  a  short  bandage,  the  other  day  a  shirt
dipped  in  warm  salt-water;

3)  daily  a  cupful  of  tea  from  shave-grass,  in  which
20  crushed  juniper-berries  had  been  boiled:  all  this  to  be
continued  for  3  weeks.

In  a  short  time  appetite  and  sleep  returned,  and  one
symptom  of  the  disease  disappeared  after  another.  There
remained  only  debility  and  paui  in  the  legs.  Agamst  these
we  applied:

1)  an  upper  shower  in  the  morning;

2)  a  knee-shower  in  the  afternoon;
3j  a  half-bath  from  time  to  time.

The  last  symptoms  of  illness  soon  disappeared.

Blood,  decomposition  of  the.

On  my  return  from  a  journey,  I  visited  a  parish-priest
of  whom  I  had  heard  on  the  way  that  his  end  was  ex-
pected. I  entered  and  found  the  geaüeman  sitting  in  an
arm-chair.  He  gave  me  the  following  account  of  his
sufferings :  I  have  25  holes  and  wounds  in  my  body.  You
see  in  my  face  5  little  plasters ;  of  these  I  have  20  on
my  body.  The  little  pustules  form  quickly  and  contain  a
brown  fluid.  If  I  put  on  a  plaster,  it  will  stick  to  the
pustule  for  a  day  and,  when  taken  off,  some  putrid  flesh
will  come  off  with  it.  In  this  manner  I  have  suffered  for
months,  and  I  fear  there  is  no  longer  help  for  me.  More


218


Fart  III.  Diseases.


tormenting  even  tlian  the  wounds  on  my  body  is  for  me
a  foul  taste  in  my  mouth  which  is  disgusting  beyond
description.  If  you,  dear  brother  in  Christ,  have  soma  ad-
vice for  a  wretched  man  like  me,  give  it  speedily.  I
wood to  be  taken  every  2  hours  to  remove  the  bad  taste
from  his  palate.  Then  1  left  him,  convinced  that  I  should
only  see  him  again  in  Heaven.

Five  days  after  this  incident,  a  messenger  brought  me
the  news  —  not  of  the  priest's  death  —  but  that  the
tea  had  effected  the  desired  change  in  the  priest's  taste,
and  that  he  even  felt  appetite  for  food.  He  now  asked
me  for  a  remedy  which  would  compl/te  his  cure.  I  pre-
the  washing  to  be  performed  as  quickly  as  possible.  Again
the  news  arrived  that  the  patient's  health  was  improving
and  the  appetite  increasing.  I  now  advised  him  to  make
use  of  the  Spanish  mantle  and  the  whole-ablution  alter-
nately, every  day  for  some  weeks.  After  a  fortnight  the
priest  said  Mass  for  the  first  time  after  a  long  interval.
From  that  time  he  took  every  week  a  hay-tlower-bath
(28"  E.)  to  conclude  with  a  cold  whole-ablution,  and  every
day  cold  half-baths  (with  ablution  of  the  upper  body)
alternately  with  whole  ablutions.  The  good  priest's  reco-
very was  a  perfect  one,  and  he  lived  for  24  years  after
this  cure  cheerfully  attending  to  his  office  as  pastor.

A  man  comes  and  relates:  For  2}  years  I  have  been
ill,  and  nobody  can  help  me.  2  years  ago  both  my  feet
swelled  and  became  quite  blue  up  to  the  knees.  2  holes
formed  on  each  foot,  out  of  which  ran  much  matter  and
blood.  When  the  feet  became  a  little  better,  the  right
arm  swelled,  became  likewise  blue  and  holes  formed  on
it.  The  arm  is  now  better,  but  I  have  a  tumour  and  pains
in  the  back.  Sometimes  my  abdomen  is  swollen,  and  1  feel
great  pain  there.  But  much  worse  than  my  bodily  com-
plaints are  my  mental  sufferings.  People  say  that  I  some-
times speak  confusedly.  If  it  were  allowed,  I  should  have
committed  suicide  long  ago.  They  also  say  I  was
bewitched.  Whether  this  be  true  or  not,  I  cannot  become
more  wretched  than  I  am.


Blood  poisonixg.


219


oat-straw-water  thus  obtained  and  slip  into  the  sack,  as
YOU  would  in  a  pair  of  trousers  up  to  the  arm-pits,  ihen
have  yourself  wrapped  in  a  blanket,  and  remain  so  tor
2  hours,  after  which  you  can  go  to  wo.k.  Ihe  «econd
day  dip  a  coarse  shirt  likewise  in  such  hot  water,  wring
it  out,  and  put  it  on,  then  the  blanket,  as  the  previous  da^.
The  third  day  you  take  a  short  bandage  dipped  in  oat-
straw-water,  for  11  hours.  Thus  contmue  for  a  fortnight.
After  this  time  all  tumours  had  disappeared,  one  foot  was
cured,  the  other  one  had  still  a  little  hole;  the  appetite
came  back,  and  the  peasant  had  to  make  use  of  one  of
the  3  applications  every  third  day.  After  3  weeks,  body
and  mind  were  completely  restored.

Blood  poisoning.

A  house-wife  had  scratched  her  finger  a  little,  and
not  minding,  the  trifle  went  to  bed  witho4.it  examining  the
injury;  it  seemed  her  too  unimportant.  In  the  night  she
wakes  up,  feels  cramp  in  her  finger,  great  nausea  and  a
tendency  to  vomit.  The  injury  was  on  the  left  hand,  and
she  felt  pain  and  cramp  in  the  right  foot.  The  hand,  and
the  arm  up  to  the  elbow  swell,  become  of  a  bright  red,
and  withm  10  hours  the  excessive  pain  extends  over  the
whole  arm.  The  veins  up  to  the  elbow  swell  and  become
dark-coloured.  There  was  no  physician  in  the  village,  and
there  was  evidently  the  greatest  danger.

Boiling  water  was  poured  over  hay-flowers,  and  in
these  hot  hay-flowers  the  whole  arm  was  wrapped  up.
The  arm,  wearing  the  bandage,  was  then  laid  in  the  hot
hay-flower-water  for  eight  hours.  These  hay-flowers  acted
like  a  vesicatory  on  the  whole  arm  and  drew  the  poi-
sonous matters  out  of  the  blood.  This  incident  shows  how
necessary  it  is  to  procure  speedy  help  in  cases  of  blood
poisoning.  Perhaps  in  1  or  2  hours  this  house-wife  might
have  been  dead.  It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  even  the
tongue  of  this  poor  woman  had  already  a  bluish  colour.
After  36  hours  the  skin  on  the  palm  of  the  hand  was
so  completely  detached  from  the  flesh  that  it  could  have


220


Pakt  111.  Diseases.


been  pulled  ofP.  As  soon  as  the  cramp  in  the  finger
ceased,  the  nausea,  too,  was  gone.

Joseph  killed  a  cow  and,  by  accident,  wounded  his
own  thumb  with  the  bloody  knife.  He  paid  no  attention
to  it  until  he  began  to  feel  excessive  pain,  and  his  hand
swelled  so  that  he  could  scarcely  move  his  fingers.  The
heat  increased,  and  before  long  yellow  and  blue  spots
appeared  on  finger  and  hand.  A  physician  gave  him  some
remedy  with  which  the  hand  was  to  be  washed  and  ban-
daged. But  the  pain,  which  had  got  hold  of  the  arm  up
to  the  elbow,  became  more  unbearable  than  ever;  the
poor  man  felt  that  the  inflammation  inside  was  making
continual  progress.

I  was  sent  for  and,  having  examin.-'id  the  case,  I  pre-
one  of  I  hour's  dui-ation.  During  the  time  when  the  arm
was  not  exposed  to  the  vapours ,  it  was  wrapped  up  in
boiled  hay-flowers  (to  above  the  elbow).*

Every  2  hours  i.  e.  as  often  as  the  pain  increased,
the  bandage  was  renewed.  This  proceeding  brought  not
only  relief  but  complete  cure.  The  spreading  of  the  in-
flammation ceased  on  the  evening  of  the  first  day,  and
after  4  days  the  inflammation  was  entirely  removed.

A  gentleman  cut  his  corn  which  was  inflamed.  In  a
few  days  the  inflammation  made  so  rapid  a  progress  that
he  could  no  longer  doubt  about  blood  poisoning  having
set  in.  Many,  who  had  some  experience  of  the  matter,
thought  him  lost.  The  patient  took  daily  2  foot-baths  of
boiled  hay-flowers  (these  being  left  in  the  water  for  the
"bath)  and  daily  the  feet  were  wrapped  in  cloths  dipped
in  a  decoction  of  shave-grass  (every  hour  to  be  re-dipped
in  it).  These  bandages  were  to  be  applied  several  times
a  day,  each  time  for  2  hours.  Since  there  appeared  other
symptoms  of  blood-poisoning  (sickly  appearance  and  want
of  appetite),  general  applications  were  added  to  the  above-


*  Hay -flowers  are  soaked  with  boiling  water,  then
squeezed  and  spread  on  a  cloth.  On  tiiis  the  patient  puts  his
arm  and  has  it  wrapped  up  in  such  a  manner  that  it  is  quite
surrounded  by  the  damp  warm  hay-flowers.


Blood  voMiTiNa.


221


mentioned  partial  ones.  A  lower  bandage  ot  1^  hours
duration  and  ablution  of  the  upper  body  were  applied  daily.

In  a  few  days  the  gentleman  was  out  of  danger,  and
in  10  days  he  was  perfectly  well  again.  He  took  daily
2  cupfuls  of  tea  from  wormwood  and  sage  (both  herbs
mixed).

Such  small  foot  complaints  require  great  precaution.

1  know  of  no  better  preservatives  than  walking  barefoot
(be  it  only  in  a  room  e.  g.  15  or  20  minutes  before  going
to  bed)  and  frequent  cold  footbaths;  for  weak  persons
the  latter  may  be  lukewarm.  Great  care  for  the  clean-
liness of  the  feet  is  an  important  means  for  the  preser-
vation of  general  health.

A  stout  parish-priest  tried  to  give  his  thick  throat
sician. In  order  to  produce  the  desired  effect  in  as  short
a  time  as  possible  and  get  rid  of  this  goitre  he  was  rather
extravagant  in  the  use  of  iodine.  In  a  short  time  the
strong  gentleman  emaciated  so  remarkably  that  he  lost
half  the  weight  of  his  body.  The  physician  gave  him  up,
because  the  iodine  had  poisoned  his  blood.

In  such  cases  the  Water-Pfarrer  is  always  good  enough
to  make  up  for  other  people's  imprudence!  I  wish  this
remark  to  be  regarded  as  a  mere  joke  which  I  write  down
without  the  slightest  feeling  of  bitterness !  The  patient
took  warm  baths  with  a  decoction  of  pine-twigs  (28 —
SO*'  R.)  followed  by  a  cold,  but  quick  ablution;  he  lay
on,  and  was  covered  with,  wet  sheets ;  there  were  further
applied  to  him:  the  upper  and  lower  shower,  the  lower
bandage  dipped  in  a  decoction  of  pine- twigs,  every  day

2  applications  in  the  given  order.  Besides  this,  he  walked
barefooted  in  the  dewy  grass.

He  took  daily  a  saltspoonful  of  chalk-dust  or  slacked
lime  dissolved  in  -J  pint  of  water,  to  be  divided  into  2
to  4  doses ;  likewise  daily  1  or  2  spoonfuls  of  Provence-
oil  whilst  he  lived  on  simple,  nourishing  household-fare.
Also  in  this  case  the  water  did  excellent  service.

Blood  vomiting.

Whenever  blood  is  spit  or  vomited,  it  is  of  the  greatest
importance  to  ascertain  whether  it  comes  from  the  lung^


Part  III.  Diseases.


Ol-  the  stomach.  It  is  suro  to  come  from  the  lungs  when
it  is  throwii  up  in  a  tit  of  coughing  like  phlegm,  and
when  it  is  foamy  and  of. a  bright  red  hue;  if  the  blood
is  coagulated  and  of  a  dark  brown  colour  and  the  eva-
cuation resembles  ordinary  vomiting,  it  may  be  concluded
that  it  comes  from  the  stomach.  Blood  vomiting  is  al-
ways frightening  and  requires  great  precaution,  since  it
is  infallibly  accompanied  by  a  greater  or  lesser  danger.
If  the  blood  comes  from  the  stomach,  who  knows,  what
little  vein  may  have  been  injured,  if  and  when  the  vomiting
will  take  place  again.  Carelessness  might  have  serious
consequences.  Therefore  the  injury  ought  to  be  healed
as  speedily  as  possible.

Blood  vomiting  from  the  lungs  is  by  far  more  dangerous
and  should  be  attended  to  immediately.

For  both  kinds  of  blood  vomiting  tea  of  shave-grass
is,  on  account  of  its  contracting  property,  an  efficacious
remedy.  If  the  blood  flows  from  the  nose,  such  tea  ought
to  be  drawn  up  by  it;  if  it  comes  from  the  mouth  some
spoonfuls  of  such  tea  should  be  taken  every  2  or  3  mi-
nutes. As  a  rule  it  stops  the  bleeding  quickly.  The  tea
should  be  taken  for  some  time  after  the  cessation  of  the
bleeding.  I  do  not  know  of  a  single  case  in  which  shave-
grass  has  failed  to  bring  about  the  desired  effect.

If  a  person  is  repeatedly  troubled  with  blood  vomi-
ting, the  causes  of  the  complaint  should  be  investigated.
It  is  then  either  the  lungs  which  are  affected  and  the
patient  is  consumptive,  or  a  too  strong  determination  of
the  blood  to  the  head  takes  place  (s.  congestions),  or  the
bleeding  proceeds  from  ulcers  on  the  stomach.

In  passing  by,  I  will  say  a  few  words  about  bleeding
of  the  nose.  Many  people  have  frequently  bleedig  at  the
nose  and  do  not  mind  it  at  all,  because  they  feel  "well"
after  it.  Yet  their  state  is  not  a  normal  one,  and  sooner
or  later  a  severe  disease  is  sure  to  ensue.  Poverty  of
blood,  weak  blood  and  their  attendants:  anxiety,  fear,
scruples  of  various  kinds  are  the  inevitable  consequences
of  this  frequent  loss  of  blood.  I  do  not  approve  of  the
various  ways  in  which  people  attempt  to  stop  bleeding
at  the  nose.  There  are  some  that  pour  water  over  the


Blood  vomiting.


223


neck  of  the  patient,  others  try  to  stop  the  bleeding  by
suddenly  frightening  him  etc.

The  only  thing  to  be  aimed  at,  seems  to  me  the  regu-
larity of  the  circulation.  The  blood  which  overfills  the
head  ought  to  be  drawn  down  to  the  abdomen  and  the
feet,  which,  with  such  people,  are  generally  poor  of  blood,
and  it  is  just  this  poverty  of  blood  that  will  cause  many
complaints  later  on.

The  following  water-applications  will  prove  of  ex-
cellent effect  in  this  leading  downwards  of  the  blood:  in
the  beginning  a  warm  foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt,  for
15  minutes  twice  or  three  times  a  week ;  walking  on  wet
stones,  likewise  twice  or  three  times  a  week,  and  2  or
3  short  bandages.  When  the  system  has  thus  been  streng-
thened, upper  and  lower  showers  and  half-baths  \yith
ablution  of  the  upper  body  will  render  very  good  service;
one  of  these  applications  will  be  sufficient  for  the  week.

There  is  one  kind  of  bleeding  of  the  nose  which  is
not  only  serious,  but  really  very  dangerous.  A  girl  of  15
bled  to  death  within  2  hours.  The  blood  flowed  from  the
nose  as  if  discharged  through  a  pipe,  and  the  bleeding
only  ended  with  the  girl's  death.

A  girl  of  16  years  of  age  discharged  through  the
nose  3  basinfuls  of  pure  blood  within  1-|  hours.  The
increasing  paleness  and  drowsiness  seemed  to  indicate  her
approaching  end.  At  2  o'clock  a.  m.,  I  was  called  to  pre-
pare her  for  death.  All  home-remedies  had  been  unavai-
ling; a  physician  was  not  to  be  had.  Without  delay,  1
had  the  contents  of  half  a  watering-can  poured  over  her
head,  the  other  half  over  the  upper  part  of  her  back.
The  bleeding  ceased  almost  instantaneously.  The  girl  lay
for  several  hours  quiet  but  on  account  of  her  weakness
more  or  less  unconscious.  She  had  scarcely  recovered  her-
self a  little  when  the  bleeding  of  the  nose  began  again.
The  gush  was  repeated  and  had  the  same  effect.  In  order
to  gain  new  strength,  the  patient  took  2  or  3  spoonfuls
of  milk  every  half  hour  —  appetite  and  thirst  being  entirely
wanting.  After  2  days,  she  began  to  take  strength-giving
soups  alternately  with  milk,  but  in  very  small  portions.
The  upper-shower  was  taken  daily.  The  bleeding  did  not


224


PaUT  III.  DiSKASES.


return  and  a  very  good  appetite  made  itself  felt  instead.
In  about  6  weeks,  the  patient  was  quite  well  again,  but
althongh  her  appearance  was  as  healthy  as  formerly,  the
girl  felt  the  consequences  of  the  attack  (great  internal
weakness)  for  not  less  than  6  months.

Bloody  flux.

A  house-father  comes  and  relates  the  following :  "My
wife  has  had  bloody  flux  for  some  time  and  is  dying;
she  may  be  dead,  when  I  come  home.  There  is  no  medical
help  for  her.  Is  there  no  help  at  all?"  My  advice  was  the
following:  the  woman  should  take  2  to  3  spoonfuls  of
tea  from  shave-grass  every  I  hour,  later  on  2  spoonfuls
daily.  She  should  put  a  cloth,  dipped  in  half  water  and
half  vinegar,  on  the  abdomen  5  the  cloth  ought  to  be
renewed  every  20  minutes  and  be  applied  for  2  hours.
The  flux  soon  ceased,  and  the  woman  had  to  make  use
of  the  compress  only  twice  after  the  first  application  and
each  time  for  -J  hour  only.

To  repaii-  the  loss  of  blood,  she  took  2  tablespoon-
fuls  of  milk  every  hour  besides  the  ordinary  household
fare.  After  4  weeks  this  woman  was  able  to  do  the  work
in  the  house  as  before.

I  must,  however,  remark  that  such  applications  should
only  be  resorted  to  in  cases  of  need,  until  a  physician
can  be  had.

Bowels,  complaints  of  the.

A  priest,  45  years  cf  age,  asserts:

"For  more  than  25  years  I  am  suffering  from  an
obstinate  costiveness,  and  for  some  years,  too,  from  sto-
mach complaint.  About  8  years  ago  I  undertook  a  cold-
water-cure,  which  improved  the  stomach,  but  the  costi-
veness remained.  In  the  year  1885,  disease  of  the  kidneys
came  on  with  surplus  formation  of  urine  acidity  and  for-
mation of  gravel,  against  which  the  doctor  ordered  a
grape  cure  and  after  this  a  ten  days'  course  with  Glau-
ber's-salt,  which  courses,  however  brought  as  a  conse-
quence a  very  violent  catarrh  of  the  bowels.  After  having
undertaken  every  possible  cure  in  vain,  it  was  declared
that  my  disease  was  incurable,  that  I  could  be  relieved.


Bowels,  inflammation  of  the. — Brain,  disease  o  f  the.  225


but  not  cure(j[.  I  was  tormented  with  sleeplessness,  want
of  appetite,  ^assitude,  heaviness  in  the  legs,  disUke  to
work,  pain  and  pressure  in  the  vicinity  of  the  kidneys,,
and  costiveness  in  a  high  degree,  with  swelling  and  stret-
ching of  the  abdomen,  with  a  sensation  of  chill  in  my
feet  and  great  heat  in  my  haad,  whilst  the  other  parts  of
my  body  perspired  easily  and  profusely.  In  this  state  I
made  up  my  mmd  to  try  the  cold  water,  against  which
I  had  been  so  much  warned."

Daily  an  upper-shower,  a  shower  for  the  back,  a
sitting-bath,  besides,  according  to  need,  a  half-bath,  knee
shower,  walking  in  water.  But  the  Spanish  mantle  ope-
rated the  most  powerfully,  and  has  become  a  dear  friend
to  this  gentleman.  After  a  course  of  12  weeks'  duration,
his  digestion  was  perfectly  regulated  without  any  special
diet,  the  bodily  weight  had  gained  30  lbs.

Bowels,  inflammation  of  the.

An  overseer  relates:  "For  years  I  have  suffered  from
violent,  almost  unbearable  pain  and  cramps  in  the  bowels.
I  can  scarcely  eat  anything  without  pain  and  succeeding
diarrhoea.  I  have  taken  a  great  deal  of  medicine,  but
obtained  only  little  relief  for  a  short  time.  The  appearance
of  this  man  in  his  best  years,  is  very  sickly.  He  is  ema-
ciated, pale,  and  his  eyes  are  dull.  What  could  bring
him  help  ?

1)  This  man  took  3  sitting-baths  weekly;

2)  He  washed  chest  and  abdomen  vigorously  with
water  and  vinegar,  every  morning  and  evening.

In  4  weeks  the  poor  man  was  freed  from  his  suffe-
rings. He  had  also  taken  12  drops  of  wormwood  extract
in  warm  water,  twice  daily.

Brain,  disease  of  the.

A  brew-master  of  about  33  years  of  age  has  been
suffering  greatly  for  11  years.  In  May  1877,  one  morning
as  he  rose  from  bed,  he  fell  suddenly  prostrate  half  in-
sensible and  remained  in  this  state  for  2  hours.  This  attack
was  the  precursor  of  serious  typhoid  fever  which  lasted

Kneipp,  Wator-Cure.  -


220


Part  JIl.  Diseases.


six  months.  Great  giddiness  with  vomiting  and  faintness
tormented  him  daily.  The  giddiness  began  with  a  l)eating
in  the  brain ;  then  it  threw  the  man  to  the  ground,  often
full  length.  This  state  continued  mostly  from  5  to  10  mi-
nutes, and  returned  daily  5,  8,  or  10  times.  After  these
six  months  he  was  able  to  work  again,  but  only  for  2
months.  Thereupon,  the  attacks  set  in  again  so  frequently
and  with  such  force  that  he  was  obliged  to  keep  his  bed
for  8  months.  In  the  course  of  these  11  years,  he  was
every  year  6  or  7,  even  8  months  confined  to  his  bed.
The  disease  increased  to  such  an  extent,  that,  when  he
was  not  in  bed,  the  attacks  of  giddiness  and  falling  return-
ed every  two  or  three  days,  especially  after  any  mental
exertion,  after  quick  motion,  at  every  turn  of  the  head.
The  attack  always  announced  itself  by  a  beating  in  the
head,  and  if  he  were  able  quickly  enough  to  cling  to  a
table,  or  in  the  open  air  to  a  tree,  it  shook  him  and.
threw  him  hither  and  thither  until  at  last  he  came  to
the  ground.  He  did  not  lose  consciousness,  but  his  sight
went.

For  9  years  the  attacks  were  always  accompanied  by
vomiting,  which  ceased  since  the  last  year.  The  whole
time,  for  above  10-^  years  the  unliappy  sufferer  felt  a
constant  pressure  on  his  head  as  if  a  heavy  weight  were
lying  there.  For  5  years  he  has  had  a  continual  humming
m  the  ears  and  a  difficulty  of  hearing  with  his  right  ear.
He  was  scarcely  ever  able  to  sleep  at  night  until  one  or
two  o'clock  on  account  of  a  feeling  of  weight  and  full-
ness in  the  head,  and  this  for  9  years.  From  May  1886
to  October  1887,  the  man  was,  with  a  very  slight  inter-
ruption, bedridden.  He  took  a  whole  host  of  medicaments
from  the  14  doctors  who  attended  him  in  the  course  of
h'u  long  illness,  several  of  whom  declared  him  incurable.

Most  of  them  gave  the  opinion  that  throrgh  a  former
hurt  on  his  head  —  a  cask  had  fallen  on  it  —  the  skull
was  cracked,  and  since  then  a  splinter  of  bone  pressed
upon  the  brain,  thereby  causing  all  his  sufferings.

In  my  opinion,  there  was  an  extraordinarily  strong  con-
gestion to  the  head,  and  the  following  applications  were


Brain,  inflammation  of  the.


227


Upper-gush,  walking  in  water,  gush  for  the  back,
thigh  and  knee-gush,  foot-vapour,  as  well  as  the  Spanish
mantle.  The  result  of  the  five  weeks'  course,  from  July  28
to  September  2'"^,  was  a  particularly  excellent  one.  Even
on  the  fifth  day,  the  patient  declared  himself  free  from
the  pressure  on  the  brain.

On  the  second  day  he  had  an  attack  after  rather
long  mental  exertion  (letter-writing),  —  it  was  the  last.
From  day  to  day  his  health  improved  to  his  great  joy;
the  next  4  weeks  he  felt  as  "born  anew,  so  free  and  so
light  in  his  head,"  and  his  sight  relieved  too.  For  these
five  weeks  he  slept  the  whole  night  through.  The  man
is  overjoyed,  and  returned,  as  it  were,  to  life.  At  home
he  had  simply  to  continue  daily  with  one  of  the  above
applications.

Brain,  inflammation  of  the.

The  blood  has  always  a  determination  to  those  parts
where  an  inflammation  has  arisen.  It  speedily  flows  to
these  heated  spots  and  leaves  other  parts,  and  especially
those  at  the  greatest  distance  from  the  inflammation,
more  or  less  bloodless.  When  the  brain  is  inflamed,  the
blood  must  be  led  to  the  extremities,  but  also  the  in-
flamed part  must  be  worked  upon.  The  applications  are
the  following :  Feet  and  legs  up  to  the  knees,  are  to  be
bandaged  in  cloths  dipped  in  water  mixed  with  vinegar.
Should  the  feet  be  very  cold,  the  cloths  might  be  dipped
in  hot  water  first,  but  as  soon  as  they  become  hot,  cold
water  is  to  be  taken  for  renewing  the  compress.  The
hands  and  arms  should  be  likewise  bandaged  at  least  to
the  elbows;  then,  the  patient  may  lie  on  wet  sheets.
After  I  hour,  the  cloth  must  be  re-dipped  in  cold  water.
If  the  heat  does  not  give  way,  these  applications  should
be  continued.  A  twofold  coarse  cloth  dipped  in  water  and
laid  on  the  abdomen,  will  greatly  assist  the  other  appli-
cations in  leading  the  blood  downwards.  As  a  more  direct
application  to  the  affected  part,  a  wet  cloth  may  be  tied
round  the  forehead  or  round  the  neck.  The  latter  appli-
cation is  almost  more  efficacious;  both  have  to  be  re-
newed every  |  hour.  The  shawl  also  does  good  service  in

15*


228


Pakt  III.  Diseases.


such  cases,  but  it,  also,  must  be  renewed  every  J  hour.
These  applications,  when  used  alternately,  will  pi'event
the  fever  from  attaining  a  high  degree,  and  the  inflam-
mation will  be  quickly  removed.  Fresh  water  is  the  best
remedy  for  interior  use  but  not  more  than  1  or  2  spoon-
fuls should  be  taken  at  a  time.  An  infusion  of  Foenum
graecum  may  also  be  taken  instead  of  water.

Burns.

A  peasant's  house  burnt  down.  The  peasant  burnt
his  face  and  hands  in  such  a  manner  that  he  was  not  to
be  recognised.  The  physician  put  several  plasters  on  the
injured  spots.  From  the  fingers  and  from  half  the  arm
skin  and  flesh  hung  down  in  strips.  Almost  despairing
with  unspeakable  pain,  the  unfortunate  man  longed  for
death  to  come  and  release  him.  The  physician  declared
the  recovery  of  the  patient  an  utter  impossibility.

The  absence  of  the  pastor  of  the  parish,  in  which
the  accident  occurred,  proved  providential  for  the  poor
man.  I  was  called  to  his  bedside,  and  on  seeing  him  in
his  intense  suffering,  I  tried  to  find  out  a  means  of  re-
lieving him  in  order  that  he  might  die  quietly.  I  had  all
•the  stiff,  sticky  little  plasters  removed,  then  I  quickly
stirred  with  a  pen  raw  white  of  egg,  linseed-oil  and  sour
cream  to  a  paste  which  was  applied  to  the  suffering  parts
in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  allow  the  entrance  of  the
air.  Over  the  paste  I  put  worn  out,  wet  linen  rags,  and
over  these  again  a  dry  cloth.  After  every  2  hours  the
dry  cloth  was  gently  removed,  and  the  damp  cloth  care-
fully moistened  again  to  prevent  the  so  pamful  sticking
of  it  to  the  wounds.  In  the  morning  and  in  the  evening
the  moist  cloth,  too,  was  removed  and  a  layer  of  fresh
paste  added  to  the  old  one.  It  is  incredible  in  how  short
a  time  the  patient  was  cured.  The  first  application  al-
ready had  the  effect  that  the  fearful  pain  gave  way  and
the  cramps,  the  approach  of  which  had  been  announced
by  the  well  known  ominous  writhing,  were  prevented.

As  internal  cooling  remerly,  the  patient  took  one  spoon-
ful of  salad-oil  twice  daily.  Under  the  paste  which  closed
the  wounds  completely  to  the  air,  the  new  skm  formed


Burns.


229


remarkably  quickly.  The  strictest  cleanlmess  -  after  the
first  few  days,  the  matter  was  washed  away  with  luke-
warm water  several  times  in  the  day  -  helped  to  pro-
mote the  cure  which  was  almost  accomplished  after  14
days  The  physician  himself  declared  this  patient  s  reco-
very almost  a  miracle.  He  had  never  believed  in  the
possibility  of  healing  such  injuries.

A  man-servant  was  grievously  injured  by  a  camphme-
flame.  One  half  of  his  upper  body  was  so  terribly  burnt
that  one  arm,  half  the  chest,  and  one  side  of  the  head
were  covered  with  black,  yellow,  and  red  spots,  and  the
skin  could  be  everywhere  stripped  off.  He  offered  a  dread-
ful sight,  and  the  unfortunate  man  suffered  agonizing  pam.
Exactly  the  same  treatment  as  the  above  mentioned  saved
him  and  gave  hun  back  to  his  vocation  and  his  master.

Protection  from  the  outer  air,  dampness  of  the  cloths
applied,  regularly  renewed  apphcation  of  the  cooling  paste,
and  great  cleanliness  are  the  chief  requirements  for,  and
conditions  of,  a  rapid  cure  of  burns.

Sauerkraut  (pickled  cabbage)  is  a  good  house-remedy
for  slighter  burns.  It  must  be  fresh  from  the  tub  and  is
bandaged  round  the  injured  part.  Also  the  water  pro-
duced from  Sauerkraut  by  pressure,  may  be  employed  in
a  similar  manner.  Some  prefer  scraped  potatoes,  others
linseed-oil.  All  these  little  remedies  are  good.

A  cook  had  the  misfortune  of  scalding  her  hand  and
her  arm  up  to  the  elbow  with  boiling  water.  Medical
aid  was  immediately  on  the  spot,  but  in  spite  of  the  most
careful  treatment,  the  wound  did  not  heal  for  weeks.
by  me  which  alleviated  her  pain  almost  instantaneously
and  eventually  effected  her  complete  curt-.

The  applications  were :  1)  The  whole  wound  was
painted  with  white  of  egg  and  oil  and  bandaged  with  a
wet  cloth ;  for  the  first  few  days  the  bandage  was  renewed
twice  daily.  2)  Injurious  juices  and  dirt  were  extracted
by  a  bandage  of  infused  hay-flowers.  Daring  the  cure,
several  ulcers  formed.  To  heal  these,  a  decoction  of  Foe-
num  graecum  (or  fenugreek)  was  applied.  By  means  of.


230


Paut  III.  Diseases.


these  remedies  which  were  alternately  made  use  of,  hand
and  arm  were  completely  cured.

Cancer.

A  very  frequent  disease  of  the  present  time  is  cancer.
There  is  hardly  a  part  of  the  body  which  may  not  be
destroyed  by  cancer,  or  cancerous  injuries.  If  it  happens
that  this  evil  has  already  spread,  I  dare  not  attempt  any-
thing with  water ;  blood  and  juices  are  already  too  cor-
rupted.

Cancer  is  hereditary,  especially  if  blood  and  juices
of  an  individual  are  already  disposed  to  that  kind  of  de-
composition. I  knew  a  married  couple  who  visited  a  cou-
sin suffering  from  cancer  in  the  tongue.  Without  any
misgivmg,  they  were  both  terrified  as  they  perceived  the
horrible  ravages  of  the  dreadful  disease.

Within  three  days,  the  half  of  the  woman's  tongue
had  swollen  in  a  morbid  manner,  and  the  man's  under  hp
became  inflamed  and  sore.  "We  have  taken  the  disease"
they  came  lamenting  to  me.  I  tried  to  encourage  them;
for  they  were  frightened  to  death,  and  did  all  I  could  to
dissuade  them  from  their  firm  assertion.  At  the  same
time  I  advised  them  on  the  one  day  to  wash  out  their
mouth,  especially  the  affected  part,  with  alum-water  about
4  times,  the  second  day  to  repeat  the  washing  with  aloe-
water,  besides  taking  every  second  day  a  head  vapour,
and  alternately  with  the  head  vapour  to  put  a  bandage
round  the  neck.

The  two  persons  were  quite  cured  of  the  disease.
I  myself  could  never  have  believed  that  terror  alone  could
have  the  effect  of  giving  so  frightful  a  disease.  I  heard
later  that  a  doctor  had  really  said  they  had  taken  the
disease.

I  have  treated  several  cases  of  cancer  in  the  fir.'^t
stages,  also  smaller  advanced  cancerous  injuries.  They
are  easily  cured.  All  applications  aim  solely  at  the  puri-
fying of  blood  and  juices.

Caries.

A  gentleman  of  position  got  a  bad  toe ;  he  thought
the  nail  had  been  a  little  hurt,  and  did  not  consider  the


Caries.


231


matter  worthy  of  any  farther  attention.  In  the  meantime
Srtoe  became  inflamed,  and  made  it  necessary  to  call
"Idies  'The  'toe  was  all  right,  he  thoaght,  al  hough
the  inflammation  had  gained  in  extent  the  whole  foot
was  greatly  swollen,  and  he  could  neither  stand  on,  noi
walk  with  it.  The  patient  suspected  nothing  until  one
day  two  little  bones  came  out  through  the  skin,  i  hen
he  began  to  mistrust  his  foot  and  all  those  who.  had  until
now  considered  and  pronounced  it  quite  excellent.

The  gentleman  knew  me  and  asked  me  to  inspect  it.
Caries  had  set  in.  I  at  once  ordered  shave-grass  to  be
boiled  in  water,  and  the  foot  as  far  as  the  swellmg
reached,  to  be  bound  in  cloths  dipped  in  the  decoction.
Within  quite  a  short  time,  the  swelling  and  the  still  young
cai-ies  were  removed;  the  foot  healed  up  again,  and  its
master  used  it  as  before.

After  about  a  year,  the  unhappy  disease  announced
itself  again,  this  time  on  the  other  foot,  and  indeed  just
on  the  big  toe  again. During  the  healing  the  patient
experienced  on  his  other  foot  a  continuous  pain  similar
to  that  which  he  had  felt  before  the  appearance  of  the
first  attack.  The  healing  of  the  toe  progressed  in  the
meantime  and  was  at  last  declared  complete  and  success-
ful, although  the  cut  and  healed  toe  remained  half  as
thick  agam  as  it  should  haye  been  and  rather  red.  The
energetic  gentleman  could  wa]k  and  work,  and  what  more
would  he  have?  As  one  who  does  not  keep  the  truth
behind  a  mountain,  but  always  speaks  his  mind  straight
out,  I  was  avoided  and  questioned  no  further.  That  was
agL-eeable  to  me,  for  my  reply  would  have  been :  the  disease
is  partly,  but  not  eniii'ely  removed.  The  consequence  will
be,  that  sooner  or  later  the  caries  will  penetrate  farther.
I  had  not  deceived  myself;  for  so  it  happened. How  had
this  foot  to  be  treated?  Necessarily  both  feet  must  re-
ceive treatment  at  the  same  time,  so  long,  until  no  spot
of  particular  redness  is  to  be  seen,  and  not  the  least  pain
is  to  be  felt.  They  are  to  be  treated  with  foot-bandages
dipped  in  a  decoction  of  oat-straw,  in  such  a  manner  that


232


Part  III.  Diseases.


the  f<  et  are  wrapped  up  a  few  times  daily,  and  th»  ban-
dages reach  a  little  above  the  diseased  and  painful  places.

The  perfect  and  real  healing  will  not  take  too  long
a  time.  How  is  it  then  that  in  our  case  the  caries  .should
hive  settled  itself  just  in  the  feet?  Why  not  e  g  in
the  hands  or  arms?  —  This  gentleman  had  formerly  had
a  serious  and  tedious  illness,  which  left  a  great  weakness
behind  it,  especially  m  the  feet.  Possibly  morbid  poiso-
nous matters  lay  there.  One  thing  is  certain  that,  with
the  then  convalescent  gentleman,  the  feet  on  account  of
the  hard  work  (they  alone  always  carry  the  body,  and
often  what  a  body!)  could  never  properly  recover  them-
selves, and  so  as  the  weaker  part,  easily  succumbed  to
the  attacks  of  the  poisonous  matters.

The  gentleman  is  still  living.  He  must  take  great
care  if  he  does  not  want  to  be  visited  again  by  caries.
At  the  least  sign,  he  would  do  well  by  following  my  friendly
and  well-meant  advice,  and  not  delay  with  the  compresses
of  shave-grass  or  decoction  of  oat-straw.  Sero  venienti-
bus  ossa !  The  gentleman  is  a  latin  scholar,  he  will  laugh
and  understand  me.  They  who  do  not  know  Latin  need
not  rack  their  brains,  or  let  their  hair  turn  grey  because,
against  my  usual  custom,  I  have,  this  tune,  not  trans-
lated the  foreign  words.  I  pass  over  other  cases  of  cured
caries,  as  they  concern  younger  persons,  with  whom,  in
the  beginning  of  the  disease,  the  cure  is  easily  and  quick-
ly effected.

Catarrh.

Most  catarrhs  owe  their  existence  to  a  rapid  tran-
sition from  the  open  air  or  a  cold  room  into  a  well  heated
room.  Also  draught  to  which  one  has  been  exposed,  may
■cause  catarrh.  It  generally  makes  itself  felt  by  a  sen-
sation of  contraction  in  chest,  throat,  and  nose.  It  is  a
feeling  as  if  there  were  a  little  dumpling  in  one's  throat.
If  this  swelling  is  overlooked,  it  settles  and  spreads.  ■  Great
susceptibility  for  catarrh  is  caused  by  effemination  of  the
hody  through  too  warm  clothing.  It  would  not  be  diffi-
cult (I  say  it  boldly)  to  remain  free  from  every  catarrh
if  the  body  was  not  "barbarously"  but  reasonably  harden-


Catarrh.


233


ed,  as  emphatically  recommended  in  other  passages  of
this  book.

What  must  we  do  in  order  to  be  spared.-'
An  example  shall  show  it  us.  I  have  been  walking
for  an  hour  at  a  rather  quick  pace.  It  is  pretty  fresh,
as  the  peasant  says  while  rubbing  his  hands;  we  have
12''  R  below  zero.  Immediately  I  enter  a  room  where  the
thermometer  shows  14"  heat.  This  change  of  temperature
amounting  to  26°  cannot  remain  unrevenged.  It  would
have  been  better  if  I  had  walked  slower  for  the  last  AO
minutes  and  remained  in  the  cool  passage  for  some  mi-
nutes (taking  some  exercise)  before  entering  the  warm
room.  In  this  manner  the  heat  of  the  body  would  have
been  decreased  and  the  perspiration  arrested.  To  make
the  change  of  temperature  completely  harmless,  I  might
have  walked  up  and  down  for  a  while  in  the  heated
room  itself.

If  you  feel  the  consequence  of  your  imprudence,  the
little  dumphng  in  your  throat,  return  to  the  open  air  and
take  some  exercise.  This  will  dissolve  and  remove  all
superfluous  matter  in  your  throat  within  ^  hour.

Hoarseness  is  nothing  else  but  catarrh  extended  to
the  organs  of  speech.  The  silver-bell,  when  tied  up,  gives
no  sound,  the  most  sonorous  voice  is  mute  when  the  organs
of  speech  are  swollen.  Remove  the  catarrh,  and  its  com-
panion, the  hoarseness,  will  follow  it  without  hesitation.

On  this  occasion  I  insert  a  remark  about  coughs  which
will  render  good  service  to  many.  There  are  people  who  have
a  tendency  to  cough  a  great  deal.  Every  trifle  e.  g.  the  tick-
ling of  the  fresh  air  in  their  throat  calls  forth  this  barking.
Such  people  cough  for  years  without  the  slightest  pain.
This  disposition  is  generally  inherited  from  the  parents
and  therefore  difficult  to  remove.  This  kind  of  cough  is
of  no  consequence,  whether  it  proceeds  from  the  throat,
or  from  other  organs.  Such  people  may  derive  comfort
from  the  German  proverb :  He  who  coughs  for  a  long  time
will  live  for  a  long  time.  Other  hereditary  defects  are
not  so  innocent  in  their  consequences,  but  well  worthy
of  attention,  as  consumption,  phthisis  etc.


234


Part  ill.  Diseases.


There  it  wants  acting  on  the  maxim :  Principiis  ob-
sta!  Meet  the  first  beginnings  decidedly,  bat  with  all
prudence  and  precaution.  A  sliglit  catarrh,  in  a  family
where  phthisis  is  hereditary,  can  like  the  bark-scarab
which  ruins  the  strongest  pine-tree,  destroy  the  most
vigorous  constitution.  Therefore  be  careful!  By  prudent
treatment  even  hereditary  defects  may  prove  without
serious  consequences  and  not  destroy  altogether  the  hop©
for  a  long  life.

Chlorosis  (Green-sickness).

The  whole  body  derives  its  strength,  the  formation
and  growth  of  its  parts  and  its  capability  of  endurance
from  the  blood ;  good  and  sufficient  blood  is,  therefore,
the  first  condition  of  health.  He  who  has  good  blood
enjoys  good  health;  he  who  has  much  blood  is  enduring,
and  where  little  or  bad  blood  is  prepared,  there  is  a
liability  for  all  possible  diseases.

Good  ,  wholesome  air,  much  light ,  nourishing  food,
and  suitable  exercise  are  essential  for  the  formation  of
good  blood.  If  these  necessary  conditions  are  wanting,
the  blood  will  fail,  and  if  the  food  is  not  sufficient  in
quality,  unhealthy  blood  will  be  formed.

Poverty  of  blood  can  also  be  caused  by  loss  of  blood
through  wounds,  by  bleeding  etc.

He  who  is  poor  of  blood  is  also  sick  or  at  least
ailing.

Those  who  sufi'er  from  chlorosis  (or  green  -  sickness)
offer  a  true  picture  of  the  effects  of  poverty  of  the  blood.
The  face  is  pale,  white,  often  yellowish,  brownish;  the
lips  and  gums  are  especially  livid,  and  in  the  whole  person
weakness,  emaciation,  want  of  vital  heat,  drooping  stature
prevail.  Further  consequences  are:  palpitation,  heavy
breath,  especially  when  mounting  stairs,  headache,  pains
in  the  back,  faulting -fits,  cramps  and  bad  dige.stion.
Such  people  have  frequently  a  strange  craving  for  un-
suitable food.

Persons  afflicted  with  this  illness  should  be  in  the
open  air  as  much  as  possible  and  if  they  are  in  the  room,
this  should  be  but  sparingly  heated.  Their  clothing  should


Chi-okosis.  23»


be  only  moderately  warm  and  not  closely  fitting  the  body,

in  order  that  air  may  V^^^^l^\^''f/fZ'nc\  and  diees-
The  food  of  such  patients  should  be  good  and  diges

tible  and  consist  chiefly  ^-^^k'  g-^^>•T^a^but^tb
and  simple  farinaceous  dishes  ;  they  should  eat  but  litt  e
:t  a  tl2  From  2  to  4  spoonfuls  of  mdk  ta^cen  f-q^^^^^^^^^^
are  the  best  food  for  them  since  the  juices  of  the  stomac  i
are  scanty  and  much  food  at  a  time  cannot  be  digested
by  them  Exercise  and  work  in  the  open  air  provided
that  tL  patient's  strength  is  not  overtaxed)  will  aid  the

formation  of  blood.  j.-  j.

The  water-applications  suitable  for  such  patients  are .
To  take  a  whole-ablution  from  bed  3  or  4  t^ies  a  week:
to  stand  in  water  to  above  the  calves  of  the  legs  for  one
minute  ;  directly  after  this  the  arms,  too,  are  held  m  water,
about  twice  or  3  tunes  a  week.

If  the  chlorotic  person  is  very  week  and  has  very
little  vital  heat,  warm  water  should  be  taken  m  the  be-
ginning for  the  ablutions  as  well  as  for  the  baths ;  the
water  may  also  be  mixed  with  salt  or  vinegar^  To  promote
appetite  it  wül  be  very  good  to  take  2  or  3  tablespoon-
fuls  of  wormwood-tea,  3  times  daily.  An  excellent  remedy
against  chlorosis  is  pulverized  chalk  of  which  a  salt-
spoonful  in  4  to  6  spoonfuls  of  water  should  be  taken

twice  daily.  „  , , . ,  i  i

As  soon  as  the  general  health  of  the  patient  has  been
improved  through  the  above  mentioned  apphcations,  halt-
baths  may  be  taken  twice  or  3  times  a  week  instead  ot
ablutions  and  foot-baths ;  upper-shower  and  knee-gush,  it
not  used  too  often,  will  also  render  excellent  service.

Poverty  of  blood  in  a  child  :  A  mother  brings  a  boy,
5  years  old.  The  boy  is  stout,  well  built  and  has  a  good
stature,  but  his  face  is  so  pale  that  he  resembles  a  corpse
rather  than  a  healthy  child.  The  child  has  neither  courage,
nor  appetite,  nor  strength,  in  a  word  the  child  is  so  poor
of  blood,  and  its  whole  organism  so  inactive  that  it  seems
an  old  man.  Several  physicians  have  attended  to  the-
child  but  nothing  has  brought  it  xchef.  Two  physicians
ordered  much  wine  to  be  drunk  ;  but  the  condition  of  the-
little  patient  remained  the  same  since  the  child  felt  a-


236


Pars  III.  Diseases.


^reat  repugnance  for  wine  as  for  all  other  food.  What
is  to  be  done  here?

1)  Every  day  the  child  should  put  on  a  shirt  dipped
in  a  decoction  of  hay-flowers.

2)  Every  day  the  whole  body  of  the  child  should  be
washed  with  water  and  vinegar.

3)  The  boy  should,  if  possible,  walk  barefooted  in
the  room;  he  should  also  go  out  in  the  open  air.  His
food  should  consist  in  simple  household-fare,  chiefly  in
water  and  milk  (but  always  in  small  quantities,  2  to  3
tablespoonfuls) ,  this  to  be  continued  for  a  fortnight.
After  this  time :

1)  To  walk  daily  in  moderately  cold  water  to  above
the  calves  of  the  legs,  for  3  to  5  minutes.

2)  To  take  a  whole-ablution  with  water  aid  vinegar,
daily.

3)  To  put  on  a  shirt  dipped  in  salt  water  or  in  a
decoction  of  hay-flowers,  once  or  twice  a  week.

These  applications  are  to  be  continued  for  a  fortnight
and  after  this  time  to  be  made  use  of  half  as  often.

Cholera.

How  much  dreaded  is  cholera !  Two  years  ago
several  countries  were  visited  by  this  terrible  epidemic
and  numberless  where  those  who  fell  a  victim  to  it.  To
protect  a  country  against  inundations  dykes  are  erected
and  rivers  regulated.  When  a  forest  is  on  fire,  ditches
are  digged  to  prevent  the  destroying  element  from  spread-
ing. Such  a  dyke  and  ditch  against  cholera,  this  terrible
foe  of  human  life,  is  water.  It  saves  us  from  danger  and
surrounds  those  by  whom  it  is  rightly  applied  with  a
dyke  or  ditch.

With  regard  to  cholera  the  prevailing  maxim  is:  If
profuse  perspiration  is  produced,  the  patient  is  saved;  if
not,  he  is  lost.

One  night  I  was  called  to  a  poor  maid-servant.  She
had  vomited  20  times,  and  just  as  many  times  she  had
made  use  of  the  close-stool.  The  physician  lived  at  a
distance  of  6  miles.  The  poor  girl  wanted  to  be  pre-
pared for  death ;  for  she  felt  herself  that  her  death  must


Cholera.  ^^'^


hp  at  hand  Her  hands  and  feet  were  as  cold  as  ice,  her
face  mle hef  features  sank,  the  symptoms  of  immment

dTsXtt  were  there.  I  ^^^^ ^^^.'^tZlZ
sniration  seeing  that  on  the  effect  of  this  proceaure
eCything  depended,  life  or  death The  housewife  brought
^needilv  2  large  coarse  sheets.  I  dipped  them  m  hot
Äolded  fnd  wrung  out,  and  -th  this  almos^^^^
compress  chest  and  abdomen  were  covered.  Underneam
on  the  skin  a  single  cloth  dipped  -/o^^/^f^.^^^,^
The  wet  hot  compress  was  covered  and  closed  to  the  air
by  a  f  ather  quilt' as  warm  and  as  heavy  as  the  patient
could  bear. Violently  did  the  heat  penetrate  mto  the
body  and  in  15  minutes  the  whole  body  was  warm;  when
20  minutes  more  had  past,  the  perspiration  rolled  down
pearls  from  the  face. I  had  the  compress  redipped
in  hot  water. In  a  very  short  time  the  cramps  ceased
and  with  them  the  vomitmg  and  the  sensation  of  sickness
To  meet  within,  the  heat  workmg  from  without,  the
patient  took  a  cupful  of  hot  milk  with  fennel  (one  spoon-
ful of  ground  fennel  boiled  in  milk  for  3  minutes).  Pro-
fuse perspiration  being  thus  produced,  the  gu'l  was  saved.

The  time  of  convalescence  is  in  such  cases  of  the
greatest  importance.  The  convalescent  should  lie  on  wet
sheets,  for  an  hour  daily,  and  be  covered  with  wet  sheets
for  the  same  thne  daily.  For  the  first  apphcation  the
sheets  should  extend  to  the  length  of  the  spine,  for  the
second  they  should  cover  chest  and  abdomen.  The  patient
just  spoken  of,  did  so  and  was  cured  m  10  days.  A
second  case  was  treated  in  the  same  way  and  with  tlie
same  result.

As  soon  as  the  symptoms  of  this  disease,  violent
diarrhoea,  vomiting,  cramps  etc.  appear,  the  person  so
affected  should  be  laid  m  bed.  Country  people  are  often,
too  hard  against  themselves  in  this  respect ;  this  is  want
of  prudence.  As  interior  application  a  warm  drink  may  be
given.  If  cramping  pam  sets  in,  or  the  feet  become  ice-cold,
a  warm  compress  should  be  applied  to  the  abdomen ,  for
not  longer  than  about  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  For  the
same  time  the  patient  should  be  laid  on  wet  sheets.  A&


238


Part  III.  Diseases.


often  as  the  cramps  return,  the  compresses  may  be
repeated.  As  soon  as  heat  and  persphation  set  in,  the
patient  is  saved.

Great  precaution  with  regard  to  food  and  drink
should  be  used  until  health  is  completely  restored.  Of
the  usual  simple  fare  the  lighter  kinds  of  food  should  be
chosen.  The  best  beverage  is  milk  which  is  remedy  at
the  same  time.

When  cholera  rages  in  a  place,  be  not  over-anxious,
but  trust  in  God.  Wash  chest  and  abdomen  vigorously
with  cold  water  every  morning  and  every  evening,  chew
10  to  12  juniper-berries  daily  and  if  you  cannot  have  the.se,
buy  pepper-cakes ;  for  3  d.  you  will  get  a  good  many  of
them.  Five  pepper-cakes,  taken  twice  a  day  wiU  warm
the  stomach,  assist  the  digestion  and  lead  out  gases.

Cholerine.

Almost  in  every  place,  there  are  some  cases  of  cho-
lerine every  year.  Cholerine  is  cholera  in  a  diminutive
form ,  a  very  unpleasant  guest ,  though  not  so  much
feared.  Its  attendants  are  violent  diarrhoea,  vomiting  and
sometimes  more  or  less  violent  cramps.

My  applications  for  cholerine  are  exactly  the  same
as  those  for  cholera,  modified  in  number  and  degree
according  to  the  stages  of  the  disease.  I  had  once  no
less  than  40  persons  afflicted  with  cholerine  under  treat-
ment and,  with  all  of  them,  the  happy  result  was  com-
plete cure.

Colic.

Colic  accompanied  by  diarrhoea  or  sickness  often
appears  suddenly  without  an  apparent  cause.  It  may  be
caused  by  cold,  by  over-heating  or  by  some  particular  food
or  drink.

A  patient  of  this  kind  should  be  laid  in  bed  without
delay  and  a  warm  cloth  (perhaps  also  a  hot-water  bottle)*


*  Poor  people  will  find  a  substitute  for  tlie  liot- water
bottle  by  making  a  brick  hot  and  rolling  it  up  in  a  woollen
cloth.


Colic.  —  Congestions.


239


put  on  the  abdomen,  then  he  should  be  covered  so  as  to
prevent  the  entrance  of  the  air.  As  a  lenitive  the  patient
should  be  given  i  pint  of  milk  in  which  fennel  or  cara-
way-seeds have  been  boiled.  This  simple  household-
remedy  will  be  sufficient.

Regarding  the  diet  of  the  patient ,  as  long  as  he
continues  in  this  condition,  the  food  should  be  very  simple
and  very  digestible,  with  very  little  salt  and  spice.  Water
and  milk  are  the  best  beverages  for  such  patients ;  water
and  wine  (mixed)  can  also  be  recommended.

Congestions.

An  officer  lamented  in  the  following  manner:
I  suffer  from  heavy  breath,  cramps  in  the  neck  and
very  violent  headache.  Often  I  spend  whole  nights  sleepless
on  account  of  congestions  and  pain  in  my  head.  No
evacuation  of  the  bowels  takes  place  unless  it  be_  pro-
duced by  remedies.  Moreover  I  have  much  cramp  m  the
chest,  and  sometimes  it  extends  to  the  bowels  and  causes
me  great  suffering.  I  know  not  how  to  protect  myself
against  the  cold;  my  hands  and  feet  are  generally  cold.
My  station  in  life  is  a  pleasant  one,  but  I  am  constantly
tormented  by  these  sufferings.  I  went  to  several  bathing-
places  but  obtained  no  reUef.  I  was  formerly  corpulent,
but  now  emaciation  has  taken  the  place  of  corpulence.
If  the  water  brings  me  no  help,  he  concluded  in  a  sad
tone,  I  shall  be  lost.

The  treatment  was  the  following:

1)  The  patient  walked  barefooted  in  the  grass  and
on  foot-paths  every  morning  and  evening  for  some  time.
This  brought  him  indescribable  relief  and  led  the  blood
off  his  head.

2)  2  short  bandages  weekly.

3)  Once  the  Spanish  mantle.

To  promote  the  evacuation  of  the  bowels,  he  took
for  several  days  a  spoonful  of  water  every  -J  hour,  and
if  there  was  greater  difficulty,  he  took  every  hour  a  spoon-
ful of  warm  water  in  which  a  piece  of  aloe  as  large  as
a  pea  and  half  a  spoonful  of  sugar  had  been  dissolved.


240


Pabt  III.  Diseases.


Consumption.

Like  a  serpent  in  the  grass  or  among  stones  lying
in  ambush  for  its  prey,  consumption  often  begins  to  do
its  destroying  work  in  some  part  of  the  system  before  it
shows  itself-  openly.  Its  beginning  is  a  decomposition
which  takes  place  in  some  part  and  by  formation  of  matter
spreads  and  destroys  organs  of  the  body.  The  chest,  the
lungs,  the  pleura,  the  abdomen,  the  intestines,  the  kidneys
the  throat,  the  windpipe,  the  larynx,  the  noblest  and
most  important  organs  may  be  thus  affected.  Wherever,
such  a  decomposition  takes  place  it  is  quickly  followed
by  disturbances  in  the  circulation.  A  person  afflicted  with
this  malady  is  like  a  tree  whose  leaves  fade  before  the
time.  Sun  and  fresh  air  are  of  no  avail  there.  The  same
may  be  said  of  a  consumptive  person.  The  blood,  this
fluid  on  the  condition  of  which  life  depends,  decreases  like  the
sap  of  a  decaying  tree  and  the  patient  resembles  a  light
growing  weaker  and  weaker  and  becoming  eventually
extinguished  through  want  of  nourishment.

If  consumption  is  so  far  advanced  that  an  organ  has
been  destroyed  by  it,  then  all  human  help  is  idle;  but
if  it  has  only  commenced  to  afPect  one  or  the  other  part
of  the  organism,  cure  by  water  is  easy.  It  is  a  sad  thing
that  the  symptoms  just  of  this  disease  seem  of  so  little
consequence.  The  patient  coughs  a  little,  the  cough  causes
no  pain  and  is  not  even  accompanied  by  expectoration.
If  the  cough  is  worse  from  time  to  time,  the  patient
considers  it  a  slight  catarrh  which  comes  to  trouble  him
sometimes,  but  which  will  soon  be  over  again.  Even  when
the  body  begins  to  be  more  languid  and  a  decrease  of
strength  is  distinctly  felt,  there  are  always  excuses.  This
time  the  catarrh  lasts  a  little  longer,  but  still  I  can  attend
to  my  duties.  At  this  stage  of  the  illness,  a  person  has
generally  already  suffared  more  than  he  himself  believes.
Blood  and  juices  have  decreased,  and  the  decomposition
has  gained  in  extension.

If,  then,  the  patient  seeks  for  help,  it  is  generally
too  late,  and  remedies  applied  at  this  period  will  often
but  serve  to  shorten  his  life. I  say  all  this  to  caution


Consumption.


241


people  against  neglect  of  so-called  catarrhs.  In  cases  of
advanced  consumption  I  do  not  even  attempt  to  cure  by-
water*  (I  declare  this  also  to  all  such  patients  who  con-
sult me) ;  for  there,  nature  is  too  much  weakened  as  to
take  up  the  combat  with  the  fresh  water.

The  symptoms  of  advanced  consumption  are  :  frequent
coughing,  much  expectoration,  heavy  breath,  and  want  of
appetite.  As  long  as  the  phlegm  swims  on  the  water
(make  the  experiment)  there  is  no  need  for  giving  up  all
hope;  if  it  sinks,  hope  for  human  help  is  generally  in
vain.  The  patient  should  resign  himself  to  the  will  of
God  and  should  quietly  prepare  for  his  last  hour.

On  the  other  hand  I  can  prove  by  many  examples
that  water  is  the  best  and  safest  remedy  in  the  first
stages  of  consumption.  It  refreshes  and  revives  the
languid  body  by  working  like  oil  poured  between  the
wheels  of  a  machine ;  it  produces  a  quicker  circulation
and  infuses  new  life  into  the  weakened  organism.  More-
over it  winnows  the  bad  juices  as  a  sieve  does  the
poppy-seed  by  throwing  off  what  is  injurious.  The  appli-
cations, however,  should  never  be  such  as  effect  violent
dissolution  and  evacuation.  Strengthening  of  the  or-
ganism must  be  the  chief  aim  in  order  that  invigorated
nature  itself  may  throw  off  mjurious  matters.  Any  appli-
cation which  is  likely  to  weaken  or  destroy  the  vital
heat  should  be  carefully  avoided.  That  would  be  pro-
moting the  disease.

Only  very  short  applications  must  be  used.  I  would
not  venture  to  make  use  of  an  application  extending  to
the  whole  body,  if  there  were  symptoms  of  rather  ad-
vanced consumption.

If  the  disease  has  its  seat  in  the  upper  part  of  the
body,  the  upper-shower  followed  by  the  knee-gush  will  be
of  excellent  service  (the  latter  to  be  applied  for  I  minute
only).  If  the  weather  is  favourable,  walking  barefoot  in
wet  grass  is  a  practice  surpassed  by  no  other ;  it  braces

*  Countless  experiments  have  always  led  to  the  same
result;  the  condition  of  the  patient  can  be  relieved,  but  he
cannot  be  cured.

Kneipp,  Water-  Ouro.  1  /•


212  Part  111.  Diseases.


the  system,  and  there  is  not  the  least  reason  for  fear  of
its  doing  harm.  Walking  on  wet  stones  is  also  good;
it  draws  th«  blood  downwards  and  effects  a  quicker  cir-
culation and,  therefore,  promotes  thti  formation  of  blood
in  general.  1  will  say  one  word  more  about  the  diet  of
such  patients  who  are,  more  than  all  others,  served  with
the  ritornello  :  "Eat  and  drink  well".  The  simplest  fare
is  the  best,  no  ardents  pirits ,  no  spiced  or  sour  food
sihould  be  taken.

The  best  diet  for  consumptive'  people  is  that  which
is  most  suitable  for  children  and  most  conducive  to  their
growtli.

It  is  remarkable  that  such  patients  have  a  particular
craving  for  salt  so  as  to  put  it  on  their  bread,  to  dip
the  meat  in  it;  they  also  have  a  special  liking  for  sour
and  spiced  food.  I  regard  this  as  one  of  the  surest  signs
of  the  malady,  and  for  me  it  has  often  been  the  deci-
sive one.

I  recommend  milk  as  preferable  to  all  othnr  kmd=;
of  food,  but  if  taken  only  without  changa  of  diet ,  it  will
soon  turn  distasteful  to  the  patient.  Strength  -  giving
soups  are  also  to  be  recommended,  the  preparation  being
sometimes  altered,  even  if  the  sick  person  should  have
a  particular  liking  for  one  kind.  Simple  farmaceous  food
without  complicated  or  artificial  preparation  should  also
hold  a  prominent  place  in  the  diet  of  a  consumptive  per-
son. The  beverage  which  is  least  apt  to  cause  repugnance
is  water,  perhaps  mixed  with  a  little  wine.  Curdled  milk
is  also  crood. I  never  recommend  beer  or  wme.

In  the  more  advanced  stages  of  this  illness,  tlie  pa-
tient often  suffers  from  violent  fever  accompamed  by  pro-
fuse perspiration  and  followed  by  a  sensation  ot  chill
He  may  be  relieved  by  a  vigorous  ablution  of  back,  chest

and  abdomen.  ,  ,  ,  i  i <-  ,i

A  schoolmistress  had  heen  treated  by  a  celebrated
physician  for  a  long  time,  but  without  result.  At  ast
ihe  was  no  longer  able  to  teach,  and  being  dispensed
from  her  duties,  she  obtained  a  pension  for  9  "Jon  hs^
When  this  time  had  elapsed,  her  condition  was  not  much
hotter,  and  the  physician  declared  her  mcurable  and  theie-


Consumption'.


243


fore  unable  to  follow  her  vocation.  Some  friends  advised
her  to  try  the  water-cure,  and  she  took  lodgings  in  a
village  near  my  parish.  The  patient  was  almost  unable
to  walk  11  miles,  so  great  was  her  weakness.  She  used
water -applications  according  to  prescriptions,  and  after
5  week^  she  was  completely  cured.  She  applied  to  the
government  in  order  to  obtain  her  former  office  as  teacher,
but  nobody  would  believe  her  cured.  She  presented  her-
self in  person  to  the  minister  (president  of  the  comittee
for  education)  who  was  astonished  at  seeing  her  healthy
appearance  and  still  more  at  the  fatal  epithet  "incurable"
in  her  certificate.  She  has  now  been  teaching  for  6  years
since  and  enjoys  the  best  of  healths.  What  disease  the
physicians  had  found  in  this  patient,  whether  decline  or
consumption,  I  don't  know.  The  symptoms  were  those
of  consumption.  Her  brother  had  died  of  this  illness,
and  sufferings  similar  to  hers  had  preceded  his  death.
It  was  high  time  to  arrest  the  disease,  but  the  water  has
in  the  open  air ,  to  walk  frequently  barefooted  in  the
dewy  grass  in  the  morning,  baths,  from  the  lightest  to
the  strongest,  always  cold.  As  interior  remedy  she  took
tea  from  herbs ;  her  food  was  the  simple  strengthening
household  fare  of  the  country  people.

A  gentleman  of  position  relates :  I  was  never  very
strong  and  never  enjoyed  so  much  he..  1th  for  a  short
time  as  many  a  person  during  his  whole  live.  I  could,
however,  finish  my  studies  and  attend  to  my  vocation
till  about  2  years  ago.  Then  a  change  took  place.
"Wherever  I  go,  I  meet  with  ominous  looks,  and  sometimes
I  heard  my  friends  whisper  to  each  other  that  I  would
not  have  to  live  much  longer.  The  thought  of  death  is
no  strange  guest  to  myself  since  I  cannot  close  my  eyes
to  the  .symptoms  of  its  approach.  My  strength  has  gone
as  well  as  the  healthy  appearance.  The  appetite ,  this
best  barometer  of  health,  shows  that  my  vital  strength
is  fast  giving  way.

I  suffer  severely  from  difficult  breath,  still  more  from
a  cough  the  sound  of  which  is  really  frightening.  The
doctors  declared  me  consumptive. They  have  given  me

ir,*


244


Part  HI.  Diskasks.


up,  but  advise  me.  to  go  to  Meran  wlu-re  the  climate  is
milder.  (Poor  fellow,  1  thought,  won't  they  even  let  you
die  at  home?)  On  my  journey  to  Meran  I  heard  of  the
effects  of  water  and  inquired  if  it  could  be  of  any  avail
for  my  broken  constitution.  You  can  try  it ,  was  the
answer.  The  beginning  was  not  easy.  I  wore  very  warm
clothing,  and  yet  I  felt  always  chilly.  Now  I  was  told
that  I  must  gradually  disaccustom  myself  from  woollen
underclothing  and  part  first  with  my  flannel  .shirt,  then
with  a  woollen  scarf  which  I  wore  round  my  neck.  I  was
wondering  what  effect  a  clothing  which  was  rather  cooling
than  warming,  would  have  on  my  illness  and  the  cold
water  made  me  shudder.  The  practices  by  which  I  was
initiated  into  the  course  of  appUcations  were  very  moderate
and  very  cautiously  applied.  On  the  third  day  already  I
could  leave  off  one  of  my  woollen  shirts,  on  the  sixth
day  I  sacrificed  the  second,  and,  after  a  few  days  more,  I
parted  with  my  woollen  scarf.

Through  the  water-applications  I  got  a  very  pleasant
sensation  of  vital  heat  which  increased  from  day  to  day,
the  difficulty  in  breathing  disappeared,  the  cough,  too,
gave  way.  The  improvement  of  my  hirmour  kept  pace
with  that  of  my  bodily  health.  The  course  of  applications
lasted  5  weeks.  Against  all  expectation,  I  was  now  on
the  way  not  to  eternal  repose  but  to  a  new  life,  as  it
were.  I  thanked  God,  my  Creator,  for  the  restoration
of  my  health  as  well  as  for  having  given  us  so  effective
and  so  easily  obtainable  a  remedy  as  water.  Would  I
could  make  it  known  to  all  men  and  exhort  them  all  to
appreciate  the  water  and  its  effects.  How  many  suffe-
rings would  they  escape  on  their  pilgrhnage  through  life,
how  much  better  would  they  fulfil  the  duties  of  then-
vocation!  ,  ,

You  Avill  be  desirous ,  dear  reader ,  to  know  what
apphcations  I  made  use  of.  Like  a  young  shepherd  whose
constitution  is  hardened  by  many  a  shower  my  upper
body  received  2  showers  daily.  First  the  let  played  on  my
back  for  half  a  minute  only,  after  some  time  for  1  minute.
Daily  I  walked  in  the  wet  grass  and  on  wet  stone^
According  to  the  general  prejudice,  I  feared  that  all


Consumption.


245


possible  complaints  would  ensue;  but  I  soon  took  the
greatest  pleasure  in  it.  Winter  was  at  hand,  and  snow
fell.  I  walked  for  a  minute  in  the  freshly  fallen  snow.
The  result  was  more  favourable  than  I  expected.  I  was
allowed  to  repeat  this  practice  frequently,  and  I  can  assure
every  one  afraid  of  water,  that  I  never  felt  so  thoroughly
warm  as  after  these  snow -walks.  The  feet  burn  for  2
or  3  minutes  on  account  of  the  sno\vy  cold;  but,  then,
a  warmth  develops  which  makes  one  forget  the  snow.
In  a  few  days  1  was  able  to  continue  my  brisk  walk  in
the  snow  for  10  minutes  or  |  hour.  It  was  just  the
walking  in  snow  which  brought  on  an  extraordinary  in-
crease of  strength,  and  which  greatly  diminished  my  diffi-
culty in  breathing.  Of  catarrh  there  was  not  the  least
idea.  If  somebody  had  told  me  about  this  practice  be-
fore, I  should  have  thought  it  madness  and  the  ruin  of
health.  I  continued  walking  barefoot  for  a  fortnight,
then  the  applications  were  limited  to  upper  and  lower
showers  applied  in  a  more  vigorous  manner,  twice  daily.
After  3  weeks  my  system  was  regulated  again,  and  in  3
more  weeks  I  had  entirely  recovered  my  former  strength.
Instead  of  going  to  Meran  in  order  to  die  there ,  I  re-
turned to  my  dear  home  to  attend  to  my  vocation  with
renewed  vigour.

A  man  comes  and  relates  :  "There  is  something  the
matter  with  my  throat  and  my  chest.  It  began  with  a
very  bad  catarrh,  then  I  lost  my  voice  almost  entirely;
for  weeks  I  felt  violent  burning  in  throat  and  chest,  and
I  have  often  attacks  of  fever.  I  have  had  several  physi-
cians and  have  inhaled  a  great  deal.  The  result  was
always  a  little  relief,  but  no  perfect  cure.  Now  I  am
emaciated,  and  for  a  long  time  I  have  not  been  able  to
work.  My  feet  are  always  cold,  my  appetite  is  better
than  formerly."

Applications :  1)  A  knee-shower  or  walking  in  water
twice  daily;  2)  an  upper-shower  in  the  morning  and  in
the  afternoon  daily ;  3)  to  drink  2  small  cupfuls  of  tea
from  foenum  graecum  daily;  4)  a  cold  sitting -bath  for
one  minute  every  second  day.  These  apphcations  to  be
continued  for  3  weeks.  '


246


Part  III.  Diseases.


Costiveness.

If  there  are  many  peoplo  who  freqnontly  suffer  from
diarrhoea,  there  are  a  far  greater  number  who  are  tor-
mented with  costiveness  and,  therefore,  must  seek  help  in
remedies  which  certainly  operate  on  the  bowels,  but  the
end  of  which  is,  in  most  cases,  destruction.  One  can
boldly  say:  The  longer  any  one  uses  such  remedies,  the
more  the  whole  constitution  suffers.  Who  could  name  the
innumerable  remedies  which  are  applied  for  purging  and
for  assisting  the  evacuation  of  the  bowels? 1  know  a
man  who  is  renowned  far  and  wide  for  his  laxatives.
What  did  he  do?  He  very  frequently  took  goose-dung,
boiled  it,  and  with  this  decoction  served  his  honoured
customers.  There  are  other  instances  I  could  give,  if  desired.
Mvvchis  villi  dcripi! The  world  wants  to  be  deceived!
But  still  that  concerns  chiefly  the  "stupid  country-fellows."
The  genteel  world  is  treated  otherwise.  Innumerable  bottles
with  different  mineral  waters  are  driven  daily  through
the  body,  and  indeed  they  do  effect  the  most  copious
evacuations.  A  patient  once  brought  me  an  enormous
quantity  of  quicksilver  which  he  had  just  taken  from  the
close-stool.  It  had  been  given  to  him  as  a  laxative.  How
many  Morison's  pills  were  taken  at  his  time,  and  how
many  people  found  an  early  grave  through  them !  There
is  scarcely  a  disease  that  is  operated  upon  and  tried  m
so  many  ways  and  so  unsuccessfully  as  costiveness.  And
in  most  cases  the  consequence  is,  that,  the  more  and
the  longer  the  remedies  are  taken  (and  at  last  there  is
no  evacuation  without  a  laxative),  the  greater  will  always
be  the  difficulty.  A  man,  entirely  forsaken  by  medicine,
complained  to  me,  that  not  one  day  passed  by,  on  which
he  was  not  obliged  to  apply  a  clyster  or  some  di-astic
remedy  to  obtain  the  necessary  evacuation. So  far  had
he  been  brought  by  these  tiresome  remedies  (?),  and  the
man  was  not  near  40  years  of  age.

It  is  a  great  improvement  in  the  medicine  ot  our
time,  that  all  violent  medicines  have  been  scouted,  and
many  doctors  —  it  must  be  said  to  their  renown  —  have  che--
mically  analysed  hundreds  of  so-called  secret-remedies  and
exposed  the  deception  to  all  reasonable  people,  ^evci-


COSTIVENESS.


247


theless  this  ghost  of  secret-remedies  still  creeps  into  a
thousand  families  and  does  mischief*

When  the  evacuation  of  the  bowels  is  irregular,  in
most  cases  the  whole  organism  is  not  in  order,  not  only
the  stomach  or  some  other  particular  part;  and  I  am  ot
the  fijm  conviction,  which  a  great  number  of  cases  have
always  confirmed,  that  again  the  water  is  the  surest  and
most  harmless  remedy  to  be  found  on  the  earth.  It  helps
by  being  applied  interiorly,  and  by  being  permitted  to
operate  exteriorly.

One  of  the  first  questions  which  the  doctor  puts  to
the  patient  is :  are  the  bowels  regular  ?  If  this  is  so,  one
has  the  fii-st  sign  of  health;  if  they  are  irregular,  it  is
the  sign  of  the  commencement  of  an  illness,  and  if  this
evil  is  not  remedied,  the  patient  goes  to  meet  an  illness,
sooner  or  later,  perhaps  an  early  death.

When  no  rain  has  fallen  for  a  long  time  in  summer,
the  earth  becomes  dry  and  splits.  When  the  necessary
moisture,  the  fluids  are  not  properly  worked  up  in  the
body,  and  heat  arises  somewhere,  dryness  with  its  un-
avoidable results  sets  in  likewise  in  the  body.  Already
many  years  ago  refuge  was  sought  in  water,  in  drink-
ing of  water  for  the  curing  of  this  disease.  I  myself
have  known  people  who  drank  from  6  to  10  pints  daily.
Was  that  a  good  thing?  It  was  too  much  of  a  good
thing,  and  the  greater  number  of  these  boasting  heroes
did  themselves  more  harm  than  good.  The  body  could
not  long  endure  this  water-torture.  My  principle  is:  who
operates  in  the  mildest  manner  with  water,  effects  the
surest  and  best  of  cures.

Those  suffering  from  costivenes  should  take  from
breakfast  to  midday,  everj  half  hour,  a  spoonful  of  water.
They  will  obtain  greater  effect  by  this  small  quantity
than  if  they  took  half  a  pint,  or  more,  at  once.  In  the
afternoon  also,  the  patient  can  take  a  spoonful  of  water

*  Several  calendars,  also  newspapers  and  periodicals  of
the  last  years  have  given  lists  of  hundreds  of  such  remedies
and  warnings  against  them.  Many  of  them  have  been  con-
demned as  a  swindle,  which  the  buyers,  the  cheated  ones,  often
buy  at  dear  rate  with  both  money  and  health.


248


Part  III.  Diseases.


every  half  hour,  or  every  hour.  This  constant,  though
sparing,  pouring  operates  in  a  cooling  manner  and  increases
the  juices.  Besides  this  the  patient  may  drink  water,
when  he  is  thirsty.  A  great  number  of  teas  which  are
obtained  from  plants  very  easily  found  will  serve  the  same
purpose.  Who  does  not  know  the  blackthorn-blossoms?
Their  tea  operates  excellently.  Tea  from  elder-flowers  is
cooling,  dissolving,  and  takes  away  the  interior  heat;  if
3  or  4  grains  of  aloe  are  mixed  with  it,  it  is  a  cleansing,
cooling,  dissolving  and  leading  off  remedy ;  6  to  8  elder-
leaves  gathered  green  in  spring  and  summer  time  and
boiled  as  tea,  are  likewise  cooling.  Half  a  cup  is  drunk
in  the  morning,  and  half  a  cup  in  the  evening.  No  house-
apotheca  should  despise  this  harmless  little  medicinal  plant,
especially  as  Almighty  God,  the  chief  doctor  and  apo-
thecary, lets  it  grow  for  all  of  us  gratuitously.

To  the  interior  application  of  water  should  be  added
exterior  ones.  The  patient,  when  rising  or  when  going  to
bed,  washes  the  abdomen  vigorously  with  a  handful  of  water.
This  remedy  is  most  simple  and  nevertheless  operates  well,
for  many  (weaker  natures)  it  is  sufficient.  Those  for  whom
this  application  is  too  easy  may,  from  time  to  time,  pour
fresh  cold  water  on  the  knees  for  1  to  3  minutes  (knee
gush),  an  excellent  application  for  producing  the  evacua-
tion of  the  bowels.

If  this  is  not  sufficient  and  great  heat  is  in  the  in-
side, the  patient  should,  a  few  times  in  the  week,  lie  on
wet  sheets;  covering  with  wet  sheets  is  also  of  good
effect.  In  the  same  way  a  cold  sitting-bath  operates  power-
fully; it  may  be  taken  twice  or  three  times  in  the  week.
A  cold  whole-bath,  if  taken  for  a  very  short  time,  is  not
to  be  despised.  All  the  named  applications  will  arouse
the  sleeping  organism,  animate  it,  bring  it  into  new^  ac-
tivity, strengthen  it.  The  wheels  are  oiled  anew,  the  whole
machine  runs  well  again,  and  the  desired  effect  will  surely
not  be  wanting.

Nothing  surpasses  the  harmless  and  sure  water-remedy,
and  what  is  easier  than  to  drmk  water,  to  wash  with

^'^  "^In  this  place,  there  is  still  a  word  to  be  said  about


COSTIVENESS.


249


emetics.  The  drastic  purging  with  minerals  and  Poisons,
Xther  it  be  in  the  form  of  powder,  pi  s  or  anythmg
rise,  appears  to  me  against  nature.  But  stdl  more  agamst
nature  is  all  that  is  taken  to  cause  vomiting,  alas!  often
again  poison. Such  an  ill-treated  .and  martyred  creature

affords  a  pitiable  sight.  ^ •  x-u

It  will  be  noticed  that  I  have  not  given  the  well
known  and  generally  used  purgatives,  such  as  rhubarb,
semm-leaves,  Epsom-salt,  Glauber's-salt  etc.  And  the  rea-
son*? These  in  themselves  harmless  remedies  are  never-
theless too  strong  for  me;  help  can  be  obtained  by  milder
means No  one  would  chase  a  gnat  or  a  flea  with  a  gun.
Much  more  do  I  decidedly  reject  all  the  insufferable  eme-
tics whether  they  are  called  water-emetic,  or  tartar-emetic,
or  bear  any  other  kmd  of  title.  If  one  must  vomit  —  and
there  are  such  cases  —  then  do  as  the  farmer  did:  when
he  felt  a  great  inclination  to  do  so,  he  put  his  finger
down  his  throat  and  was  soon  relieved.  With  strong  m-
chnation  for  vomiting,  operate  only  on  the  regularity  of
the  bowels. My  strongest  remedy  for  this  is  the  "Tonic
laxative".  This  tea  has  the  peculiarity,  that  while  it  effects
a  copious  evacuation  of  the  bowels,  it  will  also  stop
diarrhoea  (try  it  with  half  a  cupful !) It  seeks  after  the
morbid  matters  in  the  body  and  leads  them  out.  If  there
are  no  more  in  it,  if  all  have  been  removed,  its  operation
ceases  of  itself.  Therefore  the  twofold  effects.  Quackery  —
many  will  say  disdainfully!  But  whether  they  do,  or  do
not,  it  is  all  the  same  to  me. The  fact  remains  firm.

That  is  just  the  reason  why  the  powerful  laxatives
are  so  weakening,  so  bad  and  injurious  in  their  results,
because  they  do  not  drive  out  the  morbid  matters  only,
but  everything  without  distinction.

The  battle  begins  and  ends  with  the  overthrow  of
the  juices  which  are  most  precious  and  necessary  for  the
propagation  of  bodily  strength.  Who  has  not  already
experienced  this  himself?  Therefore  the  great  weakness,
the  quick  and  enormous  decrease  of  strength  after  such
courses.  Hov/  foohsh ,  how  laden  with  consequences !
Sapienti  sat !  Injuries  make  one  wise  or  at  least  ought
to  do  so.


250


Part  III,  Diseases.


Cramps.

I  was  called  to  a  sick  person  whose  whole  body  was
trembling  so  violently  that  she  was  thrown  about  on
every  side;  the  patient  could  not  speak  herself,  but  her
mother  related:  "My -daughter  has  always  a  dreadful
headache,  a  great  oppression  on  the  chest  and  in  the
vicinity  of  the  stomach;  hands  and  feet  are  always  ice-
cold  and  wet  with  a  greasy  perspiration.  My  daughter
has  been  married  for  nine  months ;  for  ten  weeks'  she
was  quite  well ;  then  this  state  began  in  a  slight  degree,
and  has  been  increasing  to  this  height.  She  cannot  eat
and  at  the  most  only  take  a  few  spoonfuls  of  plain  broth
or  coffee.  Everything  which  doctors  gave  her,  and  also
injections  applied  to  force  her  to  sleep,  only  made  her
condition  still  worse."  —

To  this  patient  I  gave  the  following  advice:

Twice  daily  to  put  her  feet,  and  as  far  as  the  calves
of  the  legs,  into  cold  water,  at  the  same  time  washing
them  with  a  sponge  or  towel ;  directly  afterwards  to  put
hands  and  arms  up  to  the  shoulders ,  in  cold  water
for  one  minute ,  washing  them  also  at  the  same  time ;
then  hands  and  feet  must  come  under  the  warm  bed
covering;  every  morning  and  afternoon  the  patient  must
take  about  12  camomile  drops  (see  apotheca)  in  6  or  8
spoonfuls  of  warm  water.  As  nourishment  she  .should
take  3  or  4  spoonfuls  of  milk  from  time  to  time,  or  drink
malt-tea;  it  is  especially  recommendable  to  take  the  milk
and  malt-tea  alternately.

After  12  days  this  person  was  so  far  advanced  that
an  appetite  set  in  for  the  usual  household  fare ;  the
cramps  had  disappeared,  and  the  oppressive  pains  in  chest
and  head  had  ceased ;  the  headache  had  gone,  hands  and
feet  were  warm.

The  further  applications  were :  every  second  day  to
put  the  feet  into  cold  water  as  above ;  twice  in  the  week
to  take  a  warm  foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt  for  14
minutes ,  and  once  a  week  to  rise  from  bed  to  take  a
whole  abl.tion,  and  directly  to  go  back  to  bed  again.
Instead  of  camomile-drops  she  took  wormwood  and  sage^


Croup.


251


ävons  each  time  10  to  12  drops  in  warm  water;  thj
Snt  wa  so  far  restored  that  she  washable  to  go  to
SS  again,  and  to  attend  to  her  ^-eh^^^^^^^^^^

needed  in  order  to  become  P^^!  f .h^^^^^^^  .^'^^^

only  to  wash  twice  a  week  with  cold  water ,  halt  baths

would  be  of  more  powerful  service  still.

Croup.

A  father  comes  and  laments  that  his  daughter,  of
4  years  of  age,  has  croup. "The  child" he  says "has  it
iust  like  the  3  other  children  who  died.  They  died  sud-
denly this  child  will  do  the  same. The  girl  can  now
scarcely  breathe  and  ceased  to  cough  because  she  is  no
longer  able  to  do  so.  Her  head  and  body  are  swollen.  What
shall  I  do  ^  It  will  take  me  4  hours  to  fetch  the  doctor
and  till  then  my  child  will  not  live."  The  answer  was:
"Goodfather,  go  home  directly,  and  get  some  hot  water
mixed  with  vinegar,  dip  a  towel  in  the  mixture,  wring
it  out,  and  put  it  round  the  child's  neck. Cover  this
swathing  with  a  dry  cloth,  and  leave  the  compress  on
the  chüd's  neck  for  |  hour. Then  dip  the  cloth  again
in  water  and  vinegar. Continue  thus  for  6  hours  wett-
ing the  compress  every  I  hour  anew. Then  take  the
compress  off  and  cover  the  neck  lightly. Hereupon  apply
to  the  child  a  short  bandage  for  which  you  may  use  the
same  towel  redipped  in  water  and  vinegar. Over  the
short  bandage  put  a  dry  cloth  and  cover  the  child  well
but  do  not  put  too  much  -on  her. Thus  the  child  is  to
rest  for  one  hour. After  an  hour  remove  the  cover  and
let  the  child  lie  in  bed  with  her  usual  covering.  Should
there  be  heavy  breath  or  cough  after  6_or  8  hours,  you
can  renew  the  neck -bandage  and  put  it  on  for  1  to  2
hours.  If  the  cloth  becomes  very  hot  and  the  child  feels
great  difficulty  in  breathing,  dip  the  cloth  in  afresh.
You  will  experience  the  effect.

The  father  did  as  he  had  been  told  and  after  30
hours  the  child,  who  had  been  thought  lost,  was  quite
well  again.  In  this  case  the  cure  could  also  have  been
effected,  by  dipping  the  cloth  in  very  cold  water^  (mixed
with  vinegar  in  equal  quantities)  and  renewing  it  every


252  Part  III.  Diseases.

f  hour.  If  this  application  liad  proved  insufficient ,  its
effect  might  Jiave  been  increased  by  a  foot -bandage
reaching  to  above  the  calves  of  the  legs.

Debilily.

A  blacksmith,  46  years  old ,  came  and  complained :
"It  is  now  2  years  since  my  hands  have  become  .so  weak
that  I  can  hardly  manage  the  hammer.  As  my  arms
have  lost  two  thirds  of  their  strength,  they  have  also
lost  more  than  half  their  thickness ;  otherwise  I  am  pretty
well.  Only  for  the  last  half  year  I  have  felt  my  feet
also  gettmg  much  weaker,  and  they  pain  me  too,  parti-
cularly towards  evening.  The  appetite  is  pretty  good,
but  not  so  much  as  formerly.  At  the  small  of  my  back
I  often  feel  a  powerful  strain."

The  veins  on  the  thin  hands  are  scarcely  seen ;  it
is  evident  that  the  arms  are  not  nourished,  therefore  the
v/eakness,  stiffness,  and  cold.  Accumulations  of  blood  in
the  nape  and  its  vicinity  may  be  the  cause  of  the  blood
not  being  able  to  flow  in  all  directions.

The  blacksmith  held  his  arms  in  a  bath  of  hay-
flowers  for  half  an  hour  daily,  and  once  at  another  time
of  the  day  for  2  minutes  in  cold  water,  besides  this  the
shawl  was  applied  3  times  weekly.  Thus  he  continued
for  a  fortnight.  Even  during  this  course  the  arms  be-
came firmer ,  the  veins  swelled  ,  the  accumulations  were
dissolved.

After  a  fortnight,  an  upper  and  lower  shower  were
talcen  daily ,  a  warm  hay-flower-bath ,  and  a  cold-water-
bath  for  the  arms ,  twice  in  the  week.  The  man  con-
tinued with  these  applications  and  became  again  able  to
do  his  work.  He  also  took  during  the  course  20  drops
of  wormwood-extract  in  warm  water  daily.

Decline.

We  often  see  people  become  corpulent  in  a  com-
paratively short  time.  It  is  the  well  founded  opinion  of
many  that  such  persons  will  not  live  much  longer.  There
are  others,  men,  women,  and  children  who  suddenly  be-
gin to  lose  their  strength  and  healthy  appearance.  The


Decline.


253


remarkable  side  of  the  matter  is,  that  such  persons  do
not  feel  any  particular  suffering.  They  generally  complain
about  languor,  bad  humour,  and  either  very  great  or  very
little  appetite.  If  help  does  not  step  m  scon,  such  halt-
withered  plants  die  gradually,  or  may  be  an  acute  illness
suddenly  brings  on  the  end.  Sick  people  of  this  kind
seem  to  me  —  to  use  a  picture  from  every  day  lite  —
hke  a  house  in  the  building  of  which  bad  material  was
employed  and  which  begins  to  decay  before  its  time  He
died  of  Bright's  disease,  people  say.  This  is  only  a
different  designation  for  what  I  call  the  break mg  down
of  a  friable,  weak  body.  Good  eating  and  drmkmg  is  of
no  avail  there.  Throw  a  tubfal  of  mortar  on  the  wall
of  a  decaymg  house  and  every  sensible  person  will  smile
at  you.  Decline  differs  from  consumption  m  as  much  as
the  latter  disease  affects  one  particular  organ  be  it  the
lungs,  the  chest,  the  larynx  or  any  other  oi'gan  from
which  it  proceeds  and  spreads,  whilst  the  former  consists
rather  in  a  general  dissolution,  in  a  ruin  of  the  \vhole
body.  Decline  has  been  supposed  to  originate  in_  the
kidneys,  in  the  abdomen;  but  in  most  cases  a  decision
as  to  its  origin  is  impossible ;  the  surest  signs  have  often
proved  deceptive,  when  the  dissection  of  the  corpse  revealed
the  real  cause  of  the  disease.

A  rather  corpulent  gentleman  enjoyed  the  best  of
healths.  His  mode  of  life  and  his  diet  were  well  regulated.
Suddenly  he  observed  that  his  corpulence  and  his  strength
were  givmg  way.  He  suffered  from  giddiness  and  was
hardly  able  to  stand  without  support.  Six  weeks  had
scarcely  past  when  he  had  lost  72  lbs.  in  weight.  The
tall,  handsome  man  of  late  tottered  and  staggered  about,,
reminding  one  of  a  broken  reed  or  a  withered  tree.  All
medical  remedies  were  of  no  avail;  the  patient  looked
forward  to  his  approaching  end  with  certainty,  but  also
with  great  sadness.  He  was  a  dear  acquaintance  of  mine,
but  when  he  came  to  see  me,  I  did  not  recognise  him.
I  had  great  doubts  about  the  possibility  of  recovery;  I
advised  him,  however,  to  make  a  last  attempt  with  water.

Nature  which  was  occupied  in  destroying  itself  had  to
be  strengthened,  the  progress  of  the  disease  to  be  checked.


254


Pars  111.  Diseases.


The  patient  walked  barefoot  in  wet  grass  or  on  wot
stones  twice  or  3  times  a  day.  Every  other  day  he  lay
on  wet  sheets  and  was  covered  with  wet  sheets,  once  a
week  he  made  use  of  the  Spanish  mantle.  These  api)li-
cations  were  succeeded  by  the  following:  weekly,  2  half-
baths,  1  short  bandage,  lying  on  wet  sheets  and  cover-
ing with  wet  sheets.  After  some  time  the  half- baths
were  replaced  by  whole -baths,  cold  ones  fur  one  mi-
nute and  warm  ones  with  twofold  change,  one  of  each
kind  to  be  taken  in  the  week ;  he  likewise  took  a  whole-
ablution  once  a  week.  To  complete  the  cure  and  prevent
a  relapse  I  precribed  a  cold  whole-bath ,  and  an  upper-
shower  with  knee -shower,  to  be  taken  every  week  and
the  Spanish  mantle,  to  be  applied  from  time  to  time.
The  patient  had  been  used  to  drink  from  4  to  5  glasses
of  beer  daily;  their  number  was  reduced  to  2;  1  further
ordered  the  diet  to  be  simple  and  nourishinj.

At  the  close  of  the  first  week,  an  improvement  was
already  noticed  in  the  state  of  the  patient ;  after  8  weeks
he  could  attend  to  his  duties.  He  continued  to  incrpase
in  strength  and  corpulence  and  is,  to  this  day,  ahialth/,
portly,  and  strong  man.

A  mother  lost  in  a  few  weeks  her  blooming  appea-
rance and  all  her  strength.  She  was  generally  believed
to  be  doomed  to  die  shortly  since  all  medical  ren  e  lies
remained  without  effect.  In  her  distress  she  had  recourse
to  water.

Twice  a  week  she  put  on  a  wet  chemise  and  en-
folded herself  in  a  dry  woollen  covering  in  w'hich  she
remained  for  an  hour ;  she  also  took  2  half-baths  in  the
week  and  continued  both  pra'itices  for  a  fortnight.  Her
health  improved.  Instead  of  the  former  applications  she
now  made  use  of  the  shojt  bandage  and  the  whole-ab-
lution from  bed,  applying  each  once  a  week.  Complete
health  was  given  to  the  mother  and  the  healthj  moiher
was  restored  to  her  rejoicing  children.

Sufferers  of  this  kind  are  often  apt  to  tak^  too  much
food.  Since  this  cannot  be  manufactured  in  juices,  blood,
bone ,  flesh  etc.  by  weakened  nature ,  such  consequences
as  abnormal  formation  of  muscles,  conglomerations  of  blood


Delirium  tuemkns.


255


or  juices  must  necessarily  ensue.  The  well  calculated  water-
a-iplications  dissolve  and  lead  off  injurious  matters,  regulate
the  circulation  and  ^strengthen  the  whole  organism.

Another  cause  which  may  brmg  on  declme  is  the
following.  Food  is  taken  and,  without  profiting  the  body,
evacuated  again.  The  organs  are  weak,  inactive^,  and
unable  to  work.  In  this  case ,  too  ,  great  disturbances
must  arise  in  the  body,  and  its  health  must  be  under-
mined. Cut  the  roots  of  any  plant,  and  it  must  die.  ihe
organs  resemble  the  roots. The  water  strengthens  and

refreshes  them.

How  many  young  people  are  now- a -days  carrying
about  sick  bodies,  real  corpses.  I  wish  with  all  my  heart
that  they  may  find  the  source  of  help  and  health  at  the
right  time.

Delirium  tremens.

A  man  36  years  of  age,  had  drunk  much  beer,  eaten
little,  and  so  had  lived  pretty  well  on  beer  alone.
For  a  short  time  after  drinking  it,  he  always  felt  very
strong,  but  as  soon  as  the  beer-vapour  had  gone  he  com-
plained about  enervation.

Delirium  tremens  had  already  developed  so  strongly
that  even  young  people  noticed  that  he  was  no  longer
right.  At  the  same  time  he  complained  particularly  much
about  rheumatic  pains,  spasms  and  occasional  headache.
Although  the  passion  for  drinking  is  extremely  difficult
of  cure ,  nevertheless  this  patient  had  a  good  will ,  and
wanted  to  be  freed  from  his  misery,  no  matter  at  what
sacrifice.  Within  3  weeks  the  following  applications  per-
fectly restored  him :  Every  day  he  understock  2  or  3
applications  in  the  following  order:  1"  day:  a)  upper-
shower  and  knee-gush,  b)  standing  in  water,  walking  in
water  and  putting  the  arms  in  water,  c)  shower  for  the
hack.  2"''  day:  a)  half-bath,  b)  upper-shower  with  knee-^
shower.  3'"'^  day  :  a)  sitting-bath,  b)  upper-shower.  4"'
day:  a)  half-bath,  b)  whole -bath.  He  thus  continued
tmtil  he  was  cured ;  all  morbid  conditions  ceased ,  th*
appearance  was  perfectly  improved,  good  appetite  had  come,
and  the  passionate  desire  for  drink  had  entirely  disappeared.


256


Part  111.  Diseases.


Tt  must  bp,  emphatically  remarkfsd  that,  during  the  course
of  applications,  many  eruptions  api)eared  on  various  parts
of  the  body  by  means  of  which  the  poisonous  matters
where  removed.

Diarrhoea.

There  are  people  who  get  diarrhoea  without  any  spe-
cial cause.  The  repetition  can  be  regular,  e.  g.  at  par-
ticular times,  once  or  twice  a  year,  or  it  can  be  irregular.
Those  seized  with  it  feel  quite  well  both  before  and  after
the  attack.  The  regular  diarrhoea  is  caused  by  strong
nature  throwing  off  all  the  accumulated  superfluous  mat-
ters. How  calmly  a  man  can  work  when  a  safety-valve
is  on  the  steam-boiler.  How  calm  one  may  be,  when
nature  like  the  boiler  throws  off  what  is  too  much  and
unwholasome !

Against  this  kind  of  diarrhoea  I  have  nothing  to
to  do  anything  against  it.

Generally  these  attacks  occur  in  autumn  or  spring,
and  it  appears  that  the  air,  the  temperature  is  of  good
influence  and  assistance.*

The  irregular  diarrhoea  which  appears  with,  or  with-
out, pains  is  more  worthy  of  notice.  It  is  a  warning  for
such  people  that  morbid  matters  have  accumulated  in
their  body,  which,  if  they  are  not  removed,  frequently
occasion  destruction.  Indeed  experience  teaches  that  people
afflicted  in  this  manner  suffer  from  some  organic  defect,
that  they  generally  die  early  or  at  least  never  reach  a
particularly  oM  vgi.  Often  diarrhoea  is  the  forerunner
of  a  serious  illness.  To  effect  its  cure,  before  all,  the
bowels  must  be  operated  upon,  but  always  alternately


*  Those  who  read  the  newspapers  see  what  part  the
blood-pnvityino-  pills,  herbs  etc.  play,  especially  in  spring  and
autumn ,  but  to  some  extent  at  every  season.  I  should  never
recommend  such  things.  Those  who  will  absolutely  take
something  (and  there  are  such  people),  let  them  take  once  a
week  on  the  one  or  the  other  day,  every  halt  hour  a  table-
spocntul  of  fresh  spring-water  for  5  or  6  hours.  Ihis  remedy
assists  nature,  many  others  may  as  well  destroy  it.


Diarrhoea.


with  applications  for  the  whole  body.  Sudden  stopping
of  diarrhoea  is  never  to  be  recommended ;  the  foul  matters
should  be  gradually  removed  and  the  interior  organs  so
strengthened  that  nature  may  not  allow  such  foul  mat-
ters to  form  without  trying  to  get  rid  of  them  at  the
right  time.

For  the  interior,  tea  is  taken  made  from  wormwood
with  sage ,  from  centaury  with  sage ,  or  from  common
yarrow  with  St.  John'swort,  one  or  two  .small  cupfuls  daily,
or  6  to  10  juniper -berries  are  taken  daily.  All  the
above  mentioned  remedies  assist  the  digestion,  increase
the  stomach -juices  and,  at  the  same  time,  contain
nourishment.

If  the  diarrhoea  is  violent  and  of  longer  duration,
half  a  spoonful  of  bilberry-spirit  should  be  taken  (in  warm
water)  twice  daily.  As  exterior  application  3  or  4  com-
presses on  the  abdomen  weekly ,  each  time  for  1|  hours
and  a  short-bandage  likewise  weekly,  will  be  sufficient.
(The  compresses  should  consist  of  a  fourfold  cloth  dipped
in  water  with  vinegar,  or  in  a  decoction  of  pine -twigs,
and  laid  or  bound  on  the  abdomen.)  This  is  continued
for  a  fortnight.  After  this  time  there  may  follow  1  or
2  half-baths  with  washing  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body
weekly,  and  also  1  or  2  whole-ablutions  weekly ;  for  the
latter  application  the  patient  should  rise  in  the  night.
This  should  be  continued  for  the  3  or  4  weeks  following
in  order  to  increase  the  strength  of  the  whole  body.  If
then  it  were  made  a  rule  never  to  let  a  week  pass  by
without  taking  at  least  a  whole-ablution  or  a  cold  half-
bath  with  washing  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body ,  tha
whole  organism  would  become  stronger  and  healthier,  and
the  diarrhoea  (unless  it  has  a  deeply  rooted  cause)  would
not  return.

A  man  of  48  came  and  complained:

"I  have  constant  diarrhoea,  already  this  morning  I
have  been  troubled  7  times  while  on  the  journey;  at
home  1  to  6  times  daily.  I  have  been  suffering  from
this  complaint  for  9  months."  The  appearance  of  thi^
man  was  very  good,  neither  thin  nor  too  stout,  the  colour
fresh. This  patient  took:

Kneipp,  Watoi-Cure.  i  7


258  Pakt  III.  Diseases.


1.  every  morning  and  every afternoon an  upper
shower ;

2.  every  morning  walking  in  water,  and  every  after-
noon a  knee-gush.

The  eff.ict  of  these  applications  was  that,  after  5  days,
the  bowels  were  moved  for  the  first  time.  He  had  taken
nothing  except  6  to  8  juniper -berries  daily.  But  why,
many  a  reader  will  ask,  were  these  applications  given
here?  they  are  so  entirely  different  from  the  usual  ones.
Answer:  Because  this  man  looked  healthy  and  strong,
his  eyes  also  looked  fresh  and  well ;  this  was  a  proof
that  there  was  still  good  natural  strength ;  if,  then,  this
is  supported,  and  still  more  warmth  produced  by  the
water-applications,  the  interior  evil  will  soon  be  removed
by  the  natural  strength  itself.  I  would  recommend  as
further  applications  :  twice  or  3  times  a  week  a  half-bath,
or  just  as  often  an  upper-shower  with  knee-shower.

A  gentleman,  aged  48,  says  :  "For  many  years  I  have
had  diarrhoea  with  very  little  interruption ;  I  have  tried
all  kinds  of  diet;  I  have  taken  a  great  deal  of  medicme,
also  used  many  househould  remedies,  have  been  sent  to
.several  bathing-places,  but  —  all  in  vain.  The  diarrhoea  is
particularly  violent  when  I  drink ,  whether  it  be  water,
beer,  or  wine.  Very  dry  food  suits  me  best.  But  because
everything  goes  from  me  too  quickly  and  too  little  di-
gested, I  have  never  got  any  strength ;  and  if  I  am  not
quite  emaciated,  my  muscles  are  nevertheless  without

strength."

The  applications  were  the  following:

1.  twice  daily  an  upper  shower,

2.  once  daily  walking  m  water,  and

3.  once  a  knee-gush.

In  the  second  week:
on  the  one  day,  upper-shower  and  walking  m  water,
the  next  day,  half-bath.

After  these  two  weeks  the  patient  felt  strenger,
fresher,  and  better,  but  the  diarrhoea  remained.

In  the  third  week  he  had:  ■ , -.u  ,

1.  daily  a  fourfold  cloth  dipped  in  water  mi.Ked  with  a
little  vinegar  laid  on  the  abdomen  for  1%  to  2  hours,


IDlPUTflEBlA.


2  the  one  day  upper-sliower  and  shower  for  the  thighs ;
3'  the  next  day  half-bath  and  upper-shower.

After  tliis  week  the  action  of  the  bowels  was  en-
tirely changed.

A  farther  week:
1.  every  day  a  half-bath;

2  every  second  day  a  cloth  on  the  abdomen,  as  above.

For  the  farther  preservation  of  health  and  strength,
the  following  applications  proved  sufficient:

1.  every  week  2  half-baths,  and

2.  every  week  once  or  twice  a  wet  compress  on  the  ab-

For  interior  use  were  applied:

a.  Wormood-drops,

b.  Juniper-berries,  alternately.

Some  one  might  ask  v/hy  just  this  succession  was
observed  in  the  application.
The  reply  is :

The  applications  of  the  first  week,  begun  from  above
and  below,  sought  to  strengthen  the  body ;

those  of  the  second  week  strengthened  both  the  body
in  general  and  the  interior  organs;

those  of  the  third  week  operated  chiefly  on  the
strengthening  of  the  stomach  and  bowels.

In  this  way  the  whole  body  was  repaired.  The  appli-
cations of  the  fourth  week  embraced  the  whole  organism
in  all  its  parts,  and  so  in  this  case,  too,  the  cure  was  a
successful  one.

Diphtheria.

Those  who  are  seized  with  Diphtheria  must  take  care :
1.  to  loosen  the  accumulated  morbid  matters  as  soon
as  possible.  2)  to  operate  upon  the  whole  constitution,
that  the  irregular  flow  of  the  blood  and  juices ,  shown
hy  the  barometer  of  the  fever,  may.  be  restored  to  order
again.  Such  a  patient  should  be  given  first  the  head-
vapour,  and  after  every  20  to  24  minutes  the  whole  body
should  be  washed.  After  6  to  8  hours  he  .should  put  on
the  .shawl  for  1-J  hoars ,  redipping  it  in  fresh  water
every  half  hour. Then  the  patient  should  take  a  foot-

17*


260


Part  III.  Diseases.


vapour,  directly  afterwards  a  lialf-hatli  (quite  cold)  with
washing  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body.  The  tune  given
to  the  latter  applications  should  be  1  minute  at  most.
Then  follows  the  shawl  for  IJ-  hours,  as  given  above.
When  these  applications  have  been  undertaken,  they
should  be  repeated  from  the  beginning,  allotting  one
to  every  half- day.  At  the  same  time  the  patient  must
diligently  gargle  his  throat  with  shave  -  grass  -  tea,  at
least  4  to  5  times  daily.  The  dreadful  disease  will  very
soon  disappear.

All  the  given  applications  are  perfectly  harmless.

If  the  patient  (this  is  a  general  rule)  is  at  rest  at
night,  if  sleep  comes  on,  he  must,  by  no  means,  be  dis-
turbed. For  good  sleep  is  a  proof  that  nature  is  return-
ing to  order  (to  rest)  again,  and  its  strengthening  effects
assist  the  applications  in  obtaining  a  good  result.

Here  it  may  be  remarked,  that  if  during  any  appli-
falls  asleep ,  he  must  never  be  awakened.  When  the
apphcation  has  made  its  effects,  the  patient  regularly
awakes  himself.

A  father  came  to  me  and  related:  "My  child,  11  years
old ,  cannot  swallow  at  all ,  and  for  3  whole  days  can
scarcely  breathe.  He  is  full  of  heat  and  is  delirious.  I
have  put  a  wet  cloth  round  his  neck,  but  he  does  not
get  any  better.  What  shall  I  do  that  the  child  may  not
suffocate?"  The  lamentations  of  the  grieved  father  and
still  more  the  failure  of  the  application  mduced  me  to
accompany  hhn  to  the  sick-bed.  There  lay  the  child,  a
picture  of  misery,  to  all  appearance  lost.  For  there  were
already  signs  which  hardly  allowed  a  thought  of  reco-
very. Well,  let  us  venture  it  in  God's  name!  Every
half  hour  during  one  day,  the  back,  chest,  and  abdomen
were  well  washed  with  cold  water.  As  the  fearful  fever-
heat  would  not  give  way,  there  was  applied  to  the  ab-
domen nothing  further  than  a  cloth  dipped  in  cold  vvater.
On  the  following  day  the  father  came  again  and  said:
"The  child  is  already  able  to  swallow  a  little,  but  on
both  sides  of  the  head  the  cheeks  towards  the  jaws  are


Dropsy.


261


swelling  rither  greatly.  His  speech  is  scarcely  to  be
understood;  yet  1  am  unspeakably  glad  that  the  htüe
one  can  talk  again."  The  father  was  advised  to  bind  up
?he  swellings  with  a  cloth  dipped  m  water  mixed  with
vinef^ar,  and  to  renew  this  compress  every  hali-tiour.

Besides  this  the  child  should  be  washed  as  given
above,  chest,  back,  and  abdomen  as  often  as  he  felt  hot
and  anxious.  On  the  third  day  the  little  one  was  out
of  all  danger.  The  washing  was  continued  for  a  short
time,  as  often  as  the  heat  began  to  increase.

Gargles  with  tea  made  from  Foenum  gr^cum  (1  tea-
«.poonful'of  Foenum  greecum  boiled  in  half  a  pint  of  water,
and  often  given  by  spoonfuls  to  the  child  sittmg  m  bed)
had  excellent  effect.  Tea  from  mallow,  common  yarrow,
mullein,  would  render  the  same  service.  Three  or  four
teaspoonfuls  of  salad-oil  taken  daily  is  also  very  good.
This  takes  away  the  interior  heat  remarkably  quickly.

The  chUd  was  saved  and,  at  the  present  day,  enjoys
excellent  health.

Dropsy.

When  the  ram  continues  for  a  long  time  and  the
sun  shines  but  little,  in  many  places  the  water  does  not
sink  into  the  earth,  neither  is  it  drawn  up  by  the  sun.
Then  there  form  little  pools  of  water  which  later  on  be-
come sour  and  foul  and  are  of  bad  effect  on  the  plants
which  grow  near  them.

Almost  the  same  thing  happens  in  the  human  body
at  the  time  dropsy  commences,  which  is  most  frequently
developed  in  those  organisms  whose  blood  and  juices  are
too  watery,  which  no  longer  possess  any  normal,  any  life-
nourishing  blood.  All  the  organs  and  constituent  parts
of  the  body  feed  upon  the  blood;  it  is  the  source  of
power  and  strength  from  which  each  draws  that  which
it  needs  for  its  purpose.  But  from  a  bog,  from  unhealthy
puddles,  from  morbid  blood  nothing  strength  and  life-
giving  can  be  taken,  hence  the  flabby  flesh,  the  inactive
bowels,  therefore  the  accumulations,  sure  forerunners  of
dropsy.


262


Paut  III.  Diseases,


The  complaint  can  be  detected  even  by  the  exterior :
young  people  suddenly  appear  old  (he  or  she,  people  say,
has  quickly  become  old,)  the  complexion  fades,  the  mus-
cles and  nerves ,  like  broken  strings ,  hang  withered  on
the  bones,  little  bags  of  water  already  form  on  different
parts  of  the  body  particularly  under  the  eyes.  You  have
only  to  touch  them,  and  the  water-globules  spring  from
under  your  fingers.  The  whole  body  soon  shows  a  number
of  such  little  bags,  just  as  if  it  were  begging  for  good
blood ;  but  it  only  receives  water.

There  are  different  kinds  of  dropsy.  If  the  accumu-
lations arise  between  the  skin  and  the  flesh,  we  have  skin-
dropsy.  If  the  bowels  in  one  or  in  several  places  are
like  a  sea,  as  it  were,  this  is  called  dropsy  of  the  bowels.
If  the  blood-pump  of  the  body,  the  heart,  is  flooded  with
water,  it  is  called  dropsy  of  the  heart,  etc.  Dropsy  also
arises  readily  after  many  diseases  and  then,  as  a  rule,  all
is  over  before  long.  For  very  many  it  has  been  a
messenger  from  death  and  the  grave ,  or  it  was ,  as  it
were,  the  last  heavy  wave  that  foundered  the  bark  of
life,  already  a  wreck.  It  appears  particularly  after  scarlet
fever,  if  this  has  not  been  thoroughly  worked  out,  if
poisonous  matters  still  remain  and  the  weakend  body  has
not  strength  enough  to  throw  them  off.  The  whole  body
then  begins  to  swell.

If  dropsy  has  already  spread,  reached  a  high  degree,
then  in  most  cases  nothing  can  be  done  on  account  of
deficiency  of  blood.  In  the  beginning  (with  not  yet  ad-
vanced decomposition)  help  can  be  obtained  very  quickly,
if  one  strives  to  pump  out  the  foul  water  from  withm
and  from  without  at  the  same  time.

Some  examples  .shall  make  it  clear.

The  whole  body  of  a  peasant  woman  about  48  years
of  age  begins  to  swell ;  she  is  scarcely  able  to  walk.  The
enervation  is  already  great,  breathing  a  great  burden.  I
advised  her  immediately  to  put  rosemary  in  wine  and
daily  to  drink  two  wine-glassfuls  of  this  rosemary  wine,
altogether  about  half  a  pint.  The  wine  strengthened  her
exceedingly,  as  she  said,  and  drove  out  a  great  deal  of
water. Exteriorly  she  used  daily  for  several  days  the


Dropsy.  263


«hnvt-bandage  for  U  hours;  for  a  longer  time  (about
f  weeS  tily  two  half-baths  of  one  minute  with  washing
of The  upper  part  of  the  body.  The  peasa.it  woman  got
well  and  was^  able  to  attend  to  her  work  entirely  and

unhindered.  t  .

A  boY  had  had  scarlet  fever,  and  according  to  every-
one's opinion  grew  strong  again-.  After  six  week«  he  got
dropsy  The  whole  body  swelled  A  shirt  dipped  m  salt
water  and  for  H  hours  each  day  accordnig  to  prescrip-
tion for  three  successive  days,  perfectly  cured  him.

A  woman,  54  years  old,  became  dropsical  The  feet
and  the  body,  so  I  was  informed,  weie  frightfully  swollen
Two  pinches  of  dwarf- elder -root  powder  were  put  into
a  pint  of  water  and  left  to  brew  for  3  minutes,  the
patient  then  drank  this  tea  at  two  or  three  intervals.
Besides  this  she  had  daily  for  3  days  a  lower-bandage
for  1  hour.  For  the  following  10  days  the  bandage  was
applied  every  second  day,  and  the  14  days  following
again  every  third  day.  —  The  patient  recovered  perfectly
and  that  even  after  3  weeks.  I  learned  later  that  the
water  went  off  in  great  quantities  as  urine.

Dwarf -elder  has  always  proved  the  best  interior
remedy  for  dropsy  of  the  belly,*  as  rosemary  has  done
for  pectorial  dropsy  and  dropsy  of  the  heart.

An  excellent  exterior  application  in  cases  of  dropsy
of  the  heart,  is  lying  on  wet  sheets  and  covering  with
wet  sheets  once  daily.  Interiorly  2  glasses  of  rosemary
wine  are  drunk  daily.

The  body  of  a  young  man,  of  36  years  of  age,
swelled  within  eight  days  in  a  remarkable  manner.  Head,
neck,  hands,  and  feet  showed  swellings  and  under  the
skin  a  quantity  of  water.  For  eight  days  he  put  on  the
Spanish  mantle  twice  a  day,  for  nine  days  further  once
a  day,  the  last  ten  days  after  every  three  days.  "I  have
become  quite  a  Spaniard",  the  man  said  laughingly,  "the

*  As  household  remedy  juniper -berries  will  do,  boiled
and  dnmk  as  tea.  This  tea  operates  well  but  always  too
weakly:  The  eifects  of  dwarf- elder-root  are  much  more  power-
ful and  enduiing.


264


Part  III.  Diseases.


climate,  although  not  pavticularly  Spanish,  has  done  me
good. I  am  quite  restored."

One  remark  I  must  not  forget  here,  as  it  is  just  in
this  disease  that  every  beginner  with  water  could  easily
deceive  himself  and  others.

In  cases  of  dropsy  the  water  may  never  be  applied
warm,  neither  in  the  form  of  vapours,  nor  of  warm  baths.

The  evil  would  thereby  gain  ground  in  an  extra-
ordinary manner  as  the  warm  water  causes  inactivity  and
languor,  and  the  torpidity  of  the  organs,  their  inactivity
is  one  of  the  worst  features  of  this  disease.  The  coldest
applications  are  the  best  here ;  but  they  must  never  be
used  for  too  long  a  time  or  in  any  other  way  than  that
vital  heat.

A  man  relates :  "My  whole  body  is  already  rather
greatly  swollen.  The  doctor  says  I  am  getting  dropsy.
I  have  taken  a  great  deal  against  it ,  but  I  get  worse
from  day  to  tay.  My  left  leg,  particularly  the  thigh,  is
very  much  swollen.  The  right  leg  too  begins  to  get
thicker.  I  have  great  thirst ;  if  I  drink  beer ,  it  gets
worse  still,  and  water  does  not  help  either.  Must  I  die,
or  is  there  still  help  for  me?"

I  replied :  "Use  the  following  :  1)  Every  day  an  upper
shower  and  a  knee  gush;  2)  three  times  a  week  a
short  bandage ,  the  cloth  being  folded  from  four  to  six
times,  for  1^  hours;  3)  every  night  rise  from  bed,
and  take  a  whole  ablution ,  and  then  return  at  once
to  bed  without  drying.  Continue  thus  for  three  weeks,
then  send  a  report."

This  was  very  favourable.  Thereupon  I  ordered  the
following  applications :

1)  Every  week  three  half-baths  for  one  minute;
2)  every  week  three  showers  for  the  back ;  3)  twice  the
Spanish  mantle  for  1^  hours ;  4)  daily  to  drink  one  cup
of  tea  made  from  crushed  juniper -berries  and  a  little
shave  -  grass ,  boiled  for  10  minutes.  This  to  be  drunk
during  the  day  in  three  portions.

After  six  weeks  the  patieiit  was  perfectly  well  again.
Besides  sleep  the  best  appetite  and  full  strength  returned


Dysenteky.  —  Diseases  of  the  ears.  -265


again  This  declaration  was  sent  to  me  three  months
after  the  course  of  apphcations.  The  man  is  fifty  years  old.

Dysentery.

Dysentery  is  a  sister  of  cholera.  They  resemble  each
other  very  much.  This  disease  begins  as  a  rule  with
dreadful  spasms  in  the  bowels,  violent  diarrhoea  accom-
panied by  bloody  flux  from  the  rectum.

The  quickest  way  to  cure  dysentery  consists  in  the
application  of  a  twofold  cloth  which  is  dipped  in  very
warm  water  and  vinegar  and  laid  on  the  abdomen.  A
small  glass  of  bilberry-spirit  will  be  of  great  effect  on  the
interior ;  this  spirit  is  easy  to  prepare  and  should  not  be
missing  in  any  house-apotheca.  Twice  a  day  2  tablespoon-
fuls  of  this  spirit  should  be  taken  in  hot  water;  the
refreshing  drink  will  be  reli-hed  by  the  patient.  If  he  is
not  better  on  the  second  day,  the  compress  on  the  ab-
■domen  should  be  renewed  and  the  same  dose  of  bilberry-
spirit  taken.

Joseph  lay  in  his  bed  bent  like  a  worm.  Sometimes
the  spasms  turned  him  round  like  a  globe.  He  screamed
with  pain.  The  stools  contained  more  than  a  pint  of  blood.
2  spoonfuls  of  bilberry-spirit  taken  in  the  morning  and
in  the  afternoon  cured  him  in  a  short  time.

Anna,  a  woman  of  more  than  50  years,  moans  in
terrible  spasms.  Diarrhoea  accompanied  by  much  blood
made  her  fear  that  her  case  was  cholera  in  its  worst
degree.  The  vinegar-cloth  on  the  body  and  the  bilberry-
sph-it  in  the  interior  have  restored  her  in  1  day.  If  bil-
berries cannot  be  had,  milk  in  which  fennel  has  been
boiled  will  also  render  good  service.

Ears,  diseases  of  the.

Who  could  enumerate  the  manifold  causes  in  which
diseases  originate  and  the  various  ways  in  which  diseases
work  upon  individual  organs  causing  them  to  suffer  even,
when  the  original  disease  has  disappeared.  The  more
delicate  an  organ,  the  more  injurious  is  the  disease  that
affects  it  and  the  more  difficult  the  cure  of  the  same.
One  of  the  most  delicate  organs  of  the  human  body  is


2G6


Paut  III.  Diseases.


the  ear,  and  very  often  the  sense  of  hearing  is  lost  through
illness  or  through  a  disorderly  mode  of  life.

A  mother  comes  and  relates :  "My  daughter  has  had
the  scarlet  fever  of  which  she  has  been  well  cured.  Since
that  time  she  has  never  been  quite  well.  Now  she  com-
plains of  this,  then  of  something  else,  but  the  hardest
thing  to  bear ,  is  that  she  has  lost  her  hearing  almost
entirely. All  remedies  applied  have  had  no  effect."

This  girl  has  not  been  cured  entirely,  and  the  hard
hearing  is  but  a  consequence  of  it,  which  might  just  as
well  have  laid  hold  of  any  other  part  of  the  body.  If  the
girl  is  cured  of  all  injurious  consequences  of  the  scarlet
fever,  her  hearing  will  be  restored  to  her.  We  have  there-
fore to  work  upon  both  the  hearing  and  the  whole  system.

By  the  following  applications  the  best  result  will  be
obtained: 1)  To  put  on  a  wet  chemise  for  1^  hours.

2)  To  put  on  a  shawl  for  1^  hours  (to  be  re-dipped  in
water  after  the  first  |  hour).  During  these  1^  hours
each  foot  to  the  calf  of  the  leg  is  wrapped  in  a  towel
dipped  m  warm  water  —  foot -bandage,  for  1-^  hours.

3)  To  rise  from  bed,  take  a  whole-ablution,  and  go  to  bed
again  without  drying,  special  attention  being  paid  to  the
back  of  the  head  and  the  ears.  4)  To  bind  a  piece  of
linen  dipped  in  warm  water  on  the  ears  and  the  parts
near  them  for  2  hours;  the  bandage  to  be  re-dipped  in
water  every  half  hour.  5)  To  take  a  head-bandage  (s.
bandages).

These  5  applications  should  be  made  use  of  for  some
time,  every  day  at  least  one  application.  A  warm  oat-
straw  bath  (28  to  30«  R.)  taken  for  25  minutes  every
week  would  also  be  of  good  effect.  It  should  be  followed
by  a  quick  ablution  with  cold  water  to  brace  the  system.
These  applications  will  restore  thorough  health  to  the
weakened  body ;  the  warm  bandages  on  the  ears  may  be
continued  for  a  longer  space  of  time.

Ears,  humming  in  the.

A  person  had  very  often  loud  humming  in  the  ears,
weak  nerves,  trembling  of  the  hands  and  f.et,  pale  com-
plexion and  sunken  eyes. This  person  had  been  attended


Epilepsy.  267


toby  several  physicians.  The  one  said  the-humniing  m  the
ears  came  from  the  nerves,  the  other  attnbuted  it  to  a
suppressed  cold  in  the  head,  the  third  declared  it  a  con-
traction of  the  tympanum  etc.  .  ^ , . •  ,

Applications:  1)  Walking  in  water  for  2  to  4  minutes
daily  then  exercise  in  a  warm  room,  or  weather  permitting,
in  the  open  air.  2)  Every  other  night  whole-ablution  froni
bed  with  water  and  vinegar. 3)  Twice  a  week  the  shawl

for  1  hour.  Tr  r  ji.

To  be  contmued  for  a  fortnight  or  3  weeks.  It  iarther
applications  are  required  a  whole-ablution  may  be  applied
once  a  week  and  walking  in  water  every  second  day.

Epilepsy.

I  never  let  this  kind  of  sufferers  give  a  report  of
themselves.  I  simply  ask  them  how  long  they  have  been
afflicted  with  this  disease,  if  they,  each  time,  perceive
the  attack  and  its  symptoms,  how  old  they  are,  if  the
mental  powers  are  still  fresh  or  already  in  a  very  low  state.

According  to  my  conviction  this  disease  also  has  its
principal  seat  m  the  blood,  whether  it  be  caused  by  po-
verty of  blood,  morbid  blood,  corrupted  blood,  or  irregular
circulation  of  the  blood.  My  opinion  is  supported  by  the
often  recurring  facts  that  the  enticed  eruptions  on  the
skin,  as  it  were  the  evaporations  of  the  blood,  have  al-
ways brought  such  patients  lasting  and  certain  help,  that
farther  these  so-called  incurable  people  are  always  known
by  their  being  puffed  up,  - their  blue  colour  (these  are
accumulations  of  corrupted  blood).

If  the  answers  to  my  questions  are  favourable,  which
occurs,  as  a  rule,  with  young  people  at  the  age  of  8  to
20  years,  I  look  upon  the  so-called  "falling-sickness"  as
a  spasmodic  condition  similar  to  S*  Vitus's-dance,  and  as
curable.  I  have  been  able  to  bring  help  to  very  many^
even  to  such  as  had  inherited  the  disease  from  their
parents.

If  particularly  the  question  regarding  the  percej  tion
of  the  signs  of  the  attack  is  answered  negatively  (sign
that  the  powers  of  the  mind  are  gone),  if  the  evil  is  old,
and  has  caused  more  or  less  imbecility,  then  the  poor


268


Pakt  III.  Diseases.


sufterers,  who  happily  never  feel  their  misery  deeply,  have
nothing  to  expect  from  me.

According  to  these  principles  I  have  ever  arranged
the  manner  of  treatment,  which  always  aims  at  improve-
ment of  the  hlood  and  the  regulating  of  the  circulation
of  the  blood.

Before  all  I  sought  to  lead  the  patients  to  liardening,
particularly  to  going  barefoot  very  diligently.  In  summer
I  occasionally  ordered  them  to  take  a  cold  bath,  never
longer  than  one  minute,  in  winter  this  bath  (lasting  one
to  two  minutes)  was  warmed  a  little.  Besides  this  they
had  once  a  week  a  wet  shirt,  dipped  in  salt  water.

The  eruption,  which  through  the  last  application  often
made  its  appearance,  was  treated  according  to  the  rules
given  hi  their  proper  place  (see  Eruptions).  I  have  always
strongly  advised  young  people  to  accustom  themselves  to
simple,  sensible,  not  effeminating  clothing,  and  especially
the  girls  to  give  up  the  blamable,  unnatural  and  disease-
bringing  lacing  up.  Their  daily  food  must  be  plam.  All
spirituous  drinks,  as  wine,  beer,  etc.  and  also  coffee,  mu.st
be  carefully  avoide'd.  Their  work  should  never  be  above
thek-  strength,  but  always  suitable  to  their  abilities.

Eruptions.

Under  this  head  I  class  all  those  innumerable  and
undefinable  impurities  of  the  skin  that  often  come  and
go  the  same  day  or  the  same  night.  Little  importance  is
generally  attached  to  them,  nevertheless,  they  become
sometimes  very  troublesome  and  torment  the  chest,  back,
arms,  legs,  or  other  parts  of  the  body.  For  years  this
burden  may  be  borne  without  causing  any  particular  illness
or  even  any  particular  trouble.  Yet,  I  know  persons  who
were  afflicted  with  attacks  of  insanity  every  time,  when
the  eruptions  disappeared,  and  I  remember  2  cases  where
raving  madness  set  in,  in  consequence  of  .suppressed  erup-
tions Applications  such  as  indicated  for  tetters  and  ulcers
enticed  the  eruptions  out  again,  whereby  those  mental
disturbances  were  immediately  removed.  Ihese  trifles  are
indeed  not  to  be  trifled  with.  They  may  have  senous
consequences,  when  neglected  especially  m  matters  ot


Eruptions.


269


cleanliness.  Besides  mental  disturbances,  consumption,  liver
and  kidney  complaints  may  ensue;  for  these  destroying
fellows  will  do  their  devastating  work  wherever  they

take  root.  ■. u  i

Every  one  tormented  in  this  manner  should,  as  long
as  he  feels  none  of  the  above  mentioned  consequences,
make  use  of  a  few  easy  water-applications,  such  as  the
whole-ablution,  the  Spanish  mantle  and  the  short  ban-
dage. It  would  prove  sufficient  if  one  application  were
taken  every  third  day.  There  is  no  reason  for  fear  if  the
eruption  seems  to  increase  after  one  or  the  other  of  these
applications.  This  is  an  excellent  proof  of  their  effect
and  ought  to  encourage  their  continuation.

Who  follows  this  advice  will  surely  see  that  the  result
of  the  whole  cure  will  be  as  good  as  that  of  every  single
apphcation.  Every  impartial  person  may  judge  for  himself
whether  it  be  better  to  use  for  such  cures  those  horrid
and  abominable  ointments  called  beauty-milk,  wonder-
balsam  etc.,  or  the  pure,  clear  water.  What  stuff  may
they  contain,  those  ointments  now-a-days  advertised  in
every  newspaper?  Many  a  gentleman  and  many  a  lady
would  blush  with  shame  if  it  were  known  to  their  noble
relations  and  acquaintances  that  they,  too,  were  found
among  the  quackers.  But  such  considerations,  I  know,
are  of  no  avail.  The  world  has  ointed,  and  the  world  is
ointing.  Ilundus  vult  decipi  i.  e.  the  world  will  continue
ointing  and  smearing. Haheat  sihi!

A  farmer  relates  :  "For  more  than  2  years  I  have
an  eruption  on  my  face  and  on  my  whole  body.  Some-
times there  is  not  much  of  it  to  be  seen,  sometimes  more.

1  am  otherwise  healthy;  but  if  this  eruption  grows  in
extension,  as  it  seems  to  do,  I  don't  know  what  fate
will  befall  me.  I  have  used  many  and  various  remedies,
but  all  in  vain."

Applications :  Weekly  2  warm  oat-straw-baths  wdth

2  changes,  every  time  15  minutes  in  the  warm  bath  and
one  minute  in  the  cold  bath  or  vigorous  whole-ablution.

2)  3  times  a  week,  whole-ablution,  with  cold  water  either
from  bed  during  the  night,  or  in  the  morning  when  rising.


270


Part  III.  Diseases.


the  apotheca.  This  to  be  continued  for  3  to  4  weeks,
after  which  time  a  whole-abhition  or  a  half-bath  should
be  taken  once  or  twice  a  week.

Erysipelas.

"My  husband  is  getting  erysipelas ;  his  face  is  swollen
and  as  red  as  fire ;  he  has  violent  fever ;  the  red  colour
spreads  over  the  whole  face ;  there  are  blisters  in  many
places,  and  he  is  screaming  with  pain"  —  these  were  the
complaints  of  a  wife.  I  ordered  a  shawl  to  be  dipped  in
warm  water  and  put  on  the  patient  for  |  hour ;  then  the  cloth
should  be  re-dipped  in  fresh  water  and  put  on  again,  the
same  should  be  done  a  third  and  fourth  time.  3  to  4
liours  after,  a  fourfold  cloth  .should  be  dipped  in  fresh
water,  wrung  out  well  and  laid  on  the  abdomen  for  3
hours;  the  cloth  should  be  renewed  (re-dipped  in  fresh
water)  every  hour.  Three  hours  after  the  removal  of  the
compress,  the  patient  is  laid  for  an  hour  on  a  cloth  which
has  been  dipped  in  cold  water,  wrung  out  and  folded
several  times.  These  3  appUcations  can  be  thus  alternately
renewed  until  the  heat  is  cooled  and  the  injurious  matters
led  out  of  the  body.  To  the  suffering  parts  of  the  face
nothing  is  applied  except  washings  with  lukewarm  water
from  time  to  time,  when  the  extension  of  the  skin  is  too
painful.  If  the  patient  is  very  thirsty,  water  or  sugar-
water  is  always  the  best  drinlc,  but  it  should  be  given
in  small  partions.  Another  course  of  water  -  applications
for  the  cure  of  erysipelas  is  the  following:

Twice  daily  the  shawl  should  be  put  on  the  patient
for  3  hours  (re-dipped  every  hour);  during  the  rest  of
the  day  back,  chest,  and  abdomen  or,  which  is  better,  the
whole  body  should  be  washed  with  water  and  vinegar,
every  ^  hour;  the  duration  of  this  washing  must  not
exceed  1  minute.  Wlien  the  fever  begins  to  decrease,  it
will  be  sufficient  to  undertake  an  ablution  every  2  or  3
hours,  later  on  once  a  day.  In  the  beginning  warm  water
mixed  with  vinegar  is  to  be  used,  later  on  fresh  water
only.  The  sweUing  on  the  face  may  only  be  washed  from
time  to  time  and  with  lukewarm  water.  —  By  these  two
courses  of  applications  many  have  been  completely  cured
from  erysipelas.


EßYSIPEI-AS.


271


Josephine,  22  years  old,  healthy  and  strong,  is  seized
with  violent  fever.  Her  exterior  is  full  of  heat,  interiorly
she  feels  chilly  and  cold;  she  suffers  from  great,  thirst
and  has  no  appetite.  As  often  as  the  heat  was  great,  her
whole  body  was  washed  in  the  beginning  with  warm  water,
then  with  cold  water;  this  was  done  for  3  whole  days.
Then  the  cold  gave  way,  the  whole  head  was  swollen,
and  the  erysipelas  appeared  in  an  unusually  high  degree ;
the  face  showed  large  blisters,  and  the  mouth  was  greatly
swollen.  For  4  days  the  ablutions  were  applied  from  6
to  10  times  a  day;  also  the  shawl  was  put  on  twice  a
day;  twice  warm,  then  cold.  After  3  days,  Josephine
began  to  perspire  profusely  and  continued  so  for  2  days;
then  she  was  cured.  The  ablution  was  taken  twice  a  day
during  the  time  of  perspiration.  The  perspiration  came
by  itself,  and  the  ablutions  promoted  it  a  great  deal.  The
whole  cure  lasted  8  days ;  the  patient  took  no  medicine
whatever.  To  the  head  nothing  was  applied;  only  during
the  last  3  days  the  face  was  washed  with  lukewarm  water,
twice  a  day.

Erysipelas  is  caused  by  a  poisonous  matter  which
gathers  between  skin  and  flesh  and  seeks  to  escape  through
the  former.  Feet,  arms,  head,  any  part  of  the  body  may
be  affected  by  it.  Wherever  it  appears,  the  skin  is  ex-
tended as  if  ready  to  burst.  Sometimes  erysipelas  causes
great  pain  before  it  appears  on  the  surface  of  the  body.
At  its  breaking  out  little  blisters  containing  a  brown  fluid
form  in  great  numbers ;  they  are  so  poisonous  that  whole
portions  of  the  skin  are  destroyed  by  them.  Erysipelas
may  be  dangerous  and  even  cause  death,  and  this  is  ge-
nerally the  case  when  instead  of  appearing  on  the  out-
side of  the  body,  it  poisons  the  blood,  the  flow  of  which
is  especially  attracted  by  the  inflamed  part.  It  often
happens,  too,  that  erysipelas  although  developed  on  the
outside,  leaves  its  original  place  and  seeks  another  in
the  interior. These  cases  mostly  end  fatally.

I  kn  ew  a  man-servant  who  had  erysipelas  on  the
arm.  He  attached  no  importance  to  the  complaint,  calling
it  a  woman's  disease.  The  erysipelas  disappeared,  but  took
post  in  the  brain  and  the  patient  died  soon  after.


272


Part  III.  Diseases.


I  also  know  a  priest  who  had  erysipelas  on  a  foot.
What  remedies  he  applied,  I  do  not  know.  The  erysipelas
disappeared,  and  the  patient  thought  himself  liberated  from
his  enemy.  But  before  long  the  unpleasant  guest  reappear-
ed, this  time  on  the  upper  arm.  Again  it  sought  another
place  and  attacked  the  head.  Within  4  days  the  priest  died.

Every  one  who  has  carefully  observed  cases  of  this
illness,  will  be  able  to  tell  of  many  a  case  where  neglect
of  it  was  revenged  by  an  early  death.

In  the  cure  of  erysipelas,  the  first  care  must  be  to
prevent  its  wandering  from  one  place  to  the  other.  On
the  spot  where  it  first  appears,  its  spreading  ought  to
be  hindered,  and  the  poisonous  matter  led  off.  Also  the
afflux  of  blood  to  the  affected  part  should  be  prevented
by  all  means.

Whoever  has  erysipelas  on  the  foot  .should  take  a
short  bandage.  This  will  extract  those  matters  which
would  otherwise  increase  the  inflammation.  After  the  short
bandage,  the  leg  upward.s  of  the  affected  part  may  be
likewise  bandaged.  Erysipelas  can  also  be  worked  upon,
on  the  spot.  This  is  done  by  putting  on  the  fiery  place
a  soft,  worn  out,  linen  cloth  which  has  been  dipped  in
warm  water.  The  wet  cloth  must  be  covered  with  a  dry
woollen  one.  This  compress  will  dissolve  and  lead  off  the
poisonous  matter.

If  somebody  gets  erysipelas  on  the  arm,  he  may,  as
in  the  previous  case,  prevent  its  spreading  by  the  appli-
cation of  a  short  bandage.  Then  he  should  put  on  the
shawl  which  ought  to  be  renewed  in  proportion  to  the
'  heat.  Here  also  the  affected  part  may  be  brought  under
immediate  treatment.

If  erysipelas  affects  the  head,  covering  with  wet  sheets
will  lead  the  poisonous  matter  downwards  and  a  neck-
bandage  will  soon  diminish  it.  When  these  applications
have  been  made  use  of,  the  affected  part  itself  may  be
treated  first  with  warm  water,  until  the  greater  part  ot
the  unhealthy  matter  has  been  led  off  (which  is  knowi  by
a  decrease  of  the  swelling  and  redness);  then  with  cold
water.  These  applications  consist  in  linen-compresses  or


Eyes,  cataract  of  the.


273


bandages ;  if  the  head  is  the  suffering  part,  the  head-
bandage  is  apphed.

Eyes,  cataract  of  the.

An  official  brought  to  me  a  boy  of  9  years  who  had
diseased  eyes.  Both  pupils  were  so  badly  affected  that
th«  poor  "boy  could  hardly  walk  alone.  "How  do  you
come  to  me?"  "My  child,"  the  father  rephed,  "has  bsen
in  a  medical  establishment  for  diseases  of  the  eyes,  but
he  was  dismissed  and  declared  to  suffer  from  incurable
cataract.  That  is  dreadful:  to  be  blind  at  the  age  of
nine!"  The  one  eye  was  already  so  dull  that  the  pupil
could  scarcely  be  distinguished;  it  was  utter  daikness
for  the  little  one.  On  the  other  eye,  there  lay  a  cloud
which  covered  all  but  a  narrow  strip  of  the  once  so  light-
some eye.

At  the  first  sight  of  the  boy,  I  had  noticed  that  not  his
eyes  only  were  suffering.  The  whole  of  his  little  organism
was  weakened,  so  miserably  enfeebled  that  whosoever  saw
him  could  but  think  :  that  child  is  ill  through  and  through
and,  as  it  seems,  declining  fast.  There  was  no  appetite,
no  life,  the  body  emaciated,  the  skin  dry  and  scurfy.  Let
us  first  seek  to  cure  the  body,  perhaps  the  eyes  will,
then,  cure  themselves.

We  began  after  having  first  removed  the  spectacles
hitherto  worn  by  the  little  sufferer.  The  boy  walked  as
much  as  possible  barefoot  in  wet  grass  or  on  wet  stones ;
back,  chest,  and  abdomen  were  vigorously  wa.shed  once
or  twice  daily.  After  some  time  the  ablutions  were  re-
placed by  half-baths,  then  by  whole-baths,  never  for  more
than  1  minute's  duration.  Whilst  the  course  of  these
applications  was  going  on,  he  also  had  from  time  to  time
a  bandage  or  a  wet  shirt  dipped  in  salt  water  and  applied
for  1^  hours.  All  these  applications  aimed  at  infusing
new  life,  new  activity  into  the  body,  i.  e.  to  cure  and
strengthen  it.

As  special  remedies  for  the  eyes,  i.  e.  for  their  clean.s-
mg  and  strengthening,  I  employed  several  eye-waters.  First
I  used  aloe  water  (a  saltspoonful  of  aloe  powder  boiled
for  a  few  minutes  in  ^  pint  of  water); with  this  the

Kneipp,  Water-Cure.  ia


274  Part  III.  Diseases.

eyes  were  well  washed,  3  to  5  times  daily.  Aloe  dissolves,
cleanses  and  heals.  Later  on  1  used  alum-water  (2  salt-
spoonfuls  of  alum  mixed  with  |  pint  of  water);  with  this
the  eyes  were  vigorously  washed,  3  or  4  times  daily.  Alum
is  corrosive  and  cleansing.  Later  still  I  took  honey-eye-
water (half  a  spoonful  of  honey  boiled  for  5  minutes  in
J  pint  of  water)  to  wash  the  eye  3-  to  5  times  daily.
The  boy  began  to  thrive  so  well  that  his  strength  incneased
from  week  to  week ;  his  appearance  became  fresher  and  heal-
thier, and  in  the  blooming  face  shone  the  bright  eyes  to
the  immense  joy  of  his  parents.  His  eyesight  is  as  good
as  that  of  hie  companions  and  nobody  would  believe  that
the  child  had  ever  been  so  wretched.

I  am  firmly  convinced  that  the  impaired  eyesight  was
only  a  consequence  of  the  more  impaired  body.  It  is  but
natural  that  there  should  be  diseased  eyes  where  the  whole
organism  is  diseased.  A  decaying  tree  bears  bhghted
leaves,  but  when  the  tree  again  is  able  to  put  fortli
fresh  sprouts,  it  will  soon  be  adorned  by  new  leaves  and
blossoms.

Eyes,  catarrh  of  the.

A  celebrated  military  physician  said  to  me  about  30
years  ago :  Catarrh  is  a  disease  from  which  every  possible
malady  may  spring,  as  mucous  fever, ,  nervous  fever  ty-
phus, dysentery,  consumption,  etc.  It  is,  therefore,  ot  the
greatest  miportance  to  be  armed  against  catarrh,  and  this
should  be  done  by  reasonable  hardening  of  the  body.  He
who  has  a  catarrh  ought  not  to  rest  untd  it  is  perfect-
ly cured.  ■  c  l

If  total  blindness  is  one  of  the  greatest  mistortunes
that  can  befall  man,  the  various  complaints  of  the  eyes,
which  are  so  often  its  forerunners,  are  certamly  well  worthy
of  notice.  We  have  only  two  eyes.  What  an  irreparable
lo.ss  is  it  therefore,  if  only  one  of  them  refuses  it^s  service :
Be  careful,  and  guard  both  of  them  well!  There  are
sufferers  from  complaints  of  the  eyes  of  every  age,  but
little  children,  and  especially  schoolchddren,  are  most
frequently  troubled  by  them.  „ , ,  .,„-„f

^  The  source  of  the  complaint  is  mostly  to  be  sought
in  the  body.  A  healthy  body  throws  off  superfluous  fluids  by


Eves,  cataärh  of  the.


275


means  of  perspiration,  respiration  and  in  other  ways.
Marvellous  is  the  working  of  this  most  wonderful  of
macliines.  A  different  process  takes  place  in  the  diseased
body.  The  fluids  which  are  not  secreted  by  the  enfeebled
organism  collect  in  the  body,  in  the  head,  or  elsewhere.
If  they  gather  in  the  head,  they  generally  choose  the  eyes
for  their  outlet.  The  secreting  fluids  are  corrosive,  the
ej'^es,  however,  and  all  parts  of  them  extremely  delicate.
This  accounts  for  the  violent  burning  regularly  caused  by
the  secretion  of  the  fluid.  This  burning  is  also  a  sign
that  the  eye  and  its  parts  are  affected  by  this  acrid
secretion.  Whenever  this  fluid  finds  no  issue,  the  eyes
become  inflamed,  they  often  become  red,  and  the  weakened
eye  can  no  longer  bear  the  light.  Cure  is  impossible
unless  the  fluid  is  secreted  as  soon  as  possible.  The  eye
and  its  parts  are  healthy  in  themselves ,  the  corrosive
matter  alone  causes  its  disease.

There  are  some  persons  suffering  from  diseased  eyes
who  can  scarcely  see  at  all,  or  they  see  everything  through
a  veil  or  a  mist,  as  it  were.  Others  have  an  impression
as  if  flies  or  gnats  were  flying  about  before  their  eyes ;
others  again  see  fiery  bunches  and  other  things.  All
these  evils  flow  from  the  same  source,  they  are  all  blossoms
of  the  same  poisonous  plant;  they  all  originate  in  tiie
same  poisonous  matter.  Remove  this ,  strengthen  the
affected  eye,  and  it  will  be  cured.  An  example  will  ex-
plain this.

Little  Antonia,  5  years  old,  looks  very  pale.  Her
face  is  puffed  up,  her  whole  appearance  unhealthy,  her
eyes  inflamed,  and  .she  can  no  longer  bear  the  light.  She
also  suffers  from  want  of  appetite  and  sleeplessness,  and
cries  a  great  deal.  What  is  to  be  done?  Every  day  tlie  child
should  be  bandaged  from  the  arm -pits  downwards,  the
bandage  being  previously  dipped  in  lukewarm  water  in
which  oat-straw  has  been  boiled.  Should  the  bandage
be  applied  at  a  time  when  the  child  usually  sleeps,  she
will  soon  fall  asleep.  If  she  does  so,  let  her  rest  until
she  awakes ;  if  she  does  not  go  to  sleep  or  awakes  soon,
she  should  remain  in  the  bandage  for  an  hour.  This
process  is  to  be  repeated  daily  for  a  week.  In  the  second

18*


276  Part  III.  Diseases.


week  a  warm  oat-straw-bath  (24  to  20°)  should  be  pre-
pared in  which  the  child  must  remain  for  15  to  20  mi-
nutes. In  the  last  minute  the  contents  of  a  small  wate-
ring-can of  not  too  cold  water  should  be  poured  over
the  child,  and  then  she  should  be  dressed  immediately.
This  refreshing  shower  is  of  the  greatest  importance  after
a  warm  bath  for  all  children.  The  warm  bath  dissolves
and  leads  off  unhealthy  matters;  the  cold  shower  closes
the  pores  and  strengthens.  The  first  time  the  child  will
cry  and  lament,  as  children  use  to  do,  but  as  soon  as  it
has  gone  through  the  process  a  few  times,  it  will,  en-
couraged by  its  mother,  gladly  enter  the  bath.  This
bath  is  to  be  repeated  every  second  or  third  day.  The
child  will  soon  feel  fresher,  stronger,  healthier;  the  eye,
too,  will  become  clearer.  Should  the  careful  mother  \yish
a  remedy  more  directly  for  the  eye,  she  may  take  a  piece
of  alum  as  big  as  4  barleycorns,  dissolve  it  in  i  pint  of
water  and  wash  the  eyes  of  the  child  3  to  4  times  daily
with  it.  After  the  removal  of  the  evil,  the  mother  should
not  neglect  to  wash  the  child  once  a  week  in  the  afore-
said manner  and  to  give  it  a  bath,  l&ewise  once  a  week.

If  the  little  patient  is  not  5  years  but  only  5  weeks
old,  the  careful  mother  must  not  be  frightened  if  I  re-
commend the  same  bandage  and  the  same  bath  also  for

this  very  little  one.

Little  Anthony,  4  years  old,  is  scrofulous,  has  erup-
tions on  the  head  and  about  the  mouth,  his  eyes  are  in-
flamed. His  mother  always  thought  the  child  would  die;
he  suffers,  but  dies  not.  The  little  one  should  have  put
on  a  shirt  dipped  in  salt  water;  then  the  mother  should
take  him  to  bed  and  envelop  him  in  a  blanket,  it  she
does  this  every  day  in  the  first  week,  every  second  day
in  the  second  week,  every  third  day  m  the  third  week
and  once  in  the  fourth  week,  and  if  she  gives  little  An-
thony a  saltspoonful  of  powdered  chalk  m  his  food  or
drink,  the  hoy  will  get  well,  and  the  mother  will  rejoice
in  the  health  of  her  child.  i  .

Bertha  goes  to  school  but  looks  very  poorly ,  she
has  almost  every  week  "bad  eyes,"  wherefore  she  cannot
read Th eses  are  quite  red  and  cause  violent  burnmg.


Eyes,  catarrh  of  the.


277


The  child  shouhl  put  on  a  wet  chemise  6  times  within
10  days,  and  if  this  application  is  not  sufficient  in  its
effects,  the  mother  should  prepare  baths  of  about  24"  R.
mixed  with  a  decoction  of  pine-twigs.  The  warm  bath
should  always  be  concluded  by  a  cold  shower.  As  eye-
water she  may  use  aloe-water  (a  saltspoonful  of  aloe  put
in  a  glass  and  poured  over  with  hot  water)  with  which
the  eyes  are  washed  3  times  a  day.  The  latter  remedy
heals  the  inflamed  eye  and  strengthens  it.

William,  a  boy  of  9  years  of  age,  had  diseased  eyes.
He  could  no  longer  read  and  scarcely  distinguish  persons,
the  poor  little  one  was  more  than  half  blind.  His  parents
had  spent  about  L  20  for  the  cure  of  these  eyes  but
without  result.  The  whole  body  of  the  child  was  just  as
impaired  as  the  eyes.  His  hands  and  feet  were  always
cold,  his  stomach  without  appetite,  his  body  emaciated,
his  stature  drooping  and  depressed.  Wretched  are  not  only
the  eyes,  wretched  is  the  whole  little  man.  Blue  spectacles
and  the  leader  were  openly  confirming  my  statement.

In  4  months  William  was  restored  to  perfect  health
of  body  and  eyes.  The  little  one  had  to  take  2  warm
baths  weekly.  4  times  weekly  I  had  a  shirt  dipped  in
cold  salt  water  and  put  on  him.  He  remained  in  it  for
1  to  1^  hours.  Moreover  I  let  the  boy  walk  barefoot
in  wet  grass  or  when  it  was  raining.  After  the  first  4
weeks  William  took  3  to  4  baths  of  15"  R.  every  week;
the  baths  were  of  only  1  minute's  duration  and  always
followed  by  exercise.  They,  were  continued  for  several
weeks.  The  boy  also  washed  his  eyes  twice  daily  with
alum-water  (a  saltspoonful  of  alum  in  \  pint  of  water).
As  the  body  revived  and  recovered  his  health,  the  eyes,
too,  became  better.  At  last  they  shone  in  the  blooming
face  of  the  boy  as  if  they  had  never  suffered  from  the
least  disease.

Christina,  24  years  old,  has  a  fresh  and  healthy
appearance  but  is  always  afflicted  with  complaint  of  the
eyes.  She  has  too  much  blood  in  the  head,  too  little  in
the  feet,  and  therefore  always  cold  feet.

Christina  takes  every  second  day  a  lukewarm  foot-
bath with  ashes  and  salt. This  draws  the  blood  from


278


Part  III.  Diseases.


the  head  downwards.  3  times  a  week  she  takes  a  half-
batli  (I  minute)  reaching  to  the  armpits.  Slie  is  mucli  bare-
foot when  working.  The  determination  of  the  blood  to
the  head  is  diminished,  ceases  gradually,  and  the  disease
of  the  eyes  disappears.

Agatha  comes  and  complains :  "For  3  years  I  have
been  tormented  with  violent  headache  so  that  I  often
could  not  sleep  for  whole  nights.  My  feet  are  constantly
cold ;  when  the  headache  gives  way  a  little ,  I  feel  such
a  pain  in  the  back  that  1  am  quite  stiff.  I  have  con-
sulted many  physicians  but  none  could  help.  For  the
last  half  year  my  sight  has  become  so  weak  that  I  can
scarcely  see  the  houses.  If  it  goes  on  like  that,  I  shall
soon  be  blind."

Agatha  made  use  of  the  following  applications :

1.  Twice  weekly  she  put  on  a  wet  chemise  dipped  in  salt
water,  enfolded  herself  in  a  blanlcet  and  remained  so
for  I2  hours.

2.  Twice  a  week  she  took  a  short  bandage  which  hid
been  dipped  in  a  decoction  of  hay-flowers  (warm)  for
1^  hours.

3.  Daily  she  had  a  knee -gash  for  1  minute  followed
by  exercise.  These  applications  were  continued  for  2
weeks.

In  the  thu'd  week  she  took  daily  in  the  mornmg  an
upper-shower  and  a  knee-gush,  in  the  afternoon  a  half-
bath,  she  also  walked  in  water  for  3  minutes  daily ;  she
continued  in  the  same  manner  during  the  fourth  week.
After  the  fourth  week  the  determination  of  the  blood  to
the  head  disappeared,  her  sight  was  restored  because  the
cause  of  the  complaint  was  removed ;  her  feet  were  warm,
in  a  word,  the  patient  was  cured.

As  further  applications  Agatha  took  3  half -baths
weekly  to  brace  the  whole  system.

Fever.

Anthony  comes  into  the  room  and  relates:  "I  had
to  make  such  an  effort  to  mount  the  stairs.  My  strength
is  entii-ely  broken;  I  have  fallen  down  twice.  I  have
also  a  fearful  headache,  I  am  sometimes  as  cold  as  ice


Giddiness.


279


and  then  very  hot  again.  Sometnnes  I  feel  a  piercing
pain  as  if  lightning  was  darting  about  in  my  body^  1
have  noticed  it  for  some  time;  but  it  is  now  5  or  6  days
since  I  feel  worse  and  utterly  unable  to  work.  _

Application :  Go  home,  Anthony,  and  he  down  in  bed
at  once;  as  soon  as  you  are  quite  warm,  wash  your  whole
body  with  cold  water  and,  without  drying  it,  go  to  bed
attain.  In  the  same  manner  wash  every  2  hours,  and
wdien  you  begin  to  perspire  profusely  and  have  done  so
for  i  hour,  wash  again.  , t  r  i

Anthony  comes  on  the  third  day  and  reports :  1  teel
much  easier,  I  have  perspired  profusely  several  times.  The
sensation  of  cold  and  heat  has  disappeared,  the  headache,
too,  has  ceased.  Appetite  is  coming  back  again  ;  I  feel
well,  but  tired.  Anthony  took  about  10  whole-ablutions
during  a  fortnight,  and  then  he  enjoyed  perfect  health.
He  is  about  40  years  old.

Giddiness.

A  priest,  in  his  best  years,  felt  a  continual  decrease
of  strength,  especially  in  his  legs.  Only  with  the  greatest
effort  he  could  walk  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  even
such  a  walk  caused  him  a  feeling  as  if  his  leg-,  were
broken.  Moreover  he  suffered  so  much  from  giddiness
that  he  could  not  stand  for  any  length  of  time  without
leaning  on  some  firm  object.  If  he  wanted  to  turn  at
the  altar,  he  was  always  obliged  to  hold  himself  by  it.
Whenever  the  sensation  of'  giddiness  decreased,  he  felt
great  pressure  on  the  chest  and  an  anxiety  as  if  he  was
about  to  be  stricken  by  apoplexy.

The  patient  used  much  mineral  water  and  medica-
ments, but  without  any  result.  His  appearance  was  very
good,  his  appetite  also,  but  he  did  not  sleep  well.

Result :  For  3  weeks  he  walked  daily  much  barefoot
(in  grass,  on  wet  stones,  and  in  water  up  to  the  knees) ;
he  had  in  the  beginning  daily  two  upper  showers  and  a
knee-shower,  later  on  half-baths,  and  baths  taken  when
in  perspiration.  At  the  conclusion  of  his  course  he  made
an  attempt  to  walk  12  miles  in  one  day  which  he  did


280


Part  III.  Diseases.


without  fatigue.  He  now  felt  quite  well  and  disposed  to
cheerfully  fulfil  the  duties  of  his  vocation.

A  gentleman,  74  years  old,  relates :  "I  suifer  a  great
deal  from  dizziness,  and  I  .som-'times  feel  great  pressure
on  my  head;  my  feet  are  often  cold,  and  whenever  my
head  is  free  from  suffering,  I  experience  great  discomfort
in  the  abdomen.

Unless  remedies  are  applied,  no  evacuation  of  the
bowels  takes  place.  The  book  "The  Water-cure"  has
induced  me  to  ask  if  at  my  age  water-applications  could
be  used  with  success.  If  not,  I  am  resigned  to  my  fate,
but  if  water  can  still  be  applied,  I  shall  go  into  the  cold
element  like  the  youngest."

In  3  weeks  the  old  gentleman  was  so  well  that  lio
repented  of  having  given  up  his  office  to  another.

The  applications  were  as  follows :  1***  day :  To  wash
the  ixpper  body  in  the  morning  with  water  aud  vinegar
and  afterwards  take  a  Icnee-shower ;  in  the  evening  a
warm  foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt ,  for  14  minutes.
2"^*^  day :  In  the  morning  upper  shower  with  one  can,  im-
mediately after  walking  on  wet  stones  (for  5  minutes);
in  the  afternoon  :  a  cold  sitting-bath  for  1  minute.  3'''^  day  :
In  the  morning,  to  walk  in  water,  for  2  minutes,  directly
after  to  hold  the  arms  in  water.  In  the  afternoon  an
upper  shower,  towards  evening  a  sitting-bath,  4*''  day:
In  the  morning  walk  in  water  up  to  the  knee,  for  3  mi-
nutes ;  immediately  after  to  hold  the  arms  in  water,  for
2  minutes;  in  the  afternoon  a  shower  for  the  back.
5*^  day :  In  the  morning  a  shower  for  the  back ,  in  the
afternoon  a  half-bath,  for  one  minute.  In  this  way  the
latter  stronger  applications  were  continued.  The  giddiness
disappeared  entirely,  the  bowels  became  regular,  the  in-
jurious gases  were  removed,  the  normal  warmth  returned :
thus  the  machine  was  in  order  again.  The  old  gentleman
enjoyed  henceforth  the  freshness  of  youth  and  the  best
of  humours.

People  will  be  surprised  at  the  fact  that  to  this
aged  man  not  more  than  one  warm  applications  was


GiDDlNKSS.


281


much  strength  and  vital  heat ;  else  he  would  have  been
advised  to  take  whole  -  ablutions  from  bed  with  warm
salt-water  or  with  vinegar  and  water  in  order  to  increase
the  vital  heat.  Old  people  prefer  the  cold  water  as  soon
as  the  temperature  of  their  blood  has  been  raised  by
warm  ablations,  and  the  first  trial  has  been  given  to  cold
ones.  They  see  that  the  effect  on  the  vital  heat  is  much
sooner  obtained  by  cold  applications  than  by  warm  ones.

A  priest,  78  years  old,  suffered  so  much  from  giddi-
ness that  he  could  no  longer  look  upwards  nor  was  it
safe  for  him  to  walk  ;  he  was  rather  corpulent.  His  whole
appearance  made  the  impression  that  the  poor  old  gentle-
man was  lacking  sufficient  vital  heat.  Although  it  seemed
as  if  water  could  be  of  no  avail  in  this  case,  his  appea-
rance changed  in  an  astonishing  manner,  he  seemed  to
have  become  young  again ,  the  giddiness  disappeared  as
well  as  his  fear  when  wallcing :  the  aged  gentleman  was
like  a  lamp  which,  having  received  a  fresh  supply  of  oil,
begins  to  burn  anew.

If  a  very  aged  person  reads  this,  he  will  ask,  what
was  done  to  him. Answer :

On  the  first  day  his  whole  body  was  bandaged  from
under  the  arms ,  the  cloth  having  been  dipped  in  hot
water  in  which  hay-flowers  had  been  boiled ;  this  for
1^  hours.  In  the  afternoon  an  ablution  with  vinegar
and  water ,  quite  warm.  On  the  second  day :  in  the
morning  a  foot-vapour,  for  20  minutes,  directly  hereafter
a  quick  shower  of  fresh  water;  in  the  afternoon  a  whole-
ablution  as  on  the  first  day.  On  the  third  day :  a  head-
vapour  (20  minutes)  with  following  upper  -  shower.  On
the  fourth  day :  in  the  morning  a  cold  upper-shower  fol-
lowed by  a  knee-shower ;  in  the  afternoon  a  wet  .shirt,
for  1|  hours.  On  the  fifth  day:  in  the  morning  a  warm
foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt;  in  the  afternoon,  upper-
shower  and  knee-shower.  Henceforth  only  cold  appli-
cations were  used,  viz. :  in  the  morning ,  upper-shower
and  knee-shower ;  two  hours  later,  walking  in  water  and
arm-bath;  in  the  afternoon,  only  upper  shower.  If  these
applications  have  been  continued  for  6  days,  it  will  be
sufficient  to  take  a  whole-ablution  from  bed  once  or  twice


282


Pakt  III.  Diskases.


a  week.  At  home  the  patient  had  only  to  walk  in  water
and  to  take  an  ann-hath  twice  a  week,  and  to  tak»,  a
sitting-bath  once  a  week ;  the  latter  could  also  be  taken
warm.  The  only  interior  remedy  applied  was  tea  from
fennel,  common  yarrow  and  sage.

Gout.

If  you  go  into  the  Allgäu  (district  in  the  sonthern  part
of  Bavaria)  in  autumn,  you  will  see  now  and  then  people
maimring  the  field.  Lately  they  have  invented  a  new  method
which  is  quite  apt  to  rouse  the  indignation  of  any  true
farmer.  They  do  not  distribute  the  food  to  the  hungry  soil  in
an  equal  manner,  as  it  was  formerly  done,  but  with  an  un-
heard-of carelessness  they  give  2  or  3  portions  to  one
clod  and  let  another  fast  the  whole  year  long.  The  whole
work  resembles  the  play  of  the  mole.  There  must  be  in
spring  foul  swamps,  on  which  this  ill-concerted  prodiga-
lity has  produced  a  luxuriance  Avhich  looks  strange  enough
beside,  other  spots  where  stunted  and  crippled  stalks  accuse
the  owner  of,  and  punish  him  for,  the  stepmotherly  treat-
ment which  they  experienced.

This  picture  will  assist  me  m  conveying  a  true  idea
of  what  the  gout  is.

Food  has  to  do  the  same  work  in  the  human  body
that  manure  does  in  the  field.  Is  there  anything  like
equality  with  regard  to  quantity  and  quality  of  food  m
the  various  stations  of  life?  Do  not  many  enjoy  super-
abundance while  numberless  others  have  365  days  of
fasting  every  year?

Wliat  must  be  the  inevitable  consequence  if  a  person
supplies  his  field  (his  body)  with  so  much  food  that  poor
nature  cannot  master  it?  The  bones  want  si^lphur  and
lime  for  their  structure.  What  must  arrive  if  the  body
by  means  of  very  nourishing  and  strengthening  food  is
supplied  with  so  much  building-up  material  as  would
suffice  for  the  comtruction  of  2  or  3  new  bodies?  What
must  arrive?  Swamps  (thick  blood)  wil  form  in  one
place,  bogs  (bad  juices)  in  another,  and  the  bones  will
be  encumbered  by  heaps  of  sand,  lime,  and  stones.


Gout.


283


The  ankles  swell,  become  inflamed  and  cause  last-
ing and  dreadful  pain  until  these  cartilaginous  knots  are
burnt,  as  it  were,  by  the  pain  itself  or  by  other  means.
And  in  spite  of  so  much  suffering  the  poor  corpnicmt
podagric  is  scarcely  pitied  by  any  one.  That  is  not  be-
coming a  christian,  yet  it  sometimes  appears  to  be  very
natural.  People  say  :  he  has  had  the  enjoyment,  let  him  now
also  bear  the  consequences  of  it.  Poor  people,  however,  are
also  sometunes  afflicted  with  gout ;  even  the  poorest  are
visited  by  it.  Once  a- poor,  but  very  dihgent,  domestic  pre-
sented himself  to  me;  he  suffrtred  from  gout  in  its  highe.st
degree.  The  reason  was  that  he  had  entirely  neglected
the  care  of  his  health  from  too  great  zeal  for  his  service.
Broken  bellows  do  not  work  the  air  into  the  pipes  of  the
organ  but  out  of  the  holes.  Weakened,  unhealthy  organs
often  work  on  tumours  instead  of  the  sound  flesh,  on  the
kernel  instead  of  the  bone.

Gout  may  also  be  caused  by  over-exertion,  dampness
and  cold.  Gout  in  a  high  degree  torments  many,  gout
in  a  lesser  degree  torments  numberless  persons.  With,
some  it  has  its  seat  in  the  toes,  with  others  in  the  head,
with  some  in  the  extremities,  with  others  again  in  interior
parts  of  the  body.

People  who  are  simple  and  not  too  much  weakened,,
who  obey  cheerfnlly  and  do  not  shrink  from  every  little
pain  I  cure  willingly  and  mostly  very  easily.  With  regard
to  podagrics  of  the  nobler  kind ,  I  never  give  way  tO'
delusions.  They  are  a  cross  for  me  and,  as  a  rule,  not
to  be  cured  by  water ;  for  they  do  not  obey  because  they
are  bent  under  the  double  yoke  of  effeminacy  and  dread
of  water,  else  they  would  be  curable  as  well  as  all  others-
afflicted  with  gout.

A  gentleman  of  high  rank  had  suffered  from  violent
pain  in  his  feet  for  about  4  weeks.  His  acquaintances
called  hhn  jokingly  a  new  member  of  the  confraternity
of  podagrics.  Sweating  cured  him  for  this  time.  But
the  following  year  the  complaint  returned,  and  he  had  to
keep  his  bed  for  12  weeks.  There  was  much  burning
and  as  much  sweatmg;  but  this  Avater  alone  did  not  cure
him  a  second  time. He  consulted  me  and  declared  that


284


Paiit  III.  Diseases.


he  was  ready  to  do  everything,  if  only  that  fearful  disease
did  not  return.  In  a  few  weeks  the  principal  part  of  the
cure  was  over.  The  swellings  disappeared  under  the
various  water-applications  and  latiu-  on  the  patient  repeated
one  or  the  other  practice  from  time  to  time.  The  com-
plaint has  not  troubled  him  for  some  years  since.  The
reader  may  learn  the  applications  from  the  following  case.

A  priest  sent  me  a  message,  letting  me  know  that
his  feet  were  burning  as  if  containing  real  fire  and  that
his  condition  drove  him  almost  to  despair.  1  advised
him  to  hare  hay-flowers  boiled,  squeezed  out  of  the  hot
water  and  put  on  a  linen  cloth ;  into  these  hot  hay-
fiowers  he  should  lay  his  feet  and  tie  the  warm  hay-
flower  -  bandage  round  his  feet.  After  2  hours  the  hay-
flowers  were  to  be  re-dipped  in  the  infusion,  squeezed
and  put  on  again.  It  is  of  no  importance  whether  the
hay-flowers  are  cold  or  warm  for  this  renewed  application.
The  sick  priest  continued  thus  for  some  days.  After
the  first  few  hours  the  chief  pain  already  ceased  and  in
2  or  3  days  the  patient  was  completely  free  from  pain.

If  hay-flowers  cannot  be  had,  oat-straw  may  be  used
in  the  same  way  instead.  This  grass  is  also  of  excellent
effect  in  such  complaints.

I  beg  to  call  the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  fact
that  in  the  cure  of  gout  I  seek  to  effect  the  cure  especially
by  warming  or  rather  dissolving.

I  must  in  this  place  caution  against  a  delusion.  As
soon  as  persons  afflicted  with  gout  feel  no  longer  any
pain,  they  believe  to  be  perfectly  cured.  It  would  be  a
great  mistake  to  discontinue  the  water  -  applications  as
soon  as  the  pain  has  ceased.  The  foot-bandages  must
be  followed  by  at  least  some  applications  m  order  to
remove  from  it  all  unhealthy  matter.  The  Spanish  mantle
put  on  twice  or  3  times  a  week  wül  render  excellent
service  for  the  first  3  weeks.  For  the  month  following
some  warm  baths  with  decoction  of  hay-flowers  or  oat-
straw  (changing  3  times)  are  recommended.

A  workman  was  seriously  afflicted  with  gout.  He
went  3  times  a  week  into  the  sack  which  had  been


Gout.


28b


clipped  in  a  hot  decoction  of  oat-straw ;  moreover  he  took
every  week  2  baths  with  a  decoction  of  pine -twigs  (35
to  Sö"  R.)  changing  3  times  and  2  cohl  whole-ablutions
from  bed.  After  3  weeks  he  was  pretty  well  cured;  he
continued,  however,  for  some  time  to  make  use  of  the
sack  twice  m  one  week  and  of  the  warm  bath  once  in
another  week.  He  was  soon  able  to  take  up  his  work
with  renewed  strength  and  has  attended  to  it  ever  since.

A  well-sinker  showed  me  the  swellings  on  his  fingers
and  his  toes  which,  so  he  said,  were  sometimes  burning
in  an  almost  unbearable  manner  —  the  complaint  had
bjen  brought  on  by  dampness.

Every  other  day  he  took  the  above  mentioned  warm
bath,  every  third  or  fourth  day  he  went  into  the  sack;
these  applications  completely  restored  the  man  in  a  short
time.  During  the  night  his  hands  were  bandaged  with
boiled  hay-flowers.

A  poor  housefather  got  a  piercing  pain  in  the
joints.  He  did  not  know  whether  it  proceeded  from
gout  or  from  another  cause ;  he  only  felt  dreadful  pain
which  rendered  him  unable  to  attend  to  his  business.

It  was  just  the  time  of  haymaking.  I  advised  him
to  go  on  his  haystack,  which  was  then  fermenting,  to
make  a  hole  in  the  hot  hay,  to  lie  hi  this  hot  hay-grave
and  to  cover  himself  with  hay  so  as  to  let  only  the  head
look  out.  He  did  so,  and  after  I  hour  he  was  swim-
ming, as  it  were,  in  perspiration.  The  peasant  ascended
his  haystack  and  descended  into  the  hay-bath  6  times
wifhin  10  days  and  was  completely  cured.

I  should  not  advise  every  one  to  do  this ;  but  only
he  who  has  experienced  it,  knows  the  extraordinary
dissolving  virtue  of  such  a  hay-vapour.  Very  old  and
deeply  rooted  diseases  can  be  led  out  by  such  a  harm-
less vapour.  The  hay-vapour  will  be  most  effective  if  it
is  immediately  followed  by  a  cold  half-bath  with  ablution
of  the  upper  body.  The  latter  application  is  exceedingly
strengthening.

Two  gentlemen  of  high  rank  improved  their  health
so  much  by  ]  5  of  these  hay-vapour-baths  that  it  seemed


286  Part  III.  Disearks.


to  them  incomprehensible  how  by  such  simple  means  anrl
in  so  simple  a  manner  a  recreation  of  the  organism
■could  be  effected.

I  venture  to  say  that  rheumatism  in  its  weaker  forms
and  cramps,  generally  remains  of  severe  diseases,  can  be
cured  by  2  or  4  such  hay-vapour-baths.

You  see,  my  dear  countryman,  what  treasures  your
house  encloses.  It  only  requires  a  trial.  In  summer  when
you  return  home  from  the  field,  throw  a  few  handfuls  of
hay  or  hay-flowers  in  hot  water,  and  let  it  cool.  Such
a  foot-bath  will  draw  every  sensation  of  fatigue  out  of
your  limbs.

And  whenever  you  feel  something  like  burning  or  a
piercing  pain,  be  sensible.  You  give  the  wholesome  herb
every  day  to  your  quadrupeds.  Let  your  own  body,  too,
profit  by  its  salutary  virtue.

An  innkeeper  relates:  "I  have  often  such  racking
pains  in  my  head,  especially  when  the  weather  changes,
that  I  am  unable  to  attend  to  my  business.  Sometimes

1  feel  the  same  pains  also  in  the  back  and  in  the  thighs,
and  when  they  descend  into  the  feet,  I  can  no  longer
walk.  If  I  drink  a  glass  of  beer,  the  pain  makes  itself
felt  in  the  head  directly.  For  months  it  has  been  im-
possible for  me  to  do  any  work,  and  life  itself  has  become
a  heavy  burden  to  me."

The  applications were the  following: 1)  Weekly

2  warm  oat-straw-baths,  30°  R.,  for  'I,  hour  followed  by
vigorous  washing  or  a  short  cold  bath ;  2)  every  day  an
upper  shower  and  a  knee-shower ;  3)  every  week  3  whole-
ablutions,  as  rapid  as  possible,  either  when  perspiring  or
from  bed ;  4)  daily  in  the  morning  and  m  the  evening  a
cup  of  tea  prepared  from  5  or  6  finely  cut  elder-leaves,
boiled  for  5  minutes.  In  4  weeks  this  innkeeper  was  sO
completely  restored  to  health  that  all  his  acquaintances
declared  his  appearance  being  that  of  a  much  younger
man  than  he  really  was.  In  order  to  prevent  the  disease
from  attacking  him  again  he  had  to  take  the  above  men-
tioned whole-bath  every  month  and  the  whole  -  ablution
once  or  twice  a  week.


Hemorrhoids.  (Piles.)


287


A  tradesman  comes  and  relates:  "Both  my  feet  are
greatly  swollen,  quite  stiff,  and  I  am  never  without  pains  ;
sometimes  I  cannot  sleep  for  one  hour  during  the  whole
night ;  especially  in  the  extremeties  I  feel  violent  pain ;
my  arms  are  also  quite  stiff;  I  have  appetite,  but  when-
ever I  take  something,  it  inflates  me  that  I  can  scarcely
breathe;  I  can  hardly  walk  and  especially  when  getting
up  in  the  morning  I  am  so  giddy  that  I  hardly  know
where  I  am.  1  have  been  attended  by  many  physicians,
have  taken  a  great  deal  of  medicine,  but,  in  my  opinion,
my  condition  has  become  worse,  and  1  have  often  wished
for  death."

The  patient  looked  pretty  strong  and  resembled  much
more  a  well-fed  brewer  than  a  tradesman  although  he
only  took  simple  fare  and  did  not  drink  much.  He  is
about  50  years  old.  The  physicians  had  declared  fatty
degeneration  of  the  heart  to  be  the  cause  of  his  sufferings.

In  5  weeks  the  patient  was  freed  from  his  many
complaints  and  enjoyed  perfect  health.  What  was  it  that
cured  him?

His  feet  were  bandaged  in  hay -flowers  for  2  to  3
hours,  first  every  day,  then  every  other  day,  and  later
on  every  third  day.  2)  every  second  day  and  later  on
every  fourth  day,  he  put  on  a  shirt  dipped  in  a  decoction
of  hay-flowers.  When  the  swelling  on  the  feet  had  al-
most entirely  disappeared ,  the  patient  was  given  an
upper  shower  and  a  knee  -  shower  every  day.  He  also
took  half-baths.  These  applications  were  continued  for
Ö  weeks.

Hemorrhoids.  (Piles.)

Hemorrhoids  (commonly  called  piles)  may  be  inherited
or  proceeding  from  certain  modes  of  life.  People  who
bad  a  sedentary  life  generally,  and  learned  men  especially,
are  often  troubled  with  this  complaint.  The  peasant  who
lives  on  a  simple  fare  and  never  sees  meat  except  on
Sundays  and  Hobdays,  who  drinks  milk  and  apostle's
wine  (water)  instead  of  beer  and  strong  wines,  who  daily
works  hard  in  the  field  and  at  home,  knows  this  com-
plaint scarcely  by  name.


288  Paut  III.  Diseases.


Homorrhoids  are  a  troublesome ,  tlioiigh  in  the  be-
ginning and  .sometimes  through  life ,  liarmless  disease.
The  itching  and  burning  is  very  painful,  but  more  pain-
ful still  is  the  effoct  of  the  complaint  on  the  mind  they
cause  irritablene.ss  and  depression.  There  are  cases  in  which
they  embitter  life  in  a  most  terrible  manner  and  almost
cause  insanity.

Indifference  and  neglect  are  here  out  of  place;  great
care  should  be  taken  to  prevent  the  disease  from  in-
creasing and  from  assuming  a  malignant  character.

But  what  are  hemorrhoids,  and  how  are  they  formed  ?

Every  reader  has,  no  doubt,  seen  a  turkey  cock  and
the  fleshy  bags  hanging  from  its  neck  like  empty  pockets.
If  the  cock  is  in  a  passion,  the  bags  become  filled  with
b^ood  and  resemble  red  globes.  Such  globes,  such  bags
filled  with  blood  or  mucus  are  the  hemorrhoids,  whether
they  appear  in  or  on  the  body,  whethi-r  they  be  bleeding
or  blind  hemorrhoids.

The  veins  are  elastic  tubes.  The  more  the  blood
flows  irregularly  to  one  place,  the  more  the  veins  become
extended,  and  they  become  so  particularly,  where  the
blood  collects  and  forms  little  blood -pools,  as  it  were.
Small  knots  form,  and  these  are  filled  with  blood.  From
time  to  time  these  knots  burst,  and  their  contents  con-
sist in  brown  mucus,  frequently,  however,  m  pure  blood.
The  bursting  of  the  piles  is  a  relief  for  the  patient;
when  filled  and  in  great  number,  they  cause  much  trouble
and  pain.

The  more  numerous  the  piles  are,  and  the  more  tre-
quently  they  burst,  the  greater  is  the  injury  caused  to
the  parts  where  they  originate.  It  is  therefore  not  seltlom
the  case  that  incurable  ulcers,  cancer  of  the  rectum  etc.
are  the  sad  consequences  of  neglected  hemorrhoids.

The  sufferings  caused  by  hemorrhoids  are  often  m-
creased  by  little  worms  (ascarides)  that  form  inside  the
rectum.  If  there  are  great  numbers  of  them,  they  seriously
injure  the  rectum  and  occasion  ulcers.

The  treatment  of  hemorrhoids  with  water  is  easy
and  in  most  cases  effective.  The  number  of  those  cured


Hemoruhoids.  (Piles.)


289


by  water-applications  is  very  great,  and  I  may  add  that
in  all  cases  the  result  was  a  happy  one.

We  shall  first  attack  the  ascarides,  these  leeches  of
the  rectum.  They  betray  their  presence  by  a  sensation
of  pmching,  biting,  gnawing,  and  itching  inside  the  anus
(the  same  feeling,  however,  always  accompanies  the  re-
filling of  the  knots).

Take  1,  2  or  3  cold-water  clysters  in  quick  succession,
and  let  the  water  flow  off  again.  As  soon  as  the  cold
water  enters  the  rectum,  the  ascarides  interrupt  their
destroying  work,  like  the  leeches,  when  salt  is  applied
to  the  bleeding  spot ;  when  then  the  water  flows  off  again,
it  washes  them  away.  If  this  proceeding  is  repeated
twice  or  three  times  (it  may  take  place  twice  or  3  times
weekly)  many  of  them,  sometimes  all,  come  away.

If  only  the  hemorrhoidal  knots  have  to  be  treated,
it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  blood  which  has
a  determination  to  a  certain  part  of  the  body  must  be
led  off,  that  vessels  which  are  too  much  extended  must
be  contracted,  that  impurities  must  be  evacuated.

To  effect  all  this,  the  following  application  will  render
good  service :  A  piece  of  linen  is  dipped  in  very  cold
water  and  prepared  in  bed  as  for  the  lying  on  wet  .sheets  ;
the  cloth  must  be  so  long  as  to  reach  from  the  neck  to
over  the  anus  and  so  wide  as  to  cover  the  back.  On
this  compress  lie  down  for  f  hour,  and  repeat  the  appli-
cation 3  or  4  times  weekly.  If  the  cloth  becomes  warm
before  the  |  hour  is  passed,  it  should  be  wetted  afresh.
A  further  very  recommendable  application  for  such  pa-
tients is  the  cold  sitting  -  bath ,  which  should  be  taken
3  or  4  times  weekly.  It  may  be  repeated  twice  or  3  times
during  one  day  or  also  during  one  night  when  taken
from  bed,  the  duration  never  exceeding  more  than  1  or
2  minutes.  If  any  one  afflicted  with  piles  makes  use  of
one  of  these  applications  for  1  or  2  weeks  every  3  months,
he  may  be  assured  that  if  a  complete  cure  be  not  effected,,
the  evil  will  be  at  least  prevented  from  increasing.  Those
who  think  these  applications  too  troublesome  can  expect
no  further  advice  from  me.

Kneipp,  Water-  Oure.  -i  o


290


Paut  III.  Diseases.


With  regard  to  food  I  want  to  call  the  attention
of  the  reader  to  one  point  to  which ,  in  my  opuiion,
generally  too  little  importance  is  attached.  Many  persons
afflicted  with  piles  have  begun  to  eat  l)ran-bread  ihstead
of  ordinary  wheaten  bread,  and  they  assert  to  have  ob-
tained great  relief  from  this  kind  of  diet. I  wish  this
bran-bread  were  eaten  not  by  some  individuals  only,  but
by  all ,  for  many  reasons. I  am  sorry  to  say  that  the
bran -bread  has  already  shared  the  fate  of  many  other
articles  of  food;  it  has  been  falsified. In  a  large  town
abroad,  I  once  found  bran-bread  (the  true  bran-bread  is
very  heavy)  just  as  light  as  ordinary  bread. I  cut  the
loaf  and  discovered  that  it  was  ordinary  bread,  the  bran
having  been  strewn  on  the  surface  only. The  recipe  for
preparing  bran-bread  has  been  given  in  the  second  part
of  this  book.

Head  complaints.

A  gentleman  of  high  rank  had  a  head  com;)laint  of
a  very  peculiar  kind. The  headache  began  regularly  at
7  a.  m.  and  lasted  till  the  evening;  it  was  so  pamful
that  he  could  not  even  read  easy  things,  far  less  was  he
able  to  attend  to  his  correspondence. At  the  settmg  of
the  sun  the  pain  ceased,  and  he  was  sure  to  spend  a
painless  night,  unless  he  hud  had  some  mental  exertion
during  the  previous  day. The  spot  where  he  felt  the
pain  was  on  the  left  side  of  the  forehead  and  had  the
size  of  a  crown-piece. The  headache  affected  the  whole
body  in  such  a  manner  that  the  gentleman  s  appearance
became  always  worse  and  with  the  healthy  appearance
his  strength  also  went. The  most  celebrated  physicians
were  consulted,  an  establi^iment  for  water-cures  had  also
been  visited  but  without  any  visible  result. Ihe  physi-
cians sent  the  patient  to  Meran  for  a  last  attempt,  and
thence  he  returned,  apparently  cured,  to im^  ;  «  ^
His  relations  rejoiced  at  his  recovery,  until  the  next
morn  ng  punctually  at  7  o'clock  the  old  unp  easant  gues
"turned  Vnd  took  post  in  its  old  place.
filled  the  house  as  the  sad  news  spread  that  new.  ^^hlch
s  eld  to  destroy  all  human  hope. The  gentleman  was


Head  coMPr.ATNTS.


291


advised  by  some  of  his  acquaintances  to  liave  recourse  to
my  water-cure,  and  an  attempt  was  resolved  upon.  The
patient  loolced  very  ill  and  was  rather  emaciated.  After
having  given  a  description  of  his  sufferings,  he  added
that  he  was  seldom  without  catarrh,  and  that  he  had
very  little  vital  heat.  All  this  had  been  attributed  to
an  accident  with  which  he  had  met  in  the  previous  year.
"Whatever  be  the  cause  of  my  sufferings,"  so  he  con-
cluded, "you  know  all  about  them,  and  you  must  cure  me."

The  sickly  appearance,  the  low  temperature  of  the
body,  the  susceptibility  for  changes  in  the  atmosphere,
the  emaciation,  all  these  symptoms  were  as  many  credible
witnesses  which  accused  not  the  painful  spot  on  the  fore-
head, but  the  whole  system  of  lacking  health  and  strength.
My  prescriptions  were  given  accordingly.  The  whole  or-
ganism was  worked  upon,  the  local  complaint  was  not
deemed  worthy  of  a  single  application.  The  simple  means
the  first  part  of  this  book  effected  the  cure  i.  e.  regular
circulation  of  the  blood,  good  digestion,  uniform  per-
spiration and  with  these  increase  of  vital  heat ,  better
appearance ,  in  a  word ,  complete  health.  It  is  always
the  old  story  which,  however,  cannot  be  told  and  re-told
often  enough.

The  correctness  of  my  opinion  concerning  the  head
complaint  was  proved  by  the  result.  In  about  6  weeks
the  whole  system  was  restored  to  health ,  nor  did  the
much  feared  pain  in  the  forehead  ever  return  at  the  usual
hour.  The  water  gave  the  cure  of  this  particular  spot
(without  any  ■  particular  application)  in  the  bargain.

A  gentleman  relates  as  follows :  "For  6  to  7  years
I  suffer  from  a  headache  which  renders  the  performance
of  the  duties  of  my  vocation  very  difficult  and  almost
impossible  for  me.

I  often  lost  courage  entirely.  I  feel  pressure  on  the
head  and  have  a  sensation  as  if  something  was  swimming
about  in  a  fluid.  Every  step  I  take  when  walking  in-
creases my  headache.  As  soon  as  I  become  warm  through
walking  or  working,  I  feel  as  if  I  were  intoxicated.

19*


292


Pakt  III.  Diseases.


8  times  I  have  had  colic  of  thß  kidneys  caused  by  stone
in  the  same.  12  pliysicians  whom  I  consulted  about  the
pains  in  my  back  have  not  been  able  to  ascertain  the
nature  of  ray  illness.  Only  one  of  them  relieved  me  a
little.  I  have  pains  in  the  kidneys  when  I  eat  anything
sour,  or  when  gases  accumulate,  when  I  walk  for  a  longer
time  and  become  warm ;  when  I  stand  or  sit  for  any
length  of  time  I  feel  pain  directly.  Sometimes  I  feel  a
great  heat  in  my  whole  body,  at  other  times  I  feel  chilly
again.  In  summer  I  suffer  more  than  in  winter.  For-
merly I  suffered  much  from  lethargy.  I  was  healthy,  very
strong  and  well  built,  when  I  was  younger;  but  for  the
last  20  years  I  have  been  so  wretched  that  I  believe
nobody  could  be  more  so.  I  have  also  been  to  a  medical
establishment  and  obtained  some  relief,  but  no  cure.

The  applications  were:  1)  daily  twice  an  upper-
shower  ;  2)  daily  walking  in  water  and  knee-gash.  More-
over the  patient  had  from  3  to  5  showers  for  the  back
weekly,  sitting-baths  frequently  •,  he  walked  in  the  grass
and  on  stones  and  took  tea  from  juniper -berrfes,  rose-
hips and  shave -grass,  but  only  for  some  time  2  cup-
fuls  daily.

In  4  weeks  the  man  was  restored  to  health  and
now,  after  6  months,  it  can  be  said  that  he  is  in  the
fall  possession  of  perfect  health,  of  bodily  strength,  and
mental  vigour.

A  man  relates :  "I  am  35  years  old,  have  a  constant
h^^adache  and  sometmies  such  a  sensation  of  weakness
that  I  can  scarcely  bear  it  any  longer.  I  have  also  pams
in  the  chest  and  in  the  back,  but  most  of  all  m  the  nape
of  the  neck  where  I  feel  a  constant  cramp-hke  contraction.
I  have  lost  a  great  deal  of  my  hair  and  if  it  contmues
falling  out,  I  shall  be  perfectly  bald  in  six  months.  Mj
feet  and  hands  are  generally  quite  cold,  and  I  have  no
appetite  whatever.

Applications:  1)  Wet  shirt  dipped  in  salt-water;
2)  3  times  weekly  a  whole  -  ablution  froni  bed  during
the  night;  3)  3  times  weekly  a  wet  shirt;  4j  daii)  a
saltspoonful  of  white  powder.


Heart  complaints.


293


After  2  months  this  man  presented  himself  and  de-
clared that  he  was  perfectly  cured,  that  there  remained
a  slight  pain  only  in  those  parts  where  he  had  suffered
most. The  weight  of  his  body  had  increased  by  10  lbs.

Two  gentlemen,  musicians,  relate  as  follows:  "We
both  have  the  same  complaint;  we  suffer  from  constant
headache,  it  is  sometimes  almost  unbearable.  We  have
little  sleep  and  are  restless  during  it.  Congestions  and
giddiness  almost  drive  us  to  despair.  Our  hands  and
feet  are  quite  cold."  Both  of  them  were  more  than  50
years  old.

For  12  days  these  companions  of  suffering  used  the
following  applications :  every  day  twice  upper-shower  and
knee-gush ;  one  day  a  half-bath,  the  other  day  a  shower
for  the  back ;  moreover  once  a  week  a  head-vapour  was
taken.  After  these  12  days  both  were  restored  to  health
and  assumed  again  the  duties  of  their  vocation.

In  order  to  preserve  their  health  and  gain  new
strength,  they  made  use  of  one  of  the  means  of  harden-
ing daily  and  took  a  half-bath  twice  weekly.  According
to  the  latest  news,  they  continue  in  good  health.

A  gentleman  from  Hungary  comes  with  the  following
statements :  "For  more  than  a  year  I  am  unable  to  attend
to  my  vocation  on  account  of  violent  headache  and  great
giddiness.  Over  the  whole  body  I  feel  intense  itching  and
burning,  which  often  deprives  me  of  my  sleep.  In  con-
sequence of  my  complaint  I  feel  melancholy  and  uneasy.

After  a  few  weeks  he  was  completely  cured  by  the
use  of  the  following  course  of  applications :  1)  Upper-
shower  dh-ectly  followed  by  walking  in  water ;  2)  a  half-
bath  daily.  In  the  second  and  third  week,  3  times  a
half-bath,  daily  upper-shower  and  knee-shower ;  3)  later
on  whole-baths  and  upper  shower  with  walking  in  water.

Heart  complaints.

In  our  times,  which  may  indeed  be  called  times  of
excitement,  there  are  innumerable  persons  who  are  said
to  suffer  from  diseases  of  the  nerves,  the  stomach  and
the  heart.  Heart,  stomach,  and  nerves  are  the  scap^-goats


294  Part  J  II.  Diseases,


to  which  most  complahits  are  attributed. If  a  person
has  enjoyed  good  health  for  20  or  HO  years,  if  he,  so  to
speak,  never  knew  where  his  heart  was  and  all  at  once
begins  to  feel  ill ,  it  must  be  a  heart  complaint  that
afflicts  him,  perhaps  even  an  organic  incurable  defect  of
the  heart. My  experience  —  and  I  have  treated  in-
numerable cases  of  this  kind  —  teaches  me  that  real
defects  of  the  heart  are  comparatively  rare. Among  KX)
cases  in  which  persons  believed,  or  had  been  decLared,
to  have  a  defect  of  the  heart,  there  were  surprisingly
few  of  whom  this  could  be  said  in  truth.  The  heart  be-
longed to  the  soundest  organs  of  many  of  these  persons,
but  there  were  other  unhealthy  conditions  which  influenced
the heart and caused  it temporary suff"ering.  The
healthiest  cat  will  scream  if  you  pinch  its  tail.  The  best
clock  will  cease  going  if  I  take  out  its  weights,  but  in
this  case  it  would  be  foolish  to  say  that  the  clock  is
bad. The  soundest  heart  can  be  impeded,  disturbed  in
its  activity  if  an  enemy  inside  throttles  it,  as  it  were.
This  enemy  must  be  sought,  the  draw-back  removed,  and
the  last  sign  of  a  heart  complaint  will  soon  disappear.
It  always  rouses  my  indignation  if  I  only  hear  people  say :
heart  complaint,  heart  complaint! People  are  alarmed
without  a  reasonable  cause  and  new  excitement  is  added
to  that  already  existing.

A  man ,  still  in  his  best  years ,  told  me  he  had  a
defect  of  the  heart,  the  physicians  having  declared  that
the  heart  was  too  much  extended.  I  inquired  if  he  had

ever  been  ill.  i ,  i. i  j

He  answered  negatively  but  added  that  he  had  an
eruption  under  the  knee.  That  was  enough  for  me.
Vigorous  nature  itself  had  here  digged  a  canal  through
which  it  secreted  unhealthy  matters.  I  had  only  to  aid
it  in  its  work  i.  e.  to  cause  the  injurious  matter  to  be
thrown  off  as  soon  as  possible.  The  heart  was  not  worked
upon  at  all.  The  patient  told  me  that  as  often  as  the
eruption  increased  in  dimension,  he  felt  his  heart  greatly
relieved  and  that  whenever  the  eruption  disappeared  tear-
ful palpitation  of  the  heart  set  in.  A  I  this  brought^  grist
to  my  mill.  The  man  received  weekly  2  short  bandages,


Heart  complaints.


295


1  lower  bandage,  1  Spanish  mantle,  and  1  foot-vapour.
The  Spanish  mantle  worked  in  a  dissolving  and  evacuating
manner  on  the  whole  body,  the  short  bandage  m  the
same  manner  chiefly  on  the  lower  body.  The  lower  band-
age completed  the  work  of  the  short  bandage  and  the
foot -vapour  drew  the  still  existing  unheaUhy  matter
powerfully  down.  In  about  3  weeks  the  body  secreted
much,  and  I  hope  all  unhealthy  matter.  The  heart  com-
plaint had  disappeared.  Since  there  was  neither  a  defect
of  the  heart  before  the  above  mentioned  symptoms  first
showed  themselves,  nor  after  the  cure  of  the  sick  body,
am  I  not  right  to  conclude  that  there  has  never  been  a
defect  at  all  ?

One  night  I  was  called  to  a  housemother  who  was
unable  to  speak  on  account  of  extremely  difficult  breath.
The  palpitation  of  the  heart  was  so  violent  that  the
motion  could  be  seen  on  the  blanket  and  that  the  beating
could  be  distinctly  heard  at  a  little  distance.  The  pa-
tient had  a  sweet  taste  in  the  palate  and  was  in  great
fear  of  meeting  her  death  by  hemorrhage  from  the
mouth;  her  mother  having  died  of  such  an  attack  the
same  year.  The  physician  attending  her  declared  her
sufferings  to  be  caused  by  various  complaints  but,  in  the
first  place,  by  a  defect  of  the  heart.  Hands  and  feet  of
the  patient  were  quite  cold,  and  she  was  co.ntinually  tor-
mented by  a  tendency  to  cough.

Cold  hands,  cold  feet,  unusually  vehement  palpitation
of  the  heart.  What  does  this  reveal?  All  the  blood
must  have  left  the  extremities  to  seek  its  original  home,
the  heart,  and  thence  it  wants  to  escape  again.  Hence
the  beating  and  hammering  as  if  it  wanted  to  force  the
bolts  and  gates  of  the  heart.

In  5  minutes  the  violent  palpitation  was  considerably
diminished  by  the  application  of  a  twofold  wet  towel  on
the  abdomen.  The  blood,  which  is  easy  to  treat,  was
soon  led  away  from  the  heart,  and  after  10  minutes  the
beating  of  the  heart  was  calm :  the  heart,  the  seat  of  th&
principal  defect,  was  cured  already.  The  patient  now
began  a  course  of  water -applications.  On  the  first  day
she  undertook  2  whole  -  ablutions  in  bed,  on  the  second


296


Part  III.  Diseasks.


day  she  put  on  the  Spanish  mantle,  on  the  third  she  had
a  liead-vapour,  on  tlie  fourth  a  foot -vapour.  She  con-
tinued the  applications  in  the  same  succession  for  some
time.  Tho  abdomen  was  the  last  to  listen  to  reason,  it
had  been  the  chief  leader  in  the  nightly  attack.  Its
obstinate  resistance,  however,  was  at  last  overcome  by
water,  and  everything  was  right  again,  quite  right,  the
heart  not  excepted,  which,  as  far  as  I  know,  remained
healthy  ever  after.

A  gentleman  of  position  had  been  indisposed  for  years
and  could  only  with  difficulty  attend  to  his  vocation.  A
pecuhar  anxiety  increased  his  sufferings.  The  least  in-
cident caused  him  palpitation,  excitement,  alarm.  Those
who  lived  with  him  had  to  be  very  cautious  in  com-
municating news ;  for  sensations  of  joy  or  sorrow  were
always  followed  by  irregularities  in  the  pulsation  of  the
heart.  In  summer  as  well  as  in  winter,  the  rooms  had  to
be  heated,  and  it  required  constant  attention  to  keep  them
in  the  right  temperature.  The  most  celebrated  physicians
were  consulted,  and  they  all  agreed  in  the  opinion  that
the  patient,  besides  suffering  from  affection  of  the  liver
and  lungs  and  from  hemorrhoids,  had  an  organic  defect
of  the  heart  and  that  he  would  meet  his  death  by  a  stroke.
The  gentleman  died.  On  account  of  his  peculiar  com-
plaints the  corpse  was  dissected.  And  what  was  the
result  of  the  dissection  r  Lungs,  liver,  and  heart  had  be-
longed to  the  soundest  organs  of  the  gentleman,  but  a
mass  of  fat  had  formed  round  the  heart  and  a  layer  of
the  same  substance  in  the  chest.  The  gentleman  had
died  through  want  of  blood.  The  blood  had  been  entirely
absorbed  by  the  formation  of  muscle  and  fat.  One  of  the
physicians,  who  were  present  at  the  dissection,  on  relating
me  the  fact  added:  "In  this  case^cience  has  been  thoroughly
deceived."

A  girl  complains :  "Wienever  I  walk  fast  or  get
frightened,  whenever  I  hear  tales  of  misery  or  misfortune,
I  feel  a  great  depression  about  the  heart,  and  it  beats  so
quickly  that  I  always  fear  to  die  suddenly.  At  the  same
time  my  hands  and  feet  become  cold,  and  in  the  heart  I
feel  great  heat. I  have  a  heart  complaint;  I  was  told


Heart  complaints.


297


so  also  by  several  physicians.  A  heart  complaint ,  of
course,  what  else  could  it  have  been?

If  a  child  sits  at  the  house-door  and  a  big  dog  comes,
the  child  screams ,  jumps  up ,  flees  frightened  into  the
house  and  calls :  Mother,  mother !  And  if  the  poor  heart
is  frightened  through  an  accident,  the  heart  cries  out  and
jumps  up  in  violent  palpitation,  and  the  blood  flows  from
the  house-doors  of  the  body,  from  the  extremities  into
the  house,  into  the  heart  which  beats  then  even  louder
and  cries  out  so  that  it  can  be  heard  at  a  distance.
"What  is  there  astonishing  in  this,  and  where  is  there  a
heart  complaint?  The  girl  should  first  of  all  leave  off  all
unnecessary  and  hurtful  clothing  and  muffling  and  then
commence  to  make  use  of  the  lighter  means  of  hardening.
The  delicate  being  will,  then,  cease  to  be  frightened  at
the  barking  of  a  dog  or  at  the  whistle  of  the  locomotive.
She  should  hold  her  arms  in  cold  water  and  stand  in
cold  water  to  above  the  calves  of  the  legs  for  one  minute
3  times  daily  ;  these  are  excellent  strengthening  remedies.
Should  the  water  seem  too  cold  the  naive  girl  may  breathe
a  little  over  it.  Prohatum  est.  These  applications  should
be  continued  for  a  week.  Then  the  patient  may  be  washed
from  bed  3  times  weekly,  and  once  a  week  she  .«hould
take  a  half-bath  to  under  the  arms  with  quick  ablution
of  the  upper  body  (|  minute).  These  practices  occupy
the  second  week.  In  the  third  and  fourth  weeks  2  upper
and  2  lower  showers  should  be  applied  to  the  patient
daily.  The  latter  practices  must  be  followed  by  brisk
exercise  in  order  to  restore  the  vital  heat.  In  6  weeks
the  girl  was  well,  and  all  scruples  about  defects  of  the
heart  were  washed  away.

A  young  lady  comes  and  asks  for  help.  She  relates
as  follows :  "I  have  past  the  examination  in  music  and
obtained  a  first  class  certificate ;  for  6  years  I  have  taught
music  in  a  convent  school.  I  suffer  so  much  from  head-
ache that  I  can  scarcely  bear  the  sound  of  an  instrument,
be  it  the  organ,  the  piano,  or  the  violin.  Even  the  altar-
bells  cause  me  a  piercing  pain  in  the  head.  The  physi-
cians attribute  my  sufferings  to  a  disease  of  the  nerves
and  of  the  heart.  Had  I  been  healthy,  I  .should  have  been


298


Part  111.  Diseases.


received  in  the  convent,  but  now  I  am  not  only  unable
to  follow  my  religious  vocation  but  even  to  earn  my  br(iad,
and  I  suffer  unspeakable  bodily  and  mental  pain."  I  re-
plied: "I  cannot  help  you,  you  must  seek  help  elsewhere."
On  her  question  why  I  treated  just  her  so  harshly,  I  re-
plied : "A  town  lady  like  you  with  such  linguistic  and
musical  accomplishments  will  probably  not  do  what  I  re-
quire; otherwise  your  deplorable  condition  is  curable."  She
answered  resolutely :  "In  order  to  become  well  again  I
shall  do  whatever  you  require." And  she  has  kept  her
word.  I  sent  her  for  ten  days  with  the  maid-servants  in
the  field  —  it  was  in  March  —  where  she  was  to  walk
barefoot.  Daily  she  had  a  warm  foot-bath  and  an  upper-
shower  to  accustom  her  to  the  cold. After  6  days  she
knelt  daily  in  water  reaching  to  her  fltomach  instead  of
the  foot-bath. She  worked  in  the  field  for  the  sake  of
exercise,  as  much  as  practice  and  strength  permitted.
After  10  days  the  young  lady  returned  to  a  benefactor
who  had  supported  her  during  her  studies  and  also  advised
her  to  try  the  water-cure.  She  continued  all  the  practices,
even  the  work  in  the  house  and  field,  which  .she  now
liked. Instead  of  the  violin  and  music  hooks,  she  now
used  spade  and  rake. In  proportion  as  the  body  grew
stronger,  the  nervous  and  heart  disease  disappeared.  After
4  months  there  was  not  the  slightest  symptom  of  any
malady  whatever,  and  the  young  musician  enjoyed  the
freshness  and  health  of  her  infancy.  _

A  student  of  theology  came  and  asked  my  advice
saying  that  he  was  suffering  in  many  ways  and  among
others  from,  a  heart  complaint.  He  wished  to  become  a
priest  but  with  so  much  headache ,  such  palpitation  ot
the  heart,  and  all  the  pressure  and  anxiety  which  accom-
panied it,  there  was  no  hope.  ^

I  advised  the  patient  to  harden  his  body  in  a  reasonable
manner,  which  would  do  him  no  harm  since  he  was  well
built  After  some  weeks  he  resumed  his  studies.  De-
came  priest,  and  for  health  and  strength  he  was  surpassed
by  few  of  his  companions.  Every  mornmg  the  young
gentleman  walked  for  i  hour  in  the  de^vy  grass,  dady
he  descended  in  the  water  up  to  his  stomach  and  washed


HOAKSENESS.


299


his  upper  body  at  the  same  time.  When  rainy  weather
prevented  him  from  his  favourite  walks  in  the  woods,  he
substituted  some  easy  work  at  home  for  the  out -door
exercise.  Later  on  he  used  profuse  upper  showers,  1  or
2  daily  alternately  with  half- baths  to  brace  his  system.
Head  and  heart  complaints  disappeared  as  his  bodily
strength  increased.

Hoarseness.

.  A  girl  of  11  years  of  age  had  lost  her  voice  for
several  months  and  only  with  great  effort  could  make
herself  understood  in  a  croaking  manner.  Her  colour  was
quite  white  ,  her  eyes  bluish ,  her  body  emaciated  and
without  all  strength.  There  was  neither  vital  heat  nor
appetite  except  for  a  little  -beer  or  wine.

In  2  months  the  girl  was  completely  cured  and
strengthened,  and  this  was  the  result  of  the  following
applications :

1)  twice  to  4  times  daily,  she  walked  barefoot  in
the  grass.

2)  2  or  4  times  weekly,  she  put  on  the  shawl.

3)  4  times  weekly,  she  took  a  sitting-bath.

4)  During  the  last  3  weeks,  when  the  weather  was
warm,  she  took  3  baths  in  water  warmed  by  the  sun,
each  week.

Her  diet  consisted  in  simple  household-  fare,  especially
in  milk,  which  was  taken  by  tablespoonfals  every  hour,
for  half  a  day.

According  to  the  news  arrived,  the  girl  enjoys  now
perfect  health.

A  priest  suffered  from  hoarseness  every  year  from
October  to  May.  He  tried  everything,  consulted  several
physicians,  but  in  vain.  The  complaint  remained  the  same
for  14  years.  At  last  he  had  recourse  to  me,  and  in  a
short  time  he  found  the  desired  help.

The  gentleman  had  to  stand  in  water  to  the  knees
daily ;  at  the  same  time  he  held  both  his  hands  in  water.
Moreover  he  had  to  take  whole-ablations  generally  when
rising  in  ths  morning,  or  daring  the  night  when  waking  up.


300  Part  III.  Diseases.


Already  after  12  days  the  complaint,  from  which  he
had  suffered  for  years,  disappeared  and  in  the  16  years
since  past  he  has  never  had  a  relapse.

Another  proof  of  the  thoroughness  of  the  cures  effected
by  water.

Hypochondriasis.

I  always  feel  the  greatest  compassion  for  hypochon-
driacs as  well  as  for  scrupulous  people. How  often  do
you  hear  people  say :  "Well  he  is  a  hypochondriac ,  he
is  scrupulous!" A  cheap  and  worthless  saying.  These
poor  people  who  are  so  much  ridiculed,  whose  feelings
are  hurt  so  frequently  are  greatly  to  be  pitied.  When-
ever I  have  to  attend  to  hypochondriacs  (I  observe  the
same  rule  with  regard  to  th^  scrupulous)  I  ask  myself:
Was  this  hypochondriac  once  a  normal  human  bemg .
Was  there  a  time  when  he  thought  and  worked  like  other
rational  men?  If  I  receive  an  affirmative  answer  to  these
questions,  it  would  be  foolishness  on  my  part  to  think
that  this  man  is  in  good  health,  and  that  he  foments
himself  and  others  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  pleasure
he  derives  from  doing  so.  On  the  contrary,  I  must  admit
that  a  chang3  has  taken  place  either  in  his  body  or  his
mind  i.  e.  that  he  must  be  very  ill  Restore  him  to  bis
former  healthy  condition,  and  hä  will  cease  to  be  a  hypo-
chondriac.  Just  the  ablest  persons  who ^uch  given
to  study  are  most  frequently  afflicted  with  this  kmd  ot
mental  disturbance.  .

In  my  opinion,  the  root  of  hypochondriasis,  like  that
of  any  other  mental  disorder,  is  to  be  sought  m  the  body
in  the  diseased  body. Only  a  cure  ^^ich  proceeds  rom
this  point  of  view  will  be  sure  and  successful.  The  treat
ment  of  such  patients  must  tend  to  rouse  them  from
Sdolence,  to  strengthen  their  weakened  system,  to  restore
the  organs  to  their  former  activity:  m  a  J^oid,  to  pro
mote  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and  the  hypochondriac
will  soon  be  cured.

I  knew  a  man  of  extraordinary  talents. For  many
years  he  lped  happily  in  his  vocation  ^omg -^^^^^^^
Ld  enthusiasm  as  much  work  as  two  other.,  buddeniy


Hypochondriasis.


301


he  became  hypocliondriac  in  such  a  degree  that  he  had
no  longer  the  least  care  about  his  duties,  shunning  and
fearing  everything  and  flying  from  all  society.

Instead  of  obtaining  help  and  compassion  of  which
he  was  so  much  in  need,  he  was  told  daily  and  hourly
that  he  was  just  a  hypochondriac  and  that  there  was  no
help  for  him.  Must  not  such  treatment  cause  the  greatest
depression  in  the  poor  patient?

It  is  remarkable  that  this  gentleman  had  already
visited  two  establishments  for  water-cures  and  thereby
only  aggravated  his  sufferings.  The  applications  had
been  too  drastic  and  only  apt  to  promote  the  destruction
of  his  half-ruined  body.

It  was  just  this  case  that  afforded  me  another  proof
of  the  efficacy  of  gentle  applications.  That  such  a  com-
plaint as  this  cannot  be  cured  in  a  few  days,  is  obvious.

Those  who  observe  the  ordinary  rules  of  health
(rational  food,  clothing,  ventilation,  recreation,  clean-
liness) will  never  become  hypochondriacs  and  when  symp-
toms of  the  illness  first  appear,  it  is  easy  to  destroy  it  >
in  the  germ.

The  most  suitable  water-applications  for  hypochon-
driasis consist  in  whole  and  part-ablutions,  in  half-baths,
especially  sitting-baths,  in  short  bandages  and  finally  in
cold  whole-baths.

Two  more  remarks  may  find  a  place  here.  It  is  the
ruin  of  our  time  that  spirituous  drinks  are  held  in  such
estimation  that  even  young  people  are  in  the  habit  of
drinking  strong  wines;  such  stuff  can  only  do  harm  to
our  present  weakened  generation.  People  should  strive
to  remain  sober  and  simple  and  many  a  complaint  which
only  of  late  made  its  appearance  on  the  stage  of  diseases
would  soon  disappear  behind  the  scenes.

Another  draw-back  to  health  is,  that  so  many  want
to  live  almost  exclusively  on  meat,  that  the  excellent
food  prepared  from  milk  and  flour,  which  gives  the  best
blood  and  the  best  juices  without  acrimony,  is  so  much
de.spised  and  avoided.  That  is  unnatural  and  must  be  of
serious  consequence.  Only  the  teeth  and  stomach  of  the
beasts  of  prey  have  been  formed  and  adapted  for  flesh


302


Part  III.  Diseases.


only. Man,  for  whose  sake  everything  else  was  created,
has  had  a  wider  range  of  food  allotted  to  him.

Innammation.

A  little  boy  scarcely  able  to  walk  sees  his  mother
strike  a  match  and  light  the  fire.  He  wants  to  imitate
her  and  contrives  to  get  one  of  those  wonderful  little
wood  splinters.  He  succeeds,  and  the  little  culprit  lights
a  great  fire  with  the  little  match.  The  whole  house  burns
down  and  everything  in  it.

How  many  lie  in  the  churchyards  in  whose  bodies  a
little  spark  of  morbid  matter,  as  it  were,  was  lighted;
the  spark  became  a  flame.  The  blood  flowing  from  all
sides  to  the  inflamed  spot  afforded  fresh  fuel.  Perhaps
no  proper  means  were  employed  to  extinguish  the  fire,
and  the  wretched  habitation  of  the  human  soul  burnt
down.

Thousands  of  animals  are  thus  destroyed  every  year.
Thousands  of  men  perish  in  the  same  manner.  And  how
quickly  this  is  often  accomplished!  Your  throat  has
caught  fire,  it  is  inflamed.  A  rough  draught  comes  and
serves  as  bellows  ;  it  blows  the  fire  on,  the  vems  supply
it  with  fuel,  and  in  a  few  hours  your  whole  throat  is  on
fire  Is  it  not  so?  What  is  to  be  done?  What  do
people  do  when  there  is  a  fire?  They  give  the  alarm
and  seek  to  save  whatever  can  be  saved.  If  there  is  time
to  do  so,  they  remove  from  the  fire  everything  combustible,
and  then  they  continue  spouting  water  on  the  fire,  ihese
hints  we  should  understand  and  profit  by  them.

As  soon  as  inflammation  appears  m  any  part  ot  me
body,  the  afflux  of  blood  to  this  spot  should  be  impeded,
the  not  yet  inflamed  blood  should  be  saved  In  the  same
manner  the  inflamed  part  should  be  worked  upon,  m
order  that  the  blood  there  collected  may  be  diverted  and
1  d  off

\)ne  night,  not  long  ago,  when  I  was  just  going  to
sleep  the  wood  in  the  stove  began  to  burn. (The  fire
had  been  laid  for  the  next  day.) How  unpleasant
thought,  this  crackling  wood  will  deprive  us  of^  our  b-
sleep! My  companion  was  sharper  than  I. ^ot  the


Influenza.


303


crackling,"  he  murmuved,  "but  my  rest  I  will  have.  And
what  did  he  do '?  He  took  the  wood ,  piece  by  piece,
out  of  the  stove ,  not  minding  that  some  of  the  pieces
were  burning  already.  It  is  clear  enough  that  there  was
no  longer  a  fire  to  trouble  us  with  its  noise.

Now  let  us  return  to  the  inflammation  of  the  throat.
Just  feel  the  patient's  feet  whether  they  are  not  as  cold
as  ice.  The  blood  seeks  the  spot  where  there  is  most
haat.  It  must  away,  as  it  were,  from  the  feet  to  the  fire
in  the  throat.  Swathe  the  feet  in  linen  rags  dipped  in
water  mixed  with  vinegar.  Soon  you  will  feel  great  heat.
The  foot -bandage  draws  the  blood  down  and  thus  de-
prives the  fire  of  some  of  its  fuel.  Then  seek  to  lead
the  blood  further  into  the  lower  body.  This  is  done  by
a  compress  dipped  in  water  mixed  with  vinegar  and  laid
on  the  abdomen.  Re-dip  it  in  water  as  often  as  it  be-
comes hot.  More  combustible  matter  is  withdrawn  from
the  endangered  neck  by  this  second  bandage  than  by  the
first.  And  now  you  can  attack  the  neck  itself,  the  seat
of  the  fire.  Dip  a  cloth  in  the  coldest  water  and  put  it
round  your  neck,  but  do  not  let  it  become  hot;*  renew
it  as  soon  as  it  becomes  warm.  If  you  allow  it  to  be-
come hot,  more  heat  will  be  produced  in  the  throat,  and
the  blood  which  was  partly  led  off  will  flow  in  the
direction  of  the  neck  again  and  fan  the  inflammation
afresh.  Whoever  understands  this  last  point  well,  will
soon  be  able  to  judge  for  himself  when  and  how  often
the  compress  has  to  be  renewed.

Influenza.

This  disease  is  by  no  means  a  new  one ;  it  is  the
same  kind  of  catarrh  which  has  long  been  known  under
the  name  of  "Grippe".  With  regard  to  this  illness,  people

*  My  30  year's  experience  gives  me  a  right  to  the
toUowing  assertion.  Every  one  who  applies  a  Priessiiitz  com-
press for  a  whole  niglit  will  make  the  unpleasant  discovery
tliat  tlie  inflammation  is  increased  by  it  rather  than  diminished.
I  his  is  generally  attributed  to  a  defect  in  the  way  of  ban-
daging; the  result,  however,  has  a  deeper  cause.  See  neck-
baudage.


304


Part  III.  Diseases.


used  lo  say  that",  the  patient  must  take  gfeat  care  of
himself  during  the  time  of  convalescence,  lest  another
disease  might  follow  the  first.  People  in  the  country  who
were  afflicted  with  it  generally  kept  their  bed,  took  2  to
4  cups  of  hot  tea,  covered  themselves  well  so  as  to  pro-
duce profuse  perspiration,  and  in  2  or  3  days  they  were
well  again  and  no  fatal  consequences  had  to  be  feared.

Water  has  often  proved  the  best  remedy  also  in  thi^j
illness.  If  influenza  appears,  the  patient  should  take  a
whole-ablution  (cold  water  mixed  with  a  little  vinegar)
every  hour.  After  the  second  or  third  application,  he  will
begin  to  sweat,  and  through  this  the  morbid  matters  will
be  removed.  I  know  of  a  peasant  who  began  to  take  the
ablutions  at  7  in  the  evening  and  continued  them  till  the
following  morning  when  he  was  perfectly  cured.  If  tea
from  St.  John'swort  and  milfoil  or  sage  and  wormwood
is  taken  in  addition  to  the  exterior  application,  the  cure
will  be  even  more  speedily  accomplished.  Instead  of  ab-
lutions half-baths  (of  2  seconds'  duration)  might  be  taken
as  often  as  the  fever  increases.

Anastasia  relates :  years  ago  I  had  influenza  and
have  not  been  well  ever  since.  I  have  used  much  medi-
cine, but  without  any  result.  I  was  formerly  pretty  strong
but  I  have  now  lost  I  of  my  weight,  I  seldom  feel  appe-
tite and  never  sleep,  I  am  almost  unable  to  attend  to  my
duties.  Wliat  is  there  to  be  done?"

Answer :  1)  Every  night  take  a  whole-ablution  from
bed  to  promote  the  vitarheat;  this  will  open  the  pores
and  produce  perspiration.

2)  Every  day  take  a  shower  for  the  back  and  an
upper  shower.  These  applications  effected  the  dissolution
of  the  unhealthy  matters  and  their  evacuation  by  means
of  sweating;  every  third  day  a  short  bandage  was  applied
which  tended  to  produce  the  same  effect  m  the  lower
body  12  days  after  these  applications  the  patient  was
considerably  better.  Several  smaller  and  lai^er  ulcers  formed
through  which  the  morbid  matter  was  led  off.  1^  urtlier
applications  were  made  use  of  to  brace  the  system,  and
after  4  weeks  the  patient  was  completely  restored.


Iksanity.


305


Why  had  she  not  been  entirely  cured  before?  Ans-
wer :  Althougli  many  remedies  were  used,  tliere  was  none
which  dissolved  and  evacuated  the  morbid  matter  in  the
whole  body.  The  medicaments  which  were  taken  went
through  the  whole  body,  but  what  had  collected  between
fle.sh  and  skin  was  left  untouched  by  them.  This  had  to
be  removed  by  perspiration.  Thus  our  ancestors  were  right
when  they  sought  to  cure  influenza  (under  its  old  name)
chiefly  by  profuse  sweating.

Insanity.

How  fearful  it  must  be  when  the  night  of  insanity
spreads  its  dark  wings  over  the  human  mind,  when  man
seems  no  longer  man  and  bears  more  resemblance  to  the
irrational  creature  than  to  the  supreme  Creator  to  whose
image  he  was  made.  50,  40,  30  years  ago,  cases  of_  in-
sanity were  rare ;  now-a-day.s  their  number  increases  in  a
terrifying  manner.  The  medical  establishments  for  the
insane,  however  numerous  they  may  be,  are  overfilled.
Outside  great  cities,  whole  suburbs  are  built  for  th3  pur-
pose of  lodging  these  most  wretched  of  haman  beings.
Besides  those  that  have  completely  lost  the  use  of  their
intellect,  there  are  thousands  who  suffer  intensely  from
greater  or  lesser  disturbances  of  the  mind  and  receive
comparatively  little  help.  In  truth,  I  may  say  that  a  great
immber  of  these  unfortunate  people  had  recourse  to  me
for  relief  and  cure,  and  that  I  always  felt  a  particular
love  and  care  for  these  comfortless  people.  They  were
generally  unable  to  attend  to  the  duties  of  their  vocation,
although  their  mental  derangement  had  not  reached  such
a  degree  as  to  make  them  fit  for  iha  mad-house.  Un-
speakable, innumerable,  and  manifold  are  the  torments  of
these  wretched  people.  Some  of  them  hate  their  formerly
cherished  vocation,  others  will  no  longer  fulfil  their  reli-
gious duties.  Fear  and  hatred  of  their  fellowmen  has  taken
hold  of  some,  hatred  of  their  own  person  of  others;  they
wish  to  commit  suicide  etc.  The  heads  and  their  contents
are  of  so  many  different  descriptions  as  the  poor  indi-
viduals themselves.

In  all  cases  of  mental  disease  which  I  treated  during
30  years,  I  have  found  out  the  cause  of  the  derangement

Kneipp,  Wator-Cure.  OQ


Part  III.  Diseases.


which  was  either  hereditary  or  proceeding  from  bodily
aihneiit*  or  sometimes  from  the  patient's  mode  of  life.

I  caution  against  a  delusion  to  which  people  are
often  subject  with  regard  to  in.sanity.  Their  heated  ima-
gination makes  them  see  supernatural  conditions  and  dia-
bolical influence  where  there  is  nothing  but  a  wretched
body  affecting  the  poor  mind.  Even  in  cases  in  which  it
seemed  evident  that  Satan  had  taken  possession  of  the
patient,  the  simple  cold  gush  drove  him  out.

In  my  whole  practice  there  has  not  been  a  single
case  in  which  natural  means,  rightly  employed,  have  not
effected  the  cure.  I  cling  finnly  to  faith  and  to  the  super-
natural a-i  to  a  life-boat,  and  God  forbid  that  I  should
give  up  a=!  much  as  one  atom  of  my  convictions,  but  on
the  other  hand  I  would  never  offer  a  handle  to  the  ene-
mies of  faith  and  so  make  faith  itself  an  object  of  derision.

Those  whom  this  concerns  will  understand  me.  An
example:  A  brother  brings  his  sister  who  declares  that
the  evil  spirit  is  dwelling  in  the  middle  of  her  chest,  that
she  knows  a  great  deal  about  him.  whilst  he  knows  all
about  her,  even  her  most  secret  thoughts,  that  she  is
completely  ruled  and  guided  by  hum.  She  further  asserted
that  her  brother  was  a  fool,  the  curate  being  more
stupid  still  and  the  physician  the  most  stupid  of  all.
Why?  "Because  they  always  say  I  must  put  on  another
head,  do  away  with  my  follies,  and  obey  them.  If  the
devil  has  taken  possession  of  anybody,"  she  ^concluded,
"one  is  no  longer  master  of  one's  own  head."  It  is  not
to  be  told  in  how  violent  and  wild  a  manner  the  poor
girl  raged  against  the  aforesaid  three  individuals.

Had  they  only  been  silent  (since  they  knew  before
whom  they  were  speaking),  they  would  not  have  caused


*  "Mens  Sana  in  corpore  sano"  says  the  proverb  of  the
ancients.  A  healtliy  mind  only  dwells  in  a  healthy  body.  Mere
it  may  be  considered  how  Rreat  an  influence  the  country  has
on  its  people,  the  palace  or  the  poor  damp  cottage  on  their
inhabitants.  Should  it  be  otherwise  with  regard  to  smil  a  d
body  wliich  are  moreover  so  closely  connected  as  to  touii
one  whole?


Jksanity.  307


so  much  excitement  in  the  patient,  and  my  task  would
have  been  easier.  With  such  patients  everything  depends
on  tiie  manner  of  treatment.  Instead  of  contradicting  her,
I  only  said/:  "Ye.s,  indeed,  your  interior  is  in  a  bad  con-
dition." This  answer  satisfied  her,  and  I  had  won  her
over  to  my  side.  Her  answer  showed  that  my  reply  had
inspired  her  with  confidence.  "If  anyone  will  not  believe
that  I  have  the  devil  in  me,"  she  replied,  „he  will  not
be  able  to  drive  him  out."

This  confidence  means  for  me  as  much  as:  the  patient
is  already  half  cured  and  my  work  more  than  half  done.
The  girl  took  what  I  gave  har ; sha  punctually  applied
the  water  according  to  prescription. In  6  weeks  she  was
perfectly  cured. It  will  be  interesting  for  many  to  hear
what  was  the  matter  with  this  person.  Her  looks  were
wild,  her  features  sunk,  her  hands  were  cold,  her  feet
colder  still,  she  felt  a  heavy  pressure  on  the  chest  and
in  her  stomach  a  repugnance  to  every  kind  of  food.  All
her  blood,  so  it  seemed,  had  flown  to  the  chest. My  fi;st
task  consisted  in  regulating  the  circulation,  in  restoring
fequal  vital  heat  and  activity  of  the  whole  organism.  To
this  effect  the  patient  stood  in  cold  water  to  above  the
calves  of  the  legs,  twice  for  2  minutes  every  day,  then
she  took  a  brisk  walk  to  thoroughly  warm  her  feet.  The
arms  up  to  the  shoulders  were  treated  in  the  same  man-
ner. Twice  a  day  she  had  back,  chest  and  abdomen
vigorously  washed  with  water  mixed  with  vinegar.  For
this  ablution  she  lay  in  bed.-  These  comparatively  easy
applications  were  continued  for  a  fortnight. The  violent
agitation  gave  way,  although  the  dsvil  was  still  active
in  the  confused  head. Her  features  began  to  revive.  After
2  weeks  the  patient  commenced  to  make  use  of  the  lower
bandage  alternately  with  half-baths  (only  for  ^  minute
and  followed  by  ablution  of  the  upper  body)  and  the
bpamsh  mantle ;  these  3  applications  were  continued  for
about  8  weeks. After  the  third  week  the  applications
were  limited  to  1  whole-ablution  and  1  short  bandage  of
1  hour,  weekly. Thus  the  supposed  devil  was  driven  out
and  the  excitement  was  changed  into  great  calm  and
undisturbed  peace.


20*


308  Vawv  III.  Diseases.


Poor  parents  brought  their  boy  of  10  years  of  age
and  related  as  follows: "As  often  as  the  bells  ring  for
church,  the  boy  begins  to  rave  and  to  utter  the  most
horrible  blasphemies  such  as  we  have  never  heard  before.
He  continues  cursing  as  long  as  he  sees  a  person  on  the
way  to  church.  Then  he  ceases.  As  soon  as  the  first
person  leaves  the  church  after  service,  he  begins  to  swear
and  continues  as  long  as  he  sees  any  one  come  from  church.
Whenever  we  pray,  he  curses;  when  we  cease  praying,  he
also  stops  cursing. Father,  it  is  really  dreadful.  Nothing
has  yet  brought  him  any  help,  and  speaking  to  him  makes
him  worse. He  once  took  hold  of  his  mother  with  both
arms  as  with  claws  and  shook  her  so  violently  that  no-
body would  beheve  a  boy  to  possess  so  much  strength.
Physicians  have  been  consulted,  but  without  result.  He
was  also  blessed  by  a  priest,  and  on  that  occasion  he
cursed  more  dreadfully  than  ever."

The  boy  had  a  very  strange  appearance:  a  livid
complexion,  distorted  features,  and  his  hair  standing  on
end  like  a  hedgehog^s  spines.  I  ventured  to  touch  his
hand  whereupon  he  was  about  to  spring  at  my  face.  lw_o
priests  who  had  seen  him  in  this  terrible  condition  said:
"moever  believes  in  possession  by  the  devil  must  say:

Here  it  is."  ^ .  .

I  treated  the  complaint  from  the  begmnmg  as  a  na-
tural one  nor  was  I  deceived;  in  6  weeks  the  poor  child
was  completely  cured.  The  boy  had  to  put  on  a  shirt
dipped  in  water  (with  some  salt)  for  1  to  H  hours  dail).
He  likewise  took  a  whole-ablution  of  water  with  vinegar
once  daily.  Both  appHcations  were  continued  for  a  tort-
night. In  the  third  week  he  put  on  the  shirt  as  afore-
said on  one  day,  the  next  day  he  had  a  warm  ^^^h  (28  R
for  ^  hour  followed  by  a  cold  one,  (i  minute)  the  th  ul
day  he  took  a  whole-ablution.  He  continued  to  make  use
Zthese  practices  alternately  during  the  third  and  fouiih
week In  the  fifth  and  sixth  week  one wet  shut  and
one  warm  bath  with  rapid  cold  ablution,  respectively,
.vere  sufficient  to  complete  the  cure.  „Prfectlv
The  cure  was  quickly  accomplished.  1  he  peitect.iy
cold  Zl  belame  wa?m  aglin,  the  lost  appetite  returned,


Insanity.


309


and  he  relished  his  meals  chiefly  prepared  from  milk  and
flour.  The  devil  was  blown  away,  as  it  were.

Perhaps  some  of  my  readers  will  ask:  "Why  does
not  the  pastor  apply  gashes  to  such  patients  since  in  our
madhouses  maniacs  are  especially  treated  with  douches?"
In  my  humble  opinion  a  sportsman  who  wants  to  entice
the  fox  out  of  his  hole  would  not  do  well  to  stand  at  the
entrance  of  it  and  discharge  his  gun  there.  It  would  be
more  advisable  to  invite  master  reynard  by  means  of  a
fowl  or  a  sucking  pig  placed  before  his  hole.  Now  listen,
dear  reader!  Where  there  is  a  disease,  there  is  also
injurious  matter.  To  dissolve  and  evacuate  this  means
enticing  and  catching  the  fox.  A  douche,  however,  does
not  dissolve,  nor  does  it  evacuate.  When  the  dissolution
and  evacuation  of  morbid  matters  has  been  accomplished,
then  a  light  douche  has  a  meanmg  and  then  I,  too,  agree
with  its  use.

4  years  ago,  a  girl  came  to  me  and  related  as  follows  :
My  brother  has  been  in  a  mad-house  for  more  than  a
year.  He  was  pronounced  incurable.  Now  I  have  some
of  the  symptoms  which  precaded  my  brother's  disease.  I
have  been  in  a  situation  till  now,  but  I  had  to  leave
because  I  am  unable  to  work.  If  I  get  no  help,  I  shall
soon  follow  my  brother  to  the  mad-house.

On  various  que.stions  which  I  put  her,  she  replied
that  her  appetite  was  constantly  changing,  being  some-
times good,  sometimes  entirely  wanting,  that  she  suffered
from  a  racking  pain  ha  her  lunbs  which  whenever  it  gave
way  was  followed  by  severe  pain  in  the  chest,  that  more
than  half  of  her  thick  long  hair  had  fallen  off.  It  was
evident  that  very  bad  juices  were  the  cause  of  the  girl's
condition  and  that  the  surest  sign  of  their  evacuation
would  consist  in  a  renewed  growth  of  the  hair  on  the
half-bald  head.

The  patient  made  use  of  the  following  applications :
daily  the  wet  chemise  dipped  in  salt  water  or  water  mixed
with  vinegar,  likewise  daily  lukewarm  half-baths  with
vigorous  cold  washing  of  the  upper  body  (duration  1  mi-
nute). It  was  summer.  Every  day  she  walked  much  bare-
foot with  good  result,  especially  in  the  dewy  grass.  She


310  Vawv  III.  DiSEAS^;s.


coTitinncid  these  practices  for  3  weeks.  Then  she  took
warm  baths  followed  by  cold  ones,  the  lower  bandage
(the  patient  used  a  sack)  dipped  in  an  infusion  of  hay-
flowers.  The  whole  cure  lasted  3  months.  Then  the  patient
was  completely  restored,  and  her  hair  grew  more  luxu-
riantly than  before.  The  person  married  later  on  and  en-
joys good  health  to  this  day.

A  pastor  greatly  respected  and  loved  by  his  parishioners
came  to  me  and  told  me  that  he  felt  discouraged  on
seeing  himself  unable  to  attend  to  his  duties.  This  con-
dition which  was  accompanied  by  great  sadness,  ill-hu-
mour and  inability  for  study,  had  induced  some  of  the
pastors  in  his  neighbourhood  to  take  the  poor  gentleman
to  a  medical  establishment  where  he  remained  for  several
weeks. On  his  return  he  was  quieter  but  not  cured.  He
asked  me  what  he  should  do  whether  leave  his  parish,  or
remain  where  he  was. The  gentleman  had  that  healthy
appearance  which  so  often  deceives  in  such  cases  and
causes  so  many  rash  unjust  and  uncharitable  judgements.*
Looking  at  him  more  closely,  one  could  notice  that  his
eye  was  dull,  his  colour  pale,  his  hair  withered.  The
applications  were  of  3  kinds :  head  and  foot-vapour,  cold
upper  and  lower  showers,  frequent  walking  on  wet  stones
or  standing  in  water  for  3  to  4  minutes.  After  some  days
he  began  to  take  warm  baths  alternately  with  cold  upper
and  lower  showers.  On  the  sixth  day  a  bluish  eruption
appeared  on  the  whole  back. The  more  this  eruption
came  out,  the  more  the  patient  felt  relieved,  ^en  the
morbid  matter  was  all  1^x1  off  the  pastor  was  well.  Ihe
whole  care  lasted  14  days. With  new  courage  the  z.alous
priest  returned  to  his  parish.

Itch.

This  hornble  complaint  can  cause  much  havoc  on,
and  still  more  in,  the  body. Tt  is  greatly  to  be  lamented

^Iü7the  same  folly  to  judge  from  a  person's  cor^^^^^^^^
that  he  or  she  indulges  in  eating  and  drinliirg  too  much  (such
s ly  tormenred  people  are  generally  the  most  easily  sanshed
as  to  judge  from  the  healthy  appearance  ot  a  menta  In  dis
eased  pe?son  t!.at  his  or  her  sntferings  are  only  caused  by
scruples  about  their  hoalth.


Itch.


311


that  people,  in  order  to  cure  this  disease,  have  recourse
to  remedies  whicli  harm  the  body  instead  of  healing  it.
Who  knows  all  the  greasy  ointments  containing  sulphur,
brandy,  and  other  admixtures.  One  tiling  these  disgusting
smeary  remedies  bring  about:  they  thoroughly  close  the
pores  of  the  skin,  they  obstruct  through  greasy  crusts  the
air  and  water  canals  so  indispensably  necessary  for  the
health  of  the  body,  they  force  the  perspiration  back  into
the  body  there  to  poison  blood  and  juices  and  to  cause
serious  diseases,  for  many  perhaps  fatal  ones.  This  is  no
exaggeration,  but  it  must  grieve  everybody  who  knows
how  easily  and  quickly  itch  can  be  cured.

Once  there  came  to  me  for  help  a  man  of  28  years
of  age,  he  was  well  built  but  his  appearance  made  me
think  of  a  piece  of  worm-eaten  wood.  He  had  found  help
nowhere ;  it  could  not  be  ascertained  what  was  th3  matter
with  him.  I  asked  him:  Have  you  perhaps  had  itch  in
your  youth?  He  answered  affirmatively  to  my  curious
question  and  added  that  he  had  been  cured  in  3  days.  —
God  forbid  that  I  should  cure  lilte  that!

It  is  just  with  regard  to  such  disgusting  maladies
which  better  than  any  thing-  else  reveal  the  presence  of
morbid  matters  in  the  body,  that  the  cure  must  be  based
on  the  principle:  Any  matter  in  the  body  that  ought  not
to  be  there,  must  be  expelled.  To  do  the  opposite  of  this
would  mean  planting  insects  in  clothes  and  hair,  and  mice
in  the  ploughed  field.  According  to  this  principle  the
water-applications  must  tend  to  entice,  extract  and  remove
unhealthy  and  poisonous  matters  and  to  strengthen  the
whole  organism  that  it  may  aid  in  the  proceeding.

First  our  patient  took  on  3  consecutive  days  a  warm
bath  (33°  R.)  of  a  decoction  of  pine-twigs*  with  three-
fold change.

Soap  did  him  good  service  in  opening  the  pores  and
removing  the  dirt.  I  cannot  help  calling  things  by  their


*  Extract  from  pine -leaves  would  serve  as  well.  For
^  tor  tanners  and  for  the  poor  the  pine-twi;is  are  quite'


312  "Part  Hi.  Diseases.


proper  names  although  it  may  unpleasantly  affect  the
nerves  of  some  of  my  readers.  These  baths  were  followed
by  strengthonhig  applications :  in  the  first  week  he  took
whole-ablutions  from  bed  in  the  niglit  and  a  fourth  warm
bath  with  cold  ablution ;  in  the  second  week  he  took  a
warm  bath  followed  by  a  cold  ablution  and  a  cold  half-
bath  with  ablution  of  the  upper  body ;  in  the  third  w(H!k
he  took  a  cold  whole-bath,  later  on  a  few  warm  batli.s
every  month.  Should  the  cure  not  be  accompli.shed  by
these  applications,  the  2  latter  practices  may  be  continued
for  some  time.  A  warm  whole -bath  taken  weekly  will
be  of  good  effect  at  all  events.

In  six  weeks  our  poor  patient  was  cured  and  was
now  able  to  embrace  a  vocation.  His  good  health  con-
tinues to  this  day,  he  has  never  again  ^iad  the  least
attack  of  the  former  troublesome  disease.

Thus  itch  is  treated  when  it  has  been  suppressed
and  forced  back  to  the  interior  of  the  body.

If  any  one  suffers  from  external  itch,  he  should  take
a  warm  bath  (33"  R.)  and  rub  the  skin  with  sharp  soap.
The  so-called  green  soap,  which  can  be  had  at  any
chemist's,  is  best.  After  a  bath  of  15  minutes'  duration
he  should  wash'  with  clean  water  (cold  or  warm)  and
ordinary  soap.  It  would  be  of  excellent  effect  if  the
patient  could  have  a  second  similar  bath  of  fresh  warm
water  directly  after  the  first.  Also  this  second  bath
should  be  followed  by  a  cold  or  warm  ablution.

Since  itch  is  very  often  taken  by  contact,  through
clothes,  Ihren  etc.,  it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  to
change  linen  and  clothes  after  the  baths.  Without  this
precaution  all  applications  would  be  of  no  avail

In  this  manner  itch  can  be  cured  in  3  or  4  days.

Jaundice.

The  gall-bladder  is  situated  in  the  liver,  and  thence
the  gall  flows  into  2  canals.  Sometimes  concretions  are
formed  in  these  canals;  they  proceed  from  the  hver  and
are  called  gall-stones.  Through  these  indurations  the
flow  of  th(!  gall  is  obstructed;  the  same  effect  may  be
produced  by  pressure,  shocks,  and  other  accidents.  When


4


Kidney  complaints.


313


the  gall  is  thus  obstructed,  it  enters  the  blood-vessels  and
causes  the  disease  called  jaundice.  It  appears  also  alter
other  serious  diseases  as  typhus,  fever  etc.  If  the  com-
plaint, however,  is  the  consequence  of  a  diseased  liver,
the  blood  becomes  morbid  or  even  poisoned,  and  in  this
case  jaundice  is  often  fatal.  It  is  of  less  importance
when  it  is  caused  by  disturbances  or  proceeds  from  other
maladies.  The  first  symptoms  of  jaundice  are  seen  in
the  white  of  the  eye,  in  the  skin  itself,  in  the  stools  and
the  urine.  There  is  generally  loss  of  appetite  and  change
of  taste.  If  the  liver  is  not  affected,  this  complaint  is
easily  cured.  For  interior  use  I  recommend  especially :
daily  3  to  4  times,  each  time  3  to  4  spoonfuls  of  worm-
wood tea  or  3  times  a  saltspoonful  of  wormwood  powder
dissolved  in  6  to  10  spoonfuls  of  warm  water.  Sage-
and  wormwood-tea  will  do  excellent  service.

To  swallow  6  pepper  -  corns ,  daily  with  the  food  is
likewise  a  means  for  improving  the  digestion.  Tempe  ance
in  eating  and  drinking  is  to  be  recommended.  Milk  is
the  best  food.  The  best  water- applications  are:  Twice
to  3  times  a  week  a  short  bandage  and  an  ablution  from
bed  in  the  night.  The  yellow  colour  remains  often  for
weeks,  but  this  is  of  no  consequence.  If  the  yellow  hue,
however ,  changes  gradually  into  brown ,  if  the  appetite
continues  decreasing,  if  great  irritation  and  burning  is
felt  in  the  skin  and  the  emaciation  is  progressing,  there
is  much  reason  for  fear  of  the  liver  being  incurable  and
cancer  or  induration  of  the  liver  setting  in.  It  is  of  a
particularly  good  effect  in  cases  of  jaundice  or  a  diseased
liver  to  take  every  morning  and  evening  a  cupful  of
milk  with  which  a  spoonful  of  coaldust  and  sugar  has
been  mixed.

Kidney  complaints.

A  farmer  relates  :  "I  am  just  as  sickly  and  miserable
as  I  seem  strong  and  corpulent.  I  can  no  longer  work,
am  constantly  puffed  up,  breathing  is  often  so  difficult,
that  I  believe  I  must  suffocate.  I  toss  about  in  bed  at
night  without  being  able  to  sleep.  The  urine  is  mostly
very  thick  and  mixed  with  blood,  and  I  have  often  a  very


314


Part  III.  Diseases.


violent  burning  in  the  bladder.  1  have  had  several  doctijrs.
One  said  I  was  suffering  from  a  liver  complaint  and  gall-
stones. Another  declared  that  my  kidneys  were  in  a  bad
state  and  that  suppuration  of  the  kidneys  would  set  in.
A  third  thought  my  stomach  digested  nothing  and  that
I  was,  therefore,  always  obstructed  with  phlegm,  because
there  is  always  a  great  deal  of  sticky  phlegm  in  my  mouth."
fortless man:  1)  In  the  week  2  warm  baths  with  boiled
oat-straw,  with  threefold  change,  30  to  32"  R.  (LO  minu-
tes in  the  warm  water,  1  minute  in  the  cold).  2)  In  the
week  2  short  bandages,  likewise  with  oat-straw  water,
for  1-J  hours.  3)  To  drink  daily  2  cups  of  tea  from
shave-grass  and  juniper-berries,  brewed  for  10  minutes.
In  six  weeks  the  man  was  perfectly  well.  His  unnatural
corpulence  had  disappeared,  the  yellow-brown  colour  of
the  skin  was  removed,  and  as  the  fresh  and  healthy  colour
had  returned,  so  also  had  his  strength.

A  poor  workman  writes :  "1  became  ill  with  com-
plaint of  the  kidneys  in  November  1887,  but  I  kept  to
my  work  until  the  middle  of  January  1888.  In  the
meantime  ray  strength  had  become  so  lo,w  that  I  was
obliged  to  keep  my  bed  for  11  weeks.  The  doctor  who
attended  me,  declared  that  my  complaint  came  only  from
colds  and  suppressed  perspiration,  and  that  it  would  be
a  tedious  case.  In  the  urine  was  always  a  great  red-
brown  sediment.  The  urine  was  chemically  analysed,  and
it  was  discovered  that  this  sediment  consisted  of  blood.
Through  this  constant  loss  of  blood  I  became  so  weak
that  the  doctor  feared  dropsy.  He,  therefore,  examhied
the  feet  and  heart  day  by  day ;  but  there  never  appeared
any  thing  like  dropsy.  As  after  a  time  I  felt  better.  I
went  back  to  my  work  again,  but  after  20  weeks  the
suffering  returned,  and  I  had  to  give  it  up  once  more.  As
I  had  already  taken  so  much  medicine  and  all  kinds  of
things  without  any  permanent  result,  I  resolved  upon  the
advice  of  a  few  friends,  to  go  to  Wörishofen.  I  now
turned  to  the  cold-water-cure  which  I  liked  exceeduigly.
The  man  was  cured  by  the  foUowmg  applications:


Knee,  tumour  on  the.  —  Lumbago.


31&


1.  The  first  clay  in  the  morning  upper  shower  and
knee-gush,  in  the  afternoon  half-bath  for  l  minute.

2.  The  second  day  very  early  in  the  morning  to  ris&
from  bed  for  a  whole  -  ablution  and  return  to  bed  im-
mediately, then  walking  in  water ;  in  the  afternoon  upper
shower  and  knee-gush.

3.  In  the  morning  upper  -  shower ,  later  shower  for
the  thighs ;  in  the  afternoon  shower  for  the  back  and
Avalking  in  water  in  the  afternoon.  So  alternately  for
8  weeks  further.

4.  Daily  morning  and  evening  to  drinlt  a  cup  of  tea
made  from  10  crushed  juniper-berries  and  a  little  shave-
grass,  each  cup  taken  in  two  portions.

Knee,  tumour  on  the.

A  person,  30  years  old,  suffers  from  a  swelling  from
the  ankle  to  above  the  knee.  It  was  very  painful,  quite
firm  and  hot.  The  patient  used  medical  remedies  for
6  months  and  among  others  a  bandage  of  plaster  of  Paris
for  12  weeks  and  a  second  one  for  8  weeks.  Her  con-
dition was  so  aggravated  that  the  foot  could  not  be
allowed  to  touch  the  ground ;  the  joint  of  the  knee  was-
especially  painful.  Since  nothing  had  brought  her  relief,
she  used  infused  hay -flowers  by  way  of  trial  and  band-
aged them  round  the  leg  from  above  the  ankle  to  the
middle  of  the  thigh.  —  The  pain  gave  way,  the  swelling
decreased  and  when  it  was  reduced  to  one  half  of  its
former  size,  showers  were  applied  to  the  suffering  part
(every  second  day).  After  about  8  weeks  the  whole  foot
could  be  used  again,  and  after  some  time  the  person  could
resume  her  very  hard  work.

Lumbago.

Lumbago  is  a  severe  pain  at  the  small  of  the  back.
The  best  application  is  lying  on  a  cloth  that  has  been
dipped  in  hot  water  mixed  with  vinegar.  It  is  generally
sufficient  to  renew  the  cloth  twice  or  3  times,  each  time
after  1  hour.


316


Part  III,  Diseases.


Lungs,  complaint  of  the.

A  house-wife  relates  as  follows :  "The  physicians  say
that  I  have  catarrh  of  the  lungs  and  of  the  throat,  that
my  lungs  are  much  aft'ected,  and  two  physicians  declared
there  was  no  help  for  me.  I  should  like  to  make  a  last
attempt  with  water ;  if  this  brings  me  no  help,  I  resign
myself  to  the  will  of  God.  For  20  days  tlie  woman
received  2  upper  showers  daily  and  directly  after  a  knee-
gush,  she  also  had  a  short  bandage  twice  a  week.  She
took  daily  2  cupfuls  of  tea  from  boiled  fennel-seed,  com-
mon nettle  and  ribwort.  After  this  time  the  cough  had
disappeared,  the  obstruction  with  phlegm  was  removed,
the  appearance  healthy  and  the  strength  restored.

Lungs,  emphysema  of  the.

It  very  frequently  happens  that  people  who  are  still
in  the  prime  of  life,  suffer  much  from  difficulty  in  breath-
ing, and  not  seldom  their  condition  becomes  so  painful
that  they  constantly  fear  to  suffocate.

Generally  such  people  are  rather  corpulent,  and  their
mode  of  life  helps  too,  as  a  secondary  cause,  to  make
their  condition  worse.  The  chief  cause  of  the  evil  is
generally,  that  the  organism  is  suffering  from  a  general
weakness,  is  feeble  and  inactive,  has  little  blood,  and  on
account  of  the  inactivity  and  torpidity  the  increase  of
blood  does  not  take  place  in  such  a  manner  as  to  supply
the  wants  of  the  body.  I  should  like  to  compare  such
people  with  a  machine,  each  part  of  which  is  m  good
order,  while  the  whole  is  too  weak  for  the  demands  put
upon  it.  A  further  cause  are  almost  regularly  the  gases,
which  accumulate  in  the  abdomen,  and  exercise  a  pressure
on  the  organs  of  the  upper  part  of  the  body.  A  greater
strain  is  thereby  put  upon  these  than  their  task  other-
wise demands.

They  suffer  under  this  pressure,  and  a  universal  con-
traction takes  place.  The  evil  is  removed  first  by  banish-
ing the  gases  out  of  the  body,  and  secondly  by  harden-
ing the  whole  body  and  strengthening  it  by  means  ot  a
simple,  good  and  nourishing  fare.  My  experience  of  more


Lungs,  emphysema  of  the.


317


than  85  years  teaches  me  that  exactly  in  people  afflicted
in  this  manner  Bright's  disease  readily  gets  the  upper
hand,  i.  e.  that  the  already  weakened  body  by  this  disease
becomes  fully  broken  down,  fully  destroyed.

A  gentleman,  rather  corpulent,  not  yet  40  years  of
age,  had  from  time  to  time  such  attacks  of  suffocation
that  he  was  firmly  convinced  —  the  doctor  too  con-
firmed him  in  it,  —  that,  were  the  attack  to  return  twice,
he  would  succumb  to  it.  The  difficulty  of  breathing  was
so  great  that  his  struggles  for  breath  could  be  heard  on
the  ground  floor  of  the  house.  At  every  attack  this  sense
of  suffocation  lasted  for  a  considerable  time  and  so  ex-
hausted the  body  that  after  each  he  felt  quite  ill.  Wlien,
after  a  short  time,  he  had  recovered  again,  he  felt  well
and  fresh.  The  attacks  often  kept  off  for  some  days,
but  then  their  violence  increased  all  the  more.

The  said  gentleman  possessed  the  greatest  dread  of
water  and  could  only  then  make  up  his  mind  for  the
water-cure  when  no  other  remedy  was  left  to  him.  For
six  weeks  he  used  different  applications.  The  cure  was
such  a  perfect  one  that  the  attacks  never  returned  and
the  gentleman  has  always  since  then  —  it  is  now  about
21  years  ago  —  enjoyed  the  best  of  healths.

The  patient  took  for  several  days  together  tea  made
from  blackthorn -blossoms,  which  produced  a  very  mild
but  copious  evacuation  of  the  bowels ;  then  h.e  made  use
of  the  short-bandage,  of  lying  on  wet  sheets  and  covering
with  wet  sheets,  and  lastly,  of  half  and  also  whole  baths,
of  one  minute's  duration.  Among  the  applications  the
Spanish  mantle  was  also  of  good  service.  They  proved
of  greater  effect  in  the  following  order.

First  the  short-bandage  ;  it  begins  to  expel  the  gases
and  to  loosen  the  causes  of  the  gases ;

then  the  covering  with  wet  sheets  and  lying  on  wet
sheets,  a  continuation  of  the  first  application,  which  also
serves  to  strengthen  the  body ;

further  the  Spanish  mantle ;  this  leads  out  the  cor-
rupted matters  through  the  skin;

lastly,  half-baths,  to  brace  the  organismi.


31.8  Part  III.  Diseasks.


Another  gentleman  suffered  fmm  difficult  breathing
to  such  un  extent  that  the  doctors  declared  dropsy  of
the  hiiart  had  set  in. This  gentleman ,  although  well
nourished,  was  not  particularly  corpulent;  nevertheless  he
could  only  with  the  greatest  exertion  ascend  the  stairs.
Appetite  he  had  almost  none,  sleep  very  disturbed;  he
was  never  without  anxiety  and  fear.  In  his  former  pro-
fession he  had  had  plenty  of  exercise,  but  afterwards  he
came  into  the  chancery  and  this  sedentary,  inactive  life
dition. For  his  cure  quite  a  few  and  easy  applications
of  water  sufficed. They  are  also  of  help  still,  as  soon
as  ever  the  evil  begins  to  show  itself  anew.  It  has  often
announced  itself  during  twelve  years,  but  each  time  it
has  been  quickly  removed.  Besides  the  water-applications
the  gentleman  used  tea  as  well,  of  which  he  became
fond  on  account  of  its  excellent  effects. This  tea  alone
effected  the  regularity  of  the  bowels  and  the  leadii  g  out
of  the  gases  from  the  stomach,  and  at  the  same  time
spared  more  numerous  and  stronger  applications  of  watsr,
which  the  gentleman  feared,  and  for  which  the  time
often  was  wanting.  This  tea  was  the  mild  "Tonic  laxa-
tive," and  applications  were  the  following :  If  the  com-
plaint appeared  in  a  lesser  degree,  lying  on  wet  sheets
three  times  in  the  week,  vigorous  ablution  of  back,  chest
and  abdomen,  every  morning  when  rismg,  were  sufficient.
If  the  evil  appeared  in  a  stronger  degree  the  gentbman
used  the  short  bandage,  or  also  a  half-bath.  —  To  the-se
applications  were  united  ablutions  in  the  night,  which
were  always  of  good  service.

It  is  remarkably  strange,  and  I  am  often  astonished
that  people  should  use  the  strongest  remedies  against  such
conditions,  remedies  which  can  never  have  good  results
for  the  health;  the  tormented  patient  is,  alas!  otten
treated  with  poison  even.*


*  There  is  now  a  letter  lyinj?  before  me  in  which  the
patient  complains  of,  and  enumerates,  the  poisons  he  has  had
To  swallow  iS  different  diseases.  1  will  reserve  the  enumeratioa
for  another  time.


Lungs,  inflammation  of  the.


319


The  latter  was  always,  and  is  still  to  this  clay,  an
unsolved  riddle  to  me.  1  have  always  to  exert  myself  in
order  to  preserve  my  interior  calm,  when  I  hear  of  such
things.

A  priest  got  inflammation  of  the  lungs  m  a  high
degree,  after  this  emphysema  of  the  lungs  (expansion  of
the  lungs,  inflation  of  the  lungs,)  and  with  it  came  such
a  cough,  that  it  was  hardly  possible  to  listen  to  it.  With
hardly  any  appetite,  with  a  countenance  of  sadness  and
ailment,  he  appeared  to  be  in  a  very  low  condition.  The
lungs  were  still  pronounced  as  curable  by  the  doctors.

The  applications  were  the  follovsäng :  For  fourteen
days  together:  1.  every  day  two  upper  showers ;  2.  twice
every  day  to  walk  in  water  for  three  to  five  minutes;
3.  three  times  a  week  a  shawl ;  4.  every  second  day  a
sitting-bath  of  1  minute's  duration.  The  patient  took  a
decoction  of  Fojnum  grsecum  boiled  with  honey,  if  possible
every  hour  a  spoonful.

The  effects  were  :  the  showers  strengthened  the  upper
part  of  the  body.  The  cough  became  in  the  beginning
still  stronger ,  but  very  much  phlagm  was  thrown  up.
After  three  days  the  cough  and  expectoration  decreased,
and  hi  twelve  days  there  was  only  a  little  remainder  of
the  phlegm  left.  —  This  was  removed  by  further  appli-
cations of  upper  showers,  knee -showers  and  tea  from
common  nettle  and  ribwort.  After  about  three  weeks,
perfect  restoration  took  place:

Lungs,  inflammation  of  the.

Margarita  is  lying  in  bed.  She  has  a  violent  dry
cough  and  much  tendency  to  vomit;  the  heat  increases
from  hour  to  hour.  Acute  pain  and  burning  torment  her
chest  and  one  of  her  sides.  The  physician  declares  that
inflammation  of  the  kings  is  commg  on.  How  can  the
patient  be  helped  ?  Every  child  knows  that  a  sponge  can
absorb  and  retain  a  great  deal  of  water.  Should  there
be  nothing  to  absorb  heat  as  a  sponge  does  the  water"?
Every  woman  in  Germany  knows  the  TopfenlUis  (cheese


320  Part  111.  Diseasics.


prepared  from  curdled  milk)-*  Take  .some  of  this  Topfm-
Ms  and  some  of  the  Topfcvivasscr  and  mix  it  to  a  paste,
spread  this  paste  on  a  linen  cloth  and  put  the  jilaster  on
the  burning  spot  whence  the  fire  of  inflammation  threatens
to  spread.  I  do  not  know  a  better  rnrsans  for  absorbing
heat ;  I  have  seen  the  greatest  intlammations  checked  and
extinguished  by  this  remedy  if  it  was  applied  twice  to
4  times  a  day  according  to  the  dagree  of  heat.  I  know
many  persons  who  owe  their  life  to  the  application  of
this  simple  compress.

As  interior  remedy  the  patient  should  take  a  spoon-
ful of  Provence-oil  twice  a  day.

Should  these  two  remedies  prove  inefficient  i.  e.  should
the  inflammation  not  be  checked  by  them,  then  water
may  be  applied.  The  patient  should  make  use  of  the
lower  bandage  twice  a  day.  Instead  of  the  lower  band-
age both  feet  to  above  the  ankles  may  be  swatlaed  in
cloths  dipped  in  water  and  vinegar ;  they  must  be  renewed
as  often  as  they  become  very  warm.  Wet  socks  may  be
substituted  for  the  foot-baudage  and  dry  ones  put  on

over  them.  .  , ,  ^

If  the  sick  Margarita  makes  use  of  the  plaster  tor
3  to  5  days  in  the  beginning  of  the  dlness,  she  wdl  be
well  again  in  6  to  7  days  or  at  the  longest  m  9  to  10  days.

Other  parts  of  the  body  may  be  inflamed  as  well  as
the  luno-s  We  speak  of  inflammations  of  the  diaphragm,
abdomen  etc.  All  these  are  to  be  worked  upon  accor-
ding to  the  above  mentioned  prmciples:  divers^ion  ot  the
blood,  cooling  of  the  inflamed  part  i.  e.  extraction  of
heat  through  the  influence  of  cold.  rr^

I  was  once  called  to  a  patient  at  midnight.  He  as
almost  unable  to  breathe.  He  coughed  dreadfully  and  had
a  great  tendency  to  vomit.  In  the  chest  especially  on
onf  s^de  of  it,  he  had  a  sensation  as  though  he  ^^as
nerc^d  wit'h  knives.  The  patient's  whole  body  was  glow-
in"  hot. Instead  of  preparmg  him  for  death,  for  NNhicli

of  tfl  milk  is  called  Topfemvasscr  (whey).


Lungs,  inflammation  op  the.


purpose  I  had  been  called,  I  had  a  lower  bandage  applied
to  him  and  a  Topfai-plaster  placed  on  the  painful  spot.
T(i  effect  interior  cooling  he  took  a  spoonful  of  salad-oil.
This  did  him  good.  For  G  days  he  continued  thus,  and
then  the  man  was  out  of  danger.

If  somebody  dies  from  inflammation  of  the  lungs  or
any  other  interior  inflammation ,  what  has  there  been
going  on  in  the  body?  The  interior  is  reflected  in  the
exterior.

You  have,  no  doubt,  seen  little  ulcers  or  perhaps
you  have  been  afflicted  with  such  yourself.  How  are
these  ulcers  formed?  First  you  perceive  a  red  spot  on
the  skin,  then  you  feel  burning  inside.  The  swelling  in-
creases, and  after  some  time  you  see  the  upmost  part  of
the  cone  become  white.  Then,  people  say,  the  ulcer  is
ripe,  and  it  is  time  to  lance  it  or  to  squeeze  it  so  as  to
remove  the  matter  and  with  it  the  bad  blood  which  has
gathered  there.

Such  a  little  ulcer  (carbuncle)  generally  causes  great
pain  not  only  in  the  part  where  it  originates  but  in  the
whole  body.  This  is  the  best  proof  for  the  truth  that  the
whole  body  has  to  .share  the  sufferings  of  the  individual
part,  that  it  is  for  the  good  of  the  whole  body  if  such
things  are  well  healed  but  in  lilce  manner  turns  to  its
disadvantage  if  they  are  neglected.

If  a  greater  ulcer  of  this  kind  does  not  become  ma-
ture, the  affected  spot  will  soon  assume  a  blue  or  red-
brown  colour,  the  blood  decays,  and  the  decayed  blood
has  an  effect  similar  to  that  of  poison.  If  it  rnixes  with
the  sound  blood,  blood  poisoning  will  set  in,  which,  when
not  arrestfed,  always  ends  fatally.

The  same  process  takes  place  m  cases  of  interior
inflammation,  but  there  the  poison  produces  its  effect  more
quickly,  its  ravages  are  more  terrible  and  more  detri-
mental.

Martin,  a  handsome  strong  man,  gets  violent  fever.
First  he  feels  chilly,  then  hot.  His  head  is  so  hot  that
the  physician  declares  his  illness  to  be  inflammation  of
the  bram.  His  whole  inside  is  in  flames,  as  it  were  The
forerunners  of  the  evil  were  headache,  lassitude,  and  a

Kneipp,  Water- Oure.  o,


'22  Part  III.  Diseases.


sensation  of  chill.  The  patient  felt  no  particular  pain  in
any  part,  except  the  fever.  After  10  days  the  man  died,
and  at  the  dissection  of  the  corpse  it  was  discovered
that  the  jioor  man's  hrain  was  intact,  and  that  he  had
died  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs.

How  would  you  have  treated  this  case?  I  was  asked.
This  case  shows  clearly  how  easily  the  diagnosis  (the
discriminating  knowledge  of  a  disease  obtained  by  the
examination  of  its  symptoms)  deceives.  The  ordinary
symptoms  of  inflammation  of  the  lungs  are:  a  piercing
pain  and  burning  about  the  lungs,  cough  and  tendency
to  vomit.  Our  patient  had  not  one  of  them.  How  great
a  difficulty  such  a  case  presents  to  the  allopathist.  And
often  it  is  the  highest  time,  the  fire  has  already  assumed
great  dimensions.  The  fire-engine  must  not  fail  to  quench
it,  otherwise  there  is  no  help,  nor  would  applications  of
drops  and  spoonfuls  be  of  avail ;  the  fire  would  instantly
consume  them.

My  simple  inaxim  for  such  desperate  cases  (and  1
hope  it  will  not  be  opposed  by  any  one)  is:  Whenever
there  is  a  fire,  try  to  extinguish  it,  check  the  mightiest
flame  first;  if  the  whole  body  is  on  fire,  extend  your
proceeding  to  the  whole  body.  Perhaps  you  will  become
master  of  it;  at  all  events,  you  will  weaken  it  and  obtain
time  for  further  consideration.

As  to  the  above  mentioned  patient,  I  should  have
had  his  chest,  back  and  abdomen  washed  every  hour  for
3  or  4  consecutive  hours;  these  ablutions  would  have
checked  the  fire.  Then  I  should  have  continued  quenching
the  fire  with  lying  on  wet  sheets  and  covering  with  wet
sheets,  with  wet  socks,  foot-bandages,  the  latter  to  be
renewed  every  hour.  If  the  patient's  lungs  had  been
otherwise  healthy  —  and  such  seems  to  me  to  have  been
the  case  since  he  felt  no  pain  in  the  highest  stage  ot
inflammation  -  his  cure  would,  humanly  speaking,  have
been  certain  i.  e.  if  God  in  his  infinite  wisdom  had  not  de-
creed otherwise.  .

Megrim.  (Migraine.)
Megrim  or  migraine  is  a  disease  to  which  the  weaker
sex  is  particularly  subject  but  which  sometimes  also  attacks


323


the  strongest  men,  especially  those  who  are  much  given
to  mental  labour.  To  comfort  such  patients,  you  some-
times hear  physicians  say:  Be  quiet,  a  stupid  head  never
gets  migraine.  The  complaint  originates  either  in  a
disturbed  circulation  or  in  some  derangement  of  the  stomach
or  the  bowels.  (Entire  want  of  appetite  and  repugnance
to  all  food.)  If  the  lower  body  is,  on  the  whole,  weak,
if  there  is  much  wind,  if  the  bowels  do  not  move  regu-
larly, these  complaints  re-act  on  the  head  and  cause  pain ;
or  the  blood  may  have  a  determination  to  one  particular
spot.  Migraine  often  announces  itself  by  a  sensation  as
if  a  veil  were  spread  over  the  eyes ;  some  have  great  pain
in  the  corners  of  the  eyes,  and  in  some  the  sight  itself
is  impaired.

Migraine  often  appears  after  illnesses,  when  nature
has  not  yet  recovered  its  strength  and  the  activity  of  the
organs  is  not  yet  a  normal  one. It  may  also  be  inherited.

Migraine  is  easy  of  cure.  If  it  proceeds  from  gases  —
and  these  are  in  my  opinion  the  principal  cause  —  it  will
be  sufficient  to  wash  the  abdomen  with  cold  water  twice
to  4  tunes  daily  for  2  or  3  consecutive  days.  Not  only
the  gases  will  be  expelled  by  this  simple  application  but
it  also  works  on  the  bowels  and  not  seldom  it  alone  will
restore  everything  to  order.  The  effect  will  be  stronger
still  if  the  water  is  mixed  with  some  salt  or  vinegar.

Should  these  applications  prove  inefficient,  2  or  3
half-baths  may  be  taken  within  a  week.  These  should
suffice.  Moreover  the  patient  may  take  tea  to  evacuate
the  gases.  Caraway  or  fennel  is  of  excellent  effect.  Five
drops  of  lavender-oil  taken  on  sugar  every  morning  and
evening  will  render  the  same  service.  Many  have  been
relieved  by  chewing  6  to  8  juniper-berries  during  the  day.

Effervescent  powders  are  thought  to  be  an  unfailing
remedy  against  this  complaint.  1  admit  that  they  lead
off  gases  but  their  effect  must  not  be  exaggerated.  They
are  not  unfailing  remedies.  Such  people  always  remind
me  of  the  amusing  story  in  which  a  hare  is  killed  by
means  of  -a  rocket.  The  Migrain esti ft  is  nowadays  con-
sidered as  the  "wow  phis  tiltru''  for  Migraine.  It  consists
of  a  finely  worked  piece  of  wood  containing  the  wonder-

21*


324  Part  III.  Diseases.


acorn  which  has  a  strong  smell  of  camphor.  No  real
gentleman  or  real  lady  goes  out  without  this  little  "  Vade
viecumy  The  root  of  the  complaint  is,  as  we  have  seen,
in  the  abdomen.  With  the  Migrainestift  the  forehead  is
stroked  a  certain  number  of  times.  I  will  not  take  the
liberty  of  judging  any  further  about  this;  but  I  should
not  be  able  to  help  smiling  if  a  patiant,  to  whom  a
clyster  has  been  ordered,  wanted  to  have  his  ear  syringed
instead.

Melancholy.

"For  several  years  I  have  suffered  from  distemper  of
the  mind,  headache,  cramp-like  pain  in  the  face,  rheu-
matism, and  profuse  perspiration  of  the  whole  body.  Se-
veral physicians  have  endeavoured  to  cure  me,  but  m  vam.

In  14  days  this  sad  condition  was  removed  and  to  brace
the  system  for  the  future  one  half-bath  and  one  whole-
ablution  weekly  were  sufficient.  The  applications  of  the
first  fortnight  were:  1)  Twice  a  week  a  wet  shirt  dipped
in  salt  water  in  order  to  lead  off  morbid  matters;  2  twice
a  week  a  half-bath  to  strengthen  the  lower  body;  3)  twice
weekly  a  whole-ablution  to  rouse  the  whole  organism  to

activity.  no  ■  c

"I  come  to  consult  you  about  a  person  suffering  trom
melancholy.  A  house-wife,  38  years  old  has  a  great  dis-
like for  all  occupation,  nor  is  she  able  to  do  any  thing
She  lives  a  sad  life  and  cares  neither  for  her  husband
nor  for  her  household.  She  avoids  all  company  and  never
leaves  the  house.  She  is  aheady  rather  emaciated  and

Applications:  1)  To  wash  every  evening  when  warm
in  bed  with  water  mixed  with  vinegar;  2)  twice  daily  a
warm  foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt,  for  14  minutes;
3)  to  take  20  drops  of  wormwood  extract  in  water  twic3
daily.  After  3  weis  she  was  in  a  pretty  good  conditioi.
Fur  her  applications:  1)  2  short  bandages  ^veeky,  2)  -
whole-ablitions  weekly.  These  applications  were  to  be
Tontinued  for  a  fortnight; from  f'^X  3  ^

patient  took  one  whole-ablution  and  walked  in  water  6  to
5  times  every  week.


Mucous  Fkver.  —  Nervous  complaint.  325


Throu'^li  over-exevtion  and  harassing  cares  a  genlle-
man  contracted  the  following  complaints:  hummuig  in  tiie
ears,  continuous  sensation  of  pressure  m  the  head,  debi-
litation of  his  reasoning  faculty  and  his  memory;  he  was,
therefore,  utterly  unable  to  perform  the  duties  ot  his
vocation.  Moreover  he  suffered  from  great  depression  ot
spirits,  from  fear  and  alarm.  He  seldom  slept  well.  Ihe
bodily  strength  of  the  once  robust  man  was  dwindling
fast,  and  there  was  a  considerable  loss  of  weight.  The
greatly  dejected  patient  submitted  to  the  following  treat-
ment: Upper  shower,  shower  for  the  back,  walking  m
water,  2  bandages  a  week,  once  a  Spanish  mantle,  and
for  interior  use  wormwood  drops  either  pure  or  mixed
with  arnica  or  centaury.  These  extracts  had  a  particu-
larly good  effect.  After  an  8  weeks'  cure  he  felt  perfectly
well  and  able  to  work ;  his  temper  was  raised  and  cheer-
ful and  has  remained  so  ever  since.  His  bodily  weight
has  gained  22  lbs.

Mucous  Fever.

If  catarrh  is  compared  to  an  infant,  mucous  fever  is
the  grown-up  child.  Mucous  fever  always  owes  its  exis-
tence to  catarrh  and  both  are  sources  of  innumerable
other  complaints,  as  mentioned  on  a  previous  occasion.
The  cure,  and  consequently  also  the  applications,  are  the
same  for  both.  Whoever  wants  to  cure  catarrh  easily
and  quickly,  should  lie  in  bed,  w^ash  his  chest  and  abdomen
every  hour  and  have  his  back  washed  by  someone  else.
Three  or  four  such  ablutions  cure  catarrh  in  its  first
stages  in  one  night.  If  parts  of  the  throal ,  head,  or  chest
become  inflamed  in  consequence  of  the  catarrh,  we  have
developed  mucous  fever  which  is  nothing  else  than  catarrh
tormenting  the  whole  body.  Those  parts  which  were  first
attacked  by  the  catarrh,  be  it  throat,  chest,  or  any
other  part,  remain  always  most  sensitive  until  the  patient
is  completely  restored.

Nervous  complaint.

A  priest  relates  as  follows:

"In  consequence  of  great  excitement,  fear,  and  fright
I  got  a  complaint  which  in  its  beginning  consisted  in


326


Part  III.  Dtsrarks


frequent  palpitation  of  the  heart,  constant  difficult  breailiin;»
and  general  weakness. The  attacks  of  palpitation  ceased
after  some  months ;  but  other  complaints  appeared  in  their
stead:  now  and  then  very  violent  and  alarming  attacks
of  asthma,  frequent  painful  pressure  and  a  feeling  of
contraction  extending  also  to  the  abdomen. I  felt  the
pressure  especially  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the.  ribs,  some-
times also  in  the  spinal  marrow.  I  often  felt  great  weak-
ness and  lassitude  in  my  limbs  and  pain  in  the  joints.
The  bowels  are  constantly  tormented  by  costiveness  and
gases. My  voice  is  much  weakened  so  that  even  simple
speaking  causes  me  pain  and  asthma: moreover  it  is
utterly  impossible  for  me  to  continue  speaking  for  any
length  of  time. My  head  is  troubled  with  giddiness,
pressure  and  violent  headache  in  such  a  degree  that  I
am  somethnes  unable  to  thinlt.  Every  trifle  irritates  me
and  increases  my  sufferings  in  chest  and  head.  My  mind
is  plunged  into  unspeakable  melancholy  which  drives  me
almost  to  despair. The  physicians  declare  my  disease  to
be  a  nervous  complaint.  Two  of  them,  an  allopathist  and
particular  diet,  bromkali,  Zincum  oxydat.,  Natr.  phosph.
etc.)  none  of  which  had  the  desired  result,  but  rather
increased  my  sufferings. Cold  whole-baths  and  much
exercise  in  the  open  air,  which  were  ordered  by  a  third
physician,  seemed  to  have  a  better  effect. This  lasted
for  6  months  when  I  resolved  to  have  recourse  to  cold
water  only.''

Thus  related  the  patient.  Let  us  look  at  him  a  little
more  closely.  His  appearance  is  unusually  red,  the  eye-
balls are  somewhat  yellow,  ears  and  lips  red  mixed  with
blue.  The  gentleman,  who  is  hardly  more  than  30  years
old,  has  lost  almost  all  his  hair.  What  must  we  con-
clude from  these  symptoms?  Certainly  a  very  great  deter-
mination of  blood  to  head  and  chest.  The  pain  in  the
forehead  shows  the  violence  of  the  afflux  of  blood  to
the  head  and  the  blood  causes  distension  of  the  vems
How  is  there  a  cure  to  be  effected?  The  two  principal
places  of  suffering,  head  and  chest,  require  our  first  atten-
tion Both  are  overwhelmed,  as  it  were,  by  the  super-


Nervous  disobdpr.


abundance  of  blood.  This  must,  be  led  to  tlu  e)cti-em.(i3.s.
Then  1  may  proceed  to  dissolve  whatever  be  abnormal  in
chest  and  head  (conglomerations,  distensions  of  veins,  etc.j,
and  finally  I  must  work  on  the  whole  system.

A  course  of  appUcations  in  the  following  order  will
be  most  suitable :  foot-vapour,  head-vapour,  short  band-
age, Spanish  mantle,  walking  on  stones,  upper  and  lower
showers,  Spanish  mantle,  walking  barefoot,  m  winter  best
in  newly  fallen  snow.  Within  3  weeks  the  patient  s  con-
dition was  much  improved.  It  required  months,  however,
to  effect  the  complete  cure  of  so  deeply  rooted  a  disease.

The  patient  will  learn  to  judge  from  the  more  or
less  good  effect  of  every  individual  application  which  of
them  should  be  offener  repeated.  General  applications
i.  e.  such  whose  effects  extend  to  the  whole  orgai.ism
should,  however,  always  accompany  those  that  aim  at  the
cure  of  one  particular  part.

A  priest  from  Bohemia  relates :  "Eight  months  ago  1
got,  in  consequence  of  over-exertion,  violent  palpitation
of  the  heart,  sleeplessness,  rising  of  the  stomach,  swelling
of  the  abdomen,  and  difficult  breathing.  I  suffered  from
pain  in  feet  and  hands,  restlessness  and  great  la3sitnde.
At  last  my  appetite  also  failed,  and  there  was  no  evacua-
tion of  the  bowels."

At  his  arrival  the  patient  seemed  very  much  exhausted,
his  complexion  was  pale  yellow.  After  a  seven  weeks'
cure  he  was  m  the  full  possession  of  health  and  good
spirits. Also  sleep  had  come  again.

The  water-applications  of  which  he  had  made  use
were  the  following:  In  the  first  3  weeks  1)  a  half-bath
from  bed  in  the  night;  2)  in  the  morning  upper  shower
and  walking  in  water ;  3)  in  the  afternoon  shower  for  the
back  and  half-bath;  4)  daily  much  walking  barefoot  in
the  grass.  Later  on  upper  shower  with  knee-gush,  half-
baths,  and  twice  a  foot-vapour;  as  internal  remedies  he
took  8  to  10  juniper-berries  daily  and  drank  tea  from
wormwood  and  sage.

Nervous  disorder.

A  gentleman  of  position  had  so  injured  his  body  and
mind  through  an  unusual  amount  of  business,  that  one


328


Part  111.  Diseases.


could  no  longer  judge  which  was  the  most  disturbed,  mind
or  body.

There  was  reason  to  fear  that  tlie  disturbance  of  the
mind  with  its  sad  consequences  might  take  a  lamentable
end.  For  months  together  lie  could  take  neither  rest  nor
sleep,  the  most  painful  sufferings  tormented  his  whole
body;  all  medicinal  remedies  were  without  effect.  The
water  was  to  rescue  here,  and  really  after  thirteen  weeks
the  patient,  fresh  and  healthy,  was  able  to  resume  his
profession  and  begin  work  anew.

Such  a  condition  can  only  be  treated  by  the  most
simple  applications:  1)  Twice  daily  to  wash  the  upper
part  of  the  body  with  water  and  vinegar.  A  knee-gush
(for  1  minute)  follows  this  washing.  The  second  appli-
cation is  to  be  repeated  in  the  afternoon.  The  2  day  :  A
mild  shower  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body  with  half  a  can
of  water.  Directly  afterwards  to  take  exercise  on  wet
stones,  besides  a  can  of  water  poured  on  the  knees ;  in
the  afternoon  the  same.  The  3 '''^  day:  An  upper  shower  (one
canful)  Afternoon:  upper  shower  (one  canful),  directly
afterwards  to  stand  in  water  (for  3  minutes).  This  appli-
cation was  so  painful  that  tears  came  -into  the  patient's
eyes.  Thus  he  continued  for  about  a  week.  In  the  second
week  upper  showers  with  increased  knee-gushes  were  or-
dered every  day  alternately  with  standing  in  water,  in
.so  far  as  the  sensitive  feet  would  allow;  these  gushes
■were  increased  during  the  week  from  one  to  three  cans.
Also  the  standing  in  water  was  extended  as  far  as  the
knees,  but  always  only  for  two,  at  the  utmost  three  mi-
nutes. In  the  third  week  the  upper-showers,  together
with  knee-gushes  and  standing  in  water  were  further
increased,  and  every  second  day  a  sittmg-bath  taken,
generally  in  the  afternoon.  In  the  fourth  week:  upper
shower  with  standing  in  water  every  morning;  in  the
afternoon  a  half-baih.  In  the  fifth  week  in  the  morning
a  .shower  for  the  back  with  standing  in  water,  or  a  knee-
gush.  In  the  afternoon  an  upper  shower.  This  was  con-
tinued, every  half  day  an  applic'^tion:  a)  upper  shower
with  knee-shower,  b)  half-bath,  c)  shower  for  tlie  back,
until  perfect  restoration  was  effected.


Nervous  exhaustion.  —  Neuvous  headache.  329


Interiorly  were  taken :  a)  white  powder,  daily  a  salt-
spoonful,  alternately  ^ith,  b)  6  to  8  juniper-berries  daily,
c)  tea  from  wormwood  and  sage.

Nervous  exhaustion.

A  pastor  is  suffering  from  unbearable  headache  which
is,  whenever  it  gives  way,  followed  by  a  sensation  of
fatigue  and  pain  in  the  throat  which  renders  him  almost
unable  to  speak.  Also  in  his  back  he  often  felt  a  pain-
ful contraction.  According  to  a  certificate  brought  from
hi-^  physician,  he  was  suffering  from  "developed  nervous
exhaustion,  brain  and  spinal  marrow  were  in  great  danger
of  being  affected."  Moreover  there  was  great  irritability
and  sensations  of  fear.

Applications:  A  light  upper  shower  in  the  morning
and  in  the  afternoon;  walking  in  wet  grass  and  on  wet
stones  for  4  minutes  daily.  Thus  to  continue  for  5  days,
then  a  more  vigorous  upper  shower,  a  knee-guf^h  and  twice
walking  in  water,  daily  for  5  other  days.  He  also  took
sitting-baths  alternately  with  the  aforesaid  applications.

To  complete  his  restoration  to  health  he  made  use
of  the  shower  for  the  back,  the  half-bath,  the  upper-
shower  and  walking  in  water  daily  for  some  time.  These
applications  removed  all  complaints  and  the  pastor  went
back  to  his  place  in  perfect  health  and  as  cheerful  as  ever.

Nervous  headache.

Two  students  had  to  leave  college  before  the  end  of
the  term.  Both  suffered  so.  much  from  headache  and
rising  of  the  blood  to  the  head  that  they  were  not
only  unable  to  study  but  even  to  read  for  a  few  minutes.
All  remedies  applied  had  been  without  effect.  I  advised
them  to  spend  the  greater  part  of  the  day  in  walking
barefoot  especially  in  the  dewj  grass,  on  their  rambles  in
the  wood  to  stand  in  a  rill  for  some  minutes  every  hour
and  finally  to  take  2  upper  showers  and,  in  warm  weather,
3  of  them  daily.

The  two  boys  followed  my  advice  and  did  even  more
than  I  required.  The  visible  improvement  of  their  health
gave  them  courage,  and  at  the  close  of  their  holidays  they
returned  joyfully  to  their  college.


330  PAUT  III.  DiSKASF.S.

Would  that  so  wholesome  a  practice  as  walking  bare-
foot in  wet  grass  might  find  a  place  among  the  numerous
drill-exercises  taught  in  schools  many  of  which  cause
great  heat  and  excitement  whilst  walking  barefoot  on  a
wet  meadow  is  unsurpassed  in  its  calming  effect.

A  man,  of  45  years  of  age,  came  complaining  to  me
head-complaint.  I  am  never  without  a  head  bandage;  I
sometimes  feel  an  unbearable  pre.ssure  on  the  back  of  my
head,  first  on  the  right  side,  then  on  the  left.  If  the
pain  extends  to  the  back,  I  get  violent  palpitation  of  the
heart  not  seldom  for  hours  together.  Appetite  is  often
entirely  wanting,  and  I  suffer  so  much  from  giddiness  that
I  can  no  longer  walk  alone,  my  wife  had  to  accompany
me  hither.  My  mental  sufferings,  however,  are  far  worse
than  those  of  my  body.  The  depression  is  sometimes  so
great  that  I  wish  for  death."  The  gentleman  was  rather
corpulent,  his  complexion  yellow  and  dull,  his  body  much
inflated.

In  13  days  the  patient  was  completely  restored.  His
bodily  weight  had  decreased ;  headache  and  giddines  had
disappeared;  good  spirits,  appetite  and  sleep  returned  in
their  stead.

The  applications  were  the  following:

1)  On  the  one  day  upper  shower  and  knee-gush  in
the  morning,  shower  for  the  back  and  walkmg  in  water
in  the  afternoon.

2)  On  the  second  day  shower  for  the  back  and  walking
in  water  in  the  morning,  shower  for  the  back  and  knee-
gush  in  the  afternoon.  .

3)  On  the  third  day  upper  shower  and  knee-gush  m
the  morning,  whole  shower  and  half-bath  in  the  afternoon.

The  natural  strength  of  the  patient  allowed  so  many
applications  daily.

Nervous  over-excitement.

Two  students  came  during  their  Easter  holidays  and
related :  "We  have  head-complaint,  determuiation  of  blood
to  the  head,  impaired  sleep  and  appetite,  and  great  lassi-
tude; we  are,  therefore,  unable  to  contmue  our  studies.


PERSPIUA'I'ION.


m


Conld  we  not  make  use  of  our  holidays  to  restore  our
h3alth  by  water  applications'?

I  advised  them  to  spend  their  holidays  as  much  as
possible  in  the  open  air,  in  the  woods  or  fi3lds  walking
barefoot.  As  it  was  yet  rather  cold  I  told  them  to  take
brisk  exercise,  especially  after  walking  in  water  which
they  should  do  from  time  to  time  for  2  or  3  minutes  in
a  ditch  filled  with  water.  They  also  held  their  arms  in
water  twice  or  3  times  a  day.  The  young  people  liked
these  applications  very  much.  Filled  with  new  courage
and  strength,  they  returned  to  their  studies  and  joyfully
looked  forward  to  the  autumn  holidays  which  should  offer
them  the  welcome  opportunity  for  another  course  of  water-
applications.

Be  it  observed  that  the  walking  in  the  wet  cold  grass
must  be  performed  at  such  a  rate  as  to  produce  suffi-
cient vital  heat;  for  the  same  reason  the  standing  in
water  ought  to  be  followed  by  rapid  exercise.

A  seminarist  came  to  me  with  the  following  com-
plaints :  I  have  such  a  pressure  in  my  head  that  I  often
scarcely  know  where  I  am,  and  what  I  do.  I  suffer  aho
from  giddiness  and  am  irnable  for  any  mental  occupation,
I  had  to  leave  the  seminary  3  months  previous  of  the
time  fixed  for  my  ordination.

There  was  warm  August  weather,  and  the  young  man
spent  the  greater  part  of  10  days  in  gardens  and  woods
walking  barefoot  from  morning  to  night.  Moreover  he
had  2  to  4  vrpper  showers  daily.  Within  12  days  all
symptoms  of  the  complaint  had  ceased ;  he  had  recovered
both  his  strength  and  his  good  spirits  and  for  further
bracing  of  the  sy.stem  he  needs  only  to  spend  his  autumn
holidays  in  the  same  manner.

Perspiration.

There  are  people  who  perspire  easily  and  profusely;
at  the  slightest  exertion  they  are  bathed  in  perspiration
which  condition,  besides  causing  weakness  and  weariness,
renders  them  liable  to  all  possible  colds  and  inflammations.

An  official  came  to  me  one  day  and  lamented  about
his  impaired  health,  his  difficult  breathing  etc. The  doc-


332


Part  III,  Diseases.


tors,  hfe  said,  pronounce  my  disease  to  be  liver  and  kidney
complaint.  "My  gi-eatest  misfortune,  however,  is  tliat  my
stomach  will  retain  no  medicine; every  spoonful  causes
me  vomiting." "Your  good  fortune,  you  mean  to  say,"
I  replied  to  the  gantleman  whose  complaint  betrayed  it-
self through  an  olfensive  smell  of  perspiration.  "You
perspire  much  when  walking,  also  in  the  morning  when
getting  up."  "Yes,  so  it  is!  How  do  you  know?"  Instead
of  answering  his  question,  I  advised  him  to  take  a  half-
bath  with  ablation  of  the  upper  body  (of  1  minute's
duration)  as  often  as  he  came  home  bathed  in  perspii'a-
tion,  after  the  bath  to  dress  quickly  without  drying  and
take  exercise  in  his  room  for  i  hour.  "What!"  the  offi-
cial exclaimed,  "your  reverence  are  joking! God  forbid!
I  should  be  stricken  by  apoplexy  at  the  fir.st  attempt!
How  often  have  I  been  warned  against  cold  and  dampness,
and  you  tell  me  to  enter  a  bath  of  cold  water!" I  re-
mained calm  but  it  required  all  my  eloquence  to  convince
the  gentleman  of  the  harmlessness  of  the  proceeding.
Amongst  other  things  I  asked  him  whether  he  ever  hesi-
tated to  wash  face  and  hands,  when  he  came  home  and
the  salt  water  was  running  down  his  forehead?  "No,"
he  answered,  "I  do  that  each  time."  "Has  your  doing  so
ever  had  any  disagreeable  consequence?"  The  gentleman,
fearing  the  hiference  I  should  draw  from  his  negative
answer,  reflected  for  a  moment,  then  he  pronounced  a
decided  "No." "Well,"  I  replied,  "let  your  whole  body
enjoy  the  same  benefit;  promise  me  to  do  it  only  once."
He  gave  his  word. After  a  fortnight  I  met  him  again
^'Are  you  still  alive?" I  asked  him. '"How  grateful  I
feel  for  your  advice,  Father,"  he  said,  "all  my  fear  of
cold  water  is  gone. Shall  I  continue  the  bathing,  it  does
me  so  good?"  Yes,  it  did  him  good  and  gradually  cured
all  his  complaints.  The  gentleman  is  still  alive ;  he  mus
be  nearly  eighty  years  old  now.  nn  • .  .

So  simple  an  application  is  often  suthcient  to  gi
good  humour  and  to  destroy  diseases  in  their  germs  I^lany
will  laugh  at  this  assertion.  Nevermind!  Iheir  dension
will  not  impair  its  truth.  m  •

Another  remark  may  find  its  place  here. Ihere  i^


Perspiration.  333


scarcely  any  thing  so  much  feared  even  by  mtelhgent  people
as  the  application  of  water  when  perspiring,  i^^eir  opi-
nion may  be  founded  on  the  truth  that  he  who,  bathed
in  perspiration,  exposes  himself  to  cold  or  draught  endangers
his  health  and  even  his  life.  I  fully  admit  all  this,  i he
result  depends  here,  as  in  other  things  not  so  much  on
"what"  is  done  but  on  "how"  it  is  done.

My  maxims  based  on  long  experience  and  practice,
are  the  following:

a)  Whoever  is  wet  through  perspiration,  ram,  etc.
must  not  expose  hmiself  to  cold  or  draught;  this  would
be  dangerous.

b)  Whoever  feels  chilly  should  not  attempt  any  appli-
cation of  water.

c)  Who  is  wet  through  rain  etc.,  should  change  clothing
as  soon  as  possible.

d)  Who  perspires,  be  it  through  disease,  through  work,
walking  or  in  consequence  of  any  exercise  whatsoever,
should  take  a  cold  bath  or  a  cold  whole-ablution,  dress
without  drying  and  take  exercise  until  the  body  is  dry.
(Rapidity  of  proceeding  is  indispensable.)  I  hope  this  will
calm  and  satisfy  the  most  hot-blooded  sanguine.

A  gentleman  of  position  perspired  every  night  so  pro-
fusely that  the  whole  mattress,  the  pillow  and  feather-
quilt  were  every  morning  dripping  wet,  a  heavy  nightly
cross  which  made  the  gentleman  dread  the  hours  of  rest.
To  add  to  his  misery,  he  suffered  from  catarrh  during
the  whole  winter  and  no  wrapping  and  muffling  could
protect  him  against  it.

A  rapid  cure  cannot  be  expected  in  such  cases;  it
can  only  be  effected  by  gradual  strengthening  and  bracing
of  the  sy.stem,  so  much  weakened  through  sweating,  and
by  a  continued  leading  out  of  morbid  matters.  Such  a
patient  must  practice  great  patience.  Our  gentleman  is
a  proof  of  the  astonishing  effects  of  water-applications
when  made  use  of  with  punctuality  and  perseverance.  As
reward  he  regained  his  complete  health.  But  that  is  not
sufficient  for  readers  afflicted  with  a  similar  complaint;
they  will  desire  to  know  how  the  cure  was  effected  and
what  they  should  do  if  they  happened  to  be  in  the  gentle-


Part  III.  Diseases,


man's  case.  This  is  my  answer:  Put  on  the  Spanish
mantle  8  times  a  week.  Should  your  duties  prevent  you
from  doing  so  during  the  day,  use  it  as  a  night-shirt  for
1^  to  2  hours.  Take  a  whole-ahlution  from  bed  twice
or  3  times  weekly,  or  if  you  have  sleepless  nights,  as  many
times  every  night.  Whenever  you  are  perspiring,  wash
yourself  more  vigorously,  but  rapidly  and  go  to  bed  without
drying,  covering  yourself  well.  If  possible,  have  your  bed
not  in  a  cold  room.  Do  not  forget  that  you  mu.st  begin
the  applications  with  the  Spanish  mantle.  When  you  have
experienced  its  beneficial  effects  you  will  not  fail  —  were  it
but  out  of  gratitude  —  to  wear  it  at  least  once  a  week  for
1^  to  2  hours,  nor  would  a  weekly  whole-ablation  impair
your  appetite  for  water.  I  could  mention  the  names  of
many  who,  after  having  renounced  to  prejudice,  have  become
great  friends  of  water.

A  particular  and  most  loathsome  kind  of  ahnormal
perspiration  is  sweating  of  the  feet.  It  consists  in  nothing
else  than  in  foul  secretions  which  corrupt  the  vessels  con-
taining them.  This  is  the  cause  of  the  extremely  offen-
sive smell  which  makes  men  and  even  animals  shun  the
presence  of  such  poor  suffe,rers.

The  suppression  of  sweating  of  the  feet  is  not  seldom
followed  by  sad  consequences.  I  know  of  a  gentleman
who  was  advised  to  wash  his  feet  with  cold  water  several
times  a  day  in  order  to  put  an  end  to  the  troublesome
sweating.  The  feet,  indeed,  ceased  to  sweat  but  a  tedious
and  dangerous  malady  set  in  instead.  Could  it  be  other-
wise? Whoever  wants  to  entice  the  fox  out  of  his  hole
must  not  stop  the  issue  of  it.  Such  a  sportsman  would
be  laughed  at  by  the  sparrows  and  mocked  by  the  haies.

How  is  sweating  of  the  feet  cured?  AH  foul  and
decaying  matters,  however  far  they  may  have  penetrated,
must  be  dissolved  and  led  out.  The  skin  and  the  vessels
must  be  healed  and  strengthened.

The  best  and  safest  way  of  curing  sweating  of  the
feet  is  the  following.  Both  feet  are  bandag.^l  in  cloths
dipped  in  an  infusion  of  hay-flowers  or  pine-twigs.  These
bandages  absorb  the  foul  matters  and  have  at  the  same
time  a  strengthenuig  effect  which  is  particular  to  these


Rheüma'jism.


335


two  plants.  Five  or  six  of  these  bandages  should  be  taken
within  10  days ;  after  this  a  warm  foot-bath  (reaching  to
the  calves  of  the  legs)  with  threefold  change  (the  cold
ablation  not  exceeding  1  minute's  duration)  of  10  minutes
each  should  be  taken  daily  for  a  fortnight.  Eithei  of  the
2  above  mentioned  applications  made  use  of  once  a  week,
will  secure  the  result  of  the  cure.  When  this  has  been
completely  effected,  walkhig  in  wet  grass  for  |  hour  from
time  to  time  will  be  of  good  service.  Those  who  cannot
do  this  should  walk  barefoot  in  the  room  for  some  mi-
mites  before  going  to  bed.

Rheumatism.

Who  would  attempt  to  enumerate  all  the  various
rheumatic  conditions  under  which  people  are  suffering,
now  in  the  head ,  and  in  the  chest,  then  in  the  toes ,  in
the  arms,  in  the  back,  etc.

The  hard-working  peasant,  the  wood-cutter  and  all
those  who  literally  eat  their  bread  in  ths  sweat  of  their
brow  know  little  of  this  complaint,  and  if  rheumatism  ever
troubles  these  people,  it  is  sure  to  be  quickly  removed.
It  may  make  its  appearance  in  the  morning,  in  the  after-
noon it  will  flee,  chased  by  healthy  exercise.

The  latter  observation  affords  useful  hints  for  the
cure  of  rheumatism.

A  veterinarian  came  to  me  lamenting  that  he  was
no  longer  able  to  pursue  his  .profession  because  a  fearful
rheumatism  had  got  hold  of  his  right  shoulder-blade  and
was  obstinately  clinging  to  it  lUce  a  cat  whose  claws
caused  him  piercing  pain.  He  had  imprudently  exposed
himself  to  cold  when  perspiring  and  expected  to  carry
this  troublesome  cat  for  6  full  weeks ,  since  the  same
thing  had  happened  to  him  several  times  previously.  "You
will  be  free  from  pain  within  24  hours,"  I  replied,  "pro-
vided you  allow  me  to  set  my  dog  on  your  cat."  He
laughed,  and  we  laid  a  wager  on  the  subject.  He  gave
me  his  word  that  he  would  punctually  execute  whatever
the  strict  master  should  please  to  order.  He  went  home
and  had  his  back  vigorously  rubbed  with  a  dry  cloth,
then  an  upper  shower  was  applied  to  him. After  about


336  Paut  nr.  DisLASES.

8  hours  he  had  a  head  -  vapour  with  succeedmg  cold
shower.  The  twenty  fourth  hour  had  not  yet  struclc
when  the  cat  was  beyond  the  mountains,  and  I  liad  wojt
my  wager.

The  reader  probably  desires  to  know  why  dry  rubbing
was  appHed  in  this  case.  When  rheumatism  is  caused
by  sudden  transition  from  cold  to  heat  or  vice-versa,  the
pain  is  generally  occasioned  by  a  disturbed  circulation,
by  conglomerations,  slight  inflammations  etc.  Application.^
tending  to  dissolve,  evacuate,  and  strengthen  the  suffering
parts  will  restore  the  circulation  to  order  again.  Friction
aims  at  assisting  the  water  in  producing  heat  and  in
effecting  the  diversion  of  the  blood.  If  the  affected  part
were  rather  cool,  a  shower  would  cause  the  rheumatism
to  change  its  place  in  the  body  but  not  to  leave  it
altogether;  it  is,  therefore,  preceded  by  dry  rubbing.

A  peasant  got  such  violent  rheumatic  pain  in  both
feet  that  he  was  no  longer  able  to  walk;  his  thighs  were
especially  painful.

He  took  twice  daily  a  lower  bandage  dipped  m  a
decoction  of  hay -flowers  and  went  to  bed  for  2  hours
each  time. Ten  such  applications  effected  a  complete  cure.

Another  peasant  could  not  be  swathed  on  account
of  excessive  pain  in  the  hips.  He  was,  therefore,  put  in
a  bath  of  oat-straw  decoction  (33  to  Sb'^  R.)  with  three-
fold change  and  took  2  such  baths  of  25  mmutes  daüy.
In  3  days  he  was  cured.

I  could  mention  numberless  cases  of  rheumatism  m
the  head  in  which  the  cure  was  effected  not  by  appli-
cations to  the  head  itself  but  chiefly  by  foot-baths  and

foot-vapours.  , .i  •

Cold  applications  to  the  head  would  make  things
worse;  warm  ones  would  cause  a  conflux  of  blood  m  the
affected  part. The  best  sequence  of  applications  is  the

following:  j  ij.

the  warm  foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt,

the  shawl,

the  foot-vapour,

the  head- vapour  followed  by  a  cold  gush,  and  again
the  shawl.


Rheumatism.


337


These  applications  will  cure  the  most  violent  head
rlieumatism,  if  one  of  them  is  made  use  of  daily.

No  kind  of  vh3umatism  should  be  neglected  because
each  one  can  develop  into  many  and  serious^  diseases  of
the  lungs,  eyes,  ears  etc.,  into  inflammations,  blood
poisoning,  ulcers  etc.

A  student  had  indulged  in  much  drinking,  and  in  this
condition  exposed  himself  to  the  cold  air.  He  got  rheu-
matism in  the  chest.  Thinking  that  such  a  trifle  could
do  him  no  harm,  he  neglected  the  complaint.  When  a
dry  cough  of  a  malignant  character  set  in,  it  was  too  late
for  hunian  remedies,  and  in  2  months  the  promising  young
man  died.  Had  he  only  vigorously  washed  chest  and  ab-
domen 4  or  5  times  a  day,  his  chest  would  have  been
free  from  rheumatism,  and  he  himself  out  of  danger,  in
one  or  two  days.

The  head  of  a  college  relates :  "I  suffer  unspeakably
in  my  arms,  shoulders  and  feet ;  I  am  quite  enveloped  in
rheumatism,  as  it  were,  and  if  the  pain  gives  way  in  one
part,  it  becomes  worse  m  another.  My  respiration  is  so
difficult  that  I  often  fear  to  suffocate;  I  am  also  troubled
with  congestions.  1  have  been  magnetized  and  electrified,
I  have  used  many  other  remedies  but  without  effect.  The
water  -  cure  has  freed  me  from  pain  in  10  days ;  I  am
convinced  tliat  a  continuation  of  some  easy  applications
will  restore  me  to  perfect  health."

The  applications  were:  An  upper  shower  and  2  thigh-
gushes  daily ;  on  the  second  day  the  Spanish  mantle ;
from  the  fourth  day  a  half -bath  instead  of  the  upper
shower  daily,  and  a  head-vapour  weekly.

A  gentleman  comes.  His  appearance  is  sickly.  His
features  are  stamped  with  an  expression  of  deep  melan-
choly. At  the  first  glance  I  recognize  in  him  a  man  of
great  suffering.  His  uhhealthy  complexion  is  of  an  ominous
yellow  hue ;  the  hair  is  very  scarce.  The  gentleman  is
not  yet  40  years  old.

His  own  report  of  his  health  is  as  follows:  I  fre-
quently suffered  from  abdominal  pains,  violent  attacks  of
colic  and  diarrhoea.  Later  I  got  disease  of  the  kidneys,
as  the  doctors  called  it. After  years  these  complaints:

Kneipp,  Water-Cure.  90


5338  Pa-ut  III.  Diseases.

left  me,  and  I  got  this  rheumatism  instead.  It  seems  to
me  as  if  a  compendium  of  all  my  former  pains  were  now
torturing  every  separate  limb. I  employed  a  great  many
medicaments;  the  result,  however,  was  never  the  wished
for  help,  but  my  old  suffering.  It  cost  me  a  great  effort
to  perform  my  duties  till  now. I  never  complained  to
any  one  since  nobody  understood  me. My  sufferings  are
only  known  to  him  who  has  promised  a  crown  to  those
who  suffer.  One  remark  I  might  add :  I  was  affected  with
dry  perspiration  of  the  feet,  the  remedies  employed  against
it,  were  effectual  but  my  general  health  was  impahed.  I
have  made  use  of  mineral  baths,  and  they  increased  my
complamt. My  bodily  pains,  however,  were  far  exceeded
by  my  mental  sufferings  caused  by  the  observation  that
others  thought  my  sensitiveness  to  play  a  great  part  in
the  matter.  Suffering  without  sympathy  is  double  suffering.

The  story  is  a  long  one,  dear  reader,  but  I  trust  a
very  instructive  one,  too.  Let  us  never  be  hard  and  un-
just to  those  who  suffer!

Wlio  will  be  able  to  detect  the  root  of  all  this
suffering,  to  disclose  to  us  the  interior  of  this  sorely  dis-
eased body? The  problem  is  less  difficult  to  solve  than
it  seems  at  first  sight.  The  patient  has  given  the  premises
in  his  account,  we  have  only  to  draw  the  conclusion.  The
yellow  complexion,  the  frequent  attacks  of  colic,  the
suppressed  sweating  of  the  feet  reveal  the  presence  of
poisonous  matters,  nor  can  the  impahed  growth  of  the
hair  be  without  a  deeper  cause  to  account  for  it.  A
thorough  cure  can  only  be  effected  when  this  poisonous
matter  is  dissolved  and  expelled,  when  the  whole  system
is  strengthened  in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  allow  such
fatal  juices  to  gather  afresh. Is  the  antidote  tor  this
poison  to  be  found  in  a  chemist's  shop? It  would  be
well  paid  for  if  it  were.  Artificial  means,  especially  when
thev  are  of  recent  invention,  are  readily  purchased  at  a  dear
pnce  whilst  He  from  whom  are  all  good  gifts,  is  scarcely
thanked  for  the  natural  remedies  which  prove  the  best

""^^""'in^the  limpid  rivulet,  in  the  clear  fountain,  there
flows  the  efficacious  remedy  which  I  mean.


4


Rheumatism.


339


The  patient  had  first  to  put  on  the  Spanish  mantle.
This  was  followed  by  a  head-vapour  with  vigorous  cold
ablution,  then  a  foot-vapour  was  taken.  I  allowed  the
use  of  these  vapours  only  at  rather  long  intervals ;  for
the  more  leniently  the  body  is  treated,  the  easier  it  is
for  nature  to  endure  the  applications  and  the  more  readily
it  will  second  their  action  in  order  to  expel  the  morbid
matters.  Then  the  patient  took  a  short  bandage  and,  to
strengthen  the  system,  an  upper  and  a  lower  shower.  He
made  use  of  all  these  applications  alternately,  taking  one
daily  for  3  weeks.  In  the  fourth  and  fifth  week  he  had
weekly  2  half-baths,  1  head-vapour,  1  foot-vapour  and
once  the  Spanish  mantle ;  finally  in  the  sixth  week,  he  had
2  warm  baths,  each  followed  by  a  cold  one,  1  half-bath
and  an  upper  and  lower  shower.  As  future  applications
I  recommended  the  patient  to  take  every  week  an  upper
and  lower  shower  and  2  or  3  whole-ablutions,  and  every
month  a  warm  bath  without  change.

Water  did  not  belie  my  confidence  even  in  this  diffi-
cult case.  The  serious  complaint  which  would,  in  all  pro-
bability, have  proved  fatal,  disappeared.  Healthy  ap-
pearance, and  lost  strength  returned,  and  the  patient's
broken  courage  was  replaced  by  renewed  enthusiasm  for
his  profession.

A  man,  40  years  old,  had  such  rheumatic  pains  in
his  right  leg  that  he  could  only  walk  short  distances  with
the  help  of  a  stick.  Sometimes  he  had  also  pains  in  his
arms  and  his  shoulders.  Having  employed  various  remedies
without  result,  he  had  recourse  to  water  and  in  6  days
he  was  almost  free  from  pain.  He  continued  the  appli-
cations and  was  completely  cured.

The  applications  were  the  following:

1)  For  6  days  2  upper  showers  and  2  thigh-gushes
daily,  once  a  week  a  lower  bandage,  twice  daily  walking
in  water  to  above  the  calves  of  the  legi  for  1  to  3  mi-
nutes, every  day  a  shower  for  the  back  and  walking  in
the  gTas».

2)  After  these  6  days  he  took  an  upper  shower
with  knee-gush  alternately  with  a  half-bath  of  1  minute's,
duration.


22*


340  Part  J 11.  Diseases.

Count  N.  has  been  suffering  from  rheumatism  for  35
years.  In  the  year  1854  he  resorted  to  Aix-lu-C"liapelle  and
obtained  relief  by  a  course  of  bidliijig.  iMnch  bivouacing
during  the  Franco-German  war  (1870—71)  brought  on  the
old  complaint,  and  again  he  used  the  Aix-la-Chapelle  baths
with  good  result.  Only  for  a  short  time  had  he  enjoyed
his  restored  health,  when  a  relapse  took  place.  The  patient
consulted  physicians  of  renown  but  without  receiving
effectual  aid.  After  having  tried  in  vain  the  baths  at
Aibling,  he  went  to  Aix-la-Chapelle  and  returned  not  cured
but  much  weakened  by  hot  baths  of  long  duration.  Seeing
the  fruitlessness  of  all  his  attempts,  he  resolved  on  trying
the  water-cure.

On  the  20*^^  of  June  1887,  the  patient  arrived  here
after  having  been  confiued  to  bed  for  2  months.  His
whole  body  was  tormented  by  rheumatic  pains,  especially
the  joints  of  the  knees,  the  feet,  the  hands,  and  the  shoul-
ders The  right  hand  and  the  arm  to  above  the  elbow
were  greatly  swollen,  the  joints  inflexible;  the  knee  was
likewise  swollen  and  could  not  be  used.  The  general
health  of  the  stately,  strongly  built  gentleman  seemad  to
be  impaired  through  long  suffering.

The  treatment  was  as  follows:

1)  Twice  a  week,  a  lower  bandage  dipped  in  a  de-
coction of  oat-straw,  hay-flowers,  and  pine-needles  (dura-
tion H  hour).  .  J- J  •

2)  Every  morning  and  evening,  a  bandage  dipped  m
the  same  decoction  was  applied  to  the  swollen  arm  for

1  to  2  hours.  r  ij  1

3)  Two  herbal  whole- baths  with  threefold  change

weekly.  , , n  r i  i

4)  Three  times  weekly,  the  shawl  for  1  hour.

After  a  fortnight  the  patient's  health  had  considerably
improved. He  left  Wceri.^hofen  and  continued  the  appli-  |
cations  at  home. He  took

1)  the  above  mentioned  arm-bandage ;

2 1  herbal  whole-bath  with  change  wo?kly,

3)  a  cold  half-bath  of  ^  to  1  minut.  s  duration  3
times  a  week;


EüPruRE.


341


4)  a  sitting-bath  of  2  minute's  duration  8  to  5  times
■weekly.

These  applications  had  the  effect  that  the  swelhng
of  the  diseased  arm  and  knees  gave  way,  and  the  joints
became  flexible  again.

To  complete  the  cure,  count  N.  used  the  following
applications  in  the  September  1887:

1)  The  warm  hand-bath,  a  hand-bandage  of  infused
hay-flowers  immediately  followed  by  cold  ablution  of  the
hand ;

2)  the  half-bath  3  or  4  times  a  week;

3)  1  herbal  whole-bath  with  threefold  change  weekly;

4)  1  upper  shower  4  times  weekly.

The  result  of  this  course  of  applications  was  a  most
favourable  one.  The  joints  became  perfectly  free  from
swelling  and  pain  and  recovered  their  flexibility,  and  count
N.  has  ever  since  enjoyed  excellent  general  health  and
good  spirits.  He  is  able  to  walk  for  hours  without  a
sensation  of  fatigue  «and,  after  he  had  been  obliged  to
renounce  for  years  to  his  favourite  sport,  the  chase,  he
indulged  in  it  for  9  consecutive  days  in  the  autumn  of
this  year,  a  fact  which  caused  great  astonishment  among
his  noble  friends.

To  prevent  a  relapse  count  N.  employs  one  of  the
means  of  hardening  every  day :  a  half-bath,  a  whole-bath
or  walking  in  water.

Rupture.

A  complaint  very  frequently  met  with  in  our  days
are  the  various  kinds  of  rupture.  They  often  appear  over-
night like  mushrooms  in  the  wood;  sometimes  they  an-
nounce themselves  through  a  sensation  of  pain.  All  per-
sons thus  affected  may  be  membered  among  the  invalids
on  account  of  their  incapability  to  do  certain  kinds  of
work ;  for  every  greater  exertion  would  expose  them  to
violent  suffering  and  even  to  death.

Rupture  is  chiefly  met  with  in  weak  natures,  hence
its  frequency  in  our  age  of  effdminacy  and  indulgence.  I
•have  the  firm  conviction  that  a  rational  hardening  from
childhood,  and  plain  nourishing  food  would  prove  effectual
moans  against  the  further  spreading  of  this  complaint.


342


Part  III.  Diseases.


Fifty  years  ago,  there  were  few  such  "broken  people"
to  be  found  in  a  village;  in  a  small  town  they  could  be
counted  on  the  fingers.  Now-a-days  among  20  persons,
3  or  4  will  be  affected  with  rupture.  To  add  to  the  evil
rupture  is  regarded  as  a  disgracing  defect  which  no  one
likes  to  own  ;  therefore  many  a  rupture  is,  in  its  beginning,
left  without  the  necessary  treatment,  and  the  small  evil
becomes  a  great  one.  Rupture  is  not  only  met  with  among
those  who  have  to  earn  their  bread  by  means  of  hard
labour;  it  also  occurs  frequently  in  the  higher  classes.
How  qiiickly  a  rupture  may  be  got!  A.  jumped  over  a
ditch  and  got  rupture ;  B.  suffered  much  from  gases,  and
got  it  thereby ;  C.  brought  it  down  from  the  pulpit  after
an  enthusiastic  sermon.

I  feel  deeply  afflicted  whenever  I  hear  that  an  other-
wise healthy  and  strong  man  has  become  invalid  by  rup-
ture. How  many  must  leave  their  profession  at  the  aga
of  40  or  50  on  account  of  the  sufferings  and  inability
caused  by  such  a  defect.  I  hav«  already  spoken  of  a
rational  water-cure.  If  water  had  but  the  power  of  pre-
venting this  one  evil,  even  then  the  small  trouble  connected
with  its  apphcation  could  not  be  compared  to  the  benefit
derived  from  it.

Rupture  is,  as  a  rule,  neither  innate  nor  inherited.
It  is  a  consequence  of  general  weakness  of  the  system
either  natural  or  brought  on  by  disease. Hardening  by
means  of  water-applications  would  have  prevented  this
weakness  or  effected  its  cure.  Will  the  so-called  "civdised
world"  ever  become  wise?  I  doubt  it. But  you,  good
countryman,  who  read  these  lines,  follow  my  advice:  Take
1  or  2  half-baths  or  sitting-baths  every  week  (any  tub
may  serve  as  bath).  You  will  soon  experience  their  streng-
thening effect. Any  time  of  the  day  is  suitable  for  the
purpose  and  the  whole  proceeding,  undressing,  bathing,
and  dressing,  will  not  take  you  more  than  4  to  6  minutes.
You  can  take  the  bath  when  coming  from  work,  and
return  to  work  immediately  after;  perspiration  is  no  im-
pediment. After  3  or  4  such  baths  you  wdl  not  require
to  be  encouraged  to  continue  them;  they  will  become  al-
most a  necessity  to  you.


EUFrURE.


343


A  peasant  once  complained  to  me  of  great  pam  in
tlie  gi-oins.  The  physician  had  declared  that  a  rupture
was  about  to  appear.  I  advised  him  to  make  frequent
use  of  lying  on  wet  sheets  and  covering  with  wet  sheets.
The  pain  soon  gave  way.  The  peasant  suspended  for  some
time  the  hardest  labour  and  remained  free  from  rupture.
The  case  was  a  warning  to  him,  and  he  was,  henceforward,
a  zealous  water-man.

Can  rupture  never  be  cured?  I  myself  have  cured
several  cases  in  adults  where  the  rupture  was  of  recent
formation.  The  spot  was  vigorously  rubbed  with  camphor-
oil  and  a  plaster  of  pitch  spread  on  wax-cloth  applied
to  it.  Fox's  grease  has  always  been  and  is  still  regarded
as  one  of  the  best  remedies  for  recent  ruptures.  The
afflected  spot  should  be  rubbed  with  it  every  2  or  3  days
and  each  time  again  covered  with  the  pitch-plaster.  In
this  manner  I  once  cured  a  rupture  which  was  7  weeks  old.

Childi-en  are  comparatively  often  affected  with  rupture.
The  cause  is  generally  to  be  sought  in  the  distention  of
the  intestines  by  food.  Such  a  child  should  have  an  oat-
straw-bath  daily  and  likewise  lie  on  wet  sheets  and  be
covered  with  wet  sheets  every  day  until  the  cure  is  effected.
The  affected  spot  should  be  gently  rubbed  with  camphor-
oil  or,  which  is  better  still,  with  fox's  grease.  Unless  a
rupture  has  already  assumed  large  dimensions,  it  will  be
cured  in  a  short  time  by  these  remedies.  If  the  former
is  the  case  the  cure  can  hardly  be  expected  and  for  such
sufferers  the  only  resource  will  be  a  truss  which  must  be
worn  according  to  surgical  directions.

Mothers  should  do  everything  in  their  power  to  pre-
vent such  defects  in  their  children  from  the  beginning.
The  happiness  of  their  children  and  their  own  depends
upon  it.  If  God  spares  my  life  a  little  longer,  I  soon,  hope
to  offer  them  a  little  book  containing  some  hints  on
rational  hardening  of  infants.  May  they  not  be  afraid  of
the  cold  water-man :  his  heart  beats  warmly  for  children
and  for  all  those  engaged  in  education.  I  do  not  intend
to  address  myself  to  those  mothers  who  by  muffling  and
wrapping  in  velvet,  silk,  and  wool  prevent  their  "angels"
even  from  enjoying  the  fresh  air.  My  advice  is  only  for


344


Part  HI.  Diseases.


those  who  dosire  to  contribute  to  the  bringing  up  of  a
healthy  and  strong  generation.

A  gentleman  of  about  40  years  of  age,  complained
of  giddiness,  congestions,  and  violent  headache.  His  ap])e-
tite  was  good,  but  he  conld  not  satisfy  it  without  causing
himself  pain.  His  complexion  was  as  unnaturally  red  as
his  body  was  stout  whilst  his  arms  and  feet  were  dis-
proportionately thin.  According  to  medical  direction,  he
wore  a  truss  because  two  ruptures  were  about  to  appear.
The  chief  complaint  consisted  in  inflation  of  the  abdomsn
by  gases.

As  soon  as  the  gases  were  expelled  and  the  org:ins
strengthened  through  water-applications,  the  protruding
beginnings  of  rupture  disappeared;  congestions  and  head-
ache also  ceased,  and  in  4  wep.ks  the  patient  was  restored
to  perfect  health.

The  treatment  had  been  as  follows:
First  day: Upper  shower  and  knee-gush  in  the  forenoon,
upper  shower  and  walking  in  water  in  the
afternoon.

Second  day:  Upper  shower  with  walldng  in  water  to  th-^
knees  in  the  forenoon,  upper  shower  and
standing  in  water  in  the  afternoon.

Third  day:  Upper  shower  with  kneeling  in  water  in  the
forenoon,  shower  for  the  back  in  the  after-
noon.

Fourth  day :  Upper  shower  and  kneeling  in  water  in  the
forenoon,  shower  for  the  back  in  the  after-
noon.

Fifth  day:  Half-bath,  later  upper  shower;  in  the  after-
noon upper  shower  and  2  hours  later  sittnig-
bath.

Sixth  day: Upper  shower  and  2  hours  later  half-bath;

in  the  afternoon  bath  reaching  to  the  arm-
])its.

Seventh  day :  Walking  m  water  to  above  the  ankles  and
2  hours  later  shower  for  the  back.
In  this  manner  the  applications  were  continued  for
4  weeks,  when  the  patient  was  restored  to  perfect  health:
it  is  especially  remarkable  tliat  his  bloated  face  and  his


Saint  Vitus's  dance.  —  Scarlet  Fever.  345


unusually  inflated  body  had  resumed  their  normal  shape
and  that  the  ruptures  had  completely  disappeared.

Saint  Vitus's  dance.

A  father  relates.  "T  have  a  daughter,  10  years  old,
who  has  never  been  healthy  from  her  infancy.  Teething
was  so  hard  for  the  girl  that  we  believed  she  would  die.
]\Ioreover  one  of  her  legs  became  thinner  than  the  other.
Now  the  girl  has  Saint  Vitus's  dance;  she  can  neither
eat  nor  sleep  and  is  terrible  to  look  at  when  the  cramps
come.  I  have  sought  help  from  many  doctors;  but  her
condition  has  always  become  worse."

"Good  man,  boil  aftermath  in  water  for  |  hour,  take
rather  much  so  that  the  water  may  become  thick  and
add  some  salt  to  the  decoction ;  then  dip  a  coarse  chemise
•in  the  water,  wring  it  out,  and  put  it  on  thj  child;  then
wrap  her  well  in  a  woollen  blanket,  and  ht  her  remain
in  it  for  1|  to  2  hours.  If  the  girl  falls  asleep,  do  not
wake  her  when  the  2  hours  are  past.  Do  this  twice  daily
for  8  days,  then  report!"

After  8  days  the  man  came  and  related:  "The  girl
has  got  a  dreadful  eruption  on  the  whole  body,  especially
on  the  back  and  the  chest,  but  she  is  becoming  quite
cheerful;  the  cramps  have  ceased,  sleep  and  appetite  have
returned. What  .shall  I  do  further?"

Answer:  "Give  the  child  the  wet  chemise  every  third
day,  for  a  fortnight;  then  the  child  will  be  well.  Let  her
also  take  20  drops  of  wormwood  extract  in  water  as
hitherto."

Scarlet  Fever.

Scarlet  fever  is  an  epidemic  which  generally  breaks
out  once  or  twice  in  every  year  and  not  seldom  demands
many  victims.  It  usually  attacks  the  children,  but  adults
are  not  always  spared  by  it.  The  symptoms  with  which
it  commences  are  headache,  pressure  on  the  stomach  and
chest,  lassitude  and  alternate  sensation  of  heat  and  chill.
The  cure  of  scarlet  fever  by  water  is  very  easy.  Children
are  generally  out  of  danger  after  2  days,  for  adults  it
will  take  a  little  longer.  As  soon  as  the  symptoms  of
the  disease  appear  in  a  child,  be  it  still  carried  on  the


346


Part  III,  Diseases.


arms  or  going  to  school,  it  should  put  on  a  shirt  dipped
in  hot  water,  with  which  some  salt  has  been  mixed,  and
lie  in  bed. The  covering  must  be  of  such  a  kind  as  to
shut  out  the  outer  air,  and  the  child  thus  wrapped  up
should  remain  so  for  1  hour. Then  the  shirt  is  taken
off,  and  the  whole  body  will  seem  strewn  with  crimson
red  spots  or  patches. Should  the  heat  be  very  great,  a
rapid  whole-ablution  could  be  applied  before  the  child  is
put  to  bed  again. In  serious  cases  in  which  the  fever
reaches  a  high  degree,  the  shirt  may  be  taken  twice  or
3  times  a  day ;  if  the  heat  gives  way,  the  intervals  between
renewing  the  application  may  be  longer.  Later  cold  water
(mixed  with  vinegar)  is  used  for  the  shirt.  By  such  treat-
ment scarlet  fever  can  be  cured  in  4  to  6  days,  at  the  utmost,
A  patient  ill  with  scarlet  fever  has  seldom  appetite;
it  would,  therefore,  be  imprudent  to  force  hhn  to  take
food. (The  eruption  is  not  only  on  the  outside  of  the
body  but  also  in  the  inside.)  There  is  generally  a  violent
thirst  which  is  best  satisfied  by  water ;  some  sugar  or  a
little  wine  may  be  mixed  with  it.  Children  in  the  country
who  prefer  milk  may  take  it. I  do  not  beheve  that  a
child  thus  treated  will  die  of  scarlet  fever.

Louis,  a  boy  of  10  years  of  age,  can  scarcely  speak
with  heat.  His  face  is  red,  and  he  complains  that  every-
thing hurts  him.  Since  heat  and  anxiety  are  great,  Louis
is  washed  every  hour  for  2  days.  On  the  third  day  he
begins  already  to  eat ;  the  ablution  is  only  applied  twice
a  day.  On  the  fifth  day  Louis  feels  well,  on  the  sLxth
day  he  walks  about  in  the  room,  and  soon  he  will  play
in  the  open  air  with  other  children.

Mary,  20  years  old,  can  no  longer  walk.  She  has
violent  headache,  a  sensation  of  great  fatigue  m  her  limbs,
a  dry  cough  and  pressure  on  the  chest.  Her  uneasiness
and  restlessness  are  extremely  great;  she  feels  disgus^t  tor
every  kind  of  food,  but  her  thirst  is  insatiable.  Älary
will  get  scarlet  fever  in  a  high  degree.  Every  hour  she
should  have  her  back,  chest,  and  abdomen  vigorously
wa'.hed  with  cold  water  mixed  with  a  little  salt.  Atter
the  ablution  -  which  must  be  performed  as  quickly  as  pos-
sible —  she  should  be  carefully  covered,  but  not  too  much.


Sciatica.


347


For  2  days  the  patient  was  washed  according  to  the
aforesaid  direction.  She  ate  nothing  but  drank  the  more.
Her  neck  is  still  burning  dreadfully.  The  eruption  begins
to  disappear,  the  thirst  is  less  violent.  The  patient  should
still  be  washed  twice  or  3  times  daily  for  2  to  4  days.

After  3  further  days  Maiy  was  completely  cured.

John,  a  boy  of  13  years,  seems  less  lively,  he  has
lost  his  former  love  for  occupation,  his  cheerfulness  is
gone.  Suddenly  his  whole  body  begins  to  swell,  especially
head,  feet,  and  abdomen.  The  boy  will  get  dropsy.  Six
weeks  ago,  John  has  had  scarlet  fever;  the  eruption
appeared  only  sparingly,  and  this  is  the  consequence  of
its  imperfect  development.

The  patient  put  on  a  shirt  dipped  in  warm  salt  water
6  times  within  8  days.  In  10  days  he  was  perfectly  well
again  and  had  also  recovered  his  good  spirits.  When
scarlet  fever  is  not  thoroughly  cured  and  morbid  matters
remain  in  the  body,  dropsy  often  follows;  but  even  sup-
pressed scarlet  fever  can  be  cured  by  the  abovementioned
course  of  applications.

A  girl,  about  24  years  old,  who  had  always  enjoyed
good  health,  got  scarlet  fever.  The  eruption  increased
within  8  days  in  such  a  manner  as'  may  be  rare  even  in
the  most  serious  cases.  The  patient  directly  required  that
water  should  be  used  as  remedy.  Her  confidence  was
chiefly  based  on  the  fact  that  her  sister  had  been  cured
by  it  from  a  grave  illness.  She  was  advised  to  have  back,
chest,  abdomen,  arms  and  -feet  washed  every  hour.  The
interval  of  1  hour  was  too  long  for  her.  The  heat  became
so  violent  that  during  5  days  the  washing  was  not  suspended
for  more  than  |  hour.  The  girl  ate  almost  nothing  and
drank  little  in  .small  portions.  Only  on  the  eleventh  day
after  a  continual  application  of  water  the  heat  gave  way,
the  eruption  began  to  die;  on  the  fourteenth  day  it  had
entirely  disappeared,  and  the  girl  was  completely  restored
to  health.

Sciatica.

An  official  suffered  for  more  than  three  months  from
violent  pain  in  the  left  thigh  and  the  whole  leg  down  to
the  ankles. He  had  employed  all  possible  remedies,  at


348


PaTIT  III.  DrSKASES.


last  he  was  advised  to  make  use  of  two  only:  warmth
and  rest.  Hence  the  gentleman  sought  to  warm  the  suffering
parts  by  warm  wrappings  and  warm  baths.  But  the  pains
increased,  his  strength  gave  way,  he  had  lost  more  than
50  lbs.  of  his  bodily  weight,  and  he  could  seldom  sleep
for  a  whole  hour  at  a  time.

At  last  he  took  courage  to  use  the  remedy  which
he  had  shunned  more  than  all  others,  the  cold  water.

lie  received  2  or  3  applications  daily.  Fir.st  day:
shower  for  the  back  in  the  morning,  upper  shower  in  the
afternoon.  Second  day:  upper  shower  in  the  morning,
shower  for  the  back  in  the  afternoon.  Every  second  or
third  day  he  took  a  half-bath,  he  also  walked  barefoot
sometimes.

Directly  after  the  first  shower,  the  patient  slept  4
bours  in  the  night.  As  liß  slept  better,  his  appetite  and
appearance  also  improved.  In  6  weeks  he  was  completely
cured.

A  professor  from  Hungary  had  been  afflicted  with
neuralgia  in  the  hips  for  7  years  and  had  visited  various
bathing-places,  Buda,  Teplitz,  Heviz  and  others,  but  without
success;  he  had  also  used  vapour-baths.  For  2  years  he
had  suffered  from  sleeplessness,  his  appetite  was  good,
his  bowels  irregular;  the  patient  further  complained  of
"  inflation  by  wind,  pressure  on  the  head,  but  especially  of
extreme  sensibility  for  changes  in  the  weather  and  constant
sensation  of  chill,  in  spite  of  woollen  clothing.  Moreover
tallow-like  secretions  of  the  skin  took  place,  and  his  hands
were  always  moist.

He  had  the  following  apphcations :  Every  night  whole-
ablution,  in  the  forenoon  upper  shower,  in  the  afternoon
shower  for  the  back,  every  2  days  a  half-bath,  knee-gushes
and  sitting-baths.  The  result  of  the  cure  was  excel  ent.
Already  after  the  fourth  day,  the  patient  slept  cahnly
during  the  whole  night,  and  he  enjoyed  good  sleep  ever
since  The  tedious  sciatica  has  completely  disappeared.
His  skin  is  also  in  a  normal  condition.  The  gentleman  is
.overjoyed  at  his  recovery  and  praises  his  light  clothing  in
the  following  terms:  "The  clothing  I  wear  is  so  light,
also  on  cool  .rainy  days,  as  other  people's  m  midsummar ;


Sleeplessness.


849


I  feel  perfectly  warm  in  my  linen  shirt  and  light  stockings,
and  I  am  no  longer  susceptible  of  the  influence  of  tem-
perature. The  water  has  effected  a  wondeifal  change  in
my  system."

Sleeplessness.

A  pastor  had  suffered  from  sleeplessness  for  9  weeks.
Hi?  strength  decreased  from  day  to  day,  and  he  became
more  and  more  incapable  for  mental  labour.  Depression,
lassitude,  despondency  took  the  place  of  his  former  dili-
gence and  cheerfalness.

Great  exertion  and  worry  had  caused  violent  agitation
in  the  mind  of  the  good  gentleman;  his  condition  was
that  of  one  in  continuous  fever.  He  was  rednced  to  com-
plete calm  by  the  head-vapour,  the  Spanish  mantle,  the
upper  shower  with  knee-gash,  the  foot-vapour,  the  short
bandage,  by  lying  on,  and  covering  with,  wet  sheets  which
practices  were  continued  for  12  days,  2  or  3  being  taken
daily.  Already  after  the  third  day  the  gentleman  slept
for  3  hours.  He  enjoys  the  best  of  healths  to  the  pre-
sent day.

Sleeplessness  may  be  caused  by  irregular  circulation,
by  suppressed  or  insufficient  transpiration,  by  gases  which
torment  stomach  and  bowels.

People  who  spend  the  whole  day  in  mental  exertion
are  particularly  subject  to  this  complaint.

I  have  had  occasion  to  dwell  on  the  aforesaid  causes
and  their  remedies  more  than  once  in  this  book;  it  remains
only  to  suggest  a  soporific  for  those  engaged  in  head-work.

I  know  a  gentleman  who  is  much  given  to  intellectual
labour.  He  would  prefer  to  have  neither  stomach  nor  feet.
It  is  generally  difficult  to  make  such  gentlemen  listen  to
reason.  In  this  case,  however,  I  was  successful.  The
gentleman  made  up  his  mind  to  bestow  a  little  more  care-
on  the  poor  companion  of  his  soul.  He  made  it  a  habit
to  use  the  Spanish  mantle  once  or  twice  a  week.  The
sleeplessness  soon  gave  way  and  with  it  all  the  little  com-
plaints by  which  it  had  been  caused.

Another  gantleman  had  a  basin  with  fresh  water  put
near  his  bed  every  night.  If  sleep,  the  longad  for  friend,,
did  not  appear  after  ^  hour,  he  got  up,  took  a  whole-


350


Part  III.  Diseases.


ablution  and  returned  to  bed  without  drying.  He  became
drowsy,  but  the  next  hour  perhaps  found  him  awake  again;
he  then  renewed  the  proceeding  once  or  twice,  if  necessary.
The  effect  of  these  nightly  ablutions  was  so  good  that
the  gentleman  had  never  again  to  complain  of  sleeple.ssness.

If  children  are  wakeful  and  fretful  at  their  usual  bed-
time, it  is  generally  because  they  have  received  too  much
food.  The  poor  little  body  sighs  under  the  burden,  and
the  gases  will  not  allow  the  little  head  to  rest.  Apply  a
short  bandage  to  the  child,  and  it  will  soon  fall  asleep.

I  often  heard  country  people  say:  a  warm  foot-bath
closes  the  eyes  when  exertion  and  fatigue  fail  to  do  so;
but  in  cases  of  mental  fatigue,  it  will  rarely  produce  the
desired  effect.  One  or  two  cold  sitting-baths  during  the
night  would  render  better  service  there.  I  recommend
these  also  to  such  as  suffer  from  hemorrhoids,  gases  and
other  complaints  of  the  lower  body.  The  duration  of  a
bath  should  be  from  1  to  2  minutes.

Sleeplessness  may  finally  be  caused  by  an  unequal
degree  of  vital  heat  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body.
There  is  generally  too  much  blood  in  head  and  chest  and
too  little  in  the  extremities.  It  has  been  explained  on
several  occasions,  how  this  is  to  be  remedied.

I  caution  against  artificial  soporifics.  They  seem  to
me  unnatural  and  whatever  is  unnatural,  can  never  be
conducive  to  health.

Small-pox.

Small-pox  is  one  of  the  most  contagious  and  virulent
diseases,  whether  it  appear  in  its  milder  form  ^varioloid)
or  as  the  dreaded  confluent  kind  (variola).  The  treat-
ment for  both  cases  is  identical.  It  is  generally  believed
that  the  patient  must  die  if  the  eruption  does  not  appear,
hence  the  importance  of  remedies  which  tend  to  pro-

"'°*^S^x  persons  who  were  ill  of  the  simpler  form  of  sm^W-
pox  were  cured  by  ablutions  applied  as  often  as  great
heat  and  uneasiness  was  felt.  In  the  beginning  the  washing
was  required  every  hour,  later  every  two  hours,  then  twice
or  3  -times  a  day. On  the  seventh  day  the  6  patient.


Small-pox.


351


were  perfectly  well.  They  ate  nothing  and  drank  much
which  can  do  no  harm,  when  little  portions  only  are  taken
at  a  time.  Would  that  all  patients  observed  this  rule.
Much  drinking  does  not  appease  thirst  thoroughly  and
increases  the  sensation  of  anxiety.

I  have  often  been  astonished  on  seeing  the  eruption
so  quickly  produced  by  the  aforesaid  treatment.  Wash
without  the  least  fear.  The  more  promptly  and  the  more
punctually  this  is  done,  the  more  quickly  the  small  pustules
will  form,  the  sooner  the  poisonous  matter  will  be  secreted
by  them.

One  remark  more :  Do  not  fear  to  admit  fresh  air  to
the  sickroom.  A  window  should  always  be  open  in  order
to  allow  the  infectious  breath  of  the  patient  to  escape.

Four  persons  got  small-pox.  They  were  cured  by
applying  twice  or  3  times  daily  the  wet  shirt  instead  of
the  ablutions  ;  the  former  might  also  have  been  substituted
by  the  Spanish  mantle.  The  shirt  was  taken  off  after  an
hour  and  renewed  when  heat  and  uneasiness  became  great.
On  the  sixth  and  seventh  day  it  was  only  done  once  or
twice.  The  whole  cure  lasted  8  days,  and  none  of  the
patients  were  disfigured  by  those  dreadful  scars  so  often
occasioned  by  this  disease.

Fred  can  no  longer  walk,  he  feels  tired  unto  death,
his  appearance  is  frightening.  He  suffers  from  'violent
headache,  frequent  attacks  of  nausea,  and  pressure  on  the
chest.  The  physician  is  sent  for.  He  declares  that  the
.symptoms  are  those  of  small-pox,  that  the  eruption  will
not  appear  before  the  fourth  day,  that  an  aperient  medi-
cine will  do  the  patient  no  harm,  and  that  nothing  else
can  be  done.  Fred  is  not  satisfied  by  this  verdict;  he
has  a  bath,  filled  with  water,  put  near  his  bed.  Every
hour  he  descends  into  the  water  and  washes  himself  with
a  rough  towel;  the  proceeding  takes  him  not  more  than
1  minute  each  time.  Within  18  hours  the  patient  has
applied  18  of  these  ablutions.  Before  the  return  of  the
physician  Fred  was  well  again.  He  ate  nothing  during
this  time,  and  water  was  his  only  drink.

Whilfst  I  am  writing  this,  I  hear  from  a  friend  of
mine  that  he  following  my  advice,  has  succeeded  in  curing


352  ^'ART  in.  DiSKASES.

by  the  same  application  4  or  5  persons  who  were  su^dt^nly
attacked  with  fever,  and  whose  condition  gave  much  ground
for  fear  of  small-pox.

If  the  feverishness  that  precedes  the  eruption  appears
in  any  person  during  the  prevalence  of  small-pox,  scarlet
fever  and  other  eruptive  diseases  water  should  be  applied
directly.  Mere  waiting  and  observing  "what  may  ensue"
is  always  dangerous.  The  fire  will  spread  and  consume
the  patient's  strength  only  too  rapidly.  To  quench  it  in
its  first  beginning  will  prove  an  easy  task  whilst  a  few
days  hesitation  may  render  all  help  unavailable.

As  soon  as  a  child  or  an  adult  complains  of  headache,
uneasiness,  difficult  breathing,  cough,  broken  courage  and
lamed  strength,  one  may  be  sure  that  the  time  for  water-
applications  has  come.  They  will  do  no  harm  even  in
cases  in  which  the  abovementioned  symptoms  prove  de-
ceptive.

In  conclusion  I  give  the  following  rules  for  the  treat-
ment of  those  affected  by  small-pox:

The  ablutions  should  be  performed  as  rapidly  as  pos-
sible and  extend  to  the  whole  body.

The  covering  (closing  to  the  outer  air)  after  the  appli-
cation should  be  performed  with  care  but  should  not  be
so  as  to  be  troublesome  to  the  patient.  The  air  must  be
kept  pure  by  proper  ventilation;  the  latter  must  be  so
arranged  as  not  to  allow  a  draught  of  cold  air  to  fall

directly  on  the  patient.  , , ir  -ii

Never  urge  a  patient  to  eat.  The  stomach  itself  will
not  fail  to  announce  the  time  when  it  is  disposed  to  work.
Food  forced  on  it  without  the  previous  claim  of  appetite
remains  undigested.  Such  food  is  sometimes  the  principal
impediment  of  recovery,  sometimes  the  sole  cause  ot  a

'^^""^If' there  is  a  desire  for  food,  the  simplest  and  most
di--stible  kinds  should  be  chosen  and  administered  to  the
patient  in  small  quantities.  I  specially  recommend  good
preserved  fruit.  Water,  water  mixed  with  wine,  and  milk
are  the  best  beverages  for  such  patients.  .

In  some  places  water  has  already  been  employed  toi
the  cure  of  small-pox,  but  alas!  in  too  rugged  a  manner.


4


Spine,  C0Mpr.AiNTS  of  the.


353


It  is  to  be  wished  thcat  it  should  be  universally  used  and
more- gently  appUed;  numerous  lives  could  thus  be  saved.  I
venture  to  assert  — and  my  assertion  is  based  on  experience  —
that  death  of  small-pox  would  be  of  very  rare  occurrence
if  water  were  promptly  resorted  to  wh  Mv-iver  it  shows
itself  m  its  commencement.  Is  it  not  a  deplorable  fact
that  every  year  hundreds  and  thousands  succumb  to  this
epidemic  and  to  the  fever  which  precedes  and  accompanies
it,  whilst  the  remedy  is  close  at  händ,  and  not  a  drop
of  it  is  employed  to  cool  the  fever  and  quench  the  heat.
Who  can  understand  this  ?  Would  that  the  efficacy  and
salutary  power  of  the  water  were  at  length  fully  appreciated.

The  treatment  of  small-pox  by  water  has  the  parti-
cular advantage  that  it  never  allows  the  poisonous  matter
to  do  its  corroding  work  on  the  surface  of  the  body  in
such  a  manner  as  to  cause  disfigurement  by  scars.

be  substituted  by  the  Spanish  mantle  which  is  taken  for
1  to  U  hours  twice  or  3  thnes  a  day.  The  mantle  must
be  carefully  washed  out  after  each  application,  smce  it
will  contain  much  poisonous  matter.

A  further  application  consists  in  a  twofold  piece  of
coarse  linen  dipped  in  water  and  laid  on  chest  and  ab-
domen. In  a  similar  manner  the  same  cloth  can  be  used
as  a  compress  on  which  the  patient  lies  down  (s.  Lvinff
on  wet  sheets).  This  application  may  be  repeated  t^ice
or  d  times  m  a  half  day,  if  the  heat  is  great.

Spine,  complaints  of  the.

An  officer  had  injured  a  vertebra  of  his  spine  when
driving  and,  according  to  the  verdict  of  several  physicians,
the  spmal  marrow  was  affected.  The  gentleman  suffered
atrocious  pains  and  only  at  times  was  his  condition  less
unbearable.  These  severe  sufferings  had  also  affected  his
namd  and  medical  attendance  was  of  no  avail  although
suited  °  physicians  of  the  city  had  been  con-

fnr+t  was  pronounced  incurable,  the  com-

fwff  ^^^^^^^^t^o^bemg  added  that  his  complaint  would
Ind  thV^  ^«"«"'nption.  The  water  cured  him  in  6  weeks,
and  the  gentleman  enjoys  good  health  even  to  this  day

Kneipp,  Water-Cure.  J


354


Pakt  11  f.  üiseasks.


although  his  recovery  took  pUice  20  years  ago.  His  men-
tal sufferings  ceased  with  the  hodily  complaint.

in  this  case:  but  if  you,  dear  reader,  should  be  similarly
affected,  1  sliould  advise  you  to  make  use  of  the  follownig
practices:  Take  the  Spanish  mantle  3  tunes  a  week:  take
a  half-bath  with  ablution  of  the  upper  body  3  times  a
week  and  an  upper  and  lower  shower  twice  a  week.  Con-
tinue'thus  punctually  for  some  weeks.  The  whole  organism
must  be  strengthened  and  the  complaints  ongmating  in
the  local  injury  will  gradually  disappear The  disturbed
vertebra,  too,  will  be  restored  to  rest. 1  repeat : if  one  j
part  of  the  body  is  suffering,  the  whole  body  is  affected.
The  whole  organism  participates  of  the  pain  of  the  indi-
vidual member.

A  boY  16  years  old,  was  affected  with  curvature  o
the  spine. He  had  been  treated  by  several  celebrated
physicians  but  without  result.  They  sent  him  to  a  medical
estabhshment  where  he  was  bandaged  in  various  ways^
After  17  weeks  he  left  the  hospital  on  two  crutches,  the
doctors  having  given  the  verdict  that  nothing  else  could
be  done  for  hhn^ A  friend  presented  the  diseased  boy  s
father  with  ''My  Watercure." Through  ab  utions  with
water  and  vmegar  the  condition  of  the  patient  was  so
much  improved  that  he  could  walk  pretty  well  with  the
^of  rstick; then  they  ^^-f^  him  to  me  expecting
me  to  complete  his  cure. After  a  17  dajs course  oi
TppHcations!  the  boy.  walked  like  any  one  of  h^^
the  help  of  a  stick  and  without  pam.  The  tieatment  naa

rtoÄA  He .n  Ji;.^

pings  tost  every  second  >"8M.  l^J^^'^^^  ^  a  knee-gash
Every he  re  «ved  2  ^.^^^  ^^^^^  „,„,,ti„„,

^^ib^ti  St 1  wat'e?.  As  fnrt.her  appUcatrons,


S'I'OMACU,  ACIDITY  OF  'I'llE  —  StOMACH  COMPLAINTS.  355


to  prevent  a  relapse,  he  used  2  half-baths,  2  upper  showers
and  once  the  waistcoat  weekly.

Stomach,  acidity  of  the.

Crescentia  relates:  "I  am. 45  years  old,  my  stomach
causes  me  almost  daily  much  suffering.  From  time  to  time
I  feel  better,  but  these  intervals  are  always  very  short.  I
have  sour  and  bitter  risings  of  the  stomach,  and  very  often
I  do  not  know  how  to  warm  myself;  the  more  acidity
and  bitterness,  the  greater  is  the  sensation  of  chill."

The  appearance  of  the  person  was  very  ill.  She  was
emaciated,  her  features  were  sunk;  there  was,  no  doubt,.
great  poverty  of  blood  caused  by  defective  digestion.

1)  To  pour  boiling  water  on  hay-flowers,  to  fill  with  them
a  small  bag  and  place  this  on  stomach  and  abdomen.  The
hay-flowers  should  be  as  hot  as  can  be  endured  and  the
bag  bound  round  the  body  with  a  cloth;  the  application
IS  to  last  1^  hours  and  to  be  taken  for  3  consecutive
days.  2)  To  take  every  night  for  3  days  a  warm  foot-
bath with  ashes  and  salt  —  14  minutes  —  and  later  every
thii-d  or  fourth  day.  3)  To  take  a  whole-ablution  from
bee  m  the  night  3  or  4  times  weekly.  4)  To  take  twice
daily  4  to  6  spoonfuls  of  wormwood  tea.  Continue  thus
tor  a  fortnight;  after  this  thne  it  will  be  sufficient  to
take  a  foot-bath  and  a  whole-ablution  from  bed  or  a  half-
bath  weekly.

Stomach  complaints.

Poor  stomach,  of  what  mischief  and  evil  art  thou  sup-
posed to  be  the  cause!  Next  to  heart  and  nerves,  thou  art
truly  the  chief  scape-goat.  Ask  a  hundred  people  if  they  be
not  troubled  with  stomach  complakt !  Very  few  will  answer
with  a  decided  "No."  And  yet  in  most  cases  the  stomach
IS  as  mnocent  as  a  new-born  infant  and  as  healthy  as  a
merrily  playmg  boy.  Examples  may  prove  the  truth  of
my  statement.

tonkin  ^  7^«l\ye^^Amaiie  vomited  most  of  what  she
fuls  of^nl^  ^""""'^  would  retain  nothing  but  3  to  l-spoon-
consulted Th"^  ^'^"^""^  ^^^^^^^ted  physicians  were

consulted. The  apothecary  at  last  declared  that  in  his

23*


356


Part  II  F.  Diseases.


whole  apotheca  he  had  no  remedy  which  she  had  not  tried.
The  patient  was  brought  to  my  dwelling  in  a  cart.  Al-
though her  coming  had  not  been  previously  announced  to
me,  I  could  not  send  the  poor  people  back.  The  patient
was  emaciated,  her  features  sunk,  her  voice  broken  a
picture  of  misery. There  was,  however,  no  cough  (the
most  important  thing  for  me),  only  a  dreadful  stomach
complaint  and  I  was  asked  to  give  her  something  for  the
stomach. I  told  them  to  be  quiet  and  not  to  complain
so  much  about  the  stomach  which  was  one  ot  the  heal-
thiest organs  of  this  person.  Some  of  them  grew  angry,
others  laughed; the  sick  woman  herself  ««^«^  to  be
doubting  as  to  whether  I  was  speakmg  m  earnest,  io  have
travelled  so  far,  she  may  have  thought  under  such  pains
only  to  hear  this  pitiless  declaration!  But  this  made  no
difference  to  me.  _  .

What  brought  me  to  such  an  opmion  ^ ,  „  ,
The  person  did  not  cough  but  the  air  (gases)  forced
itself  out  of  her  mouth.  Stomach  and  abdomen  were  hlled
w  th  gases  to  excess.  The  otherwise  so  patient  stomach

his  activity  entii-ely,  or  at  l^-^\^^.\g^-^,t'drvnl
functions.  The  evil  was  aggravated  by  the  dryness  ot  the
skin  and  a  complete  want  of  transpiration.

The  sequence  of  apphcations  was  the  following:
Lukewarm  lower  bandages,  ablution  of  the  upper  bod^
short  bandage,  whole  ablution,  knee-gush  {\  mmute),  agan.

fSve  mentioned  .uceession  and  moreover  walk  on  wet
stones  several  times  a  day.

Through  the  lukewarm  lower  bandages  I  first  sought

Tirartices I  succeeded;  the  air,  the  gases  -""f
piactices. i  ö  resumed  its  normal  acti\  ity

the"™:;  expelled,  the  appetite


Stomach  complaints.


357


returned,  blood  and  juices  were  improved,  and  in  5  weeks
the  patient  was  well  again.

For  long  years  Rose  has  suffered  from  stomach  com-
plaint and  for  some  months  especially  from  stomach  cramps.
She  has  often  to  keep  her  bed  and  can  only  with  great
difficulty  attend  to  her  duties.  Several  physicians  have
declared  that  her  disease  was  nothing  but  stomach  com-
plaint. The  poor  sufferer  used  a  great  deal  of  remedies,
liquid  and  solid,  powders  and  pills.

Her  appearance  tells  of  great  suffering:  her  features
are  sunk,  her  complexion  is  pale,  her  body  only  consisting
of  skin  and  bone.  The  lower  body  was  greatly  inflated,
and  even  the  touch  of  the  di'ess  caused  her  pain.  She
had  often  been  troubled  with  vomiting,  and  her  feet  and
hands  were  always  quite  cold.

My  opinion  of  the  case  was  the  same  as  in  the  pre-
ceding example.  The  complaint  had  its  root  in  the  lower
body  and  had  been  caused  by  frequent  rapid  transition
from  great  heat  (near  the  kitchen  fire)  to  extreme  cold
(ice-cellar).  The  girl  bore  what  seemed  to  her  a  small
discomfort  as  long  as  she  could  until  finally  the  pressure
of  the  bowels  on  the  stomach  became  so  violent  that  the
latter,  confined  and  compressed  as  it  was,  was  literally
forced  to  return  whatever  food  was  conveyed  to  it.

Besides  the  general  applications,  which  had  to  rouse
the  whole  body  to  activity,  partial  ones  had  to  be  used
for  the  purpose  of  dissolving  and  evacuating  what  had
collected  m  the  abdomen,  especially  the  gases.  Each  day
one  of  the  following  applications  was  used:

The  Spanish  mantle  (general  application).

Compresses  of  infused  hay-flowers  on  the  abdomen,
every  day  for  2  hours.

The  lower  bandage  (dissolving  and  evacuating).

Covering  with  wet  sheets  and  lying  on  wet  sheets.

Cold  whole-ablutions  twice  every  night  from  bed  and
again  the  Spanish  mantle.

Walking  on  wet  stones  or  in  wet  grass  and  some-
times a  knee-gush  served  as  secondary  applications.  After
4  weeks  an  alternate  application  of  the  Spanish  mantle


358


Part  III.  Diseases,


and  the  short  bandage,  every  second  day,  was  sufficient.
Moreover  the  patient  continued  to  brace  her  system  by
walking  barefoot.  She  became  quite  well  and  has  been
so  to  the  present  day.  1  met  her  not  long  ago  and  .she
assured  me  that  she  enjoyed  such  good  health  as  never
before  in  her  life.

Frederick  vomited  in  the  beginning  much  acid  matter;
later  whatever  he  ate  or  drank. No  remedy  was  avai-
'  lable  and  the  doctor  defined  the  complaint  as  induration
and  obstruction  of  the  stomach.

The  appearance  of  the  patient  was  by  no  means  bad,
his  features  were  somewhat  aged,  his  complexion  yellow.
Much  air  was  expelled  from  the  stomach,  the  abdomen
was  so  inflated  that  it  often  resembled  a  drum,  and  this
symptom  was  regularly  accompanied  by  violent  headache.
Here  we  have  again  inactivity  in  the  lower  regions  ,  in-
dolence of  the  bowels.

Hence  the  irregular  stools,  the  accumulation  of  gases,
the  pressure  on  stomach  and  head. The  patient  had  to
lay  a  cloth,  dipped  in  water  and  vinegar,  on  the  ab-
domen for  2  hours  daily ;  to  take,  likewise  daily,  a  warm
foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt,  and  to  have  his  back
washed  with  cold  water  twice  every  night.  After  6  days
the  patient's  condition  had  improved. After  10  days  he
employed  twice  weekly  the  short  bandage, once  the
Spanish  mantle  and  every  second  day  a  foot-bath  with
ashes  and  salt. The  third  prescription  ordered  for  the
last  2  weeks  3  upper  showers;  3  lower  showers,  and
2  half -baths  (to  the  pit  of  the  stomach)  weekly.  In
6  weeks  the  patient  was  completely  restored.

I  could  quote  innumerable  such  cases;  these  few,
however,  may  suffice.

T  readily  admit  that  if  such  complaints  are  not  cured
in  time,  if  the  continuous  pressure  on  the  stomach  and
its  inseparable  attendant,  the  inflammation  of  the  stomach
are  not  removed,  then,  of  course,  the  dreaded  and  dan-
gerous stomach  tumours  will  form  and  finally  degenerate
in  the  terrible  stomach  cancer.

Even  with  regard  to  this,  deceptions  and  errors  may
occur. 1  was  once  told  that  according  to  the  verdict  of


Stomach  complaints.


359


several  professional  men,  a  person  had  developed  stomach
cancer.  The  people  only  reqinred  me  to  indicate  to  them
the  best  means  of  precaution  to  be  taken  in  order  to
prevent  the  disease  from  attacking  other  members  of  the
family.  1  gave  them  some  rules  among  which  there  were
also  some  for  the  patient.  In  4  weeks  he  was  completely
cured.  The  remedies  consisted  in  simple  infusions  from
common  yarrow,  wormwood  and  sage  and  in  short  ban-
dages used  alternately  with  foot-baths.

A  woman,  64  years  old,  has  violent  burning  in  the
stomach,  rising  of  the  stomach  and  vomiting,  often  cold
fever  and  sometimes  profuse  perspiration.  The  evil  in-
creased in  spite  of  all  remedies  applied.  The  best  effect
will  be  obtained  by  the  following  remedies :  20  drops  of
extract  of  wormwood  in  a  small  cup  of  hot  water,  twice
daily;  lying  on  sheets  dipped  in  warm  water,  for  1  hour
daily ;  every  second  day  a  twofold  cloth  dipped  in  warm
water  and  laid  on  the  abdomen  for  1  hour  ;  every  second
day  a  warm  foot-bath  with  ashes  and  salt  for  14  minutes.

A  person,  40  years  of  age,  complained  of  frequent
pain  in  the  stomach  and  the  abdomen,  want  of  appetite,
rising  of  acid,  and  enervation.  Especially  hands  and  feet
were  always  cold. The  applications  were  as  follows :

1)  Every  morning  and  every  evening  to  rub  chest
and  abdomen  vigorously  with  water  and  vinegar  (mixed
in  equal  quantities).

2)  To  take  6  to  8  juniper-berries  daily.

3)  To  take  a  whole  -  ablution  from  bed  3  times
weekly.

In  14  days  the  patient  was  completely  restored;  in
order  to  preserve  her  good  health,  she  would  do  well  to
take  a  whole-ablution  once  a  week  for  some  time.

"For  a  long  time  I  have  suffered  from  a  severe
stomach  complaint.  After  food  I  become  dreadfully  in-
flated, and  often  I  am  obliged  to  vomit  under  great  .pain.
My  feet  ache  frequently,  my  lips  are  always  white,  my
whole  body  is  emaciating.  I  have  had  several  physi-
cians; they  gave  me  nothing  but  laxatives  which  have
reduced  me  to  a  state  of  great  weakness.


360


Part  III.  Diseases.


Applications :  1)  Thrfte  times  weekly  to  apply  a  com-
press of  infused  hay-flowers  to  the  abdomen  for  1  hour.

2)  To  take  a  whole-ablution  from  bed  every  second  night,

3)  To  take  25  drops  of  extract  of  wormwood  in  water
every  morning  and  25  drops  of  extract  of  rose-hips  every
afternoon.

k  housewife  complains :  I  am  never  free  from  pain
in  the  bowels,  the  abdomen  is  often  inflated  and  when
it  is  very  bad,  I  feel  a  pressure  on  the  stomach,  much
acid  matter  rises  from  it,  and  often  I  am  obliged  to
vomit.  I  also  suffer  from  pressure  on  the  head  and  great
giddiness.  There  are  days  when  I  have  to  make  water
every  |  hour,  and  then  again  days  when  I  cannot  do  so
but  once.  Three  physicians  declared  my  disease  to  be
stomach  catarrh.

This  patient  was  cured  within  4  weeks  in  the  following
manner :

In  the  first  week  she  had  only  2  upper  showers  and
2  knee-gushes  daily ;  she  took  daily  1  cup  of  tea  from
iuniper-berries  and  shave-grass.

In  the  second  week :  1  upper  shower  and  knee-gush
daily  and  twice  a  lower  bandage.

In  the  third  week:  Once  the  Spanish  mantle,  6  tunes
a  sitting-bath  and  once  a  half-bath.  o •  i

In  the  fourth  week  half-baths,  3  tmes  the  Spanish
mantle  and  walking  in  water  daily.

Stomach  cramp.

Mr  N-  suffers  from  pams  in  the  abdomen  through
catching  cold;  an  accumulation  of  gases  caused  hini  tre-
quent  v^omiting.  When  much  air  had  been  expelled  and
S  had  had  vident  vomitmg,  he  felt  well  agam  and  liad
verv  good  appetite.  In  the  course  of  une  the  eMl  u
:  Isfd  and'ifter  every  meal  his  pams  became  so  vxo  en
that  they  made  him  scream.  His  hands  and  feet  Nseie
ice-cold  and  the  whole  body  chilly.

In  such  cases  the  .stomach  ?^  J^wS

cent,  and  it  is  only  the  pressure  of  the  an  o  it  wh  cU
causes  a  tendency  to  vomit  and  actual  vomiting.  Bj


Stomach  'j'umouks.


361


latter  the  sufferer  is  relieved  but  only  for  a  short  time.
The  complaint  can  only  be  completely  removed  by  restor-
ing to  the  whole  body  equal  warmth  and  transpiration
and  by  regulating  the  circulation.  In  our  case  this  was
effected  by  the  following  applications :  On  the  first  day
the  patient  took  3  whole  -  ablutions  of  hot  water  and
vinegar  in  bed  and,  without  drying,  was  well  covered  after
each  ablution.  On  the  second  day  it  was  done  only  twice
and  from  thence  once  daily.  This  proceeding  is  sufficient
in  all  cases  when  a  person  through  cold  has  got  a  fever
combined  with  rising  of  the  air  and  vomiting.

Stomach  tumours.

Much  vomiting,  burning  in  the  stomach,  etc.  are  not
always  positive  signs  of  the  existence  of  stomach  tumours,
although  such  cases  occur  sometimes.

Such  sufferers  should  avoid  salt,  pepper,  and  spices
or  spiced  food  in  general.  Very  simple  diet  and  especially
simple  beverages  have  proved  the  best  remedies  for  the
beginning  tumours;  mill?:  is  of  particularly  good  effect.

The  treatment  of  external  tumours  gives  us  excellent
hints  for  the  cure  of  internal  ones.  A  boil  on  the  finger
is  easily  cured  by  wrapping  it  in  a  little  rag  frequently
dipped  in  water ;  the  water  cleanses  and  heals.  Why
should  not  internal  tumours  heal  if  a  spoonful  of  water
is  taken  every  half  hour  for  some  time,  or  if  from  salu-
tary herbs  tea  is  prepared  and  taken  in  the  aforesaid
manner  instead  of  drhiking  the  usual  cup  at  a  time  ?  Only
try  this  simple  remedy ;  you  may  take  tea  from  worm-
wood or  from  sage  or  from  both  herbs  (mixed  in  equal
quantities).  Or  take  a  small  saltspoonfal  of  aloe  powder,
dissolve  it  in  half  a  pint  of  water,  and  take  of  the  medi-
cine a  tablespoonful  every  hour.  The  latter  remedy
should  only  be  taken  for  a  half  day  at  intervals  of  2  or
3  days.

An  excellent  house-remedy,  easily  to  be  got  even  by
the  poorest,  is  the  water  obtained  from  Sauerkraut
(pickled  cabbage).  A  sufficient  supply  of  it  can  be  taken
from  the  water  which  rises  above  -the  cabbage  in  the


362


Paut  III.  Diseases.


tub.  This  water  cures  the  oldest  sores.  One  spoonful
of  it  should  be  mixed  with  6  to  8  spoonfuls  of  ordinary-
water  and  1  tablespoonfal  of  the  mixture  taken  every
hour.  As  a  rule  this  remedy  will  be  efficacious,  and
should  it  not  be  so,  it  will  never  harm  any  one.  Such
medicines  are  always  much  more  safe  and  advisable  than
those  which  contain  poison.

Tea  from  ribwort  is  also  not  to  be  despised.

As  exterior  application  I  recommend  to  such  patients
a  twofold  compress  of  linen  to  be  worn  on  the  abdomen
for  2  hours  every  second  day.  Water  is  sufficient  for
the  compress  but  a  decoction  of  hay-flowers,  shave-grass
or  pine-twigs  is  greatly  to  be  preferred.

Large  and  malignant  tumours  in  the  stomach  cannot
be  cured.  They  will  do  their  work  of  destruction  until
the  ruin  of  the  whole  system  is  accomplished  in  death.

Stone  complaint.

It  often  occurs  that  gravel  and  stone  form  in  the
bladder  and  in  the  kidneys.  Whoever  has  seen  a  person
afflicted  with  this  complaint  or  suffered  from  it  himself
knows  how  fearful  these  pains  are.  The  cure  by  water
is  infallible  and  painless;  it  is,  therefore,  the  easiest
and  best.

Among  the  various  remedies  for  this  disease,  oat-
straw-baths  hold  the  first  place.  Oat-straw  (if  this  cannot
be  had,  shave  -  grass  or  sour  hay  may  be  taken  in.stead)
is  boiled  for  J  hour  and  the  infusion  poured  into  a  warm
bath  (30°  R.).  In  this  bath  the  patient  remains  for  1
hour.  The  bath  should  be  followed  by  a  vigorous  cold
ablution.  Three  such  baths  may  be  taken  in  the  week.
Two  or  three  short  bandages  or  compresses  on  the  affected
parts  (a  fourfold  linen  cloth  and  the  usual  covering  to
prevent  the  entrance  of  the  air).  It  is  understood  that
both  applications  are  only  to  be  taken  in  bed.  They
dissolve  gravel  and  stone  in  the  bladder  and  the  kidneys
and  expel  them.  There  are  also  several  kinds  of  tea  which
occupy  a  prominent  place  among  the  remedies  against  this
disease.  Tea  from  oats  is  prepared  by  boihng  oats  for
I  hour  in  water. Two  cups  of  the  infusion  are  taken


Stone  complaint.


363


daily.  If  the  tea  is  prepared  from  oat-straw,  it  is  of  still
greater  efficacy.  Shave-grass  tea  is  scarcely  excelled  by
any  other.  Rose-hips,  too,  will  make  a  very  efficacious
tea;  this,  however,  must  be  taken  for  some  time.  Ex-
perience taught  me  that  it  is  particular  to  the  latter  kind
of  tea  to  prevent  further  formation  of  such  stones.  The
above  mentioned  applications  should  be  taken  in  the  given
number  for  2  or  3  weeks ;  then  they  should  be  made  use
of  half  as  frequently  for  3  or  4  more  weeks.  The  bless-
ing of  the  heavenly  physician  will  be  the  most  powerful
medicine  also  for  this  malady.

A  gentleman  who  proceeded  according  to  my  direc-
tion, told  me  that  he  had  expelled  many  thousands  of
small  stones  within  a  few  weeks.

Another  gentleman  suffered  so  much  from  gravel  and
stone  that  the  acrimonious  juices  penetrated  even  to  the
feet  where  they  produced  innumerable  small  boils.  Some-
times a  sensation  of  itching  and  burning  tormented  his
whole  body.  Thirty  baths  within  a  year ,  the  Spanish
mantle  twice  or  three  times  a  week,  tea  of  the  aforesaid
kinds,  completely  cured  the  disease  and  all  its  painful
consequences.

In  conclusion  I  wish  to  say  a  word  to  the  younger
generation  who,  ever  ready  to  do  away  with  what  is  old
just  because  it  is  so,  or  because  they  suppose  it  to  be
based  on  prejudice  and  ignorance,  grasps  with  eagerness
whatever  is  new  as  the  only  good.

For  all  sufferings  of  particular  frequency  and  pain-
fulness  —  and  among  these  the  one  in  question  must  be
counted  since  the  number  of  those  tormented  by  its
maddening  pains  is  legion  —  remedies  have  been  provided
by  the  all- wise  and  all-kind  Creator.  The  whole  earth
is  strewn  with  herbs  great  and  small,  to  relieve  pain  and
heal  disease.  Men  have  cancelled  the  names  of  many  of
these  salutary  plants  from  their  dispensatories  as  unscien-
tific and  obsolete ,  but  they  preserve  their  place  in  the
book  of  nature  and  will  never  be  effaced  from  it.  They
are  made  for  man  and  destined  to  afford  him  pleasure
and  relief.  Led  by  its  instinct,  the  irrational  creature,
especially  the  wild  animal,  finds  the  salutary  herb  for


364


Part  III.  Diseases.


every  pain,  for  every  wound.  Our  ancestors,  and  many
who  will  soon  descend  into  the  grave  and  whose  opinions
are  regarded  as  old-fashioned,  did  the  same.

I  rejoice  in  the  progress  of  science  but  I  do  not
call  progress  everything  that  bears  this  appellation  of
ra.odern  sound.

My  book  has  been  written  chiefly  for  the  poor,  for
patients  in  the  country  and  to  them  I  say :  "Thank  your
Creator  for  these  good  gifts,  and  do  not  envy  the  rich!"

Keep  quietly  to  your  innocent  herbal  remedies.  Whether
they  be  applied  internally  or  externally  you  have  (even
if  by  chance  they  were  not  chosen  rightly)  the  assurance
that  they  can  do  you  no  harm.

It  would  grieve  me  if  you  also  would  tread  under
foot  the  gift  of  God,  the  salutary  little  plants,  which
grow  near  your  house,  in  your  field,  or  your  meadow.
Then,  even  I  who  love  you  so  well,  should  be  no  longer
able  to  help  you.

A  gentleman  in  his  best  years  became  ill.  He  had
violent  pains  in  the  kidneys  and  could  not  make  water.
The  doctors  declared  that  there  was  a  stone  in  the  bladder
which  could  only  be  removed  by  operation.  To  this  the
patient  would  not  submit  himself.

The  gentleman  was  visited  by  a  friend  who  inquired
his  condition,  he  received  the  following  advice :  To  take
in  the  morning,  at  noon,  and  in  the  evening  a  warm
sitting-bath  of  shave-grass  decoction,  and  to  drink  a  cup
of  shave-grass  tea  before  each  bath.  In  36  hours  a  stone
of  the  size  of  a  hazelnut  was  expelled.  Suddenly  all
pain  was  gone,  and  the  man  was  cured.

Mr.  K—  in  D—  writes :  "For  6  months  I  had  been
very  ill  and  was  treated  for  stone  and  kidney  complaint,
I  also  suffered  much  from  piles.  The  three  physicians,
who  attended  me,  could  not  help  me.  As  1  was  abso-
lutely unable  to  see  to  any  business  I  got  somebody  to
take  my  place  for  6  months.  Meanwhile  I  learned  by
others  that  the  doctors  had  pronounced  me  incurable.
Another  physician  advised  me  to  go  to  Heidelberg  in


Tetters.


365


order  to  undergo  an  operation  for  stone ;  but  I  thought,
I  would  rather  die  at  home  than  in  another  town.  My
sufferings  increased,  and  instead  of  urine  2  pints  of  blood
came  from  me.

I  was  quietly  looking  forward  to  my  end  and  resigned
myself  to  my  hard  fate.  Often  when  dreadful  pains  did
not  let  me  sleep  in  the  night,  I  longed  for  death  to  release
me  from  so  much  suffering.

At  length  God  heard  my  prayer.  After  I  had  spent
£  5.  13  s.  4  d.  in  medicines  and  mineral  waters,  I  heard
of  your  book,  ordered  it  and  commenced  the  cure  im-
mediately. In  8  days  I  no  longer  felt  any  pain,  my  urine
was  as  clear  as  spring-water  (it  had  been  as  dull  as  bad
beer  before)  and  to-day  after  4  weeks,  I  am,  m  spite  of
my  age  of  60  years,  as  healthy  and  merry  as  a  youth  of
eighteen.  Although  the  physician  despaired  of  my  reco-
very I  am  perfectly  well.  If  your  book  had  not  fallen
into  my  hands,  I  should  now  be  in  my  grave."

Tetters.

Thousands  of  men  are  tormented  by  tetters,  whether
they  own  it  or  not.  These  troublesome  parasites  and
vampires  like  to  lodge  themselves  under  the  hair,  on  the
back,  the  chest,  etc.  Sometimes  they  do  not  shun  the
light  of  day  and  fasten  themselves  like  leeches  on  the
arms,  the  feet  and  more  especially  between  the  fingers.
These  eruptions  may  be  either  hereditary  or  caused  by
bad  food  and  beverages  which  corrupt  the  juices;  they
may  also  be  consequences  of  a  disordinate  mode  of  life.

It  is  very  dangerous  to  attack  this  unclean  guest
with  sharp  remedies,  be  they  for  exterior  (green  soap)  or
for  interior  use  (quicksilver,  arsenic,  etc.).  Tetters  are
easily  suppressed,  but  in  that  case  the  last  things  will
be  worse  than  the  first,  not  to  mention  the  destructive
influence  of  corrosive  remedies  on  the  skin.

I  give  the  following  rules  for  the  treatment  of  tetters :

Externally  nothing  should  be  applied  except  luke-
warm water  to  wash  away  the  dirt.  Everything  else  can
be  of  evil  consequences.


366


Part  111.  Diseases.


Food  and  drink  for  such  patients  should  be  digestible
and  simple,  but  yet  so  as  to  increase  and  improve  the
juices.  Sour,  salt  or  spiced  food  as  well  as  all  ardent
drinks  should  be  avoided  since  the  blood  already  contains
plenty  of  acrimonious  substances.  The  water-applications
to  be  made  use  of  by  such  patients  are  the  following:
On  the  first  day,  a  head-vapour  and  the  Spanish  mantle ;
on  the  second  day,  a  foot-vapour  and  a  lower  bandage;
on  the  third  day,  in  the  morning  the  Spanish  mantle  and
in  the  afternoon  a  short  bandage.  Then  the  applications
may  be  suspended  for  a  day.  On  the  fifth  day,  the  patient
should  keep  his  bed  and  take  a  cold  whole-ablution  every
two  hours.  If  he  cannot  remain  in  bed,  he  should  take
the  whole  ablution  out  of  bed  in  the  morning,  at  noon,
and  in  the  evening ;  it  must  then,  of  course,  be  followed
by  excercise.  The  applications  should  decrease  in  number
in  proportion  as  the  secretion  of  impure  juices  ceases  and
the  formation  of  a  new  skin  progresses.

One  further  remark  may  find  its  place  here.  Tetters
may  be  wet  or  dry  accordmg  to  the  amount  of  moisture
secreted  by  them.  Dry  tetters  secrete  so  little  of  it  that
it  readily  forms  a  crust  on  the  surface  of  the  skin,  whilst
wet  tetters  are  running  constantly  and  are,  therefore,  more
troublesome,  more  dangerous  and  more  difficult  of  cure.

The  consequences  of  suppressed  tetters  are  incal-
culable. Serious  diseases,  the  immediate  result,  often
lead  to  slow  decline  and  an  early  death  or,  which  is  worse,
to  insanity.

A  student  had  on  his  left  cheek  a  round  crust  which
covered  the  raw  flesh  like  a  lid  and  opened  very  fre-
quently to  let  2  or  8  drops  of  matter  flow  out.  The
face  of  the  gentleman  was  full ;  on  his  head  several  littln
pustules  could  be  perceived.  The  patient  had  consulted
several  physicians  and  applied  various  remedies  but  with-
out effect.

He  answered  my  question  whether  the  injury  had
been  caused  by  an  accident  in  the  negative  and  said  it
had  come  spontaneously.  Now  everything  was  clear  to
me.  The  pale  sickly  complexion,  still  more  the  quantity


Tetters.


367


of  matter  flowing  from  the  spot  on  the  cheek  left  no
room  for  doubt.  The  poisonous  matter  came  from  the  body.

Till  about  15  or  20  years  ago,  people  made  for  them-
selves artificial  openmgs  in  an  arm  or  a  leg.  These  so
called  fontanels  were  never  allowed  to  close,  and  they  were
indeed,  what  their  name  indicates,  little  fountains  from
which  bad  humours  of  the  body  flowed  keeping  the  spot
in  constant  suppuration.  In  our  case  vigorous  nature
itself  had  formed  the  aperture  and  supplied  it  with  a
suitable  lid.

For  a  fortnight  the  patient  applied  the  head-vapour
and  the  foot-vapour  every  second  day.  He  also  took  the
short  bandage  and  the  Spanish  mantle  so  that  he  had
2  and  often  3  apphcations  a  day.  Tea  from  sage,  worm-
wood and  mint  helped  internally  to  promote  the  cure.
Under  the  crust  a  delicate  skin  began  to  form,  the  surest
sign  of  the  accomplished  dissolution  and  evacuation  i.  e.
of  the  cure.  After  3  weeks  it  could  not  even  be  seen
on  which  cheek  the  crust  had  been.

A  girl,  25  years  old,  relates:  "My  whole  head  is
covered  with  eruptions,  I  have  numerous  little  pustules
under  the  hair,  my  ears  are  full  of  large  flakes,  and  when
they  fall  off  from  time  to  time,  the  place  remains  with-
out skin.  I  have  also  violent  headache  somethnes,  my
eyes  burn  like  fire  and  secrete  a  sticky  fluid.  I  can  no
longer  breathe  through  the  nose  and  a  sensation  of  vio-
lent itching  and  burning  extending  to  my  whole  body
disturbs  my  sleep  in  the  night.

Applications :  1)  Weekly  2  warm  baths  of  oat-straw
decoction,  30°  R.  with  twofold  change,  the  warm  bath
of  15  minutes'  duration,  the  cold  one  not  exceeding  that
of  1  minute ;  a  cold  whole  -  ablution  may  be  substituted
for  the  latter.  2)  Two  head-vapours  of  20  to  25  minutes'
duration  weekly.  3)  Two  whole-ablutions  weekly.  4)  25
drops  of  wormwood  tincture  in  8  to  10  spoonfuls  of  water
twice  daily.

In  4  weeks  the  tetters  and  the  unhealthy  matters  in
the  whole  body  were  removed  and  to  complete  the  cure,
it  was  sufficient  to  continue  the  applications  for  a  fort-
night halving  their  number.


Part  III.  Diseases.


A  tradesman  rather  corpulent  and  about  40  years
old,  relates :  "I  have  tetters  on  my  arms  and  hands,  the
fingers  excepted,  also  on  the  thighs,  on  back  and  chest.
I  spend  many  nights  in  which  I  can  only  sleep  for  1
or  2  hours  at  the  utmost.  I  have  good  appetite  and
strength.

The  applications  are  the  following:  1)  Every  night
whole  -  ablution  from  bed.  2)  Weekly  2  warm  baths  of
oat-straw  decoction,  28°  R.  with  twofold  change.  (The
rest  as  in  the  previous  example).  3)  Every  day  an  upper
shower  immediately  followed  by  a  knee -gush.  4)  Two
saltspoonfuls  of  white  powder  daily.

After  4  weeks  the  man  returned  in  perfect  health ;
to  prevent  a  relapse  I  advised  him  to  take  a  whole-ab-
lution in  the  night  twice  a  week  and  every  month  a  bath
as  aforesaid.

A  peasant's  daughter  related:  "For  about  2  years  I
have  always  eruptions  on  the  head,  also  in  the  face,  now
more,  now  less ;  under  the  hair  many  smaller  and  larger
boils  form  and  secrete  a  corrosive  fluid.  I  have  frequently
violent  itching  all  over  the  body  and  great  heat  in  the
interior.  I  have  taken  a  great  deal,  especially  purgatives,
but  w^ithout  success.

The  water-cure  restored  her  to  health  in  6  weeks.
She  made  use  of  the  following  applications  :  1)  Three
whole-ablutions  from  bed  weekly.  2)  Twice  a  week  the
wet  chemise  dipped  in  salt  water.  3)  A  head -vapour
weekly.  4)  Twenty  drops  of  extract  of  broom  in  a  glass
of  water  twice  daily.

Throat  complaint.

Andrew  begins  to  relate  as  follows :  "I  can  scarcely
speak;  sometimes  I  am  quite  unable  to  utter  a  word.  I
had  a  very  bad  finger.  It  was  then  that  I  first  lost  the
power  of  speech;  now  my  finger  is  getting  bad  again.
My  appetite  is  very  good,  and  there  is  nothing  else  the
matter  with  me.  The  doctor  says  the  uvula  is  too  long
and  must  be  cut;  but  I  will  not  let  him  do  that.

The  man's  head  is  somewhat  inflated;  the  left  side
of  it  from  the  ear  downwards  is  a  little  swollen.  Greater


Throat,  complaints  of  the.


369


is  the  swelling  inside  hence  the  contraction  of  these  parts,
hence  the  throat  complaint.  No  doubt,  the  diseased  finger
has  not  been  thoroughly  cured,  the  poisonous  matter  has
not  been  expelled.  He  who  now  strives  to  lead  off  the
morbid  matter  and  to  purify  the  juices  will  bring  the
most  efficacious  help  to  the  throat.  First  the  whole  body
must  be  acted  upon,  then  the  head  particularly.  The
former  is  done  by  the  application  of  ths  sack  (lower  ban-
dage) and  the  shawl.  A  sack  is  always  at  a  peasant's
command.  Let  him  slip  into  it  after  having  dipped  it
in  a  decoction  of  oat-straw.  The  sack  should  be  taken
for  1^  hours  on  3  successive  days,  and  after  these  only
every  third  day.  The  shawl  should  be  worn  for  1  hour
daily.  These  applications  having  been  made  use  of  for
a  fortnight,  others  should  be  substituted  for  them.  The
patient  may  take  2  whole-ablutions  and  once  the  Spanish
mantle  weekly  and ,  if  necessary  ,  a  few  head  -  vapours.
The  complaint  was  thoroughly  cured.

A  priest  relates :  "In  the  course  of  the  summer  of
1887,  I  sometimes  felt  a  slight  passing  pain  in  the  throat
combined  with  a  tendency  to  cough.  Whenever  I  had
to  speak  at  length,  in  school,  on  the  pulpit,  or  in  the
confessional,  my  voice  became  gradually  weaker  and
threatened  to  refuse  its  service  altogether.  The  evil  in-
creased during  the  months  of  September  and  October,  I
got  violent  catarrh,  of  the  throat,  and  the  doctor  declared
the  lungs  to  be  affected.  A  3  months'  stay  at  Meran,
gargling  and  painting  the  throat,  mountain-climbing  were
of  no  avail  against  my  complaint.  About  new-year's  day
one  of  the  doctors  proposed  a  little  operation  iDut  it  was
never  undertaken.  On  the  25*''  of  January  I  left  Meran
to  seek  help  at  Woerishofen.  The  water-applications,  walk-
ing in  water  and  2  upper  showers  daily,  soon  brought
relief;  the  pain  gave  way,  my  voice  grew  stronger  and
more  sonorous,  and  on  Candlemas  day  I  was  able  to  sing
High  Mass  and  to  deliver  a  short  homily  at  D — .  But
the  tone  of  my  voice  was  still  hoarse  and  a  slight  sen-
sation of  pain  followed  the  exertion.  From  week  to  week
I  felt  improvement. After  3  weeks  my  voice  was  as

Kneipp,  Water-Cure.  04.


370


Part  111.  Diseases.


strong  and  as  clear  as  formerly,  and  I  was  able  to  perform
the  duties  of  my  vocation."

Typhus.

As  in  small-pox  the  morl)id  matters  penetrate  the
skin  and  appear  as  external  eruption,  so  in  typhus  erup-
tions form  in  the  interior  of  the  body.  According  to  the
seat  of  this  disease,  we  speak  of  typhus  of  the  head  or
of  the  abdomen.  In  some  cases  of  typhus  tumours  form
on  the  outside  of  the  body  but  these  do  not  attain  deve-
lopment. This  kind  of  typhus  has  a  peculiar  name  which
I  do  not  give,  because  it  is  of  no  importance  for  country
people  to  know  it.

Regarding  the  treatment  of  typhus  3  points  are  to
be  observed:

1)  Do  not  let  the  heat  of  the  fever  reach  too  high

2)  Tumours,  if  already  existing,  should  be  dissolved,
or  their  formation  prevented.

3)  Poisonous  matters  should  be  expelled  as  soon  as

possible.  r  iu-

No  remedy  will  be  more  efficacious  for  this  three-
fold object  than  water :  it  cools,  it  dissolves,  it  cleanses%
John  went  near  the  corpse  of  his  brother  who  had
died  of  typhus. He  imprudently  put  on  some  of  the
clothes  that  had  belonged  to  the  deceased  and  got  typhus
in  its  highest  degree. Great  was  the  heat,  greater  still
the  uneasmess  of  the  patient. He  had  a  tub  of  water
put  near  his  bed. As  soon  as  heat  and  anxiety  became
very  sensible,  he  went  into  the  water  for  1  minute  at  the
utmost. He  sat  in  the  tub,  the  water  reaching  as  far  as
the  pit  of  the  stomach,  and  rapidly  washed  the  upper
body  with  a  coarse  towel,  put  on  a  clean  saurt  and  re-
turned to  the  warm  bed.  These  baths  made  him  feel  like
one  born  anew. For  3  days  he  continued  thus,  taking
3,  5,  or  6  baths  daily. The  fever-heat  was  his  clock:
on  the  first  day  it  indicated  the  necessity  of  a  bath  b
times,  on  the  second  day  3  times,  on  the  third  day  once.
In  5  days  all  danger  was  past.  Now  the  wife  o  the  con-
valescent was  attacked  by  typhus, bhe  employed  the


Typhus.


371


same  remedy,  the  same  tub,  as  her  husband  and  in  a
few  days  she,  too,  was  cured.

Thft  beverage  of  both  patients  consisted  in  water  and
curdled  milk.  They  ate  nothing  until  brisk  appetite  set
in.  Then  they  took  bread-soup,  milk-soup,  and  a  few
potatoes.  After  a  few  days  they  were  able  to  partake
of  their  usual  fare.

Max,  a  man  of  extraordinary  strength,  visited  his
brother-in-law  who  was  ill  of  typhus ;  such  a  disease,  he
thought,  would  not  attack  him.  After  8  days  he  felt  his
strength  broken  as  well  as  his  courage.  "I  can  no  longer
stand,  nor  walk,  I  feel  pressure  and  pain  all  over  my
body." He  had  caught  typhus.

Max  did  not  possess  a  bath  but  he  had  a  large
wooden  vessel.  In  this  he  knelt  and  washed  his  whole
body  with  a  coarse  towel  and  the  coldest  water  as  often
as  the  heat  reached  a  high  pitch.  He  continued  this  cure
for  8  days.  Already  on  the  sixth  day  he  asked  for  soup,
on  the  tenth  day  he  got  up,  and  in  a  short  time  he  re-
covered his  former  strength.  He  was  later  an  experienced
teacher  for  others  likewise  attacked  mth  typhus.

At  a  time  when  within  5  weeks  20  persons  were
cured  through  the  aforesaid  applications,  an  infant  2
years  old,  also  caught  the  disease.  Nobody  believed  that
the  delicate  little  creature  would  escape  death.  As  often
as  the  baby  began  to  cry  the  mother  plunged  it  in  water
which  had  been  warmed  a  little,  washed  it  quickly  and
swathed  it  in  linen  dipped  in  lukewarm  water.  After  12
days  the  little  one  was  perfectly  well  again.

Although  I  willingly  permit  the  use  of  lukewarm
water  to  patients  who  would  be  caused  too  much  fright
by  the  cold  element,  I  cannot  help  asserting  again  that
the  coldest  water  is  generally  the  best  for  applications.

A  girl  is  sent  home  from  a  boardmg-school.  She
cornplains  of  violent  headache,  rapid  change  of  heat  and
chill  and  diarrhoea;  the  child  is  unable  to  work  or  to
walk.

On  the  first  day  the  sick  girl  had  back,  chest,  and
abdomen  washed  3  times,  and  a  wet  towel  was  applied
to  the  latter  for  2  hours. On  the  second  day  she  took

24*


372  Part  III.  Diseases.


half-baths  with  abhition  of  the  upper  body  as  often  as
the  fever-heat  demanded  it.  On  the  third  day  two  such
half-baths  were  sufficient,  on  the  fourth  day  one  sufficed^
The  child  was  out  of  danger  and  soon  completely  restored

to  health  again.  c ^-  ^.

I  could  quote  more  than  a  dozen  cases  ot  patients
who  treated  after  allopathic  and  other  methods,  eventually
became  so  weak,  so  poor  of  blood  and  juices  that  they
never  recovered  their  former  health.  ,  .  .

I  generally  advise  such  extremely  weakened  typhus-
convalescents  to  take  3  or  4  times  a  day  a  little  cup  of
tea  from  wormwood;  this  remedy  will  assist  the  formation
of  good  and  abundant  stomach-juices;  besides  this  they
may  have  back,  chest,  and  abdomen  vigorously  washed
with  water  and  vinegar  3  or  4  times  a  day.

Great  anxiety  befalls  the  head  of  a  school  if  typhus
or  any  other  contagious  malady  breaks  out  m  establish-
ment Without  exaggeration,  I  assert  : «f  childien
Seeping  in  a  dormitory  one  is  attacked  with  t)T,hus  and
treated' according  to  my. system,  no  other  chi  c  wdl  ca^^^c^^
the  disease.  Contagion  is  generally
exhalations  of  the  sick  body.  Where  my  method  is  adopt
ed  these  exhalations  are  absorbed  by  ^h^jve  f
the  breath  of  the  sick  person  will /i«  f^^^%"te
is  kent  nure  by  ventilation. It  is  self-evident  that  tne
excrements  of  luch  patients  must  be  removed  as  quickly
as  poSe  and  emptied  at  a  place  where  no  danger  of
contagion  can  arise.

UlcGrs.

A  Door  day-labourer  had  for  many  months  an  open
^  rir  the  onening  being  of  the  length  of  a  finger

I  a  J.d  apply  thi^,  t°  t'j^-X  '  0  aSo  fte  caS
r^t'lfL  fLrLvt  oVi'-fS  and  then  to  „ut

every  evening  plaster  and  bandage  had  to  be


Ulcers.


373


besides  this  the  patient  had  to  take  2  spoonfuls  of  tea
from  fenugreek  every  2  hours.  He  could  attend  to  his
work  without  interruption.  A  fortnight  after  he  com-
menced the  applications  2  thirds  of  the  sore  were  healed ;
the  man  had  a  healthy  appearance,  had  no  longer  pam
and  slept  well.  Three  weeks  later  the  foot  was  comple-
tely healed.  Tea  from  fenugreek  is  prepared  by  boiling
a  little  spoonful  of  it  in  |  pint  of  water  for  1  minute.

An  official  complains  of  an  open  sore  on  the  calf  of
the  leg:  "It  is  rather  large  and  secretes  much  dirt;  the
colour  of  the  leg  which  is  of  a  blackish  blue  seems  even
more  frightening  than  the  sore  and  the  inflammation.  I
consulted  several  doctors.  Besides  other  remedies  they
man,  about  45  years  old,  is  strongly  built  and  pretty
corpulent.  His  rather  flushed  complexion  reveals  the  beer-
friend.  The  corners  of  the  eyes  were  dull,  the  eyes  them-
selves somewhat  yellow,  the  ears  red.  On  my  question
about  his  general  health  he  answered :  "There  is  nothmg
the  matter  with  me :  I  have  the  best  of  appetites,  nor
am  I  a  drinker,  but  I  relish  2  or  3  glasses  of  beer  daily.
My  complaint  is  a  purely  local  one."

All  patients  of  this  kind  —  an  exception  is  as  rare  as
a  white  raven  —  complain  of  the  one  painful  or  ulcerating
spot  believing  that,  if  this  be  healed,  their  health  must
be  perfect.  Only  the  reverse  treatment  will  cure  them.
First  cure  the  body,  expel  all  impure  matters,  and  the
sore  will  heal  spontaneously.  In  my  opinion  there  can  be
no  blindness  more  dangerous,  no  folly  more  laden  with
consequences  than  hea-ling  an  aperture,  closing  an  issue
through  which  alone  the  body  can  be  saved.  Nature
shows  how  it  will  and  can  help  itself.  We  bind  it,  so
to  speak,  hands  and  feet  by  obstructing  its  safety-valves.
Is  it  to  be  wondered  at  if  such  proceedings  lead  to  the
destruction  of  nature?

I  advised  the  official  to  take  a  lower  bandage  Ig-  hours
daily  for  a  fortnight,  to  vigorously  wash  the  upper  body
twice  a  day  and  to  apply  the  head-vapour  once  a  week
for  20  minutes.  These  applications  were  intended  to  purify
the  body  and  strengthen  it  for  the  secretion  of  the  morbid


374


Part  III.  Diseases.


juices.  After  a  fortnight  tlie  patient  tjame  back.  His  first
words  were:  "At  our  last  interview  1  told  you  1  was  not
ill,  but  now  I  know  that  I  liave  been  very  ill.  I  could
only  with  difficulty  mount  the  stairs,  so  heavy  was  my
breathing ;  I  was  always  unusually  inflated.  When  1  told
always  older.  Now,  however,  I  feel  like  born  anew.  My
respiration  is  easy,  and  I  feel  so  well.  Formerly  1  suffered
very  much  from  ill-humour,  now  I  am  always  in  good
spirits,  and  I  enjoy  my  meals  more  than  ever.  During
these  two  weeks,"  the  patient  concluded,  "1  discharged
much  urine.  I  feel  much  easier  especially  in  the  lower
body ;  the  pains  in  the  leg  give  way,  and  the  sore  begins
to  heal.  What  must  I  do  in  order  that  it  may  be  com-
pletely healed  like  the  body?"

The  official  took  twice  weekly  a  lower  bandage  for
^  hour  and  daily  a  vigorous  upper  shower.  To  the  sore
he  applied  a  linen  rag,  which  was  3  or  4  times  daily  re-
dipped  in  lukewarm  water.  Nothing  else  he  was  allowed
to  employ  for  its  healing.  Two  weeks  had  passed  again,
when  the  official  returned  to  me.  His  leg  was  healed.
He  has  never  since  ceased  to  praise  the  salutary  power
of  the  water.  A  person  thus  cured  should  (this  is  of
great  importance)  continue  one  or  the  other  of  the  tested
applications  for  some  length  of  time.  He  may  select  the
practice  whose  effects  have  proved  more  beneficial  for  him.

Agatha  suffered  for  years  from  a  sore  on  the  leg
which  from  time  to  time  opened  and  healed  agam  spon-
taneously. On  the  inevitable  ointments  I  forbear  to  speak,
it  would  only  irritate  me.  A  physician  promised  to  cure
her  if  she  consented  to  faithfully  follow  his  advice  for
some  time.  The  leg  was  brought  in  a  position  (in  bed)
somewhat  higher  than  the  rest  of  the  body.  Almost  im-
mediately the  pain  gave  way.  Some  trifling  remedy,  I
don't  know  what,  was  applied  to  the  sore,  then  it  was
well  bandaged.  The  patient  felt  no  longer  pain  m  the
diseased  limb,  and  the  cure  progressed  in  an  astonishmg
way  until  the  sore  was  closed.  Suddenly  Agatha  feels
heaviness  in  the  head  and  giddiness,  but  she  cares  little.
In  the  night,  however  her  weakness  became  so  great  that


Ulcers.


375


the  doctor,  who  had  been  speedily  called,  declared  maras-
mus would  set  in  and  bring  the  girl  to  an  early  grave.
The  last  sacraments  had  to  be  administered  to  her  that
very  night,  and  for  5  days  she  lay  motionless.  On  the
sixth  day  she  recovered  her  senses  and  spoke  with  diffi-
culty a  few  words.  Of  her  own  accord  she  applied  wet
bandages  to  the  body  and  the  diseased  leg.  On  the  second
day  the  leg  swelled  considerably  and  began  to  pain  vio-
lently, whereas  the  head  was  relieved.  Agatha  continued
bandaging  abdomen  and  leg.  One  half  of  the  leg  was
in  the  case  of  the  official,  was  an  easy  task.  Agatha
regained  her  former  health.

But  how  had  the  attack  in  the  night  been  caused?
If  a  boy  stands  on  his  head,  the  blood  naturally  flows  to
that  part.  The  morbid  matters  led  away  from  the  leg
(by  the  higher  position)  found  their  way  to  chest  and  head
and  effected  those  frightening  symptoms.  The  bandages
led  them  down  again,  the  water  opened  the  sore,  and  the
morbid  matters,  finding  their  former  passage  and  exit
reopened,  left  chest  and  head.

I  know  that  many  physicians  of  the  new  school  hold
a  different  opinion,  but  that  will  not  alter  mine  nor  that
of  many  others.  1  call  every  open  sore  caused  by  vigorous
nature  in  order  to  throw  off  what  is  unhealthy,  a  health-
preserver  and  life-guard.  Who  does  not  know  that  the
healing  of  such  sores  has  often  been  fatal,  and  that  spon-
taneous healing  of  them  in  old  age  is  always  regarded  as
a  sign  of  approaching  death?

In  a  letter  which  is  lying  before  me  I  read  literally:
"My  sore  leg  begins  to  grow  worse  again.  The  rheumatic
toothache  and  headache  which  greatly  tormented  me,  have
entirely  ceased  since  my  leg  commenced  to  be  more  pain-
ful. These  two  complaints  continue  to  trouble  me  alter-
nately and  whenever  neither  of  them  causes  me  particular
suffering,  I  feel  a  decrease  of  general  health."

There  are  complaints  that  leave  one  part  of  the  body
only  to  attack  another.  Gout  and  one  kind  of  erysipelas
are  such  wanderers.  The  complaint  in  question  also  belongs.


376  Part  J  II.  Diseases.


to  their  numbei-  with  the  difference,  however,  that  its
wanderings  lead  through  hidden  patlis  whicli  prevent  it
from  being  so  easily  recognized  as  tlie  two  aforementioned
maladies.

A  successful  attack  against  these  wanderers  can  only
be  made  by  the  use  of  threefold  applications.

In  our  case  the  lower  bandage  removes  all  unhealthy
matters  which  are  on  their  wandering  from  the  head  to
the  feet  and  vice-versa.  Often  applied  it  deprives  them
of  all  inclination  for  a  wandering  life.  As  a  secondary
means  it  acts  on  the  suffering  part  impeding  the  return
of  matters  that  had  left  it.  The  foot-vapour  followed  by
a  lower  shower  is  directed  against  the  painful  spot.  It
dissolves  morbid  matters  and  expels  them.  Cold  ablutions
or  the  Spanish  mantle  are  destined  to  strengthen  and  in-
vigorate the  whole  body  in  ord^-  that  it  may  lend  ready
aid  in  the  healing  process.  r  i,

Hence  the  sequence  of  applications  would  be  the  toUow-
in»-  The  short  bandage,  2  whole-ablutions  from  bed  ui
the  night,  again  the  short  bandage,  the  foot-vapour  and
finally  the  Spanish  mantle.

As  internal  remedies  tea  from  centaury,  sage,  and
mint  will  render  good  service:  the  two  former  act  in  a
purifying  manner,  whilst  the  latter  improves  the  stomach

''''"^^I  will  indicate  two  other  kinds  of  treatment  for  open
sores,  one  of  which  may  be  useful  to  people  who  have
no  accomodation  for  bathing.  , , ,  a

A  peasant  short  of  stature  and  rather  stout  came  and
said:  "Your  reverence,  I  have  such  an  open^sore  on  the
leg-  have  you  no  water-remedy  for  me.-'  U  5 es,  mj
friend  "  I  replied.  "Look  here,  peasant,  go  home,  and
spread  over  your  bed  a  woollen  carpet  or  any  other  coarse
cloth  Then,  take  an  old  worn  out  sack,  dip  it  in  wa  eis
wring  it  out,  and  slip  into  it.  Then  jump  mtx,  your  bed
Tnd  cover  yourself  well  first  with  a  woollen  blanket  and
over  this  put  the  feathei-quilt."  The  peasant  s  eyes  the
rL^s  tinkling  of  which\ad  amused  me  t^l  -w^
at  me  with  astonishment ;  my  prescription  seemed  to  cau^e
him  considerable  fright. "And  this,"  I  continued,  must


4


Ulcers.


377


be  done  daily  for  a  week  and  each  time  you  will  stay  in
the  sack  for  2  hours."  The  peasant  was  perspiring  with
fear  of  the  proceeding  as  he  went;  nevertheless  he  did
as  he  was  told.  Within  50  days  he  slipped  into  the  sack
no  less  than  25  times,  and  then  his  sore  was  healed.  Joy
made  him  jump  not  so  much  on  account  of  the  cured  leg
as  on  account  of  the  good  spirits  obtained  in  the  sack.
I  advised  hhn  to  make  use  of  this  practice  from  time  to
tune;  but  this  was  not  necessary  with  him.  "Out  of
gratitude  and  for  my  own  pleasure,"  he  exclaimed,  "I
will  continue  this  sack-proceeding  for  a  whole  year."  And
he  kept  his  word.

Another  course  of  applications  for  the  healing  of  open
sores  is  the  following:

Take:  1)  Twice  weekly  a  warm  bath  of  oat-straw
decoction  with  threefold  change;  2)  twice  weekly  the
lower  bandage  for  1 1  hours  or  the  Spanish  mantle  for  the
same  time.

As  a  warning  I  give  the  following  case.

A  gentleman  pretty  corpulent  but  very  healthy  received
an  open  sore  on  the  leg  which  was  very  troublesome
to  him.  He  had  recourse  to  the  water-cure  and  made
use  of  it  for  12  days,  after  which  he  felt  remarkably  easy
and  well.  "But  this  troublesome  open » sore,"  he  said,
asking  me  to  heal  it.  "Whoever  cures  your  leg  will  shorten
your  life,  I  shall  not  do  it,"  was  my  decided  reply.  My
answer  vexed  him,  and  he  went  away.  This  had  happened
in  autumn.  In  spring  he  went  to  a  bathing-place  and
took  mineral  baths ;  on  his  return  home  he  employed  several
other  remedies  and  succeeded  in  closing  the  sore.  Six  or
eight  weeks  he  enjoyed  his  healed  leg,  then  a  great  tu-
mour began  to  form  on  his  upper  back.  The  physicians
thinking  it  to  be  a  carbuncle  opened  it  but  instead  of
matter  they  found  a  hard  substance.  In  12  days  blood-
poisoning  had  put  an  end  to  the  gentleman's  life.

I  could  quote  similar  instances  in  great  number.

I  came  into  a  house.  A  son  of  the  family  was  just
taking  a  foot-bath  of  hot  water  after  the  direction  of  the
doctor.  He  was  to  take  the  bath  as  hot  as  he  could
endure  it. His  pains,  very  great  already,  were  consider-


378


Part  HI.  Diskases.


ably  increased  by  the  hot  water.  The  leg  from  the  ankle
to  the  calf  of  the  leg  was  dreadfully  swollen,  and  the
swelling  was  so  coloured  and  inhamed  that  the  bursting
of  it  seemed  imminent.

It  io  incomprehensible  to  me  how  such  a  thing  as
hot  water  can  be  ordered  as  remedy  for  a  limb  already
containing  so  much  heat,  hot  water,  which  would  almost
scald  a  healthy  leg.  The  gentleman  grew  excited  during
the  bath,  declared  that  he  could  bear  it  no  longer  and
required  that  the  water  should  be  removed  from  his  sight.
His  order  was  obeyed,  and  I  advised  him  to  apply  a  soft
rag  dipped  in  Krautwasser  (water  from  pickled  cabbage)
to  the  most  inflamed  spot,  to  bandage  the  leg  from  the
ankle  to  the  calf  of  the  leg  in  a  larger  very  soft  cloth
dipped  in  cold  water,  and  to  cover  the  whole  with  a  dry
wrapping.  Both  compresses  should  be  repeated  as  often
as  heat  and  pain  are  felt  in  the  leg.  The  young  gentle-
man followed  my  advice ;  in  2  days  he  was  able  to  walk.
The  boil  burst.  To  promote  its  heahng  he  applied  a  ban-
dage (a  small  linen  bag)  of  infused  hay-flowers.  In  10  days
the  leg  was  completely  healed.

A  gentleman  of  distinction  relates :  "Every  year  I  get
a  complaint  from  which  I  have  to  suffer  for  2  to  3  weeks.
First  1  feel  heat  and  a  piercing  pain  in  my  legs,  then
they  begin  to  swell  as  far  as  the  knees.  When  the  swel-
ling appears  the  pain  gives  way,  but  I  am  unable  to  do
any  work.  Can  this  not  be  prevented?"  The  answer  is:
"Yes,  by  the  following  apphcations."  1)  Once  or  twice
a  week  put  on  a  pair  of  linen  stockings  dipped  m  warm
oat-straw  decoction.  Swathe  the  feet  in  a  dry  cloth  and
keep  this  foot-bandage  for  2  hours.  (This  can  be  done
in  the  evening.)  2)  Once  a  week  take  a  short  bandage
for  Ij  hours.

A  countryman  comes  and  shows  his  swollen  legs,
which  feel  quite  hard  up  to  the  knees  and  are  covered
with  blackish-blue  spots.  He  suffered  great  pains  so  that
he  spent  whole  nights  without  sleep.  Since  his  legs  were
thus  affected  he  had  also  been  subject  to  great  mental
suffering,  and  so  low-spirited  was  he  that  he  often  wished


Urinary  difficulties.


379


for  death.  He  had  no  appetite,  and  his  appearance  was
very  ill.

The  applications  were  the  following :  1)  In  the  first
week  2  foot-vapours  and  in  every  succeeding  week,  one.
2)  Twice  weekly  a  shirt  dipped  in  oat-straw  decoction
for  14  hours.  3)  Twice  weekly  a  lower-bandage  for  IJ
hours.  4)  During  the  night  the  foot  should  be  swathed
in  a  cloth  dipped  in  water  in  which  2  spoonfuls  of  fenu-
greek have  been  boiled.  It  was  just  this  bandage  which
brought  great  relief  of  the  pain  and  effected  the  necessary
dissolution.  As  internal  remedy  the  patient  took  2  salt-
spoonfuls  of  fenugreek  boiled  in  ^  pint  of  water,  in  3  or
4  portions  during  the  day.

Urinary  difficulties.

I  was  once  hastily  called  to  a  carpenter,  70  years  of
age,  to  prepare  him  for  death.  He  suffered,  I  was  told,
terrible  pain  and  was  unable  to  make  water.  When  I
arrived  at  the  patient's  house  I  saw  that  I  could  do  nothing
in  my  capacity  as  pastor ;  for  the  man  was  running  about
in  the  room  and  screaming  with  pain;  his  wife  was  like-
wise crying  and  lamenting.  I  told  her  to  boil  a  handful
of  shave-grass  in  water  and  prepare  a  close-stool.  The
physician  lived  at  a  distance  of  6  miles  and,  had  he  been
called,  would  certainly  not  have  found  the  man  alive.  The
woman  came  and  poured  the  boiling  water  in  the  close-
stool.  The  patient  sat  on  it  and  allowed  the  shave-grass
vapour  to  fumigate  the  painful  spots.  'I  ordered  him  to
remain  on  it  for  20  to  30  minutes  and  then  go  to  bed.
In  an  hour,  I  added,  I  should  come  back  and  prepare  him
for  death.  On  my  return  after  an  hour  I  found  the  man
quiet  in  bed  and  bathed  in  perspiration.  He  had  discharged
4  pints  of  urine  and  felt  no  longer  the  least  pain.  The
preparation  for  death  could  be  omitted.  On  the  following
day  the  man  took  again  a  vapour  for  20  minutes ;  on  the
third  day  he  rested  and  on  the  fourth  day  returned  to
his  usual  work.

The  man  had  caught  cold,  and  this  had  caused  the
complaint.  It  is  incredible  what  help  so  simple  a  herb
can  bring  in  hours  of  bitterest  suffering ,  if  promptly  and
rightly  applied.


380  nr.  Diseases.


A.  day-labourer  had  a  similar  complaint.  He  applied
shave-grass  vapours  but  they  failed  to  produce  the  desired
effect.  They  had  to  be  assisted  by  another  application.
Shave-grass .  was  boiled,  a  fourfould  linen  cloth  dipped  in
the  hot  decoction,  wrung  out  a  little,  and  laid  on  the
suffering  part.  One  shave-grass  vapour  and  one  such  com-
press for  2  hours  daily  sufficed,  and  in  a  few  days  the
man  was  cured.  In  this  case  also  the  complaint  origi-
nated in  a  cold  although  there  were  other  secondary  causes.
The  discharged  urine  showed  that  a  deal  of  morbid  matters
had  been  dissolved  in  the  interior.

In  a  similar  case  I  employed  warm  water  mixed  with
vinegar  instead  of  shave-grass  with  the  same  good  result.
Besides  the  external  applications  I  recommend  tea  from
shave-grass  a  cupful  of  which  may  be  taken  in  2  or  3

portions  daily.  j  a

A  housemother  had  been  confined  to  bed  and  under
medical  treatment  for  19  weeks.  The  phy.sicians  declared
her  disease  to  be  cancer  of  the  bladder. Her  pain.s  were
so  great  that  her  cries  could  be  heard  by  the  neighbours.
All  hope  for  her  recovery  had  long  been  given  up.  1  ad-
vised the  poor  woman  to  have  shave-grass  boiled,  to  dip
a  cloth  in  the  decoction,  to  place  the  decocted  shave-
grass  in  the  cloth  (previously  wrung  out  a  little)  and  to
apply  this  compress  to  the  painful  spot.  The  patient  felt
relieved  even  after  the  first  application She  continued
making  use  of  it  3  or  4  times  daily  for  5  daj-s,  the  duration
S  each  application  being  2  full  hours. On  the  fifth  day
a  salt-stone  was  expelled  under  unspeakable  pam.  Ihe
Complaint  was  thoroughly  cured; the  fatal  cancer  had

^""a  man%4  years  old,  otherwise  strong  and  healthy
catheter  and  declared  that  there  was  no  remedj  for  tin.
disease.  Indeed  the  doctor  had  to  be  fetched  everj  24
hours  for  this  unpleasant  operation,  /f**^  ^^^t  but  e
man's  whole  body  was  glowing  with  fever-heat,  but  he
wa  not  allowed  to  drink.  Thus  the  poor  man  was  to -
meLed  by  twofold  suffering.  The  physician  gave  little
hope  foi  recovery.  I  was  consulted  and  advised  the  patient


Urinary  difficulties.


381


to  lie  on  a  wet  sheet  folded  several  times  and  dipped  in
warm  water,  for  |  hour.  The  same  sheet  was  then  to
be  re-dipped  and  applied  to  the  abdomen  for  1  hour.
After  the  first  application  3  pints  of  water  were  discharged.
In  the  beginning  it  was  renewed  twice  a  day,  later  once
daily.  The  patient  took  daily  a  cupful  of  tea  from  shave-
grass,  juniper-berries  or  dwarf-elder  (boiled  in  water  for
5  minutes).  Rosmary-wince  or  even  juniper-berries  only,
boiled  in  water  and  taken  as  tea  would  have,  liltewise,
rendered  good  service.  The  first  complaint  with  its  pains
gave  way,  the  fever,  too,  disappeared.  The  man  felt  much
better  after  this  cure  than  previously  to  his  illness.

A  peasant,  about  42  years  old,  relates :  "I  have  been
suffering  for  4  years,  and  my  sufferings  increase  from  month
to  month ;  I  have  difficulty  in  making  water.  Every  half
hour  I  get  violent  cramps  followed  by  a  very  scanty  dis-
charge of  water.  I  have  consulted  many  physicians;
according  to  the  direction  of  a  medical  man  at  Munich
I  drank  80  bottles  of  mineral  water,  this  relieved  rne  a
little,  but  the  disease  is  not  removed.  During  the  night
I  have  to  rise  every  half  hour  to  make  water  and  if  I
omit  this,  it  makes  my  sufferings  worse.  I  am  otherwise
healthy,  have,  as  everyone  says,  a  good  appearance,  and
I  seldom  drink  beer. What  is  to  be  done?

Applications:  1)  In  the  week  2  warm  baths  of  oat-
straw  decoction  (30  to  32")  with  threefold  change,  2)  On
the  remaining  days  of  the  week  a  short  bandage  likewise
dipped  in  oat-straw  decoction,  for  1  hour;  these  appli-
cations are  to  be  continued  for  12  to  14  days.  3)  Daily
3  small  cups  of  tea  from  shave-grass  and  juniper-berries,
boiled  for  10  minutes.

A  man-servant  had  great  difficulties  in  making  water.
Under  great  pain  a  small  and  slow  discharge  took  place.
The  physician  declared  it  necessary  to  draw  off  the  urine
by  means  of  the  catheter  which  was  done  every  second
day  for  some  time.  The  evil,  however,  increased  and  with
it  the  pain  became  greater.

The  man-servant  took  twice  daily  25  to  30  drops  of
tincture  from  juniper-berries  and  rose-hips  in  a  wineglass-
ful  of  water. He  immediately  noticed  an  improvement;


382


Part  III.  Diseases.


in  10  days  the  complaint  had  almost  disappeared.  Every
I  other  day  he  took  drops  of  wormwood  tincture  before

taking  the  aforesaid  remedies  and  in  a  short  time  he  was
completely  freed  from  the  complaint."  .

For  all  complaints  of  the  bladder,  gravel  etc.  an  in-
fusion of  black  currant  leaves  is  very  recommendable.
Such  tea  has  rendered  excellent  service  in  the  most  diffi-
cult cases.

Vaccination,  bad  efTecls  of.

A  gentleman  relates:  "I  have  been  healthy  all  my
life.  Ten  years  ago  when  smallpox  was  raging  in  my
neighbourhood  I  had  myself  vaccinated.  I  got  no  pustules
but  the  vaccinated  spot  on  the  right  arm  remained  of  a
somewhat  reddish  hue  and  a  slight  eruption  appeared  round
the  openings  made  by  the  lancet.  Through  8  years  I  only
noticed  that  the  inflamed  spot  grew  in  extension,  and  now
after  10  years  the  eruption  has  the  appearance  of  wet
tetters  and  is  so  troublesome  that  it  sometimes  deprives
me  entirely  of  ray  night's  rest.  These  eruptions  are  stronger
now  on  the  one  arm,  now  on  the  other,  and  the  same
change  takes  place  in  the  feet.  I  have  employed  a  great
deal,  even  the  most  poisonous  ointments  on  the  surface
of  the  skin ;  I  have  also  taken  much  medicine  but  without
success."

Applications:  Here  blood  and  juices  are  evidently
corrupted  and  the  eruption  only  serves  as  outlet  for  un-
healthy secretions.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  the  whole
body  .should  be  acted  upon  in  order  to  dissolve  and  eva-
cuate the  morbid  matters.

1)  Weekly  3  whole-ablutions  from  bed.

2)  To  wash  the  eruption  with  an  infusion  of  fenu-
greek twice  or  3  times  daily.  Instead  of  infused  fenu-
greek, aloe  may  be  used.  (1  teaspoonful  of  aloe  dissolved
in  2  pints  of  hot  water.)

3)  Twice  a  week  the  Spanish  mantle.  Ihese  appli-
cations are  to  be  continued  for  a  fortnight  or  3  weeks

Further  applications:  Every  week  or  every  fortnight
a  warm  bath  followed  by  a  cold  one  (See  Part  the  hrst.)
It  would  also  be  good  during  this  cure  to  drink  worm-
wood tea,  3  or  4  spoonfuls  twice  daily.


Voice  loss  of  thi;.


383


Voice,  loss  of  the.

It  frequently  occurs  that  people  lose  their  voice  partly
or  entirely  without  apparent  cause.

Twelve  years  ago  there  came  to  me  a  priest  who  was
obliged  to  carry  about  with  him  paper  and  pencil  in  order
to  communicate  his  thoughts  to  others  by  writing.  Utterly
unable  to  perform  the  duties  of  his  vocation  he  had  sought
help  everywhere.  Gargarisms,  magnetism,  electricity,
scarification  had  been  employed  in  vain;  14  times  lapis
infernalis  had  been  applied  to  his  throat  and  caused  so
much  havoc  in  it  that  a  physician  declared  he  would  never
regain  his  voice.  At  last  cold  water  became  the  remedy
to  which  the  priest,  next  to  God,  owed  his  recovery.  His
complexion  was  rather  sickly,  but  he  felt  particular  pain
in  no  part  of  his  body;  he  was  lacking  nothing  but  his
voice,  so  he  thought.  How  can  the  organ  of  speech  be
unfit  for  use  if  it  is  not  injured,  if  no  pain  whatever  is
felt?  If  I  bandage  a  person's  mouth,  no  organ  is  injured
and  yet  he  will  be  unable  to  speak.  It  would  be  folly
to  seek  for  the  cause  in  the  throat.  I  must  remove  the
bandage,  and  his  speech  will  be  returned  to  him.  The  organs
of  speech  may  be  perfectly  sound  but  various  influences,
bandages,  as  it  were,  may  impede  their  action.  Which
are  these  influences?

When  shepherd  boys  amuse  themselves  by  throwing
stones  into  the  rill  that  flows  through  the  valley  they
impede  its  regular  course  and  force  it  to  leave  its  bed
and  either  to  run  in  another  direction  or  to  fill  with  its
water  ditches  and  hollows  that  may  be  near.  The  same
process  often  takes  place  in  the  human  organism.  If  we
could  but  look  into  this  many-veined  river  basin  we  should
see  how  often  the  circulation  is  disturbed  by  such  ob-
stacles and  that  agglomerations,  swelling.s  of  mucous  mem-
branes etc.,  must  be  the  consequence.  Who  has  not  seen
a  so-called  kernel  (a  hard  concretion  in  the  flesh)  on  a
hand  or  a  foot  ?  Imagine  now  what  pressure  such  a  swel-
ling, or  whatever  it  may  be  called,  must  cause  if  it  is
formed  on  an  internal  part.  Must  not  the  activity  of  a
thus  pressed  organ  be  impaired  and  disturbed?  Muffle  the


384  Part  III.  Diseases.

most  high-sounding  boll  and  it  will  be  mute  and  all  burn-
ing and  hammering  will  be  of  no  avail.

Let  us  now  return  to  our  speechless  gentleman.  Al-
ready the  first  upper  shower  showed  me  the  dreadful
agglomerations,  almost  tumours  which  had  bound  the
organs  of  speech  like  as  many  fetters.  The  removal  of
the  agglomerations  was  effected  by  dissolving  and  evacuat-
ing water-applications.  Among  the  former  the  head-vapour
holds  the  first  place.  It  produces  perspiration  over  the
whole  upper  body ;  a  cold  shower  immediately  succeeding
it  will  wash  away  what  has  been  dissolved  and  streng-
then the  system.  Since  the  patient  is  rather  stout  and
such  persons  generally  suffer  from  determination  of  blood
to  the  head,  a  foot-vapour  with  following  cold  shower
should  be  applied  to  lead  the  blood  downwards.  These
2  applications  may  be  taken  once  a  week,  and  if  the  cor-
pulence is  very  great,  twice  weekly.

A  second  application  which  acts  in  a  dissolving  manner
on  the  whole  body  is  the  Spanish  mantle.  To  this  are
added  cold  baths  (1  or  2  weekly  for  1  minute),  half-baths
reaching  to  the  arm-pits  with  vigorous  ablution  of  the
upper  body;  one  upper  and  one  lower  shower  may  be
substituted  for  the  half-bath.  These  apphcations  punctually
taken  and  combined  vpith  a  regular  mode  of  life,  much
exercise  in  the  open  air,  and  hght  manual  labour,  restored
the  whole  machine  to  its  proper  motion  and  the  little
wheel  of  the  voice  ran  without  burning  and  electricity
spontaneously  and  as  well  as  it  had  formerly  done.  No-
body had  believed  that  this  priest  would  ever  regam  his
voice.  In  6  weeks  he  was  completely  restored  and  to  this
day,  after  12  years,  his  voice  has  so  sonorous  and  power-
ful a  tone  that  it  gives  pleasure  to  all  who  hear  it

A  priest  had  lost  his  voice  and  had  consulted  the
most  renowned  physicians  for  5  years.  He  inhaled  much
he  had  the  parotid  glands  cut,  all  in  vam.  The  seat  ot
the  complaint  was  always  considered  to  be  m  the  neck
until  the  last  physician  who  examined  him  declared  that
there  was  absolutely  nothing  the  matter  with  his  neck
but  that  he  could  not  discover  by  what  else  the  loss  ot
his  voice  might  be  caused. This  declaration  induced  the


4


VOTCK,  LOSS  OF  THE.


385


patient  to  have  recourse  to  the  much  feared  water-cure.
lie  regained  his  voice  before  6  months  had  elapsed,  and
it  was  of  so  mighty  a  sound  that  he  thought  half  of  it
would  have  sufficed  him.

Also  in  this  case  the  loss  of  the  voice  did  not  ori-
ginate in  the  organs  of  speech.  The  gentleman's  neck,
however,  was  unusually  thick  and  the  upper  body  dis-
proportionately stout  compared  to  the  emaciated  hands
and  feet.  He  had  formerly  often  suffered  from  attacks
of  colic.  Nature  sought  in  this  manner  to  help  itself
but  failed  in  throwing  off  all  morbid  matters.

Later  these  attacks  ceaseu  and  the  patient  felt  from
time  to  time  contractions  of  the  chest  which ,  however,
did  not  trouble  him  much.  The  tenant  which  had  formerly
dwelled  on  the  ground-floor  was  now  lodging  in  the  upper
story.  No  inhalations,  no  cutting  of  the  glands  or  even
of  the  uvula  ,  would  here  effect  a  care.  If  the  whole,
organism  is  restored  to  order  the  voice  will  return  spon-
taneously.

The  patient  took  in  the  week  a  head-vapour  and  a
foot-vapour,  an  upper  and  a  lower  shower.  To  contract
the  bloated  parts  of  the  body ,  he  descended  4  times
weekly  into  the  cold  water  (to  the  arm -pits)  remaining
in  it  for  one  minute  during  which  time  he  vigorously
washed  his  upper  body.  He  also  took  the  Spanish  mantle
once  a  week.  After  4  weeks  the  applications  were  re-
duced to  1  upper  and  lower  shower  and  1  half -bath
weekly.  The  patient  was  not  allowed  to  discontinue  the
applications  suddenly.  He  had  to  make  use  of  them  for
some  length  of  time  in  the  same  succession  as  during
the  actual  cure.  It  generally  requires  no  urging  on  my
part  to  induce  patients  to  continue  the  applications.

The  desire  for ,  and  the  trust  in ,  the  application
of  water  hold  pace  with  the  sensation  of  increasing
strength.

Our  gentleman's  voice  was  restored  to  its  former
strength.  The  old  complaint  never  returned  although
11  years  have  elapsed  since  the  cure.

A  professor  in  his  best  years  was  unable  to  attend
to  his  vocation  of  teacher;  he  had  lost  his  yoice.  He

E  n  e  i  p  p ,  Wator-Cure.


386


Part  III.  Diseasks.


fii'st  consulted  tho  doctors  in  his  neighbourhood,  then
other  celebrated  physicians  wlio  made  tliroat  corn|jlaints
their  special  study.  After  inhalations  and  electricity  had
been  applied  in  vain  he  was  told  that  the  vocal  ligaments
had  lost  all  elasticity,  that  seeing  the  inefficacy  of  all
remedies  nothing  could  be  done  at  present  to  cure  him
and  finally  that  he  should  let  his  organ  of  speech  enjoy
rest  from  all  activity  for  a  whole  year.  This  verdict  did
not  satisfy  the  gentleman  and  he  resolved  on  making  use
of  the  water-cure.  In  6  days  he  regained  his  voice,  in
6  weeks  it  was  so  strong  and  sonorous  as  it  had  scarce-
ly ever  been  before.  This  happened  5  years  ago  and
the  gentleman  need  have  no  fear ;  his  voice  will  remain
as  it  is.  I  will  now  answer  the  question :  what  had
there  been  the  matter  with  the  gentleman  ?  His  appear-
ance was  not  sickly  although  his  complexion  lacked  the
freshness  of  health,  his  appetite  was  excellent,  he  possessed
plenty  of  natural  strength ;  should  only  the  vocal  liga-
ments have  been  treated  so  unkindly  by  nature  as  to  lose
all  elasticity  and  refase  their  service  altogether?  That
is  not  probable.  The  gentleman  was  somewhat  vexed
at  my  assertion  that  nothing  was  the  matter  with  the
organs  of  speech  and  when  the  neck  was  entirely  passed
over  in  my  examination,  he  was  on  the  point  of  losing
all  confidence  in  my  treatment.  I,  however,  wished  to
prove  to  the  gentleman  that,  the  complaint  not  orginating
in  the  neck,  I  was  right  in  ordering  no  remedy  to  be
applied  to  it.  Where  was  the  root  of  the  evil?  The
gentleman  had  on  the  upper  part  of  the  back,  on  both
sides  of  the  seventh  vertebra  small  elevations  like  little
cushions.  They  exercised  a  pressure  on  the  organs  of
speech.  Vigorous  .showers  were  applied  to  the  young
gentleman,  he  received  the  shawl,  half- baths  and  the
Spanish  mantle.  Later  half-baths  with  ablutions  of  the
upper  body  were  sufficient.  The  fear  of  water  soon  gave
way  to  such  a  desire  for  it  that  the  applications  became
a,  necessity  to  him.  Not  a  week  passed  without  some
applications  which  preserved  him  in  good  health.

Countess  N.,  15  years  old,  relates:  "Two  years  ago
{  had  diphtheria  in  its  highest  degree.  After  this  malady


Voice,  loss  of  the.  387


1  <^ot  a  terrible  headache  and  some  weeks  later  after  a
hot  bath,  I  lost  my  voice  and  was  therefore  obliged  to
converse  with  others  by  writing.  My  parents  consulted
thi  most  celebrated  physicians.  I  had  to  inhale,  to  take
divers  mineral  remedies,  I  was  electrified  every  day  tor
several  weeks ;  leeches  were  applied  to  my  neck  which
often  caused  me  to  faint:  I  can  only  think  with  terror
of  the  details  and  will  not  even  attempt  to  mention  all
th3  medicines  I  took. Thus  I  continued  for  more  than

2  years  and  finally  the  doctors  declared  that  I  should  die
of  consumption.  On  this  they  all  agreed  that  I  should
never  recover  my  voice.  The  whole  year  through  my
hands,  my  feet,  and  my  head  are  ice-cold.  I  cannot  eat
nor  does  any  food  do  me  good;  I  am  often  tempted  to
dsspair.  I  am  only  15  years  old,  but  there  can  be  no
more  unfortunate  being  than  I  am.

The  girl  is  suffering  from  extreme  poverty  of  the
blood;  this  is  proved  by  the  sensation  of  chill;  only  in
th3  chest  she  still  feels  a  certain  warmth.  She  must  be
swathed  in  order  that  formation  of  blood  may  take  place
and  the  circulation  may  be  regalated.  The  patient  should
live  on  a  simple  fare  and  take  twice  or  3  times  daily  a
cold  arm -bath  reaching  to  the  elbows  and  a  foot-bath
reaching  over  the  ankles  or  better  still  she  should  walk
barefoot  in  wet  grass  or  on  wet  stones.  This  may  seem
contrary  to  reason,  but  these  are  excellent  means  to  pro-
duce vital  heat  in  the  system,  especially  in  the  blood-
less extremities.  To  effect -the  same  in  other  parts  of
the  body,  back,  chest  and  abdomen  should  be  vigorously
washed  with  cold  water  twice  daily.  The  first  attempts
cost  a  great  effort  on  the  part  of  the  patient  bat  the
awakening  vital  heat  gave  her  new  courage.  Duration
and  height  of  the  2  baths  could  be  increased.  These
practices  were  continued  for  8  or  10  days.  Then  followed
light  knee -gushes  and  upper  showers;  they  were  taken
every  second  or  fourth  day,  one  in  the  morning,  the  other
in  the  afternoon.  After  a  fortnight  these  applications
were  replaced  by  a  half-bath  reaching  to  the  pit  of  the
stomach,  taken  for  1  minute,  and  an  upper  shower,  daily.
The  diet  should  be  of  such  a  kind  as  to  promote  the

25*


388


Part  III.  Diseases.


formatinn  of  blood  and  juices,  hence  it  should  consist  in
simple  food  not  spoiled  by  spice.^,  etc.  Milk  is  the  best
drink,  only  little  beer  and  nothing  ardent  should  be  taken.
To  brace  her  system  she  had  to  continue  the  aforesaid
practices  for  some  time.

A  girl,  of  16  years,  lost  her  voice  without  any  apparent
cause  and  could  only  with  great  difficulty  make  herself
understood.  She  consulted  physicians :  these  ordered  medi-
caments, but  they  had  no  effect.  The  girl  had  a  blooming
appearance  and  good  appetite;  her  head  was  full  and
round,  her  short  neck  rather  thick,  her  breathing  some-
what difficult.  Her  feet  were  always  cold.  In  6  weeks
the  girl  was  completely  cured.  By  which  applications?
The  blooming  complexion,  the  full  hot  head,  the  cold  feet
showjd  clearly  that  there  existed  a  determination  of  blood
to  the  head.  Hence  the  disproportionate  development  of
the  upper  parts  of  the  body,  perhaps  also  agglomerations
of  blood.  Equality  of  vital  heat  was  the  first  object  to
be  aimed  at.  The  girl  took  twice  or  3  times  daily  a  cold
foot-bath  (of  1  minute's  duration  at  the  utmost)  followed
by  brisk  exercise  in  the  open  air ;  she  also  walked  bare-
foot in  the  wet  grass  or  on  wet  stones.  The  practices
tended  to  draw  the  blood  downwards  to  the  extremities ;
others  had  to  be  made  use  of  in  order  to  dissolve  and
remove  the  agglomerations  in  the  head,  neck,  and  upper
body.  To  effect  this  the  Spanish  mantle  was  applied
daily  during  the  first  week,  three  times  during  the  second
week  and  twice  during  the  third,  later  only  once  a  week.
After  a  fortnight  1  half-bath  with  washing  of  the  upper
body  was  taken  in  the  week,  to  brace  the  system.  The
same  result  might  be  obtained  by  1  upper  and  lower
shower.  Thus  the  three  objects,  production  of  equal  vital
heat,  dissolution  and  evacuation  of  superfluous  matters
and  strengthening  of  the  whole  system,  were  attained  by
the  respective  parts  of  the  healing  process.  The  girl  in-
creased in  strength  and  her  voice  became  clearer  and
more  sonorous  than  it  had  ever  been  before  and  was  thus
excellently  adapted  for  singing  which  art  is  the  object  of
the  girl's  particular  study.


"Worms.


389


Worms.

Among  the  vermin  apt  to  weaken  the  hnmaii  body
and  cause  disorder  in  the  organism  the  asca.ides  and
other  kinds  of  worms  are  especially  mjunous.  Little
children  are  frequently  troubled  with  them  and  if  a  mo  hei
be  noth  careful  ih^y  may  do  much  harm,  iliey  toiin  n
the  rectum;  indigestible  farinaceous  food  and  especially
black  bread  are  particularly  favoarable  to  their  formation
and  growth.  Worms  are  generally  expelled  from  the
rectum,  but  sometimes  also  from  the  mouth.  Symptoms
of  their  presence  in  the  body  are :  great  appetite  un-
easiness and  pain  in  the  abdomen.  Children  attiicted  with
worms  are  apt  to  put  their  fingers  in  the  nose  and  have
a  sickly  appearance  due  to  the  deprivation  of  nourishment
through  the  worms.

Kemedies  agamst  worms  are:  i • o •  +

1.  Cut  up  an  onion  and  put  it  overnight  in  I  pints
of  water.  In  the  mornhig  the  juice  should  be  well  prB.ssed
out  of  the  onion  and  the  water  drunk  fasting.  If  this
remedy  has  been  used  for  3  or  4  days  the  worms  wül
certaüdy  be  killed  and  expelled.

2.  A  spoonful  of  honey  is  boiled  m  2  pints  ot  water
and  this  water  taken.  The  worms  drink  themselves  full
of  this  water  and  a  cup  of  wormwood  tea,  Avhich  is
poison  for  them,  taken  later,  will  kill  and  expel  them.

3.  The  strongest  effect  is  produced  by  wormseed,  the
seed  of  a  plant  which  has  the  property  of  expelling  worms.

Three  thick  long  worms  came  one  day  out  of  a  wo-
man's mouth.  She  had  been  ill  for  some  time  and  was
taking  medicine.  Two  spoonfuls  of  wormseed  taken  2
hours  before  breakfast  on  2  successive  days  eifected  that
within  3  days  no  less  than  78  long  worms  were  expelled.

Wormseed  is  not  espensive  and  can  be  had  at  any
chemist's.

Among  all  worms  the  tape -worm  is  the  most  dan-
gerous. To  expel  this,  a  very  safe  remedy  with  directions
for  use  may  be  obtained  in  every  apothecary's  shop.


 ^


Alphabetical  Index.


Abdominal  complaints  153,105.

  pains  1(37,  337.

Ablutions  9G.
Abscesses  205.
Almond  oil  128.
Aloe  powder  132.

  water  132.

Althea  (Althaea  officinalis)  129.

  roots  130.

Alum  130.

  water  130.

Anise  (PimpinellaAnisum)  130.
Aperients  136,  148,  186,  256.
Apoplexy  208.
Appetite,  loss  of  164.
Arm-bath  70.

Arms,  hardening  of  the  31.
Arnica  (Arnica  montana)  158.

  tincture  158.

Ascarides  289.
Asthma  81,  213.

Back,  shower  for  the  90.
Bandages  101.

Barbadoes  Aloes  (Aloe  vul-
garis) 131.

Barefooted  walking  in  newly
fallen  snow  28.

Barefooted  walking  in  wet
grass  26.

iBarefooted  walking  on  wet
stones  27.

Bark  of  oak  133,  '


Baths  42.
Bed-wetting  214.
Bilberry  (Vacciniuni  myrtilhis)
133.

  spirit  134.

Births  215.

Bitter  Aloe  (Agave  Americana)
135.

Bitter-spirit  138.

Black- thorn- blossoms  (Prunus

spinosa  136
Bladder,  catarrh  of  the  215.

  complaint  of  tlie  216.

  stone  in  the  362.

  ulcers  on  the  86.

Bleeding  38.

 of  the  nose  222.

Blind-nettle  87.

Blisters  caused  by  walking  44.

Blood,  decomposition  of  the

217.

Blood,  formation  of  tlie  40, 234.
Blood  poisoning  219.

 ,  poverty  of  the  96,  235.

  vomiting  221.

Bloody  flux  48,  168,  224.
Bog- bean  (Menyanthes  trifo-

liata)  137.
Bone-dust  138.

Bowels,  complaint  of  tiie  110,
224.

 inflammation  of  the  10.5,

226.


Alphabetical  Index.


391


Brain,  disease  of  tiie  225.

 inflammation  of  tlie  227.

Breathing-,  difiicnlt  213.
Breath,  offensive  167.
Bran  140.

Rran-bread  195,  290.
Bran-decoction  140.
Brier  (Rosa  canina)  HO.
linrning- in  the  bladder  188, 314,
Burns  228.

Camomile  (Matricaria  chamo-
milla  141.

  hags  141.

  tea  141.

Camphor  oil  110,  143.

  spirit  142.

Cancer  230.
Canine  madnes«;  86.
Caraway  (Cariir.i  carvi)  143.
Career  of  tlie  author  1.
Caries  230.

Catarrh  113,  232.  ^1'-
Centaury  (Eiytliraea  centau-

rinra)  143.
Chalk-dust  144.
Charcoal  146.
Chest,  plilefrm  in  the  152.
Chicory (Cichorium  intyhus)

184.

Children  139,  140,  274,  343.
Chinks  129.
Chlorosis  48,  96,  234.
Cholera  236.
Cholerine  238.
Circulation  42,  48.
Close-stool  vapour  85,
Closet  125.
Clove-oil  145.

Cloves  (Eug^enia  caryophyllata

Thunb.1  145.
Clysters  289.
Coal-dust  146.
Cod  liver  oil  146.
Colds  52.
Colic  238.

Colt's  foot  CTussilago  Farfai'a
L.)  147.

Common  elder(Sambucus  nigra
L.)  148.


Common  nettle  (.Urtica  doica

L.)  151.
Congestions  42,  81,  111,  2.39.
Consumption  240.
Consumptive  people  146,  242.
Constipation,  see  Costiveness

246.
Contusions  43.

Convalescents  45,  HO,  146,  169,
183.

Cooling-  drink  150.
Corns  44,  84.
Costiveness  246.
Cough  233.
Covering  20.

Cowslips  (Primula  officinalis

L.)  152.
Cramp-herb  181.
Cramps  42,  110,  181,  250.
Croup  251.

Cure  hy  water,  how  it  is  effect-
ed 8.

Debility  252.
Decline  252.
Delirium  tremens  255.
Determination  of  the  blood  to

the  head  84.
Diarrhoea  256.
Digestion,  bad  115.

 ■  organs  of  146.

Diphtheria  259.
Disease,  what  it  is  6.
Dissolution  of  morbid  matters

15.

Douches  309.
Drinking  of  water  114.

  of  hot  water  117.

  during  meals  115.

Drinks,  spirituous  301.
Dropsy  1.50,  153,  261.
Dwarf-elder  (Sambucus  ebulus

L.)  153.
Dwarf- elder  tea  153.
Dysentery  265.

Ears,  cramp  in  the  129.

  diseases  of  the  265.

  humming  in  the  80,  81,

266.


392


ALPHABEriUAL  InUEX,


Ears,  running  80.

  vapours  for  the  87.

Ear-wax,  obdurate  129.
Effervescent  powders  323.
Elder  berries  150.

  flowers  löü.

 roots  148,  151.

Emetics  249.
Emphysema  316.
Epilepsy  267.
Eruptions  268.
Eruptive  diseases  352.
Exercise  after  applications  IV
Extracts  125.
Eye-bath  72.

Eyebri^ht  (Euphrasia  officina-
lis) 73,  154.
Eyes,  cataract  of  the  273.

 catarrh  of  the  274.

  complaints  of  the  275.

 inflammation  of  the  81.

 running  132.

 vapours  fur  the  87.

Faintness,  attacks  of  158.
Feather-quilt  20.
Fennel-powder  155.
Fenugreek  (Foenum  graecum)

156.
Fever  278.

Fistulas  of  the  rectum  49.
Flour-sack  108.
Foot-bandage  105.
  bath,  cold  42.

 bath,  warm  42.

 vapour  82.

Gall  312.
Gargles  157,  160.
Gases  47,  110.

General  cause  of  every  disease
7.

Gentian  (Gentiana  Lutea  L.)
157.

Giddiness  164,  279.
Glands  133.
Goitre  133.
Gout  49,  282.
Gravel  49,  141,  163.
Green-sickness  234.


Gripes  141.

Half-baths  45.

Hand  bath  77.

Hardening,  means  of  22.

: want  of  46.

Hay-flowers  43.

Hay-flower  decoction  43.

 bath  65.

 foot-balli  4:5

 sitting-bath  4'.).

Headache  322,  329.

Head-bandage  101.

Head-bath  70.

Head,  care  of  the  72.

  complaints  290.

Head-gush  96.
I  Head,  inflated  81.
I  Head-vapour  77.

Hearing,  difflcult  129.

Heart-burn  143.

Heart  complaints  293.

 ,  organic  defects  of  the  294.

j  ,  dropsy  of  the  263.

— -  palpitation  of  the  297.

Heat,  extraction  of,  by  water
applications  51,  52.

Hemorrhoids  (Piles)  46,  287.

Hempen  cloth  20.

Herb  dumplings  152.

Home  apotheca,  contents  of  a
little  194.

Honey  159.

  eye-water  160.

  mead  160

  ointment  150.

  wine  160,  193.

Hoarseness  299.

Horse-cures  4,  54.

Hot  diseases  58.

Hypochondriasis  46,  300.

Hysteria  46,

Ice  29,  37.
Incense  159.
Indigestion  36,  115.
Indurations  of  the  gall  312.
Inflammation  302.
Influenza  303.
Inhalation  166.


Alphabetical,  Ikdes.


393


Injuries  43.
Insanity  305.

Insects,  sting  of  poisonous  8G.
Itch  310.
Jaundice  312.
Jugular  glands  81.
Juniperberries  ( Juiiiperus  com-
munis L.)  101.

  sprouts  162.

  vapour  161.

Kidney  complaints  313.
Knee-sliower  32,  87.
Kneeling  in  water  45,  47.
Knee,  tumour  on  the  315.
Knot-grass  (Polygonum  avicu-
lare  L.)  162.

Lard  110.

Lavender-oil  (Lavandula  vera)

163.
Leeches  38.

Legs,  hardening  of  the  31.
Lime-tree  blossoms  (Tilia  gran-

difolia)  164.
Lindenwood  146.
Linseed  (Linum  usitatlssimum)

165.

Liver  complaints  146,  313.
Lower  bandage  107.
Lumbago  315.

Lungs,  complaint  of  the  316.

  emphysema  ot  the  316

• inflammation  of  the  319.

Lungwort  172.

Mallow  (Althaea  rosea)  165.
Malt  husks,  bath  of  44.
Medicinal  herbs  121.
Megrim  (Migraine)  322.
Migrainestift  323.
Melancholy  105,  324.
Milk,  curdled  320.
Milt  185.

Mind,  disturbance  of  the  105,

324,  268.
Mineral  baths  67.

  waters  67.

Mint  (Mentha)  166.
  tea  from  167.


]\listletoe  (Visi'um  album)  168.
Mixed  baths  65.
Morning  walk  25,  98.
Mothers  26,  64.
Mucous  fever  81,  325.
Mullein  (Verbascum  Schraden
(Meyer)  168.

Nails  32.

  grown  in  the  flesh  44,  84,

Nausea  158.
Neck-bandage  102.
Nervous  complaint  325.

  disorder  327.

  exhaustion  329.

  headache  329.

  over-excitement  330.

Nettle  (Urtica  doica)  151.
Nettle-root  152.
Nose-bleeding  181,  222.

Oak,  bark  of  tlie  133.
Oats  (Avena  sativa)  169

 ,  tea  from  169.

Oat-straw  65.

 bath  65.

 decoction  43.

 foot-bath  43.

 sitting-bath  49.

Obdurations  on  the  feet  43,
127.

Old  people  140.

Palate  176.
Part-ablutions  101.
Pectoral  fever  105.
Peppermint  (Mentha  peperita)
166.

Perspiration  331.
Phlegm-obstructions  165,  172,

173,  182.
Piles  287.
Pine-sprig  bath  65.
Pitch-plaster  343.
Podagra  64.
Powder,  black  138.

  grey  138.

 white  138.

Powders  127.

Pressure  of  the  water  46,  50.


.394


ALniAIiETlCAL  InDKX.


Priessiiitz  compresses  303.
Provence  oil  ITii.
PiU'S'iug,  wliat  it  is  18G,
Putridity  between  the  toes  43.

Rectum,  prolapse  of  the  133.
Refreshint^-  diiiiic  150.
Resin- piels  159.
Respiration,  dit'rtcult  213.
Rheumatism  45,  335.  ] ' ,
Ribwort  (Plautago  lanceolata)

171,
Rickets  139.
Rose-hips  140.
Rosemar3'  wine  174.
Rubbing,  why  not  employed  20.

  dry,  when  employed  336.

Rue  (Ruta  graveolens)  174.

Rue-oil  175.

Rupture  341.

Russian  vapour-baths  74.

Sage  (Salvia  officinalis)  175.
Saint  John's  wort  (Hypericum

perforatum)  182.
Saint  Vitus's  dance  345.
Salad-oil  129,  176.
Salt  69.
Salt  water  69.
Sandal  (Santala)  176.
Sauerkraut  177.
Scalds  229.
Scarlet  fever  345.
■Sciatica  347.
Secretive  oil  177.
Secret  remedies  121.
Shave-grass (Equisetura  ar-

vense)  179.
Shave-grass  decoction  86.

 sitting-bath  49.

 tea  181.

 vapours  181.

ühawl  104.
Shivering  18,  53.
Short  bandage  109.
Silver-weed  (Poteiitilla  anseri-

na)  181.
Sitting-baths  47.

  in  the  water  45.

äkin,  diseases  of  the  171,  268.


Skin,  dropsy  of  the  2G2.

 formation  of  a  new  132.

  impuriiies  of  the  268.

Sleeplessness  48,  349.
Small-pox  113,  3.50.
Snow  walking  28.
Sores,  old  176,  179.
Sour  hay  109.
Spanish  mantle  111.
Spinach,  nettles  prepared  au
152.

Spine,  Complaints  of  the  353.

  curvature  of  the  354.

Sprains  142.
Spring-cure  148.
Spring  diseases  148.
Standing  in  water  31.
Stomach,  acidity  of  the  35.5.

 i;omfort  (eyebright)  154.

 complaints  355,

  cramp  360.

  juices  of  the  116,

  lumoiirs  361.

Stomachics  157.
Stomachic  bitters  154
Stone  complaint  49,  86,  362.
Stout  people  77,  91,  113.
Strawberries  (Fragaria  vesca)
183.

Strawberry  leaves,  tea  from
183.

Strength-giving  soup  196.
Strokes  impending  41,  113.
Succory  (Cichorium  intybus  L.)

184.
Sun-whirl  184.

Sweating,  see  perspiration  331.

  closets  74.

Sweetmeats  123.

Teas  126.
Teeth  130.

Temperature,  change  of  23b.

Tetanus  171.

Tetters  365.

Thigh-gush  89.

Thirst,  violent  117.

Throat,  complaint  of  tlie  368.

  inflammation  of  the  101.

'  Tinctures  125.


Alphabetical  Index.


39&


Tonic  laxative  No.  I  186.

 No.  II.  188.

Toothache  30.
Topfenkas  319.
Truss  343.
'J'umonrs  129,  133.
Typhus  59,  113,  370.
Ulcers  132,  372.

  gangrenous  179.

Tipper  shower  92.

Urine,  secretion  of  the  150.

Urinary  difficulties  181,  379.

Vaccination,  bad  results  of
.382.

Valerian,  common  (Valeriana

officinalis)  188.
Vapours  73.
Varixes  45.
Ventilation  11.

Vessels,  interior,  strengtheniii?^

of  65,  133,  159.
Vinegar  100.

Alolet  (Viola  odorata)  188.

  leaves  188.

Voice,  loss  of  the  383.
Vomiting  249.

Walking  in  water  30.


Water- application  in  hospi-
tal es  .5.

Water-mint  166.

Weariness  106.

Wet  sheets,  covering  with  34.

 lying  on  35.

  shirt  110.

  socks  lOu.

Whitlow  43,  206.

Whole-ablution  97.

Whole-bath  .50.

Whole-shower  91.

Whooping  cough  189.

Wild  Angelica  (Angelica  sil-
vestris  L.)  191.

Windpipe  obstructed  by
phlegm  104.

Wine  100.

Wire-brushes  67.

Witch's  herb  182.

Women  42.

Woodroof  (Asperula  odorata)
183.

Woollen  clothing  11.
Worms  389.

Wormwood (Artemisia  ab-
sinthium) 192.
Wounds,  putrid  179.


Errata.


Page

G

1.

20

read  third

I'

17

•1

12

globe

r

22

r

3

)i

barefoot

V

45

?:

20

n

is  covered

n

48

10

n

bloody  flux

V

57

7

and  8  „

you

)i

74

30

V

sucli  a  box

V

79

»7

24

!)

After  the  elapse  of

V

97

ji

6

I)

differs  from

r>

144

)i

9

n

fowls

r

217

n

G

r

constipatiou

r>

225

r

4

')

stretch-ing

V

242

r

8

n

110  ardent  spii'its.

Hneipp'


Watsr
Kneading,  l>iet


Cure


Mineral.  Sea-Water,  Mud-,  Sunlight-,  Gravel-Baths
SURGICAL  CLINICS.

Opön  all  the  year  round,  -"i^y  Room,  may  be  Ideated"  bj
«stPim  —  Mild  Climate.  —  Pnre  mountani-air.  —  Laige  ana
shadowy  pSk  -  Splendid  Pleasnre-Grounds  -  Opportunities
for  excursionists.  —  Superior  board  and  lodging.
Moderate  Prices.


Imperial  Bath  Rosenheim


Railway-Line  Mimicli-Salzburs

Larger  and  more  richly  equipped  than  any  other  Kneipp-

Estahlishment.

Medical  Superintendance  by  Dr.  med.  F.  Bernliuber
(formerly  2  years  at  Woenshofen.)
The  rapid  development  of  our  Establishment  has  com-
pelled us  to  appoint  a  second  physician  in  the  person  of  Dr.
med.  H.  Kastl,  who  has  also  practised  for  months  at  Wceris-
hofen,  and  to  whom  is  no  w  entrusted  the  special  management
of  the  Water-Treatment.

Large  Hotel,  80  Rooms,  100  Beds.
Reading-Room,  Billiards,  Bowling-Alley,  Cricket-Field.


Prospectus  post-free  on  application.


Family  Medicine  Chest

as  ordered  by  the

Rev.  Sebast.  Kneipp,

and  recommended  in  his  book:  "My  Water-
Cure"  P.  160.

in

Ornamental
"Wal^'^t  ©St©.©

worthy  of  any  Boudoir  or  Drawing-Koom.

Complete  Mk.  50, — .

Sold  by

Andre  Rodner,

in  firm

Müller  &  Rodner,

Truss-Makers,  Purveyers  to  the  Bavarian  Court
Thai  24  MUNICH  Thai  24


(Sjf


CONTAINS  :
The  above-mentioned  brochure,  53  Teas
and  Powders  shut  up  in  metal  boxes  to  keep
indefinitely,  16  Oils  and  Tinctures,  superior
quality,  daily  supplied  by  a  first-rate  Pharma-
ceutic Establishment,  a  folding  warmer  with
accessories,  mortar  and  tea-strainer.


Legally  protected.


Health-Resort  |

recommended  by  the
Rev.  Sebast.  Kneipp:

(See  Preface  of  "My  Water- Cure",  26'»  Edit.)

Dr.  Loesers

Hydropathie  Establisliinent  |

at  Veitshöchbeim  near  WürzUurg  (Bavaria)  9

attends  its  Clients  exsclusively  upon  W
Rev.  KNEIF-P's  System.  W

^ Patients  of  any  description  are  taken  ¥

^  care  of  as  their  complaints  require. Superior  9

li  Board  and  Lodging  in  strict  conformity  with  g

^  the  ruling  principle.  ^
ig Comfortable  Baths.  Bare-foot  Walkers  will  ^

lg  enjoy  the  grassy  tracts  along  the  river  (Maine).  ^

^ The  Establishment  is  lodged  in  the  so-  If

^  called  "House  of  Knights"  (Cavalier-Bau)  ad-

joining  the  beantiful  Court-Garden  (200  Acres)  ^

laid  out  in  rococo  style  and  famous  for  its

Pleasure-Grounds,  Walks,  Pine-  &  Leaf-Wood  ^

Avenues,  enlivened  by  Musical  Performances  ^

several  times  a  week. Excursions  to  Würz-  ^

^  burg  by  Train  (15  min.)  by  Steam-Boat  on

S  the  Maine  and  by  drive.  Picturesque  Environs.  ^

^  Private  Lodgings  to  suit  all  tastes. Hotels.  ^

2 Dining-Rooms  at  the  New  Court-Garden  ^

^  Restaurant.  ^

^  Moderate  Prices  throughout.

^ For  Prospect  and  any  further  Information  ^
^  apply  to  the  Proprietor  and  Manager  of  the
^  Establishment.  1^


Hydropathie  Establishment  Stadt  Sehärding

formely  at  AISTERSHEIM
founded  by  its  jjrosent  Proprietor  und  Manager

Otto  Etoenheclit,  physician.
The  1'"  of  Septemb.  1890. TUl  End  of  Novemb.  1891  723  Patients.

This  Establishment  receives  well  off  Patients  as  well  as  others  and
attends  them  strictly  upon  the

Rev.  KNEIPP's  Principles.

For  the  sake  of  better  accessibility  and  opportunity  of  lodging  and
hoarding  its  Clients  it  has  been  transferred  from  Aistersheim  to  Schiirding-
Town.  It  has  been  set  up  on  the  premises  of  the  Owner,  in  the  Centre  of
the  Town  in  a  beautiful  garden-retirement.

The  Kneading  (Massage)  is  administered  by  the  Proprietor,  supported
by  well-trained  Attendants.  Boarders  are  charged  adequate  to  wants  and
moderately  throughout.  Hötels,  Breweries  Restaurants  and  Private  Lodgings
in  the  Town.  The  Proprietor  and  Manager  of  the  Establishment  has  been
warmly  recommended  by  theEevd.  Seb.  Kneipp  in  his  books  "My  Water-
Cure"  and  "Thus  shall  you  live."  Astonishing  Successes.  Testimonials  may
be  examined.

Schärding  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Inn,  close  to  the  Bavanen
frontier  is  the  meeting-point  of  two  Railways  ("Salzkamniergut"-  and  "Elisa-
beth-West"-Line),  station  for  the  Inn-Steamers,  charmingly  situated,  with
about  4000  Inhab.  The  important  Citadel  it  was  in  former  times  is  still
recognisable  bv  its  ditches,  bastions,  towers  and  ramparts.  The  Railway-
Station  is  only  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  distance  oil'.  At  the  Station  3  Omni-
busses, fare  10  kr.,  and  eleg.int  carriages  of  any  kind.  Schärding  is  the  Seat
of  the  bistrict-Governmeiit,  Countrv-Court,  Board  of  Customs,  Savings-Bank
ect  The  beautiful  situation  of  the  town  is  best  viewed  from  the  top  of  the
"Schloss- Aussicht."  Here  stands  the  Villa  of  the  Proprietor  where  he  may
be  consulted  at  his  daily  reception-hours.  On  the  same  level  as  the  \illa
stands  the  Belvedere-Tower,  the  visitors  of  which  enjoy  the  delighttul  Pro-
snect  over  the  Bavarian  environs.  , r, ■  i

A  Bridge,  400  Paces  long,  unites  Schärding  with  the  Bavarian  place
Neuhaus,  whose  beautiful  Castle  is  occupied  now-a-davs  by  a  Nunnery  atid
Ladies'-Boarding-School.  Many  beautiful  Avenues,  Pleasure-Grounds  ect.;
half  an  hour  ol  the  Otterwald-Forest  and  tlie  Country  seat  belonging  to
Mr  üeorce  Wieninger,  brewer  and  landed  proprietor,  containing  a  Model-
Farm  and  Natural-History-Collections  op.-n  to  Visitors  free  ot  charge.

Masrni'iccnt  Mountain-Water-t^ui.pIv  (T'/i  Atmosph.  Pressure)  civmg
soft  water  (4  degr.  Hardn.).  Delicious  Sjiring- Water  led  into  aluuistevcrj-  hon.^e.
Oi^inialf lio"""  •^''''"">  *''on"er-town,  20000  inhab.


^  Kneipp'sche  Wasserheilanstalt  C

<friedrh:hsbad.$

^ IMMENSTADT  a  beautifully  situated  place  ^

<in  the  Pavarian  alps,  2200  feet  above  the  W
level  of  the  sea,  and  on  the  main  route  Munich-  ^

C Lindau,  is  a  favorite  summer  resort,  and  much  ^
frequented  by  pleasure  parties.  Near  by  are  ^
^  many  interesting  places  to  visit,  and  much  ^
^  pleasure  to  be  found  in  mountain  climbing,  ^
^  and  boating  on  lake  alp.  ^
^ The  Establishment  0

^ Fredericks -Bath  ^

Cis  delightfully  located  on  a  sunny  hill  slope,  %
with  a  stately  prospect  of  the  mountain  range,  0

c


and  plain  which  spread  out  before  it.
Besides  the

Kneipp  method

every  kind  of  baths,  vapor  baths,  tubbaths  etc.,
electricity  in  all  its  forms,  and  massage  are
applied.  The  season  lasts  six  months  beginning
with  May,  the  Estabhshment  however  is  open
to  patients  all  the  year.

For  further  information  apply  to


pliyslcian  *  proprietor.


Exclusive  Right  is  given  to

Messrs.

L.  OBERH^USSER

and

R.  LANDAUER

Apothecaries  at  Wlirztjnrg

by  the

Rev.  Seb.  Kneipp

to  provide  the  wliole  earth  with

Teas,  Herbs,  Roots,  Polders,  Pills,
Oils,  Tinctures  &c.

prepared  under  his  control  and  bearing  his
fac-simile  and  portrait.

Family-,  Pocket-  and  Travelling
Medecine  Chests

^  made  up  with  the  above

m  all  sizes  till  procuring  the  benefits  of  a
whole  Pharmaceutic  Establishment.

Ask  for  our  Illustrated  Price-List!

I  Depöts  wiU  be  established  in  England  &  Amerika  and
indicated  if  desired.


In  order  to  obtahi  any  Article  of

Genuine  Kneipp  Pliarmacy

the  only  one  that  is  worth  being  used
apply  to

L.  Oberhaeusser,  Wiirzburg,  Bavaria.


Genuine

Home -spun  Linen -Cloth

as  recommended  by  the

Rev.  Sebast.  Kneipp

warranted  hand-made  and  genuine  quality

Sold  by

Gustav  Grrau

FULDA  (Prussia)

Ready-made  Shirts,  Spanish  Cloaks
and  Baby-Clothes
always  in  stock.
Specimens  and  Priee-List  post-free.


Registered  Trade-Marli.

The  Rev.  Sebast.  Kneipp  has  recognised  the  Specimens
of  the  above  laid  before  him  to  be  the  Linea-Cloth  recommended
by  him.


4  Taunus  Str. WIESBADEN 4  Taunus  Str.

Dr.  med.  S^m^tlg

Specialist  for

Kneipp's  Hydropathie  Treatment

Ttie  Establishment  is  open  all  the  year  round.

üefereiiLce :

, "Mr.  Joseph  Lustig,  Dr.  med.,  has  by  studying
most  carefully  my  "Water-Cure"  under  my  personal  super-
intendance  so  thoroughly  familiarized  himself  with  its
1  Theory  and  Practise,  that  1  can  recommend  Dr.  Lustig  to
--^any  person  desirous  of  undergoing  my  "Water-Cure'  as  a
^  competent  and  conscientious  representative  of  the  same.
Woerishofen,  18*  Sept.  1890

sien.  Seb.  Kneipp,  curate."


Regularly  Knitted

Genuine  Linen  Underclothing

manufactured  by

Lenz  &  Co.,

Böblingen  near  Stuttgart
Shirts  Chemises,  Camisoles,  Drawers,  Half-StocMngs  &  StocliiDg.
Winter-  and  Summer-Articles,  hrown  or  bleached.

With  Consent  of  the  Author  of  "My  Water-Cure"  we  re-
comnYend  the  above  as  being  a  superior  Doubledyarn-Knitting,
seamless,  wi?h  large  meshes,  of  delicious  wear  and  extremely

"^Pe^sons  trying our  Underclothing will  readily
experience  its  cheering  influence  on  the  body.
Our  Mark:  "Naturheilmetliode."

near  BIBERACH  oUiss

Post -Office  UmmendLort,  Wiirteml>erg

On  the  Railway-Line  STUTTGART-FRIEDRICHSHAFEN.
The  senior  as  well  as  the  largest  off  all

Hydropathie  EstaWistunents

founclecl  on  Kneipp's  Principles

Medical  Superindendance  Dr.  med.  J.  N.  Stützle.

Open  all  the  year  round.  Successful  Winter-Cures.
Clients  are  offered  any  convenienes  that  may  be  claimed
from  a  first-rate  Establishment.  115  richly  furnished
Rooms.  Patients  nursed  by  Sisters  of  Charity.  Pride  is
taken  in  keeping  a  good  table.

Moderate  Prices.
Prospectus  and  further  Information  post-free
from  the

Managers  of  the  Jordan-Bath.


sxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx>c<xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx>o<x

MERGENTHEIM  o/th,  Tauber  O

(Württemberg,  Germany).  X
Rev.  SEBAST.  KNEIPP's  If

WATER-CURE  and  NATURAL  MINERAL  SPRINGS  8

for  chronic  diseases,  as  Gout,  Rheumatisme,  Diabetes,  B
Asthma,  Jaundice,  diseases  of  the  liver.  Kidneys  (Bright's)  Q
bladder,  stomach,  bowels  and  skin,  of  the  bones,  joints  x
and  nervous  system.  Paralysis  (esp.  paralysed  limbs  of  ft
children),  Hysterics,  Hypochondria,  Scrofula  and  diseases  0
of  w^omen  etc.  etc.  x
The  leading  physician  (George  A.  Heesciiel,  M.  D.  q
formerly  at  New  York)  was  for  a  long  time  a  scholar  of  g
Rev.  Sebast.  Kneipp  at  Woerishofen,  fi
by  whom  he  is  highly  recommended.  H
The  city  of  Mergentheim  is  fbeautifally)  situated  in  0
the  valley  of  the  Tauber  (Württemberg),  the  sanitary  x
(over  100  lodging  rooms)  itself  is  surrounded  by  a  very  g
handsome  and  large  Park,  guarded  against  the  cold  winds  fS
X  of  the  North  by  mountains,  covered  partially  by  vine  yards,  x
Q  partially  by  forests,  and  has  a  pure  air  rich  in  Ozon.  H
p  The  prices  are  very  moderate.  Letters  for  information  g
X  may  be  sent  to  the  administration  of  the  Bath  in  Mergent-  x
e  heim.  Mergentheim  has  a  R.  E.  Station  of  the  Würz-  H
H  burg- Crailsheim  and  Heidelberg-Lauda  R  R.  O

xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx


The  Rev.
SEB.  KNEIPP's


fOLKSVETiSTANDUICHg

ÜESUilDHEITS-Äf


Flour  for  making
Strong  Gravy  Soup

manufactured  by

H.  ZEIHER

at  ULM  a|D.,  Württemberg,  Germany,

precisely  according  to  the  personal  information  given

by  the

Rev.  SEB.  KNEIPP,  Parson  at  Woerishofen.


The  above-said  Flour  was  examined  by  the
Rev.  SEBAST.  KNEIPP

himself,  and,  according  to  attestation,  acknowledged

to  be  excellent.


System  Kneipp.

Standard-Lineii-Mat-Wel)-Underclotliiiig

Legally  protected  against  Imitation.
No  Tricot-Ware.

The  basis  of  thisUnterclothing,  manufactured  according  to
Rev.  KNElPP's  Principles
is  a  peclia.  Hat-Web  „,ade  ot  s»pe..ior

matchless  for:

Comfortable  wear,  stimulat-
ing action  upon  the  Nervous
System,  preventing  any  dan-
ger resulting  from  checlced
perspiration, meeting  any
caprices  of  the  weather,  lit-
ting,  appearance,  easy  wash-
ing and  durability.  Its  origi-
nality and  suitableness  are
above  all  competition.
Be  sure  that  you  obtain
Articles  bearing  our  Trade-
Mark  as  shown  by  our  Ad-

VCrtlSCHlGllt»

Mech.  Linen-Spinnery,  J.  St  Comp,,  Memmingen.

Chiief-Depots:  rr -c^  n

Alsfeld-  Herr  H.  L.  Berck  für  Oberhessen.  Bielefeld:  Hr.  bmil
S  humacher  für  Norddeutschland.  ^^-^-^1.  Herren  Rosner
und  Seidl  für  Bayern.  Mannheim:  Herren  Kirchner  kA.o.  lur
d?e  Eheinpfalz  Stuttgart:  Württemb.  Handelsgesellschatt  fur
WüiÄrg.  Graz:  Herr  Jos.  Beyer!  für  Steiermark  l^nz:
Herr  Franz  Reininger  für  Oberosterreich.  Wien  I.:  Heir  Wim.
^«iinpiSer  Lichtensteg  4.  Solothurn:  Herr  L.  Langner-Frey
?  d  Schweiz S^^^  A.  Schröder  &  Co  f.  Holland  u.  d.

Colonien Wörishofen:  Herr  H.  ßischoff  zw.  d.  Badehausern.

Depots:

Augsburg:  Herr  G.  Reinhardt.  Darmstadt:  Herr  Aug.  Schwab.
Frankfurt  a/M.:  Herren  J.  &  A.  Sulzbacher,  Liebfrauenstr.  8;
Herr  Lud.  Zettelmann,  Gr.  Bockenheimerstr.  37:  Hanau:  Herr
Friedrich  Faber.  Karlsruhe:  Herr  Aug.  Schulz.  Landshut:
Herr  Max  Thalmayr.  Mannheim:  Herr  Karl  Morje.  Mem-
mingen: Herr  F.  W.  Häring  z.  tiefen  Laden.  Nürnberg:  Herr
Gg.  Eisenbach.  Neutra  (Ungarn):  Herr  Eman.  Fach.  Passau:
Herr  Georg  Wimmer.  Regensburg:  Herr  J.  Strobel.  Strass-
burg  i/E.:  Herr  J.  L.  Erlenbach,  hoher  Steg.  Wiesbaden,
Mainz  und  Umgegend:  Herr  W.  Thomas,  Webergasse  23.
Würzburg:  Herr  M.  Ph.  Seisser.


Nobody  carin»  for  health  can  dispense  witli  our

Genuine  Linen  Hygienic  Underclotliing

(Tricot-Shirts,  Drawers,  Camisols,  Socks
and  Stockings)

the  only  one  in  tlie  market  which  is  manufactured  of  the  best
material  according  to  the  instructions  of  the

Rev.  Sebastian  Kneipp,

no  other  house  being  authorized  or  supported  by  him  in  that
respect.ljas  to  be  seen  by  the  following
Declar-jition:
"I  thereby  declare  the  "Genuine  Linen  Hygienic  Uuter-
clothing"  manufactured  by  the

Augsburg- Tricot- Manufactory

(formerly  A.  Koblenzer)  at  Pfersee- Augsburg

to  justify  throughout  its  de-


nomination, being  made  of
genuine  linen  and  according
to  my  special-directions.  It
recommends  itself  strongly
to  everybody  caring  for
healtii,  particularly  to  per-
sons using  my  Hydropathic
Treafnient,  the  salutary  ac-
tion of  which  will  be  highly
promoted  by  the  wearing  of
that  underclothing.  The
articles  not  bearing  ray
facsimile  and  the  stamp
of  the  above-named
manufactory  are  imi-
tations."
sign.  Seb.  Kneipp,  curate.

Wearers  of  our  "Genuine  Linen  Hygienic  Unterclothing"
will  safely  defy  any  season  or  climate.  It  is  already  in  great
favour  with  the  medical  world.

Do  not  throw  away  your  money  in  buying  imitations!

Private  Orders  are  attended  to  by  our  depot:
Mr-.  Fi'lcdricli  Zecli,  Wörisliofeu,
Eesellers  are  provided  direct  from  the
Augsburger  Mechanische  Tricotwaaren-Fabrik
(vorm.  A.  Koblenzer)  Pfersee-Augsburg:.
Depöts  in  London:


Woerishofen,  1890


Wholesale
Oberlaender,  London  E.  C,
7  Wood-Street  Square.


Retail:
Georg  Engel,  London  E.  C,
18  Castle-Street,  Falcon-Square.


In  the  course  of  the  year  will  be  brought  out  by
Mr  JOS.  KÖSEL,  Publisher,  KEMPTEN  (Havana)
an  authorised  English  Edition  of:

"Thus  slialt  thou  live!

Hints  and  Advices  for  Healthy  and  Sick  People
suggesting  a  plain,  rational  M°de  of  Uvrng  and
a  natural  Method  of  Curing  by^feEB.  KNMil:',
Curate  at  Woerishofen  (Bavaria).

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS:

Tntroduetion  and  P-f^^ce FiKS'r  Pakt:  Prelin^^^^ Kight  on
ÄaürorBod"^  '^Ch'a'pl^n  1 2^  its  relation  to  Health.

Chapt  111:  WarnV  and  Cold  i"  ^h-r  relaUon  o^^^^^^^^

fytnasücs^rt'Jnie. Wel-^as  a  means  of  pre-ving  ph^^^^^^^^

iSiffS-  ÄSiidSÄSoÄ^^^a^

rhdce  of  PiSion.  High  Schools.  Pupils  in  a  Traimng-College.  ^-are
if  a  TrrC."^  GM's  Collegel  ^  Hygiene  in  «'rPs  Boardi^^^^^^^^^^^  ^eans
of  Water  Convent-Life.  SuppLEMtNT:  1,  On  ömolung.  ^,  On  l.oias.
3,  Water  resorted  to  by  Aged  People. 4,  Vinegar. 5,  "Toppen"  Cheese.

Second  Part: What  Curing  am  I  taught  by  Experience!  Asthma.
Theeye General  observations  on  weak  eyes  and  their  curing  Peritonitis.
Iti  comequences Caries. Incontinence.  Wo^^^'^-  ^h*^
tmicrof  TrSr  Circulation. Anaemia,  tomiting  of  Blood  on  coughing.
Vomiting  of  Blood  from  the  Stomach. Stagnant  Blood. Putnhed  BloOd.
LosT  ot"  Blood  its  consequences. Pleuresy. Its  consequences. Diseases  of
the  Chest.  Emphysema.  Inflammation  uncured.  Epilepsy Morbid  Obesity.
•  Abortion  through  Lacing. Foot-Scab. Foot- Ailments.  Perspiration.  Dis-
faSs  Tthe  Eal Abscefses. White  Swelling.  Gont,  D'^ease  oHhe  Joints
Sore  Throat. Urinary  Disorder. Cutaneous  eruptions. Measels  Scarlet
Fever,  etc Dislocation  of  the  hip. infants'  Diseases  Head-Affections.
Splsms. Liver-Complaints. Pulmonary  Diseases  (Tendency  to  Consump-
tion, Cold  in  the  Head,  Influenza,  Emf^iyseraa,  Congestion  etc.)  Stomach-
Complaints  (Dysentery,  Constipation,  Eriiclation,  Dyspepsia  etc  Maras-
mus. Nervous  Diseases.  Nephritic  Pain.  Rheumatism, the  like.  Rheu-
matisme  combined  with  Gout.  Spinal  Diseases^ 1  abes Apoplectic  A  tack
Scrofula. Suffering  from  Stone. Typhus  and  Typhoid  Fever.  Abdominal
Diseases  (Inflammation,  Spasms,  Weakness  etc.) Chorea  and  similar  affec-
tions.  Wrong  Nutrition,  its  consequences. General  Congestion.  Wounds.
Poisening. plunge-Bath,  in  voluntary,  how  to  behave  after. Dropsy,  ihe
Body  ruined  by  Dissoluteness. Supplement. 1,  On  Arnica  (Arnica  mon-
tana  L.) 2,  Ansmia. 3,  Gout. 4,  A  Word  on  Meal-Brotli^ 5,  Effects  of
Water, a,  Washing,  b,  Wrapping,  c.  Showers,  d.  Baths.  CONCLUSION.


To  behad  of  Mrs.  H.  G  R  E  V  E  L  &  CO.,  LONDON  W.  C,
33  King  Street,  Covent  Garden:
Published  by  JOS.  KÖSEL,  Bookseller,  KEMPTEN:

"Dl  o  -n-f  A  f  1  r»  CI  illustrating  SEB.  KNEIPP'S
iri(lllu"ii.uicl3  ..Water- Cure",  describing

and  picturing  most  accurately  all
Medicinal  Plants  mentioned  in  his  books  with  addition  of
several  others  frequently  resorted  to  by  (country)  people.


In  order  to  comply  with  many  wishes  the  Editor  deter-
mined upon  publishing  a  minute  pictorial  representation  togetlier
■with  an  elucidating  description  of  all  those  Medicinal  Plants
that  are  mentioned  in  Rev.  Kneipp's  Books.  The  „Plant-
Atlas",  now  complete,  is  carrying  out  that  plan.  Everybody  is
•enabled  by  simply  consulting  the  "Plant-Atlas"  to  find  out  him-
self whatever  herb  he  will  look  for  in  woods  or  fields  and  thus
to  make  up  in  a  most  pleasant  way  that  "Family-Medicine-
Ohest",  recommended  by  Kneipp.

The  "Plant- Atlas"  is  of  the  same  Size  as  Rev.  Kneipp's
Books  and  has  been  published  in  3  Editions,  2  of  them  illustrated
by  Phototypes,  either  plain  or  Colour  ed  Prints;  one  with
Wood-Cuts.

a)  Edition  I  containing  20  Plates,  one  or  several  plants
on  one  page  the  pictures  in  highly  finished  Phototypic  Printing
-and  reduced.

Price,  Sewn:  JL  3.60. Cloth:  JL  5.20.

b)  Edition  II  containing  41  Plates;  generally  only  one
Plant  on  one  Page. Colour  ed  Phototypes,  true  to  Nature.

Price,  Sewn:  JL  8.—. Cloth:  JL  10.—.

Both  Editions  are  accompanied  by  an  explanatory  De-
scription supplied  by  a  distinguished  Botanist  and  dwelling  on
any  point  of  importance,  for  instance  upon  the  General  and
Special  Characteristics  of  every  Plant,  its  flowering  time,  use,
occurrence,  diagnostics,  mode  of  acting,  healing  power  etc.
Our  Colour-Phototype-Edition  having  met  with  general  appro-
val —  several  thousand  Copies  already  sold  —  we  shall  bring  out  in
the  course  of  the  summer  1892  a  Bohemian,  Polish,  French,
English,  Italian,  Spanish  and  Dutch  Edition.

c)  Edition  III  forming  a  little  brochure  containing  all  those
Medicinal  Plants  mentioned  in  Rev.  Kneipp's  Books,  in  wood-
cuts, minutely  copying  the  Originals,  with  the  German  and  Latin
names  of  the  Plants,  giving  in  many  cases  Particulars  as  to
Root,  Flower,  Fruit  etc.  An  Index  is  added  for  the  sake  of
easy  consultation.

Price  80  Pfg.  sewn.  Cloth,  flexible:  Mk.  1,20.  Polish  and
Bohemians  Translations  are  in  preparation.


Opinions  given  by  Experts

upon  the  technical  execution  of  our
„Plant-A-tlas."

The Stereotypeur"  Vol.  Ill,  No.  },  writes  under  the
headin-  "Aototypic  Colom--Printin as  follows:

come. We  hiive  before  our  eyes  the

"Plant-Atlas,  illustrating  Seb.  Kneipp's  "Water-Cnre

Edition  II,  mT-n.T
puhlished  by  JOS.  K(ESEL,  Bookseller,  KEMPTEN,

ofToÄgts  we^ll  as  on  general^consumniatioi,  that  prpfession^^^^^^^^  sure
rlpliirht  in  the  nerforniance.  Might  the  Editor  ot  the  Hiant-Auas  ,  wuo
t  aÄVLm  tn  pi^bU^  makes  use  of  the  very  last  improvements
^•Kranch  and  aswe  hear,  also  undertakes  Coloui-Prints  based  on
PhotoVnS-lna  s  for  foreign 'account  -  be  inclined  to.  reveal  his  mode
of  pSding?  Colleguls  no  doubt  would  be  much  indebted  to  him."

The  same  Review,  Vol.  Ill,  No.  6  writes:
Several  times  already  we  have  called  attention  to  t^^
ductions  in  the  photypic  hne,  issuing  from  JOb.  I^^^EL  s  Vei  lags^^^^^
KEMPTEN. Tie  coming  out  of  the  Plates  6— 10  of  the i'lant- Atlas,
illustrating  Seb.  Kneipp's  Water-Cure"  confirms  our  former  verdict.  Our
Itudiou  Collegues  will  take  delight  in  those  Co  our- Prints  and  any  Ama-
teur of  Botany  wül  be  surprised  at  meeting  with  his  pets  as  he  does  m


a  book."


The  Portrait  of  the  Rev.  SEB.  KNEIPP  (Steel  Engrav.)
signed  by  himself.  Size:  12,4X9,5  Inch.  Price:  60^,.  Rolled
and  wrapped  70  ^.  Ornamentally  framed,  black  or  brown  with
gilt  cornices 2.60;  the  same  packed  in  a  box  -J^  3.15.

The  Same,  Lar^-e  Size:  25X19  Inch.  Price  J^2.—.  Rolled  and
wrapped  =y^.  2.10,  ornamentally  framed,  black  and  brown  with
gilt  cornices 7.—,  the  same  packed  in  a  box  7.80.

Das  Buch  vom  Pfarrer  Kneipp.  Sein  Leben  und  Wirken
als  Seelsorger  und  Arzt.  Mit  einer  Schilderung  der  Wöris-
hofener  Verhältnisse  und  einem  Verzeichnisse  einiger  in-
teressanter Heilerfolge.  Von  Alphons  vom  Rhein.  Mit
dem  Bildnisse  des  Herrn  Pfarrers  Kneipp  in  Stahlstich  und
zahlreichen  neuen  Original- Illustrationen.  Zweite  Aufl.
8».  84  Roth-  und  Schwarzdruck.  Preis  broch.  ^l.  1.20,
in  Halblwd.  einf.  gebd.  ./L  1.50,  eleg.  gebd.  in  Halblwd.  mit
Leder-Imitation  und  reicher  Goldverzierung  ^/^  2.—.


Published  l>y  JOS.  K(")SKL,  nookseller,  KEMl'TEN.
May  be  ordered  ironi  Mrs.  H.  GEEVEL  &  CO.,  LONDON  W. C
33  King  Street,  Covent  Garden.  '  ''

Original  German  Editions  of  Seb.  Kneipp's  Works  :

Kiieipp,  Seb.,  "iVIeine  Wasser-Kur."  Preis  brocb,  .^2  60
gebd.  in  R.  und  E.  Leder  mit  Goldtitel  a/.  3.20.  '

Kneipp, Seb.,"Sosolltiiir  leben!»  Preis  brocli.  2.60  gebd.
in  R.  u.  E.  Leder  mit  Goldtitel  ^/l.  3.20.  '

I?x*aclit-A.nfi!{2ra,lbe  von  "Meine  Wasser-Kur."  Preis brocb
c//.  4.—,  eleg.  gebd.  in  R.  u.  E.  f.  Kalbleder  ^  6.20.

I'r-a.clit--A^us«j:al:>«'!  von  "So  -ollt  ihr  leben!"  Preis  brocb.
4.—,  eleg.  gebd.  in  R.  u.  E.  f.  Kalbleder  ^  6.20.

Gesunder  Leib  nach  "Vater  Kneipp!"  Eine  Gesundheitslehre  für  .Jun?
und  Alt  in  Reimen.  Reinerlös  zu  wohlthätigen  Zwecken.  5.  Aull.  8.
8  Seiten. Preis  6  Pfg.,  in  Partien  von  100  Stück  an  4  Pfg.

Illustrirter  Wörishofener  Kneipp-Kalender  für  das  Jahr  1891.  Erster
Jahrg. 8. Neun  und  ein  halb  ßg. 7.  Aufl. Preis  50  Pfg.

Illustrirter  Wörishofener  Kneipp-Kalender  für  das  Jahr  1892.  Zweiter
Jahrg. 8. Zehn  und  ein  halb  Bg. Preis  50  Pfg.

A  French  Edition  of  tlio  KNKIPP-ALllANAC,  authorised  by  the  Her.  Kneipp

has  hoen  published  by  Mr.  P.  LETHIELLKUX,  Paris - To  be  obtained  also  from

JOS.  K(ESEL,  BüotseUer,  KEMPTEN  (Bavaria)  or  H.  GREVEL  &  CO.

Oertel,  Friedr.,  Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipp's  Kraftnährmittel.  Ein  Leit-
faden für  Gesunde  und  Kranke.  2.  Aufl.  kl.  8.  XII  u.  104  S.  Preis  broeh.
in  eleg.  Farbendruck- Umschlag  80  Plg.,  gebd.  in  R.  u.  E.  Leinwd.  1  M.

Rhein,  A.,  Die  Krankheit  unserer  Zeit.  Ein  Trost  und  Rathschlag  für
Nervenkranke.  Mit  einer  Icurzen  vergl.  Betrachtung  des  Kneipp'schen
und  Kuhne'schen  Heilverfahrens. 8. 40  Seiten. Preis  broch.  1  M.

Ulsamer,  Joh.  Alfred,  Hauptlehrer,  Haus-Apotheke.  A]t€r])robte  Heil-
kräuter, die  in  keiner  wohleingerichteten  Haus-Apotheke  fehlen  sollten.
Mit  vielen  Bildern.  2.  Aufl.  8.  112  S.  Preis  broch.  80  Pfg.,  gebd.  1  M.

 Unsere  einheimischen  Beeren  in  Garten,  Feld  und  Wald.  Eine

bewährte  Anweisung  zur  Anpflanzung  und  Pflege  der  Fruehtslräucher
des  Gartens,  zur  Keimtniss  aller  essbaren  Beeren  des  Waldes,  deren
Benützung  für  die  Küche  und  Hausapotheke,  mit  genauen  Vorschrilten
und  Rezepten  für  Wein-,  Liqueur-,  Mus-  und  Theebereitung  u.  s.  w.
8. 63  S. Preis  broch.  60  Pf.,  gebd.  80  Pfg.

In  the  Press:

Pfarrer  Seb.  Kneipp's  Heilverfahren  wissenschaftlich  beleuchtet  und
in  seiner  Anwendung  auf  die  verschiedenen  Krankkeiten  allgemeinver-
ständlich dargestellt  Autorisirte  Ausgabe,  mit  Genehmigung  und
unter  Beihille  des  Herrn  Pfarrers  Sebastian  Kneipp  herausgegeben.
1.  Heft:  ,,Die  spinale  Kinderlähmung"  (Poliomvelitis  anterior  acuta),
ihre  Ursachen,  ihr  Wesen  und  ihre  Heilung,  von  Dr.  med.  Max  Tacke.
Preis  broch.  ca.  M.  1, — .

Kneipp  und  die  Wissenschaft  oder  Die  Wasserkur  der  nächsten
Zukunft.  Erstmalige  gemeinverständliche  Darstellung  der  Kneipp'schen
Wasserkur  nach  den  Grundsätzen  der  Wisseusehatt  von  Dr.  Sehl)  chte,
Oberamts-Wundarzt  und  Hospitalarzt,  sowie  Leiter  einer  Kneipp'schen
Wasserheilanstalt  in  Biberach  ajR.

Tliis  book  will  como  out  in  Spring  1892. Orders  in  advaoco  aro  received

already  now  by  any  Booksaller.

Particulars  on  Kneipp  are  given  by  our  „KNEIPP-BKOCHÜRE",  containinp
detailed  information  about  the  Origin  of  the  Knoipp-Cure,  and  its  propagation,  a  .short
Biography  of  t.io  Kov.  Kneipp,  Medical  Vurdicis,  News  paper  Opinions  on  the  New
Curing  .Method  etc.  With  numerous  lllustr.  Post-free  ovurywhoro  on  application,
several  copies  if  intended  for  distribution.  An  English  Translation  is  in
Preparation.


H.  GREVEL  &  GO'S  PUBLICATIONS.

ZU  fiiujltt  Btßravj.

THE  CLASSICAL  PICT^iEi  WlERY  FOR/S^^--  Momhly
Magazine  of  Reproductions  from  the  Art  Galleries  of  Europe.

Each  Part, 1«,  containing  Twelve  Plates,  4to. Annual  Subscription,

^^*"'rKVhf  their  price,  tho  plates  are  little  short  of  wondeHul  Thoy  will
be  of  no  li  t  fvalue  to  the  serious  student  of  art.  who  will  bo  able  by  üs  means  to
compa?"  typos  Ind  expression-,  and  refresh  his  memory  an  various  ways.  -Saturday

THk"cLASSICAL  PICTURE  GALLERY.  Vols.  I.  and  II.  tor  1890
and  1891  containing  each  144  Plates.  With  Biographical  Notices  of  the
Artists,  tind  a  Complete  Index. Each  Vol.  4to,  cfoth  extra,  güt  top.

THE  H^UMAN  FIGURE:  its  Beauties  and  Defects.  By  Eknst
BeüCKE,  Emeritus  Professor  of  Physiology  in  the  University  of  Vienna
and  formerlv  Teacher  of  Anatomy  in  t^e  Academy  o  Eine  Arts  at
Berlin.  Authorised  translation.  Eevised  by  the  Author  With  2J  11-
histrations  bv  Hermann  Paar.  Edited  by  Prof.  W.  Anderson,  Royal
Academy  of  "Arts,  London. Crown  8  vo,  cloth, (s.  brf.

"An  exceedingly  valuable  work."— Time*.  .  ^^,,.,r ^  .i.

THE  STUDENT'S  ATLAS  OF  ARTISTIC  ANATOMY,  for  the
Use  of  Sculptors,  Painters,  Medical  Students,  and  Amateurs.
With  TiiiETY-FOUK  Plates.  By  Chakles  Roth,  Professor  of  Sculp-
ture at  the  Munich  Academy.  Edited  by  C.  E.  Fitzgeeald,  M.D.
1  Vol. Fol.,  in  cloth  case. £1  5«.  , *  *m

••A  valuable  aid  to  the  study  of  artistic  anatomy,  and  in  itself  a  work  of  art.

DIEGO  VELAZQUEZ  AN  J  HIS  TIMES.  By  Gael  JuSTi,  Professor
at  (he  Universitv  of  Bonn.  Translated  by  Professor  A.  H.  KEANE,  and
Revised  by  the  "Author.  With  52  Magnificent  Woodcuts  an  Etclnug  of
Velazquez'  Own  Portraits  by  Forberg,  and  a  Plan  of  tlie  Old  Palace
at  Madrid. 1  Vol. Royal  8  vo,  Roxburgh £11«-.  ,  •

'•No  better  example  could  be  given  of  the  growth  ot  histoncal  knowledge  durmg
the  past  thirty  years  than  is  to  be  found  in  Carl  .Justi's  recent  book  on  'Velaztiuez,
well  translated  by  Professor  A.  H.  Keane. The  amount  of  research  and  of  real  obser-
vation which  his  book  shows  is  typical  of  the  modorn  scholar."— Times.
MANUAL  OF  ARCHAEOLOGY:  containing  an  Introduction  to
Egyptian  and  Oriental  Art,  Greek,  Etruscan,  and  Roman  Art.
With  114  Illustrations. By  Talfooed  Ely,  Member  of  the  Councils
of  the  Society  for  the  Promotion  of  Hellenic  Studies. 1  Vol.  Crown

8vo,  cloth. 6«.  .  X  „■ •  i X  • •  i.

"A  most  admirable  gift  to  those  who  take  an  intelligent  interest  in  ancient

art."— ffra^j/u'c.

MANUAL  OF  BIBLIOGRAPHY:  being  an  Introduction  to  the
Knovvledge  of  the  Book,  Library  Management,  and  the  Art
of  Cataloguing.  With  a  Glossaiy  of  Technical  Terms,  and  a  Latin-
English  and  English-Latin  Topogra'phical  Index  ot  the  Early  Printing
Centres.  With  37  Illustrations.  New  Edition.  ByWALTEE  T.  ROGEES,
inner  Temple  Library.  1  Vol.  Crown  8vo,  cloth.  5s.
"Contains  mncli  rare  and  cnriuiis  information." — Morniny  Post.
MANUAL  OF  MYTHOLOGY  IN  RELATION  TO  GREEK  ART.
Bv  Maxtme  Collignon,  late  Membor  of  the  Ecole  Francaise,  Athens.
Translated  and  Enlarged  by  Jane  E.  IIaerinon,  Author  of  "Myths
of  the  Ody-ssey,"  "Introductory  Studies  in  Greek  Art,"  etc.  With  140
Illustrations. Crown  8vo,  cloth  extra,  gilt  top. 10«.  Qd.

"This  is  a  good  book,  It  fills  a  gap  in  our  literature,  doing  f'or  Greek  mytho-
logy much  tho  same  service  which  Mrs.  Jamioson  rendered  to  Christian  hagiology."
— Academi/.

MANUAL  OF  ANCIENT  SCULPTURE.  By  Pieeke  Paris,  lornicrly
Member  of  tho  ficole  Francaise,  at  Athens.  Edited  and  Augmented  by
Jane  E.  Harrison,  Author  ot  "Myths  of  the  Odyssey,"  "Introductory


^tubenf'e  ^irxt  .Rvt  Bxivav^—coniiniied.

Stutlios  ill  tii-eok  Art,"  etc.  Willi  187  lllustrutions. Crown  8vo,  cloth

extra,  gilt  to[). 10«.  6d.

"it  ia  w  rittou  in  u  foliuitoiis  and  intorosting  stylo,  and  its  illustrations,  nuiu-
horing:  in  all  1.S7.  loiirodiicn  in  an  nccurato  manner  tho  bosl  of  the  Bculpturud  treasures
which  aro  rel'oiii'd  tu  in  Ilm  text." — Scotsman.

MANUAL  OF  EGYPTIAN  ARCHAEOLOGY.  By  Professor  G.
MASi'Kito,  iXC.L.  Oxon.  Englisii  Edition,  witii  Notes,  bv  Amelia
B.  EuwAKUS,  Pli.D.  LLV).  With  299  Illu.st)iitions.  New  lidition,  re-
vised, witii  a  Complete  Index.  Crown  8  vo,  cloth  extra,  gilt  top.  10».  Orf.

C'ONTKNTS.— {Jliaiitiir  1.  Civil  and  Military  Aicliitooture.— Chapter  II.  Keli-
gious  Ardiitucturo. — Chaptur  111.  Tombs.— Chapter  IV.  Painting  and  Sculpture.
— Chapter  V. The  Industrial  Arts.

"It  is  a  marvel  of  erudition  and  condonsatio'ii.  It  sums  up  the  long  results  of
thousands  of  years  of  EgjTitian  civilisation  in  language  precise  enough  to  make  tho
work  a  handbook  for  tho  specialist,  and  popular  enough  to  ensure  its  becoming  a  guide
to  tho  antifiuariiin  lure  of  the  country  for  travellers  in  Kgypt." — Scoteman.

MANUAL  OF  ORIENTAL  ANTIQUITIES:  including  the  Archi-
tecture, Sculpture,  and  Inustrial  Arts  of  Chaldaea,  Assyria,
Persia,  Syria,  Judaea,  Phoenicia,  and  Carthage. By  Ekxest
Babelon,  Librarian  ot  the  Department  of  Medals  and  Antiques  in  the
Hibliothfeque  Nationale,  Paris. Translated  and  enlarged  l)y  B.  T.  A.
EvETS,  M.A.,  ot  the  Department  oi  Egyptian  and  Assyrian  Äntiquitie.s,
British  Mnseuni.  With  241  lllnstr.  Crown  8vo,  cloth  exti"a,  gilt  top.  10«.6ff.
"Tho  'Manual  of  Oriental  Auticjuities,'  which  takes  deservedly  a  high  position
both  for  the  general  acmiracy  of  its  statements  and  the  excellent  character  of  its  illu-
strations."— Atlienaeum.

MANUAL  OF  EMBROIDERY  AND  LAGE:  their  Manufacture
and  History  from  the  Remotest  Antiquity  to  the  Present  Day.

By  Ernest  Letebure,  Administrator  ot  the  Musee  des  Arts  Decoraiifs,
Paris.  Translated  and  Enlarged,  with  Notes  and  New  Designs,  by
Alan  S.  Colk,  of  the  South  Kensington  Museum.  With  156  lUnslr.
Crown  8vo,  cloth  extra,  gilt  top. 10«.  6rf.

"A  book  which  is  nut  only  a  c"mprohonsive,  well-arranged,  and  trustworthy

history  of  a  delightful  art,  but  a  book  which  is  pleasant  so  see,  and  pleasant  to  read,

well  written  and  well  edited."— ylca'/emi/.

MANUAL  OF  MUSICAL  HISTORY.  With  130  Illustrations  of
Portraits,  Musical  Instruments,  Facsimiles  of  Hare  and  Curious  Musical
Works.  By  James  E.  Matthew.  1  Vol.  Crown  8 vo,  cloth.  10«.  6rf.
PICTORIAL  ATLAS  TO  HOMER.  Thirty-six  Plates  with  de-
scriptive Text,  containiusr  225  Illustrations  from  Works  of  Ancient  Art,
and  an  Epitome  ot  the  Contents  of  each  book  of  the  Iliad  and  the
Odyssey.  Bv  Dr.  R.  Engelmann  and  Professor  W.  C.  F.  Anderson.
1  Vol.  4to,"cloth.  10«.  6(Z.
OLYMPOS:  Tales  of  the  Gods  of  Greece  and  Rome.  By  Tal-
FOÜKD  Ely.  With  47  Woodcuts  and  6  full-page  Photographic  Plates.
1  Vol. Crown  8vo,  cloth. 10«.  Od.

"This  is  reallT  an  excellent  book  of  its  kind."— ^/jccfafor.
ARCHITECTURAL  MONUJVIENTS  and  BUILDINGS  of
GREAT  BRITAIN  and  IRELAND.  Edited  by  Constaniixe
Uhue. In  6  Parts,  Fol.,  containing  150  magnificent  Photographs  oi  tlie
most  remarkable  Architectural  Monuments. Each  Part  £l  5«.
THE  BOOK:  its  Printers,  Illustrators,  and  Binders,  from  Guten-
berg to  the  Present  Time. By  Henri  Bouciiot,  of  the  National
Library,  Paris.  With  a  Treatise  on  the  Art  of  Collecting  and  De.-^cribing
Earlv  Printed  Books,  and  a  Latin-English  and  English-Latin  lopo-
grapliical  Index  of  the  Earliest  Printing  Presses.  Edited  by  II.  I'Keyel.
Containing  172  Facsimiles  of  Early  Tvpographv,  I'.ook  Illustr.,  Printers
Marks,  Bindings,  numerous  Borders,  Initials,  Head  and  Tail  Pieces,  anrt
a  Frontispiece.  1  Vol.  Boyal  8vo,  383  pages,  vellum  cloth, .fl  i«-
liegiiining  with  the  lUock  books,  which  anticipated  by  a  few  doijdes  ttie  dis-
covery of  Printing,  this  work  gives  an  account  of  tho  ri»o  and  progress  of  Printing-
the  dispersion  over  Europe  of  tho  German  printers,  the  growth  of  Bouk  Illustration,  of
tho  Binder's  Art,  and  all  similar  matter  down  to  tho  present  day.


ßhiUnfe  ftne  Mvt  mv&v 2— continued.

RICHARD  WAGNER'S  LETTERS  THO  HIS  DRESDEN  FRIENDS  (Letters  to  Theodor
Uhllff,  1849-18531  Letters  to  Wilhelm  Fischer,  1841-1859)  Letters  to  Ferdinand
Heine,  1841-1868).  Translated  by  J.  S.  Shedlodc  With  an  Etcluug  oi
Waguer's  Portrait  taken  in  1853,  and  a  Complete  Index.  1  Vol.  Grown
8  voT  cloth  extra,  gilt  top. 12«.  (irf.

"Admiror-s  of  VVa^'ner's  genius  will  üud  here  a  limd  ot  mtonuation  about  tUs

vie  intime  of  tlio  musician." — Graphik.

CORRESPONDENCE  OF  WAGNER  AND  LISZT  FROM  1841  TO  1861.  Traiislaled
into  English,. a-Klwith  a  Preface  by  Dr.  Francis  Hüiler.  2  Vols.  Crown

^^%otbinsf!we*i'n^struiivo^^^^  the  real  character  and  relations  of

Liszt  and  Wagner  lias  been  published.  Seldom  has  the  force  and  tevvour  ot  Waguer  a
German  been  rendered  with  such  accuracy  and  character."— il/anc/icsJer  truardian.
THE  SWORDSMAN  ;  a  Manual  of  Fence  for  the  Foil,  Sabre,  and  Bayonet,  With  an
Appendix  consisting  of  a  Code  of  Rules  for  Assaults,  Competitions,  etc.  By  Alfred
Hutten,  late  Capt.  King's  Dragoon  Guards,  Author  of  "Uold  Steel,
"Fixed  Bayonets."  With  42  Illustration.«.  iVol.  Crown  8  vo,  cloth,  ds.brf.
Ditto,  50  copies  on  Whatman  paper,  bound  in  vellum. 10«.  6d.

"We  do  not  know  a  work  that  is  so  full  of  clear  explanation  and  sound  In-
struction."— Court  Journal.

PRACTICAL  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  GERMAN  LANGUAGE.  With  Reading  Lessons,  and  a
German-English  and  English-German  Vocabulary.  By  William  Eysenbach.
Third  Edition. 1  Vol. 8vo,  cloth. 3«.  6rf.

"It  is  decidedly  'practical.' We  like  its  gradual  mode  of  presenting  difficulty

after  difficulty,  and  the  conversational  tone  of  the  exercises." — Schoolmaster.

DICTIONARY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  AND  GERMAN  LANGUAGES.  By  Dr.  Fr.  Köhler.
Two  Parts  in  One  Volume. 1  Vol. 8vo,  half  calf. 7  s.  6d.

n.  GREVEL  &  CO.,  33,  RING  STREET,  CÖVENT  GARDEN.  LONDON,  W.  C.


Dedicated


to


all  Mends


of


a  natural
way

of

living

and

curing !


Kneipp-JournaLfr;anat:'a.

way  of  living  and  curing.  Offi-
cial paper  of  the  Kneipp-Society.
IL  26  N'^  year.  Price  l.s.  6d.
halfyeaiiy.

The  "Kneipp  -  Journ al"  contains
besides  original  articles  written  by  the
Rev.  Father  Kneipp  himself,  numerous
articles  from  Kneipp- physicians  and
other  adherents  of  the  Kneipp -Move-
ment, also  reports  of  patients,  of  the
different  Kneipp-Societies,  news  from
Woerishofen,  medical  adviser.

To  be  hnd  all  of  booksellers  and
direct  from  the  publisher

L.  AUER,

DONAUWÖRTH  (Bavaria).
Specimen  Numbers  are  sent  gratis  and  free  ot  postage  I


1


for  use  of  Water- Cure,  examined  and  appro-
ved by

Rev.  SEBAST.  KNEIPP

who  has  given  me  permission  in  his  own
handwriting,  to  recommend  the  same
in  his  books.  This  hnen ,  coarse  or  fine ,  is
worked  off  the  best  material,  very  duraljle
and  reasonable  in  price.
Ready  made

Spanish  mantles,  bandages
and  shawls

on  stock.  I  also  undertake  the  making  of  shirts
and  sheets  to  measure.  If  desired,  I  supply
in  addition  to  the  linen  the  necessary  woollen
blankets  and  mantles.

Samples  post-free  to  all  countries.

M.  F.  EHRING,

Münster  (Westfalia).

Agents  for:
Great  Britain:  Huelser  &  Co.,  LONDON,

Temple  chambers.
Austria:  F.  Mieszczakowski,  VIENNA  I.,

Rudolfsplatz  5.
Switzerland:  C.  Hoclireutiner,  ZÜRICH,
Seefeldstrasse  47.
|1  France:  Georges  Oelker,  PARIS,  Rue  d'Haute-
M'  . ville  17.


4


Printal  bv  Jos,  Ki.sel,  Kempten.
