Knights of Pythias Illustrated (E. A. Cook (publisher), 1880)
==========================================================
The 1880 illustrated ritual exposé of the Knights of Pythias. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/KnightsOfPythiasIllustratedPubByEACook1880).

*


/


KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS

^ ILLUSTRATED

BY A PAST CHANCELLOR,

jfi Jfwll 3|*p0mtum

OF THEE

THREE RANKS OF THE ORDER,


WITH THE ADDITION OF THE


AMENDED, PERFECTED AND AMPLIFIED THIRD RANK.


CHICAGO, ILL.

EZRA A, COOK & CO., PUBLISHERS.

188 0 .


Bill'


i


KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS

i

ILLUSTRATED


OF THE


CEREMONIES OF THE THREE DEGREES

* OF THE

. T

. ^ N

SUBORDINATE LODGE.


CHICAGO, ILL.

EZRA A. COOK & CO., PUBLISHERS,
il ’


1878 .


H 5 / a z z
. C 7 sr


Entered According to Act of Congress in the year 18 <7.

By Ezra A. Cook & Co.,

In the office of tbe Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C«


■d r/~ //


TABLE OF CONTENTS,


J

i Page.

Preface 4

Diagram of Lodge Room 6

Qualifications and Titles of Officers 7

Positions of Officers in the Lodge Room 7

Opening Ceremonies 8

Opening Prayer by Prelate 8

Opening Ode 9

Order of Business 13

Closing Ceremonies 13

Closing Prayer 14

Closing Ode 14

Arrangement of The Altar in different Ranks 15

Initiation, First or Rank of Page 18

Administering Obligation, First Rank (Illustrated ) 20

Obligation, Rank of Page 21

Initiatory Anthem 22

Signs of Courtesy, Recognition, Caution, Distress 24-26

Grip, First Rank 27

Remarks on Rank of Page .. 30

Form of Passing from Rank of Page to Esquire 31

Initiation, Second or Armorial Rank of Esquire 33

Obligation Rank of Esquire 35

Signs, Countersigns and Grip, Rank of Esquire 3?

Address to Candidate 40

Remarks on Rank of Esquire 41

Form of Passing from Rank of Esquire to Knight 42

Advance your Shields and Parry 44

Initiation, Third or Rank of Knight , 45

Obligation, Rank of Knight 48

Signs, Countersign and Grip, Third Rank 52—55

Remarks on Rank of Knight 58

Initiation, Amended. Perfected and Amplified Third Rank 59

Diagram of Taking Obligation Amplified Third Rank 63

Obligation Amended, Perfected and Amplified Third Rank 64

Council of Ten 67

Diagram of Lodge Room arranged for Council of Ten — S8

Ceremonies in opening Council of ten 69

Dissolving Council of Ten (Diagram) 73

Visor Signs 79

Countersign and Grip, Third Rank 80

Ceremonies for Supreme or Grand Official Visitations 85

Remarks on Amplified Third Rank 86

Knights of Pythias at a Glance (Signs, Grips etc, of all the Ranks) .. . 90


PUBLISHERS’ PREFACE.

“At the devil’s booth are all things sold;

Bach ounce of dross costs its ounce of gold,
lor a cap and bells our lives we pay,

Bubbles we earn with a whole soul’s tasking,

’Tis heaven alone that is given away;

’Tis only God may be had for the asking .’ 1

Lowell.

Little did we think, when reading in youth, of the follies, false
methods and narrow views of the Knighthood of the “Dark Ages”
so truthfully caricatured in the History of Don Quixote; mental-
ly contrasting them with Christian civilization founded on the
Holy Bible ; that in our time in our own land an army of Knights
more foolish, blind and guilty than those burlesqued by Don
Quixote would voluntarily enroll their names and parade the
streets of our cities.

Like Masonry and Odd Fellowship, this order makes use of the
Bible but like the former it puts the implements of the order on
top of the Bible (the first rank excepted.) The fact that the very
name “Book of Law” is the term which the great apostle of
Masonry, Albert G. Mackey applies to the sacred book on the
altar which he says: “is that volume which by the religion of
the countiy is believed to contain the revealed w ill of the Grand
Architect of the universe,” (Mackey’s Jurisprudence p. 33,)
gives good reason for the conclusion that this term was chosen in
order that the Bible may be conveniently replaced by any other
sacred book when the order is established in heathen or Mo-
hamedan countries.

Historical Sketch op the Knights op Pythias.

This secret order which now claims a membership of 100,000
and whose supreme council of the world “composed only of
Officers and Ex-Officers of Grand Lodges, which Aug. 14th, 1877,
met in Cleveland, Ohio, about 2,000 strong, had its origin in the
fertile brain of an ambitious adventurer by the name of J. H.
Ratlibone. As of the Grange, Washington, D. C., was its birth place
and Washington Lodge No. 1, was formally organized Feb. 23d,
18G4, though a preliminary meeting for the purpose was held the
19th, four days before. The ritual prepared previously by
J. II. Ilathbone, was adopted and a committee was appointed to
prepare an addition thereto with Rathbone as Chairman. In four
days more they met again adopted the additional ritual and ap-
pointed a committee to prepare still more ritual which with some
revisions formed the three Ranks of the order. March 24th, steps
were taken to organize a Grand Lodge, and April 8th, the Grand
Lodge of the District of Columbia was organized and they were
ready to sell Secrets at wholesale and retail.

Whether the founder of the order, J. H. Rathbone, had expected
to have the monopoly of the business of selling the Secrets of the
order or not he seems to have been displeased at the formation or
perhaps the management of the Grand Lodge, for he resigned his
office as Venerable Patriarch and even his membership in the


V

order, but two weeks afterwards. He is soon heard of as again
revising the ritual of the order.

Within four months after the organization of Washington
Lodge No. 1, two other lodges had been started there and
one in Alexandria, Ya.

Within six months from the formation of the “Mother Lodge”
it with all but one of the children were dead and the Grand Lodge
also. In 1866 the members of Franklin Lodge No. 2, Washington
D. C., the only surviving lodge started another lodge in the city
and the Grand Lodge was also, resusitated soon after. July 1867
the total membership was still but 694, but in three months
increased to 1380, and March 10th the District of Columbia
Grand Lodge issued charters for the Grand Lodges of Maryland
and New Jersey.

August 11th, 1868 the Supreme Grand Lodge of the world was
organized at Washington D C., and at its first session afterwards
at Richmond, Ya., March 9th, 18G9 the membership was reported
at over 35,000 with nearly 200 lodges, eight Grand Lodges and an
income of $194,573,25, and the year following had increased to
52,000 members, 465 lodges and sixteen Grand Lodges, the total
receipt being $541,219,34, at the close of the year 1870 the mem-
bership is reported at 84,000.

With this apparent prosperity there had been some fierce
wrangling, quite at variance with the great friendship the order
professes to inculcate. Even the Civil Courts were several times
appealed to, to decide questions of disputed authority and 1870
found two Grand Lodges in both Maryland and New Jersey and
a bitter war in the Supreme Lodge of the World, on the question
of Rathbone’s new rank and a new Obligation ordered by the
Supreme Lodge to be administered to every member of the
order, which thousands refused to take.

For several years the order has been used by political tricksters
nine-tenths of them high Masons to such an extent as to thorough-
ly disgust its most intelligent members in many localities and
its managers are forced to admit a net loss of 5,942 during the
past year, while it is undoubtedly true that a very large number
still reported as members will never again enter their “Castle
Halls.”

That this little volume may be blessed of God in the utter
demolition of this dark order is the hope and prayer of

The Publishers’.

5

I


I


DIAGRAM,

Showing the shape of the stations, which are designated in the Lodge by the
following colors: Chancellor Commander, red: Vice Chancellor, blue; Prelate,
black: Past Chancellor, yellow. The altar here shown is arranged for the
Third or Chivalric Rank of Knight. The Initials F. C. B. shown on the
shields on sides of Altar stand for the pass-words of the three ranks—
Friendship, Caution, Bravery,


KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS ILLUSTRATED,


Qualifications and Titles of Officers.

1st. Past Chancellor. — Acquired by service in having passed
through the executive office and chair of the Lodge, and which
title and rank he shall hold thereafter.

2d. Chancellor Commander. — Attained by election : which
latter title of Commander shall only be held and worn while the
principal and executive officer of the Lodge. Service as Chan-
cellor Commander to end of term entitles to the rank of Past
Chancellor ever afterwards.

3rd. Vice Chancellor. — Attained by election.

4th. Prelate. — Attained by election.

5th. Master of Exchequer. — Attained by election.

6th. Master of Finance. — Attained by election.

7th. Keeper of Records and Seal. — Attained by election.

8th. Master at Arms. — By election or appointment.

9th. Inner Guard. — By appointment.

10th. Outer Guard. — By appointment.

Position of Officers in The Lodge.

Past Chancellor. — On the right hand side of the Lodge, mid-
way or center of room, looking from Chancellor Commander’s
station to the Vice Chancellor’s station at the opposite end.

Chancellor Commander. — At the head or end of the room.

Vice Chancellor. — At opposite or lower end of room.

Prelate. — On left hand side of the Chancellor Commander,
at center of the Lodge, and in a direct line as drawn from the
Past Chancellor, over or through the Altar, opposite the position
of the Past Chancellor.

Master of Exchequer, ) At head of Lodge-room and on the

Master of Finance, J left hand of the Chancellor Com.

Keeper of Records and Seal, ) At head of Lodge-room

Master at Arms, J and on the right of the

Chancellor Commander.

Inner Guard. — At inner door and near the Vice Chancellor,

Outer Guard. — At outer door.


8


OPENING CEREMONIES.

At precisely the hour appointed for the convening of the Lodge, if
a quorum be present, the Chancellor Commander seeing that the
members are clothed in proper regalia, or insignia of the Order,
and after nothing the Master at arms to satisfy himself that all
present are duly qualified as members in good standing of the
Order, and in possession of, and with the proper rank and Semi
Annual Pass word gives one rap with his gavel or sword hilt.

Chancellor Commander. — “ It is my will and pleasure that

Lodge, No. — , Knights of Pythias, now come to order, in this
4 Castle Hall,’ for the dispatch of such business and work as may
be brought before it. The officers and members will give me their
aid and counsel in further promulgating the bonds of Friendship
that unite us, using due Caution in the transaction of any busi-
ness that is presented, and with Bravery accepting all issues
which, with strict impartiality and fairness, we may be called to
pass upon. Let Harmony, Peace and Unity prevail.

“Brother Inner Guard, you will order the Outer Guard to clear
the ante-room, close the doors and permit no one to enler until
the Lodge is duly and regularly opened, and he notified of the
same through you by me.”

Inner Guard to Outer Guard (opens door). — “ It is the will and
pleasure of the Chancellor Commander that you permit no one
to enter until the Lodge is duly and regularly opened, and you
are notified of the same by him through me.”

Outer Guard. — “ The commands of the Chancellor Commander
shall be obeyed.”

Inner Guard to Chancellor Commander (closes and locks inner
door). — “ Chancellor Commander, the Outer Guard has received
your commands and will implicitly obey them.”

Chancellor Commander (two raps — all rise). — “ The brethren
will attend while the Prelate implores the blessings of Deity.”

OPENING PRAYER BY PRELATE.

“ We humbly invoke Thy blessing, thou Supreme Ruler of the
Universe, upon the officers and members of this Lodge. Grant,
we beseech Thee, thine aid in conducting the business for which
we are here assembled; and may it please Thee to shower divine
grace upon us in this our convention. Let harmony and brotherly
love prevail among, and finally permit us to assemble around
Thy throne at the last great day, a happy and united brotherhood,


9

elected to share Thy heavenly home. Hear, we beseech Thee, and
answer us in peace, for Thine own sake. Amen.”

(All respond.) Amen.

OPENING ODE.

Great God, to Thee we raise
Our hopeful song of praise —

Grant us Thy love.

Let us in friendship be ;

Let us harmonious see,

Our Order extended be,

All nations o’er.

Let brothers hand in hand
True to each other stand

Throughout all time.

Then when life’s labor’s o’er,

Leaving Time’s earthly shore,

May we meet to part no more
In Heaven above.

Chancellor Commander. — Three raps. (All seated.)

Chancellor Commander (one rap) “Brother Inner Guard.”

Inner Guard (rising promptly). — “ Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — Brother Inner Guard, you will re-
lieve the Brother Outer Guard and have him present himself at
your station.”

Inner Guard retires and relieves the Outer Guard, who imme-
diately presents himself at the station of the Inner Guard' and
says :

“ Chancellor Commander, the Outer Guard reports for duty.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brother Outer Guard.”

Outer Guard. — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “ Where is your station, and what
are your duties ? ”

Outer Guard (standing). — “ Outside of the inner, and to take
charge of the outer door. My duties are to see that the brethren
clothe themselves in proper regalia or insignia of the Order in
the ante-room, and are duly qualified to enter the inner door ; to
take charge of the regalia, and perform such other duties as the
Chancellor Commander may direct,”


10


Chancellor Commander. — “ Brother Outer'Guard, you will now
resume your proper station and relieve the Brother Inner Guard.”

Inner Guard returns, assumes his station, and says :

“ Chancellor Commander, the Inner Guard reports from his
station.”

Chancellor Commander. — “ Brother Inner Guard.”

Inner Guard (standing). — “ Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Where is your station, and what
are your duties in this Lodge? ”

Inner Guard. — “ At the inner door near the Vice Chancellor.
My duties are to allow no brother to enter the Lodge who is not
clothed in proper regalia or insignia of the Order, and does not
give the correct raps and pass words, and to obey such other
orders as ma) r be communicated to me by the Chancellor Com-
mander.”

(Inner Guard remains standing),

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “ Brother Master at Arms.”

Master at Arms (rising promptly and facing the C. C.). — “ Chan-
cellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “ Where is your station and what
are your duties in this Lodge ? ”

Master at Arms. — “ At the right and in front of the Chancel-
lor Commander. My duties are to examine all present prior to
the opening of the Lodge in any rank, and report the result of
said examination to the Chancellor Commander; to prepare and
accompany all Retainers, Pages or Esquires during the ceremo-
nies of initiation, proving or charging in the different grades of
rank, and perform such other duties as the Chancellor Comman-
der may direct.” (Master at Arms remains standing.)

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “ Brother Keeper of Rec-
ords and Seal.”

Keeper of Records and Seal (standing). — “Chancellor Com-
mander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Where is your station and what
are your duties in this Lodge?”

Keeper of Records and Seal. — “At the right of the Chancellor
Commander. My duties are to keep a just and impartial record
of all the proceedings of this Lodge, conduct all its correspond-
ence, have charge of the Seal and Archives, make out semi-annual
returns of the work and business of this Lodge, and transmit the


11


same to the Grand Lodge ; deliver any funds, documents, or other
Lodge properly coming into my hands to the proper officer, and
to faithfully perform all other duties prescribed by the Constitu-
tion and By-Laws of this Lodge.” (Keeper of Records and Seal
remains standing.)

Chancellor Commander (one rap,. — “Brother Master of Finance.”

Master of Finance (standing). — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Where is your station and what are
your duties in this Lodge ?”

Master of Finance. — “At the left of the Chancellor Comman-
der. My duties are too keep an accurate account between this
Lodge and its members ; notify all brethren who are in arrears ;
receive all monies and immediately pay the eame over to the
Master of Exchequer, taking his receipt therefor; to make out
and present to this Lodge my report at the expiration of the
semi-annual term, and to perform all other duties required of me
by the Constitution and Ritual of the Order.” (Master of Finance
remains standing.)

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “Brotner Master of Ex-
chequer.”

Master of Exchequer (standing). — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Where is your station and what
are your duties in this Lodge ?”

Master of Exchequer. — “At the left of the Chancellor Com-
mander. My duties are to receive from the Master of Financj
all Lodge monies received by him, giving my receipt therefor,
keeping an exact and true account of all monies so received,
making no disbursements thereof unless authorized so to do by
the Lodge under an order from the Chancellor Commander, at-
tested by the Keeper of Records and Seal, and to make a correct
report to this Lodge at the end of every semi-annual term”
(Master of Exchequer remains standing.)

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “Brother Prelate.”

Prelate (standing). — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Where is your station and what
are your duties in this Lodge ?”

Prelate. — “On the left of the Chancellor Commander and oppo-
site the Altar, forming one end of the base line of the double tri-
angle. My duties are to perform all obligatory ceremonials in
the conferring of the several grades of rank ; offer up invocations


12


to, and ask blessings from the Deity upon our labors and brother-
hood, and perform such other duties required of me by the Con-
stitution, Laws and usuagcs of the order, or as may be directed
from time to time by the Chancellor Commander of this Lodge.”
(Prelate remains standing.)

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “ Brother Vice Chancellor.”

Vice Chancellor (standing).— “ Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Where is your station and what are
your duties in this Lodge?”

Yice Chancellor. — “ In the second official chair, forming the
apex of the second triangle, opposite to and facing the Chancellor
Commander. My duties are to have charge of the second tri-
angle and assist the Chancellor Commander in preserving order
and decorum in the Lodge, aid in conducting the ceremonies of
the several grades of rank, appoint a minority of all committees,
(unless otherwise ordered by the Lodge,) preside in the absence
of the Chancellor Commander, and have charge of the wicket.”
(Yice Chancellor remains standing.)

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “ Brother Past Chancellor.”

Past Chancellor (standing). — “ Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “ Where is your station and what are
your duties in this Lodge?”

Past Chancellor. — “ On the right of the Chancellor Commander,
opposite the Altar, forming the terminal of the base line of the
double triangle. My duties, to have special supervision of all
preparations and be held responsible for all lloor-work or cere-
monies in conferring the several grades of rank, and such other
duties as the Chancellor Commander may direct.”

Chancellor Commander.— “ Where is the statidh and what are
the duties of the Chancellor Commander of this Lodge?”

Past Chancellor. — “The station of the Chancellor Commander
is in the first official chair, forming the head of the first triangle
and Lodge. It is the duty of the Chancellor Commander to pre-
side over and have charge of both triangles, the officers, members
and visitors of his Lodge, preserve order during its session,
appoint a majority of all committees (unless otherwise ordered
by the Lodge), decide all questions of order without debate, sub-
ject, however, to an appeal to the Lodge, and perform such other
duties appertaining to his office as may be prescribed in the
work of the Order and By-Laws of his Lodge.” (Past Chancel-
lor remains standing.)


13


Chancellor Commander two raps; (rising to his feet; all rise).
— “ All of which duties I am under solemn obligation to perform
with justice and impartiality; in view of which I earnestly ask
the kind co- operation of the officers and members of this Lodge.
Let not anger or dissension arise in our midst, but let us devote
our whole attention, our entire zeal, to the labor before us ; and
finally, let lessons of Obedience be inculcated, Strength be our
motto, Friendship our watchword, and Caution our guiding star.
Let harmony and peace prevail.”

Chancellor Commander. — “ I now declare Lodge, No. — ,

duly opened for the transaction of such business as shall legally
come before it. Brother Master at Arms, you will arrange the
Altar.”

(The Master at Arms goes to the Altar, opens the Book and
places the swords of Defence in proper position, (see instructions
for arrangement of the Altar in the different grades of rank, page
15) and returns to his place.)

Chancellor Commander (addressing Inner Guard). — “ Brother
Inner Guard, you will communicate to the Outer Guard that this
Lodge is now open, and to admit all brethren duly qualified to
enter.”

Inner Guard (opens door and goes out). — “Brother Outer
Guard, it is the order of the Chancellor Commander that you
admit all brethren duly qualified to enter, as the Lodge is regu-
larly opened.” (Returns and shuts the door.)

Inner Guard. — “ Chancellor Commander, your commands have
been obeyed.”

Chancellor Commander gives three raps, seating the Lodge.

ORDER OF BUSINESS.

1. Calling Roll of Officers.

2. Reading Minutes.

3. Reception of Petitions.

4. Reports of Committees.

5. Balloting for Candidates.

6. Conferring Grades of Rank.

7. Communications and Bills Read.

8. New Business.

9. Has any brother any thing to offer for the good of the Order ?

10. Closing in due form.

CLOSING CEREMONIES.

Chancellor Commander. — “ There being no further business*
before the Lodge, we will proceed to close. The brethren will
attend while the Prelate implores the blessing of Deity on our
deliberations.” (Two raps.)

Note. — I f there are candidates in waiting or other business, these dos-
ing ceremonies are deferred till the Lodge is ready to dose.


14


CLOSING PRAYER BY THE PRELATE.

“Vouchsafe Thy blessing, our Heavenly Father, on the events
of this evening. Be with us during the coming week. Shield
us from all harm, and finally permit us to be with Thee on the
last great day, a united brotherhood, elected to share the blessings
of life eternal in the heavens. Hear and answer us in peace for
Thy great name’s sake. Amen.”

(All respond.) Amen.

CLOSING ODE.

May your slumbers be all blest
When you close your eyes in rest;

May the holy angels keep
Vigils o’er you while you sleep.

Sleep till rosy morning comes,

With its light to bless your homes ;

Bless the angels that will keep
Vigils o’er you while you sleep.

Goodnight.

Chancellor Commander. — “Officers and brethren, we are now
about to quit these portals to mingle again with the outer world.
Let all of us endeavor to so regulate our conduct that it will
bring credit upon ourselves and honor to our order. In conclu-
sion, permit me to return you my sincere thanks as Chancellor
Commander, for the kind assistance you have rendered in con-
ducting the business of this convention. And now, by virtue of

the power vested in me as Chancellor Commander, I declare

Lodge, No. , duly closed until our next regular convention,

(except in case of necessity, when all shall receive due notice,)
and then I hope to see as many of you present as can possibly
make it convenient to attend.”

“Brother Master at Arms, you will close the Book of Law and
secure the Swords of Defense. Brother Inner Guard you will
now permit the brethren to retire, and inform the Outer Guard
that the lodge is closed.” (One rap.)

ARRANGEMENT-OF THE ALTAR IN THE DIFFERENT
GRADES OF RANK.

When the Lodge is called to-order by the Chancellor Comman-
der, there will be lying upon the altar a Bible, which is closed,


15


and resting on it will be two swords, hilts together, and handles
towards the Chancellor Commander’s station. When the Chan-
cellor Commander orders the Master at Arms to “arrange the al-
tar,” he will go there and arrange it as tollows :


THE ALTAR IN THE INITIATORY RANK OF PAGE.


The Book opened the same as in the
Chivalric Rank of Knight, and wheth-
er on the altar or Coffin rests on
the two Swords, which are crossed un
derneath the Book, with the hilts or
handles toward the Chancellor Com-
mander and points towards the Vice
Chancellor. (While initiating, the han-
dles should be towards the Prelate and
points towards Ihe candidate.)


THE ALTAR IN THE ARMORIAL RANK OF ESQUIRE.


The Book opened, the same as in the
Chivalric Rank of Knight, with the
two swords laying on it — crossed—
with the handles towards the Chancel-
lor Commander and points towards the
Yice Chancellor.


THE ALTAR IN THE CHIVALRIC RANK OF KNIGHT.


The Book opened about the middle
so as to lay square, and one sword lay-
ing diagonally across and over it, with
the handle — or hilt — towards the foot of
the room — or Yice Chancellor’s station
— and point towards the head of the
room, or Chancellor Commander’s sta-
tion.


INITIATION.

FIRST, OR INITIATORY RANK OF PAGE.

The candidate i 3 brought into the
ante-room, and as soon as his presence
is known the utmost silence must be
maintained in the Lodge. The Chan-
cellor Commander will delegate one or
two members to prepare the properties,
under the supervision and control of
the Past Chancellor ; the rest of the
lodge, after clothing themselves in their
Slasks and Black Robes, remain seated. Loud talk or heavy
walking must be avoided, as the solemnity of the initiation de-
pends entirely on the strict silence that pervades the room. The
Master at Arms retires to the anteroom and prepares the candidate.

Preparation for Pirst, or Initiatory Rank of Page.

The preparation consists in the candidate having his coat and
vest removed, the White Robe put on and his eyes securely
blindfolded, in which manner he is conducted to the door of the
Lodge by the Master at Arms. Particular care should be taken
that the Master at Arms or Outer Guard do not converse in a
frivolous manner with the candidate while he is being prepared,
but on the contrary a grave solemnity should mark the whole
transaction.

Master at Arms (gives one rap) ; Inner Guard (1 rap) ; Master
at Arms (2 raps) ; Inner Guard (2 raps) Master at Arms (3 raps) ;
Inner Guard (3 raps).

Inner Guard. — “Who comes here, and what do you desire ?”

Master at Arms. — “The Master at Arms of this Lodge, with a
stranger who desires to become a Retainer of, and asks to be ini-
tiated into the mysteries of the First or Initiatory Rank of Page
of this Chivalric Order.”

Inner Guard. — “Chancellor Commander, a stranger knocks for
admission to these portals who desires to become a Retainer of,
and asks to be initiated into the mysteries of the First or Initia-
tory Rank of Page of this Chivalric Order.”

Chancellor Commander. — “It is my order, as Chancellor Com-
mander, that you admit him without further challenge.”

(Inner Guard opens door.”)


11

The Master at Arms enters with the candidate and conducts
him around the room very slowly three times, (during which
time the utmost silence must prevail, with the exception of the
music, which should be of a solemn character,) and then halts
before the chair of the Chancellor Commander.

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, a stranger stands
before you, who desires to become a Retainer of, and asks to be
initiated into the mysteries of the First or Initiatory Rank of
Page in this ChivaJric Order.”

Chancellor Commander (addressing the candidate.) — “Stranger,
clad as you are, and devoid of the gift of sight, I ask you, as
Chancellor Commander of this Lodge, is this your desire?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Before proceeding further with
this ceremony, it is a duty incumbent upon me to propound to
yon several questions touching your qualifications to become a
member of this Order in any Rank. I will therefore ask : Do
you believe in the existence of a Supreme Being?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Are you of sound bodily nealth ?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Have you ever before applied to be
come a member of the Order of Knights of Pythias?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Stranger, have you fully considered
the weighty duties that will devolve upon you when once a mem-
ber of this Order in any Rank that it may confer, or do you en
ter these portals from mere idle curiosity?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “You are probably aware, and if not
I will now inform you, that when you are duly become a mem-
ber of, and progress in the Order of Knights of Pythias, that you
are entitled to all the honors, benefits and privileges arising from
the several Grades of Rank, as attained, that can in any way be
bestowed upon you. Now, therefore, having given you these as-
surances on my part, as Chancellor Commander, and in all sin,
cerity and kindness, I ask you in the name of the order universal,
what are we to expect from you in return ?*’

Candidate answers.— 1 ^Obedience. 5 *


18


Chancellor Commander. — ‘‘Such being your pledge, I ask, Are
you willing to take upon yourself a solemn and binding obliga-
tion to keep forever secret all that you may see or hear or here-
after be instructed in, of the mysteries of this Order — an obliga-
tion which we have all taken, and one which I, as Chancellor
Commander, assure you will in no wise affect ’ your religion or
your politics?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Are you keenly sensible as to the
solemnity, and willing to conform and live up to the require-
ments of, an obligation of this character?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Are you aware that, once you have
taken upon yourself this solemn and binding obligation, there is
no receding from its demands ?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Should you waver in your purpose,
there is yet time to withdraw.” (Pause.) “Do you still desire
to proceed ?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “The Master at Arms will conduct
the stranger to the Prelate of this Lodge, who will administer to
him the solemn and binding obligation of the First, or Initiatory
Rank of Page, of this Chivalric Order.”

Master at Anns conducts stranger round the lodge three times,
or until everything is prepared for administering the obligation.
Immediately upon leaving the station of the Chancellor Com-
mander the attendants should, as noiselessly as possible, stand
ready to turn down the lights very low, and to light the urns that
are stationed at each end of the open coffin* containing a com-
plete human skeleton. As soon as all is in readiness the Master
at Arms brings the candidate opposite and in front of the
Prelate.

Master at Arms. — “Prelate, by direction of the Chancellor
Commander I present to you a stranger who desires to take upon


19


himself the solemn and binding obligation of the First, or Initia-
tory Rank of Page, he having so signified his desire and willing-
ness to conform thereto.”

Prelate (to candidate). — “Stranger is this your desire?”

Candidate answers.

Prelate. — “Master at Arms, why is the stranger brought before
me in this garb?”

Master at Arms. — “To indicate the purity of his intentions,
white being the emblem thereof.”

Prelate. — “I most willingly and cheerfully accept the emblem,
indicating as it does, that purity of heart and rectitude of con-
duct which are essential to obtain admission into this, the First,
or Initiatory Rank and Grade of our Chivalric Order. Has the
stranger been instructed as to the ser ious, solemn and binding
obligation he is about to take upon himself?”

Master at Arms. — “He has.”

Prelate. — “Stranger, is this so ?” *

Candidate answers.

. Prelate. — “Master at Arms, you will place the candidate in
proper position, by his kneeling upon both knees, his left hand
on the left breast, over his heart ; his right hand extended, palm
down, and resting on the Book of Law and Swords of Defence.”

The Master at Arms causes the candidate to kneel by the side
of the open coffin containing a human skeleton, the Prelate on
the opposite side, and places his right hand on the Holy Bible,
that rests on the (two) Swords of Defence which lie across the
coffin and rest on it, handles of swords towards the Prelate, cross-
ed with points towards the candidate, and his left hand on the
left breast over his heart. The officers and members assembled
around the Prelate all kneel, the members covering him with
their lances, if so armed, until the candidate has assumed the ob-
ligation, when the lances are raised to a perpendicular position,
and remain so until he leaves the room. (See diagram.)


The cut shows the Prelate administering the obligation. The Chancellor
Commander is at the head of the coffin, the Vice Chancellor at the foot, the
Past Chancellor at the right of the candidate, the Master at Arms at the left,
the Prelate opposite the candidate as shown. On each side of the Prelate is
a Knight and the rest of the Knights kneel in rows in a semicircle back of
the Prelate.


21


Master at Arms. — “Prelate, the candidate is duly prepared.”

Prelate. — “Stranger, as you are about to subscribe to an obli-
gation of great solemnity, it is but just that you should be in
rightful possession of all your mental faculties, and as by the
rules of our order you have hitherto been deprived of sight, for
reasons which must have been evident to you, the Master at Arms
will now remove the bandage, that you may be able to see as well
as to hear.”

Master at Arms removes bandage. Prelate kneels opposite;
the brethren kneeling in a half circle opposite and facing candi-
date, with lowered lances.

Prelate. — “You will now repeat after me:”

OBLIGATION FIBST BANK.

“I, (your name) in the presence of these true and tried brethren
do most solemnly promise, declare and swear, that I will never
reveal to the day of my death and will keep secret all the myste-
ries of which I have been, or may be hereafter instructed in; and
that I will keep forever sacred within the . deep recesses of my
heart, even in the sanctuary thereof, veiled from all human eyes,
all the passwords, grips, signs and countersigns, together with
each and every secret that I may hereafter be instructed iu ; ex-
cept it be in a regular Lodge, duly instituted and working under
proper legal authority, of the Order of Knights of Pythias, or to
an authorized officer, or duly qualified member of the Order, of
proper rank ; and to the latter only after strict and satisfactory ex-
amination, sufficient to warrant my conversing with him or them
on or about the same.

“I further promise and declare, that I will ever and always re-
lieve a distressed brother; that I will warn him of any danger
which I may know to threaten him, and will fly to his succor
and aid whenever and -wherever I may be convinced by eye or
ear that he is in need thereof.

“I further declare and say, that I am not now, nor w T iii I ever
so long as I remain a member of the Order of Knights of Pythias,
become a member of, or affiliate with any body, under whatsoever
name, claiming to be a higher, a branch, or side degree of the
Knights of Pythias, unless under the control, guidance of and


22


fully recognized as such by the Supreme Lodge Knights of Pyth-
ias of the World.

“I further promise and declare, that I will observe all the rules
and regulations required by the Constitution and By-Laws of
this or any other Lodge of this Order that I may become a mem-
ber of, and to the best of my ability will live up to all the require-
ments of the Order.

“In evidence of which I herewith pledge my sacred word of
honor. So help me God, and keep me steadfast in this my first
and binding obligation in the Order of Knights of Pythias.”

Prelate. — “In token of your sincerity you will now kiss the
Book that is open before you, which is our Book of Law, and is
the Holy Bible.”

Candidate does so, and while peforming this act the following
is chanted :

INITIATORY ANTHEM.

“Mid the deep hush that o’er the earth is creeping,

Eather, I come to thee ;

With humbleness of heart I kneel entreating —

Be merciful to me.”

Yfhen through, the Prelate, Chancellor Commander, Vice
Chancellor, Master at Arms and candidate all rise, (the rest re-
main kneeling), and while standing in their different positions>
the Prelate says :

Prelate. — “Stranger, you have taken upon yourself an obliga-
tion of great solemnity. It is perhaps needless for me to enjoin
upon you the great necessity of your living up to, in each and
every particular, all the requirements therein contained. You
have pledged your most solemn word of honor — all that man can
pledge of inestimable worth. You have called upon the Supreme
Ruler of the Universe to help you in keeping inviolate the trust
confided to you. As a retainer, (for by that title I can now ad-
dress you), I feel that you will keep sacred this obligation, and I
have every reason to believe that you will become a faithful
friend, a good companion and an exemplary Page. This obliga-
tion you have taken over the Skeleton* of our honored and
revered patron saint, Pythias. This you can never forget. With


*The word here it* optional with the Prelate. He may use either of the
following words: Emblem, Symbol, or Skeleton .


23


pleasure I present you with a sprig of myrtle, emblematic of
Friendship, which is the motto of this Hank. This you will re-
tain carefully until you may be called upon to relinquish it.
Finally, I would call your attention to the arrangement of the
Book of Law and Swords of Defence in this Bank. (Explains
them. See page 15.)

Prelate, (addressing Master at Arms). — “Master at Arms, you
will now conduct the Retainer to the ante-room and prepare him
to receive further and full instruction, that will entitle him to
the Rank and Grade of Page.”

All remain kneeling till they retire from the room. The lights
are then turned up, the Coffin removed, flambeaus extinguished,
etc. The Master at Arms prepares the candidate, by removing
the White Robe and investing him with his coat and vest. He
is then brought back to the door.

Master at Arms ; one rap ; two raps ; three raps.

Inner Guard. — “Who comes here ?”

Master at Arms. — “Retainer John Brown, who is desirous oi
receiving further knowledge of the mysteries and work of the
First, or Initiatory Rank of Page in this Chivalric Order.”

Inner Guard. — “Chancellor Commander, Retainer John Brown
applies for further instruction in the work of the First, or Ini-
tiatory Rank of Page in this Chivalric Order.”

Chancellor Commander. — “As Chancellor Commander of this
Lodge, it is my order that you admit him without further chal-
lenge.”

Inner Guard (opening the door). — “Master at Arms, it is the
order of the Chancellor Commander that he be admitted without
further challenge.”

The Master at Arms enters with, and conducts the candidate
twice around the Lodge* and halts before the Vice Chancellor.

Master at Arms. — “Vice Chancellor, I present you Retainer
J ohn Brown, for further instruction in the work of the First, or
Initiatory Rank of Page in this Chivalric Order.”

Vice Chancellor. — “Has he conformed to the Law and taken
the obligation ?”

Master at Arms. — “He has.”

Vice Chancellor. — “How am I as Vice Chancellor, to be oom


24

vincecl that he has subscribed and will conform to the obliga-
ion of this, the First, or Initiatory Rank of Page in this Chival-
ric Order ?”

Master at Arms. — “He is in possession of the sprig of myrtle.”

Vice Chancellor. — “To those of the First, or Initiatory Rank of
Page in this Chivalric Order, what is the myrtle emblematic
of?”

Master at Arms. — “Friendship, like unto that which bound
Damon to Pythias.”

Vice Chancellor. — “What does it teach?”

Master at Arms. — “Universal Fraternity and Benevolence, es-
pecially to those of the different grades of rank of our Chival-
ric Order, and to all worthy people, wherever existing.”

Vice Chancellor. — “How does it instruct us ?”

Master at Arms. — “It instructs us that, in the mind of a Page
of this Order, those virtues should be as expansive as the azure
arch of heaven, as binding as his obligation and pure as was that
of our great prototypes, Damon and Pythias.”

Yice Chancellor. — “Retainer John Brown I cheerfully accept
the symbol as an earnest of your intentions, (takes it from him,)
and will proceed to instruct you in the raps, secret signs, coun-
tersigns and passwords of this the First, or Initiatory Rank of
Page, to which pay particular attention, as upon your knowl-
edge of them will in part depend your future progress in this
Order.”

“Upon coming into the Lodge, you will knock at the outer
door in any, or a usual manner. It will be opened by the Outer
Guard, who will admit you to the anteroom. After clothing
yourself in the proper regalia, or insignia of this Rank, which
is Blue, you will apply at the in her door, and give first one, then
two, then three raps in this order, which will be answered in a
like manner from within. You will then give your name and
Rank, together with the name and number of your Lodge, and
this password, Friend (whispers it in his ear,) which will admit
you. You will then advance to the center of the room and sa-
lute the Chancellor Commander in this manner :

SIGN OF FRIENDSHIP OR COURTESY.

Form a link with the second finger of each hand, the back of
the left hand up and the back ot the right hand forward; the
forearms forming the base of a triangle. [See cut.]


25


“This is called the sign of Friendship or Courtesy, and is al-
ways used on entering or retiring from the Lodge when open in
the Rank of Page. It is recognized by the Chancellor Com-
der by giving the same sign or by a wave of the hand.”

“There are three other signs, (in which, while instructing, you
will please follow me.)”


THE SIGN OF RECOGNITION

Is given thus: Place your right thumb
near the end of your two first fingers of same
hand as though holding a pen to write, then
smooth the hair back over the right ear with
the two fingers, nails next to the head, three
times, and is answered by the person saluted
with the left hand in same manner.


The Sign of Caution, which is given in two ways, namely,
audibly and inaudibly, is as follows :


INAUDIBLE SIGN OF CAUTION.

Raise right hand and with thumb and fore-
finger squeeze the wings of the nose. This is
done three times, noiselessly, in quick succession
drawing the hand six or eight inches from the
nose after each squeeze.

AUDIBLE SIGN OF CAUTION.

Made in the same way as Inaudible Sign, but
to attract attention give a quick snuff each time
as thumb and finger are being withdrawn from
the nose.

Answer. — Same as sign.


The Sign of Distress is given in this manner :


26


SIGN OF DISTRESS.

Strike the hands together three times, right
hand uppermost.

There is a hailing word in connection with the
Sign of Distress, which is nomad, (Damon back-
wards).

Answer. — Damon.


Vice Chancellor (addressing Master at Arms). — “The Master
at Arms will now conduct the Page to our Chancellor Com-
mander for final instruction.”

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, under instruction
of the Vice Chancellor, I present you Page John Brown for fin-
al instruction and examination in that Rank.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Has the Page been taught the
Signs and Passwords that will indicate his Rank as a Page ?”

Master at Arms. — “He has been instructed therein by the Vice
Chancellor.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Page John Brown, as an evidence
of the attention you have paid in what you have been instructed
by the Vice Chancellor, you will be kind enough to give me the
Sign of Friendship or Courtesy of this Rank ?”

Candidate forms a link with second finger of each hand, fore-
arms forming base of a triangle.

Chancellor Commander. — “How is it recognized by the
Chair ?”

Candidate. — “Chancellor Commander answers by same sign or
by wave of his hand.”

Chancellor Commander. — “The Sign of Recognition ?”

Candidate quickly passes two first fingers of right hand, with


27

ball of thumb near their end and nails next to head, back over
right ear three times.

Chancellor Commander. — “Its answer?”

Candidate. — “Sign made with left hand in same manner.”

Chancellor Commander. — “The Sign of Caution in both ways ?”

Candidate. — “Thumb and forefinger drawn from nose three
times, if for audible sign snuffing air, if for inaudible sign not
doing so.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Its answer?”

Candidate. — “The same.”

Chancellor Commander. — “The Sign of Distress?”

Candidate. — “Strike hands together three times, right hand up
permost.”

Chancellor Commander. — “In the absence of being able to
use it, what do you do ?”

Candidate. — “Use word .Nomad, which is Damon backwards.”

Chancellor Commander. — “What is the answer?”

Candidate. — “Damon.”

Chancellor Commander. — “It now only remains for me to in-
struct you in the Grip and use of the Gavel or Truncheon of au
thority. The Grip is given in this manner.”


GRIP, FIRST RANK.

Each extend the right hand, opening the fingers between the
second and third as shown in upper cut, and grasp each other by
the first two fingers, closing the other fingers as shown in lower
cut.

Chancellor Commander. — “There is a word or cover key con-


28


nected with this grip which I will show you how to arrive at.”

The Chancellor Commander and Master at Arms holding each
other by the grip engage in the following colloquy :

Chancellor Commander. — “Say what is this?”

Master at Arms. — “A good thing.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Most people would say so.”

Master at Arms. — “Some would.”

Chancellor Commander. — “O, would they?”

Master at Arms. — “No doubt.”

The first letters of each sentence spell the word Samson; the
name of the grip, which means Strength as its name indicates.”

Chancellor Commander. — “The Gavel is an instrument made
use of to preserve order, call the Lodge to their feet and seat them.
(One rap), one rap calls the Lodge to order, and in opening or
closing calls up the officers addressed. (Two raps), two raps
calls the Lodge to their feet. (Three raps), three raps seats the
Lodge.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Do you remember having heard

these raps before, and if so, how and when are they used ?”

Candidate answers and they are again explained to him by
Chancellor Commander.”

The knocks at the inner door to gain admission to the Lodge
when open in the first rank : The brother wishing to gain ad-
mission gives (1) rap ; Inner Guard (1) rap; brother (2) raps:
Inner Guard (2) ; brother (3) ; Inner Guard (3). Inner Guard then
opens the wicket and the brother whispers his name and the word
Friend to the Inner Guard who closes the wicket and reports his
name to the Chancellor Commander who directs that he be ad-
mitted. In case it is a visitor from some other Lodge he will
give his own name, the name and number of his Lodge and the
password Friend.

Chancellor Commander. — “You have now received all the in-
struction that can be given you in this, the First, or Initiatory
Rank of Page. It will be necessary for you to become profi-
cient in all the secret work, so that you can make yourself
known to members as having received the First, or Initiatory
Rank of Page of this order.


29


“In conclusion, I nave a few words to say touching the motto
of this degree : Friendship has for ages been looked upon as the
corner stone of every secret society. For the purpose of practi-
cally testing the great principle of fellowship, numerous orders
have been established over the entire globe. Our honored pat-
ron, the valiant knight from whom our order takes its name, gave
a most heroic example of pure Friendship, that the whole world
might follow. Confined, at his own request, in a loathsome dun-
geon, a hostage for Damon, that his friend might see his wife and
child ere death snatched him from them forever ; the cruel ty-
rant that had condemned the friend of Pythias to the block, gave
him but six short hours to live. Damon’s wife and child were
leagues away. Mounted on a swift steed, he flew to them ; and
when he had given them the last fond embrace, he starts to return,
and finds that his slave, to save his life, had slain his steed. The
hour approaches, the dread moment has arrived, and Pythias is
brought to the scaffold to suffer for his friend. Does he falter
there? No! Does he murmur? No! but with his face all ra-
diant with smiles, exclaims : ‘ ’Tis sweet to die for those we love.’
At the last moment Damon arrives, and Pythias is saved. The
would-be sacrifice was prevented by an all-wise Providence Let
the teachings of that day remain fresh in the memory of all. The
virtue, Friendship, should be emulated by us. We, as a society,
are sworn to exercise it in our midst. Let us not forget its teach-
ings, but rather keep the motto ever in view, that when we are
called upon to enter the dark valley of the shadow of death, we
can pass from this earthly sphere with malice towards none, and
at peace with the whole world.”

Chancellor Commander (addressing Master at Arms) — “Master
at Arms, you will now face Page John Brown to the Lodge, and
clothe him in the proper regalia of the First, or Initiatory Rank
of a Page of this Order.”

Master at Arms faces candidate towards Vice Chancellor’s
station, and invests him with the proper regalia.

Chancellor Commander (two raps). — “Officers and Brethren of
the First, or Initiatory Rank of Page of this Chivalric Order,
permit me to introduce to you Page John Brown, who has been
regularly initiated, according to the established formulas and
ceremonies, as a Page of this Order.”

After the public introduction, the Chancellor Commander
gives one rap and says : — “The Lodge will be at ease until the
sound of the gavel at the Chancellor Commander’s station.”


REMARKS ON FIRST RANK.

» “Man-like it is to fall into sin,

Fiend-like it is to dwell therein.”

With charity we suppose that the great multitude of the Knights
of Pythias are neither wilfully ignorant nor willing to remain
guilty. *

Will these members of the order, as well as others who read
this revelation, carefully compare it with the “Book of Law, the
Holy Bible,” and if the two are antagonistic, withhold their
sympathy and financial and moral support from the order of the
Knights of Pythias, as an institution containing germs whose
development will prove fatal to the privileges which they most
highly prize. *

The Knights have one excellent principle, if they mean what
they say, viz: the adoption oftheHoly Bible as their book oflaw.

Compare the practices of this order with the precepts of the
Bible. “To the law and to the testimony ; if they speak not
according to this word it is because there is no light in them.”
Isaiah 8: 20.

“If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness.” Luke 6: 23.

The lodge members in preparing to receive a candidate for
initiation in the first rank array themselves in Masks and Black
Robes. The Book of Law says, “provide things honest in
the sight of all men.” Romans 12: 17.

Is not such a preparation contrary to the “simplicity and
godly sincerity” in which Paul rejoiced? 2 Cor. 1 : 12, and from
which he feared Christians would be led away by Satan ? “But I
fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtil ty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
that is in Christ.” See. 2 Cor. 11 : 3.

These remarks apply with equal force to the manner in which
the candidate is iniroduced.

His blindfolded eyes ; his white robe ; the raps at the lodge room
door; the questions and answers following; the slow and solemn
parade about the lodge room, all show that it is contrary to the
honest yea, yea and nay, nay inculcated by God’s word.

But the most fundamental and fatal feature of the order, stamp-
ing it an enemy of mankind, by ignoring Christ, may be
found in embryo in this question asked in the early part of the
initiation. “Do you believe in the existence of a Supreme Being ?”

“He that honoureth not the Son, honoureth not the Father
which hath sent Him.” John 5 : 23.

Thus early in their ritual the Knights favorably recognize a
man-devised Deism, and ignore Christ who is “the power of God
and the wisdom of God.” 1 Cor. 1 : 24.

This order lias a form of godliness but denies the power thereof,
(see also prayers on opening and closing the lodge.) The Book
of Law commands: — “ From such turn away.” 2 Tim 3: 5.

The friendship inculcated by this order will be noticed at the
close of the second rank.

The obligations of the three ranks partake of one spirit and
will be noticed at the close of the amplified third rank.


31


FORM OF PASSING FROM RANK OF PAGE TO THAT OF ESQUIRE.

The Lodge being at ease, the Chancellor Commander assumes
his chair and gives one rap. Immediate observance must be
given it. The officers repair to their chairs and members to
their seats.

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “Brother Master at Arms.”

Master at Arms (rising promptly). — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Are you satisfied, from your pre-
vious examinations, that all present are qualified to remain in
this Lodge of the First, or Initiatory Rank of Page ?”

The Master at Arms, it is supposed, will always bear in mind
the fact that members admitted between the first and second sec-
tions of the work have not been examined by him.”

Master at Arms (looking around.) — “I am so satisfied Chan-
cellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Are you satisfied that all present
are qualified to remain in the Second, or Armorial Rank of Es-
quire ?”

Master at Arms. — “I am” (or am not — as the case may be,) “so
satisfied.”

Should the Master at Arms respond in the affirmative, the
Chancellor Commander gives the rap, calling the Inner Guard
up, and passes fully to the Second Rank.

Should the Master at Arms answer in the negative, he will
prove those in doubt, if there are any besides the candidate or
candidates just initiated, and says :

Master at Arms.— “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander.— 4 ‘Brother Master at Arms.”

Master at Arms.— “I find all qualified except the Page (or
Pages) just initiated, or awaiting to be proved in the Rank of
Esquire.”

Chancellor Commander.— “Brother Master at Arms, you will
invite those not qualified to remain in the Second or Armorial
Rank of Esquire to approach the altar, salute the Chancellor
Commander and retire.”


32


While they are at the altar, and having made the sign, any an-
nouncement required will be made to them, when escorted by
the Master at Arms to the inner door, they retire from the lodge
room and the Master at Arms repairs to his station.

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “Brother Inner Guard.”

Inner Guard (rising promptly). — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “It is my order that Lodge, No.

, Knights of Pythias, of the Grand Jurisdiction of , be

now closed in the First, or Initiatory Rank of Page, and opened
in that of the Second, or Armorial Rank of Esquire. This order
yon will communicate to the Brother Outer Guard, and bid him
act in conformity therewith.”

Inner Guard (goes out and says). — “Brother Outer Guard it is
the order of the Chancellor Commander that this Lodge be closed
in the First, or Initiatory Rank of Page, and opened in that of
the Second, or Armorial Rank of Esquire ; you will perform
your duties in conformity therewith.”

Outer Guard. — “The commands of the Chancellor Commander
shall be obeyed.”

Inner Guard (returning). — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brother Inner Guard.”

Inner Guard. — “The Outer Guard has received your commands
and will obey them.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Therefore the officers and members
will give strict attention that the Lodge is now open in the Sec-
ond, or Armorial Rank of Esquire.”

Chancellor Commander (two raps, all rise). — “Advance your
shields by placing your left hand on the left breast.”

All give that sign and while under it the Chancellor Com-
mander says: “I am also satisfied in my triangle; Brother Vice
Chancellor, are you satisfied in yours ?”

Vice Chancellor. — “I am, Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Recover !”

All drop the sign and assume a standing position, arms down.”

Chancellor Commander. — “All is well. Brother Master at
Arms you will arrange the Book of Law and Swords of Defence.”
(See page 15.)

After which Chancellor Commander gives three raps. (All
seated.)


INITIATION.


33


SECOND, OR ARMORIAL RANK OF ESQUIRE.
PREPARATION.

The Page or Pages are taken to the
ante-room in ordinary dress, and each
one given a shield, which he is required
to put on his left forearm, and from
thence to the door of the Lodge, on the
outside of which is suspended a shield,
on which theMaster at Arms gives one
rap.”

Inner Guard (through the wicket). — “Who comes here! Who
strikes upon the shield of this Lodge of the Second, or Armorial
Rank of Esquire, in this Chivalric Order ?”

Master at Arms.— “Page John Brown, who is desirous, if the
officers and members will permit, of being further advanced in
knowledge in this Chivalric Order, by being proved in the Sec-
ond, or Armorial Rank of Esquire.”

Inner Guard (closes wicket). — “Chancellor Commander, the
Master at Arms presents Page John Brown, who asks- that he
may be further advanced by being proved in the Second, or Ar-
morial Rank of Esquire in this Chivalric Order.”

Inner Guard opens the door a few inches, that the candidate
may hear the following dialogue:

Chancellor Commander. — “If there are no objections, he will
be admitted.”

Vice Chancellor (promptly, in a loud tone). — “Chancellor
Commander, before the Page is admitted, I would like to in-
quire of the Keeper of Records and Seal, if he has served a prop-
er time in that rank, and is qualified to bear arms in this, the
Second, or Armorial Rank of Esquire, in this Chivalric Order?”

Keeper of Records and Seal. — “He has.”

Prelate (promptly, in a loud tone). — “Chancellor Commander,
has the Page shown by his strict fidelity to the Order that he is
entitled to this, the Second, or Armorial Rank of Esquire, in this
Chivalric Order?”

Chancellor Commander. — “To the best of my knowledge and
belief, he has.”

Master of Exchequer (promptly, in a loud tone.) — “Chancellor
Commander, is the Page’s reputation among the members of this


34


Chivalric Order and his fellow men, such as should commend
him to the Lodge as a proper person to receive the Second, or
Armorial Rank of Esquire?”

Chancellor Commander. — “He has conformed to the law of the
First, or Initiatory Rank of Page, and I see no reason why he
should not be admitted to full fellowship with the Esquires of
this Chivalric Order. No legal objection having been advanced
it is my order, as Chancellor Commander, that the Page be ad-
mitted under the usual formulas.”

Inner Guard (opens door). — “Master at Arms, there being no
legal objection advanced, the Chancellor Commander orders that
the Page be admitted.”

Master at Arms enters with the candidate, conducts him twice
around the room, and halts before the chair of the Vice Chan-
cellor.

Master at Arms. — “Vice Chancellor, I have the pleasure of
presenting to you Page John Brown, who has received that rank
in this Lodge, and having served a proper time as such, is de-
sirous of being further advanced in the mysteries of this Chival-
ric Order, by being proved in the Second, or Armorial Rank of
Esquire,” —

Vice Chancellor. — “Page John Brown it is with unfeigned
pleasure that I greet you as an aspirant for the honors of the Es-
quire’s Rank, heartily congratulating you on the progress you
have made, and of being thought worthy to be entitled thereto.
It becomes my duty before proceeding further, to interrogate
you as to whether you are willing to take upon yourself a bind-
ing obligation to keep forever secret the mysteries of the Second,
or Armorial Rank in this Chivalric Order?”

Candidate answers.

Vice Chancellor. — “Master at Arms, you will conduct the Page
to our Prelate, who will administer the obligation of the Second,
or Armorial Rank of Esquire in the Order of Knights of Pyth-
ias.”

The Master at Arms presents candidate before the Prelate at
the altar, opposite to and facing him.

Master at Arms. — “Prelate, by direction of our Vice Chancel-
lor, I present you Page John Brown, who is desirous of being


35


further advanced in the mysteries of this Chivalric Order, for the
purpose of taking upon himself the obligation of the Second, or
Armorial Rank of Esquire.”

Prelate. — “Page John Brown, is this your desire?”

Candidate answers.

The Prelate rising from his chair goes to the altar, which is
turned so as to bring the sword handles towards the Prelate’s sta-
tion and points toward the candidate, and says: “You will ad-
vance your shield by placing your left hand on the left breast,
over your heart ; the left foot thrown forward, raise your right
hand perpendicularly, with the hand clinched, as if in the act of
striking a downward blow ; in which position you will repeat
after me :

Chancellor Commander, (two raps).

OBLIGATION, SECOND OB ABMOBIAL BANK OF ESQUIBE.

“I, John Brown, in the presence of the true and tried Esquires
here assembled, covered by my shield, and of my own free will
and accord, do pledge my word and most sacred honor, that un-
der any and every circumstance or position in which I may be
placed, I will keep inviolate all the signs, passwords, grips or
tokens of this the Esquire Rank of the Knights of Pythias, ex-
cept it be when given in instruction in course of duty as, or to a
properly authorized officer of a regular Lodge of this rank, or
deputized authority as an examining committee to demand the
same.

“And I specially promise that I will not write or indite upon
anything movable or immovable, any of the private work of the
Rank of Esquire, by which the secrets may become known, or
suffer it to be done by another, if in my power to prevent ; and
that I will at all times and under all circumstances, aid and as-
sist an Esquire in distress ; that I will warn, counsel or shield
him from any danger which I may know to threaten him or any
member of his family. All this I promise and declare without
mental reservation. So help me God, and keep me steadfast in
this my second obligation of the Knights of Pythias.”

Prelate. — “In token of your sincerity, you will now kiss the
book that is open before you, which is our Book of Law, and is
the Holy Bible.”

Chancellor Commander (three raps).

Prelate. — “Esquire you have now taken upon yourself the sol-


86


emn and binding obligation of the Second, or Armorial Rank of
Esquire. It now remains for you to regulate your acts that those
of this rank may say of you: “He is indeed truly an Esquire,”
remembering always that your Shield ot Honor must be kept so
bright in its purity of polish, that he who would say aught
against its purity of purpose and act, would he rendered blind by
its bright surface reflecting the dazzling sheen of your injured
honor.”

“Asking your special attention to the arrangement of the altar,
Book of Law and Swords of Defence, which you will find highly
important hereafter,” (explains them) ; “the Master at Arms will
now conduct you to the Chancellor Commander, who will in-
struct you in the signs, countersigns, grip and password, of this
the Second, or Armorial Rank of Esquire in this Cliivalric Or-
der.”

Master at Arms presents candidate before the Chancellor Com-
mander.”

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, by direction of the
Prelate, I present you Esquire John Brown, for instruction in
the secret work of this the Second, Armorial or Esquire’s Rank
in this Cliivalric Order, he having taken the obligation in regular
form, under his shield, and is thereby entitled to receive the
same.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Esquire, it now remains for me to
instruct you, that you will be able to make yourself known to
members as having attained the Second, or Armorial Rank of
Esquire in this Cliivalric Order, and also to prepare you, as of
that rank, to take a seat in our midst.”

“The numerical order of this Rank is that of the Second, or
Armorial, wherein, as in olden times, you were permitted, for
the first time, to carry a shield ; the title of its members is Es-
quire, the motto is Caution, the color of the regalia or insignia, is
yellow; the password is Watch; (pulls his watch from his pocket
just before uttering the words) ; the sign of caution or courtesy,
given on entering or retiring from the Lodge, when open in the
Rank of Esquire, is;


37


SIGN OF CAUTION OR COURTESY, RANK OF
ESQUIRE.

Place the right elbow in left hand and gently
clinch the chin with the right hand. [See cut.]
Countersign in Answer : Same, or a wave
of the hand by the Chancellor Commander.

The Alarm : One rap.


shield sign.

Raise right hand perpendicularly, with the
hand clinched as if in the act of striking a down-
ward blow, left hand over heart. Same position
as when takingtheobligation of this rank. [See
cut]


GRIP, RANK OF ESQUIRE.

Grasp left hands in ordinary w T ay. No shake.


Chancellor Commander. — “Master at Arms, you will now re
tire with the Esquire to the ante-room, clothe him in the pioper
legalia of the Second or Armorial Rank of Esquire, in this
Chivalric Order, and permit him to w r ork his way into the Lodge
without his shield.”

Master at Arms and Esquire retire. Upon re-entering, after
the candidate has given the sign, while at the Altar, the Chan-
cellor Commander addresses him as follows •


88


Chancellor Commander. — “Esquire John Brown, before taking
your seat, you will please come this way.”

Candidate comes in front of station of Chancellor Commander.

Chancellor Commander. — “We have a Keeper of Records and
Seal that is methodical in all his official business ; he has given
me a blank for you to fill out that he may know your hand-writ-
ing and the manner of spelling your name, the name and number
of the street where you reside, etc.” (hands him .the blank.)

BLANK FOR CANDIDATE TO FILL OUT.

Name

Residence

Occupation

Motto

Password

Near the Chancellor Commander’s station is a small writing
desk so arranged that by touching a secret spring the top ot the
desk falls in and a bell is rung or a pistol fired and the word
Caution in large letters appears.

When the candidate is handed the blank to fill out the desk is
occupied by three of the brethren ; one at each end and usually
an officer in the center, whom we will suppose to be the Master
of Exchequer. The Chancellor Commander calls out: “Brother
Master of Exchequer you will please move from the desk, that
the candidate may fill out the blank. (Master of Exchequer fails
to hear, seems absorbed in his work.)

Chancellor Commander (louder.) — “Brother Master of Exche-
quer will you vacate that desk that the candidate may occupy it
a moment V” (Still no attention is paid to the order.)

Chancellor Commander (still louder). — “Brother Master of Ex-
chequer will you get up from that desk and go to your own sta-
tion to do your writing?”

Master of Exchequer finally gathers up his writing materials
and vacates the desk to the candidate. The brethren at each end
keep up an earnest discussion on some subject and the Master at
Arms stands behind the candidate, all of which is well designed
to confuse him. When he begins to write the password the Mas-
ter at Arms gives his shoulders a sudden jerk and the report of
the pistol or ring of the bell with the tumbling of the desk and
candidate to the floor creates a general confusion.


39


In some lodges the desk and the chair on which the candidate
is seated tumble to pieces, and in a few lodges ; as the spring is
touched, two upright doors above the table suddenly open and a
large pale hand about two feet long comes down on the candi-
date’s hand.

Chancellor Commander (looking piously gra ve ). —“Brother
Master at Arms, what is the cause of this confusion?”

Master at Arms.— “The candidate has attempted to write the
password.”

The Chancellor Commander then delivers a short impromptu
address to the candidate, something similar to the following :

Chancellor Commander (to candidate). — “I am astonished that
a gentlemen of your general good appearance, and honest expres-
sion of countenance, having an established reputation for court-
eous conduct and unflinching integrity would come here and
take solemn obligations and especially promise that you would
not write or indite upon anything movable or immovable any of
the private work of the Rank of Esquire, should attempt to vio-
late your obligation even before the ceremony of conferring the
Second Rank upon you is concluded.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brother Master at Arms you will
divest the candidate of his regalia.”

A brother rising says. — “I move that the candidate be suspended
for 99 years.”

The motion is seconded and stated to the Lodge by the Chan-
cellor Commander, when after arguments pro and con the Chan-
cellor Commander gives the candidate an opportunity to rise and
explain, if he has any explanation to offer for the violation of his
obligation.

After a humble apology by the candidate the motion for his
suspension is withdrawn by the mover with consent of the sec-
ond.

Should the candidate remember his obligation and not write
the password he is complimented by the Chancellor Commander
and is frequently shown wliat would have happened had he vio-
lated his word.


40

ADDRESS TO CANDIDATE, BY CHANCELLOR COM-
MANDER,

“Esquire John Brown, I assure you that this has not been done
to trifle with your feelings, but to practically test the motto of
the Second, or Armorial Rank of Esquire in this order. Cauiion
has been defined as prudence, care, wariness and watchfulness ;
prudence not only in the lodges, but in your every day life ; care
in the proper transaction of your business ; wariness in your every
avocation, and a proper watchfulness of your family, that they
may be permitted to enjoy every earthly blessing that is in your
power to bestow upon them. The lesson that you have received
is one that is likely to make a lasting and durable impression on
your mind, and ever bring to your remembrance the solemn and
binding obligation you have taken upon yourself never to reveal
any of the secrets contained in this Rank of our Order. In the
primary portion of these ceremonies, another practical exempli-
fication of the teachings of this Rank was given you ; and it was
intended that all that was then said should reach your ears and
furnish food for thought. To that end the Master at Arms
brought you to the very threshhold of the Lodge, and the Inner
Guard left the door ajar, as you no doubt thought accidentally.
The Vice Chancellor questioned the Keeper of Records and Seal
as to whether you had served a proper time as Page, it being im-
peratively necessary, according to our rules, that the space of
(one week, or two weeks as may be fixed by the By-laws. Usually
one week) should elapse between the conferring of the diflerent
Grades of Rank in the Order. The Prelate questioned as to your
fidelity to the order, and the Master of Exchequer interrogated
as to your personal character, as no one whose reputation does
not stand clear with the outer world can be received in friend-
ship here. Therefore you perceive that Caution was used to its
fullest extent before you were admitted to the Lodge. I feel sat
isfied from the teachings that have been inculcated here, that you
will prove yourself prudent and w r atchful, exhibiting the proper
forethought in all your dealings, that is essential to your position
in the world and proper station in this Order.

“Master at Arms, you will now face Esquire John Brown to
the Lodge, (and it not having remembered his obligation, and
therefore been divested of his regalia, the Chancellor Commander


41

will continue) and clothe him in the proper regalia of the Second
or Armorial Rank of an Esquire of this Order.”

Master at Arms faces the candidate toward the Vice Chancel-
lor’s station, and invests him with the proper regalia.

Chancellor Commander (two raps). — “Officers and members of
the Second, or Armorial Rank of this Chivalric Order, permit me
to introduce to you Esquire John Brown, who has been regularly
proved, according to the established formulas and ceremonies, as
an Esquire of this Order.”

After the public introduction the Chancellor Commander gives
one rap and says :

“The Lodge will be at ease until the sound of the gavel at the
Chancellor Commander's station.”


REMARKS ON SECOND RANK.

Towards the close of the first rank the Chancellor Comman-
der remarks : Friendship has for ages been looKed upon as the
Corner Stone of every Secret Society.

The editor of the Peoria Transcript, a shrewd business man,
said of Masonry: “It is 'organized selfishness.” Such we believe
to be the opinion of this 02 der, not only of honest persons outside
of the Knights of Pythias but also of its own members.

What a narrow friendship is that which restricts its professed
benefits to a favored few !

Not only are all women excluded from the order but at the
session of the “Supreme Lodge of the World” at Richm nd, Ya.,
commencing March Utli, 1869 the application for a charter by a
body of colored citizens of Philadelphia, “praying that they
might be permitted to have and enjoy the great privileges and
benefits of the Knights of Pythias,” was refused.”

“Thou shalt love tliy neighbor as tl^self.” Matt 22 ; 39 ; is the
rule of the Holy Scriptures. Christ gave His best and greatest
blessings to “whosoever” would receive them. Like His heart all
hearts should burn with a tender friendship for every member of
the human family, and as we “have opportunity” we should, like
the good Samaritan, help the needy wherever found.

Knights of Pythias offer their friendship to a select few. It is
a spurious imitation a of true friendship more fatal to the best
interests of mankind than counterfeit money is to the interests of
honorable commercial transactions.

The signs and grips which a candidate receives at the close of
his obligation (and which he must conceal even from those nearest
and dearest to him, if not members of the order) are put by the
Bible into very bad company.

“A naughty person, a wicked man walketh with a froward mouth.

He winketh with his eyes, he speak eth with his feet, he teacheth
with his fingers.


42


Frowardness is in his heart, he deviseth mischief continually;
he soweth discord.” Prov. 6: 12-14.

Life is too short, too solemn to be spent in counterfeiting any-
thing valuable. Let us turn to Christ and with the grace which
he gives to those who ask, exemplify by our own lives, and
strengthen in every human being that we can influence, Christian
or Bible friendship.

“ Caution ” is unquestionably needful and wise and were it properly
exercised the Knights of Pythias and other secret orders would
find a far smaller number who would submit to their wretched
mummeries and tricks.

But who can Axil to see that not a wise caution but suspicion
and distrust is really what is taught by the low mean trick of a
systematic effort of a body of men to confuse another, and having
succeeded in doing so to jerk him from his chair to the floor,
blow the desk at which he is seated in pieces and then reproach
him with violating his obligation and vote to suspend him per-
petually from membership. Could they possibly take a better
method to convince the initiate that tlieir pretended friendship is
a sham and he must be on a sharp lookout for other tricks ?

FORM OF PASSING FROM RANK OF ESQUIRE TO THAT OF KNIGHT*

The Lodge being at ease the Chancellor Commander resumes
his chair and gives one rap. The officers repair at once to their
chairs and members to their seats.

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “Brother Master at Arms.”

Master at Arms (rising). — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — ‘Are you satisfied, from your previ-
ous examinations, that all present are qualified to remain in this
Lodge of the Second, or Armorial Rank of Enquire?”

(The Master at Arms, it is supposed, will always bear in mind
the fact that members admitted between the first and second sec-
tions of the work have not been examined by him.)

Master at Arms (looking around). — “I am so satisfied, Chan-
cellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Are you satisfied that all present
are qualified!*) remain in the Third, or Chivalric Rank of Knight ?”

Master at Arms. — “I am (or am not — as the case may be) so
satisfied.”

Should the Master at Arms respond in the affirmative, the Chan-
cellor Commander gives one rap, calling the Inner Guard up,
and passes fully to the Third Rank.

Should the Master at Arms answer in the negative, he will
prove those in doubt, if there are any besides the candidate or
candidates just proved.

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brother Master at Arms.”


43


Master at Arms. — “I find all qualified, except the Esquire (or
Esquires) just proved or awaiting to be charged in the Rank of
Knight.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brother Master at Arms, you will
invite those not qualified to remain in the Third, or Chivalric
Rank of Knight, to approach the Altar, salute the Chancellor
Commander and retire.”

While they are at the Altar, and having made the sign, any an-
nouncement required will be made to them, when escorted by the
Master at Arms to the inner door, they retire from the lodge-
room and the Master at Arms repairs to his station.

Chancellor Commander (one rap). — “Brother Inner Guard.”

Inner Guard (rising.) — “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “It is my order that Lodge,

No. Knights of Pythias, of the Grand Jurisdiction of ,

be now closed in the Second, or Armorial Rank of Esquire and
opened in that of the Third, or Chivalric Rank of Knight. This
order you will communicate to the Brother Outer Guard and bid
him act in conformity therewith.”

Inner Guard (going into ante-room) — “Brother Outer Guard, it is
the order of the Chancellor Commander that the Lodge be closed
in the Second, or Armorial Rank of Esquire and opened in that
of the Third, or Chivalric Rank of Knight; you will perform
your duties in conformity therewith.”

Outer Guard.— “The commands of the Chancellor Commander
shall be obeyed.”

Inner Guard (returns).— “Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander.— “Brother Inner Guard.”

Inner Guard.— “The Outer Guard has received your commands,
and will obey them.”

Chancellor Commander.— “Therefore the officers and members
will give strict attention that the Lodge is now open in the Third
or Chivalric Rank of Knight.”

Chancellor Com. (two raps, all rise). — “Advance your shields !


44


Advance Your Shields .

Advance your shields, left hand clinched
and held height of chin and afoot in front of
it, back of hand from you.


Chancellor Commander. — “Parry !”


PARKY SIGN.

Bring sword to a “Present ” and swung
point from right to left as if to parry or
ward off a blow. When sign is com-
pleted the right hand will he about a foot
from the body and the sword will point
about two feet in front of left foot.


Chancellor Commander (swords still held at “parry”). — I am
also satisfied in my triangle; Brother Vice Chancellor are you
satisfied in yours?”

Vice Chancellor. — “I am, Chancellor Commander.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Recover I” (All resume the ordina-
ry position, arms down.)

Chancellor Commander. — “All is well.” Brother Master at
Arms you will arrange the Book of Law and Swords of Defence..
(See page 15.)

This being done and the Master at Arms having returned to
his station, the Chancellor Commander gives three raps. (All
seated.)


45


INITIATION.

THIRD, OR CHIYALRIC RANK OF KNIGHT.

The Esquire is taken to the ante-room
where he is instructed by the Master at
Arms to say, in answer to any direct
interrogatory made of him, “By what
right does he make this demand ?” the
answer will be, “By that of being a
brave man,” or else get the candidate to
authorize him — the Master at Arms —
to do so for him, after which he is
blindfolded, the shield put on his left
forearm as in the preceding Rank ; he is then conducted to the
inner door, upon which there is no shield ; the Master at Arms
gives two raps, which are answered in the same manner from
within, and the wicket is opened.

Inner Guard. — “Who comes here? Who dares to interrupt
the proceedings of this Lodge while working in the Third, or
Chivalric Rank of Knight?”

Master at Arms. — “Esquire John Brown, who having received
the First, or Initiatory Rank of Page, been proved in the Second
or Armorial Rank of Esquire, and passing a fair ballot, now de-
clares himself a Brave man, and as such demands admittance to
this Lodge of the Third, or Chivalric Rank of Knight.”

Inner Guard (closes wicket.) — “Chancellor Commander, there
is without an Esquire who has received the First or Initiatory
Rank of Page, been proved in the Second or Armorial Rank of
Esquire, and now demands admittance to this Lodge of the Third
or Chivalric Rank of Knight.”

Chancellor Commander. — “By what right does he make this
dem and?”

Ik ner Guard. — “By reason of having been initiated, proved,
pass ing a fair ballot, and boasting himself a Brave man.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Such being his pledge and demand
and having attained the necessary preparatory Rank, it is mv
order as Chancellor Commander that you let him enter without
further challenge.”

The Master at Arms conducts the Esquire around the Castle
Hall once and halts before the chair of the Chancellor Com
mander.


40


Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, Esquire John
Brown, who has been duly initiated as a Page, and proved as an
Esquire, in this Chivalric Order, desires to receive the highest
Rank conferred by this Lodge, by being instructed in the myste-
ries and passing through the ordeal that all brave Knights have
done who have reached this summit of Pythian honors.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Esquire, is this your demand ?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Upon entering this Castle Hall as
a Retainer, seeking the First or Initiatory Rank of Page, a re-
quirement w r as exacted from and of you ; do you remember what
it was, and if so, will you state its nature ?’ ’

Candidate. — Obedience.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brethren of the Knight’s Rank, are
you satisfied that the Esquire remembers and fully appreciates
this requirement sufficient to advance him in our highest hon-
ors?”

(All.) — “We are.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Upon attaining the First or Initia-
tory Rank of Page in this order, you were taught one great les-
son. Do you remember what it was, and if so will you be kind
enough to state the same ?”

Candidate. — “Friendship.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brethren of the Knight’s Rank, has
the Esquire who demands advancement in our order merited as
well as received your Friendship.”

(All.)— “He has.”

Chancellor Commander, — “Upon reaching and being proved
in the Second or Armorial Rank of Esquire of this order, you
were taught another great lesson. Will you state w T hat it was ?”

Candidate. — “Caution.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brethren of the Knight’s Rank, has
the Esquire who stands before you as a candidate for the Third or
Chivalric Rank of Knight, proven himself, to the best of your
knowledge and belief, obedient, prudent, cautious and watchful ?”

(All.)— “He has.”

Chancellor Commander. — “This being so, Esquire, I can see no
just reason why you should not be permitted to proceed in this
Chivalric Order; but it is my duty to inform you that your cour-


47


age ami confidence may be put to a severe test during the cere
monies through which you are about to pass, but should such be
the will of those around you assembled, and if, as you declare in
your demand, you are a Brave man, and will implicitly obey all
the orders given you, and requirements exacted during its pro-
gress, no accident can possibly befall you. On the contrary, if
you are not a man of iron nerve, or if you have made this de-
mand from an unworthy motive, I tell you plainly and sincerely
that I cannot be answerable for any Injury you may receive. To
assure you, however, that this Lodge, its officers and members
fully appreciate your position, I will, as Chancellor Commander,
state that the ordeal you may have to undergo is one, not only
dangerous in character, but of a fearful nature. (Sometimes the
Chancellor Commander requests the Keeper of Records and Seal
to read or quote the by-law of the Lodge, promising $10 per week
to a brother in case of disability and $100 for funeral expenses in
case of death and generally exaggerates the amount of the prom-
ised benefit.) Should your vaunted bravery fail you at the
crowning point of its consummation , by it we as an order prove
and exemplify the fact as to whether you have been truthful in
your former protestations of Friendship, such as was exhibited
by Damon towards Pythias, or the Caution, though .unwise, as
shown by Lucullus in slaying his master’s horse to preserve his
.life.

“Heretofore you have answered readily and promptly the in-
terrogatories as made i n the former and preceding grades of rank,
but the answers now to be given are of too serious a nature to be
lightly made, and I would therefore ask your greatest considera-
tion before so doing ; but to give you a last opportunity to elect
for yourself, I will state that it is not too late, if you so desire, to
be escorted hence and permitted to retire, (pause). With the
official assurance from me that no accident can befall an obedient
and friendly person, who is not only cautious but a truly brave
man, aspiring to the high rank of Knight, I ask, as Chancellor
Commander, in the name of this Lodge, its officers and members
around you assembled, do you still persist in your demand?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Are you willing to take upon your
seif a solemn and binding obligation to keep forever secret the
mysteries of this Chivalric Rank of Knight r"


48


Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Master at Arms, yon will conduct
the Esquire to our Prelate, who will administer the obligation of
the Third and Chivalric Rank of Knighthood in this Order.”

Master at Arms presents candidate before the Prelate at the
Altar, opposite to and facing him.

Master at Arms.— “Prelate, by order of the Chancellor Com-
mander of this Lodge, I present Esquire John Brown, who hav*
ing been initiated as a Page and proved in the Second or Armo-
rial Rank of Esquire, now declares himself a Brave man, and as
such demands that he be obi igated in the Third or Chivalric Rank
of Knight in this Order.”

Prelate. — “Esquire John Brown, do you declare yourself a
Brave man, and make this demand of your own volition ?”

Candidate answers.

Prelate- — “Master at Arms, why is he thus blindfolded ?”

Master at Arms. — “That he might be conducted through this
Castle Hall without being able to discover any of the secrets or
ceremonies of the Knight Rank of our Order, should he fail to
insist in his demands before the Chancellor Commander.”

Prelate. — “Since the Esquire insists in his demands, you will
remove the hoodwink, (which being done, the Prelate continues,)
and place him in proper position, at the Altar, to take the obli-
gation, by advancing his shield in placing his left hand on his
left breast, over the heart, advancing his right foot, his right
hand resting on the Book of Law and grasping the hilt of the
Sword of Defence before him as if making a parry with the
sword, in which position he will assume the obligation.”

Master at Arms places candidate in proper position.

Chancellor Commander. — (Two raps.)

OBLIGATION BANK OF KNIGHT.

Prelate, rising, goes to the Altar and says :

“(You will now repeat after me.) I, (your name) do most sol-
emnly and sincerely promise and declare, under the penalties of
my former obligations, that I will never reveal, directly or in-
directly, any of the signs, tokens or mysteries of this Rank of
Bravery, or those of any other Rank of the Knights of Pythias,
to any person not properly authorized by this, or a Lodge work-
ing under the control of a regularly constituted Grand Lodge,
recognized by the Supreme Lodge Knights of Pythias of the


49


World, to receive the same ; except it be a just and lawful Knight,
whom I shall know to be legally entitled to receive the same, or
within the Castle Hall of a just and regularly constituted Lodge,
subordinate to the Supreme Lodge, Knights of Pythias of the
World.

“I further promise and declare, never to communicate, by word,
syllable, letter, sign or character, the semi-annual password to
any person, save and except the proper officers within a Lodge,
or in course of duty, acting in capacity of Chancellor Com-
mander, Grand Chancellor or his deputy, or Supreme Chancellor
or his deputy.

‘ ; I further promise to obey all orders that may be given me,
emanating from the Supreme, Grand, this or any other Lodge of
this Order of which I may become a member, or any competent
authority issuing the same, so long as they do not conflict with
my political or religious liberty. And if I ever, by word or
sign, expose the secret work or ceremonies of this Order, in an
unauthorized manner, or fail in any of my obligations, may I
suffer all the anguish and torments possible for man to suffer.
All this I promise and declare, without any mental reservation
whatever. So help me God, and keep me steadfast.”

“Prelate. — “Esquire John Brown, in testimony of your sincer-
ity, you will now kiss the Book that is open before you, which
is our Book of Law, the Holy Bible.” (Kisses the book.)

Chancellor Commander. — (Three raps.)

Prelate. — “Esquire, you have now taken the obligation that
ties you to us, and I hail you as an aspirant to the honors due to
a Knight of this Order. You must ever remember your obliga-
tion, and the purpose of your shield in the Second or Armorial
Bank of Esquire in this Order. You have seen how easily you
might have fallen into an error, but for the interposition of a
brother. Let the solemnity of that occurrence be ever present in
your mind and emblazoned upon your shield and memory, to
stimulate you to fulfill and keep inviolate every obligation taken
by you. The obligation to which you have just subscribed, im-
poses a condition to obey all orders which may be given you, so
long as they do not conflict with your civil or religious liberty.
You have also stated in this Lodge that you are • a man of cour-
age. That assertion remains yet to be proven ; and for the last


50


time inviting your attention to tlie arrangement of the Altar,
Book of Law and Swords of Defence, (See page 15 ;) I now
consign you to our Master at Arms, who will proceed with you
to the ante-room, properly equip and present you to the Chan-
cellor Commander, before whom your bravery may be put to a se-
vere test. Have confidence, should such be the case, and all will
be well.”

Master at Arms takes him out and equips him in the helmet,
shield, baldric, belt and sword with no blade to its handle, but is
firmly soldered to the scabbard. When thus equipped he knocks,

is admitted and taken before the Chancellor Commander.

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, under the instruc-
tions of the Prelate, I present Esquire John Brown who has ta-
ken the obligation of the Cliivalric Bank of Knight, in this Or-
der, and now demands his final instructions.”

Vice Chancellor. — “Chancellor Commander, before you pro-
ceed any further, I demand to know by what right he wears the
uniform, equipments and arms of a Knight without having gone
through an ordeal to test his claims to so hi 6 h a rank in this Chiv-
alric Order? I demand the ordeal!”

Chancellor Commander. — “I had hoped the Esquire’s conduct
had been such as to warrant the Lodge in waiving this fearful
ceremonial ; yet it is for the Lodge, in its sovereign capacity, to
say. Brethren what say you, is it ordeal, or no ordeal ?”

All. — “Ordeal, the ordeal !”

Chancellor Commander. — “The Lodge so decides. Master at
Arms, you will repair to the armory of this Castle Hall, and
bring forth the first implement of torture contained therein that
your hand may fall upon, and produce it here— remember that it
is my order that you select from all that are there in the dark.”

Master at Arms retires, and things are heard to bill down, mak-
ing noise, etc. ; in the meantime the Chancellor Crmmander in-
structs an assistant to relieve the candidate of helmet, shield, etc.,
and the Master at Arms returns with his selection and places it
before the candidate ; the Chancellor Commander exhibits the
“Property of tlie Third Bank,” an oak plank with about thirty-
six spikes set therein, and causes candidate to examine it closely,
after which it is placed in position. The ceremonies are varied,
the language extempore and is such as the Chancellor Commander


51


thinks will make a deep impression on the candidate. Though
the Chancellor Commander plainly intimates that there are a
number of implements of torture, there is in fact only an oak
plank about twenty inches square and two inches thick, filled
with spikes of iron or steel, five or six inches long, called the
“property ’’and another an exact imitation of the first in appearance,
in which the teeth are rubber. In some cases blood is sprinkled on
and between the spikes to make the effect the more terrifying to the
mind of the candidate. The “property” being in position the
Master at Arms conducts the candidate to a chair or the three
steps facing the “property” and directs him to take off his boots,
when the Chancellor Commander says: “Brother Master at
Arms you will conduct the candidate this way.”

He is conducted near the Chancellor Commander who then
addresses him in a short impromptu speech in which he pictures
the various tests and tortures suffered by others in past ages, thus
still further exciting his feelings, while at the same time divert-
ing his attention while the plank with rubber spikes in is put in
place of the other.

He is then escorted by the Master at Arms and executioners to
a chair two or three feet back of the “property” which is between
the chair and the Chancellor Commander. He step's into the
chair, faces the Chancellor Commander, and the Knights form in
two rows about six feet apart facing inward, each wearing a
mask and long black robe, the robes of the executioners extend-
ing over the head wfith small holes to see through. When thus
ready the Master at Arms says: “Chancellor Commander, the
candidate is in proper position.”

Chancellor Commander to candidate (moving forward and
bringing his sword to a “carry”).— “We are now going to test
your protestations of friendship and your fidelity to your obli-
gation. You have sworn you would obey all orders emenating
from the Supreme Chancellor, Grand Chancellor or the Chancel
lor Commander of this Lodge. I now as Chancellor Commander
of this Lodge order you to jump with both feet on those points.”

If he does not promptly obey the Knights all say: “He hesi-
tates, he hesitates,” etc.

If he does not obey the second order to jump they cry : “Cow
ard,” etc.


52


If ho does not obey the third order to jump the Chancellor
Commander orders the executioners to put him on the points
which they proceed to do, always bringing down both feet on
the mock cpikcs and sometimes laying him down on them.

Should there be twx> candidates, alter tlio tirst is tested ho may
be laid down with a wliito robe over him and red cloths at his
feet, and when tlio second candidate comes to tho test the first
lies groaning as if in great agony. [This groaning humbug is
not always practiced.] About one man in ten will jump under
the impression that the board with spikes will be jerked away
by some one.

[The above is extempore and other appropriate words may be
used .] .

When the foregoing or similar ceremonies are completed the
Master at Arms conducts the candidate to the Vice Chancellor.

Master at Arms. — “Vice Chancellor, 1 present Esquire John
Brown, who has passed the ordeal that all Knights of this order
must undergo, and having so done, now demands from you the
sign, countersign, password and grip of this the Third or Chiv-
alricRankof Knight, he being entitled thereto.”

Vice Chancellor. -“My brother, as a Brave man, I (if he did
not obey — cannot) g- eel }'ou. May the lesson you have received
to-niglit be -impressed indelibly upon your mind. We find
many obstructions laying in our path through life, which, to the
timid may seem dangerous and deadly ; but the truly courageous
man may brave them all and find them mere shadows. And
now, with the hope that you ill ever show yourself as hravc as
(or if not obeying— a braver man than) you have during the pro-
gress of this ceremonial, 1 will, with pleasure, instruct you in
the signs, countersigns, password and grip.

The sign of Bravery or Courtesy in tlio Rank of Knight is as


STGN OF BRAVERY OR COURTESY, THIRD RANK.

Form a triangle with forearms extending horizon-
tally from you, points of fingers and thumbs to-
gether and spread out; heel of hands about five
inches apart. (See cut.) This is called the visor
sign.


53


VISOR SIGN ON ENTERING I ODGE.

On entering to salute the Chancellor Com-
mander, raise visor so as to touch the breast with
the forefingers, the thumbs pointing downward
Hands are then separated and with a gentle wave
are brought to the side.


VISOR SIGN ON RETIRING FROM LODGE.

On retiring approach the Altar, face the
^7 Chancellor Commander and turn the visor

(hands) down, so that the thumbs point up
and the fingers down and then bring hands to
side with a gentle wave.


The Countersign, given by the Chancellor Commander is same
as sign or a wave of the hand. ThePasswoid, gmn at ne 1
door, is Confidence. The Alarm at the innei door is wo r
The Grip is given in this manner :


GRIP, THIRD RANK.

Take each other by the right hand as for
ordinary hand shake. When withdrawing
hands press each other’s forefinger with
thumb and forefinger, gently, the whole
length of finger, slightly crooking the ends
of the forefingers and hooking or pressing
them together at the points.


54


Vice Chancellor. — “Master at Arms, you will now conduct our
newly tried and instructed brother to the Chancellor Commander
for final examination, instruction and enrollment on the roster of
this Lodge, as having that Rank. (He does so.)

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, by direction of the
Vice Chancellor of this Lodge, I present to you Brother John
Brown, w T ho has been instructed in the sign, countersign, pass-
word and grip of the Third or Chivalric Rank of Knight, for
final examination, instruction and enrollment on the roster of
this Lodge as having that Rank.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brother John Brown, as an evidence
of the attention paid to the instruction already given you, you
will be kind enough to satisfy me that you are in possession of
the sign.

Candidate gives the Yisor Sign which he says is turned up upon
entering and down on retiring ; the Countersign, same or a wave of
the hand; the Password, Confidence; the Alarm, two raps; the
Grip, shake hands in ordinary manner, then press each other’s
forefinger, whole length of finger, gently, hooking the forefingers
slightly as the hands are withdrawn.

Chancellor Commander. — “You being correct so far in the
work of this Chivalric Rank, I will now instruct you in the fol-
lowing. The Sign of Recognition or Challenge Sign is :

SIGN OF RECOGNITION OR CHALLENGE SIGN, THIRD
RANK.

Place left hand over the heart ; right hand open,
palm down and about the height of the hips, indi-
cating the position your hands were in when you
took the obligation.

The answer is the same, indicating the same, it
being simply the position your hands were in when
assuming the obligation of the First, or Initiatory
Rank of Page.


55


The Voting Sign is:

VOTING SIGN.

Clench the left hand and raise it about
as high as the eyes.

The Semi-Annual Password, as its name
indicates, and which is given at the outer
door, (the Rank Passwords are not,) is* —


The Parry Sign is :

PARRY SIGN.

Bring sword to a t; Present ” and swing
point from right to left as if to parry or
ward off a blow. When sign is com-
pleted the right hand will be about a foot
from the body and the sword will point
about two feet in front of left foot.


The Grand Honors are given thus :

GRAND HONORS.

Place the left hand on the heart and
sword at a “ present.”

SUPREME HONORS.

Given like Grand Honors except that
left forearm is held horizontal, extending
directly forward, elbow at side, with hand
open and palm up.


*The Semi-Annual Pass Word for the last half of 1878 July t<3>Jan.) was
“Be United .”


56


Chancellor Commander. — “I will here state to you that no
signs, passwords, or other instruction given you in this Order-
will be of any avail or assistance to you, when in anywise trans-
gressing the laws of the country or reputable rules of society;
neither are they binding upon you when given, made or sent to
you by any other member of the Order guilty of these offences;
this you will invariably bear in mind.

“Your close attention is always asked to the manner in which
the Altar is arranged when you enter the Lodge, and to which
your notice has been called before, as by it you will always give
the correct sign of the rank in which it may be working, and
thereby prevent disclosing that to others which they may not be
legally entitled to, therefore, I will now explain them to you.
In the First, or Initiatory Rank of Page, it is with the Book
open, two swords crossed underneath, and handles towards the
Chancellor Commander ; in the Second, or Armorial Rank of
Esquire, the same, except that the swords are on top of the Book
of Law, while in the Third, or Chivalric Rank of Knight there
is but one sword to be seen, which lies on top of the Book, diag-
onally across it, and with the handle toward the Vice Chancel-
lor’s station. These you will please charge your memory with,
and thereby prevent mistakes occurring.

“Brother Brown, you have now passed through the Third, or
Chivalric Rank of Knight, and the highest that can be given you
in this Lodge. The motto thereof is Bravery, you have been
severely tested, and passed the ordeal unscathed, exemplifying
in part your confidence in and willingness to adhere to all lawful
mandates. Bravery is defined as courage, heroism, undaunted
spirit, intrepidity and gallantry, though there are other meanings
to the term. There is a moral as well as a physical courage ; the
lesson inculcated in this instance embraces them both. You are
expected to be brave and courageous in upholding the rights of a
brother, maintaining the dignity of the Order, or its tenets of
Friendship, .Charity and Benevolence, and though the uninitiated
and skeptical person should deride, condemn or mock, ever stand
ready to defend it and them from slur or sarcasm ; not that they
would in any manner take from it or its teachings the honor due,
but let the world know that any shaft aimed thereat is as though
received by yourself. Aiding thus in upholding our rights, us-
ages and customs as a chivalric order, you strengthen and sus-
tain our glorious principles, and more closely unite yourself with


57


those who are linked together in the holy ties of brotherly love.
Courage enables you to encounter difficulties and dangers with
firmness and without fear of depression of spirits ; it is also a
constituent part of fortitude, which implies patience to bear con-
tinued suffering. Constitutional courage often forsakes its pos-
sessor in the hour of danger, but courage which arises from a
sense of duty, like that of the noble Pythias when addressing the
tyrant Dionysius:

“As thou’rt a husband and father, hear me —

Let Damon go and see his wife and child
Before he dies — for four hours respite him —

Put me in chains ; plunge me into his dungeon
As pledge for his return ; do this — but this —

And may the gods themselves build up thy greatness
As high as their own heaven.”

“Courage like this, when coupled with friendship, acts uni-
formly. Brother Knight John Brown, I have no fear but that
you will prove yourself in like manner Friendty, Cautious and
Brave — ever ready to extend the strong hand of fellowship to*
ward your brethren, and to stand by the courageous.

(Sometimes the Candidate is here catechised in reference to the
Signs, Countersign, Pass Word, alarm on entering, the Grip etc.
of the degree. See page 54.)

Chancellor Commander. — “Keeper of Records and Seal, you
will now present the Roster of this Lodge to Brother Knight J ohn
Brown for enrollment.”

Keeper of Records and Seal presents the book, w T ith Constitu-
tion and By-Laws in it, kept for that purpose ; the Knight signs
his name, and enters his residence or address.

Chancellor Commander. — “Master at Arms, you will now face
the newly charged Bi other Knight to the Lodge, and clothe him
in the proper regalia or insignia of the Third, or Chivalric and
Honorable RanK of Knight.”

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander your orders have
been obeyed.”

Chancellor Commander (two raps). — “Officers, members and

visitors of Lodge, Ko. — , Knights of Pythias, permit me to

introduce to you Brother Knight John Brown, who has been reg-
ularly initiated in the First, Initiatory or Page’s, proved in the
Second, Armorial or Esquire’s, and fully charged in the Third ?
Chivalric or Knight’s Rank of this Order, in the usual ritualistic


/


58


and ceremonial form, [examined in accordance with the law —
should such be the case. This examination referred to is fre-
quently and in some Lodges usually omitted], and enrolled as a

member of Lodge, No. — , Knights of Pythias. Brethren,

join with me in extending a hearty, sincere and chivalric wel-
come to our Brother Knight.” (One rap.)

All gather around and shake hands.

Chancellor Commander. — ‘‘Lodge will be at ease until
the sound of the gavel at the Chancellor Commander’s station.


REMARKS ON THIRD RANK.

Of the injurious effects produced by the grand titles used by
the order of Knights, we gire the result of the opinion of the
citizens of the United States as expressed in their National
Constitution. Sec. 9 : paragraph 7.

“No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States ; and
no person holding any office of profit or trust under them, shall
without the consent of Congress, accept of any present, emolu-
ment, office or title of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince
or foreign State.”

The offensive boasting of Bravery taught in the third degree
must be repugnant to every truly brave and well balanced mind.

“Though I were perfect yet would I not know my Soul.” Job 9 ;21

“Where is boasting then? It is excluded.” Rom. 3 ; 27.

In the last days when perilous times come men shall be“boast-
ers”’ * * * See 2 Tim. 3: 1, 2.

The bravery test in the third degree, reminds us of a stoiy
illustrating the estimate placed on such unnecessary tests of cour-
age by a genuine Knight of the olden time.

He with his lady love were seated together witnessing a fight
of furious, hungry wild beasts in the arena below. The lady’s
glove fell into the arena. Said she, if you are loving and brave,
bring me my glove. His pride led him to show his courage by
entering the fearful arenaand recovering the glove amidst shouts of
applause from the crowds of shallow spectators ranged around.
But the generous impulses of his soul were so severely shocked
by the criminal wickedness and want of sensibility of a request
to jeopardize his life for the recovery of a glove that he was
constrained to show his scorn for such a spirit by throwing the
glove into the lady’s face and leaving her lor ever.

The deceit connected with the bravery test aggravates rather than
lessens the contemptible nature of the spike farce in the third
rank.

Can any candid, noble nature uphold an institution after becom-
ing aware that it systematically practices such chicanery?


59


INITIATION.

Amended, Perfected and Amplified Ancient and Chivalric Form

OF THE

THIRD RANK, KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS,

Note:— This Rank and the “regular” Third Rank are substantially one;
only differing in the mode of conferring. No man who has taken either
of them will receive the other third rank.

The Perfected and Amplified Rank is conferred in but a few wealthy
lodges, because of the great expense attending the purchase of the
apparatus for conferring it.

The Esquire is taken to the ante-room
when he is instructed by the Master at
Arms to say, in answer to any direct
interrogatory made of him, “By what
right does he make this demand ?” the
answer will he, “By that of being a
brave man,” or else get the candidate to
authorize him — the Master at Arms —
to do so for him, after which he is
blindfolded, the shield put on his left
fore-arm as in the preceding Rank ; he is then conducted to the
inner door, upon which there is no shield ; the Master at Arms
gives two raps, which are answered in the same manner from
within, and the wicket is opened.

Inner Guard. — “Who comes here? Who dares to interrupt
the proceedings of this Lodge while working in the Third, or
Chivalric Rank of Knight?’’

Master at Arms. — “Esquire John Browm, who having received
the First, or Initiatory Rank of Page, been proved in the Second
or Armorial Rank of Esquire, and passing a fair ballot, now de-
clares himself a Brave man, and as such demands admittance to
this Lodge of the Third, or Chivalric Rank of Knight.”

Inner Guard (closes wicket.) — “Chancellor Commander, there
is without an Esquire who has received the First or Initiatory
Rank of Page, been proved in the Second or Armorial Rank of
Esquire, and now demands admittance to this Lodge of the Third
or Chivalric Rank of Knight.”

Chancellor Commander. — “By what right does he make this
demand ?”

Inner Guard. — “By reason of having been initiated, proved,
passing a fair ballot, and boasting himself a Brave man.”


60


Chancellor Commander. — “Such being his pledge and demand
and having attained the necessary preparatory Rank, it is my
order as Chancellor Commander that you let him enter without
further ch alien ge.”

The Master at Arms conducts the Esquire around the Castle
Hall once and halts before the chair of the Chancellor Com
mander.

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, Esquire John
Brown, who has been duly initiated as a Page, and proved as an
Esquire, in this Chivalric Order, desires to receive the highest
Rank conferred by this Lodge, by being instructed in the myste-
ries and passing through the ordeal that all brave Knights have
done who have reached this summit of Pythian honors.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Esquire, is this your demand ?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Upon entering this Castle Hall as
a Retainer, seeking the First or Initiatory Rank of Page, a re-
quirement was exacted from and of you ; do you remember what
it was, and if so, will you state its nature?”

Candidate. — Obedience.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brethren of the Knight’s Rank, are
you satisfied that the Esquire remembers and fully appreciates
this requirement sufficient to advance him in our highest hon
ors?”

(All.) — “We are.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Upon attaining the First or Initia-
tory Rank of Page in this order, you were taught one great les-
son. Do you remember what it was, and if so will you be kind
enough to state the same ?”

Candidate. — “Friendship.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brethren of the Knight’s Rank, has
the Esquire who demands advancement in our order merited as
well as received your Friendship.”

(All.)— “He lias.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Upon reaching and being proved
in the Second or Armorial Rank of Esquire of this order, you
were taught another great lesson. Will you state what it was ?”

Candidate. — “Caution.”

Chancellor Commander.— “Brethren of the Knight’s Rank, hap


61


the Esquire who stands before you as a candidate for the Third or
Chivalric Rank of Knight, proven himself, to the best of your
knowledge and.belief, obedient, prudent, cautious and watchful ?”

(All.) — “He has. 1 ’

Chancellor Commander. — “This being so, Esquire, I can see no
just reason why you should not be permitted to proceed in this
Chivalric Order ; but it is my duty to inform you that your cour-
age and confidence may be put to a severe test during the cere-
monies through which you are about to pass, but should such be
the will of those around you assembled, and if, as you declare in
your demand, you are a Brave man, and will implicitly obey all
the orders given you, and requirements exacted during its pro-
gress, no accident can possibly befall you. On the contrary, if
you are not a man of iron nerve, or if you have made this de-
mand from an unworthy motive, I tell you plainly and sincerely
that I cannot be answerable for any Injury you may receive. To
assure you, however, that this Lodge, its officers and members
fully appreciate your position, I will, as Chancellor Commander,
state that the ordeal you may have to undergo is one, not only
dangerous in character, but of a fearful nature. Should your
vaunted bravery fail you at the crowning point of its
consummation, by it we as an order prove and exemplify the fact
as to whether you have been truthful in your former protestations
of Friendship, such as was exhibited by Damon towards Pythias,
or the Caution, though unwise, as shown by Lucullus in slaying
his master’s horse to preserve his life.

“Heretofore you have answered readily and promptly the in-
terrogatories as made in the former and preceding grades of rank
but the answers now to be given are of too serious a nature to be
lightly made, and I would therefore ask your greatest considera-
tion before so doing; but to give you a last opportunity to elect
for yourself, I will state that it is not too late, if you so desire, to
be escorted hence and permitted to retire, (pause). With the
official assurance from me that no accident can befallen obedient
and friendly person, who is not only cautious but a truly brave
man, aspiring to the high rank of Knight, I ask, as Chancellor
Commander, in the name of this Lodge, its officers and members
around you assembled, do you still persist in your demand ?”

Candidate answers.


62


Chancellor Commander. — “Are you willing to take upon your
self 3 , solemn and binding obligation to keep forever secret the
mysteries of this Chivalric Rank of Knight?”

Candidate answers.

Chancellor Commander. — “Master at Arms, you will conduct
the Esquire to our Prelate, who will administer the obligation of
the Third and Chivalric Rank of Knighthood in this Order.”

Master at Arms presents candidate before the Prelate at the
Altar, opposite to and facing him.

Master at Arms. — “Prelate, by order of the Chancellor Com_
mander of this Lodge, 1 present Esquire John Brown, who hav-
ing been initiated as a Page and proved in the Second or Armo-
rial Rank of Esquire, now declares himself a Brave man, and as
such demands that he be obligated in the Third or Chivalric Rank
of Knight in this Order.”

Prelate. — “Esquire John Brown, do you declare yourself a
Brave man, and make this demand of your own volition ?”

Candidate answers.

Prelate- — “Master at Arms, why is he thus blindfolded ?”

Master at Arms. — “That he might be conducted through this
Castle Hall without being able to discover any of the secrets or
ceremonies of the Knight Rank of our Order, should he fail to
insist in his demands before the Chancellor Commander.”

Prelate. — “Since the Esquire insists in his demands, you will
remove the hoodwink, (which being done, the Prelate continues,)
and place him in proper position, at the Altar, to take the obli-
gation, by advancing his shield in placing his left hand on his
left breast, over the heart, advancing his right foot, his right
hand resting on the Book of Law and grasping the hilt of the
Sword of Defence before him as if making a parry with the
sword, in which position he will assume the obligation.”

Master at Arms places candidate in proper position.

Chancellor Commander. — (Two raps.) Attention Knights.

Rise; form triangle and assist our Prelate in the administration
of the solemn obligation. (See diagram.)


63

ADMINISTERING OBLIGATION THIRD OR CIIIYALRIC RANK OF KNIGHT

Candidate stands at altar as described, the prelate standing opposite,
the Master at Arms behind and to the left of the candidate.

The Knights form a triangle with the Chancellor Commander at its apex,
the Vice Chancellor at the right corner and the Past Chancellor at the
left corner.


64


The triangle being formed, the Chancellor Commander will
order ;

Chancellor Commander. — Attention Knights ! Handle swords ;
draw swords ; carry arms.

(Prelate rising goes to and enters the head of the triangle, and
assumes his position at the Altar, the Candidate and Master at
Arms already having assumed theirs, when all being in their
proper position, the Past Chancellor, Chancellor Commander and
Vice Chancellor leave their stations and go to the corners at head
and base of the triangle, when the Chancellor Commander orders
“Rest!” and the Prelate proceeds.)

Obligation Amended, Perfected and Amplified Third
Rank.

“(You will now repeat after me.) I, (your narcm) do most sol-
emnly and sincerely promise and declare, under the penalties of
my former obligations, that I will never reveal, directly or in-
directly, any of the signs, tokens or mysteries of this Rank of
Bravery, or those of any other Rank of the Knights of Pythias,
to any person not properly authorized by this, or a Lodge work-
ing under the control of a regularly constituted Grand Lodge,
recognized by the Supreme Lodge Knights of Pythias of the
World, to receive the same ; except it be a just and lawful Knight,
whom I shall know to be legally entitled to receive the same, or
within the Castle Hall of a just and regularly constituted Lodge,
subordinate to the Supreme Lodge, Knights of Pythias of the
World.

“I further promise and declare, never to communicate, by word,
syllable, letter, sign or character, the semi-annual password to
any person, save and except the proper officers within a Lodge,
or in course of duty, acting in capacity of Chancellor Com-
mander, Grand Chancellor or his deputy, or Supreme Chancellor
or his doputy.

“I further promise to obey all orders that may be given me,
emanating from the Supreme, Grand, this or any other Lodge of |
this Order of which I may become a member, or any competent
authority issuing the same, so long as they do not conflict with
my political or religious liberty. And if I ever, by word or


65


sign, expose the secret work or ceremonies of this Order, in an
unauthorized manner, or fail in any of my obligations, may I
suffer all the anguish and torments possible for man to suffer.
All this I promise and declare, without any mental reservation
whatever. So help me God; and keep me steadfast.”

“Prelate. — “Esquire John Brown, in testimony of your sincer-
ity, you will now kiss the Book that is open before yon, which
is our Book of Law, the Holy Bible.” (Kisses the book.)

Prelate. — “Esquire, you have now taken the obligation that
ties you to us, and I hail you as an aspirant to the honors due to
a Knight of this Order. You must ever remember your obliga-
tion, and the purpose of your shield in the Second or Armorial
Rank of Esquire in this Order. You have seen how easily you
might have fallen into an error, but for the interposition of a
brother. Let the solemnity of that occurrence be ever present in
your mind and emblazoned upon your shield and memory, to
stimulate you to fulfill and keep inviolate every obligation taken
by you. The obligation to which you have just subscribed, im-
poses a condition to obey all orders which may be given you, so
long as they do not conflict with your civil or religious liberty.
You have also stated in this Lodge that you are a man of cour-
age. That assertion remains yet to be proven ; My friend have
confidence and all is well. Farewell ! (Prelate steps aside from
the Altar, face about to the Chancellor Commander and says :)

Prelate. — “Chancellor Commander, the Esquire has been obli-
gated and cautioned.

Chancellor Commander (from his position at the head of the
triangle.) — “Master at Arms, conduct hence this Esquire, equip
him as becomes his rank and give him courteous guidance to the
“Ten in Council,” who shall for us decide what test of bravery
the Esquire bears.

Attention, Knights! Break files at center base of triangle.
[The four files break to the rear — (see diagram) — candidate and
Master at Arms pass out — which being done, the Chancellor
Commander orders :] Close triangle ; return swords ; about face;
to posts march; be seated.


67

Master at Arms conducts candidate to ante-room, relieves him
of his shield, clothes him with the uniform Belt of the Order,
without sword or scabbard, and puts sandals on his feet. The
Council of Ten being in readiness, of which he is notified by a
single rap on the door by the “Warder of the Gate,” the Master
at Arms approaches and gives several loud raps in quick suc-
cession.


THE COUNCIL OF TEN

is composed of the following personages:

King, represented by the Prelate.

“Warder of the Gate,” represented by the Inner Guard.

“Nine Councillors,” known respectively as “First Councillor,”
“Second Councillor,” etc.

The Council is held in the Lodge-room, or some chamber spe-
cially prepared. If the former, the lower end should be occupied
by the Council, the King being seated in the Vice Chancellor’s
chair, facing the Councillors, who are seated in a semi-circle
about him. The King and Councillors should be clothed in full
uniform of the Order, or in suits of armor — all being either vis-
ored or masked.


DIA GRAM OF LODGE ROOM, ARRANGED FOR COUNCIL OF TEN.


69

The Knights and visitors are seated as usual around the room,
masked and in black robes or uniform of the order

Councillors in full armor or uniform, seated, with visors down
or masked.

CEREMONIES IN OPENINO COUNCIL OF TEN.

Enter King of Council, (announced by the Warder of the Gate,
“The King!”) Councillors all arise and remain standing, King
ascends the throne, raising his visor.

King. — “Brethren, with knightly courtesy I greet you. Are all
here ?

Warder of the Gate (saluting). — “They are, most knightly
King.”

King. — “Up visors, gentlemen, that you and I may know each
one the other.”

(All raise their visors, or unmask.)

King. — “I see here now the nine true Knights who, with my-
self, do constitute the “Ten,” from w r hose decision there is no
appeal ; whose edicts once sent forth are to the inmates of our
Castle Hall established law. Questions of deep import exercise
our mind, and in due time the matter shall be cognizant to all.
I now declare this Council formed, and on my honor as a Knight,
I pledge myself to secrecy, swearing the same by my extended
sword.”

King draws and extends his sword, and Knight Councillors
drawing, cross their swords thereon, (or if unarmed, extend and
lay their right hand thereon,) and say,

“And I,” “and I,” “and I,” etc.

King. — “Amen.”

(King withdraws his sword returns it to the scabbard, then
takes his seat.)

King. — “Be seated. Warder, make fast our gates. Knights,
in view of those who may the presence of this Council seek,
’twere well that each one drop the visor o’er his face.”

(Loud knocking at the inner door.)

King. — “What means this boisterous clamor at our gate ? One
of you away and bring us tidings of the cause.”

Warder of the Gate goes to the door, raises wicket, through
which he receives a parchment; closes wicket and going to Ihe
center of the Council circle and directly in front of the King,
reports;


70


Warder of tlie Gate. — “Most knightly King, without I found a
brave and valiant Knight, leading an Esquire in pilgrim garb, for
whom he seeks the right to wear the high prized honor of the
golden spur, and sends this voucher of his equity.”

(Hands parchment to King, who peruses the same and says :)

King. — “As he is vouched for by our well tried friend as being
made of honest, manly stuff, there stands no reason to withhold
the boon, if we shall find him as endorsement states, a brave and
worthy man. Admit him to the presence of the Ten.”

The Warder of the Gate goes to and opens the door. Master at
Arms with candidate enters and assumes a position outside semi-
circle, at the center and opposite the King.

Master at Arms. — “Most knightly King and brothers of our
band, I here present an Esquire I have known, bearing an honest
name among his fellow men, and being gifted with patrician soul
he seeks to rise above the common herd and prove himself a man
of iron nerve — a fit companion for these w^ell tried knights.”

King. — “At your request, and without waste of speech, I bid
this Council on the test decide; asking the pilgrim if he still
persist?”

Candidate. — “I do.”

First Councillor (rising and addressing the King and Council.)
— “I would decree that he be made to spring from off the summit
of yon beetling cliff, down to the fretful waves that surge below.”
(Resumes his seat.)

Second Councillor (rising). — “That were to bid him spring to
certain death; the quick descent would filch his necessary wind,
and we might lose a valiant knight thereby: rather let us stretch
his naked frame over a furnace of white heated coals, and if his
lips are parted by a moan, vote him not fit to sit within our Hall.”
(Resumes his seat.)

Third Councillor (rising). — “The last named test were scarce
less fatal than the one before, the chance of life depending on the
briefness of the ordeal. In lieu of these, I do propose that he be
made to leap upon a score of tempered spikes, set in a solid slab
of living oak; and when they pierce his naked, tender feet, let
each one prime his ears to catch the groaning of each new born
pain.” (Resumes his seat.)

Fourth Councillor (who is seated at one extreme end of semi-
circle, rises and addresses King alone.)— “Most knightly King*


71

methought I saw a shade of hesitation passing o’er the pilgrim’s
face; aye, more, I’ll wager me it was most arrant fear, and by my
spurs I doubt he hath this courage that he claims.” (Resumes
his seat.)

Fifth Councillor (seated at the other extreme of semicircle, ris-
ing and addressing the King and Council.)— -“ Aye, fear it was,
most certainly, for with my eyes I # saw him quail, and cast a
troubled glance around as if for pity, which we as knightly
councillors know naught of, save for distress and those of gentler
sex.” (Resumes his seat.)

King (to candidate, earnestly).—' “It grieves me much that one
so recommended, and deemed by his good guide both resolute
and brave, should by a tremor show his dread of test. Pilgrim
Esquire, ere you can wear the insignia of a Knight— the golden
spur, denotive of your manhood and true courage— your feet
must tread the drear and ofttimes dangerous path to Pythian
honors, and you must show by acts that wear the native hue of
bravery that you are worthy of the rank to which we can advance
you. Despite your show of fear, you cannot now withdraw, but
on the choosing of these Knights, must go where they dictate —
and go alone, save that old Pluto bear you company, and as a
guardian he were worse than none.

Sixth Councillor (rising, draws his sword, presents, and after
the words “Most knightly King,” comes to a carry.) — “Most
knightly King, I would vouchsafe a word on this poor pilgrim’s
part, telling my story with all briefness that I may. At one time
in the rage of battle, by a foeman’s lance my horse and I were
parted ’ 6 ainst our wills ; and as I lay both spent and bleeding on
the ground, a youth, a simple Page, passed by in course of duty,
and looking back he saw me helpless on our mother earth, the
life blood oozing from my gaping wounds : quickly he tore his
doublet into strips and staunched their flow, then bore me off to
safe and shady nook, and by his gentle care 1 live to-day. In
view of this I registered a vow' to help a Page, aye, Esquire or
Knight, who needed aid, to succor him from ill ; and ’fore this


n


Esquire I renew my vow, and proffer him protection it he crave
it.” (Moves towards the candidate and remains standing, as if to
assume his part in whatever it may be decreed he shall do.)

Seventh Councillor (rising and addressing the King). — “Most
knightly King, the words just spoken honor him who gave them
utterance, and yet it were not well that one so high in rank, so
great on field of battle, so loved among his brother knights,
should risk his life for this* Esquire, with whom we have but
slight acquaintance, and who, I doubt, can ever take the place of
one so tried as our brave brother. Who wears the spurs should
win them, and thus for caution’s sake, and for prudential reasons
I would urge that this man carve his way to the high honor he
sees fit to claim. It would most seemly be (turning to the Coun-
cil), that one and all reject, without debate, the offer made.”

Council (all rising). — “We do reject it.” (Council are all seat-
ed except Sixth Councillor.)

King. — “ ’Tis well, and be it understood, most valiant Knight,
that you remain, (Sixth Councillor resumes his seat) while you
Esquire, will win alone the spurs you seek to wear. And now
brave Knights, by favor of our friend, let each man cast his lot;
taking the colors as the tests were named— blue for the first, yel-
low the next and red the third.”

Master at Arms distributes to King and each Councillor three
slips of paper, blue, yellow and red respectively; then collects
them in a suitable manner, each one depositing his red paper
and retaining the other two. Master at i'.rms presents receptacle
to King, who examines the ballot and says :

King. — “The third is chosen. Away with him and bid old
Pluto put him to the test.”

Master at Arms saluting King with sword, retires with candi-
date.

King (rising to his feet, drawing his sword and coming to a
carr y). — “By virtue of my will this Council stands dissolved.”

The Council rise to their feet, and opening at the center, swing
back and close up their lines, facing inward, at the same time


78


drawing their swords, bringing them to a carry, and as the King
moves down, present arms all together, (or if unarmed, make mil-
itary salute). The King passes between the two ranks, and ar-
riving at the end of the lines, faces about and salutes, when he
orders :

King. — “Carry arms — about face — to your posts march, and be
seated.”

[This ends the ceremony. See diagram.]


DISSOLVING COUNCIL OF TEN.


74


The Lodge-room is darkened, made as nearly as possible to rep-
resent a wilderness. To the right of the Chancellor Command-
ers's station is an elevation representing a mound, on which is
laid a complete skeleton, (or its representation.) On the right of
the Vice Chancellor is placed a mock cauldron, in which is burn-
ed some red fire, round which are gathered some of the Knights
robed in black and masked, apparently wrangling over the con-
tents. The cue for igniting the red fire and grouping around the
cauldron, is the utterance by Pluto, of the following words: “ I
left him there to bitten up the bloodhounds of this wilderness.”

Pluto is seated in the center of the room, dressed in a suit of
silver mail, cavalier cloak of black, trimmed with silver lace,
suspended from left shoulder ; helmet similar to that worn by
the herald Mercury ; and sword. [Pluto is represented by the
Past Chancellor or by some other qualified person.]

Master at Arms enters with candidate, clothed as when before
the Council of Ten, walks slowly tow T ards the center of the room
and halts about one-lialf way between the door and Pluto.

Pluto (looking up). — “Who dares to break the stillness of
eternal night by wandering past the limits of the earth to my
most dread abode ? Beats there a heart with slow and measured
pulse when standing at the gate of Pluto’s wild domain ?”

Master at Arms. — “Imperial Prince, behold a well-tried ’Squire
who craves the honors af his knightly spurs, and boasts himself
a brave, courageous man. Ere we accord this honor that he
craves, we do appeal to you, the potent king of this most l arren
waste, to test him to the quick, and if he lacks the courage that
he boasts, let his flesh blister in yon furnace heat, till dropping
from the bones, it leaves a calcined record on the road, to warn
others of the coward’s fate.”

M aster at Arms, leaving the candidate standing there, retires
out of sight.

Pluto (rising and approaching candidate). — “Welcome, thou
denizen of earth. If thou art brave I will conduct the safe, and
recommend thee for thy knightly spurs ; but if thy cheek show
but a tinge of that white-livered hue that 1 have called the coun-
tersign of fear; if thy strong limbs but for a moment shake and
tremble like an aspen in the road, bid then farewell to earth!
(Takes candidate by the right arm.) Come, let us go, and as you


75


tread, beware! for deadly adders swarm in your path, whose foul
envenomed fangs would quickly still the beating of your heart.”

Stoops as if catching something from the ground, and exhibits
an imitation snake, that he had concealed on his person.

Phito. — “See ! here is one, that springing from the pregnant
ground would, but for the power I hold, have fastened on your
flesh ; and still another (other snakes are seen on the floor that
they are likely to tread on) creeps around my foot. Be brave,
and all is well!”

[An imitation mound with skeleton thereon.]

“Look on yon mound ; there lies the framework of a coward
soul, who wandering round with me as you do now, trembled
to hear the howling of wild beasts. This show of fear invoked
my wrath, and with a sw T oop of my avenging sword, I left him
there to fatten up the bloodhounds of this wilderness.”

[The cauldron is set on fire.]

“Ah! yonder leaps the red and lurid flame! (A mock cauld-
ron with colored fire, surrounded by masked knights robed in
black, is seen at further end ol Lodge-room.) Note how it licks
around that coward’s bones, and boils the water of his stagnant
blood ! My sable band hold royal feast over a victim that I slew
last night; see how they quarrel o’er his livered blood, and
wrangle for a dish full of his brains ! Ere yet the hand of death
had stopped the twitching of his livid limbs, and while he
writhed beneath the fatal blow, they plucked his hair out by the
roots, twisted his nails from out their fleshy bed and rubbed
saltpetre on his gaping wounds.

“Ho! one of you, come quickly hither and produce the test!”

[Vice Chancellor, who is robed in black and masked, ap-
proaches and presents the test. Pluto takes it.]

“I have provided here, by order of the ‘Ten,’ a goodly combi-
nation of tough wood and steel ; take it yourself that you may
see the points.”

[Hands it to candidate, who takes and examines it.]

Pluto. — “Of its keen sharpness are you Avell assured?” (Pluto
tries it with his sword.)

Candidate answers.

Pluto to Vice Chancellor. — “Begone, and place it on the testing
spot!”


76


[Vice Chancellor takes it from the candidate, carries it to the
testing spot, where it is put in position in full view of the candi-
date, and the change made by the Vice Chancellor at the propel
time and quietly as possible.]

[Pluto, in an unconcerned and careless manner, turns the can-
didate w r ith his back to Ihe testing spot, and placing his hands
upon the candidate's shoulders, looks him square in the eyes to
attract his attention while saying:]

Pluto. — “Come, let me gaze into your eyes, those well springs
of the soul, from which outflash the hidden secrets of the heart!
When Adam fell from his primeval bliss, tempted by me through
unsuspecting Eve, I made him deaf to 'Gabriel’s cautioning
tongue, lest he might stop, considering, on the brink, and waxing
brave, upset my plans for peopling this wild waste. Thus much
is left of my angelic mould, that to the brave I give my knightly
hand to bear them safe o’er this unhallow r ed soil : but to the man
of w r eak and reedy nerve I leave the w r ooing of my untamed imps
that seek an introduction to his blood.”

[At this moment the curtain at the chair of the Chancellor
Commander is drawn aside and the Chancellor Commander is
seen, dressed in a scarlet robe, with a white cross upon his breast,
a gilt crown upon his head and a gilt cross, as a sceptre, in his
hand. Pluto, turning, se( s him, (trembling,) says:]

Pluto. — “Before that awful emblem of my great defeat I bow
in mute despair, and leaving 3 ou in guardianship of him whose
word to me is law, 1 vanish from your sight.”

[Pluto retires out of sight, as noiselessly as possible, and lays
aside his robes, etc.]

Chancellor Commander descending from and leaving his sta-
tion, takes the candidate by the left arm, so as to keep him away
from the test while the board with iron spikes is slily replaced
with one with rubber spikes, addresses him while leading him
around finally to the testing spot, as follows :

Chancellor Commander. — “Esquire, it was decreed by the
Grand Council who essayed you here, that as a proof of your
obedience and unflinching nerve, you jump with naked feet upon
that instrument of torture. I bid you now make bare each ten-
der foot, and at the instant that I orders give, leap on those brist-
ling points,”


77

[Master at Arms assists him to take off his sandals and ascend
the eminence.]

Chancellor Commander, (to the Knights).— “Come, one and all,
and bear him witness in the act, and if he fail, conduct ye as ye
will.”

[Knights assemble around without further command, with
swords at a carry. All being ready, the Chancellor Commander
continuing, says :]

Chancellor Commander. — “Now, if you are u, brave and steel-
souled man, Leap down !”

[In case he refuses, after a third command, the Chancellor Com-
mander steps forward, puts his foot on it and then requires the
candidate to do it ; both feet must go on.]

Chancellor Commander (returning to his station). — “Attention
Knights! return swords; about face; posts march; be seated.”

[After the ceremonies, the candidate puts on his sandals and is
conducted to tli£ station of the Chancellor Commander, the cos-
tumes of each having been laid aside, or not, as may be desired.]

Chancellor Commander (to candidate). — “My friend, the cere-
monies you have passed through were not conceived in idle
sport to trifle w ith your feelings, but to convey a practical lesson
to your mind in a manner so impressive as not to be easily effaced.
You was brought into the presence of our armed council to re-
mind you that good men are always clad in the bright armor of
Truth and Virtue, from which the shafts of Vice and Falsehood
fall harmlessly to the ground.

“You was vouched for by a friend to show the necessity of an
upright life if we would enter into the habitations of the good
beyond the g* ave. A lesson of Friendship was given you when
standing alone and unprotected, by one to you unknown, who
volunteered to bear, in your behalf, the test on which the Council
might decide; but Caution to the rescue came and bade you go
alone, lest we might lose the counsels of a w r ell-tried Knight, for
the rash promptings of a reckless but well-meaning mind.

“Then you was led through a wilderness, to remind you of
life’s journey ; that w'e have no abiding city here, nor is the pros-
pect sufficiently inviting to induce us to seek to wander here for-
ever, even if we could.

“You was beset by snakes and adders to remind you of the trials


78


and temptations of life; and in the fleshless form exhibited to
you, you saw the penalty of Cowardice. Such is the punishment
that awaits the soul that lacks the moral courage to stand bravely
out, catching the shafts of Error upon the shield of Purity, and
hewing Falsehood with the sword of Truth.

“You was then shown a scene indicative of the evil passions
of man — evincing his readiness to rejoice in the downfall of his
neighbor. The sudden vanishing of your conductor before the
symbol of the cross, was to convey to your mind that there is a
time when the evil doer will blanch before the stern face of jus-
tice, although his wickedness may seem to prosper for a season.

“Lastly, you was led to a place where your faith was put to the
extremest test ; you was there taught a lesson of obedience, but
greater than all, you was shown that if you have only the moral
heroism and stamina to face manfully the dangers that apparent-
ly surround you, you will find them mere shadows that vanish at
the first blow.

“Such are the moral convictions we have striven to print indel-
ibly on your mind, and we trust that your intercourse with the
world at large will prove the lessons have not been in vain.

“Master at Arms, conduct our friend to the chair of the Vice
Chancellor for further insight to our mysteries.” (Master at
Arms does so.)

Master at Arms (to Vice Chancellor). — “Obedient to command,
Vice Chancellor, I present this candidate to you to be instructed
in our secret work.”

[If he obeyed command to jump on the soikes the Vice
Chancellor says :]

Vice Chancellor. — “As a brave man I extend you cordial greet-
ing, and now proceed to give you knowledge of our secret work,
that you may know that he wild wears the spurs has fairly won
them”

[If he was not obedient the Vice Chancellor says :]

Vice Chancellor. — “As a brave and obedient man I cannot give
you cordial greeting, yet will, in consideration of the many trials
you have undergone, proceed to give you knowledge of our secret
work, that you may know that he who wears the spurs should
fairly win them.”


79


|


SIGN OF BRAVERY OB COURTESY, TIIIRD RANK.

Form a triangle with forearms extending hor-
izontally from you, points of fingers and thumbs
together and spread out; heel of hands about
five inches apart. See cut. This is called the
visor sign.


VISOR SIGN ON ENTERING LODGE.

On entering to salute the Chancellor Com-
mander, raise visor so as to touch the breast with
the forefingers, the thumbs pointing downward.
Hands are then separated and with a gentle wave
are brought to the side.


VISOR SIGN ON RETIRING FROM LODGE.

On retiring approach the Altar, face the
Chancellor Commander and turn the visor
(hands) down, so that the thumbs point up
and the fingers down and then bring hands to
side with a gentle wave.


80


The Countersign, given by the Chancellor Commander, is same
as sign or a wave of the hand. The Password, given at the inner
door, is Confidence. The Alarm at the inner door is two raps.
The Grip is given in this manner:


Take each other by the right hand as for
ordinary hand shake. When withdrawing
hands press each other’s forefinger with
thumb and forefinger, gently, the whole
length of finger, slightly crooking the ends
of the forefingers and hooking or pressing
them together at the points.


Yice Chancellor. — “Master at Arms, }mu will now conduct our
newly tried and instructed brother to the Chancellor Commander
for final examination, instruction and enrollment on the roster of
this Lodge, as having that Rank. (He does so.)

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, by direction of the
Yice Chancellor of this Lodge, I present to you Brother John
Brown, who has been instructed in the sign, countersign, pass-
word and grip of the Third or Cliivalric Rank of Knight, for
final examination, instruction and enrollment on the roster of
this Lodge as having that Rank.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Brother John Brown, as an evidence
of the attention paid to the instruction already given you, you
will be kind enough to satisfy me that you are in possession of
the sign

Candidate gives the Yisor Sign which he says is turned up on en-
tering and down on retiring; the Countersign, same or a wave of
the hand; the Password, Confidence; the Alarm’, two raps; the
Grip, shake hands in ordinaiy manner, then press each other’s
forefinger, whole length of finger, gently, hooking the forefingers
slightly as the hands are withdrawn.

Chancellor Commander. — “Master at Arms, repair with our
friend to the centre of our Castle Hall; place him in due position
to be dubbed a Knight.”


81

[Master at Arms places candidate in centre of hall, and causes
him to kneel upon the right knee near the altar.]

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander your orders have
been obeyed.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Attention, Knights! (all rise) Han-
dle swords ; draw swords ; carry arms ; forward and form triangle
around candidate!” (See diagram, page 63.)

[Knights, with swords at “carry,” surround the candidate on
three sides, forming, as near as possible, a triangle. The Chan-
cellor Commander approaches and strikes candidate with the
fiat of his sword on right shoulder three times, saying :]

Chancellor Commander. — “In the name of the Order Universal
(one rap) and by power in me vested (one rap) as Chancellor
Commander of this Lodge, (one rap) I bid thee rise and stand
erect a Pythian Knight, (candidate rises) and in the presence of
your conferes, I command you to be invested with the spurs your
rank now entitles you to wear.”

[Master at Arms invests candidate with a spur on each heel.]

Chancellor Commander. — “Attention, Knights ! Present arms !
(if armed, if not) Salute!”

[Knights present swords, (if armed,) if not, salute, by bringing
right hand to head as if making a military salute.]

Chancellor Commander (returning to his station). — “Carry
arms ; return swords ; about face ; to your posts march !” (Knights
march to their ordinary places in Lodge room.)

Chancellor Commander. — “Knights! about face; be seated!”

[The candidate and Master at Arms remain standing in centre
of hall.]

Chancellor Commander. — “Master at Arms, you will present
the newly tried and made brother at the Chancellor Commander’s
station.” (He does so.)

Chancellor Commander. — “Knight John Brown, you have now
passed through the Third or Chivalric RanK of Knight, and the
highest that can be given you in this Lodge. The motto thereof
is Bravery, you have been severely tested, and passed the ordeal
unscathed, exemplifying in part your confidence in and willing-
ness to adhere to all lawful mandates. Bravery is defined as
courage, heroism, undaunted spirit, intrepidity and gallantry
though there are other meanings to the term. There is a moral
as well as a physical courage; the lesson inculcated in this in-


82


stance embraces them both. You are expected to be brave and
courageous in upholding the rights of a brother ; maintaining
the dignity of the order, or its tenets of Friendship, Charity and
Benevolence, and though the uninitiated and skeptical person
should deride, condemn or mock, ever stand ready to defend it
and them from slur or sarcasm ; not that they would in any man-
ner take from it or its teachings the honor due, but let the world
know that any shaft aimed thereat is as though received by your-
self. Aiding thus i n upholding our rights, usages and customs
as a chivalric order, you strengthen and sustain our glorious
principles, and more closely unite yourself with those who are
linked together in the holy ties of brotherly love. Courage en-
ables you to encounter difficulties and dangers with firmness and
without fear of depression of spirits; it is also a constituent part
of fortitude, which implies patience to bear continued suffering.
Constitutional courage often forsakes its possessor in the hour of
danger, but courage which arises from a sense of duty, like that
of the noble Pythias when addressing the tyrant Dionysius

“As thou’rt a husband and father, hear me —

Let Damon go and see his wife and child
Before he dies — for four hours respite him —

Put me in chains ; plunge me into his dungeon
As pledge for his return; do this — but this —

And may the gods themselves buildup thy greatness
As high as their own heaven.”

“Courage like this, when coupled with friendship, acts uni-
formly.

“Brother Knight John Brown, I have no fear but that you
will prove yourself in like manner, Friendly, Cautious and Brave
—ever ready to extend the strong hand of fellowship toward your
brethren, and to stand by the courageous. In token whereof I
greet you in Friendship, (gives grip of first rank) in Caution,
(o-ives grip of second rank) in Bravery, (gives grip of third
rank.) The Sign of recognition or Challenge Sign is:


SIGN OF RECOGNITION OH CTIAT/LENGE SIGN, THIRD
RANK.

Place left hand over the heart; right hand open,
palm down and about the height of the hips, indi-
cating the position your hands were in when you
took the obligation.

The answer is the same, indicating the same, it
being simply the position your hands were in when
assuming the obligation of the First, or Initiatory
Rank of Page.


83


The Voting Sign is:


voting SIGN.

Clench the left hand and raise it
about as high as the eyes.


The Semi-Annual Password, as its
name indicates, and which is given at
the outer door, (the Rank Passwords
are not, ) is* —


The Parry Sign is:


PARRY SIGN,

Bring sword to a “Present” and
swing point from right to left as if to
parry or ward off a blow. When sign
is completed the right hand will be
about a foot from the body and the
sword will point about two feet in front
of left foot.


♦The Semi-Aniiiial Pass


Word from July 1878 to Jan 1878 wan "B* Unit'd.'


84


The Grand Honors are given thus :


GRAND nONORS.

Place the left hand on the heart and
sword at a “ present.”

SUPREME HONORS.

Given like Grand Honors except that
left forearm is held horizontal, extending
directly forward, elbow at side, with hand
open and palm up.


Chancellor Commander. — “Keeper of Records and Seal, you
will now present the loster of this Lodge to our Brother Knight
.J olin Brown for enrollment.

[Which being done, the Chancellor Commander says:]

Chancellor Commander. — “Master at Arms, you will now face
the newly charged Brother Knight to the Lodge, and clothe him
in the proper regalia or insignia of the Third, Chivalric and Hon-
orable Rank of Knight.” (Master at Arms does so.)

Master at Arms. — “Chancellor Commander, your orders have
been obeyed.”

Chancellor Commander (two raps). — “Officers, members and

visitors of Lodge, No. — , Knights of Pythias, permit me

to introduce to you Brother Knight John Browm, who has been
regularly initiated in the First, Initiatory or Page, proved in the
Second, Amorial or Esquire’s, and fully charged in the Third,
Chivalric, or Knight’s Rank of this Order, in the usual ritual-
istic and ceremonial, [examined in accordance with the law —

should such be the case], and enrolled as a member of Lodge,

No- — , Knights of Pythias.

“Brethren, join with me in extending a hearty, sincere and
chivalric welcome to our Brother Knight.” (Mask is taken off.)

Chancellor Commander (o*ie rap). — “Lodge w r ill be at ease un-
til the sound of the gavel at the Chancellor Commander’s sta-
tion.”

[All gather around and shake hands.]


85


OFFICIAL VISITATIONS.

F0 BM OK CEREMONIALS TO BE USED IN SUPREME OR GRAND
OFFICIAL VISITATIONS.

The Supreme or Grand Officer, being accompanied by (some
one qualified to act as) the Supreme or Grand Guide enter i
an e room in the regular way, when, after clothing themselves m
the proper regalia or insignia of their rank, the Guide goes to ti e

KL >"•» S

r on „f tpr ihe s ig>n is taken uo by v^nancenor

«»><>«. *• ,he

Altar,.™., “Chancellor Commander, as the Supreme

that the Supreme (or ‘(' “ J , to 1>laklos official vi,i-
itl „ f !» the ““ m^ra ielefore h.4 your ledge in

readiness mid instructed to give him the proper honored™ h.s

office when entering the Lodge. _.. Supreme (or Grand)

Chancellor Commander (standing). bup.e ( . om . teous

^S£rS5=^nthe

Lo T dge fs ready the Guide

who comes out for th P P . t he proper alarm.

>■* ™ i “ ) -

T^dT'TheSupreme (or Grand) Guide, accompanied by the

Clmncellom the vfctfchancellor, rising, reports it to the Chan-
cellor Commander. ig order a s Chancellor Com-

maltha! it

ta r.“ r e ( clSoXmL,»der that yon Mm, .them

W (Inner^G™rd op ens the door and they enter.)

^toTr^ce Lay Past officer or competent member to act as such him.


86


Chancellor Commander (two raps), — “Brethren, assist me in
givingthe Grand (or Supreme) honors.”

All do so, the Guide and Officer going to the Altar, give
the proper sign of the rank, which is responded to by the Chan-
cellor Commander, when the Guide escorts the Visiting Officer
to the Chancellor Commander’s station, at his right hand; the
Chancellor Commander hands the Officer the gauntlet — or gavel
of authority, who takes it and orders “Recover,” when the honors
are dropped — or swords brought to a carry — and if armed, says,
“Return swords,” then gives three raps, when all are seated, the
Supreme or Grand Guide in a chair at the right of the Lodge
Master at Arms, when the object of the visit is explained and
gone into. When ready to retire, he delivers the gavel to the
Chancellor Commander, who accepts, (and having been informed
of their intention of retiring,) gives two raps and says :

Chancellor Commander. — “Brethren, assist me in giving the
Supreme (or Grand) honors,” and the Supreme or Grand Officer,
accompanied by his Guide, goes to the Altar — while the honors
are being given, gives countersign and retires, when the Chan,
cellor Commander orders, “Recover!” “return swords!” and seats
the Lodge in the usual manner.


Remarks on Amplified Third Rank.

The essential part of the ceremonies of each rank is the
Obligation.

In each rank the candidate is asked whether or not lie is will-
ing to take a solemn and binding obligation to keep forever
secret the mysteries of the rank.

“Let me read it first?” The candidate might reasonably reply,
am commanded to prove all things in the Book of Law, the
Holy Bible.” (1 Thess. 5. 21.)

“No! you cannot; but I as Chancellor Commander assure you
that it will in no wise affect your religion or your politics.”

“What guarantee have I that your assurance is good ? You
wear your title by virtue of the votes of men who have dishonored
the God of truth by not confessing His Son, and the Bible
warns us not to trust in man”.

“Thus saith the Lord : Cursed be the man that trusteth in man.”
Jer. 17:5


87


“When tile Lord shall stretch out his hand, both he that helpeth
shall fall and he that is hoipen shall fall down, and they all shall
fail together.” Isaiah 81 : 8.

“1 must read the Obligation first, no prudent business man
would sign a paper without first reading it.” “The prudent man
looketh well to his going.” Prov. 14: 15.

“We have all taken the oath. You know us, if you cannot
conform to our usages you may retire.”

The obligations are Oaths; oaths hid from the candidate except
as he takes their requirements upon himself; and, “If a soul swear
pronouncing with his lips to do evil or to do good, whatsoever
it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath and it be hid from
him ; when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one of these.”
Leviticus 5 ; 14.

Whether, then, the obligations of the Knights of Pythias are
bad or good each person taking them can here read the Divine
verdict upon the act “Guilty.”

However, with this exposition in hand the oaths are not hid
from us, and we have an opportunity to compare them with God’s
Word. The readers of this ritual can judge successfully whether
or not the obligations conflict with the politics or religion of a
Christian patriot, a person who recognizes God in Christ as the
ruler of the state and also of the church.

The first paragraph of each oath binds to absolute secrecy dur-
ing life from all but a small though miscellaneous set of men, con-
cerning the mysteries (passwords, grips, signs, etc.,) of the Knights
of Pythias.

If you are not a Christian, The Book of Law, God’s Holy Word
“ Now commandeth all men everywhere to repent.” Acts 17 : 80.
Christ says “come unto me.” Matt. 11: 28. “Turn ye: turn ye.’ »
Ezekiel 88: 11.

The fact that you are a rebellious child does not release you
from Christ’s requirements. Give up your rebellion.

Christ says: “Follow me,” Matt. 16 : 24; 4: 19 ; 9 : 9, 19: 21.
Luke 18 : 22 ; 5 : 27 ; 9 : 59. John 12 : 26 ; 21 : 22 ; 1 : 43. And

no one can follow Christ in combining with a number of fellow-
men in the concealment of matters of pretended or general interest .
Christ “spake openly to the World.” He says: “In secret have I
said nothing ” John 18 : 20.

Friend, the Book of Law shows that the first part of each obli-
gation comes into direct antagonism with your duty. The
assurance of the Chancellor Commander to the contrary notwith
standing.

How men can be Republicans in sentiment and yet take vows of


88


obedience to an irresponsible despotic aristocracy in secret lodges
is a strange anomaly.

That such a rash vow is often repented at leisure the fact that
forty-three thousand Knights in the State of Pennsylvania out of
forty-five thousand, broke it by refusing obedience to an edict of
the Grand Lodge, thus incurring, if the obligation is binding, the
fearful self-imposed penalty of suffering all the anguish and tor-
ments possible for man to suffer, shows.

It is an historical fact that the Knights of the Dark Ages used
to obtain oaths of persons by false pretenses and then make their
dupes believe it to be their duty to fulfil them. A practice which
gave rise to fearful abuses.

But in the darkness of this modern Knighthood there is a gleam
of light. The Knights do not in the obligations fulfil their
assurance of non-interference with the politics and religion of the
candidate, and since they fail in fulfilling their part of the
agreement, of course the covenant is void.

Still those taking these oaths are guilty. They have sinned by
taking obligations that were hid from them, see Leviticus 5: 4 —
6 ; and also in promising to obey obligations at variance with the
will of Christ as revealed in the Bible. And a person who finds
himself in this sad condition should confess his sin. “He shall
confess that he hath sinned in one ot these. ” “If we confess our
sins ; he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse
us from all unrighteousness.” 1 John 1 : 9.

“He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso confess-
eth and forsaketh them shall have mercy.” Prov. 28 : 13.

The amplified form of the third rank, we believe no right
minded person can read without horror. In the face of God’s
commands against swearing, unpremeditated profanity is awful;
but words fail us when we contemplate a system which puts
oaths into its regular order of exercises. The personification of
Pluto the God of the infernal regions, (Satan) might be expected
in such an assembly. And when the Knights who practice the
amplified form of initiation, have concluded their demoniacal
rites and “attend” while the prelate implores theblessingof Deity
on their deliberations, can we avoid the fearful conclusion that
the god of the lower regions rather than the dishonored, disobeyed,
insulted Lord of the Holy Bible, attends and accepts their worship ?

“I say, that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacri-
fice to devils and not to God : and I would not that ye should have
fellowship witli devils. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord
and the cup of devils ; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord’s table
and of the table of devils.” 1 Oor. 10: 20 21.


89


“Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but
rather reprove them, for it is a shame even to speak of those
things which are done of them in secret.” Eph. 5 : 11-12.

“Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness.” Isaiah 5 : 20.

“Let the wicked forsake his way and the unrighteous man his
thoughts ; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have
mercy upon him ; and to our God for he will abundantly pardon.”
Isaiah 55 : 7 .

“Then spake Jesus again unto them, saying: I am the light ot
the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but
shall have the light of life.” John 8 : 12.


90


KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS AT A GLANCE.


FIRST OR INITIATORY RANK.

The preparation of the candidate in this Rank consists in re.
moving the coat and vest, putting on a White Robe and blind-
folding Securely. The members all have Black Robes and Masks*

SIGN OF FRIENDSHIP OR COURTESY.

Form a link with the second finger of each hand, the back of
the left hand up and the back of the right hand forward ; the
forearms forming the base of a triangle. [See cut.]


“The sign of Friendship or Courtesy, is always used on enter-
ing or retiring from the Lodge when open in the Rank of Page.
It is recognized by the Chancellor Commander by giving the
same sign or by a waive of the hand.”


THE SIGN OF RECOGNITION.

Is given thus : Place your right thumb
near the end of your two first fingees of same
hand as though holding a pen to write, then
smooth the hair back over the right ear with
the two fingers, nails next to the head, three
times, and is answered by the person saluted
with the left hand in same manner.


91


INAUDIBLE SIGN OF CAUTION.

Raise right hand and with thumb and fore-
finger squeeze the wings of the nose. This is
done three times, noiselessly, in quick succession
drawing the hand six or eight inches from the
nose after each squeeze.

AUDIBLE SIGN OF CAUTION.

Made in the same w r ay as Inaudible Sign, but
to attract attention.give a quick snuff each time
as thumb and finger are being withdrawn from
the nose.

Answer. — Same as Sign.


SIGN OF DISTRESS.

Strike the hands together three times, right
hand uppermost.

There is a hailing word in connection with the
Sign of Distress, which is nomad, (Damon back-
wards).

Answer .— Damon*


GRIP, FIRST RANK.

Each extend the right hand, opening the fingers between the
second and third as shown in upper cut, and grasp each others
first two fingers, closing the other fingers as shown in lower
cut.


92


WORD OR COVER KEY TO GRIP.

The Chancellor Commander and Master at Arms holding each
other by the grip engage in the following colloquy:

Chancellor Commander. — “Say what is this ?”

Master at Arms. — “A good thing.”

Chancellor Commander. — “Most people would say so.”

Master at Arms. — “Some would.”

Chancellor Commander. — “O, would they?”

Master at Arms. — “No doubt.”

SECOND, OR RANK OF ESQUIRE.

PREPARATION.

The Page or Pages are taken to the ante-room in ordinary
dress, and each one given a shield, which he is required to put
on his left forearm, and from thence to the door of the Lodge, on
the ontside of which is suspended a shield, on which the Master
at Arms gives one rap.”


SIGN OP CAUTION OR COURTESY, RANK OP
ESQUIRE.

Place right elbow in left hand and gently
clinch the chin with the right hand. (See
cut.)

Countersign in answer : Same or a
wave of the hand by the Chancellor Com-
mander.

The Alarm: One rap.


L


93


SHIELD SIGH.

Raise right hand perpendicularly, with the
hand clinched as if in the act of striking a
downward blow. Same position as when
taking the obligation of this rank, (see cut.)


GRIP, RANK OF ESQUIRE.

Grasp left hands, in ordinary way. No shake.


THIRD, OR RANK OF KNIGHT.

Note — T he Si"ns, Grip, Fas?-word etc., of the Amplified Third Rank are
the same.

The candidate is prepared in the same manner as in the Second
Rank.


SIGN OF BRAVERY OR COURTESY, THIRD RANK.

Form a triangle with forearms extending hor-
izontally from yon, points of fingers and thumbs
together and spread out; heel of hands about
five inches apart. (See cut.) This is called the
visor sign.


94


VISOR SIGN ON ENTERING LODGE.

On entering to salute the Chancellor Com.
mander, raise visor so as to touch the breast with
the forefingers, the thumbs pointing downward.
Hands are then separated and with a gentle wave
are brought to the side.


YISOR SIGN ON RETIRING FROM LODGE.

On retiring approach the Altar, face the
Chancellor Commander and turn the visor
(hands) down, so that the thumbs point up
and the fingers down and then bring hands to
side with a gentle wave.


The Countersign, given by the Chancellor Commander, Is same
as sign or a wave of the hand. The Pass-word, given at the inner
door, is Confidence. The Alarm at the inner door is two raps.


GRIP, THIRD RANK.

Take each other by the right hand as for
ordinary hand shake. When withdrawing
hands press each other’s forefinger with
thumb and forefinger, gently, the whole
length of finger, slightly crooking the ends
of the forefingers and hooking or pressing
them together at the points.


95


SIGN OF RECOGNITION OR CHALLENGE SIGN.

Place left hand over the heart; right hand open,
palm down and about the height of the hips, indh
eating the position your hands were in when you
took the obligation.

The answer is the same, indicating the same, it
being simply the position your hands were in when
assuming the obligation of the First, or Initiatory
Rank of Page.


VOTING SIGN.

Clench the left hand and raise it about
as high as the eyes.

I

SEMI-ANNUAL PASS WORD.

The Semi-Annual Password, as its name
indicates, and which is given at the outer
door, (the Rank Passwords are not,) is* * —


PARRY SIGN.

Bring sword to a “present ” and swing
point from right to left as if to parry or
ward off a blow. When sign is com-
pleted the right hand will be about a foot
from the body and the sword will point
about two feet in front of left foot.


♦The Semi-Annual Pass Word for the last half of 1878 (July to Jan.) was

*M4 VnitHL "


96


GRAND HONORS.

Place the left hand on the heart and
sword at a “ present.”

SUPREME HONORS.

Given like Grand Honors except that
left forearm is held horizontal, extending
directly forward, elbow at side, with hand
open and palm up.


PUBLICATIONS OF EZRA A. COOK & CO., CHICA&O.


- i

" i

i


Freemasonry Exposed by Capt. Wm. Morgan - - - - ^

do Per Dozen, post paid - -

Odd-Fellowship Illustrated ------

do Per Dozen, post paid - - - - - 2

Exposition of the Grange, Illustrated with Cuts - -- - -

do Per Dozen, post paid - - - - .2

Ritual Grand Army of the Republic: and Machinists and Blacksmiths Union

do Per Dozen, post paid . ....

Knights of Pytnias Illustrated .....

do Per Dozen, postpaid . . . . .2

History of the Abduction and Murder of Capt. Wm. Morgan

- do Per Dozen, post paid ... .2

Valance, Confession of the Min der of Morgan ...

do Per Dozen, post paid . . . l

The Mystic Tye or Freemasonry a League with the Devil .

do Per Dozen, post paid ....

Narratives and Arguments, showing conflict of Masonry with Laws .
do Per Dozen, post paid ....

The Broken Seal Cloth Covers ....

do paper covers ......

do In Paper Covers Per Dozen, post paid ... 4

Secret Societies, Ancient and Modern, (by Gen’l Phelps, 240 pages . .

do Per Dozen, post paid ..... 4

The Antimasonic Scrap Book, (24 Cynosure Tracts bound) ...

do Per Dozen, post paid . . . . . . 1

College Secret Societies, by H. L. Kellogg • . . .

do Per Dozen, post paid ..... 2

Minutes of the Syracuse Convention .....

do Per Dozen, post paid . . . . .2

Minutes of The Pittsburgh Convention ....

do Per Dozen, post paid ..... 2

History of The National Christian Association ....

do Pei Dozen, post paid .... 1

Rev. W. P. McNarys Sermon on Masonry ....

do Per Dozen, post paid

Freemasonry Contrary to the Christian Religion ...

do Per Dozen, post paid .....

Barnard’s Reminiscences of Morgan Times .....

do Per Dozen, post paid . .... 1

Judge Whitney’s Defence before Grand Lodge of 111 ...

do Per Dozen, post paid . . . . . 1

Masonry a work of Darkness ......

do Per Dozen, post paid . I

Thirteen Reasons why a Christian should not be a Freemason . .

do Per Dozen, post paid .....

Shall Christians fellowship Freemasons? by Pres t. II. H. Geosge
do Per Dozen, post paid . .

Hon, John Quincy Adams’ Letters on Masonry ....

do Per dozen, post paid . . . . .4

Oaths and Penalties of 33 Degrees of * reemasonry ...

) do Per dozen, post paid ..... 1

Sermon on Masonry by Rev. Jas Williams, a Seceding Master Mason

do Per Dozen, post paid .....

Oaths and Penalties of Masonry Proved In New Berlin Trials . .

do Per Dozen, post paid . 1

Sermon on Odd-Fellowship ete., bv Rev. J. Sarver ...

do Per Dozen, post paid ■ ■ ■ . ■

Secrecy y. S. The Family, State and Church, by Rev. Mi S. Drury

do Pei Dozen, post paid .....

Address of Rev. J. G. Carson, D. D., on Freemasonry ...

do - Per Dozen, post paid .....

General Washington Opposed to Secret Societies, by Hon. Joseph Ritner
do Per Dozen, post paid

Are Masonic Oaths Binding on the Initiate? by Elder A. L Post

do Per dozen, post paid ....

Grand Lodge Masonry, by Brest. Blanchard ....

do Per Dozen, post paid .....

Rev. R. T. Cross, Sermon on Secretism .....

do Per Dozen, post paid ....

Sermon on Secret Societies, by Rev. Daniel Dow ....

do Per Dozen, post paid .....

Freemasonry a Fourfold Conspiracy by Prest, Blanchard ...

do Per Dozen, post paid .....

Odd-Fellowship Judged, taper Covers .....

do do Boards .....

Good Templarlsm Illustrated .....

do do Ter Dozen, . - . .2

Freemasonry Illustrated, an Illustrated Exposition of Seven Degrees, 640 pages, cloth 1
do do do do do do do paper

do do do do Three Degrees, 376 pages, cloth

do do do do do do do paper
