Investigations into the Etiology of Traumatic Infective Diseases (Robert Koch (W. Watson Cheyne, trans.), 1880)
==========================================================
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/investigationsi01kochgoog). Staged for the Tower of Babel library.

Google



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover.

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher lo a library and linally lo you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for
personal, non -commercial purposes.

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/|



d



Socrfi



Si


Sod* I** «



1L*


£©<?.[ r/t. e



1L*



r,


THE NEW SYDENHAM



SOCIETY.



INSTITUTED MDCCCLVIII.



VOLUME LXXXVIII.



LONDON :

PRINTED BY WEST, NEWMAN AND CO.,

HATTON GARDEN, E.C.



INVESTIGATIONS



INTO THE



ETIOLOGY



OF



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES,



BY



DR. ROBERT KOCH,

(WOLLSTEIN.)



TBANSLATED BY

W. WATSON CHEYNE, F.E.C.S.,

ASSISTANT SUBGEON TO KINO'S COLLEGE HOSPITAL.



LONDON:

THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY,

1880.



CONTENTS.


PAGE


V


• •

Vll


• • •

Xlll


Present state of knowledge regarding the relations of micro-


organisms to Traumatic Infective Diseases .


1


1. The occurrence of micro-organisms in the human


body in disease


1


2. Relations of micro-organisms to traumatic infective


diseases, as established by experiment


8


8. Objections to the conclusiveness of these facts


12


Method of investigation . .


Artificial traumatic infective diseases


88


1. Septicaemia in mice


88


2. Progressive destruction of tissue in mice


40


8. Spreading abscess in rabbits ....


44


4. Pyaemia in rabbits


47


5. Septicaemia in rabbits


58


6. Erysipelas in rabbits


56


59


68



TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.



The reader of the following work cannot fail to admit
the beauty and importance of the observations which it
records, provided he can be satisfied of their authenticity.
With regard to the plates which illustrate the text I am
able to give the most satisfactory confirmatory evidence.
Since the work was published Dr. Koch has succeeded in
photographing his microscopic preparations, and he has
forwarded a considerable mumber of the photographs to
Professor Lister. These, which have unmistakably been
taken from sections of tissue, when examined by a pocket
lens or projected on a screen, show plainly that the drawings
are faithful representations of what has been seen. I have
also lately received from Dr. Koch several of his stained
sections, and those which I have been able to examine are
equally satisfactory with the photographs.



PREFACE.



The present work pertains to a series of investigations
which I have already made regarding the etiology of infective
diseases, and which I intend to prosecute more fully here-
after. The object of the enquiry was to determine whether
the infective diseases of wounds are of parasitic origin
or not. Owing to extraneous circumstances I found it
necessary to confine myself solely to experiments on the
action of putrid materials on animals. These experiments
have led to definite, and, as it seems to me, not unimportant
results. Nevertheless, in order to obtain a complete answer
to the question it would have been necessary to carry out a
further series of similar experiments on animals with
materials obtained from persons suffering from or who had
died of traumatic infective diseases, and— what indeed seems
to me to be the moat important— to look for micro-organisms
in the human body by the method described in this work.

As, however, I had not the opportunity of completing my
investigations in this direction, I have contented myself with
producing experimentally in animals morbid processes which
resemble the traumatic infective diseases observed in man,
and which may serve as illustrations of them.

Since I have succeeded in completing this series of morbid
processes, to the extent of furnishing examples illustrative
of the most important traumatic infective diseases, viz., of
septicaemia, pyaemia, progressive suppuration, gangrene, and
erysipelas, I believe that I have solved the problem, so



X PREFACE.

far as is possible by experiments on animals alone; and
I therefore think it well to publish the results already
obtained.

With respect to the illustrations accompanying this work I
must here make a remark. In a former paper* on the
examination and photographing of bacteria I expressed the
wish that observers would photograph pathogenic bacteria,
in order that their representations of them might be as true
to nature as possible. I thus felt bound to photograph the
bacteria discovered in the animal tissues in traumatic infective
diseases, and I have not spared trouble in the attempt.
The smallest, and, in fact, the most interesting bacteria,
however, can only be made visible in animal tissues by stain-
ing them, and by thus gaining the advantage of colour.
But in this case the photographer has to deal with the same
difficulties as are experienced in photographing coloured
objects, e. g., coloured tapestry. These have, as is well
known, been overcome by the use of coloured collodion. This
led me to use the same method for photographing stained
bacteria, and I have, in fact, succeeded, by the use of eosin-
collodion, and by shutting oflf portions of the spectrum by
coloured glasses, in obtaining photographs of bacteria which
had been stained with blue and red aniline dyes. Never-
theless, from the long exposure required and the unavoidable
vibrations of the apparatus, the picture does not have sharpness
of outline sufficient to enable it to be of use as a substitute
for a drawing, or indeed even as evidence of what one sees.
For the present, therefore, I must abstain from publishing
photographic representations; but I hope, at a subsequent
period, when improved methods allow a shorter exposure, to
bo able to remedy this defect.

* The paper referred to is published in Cokn's Beitrage zur Biologie d.
Pflanzen,



INTRODUCTION.



As at present used, the term " traumatic infective diseases "
(Wund infections Krankheiten) indicates a group of affections
formerly known as traumatic fever, purulent infection, putrid
infection, septicaemia, pyaemia, but which were included at a
subsequent period (when the view became generally accepted
that these diseases were essentially of the same nature) under
the title " pyaemic or septicaemic processes."

Strictly speaking, we should include in this group all
those diseases which are the sequel of wounds, even the
smallest, as, for example, the pricks of a vaccinating needle,
and which have been proved with certainty, by clinical obser-
vation or experiment, to be contagious. For example, vaccine
infection, anthrax, glanders, hydrophobia, and even syphilis,
must be ranked among the traumatic infective diseases.
Nevertheless this term does not commonly have such a wide
signification, but is limited to those morbid processes specially
interesting to the surgeon, which may complicate injuries
and operation wounds ; in other words, to septicaemia, pyaemia,
progressive inflammation and suppuration, and erysipelas.
Of late the conviction has more and more gained ground
that puerperal fever is also to be regarded as an infective
disease, starting from the placental surface or from wounds
of the genital passages. Further, many authors include
diphtheria also among these diseases, because it at times
attacks wounds, and because the possibility of transmitting
it by inoculation has been abundantly demonstrated.



Xll INTRODUCTION.

In the comments introductory to the experimental part
of this work, I shall likewise confine myself to the last-
mentioned morbid processes; in the second part, however,
I shall deviate from the ordinary limitation of the term
" traumatic infective diseases "in so far that I shall also take
notice of anthrax on account of its manifold relations to the
septicaemia produced experimentally in animals.

The expressions pyaemia and septicaemia are often used
with different meanings, and it is therefore necessary to
indicate precisely what I shall understand by terms so
universally employed.

For a long time pyaemia was distinguished from septicaemia
by the occurrence of metastatic deposits in the former and
their absence in the latter. But since it has been established
that, even in such cases as had been previously described
as septicaemia, isolated microscopic metastatic deposits are
not unfrequently present, and that the two processes cannot
be definitely separated in this way, some authors have pre-
ferred to designate as septicaemia the disease brought about by
absorption of dissolved putrid poison, and to call all the other
morbid processes connected with the development of micro-
scopic organisms, pyaemic processes.

Birch-Hirschfeld,* for example, separates pyaemia from
septicaemia in this way. He understands by the term
" septicaemia " a disease originating in alterations of the
blood, which alterations are a consequence of the absorption of
the products of putrefaction. On the other hand, he defines
pyaemia as " a general infection, which proceeds from the sur-
faces of wounds or from the focus of a primary suppurative
inflammation, probably evoked by specific organisms and
different from the putrid infection." Cohnheimt also identifies

* Lehrbuoh der pathologischen Anatomie. Leipzig, Vogel, 1876, p. 1224.
f Vorlesungen uber Pathologie. Berlin, 1877, s. 469,



INTRODUCTION. Xlll

septicaemia with putrid infection, and attributes it to the
entrance of a putrid poison in solution into the fluids of
the body. Davaine, whose works I shall have to allude
to repeatedly, adheres, on the other hand, to the older
distinction between pyaemia and septicaemia, and includes
under the latter term all those cases in which the post-mortem
examination shows no metastatic deposits, although in both
cases he considers the co-operation of specific organisms as
proven.

The terms pyaemia and septicaemia no longer retain their
original signification, for pyaemia does not arise, as was at one
time believed, from the entrance of pus into the blood-vessels,
and septicaemia is not putrefaction of the living blood. They
now remain only as collective names for a number of symptoms
which in all probability belong to different diseases. So long,
however, as these diseases are not sufficiently separated from
each other, it seems best for the present to retain these terms
in their ordinary signification, in order to avoid the necessity
of constantly adopting new definitions.

For these reasons I shall in what follows include under the
term septicaemia all those cases of general traumatic infection
in which no metastatic deposits occur, and under pyaemia
those in the course of which they may be present.



THE

PRESENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE

WITH REGARD TO

THE RELATIONS OF MICRO-ORGANISMS TO
TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES.


I. The Occurrence of Micro-organisms in the
Human Body in Disease.

The first communication regarding the occurrence of
bacteria in the organs of those who have died of traumatic
infective diseases was made by Eindfleisch* in the year 1866.
In pyaemia, puerperal fever, and like infective diseases, small
softened metastatic deposits, of the size of a pin's head, at
times occur. These deposits are always found in greater
numbers in the substance of the heart, in the muscular tissue
of which they have at first the appearance of greyish white
spots, these specks becoming, at a later period, cavities filled
with a thin fluid pulp. The contents of these cavities consist,
as Rindfleisch has shown, not of pus-corpuscles, but solely of
" vibriones. ,, These organisms lie at first closely packed
between the fasciculi of the muscle; at a later period,
however, from disintegration of the muscular fibres, they
penetrate into their interior. Eindfleisch was unable to trace
the alterations further than to the formation of these small
abscess-like softened spots, because the process in question
only occurs in those forms of infective diseases which are
most severe and rapidly fatal. Eindfleisch has not specially
described the organisms termed by him " vibriones," as
regards their size or as to whether they were rod-shaped or
spherical.

* Lehrbuch der patkologisclien gewebelehre. 1 Aufl., s. 204 (4 AufL,
p. 199).



2 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

That the development of these miliary purulent deposits,
which occur also in other organs in typhus, pyaemia, &c, is
produced by parasitic organisms, in other words by bacteria,
was shown almost simultaneously by Von Kecklinghausen
and Waldeyer. Von Kecklinghausen * describes the bodies
found in the smallest renal veins, in the glomeruli, urinary
tubules, and pulmonary alveoli, under the name of micrococci,
and states that they may be distinguished from detritus by
the uniform size of their granules and by their resistance to
the action of glycerine, acetic acid, caustic soda, &c. He
likewise calls attention to the brownish colour of the centre of
the deposit, as well as to the fact that the uriniferous tubules
and the vessels in which the micrococci He are very much
distended at intervals.

Waldeyer confirmed Kindfleisch's statement regarding the
occurrence of numerous miliary bacteric deposits in the
substance of the heart in pyaemia, and he also found bacteria
in small abscess-like spots in the kidneys.

Attention was directed by these investigations to the bac-
teria, which are present in metastatic deposits in pyaemia, and
which up to that time had been overlooked or regarded as
unimportant. These statements were confirmed and extended
by many similar observations, and it may now be regarded as
an established fact that, in most of the metastatic deposits in
pyaemia, bacteria in the form of the so-called zooglaea will, on
careful examination, be found. Nothing essentially new, with
some exceptions to be noticed directly, has, however, been
added by later investigations to the original observations of
Bindfleisch, Von Kecklinghausen, and Waldeyer. It is
therefore unnecessary to take special notice of the numerous
papers on this subject.

It is worthy of mention that P. Vogtt has seen moving
"monads," even during life, in the metastatic deposits of a
pyaemic individual. It now naturally occurred to observers
to subject the pus of wounds to examination, in order to ascer-
tain if the bacteria, found in the metastatic deposits, accumu-

* Vortrag in der Wurzb. physik.-med. Ges. 10 Juni, 1871 (quoted from
Birch-Hirsclifeld, Med. Jalirbb. Bd. 155, Heft 1).

f Centralblatt fiir die mediciii, Wisseuscliaft. 1872, No. 44.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 3

lated in the first instance in the pus of the wound, and from
thence penetrated into the tissue. Extensive observations
of this kind have been made by Birch-Hirschfeld.* He came
to the conclusion that the unhealthiness of a wound stood in
a direct relation to the number of spherical bacteria in the
pus of that wound. The more abundantly these appeared the
worse became the state of the wound and the general
condition of the patient. The most unfavourable cases were
those in which the spherical bacteria had become grouped
together in colonies (zooglsea). As the spherical bacteria
increased in number their penetration into the pus-corpuscles
could also be observed. Birch-Hirschfeld examined at the
same time the blood of pyaemic patients, and found that it
contained bacteria. He further states that the severity and
rapidity of the general infection are in proportion to the
number of bacteria which may be detected in the blood.

The channel by which the bacteria gain access to the meta-
static deposits would, if these observations were correct, be
pretty clearly indicated. The mode by which they pass into
the circulation, from the surface of the wound, alone remained
unknown. This blank was filled up by the investigations of
Klebs. The work of Klebst deserves notice here, not on this
ground alone, but also because his researches furnish very
numerous and thorough observations on the bacteria of
wound diseases, and further because in them the attempt was
made for the first time, by the aid of abundant and excellently
used materials for observation, to demonstrate a causal
connection between bacteria and traumatic infective diseases.
Klebs designates the bacteria found in the pus of a wound as
microsporon septicum, starting with the view that spherical
and rod- shaped bacteria stand in a genetic relation to each
other, and also that the micrococci and bacteria commonly
found together in wounds are forms of the same organism.
The growth of this microsporon septicum in the form of
zooglsea masses firmly attached to the surface of the wound
was observed by Klebs on granulations, joint surfaces, and
serous membranes. He was also able to trace the penetration

* Untersuchungen iiber Pyaeniie. Leipzig, 1873.
t Beitrage zur patkolog. Anatoinie der Sclmsswundeii. Leipzig,
Vogel, 1872.



4 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

of the zooglsea into the interspaces of the cellular tissue.
This takes place either with or without the aid of wandering
lymph corpuscles. The passage of the microsporon along
the lymphatic vessels could not be followed with complete
certainty; on the other hand its penetration through the
eroded walls of a vein into the circulation was observed in one
instance. Further, the elements of the microsporon were found
by Klebs in the thrombi which develop behind the valves ox
veins, and in the metastatic deposits in the lung and liver.

Although the facts which have been hitherto collected with
reference to the dependence of pyaemia on the development
of bacteria in the body are numerous and important, yet
the statements relating to the occurrence of organisms in
septicaemia are few and doubtful.

Coze and Feltz as well as Hueter* attribute the corrugated
form of the red corpuscles frequently seen in septicemic
diseases to the adhesion and penetration of bacteria; an
observation which has been much and justly doubted.

The only other statement I have been able to find, as to
the presence of bacteria in the blood in septicaemia, is made
by Collmann von Schatteburgt. He saw, in one case, rods
both in the blood of the body generally and in the vascular
loops of the glomeruli.

The observations on erysipelas are much more abundant.

NepveuJ found micrococci in the blood of erysipelatous
patients, and these were present in greatest number in blood
taken from the erysipelatous part.

Wilde § obtained the same result and he also states that
the pus of wounds, from which erysipelatous inflammation
starts, contains numerous micrococci. Orth lj has also found
micrococci in the contents of the bullae in erysipelas.

Of especial importance is the discovery made by Von
Eecklinghausen and LukomskylT that the lymphatic vessels

* Compare Birch-Hirschfeld : Lehrbuch der pathologisclien Anatomic
Leipzig, 1876, p. 469, and Med. Jakrbb., Bd. 166, p. 184.

f Virchow und Hirsch : Jaliresbericlit for 1875. I., page 869.
I Virchow und Hirsch : Jaliresbericlit for 1872. I., page 254.
§ Med. Jahrbb. Bd. 155, Heft 1, page 104.
|| Archiv f. Experiment. Pathol, u. Pharmakol. I., page 81.
IF Virchow's Archiv. Bd. 60, page 418.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 5

and canaliculi (saft kaniilchen) of the skin at the border of
the erysipelatous part are filled with micrococci.

This observation was confirmed by Billroth and Ehrlich,*
who likewise found micrococci, not only in the lymphatic, but
also in the blood-vessels.

Micrococci have also been seen, by Tillmanns,+ in
erysipelatous skin, and by Letzerich J in cases of erysipelas
attacking vaccination wounds, in the wound itself, in the
blood-vessels, muscles, liver, spleen, and kidneys.

With respect to phlegmonous suppurations, the observations
have apparently been confined as yet to the contents of the
abscesses, while the walls of the latter — that is to say the
adjacent tissue which, as will subsequently be shown, is the
true seat of the bacteric development — have up to this time
received no attention. In the pus from the abscess, just as
in the ordinary pus from wounds, bacteria have often and
micrococci have almost always been found. A detailed
account of the statements on this point is accordingly un-
necessary.

Hospital gangrene differs so little from the diphtheria of
mucous membranes that the observations made with reference
to the latter also hold good for the former.

According to Cohnheim,§ after tracheotomy the disease at
times spreads from the mucous membrane to the operation
wound. But even without any apparent infection wounds
often become diphtheritic, and Cohnheim thinks it probable
that hospital gangrene is nothing more or less than a diph-
theritic inflammation of the surface of a wound.

Hueter || found in the greyish diphtheritic deposits on
wounds, and, on more accurate examination, in the neigh-
bouring tissues, as yet apparently quite healthy, the same
small round bodies with dark contours which he afterwards
saw in the false membrane in diphtheritis of the larynx
and pharynx.

* v. Langenbeck's Arcliiv. Bd. 20, p. 418.

f Deutsche medicin. Wochenschrift, 1878. No. 17, p. 224.

I Virchow uiicl Hirsch : Jahresbericlit for 1875, p. 69.

§ I/, c, p. 482.

|| Steudener : Volkmann's klinisclie Vortriige. No. 38, p. 24.



6 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

By the researches of Oertel, Nassiloff, Classen, Letzerich,
Klebs, and Eberth,* it has been placed beyond doubt that in
diphtheritic deposits large numbers of micrococci are present.
The statements are, however, as yet contradictory with
regard to the question whether or not the bacteria penetrate
into the tissues.

Oertel t found the inflamed mucous membrane crammed
with micrococci, and was further able to trace them in the
afferent lymphatic vessels of the nearest lymphatic glands,
in the glands themselves, as well as in the blood-vessels of
the kidney and of other internal organs.

Similar observations have been made by Eberth, Nassiloff,
and Letzerich.

The presence of small deposits of bacteria in the cardiac
tissue, in the liver, kidneys, and other organs, in cases of
diphtheria, has of late been repeatedly demonstrated.!

Attention has also been drawn, by different observers, §
especially by those who have inoculated diphtheria on the
cornea of rabbits, to the brownish colour of the micrococcus
masses.

On comparing the behaviour of the bacteria in diphtheria
and in pyaemia, one is at once struck by a remarkable corre-
spondence. In both morbid processes the surface of the
wound is covered with masses of micrococci which penetrate
into the deeper layers of the tissue and into the lymphatic
vessels ; in both, peculiar miliary bacteric deposits are present
in the cardiac tissue, in the liver, and in the kidney ; and in
both, these bacteric deposits are of a brownish colour. The
question is at once forced on the mind, May not the parasitic
micro-organisms of pyaemia and of diphtheria be identical ?

The same appearances may be seen in puerperal fever.
In this disease Waldeyer|| has found spherical bacteria in
the affected tissues, in the lymphatic vessels, and in the
peritoneal exudation ; whilst Birch-HirschfeldH has observed

* See Birch-Hirsclifeld : Lehrbuch der pathol. Anatomie, p. 799.

f Steudener, I. c, p. 24.

I Cohnheim, I.e., page 480.

§ Birch-Hirsclifeld, I, c, page 799.

|| Archiv fur Gynakologie. Bd. II. 1871.

f Med. Jahrbb. Bd. 155, p. 105.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DIREARER. 7

micrococcus masses on vaginal ulcers, in the perivaginal
cellular tissue, in the blood, in the spleen, and in the liver.
The presence of micrococci in the kidneys, lungs, and cardiac
muscular tissue was demonstrated by Heiberg and Orth,* and
the latter makes mention of the greyish yellow colour of those
present in the uriniferous tubules which are affected with
nodular dilatations.

As standing probably in close relation to puerperal fever,
we must here mention the disease affecting new-born infants,
first described by Ortht and called by him mycosis septica.
In one such case micrococci were found in the blood, in the
pleural cavity, and in the urinary bladder.

The so-called mycosis of the navel in new-born infants
(nabelmykose) seems likewise to belong to this group of
diseases. Weigert J describes a case of this kind, and states
that the ulcer of the navel was covered with micrococci, and
that groups of micrococci were present in the centre of small
extravasations of blood in the lungs and kidneys.

Hennig has investigated an analogous case and obtained
the same result.

The extremely interesting observations with regard to the
occurrence of bacteria in endocarditis seem less easily
explicable.

All investigators who have been engaged in seeking bacteria
in morbid tissues agree in regarding the undertaking as one
of extraordinary, often even of insuperable, difficulty. To
make up for the weakness of the anatomical proofs as to the
presence of bacteria, pathological experiment has in most
cases been resorted to. In order, therefore, to obtain a
complete survey of the facts known respecting the relations
of bacteria to traumatic infective diseases, it is now necessary
to give a short digest of the results of the experimental inves-
tigations on this subject.


Ibid. Bd. 166, p. 188.
f Archiv. der Heilkunde, 1872. XIII., p. 265.
\ Jahresber. der schles. Gesellsch. fur vaterl. Kultur. 1875, p. 229.



8 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO



II. Kelations of Micro-organisms to Traumatic Infective
Diseases, as established by Experiment.

It is known, as the result of experience, that, when trau-
matic infective diseases set in, the discharges of the wound
and the fluids in the neighbouring tissues take on a putrid
character. These alterations in the wound often, indeed,
make their appearance before any perceptible manifestation
of the general disease, and it was therefore concluded that the
putrefaction of the discharges was the cause of the infective
disease. Some, however, disputed the accuracy of this con-
clusion, and maintained that the infective disease was produced
by causes acting from within, and that the deterioration of
the wound occurred secondarily. To settle this controversy
numerous experiments have been set on foot. Experimenters
for a long time contented themselves with ascertaining the
noxious influence of putrid substances on animals when injected
into the blood or into the subcutaneous tissue, and with iso-
lating the poisonous substance contained in these putrid fluids.
The question as to whether the disease produced by the injection
of the putrid fluid was only a simple poisoning, or whether it
in reality possessed the infective qualities of those diseases
observed in man, was left untouched by the older and most of
the later experimenters. If in an animal, by injection of a
putrid fluid, a disease was produced resembling to some extent
the human infective disease in symptoms and post-mortem
appearances, this circumstance sufficed for their identification,
and from such an experiment extensive conclusions as to
infective diseases were drawn. But in order that such experi-
ments should prove the infective character of the disease, it
must be definitely ascertained, by further transmission from
one animal to another, that the disease produced experi-
mentally is in like manner of undoubtedly infective nature.

As we have here to do only with infective diseases, all the
investigations which have reference merely to the toxic
properties of putrid materials, as well as those in which the
possibility of a confusion between toxic action and infection is
not excluded, must be left unnoticed.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 9

The first attempt to produce traumatic infective diseases
artificially in the lower animals was made by Coze and Feltz.*
These investigators injected some grammes of blood, from
a patient who had died of putrid poisoning and puerperal
fever, into the subcutaneous cellular tissue of rabbits. In
consequence of this the animals died with peculiar and
characteristic symptoms. A much smaller quantity of the
blood of the rabbits thus killed was injected subcutaneously
into other rabbits and the same symptoms and fatal
termination occurred as took place with the original putrid
blood. Coze and Feltz continued this transmission of blood,
in gradually diminishing quantities, from the dead animals to
others, and they finally succeeded in bringing about infection
with an extremely minute amount of blood. This led them to
assume that the poison increased in virulence by successive
inoculations. In the blood of animals which had died of
putrid infection they found bacteria in great numbers, indeed
they assert that they have seen at the same time rods, long
threads with an oscillating or vermiform motion, and chains
of small granules.

The discovery of the increasing virulence of the successively
inoculated putrid poison excited the most lively interest.

The experiments of Coze and Feltz were repeated and
confirmed by Clementi and Thin, and by Behier and
Lionville.t These observers likewise convinced themselves
that for the first infection a comparatively large quantity of
the infective material, be it blood, peritoneal fluid, or the like,
is necessary ; while for the later infections an extremely
minute quantity is sufficient. They also found numerous
bacteria in the blood of the animals killed by the inoculation.

Colin, Vulpian, Eaynaud, and others obtained similar
results.!

Davaine, § however, has studied these conditions more
thoroughly than any other observer. He transmitted the

* Virchow und Hirsch : Jahresbericht fiir 1866. I., p. 195.
f Richter: Die neueren Kenntnisse der Krankmachenden Schma-
rotzerpilze. separatabdr. aus d. med. Jahrbb.
J Med. Jahrbb. Vol. 166, p. 174.
§ Ibid.



10 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

infection through a series of twenty-five animals in succession,
and for the last effective transmission of the putrid infecting
material he used only a trillionth part of a drop of blood.
Davaine saw in the blood of these animals actively moving
bacteria, differing in that respect from those of splenic fever,
which are quiescent and were for that reason called by him
bacteridia.

Although the most diverse fluids were used by him in these
experiments for the first infection, e. g. 9 putrefying blood,
blood from pysemic cases, from puerperal fever, scarlet fever,
small-pox, and typhus, yet the effects produced were always
similar, and the post-mortem examination showed in all cases
bacteria in the blood, and swelling of the spleen, with absence of
metastatic deposits. Davaine accordingly calls this disease
septicaemia.

Of the other traumatic infective diseases, diphtheria and
erysipelas have been artificially produced in animals.

The attempt to transmit erysipelas was first made by
Orth.* He injected under the skin of a rabbit the contents
of an erysipelatous bulla in which were numerous spherical
bacteria. There followed an inflammation entirely analogous
to erysipelas in man, and, by the application of the oedematous
fluid from the subcutaneous tissue of this animal to a second
rabbit, the characteristic progressive inflammation was
communicated to the latter. In the oedematous fluid in the
subcutaneous cellular tissue, and in the affected parts of the
skin of the animals suffering from artificial erysipelas, Orth
demonstrated the presence of bacteria in large numbers.

Lukomsky t has also experimented on rabbits with erysipe-
latous fluid in order to produce an artificial erysipelas. He,
however, obtained in the animals experimented on an
extensive phlegmonous inflammation of the subcutaneous
cellular tissue with implication of the skin. But in his cases
also micrococci were present in the canaliculi (saftkanalen)
of the areolar tissue and in the lymphatic vessels.

That diphtheria may be communicated to rabbits, and
that micrococci appear in the artificial diphtheria similar

* Birch-Hirschfeld : Lehrb. d. patholog. Anat., p. 608.
f Loc. cit.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 11

in characters to those found in diphtheria in man, has
been demonstrated by Hueter, Tommasi, G^rtel, and Letze-
rich (/. c.)

The investigations on diphtheria led to the introduction
of an experiment of extreme importance in the study of
pathogenic bacteria, viz., the use of the transparent cornea
of the rabbit as the place for inoculation.

Nassiloff* and E berth t were the first to carry out these
corneal inoculations. At first diphtheritic substances were
alone used, but it was soon found that the most diverse putrid
materials, products of inflammation, and the like, could also
be inoculated on the cornea with effect.

Similar experiments have likewise been carried out and
in various ways modified by Leber, Stromeyer, Dolschenkow,
Orth, and more especially by Frisch. \

In a successful inoculation of this kind a peculiar stellate
patch with conical processes — the so-called "mushroom"
appearance (Pilzfigur) — is produced, the centre of which is
the point of inoculation. The materials composing this patch
are, in diphtheritic inoculations, dense masses of micrococci,
which are of a yellow or greenish-brown colour like the
micrococci of the diphtheritic and pyaemic deposits in the
muscular tissue of the heart and in the kidneys. The " Pilz-
figur " is also obtained by inoculation of putrid fluids, and
here it consists of rod-shaped bacteria. Frisch further inocu-
lated materials from splenic fever on the cornea of living
rabbits, and observed the development of splendid "Pilz-
figuren," which consisted only of Bacillus Anthracis.§

In all these experiments the inflammatory appearances in
the cornea were exactly in proportion to the development and
extent of the bacteria. Eberthjj found the association of
the bacteria with the artificial diphtheria of the cornea so

* Virchow's Arcliiv. Vol. 50, p. 550.

f Eberth. Bacterische Mykosen. Leipzig, 1872.

I Experimentelle Studien liber die Verbreitung der FiiulnisRorgauismen
in den Geweben. Erlangen, 1874.

§ Die Milzbrand-bakterien und ihre Vegetation in der lebenden Horn
haut. Vienna, 1876.

|| L. c, p. 14.



12 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

constant that he distinctly says : Without the fungi (i. e.,
bacteria) no diphtheria.

A special method, and one of much promise for demon-
strating the origin of infective diseases from a contagium
animatum, was followed by Klebs.* He introduced fluids
and other substances, taken from patients who were suffering
from or who had died of infective diseases, into thoroughly
purified flasks containing cultivating fluids. After develop-
ment of organisms had occurred in these fluids a small
quantity was taken and put into a second vessel containing
a similar liquid. With the fluid of the second flask a third
was inoculated, and so on through a series sufficiently
long to enable him to assume that only an excessively small
part of the infective substance originally employed, or indeed
none at all, could be present in the last cultivating liquid.
The fluids, thus freed from the original infective material,
were inoculated on animals. Klebs t has employed this
method, which he terms fractional cultivation, more especially
with substances from diphtheritic and septic processes, though
also with material from various other diseases. The fluids
obtained in this manner by fractional cultivation, when
inoculated on animals, produced again septicaemia and
diphtheria ; and Klebs also found, both in the cultivating
fluids and in the infected animals, the characteristic mi-
crococci.

In a similar manner Ortht has grown in cultivating fluids
bacteria from an erysipelatous bulla, and, by the injection
of this fluid, has reproduced erysipelas in rabbits.

III. Objections to the conclusiveness of these Facts.

The facts put together in the two foregoing sections are
undoubtedly of considerable significance. When taken along
with theoretical considerations, and looked at in the light of

* Virchow und Hirsch. Jahresbericht, 1874. Vol. i., p. 359.

| Ueber die Umgestaltung der medicinischen Auschauungen in den
letzten drei Jahrzehnten. Bede, gehalten in Munchen bei der 50.
Versammlung deutscher Naturforsclier. Leipzig. Vogel. 1878.

I Birch- Hirschfeld, I. c, p. 608.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 13

the brilliant results of the antiseptic method of treatment,
they furnish evidence sufficient to enable many to accept as
proved the existence of living infective material, especially in
traumatic infective diseases. On the other hand, various
objections, of more or less weight, have been urged against
this assumption ; and a short discussion of these is requisite
in order to form a judgment as to the significance of bacteria
in traumatic infective diseases.

A considerable number of investigators have advanced the
statement that the normal blood and tissues of man and
of the lower animals always contain micro-organisms. From
this some infer that these organisms are not the cause of the
infective disease, but that an abnormal increase in their
numbers follows the morbid process, because the fluids, of the
animal body, when altered by disease, present conditions very
favourable for their development. We need not consider these
views, which have as yet never been experimentally proved,
but which are advanced on theoretical grounds alone. Were
it, however, true that bacteria do occur in normal blood, and
that the same bacteria — e. g., micrococci — are found, though
in unusual numbers, in organs altered by disease, then the
possibility of proving that these micrococci were the cause of
the disease would be rendered much more difficult, perhaps
indeed quite hopeless. We must therefore enquire how far
the assertion in question is correct.

Lostorfer, Nedsvetzki, and Bechamp* discovered small
moving particles in normal human blood. Lostorfer calls
these bodies micrococci, and asserts that he has traced their
further development to sarcinse. Nedsvetzki has given to
these particles the name of haemococci, and he considers them
as identical with the bodies described by Bechamp. Bechamp
has in numerous papers expressed his views respecting the
bodies called by him microzymes. He found these bodies in
almost all animal fluids, and, from experiments which he
carried on in conjunction with Estor, he concludes that
microzymes can, through their physiological activity, bring
about the coagulation of the blood, and the lactic, acetic,

* Kichter, I. c, p. 12.



14 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

and alcoholic fermentations ; that they are also active in
the transformation of glycogen in the liver, in the develop-
ment of the embryo in hens' eggs during hatching, and in all
possible processes in the animal body. That Bechamp looks
on his microzymes as intimately related to bacteria is
apparent, because, according to him, the microzymes in the
intestine below the ilioeaecal valve change normally into
bacteria ; and at diseased spots of the small intestine — as,
e. g., where a tapeworm is attached — bacteria develop imme-
diately from microzymes.

J. Liiders, Bettelheim, Bichardson,* and, later, Kolaczek
and Letzerich,t also believe that they have seen bacteria in
normal human blood.

Tiegelt and Billroth § have attempted in an indirect manner
to demonstrate the existence of bacteria in normal animal
tissues. They introduced, with certain precautions, fresh
portions of muscle, liver, &c, into melted paraffin. The
tissues thus enclosed in an air-tight case were, after the
lapse of some time, examined to ascertain the presence or
absence of bacteria. Numerous bacteria were found, and
hence Billroth || concludes that in most of the tissues of the
body, in greater proportion indeed in the blood, spores of
bacteria capable of development are present.

Objections have been urged against the experiments of
Billroth and Tiegel, to the effect that the enclosure in .
paraffin does not protect against the entrance of bacteria,
because cracks and fissures form in the paraffin on cooling,
and even afterwards, as every one must have observed
who has embedded objects in paraffin for microscopical
examination.

When normal blood was tested by Pasteur, 1} Burdon
Sanderson,** and Klebs,tt as to its power of causing develop-

* Virchow and Hirsch. Jahresbericht for 1868. Vol. i., p. 205.

+ Med. Jahrbb. Vol. 168, p. 68.

I Virchow and Hirsch. Jahresber., 1874. Vol. i., p. 119.

§ Coccobacteria Septica. Berlin, 1874, p. 58.

|| L. c, pp. 60 and 137.

H Virchow und Hirsch. Jahresberich., 1874. Vol. i., p. 119.

** Cohn. Beitriige zur Biologie der Pflanzen. Vol. i., part 2, p. 194.

ft Med. Jahrbb. Vol. 166, p. 196.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 15

ment, by methods excluding all sources of error, negative
results were obtained.

Opposed to the alleged direct observations of bacteria in
normal blood are the statements of trustworthy microscopists
such as Eindfleisch and Biess,* who distinctly assert that the
normal blood is free from bacteria, but that on the other hand,
as Eiess more especially pointed out, it contains small round
bodies more or less numerous, which are most probably
debris arising from the disintegration of white blood corpuscles,
and which, on account of their resemblance to micrococci,
have been confounded with them.

According to my own experience the examination of blood,
with the view of ascertaining the possible presence of bacteria,
is excessively difficult, unless one makes use of the aids to be
described afterwards, viz., of staining and suitable illumina-
tion. Without the assistance derived from these methods
it is in most cases impossible to distinguish the bodies so
characteristically described by Eiess, from true micrococci;
and I can therefore easily imagine that, according as one
wished to find that bacteria were present or absent, the
granular constituents of the blood would be regarded as
micrococci, or micrococci when present would be regarded
as the remains of disintegrated white corpuscles. I have,
however, on many occasions examined normal blood and
normal tissues by means which prevent the possibility of
overlooking bacteria, or of confounding them with granular
masses of equal size ; and I have never, in a single
instance, found organisms. I have therefore come to the
conclusion that bacteria do not occur in the blood, nar in the
tissues of the healthy living body either of man or of the loner
animals.

On the other hand, the following objections which have been
raised against the assumption that bacteria are the cause of
traumatic infective diseases seem to me to be well founded.
In order to establish this assertion (that they are the cause of
traumatic infective diseases) it would be absolutely necessary
tltat the presence of bacteria in these diseases be proved without
exception, and further that the conditions as regards their
* Vircliow und Hirscli. Jaliresber., 1872. Vol. L, p. 252.



16 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

number and distribution be such as to afford a complete
explanation of the symptoms. For, if in some cases of a
certain form of infective disease bacteria be found, while in
others of like nature they are absent, and if further the
bacteria present be so few in number that it is impossible
that a severe disease or a fatal termination could thereby be
produced, then of course nothing remains but to regard the
irregular appearance of the bacteria as depending on chance,
and their small number as insufficient as an only cause of the
disease in question ; in other words it is necessary to assume
the presence of some other agency. The observations hitherto
made with regard to the occurrence of bacteria in traumatic
infective diseases do not, however, in reality fulfil the necessary
conditions.

On account of the difficulties, before alluded to, attending
the demonstration of bacteria in the blood, and more especially
in the tissues, many of the above-mentioned statements have
been received with considerable suspicion, — whether always
with justice must remain uncertain, — for the earlier method
of investigation is in most cases a groping in the dark, and
its results cannot be otherwise than very doubtful.

But, apart from the uncertain results of much laborious
work on the bacteria of traumatic infective diseases, the
literature of the subject contains a number of statements as
to complete absence of bacteria in undoubted instances of
these affections. It would serve no good purpose to enumerate
here all these negative statements, as their value is even less
than that of the positive. One or two may, however, be men-
tioned as illustrations.

Birch-Hirschfeld* states that negative results with regard
to the occurrence of bacteria, especially in cases of spreading
(fulminanter) gangrene and putrid infection, are by no means
rare.

Orth,+ after mentioning that micrococci are present in
the blood, particularly in septic diseases, puerperal fever,
and diphtheria, expressly states that they are by no means
constantly found.

* L. c, p. 1224.

t Compendium der pathol.-anatomischen Diagnostik. Berlin, 1876,

p. 111.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 17

Eberth,* who has convinced himself of the frequent occur-
rence of bacteria in septicaemia, does not regard that
disease as caused by an infection of the blood by bacteria
alone, because he has seen the most distinct septicaemia
without the presence of bacteria in the blood.

Weigertt speaks thus of the occurrence of bacteria :■ —
" However certainly one may refer the development of some
diseases to the action of bacteria, yet, on the other hand, there
exist a far greater number of morbid processes which would
theoretically be considered as mycotic, but in which a conscien-
tious observer cannot discover any traces of bacteric agency."

I have intentionally taken these extracts from the writings
of those authors who have shown, by having sometimes
obtained positive results, that they understood how to overcome
the great difficulties connected with the discovery of bacteria,
and whose statements, therefore, with regard to their frequent
absence in cases of traumatic infective diseases, deserve especial
consideration.

The second circumstance, which seems to me of essential
importance in considering this question, viz., that in almost
all cases in which bacteria were found the number was
strikingly small, has as yet received too little attention.

We do not yet know with certainty how many bacteria are
necessary to produce in man definite symptoms of disease, or
what proportion per kilogram of an animal is required to
cause a fatal result. Undoubtedly some definite relations,
varying at most only within narrow limits in consequence of
differences in the affected individuals, must exist between
the number of pathogenic bacteria and their effect, i. e.,
the symptoms of the disease. The only disease which may
with certainty be affirmed to be of bacteric origin, viz., anthrax,
gives us sufficient ground for this supposition. Small animals
die after inoculation with anthracic blood more quickly than
do large ones, and in animals of the same genus and of like
size the fatal termination occurs later when the fluid used
contains but few spores or bacilli capable of development
than when it is rich in them. The explanation of these facts

* Med. Jahrbb. Vol. 166, p. 185.

t Berl. Klin. Wochenschr., 1877, No. 18.



18 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

can only be this, that to kill, e. r/., a sheep, more bacilli
are requisite than to kill a mouse ; that bacilli or spores being
introduced in about equal quantities into both animals at the
time of inoculation, the number of bacilli necessary to cause
the death of the mouse, being small, is reached more quickly
than the larger quantity requisite to kill the sheep ; and
further, that in animals of the same species the fatal number
of bacilli is longer in being attained when the spores intro-
duced are few in number than when they are injected in large
amount.

We learn further from the study of anthrax that the
number of bacilli present in the blood must be enormously
large before death results. In relapsing fever also, the rela-
tions of which to the spirochseta discovered by Obermeier are
as yet not sufficiently known, but which nevertheless, on
account of the absolutely constant occurrence of these organisms
during every attack of fever, must be regarded as in all
probability a parasitic disease, the same relation exists between
the number of bacteria in the blood and the symptoms of the
disease. Of course it must not be assumed that all pathogenic
bacteria behave alike in this respect, but it may be concluded
from the analogy of anthrax and relapsing fever that a con-
siderable number of bacteria is necessary to produce symptoms.
But the observations which have been hitherto made with regard
to bacteria in traumatic infective diseases do not in most
cases show that this requirement is fulfilled. Mention is
generally made of large masses of micrococci on the surface
of the wound, which collections, however, can only be
regarded as of importance in large wounds ; while in internal
organs only miliary colonies of bacteria have been found, and
these often in small numbers. This result bears no relation
whatever to the almost incredible numbers of bacilli in the
blood in anthrax. It is therefore only observations which
show the presence of a large number of bacteria which can
be regarded as affording sufficient explanation of the morbid
appearances. Statements no doubt exist with regard to the
occurrence of micrococci in the blood and tissues, but unfor-
tunately it is precisely these assertions which for the reasons
above-mentioned are the least satisfactory.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 19

A third point remains to be urged against the cogency of
the facts known as to the occurrence of bacteria. It is this,
that morphologically the bacteria found in the most diverse
traumatic infective diseases, and also in other infective pro-
cesses not in any way connected with wounds, are strikingly
similar.

It must at once strike anyone who studies the literature on
the subject of bacteria that the two best known bacteric
diseases, anthrax and relapsing fever, are notable for the
well-marked and easily recognisable form of their parasites;
but that in almost all other infective diseases, which ap-
parently stand in close relation with micro-organisms, there
exists a remarkable agreement as regards the form, size,
arrangement, and colour of the bacteria observed. But,
for the very reason that in relapsing fever and in anthrax
such marked differences in this respect exist, the similarity
of the other pathogenic bacteria must awaken distrust as to
the accuracy of the observations and of the assumption that
diseases which seem to bear so little relation to each other
should, nevertheless, be produced by the same organisms.

Such doubts have been often expressed.

Thus, for example, Birch-Hirschfeld* says, " the morpho-
logical characters of the bacteria found in pyaemia, diphtheria,
small-pox, and cholera are so similar that the idea naturally
arises that identical organisms are being dealt with. But, if
this were the case, it would follow that no specific significance
could be attributed to these forms. They would have to be
regarded merely as parasites of the disease and not as its
cause."

To the diseases mentioned by Birch-Hirschfeld a number of
others may be added in which micrococci, indistinguishable
from each other, were found. Such are erysipelas, puerperal
fever, mycosis of the navel in newly-born infants (nabel-
mycose), hospital gangrene, intestinal mycosis, endocarditis
(with or without acute articular rheumatism), primary infec-
tive periostitis, scarlet fever, rinderpest, and pleuro-pneumonia.
It is, however, impossible that all these diseases can be

* L. c, p. 233.



20 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

produced by one and the same parasite, and we must therefore
assume either that the micrococci are in reality always the
same, in which case they would be merely associated, as an
accidental complication, with the diseases enumerated, or that
the micrococci — though, on account of their small size, very
similar, and indeed apparently the same — are nevertheless
different in nature, and consequently capable of giving rise to
these diverse results.

In order to show that this latter assumption does not lie
beyond the range of possibility, Cohn* has called attention to
the apparently similar external and microscopical nature of the
sweet and bitter almond, while a great difference exists between
them in physiological action. And Virchow,t in the same
sense, has referred to the fact that one cannot say with regard
to the formative cells of the egg and numerous pathological
growths what structure wiil be developed from them, although
as compared with bacteria these are truly gigantic in size.

The possibility that the micrococci, in spite of their uniform
appearance, may be in reality different, and the true contagium
vivum of the disease in which they are found, must assuredly
be admitted. But as a practical groundwork, more especially
with regard to the prophylaxis and treatment of the traumatic
infective diseases, the possibility of a contagium vivum does
not help us much ; we require conclusive evidence that this or
that micrococcus, definite in nature and always recognisable
under varying conditions by certain characteristics, is the only
cause of the disease in question. So long as the existence of
a contagium vivum is only a matter of possibility, or even of
probability, we cannot avoid taking into consideration in
all our investigations, the likewise possible presence of other
causes of disease, e.g., of the unknown x of a lifeless disease
ferment never yet demonstrated, of the y of the genus
epidemicus, and of other unknown quantities. It is, however,
apparent that the solution of the problem proposed would thus
be rendered in the highest degree difficult, and would be
endangered through numerous sources of error — in fact might
probably be quite impossible.


Beitriige zur Biologie der Pflanzen. Vol. I., part 2, p. 135.
f Die Fortschritte der Kriegsheilkunde. Berlin, 1874, p. 83.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 21

If we now look at the facts brought together and the remarks
on them, we come to this conclusion, that the frequent dis-
covery of micro-organisms in traumatic infective diseases and
the experimental investigations made in connection with them
render the parasitic nature of these diseases probable ; but
that a thoroughly satisfactory proof has not yet been fur-
nished, and can only be so when we have succeeded in finding
the parasitic micro-organisms in all cases of the disease in
question, when we can further demonstrate their presence in
such numbers and distribution that all the symptoms of the
disease may thus find their explanation, and finally when we
have established the existence, for every individual traumatic
infective disease, of a micro-organism with well-marked mor-
phological characters.

Is it then possible to fulfil these conditions in any degree ?
or have we now, as many microscopists assume, reached the
limit of the capabilities of our optical appliances ?

This question will, indeed, have often enough occurred to
every one who has specially devoted himself to the examination
of pathogenic bacteria. It has also occupied my attention
greatly, and at once forced itself on me when I commenced
these general investigations on bacteria, and saw what great
advantages might be obtained by a proper use of microscopic
aids in recognising and distinguishing the smallest forms of
bacteria with their spores and cilia.

Since that time I have unremittingly attempted to improve
the means for the discovery of pathogenic bacteria in animal
tissues, because I could not get rid of the idea that the doubtful
results of investigations with regard to the parasites of infective
diseases might have their foundation in the incompleteness of
the methods used.

I shall now, before passing on to the experimental part of
my work, describe the method which I have finally adopted as
most suitable, and which has led me to positive results.



22 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO



METHOD OF INVESTIGATION.

Von Becklinghausen's method, in which advantage is taken
of the property bacteria have of resisting acids and alkalies,
a power not possessed by animal tissues, is still used by most
microscopists. If a group of extremely minute particles,
characterised by the uniform size of its component granules,
does not alter either in acetic acid or in caustic potash or soda,
and if there are other grounds for suspecting the presence of
bacteria, the problem may then generally be regarded as solved,
and the micrococcus found. An error cannot easily occur here,
because the appearance of a closely-packed heap of micrococci,
the so-called zoogleea, is so characteristic that he who has
once had this picture stamped on his mind will recognise it
at any time. Incomparably more difficult are the circum-
stances when bacteria — and this particularly applies to micro-
cocci — are scattered through the tissues either singly or in
small loose groups. For now the characteristic appearance
of zooglsea no longer aids the observer, and one has solely to
depend on the resisting power of the bacteria to alkalies and
acids, because there are a great number of minute particles
present in tissues altered by disease which may very easily
be confounded with organisms. This method, however, of
distinguishing by reagents soon shows itself unreliable.
Many bacteria, more especially those which are extremely
minute, are as readily destroyed or altered by these reagents
as are the animal tissues; and, in the latter, indefinite
granules often occur which are not removed by acids or alkalies.
This method, therefore, cannot do more than demonstrate
zooglaea masses.

An attempt has been made to obtain better results by the
use of staining fluids, and the one which has been chiefly
recommended, simultaneously indeed by several observers, is
hematoxylin. This is a great step in advance of the first
method, especially when it is used in the same way as for
staining nuclei. But it is very incomplete, inasmuch as the



TEAUMAT1C INFECTIVE DISEASES. 23

hematoxylin does not stain rod-shaped bacteria at all, and
only colours the spherical so slightly as to prevent their
certain recognition when isolated. The use of hematoxylin
is a great advance on the simple examination of the object
with reagents, because when stained the bacteric masses are
very much more evident than the rest of the tissue, and one is
thus less likely to overlook them or to confound them with
other objects. This method, which does not of course exclude
examination with reagents, also possesses this great advantage,
that the stained preparations can be preserved in Canada
balsam, and can thus be used at any time for comparison
with others.

Staining with the aniline dyes has yielded still better
results than staining with hematoxylin. So far as I know,
aniline staining, as a means of demonstrating bacteria in
animal tissues, was first employed by Weigert.* His method,
by the communication of which he has laid me under the
greatest obligation, is as follows : —

The objects for examination are first hardened in alcohol.
The sections made from these are allowed to lie for a consider-
able time in a pretty strong watery solution of methyl-violet.
They are then treated with dilute acetic acid, the water
removed by alcohol, cleared up in oil of cloves, and mounted
in Canada balsam.

Instead of methyl-violet other aniline dyes, e.g., fuchsin,
aniline-brown, &c, may be used in the same manner.

This is, of course, only a general outline of the method; for
the individual tissues, and more especially the different forms
of bacteria show so great a variety of result from such treat-
ment that it would be impossible to lay down rules which
would be universal, and which would apply to every case. For
many objects fuchsin is best adapted ; for others the methyl
colours are more suitable. Among these latter there exists
such a difference in the staining power that the sections must
lie in one solution only a few minutes, in another several
hours. One must therefore work with a large number of
sections at once, and test them as to the most suitable

* Bericht liber die Sitzungen der Sclilesischen Gesellsckaft fiir Vaterl.
Ctoltur. Dec. 10, 1878.



24 MICRO-OBGANISMS IN RELATION TO

staining material and as to the time required for the staining.
The experienced investigator will find out after a few attempts
what is the most suitable material. The strength of the
acetic acid solution is not of much consequence. The best
solution is one containing only a small percentage of the
acid, and it is well not to allow it to act too long. The other
manipulations, such as the removal of water, clearing up and
mounting, are exactly the same as in the preparation of other
microscopic specimens. One must avoid leaving the sections
too long in alcohol or oil of cloves, otherwise the staining
material will be washed out by these fluids.

In preparations which are treated in this way only the
nuclei of the cells and the bacteria are seen to be stained.
The latter as a rule take up the aniline colour, and, in fact,
their staining is so marked that the individual bacteria can be
much more distinctly recognised than after the use of hema-
toxylin. It is thus very easy to recognize with certainty
isolated large bacteria, e.g., bacillus anthracis, in the most
diverse tissues, when the preparations have been treated with
aniline dyes. As soon, however, as we have to deal with
smaller bacteria the method yields uncertain results, and,
finally, with the smallest forms becomes quite useless.

In order now to understand how it is that small objects,
notwithstanding intense staining, cannot be distinguished at
all in the animal tissues, or only with difficulty, one must
clearly comprehend the component parts of the microscopic
picture. Let us for the sake of simplicity consider only the
case of a section of an animal tissue mounted in Canada
balsam in the ordinary manner.

If all the constituents of this tissue were colourless, and
had the same refractive power as Canada balsam, nothing
whatever would be seen. This is, however, not the case.
Fibres, nuclei, and many other portions of tissue, differ from
Canada balsam in their refractive power, and thus by diffrac-
tion of the rays of light passing through them an image con-
sisting of lines and shadows is developed which may be termed
shortly the structure picture.*
Let us now suppose a second case, namely, that portions

* Nffigeli und Schwendener : Mikroskop. Leipzig, 1877, p. 220.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 25

of the tissue, e.g., cell nuclei and bacteria, were coloured, then
the conditions would appear as follows : — With equal refractive
power of tissue and Canada balsam, nuclei and bacteria would
be alone visible, and that on account of the staining material
with which they are impregnated ; we should therefore have a
pure colour picture quite different from the structure picture
procjuced by fibres, membranes, &c, but in part coinciding
with that, as for example in the case of the nuclei. For the
best possible demonstration of bacteria, which are particularly
intensely stained by aniline dyes, such a pure colour picture
would certainly be the most suitable. The unavoidable
structure picture, however, interferes with this.

Large coloured objects, as for example bacillus anthracis, are
but little affected in this way as regards distinctness. Only
when the section as a whole or when portions of the tissue are
very thick (e.g., the intestinal mucous membrane in its whole
thickness) may the structure picture become so preponderant,
the number of the shadows placed above each other so great,
that even the large bacillus anthracis can be no longer easily
distinguished. When, however, the bacteria are smaller and
thinner, and thus take up less pigment, the bad effects of
the structure picture are much more apparent; a broad dark
line may then so overshadow some bacteria that their colour
picture becomes too weak to make an impression on the eye.
In very thin sections, and in those tissues whose structure
consists of but few lines and shadows (e.g., subcutaneous
cellular tissue, cornea, &c), very small bacteria may indeed
be distinguished with some accuracy. Ultimately, however, a
point is reached where the bacteria are so small that the
tiny stained granules and threads are hidden and rendered
invisible by even the faintest structure shadows. In some
particularly favourable places one may indeed suspect the
presence of bacteria, but a sure recognition of them and dis-
tinction of their form and size is no longer possible.

This difficulty was experienced by me in these investigations.
In materials stained in the manner to be subsequently
described I easily found large bacteria, and also smaller ones,
particularly when they formed accumulations in the glomeruli
of the kidney. But now the thought arose, must not bacteria



26 MICEO- ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

be present also in the spleen and in the capillaries of the lung ?
For the spleen was swollen and the blood from the left side of
the heart which had just passed through the lungs produced
on inoculation on another animal the same fatal disease and
the same extremely fine granular accumulations of micrococci
in the glomeruli as in the first animal. But in spite of the
greatest pains the suspected bacteria could not be found. In
the septicaemia of mice, which, as I shall afterwards show, is
in the highest degree infective, I was quite unable to demon-
strate any micro-organisms. I thus obtained the same incom-
plete results as the investigators who had formerly studied
traumatic infective diseases.

At that time, in attempting to photograph bacteria em-
bedded in Canada balsam, my attention was directed to the
fact that the microscopic image consists of a structure and of
a colour picture, and I found that the structure picture can be
markedly increased or weakened by the nature of the illumi-
nation. In this there is nothing new. Every microscopist knows
what is the effect of the diaphragm placed below a preparation.
A narrow diaphragm not only darkens the field of vision,
but makes the structure of the object more apparent ; a wide
one, on the other hand, renders the whole picture clearer, but
makes portions of the structure more indistinct. The
difference between narrow and wide diaphragms becomes still
more strikingly apparent, when, as in photography, not merely
a concave mirror, but a lens or condenser, is used for the
illumination, and for this reason, that — particularly with a
condenser of short focal distance — the cone of rays illumina-
ting the object is capable of much greater variation. When a
narrow diaphragm is placed before the condenser the base of
this cone becomes so small that the whole cone may almost be
regarded as a bundle of parallel rays of light. The larger, how-
ever, the opening of the diaphragm is, so much the larger does
the radius of the base of the cone become, its length still remain-
ing the same, but far surpassing as regards the ratio of breadth
of base to length that obtained by an ordinary concave mirror.
If now we examine a microscopic preparation with an illu-
mination in which the cone of rays is at first narrow, but is
gradually made broader, though always remaining of the same



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 27

length, we shall at oiice see that — as indeed cannot be other-
wise according to dioptrical laws — the structure picture re-
sulting from diffraction, which picture was most marked when
the narrowest diaphragm was used, becomes less and less
apparent. In proportion, however, as the structure picture
diminishes, does the colour picture become more intense and
sharply defined. Thus a method is indicated by which the
effects of the structure picture may be in so far obviated that
even the smallest stained bodies which are within the optical
power of the instrument become distinctly discernible. That
is to say, an illumination cone must be used of so wide a base
that the appearances resulting from diffraction may be com-
pletely removed. I tried numerous different lenses and con-
densers without finding one which removed the structure
picture sufficiently till I fell in with the illumination apparatus
suggested by Abbe and made by Carl Zeiss in Jena, which I
found to answer my purpose in every way.

This apparatus consists of a combination of lenses, the
focal point of which is only some millimetres distant from
the lowest lens of the objective system. When this compound
lens is placed in the opening of the stage of the microscope, a
little deeper than the level of the stage, the focal point coin-
cides with the object to be examined, and the latter thus
obtains the most favourable illumination. The angle of
aperture is so large that on escaping from the condenser into
water the outermost rays are inclined at an angle of almost 60°
with the axis, the whole effective pencil possessing thus an angle
of aperture of 120° — a greater angle than is given any other
condenser.* The rays of light are conveyed to this system of
lenses by a mirror which is only moveable round a fixed point
in the axis of the microscope. Between mirror and lens, and
near the focal point of the former, is a support for diaphragms,
which are moveable both laterally and circularly, so that the
direction of the illuminating pencil may be altered in any way
desired. By the use of diaphragms with larger or smaller aper-
tures the aperture of the pencil may be modified from the largest
to the smallest attainable with the apparatus. By lateral dis-
placement of the diaphragm without movement of the mirror,

* Nasgeli imd Schweiidener. L. c, p. 99.



28 MICBO-OBGANISMS IN RELATION TO

oblique illumination can be obtained, and by shutting off the
centre of the opening in the diaphragm the middle of the
pencil can be got rid of.

By means of this apparatus the connection before described
as existing between structure and colour picture can be made
evident in the most simple and convincing manner. Let us
suppose that a section of a tissue containing very few bacteria
stained with aniline is to be examined by the aid of Abbe's
illumination apparatus. At first a diaphragm with a narrow
opening is used.* The illumination of the object is then
about the same as in illumination with a concave mirror and
medium cylinder diaphragm. The field of vision, therefore,
appears pretty dark, the structure of the tissues is distinctly
marked, more especially do the nuclei of the cells strike the
eye as dark bodies with a but slightly pronounced staining of
a dark blue or red colour ; as regards the smaller granules
one cannot ascertain at all with certainty whether they are
stained or not, nor can it be made out whether these particles
are bacteria or constituents of the tissue. Now let diaphragms
with a constantly increasing size of aperture be used one after
another. The picture gradually alters in a most striking
manner. The dark outlines of the cells and cell nuclei, and
the sharp lines of the elastic fibres, walls of vessels and the
like become pale and ill-defined ; the shadows of the bodies
present above and below the visual level disappear more and
more ; many of the points and granules previously seen, which
might possibly have been considered to be bacteria, disappear
completely, while, on the other hand, small objects which
formerly appeared black are observed to be coloured, and the
colour of the nuclei becomes more distinct. The field of vision
at the same time becomes clearer. The more the lines and
shadows and all the differences between clear and dark dis-
appear, so much the more sharply and strongly do all coloured
objects stand out, and so much the more distinctly can one
recognise their outlines and minute differences in tone and
strength of colour. Finally, when the last diaphragm has

* I have had a set of diaphragms prepared, the openings of which
increase constantly one millimetre, thus furnishing all varieties of illu-
mination.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 29

been removed, all the outlines of mere structure have disap-
peared, the field of vision is uniformly cleared, and only
coloured objects can be seen. The clearer the light which one
selects for illumination (the best .light is that from white
clouds illuminated by the sun), so much the brighter and
more sharply-defined do these objects appear. It then
becomes easy to distinguish among the stained bodies the
bacteria of which nothing could previously be seen, or which
appeared as dark indefinite granules, rods, &c. And this is
the more easy, as there is almost nothing stained but nuclei
and bacteria. The outlines and size of the bacteria can thus
be recognised, and by their uniform appearance they can
be distinguished with certainty from other stained granular
masses — e.g., broken down cell nuclei.

A very simple arrangement may serve to demonstrate the
action of Abbe's illumination apparatus. This consists of a
small glass vessel filled with Canada balsam, in which small
coloured and colourless glass beads are placed. Here, there-
fore, conditions are present similar to those in a stained
preparation mounted in Canada balsam. The coloured beads
correspond to the stained nuclei or bacteria, the colourless to
the parts of the tissue which are unstained. If one looks through
the vessel on to a broad sheet of paper placed immediately
below it and brightly illuminated with daylight, the colourless
beads cannot be seen, while the coloured, on the other hand,
are distinct and sharply defined. If now the paper be placed
at a greater distance from the glass — that is to say, if the
pencil illuminating the pearls becomes longer and its angle of
aperture smaller, its base remaining the same — the same ap-
pearance occurs as when with Abbe's illumination apparatus
diaphragms with smaller openings are used in succession,
the colourless beads begin to be gradually visible, acquire
more distinct and darker outlines, while the coloured ones
become darker ; and, finally, the two kinds can hardly be dis-
tinguished, the coloured becoming completely masked by the
colourless. Microscopists who examine for the first time
preparations highly magnified and illuminated with Abbe's
apparatus without a diaphragm are generally struck with the
unusual appearance, the field being too bright and confused,



30 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

although the outlines of the coloured objects are sharply
defined. Such observers have been accustomed to the dark
field obtained by ordinary illumination with a concave mirror,
and they accordingly feel the want of the outline of the
tissue structure. For them it is expedient not to dispense
entirely with the diaphragm, but to increase the size of the
aperture until the stained object under examination appears
sufficiently distinct ; there will then remain quite enough of
the structure picture to enable them to make out the relations
of the tissue to the coloured objects.

It is well in general to use, in addition to the examination
of the bacteria by means of the pure colour picture, other
methods of investigation, such as the observation of the
structure of the tissue at the same time, and the examination
of the fresh object, with or without the use of alkalies and
acids ; and I may here expressly mention that I have often
made use of these chemical tests as a check, in addition to
my chief method of examination.

Although the aniline staining and the use of Abbe's illumi-
nation apparatus so markedly facilitate the investigation of
pathogenic bacteria, we must not imagine that all difficulties
are thus removed and all sources of error shut out. On
the contrary, a considerable amount of practice is necessary
before one is in a position rightly to utilise these very efficient
means. Some of the difficulties which most frequently occur
may be shortly alluded to.

As even isolated bacteria do not escape the observing eye, it
not unfrequently happens that one meets with organisms which
are derived from the fluids used for staining, washing, &c.
For even distilled water is almost never free from bacteria.
One, however, very soon learns to distinguish these bacteria
from others, and to recognise them immediately as accidental
impurities.

Further, incipient putrefaction must be suspected whenever
isolated bacteria are found in the superficial layers of organs.
But the bacteria appearing in putrefaction, at first generally
large bacilli,* are so characteristic that they are not easily

* See my paper on " Pkotograpliiren der Bakterien." Beitrage fctir
Biologie der Pflanzen. Vol. 2, part. 3. Photogramm No. 6. Plate xvi.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. SI

confounded with the pathogenic bacteria. Nevertheless, it is
well to be cautious in drawing conclusions from preparations
already containing putrefactive bacteria ; indeed it is best not
to use such tissues at all. In order to eliminate every risk of
confusion with the putrefactive organisms, and to exclude the
idea that in arrangement and number the pathogenic bacteria
may have undergone alterations after death, I have only used
objects for examination which were placed in absolute alcohol
immediately after the death of the animal, though in a few
cases a delay of some hours has occurred. Consequently I
have never found putrefactive bacteria in the preparations
obtained in this way. On the other hand, I have seldom
failed to find them in preparations obtained from human
subjects, although the jx)8t mortem examination was made ten
to twenty hours after death.

I must here draw attention to a remarkable variety of cells
which might give rise to confusion with small masses of micro-
coccus. These are the so-called plasma cells, described and
figured by Ehrlich ;* flat cells, for the most part situated on
the external coats of blood-vessels, and consisting of a round
heap of granules grouped around a nucleus. Their behaviour
with respect to aniline staining is exactly the opposite of that
of all other cells. In the latter only the nucleus is stained ;
in the plasma cells, on the other hand, only the finely granular
plasma is coloured, the nucleus remaining unstained. Now as
the granules have exactly the size of many micrococci, the
plasma cell presents the appearance of a small micrococcus
colony, more especially when the nucleus is indistinct or has
disappeared. But the granules are commonly of unequal
size. This fact, taken along with the presence of a nucleus
and the results of comparison with other similar cells, enables
the diagnosis to be easily made. In human tissues these
plasma cells are not very abundant, but they occur in great
numbers in mice, particularly in the skin of the ear.

If it be wished to exclude entirely all possibility of confusing
bacteria with portions of animal tissues, or if it be desired to
render the number and distribution of the bacteria in an organ

* Archiv fur Microscopische Anatomie. Vol. xiii. 1877, p. 263.



82 MICRO-OBGANISMS IN RELATION, ETC.

more evident, then the following method may be made use of:
— After staining with aniline, the sections are treated with a
weak solution of carbonate of potash, instead of with acetic
acid. By this means the nuclei and plasma cells — indeed as
a rule all animal tissues — lose again the colouring matter,
and the bacteria alone remain stained. Large sections, in
which the bacteria only are stained by the method just
described, form splendid objects for affording a general view.

In microscopical technique staining methods play an im-
portant part, and many of the most valuable discoveries
already made have been obtained by their help. But the full
benefit which staining affords in microscopic work can only,
as my investigations show, be completely obtained by making
use also of a suitable apparatus for illumination.

This has not yet, so far as I am aware, been taken advan-
tage of, and I do not therefore consider it superfluous to
recommend my method of illumination for other microscopical
investigations in which it is desired to differentiate very small
stained elements from others.

With regard to the method of using Abbe's apparatus, I
must draw attention to the fact that a sharply-defined picture
can only be obtained by the use of such objective systems as
have all the zones of the objective aperture properly corrected.
The objective systems made by Zeiss are tested by means of
Abbe's condenser as to the correctness of the individual zones,
especially of the marginal ones. These, and more especially
the new oil systems constructed after the designs of Abbe, are
therefore thoroughly adapted for the observation of colour
pictures. In other systems which I have tried from this point
of view, the marginal zones were almost always insufficiently
corrected. The only other lenses with which I have obtained
well-defined colour pictures were made by Siebert and Kraft.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 33



ARTIFICIAL TEAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES.

I, Septicemia in Mice.

Mice are especially adapted for experiments on infective
diseases, as I previously found in my investigations on
anthrax. I therefore attempted to produce artificial traumatic
infective diseases in these animals by the use of the method
which was followed by Coze, Feltz, Davaine, &c.

Accordingly putrid fluids, e.g., putrefying blood, putrid
meat infusion, &c, were injected under the skin of the back
in mice. The result of such an injection differs much
according to the nature of the putrid fluid, and according
to the quantity which is introduced. Blood and meat in-
fusion, which have putrefied for a long time, appear to act
less injuriously than fluids which have putrefied for a few
days only. Of these latter fluids, as, for instance, of blood
which has not putrefied too long, five drops is sufficient to kill
a mouse within a short time. In this case marked symptoms
may be observed in the animal immediately after the injection.
It becomes restless, running about constantly, but showing
great weakness and uncertainty in all its movements; it
refuses food, the respiration becomes irregular and slow, and
death takes place in four to eight hours.

In such a case the greater part of the fluid injected is found
in the subcutaneous cellular tissue of the back in much
the same condition as before it was injected. It contains
bacteria of the most diverse forms, irregularly mixed together,
and as numerous as when examined before injection. No
inflammation can be observed in the neighbourhood of the
place of injection. The internal organs are also unaltered.
If blood taken from the right auricle be introduced into
another mouse no effect is produced. Bacteria cannot be
found in any of the internal organs, nor in the blood of the
heart.

An infective disease has therefore not been produced as the

D



84 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

result of the injection. On the other hand, there can be no
doubt that the death of the animal was due to the soluble
poison, sepsin, which has been shown by the researches of
Bergmann, Panum, and various other investigators, to exist
in putrid blood. The animal has accordingly died not from
an infective disease, but simply from the effects of a chemical
poison.

This supposition is confirmed by the fact that when less
fluid is introduced into the animal, the symptoms of poisoning
which follow are less marked, and are quite absent when
one or at most two drops have been injected. After the
use of such small quantities of blood, mice often remain
permanently without any morbid symptoms. But a third
of them, on an average, become ill after the lapse of about
twenty-four hours, during which time they have remained
apparently healthy. The symptoms which are then present
are characteristic and constant, and are in no case preceded
by any of the symptoms of poisoning previously described.

Before I describe these symptoms, I must mention that the
infection may succeed when even less than one drop of putrid
fluid has been used. The less the amount employed in the
first instance, the fewer are the animals affected ; for example,
of twelve animals inoculated in the ordinary manner with
one-twentieth to one-tenth of a drop each, only one was suc-
cessfully infected.

The first symptom in the infected animals is an increased
secretion from the conjunctiva. The eye appears dull, and
a whitish mucus collects between the lids, and finally com-
pletely glues them together. At the same time lassitude
sets in, the animal moves little and languidly ; as a rule it
sits quite still, with its back much bent and its extremities
closely drawn up. It then ceases to eat; its respirations
become slower, weakness increases more and more, and death
comes on almost imperceptibly. Convulsions never precede
it (they always do so in anthrax). After death the animal
still remains in the sitting posture with its back strongly
bent, while, on the other hand, a mouse which has died from
anthrax is always found lying on its back or side with its
stiffened extremities fully extended. Thus by the position of



TBAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 85

the body after death, a fatal result produced by the inoculation
of putrefying blood is at once distinguished from that
occasioned by inoculation with the material of anthrax.
The death of mice infected with putrefying blood occurs forty
to sixty hours after the inoculation.

On post-mortem examination there is found at the place of
injection or inoculation slight oedema of the subcutaneous
cellular tissue. This, however, is often absent, and the
internal organs, with the exception of considerable swelling of
the spleen, appear quite unaltered.

If one now takes a very small quantity {e.g., one-tenth of a
drop) of the fluid of the subcutaneous oedema, or of blood from
the heart of such an animal, and inoculates another mouse,
exactly the same diseased symptoms occur in the latter
animal after the same lapse of time and in the same order as
in the former, and death takes place in about fifty hours.
From this second animal a third may be infected in like
manner, and so on through as many successive animals as
one pleases. I have performed these experiments on fifty-four
mice and have always obtained the same result. Of these,
seventeen inoculations were made in succession ; of the others
the series of successive infections were less extended.

The certainty with which the infective material can be
carried from one mouse to another is here even greater than
in anthrax. In the latter, in order to obtain constant results
the material for inoculation must be taken from the spleen,
because the blood of mice affected with anthrax often contains
very few bacilli. In the disease of the mouse produced by
putrefying blood it is, on the other hand, a matter of indifference
from which organ the material used for inoculation is taken,
and even the smallest amount will produce an effect with
certainty. It is* sufficient, in order to bring about the
death of the animal within about fifty hours, to pass the
point of a scalpel, which has been in contact with the
infected blood, over a small wound of the skin. I have often
performed the following experiment : — The subcutaneous
tissue of a mouse which had died after inoculation on the
tail was touched with a knife on the opposite part of the body
to that which had been inoculated, viz., on the head, and with



86 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

this instrument a small scratch was made on the ear of
another mouse. The animals thus infected died, without
exception, of the same disease.

This disease is therefore undoubtedly an infective disease,
which, from the result of the post-mortem examination, must
be called septicaemia.

The great virulence which the blood of septicemic mice
possesses leads us to suspect that if this disease be a parasitic
affection brought about by bacteria, the parasites must be
present in the blood, and that in great numbers. But in my
first investigations I entirely failed to discover bacteria in the
septicemic blood. Not till I used Abbe's condenser did I
succeed in demonstrating their presence with complete
certainty, in spite of their minute size.

I examined the blood by a method which I have described
in another place, and which in this case yielded good results *
(by drying it on a cover glass and then staining with
methyl violet).

The blood of the animals which became ill after injection
of one to ten drops of putrefying blood was found to contain
as a rule different varieties of bacteria in small numbers,
micrococci, and large and small bacilli. If, however, the
animals died after inoculation with putrefying or septicemic
blood, small bacilli alone appeared in the blood. This
result was invariable, and the bacilli were always in large
numbers. These bacilli (see Plate i., fig. 1), which lie singly
or in small groups between the red blood corpuscles, have a
length of '8 to 1 mikrm. + Their thickness, which cannot be
measured accurately, but only approximately estimated, is
about *1 to *2 mikrm. In order to establish a comparison
with other known bacteria there are represented in fig. 4
specimens of Bacillus Anthracis, magnified to the same
degree, from the blood of a mouse, the blood having been
dried on a cover-glass and stained in exactly the same
manner as the septicemic blood (the lines of junction of the
individual rods come out rather too strongly in the drawing).
One often sees the bacilli in septicemic blood attached to each

* Cohn's Beitrage zur Biologie der Pflanzen. Bd. 2, Heft 3, p. 402.
f 1 mikrm. = '001 millimetre.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 87

other in pairs, either in straight lines or forming an obtuse
angle. Chains of three or four bacilli also occur, but they
are rare. They show at first sight a great resemblance to
small needle-like crystals, but that they are undoubtedly
vegetable bodies is evident, for when septicemic blood is
placed on a concave slide and kept in an incubation apparatus
the bacilli grow in the same manner as the bacilli of anthrax,
not forming, however, long threads like the latter, but dense
masses which consist of isolated bacilli. In some cases
I have also seen spores appear in the bacilli. I could not,
from want of time, study further the conditions of life and of
vegetation of these septicemic bacilli. I intend, however, at
some future period to investigate these. Without the use of
staining materials the bacilli can only with extreme difficulty
be recognised in fresh blood, even when one is familial* with
their form, and I have not been able to obtain any certain
evidence as to whether they move or not. Their relation to
the white blood corpuscles is peculiar. They penetrate into
these and multiply in their interior. One often finds that
there is hardly a single white corpuscle in the interior of
which bacilli cannot be seen. Many corpuscles contain
isolated bacilli only; others have thick masses in their
interior, the nucleus being still recognisable ; while in others
the nucleus can be no longer distinguished ; and finally, the
corpuscle may become a cluster of bacilli breaking up at the
margin — the origin of which one could not have explained
had there been no opportunity of seeing all the intermediate
steps between the intact white corpuscle and these masses
(Plate i., fig. 2).

Starting from the point of inoculation, one can easily see
the path by which the bacilli have penetrated into the body.
In the subcutaneous cellular tissue in the neighbourhood of
the inoculated spot they are very numerous, and at times
accumulated in dense masses, as can be best observed
in inoculations on the ear. They are more especially
numerous on the surface of the cartilage of the ear, and they
are here covered with a layer of lymph corpuscles. The
latter are also present along with numerous red blood
corpuscles in the loose cellular tissue.



38 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

The large number of red blood corpuscles which pass out of
the vessels leads to the conclusion that an alteration has
taken place in the walls of these vessels, and thus it becomes
extremely probable that the bacilli grow into the vessels and
enter the circulation through spaces in their walls, which
permitted the exit of the much larger red blood corpuscles.
I have never found these bacilli in the lymphatic vessels.
Even in the greatly enlarged lymphatic glands they can only
be found in the capillary blood-vessels which run through
these glands, not, however, in the lymph spaces. In the loose
cellular tissue they often spread widely, and may reach from
the ear to the mediastinum ; from the back into the cellular
tissue of the pelvis. I have not found them free in the
cavities of the body. Their distribution in the blood-vessels
can be best observed on the diaphragm, the vessels running
on the border of the centrum tendineum being selected for
investigation. The larger veins (Plate iii., fig. 8, shows a
small section of one) contain considerable numbers of bacilli
pretty equally distributed, and also numerous small clusters
developed in the white blood corpuscles. The bacilli which
are free in the interior of the vessels are almost always
arranged with their long axis in the direction of the blood-
stream, and it is thus evident that they were placed in this
position by the flowing blood, and after its stagnation have
neither increased in number nor moved. In the capillaries
the bacilli congregate, particularly at the points of division,
but I have never yet seen a complete obstruction of the
smaller vessels produced in this way. The inner wall of
the arteries is often thickly beset with bacteria directed
lengthwise.

In exactly the same manner are the bacilli distributed in
the rest of the vascular system. In the examination of
sections of lung, liver, kidney, and spleen, one meets every-
where with vessels containing free bacilli, and with white blood
corpuscles with bacilli in their interior. The bacilli are not
specially accumulated in the glomeruli; strangely enough,
they are not more numerous in the greatly enlarged spleen
than in other organs.

The whole morbid process has thus a great resemblance to



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 89

anthrax. In both diseases the infective power of the blood is
due to the bacilli present in it ; as soon as these disappear
the disease can be no longer produced by inoculation with the
blood. Both diseases are distinguished by the invariable
development of exceedingly numerous bacilli. There can
thus be no doubt that the bacilli of the septicaemia described
here possess the same significance as the bacilli of splenic
fever, namely, that they are to be regarded as the contagium
of this disease.

As anthrax can be successfully inoculated on different
species of animals, I have also tried to infect other animals
with the blood of septicemic mice. Having at my disposal
only rabbits and field-mice, in addition to house-mice, I was
compelled to limit my experiments to them. In both the
attempt had a negative result. At first the rabbits were
merely inoculated ; afterwards the whole of the blood of a
septicemic mouse was injected subcutaneously into one
animal, and finally, in addition to the blood, the lungs, heart,
liver, kidneys, and spleen of a septicemic mouse were
introduced under the skin of a rabbit.

These animals did not exhibit the slightest evidence of
disease, either locally or constitutionally.

It seems peculiar that even field-mice, which resemble
house-mice in size and which can hardly at the first glance be
distinguished from them, should possess an immunity from
this septicemia. These animals, however, are also much less
sensitive to anthrax than house-mice. I attribute this result
to differences in the blood of these closely allied animals,
which strike one at once on investigation of fresh blood.
In the blood of the house-mouse crystals seldom form, and
when they do they shoot out only at the border of the drop of
blood in the shape of small rectangular tablets and needles.
The blood of the field-mouse, on the other hand, always
undergoes changes very soon after removal from the body,
all the red blood corpuscles becoming transformed into large
regular hexagonal plates either immediately or after adjacent
corpuscles have run together, and thus the drop becomes in a
short time transformed into a crystalline pulp. But although
one could not inoculate the septicemia of the house-mice on



40 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

the two species of animals mentioned, yet it does not at all
follow that all other species likewise possess an immunity
from this disease. Many animals are in like manner
insensible to anthrax, and it would certainly repay one to
test as many different animals as possible with regard to
their behaviour towards this septicaemia.

II. Progressive Destruction of Tissue (Gangrene) in Mice.

Occurring along with the septicemic bacillus just described
I have sometimes found in mice, after the introduction, of
putrefying blood, a micrococcus in the neighbourhood of the
place of injection. This organism attracted my attention by
its rapid increase and by its regular formation of chains.
As a rule, when the animal dies of septicaemia after about two
days, none of the numerous forms of bacteria which were
injected with the putrid blood can be discovered, except the
septicaemic bacilli, or it may be a few residual specimens
growing with difficulty. It must therefore be supposed that
none of the other bacteria injected at the same time find in
the body of the living mouse a suitable soil, and that they
therefore perish more or less quickly. My attention was thus
at once arrested, when in some cases micrococci were found
growing in unusual abundance and of constantly characteristic
form. They were not present in the blood, and by inoculation
with the blood the septicaemic bacilli alone were transmitted.
In order to test whether they could be inoculated, it was
therefore necessary that the material used should be taken
from the neighbourhood of the place of injection. Inoculations
carried out in this way were successful in producing both
forms of disease and the virulence of the serum from the
subcutaneous cellular tissue containing these micrococci was
just as marked as that of the septicaemic blood. When the
point of a knife which had been well cleaned was merely
brought in contact with the subcutaneous tissue at a spot
about one centimetre and a half from the place of injection or
inoculation, and when with this knife another animal was
immediately inoculated, the inoculation was successful on
every occasion. Septicaemia was of course always produced
at the same time, because the serum used contained also



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 41

septicemic bacilli. The influence of these micrococci on
animal tissues and their mode of spreading can be best traced
on the ear of a mouse; and it is specially instructive to
compare an ear on which only septicemic bacilli have been
inoculated with one into which both the bacilli and the
chain-like micrococci have been introduced. In the former
ear the cellular tissue is full of red blood corpuscles and
lymph cells, so that the bacilli can often be recognized only
with great difficulty among the numerous cell nuclei. The
other ear presents totally different appearances. Spreading
out from the place of inoculation one can see extremely
delicate and regular micrococcus chains, here pressed together
so as to form thick masses, there arranged diffusely, the
individual elements of these chains (Plate iii., fig. 6), as can
be estimated from measurements of the longer ones having a
diameter of '5 mikrm. These can be traced almost to the
base of the ear, and throughout the part occupied by them all
the tissues are markedly altered. As far as the micrococci
extend, neither red blood corpuscles, nor nuclei of lymph
or of connective tissue cells, can be seen. Even the extremely
resistent cartilage cells, and the plasma cells so richly present
in the mouse's ear and which are likewise characterised by
great resisting power, are pale and scarcely recognisable.
All the constituents of the tissue look as if they had been
treated with caustic potash ; they are dead, they have become
gangrenous. Under these circumstances the bacteria develop
all the more vigorously. The micrococci penetrate in numbers
into the damaged blood and lymphatic vessels, and here and
there they fill them so completely that the vessels appear as
if injected. Among these the septicemic bacilli, no longer
obscured by nuclei, are seen very distinctly in small groups
which at times are very dense and remind one of the
"Pilz figures'' of the inoculated cornea. While the bacilli
can be traced up to the root of the ear, and indeed beyond it,
have at the same time increased enormously in the blood, and
have ultimately caused the death of the animal, the
micrococci, on the other hand, and the destructive process
associated with them, have only extended during the same
time (within about fifty hours) as far as the vicinity of the



42 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

root of the ear. Their limit is sharply defined, as can be seen
very well on a longitudinal section of the ear examined with a
low magnifying power (twenty-five diameters). (Plate i., fig. 5.)
The upper part (c), from the tip to b, is gangrenous. The
larger dark oval or round spots (d) are transverse sections of
vessels containing masses of micrococci in their interior.
The widely-distributed micrococcus chains cannot of course
be recognised with this power. It is only in the lower fourth
of the gangrenous region that they occur in denser groups,
which can be seen as little dark points. Then all of a sudden
at b appears a densely agglomerated mass of nuclei, forming as
it were a wall against the invasion of the micrococci, and this is
the limit up to which these organisms may be found. They do
not extend, even in the blood-vessels, beyond this line. This
wall of nuclei has no great breadth, and immediately beyond
it comes the normal tissue. By the use of high magnifying
powers it becomes apparent that the micrococci do not reach
quite up to the nuclear layer. On the side directed towards
the micrococci the nuclei are undergoing destruction.
Numerous fragments of irregular shape, constantly becoming
smaller, form the upper limit of the wall of nuclei, and when
this region is reached, in examining the preparation, we may
be sure that we are in the neighbourhood of these organisms.
There almost always remains between the last remnants of
the nuclei and the micrococci a line of considerable breadth
consisting only of gangrenous tissue, in which neither
micrococci nor nuclei can be found. It is seldom that the
micrococci extend into the disintegrating nuclear layer.

These appearances lead us to the conclusion that the action
of these micrococci in causing the gangrene is somewhat as
follows : — Introduced by inoculation into living animal tissues,
they multiply, and as a part of their vegetative process they
excrete soluble substances which get into the surrounding
tissues by diffusion. When greatly concentrated, as in the
neighbourhood of the micrococci, this product of the
organisms has such a deleterious action on the cells that
these perish and finally completely disappear. At a greater
distance from the micrococci the poison becomes more
diluted and acts less intensely, only producing inflammation



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 43

and accumulation of lymph corpuscles. Thus it happens
that the micrococci are always found in the gangrenous
tissue, and that in extending they are preceded by a wall of
nuclei which constantly melts down on the side directed
towards them, while on the opposite side it is as constantly
renewed by lymph corpuscles deposited afresh.

These observations refer to inoculations with fluid containing
both micrococci and bacilli, and it might have been supposed
that the septicemic bacilli were necessary forerunners of the
micrococci, that they must to a certain extent prepare the way
for them. I therefore attempted, by various means, to
separate these parasites from each other. Thus, at one time a
considerable quantity, at another only a little of the fluid was
used for inoculation, or again it was taken at different distances
from the point of inoculation, or, lastly, the parts of the body
to which it was applied were varied as much as possible. But
all this was of no avail. Either pure septicaemia or septi-
caemia along with progressive gangrene was obtained, never the
latter alone. Chance led me to the proper method. A field-
mouse — which, as I formerly pointed out, possesses an
immunity from septicaemia — was inoculated with septicaemic
bacilli and chain-like micrococci. The experiment was made
in the expectation that neither parasite would develop. This
expectation, however, was not fulfilled, for, though the bacilli
as usual underwent no development, the micrococci increased
and spread in exactly the same manner as has been described
in the case of the house-mouse. Beginning at the place
of inoculation on the root of the tail, the gangrene spread
onwards along the back, passing deeply among the dorsal
muscles, and downwards on both sides to the abdominal
wall. The animal died three days after the inoculation.
The parts affected with the gangrene were partially denuded
of epidermis and hairs, and contained chain-like micrococci
in extraordinary numbers. The same micrococci were also
found on the surface of the abdominal organs, although there
was no visible peritonitis. The blood and the interior of the
organs were, on the other hand, quite free from them. From
this animal other field-mice, and from these again house-mice
in various successive series were subsequently injected, and



44



MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO



always with the like result, viz., that only chain-like micro-
cocci and, in their train, progressive gangrene were obtained.

III. Spreading Abscess in Eabbits.

Coze and Feltz, Davaine, and many others have obtained
in rabbits, by the injection of putrid blood, an infective
septicemic disease. I have therefore repeated their experi-
ments. I have not, however, succeeded in producing the
effects described by Davaine, but I observed — what others who
have made similar experiments on rabbits have already
noticed — that in these animals the formation of an abscess
constantly increasing in extent may occur in the subcutaneous
cellular tissue without any general infection taking place.
Such animals have at first no symptoms of disease ; a flat
lentiform hard infiltration at the seat of the injection is all
that can be observed. After several days this hardness
extends in all directions, chiefly downwards, especially
towards the abdomen and anterior extremities. The animal
at the same time emaciates and grows feeble, and dies in
about twelve to fifteen days after the injection.

The post-mortem examination shows the presence, in
the subcutaneous tissue, of extensive flat abscesses with
cheesy contents ; their walls bulge in various directions,
though the whole remains a single cavity. There is also an
extreme degree of emaciation, but no alteration in the
peritoneum, intestine, kidneys, spleen, liver, heart, or lungs.
In the blood the white corpuscles are greatly increased in
number, but no bacteria can be found. The cheesy contents
consist of a finely granular material, and scattered about in
this are nuclei undergoing disintegration, but no bacteria can
be definitely made out. Here, then, we have appearances
similar to those often found in man, and much used as an
argument against the parasitic nature of such morbid
processes. I refer to abscesses resulting from phlegmonous
inflammation which must be regarded as infective in their
origin, but in which no micro-organisms have been found.

When, however, portions of these abscesses are hardened
and examined in sections, the surprising result is obtained
that, though bacteria are not present in their contents, their



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 45

walls are everywhere formed by a thin layer of micrococci
united together into thick zooglaea masses. These organisms
are the smallest pathogenic micrococci which I have as yet
observed. In some places I was fortunate enough to find
them arranged in rows, and thus was able to measure them ;
and I ascertained that they were about *15 mikrm. in diameter
(this is of course only an approximate measurement). From
the form and character of the zooglaea masses surrounding
the abscesses it follows that these masses stand in the most
intimate relation to the contents of the abscesses; that, in
fact, the contents are constituted by the zooglaea masses and
the dead portions of tissue enclosed by them. This process
takes place as follows : — The micrococci grow only in masses
which, at the periphery of the more or less lentiform abscess,
differ in arrangement from that which they assume on its
upper, and more especially on its under surface. The
margins of the abscess extend into the loose meshes of the
subcutaneous cellular tissue, where the micrococci find the
least resistance to their extension, and accordingly surround
the abscess in thick cloud-like masses (Plate i., fig. 5). The
cellular tissue in the immediate vicinity is more or less richly
filled with nuclei (e), between which one can see small isolated
micrococcus colonies (b, c) — forerunners, in fact, of the main
zooglaea masses. The smallest colonies which can be found
*Beem, from their general form and their radiating pointed
processes, to be present in the canaliculi of the cellular tissue.
I have not been able to demonstrate any connection between
these micrococci and the connective tissue corpuscles, such as
is observed in the inoculated cornea. On the wall of that part of
the abscess which is directed towards the deeper structures, and
where the dense fascia opposes the extension of the organisms,
they cannot develop so luxuriantly as at the borders of the
abscess. On the contrary, the groups are here small and
flattened (Plate iii., fig. 7), and only occasionally send out
processes into the layers of the cellular tissue "beneath, this tissue
being in these situations interspersed with nuclei. An appear-
ance which is quite characteristic can be observed when the
zooglaea masses aye examined more closely. Their outer borders,
by which I understand the parts of the zooglaea masses which are



46 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

directed towards the healthy cellular tissue (fig. 8, a), are
stained by the aniline fluid of an intense dark colour, and the
individual micrococci can be distinctly made out. In the
small, and apparently young colonies more especially (fig. 8,
b, c, d, and fig. 7, b) the micrococci are uniformly coloured.
But on passing towards the interior of the abscess the staining
of the zooglaea becomes less marked, the individual micrococci
can be no longer accurately defined, they become more and
more finely granular, and ultimately form an almost homo-
geneous mass which no longer takes the colouring matter
(fig. 8, #).* Still nearer the abscess cavity are found pale
unrecognisable masses derived from the zooglaea (fig. 7, d)
intermixed with the detritus of the nuclei (fig. 7, e, and
fig- 8, /) ; and the cheesy contents of the abscess are composed
of these two materials alone — the dead zooglaea and the
remnants of the nuclei, the former being present in largest
amount. I have called these unstained masses dead zooglaea
for the following reasons : — In the first place, this explanation
suggests itself so naturally, and seems such a necessary
deduction from direct observation and from the comparison of
the small micrococcus colonies found in process of growth
with the large zooglaea masses which have completed their
vegetative life, that no special proof is required for it. One
might fairly compare this growth of the micrococci on the one
side and their death on the other with the vegetation of
Sphagnum. Other considerations further indicate that,
when bacteria are no longer stained by aniline, it is a certain
sign of their death. The form of bacteric vegetation described
here deserves the greatest attention, for it is evident how
easily in similar cases the narrow line of bacteria might be
overlooked, even though the latter were still in full growth and
easily recognisable. Similar circumstances also apparently
occur in human infective diseases. Thus Klebst found in
endocarditis that the micrococci deposited on the aortic valves
were dark-coloured on the surface, while in the deeper parts

* The micrococci in figs. 7 and 8 have been drawn too large in parts,
more especially towards the interior of the zooglaea.

f Archiv for experimentelle Pathol, und Pharmajt. Bd. IX., p. 72
(Taf. II., fig. 8).



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 47

they became paler, and finally quite disappeared, passing into
a homogeneous mass.

In order to ascertain whether the morbid process here
designated as progressive abscess formation could be trans-
mitted from one animal to another, rabbits were injected with
blood taken from others which had already died of this
disease. These injections produced no effect. A small quantity
of the cheesy contents of the abscess was now taken, diluted
with distilled water, and injected under the skin of a rabbit.
There resulted exactly the same abscess-formation in this
animal as in the first. The abscesses spread in the same
manner as described in the former case, and caused the death
of the animal experimented on in a week and a half. From
this animal the disease was conveyed to a third, and so on
through several in succession.

It was thus demonstrated that the disease is not merely
occasioned by the injection of a considerable quantity of
putrefying blood, but is of a decidedly infective character.
The assumption made above that the micrococci in the cheesy
contents of these abscesses are dead, does not appear in
keeping with this result of inoculation. This apparent
contradiction may, however, I think, be cleared up, for it is
very probable that these micrococci, like other bacteria, form
resting spores (Dauer-sporen) after the expiration of their
vegetative life, and that these bodies, just like the spores of
bacillus, are not stained by aniline, and therefore remain
invisible in Canada balsam. The infection in the case referred
to would be brought about by such spores.

IV. Pyjemia in Babbits.

Having failed in various attempts to produce a general
infection in rabbits by the injection of putrid blood, I tried the
effect of other putrid fluids.

A piece of a mouse's skin about a square centimetre in size
was macerated for two days in thirty grammes of distilled water,
and a syringeful of this fluid was injected subcutaneously into
the back of a rabbit. This animal remained for two days free
from any noticeable symptoms of disease, then it began to eat
less, became gradually weaker, and died one hundred and five



48 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

hours after the injection. A post-mortem examination was at
once made, and there was found a flat, purulent (not cheesy)
infiltration in the subcutaneous cellular tissue, extending
from the point of injection as far as the hip behind and the
linea alba below. In the abdominal wall the yellowish
infiltration extended in parts through the abdominal muscles,
and even to the peritoneum. The latter was dull and in
many places covered with delicate whitish clots. In the
peritoneal cavity a small quantity of turbid fluid was found.
The intestines were glued together by white fibrinous masses.
The liver, stomach, and spleen were covered with thin white
layers of fibrin, and the spleen was much enlarged. The
liver, after the removal of the deposit on it, presented a
greyish mottled appearance, and showed on section grey
wedge-shaped patches; its borders were also in parts of a
grey colour. In the lungs were found some dark red
patches about as large as a pea, devoid of air. As regards the
remaining organs no alterations could be detected, not even in
the heart.

A syringeful of blood taken from the heart of this animal
was now injected under the skin of the back of a second
rabbit. The latter died in forty hours. The result of the
post-mortem examination was essentially the same. The
infiltration in the neighbourhood of the place of injection was,
however, more (edematous, and the cellular tissue was
besprinkled with small extravasations of blood; the
peritonitis was less advanced; on the small and large
intestines a few small subserous extravasations of blood
were present ; and in the lungs and the liver were metastatic
deposits similar to those found in the first rabbit.

I had therefore without doubt a general infective disease to
deal with. Indeed it was possible that it might be the same
affection as had been obtained by Coze and Feltz, and by
Davaine, from injections of putrid fluids into rabbits, and
which had led them to their observations on the increasing
virulence of septicemic blood when transmitted through
a series of animals in succession. I therefore resolved
to carry out a series of experiments similar to those already
performed by Davaine,



i



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 49

To furnish a general view of the results of these experiments
I shall arrange them in a tabular form : —



iabbite.


Flnid injected.


Quantity of the same.


Death.


I.


Maceration fluid.


10 drops.


In 105 hours.


H.


Blood of I.


10 „


In 40 „


m.


Blood of II.


3 „


In 54 „


IV.


Blood of IH.


1 „


In 92 „


v.


Blood of IV.


TO >>


In 125 „


VI.


Blood of V.


TOw «•


Remained well.



The blood was diluted in the same manner as had been
done by Davaine in his experiments. In order to obtain the
one-thousandth of a drop for injection, a drop of blood was
mixed with one hundred drops of distilled water ; of this mixture
one drop was again added to one hundred drops of distilled
water, and of the solution so obtained (the blood being now
diluted ten thousand times) ten drops were injected. The
table comprises only a few experiments, but the relation
between the quantity of blood injected and the time which
elapsed before death is so constant that it cannot be acci-
dental. There was no indication of increasing virulence of
this blood when inoculated into several animals in succession.
The less the quantity of blood injected, the longer the time
which elapsed before death occurred, and where the quantity
was reduced to the one-thousandth of a drop no result followed.
I do not say, however, that the infective power of the blood
was entirely abolished by reducing the quantity to one-
thousandth of a drop, for this experiment was performed on
one animal only, and it might very possibly have happened
that if several animals had been injected at the same time
with the same amount, one or other would have become ill, or
even have died. But it follows from the table that when the
quantity is small the effect is delayed, and that when very
minute the result is uncertain, or even negative. These
results can only be explained on the supposition that the
blood always contains a like quantity of undissolved infective
particles, and that these particles must have increased to a
certain number before they can cause death.

For, an infective material in solution, which is active in
quantities varying from ten drops to one-tenth of a drop, must

E



50 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

also be infective under all circumstances, even when reduced
to a thousandth of a drop ; but death would take place at a
correspondingly later period.

If, however, the infective material be supposed to be
insoluble, and if a certain quantity is always necessary to
destroy a rabbit, then the explanation of the fact that the
result is more and more delayed in proportion as the injected
blood is diluted is at once evident. For the more the blood is
diluted the fewer bacteria does each drop contain, and if
fewer bacteria be introduced into the animal experimented on,
longer time must of course elapse before these have attained
the number necessary to cause the death of a rabbit than
when the quantity at first injected was large. If the blood be
yet further diluted, a time will finally come when in the
quantity of blood used for injection, say ten drops, there will
not with certainty be a single bacterium, or at least a number
sufficient for infection. Then the result becomes a matter of
uncertainty.

Let us now see how the facts furnished by microscopic
investigation coincide with this explanation.

But first I must mention that the post-mortem appearances
found in the last three rabbits were, with some unimportant
variations, the same as in the first two, viz., local purulent
oedematous infiltration of the subcutaneous cellular tissue,
metastatic deposits in the lungs and liver, swelling of the spleen,
and peritonitis. These appearances harmonize so completely
with those commonly designated as pyaemia, that I do not
hesitate to use that term for the disease under consideration.

On microscopic examination micrococci are found in great
numbers everywhere throughout the body, and more especially
in the parts which have undergone alterations visible to the
naked eye. These micrococci are for the most part single or
in pairs, and their measurement is therefore difficult. Ten
measurements of pairs of micrococci differed but little from
each other, and gave '25 mikrm. as the average diameter of a
single individual. As regards size, therefore, they stand
midway between the chain-like micrococcus of the progressive
gangrene of the tissues and the zooglaea-forming micrococcus
of the cheesy abscesses of rabbits. Their relation to the



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 51

blood-vessels can be best seen in the renal capillaries, and I
have therefore selected a small vessel from the cortex of the
kidney for delineation (Plate v., fig. 9). It is impossible in
a drawing to represent their relative size correctly, and
it was necessary to draw them here on a somewhat larger
scale than the micrococci of figs. 7 and 8. In the interior of
the vessel at c is a dense deposit of micrococci adherent to
the wall, and enclosing in its substance a number of red blood
corpuscles. This mass would probably have very soon filled
the calibre of the vessel, for fresh blood corpuscles are
constantly being deposited upon it, and these become
surrounded by delicate offshoots from the mass of micrococci.
From this we may conclude, either that the micrococci have
of themselves, owing to the nature of their surface, the power
of causing the red blood corpuscles, to which they adhere, to
stick together, or that these organisms can occasion coagulation
of the blood in their vicinity, and thus the formation of
thrombi.

The manner in which these micrococci, as it were, spin
round the blood corpuscles and enclose them, seems to me to
be quite characteristic of this particular form. Such partial
or complete thrombus formations occur in the renal vessels in
many places, particularly in the glomeruli, where individual
capillary loops may be found completely blocked by micrococci.
But even in these thick zooglsBa-like masses one can still
recognise the clear circles due to the enclos.ed red blood
corpuscles. As a rule, however, only small groups of
micrococci are met with (as in fig. 9, b). They were found
arranged in this manner surrounding and glueing together a
small number of blood corpuscles, in the capillary vascular
system of all the organs examined, as, for example, in the
spleen and in the lungs. In the larger vessels also groups of
considerable size are formed, and I am disposed to believe
that the large metastatic deposits in the liver and in the lungs
do not arise by gradual growth of a mass of micrococci, as in
fig. 9, but by the arrest of large groups of micrococci and of
the clots associated with them formed in the manner described
in the circulating blood ; in other words, by true embolism.
In the metastatic deposits an extensive development of



52 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

micrococci occurs, and these are not confined to the vessels,
but invade the neighbouring tissues. Micrococci in pairs are
pretty equally distributed over the surface of the abdominal
organs. Masses of micrococci do not form in the peritonea
cavity ; and the small flakes of pus in the peritoneal fluid and
the fibrinous deposits infiltrated with pus cells present on the
surface of the abdominal organs, contain micrococci only
uniformly distributed, or at most collected into small groups.

In the neighbourhood of the place of injection the sub-
cutaneous cellular tissue is infiltrated with extensive flat
collections of pus, which are surrounded by micrococci more
or less numerous, but never in the form of zooglaea. They
also surround the subcutaneous veins of this part, which are
much distended with blood corpuscles, and their presence in
the walls of the vessels and their passage through these
walls into the interior can be seen in many places. No
micrococci were found in the lymphatic vessels or in the
neighbouring lymphatic glands, which were, however, greatly
swollen.

Comparing the results of the microscopic investigation
with the before-mentioned effects of the injection, we find that
they are in complete unison.

In the experiments the blood was taken from the heart,
and with reference to the cause of its infecting property
we have only to consider the state of the blood in the larger
vessels. This, as already mentioned, contains numerous
micrococci. The first part of the assumption that the
infective particles were bacteria is thus proved. If, however,
these underwent the same growth in the blood, as the
septicemic and anthracic bacilli, they must become as
numerous in the blood as the latter, and the virulence of the
blood would thus be much greater than it was in reality found
to be. But, as we have seen, the micrococci of pyaemia
behave differently in this respect from the organisms of
septicaemia and anthrax. As soon as they come in contact
with the red blood corpuscles the latter stick together and
form larger or smaller clots in the blood. They can thus no
longer pass through the minute capillary networks, like the
bacilli which move freely among the red corpuscles, but are



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 58

arrested in the larger or smaller vessels. From the point of
infection fresh micrococci will no doubt constantly pass into
the blood, and also individual micrococci will become detached
from these small thrombi and emboli and mix with the blood
stream. Nevertheless, their total number in the circulating
blood cannot exceed a certain point, because they are very
soon deposited somewhere. Thus we have a simple explanation
of the fact that the number of micrococci present in the body
of the animal experimented on constantly increases, and,
finally, apart from the disturbances of circulation produced
by them, become sufficiently numerous to cause the death of
the animal. Nevertheless, the quantity present in the cardiac
blood continues pretty uniform, and is so small as to have
an uncertain action when the thousandth part of a drop
is used.

5. Septicemia in Rabbits.

After injection of putrid infusion of meat into rabbits,
I have twice obtained a general infection of another sort
in which metastatic deposits do not occur, and which I would
therefore describe, in contrast to the foregoing, as septicaemia.
This infusion, like the putrid fluids used in the earlier experi-
ments, contained numbers of bacteria of the most various
forms. When injected under the skin of the back of a rabbit
it produces an extensive putrid suppuration of the subcutaneous
cellular tissue, and the animal dies in three days and a half.
At the ichorous spot, which must, on account of its size,
be looked upon as the immediate cause of death (owing to
absorption of poisonous materials in solution), the same
variety of bacteric forms was present as in the meat infusion.
At the border of this spot the cellular tissue was infiltrated
with a slightly turbid watery fluid, which contrasted strikingly
with the brownish stinking ichor in the vicinity of the place
of injection. In this oedema fluid great numbers of micro-
cocci of considerable size and of an oval form were almost the
only organism observed. In the blood also similar micrococci
were found, though only in small numbers. Further, in the
papilli of the kidney and in the greatly-enlarged spleen some



54 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

of the small veins were completely blocked for short distances
with these oval micrococci.

Two drops of this oedematous fluid were now injected under
the skin of the back of a second rabbit. The animal died in
twenty-two hours, and here, in the neighbourhood of the
place of injection, not a trace of pus could be observed. On
the other hand slight oedema, with a streaky whitish appear-
ance of the subcutaneous cellular tissue, extended from the
point of injection to the abdomen. In this oedematous
cellular tissue lay numerous flat extravasations of blood
half a centimetre in breadth, the vessels around these being
very greatly distended. The muscles of the thigh and of the
abdominal wall were also interspersed with small extravasa-
tions. In the heart and lungs no alterations were found.
In the peritoneal cavity no fluid was present, the peritoneum
being unaltered and the coils of intestine not glued together.
But the surface of the intestine, in consequence of a number
of small subserous extravasations presented an appearance
as if injected here and there with blood. The spleen was also
very considerably enlarged.

In this second animal the oval micrococci were alone
present in the oedematous cellular tissue, all the other bacteria
having disappeared. The number of these organisms was
very considerable, many of the small veins being completely
filled with them. In the haemorrhagic spots were small veins,
which were here and there distended with micrococci, thus
presenting spindle-shaped dilatations, which had at parts
burst, the micrococci having thus escaped in large numbers
into the surrounding cellular tissue. This appearance could
be particularly well seen in the muscles of the thigh.

In the pulmonary capillaries the micrococci were not very
numerous ; they were scattered through the blood singly or in
pairs, and occasionally in small groups. In the kidneys these
organisms were present in much larger numbers. The great
majority of the glomeruli seemed enlarged, as if swollen ; their
capillary loops were increased in size and distended with red
blood corpuscles. The other glomeruli were smaller than usual,
the nuclei of their capillary walls being closer together, so that
they presented an appearance as if they had been compressed.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 55

In all the enlarged glomeruli, without exception, more or less
extensive deposits of oval micrococci were present. These
were arranged in longitudinal series and also side by side, so
as to form a single layer, covering the inner wall of the
capillaries for short distances, but never embracing the whole
circumference. The micrococcus colonies thus presented the
appearance of short, slightly-curled, trough-like pellicles. In
other places the vascular loops were completely distended,
and there were also present all transitions from these dense
obstructing masses to the small loose colonies and the single
micrococci (Plate v., fig. 10).

In the compressed glomeruli colonies were very exceptionally
present, and then only of small size. Isolated obstructing
micrococcus masses were also present in the vascular capillary
network of the medullary substance. They were also present
in an isolated form in almost all the vessels. Accumulations
of whitish corpuscles in the neighbourhood of the micrococci
and alterations in the epithelial cells of the uriniferous tubules
were not observed. The micrococci were never seen in the
interior of the uriniferous tubules. The spleen contained
loosely-arranged micrococcus colonies scattered about in the
capillaries in moderate numbers, and also isolated dense
deposits which distended the small vessels at the border
and in the interior of the Malpighian corpuscles for short
distances.

In the capillaries surrounding the intestinal glands numerous
obstructing micrococcus masses were present (Plate i., fig. 11).
At many points these were so extensive that branching
accumulations were seen consisting entirely of these organisms.

The liver, like the lungs, contained no great accumulation
of micrococci.

The largest diameter of an isolated micrococcus was
•8 to I/O mikrm.

These organisms differ from the micrococci of pyaemia very
markedly as regards size, and in most other points. Thus
they never enclose the blood corpuscles, even when they have
accumulated in large numbers in the interior of the blood-
vessels. They rather push them on one side. They do not
cause coagulation of the blood, and thus emboli do not occur.



56 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

Only in one point do they resemble the pysemic micrococci,
namely, they do not show an increasing virulence when
inoculated into a series of animals in succession.

Thus a syringeful (ten drops) of blood taken from the heart
of the second rabbit was injected subcutaneously into a third
rabbit. This animal died in thirty-six hours, the naked eye
and microscopic appearances being exactly the same as in
rabbit No. 2.

From rabbit No. 3 two drops of blood were injected into a
mouse, and one drop into a rabbit.

The mouse died in thirty-seven hours ; the rabbit remained
unaffected.

The blood and all the organs of this mouse contained these
oval micrococci, just as in the rabbit. A second mouse was
then inoculated with blood taken from this mouse's heart,
the operation being performed in the following manner : —
The point of a scalpel was dipped in the blood of the heart,
and about one-tenth of a drop was put into a small pocket-
like wound on the root of the tail. This animal remained
healthy.

On a second occasion I have, by injection of putrid meat
infusion, obtained in a rabbit the same septicemic process
with the same oval micrococci.

Here, also, the disease could only be transmitted to other
rabbits when at least five to ten drops of blood were used for
inoculation.

6. Erysipelas in Babbits.

Not only were large quantities of putrid fluids injected into
rabbits, • but various attempts were also made to produce
disease by inoculation with different putrefying materials.
These were not successful. In one case, however, after
inoculation of the ear of a rabbit with mouse's dung softened
in distilled water, redness and swelling occurred and spread
slowly downwards from the point of inoculation. This
redness extended on the fifth day as far as the root of the ear.
When held up to the sunlight the ear which had not been
inoculated appeared unaltered, only the chief blood-vessels



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 57

being seen, while the inoculated ear, similarly illuminated,
presented a uniformly dark red appearance, the individual
vessels being no longer recognisable. It was thicker, and at
the same time had become more fluid than the other, its
point being bent and hanging down in consequence of its
weight. The animal was, moreover, evidently ill, and died on
the seventh day.

No effect was produced on another rabbit by injecting into
it blood taken from the first. Unfortunately an attempt was
not made to transmit the morbid process by inoculation with
material from the ear of the affected rabbit to that of another.

Neither in the blood nor in the internal organs of this
rabbit were any alterations found worthy of mention, notably
no bacteria. The state of matters in the ear was, however,
so remarkable, and bore so unmistakably the characters of a
parasitic disease, that I have considered it right, although the
infective nature of the disease was not directly demonstrated,
to give here a description of the affection.

In transverse sections of the ear the blood-vessels were
seen to be markedly dilated, full of red corpuscles, and
surrounded by the nuclei of numerous white corpuscles.
These nuclei were more numerous towards the cartilage of the
ear, and on its surface they formed a pretty uniform dense
layer. Between this layer and the cartilage cells were seen
small fine rods arranged at pretty equal distances, which rods
were distributed parallel to the cartilage in the dense cellular
tissue which lies immediately outside the cartilage cells. In
many places only single rods were seen; in others several
were present, being arranged parallel to each other; while
again, thickly interwoven clumps of these same rods were
found, and that in parts where the white corpuscles were
somewhat more thickly accumulated than elsewhere. These
rods were present nowhere except close to the cartilage.
Longitudinal sections were accordingly prepared which
showed very distinctly the distribution of the rods on the
surface of the cartilage. Figure 12, Plate i., is drawn from
such a section. The large round bodies (c) are the nuclei of
large flat cells, under which lie the cartilage cells. On this
layer of flat cells there is a thick network consisting of bacilli,



58 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

and outside these bacilli, indeed in fact covering them, are the
nuclei (b), of the white corpuscles of which, however, only a
small portion remains in the section. In many places the
bacilli form more or less round dense clumps (as shown in
fig. 12 a) which look like a pad of hair. From these clumps long
rows of bacilli, in which the organisms become fewer and
fewer, radiate in all directions. This reminds one of the
peculiar, often starlike, figures which the bacillus anthracis
forms when inoculated on the cornea of a living rabbit-*
This network of bacilli extended over the whole cartilage of
the ear on both surfaces. As the morbid process could be
traced in its extension from its origin at the point of
inoculation over the whole ear, and as throughout the whole
limit of the process these bacilli were present, and as, further,
the signs of inflammatory reaction were most marked in the
immediate neighbourhood of these organisms, I consider it
indubitable that they were the cause of the disease. I have
never observed any formation of spores in them. They vary
much in length. One rod, in which I could with certainty
only distinguish two joints, was 3 mikrm. in length. The
longest rod, consisting of six or seven joints, was 9 — 10 mikrm.
in length. They are about *3 mikrm. thick (the bacillus
anthracis may be as long as 20 mikrm. and as thick as 1 to
1*25 mikrm., — that is to say, about twice as long and three or
four times as thick as the bacilli of the rabbit's ear).

* Frisch, I.e., PL i., fig. 3, and PL ii., figs. 9 and 10.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 59



ANTHRAX.

The numerous investigations which have been made with
regard to anthrax have almost all had reference to the
behaviour of the bacillus anthracis outside the animal body.
With regard to their numbers in the blood the conclusions
have, as a rule, been drawn from blood taken by chance from
any part of the body. No observations have yet been published
as to the number of bacilli really present in the body, and as
to their distribution in the vascular system.

In order to supply this deficiency, and because the bacillus
anthracis behaves so like the septicemic bacilli (thus being
useful for comparison with the other pathogenic bacteria here
described), I have examined rabbits and mice which have died
of inoculated anthrax in the same manner as I did those
killed by artificial traumatic infective diseases.

The staining of the bacillus alone, as obtained by treatment
of sections stained in methyl violet with carbonate of potash,
here proved of the greatest service. The mucous membrane
of the stomach and intestine can, for example, be so prepared
for examination by this method, that even with low powers
the bacilli may be seen in all the vessels. In like manner
sections of lung, liver, and kidneys, furnish extremely distinct
and instructive preparations.

Although I had often previously examined the blood of
animals suffering from anthrax, and had thus formed a high
estimate as to the number of bacilli present in the body of an
anthracic animal, yet I was quite surprised when I saw for
the first time sections and portions of organs stained in this
way, as e.g., the intestinal mucous membrane and the iris of
a rabbit. When magnified fifty diameters such a preparation
presents at the first glance an appearance as if a blue
colouring-matter had been injected into the vessels. Each
intestinal villus is permeated by an exceedingly delicate blue
network ; in the mucous membrane of the stomach all the
capillary network surrounding the gastric glands is stained



60 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

blue ; in the ciliary processes each projection is injected, and
a spiral vessel stained of a dark blue colour leads from thence
to the iris and breaks up into a fine blue network with loops
directed towards the edge of the iris. The liver and lungs,
and the glandular structures, such as the pancreas and salivary
glands, are completeiy permeated by the same blue vascular
network. Indeed there is no organ which is not more or less
injected with the blue mass. It is, however, very striking
that this injection is only present in the capillary vessels.
All the larger vessels, even the arteries and veins of an
intestinal villus, are either not at all stained or have but a
light blue streak in their interior, and that only here and
there. When magnified 250 times one can see that the blue
capillary network is composed of numerous delicate rods
(Plate iii., fig. 13), and when a power of 700 diameters is
used it is found that the apparent injection is nothing more
or less than the bacillus anthracis, stained dark blue, and
present in incredible numbers in the whole capillary system.
In the other vessels, especially in the larger ones, often only
a single bacillus may be met with at long intervals, or they
may be quite absent. Here, therefore, we have a striking
proof of how little value are conclusions drawn in traumatic
infective diseases from the examination of a drop of blood
taken from a blood-vessel by chance ; for one might quite well
take a drop of blood from the heart and find no micro-
organisms in it, or one might readily overlook the few which
might be present, and that although the capillary system
abounds in them.

The distribution of the bacillus anthracis in the capillaries
is not, however, quite uniform. There are fewer in the brain,
in the skin, in the capillaries of the muscle, and in the tongue
than elsewhere ; on the other hand, in the liver, lungs,
kidneys, spleen, intestines, and stomach, they are always
present in the enormous numbers above described. The
spleen, to which the disease owes its name, is not distinguished
above the other organs which have been mentioned by a
greater number of bacilli. In the capillaries themselves the
bacilli accumulate in largest numbers at the point farthest
removed from the nearest afferent artery and the efferent vein ;



TBAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 61

that is to say, where the arterial capillaries join the venous,
the aggregate diameter of the vessels being there the broadest
and the blood stream flowing the slowest. In the intestinal
villus this spot is at its apex and the neighbouring part of the
periphery ; in the liver it lies midway between the ultimate
twigs of the hepatic vein and of the vena port®. Among the
points where the bacilli accumulate in greatest numbers are
also the glomeruli of the kidney, which become for the most
part transformed into clumps of bacilli. It by no means
unfrequently happens that from the presence of the rapidly
increasing bacilli at the places mentioned, chiefly in the
glomeruli, intestinal villi, mucous membrane of the stomach,
salivary glands, and pancreas, individual capillaries become
torn, and blood with the contained bacilli is extravasated.
This occurs most frequently in the glomeruli. Many of these
burst and the bacilli pass into the uriniferous tubules. They
do not, however, extend far into these; at least I have only
found them in the commencement of the convoluted tubules,
in which they form long threads interwoven with each other.
I have never seen bacilli in the straight uriniferous tubules.

The facts which I have described are those met with in
rabbits. Mice, which I have often investigated, behave
essentially in the same manner. In the latter animals,
however, the spleen is more especially the seat of the bacilli ;
then come the lungs, and last of all the kidneys. The contrast
between the very large numbers of bacilli in the capillaries
and their small quantity in the large vessels is even more
striking in the mouse than in the rabbit.

I have also had an opportunity of examining the lungs,
liver, spleen, and kidneys of sheep which had died of anthrax,
and I found here also that the bacilli had the same relations
as regards numbers and distribution as in the rabbit.

I would recommend the study of organs taken from animals
affected with anthrax, and stained in the manner described,
to those who, in spite of all the proof already furnished, do
not yet regard it as a parasitic disease. The simple fact that
death occurs in twenty-four hours after inoculation with the
smallest drop of anthracic blood, provided that it contains
bacilli or their spores, and that then almost all the capillaries



62 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

of the lungs, liver, kidneys, spleen, intestine, stomach, &c.
(placed in absolute alcohol immediately after death), are found
to be filled with enormous numbers of the same bacilli, has so
evidently only one interpretation that no commentary is
required. The investigator who still considers the presence of
these organisms as accidental, quite immaterial, or merely
accessory, must, before he can attribute the death of the
animal to some other unknown ferment, consider likewise as
immaterial the loss of the constituents of the blood which go
to build up these innumerable bacilli, the accumulation of
waste products which such a rapid interchange of material as
the growth of the bacilli must of necessity involve, and also
the disturbances in the circulation and in the nourishment of
important organs induced by the plugging of most of the
capillaries. But in that case there would be no reason why,
in the case of trichinosis, scabies, and other parasitic diseases
communicated by direct contact, some specific ferments in
addition to trichinae, acari, &c, should not also be supposed
to be present.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 68



CONCLUSIONS.

I am well aware that the investigations above described are
very imperfect. It was necessary, in order to have time for
those parts of the investigation which seemed the most
important and essential, to omit the examination of many
organs, such as the brain, heart, retina, &c, which ought not
to pass unnoticed in researches on infective diseases. For
the same reason no record was kept of the temperature,
although this would undoubtedly have yielded most interesting
results. I have intentionally refrained from entering into
details of morbid anatomy, as only the etiology interested me,
and as I did not feel qualified to undertake a study of the
morbid anatomy of traumatic infective diseases. I must
therefore leave this part of the investigation to those who are
better able to undertake it.

Nevertheless I consider that the results of my researches
are sufficiently definite to enable me to deduce from them
some well-founded conclusions.

In this summary I shall, however, confine myself to the
most obvious conclusions. It has indeed of late become too
common to draw the most sweeping conclusions as to infective
diseases in general from the most unimportant observations
on bacteria. I shall not follow this custom, although the
material at my command would furnish rich food for
meditation. For the longer I study infective diseases the
more am I convinced that generalisations of new facts are here
a mistake, and that every individual infective disease or group
of closely allied diseases must be investigated for itself.

As regards the artificial traumatic infective diseases
observed by me, the conditions, which must be established
before their parasitic nature can be proved, were com-
pletely fulfilled in the case of the first five, but only
partially in that of the sixth. For the infection was
produced by such small quantities of fluid (blood, serum,
pus, &c.) that the result cannot be attributed to a merely
chemical poison.



64 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

In the materials used for inoculation bacteria were without
exception present, and in each disease a different and well-
marked form of organism could be demonstrated.

At the same time, the bodies of those animals which died of
the artificial traumatic infective diseases contained bacteria in
such numbers that the symptoms and the death of the
animals were sufficiently explained. Further, the bacteria
found were identical with those which were present in the
fluid used for inoculation, and a definite form of organisms
corresponded in every instance to a distinct disease.

These artificial traumatic infective diseases bear the greatest
resemblance to human traumatic infective diseases, both as
regards their origin from putrid substances, their course, and
the result of post-mortem examination. Further, in the first
case, just as in the last, the parasitic organisms could be only
imperfectly demonstrated by the earlier methods of investi-
gation; not till an improved method of procedure was
introduced was it possible to obtain complete proof that they
were parasitic diseases. We are therefore justified in assuming
that human traumatic infective diseases will in all probability
be proved to be parasitic when investigated by these improved
methods.

On the other hand, it follows from the fact that a definite
pathogenic bacterium, e. g., the septicemic bacillus, cannot be
inoculated on every variety of animal (a similar fact is also
true with regard to the bacillus anthracis) ; that the
septicaemia of mice, rabbits, and man are not under all
circumstances produced by the same bacterial form. It is of
course possible that one or other of the bacteric forms found
in animals also play a part in such diseases in the human
subject. That, however, must be specially demonstrated for
each case ; a priori one need only expect that bacteria are
present ; as regards form, size, and conditions of growth, they
may be similar, but not always the same, even in what appear
to be similar diseases in different animals.

Besides the pathogenic bacteria already found in animals,
there are no doubt many others. My experiments refer only
to those diseases which ended fatally. Even these are in all



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 65

probability not exhausted in the six forms mentioned.
Further experiments on many different species of animals,
"with the most putrid substances and with every possible
modification in the method of application, will doubtless bring
to light a number of other infective diseases, which will lead
to further conclusions regarding infective diseases and
pathogenic bacteria.

But even in the small series of experiments which I was
able to carry out, one fact was so prominent that I must
regard it as constant, and, as it helps to remove most
of the obstacles to the admission of the existence of a
contagium vivum for traumatic infective diseases, I look on it
as the most important result of my work. I refer to the
differences which exist between pathogenic bacteria and to the
constancy of their characters. A distinct bacteric form
corresponds, as we have seen, to each disease, and this form
always remains the same, however often the disease is
transmitted from one animal to another. Further, when
we succeed in reproducing the same disease de novo by
the injection of putrid substances, only the same bacteric
form occurs which was before found to be specific for that
disease.

Further, the differences between these bacteria are as great
as could be expected between particles which border on the
invisible. With regard to these differences, I refer not only to
the size and form of the bacteria, but also to the conditions of
their growth, which can be best recognised by observing their
situation and grouping. I therefore study not only the
individual alone, but the whole group of bacteria, and would,
for example, consider a micrococcus which in one species of
animal occurred only in masses (i. e. 9 in a zooglsea form),
as different from another which in the same variety of animal,
under the same conditions of life, was only met with as
isolated individuals. Attention must also be paid to the
physiological effect, of which I scarcely know a more striking
example than the case of the bacillus and the chain-like
micrococcus growing together in the cellular tissue of the ear;
the one passing into the blood and penetrating into the white
blood corpuscles, the other spreading out slowly in the tissue

F



66 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

in its vicinity and destroying everything round about; or
again, the case of the septicemic and pyaemic micrococci of the
rabbit in their different relations to the blood ; or lastly, the
bacilli extending only over the surface of the aural cartilage in
the erysipetalous disease, as contrasted with the bacillus
anthracis likewise inoculated on the rabbit's ear, but quickly
passing into the blood.

As, however, there corresponds to each of the diseases
investigated a form of bacterium distinctly characterised by
its physiological action, by its conditions of growth, size, and
form, which, however often the disease be transmitted
from one animal to another, always remains the same and
never passes over into other forms, e.g., from the spherical
to the rod-shaped, we must in the meantime regard these
different forms of pathogenic bacteria as distinct and constant
species.

This is, however, an assertion which will be much disputed
by botanists, to whose special province this subject really
belongs.

Amongst those botanists who have written against the
subdivision of bacteria into species, is Nageli, who says,*
" I have for ten years examined thousands of different forms
of bacteria, and I have not yet seen any absolute necessity for
dividing them even into two distinct species.' '

Brefeld t also states that he can only admit the existence
of specific forms justifying the formation of distinct species
when the whole history of development has been traced by
cultivation from spore to spore in the most diverse nutritive
fluids.

Although Brefeld's demand is undoubtedly theoretically
correct, it cannot be made a sine qua non in every investigation
on pathogenic bacteria. We should otherwise be compelled to
cease our investigations into the etiology of infective diseases
till botanists have succeeded in finding out the different
species of bacteria by cultivation and development from spore
to spore. It might then very easily happen that the endless

* Die Niederen Pilze. Miinchen, 1877, p, 20.

\ Untersuchungen iiber die Spaltpilze. Sitzungsbericht der Gesellschaft
Naturforschender Freunde in Berlin. 19fch Feb., 1878.



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 67

trouble of pure cultivation would be expended on some form
of bacterium which would finally turn out to be scarcely worthy
of attention. In practice only the opposite method can work.
In the first place certain peculiarities of a particular form of
bacterium different from those of other forms, and in the
second place its constancy, compel us to separate it from
others less known and less interesting, and provisionally
to regard it as a species. And now, to verify this provisional
supposition, the cultivation from spore to spore may be
undertaken. If this succeeds under conditions which shut
out all sources of fallacy, and if it furnishes a result
corresponding to that obtained by the previous observations,
then the conclusions which were drawn from these observations
and which led to its being ranked as a distinct species must
be regarded as valid.

On this, which as it seems to me is the only correct
practical method, I take my stand, and, till the cultivation
of bacteria from spore to spore shows that I am wrong,
I shall look on pathogenic bacteria as consisting of different
species.

In order, however, to show that I do not stand alone in this
view, I shall here mention the opinion of some botanists who
have already come to a similar conclusion.

Cohn* states that, in spite of the fact that many dispute
the necessity of separating bacteria into genera and species,
he must nevertheless adhere to the method as yet followed by
him, and separate bacteria of different form and fermenting
power from each other, so long as complete proof of their
identity is not given.

From his investigations on the effects of different temper-
atures and of dessication on the development of bacterium
termo, Eidam t came to the conclusion that different forms of
bacteria require different conditions of nutriment, and that
they behave differently towards physical and chemical
influences. He regards these facts as a further proof of the
necessity of dividing organisms into distinct species.

I shall bring forward another reason to show the necessity

* Beitrage zur Biologie der Pflanzen. Bd. I., Heft. 3, p. 144.
t Beitrage ziir Biologie der Pflanzen. Bd. I., Heft. 3, p. 223.



68 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

of looking on the pathogenic bacteria which I have described
as distinct species. The greatest stress, in investigations on
bacteria, is justly laid on the so-called pure cultivations, in
which only one definite form of bacterium is present. This
evidently arises from the view that if, in a series of cultivations,
the same form of bacterium is always obtained, a special
significance must attach to this form: it must indeed be
accepted as a constant form, or, in a word, as a species.
Can, then, a series of pure cultivations be carried out without
admixture of other bacteria? It can in truth be done, but
only under very limited conditions. Only such bacteria can
be cultivated pure, with the aids at present at command,
which can always be known to be pure, either by their size
and easily recognisable form, as the" bacillus anthracis, or by
the production of a characteristic colouring matter, as the
pigment bacteria. When, during a series of cultivations, a
strange species of bacteria has by chance got in, as may
occasionally happen under any circumstances, it will in
these cases be at once observed, and the unsuccessful experi-
ment will be thrown out of the series without the progress
of the investigation being thereby necessarily interfered
with.

But the case is quite different when attempts are made to
carry out cultivations of very small bacteria, which, perhaps,
cannot be distinguished at all without staining ; how are we
then to discover the occurrence of contamination? It is
impossible to do so, and therefore all attempts at pure
cultivation in apparatus, however skilfully planned and
executed, must, as soon as small bacteria with but little
characteristic appearances are dealt with, be considered as
subject to unavoidable sources of fallacy, and in themselves
inconclusive.

But nevertheless a pure cultivation is possible, even in the
case of the bacteria which are smallest and most difficult to
recognise. This, however, is not conducted in cultivation
apparatus, but in the animal body. My experiments
demonstrate this. In all the cases of a distinct disease, e. g.,
of septicaemia of mice, only the small bacilli were present,
and no other form of bacterium was ever found with it, unless



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 69

in the case where that causing the tissue gangrene was
intentionally inoculated at the same time. In fact, there
exists no better cultivation apparatus for pathogenic bacteria
than the animal body itself. Only a very limited number of
bacteria can grow in the body, and the penetration of
organisms into it is so difficult that the uninjured living body
may be regarded as completely isolated with respect to other
forms of bacteria than those intentionally introduced. It is
quite evident, from a careful consideration of the two diseases
produced in mice — septicaemia and gangrene of the tissue —
that I have succeeded in my experiments in obtaining a pure
cultivation. In the putrefying blood, which was the cause of
these two diseases, the most different forms of bacteria were
present, and yet only two of these found in the living mouse
the conditions necessary for their existence. All the others
died, and these two alone, a small bacillus and a chain-like
micrococcus, remained and grew. These could be trans-
ferred from one animal to another as often as was desired,
without suffering any alteration in their characteristic form,
in their specific physiological action and without any other
variety of bacteria at any time appearing. And further,
as I have demonstrated,- it is quite in the power of the
experimenter to separate these two forms of bacteria from
each other. When the blood in which only the bacilli are
present is used, these alone are transmitted, and thenceforth
are obtained quite pure ; while on the other hand, when a
field-mouse is inoculated with both forms of bacteria, the
bacilli disappear, and the micrococcus can be then cultivated
pure. Doubtless an attempt to unite these two forms again
in the same animal by inoculation would have been successful.
In short, one has it completely in one's power to cultivate
several varieties of bacteria together, to separate them from
each other, and eventually to combine them again. Greater
demands can hardly be made on a pure cultivation, and I
must therefore regard the successive transmission of artificial
infective diseases as the best and surest method of pure
cultivation. And it can further claim the same power of
demonstrating the existence of specific forms of bacteria, as
must be conceded to any faultless cultivation experiments.



70 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

From the fact that the animal hody is such an excellent
apparatus for pure cultivation, and that, as we have seen,
when the experiments are properly arranged and sufficient
optical aids used, only one specific form of bacterium can be
found in each distinct case of artificial traumatic infective
disease, we may now further conclude that when, in examining
a traumatic infective disease, several different varieties of
bacteria are found, as e.g., chains of small granules, rods,
and long oscillating threads (such as were seen together
by Coze and Feltz in the artificial septicaemia of rabbits,
see p. 9), we have to do with either a combined infective
disease, — that is, not a pure one, — or, what in the case cited
is more probable, an inexact and inaccurate observation.
When, therefore, several species of bacteria occur together
in any morbid process, before definite conclusions are
drawn as to the relations of the disease in question to
the organisms, either proof must be furnished that they
are all concerned in the morbid process, or an attempt
must be made to isolate them and to obtain a true pure
cultivation. Otherwise we cannot avoid the objection that
the cultivation was not pure, and therefore not conclusive.
I shall only briefly refer to a further necessary consequence
of the admission of the existence of different species
of pathogenic bacteria. The number of the species of
these bacteria is limited; for, of the numerous diverse
forms present in putrid fluids, one or but few can in the
most favourable cases develop in the animal body. Those
which disappear are, for that species of animal at least,
not pathogenic bacteria. If, however, as follows from
the foregoing, there exist hurtful and harmless bacteria,
experiments performed on animals with the latter, e. g.,
with bacterium termo, prove absolutely nothing for or
against the behaviour of the former — the pathogenic — forms.
But almost all the experiments of this nature have been
carried out with the first mixture of different species of
bacteria which came to . hand without there being any
certainty that pathogenic bacteria were in reality present
in the mixture. It is therefore evident that none of these
experiments can be regarded as furnishing evidence of



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 71

any value for or against the parasitic nature of infective
diseases.

In all my experiments, not only have the form and size of
the bacteria been constant, but the greatest uniformity in
their actions on the animal organism has been observed,
though no increase in virulence, as described by Coze and
Feltz, Davaine, and others. This leads me to make some
remarks on the supposed law of the increasing virulence of
blood when transmitted through successive animals, discovered
or confirmed by the investigators just mentioned.

The discovery of this law has, as is well known, been
received with great enthusiasm, and it has excited no little
interest owing to its intimate bearing on the doctrine of
natural selection (Anpassung und Vererbung). Some investi-
gators, who are in other things very exact, have allowed
themselves to be blinded by the seductive theory that the
insignificant action of a single putrefactive bacterium may,
by continued natural selection in passing from animal
to animal, be increased in virulence till it becomes deadly
though a drop of the infective liquid be diluted a quadrillion
times. They have founded thereon the most beautiful
practical applications, not suspecting that the bacteria in
question have never been with certainty demonstrated.

The original works of Coze and Feltz, as also that of
Davaine, are not at my disposal for reference ; and I cannot
therefore enter into a complete criticism of them. So far,
however, as I can gather from the references accessible to me,
especially from the detailed notices in Virchow and Hirsch's
' Jahresbericht,' no complete proof that the virulence of
septicemic blood increases from generation to generation
seems Co have been furnished. Apparently blood more and
more diluted was injected, and astonishment was felt when
this always acted, the effect being then ascribed to its
increasing virulence. But controlling experiments to ascertain
whether the septicemic blood were not already as virulent in
the second and third generations as in the twenty-fifth, do not
seem to have been made. My experiments so far support and
are in accordance with those of Coze, Feltz, and Davaine



72 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION TO

in that for the first infection of an animal relatively
large quantities of putrid fluids are necessary ; but in the
second generation, or at the latest in the third, the full
virulence was attained, and afterwards remained constant.

Of my artificial infective diseases the septicaemia of the
mouse has the greatest correspondence with the artificial
septicaemia described by Davaine. If we were to experi-
ment with this disease in the same manner as Davaine
experimented, we would, if no controlling experiments
were employed, find the same increase in virulence of
the disease. It would only be necessary to use blood
in slowly decreasing quantities in order to obtain in
this way any progressive increase of the virulence that
might be desired. I, however, took from the second or
third animal the smallest possible quantity of material for
inoculation, and thus arrived more quickly at the greatest
degree of virulence. Till, therefore, I am assured that, in the
septicaemia observed by Davaine, such controlling experiments
were made, I can only look on an increase in virulence as
holding good for the earlier generations. In order to explain
this we do not, however, require to have recourse to the
magical wand of natural selection; a feasible explanation
can be very naturally furnished. Let us take again the
septicaemia of mice, as being the most suitable example.

If two drops of putrefying blood be injected into such an
animal there is introduced not only a number of totally
distinct species of bacteria, but also a certain amount of
dissolved putrid poison (sepsin), not sufficient to produce a
fatal effect, but yet certainly not without influence on the
health of the animal. Different factors must therefore be
considered as affecting the health of the animal. On the one
hand there is the dissolved poison, on the other the different
species of bacteria, of which, however, perhaps only two, as in
the example before us, can multiply in the body of the mouse
and there exert a continuous noxious influence. Only one of
these two species can penetrate into the blood, and if the blood
alone be used for further inoculations, only this one variety will
come victorious out of the battle for existence. The further
development of the experiment depends entirely on the quantity



TRAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. 73

of the putrid poison, and on the relation of the two forms of
bacteria to each other in point of numbers. If one injects
a large amount of the septic poison and a large number of
that variety of bacteria which increases locally (in this case the
chain-like micrococci causing the gangrene of the tissue), but
only a very small number of the bacteria which pass into the
blood (here the bacilli), the first animal experimented on will
die, as a result of the preponderating influence of the first
two factors before many bacilli can have got into the blood
and multiplied there. Of the blood of this first animal,
containing, as it does proportionately very few bacilli, one-
fifth to one-tenth of a drop must be inoculated in order
to convey the disease with certainty. In the second animal,
however, only the bacilli are introduced, and these develop
undisturbed in the blood. For the infection of the third
animal the smallest quantity of this blood which can produce
an effect is then sufficient, and after this third generation
the virulence of the blood remains uniform.

We may also imagine another case in which the increase of
the virulence may go on through more than two generations
without any modification resulting from natural selection
and transmission from animal to animal. This would take
place if several species of bacteria capable of passing into
the blood were introduced into the animal at the first injection.
Let us suppose, for example, that in the same putrefying
blood which served for the foregoing experiment, the bacilli of
anthrax were also present, there would be then contained in
the blood of the first animal not only the septicemic bacillus,
but also bacillus anthracis, and of each only a small number ;
of the anthrax bacillus there would be even fewer than of the
other, because in mice they are deposited chiefly in the spleen,
lungs, &c. ; while in the blood of the heart they are, even in
the most favourable cases, only sparsely distributed. On the
other hand, the anthrax bacilli have this advantage, that,
provided they be inoculated in considerable numbers, they kill
even within twenty hours, while the septicemic bacilli only
destroy life after fifty hours. In the blood of the second
animal, therefore, both species of bacilli would be present in
larger numbers than in the first, although not yet so numerous



74 MICRO-ORGANISMS IN RELATION, ETC.

as if either organism had been inoculated singly. Hence a
larger quantity of blood is necessary to ensure transmission to
a third animal. Perhaps this might be the case even in the
fourth generation, till finally one or other variety of bacillus
would alone be present in the blood injected. Probably this
would be the septicemic bacillus.

In this way the experiments of Coze, Feltz, and Davaine
may admit of simple explanation and be brought into harmony
with my results.



PRINTED BY WEST, NEWMAN AND CO., 54, HATTON GARDEN, LONDON, E.G.



EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.



All the drawings have been made as true to nature as possible
by the use of the camera lucida and of Zeiss' s T V inch oil immer-
sion objective. An object micrometer was used to determine the
magnifying power.



PLATE I.

Fig. 5. — Longitudinal section of the ear of a mouse. Pro-
gressive gangrene of the tissue : —

a. Normal cartilage and on each side normal tissue.

b. Line of demarcation, accumulation of nuclei.

c. Gangrenous portion of the ear devoid of nuclei.

d. Transverse section of a vessel full of micrococci, x 25.

Fig. 8. — Marginal zone of a cheesy abscess in a rabbit.
Lateral portion : —

a. Cloud-like masses of zooglsea.

b. and c. Smaller.

d. Smallest micrococcus colonies.

e. Accumulation of nuclei in the neighbourhood of the

zooglsea.
/. Broken-down nuclei.
g. Dead portion of zooglsea. x 700.

Fig. 11. — Capillary vessel from the mucous membrane of the
small intestine of a septicemic rabbit : —

a. Nuclei of the wall of the vessel.

b. Oval micrococci, x 700.



KOCH ON WOUNDS &1


tf \ © «. *

* "■ % '■"« -5

VJ* r y



K


-J'



o--;


PLATE II.

Fig. 1. — Blood of a septicaemia mouse, dried on a cover glass,
stained with methyl violet, and mounted in Canada balsam.
Bed blood corpuscles are seen, and among them are small bacilli,
x 700.

Fig. 2. — White blood corpuscles from one of the veins of the
diaphragm of a septicemic mouse. All stages of transition are
shown from blood corpuscles which contain but few bacilli to
those which have become converted into masses of bacilli, x 700.

Fig. 4. — Blood of a mouse affected with anthrax. Bed blood
corpuscles and anthrax bacilli. The specimen was prepared in
the same way as that shown in fig. 1. The points of junction of
the bacilli are too strongly drawn, x 700,

Fig. 12. — Section of the ear of a rabbit parallel to the surface
of the cartilage. The morbid process resembled erysipelas : —

a. Ball-like accumulation of bacilli.

b. Accumulation of nuclei above the layer of bacilli.

c. Nuclei of flat cells connected with the cartilage below

the layer of bacilli.

d. Bacilli arranged parallel to each other, x 700.



KOCH ON WOUNDS ft?



*



7


V &



»i ,♦



S



',



1



*

i



I



\



PLATE III.

Fig. 8. — Vein of the diaphragm of a septicaemia mouse : —
a. Nuclei of the vascular wall.
6. Septicemic bacilli.

c. White blood corpuscles which have become transformed

into masses of bacilli.

d. Capillaries opening into the vein, x 700.

Fig. 7. — Marginal zone of a cheesy abscess cavity in a rabbit.
Lower surface : —

a. Accumulation of nuclei at the outer border of the abscess.
6. Zooglaea, consisting of very small micrococci (these have
been drawn too large in parts, more especially in the
interior of the zooglaea).

c. Zooglaea, partially dead.

d. Dead zooglaea.

e. Remnants of nuclei, x 700.



KOCH ON WOUNDS JM


I | Fig. 3



■■#?


• -'' • ■



%


PLATE IV.

Fig. 6. — A portion of the cartilage and adjacent tissue in the
vicinity of c, fig. 5. Magnified 700 diameters : —
a. Necrotic cartilage cells.
6. Chain-like micrococci in masses.
c. The same isolated, x 700.

Fig. 13. — Villus of a rabbit. Anthrax. The bacilli alone
stained. X 250.



KOCH ON WOUNDS &<?



Plate N.



Fig. 13


/



\



V.



\



\



/* \ \
i \* ■'*- s --. -



.•4



H


//'



(



/-



/'



V,


;w



\



v -..


\



/

/


>)'


1


\


//'


1


/


.7


/ L


s~


/


1 ,


/


' !


1 1


' "X\


■>


/ 1


!7:


V


"""''


\
\


1 ,


.'«•


l\


//'/


^'


1


I


'1
li \


\
\


(fir


V.


//


1


■C~


1


1


^


•'?


\


//'


■'•;


;<


>,


^\


//


\\


//


^


\/


V

V

\


Fig. G.



b



/



r



y !>.,.— ,



V ! ft


West ll°wn-.»n * C? &c <♦ liih.



PLATE V.

Fig. 9. — Vessel from the cortex of the kidney of a pyemic
rabbit : —

a. Nuclei of the vascular wall.

b. Small group of micrococci between blood corpuscles.

c. Dense masses of micrococci adherent to the wall and

enclosing blood corpuscles.

d. Pairs of micrococci at the border of the large mass.

x 700.

Fig. 10. — Glomerulus of a septicemic rabbit : —

a. Capillary loop with oval micrococci spread out like a

membrane.

b. Micrococci deposited on the walls of a capillary vessel.

c. Loop completely filled with micrococci.

d. Individual micrococci in a capillary vessel near a

glomerulus, x 700.

Fig. 14. — A part of the vascular network of the same, x 700.



EEPOBT



PRESENTED TO THE



TWENTY-SECOND ANNUAL MEETING



OF THE



NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY



HELD AT CAMBRIDGE,



August 8th, 1880.



WITH



CksiM fkt of fttblrsjre* Morfis



AND OTHER INFORMATION.



OFFICERS FOR 1880-81.



Sir WILLIAM W. GULL, Bart., M.D., F.R.S., D.C.L., LL.D.



ROBERT BARNES, M.D.

Sir GEORGE BURROWS, F.R.S. ,Bart.

R. W. FALCONER, M.D., D.C.L.

(Bath).
W. D. HUSBAND, Esq. (York).
W. T. GAIRDNER, M.D. (Glasgow).
CiESAR H. HAWKINS, Esq., F.R.S.
T. HOLMES, Esq.
J. HUGHLINGS JACKSON, M.D.,

F R S
•GEORGE JOHNSON, M.D., F.R.S.



rnt-gttsibmfi.

JOSEPH LISTER, Esq., F.R.S.
Sir JAMES PAGET, F.R.S., Rart.
♦GEORGE PAGET, M.D., F.R.S.

(Cambridge).
♦WILLIAM RUTHERFORD, M.D.,

F.R.S. (Edinburgh).
T. GRAINGER STEWART, M.D.

(Edinburgh).
Sir THOMAS WATSON, M.D.,F.R.S.,

Bart.
HERMANN WEBER, M.D.



Cmmal.



•T. CLIFFORD ALLBUTT, M.D.,

F R S
•MILNER BARRY, M.D.
(Tunbridge Wells).

THOMAS BARLOW, M.D.
•LAUDER BRUNTON, M.D., F.R.S.

W. H. BROADBENT, M.D.

THOMAS BUZZARD, M.D.

W. CHOLMELEY, M.D.

WILLIAM COLLES, M.D.
(Dublin).

R. M. CRAVEN, Esq. (Hull).

J. LANGDON H. DOWN, M.D.

DYCE DUCKWORTH, M.D.

J. MATTHEWS DUNCAN, M.D.

JOHN EASTON, M.D.

Sir JOSEPH FAYRER, M.D.

C. J. HARE, M.D.

G. E. HERMAN, M.D.



H. MACNAUGHTEN JONES, M.D.

(Cork).
J. C. LANGMORE, M.B.
P. W. LATHAM, M.D. (Cambridge).
•STEPHEN MACKENZIE, M.D.
J. W. MOORE, M.D. (Dublin).
•WALTER MOXON, M.D.
•WILLIAM ROBERTS, M.D.

(Manchester).
SEPTIMUS W. SIBLEY, Esq.
J. K. SPENDER, M.D. (Bath).
•WILLIAM SQUARE, Esq.

(Plymouth).
•PAUL SWAYNE, Esq. (Devonport).
T. P. TEALE, Esq. (Leeds).
WILLIAM TURNER, M.B.,F.R.S.E.

(Edinburgh).
JOHN WALTERS, M.B. (Reigate).
JAMES WEST, Esq. (Birmingham).



ffrtastrrtr.

W. SEDGWICK SAUNDERS, M.D., 13, Queen Street, Cheapside, E.C.

E. CLAPTON, M.D. | S. FENWICK, M.D.

F. M. CORNER, Esq.

jpon. Srcrciarg.

JONATHAN HUTCHINSON, Esq., 15, Cavendish Square, W.



Those marked with an Asterisk were not in office last year.



REPORT



Presented to the Twenty-second Annual Meeting
of the New Sydenham Society.



The series for the year 1879 consisted of the following
works : — The second and concluding volume of Waring's
Bibliotheca Therapeutica, a second part of the Society's
Lexicon of Medical Terms, Guttmann's Manual of Physical
Diagnosis, and a second Fasciculus of the Society's Atlas of
Pathology. With the latter were included essays on the
present state of knowledge as to the Pathology of the
Kidney, by Dr. Greenfield, and as to that of the Spleen and
Supra-Eenals, by Dr. Goodhart. These papers were
compiled at the request of the Council, and were freely
illustrated by drawings from the microscope.

The series for the current year will probably comprise
the following : —

I. A third fasciculus of the Society's Lexicon. (Already
out).

II. The fifth and concluding volume of Hebra's Treatise
on Skin Diseases, with index to the whole. (Already
out).

III. Koch's Eesearches on the Etiology of diseases

consequent on Wound Infection.

IV. A third Fasciculus of the Society's Atlas of Pathology,

comprising diseases of the Liver.

V. A fourth Fasciculus of the Lexicon.
The Council has adopted, for reprinting, the classical
Treatise of Dr. Stokes on Diseases of the Chest. This
work, which has been always held in very high estimation
by all authorities, has been for some time out of print. It
will be edited for the Society, with short annotations, &c,



REPORT.



by Dr. Hudson, of Dublin. It has also been decided to edit
for the Society a selection from the works of Duchenne ;
and Dr. Vivian Poore has, at the Council's request, under-
taken the preparation of the work.

The translation of Professor Charcot's Lectures on the
Diseases of Old Age, and on certain Chronic Maladies, has
been decided on. The work has been placed in the hands
of Mr, William S. Tuke.

The preparation of the Society's Lexicon is, in the hands
of its editors, Mr. Power and Dr. Sedgwick, progressing
satisfactorily and as rapidly as the difficulties of the task
permit. Three Fasciculi have been issued, and another is
just ready. It is to be distinctly understood that the
Fasciculi of this work are always issued as soon as ready.
The Council is prepared to devote to it any portion of the
year's income that may be requisite ; and nothing but the
onerous nature of the editors' task will be allowed to delay
its publication.

The Balance Sheet has been audited, and is, as usual,
appended.



, — *—



p



cd

o
o



►0

9
CD

P-


CD

■<

O

e

o^

E3*

0>

H

CO

P

D
P-

s

C


O

a
o



to

—I

P



CD
CO
CO

p-

p-

p*

o

ET.

o



CO

cd

o

P.

CO
cd

»i

P

3.
cd

CO


cd



on



CO
P



CO

&

CO

o

3.
»d

P.

o


CO



CCCKtOlOCClOtCH-itOCCMCCMH*
....................... g>



w

s

cd

D

5

a

cd



QooDcxxaoaoaoaoaoaocxcxooODcxaoao

X<I^>~><I^J^>^>^»0><»0}05C£CDOC>C&

OCOCCMC»Oi|kCO)9HOCOaO^QOi|^



(3D 00

a> oo
06 to



o

OD
X



CC



09

O

tO CO

«*•? CC



Oi cc
to rf-



00

00

*co*

CD
CD

►d
»1

CD
O
CD
P-

s

a)

~»t-*ioioc:c:*»x 5

CStCX^l^tO*3lOOC^tOtOC»lOlOM*OCO»-»COH-»»-«JbCD.
t-i |_i |_> h-» t— » CO

CD



W

CD
O
CD

£'



**ocooooooooooooooo©o©of



CD

o
o



00

to



00 ta

to



CC •



MO,



P
6TS



g



CD O

5 w
p-x
* >0



o
o



ft



o

o

S3

<'

t— i

o



o
f
>

H
O



oo

00

o



o

CD

3
cr

CD

CD
CO



00
CO


CD
CD
CO



rc> p D

p.® »

CO *— *



3
CD


r*

CO



CD


s

CD

g

«^



►< CD oo
2 * 2 »

S 8 sr s -
g s 5 a

S 2*< co

k >< *<

CD CD H

cL
cn co ^^

CD CD M
09 08 2?
CD


r*
P
OCJ
CD



WW?

§ 5^

CO P-
CD

Mj CO

P


P-MM



CD

B

CD


g-a

«*• 22.

CO

S

P


&
P

CO



w

It*

QQ

W

bd

o

w



00

•a

CO



CD

!

CD



o
oc-
oo



CO



2720
1367


t

to


|— » CO


CC CD


OD



to X



to IF-



to

O OS
C* If-



IH CO o -* wi lU



OC. OC60*J



lb



00



£* if- x c:
cc o CC CO
CO CO cc to



CC O CO CO »
00X0(01



CLASSIFIED LIST



OF THE



SOCIETY'S PUBLICATIONS.



ffltMtint.

ON THE TEMPERATURE IN DISEASE : A MANUAL

OF MEDICAL THERMOMETBY. By Dr. C. A. Wunder-
lich. (Leipzig). Translated by Dr. Bathurst Woodman.
With forty Woodcuts and seven Lithographs.

" It is well to recollect that this contains not only observations on the
temperature in disease, but also in health, and is a complete epitome as to the
history of the subject up to date. It is a work of reference absolutely necessary
for all who would keep themselves abreast of the day in relation to so im-
portant a matter as corporeal temperature." — Edin. Med. Journ., May, 1872.

" In short, without pledging ourselves to Wunderlich as infallible, we may
say, emphatically, that his is a masterwork, in which every part of his subject
is considered with that thoroughness which comes of ripe knowledge and
reflection. Let us add that Dr. Bathurst Woodman, following one or two
laudable examples that have been set by other translators for the Sydenham
Society, has enriched the work with notes of his own observations and those of
other English writers, which are of no small value, and unquestionably do much
to make the volume complete and full." - Lancet, April 20, 1872.

" The translator has rendered into readable English, and enriched with
practical notes, a book which, even in its original form, has started into active
work many physicians in England, France, and America, and which now, in its
popular form, must render the diagnosis of disease infinitely more accurate." —
Medical Times and Gazette, June 3, 187 1.

" The publication of this volume marks an epoch in the history of medical
thermometry. The very possibility of such a book — full not only of exact
knowledge, but of important generalisations — is an indication that the great
problems relating to the alterations in the human temperature — the problems of
fever and collapse — are now being studied in a manner calculated to throw light
on the hidden processes of disease. . . - . . The value of this great work of
Professor Wunderlich is that it lays open his vast clinical experience of the
thermometer, and that it sketches in general terms the course of the temperature
in various forms of disease." — Glasgow Medical Journal, August, 1871.

" This treatise displays so much perseverance and thoroughness, such
admirable caution and insight, and such wide and minute learning, that it may
be said not only to establish this branch of investigation for the first time upon
a deep and lasting basis, but also to build up a very great part of the edifice,
and to point out with clearness the directions in which future labour must be
applied." — Dr. Allbutt in Brit, and For. Med. Chir. Rev., April, 1870.



LECTURES ON CLINICAL MEDICINE, delivered at the
Hotel Dieu, Paris. By Professor Trousseau. Five Volumes.
Vol. 1, translated, with notes and appendices, hy the late

b



8 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Dr. Bazire. Vols. 2 to 5, translated from the third edition,
revised and enlarged, by Sir John Eose Cormack.

" We are indebted to the New Sydenham Society for this rich contribution

to our medical literature Trousseau is an author to be read rather than

reviewed. He can only be criticised worthily at the bedside We com-
mend this great physician's work to the study of every reader." — Lancet,
October 15, 1870.

" The above-mentioned works constitute the nineteenth annual issue to its
subscribers of the New Sydenham Society ; and, though relating to different
subjects, we have classed them together, because it seems of more importance
to the profession that they should know the very valuable practical information
they can secure for one guinea, than at this time of day they should b<*
treated to an elaborate critique on Trousseau's Clinical Medicine, or on
Wunderlich's Treatise on Thermometry ; the worth of these volumes being well
known to all but the merest tyro in medicine." — Edinburgh Medical Journal,
May, 1872.

" We should think any medical library absurdly incomplete now which did
not have, alongside of Watson and Graves and Tanner, the clinical medicine of
Trousseau. The work is full of the results of the richest natural observation,
and is the production of one who was enlightened enough to combine with new
methods of investigation the vigorous and independent ideas of the old
physicians, whom he so eloquently magnifies. The volume is an extremely
rich and valuable addition to the library of physicians and practitioners gene-
rally." — Lancet, December 4, 1869.



LATHAM'S COLLECTED WORKS. 2 vols. Edited by

Dr. Eobert Martin. With Memoir of Latham by Sir Thomas

Watson.

" It indicates discrimination and taste on the part of those who conduct the
New Sydenham Society, that they have selected for publication a work so
different in many respects from the ephemeral books which issue in such

numbers from the teeming press of the present day This is one of the

few books which deserve to live, because it is full of real and conscientious
work, — of observations, carefully, reverently, and modestly made during a long
series of years, — of thoughts pondered and repondered with candour and self
distrust and willingness to be taught, while the literary execution is unmistakably
that of a man of education, culture, and taste." — Edinb. Med. J our,, March, 1877.

" The different subjects are dealt with in a way which will always render
them fresh to the reader from tbe peculiarly original bent of the writer's mind,
and the acuteness ol his reasoning. We quite agree with the editor that

* where all are so admirable, it were perhaps well to avoid the singling out of
any one as though pre-eminently good.' If we made any exception to this, it
would be to specially direct attention to the articles on * Treatment ' and

* Cure.' We commend their perusal to all practical physicians." — Dublin
Journal of Medical Science, August, 1879.



CLINICAL LECTURES ON MEDICINE AND SUR

GEEY. Translated from the German, and selected from Pro-
fessor Volkmann's Series. Two Volumes.



MEMOIRS ON DIPHTHERIA; containing Memoirs by
Bretonneau, Trousseau, Daviot, Guersant, Bouchet, Empis, &c.
Selected and Translated by Dr. B. H. Semple.



CLASSIFIED LIST OF PUBLICATIONS.



" Bretonneau's memoir must be considered the fullest and most searching
that has yet appeared in any country on this extraordinary disease." — British
Medical Journal.

" Like honour is due to M. Bretonneau for his admirable investigations.

His treatise on Diphtheria constitutes the greater part of the volume

recently published by the New Sydenham Society. Of the remaining memoirs

each contains much valuable material There is no part of the volume

which will better repay study than the researches of M. Empis." — Medical'
Chirurgical Review,

RADICKE'S PAPERS ON THE APPLICATION OP

STATISTICS TO MEDICAL INQUIRIES. Translated by
Dr. Bond.

" We can hardly conceive an object to which the New Sydenham Society
could better devote a portion of its rapidly-increasing resources than to the
introduction of papers such as these to the profession. It is by such work as
this that the Society is calculated to confer inestimable benefits on the profession
of this country." — Medical Times and Gazette, January 25, 1862.



LECTURES ON PHTHISIS. By Professor Niemeyer. Trans-
lated by Professor Baumler.

" Niemeyer's work is eminently suggestive, not only as regards pathology,
but also as regards treatment and prevention. There is no work on treatment
of Phthisis in the English language so advanced in its pathology ; it leaves the
crude theories of Laennec and his followers far in the rear, and by showing the
essential dependence of tubercle on preceding inflammatory processes, it shows
also how we may ward off this intractable disease from our patients, and how
we may most usefully employ the remedies at hand for its prevention." —
Edinburgh Medical Journal, December, 1870.

" The members of the New Sydenham Society must be well content with
the works supplied to them for their subscription. Those issued of late are of
peculiarly solid and lasting value. We have now three before us, which,
besides the recommendation of intrinsic scientific value, have that of high
practical utility. We refer to Trousseau's * Clinical Medicine,' Niemeyer's
* Lectures on Pulmonary Consumption,' and Strieker's * Histology.' " — Brit, and
For. Med. Chir. Rev., April, 1871,



THE COLLECTED WORKS OF DR. ADDISON. Edited,
with Introductory Prefaces to several of the Papers, by Dr.
Wilks and Dr. Daldy. With Portrait, and numerous Litho-
graphic Plates.

" We must cordially commend the decision of the Council of the New
Sydenham Society, which led to the publication of this historically interesting
and practically valuable book. Few names have, of late years, been better
known to the profession than that of the eminent physician whose contributions
to its literature, too few in number, have nevertheless been, one and all, highly
and justly esteemed. A brief but kindly and discriminating biography of Dr.

Addison precedes the collection of his papers " — Edinburgh Medical

Journal, December, 1868.

" No one who has studied the valuable papers, published by Dr. Addison
in the Guy's Hospital Reports, can fail to be pleased that they are now rendered
more widely available by this separate publication. His great and extensive



10 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



knowledge of skin diseases renders the articles on that subject of much interest.
If, however, we were asked to select the one most likely to be useful to the
practitioner, we should unhesitatingly point to that on the Physical Examination
of the Chest." — Medical Times and Gazette, July 4, 1868.



A GUIDE TO THE QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITA-
TIVE ANALYSIS OF THE UEINE. By Dr. C. Neubaueb
and Dr. J. Vogel. Fourth edition, considerably enlarged.
Translated by William 0. Markham, F.E.C.P.L. With four
Lithographs, and numerous Woodcuts.

" The New Sydenham Society have conferred a benefit, not only on their
own subscribers, but on the whole profession in this country, by publishing the
work of Drs. Neubauer and Vogel." — Medical Times and Gazette.

" It is one of those works in which there is not an unnecessary line nor even
a word. It is quite a text-book upon urinology for the scientific physician, and
may be handled likewise by the youngest student." — Lancet.



MEMOIRS ON ABDOMINAL TUMOURS AND INTU-
MESCENCE. By Dr. Bright. Keprinted from the " Guy's
Hospital Beports," with a Preface by L>r. Barlow. Numerous
Woodcuts.

" Dr. Bright's object was to bring his vast clinical experience and great
diagnostic tact to bear on the elucidation of confessedly a most obscure depart-
ment of medical disease — the discrimination and diagnosis of abdominal
tumonrs ; and this he has done by briefly stating their principal characteristics,
as they are produced, either by the presence of tumours dependent on a cepha-
locyst hydatid, by ovarian tumours, or diseases of the spleen, liver, or kidney.
Under each of these heads we have valuable features recorded, by which in life
they may be recognised, whilst after death their pathological characters are de-
scribed in a manner that leaves but one impression on our minds, that here
indeed the author has held up the mirror to nature ; and under each section
we have a perfect embarras.de richesse, in the shape of illustrative cases. The
whole work is profusely filled with woodcuts and outlines descriptive of the
several diseases described, by which means the author's verbal descriptions are
more vividly presented to the reader's understanding." — Dublin Quarterly
Journal of Medical Science, May, 1861.

" The memoirs possess a permanent value, as models of clinical reports, as
exhibiting the method by which the investigation of this difficult class of
organic diseases may be pursued with greatest certainty of success, and as
furnishing the great general outlines of the inquiry. It is by the study of such
models that the difficult art of medical observation may best be understood, and
may to some extent be acquired. Certainly no papers in our periodical literature
were more worthy than these of being republished and circulated in a collected
and accessible form."- Edinburgh Medical Journal, January, 1861.



A CLINICAL ACCOUNT OF DISEASES OF THE

LIVER. By Prof. Frerichs. 2 vols. Translated by Dr.
Murchison. With coloured Lithographs, and numerous
Woodcuts.

" Frerichs' book is one of those treatises that will frequently be taken down
from the book-shelves to be consulted, both by physiologists and physicians."
— Lancet,



CLASSIFIED LIST OP PUBLICATIONS. 11



" We shall look forward with interest to the completion of this very
valuable addition to the Clinical History of Liver Diseases." — Medical Times
and Gazette.



CZERMAK ON THE PRACTICAL USES OF THE
LAEYNGOSCOPE. Translated by Dr. G. D. Gibb. Numerous
Woodcuts.

" What has been given will, we trust, convince any one who may hitherto
have doubted the value of laryngoscopy, that it is a real acquisition , To those
who are desirous of becoming more fully acquainted with the subject, we
strongly recommend the study of the work [Professor Czermak's] from which
we have chiefly culled our extracts." — Mcdico-Chirurgical Review, Oct., 1862.



A HAND-BOOK OP PHYSICAL DIAGNOSIS COM-
PETING THE THBOAT, THOBAX, AND ABDOMEN.
By Dr. Paul Guttmann, of Berlin. Translated by Dr. Napier,
of Glasgow.

" We are persuaded that if the practitioner will carefully study this work,
and conscientiously carry out its suggestions, he will find an incalculable
advance in the realistic appreciation of diseases by means of their physical
phenomena. The work is not properly a * students' ' book. It presumes a
certain familiarity with the diseases of the organs with which it deals, and the
endeavour is made to connect the physical phenomena with the pathological

conditions present in these diseases It was a wise decision of the New

Sydenham Society to place a translation of it in the hands of their subscribers."
— Glasgow Medical Journal^ March, 1880.

" The New Sydenham Society has done well to put within the reach of their
subscribers a work which not only has attained to a third edition in its own
language, but has also been translated into Italian, Russian, Spanish, French,

and Polish As a systematic and scientific treatise it well repays

perusal. The book concludes with a good account of laryngoscopy, and of the
physical signs of the principal diseases of the larynx. The acoustics of
percussion and auscultation' are elaborated with great care, and the precise
explanation of the causes of many familiar physical signs will be very acceptable
to teachers of clinicaj medicine, who have hitherto felt the want of an adequate
scientific exposition of the principles of physical diagnosis." — Dublin Journal
of Medical Science, November, 1880.



AN ATLAS OP ILLUSTRATIONS OP PATHOLOGY,

COMPILED (CHIEFLY FBOM OBIGINAL SOUBCES)
FOB THE SOCIETY.

The Committee in charge of this work consists of Dr. Gee,
Dr. Green, Dr. Moxon, Dr. Sutton, Mr. Holmes, and Mr.
Hutchinson.

TWO FASCICULI have been published, and it is pro-
posed to issue one every year.

The following subjects have been illustrated : —



12



THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



FIRST FASCICULUS.

Scrofula ; Syphilis ; and Lymph- Adenoma. — Plate I.



Fig. i. Scrofulous Disease of the
Kidney and Ureter. Fig. 2. Scrofu-
lous Disease of the Kidney. Fig. 3.
Scrofulous Disease of the Kidney.



Fig. 4. A Mass of Syphilitic Deposit
in the Cortical Substance of the Kid-
ney. Fig. 5. Lymph-Adenoma of
Kidney.



Nephritis after Diphtheria ; Scarlet Fever ; and Burns. — Plate II.



Fig. 1. Nephritis after Diphtheria.
— Section of Kidney. Fig. 2. Subacute
Nephritis after Scarlet Fever. — Outer
surface of kidney. Fig. 3. Subacute
Nephritis after Scarlet Fever. Fig. 4.
Acute Nephritis, after Scarlet Fever.
Fig. 5. Subacute Nephritis after



Scarlet Fever. Fig. 6. A cute Nephritis
after a Burn. — Outer surface of the
kidney of a child who died after a very
extensive burn. Fig. 7. Acute Ne-
phritis after a Burn. — Section ot the
same kidney.



The Granular Kidney in different stages. — Plate III.



Fig. 1. Extremely Granular Kidney.
Fig. 2. Extremely Granular Kidney. —
Section of the same kidney. Fig. 3.
Less Granular (contracted) Kidney. —
Outer surface of the right kidney taken
from the same subject as the left
kidney shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Fig. 4.



Granular Kidney of Bright. Fig. 5.
Contracted Granular Kidney, in sec-
tion. Fig. 6. Contracted Granular
Kidney; exterior. Fig. 7. Large
Granular Kidney. Fig. 8. Large
Granular Kidney with cysts.



Embolism ; Infarction Processes from Pyaemia ; Jaundice and

Purpura ; Scrofula. — Plate IV.



Fig. 1. Embolic Changes in Pyaemia.
Fig. 2. Embolic Changes in Pyaemia.
Fig. 3. Pyaemic Deposits in Kidney.
Fig. 4. Pyaemic Deposits in the Kidney.
Fig. 5. Results of Jaundice and Pur-



pura. Fig. 6. A variety of the Scrof-
ulous Kidney. — The substance of the
kidney is wholly destroyed and re-
placed by cavities containing a white
mortar-like substance.



SECOND FASCICULUS.

Diseases of the Kidney. — Plate V.



Fig. 1. Amyloid Disease of Kidney
in advanced stage. Fig. 2. A section
of the same Kidney. Fig. 3. The pale



flabby Kidney. Fig. 4. The same
organ seen in section. Fig. 5. Me-
dullary Cancer of the Kidney.



Various Diseased Conditions of the Spleen. — Plate VI.



Fig. 1. Hodgkin's Disease of Spleen
(Lympho-sarcoma). Fig. 2. Acute
Splenic enlargement in Diphtheria.
Fig. 3. Suppurating infarction of



Spleen from a case of Ulcerative En-
docarditis. Fig. 4. Embolic changes
in Pyaemia. Fig. 5. Rupture of the
Spleen.



ease



Diseases of the Supra Eenal Capsules and Spleen. — Plate VII.

Fig. 1. Cancer of the Supra Renal
Capsule. Figs. 2, 3, 4. Adenoma of
the Supra Renal Capsule. Fig. 6.
Addison's Disease of the Supra Renal
Capsule (in section). Fig. 5. Addison's
Disease of the Supra Renal Capsule. —



" Fibro-calcareous or strumous dis-
Fig. 7. Tubercle of the Spleen



(external surface). Fig. 8. Tubercle
of the Spleen (in section). Fig. 9.
Lardaceous Spleen.



CLASSIFIED LIST OF PUBLICATIONS.



13



Microscopic Pathology of Kidneys. — Plate VIII.



Fig. i. Lardaceous Degeneration of
the Kidney. — Section of cortex. Fig. 2.
Lardaceous Degeneration. — g. A glo-
merulus from the same kidney, as in
Fig. 1, which has undergone lardaceous
degeneration and is becoming fatty.
Fig. 3. Part of the same seen with a
higher power, showing contents of one
of the tubules. Fig. 4. Lardaceous
Degeneration in earlier stage com-
bined with interstitial fibrous change.
Figs. 5 & 6. Lardaceous Degeneration
(after Cornil). Fig. 5. Section show-
ing the hyaline membranous wall of
the tubules a a much swollen, stained
violet-red, showing waxy degeneration.
Fig. 6. Transverse section of one of
the pyramids, near summit of cone.
Fig. 7. Granular Contracted Kidney.
Fig. 8. From the same. — A thickened
arteriole surrounded by fibroid growth.
Fig. 9. Partial Fibrous Degeneration
of Malpighian body in slight chronic
intertubular nephritis. Fig. 10. From



the same kidney ; showing early
changes around Malpighian body.
Fig. 11. Multiplication of Nuclei on
glomerulus with adhesion of capillary
tuft to wall of capsule. Fig. 12. Sub-
acute Interstitial Nephritis with large
white kidney. Fig. 13. Scarlatinal
Nephritis. — Intertubular exudation in
a case fatal on 7th day of fever. Fig.
14. Subacute Interstitial Nephritis.
Fig. 15. Acute Catarrhal Nephritis,
showing swelling and granular de-
generation of epithelium. (100 diam.)
Fig. 16. Part of the same seen with a
higher power. Fig. 17. Section of
cortex from a case of parenchymatous
(catarrhal) nephritis at a later stage
(so-called "fatty" kidney). Fig. 18.
From nearly transverse section near
base of pyramid in similar case. Fig.
19. Casts in tubes in interstitial ne-
phritis (post scarlatinal). Fig. 20.
Colloid cast, b, in tubule ; «, unaltered
epithelium.



Microscopic Pathology of the Kidney. — Plate IX.



Fig. 1. Scarlatinal Nephritis. Fig.
2. Shows two of the glomeruli from
same section as Fig. 1. Fig. 3. Sec-
tion from the same. — Part of the wall
of a Malpighian body from which the
capillary tuft has fallen out. Fig. 4.
Scarlatinal Nephritis. — (From a case
fatal about 12 weeks from attack of
fever). Fig. 5. Scarlatinal Nephritis.
— (From a case fatal 15 months after
attack of scarlet fever). Fig. 6. From
same kidney as Fig. 5, but in a deeper
part of cortex, close to medulla. Si-
milar growth of interstitial connective
tissue. Fig. 7. Subacute Interstitial
Nephritis, probably Scarlatinal, under
low power ; showing diffuse infiltration
and cluster of dilated tubules. Fig. 8.
Chronic Parenchymatous Nephritis
(large white kidney) with little or no
interstitial change. — Section of cortex,
showing changes in epithelium of
convoluted tubules. Fig. 9. Kidney in
leucocythaemia — to show localisation
of changes around glomeruli and ves-
sels. Fig. 10. Swelling of inner coat
of small artery in granular contracted
kidney. Fig. 11. Tuberculous Pyelo-
nephritis. Fig. 12. Fatty Degenera-
tion from Alcoholic Poisoning (after



Lancereaux). Fig. 13. Fatty Degene-
ration in Cancer. Fig. 14. Individual
epithelial cells from the preceding
section ; in various stages of fatty
degeneration. Fig. 15. Cystic Dege-
neration of Kidney (after Lancereaux.)
Fig. 16. From a cyst in kidney near
base of pyramid. Fig. 17. Colloid
Degeneration of Kidney. Figs. 18,

19, 20, and 21, illustrate the hyaline
changes found in the splenic arteries
in certain febrile conditions. Fig. 18.
From a section through the spleen of
a case of early scarlatina, showing
hyaline degeneration of the coat of an
artery, transversely cut. Fig. 19.
Artery in longitudinal section. Fig.

20. Malpighian corpuscle from the
spleen of a case of early scarlatina.
Fig. 21. Part of the central and inter-
mediate zone of the same Malpighian
corpuscle as in Fig. 20, only more
highly magnified (180 diam.) Fig. 22.
Hodgkin's Disease. — Section of a
spleen to show the overgrowth of the
lymphatic sheath in Hodgkin's disease.
(1 inch.) Fig. 23. Adenoma of the
Supra Renal Capsule, showing the
columns stuffed with fatty granules.



14



THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Microscopic Pathology of Spleen and Supru-renals. — Plate X.



Fig. i. Capsulitis of the Spleen. —
Vertical section of fibrous nodule in
the capsule of the spleen, showing
that the thickening of the capsule
takes place by cellular growth in its
deeper layers. Fig. 2. Fibrosis of the
Spleen. — From the enlarged spleen of
a ricketty child. Fig. 3. Fibrosis of
the Spleen. — Showing a more advanced
or fibrous condition spreading round
some dilated veins. Fig. 4. Muscular
Hypertrophy. — Over-growth of mus-
cular trabeculae in the spleen. Fig. 5.
Muscular Hypertrophy. — Extreme
stage of fibro-muscular growth in the
spleen. Fig. 6. The Leucocythaemic
Spleen. — Section of the edge of a
Malpighian corpuscle, showing the
compressed fibrous tissue between it
and the splenic pulp. Fig. 7. The
Leucocythaemic Spleen. — The pulp
and stroma are normal. Fig. 8.



lymphoid noduie in the spleen of
Hodgkin's disease. Fig. 9. Tubercular
Spleen. (37 diam.) Fig. 10. Tuber-
cular Spleen. Fig. 11. Induration and
Atrophy. — A section of the spleen
from a case of heart disease. Fig. 12.
Lardaceous Spleen. — The sago spleen,
showing the Malpighian corpuscles
and small arteries mapped out by
structureless hyaline lardaceous mat-
ter. Fig. 13. Lardaceous Spleen. —
Transverse section of a Malpighian
corpuscle, or small artery, with its
surrounding lymphoid sheath. Fig.
14. Addison's Disease. — Vertical sec-
tion of a supra renal capsule from the
exterior inwards, to show the early
changes in Morbus Addisonii. (250
diam.) Fig. 15. Addison's Disease. —
Section of a supra renal capsule, to
show the late, or fibro-calcareous,
stage of Morbus Addisonii.



Hodgkin's Disease. — The texture of a

With Essay on the Pathology of the Kidney, by Dr. Greenfield.
Essay on the Pathology of the Spleen and Supra-renals, by
Dr. Goodkart.



In Preparation,

ON THE DISEASES OF OLD AGE.

Translated by Mr. William Tuke.



By Prof. Charcot.



In Preparation.

THE DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF DISEASES

OF THE CHEST. By Dr. Stokes. A Eeprint to be Edited
by Dr. Hudson, of Dublin.



ESMARCH ON THE USES OF COLD IN SURGICAL

PBACTICE. Translated by Dr. Montgomery. Woodcuts.

44 Esmarch's treatise is of high practical interest." — British Medical Journal,
December, 1863.

BILLROTH'S LECTURES ON SURGICAL PATH-
OLOGY AND THERAPEUTICS. A Hand-book for Students
and Practitioners. 2 vols.

" While being rendered in most fluent and unconstrained English, it is
singularly free from obscurities and ambiguities with which translations gene-
rally abound." — London Medical Record, April, 1878.



CLASSIFIED LIST OF PUBLICATIONS. 15



" Whether looked at as a text-book for students or as a work of reference
for the hard-worked and busy practitioner, it deserves to be spoken of in high
terms of commendation." — Brit, and For. Med. Chir. Rev., July, 1873.



INVESTIGATION INTO THE ETIOLOGY OF THE

TKAUMATIC INFECTIVE DISEASES. By E.Koch. Trans-
lated, with Lithographic Plates, by Mr. Watson Cheyne.



ON THE PROCESS OF REPAIR AFTER RESECTION

AND EXTIKPATION OF BONES. By Dr. A. Wagner, of
Berlin. Translated by Mr. T. Holmes.



CLINICAL LECTURES. Selected from Professor Volkmann's
Series. 2 vols. (See " Medicine.")



In Preparation.

THE WORKS OF ABRAHAM COLLES. Chiefly his
Treatise on the Venereal Disease and on the Use of Mercury.
Edited, with Portrait, by Dr. McDonnell, of Dublin.



ON THE MORE IMPORTANT DISEASES OF WOMEN

AND CHILDKEN, with other Papers, by Dr. Gooch. Be-
printed; with a Prefatory Essay by Dr. Bobert Ferguson.
With woodcuts.

" The work of Dr. Gooch is so well known and highly appreciated by every
lover of medical literature that we need say nothing in its praise. It has been
before the world for thirty years, and only one opinion has been expressed upon
its merits. We cannot but consider, therefore, that the Council of the New
Sydenham Society has done well to republish it, more especially as the Council
has had the good fortune to persuade Dr. Robert Ferguson to furnish an intro-
ductory essay on the author's life and writings." — Lancet.



CLINICAL MEMOIRS ON DISEASES OF WOMEN.

By Drs. Bernutz and Goupil. 2 vols. Translated and abridged,
Dr. Meadows.

" The careful study of these valuable memoirs is imperative on all who are
interested in gynaecology." — Lancet, October, 1866.



SMELLIE'S MIDWIFERY. 3 vols. Edited and Annotated
by Dr. McClintock, of Dublin. With Portrait of Smellie.

"This book begins with a fine engraving of the author, and had the N. S. S.
done for Smellie's memory no more than the publication of this valuable print,
it would have a strong claim on the gratitude of the profession. McCHntock's



16 THE KEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



life of Bmellie it a very interesting contribution to medical literature. His
work* fthow that he was a very great man and midwife, but his biography was

needed to show his peculiarities Let the reader carefully peruse Dr.

McClintock's annotations, and he will see how Smellie's Editor recognises
Hmcllic's keenness of eye in discerning how to make progress." — Edin. Med,
Journal, March, 1877.

" The New Syd. Soc. has done nothing more commendable than to produce

the work we are now about to notice Smellie was the Sydenham of

Midwifery. Although it was a chief part of his glory to have studied deeply
and soundly the mechanism of labour as a natural process, and in that study to
have laid the ample foundations of the highly finished art of midwifery as we
see it practised by the best obstetricians of the present day, we also see evidence
in every one of his 'cases' of shrewd and sagacious medical views, showing
that his great manipulative faculties were governed and controlled by good
judgment, physiological considerations, and that great respect for nature which

Is a characteristic of all great physicians In short, he was a model

practitioner in midwifery whose influence grows rather than diminishes, and
whose works will be found to contain the germ of most of our practice and
doctrine Dr. McClintock has fairly placed alongside of Smellie's prin-
cipal viewB those of modern authorities, including his own, derived from an
experience altogether exceptional, and has produced a joint work without which
no obstetric library will be complete." — Lancet, August 4, 1877.



I9(0(a(0t0 of t!)e 3Ey>c an* !£av+

ON THE ANOMALIES OF ACCOMMODATION AND

RKFR ACTION OF THE EYE, with a PRELIMINARY
•ESSAY ON PHYSIOLOGICAL DIOPTRICS. By F. C.
T>oni>kk», M.D., Professor of Physiology and Ophthalmology in
tho University of Utrecht. Written expressly for the Society.
Translated from tho Author's Manuscript by W. D. Moobe, M.D.

" This splendid monograph, from the hand of the accomplished professor
of physiology and ophthalmology, of Utrecht, will be hailed as a boon by all
lovers of ophthalmic science.*' — Lancet.



THREE MEMOIRS ON GLAUCOMA AND ON

IRIDECTOMY AS A MEANS OF TREATMENT. By

Professor Yon G&sfe. Translated by Mr. T. Wixdsob, of
Manchester.

" This is the fifth volume of the first year, and contains translations of three
mportant and well known essays from the German." — Lancet.

" The value — the great practical value — of these memoirs will be admitted
by every one who peruses them." — MeJtca* Times and Gazette,



ON THE MECHANISM OF THE BONES OF THE
KAR ASP THE MEMBRANA TYMFAXI. (Pamphlet.)
Rv Ptofcssor Hkimholti. Translated bv Mr. Hixias.

" This little work is the translation of a very valuable essay published by
the $r**t physicist of Berlin* and which is thus rendered accessible to a
circk of &*£&& KMritrs*"-^****, July 5, 1373.



CLASSIFED LIST OP PUBLICATIONS. 17

THE AURAL SURGERY OF THE PRESENT DAY.

By W. Kramer, M.D., of Berlin. Translated by Henry Power,
Esq., F.B.C.S., M.B. "With two Tables and nine Woodcuts.



VON TROELTSCH'S TREATISE ON DISEASES OP

THE EAB. Translated, with Notes, by Mr. Hinton.,,



tfovtmit ffltXHtint.

A HANDBOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF FORENSIC

MEDICINE, BASED UPON PEESONAL EXPEEIENCE.
By J. L. Casper, M.D., late Professor of Medical Jurisprudence
in the University of Berlin. Translated by G. W. Balfour,
M.D. 4 vols.

" Casper's great work, based as it is upon a minute and laborious observa-
tion of facts, must prove the most trustworthy guide in the interpretation of the
ofttimes difficult questions which the medical jurist is called upon to solve." —
Lancet.

" This work must be regarded as a valuable and judicious addition to the
publications of the Society from which it emanates. The advantages to be
derived by the reader from its perusal cannot be over-estimated or too eagerly
sought for." — Madras Quarterly Journal of Medical Science.



Stjscascs of tije ilcrbous Sgstetn*

SCHRCEDER VAN DER KOLK ON A CASE OF

ATBOPHY OF THE LEFT HEMISPHEEE OF THE
BBAIN. Translated by Dr. W. Moore, of Dublin. Four
Lithographs.

ON THROMBOSIS OF THE CEREBRAL SINUSES.

By Professor Von Dusch. Translated by Dr. Whitley.



LECTURES ON DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS

SYSTEM. By Professor Charcot. (First Series.) Translated
by Dr. Sigerson, of Dublin. With woodcuts.

" These lectures of M. Charcot are too well known in the original to call
for any special criticism here. They have, indeed, obtained an European
reputation, and it has long been felt that it would be a great gain to our literature

to have them rendered into English We strongly advise all those of

our readers who may not yet have made themselves acquainted with these

lectures to lose no time in doing so The translator, Dr. Sigerson, a

former pupil of the author, has succeeded admirably in his rendering of the

elegant literary style of M. Charcot It is, without doubt, one of the

most valuable books that has been issued by this Society since their translation
of Trousseau." — Lancet, August, 1877.



18 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



" This volume will be highly prized by the members of the N. S. S. M.
Charcot's name ranks among the very foremost of those who have advanced the
knowledge of nerve-pathology. The work he has done is marked by great
accuracy and close observation, and by great acumen in interpreting facts and
drawing inferences."— Brit, and For. Med. Chir. Rev., July, 1877.



In Preparation.
A SECOND VOLUME OP LECTURES ON DISEASES
OF THE NEEVOUS SYSTEM. By Professor Charcot.
Translated by Dr. Sigerson. With this volume all the Plates
to the two volumes will be given.



A MANUAL OP MENTAL PATHOLOGY AND THERA-
PEUTICS. By Professor Gkiesinger. Translated by Dr.
Locehart Eobertson and Dr. James Eutherford.

" The thanks of the profession are due to the Council of the N. S. S. for

the selection of this work We need scarcely say that each section is

full of instruction, and carries upon its face the evidence of great experience
and close and deep thought."— Medical Times and Gazette, September, 1867.

ON EPILEPSY. By Professor Schrceder van der Kolk.



3natomg, P$£8tologg, antr (Srurra! patljologg*

A MANUAL OF HUMAN AND COMPARATIVE HIS-
TOLOGY. By S. Stricker. 3 vols. Translated by Mr. Power.

" This work, edited by Stricker, and having as its contributors nearly all of
the best names in Germany, is one well deserving of attention, and constitutes,
we think, a very valuable addition to the stores ot the New Sydenham Society."
— Medical Times and Gazette, December 10, 1870.

" There has hitherto been no work which contained a full and complete
account of the various elements of animal structure, still less of the way in
which minute examination of these elements should be conducted. The book

before us supplies this want in a very remarkable degree The work is

illustrated by over a hundred woodcuts. Modern medical literature of the
higher class so teems with histological references, that a treatise in which they
are explained has become almost a necessity." — Lancet, December 3, 1870.

" We must congratulate the New Sydenham Society on their enterprise,
and thank them for making so important a work accessible to the English
reader." — Quarterly y<mmal of the Microscopic Society; April, 1873.

44 Ably translated and edited by Mr. Henry Power The members

of the Society may be congratulated on the addition of such valuable treatises
to their libraries." — Brit, and For. Med. Chir. Rev., July, 1873.



EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCHES ON THE EFFECTS

OF LOSS OF BLOOD IN PRODUCING CONVULSIONS,
By Drs. Kussmaul and Ten nee. Translated by Dr. Bronnxr,
of Bradford.



CLASSIFIED LIST OP PUBLICATIONS. 19

A MANUAL OF PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY,

intended to serve as an introduction to the study of Morbid
Anatomy. By Professor Eindfleisch. (Bonn.) 2 vols. Trans-
lated by Dr. Baxter.

Vol. i. — " Rindfleisch's work forms a mine which no recent pathological
writer could afford to neglect who desired to interpret aright pathological

structural changes The special part treats of the anomalies of the

blood, the circulatory apparatus, of the serous and mucous membranes, skin,
lung, liver, kidneys, and so on. As a specimen of the scientific spirit with
which Rindfleisch has entered upon his very laborious work, the reader cannot
do better than to peruse the part devoted to normal as a type of the pathological
growths, and that which immediately follows on interstitial inflammation and

specific inflammation Altogether the book is the result of honest, hard

labour." — Lancet, April 6, 1872.

Vol. 2. — " The members of the Society may be congratulated on the

addition of such valuable treatises to their libraries The Society ought

to flourish whilst it caters so well for its members. They have every reason to
be content both with the quantity and quality of the matter supplied." — Brit,
and For. Chir. Rev., July, 1873.



AN ATLAS OF ILLUSTRATIONS OP PATHOLOGY.

(See " Medicine," page 11.)



ON THE MINUTE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS

OF THE SPINAL CORD. By Professor Schrceder van der
Kolk. Translated by Dr. W. D. Moore. Numerous Litho-
graphs.

ON THE MINUTE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS

OF THE MEDULLA OBLONGATA, AND ON EPILEPSY.
By Professor , Schrceder van der Kolk. Translated by Dr. W.
D. Moore. Numerous Lithographs.



lUtrospects, autr SSaorfts of (General Wbiftvtntt.

A YEAR-BOOK OF MEDICINE AND SURGERY, AND

THEIR ALLIED SCIENCES, for 1859. Edited by Dr.
Harley, Dr. Handfield Jones, Mr. Hulke, Dr. Graily Hewitt,
and Dr. Odling.

" Our space will not admit of a further statement of the excellent character
of the Year- Book and the other works issued by the New Sydenham Society,
but we should strongly urge every member of the profession, who has the
advancement of medical knowledge at heart, to lose no time in forwarding his
name, should he not already have done so." — London Medical Journal.



I



IIH



i



20 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



YEAR-BOOK for 1860. Edited by Dr. Harley^ Dr. Handfiei
Jones, Mr. Hulkk, Dr. Graily Hewitt, and Dr. Sanderson.

" This is, as it professes to be, an improvement on its predecessor. On tl
whole the editors have done their laborious work well." — British Media
Journal, December 31, 186 1.

YEAR-BOOK for 1861. Edited by Dr. Harley, Dr. Handfiei
Jones, Mr. Hulke, Dr. Graily Hewitt, and Dr. Sanderson.



YEARBOOK for 1862. Edited by Dr. Montgomery, D:
Handfield Jones, Mr. Windsor, Dr. Graily Hewitt, an
Dr. Sanderson.

YEAR-BOOK for 1863. By the same Editors.



YEAR-BOOK for 1864. Edited by Mr. Hinton, Dr. Handfiel
Jones, Mr. Windsor, Dr. M. Bright, and Dr. Hilton Fagge.

" Of the usefulness of these reports all who have consulted them will be*
the fullest testimony. They supply a very valuable bibliography ; they enabi
the reader to judge what papers or works he may study with advantage to h
peculiar pursuits ; and they present a condensed summary of the most in
portant advances and improvements in medical science." — Edinburgh Media
Journal.

A BIENNIAL RETROSPECT OF MEDICINE, SUE

GERY, AND THEIR ALLIED SCIENCES, for the Yeai
1865 and 1866. Edited by Mr. Power, Dr. Anstie, Mj
Holmes, Dr. Barnes, Mr. Windsor, and Dr. Hilton Fagge.



A BIENNIAL RETROSPECT OF MEDICINE, SUE

GERY, AND THEIR ALLIED SCIENCES, for the Yeai
1867 and 1868. Edited by Mr. H. Power, Dr. Anstie, M]
Holmes, Mr. R. B. Carter, Dr. Barnes, and Dr. Thomj
Stevenson.

A BIENNIAL RETROSPECT for 1869 and 1870.

" As to the Biennial Retrospect, it is as good as any of its class ; while <
little value to town practitioners, possessing easy access to large, well-selectei
and well-catalogued libraries, it is no doubt of great value to country practitione
whose resources in that respect are more limited." — Edinburgh Media
Journal, May, 1872.

A BIENNIAL RETROSPECT for 1871 and 1872.



A BIENNIAL RETROSPECT for 1873 and 1874.

" Full justice is done to English observers, and the whole volume is creditab
to its compilers and to the Society under whose auspices it is published. "-
Lancet, January, 1876.



CLASSIFIED LIST OF PUBLICATIONS. 21



THE MEDICAL DIGEST. Being a means of ready reference
to the principal contributions to Medical Science during the last
Thirty years. By Dr. Biohard Neale.

" The Council has certainly acted wisely in publishing the work before us
It is a section of what has long been a desideratum — a general index to medical
literature, and as a section its great value cannot but suggest how inestimably

valuable a complete work of this kind would be Compiled by a

practitioner for his own use, it is calculated especially for the use of the
practitioner." — Lancet, January 5, 1875.

" The idea of this volume is a good one. Something of the kind had been
all along contemplated by the Society, but never carried out till now, when Dr.

Neale offered his manuscript, exactly as it is printed We have been at

the pains of testing the index in a good many instances, and have come to the
conclusion that it may be relied on for discovering easily the contents of the
volume." — Edinburgh Medical Journal, April, 1878.

BIBLIOTHECA THERAPEUTICA; OR BIBLIO-

GBAPHY OF THERAPEUTICS. By E. J. Waring, M.D.
2 vols.

" We feel sure that, although not exactly what we would like in a
work of the kind, Waring's * Bibliotheca Therapeutica,' with its copious and
valuable indices, will be frequently referred to with advantage, and with
considerable confidence as regards its accuracy." — Glasgow Medical Journal,
Sept., 1879.

" With the Index of Diseases before him, the student has a bird's-eye view
of the principal remedies recommended from time to time in the treatment of
individual diseases, and the dates of their respective employments ; whilst
further reference to the body of the work, in the manner pointed out in the
index, will disclose the name of the authority, and other particulars of special
interest to the pathologist and therapeutist." — From Preface to Vol. 2.



A LEXICON OP MEDICAL TERMS. Edited by Mr.
Power and Dr. Sedgwick. Parts 1 to 4. This Lexicon is
based upon the well-known work of Dr. Mayne, the copyright
of which was purchased by the Society. It is, however,
entirely rewritten by the present Editors, and very much
enlarged.

©istasts of t$t Min antfr Sgplitlte.

ON SYPHILIS IN INFANTS. By Paul Diday. Translated
by Dr. Whitley.

" The work of M. Diday is of great merit ; it contains all that has been
written on infantile syphilis, and he puts the whole subject in a well-arranged
form for further investigation as well as present use." — Brit, and For. Med.
Chir. Rev.

ON DISEASES OF THE SKIN, INCLUDING THE

EXANTHEMATA. By Professor Hebra. 5 vols. Translated
and Edited by Dr. Hilton Fagge, Dr. Pye- Smith, and Mr.
Waren Tay.

" Had we space we should have been glad to enter into a lengthened
critique of the second volume of Hebra's work. We are relieved from any



22 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



misgiving, however, by the fact that the work will be very largely circulated
amongst our readers by the Sydenham Society, and that they, with others who
aspire to any real knowledge of skin diseases, would not, under any circum-
stances, be satisfied without studying the work for themselves This

second volume contains information relative to the most important diseases of
the skin ; andit will, we are confident, do good service in helping on the cause
of cutaneous medicine in England." — Lancet, November 7, 1868.

11 Of all the works produced by the New Sydenham Society this is one of

the most valuable and most welcome It is to be remarked that this

book is not a mere translation of the German work ; it is a new and revised
edition, undertaken by the author for his English brethren." — Medical Times
and Gazette, April 27, 1867.

" The New Sydenham Society has done good service to the medical pro-
fession by undertaking the translation and publication of Professor Hebra's
excellent work. In several respects the English edition is greatly superior to
the original. In closing its pages we have but one regret, namely, that the
New Sydenham Society does not embody the whole medical confraternity,
so that every member af our noble profession might have on his bookshelves
a copy of this most valuable book." — Journal of Cutaneous Medicine, April,
1877.

Vol. 3.— " Mr. Tay has performed a difficult task with great ability and
success, and the work is far pleasanter to read in its English dress than in the
original. Mr. Tay has enriched the work with valuable notes of his own,
embodying the views of English authorities and sometimes his own experience
on the question discussed in the body of the work." — Medical Times and
Gazette, June 20, 1874.

Vol. 4 — " The entire work is admirable for its lucidity of arrangement, its
simplification of confused and intricate subjects, and not least for the avoidance
of those pedantic and repelling terms which a celebrated dermatologist has
grandiloquently styled the ' terminological innovations of modern nomen-
clators.' " — Dublin Journal of Medical Science, May, 1875.



LANCEREAUX'S TREATISE ON SYPHILIS. 2 vols.

Translated by Dr. Whitley.

" The work is the most exhaustive book which has been published on the
subject, and has been quoted by all the recent writers in this country, America,
and the Continent. It is a perfect mine of information. The translation is
well done, and the New Syd. Soc. may be congratulated on having added such
an important treatise to its list of works." — Lancet, March, 1869.



QSty Societg'0 &tlas of Wmam» of fyt Sfttu*

*Iu fifteen Annual Fasciculi comprising the following subjects.
Unless otherwise indicated, the Plates are original.

PLATE

Favus. From Hebra .• I.

Tinea Tonsurans. From Hebra. . . . .II.

Lupus Exulcerans. From Hebra III.

Psoriasis Diffusa. From Hebra. .... IV.

Ichthyosis. From Hebra V.

Lupus Serpiginosus ; Alopecia Areata. From Hebra. . VI.



CLASSIFIED LIST OF PUBLICATIONS.



28



Lupus Vulgaris et Serpiginosus (Cicatrising). From
Hebra

Herpes Zoster Frontalis (affecting the Frontal and
Trochlear Branches of the Fifth Nerve).

Molluscum Contagiosum, a, on a Child's Face ; b, on
the Breast of the Child's Mother ; c, Anatomical
Characters of the Tumours ; d, Microscopic Cha-
racters.

Morbus Addisonii.

Leucoderma.

Pemphigus.

Pityriasis Versicolor.

Psoriasis Inveterata. .

Eczema Impetiginodes on Face of Adult.

Eczema on the Face, &c, of Infant; Eczema Kubrum
on Leg of Adult.

Psoriasis of Hands and Finger-nails; Syphilitic
Psoriasis of Finger-nails ; Congenita- Syphilitic
Psoriasis of Finger- and Toe-nails; Onychia
Maligna; Chronic General Onychitis..

Molluscum Fibrosum seu Simplex

Psoriasis-Lupus (Lupus non Exedens, in numerous
Symmetrical Patches)

Porrigo Contagiosa (e pediculis). ....

Erythema Nodosum

Morbus Pedicularis

Herpes Zoster (with scars of a former attack).

Erythema Circinatum

Eczema (from Sugar)

Acne Vulgaris

Scabies (on Hand of Child). Scabies (with (Edema,
&c.) Scabies Norvegica

Porrigo Contagiosum after Vaccination. Circinate
Eruptions in Congenital Syphilis.

True Leprosy (Tubercular Form). True Leprosy
(AnaBsthetic Form)

Pityriasis Kubra

Papular Syphilitic Eruption, with Indurated Chancre
on the Skin of the Abdomen

Pruriginous Impetigo after Varicella

Lichen of Infants

Kerion of Scalp after King worm. . ,

Eruption produced by Iodide of Potassium.

Tinea Circinata. • .

Kupia-Psoriasis (from inherited Syphilis). .

Prurigo Adolescentium

Purpura Thrombotica

Syphilitic Eupia, with Keloid of Scars.



PLATE

VH.
VIH.



IX.

X.

XI.

XH.

XIII.

XIV.

XV.

XVI.



XVH.

xvni.

XIX.

XX.

XXI.

XXII.

XXIH.

xxrv.

XXV.
XXVI.

XXVH.

xxvru.

XXIX.
XXX.

XXXI.

XXXII.

XXXHI.

XXXIV.

XXXV.

XXXVI.

XXXVII.

XXXVHI.

XXXIX.

XL.



24 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



PLATE

Framboesia (Endemic Verrugas). . .... XIjI.

Lupus Erythematosus XJjII.

Ulcerating Eruption from Bromide of Potassium. . . Xlilll

Morphea, or Addison's Keloid XLIY.



(< This Fasciculus supplies life size portraits of pityriasis rubra, papular
syphilis, with indurated chancres, and pruriginous impetigo following varicella,
which are extremely beautiful, and look life-like." — Edin. Medical Journal,
May, 1872.

" They are better, to our mind, than any other plates in use amongst us ;
and there cannot be a question as to the Society's issue being as popular as it
is useful." — Lancet.

" We have received the thirteenth fasciculus of this splendid collection of
drawings, of which no further praise is needed than to say that they are
executed with the same artistic skill and fidelity to nature which have charac-
terised the whole series." — Dublin Journal of Medical Science, May, 1874.



A CATALOGUE OF THE PORTRAITS COMPRISED

IN THE SOCIETY'S ATLAS OF SKIN DISEASES.
Prepared, at the request of the Council, by Mr. Hutchinson.
Parts 1 and 2.

" The descriptions, cases, and plates are well given There is one

good feature in some of the cases described. Take that of Addison's Keloid,
p. 160. In it we have notes, &c, of a rare skin disease, which has been
accurately described by the observers under whose care the patient had been at
various stages of the case. This is, therefore, a valuable contribution to medi-
cine." — Edinburgh Medical Journal, February, 1877.



LIST OF PUBLISHED WORKS.

Arranged according to the Year of Issue.



Vol. 1859. (First Year.)

1. Diday on Infantile Syphilis.

2. Gooch on Diseases of Women.

3. Memoirs on Diphtheria.

4. Van der Kolk on the Spinal Cord, &c.

5. Monographs (Kussmaul and Tenner, Graefe, Wagner, &c.)



1860. (Second Year.)

6. Dr. Bright on Abdominal Tumours.

7. Frerichs on Diseases of the Liver. Vol. I.

8. A Yearbook for 1859.

9. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (1st Fasciculus.)



1861. (Third Yea/r.)

10. A Yearbook for 1860.

11. Monographs (Czermak, Dusch, Eadicke, &c.)

12. Casper's Forensic Medicine. Vol. I.

14. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (2nd Fasciculus.)



1862. (Fourth Yewr.)

18. Frerichs on Diseases of the Liver. Vol. II.

15. A Yearbook for 1861.

16. Casper's Forensic Medicine. Vol. II.

17. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases (3rd Fasciculus.)



1863. (Fifth Year.)

18. Kramer on Diseases of the Ear.

19. A Yearbook for 1862.

20. Neubaueb and Vogel on the Urine.



26 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Vol. 1864. (Sixth Year.)

21. Casper's Forensic Medicine. Vol. III.

22. Donders on the Accommodation and Kefraction of the

Eye.
28. A Yearbook for 1863.
24. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (4th Fasciculus).



1865. (Seventh Year.)

25. A Yearbook for 1864.

26. Casper's Forensic Medicine. Vol. IV.

27. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (5th Fasciculus).



1866. (Eighth Year.)

28. Bernutz and Goupil on the Diseases of Women. Vol. I.

29. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (6th Fasciculus.)

80. Hebra on Diseases of the Skin. Vol. I.

81. Bernutz and Goupil on Diseases of Women. Vol. II.



1867. (Ninth Year.)

82. Biennial Eetrospect of Medicine and Surgery.

83. Griesinger on Mental Pathology and Therapeutics.

84. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (7th Fasciculus).

85. Trousseau's Clinical Medicine. Vol. I.



1868. (Tenth Year.)

86. The Collected Works of Dr. Addison.

37. Hebra on Skin Diseases. Vol. II.

88. Lancereaux's Treatise on Syphilis. Vol. I.

89. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (8th Fasciculus).
40. Catalogue of Atlas of Skin Diseases. (First Part.)



1869. (Eleventh Year.)

41. Lancereaux's Treatise on Syphilis. Vol. II.

42. Trousseau's Clinical Medicine. Vol. II.

43. Biennial Eetrospect of Medicine and Surgery.

44. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (9th Fasciculus.)



1870. (Twelfth Year.)

45. Trousseau's Lectures on Clinical Medicine. Vol. III.

46. Niemeyer's Lectures on Pulmonary Consumption.

47. Stricker's Manual of Histology. Vol. I.

48. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (10th Fasciculus).



LIST OF PUBLISHED WORKS. 27

Vol. 1871. (Thirteenth Year.)

49. Wunderlich's Medical Thermometry.

50. Biennial Eetrospect of Medicine and Surgery.

51. Trousseau's Clinical Medicine. Vol. IV.

52. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (11th Fasciculus.)



1872. (Fourteenth Year.)

53. Stricker's Manual of Histology. Vol. II.

54. Eindfleisch's Pathological Histology. Vol. I.

55. Trousseau's Clinical Medicine. Vol. V.

56. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (12th Fasciculus.)



1873. (Fifteenth Year.)

57. Stricker's Manual of Histology. Vol. III.

58. Eindfleisch's Pathological Histology. Vol. II.

59. Biennial Eetrospect of Medicine and Surgery.

60. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (13th Fasciculus.)



1874. (Sixteenth Year.)

61. Hebra on Skin Diseases. Vol. III.

62. Von Troeltsch on Diseases of the Ear.
Helmholtz on Membrana Tympani, &c. (In one Vol.)

64. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (14th Fasciculus.)

63. Hebra on Skin Diseases. Vol. I.



1875. (Seventeenth Year.)

65. Biennial Eetrospect of Medicine and Surgery.

66. Catalogue of Atlas of Skin Diseases. (Second Part.)

67. Latham's Works. Vol. I.

69. Atlas of Portraits of Skin Diseases. (15th Fasciculus.)

70. Clinical Lectures by various German Professors.

1876. (Eighteenth Year.)

68. Smellie's Midwifery, by McClintock.

71. Clinical Lectures by various German Professors.

72. Charcot's Clinical Lectures on Diseases of the Nervous

System.

73. Billroth's Lectures on Surgery.



1877. (Nineteenth Year.)

74. Smellie's Midwifery, by McClintock.

75. Clinical Lectures by various German Professors.

76. The Medical Digest, by Dr. Neale.

77. Billroth's Lectures on Surgery. Vol. II.



.(



28 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Vol. 1878. (Twentieth Year.)

79. Smellie's Midwifery, by McClintock. (Concluding Volume.)
78. Bibuotheca Therapeutica, by Dr. Waring. Vol. I.

80. Latham's Works. Vol. II.

81. Lexicon of Medical Terms. (First Part.)



1879. (Twenty -first Year.)

82. Bibuotheca Therapeutica, by Dr. Waring. Vol. II.
88. Lexicon of Medical Terms. (Second Part.)

84. Manual of Physical Diagnosis, by Dr. Guttmann.

85. Atlas of Illustrations of Pathology. (Fasciculus II.)



1880. Twenty-second Year.

86. Lexicon of Medical Terms. (Third Part.)

87. Hebra on Diseases of the Skin. Vol. V.

88. Koch's Researches on Wound Infection.

89. Lexicon of Medical Terms. (Fourth Part.)

90. Atlas of Illustrations of Pathology. (Fasciculus EH.)



LIST OF SURPLUS VOLUMES,

With Prices.



N.B. — The prices affixed can be continued only for a limited period until

surplus stock is disposed of.



ATLAS OF SKIN DISEASES. Fasciculi I. to XV.

Separately, ios. 6d. each. Most of the stones have been destroyed, and
only a limited number of impressions remain in stock, and a few are out of

print.

ON SYPHILIS IN INFANTS. By Paul Diday. Trans-

lated by Dr. Whitley. 2s. 6d.



GOOCH ON THE MORE IMPORTANT DISEASES

OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN. Prefatory Essay by Dr. Robert
Ferguson. Woodcuts. 28. 6d.



MEMOIRS ON DIPHTHERIA. By Bretonneau,

Trousseau, Daviot, Guersant, Bouchut, Empis, &c. Selected and
Translated by Dr. R. H. Semple. 3s. 6d.



ON THE MINUTE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS

OF THE SPINAL CORD. By Professor Schroeder van der Kolk.

ON THE MINUTE STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS

OF THE MEDULLA OBLONGATA, AND ON EPILEPSY. By
Professor Schroeder van der Kolk. Translated by Dr. W. D. Moore,
of Dublin. In one volume, with numerous Lithographs. 5s.



EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCHES ON THE EFFECTS

OF THE LOSS OF BLOOD IN INDUCING CONVULSIONS.
By Drs. Kussmaul and Tenner. Translated by Dr. Bronner, of
Bradford.

ON THE PROCESS OF REPAIR AFTER RE-
SECTION AND EXTIRPATION OF BONES. By Dr. A. Wagner, of
Berlin. Translated by Mr. T. Holmes. Numerous Woodcuts.

PROFESSOR VON GRAEFE'S THREE MEMOIRS

ON GLAUCOMA, AND ON IRIDECTOMY AS A MEANS OF
TREATMENT. Translated by Mr. T. Windsor, of Manchester.

Three Monographs in one Volume. 2s. 6d.



THE NEW



J



MEMOIRS ON ABDOMINAL TUMOURS AND In-
tumescence. By Dr. Bright. Reprinted from the ' Guy's Hospital
Reports,' with a Pieface by Dr. Barlow. Numerous Woodcuts. 7s. 6d.

A CLINICAL ACCOUNT OF DISEASES OF THE

LIVER. By Professor Frerichs. Translated by Dr. Murchison.
Numerous Woodcuts and coloured Lithographs. 2 vols. 12s. 6d. Vol I.
separately, 3s. 6d.

C2ERMAK ON THE PRACTICAL USES OF THE

LARYNGOSCOPE. Translated by Dr. G. D. Gibb. Numerous
Woodcuts.

DUSCH ON THROMBOSIS OF THE CEREBRAL

SINUSES. Translated by Dr. Whitley.

SCHROEDER VAN DER KOLK ON ATROPHY OF

THE BRAIN. Translated by Dr. W. D. Moore, of Dublin. Four
Lithographs.

RADICKE'S PAPERS ON THE APPLICATION OF

STATISTICS TO MEDICAL ENQUIRIES. Translated by Dr. Bond.

ESMARCH ON THE USES OF COLD IN SURGICAL

PRACTICE. Translated by Dr. Montgomery.

Five Monographs in one Volume. 5s.



A HAND-BOOK OF THE PRACTICE OF FOR-
ENSIC MEDICINE, BASED UPON PERSONAL EXPERIENCE
By J. L. CASPER, M.D., Professor of Forensic Medicine in the University
of Berlin. Translated by Dr. G. W. Balfour. Vols. II.. III., IV.
7s. 6d. each. Vol. I. can be had only by subscribing for the year.



THE AURAL SURGERY OF THE PRESENT DAY.

By W. Kramer, M.D., of Berlin. Translated by Henry Power, F.R.C.S.,
M.B. With two Tables and nine Woodcuts. 2s. 6d.



A GUIDE TO THE QUALITATIVE AND QUAN-
TITATIVE ANALYSIS OF THE URINE. By Dr. C. Neubauer and

Dr. J. Vooel. Fourth edition, considerably enlarged. Translated by
by W. O. Mahkham, F.R.CP.L. With Four Lithographs and numerous
Woodcuts. 5s.

ON THE ANOMALIES OF ACCOMMODATION AND

REFRACTION OF THE EYE, WITH A PRELIMINARY ESSAY
ON PHYSIOLOGICAL DIOPTRICS. By F. C. Donders, M.D., Pro-
fessor of Physiology and Ophthalmology in the University of Utrecht.
Translated from the Authors's Manuscript by W. D. Moore, M.D. 7s. 5d.

TROUSSEAU'S CLINICAL MEDICINE. Vols. I., II.,

III., IV., and V. 5s. each, or 21s. the set. This set comprises the complete
work, with copious Index.



LIST OF SURPLUS VOLUMES. 81



YEAR-BOOKS OF MEDICINE AND SURGERY.

1859—66. Seven Vols. 2s. 6d. each vol.



BIENNIAL RETROSPECT OF MEDICINE AND

SURGERY, 1866—75. 5 vols. 2s. 6d. each.



STRICKER'S MANUAL OF HISTOLOGY. 3 vols.

31s. 6d. Vols. I. and III. separately, 5s. each.



RINDFLEISCH'S PATHOLOGICAL HISTOLOGY.

Vol. II., 5s. Vol. I. can be obtained only by subscribing for the year of



its issue.



HEBRA'S TREATISE ON DISEASES OF THE

SKIN. Vols. 1 to 4, 21s.



LANCEREAUX'S TREATISE ON SYPHILIS. Two

vols. 5 s.

NIEMEYER'S LECTURES ON PULMONARY CON-
SUMPTION. 2s. 6d.

LATHAM'S WORKS. 2 vols. 7s. 6d. Vol. I., 2s. 6d.



CLINICAL LECTURES BY VARIOUS GERMAN

PROFESSORS. First series, 5s.



Several of these works are well suited for presents to
Students or for Class Prizes. Amongst them Trousseau's
Clinical Medicine; Strioker's Histology; Frerich's On
Diseases of the Liver ; Latham's Works ; and Donders
On Anomalies of Refraction, &c, may be especially
mentioned.

None of the Works published in 1876, 1877, 1878, or 1879
can be obtained separately unless by special arrangement.
The series of each of these years can be had on subscribing
for the year.



LAWS OF THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



I. — The Society is instituted for the purpose
of supplying certain acknowledged deficiences
in the existing means of diffusing medical
literature, and shall be called "The New
Sydenham Society."

II. — The Society shall carry out its objects
by a succession of publications, of which the
following shall be the chief : — 1. Translations
of Foreign Works, Papers, and Essays of merit,
to be reproduced as early as practicable after
their original issue. 2. British Works, Papers,
Lectures, Ac., which, whilst of great value,
have become from any cause difficult to be
obtained, excluding those of living authors.
8. Atmn*l Volumes consisting of Reports in
Abstract of the progress of the different
branches of Medical and Surgical Science
during the year. 4. Dictionaries of Medical
Bibliography and Biography. Those included
under Nos. 1 and 2 shall be held to have the
first claim on the attention of the Society;
and the carrying out of those under Nos. 8 and
4 shall be considered dependent upon the
amount of funds which may be placed at its
disposal.

JH. — The Subscription constituting a Mem-
ber shall be One Guinea, to be paid in advance
on the 1st of January annually, and it shall
entitle the subscriber to a copy of every work
published for that year. No books shall be
issued to any Member until his subscription
for the year has been paid,

IV.— The Officers of the Society shall be
elected from the Members, and shall consist
of a President, sixteen Vice-Presidents, a
Treasurer, a Secretary, and a Council of
thirty-two, in whom the power of framing
Bye-laws and of directing the affairs of the
Society shall be vested. Twelve of the Council
shall be provincial residents.

V.— Five Members of the Council shall form
a quorum.

VI. — The Officers of the Society shall be
elected by ballot at the General Anniversary
Meeting of the Society. Balloting lists of
Officers proposed by the Council, with blank
places for such alterations as any Member
may wish to make, shall be laid on the
Society's table for the use of Members.

VTI. — The President, Vice-Presidents, and
Council, shall be eligible for re-election, except
that of the Vice-Presidents four, and of the
Council eight, shall retire every year.

VUL— The Council shall appoint local Hono-
rary Secretaries wherever they shall see fit.

IX — The business of the President shall be
to preside at the Annual and Extraordinary
Meetings of the Society; in his absence one of
the Vice-Presidents, or the Treasurer, or any
Member of the Council chosen by the Members
present, shall take the Chair.

X. — The Treasurer, or some person ap-
pointed by him, shall receive all moneys due
to the Society.



XI. — The money in the hands of the Trea-
surer, which shall not be immediately required
for the uses of the Society, shall be vested in
such speedily available securities as shall be
approved by the Council.

XII .— The Council shall select the Works to
be published by the Society, and shall make
all arrangements, pecuniary or otherwise, in
regard to their publication. In the event of
any Member of the Council being appointed to
edit any Work for the Society, for which he is
to receive pecuniary remuneration, he shall
immediately oease to be a Member of the
Council, and shall not be eligible for re-
election till after the publication of the Work.

Xni— The Council shall lay before the
Members at each Anniversary Meeting a Report
of their proceedings during the past year, and
also an account of the Receipts and Expendi-
ture of the Society ; and shall further cause to
be printed and circulated among the Members
an abstract of such Report and Accounts im-
mediately after such Anniversary Meeting.

XIV. — The annual Accounts of the Receipts
and Expenditure of the Society shall be
audited by a Committee of three Members,
selected at the preceding Anniversary Meeting
from among the Members at large.

XV. — The Secretary shall have the manage-
ment of the general Correspondence of the
Society, and of such other business as may
arise in carrying out its objects.

XVL— The local Secretaries shall farther
the objects of the Society in their respeetiTe
districts, and shall be in communication with
the metropolitan Secretary.

XVIL— The Anniversary Meeting shall be
held in the same town as, and at the time of,
the Annual Meeting of the British Medical
Association, notice of it having been given
to all Members at least a week before the day
fixed on.

XVIII.— The Members generally shall be
invited and encouraged to propose Works, &o.,
and to make any suggestions to the Council
they may think likely to be useful.

XIX.— The Works of the Society shall be
printed for the Members only.

XX. — No alteration in the Laws of the
Society shall be made, except at a General
Meeting. Notice of the alteration to be pro-
posed must also have been laid before the
Council at least a month previously.

XXI. — The Council shall have power to call
a General Meeting of the Members at any time,
and shall also be required to do so within three
weeks, upon receiving a requisition in writing
to that effect from not less than twenty Mem-
bers of the Society.

XXII. — All Special General Meetings of the
Society shall be held at such place as the
Council may appoint.

XXIII.— The Council shall meet at least
once in two months, unless by special resoln-
tion to the contrary.



GENERAL INFORMATION.



A THIRD EDITION of the VOLUMES for 1859 was printed,
and a Second of that for 1860. For subsequent years the First Edition
was much larger ; and it is not likely that any of the Volumes will be
reprinted.

Most of the stones for Plates, &c, both those for the Atlas of Skin
Diseases and those for printed Volumes, have been destroyed, and will
not be reproduced.

A few complete Sets of the Society's Works are on hand, and can be
obtained by new Members, but the number remaining is very small.

The Society is now in its Twenty-second year, and the cost of a
complete Set to the end of 1879 is Twenty-one Guineas. Arrangements
have been made by which new Members can obtain single Volumes, or
sets of Volumes, from the Society's stock in hand. Some of the Volumes,
of which a larger surplus exists than of others, can be purchased at fixed
prices (for which see list.) The Society's Agent is empowered to make
special arrangements with new Members who may wish to obtain any of
the past Volumes.

CARRIAGE, &c. — The Society's Works are supplied free of cost to
any address in London, Edinburgh, or Dublin; but the expenses of
Carriage to all other places must be borne by the Members to whom they
are sent. Members wishing to receive their Volumes by Book-post can
do so by prepaying the postage. Members are requested to give detailed
instructions respecting the mode by which they wish their Volumes to be
forwarded, and also to remember that the Society's responsibility ceases
when the Book has been delivered according to the instructions given.
Members wishing to receive their Works by Book-post can do so by
prepaying the sum of 2s. 6d. for the year.

The Subscription is One Guinea annually, to be paid in advance.
The best mode of sending money is by Post-office Order, payable to
Mr. Henry King Lewis, at the London Office; or by Cheque to the



34 GENERAL INFORMATION.



order of the Treasurer, Dr. Sedgwick Saunders. It is requested that in

future all communications in reference to the payment of Subscriptions,

or the issue of Books, may be made to Mr. Lewis, the Society's Agent,

and not to the Secretary.

JONATHAN HUTCHINSON,

Hon. Secretary.
15, Cavendish Square, W.



* + * Any Member wishing for additional Copies of this Report, &o.,
can obtain them by applying to Mr. Hutchinson ; or to the Society's
Agent, Mr. Lewis, 186, Gower Street, W.C. The Council will be much
obliged by its distribution amongst those thought likely to join the
Society.

PS.— The Society's Agent is prepared to supply, at fixed prices,
CASES for binding the Lexicon, and PORTFOLIOS for the reception
of the Plates of Skin Diseases.



NOTICE TO NEW SUBSCRIBERS AND LOCAL SECRETARIES.

New members who subscribe for not fewer than three past years at
once will be allowed to select volumes from the surplus stock to the
value of one guinea without additional payment (see page 29 for list of
surplus stock and prices). The like privilege will be secured each year
by any Local Secretary who has not fewer than ten members on his list
whose subscriptions are paid before the end of March.



LIST OF THE



OFFICERS AND MEMBERS

OF



1880—81.



PRESIDENT.
Sie William W. Gull, Bart., M.D., F.B.S., D.C.L., LL.D.

VICE-PRESIDENTS.

BOBEBT BABNES, M.D.

Sir George Burrows, F.B.S., Bart.

B. W. Falconeb, M.D., D.C.L., Bath.

W. D. Husband, Esq., F.B.C.S., Bournemouth.

W. T. Gaibdneb, M.D., Glasgow.

GiESAB H. Hawkins, Esq., F.B.S.

T. Holmes, Esq.
*Geobge Johnson, M.D., F.B.S.

Joseph Listeb, Esq., F.B.S., D.C.L.

Sir James Paget, F.B.S., Bart.
*Geobge Paget, M.D., F.B.S., Cambridge.
* William Buthebfobd, M.D., F.B.S., Edinburgh.

T. Gbaingeb Stewabt, M.D., Edinburgh.,

Sir Thomas Watson, M.D., F.B.S., Bart.

Hermann Webeb, M.D.



36



OFFKEES.



COUNCIL.



^T. CLIFFORD AuJEtTT, MJ)..

F.R.S.
^Milxee Bulky, M J).. Tumi, nv/fr.

Thomas Barlow. MJ).
*Lact>er Bbcxtox, MJ)., FJfc.S.

W\ H. BeOAPBEXT. M J).

Thomas Buzzard, M.D.
W. Cholmelet. M J).
"William Colles. MJ).. lhu*m.

B. M. Cbayex, Esq.. H*iL
J. Laxgdox H. Dowx, M J).
Dtck Ptcewobth. M J).

J. Matthews Ptxcax. M J).

Johx Eastox. M J).

Sir Joseph Fatree, M J).

C. J. Hare. M J).
6. E. Heemax, M J).



H. Macxaughtex Jokes, MJ).,
Gn*.

J. C. Laxgmoee, M.B.

P. W. Latham. MJ)., Cambridge.
* Stephen Maceexzie, M J>.

J. W. Moose. MJ)., DmMn.
'•Walter Moxox, MJ).
~Wm. Kobeets, MJ)., Manchester.

SEPTTMrs W. Sibley, Esq.

J. K. Sfexdee, MJ)., Batik.
"Wm. Square, Esq.. Plymouth.
-Paul Swatxe. Esq., Dtroftport.

T. P. Teale. Esq., Letds,

We Ttexee, M.B., FJLSJE.,

Johx Walters, M3., ReigaU.
James West. Esq., BirmimgMam.



TREASURER.
W. Sedgwick Sat^dees, MJ)., 13, l?«mi SfrwC, Owgwufc, £.C.

AUDITORS.

E. Claptox, MJ>. S. Fexwice, MJ).

F. M. Coexee. Esq.



HON. SECRETARY.
Joxathax HrrcHDcsox, Esq., 15, Carmdish S



SpMRTY, IT.



DEPOT AND AGENCY.
Mr. H. K. Levis, 186, ifvwvr Srrw*, 1T.C



J*.«* marktid «iu «a _4***i«r vtrrv »** ta ope* uut ymr m



LIST OF HON. LOCAL SECRETARIES,

And of Towns where it is desired that an appointment

should be made.



Tlie Council will be much obliged to any gentlemen willing to act as
Local Secretaries in Towns where the appointment is vacant, if they
will communicate with Mb. Hutchinson. Any suggestions of suitable
names will also confer a favour. The duties of Local Secretaries consist
in arranging for the distribution of books, the collection of Subscriptions,
and canvassing for new members.



ENGLAND

Aberdare . . .

Abergavenny

Aberystwitk

Abingdon . . .

Accrington . . .

Acton (see Ealing),

Alfreton

Alnwick

Altrincham...

Ampthill . . .

Andover

Arundel

Ashbourne . . .

Ashford

Ashton-under-Lyne

Aylesbury ...

Bacup

Banbury

Bangor

Barnsley . . .

Barnstaple ...

Bath

Beaminster and Bridport . .

Beaumaris, Anglesea

•DeCCL€o ... ... •

Bedford

Beverley

Bethesda, Carnarvonshire

Bewdley

Bideford "



AND WALES.



Morris Jones, Esq.
Paulin Martin, Esq.



W. H. Lush, F.B.C.P. Ed.

(Fyfield).



Bobert Ceely, Esq.



B. Budd, Esq., M.D.
J. K. Spender, M.D.
J. S. Webb, Esq.

W. M. Crowfoot, Esq.
B. H. Coombes, M.D.



J. Gabb, Esq.

W. H. Ackland, M.D.



88



THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Bilston

Birkenhead
Birmingham
Bishop Auckland ...
Bishop's S tort ford...

Blackburn

Blaokheath

Blackpool

Bodmin

Bolton

Boroughbridge
Boston, Lincolnshire
Bournemouth
Bradford, Yorkshire

Brecon

Brentwood

Bridgend

Bridge water

Bridgnorth

Bridlington

Brighton

Bristol

Bromley, Kent
Brompton, Kent ...
Burnley, Lancashire
Burton-on-Trent ...
Bury, Lancashire ...
Bury St Edmunds
Buxton, Derbyshire

Cambridge

Canterbury

Cardiff

Carlisle

Carmarthen

Carnarvon

Castloford

Chard

Chatham

Cheadle. Cheshire ...
Cheadle, Staffordshire

Chelmsford

C&ehenham

Chertsey

Chepstow

Chested
Chesser&eld

ChichesT*?

Chippenham. Wilts
Chori



George Walker, M.D.
W. Wright Wilson, Esq.
T. A. McCullagh, Esq.

Matthew J. Bae, M.D.

Gay Shute, Esq.

W. B. Eicnardson, Esq.



... A. Mercer Adam, M.D.

• • •

... T. C. Deaby, Esq.

. . . Talfourd Jones, M.D.



W. L. Winterbotham, M.D.

Alfred Mathias, Esq.

C. F. Hutchinson, M.D.

Ed. Mackey, M.D.

F. R. Cross, Esq., FJR.C.S.



W. M. Coultate, Esq.
G. Lowe, MJ).
J. S. C. Yule, Esq.
F. E. Image, Esq.

E. Carver, MJ*.
James Beid, Esq.

W. B. Page. Esq.
J. Hughes, Esq.

E. W. Kemp, Esq.



E. T* Wilson, 1LD.



W. McEwen. M J>.

John Oameeie, MJ).
X. TVacke, M J>.


LIST OF HON. LOCAL SECRETARIES.



39



Christchuroli

Cirencester . .

Colchester ..

Colney Hatch

Congleton .

Coventry .

Cowes, Isle of Wight

Crewe

Croydon

Darlington . .

Dartford

Dartmouth . .

Deal, Kent..

Denbigh

Deptford

Derby

Devizes

Devonport ..

Dewsbury . .

Diss...

Doncaster ..

Dorchester . .

Dorking

Douglas, Isle of Man

Dover

Droitwich .

Dudley

Durham

Ealing

Eastbourne

East Grinstead

East Eetford

Edmonton ..

Ely

Enfield
Epsom
Evesham
Exeter
Exmouth
Falmouth . .
Faversham . .
Folkestone ..
Forest Hill . .
Frome

Gainsborough
Gloucester ..
Godalming . .
Gosport
Grantham ..



E. Waylen, Esq.



J. Brown, M.D.

J. Atkinson, Esq.
A. Carpenter, M.D.
J. Lawrence, M.D.



F. W. Wright, Esq.

G. Waylen, Esq.



T. E. Amyot, Esq.
J. Sykes, M.D.
G. Curme, Esq.



Charles Parsons, M.D.
S. S. Roden, M.D.



J. Goodchild, Esq.
B. Roberts, M.D.

W. B. Pritchard, Esq.



Clement Daniel, M.D.



G. W. Tumbull, M.D.



R. L. Bowles, M.D.
J. Bright, M.D.

D. Mackinder, M.D.
F. Needham, M.D.



G. W. Shipman, Esq.



40



THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Gravesend

Great Grimsby

Greenwich and Blackheath
Guernsey ...

Guildford

xiaiiiax ... ... ...

Hanley
Han well
Harrow
Harrogate ...
Harrow-on- the-Hill
Hartlepool ...
Hastings

Haverfordwest

Heckmondwike

Hemel-Hempstead

Hereford

Hertford

Hexham

High Wycombe

Hillingdon ...

Hinkley, Leicestershire ...

Hitchin

Hounslow

Holywell

Huddersfield

a^L IULJL ••• ••• •••

Huntingdon

Hyde and Marple ...

Ilfracombe ..

Ipswich

Isleworth

Jersey

Kendal

Kenilworth . .

Kettering . .

Kidderminster

Kingsbridge

Kingston-upon Thames & Surbiton

Knottingley

Lancaster

Langport

Launceston

Leamington

Ledbury

Leeds

Leek

Leicester

Leominster



11. Innes Nisbett, Esq.

Gay Shute, Esq.
B. Collenette, M.D.



B. N. Day, Esq.
G. Oliver, M.D.



J. Underwood, M.D.
J. E. Brown, M.D.
F. B. Lee, Esq.

Thomas Turner, Esq.
C. E. Shelley, M.D.



R. R. Shillitoe, Esq.



John Irving, Esq., M.B.
Kelbourne King, M.D.
L. Newton, Esq.
J. Johnson Bailey, M.D.

C. W. Hammond, M.D.



W. W. Kershaw, M.D.



T. W. Thursfield, M.D.

F. Greenwood, Esq.
Joseph Kenny, Esq.
J. Barclay, M.D.



LIST OF HON. LOCAL SECRETARIES.



41



Leytonstone
Lewes
Lichfield
Lincoln

Liskeard

Liverpool

Llandilo

Llandovery

Llandudno ...

Llanelly

Longton, Staffordshire

Louth

Lowestoft ...

Ludlow

Luton

Lutterworth ...

Lynn

Macclesfield

Maidenhead

Maidstone ...

Maldon, Essex

Malton

Malvern

Manchester

Mansfield ...

Market Drayton . . .

Marlborough, Wilts

Martock

Merthyr Tydvil . . .

Middlesboro'-on-Tees

Mold

Monmouth ...

Moreton -in - Marsh

Morpeth

Newark-upon-Trent

Newbury , Berks . . .

Newcastle-under-Lyne

Newcastle upon Tyne

New Malton, Yorkshire

Newmarket, Cambridgeshire

Newport, Hants ...

Newport, Mon.

Newton Abbot

Newton -le- Willows

Northampton

North Shields

North wich ...

Norwich

Nottingham



F. W. Cooper, Esq.

H. P. Welchman, Esq.
T. Sympson, M.D.

J. Muir Howie, M.B.

D. Thomas, Esq.

J. Baglan Thomas, Esq.

F. Fawssett, M.D.
W. H. Clubbe, Esq.



E. Woodward, Esq.



W. T. Colby, Esq.
W. C. West, M.D.
J. Chadwick Peatson, M.D.



J. Hedley, Esq.



F. H. Appleby, Esq.
J. Bunny, M.D.

Thomas Oliver, M.D.



W. W. Morgan, M.D.

Frederick Noon, Esq.
Charles Jewel Evans, Esq.
Bobert Peart, M.D.

Hayness Bobinson, Esq.
W. H. Bansom, M.D.



42



THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Odiham

Oldham

Oswestry ...

v/uiey ... ... ... ...

Oxford

Penrith

Penzance ...

Peterborough

Petersfield

Plymouth

Pontcfract

Jr 0016 ... ... ... ...

Pontypool ...
Portsmouth (see Southsea)

Preston

Putney

Eamsgate and I. of Thanet

Beading

Redruth

Beigate

Bichmond, Surrey

Bipon

Bochdale ...

Bochester (& Chatham & Strood)...

Bochford ...

Bomford, Essex ...

JtiiOoS ... ... ... ...

Botherham...

Bugby

Bugeley

Byde, I. of Wight

Bye, Sussex
Saffron Walden ...

St. Albans

St. Austell ...

St. Helen's, Lancashire ...

IOu« JLYvO • • • • • • •*• •••

Salisbury ...
Scarborough
Shaftesbury
Sheerness ...
Sheffield
Shej)ton Mallet
Sherborne ...

Shirley, Hants

Shrewsbury
Sidmouth ...
Skipton
Sleaford



J. M'Intyre, M.D.
T. Piatt, Esq.



A. Winkiield, Esq.

J. B. Montgomery, M.D.



Oonnell Whipple, Esq.



S. B. Mason, Esq.
B. Allen, Esq.
E. Watford, Esq.



J. Walters, M.D.
E. Fenn, M.D.

B. M. Pooley, Esq.

T. King, M.D.



H. D. Foote, M.D.



11. Stear, Esq.



E. P. Twyford,M.D.
W. B. Grove, M.D.
W. D. Wilkes, Esq.
B. B. Cooke, Esq.

E. Swales, Esq.

M. Martin de Bartolome, M.D.



E. Andrew, M.D.



LIST OF HON. LOCAL SECRETARIES.



43



(see Forest Hill)



Sniethwick
Snaith

Southampton

Southmolton

Southport

Southsea

South Shields

Spalding

Stafford

Stalybridge

Stamford

Stockport

Stockton-on-Tees ...

Stoke-on-Trent (Potteries)

Stourbridge

Stratford, Essex ...

Stratford- on- Avon

Stroud, Gloucestershire ..

Sunderland

Surbiton

Swansea

Swindon

Sydenham

Taunton

Tavistock

Teignmouth

Tenby

Tewkesbury

Thetford

Thirsk

Tiverton

Torquay

Totnes

Tottenham

Truro

Tunbridge

Tunbridge Wells

Twickenham

Ulverston ...

Uxbridge ...

Ventnor

Wakefield ...

Wallingford

Walsall

Warminster

Warrington

Warwick ...

Wednesbury

Watford



E. W. Griffin, M.D.



W. H. Axford, M.D.
J. Frain, M.D.
E. Morris, M.D.
S. Cookson, M.D.

W. Newman, M.D.
J. A. Ball, Esq.
W. H. Oliver, Esq.
Samuel Johnson, M.D.
A. Freer, Esq.

J. J: Nason, M.B.

M. Douglas, Esq.
W. W. Kershaw, M.D.
T. D. Griffiths, M.B.
G. M. Swinhoe, Esq.

W. Liddon, M.B.



P. Minns, M.D.
W. H. Byott, M.D.



E. H. May, M.D.
C. Sharp, Esq.

J. Milner Barry, M.D.



G. H. Macnamara, Esq.

F. H. Wood, Esq.
C. A. Barrett, Esq.



J. H. Gornall, Esq.



u



THE NKW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Wellington, Somerset


Wellington, Salop


Wells


.. J. G. French, Esq.


Welshpool, Montgomeryshire


Wcm


West Bromwich ...


J. Manley, Esq.


Weston - super- Mare


. . R. Alford, Esq.


Weymouth


Whitby


John Yeoman, M.D.


Whitehaven


. . J. F. I' Anson, M.D.


Wigan


.. G. G. Tatham, M.D.


Wimbledon


Wimborne ...


Winchester


. . F. J. Butler, M.D.


Windsor


. J. Ellison, M.D.


Wirksworth


Wisbeach


Witney


. '. A. Batt, M.D.


Wolverhampton ...


Vincent Jackson, Esq.


Woodbridge


Woodford


Woolwich


B. Mason, Esq.


Worcester ...


Worksop


Worthing ...


W. J. Harris, Esq.


Wrexham ...


E. Davies, M.D.


Yarmouth ...


C. Palmer, Esq.


Yeovil


York


G. Shann, Esq.


SCOT1


LAND.


Aberdeen ...


. John Wight, M.D.


Ayr


. G. McKerrow, M.D.


Banff


J. Barclay, M.D.


Brechin


Coldstream...


Cupar, Fife


'. J. W. Reid Mackie, M.D.


Dumfries ...


Dundee and Forfar


Dumfermline


*


Edinburgh...


. W. Husband, M.D.


Elgin


. G. Duff, M.D.


Glasgow


J. W. Anderson, M.D.


Greenock ...


James Wallace, M.D.


Haddington


T. Howden, junr., M.D.


Hamilton


Helensburg


Inverness ...


Kilmarnock


— Macfarlane, M.D.



LIST OF HON. LOCAL SECRETARIES.



45



Leith

Lerwick (Shetland)

Linlithgow . . .

Lochgilphead

Montrose . . .

Paisley

Peebles

Perth

Eothesay . . .

St. Andrews, Fife

Stirling

Thurso

Wishawton



James Struthers, M.D.

G. Hunter, M.D.
J. Butherford, M.D.
James C. Howden, M.D.
D. Taylor, M.D.

D. H. Stirling, M.D.



Charles Gibson, M.D.



Ardee

Armagh

Ballinasloe

Belfast

Carlow

Carrick-on-Suir

Cashel

Cavan

Clonmel

Cork

Dublin

Dundalk

Ennis

Enniskillen

Galway

Killarney

Kilkenny

Kingstown

Lifford

Limerick

Letterkenny

Lisburn, Antrim

Listowel . . .

Londonderry

Mallow

Moate

Monaghan

Mullingar

Nenagh

New Boss

Newry

Parsonstown

Queenstown

Boscommon



IRELAND.

Thomas J. Moore, M.D.
Thomas Cuming, M.D.

(Books per Mr. Greer.)

J. Martin, M.D.

W. Malcolmson, M.D.

E. Finn, M.D.
J, W. Moore, M.D.
H. Macdonnell, M.D.



W. O'Brein Adams, M.D.
B. Little, M.B.
T. Kane, M.B.



W. Bernard, M.D.
W. J. Galway, M.D.



J. Harrison, M.D.



4d



THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Iiosstrevor ...
Bothmines . . .
Boscrea
Sligo
Thurles
Tralee

Tullamore ...
Waterford ...
Westport ...
Wexford . . .
Yougbal . . .



T. A. Vesey, M.B.



H. H. Boxwell, M.D.



PARIS.
8. Pozzi, M.D.



FLORENCE.
David Young, M.D.



INDIA.



Calcutta

Madras

Bombay

Lahore

Moulton



Adelaide



Melbourne



Sydney



Christchurch

Nelson

Napier, Hawkes' Bay



E. F. Brockman, M.D.

• • • • • • •

• • • • • • •

Joseph Blood, M.B.

8. AUSTRALIA.
H. Whittell, M.D.

VICTORIA.
Edward Barker, M.D.

NEW SOUTH WALES.

James Spark, M.D.

NEW ZEALAND.

... J. Irving, M.D.



... F. E. De Lisle, M.D,



QUEENSLAND.
Toowoomba, Brisbane S. Flood, M.D.



Montreal . . .



Abingdon, 111.
Cincinnati ...
New York . . .
Boston
Philadelphia

Baltimore ...



CANADA.



UNITED STATES.

Madison Beece, M.D.

Messrs. B. Clarke & Co.

... Messrs. Wood & Co.

B. H. Salter, M.D.

Richard J. Dunglison, M.D,

(Mr. Presley Blakiston).



LIST OF HON. LOCAL SECRETARIES. 47



BARBADOES. DEMERARA.

Eobert E. Walcott, M.D.

JAPAN.
Yokohama and Yeddo S. Eldridge, M.D.



General Secretary (Hon.)

JONATHAN HUTCHINSON, Esq., 15, Cavendish Square,

London, W.

Agency and Depot for Books.
Mr. H. K. LEWIS, 186, Gower Street, London.



MEMBERS.



Aberdaee Jones, Evan, Tymawr

Abergavenny Steel, S. H.

Glendinning, J., M.D.

Aberystwith Jones, Morris, Loc. Sec.

Abingdon Martin, Paulin, Loc. Sec.

Addiscombe Smith, S. Parsons, M.D.

Aldershot Aldershot Medical Book Club

Alford Handsley, T. A.

Alconbury Hill see Huntingdon

Alnwick Bowlands, W., M.B.

Alresford see Winchester
Alton see Odiham

Alverstoke Tracy, S. J.

Andover ". Lush, W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Anerley Partridge, S. B.

Turner, J. Sydney

Arundel

Ashburton Fraser, W. J., B.M.

Ashcott Bridgewater

Ashford

Aylesbury Ceely, Eobert, Loc. Sec.

Hooper, Charles, Aylesbury.

Dickson, J. D., M.D.

"Wilcox, B. W., Aylesbury.

Bond, W. J., The drove Brill

Bacup Stewart, W., M.D.

Bamburgh Burman, C. Clark, M.D.

Bampton Atkinson, J. P., M.D.

Bakewell Pentem, P. S., M.D.

Banbury

Balham Burn, W. B.

Barnet Harnett, W. J., M.D.

Perigal, A., M.D.
Barnard Castle Mitchell, J., M.D.

Atkinson, J.

Barnsley Jackson, A.

Barnstaple Budd, B., M.D.

Harper, J.



MEMBERS. 49



Barrow-in-Furness Stark, P. W., M.D.

Basingstoke Andrews, S.

Miller, F., L.B.C.P.
Bath Spender, J. K., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Budd, S. P.

Falconer, W. E., M.D.

Fowler, B.

Fox, A. W., M.B.

Hensley, H., M.D.

Lawrence, G. E., Lincombe

Mason, F.

Michael, D.

Wyndowe, S. J., M.D.
Beccles Crowfoot, W. M., Loc. Sec.

Metcalfe, B. J., M.D.
Beaminister see Bridport
Beckenham Porter, B. V.

Stillwell, S., M.D.
Bedford Coombs, B. H., M.D., Loc. Sec,

Goldsmith, G. P., M.D.

Bedlington

Bellingham

Belper Gaylor, E., L.B.C.P.

Bethesda

Beverley

Bewdley Gabb, John, Loc. Sec.

Greensill, J. N., Great Witley

Bideford Ackland, W. H., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Billericay Carter, Fredk.

Bexley Heath Barrington, N. W., M.D.

Birkenhead , Walker, G., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Braidwood, P. M., M.D.

Byerley, Isaac, Seacombe

Forbes, D., M.D., Rockferry

Harris, A. C. E., M.D.

Lambert, J., M.D.

Laidlaw, W. C, M.D., Tranmere

Main, W., M.D., New Ferry

Kobson, John, M.D., Rockferry

Spratley, S., Rockfei-ry
Birmingham Wilson,W. Wright, F.K.C.S.E., L. See.

Archer, John, Edybaston

Baker, A.

Bassett, J.

Berry, S.

Borough of Birmingham Central Free
Library

Clay, J.

Drummond, A., M.B.



50 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Birmingham, continued ... Evans, T. D. F.

Evans, G. H., M.D.

Foster, B.

Goodall, W. P.

Hadley, Clement

Jones, G.

Keyworth, J. W., M.D.

Medical Book Society : G. Jones, Sec.

Russell, J., M.D.

Savage, T., M.D.

Sawyer, J., M.D.

West, J. J.

Lloyd, G. J.

Bishop Auckland

Blackburn Rae, M. L, M.D., Loc. See.

Davidson, I. R., M.D.
Blackheath Shute, Gay, Loc. Sec.

Burton, J. M.

Forsyth, Alex., M.D., Greenwich

Noyes, H. G., M.D., Lee

Peacey, W., Lewisham

Pope, A. C, M.D., Lee Park

Purvis, P., M.D.

Roper, A.

Steel, C, Lewisham

Sturton, H. W. S., Greenwich

Williams, — ., M.D., Burnt Ash

Steel, R., Greenwich

Burton, J. S.
Blackpool Richabdson, W. B., Loc. Sec.

Hardman, W., M.D.
Blandford see Dorchester

Blankland Montgomery, W.

Bletchingley

Bloxham

Bolton Bolton Medical Society : C. Macfie,

M.D.

Livy, J., M.D,
Bootle see Liverpool

Boro'bridge Sedgwick, J., M.D.

Boston Adam A. Mercer, M.D.

Lamphier, R., M.D., Alford

Pilcher, W. J.

Walker, J. W., M.D., Spilsby
Bournemouth Drury, W. V., M.D.

Husband, W. D„ M.D.

Bournemouth Medical Society : per
W. Salt, M.D.
' Woodroffe, J. F., M.D.



MEMBERS. 51



BoWDON

Box

Bradford -on -Avon Adye, W., M.D.

Bradford Denby, T. C, Loc. Sec.

Appleyard, J.

Brown, S., M.D.

Foster, J.

Lodge, S.

Miall, Philip

Munro, A. B., M.D.

Infirmary Library

Leeson, J. F., M.D., llkley

Spenser, H.

Braintree Harrison, J.

Brampton Wotherspoon, T. A., M.D.

Brecon Jones, Talfourd, M.D., Loc. Sec.

North, John

Williams, J.

Brentford

Brentwood Amsden, G., M.D.

Bridgend M'Cracken, I., M.B.

Bridgnorth ... Mathias, Alfred, Loc. Sec.

Oolles, A.

Thursfield, W., jun.

BrDDGWATER WlNTERBOTHAM, W. L., M.B., LoC. Sec.

Cornwall, J., Aihcott

Parsons, J.

Todd, W. J., North Petherton
Brddlington Hutchinson, C. F. , M.D. , Loc. Soc.

Brett, F. 0. *

Savile, R., M.D., Nafferton
Brtdport Webb, J. S., Loc. Sec, Beaminstev

Daniell, W. J., Beamiwter

Denzelow, Defros, M.D.

Hay, W. H., M.D.
Brighton Mackey, Edward, M.D. , Loc. Sec.

Furner, E. F.

Humphrey, F. A.

Library of Medical Society: per
Bogers, B. J.

Smith, Heckstall

Vipan, C.

Brigg

Bristol Cross, F. R., F.R.C.S., Loc. Sec. f Cll/ton

Beddoe, J., M.D., Clifton

Belfield, C. W., L.R.C.P.

Brittain, F., M.D., Clifton

Bristol Medical Library

Bristol General Hospital Library



52 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Bristol, continual Clark, Mitchell, Clifton •

Coe, R. W.

Grossman, E., Hambrook

Daubenev, — ., M.D.

Daviss, David

Fendick, R.

Fox, E. Long, MJD., Clifton

Fox. G. H., M.D., Bridiwjton

Goodeve, E., M.D., Stoke Bishop

Hawkins, Caesar F.

Lansdowne, J. G., Clifton

Marshall, H., M.D., Clifton

Xewstead. J., Clifton

Phelps, W. H.

Prit chard, Augustus, Clifton

Ring. C. Gore, L.B.C.P.E., Clifton

Royal Innrmary Library

Skerritt. E. M." M.D.

Smith. R. Shingleton

Spencer. W. H., Clifton

Chillcott. J. E.

Broadmoor Orange. W., MJD.

Bromley Ilott. J. W.

Bromyard Powell. W.

Broonsgroye Wood. R.

Broughtox Clappeiton. James

Brook Greex

Bcvefastleigh Ubsdell. H.

BCCEXXGHAM

Bcde Lvle. Thomas. MJ>.

*

Bcilth

BcRSLEY COULTATE. W. M.. Ll*. &T.

Briggs. H., M J).

Anmngson. J. W\

Hexron. J.. MJ).

0~ Sullivan. D.
Bnrn:wood **v Lichfield
Bceiox-ox-Teest Lowe. G.. MJX. Llv. ■&*.

Mason. P. B.

Woifenden. L W„ Tmtrwry
Bolt Ycle. J. S. C. Loe. Sat.

Grompton. F.

Retcher. A.. MJX

Meiior. J.

X^naul. W.

Galicwar. J.. ;>v«tVdm
Btsy Sr. ErarcMrts Image. F. t« T^v. >*v.



MEMBERS. 53



Buxton

Cambridge Carver, E. M., Loc. Sec.

Balding, M., Ihyston

Collier, — .

Drosier, W. H., M.D.

Hills, F. Hyde

Latham, P. W., M.D.

Paget, J. E., M.D.

Perkins, J., LL.D.

Pyne, B., Eoyston

University Library : per H. Bradshaw
Cannock Taylor, Moses

Mockett, G. T.
Canterbury Held, Jas., Loc. Sec.

East Kent Medical Library

Bigden, Brian

Shaw, W.

Sadler, H. G.

Wacher, F., Kingsbridge

Capel Jardine, J. Lee

Cardiff Cardiff Medical Society : Horder, T. G.

Evans, Maurice G.
Carlisle Page, W. B., Loc. Sec.

Arras, W., M.D.

Campbell, J. A., M.D.

Hair, P., M.D.

Lockie, Stewart, M.D.

M'Bean, B. B., M.D., Annan

Moffat, P., M.D., Dalston

Pearson, J., M.D., Mary port
Carmarthen Hughes, J., F.B.C.S.

Bowlands, J., F.B.C.S.

Carnarvon

Castleford Kemp, E. W., Loc. Sec.

Caterham Valley Barrow, Gerald, E .

Catterick Cockcroft, William

Chapel- Allerton see Leeds

Chard

Chapeltown see Sheffield
Chatham see Bochester
Chelmsford

Wheeler, Daniel

Bodkin, W.
Cheltenham Wilson, E. T., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Askwith, B., M.D.

Bubb, T.

Carden, A.

Kerr, C. B., M.D.

Kilgour, J. S., M.D.



54 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Cheltenham, continued ... Ferguson, G. B.

Howard, H. H.

Bevan, J. P., L.R.C.P.

Bennett, C. J.

Medical Society

Thorpe, D., M.D.

Walters, C. A.

Winterbotham, L.

Smith, T., M.D.

Chepstow

Chkrtsey Shurlock, Main waring

Chebteb M'Ewen, W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Davis-Colley, T., M.D.

Dobie, W., M.D.

Haining, W., M.D.

Hamilton, Alex.

Infirmary Library

Jackson, E. A., M.D., Little Sutton

Moreton, J. E., Tarvin

Roberts, J., M.D.

Russell, D., M.D., Neston

Taylor, Jas.

Waters, E., M.D.

Weaver, F. P., M.D., Frodsham

Williams, W., M.D., Mold

Woodward, J. E.
Chesterfield Carnegie, J. , M.D. , Loc. Sec.

Booth, C, M.D.

Foulds, S.

Jeffreys, R.

Manson, D., M.D.

Robinson, H.

Rose, J., M.D.
Chester-lo- Street see Newcastle-on-Tyne
Chichester Tyache, N., M.D., Loc, Sec.

Buckell, L., M.D.

Freeland, F.

Chippenham Crisp, J. H., Lacock

Chipping Norton Hopgood, Thomas

Chiswick Leigh, W., M.D.

Chudleigh Lillies, G. W., M.D.

Watson, J. Adams, L.R.C.P.E.

Cinderford Whatmough, Charles, M.D.

Cirencester Wilson, C. W., M.D.

Clevedon Davis, T., M.D.

Skinner, S., M.B.
Cleobury Mortimer
Clifton see Bristol
Cockermouth Dodgson, H.. M.D.



MEMBERS. 55

CooGLESHAiiL Giles, Harold

Colchester Waylen, — ., M.B. , Loc. Sec.

Colchester Medical Society

Bree, C. R., M.D.

Salter, J. H., Tolleshunt D'Arcy
Collingham see Newark-on-Trent

Colney Hatch Marshall, W. G.

Congleton Beales, R., M.D.

Corbridge M'Lean, H., M.D.

CORSHAM

Cotham see Bristol

Cosham Martin, H. A., M.D.

Coventry Brown, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Millerchip, T., M.D.

Partridge, — , M.D., Maiden
Cowes Hoffmeister, W. C, M.D.

Jones, John

Cowfold Graveley, T.

Cranbrook Joyce, T., M.D.

Crewe Atkinson, J.

Vaughan, W. E.

Cromer M'Kelvie, R., M.D.

Crondall Burroughs, T. W.

Croydon Carpenter, A., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Cleaver, H. A.

Lanchester, H., M.D.

Richardson, J. A.

Stevens, A. F., Wallington

Thompson, H. G., M.D.

Tompkins, C. P., Beddington
Cwm-Avon James, J. R.

Darlington Lawrence, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Cockcroft, G.

Fothergill, J. R.

Mackie, J., Heighington

Atkinson, J., M.D., Barnard Castle

Arrowsmith, W. H., M.D.

Dalton-in-Furness Balbirnie, J. P., L.R.C.P.

Dartford Weddell, J. C, M.D.

M'Naul, H. H., M.B.

Dartmouth Richardson, Ralph, M.D. (2 copies),

Loc. Sec.

Cockin, J., R.N.
Daventry

Dawley Green Soame, C. B. H.

Dawlish Baker, A. DeWinter

Deal Davey, R. S., M,D.

Hughes, D.

e



56 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Denbigh Roberts, G. M., M.D.

Deptford Cope, Bicardo

Derby Wright, F. W., Loc. Sec.

Baker, J. W.

Borough, F.

Cooper, C. A., M.D., Mreston

Gentles, T. J.

Iliffe, Frank

Ogle, W., M.D.

Walker, B., Spondon

Wigg, T. Carter
Devizes Waylen, G., Loc. Sec.

Anstie, T. B.

Carless, E. N., M.D.

Carter, C. H., M.D., Peicsey

Hitchcock, C, M.D., Market Lavington

Langdon, H. W., M.B.C.S.

Devonport Medical Society : per Mr. Swiss

Diss Amyot, T. E.

Doncaster Sykes, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Arbuckle, H. W., M.D., Thome

Kenyon, J., Hooton Pagiiell

Phillips, G. G., Tick Hill

Stone, E., M.D., Knottingley

Storrs, Bobert
Dorchester Curme, G., Loc. Sec.

Bacot, W. G., Blandford

County Hospital Medical Library

Clapcott, J., Evershott

Emson, Alfred

Evans, G. M., Bridport

Good, J.
Dorking

Douglas (Isle of Man)
Dover Parsons, Chas., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Astley, E. F.

Walter, Clement

Dowlais Jones, Lewis, Burryport

Dowuhara Market see Ely

Droitwich Boden, S. S., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Whitely, Ed. A.

Dudley Bodington, G. F., M.D., Kingsmn/ord

Durham Jepson, E. C.

Ealing Goodchild, John, Loc. Sec.

Brown, G. D.

Christie, T. B., M.D.

Lingham, H. B., Acton
Earl's Shilton see Leicester



MEMBERS* O #

Eastbourne Roberts, Bransby, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Miindee, G.

Gould, E. Gardiner, L.K.Q.C.P.I.

East Dereham Vincent, J., M.D.

East Molesey Skimming, R., M.D.

East Retford Pritchard, W. B., Loc. Sec.

Eccles see Manchester
Eckington see Sheffield
Egremont see Whitehaven

Ellesmere Roe, J. W., M.D.

Ely Lucas, Thomas, Burwell

Wales, T. G., Downliam Market

Emsworth Orsborne, John, M.D.

Enfield Mugliston, G., M.D.

Ridge, J. J., M.D.
Epping see Harlow
Epsom Daniell, W. C, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Jones, A. O'Brien
Evesham
Evershot see Dorchester

Ewell Barnes, G. R., M.D.

Exeter Devon and Exeter Hospital : J. Bank-
hart

Shapter, Lewis, M.D.

Saunders, G., M.D., Exminster

Rogers, N., M.D.
Exminster see Exeter
Exmouth Turnbull, G. W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Bryce, J. B.

Ewen, A. B.

Walker, R., M.D., Budleigh Salterton
Eye Barnes, Edgar, M.D.

Fakenham Chambers, T. S., L.R.C.P.E.

Falmouth Cann, Thomas

Farningham Ashurst, W. R., M.D.

Faversham Powell, Scudamore A., M.B.

Ferryhill Clark, H., M.D.

Festiniog

Finchley Hochee, J.

Fishguard Thomas, J. B., M.D.

Folkestone Bowles, R. L., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Bate man, W.

Eastes, Sylvester

Fitzgerald, C. E., M.D.

Hackney, J., Hythe

Tyson, W. T.
Forest Hill Bright, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Collingridge, W.



58 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Frome Cockey, Edmund

Fyfield

Gainsborough Mackindbb, D., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Gateshead see Newcastle-on Tyne

Gloucester Needham, P., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Waddy, H. E.
Godalming see Guildford
Goniersal see Leeds

Goole Bramwell, J. M.

(ioslorth see Whitehaven

Gosport Mmnby, R. H.

Muuiby, L. P.
Grantham Shipman, G. W., Loc. Sec.

Ashby, A., M.D.

Paterson, — , M.D.
Graveheni) Nisbett, R. J., Loc. Sec.

Armstrong, J., M.D.

Birdwood, R. A.

Pinching, C. J.
Great Witley see Bewdley

(treat Haddon Willans, W. Blundell

Great Wakering Raper, W. A., M.D.

Greenfield see Llanelly
Greenwich see Blackheath

(irimshy Stephenson, G. S., M.B.

Guernsey Collinette, B., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Corbin, M. A. B., St. Peters
Guildford Lafargue, G. F. H., M.D., Godalming

Morton, J., M.D.

Surrey County Hospital

Yate, T., Godidminy

Sutcliff, J. H., Hipley

Hales Owen Phillips, D. W.

Halifax Waite, W.

Halstead Kellett, R. G., M.D.

Hambrook see Bristol

Hampton see Kingston-on-Thames

Hanwell Richards, J. P.

Harewood see Leeds

Harlow Day, R. N., Loc. Sec.

Clegg, J., Epping
Harpurhey see Manchester
Harrowgate Oliver, G. , M.D. , Loc. Sec.

Hartley, — , M.D., Thirsk

Hartley, J. F.

Hunt, H. J.

Johnson, C. J. B., M.D., WetJierby



MEMBERS. 59

Harrow-on-the-Hill Bridgwater, T., M.D.

Kiernan, L., M.D.

Hartlepool (West) Mackechnie, D., M.D.

Haslingden Aspinall, W., M.D.

Hastings Underwood, J. , M.D., Loc. Sec.

Adey, Charles, M.D., St. Leonards

East Sussex Medico-Chirurgical Society

Heath, E., M.D.

Humphreys, J. H.

Trollope, T., M.D.
Havant

Haverfordwest Brown, J. D., M.D.

Hawkshead Parsons, G., M.D.

Hay Applebe, E. A.

Hincks, T. S. H., M.D.

Hayward's Heath

Heckmondwike
Heighington see Darlington

Hemel-Hempstead Steele, Bussell

Hemsworth Leek, Thomas, M.D.

Henfield Lewis, C. F., L.B.C.P.

Henley-on-Thames Jeston, B. P.

Hereford Turner, Thomas, Loc. Sec.

Bull, H. G., M.D.

Lingen, Charles, M.D.

Mason, Thomas, Wellington

Price, J. : for Book Society

Thomason, B.

Hertford Shelley, C. E., M.D.

Hexham see Newcastle-on-Tyne

Heywood Jameson, G. H., M.D.

High Barnet see Barnet

High Wycombe Turner, John

Higham Ferrars see Northampton

Hitchin Shilutoe, B. B., Loc. Sec.

Hogsthorpe Bainey, W. B., M.D.

Holbeach see Spalding
Hollingwood see Manchester
Hollingworth Pomfret, H. L .*

Wyld, Harold, M.D.
Hooten Pagnell see Doncaster
Holt Skrimshire, J. T.

Hales, B. T., M.D.

Honley Smailes, T., L.B.C.P.

Hoxne Phillips, J. Dudley

Huddersfield Irving, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Cameron, J. S., M.D.

Haig, Thomas, Meltham
Hull King, B., M.D., Loc. Sec.



60 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Hull, continued Craven, E. M.

Daly, 0., M.D.

Dosser, J.

Gibson, J. H.

Hardey, E. P.

Hewson, W. K.

Infirmary Library

Locking, J. A.

Merson, J., M.D.

Nicholson, E. H. B.

Plaxton, W., M.D.

Eockcliffe, W. C, M.D.

Sharpe, E.
Huntingdon Newton, L., Loc. Sec.

Book Society

Calcott, Lewis B., Oundle
Hythe

Ibstock see Leicester

Hkley see Otley

Ipswich Hammond, C. W., M.D., Loc. Sec

Book Society

Elliston, G. S., M.D.

Benham, H. S., M.D.

Casley, — , M.D.

Sampson, G. G.

Jersey Godfray, A., M.D.

Keighley Chaffers, E.

Eoberts, A.

Jack, W., M.D.

Kettering Dryland, J. W.

Kidderminster
Kingsbridge see Plymouth
Kingston see Surbiton

Kintbury Liddcrdale, J.

Knaresborough



«



Lancaster Shuttleworth, G. E . , M.D.

Cassidy, D. M'K., M.D.
Langport

Langley Moor Stewart, E. , M.D.

Leamington Thursfield, T. W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Baker, E. L., M.D.

Clark, J. F.

Haynes, — , M.D.

Morris, J.

Shapley, H. T., M.B,



MEMBERS. 61



Leamington, continued ... Thome, F.

Leeds Greenwood, F., Loc. Sec.

Beverley, W. H.

Carter, J. B., Chapel Allerton

Clare, W.

Gisburn, I. I. W.

Greenwood, J. W., Ossett

Hallilay, J.

Jessop, T. R.

Nevitt, J. G., Chapel Allerton

Oglesby, R. P.

Price, W. N.

Bamsbotham, S. H., M.D.

Ramskill, J.

Scattergood, T.

School of Medicine

Taylor, G. S.

Teale, T. P., M.A., M.B.

Wheelhouse, C. G.
Leek Kenny, Joseph, Loc. Sec.

Dakeyne, T. E., M.D.
Leicester Barclay, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Blunt, T., M.D.

Cooper, C. W., M.B.

Eddowes, J. H., M.D., Tjowjhboro'

Fulshaw, R., EarVs Shilton

Grant, F., Market Harboro'

Hatchett, J., M.D., Iiavenstone

Johnson, T. S., Great Peatling

Leicester Infirmary Library

Leicester Medical Book Society

Pearce, G. A.

Thomas, R. H., Ibstock

Thompson, C, M.D.

Waterhouse, J. B., Great Peatling

Wood, J. A., Sheepshed

Wright, J., Markfield
Leighton Buzzard

Leigh Hall, John

Leatherhead Hurd-Wood, J., M.D.

Leominster

Lewisham Roberts, H. W.

Leytonstone Cooper, F. W.

Leyland see Preston

Lichfield Welchman, H. P., Loc. Sec.

Davis, R. A., M.D., Burnticood

Morgan, Herbert

Guthrie, G., M.D., Bumtwood
Lincoln Sympson, T., M.D., Loc. Sec.



62 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Lincoln, continued Harrison, C, M.D.

Lowe, G. M., M.B.

O'Neil, W., M.D.

Wilkinson, T. H.

Linslade Storey, W., M.D.

Liverpool Howie, J. Munt, M.B., Loc. Sec.

Bailey, F. J.

Barr, J., M.D., Everton

Batty, W. E. L.

Bicker steth, E. B.

Bligh, — , M.D.

Campbell, Macfie

Cregeen, J. N.

Dawson, T.

Drysdale, J. J., M.D.

Fraser, D. M.

Gee, B., M.D.

Gill, G.

Glynn, M.D.

Greenwood, H.

Grimsdale, T. F.

Harvey, — , M.D., Wavertree

Horton, A., M.D.

Hicks, J. S.

Hutchinson, J. B.

Limrick, W. A., M.D.

Macbeth, J., M.D.

Manifold, W. H.

Medical Institution

Paul, F. T.

Parker, E.

Bogers, T. L., M.D.

School of Medicine

Smith, J. K., M.D.

Skinner, T.

Taylor, J. S., M.D.

Warburton, J. W., M.D.

Walker, G. E.

Walker, G., M.D., Bootle

Watson, T. B., M.D., New Brighton

Whittle, E., M.D.

Wigglesworth, A., Everton

Llandudno Nicol, J., M.D.

Llandovery Thomas, D., Loc. Sec.

Llanrwst Jones, T. E.

Llanelly Thomas, J. Baglan, Loc. Sec.

Jones, T. M., Loughor

Samuel, Bichard, Greenfields



MEMBERS. 63



LONDON.

Adams, J. E., 10 Finsbury Circus
Adlard, J. E., 22£ Bartholomew Close
Allingham, W., 25 Grosvenor Street
Allen, E., 11 Ave Maria Lane
Allen, E. G., 12 Tavistock Eow (3 copies) : —

Peabody Institute ; Baltimore University of Toronto ; Anon.
Anderson, M. S., 2 Gerrard Street, N.
Andrew, J., M.D., 22 Harley Street
Andrew, J., M.D., Everleigh House, Prince Arthur's Boad, Hamp-

stead
Aveling, J. H., M.D., 1 Upper Wimpole Street
Aveling, C. T., 12 Portland Place, Lower Clapton

Bain, J., 1 Haymarket, S.W.

Baker & Co., 4 Bond Court, Walbrook

Ballard, E., M.D., 12 Highbury Terrace, Islington

Bailliere & Co., King William Street

Barwell, Bichard, 82 George Street

Bantock, G. G., M.D., 12 Granville Place, Portman Square

Barlow, Thomas, M.D., 10 Montague Street, Bussell Square

Barclay, A. W., M.D., 23a Bruton Street

Barnes, B., M.D., 16 Harley Street

Barker, A. J., M.D., Ivy Lodge, Hornsey Boad

Bartlett, J. H., 35 Ladbroke Gardens, Notting Hill

Barton, J. K., 88 Gloucester Boad, Queen's Gate, S.W.

Bateman, H., 18 Canonbury Lane

Battye, E. F., 128 St. George's Boad, S.W.

Baxter, E. B., M.D., 28 Weymouth Street, W.

Belgrave and Chelsea Medical Book Club

Bell, H. Boyes, 44 Harley Street

Beale, L., M.D., F.B.S., 61 Grosvenor Street

Bennett, B., M.D., 22 Cavendish Square

Benington, B. C, Bose Bank, Coplestone Boad, Peckham

Birkett, E. L., M.D., 48, Bussell Square

Blake, E. T., M.D., 47 Seymour Street, Hyde Park

Bowman, W., F.B.S., 6 Clifford Street

Boulter, H. B., Library, St. Bartholomews

Bovill, E., 82 James Street, Buckingham Gate

Bristowe, J. S., M.D., 11 Old Burlington Street

Broadbent, W. H., M.D., 84 Seymour Street, Portman Square

Brookfield, J. Stores, M.D., 2 Devonshire Villas, Brondesbury, N.W.

Brown, Crichton, M.D., 7 Cumberland Terrace

Brown, Dyce, M.D., 29 Seymour Street

Brown, J. H., M.D., 55 Gordon Square

Brown, F. G., 16 Finsbury Circus

Brown, C. Gaye, M.D., 88 Sloane Street, Chelsea

Brown- Sequard, — , M.D., 44 Bussell Square



64 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Brunton, L., M.D., 60 Welbeck Street
Bryant, W. J., M.D., 28a Sussex Square, W.
Bryant, Thomas, 68 Upper Brook Street
Buchanan, G., M.D., 24 Nottingham Place
Buitows, Sir G., M.D., 18 Cavendish Square
Buzzard, T., M.D., 66 Grosvenor Street, W.

Carfrae, G. M., M.D., 4 Hertford Street, Mayfair

Chambers, Thomas, M.D., 64 Chester Square

Channer, H. 0., M.D.

Charing Cross Hospital

Cheadle, W. B., M.D., 2 Hyde Park Place, Cumberland Gate

Chepmell, E. C., M.D.

Cheyne, B. R., 27 Nottingham Place

Chippendale, J., 16 Upper Phillimore Place, Kensington, S.W.

Chiara, — , M.D.

Chisholm, E., M.D.

Cholmeley, W., M.D., 63 Grosvenor Street

Church, W. S., M.D., 180 Harley Street

Clark, Andrew, M.D., 16 Cavendish Square, W.

Clapton, A., M.D., 10a St. Thomas Street, S.E.

Claremont, C, Milbrook House, Hampstead Boad

Clifton, N. H., 20 Cross Street, Islington

Clover, J. T., 8 Cavendish Place

Collins, F., M.D., 7 Charter House Square, E.C.

Cooke, B. H., Church Street, Stoke Newington

Corner, F. M., Manor House, East India Boad, Poplar

Cory, B., M.D., 14 Palace Boad, Lambeth Boad, S.E.

Coryn, W. J., M.D., 68 Acre Lane, Brixton Boad

Couper, J., M.D., 80 Grosvenor Street

Cowell, G., 19 George Street, Hanover Square

Critchett, G., 21 Harley Street

Crocker, Badcliffe, M.D., 28 Welbeck Street

Croft, J., 61 Brook Street, Grosvenor Square

Crosby, T. B., M.D., 21 Gordon Square

Curgenven, J. B., 11 Craven Hill Gardens, Bayswater

Daniell, B. T., M.D., 20 Cathcart Boad, West Brompton

Davidson, J., King's College Hospital

Davis, F. W., B.N.

Davies, H., M.D. ,23 Finsbury Square, E.C.

Dawson, Yelverton, 4 Sydney Street, Fulham Boad, S.W.

Dawson & Son, 121 Cannon Street (for Senores Medina Hermanos)

Dewar, J., 182 Sloane Street

Dickson, J. W., M.D., 28 The Grove, Hackney

Dingley, B., 7 Argyle Square

Dobell, H. B., M.D., 84 Harley Street

Dowdeswell, G., Windham Club, St. James's Square

Down, J. L. H., M.D., 39 Welbeck Street, W.



MEMBERS. 65



Drury, C. H., M.D., 8 Bucklersbury
Duckworth, Dyce, M.D., 11 Grafton Street, W.
Dudgeon, R. E., M.D., 58 Montague Square
Dunbar, James, 77 Ladbroke Grove, Kensington Park
Durham, A. E., 82 Brook Street, W.
Duncan, J., M.D., 8 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden
Duncan, J. Mathews, M.D., 71 Brook Street, W.
Duncan, H. M., 189 Buckingham Palace Boad

Easton, J., M.D., 19 Norfolk Crescent, Hyde Park

Engall, Thomas, 15 Euston Square

Erichsen, J. E., 6 Cavendish Place

Evans, W. T., M.D., 21 Westbourne Villas, Harrow Road

Evans, T. 0., 99 Camden Street

Fagge, C. H., M.D., 11 St. Thomas Street

Fardon, E. A., Middlesex Hospital

Farr, G. F., M.D., 175 Kennington Road, S.E.

Fearnside, H., M.D., 49 Leinster Gardens, Hyde Park

Fitzgerald, W. A., 195 Loughborough Road, Brixton

Fen wick, S., M.D., 29 Harley Street

Fleming, J. N., M.D., Champion Hill, Camberwell

Fletcher, J. C, M.D., 149 Camden Road

Ford, Edwin M., Avenue House, Peckham Rye

Fotherby, H. T., M.D., 8 Finsbury Square

Fox, Wilson, M.D., 67 Grosvenor Street

Fowler, G. F., 8 & 4 New Inn Yard, Shoreditch (2)

Francis, C. R., M.B., 1 Nelson Terrace, Clapham Common

Fuller, H. R., 19 Granville Place, Portman Square

Gannon, J. P.

Garden, A., M.D.

Garlick, W., M.D., 88 Great James Street, Bedford Row

Gibbs, H., M.D., 42 Colville Terrace, Bayswater

Gibson, J, R., 10 Russell Square

Giles, G., 11 North Terrace, Alexander Square, Brompton

Godrich, F., 140 Fulham Road, West Brompton

Goodhart, J. F., M.D., 27 Weymouth Street

Gowlland, P. Y., 84 Finsbury Square, E.C.

Graham, J., M.D., 29 Glo'ster Road, Regent's Park

Greenwood, A., 178 Cold Harbour Lane, Camberwell

Grindlay & Co., Parliament Street: —

Dr. J. Monteith

Dr. M'Connor
Guy, Thomas, M.D., 28 Auriol Road, Kensington
Gull, Sir W., M.D., Bart., 74 Brook Street
Gunn, R. Marcus, Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital, Moorfields

Hamilton & Co., Paternoster Row (6 copies)



66 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Hall, De Haviland, M.D., Westminster Hospital

Habershon, S. 0., M.D., 70 Brook Street, W.

Harris, Vincent, M.D., 28 Upper Berkeley Street, W.

Harris, S. C, Heme House, Ribblesdale Road, Hornsey

Hare, C. J., M.D., 57 Brook Street

Harling, R. D., M.D., 16 Seymour Street, W.

Harrison, H. F. E., M.D., 9 Park Villas, Shepherd's Bush

Hague, Samuel, 277 Southampton Street, Gamberwell

Hawkins, C. H., F.R.S., 26 Grosvenor Street, W.

Heath, Christopher, 86 Cavendish Square

Henry, Alex., M.D., 57 Doughty Street

Herman, — , M.D., 20 Finsbury Square, E.C.

Hewitt, P. G., Chesterfield Street, Mayfair

Hewitt, Grailey, M.D., 86 Berkeley Square

Hope, W. M., 181 Piccadilly

Holmes, T., 18 Great Cumberland Place

Holman, W. H., M.D., 68 Adelaide Road

Hood, Peter, M.D., 28 Lower Seymour Street, W.

Hood, D. W. C, M.D., 48 Green Street, Park Lane

Hugman, W., 55 Guildford Street, Russell Square

Hunter, Bernard, 15 Grafton Street East

Hunterian Society, London Institution, Finsbury Circus

Hutchinson, J., 15 Cavendish Square

Hutton, R. J., M.D., 240 City Road, E.C.

Ironside, R. A., M.D., 8, Highbury New Park

Jackson, Hughlings, M.D., 8 Manchester Square

Johnson, W. B., 2 York Road, Lambeth

Johnson, G., M.D., 11 Savile Row

Jones, C. H., M.D., 49 Green Street, Park Lane

Jones, Sydney, M.B., 16 George Street, Hanover Square

Keep, C, Guy's Hospital

Kibbler, R. C., L.R.C.P., Granton House, King Edward's Road,

South Hackney
Kimpton, R., 81 Wardour Street (2 copies)
Kimpton, H., High Holborn (8 copies)
King's College Library
King, H. S. & Co., Cornhill :—

Moore, R. W., M.D.

Reed, A. G.

Ruttonjee, Hormusjee

Miller, T. French, M.D.

Jamieson, R. A., M.D.

Myers, W. W.

Berbice Society

Chandra, R. C, M.D. ,

Calcutta School Book Society



MEMBERS. 67



Chesnaye, Surgeon-Major

Menzies, J. A., M.D.

Henston, — , M.D.

Cameron, L., M.D.
Kisch, A., M.D., 46 Portsdown Boad, Maida Vale
Knight, C. F., 189 St. John Street, Clerkenwell

Lansberg, P. von

Langmore, J. C, M.B., 20 Oxford Terrace

Lawrence, H. Cripps, L.B.C.P.L., 49 Oxford Terrace

Lawrence, J. E., East Hill, Wandsworth

Lawson, B., 20 Lansdowne Boad, Notting Hill

Leadam, Ward, M.D., 80 Gloucester Terrace, Hyde Park

Lewis, H. K., 136 Gower Street, W.C.

Ligertwood, J., M.D., Boyal Hospital, Chelsea

Lister, Prof., 12 Park Crescent, Begent's Park

Little, W. J., M.D., 18 Park Street

Loane, Joseph, Dock Street, Whitechapel

Lockhart, W., M.D., Park Villa, 67 Granville Park, Blackheath

Lockwood & Co., 7 Stationers' Hall Court : —

Columbus School for Feeble Minded, Ohio

Columbus Hospital for Insane, Ohio

Athens Hospital for Insane, Ohio

Cincinnati Hospital Library, Ohio

Murphy, J. A., M.D., Cincinnati, Ohio

Brown, W. T., M.D., Cincinnati, Ohio

Shepard, L. B., M.D., Cincinnati, Ohio

Parvin, T., M.D., Indianapolis, Indiana

Yandell, D. Y., M.D., Louisville

Meisse, J., M.D., Chillicottie

Stillwell, J. A., M.D., Brownstown

Seigler, J. A., M.D., Brownsville, Indiana

Ohio Eclectic Medical Association ; and 2 others
London Hospital Library, Mile End

London School of Medicine for Women, Henrietta Street, Caven-
dish Square
Longinan & Co., Paternoster Bow: —

Alston, — , M.D.

Blake, — , M.D.

Garrison Medical Officers' Library

Gibralta Garrison Library

Tolmie, Surgeon-Major T. C. A., M.D.

Bosenburg, • — , M.D.

Stokes, — , M.D., Gibralta

Gozel, — , M.D.

Piddington, W. B. (2 copies)
Lubbock, M., M.D., 6 Grosvenor Street
Low & Co., 188 Fleet Street :—

Brown, W., M.D., Dunedin



68 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Bowker, C. S., M.D.
Ashurst, S., M.D.
Carter, C, M.D.
Burns, R., M.D.
Page, E. A., M.D.

Mackenzie, S., M.D., 26 Finsbury Square

Mackenzie, Morell, 19 Harley Street

Maclaren, A. C, M.D., 60 Harley Street

M'Corniac, W., 18 Harley Street

M'Farlane, W., M.D., 15 Lower Phillimore Place, W.

M'Kechnie, T. H., 60 Wimpole Street

Markwick, A., M.D., 1 Leinster Square

Mason, S., M.D., 44 Finsbury Circus

Meadowes, A., M.D., 27 George Street, Hanover Square

Medico- Chirurgical Society, Berners Street

Medical Society University College

Medical Book Society, 80 Queen Street, Cheapside

Medical Society of London, 11 Chandos Street, Cavendish Square

Meryon, E., M.D., 14 Clarges Street, Piccadilly

Mickley, G., M.B., M.A., St. Luke's Hospital

Middlesex Hospital Library, Berners Street

Miller, C. M., M.D., Claremont Villa, 86 Stoke Newington Road

Moline, Paul F., University College

Moxon, W., M.D., 6 Finsbury Circus

Mouat, F. J., M.D., 12 Durham Villas, Kensington, W.

Muir, J. C, L.R.C.P., 44 Cornwall Road, Westbourne Park

Muckerjee, S., M.D., 7 Crescent Place, Mornington Crescent

Murphy, S. F., 158 Camden Road

Myers, A. T., 1 St. George's Place, Hyde Park Corner

Nash, E., M.D., 123 Lansdowne Road, Notting Hill
Neatby, E. A., 2 Christchurch Road, Hampstead
Neatby, T., M.D., 29 Thurloe Road, Hampstead
Needham, J., M.D., 2 Westbury Gardens, Clapham Road
Nettleship, E., 4 Wimpole Sti*eet

North London Medical Book Society, 88 Parkhurst Road, Hollo-
way, N.

O'Brien, B., M.D., 26 Somerleyton Road, Brixton
Oldham, H., M.D., 4 Cavendish Place

Paget, Sir J., F.R.S., 1 Harewood Place, Hanover Square
Palfrey, J., M.D., 29 Brook Street, Grosvenor Square
Panioty, John E., 2 St. Lawrence Road, Notting Hill
Paul, J. L., M.D., 48 Queensborough Terrace, \V.
Peacock, T. B., M.D., 20 Finsbury Circus, E.C.
Peirce, R. King, 94 Addison Road, Kensington
Peirce, J. Channing, M.D., Manor House, Brixton Rise



MEMBERS. 69



Perkins, Houghton, 78 Mortimer Street, Cavendish Square

Pick, T. P., 18 South Eaton Place, Eaton Square

Poore, G. V., M.D., 80 Wimpole Street, W.

Portman Medical Book Club, 49 Seymour Street

Potter, J., M.D., 20 George Street, Hanover Square

Potts, W., M.D., 2 Albert Terrace, Regent's Park

Powell, R. D., M.D., 15 Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square

Power, H., M.B., 87a Great Cumberland Place, Hyde Park

Powdrell, J., 160 Euston Road

Priestley, W. 0., M.D., 17 Hertford Street, Mayfair

Purnell, J. J., Woodlands, Streatham Hill

Quain, R., M.D., 67 Harley Street
Quain, R., F.R.S., 82 Cavendish Square

Ramskill, J. S., M.D., 5 St. Helen's Place, Bishopsgate

Ringer, Sydney, M.D., 15 Cavendish Place

Rivington, Walter, 22 Finsbury Square

Roberts, J. H., Hill Crest, Greenhill Road, Hampstead

Roberts, A., Hill Crest, Greenhill Road, Hampstead

Roberts, D. W., 56 Manchester Street

Roberts, F., M.D., 58 Harley Street

Robertson, G., Melbourne, and 17 Warwick Square (8 copies)

Roper, G., 6 West Street, Finsbury Circus

Ross, D. M., M.D., 54 Upper Berkeley Street, W.

Roth, M. f M.D., 48 Wimpole Street

Sansom, A. E., M.D., 80 Devonshire Street, Portland Place

Saunders, W. S., M.D., 18 Queen Street, Cheapside

Savage, G. H., M.D., Bethlehem Royal Hospital, St. George's

Road, Lambeth
Scott, J., M.D., 8 Chandos Street, Cavendish Square
Schmidt, A. E., M.D., 150 Bethnal Green Road
Sedgwick, L. W., M.D., 2 Gloucester Terrace, Hyde Park
Senior, Charles, Adelaide House, 22 Hilgrove Road, N.
Seager, Herbert W., St. Mary's Hospital
Sewell, C. B., M.D., 18 Fenchurch Street, E.C.
Seton, D. E., M.D., 12 Thurloe Place, S.W.
Skinner, W., 45 Lower Belgrave Street, S.W.
Shillitoe, B., 2 Frederick Place, Old Jewry
Sibley, S. W., 7 Harley Street
Silcock, A. Q., 5 Graham Road, Dalston
Simpkin & Co., Stationers' Hall Court : —

Van de Laan ; and 8 others
Skelding, J., 16 Euston Square
Skeat, — , 10 King William Street
Smith, E. Noble, L.R.C.P.

Smith, Eustace, M.D., 5 George Street, Hanover Square
Smith, Protheroe, M.D., 42 Park Street



70 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Smith, Fredk., 780 Old Kent Road

Smith, Walter, M.D., 2 Stanhope Terrace, Gloucester Gate

Smith, Gilbert, M.D., 68 Harley Street

Snell, E. G. C, M.D., 181 Green Street, Victoria Park

Sotheran, 186 Strand : —

Haslar Hospital

Plymouth Hospital

Chatham Hospital

Edulgee Musserwangee
South London Medical Reading Society, 148 Lambeth Road, S.E.
Squire, B., 24 Weymouth Street
St. Bartholomew's Hospital Library
St. Mary's Hospital Library
St. George's Hospital Library

Stevens, Felix, M.D., 18 High Street, Stoke Newington
Stevens, B. F., 4 Trafalgar Square (4 copies)
Stewart, W. E., 16 Harley Street
Stewart, A. P., M.D., 75 Grosvenor Street
Stewart, H. C, M.D., 22 North Bank, Regent's Park
Stoke Newington Medical Society, 57 Darnley Road, Hackney, E.
Surgeons, Royal College of, Lincoln's Inn Fields
Symonds, J., M.D., 79 Amhurst Road, Hackney

Tamburini, — , M.D.

Tayloe, E., South Lodge, Clapham Common

Tegart, E., 49 Jermyn Street, S.W.

Tenison, E. T. R., M.D., 9 Keith Terrace, Shepherd's Bush

Thacker & Co., Newgate Street: —

Charles, — , M.D.

Manhook, — , M.D.

Udoz, Chand Dutt, M.D.

Benode, K. Bose, M.D.
Thorowgood, J. C, M.D., 61 Welbeck Street
Thompson, A., M.D., 10 Delamere Street, W.
Thompson, Sir H., 85 Wimpole Street
Thyne, T., M.D., 140 Minories, E.C.
Toulmin, F., Upper Clapton, N.E.
Travers, W., M.D., 2 Phillimore Gardens, S.W.
Turner, F. Charelwood, M.D., M.A., 15 Finsbury Square
Tweedy, J., M.D., 18 Harley Street
Twynam, G. E., 18 Blandford Square, W.
Triibner & Co., 57 Ludgate Hill (11 copies)

Vaillant, Edward, 85 George Street, Portman Square

Venning, Edgecombe, 87 Sloane Street, W.

Vereker-Bindon, — , M.D., 2 Elm Villas, Willesden Lane, Kilburn

Wake, — , M.D., 2 Cathcart Hill, Holloway, N.
Waring, E. J., M.D., 49 Clifton Gardens, Maida Vale



MEMBERS. 71

Waggett, J., M.D., 40 Ladbroke Grove, Kensington Park Gardens

Walker, J. P., M.D., 80 Bedford Square

Waller, A., 14 Gibson Square, Islington

Warner, Percy, 4 Merrick Square, Borough

Warren, E. C, M.D., 99 Albion Boad, Dalston

Watkins, S. C, Poplar Hospital for Accidents, East India Boad,

Poplar
Watkins, E., M.D„ 61 Guildford Street
Watkins, C. J., 27 Mornington Crescent
Watney, Herbert, M.D.. 1 Wilton Crescent, S.W.
Watson, Sir T., M.D., Bart., 16 Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square
Watson, J., M.D., 6 Southampton Street, Bloomsbury
Waylen, A., M.D.
Webb, F., M.D., 118 Maida Vale
Weber, H., M.D., 10 Grosvenor Street
Weber, F., M.D., 44 Green Street, Grosvenor Square
Webster & Larking, Piccadilly
Wells, T. Spencer, 8 Upper Grosvenor Street
Wesley, W., Strand
Weston, Philip, M.D., 891 City Boad
Whaley, J. C, Prospect Place, Kilburn
Whitmore, W. T., 7 Arlington Street, S.W.
Wigg, A. E., University College Hospital
Williams & Norgate, Henrietta Street
Williams, Theodore, M.D., 47 Upper Brook Street
Williams, J., M.D., 44 Mildmay Park, N.
Williams, Dawson
Wilkin, J. C, 15 Hyde Park Street
Wilks, S., M.D., 72 Grosvenor Street

Wilson, Erasmus, F.B.S., 17 Henrietta Street, Cavendish Square
Worley, W. C, 48 De Beauvoir Boad, W.
Worsley-Benison, H. W. S., 25 Grange Boad, Canonbury, N.

Loughborough see Leicester

LosTwrrmBL Bow, C, M.D.

Loughor see Llanelly

Louth Faussett, F.

Lowestoft Clubbe, W. H., Loc. Sec.

Bay, J.

Worthington, F. S.

Lower Tulse Hill Stowers, J. Herbert, M.D.

Luton

Lutterworth Busgard, M., M.D.

Lymington Hill, W. B., M.D.

Lyndhurst see Southampton

Lynn Woodward, E., L.B.C. P., IjOC. Sec.

West Norfolk and Lynn Hospital

Parry, G., Docking

Webster, W.



72 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Mablethorpe

Macclesfield

Madeley

Maidenhead

Maidstone Plomley, I. F.

Ground, E.

Malpas Parker, E., M.D.

Malton Colby, W. T., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Malvern West, W. C, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Dawson, W. H.

Eowland, H. M., M.D.

Weir, A., M.D., St. Munyho's

Manchester Peatson, J. Chad wick, M.D., 25 Mount

Street, Peter Street, Loc. Sec.

Armstrong, J., Harpurhey

Blackley, C. H., Trafford

Borchardt, L., M.D.

Bradbury, J. 0., Salford

Bradshaw, J. D., Bowdon

Brown, H., M.D., Heaton Mersey

Buckley, S., F.R.C.S.

Child, W. L., Prestwich

Clarke, A, C. S. W., Salford

Clarke, B., M.D., Farnsworth

Coveney, J. H., Prestwich

Crompton, S., M.D., Cheetham Hill

Earl, J., Cheetham Hill

Fletcher, J. S., M.D., Hiyher Brouyhton

Fox, R. D.

Gornall, R. H., Newton Heath

Heathcote, G.

Hewson, R. W., Cheadle

Heslop, R.

Hodgkinson, Alex., M.D.

Humphrey, H., M.D., Eccles

Bderton, F., Fairfield

Irwin, J., M.D.

Jones, T., M.D.

Kennedy, J.

Lancashire, J., Stand

Leach, D. J.

Library of Royal Infirmary

Library of Medical Society

Land, E.

MaUett, W. J., M.D.

Morgan, J. E., M.D., Eccles

Mould, G. W., M.D.

Mules, P. H., M.D., Bowdon

Murphy, C. 0.



MEMBERS. 73

Manchester, continued ... Nesfield, S., M.D.

Paton, Eobert

Phipps G. C, M.D.

Peirce, F. M., M.D.

Radford, T., M.D., Higher Broughton

Ransome, M. A., M.B., Boicdon

Reed, G., M.D.

Renshaw, J., M.D., Stret/ord

Renshaw, S. H., M.D., Sale

Roberts, D. L., M.D.

Roberts, W., M.D.

Rodger, R., M.D.

Roe, R. E. H., Patticru/t

Ross, James

Simpson, H., M.D.

Smale, H. C.

Smart, R. B.

Southam, F.

Stephens, J.

Skinner, C. G. L., Harpurhey

Simon, R. M., M.D.

Stone, J., M.D.

Walmsley, Francis H.

Walter, W., M.D.

Wattie, Alex., M.A., M.B.

Westmorland, J., Cheetham

White, J. A., Pendleton

Williams, W. J., M.D.

Withington, G. H., KersaU
March see St. Ives (Huntingdon)

Mabgate Rowe, T. S., M.D.

Market Deeping Forster, H. J.

Market Drayton

Market Overton Roe, W.

Market Rasen Taplin, B. D., Binbrook

Markneld see Leicester

Marlborough

Marple Bailey, J. Johnson, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Mabtock

Maryport Spurgin, W. H.

Crerar, J., M.R.O.P.
Melksham King, J. R.

Keir, W. Ingram
Melton Mowbray

Merthyr Tydvil BroDLE, Cornelius, L.R.C.P. Lond.,

Loc. Sec.

Migkleover Lindsay, J. Murray, M.D.

Middlesborough-on-Tees Hkdley, J.. Loc. Soc.

Glen, J., M.D.



74 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Middlesboro'-on-Tees^wi. Ketchen, W., M.D.

White W.

Williams, V. J. T., M.D.
Milbrook see Southampton

Mitcham Marshall, Ed.

Mold see Chester
Monmouth
moreton-in the-marsh

Morpeth Logie, Jas., M.D.

Moseley Blake, G. F.

Shaw, Oliver C.

Nafferton see Bridlington

Needham Market

Neston see Chester

Newark- on -Trent Appleby, F. H., Loc. Sec.

Luscombe, W. E., North Collingham

Hallowes, W. B.
Newbury Bunny, Josh., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Palmer, Montagu H. C.

Hickman, Eichard
Newcastle -under-Lyne
Newcastle-on-Tyne Oliver, Thos., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Armstrong, L.

Arnison, W. C, M.D.

Atkinson, J. J., Wylam-on-Tyne

Barkus, B., M.D., Gateshead

Beatly, T. C, jun., Seaham Harbour

Benson, T., Stanley

Bowman, HughTorrington, M.A., M.B.

Brown, W. J., M.B.

Callcott, J. T., Sedgefield

Crisp, J. L., South Shields

Downie, G., Chester-le- Street

Gateshead Medical Society

Gibb, C. J., M.D.

Gibson, C, M.D.

Heath, G. Y., M.D.

Houseman, J., M.D.

Hume, G. H., M.D.

Jackson, D., M.D.

Kennedy, W. A.

Library of Newcastle Infirmary

Macaulay, J., M.D.

Matthews, J., M.D., Txjnemouth

M'Coull, G., L.B.C.P. Ed., Ovington-
on-Tyne

Murray, W., M.D.

Murray, J. C., M.D.



MEMBERS. 75



Newcastle-on-Tyne, con. Nesham, T. 0., M.D.

Rayne, S. W.

Renton, W., M.D., Shotley Bridge

Service, John, West Bolden

Smith, J. W., M.D., Byton-on-Tyne

Smith, J.

Stainthorpe, G. F.

Sutherland, W., Capheaton

Wilkinson, Auburn

Wilson, R. H., M.D., Gateshead

Wilson, W. T., M.D.

Wilson, J., M.D., Lanchester

Newent Smelt, F. H., L.R.C.P.E.

Newick, Uckfield Graveley , Richard

Newmabket

Newpobt (Monmouthshire) Mobgan, W. W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Limberry, Thos.

Ready, W. J. Markham
Newpobt (Pembrokeshire) Havard, D., M.D.
Newton Abbott

Norham- on- Tweed Paxton, J., M.D.

Northampton Evans, C. J., Loc. Sec.

Banks, P. H., Bxseley

Busgard, — , M.D.

Clarke, W. W., M.B., Wellingborough

De Denne, T. V.

Infirmary Library

Moxon, W.
North Curry see Taunton
North Shields Peart, R., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Bourne, W., M.D.

Stephens, Thos.

Turnbull, T. J.
Norwich Robinson, H. S., Loc. Sec.

Eade, P., M.D.

Manby, F., Beedham

Medico-Chirurgical Society

Taylor, Hugh, Cottishall
Nottingham Ransome, W. H., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Beddard, J., M.B.

Brookhouse, J. 0., M.D.

General Hospital Library

Howitt, F., M.D.

Phillimore, W. P., M.D.

Terrewest, Miss

Wight, Joseph

Wright, Thomas, M.D.
Nuneaton Hammond, W., M.D.



76 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Oaken Hawthorn, F. J.

Ooiham M'Intyre, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Oldham Platt, Thos., Loc. Sec.

Fawsitt, T.

M'Gowan, S. A., M.D.

Thomson, G., M.D.

Ormskirk Wickham, H., Ruford

Ossett see Leeds
Oswestry

Oswaldtwistle Townley , A. T.

Otley Bitchie, Thos.

Scott, Thos.

Ottery St. Mary Hemsted, A., L.R.C.P.

Over see St. Ives

Over Darwen Wraith, J. H.

Oxford Winkfield, A., F.R.C.S., Loc. Sec.

Ackland, W. H., M.D.

Chapman, £.

Freeborn, R. F., M.D.

Jackson, R., M.D.

Morgan, W. L.

Medico- Chirurgical Society

Radcliffe Library

Oxley, A. R.

Symonds, F.

Thompson, Harold

Thompson, W. A.

Ward, J. B., M.D.

Painswick Sampson, H. M.

Pendleton see Manchester
Peniston see Sheffield

Pembroke Dock Stamper, J. F„ M.D.

Penge Peck, R. H.

Watson, G. S.
Penrith Wickham, J., M.D.

Jackson, T., M.D.

Pen-y-groes Roberts, Evan

Penzance Montgomery, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Boase, F.

Grenfell, H.

Bennett, W. S.

Tresize, W. R., St. Just

Berry, W. A.
Peterborough Cane, Leonard, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Walker, T. J., M.D.

Thomson, W., M.D.
Pewsey see Devizes
Plaistow Kennedy, A. E.



MEMBERS. 77



Plumstead Smith, Henry

Plymouth Whipple, Connell, Loc. Sec.

Bazeley, W.

Clay, W. H., M.D.

Ecoles, G. H., M.D.

Elliott, E. M., Kingshiidge

Harper, T.

May, G. H. T.

Plymouth Book Society

Meeres, E. E., M.D.

Square, W. J.

Swain > P. W., Devonport

Willis, R., Horrabridge

Pontypool Mason, S. B.

Poole

Pobtland Trevan, M., R.N.

Portsmouth Ford, A. Vernon, L.R.Q.C.P.

Portsea

Portmadoo Griffiths, S., M.D.

Morris, W. Jones, L.R.C.P.E,
Preston Allen, R., Loc. Sec.

Arminson, W. B., M.D.

Berry, J., Leyland

Christison, J., M.D.

Hall, J.

Hammond, J. H., M.D.

Heslop, R. C, M.D.

Gilbertson, J. B., M.D.

Rigby, J.
Prescot
Pulborough Taylor, W. E., M.D.

Queen Camel Stovin, C. F., M.D.

Rainhtll Wigglesworth, J., M.B.

Ramsgate Walford, E., Loc. Sec.

Glanville, F. F.

Ravensthorpe Ramsden, W. T.

Rawtenstall Edward, A. A., M.D.

Reading Walford, T. L., Loc. Sec.

Book Society

May, G.

Armstrong, — , M.D.

Graham, C. R.

Hayes, H. R., Basingstoke

Lowsley, Oded

Workman, J. W.

Young, W. B.
Redland Webster, Thomas



78 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Redruth Hichens, J. S.

Michell, G. A.
Reigate Walters, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Blake, E., M.D.

Holman, 0., M.D.

Smith, T. P., M.B.
Retfobd

Rhayader Richardson, R.

Richmond (Surrey) Fenn, E., M.D.

Richmond (Yorks) Bowes, R.

Ripon

Rippingale Adams, G. N., M.D.

Rochester Langston, J., Strood

White, C. J., M.D., Snodland

Tribe, H. H., Chatham

Rochdale Pooley, R. M., Loc. Sec.

Rochford King, Thomas, M.D. , Loc. Sec.

Rockferry see Birkenhead

Romford

Rotherham Foote, H. D., M.D., M.R.C.S.

Blythman, C. S., M.B., M.R.C.S.,
Swinton

Burman, W. M., L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S.,
L.S.A., W athon-Deane

Brett, J., L.R.C.P. Lond., M.R.C.S.
England

Clark, W., M.D., L.R.C.S.E., Wentworth

Gowan, Charles, M.D., Auston

Jones, W. M., M.R.C.S., L.S.A.

Knight, H. J., M.R.C.S.

Lyth, J. B., M.R.C.S.E., L.R.C.P. Ed.

Oxley, W., M.R.C.S., L.S.A.

Saville, W., M.R.C.S., L.S.A.

Smith, W. J., Parkgate

Rothwell More, J., M.D.

Royston see Cambridge

Ruddington Hall, J., M.D.

Rugby Dukes, Clement, M.B.

Simpson, Herbert, M.D.
Ryde Buck, T. A., M.D.

Saffron Walden Stear, H. , Loc. Sec.

St. Albans Prior, R. H., M.D.

St. Clears Jones, V., LI.

St. Germans Kerswell, J. B.

St. Helens Twyford, E. P., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Gaskell, R. A.

Jamieson, A., M.D.

Martin, J. H.



MEMBERS. 79



St. Ives (Cornwall) Joll, Boyd B. , M.B.

St. Ives (Huntingdon)... Grove, W. R., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Dixon, Rev. W., Over

Osborne, Harold Rochester

Easby, — , M.D., March
St. Just see Penzance

St. Tudye Pearse, W.

St. Leonards see Hastings

Salford see Manchester

Salisbury Wilkes, W. D., Loc. Sec.

Darke, F. R. P.

Kelland, James

Gordon, James, M.D.

Lee, F. F.

Sandon Tylecote, J. H., M.D.

Sawbbidgeworth Brickwell, J.

Scarborough Cooke, R. B., Loc. Sec.

Murray, Ivor, M.D.

Wandby, W.
Seacombe see Birkenhead

Sedburgh Green, T. B.

Sedgefield Smith, R., M.D.

Sevenoaks Alliott, A. J., M.B.

Shaftesbury (Dorset) Wilkinson, A., M.D.

Shanklin

Sheepshed see Leicester

Sheerness Swales, £. /

Sheffield Martin de Bartholome, M., M.D., Loc.

Sec.

Banham, H. F., M.D.

Barber, Jonathan

Benson, John

Booth, W. H.

Branson, F., M.D.

Drew, S., M.D., CJiapeltoim

Favell, W. F.

Gleadall, J.

Gwynn, C. N.

Hardwicke, J., M.D.

Hardwicke, H. J., M.D.

Hawthorn, H. J., Ecclesjield

Jackson, A., M.R.C.S.

Jones, J. T., Kckingion

Keeling, J. H., M.D.

Martin, John W., Dronfield

Porter, W. S.

Roberts, J. S., M.D.

Robinson, G., M.R.C.S.

Sheffield Medical Book Society



80 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Sheffield, continued Smith, E. J. Pye

Taylor, G. Stopford

Thomas, W. E., L.E.Q.C.P.

Watson, T. H., M.B.

Sherborne Williams, W. H., jun.

Shotley Bridge see Newcastle-on-Tyne

Shrewsbury Andrew, E., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Eddowes, A.

Edwards, H. N.

Taylor, H. Coupland, M.D.

Whitwell, F.

SmMOUTH

Sleaford

Slough

Southampton Griffin, E. W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Bencraft, H.

Dayman, H., Milbrook

Nunn, G. E., Lyndhurst

Oliver, J.

Eoyal Victoria Hospital

Southampton Medical Society

Sims, W., M.D.

Trend, T. W., M.D.

Viant, H., L.E.C.P., Totton

Ward, Thomas
Southend
Southport Mort, W., M.D.

Barron, A.
South Shields Frain, Jos., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Armstrong, I. F., M.D.

Bradley, W. M., M.D., J arrow

Crease, J. B.

Hewitson, W.

Eobson, J.

Eobson, Adam
Southsea Axford, W. H., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Manley, — , M.D.

Maybury, L., M.D.

Miller, J. W. Moore, M.D.

Turner, G.
Spalding Morris, E., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Vise, Ambrose Blythe, Holbeach

Swan, E. Jocelyn, Gosberton
Spilsby see Boston
Stafford (Vacant) Loc. Sec.

Blackford, J. C, M.D., Cannock

Weston, E. J.

Wynne, J. K., Eccleshall
Staines



MEMBERS. 81

Staleybbidge Booth, T. C.

Stamford Newman, W., M.D., F.E.C.S., Loc. Sec.

Medical Book Society

Heward, J. M.

Stamford Bridge Wright, F.

Stand see Manchester

Staplbton Levinge, E. G., M.D.

Stockport Ball, J. A., Heaton Norris, Loc. Sec.

Bagley, Samuel, Hazel Grove

Bird, J. D., M.B., Heaton Chapel

Downs, G., M.D.

Greenhalgh, T., M.D., Heaton Norris

Jordan, F. M., M.D., Heaton Chapel

Massey, T.

Turner, G., M.D.

Whitehead, G. M.
Stockton-on-Tees Oliver, W. H., Loc. Sec.

Foss, R.

Hind, H. F.

Trotter, A. E. H.

Young, C, M.D., Yarm
Stoke-upon-Trent Johnson, Samuel, C, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Arlidge, T. T., M.D.
Stourbridge Freer, A., Loc. Sec.

Ashmead, C, L.R.C.P., Brierley Hill

Chapman, G., Biierley Hill

Ker, Hugh R., Cradley Heath

Oates, J. P.

Thomson, Wesley, M.D., Cradley

Stratford-on-Avon Nason, J. J., M.B., Loc. Sec.

Strood see Rochester

Stroud Cubitt, G. R.

Sudbury Holden, J. S., M.D.

Sunbury-on-Thames see Surbiton

Sunderland Douglas, M., Loc. Sec.

Bernard, G., M.D., Silksworth

Brady, Prof. G.

Broadbent, S. W.

Dixon, W. H., M.D.

Horan, J.

Maling, E. A.

Medical Society

Morgan, G. B.

Smith, Ayre, M.D.

Watson, J., South Hetton

Waterston, J.

Welford, G.

Wilson, J.
Surbiton Kebshaw, W. W., M.D., Loc. See.



82 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Surbiton, continued Coleman, M. T.

Gunther, T. M., M.D.

Izod, Charles, Ksher

Jones, Price, M.D.

Kingsford, Edward, Sunbury

Mott, Charles

Tindall, W. R., M.D., Hampton

Trouncer, J. H., M.D.

Wyman, W. S., M.D., Putney
Sutton
Swansea Griffiths, T. D., M.B., Lod. Sec.

Evans, J., L.R.C.P. Ed.

Latimer, H. A.

Mowat, G., M.D.

Thomas, Jabez, M.D.
Swindon Swinhoe, G. M., L.R.C.P., hoc. Sec.

Maclean, J. Campbell, M.B.
Sydenham Erskine, W.

Wilkinson, F. E., M.D.

TAiiARvoR Roberts, J., M.D.

Tamworth Joy, J. Holmes, M.D.

Tarvin see Chester

Taunton Liddon, W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Farrant, S.

Kinglake, H., M.D.

Liddon, E., M.D.

Olivey, H. P., North Curry

Penny, H. S.

Rigden, G. W.

West, R. H., M.A.

Tavistock Crichton, — , M.D.

Teignmouth Lake, W. C, M.D.

Magrath, J. A., M.D.

Tenterden Saunders, E.

Tetbury
Thames Ditton

Thetford Minns, P., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Thaxted

Thirsk Ryot, W. H., M.D.

Thome and Tickhill see Doncaster

Tisbury Lindsay, R., M.D.

Tolleshunt D'Arcy see Colchester

Tooting Ward, F. H.

Torquay Cash, A. M., M.D.

Heath, R., M.D., Ellington
Tottenham May, E. H., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Cathcart, S.

Cresswell, J., Winchmore Hitt



MEMBERS. 83



Tottenham, continued Hut ton, E. E.

Tonbridge levers, Eyre, M.D.

Towcesteb Weir, J. B., M.D.

Evans, Arthur G.

Tredegar O'Rorke, C, M.D.

Tbing Pope, E., M.D.

Trowbridge Tayler, G. C.

Truro Sharp, E., Loc. Sec.

Leverton, H. Spry

Royal Cornwall Infirmary Library
Tunbridgk Wells Barry, J. Milner, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Chadwick, C, M.D.

Manser, F.

Johnson, J., M.D.

Stamford, W.

Ranking, J. E., M.B.

Wallis, W., jun., Hart field

Wardell, J. R., M.D. *
Tynemouth nee Newcastle-upon-Tyne

Ulverstone

Upper Gornal Walker, T. A.

Upper Norwood
Uppingham

Upton-on- Severn Braddon, C.

Uxbrddge Macnamara, G. H., Loc. Sec.

Ventnob

Wakefield Wood, F. H., Loc. Sec.

Clark, H.

Holdsworth, S. R.

Kemp, B.

Kemp, B., jun.

Major, — , M.D.

Slatter, W. A.

Walker, Thomas

Wiseman, J. G., M.D., Ossett
Wallingford Barrett, C. A., Loc. Sec.

Barron, J., M.D.

Greene, Walter, L.R.C.P.
Walsall

Walton-on- Thames
Warminster

Warrington Gornall, J. H., Loc. Sec.

Waterbeach Grubb, J. S., M.D.

Watford

Wath-on-Deane see Rotherham

Wednesbury see West Bromwich



84 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Wellington (Somerset)... Edwards, Walter, M.D.

Wells . French, J. G., Loc. Sec.

Weobley Applebe, E. A., M.D.

Wem Wilson, J. G., M.D.

West Bbomwioh Manley, J., Loc. Sec.

Evans, A. P.

Garman, W. 0., Wednesbury

Sutcliff, H.

Underhill, F. W.

Underhill, T., Great Bridge

Underhill, W., Tipton

Westgate-on-Sea Flint, Arthur, F.E.C.P.

Weston-super-Mare Alford, E., Loc. Sec.

Clark, — , M.D.
Martin, Edward Fuller
M'Clure, T. W., M.D., Worle
Roxburgh, Robert
Wickstead, F. W. S.

Weymouth

Weybridge Graham, A. R., M.D.

Whitby Yeoman, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Lavenick, J. V., L.R.C.P. Lond.
Mead, E. P., M.D.

Whitehaven P Anson, J. F., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Braithwaite, S., Egrerrwnt
Oalderwood, G., M.D., Egremont
Dickson, J., M.D.
Henry, E. W., M.D.
Horan, P. C, M.D.
Parker, C, M.D., Gosforth
Speirs, W., Cleator

Wigan Tatham, G. G., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Gallibrand, W., M.D.

WlLLESDEN

WlMBORNE

Winchester Butler, F. J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Forder, Thomas

Hants County Hospital Library

Windermere Hamilton, A., M.D.

Winchmore Hill see Tottenham

Windsor Ellison, J., M.D.

Fairbank, Thomas, M.D.

Harper, J. P., M.D.

Wisbeach Lithgow, R. A. D., M.D.

Witney Batt, A., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Wolverhampton Jackson, V. , Loc. Sec.

Cooke, J. B., M.B., Tettenliall

Fraser, J., M.D.

Newnham, C. A.



MEMBERS. 85



Wolverhampton, continued M'Munn, C.A., M.D.

Bell Medical Library
Woolwich Mason, R., Loc. Sec.

Butler, W. H., L.R.C.P.

Wobcbsteb Worcester Medical Society

Workington Hight, J., M.D.

M'Kerrow, G., M.B.
Worksop Newton, Isaac

O'Connor, D. M.

Worthing Harris, W. J., Loc. Sec.

Wotton-under-Edge Forty, D. H.

Wrexham Davies, E., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Dickenson, J.

Williams, E., M.D.
Wylam see Newcastle-on-Tyne
Yarmouth (Norfolk) Palmer, C, Loc. Sec.

Aldred, C. C, M.D.

Mayo, A. C.

Mitchell, Alex., M.D.

Helston, — , M.D.
Yarmouth (Isle of Wight) Hollis, C. W., M.D.
York Shann, G., M.D., Loc. Sec.

BaU, Alfred

Draper, W.

Dunhill, C. H., M.D.

Gill, H. C, Clifton

Hines, C. H.

Hood, W.

Jalland, W. H.

Matterson, W., M.D.

North, S. W.

Ramsey, I., M.D.

Read, W.

Swanson, G. J., M.D.

Williams, T. M.



SCOTLAND.

Aberdeen Wight, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Adam, J.

Davidson, A. D., M.D.
Frazer, A., M.D.
Garden, R. J., M.D.
Jackson, H., M.D.
M'Hardy, J. D., Banchory
M'Robbie, J. S.
Medico Chirurgical Society



86 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Aberdeen, continued Mortimer, W., Turriff

Ogston, F., M.D.
Keith, Archd., M.D.
Eobb, J., M.D.
Smith-Shand, W. F. J., M.D.
University of Aberdeen
Wallace, A., M.D., Turriff
Ogilvie, Will., J. C, M.D.
Willock, Kichmond, M.D.

Airdrie Arthur, H., M.D.

Bankin, P., M.D.

Alexandria M'Lelland, A., M.D.

Alloa Kirkwood, J., M.D.

Wilson, E., M.D.

Annan Drummond, T., M.D.

Arbroath Walker, J. H., M.D., Friskheitn

Auchtermuchty Troup, F., M.D.

Ayr M'Kerrow, G., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Aitken, J., M.D., Drongan

Dobbie, E., M.D.

Highet, K., M.D., Dalmellinyton

Eiddall, — , M.D.

M'Gill, J. F., M.D., Annbank

Watt, J. E., M.D.

Moore, — , M.D.

Banff Barclay, J., M.D.

Manson, A. J.
Bannockburn see Stirling

Barrhead Gorbett, E.

Berwick-on-Tweed Fraser, T., M.D.

Bridge of Earn see Perth

Buckie Duquid, W. E., M.D.

Campbeltown Gibson, W., M.D.

Cunningham, J., M.B.

Castle Douglas Lorraine, W., M.D.

Catrine Sloan, D., M.D.

Coldingham-by-Ayrton ... M'Dougal, J. M., M.D.

Coldstream Turnbull, M. J., M.D.

Cumnock Lawrence, J., M.D.

Herbertson, E. G., L.E.C.P.

Dalmally M'Nicol, H.

Dreghorn Hunter, J., M.D.

Dufftown Innes, J. A., M.D.

Dumfries M'Culloch, J. M., M.D.

Dundonald Alexander, W., M.D.

Dunfermline Henry, W., M.B.



MEMBERS. 87



Dunfermline Henry, W., M.B.

Dunse Stuart, J. A. E., M.D.

M'Watt, J.
Dundee Dewar, J. A., M.D., Arbroath

Paton, D., M.D., Carnoustie

Eorie, J., M.D.

Sinclair, Eobert, M.D.

Wemys, J. W., M.D., Brouyhty Ferry

Edinburgh Husband, W., M.D., hoc. Sec.

Adams, Josh.

Anderson, T., M.D., Bosewell

Andson, W., M.D.

Balfour, G., M.D.

Balfour, Thos., M.D.

Balfour, A., M.D., Portobello

Berry, G. A., M.D.

Bishop, J.

Bose, 0. G.

Black, A.

Beck, J. H. M., M.D.

Bruce, B., M.D.

Bryce, W., M.D.

Brackenridge, D. J.

Bramwell, Byron, M.D.

Brown, J. Macdonald

Bruce, Alex., M.D.

Burns, J., M.D.

Cadell, F.

Cappie, J., M.D.

Clouston, T. S., M.D.

Craig, A., M.D., Pathhead, Ford

Dickson, G., M.D.

Dickson, A., M.D.

Duncan, J., M.D.

Duncanson, J. Kirk, M.D.

Dunsmure, J., M.D.

Falconer, John, M.D., Lasswade

Fraser, Prof. T.

Furley, E. 0.

Gordon, J., M.D., East Linton

Gordon, P., M.D., Juniper Green

Haldane, Eutherford, M.D.

Hirschfeld, — , M.D.

Jamieson, J., M.D.

Jordan, Gregory P.

Keillor, A., M.D.

Keith, J. S., M.D.

Kerr, W. W.

9



88 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Edinburgh, continued Kendall, W. B.

Kirk, J. B., M.D., Bathjate

Laycock, Thomas, M.D.

Lennox, D.

Library of University of Edinburgh

Livingstone, Bros.

Lucas, B., M.D., Dalkeith

M'Donald, A., M.D., F.B.C.S.E.

Macdonald, Keith, M.D.

Macgillivray, C. W., M.D.

Maclagan, D., M.D.

Maclaren, P. H., M.D.

M'Bae, E., M.B., Penicuik

Malcolm, B. B., M.D.

Middle ton, J., M.D.

Muirhead, W. C, M.D.

Murdock, J., M.D.

Pattison, Thomas, M.D.

Playfair, J., M.D.

Boyal College of Surgeons : per Dr. Inglis

Boyal Medical Society of Edinburgh

Boyal College of Physicians

Butherford, W., M.D.

Butherford, T., M.D., Kelso

Sanders, Prof., W. B.

Scott, Jas., Bonnington

Sibbald, J., M.D.

Sidey, J. A., M.D.

Silke, G. B., M.D.

Simpson, Prof. A., M.D.

Sinclair, Alexander J., M.D.

Stewart, T. G., M.D.

Stewart, D. E., Selkirk

Stewart, J., M.D.

Sym, Allan

Taylor, W., M.D.

Thomson, A., M.D.

Underhill, C. E., M.D.

Valentine, Bev. Colin S., LL.D.,
F.B.C.S.E.

Walker, J.

Watt, J. D., M.D.

Weir, T. G., M.D.

Woodhead, G. S.

Young, Peter, M.D.

Young, P. A., M.D., PortobeUo

Zeigler, W., M.D.
Elgin Duff, G., M.D., Loc. Sec.

George, J. T., M.D., Keith, Banf



MEMBERS. 89



Elgin, continued M'Kay, Morris, M.D.

Gallatly, W., M.D.
Fobfab Mubray, W. F., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Maclagan, Wedderburn, M.D.

Hunter, C, M.D.

Fort William Hutchinson, J., M.13.

Fbasbbbuboh Grieve, A. C.

Fyvib Greig, A. F.

Galashiels Somerville, E., M.D.

Glasgow Andekson, J. W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Adams, J., M.D.

Agnew, D., M.D.

Anderson, T. M'Call, M.D.

Brown, A., M.D.

Buchanan, T. D., M.D.

Buchanan, J. M., M.D.

Burns, J., M.D.

Carmichael, N., M.D.

Carr, W., M.D.

Cleland, J., M.D.

Charteris, M., M.D.

Coats, Joseph, M.D.

Connell, B., M.D.

Core, W., M.D.

Cowan, B., M.D.

Dick, J., M.D.

Duncan, Eben., M.D.

Farquharson, J., M.D., Coatbridye

Fergus, A., M.D.

Finlayson, J., M.D.

Fleming, W. J., M.D.

Forrest, E. W.

Frew, — , M.D., Newmilns

Fullerton, Neil, M.D., Lamlash

Gairdner, W., M.D.

Glasgow University Medico-Chirurgical
Society

Goff, B„ M.D., Bothwell

Gray, J., M.D.

Henderson, T. B., M.D., 17 Ebnbank
Crescent

Henderson, T. B., 48 Kelvin Grove
Street

Hunter, Walter, M.B.

Lapraik, T., M.D.

Lawrie, J., M.D.

Leishman, W., M.D.

Love, J. K.



90 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



Glasgow, continued Library of University of Glasgow

Library of Glasgow Faculty of Medicine
Library of Faculty of Physicians and

Surgeons
M* Gavin, J., Dennistown
M'Fie, Johnstone, M.D.
M'Conville, J., M.D.
M'Colman, D., M.D., Ballachulish
M'Leod, G. H. B., M.D.
M'Vean, J. D.
Miller, J., M.D., Springburn
Millar, J., M.D., Wishaw
M'Millan, E., M.D., Tradeston
Morton, J., M.D.
M'Phail, D., M.D.
M'Kenzie, Henry
Muir, W., M.D., Bridgeton
Munro, Donald
Nairn, J. Stewart, M.D.
Napier, — , M.D., CrosshiU
Newman, — , Partick
Patrick, W., M.D.
Peden, W. K.
Perry, E., M.D.
Pollock, A. B.

Pollok, B., M.D., Pollokshield*
Beid, Thomas, M.D.
Beid, W. L., M.D.
Bigby, John

Bitchie, A., M.D., Pollockshaws
Bobertson, A., M.D.
Bobertson, A. M.
Semple, B., M.D.
Sewell, W. B., M.D., Kincardine-on-

Forth
Simpson, P. A., M.D.
Smith, W., M.D.
Smith, TliQmas
Spiers, D., M.D.
Steven, J. L k

Steven, Finlay, M.D., Coatbridge
Thomas, M., M.D.
Thomson, A. T., M.D.
Turner, H., M.D.
Walker, B.
Wallace, A., M.D.
Watson, W. B., Dennistown
Wilson, J. G., M.D.
Yeaman, G., M.D.



MEMBERS. 91



Glasgow, continued Young, David, M.D., Pathhead

Glenluce M'Cormack, W.

Greenock Wallace, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Black, J. E., MJD.

Auld, Charles, M.D.

Whiteford, — , M.D.

Carlyle, J., M.D., AuchmuU

Marshall, W. J., M.D.

M'Dougal, J., M.D.

Paton, J., M.D.

Douglas, J., M.D.

M'Kecknie, W., M.D., Thorndean

Stewart, A. D.

Wilson, W. A., M.D.
Haddington Howden, T., Jun., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Martine, W., M.p.
Hamilton Loudon, J., M.D.

Irvine Wilson, W., M.D.

Inverness M'Nee, J., M.D.

Aitken, Thomas
M'Donald, W., M.B.

Jedburgh Blair, W., M.D.

Johnstone Taylor, M. H., M.B.

Kelso Johnson, E., M.D.

Kilcreggan Zair, J. M., M.B.

Kirkcaldy Gordon, H., M.D.

Kilmarnock Macfarlane, A. W., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Bankin, Guthrie

Baxter, W., M.D.

Kilmaurs Buchan, George

Kirkcudbright Urquhart, Andrew J.

Leith Struthers, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Henderson, J., M.D.

Garland, 0. H., M.D.

Leshmahagow Lindsay, J.

Leuchars see St. Andrews

Linlithgow Hunter, G., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Lochgilphead Cameron, J., M.D.

Melrose Meikle, J., M.D.

Montrose Howden, J. C, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Steele, G., M.D.
Musselburgh > Scott, T. B., M.D.



Newburgh see St. Andrews



92 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



New Galloway Millman, A. M'Kinlay, M.D.

Newport see St. Andrews

Paisley Taylor, D., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Donald, J. T., M.D.

Fraser, Donald, M.D.

Graham, Thomas, M.D.

Infirmary Library

M'Kinlay, — , M.D., Barrhead

Paton, J., M.D.

Bichmond, D., M.D.

Penicuik M'Rae, A. E., M.D.

Perth Stirling, D. H., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Bramwell, J. P., M.D.

Irvine, W. S., M.D., Pitlochry

Roy, W., M.D.

Laing, H. W., M.B., Bridge of Earn

Peterhead Jamieson, P.

Pitlochry see Perth
Port William

Rutherglen Gorman, J.

St. Andrews Mackie, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Archibald, D., M.D.
Library of University of St. Andrews
Constable, J., M.D.., Leuchars
Niven, T., M.D., Newburgh
Stewart, J., M.D., Newport
Whitelaw, W., M.D.

Shotts Caldwell, J.

Skelmorlie Wylie, W., M.D.

Strathpeffer Middleton, James, M.D.

Stirling Gibson, C, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Johnstone, W., M.D.

Bae, J., M.D.

Robertson, J., M.D., Bannockburn

Taynuilt M'Nacnaughton, Allan

Tombeg M'Rae, D., M.D.

Whithorn Douglas, J. C, M.D.

Wick

Wigton M'Bride, Charles, M.D.



MEMBERS. 93



IRELAND.

Antrim Adams, J. J., M.D.

Ardeb

Armagh Gaming, Thomas, M.D.

Fraser, H., M.D.

Huston, R. Todd, M.D., Tyman

Palmer, J., M.D.

Pratt, T., M.D.
Athlone Langstaff, H. H., M.D.

AuGHNAGLOY Scott, W., M.D.

Oordner, Louis, M., L.K.Q.C.P.

Bagnalstown Allen, C. D., M.B.

Ballina Macaulay, R., M.D.

Belfast Aiken, W., M.D.

Cuming, Prof. D.

Purdon, 0. D., M.D.

Purdon, T. H., M.D.

Whitla, W., M.D.

Workman, 0., M.D.

Hartree, J, P., M.D.

Byers, J. W., M.A., M.D.

Esler, R., M.D.

Ulster Medical Society

Bellaghy Charles, D. Allen, M.D.

Boyle O'Farrell, H., M.D.

Bray see Dublin

Bruff Macnamara, P. J., M.D.

Carlow O'Meara, Thomas P., M.D.

O'Meara, W. H., M.D.
Carrick-on-Suir Martin, J., M.D., hoc. Sec.

Reynett, J., M.D., Portlaw

White, T. K., M.D., KilsheeUen

Castleisland Nolan, W.

Castle wellan

Cavan Malcomson, W., M.D., hoc. Sec.

Cookstown M'lver, W., M.D.

Cork Finn, E., M.D., hoc. Sec.

Cremen, Patrick J., M.D.

Donovan, Dennis, M.D.

Harvey, J. R., M.D. (for Medical Club)

Hobart, N., M.D.

Jones, M'Naughton, M.D.

0* Sullivan, S., M.D.

Queen's College, Cork : per J. England,
Esq.



94 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Cork, continued Tanner, W. K., M.D.

Townsend, E. E., M.D.

Townsend, W. C., M.D.

Mulcahy, D.

Corofin, Go. Glare Macnamara, G. U.

Culdaff Gilmore, T. C., M.D.

Downpatrick Maconchy, J. K., M.B.

Dublin Moore, J. W., M.D., hoc. Sec.

Armstrong, J. H.

Banks, J. T., M.D.

Barker, W. 0., M.D.

Barton, J. K., M.D.

Beatty, J. G., M.D.

Bennett, E. H., M.B.

Benson, J. Hawtry, M.D.

Biggar, S. L., M.D.

Brady, J., M.D.

Catholic University School of Medicine

Churchill, F., M.D.

Colles, W., M.B.

Corley, A. H.

Cruise, J. B., M.D.

Cryan, B., M.D.

Daly, F. H.

Darby, T., M.D., Bray

Davison, H. A.

Denham, J., M.D.

Duffey, G. F., M.D.

Elliott, W. A.

Fitzgibbon, H., M.D.

Fitkgerald, C. E.

Fitzpatrick, T., M.D.

Foot, A. W., M.D.

Grimshaw, T. W.

Hamilton, E., M.B.

Hayden, T., M.D.

Head, H. H., M.D.

Hudson, A., M.D.

Jennings, W. B.

Johnston, G., M.D.

KeUy, J.

Kidd, G. H., M.D.

King's & Queen's College of Physicians

Kirkpatrick, J. B., M.D.

Library of Meath Hospital

Library of Adelaide Hospital

Library of School of Physic in Ireland

Little, J., M.D.



S



MEMBERg. 95



Dublin, continued Madden, T. W., M.D.

Marks, A. H., M.D.
Mason, Thomas
M'Dowell, B. G., M.D.
M'Donnell, J., M.D.
Minchin, H., M.D.
Moore, C. F., M.D.
Moore, W., M.D.
Murphy, J.

National Library of Ireland
Powell, G. W., M.D.
Pollock, J. F., Blackrock
Peele, E., M.D.
Porter, G. H., M.D.
Purefoy, B. D., M.D.
Bainsford, B., M.D.
Bichmond Hospital Library
Boyal College of Surgeons
Shannon, P., M.D.
Smyley, P. C.
Stoker, W. T., M.D.
Thomson, W., M.D.
Torney, Thomas, M.D.
TottreU, W.
Trinity College Library
Wharton, J. H., M.B.
Wheeler, W. J., M.D.

DlJNDALK

Enniscorthy Drapes, Thomas, M.D.

Enniskerry Barrington, C. E., M.D.

Galway Queen's College

Kinkead, Prof., M.D.
Glasslough Stewart, B. W., M.D.

Kilkenny Johnson, Z., M.D.

KtT.T.AT.A

Kinvaba Nally, W. J.

Kingstown Adams, W. OBbien, Loc. Sec.

Liffobd Little, Bobert, M.B.

Limerick Kane, Thomas, M.D., Loc. Sec.

De Landre, G., M.B.

Courtenay, E. Maziere
Londonderry Bernard, Walter, M.D. , Loc. Sec,

Miller, J. E., M.D.

White, Barnwall, M.D.



96 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Londonderry, continued... M'Cullagh, Jas. A., M.D.

LoUGHREA

Maoheba M'Gowan, W., M.D.

Malahide Lloyd, Hans, M.D.

Monaghan Boss, D. M., Loc. Sec.

Bobertson, J. C, M.D.
Moynalty Dundas, G. H.

Navan Hamilton, P., M.D.

Newcastle Clarendon, S., M.B.

Obanmore Geoghegan, Lawrence

Pomeroy Henry. B., M.D.

Boscommon Habbison, J., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Boscbea Powell, B. C, M.D., Parkmoor

Bosstbevob Vesey, T. A., M.B., Loc. Sec.

Bostellan Travers, B. B., F.B.G.S.

Sligo M'Munn, J., M.D.

Tullow Warren, W., M.D.

Kidd, H.

Wexford Boxwell, H. H., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Cardiff, J. B., M.D., BaUinabola



EUROPE.

Bologna (Italy) Ciaccio, Guiseppe, M.D.

Como (Switzerland) Comolli, — , M.D.

Constantinople (Turkey) Patterson, John

Florence (Italy) Young, D., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Kazan (Bussia) Inyasevsky, N. J., M.D.

Madeiba Grabham, T., M.D.

Marseilles (France) Duranty, E. Nicolas, M.D.

Nice (France) Crossby, — , M.D.

Paris Pozzi, S., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Vienna Boxburgh, B., M.D.



MEMBERS. 97



AFRICA.
Capetown Gorman, Charles, M.D.

East London (Cape Col.) Hartley, W. Darley

GbaafBeinett (Cape Col.) Hislop, G. B., M.D.

Port Elizabeth (Algoa Bay) Neebe, C. W., M.D.

Somerset East (S. Africa) Clarke, Thomas Furze, M.D.

Winbueo (Orange Free

State) Leech, J. B., M.D.

ASIA.

Bombay Banat, H. E.

Dalai, K. A., M.D.

Joynt, F. G.

Joynt, C, M.D.
And others

Beloaum (Bombay) Wall, Bobert M.

Baeeilly Loch, J. H., M.D.

Calcutta Jones, J., M.D.

Ceylon (Colombo) Kinsey, W. B., M.D.

Hong-Kong General Military Hospital

Madras Bbockman, Surgeon-Major E. F., L. Sec.

King, H., M.B.

Morgan, W. H.

Lloyd, E. E.

Porter, A., M.D., F.B.C.S.I.

Robertson, C, M.D.

Cornish, W. B., F.B.C.S.

Sibthorpe, C.

Branfoot, A. M., M.B.

Nath, J.

Sturmer, A. J.

Moran, J. J., M.D.

Ward, T.

Boon, H.

Audy, S. Pulney, M.D.

Mootoosomar, Moodehar
Moultan Blood, Joseph, M.B., hoc. See.



98 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.

Moultan, continued Mullane, J., M.D.

Juswant, Kai
Mysore M'Gann, T. J.

Nagpub School of Medicine

Nanh Tal (N. W. P.) ... Cleghorn, James, M.D.

Orissa Gupta, B.

Peshawar Haig, P. E. D. H.

Singapore Bowell, T. S., M.D.

Vizagapatam Smith, J.

Yokohama & Yedo (Japan) Eldbidge, Stuart, M.D., Loc. Sec.

SOUTH AUSTRALIA.

Adelaide Thomas, J. D., M.D.

WhitteU, Horatio, M.D.

Way, E. Willis, M.D.

Armidale Wigan, George, M.D.

Ararat Morrison, A.

VICTORIA.

Melbourne Barker, E., M.D., Loc. Sec.

And nineteen Members

NEW SOUTH WALES.

Sydney Spark, Jas., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Booker, K. B., M.D.
Dixson, Craig, M.D.
Durham, J. C. C, M.D.
Pickburn, — , M.D.
Mackenzie, W. F., M.D.
M'Kellar, Charles, M.D.

NEW ZEALAND.
Auckland Auckland Institute

Canterbury Guthrie, T. Orr, M.D.



MEMBERS. 99

Chkistchurch Irving, J. , M.D. , Imc. Sec.

Prius, — .

Townend, J. H., L.R.C.P.

Napier De Lisle, F. L., M.D., Loc. Sec.

Caro, — , M.D.

Hitchings, Thomas, M.D.

Spenser, W. J.

Todd, Alex., M.D., Waipawa

Menzies, — , M.D.
Nelson Squire, W. W., M.D.

Williams, G.

QUEENSLAND.
Brisbane Flood, S., M.D., Loc. Sec.

TASMANIA.
Swansea Lovett, — , M.D.

BARBADOES.

Wallcott, R, M.D., Loc. Sec.
Garrison Library, St. Ann's

UNITED STATES.
Abingdon Reece, Madison, M.D., Loc. Sec.

Boston Salter, W. H., M.D., Loc. Sec.

And thirty-three Members

Buffalo Cronyn, J., M.D.

Samo, J. B., M.D.

Dubugue Hon, Asa, M.D.

Hay, Walter, M.D.

Jersey City Watson, B. A., M.D.

Louisville (Kentucky) ... Library of the Polytechnic Society of

Kentucky
Lynn (Massachussetts) ... Pinkham, J. G., M.D.

Sing-Sing Fisher, G. J., M.D.

Fisher, A. K.
Helm, W. A., M.D.



100 THE NEW SYDENHAM SOCIETY.



New York Wood & Co. (Messrs.), Local Agents

Knight, C. H., M.D.
And forty Members

Philadelphia Blacxiston, Presley, Local Agent

Da Costa, J. M., Pennsylvania

Meigs, John Forsyth, Pennsylvania

Lewis, Samuel, Pennsylvania

Hay, Thomas, Pennsylvania

Ashurst, John, Jan., Pennsylvania

Stills, Alfred, Pennsylvania

Collins, James, Pennsylvania

Atlee, W. L., Pennsylvania

West, T. H., West Virginia

Kemper, G. H., Indiana

Otte, C. H., Maryland

Moses, T. A., Missouri

Benham, S. M., Pennsylvania

Scholtze, S. S., Pennsylvania

Curwen, John, Pennsylvania

Darrach, James, Pennsylvania

Palmer, J. Dabrey, Florida

Gaines, E. P., Alabama

Fleming, A., Pennsylvania

Prince, David, Illinois

Hewlett, V. P., New Jersey

Hearne, J. C, Missouri

Wey, W. C, New York

Gamble, D. C, Missouri

Van der Veer, A., New York

Carpenter, John S., Pennsylvania

Surgeon-General, U. 8. Navy

State Hospital for Insane, Warren,

Pennsylvania
Van der Poel, S. 0., Neio York



CANADA.
Durham Gun, Jas., M.D.

Montreal Nichol, Thos., M.D., LL.B., B.C.Li.

Nova Scotia Maclarty , — , Sydney

St. Johns (N. Brunswick) Berryman, — , M.D.

Toronto Geikie, W. B., M.D.



MEMBERS. 101



WEST INDIES.
St. Lucia Galgey, Otho, M.D.

SOUTH AMERICA.
Valparaiso Cooper, G. F., M.D.

Argentine Eepublic Frend, J. A., Rosario

JAMAICA.

Kingston Anderson, J., M.D.

Wegg, John A.
Clarke, J. H., M.D.
Saunders, A. B., M.D.



WEST, NEWMAN AMD CO., PRINTERS, 54, HATTON GARDEN, LONDON, E.C.



\l



V



v.



/-
