Kojiki: Records of Ancient Matters (Basil Hall Chamberlain, 1882)
=================================================================
The first English translation of Japan's oldest chronicle (712 AD) — mythology, songs and early history. Public domain. Wikisource transcription of the 1882 Asiatic Society of Japan edition.

============================================================
INTRODUCTION
============================================================

---

---

[Read before the Asiatic Society of Japan April 12th, May 10th, and
June 21st, 1882.]

---

Of all the mass of Japanese literature, which lies before us as the result of nearly twelve centuries of book-making, the most important monument is the work entitled “Ko-ji-ki” or “Records of Ancient Matters,” which was completed in A. D. 712. It is the most important because it has preserved for us more faithfully than any other book the mythology, the manners, the language, and the traditional history of

Ancient Japan. Indeed it is the earliest authentic connected literary product of that large division of the human race which has been variously denominated Turanian, Scythian and Altaïc, and it even precedes by at least a century the most ancient extant literary compositions of non-Aryan India. Soon after the date of its compilation, most of the salient features of distinctive Japanese nationality were buried under a superincumbent mass of Chinese culture, and it is to these “Records” and to a very small number of other ancient works, such as the poems of the “Collection of a Myriad Leaves” and the Shintō Rituals, that the investigator must look, if he would not at every step be misled into attributing originality to modern customs and ideas, which have simply been borrowed wholesale from the neighbouring continent.

It is of course not pretended that even these “Records” are untouched by Chinese influence: that influence is patent in the very characters with which the text is written. But the influence is less, and of another kind. If in the traditions preserved and in the customs alluded to we detect the Early Japanese in the act of borrowing from China and perhaps even from India, there is at least on our author’s part no ostentatious decking out in Chinese trappings of what he believed to be original matter, after the fashion of the writers who immediately succeeded him. It is true that this abstinence on his part makes his compilation less pleasant to the ordinary native taste than that of subsequent historians, who put fine Chinese phrases into the mouths of emperors and heroes supposed to have lived before the time when intercourse with China began. But the European student, who reads all such books, not as a pastime but in order to search for facts, will prefer the more genuine composition. It is also accorded the first place by the most learned of the native literati.

Of late years this paramount importance of the “Records of Ancient Matters” to investigators of Japanese subjects generally has become well-known to European scholars; and even versions of a few passages are to be found scattered through the pages of their writings. Thus [[Author:William George Aston|Mr. Aston]] has given us, in the Chrestomathy appended to his “Grammar of the Japanese Written Language,” a couple of interesting extracts; [[Author:Ernest Mason Satow|Mr. Satow]] has illustrated by occasional extracts his elaborate papers on the Shintō Rituals printed in these “[[Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan|Transactions]],” and a remarkable essay

by Mr. Kempermann published in the Fourth Number of the “Mittheilungen der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Natur und Völkerkunde Ostasiens,” though containing no actual translations, bases on the accounts given in the “Records” some conjectures regarding the origines of Japanese civilization which are fully substantiated by more minute research. All that has yet appeared in any European language does not, however, amount to one-twentieth part of the whole, and the most erroneous views of the style and scope of the book and its contents have found their way into popular works on Japan. It is hoped that the true nature of the book, and also the true nature of the traditions, customs, and ideas of the Early Japanese, will be made clearer by the present translation, the object of which is to give the entire work in a continuous English version, and thus to furnish the European student with a text to quote from, or at least to use as a guide in consulting the original. The only object aimed at has been a rigid and literal conformity with the Japanese text. Fortunately for this endeavour (though less fortunately for the student), one of the difficulties which often beset the translator of an Oriental classic is absent in the present case. There is no beauty of style, to preserve some trace of which he may be tempted to sacrifice a certain amount of accuracy. The “Records” sound queer and bald in Japanese, as will be noticed further on; and it is therefore right, even from a stylistic point of view, that they should sound bald and queer in English. The only portions of the text which, from obvious reasons, refuse to lend themselves to translation into English after this fashion are the indecent portions. But it has been thought that there could be no objection to rendering them into Latin,—Latin as rigidly literal as is the English of the greater part.

After these preliminary remarks, it will be most convenient to take the several points which a study of the “Records” and the turning of them into English suggest, and to consider the same one by one. These points are:

*—Authenticity and Nature of the Text, together with Bibliographical Notes.
*—Details concerning the Method of Translation.
*—The “Nihon-Gi” or “Chronicles of Japan.”
*—Manners and Customs of the Early Japanese.

*—Religious and Political Ideas of the Early Japanese. Beginnings of the Japanese Nation, and Credibility of the National Traditions.

I.

The latter portion of the Preface to the “Records of Ancient Matters” is the only documentary authority for the origin of the work. It likewise explains its scope. But though in so doing the author descends to a more matter-of-fact style than the high-sounding Chinese phrases and elaborate allusions with which he had set forth, still his meaning may be found to lack somewhat of clearness, and it will be as well to have the facts put into language more intelligible to the European student. This having already been done by Mr. Satow in his paper on the “[[Transactions of the Asiatic Society of Japan/Series 1/Volume 3/Part 1/The Revival of Pure Shintô|Revival of Pure Shintô]],” it will be best simply to quote his words. They are as follows: “The Emperor Temmu, at what portion of his reign is not mentioned, lamenting that the records possessed by the chief families contained many errors, resolved to take steps to preserve the true traditions from oblivion. He therefore had the records carefully examined, compared, and weeded of their faults. There happened to be in his household a person of marvellous memory named Hiyeda no Are, who could repeat without mistake the contents of any document he had ever seen, and never forgot anything that he had heard. Temmu Tennô took the pains to instruct this person in the genuine traditions and ‘old language of former ages,’' and to make him repeat them until he had the whole by heart. ‘Before the undertaking was completed,’ which probably means before it could be committed to writing, the Emperor died, and for twenty-five years Are’s memory was the sole depository of what afterwards received the title of Kojiki or Furu-koto-bumi as it is read by Motoori. At the end of this interval the Empress Gemmiô ordered Yasumaro to write it down from the

mouth of Are, which accounts for the completion of the manuscript in so short a time as four months and a half. Are’s age at this date is not stated, but as he was twenty-eight years of age some time in the reign of Temmu Tennô, it could not possibly have been more than sixty-eight, while taking into account the previous order of Temmu Tennô in 681 for the compilation of a history, and the statement that he was engaged on the composition of the Kojiki at the time of his death in 686, it would not be unreasonable to conclude that it belongs to about the last year of his reign, in which case Are was only fifty-three in 711.”

The previous order of the Emperor Tem-mu mentioned in the above extract is usually supposed to have resulted in the compilation of a history which was early lost. But Hirata gives reasons for supposing that this and the project of the “Records of Ancient Matters” were identical. If this opinion be accepted, the “Records,” while the oldest existing Japanese book, are, not the third, but the second historical work of which mention has been preserved, one such having been compiled in the year 620, but lost in a fire in the year 645. It will thus be seen that it is rather hard to say whom we should designate as the author of the work. The Emperor Tem-mu, Hiyeda no Are, and Yasumaro may all three lay claim to that title. The question, however, is of no importance to us, and the share taken by Are may well have been exaggerated in the telling. What seems to remain as the residue of fact is that the plan of a purely national history originated with the Emperor Tem-mu and was finally carried out under his successor by Yasumaro, one of the Court Nobles.

Fuller evidence and confirmatory evidence from other sources as to the origin of our “Records” would doubtless be very acceptable. But the very small number of readers and writers at that early date, and the almost simultaneous compilation of a history (the “Chronicles of Japan”) which was better calculated to hit the taste of the age, make the absence of such evidence almost unavoidable. In any case, and only noticing in passing the fact that Japan was never till quite recent years noted for such wholesale literary forgeries (for Motowori’s condemnation of the “Chronicles of Old Matters of Former Ages” has been considered rash by later scholars),—it cannot be too much emphasized that in this

instance authenticity is sufficiently proved by internal evidence. It is hard to believe that any forger living later than the eighth century of our era should have been so well able to discard the Chinese “padding” to the old traditions, which, after the acceptance by the Court of the “Chronicles of Japan,” had come to be generally regarded as an integral portion of those very traditions; and it is more unlikely still that he should have invented a style so little calculated to bring his handiwork into repute. He would either have written in fair Chinese, like the mass of early Japanese prose writers (and his Preface shows that he could do so if he were so minded); or, if the tradition of there having been a history written in the native tongue had reached him, he would have made his composition unmistakably Japanese in form by arranging the characters in the order demanded by Japanese syntax, and by the consistent use of characters employed phonetically to denote particles and terminations, after the fashion followed in the Rituals, and developed (apparently before the close of the ninth century) into what is technically known as the “Mixed Phonetic Style” (Kana-mazhiri), which has remained ever since as the most convenient vehicle for writing the language. As it is, his quasi-Chinese construction, which breaks down every now and then to be helped up again by a few Japanese words written phonetically, is surely the first clumsy attempt at combining two divergent elements. What however is simply incredible is that, if the supposed forger lived even only a hundred years later than A.D. 712, he should so well have imitated or divined the archaisms of that early period. For the eighth century of our era was a great turning point in the Japanese language, the Archaic Dialect being then replaced by the Classical; and as the Chinese language and literature were alone thenceforward considered worthy the student’s attention, there was no means of keeping up an acquaintance with the diction of earlier reigns, neither do we find the poets of the time ever attempting to adorn their verse with obsolete phraseology. That was an affectation reserved for a later epoch, when the diffusion of books rendered it possible. The poets of the seventh, eighth, and ninth centuries apparently wrote as they spoke; and the test of language alone would almost allow of our arranging their compositions half century by half century, even without the dates which are given in many instances in the “Collection

of a Myriad Leaves” and in the “Collection of Songs Ancient and Modern,”—the first two collections of poems published by imperial decree in the middle of the eighth, and at the commencement of the tenth, century respectively.

The above remarks are meant to apply more especially to the occasional Japanese words,—all of them Archaic,—which, as mentioned above, are used from time to time in the prose text of the “Records,” to help out the author’s meaning and to preserve names whose exact pronunciation he wished handed down. That he should have invented the Songs would be too monstrous a supposition for any one to entertain, even if we had not many of the same and other similar ones preserved in the pages of the “Chronicles of Japan,” a work which was undoubtedly completed in A.D. 720. The history of the Japanese language is too well known to us, we can trace its development and decay in too many documents reaching from the eighth century to the present time, for it to be possible to entertain the notion that the latest of these Songs, which have been handed down with minute care in a syllabic transcription, is posterior to the first half of the eighth century, while the majority must be ascribed to an earlier, though uncertain, date. If we refer the greater number of them in their present form to the sixth century, and allow a further antiquity of one or two centuries to others more ancient in sentiment and in grammatical usage, we shall probably be making a moderate estimate. It is an estimate, moreover, which obtains confirmation from the fact that the first notice we have of the use of writing in Japan dates from early in the fifth century; for it is natural to suppose that the Songs believed to have been composed by the gods and heroes of antiquity should have been among the first things to be written down, while the reverence in which they were held would in some cases cause them to be transcribed exactly as tradition had bequeathed them, even if unintelligible or nearly so, while in others the same feeling would lead to the correction of what were supposed to be errors or inelegancies. Finally it may be well to observe that the authenticity of the “Records” has never been doubted, though, as has already been stated, some of the native commentators have not hesitated to charge with spuriousness another of their esteemed ancient histories. Now it is unlikely that, in the war which has been waged between

the partisans of the “Records” and those of the “Chronicles,” some flaw in the former’s title to genuineness and to priority should not have been discovered and pointed out if it existed.

During the Middle Ages, when no native Japanese works were printed, and not many others excepting the Chinese Classics and Buddhist Scriptures, the “Records of Ancient Matters” remained in manuscript in the hands of the Shintō priesthood. They were first printed in the year 1644, at the time when, peace having been finally restored to the country and the taste for reading having become diffused, the great mass of the native literature first began to emerge from the manuscript state. This very rare edition (which was reprinted in fac-simile in 1798) is indispensable to anyone who would make of the “Records” a special study. The next edition was by a Shintō priest, Deguchi Nobuyoshi, and appeared in 1687. It has marginal notes of no great value, and several emendations of the text. The first-mentioned of these two editions is commonly called the “Old Printed Edition” (舊印木), but has no title beyond that of the original work,—“Records of Ancient Matters.” The name of the other is “Records of Ancient Matters with Marginal Readings” (鼇頭古事記). Each is in three volumes. They were succeeded in 1789–1822 by Motowori’s great edition, entitled “Exposition of the Records of Ancient Matters” (古事記傳). This, which is perhaps the most admirable work of which Japanese erudition can boast, consists of forty-four large volumes, fifteen of which are devoted to the elucidation of the first volume of the original, seventeen to the second, ten to the third, and the rest to prolegomena, indexes, etc. To the ordinary student this Commentary will furnish all that he requires, and the charm of Motowori’s style will be found to shed a glamour over the driest parts of the original work. The author’s judgment only seems to fail him occasionally when confronted with the most difficult or corrupt passages, or with such as might be construed in a sense unfavourable to his predilections as an ardent Shintoist. He frequently quotes the opinions of his master Mabuchi, whose own treatise on this subject is so rare that the present writer has never seen a copy of it, nor does the public library of Tōkiō possess one. Later and less important editions are the “Records of Ancient Matters with the Ancient Reading” (古訓古事記), a reprint by one of Motowori’s pupils of the Chinese text and

of his Master’s Kana reading of it without his Commentary, and useful for reference, though the title is a misnomer, 1803; the “Records of Ancient Matters with Marginal Notes” (古事記標註), by Murakami Tadanori, 1874; the “Records of Ancient Matters in the Syllabic Character” (假名古事記), by Sakata no Kaneyasu, 1874, a misleading book, as it gives the modern Kana reading with its arbitrarily inserted Honorifics and other departures from the actual text, as the ipsissima verba of the original work; the “Records of Ancient Matters Revised” (校正古事記), by Uyematsu Shigewoka, 1875. All these editions are in three volumes, and the “Records of Ancient Matters with the Ancient Reading” has also been reprinted in one volume on beautiful thin paper. Another in four volumes by Fujihara no Masaoki, 1871, entitled the “Records of Ancient Matters in the Divine Character” (神字古事記), is a real curiosity of literature, though otherwise of no value. In it the editor has been at the pains of reproducing the whole work, according to its modern Kana reading, in that adaptation of the Korean alphabetic writing which some modern Japanese authors have supposed to be characters of peculiar age and sanctity, used by the ancient gods of their country and named “Divine Characters” accordingly.

Besides these actual editions of the “Records of Ancient Matters,” there is a considerable mass of literature bearing less directly on the same work, and all of which cannot be here enumerated. It may be sufficient to mention the “Correct Account of the Divine Age” (神代正語) by Motowori, 8 Vols. 1789, and a commentary thereon entitled “Tokiha-Gusa” (神代正語常盤草) by Wosada Tominobu, from which the present translator has borrowed a few ideas; the “Sources of the Ancient Histories” (古史徴) and its sequel entitled “Exposition of the Ancient Histories” (古史傅), by Hirata Atsutane, begun printing in 1819,—works which are specially admirable from a philological point of view, and in which the student will find the solution of not a few difficulties which even to Motowori had been insuperable; the “Idzu no Chi-Waki” (稜威道別), by Tachibana no Moribe, begun printing in 1851,

a useful commentary on the “Chronicles of Japan”; the “Idzu no Koto-Waki” (稜威語別), by the same author, begun printing in 1847, an invaluable help to a comprehension of the Songs contained in both the “Records” and the “Chronicles”; the “Examination of Difficult Words” (難語考, also entitled 山彦册子), in 3 Vols., 1831, a sort of dictionary of specially perplexing terms and phrases, in which light is thrown on many a verbal crux and much originality of thought displayed; and the “Perpetual Commentary on the Chronicles of Japan” (日本書記通證), by Tanigaha Shisei, 1762, a painstaking work written in the Chinese language, 23 Vols. Neither must the “Kō Gan Shō” (厚顔抄), a commentary on the Songs contained in the “Chronicles” and “Records” composed by the Buddhist priest Keichiū, who may be termed the father of the native school of criticism, be forgotten. It is true that most of Keichiū’s judgments on doubtful points have been superseded by the more perfect erudition of later days; but some few of his interpretations may still be followed with advantage. The “Kō Gan Shō,” which was finished in the year 1691, has never been printed. It is from these and a few others and from the standard dictionaries and general books of reference, such as the “Japanese Words Classified and Explained” (和名類聚鈔), the “Catalogue of Family Names” (姓氏録), and (coming down to more modern times) Arawi Hakuseki’s “Tōga” (東雅), that the translator has derived most assistance. The majority of the useful quotations from the dictionaries, etc., having been incorporated by Motowori in his “Commentary,” it has not often been necessary to mention them by name in the notes to the translation. At the same time the translator must express his conviction that, as the native authorities cannot possibly be dispensed with, so also must their assertions be carefully weighed and only accepted with discrimination by the critical European investigator. He must also thank Mr. Tachibana no Chimori, grandson of the eminent scholar Tachibana no Moribe, for kindly allowing him to make use of the manuscript of the unpublished portions of the “Idzu no Chi-Waki” and the “Idzu no Koto-Waki,” works indispensable to the comprehension of the more difficult portion of the text of the “Records.” To Mr. Satow he is indebted for the English and Latin equivalents of the Japanese botanical names, to Capt. Blakiston and Mr. Namiye Motokichi for similar assistance with regard to the zoological names.

Comparing what has been said above with what the author tells us in his Preface, the nature of the text, so far as language is concerned, will be easily understood. The Songs are written phonetically, syllable by syllable, in what is technically known as Manyō-Gana, i.e. entire Chinese characters used to represent sound and not sense. The rest of the text, which is in prose, is very poor Chinese, capable (owing to the ideographic nature of the Chinese written character), of being read off into Japanese. It is also not only full of “Japonisms,” but irregularly interspersed with characters which turn the text into nonsense for a Chinaman, as they are used phonetically to represent certain Japanese words, for which the author could not find suitable Chinese equivalents. These phonetically written words prove, even apart from the notice in the Preface, that the text was never meant to be read as pure Chinese. The probability is that (sense being considered more important than sound) it was read partly in Chinese and partly in Japanese, according to a mode which has since been systematized and has become almost universal in this country even in the reading of genuine Chinese texts. The modern school of Japanese literati, who push their hatred of everything foreign to the bounds of fanaticism, contend however that this, their most ancient and revered book, was from the first intended to be read exclusively into Japanese. Drawing from the other sources of our knowledge of the Archaic Dialect, Motowori has even hazarded a restoration of the Japanese reading of the entire prose text, in the whole of which not a single Chinese word is used, excepting for the titles of the two Chinese books (the “Confucian Analects” and the “Thousand Character Essay”) which are said to have been brought over to Japan in the reign of the Emperor Ō-jin, and for the names of a Korean King and of three or four other Koreans and Chinese. Whatever may be their opinion on the question at issue, most European scholars, to

whom the superior sanctity of the Japanese language is not an article of faith, will probably agree with Mr. Aston in denying to this conjectural restoration the credit of representing the genuine words into which Japanese eighth century students of history read off the text of the “Records.”
II.

To the translator the question above mooted is not one of great importance. The text itself must form the basis of his version, and not any one’s,—not even Motowori’s,—private and particular reading of it. For this reason none of the Honorifics which Motowori inserts as prefixes to nouns and terminations to verbs have been taken any notice of, but the original has been followed, character by character, with as great fidelity as was attainable. The author too has his Honorifics; but he does not use them so plentifully or so regularly as it pleases Motowori to represent him as having intended to do. On the other hand, Motowori’s occasional emendations of the text may generally be accepted. They rarely extend to more than single words; and the errors in the earlier editions may frequently be shown to have arisen from careless copying of characters originally written, not in the square, but in the cursive form. The translator has separately considered each case where various readings occur, and has mentioned them in the Notes when they seemed of sufficient importance. In some few cases he has preferred a reading not approved by Motowori, but he always mentions Motowori’s reading in a Foot-note.

The main body of the text contains but little to perplex any one who has made a special study of the early Japanese writings, and it has already been noticed that there is an admirable exegetical literature at the student’s command. With the Songs embedded in the prose text the case is different, as some of them are among the most difficult things in the language, and the commentators frequently arrive at most discordant interpretations of the obscurer passages. In the present version particulars concerning each Song have, except in a very few cases where

comment appeared superfluous, been given in a Foot-note, the general sense being usually first indicated, the meaning of particular expressions then explained, and various opinions mentioned when they seemed worthy of notice. Besides one or two terms of Japanese grammar, the only technical knowledge with which the readers of the Notes are necessarily credited is that of the use by the Japanese poets of what have been styled Pillow-Words, Pivots, and Prefaces; and those Pillow-Words which are founded on a jeu-de-mots or are of doubtful signification form, with the one exception mentioned below, the only case where anything contained in the original is omitted from the English version. After some consideration, it has been deemed advisable to print in an Appendix the Japanese text of all the Songs, transliterated into Roman. Students will thus find it easier to form their own opinion on the interpretation of doubtful passages. The importance likewise of these Songs, as the most ancient specimens of Altaïc speech, makes it right to give them as much publicity as possible.

The text of the “Records” is, like many other Japanese texts, completely devoid of breaks corresponding to the chapters and paragraphs into which European works are divided. With the occasional exception of a pause after a catalogue of gods or princes, and of notes inserted in smaller type and generally containing genealogies or indicating the pronunciation of certain words, the whole story, prose and verse, runs on from beginning to end with no interruptions other than those marked by the conclusion of Vol. I and by the death of each emperor in Vols. II and III. Faithfulness however scarcely seems to demand more than this statement; for a similarly continuous printing of the English version would attain no end but that of making a very dry piece of reading more arduous still. Moreover there are certain traditional names by which the various episodes of the history of the so-called “Divine Age” are known to the native scholars, and according to which the text of Vol. I may naturally be divided. The reigns of the emperors form a similar foundation for the analysis of Vols. II and III, which contain the the account of the “Human Age.” It has been thought that it would be well to mark such natural

divisions by the use of numbered Sections with marginal headings. The titles proposed by Motowori in the Prolegomena to his Commentaries have been adopted with scarcely any alteration in the case of Vol. I. In Vols. II and III, where his sections mostly embrace the whole reign of an emperor, and the titles given by him to each Section consists only of the name of the palace where each emperor is said to have resided, there is less advantage in following him; for those Sections are often inordinately long, and their titles occasionally misleading and always inconvenient for purposes of reference, as the Japanese emperors are commonly known, not by the names of their places of residence, but by their “canonical names.” Motowori, as an ardent nationalist, of course rejected these “canonical names,” because they were first applied to the Japanese emperors at a comparatively late date in imitation of Chinese usage. But to a foreigner this need be no sufficient reason for discarding them. The Sections in the translation of Vols. II and III have therefore been obtained by breaking up the longer reigns into appropriate portions; and in such Sections, as also in the Foot-notes, the emperors are always mentioned by their “canonical names.” The Vol. mentioned in brackets on every right-hand page is that of Motowori’s Commentary which treats of the Section contained in that page.

The Notes translated from the original are indented, and are printed small when they are in small type in the Japanese text. Those only which give directions for pronouncing certain characters phonetically have been omitted, as they have no significance when the original tongue and method of writing are exchanged for foreign vehicles of thought and expression. The Songs have likewise been indented for the sake of clearness, and each one printed as a separate paragraph. The occasionally unavoidable insertion in the translation of important words not occurring in the Japanese text has been indicated by printing such words

within square brackets. The translator’s Notes, which figure at the bottom of each page, do not aim at anything more than the exegesis of the actual text. To illustrate its subject-matter from other sources, as Motowori does, and to enlarge on all the subjects connected with Japanese antiquity which are  merely alluded to in a single phrase, would require several more volumes the size of this one, many years of labour on the part of the investigator, and an unusually large stock of patience on the reader’s part. The Notes terminate with the death of the Emperor Ken-zō, after which the text ceases to offer any interest, except as a comment on the genealogies given in the “Chronicles of Japan.”

Without forgetting the fact that so-called equivalent terms in two languages rarely quite cover each other, and that it may therefore be necessary in some cases to render one Japanese word by two or three different English words according to the context, the translator has striven to keep such diversity within the narrowest limits, as it tends to give a false impression of the original, implying that it possesses a versatility of thought which is indeed characteristic of Modern Europe, but not at all of Early Japan. With reference to this point a certain class of words must be mentioned, as the English translation is unavoidably defective in their case, owing to the fact of our language not possessing sufficiently close synonyms for them. They are chiefly the names of titles, and are the following:—

Agata-no-atuhe | roughly rendered by | Departmental Suzerain.
Agata-nushi |    | Departmental Lord.
Asomi (Asoñ) |    | Court Noble.
Atahe |    | Suzerain.
Hiko |    | Prince.
Hime |    | Princess.
Inaki |    | Territorial Lord.
Iratsuko |    | Lord.
Iratsume |    | Lady.
Kami |    | Deity.
Kimi |    | Duke.
Ma |    | True.
Miko (王) |    | King.

Mi ko (御子) |    | August Child.
Mikoto |    | Augustness.
Miyatsuko |    | Ruler.
Murazhi |    | Chief.
Omi |    | Grandee.
Sukune |    | Noble.
colspan=2|Wake (in the names of human beings) | Lord.

It must be understood that no special significance is to be attached to the use of such words as “Duke,” “Suzerain,” etc. They are merely, so to speak, labels by which titles that are distinct in the original are sought to be kept distinct in the translation. Many of them also are used as that species of hereditary titular designation which the translator has ventured to call the “gentile name.” Where possible, indeed, the etymological meaning of the Japanese word has been preserved. Thus omi seems to be rightly derived by Motowori from oho-mi, “great body”; and “grandee” is therefore the nearest English equivalent. Similarly murazhi, “chief,” is a corruption of two words signifying “master of a tribe.” On the other hand, both the etymology and the precise import of the title of wake are extremely doubtful. Hiko and hime again, if they really come from hi ko, “sun-child” and hi me, “sun-female” (or “fire-child” and “fire-female”), have wandered so far from their origin as, even in Archaic times, to have been nothing more than Honorific appellations, corresponding in a loose fashion to the English words “prince and princess,” or “lord and lady,”—in some cases perhaps meaning scarcely more than “youth and maiden.”

The four words kami, ma, miko and mikoto alone call for special notice; and ma may be disposed of first. It is of uncertain origin, but identified by the native philologists with the perpetually recurring honorific mi, rendered “august.” As, when written ideographically, it is always represented by the Chinese character 眞, the translator renders it in English by “true”; but it must be understood that this word has no force beyond that of an Honorific.

Mikoto, rendered “Augustness,” is properly a compound, mi koto,

“august thing.” It is used as a title, somewhat after the fashion of our words “Majesty” and “Highness,” being suffixed to the names of exalted human personages, and also of gods and goddesses. For the sake of clearness in the English translation this title is prefixed and used with the possessive pronoun, thus: Yamato-Take-no-Mikoto, His Augustness Yamato-Take.

With regard to the title read miko by the native commentators, it is represented in two ways in the Chinese text. When a young prince is denoted by it, we find the characters 御子, “august child,” reminding us of the Spanish title of infante. But in other cases it is written with the single character 王, “King,” and it may be questioned whether the reading of it as miko is not arbitrary. Many indications lead us to suppose that in Early Japan something similar to the feudal system, which again obtained during the Middle Ages, was in force; and if so, then some of these “kings,” may have been kings indeed after a fashion; and to degrade their title, as do the modern commentators, to that of “prince” is an anachronism. In any case the safest plan, if we would not help to obscure this interesting political question, is to adhere to the proper signification of the character in the text, and that character is 王, “King.”

Of all the words for which it is hard to find a suitable English equivalent, Kami is the hardest. Indeed there is no English word which renders it with any near approach to exactness. If therefore it is here rendered by the word “deity” (“deity” being preferred to “god” because it includes superior beings of both sexes), it must be clearly understood that the word “deity” is taken in a sense not sanctioned by any English dictionary; for kami, and “deity” or “god,” only correspond to each other in a very rough manner. The proper meaning of the word “kami” is “top,” or “above”; and it is still constantly so used. For this reason it has the secondary sense of “hair of the head;” and only the hair on the top of the head,—not the hair on the face,—is so designated. Similarly the Government, in popular phraseology, is O Kami, literally “the honorably above”; and down to a few years ago Kami was the name of a certain titular

rank. Thus it may be understood how the word was naturally applied to superiors in general, and especially to those more than human superiors whom we call “gods.” A Japanese, to whom the origin of the word is patent, and who uses it every day in contexts by no means divine, does not receive from the word Kami the same impression of awe which is produced on the more earnest European mind by the words “deity” and “god,” with their very different associations. In using the word “deity,” therefore, to translate the Japanese term Kami we must, so to speak, bring it down from the heights to which Western thought has raised it. In fact Kami does not mean much more than “superior.” This subject will be noticed again in  of the present Introduction; but so far as the word Kami itself is concerned, these remarks may suffice.

To conclude this Section, the translator must advert to his treatment of Proper Names, and he feels that he must plead guilty to a certain amount of inconsistency on this head. Indeed the treatment of Proper Names is always an embarrassment, partly because it is often difficult to determine what is a Proper Name, and partly because in translating a text into a foreign tongue Proper Names, whose meanings are evident in the original and perhaps have a bearing on the story, lose their significance; and the translator has therefore first of all to decide whether the name is really a Proper Name at all or simply a description of the personage or place, and next whether he will sacrifice the meaning because the word is used as a name, or preserve the original name and thus fail to render the meaning,—a meaning which may be of importance as revealing the channels in which ancient thought flowed. For instance Oho-kuni-nushi-no-kami, “the Deity Master of the Great Land,” is clearly nothing more than a description of the god in question, who had several other names, and the reason of whoso adoption of this special one was that the sovereignty of the “Great Land,” i.e. of Japan (or rather of Idzumo and the neighbouring provinces in north-western Japan), was ceded to him by another god, whom he deceived and whose daughter he ran away with. Again Toyo-ashi-hara-no-chi-aki-no-naga-i-ho-aki-no-midzu-ho-no-kuni, which signifies “the Luxuriant

, the Land of Fresh Rice-ears,—of a Thousand Autumns,—of Long Five Hundred Autumns” cannot possibly be regarded as more than an honorific description of Japan. Such a catalogue of words could never have been used as a name. On the other hand it is plain that Tema was simply the proper name of a certain mountain, because there is no known word in Archaic Japanese to which it can with certainty be traced. The difficulty is with the intermediate cases,—the cases of those names which are but partly comprehensible or partly applicable to their bearers; and the difficulty is one of which there would seem to be no satisfactory solution possible. The translator may therefore merely state that in Vol. I of these “Records,” where an unusual number of the Proper Names have a bearing on the legends related in the text, he has, wherever feasible, translated all those which are borne by persons, whether human or divine. In the succeeding Volumes he has not done so, nor has he, except in a very small number of instances, translated the Proper Names of places in any of the three volumes. In order, however, to convey all the needful information both as to sound and as to sense, the Japanese original is always indicated in a Foot-note when the translation has the name in English, and vice versâ, while all doubtful etymologies are discussed.
III.

It will have been gathered from what has been already said, and it is indeed generally known, that the “Records of Ancient Matters” do not stand alone. To say nothing of the “Chronicles of Old Matters of Former Ages,” whose genuineness is disputed, there is another undoubtedly authentic work with which no student of Japanese antiquity can dispense. It is entitled “[[Nihongi|Nihon-Gi]],” i.e., “Chronicles of Japan,” and is second only in value to the “Records,” which it has always excelled in popular favour. It was completed in A.D. 720, eight years after the “Records of Ancient Matters” had been presented to the Empress Gem-miyō.

The scope of the two histories is the same; but the language of the later one and its manner of treating the national traditions stand in notable contrast to the unpretending simplicity of the elder work. Not

only is the style (excepting in the Songs, which had to be left as they were or sacrificed altogether) completely Chinese,—in fact to a great extent a cento of well-worn Chinese phrases,—but the subject-matter is touched up, re-arranged, and polished, so as to make the work resemble a Chinese history so far as that was possible. Chinese philosophical speculations and moral precepts are intermingled with the cruder traditions that had descended from Japanese antiquity. Thus the naturalistic Japanese account of the creation is ushered in by a few sentences which trace the origin of all things to Yin and Yang (陰陽), the Passive and Active Essences of Chinese philosophy. The legendary Emperor Jim-mu is credited with speeches made up of quotations from the “[[Book of Changes|Yi Ching]],” the “[[Book of Rites|Li Chi]],” and other standard Chinese works. A few of the most childish of the national traditions are omitted, for instance the story of the “White Hare of Inaba,” that of the gods obtaining counsel of a toad, and that of the hospitality which a speaking mouse extended to the deity Master-of-the Great-Land. Sometimes the original tradition is simply softened down or explained away. A notable instance of this occurs in the account of the visit of the deity Izanagi to Hades, whither he goes in quest of his dead wife, and among other things has to scale the “Even Pass (or Hill) of Hades.” In the tradition preserved in the “Records”" and indeed even in the “Chronicles,” this pass or hill is mentioned as a literal geographical fact. But the compiler of the latter work, whose object it was to appear and to make his forefathers appear, as reasonable as a learned Chinese, adds a gloss to the effect that “One account says that the Even Hill of Hades is no distinct place, but simply the moment when breathing ceases at the time of death”;—not a happy guess certainly, for this pass is mentioned in connection with Izanagi’s return to the land of the living. In short we may say of this work what was said of the Septuagint,—that it rationalizes.

Perhaps it will be asked, how can it have come to pass that a book

in which the national traditions are thus unmistakably tampered with, and which is moreover written in Chinese instead of in the native tongue, has enjoyed such a much greater share of popularity than the more genuine work?

The answer lies on the surface: the concessions made to Chinese notions went far towards satisfying minds trained on Chinese models, while at the same time the reader had his respect for the old native emperors increased, and was enabled to preserve some sort of belief in the native gods. People are rarely quite logical in such matters, particularly in an early stage of society; and difficulties are glossed over rather than insisted upon. The beginning of the world, for instance, or, to use Japanese phraseology, the “separation of heaven and earth” took place a long time ago; and perhaps, although there could of course be no philosophical doubt as to the cause of this event having been the interaction of the Passive and Active Essences, it might also somehow be true that Izanngi and Izanami (the “MaleWho-Invites” and the “Female-Who-Invites”) were the progenitor and progenitrix of Japan. Who knows but what in them the formative principles may not have been embodied, represented, or figured forth after a fashion not quite determined, but none the less real? As a matter of fact, the two deities in question have often been spoken of in Japanese books under such designations as the “Yin Deity” and the “Yang Deity,” and in his Chinese Preface the very compiler of these “Records” lends his sanction to the use of such phraseology, though, if we look closely at the part taken by the goddess in the legend narrated in Sect. IV, it would seem but imperfectly applicable. If again early sovereigns, such as the Empress Jin-gō, address their troops in sentences cribbed from the “[[Book of Documents|Shu Ching]],” or, like the Emperor Kei-kō, describe the Ainos in terms that would only suit the pages of a Chinese topographer,—both these personages being supposed to have lived prior to the opening up of intercourse with the continent of Asia,—the anachronism was partly hidden by the fact of the work which thus recorded their doings being itself written in the Chinese language, where such phrases only sounded natural. In some instances, too, the Chinese usage had so completely

superseded the native one as to cause the latter to have been almost forgotten excepting by the members of the Shintō priesthood. This happened in the case of the Chinese method of divination by means of a tortoise-shell, whose introduction caused the elder native custom of divination through the shoulder-blade of a deer to fall into desuetude. Whether indeed this native custom itself may not perhaps be traced back to still earlier continental influence is another question. So far as any documentary information reaches, divination through the shoulder-blade of a deer was the most ancient Japanese method of ascertaining the will of the gods. The use of the Chinese sexagenary cycle for counting years, months, and days is another instance of the imported usage having become so thoroughly incorporated with native habits of mind as to make the anachronism of employing it when speaking of a period confessedly anterior to the introduction of continental civilization pass unnoticed. As for the (to a modern European) grotesque notion of pretending to give the precise months and days of events supposed to have occurred a thousand years before the date assigned to the introduction of astronomical instruments, of observatories, and even of the art of writing, that is another of those inconsistencies which, while lying on the very surface, yet so easily escape the uncritical Oriental mind. Semi-civilized people tire of asking questions, and to question antiquity, which fills so great a place in their thoughts, is the last thing that would occur to any of their learned men, whose mental attitude is characteristically represented by Confucius when he calls himself “A transmitter and not a maker, believing in and loving the ancients.” As regards the question of language, standard Chinese soon became easier to understand than Archaic Japanese, as the former alone was taught in the schools, and the native

language changed rapidly during the century or two that followed the diffusion of the foreign tongue and civilization. We have only to call to mind the relative facility to most of ourselves of a Latin book and of one written in Early English. Of course, as soon as the principles of the Japanese Renaissance had taken hold of men’s minds in the eighteenth century, the more genuine, more national work assumed its proper place in the estimation of students. But the uncouthness of the style according to modern ideas, and the greater amount of explanation of all sorts that is required in order to make the “Records of Ancient Matters” intelligible, must always prevent them from attaining to the popularity of the sister history. Thus, though published almost simultaneously, the tendencies of the two works were very different, and their fate has differed accordingly.

To the European student the chief value of the “Chronicles of Japan” lies in the fact that their author, in treating of the so-called “Divine Age,” often gives a number of various forms of the same legend, under the heading of “One account says,” suffixed in the form of a note to the main text. No phrase is more commonly met with in later treatises on Japanese history than this,—“One account in the ‘Chronicles of Japan’ says,” and it will be met with occasionally in the Foot-notes to the present translation. There are likewise instances of the author of the “Chronicles” having preserved, either in the text or in “One account,” traditions omitted by the compiler of the “Records.” Such are, for instance, the quaint legend invented to explain the fact that the sun and moon do not shine simultaneously, and the curious

development of the legend of the expulsion of the deity Susa-no-wo (“Impetuous Male”), telling us of the hospitality which was refused to him by the other gods when he appeared before them to beg for shelter. Many of the Songs, too, in the “Chronicles” are different from those in the “Records,” and make a precious addition to our vocabulary of Archaic Japanese. The prose text, likewise, contains in the shape of notes, numbers of readings by which the pronunciation of words written ideographically, or the meaning of words written phonetically in the “Records” may be ascertained. Finally the “Chronicles” give us the annals of seventy-two years not comprised in the plan of the “Records,” by carrying down to A.D. 700 the history which in the “Records” stops at the year 628. Although therefore it is a mistake to assert, as some have done, that the “Chronicles of Japan” must be placed at the head of all the Japanese historical works, their assistance can in no wise be dispensed with by the student of Japanese mythology and of the Japanese language.
IV.

The Japanese of the mythical period, as pictured in the legends preserved by the compiler of the “Records of Ancient Matters,” were a race who had long emerged from the savage state, and had attained to a high level of barbaric skill. The Stone Age was forgotten by them—or nearly so,—and the evidence points to their never having passed through a genuine Bronze Age, though the knowledge of bronze was at a later period introduced from the neighbouring continent.

They used iron for manufacturing spears, swords, and knives of various shapes, and likewise for the more peaceful purpose of making hooks wherewith to angle, or to fasten the doors of their huts. Their other warlike and hunting implements (besides traps and gins, which appear to have been used equally for catching beasts and birds and for destroying human enemies) were bows and arrows, spears and elbow-pads,—the latter seemingly of skin, while special allusion is made to the fact that the arrows were feathered. Perhaps clubs should be added to the list. Of the bows and arrows, swords and knives, there is perpetual mention; but nowhere do we hear of the tools with which they were manufactured, and there is the same remarkable silence regarding such widely spread domestic implements as the saw and the axe. We hear, however, of the pestle and mortar, of the fire-drill, of the wedge, of the sickle, and of the shuttle used in weaving.

Navigation seems to have been in a very elementary stage. Indeed the art of sailing was, as we know from the classical literature of the country, but little practised in Japan even so late as the middle of the tenth century of our era subsequent to the general diffusion of Chinese civilization, though rowing and punting are often mentioned by the early poets. In one passage of the “Records” and in another of the “Chronicles,” mention is made of a “two-forked boat” used on inland pools or lakes; but, as a rule, in the earlier portions of those works, we read only of people going to sea or being sent down from heaven in water-proof baskets without oars, and reaching their destination not through any efforts of their own, but through supernatural interposition.

To what we should call towns or villages very little reference is

made anywhere in the “Records” or in that portion of the “Chronicles” which contains the account of the so-called “Divine Age.” But from what we learn incidentally, it would seem that the scanty population was chiefly distributed in small hamlets and isolated dwellings along the coast and up the course of the larger streams. Of house-building there is frequent mention,—especially of the building of palaces or temples for sovereigns or gods,—the words “palace” and “temple” being (it should be mentioned) represented in Japanese by the same term. Sometimes, in describing the construction of such a sacred dwelling, the author of the “Records,” abandoning his usual flat and monotonous style, soars away on poetic wings, as when, for instance, he tells how the monarch of Idzumo, on abdicating in favour of the Sun-Goddess’s descendant, covenanted that the latter should “make stout his temple pillars on the nethermost rock-bottom, and make high the cross-beams to the plain of High Heaven.” It must not, however, be inferred from such language that these so-called palaces and temples were of very gorgeous and imposing aspect. The more exact notices to be culled from the ancient Shintō Rituals (which are but little posterior to the “Records” and in no wise contradict the inferences to be drawn from the latter) having been already summarized by Mr. Satow, it may be as well to quote that gentleman’s words. He says: “The palace of the Japanese sovereign was a wooden hut, with its pillars planted in the ground, instead of being erected upon broad flat stones as in modern buildings. The whole frame-work, consisting of posts, beams, rafters, door-posts and window-frames, was tied together with cords made by twisting the long fibrous stems of climbing plants, such as Pueraria Thunbergiana (kuzu) and Wistaria Sinensis (fuji). The floor must have been low down, so that the occupants of the building, as they squatted or lay on their mats, were exposed to the stealthy attacks of venomous snakes, which were probably far more numerous in the earliest ages when the country was for the most part uncultivated, than at the present day There seems some reason to think that the yuka, here translated floor, was originally nothing but a couch which ran round the sides of the hut, the rest

of the space being simply a mud-floor, and that the size of the couch was gradually increased until it occupied the whole interior. The rafters projected upward beyond the ridge-pole, crossing each other as is seen in the roofs of modern Shiñ-tau temples, whether their architecture be in conformity with early traditions (in which case all the rafters are so crossed) or modified in accordance with more advanced principles of construction, and the crossed rafters retained only as ornaments at the two ends of the ridge. The roof was thatched, and perhaps had a gable at each end, with a hole to allow the smoke of the wood-fire to escape, so that it was possible for birds flying in and perching on the beams overhead, to defile the food, or the fire with which it was cooked.” To this description it need only be added that fences were in use, and that the wooden doors, sometimes fastened by means of hooks, resembled those with which we are familiar in Europe rather than the sliding, screen-like doors of modern Japan. The windows seem to have been mere holes. Rugs of skins and rush matting were occasionally brought in to sit upon, and we even hear once or twice of “silk rugs” being used for the same purpose by the noble and wealthy.

The habits of personal cleanliness which so pleasantly distinguish the modern Japanese from their neighbours in continental Asia, though less fully developed than at present, would seem to have existed in the germ in early times, as we read more than once of bathing in rivers, and are told of bathing-women being specially attached to the person of a certain imperial infant. Lustrations, too, formed part of the religious practices of the race. Latrines are mentioned several times. They would appear to have been situated away from the houses and to have generally been placed over a running stream, whence doubtless the name for latrine in the Archaic Dialect,—kaha-ya, i. e. “river-house.” A well-known Japanese classic of the tenth century, the “Yamato Tales,” tells us indeed that “in older days the people dwelt in houses raised on platforms built out on the river Ikuta,” and goes on to relate a story which presupposes such a method of architecture. A passage in the account

of the reign of the Emperor Jim-mu which occurs both in the “Records” and in the “Chronicles,” and another in the reign of the Emperor Sui-nin occurring in the “Records” only, might be interpreted so as to support this statement. But both are extremely obscure, and beyond the fact that people who habitually lived near the water may have built their houses after the aquatic fashion practised in different parts of the world by certain savage tribes both ancient and modern, the present writer is not aware of any authority for the assertion that they actually did so except the isolated passage in the “Yamato Tales” just quoted.

A peculiar sort of dwelling-place which the two old histories bring prominently under our notice, is the so-called “parturition-house,”—a one-roomed hut without windows which a woman was expected to build and retire into for the purpose of being delivered unseen. It would also appear to be not unlikely that newly-married couples retired into a

specially built hut for the purpose of consummating the marriage, and it is certain that for each sovereign a new palace was erected on his accession.

Castles are not distinctly spoken of till a period which, though still mythical in the opinion of the present writer, coincides according to the received chronology with the first century B. C. We then first meet with the curious term “rice-castle,” whose precise signification is a matter of dispute among the native commentators, but which, on comparison with Chinese descriptions of the Early Japanese, should probably be understood to mean a kind of palisade serving the purpose of a redoubt, behind which the warriors could ensconce themselves. If this conjecture be correct, we have bore a good instance of a word, so to speak, moving upward with the march of civilization, the term, which formerly denoted something not much better than a fence, having later come to convey the idea of a stone castle.

To conclude the subject of dwelling-places, it should be stated that cave-dwellers are sometimes alluded to. The legend of the retirement of the Sun-Goddess into a cavern may possibly suggest to some the idea of an early period when such habitations were the normal abodes of the ancestors of the Japanese race. But at the time when the national traditions assumed their present shape, such a state of things had certainly quite passed away, if it ever existed, and only barbarous Ainos and rough bands of robbers are credited with the construction of such primitive retreats. Natural caves (it may be well to state) are rare in Japan, and the caves that are alluded to were mostly artificial, as may be gathered from the context.

The food of the Early Japanese consisted of fish and of the flesh of the wild creatures which fell by the hunter’s arrow or were taken in the trapper’s snare,—an animal diet with which Buddhist prohibitions had not yet interfered, as they began to do in early historical times. Rice is the only cereal of which there is such mention made as to place it beyond a doubt that its cultivation dates back to time immemorial.

Beans, millet, and barley are indeed named once, together with silk-worms, in the account of the “Divine Age.” But the passage has every aspect of an interpolation in the legend, perhaps not dating back long before the time of the eighth century compiler. A few unimportant vegetables and fruits, of most of which there is but a single mention, will be found in the list of plants given below. The intoxicating liquor called sake was known in Japan during the mythical period, and so were chopsticks for eating the food with. Cooking-pots and cups and dishes—the latter both of earthenware and of leaves of trees,—are also mentioned; but of the use of fire for warming purposes we hear nothing. Tables are named several times, but never in connection with food. They would seem to have been exclusively used for the purpose of presenting offerings on, and were probably quite small and low,—in fact rather trays than tables according to European ideas.

In the use of clothing and the specialization of garments the Early Japanese had reached a high level. We read in the most ancient legends of upper garments, skirts, trowsers, girdles, veils, and hats, while both sexes adorned themselves with necklaces, bracelets, and head-ornaments of stones considered precious,—in this respect offering a striking contrast to their descendants in modern times, of whose attire jewelry forms no part. The material of their clothes was hempen cloth and paper-mulberry bark, coloured by being rubbed with madder, and probably with woad and other tinctorial plants. All the garments, so far as we may judge, were woven, sewing being nowhere mentioned, and it being expressly stated by the Chinese commentator on the “Shan Hai Ching,” who wrote early in the fourth century, that the Japanese had no needles. From the great place which the chase occupied in daily life we are led to suppose that skins also were used to make garments of. There is in the “Records” at least one passage which favours this supposition, and the “Chronicles” in one place mention the straw rain-coat and broad-brimmed

hat, which still form the Japanese peasant’s effectual protection against the inclemencies of the weather. The tendrils of creeping plants served the purposes of string, and bound the warrior’s sword round his waist. Combs are mentioned, and it is evident that much attention was devoted to the dressing of the hair. The men seem to have bound up their hair in two bunches, one on each side of the head, whilst the young boys tied theirs into a topknot, the unmarried girls let their locks hang down over their necks, and the married women dressed theirs after a fashion which apparently combined the two last-named methods. There is no mention in any of the old books of cutting the hair or beard except in token of disgrace; neither do we gather that the sexes, but for this matter of the head-dress, were distinguished by a diversity of apparel and ornamentation.

With regard to the precious stones mentioned above as having been used as ornaments for the head, neck, and arms, the texts themselves give us little or no information as to the identity of the stones meant to be referred to. Indeed it is plain (and the native commentators admit the fact) that a variety of Chinese characters properly denoting different sorts of jewels were used indiscriminately by the early Japanese writers to represent the single native word tama, which is the only one the language contains to denote any hard substance on which a special value is set, and which often refers chiefly to the rounded shape, so that it might in fact be translated by the word “bead” as fittingly as by the word “jewel.” We know, however, from the specimens which have rewarded the labours of archæological research in Japan that agate, crystal, glass, jade, serpentine, and steatite are the most usual materials, and carved and pierced cylindrical shapes (maga-tama and kuda-tama), the commonest forms.

The horse (which was ridden, but not driven), the barndoor fowl, and the cormorant used for fishing, are the only domesticated creatures mentioned in the earlier traditions, with the doubtful exception of the

silkworm, to winch reference has already been made. In the later portions of the “Records” and “Chronicles”, dogs and cattle are alluded to; but sheep, swine, and even cats were apparently not yet introduced. Indeed sheep were scarcely to be seen in Japan until a few years ago, goats are still almost unknown, and swine and all poultry excepting the barn-door fowl are extremely uncommon.

The following enumeration of the animals and plants mentioned in the earlier portion of the “Records” may be of interest. The Japanese equivalents, some few of which are obsolete, are put in parenthesis, together with the Chinese characters used to write them:

*Ampelopsis serianæfolia [?] (kagami 羅摩).
*Aphananthe aspera, (muku, written phonetically).
*Aucuba japonica [probably], (aha-gi, written phonetically).
*Bamboo, (take 竹).
*Bamboo-grass [Bambusa chino], (sasa 小竹).
*Barley [or wheat?], (mugi 麥).
*Beans [two kinds, viz., Soja glycine and Phaseolus radiatus (the general name is mame 豆, that of the latter species in particular adzuki, 小豆.
*Bulrush [Typha japonica] (kama 蒲黃).
*Bush-clover [Lespedeza of various species], (hagi 萩).
*Camellia japonica (tsuba-ki 椿).
*Cassia [Chinese mythical; or perhaps the native Cercidiphyllum japonica], (katsura, variously written).
*Chamæcyparis obtsusa, (hi-no-ki 檜).
*Cleyera japonica [and another allied but undetermined species], (saka-ki 榊).
*Clubmoss, (hi-kage 日景).

*Cocculus thunbergi [probably] (tsudzura 黑葛.)
*Cryptomeria japonica, (sugi 榲).
*Eulalia japonica (kaya 葺草).
*Evonymus japonica, (masa-ki 眞賢木).
*Ginger, [or perhaps the Xanthoxylon is intended] (hazhikami 薑).
*Halochloa macrantha [but it is not certain that this is the sea-weed intended] (komo 海専).
*Holly [or rather the Olea aquifolium, which closely resembles holly]hihi-ra-gi 柊).
*Knot-grass [Polygonum tinctorium] (awi 藍).
*Lily, (sawi written phonetically, yama-yuri-gusa 山由理草, and saki-kusa 三枝草).
*Madder, (akane 茜).
*Millet [Panicum italicum], (aha 粟).
*Moss, (koke 蘿).
*Oak two species, one evergreen and one deciduous,—Quercus myrsinæfolia, Q. dentata (kashi 白檮, kashiwa 柏)].
*Peach, (momo 桃).
*Photinia glabra [?], (soba, written phonetically).
*Pine-tree, (matsu 松).
*Pueraria thunbergiana, (kudzu 葛).
*Reed, (ashi 葦).
*Rice, (ine 稻).
*Sea-weed [or the original term may designate a particular species], (me 海布).
*Sedge [Scirpus maritimus], (suge 菅).
*Spindle-tree [Evonymus radicans], (masaki no kadura 眞柝鬘).
*Vegetable Wax-tree [Rhus succedanea], (hazhi 櫨).
*Vine, (yebi-kadzura 萄蒲).
*Wild cherry [or birch?], (hahaka 朱櫻).
*Wild chive [or rather the allium odorum, which closely resembles it], (ka-mira 臭韮).
*Winter-cherry [Physalis alkekengi] (aka-kaguchi written phonetically, and also hohodzuki 酸醤).
The later portions of the work furnish in addition the following:—

*Alder [Alnus maritima] (hari-no-ki 榛).
*Aralia (mi-tsuna-gashiha 御綱柏).
*Brasenia peltata (nunaha 蓴).
*Cabbage [brassica] (awona 菘菜).
*Catalpa Kaempferi [but some say the cherry is meant] (adzusa 梓).
*Chestnut (kuri 栗).
*Dioscorea quinqueloba (tokoro-dzura 解葛).

*Evonymus sieboldianus (mayumi 木檀).
*Gourd (hisago 瓢).
*Hedysarum esculentum (wogi 荻).
*Hydropyrum latifolium (komo 菰).
*Kadzura japonica (sana-kadzura 蘰).
*Livistona sinensis (ajimasa 檳榔).
*Lotus [nelumbium] (hachisu 蓮).
*Musk-melon (hozochi 熟瓜).
*Oak, [three species, Quercus serrata (kunugi 歷木) and Q. glandulifera (nara 楢), both deciduous; Q. gilva (ichihi 赤檮) [evergreen]
*Orange (tachibana 橘).
*Podocarpus macrophylla (maki 檜).
*Radish, [Raphanus sativus] (oho-ne 大根).
*Sashibu (written phonetically) [not identified].
*Water caltrop, [Trapa bispinosa] (hishi 菱).
*Wild garlic [Allium nipponicum] (nu-biru 野赫).
*Zelkowa keaki [probably] (tsuki 槻).

A few more are probably preserved in the names of places. Thus in Shinano, the name of a province, we seem to have the shina (Tilia cordata), and in Tadetsu the tade (Polygonum japonicum). But the identification in these cases is mostly uncertain. It must also be remembered that, as in the case of all non-scientific nomenclatures, several species, and occasionally even more than one genus, are included in a single Japanese term. Thus chi-dori (here always rendered “dotterel”) is the name of any kind of sand-piper, plover or dotterel. Kari is a general name applied to geese, but not to all the species, and also to the great bustard. Again it should not be forgotten that there may have been, and probably were, in the application of some of these terms, differences of usage between the present day and eleven or twelve centuries ago. Absolute precision is therefore not attainable.

Noticeable in the above lists is the abundant mention of plant-names in a work which is in no ways occupied with botany. Equally noticeable is the absence of some of those which are most common at the present day, such as the tea-plant and the plum-tree, while of the orange we are specially informed that it was introduced from abroad. The difference between the various stones and metals seems, on the other hand, to

have attracted very little attention from the Early Japanese. In later times the chief metals were named mostly according to their colour, as follows:

Yellow | metal | (gold).
White |  | (silver).
Red |  | (copper).
Black |  | (iron).
colspan=2|Chinese (or Korean) | (bronze).

But in the “Records” the only metal of which it is implied that it was in use from time immemorial is iron, while “various treasures dazzling to the eye, from gold and silver downwards,” are only referred to once as existing in the far-western land of Korea. Red clay is the sole kind of earth specially named.

The words relative to colour which occur are:—

Yellow is not mentioned (except in the foreign Chinese phrase “the Yellow Stream,” signifying Hades, and not to be counted in this context), neither are any of the numerous terms which in Modern Japanese serve to distinguish delicate shades of colour. We hear of the “blue (or green), i.e. black clouds” and also of the “blue (or green), sea”; but the “blue sky” is conspicuous by its absence here as in so many other early literatures, though strangely enough it does occur in the oldest written monuments of the Chinese.

With regard to the subject of names for the different degrees of relationship,—a subject of sufficient interest to the student of sociology to warrant its being discussed at some length,—it may be stated that in modern Japanese parlance the categories according to which relationship is conceived of do not materially differ from those that are current in Europe. Thus we find father, grandfather, great-grandfather, uncle,

nephew, stepfather, stepson, father-in-law, son-in-law, and the corresponding terms for females,—mother, grandmother etc.,—as well as such vaguer designations as parents, ancestors, cousins, and kinsmen. The only striking difference is that brothers and sisters, instead of being considered as all mutually related in the same manner, are divided into two categories, viz.:
Ani     |  兄  |  elder brother(s),
Otouto  |  弟  |  younger brother(s),
Ane     |  姉  |  elder sister(s),
Imouto  |  妹  |  younger sister(s),
in exact accordance with Chinese usage.

Now in Archaic times there seems to have been a different and more complicated system, somewhat resembling that which still obtains among the natives of Korea, and which the introduction of Chinese ideas and especially the use of the Chinese written characters must have caused to be afterwards abandoned. There are indications of it in some of the phonetically written fragments of the “Records.” But they are not of themselves sufficient to furnish a satisfactory explanation, and the subject has puzzled the native literati themselves. Moreover the English language fails us at this point, and elder and younger brother, elder and younger sister are the only terms at the translator's command. It may therefore be as well to quote in extenso Motowori's elucidation of the Archaic usage to be found in Vol. XIII, pp. 63-4 of his “Exposition of the Records of Ancient Matters.” He says : “Anciently, when brothers and sisters were spoken of, the elder brother was called se or ani in contradistinction to the younger brothers and younger sisters, and the younger brother also was called se in contradistinction to the elder sister. The elder sister was called ane in contradistinction to the younger sister, and the younger brother also would use the word ane in speaking of his elder sister himself. The younger brother was called oto in contradistinction to the elder brother, and the younger sister also was called oto in contradistinction to the elder sister. The younger sister was called imo in contradistinction to the elder brother, and the elder sister also was called imo in contradistinction to the

younger brother. It was also the custom among brothers and sisters to use the words iro-se for se, iro-ne for ane, and iro-do for oto, and analogy forces us to conclude that iro-mo was used for imo.” (Motowori elsewhere explains iro as a term of endearment indentical
---
 with the word iro, “love ;” but we may hesitate to accept this view.) It will be observed that the foundation of this system of nomenclature was a subordination of the younger to the elder-born modified by a subordination of the females to the males. In the East, especially in primitive times, it is not “place aux dames,” but “place aux messieurs”.

Another important point to notice is that, though in a few passages of the “Records” we find a distinction drawn between the chief and the secondary wives,—perhaps nothing more than the favorite or better-born, and the less well-born, are meant to be thus designated,—yet not only is this distinction not drawn throughout, but the wife is constantly spoken of as imo, i.e. “younger sister.” In fact sister and wife were convertible terms and ideas ; and what in a later stage of Japanese, as of Western, civilization is abhorred as incest was in Archaic Japanese times the common practice. We also hear of marriages with half-sisters, with stepmothers, and with aunts ; and to wed two or three sisters at the same time was a recognized usage. Most such unions were naturally so contrary to Chinese ethical ideas, that one of the first traces of the influence of the latter in Japan was the stigmatizing of them as incest ; and the conflict between the old native custom and the imported moral code is seen to have resulted in political troubles. Marriage with sisters was naturally the first to disappear, and indeed it is only mentioned in the legends of the gods ; but unions with half-sisters, aunts, etc., lasted on into the historic epoch. Of exogamy, such as obtains in China, there is no trace in any Japanese document, nor do any other artificial impediments seem to have stood in the way of the free choice of the Early Japanese man, who also (in some cases at least) received a dowry with his bride or brides.

If, taking as our guides the incidental notices which are scattered

up and down the pages of the earlier portion of the “Records” we endeavour to follow an Archaic Japanese through the chief events of his life from the cradle to the tomb, it will be necessary to begin by recalling what has already been alluded to as the “parturition-house” built by the mother, and in which, as we are specially told that it was made windowless, it would perhaps be contradictory to say that the infant first saw the light. Soon after birth a name was given to it,—given to it by the mother,—such name generally containing some appropriate personal reference. In the most ancient times each person (so far as we can judge) bore but one name, or rather one string of words compounded together into a sort of personal designation. But already at the dawn of the historical epoch we are met by the mention of surnames and of what, in the absence of a more fitting word, the translator has ventured to call “gentile names,” bestowed by the sovereign as a recompense for some noteworthy deed.

It may be gathered from our text that the idea of calling in the services of wet-nurses in certain exceptional cases had already suggested itself to the minds of the ruling class, whose infants were likewise sometimes attended by special bathing-women. To what we should call education, whether mental or physical, there is absolutely no reference made in the histories. All that can be inferred is that, when old enough to do so, the boys began to follow one of the callings of hunter or fisherman, while the girls staid at home weaving the garments of the family. There was also a great deal of fighting, generally of a treacherous kind, in the intervals of which the warriors occupied themselves in cultivating patches of ground. The very little which is to be gathered concerning the treatment of old people would seem to indicate that they were well cared for.

We are nowhere told of any wedding ceremonies except the giving of presents by the bride or her father, the probable reason being

that no such ceremonies existed. Indeed late on into the Middle Ages cohabitation alone constituted matrimony,—cohabitation often secret at first, but afterwards acknowledged, when, instead of going round under cover of night to visit his mistress, the young man brought her back publicly to his parents’ house. Mistress, wife, and concubine were thus terms which were not distinguished, and the woman could naturally be discarded at any moment. She indeed was expected to remain faithful to the man with whom she had had more than a passing intimacy, but no reciprocal obligation bound him to her. Thus the wife of one of the gods is made to address her husband in a poem which says:

“Thou  indeed, being a man, probably hast on the various island-headlands that thou seest, and on every beach-headland that thou lookest on, a wife like the young herbs. But I, alas! being a woman, have no man except thee; I have no spouse except thee,” etc., etc.

In this sombre picture the only graceful touch is the custom which lovers or spouses had of tying each other’s girdles when about to part for a time,—a ceremony by which they implied that they would be constant to each other during the period of absence. What became of the children in cases of conjugal separation does not clearly appear. In the only instance which is related at length, we find the child left with the father; but this instance is not a normal one. Adoption is not mentioned in the earliest traditions; so that when we meet with it later on we shall probably be justified in tracing its introduction to Chinese sources.

Of death-bed scenes and dying speeches we hear but little, and that little need not detain us. The burial rites are more important. The various ceremonies observed on such an occasion are indeed not explicitly detailed. But we gather thus much: that the hut tenanted by the deceased was abandoned,—an ancient custom to whose former existence the removal of the capital at the commencement of each new sovereign’s reign long continued to bear witness,—and that the body

was first deposited for some days in a “mourning-house,” during which interval the survivors (though their tears and lamentations are also mentioned) held a carousal, feasting perhaps on the food which was specially prepared as an offering to the dead person. Afterwards, the corpse was interred, presumably in a wooden bier, as the introduction of stone tombs is specially noted by the historian as having taken place at the end of the reign of the Emperor Sui-nin, and was therefore believed by those who handed down the legendary history to have been a comparatively recent innovation, the date assigned to this monarch by the author of the “Chronicles” coinciding with the latter part of our first, and the first half of our second centuries. To a time not long anterior is attributed the abolition of a custom previously observed at the interments of royal personages. This custom was the burying alive of some of their retainers in the neighbourhood of the tomb. We know also, both from other early literary sources and from the finds which have recently rewarded the labours of archæologists, that articles of clothing, ornaments, etc., were buried with the corpse. It is all the more curious that the “Records” should nowhere make any reference to such a custom, and is a proof (if any be needed) of the necessity of not relying exclusively on any single authority, however respectable, if the full and true picture of Japanese antiquity is to be restored. A few details as to the abolition of the custom of burying retainers alive round their master’s tomb, and of the substitution for this cruel holocaust of images in clay will be found in Sect. LXIII, Note 23, and in Sect. LXXV, Note 4, of the following translation. If the custom be one which is properly included under the heading of human sacrifices, it is the only form of such sacrifices of which the earliest recorded Japanese social state retained any trace. The absence of slavery is another honourable feature. On the other hand, the most cruel punishments were dealt out to enemies and wrongdoers. Their nails were extracted, the sinews of their knees were cut, they were buried up to the neck so that their eyes burst, etc. Death, too, was inflicted

for the most trivial offences. Of branding, or rather tattooing, the face as a punishment there are one or two incidental mentions. But as no tattooing or other marking or painting of the body for any other purpose is ever alluded to, with the solitary exception in one passage of the painting of her eyebrows by a woman, it is possible that the penal use of tattooing may have been borrowed from the Chinese, to whom it was not unknown.

The shocking obscenity of word and act to which the “Records” bear witness is another ugly feature which must not quite be passed over in silence. It is true that decency, as we understand it, is a very modern product, and is not to be looked for in any society in the barbarous stage. At the same time, the whole range of literature might perhaps be ransacked in vain for a parallel to the naïve filthiness of the passage forming Sect. IV. of the following translation, or to the extraordinary topic which the hero Yamato-Take and his mistress Miyazu are made to select as the theme of poetical repartee. One passage likewise would lead us to suppose that the most beastly crimes were commonly committed.

To conclude this portion of the subject, it may be useful for the sake of comparison to call attention to a few arts and products with which the early Japanese were not acquainted. Thus they had no tea, no fans, no porcelain, no lacquer,—none of the things, in fact, by which in later times they have been chiefly known. They did not yet use vehicles of any kind. They had no accurate method of computing time, no money, scarcely any knowledge of medicine. Neither, though they possessed some sort of music, and poems a few of which at least are not without merit, do we hear anything of the art of drawing. But the most important art of which they were ignorant is that of writing. As some

has existed on this head, and scholars in Europe have been misled by the inventions of zealous champions of the Shintō religion into a belief in the so-called “Divine Characters,” by them alleged to have been invented by the Japanese gods and to have been used by the Japanese people prior to the introduction of the Chinese ideographic writing, it must be stated precisely that all the traditions of the “Divine Age”, and of the reigns of the earlier Emperors down to the third century of our era according to the received chronology, maintain a complete silence on the subject of writing, writing materials, and records of every kind. Books are nowhere mentioned till a period confessedly posterior to the opening up of intercourse with the Asiatic continent, and the first books whose names occur are the “Lun Yü” and the “Ch’ien Tzŭ Wên,” which are said to have been brought over to Japan during the reign of the Emperor Ō-jin,—according to the same chronology in the year 284 after Christ. That even this statement is antedated, is shown by the fact that the “Ch’ien Tzŭ Wên” was not written till more than two centuries later,—a fact which is worthy the attention of those who have been disposed simply to take on trust the assertions of the Japanese historians. It should likewise be mentioned that, as has already been pointed out by Mr. Aston, the Japanese terms fumi “written document,” and fude “pen,” are probably corruptions of foreign words. The present, indeed, is not the place to discuss the

whole question of the so-called “Divine Characters,” which Motowori, the most patriotic as well as the most learned of the Japanese literati, dismisses in a note to the Prolegomena of his “Exposition of the Records of Ancient Matters” with the remark that they “are a late forgery over which no words need be wasted.” But as this mare’s nest has been imported into the discussion of the Early Japanese social state, and as the point is one on which the absolute silence of the early traditions bears such clear testimony, it was impossible to pass it by without some brief allusion.
V.

The religious beliefs of the modern upholders of Shintō may be ascertained without much difficulty by a perusal of the works of the leaders of the movement which has endeavoured during the last century and a half to destroy the influence of Buddhism and of the Chinese philosophy, and which has latterly succeeded to some extent in supplanting those two foreign systems. But in Japan, as elsewhere, it has been impossible for men really to turn back a thousand years in religious thought and act; and when we try to discover the primitive opinions that were entertained by the Japanese people prior to the introduction of the Chinese culture, we are met by difficulties that at first seem insuperable. The documents are scanty, and the modern commentaries untrustworthy, for they are all written under the influence of a preconceived opinion. Moreover, the problem is apparently complicated by a mixture of races and mythologies, and by a filtering in of Chinese ideas previous to the compilation of documents of any sort, though these are considerations which have hitherto scarcely been taken into account by foreigners, and are designedly neglected and obscured by such narrowly patriotic native writers as Motowori and Hirata.

In the political field the difficulties are not less, but rather greater;

for when once the Imperial House and the centralized Japanese polity, as we know it from the sixth or seventh century of our era downwards, became fully established, it was but too clearly in the interest of the powers that be to efface as far as possible the trace of different governmental arrangements which may have preceded them, and to cause it to be believed that, as things were then, so had they always been. The Emperor Tem-mu, with his anxiety to amend “the deviations from truth and the empty falsehoods” of the historical documents preserved by the various families, and the author of the “Chronicles of Japan” with his elaborate system of fictitious dates, recur to our minds, and we ask ourselves to what extent similar garblings of history,—sometimes intentional, sometimes unintentional,—may have gone on during earlier ages, when there was even less to check them than there was in the eighth century. If, therefore, the translator here gives expression to a few opinions founded chiefly on a careful study of the text of the “Records of Ancient Matters” helped out by a study of the “Chronicles of Japan,” he would be understood to do so with great diffidence, especially with regard to his few (so to speak) constructive remarks. As to the destructive side of the criticism, there need be less hesitation; for the old histories bear evidence too conclusively against themselves for it to be possible for the earlier portions of them, at least, to stand the test of sober investigation. Before endeavouring to piece together the little that is found in the “Records” to illustrate the beliefs of Archaic Japanese times, it will be necessary, at the risk of dulness, to give a summary of the old traditions as they lie before us in their entirety, after which will be hazarded a few speculations on the subject of the earlier tribes which combined to form the Japanese people; for the four questions of religious beliefs, of political arrangements, of race, and of the credibility of documents, all hang closely together and, properly speaking, form but one highly complex problem.

Greatly condensed, the Early Japanese traditions amount to this: After an indefinitely long period, during which were born a number of abstract deities, who are differently enumerated in the “Records” and in the “Chronicles,” two of these deities, a brother and sister named Izanagi and Izanami (', the “Male Who Invites” and the “Female Who Invites”), are united in marriage, and give birth to the various islands

of the Japanese archipelago. When they have finished producing islands, they proceed to the production of a large number of gods and goddesses, many of whom correspond to what we should call personifications of the powers of nature, though personification is a word which, in its legitimate acceptation, is foreign to the Japanese mind. The birth of the Fire-God causes Izanami’s death, and the most striking episode of the whole mythology then ensues, when her husband, Orpheus-like, visits her in the under-world to implore her to return to him. She would willingly do so, and bids him wait while she consults with the deities of the place. But he, impatient at her long tarrying, breaks off one of the end-teeth of the comb stuck in the left bunch of his hair, lights it and goes in, only to find her a hideous mass of corruption, in whose midst are seated the eight Gods of Thunder. This episode ends with the deification of three peaches who had assisted him in his retreat before the armies of the under-world, and with bitter words exchanged between him and his wife, who herself pursues him as far as the “Even Pass of Hades.”

Returning to Himuka in south-western Japan, Izanagi purifies himself by bathing in a stream, and, as he does so, fresh deities are born from each article of clothing that he throws down on the river-bank, and from each part of his person. One of these deities was the Sun-Goddess, who was born from his left eye, while the Moon-God sprang from his right eye, and the last born of all, Susa-no-Wo, whose name the translator renders by “the Impetuous Male,” was born from his nose. Between these three children their father divides the inheritance of the universe.

At this point the story loses its unity. The Moon-God is no more heard of, and the traditions concerning the Sun-Goddess and those concerning the “Impetuous Male Deity” diverge in a manner which is productive of inconsistencies in the remainder of the mythology. The Sun-Goddess and the “Impetuous Male Deity” have a violent quarrel, and at last the latter breaks a hole in the roof of the hall in Heaven where his sister is sitting at work with the celestial weaving-maidens, and through it lets fall “a heavenly piebald horse which he had flayed

with a backward flaying.” The consequences of this act were so disastrous, that the Sun-Goddess withdrew for a season into a cave, from which the rest of the eight hundred myriad (according to the “Chronicles” eighty myriad) deities with difficulty allured her. The “Impetuous Male Deity” was thereupon banished, and the Sun-Goddess remained mistress of the field. Yet, strange to say, she thenceforward retires into the background, and the most bulky section of the mythology consists of stories concerning the “Impetuous Male Deity” and his descendants, who are represented as the monarchs of Japan, or rather of the province of Idzumo. The “Impetuous Male Deity” himself, whom his father had charged with the dominion of the sea, never assumes that rule, but first has a curiously told amorous adventure and an encounter with an eight-forked serpent in Idzumo, and afterwards reappears as the capricious and filthy deity of Hades, who however seems to retain some power over the land of the living, as he invests his descendant of the sixth generation with the sovereignty of Japan. Of this latter personage a whole cycle of stories is told, all centering in Idzumo. We learn of his conversations with a hare and with a mouse, of the prowess and cleverness which he displayed on the occasion of a visit to his ancestor in Hades, which is in this cycle of traditions a much less mysterious place than the Hades visited by Izanagi, of his amours, of his triumph over his eighty brethren, of his reconciliation with his jealous empress, and of his numerous descendants, many of whom have names that are particularly difficult of comprehension. We hear too in a tradition, which ends in a pointless manner, of a microscopic deity who comes across the sea to ask this monarch of Idzumo to share the sovereignty with him.

This last-mentioned legend repeats itself in the sequel. The Sun-Goddess, who on her second appearance is constantly represented as acting in concert with the “High August Producing Wondrous Deity,”—one of the abstractions mentioned at the commencement of the “Records,”—resolves to bestow the sovereignty of Japan on a child of whom it is doubtful whether he were hers or that of her brother the “Impetuous Male Deity.” Three embassies are sent from Heaven to Idzumo to arrange matters, but it is only a fourth that is successful, the final ambassadors obtaining the submission of the monarch or deity of

Idzumo, who surrenders his sovereignty and promises to serve the new dynasty (apparently in the under-world), if a palace or temple be built for him and he be appropriately worshipped. Thereupon the child of the deity whom the Sun-Goddess had originally wished to make sovereign of Japan, descends to earth,—not to Idzumo in the north-west, be it mentioned, as the logical sequence of the story would lead one to expect,—but to the peak of a mountain in the south-western island of Kiushiu.

Here follows a quaint tale accounting for the odd appearance of the bèche-de-mer, and another to account for the shortness of the lives of mortals, after which we are told of the birth under peculiar circumstances of the heaven-descended deity’s three sons. Two of these, Ho-deri and Ho-wori, whose names may be Englished as “Fire-Shine” and “Fire-Subside,” are the heroes of a very curious legend, which includes an elaborate account of a visit paid by the latter to the palace of the God of Ocean, and of a curse or spell which gained for him the victory over his elder brother, and enabled him to dwell peacefully in his palace at Takachiho for the space of five hundred and eighty years,—the first statement resembling a date which the “Records” contain. This personage’s son married his own aunt, and was the father of four children, one of whom “treading on the crest of the waves, crossed over to the Eternal Land,” while a second “went into the sea plain,” and the two others moved eastward, fighting with the chiefs of Kibi and Yamato, having adventures with gods both with and without tails, being assisted by a miraculous sword and a gigantic crow, and naming the various places they passed through after incidents in their own career, as “the Impetuous Male” and other divine personages had done before them. One of these brothers was Kamu-Yamato-Ihare-Biko, who (the other having died before him) was first given the title of Jim-mu Ten-nō more than fourteen centuries after the date which in the “Chronicles” is assigned as that of his decease.

Henceforth Yamato, which had scarcely been mentioned before, and the provinces adjacent to it become the centre of the story, and Idzumo again emerges into importance. A very indecent love-tale forms a bridge which unites the two fragments of the mythology; and the “Great Deity of Miwa,” who is identified with the deposed monarch of Idzumo, appears on the scene. Indeed during the rest of the story this

“Great Deity of Miwa,” and his colleague the “Small August Deity” (Sukuna-Mi-Kami), the deity Izasa-Wake, the three Water-Gods of Sumi, and the “Great Deity of Kadzuraki,” of whom there is so striking a mention in Sect. CLVIII, form, with the Sun-Goddess and with a certain divine sword preserved at the temple of Isonokami in Yamato, the only objects of worship specially named, the other gods and goddesses being no more heard of. This portion of the story is closed by an account of the troubles which inaugurated the reign of Jim-mu’s successor, Sui-sei, and then occurs a blank of (according to the accepted chronology) five hundred years, during which absolutely nothing is told us excepting dreary genealogies, the place where each sovereign dwelt and where he was buried, and the age to which he lived,—this after the minute details which had previously been given concerning the successive gods or monarchs down to Sui-sei inclusive. It should likewise be noted that the average age of the first seventeen monarchs (counting Jim-mu Ten-nō as the first according to received ideas) is nearly 96 years if we follow the “Records” and over a hundred if we follow the accepted chronology which is based chiefly on the constantly divergent statements contained in the “Chronicles.” The age of several of the monarchs exceeds 120 years.

The above-mentioned lapse of an almost blank period of five centuries brings us to the reign of the Emperor known to history by the name of Sū-jin, whose life of one hundred and sixty-eight years (one hundred and twenty according to the “Chronicles”) is supposed to have immediately preceded the Christian era. In this reign the former monarch of Idzumo or god of Miwa again appears and produces a pestilence, of the manner of staying which Sū-jin is warned in a dream, while a curious but highly indecent episode tells us how a person called Oho-Tata-Ne-Ko was known to be a son of the deity in question, and was therefore appointed high priest of his temple. In the ensuing reign an elaborate legend, involving a variety of circumstances as miraculous as any in the earlier portion of the mythology, again

centres in the necessity of pacifying the great god of Idzumo; and this, with details of internecine strife in the Imperial family, of the sovereign’s amours, and of the importation of the orange from the “Eternal Land,” brings us to the cycle of traditions of which Yamato-Take, a son of the Emperor Kei-kō, is the hero. This prince, after slaying one of his brothers in the privy, accomplishes the task of subduing both western and eastern Japan; and, notwithstanding certain details which are unsavoury to the European taste, his story, taken as a whole, is one of the most striking in the book. He performs marvels of valour, disguises himself as a woman to slay the brigands, is the possessor of a magic sword and fire-striker, has a devoted wife who stills the fury of the waves by sitting down upon their surface, has encounters with a deer and with a boar who are really gods in disguise, and finally dies on his way westward before he can reach his home in Yamato. His death is followed by a highly mythological account of the laying to rest of the white bird into which he ended by being transformed.

The succeeding reign is a blank, and the next after that transports us without a word of warning to quite another scene. The sovereign’s home is now in Tsukushi, the south-western island of the Japanese archipelago, and four of the gods, through the medium of the sovereign’s wife, who is known to history as the Empress Jin-gō, reveal the existence of the land of Korea, of which, however, this is not the first mention. The Emperor disbelieves the divine message, and is punished by death for his incredulity. But the Empress, after a special consultation between her prime minister and the gods, and the performance of various religious ceremonies, marshals her fleet, and, with the assistance of the fishes both great and small and of a miraculous wave, reaches Shiragi (one of the ancient divisions of Korea), and subdues it. She then returns to Japan, the legend ending with a curiously naïve tale of how she sat a-fishing one day on a shoal in the river Wo-gawa in Tsukushi with threads picked out of her skirt for lines.

The next section shows her going up by sea to Yamato,—another joint in the story, by means of which the Yamato cycle of legends and

the Tsukushi cycle are brought into apparent unity. The “Chronicles of Japan” have even improved upon this by making Jin-gō’s husband dwell in Yamato at the commencement of his reign and only remove to Tsukushi later, so that if the less elaborated “Records” had not been preserved, the two threads of the tradition would have been still more difficult to unravel. The Empress’s army defeats the troops raised by the native kings or princes, who are represented as her step-sons; and from that time forward the story runs on in a single channel and always centres in Yamato. China likewise is now first mentioned, books are said to have been brought over from the mainland, and we hear of the gradual introduction of various useful arts. Even the annals of the reign of Ō-jin however, during which this civilizing impulse from abroad is said to have commenced, are not free from details as miraculous as any in the earlier portions of the book. Indeed Sects. CXIV–CXVI of the following translation, which form part of the narrative of his reign, are occupied with the recital of one of the most fanciful tales of the whole mythology. The monarch himself is said to have lived a hundred and thirty years, while his successor lived eighty-three (according to the “Chronicles” Ō-jin lived a hundred and ten and his successor Nin-toku reigned eighty-seven years). It is not till the next reign that the miraculous ceases, a fact which significantly coincides with the reign in which, according to a statement in the “Chronicles,” “historiographers were first appointed to all the provinces to record words and events, and forward archives from all directions.” This brings us to the commencement of the fifth century of our era, just three centuries before the compilation of our histories, but only two centuries before the compilation of the first history of which mention has been preserved. From that time the story in the “Records,” though not well told, gives us some very curious pictures, and reads as if it were reliable. It is tolerably full for a few reigns, after which it again dwindles into mere genealogies, carrying us down to the commencement of the seventh century. The “Chronicles,” on the contrary, give us full details down to A.D. 701, that is to within nineteen years of the date of their compilation.

The reader who has followed this summary, or who will take the trouble to read through the whole text for himself, will perceive that there is no break in the story,—at least no chronological break,—and

no break between the fabulous and the real, unless indeed it be at the commencement of the fifth century of our era, i.e. more than a thousand years later than the date usually accepted as the commencement of genuine Japanese history. The only breaks are,—not chronological,—but topographical.

This fact of the continuity of the Japanese mythology and history has been fully recognized by the leading native commentators, whose opinions are those considered orthodox by modern Shintoists; and they draw from it the conclusion that everything in the standard national histories must be equally accepted as literal truth. All persons however cannot force their minds into the limits of such a belief; and early in the last century a celebrated writer and thinker, [[w:Arai Hakuseki|Arawi Hakuseki]], published a work in which, while accepting the native mythology as an authentic chronicle of events, he did so with the reservation of proving to his own satisfaction that all the miraculous portions thereof were allegories, and the gods only men under another name. In this particular, the elasticity of the Japanese word for “deity,” kami, which has already been noticed, stood the eastern Euhemerus in good stead. Some of his explanations are however extremely comical, and it is evident that such a system enables the person who uses it to prove whatever he has a mind to. In the present century a diluted form of the same theory was adopted by Tachibana no Moribe, who, although endeavouring to remain an orthodox Shintoist, yet decided that some of the (so to speak) uselessly miraculous incidents need not be believed in as revealed truth. Such, for instance, are the story of the speaking mouse, and that of Izanagi’s head-dress turning into a bunch of grapes. He accounts for many of these details by the supposition that they are what he calls wosana-goto, i.e. “child-like words,” and thinks that they were invented for the sake of fixing the story in the minds of children, and are not binding on modern adults as articles of faith. He is also willing to allow that some

passages show traces of Chinese influence, and he blames Motowori’s uncompromising championship of every iota of the existing text of the “Records of Ancient Matters.” As belonging to this same school of what may perhaps be termed “rationalistic believers” in Japanese mythology, a contemporary Christian writer, Mr. Takahashi Gorō, must also be mentioned. Treading in the foot-steps of Arawi Hakuseki, but bringing to bear on the legends of his own country some knowledge of the mythology of other lands, he for instance explains the traditions of the Sun-Goddess and of the Eight-Forked Serpent of Yamada by postulating the existence of an ancient queen called Sun, whose brother, after having been banished from her realm for his improper behaviour, killed an enemy whose name was Serpent, etc., while such statements as that the microscopic deity who came over the waves to share the sovereignty of Idzumo would not tell his name, are explained by the assertion that, being a foreigner, he was unintelligible for some time until he had learnt the language. It is certainly strange that such theorists should not see that they are undermining with one hand that which they endeavour to prop up with the other, and that their own individual fancy is made by them the sole standard of historic truth. Yet Mr. Takahashi confidently asserts that “his explanations have nothing forced or fanciful” in them, and that “they cannot fail to solve the doubts even of the greatest of doubters.”

The general habit of the more sceptical Japanese of the present day,—i.e. of ninety-nine out of every hundred of the educated,—seems to be to reject, or at least to ignore, the history of the gods, while implicitly accepting the history of the emperors from Jim-mu downwards; and in so doing they have been followed with but little reserve by most Europeans,—almanacs, histories and cyclopædias all continuing to repeat on the antiquated authority of such writers as [[Author:Engelbert Kaempfer|Kaempfer]] and [[Author:Isaac Titsingh|Titsingh]], that Japan possesses an authentic history covering more than two thousand years, while [[Author:Philipp Franz von Siebold|Siebold]] and [[w:Johann Joseph Hoffmann|Hoffmann]] even go the length of discussing the hour of Jim-mu’s accession in the year 660 B.C! This is the attitude of mind now sanctioned by the governing class. Thus, in the historical compilations used as text-books in the schools, the

stories of the gods,—that is to say the Japanese traditions down to Jim-mu exclusive,—are either passed over in silence or dismissed in a few sentences, while the annals of the human sovereigns,—that is to say the Japanese traditions from Jim-mu inclusive,—are treated precisely as if the events therein related had happened yesterday, and were as incontrovertibly historical as latter statements, for which there is contemporary evidence. The same plan is pursued elsewhere in official publications. Thus, to take but one example among many, the Imperial Commissioners to the Vienna Exhibition, in their “Notice sur l'Empire du Japon,” tell us that “L’histoire de la dynastie impériale remonte très-haut. L’obscurité entoure ses débuts, vu l’absence de documents réguliers ou d’un calendrier parfait. Le premier Empereur de la dynastie présente, dont il reste des annales dignes de confiance, est Jin-mou-ten-nô qui organisa un soulèvement dans la province de Hiuga, marcha à l’Est avec ses compagnons, fonda sa capitale dans la vallée de Kashi-hara dans le Yamato, et monta sur le trône comme Empereur. C’est de cet Empereur que descend, par une succession régulière, la présente famille régnante du Japon. C’est de l’année de l’avènement de Jin-mou-ten-nô que date l’ère japonaise (Année 1-660 avant Jésus-Christ.

As for the ère Japonaise mentioned by the commissioners, it maybe pertinent to observe that it was only introduced by an edict dated 15th Dec., 1872, that is to say just a fortnight before the publication of their report. And this era, this accession, is confidently placed thirteen or fourteen centuries before the first history which records it was written, nine centuries before (at the earliest computation) the art of writing was introduced into the country, and on the sole authority of books teeming with miraculous legends!! Does such a proceeding need any comment after once being formulated in precise terms, and can any unprejudiced person continue to accept the early Japanese chronology and the first thousand years of the so-called history of Japan?

Leaving this , let us now see whether any information

relative to the early religious and political state of the Japanese can be gleaned from the pages of the “Records” and of the “Chronicles.” There are fragments of information,—fragments of two sorts,—some namely of clear import, others which are rather a matter for inference and for argument. Let us take the positive fragments first—the notices as to cosmological ideas, dreams, prayers, etc.

The first thing that strikes the student is that what, for want of a more appropriate name, we must call the religion of the Early Japanese, was not an organized religion. We can discover in it nothing corresponding to the body of dogma, the code of morals, and the sacred book authoritatively enforcing both, with which we are familiar in civilized religions, such as Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam. What we find is a bundle of miscellaneous superstitions rather than a coordinated system. Dreams evidently were credited with great importance, the future being supposed to be foretold in them, and the will of the gods made known. Sometimes even an actual object, such as a wonderful sword, was sent down in a dream, thus to our ideas mixing the material with the spiritual. The subject did not, however, present itself in that light to the Early Japanese, to whom there was evidently but one order of phenomena,—what we should call the natural order. Heaven, or rather the Sky, was an actual place,—not more ethereal than earth, nor thought of as the abode of the blessed after death,—but simply a “high plain” situated above Japan and communicating with Japan by a bridge or ladder, and forming the residence of some of those powerful personages called kami,—a word, which we must make shift to translate by “god” or “goddess,” or “deity.” An arrow shot from earth could reach Heaven, and make a hole in it. There was at least one mountain in Heaven, and one river with a broad stony bed like those with which the traveller in Japan becomes familiar, one or two caves, one or more wells, and animals, and trees. There is, however, some confusion as to the mountain,—the celebrated Mount Kagu,—for there is one of that name in the province of Yamato.

Some of the gods dwelt here on earth, or descended hither from Heaven, and had children by human women. Such, for instance, was the emperor Jim-mu’s great-grandfather. Some few gods had tails or

were otherwise personally remarkable; and “savage deities” are often mentioned as inhabiting certain portions of Japan, both in the so-called “Divine Age” and during the reigns of the human emperors down to a time corresponding, according to the generally received chronology, with the first or second century of the Christian era. The human emperors themselves, moreover, were sometimes spoken of as deities, and even made personal use of that designation. The gods occasionally transformed themselves into animals, and at other times simple tangible objects were called gods,—or at least they were called kami; for the gulf separating the Japanese from the English term can never be too often recalled to mind. The word kami, as previously mentioned, properly signifies “superior,” and it would be putting more into it than it really implies to say that the Early Japanese “deified,”—in our sense of the verb to “deify,”—the peaches which Izanagi used to pelt his assailants with, or any other natural objects whatsoever. It would, indeed, be to attribute to them a flight of imagination of which they were not capable, and a habit of personification not in accordance with the genius of their language. Some of the gods are mentioned collectively as “bad Deities like unto the flies in the fifth moon”; but there is nothing approaching a systematic division into good spirits and bad spirits. In fact the word “spirit” itself is not applicable at all to the gods of Archaic Japan. They were, like the gods of Greece, conceived of only as more powerful human beings. They were born, and some of them died, though here again there is inconsistency, as the death of some of them is mentioned in a manner leading one to suppose that they were conceived of as being then at an end, whereas in other cases such death seems simply to denote transference to Hades, or to what is called “the One Road,” which is believed to be a synonym for Hades. Sometimes, again, a journey to Hades is undertaken by a god without any reference to his death. Nothing, indeed, could be less consistent than the various details.

Hades itself is another instance of this inconsistency. In the legend of Oho-Kuni-Nushi (the “Master of the Great Land”),—one of the Idzumo cycle of legends,—Hades is described exactly as if it were

part of the land of the living, or exactly as if it were Heaven, which indeed comes to the same thing. It has its trees, its houses, its family quarrels, etc., etc. In the legend of Izanagi, on the other hand, Hades means simply the abode of horrible putrefaction and of the vindictive dead, and is fitly described by the god himself who had ventured thither as “a hideous and polluted land.” The only point in which the legends agree is in placing between the upper earth and Hades a barrier called the “Even Pass (or Hill) of Hades.” The state of the dead in general is nowhere alluded to, nor are the dying ever made to refer to a future world, whether good or evil.

The objects of worship were of course the gods, or some of them. It has already been stated that during the later portions of the story, whose scene is laid almost exclusively on earth, the Sun-Goddess, the deity Izasa-Wake, the Divine Sword of Isonokami, the Small August Deity (Sukuna-Mi-Kami), the “Great Gods” of Miwa and of Kadzuraki and the three Water-Deities of Sumi, alone are mentioned as having been specially worshipped. Of these the first and the last appear together, forming a sort of quaternion, while the other five appear singly and have no connection with each other. The deities of the mountains, the deities of the rivers, the deities of the sea, etc., are also mentioned in the aggregate, as are likewise the heavenly deities and the earthly deities; and the Empress Jin-gō is represented as conciliating them all previous to her departure for Korea by “putting into a gourd the ashes of a maki tree, and likewise making a quantity of chopsticks and also of leaf-platters, and scattering them all on the waves.”

This brings us to the subject of religious rites,—a subject on which we long for fuller information than the texts afford. That the conciliatory offerings made to the gods were of a miscellaneous nature will be expected from the quotation just made. Nevertheless, a very natural method was in the main followed; for the people offered the things by which they themselves set most store, as we hear at a later period of the poet [[Author:Ki no Tsurayuki|Tsurayuki]], when in a storm at sea, flinging his mirror into the waves because he had but one. The Early Japanese made offerings of

two kinds of cloth, one being hempen cloth and the other cloth manufactured from the bark of the paper mulberry,—offerings very precious in their eyes, but which have in modern times been allowed to degenerate into useless strips of paper. They likewise offered shields, spears, and other things. Food was offered both to the gods and to the dead; indeed, the palace or tomb of the dead monarch and the temple of the god cannot always be distinguished from each other, and, as has already been mentioned, the Japanese use the same word miya for “palace” and for “temple.” Etymologically signifying “august house,” it is naturally susceptible of what are to us two distinct meanings.

With but one exception, the “Records” do not give us the words of any prayers (or, as the Japanese term norito has elsewhere been translated, “rituals”). Conversations with the gods are indeed detailed, but no devotional utterances. Fortunately however a number of very ancient prayers have been preserved in other books, and translations of some of them by Mr. Satow will be found scattered through the volumes of the Transactions of this Society. They consist mostly of declarations of praise and statements of offerings made, either in return for favours received or conditionally on favours being granted. They are all in prose, and hymns do not seem to have been in use. Indeed of the hundred and eleven Songs preserved in the “Records,” not one has any religious reference.

The sacred rite of which most frequent mention is made is purification by water. Trial by hot water is also alluded to in both histories, but not till a time confessedly posterior to the commencement of intercourse with the mainland. We likewise hear of compacts occasionally entered into with a god, and somewhat resembling our European wager, oath, or curse. Priests are spoken of in a few passages, but without any details. We do not hear of their functions being in any way mediatorial, and the impression conveyed is that they did not exist in very early times as a separate class. When they did come into existence, the profession soon became hereditary, according to the general tendency in Japan towards the hereditability of offices and occupations.

Miscellaneous superstitions crop up in many places. Some of these

were evidently obsolescent or unintelligible at the time when the legends crystallized into their present shape, and stories are told purporting to give their origin. Thus we learn either in the “Records” or in the “Chronicles,” or in both works, why it is unlucky to use only one light, to break off the teeth of a comb at night-time, and to enter the house with straw hat and rain-coat on. The world-wide dread of going against the sun is connected with the Jim-mu legend, and recurs elsewhere. We also hear of charms,—for instance, of the wondrous “Herb-Quelling Sabre” found by Susa-no-Wo (the “Impetuous Male Deity”) inside a serpent’s tail, and still preserved as one of the Imperial regalia. Other such charms were the “tide-flowing jewel” and “tide-ebbing jewel,” that obtained for Jim-mu’s grandfather the victory over his elder brother, together with the fish-hook which figures so largely in the same legend. Divination by means of the shoulder-blade of a stag was a favourite means of ascertaining the will of the gods. Sometimes also human beings seem to have been credited in a vague manner with the power of prophetic utterance. Earthenware pots were buried at the point of his departure by an intending traveller. In a fight the initial arrow was regarded with superstitious awe. The great precautions with which the Empress Jin-gō is said to have set out on her expedition to Korea have already been alluded to, and indeed the commencement of any action or enterprise seems to have had special importance attributed to it.

To conclude this survey of the religious beliefs of the Early Japanese by referring, as was done in the case of the arts of life, to certain notable features which are conspicuous by their absence, attention may

be called to the fact that there is no tradition of a deluge, no testimony to any effect produced on the imagination by the earthquakes from which the Japanese islanders suffer such constant alarms, no trace of star-worship, no notion of incarnation or of transmigration. This last remark goes to show that the Japanese mythology had assumed its present shape before the first echo of Buddhism reverberated on these shores. But the absence of any tradition of a deluge or inundation is still more , both because such catastrophes are likely to occur occasionally in all lands, and because the imagination of most nations seems to have been greatly impressed by their occurrence. Moreover what is specifically known to us as the Deluge has been lately claimed as an ancient Altaïc myth. Yet here we have the oldest of the undoubtedly Altaïc nations without any legend of the kind. As for the neglect of the stars, round whose names the imagination of other races has twined such fanciful conceits, it is as characteristic of Modern as of Archaic Japan. The Chinese designations of the constellations, and some few Chinese legends relating to them, have been borrowed in historic times; but no Japanese writer has ever thought of looking in the stars for “the poetry of heaven.” Another detail worthy of mention is that the number seven, which in so many countries has been considered sacred, is here not prominent in any way, its place being taken by eight. Thus we have Eight Great Islands, an Eight-forked Serpent, a beard Eighty Hand-breaths long, a God named “Eight-Thousand Spears,” Eighty or Eight Hundred Myriads of Deities, etc., etc. The commentators think it necessary to tell us that all these eights and eighties need not be taken literally, as they simply mean a great number. The fact remains that the number eight had, for some unknown reason, a special significance attached to it; and as the documents which mention eight also mention nine and ten, besides higher numbers, and as in some test cases, such as that of the Eight Great Islands, each of the eight is separately enumerated, it is plain that when the Early Japanese said eight they meant eight, though they may doubtless have used that number in a vague manner, as we do a dozen, a hundred, and a thousand.

How glaringly different all this is from the fanciful accounts of Shintō that have been given by some recent popular writers calls for

no comment. Thus one of them, whom another quotes as an authority, tells us that Shintō “consists in the belief that the productive ethereal spirit being expanded through the whole universe, every part is in some degree impregnated with it, and therefore every part is in some measure the seat of the deity; whence local gods and goddesses are everywhere worshipped, and consequently multiplied without end. Like the ancient Romans and the Greeks, they acknowledge a Supreme Being, the first, the supreme, the intellectual, by which men have been reclaimed from rudeness and barbarism to elegance and refinement, and been taught through privileged men and women, not only to live with more comfort, but to die with better hopes.” (!) Truly, when one peruses such utterly groundless assertions,—for that here quoted is but one among many,—one is tempted to believe that the nineteenth century must form part of the early mythopœic age.

With regard to the question of government, we learn little beyond such vague statements as that to so-and-so was yielded by his eighty brethren the sovereignty of the land of Idzumo, or that Izanagi divided the dominion over all things between his three children, bestowing on one the “Plain of High Heaven,” on another the Dominion of the Night, and on the third the “Sea-Plain.” But we do not in the earlier legends see such sovereignty actually administered. The heavenly gods seem rather to have been conceived as forming a sort of commonwealth, who decided things by meeting together in counsel in the stony bed of the “River of Heaven,” and taking the advice of the shrewdest of their number. Indeed the various divine assemblies, to which the story in the “Records” and “Chronicles” introduces us, remind us of nothing so much as of the village assemblies of primitive tribes in many parts of the world, where the cleverness of one and the general willingness to follow his suggestions fill the place of the more definite organization of later times.

Descending from heaven to earth, we find little during the so-called “Divine Age” but stories of isolated individuals and families; and it is not till the narrative of the wars of the earlier Emperors commences, that any kind of political organization comes

into view. Then at once we hear of chieftains in every locality, who lead their men to battle, and are seemingly the sole depositories of power, each in his microscopic sphere. The legend of Jim-mu itself, however, is sufficient to show that autocracy, as we understand it, was not characteristic of the government of the Tsukushi tribes; for Jim-mu and his brother, until the latter’s death, are represented as joint chieftains of their host. Similarly we find that the “Territorial Owners” of Yamato, and the “Rulers” of Idzumo, whom Jim-mu or his successors are said to have subjugated, are constantly spoken of in the Plural, as if to intimate that they exercised a divided sovereignty. During the whole of the so-called “Human Age” we meet, both in parts of the country which were already subject to the Imperial rule and in others which were not yet annexed, with local magnates bearing these same titles of “Territorial Owners,” “Rulers,” “Chiefs,” etc.; and the impression left on the mind is that in early historical times the sovereign’s power was not exercised directly over all parts of Japan, but that in many cases the local chieftains continued to hold sway though owning some sort of allegiance to the emperor in Yamato, while in others the emperor was strong enough to depose these local rulers, and to put in their place his own kindred or retainers, who however exercised unlimited authority in their own districts, and used the same titles as had been borne by the former native rulers,—that, in fact, the government was feudal rather than centralized. This characteristic of the political organization of Early Japan has not altogether escaped the attention of the native commentators. Indeed the great Shintō scholar Hirata not only recognizes the fact, but endeavours to prove that the system of centralization which obtained during the eighth, ninth, tenth, eleventh, and part of the twelfth centuries, and which has been revived in our own day, is nothing but an imitation of the Chinese bureaucratic system; and he asserts that an organized feudalism, similar to that which existed from the twelfth century down to the year 1867, was the sole really ancient and national Japanese form of government. The translator cannot follow Hirata to such lengths, as he sees no evidence in the early histories of the intricate organization of mediæval Japan. But that, beyond the immediate limits of the Imperial domain, the government resembled feudalism rather than centralization seems

indisputable. It is also true that the seventh century witnessed a sudden move in the direction of bureaucratic organization, many of the titles which had up till that time denoted actual provincial chieftains being then either suppressed, or else allowed to sink into mere “gentile names.” Another remark which is suggested by a careful perusal of the two ancient histories is that the Imperial succession was in early historical times very irregular. Strange gaps occur as late as the sixth century of our era; and even when it was one of the children who inherited his father’s throne, that child was rarely the eldest son.

What now are we to gather from this analysis of the religious and political features revealed to us by a study of the books containing the Early Japanese traditions as to the still remoter history and tribal divisions of Japan, and as to the origin of the Japanese legends? Very little that is certain, perhaps; but, in the opinion of the present writer, two or three interesting probabilities.

In view of the multiplicity of gods and the complications of the so-called historical traditions, he thinks that it would be à priori difficult to believe that the development of Japanese civilization should have run on in a single stream broken only in the third century by the commencement of intercourse with the mainland of Asia. We are, however, not left to such a merely theoretical consideration. There are clear indications of there having been three centres of legendary cycles, three streams which mixed together to form the Japan which meets us at the dawn of authentic history in the fifth century of our era. One of these centres,—the most important in the mythology,—is Idzumo; the second is Yamato; the third is Tsukushi, called in modern times Kiushiu. Eastern and Northern Japan count for nothing; indeed, much of the North-East and North was, down to comparatively recent times, occupied by the barbarous Ainos or, as they are called by the Japanese Yemishi, Yebisu or Yezo. That the legends or traditions derived from the three parts of the country here mentioned accord but imperfectly together is an opinion which has already been alluded to, and upon which light may perhaps be thrown by a more thorough sifting of the myths and beliefs classified according to this three-fold system. The question of the ancient division of Japan into several independent states

is, however, not completely a matter of opinion. For we have in the “Shan Hai Ching” a positive statement concerning a Northern and a Southern Yamato (), and the Chinese annals of both the Han dynasties tell us of the division of the country into a much larger number of kingdoms, of which, according to the annals of the later Han dynasty, Yamato () was the most powerful. A later official Chinese historian also tells us that Jih-pên (, our Japan) and Yamato had been two different states, and that Jih-pên was reported to have swallowed up Yamato. By Jih-pên the author evidently meant to speak of the island of Tsukushi or of part of it. That the Chinese were fairly well acquainted with Japan is shown by the fact of there being in the old Chinese literature more than one mention of “the country of the hairy people beyond the mountains in the East and North,”—that is of the Yemishi or Ainos. No Chinese book would seem to mention Idzumo as having formed a separate country; and this evidence must be allowed its full weight. It is possible, of course, that Idzumo may have been incorporated with Yamato before the conquest of the latter by the Tsukushi people, and in this case some of the inconsistencies of the history may be traceable to a confusion of the traditions concerning the conquest of Idzumo by Yamato and of those concerning the conquest of Yamato by Tsukushi. Perhaps too (for so almost impossible a task is it to reconstruct history out of legend) there may not, after all, be sufficient warrant for believing in the former existence of Idzumo as a separate state, though it certainly seems hard to account otherwise for the peculiar place that Idzumo occupies in mythic story. In any case, and whatever light may hereafter be thrown on this very obscure question, it must be remembered that, so far as clear native documentary evidence reaches, 400 A.D. is approximately the highest limit of reliable Japanese history. Beyond that date we are at once confronted with the miraculous; and if any facts relative to earlier Japan are to be extracted from the pages of the “Records” and “Chronicles,” it must be by a process very different from that of simply reading and taking their assertions upon trust.

With regard to the origin, or rather to the significance, of the clearly fanciful portions of the Japanese legends, the question here

mooted as to the probability of the Japanese mythology being a mixed one warns us to exercise more than usual caution in endeavouring to interpret it. In fact, it bids us wait to interpret it until such time as further research shall have shown which legends belong together. For if they are of heterogeneous origin, it is hopeless to attempt to establish a genealogical tree of the gods, and the very phrase so often heard in discussions on this subject,—“the original religious beliefs of the Japanese,”—ceases to have any precise meaning; for different beliefs may have been equally ancient and original, but distinguished geographically by belonging to different parts of the country. Furthermore it may not be superfluous to call attention to the fact that the gods who are mentioned in the opening phrases of the histories as we now have them are not therefore necessarily the gods that were most anciently worshipped. Surely in religions, as in books, it is not often the preface that is written first. And yet this simple consideration has been constantly neglected, and, one after another, European writers having a tincture of knowledge of Japanese mythology, tell us of original Dualities, Trinities, and Supreme Deities, without so much as pausing to notice that the only two authorities in the matter,—viz., the “Records” and the “Chronicles,”—differ most gravely in the lists they furnish of primary gods. If the present writer ventured to throw out a suggestion where so many random assertions have been made, it would be to the effect that the various abstractions which figure at the commencement of the “Records” and of the “Chronicles” were probably later growths, and perhaps indeed mere inventions of individual priests. There is nothing either in the histories or in the Shintō Rituals to show that these gods, or some one or more of them, were in early days, as has been sometimes supposed, the objects of a purer worship which was afterwards obscured by the legends of Izanagi, Izanami, and their numerous descendants. On the contrary, with the exception of the deity Taka-Mi-Musu-Bi, they are no sooner mentioned than they vanish into space.

Whether it is intrinsically likely that so rude a race as the Early Japanese, and a race so little given to metaphysical speculation as the Japanese at all times of their history, should have commenced by a highly abstract worship which they afterwards completely abandoned, is a question which may better be left to those whose general knowledge of early peoples and early religious beliefs entitles their decisions to respect. Their assistance, likewise, even after the resolution of the Japanese mythology into its several component parts, must be called in by the specialist to help in deciding how much of this mythology should be interpreted according to the “solar” method now so popular in England, how much should be accepted as history more or less perverted, how much should be regarded as embodying attempts at explaining facts in nature, and what residue may be rejected as simple fabrication of the priesthood in comparatively late times. Those who are personally acquainted with the Japanese character will probably incline to enlarge the area of the three latter divisions more than would be prudent in the case of the highly imaginative Aryans, and to point out that, though some few Japanese legends or portions of legends can be traced to false etymologies invented to account for names of places, and are therefore true myths in the strictest acceptation of the term, yet the kindred process whereby personality is ascribed to inanimate objects,—a process which lies at the very root of Aryan mythology,—is altogether alien to the Japanese genius, and indeed to the Far-Eastern mind in general. Mythology thus originated has been aptly described as a “disease of language.” But all persons are not liable to catch the same disease, neither presumably are all languages; and it is hard to see how a linguistic disease which consists in mistaking a metaphor for a reality can attack a tongue to which metaphor, even in its tamest shape, is an almost total stranger. Thus not only have Japanese Nouns no Genders and Japanese Verbs no Persons, but the names of inanimate objects cannot even be used as the subjects of Transitive Verbs. Nowhere for instance in Japanese, whether Archaic, Classical, or Modern, do we meet

with such metaphorical,—mythological,—phrases as “the hot wind melts the ice,” or “his conversation delights me,” where the words “wind” and “conversation” are spoken of as if they were personal agents. No, the idea is invariably rendered in some other and impersonal way. Yet what a distance separates such statements, in which the ordinary European reader unacquainted with any Altaïc tongue would scarcely recognize the existence of any personification at all, from the bolder flights of Aryan metaphor! Indeed, though Altaïc Asia has produced very few wise men, the words of its languages closely correspond to the definition of words as “the wise man’s counters”; for they are colourless and matter-of-fact, and rarely if ever carry him who speaks them above the level of sober reality. At the same time, it is patent that the sun plays some part in the Japanese mythology; and even the legend of Prince Yamato-Take, which has hitherto been generally accepted as historical or semi-historical, bears such close resemblance to legends in other countries which have been pronounced to be solar by great authorities that it may at least be worth while to subject it to investigation from that point of view. The present writer has already expressed his conviction that this matter is not one for the specialist to decide alone. He would only, from the Japanese point of view, suggest very particular caution in the application to Japanese legend of a method of interpretation which has elsewhere been fruitful of great results.

A further particular which is deserving of notice is the almost certain fact of a recension of the various traditions at a comparatively late date. This is partly shown by the amount of geographical knowledge displayed in the enumeration of the various islands supposed to have been given birth to by Izanagi and Izanami (the “Male who Invites” and the “Female who Invites”),—an amount and an exactness of knowledge unattainable at a time prior to the union under one rule of all the provinces mentioned, and significantly not extending much beyond those provinces. Such a recension may likewise be inferred,—if the opinion of the manifold origin of the Japanese traditions be accepted,—from the fairly ingenious manner in which their component parts have generally been welded together. The way in which one or two

instance, that of the curious curse pronounced by the younger brother Ho-wori on the elder Ho-deri—are repeated more than once exemplifies a less intelligent revision. Under this heading may, perhaps, be included the legends of the conquest of Yamato by the Emperor Jim-mu and of the conquest of the same country by the Empress Jin-gō, which certainly bear a suspicious likeness to each other. Of the subjection of Korea by this last-named personage it should be observed that the Chinese and Korean histories, so far as they are known to us, make no mention, and indeed the dates, as more specifically given in the “Chronicles,” clearly show the inconsistency of the whole story; for Jin-gō’s husband, the Emperor Chiū-ai, is said to have been born in the 19th year of the reign of Sei-mu, i.e. in A. D. 149, while his father, Prince Yamato-Take, is said to have died in the 43rd year of Kei-kō, i.e. in A. D. 113, so that there is an interval of thirty-six years between the death of the father and the birth of the son!

One peculiarly interesting piece of information to be derived from a careful study of the “Records” and “Chronicles” (though it is one on which the patriotic Japanese commentators preserve complete silence) is that, at the very earliest period to which the twilight of legend stretches back, Chinese influence had already begun to make itself felt in these islands, communicating to the inhabitants both implements and ideas. This is surely a fact of very particular importance, lending, as it does, its weight to the mass of evidence which goes to prove that in almost all known cases culture has been introduced from abroad, and has not been spontaneously developed. The traces of Chinese influence are indeed not numerous, but they are unmistakable. Thus we find chopsticks mentioned both in the Idzumo and in the Kiushiu legendary cycle. The legend of the birth of the Sun-Goddess and

Moon-God from Izanagi’s eyes is a scarcely altered fragment of the Chinese myth of P‘an Ku; the superstition that peaches had assisted Izanagi to repel the hosts of Hades can almost certainly be traced to a Chinese source, and the hand-maidens of the Japanese Sun-Goddess are mentioned under the exact title of the Spinning Damsel of Chinese myth (), while the River of Heaven (), which figures in the same legend, is equally Chinese,—for surely both names cannot be mere coincidences. A like remark applies to the name of the Deity of the Kitchen, and to the way in which that deity is mentioned. The art of making an intoxicating liquor is referred to in the very earliest Japanese legends. Are we to believe that its invention here was independent of its invention on the continent? In this instance moreover the old histories bear witness against themselves; for they mention this same liquor in terms showing that it was a curious rarity in what, according to the accepted chronology, corresponds to the century immediately preceding the Christian era, and again in the third century of that era. The whole story of the Sea-God’s palace has a Chinese ring about it, and the “cassia-tree” (桂) mentioned in it is certainly Chinese, as are the crocodiles. That the so-called maga-tama, or “curved jewels,” which figure so largely in the Japanese mythology, and with which the Early Japanese adorned themselves, were derived from China was already suspected by Mr. Henry von Siebold; and quite latterly Mr. Milne has thrown light on this subject from an altogether unexpected quarter. He has remarked, namely, that jade or the jade-like stone of which many of the maga-tama are made, is a mineral which has never yet been met with in Japan. We therefore know that some at least of the “curved jewels” or of the material for them came from the mainland, and the probability that the idea of carving these very oddly shaped ornaments was likewise imported thence gains in probability. The peculiar kind of arrow called nari-kabura (鳴鏑) is another trace of Chinese influence in the material order, and a thorough search by a competent Chinese scholar would perhaps reveal others. But enough at least has been said to show the indisputable existence of that influence. From other sources we know

that the more recent mythic fancy of Japan has shown itself as little impenetrable to such influence as have the manners and customs of the people. The only difference is that assimilation has of late proceeded with much greater rapidity.

In this, language is another guide; for, though the discoverable traces of Chinese influence are comparatively few in the Archaic Dialect, yet they are there. This is a subject which has as yet scarcely been touched. Two Japanese authors of an elder generation, Kahibara and Arawi Hakuseki, did indeed point out the existence of some such traces. But they drew no inference from them, they did not set to work to discover new ones, and their indications, except in one or two obvious cases, have received little attention from later writers whether native or foreign. But when we compare such words as kane, kume, kuni, saka, tana, uma, and many others with the pronunciation now given, or with that which the phonetic laws of the language in its earlier stage would have caused to be given, to their Chinese equivalents , , , , , , etc., the idea forces way that such coincidences of sound and sense cannot all be purely accidental; and when moreover we find that the great majority of the words in question denote things or ideas that were almost certainly imported, we perceive that a more thorough sifting of Archaic Japanese (especially of botanical and zoological names and of the names of implements and manufactures) would probably be the best means of discovering at least the negative features of an antiquity remoter than all written documents, remoter even than the crystallization of the legends which those documents have preserved. In dealing with Korean words found in Archaic Japanese we tread on more delicate ground; for there we have a language which, unlike Chinese, stands to Japanese in the closest family relationship, making it plain that many coincidences of sound and sense should be ascribed to radical affinity rather than to later intercourse. At the same time it appears more probable that, for instance, such seemingly indigenous Japanese terms as Hotoke, “Buddha,” and tera, “Buddhist temple,” should have been in fact borrowed from the corresponding Korean words Puchhö and chöl than that both nations should have independently chosen homonyms to denote the same foreign ideas. Indeed, it will perhaps not be too bold to assume that in the case of Hotoke, “Buddha,”

we have before us a word whose journeyings consist of many stages, it having been first brought from India to China, then from China to Korea, and thirdly from Korea to Japan, where finally the ingenuity of philologists has discovered for it a Japanese etymology (hito ke, “human spirit”) with which in reality it has nothing whatever to do.

These introductory remarks have already extended to such a length that a reference to the strikingly parallel case of borrowed customs and ideas which is presented by the Ainos in this same archipelago must be left undeveloped. In conclusion, it need only be remarked that a simple translation of one book, such as is here given, does not nearly exhaust the work which might be expended even on the elucidation of that single book, and much less can it fill the gap which still lies between us and a proper knowledge of Japanese antiquity. To do this, the co-operation of the archæologist must be obtained, while even in the field of the critical investigation of documents there is an immense deal still to be done. Not only must all the available Japanese sources be made to yield up the information which they contain, but the assistance of Chinese and Korean records must be called in. A large quantity of Chinese literature has already been ransacked for a similar purpose by Matsushita Ken-rin, a translation of part of whose very useful compilation entitled “An Exposition of the Foreign Notices of Japan” (異稱日本傳) would be one of the greatest helps towards the desired knowledge. In fact there still remains to be done for Japanese antiquity from our standpoint what Hirata has done for it from the standpoint of a Japanese Shintoist. Except in some of Mr. Satow’s papers published in these “Transactions,” the subject has scarcely yet been studied in this spirit, and it is possible that the Japanese members of our Society may be somewhat alarmed at the idea of their national history being treated with so little reverence. Perhaps, however, the discovery of the interest of the field of study thus only waiting to be investigated may reconcile them to the view here propounded. In any case if the early history of Japan is not all true, no amount of make-believe can make it so. What we would like to do is to sift the true from the false. As an eminent writer on anthropology has recently

said, “Historical criticism, that is, judgment, is practised not for the purpose of disbelieving, but of believing. Its object is not to find fault with the author, but to ascertain how much of what he says may be reasonably taken as true.” Moreover, even in what is not to be accepted as historic fact there is often much that is valuable from other points of view. If, therefore, we lose a thousand years of so-called Japanese history, it must not be forgotten that Japanese mythology remains as the oldest existing product of the Altaïc mind.

The following is a list of all the Japanese works quoted in this Introduction and in the Notes to the Translation. For the sake of convenience to the English reader all the titles have been translated excepting some few which, mostly on account of their embodying a recondite allusion, do not admit of translation:—

*Catalogue of Family Names, 姓氏錄, by Prince Mata.
*Chronicles of Japan (generally quoted as the “Chronicles,”) 日本紀 or 日本書紀, by Prince Toneri and others.
*Chronicles of Japan Continued, 續日本紀, by Sugano Ason Mamichi, Fujihara no Ason Tsugunaha and others.
*Chronicles of Japan Explained, 釋日本記, by Urabe no Yasukata.
*Chronicles of the Old Matters of Former Ages, 先代舊事記, authorship uncertain.
*Collection of a Myriad Leaves, 萬葉集, by Tachibana no Moroye (probably).
*Collection of Japanese Songs Ancient and Modern, 古今和歌集, by Ki no Tsurayuki and others.
*Commentary on the Collection of a Myriad Leaves, 萬葉考, by Kamo no Mabuchi.

*Commentary on the Lyric Dramas, 謠曲拾葉集, by Jin-kō.
*Commentary on the Ritual of the General Purification, 大秡詞後釋, by Motowori Norinaga.
*Correct Account of the Divine Age, 神代正語, by Motowori Norinaga.
*Dictionary of the Pillow-Words, 冠辞考, by Kamo no Mabuchi.
*Digest of the Imperial Genealogies, 纂輯御系圖, by Yokoyama Yoshikiyo and Kurokaha Saneyori.
*Discussion of the Objections to the Inquiry into the True Chronology, 眞暦不審考, by Motowori Norinaga.
*Examination of Difficult Words, 難語考, by Tachibana no Moribe.
*Examination of the Synonyms for Japan, 國號考, by Motowori Norinaga.
*Explanation of Japanese Names, 日本譯名, by Kahibara Tokushin.
*Explanation of the Songs in the Chronicles of Japan, 日本紀歌廼解, by Arakida no Hisaoi.
*Exposition of the Ancient Histories, 古史傳, by Hirata Atsutane.
*Exposition of the Foreign Notices of Japan, 異稱日本傳, by Matsushita Ken-rin.
*Exposition of the Record of Ancient Matters (usually quoted simply at “Motowori’s Commentary”), 古事記傳, by Motowori Norinaga.
*Exposition of the Records of Ancient Matters Criticized (usually quoted as “Moribe’s Critique on Motowori’s Commentary,”) 難古事記傳, by Tachibana no Moribe.
*Gleanings form Ancient Story, 古語拾遺, by Imibe no Hironari.
*Idzu no Chi-Waki, 稜威道別, by Tachibana no Moribe.
*Idzu no Koto-waki, 稜威言別, by
*Inquiry into the Significance of the Names of All the Provinces (MS.), 諸國名義考, by Fujihara no Hitomaro.
*Inquiry into the True Chronology, 眞暦考, by Motowori Norinaga.
*Japanese Words Classified and Explained, 和名類聚鈔, by Minamoto no Shitagafu.
*Ko-Shi Tsū, 古史通, by Arawi Kumbi Hakuseki.
*Kō-Gan Shō, (MS.), 厚顔抄, by Kei-chiyu.

*Perpetual Commentary on the Chronicles of Japan (usually quoted as “Tanigaha Shisei’s Commentary,”) 日本書記通證, by Tanigaha Shisei.
*Records of Ancient Matters (often quoted simply as the “Records”), 古事記, by Futo no Yasumaro.
*Records of Ancient Matters in the Divine Character, 神字古事記, by Fujihara no Masaoki.
*Records of Ancient Matters in the Syllabic Character, 假名古事記, by Sakata no Kaneyasu.
*Records of Ancient Matters Revised, 校正古事記, Anonymous.
*Records of Ancient Matters With Marginal Notes (usually quoted as “the Edition of 1687”), 鼇頭古事記, by Deguchi Nobuyoshi.
*Records of Ancient Matters With the Ancient Reading, 古訓古事記, by Nagase no Masachi (published with Motowori’s sanction).
*Records of Ancient Matters with Marginal Readings, 標註古事記, by Murakami Tadayoshi.
*Ritual of the General Purification, 犬祓詞, Authorship Uncertain.
*Shintō Discussed Afresh, 神道新論, by Takahashi Gorō.
*Sources of the Ancient Histories, 古史徴, by Hirata Atsutane.
*Tale of a Bamboo-Cutter, 竹取物語, Authorship Uncertain.
*Tama-Katsuma, 玉勝間, by Motowori Norinaga.
*Tokiha-Gusa (the full title is Jin-Dai Sei-Go Tokiha-Gusa,) 常盤草 (神代正語常盤草), Hosoda Tominobu.
*Topography of Yamashiro, 山城風土紀, Authorship Uncertain.
*Tō-Ga (MS.), 東雅, by Arawi Kumbi Hakuseki.
*Wa-Kun Shiwori, 和訓栞, by Tanigaha Shisei.
*Yamato Tales, 大和物語, Authorship Uncertain.

Besides these, two or three standard Chinese works are referred to, such as the “Yi Ching” or “Book of Changes” () and the “Shan Hai Ching” or “Mountain and Sea Classic” (); but they are very few, and so easily recognized that it were unnecessary to enumerate them. All Japanese words properly so called are transliterated according to Mr. Satow’s “Orthographic System,” which, while representing the native spelling, does not in their case differ very greatly from the modern pronunciation. In the case of Sinico-Japanese words, where the divergence between the “Orthographic” spelling and the

is often considerable, a phonetic spelling has been preferred. With but two or three exceptions, which have been specially noted, Sinico-Japanese words are found only in proper names mentioned in the Preface and in the translator’s Introduction, Foot-notes, and Sectional Headings. The few Chinese words that occur in the Introduction and Notes are transliterated according to the method introduced by [[Author:Thomas Francis Wade|Sir Thomas Wade]], and now so widely used by students of Chinese.

---

---

---

I Yasumaro say:

Now when chaos had begun to condense, but force and form were not yet manifest, and there was nought named, nought done, who could know its shape? Nevertheless Heaven and Earth first parted, and the Three Deities performed the commencement of creation; the Passive and Active Essences then developed, and the Two Spirits became the ancestors of all things. Therefore did he enter obscurity and emerge into light, and the Sun and Moon were revealed by the washing of his eyes; he floated on and plunged into the sea-water, and Heavenly and Earthly Deities appeared through the ablutions of his person? So in the dimness of the great commencement, we, by relying on the original teaching, learn the time of the conception of the earth and of the birth of islands; in the remoteness of the original beginning, we, by trusting the former sages, perceive the era of the genesis of Deities and of the establishment of men. Truly do we know that a mirror was hung up,

that jewels were spat out, and that then an Hundred Kings succeeded each other; that a blade was bitten, and a serpent cut in pieces, so that a Myriad Deities did flourish. By deliberations in the Tranquil River the Empire was pacified; by discussions on the Little Shore the land was purified. Wherefore His Augustness Ho-no-ni-ni-gi first descended to the Peak of Takachi, and the Heavenly Sovereign Kamu-Yamato did traverse the Island of the Dragon-Fly. A weird bear put

forth its claws, and a heavenly sabre was obtained at Takakura. They with tails obstructed the path, and a great crow guided him to Yeshinu. Dancing in rows they destroyed the brigands, and listening to a song they vanquished the foemen. Being instructed in a dream, he was reverent to the Heavenly and Earthly Deities, and was therefore styled the Wise Monarch; having gazed on the smoke, he was benevolent to the black-haired people, and is therefore remembered as the Emperor-Sage. Determining the frontiers and civilizing the country, he issued laws from the Nearer Afumi; reforming the surnames and selecting the

gentile names, he held sway at the Further Asuka. Though each differed in caution and in ardour, though all were unlike in accomplishments and in intrinsic worth, yet was there none who did not by contemplating antiquity correct manners that had fallen to ruin, and by illumining modern times repair laws that were approaching dissolution.

In the august reign of the Heavenly Sovereign who governed the Eight Great Islands from the Great Palace of Kiyomihara at Asuka, the Hidden Dragon put on perfection, the Reiterated Thunder came at the

appointed moment. Having heard a song in a dream, he felt that he should continue the succession; having reached the water at night, he knew that he should receive the inheritance. Nevertheless Heaven’s time was not yet, and he escaped like the cicada to the Southern Mountains; both men and matters were favourable, and he marched like the tiger to the Eastern Land. Suddenly riding in the Imperial Palanquin, he forced his way across mountains and rivers: the Six Divisions rolled like thunder, the Three Hosts sped like lightning. The erect spears lifted up their might, and the bold warriors arose like smoke: the crimson flags glistened among the weapons, and the ill-omened crew were shattered like tiles. Or ere a day had elapsed, the evil influences were purified: forthwith were the cattle let loose and the horses given repose, as with shouts of victory they returned to the Flowery Summer; the flags were rolled up and the javelins put away, as with dances and chants they came to rest in the capital city. The year was that of the Cock, and it was in the Second Moon. At the Great Palace

of Kiyomihara did he ascend to the Heavenly seat: in morality he outstripped Ken-Kō, in virtue he surpassed Shiū-Ō. Having grasped the celestial seals, he was paramount over the Six Cardinal Points; having obtained the heavenly supremacy, he annexed the Eight Wildernesses. He held the mean between the Two Essences, and regulated the order of the Five Elements. He established divine reason wherewith to advance good customs; he disseminated brilliant usages wherewith to make the land great. Moreover the ocean of his wisdom, in its vastness, profoundly investigated the highest antiquity; the mirror of his heart, in its fervour, clearly observed former ages.

Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign commanded, saying: “I hear that the chronicles of the emperors and likewise the original words in the possession of the various families deviate from exact truth, and are mostly amplified by empty falsehoods. If at the present time these imperfections be not amended, ere many years shall have elapsed, the purport of this, the great basis of the country, the grand foundation of the monarchy, will be destroyed. So now I desire to have the chronicles of the emperors selected and recorded, and the old words examined and ascertained, falsehoods being erased and the truth determined, in order to transmit [the latter] to after ages.” At that time there was a retainer whose surname was Hiyeda and his personal name Are. He was twenty-eight years old, and of so intelligent a disposition that he could repeat with his mouth whatever

met his eyes, and record in his heart whatever struck his ears. Forthwith Are was commanded to learn by heart the genealogies of the emperors, and likewise the words of former ages. Nevertheless time elapsed and the age changed, and the thing was not yet carried out.

Prostrate I consider how Her Majesty the Empress, having obtained Unity, illumines the empire,—being versed in the Triad, nourishes the people. Ruling from the Purple Palace, Her virtue reaches to the utmost limits of the horses’ hoof-marks: dwelling amid the Sombre Retinue, Her influence illumines the furthest distance attained to by vessels’ prows. The sun rises, and the brightness is increased; the clouds disperse, neither is there smoke. Never cease the historiographers from recording the good omens of connected stalks and double rice-ears; never for a single moon is the treasury without the tribute of continuous beacon-fires and repeated interpretations. In fame She must be pronounced superior to Bum-Mei, in virtue more eminent than Ten-Itsu.

Hereupon, regretting the errors in the old words, and wishing to correct the misstatements in the former chronicles, She, on the eighteenth day of the ninth moon of the fourth year of Wa-dō, commanded me Yasumaro to select and record the old words learnt by heart by Hiyeda no Are according to the Imperial Decree, and dutifully to lift them up to Her.

In reverent obedience to the contents of the Decree, I have made a careful choice. But in high antiquity both speech and thought were so simple, that it would be difficult to arrange phrases and compose periods in the characters. To relate everything in an ideographic transcription would entail an inadequate expression of the meaning; to write altogether

to the phonetic method would make the story of events unduly lengthy. For this reason have I sometimes in the same sentence used the phonetic and ideographic systems conjointly, and have sometimes in one matter used the ideographic record exclusively. Moreover where the drift of the words was obscure, I have by comments elucidated their signification; but need it be said that I have nowhere commented on what was easy? Again, in such cases as calling the surname 日下 Kusaka, and the personal name written with the character 帶 Tarashi, I have followed usage without alteration. Altogether the things recorded commence with the separation of Heaven and Earth, and conclude with

the august reign at Woharida. So from the Deity Master-of-the-August-Centre-of-Heaven down to His Augustness Prince-Wave-Limit-Brave-Cormorant-Thatch-Meeting-Incompletely makes the First Volume; from the Heavenly Sovereign Kamu-Yamato-Ihare-Biko down to the august reign of Homuda makes the Second Volume; from the Emperor Oho-Sazaki down to the great palace of Woharida makes the Third Volume. Altogether I have written Three Volumes, which I reverently and respectfully present. I Yasumaro, with true trembling and true fear, bow my head, bow my head.

Reverently presented by the Court Noble Futo no Yasumaro, an Officer of the Upper Division of the First Class of the Fifth Bank and of the Fifth Order of Merit, on the 28th day of the first moon of the fifth year of Wa-dō.

============================================================
SECTION 1
============================================================

---

[]

The names of the Deities that were born in the Plain of High Heaven when the Heaven and Earth began were the Deity Master-of-the-August-Centre-of-Heaven, next the High-August-Producing-Wondrous Deity, next the Divine-Producing-Wondrous-Deity. These three Deities were all Deities born alone, and hid their persons. The names of the Deities that were born next from a thing that sprouted up like unto a reed-shoot when the earth, young and like unto floating oil, drifted about medusa-like, were the Pleasant-Reed-Shoot-Prince-Elder

============================================================
SECTION 2
============================================================

Deity, next the Heavenly-Eternally-Standing-Deity. These two Deities were likewise born alone, and hid their persons.

[]
The names of the Deities that were born next were the Earthly-Eternally-Standing-Deity, next the Luxuriant-Integrating-Master-Deity.

These two Deities were likewise Deities born alone, and hid their persons. The names of the Deities that were born next were the Deity Mud-Earth-Lord, next his younger sister the Deity Mud-Earth-Lady; next the Germ-Integrating-Deity, next his younger sister the Life-Integrating-Deity; next the Deity Elder-of-the-Great-Place, next his younger sister the Deity Elder-Lady-of-the-Great-Place; next the Deity Perfect-Exterior, next his younger sister the Deity Oh-Awful-Lady; next the

============================================================
SECTION 3
============================================================

Deity the Male-Who-Invites, next his younger sister the Deity the Female-Who-Invites.

[]
Hereupon all the Heavenly Deities commanded the two Deities His Augnstness the Male-Who-Invites and Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites, ordering them to “make, consolidate, and give birth to this drifting land.” Granting to them an heavenly jewelled spear, they [thus] deigned to charge them. So the two Deities, standing upon the Floating

============================================================
SECTION 4
============================================================

Bridge of Heaven, pushed down the jewelled spear and stirred with it, whereupon, when they had stirred the brine till it went curdle-curdle, and drew [the spear] up, the brine that dripped down from the end of the spear was piled up and became an island. This is the Island of Onogoro.

[]

Having descended from Heaven onto this island, they saw to the erection of an heavenly august pillar, they saw to the erection of an hall of eight fathoms. Tunc quæsivit [Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat] a

============================================================
SECTION 5
============================================================

minore sorore Augustâ Feminâ-Qui-Invitat: “Tuum corpus quo in modo factum est?” Respondit dicens: “Meum corpus crescens crevit, sed una pars est quæ non crevit continua.” Tunc dixit Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat: “Meum corpus crescens crevit, sed est una pars quæ crevit euperflua. Ergo an bonum erit ut hanc corporis mei partem quæ crevit superflua in tui corporis partem quæ non crevit continua inseram, et regionea procreem?” Augusta Femina-Quæ-Invitat respondit dicens: “Bonum erit.” Tunc dixit Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat: “Quod quum ita sit, ego et tu, hanc cœlestem augustam columnam circumenutes mutuoque occurrentes, augustarum [i.e. privatarum] partium augustam coitionem faciemus.” Hâc pactione factâ, dixit [Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat]: “Tu a dexterâ circumeuns occurre; ego a sinistrâ occurram.” Absolutâ pactione ubi circumierunt, Augusta Femina-Qui-Invitat primum inquit: “O venuste et amabilis adolescens!” Deinde Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat inquit: “O venusta et amabilis virgo!” Postquam singuli orationi finem fecerunt, [Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat] locutus est sorori, dicens: “Non decet feminam primum verba facere.” Nihilominus in thalamo [opus procreationis] inceperunt, et filium [nomine] Hirudinem [vel Hirudini similem] pepererunt. This child they placed in a boat of reeds, and let it float away. Next they gave birth to the Island of Aha. This likewise is not reckoned among their children.

[]

Hereupon the two Deities took counsel, saying: “The children to whom we have now given birth are not good. It will be best to announce this in the august place of the Heavenly Deities.” They ascended

forthwith to Heaven and enquired of Their Augustnesses the Heavenly Deities. Then the Heavenly Deities commanded and found out by grand divination, and ordered them, saying: “They were not good because the woman spoke first. Descend back again and amend your words.” So thereupon descending back, they again went round the heavenly august pillar as before. Thereupon his Augustness the Male-Who-Invites spoke first: “Ah! what a fair and lovely maiden!” Afterwards his younger sister Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites spoke: “Ah! what a fair and lovely youth!” Tali modo quum orationi finem fecerant, auguste coierunt et pepererunt a child, the Island of Ahaji, Ho-no-sa-wake. Next they gave birth to the Island of Futa-na in Iyo. This

island has one body and four faces, and each face has a name. So the Land of Iyo is called Lovely-Princess; the Land of Sanuki is called Prince-Good-Boiled-Rice; the Land of Aha is called the Princess-of-Great-Food; the Land of Tosa is called Brave-Good-Youth. Next they gave birth to the Islands of Mitsu-go near Oki, another name for which [islands] is Heavenly-Great-Heart-Youth. Next they gave birth to the island of Tsukushi. This island likewise has one body and four faces, and each face has a name. So the Land of Tsukushi is called

White-Sun-Youth; the Land of Toyo is called Luxuriant-Sun-Youth; the Land of Hi is called Brave Sun-Confronting-Luxuriant-Wondrous-Lord-Youth; the Land of Kumaso is called Brave-Sun-Youth. Next they gave birth to the Island of Iki, another name for which is Heaven’s One-Pillar. Next they gave birth to the Island of Tsu, another name for which is Heavenly-Hand-net-Good-Princess. Next they gave birth to the Island of Sado. Next they gave birth to Great-Yamato-the-Luxuriant-Island-of-the-Dragon-Fly, another name for which is

. The name of “Land-of-the Eight-Great-Islands” therefore originated in these eight islands having been born first. After that, when they had returned, they gave birth to the Island of Ko [-zhima] in Kibi, another name for which [island] is Brave-Sun-Direction-Youth. Next they gave birth to the Island of

============================================================
SECTION 6
============================================================

Adzuki, another name for which is Oho-Nu-De-Hime. Next they gave birth to the Island of Oho [-shima], another name for which is Oho-Tamaru-Wake. Next they gave birth to the Island of Hime, another name for which is Heaven’s-One-Root. Next they gave birth to the Island of Chika, another name for which is Heavenly-Great-Male. Next they gave birth to the Island[s] of Futa-go, another name for which is Heaven’s-Two-Houses. (Six islands in all from the Island of Ko in Kibi to the Island of Heaven’s-Two-Houses.)

[]

When they had finished giving birth to countries, they began afresh giving birth to Deities. So the name of the Deity they gave birth to was the Deity Great-Male-of-the-Great-Thing; next they gave birth to the Deity Rock-Earth-Prince; next they gave birth to the Deity

Rock-Nest-Princess; next they gave birth to the Deity Great-Door-Sun-Youth; next they gave birth to the Deity Heavenly-Blowing-Male; next they gave birth to the Deity Great-House-Prince; next they gave birth to the Deity Youth-of-the-Wind-Breath-the-Great-Male; next they gave birth to the Sea-Deity, whose name is the Deity Great-Ocean-Possessor; next they gave birth to the Deity of the Water-Gates, whose name is the Deity Prince-of-Swift-Autumn; next they gave birth to his younger sister the Deity Princess-of-Swift-Autumn. (Ten Deities in all from the Deity-Great-Male-of-the-Great-Thing to the Deity Princess-of-Autumn.) The names of the Deities given birth to by these two Deities Prince-of-Swift-Autumn and Princess-of-Swift-Autumn from their separate

dominions of river and sea were: the Deity Foam-Calm; next the Deity Foam-Waves; next the Deity Bubble-Calm; Next the Deity Bubble-Waves; next the Deity Heavenly-Water-Divider; next the Deity Earthly-Water-Divider; next the Deity Heavenly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor; next the Deity Earthly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor. (Eight Deities in all from the Deity Foam-Prince to the Deity Earthly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor.) Next they gave birth to the Deity of Wind, whose name is the Deity Prince-of-Long-Wind. Next they gave birth to the Deity of Trees, whose name is Deity Stem-Elder, next they gave birth to the Deity of Mountains, whose name is the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor. Next they gave birth to the Deity of Moors, whose name is the Deity Thatch-Moor-Princess, another name for whom is the Deity Moor-Elder. (Four Deities in all from the Deity Prince-of-Long-Wind to Moor-Elder.) The names of the Deities

given birth to by these two Deities, the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor and the Deity Moor-Elder from their separate dominions of mountain and moor were: the Deity Heavenly-Elder-of-the-Passes, next the Deity Earthly-Elder-of-the-Passes; next the Deity Heavenly-Pass-Boundary, next the Deity Earthly-Pass-Boundary; next the Deity Heavenly-Dark-Door, next the Deity Earthly Dark-Door; next the Deity Great-Vale-Prince, next the Deity Great-Vale-Princess. (Eight Deities in all from the Deity Heavenly-Elder-of the-Passes to the Deity Great-Vale-Princess.) The name of the Deity they next gave birth to was the Deity Bird’s-Rock-Camphor-tree-Boat, another name for whom is the Heavenly-Bird-Boat. Next they gave birth to the Deity

============================================================
SECTION 7
============================================================

. Next they gave birth to the Fire-Burning-Swift-Male-Deity, another name for whom is the Deity Fire-Shining-Prince, and another name is the Deity Fire-Shining-Elder.

[]

Through giving birth to this child her august private parts were burnt, and she sickened and lay down. The names of the Deities born from her vomit were the Deity Metal-Mountain-Prince and next the Deity Metal-Mountain-Princess. The names of the Deities that were born from her fæces were the Deity Clay-Viscid-Prince and next the Deity Clay-Viscid-Princess. The names of the Deities that were next born from her urine were the Deity Mitsuhanome and next the Young-Wondrous-Producing-Deity. The child of this Deity was called

the Deity Luxuriant-Food-Princess. So the Deity the Female-Who-Invites, through giving birth to the Deity-of-Fire, at length divinely retired. (Eight Deities in all from the Heavenly-Bird-Boat to the Deity Luxuriant-Food-Princess.)

So then His Augustuess the Male-Who-Invites said: “Oh! Thine Augustness my lovely younger sister! Oh! that I should have exchanged thee for this single child!” And as he crept round her august

============================================================
SECTION 8
============================================================

pillow, and as he crept round her august feet and wept, there was born from his august tears the Deity that dwells at Konomoto near Unewo on Mount Kagu, and whose name is the Crying-Weeping-Female-Deity. So he buried the divinely retired Deity the Female-Who-Invites on Mount Hiba at the boundary of the Land of Idzumo and the Land of Hahaki.

[]

Then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites, drawing the ten-grasp

sabre that was augustly girded on him, cut off the head of his child the Deity Shining-Elder. Hereupon the names of the Deities that were born from the blood that stuck to the point of the august sword and bespattered the multitudinous rock-masses were: the Deity Rock-Splitter, next the Deity Root-Splitter, next the Rock-Possessing-Male-Deity. The names of the Deities that were next born from the blood that stuck to the upper part of the august sword and again bespattered the multitudinous rock-masses were: the Awfully-Swift-Deity, next the Fire-Swift-Deity, next the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity, another name for whom is the Brave-Snapping-Deity, and another name is the Luxuriant-Snapping Deity. The names of the Deities that were next born from the blood that collected on the hilt

of the august sword and leaked out between his fingers were: the Deity Kura-okami and next the Deity Kura-mitsuha.

The name of the Deity that was born from the head of the Deity Shining-Elder who had been slain was the Deity Possessor-of-the-True-Pass-Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his chest was the Deity Possessor-of-Descent-Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his belly was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Innermost Mountains. The name of Deity that was next born from his private parts was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Dark-Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his left hand was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Dense[ly-Wooded]-Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his right hand was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Outlying-Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his left foot was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Moorland-Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his right foot was the

============================================================
SECTION 9
============================================================

Deity Possessor-of-the-Outer-Mountains. (Eight Deities in all from the Deity Possessor-of-the-True-Pass-Mountains to the Deity Possessor-of-the-Outer-Mountains.) So the name of the sword with which [the Male-Who-Invites] cut off [his son’s head] was Heavenly-Point-Blade-Extended, and another name was Majestic-Point-Blade-Extended.

[]

Thereupon [His Augustness the Hale-Who-Invites], wishing to meet and see his younger sister Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites, followed after her to the Land of Hades. So when from the palace she raised the door and came out to meet him, His Augustness the

Male-Who-Invites spoke, saying: “Thine Augustness my lovely younger sister! the lands that I and thou made are not yet finished making; so come back!” Then Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites answered, saying: “Lamentable indeed that thou camest not sooner! I have eaten of the furnace of Hades. Nevertheless, as I reverence the entry here of Thine Augustness my lovely elder brother, I wish to return. Moreover I will discuss it particularly with the Deities of Hades. Look not at me!” Having thus spoken, she went back inside the palace; and as she tarried there very long, he could not wait. So having taken and broken off one of the end-teeth of the multitudinous and close-toothed comb stuck in the august left bunch [of his hair], he lit one light and went in and looked. Maggots were swarming, and [she

was] rotting, and in her head dwelt the Great-Thunder, in her breast dwelt the Fire-Thunder, in her belly dwelt the Black-Thunder, in her private parts dwelt the Cleaving-Thunder, in her left hand dwelt the Young-Thunder, in her right hand dwelt the Earth-Thunder, in her left foot dwelt the Rumbling-Thunder, in her right foot dwell the Couchant-Thunder:—altogether eight Thunder-Deities had been born and dwelt there. Hereupon His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites, overawed at the sight, fled back, whereupon his younger sister Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites said: “Thou hast put me to shame,” and at once sent the Ugly-Female-of-Hades to pursue him. So His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites took his black august head-dress and cast it down, and it instantly turned into grapes. While she picked them up and ate them, he fled on; but as she still pursued him, he took and broke the multitudinous and close-toothed comb in the right bunch [of his hair] and cast it down, and it  turned into bamboo-sprouts. While she pulled them up and ate them, he fled on. Again later [his younger sister] sent the eight Thunder-Deities with a thousand and five hundred warriors

of Hades to pursue him. So he, drawing the ten-grasp sabre that was augustly girded on him, fled forward brandishing it in his back hand; and as they still pursued, he took, on reaching the base of the Even Pass of Hades, three peaches that were growing at its lase, and waited and smote [his pursuers therewith], so that they all fled back. Then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites announced to the peaches: “Like as ye have helped me, so must ye help all living people in the Central Land of Reed-Plains when they shall fall into troublous circumstances and be harrassed!”—and he gave [to the peaches] the designation of Their Augustnesses Great-Divine-Fruit. Last of all his younger sister Her Augustness the Princess-Who-Invites came out herself in pursuit. So he drew a thousand-draught rock, and [with it] blocked up the Even Pass of Hades, and placed the rock in the middle; and they stood opposite

to one another and exchanged leave-takings; and Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites said: “My lovely elder brother, thine Augustness! If thou do like this, I will in one day strangle to death a thousand of the folks of thy land.” Then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites replied: “My lovely younger sister, Thine Augustness! If thou do this, I will in one day set up a thousand and five hundred parturition-houses. In this manner each day a thousand people would surely die, and each day a thousand and five hundred people would surely be born.” So Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites is called the Great-Deity-of-Hades. Again it is said that, owing her to having pursued and reached [her elder brother], she is called the Road-Reaching-Great-Deity. Again the rock with which he blocked up the Pass of Hades is called the Great-Deity-of-the-Road-Turning-back, and again it is called

============================================================
SECTION 10
============================================================

the Blocking-Great-Deity-of-the-Door-of-Hades. So what was called the Even-Pass-of-Hades is now called the Ifuya-Pass in the Land of Idzumo.

[]

Therefore the Great Deity the Male-Who-Invites said: “Nay! hideous! I have come to a hideous and polluted land,—I have! So I will perform the purification of my august person.” So he went out to a plain [covered with] ahagi at a small river-mouth near Tachibana in Himuka in [the island of] Tsukushi, and purified and cleansed himself. So the name of the Deity that was born from the august staff which he threw down was the Deity Thrust-Erect-Come-Not-Place. The name of the Deity that was born from the august

girdle which he next threw down was the Deity Road-Long-Space. The name of Deity that was born from the august skirt which he next threw down was the Deity Loosen-Put. The name of the Deity that was born from the august upper garment which he next threw down was the Deity Master-of-Trouble. The name of the Deity that was born from the august trousers which he next threw down was the Road-Fork-Deity. The name of the Deity that was born from the august hat which he next threw down was the Deity Master-of-the-Open-Mouth. The names of the Deities that were born from the bracelet of his august left hand which he next threw down were the Deity Offing-Distant, next the Deity Wash-Prince-of-the-Offing, next the Deity Intermediate-Direction-of-the-Offing. The names of the Deities that

were born from the bracelet of his august right hand which he next threw down were: the Deity Shore-Distant, next the Deity Wash-Prince-of-the-Shore, next the Deity Intermediate-Direction-of-the-Shore.

Thereupon saying: “The water in the upper reach is [too] rapid; the water in the lower reach is [too] sluggish,” he went down and plunged in the middle reach; and, as he washed, there was first born the Wondrous-Deity-of-Eighty-Evils, and next the Wondrous-Deity-of-Great-Evils. These two Deities are the Deities that were born from the filth [he contracted] when he went to that polluted, hideous land. The names of the Deities that were next born to rectify those evils were: the Divine-Rectifying-Wondrous Deity, next the Great-Rectifying-Wondrous-Deity, next the Female-Deity-Idzu. The names of the Deities that were next born, as he bathed at the bottom of the water, were: the Deity Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Bottom, and next His

Elder-Male-of-the-Bottom. The names of the Deities that were born as he bathed in the middle [of the water] were: the Deity Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Middle, and next His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Middle. The names of the Deities that were born as he bathed at the top of the water were the Deity Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Surface, and next His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Surface. These three Ocean-Possessing Deities are the Deities hold in reverence as their ancestral Deities by the Chiefs of Adzumi. So the Chiefs of Adzumi are the descendants of His Augustness Utsushi-hi-gana-saku, a child of these Ocean-Possessing Deities. These three Deities His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Bottom, His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Middle, and His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Surface are the three Great Deities of the Inlet of Sumi. The name of the Deity that was born as he thereupon washed his left august eye was the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity. The name of the Deity that was next born as he washed his right august eye was His Augustness

============================================================
SECTION 11
============================================================

Possessor. The name of the Deity that was next born as he washed his august nose was His Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness.

[]

At this time His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites greatly rejoiced, saying: “I, begetting child after child, have at my final begetting gotten three illustrious children,” [with which words,] at once jinglingly taking off and shaking the jewel-string forming his august necklace, he bestowed it on the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, saying: “Do Thine Augustness rule the Plain-of-High-Heaven.” With this charge he bestowed it on her. Now the name of this august necklace was the August-Store-house-Shelf-Deity. Next he said to His Augustness Moon-Night-Possessor: “Do Thine Augustness rule the Dominion of the

============================================================
SECTION 12
============================================================

Night.” Thus he charged him. Next he said to His-Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: “Do Thine Augustness rule the Sea-Plain.”

[]

So while [the other two Deities] each [assumed his and her] rule according to the command with which [their father] had deigned to charge them, His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness did not [assume the] rule [of] the dominion with which he had been charged, but cried and wept till his eight-grasp beard reached to the pit of his stomach. The fashion of his weeping was such as by his weeping to wither the green mountains into withered mountains, and by his weeping to dry up all the rivers and seas. For this reason the sound of bad Deities was like unto the flies in the fifth moon as they all swarmed, and in all things every portent of woe arose. So the Great August Deity the Male-Who-Invites said to His Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: “How is it that, instead of ruling the land with which I charged thee, thou dost wail and weep?” He replied, saying: “I wail because I wish

============================================================
SECTION 13
============================================================

to depart to my deceased mother’s land, to the Nether Distant Land.” Then the Great August Deity the Male-Who-Invites was very angry and said: “If that be so, thou shall not dwell in this land,” and forthwith expelled him with a divine expulsion. So the Great Deity the Male-Who-Invites dwells at Taga in Afumi.

[]

So thereupon His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said: “If that be so, I will take leave of the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, and depart.” [With these words] he forthwith went up to Heaven, whereupon all the mountains and rivers shook, and every land and country quaked. So the Heaven-Shining-Great-August Deity, alarmed at the noise, said: “The reason of the ascent hither of His Augustness my elder brother is surely no good intent. It is only that he wishes to wrest my land from me.” And she forthwith, unbinding her august hair, twisted it into august bunches; and both into the left and into the right august bunch, as likewise into her august head-dress and likewise on to her

left and her right august arm, she twisted an augustly complete [string] of curved jewels eight feet [long],—of five hundred jewels, and, slinging on her back a quiver holding a thousand [arrows], and adding [thereto] a quiver holding five hundred [arrows], she likewise took and slung at her side a mighty and high [-sounding] elbow-pad, and brandished and stuck her bow upright so that the top shook, and she stamped her feet into the hard ground up to her opposing thighs, kicking away [the earth] like rotten snow, and stood valiantly like unto a mighty man, and waiting, asked: “Wherefore ascendest thou hither?” Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness replied, saying: “I have no evil intent. It is only that when the Great-August-Deity

[our father] spoke, deigning to enquire the cause of my wailing and weeping, I said: ‘I wail because I wish to go to my deceased mother’s land,’—whereupon the Great-August-Deity said: ‘Thou shalt not dwell in this land,’ and deigned to expel me with a divine expulsion. It is therefore solely with the thought of taking leave of thee and departing, that I have ascended hither. I have no strange intentions.” Then the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity said: “If that he so, whereby shall I know the sincerity of thine intentions?” Thereupon His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness replied, saying: “Let each of us swear, and produce children.” So as they then swore to each other from the opposite banks of the Tranquil River of Heaven, the august names of the Deities that were born from the mist [of her breath] when, having first begged His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness to hand her the ten-grasp sabre which was girded on him and broken it into three fragments, and with the jewels making a jingling sound having brandished and washed them in the True-Pool-Well of Heaven, and having crunchingly crunched them, the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity

blew them away, were Her Augustness Torrent-Mist-Princess, another august name for whom is Her Augustness Princess-of-the-Island-of-the-Offing; next Her Augustness Lovely-Island-Princess, another august name for whom is Her Augustness Good-Princess; next Her Augustness Princess-of-the-Torrent. The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when, having begged the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity to hand him the augustly complete [string] of curved jewels eight feet [long],—of five hundred jewels,—that was twisted in the left august bunch [of her hair], and with the jewels making a jingling sound having brandished and washed them in the True-Pool-Well of Heaven, and having crunchingly crunched them, His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness blew them away, was His Augustness Truly-Conqueror-I-Conquer-Conquering-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears. The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when again, having begged her to hand him the jewels that were

============================================================
SECTION 14
============================================================

twisted in the right august bunch [of her hair], and having crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was His Augustness Ame-no-hohi. The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when again, having begged her to hand him the jewels that were twisted in her august bead-dress, and having crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was His Augustness Prince-Lord-of-Heaven. The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when again, having begged her to hand him the jewels that were twisted on her left august arm, and having crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was His Augustness Prince-Lord-of-Life. The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when again, having begged her to hand him the jewels that were twisted on her right august arm, and having crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was His-Wondrous-Augustness-of-Kumanu. (Five Deities in all.)

[]

Hereupon the Heavenly Shining-Great-August-Deity said to His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: “As for the seed of the five male Deities born last, their birth was from things of mine; so undoubtedly they are my children. As for the seed of the three female Deities

born first, their birth was from a thing of thine; so doubtless they are thy children.” Thus did she declare the division. So Her Augustness Torrent-Mist-Princess, the Deity born first, dwells in the Inner temple of Munakata. The next, Her Augustness Lovely-Island-Princess, dwells in the middle temple of Munakata. The next, Her Augustness Princess-of-the-Torrent, dwells in the outer temple of Munakata. These three Deities are the three Great Deities held in reverence by the Dukes of Munakata. So His Augustness Brave-Rustic-Illuminator, child of His Augustness Ame-no-hohi, one of the five children born afterwards (this is the ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of

Idzumo, of the Rulers of the Land of Muzashi, of the Rulers of the Upper Land of Unakami, of the Rulers of the Lower Laud of Unakami, of the Rulers of the Land of Izhimu, of the Departmental Suzerains of the Island of Tsu and of the Rulers of the Land of Toho-tsu-Afumi.) The next, His Augustness Prince-Lord-of-Heaven (is the ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Ofushi-kafuchi, of the Chiefs of Nukatabe-no-yuwe, of the Rulers of the Land of Ki, of the Suzerains of

============================================================
SECTION 15
============================================================

Tanaka in Yamato, of the Rulers of the Land of Yamnshiro, of the Rulers of the Land of Umaguta, of the Rulers of the Land of Kihe in Michi-no-Shiri, of the Rulers of the Land of Suhau, of the Rulers of Amuchi, in Yamato, of the Departmental Suzerains of Takechi, of the Territorial Lords of Kamafu, and of the Rulers of Sakikusabe).

[]

Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity: “Owing to the sincerity of my intentions I have, in begetting children, gotten delicate females. Judging from this, I have undoubtedly gained the victory.” With these words, and impetuous with victory, be broke down the divisions of the rice-fields laid out by the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, filled up

the ditches, and moreover strewed excrements in the palace where she partook of the great food. So, though he did thus, the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity upbraided him not, but said: “What looks like excrements must be something that His Augustness mine elder brother has vomited through drunkenness. Again, as to his breaking down the divisions of the rice-fields and filling up the ditches, it must be because he grudges the land [they occupy] that His Augustness mine elder brother acts thus.” But notwithstanding these apologetic words, he still continued his evil acts, and was more and more [violent]. As the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity sat in her awful weaving-hall seeing to the weaving of the august garments of the Deities, he broke a hole in the top of the weaving-hall, and through it let fall a heavenly piebald horse which he had flayed with a backward flaying,

============================================================
SECTION 16
============================================================

at whose sight the women weaving the heavenly garments were so much alarmed that impegerunt privatas partes adversis radiis et obierunt.

[]

So thereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, terrified at the sight, closed [behind her] the door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling, made it fast, and retired. Then the whole Plain of High Heaven was obscured and all the Central Land of Reed-Plains darkened. Owing to this, eternal night prevailed. Hereupon the voices of the myriad Deities were like unto the flies in the fifth moon as they swarmed, and a myriad portents of woe all arose. Therefore did the eight hundred myriad Deities assemble in a divine assembly in the bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven, and bid the Deity Thought-Includer, child of the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity think of a plan, assembling the long-singing birds of eternal night and making them sing, taking the hard rocks of Heaven from the river-bed of the Tranquil River of

Heaven, and taking the iron from the Heavenly Metal-Mountains, calling in the smith Ama-tsu-ma-ra, charging Her Augustness I-shi-ko-ri-do-me to make a mirror, and charging His Augustness Jewel-Ancestor to make an augustly complete [string] of curved jewels eight feet [long],—of five hundred jewels,—and summoning His Augustness

and His Augustness Grand-Jewel, and causing them to pull out with a complete pulling the shoulder [-blade] of a true stag from the Heavenly Mount Kagu, and take cherry-bark from the Heavenly Mount Kagu, and perform divination, and pulling up by pulling its roots a true cleyera japonica with five hundred [branches] from the Heavenly Mount Kagu, and taking and putting upon its upper branches the augustly complete [string] of curved jewels eight feet [long],—of five hundred jewels,—and taking and tying to the middle branches the mirror eight feet [long], and taking and

banging upon its lower branches the white pacificatory offerings and the blue pacificatory offerings, His Augustness Grand-Jewel taking these divers things and holding them together with the grand august offerings, and His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord prayerfully reciting grand liturgies, and the Heavenly Hand-Strength-Male-Deity standing hidden beside the door, and Her Augustness Heavenly-Alarming-Female hanging [round her] the heavenly clubmoss from the Heavenly Mount Kagu as a sash, and making the heavenly spindle-tree her head-dress, and binding the leaves of the bamboo-grass of the

Heavenly Mount Kagu in a posy for her hands, and laying a sounding-board before the door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling, and stamping till she made it resound and doing as if possessed by a Deity, and pulling out the nipples of her breasts, pushing down her skirt-string usque ad privatas partes. Then the Plain of High Heaven shook, and the eight hundred myriad Deities laughed together. Hereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity was amazed, and, slightly opening the door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling, spoke thus from the inside: “Methought that owing to my retirement the Plain of Heaven would be dark, and likewise the Central Land of Reed-Plains would all be dark: how then is it that the Heavenly-Alarming-Female makes merry, and that likewise the eight hundred myriad Deities all laugh?” Then the Heavenly-Alarming-Female spoke, saying: “We rejoice and are glad because there is a Deity more illustrious than Thine Augustness.” While she was thus speaking, His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord and His Augustness Grand-Jewel pushed forward the mirror and respectfully showed it to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, whereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, more and more astonished, gradually came forth from the door and gazed upon it, whereupon the Heavenly-Hand-Strength-Male-Deity, who was standing hidden, took her august hand and drew her out, and then His

============================================================
SECTION 17
============================================================

Augustness Grand-Jewel drew the bottom-tied rope along at her august back, and spoke, saying: “Thou must not go back further in than this!” So when the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity had come forth, both the Plain of High Heaven and the Central-Land-of-Reed-Plains of course again became light.

[]

Thereupon the eight hundred myriad Deities took counsel together, and imposed on His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness a fine of a thousand tables, and likewise cut his beard, and even caused the nails of his fingers and toes to be pulled out, and expelled him with a divine expulsion. Again he begged food of the Deity Princess-of-Great-Food. Then the Princess-of-Great-Food took out all sorts of dainty things from her nose, her mouth, and even her fundament, and made them up into all sorts [of dishes], which she offered to him. But His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness watched her proceedings, considered that she was offering up to him filth, and at once killed the Deity Princess-of-Great-Food. So the things that were born in the body of the Deity who had been killed were [as follows]:

============================================================
SECTION 18
============================================================

in her head were born silkworms, in her two eyes were born rice-seeds, in her two ears was born millet, in her nose were born small beans, in her private parts was born barley, in her fundament were born large beans. So His Augustness the Deity-Producing-Wondrous-Ancestor caused them to be taken and used as seeds.

[]

So, having been expelled, [His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness] descended to a place [called] Tori-kami at the head-waters of the River Hi in the Land of Idzumo. At this time some chopsticks came floating down the stream. So His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, thinking that there must be people at the head-waters of the river, went up it in quest of them, when he came upon an old man and an old woman,—two of them,—who had a young girl between them, and were weeping. Then he deigned to ask: “Who are ye?” So the old man replied, saying: “I am an Earthly Deity, child of the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor. I am called by the name of Foot-Stroking-Elder, my wife

is called by the name of Hand-Stroking-Elder, and my daughter is called by the name of Wondrous-Inada-Princess.” Again he asked: “What is the cause of your crying?” [The old man] answered, saying: “I had originally eight young girls as daughters. But the eight-forked serpent of Koshi has came every year and devoured [one], and it is now its time to come, wherefore we weep.” Then he asked him: “What is its form like?” [The old man] answered, saying: "Its eyes are like akakagachi, it has one body with eight heads and eight tails. Moreover on its body grows moss, and also chamæcyparis and cryptomerias. Its length extends over eight valleys and eight hills, and if one look at its belly, it is all constantly bloody

and inflamed.” (What is here called akakagachi is the modern hohodzuki.) Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said to the old man: “If this be thy daughter, wilt thou offer her to me?” He replied, saying: “With reverence, but I know not thine august name.” Then he replied, saying: “I am elder brother to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity. So I have now descended from Heaven.” Then the Deities Foot-Stroking-Elder and Hand-Stroking-Elder said: “If that be so, with reverence will we offer [her to thee].” So His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, at once taking and changing the young girl into a multitudinous and close-toothed comb which he stuck into his august hair-bunch, said to the Deities Foot-Stroking-Elder and Hand-Stroking-Elder: “Do you distill some eight-fold refined liquor. Also make a fence round about, in that fence make eight gates, at each gate tie [together] eight platforms, on each platform put a liquor-vat, and into each vat pour the eight-fold refined liquor, and wait.” So as they waited after having thus prepared everything in accordance with his bidding, the eight-forked serpent came

============================================================
SECTION 19
============================================================

truly as [the old man] had said, and immediately dipped a head into each vat, and drank the liquor. Thereupon it was intoxicated with drinking, and all [the heads] lay down and slept. Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness drew the ten-grasp sabre, that was augustly girded on him, and cut the serpent in pieces, so that the River Hi flowed on changed into a river of blood. So when he cut the middle tail, the edge of his august sword broke. Then, thinking it strange, he thrust into and split [the flesh] with the point of his august sword and looked, and there was a sharp great sword [within]. So he took this great sword, and, thinking it a strange thing, he respectfully informed the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity. This is the Herb-Quelling Great Sword.

[]

So thereupon His Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness sought in the land of Idzumo for a place where he might build a palace. Then he arrived at a place [called] Suga, and said: “On coming to this place my august heart is pure,”—and in that place he built a palace to

dwell in. So that place is now called Suga. When this Great Deity first built the palace of Suga, clouds rose up thence. Then he made an august song. That song said:

Then he called the Deity Foot-Stroking-Elder and said: “Thee do I appoint Headman of my palace;” and moreover bestowed on him the name of Master-of-the-Temple-of-Inada Eight-Eared-Deity-of-Suga.

============================================================
SECTION 20
============================================================

[]

Quare, quum incepit in thalamo [opus procreationis] cum Mirâ-Herâ-Inadâ, procreavit Deum nomine Eight-Island Ruler. And again, having wedded the Divine-Princess-of-Great-Majesty, daughter of the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor, he begot children: the Great-Harvest Deity and the August-Spirit-of-Food. The elder brother the Deity Eight-Island-Ruler wedded Princess-Falling-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees, daughter of the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor, and begot a child: the Deity Fuha-no-moji-Ku-nu-su-nu. This Deity wedded Princess Hikaha,

daughter of the Deity Okami, and begot a child: Water-Spoilt-Blossom-of-Fuka-buchi. This Deity wedded the Deity Ame-no-tsudohe-chi-ne, and begot a child: the Deity Great-Water-Master. This Deity wedded the Deity Grand-Ears, daughter of the Deity Funu-dzu-nu, and begot a child: the Deity Heavenly-Brandishing-Prince-Lord. This Deity wedded the Young-Princess-of-the-Small-Country, daughter of the Great-Deity-of-the-Small-Country, and begot a child: the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land, another name for whom is the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, and another name is the

============================================================
SECTION 21
============================================================

, and another name is the Deity of Eight-Thousand-Spears, and another name is the Deity-Spirit-of-the-Living-Land. In all there were five names.

[]

So this Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land had eighty Deities his brethren; but they all left the land to the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land. The reason for their leaving it was this: Each of these eighty Deities had in his heart the wish to marry the Princess of Yakami in Inaba, and they went together to Inaba, putting their bag on [the back of] the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, whom they took with them as an attendant. Hereupon, when they arrived at Cape Keta, [they found] a naked hare lying down. Then the eighty Deities spoke to the hare, saying: “What thou shouldest do is to bathe in the sea-water here, and lie on the slope of a high mountain exposed to the blowing of the wind.” So the hare followed the  of the eighty Deities, and lay down. Then, as the sea-water dried, the skin of its body all split with the blowing of the wind, so that it lay weeping with pain. But the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, who came last of all, saw the hare, and said: “Why liest thou weeping?” The hare replied, saying: “I was in the Island of Oki, and wished to cross over to this land,

============================================================
SECTION 22
============================================================

but had no means of crossing over. For this reason I deceived the crocodiles of the sea, saying: ‘Let you and me compete, and compute the numbers of our [respective] tribes. So do you go and fetch every member of your tribe, and make them all lie in a row across from this island to Cape Keta. Then I will tread on them, and count them as I run across. Hereby shall we know whether it or my tribe is the larger.’ Upon my speaking thus, they were deceived and lay down in a row, and I trod on them and counted them as I came across, and was just about to get on land, when I said: ‘You have been deceived by me.’ As soon as I had finished speaking, the crocodile who lay the last of all seized me and stripped off all my clothing. As I was weeping and lamenting for this reason, the eighty Deities who went by before [thee] commanded and exhorted me, saying: ‘Bathe in the salt water, and lie down exposed to the wind.’ So, on my doing as they had instructed me, my whole body was hurt.” Thereupon the Deity Great-Name-Possessor instructed the hare, saying: “Go quickly now to the river-mouth, wash thy body with the fresh water, then take the pollen of the sedges [growing] at the river-mouth, spread it about, and roll about upon it, whereupon thy body will certainly be restored to its original state.” So [the hare] did as it was instructed, and its body became as it had been originally. This was the White Hare of Inaba. It is now called the Hare Deity. So the hare said to the Deity Great-Name-Possesser: “These eighty Deities shall certainly not get the Princess of Yakami. Though thou bearest the bag, Thine Augustness shall obtain her.”

[]

Thereupon the Princess of Yakami answered the eighty Deities, saying: “I will not listen to your words. I mean to marry the

Deity Great-Name-Possessor.” So the eighty Deities, being enraged, and wishing to slay the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, took counsel together, on arriving at the foot of Tema in the land of Hahaki, and said [to him]: “On this mountain there is a red boar. So when we drive it down, do thou wait and catch it. If thou do not wait and catch it, we will certainly slay thee.” Having [thus] spoken, they took fire, and burnt a large stone like unto a boar, and rolled it down. Then, as [they] drove it down and [he] caught it, he got stuck to and burnt by the stone, and died. Thereupon Her Augustness his august parent cried and lamented, and went up to Heaven, and entreated His Divine-Producing-Wondrous-Augustness, who at once sent Princess Cockle-Shell and Princess Clam to bring him to life. Then Princess Cockle-Shell triturated and scorched [her shell], and Princess Clam carried water and smeared [him] as with mother’s milk, whereupon he became a beautiful young man, and wandered off. Hereupon the eighty Deities, seeing [this], again deceived him, taking him with

============================================================
SECTION 23
============================================================

them into the mountains, where they cut down a large tree, inserted a wedge in the tree, and made him stand in the middle, whereupon they took away the wedge and tortured him to death. Then on Her Augustness his august parent again seeking him with cries, she perceived him, and at once cleaving the tree, took him out and brought him to life, and said to him: “If thou remain here, thou wilt at last be destroyed by the eighty Deities.” Then she sent him swiftly off to the august place of the Deity Great-House-Prince in the land of Ki. Then when the eighty Deities searched and pursued till they came up to him, and fixed their arrows [in their bows], he escaped by dipping under the fork of a tree, and disappeared.

[

[The Deity Great-House-Prince spoke to him], saying: “Thou must set off to the Nether-Distant-Land where dwells His

. That Great Deity will certainly counsel thee.” So on his obeying her commands and arriving at the august place of His Impetuous-Male-Augustness, the latter’s daughter the Forward-Princess came out and saw him, and they exchanged glances and were married, and [she] went in again, and told her father, saying: “A very beautiful Deity has come.” Then the Great Deity went out and looked, and said: “This is the Ugly-Male-Deity-of-the-Reed-Plains,” and at once calling him in, made him sleep in the snake-house. Hereupon his wife, Her Augustness the Forward-Princess, gave her husband a snake-scarf, saying: “When the snakes are about to bite thee, drive them away by waving this scarf thrice.” So, on his doing as she had instructed, the snakes became quiet, so that he came forth after calm slumbers. Again on the night of the next day [the Impetuous-Male-Deity] put him into the centipede and wasp-house; but as she again gave him a centipede and wasp-scarf, and instructed him as before, he came forth calmly. Again [the Impetuous-Male-Deity] shot a whizzing barb into the middle of a large moor, and sent him to fetch the arrow, and, when

he had entered the moor, at once set fire to the moor all round. Thereupon, while he [stood] knowing no place of exit, a mouse came and said: “The inside is hollow-hollow; the outside is narrow-narrow.” Owing to its speaking thus, he trod on the place, whereupon he fell in and hid himself, during which time the fire burnt past. Then the mouse brought out in its mouth and presented to him the whizzing barb. The feathers of the arrow were brought in their mouths by all the mouse’s children. Hereupon his wife the Forward-Princess came bearing mourning-implements, and crying. Her father the great Deity, thinking that [the Deity-Great-Name-Possessor] was already dead and done for, went out and stood on the moor, whereupon [the Deity Great-Name-Possessor] brought the arrow and presented it to him, upon which [the Great Deity], taking him into the house and calling him into an eight-foot spaced large room, made him take the lice off his head. So, on looking at the head, [he saw that] there were many centipedes [there]. Thereupon, as his wife gave to her husband berries of the muku tree and red earth, he chewed the berries to pieces, and spat them out with the red earth which he held in his month, so that the Great Deity believed him to be chewing up and spitting out the centipedes, and, feeling fond [of him] in his heart, fell asleep. Then [the Deity Great-Name-Possessor], grasping the Great Deity’s hair, tied it fast to the various rafters of the house, and, blocking up the floor of the house with a five hundred draught rock, and taking his wife the

on his back, then carried off the Great Deity’s great life-sword and life-bow-and-arrows, as also his heavenly speaking-lute, and ran out. But the heavenly speaking-lute brushed against a tree, and the earth resounded. So the Great Deity, who was sleeping, started at the sound, and pulled down the house. But while he was disentangling his hair which was tied to the rafters, [the Deity Great-Name-Possessor] fled a long way. So then, pursuing after him to the Even Pass of Hades, and gazing on him from afar, he called out to the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, saying: “With the great life-sword and the life-bow-and-arrows which thou carriest, pursue thy half-brethren till they crouch on the august slopes of the passes, and pursue them till they are swept into the reaches of the rivers, and do thou, wretch! become the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land; and moreover, becoming the Deity Spirit-of-the-Living-Land, and making my daughter the Forward-Princess thy consort, do thou make stout the temple-pillars

============================================================
SECTION 24
============================================================

at the foot of Mount Uka in the nethermost rock-bottom, and make high the cross-beams to the Plain-of-High-Heaven, and dwell [there], thou villain!” So when, bearing the great sword and bow, he pursued and scattered the eighty Deities, he did pursue them till they crouched on the august slope of every pass, he did pursue them till they were swept into every river, and then he began to make the land. Quamobrem Hera Yakami, secundum anterius pactum, [cum eo] in thalamo coivit. So he brought her with him; but, fearing his consort the Forward Princess, she stuck into the fork of a tree the child that she had borne, and went back. So the child was called by the name of the Tree-Fork-Deity, and another name was the Deity-of-August-Wells.

[]

This Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears, when he went forth to woo the Princess of Nuna-kaha in the land of Koshi, on arriving at the house of the Princess of Nuna-kaha sang, saying:

Then the Princess of Nuna-kaha, without yet opening the door, sang from the inside saying:—

[Second Song of the Princess.]

Quamobrem eâ nocte non coierunt, sed sequentis diei nocte auguste coierunt.

============================================================
SECTION 25
============================================================

[]

Again this Deity’s Chief Empress, Her Augustness the Forward-Princess, was very jealous. So the Deity her husband, being distressed, was about to go up from Idzumo to the Land of Yamato; and as he stood attired, with one august hand on the saddle of his august horse and one august foot in the august stirrup, he sang, saying:

“When I take and attire myself so carefully in my august garments black as the true jewels of the moor, and, like the birds of the offing, look at my breast,—though I raise my fins, [I say that] these are not good, and cast them off on the waves on the beach. When I take and attire myself so carefully in my august garments green as the kingfisher, and, like the birds of the offing, look at my breast,—though I raise my fins, [I say that] these, too, are not good, and cast them off on the waves on the beach. When I take and attire myself so carefully in my raiment dyed in the sap of the dye-tree, the pounded madder sought in the mountain fields, and, like the birds of the offing, look at my breast,—though I raise my fins, [I say that] they are good. My dear younger sister, Thine Augustness! Though thou say that thou will not weep,—if like the flocking birds, I flock and depart, if, like the led birds, I am led away and depart, thou wilt hang down thy head like a single eulalia upon the mountain and thy weeping shall indeed rise as the mist of

the morning shower. Thine Augustness [my] spouse like the young herbs! The tradition of the thing, too, this!”

Then his Empress, taking a great august liquor-cup, and drawing near and offering it to him, sang, saying:—

“Oh! Thine Augustness the Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears! [Thou], my [dear] Master-of-the-Great-Land indeed, being a man, probably hast on the various

that thou seest, and on every beach-headland that thou lookest on, a wife like the young herbs. But as for me, alas! being a woman, I have no man except thee; I have no spouse except thee. Beneath the fluttering of the ornamented fence, beneath the softness of the warm coverlet, beneath the rustling of the the cloth coverlet, [thine] arms white as rope of paper-mulberry bark softly patting [my] breast soft as the melting snow, and patting [each other] interlaced, stretching out and pillowing [ourselves] on [each other’s arms],—true jewel-arms, and with outstretched legs, will we sleep. Lift up the luxuriant august liquor!”

She having thus sung, they at once pledged [each other] by the cup with [their hands] on [each other’s] necks, and are at rest till the present time. These are called divine words.

============================================================
SECTION 26
============================================================

[]

So this Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land wedded Her Augustness Torrent-Mist-Princess, the Deity dwelling in the inner temple of Munakata, and begot children: the Deity Aji-shiki-taka-hiko-ne, next his younger sister Her Augustness High-Princess, another name for whom is Her Augustness Princess Under-Shining. This Deity Aji-shiki-taka-hiko-ne is he who is now called the Great August Deity of Kamo. Again the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land wedded Her Augustness Princess Divine-House-Shield and begot a child: the Deity Thing-Sign-Master. Again he wedded the Deity Bird-Ears, daughter of the Deity

, and begot a child: the Deity Bird-Growing-Ears. This Deity wedded Hina-teri-nakata-bichi-wo-ikochini, and begot a child: the Deity Land-Great-Wealth. This Deity wedded the Deity Ashi-nadaka, another name for whom is Princess-Eight-Rivers-and-Inlets, and begot a child: the Deity Swift-Awful-Brave-Sahaya-Lord-Ruler. This Deity wedded Princess Luck-Spirit, daughter of

the Deity Heavenly-Awful-Master, and begot a child: the Deity Awful-Master-Prince. This Deity wedded Princess Hina-rashi, daughter of the Deity Okami, and begot a child: the Deity Tahiri-kishi-marumi. This Deity wedded the Deity Princess-Life-Spirit-Luck-Spirit, daughter of the Deity Waiting-to-See-the-Flowers-of-the-Holly, and begot a child: the Deity Miro-na-mi. This Deity wedded Princess Awo-numa-nu-oshi, daughter of the Deity Master-of-Shiki-yama, and begot a child: the Deity Nunoshi-tomi-tori-naru-mi. This Deity wedded the Young-Day-Female-Deity, and begot a child: the Deity

============================================================
SECTION 27
============================================================

. This Deity wedded the Deity Toho-tsu-ma-chi-ne, daughter of the Deity Heavenly-Pass Boundary, and begot a child: the Deity Toho-tsu-yama-zaki-tarashi.

[]

So when the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land dwelt at the august cape of Miho in Idzumo, there came riding on the crest of the waves in a boat of heavenly Kagami a Deity dressed in skins of geese flayed

with a complete flaying, who, when asked his name, replied not; moreover the Deities who accompanied him, though asked, all said that they knew not. Then the toad spoke, saying: “As for this, the Crumbling Prince will surely know it.” Thereupon [the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land] summoned and asked the Crumbling-Prince, who replied, saying: “This is the Little-Prince-the-Renowned-Deity, the august child of the Deity-Producing-Wondrous-Deity.” So on their then respectfully informing His Augustness the Deity-Producing-Wondrous-August-Ancestor, he replied, saying: “This is truly my child. He among my children is the child who dipped between the

fork of my hand. So do he and thou become brethren, and make and consolidate this land.” So from that time forward the two Deities the Great-Name-Possessor and the Little-Prince-the-Renowned-Deity made and consolidated this land conjointly. But afterwards the Little-Prince-the-Renowned-Deity crossed over to the Eternal Land. So [the Deity here] called the Crumbling Prince, who revealed the Little-Prince-the-Renowned-Deity, is what is now [called] the scarecrow in the mountain fields. This Deity, though his legs do not walk, is a Deity who knows everything in the Empire.

============================================================
SECTION 28
============================================================

[]

Thereupon the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land lamented himself, and said: “How shall I alone be able to make this land? Together with what Deity can I make this land?” At this time there came a Deity illuminating the sea. This Deity said: “If thou wilt lay me to rest well, I can make it together with thee. If not, the land cannot be made.” Then the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land said: “If that be so, what is the manner of reverently laying thee to rest?” He replied, saying: “Reverently worship me on Yamato’s green fence, the eastern mountain’s top.” This is the Deity who dwells on the top of Mount Mimoro.

[]

So the Great-Harvest-Deity wedded the Princess [of?] Inu, daughter of the Divine-Life-Producing-Wondrous-Deity, and begot children: the

Deity August-Spirit-of-the-Great-Land, next the Deity of Kara, next the Deity Sohori, next the Deity White-Sun, next the Sage-Deity. (Five Deities.) Again he wedded the Refulgent-Princess, and begot children: the Deity Great-Refulgent-Mountain-Dwelling-Grandee, next the August-Harvest-Deity. Again he wedded Princess Ame-shiru-karu-midzu, and begot children: the Deity Oki-tsu-hiko, next Her Augustness

, another name for whom is the Deity Great Furnace-Princess:—this is the Deity of the Furnace held in reverence by all people. Next the Deity Great-Mountain-Integrator, another name for whom is the Deity-Great-Master-of-the-Mountain-End: this Deity dwells on Mount Hiye in the land of Chika-tsu-Afumi, and is likewise the Deity dwelling at Matsu-no-wo in Kadzunu, who uses the whizzing barb. Next the

; next the Deity Asuha; next the Deity Hahigi; next the Deity Refulgent-Mountain-Dwelling-Grandee; next the Deity Swift-Mountain-Dwelling; next the High Deity-of-the-Fire-in-the-Yard; next the Great-Earth-Deity, another name for whom is the Deity August-Ancestor-of-Earth. (Nine Deities.)

The Deity Swift-Mountain-Dwelling wedded the Deity Princess-of-Great-Food, and begot children: the Deity Young-Mountain-Integrator; next the Young-Harvest-Deity; next his younger sister the Young-Rice-Transplanting-Female-Deity; next the Water-Sprinkling-Deity; next the Deity-of-the-High-Sun-of-Summer, another name for whom is the Female-Deity-of-Summer; next the Autumn-Princess; next the Deity Stem-Harvest; next the Deity Lord-Stem-Tree-Young-House-Rope.

============================================================
SECTION 30
============================================================

[]

The Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity commanded, saying: “The Luxuriant-Reed-Plains-the-Land-of-Fresh-Rice-ears-of-a-Thousand-Autumns,—of Long-Five-Hundred-Autumns is the land which my august child His Augustness Truly-Conqueror-I-Conquer-Conquering-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears shall govern.” Having [thus] deigned to charge him, she sent him down from Heaven. Hereupon His Augustness Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears, standing on the Floating Bridge of Heaven, said: “The Luxuriant-Reed-Plains-the-Land-of-Fresh-Rice-ears-of-a-Thousand-Autumns,—of Long-Five-Hundred-Autumns is painfully uproarious,—it is.” With this announcement, he immediately re-ascended, and informed the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity. Then the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity and the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity commanded the eight hundred myriad Deities to assemble in a divine assembly in the bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven, and caused the Deity Thought-Includer to think [of a plan], and said: “This Central Land of Reed-Plains is the land with which we have deigned to charge our august child as the land which he shall govern. So as he deems that violent and

============================================================
SECTION 31
============================================================

savage Earthly Deities are numerous in this land, which Deity shall we send to subdue them?” Then the Deity Thought-Includer and likewise the eight hundred myriad Deities took counsel and said: “The Deity Ame-no-ho-hi is the one that should be sent.” So they sent the Deity Ame-no-ho-hi; but he at once curried favour with the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land, and for three years brought back no report.

[]

Therefore the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity and the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity again asked all the Deities, saying, “The Deity Ame-no-ho-hi, whom we sent down to the Central Land of Reed-Plains, is long of bringing back a report. Which Deity were it best to send on a fresh mission?” Then the Deity Thought-Includer replied, saying: “The Heavenly-Young-Prince, son of the Deity Heaven’s-Earth-Spirit should be sent.” So they bestowed on the Heavenly-Young-Prince the heavenly true deer-bow and the heavenly feathered arrows, and sent him. Thereupon the Heavenly-Young-Prince, descending to that land, at once wedded Princess Under-Shining, daughter of the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land, and moreover, planning how he might gain [possession of] the land, for eight years brought back no report. So then the

and the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity again asked all the Deities, [saying]: “The Heavenly-Young-Prince is long of bringing back a report. Which Deity shall we send on a fresh mission to enquire the cause of the Heavenly-Young-Prince’s long tarrying?” Thereupon all the Deities and likewise the Deity Thought-Includer replied, saying: “The pheasant the Name-Crying-Female should be sent,” upon which [the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity and the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity] charged [the pheasant], saying: “What thou shalt go and ask the Heavenly-Young-Prince is this: ‘The reason for which thou wast sent to the Central Land of Reed-Plains was to subdue and pacify the savage Deities of that land. Why for eight years bringest thou back no report?’ ” So then the Crying-Female, descending from Heaven, and perching on the multitudinous [ly-branching] cassia-tree at the Heavenly-Young-Prince’s gate, told him everything according to the mandate of the Heavenly Deities. Then the Heavenly-Spying-Woman, having heard the bird’s words, spoke to the Heavenly-Young-Prince, saying: “The sound of this bird’s cry is very bad. So thou shouldest shoot it to death.” On her [thus] urging him, the Heavenly-Young-Prince at

once took the heavenly vegetable wax-tree bow and the heavenly deer-arrows bestowed on him by the Heavenly Deities, and shot the pheasant to death. Then the arrow, being shot up upside down through the pheasant’s breast, reached the august place where the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrating-Deity were sitting in the bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven. This “High-Integrating-Deity” is another name for the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity. So, on the High-Integrating-Deity taking up the arrow and looking at it [he saw that] there was blood adhering to the feathers of the arrow. Thereupon the High-Integrating-Deity, saying: “This arrow is the arrow that was bestowed on the Heavenly-Young-Prince,” showed it to all the Deities, and said: “If this be an arrow shot at the evil Deities by the Heavenly-Young-Prince in obedience to our command, let it not hit him. If he has a foul heart, let the Heavenly-Young-Prince perish by this arrow.” With these words, he took the arrow and thrust it back down through the arrow’s hole, so that it hit the Heavenly-Young-Prince on the top of his breast as he was sleeping on his couch, so that he died. (This is the origin of [the saying] ‘Beware of a returning arrow.’) Moreover the pheasant returned not.

So this is the origin of the modern proverb which speaks of ‘the pheasant as sole messenger.’ So the sound of the wailings of the Heavenly-Young-Prince’s wife Princess Under-Shining, re-echoing in the wind, reached Heaven. So the Heavenly-Young-Prince’s father, the Deity Heaven’s-Earth-Spirit, and his wife and children who were in heaven, hearing it, came down with cries and lamentations, and at once built a -house there, and made the wild goose of the river the head-hanging bearer, the heron the broom-bearer, the kingfisher the person of the august food, the sparrow the pounding-woman, the

pheasant the weeping woman; and, having thus arranged matters, they disported themselves for eight days and eight nights At this time the Deity Ajishiki-taka-hiko-ne came and condoled on the mourning for the Heavenly-Young-Prince, whereupon the Heavenly-Young-Prince’s father and wife who had come down from Heaven bewailed themselves, saying: “My child is not dead, no! My lord is not dead, no!” and with these words clung to his hands and feet, and bewailed themselves and lamented. The cause of their mistake was that the two Deities closely resembled each other in countenance: so therefore they made the mistake. Thereupon the Deity Ajishi-ki-taka-hiko-ne was very angry, and said: “It was only because he was my dear friend that I came to condole. Why should I be likened to an unclean dead person?”—and with these words he drew the ten-grasp sabre that was augustly girded on him, and cut down the mourning-house, and kicked away [the pieces] with his feet. This was on what is called Mount Mourning at the source of the River Awimi in the land of Minu. The great sword with which he cut [the mourning-house to pieces] was called by the name of Great-Blade-Mower, another name by which it was called being the

============================================================
SECTION 32
============================================================

Divine-Keen-Sabre. So when the Deity Aji-shiki-taka-hiko-ne flew away in his anger, his younger sister Her Augustness the High-Princess in order to reveal his august name, sang, saying:

This Song is of a Rustic Style.

[]

Hereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity said: “Which Deity were it best to send on a fresh mission?” Then the Deity

Thought-Includer and likewise all the Deities said: "“He who is named the Deity Majestic-Point-Blade-Extended and dwells in the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling by the source of the Tranquil River of Heaven, is the one that should be sent; or if not this Deity, then this Deity’s child, the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity, might be sent Moreover, owing to this Deity Heavenly-Point-Blade-Extended having blocked up and turned back the waters of the Tranquil River of Heaven, and to his dwelling with the road blocked up, other Deities cannot go [thither]. So the Heavenly-Deer-Deity should be sent specially to ask him.” So then the Heavenly-Deer-Deity was sent to ask the Deity Heavenly-Point-Blade-Extended, who replied, saying: “I will obey, and will respectfully serve you. Nevertheless on this errand ye should send my child, the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity,”—[and with these words] immediately offered [his son to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity]. So the Deity Heavenly-Bird-Boat was attached to the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity, and they were sent off. Therefore these two Deities, descending to the little shore of Inasa in the

land of Idzumo, drew their swords ten hand-breadths long, stuck them upside down on the crest of a wave, seated themselves cross-legged on the point of the swords, and asked the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land, saying: “The Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrating-Deity have charged us and sent us to ask, [saying]: ‘We have deigned to charge our august child with thy dominion, the Central Land of Reed-Plains, as the land which he should govern. So how is thy heart? He replied, saying: “I am unable to say. My child the Deity Eight-Fold-Thing-Sign-Master will be the one to tell you; but he is gone to Cape Miho to pursue birds and catch fish, and has not yet returned.” So Then the Deity Bird-Boat was sent to summon the Deity Eight-Fold-Thing-Sign-Master, who, on being graciously asked, spoke to the Great Deity his father, saying: “I will obey. [Do thou] respectfully present this land to the august child of the Heavenly Deity;”—and thereupon he trod on [the edge of] his boat so as to capsize it, clapped his heavenly departing hands in the fence of green branches, and disappeared. So then they asked

the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land, saying: “Thy son the Deity Thing-Sign-Master has now spoken thus. Hast thou other sons who should speak?” Hereupon he spoke again, saying: “There is my other son, the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm. There is none beside him.” While he was thus speaking, the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm came up, bearing on the tips of his fingers a thousand-draught rock, and said: “Who it is that has come to our land, and thus secretly talks? If that be so, I should like to have a trial of strength. So I should like to begin by taking thine august hand.” So on his letting him take his august hand, his touch at once turned it into an icicle, and again his touch turned it into a sword-blade. So then he was frightened and drew back. Then on the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity wishing to take the hand of the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm, and asking permission to take it in return, he grasped and crushed it as if it were taking a young reed, and cast it aside, upon which [the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm] fled away. So when [the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity] pursuing after him, came up with him at the Sea of Suha in the land of Shinanu, and was about to slay

him, the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm said: “I will obey. Slay me not. I will go to no other place but this, neither will I go against the command of my father the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land. I will not go against the words of the Deity Eight-Fold-Thing-Sign-Master. I will yield up this Central Land of Reed-Plains according to the command of the august child of the Heavenly Deities.” So they returned again, and asked the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land [saying]: “Thy children the two Deities the Deity Thing-Sign-Master and the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm have said that they will follow and not go against the commands of the august child of the Heavenly Deities. So how is thy heart?” Then he replied, saying: “According as the two Deities my children have said, I too will not go against them. In accordance with the [heavenly] command, I will at once yield up this Central Land of Reed-Plains. But as to my place of residence, if ye will make stout the temple-pillars on the nethermost rock-bottom, and make high the cross-beams to the Plain of High Heaven like the rich and perfect august nest where the august child of the Heavenly Deities rules the succession of Heaven’s sun, and will deign to establish me, I will hide in the eighty (less than a hundred) road-windings, and wait on him. Again, as for my children the hundred and eighty Deities, if the Deity Eight-Fold-Thing-Sign-Master will be the Deities’ august rear and van and will respectfully serve them, there will be no disobedient Deities.”

Having thus spoken [he hid himself. So in accordance with his word,] they built a heavenly august abode on the shore of Tagishi in the land of Idzumo; and the Deity Wondrous-Eight-Spirits, grandson of the Deity of Water-Gates, was made butler to offer up the heavenly august banquet, when, having said prayers, the Deity Wondrous-Eight-Spirits turned into a cormorant, went down to the bottom of the sea, took in his mouth red earth from the bottom, made eighty heavenly platters, and, cutting sea-weed stalks, made a fire-drill mortar, and made a fire-drill pestle out of stalks of komo, and drilled out fire, saying: “This fire which I have drilled will I burn until, in the Plain

of High Heaven, the soot on the heavenly new lattice of the gable of His Augustness the Wondrous-Divine-Producer-the-August-Ancestor hang down eight hand-breadths; and as for what is below the earth, I will bake down to the nethermost rock-bottom, and,—the fishing sailors, who spread their thousand-fathom ropes of paper-mulberry and angle, having with many shouts drawn in and landed the large-mouthed small-finned perch,—I will offer up the heavenly true fish-food so that the split bamboos bend.” So the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity re-ascended [to Heaven], and reported how he had subdued and pacified the Central Land of Reed-Plains.

============================================================
SECTION 33
============================================================

[]

Then the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrating-Deity commanded and charged the Heir Apparent His Augustness Truly-Conqueror-I-Conquer-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears [saying: “The Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity] says that he has now finished pacifying the Central Land of Reed-Plains. So do thou, in accordance with our gracious charge, descend to and dwell in and rule over it.” Then the Heir Apparent His Augustness Truly-Conqueror-I-Conquer-Conquering-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears replied, saying: “While I have been getting ready to descend, there has been born [to me] a child whose name is His Augustness Heaven-Plenty-Earth-Plenty-Heaven’s-Sun-Height-Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty. This child should be sent down.” [As for this august

child, he was augustly joined to Her Augustness Myriad-Looms-Luxuriant-Dragon-fly-Island-Princess, daughter of the High-Integrating-Deity, and begot children: His Augustness-Heavenly Rice-ear-Ruddy, and next His Augustness Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty.] Therefore, in accordance with these words, they laid their command on His Augustness Prince Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty, deigning to charge him with these words: “This Luxuriant Reed-Plain-Land-of-Fresh-Rice-ears is the land over which thou shalt rule.” So [he replied]: I “will descend from Heaven according to your commands.” So when His Augustness Prince-ear-Ruddy-Plenty was about to descend from Heaven, there was at the eight-forking road of Heaven a Deity whose refulgence reached upwards to the Plain of High Heaven and downwards to the Central

Land of Reed-Plains. So then the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrating Deity commanded and charged the Heavenly-Alarming-Female-Deity [, saying]: “Though thou art but a delicate female, thou art a Deity who conquers in facing Deities. So be thou the one to go and ask thus: ‘This being the road by which our august child is about to descend from Heaven, who is it that is thus there?’ ” So to this gracious question he replied, saying “I am an Earthly Deity named the Deity Prince of Saruta. The reason for my coming here is that, having heard of the [intended] descent of the august child of the Heavenly Deities, I have come humbly to meet him and respectfully offer myself as His Augustness’s vanguard.” Then joining to him His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord, His Augustness Grand-Jewel, Her Augustness Heavenly-Alarming-Female, Her Augustness I-shi-ko-ri-do-me, and His Augustness Jewel-Ancestor, in all five chiefs of companies, they sent him down from Heaven. Thereupon they joined to him the eight-feet [long] curved jewels and

mirror that had allured [the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity from the Rock-Dwelling,] and also the Herb-Quelling-Great-Sword, and likewise the Deity Thought-Includer, the Hand-Strength-Male-Deity, and the Deity Heavenly-Rock-Door-Opener of Eternal Night, and charged him thus: “Regard this mirror exactly as if it were our august spirit, and reverence it as if reverencing us”. Next did they say: “Let the Deity Thought-Includer take in hand our affairs, and carry on the government.” These two Deities are worshipped at the temple of Isuzu. The next, the Deity of Luxuriant-Food, is the

Deity dwelling in the outer temple of Watarahi. The next, the Deity Heavenly-Rock-Door-Opener, another name for whom is the Wondrous-Rock-True-Gate-Deity, and another name for whom is the Luxuriant-Rock-True-Gate-Deity,—this Deity is the Deity of the August Gate. The next, the Deity Hand-Strength-Male, dwells in Sanagata. Now His Augustness the Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord (is the ancestor of the Nakatomi Chieftains); His Augustness Grand Jewel (is the ancestor of the Imibe Headmen); Her Augustness the Heavenly-Alarming-Female (is the ancestress of the Duchesses of Saru); Her Augustness I-shi-ko-ri-do-me (is the ancestress of the Mirror-Making Chieftains); His Augustness-Jewel-Ancestor (is the ancestor of the Jewel-Ancestor Chieftains).

============================================================
SECTION 34
============================================================

[]

So then [the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrating-Deity] commanded His Augustness Heaven’s-Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty; and he, leaving the Heavenly Rock-Seat, pushing asunder the eight-fold heavenly spreading clouds, and dividing a road with a mighty road-dividing, set off floating shut up in the Floating Bridge of Heaven, and descended from Heaven onto the peak of Kuzhifuru which is Takachiho in Tsukushi. So His Heavenly Great

Augustness and His Augustness Heaven’s-Round-Eyes, both taking on their backs the Heavenly rock-quivers, taking at their side the large mallet-headed swords, taking in their hands the Heavenly vegetable-wax-tree bow, and clasping under their arms the Heavenly true deer-arrows, stood in his august van in respectful attendance. So His Heavenly-Great-Wondrous-Augustness (is the ancestor of the Ohotomo Chieftains); His Augustness Heaven’s-Round-Eyes (is the ancestor of the Kume Lords). Thereupon he said: “This place is opposite to the land of Kara. One comes straight across to the august Cape of

============================================================
SECTION 35
============================================================

Kasasa; and it is a land whereon the morning sun shines straight, a land which the evening sun’s sunlight illumines. So this place is an exceedingly good place.” Having thus spoken, he made stout the temple-pillars on the nethermost rock-bottom, and made high the cross-beams to the Plain of High Heaven, and dwelt there.

[]

So then he charged Her Augustness the Heavenly-Alarming-Female [saying]: “Do thou, who wast the one to make known this Great Deity Prince of Saruta who respectfully served as my august vanguard, respectfully escort him [back]; and do thou likewise bear the august name of that Deity, and respectfully serve me.” Wherefore the Duchesses of Saru bear the name of the Male Deity the Prince of Saruta, and the women are Duchesses of Saru.

============================================================
SECTION 36
============================================================

[]

Now when this Deity Prince of Saruta dwelt at Azaka, he went out fishing, and had his hand caught by a hirabu shell-fish, and was drowned in the brine of the sea. So the name by which he was called when he sank to the bottom was the Bottom-Touching-August-Spirit; the name by which he was called when the sea-water gurgled up was the Gurgling-Up-August-Spirit; the name by which he was called when the bubbles formed was the Bubble-Bursting-August-Spirit. Thereupon [Her Augustness the Heavenly-Alarming-Female], having escorted [back] the Deity Prince of Saruta, came back, and at once drove together all the things broad of fin and the things narrow of fin, and asked them, saying: “Will ye respectfully serve the august son of the Heavenly Deities?”—upon which all the fishes declared that they would respectfully serve him. Only the bèche-de-mer said nothing. Then Her Augustness the Heavenly-Alarming-Female spoke to the bèche-de-mer, saying: “Ah! this mouth is a mouth that gives no reply!”—and [with these words] slit the mouth with her stiletto.

============================================================
SECTION 37
============================================================

So at the present day the bèche-de-mer has a slit mouth. Wherefore [from august reign to] august reign, when the offerings of the first-fruits of Shima are presented [to the Emperor, a portion of them] is granted to the Duchesses of Saru.

[]

Hereupon His Augustness Heaven’s-Sun-Height-Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty met a beautiful person at the august cape of Kasasa, and asked her whose daughter she was. She replied, saying: “I am a daughter of the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor, and my name is the Divine-Princess-of-Ata, another name by which I am called being Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees.” Again he asked: “Hast thou any brethren?” She replied, saying: “There is my elder sister, Princess-Long-as-the-Rocks.” Then he charged her [,saying]: “Ego sun cupidus soiendi tecum. Tibi quomodo videtur?” She replied, saying: “I am not able to say. My father the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor will say.” So he sent a request [for her] to her father the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor, who, greatly

delighted, respectfully sent her off, joining to her her elder sister Princess Long-as-the-Rocks, and causing merchandise to be carried on tables holding an hundred. So then, owing to the elder sister being very hideous, [His Augustness Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty] was alarmed at the sight of her, and sent her back, only keeping the younger sister Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees, whom he wedded for one night. Then the Deity-Great-Mountain-Possessor was covered with shame at Princess Long-as-the-Rocks being sent back, and sent a message [to His Augustness Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty], saying: “My reason for respectfully presenting both my daughters together was that, by sending Princess-Long-as-the-Rocks, the august offspring of the Heavenly Deity, though the snow fall and the wind blow, might live eternally immovable like unto the enduring rocks, and again that by sending Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees, [they] might live flourishingly like unto the flowering of the blossoms of the trees: to insure this, I offered them. But owing to thy thus sending back Princess Long-as-the-Rocks, and keeping only Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees, the august offspring of the Heavenly Deity shall be but as frail as the

============================================================
SECTION 38
============================================================

flowers of the trees.” So it is for this reason that down to the present day the august lives of Their Augustnesses the Heavenly Sovereigns are not long.

[]

So later on Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees waited on [His Augustness Prince Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty and said: “I am pregnant, and now the time for my delivery approaches. It is not fit for me to be delivered of the august offspring of Heaven privately; so I tell thee.” Then [His Augustness Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty] said: “Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly! what! pregnant after one night! It cannot be my child. It must surely be the child of an Earthly Deity.” Then she replied, saying:

“If the child with which I am pregnant be the child of an Earthly Deity, my delivery will not be fortunate. If it be the august child of the Heavenly Deity, it will be fortunate;”—and thereupon she built a hall eight fathoms [long] without doors, went inside the hall and plastered up [the entrance] with earth; and when the time came for her delivery, she set fire to the hall and was delivered. So the name of the child that was born when the fire was burning most fiercely was His Augustness Fire-Shine (this is the ancestor of the Hayabito, Dukes of Ata); the name of the child born next was His Augustness Fire-Climax; the august name of the child born next was His Augustness Fire-Subside, another

============================================================
SECTION 39
============================================================

name for whom is His Augustness Heaven’s-Sun-Height-Prince-Great-Rice-ears-Lord-Ears (three Deities [in all]).

[]

So His Augustness Fire-Shine was a prince who got his luck on the sea, and caught things broad of fin and things narrow of fin. His Augustness Fire-Subside was a prince who got his luck on the mountains, and caught things rough of hair and things soft of hair. Then His Augustness Fire-Subside said to his elder brother His Augustness Fire-Shine: “Let us mutually exchange, and use each other’s luck.” [Nevertheless,] though he thrice made the request, [his elder brother] would not accede [to it]; but at last with difficulty the mutual exchange was obtained. Then His Augustness Fire-Subside, undertaking the sea-luck, angled for fish, but never got a single fish; and moreover he lost the fish-hook in the sea. Thereupon his elder brother His Augustness Fire-Shine asked him for the fish-hook, saying: “A mountain-luck is a luck of its own, and a sea-luck is a luck of its own. Let each of us now restore [to the other] his luck.” To which the younger brother His Augustness Fire-Subside replied, saying: “As for thy

============================================================
SECTION 40
============================================================

fish-hook, I did not get a single fish by angling with it; and at last I lost it in the sea.” But the elder brother required it of him [the more] urgently. So the younger brother, breaking his ten grasp sabre that was augustly girded on him, made [of the fragments] five hundred fish hooks as compensation; but he would not take them. Again he made a thousand fish-hooks as compensation; but he would not receive them, saying: “I still want the real original fish-hook.”

[]

Hereupon, as the younger brother was weeping and lamenting by the sea-shore, the Deity Salt-Possessor came and asked him, saying: “What is the cause of the Sky’s-Sun-Height’s weeping and lamentation?” He replied, saying: “I had exchanged a fish-hook with my elder brother, and have lost that fish-hook; and as he asks me for it, I have given him many fish-hooks as compensation; but

he will not receive them, saying, ‘I still want the original fish-hook.’ So I weep and lament for this.” Then the Deity Salt-Possessor said: “I will give good counsel to Thine Augustness;”—and therewith built a stout little boat without interstices, and set him in the boat, and instructed him, saying: “When I shall have pushed the boat off, go on for some time. There will be a savoury august road; and if thou goest in the boat along that road, there will appear a palace built like fishes’ scales,—which is the palace of the Deity-Ocean-Possessor. When thou reachest the august gate of that deity [’s palace], there will be a multitudinous [-ly branching] cassia-tree above the well at its side. So if thou sit on the top of that tree, the Sea-Deity’s daughter will see thee, and counsel thee.” So following [these] instructions, [His Augustness Fire-Subside] went a little [way], and everything happened as [the Deity Salt-Possessor] had said; and he forthwith climbed the cassia-tree, and sat [there]. Then when the handmaidens of the Sea-Deity’s daughter Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess, bearing jewelled vessels, were about to draw water, there was a light in the well. On looking up, there was a beautiful young man. They thought

it very strange. Then His Augustness Fire-Subside saw the handmaidens, and begged to be given some water. The handmaidens at once drew some water, put it into a jewelled vessel, and respectfully presented it to him. Then, without drinking the water, he loosened the jewel at his august neck, took it in his mouth, and spat it into the jewelled vessel. Thereupon the jewel adhered to the vessel, and the handmaidens could not separate the jewel [from the vessel]. So they took it with the jewel adhering to it, and presented it to Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess. Then, seeing the jewel, she asked her handmaidens, saying: “Is there perhaps some one outside the gate?” They replied, saying: “There is some one sitting on the top of the cassia-tree above our well. It is a very beautiful young man. He is more illustrious even than our king. So, as he begged for water, we respectfully gave him water; but, without drinking the water, he spat this jewel into [the vessel]. As we were not able to separate this [from the other], we have brought [the vessel] with [the jewel] in it to present to thee.” Then Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess, thinking it strange, went out to look, and was forthwith delighted at the sight. They exchanged glances, after which she spoke to her father, saying: “There is a beautiful person at our gate.” Then the Sea-Deity himself went out to look, and saying, “This person is the Sky’s-Sun-Height, the august child of the Heaven’s-Sun-Height,” led him into the interior [of the palace], and spreading eight layers of rugs of sea-asses’ skins, and spreading on the top other eight layers of silk rugs, and setting him on the top of them, arranged merchandise on tables holding an hundred, made an august banquet, and forthwith gave him his daughter Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess in marriage. So he dwelt in that land for three years. Hereupon His Augustness

thought of what had gone before, and heaved one deep sigh. So Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess, hearing the sigh, informed her father, saying: “Though he has dwelt three years [with us], he had never sighed; but this night he heaved one deep sigh. What may be the cause of it?” The Great Deity her father asked his son-in-law, saying: “This morning I hear my daughter speak, saying: ‘Though he has dwelt three years [with us], he had never sighed; but this he heaved one deep sigh.’ What may the cause be? Moreover what was the cause of thy coming here?” Then [His Augustness Fire-Subside] told the Great Deity exactly how his elder brother had pressed him for the lost fish-hook. Thereupon the Sea-Deity summoned together all the fishes of the sea, great and small, and asked them, saying: “Is there perchance any fish that has taken this fish-hook?” So all the fishes replied: “Lately the tahi has complained of something sticking in its throat preventing it from eating; so it doubtless has taken [the hook].” On the throat of the tahi being thereupon examined, there was the fish-hook [in it]. Being forthwith taken, it was washed and respectfully presented to His Augustness Fire-Subside, whom the Deity Great-Ocean-Possessor then instructed, saying: “What thou shalt say when thou grantest this fish-hook to thine elder brother [is as follows]: ‘This fish-hook is a big hook, an eager hook, a poor hook, a silly hook.’ Having [thus] spoken, bestow it

with thy back hand. Having done thus,—if thine elder brother make high fields, do Thine Augustness make low fields; and if thine elder brother make low fields, do Thine Augustness make high fields. If thou do thus, thine elder brother will certainly be impoverished in the space of three years, owing to my ruling the water. If thine elder brother, incensed at thy doing thus, should attack thee, put forth the tide-flowing jewel to drown him. If he express grief, put forth the tide-ebbing jewel to let him live. Thus shalt thou harrass him.” With these words, [the Sea-Deity] gave [to His Augustness Fire-Subside] the tide-flowing jewel and the tide-ebbing jewel,—two in all,—and forthwith summoned together all the crocodiles, and asked them, saying: “The Sky’s-Sun-Height, august child of the Heaven’s-Sun-Height, is now about to proceed out to the Upper-Land. Who will in how many days respectfully escort him, and bring back a report.” So each according to the length of his body in fathoms spoke, fixing [a certain number of] days,—one of them, a crocodile one fathom [long], saying: “I will escort him, and come back in one day.” So then [the Sea-Deity] said to the crocodile one fathom [long]:

============================================================
SECTION 41
============================================================

“If that be so, do thou respectfully escort him. While crossing the middle of the sea, do not alarm him.” Forthwith he seated him upon the crocodile’s head, and saw him off. So [the crocodile] respectfully escorted him home in one day, as he had promised. When the crocodile was about to return, [His Augustness Fire-Subside] untied the stiletto which was girded on him, and, setting it on the crocodile’s neck, sent [the latter] back. So the crocodile one fathom [long] is now called the Deity Blade-Possessor.

[]

Hereupon [His Augustness Fire-Subside] gave the fish-hook [to his elder brother], exactly according to the Sea-Deity’s words of instruction. So thenceforward [the elder brother] became poorer and poorer, and, with renewed savage intentions, came to attack him. When he was about to attack [His Augustness Fire-Subside, the latter] put forth the tide-flowing jewel to drown him; on his expressing grief, he put forth the tide-ebbing jewel to save him. When he had thus been harrassed, he bowed his head, saying: “I henceforward will be Thine Augustness’s guard by day and night, and respectfully serve thee.” So down to the present day his various posturings when drowning are ceaselessly served up.

============================================================
SECTION 42
============================================================

[]

Hereupon the Sea-Deity’s daughter Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess herself waited on [His Augustness Fire-Subside], and said: “I am already with child, and the time for my delivery now approaches. But methought that the august child of an Heavenly Deity ought not to be born in the Sea-Plain. So I have waited on thee here.” Then forthwith on the limit of the waves upon the sea-shore she built a parturition-hall, using cormorants’ feathers for thatch. Hereupon, before the thatch was completed, she was unable to restrain the urgency of her august womb. So she entered the parturition-hall. Then, when she was about to be delivered, she spoke to her husband [,saying]: “Whenever a foreigner is about to be delivered, she takes the shape of her native land to be delivered. So I now will take my native

shape to be delivered. Pray look not upon me!” Hereupon [His Augustness Fire-Subside], thinking these words strange, stealthily peeped at the very moment of delivery, when she turned into a crocodile eight fathoms [long], and crawled and writhed about; and he forthwith, terrified at the sight, fled away. Then Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess knew that he had peeped; and she felt ashamed, and, straightway leaving the august child which she had borne, she said: “I had wished always to come and go across the sea-path. But thy having peeped at my [real] shape [makes me] very shame-faced,”—and she forthwith closed the sea-boundary, and went down again. Therefore the name by which the august child whom she had borne was called was His Augustness Heaven’s-Sun-Height-Prince-Wave-limit-Brave-Cormorant-Thatch-Meeting-Incompletely. Nevertheless afterwards, although angry at his having wished to peep, she could not restrain her loving heart, and she entrusted to her younger sister Jewel-Good-Princess, on the occasion of her nursing

the august child, a Song to be presented [to His Augustness Fire-Subside]. The Song said:

Then her husband replied by a Song, which said:

So His Augustness-Prince-Great-Rice-ears-Lord-Ears dwelt in the palace of Takachiho for five hundred and eighty years. His august mausoleum is likewise on the west of Mount Takachiho.

============================================================
SECTION 43
============================================================

[]

His Augustness Heaven’s-Sun-Height-Prince-Wave-limit-Brave-Cormorant-Thatch-Meeting-Incompletely wedded his maternal aunt Her Augustness Jewel-Good-Princess, and begot august children named: His Augustness Five-Reaches; next His Augustness Boiled-Rice; next His Augustness August-Food-Master; next His Augustness Young-August-Food-Master, another name for whom is His Augustness Luxuriant-August-Food-Master, and another name is His Augustness Divine-Yamato-Ihare-Prince. So His Augustness August-Food-Master, treading on the crest of the waves, crossed over to the Eternal Land. His Augustness Boiled-Rice went into the Sea-Plain, it being his deceased mother’s land.

============================================================
SECTION 44
============================================================

---

[]

The two Deities His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko and his elder brother His Augustness Itsu-se, dwelling in the palace of Takachiho, took counsel, saying: “By dwelling in what place shall we [most] quietly carry on the government of the Empire? It were probably best to go east.” Forthwith they left Himuka on their progress to Tsukushi. So when they arrived at Usa in the land of Toyo, two of the natives, whose names were Usa-tsu-hiko and Usa-tsu-hime built a palace raised on one foot, and offered them a great august banquet. Removing thence, they dwelt for one year at the

palace of Wokada in Tsukushi. Again making a progress up from that land, they dwelt seven years at the palace of Takeri in the land of Agi. Again removing, and making a progress up from that land, they dwelt eight years at the palace of Takashima in Kibi. So when they made their progress up from that land, they met in the Hayasuhi Channel a person riding towards them on the carapace of a tortoise, and raising his wings as he angled. Then they called to him to approach, and asked him, saying: “Who art thou?” He replied, saying: “I am an Earthly Deity.” Again they asked him, saying: “Knowest thou the sea-path?” He replied, saying: “I know it well.” Again they asked him, saying: “Wilt thou follow and respectfully serve us?” He replied, saying: “I will respectfully serve you.” So they pushed a pole across to him, drew him into the august vessel, and forthwith conferred on him the designation of

Sawo-ne-tsu-hiko. (This is the ancestor of the Rulers of the land of Yamato). So when they went up from that land they passed the Namihaya Crossing, and brought up at the haven of Shirakata. At this time Nagasune-biko of Tomi raised an army, and waited to go out to fight [against them]. Then they took the shields that had been put in the august vessel, and disembarked. So they called that place by the name of Tate-dzu. It is what is now called the Tadetsu of Kusaka.

when fighting with the Prince of Tomi, His Augustness Itsu-se was pierced in his august hand by the Prince of Tomi’s hurtful arrow. So then he said: “It is not right for me, an august child of the Sun-Deity, to fight facing the sun. It is for this reason that I am stricken by the wretched villain’s hurtful hand. I will henceforward turn round, and smite him with my back to the sun.” Having [thus] decided, he, on making a progress round from the southern side, reached the sea of Chinu, and washed the blood on his august hand: so it is called the sea of Chinu. Making a progress round from thence, and arriving at the river-mouth of Wo in the land of Ki, he said: “Ah! that I should die stricken by the wretched villain’s hand!” and expired as a valiant man. So that river-mouth was called the river-mouth of Wo. The mausoleum, too, is on Mount Kama in the land of Ki.

============================================================
SECTION 45
============================================================

[]

So when His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko made a progress round from thence, and reached the village of Kumanu, a large bear came out of the mountain, and forthwith disappeared into it. Then His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko suddenly fainted away, and his august army likewise all fainted and fell prostrate. At this time Takakurazhi (this is the name of a person) of Kumanu came bearing one cross-sword to the place where the august child of the Deity was lying prostrate, and presented it to him, upon which the august child of the Heavenly Deity forthwith rose up, and said: “How long I have slept!” So when he accepted the cross-sword, the savage Deities of the mountains of Kumanu all spontaneously fell cut down. Then the whole august army, that had been bewildered and had fallen prostrate, awoke and rose up. So the august child of the Heavenly Deity asked him how

he had got the cross-sword. Takakurazhi replied, saying: “I was told in a dream that the two Deities the Heaven-Shining-Great-Deity and the High Integrating Deity commanded and summoned the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity, and charged him [thus]: ‘The Central Land of Reed-Plains is painfully uproarious,—it is. Our august children must he ill at ease. As [therefore] the Central Land of Reed-Plains is a land which thou specially subduedst, thou the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity shalt descend [thither].’ Then he replied, saying: ‘I will not descend [myself], but I have the cross-sword wherewith I specially subdued the land. (The name by which this sword is called is the Deity Thrust-Snap; another name by which it is called is the Deity Awful-Snap, and another name for it is the August-Snap-Spirit. This sword dwells in the temple of the Deity of Isonokami.) The manner in which I will send this sword down will be to perforate the ridge of [the roof of] Takakurazhi’s store-house, and drop it through!’ {So the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity instructed me, saying: ‘I will perforate the ridge of [the roof of] thy store-house, and drop this sword through.} So do thou, with

============================================================
SECTION 46
============================================================

the good eyes of morning, take it and present it to the august child of the Heavenly Deity.’ So, on my searching my store-house early next morning in accordance with the instructions of the dream, there really was a cross-sword there. So I just present this cross-sword to thee.”

[]

“Then His Augustness the Great-High-Integrating-Deity again commanded and taught, saying: ‘August son of the Heavenly Deity! make no progress hence into the interior. The savage Deities are very numerous. I will now send from Heaven a crow eight feet [long]. So that crow eight feet [long] shall guide thee. Thou must make thy progress following after it as it goes So on [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] making his progress following after the crow eight feet [long] in obedience to the Deity’s instructions, he reached the lower course of the Yeshinu river, where

there was a person catching fish in a weir. Then the august child of the Heavenly Deity asked, saying: “Who art thou?” He replied, saying: “I am an Earthly Deity and am called by the name of Nihe-motsu no Ko.” (This is the ancestor of the Cormorant-Keepers of Aha). On [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] making his progress thence, a person with a tail came out of a well. The well shone. Then [His Augustness] asked: “Who art thou?” He replied, saying: “I am an Earthly Deity, and my name is Wi-hika.” (This is the ancestor of the Headmen of Yeshinu). On his forthwith entering the mountains, His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko again met a person with a tail. This person came forth pushing the cliffs apart. Then [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] asked: “Who art thou?” He replied, saying: “I am an Earthly Deity, and my name is Iha-oshi-waku no Ko. I heard [just] now that the august son of the Heavenly Deity was making his progress. So it is for that that I have come to meet thee.” (This is the ancestor of the Territorial Owners

============================================================
SECTION 47
============================================================

of Yeshinu). Thence [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] penetrated over on foot to Uda.” So they say: “The Ugachi of Uda.”

[]

So then there were in Uda two persons, Ukashi the Elder Brother and Ukashi the Younger Brother. So [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] sent the crow eight feet [long] in advance to ask these persons, saying: “The august child of the Heavenly Deity has made a progress [hither]. Will ye respectfully serve him?” Hereupon Ukashi the Elder Brother waited for and shot at the messenger with a whizzing barb to made him turn back. So the place where the whizzing barb fell is called Kabura-zaki. Saying that he intended to wait for and smite [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko], he [tried to] collect an army. But being unable to collect an army, he said deceitfully that he would respectfully serve [His Augustuess Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko], and built a great palace, and in that palace set a pitfall, and waited. Then Ukashi the Younger Brother came out to [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] beforehand, and made obeisance, saying: “Mine elder brother Ukashi the Elder Brother has shot at and turned back the messenger of the august child of the Heavenly Deity,

and, intending to wait for and attack thee, has [tried to] collect an army; but, being unable to collect it, he has built a great palace, and set a gin within it, intending to wait for and catch thee. So I have come out to inform [thee of this].” Then the two persons His Augustness Michi-no-Omi, ancestor of the Ohotomo Chieftains, and His Augustness Ohokume, ancestor of the Kume Lords, summoned Ukashi the Elder Brother and reviled him, saying: “Into the great palace which thou hast built to respectfully serve [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko], be thou the first to enter, and declare plainly the manner in which thou intendest respectfully to serve him;”—and forthwith grasping the hilts of their cross-swords, playing with their spears, and fixing arrows [in their bows], they drove him in, whereupon he was caught in the gin which he himself had set, and died. So they forthwith pulled him out, and cut him in pieces. So the place is called Uda-no-Chihara. Having done thus, [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] bestowed on his august army the whole of the great banquet presented [to him] by Ukashi the Younger Brother. At this time he sang, saying:

“Ugh! pfui! dolt! This is saying thou

============================================================
SECTION 48
============================================================

rascal. Ah! pfui! dolt! This is laughing [him] to scorn.”

So Ukashi the Younger Brother (he is the ancestor of the Water-Directors of Uda).

[]

When [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] made his progress, and reached the great cave of Osaka, earth-spiders with tails, [namely] eighty bravoes, were in the cave awaiting him. So then the august son of the Heavenly Deity commanded that a banquet be bestowed on the eighty bravoes. Thereupon he set eighty butlers, one for each of the eighty bravoes, and girded each of them with a

============================================================
SECTION 49
============================================================

sword, and instructed the butlers, saying: “When ye hear me sing, cut [them down] simultaneously.” So the Song by which he made clear to them to set about smiting the earth-spiders said:

Having thus sung, they drew their swords, and simultaneously smote them to death.

[]

After this, when about to smite the Prince of Tomi, he sang, saying:

Again he sang:

Again he sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 50
============================================================

Again when he smote Shiki the Elder Brother and Shiki the Younger Brother, the august army was temporarily exhausted. Then he sang, saying:

[]

So then His Augustness Nigi-hayabi waited on and said to the august child of the Heavenly Deity: “As I heard that [thou], the august child of the Heavenly Deity, hadst descended from Heaven, I have followed down to wait on thee.” Forthwith presenting to him the heavenly symbols, he respectfully served him. So His Augustness Nigi-hayabi wedded the Princess of Tomi, sister of the Prince of Tomi,

============================================================
SECTION 51
============================================================

and begot a child, His Augustness Umashi-ma-ji. (He was the ancestor of the Chiefs of the Warrior-Clan, of the Grandees of Hodzumi, and of the Grandees of the Neck-Clan.) So having thus subdued and pacified the savage Deities, and extirpated the unsubmissive people, [His Augustness Kama-yamato-ihare-biko] dwelt at the palace of Kashibara near Unebi, and ruled the Empire.

[]

So when he dwelt in Himuka, [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] wedded Princess Ahira, younger sister of the Duke of Wobashi

in Ata, and begot children: there were two,—His Augustness Tagishi-mimi, next His Augustness Kisu-mimi. But when he sought for a beautiful maiden to make her his Chief Empress, His Augustness Oho-kume said: “There is here a beauteous maiden who is called the august child of a Deity. The reason why she is called the august child of a Deity is that the Princess Seya-datara, daughter of Mizokuhi of Mishima, was admired on account of her beauty by the Great-Master-of-Things the Deity of Miwa, qui, quum pulchra puella oletum fecit, in sagittam rubro [colore] fucatam se convertit, et ab inferiori parte cloacæ [ad usum] faciendi oleti virginis privatas partes transfixit. Tunc pulchra virgo cousternata est, et surrexit, et trepide fugit. Statim sagittam attulit, et juxta thalamum posuit. Subito [sagitta] formosus

adolescens facta est, qui cito pulchram puellam sibi in matrimonio junxit, et filiam procreavit nomine Hoto-tatara-i-susugi-hime; et est nomen alternativum Hime-tatara-i-suke-yori-hime. (Id est posterior mutatio nominis, quoniam abhorruit facere mentionem privatarum partinm). So therefore she is called the august child of a Deity Hereupon seven beauteous maidens were out playing on the moor of Takasazhi, and I-suke-yori-hime was among them. His Augustness Ohokume, seeing I-suke-yori-hime, spoke to the Heavenly Sovereign in a Song, saying:

Then I-suke-yori-hime was standing first among the beauteous maidens. Forthwith the Heavenly Sovereign, having looked at the beauteous maidens, and knowing in his august heart that I-suke-yori-hime was standing in the very front, replied by a Song, saying:

Then His Augustness Ohokume informed I-suke-yori-hime of the

Heavenly Sovereign’s decree, whereupon she, seeing the slit sharp eyes of His Augustness Ohokume, sang in her astonishment, saying:

Then His Augustness Ohokume replied by a Song, saying:

So the maiden said that she would respectfully serve [the Heavenly Sovereign]. Hereupon the house of Her Augustness I-suke-yori-hime was on [the bank of] the River Sawi. The Heavenly Sovereign made a progress to the abode of I-suke-yori-hime, and augustly slept

============================================================
SECTION 52
============================================================

[there] one night. (The reason why that river was called the River Sawi was that on the River’s banks the mountain-lily-plant grew in abundance. So the name of the mountain-lily-plant was taken, and the designation of River Sawi [bestowed]. The name by which the mountain-lily- plant was originally called was sawi.) Afterwards, when I-suke-yori-hime came and entered into the palace, the Heavenly Sovereign sang augustly saying:

The names of the august children thus born were: His Augustness Hiko-ya-wi, next His Augustness Kamu-ya-wi-mimi, next His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi (Three Deities).

[]

So when, after the decease of the Heavenly Sovereign, the elder

half-brother, His Augustness Tagishi-mimi, wedded the Empress I-suke-yori-hime, he plotted how he might slay his three younger brethren, pending which their august parent I-suke-yori-hime lamented, and made [the plot] known to her august children by a Song. The Song said:

Again she sang, saying:

When hereupon her august children, hearing and knowing [of the danger], were alarmed and forthwith were about to slay Tagishi-mimi, His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi said to his elder brother His Augustness Kamu-ya-wi-mimi: “Thy dear Augustness, [do thou] take a weapon, and go in and slay Tagishi-mimi.” So he took a weapon and went in, and was about to slay him. But his arms and legs trembled so, that he was unable to slay him. So then the younger brother His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi begged [to be allowed]

============================================================
SECTION 53
============================================================

to take the weapon which his elder brother held, and went in and slew Tagishi-mimi. So again, in praise of his august name, he was called His Augustness Take-nuna-kaha-mimi. Then His Augustness Kamu-ya-wi-mimi resigned [in favour of] the younger brother His Augustness Take-nuna-kaba-mimi, saying: “I could not slay the foeman; but Thine Augustness was at once able to slay him. So, though I be the elder brother, it is not right that I should be the superior. Wherefore do Thine Augustness be the superior, and rule [all] beneath the Heaven. I will assist Thine Augustness, becoming a priest, and respectfully serving thee.”

[]

So His Augustness Hiko-ya-wi (is the ancestor of the Chieftains of Mamuta, and of the Chieftains of Teshima). His Augustness Kamu-ya-wi-mimi (is the ancestor of the Grandees of Oho, of the Chieftains of the Tribe of Chihisako, of the chieftains of the Tribe of Sakahi, of the Dukes of

Hi, of the Dukes of Ohokida, of the Dukes of Aso, of the Chieftains of the Granaries of Tsukushi, of the Grandees of the Sazaki Tribe, of the Rulers of the Tribe of Sazaki, of the Rulers of Wo-Hatsuse, of the Suzerains of Tsuke, of the Rulers of the land of Iyo, of the Rulers of the land of Shinanu, of the Rulers of the land of Ihaki in Michinoku, of the Rulers of the Land of Naka in Hitachi,

============================================================
SECTION 54
============================================================

of the Rulers of the land of Nagasa, of the Suzerains of Funaki in Ise, of the Grandees of Niha in Wuhari, and of the Grandees of Shimada.)

[]

His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi ruled the Empire. Altogether the august years of this Heavenly Sovereign Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko were one hundred and thirty-seven. His august mausoleum is on the top of the Kashi Spur on the northern side of Mount Unebi.

[]

His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi dwelt at the palace of Takawoka in Kadzuraki, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Kaha-mata-bime, ancestress of the Departmental

============================================================
SECTION 56
============================================================

Lords of Shiki, and begot an august child: His Augustness Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-de-mi (one Deity). The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were forty-five. His august mausoleum is on the Mound of Tsukida.

[]

His Augustness Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-de-mi dwelt in the palace of Ukiana at Kata-shiha, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Akuto-hime, daughter of the Departmental Lord Haye, elder brother of Kaha-mata-bime, and begot august children: His Augustness Toko-ne-tsu-hiko-irone, next His Augustness Oho-yamato-hiko-suki-tomo, next His Augustness Shiki-tsu-hiko. Of the august children of this Heavenly Sovereign,—three Deities,—His Augustness Oho-yamato-hiko-suki-tomo [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. There were two Kings, children of the next [brother], His Augustness

. One child (was the ancestor of the Territorial Lords of Suchi in Iga, of the Territorial Lords of Nabari, and of the Territorial Lords of Minu); one child, His Augustness Wa-chi-tsumi, dwelt in the palace of Miwi in Ahaji. So this King had two daughters: the name of the elder was Hahe-irone, and another name for her was Her Augustness Princess Oho-yamato-kuni-are; the name of the younger was Hahe-irodo. The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were forty-nine. Augustum mausoleum est in privatis partibus Montis Unebi.

============================================================
SECTION 57
============================================================

[]

His Augustness Oho-yamato-hiko-suki-tomo dwelt in the palace of Sakahiwo at Karu, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded  Augustness Princess Futo-ina-waka, another name for whom was Her Augustness Princess Ihi-bi, ancestress of the Departmental Lords of Shiki, and begot august children: His Augustness Mi-ma-tsu-hiko-kawe-shine, next His Augustness Tagishi-hiko (two Deities). So His Augustness Mi-ma-tsu-hiko-kawe-shine [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The next His Augustness Tagishi-hiko (was the ancestor of the Lords of Chinu, of the Lords of Take in Tajima, and of the Territorial Lords of Ashiwi). The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were forty-five. His august mausoleum is above the Vale of Manago by Mount Unebi.

[]

His Augustness Mi-ma-tsu-hiko-kawe-shine dwelt at the palace of Waki-no-kami in Kadzuraki, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly

Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Princess Yoso-taho, younger sister of Oki-tsu-yoso, ancestor of the Chiefs of Wohari, and begot august children: His Augustness Ame-oshi-tarashi-hiko, and next His Augustness Oho-yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito (two Deities). Now the younger brother, His Augustness Tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The elder brother His Augustness Ame-oshi-tarashi-hiko (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Kasuga, the Grandees of Ohoyake, the Grandees of Ahata, the Grandees of Wonu, the Grandees of Kaki-no-moto, the Grandees of Ichihiwi, the Grandees of Ohosaka, the

============================================================
SECTION 59
============================================================

Grandees of Ana, the Grandees of Taki, the Grandees of Haguri, the Grandees of Chita, the Grandees of Muza, the Grandees of Tsunuyama, the Dukes of Ihitaka in Ise, the Dukes of Ichishi, and the Rulers of the Land of Chika-tsu-Afumi).

The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were ninety-three. His august  is on Mount Hakata at Waki-no-kami.

[]

His Augustness Oho-yamato-tanashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito dwelt in the palace of Akidzushima at Muro in Kadzuraki, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded his niece Her Augustness Princess Oshika, and begot august children: His Augustness Oho-kibi-no-moro-susumi, next His Augustness

============================================================
SECTION 60
============================================================

(two Deities). So His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-futo-ni [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were one hundred and twenty-three. His august mausoleum is on the Mound of Tamade.

[]
His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-futo-ni dwelt at the palace of Ihodo at Kuruda, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Princess Kuhashi, daughter of Ohome, ancestor of the Departmental Lords of Tohochi, and begot an august child: His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-kuni-kuru (one Deity). Again he wedded Princess Chiji-haya-ma-waka of Kasuga, and begot an august child: Her Augustness Princess Chiji-haya (one Deity). Again wedding Her Augustness Princess Oho-yamato-kuni-are, he begot august children: Her Augustness Yamato-to-mo-so-bime; next His Augustness Hiko-sashi-kuta-wake; next His Augustness Hiko-isa-seri-biko,

another name for whom is His Augustness Oho-kibi-tsu-hiko; next Yamato-to-bi-haya-waka-ya-hime (four Deities). Again he wedded Hahe-irodo, younger sister of Her Augustness Princess Are, and begot august children,—His Augustness Hiko-same-ma, next His Augustness Waka-hiko-take-kibi-tsu-hiko (two Deities). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] in all eleven Deities (five kings and three queens). So His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-kuni-kuru [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The two Deities His Angustness Oho-kibi-tsu-hiko and His Augustness Waka-take-kibi-tsu-hiko together set sacred jars at the front of the River Hi in Harima; and, making Harima the mouth of the road, subdued and pacified the Land of Kibi. So His Augustness Oho-kibi-tsu-hiko (was the ancestor of the Grandees of

Kamu-tsu-michi in Kibi). The next, His Augustness Waka-hiko-take-kibi-tsu-hiko (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Shimo-tsu-michi in Kibi, and of the Grandees of Kasa). The next His Augustness Hiko-same-ma (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Uzhika in Harima). The next, His Augustness Hiko-sashi-kata-wake (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Tonami in Koshi, of the Grandees of Kunisaki in the land of Toyo, of the Dukes of Ihobara, and of the Maritime Suzerains of Tsunuga). The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were one hundred and six. His august mausoleum is at Uma-saka at Katawoka.

============================================================
SECTION 61
============================================================

[]

His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-kuni-kuru dwelt in the palace of Sakaki-bara at Karu, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Utsu-shiko-me, younger sister of His Augustness Utsu-shiko-wo, ancestor of the Grandees of Hodzumi, and begot august children: His Augustness Oho-biko, next His Augustness Sukuna-biko-take-wi-gokoro; next His Augustness Waka-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-oho-bibi (three Deities). Again, wedding Her Augustness I-gaka-shiko-me, daughter of His Augustness Utsu-shiko-wo, he begot an august child: His Augustness Hiko-futsu-oshi-no-makoto. Again, wedding Princess Haniyasu, daughter of Awotama of Kafuchi, he begot an august child, His Augustness Take-hani-yasu-biko (one Deity). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered in all five Deities]. So His Augustness Waka-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-oho-bibi [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The children of his elder brother,

His Augustness Oho-biko, were His Augustness Take-nuna-kaba-wake (ancestor of the Grandees of Abe); next His Augustness Hiko-inakoshi-wake. (This was the ancestor of the Butler Grandees.) His Augustness Hiko-futsu-oshi-no-makoto wedded Princess Takachina of Kadzuraki, younger sister of Oho-nabi, ancestor of the Chiefs of Wohari, and begot a child: the Noble Umashi Uchi. (This was the ancestor of the Grandees of Uchi in Yamashiro.) Again, wedding Princess Yama-shita-kage, younger sister of Udzu-hiko, ancestor of the Rulers of the Lord of Ki, he begot a child, the Noble Take-Uchi. The

children of this Noble Take-Uchi [numbered] in all nine (seven males and two females),—[namely] the Noble of Hata-no-Yashiro, [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Hata, of the Grandees of Hayashi, of the Grandees of Hami, of the Grandees of Hoshikaha, of the Grandees of Afumi, and of the Dukes of the Hatsuse Tribe); next the Noble Kose-no-Wo-Kara [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Kose, of the Grandees of the Sazaki Tribe, and of the Grandees of the Karu Tribe); next the Noble Soga no Ishikaha [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Soga, of the Grandees of Kahanobe of the Grandees of Tanaka, of the Grandees of Takamuko, of the Grandees

of Woharida, of the Grandees of Sakurawi, and of the Grandees of Kishida); next the Noble Heguri-no-Tsuku, [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Heguri, of the Grandees of Sawara, and of the Uma-mi-kuhi Chiefs); next the Noble Ki-no-Tsunu [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Ki, of the Grandees of Tsunu, and of the Grandees of Sakamoto); next Princess Mato of Kume; next Princess Nu-no-iro; next Kadzuraki-no-Nagaye-no-sotsu-biko [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Tamade, of the

============================================================
SECTION 62
============================================================

Grandees of Ikuha, of the Grandees of Ikuye and of the Grandees of Agina); moreover [there was] the Noble Waku-go (the ancestor of the Grandees of Yenuma). This Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were fifty-seven. His august mausoleum is on the mound in the middle of the Pool of Tsurugi.

[]

His Augustness Waka-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-oho-bibi dwelt in the palace of Izakaha at Kasuga, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Princess of Takanu, daughter of Yugori the Great Departmental Lord of Taniha, and begot an august child: His

Augustness Hiko-yumusumi, (one Deity). Again he wedded his step-mother, Her Augustness I-gaka-shiko-me, and begot august children,—His Augustness Mima-ki-iri-biko-iniwe, next Her Augustness Mima-tsu-hime (two Deities). Again he wedded Her Augustness Oke-tsu-hime, younger sister of His Augustness Hiko-kuni-oketsu, ancestor of the Grandees of Wani, and begot an august child: King Hiko-imasu (one Deity). Again, wedding Princess Washi, daughter of the Noble Kadzuraki-no-tarumi, he begot an august child,—King Take-tayo-hadzura-wake (one Deity). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] in all five Deities (four Kings and one Queen). So His Augustness Mi-maki-iri-biko-iniwe [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The children of his elder brother, King Hiko-yumusumi were: King Oho-tsutsuki-tari-ne, next King Sanugi-tari-ne (two Kings).

There were five Deities daughters of these two Kings. Next King Hiko-imasu wedded the Princess of Yena in Yamashiro, another name for whom was Kari-bata-tobe, and begot children: King Oho-mata, next King Wo-mata, next King Noble [of?] Shibumi (three Deities). Again, wedding Saho-no-oho-kurami-tome, daughter of Take-kuni-katsu-tome, of Kasuga, he begot children,—King Saho-biko; next King Wo-zaho; next Her Augustness Saho-bime, another name for whom is Sahaji-hime (Her Augustness Saho-bime here mentioned was consort of the Heavenly Sovereign Ikume); and King Muro-biko (four Deities). Again, wedding Okinaga-no-midzu-yori-hime, daughter of the Heavenly Deity Mikage,

who is held in reverence by the deacons of Mikami in Chika-tsu-Afumi, he begot children: King Tatasu-michi-no-ushi, Prince of Taniha; next King Midzuho-no-ma-wa-ka; next King Kamu-oho-ne, another name for whom is King Yatsuri-iri-biko; next Midzuho-no-i-ho-yori-hime; next Mimi-tsu-hime (five Deities). Again, wedding his mother’s younger sister Her Augustness Woke-tsu-hime, he begot children: King Ma-waka of Oho-tsutsuki in Yamashiro; next King Hiko-osu; next King Iri-ne (three Deities). Altogether the children of King Hiko-imasu [numbered] in all eleven Kings. So the children of the elder brother King Oho-mata were: King Ake-tatsu; next King Unakami (two Deities). This King Ake-tatsu

(was the ancestor of the Dukes of the Homuji Tribe in Ise and of the Rulers of Sana in Ise). King Una-kami (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Himeda). The next King Wo-mata (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Magari in Tagima). The next King Noble Shibumi (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Sasa). The next King Saho-biko (was the ancestor of the Chiefs of the Kusaka Tribe and of the Rulers of the Land of Kahi). The next, King Wo-zaho (was the ancestor of the Lords of Kadzunu and the Lords of Kanu in Chika-tsu-Afumi). The next King Muro-biko (was the ancestor of the Lords of Mimi in Wakasa). King Michi-no-ushi wedded the Lady Masu of Kahakami in Taniha, and begot children: Her Augustness Princess Hibasu; next Her Augustness Princess Matonu; next Her Augustness Oto-hime; next King Mi-kado-wake (four Deities). This King Mikado-wake (was the

of the Lords of Ho in Mikaha). Prince Midzuho-no-ma-waka, younger brother of this King Michi-no-ushi, (was the ancestor of the Suzerains of Yasu in Chika-tsu-Afumi). The next, King Kamu-oho-be (was the ancestor of the [Rulers of] the Land of Minu, of the Rulers of the land of Motosu, and of the Chiefs of the Nagahata Tribe). The next, King Ma-waka of Oho-tsutsuki in Yama-shiro wedded Princess Ajisaha of Mone, daughter of his younger brother Iri-ne, and begot a child: King Kani-me-ikadzuchi. This King wedded Princess Takaki, daughter of the Grandee Tohotsu of Taniha, and begot a child: King Noble Okinaga. This King wedded the Princess of Takanuka in Kadzuraki, and begot children: Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi; next Her Augustness Sora-tsu-hime; next King

Prince Okinaga. (Three Deities. This King was the ancestor of the Dukes of Homuji in Kibi, and of the Dukes of Aso in Harima.) Again King Noble Okinaga wedded Princess Inayori of Kahamata, and begot a child: King Oho-tamu-saka. (This was the ancestor of the Rulers of the land of Tajima.) The above-mentioned Take-toyo-hadzura-wake (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Chimori, of the Rulers of the Oshinumi Tribe, of the Rulers of the Mina Tribe, of the Oshinumi Tribe in Inaba, of the Lords of Takanu in Taniha, and of the Abiko of Yosami). The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were sixty-three. His august mausoleum is at the top of the hill of Izakaha.

============================================================
SECTION 63
============================================================

[]

His Augustness Mima-ki-iri-biko-iniwe dwelt at the Palace of Midzugaki at Shiki, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Tohotsu-no-ayu-me-me-kuhashi-hime, daughter of Arakaha-to-be, Ruler of the land of Ki, and begot august children: His Augustness Toyo-ki-iri-biko, and next Her Augustness Toyo-suki-iri-bime (two Deities). Again, wedding the Great Princess of Ama, ancestress of the Chiefs of Wohari, he begot august children: His Augustness Oho-iri-ki; next His Augustness Ya-saka-no-iri-biko; next Her Augustness Nuna-ki-no-iri-bime; next Her Augustness Towochi-no-iri-bime (four Deities). Again, wedding Her Augustness  Mimatsu, daughter of His Augustness Oho-biko, he begot august children: His Augustness Ikume-iri-biko-isachi; next His Augustness Iza-no-ma-waka; next Her Augustness Princess Kuni-kata; next Her Augustness

Princess Chiji-tsuku-yamato; next Her Augustness Princess Iga; next His Augustness Yamato-Hiko (six Deities). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] in all twelve Deities (seven Kings and five Queens). So His Augustness Ikume-iri-biko-isachi [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The next, His Augustness Toyo-ki-iri-biko (was the ancestor [of the Dukes] of Kami-tsu-ke-nu, and the Dukes of Shimo-tsu-ke-nu). The younger sister Her Augustness Princess Toyo-Suki (was high-priestess of the temple of the Great Deity of Ise). The next brother, His Augustness Oho-iri-ki (was ancestor of the Grandees of Noto). The next, His Augustness Yamato-hiko,—(in the time of this King a hedge of men was for the first time set in the mausoleum).

============================================================
SECTION 64
============================================================

[]

In the reign of this Heavenly Sovereign a great pestilence arose, and the people died as if none were to be left. Then the Heavenly Sovereign grieved and lamented, and at night, while on his divine couch, there appeared [to him] in an august dream the Great Deity the Great-Master-of-Things, and said: “This is my august doing. So if thou wilt cause me to be worshipped by Oho-tata-ne-ko, the divine spirit shall not arise, and the land will be tranquillized.” When, therefore, couriers were dispatched in every direction to search for the person [named] Oho-tata-ne-ko, he was discovered in the village of Minu in Kafuchi, and was respectfully sent [to the Heavenly Sovereign].

Then the Heavenly Sovereign deigned to ask: “Whose child art thou?” He replied, saying: “I am Oho-tata-ne-ko, child of His Augustness Take-mika-dzu-chi [who was] child of His Augustness Ihi-gata-sumi, [who was] child of His Augustness Kushi-mi-gata, [who was] child of the Great Deity the Great-Master-of-Things by his wife Iku-tama-yori-bime, daughter of His Augustness Suwe-tsu-mimi.” Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, being greatly rejoiced, commanded that the Empire should be tranquil, and the people flourish, and forthwith made His Augustness Oho-tata-ne-ko high-priest to worship the Great Deity of Great Miwa on Mount Mimoro. Again he ordered His Augustness Igaka-shiko-wo to make eighty heavenly platters, and reverently to establish the shrines of the Heavenly Deities and the Earthly Deities; likewise to worship with a red-coloured shield and

============================================================
SECTION 65
============================================================

spear the Deity of Sumisaka at Uda, and with a black-coloured shield and spear the Deity of Ohosaka; likewise to present august offerings of cloth to all the Deities of the august declivities of the hills and to all the Deities of the reaches of the rivers, without neglecting any. In consequence of this the pestilential vapour ceased altogether, and the country was tranquillized.

[]

The reason why this person called Oho-tata-ne-ko was known to be a Deity’s child, was that the above-mentioned Iku-tama-yori-bime was regularly beautiful, whereupon a [divine] youth [who thought] the majesty of her appearance without comparison in the world, came

suddenly to her in the middle of the night. So, as they loved each other and lived in matrimony together, the maiden ere long was pregnant. Then the father and mother, astonished at their daughter being pregnant, asked her, saying: “Thou art pregnant by thyself. How art thou with child without [having known] a man?” She replied, saying: “I have naturally conceived through a beautiful young man, whose name I know not, coming here every evening and staying with me.” Therefore the father and mother, wishing to know the man, instructed their daughter, saying: “Sprinkle red earth in front of the couch, and pass a skein of hemp through a needle, and pierce [therewith] the skirt of his garment.” So she did as they had instructed, and, on looking in the morning, the hemp that had been put in the needle went out through the hole of the door-hook, and all the hemp that remained was three twists only. Then forthwith, knowing how he had gone out by the hook-hole, they went on their quest following the thread, which, reaching Mount Miwa, stopped at the shrine of the Deity. So they knew [that Oho-tata-ne-ko was] the child of the Deity [residing] there. So the place was called by the name of Miwa on account of the three twists of hemp that had remained. (His Augustness Oho-tata-ne-ko, here referred to, was the ancestor of the Dukes of Miwa and of the Dukes of Kamo.)

============================================================
SECTION 66
============================================================

[]

Again in this august reign His Augustness Oho-biko was sent to the circuit of Koshi, and his son, His Augustness Take-nuna-kaha-wake, was sent to the twelve circuits to the eastward to quiet the unsubmissive people. Again Hiko-imasu was sent to the land of Taniha to slay Kugamimi-no-mikasa (this is the name of a person). So when His Augustness Oho-biko was going away to the land of Koshi, a young girl wearing a loin-skirt stood on the Pass of Hera in Yamashiro, and sang, saying:

Hereupon His Augustness Oho-biko, thinking it strange, turned his horse back, and asked the young girl, saying: “These words that thou speakest, what are they?” The young girl replied, saying: “I said nothing; I was only singing a song,”—and thereupon she suddenly vanished, none could see whither. So His Augustness Oho-biko returned up again [to the capital] and made a report [of the matter] to the Heavenly Sovereign, who replied and charged him [,saying]: “Methinks this is a sign that my half-brother, King Take-hani-yasu, who dwells in the land of Yamashiro, is planning some foul plot. [Do thou,] uncle, raise an army, and go [after him].” When he forthwith sent him off, joining to him his Augustness Hiko-kuni-buku, ancestor of the Grandees of Wani, they set sacred jars on the Pass of Wani, and went away. Thereupon, when they reached the River

Wakara in Yamashiro, King Take-hani-yasu, who had raised an army, was waiting to intercept [their passage], and [the two hosts] stood confronting and challenging each other with the river between them. So the place was called by the name of Idomi,—what is now called Idzumi. Then His Augustness Hiko-kuni-buku spoke, begging the other side to let fly the first arrow. Then King Take-hani-yasu shot, but could not strike. Thereupon, on His Augustness Kuni-buku shooting an arrow, it forthwith struck King Take-hani-yasu dead. So the whole army was routed, and fled in confusion. Then the [Imperial troops pursued] after the fugitive army as far as the ferry of Kusuba, when, harrassed by the pursuit, exierunt [hostium] excrementa, quæ bracis adhæserunt. Quare isti loco impositum est nomen Kuso-bakama. In prœsenti nominatur Kusu-ba. Again, on being intercepted in their flight and cut down, [their bodies] floated like cormorants in the river. So the river was called by the name of U-kaha. Again, because the warriors were cut to pieces, the place was called by the name of Hafuri-sono. Having thus finished [the work of] pacification, they went up [to the capital] to make their report [to the Heavenly Sovereign].

============================================================
SECTION 67
============================================================

[]

So His Augustness Oho-biko went away to Koshi in accordance with the previous [Imperial] commands. Then Take-nuna-kaha-wake, who had been sent round by the east, and his father Oho-biko met together in Ahidzu. So the place was called by the name of Ahidzu. Wherefore, each of them, having settled the government of the land to which he had been sent, made his report [to the Heavenly Sovereign]. Then the Empire was at peace and the people prosperous. Thereupon tribute on the arrow-notches of the men and tribute on the finger-tips of the women was first levied. So in praise of this august reign they said: “the Heavenly Sovereign Mima-ki, who ruled the first land.” Again, in this august reign the Pool of Yosami was made; moreover the Pool of Sakawori at Karu was made.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were one hundred and sixty-eight. His august mausoleum is on the mound at the corner of the Yamanobe road.

============================================================
SECTION 69
============================================================

[]

His Augustness Ikume-iri-biko-isachi dwelt at the palace of Tama-kaki in Skiki, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness the Princess Sahaji, younger sister of His Augustness Saho-biko, and begot an august child: His Augustness Homu-tsu-wake (one Deity). Again, wedding Her Augustness the Princess Hibasu, daughter of King Tatasu-michi-no-ushi, Prince of Taniha, ho begot august children: His Augustness Ini-shiki-no iri-biko; next His Augustness Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake; next His Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hiko; next Her Augustness Yamato-hime; next His Augustness Waka-ki-iri-biko (five Deities.) Again, wedding Her Augustness Nubata-no-iri-biko, younger sister of Her Augustness Princess Hibasu, he begot august children: His Augustness Nu-tarashi-wake; next His Augustness Iga-tarashi-hiko (two Deities). Again, wedding Her Augustness Azami-no-iri-bime, younger sister of Her

Augustness Nubata-no-iri-bime, he begot august children: His Augustness Ikobaya-wake; next Her Augustness the Princess of Azami (two Deities). Again, wedding Her Augustness Kagu-ya-hime, daughter of King Oho-tsutsuki-tari-ne, he begot an august child: King Wozabe (one Deity). Again, wedding Karibata-tobe daughter of Fuchi of Ohokuni in Yamashiro, be begot august children: King Ochi-wake; next King Ika-tarashi-hiko; next King Itoshi-wake. Again, wedding Oto-karibata-tobe, daughter of Fuchi of Otokuni, he begot august children: King Iha-tsuku-wake; next Her Augustness Iha-tsuku-bime, another name for whom was Her Augustness Futaji-no-iri-bime (two Deities). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] altogether sixteen (thirteen Kings and three Queens). So His Augustness Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. (His august stature was ten feet two inches;

the length of his august shank was four feet one inch.) The next, His Augustness Inishiki-no-iri-biko made the pool of Chinu; again he made the pool of Sayama; again he made the pool of Takatsu at Kusaka. Again he dwelt at the palace of Kahakami at Totori, and caused a thousand cross-swords to be made, and presented them to the temple of the Deity of Iso-no-kami. Forthwith he dwelt at that palace, and established the Kahakami Tribe. The next, His Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hiko, (was the ancestor of the Lords of Yamanobe, of the Lords of Sakikusa, of the Lords of Inaki, of the Lords of Ada, of the Lords of Minu in the Land of Wohari; of the Lords of Ihanashi in Kibi, of the Lords of Koromo, of the

Lords of Takasuka, of the Dukes of Asuka, and of the Lords of Mure). The next, Her Augustness Yamato-hime, (was high-priestess of the temple of the Great Deity of Ise). The next, King Ikobaya-wake (was the ancestor of the Lords of Anahobe at Saho). The next, Her Augustness the Princess of Azami (was married to King Inase-biko). The next, King Ochi-wake (was the ancestor of the Mountain Dukes of Wotsuki and of the Dukes of Koromo in Mikaha). The next, King Ika-tarashi-hiko (was the ancestor of the Mountain Dukes Kasuga, of the Dukes of Ike in Koshi, and of the Dukes of Kasugabe). The next, King Itoshi-wake (owing to his having no children, made the Itoshi Tribe his proxy). The next, King Iha-tsuku-wake, (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Haguhi and of the Dukes of Miwo.) The next, Her Augustness Futaji-no-Iri-bime (became the empress of His Augustness Yamato-take).

============================================================
SECTION 70
============================================================

[]

When this Heavenly Sovereign made Sabo-bime his Empress, Her Augustness Sabo-bime’s elder brother, King Saho-biko, asked his younger sister, saying: “Which is dearer [to thee], thine elder brother or thy husband?” She replied, saying: “Mine elder brother is dearer.” Then King Saho-biko conspired, saying: “If I be truly the dearer to thee, let me and thee rule the empire,” and forthwith he made an eight times tempered stiletto, and handed it to his younger sister, saying: “Slay the Heavenly Sovereign in his sleep with this small knife.” So the Heavenly Sovereign, not knowing of this conspiracy, was augustly sleeping, with the Empress’s august knees as his pillow. Then the Empress tried to cut his august throat with the stiletto; but though she lifted it thrice, she could not cut the throat for an irrepressible feeling of sadness, and she wept tears, which fell overflowing onto [the Heavenly Sovereign’s] august face. Straightway the Heavenly Sovereign started up, and asked the Empress, saying: “I have had a strange dream: a violent shower came from the direction of Saho and suddenly wetted my face; again a small damask-coloured snake coiled itself round my neck. Of what may such a dream be the omen?” Then the Empress, thinking it improper to dispute, forthwith informed the Heavenly Sovereign, saying: “Mine elder brother King Saho-biko asked me, saying, ‘Which is dearer [to thee], thy husband or thine elder brother?’ So, as I was embarrassed by [this] direct question, I replied, saying, ‘Oh! mine elder brother is the dearer.’ Then he

============================================================
SECTION 71
============================================================

charged me, saying: ‘I and thou will together rule the Empire; so the Heavenly Sovereign must be slain;’—and so saying, he made an eight times tempered stiletto, and handed it to me. Therefore I wanted to cut thine august throat; but though I thrice lifted [the weapon], a feeling of regret suddenly arose, so that I could not cut thy throat, and the tears that I wept fell and wetted thine august face. [The dream] was surely the omen of this.” Then the Heavenly Sovereign said: “How nearly have I been betrayed—and forthwith he raised an army to smite King Saho-biko, whereupon the King made a rice-castle to await the fray. At this time Her Augustness Saho-bime, unable to forget her elder brother, fled out through the back-gate [of the palace], and came into the rice-castle.

[]

At this time the Empress was pregnant. Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign could not restrain [his pity for] the Empress, who was pregnant and whom he had loved for now three years. So he turned his army aside, and did not hasten the attack. During this delay, the august child that she had conceived was born. So having put out the august child and set it outside the rice-castle, she caused [these words] to be said to the Heavenly Sovereign: “If this august child be

to be the Heavenly Sovereign’s august child, let him deign to undertake it.” Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign said: “Although detesting the elder brother, I yet cannot repress my love for the Empress,” and forthwith planned to secure the Empress. Wherefore, choosing from among his warriors a band of the strongest and deftest, he charged [them, saying]: “When ye take the august child, likewise abduct the queen its mother. Whether by the hair or by the hands, or wherever ye may best lay hold of her, clutch her and drag her out.” Then the Empress, knowing his intention beforehand, shaved off all her hair and covered her head with the hair, and likewise made her jewel-string rotten and wound it thrice round her arm, and moreover made her august garments rotten by means of rice-liquor and put on the garments as if they were whole. Having made these preparations, she took the august child in her arms and pushed it outside the castle. Then the strong men, taking the august child, forthwith clutched at the august parent. Then, on their clutching her august hair, the august hair fell off of itself; on their clutching her august arms, the jewel-string likewise snapped; on their clutching her august garments, the august garments at once tore. Therefore they obtained the august child, but did not get the august parent. So the warriors came back [to the Sovereign], and reported, saying: “On account of her august hair falling off of itself, of her august garments easily tearing, and moreover of the jewel-string which was wound round her august hand at once snapping, we have not got the august parent; but we have obtained the august child.” Then the Heavenly Sovereign, sorry and angry, hated the people who made the jewels, and deprived

them all of their lands. So the proverb says: “Landless jewel-makers.” Again did the  Heavenly Sovereign cause the Empress to be told, saying: “A child’s name must be given by the mother: by what august name shall this child be called?” Then she replied, saying: “As he was born now at the time of the castle being burnt with fire and in the midst of the fire, it were proper to call him by the august name of Prince Homu-chi-wake.” And again he caused her to be asked: “How shall he be reared?” She replied, saying “He must be reared by taking an august mother and fixing on old bathing-women and young bathing-women.” So he was respectfully reared in accordance with the Empress’s instructions. Again he asked the Empress, saying: “Who shall loosen the fresh small pendant which thou didst make fast?” She replied, saying: “It were proper that Ye-hime and

Oto-bime, daughters of King Tatasu-michi-no-ushi prince of Taniha, should serve thee, for these two queens are of unsullied parentage.” So at last [the Heavenly Sovereign] slew King Saho-biko, and his younger sister followed him.

============================================================
SECTION 72
============================================================

[]

So the way they led about and amused the august child was by making a two-forked boat out of a two-forked cryptomeria from Ahidzu in Wohari, bringing it up and floating it on the Pool of Ichishi and on the Pool of Karu in Yamato, [thus] leading about and amusing the august child. Nevertheless the august child spoke never a word, though his eight-grasp beard reached to the pit of his stomach. So it was on hearing the cry of a high-flying swan that he made his first utterance. Then [the Heavenly Sovereign] sent Yamanobe-no-Ohotaka (this is the name of a person) to catch the bird. So this person, pursuing the swan, arrived in the Land of Harima from the Land of Ki, and again in his pursuit crossed over to the Land of Inaba, then reaching the Land of

Taniha and the Land of Tajima; [thence] pursuing round to the eastward, he reached the Land of Afumi, and thereupon crossed over into the Land of Minu; and, passing along by the Land of Wohari, pursued it into the Land of Shinanu, and at length, reaching in his pursuit the Land of Koshi, spread a net in the Estuary of Wanami, and, having caught the bird, brought it up [to the capital] and presented it [to the Sovereign]. So that estuary is called the Estuary of Wanami. It had been thought that, on seeing the bird again, he would speak; but he did not speak, as had been thought. Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, deigning to be grieved, augustly fell asleep, when, in an august dream, he was instructed, saying: “If thou wilt build my temple like unto thine august abode, the august child shall surely speak.” When he had been thus instructed, [the Heavenly Sovereign] made grand divination to seek what Deity’s desire this might be. Then [it was discovered that] the curse was the august doing of the Great Deity of Idzumo. So when about to send the august child to worship [at] that Great Deity’s temple, [he made divination to discover] by whom it were well to have him attended. Then the lot fell on King Ake-tatsu. So he made King Ake-tatsu swear, saying: “If there

is truly to be an answer to our adoration of this Great Deity, may the heron dwelling on the tree by the Pool of Sagisu here fall [through my] oath.” When he thus spoke, the heron that had been sworn by fell to the ground dead. Again on his commanding it to come to life [in answer to his] oath, it then came to life again. Moreover he caused to wither by an oath and again brought to life again by an oath a broad-foliaged bear-oak on Cape Amakashi. Then [the Heavenly Sovereign] granted to Prince Ake-tatsu the name of Prince Yamato-oyu-shiki-tomi-toyo-asakura-ake-tatsu. So when the august child was sent off with the two Princes, Prince Ake-tatsu and Prince Una-kami, as his attendants, it was divined that [if they went out] by the Nara gate, they would meet a lame person

and a blind person; that [if they went out] by the Ohosaka gate, they would likewise meet a lame person and a blind person, and that only the Ki gate,—a side gate,—would be the lucky gate; and when they started off, they established the Homuji clan in every place they arrived at. So when they had reached Idzumo and had finished worshipping the Great Deity, and were returning up [to the capital], they made in the middle of the River Hi a black plaited bridge and respectfully offered a temporary palace [for the august child] to dwell in. Then when the ancestor of the rulers of the Land of

Idzumo, whose name was Kihisa-tsu-mi, having made an imitation green-leafed mountain, placed [it] in the lower reach of the river, and was about to present the great august food, the august child spoke, saying: “What here resembles a green-leafed mountain in the lower [reach of the] river, looks like a mountain, but is not a mountain. Is it perchance the great court of the deacon who holds in reverence the Great Deity Ugly-Male-of-the-Reed-Plains that dwells in the temple of So at Ihakuma in Idzumo?” [Thus] he deigned to ask. Then the Kings, who had been sent in august attendance [on him], hearing with joy and seeing with delight, set the august child to dwell in the palace of Nagaho at Ajimasa, and despatched a courier [to inform

============================================================
SECTION 73
============================================================

the Heavenly Sovereign]. Then the august child wedded Princess Hinaga for one night. So, on looking privately at the beautiful maiden, [he found her] to be a serpent, at the sight of which he fled away alarmed. Then Princess Hinaga was vexed, and, illuminating the sea-plain, pursued after them in a ship; and they, more and more alarmed at the sight, pulled the august vessel across the mountain-folds, and went fleeing up [to the capital]. Thereupon they made a report, saying: “We have come up [to the capital] because thy great and august child has become able to speak through worshipping the Great Deity.” So the Heavenly Sovereign, delighted, forthwith sent King Unakami back to build the Deity’s temple. Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, on account of this august child, established the Totori Clan, the Torikahi Clan, the Homuji Clan, the Ohoyuwe and the Wakayuwe.

[]

Again, in accordance with the Empress’s words, he summoned Her Augustness Princess Hibasu, next Her Augustness Princess Oto, next Her Augustness Princess Utakori, next Her Augustness Princess Matonu, daughters of Prince Michi-no-ushi,—four Deities in all. Now he

============================================================
SECTION 74
============================================================

kept the two Deities Her Augustness Princess Hibasu and Her Augustness Princess Oto; but as for the two Deities the younger queens, he sent them back to their native place on account of their extreme hideousness. Thereupon Princess Matonu said with mortification: “When it is known in the neighbouring villages that, among sisters of the same family, we have been sent back on account of our ugliness, it will be extremely mortifying;” and, on reaching Sagaraka in the Land of Yamashiro, she tried to kill herself by hanging herself from a branch of a tree. So that place was called by the name of Sagariki. It is now called Sagaraka. Again, on reaching Otokuni, she at last killed herself by jumping into a deep pool. So that place was called by the name of Ochikuni. It is now called Otokuni.

[]

Again the Heavenly Sovereign sent Tajima-mori, ancestor of the

Chiefs of Miyake, to the Eternal Land to fetch the fruit of the everlasting fragrant tree. So Tajima-mori at last reached that country, plucked the fruit of the tree, and brought of clubmoss eight and of spears eight; but meanwhile the Heavenly Sovereign had died. Then Tajima-mori set apart of clubmoss four and of spears four, which he presented to the Great Empress, and set up of clubmoss four and of spears four as an offering at the door of the Heavenly Sovereign’s august mausoleum, and, raising on high the fruit of the tree, wailed and wept, saying: “Bringing the fruit of the everlasting fragrant tree from the Eternal Land, I have come to serve thee;” and at last he wailed and wept himself to death. This fruit of the everlasting fragrant tree is what is now called the orange.

============================================================
SECTION 75
============================================================

[]

This Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were one hundred and fifty-three. His august mausoleum is in the middle of the moor of Mitachi at Sugahara. Again in the time of the Great Empress Her Augustness Princess Hibasu, the Stone-Coffin-Makers’ were established, and also the Earthenware-Masters’ Clan was established. This Empress was buried in the mausoleum of Terama near Saki.

============================================================
SECTION 76
============================================================

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake dwelt in the palace of Hishiro at Makimuku, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Elder Lady of Inabi in Harima, daughter of Waka-take, Prince of Kibi, ancestor of the Grandees of Kibi, and begot august children: King Kushi-tsunu-wake; next His Augustness Oho-usu; next His Augustness Wo-usu, another name for whom is His Augustness Yamato-wo-guna; next His Augustness Yamato-ne-ko; next King Kamu-kushi. Again wedding Her Augustness Princess

Yasaka-no-iri, daughter of His Augustness Prince Yasaka-no-iri, he begot august children: His Augustness Prince Waka-tarashi; next His Augustness Prince Iho-ki-no-iri; next His Augustness Oshi-no-wake; next Her Augustness Princess Iho-ki-no-iri. Children by another concubine were King Toyo-to-wake; next the Lady Nunoshiro. Children by another concubine were: the Lady Nunaki; next Her Augustness Princess Kago-yori; next King Prince Waka-ki-no-iri; next King the Elder Prince of Kibi-no-ye; next Her Augustness Princess Takaki; next Her Augustness Princess Oto. Again wedding Princess Mi-hakashi of Himuka, he begot an august child: King Toyo-kuni-wake. Again wedding the Younger Lady of Inabi, younger sister of the Elder Lady of Inabi, he begot august children: King Ma-waka; next King Hiko-hito-no-oho-ye. Again

wedding Princess Ka-guro, daughter of King Prince Sume-iro-oho-naka-tsu-hiko, great-grandchild of His Augustness Yamato-take, he begot an august child: King Oho-ye. The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign Oho-tarashi-hiko numbered in all twenty-one kings and queens of whom there is a register, and fifty-nine kings and queens of whom there is no record,—eighty kings and queens altogether, out of whom His Augustness Waka-tarashi-hiko and also His Augustness Yamato-take, and also His Augustness Prince I-ho-ki-no-iri,—these three Kings,—bore the name of Heirs Apparent. The seventy-seven kings and queens beside these were all granted Rulerships in the various lands, or else [posts as] Lords, Territorial Lords or Departmental Chiefs. So His Augustness Waka-tarashi-hiko [was he who afterward] ruled the Empire. His Augustness Wo-usu subdued the savage deities and likewise the unsubmissive people in the East and West.

============================================================
SECTION 77
============================================================

The next, King Kushi-tsunu-wake (was the ancestor of the chiefs of Mamuta). The next, His Augustness Oho-Usu, (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Mori, of the Dukes of Ohota and of the Dukes of Shimada.) The next, King Kamu-kushi, (was the ancestor of the Sakabe Abiko in the Land of Ki, and of the Sakabe of Uda). The next, King Toyo-kuni-wake (was the ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Himuka).

[]

Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, to assure himself of what he had heard of the beauty of the two maidens Ye-hime and Oto-hime, daughters of King Kamu-oho-ne, ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Minu, sent his august child, His Augustness Oho-usu, to summon them up [to the Capital]. So His Augustness Oho-usu who had been sent, instead of summoning them up, forthwith wedded both the maidens himself, and then sought other women, to whom he falsely gave the maidens’ names, and sent them up [to his father]. Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, knowing them to be other women, frequently subjected them to his long glances; but, never wedding them, caused them to sorrow. So the child that His Augustness Oho-usu begot on

============================================================
SECTION 78
============================================================

wedding Ye-hime, was King Oshi-kuro-no-ye-hiko (he was the ancestor of the Lords of Unesu in Minu). Again, the child that he begot on wedding Oto-hime, was King Oshi-kuro-no-oto-hiko (he was the ancestor of the Dukes of Mugetsu).

[]

In this august reign the Labourers’ Tribe was established; again, the port of Aha in the East was established; again, the Great Butlers’ Tribe was established; again, the granaries of Yamato were established; again, the Pool of Sakate was made, and bamboos planted on its bank.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign said to His Augustness Wo-usu: “Why does not thine elder brother come forth to the morning and evening great august repasts? Be thou the one to take the trouble to teach him [his duty].” Thus he commanded; but for five days after, still [the prince] came not forth. Then the Heavenly Sovereign deigned to ask His Augustness Wo-usu [saying]: “Why is thine elder brother so long of coming? Hast thou perchance not yet taught him [his duty]?” He replied, saying: “I have been at that trouble.” Again

============================================================
SECTION 80
============================================================

[the Heavenly Sovereign] said: “How didst thou take the trouble?” He replied, saying: “In the early morning when he went into the privy, I grasped hold of him and crushed him, and, pulling off his limbs, wrapped them in matting and flung them away.”

[]

Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, alarmed at the valour and ferocity of his august child’s disposition, commanded him, saying: “In the West there are two Kumaso bravoes,—unsubmissive and disrespectful men. So take them,”—and [with this command] he sent him off. It happened that at this time his august hair was bound at the brow. Then His Augustness Wo-usu was granted by his aunt Her Augustness Yamato-hime her august [upper] garment and august skirt; and, with a sabre hidden in his august bosom, he went forth. So, on reaching the house of the Kumaso bravoes, he saw that near the house there was a three-fold belt of warriors, who had made a cave to dwell in. Hereupon they, noisily discussing a rejoicing for the august cave, were getting food ready. So [Prince Wo-usu] sauntered

about the neighbourhood, waiting for the day of the rejoicing. Then when the day of the rejoicing came, having combed down after the manner of girls his august hair which was bound up, and having put on his aunt’s august [upper] garment and august skirt, he looked quite like a young girl, and, standing amidst the women, went inside the cave. Then the elder brother and the younger brother, the two Kumaso bravoes, delighted at the sight of the maiden, set her between them, and rejoiced exuberantly. So, when [the feast was] at its height, [His Augustness Wo-usu,] drawing the sabre from his bosom, and catching Kumaso by the collar of his garment, thrust the sabre through his chest, whereupon, alarmed at the sight, the younger bravo ran out. But pursuing after and reaching him at the bottom of the steps of the cave, and catching him by the back, [Prince Wo-usu] thrust the sabre through his buttock. Then the Kumaso bravo spoke, saying: “Do not move the sword; I have something to say.” Then [His Augustness Wo-usu], respited him for a moment, holding him down [as he lay] prostrate. Hereupon [the bravo] said: “Who is Thine Augustness?” Then he said: “I am the august child of Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake, the Heavenly Sovereign who, dwelling in the palace of Hishiro at Makimuku, rules the Land of the Eight Great Islands; and my name is King Yamato-wo-guna. Hearing that you two [fellows], the Kumaso bravoes, were unsubmissive and disrespectful, [the Heavenly Sovereign] sent me with the command to take and slay you.” Then the Kumaso bravo said: “That must be true. There are no persons

============================================================
SECTION 81
============================================================

in the West so brave and strong as we two. Yet in the Land of Great Yamato there is a man braver than we two,—there is. Therefore will I offer thee an august name. From this time forward it is right that thou be praised as the August Child Yamato-take.” As soon as he had finished saying this, [the Prince] ripped him up like a ripe melon, and slew him. So thenceforward he was praised by being called by the august name of his Augustness Yamato-take. When he returned up [to the capital] after doing this, he subdued and pacified every one of the Deities of the mountains and of the Deities of the rivers and likewise of the Deities of Anado, and then went up to [the capital].

[]

Forthwith entering the Laud of Idzumo, and wishing to slay the Idzumo bravo, he, on arriving, forthwith bound [himself to him in] friendship. So, having secretly made [the wood of] an oak [-tree] into

============================================================
SECTION 82
============================================================

a false sword and augustly girded it, he went with the bravo to bathe in the River Hi. Then, His Augustness Yamato-take, getting out of the river first, and taking and girding on the sword that the Idzumo bravo had taken off and laid down, said: “Let us exchange swords!” So afterwards the Idzumo bravo, getting out of the river, girded on His Augustness Yamato-take’s false sword. Hereupon His Augustness Yamato-take, suggested, saying: “Come on! let us cross swords.” Then on drawing his sword, the Idzumo could not draw the false sword. Forthwith His Augustness Yamato-take drew his sword and slew the Idzumo bravo. Then he sang augustly, saying:

So having thus extirpated the [bravoes] and made [the land] orderly, he went up [to the capital], and made his report [to the Heavenly Sovereign].

[]

Then the Heavenly Sovereign again urged a command on His Augustness Yamato-take, saying: “Subdue and pacify the savage Deities and likewise the unsubmissive people of the twelve roads of the East;” and when he sent him off, joining to him Prince Mi-suki-tomo-mimi-take, ancestor of the Grandees of Kibi, he bestowed on him

============================================================
SECTION 83
============================================================

a holly-wood spear eight fathoms [long]. So when he had received the [Imperial] commands and started off, he went into the temple of the Great August Deity of Ise, and worshipped the Deity’s court, forthwith speaking to his aunt, Her Augustness Yamato-hime, saying: “It must surely be that the Heavenly Sovereign thinks I may die quickly; for after sending me to smite the wicked people of the West, I am no sooner come up again [to the capital] than, without bestowing on me an army, he now sends me off afresh to pacify the wicked people of the twelve circuits of the East. Consequently I think that he certainly thinks I shall die quickly.” When he departed with lamentations and tears, Her Augustness Yamato-hime bestowed on him the “Herb-Quelling-Sabre,” and likewise bestowed on him an august bag, and said: “If there should be an emergency, open the mouth of the bag.”

[]

So reaching the Land of Wohari, he went into the house of Princess Miyadzu, ancestress of the Rulers of Wohari, and forthwith thought

to wed her; but thinking again that he would wed her when he should return up [toward the capital], and having plighted his troth, he went [on] into the Eastern Lands, and subdued and pacified all the savage Deities and unsubmissive people of the mountains and rivers. So then, when he reached the Land of Sagamu, the Ruler of the land lied, saying: “In the middle of this moor is a great lagoon, and the Deity that dwells in the middle of the lagoon is a very violent Deity.” Hereupon [Yamato-take] entered the moor to see the Deity. Then the Ruler of the land set fire to the moor. So, knowing that he had been deceived, he opened the mouth of the bag which his aunt, Her Augustness Yamato-hime had bestowed on him, and saw that inside of it there was a fire-striker. Hereupon he first mowed away the herbage with his august sword, took the fire-striker and struck out fire, and, kindling a counter-fire, burnt [the herbage] and drove back [the other fire], and returned forth, and killed and destroyed all the Rulers of that Land, and forthwith set fire to and burnt them. So [that place] is now called Yakidzu.

============================================================
SECTION 84
============================================================

[]

When he thence penetrated on, and crossed the sea of Hashiri-midzu, the Deity of that crossing raised the waves, tossing the ship so that it could not proceed across. Then [Yamato-take’s] Empress, whose name was Her Augustness Princess Oto-tachibana said: “I will enter the sea instead of the august child. The august child must complete the service on which he has been sent, and take back a report [to the Heavenly Sovereign].” When she was about to enter the sea, she spread eight thicknesses of sedge rugs, eight thicknesses of skin rugs and eight thicknesses of silk rugs on the top of the waves, and sat down on the top [of them]. Thereupon the violent waves at once went down, and the august ship was able to proceed. Then the Empress sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 85
============================================================

So seven days afterwards the Empress’s august comb drifted onto the sea-beach,—which comb was forthwith taken and placed in an august mausoleum which was made.

[]

When, having thence penetrated on and subdued all the savage Yemishi and likewise pacified all the savage Deities of the mountains and rivers, he was returning up [to the capital], he, on reaching the foot of the Ashigara Pass, was eating his august provisions, when the Deity of the pass, transformed into a white deer, came and stood [before him]. Then forthwith, on his waiting and striking [the deer] with a scrap of wild chive, [the deer] was hit in the eye and struck dead. So, mounting to the top of the pass, he sighed three times and spoke, saying: “Adzuma ha ya!” So that land is called by the name of Adzuma.

============================================================
SECTION 86
============================================================

[]

When, forthwith crossing over from that land out into Kahi, he dwelt in the palace of Sakawori, he sang, saying:

Then the old man, who was the lighter of the august fire, completed the august Song, and sang, saying:

Therefore [Yamato-take] praised the old man, and forthwith bestowed [on him] the Rulership of the Eastern Land[s].

============================================================
SECTION 87
============================================================

[]

Having crossed over from that land into the land of Shinanu and subdued the Deity of the Shinanu pass, he came back to the land of Wohari, and went to dwell in the house of Princess Miyazu, to whom he had before plighted his troth. Hereupon, when presenting to him the great august food, princess Miyazu lifted up a great august liquor-cup and presented it to him. Tunc Heræ Miyazu veli oræ adhæserunt menstrua. Quare [Augustus Yamato-take] illa menstrua vidit, et auguste cecinit, dicens:

============================================================
SECTION 88
============================================================

Tunc Hera Miyazu augusto cantui respondit, dicens:

Quare tunc [ille] coivit [cum illâ], after which, placing in Princess Miyazu’s house his august sword “the Grass-Quelling Sabre,” he went forth to take the Deity of [Mount] Ibuki.

[]

Hereupon he said: “As for the Deity of this mountain, I will

============================================================
SECTION 89
============================================================

simply take him empty-handed,”—and was ascending the mountain, when there met him on the mountain-side a white boar whose size was like unto that of a bull. Then he lifted up words, and said: “This creature that is transformed into a white boar must be a messenger from the Deity. Though I slay it not now, I will slay it when I return,”—and [so saying,] ascended. Thereupon the Deity caused heavy ice-rain to fall, striking and perplexing His Augustness Yamato-take. (This creature transformed into a white boar was not a messenger from the Deity, but the very Deity in person. Owing to the lifting up of words, he appeared and misled [Yamato-take.]) So when, on descending back, he reached the fresh spring of Tama-kura-be and rested there, his august heart awoke somewhat. So that fresh spring is called by the name of the fresh spring of Wi-same.

[]

When he departed thence and reached the moor of Tagi, he said:

“Whereas my heart always felt like flying through the sky, my legs are now unable to walk. They have become rudder-shaped.” So that place was called by the name of Tagi. Owing to his being very weary with progressing a little further beyond that place, he lent upon an august staff to walk a little. So that place is called by the name of the Tsuwe-tsuki pass. On arriving at the single pine-tree on Cape Wotsu, an august sword, which he had forgotten at that place before when augustly eating, was still [there] not lost. Then he augustly sang, saying:

When he departed thence and reached the village of Mihe, he again said: “My legs are like three-fold crooks, and very weary.” So that place

was called by the name of Mihe. When he departed thence and reached the Moor of Nobo, he, regretting [his native] land, sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 90
============================================================

Again he sang, saying:

This Song is a Land-Regretting Song. Again he sang, saying:

This is an Incomplete Song. At this time, his august sickness was very urgent. Then, he sang augustly, saying:

As soon as he had finished singing, he died. Then a courier was despatched [to the Heavenly Sovereign

[]

Thereupon [his] Empresses and likewise [his] august children,

who dwelt in Yamato, all went down and built an august mausoleum, and, forthwith crawling hither and thither in the rice-fields encompassing [the mausoleum], sobbed out a Song, saying:

Thereupon [the dead prince], turning into a white dotterel eight fathoms [long], and soaring up to Heaven, flew off towards the shore. Then the Empresses and likewise the august children, though they tore their feet treading on the stubble of the bamboo-grass, forgot the pain, and pursued him with lamentations. At that time they sang, saying:

Again when they entered the salt sea, and suffered as they went, they sang, saying:

Again when [the bird] flew and perched on the seaside, they sang, saying:

These four Songs were all sung at [Yamato-take’s] august interment. So to the present day these Songs are sung at the great august interment of a Heavenly Sovereign. So [the bird], flew off from that country, and stopped at Shiki in the land of Kafuchi. So they made an august mausoleum there, and laid [Yamato-take] to rest.

============================================================
SECTION 91
============================================================

with that august mausoleum was called by the name of the “August-Mausoleum of the White-Bird Nevertheless the bird soared up thence to heaven again, and flew away.

[]

During all the time that this [Prince] His Augustness Yamato-take went about pacifying countries, Nana-tsuka-hagi, ancestor of the Suzerains of Kume, always followed and respectfully served him as butler.

[]

This [Prince] His Augustness Yamato-take wedded Her Augustness Princess Futaji-no-iri, daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Ikume, and begot an august child: His Augustness Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko (one Deity). Again, wedding Her Augustness Princess Oto-tachibana who [afterwards] entered the sea, he begot an august child: King Waka-take

(one Deity). Again, wedding Princess Futaji, daughter of Oho-tamu-wake, ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Yasu in Chika-tsu-Afumi, he begot an august child: King Ine-yori-wake (one Deity). Again wedding Princess Oho-kibi-take, younger sister of Take-hiko, [ancestor of the] Grandees of Kibi, he begot an august child: King Take-kahiko (one Deity). Again, wedding Princess Kukuma-mori of Yamashiro, he begot an august child, King Ashi-kagami-wake (one Deity). A child by another wife was King Okinaga-ta-wake. Altogether the entire [number] of the august children of His Augustness Yamato-take was six Deities. So His Augustness Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The next, King Ine-yori-wake (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Inukani and of the Dukes of Takebe.) The next, King Take-kahiko

(was the ancestor of the Dukes of Aya in Sanugi, the Dukes of Wake in Iyo, the Lords of Towo, the Headmen of Masa and the Lords of Miyaji.) King Ashi-kagami-wake (was the ancestor of the Lords of Kamakura, the Dukes of Wodzu, the Lords of Ihashiro and the Lords of Fukita.) The child of the next, King Okinaga-ta-wake was King Kuhimata-naga-hiko. This King’s children were: Her Augustness Princess Ihinu-ma-guro, next Okinaga-ma-waka-naka-tsu-hime, next Oto-hime (three Deities). So the above mentioned King Waka-take wedded Princess Ihinu-ma-guro,

============================================================
SECTION 93
============================================================

and begot King Sume-iro-oho-naka-tsu-kiko. This King wedded princess Shibanu, daughter of Shibanu-iri-ki of Afumi, and begot a child, Her Augustness Princess Kaguro. So the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-tarashi-hiko wedded this [lady] Her Augustness Princess Kaguro, and begot King Oho-ye (one Deity). This King wedded his younger half-sister Queen Shiro-kane, and begot children: King Oho-na-gata, and next Her Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hime (two Deities). So this [lady] Her Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hime was the august mother of King Kagosaka and King Oshikuma.

[]

This Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were one hundred and thirty-seven, and his august mausoleum is above the Yamanobe road.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign Wata-tarashi-hiko dwelt at the palace of Taka-anaho at Shiga in Chika-tsu-Afumi and ruled the empire. This

============================================================
SECTION 95
============================================================

Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Lady Oho-takara, daughter of Take-oshiyama-tari-ne, ancestor of the Grandees of Hodzumi, and begot an august child: King Waka-nuke (one Deity). So [the Heavenly Sovereign] raised the Noble Take-uchi [to the office of] Prime Minister, deigned to settle the Rulers of the Great Countries and Small Countries, and likewise deigned to settle the boundaries of the various countries, as also the Departmental Lords of the Great Departments and Small Departments. The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were ninety-five, and his august mausoleum is at Tatanami near Saki.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko dwelt at the palace of Toyora at Anado, and likewise at the palace of Kashihi in Tsukushi,

and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hime, daughter of King Oho-ye, and begot august children: King Kagosaka and King Oshikuma (two Deities). Again he wedded Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi. This Empress gave birth to august children: His Augustness Homu-ya-wake, and next His Augustness Oho-tomo-wake, another name for whom was His Augustness Homuda-wake. The reason why this Heir Apparent was given the august name of His Augustness Oho-tomo-wake was that when first born, he had on his august arm [a protuberance of] flesh resembling an elbow-pad, whence the august name bestowed on him. By this it was known while he was in the womb that he would rule countries. In this august reign the granaries of Ahaji were established.

============================================================
SECTION 96
============================================================

[]

This Empress, Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi, was at that time divinely possessed. So when the Heavenly Sovereign, dwelling at the palace of Kashihi in Tsukushi, was about to smite the Land of Kumaso, the Heavenly Sovereign played on his august lute, and the Prime Minister the Noble Take-uchi, being in the pure court, requested the divine orders. Hereupon the Empress, divinely possessed, charged him with this instruction and counsel: “There is a land to the Westward, and in that land is abundance of various treasures dazzling to the eye, from gold and silver downwards. I will now bestow this land upon thee.” Then the Heavenly Sovereign replied, saying: “If one ascend to a high place and look Westward, no country is to be seen. There is only the great sea;” and saying, “they are lying Deities,” he pushed away his august lute, did not play on it, and sat silent. Then the Deities were very angry, and said: “Altogether as for this empire, it is not a land over which thou oughtest to rule. Do thou go to the one road!” Hereupon the Prime Minister the Noble Take-uchi said: “[I am filled with] awe, my Heavenly Sovereign!

============================================================
SECTION 97
============================================================

Continue playing thy great august lute.” Then he slowly drew his august lute to him, and languidly played on it. So almost immediately the sound of the august lute became inaudible. On their forthwith lifting a light and looking, [the Heavenly Sovereign] was dead.

[]

Then, astonished and alarmed, they set him in a mortuary palace, and again taking the country’s great offerings, seeking out all sorts of crimes, such as flaying alive and flaying backwards, breaking down the divisions of rice-fields, filling up ditches, evacuating excrements and urine, marriages between superiors and inferiors, marriages with horses, marriages with cattle, marriages with fowls, and marriages with dogs, and having made a great purification of the land, the Noble Take-uchi again stood in the pure court and requested the Deities’ commands. Thereupon the manner of their instruction and counsel was exactly the same as on the former day: “Altogether this land is a land to be ruled over by the august child in Thine Augustness’s august womb.” Then the Noble Take-uchi said, “[I am filled with] awe, my Great Deities! The august child in this Deity’s womb, what [sort of]

child may it be?” [The Deities] replied, saying: “It is a male child.” Then [the Noble Take-uchi] requested more particularly, [saying]: “I wish to know the august names of the Great Deities whose words have now thus instructed us.” Forthwith [the Deities] replied, saying: “It is the august doing of the Great-August-Heaven-Shining-Deity, likewise it is the three great Deities Bottom-Possessing-Male, Middle-Possessing Male and Surface-Possessing-Male. (At this time the august names of these three great Deities were revealed.) If now thou truly thinkest to seek that land, thou must, after presenting the offerings to every one of the Heavenly Deities and Earthly Deities, and likewise of the Deities of the mountains and also of all the Deities of the river and of the sea, and setting our august spirits on the top of thy vessel, put into gourds the ashes of the Podocarpus macrophylla tree, and likewise make a quantity of chopsticks and also of

============================================================
SECTION 98
============================================================

, and must scatter them all on the waves of the great sea, that thou mayest cross over.” So when [she] punctually fulfilled these instructions, equipped an army, marshalled her vessels, and crossed over, the fishes of the sea-plain, both great and small, all bore the august vessel across on their backs, and a strong favourable wind arose, and the august vessel followed the billows.

[]

So the wave of the august vessel pushed up onto the land of Shiragi, reaching to the middle of the country. Thereupon the chieftain of the country, alarmed and trembling, petitioned [the Empress], saying: “From this time forward obedient to the Heavenly Sovereign’s commands, I will feed his august horses and will marshal vessels every year, nor ever let the vessels’ keels dry or their poles and oars dry, and will respectfully serve him without drawing back while heaven and earth shall last.” So therefore the Land of Shiragi was constituted the

feeder of the august horses, and the Land of Kudara was constituted the crossing store. Then the Empress stuck her august staff on the gate of the chieftain of Shiragi, and having made the Rough August Spirits of the Great Deities of the Inlet of Sumi the guardian Deities of the land, she laid them to rest, and crossed back. So while this business was yet unconcluded, [the child] with which she was pregnant was about to be born. Forthwith, in order to restrain her august womb, she took a stone and wound it round the waist of her august skirt, and the august child was born after she had crossed [back] to the Land of Tsukushi. So the name by which the place

============================================================
SECTION 99
============================================================

was called where the august child was born was Umi. Again the stone which she wound round her august skirt is at the village of Ito in the Land of Tsukushi.

[]

Again when, having reached the village of Tamashima in the Department of Matsura in Tsukushi, she partook of an august meal on the bank of the river, it being then the first decade of the fourth moon, she then sat on a shoal in the middle of the river, picked out threads from her august skirt, used grains of rice as bait, and hooked the trout in the river. (The name by which the river is called is the Wo-gaha; again the name by which the shoal is called is Kachi-do-hime.) So down to the present time it is an  [custom] for women in the first decade of the fourth moon to pick out threads from their skirts, use grains as bait, and hook trout.

============================================================
SECTION 100
============================================================

[]

Hereupon, when Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi was returning up to Yamato, she, owing to doubts concerning the disposition of the people, prepared a mourning-vessel, set the august child in that mourning-vessel, and let a report ooze out that the august child was already dead. While she went up thus, King Kagosaka and King Oshikuma, having heard [of the circumstance], thought to waylay her, went forth to the moor of Toga, and hunted for an omen. Then King Kagosaka climbed up an oak-tree, and then a large and angry boar came forth, dug up the oak-tree, and forthwith devoured King Kagosaka. His younger brother, King Oshikuma, undaunted by this circumstance, raised an army and lay in wait [for the Empress], to close with the mourning-vessel as being an empty vessel. Then an army was landed from the mourning-vessel, and joined in combat [with the opposing forces]. At this time King Oshikuma made the Noble Isahi, ancestor of the Kishi Clan of Naniha, his

; and on the august side of the Heir Apparent His Augustness Naniha-ne-ko-take-furu-kuma, ancestor of the Grandees of Wani, was made generalissimo. So when [the Empress’s troops] had driven [King Oshikuma’s troops] as far as Yamashiro, [the latter] turned and made a stand, and both [sides] fought together without retreating. Then His Augustness Take-furu-kuma planned, and caused it to be said that, as Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi was already dead, there was no need for further fighting,—forthwith snapping his bowstrings and feigning submission. Therefore King Oshikuma’s generalissimo, believing the falsehood, unbent his bows and put away his arms. Then [the Empress’s troops] picked out of their topknots some prepared bowstrings (one name [of the bowstrings] was usa-yu-dzuru,) stretched [their bows] again, and pursued and smote [the enemy]. So [these] fled away to Afusaka, rallied, and fought again. Then [the Empress’s troops]  on, and defeated them, and cut to pieces that army at Sasanami. Thereupon King Oshikuma, together with the Noble Isahi, being pursued and pressed, got on board a vessel and floated on the sea, and sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 101
============================================================

Forthwith they plunged into the sea, and died together.

[]

So when His Augustness the Noble Take-uchi, taking with him the Heir Apparent for the purpose of purification, passed through the lands of Afumi and Wakasa, he built a temporary palace at Tsunuga at the mouth of the Road of Koshi [for the Heir Apparent] to dwell in. Then His Augustness the Great Deity Izasa-wake, who dwelt in that place, appeared at night in a dream, and said: “I wish to exchange my name for the august name of the august child.” Then [the dreamer of the dream] prayed, saying: [“I] am filled with awe! The name shall be respectfully exchanged according to thy command.” Again the Deity charged [him, saying]: “To-morrow morning [the Heir Apparent] must go out on the beach; I will present my [thank-] offering for the name [given me] in exchange.” So when [the Heir Apparent] went

============================================================
SECTION 102
============================================================

out in the morning to the beach, the whole shore was lined with broken-nosed dolphin-fishes. Thereupon the august child caused the Deity to be addressed, saying: “Thou bestowest on me fish of thine august food.” So again his august name was honoured by his being called the Great Deity of August Food. So he is now styled the Food-Wondrous-Great-Deity. Again the blood from the noses of the dolphin-fishes stank. So the strand was called by the name of Chiura. It is now styled Tsunuga.

[]

Hereupon, when the [Heir Apparent] returned up [to the Capital], his august parent, Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi, distilled some waiting-liquor, and presented it to him. Then his august parent sang augustly, saying:

“This august liquor is not my august liquor:—oh! it is august liquor respectfully brought as a divine congratulation, a repeated congratulation, a bountiful congratulation, a reiterated congratulation, by

the Small August Deity, who dwells eternally, firmly standing. Partake not shallowly! Go on! go on!”

Having thus sung, she presented to him the great august liquor. Then His Augustness the Noble Take-uchi replied for the august child and sang, saying:

These are Drinking Songs.

============================================================
SECTION 103
============================================================

[]

Altogether the august years of this Heavenly Sovereign Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko were fifty-two. His august mausoleum is at Nagaye, near Wega, in Kafuchi. (The Empress died at the august age of one hundred. She was buried in the mausoleum of Tatanami in Saki.)

[]

His Augustness Homuda-wake dwelt at the palace of Akira at Karushima, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded three queens, daughters of King Homuda-no-Ma-waka, the name of one of whom was Her Augustness Princess Takagi-no-iri; of the next, Her Augustness Naka-tsu-hime; and of the next, Her Augustness Oto-hime. (The father of these Queens, King Homuda-no-ma-waka, was the son of His

Prince Iho-ki-no-iri by his wife Shiritsuki-tome, daughter of the Noble Take-inada, ancestor of the Chiefs of Wohari.) So the august children of Her Augustness Princess Takagi-no-iri were: His Augustness Nukata-no-oho-waka-tsu-hiko; next His Augustness Oho-yama-mori; next His Augustness Iza-no-ma-waka; next his younger sister the Lady of Ohohara; next the Lady of Komuku. (Five Deities). The august children of Her Augustness Naka-tsu-hime were: the Lady of Arata in Ki; next His Augustness Oho-sazaki; next His Augustness

Netori. (Three Deities). The august children of Her Augustness Oto-hime wore: the Lady Abe; next the Lady of Mihara in Ahaji; next the Lady of Unu in Ki; next the Lady of Minu. (Five Deities). Again he wedded the Princess Miya-nushi-ya-kaha-ye, daughter of the Grandee Wani-no-Hifure, and begot august children: Uji-no-waki-iratsuko; next his younger sister Yata-no-waki-iratsume; next Queen Medori. (Three Deities.) Again he wedded Wo-nabe-no-iratsume, younger sister of Yakaha-ye-hime, and begot an august child: Uji-no-waki-iratsume. (One Deity.) Again he wedded Okinaga-ma-waka-naka-tsu-hime, daughter of King Kuhimata-naga-hiko, and begot an august child: King Waka-nuke-futa-mata (one Deity). Again he wedded the Princess of Itowi, daughter of Shima-tari-ne, ancestor of the

Agricultural Chiefs of Sakurawi, and begot an august child: His Augustness Hayabusa-wake (one Deity). Again, he wedded Naga-hime of Idzumi in Himuka, and begot august children: King Oho-haye, next King Wo-haye; next Hata-bi-no-waki-iratsume (three Deities). Again he wedded Princess Ka-guro, and begot august children: Kaha-rada-no-iratsume; next, Tama-no-iratsume; next, Osaka-no-oho-naka-tsu-hime; next, Tohoshi-no-iratsume; next, King Kataji (five Deities). Again, he wedded Nu-iro-me of Kadzuraki, and begot an august child: King Iza-no-ma-waka. (One Deity.) The august children of this

============================================================
SECTION 105
============================================================

Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] altogether twenty-six (eleven Kings and fifteen Queens). Of these His Augustness Oho-sazaki [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire.

[]

Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign asked His Augustness Oho-yama-mori and His Augustness Oho-sazaki, saying: “Which think ye dearer, an elder child or a younger child?” (The reason why the Heavenly Sovereign propounded this question was because it was his intention to make Uji-ni-waki-iratsuko rule the Empire.) Then His Augustness Oho-yama-mori said: “The elder child is the dearer.” Next His Augustness Oho-sazaki, knowing the august feeling which made the Heavenly Sovereign deign to ask [the question], said: “The elder child, having already become a man, gives no trouble; but the younger child, not being yet a man, is the dearer.” Then the Heavenly Sovereign said: “My lord Sazaki’s words agree with my thoughts,” and forthwith ordained the division [of the inheritance] thus: His Augustness Oho-yama-mori to administer the government of the mountains and the sea, His Augustness Oho-sazaki to take and deign to report on the government of the realm, and Uji-no-waki-iratsuko to rule the succession of Heaven’s sun. So His Augustness Oho-sazaki was not disobedient to the Heavenly Sovereign’s commands.

[]

One day the Heavenly Sovereign, when he had crossed over into the land of Afumi, augustly stood on the moor of Uji, gazed on the moor of Kadzu, and sang, saying:

So when he reached the village of Kohata, a beautiful maiden met him at a fork in the road. Then the Heavenly Sovereign asked the maiden, saying: “Whose child art thou?” She replied, saying: “I am the daughter of the Grandee Wani-no-Hifure, and my name is Princess Miya-nushi-ya-kaha-ye.” The Heavenly Sovereign forthwith said to the maiden: “When I return on my progress to-morrow, I will enter into thy house.” So Princess Ya-kaha-he told her father all that [had happened]. Thereupon her father replied, saying: “Ah! it was the Heavenly Sovereign! [His commands are] to be respected. My child, respectfully serve him!”—and so saying, he grandly decorated the house, and awaited [the Heavenly Sovereign’s return], whereupon he came in on the next day. So when [the father] served [the Heavenly Sovereign] a great august feast, he made his daughter Her

Augustness Princess Ya-kaha take the great august liquor-cup and present it. Thereupon, while taking the great august liquor-cup, the Heavenly Sovereign augustly sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 107
============================================================

Ita auguste coivit [cum illâ], et procreavit filium Uji-no-waki-iratsuko.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign, hearing of the beauty of Princess Kami-naga, daughter of the Duke of Muragata in the land of Himuka, and thinking to employ her, sent down for her, whereupon the Heir Apparent His Augustness Oho-sazaki, having seen the maiden land at

the port of Naniha, and being charmed with the grace of her appearance, forthwith directed the Prime Minister the Noble Take-uchi, to intercede for him in the great august presence of the Heavenly Sovereign, and make [the latter] grant to him Princess Kami-naga, whom he had sent down for. Then on the Prime Minister the Noble Take-uchi requesting the great commands, the Heavenly Sovereign forthwith granted Princess Kami-naga to his august child. The way he granted her was this:—the Heavenly Sovereign, on a day when he partook of a copious feast, gave Princess Kami-naga the great august liquor oak- [leaf] to present to the Heir Apparent. Then he augustly sang, saying:

Again he augustly sang, saying:

Having thus sung, he bestowed [her on the Heir Apparent]. So after having been granted the maiden, the Heir Apparent sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 108
============================================================

Again he sang, saying:

[]

Again, the Territorial Owners of Yeshinu, seeing the august sword which was girded on His Augustness Oho-sazaki, sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 109
============================================================

Again, having made a cross-mortar at Kashifu in Yeshinu, and having in that cross-mortar distilled some great august liquor, they, when they presented the great august liquor [to the Heavenly Sovereign], sang as follows, drumming with their mouths:

This Song is one which it is the custom to chant down to the present day when, from time to time, the Territorial Owners present a great feast [to the Sovereign].

[]

In this august reign were graciously established the Fisher Tribe, the Mountain Tribe, the Mountain Warden Tribe, and the Ise

============================================================
SECTION 110
============================================================

Tribe. Again the Pool of Tsurugi was made. Again there came over [to Japan] some people from Shiragi. Therefore His Augustness the Noble Take-uchi, having taken them with him and set them to labour on pools and embankments, made the Pool of Kudara.

[]

Again King Shō-ko, the Chieftain of the land of Kudara, sent as tribute by Achi-kishi one stallion and one mare. (This Achi-kishi was the ancestor of the Achiki Scribes.) Again he sent as tribute a cross-sword, and likewise a large mirror. Again he was graciously bidden to send as tribute a wise man, if there were any such in the land of Kudara. Therefore, receiving the [Imperial] commands, he sent as tribute a man named Wani-kishi, and likewise by this man he sent as tribute the Confucian Analects in ten volumes and the Thousand Character Essay in one volume,—altogether eleven volumes. (This Wani-kishi was the

============================================================
SECTION 111
============================================================

ancestor of the Fumi Grandees.) Again he sent as tribute two artisans,—a smith from Kara named Taku-so and a weaver from Go named Sai-so.

[]

Again there came over [to Japan] the ancestor of the Hada Rulers, the ancestor of the Aya Suzerains, and likewise a man who knew how to distill liquor, and whose name was Nim-pan, while another name for him was Susukori. So this [man] Susukori distilled some great august liquor, and presented it to the Heavenly Sovereign, who, excited with the great august liquor that had been presented to him, augustly sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 112
============================================================

On his walking out singing thus, he hit with his august staff a large stone in the middle of the Ohosaka road, upon which the stone ran away. So the proverb says: “Hard stones get out of a drunkard’s way.”

[]

So after the decease of the Heavenly Sovereign, His Augustness Oho-sazaki, in conformity with the Heavenly Sovereign’s commands, ceded the Empire to Uji-no-waki-iratsuko. Thereupon His Augustness Oho-yama-mori, disobeying the Heavenly Sovereign’s commands, and anxious in spite thereof to obtain the Empire, had the design to slay the Prince his younger brother, secretly raised an army, and prepared to attack him. Then His Augustness Oho-sazaki, hearing that his elder brother had prepared an army, forthwith despatched a messenger to apprise Uji-no-waki-iratsuko. So, startled at the news, [the latter] set troops in ambush by the river-bank, and likewise, after having drawn a fence of curtains and raised a tent on the top of the hill, placed there publicly on a throne one of his retainers to pretend that he was the King, the manner in which all the officials reverentially went and came being just like that [usual] in the King’s presence. And moreover, preparing for the time when the King his elder brother should cross the river,

he arranged and decorated a boat and oars, and moreover ground [in a mortar] the root of the Kadzura japonica, and having taken the slime of its juice, rubbed therewith the grating inside the boat, so as to make any who should tread on it fall down, and then himself put on a cloth coat and trowsers, and having assumed the appearance of a common fellow, stood in the boat holding the oar. Hereupon, when the King his elder brother, having hid his troops in ambush and put on armour beneath his clothes, reached the river-bank and was about to get into the boat, he gazed at the grandly decorated place [on the hill], thought the King his younger brother was sitting on the throne, being altogether ignorant [of the fact] that he was standing in the boat holding the oar, and forthwith asked the fellow who was holding the oar, saying: “It has been reported to me that on this mountain there is a large and angry boar. I wish to take that boar. Shall I peradventure get that boar?” Then the fellow holding the oar replied, saying: “Thou canst not.” Again he asked, saying: “For what reason?” [The boatman] answered, saying: “He is not to be got, however often and in however many places he be chased. Wherefore I say that thou canst not [catch him either].” When they had crossed as far as the middle of the river, [Prince Uji-no-waki-iratsuko] caused the boat to be tilted over, and [his elder brother] to fall into the water. Then forthwith he rose to the surface, and floated down with the current. Forthwith, as he floated, he sang, saying:

Thereupon the troops that had heen hidden on the river-hank rose up  on this side and on that side, and fixing their arrows [in their bows], let him go floating down. So he sank on reaching Kawara Point. So on their searching with hooks the place where he had sunk, [the hooks] struck on the armour inside his clothes, and made a rattling sound. So the place was called by the name of Kawara Point. Then when they hooked up his hones, the younger King sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 113
============================================================

So the bones of His Augustness Oho-yama-mori were buried on the Nara mountain. His Augustness Oho-yama-mori (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Hijikata, the Dukes of Heki, and the Dukes of Harihara.)

[]

Thereupon while the two Deities His Augustness Oho-sazaki and Uji-no-waki-iratsuko were, each of them, ceding the Empire to the other, a fisherman came with a great feast as tribute. So they each

============================================================
SECTION 114
============================================================

resigned it to the other. So the elder brother refused it, and caused it to be offered to the younger brother, and the younger brother refused it and caused it to be offered to the elder brother, during which mutual cedings many days elapsed. As such mutual ceding took place not [only] once or twice, the fisherman wept from the fatigue of going back wards and forwards. So the proverb says: “Ah! the fisherman weeps on account of his own things.” Meanwhile Uji-no-waki-iratsuko died early. So His Augustness Oho-sazaki did rule the Empire.

[]

Moreover of old there had been [a man] called by the name of Ama-no-hi-boko, child of the ruler of the land of Shiragi. This person crossed over here [to Japan]. The reason of his crossing over here was [this]: In the land of Shiragi there was a certain lagoon, called by the name of the Agu Lagoon. On the bank of this lagoon a certain poor girl was [taking her] midday sleep. Tunc solis radii, cœlesti arcui similes, in privatas partes impegerunt. Again there was a certain

poor man, who, thinking this occurrence strange, constantly watched the woman’s behaviour. So the woman, having conceived from the time of that midday sleep, gave birth to a red jewel. Then the poor man who had watched her begged [to be allowed] to take the jewel, and kept it constantly wrapped up by his side. This person, having planted a rice-field in a valley, had loaded a cow with food for the labourers, and was getting into the middle of the valley, when he met the ruler’s son, Ama-no-hi-boko, who thereupon asked him, saying: “Why enterest thou the valley with a load of food upon a cow. Thou wilt surely kill this cow and eat her.” Forthwith he seized the man and was about to put him into prison, when the man replied, saying: “I was not going to kill the cow. I was simply taking food to the people in the fields.” But still [the ruler’s child] would not let him go. Then he undid the jewel [which hung] at his side, and [therewith] bribed [the ruler’s child]. So [the latter] let the poor man go, brought the jewel [home], and placed it beside his couch. Forthwith it was transformed into a beautiful maiden, whom he straightway wedded, and made his chief wife. Then the maiden perpetually prepared all sorts of dainties with which she constantly fed her husband. So the ruler’s child [grew] proud in his heart, and reviled his wife. But the woman said: “I am not a woman who ought to be the wife of such as thou. I will go to the land of my ancestors;”—and forthwith she secretly embarked in a boat, and fled away across here [to Japan], and landed at Naniha. (This is the deity called princess Akaru, who dwells in the shrine of Hime-goso at Naniha.) Thereupon Ame-no-hi-boko, hearing of his wife’s flight, forthwith

============================================================
SECTION 115
============================================================

her across hither, and was about to arrive at Naniha, when the Deity of the passage prevented his entrance. So he went hack again, and landed in the country of Tajima.

[]

Forthwith staying in that country, he wedded Saki-tsu-mi, daughter of Tajima-no-matawo, and begot a child: Tajima-morosuku. The latter’s child was Tajima-hi-ne. The latter’s child was Tajima-hinaraki. The latter’s children were Tajima-mori, next Tajima-hitaka, next Kiyo-hiko (three Deities). This Kiyo-hiko wedded Tagima-no-mehi, and begot children: Suga-no-morowo, next his younger sister Suga-kama-yura-domi. So the above mentioned Tajima-hitaka wedded his niece Yura-domi, and begot a child: Her Augustness Princess Takanuka of

============================================================
SECTION 116
============================================================

. (This was the august parent of Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi.) So the things which Ama-no-hi-boko brought over here, and which were called the “precious treasures,” were: two strings of pearls; likewise a wave-shaking scarf, a wave-cutting scarf, a wind-shaking scarf, and a wind-cutting scarf; likewise a mirror of the offing and a mirror of the shore,—eight articles in all. (These are the Eight Great Deities of Idzushi.)

[]

So this Deity had a daughter whose name was the Deity Maiden-of-Idzushi. So eighty Deities wished to obtain this Maiden-of-Idzushi

in marriage, but none of them could do so. Hereupon there were two Deities, brothers, of whom the elder was called the Youth-of-the-Glow-on-the-Autumn-Mountains, and the younger was named the Youth-of-the-Haze-on-the-Spring-Mountains. So the elder brother said to the younger brother: “Though I beg for the Maiden of Idzushi, I cannot obtain her in marriage. Wilt thou [be able] to obtain her?” He answered, saying: “I will easily obtain her.” Then the elder brother said: “If thou shalt obtain this maiden, I will take off my upper and lower garments, and distill liquor in a jar of my own height, and prepare all the things of the mountains and of the rivers [,and give them to thee] in payment of the wager.” Then the younger brother told his mother everything that the elder brother had said. Forthwith the mother, having taken wistaria-fibre, wove and sewed in the space of a single night an upper garment and trowsers, and also socks and boots, and likewise made a bow and arrow, and clothed him in this upper garment, trowsers, etc., made him

take the bow and arrows, and sent him to the maiden’s house, where both his apparel and the bow and arrows all turned into wistaria-blossoms. Thereupon the Youth-of-the-Haze-on-the-Spring-Mountains hung up the bow and arrows in the maiden’s privy. Then, when the Maiden-of-Idzushi, thinking the blossoms strange, brought them [home, the Youth-of-the-Haze-on-the-Spring-Mountains] followed behind the maiden into the house, and forthwith wedded her. So she gave birth to a child. Then he spoke to his elder brother, saying: “I have obtained the Maiden-of-Idzushi.” Thereupon the elder brother, vexed that the younger brother should have wedded her, did not pay the things he had wagered. Then when [the younger brother] complained to his mother, his august parent replied, saying: “During my august life the Deities indeed are to be well imitated; moreover it must be because he imitates mortal men that he does not pay those things.” Forthwith, in her anger with her elder child, she took a jointed bamboo from an island in the River Idzushi, and made a coarse basket with eight holes, and took stones from the river, and mixing them with brine, wrapped them in the leaves of the bamboo and caused this curse to be spoken: “Like unto the becoming green of these

============================================================
SECTION 117
============================================================

, [do thou] become green and wither! Again, like unto the flowing and ebbing of this brine, [do thou] flow and ebb! Again, like unto the sinking of these stones, [do thou] sink and be prostrate!” Having caused this curse to be spoken, she placed [the basket] over the smoke. Therefore the elder brother dried up, withered, sickened, and lay prostrate for the space of eight years. So on the elder brother entreating his august parent with lamentations and tears, she forthwith caused the curse to be reversed. Thereupon his body became sound as it had been before. (This is the origin of the term “a divine wager-payment.”)

[]

Again this Heavenly Sovereign Homuda’s august child King Waka-nuke-futa-mata wedded his mother’s younger sister Momo-shiki-iro-be, another name for whom was Her Augustness Oto-hime-ma-waka-hime, and

begot children: Oho-iratsuko, another name for whom was King Oho-hodo; next Her Augustness Osaka-no-oho-mika-tsu-hime; next Tawi-no-naka-tsu-hime; next Tamiya-no-naka-tsu-hime; next Fujihara-no-koto-fushi-no-iratsume; next Queen Torime; next King Sane. (Seven Kings [and Queens].) So King Oho-hodo (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Mikuni, the Dukes of Hata, the Dukes of Okinaga, the Dukes of Sakabito of Sakata, the Dukes of Yamaji, the Dukes of Meta in Tsukushi, and the Dukes

============================================================
SECTION 118
============================================================

of Fuse). Again King Netori wedded his younger half-sister the Lady Mihara, and begot children: King Naka-tsu-hiko; next King Iwashima. (Two Kings.) Again the child of King Katashiha was King Kunu.

[]

The august years of this Heavenly Sovereign Homuda were altogether one hundred and thirty. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Mofusu at Wega in Kafuchi.

============================================================
SECTION 119
============================================================

---

[]

His Augustness Oho-sazaki dwelt in the palace of Takatsu at Naniba, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded (the Empress) Her Augustness Iha-no-hime, daughter of Kadzuraki-no-so-tsu-biko, and begot august children: His Augustness Ohoye-no-izaho-wake; next the Middle King of the Inlet of Sumi; next His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake of Tajihi; next His Augustness the Noble Wo-asadzuma-no-waku-go (four Deities). Again he wedded Princess Kami-naga, daughter of the Duke of Muragata in Himuka, as mentioned above, and begot august

============================================================
SECTION 120
============================================================

children: Hatabi-no-oho-iratsuko, another name for whom was the King of Great Kusaka; next Hatabi-no-waki-iratsume, another name for whom was Her Augustness Princess Nagahi, and another name was Her Augustness Waka-kusaka-be. (Two Deities.) Again he wedded his younger half-sister Yata-no-waki-iratsume. Again he wedded his younger half-sister Uji-no-waki-iratsumo. These two Deities had no august children. Altogether the august children of this Heavenly Sovereign Oho-sazaki [numbered] in all six Deities. (Five Kings and one Queen.) So His Augustness Izaho-wake [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. Next His Augustness Tajihi-no-midzu-ha-wake likewise ruled the Empire. Next His Augustness the Noble Wo-asadzuma-no-waku-go likewise ruled the Empire.

[]

In the august reign of this Heavenly Sovereign the Kadzuraki Tribe was established as the august proxy of the Empress, Her Augustness Iha-no-hime. Again the Mibu Tribe was established as the august proxy of the Heir Apparent, His Augustness Izaho-wake. Again the Tajihi Tribe was established as the august proxy of His Augustness

============================================================
SECTION 121
============================================================

Midzuha-wake. Again the Oho-kusaka Tribe was established as the august proxy of King Oho-kusaka, and the Waka-kusaka Tribe was established as the august proxy of King Waka-kusaka-be. Again people from Hada were set to labour, and the embankment at Mamuta and also the granaries of Mamuta were made. Again the Pool of Wani and the Pool of Yosami were made. Again the Naniha Channel was dug, and [the waters of the rivers] led to the sea. Again the Wobashi Channel was dug. Again the port of the inlet of Sumi was established.

[]

Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, ascending a lofty mountain and looking on the land all round, spoke, saying: “In the whole land there rises no smoke; the land is all poverty-stricken. So I remit all the people’s taxes and [forced labour] from now till three

============================================================
SECTION 122
============================================================

years [hence].” Therefore the great palace became dilapidated, and the rain leaked in everywhere; but no repairs were made. The rain that leaked in was caught in troughs, and [the inmates] removed from [its reach] to places where there was no leakage. When later [the Heavenly Sovereign] looked on all the land, the smoke was abundant in the land. So finding the people rich, he now exacted taxes and forced labour. Therefore the peasantry prospered, and did not suffer from forced labour. So in praise of that august reign, it was called the reign of the Emperor-Sage.

[]

His Empress, Her Augustness Iha-no-hime, was exceedingly jealous. So the concubines employed by the Heavenly Sovereign could not even peep inside the palace; and if anything happened, [the Empress] stamped with jealousy. Then the Heavenly Sovereign, hearing of the regular beauty of Princess Kuro, daughter of the Suzerain of Ama in Kibi, and having sent for her, employed her. But she, afraid of the

Empress’s jealousy, fled down to her native land. The Heavenly Sovereign, gazing from an upper story upon Princess Kuro’s departure by boat upon the sea, sang, saying:

So the Empress was very angry on hearing this august Song, and sent people to the great strand to drive Princess Kuro ashore, and chase her away on foot. Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, for love of Princess Kuro, deceived the Empress, saying that he wanted to see the Island of Ahaji. And when he made his progress and was in the Island of Ahaji, he, gazing afar, sang, saying:

Forthwith passing on from that island, he made a progress to the land of Kibi. Then Her Augustness Princess Kuro made him grandly reside at a place among the mountain-fields, and presented to him great august food. When for this [purpose] she plucked cabbage in that place to boil into great august soup, the Heavenly Sovereign went to the place where the maiden was plucking the cabbage, and sang, saying:

When the Heavenly Sovereign made his progress up, Princess Kuro presented an august Song, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 123
============================================================

Again she sang, saying:

[]

After this time the Empress made a progress to the land of Ki in order to pluck aralia-leaves for a copious feast; and in the meanwhile the Heavenly Sovereign wedded Yata-no-waki-iratsume. Hereupon, when the Empress was returning in her august vessel loaded full of aralia-leaves, a coolie from Kozhima in the land of Kibi, who was in the service of the Superintendent of the Water-Directors, being on his way off to his own country, met at the great passage of Naniha the vessel of a lady of the train who had got behind, and forthwith told

her, saying: “The Heavenly Sovereign has recently wedded Yata-no-waki-iratsume, and plays with her day and night. It must probably be because the Empress has not heard of this thing, that she quietly makes progresses for pleasure.” Then the lady of the train, having heard this narrative, forthwith pursued and reached the august vessel, and reported everything exactly as the coolie had told it. Hereupon the Empress, greatly vexed and angry, threw away into the sea all the aralia-leaves which she had put on board the august vessel. So the place [where she did so] is called by the name of Cape Mitsu. Forthwith without entering the palace, but taking her august vessel away [from it] and ascending the channel against the current, she made a progress up into Yamashiro by the river. At this time she sang, saying:

Forthwith going round by Yamashiro, and arriving at the entrance of the Nara Mountain, she sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 124
============================================================

Having sung thus, she returned and entered for some time into the house of a person from Kara named Nurinomi at Tsutsuki.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign, having heard that the Empress had made a progress up by Yamashiro, made a person,—a retainer called by the name of Toriyama,—give an august Song, which said:

Again he continued by despatching Kuchiko, Grandee of Wani, and sang, saying:

Again he sang, saying:

So when the Grandee of Kuchiko was repeating this august Song [to the Empress], it was raining heavily. Then upon his, without avoiding the rain, coming and prostrating himself at the front door of the palace, she on the contrary went out at the back door; and on his coming and prostrating himself at the back door of the palace, she on the contrary went out at the front door. Then, as he crept backwards and forwards on his knees in the middle of the court, the streams of water reached to his loins. Owing to the grandee being clad in a garment dyed green and with a red cord, the streams of water brushed against the red cord, and the green all changed to red colour. Now the Grandee of Kuchiko’s younger sister Princess Kuchi was in the service of the Empress. So Princess Kuchi sang, saying:

Then when the Empress asked the reason, she replied, saying: “He is my brother, the Grandee of Kuchiko.” Thereupon the Grandee of Kuchiko and also his younger sister Princess Kuchi and likewise Nurinomi [all] three took counsel [together], and sent to report to the

Heavenly Sovereign, saying: “The reason of the Empress’s progress is that there are [some] insects reared by Nurinomi,—strange insects changing in three ways, once becoming creeping insects, once becoming cocoons, and once becoming flying birds,—and it is only to go and look at them that she has entered into [Nurinomi’s house]. She has no strange intentions.” When they had thus reported, the Heavenly Sovereign said: “That being so, I want to go and see [these insects], as I think [they must be] strange;” [and with these words] he made a progress up from the great palace. When he entered into Nurinomi’s house, Nurinomi, had already presented to the Empress the three-fold insects reared by him. Then the Heavenly Sovereign augustly stood at the door of the palace where the Empress dwelt, and sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 125
============================================================

These six Songs sung by the Heavenly Sovereign and by the Empress are Changing Songs which are Quiet Songs.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign, loving Yata-no-waki-iratsume, deigned to send her an august Song. That Song said:

Then Yata-no-waki-iratsume replied in a Song, saying:

So the Yata Tribe was established as the august proxy of Yata-no-waki-iratsume.

[]

Again the Heavenly Sovereign begged for his younger half-sister Queen Medori, using as middle-man his younger brother King

. Then Queen Medori spoke to King Hayabusa-wake, saying: “Owing to the violence of the Empress, [the Heavenly Sovereign] has not deigned to take Yata-no-waki-iratsume [into the Palace]. So I will not respectfully serve him. I will become the wife of Thine Augustness.” Forthwith they wedded each other, wherefore King Hayabusa-wake made no report [to the Heavenly Sovereign]. Then the Heavenly Sovereign, going straight to the place where Queen Medori dwelt, stood on the door-sill of the palace. Hereupon, Queen Medori being at her loom, was weaving garments. Then the Heavenly Sovereign sang, saying:

Queen Medori replied in a Song, saying:

So the Heavenly Sovereign, perceiving her feelings, returned into the palace. At this time when her husband King Hayabusa-wake came, his wife Queen Medori sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 127
============================================================

The Heavenly Sovereign, hearing this Song, forthwith raised an army, wishing to slay King Hayabusa and Queen Medori, who then fled away together, and ascended Mount Kurahashi. Thereupon King Hayabusa-wake sang, saying:

Again he sang, saying:

So when they fled thence, and reached Soni in Uda, the Imperial army pursued, overtook, and slew them.

[]

Chief Ohotate of Yamabe, who was the generalissimo of that army, took the jewelled armlet which was wound round Queen Medori’s august arm, and gave it to his own wife. After this time, when a copious feast was to be held, the women of the various families all went to court. Then the wife of Chief Ohotate came with that Queen’s jewelled armlet wound round her own arm. Thereupon the Empress,

============================================================
SECTION 128
============================================================

Her Augustness Iha-no-hime, herself took the oak-leaves [full] of great august liquor and graciously gave them to the women of the various families. Then the Empress, recognizing the jewelled armlet, gave [the wearer] no oak-leaf [-full] of great august liquor, hut forthwith sent her away; and sending for the husband, Chief Ohotate, said: “Owing to that King and Queen’s impropriety, [the Emperor] deigned to send them away. This was nothing strange. And a slave such as thou despoils of the jewelled armlet that was wound round her august arm the body of his lady [that was still] warm, and gives it to his own wife!”—and forthwith he was  to death.

[]

Another time, the Heavenly Sovereign, when about to hold a copious feast, made a progress to the Island of Hime, just when a wild-goose had laid an egg on that island. Then, sending for His Augustness the Noble Take-uchi, he asked him in a Song about the laying of an egg by a wild goose. This Song said:

Hereupon the Noble Take-uchi spoke in a Song, saying:

Having thus spoken, he was granted the august lute and sang, saying:

This is a Congratulatory Incomplete Song.

============================================================
SECTION 129
============================================================

[]

In this august reign there was a tall tree on the west of the river Tsuki. The shadow of this tree, on its being struck by the morning sun, reached to the Island of Ahaji; and on its being struck by the evening sun, it crossed Mount Takayasu. So the tree was cut down and made into a vessel,—and a very swift-going vessel it was. At the time, this vessel was called by the name of Karanu. So with this vessel the water of the Island of Ahaji was drawn morning and evening, and presented as the great august water. The broken [pieces] of this vessel were used [as fuel] to burn salt, and the pieces of wood that remained over from the burning were made into a lute, whose sound re-echoed seven miles [off]. So [some one] sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 130
============================================================

This is a Changing Song which is a Quiet song.

[]

The august years of this Heavenly Sovereign were eighty-three. His august mausoleum is on the Ear-Moor of Mozu.

[]

His Augustness Iza-ho-wake dwelt in the palace of Wakasakura at Ihare, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Princess Kuro, daughter of the Noble of Ashida, child of

============================================================
SECTION 132
============================================================

So-tsu-biko of Kadzuraki, and begot august children: King Oshiha of Ichinobe; next King Mima; next his younger sister Awomi-no-iratsume, another name for whom was Ihi-toyo-no-iratsume.

[]

Originally, when dwelling at the palace of Naniha, [the Heavenly Sovereign] on holding a copious feast when at the great tasting, was intoxicated with the great august liquor, and fell greatly and augustly asleep. Then his younger brother, King Sumi-no-ye-naka-tsu, wishing to take the Heavenly Sovereign, set fire to the great palace. Thereupon the Suzerain of Achi, ancestor of the Suzerains of Aya in Yamato, having taken him away by stealth, set him on an august horse, and caused him to make a progress into Yamato. So [the Heavenly Sovereign] awoke on reaching the moor of Tajihi, and said: “What place is this?” Then the Suzerain of Achi said: “King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu set fire to the great palace; so I am fleeing with thee into Yamato.” Then the Heavenly Sovereign sang, saying:

On reaching the Pass of Hanifu and gazing at the palace of Naniha, the fire was still bright. Then the Heavenly Sovereign sang again, saying:

So when they reached the entrance of the Ohosaka mountain, they met one woman. This woman said: “A number of men bearing weapons are barring [the way across] the mountain. Thou shouldst cross it going round by way of Tagima.” Then the Heavenly Sovereign sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 133
============================================================

So, making his progress up, he dwelt in the temple of the Deity of Isonokami.

[]

Thereupon his younger brother His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake came, and sent [to ask for] an audience. Then the Heavenly Sovereign caused him to be told [these words]: “As I am in doubt whether perhaps Thine Augustness may [not] be of like mind with King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu, I will not meet and speak with thee.” [His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake] replied, saying: “I have no evil intent. I am not of like mind with King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu.” [The Heavenly Sovereign] again caused him to be told [these words]: “If that be so, [do thou] now return down, and slay King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu, and come up [again hither]. At that time I will surely meet and speak with thee.” So he forthwith returned down to Naniha, and deceived [a man] named Sobakari, a man-at-arms in the personal service of King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu, saying: “If thou wilt obey my words, I shall become Heavenly Sovereign, and will make thee prime Minister, to rule the Empire. How [would this be]?” Sobakari replied, saying: “[I will do] according to thy

.” Then plenteously endowing that man-at-arms, he said: “If that be so, slay the King.” Thereupon Sobakari watched for the time when his King went into the privy, and thrust him to death with a spear. So when [His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake] was making his progress to Yamato taking Sobakari with him, he, on reaching the entrance of the Ohosaka mountain, thought [thus]: “Although Sobakari deserves very well of me, he has truly slain his lord. This is unrighteous. Nevertheless if I reward not his deed, I may be called untruthful; and if I quite carry out my promise, his intentions are on the contrary to be feared. So, though recompensing his deed, I will destroy his actual person.” Therefore he said to Sobakari: “I will halt here to-day and bestow on thee the rank of Prime Minister, and to-morrow will [continue my] progress up.” So a halt was made at the entrance to the mountain, a temporary palace forthwith built, a copious feast suddenly held, the rank of Prime Minister forthwith bestowed on the man-at-arms, and all the officials made to do obeisance [to him]. The man-at-arms, delighted, thought that he had accomplished his design. Then [His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake] said to the man-at-arms: “To-day I will drink liquor from the same cup as the Prime Minister.” And when they drank together, a bowl large [enough] to hide the face was filled with the liquor presented. Hereupon the King’s child drank first, and the man-at-arms drank afterwards. So when the man-at-arms was drinking, the great cup covered his face. Then [His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake] drew forth a sabre which he had laid under the matting, and cut off the head of the man-at-arms. Forthwith on the morrow he made his progress up. So the place was called by the name of Chika-tsu-Asuka. Going up and reaching Yamato,

============================================================
SECTION 134
============================================================

he said: “I will halt here to-day and, having purified myself, will go forth to-morrow and worship at the temple of the Deity.” So that place is called by the name of Toho-tsu-Asuka. So going forth to the temple of the Deity of Iso-no-kami, he sent to report to the Heavenly Sovereign that he had come up to serve him after accomplishing the work [with which he had been entrusted]. So [the Heavenly Sovereign] sent for, and met, and spoke with him.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign thereupon first appointed the Suzerain of Achi to the office of Treasurer, and likewise bestowed on him domains. Again in this august reign the name of Waka-sakura Tribe was granted to the Grandees of the Waka-sakura Tribe. Again the gentile name of Dukes of Himeda was granted to the Dukes of Himeda. Again the Ihare Clan was established.

============================================================
SECTION 135
============================================================

[.]

The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were sixty-four. His august mausoleum is at Mozu.

[]

His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake dwelt in the palace of Shibakaki at Tajihi, and ruled the Empire. The length of this Heavenly Sovereign’s august person was nine feet two inches and a half. The length of his august teeth was one inch, and their breadth two lines, and the upper and lower [row] corresponded exactly, like jewels strung . The Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Lady of Tsunu, daughter of Kogoto, Grandee of Wani, and begot august children: the Lady of Kahi; next the Lady of Tsubura (two Deities). Again he wedded Oto-hime, daughter of the same Grandee, and begot august children: King Takara; next the Lady of Takabe,—altogether four Kings [and Queens]. The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were sixty. His august mausoleum is on the Moor of Mozu.

============================================================
SECTION 137
============================================================

[]

His Augustness Wo-asa-dzu-ma-waku-go-no-sukune dwelt in the Palace of Toho-tsu-Asuka, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Osaka-no-oho-naka-tsu-hime, younger sister of King Oho-hodo, and begot august children: King Karu of Kinashi; next Nagata-no-oho-iratsume; next King Kuro-hiko of Sakahi; next His Augustness Anaho; next Karu-no-oho-iratsume, another name for whom is So-tohoshi-no-iratsume (the reason for her being given the august name of Queen So-tohoshi was that the refulgence of her person passed through her garments); next King Shiro-biko of Yatsuri;

============================================================
SECTION 138
============================================================

next His Augustness Oho-hatsuse; next Tachibana-no-oho-iratsume; next Sakami-no-iratsume (nine Deities). Altogether the Heavenly Sovereign’s august children [numbered] nine Deities (five Kings and four Queens). Of these nine Kings and Queens, His Augustness Anaho [was he who  the Empire. Next his Augustness Oho-hatsuse ruled the Empire.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign, when first about to rule the succession of Heaven’s Sun, declined, saying: “I have a long sickness; I cannot rule the sun’s succession.” Nevertheless, as from the Empress downwards all the magnates strongly urged him, he forthwith ruled the Empire. At this time the ruler of Shiragi dutifully sent eighty-one vessels with august tribute. Then the chief envoy sent with the august tribute, whose name was Komu-ha-chimu-kamu-ki-mu, was a man deeply versed in the medical art. So he cured the Heavenly Sovereign’s august sickness.

[]

Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, lamenting the transgressions in

============================================================
SECTION 140
============================================================

the surnames and gentile names of the people of all the surnames and names in the Empire placed jars [for trial by] hot water at the Wondrous Cape of Eighty Evils in Words at Amakashi, and deigned to establish the surnames and gentile names of the eighty heads of companies. Again the Karu Tribe was established as the august proxy of King Karu of Ki-nashi; the Osaka Tribe was established as the Empress’s august proxy; and the Kaha Tribe was established as the august proxy of the Empress’s younger sister Ta-wi no Naka-tsu-hime.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were seventy-eight. His august mausoleum is at Naga-ye near Wega in Kafuchi.

============================================================
SECTION 141
============================================================

[]

After the decease of the Heavenly Sovereign, it was settled that King Karu of Ki-nashi should rule the Sun’s succession. But in the interval before his accession, he debauched his younger sister the Great Lady of Karu, and sang, saying:

This is a Hind-Lifting Song. Again he sang, saying:
“The rattle-rattle of the hail against the bamboo-grass:—After I shall have certainly slept, what though I be plotted against by people! When I shall have

============================================================
SECTION 142
============================================================

slept a good sleep delightfully, if there is the disorder of the cut Hydropyrum latifolium, let there be disorder,—when I shall have slept a good sleep!”

This is a Rustic Lifting Song.

[]

Therefore all the officials and likewise the people of the Empire turned against the Heir Apparent Kara, and towards the August Child Anaho. Then the Heir Apparent Karu, being alarmed, fled into the house of the Grandee the Noble Oho-mahe Wo-mahe, and made a

of implements of war. (The arrows made at this time were provided with copper arrow-insides; so those arrows are called by the name of Kara arrows.) Prince Anaho likewise made implements of war. (The arrows made by this Prince were just the arrows of the present time: they are called Anaho arrows.) Thereupon Anaho raised an army, and beleaguered the house of the Noble Oho-mahe Wo-mahe. Then, when be reached the gate, heavy ice-rain was falling. So he sang, saying:

Then the Noble Oho-mahe Wo-mahe came singing, lifting his hands, striking his knees, dancing, and waving his arms. The Song said:

This Song is of a Courtier’s Style. Singing thus, he came near and said: “August Child of our Heavenly Sovereign! Come not with arms against the King thine elder brother. If thou shouldst come against him with arms, people will surely laugh. I will secure him and present him to thee.” Then Prince Anaho disbanded his troops and went away. So the Noble Oho-mahe Wo-mahe secured Prince Karu, and led him forth, and presented him [to Prince Anaho]. The captive Prince sang, saying:

Again he sang:

============================================================
SECTION 143
============================================================

[]

So Prince Karu was banished to the hot waters of Iyo. Again when about to be banished, he sang, saying:

These three songs are of a Heaven-Soaring style. Again he sang, saying:

This Song is of a Partly Lowered Rustic style. Queen So-tohoshi presented a Song [to him]. That Song said:

So when afterwards again, being unable to restrain her love, she went after him, she sang, saying:

So when in her pursuit she reached [the place where prince Karu was, he, who had been] pensively waiting, sang, saying:

Again he sang, saying:
“Driving sacred piles in the upper reach, driving true piles in the lower reach of the

============================================================
SECTION 144
============================================================

river of secluded Hatsuse, and hanging on the sacrificial piles a mirror, hanging on the true piles true jewels:—if they said that the younger sister whom I love like a true jewel, that the spouse whom I love like a mirror were [there], I would go home, I would long for my country.”

Having thus sung, they forthwith killed themselves together. So these two songs are Reading Songs.

[]

The august child Anaho dwelt at the palace of Anaho at

, and ruled the Empire. The Heavenly Sovereign sent the Grandee of Ne, ancestor of the Grandees of Sakamoto, to the residence of King Oho-kusaka, on behalf of his younger brother Prince Oho-hatsuse to command thus: “I wish Thine Augustness’s younger sister Queen Waka-kusaka to wed Prince Oho-hatsuse. So do thou present her.” Then King Oho-kusaka did obeisance four times, and said: “Owing to a supposition that there might be some such Great Commands, I have kept her always indoors. With reverence will I respectfully offer her according to the Great Commands.” Nevertheless, thinking it disrespectful [merely] to send a message, he forthwith, as a ceremonial gift from his younger sister, made [the Grandee of Ne] take a push-wood jewel headdress to present [to the Heavenly Sovereign]. The Grandee of Ne forthwith stole the jewel headdress meant as a ceremonial gift, and slandered King Oho-kusaka, saying: “King Oho-kusaka would not receive the Imperial Commands, but said: ‘An soror mea fiet eædem stirpis [viri] inferior storea?’ and, grasping the hilt of his cross-sword, was angry.” So the Heavenly Sovereign, having in his great anger slain King Oho-kusaka, took that King’s chief wife Nagata-no-oho-iratsume, and made her Empress.

============================================================
SECTION 145
============================================================

[]

After this, the Heavenly Sovereign, being on [his] divine couch, was sleeping at midday. Then he spoke to his Empress, saying: “Is there anything on thy mind?” She replied, saying: “Being the object of the Heavenly Sovereign’s generous favour, what can there be on my mind?” Hereupon the Empress’s former child, King Ma-yowa, who was seven years old that year, happened to be just then playing outside the apartment. Then the Heavenly Sovereign, not knowing that the young King was playing outside the apartment, spoke to the Empress, saying: “I have constantly something upon my mind, namely [the fear] that thy child King Ma-yowa, when he comes to man’s estate, may, on learning that I slew the King his father, requite me with a foul heart.” Thereupon King Ma-yowa, who had been playing outside the apartment, and whose ear had caught these words, forthwith watched for the Heavenly Sovereign to be augustly asleep, and, taking the great sword [that lay] by his side, forthwith struck off the Heavenly Sovereign’s head, and fled into the house of the Grandee Tsubura. The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were fifty-six. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Fushimi at Sugahara.

============================================================
SECTION 146
============================================================

[]

Then Prince Oho-hatsuse, who at that time was a lad, was forthwith grieved and furious on hearing of this event, and went forthwith to his elder brother King Kuro-biko, and said: “They have slain the Heavenly Sovereign. What shall be done?” But King Kuro-biko was not startled, and was of unconcerned heart. Thereupon King Oho-hatsuse reviled his elder brother, saying: “For one thing it being the Heavenly Sovereign, for another thing it being thy brother, how is thy heart without concern? What! not startled, but unconcerned on hearing that they have slain thine elder brother!”—and forthwith he clutched him by the collar, dragged him out, drew his sword, and slew him. Again, going to his elder brother King Shiro-biko, he told him the circumstances as before. The unconcernedness again was like [that shown by] King Kuro-biko. [So King Oho-hatsuse,] having forthwith clutched him by the collar, pulled him along, and dug a pit on reaching Woharida, buried him as he stood, so that by the time he had been buried up to the loins, both his eyes burst out, and he died.

[]

Again he raised an army and beleaguered the house of the Grandee Tsubura. Then [the other side also] raised an army to resist the

attack, and the arrows that were shot forth were like unto the falling down of the [ears of the] reeds. Thereupon King Oho-hatsuse, using his spear as a staff, peeped in, and said: “Is perchance the maiden, with whom I spoke, in this house?” Then the Grandee Tsubura, hearing these commands, came forth himself, and having taken off the weapons with which he was girded, did obeisance eight times, and said: “The maiden Princess Kara, whom anon thou deignedst to woo, is at thy service. Again in addition I will present to thee five granaries. (What are called the five granaries are now the gardeners of the five villages of Kadzuraki:) Meanwhile the reason why she does not come out to meet thee in person is that from of old down to the present time grandees and chiefs have been known to hide in the palaces of Kings, but Kings have not yet been known to hide in the houses of grandees. Therefore I think that, though a vile slave of a grandee exerting his utmost strength in the fight can scarcely conquer, yet must he die rather than desert a Prince who, trusting in him, has entered into his house.” Having thus spoken, he again took his weapons and

============================================================
SECTION 148
============================================================

went in again to fight. Then, their strength being exhausted and their arrows finished, he said to the Prince: “My hands are wounded, and our arrows likewise are finished. We cannot now fight. What shall be done?” The Prince replied, saying: “If that be so, there is nothing more to do. [Do thou] now slay me.” So [the Grandee Tsubura] thrust the Prince to death with his sword, and forthwith killed himself by cutting off his own head.

[]

After this Karu-fukuro, ancestor of the Dukes of Yama of Sasaki in Afumi, said [to King Oho-hatsuse]: “At Kuta [and?] on the moor of Kaya at Wata in Afumi, boars and deer are abundant. Their legs as they stand are like a moor [covered] with wogi; the horns they point up are like withered trees.” At this time [King Oho-hatsuse], taking with him King Ichi-no-be-no-oshiha, made a progress to Afumi, and on reaching this moor, each of them built a separate temporary palace to lodge in. Then next morning, before the sun had risen, King Oshiha with a tranquil heart rode along on his august horse, and, reaching and standing beside King Oho-hatsuse’s temporary Palace, said to King Oho-hatsuse’s august attendants: “Is he not

============================================================
SECTION 149
============================================================

awake yet? He must he told quickly [that I am come]. It is already daylight. He must come to the hunting-ground,”—and forthwith urging his horse, he went forth. Then the people who served the august person of King Oho-hatsuse said: “As [King Oshiha] is a violent-spoken Prince, thou shouldst be on thy guard, and likewise it were well to arm thine august person.” Forthwith he put on armour underneath his clothes, took and girded on him his bow and arrows, rode off on horseback, and in a sudden interval setting his horse by the side [of the other King’s], took out an arrow, shot King Oshiha down, forthwith moreover cut his body [to pieces], put [them] into a horse’s manger, and buried them level with the earth.

[

Hereupon King Ichi-no-be’s children King Ohoke and King Woke (two Deities), having heard of this affray, fled away. So when they reached Karibawi in Yamashiro and were eating their august provisions, an old man with a tattooed face came and seized the provisions. Then the two Kings said: “We do not grudge the provisions. But who art thou?” He replied, saying: “I am a boar-herd in Yamashiro.” So they fled across the River Kusuba, reached the land of Harima, entered the house of a native of that country named Shizhimu, hid their persons, and worked as grooms and cow-herds.

============================================================
SECTION 150
============================================================

[]

His Augustness Oho-hatsuse-no-waka-take dwelt in the palace of Asakura at Hatsuse, and ruled the Empire. The Heavenly Sovereign wedded Queen Wake-kusaka-be, younger sister of King Oho-kusaka (no children). Again he wedded Princess Kara, daughter of the Grandee Tsubura, and begot august children: His Augustness Shiraka; next his younger sister Her Augustness Princess Waka-tarashi (two Deities).

[]

So the Shiraka Clan was established as the august proxy of Prince Shiraka. Again the Hatsuse-Clan-Retainers were established. At this time there came over people from Kure. Again the Kahase Retainers were established. These people from Kure were lodged at Kure-hara. So the place was called by the name of Kure-hara.

============================================================
SECTION 152
============================================================

[]

In the beginning, when the Empress dwelt at Kusaka, [the Heavenly Sovereign] made a progress into Kafuchi by way of the Tadagoye road at Kusaka. Then, on climbing to the top of the mountain and gazing on the interior of the country, [he perceived that] there was a house built with a raised roof-frame. The Heavenly Sovereign sent to ask [concerning] that house, saying: “Whose roof with a raised frame is that?” The answer was: “It is the house of the great Departmental Lord of Shiki.” Then the Heavenly Sovereign said: “What! a slave builds his own house in imitation of the august abode of the Heavenly Sovereign!”—and forthwith he sent men to burn the house [down], when the Great Departmental Lord, with trembling and dread, bowed his head, saying: “Being a slave, I like a slave did not understand, and have built overmuch. I am in great dread.” So the thing that he presented as an august offering [in token] of his

============================================================
SECTION 153
============================================================

entreaty was a white dog clothed in cloth, and with a bell hung [round its neck]; and he made a kinsman of his own, named Koshihaki, lead it by a string and present it [to the Heavenly Sovereign]. So the Heavenly Sovereign ordered them to desist from burning [the house].

[]

Forthwith making a progress to the residence of Queen Waka-kusaka-be, the Heavenly Sovereign sent the dog as a present with a message, saying: “This thing is a strange thing which I got to day on the road. So it is a thing to woo with,”—and so saying, sent it in as a present. Thereupon Queen Waka-kusaka-be sent to say to the Heavenly Sovereign: “It is very alarming that thou shouldst make a progress with thy back to the sun. So I will come up straight [to the capital], and respectfully serve thee.” When therefore he returned up and dwelt in the palace, he went and stood on the ascent of that mountain, and sang, saying:

“In the hollow between the nearer and the further mountain, this Mount Kusaka-be and Mount Heguri, [is] growing the flourishing broad-leafed bear-oak; at the base grow intertwining bamboos; on the top grow luxuriant bamboos:—we sleep not [now] intertwined like the intertwining bamboos, we sleep not certainly like the

============================================================
SECTION 154
============================================================

luxuriant bamboos: [but] oh! my beloved spouse, with whom [I] shall afterwards sleep intertwined!”

And he forthwith sent back a messenger with this Song.

[]

Again once when the Heavenly Sovereign, going out for amusement, reached the River Miwa, there was a girl, whose aspect was very beautiful, washing clothes by the river-side. The Heavenly Sovereign asked the girl, [saying]: “Whose child art thou?” She replied, saying: “My name is Akawi-ko of the Hiketa Tribe.” Then he caused her to be told, saying: “Do not thou marry a

husband. I will send for thee,”—and [with these words] he returned to the palace. So eighty years had already passed while she reverently awaited the Heavenly Sovereign’s commands. Thereupon Akawi-ko thought: “As, while looking for the [Imperial] commands, I have already passed many years, and as my face and form are lean and withered, there is no longer any hope. Nevertheless, if I do not show [the Heavenly Sovereign] how truly I have waited, my disappointment will be unbearable;”—and [so saying] she caused merchandise to be carried on tables holding an hundred, and came forth and presented [these gifts as] tribute. Thereat the Heavenly Sovereign, who had quite forgotten what he had formerly commanded, asked Akawi-ko, saying: “What old woman art thou, and why art thou come hither?” Then Akawiko replied, saying: “Having in such and such a month of such and such a year received the Heavenly Sovereign’s commands, I have been reverently awaiting the great command until this day, and eighty years have past by. Now my appearance is quite decrepit, and there is no longer any hope. Nevertheless I have come forth in order to show and declare my faithfulness.” Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign was greatly startled [,and exclaimed]: “I had quite forgotten the former circumstance; and thou meanwhile, ever faithfully awaiting my commands, hast vainly let pass by the years of thy prime. This is very pitiful.” In his heart he wished to marry her, but shrank from her extreme age, and could not make the marriage; but he conferred on her an august Song. That Song said:

Again he sang, saying:

Then the tears that Akawi-ko wept quite drenched the red-dyed sleeve that she had on. In reply to the great august Song, she sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 155
============================================================

Again she sang, saying:

Then the old woman was sent back plentifully endowed. So these four Songs are Quiet Songs.

[]

When the Heavenly Sovereign made a progress to the palace of Yeshinu, there was on the bank of the Yeshinu river a girl of beautiful appearance. So having wedded this girl, he returned to the Palace. Afterwards, when he again made a progress to Yeshinu, he halted where he had met the girl, and in that place raised a great august throne, seated himself on that august throne; played on his august lute, and made the maiden dance. Then he composed an august Song on account of the maiden’s good dancing. That Song said:

============================================================
SECTION 156
============================================================

[]

When forthwith he made a progress to the Moor of Akidzu, and augustly hunted, the Heavenly Sovereign sat on an august throne. Then a horse-fly bit his august arm, and forthwith a dragon-fly came and ate up the horse-fly, and flew [away]. Thereupon he composed an august Song. That Song said:

============================================================
SECTION 157
============================================================

So from that time that moor was called by the name of Akidzu-nu.

[]

Again once the Heavenly Sovereign made a progress up to the summit of Mount Kadzuraki. Then a large [wild] boar ran out. When the Heavenly Sovereign forthwith shot the boar with a whizzing barb, the boar, furious, came towards him roaring. So the Heavenly Sovereign, alarmed at the roaring, climbed up to the top of an alder. Then he sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 158
============================================================

[]

Again once, when the Heavenly Sovereign made a progress up Mount Kadzuraki, the various officials were all clothed in green-stained garments with red cords that had been granted to them. At that time there were people ascending the mountain on the opposite mountain acclivity quite similar to the order of the Heavenly Monarch’s retinue. Again the style of the habiliments and likewise the people were similar and not distinguishable. Then the Heavenly Sovereign gazed, and sent to ask, saying: “There being no other king in Yamato excepting myself, what person goeth thus?” The style of the reply again was like unto the commands of a Heavenly Sovereign. Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, being very angry, fixed his arrow [in his bow], and the various officials all fixed their arrows [in their bows]. Then those people also all fixed their arrows [in their bows]. So the Heavenly Sovereign again sent to ask, saying: “Then tell thy name. Then let each of us tell his name, and [then] let fly his arrow.” Thereupon [the other] replied, saying:  I was the first to be asked, I will be the first to tell my name. I am the deity who dispels with a word the evil and with a word the good,—the Great Deity of Kadzuraki, Lord of One Word.” The Heavenly

============================================================
SECTION 159
============================================================

Sovereign hereupon trembled, and said: “I reverence [thee], my Great Deity. I understood not that thy great person would be revealed;”—and having thus spoken, he, beginning by his great august sword and likewise his bow and arrows, took off the garments which the hundred officials had on, and worshipfully presented them [to the Great Deity]. Then the Great Deify, Lord of One Word, clapping his hands, accepted the offering. So when the Heavenly Sovereign made his progress back, the Great Deity came down the mountain, and respectfully escorted him to the entrance of the Hatsuse mountain. So it was at that time that the Great Deity Lord of One Word was revealed.

[]

Again when the Heavenly Sovereign made a progress to Kasuga to wed Princess Wodo, daughter of the Grandee Satsuki of Wani, a maiden met him by the way, and forthwith seeing the Imperial progress, ran and hid on the side of a mound. So he composed an august Song. That august Song said:

============================================================
SECTION 160
============================================================

So that mound was called by the name of the Mound of the Metal Spade.

[]

Again when the Heavenly Sovereign made a copious feast under a hundred-branching tsuki-tree at Hatsuse, a female attendant from Mihe in the land of Ise lifted up the great august cup, and presented it to him. Then from the hundred-branching tsuki-tree there fell a leaf and floated in the great august cup. The female attendant, not knowing that the fallen leaf was floating in the cup, did not desist from presenting the great august liquor to the Heavenly Sovereign, who, perceiving the leaf floating in the cup, knocked the female attendant down, put his sword to her neck, and was about to cut off her head, when the female attendant spoke to the Heavenly Sovereign, saying: “Slay me not! There is something that I must say to thee;” and forthwith she sang, saying:

“The palace of Hishiro at Makimuku is a palace where shines the morning sun, a palace whore glistens the evening sun, a palace plentifully rooted as the roots of the bamboo, a palace with spreading roots like the roots of the trees, a palace pestled with oh! eight hundred [loads of] earth. As for the branches of the hundred-fold flourishing tsuki-tree growing by the house of new licking at the august gate [made of]

chamæcyparis [wood], the uppermost branch has the sky above it, the middle branch has the east above it, the lowest branch has the country above it. A leaf from the tip of the uppermost branch falls against the middle branch; a leaf from the tip of the middle branch falls against the lowest branch; a leaf from the tip of the lowest branch, falling into the oil floating in the fresh jewelled goblet which the maid of Mihe is lifting up, all [goes] curdle-curdle. Ah! this is very awful, August Child of the High-Shining Sun! The tradition of the thing, too this!”

So on her presenting this Song, her crime was pardoned. Then the Empress sang. Her Song said:

Forthwith the Heavenly Sovereign sang, saying:

============================================================
SECTION 161
============================================================

These three Songs are Songs of Heavenly Words. So at this copious feast this female attendant from Mihe was praised and plentifully endowed.

[]

On the day of this copious feast the Heavenly Sovereign, when Princess Wodo of Kasuga presented to him the great august liquor, sang again, saying:

This is a Cup Song. Then Princess Wodo presented a Song. That Song said:

This is a Quiet Song.

============================================================
SECTION 162
============================================================

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were one hundred and twenty-four. His august mausoleum is at Takawashi in Tajihi in Kafuchi.

[]

His Augustness Shiraka-no-oho-yamato-ne-ko dwelt at the palace of Mikakuri at Ihare, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign had no Empress, and likewise no august children. So the Shiraka Clan was established as his august proxy. So after the Heavenly Sovereign’s decease, there was no King to rule the Empire. Thereupon, on enquiry [being made] for a King who should rule the sun’s succession, Oshinumi-no-iratsume, another name for whom was Princess Ihi-toyo, younger sister of Prince Ichinobe-oshiha-wake, [was found to be] residing at the palace of Tsunusashi at Takaki in Oshinumi in Kadzuraki.

[]

Then Wodate, Chief of the Mountain Clan, when appointed governor of the land of Harima, arrived just at [the time of] a rejoicing for the

new cave of an inhabitant called Shizhimu. Hereupon, when the feasting and the drinking were at their height, they all danced in torn. So two young children [employed] to light the fire sat beside the furnace. These young children were made to dance. Then one of the young children said: “Do thou the elder brother dance first.” The elder brother likewise said: “Do thou the younger brother dance first.” When they thus yielded to each other, the people who were met together laughed at their manner of yielding to each other. So at last the elder brother danced, [and when he had] finished, the younger when about to dance chanted, saying:

Then forthwith Chief Wodate, starting at the sound [of these words], and rolling off his couch, drove away the people of the cave; and, having set the two princes [one] on his left knee and [the other] on his right and wept and lamented, he collected the people together, and having built a temporary palace, and set [the two princes] to dwell in that temporary palace, he sent a courier up [to the capital]. Thereupon their aunt, Queen Ihi-toyo, delighted to hear [the news], made them come up to the palace.

============================================================
SECTION 165
============================================================

[]

So when the government of the Empire was about to be assumed, the Grandee Shibi, ancestor of the Grandees of Heguri, mixed in the Songs, and took the hand of the beautiful person whom His Augustness Woke was about to wed. This maiden was a daughter of one of the Headmen of Uda, and her name was Ofuwo. Then His Augustness Woke likewise mixed in the Song-Hedge. Thereupon the Grandee Shibi sang, saying:

When he had thus sung, and requested the conclusion of the Song, His Augustness Woke sang, saying:

Then the Grandee Shibi sang again, saying:

Hereupon the Prince sang again, saying:

Then the Grandee Shibi, getting more and more angry, sang, saying:

Then the Prince again sang, saying:

Having thus sung, the feast was concluded at dawn, and they all retired. Next morning the two Deities, His Augustness Ohoke and His Augustness Woke, took counsel, saying: “All the people of the Court go to Court in the morning, and assemble at Shibi’s gate at noon. So Shibi must surely now be sleeping, and moreover there will be

============================================================
SECTION 166
============================================================

nobody at the gate. So unless it be now, it were bard to plot against him,”—and forthwith they at once raised an army, and beleaguered the house of the Grandee Shibi, and slew him.

[]

Then each of the two Princes ceded the Empire to the other, and His Augustness Ohoke [finally] ceded it to the younger brother His Augustness Woke, saying: “Had not Thine Augustness revealed our names when we dwelt in the house of Shizhimu in Harima, we should never have arrived at being the lords of the Empire. This is quite owing to Thine Augustness’s deed. So, though I be the elder brother, do Thine Augustness rule the Empire first,”—and [with these words] he urgently ceded [his claim]. So, being unable to refuse, His Augustness Woke ruled the Empire first.

[]

His Augustness Woke-no-ihasu-wake dwelt at the palace of Chika-tsu-Asuka, and ruled the Empire for eight years. The Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Queen of Naniha, daughter of the King of Ihaki. He had no children. At the time when this Heavenly Sovereign was searching for the august bones of the King his father, King Ichinobe, there came out from the laud of Afumi [to the palace] a poor old woman, who said: “The place where the prince’s august bones are buried is specially well known to me, and moreover [his skeleton] can be known by his august teeth.” (His august teeth were teeth uneven like a lily.) Then

people were set to dig the ground and search for the august bones; and the bones having been forthwith obtained, an august mausoleum was made on the mountain east of the Moor of Kaya, and they were interred, and the children of Kara-fukuro were made to guard the august mausoleum. Afterwards the august bones were brought up [to the Capital]. So having returned up [to the Capital, the Heavenly Sovereign] sent for the old woman, praised her for having, without forgetting, kept the place in mind, and conferred upon her the name of the Old Woman Oki-me: thus did he send for her into the palace, and deign to treat her with deep and wide kindness. So he built a house for the old woman to dwell in close to the palace, and always sent for her every day. So he hung a bell by the door of the great hall, and always rang it when he wished to call the old woman. So he composed an august Song. That Song said:

============================================================
SECTION 168
============================================================

Hereupon the old woman said: “I am very aged, and would fain depart to my native land.” So when the Heavenly Sovereign let her depart according to her request, he saw her off and sang, saying:

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign searched for the old boar-herd who had seized his august provisions at the time when he first met with adversity and was fleeing; and, having sought him out, sent for him up [to the Capital], beheaded him in the bed of the River Asuka, and cut the knee-tendons of all his kindred. Wherefore down to the present time

============================================================
SECTION 169
============================================================

his descendants, on the day when they come up to Yamato, always limp of their own accord. So the man’s abode had been well seen and divined. So the place was named Shimesu.

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign, deeply hating the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse, who had slain the King his father, wished to be revenged on his spirit. So when, wishing to destroy the august mausoleum of the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse, he [was about to] send people [to execute this design], his elder brother, His Augustness Ohoke, addressed him, saying: “To demolish this august mausoleum thou shouldst not send other people. None but myself shall go, and I will demolish it according to the Heavenly Sovereign’s august heart.” Then the Heavenly Sovereign commanded: “Make thy progress, then, according to thy decree.” Wherefore His Augustness Ohoke, having proceeded down himself, slightly excavated the side of the august mausoleum, and returned up [to the capital], and reported that he had dug up and demolished it. Then the Heavenly Sovereign, astonished at the quickness of his return up, asked how he had demolished it. He replied, saying: “I slightly excavated the earth at the side of the august mausoleum.” The Heavenly Sovereign said: “Wishing to be revenged on the enemy of the King our father, I had counted on the complete demolition of the mausoleum. Why hast thou [only] slightly

============================================================
SECTION 170
============================================================

it?” He replied, saying: “The reason why I did so was that the wish to be revenged on the spirit of the foe of the King our father is truly just. Nevertheless the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse, though he were our father’s foe, was still our uncle, and moreover was an Heavenly Sovereign who ruled the . So if we now, simply from the consideration of his having been our father’s enemy, were completely to demolish the mausoleum of an Heavenly Sovereign who ruled the Empire, after-generations would surely revile us. Meanwhile the wrongs of the King our father must not be unrevenged. So I slightly excavated the side of the mausoleum. This insult will quite suffice as a token to future ages.” On his thus addressing him, the Heavenly Sovereign said: “This also is very just. Be it as thou sayest.”

[]

So the Heavenly Sovereign died, and His Augustness Ohoke ruled the succession of Heaven’s sun. The Heavenly Sovereign’s august years were thirty-eight, and he ruled the Empire for eight years. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Ihatsuki at Katnwoka.

[]

His Augustness Ohoke dwelt at the palace of Hirataka at Isonokami, and ruled the Empire. The Heavenly Sovereign wedded Kasuga-no-oho-iratsume, the august daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse-no-wuka-take, and begot august children: Takaki-no-iratsume; next Takara-no-iratsume; next Kusubi-no-iratsume; next Tashiraka-no-iratsume; next His Grandeur Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki; next Prince Ma-waka. The child born to him by his next wife Naka-no-waku-go-no-iratsume, daughter of the Grandee Hitsuma of Wani, was:

============================================================
SECTION 172
============================================================

. The august children of this Heavenly Monarch numbered seven altogether. Of these His Augustness Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire.

[]

His Grandeur Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki dwelt in the palace of Namiki at Hatsuse, and ruled the Empire for eight years. This Heavenly Monarch had no august children. So the Wo-hatsuse Tribe was established as his august proxy. His august mausoleum is on the mount of Ihatsuki at Karawoka. On the death of this Heavenly Monarch there was no prince to inherit the Empire. So His Augustness Ohoda, the fifth descendant of the Heavenly Monarch Homuda, was sent for down to the land of Afumi, and married to her Augustness Tashiraka, and presented with the Empire.

[]

His Augustness Ohodo dwelt in the Palace of Tamaho at Ihare, and ruled the Empire. The (two) august children born to this Heavenly Monarch by Waka-hime, ancestress of the Dukes of Miwo, were: Oho-iratsuko, next Idzumo-no-iratsume. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife, Meko-no-iratsume, sister of the Chieftain Ofushi, ancestor of the Chieftains of Wohari, were: His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-take-kana-hi, next His Augustness Take-wo-hiro-kuni-oshi-tate. The (one) august child born to him by his next wife (the Great Empress) Her Augustness Tashiraka, the august daughter of the Heavenly Monarch Ohoke, was: His Augustness Ame-kuni-oshi-haruki-hiro-niha. The (one) august child born to him by his next wife Wo-kumi-no-iratsume, daughter of Prince Okinaga-no-mate, was: Sasage-no-iratsume. The three august children born to him by his next wife Kuro-hime, daughter of Prince Sakata-no-oho-mata, were: Kamu-saki-no-iratsume, next Mamuta-no-iratsume, next Umakuta-no-iratsume. The (three) august children born to him by his next wife Seki-hime, daughter of Womochi Grandee of Mamuta, were: Mamuta-no-oho-iratsume, next Shira-saka-no-iku-hi-no-iratsume, next Wo-nu-no-iratsume, another name for whom

============================================================
SECTION 174
============================================================

is Naga-me-hime. The (four) children born to him by his next wife Yamato-hime, younger sister of Katabu Duke of Miwo, were: Oho-iratsume, next Prince Maroko, next Prince Mimi, next Aka-hime-no-iratsume. The (three) children born to him by his next wife Abe-no-haye-hime, were: Waka-ya-no-iratsume, next Tsubura-no-iratsnme, next Prince Adzu. The august children of this Heavenly Monarch numbered nineteen in all, (seven Kings and twelve Queens). Of these His Augustness Ame-kuni-oshi-haruki-hiro-niha [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire; next His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-take-kana-hi ruled the Empire; next His Augustness Take-wo-hiro-kuni-oshi-tate ruled the Empire; the next, Queen Sasage, presided at the temple of the Deity of Ise. In this august reign Ihawi, Lord of Tsukushi, was disobedient to the Imperial Decrees, and was exceedingly disrespectful. So the Great Chieftain Mononobe-no-arakawi and the Chieftain Ohotomo-no-kanamura were both sent to slay Ihawi. The august years of this Heavenly Monarch were forty-three. His august mausoleum is at Awi in Mishima.

[]

His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-take-kana-hi dwelt in the Palace of Kanahashi at Magari, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Monarch had no august children. His august grave is at the village of Takaya in Furuchi in Kafuchi.

[]

His Augustness Take-wo-hiro-kuni-oshi-tate dwelt in the Palace of Ihorinu at Hinokuma, and ruled the Empire. The august children born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife Her Augustness Tachi-bana-no-naka-tsu-hime, the august daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Ohoke, were: Her Augustness Ishi-hime, next Her Augustness Wo-ishi-hime, next King Kura-no-waka-ye. The august children born to him by his next wife, Kafuchi-no-waku-go-hime, were: King Honoho, next

============================================================
SECTION 176
============================================================

King Weha. The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign numbered altogether five (three King and two Queens). So King Honoho (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Shihida). Prince Weha (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Wina and of the Dukes of Tajihi).

[]

The Heavenly Sovereign Ame-kuni-oshi-haruki-hiro-niha dwelt in the Great Palace of Shikishima, and ruled the Empire. The (three) august children born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife, Her Augustness Ishi-hime, the august daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Hi-no-kuma, were: King Yata; next His Augustness Nu-na-kura-tama-shiki; next King Kasanuhi. The (one) august child born to him by his next wife Her Augustness Wo-ishi-hime, younger sister [of the first one], was: King Kami. The (three) august children born to him by his next wife Nukako-no-iratsume, daughter of the Grandee Hitsuma of Kasuga, were: Kasuga-no-yamada-no-iratsume, next King Maroko, next King Soga-no-kura. The (thirteen) children born to him by his next wife Kitashi-hime, daughter of the Prime Minister the Noble Inawe of Soga were: His Augustness Tachibana-no-toyo-hi, next his younger sister Queen Ihakumo, next King Atori, next Her Augustness Toyo-mike-kashiki-ya-hime, next King Mata-maroko, next King Oho-yake, next King Imigako, next King [of?] Yamashiro, next his younger sister Queen Oho-tomo, next King Sakurawi-no-yumi-hari, next King Manu, next King Tachibana-moto-no-waku-go next King Tone. The five august children born to him by his next wife Wo-ye-hime, aunt of Her Augustness Kitashi-hime, were: King Umaki, next King Kadzuraki, next King Hashi-bito-no-ana-ho-be, next King Saki-kusa-be-no-ana-ho be, another name for whom was Sume-irodo, next His Augustness Hatsuse-be-no-waka-sazaki. Altogether the august children of this Heavenly Sovereign numbered twenty-five Kings and Queens. Of these His Augustness Nu-na-kura-futo-tama-shiki [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. Next His Augustness Tachibana-no-toyo-hi ruled the Empire. Next Her Augustness Toyo-mike-kashiki-ya-hime ruled the Empire. Next His Augustness Hatsuse-be-no-waka-sazaki ruled the Empire. In all there were four Kings and Queens that ruled the Empire.

============================================================
SECTION 177
============================================================

[]

His Augustness Nuna-kura-futo-tama-shiki dwelt in the Palace of Wosada, and ruled the Empire for fourteen years. The (eight) children born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife, his half-sister Her Augustness Toyo-mike-kashiki-ya-hime, were: King Shidzu-kahi, another name for whom was Kahi-dako; next King Takeda, another name for whom was King Wo-kahi; next King Woharita, next King Umori, next King Wohari, next King Tame, next King Sakurawi-no-yumi-hari. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife Wo-kuma-ko-no-iratsume, daughter of the Headman Ohoka of Ise, were: Her Augustness Futo-hime, next Queen Tatara, another name for whom was Queen Nukade-hime. The (three) august children born to him by his next wife Her Augustness Hiro-hime, daughter of King Okinaga-no-ma-de, were: King Osaka-no-hiko-hito, another name for whom was King Maroko; next King Saka-nobori, next King Uji. The (four) august children born to him by his next wife Omina-ko-no-iratsume, daughter of Kasuga-no-naka-tsu-waku-go, were: King Naniha, next King Kuhada, next King Kasuga, next King Oho-mata. Of the august children of this Heavenly Monarch,— and Queens altogether,—King Hiko-hito begot by his wife his half-sister Queen Tamura, another name for whom was Her Augustness Nukade-hime, (three) august children, namely: the Heavenly Sovereign that ruled the Empire from the Palace of Wokamoto, next King Naka-tsu, next King Tara. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife, Queen Ohomata, younger sister of King Aya, were: King Chinu, next his younger sister Queen Kuhada. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife his half-sister Princess Yumi-hari, were: King Yamashiro, next Queen Kasanuhi,—altogether seven Kings and Queens. The august mausoleum [of the Heavenly Sovereign Nuna-kura-futo-tama-shiki] is at Shinaga in Kafuchi.

[]

His Augustness Tachibana-no-toyo-hi dwelt in the Palace of Ikeno-be, and ruled the Empire for three years. The one august child born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife Oho-gitashi-hime, daughter of

============================================================
SECTION 179
============================================================

the Prime Minister the Noble Iname, was: King Tame. The (four) august children born to him by his next wife, his half-sister Princess Hashi-bito-no-anaho-be, were: His Augustness Uhe-no-miya-no-uma-ya-dono-toyo-to-mimi; next King Kume, next King We-kuri, next King Mamuta. The august children born to him by his next wife Ihi-me-no-ko, daughter of Tagima-no-kura-bito-hiro, were: King Tagima, next his younger sister Sugashiroko-no-iratsume. The august mausoleum of this Heavenly Sovereign, which had been by the borders of Lake Ihare, was afterwards removed to the middle sepulchre of Shinaga.

The Heavenly Sovereign Hatsuse-be-no-waka-sazaki dwelt at the Palace of Shibakaki at Kurahashi, and ruled the Empire for four years. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Kurahashi.

Her Augustness Toyo-mike-kashiki-ya-hime dwelt at the Palace of Woharida, and ruled the Empire for thirty-seven years. Her august mausoleum, which had been on the mound of Ohonu, was afterwards removed to the great sepulchre at Shinaga.

============================================================
APPENDIX 1
============================================================

---

---

I. ()

II. ()

Ya-chi-hoko no
Kami no mikoto ha
Ya-shima-kuni
Tsuma magi-kanete
Toho-tohoshi
Koshi no kuni ni
Sakashi-me wo
Ari to kikashite
Kuhashi-me wo
Ari to kikashite
Sa-yobahi ni
Ari-tatashi
Yobahi ni
Ari-kayohase
Tachi ga wo mo
Imada tokazute
Osuki wo mo
Imada tokaneba
Wotome no
Nasu ya ita-to wo
Osoburahi
Wa ga tatasereba
Hikodzurahi
Wa ga tatasereba

Awo-yama ni
Nuye ha naki
Sa-nu tso tori
Kigishi ha toyomu
Niha tsu tori
Kake ha naku
Uretaku mo
Naku-naru tori ka
Kono tori mo
Uchi-yame-kosene
Ishitafu ya
Ama-hase-dzukahi
Koto no
Katari-goto mo
Ko wo ba
III. ()

IV. ()

V. ()

Nuba-tama no
Kuroki mi keshi wo

Ma-tsubusa ni
Tori-yosohi
Oki tsu tori
Muna miru toki
Ha-tatagi mo
Kore ha fusahazu
He tsu nami
So ni nugi-ute
So-ni-dori no
Awoki mi keshi wo
Ma-tsubusa ni
Tori-yosohi
Oki tsu tori
Muna miru toki
Ha-tatagi mo
Ko mo fusahazu
He tsu nami
So ni nugi-ute
Yama-gata ni
Magishi atane tsuki
Some-ki ga shiru ni
Shime-koromo wo
Ma-tsubusa ni
Tori-yosohi
Oki tsu tori
Muna miru toki
Ha-tatagi mo
Ko shi yoroshi
Itokoya no
Imo no mikoto
Mura-tori no
Wa ga mure-i-naba
Hike-tori no
Wa ga hike-i-naba
Nakazhi to ha
Na ha ifu to mo
Yamato no
Hito-moto susuki
Unakabushi
Na ga nakasamaku
Asa-ame no
Sa-giri ni tatamu zo
Waka-kusa no
Tsuma no mikoto
Koto no
Katari-goto mo
Ko wo ba
VI. ()

Ya-chi-hoko no
Kami no mikoto ya
A ga oho-kuni
Nushi koso ha
Wo ni i-maseba
Uchi-miru
Shima no saki-zaki

Kaki-miru
Iso no saki ochizu
Waka-kusa no
Tsuma motase-rame
A ha mo yo
Me ni shi areba

Na wokite
Wo ha nashi
Na wokite
Tsuma ha nashi
Aya-kaki no
Fuhaya ga shita ni
Mushi-busuma
Nikoya ga shita ni
Taku-busuma
Sayagu ga shita ni
Awa-yuki no
Wakayaru mune wo
Taku-dzunu no
Shiroki tadamuki
So-dataki
Tataki-managari
Ma-tama-de
Tama-de sashi-maki
Momo-naga ni
I wo shi nase
Toyo mi ki
Tate-matsurase
VII. ()

VIII. ()

IX. ()

X. ( and .)

Uda no taka-ki ni
Shigi-wana haru
Wa ga matsu ya
Shigi ha sayarazu

Isukuhashi
Kujira sayaru
Konami ga
Na kohasaba
Tachi-soba no
Mi no nakeku wo
Mokishi hiwene
Uhanari ga
Na kohasaba
Ichi-saka-ki mi no
Ohokeku wo
Kokida hiwene
Ye ye
Shi ya ko shi ya
[Ko ha igonofu zo]
Aa shi yo ko shi ya
XI. ()

XII. ()

XIII. ()

XIV. ()

Kamu-kaze no
Ise no umi no

Ohishi ni
Hahi-motohorofu
Shitadami no
I-hahi-motobori
Uchite shi yamamu
XV. ()

XVI. ()

XVII. ()

XVIII. ()

XIX. ()

XX. ()

XXI. ()

XXII. ()

XXIII. ()

XXIV. ()

XXV. ()

XXVI. ( and .)

XXVII. ()

XXVIII. ()

XXIX. ()

XXX. ()

XXXI. (Sect. lxxxix, Note .)

XXXII. (Sect. lxxxix, Note .)

XXXIII. ()

Wotome no
Toko no be ni

Wa ga okishi
Tsurugi no tachi
Sono tachi ha ya
XXXIV. ()

XXXV. ()

XXXVI. ()

XXXVII. ()

XXXVIII. ()

XXXIX. ()

Kono mi ki ha
Wa ga mi ki narazu

Kushi no kami
Toko-yo ni i-masu
Iha tatasu
Sukuna mi kami no
Kamu-hogi
Hogi-kuruhoshi
Toyo-hogi
Hogi-motohoshi
Matsuri-koshi
Mi ki zo
Asazu wose sa sa
XL. ()

XLI. ()

XLII. ()

Kono kani ya
Idzuku no kani
Momo-dzutafu
Tsunuga no kani
Yoko-sarafu
Idzuku ni itaru
Ichiji-shima
Mi-shima ni to ki
Niho-dori no
Kadzuki iki-dzuki
Shina-dayufu
Sasa-nami-ji wo
Suku-suku to
Wa ga i-maseba ya
Kohata no michi ni
Ahashishi wotome
Ushiro-de ha
Wo-date ro ka mo
Ha-nami ha
Shibi (shi) nasu
Ichihiwi no
Wanisa no ni wo

Hatsu-ni ha
Hada akarakemi
Shiha-ni ha
Ni-guroki yuwe
Mi-tsu-guri no
Sono naka tsu ni wo
Kabu-tsuku
Ma-hi ni ha atezu
Mayo-gaki
Ko ni kaki-tare
Ahashishi womina

Ka mo ga to
Wa ga mishi ko-ra
Kaku mo ga to
A ga mishi ko ni
Utadakeni
Mukahi-woru ka mo
I-sohi-woru ka mo
XLIII. ()

XLIV. ()

XLV. ()

Michi no shiri
Kohada-wotome wo

Kami no goto
Kikoyeshikadomo
Ahi-makuramaku
XLVI. ()

XLVII. ()

XLVIII. ()

XLIX. ()

L. ()

LI. ()

Chihaya-hito
Uji no watari ni

Watari-ze ni tateru
Adzusa-yumi ma-yumi
I-kiramu to
Kokoro ha mohedo
I-toramu to
Kokoro ha mohedo
Moto-he ha
Kimi wo omohi-de
Suwe-he ha
Imo wo omohi-de
Iranakeku
Soko ni omohi-de
Kanashikeku
Koko ni omohi-de
I-kirazu zo kuru
Adzusa-yumi ma-yumi
LII. ()

LIII. ()

LIV. ()

LV. ()

LVI. ()

LVII. ()

LVIII. ()

LIX. ()

LX. ()

Mimoro no
Sono Takaki naru

Ohowiko ga hara
Ohowiko ga hara ni aru
Kimo-mukafu
Kokoro wo dani ka
Ahi-omohazu aramu
LXI. ()

LXII. ()

LXIII. ()

LXIV. ()

LXV. ()

LXVI. ()

Medori no
Wa ga oho-kimi no

Orosu hata
Taga kane ro ka mo
LXVII. ()

LXVIII. ()

. ()

LXX. ()

LXXI. ()

LXXII. ()

LXXIII. ()

LXXIV. ()

LXXV. ()

LXXVI. ()

LXXVII. ()

LXXVIII. ()

LXXIX. ()

LXXX. ()

LXXXI. ()

LXXXII. ()

LXXXIII. ()

LXXXIV. ()

LXXXV. ()

LXXXVI. ()

Natsu-kusa no
Ahine no hama no

Kaki-gahi ni
Ashi fumasu na
Akashite tohore
LXXXVII. ()

LXXXVIII. ()

LXXXIX. ()

XC. ()

Kusaka-be no
Kochi no yama to

Tatami-komo
Heguri no yama no
Kochi-gochi no
Yama no kahi ni
Tachi-zakayuru
Ha-biro kuma-kashi
Moto ni ha
I-kumi-dake ohi
Suwe-he ni ha
Tashimi-dake ohi
I-kumi-dake
I-kumi ha nezu
Tashimi-dake
Tashi ni ha wi-nezu
Nochi mo kumi-nemu
Sono omohi-dzuma
Ahare
XCI. ()

XCII. ()

XCIII. ()

XCIV. ()

XCV. ()

Agura-wi no
Kami no mi te mochi

Hiku koto ni
Mahi suru womina
Toko-yo ni mo ka mo
XCVI. ()

XCVII. )

XCVIII. ()

Wotome no
I-kakuru woka wo

Kana-suki mo
I-hochi mo ga mo
Suki-banuru mono
XCIX. ()

C. ()

Yamato no
Kono takechi ni

Ko-dakaru
Ichi no tsukasa
Nibi-nahe-ya ni
Ohi-dateru
Ha-biro yu-tsu ma-tsubaki

So ga ha no
Hirori-i-mashi
So no hana no
Teri-i-masu
Taka-hikaru
Hi no mi ko ni
To-yo mi ki
Tate-matsurase
Koto no
Katari-goto mo
Ko wo ba
CI. ()

CII. ()

CIII. ()

CIV. ( and .)

CV. ( and .)

CVI. ( and .)

CVII. (.)

CVIII. ( and .)

CIX. (.)

CX. ()

CXI. ()

============================================================
APPENDIX 2
============================================================

---

---

 | |Accession. | Death. | Age. | Age accord. to
“Records.” | Age accord. to
“Chronicles.”
 |
660 (B.C.) | 585 (B.C.) | 127 | |137 | |127

581 | 549 | 84 | |45 | |80

548 | 511 | 57 | |49 | |57

510 | 477 | 77 | |45 | |77

 |
475 | 393 | 114 | |93 | |113

392 | 291 | 137 | |123 | |reigned 102 years

290 | 215 | 128 | |106 | | 76

214 | 158 | 116 | |57 | | 57

157 | 98 | 111 | |63 | | 60

97 | 30 | 119 | |168 | |120

29 | 70 (A.D.) | 141 | |153 | |140

71 (A.D.) | 130 | 143 | |137 | |106

131 | 190 | 108 | |95 | |107

192 | 200 | 52 | |52 | |52

201 | 269 | 100 | |100 | |100

270 | 310 | 111 | |130 | |110

313 | 399 | 110 | |83 | |reigned 87 years

400 | 405 | 67 | |64 | |70

406 | 411 | 60 | |60 | |reigned 6 years

412 | 453 | 80 | |78 | | 42

454 | 456 | 56 | |56 | | 3

457 | 479 | age omitted | |124 | | 23

480 | 484 | 41 | |not given | | 5

485 | 487 | age omitted | |38 | | 3

488 | 498 | 50 | |not given | | 11

499 | 506 | 18 | |reigned 8 years | | 8

507 | 531 | 82 | |43 | |82

534 | 535 | 70 | |not given | |70

536 | 539 | 73 |  |  | 73

540 | 571 | 63 |  |  | reigned 32 years

572 | 585 | 48 | |reigned 14 years | | 14

586 | 587 | 69 | | 3  | | 2

588 | 592 | 73 | | 4  | | 5

593 | 628 | 75 | | 37  | |75

---

---