Kore Kosmou (The Virgin of the World)
Hermes Trismegistus (attrib.); translated by G. R. S. Mead (1906)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Kore Kosmou ("The Virgin of the World," Stobaeus Phys. xli. 44–45) in G. R. S. Mead's English translation, extracted as a standalone text from Thrice-Greatest Hermes, vol. III (London: Theosophical Publishing Society, 1906), Excerpts XXV–XXVI, with Mead's notes. This 1906 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

EXCERPT XXV.

THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD [I .] 297

(Title in Patrizzi (p. 27b), in the Latin translation, “Minerva Mundi.” 2ys

Text: Stob., Phys., xli. 44, under heading: “From Thrice-Greatest Hermes’ Sacred
Book ‘The Virgin of the World’”; G. pp. 395-419; M. i. 281-298; W. i. 385-407.

Menard, Livre III., No. i. of “Fragments of the Sacred Book entitled ‘The Virgin of
the World, ”’pp. 177-200.)

1 . 299 SO speaking Isis doth pour forth for Horns the siveet draught (the
first j of deathlessness m which souls have custom to receive from Gods, and
thus begins her holiest discourse (logos):

Seeing that, Son Horns, Heaven, adorned with many a wreath [of starry
crowns], is set o’er every nature of [all] things beneath, and that nowhere it
lacketh aught of anything which the whole cosmos now doth hold, — in every
way it needs must be that every nature which lies underneath, should be co-
ordered and full-filled by those that lie above; for things below cannot of
course give order to the ordering above.

It needs must, therefore, be the less should give place to the greater mysteries.
The ordinance of the sublimer things transcends the lower; it is both sure in
every way and falleth death no mortal’s thought. Wherefore the [mysteries]
below did sigh, fearing the wondrous beauty and the everlasting durance of
the ones above,

297 Or “Apple of the Eye of the World” — see Commentary. Referred to as K. K., — i.e. Kogr] Koopou.

298 Curiously enough, though the page-headings throughout have “Minerva Mundi,” the heading of p. 28 still stands
“Pupilla Mundi” — showing that Patrizzi himself was puzzled how to translate the Greek, and had probably in the
first place translated it throughout “Pupilla Mundi,” or “Apple of the Eye of the World.” In his Introduction (p. 3),
however, Patrizzi writes: “But there is extant also another [book of Hermes] with the title of ‘The Sacred Book,’
which we found in Cyprus, in a monastery called Enclistra, at the same time as the rest of the books, and which John
Stobteus has inserted in his Physical Eclogues together with other fragments.” This would seem to suggest that
Patrizzi had seen the original Sermon, and that its main title was “The Sacred Book.”

299 I have numbered the paragraphs for convenience of reference.

300 to TigcoTov ctp(3goola?.

- 54 -

T. was worth the gaging] 01 and the pains to see Heaven’s beauty, beauty
that seemed like God, — God who was yet unknown, and the rich majesty
of Night, who weaves her web with rapid light 302 , though it be less than
Sun’s, and of the other mysteries 303 in turn that move in Heaven, with
ordered motions and with periods of times, with certain hidden influences 304
bestowing order on the things below and co-increasing them.

2. Thus fear succeeded fear, and searching search incessant, and for so long
as the Creator of the universals willed, did ignorance retain its grip on all,
Tut when He judged it fit to manifest Him who He is, He breathed into
the Gods the Hoves, and freely poured the splendouf 03 which He had
within His heart, into their minds, in ever greater and still greater measure;
that firstly they might have the wish to seek, next they might yearn to find,
and finally have power to win success as well. Tut this, my Horns, wonder-
worthy son, could never have been done had that seed 306 been subject to
death, for that as yet had no existence, but only with a soul that could
vibrate responsive to the mysteries of Heaven.

3. Such iv as all-knowing Hermes, who saw all things, and seeing
understood, and understanding had the power both to disclose and to give
explanation. For what he knew, he graved on stone; yet though he graved
them onto stone he hid them mostly, keeping sure silence though in speech,
that every younger age of cosmic time might seek for them. And thus, with
charge unto his kinsmen of the Gods to keep sure watch, he mounted to the
Stars.

To him succeeded Tat, who was at once his son and heir unto these
knowledges; and not long afterwards Asclepius-Imuth, according to the will
of Ptah who is Hephcestus 307 ’ , and all the rest who were to make enquiry of
the faithful certitude of heavenly contemplation, as Foreknowledge 308 willed,
Foreknowledge queen of all,

4. Hermes, however, made explanation to surrounding [space], how that
not even to his son (because of the yet newness of his youth) had he been
able to hand on the Pefect Vision. Tut when the Sun did rise for me, and

301 Or contemplation, Oswgia?.

302 Sc. The weft and warp of stars.

303 The planetary spheres.

304 anoQOica, or emanations. Cf. R. 16, n. 4, for the conflation of the pure Egyptian emanation doctrine with
astrological considerations.

30s Radiance or light.

306 Sc. the race of the Gods.

307 For the restored text, see R. 122.

308 Or Providence, tigovoia.

- 55 -

with all-seeing eyes I 309 ga^ed upon the hidden [mysteries] of that New
Dawn, and contemplated them, slowly there came to me — hut it was
sure — conviction that the sacred symbols of the cosmic elements were hid
away hard by the secrets of Osiris.

5. [Hermes], ere he returned to Heaven, invoked a spell on them, and
spake these words. (For ’tis not meet, my son, that I should leave this
proclamation ineffectual, hut [rather] should speak forth what words [our]
Hermes uttered when he hid his hooks away.) Thus then he said:

“O holy hooks, who have been made by my immortal hands, by
incorruption ’s magic spells, . . f 10 free from decay throughout eternity
remain and incorrupt from tune ! Become unseeable, unfmdable, for every
one whose foot shall tread the plains of this [our] land, until old Heaven
doth bring forth meet instruments for you, whom the Creator shall call
souls. ”

Thus spake he; and, laying spells on them by means of his own works, he
shuts them safe away in their own %ones. And long enough the time has
been since they were hid away. 311

6. And Nature, O my son, was barren, till they who then were under
orders to patrol the Heaven, approaching to the God of all, their Tang
reported on the lethargy of things. The time was come for cosmos to awake,
and this was no one’s task but His alone.

“We pray Thee, then, ” they said, “direct Thy thought to things which now
exist and to what things the future needs. ”

7. When they spake thus, God smiled and said: ‘Nature, arise!” And
from His ivord there came a marvel, feminine, possessed of pefect beauty,
gating at which the Gods stood all-amazed. And God the Forefather,
with name of Nature, honoured her, and bade her be prolific.

Then gating fixedly on the surrounding space, He spake these words as
well: “Fet Heaven be filled with all things full, and Air, and JFther too!
“God spake and it was so. And Nature with herself communing knew she
must not disregard the Sire’s command; so with the help of Toil she made a
daughter fair, whom she did call Invention. And on hef 12 God bestowed

309 The masculine is here used, the writer forgetting for the moment that he had assumed the person of Isis.

31,1 The text is here again hopeless. Meineke’s emendation ( Adnot ., p. cxxx.) ac, . . . tpappaxco %giaa? stunga-up — which
makes Hermes smear the books with some magical ointment — is ingenious, but hardly satisfactory, though
Wachsmuth adopts it.

311 This is purely conjectural; the text is utterly corrupt.

312 Sc. Invention.

- 56 -

the gift of being and with His gift He set apart all them that had been so-
far made ; filled them with mysteries, and to Invention gave the power of
ruling them.

8. But He, no longer willing that the world above should be inert, but
thinking good to fill it full of breaths, so that its parts should not remain
immotive and inert, He thus began on these 313 with use of holy arts as
proper for the bringing forth of His own special work.

For taking breath from His own Breath and blending this with knowing
Fire 314 , He mingled them with certain other substances which have no
power to know; and having made the two 3h — either with other — one, with
certain hidden words of power, He thus set all the mixture going
thoroughly; until out of the compost smiled a substance, as it were, far
subtler, purer far, and more translucent than the things from which it came;
it was so clear that no one but the Artist could detect it.

9. And since it neither thawed when fire was set unto it for it was made of
Fire), nor yet did freeze when it had once been properly produced for it was
made of Breath), but kept its mixture's composition a certain special kind,
peculiar to itself of special type and special blend, — (which composition,
you must know, God called Psychosis, after the more auspicious meaning of
the name and from the similarity of its behaviour 316 ) — it was from this
coagulate He fashioned souls enough in myriads 317 , moulding with order
and with measure the efflorescent product of the mixture for ivhat He
willed, with skilled experience and fitting reason, so that they should not be
compelled to differ any way one from another.

10. For, you must know, the efflorescence that exhaled out of the movement
God induced, was not like to itself. For that its first florescence was greater,
fuller, every way more pure, than was its second; its second was far second

313 Sc. the breaths or spirits.

314 TiUg vos gov — a term in frequent use subsequently among the Later Platonists; cf. Porphyry, ap. Euseb., Prop. Ev.,
XV. xi. 16.

315 Sc. the knowing and unknowing primal elements. Cf. P. S. A., vi.

316 The text is very involved and obscure, and the meaning of the writer is by no means clear. Psychosis ((Jju^cooig)
means either animation (quickening) or “making cold” (cf. ijiuxw an d t ] JU X (3w )> the name Psychosis is thus apparently
supposed by the writer to have some connection with the term EtJjuxs (“freeze,” or grow cold), which he has just
employed in his description of the behaviour of the mixture. In its less auspicious sense £ijiux s meant “grow cold”; in
its more auspicious meaning it signified “breathe.” But even so it must be said that the further reason (viz., similarity
of behaviour) given for the choice of the term Psychosis is the exact opposite of what is stated in the description of
the soul-stuff s nature; and this is all the more puzzling when we recall the theory of Origen and his predecessors
that the soul (4 | ux' 1 i) was so-called precisely because it had grown cold and fallen away from the Divine heat and life.
With the term cf. the ocopaTwoig of Exx. viii. 5, vii. 2.

317 Cf. Plato, Tim., 41: “He divided the whole mixture into souls equal in number to the stars, and assigned each soul
to a star.” So also Philo, who speaks of the souls as “equal in number to the stars ” — De Som., i. § 22; M. 642, P. 586
(Ri. iii. 244).

- 57 -

to the first, hut greater far than was its third 'f 8 And thus the total number
of degrees reached up to sixty. 319 In spite of this, in laying down the law,
He ordered it that all should be eternal, as though from out one essence, the
forms of which Himself alone could bring to their completion.

1 1 . Moreover, He appointed for them limits and reservations in the height
of upper Mature 320 , that they might keep the cylinder^ 21 a-whirl in proper
order and economy and [thus] might please their Sire. And so in that all-
fairest station of the Mther He summoned unto Him the natures of all
things that had as yet been made, and spake these words:

“O Souls, ye children fair of Mine own Breath and My solicitude, whom I
have now with My oivn Hands 322 brought to successful birth and consecrate
to My own world, give ear unto these words of Mine as unto laws, and
meddle not with any other space but that which is appointed for you by My
will.

‘Tor you, if ye keep steadfast, the Heaven, with the star-order, and thrones
I have ordained full-filled with virtue, shall stay as noiv they are for you;
but if ye shall in any way attempt some innovation contrary to My decrees,
I swear to you by My most holy Breath, and by this mixture out of which I
brought you into being, and by these Hands of Mine which gave you life 323 ,
that I will speedily devise for you a bond and punishments. ”

12. And having said these words, the God, who is my Hord, mixed the
remaining cognate elements (W ater and Earth 324 ) together, and, as before,
invoking on them certain occult words, words of great power though not so
potent as the first, He set them moving rapidly, and breathed into the
mixture power of life; and taking the coagulate (which like the other floated
to the top), when it had been well steeped and had become consistent, He
modelled out of it those of the [sacred] animals 325 possessing forms like unto
men ’s.

318 Cf. Plato, ibid.: “They [the souls] were not, however, pure as before, but diluted to the second and third degrees.

319 See § 56 below.

320 Of the Nature Above (Tfjg avw tpuaew?); f. the “Jerusalem Above” of the “Gnostics.” Cf. also Tim., 41 D: “And
having there [that is, among the stars] placed them as in a chariot, he showed them the nature of the universe, and
declared to them the laws of destiny, according to which their first birth should be one and the same for all, — no one
should suffer a disadvantage at his hands; they were to be sown in the instmments of time severally adapted to them,
and to come forth the most religious of animals; and as human nature was of two kinds, the superior race would
hereafter be called man.” With the last sentence, f. also 12 below.

321 Cf. P. S. A., xix.

322 Cf. § 31 below.

323 Cf. Hermes-Prayer, iii. 3, and note.

324 We have had previous mention of fire, (asther) and air, — the psychosis being the quintessence.

325 These are presumably the types of life in the upper world, symbolized by the zodiac.

- 58 -

The mixtures’ residue He gave unto those souls that had gone in advance
and had been summoned to the lands of Gods, to regions near the Stars,
and to the [choir of] holy da im ones. He said:

13. “My sons, ye children of My Nature, fashion things l Take ye the
residue of what My art hath made, and let each fashion something which
shall bear resemblance to his own nature. These will I further give to you as
models. ”

He took and set in order fair and fine, agreeably to the motions of the
souls, the world of sacred animals, appending as it were to those resembling
men those which came next in order ; and on these types of lives He did
bestow the all-devising powers and all-contriving procreative breath of all the
things which were for ever generally to be.

And He withdrew, with promises to join unto the visible productions of
their hands breath that cannot be seen 326 , and essence of engendering its like
to each, so that they might give birth to others like themselves. And these
are under no necessity to do aught else than what they did at first.

14. [And Horns asked:]

What did the souls do, mother, then ?

And Isis said:

Taking the blend of matter, Horus, son, they first looked at the Father’s
mixture and adored it, and tried to find out whence it was composed; but
this was not an easy thingfor them to know.

They then began to fear lest they should fall beneath the Father’s wrath for
trying to find out, and so they set to work to do what they were bid.

Thereon, out of the upper stuff which had its topmost layer superfluously
light, they formed the race of birds; while they were doing this the mixture
had become half-hardened, and by this time had taken on a firm
consistency — thereon they fashioned out the race of things which have four
feet; [ next they did fashion forth] the race of fish — less light and needing a
moist substance of a different kind to swim in; and as the residue was of a
cold and heavy nature, from it the Souls devised the race of creeping things.

15. They then, my son, as though they had done something grand, with
over-busy daring armed themselves, and acted contrary to the commands
they had received; and forthwith they began to overstep their proper limits

326 So Meineke in notes, following Cantor, — instead of the traditional “visible.”

- 59 -

and their reservations, and would no longer stay in the same place, hut were
for ever moving, and thought that being ever stationed in one place was
death.

That they would do this thing, however, O my son (as Hermes says when
he speaks unto me), had not escaped the Eye of Him who is the God and
Lord of universal things; and He searched out a punishment and bond, the
which they now in misery endure.

Thus was it that the Sovereign King of all resolved to fabricate with art the
human frame, in order that in it the race of Souls throughout might be
chastised.

16. ‘Then sending for me,” Hermes says, “He spake: ‘Soul of My Soul,
and holy mind of My oivn Mind 327 , up to what point, the nature of the
things beneath, shall it be seen in gloom ? How long shall what has up to
now been made remain inactive and be destitute of praise l Bring hither to
Me now, My son, all of the Gods in Heaven, ’ said God” — as Hermes
saith.

And when they came obedient to His command , — ‘Hook down, ” said He,
“upon the Earth, and all beneath. ” And they forthwith both looked and
understood the Sovereign’s will. And when He spake to them on human
kind’s behalf, they [all] agreed to furnish those who were to be, with
whatsoever thing they each could best provide.

17. Sun said: ‘Til shine unto my full, ”

Moon promised to pour light upon the after-the-sun course, and said she
had already given birth to Tear, and Silence, and also Sleep, and
Memory — a thing that ivould turn out to be most useful for them. 328

Cronus announced himself already sire of justice and Necessity.

Zeus said: “So that the race which is to be may not for ever fight, already
for them have I made Fortune, and Hope, and Peace. ”

Ares declared he had become already sire of Struggle, Wrath, and Strife.

Nor yet did Aphrodite hesitate; she also said: ‘Til join to them Desire, my
Eord, and Bliss, and Daughter [too], so that our kindred souls, in
working out their very grievous condemnation, may not exhaust their
punishment unto the full, ”

Full pleased were all, my son, at Aphrodite’s words.

327 Cf. Cyril, 15 (Frag. xvi.).

328 Cf. Plat. Crit, 108.

- 60 -

“And for my part,” said Hermes, “I will make men’s nature well
endowed; I will devote to them Prudence and Wisdom, Persuasiveness and
Truth, and never will I cease from congress with Invention, hut ever will I
benefit the mortal life of men horn underneath my types of life. 329 For that
the types our Father and Creator hath set apart for me, are types of
wisdom and intelligence, and more than ever [is this so] what time the
motion of the Stars set over them doth have the natural power of each
consonant with itself ”

18. And God, the Master of the universe, rejoiced on hearing this, and
o rdered that the race of men should he.

“I, ” Hermes says, “was see king for the stuff which had to he employed, and
calling on the Monarch for His aid. And He gave order to the Souls to
give the mixture’s residue; and taking it I found it utterly dried up.

‘ Thereon , in mixing it, I used more water far than was required to bring
the matter hack unto its former state, so that the plasm was in every way
relaxahle, and weak and powerless, in order that it might not, in addition
to its natural sagacity, he full of power as well,

“I moulded it, and it was fair; and I rejoiced at seeing mine own work, and
from below I called upon the Monarch to behold. And He did look on it,
and was rejoiced, and ordered that the Souls should he enfleshed.

‘Then were they first plunged in deep gloom, and, learning that they were
condemned, began to wail, . . 33 ° I was myself amazed at the Souls’
utterances. ”

19. Now give good heed, son Homs, for thou art being told the Mystic
Spectacle which Kamephis, our forefather, was privileged to hear from
Hermes, record-writer of all deeds, and I from Kamephis, most ancient of
[us] all, ivhen he did honour me with the Black [Rite] that gives perfection;
hear thou it now from met

Fo r when, O wondrous son of mighty fame, if they were about to he shut in
their prisons, some simply uttered wails and groans — in just the self-same
way as beasts that once have been at liberty, when torn from their
accustomed haunts they love so well, will be bad slaves, will fight and make
revolt, and be in no agreement with their masters; nay more, if circumstance
should serve, will even do to death those that oppress them. 331

329 Sc. “signs of the zodiac,” so-called.

330 There is a lacuna in the text, which I have thus conjecturally completed.

331 The reading of this sentence has not yet been properly emended, so that its translation is somewhat conjectural.

-61 -

Others with louder outcry hissed like snakes; another one shrieked shrilly,
and ere he spake shed many tears, and, turning up and down what things
served him as eyes, he said:

20. “O Heaven, thou source of our begetting, O /Ether, Air, O Hands
and holy Breath of God our Monarch, O ye most brilliant Stars, eyes of
the Gods, O tireless light of Sun and Moon, co-nurslings of our origin , —
reft from [you] all we suffer piteously.

“And this the more, in that from spacious realms of light, from out [thy]
holy envelope and wealthy dome, and from the blessed government we shared
with Gods, we shall be thus shut down into these honourless and lowly
quarters.

“What is the so unseemly thing we miserables have done ? What [crime]
deserves these punishments ? How many sins await us wretched ones? How
many are the things we have to do in this our hopeless plight, necessities to
furnish for this watery frame that is so soon dissolved?

21 . “For that no longer shall our eyes behold the souls of God; when
through such watery spheres as these we see our own forefather Heaven
grown small and tiny, we shall dissolve in sighs, — nay, there’ll be times we
shall not see at all 332 , for sentence hath been passed on us poor things; the
gift of real sight hath not been given to us, in that it hath not been
permitted us to see without the light. Windows they are, not eyes! 333

“How wretchedly shall we endure to hear our kindred breaths breathe in
the air, when we no longer shall be breathing with them ! For home, instead
of this great world high in the air, a heart’s small mass awaits us. Set
Thou us free from bonds so base as these to which we have sunk down, and
end our grief!

“O Ford, and Father, and our Maker, if so it be Thou hast thus quickly
grown indifferent unto the works of Thine own Hands, appoint for us some
limits ! Still deem us worthy of some words, though they be few, while yet we
can see through the whole world-order bright on every side!”

22. Thus speaking, Horns, son, the Souls gained their request; for that the
Monarch came, and sitting on the Throne of Truth made answer to their
prayers.

332 An Orphic verse has here crept into the text from the margin. It runs: “By light it is we see; by eyes we naught
behold.” Fragm. Monad., x., p. 504, Herm.

333 Cf. Plat., Men., 76; Seneca, Qucest. Nat, iv. 9.

- 62 -

“O Souls, Love and Necessity shall be jour lords 334 , thej who are lords
and marshals after Me of all, 335 Know, all of you who are set under My
unageing rule, that as long as ye keep you free of sin, ye shall dwell in the
fields of Heaven; but if some cause of blame for aught attach itself to you, ye
shall dwell in the place that Destiny allots, condemned to mortal wombs.

“If, then, the things imputed to your charge be slight, leaving the bond of
fleshly frames subject to death, ye shall again embrace your father]
Heaven, and sigh no more; but if ye shall commit some greater sins, and
with the end appointed of your frames be not advanced, no longer shall ye
dwell in Heaven, nor even in the bodies of mankind, but shall continue
after that to wander round in lives irrational, ” 336

23. Thus speaking^ Homs mine, He gave to all the gift of breath 337 , and
thus continued:

“It is not without purpose or by chance I have laid down the law of your
transforming^ '; but as [it will be] for the worse if ye do aught unseemly, so
for the better, if ye shall will what’s worthy of your birth.

“For I, and no one else, will be the Witness and the Watcher. Know, then,
it is for what ye have done heretofore, ye do endure this being shut in bodies
as a punishment.

“The difference in your rebirths, accordingly, for you, shall be as I have
said, a difference of bodies, and their final] dissolution [shall be] a benefit
and a [ return to] the fair happiness of former days.

“But if ye think to do aught else unworthy of Me, your mind shall lose its
sight so as to think the contrary [of what is true], and take the punishment
for benefit; the change to better things for infamous despite.

“But the more righteous of you, who stand upon the threshold of the change
to the diviner state, shall among men be righteous kings, and genuine
philosophers, founders of states, and lawgivers, and real seers, and true

334 Cf. Tim. 42 A: “When they should be implanted in bodies by necessity . . . they should have . . . sensation . . . and
love.”

335 Cf. Frag, xxiii.

336 Cf. Tim., 42 B: “He who lived well during his appointed time was to return and dwell in his native star, and there
he would have a blessed and congenial existence. But if he failed in attaining this, at the second birth, he would pass
into a woman, and if, when in that state of being, he did not desist from evil, he would be continually changed into
some brute who resembled him in the evil nature which he had acquired, and would not cease from his toils and
transformations until he followed the revolution of the ‘same’ and the ‘like’ within him, and overcame by the help of
reason the turbulent and irrational mob of later accretions, made up of fire and air and water and earth, and returned
to the form of his first and better state.” Notice the omission of any reference to the inferior status of woman in the
Egyptian tradition.

337 Lit. “their spirits” — which apparently link the souls with their bodies.

338 Reading fj.sxa(3oka?.

- 63 -

herb-knowers ', and prophets of the Gods most excellent ) skilful musicians,
skilled astronomers, and augurs wise, consummate sacrificers, — as many of
you as are worthy of things fair and good.

24. “Among winged tribes [they shall be] eagles, for these will neither scare
away their kind nor feed on them ; nay more, when they are by, no other
weaker beast will be allowed by them to suffer wrong for what will be the
eagles’ nature is too just [to suffer it].

“Among four-footed things [they will be] lions, — a life of strength and of a
kind which in a measure needs no sleep, in mortal body practising the
exercises of immortal life — for they nor weary grow nor sleep. 339

“And among creeping things [they will be] dragons, in that this animal
will have great strength and live for long will do no harm, and in a way be
friends with man, and let itself be tamed; it will possess no poison and will
cast its skin, 340 as is the nature of the Gods.

“Among the things that swim [they will be] dolphins; for dolphins will
take pity upon those who fall into the sea, and if they are still breathing
bear them to the land, while if they’re dead they will not ever even touch
them, though they will be the most voracious tribe that in the water dwells. ”

25. Thus speaking God became imperishable Mind. 341 Thereon, son
Horns, from the Earth uprose a very Mighty Spirit which no mass of body
could contain, whose strength consisted in his intellect. And though he knew
full well the things on which he questioned — the body with which man was
clothed according to his type, a body fair and dignified, yet savage overmuch
and full of fear — immediately he saw the souls were entering the plasms, he
cried out:

“What are these called, O Hermes, Writer of the Records of the Gods?”

And when he answered “Men!” — ‘Hermes,” he said, “it is a daring
work, this making man, with eyes inquisitive, and talkative of tongue, with
power henceforth to hear things even which are no concern of his, dainty of
smell, who will use to its full his power of touch on every thing.

339 Cf. Manetho, cited in the Orthography of Chceroboscus (Cramer, Anecd. Ox., ii. 235, 32; TElian, H. A., v. 39, who
follows Apion; R. 145, n. 3). But indeed this queer belief is a commonplace of the Mediaeval Bestiaries, which all go
back to their second century Alexandrian prototype, the famous Phjsiologus, which was doubtless in part based on
Aristotle’s Histor y of Animals and Pliny’s Natural Histoy.

34(1 Eaasi 8 e xai ytlgaaav. The reading is corrupt. But if we read yfjQa? for ytiganav, we have in the writer’s ornate and
somewhat strained style £&v yfiga? for the usual yflpa? ExSuveiv found in Aristotle (H. V., 5. 7. 10; 8. 17. 11) for the
changing of a serpent’s skin. The phrase “as is the nature of the Gods” may then be explained as referring to the
parallel between the anciently supposed rejuvenescence of the serpent and the perpetual growing young of the Gods.
341 Cf. C. H., i. 27: “This when he’d said, the Shepherd mingled with the powers.” Cf. Tim., 42 E: “When the Creator
had made all these ordinances He remained in His own accustomed nature.”

- 64 -

“ Hast thou, his generator ; judged it good to leave him free from care ; ivho
in the future daringly mil gasp upon the fairest mysteries which Nature
hath ? Wouldst thou leave him without a grief who in the days to come will
make his thoughts reach unto mysteries beyond the Earth ?

26. “Men will dig up the roots of plants, and will find out their juices’
qualities. Men will observe the nature of the stones. Men will dissect not
only animals irrational, but they’ll dissect themselves, desiring to find out
how they were made. They will stretch out their daring hands e’en to the
sea, and cutting self grown forests down will ferry one another o ’er to lands
beyond. [Men] will seek out as well the inner nature of the holy spaces
which no foot may tread, and will chase after them into the height, desiring
to observe the nature of the motion of the Heaven.

‘These are yet moderate things [which they will do]. For nothing more
remains than Earth ’s remotest realms; nay, in their daring they will track
out Night, the farthest Night of all.

27. ‘Naught have they, then, to stop them from receiving their initiation in
the good of freedom from all pain, and, unconstrained by terror’s grievous
goads, from living softly out a life free from all care.

‘Then will they not gird on the armour of an over-busy daring up to
Heaven ? Will they not, then, reach out their souls freed from all care unto
the [primal] elements themselves ?

‘Teach them henceforth to long to plan out something, where they have as
well to fear the danger of its ill-success, in order that they may be tamed by
the sharp tooth of pain in failure of their hopes.

“Let the too busy nature of their souls be balanced by desires, and fears,
and griefs, and empty hopes.

“Let loves in quick succession sway their souls, hopes, manifold desires,
sometimes fulfilled, and sometimes unfulfilled, that the sweet bait of their
success may draw them into struggle amid direr ills.

“Eet fever lay its heavy hand on them, that losing heart they may submit
desire to discipline. ”

28. Thou grievest, dost thou, Horns, son, to hear thy mother put these
things in words ? Art thou not struck with wonder, art thou not terror-
struck at how poor man was grievously oppressed ? Hear what is sadder
still!

- 65 -

When Momos said these things Hermes was pleased \ for ivhat he said was
said out of affection for him; and so he did all that he recommended \
speaking thus:

“Momos, the Nature of the breath Divine which doth surround [all
things] shall not become inert. The Master of the universe appointed me as
steward and as ?nanager.

“Wherefore the overseer of His co?mnand will be the keen-eyed Goddess of
the all, Adrasteia 342 ; and I will skilfully devise an instrument, mysterious,
possessed of power of sight that cannot err, and cannot be escaped, whereto
all things on earth shall of necessity be subject, from birth to final
dissolution, — an instrument which binds together all that’s done. This
instrument shall rule all other things on Earth as well [as man]. ”

29. These words, said Hermes, did I speak to Momos, and forthwith the
instrument ivas set a-going.

When this was done, and when the souls had entered in the bodies, and
[Hermes] had himself been praised for what was done, again the Monarch
did convoke the Gods in session. The Gods assembled, and once more did
He make proclamation, saying:

‘Ye Gods, all ye who have been made of chief est Nature, free from all
decay, who have received as your appointed lot for ever more to order out the
mighty TEon, through whom all universal things will never weary grow
surrendering themselves in turn the one to other, — how long shall we be
rulers of this sovereignty that none can ever know ? How long these things,
shall they transcend the power of sight of Sun and Moon ?

“Tet each of us bring forth according to his power. Het us by our oivn
energy wipe out this inert state of things; let chaos seem to be a ?nyth
incredible to future days. Set hand to mighty work; and I myself will first
begin. ”

30. He spake; straightway in cosmic order there began the differentiation of
the up-to-then black unity [of things]. And Heaven shone forth above
tricked out with all his mysteries; Earth, still a -tremble, as the Sun shone
forth grew harder, and appeared with all the fair adornments that bedeck
her round on every side. Tor beautiful to God are even things which men
think ?nean, in that in truth they have been made to serve the laivs of God.

342 Nemesis, the karmic deity, “she from whom none can escape, according to the generally accepted derivation of
the name.

- 66 -

And God rejoiced ivhen now He saw His works a-moving and ' filling full
His Hands, which held as much as all surrounding space, with all that
Nature had produced, and squeezing tight the handfuls mightily, He said:

“Take [these], O holy Earth, take those, all-honoured one, who art to be
the mother of all things, and henceforth lack thou naught!”

31. God spake, and opening His Hands, such Hands as God should
have, He poured them all into the composition of the world. And they in
the beginnings were unknown in every way; for that the Souls as newly shut
in prison, not enduring their disgrace, began to strive in emulation with the
Gods in Heaven, in full command of their high birth, and when held back,
in that they had the same Creator ; made revolt, and using weaker men as
instruments, began to make them set upon each other, and range themselves
in conflict, and make war among themselves.

Thus strength did mightily prevail o’er weakness, so that the strong did
burn and massacre the weak, and from the holy places down they cast the
living and the dead down from the holy shrines, until the Elements in their
distress resolved to go to God their Monarch [to complain] about the savage
state in which men lived.

The evil now being very great, the Elements approached the God who made
them, and formulated their complaint in some such words as these:

32. It was moreover Fire who first received authority to speak. He said:

“O Ford, Artificer of this new World, thou Name mysterious among the
Gods, and up to now revered by all mankind, how long hast Thou, O
Daimon, judged it right to leave the life of mortals without God?

“Show now Thyself unto Thy World consulting] 43 Thee; initiate the
savagery of life with peace; give laws to life; to right give oracles; fill with
fair hopes all things; and let men fear the vengeance of the Gods, and none
will sin.

“Should they receive due retribution for their sins, they will refrain
henceforth from doing wrong ; they will respect their oaths, and no one any
more will ponder sacrilege.

‘Eet them be taught to render thanks for benefits received, that I, the Fire,
may joyfully do sendee in the sacrificial rites, that they may from the altar
send sweet-smelling vapours forth.

343 Sc. as supplicants consulting an oracle.

- 67 -

“For up to now I am polluted, Ford; and by the godless daring of these
men I am compelled to burn up flesh. They will not let me be for what I
was brought forth; but they adulterate with all indecency my undecaying
state. ”

33. And Air too said:

“I also, Master, am made turbid by the vapours which the bodies of the
dead exhale, and I am pestilential, and, no longer filled with health, I gaye
down from above on things I ought not to behold. ”

Next Water, O my son of mighty soul, received authority to speak, and
spake and said:

“O Father, O wonderful Creator of all things, Daimon self born, and
Nature ’s Maker, who through Thee doth conceive all things, now at this
last, command the rivers’ streams for ever to be pure, for that the rivers and
the seas or wash the murderers’ hands or else receive the murdered. ”

34. After came Earth in bitter grief, and taking up the tale, O son of high
renown, thus she began to speak:

“O sovereign Ford, Chief of the Heavenly Ones, and Master of the
Wheels 344 , Thou Ruler of us Elements, O Sire of them who stand beside
Thee, from whom all things have the beginning of their increase and of their
decrease, and into whom they cease again and have the end that is their due
according to Necessity ’s decree, O greatly honoured One, the godless rout of
men doth dance upon my bosom.

“I hold in my embrace as well the nature of all things; for I, as Thou didst
give command, not only bear them all, but I receive them also when they ’re
killed. Rut now am I dishonoured. The world upon the Earth though filled
with all things [else] hath not a God.

‘ For having naught to fear they sin in everything, and from my heights, O
Ford, down [dead] they fall by every evil art. And soaking with the juices
of their carcases I’m all corrupt. Hence am I, Ford, compelled to hold in
me those of no worth. With all I bear I would hold God as well.

“Bestow on Earth, if not Thyself, for I could not contain Thee, yet some
holy Emanation 345 of Thyself. Make Thou the Earth more honoured than
the rest of Elements; for it is right that she should boast of gifts from Thee,
in that she giveth all. ”

344 Or disks, presumably the world-wheels.

345 nva isgav atioggoiav.

- 68 -

35. Thus spake the Elements; and God, fulfilling all things with the
sound of This [most] holy 1 Voice, spake thus:

“Depart, ye Holy Ones, ye Children worthy of a mighty Sire, nor yet in
any way attempt to innovate, nor leave the whole of [this] My World
without your active service.

‘Tor now another Efflux of My Nature is amongyou, and he shall be a
pious supervisor of all deeds — -judge incorruptible of living men and
monarch absolute of those beneath the earth, not only striking terror [into
them] but taking vengeance on them. And by his class of birth the fate he
hath deserved shall follow every man. ”

A nd so the Elements did cease from their complaint, upon the Master’s

0 rder ; and they held their peace; and each of them continued in the exercise
of his autho rity and in his rule.

36. And Horus thereon said:

How was it, mother, then, that Earth received God’s Efflux ?

And Isis said:

1 may not tell the story of [this] birth 346 ; for it is not permitted to describe
the origin of thy descent, O Horus, [son] of mighty power, lest afterwards
the way -of birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto men , —
except so far that God the Monarch, the universal Orderer and Architect,
sent for a little while thy mighty sire Osiris, and the mightiest Goddess Isis,
that they might help the world, for all things needed them.

Tis they who filled life full of life. Tis they who caused the savagery of
mutual slaughtering of men to cease. Tis they who hallowed precincts to the
Gods their ancestors and spots for holy rites. Tis they who gave to men
laws, food, and shelter.

Tis they who will, says Hermes, learn to know the secrets of my records all,
and will make separation of them; and some they will keep for themselves,
while those that are best suited for the benefit of mortal men, they will
engrave on tablet and on obelisk.

Tis they who were the first to set up courts of law; and filled the world with
justice and fair rule. Tis they who were the authors of good pledges and of
faith, and brought the mighty witness of an oath into men ’s lives.

346 Cf. C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 3 (Com.).

- 69 -

His they ivho taught men how to wrap up those who ceased to live >, as they
should be. 347

His they who searched into the cruelly of death, and learned that though the
spirit which goes out longs to return into men ’s bodies, yet if it ever fail to
have the power of getting back again, then loss of life results.

His they who learned from Hermes that surrounding space was filled with
daimons, and graved on hidden ston es [the hidden teaching].

His they alone who, taught by Hermes in God’s hidden codes, became the
authors of the arts, and sciences, and all pursuits which men do practise,
and givers of their laws.

His they who, taught by Hermes that the things below have been disposed
by God to be in sympathy with things above, established on the earth the
sacred rites o ’er which the mysteries in Heaven preside.

His they who, knowing the destructibility of [mortal] frames, devised the
grade of p rophets, in all things perfected, in order that no p rophet who
stretched forth his hands unto the Gods, should be in ignorance of anything
that magic and philosophy should feed the soul, and medicine preserve the
body when it suffered pain.

38. And having done all this, my son, Osiris and myself perceiving that the
world was [now] quite full, were thereupon demanded back by those who
dwell in Heaven, but could not go above till we had ?nade appeal unto the
Monarch, that surrounding space might with this knoivledge of the soul 1348
be filled as well, and we ourselves succeed in making our ascent acceptable
[to Him]. . . . For that God doth in hymns rejoice.

Ay, mother, Horns said. On me as well bestow the knowledge of this
hymn, that I ?nay not remain in ignorance.

And Isis said: Give ear, O son! 349

347 Sc. mummification.

348 fiecogla, contemplative science, face to face knowledge.

349 The Commentary begins at the end of the following excerpt.

- 70 -

EXCERPT XXVI.

THE VIRGIN OF THE WORLD [II.]

(Patrizzi (p. 32b) runs this on to the last without a break.

Text: Stob., Phys., ili. 45, under heading: “In the Same”; G. pp. 420-427; M. i. 299-
304; W.i. 407-414.

Menard; Livre III., No. ii. of “Fragment,” etc., as above, pp. 201-208.)

39. NOW if thou wouldst , O son of mighty soul, know aught beside, ask
on!

And Horns said: O mother of great honour, I mu Id know how royal souls
are born ?

And Isis said: Son Horns, the distinction which marks out the royal souls
is somewhat of this kind.

Four regions are there in the universe which fall beneath a law and
leadership which cannot be transgressed — Heaven, and the Hither, and the
Air, and the most holy Earth.

Above in Heaven, son, the Gods do dwell, o’er whom with all the rest doth
rule the Architect of all; and in the Hither [dwell] the Stars, o’er whom the
mighty Eight-giver the Sun holds sway; but in the Air [live] only souls 350 ,
o’er whom doth rule the Moon ; and on the Earth [do dwell] men and the
rest of living things, o ’er whom he who doth happen to be king holds sway.

40. The Gods engender, son, the kings it has desen’ed, to rule [the race]
that lives on Earth. The rulers are the emanations of the king, of whom the
nearer to him is more royal than the rest; for that the Sun, in that ’tis
nearer than the Moon to God, is far more vast and potent, to whom the
Moon comes second both in rank and power.

The king, then, is the last of all the other Gods, but first of men; and so
long as he is upon the Earth, he is divorced from his true godship, but hath
something that doth distinguish him from men and which is like to God.

The soul which is sent down to dwell in him, is from that space which is
above those regions whence [the souls] descend to other men. Down from
that space the souls are sent to rule for those two reasons, son.

35,1 MS. A adds “of daimones.”

-71 -

41 . They who have run a noble, blameless race throughout the cycle of their
lives, and are about to be changed into Gods, [are born as kings,] in order
that by exercise of kingship they ?nay train themselves to use the power the
Gods enjoy ; while certain souls who are already Gods, but have in some
slight way infringed the rule of life which God inspired, are born as kings,
in order that they may not, in being clothed in bodies, undergo the
punishment of loss of dignity as well as nature, and that they may not,
when they are enfleshed, have the same lot as other men, but have when
bound what they enjoyed when free.

42. The differences which are, however, in the dispositions shown by those
who play the part of kings, are not determined by distinguishing their souls,
for these are all divine, but by the constitution of the angels and the
daimons who attend on them. For that such souls as these descending for
such purposes do not come down without a guard and escort; for Justice up
above knows how to give to each what is its due estate e ’en though they be
made exiles from their county ever fair.

When, then, my son, the angels and the daimons who bring down the soul
are of a warlike kind, it has to keep firm hold of their proclivities,
forgetting its own proper deeds, but all the more remembering the doings of
the other host attached to it.

When they are peaceful, then the soul as well doth order its own course in
peace.

When they love justice, then it too defends the right.

When they are music-lovers, then it also sings.

And when they are truth-lovers, then it also doth philosophise.

For as it were out of necessity these souls keep a firm hold of the proclivities
of those that bring them here; for they are falling down to man’s estate,
forgetting their own nature, and the farther they depart from it, the more
they have in memoy the disposition of those [powers] which shut them [into
bodies].

43. Well hast thou, mother, all explained, said Horus. But noble souls , —
how they are born, thou hast not told me yet.

As on the Earth, son Horus, there are states which differ one from other,
so also is it in the case of souls. For they have regions whence they start;
and that which starts from a more glorious place, hath nobler birth than
one which doth not so. For just as among men the free is thought more

- 72 -

noble than the slave — (for that which is superior in souls and of a ruling
nature of necessity subjects what is inferior) — so also, son, . ... 351

44. And how are male and female souls produced ?

Souls, Homs, son, are of the selfsame nature in themselves, in that they
are from one and the same place where the Creator modelled them; nor male
nor female are they. Sex is a thing of bodies, not of souls.

That which brings it about that some of them are stouter ; some more
delicate, is, son, that [cosmic] “air” in which all things are made. “Air”
for the soul is nothing but the body which envelopes it, an element which is
composed of earth and ivater, air and fire. 352

As, then, the composition of the female ones has more of wet and cold, but
less of dry and warm, accordingly the soul which is shut in a plasm of this
kind, becomes relaxed and delicate, just as the contrary is found to be in
case of males.

For in their case there’s more of dry and warm, and less of cold and wet;
wherefore the souls in bodies such as these are sturdy and more active.

45. And how do souls become intelligent, O mother mine ?

And Isis answered:

The organ of the sight, my son, is swathed in wrappings. When these are
dense and thick, the eye is dim; but when they ’re thin and light, then is the
sight most keen. So is it also for the soul. For it as well has envelopes
incorporal appropriate to it, just as it is itself incorporal. These envelopes
are “airs” which are in us. When these are light and thin and clear, then is
the soul intelligent; but, on the contrary, when they are dense and thick and
turbid, then [the soul], as in bad weather, sees not at distance but only
things which lie about its feet.

46. And Homs said:

What is the reason, mother, that the men outside our holiest land are not
so wise of mind as our compatriots ?

And Isis said:

351 A lacuna, unfortunately, here occurs in the text, and must be of some extent, for the way of both of these souls is
not given.

352 Cf. 45 below.

- 73 -

The Earth lies in the middle of the universe upon her hack , like to a
human being, with eyes turned up to heaven, and portioned out into as
many regions as there are limbs in man.

She turns her eyes to Heaven as though to her own Sire 353 , that with his
changes she may also bring about her own.

She hath her head set to the south of all, right shoulder to south-east, left
shoulder to south-west; her feet below the Tear, right foot beneath its tail,
left under its head; her thighs beneath those that succeed the Tear; her waist
beneath the middle [Stars].

47. A sign of this is that men in the south, who dwell upon her head, are
fine about the head and have good hair.

Those in the east are ready for a fight and archer folk — -for this pertains to
the right hand.

Those in the west are steadier and for the most part fight with the left hand,
and what is done by others with the right, they for their part attribute to the
left.

Those underneath the Tear excel in feet and have especially good legs.

Those who come after them a little way, about the yme which is our present
Italy and Greece, they all have well-made thighs and backs. . . .

Moreover, all these [northern] parts being whiter than the rest bear whiter
men upon them.

Tut since the holiest land of our forebears lies in the midst of Earth, and
that the midst of a man ’s body serves as the precinct of the heart alone, and
heart's the spot from which the soul doth start, the men of it not only have
no less the other things which all the rest possess, but as a special thing are
gifted with intelligence beyond all men and filled with wisdom, in that they
are begotten and brought up above her heart.

48. Further, my son, the south being the receiver of the clouds which mass
themselves together from the atmosphere ... 3)4

For instance, it is just because there is this concentration of them in the
south, that it is said our river doth flow thence, upon the breaking up of the
frost there.

353 Cf. P. S. A., xxiv. 1.

354 Something has evidently fallen out here, as the sentence is nowhere completed.

- 74 -

For ivhensoe ’er a cloud 355 descends, it turns the air about it into mist, and
sends it downward in a kind of fog; and fog or mist is an impediment not
only to the eyes, but also to the mind.

Whereas the east, O Homs, great in glory, in that ’tis thrown into
confusion and made overhot by the continual risings of the sun, and in like
fashion too, the west, its opposite, in that it suffers the same things through
its descents, 356 afford the men born in them no conditions for clear
observation. And Boreas with his concordant cold, together with their
bodies doth congeal the minds of men as well.

Whereas the centre of all these being pure and undisturbed, foreknows both
for itself and all that are in it. For, free from trouble, ever it brings forth,
adorns and educates, and only with such weapons wars [on men], and wins
the victory, and with consummate skill, like a good satrap, 357 bestows the
fruit of its own victory upon the vanquished.

49. This too expound, O lady, mother mine ! For what cause is it that
when men still keep alive in long disease, their rational part — their very
reason and their very soul — at times becomes disabled?

And Isis answer made:

Of living things, my son, some are made friends with fire, and some with
water, some with air ; and some with earth, and some with two or three of
these, and some with all.

And, on the contrary, again some are made enemies of fire, and some of
water, some of earth, arid some of air, and some of two of them, and some
of three, and some of all.

For instance, son, the locust arid all flies flee fire ; the eagle and the hawk
and all highflying birds flee water; fish, air and earth; the snake avoids the
open air. Whereas snakes and all creeping things love earth; all swimming
things [love] water; winged things, air, of which they are the citizens; while
those that fly still higher [love] the fire and have their habitat near it. Not
that some of the animals as well do not love fire; for instance salamanders,
for they even have their homes in it. It is because one or another of the
elements doth form their bodies outer envelope.

353 Reading vecpeXt] for vecpeXr]. The text is very faulty.

356 These ideas of course spring from the conception of a flat earth and moving sun. The sun was thus thought to be
nearer the earth at its rising and setting, and consequently those at the extremes of east and west were thought to be
in danger of being burnt up by its heat.

357 Some historical allusion may perhaps be suspected in this term; but I can find nothing appropriate to suggest.

-75 -

50. Each soul, accordingly, while it is in its body is weighted and
constricted by these four. Moreover it is natural it also should be pleased
with some of them and pained with others.

For this cause, then, it doth not reach the height of its prosperity; still, as it
is divine by nature, e’en while [wrapped up] in them, it struggles and it
thinks, though not such thoughts as it would think were it set free from
being bound in bodies.

Moreover if these frames] are swept with storm and stress, or of disease or
fear, then is the soul itself tossed on the waves, as man 358 upon the deep
with nothing steady under him.

COMMENTARY

ARGUMENT

1 . The “Virgin of the World” is a sacred sermon of initiation into the Hermes-lore,
the first initiation, in which the tradition of the wisdom is handed on by the
hierophant to the neophyte, by word of mouth. The instructor, or revealer, is the
representative of Isis-Sophia, and speaks in her name, pouring forth for her
beloved son, the new-born Horns, the first draught of immortality, which is to
purge away the poison of the mortal cup of forgetfulness and ignorance, and so
raise him from the “dead.”

This pouring-forth explains that the divine economy is perfect order, mystery
transcending mystery, — each state of being, and each being, a mystery to those
below that state.

This order no mortal intellect can ever grasp; nay, in the far-off ages, when as yet
there were no men, but only Gods, those essences that know no death, the first
creation of the World-creator, — even these Gods, these mysteries to us, were in
amazement at the glories of the greater mysteries which decked the Heaven with
their unveiled transcendent beauty. Even these Gods did not know God as yet.

2. The Gods were immortal, but unknowing; they were intoxicated with Heaven’s
beauty, amazed, nay awestruck, at the splendour of the mysteries of Heaven. Then
came there forth another outpouring of the Father over all; He poured the
Splendour of His Mind into their hearts and they began to know. 359

With this representation is blended a mythical historical tradition which suggests
that all this was brought about for an “earth” on which our humanity had not as yet
appeared, in far-off distant days when apparently our earth was not as now, ages
ago, the purest Golden Age when there were Gods, not men. In that race of Gods,

358 For av0gw7io? Meineke reads av0sgixo? (“asphodel”), and compares Callimachus, H. in Del., 193: TtaXipgoifl
gravy/stai av0sgixo? at?. But I see no necessity for this strained “emendation.”

359 The arising of the knowledge of God among the Gods, and the gradual descent of this knowledge down to man,
reminds us somewhat of the method of the descent of the “Gospel” in the system of Basilides.

- 76 -

those of them in whom the ray was no low-burning spark, but a divine flame, were
the instructors in the heavenly wisdom.

3. Of these was Hermes, a race or “being” rather than an individual; these “Sons of
Fire” left the record of their wisdom engraved on “stone” in symbol, in charge of
others of the same race but less knowing than themselves; and so they ascended to
Heaven.

4. Those that succeeded them had not the flame so bright within their hearts; they
were of the same race, but younger souls — the Tat-race. Hermes could not hand on
the direct knowledge to them, the “perfect sight” (Gsoopioc), and so recorded the
wisdom in symbol and myth. Still later the Asclepius-race joined themselves to the
Tat-souls.

All this, however, took place many many ages ago, long even before the days of the
men-gods Osiris and Isis; for the real wisdom of Hermes was so ancient that even
Isis herself had had to search out the hidden records, and that too by means of the
inner sight, when she herself had won the power to see, and the True Sun had risen
for her mind.

5. But the strain of reconstructing the history of this far-distant past, as he
conceived it to have been, is too much for the writer. He knows he is dealing with
“myths,” with what Plutarch would have called the “doings of the daimones;” he
knows that in reality these primaeval “Books” of Hermes have no longer any
physical existence, if indeed they ever had any; he knows that no matter what
legends are told, or whatever the general priesthood may believe about ancient
physical inscriptions of the primaeval Hermes, — all this has passed away, and that
the real wisdom of Hermes is engraved on the tablets of the asther, and not hidden
in the shrines of earth.

The “Books” are engraved in the “sacred symbols of the cosmic elements,” and
hidden away hard by the “secrets of Osiris” — the mysteries of creative fire, the
light that speaks in the heart. The true Books of Hermes are hidden away in their
own zones, the pure elements of the unseen world — the celestial Egypt.

6. This wisdom was held in safe keeping for the “souls” of men; it was a soul-
gnosis, not a physical knowledge. Hereupon the writer begins the recital of his
tradition 360 of the creation of the “souls” of men in their unfallen state, all of which
is derived from the “Books of Hermes.” The soul-creation runs as follows:

The Watchers 361 approach the Creator. The hour has struck for a new Cosmic
Dawn, for a new Day. The time has come for Cosmos to awake after the Night. 362
The Creative Mind of the universe turns His attention, His thought, to a new phase
of tilings, a new world-period.

36 ° Q r j-ather apocalypse; see § 15: “As Hermes says when he speaks unto me.”

361 Cf. the Egregores of The Book of Enoch-, see Charles’ Translation (Oxford; 1893), Index, under “Watchers.”

362 The new Manvantara following a periodical Pralaya, to use the terms of Indo-Aryan tradition.

- 77 -

7. God smiled, and His laughter thrilled through space, 363 and with His Word,
called forth into the light the new dawn from out the primaeval darkness of the new
world-space. His first creation, transcendental or intelligible Nature, stood before
Him, in all the marvel of her new beauty, the primal pleroma, or potential fullness,
of the new universe or system, the ideal cosmos of our world, for there were many
others, — the Gods who marvelled at the mystery.

Straightway this Nature fell from one into three, herself and Toil and their fairest
child Invention, to whom God gave the gift of being, themselves producing ideal
form alone.

The first creation, then, was the bringing forth of potencies and types and ideas, to
whom God gave the gift of being; it was as yet the world “above,” the primaeval
Heaven, in ultimate perfection, thus constituting the unchanging boundaries of the
new universe that was to be. These things-that-are were filled with “mysteries,” not
“breaths” or “lives,” for these were not as yet.

8. The next stage is the breathing of the spiritual (not the physical) breath of lives
into the fairest blend of the primal elements that condition the world-area. This
blend or soul- sub stance is called psychosis. The primal elements were not our mixed
earth, water, fire, and air, but “knowing fire” (perhaps “fire in itself,” as Hermes
elsewhere calls it, or intelligible fire, perchance the “flower of fire” of the so-called
“Chaldasan Oracles” 364 ) and unknowing air, if we may judge from the phrase (7):
“Let heaven be filled with all tilings full, and air and aether [? = fire] too!” It is
Heaven or the ideal world that is so filled; even earth-water was not yet manifested,
much less earth and water.

It seems, then, that these souls (souls corresponding above with the subsequent
man-stage below) were a blend of the three: spirit, knowing fire, and unknowing
air, — triads, yet a unity called psychosis.

9. They were moreover all essentially equal, but differed according to some fixed
law of numbering; they were also apparently definite in number, one soul
perchance for every star, as with Plato, according to the law of similarity of less and
greater, of within and without.

10. These souls, then, were “sacred (or typical) men,” a creation prior to that of the
“sacred animals”; their habitat was in Upper Nature, the “all-fairest station of the
:et her” — the celestial cosmos.

1 1 . They were appointed to certain stations and to the task of keeping the “wheel
revolving,” — that is, as we shall see, they were to fashion forms for birth and death,
and so provide means of transmission for the life-currents ever circulating in the
great sphere. This was their appointed task, the law imposed on them, as obedient
children of the Great King, their sire. So long as they kept their appointed stations
they were to live for ever in surroundings of bliss and beauty, in full contemplation

363 The creation is figured in one Egyptian tradition as the bursting forth of the Creator into seven peals of
laughter, — a sevenfold “Ha!”

364 Cf. the “florescence” of § 10.

- 78 -

of the glories of the greater universe, throned amid the stars. But if they disobeyed
the law, bonds and punishment await them.

12. We next come to a further creation of souls — a subject somewhat difficult to
follow. These souls are of an inferior grade to the preceding, for they are composed
of the primal water and earth, of “water in itself’ and “earth in itself’ we must
suppose, and not of the compound elements we now call by these names. These
are the souls of certain “sacred animals” or lives, which bear the same relationship
to the souls which “keep the wheel revolving” as animals do to man on eardi. They
are, however, not shaped like the animals on earth, nor possess even typical animal
forms, but bear the forms of men, though they are not men.

13. Still was the divine “water-earth” substance unexhausted, and so the residue
was handed over to “those souls that had gone in advance and had been
summoned to the land of Gods,” — that is to say, those stations near the Gods, in
highest tether, of which mention has just been made. These souls are, of course, the
man-souls proper.

Out of this residue these Builders were to fashion animals, after the models the
Creator gave them, — certain types of life, below the “man” type proper, ranged in
due order corresponding to the “motions of the souls.” That is to say, there were
various classes of Builders according to the types of animals which were to be
copied. The Builders were to fashion the forms, the Creator was to breathe into
them the life.

14. Thus these Builders fashioned the etheric doubles of birds, quadrupeds, fish
and reptiles, and not their physical bodies, for as yet the earth was not solid.

15. And so the Builder-souls accomplished their task, and fashioned the primaeval
copies of the celestial types of animals. Proud of their work, they grew restive at the
restraints placed upon them by the law of their stations, and overstepped the limits
decreed by the Creator. 161

Whereupon the punishment is pronounced, and the Creator resolves to make the
human frame, therein to imprison the disobedient souls.

And here we learn incidentally that all of this psychogenesis which has gone before
was the direct teaching of Hermes to the writer; of no physical Hermes, however,
but of that Hermes whose “Books” are hidden in the zones (5), of the Hermes
whom the writer, as he would have us believe, came to know face to face only after

365 Cf. the same idea as expressed by Basilides (ap. Hipp., Philos., vii. 27), but in reversed order, when, speaking of
the consummation of the world-process, and the final ascension of the “Sonship” with all its experience gained from
union with matter, he says of the remaining souls, which have not reached the dignity of the Sonship, that the Great
Ignorance shall come upon them for a space.

“Thus all the souls of this state of existence, whose nature is to remain immortal in this state of existence alone,
remain without knowledge of anything different from or better than this state; nor shall there be any rumour or
knowledge of things superior in higher states, in order that the lower souls may not suffer pain by striving after
impossible objects, just as though it were fish longing to feed on the mountains with sheep, for such a desire would
end in their destruction. All things are indestructible if they remain in their proper condition, but subject to
destmction if they desire to overleap and transgress their natural limits” (F. F. F, p. 270).

- 79 -

his inner vision was opened, and he had gazed with all-seeing eyes “upon the
mysteries of that new dawn” (4).

16. For the new and mysterious fabrication of the man- form, all the seven obedient
Gods, to whom the man-souls are kin (17), are summoned by the chief of them,
Hermes himself, the beloved son and messenger of the Supreme, “soul of My Soul,
and holy mind of My own Mind.” 366

17. All of the seven promise to bestow the best they have on man.

18. The plasm out of which the man-form is to be modelled is the residue of the
mixture out of which the Builders had already made the animal doubles. But the
Builder of the man-frames was Hermes himself, who mixed the plasm with still
more water.

1 9. Here the writer inserts a further piece of information concerning the source of
his tradition. It is no longer as before what Hermes himself reveals to him in vision,
but what the writer was told at a certain initiation called the “Black Rite.” This rite
was presided over by Kamephis, who is called the “earliest of all,” or perhaps more
correcdy the “most primaeval of [us] all.” Kamephis is thus conceived as the
representative of a more ancient wisdom than that of Isis, and yet even he but
hands on the tradition of Hermes. 367

20. The souls are “enfleshed,” and utter loud complaints. Apparently not all at first
can speak articulately; most of them can only groan, or scream, or hiss. The leading
class of souls can, however, so far dominate the plasm as to speak articulately, and
so one of their number utters a desperate appeal to Heaven.

21. They have now lost their celestial state, and Heaven is shut away from them; no
longer can they see “without the light.” They are shut down into a “heart’s small
compass”; the Sun of their being has become a light-spark only, hidden in the
heart. This is, of course, the logos, the inmost reality in man.

22. The souls pray for some amelioration of their unhappy lot, and the conditions
of the moral law are expounded to them. They who do rightly shall, on their body’s
dissolution, reascend to Heaven and be at rest; they who do ill, shall work out their
redemption under the law of metempsychosis, or change from body to body, from
prison to prison.

23. Details of this metempsychosis are then given with special reference to the
incarnations of the “more righteous,” who shall be kings, philosophers and
prophets. Such souls apparently, for it is not expressly so stated, shall, in passing
round the wheel of rebirth, when out of incarnation in a human body, have some
sort of life with the souls of the leading types of animals, which are given as eagles,
lions, dragons, and dolphins. Or, if we are unjustified in this speculation, such souls
shall in their animal parts have intimate relation with the noblest types of animal
essence (24).

366 Cf. Cyril, C.Jul., i. 35; Frag. xvi.

367 Cf. §§ 29 and 37.

- 80 -

25. There now comes upon die scene die mighty Intellect of the Earth, a veritable
Erdgeist, in the form of Momus, who speaking out of affection for him (28), urges
Hermes to increase ills and trials upon the souls of men, so that they shall not dare
too much (25-27). And thereon Hermes sets in motion the instrument or engine of
unerring fate and mechanical retribution (28, 29).

29. Now all these things took place at the dawn of earth-life, when all as yet was
inert, as far as our now solid earth is concerned. We must then suppose that as yet
our present phase of existence on earth had not yet been manifested; that all was as
yet in a far subtler or more primitive state of existence, when earth was still all “a-
tremble,” and had not yet hardened to its present state of solidity; — that is to say,
that the man-plasm was in an etheric state (30).

31. The earth gradually hardens. Into the now more solid earth, the Creator and
His obedient sons, the Gods who had not made revolt, poured forth the blessings
of nature. This is described by the beautiful symbol of the hands of blessing,
figured in Egypt as the sun-rays, each terminating in a hand for giving light and
life. 368

The imprisoned souls, the kinsmen of the Gods obedient, continue their revolt;
they are the leaders of mankind, of a mankind far weaker than themselves, a
humanity, apparently evolved normally from the nature of tilings and as yet in its
childhood. Instead of teaching them the lessons of love and wisdom, the
Disobedient Ones use them for evil purposes, for war and conflict, for oppression
and savagery.

32. Things go from bad to worse; the earth is befouled with the horrors of savage
man, until in despair the pure elements complain to God. They pray that He will
send a holy emanation of Himself to set things right (32-34).

35. Hereupon God sends forth the mystery of a new birth, a divine descent, or
emanation, an avatara , as the Aryan Hindu tradition would call it, a dual
manifestation. 369 And so Osiris and Isis are born to help the world, to recall men
from savagery, and restore the moral order (35-37).

It was they who were taught directly by Hermes (37) in all law and science and
wisdom. Their mission meets with success, and the “world” is filled with a
knowledge of the Path of Return. But before their ascension into Heaven they have
a petition to make to the Father, that not only earth but also the surrounding
spaces up to Heaven itself may be filled with a knowledge of the truth. Thus then
they proceed to hymn the Sire and Monarch of all in a praise-giving which,
unfortunately, Stobasus did not think fit to copy.

The original text of the “Virgin of the World” treatise is obviously broken only by
the omission of the Hymn of Osiris and Isis, and Excerpt ii. follows otherwise

368 Cf. Hermes-Prayer, iii. 3.

369 This is of special interest as showing how the Egyptian tradition, in this pre-eminent above all others, did not limit
the manifestation to the male sex alone.

- 81 -

immediately on Excerpt i. The subject is the birth of royal souls, taken up from the
instruction given in K. K., 23, 24 above.

39. There are four chief spaces: (i) Invisible Heaven, inhabited by the Gods, with
the Invisible Sun as lord of all; (ii) fEther, inhabited by the Stars, of which for us the
Sun is leader; (iii) Air, in which dwell non-incarnate souls, ruled by the Moon, as
watcher o’er the paths of genesis; (iv) Earth, inhabited by men and animals, and
over men the immediate ruler is the Divine King of the time.

40. The king-soul is the last of the Gods but the first of men’ 70 ; he is, however, on
earth a demigod only, for his true divinity is obscured. His soul, or ka, comes from
a soul-plane superior to that of the rest of mankind.

The ascending souls of normally evolving humanity are thought of, apparently, as
describing ever widening circles in their wheelings in and out of incarnation, rising,
as they increase in virtue and knowledge, at the zenith of their ascent in the
intermediate state, before they turn to descend again into rebirth, ever nearer to the
limits of the sensible world and, the frontiers of Heaven.

41. But there is also another class of descending royal souls, who have only slightly
transgressed, and therefore descend only as far as this grade of humanity.

42. For the royal or ruling soul is not only a warrior monarch; his sovereignty may
be also shown in arts of peace. He may be a righteous judge, a musician or poet, a
truth-lover or philosopher. The activities of these souls are not determined, as is
the case with souls of lower grades, — that is, those souls which have fallen deeper
into material existence, — by what Basilides would have called the “appendages” of
the animal nature; they are determined by a fairer taxis , an escort of angels and
daimones, who accompany them into birth.

43. The description of their manner of birth, however, is, unfortunately, lost to us,
owing either to the hesitation of Stobasus to make it public, or to its being cut out
by some subsequent copyist.

44. We are next told that sex is no essential characteristic of the soul. It is an
“accident” of the body, but this body is not the physical, but the “aery” body,
which air, however, is not a simple element, but already differentiated into four
sub-elements.’ 71

45. Moreover the sight, or intelligence, of the soul also depends upon the purity of
certain envelopes, which are called “airs,” — “airs” apparently more subtle even
than the aery body (45). 372

46. Next follows a naive reason for the excellence of Egypt and the wisdom of the
Egyptians (46-48). Here the writer seems to be no longer dependent directly on the
Trismegistic tradition, but is inserting and expanding popular notions.

370 Cf C. H, xviii. 8 ff.

371 The “spirituous” or “aery” body, or vehicle, is composed of the sub-elements, but in it is a predominance of the
sub-element “air,” just as in the physical there is a predominance of “earth.” — Philoponus, Proam. in Aristot. de
Amma\ see my Orpheus (London, 1896), “The Subtle Body,” pp. 276-281. Cf. also S. I. H., 15, 20.

372 Compare this with the prana’s of Indian theosophy; see C. H., x. (xi.) 13, Comment.

- 82 -

49. The remaining sections of the Excerpt are taken up with speculations as to the
cause of delirium (49, 50), and Stobasus brings his extract to a conclusion
apparently without allowing the writer to complete his exposition.

SOURCES?

The discussion as to the meaning of the title, which has so far been invariably
translated “The Virgin of the World,” will come more appropriately later on.

How much of the original treatise has been handed on to us by S to He us we have
no external means of deciding. Our two Extracts, however, plainly stand in
immediate connection with each other, and the original text is broken only by the
unfortunate omission of the Hymn of Osiris and Isis. The first Extract, moreover,
is plainly not the beginning of the treatise, since it opens with words referring to
what has gone before; while the second Extract ends in a very unsatisfactory
manner in the middle of a subject.

What we have, however, gives us some very interesting indications of how the
writer regarded his sources, — whether written or oral, whether physical or psychic.
He of course would have us take his treatise as a literary unity; and indeed the
subject is so worked up that it is very difficult to discover what the literary sources
that lay before the writer may have been, for the story runs on straight enough in
the same thought-mould and literary form, in spite of the insertion of somewhat
contradictory statements concerning the sources of information.

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 136) expressly states that the creation-story shows
indubitable traces of two older forms, and that this is not a matter of surprise, as
we find two (or more precisely four) different introductions, — we are not able
entirely to follow him. It is true that these introductory statements are apparently at
variance, but on further consideration they appear to be not really self-
contradictory.

THE DIRECT VOICE AND THE BOOKS OF HERMES

The main representation is that the teacher of Isis is Hermes, who saw the world-
creation, that is, the creation of our earth-system, and the soul-making, with his
own spiritual sight (2). Isis has obtained her knowledge in two ways: either from
the sacred Books of Hermes (4, 5); or by the direct spiritual voice of the Master
(15). The intention here is plainly to claim the authority of direct revelation, for
even the Books are not physical. They have disappeared, if indeed they ever were
physical, and can only be recovered from the tablets of unseen nature, by ascending
to the zones (5) where they are hidden; and these zones are plainly the same as the
soul- spaces mentioned in S. I. H., 8.

At the same time there is mention of another tradition, which, though in later
details purporting to be historic and physical, in its beginnings is involved in purely
mythological and psychic considerations. When the first and most ancient Hermes
ascended to Heaven, he left his Books in the charge of the Gods, his kinsmen, in
the zones, and not on earth (3). On earth there succeeded to this wisdom a younger

- 83 -

race, beloved of Hermes, and personified as his son Tat. These were souls as yet
too young to understand the true science face to face. They were apparently
regarded as the Tat (Thoth) priesthood of our humanity, who were subsequently
joined by wisdom-lovers of another line of tradition, the Imuth (Asclepius)
brotherhood, who had their doctrine originally from Ptah. 3 This seems to hint at
some ancient union of two traditions or schools of mystic science, perhaps from
the Memphitic and Thebaic priesthoods respectively. 374

What, however, is clear is that the writer professes to set forth a higher and more
direct teaching than either the received tradition of the Isiac mystery-cult or of the
Tat- Asclepius school. This he does in the person of Isis as the face to face disciple
of the most ancient Hermes 375 , 3 thus showing us that in the Hermes-circles of the
Theoretics, or those who had the direct sight, though the Isis mystery-teaching was
considered a tradition of the wisdom, it was nevertheless held to be entirely
subordinate to the illumination of the direct sight.

KAMEPHIS AND THE DARK MYSTERY

In apparent contradiction to all this we have the following statement: “Now give
good heed, son Horns, for thou art being told the mystic spectacle which
Kamephis, our forefather, was privileged to hear from Hermes, the record-writer of
all deeds, and I from Kamephis when he did honour me with the Black [Rite] that
gives perfection” (19). 376

Here Reitzenstein (p. 137) professes to discover the conflation of two absolutely
distinct traditions of (i) Kamephis, a later god and pupil of Hermes, and (ii)
Kamephis, an older god and teacher of Isis; but in this I cannot follow him. It all
depends on the meaning assigned to the words Tiocqa xoti tiocvtcov nQoysvsozeQou,
which Reitzenstein regards as signifying “the most ancient of all [gods],” but which
I translate as “the most ancient of [us] all.”

I take it to mean simply that, according to the general Isis -tradition, the founder of
its mysteries was stated to be Kamephis, but that the Isis-Hermes circles claimed
that this Kamephis, though truly the most ancient figure in the Isis tradition
proper, was nevertheless in his turn the pupil of the still more ancient Hermes.

The grade of Kamephis was presumably represented in the mystery-cult by the
arch-hierophant who presided at the degree called the “Dark Mystery” or “Black

373 Cf. Diog. Laert., Proam., i.: “The Egyptians say that Hephasstus (Ptah) was the son of Neilus (the Nile), and that he
was the originator of philosophy, of that philosophy whose leaders are priests and prophets” — that is to say, a mystic
philosophy of revelation.

374 Thus Suidas ( s.v . “Ptah”) says that Ptah was the Hephasstus of the Memphite priesthood, and tells us that there
was a proverbial saying current among them: “Ptah hath spoken unto thee.” This reminds us of our text: “As
Hermes says when he speaks unto me.”

375 The type of Isis as utterer of “sacred sermons,” describing herself as daughter or disciple of Hermes, is old, and
goes back demonstrably to Ptolemaic times. R. 136, n. 4; 137, n. 1.

376 ohot’ EfJLE nod t<S xeksiffl psXavi £ti(jiy]aev. This has hitherto been always supposed by the philological mind simply
to refer to the mysteries of ink or writing, and that too without any humorous intent, but in all portentous solemnity.
We must imagine, then, presumably, that it refers to the schooldays of Isis, when she was first taught the Egyptian
equivalents for pothooks and hangers. This absurdity is repeated even by Meineke.

- 84 -

Rite.” It was a rite performed only for those who were judged worthy of it
(8xt[X7]asv) after long probation in lower degrees, something of a far more sacred
character, apparently, than the instruction in the mysteries enacted in the light.

I would suggest, therefore, that we have here a reference to the most esoteric
institution of the Isiac tradition, the more precise nature of which we will consider
later on; it is enough for the moment to connect it with certain objects or shows
that were apparently made to appear in the dark. As Clement of Alexandria says in
his famous commonplace book, called the Stromateu 7 '

“It is not without reason that in the mysteries of the Greeks, lustrations hold the
first place, analogous to ablutions among the Barbarians [that is, non-Greeks].
After these come the lesser mysteries, which have some foundation of instruction
and of preliminary preparation for what is to follow; and then the great mysteries,
in which nothing remains to be learned of the universe, but only to contemplate
and comprehend nature [herself] and the tilings [which are mystically shown to the
initiated].” 378

KNEPH-KAMEPHIS

But who was Kamephis in the theology of the Egyptians? According to
Reitzenstein, Kamephis or Kmephis, that is Kmeph, is equated by Egyptologists
with Kneph, who, according to Plutarch 379 , was worshipped in the Thebaid as the
ingenerable and immortal God. Kneph, however, as Sethe has shown 380 , is one of
the aliases of Ammon, who is the “bull [or husband] of his mother,” the “creator
who has created himself.” Kneph is, moreover, the Good Daimon, as Philo of
Byblus says. 381 He is the Sun-god and Heaven-god Ammon.

“If he open his eyes, he filleth all with light in his primaeval ’ 8- land; and if he close
them all is dark.” 383

377 The more correct title of this work should be “Gnostic Jottings (or Notes) according to the True Philosophy,” as
Clement states himself and as has been well remarked by Hort in his Ante-Nicene Fathers, p. 87 (London, 1895).

378 Op. tit., v. 11 . Sopater (Dist. Qnast., p. 123, ed. Walz) speaks of these as “figures” (ayf](juxxa), the same expression
which Proclus (In Flat. Rep., p. 380) employs in speaking of the appearances which the Gods assume in their
manifestations; Plato ( Phadr ., p. 250) calls them “blessed apparitions,” or beatific visions” (suSalpova tpaapaxa); the
author of the Fpinon/is (p. 986) describes them as “what is most beautiful to see in the world”; these are the “mystic
sights” or “wonders” (puaxixa Osapaxa) of Dion Chrysostom ( Orat ., xii., p. 387, ed. Reiske); the “holy appearances”
(ayia cpocvxaajjuxxa) and “sacred shows” (isga Seixvupeva) of Plutarch (Wyttenbach, Fragm., vi. 1, t. v., p. 722, and De
Project. Virtut. Sent., p. 81, ed. Reiske); the “ineffable apparitions” (aggt]xa tpaapaxa) of Aristides (Orat., xix. p. 416,
ed. Dindorf); the “divine apparitions” (Osta tpaapaxa) of Himerius (Eclog., xxxii., p. 304, ed. Wemsdorf), — those
sublime sights the memory of which was said to accompany the souls of the righteous into the after-life, and when
they returned to birth. Cf. Lenormant (F.) on “The Eleusinian Mysteries” in The Contemporary Review (Sept. 1880), p.
416, who, however, thinks that these famous philosophers and writers bankrupted their adjectives merely for the
mechanical figures and stage-devices of the lower degrees. See my “Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries” in The
Theosophical Review (April, May, June, 1898), vol. xxii., p. 156.

379 De Is. et Or., xxi.

380 Berl phil. Wochenschr. (1896), p. 1528; R. 137, n. 3.

381 R. 133, n. 2.

382 Ttgotoyovcp — cf. the Ttgoyevecrxegou Ttavxwv above.

383 Epeius, ap. Eusebius, Prap. Ev., i. 10, p. 41 D.

- 85 -

Here we have Kneph- Ammon as the giver of light in darkness, and the opener of
the eyes.

Moreover, Porphyry 384 tells us that the Egyptians regarded Kneph as the demiurge
or creator, and represented him in the form of a man, with skin of a blue-black tint,
girt with a girdle, and holding a sceptre, and wearing a crown of regal wings. This
symbolism, says Porphyry, signified that he was the representative of the Logos or
Reason, difficult to discover, hidden 385 , not manifest 386 ; it is he who gives light and
also life’ 87 ; he is the King. The winged crown upon Inis head, he adds, signifies that
he moves or energizes intellectually.

Kamephis, then, stands in the Isis-tradition for the representative of
Agathodaimon, the Logos-creator. He is, however, a later holder of this office, and
has had it handed on to him by Hermes, or at any rate he is instructed in the
Logos-wisdom by Hermes.

HERMES I. AND HERMES II.

In this connection it is instructive to refer to the account which Syncellus"’ 88 tells us
he took from the statement of Manetho.

Manetho, says Syncellus, states in his Books, that he based his replies concerning
the dynasties of Egypt to King Ptolemy on the monuments.

“[These monuments], he [Manetho] tells us, were engraved in the sacred
language, and in the characters of the sacred writing by Thoth the First
Hermes; after the Flood they were translated from the sacred language into
the then common tongue, but [still written] in hieroglyphic characters, and
stored away in books, by the Good Damon’ s son, the Second Hermes, the
father of Tat, in the inner shrines of the temples of Egypt. ”

Here we have a tradition, going back as far as Manetho, which I have shown, in
Chapter V. of the “Prolegomena” on “Manetho, High Priest of Egypt,” cannot be
so lighdy disposed of as has been previously supposed, — dealing expressly with the
Books of Hermes.

This tradition, it is true, differs from the account given in our Sermon (3-5), where
the writer says nodiing expressly of a flood, but evidendy wishes us to believe that
the most ancient records of Hermes were magically hidden in the zones of the
unseen world, and that the flood, if there was one, was a flood or lapse of time that
had utterly removed these records from the earth. For him they no longer existed
physically.

384 Ap. Euseb., Prop-, iii. 11, 45, p. 115.

385 Cf. the epithet “utterly hidden” found in the “Words ( Logoi ) of Ammon,” referred to by Justin Martyr, Cohort .,
xxxviii., and the note thereon in “Fragments from the Fathers.”

386 Typified by the dark-coloured body.

387 Cwo7toio? — typified, presumably, by the girdle (the symbol of the woman) and the staff (the symbol of the man).

388 Chron., xl. (ed. Dind., i. 72).

- 86 -

Manetho’s account deals with another view of the matter. His tradition appears to
be as follows. The oldest records were on stone monuments which had survived
some great flood in Egypt. These records belonged to the period of the First
Hermes, the Good Daimon par excellence , the priesthood, therefore, of the earliest
antediluvian Egyptian civilization. After the flood they were translated from the
most archaic language into ancient Egyptian, and preserved in book-form by the
Second Hermes, the priesthood, presumably, of the most ancient civilization after
the flood, who were in time succeeded by the Tat priesthood.

That this tradition is elsewhere contradicted by the Isis-tradition proper, which in a
somewhat similar genealogy places Isis at the very beginning prior even to Hermes
I. 389 , need not detain us, since each tradition would naturally claim the priority of
those whom it regarded as its own special founders, and we are for the moment
concerned only with the claims of the Hermes-school.

The main point of interest is that there was a tradition which explained the past on
the hypothesis of periods of culture succeeding one another, — the oldest being
supposed to have been the wisest and highest; the most archaic hieroglyphic
language, which perhaps the priests of Manetho’s day could no longer fully
understand’ 90 , was supposed to have been the tongue of the civilization before the
Flood of Hermes I. It may even be that the remains of this tongue were preserved
only in the magical invocations, as a tiring most sacred, the “language of the gods.”

The point of view, however, of the circle to which our writer belonged, was that
the records of this most ancient civilization were no longer to be read even in the
oldest inscriptions; they could only be recovered by spiritual sight. Into close
relation with this, we must, I think, bring the statement made in § 37, that Osiris
and Isis, though they themselves had learned all the secrets of the records of
Hermes, nevertheless kept part of them secret, and engraved on stone only such as
were adapted for the intelligence of “mortal men.”

The Kamephis of the Isis-tradition, then, apparently stands for Kneph as
Agathodaimon, that is for Hermes, but not for our Hermes I. 391 , for he has no
physical contact with the Isis-tradition, but for Hermes II., who was taught by
Hermes I.

THE BLACK RITE

But what is the precise meaning of the “black rite” at which Kamephis presides? I
have already suggested the environment in which the general meaning may be
sought, though I have not been able to produce any objective evidence of a precise

389 Varro, De Gente Pop. Rom., ap. Augustine, De Civ. Dei, xviii. 3, 8; R. 139, n. 3.

390 It is said that with regard to ancient archaic texts which are still extant, modern Egyptology is able to translate
them with greater accuracy than the priests of Manetho’s day; but this one may be allowed to question, unless the
ancient texts are capable solely of a physical interpretation.

391 The Hermes, presumably, who was fabled to be the son of the Nile, not the physical Nile, but the Heaven Ocean,
the Great Green, the Soul of Cosmos, and whom, we are told, the Egyptians would never speak of publicly, but,
presumably, only within the circles of initiation. This Nile may be in one sense the Flood that hid the Books of
Hermes in its depths or zones; but equally so the son of Nile may be the first Hermes after the Flood.

- 87 -

nature. Reitzenstein (pp. 139 f£), however, thinks he has discovered that evidence.
His view is as follows:

The key to the meaning, according to him, is to be found in the following line from
a Magic Papyrus 392 :

“ I invoke thee, Lady Isis, with whom the Good Daimon doth unite 393 ' , He
who is Lord sv rep zsXsicp jisXavi. ”

Reitzenstein thinks that the Good Daimon here stands for Chnum, and works out
(p. 140) a learned hypothesis that the “black” refers to a certain territory of black
earth, between Syene and Takompso, the Dedocaschoenus, especially famed for its
pottery, which was originally in the possession of the Isis priesthood, but was
subsequendy transferred to the priesthood of Chnum by King Doser. Reitzenstein
would thus, presumably, translate the latter half of the sentence as “the Good
Daimon who is Lord in the perfect black [country],” and so make it refer to
Chnum, though indeed he seems himself to feel the inadequacy of this explanation
to cover the word “perfect” (p. 144). But this seems to me to take all the dignified
meaning out of both our text and that of the Magic Papyrus, and to introduce local
geographical considerations which are plainly out of keeping with the context.

It is far more natural to make the Agathodaimon of the Papyrus refer to Osiris; for
indeed it is one of his most frequent designations. Moreover, it is precisely Osiris
who is pre-eminently connected with the so-called “under world,” the unseen
world, the “mysterious dark.” He is lord there, while Isis remains on earth; it is he
who would most fitly give instructions on such matters, and indeed one of the
ancient mystery-sayings was precisely, “Osiris is a dark God.” 394

“He who is Lord in the perfecting black,” might thus mean that Osiris, the
masculine potency 395 of the soul, purified and perfected the man on the mysterious
dark side of things, and completed the work which Isis, the feminine potency of
the soul, had begun on him.

That, in the highest mystery-circles, this was some stage of union of the man with
the higher part of himself, may be deduced from the interesting citations made by
Reitzenstein (pp. 142-144) from the later Alchemical Hermes-literature; it clearly
refers to the mystic “sacred marriage,” 396 the intimate union of the soul with the
logos , or divine ray. Much could be written on this subject, but it will be sufficient to
append two passages of more than ordinary interest. The Jewish over-writer of the
Naassene Document contends that the chief mystery of the Gnosis was but the
consummation of the instruction given in the various mystery-institutions of the
nations. The Lesser Mysteries, he tells us, commenting on the text of the Pagan
commentator, pertained to “fleshly generation,” whereas the Greater dealt with the

392 Wessley, Denkschr. d. k. Akad. (1893), p. 37, 1. 500.

393 So R., though this is a meaning to which the lexicons give no support; the verb generally meaning “to defer” or
“assent to.”

394 Compare also the mystery ritual in The Acts oj John: “I am thy God, not that of the betrayer” ( F . F. F., p. 434).

395 As the Gnostic Marcus would have called it.

396 On this is go? yapo? or yapo? Ttvsupa-uxo?, see Lobeck (C. A.), Aglaophanms (Konigsberg, 1829), 608, 649, 651.

- 88 -

new birth, or second birth, with regeneration, and not with genesis. And speaking
of a certain mystery, he says:

“For this is the Gate of Heaven , and this is the House of God, inhere the
Good God 397 dwells alone, into which [House] no impure [man] shall
come; hut it is kept under watch for the spiritual alone; where when they
come they must cast away their garments, and all become bridegrooms
obtaining their true manhood through the Virginal Spirit. For such a man
is the Virgin big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son, not psychic, not
fleshly, but a blessed Mon of Mons. ” m

In the marvellous mystery-ritual of the new-found fragments of The Vets of John,
lately discovered in a fourteenth century MS. in Vienna, disguised in hymn form,
and hiding an almost inexhaustible mine of very early tradition, the “sacred
marriage” is plainly suggested as one of the keys to part of the ritual. Compare, for
instance, widi the “casting away of their garments,” in the above-quoted passage of
the Naassene writer, the following:

“[The Disciple.] I would flee.

[The Master. ] I would [have thee] stay.

[The Assistants.] Amen !

[The Disciple.] I would be robed.

[The Master. ] And I would robe [thee].

[The Assistants.] Amen!

[The Disciple.] I would be at-oned.

[The Master. ] And I would at-one.

[The Assistants.] Amen! ” 399

BLACK LAND.

But to return to the “mysterious black.” Plutarch tells us: “Moreover, they [the
Egyptians] call Egypt, inasmuch as its soil is particularly black, as though it were the
black of the eye, Chemia, and compare it with the heart,” 400 — for, he adds, it is hot
and moist, and set in the southern part of the inhabitable world, in the same way as
the heart in the left side of a man . 401

397 That is, the Agathodaimon.

398 That is, the “Birth of Homs.” Hippolytus, Philos., v. 8 (ed. Dunk, and Schneid, pp. 164, 166, 11. 86-94). see “Myth
of Man in the Mysteries,” § 28. The last clause is the gloss of the later Christian over-writer.

399 The text is to be found in James (M. R.), Apocrypha Anecdota, ii. (Cambridge, 1897), in Texts and Studies-, F. F. F., pp.
432, 433.

400 De Is. et Os., xxxiii.

401 Cf. this with K. K, 47, where Egypt is said to occupy the position of the heart of the earth.

- 89 -

Egypt, the “sacred land ” par excellence , was called Chemia or Chem (Hem), Black-
land, because of the nature of its dark loamy soil; it was, moreover, in symbolic
phraseology the black of the eye, that is, the pupil of the earth-eye, the stars and
planets being regarded as the eyes of the gods. 402 Egypt, then, was the eye and heart
of the Earth; the Heavenly Nile poured its light-flood of wisdom through this dark
of the eye, or made the land throb like a heart with the celestial life-currents.

Nor is the above quotation an unsupported statement of Plutarch’s, for in an
ancient text from Edfu 403 , we read: “Egypt (lit. the Black), which is so called after
the eye of Osiris, for it is his pupil.”

Ammon-Kneph, too, as we have seen, is black, or blue-black, signifying his hidden
and mysterious character; and in the above-quoted passage he is called “he who
holds himself hidden in his eye,” or “he who veils himself in his pupil.”

This pupil, then, concludes Reitzenstein (p. 145), is the “mysterious black.” Is this,
then, the origin of this peculiar phrase? If so, it would be connected with seeing,
the spiritual sight, the true Hpopleia.

THE PUPIL OF THE WORLD’S EYE

But Isis, also, is the black earth, and, therefore, the pupil of the eye of Osiris, and,
therefore, also of the Chnum or Ammon identified with Osiris at Syene. Isis,
therefore, herself is the “Pupil of the World’s Eye” — the xoqr] xoctjiou . 404

Reitzenstein would, therefore, have it that the original type of our treatise looks
back to a tradition which makes the mystery-goddess Isis the disciple and spouse of
the mysterious Chnum or Ammon, or Kneph or Kamephis, as Agathodaimon; and,
therefore, presumably, that the making of this Kamephis the disciple in his turn of
Hermes is a later development of the tradition, when the Hermes -communities
gained ascendancy in certain circles of the Isis-tradition.

This is very probable; but dare we, widi Reitzenstein, cast aside the “traditional”
translation of xoqr] xoctjiou, as “Virgin of the World,” and prefix to our treatise as
title the new version, “The Pupil of the Eye of the World”? It certainly sounds
strange as a title to unaccustomed ears, and differs widely from any other titles of
the Hermetic sermons known to us. But what does the “Virgin of the World” mean
in connection with our treatise? Isis as the Virgin Mother is a familiar idea to
students of Egyptology 405 ; she is xocx ' Zpr/J\'j, the “World-Virgin.”

402 Cf. K. K, 20: “Ye brilliant stars, eyes of the gods.”

403 Cited by Ebers, “Die Korperteile in Altagyptischen,” Abh. d. k. bajr. Akad. (1897), p. Ill, where other references
are given.

404 Compare also the Naassene document, § 8, in the “Myth of Man” chapter of the Prolegomena, where Isis is called
“the seven-robed and black-mantled goddess.”

405 Cf. “Isis, the Queen of Heaven, whose most ancient and distinctive title was the Virgin Mother.” Marsham Adams
(F.), The Took of the Master, or the Tgyptian Doctrine of the Tight born of the Virgin Mother (London, 1898), p. 63.

- 90 -

THE SON OF THE VIRGIN

And here it will be of interest to turn to a curious statement of Epiphanius 406 ; it is
missing in all editions of this Father prior to that of Dindorf (Leipzig, 1859), which
was based on the very early (tenth century) Codex Marcianus 125, all previous
editions being printed from a severely censured and bowdlerized fourteenth
century MS.

Epiphanius is stating that the true birthday of the Christ is the Feast of Epiphany,
“at a distance of thirteen days from the increase of the light [i.e. December 25]; for it needs must
have been that this should be a figure of our Lord Jesus Christ Himself and of His twelve
disciples, who make up the thirteen days of the increase of the Light. ” The Feast of the
Epiphany was a great day in Egypt, connected with the “Birth of the fEon,” — a
phase of the “Birth of Horus.” For Epiphanius thus continues:

“LI dip many other things in the past and present support and bear witness
to this proposition, I mean the birth of Christ! Indeed, the leaders of the
idol- cults 407 , filled with wiles to deceive the idol-worshippers ivho believe in
them, in many places keep highest festival on this same night of Epiphany
[— the Manifestation to Eight], so that they whose hopes are in error may
not seek the truth. For instance, at Alexandria, in the Koreion 408 , as it is
called — an immense temple, that is to say the Precinct of the Virgin — after
they have kept all-night vigil with songs and music, chanting to their idol,
when the vigil is over, at cock-crow, they descend with lights into an
underground crypt, and carry up a wooden image lying naked on a litter,
with the seal of a cross made in gold on its forehead, and on either hand
two similar seals, and on either knee two others, all five seals being
similarly made in gold. And they carry round the image itself,
circumambulating seven times the innermost temple, to the accompaniment
of pipes, tabors and hymns, and with merry-making they carry it down
again underground. And if they are asked the meaning of this mystery, they
answer: ‘To-day at this hour the Maiden (Kore), that is, the Virgin, gave
birth to the JEon.

He further adds that at Petra, in Arabia, where, among other places, this mystery
was also performed, the Son of the Virgin is called by a name meaning the “Alone-
begotten of the Lord.” 4119

Here, then, at Alexandria, in every probability the very environment of our treatise,
we have a famous mystery-rite, solemnized in the Temple of the Virgin, who gives

406 Hcer., li. 22.

407 And pre-eminently, therefore, for Epiphanius, the Egyptians.

408 That is, the Temple of Kore. This can hardly be the Temple of Persephone, as Dindorf (iii. 729) suggests, but
rather the Temple of Isis.

m Cf.D.J.L.,pp. 407 ff.

-91 -

birth to a Son, the /Eon. This, we shall not be rash in assuming, signifies not only
the birth of the new year, but also still more profound mysteries, when we
remember the words of the Naassene Document quoted above: “For such a man is
the Virgin, big with child, conceiving and bearing a Son, — not psychic, not fleshly
[nor, we may add, temporal], but a blessed /Eon of /Eons” — that is, an Eternity of
Eternities, an immortal God.

We should also notice the crowing of the cock, which plays so important a part in
the crucifixion-story in the Gospels 410 , and above all things the stigmata on the
image, the symbols of a cosmic and human mystery.

THE MYSTERY OF THE BIRTH OF HORUS

In our own treatise the mysterious Birth of Horns is also referred to (35, 36) as
follows.

Isis has handed on the tradition of the Coming of Osiris, the Divine emanation, the
descent of the efflux of the Supreme, and Horns asks: “How was it, mother, then,
that Earth received God’s efflux?” — where Earth may well refer to the “Dark
Earth,” a synonym of Isis herself.

And Isis answers: “I may not tell the story of [this] birth; for it is not permitted to
describe the origin of this descent, O Horns, [son] of mighty power, lest afterward
the way of birth of the immortal Gods should be known unto men.”

Here I think we have a clear reference to the mysterious “Birth of Horns,” the
birth of the gods, — that is to say, of how a man becomes a god, becomes the most
royal of all souls, gains the kingdom, or lordship over himself. This mystery was
not yet to be revealed to the neophyte — Horns — and yet this Birth is suggested to
Tat by Hermes — C. H., xiii. (xiv.) 2 — when he says: “Wisdom that understands in
silence [such is the matter and the womb from out which Man is born] and the
True Good the Seed.”

The womb is the mysterious Silence, the matter is Wisdom, Isis herself, the seed is
the Good, the Agathodaimon, Osiris.

But in our treatise Horns has not yet reached to this high state; Isis, as the
introductory words tell us, is pouring forth for him “the first draught of
immortality” only, “which souls have custom to receive from gods”; he is being
raised to the understanding of a daimon, but not as yet to that of a god.

All of this, moreover, seems to have been part and parcel of the Isis mystery-
tradition proper, for as Diodorus (i. 25), following Hecatams, informs us, it was Isis
who “discovered the philtre of immortality, by means of which, when her son
Horns, who had been plotted against by the Titans, and found dead (vsxqov)
beneath the water, not only raised him to life (avocaiTjaai) by giving him life
(<j>uyf]v), but also made him sharer in immortality.”

410 Though some have conjectured that the “cock” was the popular name for the Temple -watchman who called the
hours.

- 92 -

Here we have evidence to show that in the mystery-myth Horns was regarded as
the human soul, and that there were two interpretations of the mystery. It referred
not only to the “rising from the dead” in another body, or return to life in another
enfleshment, but also to a still higher mystery, whereby the consciousness of
immortality was restored to the memory of the soul. The soul had been cast by the
Titans, or the opposing powers of the subde universe, into the deep waters of the
Great Sea, the Ocean of Generation, or Celestial Nile, for as the mysterious
informant of Cleombrotus told him 41 , these stories of Titans concerned daimons
or souls proper, not bodies . 412

From this death in the sea of matter, Isis, the Mother Soul, brings Horns repeatedly
back to life, and finally bestows on him the knowledge of immortality, and so raises
him from the “dead.” 41 ’

This birth of the “true man” within, the logos , was and is for man the chief of all
mysteries. In the Chapter on “The Popular Theurgic Hermes-Cult,” we have
already, in elucidation of the sacramental formula, “Thou art I and I am thou,”
quoted the agraphon from the Gospel of Eve concerning the Great Man and the Little
Man or Dwarf, and lovers of the Aupanishad literature of Hindu- Aryan theosophy
need hardly be reminded of “the ‘man,’ of the size of a thumb,” within, in the ether
of the heart . 414

411 See below, where the story is given from Plutarch’s Moralia.

412 Compare The Book of the Deaf lxxviii. 31, 32; Budge’s Trans. (London, 1901), ii. 255: “I shall come forth . . . into
the House of Isis, the divine lady. I shall behold sacred things which are hidden, and I shall be led on to the secret
and holy things, even as they have granted unto me to see the birth of the Great God. Horns hath made me to be a
spiritual body through his soul, [and I see what is therein].” Compare the last sentence with C. H., i. 7, and xi. (xii.) 6,
where the pupil “sees” by means of the soul of his Master.

413 This passage, I believe, affords us an objective point of departure for the reconsideration of C. W. Leadbeater’s
statement, in his Christian Creed (London, 1898), p, 45, that “Pontius Pilate” is a pseudo-historical gloss for tiovto:;
TtiXrjxog, the “dense sea” of “matter,” into which the soul is plunged. See for a discussion of this hypothesis D. T. L.,
pp. 423 ff.

In connection with this a colleague has supplied me with an exceedingly interesting note from Texts and Studies,
iv. 2, Coptic Apocryphal Gospels, p. 177, Frag. 4. The Sahidic text is found in Rendiconti della R. Accademia dei
Lincei, vol. iii., sem. 2, pp. 381-384 (Frammenti Copti, Nota Via), by Ignazio Guidi (1887). The legend runs that the
Devil taking “the form of a fisherman,” goes fishing, and is met by Jesus as He was coming down from the Mount
with His disciples. The Devil announces that “he who catcheth fish here, he is the Master. It is not a wonder to catch
fish in the waters, the wonder is in this desert, to catch fish therein.” They then have a trial of skill, but the MS.
unfortunately breaks off before the result is told. It is in this Fragment that the following remarkable sentence
occurs: “Now as Pilate was saying these things before the authorities of Tiberius, the king, Herod, could not refrain
from setting Pilate at naught, saying, ‘Thou art a Galilasan foreign Egyptian Pontus.’” The literal translation from the
Coptic runs: “Thou art a Pontus Galilasan foreign Egyptian.”

414 Compare, for instance, Kathopanishad, Sec. ii., Pt. ii., iv. 11, 12: “The Man, of the size of a thumb, resides in the
midst, within in the self, of the past and the future the lord; from him a man hath no desire to hide. This verily is
That.

“The Man, of the size of a thumb, like flame free from smoke, of past and of future the lord, the same is to-day,
to-morrow the same will he be. This verily is That.” — Mead and Chattopadhyaya’s Trans. (London, 1896), i. 68, 69.

Here “to-day” and “to-morrow” are said by some to refer to different incarnations; the “Man” (purusha) being the
potential Self, destined finally to become, or grow into the stature of, the Great Self (Maha-purusha).

- 93 -

“ISHON”

But what is of more immediate interest is that the same idea is to some extent
found in the Old Covenant documents, especially in the Prophetical and Wisdom
literature, which latter was strongly influenced by Hellenistic ideas.

Ishon , which literally means “little man” or “dwarf,” 41 " is in A.V. generally translated
“apple of the eye.” 416

Thus we read in a purely literal sense, referring to weeping: “Let not die apple of
thine eye cease” (Lam. ii. 18).

It was, however, a common persuasion, that the intelligence or soul itself, not
merely the reflection of the image of another person, resided in the eye, and was
made manifest chiefly by the eye.

Thus the “apple of the eye” was used as a synonym for a man’s most precious
possession, the treasure-house as it were of the light of a man.

And so we read: “He [Yahweh | kept him [Israel] as the apple of his eye” (Ps. xvii.
8) — where ishon is in the Hebrew further glossed as the “daughter of the eye”; and
again: “Thus saith the Lord of Hosts: . . . He that toucheth you toucheth the apple
of his eye” (Zech. ii. 8).

The “apple of the eye” {ishon) was, then, something of great value, something very
precious, and, therefore, we read in the Wisdom-literature that the punishment of
the man who curses his father and mother is that “his lamp shall be put out in
obscure {ishon) darkness” (Prov. xx. 20) — that is, that he shall thus extinguish the
lamp of his intelligence, or perhaps spiritual nature, “in the apple of his eye there
will be darkness”; and this connects with a passage in the Psalms which shows
traces of the same Wisdom-teaching. “In the hidden part 417 [of man] thou shalt
make me to know wisdom” (Ps. Ii. 6).

But the most striking passages are to be found in that pre-eminently Wisdom-
chapter in the Proverbs-collection, where the true Israelite is warned to remain
faithful to the Law (Torah), and to have no commerce with the “strange woman,”
the “harlot” — that is, the “false doctrines” of the Gentiles. 418

“Keep my law as the apple of thine eye” (Prov. vii. 2), says the writer, speaking in
the name of Yahweh, for he has seen the young and foolish being led astray by the
“strange woman.” “He went the way to her house, in the twilight, in the evening; in
the black {ishon) and dark night” (Prov. vii. 9). That is to say, his lamp was put out;
there was dark night in his eye, in that little man of his, which should be his true
light-spark understanding the wisdom of Yahweh.

415 See the article, “Theosophic Light on Bible Shadows,” in The TheosophicalRevieiv (Nov. 1904), xxxv. 230, 231.

416 The minute image of a person reflected in the pupil of the eye of another may to some extent account for the
popular belief underlying this identification.

417 The same idea which we found above in connection with Ammon.

418 To go “a-whoring” after strange gods and strange doctrines was the graphic figure invariably employed by
Hebrew orthodoxy; “to commit fornication” not unfrequently echoes the same idea in the New Testament.

- 94 -

Here, I think, we have additional evidence, that the idea, that the pupil of the eye
was the seat of the spiritual intelligence in man, was widespread in Hellenistic
circles. 419 But even so, can we translate xoqr] xoajxou as the “Apple of the World-
Eye”? It is true that Isis is the instrument or organ of conveying the hidden wisdom
to Horus, and that it is eventually Hermes or the Logos who is the true light itself,
which shines through her, the pupil of Egypt’s eye 420 , out of that mysterious
darkness, in which she found herself, when she received illumination at the hands
of Kamephis; but is this sufficient justification for rejecting the traditional
translation of the title, and adopting a new version?

On the whole I am inclined to think, that though the new rendering may at first
sight appear somewhat strained, nevertheless in proportion as we become more
familiarized with the idea and remember the thought-environment of the time, we
may venture so to translate it. Isis, then, is the “Apple or Pupil of the Eye of
Osiris.” On earth the “mysterious black” is Egypt herself, the wisdom-land. Isis is
the mysterious wisdom of Egypt, but in our treatise she is even more than this, for
she is that wisdom but now truly illumined by the direct sight, the new dawn of the
Trismegistic discipline of which she speaks (4).

To a Greek, however, the word xbpy would combine and not distinguish the two
meanings of the title over which we have been labouring; but even as logos meant
both “word” and “reason,” so kore would mean both “virgin” and “pupil of the
eye”; but as it is impossible to translate it in English by one word, we have followed
the traditional rendering.

THE SIXTY SOUL-REGIONS

We now turn to a few of the most important points which require more detailed
treatment than the space of a footnote can accommodate. There are, of course,
many other points that could be elaborated, but if that were done, the present work
would run into volumes.

The number of degrees into which the soul-stuff (psychosis) is divided, is given as
three, and as sixty (10). If this statement stood by itself we should have been
somewhat considerably puzzled to have known what to make of it, even when we
remembered the mystic statement that 60 is par excellence the number of the soul,
and that he who can unriddle the enigma will know its nature.

Fortunately, however, if we turn to S. I. H., 6 (Ex. xxvii.), we find that according to
this tradition the soul-regions also were divided into 60 spaces, presumably
corresponding to the types of souls.

419 For the latest study on the subject, see Monseur (E.), “L’Ame Pupilline,” Rer. de I’Hist. des Relig. (Jan. and Feb.
1905), who discusses the significance in primitive religion of the reflected image to be seen in the pupil of the eye.
This “little man” of the eye was taken to be its soul, and to control all its functions.

420 Cf., for the idea in the mind of the ancients, Tim. 45 B: “So much of the fire as would not burn, but gave a gentle
light, they formed into a substance akin to the light of every-day life; and the pure fire which is within us and related
thereto they made to flow through the eyes in a stream smooth and dense, compressing the whole eye, and especially
the centre part, so that it kept out everything of a coarser nature, and allowed to pass only this pure element.”

- 95 -

They were in 4 main divisions and 60 special spaces, with no overlapping (7). These
spaces were also called zones, firmaments or layers.

We are further told (6) that the lowest division, that is the one nearest to the earth,
consists of 4 spaces; the second, of 8; the third, of 16; and the fourth, of 32.

And still further (7), that there were besides the 4 main divisions 12 intervallic ones.
This introduces an element of uncertainty, for, as far as I am aware, we have no
objective information which can enable us to determine how the intervallic
divisions were located in the mind of the writer; speculation is rash, but a scheme
has suggested itself to me, and I append it with all reservation.

First of all we have 4 main divisions or planes, separated from one another by 3
determinations of some sort, for the whole ordering pertains to the Air proper, and
perhaps the 4 states of Air were regarded as earthy, watery, aery, and fiery Air. The
3 determinations may perhaps have been regarded as corresponding to the three
main grades or florescences of the soul-stuff, which were apparently of a superior
substance.

Each division of the 4 may further have been regarded as divided off by three
intervallic determinations; so that we should have 3 such intervals in the lowest
division, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 1 space each; 3 in the second, subdividing it
into 4 spaces of 2 spaces each; 3 in the third, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 4
spaces each; and 3 in the fourth, subdividing it into 4 spaces of 8 spaces each. The
sum of these intervals would thus be 1 2.

PLUTARCH’S YOGIN

In this connection, however, I cannot refrain from appending a pleasant story told
by Plutarch. 4 " 1

The speaker is Cleombrotus, a Lacedtemonian gentleman and man of means, who
was a great traveller, and a greedy collector of information of all sorts to form the
basis of a philosophical religion. He had spent much time in Egypt, and had also
been a voyage beyond the Red Sea. On his travels Cleombrotus had heard of a
philosopher-recluse, who lived in complete retirement, except once a year when he
was seen by “the folk round the Red Sea”; then it was that a certain divine
inspiration came upon him, and he came forth and “prophesied” to the nobles and
royal scribes who used to flock to hear him. With great difficulty, and only after the
expenditure of much money, Cleombrotus discovered the hermitage of this recluse,
and was granted a courteous reception.

Our old philosopher was the handsomest man Cleombrotus had ever met, deeply
versed in the knowledge of plants, and a great linguist. With Cleombrotus,
however, he spoke Doric, and almost in verse, and “as he spake perfume filled the
place from the sweetness of Inis breath.”

421 De Defect n Oracnlomw , xxi., xxii. (421A-422C), ed. G. N. Bernardakis (Leipzig, 1891), iii. 97-101. See my paper,
“Plutarch’s Yogi,” in The Theosophical Review (Dec. 1891), ix. 295-297.

- 96 -

His knowledge of die various mystery-cults was profound, and his intimate
acquaintance with the unseen world remarkable; he explained many tilings to
Cleombrotus, and especially the nature of the daimones, and the important part
they played as factors in any satisfactory interpretation of ancient mythology, seeing
that most of the great myths referred to the doings of the daimones and not of
mortals.

Cleombrotus, however, has told his story merely as an introduction to the
quotation of a scrap of information let fall by the old philosopher concerning the
plurality of worlds 422 ; thus, then, he continues:

“THE PLAIN OF TRUTH”

“He told me that the number of worlds was neither infinite, nor one, nor
five, but that there were 183 of them, arranged in the figure of a triangle of
which each side contained 60, and of the remaining 3 one set at each angle.

And those on the sides touch each other, revolving steadily as in a choral
dance. And the area of the triangle is the Common Hearth of all, and is
called the ‘Plain of Truth, 423 in which the logoi and ideas and paradigms
of all things which have been, and which shall be, lie immovable; and the
Mon [or Eternity] being round them [sc. the ideas], time flows down upon
the worlds like a stream. And the sight and contemplation ( dear) of these
things is possible for the souls of men only once in ten thousand years,
should they have lived a virtuous life. And the highest of our initiations
here below is only the dream of that true vision and initiation 424 ; and the
discourses [sc. delivered in the mystic rites] have been carefully devised to
awaken the memory of the sublime things above, or else are to no purpose. ”

This statement I am inclined to regard as one of the most distinct pronouncements
on the nature of the higher mysteries which has been preserved to us from
antiquity, and the locus classicus and point of departure for any really fruitful
discussion of the true nature of the philosophic mysteries, and yet I have never
seen it referred to in this connection.

Our old philosopher was well acquainted with the Egyptian mystery-tradition, for
Cleombrotus obtained information from him concerning the esoteric significance

422 In this referring to the passage in the Timaus, (55 C D), which runs: “Now, he who, duly reflecting on all this,
enquires whether the worlds are to be regarded as indefinite or definite in number, will be of opinion that the notion
of their indefiniteness is characteristic of a sadly indefinite and ignorant mind. He, however, who raises the question
whether they are to be truly regarded as one or five, takes up a more reasonable position” (jowett’s Trans., 3rd ed.,
iii. 475, 476).

423 Cf. S. 1. H., 3: “Now as I chance myself to be as though initiate into the nature that transcendeth death, and that
my feet have crossed the Plain of Truth”; and K. K., 22: “The Monarch came, and sitting on the Throne of Truth
made answer to their prayers.” The locus classicus is, of course, Plato, Phadrus, 248 B.

424 Cf. K K, 37: “’Tis they who, taught by Hermes that the things below have been disposed by God to be in
sympathy with things above, established on the earth the sacred rites o’er which the mysteries in heaven preside.”

- 97 -

of Typhon and Osiris, and what I have quoted above falls naturally into place in the
scheme of ideas of the tradition preserved in the treatise which we are discussing. 425
It, indeed, pertains to a higher side of the matter, for it purports to be the highest
theoria of all, and possible for the souls even of the most righteous only at long
periods of time.

Of course the representation is symbolical. The triangle is no triangle; it is the
“plain of truth,” the “hearth of the universe.” The triangle, then, pertained to the
plane of Fire proper and not Air. Still, the ordering of the “worlds” is similar to
that of our soul spaces. The triangle is shut off from the manifested world by the
TEon; it is out of space and time proper. Time flows down from it. The worlds
proper are 3 worlds or cosmoi, each divided into 60 subordinate cosmoi, in choral
dance, or orderly harmonious movement of one to the other. Our soul-spaces,
then, may have been regarded as some reflection of these supernal conditions.

One is almost tempted to turn the plane triangle into a solid figure, a tetrahedron 426 ,
and imagine the idea of a world or wheel, at each of the four angles, and to
speculate on the Wheels of Ezekiel, the prototype of the Mercabah or Heavenly
Chariot of Kabalism, the Throne of Truth of the Supreme, but I will not try the
patience of my readers any further, for doubtless most of them will have cried
already: Hold, enough!

THE BOUNDARIES OF THE NUMBERS WHICH PRE-EXIST IN THE SOUL

Perhaps, however, it would be as well, before dismissing the subject, to consider
very briefly what Plato, following Pythagoras 427 , has to say concerning the
“boundaries” of all numbers which pre-exist in the soul. These soul-numbers are 1,
2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 27 (the combination of the two Pythagorean series 1, 2, 4, 8 and 1, 3, 9,
27), or 1,2, 3, 2 2 , 2 3 , 3 2 , 3 3 . Of these numbers 1, 2, 3 are apportioned to the World-
Soul itself, in its intellectual or spiritual aspect, and signify its abiding in (1), its
proceeding from (2), and its returning to itself (3); this with regard to primary
natures. But in addition, intermediate subtle natures or souls are “providentially”
ordered in their evolution and involution, by the World-Soul; they proceed
according to the power of the fourth term (4 or 2 2 ), “which possesses generative
powers,” and return according to that of the fifth (9 or 3 2 ), “which reduces them to
one.” Finally also solid or gross natures are also “providentially” ordered in their
procession according to 8 (2 3 ), and in their conversion according to 27 (3 3 ). 428

From all of which we get the following scheme of circular progression and
conversion of the soul, the various main stages through which it passes:

425 Our difficulty, however, is that Plutarch, in the words of one of his characters, rejects the idea of this numbering
being in any way Egyptian, and ascribes it to a certain Petron of Himera in Sicily, — thereby suggesting a probable
Pythagorean connection.

426 See the section, “Some Outlines of iEonology,” F. F. F., pp. 311-335.

427 See my Orpheus (London, 1896), pp. 255-262.

428 Cf. Taylor (T.), “Introd. to Timasus,” Works of Plato (London, 1804), p. 442.

- 98 -

r

2 1

1

With this compare the “Chaldasan Oracle” ( ap . Psellus, 19): “Do not soil the spirit,
nor turn the plane into the solid” — jxrj Tivshpcc jxokuvr|q phis (3a0uvr|<; to Sninsdov
(ed. Cory, Or. clii., p. 270); where the four stages correspond to the point, line,
plane, and solid. It is also to be remembered that since x° = 1, 2° = 1 and 3° = 1.

That these are the boundary numbers of the soul, according to Pythagoreo-Platonic
tradition, is of interest, but how this can in any way be made to agree with the
ordering of the soul-spaces in our treatise is a puzzle. That by adding these
numbers together (1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 8 + 9 + 27) we get 54, and by farther adding
the numbers of the World-Soul proper (1+2 + 3) we get 6, and so total out the
whole sum of the phases to 60, savours somewhat of “fudging,” as we used to call
it at school. It is by no means convincing, for we are here combining particulars
with universals as though they were of equal dignity; still the ancients frequendy
resort to such combinations.

That, however, there is something more than learned trifling in these numbers of
Plato may be seen by the brilliant study of Adam on the “nuptial number” of
Plato 429 , which was based upon the properties of the “Pythagorean triangle,” a
right-angled triangle to the containing sides of which the values of 3 and 4 were
given, the value of its hypothenuse being consequently 5; and 3x4x5 = 60. The
numbers 3, 4, 5, together with the series 1, 2, 4, 8, and 1, 3, 9, 27, were the
numerical sequences which supplied those “canons of proportion” with which the
Pythagoreans and Platonists chiefly busied themselves.

Still, as far as I can see, this does not throw any clear light on the ordering of the
soul spaces as given in our treatise, and we are therefore tempted to connect it with
the tradition of the mysterious 60’s of Cleombrotus. But what that choral dance
was which ordered the subordinate cosmoi into 60’s, and whether they proceeded
by stages which might correspond to 3’s and 4’s and 5’s, we have, as far as I am
aware, no data on which to base an argument. It may, however, have been
connected with Babylonian ideas; the 3 may have been regarded as “falling into” 4,
so making 12, and this stage in its turn have been regarded as “falling into” 5, and
so making 60.

429 Rep., viii. 545C-547A. See Adam (J.), The Nuptial Number oj Plato: Its Solution and Significance (London, 1891).

- 99 -

THE MYSTERIOUS CYLINDER

It is to be noticed, however, that before the souls revolted, the Demiurge
“appointed for them limits and reservations 4 ’" in the height of Upper Nature, that
they might keep the cylinder a-whirl in proper order and economy” (11).

They were, then, confined to certain orderings and spaces. But what is the
mysterious “cylinder” which they were to keep revolving?

So far I have come across nothing that throws any direct light on the subject.
However, Proclus 4 ’ 1 says that Porphyry stated that among the Egyptians the letter
y, surrounded by a circle, symbolized the mundane soul.

It is curious that Porphyry should have referred this idea to the Egyptians, when he
must have known that Plato, to whom Porphyry looked as the corypheus of all
philosophy, had treated of the significance of the symbol X (in Greek y) in perhaps
the most discussed passage of the Timms (36B). 4 ’ 2 This letter symbolized the
mutual relation of the axes and equators of the sphere of the “same” (die “fixed
stars”) and the sphere of the “other” (the “seven planetary spheres”). Porphyry,
however, may have believed that Plato, or Pythagoras, got the idea in the first place
from Egypt — the common persuasion of his school.

This enigma of Plato is described as follows by Jowett in his Introduction to the

Tima us: 433

‘The universe revolves round a centre once in twenty-four hours, hut the
orbits of the fixed stars take a different direction from that of the planets.

The outer and the inner sphere cross one another and meet again at a point
opposite to that of their first contact; the first moving in a circle from left to
right along the side of a parallelogram which is supposed to be inscribed in
it, the second also moving in a circle along the diagonal of the same
parallelogram from right to left 34 ; or, in other ivords, the first describing the
path of the equator, the second, the path of the ecliptic. ”

We should thus, just as the Egyptians, according to Porphyry, symbolized it,
represent the conception by the figure of a circle with two diameters suggesting
respectively the equator and the ecliptic.

43(1 Which may have been regarded as the prototypes of the soul-spaces.

431 Comment, in Plat Tim., 216C; ed. C. E. C. Schneider (Vratislavia;, 1847), p. 250.

432 A passage which Proclus, op. cit., 21 3A (ed. Sch., p. 152) further explains by means of the “harmonic canon” or
ruler.

433 Jowett (B.), Dialogues of Plato (3rd ed., Oxford, 1892), iii. 403.

434 Cf. text 36C: “The motion of the same he carried round by the side to the right, and the motion of the diverse
diagonally to the left,” — that is the side of the rectangular figure supposed to be inscribed in the circle of the “same,”
and diagonally, across the rectangular figure from comer to corner; and 38D, 39A: “Now, when all the stars which
were necessary to the creation of time [, i.e . the spheres of the sun, moon, and five planets] had attained a motion
suitable to them, and had become living creatures, having bodies fastened by vital chains, and learned their appointed
task, moving in the motion of the diverse, which is diagonal, and passes through, and is governed by the motion of
the same, they revolved, some in a larger and some in a lesser orbit. . . . The motion of the same made them turn all
in a spiral.” With these instruments of “time,” surrounded by the sphere of the same, compare the idea of time
flowing down on the worlds, from the iEon, in the story of Cleombrotus.

- 100 -

But what is the rectangular figure to which Jowett refers, but which he does not
further describe? The circles are spheres; and, therefore, the rectangular figure must
be a solid figure inscribed in the sphere “of the same.” If we now set the circle
revolving parallel to the longer sides of the figure, this “parallelogram” will trace
out a cylinder, while the seven spheres of the “other,” the “souls” of the “planets,”
moving parallel to one of the diagonals of our figure, and in an opposite direction
to the sphere of the “same,” will, by their mutual difference of rates of motion,
cause their “bodies” (die souls surrounding the bodies) to trace out spiral orbits.

All this in itself, I confess, seems very far-fetched, and I should have thrown my
notes on the subject into the waste-paper basket, but for the following
consideration: Basil of Caesarea, in his Hexameron, or Homilies on the Six Days of
Creation, declared it “a matter of no interest to us whether the earth is a sphere or a
cylinder or a disk, or concave in the middle like a fan .” 411

The cylinder-idea, then, was a favourite theory with regard to the earth-shape in the
time of Basil, that is [in] the fourth century.

This cylinder-idea, however, I am inclined to think was very ancient. In the domain
of Greek speculation we first meet with it in what little is known of the system of
Anaximander of Miletus, the successor of Thales.

Anaximander is reported to have believed that “the earth is a heavenly body,
controlled by no other power, and keeping its position because it is the same
distance from all tilings; the form of it is curved, cylindrical, like a stone column; it
has two faces; one of these is the ground beneath our feet, and the other is
opposite to it .” 436

And again: “That the earth is a cylinder in form, and that its depth is one-third of
its breadth .” 41

Now I have never been able to persuade myself that the earliest philosophers of
Greece “invented” the ideas ascribed to them. They stood on the borderland of
mythology and mysticism, and, in every probability, took their ideas from ancient
traditions. Anaximander himself was in every probability indirectly, for all we know
even directly, influenced by Egyptian and Chakkean notions; indeed, who can any
longer doubt in the light of the Cnossus excavations ?” 438

Anaximander is thus said to have regarded the earth-cylinder as fixed, whereas in
our treatise the cylinder is not the earth and is not fixed; it is, on the contrary, a
celestial cylinder and in constant motion. Can it, then, possibly be that this cylinder
notion was associated with some Babylonian idea, and had its source in that

435 So quoted in Andrew Dickson White’s History of the Warfare of Science ivith Theology in Christendom (New York, 1898),
i. 92. Dr White, unfortunately, does not give the exact reference. The “fan” is, of course, the winnowing fan, a broad
basket into which the corn mixed with chaff was received after threshing, and was then thrown up into the wind, so
as to disperse the chaff and leave the grain.

436 Alexander of Aphrodisias, Comment, on Aristotle in Meteor., 91r (vol. i., 268 I d); Diels, Doxographi Graci (Berlin,
1879), p. 478. Cf. Aetius, De Placitis Reliquia, iii. 10 (Diels, 579).

437 Plutarch, Strom., 2 (Diels, 579). See Fairbanks (A.), The First Philosophers of Greece (London, 1898), pp. 13, 14.

438 Delitzsch also, in his Babel and Bibel, states that the great debt of early Greece to Assyria will be made clear in a
forthcoming work of German scholarship.

- 101 -

country par excellence of cylinders? In Babylonia, moreover, the cylinder-shape was
frequently used for seals, fashioned like a small roller, so that the characters or
symbols engraved on them could be impressed on soft substance, such as wax.
Further, the Babylonian and Egyptian civilizations were, as we know, closely
associated, and pre-eminently so in the matter of sigils and seals. In the Coptic-
Gnostic works, translated from Greek originals, and indubitably mainly of Egyptian
origin, the idea of “characters,” “seals,” and “sigils,” as types impressed on matter,
is a commonplace.

Can our cylinder, then, have some connection with the circle of animal types, or
types of life, of which so much is said in our treatise? The souls of the supernal
man class would then have had the task of keeping this cylinder in motion, so that
thereby the various types were continually impressed on the plasms in the sphere of
generation, or ever-becoming — the wheel of genesis?

This may be so, for in P. S. A., 19, we read: “The air, moreover, is the engine, or
machine, through which all things are made . . . mortal from mortal things and
things like these.”

So also in K. K., 28, Hermes says: “And I will skillfully devise an instrument,
mysterious, possessed of power of sight that cannot err . . . an instrument that
binds together all that’s done.”

Here again we have the same idea, all connected with the notion of Fate or
Heimarmene; the instrument of Hermes is the Karmic Wheel, by which cause and
effect are linked together, and that too with a moral purpose. 4 ’ 9

Finally, in connection with our cylinder, we may compare the Aryan Hindu myth of
the “Churning of the Ocean,” in the Vishnu Parana. The churning- staff or Pillar
was the heaven-mountain, round which was coiled the cosmic serpent, to serve as
rope for twirling it. The rope was held at either end by the Devas and Asuras, or
gods and daemons. There is also a mystic symbol in India which probably connects
with a similar range of ideas. It is two superimposed triangles (X), with their apices
touching, and round the centre a serpent is twined, — a somewhat curious
resemblance to our X and cylinder-idea. And so much for this puzzling symbol.

THE EAGLE, LION, DRAGON AND DOLPHIN

We now pass to the four leading types of animals, connected with souls of the
highest rank — namely, the eagle, lion, dragon, and dolphin (24, 25) — which it may
be of interest to compare with the symbolism of some of the degrees of the
Mithriac Mysteries. 44 " In one of the preliminary degrees of the rite, we are
informed, some of the mystas imitated the voices of birds, others the roaring of
lions. 441 All of this was interpreted by the initiates as having reference to

439 I have also got a stray reference, “xulavSgo?, Plut., 2, 682 C, Xylander’s pages,” but I have not been able to verify
this.

440 See Cumont (F.), Textes et Monuments figures nlat. aux Mjsteres de Mithra (Bruxelles, 1899), i. 315.

441 Ps. Augustine, Quastt. Vet. etNov. Test. (Migne, P. V., tom, xxxiv. col. 2214 £).

- 102 -

transmigration or metempsychosis. Thus Porphyry 442 tells us that in the Mysteries
of Mithras they called the my star by the names of different animals, so symbolizing
man’s common lower nature with that of the irrational animals. Thus, for instance,
they called some of the men “lions,” and some of the women “lionesses,” some
were called “ravens,” while the “fathers,” the highest grade, were called “hawks”
and “eagles.” The “ravens” were the lowest grade; those of the “lion” grade were
apparently previously invested with the disguises and masks of a series of animal
forms before they received the lion shape.

Porphyry tells us, further, that Pallas, who had, prior to Porphyry’s day, written an
excellent treatise on the Mithriaca, now unfortunately lost, asserts that all this was
vulgarly believed to refer to the zodiac, but that in truth it symbolized a mystery of
the human soul, which is invested with animal natures of various kinds 443 ,
according to the tradition of the Magi. Thus they call the sun (and therefore those
corresponding to this nature) a bull, a lion, a dragon, and a hawk.

It is further to be remembered that Appuleius 444 , in describing the robe with which
he was invested after his initiation into the Mysteries of Isis, tells us that he was
enthroned as the sun, robed in twelve sacramental stoles or garments; these
garments were of linen with beautiful paintings upon them, so that from every side
“you might see that I was remarkable by the animals which were painted round my
vestment in various colours.” This dress, he says, was called the “Olympic Stole.”

MOMUS

Finally, it may perhaps be of service to make the reader a little better acquainted
with Momus.

Among the Greeks Momus was the personification of the spirit of fault-finding.
Hesiod, in his Theogony (214), places him among the second generation of the
children of Night, together with the Fates. From the Cypria * 45 of Stasimus 446 , we
learn that, when Zeus, in answer to Earth’s prayer to relieve her of her
overpopulation of impious mankind 447 , first sent the Theban War, and on this
proving insufficient, bethought him of annihilating the human race by thunderbolts
(fire) and floods (water), Momus advises the Father of gods and men to marry the
goddess Thetis to a mortal, so that a beautiful daughter (Aphrodite-Helen) might
be born to them, and so mankind, Greeks and Barbarians, on her account be

442 De Abstinentia, iv. 16 (ed. Nauck, p. 253).

443 Cf. Clement of Alexandria on the Basilidian theory of “appendages,” remembering that the School of Basilides
was strongly tinctured with Egyptian ideas. “The Basilidians are accustomed to give the name of appendages (or
accretions) to the passions. These essences, they say, have a certain substantial existence, and are attached to the
rational soul, owing to a certain turmoil and primitive confusion. On to this nucleus other bastard and alien natures
of the essence grow, such as those of the wolf, ape, lion, goat, etc. . . . And not only do human souls thus intimately
associate themselves with the impulses and impressions of irrational animals, but they even initiate the movements
and beauties of plants, because they likewise bear the characteristics of plants appended to them. Nay, there are also
certain characteristics [of minerals] shown by habits, such as the hardness of adamant” (F. F. F, p. 276).

444 Metamorphoses, Book xi.

445 Which Pindar and Herodotus ascribed to Homer himself.

446 See Frag. I. from the Scholion on Horn., II, i. 5 ff.

447 See K K, 34.

- 103 -

involved in internecine strife — namely, the Trojan War. Further, the Scholiast on
II., i. 5, avers that it was Momus whom Homer meant to represent by the “will” or
“counsel” of Zeus.

Sophocles, moreover, wrote a Satyric drama called “Momus,” 448 and so also
Achasus. 449

Both Plato 45 " and Aristotle 431 refer to Momus. Callimachus, the chief librarian of
the Alexandrian Library, from 260-240 B.C., in his Mtia i 452 , pilloried his critic and
former pupil Apollonius Rhodius as Momus.

Momus, moreover, was a favourite figure with the Sophists and Rhetoricians,
especially of die second century A.D. In 2E1. Aristides 453 , Momus, as he could find
no fault with Aphrodite herself, found fault with her shoe 414 . Lucian makes
Aphrodite vow to oppose Momus tooth and nail 455 , and makes Momus find fault
with even the greatest works of the gods, such as the house of Athene, the bull of
Zeus, and the men of Hephaestus, — the last because the god-smith had not put
windows in their breasts so that their hearts might be seen 4 " 6 .

And, interestingly enough in connection with our treatise, Lucian, in one of his
witty sketches 457 , makes Momus one of the persons of the dialogue with Zeus and
Hermes. Momus finds fault because Bacchus is reckoned among the gods, and is
commanded by Zeus to refrain from making ridicule of Hercules and Asclepius.

The popular figure of Momus was that of a feeble old man 438 , — a very different
representation from the grandiose Intelligence of our treatise, a true Lucifer.

Some representations give his one sharp tooth, and others wings. The story runs
that Zeus finally banished him from Olympus for his fault-finding. 459

The Onomastica Vaticana 460 connects Momus with Mammon; but this side-issue need
not detain us 461 .

THE MYSTIC GEOGRAPHY OF SACRED LANDS

With regard to the symbolic figure of the Earth of §§ 46-48 of the second K. K.
Extract, and the persuasion that Egypt was the heart or centre thereof, we may

448 Frag. 369-374B (ed. Dind.); the context of which some believe to be found in Lucian’s Hermotimus, 20.

449 Frag. 29, from the Scholion on Aristophanes, Pax, 357.

450 Rep., vi. 487A: “Nor would even Momus find fault with this.”

451 De Partt. Animal., iii. 2.

452 And also at the end of his Hymn to Apollo, ii. 112; also Epigram. Frag., 70.

453 Or., 49; ed. Jebb, p. 497.

454 Of- Julian, Ep. ad Dionjs.

455 Dial. Deor., xx. 2.

456 Hermot., xx.; cf. Nig., xxxii.; Dial. Deor., ix.; Ver. Hist., ii. 3; Bab. Fab., lix.; and ]np. Frag., xxii.

457 Deor. Consil, iv.

458 Philostratus, Ep. 21.

459 For the above and other references, see Trumpets art. “Momus,” in Roscher’s Lexicon.

460 Lug., 194, 59.

461 See Nestle’s art. “Mammon,” in Cheyne’s Encyclopcedia Biblica.

- 104 -

append two quotations on the subject from widely different standpoints. The first
is from Dr Andrew D. White’s recent volumes : 462

“Every great people of antiquity, as a rule, regarded its own central city or most
holy place as necessarily the centre of the earth.

‘The Chaldeans held that their ‘ holy house of the gods’ was the centre. The
Egyptians sketched the world under the form of a human figure, in which
Egypt was the heart, and the centre of it Thebes. For the Assyrians, it was
Babylon; for the Hindus, it was Mount Mem; for the Greeks, so far as the
civilised world was concerned, Olympus or the temple of Delphi; for the
modern Mohammedans, it is Mecca and its sacred stone; the Chinese, to
this day, speak of their empire as the ‘ middle kingdom. ’ It was in
accordance, then, with a simple tendency of human thought that the Jews
believed the centre of the world to be Jerusalem.

‘The book of Ezekiel speaks of Jerusalem as in the middle of the earth,
and all other parts of the world as set around the holy city. Throughout the
‘ages of faith ’ this was very generally accepted as a direct revelation from the
Almighty regarding the earth’s form. St Jerome, the greatest authority of the
early Church upon the Bible, declared, on the strength of this utterance of
the prophet, that Jerusalem could be nowhere but at the earth ’s centre; in
the ninth century Archbishop Kabanus Maurus reiterated the same
argument; in the eleventh century Hugh of St Victor gave to the doctrine
another scriptural demonstration; and Pope Urban, in his great sermon at
Clermont urging the Franks to the crusade, declared, Jerusalem is the
middle point of the earth’; in the thirteenth century an ecclesiastical writer
much in vogue, the monk Casarius of Heisterbach, declared, As the heart
in the midst of the body, so is Jerusalem situated in the midst of our
inhabited earth, ’ — ‘so it was that Christ was crucified at the centre of the
earth. ’ Dante accepted this view of Jerusalem as a certainty, wedding it to
immortal verse; and in the pious book of travels ascribed to Sir John
Mandeville, so widely read in the Middle Ages, it is declared that
Jerusalem is at the centre of the world, and that a spear standing erect at
the Holy Sepulchre casts no shadow at the equinox.

‘Ezekiel’s statement thus became the standard of orthodoxy to early map-
makers. The map of the world at Hereford Cathedral, the maps of Andrea
Bianco, Marino Sanuto, and a multitude of others fixed this view in men’s
minds, and doubtless discouraged during many generations any scientific

462 Op. supra at, i. 98, 99.

- 105 -

statements tending to unbalance this geographical centre revealed in
Scripture. ”

So much for the righteous indignation of modern physical science; now for
cryptology and mysticism. M. W. Blackden, in a recent article on “The Mysteries
and the ‘Book of the Dead,”’ writes as follows : 463

“One other key there is . . . without which it is useless to approach The
Took of the Dead with the idea of discussing any of those gems of wisdom
for which old Egypt was so famous. . . . The knowledge of its existence is
no recent discovery: it is simply that ancient nations such as the Egyptians,
Chaldees, and Jews, had a system of symbolic geography. . . .

‘The Jewish and Egyptian priestly caste endeavoured to map out their
lands in accordance with their symbols of spiritual things, so far as the
physical features would permit. This symbolism of mountain, city, plain,
desert, and river extended from the various parts and furniture of the
Eodge, to use Masonic phraseology, up to the spiritual anatomy, as it were,
of both macrocosm and microcosm.

‘Thus in the Jewish Scriptures it is not difficult to distinguish, in the
prophetic battles of the nations that were to rage round about Jerusalem, the
same symbolism as we have more directly expressed in a little old book
called The Siege of Mansoul, the author of which was the John Tuny an of
The Pilgrim’s Progress, a man who could well grasp the excellence of
geographical symbolism.

“I cannot, of course, here enter at length into the geographical symbols of
Egypt, it would take too long; but as I have given Jerusalem as a symbol, I
may say further that Jerusalem as a symbol corresponds to the Egyptian
On, or Heliopolis, and so astronomically to the centre of the world and of
the universe, and in the microcosm to the spiritual Heart of Man . 464

“Tut there is one difference between the Hebrew and Egyptian city; for
whereas the actual Jerusalem corresponds among the Hebrew prophets to
that Jerusalem that now is, and is in bondage with her children, Heliopolis
corresponded among the Egyptian priesthood to that city which was to come,
the Heavenly City, the New Heart, that should be given to redeemed
mankind. ”

463 The TheosophicalSSevieiv (July, 1902), vol. xxx. pp. 406, 407.

464 “There is an old map of the world in the British Museum which demonstrates both these significations. See also
Mappa Mundi, ‘Ebsdorf,’ 1284, and that in Hereford Cathedral made by Richard of Haldingham, one of the
Prebends, 1290-1310.”

- 106 -

Here then we have a thesis that deserves a volume to itself; and so I leave it to him
who has a mind to undertake the labour.
