Memoirs of a Revolutionist, Vol. I
Peter Kropotkin (1899)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Peter Kropotkin's 'Memoirs of a Revolutionist', Volume I (London: Smith, Elder, 1899), with a preface by Georg Brandes. Scan via Internet Archive (University of Toronto). Runs complete through Volume I. The publisher's catalogue and library matter at the back are trimmed. This 1899 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

MEMOIES

OP


BY


P. KEOPOTKIN


WITH  A  PREFACE  BY  GEORGE  BRANDES


IN TWO VOLUMES—  VOL.  I.


PORTRAITS


LONDON

SMITH,  ELDEE,  &  CO.,  15  WATERLOO  PLACE
1899

[AH rights reserved]


THE  Autobiographies  which  we  owe  to  great  minds
have  in  former  times  generally  been  of  one  of  three
types :  '  So  far  I  went  astray,  thus  I  found  the  true
path '  (St.  Augustine) ;  or,  '  So  bad  was  I,  but  who
dares  to  consider  himself  better ! '  (Eousseau)  ;  or,
'  This  is  the  way  a  genius  has  slowly  been  evolved
from  within  and  by  favourable  surroundings  '  (Goethe) .
In  these  forms  of  self-representation  the  author  is  thus
mainly  pre-occupied  with  himself.

In  the  nineteenth  century  the  autobiographies  of
men  of  mark  are  more  often  shaped  on  lines  such  as
these :  '  So  full  of  talent  and  attractive  was  I ;  such
appreciation  and  admiration  I  won  ! '  (Johanne  Louise
Heiberg,  '  A  Life  lived  once  more  in  Reminiscence  ') ;
or,  '  I  was  full  of  talent  and  worthy  of  being  loved,
out  yet  I  was  unappreciated,  and  these  were  the  hard
struggles  I  went  through  before  I  won  the  crown  of
fame  '  (Hans  Christian  Andersen,  '  The  Tale  of  a
Life ') .  The  main  pre-occupation  of  the  writer,  in
these  two  classes  of  life-records,  is  consequently  with


vi  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

what  his  fellow-men  have  thought  of  him  and  said
about  him.

The  author  of  the  autobiography  before  us  is  not
pre-occupied  with  his  own  capacities,  and  consequently
describes  no  struggle  to  gain  recognition.  Still  less
does  he  care  for  the  opinions  of  his  fellow-men  about
himself  ;  what  others  have  thought  of  him,  he  dismisses
with  a  single  word.

There  is  in  this  work  no  gazing  upon  one's  own
image.  The  author  is  not  one  of  those  who  willingly
speak  of  themselves ;  when  he  does  so,  it  is  reluctantly
and  with  a  certain  shyness.  There  is  here  no  confes-
sion that  divulges  the  inner  self,  no  sentimentality,
and  no  cynicism.  The  author  speaks  neither  of  his
sins  nor  of  his  virtues ;  he  enters  into  no  vulgar  intimacy
with  his  reader.  He  does  not  say  when  he  fell  in  love,
and  he  touches  so  little  upon  his  relations  with  the
other  sex,  that  he  even  omits  to  mention  his  marriage,
and  it  is  only  incidentally  we  learn  that  he  is  married
at  all.  That  he  is  a  father,  and  a  very  loving  one,  he
finds  time  to  mention  just  once  in  the  rapid  review  of
the  last  sixteen  years  of  his  life.

He  is  more  anxious  to  give  the  psychology  of  his
contemporaries  than  of  himself ;  and  one  finds  in  his
book  the  psychology  of  Kussia  :  the  official  Kussia  and
the  masses  underneath — Kussia  struggling  forward  and
Kussia  stagnant.  He  strives  to  tell  the  story  of  his
contemporaries  rather  than  his  own  ;  and  consequently,
the  record  of  his  life  contains  the  history  of  Kussia
during  his  lifetime,  as  well  as  that  of  the  labour  move-


PREFACE  Vll

ment  in  Europe  during  the  last  half-century.  When
he  plunges  into  his  own  inner  world,  we  see  the  outer
world  reflected  in  it.

There  is,  nevertheless,  in  this  book  an  effect  such
as  Goethe  aimed  at  in  '  Dichtung  und  Wahrheit,'  the
representation  of  how  a  remarkable  mind  has  been
shaped  ;  and  in  analogy  with  the  '  Confessions  '  of  St.
Augustine,  we  have  the  story  of  an  inner  crisis  which
corresponds  with  what  in  olden  times  was  called  '  con-
version.' In  fact,  this  inner  crisis  is  the  turning  point
and  the  core  of  the  book.

There  are  at  this  moment  only  two  great  Kussians
who  think  for  the  Russian  people,  and  whose  thoughts
belong  to  mankind,  Leo  Tolstoy  and  Peter  Kropotkin.
Tolstoy  has  often  told  us,  in  poetical  shape,  parts  of  his
life.  Kropotkin  gives  us  here,  for  the  first  time,  with-
out any  poetical  recasting,  a  rapid  survey  of  his  whole
career.

However  radically  different  these  two  men  are,
there  is  one  parallel  which  can  be  drawn  between
the  lives  and  the  views  on  life  of  both.  Tolstoy  is
an  artist,  Kropotkin  is  a  man  of  science ;  but  there
came  a  period  in  the  career  of  each  of  them,  when
neither  could  find  peace  in  continuing  the  work
to  which  he  had  brought  great  inborn  capacities.
Religious  considerations  led  Tolstoy,  social  considera-
tions led  Kropotkin,  to  abandon  the  paths  they  had
first  taken.

Both  are  filled  with  love  for  mankind ;  and  they
are  at  one  in  the  severe  condemnation  of  the  indif-

*  A4


viii  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

ference,  the  thoughtlessness,  the  crudeness  and  brutality
of  the  upper  classes,  as  well  as  in  the  attraction  they
both  feel  towards  the  life  of  the  downtrodden  and  ill-
used  man  of  the  people.  Both  see  more  cowardice  than
stupidity  in  the  world.  Both  are  idealists  and  both
have  the  reformer's  temperament.  Both  are  peace-
loving  natures,  and  Kropotkin  is  the  more  peaceful  of
the  two — although  Tolstoy  always  preaches  peace  and
condemns  those  who  take  right  into  their  own  hands
and  resort  to  force,  while  Kropotkin  justifies  such
action,  and  was  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Terrorists.
The  point  upon  which  they  differ  most  is  in  their
attitudes  towards  the  intelligent  educated  man  and
towards  science  altogether ;  Tolstoy,  in  his  religious
passion,  disdains  and  disparages  the  man  equally  with
the  thing,  while  Kropotkin  holds  both  in  high  esteem,
although  at  the  same  time  he  condemns  men  of  science
for  forgetting  the  people  and  the  misery  of  the  masses.

Many  a  man  and  many  a  woman  have  accomplished
a  great  life-work  without  having  led  a  great  life.
Many  people  are  interesting,  although  their  lives  may
have  been  quite  insignificant  and  commonplace.  Kro-
potkin's  life  is  both  great  and  interesting.

In  these  volumes  will  be  found  a  combination  of
all  the  elements  out  of  which  an  intensely  eventful  life
is  composed — idyll  and  tragedy,  drama  and  romance.

The  childhood  in  Moscow  and  in  the  country,  the
portraits  of  his  mother,  sisters,  and  teachers,  of  the  old
and  trusty  servants,  together  with  the  many  pictures  of
patriarchal  life,  are  done  in  such  a  masterly  way  that


PREFACE  IX

every  heart  will  be  touched  by  them.  The  landscapes,
the  story  of  the  unusually  intense  love  between  the
two  brothers — all  this  is  pure  idyll.

Side  by  side  there  is,  unhappily,  plenty  of  sorrow
and  suffering :  the  harshness  in  the  family  life,  the
cruel  treatment  of  the  serfs,  and  the  narrow-minded-
ness and  heartlessness  which  are  the  ruling  stars  of
men's  destinies.

There  is  variety  and  there  are  dramatic  cata-
strophes :  life  at  Court  and  life  in  prison ;  life  in  the
highest  Eussian  society,  by  the  side  of  emperors  and
grand  dukes,  and  life  in  poverty,  with  the  working
proletariat,  in  London  and  in  Switzerland.  There
are  changes  of  costume  as  in  a  drama ;  the  chief  actor
having  to  appear  during  the  day  in  fine  dress  in  the
Winter  Palace,  and  in  the  evening  in  peasant's  clothes
in  the  suburbs,  as  a  preacher  of  revolution.  And
there  is,  too,  the  sensational  element  that  belongs  to
the  novel.  Although  nobody  could  be  simpler  in  tone
and  style  than  Kropotkin,  nevertheless  parts  of  his
narrative,  from  the  very  nature  of  the  events  he  has  to
tell,  are  more  intensely  exciting  than  anything  in  those
novels  which  aim  only  at  being  sensational.  One
reads  with  breathless  interest  the  preparations  for  the
escape  from  the  hospital  of  the  fortress  of  St.  Paul
and  St.  Peter,  and  the  bold  execution  of  the  plan.

Few  men  have  moved,  as  Kropotkin  did,  in  all
layers  of  society ;  few  know  all  these  layers  as  he  does.
What  a  picture !  Kropotkin  as  a  little  boy  with  curled
hair,  in  a  fancy-dress  costume,  standing  by  the  Emperor


X  MEMOIRS  OF A  REVOLUTIONIST

Nicholas,  or  running  after  the  Emperor  Alexander  as
his  page,  with  the  idea  of  protecting  him.  And  then
again — Kropotkin  in  a  terrible  prison,  sending  away
the  Grand  Duke  Nicholas,  or  listening  to  the  growing
insanity  of  a  peasant  who  is  confined  in  a  cell  under
his  very  feet.

He  has  lived  the  life  of  the  aristocrat  and  of  the
worker ;  he  has  been  one  of  the  Emperor's  pages  and  a
poverty-stricken  writer ;  •  he  has  lived  the  life  of  the
student,  the  officer,  the  man  of  science,  the  explorer
of  unknown  lands,  the  administrator,  and  the  hunted
revolutionist.  In  exile  he  has  had  at  times  to  live
upon  bread  and  tea  as  a  Eussian  peasant ;  and  he  has
been  exposed  to  espionage  and  assassination  plots  like
a  Eussian  emperor.

Few  men  have  had  an  equally  wide  field  of  ex-
perience. Just  as  Kropotkin  is  able,  as  a  geologist,  to
survey  prehistoric  evolution  for  hundreds  of  thousands
of  years  past,  so  too  he  has  assimilated  the  whole
historical  evolution  of  his  own  times.  To  the  Literary
and  scientific  education  which  is  won  in  the  study  and
in  the  university  (such  as  the  knowledge  of  languages,
belles-lettres,  philosophy,  and  higher  mathematics),  he
added  at  an  early  stage  of  his  life  that  education  which
is  gained  in  the  workshop,  in  the  laboratory,  and  in  the
open  field — natural  science,  military  science,  fortifica-
tion, knowledge  of  mechanical  and  industrial  processes.
His  intellectual  equipment  is  universal.

What  must  this  active  mind  have  suffered  when  he
was  reduced  to  the  inactivity  of  prison  life  !  What  a


PREFACE  XI

test  of  endurance  and  what  an  exercise  in  stoicism  !
Kropotkin  says  somewhere  that  a  morally  developed
personality  must  be  at  the  foundation  of  every
organization.  That  applies  to  him.  Life  has  made
of  him  one  of  the  corner-stones  for  the  building  of
the  future.

The  crisis  in  Kropotkin's  life  has  two  turning-
points  which  must  be  mentioned.

He  approaches  his  thirtieth  year — the  decisive  year
in  a  man's  life.  With  heart  and  soul  he  is  a  man  of
science ;  he  has  made  a  valuable  scientific  discovery.
He  has  found  out  that  the  maps  of  Northern  Asia  are
incorrect ;  that  not  only  the  old  conceptions  of  the
geography  of  Asia  are  wrong,  but  that  the  theories  of
Humboldt  are  also  in  contradiction  with  the  facts.  For
more  than  two  years  he  has  plunged  into  laborious
research.  Then,  suddenly,  on  a  certain  day,  the  true
relations  of  the  facts  flash  upon  him  ;  he  understands
that  the  main  lines  of  structure  in  Asia  are  not  from
north  to  south  or  from  west  to  east,  but  from  the
south-west  to  the  north-east.  He  submits  his  discovery
to  test,  he  applies  it  to  numerous  separated  facts,
and — it  holds  its  ground.  Thus  he  knew  the  joy  of
scientific  revelation  in  its  highest  and  purest  form,
he  has  felt  how  elevating  is  its  action  on  the  mind.

Then  comes  the  crisis.  The  thought  that  these
joys  are  the  lot  of  so  few,  fills  him  now  with  sorrow.
He  asks  himself  whether  he  has  the  right  to  enjoy
this  knowledge  alone — for  himself.  He  feels  that  there
is  a  higher  duty  before  him — to  do  his  part  in  bringing


xii  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

to  the  mass  of  the  people  the  information  already
gained,  rather  than  to  work  at  making  new  dis-
coveries.

For  my  part  I  do  not  think  that  he  was  right.
With  such  conceptions  Pasteur  would  not  have  been
the  benefactor  of  mankind  that  he  has  been.  After  all,
everything,  in  the  long  run,  is  to  the  benefit  of  the
mass  of  the  people.  I  think  that  a  man  does  the  utmost
for  the  well-being  of  all  when  he  has  given  to  the  world
the  most  intense  production  of  which  he  is  capable.
But  this  fundamental  notion  is  characteristic  of  Kro-
potkin  ;  it  contains  his  very  essence.

And  this  attitude  of  mind  carries  him  farther.  In
Finland,  where  he  is  going  to  make  a  new  scientific
discovery,  as  he  comes  to  the  idea — which  was  heresy
at  that  time — that  in  prehistoric  ages  all  Northern
Europe  was  buried  under  ice,  he  is  so  much  impressed
with  compassion  for  the  poor,  the  suffering,  who  often
know  hunger  in  their  struggle  for  bread,  that  he
considers  it  his  highest,  absolute  duty  to  become  a
teacher  and  helper  of  the  great  working  and  destitute
masses.

Soon  after  that  a  new  world  opens  before  him —
the  life  of  the  working  classes — and  he  learns  from
those  whom  he  intends  to  teach.

Five  or  six  years  later  this  crisis  appears  in  its
second  phase.  It  happens  in  Switzerland.  Already
during  his  first  stay  there  Kropotkin  had  abandoned
the  group  of  state-socialists,  from  fear  of  an  economical
despotism,  from  hatred  of  centralization,  from  love


PREFACE  xiii

for  the  freedom  of  the  individual  and  the  commune:
Now,  however,  after  his  long  imprisonment  in  Russia,
during  his  second  stay  amidst  the  intelligent  workers  of
West  Switzerland,  the  conception  which  floated  before
his  eyes  of  a  new  structure  of  society,  more  distinctly
dawns  upon  him  in  the  shape  of  a  society  of  federated
associations,  co-operating  in  the  same  way  as  the  railway
companies,  or  the  postal  departments  of  separate  coun-
tries co-operate.  He  knows  that  he  cannot  dictate
to  the  future  the  lines  which  it  will  have  to  follow ;  he
is  convinced  that  all  must  grow  out  of  (the  constructive
activity  of  the  masses,  but  he  compares,  for  the  sake  of
illustration,  the  coming  structure  with  the  guilds  and
the  mutual  relations  which  existed  in  mediaeval  times,
and  were  worked  out  from  below.  He  does  not  believe
in  the  distinction  between  leaders  and  led;  but  I
must  confess  that  I  am  old-fashioned  enough  to  feel
pleased  when  Kropotkin,  by  a  slight  inconsistency,
says  once  in  praise  of  a  friend  that  he  was  '  a  born
leader  of  men.'

The  author  describes  himself  as  a  Revolutionist,
and  he  is  surely  quite  right  in  so  doing.  But  seldom
have  there  been  revolutionists  so  humane  and  mild.
One  feels  astounded  when,  in  alluding  on  one  occa-
sion to  the  possibility  of  an  armed  conflict  with  the
Swiss  police,  there  appears  in  his  character  the  fight-
ing instinct  which  exists  in  all  of  us.  He  cannot  say
precisely  in  this  passage  whether  he  and  his  friends
felt  a  relief  at  being  spared  a  fight,  or  a  regret  that  the
fight  did  not  take  place.  This  expression  of  feeling


MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

stands  alone.  He  has  never  been  an  avenger,  but  always
a  martyr.

He  does  not  impose  sacrifices  upon  others ;  he
makes  them  himself.  All  his  life  he  has  done  it,  but
in  such  a  way  that  the  sacrifice  seems  to  have  cost
him  nothing.  So  little  does  he  make  of  it.  And  with
all  his  energy  he  is  so  far  from  being  vindictive,  that
of  a  disgusting  prison  doctor  he  only  remarks :  '  The
less  said  of  him  the  better.'

He  is  a  revolutionist  without  emphasis  and  with-
out emblem.  He  laughs  at  the  oaths  and  ceremonies
with  which  conspirators  bind  themselves  in  dramas
and  operas.  This  man  is  simplicity  personified.  In
character  he  will  bear  comparison  with  any  of  the
fighters  for  freedom  in  all  lands.  None  have  been
more  disinterested  than  he,  none  have  loved  mankind
more  than  he  does.

But  he  would  not  permit  me  to  say  in  the  forefront
of  his  book  all  the  good  that  I  think  of  him,  and
should  I  say  it,  my  words  would  outrun  the  limits  of>
a  reasonable  Preface.

GEORGE  BRANDES.


CONTENTS

ov

THE FIEST VOLUME

PART  PAO»

I. CHILDHOOD 1

II.  THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES 81

III.  SIBERIA 179


PORTRAIT OF PRINCE PETER KROPOTKIN IN 1864

Frontispiece

PORTRAIT OF PRINCESS CATHERINE KROPOTKIN

(MOTHEB OF THE AUTHOR) To  fOCC  p. 6


THIS  book  would  not  probably  have  been  written  for  some
time  to  come,  were  it  not  for  the  kind  invitation  and  the  most
friendly  encouragement  of  tlie  editor  and  tlie  publisher  of  the
'  Atlantic  Monthly '  to  write  it  for  serial  publication  in  tlieir
Review.  I  feel  it  a  pleasant  duty  to  acknowledge  here  my
very  best  thanks  both  for  the  hospitality  that  was  offered  to
me,  and  for  the  friendly  pressure  that  was  exercised  in  order
to  induce  me  to  undertake  this  work.  It  ivas  published  in
the  'Atlantic  Monthly'  (September  1898  to  September  1899}
under  the  title  of  'Autobiography  of  a  Revolutionist.'  Pre-
paring it  now  for  publication  in  book  form,  I  have  considerably
added  to  the  original  text  in  the  portions  relating  to  my  youth
and  my  stay  in  Siberia,  and  especially  in  the  Sixth  Part,  in
which  I  have  narrated  my  life  in  Western  Europe.

P.K.
October  1899.


PAET  FIRST
CHILDHOOD


VOL.  I.  B


Moscow  is  a  city  of  slow  historical  growth,  and  down
to  the  present  time  its  different  parts  have  wonderfully
well  retained  the  features  which  have  been  stamped  upon
them  in  the  slow  course  of  history.  The  Trans-Moskva
River  district,  with  its  broad,  sleepy  streets  and  its
monotonous  gray  painted,  low-roofed  houses,  of  which
the  entrance-gates  remain  securely  bolted  day  and  night,
has  always  been  the  secluded  abode  of  the  merchant
class,  and  the  stronghold  of  the  outwardly  austere,
formalistic,  and  despotic  Nonconformists  of  the  '  Old
Faith.'  The  citadel,  or  Kremlis  still  the  stronghold  of
Church  and  State  ;  and  the  immense  space  in  front  of  it,
covered  with  thousands  of  shops  and  warehouses,  has
been  for  centuries  a  crowded  beehive  of  commerce,  and
still  remains  the  heart  of  a  great  internal  trade  which
spreads  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  vast  empire.  The
Tverskaya  and  the  Smiths'  Bridge  have  been  for  hun-
dreds of  years  the  chief  centres  for  the  fashionable  shops ;
while  the  artisans'  quarters,  the  Pluschikha  and  the
Dorogomilovka,  retain  the  very  same  features  which
characterized  their  uproarious  populations  in  the  times
of  the  Moscow  Tsars.  Each  quarter  is  a  little  world  in
itself  ;  each  has  its  own  physiognomy,  and  lives  its  own
separate  life.  Even  the  railways,  when  they  made  an

B 2


4  MEMOIRS  OF A  REVOLUTIONIST

irruption  into  the  old  capital,  grouped  apart  in  special
centres  on  the  outskirts  of  the  old  town  their  stores
and  machine-works  and  their  heavily  loaded  carts  and
engines.

However,  of  all  parts  of  Moscow,  none,  perhaps,  is
more  typical  than  that  labyrinth  of  clean,  quiet,  winding
streets  and  lanes  which  lies  at  the  back  of  the  Kreml,
between  two  great  radial  streets,  the  Arbat  and  the  Pre-
chistenka,  and  is  still  called  the  Old  Equerries'  Quarter
— the  Staraya  Konyiishennaya.

Some  fifty  years  ago,  there  lived  in  this  quarter,  and
slowly  died  out,  the  old  Moscow  nobility,  whose  names
were  so  frequently  mentioned  in  the  pages  of  Eussian
history  before  the  time  of  Peter  I.,  but  who  subsequently
disappeared  to  make  room  for  the  new-comers,  'the
men  of  all  ranks ' — called  into  service  by  the  founder
of  the  Eussian  state.  Feeling  themselves  supplanted  at
the  St.  Petersburg  court,  these  nobles  of  the  old  stock
retired  either  to  the  Old  Equerries'  Quarter  in  Moscow,
or  to  their  picturesque  estates  in  the  country  round
about  the  capital,  and  they  looked  with  a  sort  of
contempt  and  secret  jealousy  upon  the  motley  crowd  of
families  which  came  '  from  no  one  knew  where '  to  take
possession  of  the  highest  functions  of  the  government,
in  the  new  capital  on  the  banks  of  the  Neva.

In  their  younger  days  most  of  them  had  tried
their  fortunes  in  the  service  of  the  state,  chiefly  in  the
army;  but  for  one  reason  or  another  they  had  soon
abandoned  it,  without  having  risen  to  high  rank.  The
more  successful  ones  obtained  some  quiet,  almost
honorary  position  in  their  mother  city — my  father
was  one  of  these — while  most  of  the  others  simply


CHILDHOOD  5

retired  from  active  service.  But  wheresoever  they
might  have  been  shifted,  in  the  course  of  their  careers,
over  the  wide  surface  of  Russia,  they  always  somehow
managed  to  spend  their  old  age  in  a  house  of  their
own  in  the  Old  Equerries'  Quarter,  under  the  shadow
of  the  church  where  they  had  been  baptized,  and
where  the  last  prayers  had  been  pronounced  at  the
burial  of  their  parents.

New  branches  budded  from  the  old  stocks.  Some
of  them  achieved  more  or  less  distinction  in  different
parts  of  Russia  ;  some  owned  more  luxurious  houses  in
the  new  style  in  other  quarters  of  Moscow  or  at  St.
Petersburg ;  but  the  branch  which  continued  to  reside
in  the  Old  Equerries'  Quarter,  somewhere  near  to  the
green,  the  yellow,  the  pink,  or  the  brown  church
which  was  endeared  through  family  associations,  was
considered  as  the  true  representative  of  the  family,  irre-
spective of  the  position  it  occupied  in  the  family  tree.
Its  old-fashioned  head  was  treated  with  great  respect,
not  devoid,  I  must  say,  of  a  slight  tinge  of  irony,  even
by  those  younger  representatives  of  the  same  stock  who
had  left  their  mother  city  for  a  more  brilliant  career  in
the  St.  Petersburg  Guards  or  in  the  court  circles.  He
personified,  for  them,  the  antiquity  of  the  family  and
its  traditions.

In  these  quiet  streets,  far  away  from  the  noise  and
bustle  of  the  commercial  Moscow,  all  the  houses  had
much  the  same  appearance.  They  were  mostly  built
of  wood,  with  bright  green  sheet-iron  roofs,  the
exteriors  stuccoed  and  decorated  with  columns  and
porticoes ;  all  were  painted  in  gay  colours.  Nearly
every  house  had  but  one  story,  with  seven  or  nine  big,


6  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

gay-looking  windows  facing  the  street.  A  second
story  was  admitted  only  in  the  back  part  of  the  house,
which  looked  upon  a  spacious  yard,  surrounded  by
numbers  of  small  buildings,  used  as  kitchens,  stables,
cellars,  coach-houses,  and  as  dwellings  for  the  retainers
and  servants.  A  wide  gate  opened  upon  this  yard,  and
a  brass  plate  on  it  usually  bore  the  inscription,  '  House
of  So-and-So,  Lieutenant  or  Colonel,  and  Commander  '
— very  seldom  '  Major-General '  or  any  similarly  ele-
vated civil  rank.  But  if  a  more  luxurious  house,
embellished  by  a  gilded  iron  railing  and  an  iron  gate,
stood  in  one  of  those  streets,  the  brass  plate  on  the
gate  was  sure  to  bear  the  name  of  '  Commerce  Counsel  '
or  '  Honourable  Citizen  '  So-and-So.  These  were  the
intruders,  those  who  came  unasked  to  settle  in  this
quarter,  and  were  therefore  ignored  by  their  neigh-
bours.

No  shops  were  allowed  in  these  select  streets,
except  that  in  some  small  wooden  house,  belonging  to
the  parish  church,  a  tiny  grocer's  or  greengrocer's  shop
might  have  been  found ;  but  then,  the  policeman's
lodge  stood  on  the  opposite  corner,  and  in  the  daytime
the  policeman  himself,  armed  with  a  halberd,  would
appear  at  the  door  to  salute  with  his  inoffensive
weapon  the  officers  passing  by,  and  would  retire  inside
when  dusk  came,  to  employ  himself  either  as  a  cobbler
or  in  the  manufacture  of  some  special  snuff  patronised
by  the  elder  servants  of  the  neighbourhood.

Life  went  on  quietly  and  peacefully — at  least  for
the  outsider — in  this  Moscow  Faubourg  Saint-Germain.
In  the  morning  nobody  was  seen  in  the  streets.  About
midday  the  children  made  their  appearance  under  the


CHILDHOOD  7

guidance  of  French  tutors  and  German  nurses,  who
took  them  out  for  a  walk  on  the  snow-covered  boule-
vards. Later  on  in  the  day  the  ladies  might  be  seen
in  their  two-horse  sledges,  with  a  valet  standing  behind
on  a  small  plank  fastened  at  the  end  of  the  runners,  or
ensconced  in  an  old-fashioned  carriage,  immense  and
high,  suspended  on  big  curved  springs  and  dragged  by
four  horses,  with  a  postillion  in  front  and  two  valets
standing  behind.  In  the  evening  most  of  the  houses
were  brightly  illuminated,  and,  the  blinds  not  being
drawn  down,  the  passer-by  could  admire  the  card-
players  or  the  waltzers  in  the  saloons.  '  Opinions  '
were  not  in  vogue  in  those  days,  and  we  were  yet  far
from  the  years  when  in  each  one  of  these  houses  a
struggle  began  between  '  fathers  and  sons  ' — a  struggle
that  usually  ended  either  in  a  family  tragedy  or  in  a
nocturnal  visit  of  the  state  police.  Fifty  years  ago
nothing  of  the  sort  was  thought  of ;  all  was  quiet  and
smooth — at  least  on  the  surface.

In  this  Old  Equerries'  Quarter  I  was  born  in  1842,
and  here  I  passed  the  first  fifteen  years  of  my  life.
Even  after  our  father  had  sold  the  house  in  which  our
mother  died,  and  bought  another,  and  when  again  he.
had  sold  that  house,  and  we  spent  several  winters  in
hired  houses,  until  he  had  found  a  third  one  to  his
taste  within  a  stone' s-throw  of  the  church  where  he
had  been  baptized,  we  still  remained  in  the  Old
Equerries'  Quarter,  leaving  it  only  during  the  summer
to  go  to  our  country-seat.


MKMOIRS  OF A  HEVOLUT10NIST


II


A  HIGH,  spacious  bedroom,  the  corner  room  of  our
house,  with  a  wide  bed  upon  which  our  mother  is  lying,
our  baby  chairs  and  tables  standing  close  by,  and  the
neatly  served  tables  covered  with  sweets  and  jellies  in
pretty  glass  jars — a  room  into  which  we  children  are
ushered  at  a  strange  hour — this  is  the  first  half-distinct
reminiscence  of  my  life.

Our  mother  was  dying  of  consumption;  she  was
only  thirty-five  years  old.  Before  parting  with  us
for  ever,  she  had  wished  to  have  us  by  her  side,  to
caress  us,  to  feel  happy  for  a  moment  in  our  joys,  and
she  had  arranged  this  little  treat  by  the  side  of  her  bed
which  she  could  leave  no  more.  I  remember  her  pale
thin  face,  her  large,  dark  brown  eyes.  She  looked  at  us
with  love,  and  invited  us  to  eat,  to  climb  upon  her  bed ;
then  suddenly  she  burst  into  tears  and  began  to
cough,  and  we  were  told  to  go.

Some  time  after,  we  children — that  is,  my  brother
Alexander  and  myself — were  removed  from  the  big
house  to  a  small  side  house  in  the  courtyard.  The
April  sun  filled  the  little  rooms  with  its  rays,  but  our
German  nurse  Madame  Burman  and  Ulidna,  our
Russian  nurse,  told  us  to  go  to  bed.  Their  faces  wet
with  tears,  they  were  sewing  for  us  black  shirts  fringed
with  broad  white  tassels.  We  could  not  sleep :  the
unknown  frightened  us,  and  we  listened  to  their
subdued  talk.  They  said  something  about  our  mother


CHILDHOOD  9

which  we  could  not  understand. We  jumped  out  of  our
beds,  asking, '  Where  is  mamma  ? Where  is  mamma  ?  '

Both  of  them  burst  into  sobs,  and  began  to  pat  our
curly  heads,  calling  us  'poor  orphans/  until  Uliana
could  hold  out  no  longer,  and  said,  '  Your  mother  is
gone  there— to  the  sky,  to  the  angels.'

'  How  to  the  sky  ?  Why  ?  '  our  infantile  imagina-
tion in  vain  demanded.

This  was  in  April  1846.  I  was  only  three  and  a  half
years  old,  and  my  brother  Sasha  not  yet  five.  Where  our
elder  brother  and  sister,  Nicholas  and  Helene,  had  gone
I  do  not  know :  perhaps  they  were  already  at  school.
Nicholas  was  twelve  years  old,  Helene  was  eleven  ;  they
kept  together,  and  we  knew  them  but  little.  So  we  re-
mained, Alexander  and  I,  in  this  little  house,  in  the  hands
of  Madame  Burman  and  Uliana.  The  good  old  German
lady,  homeless  and  absolutely  alone  in  the  wide  world,
took  toward  us  the  place  of  our  mother.  She  brought
us  up  as  well  as  she  could,  buying  us  from  time
to  time  some  simple  toys,  and  overfeeding  us  with
ginger  cakes  whenever  another  old  German,  who  used
to  sell  such  cakes — probably  as  homeless  and  solitary
as  herself — paid  an  occasional  visit  to  our  house.  We
seldom  saw  our  father,  and  the  next  two  years  passed
without  leaving  any  impression  on  my  memory.


10  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST


III


OUE  father  was  very  proud  of  the  origin  of  his  family,
and  would  point  with  solemnity  to  a  piece  of  parchment
which  hung  on  the  wall  of  his  study.  It  was  decorated
with  our  arms— the  arms  of  the  principality  of  Smolensk
covered  with  the  ermine  mantle  and  the  crown  of
the  Monomachs — and  there  was  written  on  it,  and
certified  by  the  Heraldry  Department,  that  our  family
originated  with  a  grandson  of  Rostislav  Mstislavich  the
Bold  (a  name  familiar  in  Kussian  history  as  that  of  a
Grand  Prince  of  Kleff),  and  that  our  ancestors  had  been
Grand  Princes  of  Smolensk.

'  It  cost  me  three  hundred  roubles  to  obtain  that
parchment,'  our  father  used  to  say.  .Like  most  people
of  his  generation,  he  was  not  much  versed  in  Russian
history,  and  valued  the  parchment  more  for  its  cost  than
for  its  historical  associations.

As  a  matter  of  fact,  our  family  is  of  very  ancient
origin  indeed  ;  but,  like  most  descendants  of  Rurik  who
may  be  regarded  as  representative  of  the  feudal  period  of
Russian  history,  it  was  driven  into  the  background  when
that  period  ended,  and  the  Romanoffs,  enthroned  at
Moscow,  began  the  work  of  consolidating  the  Russian
state.  In  recent  times,  none  of  the  Kropotkins  seem  to
have  had  any  special  liking  for  state  functions.  Our
great-grandfather  and  grandfather  both  retired  from  the
military  service  when  quite  young  men,  and  hastened
to  return  to  their  family  estates.  It  must  also  be  said
that  of  these  estates  the  main  one,  Uriisovo,  situated


CHILDHOOD  11

in  the  government  of  Ryazan,  on  a  high  hill  at  the  border
of  fertile  prairies,  might  tempt  any  one  by  the  beauty  of
its  shadowy  forests,  its  winding  rivers,  and  its  endless
meadows.  Our  grandfather  was  only  a  lieutenant  when
he  left  the  service,  and  retired  to  Urusovo,  devoting
himseM  to  his  estate,  and  to  the  purchase  of  other  estates
in  the  neighbouring  provinces.

Probably  our  generation  would  have  done  the  same  ;
but  our  grandfather  married  a  Princess  Gagarin,  who
belonged  to  a  quite  different  family.  Her  brother  was
well  known  as  a  passionate  lover  of  the  stage.  He  kept
a  private  theatre  of  his  own,  and  went  so  far  in  his
passion  as  to  marry,  to  the  scandal  of  all  his  relations,
a  serf — the  genial  actress  Semyonova,  who  was  one  of
the  creators  of  dramatic  art  in  Russia,  and  undoubtedly
one  of  its  most  sympathetic  figures.  To  the  horror  of
'  all  Moscow,'  she  continued  to  appear  on  the  stage.

I  do  not  know  if  our  grandmother  had  the  same
artistic  and  literary  tastes  as  her  brother — I  remember
her  when  she  was  already  paralyzed  and  could  speak  only
in  whispers ;  but  it  is  certain  that  in  the  next  genera-
tion a  leaning  toward  literature  became  a  characteristic
of  our  family,.  One  of  the  sons  of  the  Princess  Gagarin
was  a  minor  Russian  poet,  and  issued  a  book  of  poems
—a  fact  which  my  father  was  ashamed  of  and  always
avoided  mentioning  ;  and  in  our  own  generation  several
of  our  cousins,  as  well  as  my  brother  and  myself,  have
contributed  more  or  less  to  the  literature  of  our  period.

Our  father  was  a  typical  officer  of  the  time  of
Nicholas  I.  Not  that  he  was  imbued  with  a  warlike
spirit  or  much  in  love  with  camp  life ;  I  doubt  whether
he  spent  a  single  night  of  his  life  at  a  bivouac  fire,  or


12  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

took  part  in  one  battle.  But  under  Nicholas  I.  that
was  of  quite  secondary  importance.  The  true  military
man  of  those  times  was  the  officer  who  was  enamoured
of  the  military  uniform  and  utterly  despised  all  other
sorts  of  attire  ;  whose  soldiers  were  trained  to  perform
almost  superhuman  tricks  with  their  legs  and  rifles  (to
break  the  wood  of  the  rifle  into  pieces  while  '  presenting
arms '  was  one  of  those  famous  tricks) ;  and  who  could
show  on  parade  a  row  of  soldiers  as  perfectly  aligned  and
as  motionless  as  a  row  of  toy-soldiers.  'Very  good,'
the  Grand  Duke  Mikhael  said  once  of  a  regiment,
after  having  kept  it  for  one  hour  presenting  arms —
'  only  they  breathe  \  '  To  respond  to  the  then  current
conception  of  a  military  man  was  certainly  our  father's
ideal.

True,  he  took  part  in  the  Turkish  campaign  of  1828  ;
but  he  managed  to  remain  all  the  time  on  the  staff  of
the  chief  commander ;  and  if  we  children,  taking  ad-
vantage of  a  moment  when  he  was  in  a  particularly
good  temper,  asked  him  to  tell  us  something  about  the
war,  he  had  nothing  to  tell  but  of  a  fierce  attack  of
hundreds  of  Turkish  dogs  which  one  night  assailed  him
and  his  faithful  servant,  Frol,  as  they  were  riding  with
despatches  through  an  abandoned  Turkish  village.  They
had  to  use  swords  to  extricate  themselves  from  the
hungry  beasts.  Bands  of  Turks  would  assuredly  have
better  satisfied  our  imagination,  but  we  accepted  the
dogs  as  a  substitute.  When,  however,  pressed  by  our
questions,  our  father  told  us  how  he  had  won  the
cross  of  Saint  Anne  '  for  gallantry,'  and  the  golden
sword  which  he  wore,  I  must  confess  we  felt  really
disappointed.  His  story  was  decidedly  too  prosaic.


CHILDHOOD  13

The  officers  of  the  general  staff  were  lodged  in  a  Turkish
village,  when  it  took  fire.  In  a  moment  the  houses  were
enveloped  in  flames,  and  in  one  of  them  a  child  had  been
left  behind.  Its  mother  uttered  despairing  cries.  There-
upon, Frol,  who  always  accompanied  his  master,  rushed
into  the  flames  and  saved  the  child.  The  chief  com-
mander, who  saw  the  act,  at  once  gave  father  the  cross
for  gallantry.

'  But,  father,'  we  exclaimed, '  it  was  Frol  who  saved
the  child  ! '

'  What  of  that  ?  '  replied  he,  in  the  most  na'ive
way.  '  Was  he  not  my  man  ?  It  is  all  the  same.'

He  also  took  some  part  in  the  campaign  of  1831,
during  the  Polish  Revolution,  and  in  Warsaw  he  made
the  acquaintance  of,  and  fell  in  love  with,  the  youngest
daughter  of  the  commander  of  an  army  corps,  General
Sulfma.  The  marriage  was  celebrated  with  great  pomp,
in  the  Lazienki  palace ;  the  lieutenant-governor,  Count
Paskiewich,  acting  as  nuptial  godfather  on  the  bride-
groom's side.  '  But  your  mother,'  our  father  used  to
add, '  brought  me  no  fortune  whatever.'

Which  was  true.  Her  father,  Nikolai  Semyonovich
Sulfma,  was  .not  versed  in  the  art  of  making  a  career  or
a  fortune.  He  must  have  had  in  him  too  much  of  the
blood  of  those  Cossacks  of  the  Dnyeper,  who  knew  how
to  fight  the  well-equipped,  warlike  Poles  or  armies  of
the  Turks,  three  times  more  than  themselves,  but  knew
not  how  to  avoid  the  snares  of  the  Moscow  diplomacy,
and,  after  having  fought  against  the  Poles  in  the  ter-
rible insurrection  of  1648,  which  was  the  beginning  of
the  end  for  the  Polish  republic,  lost  all  their  liberties  in
falling  under  the  dominion  of  the  Eussian  Tsars.  One


14  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

Sulima  was  captured  by  the  Poles  and  tortured  to  death
at  Warsaw,  but  the  other  '  colonels  '  of  the  same  stock
only  fought  the  more  fiercely  on  that  account,  and
Poland  lost  Little  Eussia.  As  to  our  grandfather,  he
knew  how,  with  his  regiment  of  cuirassiers  during
Napoleon  I.'s  invasion,  to  cut  his  way  into  a  French
infantry  square  bristling  with  bayonets,  and  to  recover,
after  having  been  left  for  dead  on  the  battle-field,  with  a
deep  cut  in  his  head ;  but  he  could  not  become  a  valet  to
the  favourite  of  Alexander  I.,  the  omnipotent  Arakch6eff,
and  was  consequently  sent  into  a  sort  of  honorary  exile,
first  as  a  governor-general  of  West  Siberia,  and  later  of
East  Siberia.  In  those  times  such  a  position  was  con-
sidered more  lucrative  than  a  gold-mine,  but  our  grand-
father returned  from  Siberia  as  poor  as  he  went,  and  left
only  modest  fortunes  to  his  three  sons  and  three  daugh-
ters. When  I  went  to  Siberia,  in  1862,  I  often  heard
his  name  mentioned  with  respect.  He  was  almost
driven  to  despair  by  the  wholesale  stealing  which  went
on  in  those  provinces,  and  which  he  had  no  means  to
repress.

Our  mother  was  undoubtedly  a  remarkable  woman
for  the  times  she  lived  in.  Many  years  after  her  death
I  discovered,  in  a  corner  of  a  storeroom  of  our  country
house,  a  mass  of  papers  covered  with  her  firm  but
pretty  handwriting  :  diaries  in  which  she  wrote  with
delight  of  the  scenery  of  Germany,  and  spoke  of  her
sorrows  and  her  thirst  for  happiness  ;  books  which  she
had  filled  with  Eussian  verses  prohibited  by  censorship —
among  them  the  beautiful  historical  ballads  of  Eyleeff,
the  poet,  whom  Nicholas  I.  hanged  in  1826  ;  other
books  containing  music,  French  dramas,  verses  of


CHILDHOOD  16

Lamartine, and  Byron's  poems  that  she  had  copied  ;
and  a  great  number  of  water-colour  paintings.

Tall,  slim,  adorned  with  a  mass  of  dark  chestnut
hair,  with  dark  brown  eyes  and  a  tiny  mouth,  she  looks
quite  lifelike  in  a  portrait  in  oils  that  was  painted
con  amore  by  a  good  artist.  Always  lively  and  often
careless/  she  was  fond  of  dancing,  and  the  peasant
women  in  our  village  would  tell  us  how  she  would
admire  from  a  balcony  their  ring-dances — slow  and
full  of  grace — and  how  finally  she  would  herself  join
in  them.  She  had  the  nature  of  an  artist.  It  was  at
a  ball  that  she  caught  the  cold  that  produced  the
inflammation  of  the  lungs  which  brought  her  to
the  grave.

All  who  knew  her  loved  her.  The  servants
worshipped  her  memory.  It  was  in  her  name  that
Madame  Biirman  took  care  of  us,  and  in  her  name  the
Russian  nurse  bestowed  upon  us  her  love.  While
combing  our  hair,  or  signing  us  with  the  cross  in  our
beds,  Uliana  would  often  say,  '  And  your  mamma  must
now  look  upon  you  from  the  skies,  and  shed  tears  on
seeing  you,  poor  orphans.'  Our  whole  childhood  is
irradiated  by  her  memory.  How  often  in  some  dark
passage,  the  hand  of  a  servant  would  touch  Alexander
or  me  with  a  caress  ;  or  a  peasant  woman,  on  meeting
us  in  the  fields,  would  ask,  '  Will  you  be  as  good  as
your  mother  was  ?  She  took  compassion  on  us.  You
will,  surely.'  '  Us '  meant,  of  course,  the  serfs.  I  do
not  know  what  would  have  become  of  us  if  we  had
not  found  in  our  house,  amidst  the  serf  servants,  that
atmosphere  of  love  which  children  must  have  around
them.  We  were  her  children,  we  bore  likeness  to  her,


If)  MEMOIRS  OF A  REVOLUTIONIST

and  they  lavished  their  care  upon us, sometimes in
a  touching  form,  as  will  be  seen  later  on.

Men  passionately  desire  to  live  after  death,  but
they  often  pass  away  without  noticing  the  fact  that  the
memory  of  a  really  good  person  always  lives.  It  is
impressed  upon  the  next  generation,  and  is  transmitted
again  to  the  children.  Is  not  that  an  immortality  worth
striving  for  ?


IV


Two  years  after  the  death  of  our  mother  our  father
married  again.  He  had  already  cast  his  eyes  upon  a
nice-looking  young  person,  this  time  belonging  to  a
wealthy  family,  when  the  fates  decided  another  way.
One  morning,  while  he  was  still  in  his  dressing-gown,
the  servants  rushed  madly  into  his  room,  announcing
the  arrival  of  General  Timofeeff,  the  commander  of
the  sixth  army  corps,  to  which  our  father  belonged.
This  favourite  of  Nicholas  I.  was  a  terrible  man.  He
would  order  a  soldier  to  be  flogged  almost  to  death  for
a  mistake  made  during  a  parade,  or  he  would  degrade
an  officer  and  send  him  as  a  private  to  Siberia  because
he  had  met  him  in  the  street  with  the  hooks  on  his
high,  stiff  collar  unfastened.  With  Nicholas  General
Timof Jeff's  word  was  all-powerful.

The  general,  who  had  never  before  been  in  our
house,  came  to  propose  to  our  father  to  marry  his
wife's  niece,  Mademoiselle  Elisabeth  Karandino,  one
of  several  daughters  of  an  admiral  of  the  Black  Sea  fleet


CHILDHOOD  17

—a  young  lady  with  a  classical  Greek  profile,  said  to  have
been  very  beautiful.  Father  accepted,  and  his  second
wedding,  like  the  first,  was  solemnized  with  great  pomp.

'  You  young  people  understand  nothing  of  this  kind
of  thing,'  he  said  in  conclusion,  after  having  told  me  the
story  more  than  once,  with  a  very  fine  humour  which
I  will  not  attempt  to  reproduce.  '  But  do  you  know
what  it  meant  at  that  time,  the  commander  of  an  army
corps — above  all,  that  one-eyed  devil,  as  we  used  to  call
him — coming  himself  to  propose?  Of  course  she  had  no
dowry ;  only  a  big  trunk  filled  with  ladies'  finery,  and
that  Martha,  her  one  serf,  dark  as  a  gypsy,  sitting  upon  it.'

I  have  no  recollection  whatever  of  this  event.  I  only
remember  a  big  drawing-room  in  a  richly  furnished
house,  and  in  that  room  a  young  lady,  attractive  but
with  a  rather  too  sharp  southern  look,  gambolling  with
us,  and  saying,  '  You  see  what  a  jolly  mamma  you  will
have  ; '  to  which  Sasha  and  I,  sulkily  looking  at  her,
replied,  '  Our  mamma  has  flown  away  to  the  sky.'  We
regarded  so  much  liveliness  with  suspicion.

Winter  came,  and  a  new  life  began  for  us.  Our
house  was  sold' and  another  was  bought  and  furnished
completely  anew.  All  that  could  convey  a  reminiscence
of  our  mother  disappeared — her  portraits,  her  paintings,
her  embroideries.  In  vain  Madame  Burman  implored
to  be  retained  in  our  house,  and  promised  to  devote
herself  to  the  baby  our  stepmother  was  expecting  as  to
her  own  child  :  she  was  sent  away.  '  Nothing  of  the
Sulimas  in  my  house,'  she  was  told.  All  connection
with  our  uncles  and  aunts  and  our  grandmother  were
broken.  Uliana  was  married  to  Frol,  who  became  a

VOL.  i.  c


18  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

major-domo,  while  she  was  made  housekeeper ;  and  for
our  education  a  richly  paid  French  tutor,  M.  Poulain,  and
a  miserably  paid  Russian  student,  N.  P.  Smirnoff,  were
engaged.

Many  of  the  sons  of  the  Moscow  nobles  were
educated  at  that  time  by  Frenchmen,  who  represented
the  debris  of  Napoleon's  Grande  Arrnee.  M.  Poulain
was  one  of  them.  He  had  just  finished  the  education
of  the  youngest  son  of  the  novelist  Zagoskin  ;  and  his
pupil,  Serge,  enjoyed  in  the  Old  Equerries'  Quarter  the
reputation  of  being  so  well  brought  up  that  our  father
did  not  hesitate  to  engage  M.  Poulain  for  the  consider-
able sum  of  six  hundred  roubles  a  year.

M.  Poulain  brought  with  him  his  setter,  Tresor,  his
coffee-pot  Napoleon,  and  his  French  text-books,  and  he
began  to  rule  over  us  and  the  serf  Matvei  who  was
attached  to  our  service.

His  plan  of  education  was  very  simple.  After  having
woke  us  up  he  attended  to  his  coffee,  which  he  used  to
take  in  his  room.  While  we  were  preparing  the  morning
lessons  he  made  his  toilet  with  minute  care  :  he  sham-
pooed his  grey  hair  so  as  to  conceal  his  growing  bald-
ness, put  on  his  tail-coat,  sprinkled  and  washed  himself
with  eau-de-cologne,  and  then  escorted  us  downstairs  to
say  good-morning  to  our  parents.  We  used  to  find  our
father  and  stepmother  at  breakfast,  and  on  approaching
them  we  recited  in  the  most  ceremonious  manner,  '  Bon-
jour,  mon  cher  papa,'  and  '  Bonjour,  ma  chere  maman,'
and  kissed  their  hands.  M.  Poulain  made  a  very
complicated  and  elegant  obeisance  in  pronouncing  the
words,  '  Bonjour,  monsieur  le  prince,'  and  '  Bonjour,
madame  la  princesse,'  after  which  the  procession  imme-


CHILDHOOD  19

diately  withdrew  and  retired  upstairs.  This  ceremony
was  repeated  every  morning.

Then  our  work  began.  M.  Poulain  changed  his
tail-coat  for  a  dressing-gown,  covered  his  head  with
a  leather  cap,  and  dropping  into  an  easy-chair  said
'  Eecitev  the  lesson.'

We  recited  it  '  by  heart '  from  one  mark  which  was
made  in  the  book  with  the  nail  to  the  next  mark.  M.
Poulain  had  brought  with  him  the  grammar  of  Noel
and  Chapsal,  memorable  to  more  than  one  generation
of  Russian  boys  and  girls  ;  a  book  of  French  dialogues  ;
a  history  of  the  world,  in  one  volume  ;  and  a  universal
geography,  also  in  one  volume.  We  had  to  commit  to
memory  the  grammar,  the  dialogues,  the  history,  and
the  geography.

The  grammar,  with  its  well-known  sentences,
'  What  is  grammar  ?  '  '  The  art  of  speaking  and
writing  correctly,'  went  all  right.  But  the  history
book,  unfortunately,  hacl  a  preface,  which  contained  an
enumeration  of  all  the  advantages  which  can  be
derived  from  a  knowledge  of  history.  Things  went  on
smoothly  enough  with  the  first  sentences.  We
recited  :  '  The  prince  finds  in  it  magnanimous  examples
for  governing  his  subjects ;  the  military  commander
learns  from  it  the  noble  art  of  warfare.'  But  the
moment  we  came  to  law  all  went  wrong.  '  The  juris-
consult meets  in  it ' — but  what  the  learned  lawyer
meets  in  history  we  never  came  to  know  That
terrible  word  '  jurisconsult '  spoiled  all  the  game.  As
soon  as  we  reached  it  we  stopped.

'  On  your  knees,  gros  pouft ! '  exclaimed  Poulain.
(That  was  for  me.)  '  On  your  knees,  grand  dada ! '

c  2


20  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

(That  was  for  my  brother.)  And  there  we  knelt,
shedding  tears  and  vainly  endeavouring  to  learn  all
about  the  jurisconsult.

It  cost  us  many  pains,  that  preface  !  We  were
already  learning  all  about  the  Eomans,  and  used  to  put
our  sticks  in  Uliana's  scales  when  she  was  weighing
rice,  '  just  like  Brennus ;  '  we  jumped  from  our  table
and  other  precipices  for  the  salvation  of  our  country,
in  imitation  of  Curtius ;  but  M.  Poulairi  would  still
from  time  to  time  return  to  the  preface,  and  again  put
us  on  our  knees  for  that  very  same  jurisconsult.  Was
it  strange  that  later  on  both  my  brother  and  I  should
entertain  an  undisguised  contempt  for  jurisprudence  ?

I  do  not  know  what  would  have  happened  with
geography  if  M.  Poulain's  book  had  had  a  preface.
But  happily  the  first  twenty  pages  of  the  book  had
been  torn  away  (Serge  Zagoskin,  I  suppose,  rendered
us  that  notable  service),  and  so  our  lessons  commenced
with  the  twenty-first  page,  which  began,  '  of  the  rivers
which  water  France.'

It  must  be  confessed  that  things  did  not  always
end  with  kneeling.  There  was  in  the  class-room  a
birch  rod,  and  Poulain  resorted  to  it  when  there  was
no  hope  of  progress  with  the  preface  or  with  some
dialogue  on  virtue  and  propriety  ;  but  one  day  sister
Helene,  who  by  this  time  had  left  the  Catherine  Insti-
tut  des  Demoiselles,  and  now  occupied  a  room  under-
neath ours,  hearing  our  cries,  rushed,  all  in  tears,  into
our  father's  study,  and  bitterly  reproached  him  with
having  handed  us  over  to  our  stepmother,  who  had
abandoned  us  to  'a  retired  French  drummer.'  '  Of
course,'  she  cried,  '  there  is  no  one  to  take  their  part,


CHILDHOOD  '21

but  I  cannot  see  my  brothers  being  treated  in  this  way
by  a  drummer  !  '

Taken  thus  unprepared,  our  father  could  not  make
a  stand.  He  began  to  scold  Helene,  but  ended  by
approving  her  devotion  to  her  brothers.  Thereafter
the  birch  rod  was  reserved  for  teaching  the  rules  of
propriety  to  the  setter,  Tresor.

No  sooner  had  M.  Poulain  discharged  himself  of
his  heavy  educational  duties  than  he  became  quite
another  man — a  lively  comrade  instead  of  a  gruesome
teacher.  After  lunch  he  took  us  out  for  a  walk,  and
there  was  no  end  to  his  tales  :  we  chattered  like  birds.
Though  we  never  went  with  him  beyond  the  first
pages  of  syntax,  we  soon  learned,  nevertheless,  '  to  speak
correctly  ; '  we  used  to  think  in  French ;  and  when  he
had  dictated  to  us  half  through  a  book  of  mythology,
correcting  our  faults  by  the  book,  without  ever  trying
to  explain  to  us  why  a  word  must  be  written  in  a
particular  way,  we  had  learned  '  to  write  correctly.'

After  dinner  we  had  our  lesson  with  the  Eussian
teacher,  a  student  of  the  faculty  of  law  in  the  Moscow
University.  He  taught  us  all  '  Russian  '  subjects —
grammar,  arithmetic,  history,  and  so  on.  But  in  those
years  serious  teaching  had  not  yet  begun.  In  the
meantime  he  dictated  to  us  every  day  a  page  of  history )
and  in  that  practical  way  we  quickly  learned  to  write
Russian  quite  correctly.

Our  best  time  was  on  Sundays,  when  all  the  family,
with  the  exception  of  us  children,  went  to  dine  with
Madame  la  Generale  Timofeeff.  It  would  also  happen
occasionally  that  both  M.  Poulain  and  N.  P.  Smirnoff
would  be  allowed  to  leave  the  house,  and  when  this


22  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

occurred  we  were  placed  under  the  care  of  Uliana.
After  a  hurriedly  eaten  dinner  we  hastened  to  the
great  hall,  to  which  the  younger  housemaids  soon
repaired.  All  sorts  of  games  were  started — blind  man,
vulture  and  chickens,  and  so  on ;  and  then,  all  of  a
sudden,  Tikhon,  the  Jack-of-all-trades,  would  appear
with  a  violin.  Dancing  began ;  not  that  measured
and  tiresome  dancing,  under  the  direction  of  a  French
dancing-master  '  on  india-rubber  legs,'  which  made
part  of  our  education,  but  free  dancing  which  was  not
a  lesson,  and  in  which  a  score  of  couples  turned  round
any  way;  and  this  was  only  preparatory  to  the  still
more  animated  and  rather  wild  Cossack  dance.
Tikhon  would  then  hand  the  violin  to  one  of  the  older
men,  and  would  begin  to  perform  with  his  legs  such
wonderful  feats  that  the  doors  leading  to  the  hall  would
soon  be  filled  by  the  cooks  and  even  the  coachmen,
who  came  to  see  the  dance  so  dear  to  the  Russian
heart.

About  nine  o'clock  the  big  carriage  was  sent  to
fetch  the  family  home.  Tikhon,  brush  in  hand,
crawled  on  the  floor,  to  make  it  shine  with  its  virgin
glance,  and  perfect  order  was  restored  in  the  house.
And  if,  next  morning,  we  two  had  been  submitted  to
the  most  severe  cross-examination,  not  a  word  would
have  been  dropped  concerning  the  previous  evening's
amusements.  We  never  would  have  betrayed  any  one
of  the  servants,  nor  would  they  have  betrayed  us.
One  Sunday,  my  brother  and  I,  playing  alone  in  the
wide  hall,  ran  against  a  bracket  which  supported  a
costly  lamp.  The  lamp  was  broken  to  pieces.  Imme-
diately a  council  was  held  by  the  servants.  No  one


CHILDHOOD  23

scolded  us ;  but  it  was  decided  that  early  next  morning
Tikhon  should  at  his  risk  and  peril  slip  out  of  the
house  and  run  to  the  Smiths'  Bridge  in  order  to  buy
another  lamp  of  the  same  pattern.  It  cost  fifteen
roubles — an  enormous  sum  for  the  servants  ;  but  it  was
done,  and  we  never  heard  a  word  of  reproach  about  it.
When  I  think  of  it  now,  and  all  these  scenes  come
back  to  my  memory,  I  notice  that  we  never  heard
coarse  language  in  any  of  the  games,  nor  saw  in  the
dances  anything  like  the  kind  of  dancing  which  children
are  now  taken  to  admire  in  the  theatres.  In  the
servants'  house,  among  themselves,  they  assuredly  used
coarse  expressions  ;  but  we  were  children — her  children
— and  that  protected  us  from  anything  of  the  sort.

In  those  days  children  were  not  bewildered  by  a
profusion  of  toys,  as  they  are  now.  We  had  almost
none,  and  were  thus  compelled  to  rely  upon  our  own
inventiveness.  Besides,  we  both  had  early  acquired  a
taste  for  the  theatre.  The  inferior  carnival  theatres,
with  the  thieving  and  fighting  shows,  produced  no
lasting  impression  upon  us :  we  ourselves  played
enough  at  robbers  and  soldiers.  But  the  great  star  of
the  ballet,  Fanny  Elssler,  came  to  Moscow,  and  we
saw  her.  When  father  took  a  box  in  the  theatre,  he
always  secured  one  of  the  best,  and  paid  for  it  well ;
but  then  he  insisted  that  all  the  members  of  the  family
should  enjoy  it  to  its  full  value.  Small  though  I  was
at  that  time,  Fanny  Elssler  left  upon  me  the  impression
of  a  being  so  full  of  grace,  so  light,  and  so  artistic
in  all  her  movements,  that  ever  since  I  have  been
unable  to  feel  the  slightest  interest  in  a  dance  which


24  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

belongs more to  the domain  of  gymnastics than to
the  domain  of  art.

Of  course  the  ballet  that  we  saw — '  Gitana,'  the
Spanish  Gypsy— had  to  be  repeated  at  home ;  its
substance,  not  the  dances.  We  had  a  ready-made
stage,  as  the  doorway  which  led  from  our  bedroom  into "
the  class-room  had  a  curtain  instead  of  a  door.  A  few
chairs  put  in  a  half -circle  in  front  of  the  curtain,  with
an  easy-chair  for  M.  Poulain,  became  the  hall  and  the
imperial  box,  and  an  audience  could  easily  be  mustered
with  the  Russian  teacher,  Uliana,  and  a  couple  of  maids
from  the  servants'  rooms.

Two  scenes  of  the  ballet  had  to  be  represented  by
some  means  or  other :  the  one  where  the  little  Gitana
is  brought  by  the  gypsies  into  their  camp  in  a  wheel-
barrow, and  that  in  which  Gitana  makes  her  first
appearance  on  the  stage,  descending  from  a  hill  and
crossing  a  bridge  over  a  brook  which  reflects  her  image.
The  audience  burst  into  frantic  applause  at  this  point,
and  the  cheers  were  evidently  called  forth — so  we
thought,  at  least — by  the  reflection  in  the  brook.

We  found  our  Gitana  in  one  of  the  youngest  girls
in  the  maid-servants'  room.  Her  rather  shabby  blue
cotton  dress  was  no  obstacle  to  personifying  Fanny
Elssler.  An  overturned  chair,  pushed  along  by  its  legs,
head  downwards,  was  an  acceptable  substitute  for  the
wheelbarrow.  But  the  brook  !  Two  chairs  and  the
long  ironing-board  of  Andrei,  the  tailor,  made  the
bridge,  and  a  piece  of  blue  cotton  made  the  brook.  The
image  in  the  brook,  however,  would  not  appear  full  size,
do  what  we  might  with  M.  Poulain's  little  shaving-
glass.  After  many  unsuccessful  endeavours  we  had  to


CHILDHOOD  25

give  it  up,  but  we  bribed  .Uliana  to  behave  as  if  she
saw  the  image,  and  to  applaud  loudly  at  this  passage,
so  that  finally  we  began  to  believe  that  perhaps
something  of  it  could  be  seen.

Kacine's  '  Phedre/  or  at  least  the  last  act  of  it,  also
went  off  nicely;  that  is,  Sasha  recited  the  melodious
verses  beautifully —

A  peine  nous  sortions  des  portes  de  Trezene  ;

and  I  sat  absolutely  motionless  and  unconcerned  during
the  whole  length  of  the  tragic  monologue  intended  to
apprise  me  of  the  death  of  my  son,  down  to  the  place
where,  according  to  the  book,  I  had  to  exclaim,  '  0
dieux  ! '

But  whatsoever  we  might  impersonate,  all  our
performances  invariably  ended  with  hell.  All  candles
save  one  were  put  out,  and  this  one  was  placed  behind
a  transparent  paper  to  imitate  flames,  while  my  brother
and  I,  concealed  from  view,  howled  in  the  most  appal-
ling way  as  the  condemned.  Uliana,  who  did  not  like  to
have  any  allusion  to  the  evil  one  made  at  bedtime,
looked  horrified ;  but  I  ask  myself  now  whether  this
extremely  concrete  representation  of  hell,  with  a  candle
and  a  sheet  of  paper,  did  not  contribute  to  free  us  both
at  an  early  age  from  the  fear  of  eternal  fire.  Our
conception  of  it  was  too  realistic  to  resist  scepticism.

I  must  have  been  very  much  of  a  child  when  I  saw
the  great  Moscow  actors  :  Schepkin,  Sadovskiy,  and
Shumski,  in  Gogol's  Revisor  and  another  comedy ;
still,  I  remember  not  only  the  salient  scenes  of  the  two
plays,  but  even  the  attitudes  and  expressions  of  these
great  actors  of  the  realistic  school  which  is  now  so


26  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

admirably  represented  by  Duse.  I  remembered  them
so  well  that  when  I  saw  the  same  plays  given  at
St.  Petersburg  by  actors  belonging  to  the  French
declamatory  school,  I  found  no  pleasure  in  their
acting,  always  comparing  them  with  Schepkin  and
Sad6vskiy,  by  whom  my  taste  in  dramatic  art  was
settled.

This  makes  me  think  that  parents  who  wish  to
develop  artistic  taste  in  their  children  ought  to  take
them  occasionally  to  really  well-acted,  good  plays,
instead  of  feeding  them  on  a  profusion  of  so-called
'children's  pantomimes.'


WHEN  I  was  in  my  eighth  year,  the  next  step  in  my
career  was  taken,  in  a  quite  unforeseen  way.  I  do  not
know  exactly  on  what  occasion  it  happened,  but
probably  it  was  on  the  twenty-fifth  anniversary  of
Nicholas  I.'s  reign,  when  great  festivities  were  arranged
at  Moscow.  The  imperial  family  were  coming  to  the
old  capital,  and  the  Moscow  nobility  intended  to
celebrate  this  event  by  a  fancy-dress  ball  in  which
children  were  to  play  an  important  part.  It  was  agreed
that  the  whole  motley  crowd  of  nationalities  of  which
the  population  of  the  Russian  Empire  is  composed
should  be  represented  at  this  ball  to  greet  the
monarch.  Great  preparations  went  on  in  our  house,
as  well  as  in  all  the  houses  of  our  neighbourhood.


CHILDHOOD  27

Some  sort  of  remarkable  Russian  costume  was  made
for  our  stepmother.  Our  father,  being  a  military  man,
had  to  appear,  of  course,  in  his  uniform;  but  those  of
our  relatives  who  were  not  in  the  military  service  were
as  busy  with  their  Russian,  Greek,  Caucasian,  and
Mongolian  costumes,  as  the  ladies  themselves.  When
the  Moscow  nobility  gives  a  ball  to  the  imperial  family,
it  must  be  something  extraordinary.  As  for  my
brother  Alexander  and  myself,  we  were  considered  too
young  to  take  part  in  so  important  a  ceremonial.

And  yet,  after  all,  I  did  take  part  in  it.  Our  mother
was  an  intimate  friend  of  Madame  Nazimoff,  the  wife
of  the  general  who  was  Governor  of  Wilno  when  the
emancipation  of  the  serfs  began  to  be  spoken  of.
Madame  Nazimoff,  who  was  a  very  beautiful  woman,
was  expected  to  be  present  at  the  ball  with  her  child,
about  ten  years  old,  and  to  wear  some  wonderful
costume  of  a  Persian  princess  in  harmony  with  which
the  costume  of  a  young  Persian  prince,  exceedingly
rich,  with  a  belt  covered  with  jewels,  was  made  ready
for  her  son.  But  the  boy  fell  ill  just  before  the  ball,
and  Madame  Nazimoff  thought  that  one  of  the  children
of  her  best  friend  would  be  a  good  substitute  for  her
own  child.  Alexander  and  I  were  taken  to  her  house
to  try  on  the  costume.  It  proved  to  be  too  short  for
Alexander,  who  was  much  taller  than  I,  but  it  fitted
me  exactly,  and  therefore  it  was  decided  that  I  should
impersonate  the  Persian  prince.

The  immense  hall  of  the  House  of  the  Moscow  no-
bility was  crowded  with  guests.  Each  of  the  children
received  a  standard  bearing  at  its  top  the  arms  of  one
of  the  sixty  provinces  of  the  Russian  Empire.  I  had


28  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

an  eagle  floating  over  a  blue  sea,  which  represented,  as
I  learned  later  on,  the  arms  of  the  government  of
Astrakhan,  on  the  Caspian  Sea.  We  were  then  ranged
at  the  back  of  the  great  hall,  and  slowly  marched  in
two  rows  toward  the  raised  platform  upon  which  the
Emperor  and  his  family  stood.  As  we  reached  it
we  went  right  and  left,  and  thus  stood  aligned  in
one  row  before  the  platform.  At  a  given  signal  all
standards  were  lowered  before  the  Emperor.  The
apotheosis  of  autocracy  was  made  most  impressive :
Nicholas  was  enchanted.  All  provinces  of  the  Empire
worshipped  the  supreme  ruler.  Then  we  children
slowly  retired  to  the  rear  of  the  hall.

But  here  some  confusion  occurred.  Chamberlains
in  their  gold-embroidered  uniforms  were  running  about,
and  I  was  taken  out  of  the  ranks ;  my  uncle,  Prince
Gagarin,  dressed  as  a  Tungus  (I  was  dizzy  with  admira-
tion of  his  fine  leather  coat,  his  bow,  and  his  quiver
full  of  arrows),  lifted  me  up  in  his  arms,  and  planted
me  on  the  imperial  platform.

Whether  it  was  because  I  was  the  tiniest  in  the
row  of  boys,  or  that  my  round  face,  framed  in  curls,
looked  funny  under  the  high  Astrakhan  fur  bonnet  I
wore,  I  know  not,  but  Nicholas  wanted  to  have  me  on
the  platform ;  and  there  I  stood  amidst  generals  and
ladies  looking  down  upon  me  with  curiosity.  I  was
told  later  on  that  Nicholas  I.,  who  was  always  fond  of
barrack  jokes,  took  me  by  the  arm,  and,  leading  me  to
Marie  Alexandrovna  (the  wife  of  the  heir  to  the  throne) ,
who  was  then  expecting  her  third  child,  said  in  his
military  way,  '  That  is  the  sort  of  boy  you  must  bring
me' — a  joke  which  made  her  blush  deeply.  I  well


CHILDHOOD  29

remember,  at  any  rate,  Nicholas  asking  me  whether  I
would  have  sweets ;  but  I  replied  that  I  should  like  to
have  some  of  those  tiny  biscuits  which  were  served
with  tea  (we  were  never  overfed  at  home),  and  he
called  a  waiter  and  emptied  a  full  tray  into  iny  tall
bonnet.  '  I  will  take  them  to  Sasha,'  I  said  to  him.

However,  the  soldier-like  brother  of  Nicholas,
Mikhael,  who  had  the  reputation  of  being  a  wit,
managed  to  make  me  cry.  '  When  you  are  a  good  boy,'
he  said,  '  they  treat  you  so,'  and  he  passed  his  big  hand
over  my  face  downwards  ;  '  but  when  you  are  naughty,
they  treat  you  so/  and  he  passed  the  hand  upwards,
rubbing  my  nose,  which  already  had  a  marked  tendency
toward  growing  in  that  direction.  Tears,  which  I
vainly  tried  to  stop,  came  into  my  eyes.  The  ladies  at
once  took  my  part,  and  the  good-hearted  Marie
Alexandrovna  took  me  under  her  protection.  She  set
me  by  her  side,  in  a  high  velvet  chair  with  a  gilded
back,  and  our  people  told  me  afterward  that  I  very  soon
put  my  head  in  her  lap  and  went  to  sleep.  She  did
not  leave  her  chair  during  the  whole  time  the  ball  was
going  on.

I  remember  also  that,  as  we  were  waiting  in  the
entrance-hall  for  our  carriage,  our  relatives  petted  and
kissed  me,  saying,  '  Petya,  you  have  been  made  a  page ;  '
but  I  answered,  '  I  am  not  a  page ;  I  will  go  home,'  and
was  very  anxious  about  my  bonnet  which  contained  the
pretty  little  biscuits  that  I  was  taking  home  for  Sasha.

I  do  not  know  whether  Sasha  got  many  of  those
biscuits,  but  I  recollect  what  a  hug  he  gave  me
when  he  was  told  about  my  anxiety  concerning  the
bonnet.


80  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

To  be  inscribed  as  a  candidate  for  the  corps  of  pages
was  then  a  great  favour,  which  Nicholas  seldom  be-
stowed on  the  Moscow  nobility.  My  father  was
delighted,  and  already  dreamed  of  a  brilliant  court
career  for  his  son.  Our  stepmother,  every  time  she
told  the  story,  never  failed  to  add,  '  It  is  all  be-
cause I  gave  him  my  blessing  before  he  went  to  the
ball.'

Madame  Nazfmoff  was  delighted,  too,  and  insisted
upon  having  her  portrait  painted  in  the  costume
in  which  she  looked  so  beautiful,  with  me  standing  at
her  side.

My  brother  Alexander's  fate,  also,  was  decided  next
year.  The  jubilee  of  the  Izmaylovsk  regiment,  to
which  my  father  had  belonged  in  his  youth,  was  cele-
brated about  this  time  at  St.  Petersburg.  One  night,
while  all  the  household  was  plunged  in  deep  sleep,  a
three-horse  carriage,  ringing  with  the  bells  attached  to
the  harnesses,  stopped  at  our  gate.  A  man  jumped  out
of  it,  loudly  shouting,  '  Open  !  An  ordinance  from  his
Majesty  the  Emperor.'

One  can  easily  imagine  the  terror  which  this  noctur-
nal visit  spread  in  our  house.  My  father,  trembling,
went  down  to  his  study.  '  Court-martial,  degradation
as  a  soldier,'  were  words  which  rang  then  in  the  ears
of  every  military  man  ;  it  was  a  terrible  epoch.  But
Nicholas  simply  wanted  to  have  the  names  of  the  sons
of  all  the  officers  who  had  once  belonged  to  the  regi-
ment, in  order  to  send  the  boys  to  military  schools,  if
that  had  not  yet  been  done.  A  special  messenger  had
been  dispatched  for  that  purpose  from  St.  Petersburg


CHILDHOOD  31

to  Moscow,  and  now  he  called  day  and  night  at  the
houses  of  the  ex-Izmaylovsk  officers.

With  a  shaking  hand  my  father  wrote  that  his
eldest  son,  Nicholas,  was  already  in  the  first  corps  of
cadets  at  Moscow  ;  that  his  youngest  son,  Peter,  was  a
candidate  for  the  corps  of  pages ;  and  that  there
remained  only  his  second  son,  Alexander,  who  had  not
yet  entered  the  military  career.  A  few  weeks  later  came
a  paper  informing  father  of  the  'monarch's  favour.1
Alexander  was  ordered  to  enter  a  corps  of  cadets  in
Orel,  a  small  provincial  town.  It  cost  my  father  a  deal
of  trouble  and  a  large  sum  of  money  to  get  Alexander
sent  to  a  corps  of  cadets  at  Moscow.  This  new '  favour  '
was  obtained  only  in  consideration  of  the  fact  that  our
elder  brother  was  in  that  corps.

And  thus,  owing  to  the  will  of  Nicholas  I.,  we  had
both  to  receive  a  military  education,  though,  before  we
were  many  years  older,  we  simply  hated  the  military
career  for  its  absurdity.  But  Nicholas  I.  was  watchful
that  none  of  the  sons  of  the  nobility  should  embrace
any  other  profession  than  the  military  one,  unless  they
were  of  infirm  health ;  and  so  we  had  all  three  to  be
officers,  to  the  great  satisfaction  of  my  father.


VI


WEALTH  was  measured  in  those  times  by  the  number
of  '  souls '  which  a  landed  proprietor  owned.  So  many
'  souls  '  meant  so  many  male  serfs :  women  did  not


82  MEMOIES  OF A REVOLUTIONIST

count.  My  father,  who  owned  nearly  twelve  hundred
souls,  in  three  different  provinces,  and  who  had,  in
addition  to  his  peasants'  holdings,  large  tracts  of  land
which  were  cultivated  by  these  peasants,  was  accounted
a  rich  man.  He  lived  up  to  his  reputation,  which
meant  that  his  house  was  open  to  any  number  of
visitors,  and  that  he  kept  a  very  large  household.

We  were  a  family  of  eight,  occasionally  of  ten  or
twelve  ;  but  fifty  servants  at  Moscow,  and  half  as  many
more  in  the  country,  were  considered  not  one  too
many.  Four  coachmen  to  attend  a  dozen  horses,  three
cooks  for  the  masters  and  two  more  for  the  servants,  a
dozen  men  to  wait  upon  us  at  dinner-time  (one  man,
plate  in  hand,  standing  behind  each  person  seated  at  the
table),  and  girls  innumerable  in  the  maid-servants'  room,
— how  could  anyone  do  with  less  than  this  ?

Besides,  the  ambition  of  every  landed  proprietor
was  that  everything  required  for  his  household  should
be  made  at  home  by  his  own  men.

'  How  nicely  your  piano  is  always  tuned  !  I  suppose
Herr  Schimmel  must  be  your  tuner  ?  '  perhaps  a  visitor
would  remark.

To  be  able  to  answer,  '  I  have  my  own  piano-tuner,'
was  in  those  times  the  correct  thing.

'  What  beautiful  pastry  !  '  the  guests  would  exclaim,
when  a  work  of  art,  composed  of  ices  and  pastry,
appeared  toward  the  end  of  the  dinner.  '  Confess,
prince,  that  it  comes  from  Tremble '  (the  fashionable
pastry-cook).

'It  is  made  by  my  own  confectioner,  a  pupil  of
Tremble,  whom  I  have  allowed  to  show  what  he  can
do/  was  a  reply  which  elicited  general  admiration.


CHILDHOOD  33

To  have  embroideries,  harnesses,  furniture — in  fact,
everything — made  by  one's  own  men  was  the  ideal  of
the  rich  and  respected  landed  proprietor.  As  soon  as
the  children  of  the  servants  attained  the  age  of  ten,  they
were  sent  as  apprentices  to  the  fashionable  shops,
where  they  were  obliged  to  spend  five  or  seven  years
chiefly  in  sweeping,  in  receiving  an  incredible  number
of  thrashings,  and  in  running  about  town  on  errands  of
all  sort.  I  must  own  that  few  of  them  became  masters
of  their  respective  arts.  The  tailors  and  the  shoe-
makers were  found  only  skilful  enough  to  make  clothes
or  shoes  for  the  servants,  and  when  a  really  good  pastry
was  required  for  a  dinner-party  it  was  ordered  at
Tremble's,  while  our  own  confectioner  was  beating  the
drum  in  the  music  band.

That  band  was  another  of  my  father's  ambitions,
and  almost  every  one  of  "his  male  servants,  in  addition
to  other  accomplishments,  was  a  bass-viol  or  a  clarinet
in  the  band.  Makar,  the  piano-tuner,  alias  under-butler,
was  also  a  flutist ;  Andrei,  the  tailor,  played  the  French
horn  ;  the  confectioner  was  first  put  to  beat  the  drum,
but  he  misused  his  instrument  to  such  a  deafening
degree  that  a  tremendous  trumpet  was  bought  for  him,
in  the  hope  that  his  lungs  would  not  have  the  power
to  make  the  same  noise  as  his  hands ;  when,  however,
this  last  hope  had  to  be  abandoned-,  he  was  sent  to  be
a  soldier.  As  to  '  spotted  Tikhon,'  in  addition  to  his
numerous  functions  in  the  household  as  lamp-cleaner,
floor-polisher,  and  footman,  he  made  himself  useful  in
the  band — to-day  as  a  trombone,  to-morrow  as  a
bassoon,  and  occasionally  as  second  violin.

The  two  first  violins  were  the  only  exceptions  to  the

VOL.  i.  D


34  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

rule  :  they  were  '  violins,'  and  nothing  else.  My  father
had  bought  them,  with  their  large  families,  for  a  hand-
some sum  of  money,  from  his  sisters  (he  never  bought
serfs  from  nor  sold  them  to  strangers) .  In  the  evenings
when  he  was  not  at  his  club,  or  when  there  was  a  dinner
or  an  evening  party  at  our  house,  the  band  of  twelve  to
fifteen  musicians  was  summoned.  They  played  very
nicely,  and  were  in  great  demand  for  dancing-parties  in
the  neighbourhood ;  still  more  when  we  were  in  the
country.  This  was,  of  course,  a  constant  source  of
gratification  to  my  father,  whose  permission  had  to  be
asked  to  get  the  assistance  of  his  band.

Nothing,  indeed,  gave  him  more  pleasure  than  to  be
asked  for  help,  either  in  the  way  mentioned  or  in  any
other  :  for  instance,  to  obtain  free  education  for  a  boy?
or  to  save  somebody  from  a  punishment  inflicted  upon
him  by  a  law  court.  Although  he  was  liable  to  fall
into  fits  of  rage,  he  was  undoubtedly  possessed  of  a
natural  instinct  toward  leniency,  and  when  his  patron-
age was  requested  he  would  write  scores  of  letters  in
all  possible  directions,  to  all  sorts  of  persons  of  high
standing,  in  favour  of  his  protege.  At  such  times,  his
mail,  which  was  always  heavy,  would  be  swollen  by
half  a  dozen  special  letters,  written  in  a  most  original,
semi-official,  and  semi-humorous  style  ;  each  of  them
sealed,  of  course,  with  his  arms,  in  a  big  square  envelope,
which  rattled  like  a  baby-rattle  on  account  of  the
quantity  of  sand  it  contained — the  use  of  blotting-paper
being  then  unknown.  The  more  difficult  the  case,  the
more  energy  he  would  display,  until  he  secured  the
favour  he  asked  for  his  protege,  whom  in  many  cases
he  never  saw.


CHILDHOOD  36

My  father  liked  to  have  plenty  of  guests  in  his
house.  Our  dinner-hour  was  four,  and  at  seven  the
family  gathered  round  the  samovar  (tea-urn)  for  tea.
Everyone  belonging  to  our  circle  could  drop  in  at  that
hour,  and  from  the  time  my  sister  Helene  was  again
with  us11  there  was  no  lack  of  visitors,  old  and  young,
who  took  advantage  of  the  privilege.  When  the
windows  facing  the  street  showed  bright  light  inside
that  was  enough  to  let  people  know  that  the  family  was
at  home  and  friends  would  be  welcome.

Nearly  every  night  we  had  visitors.  The  green
tables  were  opened  in  the  hall  for  the  card-players,
while  the  ladies  and  the  young  people  stayed  in  the
reception-room  or  around  Helene's  piano.  When  the
ladies  had  gone,  card-playing  continued  sometimes  till
the  small  hours  of  the  morning,  and  considerable  sums
of  money  changed  hands  among  the  players.  Father
invariably  lost.  But  the  real  danger  for  him  was  not
at  home  :  it  was  at  the  English  Club,  where  the  stakes
were  much  higher  than  in  private  houses,  and  especially
when  he  was  induced  to  join  a  party  of  '  very  respect-
able '  gentlemen,  in  one  of  the  aristocratic  houses  of
the  Old  Equerries'  Quarter,  where  gambling  went  on
all  night.  On  an  occasion  of  this  kind  his  losses  were
sure  to  be  heavy.

Dancing-parties  were  not  infrequent,  to  say  no-
thing of  a  couple  of  obligatory  balls  every  winter.
Father's  way,  in  such  cases,  was  to  have  everything
done  in  a  good  style,  whatever  the  expense.  But  at  the
same  time  such  niggardliness  was  practised  in  our  house
in  daily  life  that  if  I  were  to  recount  it,  I  should  be  ac-
cused of  exaggeration.  It  is  said  of  a  family  of  pretenders

D 2


36  MEMOIRS  OF A REVOLUTIONIST

to  the  throne  of  France,  renowned  for  their  truly  regal
hunting-parties,  that  in  their  everyday  life  even  the
tallow  candles  are  minutely  counted.  The  same  sort
of  miserly  economy  ruled  in  our  house  with  regard  to
everything  ;  so  much  so  that  when  we,  the  children  of  the
house,  grew  up,  we  detested  all  saving  and  counting.
However,  in  the  Old  Equerries'  Quarter  such  a  mode  of
life  only  raised  my  father  in  public  esteem.  '  The  old
prince,'  it  was  said,  '  seems  to  be  sharp  over  money
at  home ;  but  he  knows  how  a  nobleman  ought  to
live.'

In  our  quiet  and  clean  lanes  that  was  the  kind  of
life  which  was  most  in  respect.  One  of  our  neighbours,

General  D ,  kept  his  house  up  in  very  grand  style  ;

and  yet  the  most  comical  scenes  took  place  every
morning  between  him  and  his  cook.  Breakfast  over,
the  old  general,  smoking  his  pipe,  would  himself  order
the  dinner.

'  Well,  my  boy,'  he  would  say  to  the  cook,  who
appeared  in  snow-white  attire,  '  to-day  we  shall  not  be
many :  only  a  couple  of  guests.  You  will  make  us  a
soup,  you  know,  with  some  spring  delicacies — green
peas,  French  beans,  and  so  on.  You  have  not  given  us
any  yet,  and  madam,  you  know,  likes  a  good  French
spring  soup.'

'  Yes,  sir.'

'  Then,  anything  you  like  as  an  entree.'

1  Yes,  sir.'

'  Of  course,  asparagus  is  not  yet  in  season,  but  I  saw
yesterday  such  nice  bundles  of  it  in  the  shops.'

'  Yes,  sir  ;  eight  shillings  the  bundle.'

'  Quite  right ! Then,  we  are  sick  of  your  roasted


CHILDHOOD  37

chickens  and  turkeys  ;  you  ought  to  get  something  for
a  change.'

'  Some  venison,  sir  ?  '

'  Yes,  yes,  anything  for  a  change.'

And  when  the  six  courses  of  dinner  had  been  decided
on,  th&  old  general  would  ask, '  Now  how  much  shall  I
give  you  for  to-day's  expenses  ?  Six  shillings  will  do,  I
suppose  ? '

'  One  pound,  sir.'

'  What  nonsense,  my  boy  !  Here  are  six  shillings ;
I  assure  you  that's  quite  enough.'

'  Eight  shillings  for  asparagus,  five  for  the  vegetables.'

'  Now,  look  here,  my  dear  boy,  be  reasonable.  I'll
go  as  high  as  seven-and-six,  and  you  must  be  econo-
mical.'

And  the  bargaining  would  go  on  thus  for  half  an
hour,  until  the  two  would  agree  upon  fourteen  shillings
and  sixpence,  with  the  understanding  that  the  morrow's
dinner  should  not  cost  more  than  three  shillings.
Whereupon  the  general,  quite  happy  at  having  made
such  a  good  bargain,  would  take  his  sledge,  make  a
round  of  the  fashionable  shops,  and  return  quite  radiant,
bringing  for  his  wife  a  bottle  of  exquisite  perfume,  for
which  he  had  paid  a  fancy  price  in  a  French  shop,  and
announcing  to  his  only  daughter  that  a  new  velvet
mantle — '  something  very  simple  ',  and  very  costly —
would  be  sent  for  her  to  try  on  that  afternoon.

All  our  relatives,  who  were  numerous  on  my  father's
side,  lived  exactly  in  the  same  way  :  and  if  a  new  spirit
occasionally  made  its  appearance,  it  usually  took  the
form  of  some  religious  passion.  Thus  a  Prince  Gagarin
joined  the  Jesuit  order,  again  to  the  scandal  of  '  all


38  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

Moscow,'  another  young  prince  entered  a  monastery,
while  several  older  ladies  became  fanatic  devotees.

There  was  a  single  exception.  One  of  our  nearest
relatives,  Prince— let  me  call  him  Mirski — had  spent  his
youth  at  St.  Petersburg  as  an  officer  of  the  Guards.  He
took  no  interest  in  keeping  his  own  tailors  and  cabinet-
makers, for  his  house  was  furnished  in  a  grand  modern
style,  and  his  wearing  apparel  was  all  made  in  the  best
St.  Petersburg  shops.  Gambling  was  not  his  pro-
pensity— he  played  cards  only  when  in  company  with
ladies  ;  but  his  weak  point  was  his  dinner-table,  upon
which  he  spent  incredible  sums  of  money.

Lent  and  Easter  were  his  chief  epochs  of  extrava-
gance. When  the  Great  Lent  came,  and  it  would  not
have  been  proper  to  eat  meat,  cream,  or  butter,  he
seized  the  opportunity  to  invent  all  sorts  of  delicacies
in  the  way  of  fish.  The  best  shops  of  the  two  capitals
were  ransacked  for  that  purpose ;  special  emissaries
were  dispatched  from  his  estate  to  the  mouth  of  the
V61ga,  to  bring  back  on  post-horses  (there  was  no  rail-
way at  that  time)  a  sturgeon  of  great  size  or  some  ex-
traordinarily cured  fish.  And  when  Easter  came,  there
was  no  end  to  his  inventions.

Easter,  in  Russia,  is  the  most  venerated  and  also
the  gayest  of  the  yearly  festivals.  It  is  the  festival  of
spring.  The  immense  heaps  of  snow  which  have  been
lying  during  the  winter  along  the  streets  rapidly  thaw,
and  roaring  streams  run  down  the  streets ;  not  like  a
thief  who  creeps  in  by  insensible  degrees,  but  frankly
and  openly  spring  comes — every  day  bringing  with  it
a  change  in  the  state  of  the  snow  and  the  progress  of
the  buds  on  the  trees  ;  the  night  frosts  only  keep  the


CHILDHOOD  89

thaw  within  reasonable  bounds.  The  last  week  of  the
Great  Lent,  Passion  Week,  was  kept  in  Moscow,  in
my  childhood,  with  extreme  solemnity  ;  it  was  a  time
of  general  mourning,  and  crowds  of  people  went  to  the
churches  to  listen  to  the  impressive  reading  of  those
passages  of  the  Gospels  which  relate  the  sufferings  of
the  Christ.  Not  only  were  meat,  eggs,  and  butter  not
eaten,  but  even  fish  was  refused  ;  some  of  the  most
rigorous  taking  no  food  at  all  on  Good  Friday.  The
more  striking  was  the  contrast  when  Easter  came.

On  Saturday  everyone  attended  the  night  service
which  began  in  a  mournful  way.  Then,  suddenly,  at
midnight,  the  resurrection  news  was  announced.  All
the  churches  were  at  once  illuminated,  and  gay  peals
of  bells  resounded  from  hundreds  of  bell  towers.  Gene-
ral rejoicing  began.  All  the  people  kissed  one  another
thrice  on  the  cheeks,  repeating  the  resurrection  wordsf
and  the  churches,  now  flooded  with  light,  shone  with
the  gay  toilettes  of  the  ladies.  The  poorest  woman
had  a  new  dress  ;  if  she  had  only  one  new  dress  a  year,
she  would  get  it  for  that  night.

At  the  same  time,  Easter  was,  and  is  still,  the  sig-
nal for  a  real  debauch  in  eating.  Special  Easter  cream
cheeses  (pdskha)  and  Easter  bread  (koottch)  are  pre-
pared ;  and  everyone,  no  matter  how  poor  he  or  she
may  be,  must  have  a  small  paskha  and  a  small  koolich,
with  at  least  one  egg  painted  red,  to  be  consecrated  in
the  church,  and  to  be  used  afterward  to  break  the  Lent.
With  most  old  Eussians,  eating  began  at  night,  after  a
short  Easter  mass,  immediately  after  the  consecrated
food  had  been  brought  from  church ;  but  in  the  houses
of  the  nobility  the  ceremony  was  postponed  till  Sunday


40  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

morning,  when  a  table  was  covered  with  all  sorts  of
viands,  cheeses,  and  pastry,  and  all  the  servants  came
to  exchange  with  their  masters  three  kisses  and  a  red-
painted  egg.  Throughout  Easter  week  a  table  spread
wTith  Easter  food  stood  in  the  great  hall,  and  every
visitor  was  invited  to  partake.

On  this  occasion  Prince  Mirski  surpassed  himself.
Whether  he  was  at  St.  Petersburg  or  at  Moscow,
messengers  brought  to  his  house,  from  his  estate,  a
specially  prepared  cream  cheese  for  the  paskha,  and
his  cook  managed  to  make  out  of  it  a  piece  of  artistic
confectionery.  Other  messengers  were  dispatched  to
the  province  of  Novgorod  to  get  a  bear's  ham,  which
was  cured  for  the  prince's  Easter  table.  And  while
the  princess,  with  her  two  daughters,  visited  the  most
austere  monasteries,  in  which  the  night  service  would
last  three  or  four  hours  in  succession,  and  spent  all
Passion  Week  in  the  most  mournful  condition  of  mind,
eating  only  a  piece  of  dry  bread  between  the  visits  she
paid  to  Russian,  Roman,  and  Protestant  preachers,  her
husband  made  every  morning  the  tour  of  the  well-
known  Milutin  shops  at  St.  Petersburg,  where  all
possible  delicacies  are  brought  from  the  ends  of  the
earth.  There  he  used  to  select  the  most  extravagant
dainties  for  his  Easter  table.  Hundreds  of  visitors
came  to  his  house,  and  were  asked  '  just  to  taste '  this
or  that  extraordinary  thing.

The  end  of  it  was  that  the  prince  managed  literally
to  eat  up  a  considerable  fortune.  His  richly  furnished
house  and  beautiful  estate  were  sold,  and  when  he  and
his  wife  were  old  they  had  nothing  left,  not  even  a
home,  and  were  compelled  to  live  with  their  children.


CHILDHOOD  41

No  wonder  that  when  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs
came,  nearly  all  these  families  of  the  Old  Equerries'
Quarter  were  ruined.  But  I  must  not  anticipate
events.


VII


To  maintain  such  numbers  of  servants  as  were  kept
in  our  house  would  have  been  ruinous  if  all  provi-
sions had  to  be  bought  at  Moscow ;  but  in  those  times
of  serfdom  things  were  managed  very  simply.  When
winter  came,  father  sat  at  his  table  and  wrote  the
following  : —

'  To  the  manager  of  my  estate,  Nikolskoye,  situated
in  the  government  of  Kaluga,  district  of  Meschovsk,  on
the  river  Sirena,  from  the  Prince  Alexei  Petrovich
Kropotkin,  Colonel  and  Commander  of  various  orders.

'  On  receipt  of  this,  and  as  soon  as  winter  commu-
nication is  established,  thou  art  ordered  to  send  to  my
house,  situated  in  the  city  of  Moscow,  twenty-five
peasant-sledges,  drawn  by  two  horses  each,  one  horse
from  each  house,  and  one  sledge  and  one  man  from  each
second  house,  and  to  load  them  with  [so  many]  quarters
of  oats,  [so  many]  of  wheat,  and  [so  many]  of  rye,  as
also  with  all  the  poultry  and  geese  and  ducks,  well
frozen,  which  have  to  be  killed  this  winter,  well  packed
and  accompanied  by  a  complete  list,  under  the  super-
vision of  a  well-chosen  man  ; '  and  so  it  went  on  for  a
couple  of  pages,  till  the  next  full-stop  was  reached.
After  this  there  followed  an  enumeration  of  the  penal-


42  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

ties  which  would  be  inflicted  in  case  the  provisions
should  not  reach  the  house  situated  in  such  a  street,
number  so-and-so,  in  due  time  and  in  good  condition.

Some  time  before  Christmas  the  twenty-five  peasant-
sledges  really  entered  our  gates,  and  covered  the  surface
of  the  wide  yard.

'  Frol ! '  shouted  my  father,  as  soon  as  the  report  of
this  great  event  reached  him.  '  Kiryushka  !  Yeg6rka  !
Where  are  they  ?  Everything  will  be  stolen  !  Frol,  go
and  receive  the  oats !  Uliana,  go  and  receive  the
poultry !  Kiryushka,  call  the  princess  ! '

All  the  household  was  in  commotion,  the  servants
running  wildly  in  every  direction,  from  the  hall  to  the
yard,  and  from  the  yard  to  the  hall,  but  chiefly  to  the
maid-servants'  room,  to  communicate  there  the
Nikolskoye  news  :  '  Pasha  is  going  to  marry  after
Christmas.  Aunt  Anna  has  surrendered  her  soul  to
God,'  and  so  on.  Letters  had  also  come  from  the
country,  and  very  soon  one  of  the  maids  would  steal
upstairs  into  my  room.

'  Are  you  alone  ? The  teacher  is  not  in  ?  '

'  No,  he  is  at  the  university.'

'  Well,  then,  be  kind  and  read  me  this  letter  from
mother.'

And  I  would  read  to  her  the  naive  letter,  which
always  began  with  the  words, '  Father  and  mother  send
you  their  blessing  for  ages  not  to  be  broken.'  After  this
came  the  news  :  '  Aunt  Eupraxie  lies  ill,  all  her  bones
aching  ;  and  your  cousin  is  not  yet  married,  but  hopes
to  be  after  Easter  ;  and  aunt  Stepanida's  cow  died  on
All  Saints'  day.'  Following  the  news  came  the  greetings,
two  pages  of  them :  '  Brother  Paul  sends  you  his


CHILDHOOD  43

greetings,  and  the  sisters  Mary  and  Daria  send  their
greetings,  and  then  uncle  Dmitri  sends  his  many
greetings,'  and  so  on.  However,  notwithstanding  the
monotomy  of  the  enumeration,  each  name  awakened
some  remarks  :  '  Then  she  is  still  alive,  poor  soul,  if  she
sends  her  greetings  ;  it  is  nine  years  since  she  has  lain
motionless.'  Or,  '  Oh,  he  has  not  forgotten  me ;  he
must  be  back,  then,  for  Christmas ;  such  a  nice  boy.
You  will  write  me  a  letter,  won't  you  ?  and  I  must  not
forget  him  then.'  I  promised,  of  course,  and  when  the
time  came  I  wrote  a  letter  in  exactly  the  same  style.

When  the  sledges  had  been  unloaded,  the  hall  filled
with  peasants.  They  had  put  on  their  best  coats  over
their  sheepskins,  and  waited  until  father  should  call
them  into  his  room  to  have  a  talk  about  the  snow  and
the  prospects  of  the  next  crops.  They  hardly  dared  to
walk  in  their  heavy  boots  on  the  polished  floor.  A  few
ventured  to  sit  down  on  the  edge  of  an  oak  bench;
they  emphatically  refused  to  make  use  of  chairs.  So
they  waited  for  hours,  looking  with  alarm  upon
everyone  who  entered  father's  room  or  issued  from  it.

Some  time  later  on,  usually  next  morning,  one  of
the  servants  would  run  slyly  upstairs  to  the  class-
room.

'  Are  you  alone  ?  '

'Yes.'

'  Then  go  quickly  to  the  hall.  The  peasants  want
to  see  you;  something  from  your  nurse.'

When  I  went  down  to  the  hall,  one  of  the  peasants
would  give  me  a  little  bundle  containing  perhaps  a  few
rye  cakes,  half  a  dozen  hard-boiled  eggs,  and  some
apples,  tied  in  a  motley  coloured  cotton  kerchief.


44  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

'  Take  that :  it  is  your  nurse,  Vasilisa,  who  sends  it  to
you.  Look  if  the  apples  are  not  frozen.  I  hope  not :
I  kept  them  all  the  journey  on  my  breast.  Such  a
fearful  frost  we  had.'  And  the  broad,  bearded  face,
covered  with  frost-bites,  would  smile  radiantly,  showing
two  rows  of  beautiful  white  teeth  from  beneath  quite  a
forest  of  hair.

'And  this  is  for  your  brother,  from  his  nurse  Anna,'
another  peasant  would  say,  handing  me  a  similar  bundle.
'  "  Poor  boy,"  she  says,  "  he  can  never  have  enough  at
school."

Blushing  and  not  knowing  what  to  say,  I  would
murmur  at  last,  '  Tell  Vasilisa  that  I  kiss  her,  and  Anna
too,  for  my  brother.'  At  which  all  faces  would  become
still  more  radiant.

*  Yes,  I  will,  to  be  sure.'

Then  Kirila,  who  kept  watch  at  father's  door,
would  whisper  suddenly,  '  Kun  quickly  upstairs ;  your
father  may  come  out  in  a  moment.  Don't  forget  the
kerchief ;  they  want  to  take  it  back.'

As  I  carefully  folded  the  worn  kerchief,  I  most
passionately  desired  to  send  Vasilisa  something.  But  I
had  nothing  to  send,  not  even  a  toy,  and  we  never  had
pocket-money.

Our  best  time,  of  course,  was  in  the  country.  As
soon  as  Easter  and  Whitsuntide  had  passed,  all  our
thoughts  were  directed  towards  Nikolskoye.  However,
time  went  on — the  lilacs  must  be  past  blooming  at
Nik61skoye — and  father  had  still  thousands  of  affairs
to  keep  him  in  town.  At  last,  five  or  six  peasant-carts
entered  our  yard  :  they  came  to  take  all  sorts  of  things


CHILDHOOD  4o

which  had  to  be  sent  to  the  country  house.  The  great
old  coach  and  the  other  coaches  in  which  we  were
going  to  make  the  journey  were  taken  out  and
inspected  once  more.  The  boxes  began  to  be  packed.
Our  lessons  made  slow  progress ;  at  every  moment  we
interrupted  our  teachers,  asking  whether  this  or  that
book  should  be  taken  with  us,  and  long  before  all
others  we  began  packing  our  books,  our  slates,  and  our
toys,  which  were  of  our  own  making.

Everything  was  ready :  the  peasant-carts  stood
heavily  loaded  with  furniture  for  the  country  house,
boxes  containing  the  kitchen  utensils,  and  almost
countless  empty  glass  jars  which  were  to  be  brought
back  in  the  autumn  filled  with  all  kinds  of  preserves.
The  peasants  waited  every  morning  for  hours  in  the
hall ;  but  the  order  for  leaving  did  not  come.  Father
continued  to  write  all  the  morning  in  his  room,  and
disappeared  at  night.  Finally,  our  stepmother  inter-
fered, her  maid  having  ventured  to  report  that  the
peasants  were  very  anxious  to  return,  as  haymaking
was  near.

Next  afternoon,  Frol,  the  major-domo,  and  Mikhael
Aleeff,  the  first  violin,  were  called  into  father's  room.  A
sack  containing  the  '  food  money ' — that  is,  a  few  coppers
a  day — for  each  of  the  forty  or  fifty  souls  who  were  to
accompany  the  household  to  Nik61skoye,  was  handed
to  Frol,  with  a  list.  All  were  enumerated  in  that  list :
the  band  in  full ;  then  the  cooks  and  the  under-cooks,
the  laundresses,  the  under-laundress,  who  was  blessed
with  a  family  of  six  mites,  '  Polka  Squinting,'  '  Domna
the  Big  One,'  '  Domna  the  Small  One,'  and  the  rest
of  them.


46  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

The  first  violin  received  an  '  order  of  march.'  I
knew  it  well,  because  father,  seeing  that  he  never
would  be  ready,  had  called  me  to  copy  it  into  the  book,
in  which  he  used  to  copy  all  '  outgoing  papers  '  :—

'  To  my  house  servant,  Mikhael  Aleeff,  from  Prince
Alexei  Petrovich  Kropotkin,  Colonel  and  Commander.

'  Thou  art  ordered,  on  May  29,  at  six  A.M.,  to  march
out  with  my  loads,  from  the  city  of  Moscow,  for  my
estate,  situated  in  the  government  of  Kaluga,  district  of
Meschovsk,  on  the  river  Sirena,  representing  a  distance
of  one  hundred  and  sixty  miles  from  this  house  ;  to
look  after  the  good  conduct  of  the  men  entrusted  to
thee,  and  if  any  one  of  them  proves  to  be  guilty  of
misconduct,  or  of  drunkenness,  or  of  insubordination,
to  bring  the  said  man  before  the  commander  of  the
garrison  detachment  of  the  separate  corps  of  the
interior  garrisons,  with  the  inclosed  circular  letter,  and
to  ask  that  he  may  be  punished  by  flogging  [the  first
violin  knew  who  was  meant],  as  an  example  to  the
others.

'  Thou  art  ordered,  moreover,  to  look  especially
after  the  integrity  of  the  goods  entrusted  to  thy  care,
and  to  march  according  to  the  following  order  :  First
day,  stay  at  village  So-and-So,  to  feed  the  horses ;
second  day,  spend  the  night  at  the  town  of  Podolsk  ; '
and  so  on  for  all  the  seven  or  eight  days  that  the
journey  would  last.

Next  day,  at  ten  instead  of  at  six — punctuality  is
not  a  Russian  virtue  ('  Thank  God,  we  are  not  Germans,'
true  Russians  used  to  say),  the  carts  left  the  house.
The  servants  had  to  make  the  journey  on  foot ;  only
the  children  were  accommodated  with  a  seat  in  a  bath-


CHILDHOOD  47

tub  or  basket,  on  the  top  of  a  loaded  cart,  and  some  of
the  women  might  find  an  occasional  resting-place  on  the
ledge  of  a  cart.  The  others  had  to  walk  all  the  hundred
and  sixty  miles.  As  long  as  they  were  marching
through  Moscow,  discipline  was  maintained :  it  was
peremptorily  forbidden  to  wear  top-boots  or  to  pass  a
belt  over  the  coat.  But  when  they  were  on  the  road,
and  we  overtook  them  a  couple  of  days  later,  and
especially  when  it  was  known  that  father  would  stay  a
few  days  longer  at  Moscow,  the  men  and  the  women—
dressed  in  all  sorts  of  impossible  coats,  belted  with
cotton  handkerchiefs,  burned  by  the  sun  or  dripping
under  the  rain,  and  helping  themselves  along  with
sticks  cut  in  the  woods — certainly  looked  more  like  a
wandering  band  of  gypsies  than  the  household  of  a
wealthy  landowner.  Similar  peregrinations  were  made
by  every  household  in  those  times,  and  when  we  saw  a
file  of  servants  marching  along  one  of  our  streets,  we
at  once  knew  that  the  Apukhtins  or  the  Pryanishnikoffs
were  migrating.

The  carts  were  gone,  yet  the  family  did  not  move.
All  of  us  were* sick  of  waiting  ;  but  father  still  con-
tinued to  write  interminable  orders  to  the  managers  of
his  estates,  and  I  copied  them  diligently  into  the  big
'  outgoing  book.'  At  last  the  order  to  start  was  given.
We  were  called  downstairs.  My  father  read  aloud  the
order  of  march,  addressed  to  '  the  Princess  Krop6tkin,
wife  of  Prince  Alex6i  Petrovich  Krop6tkin,  Colonel  and
Commander,'  in  which  the  halting-places  during  the
five  days'  journey  were  duly  enumerated.  True,  the
order  was  written  for  May  30,  and  the  departure  was
fixed  for  nine  A.M.,  though  May  was  gone,  and  the


48  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

departure  took  place  in  the  afternoon :  this  upset  all
calculations.  But,  as  is  usual  in  military  marching-
orders,  this  circumstance  had  been  foreseen,  and  was
provided  for  in  the  following  paragraph  : —

'  If,  however,  contrary  to  expectation,  the  depar-
ture of  your  highness  does  not  take  place  at  the  said
day  and  hour,  you  are  requested  to  act  according  to
the  best  of  your  understanding,  in  order  to  bring  the
said  journey  to  its  best  issue.'

Then,  all  present,  the  family  and  the  servants,  sat
down  for  a  moment,  signed  themselves  with  the  cross,
and  bade  my  father  good-bye.  '  I  entreat  you,  Alexis,
don't  go  to  the  club,'  our  stepmother  whispered  to  him.
The  great  coach,  drawn  by  four  horses,  with  a  postilion,
stood  at  the  door,  with  its  little  folding  ladder  to
facilitate  climbing  in ;  the  other  coaches  also  were
there.  Our  seats  were  enumerated  in  the  marching-
orders,  but  our  stepmother  had  to  exercise  '  the  best  of
her  understanding '  even  at  that  early  stage  of  the
proceedings,  and  we  started  to  the  great  satisfaction
of  all.

The  journey  was  an  inexhaustible  source  of  enjoy-
ment for  us  children.  The  stages  were  short,  and  we
stopped  twice  a  day  to  feed  the  horses.  As  the  ladies
screamed  at  the  slightest  declivity  of  the  road,  it  was
found  more  convenient  to  alight  each  time  the  road
went  up  or  down  hill,  which  it  did  continually,  and  we
took  advantage  of  this  to  have  a  peep  into  the  woods
by  the  roadside,  or  a  run  along  some  crystal  brook.
The  beautifully  kept  high  road  from  Moscow  to  Warsaw,
which  we  followed  for  some  distance,  was  covered,
moreover,  with  a  variety  of  interesting  objects  :  files  of


CHILDHOOD  49

loaded  carts,  groups  of  pilgrims,  and  all  sorts  of  people.
Twice  a  day  we  stopped  in  large,  animated  villages,  and
after  a  good  deal  of  bargaining  about  the  prices  to  be
charged  for  hay  and  oats,  as  well  as  for  the  samovars,
we  dismounted  at  the  gates  of  an  inn.  Cook  Andrei
bought  a^  chicken  and  made  the  soup,  while  we  ran  in
the  meantime  to  the  next  wood,  or  examined  the  farm-
yard, the  gardens,  the  inner  life  of  the  inn.

At  Maloyaroslavetz,  where  a  battle  was  fought  in
1812,  when  the  Russian  army  vainly  attempted  to  stop
Napoleon  in  his  retreat  from  Moscow,  we  usually  spent
the  night.  M.  Poulain,  who  had  been  wounded  in  the
Spanish  campaign,  knew,  or  pretended  to  know,  every-
thing about  the  battle  at  Maloyaroslavetz.  He  took
us  to  the  battlefield,  and  explained  how  the  Russians
tried  to  check  Napoleon's  advance,  and  how  the  Grande
Armee  crushed  them  and  made  its  way  through  the
Russian  lines.  He  explained  it  as  well  as  if  he  himself
had  taken  part  in  the  battle.  Here  the  Cossacks
attempted  un  mouvement  tournant,  but  Davout,  or
some  other  marshal,  routed  them  and  pursued  them
just  beyond  these  hills  on  the  right.  There  the  left
wing  of  Napoleon  crushed  the  Russian  infantry,  and
here  Napoleon  himself,  at  the  head  of  the  Old  Guard,
charged  Kutuzoff  s  centre,  and  covered  himself  and  his
Guard  with  undying  glory.

We  once  took  the  old  Kaluga  route,  and  stopped  at
Tariitino  ;  but  here  M.  Poulain  was  much  less  eloquent.
For  it  was  at  this  place  that  Napoleon,  who  intended
to  retreat  by  a  southern  route,  was  compelled,  after  a
bloody  battle,  to  abandon  his  plan,  and  was  forced  to
take  the  Smolensk  route,  which  his  army  had  laid

VOL.  I.  E


60  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

waste  during  its  march  on  Moscow.  However,  in
M.  Poulain's  narrative,  Napoleon  did  not  lose  the  battle  :
he  was  only  deceived  by  his  marshals;  otherwise  he
would  have  marched  straight  upon  Kieff  and  Odessa,
and  his  eagles  would  have  floated  over  the  Black  Sea.

Beyond  Kaluga  we  had  to  cross  for  a  stretch  of  five
miles  a  beautiful  pine  forest,  which  remains  connected
in  my  memory  with  some  of  the  happiest  reminiscences
of  my  childhood.  The  sand  in  that  forest  was  as  deep
as  in  an  African  desert,  and  we  went  all  the  way  on
foot,  while  the  horses,  stopping  every  moment,  slowly
dragged  the  carriages  in  the  sand.  When  I  was  in  my
teens,  it  was  my  delight  to  leave  the  family  behind,
and  to  walk  the  whole  distance  by  myself.  Immense
red  pines,  centuries  old,  rose  on  every  side,  and  not  a
sound  reached  the  ear  except  the  voices  of  the-  lofty
trees.  In  a  small  ravine  a  fresh  crystal  spring
murmured,  and  a  passer-by  had  left  in  it,  for  the  use
of  those  who  should  come  after  him,  a  small  funnel-
shaped  ladle,  made  of  birch  bark,  with  a  split  stick  for
a  handle.  Noiselessly  a  squirrel  ran  up  a  tree,  and  the
underwood  was  as  full  of  mysteries  as  were  the  trees.
In  that  forest  my  first  love  of  Nature  and  my  first  dim
perception  of  its  incessant  life  were  born.

Beyond  the  forest,  and  past  the  ferry  which  took
us  over  the  Ugra,  we  left  the  high  road  and  entered
narrow  country  lanes,  where  green  ears  of  rye  bent
toward  the  coach,  and  the  horses  managed  to  bite
mouthfuls  of  grass  on  either  side  of  the  way,  as  they
ran,  closely  pressed  to  one  another  in  the  narrow,
trenchlike  road.  At  last  we  saw  the  willows  which
marked  the  approach  to  our  village,  and  suddenly  we


CHILDHOOD  51

caught  sight  of  the  elegant,  pale-yellow  bell  tower  of
the  Nikolskoye  church.

For  the  quiet  life  of  the  landlords  of  those  times
Nik61skoye  was  admirably  suited.  There  was  nothing
in  it  of  the  luxury  which  is  seen  in  richer  estates ;  but
an  artistic  hand  was  visible  in  the  planning  of  the
buildings  and  gardens,  and  in  the  general  arrangement
of  things.  Besides  the  main  house,  which  father  had
recently  built,  there  were,  round  a  spacious  and  well-
kept  yard,  several  smaller  houses,  which  gave  a
greater  degree  of  independence  to  their  inhabitants,
without  destroying  the  close  intercourse  of  the
family  life.  An  immense  '  upper  garden '  was  devoted
to  fruit-trees,  and  through  it  the  church  was  reached.
The  southern  slope  of  the  land,  which  led  to  the  river,
was  entirely  given  up  to  a  pleasure  garden,  where
flower-beds  were  intermingled  with  alleys  of  lime-
trees,  lilacs,  and  acacias.  From  the  balcony  of  the
main  house  there  was  a  beautiful  view  of  the  Sir6na,
with  the  ruins  of  an  old  earthern  fortress  where  the
Kussians  had  offered  a  stubborn  resistance  during  the
Mongol  invasion,  and  farther  on,  the  boundless  yellow
grain-fields,  with  copses  of  woods  on  the  horizon.

In  the  early  years  of  my  childhood  we  occupied  with
M.  Poulain  one  of  the  separate  houses  entirely  by  our-
selves ;  and  after  his  method  of  education  was  softened
by  the  intervention  of  our  sister  Helene,  we  were  on
the  best  possible  terms  with  him.  Father  was  in-
variably absent  from  home  in  the  summer,  which  he
spent  in  military  inspections,  and  our  stepmother  did
not  pay  much  attention  to  us,  especially  after  her  own

E 2


52  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

child,  Pauline,  was  born.  We  were  thus  always  with
M.  Poulain,  who  thoroughly  enjoyed  the  stay  in  the
country,  and  let  us  enjoy  it.  The  woods ;  the  walks
along  the  river ;  the  climbing  over  the  hills  to  the  old
fortress,  which  M.  Poulain  made  alive  for  us  as  he  told
how  it  was  defended  by  the  Eussians,  and  how  it  was
captured  by  the  Tartars  ;  the  little  adventures,  in  one
of  which  he  became  our  hero  by  saving  Alexander
from  drowning;  an  occasional  encounter  with  wolves
— there  was  no  end  of  new  and  delightful  impressions.
Large  parties  were  also  organised  in  which  all  the
family  took  part,  sometimes  picking  mushrooms  in  the
woods,  and  afterward  having  tea  in  the  midst  of  the
forest,  where  a  man  a  hundred  years  old  lived  alone  with
his  little  grandson,  taking  care  of  the  bees.  At  other
times  we  went  to  one  of  father's  villages  where  a  big
pond  had  been  dug,  in  which  golden  carp  were  caught
by  the  thousand — part  of  them  being  taken  for  the  land-
lord and  the  remainder  being  distributed  among  all  the
peasants.  My  former  nurse,  Vasilisa,  lived  in  that  vil-
lage. Her  family  was  one  of  the  poorest ;  besides  her
husband,  she  had  only  a  small  boy  to  help  her,  and  a  girl,
my  foster-sister,  who  became  later  on  a  preacher  and  a
'  Virgin  '  in  the  Nonconformist  'sect  to  which  they  be-
longed. There  was  no  bound  to  her  joy  when  I  came
to  see  her.  Cream,  eggs,  apples,  and  honey  were  all
that  she  could  offer ;  but  the  way  in  which  she  offered
them,  in  bright  wooden  plates,  after  having  covered  the
table  with  a  fine  snow-white  linen  tablecloth  of  her
own  making  (with  the  Eussian  Nonconformists  absolute
cleanliness  is  a  matter  of  religion),  and  the  fond  words
with  which  she  addressed  me,  treating  me  as  her  own


CHILDHOOD  53

son,  left  the  warmest  feelings  in  my  heart.  I  must  say
the  same  of  the  nurses  of  my  elder  brothers,  Nicholas
and  Alexander,  who  belonged  to  prominent  families  of
two  other  Nonconformist  sects  in  Nikolskoye.  Few
know  what  treasuries  of  goodness  can  be  found  in  the
hearts  of  Russian  peasants,  even  after  centuries  of
the  most  cruel  oppression,  which  might  well  have
embittered  them.

On  stormy  days  M.  Poulain  had  an  abundance  of
tales  to  tell  us,  especially  about  the  campaign  in  Spain.
Over  and  over  again  we  induced  him  to  tell  us  how  he
was  wounded  in  a  battle,  and  every  time  he  came  to
the  point  when  he  felt  warm  blood  streaming  into  his
boot,  we  jumped  to  kiss  him  and  gave  him  all  sorts  of
pet  names.

Everything  seemed  to  prepare  us  for  the  military
career :  the  predilection  of  our  father  (the  only  toys
that  I  remember  his  having  bought  for  us  were  a  rifle
and  a  real  sentry-box) ;  the  war  tales  of  M.  Poulain ;
nay,  even  the  library  which  we  had  at  our  disposal.
This  library,  which  had  once  belonged  to  General
Eepninsky,  our  mother's  grandfather,  a  learned
military  man  of  the  eighteenth  century,  consisted
exclusively  of  books  on  military  warfare,  adorned  with
rich  plates  and  beautifully  bound  in  leather.  It  was
our  chief  recreation,  on  wet  days,  to  look  over  the
plates  of  these  books,  representing  the  weapons  of  war-
fare since  the  times  of  the  Hebrews,  and  giving  plans  of
all  the  battles  that  had  been  fought  since  Alexander  of
Macedonia.  These  heavy  books  also  offered  excellent
materials  for  building  out  of  them  strong  fortresses
which  would  stand  for  some  time  the  blows  of  a


64  MEMOIRS  OF A  REVOLUTIONIST

battering-ram  and  the  projectiles  of  an  Archimedean
catapult  (which,  however,  persisted  in  sending  stones
into  the  windows,  and  was  soon  prohibited).  Yet
neither  Alexander  nor  I  became  military  men.  The
literature  of  the  sixties  wiped  out  the  teachings  of  our
childhood.

M.  Poulain's  opinions  about  revolutions  were  those
of  the  Orleanist  '  Illustration  Fran9aise,'  of  which  he
received  back  numbers,  and  of  which  we  knew  all  the
woodcuts.  For  a  long  time  I  could  not  imagine  a
revolution  otherwise  than  in  the  shape  of  Death  riding
on  a  horse,  the  red  flag  in  one  hand  and  a  scythe  in
the  other,  mowing  down  men  right  and  left.  So  it
was  pictured  in  the  '  Illustration.'  But  I  now  think
that  M.  Poulain's  dislike  was  limited  to  the  uprising  of
1848,  for  one  of  his  tales  about  the  Revolution  of  1789
deeply  impressed  my  mind.

The  title  of  prince  was  used  in  our  house  with  and
without  occasion.  M.  Poulain  must  have  been  shocked
by  it,  for  he  began  once  to  tell  us  what  he  knew  of  the
great  Revolution.  I  cannot  now  recall  what  he  said,
but  one  thing  I  remember,  namely,  that  '  Count
Mirabeau  '  and  other  nobles  one  day  renounced  their
titles,  and  that  Count  Mirabeau,  to  show  his  contempt
for  aristocratic  pretensions,  opened  a  shop  decorated
with  a  signboard  which  bore  the  inscription, '  Mirabeau,
tailor.'  (I  tell  the  story  as  I  had  it  from  M.  Poulain.)
For  a  long  time  after  that  I  worried  myself  thinking
what  trade  I  should  take  up,  so  as  to  write, '  Kropotkin,
such  and  such  a  handicraft  man.'  Later  on,  my
Russian  teacher,  Nikolai  Pavlovich  Smirn6ff,  and  the
general  Republican  tone  of  Russian  literature  influenced


CHILDHOOD  55

me  in  the  same  way ;  and  when  I  began  to  write
novels— that  is,  in  my  twelfth  year — I  adopted  the
signature  P.  Kropotkin,  which  I  never  have  departed
from,  notwithstanding  the  remonstrances  of  my  chiefs
when  I  was  in  the  military  service.


VIII

IN  the  autumn  of  1852  my  brother  Alexander  was
sent  to  the  corps  of  cadets,  and  from  that  time  we  saw
each  other  only  during  the  holidays  and  occasionally
on  Sundays.  The  corps  of  cadets  was  six  miles  from
our  house,  and  although  we  had  a  dozen  horses,  it
always  happened  that  when  the  time  came  to  send  the
sledge  to  the  corps  there  was  no  horse  free  for  that  pur-
pose. My  eldest  brother,  Nicholas,  came  home  very
seldom.  The  relative  freedom  which  Alexander  found
at  school,  and  especially  the  influence  of  two  of  his
teachers  in  literature,  developed  his  intellect  rapidly,
and  later  on  I  shall  have  ample  occasion  to  speak  of  the
beneficial  influence  that  he  exercised  upon  my  own
development.  It  is  a  great  privilege  to  have  had  a
loving,  intelligent  elder  brother.

In  the  meantime  I  remained  at  home.  I  had  to
wait  till  my  turn  to  enter  the  corps  of-  pages  should
come,  and  that  did  not  happen  until  I  was  nearly
fifteen  years  of  age.  M.  Poulain  was  dismissed,  and  a
German  tutor  was  engaged  instead.  He  was  one  of  those
idealistic  men  who  are  not  uncommon  among  Germans,


56  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

but  I  remember  him  chiefly  on  account  of  the  enthu-
siastic way  in  which  he  used  to  recite  Schiller's  poetry,
accompanying  it  by  a  most  naive  kind  of  acting  that
delighted  me.  He  stayed  with  us  only  one  winter.

The  next  winter  I  was  sent  to  attend  the  classes  at
a  Moscow  gymnasium  ;  and  finally  I  remained  with
our  Kussian  teacher,  Smirnoff.  We  soon  became
friends,  especially  after  my  father  took  both  of  us  for
a  journey  to  his  Ryazan  estate.  During  this  journey
we  indulged  in  all  sorts  of  fun,  and  we  used  to  invent
humorous  stories  in  connection  with  the  men  and  the
things  that  we  saw;  while  the  impression  produced
upon  me  by  the  hilly  tracts  we  crossed  added  some  new
and  fine  touches  to  my  growing  love  of  nature.  Under
the  impulse  given  me  by  Smirnoff,  my  literary  tastes
also  began  to  grow,  and  during  the  years  from  1854  to
1857  I  had  full  opportunity  to  develop  them.  My
teacher,  who  had  by  this  time  finished  his  studies  at
the  university,  obtained  a  small  clerkship  in  a  law
court,  and  spent  his  mornings  there.  I  was  thus  left
to  myself  till  dinner-time,  and  after  having  prepared  my
lessons  and  taken  a  walk,  I  had  plenty  of  leisure  for
reading  and  writing.  In  the  autumn,  when  my  teacher
returned  to  his  office  at  Moscow,  while  we  remained  in
the  country,  I  was  left  again  to  myself,  and  though  in
continual  intercourse  with  the  family,  and  spending
part  of  the  day  in  playing  with  my  little  sister  Pauline,
I  could  in  fact  dispose  of  my  time  as  I  liked.

Serfdom  was  then  in  the  last  years  of  its  existence.
It  is  recent  history — it  seems  to  be  only  of  yesterday  ;
and  yet,  even  in  Eussia,  few  realize  what  serfdom  was


CHILDHOOD  57

in  reality.  There  is  a  dim  conception  that  the  condi-
tions which  it  created  were  very  bad  ;  but  how  these
conditions  affected  human  beings  bodily  and  mentally
is  only  vaguely  understood.  It  is  amazing,  indeed,
to  see  how  quickly  an  institution  and  its  social  conse-
quences are  forgotten  when  the  institution  has  ceased
to  exist,  and  with  what  rapidity  men  and  things  change
after  that.  I  will  try  to  recall  the  conditions  of  serf-
dom by  telling,  not  what  I  heard,  but  what  I  saw.

Uliana,  the  housekeeper,  stands  in  the  passage
leading  to  father's  room,  and  crosses  herself ;  she  dares
neither  to  advance  nor  to  retreat.  At  last,  after  having
recited  a  prayer,  she  enters  the  room,  and  reports,  in
a  hardly  audible  voice,  that  the  store  of  tea  is  nearly
at  an  end,  that  there  are  only  twenty  pounds  of
sugar  left,  and  that  the  other  provisions  will  soon  be
exhausted.

'  Thieves,  robbers  !  '  shouts  my  father,  '  And  you,
you  are  in  league  with  them ! '  His  voice  thunders
throughout  the  house.  Our  stepmother  leaves  Uliana
to  face  the  storm.  But  father  cries,  'Frol,  call  the
princess  !  Where  is  she  ?  '  And  when  she  enters,  he
receives  her  with  the  same  reproaches.

'  You  also  are  in  league  with  this  progeny  of  Ham  ;
you  are  standing  up  for  them  ;  '  and  so  on,  for  half  an
hour  or  more.

Then  he  commences  to  verify  the  accounts.  At  the
same  time,  he  thinks  about  the  hay.  Frol  is  sent  to
weigh  what  is  left  of  that,  and  our  stepmother  is  sent
to  be  present  during  the  weighing,  while  father  calcu-
lates how  much  of  it  ought  to  be  in  the  barn.  A
considerable  quantity  of  hay  appears  to  be  missing,  and


68  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

Uliana  cannot  account  for  several  pounds  of  such  and
such  provisions.  Father's  voice  becomes  more  and
more  menacing  ;  Uliana  is  trembling ;  but  it  is  the
coachman  who  now  enters  the  room,  and  is  stormed  at
by  his  master.  Father  springs  at  him,  strikes  him,
but  he  keeps  repeating,  '  Your  highness  must  have  made
a  mistake.'

Father  repeats  his  calculations,  and  this  time  it
appears  that  there  is  more  hay  in  the  barn  than  there
ought  to  be.  The  shouting  continues ;  he  now
reproaches  the  coachman  with  not  having  given  the
horses  their  daily  rations  in  full ;  but  the  coachman
calls  on  all  the  saints  to  witness  that  he  gave  the  ani-
mals their  due,  and  Frol  invokes  the  Virgin  to  confirm
the  coachman's  appeal.

But  father  will  not  be  appeased.  He  calls  in
Makar,  the  piano-tuner  and  sub-butler,  and  reminds
him  of  all  his  recent  sins.  He  was  drunk  last  week,
and  must  have  been  drunk  yesterday,  for  he  broke  half
a  dozen  plates.  In  fact,  the  breaking  of  these  plates
was  the  real  cause  of  all  the  disturbance :  our  step-
mother had  reported  the  fact  to  father  in  the  morning,
and  that  was  why  Uliana  was  received  with  more
scolding  than  was  usually  the  case,  why  the  verification
of  the  hay  was  undertaken,  and  why  father  now  con-
tinues to  shout  that  '  this  progeny  of  Ham  '  deserve
all  the  punishments  on  earth.

Of  a  sudden  there  is  a  lull  in  the  storm.  My  father
takes  his  seat  at  the  table  and  writes  a  note.  '  Take
Makar  with  this  note  to  the  police  station,  and  let  a
hundred  lashes  with  the  birch  rod  be  given  to  him.'

Terror  and  absolute  muteness  reign  in  the  house.


CHILDHOOD  69

The  clock  strikes  four,  and  we  all  go  down  to
dinner;  but  no  one  has  any  appetite,  and  the  soup
remains  in  the  plates  untouched.  We  are  ten  at  table,
and  behind  each  of  us  a  violinist  or  a  trombone-player
stands,  with  a  clean  plate  in  his  left  hand ;  but  Makar
is  not  among  them.

'  Where  is  Makar  ?  '  our  stepmother  asks.  '  Call
him  in.'

Makar  does  not  appear,  and  the  order  is  repeated.
He  enters  at  last,  pale,  with  a  distorted  face,  ashamed,
his  eyes  cast  down.  Father  looks  into  his  plate,  while
our  stepmother,  seeing  that  no  one  has  touched  the
soup,  tries  to  encourage  us.

'  Don't  you  find,  children,'  she  says,  '  that  the  soup
is  delicious  ?  '

Tears  suffocate  me,  and  immediately  after  dinner  is
over  I  run  out,  catch  Makar  in  a  dark  passage  and  try
to  kiss  his  hand  ;  but  he  tears  it  away,  and  says,  either
as  a  reproach  or  as  a  question, '  Let  me  alone  ;  you,  too,
when  you  are  grown  up,  will  you  not  be  just  the  same  ?  '

'  No,  no,  never  !  '

Yet  father*was  not  among  the  worst  of  landowners  •
On  the  contrary,  the  servants  and  the  peasants  con-
sidered him  one  of  the  best.  What  we  saw  in  our
house  was  going  on  everywhere,  often  in  much  more
cruel  forms.  The  flogging  of  the  -serfs  was  a  regular
part  of  the  duties  of  the  police  and  of  the  fire  brigade.

A  landowner  once  made  the  remark  to  another,
'  Why  is  it,  general,  that  the  number  of  the  souls  on
your  estate  increases  so  slowly  ?  You  probably  do  not
look  after  their  marriages.'


CO  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

A  few  days  later  the  general  ordered  that  a  list  of
all  the  inhabitants  of  his  village  should  be  brought
him.  He  picked  out  from  it  the  names  of  the  boys
who  had  attained  the  age  of  eighteen,  and  of  the
girls  just  past  sixteen — these  are  the  legal  ages  for
marriage  in  Eussia.  Then  he  wrote,  '  John  to  marry
Anna,  Paul  to  marry  Parashka,'  and  so  on  with  five
couples.  The  five  weddings,  he  added,  must  take
place  in  ten  days,  the  next  Sunday  but  one.

A  general  cry  of  despair  rose  from  the  village.
Women,  young  and  old,  wept  in  every  house.  Anna
had  hoped  to  marry  Gregory ;  Paul's  parents  had
already  had  a  talk  with  the  Fedotoffs  about  their  girl,
who  would  soon  be  of  age.  Moreover,  it  was  the
season  for  ploughing,  not  for  weddings ;  and  what
wedding  can  be  prepared  in  ten  days?  Dozens  of
peasants  came  to  see  the  landowner ;  peasant  women
stood  in  groups  at  the  back  entrance  of  the  mansion,
with  pieces  of  fine  linen  for  the  landowner's  spouse,  to
secure  her  intervention.  All  in  vain.  The  master  had
said  that  the  weddings  should  take  place  at  such  a  date,
and  so  it  must  be.

At  the  appointed  time,  the  nuptial  processions,  in
this  case  more  like  burial  processions,  went  to  the
church.  The  women  cried  with  loud  voices,  as  they
are  wont  to  cry  during  burials.  One  of  the  house
valets  was  sent  to  the  church,  to  report  to  the  master
as  soon  as  the  wedding  ceremonies  were  over ;  but
soon  he  came  running  back,  cap  in  hand,  pale  and
distressed.

'Parashka,'  he  said,  'makes  a  stand;  she  refuses
to  be  married  to  Paul.  Father '  (that  is,  the  priest)


CHILDHOOD  61

asked  her,  "  Do  you  agree  ?  "  but  she  replied  in  a  loud
voice,  "No,  I  don't.'"

The  landowner  grew  furious.  '  Go  and  tell  that
long-maned  drunkard '  (meaning  the  priest ;  the  Kussian
clergy  wear  their  hair  long)  '  that  if  Parashka  is  not
marriedx  at  once,  I  will  report  him  as  a  drunkard  to  the
archbishop.  How  dares  he,  clerical  dirt,  disobey  me  ?
Tell  him  he  shall  be  sent  to  rot  in  a  monastery,  and  I
shall  exile  Parashka's  family  to  the  steppes.'

The  valet  transmitted  the  message.  Parashka's
relatives  and  the  priest  surrounded  the  girl ;  her
mother,  weeping,  fell  on  her  knees  before  her,
entreating  her  not  to  ruin  the  whole  family.  The  girl
continued  to  say  '  I  won't,'  but  in  a  weaker  and  weaker
voice,  then  in  a  whisper,  until  at  last  she  stood  silent.
The  nuptial  crown  was  put  on  her  head ;  she  made
no  resistance,  and  the  valet  ran  full  speed  to  the
mansion  to  announce,  '  They  are  married.'

Half  an  hour  later,  the  small  bells  of  the  nuptial
processions  resounded  at  the  gate  of  the  mansion.
The  five  couples  alighted  from  the  cars,  crossed  the
yard  and  entered  the  hall.  The  landlord  received
them,  offering  them  glasses  of  wine,  while  the  parents,
standing  behind  the  crying  daughters,  ordered  them  to
bow  to  the  earth  before  their  lord.

Marriages  by  order  were  so  common  that  amongst
our  servants,  each  time  a  young  couple  foresaw  that
they  might  be  ordered  to  marry,  although  they  had  no
mutual  inclination  for  each  other,  they  took  the  pre-
caution of  standing  together  as  godfather  and  god-
mother at  the  christening  of  a  child  in  one  of  the
peasant  families.  This  rendered  marriage  impossible,


62  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

according  to  Russian  Church  law.  The  stratagem  was
usually  successful,  but  once  it  ended  in  a  tragedy.
Andrei,  the  tailor,  fell  in  love  with  a  girl  belonging  to
one  of  our  neighbours.  He  hoped  that  my  father
would  permit  him  to  go  free,  as  a  tailor,  in  exchange
for  a  certain  yearly  payment,  and  that  by  working
hard  at  his  trade  he  could  manage  to  lay  aside  some
money  and  to  buy  freedom  for  the  girl.  Otherwise,  in
marrying  one  of  my  father's  serfs  she  would  have
become  the  serf  of  her  husband's  master.  However,
as  Andrei  and  one  of  the  maids  of  our  household  fore-
saw that  they  might  be  ordered  to  marry,  they  agreed
to  unite  as  god-parents  in  the  christening  of  a  child.
What  they  had  feared  happened  :  one  day  they  were
called  to  the  master,  and  the  dreaded  order  was  given.

'  We  are  always  obedient  to  your  will,'  they  replied,
'  but  a  few  weeks  ago  we  acted  as  godfather  and  god-
mother at  a  christening.'  Andrei  also  explained  his
wishes  and  intentions.  The  result  was  that  he  was
sent  to  the  recruiting  board  to  become  a  soldier.

Under  Nicholas  I.  there  was  no  obligatory  military
service  for  all,  such  as  now  exists.  Nobles  and  mer-
chants were  exempt,  and  when  a  new  levy  of  recruits
was  ordered,  the  landowners  had  to  supply  a  certain
number  of  men  from  their  serfs.  As  a  rule,  the
peasants,  within  their  village  communities,  kept  a  roll
amongst  themselves ;  but  the  house  servants  were
entirely  at  the  mercy  of  their  lord,  and  if  he  was
dissatisfied  with  one  of  them,  he  sent  him  to  the
recruiting  board  and  took  a  recruit  acquittance,  which
had  a  considerable  money  value,  as  it  could  be  sold  to
anyone  whose  turn  it  was  to  become  a  soldier.


CHILDHOOD  63

Military  service  in  those  times  was  terrible.  A  man
was  required  to  serve  twenty-five  years  under  the  colours,
and  the  life  of  a  soldier  was  hard  in  the  extreme.  To
become  a  soldier  meant  to  be  torn  away  for  ever  from
one's  native  village  and  surroundings,  and  to  be  at  the
mercy  of  officers  like  Timofeeff,  whom  I  have  already
mentioned.  Blows  from  the  officers,  flogging  with
birch  rods  and  with  sticks,  for  the  slightest  fault,  were
normal  affairs.  The  cruelty  that  was  displayed  sur-
passes all  imagination.  Even  in  the  corps  of  cadets,
where  only  noblemen's  sons  were  educated,  a  thousand
blows  with  birch  rods  were  sometimes  administered,  in
the  presence  of  all  the  corps,  for  a  cigarette — the
doctor  standing  by  the  tortured  boy,  and  ordering  the
punishment  to  end  only  when  he  ascertained  that  the
pulse  was  about  to  stop  beating.  The  bleeding  victim
was  carried  away  unconscious  to  the  hospital.  The
Grand  Duke  Mikhael,  commander  of  the  military
schools,  would  quickly  have  removed  the  director  of  a
corps  in  which  one  or  two  such  cases  did  not  occur
every  year.  '  No  discipline,'  he  would  have  said.

With  common  soldiers  it  was  far  worse.  When  one
of  them  appeared  before  a  court-martial,  the  sentence
was  that  a  thousand  men  should  be  placed  in  two  ranks
facing  each  other,  every  soldier  armed  with  a  stick  of
the  thickness  of  the  little  finger  .(these  sticks  were
known  under  their  German  name  of  Spitzrutheri) ,  and
that  the  condemned  man  should  be  dragged  three,
four,  five,  and  seven  times  between  these  two  rows,
each  soldier  adminstering  a  blow.  Sergeants  followed
to  see  that  full  force  was  used.  After  one  or  two
thousand  blows  had  been  given,  the  victim,  spitting


64  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

blood,  was  taken  to  the  hospital  and  attended  to,  in
order  that  the  punishment  might  be  finished  as  soon  as
he  had  more  or  less  recovered  from  the  effects  of  the  first
part  of  it.  If  he  died  under  the  torture,  the  execu-
tion of  the  sentence  was  completed  upon  the  corpse.
Nicholas  I.  and  his  brother  Mikhael  were  pitiless  ;  no
remittance  of  the  punishment  was  ever  possible.  'I
will  send  you  through  the  ranks ;  you  shall  be  skinned
under  the  sticks,'  were  threats  which  made  part  of
the  current  language.

A  gloomy  terror  used  to  spread  through  our  house
when  it  became  known  that  one  of  the  servants  was  to
be  sent  to  the  recruiting  board.  The  man  was  chained
and  placed  under  guard  in  the  office  to  prevent  suicide.
A  peasant  cart  was  brought  to  the  office  door,  and  the
doomed  man  was  taken  out  between  two  watchmen.
All  the  servants  surrounded  him.  He  made  a  deep  bow
asking  everyone  to  pardon  him  his  willing  or  un-
willing offences.  If  his  father  and  mother  lived  in  our
village,  they  came  to  see  him  off.  He  bowed  to  the
ground  before  them,  and  his  mother  and  his  other
female  relatives  began  loudly  to  sing  out  their  lamen-
tations— a  sort  of  half -song  and  half -recitative  :  '  To
whom  do  you  abandon  us  ?  Who  will  take  care  of  you
in  the  strange  lands  ?  Who  will  protect  me  from  cruel
men  ? ' — exactly  in  the  same  way  in  which  they  sang
their  lamentations  at  a  burial,  and  with  the  same  words.

Thus  Andrei  had  now  to  face  for  twenty-five  years
the  terrible  fate  of  a  soldier :  all  his  schemes  of
happiness  had  come  to  a  violent  end.

The  fate  of  one  of  the  maids,  Pauline,  or  Polya,  as


CHILDHOOD  65

she  used  to  be  called,  was  even  more  tragical.  She  had
been  apprenticed  to  make  fine  embroidery,  and  was  an
artist  at  the  work.  At  Nikolskoye  her  embroidery
frame  stood  in  sister  Helene's  room,  and  she  often  took
part  in  the  conversations  that  went  on  between  our
sister  and  a  sister  of  our  stepmother  who  stayed  with
Helene.  Altogether,  by  her  behaviour  and  talk  Polya
was  more  like  an  educated  young  person  than  a  house-
maid.

A  misfortune  befell  her :  she  realized  that  she
would  soon  be  a  mother.  She  told  all  to  our  step-
mother, who  burst  into  reproaches  :  '  I  will  not  have
that  creature  in  my  house  any  longer !  I  will  not
permit  such  a  shame  in  my  house  !  oh,  the  shameless
creature !  '  and  so  on.  The  tears  of  Helene  made  no
difference.  Polya  had  her  hair  cut  short,  and  was
exiled  to  the  dairy ;  but  as  she  was  just  embroidering
an  extraordinary  skirt,  she  had  to  finish  it  at  the  dairy,
in  a  dirty  cottage,  at  a  microscopical  window.  She
finished  it,  and  made  many  more  fine  embroideries,  all
in  the  hope  of  obtaining  her  pardon.  But  pardon  did
not  come.

The  father  of  her  child,  a  servant  of  one  of  our
neighbours,  implored  permission  to  marry  her ;  but  as
he  had  no  money  to  offer,  his  request  was  refused.
Polya's  '  too  gentlewoman-like  manners  '  were  taken  as
an  offence,  and  a  most  bitter  fate  was  kept  in  reserve
for  her.  There  was  in  our  household  a  man  employed
as  a  postilion,  on  account  of  his  small  size  ;  he  went
under  the  name  of  '  bandy-legged  Filka.'  In  his  boy-
hood a  horse  had  kicked  him  terribly,  and  he  did  not
grow.  His  legs  were  crooked,  his  feet  were  turned

VOL.  I.  F


66  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

inward,  his  nose  was  broken  and  turned  to  one  side,  his
jaw  was  deformed.  To  this  monster  it  was  decided  to
marry  P61ya — and  she  was  married  by  force.  The
couple  were  sent  to  become  peasants  at  my  father's
estate  in  Ryazan.

Human  feelings  were  not  recognized,  not  even
suspected,  in  serfs,  and  when  Turgueneff  published  his
little  story  '  Mumu,'  and  Grigor6vich  began  to  issue  his
thrilling  novels,  in  which  he  made  his  readers  weep  over
the  misfortunes  of  the  serfs,  it  was  to  a  great  number
of  persons  a  startling  revelation.  '  They  love  just  as
we  do ;  is  it  possible  ?  '  exclaimed  the  sentimental  ladies
who  could  not  read  a  French  novel  without  shedding
tears  over  the  troubles  of  the  noble  heroes  and  heroines.

The  education  which  the  owners  occasionally  gave
to  some  of  their  serfs  was  only  another  source  of  misfor-
tune for  the  latter.  My  father  once  picked  out  in  a
peasant  house  a  clever  boy,  and  sent  him  to  be  educated
as  a  doctor's  assistant.  The  boy  was  diligent,  and  after
a  few  years'  apprenticeship  made  a  decided  success.
When  he  returned  home,  my  father  bought  all  that
was  required  for  a  well-equipped  dispensary,  which  was
arranged  very  nicely  in  one  of  the  side  houses  of  Nik61-
skoye.  In  summer  time  Sasha  the  Doctor — that  was
the  familiar  name  under  which  this  young  man  went
in  the  household — was  busy  gathering  and  preparing
all  sorts  of  medical  herbs,  and  in  a  short  time  he
became  most  popular  in  the  region  round  Nik61skoye.
The  sick  people  among  the  peasants  came  from  the
neighbouring  villages,  and  my  father  was  proud  of  the
success  of  his  dispensary.  But  this  condition  of  things


CHILDHOOD  67

did  not  last.  One  winter,  my  father  came  to
Nik61skoye,  stayed  there  for  a  few  days,  and  left.
That  night  Sasha  the  Doctor  shot  himself — by  acci-
dent, it  was  reported  ;  but  there  was  a  love  story  at
the  bottom  of  it.  He  was  in  love  with  a  girl  whom
he  could  not  marry,  as  she  belonged  to  another
landowner.

The  case  of  another  young  man,  Gherasim
Krugl6ff,  whom  my  father  educated  at  the  Moscow
Agricultural  Institute,  was  almost  equally  sad.  He
passed  his  examinations  most  brilliantly,  getting  a  gold
medal,  and  the  director  of  the  Institute  made  all
possible  endeavours  to  induce  my  father  to  give  him
freedom  and  to  let  him  go  to  the  university — serfs
not  being  allowed  to  enter  there.  '  He  is  sure  to
become  a  remarkable  man,'  the  director  said,  'perhaps
one  of  the  glories  of  Kussia,  and  it  will  be  an  honour
for  you  to  have  recognized  his  capacities  and  to
have  given  such  a  man  to  Russian  science.'

'  I  need  him  for  my  own  estate,'  my  father  replied
to  the  many  applications  made  on  the  young  man's
behalf.  In  reality,  with  the  primitive  methods  of  agri-
culture which  were  then  in  use,  and  from  which  my
father  would  never  have  departed,  Gherasim  Krugloff
was  absolutely  useless.  He  made  a  survey  of  the  estate,
but  when  that  was  done  he  was  ordered  to  sit  in  the
servants'  room  and  to  stand  with  a  plate  at  dinner-time.
Of  course  Gherasim  resented  it  very  much  ;  his  dreams
carried  him  to  the  university,  to  scientific  work.  His
looks  betrayed  his  discontent,  and  our  stepmother
seemed  to  find  an  especial  pleasure  in  offending  him  at
every  opportunity.  One  day  in  the  autumn,  a  rush  of

F 2


68  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

wind  having  opened  the  entrance  gate,  she  called  out  to
him,  '  Garaska,  go  and  shut  the  gate.'

That  was  the  last  drop.  He  answered,  '  You
have  a  porter  for  that/  and  went  his  way.

My  stepmother  ran  into  father's  room,  crying,
'  Your  servants  insult  me  in  your  house  !  '

Immediately  Gherasim  was  put  under  arrest,  and
chained,  to  be  sent  away  as  a  soldier.  The  parting  of
his  old  father  and  mother  with  him  was  one  of  the  most
heartrending  scenes  I  ever  saw.

This  time,  however,  fate  took  its  revenge.  Nicholas
I.  died,  and  military  service  became  more  tolerable.
Gherasim's  great  ability  was  soon  remarked,  and  in  a
few  years  he  was  one  of  the  chief  clerks,  and  the  real
working  force  in  one  of  the  departments  of  the  Ministry
of  War.  Meanwhile,  my  father,  who  was  absolutely
honest,  and,  at  a  time  when  almost  every  one  was
receiving  bribes  and  making  fortunes,  had  never  let
himself  be  bribed,  departed  once  from  the  strict  rules
of  the  service  in  order  to  oblige  the  commander  of  the
corps  to  which  he  belonged,  and  consented  to  allow  an
irregularity  of  some  kind.  It  nearly  cost  him  his  pro-
motion to  the  rank  of  general ;  the  only  object  of  his
thirty-five  years'  service  in  the  army  seemed  on  the
point  of  being  lost.  My  stepmother  went  to  St.  Peters-
burg to  remove  the  difficulty,  and  one  day,  after  many
applications,  she  was  told  that  the  only  way  to  obtain
what  she  wanted  was  to  address  herself  to  a  particular
clerk  in  a  certain  department  of  the  ministry.  Although
he  was  a  mere  clerk,  he  was  the  real  head  of  his
superiors,  and  could  do  everything.  This  man's  name
was  Gherasim  Ivanovich  Krugl6ff.


CHILDHOOD  69

'  Imagine,  our  Garaska  ! '  she  said  to  me  afterward.
'  I  always  knew  that  he  had  great  capacity.  I  went  to
see  him,  and  spoke  to  him  about  this  affair,  and  he  said,
"  I  have  nothing  against  the  old  prince,  and  I  will  do
all  I  can  for  him."

Gherasim  kept  his  word  :  he  made  a  favourable
report,  and  my  father  got  his  promotion.  At  last  he
could  put  on  the  long-coveted  red  trousers  and  the
red-lined  overcoat,  and  could  wear  the  plumage  on  his
helmet.

These  were  things  which  I  myself  saw  in  my  child-
hood. If,  however,  I  were  to  relate  what  I  heard  of
in  those  years  it  would  be  a  much  more  gruesome
narrative  :  stories  of  men  and  women  torn  from  their
families  and  their  villages,  and  sold,  or  lost  in  gambling,
or  exchanged  for  a  couple  of  hunting  dogs,  and  then
transported  to  some  remote  part  of  Russia  for  the  sake
of  creating  a  new  estate ;  of  children  taken  from  their
parents  and  sold  to  cruel  or  dissolute  masters;  of
flogging  '  in  the  stables,'  which  occurred  every  day
with  unheard-o^  cruelty  ;  of  a  girl  who  found  her  only
salvation  in  drowning  herself ;  of  an  old  man  who
had  grown  grey-haired  in  his  master's  service,  and  at
last  hanged  himself  under  his  master's  window  ;  and  of
revolts  of  serfs,  which  were  suppressed  by  Nicholas  I.'s
generals  by  flogging  to  death  each  tenth  or  fifth  man
taken  out  of  the  ranks,  and  by  laying  waste  the  village,
whose  inhabitants,  after  a  military  execution,  went
begging  for  bread  in  the  neighbouring  provinces,  as
if  they  had  been  the  victims  of  a  conflagration.  As  to
the  poverty  which  I  saw  during  our  journeys  in  certain
villages,  especially  in  those  which  belonged  to  the  im-


70  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

perial  family,  110  words  would  be  adequate  to  describe
tbe  misery  to  readers  who  have  not  seen  it.

To  become  free  was  the  constant  dream  of  the
serfs — a  dream  not  easily  realized,  for  a  heavy  sum  of
money  was  required  to  induce  a  landowner  to  part  with
a  serf.  '  Do  you  know,'  my  father  said  to  me  once,
'  that  your  mother  appeared  to  me  after  her  death  ?
You  young  people  do  not  believe  in  these  things,  but  it
was  so.  I  sat  one  night  very  late  in  this  chair,  at  my
writing-table,  and  slumbered,  when  I  saw  her  enter
from  behind,  all  in  white,  quite  pale,  and  with  her  eyes
gleaming.  When  she  was  dying  she  begged  me  to
promise  that  I  would  give  liberty  to  her  maid,  Masha,
and  I  did  promise  ;  but  then  what  with  one  thing  and
another,  nearly  a  whole  year  passed  without  my  having
fulfilled  my  intention.  Then  she  appeared,  and  said
to  me  in  a  low  voice,  "  Alexis,  you  promised  me  to  give
liberty  to  Masha :  have  you  forgotten  it  ?  "  I  was
quite  terrified  :  I  jumped  out  of  my  chair,  but  she  had
vanished.  I  called  the  servants,  but  no  one  had  seen
anything.  Next  morning  I  went  to  her  grave  and
had  a  litany  sung,  and  immediately  gave  liberty  to
Masha.'

When  my  father  died,  Masha  came  to  his  burial,
and  I  spoke  to  her.  She  was  married,  and  quite  happy
in  her  family  life.  My  brother  Alexander,  in  his  jocose
way,  told  her  what  my  father  had  said,  and  we  asked
her  what  she  knew  of  it.

'  These  things,'  she  replied,  '  happened  a  long  time
ago,  so  I  may  tell  you  the  truth.  I  saw  that  your
father  had  quite  forgotten  his  promise,  so  I  dressed  up


CHILDHOOD  71

in  white  and  spoke  like  your  mother. I  recalled  the
promise  he  had  made  to  her — you  won't  bear  a  grudge
against  me,  will  you  ?  '
'  Of  course  not ! '

Ten  or  twelve  years  after  the  scenes  described  in
the  early  part  of  this  chapter,  I  sat  one  night  in  my
father's  room,  and  we  talked  of  things  past.  Serfdom
had  been  abolished,  and  my  father  complained  of  the
new  conditions,  though  not  very  severely;  he  had
accepted  them  without  much  grumbling.

'  You  must  agree,  father,'  I  said,  '  that  you  often
punished  your  servants  cruelly,  and  without  any
reason.'

'With  the  people,'  he  replied,  'it  was  impossible  to
do  otherwise ; '  and,  leaning  back  in  his  easy-chair,  he
remained  plunged  in  thought.  '  But  what  I  did  was
nothing  worth  speaking  of,'  he  said  after  a  long  pause.
'  Take  that  same  Sableff :  he  looks  so  soft,  and  talks  in
such  a  meek  voice  ;  but  he  was  really  terrible  with  his
serfs.  How  many  times  they  plotted  to  kill  him  !  I,
at  least,  never  took  advantage  of  my  maids,  whereas
that  old  devil  Tonkoff  went  on  in  such  a  way  that  the
peasant  women  were  going  to  inflict  a  terrible  punish-
ment upon  him.  .  .  .  Good-bye  ;  bonne  nuit  \  '


72  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST


IX


I  WELL  remember  the  Crimean  war.  At  Moscow  it
affected  people  but  little.  Of  course,  in  every  house
lint  and  bandages  for  the  wounded  were  made  at
evening  parties  ;  not  much  of  it,  however,  reached  the
Russian  armies,  immense  quantities  being  stolen  and
sold  to  the  armies  of  the  enemy.  My  sister  Helene
and  other  young  ladies  sang  patriotic  songs,  but  the
general  tone  of  life  in  society  was  hardly  influenced  by
the  great  struggle  that  was  going  on.  In  the  country,
on  the  contrary,  the  war  caused  much  gloominess.
The  levies  of  recruits  followed  one  another  rapidly,
and  we  continually  heard  the  peasant  women  singing
their  funereal  songs.  The  Russian  people  look  upon
war  as  a  calamity  which  is  being  sent  upon  them  by
Providence,  and  they  accepted  this  war  with  a  solem-
nity that  contrasted  strangely  with  the  levity  I  saw
elsewhere  under  similar  circumstances.  Young  though
I  was,  I  realized  that  feeling  of  solemn  resignation
which  pervaded  our  villages.

My  brother  Nicholas  was  smitten  like  many  others
by  the  war  fever,  and  before  he  had  ended  his  course  at
the  corps  he  joined  the  army  in  the  Caucasus.  I  never
saw  him  again.

In  the  autumn  of  1854  our  family  was  increased  by
the  arrival  of  two  sisters  of  our  stepmother.  They  had
had  their  own  house  and  some  vineyards  at  Sebastopol,
but  now  they  were  homeless,  and  came  to  stay  with  us.
When  the  allies  landed  in  the  Crimea,  the  inhabitants


CHILDHOOD  73

of  Sebastopol  were  told  that  they  need  not  be  afraid,
and  had  only  to  stay  where  they  were ;  but  after  the
defeat  at  the  Alma,  they  were  ordered  to  leave  with
all  haste,  as  the  city  would  be  invested  within  a  few
days.  There  were  few  conveyances,  and  there  was  no
way  of  moving  along  the  roads  in  face  of  the  troops
which  were  marching  southward.  To  hire  a  cart  was
almost  impossible,  and  the  ladies,  having  abandoned  all
they  had  on  the  road,  had  a  very  hard  time  of  it  before
they  reached  Moscow.

I  soon  made  friends  with  the  younger  of  the  two
sisters,  a  lady  of  about  thirty,  who  used  to  smoke  one
cigarette  after  another,  and  to  tell  me  of  all  the  horrors
of  their  journey.  She  spoke  with  tears  in  her  eyes  of
the  beautiful  battle-ships  which  had  to  be  sunk  at  the
entrance  of  the  harbour  of  Sebastopol,  and  she  could
not  understand  how  the  Russians  would  be  able  to
defend  Sebastopol  from  the  land ;  there  was  no  wall
even  worth  speaking  of.

I  was  in  my  thirteenth  year  when  Nicholas  I.
died.  It  was  late  in  the  afternoon  of  February  18
(March  2),  that  the  policemen  distributed  in  all  the
houses  of  Moscow  a  bulletin  announcing  the  illness  of
the  Tsar,  and  inviting  the  inhabitants  to  pray  in  the
churches  for  his  recovery.  At  that  time  he  was  already
dead,  and  the  authorities  knew  it,  as  there  was  tele-
graphic communication  between  Moscow  and  St.  Peters-
burg ;  but  not  a  word  having  been  previously  uttered
about  his  illness,  they  thought  that  the  people  must
be  gradually  prepared  for  the  announcement  of  his
death.  We  all  went  to  church  and  prayed  most
piously.


74  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

Next  day,  Saturday,  the  same  thing  was  done,  and
even  on  Sunday  morning  bulletins  about  the  Tsar's
health  were  distributed.  The  news  of  the  death  of
Nicholas  reached  us  only  about  midday,  through  some
servants  who  had  been  to  the  market.  A  real  terror
reigned  in  our  house  and  in  the  houses  of  our  relatives,
as  the  information  spread.  It  was  said  that  the  people
in  the  market  behaved  in  a  strange  way,  showing  no
regret,  but  indulging  in  dangerous  talk.  Full-grown
people  spoke  in  whispers,  and  our  stepmother  kept
repeating,  '  Don't  talk  before  the  men ; '  while  the
servants  whispered  among  themselves,  probably  about
the  coming  '  freedom.'  The  nobles  expected  at  every
moment  a  revolt  of  the  serfs — a  new  uprising  of
Pugachoff.

At  St.  Petersburg,  in  the  meantime,  men  of  the
educated  classes,  as  they  communicated  to  one  another
the  news,  embraced  in  the  streets.  Everyone  felt  that
the  end  of  the  war  and  the  end  of  the  terrible  condi-
tions which  prevailed  under  the  '  iron  despot '  were
near  at  hand.  Poisoning  was  talked  about,  the  more
so  as  the  Tsar's  body  decomposed  very  rapidly,  but  the
true  reason  only  gradually  leaked  out :  a  too  strong
dose  of  an  invigorating  medicine  that  Nicholas  had
taken.

In  the  country,  during  the  summer  of  1855,  the
heroic  struggle  which  was  going  on  in  Sebastopol  for
every  yard  of  ground  and  every  bit  of  its  dismantled
bastions  was  followed  with  a  solemn  interest.  A
messenger  was  sent  regularly  twice  a  week  from  our
house  to  the  district  town  to  get  the  papers ;  and  on
his  return,  even  before  he  had  dismounted,  the  papers


CHILDHOOD  75

were  taken  from  his  hands  and  opened.  Helene  or  I
read  them  aloud  to  the  family,  and  the  news  was  at
once  transmitted  to  the  servants'  room,  and  thence  to
the  kitchen,  the  office,  the  priest's  house,  and  the
houses  of  the  peasants.  The  reports  which  came  of
the  last  days  of  Sebastopol,  of  the  awful  bombardment,
and  finally  of  the  evacuation  of  the  town  by  our  troops
were  received  with  tears.  In  every  country  house
round  about,  the  loss  of  Sebastopol  was  mourned  over
with  as  much  grief  as  the  loss  of  a  near  relative  would
have  been,  although  everyone  understood  that  now
the  terrible  war  would  soon  come  to  an  end.


X


IT  was  in  August  1857,  when  I  was  nearly  fifteen,  that
my  turn  came  to  enter  the  corps  of  pages  and  I  was
taken  to  St.  Petersburg.  When  I  left  home  I  was  still
a  child ;  but  human  character  is  usually  settled  in  a
definite  way  at  an  earlier  age  than  is  generally  supposed,
and  it  is  evident  to  me  that  under  my  childish  appear-
ance I  was  then  very  much  what  I  was  to  be  later
on.  My  tastes,  my  inclinations,  were  already  deter-
mined.

The  first  impulse  to  my  intellectual  development  was
given,  as  I  have  said,  by  my  Bussian  teacher.  It  is  an
excellent  habit  in  Russian  families — a  habit  now,  un-
happily, on  the  decline — to  have  in  the  house  a  student
who  aids  the  boys  and  the  girls  with  their  lessons,  even


7G  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

when  they  are  at  a  gymnasium.  For  a  better  assimila-
tion of  what  they  learn  at  school,  and  for  a  widening  of
their  conceptions  about  what  they  learn,  his  aid  is
invaluable.  Moreover,  he  introduces  an  intellectual
element  into  the  family  and  becomes  an  elder  brother
to  the  young  people — often  something  better  than  an
elder  brother,  because  the  student  has  a  certain  re-
sponsibility for  the  progress  of  his  pupils ;  and  as  the
methods  of  teaching  change  rapidly,  from  one  genera-
tion to  another,  he  can  assist  his  pupils  much  better
than  the  best  educated  parents  could,

Nikolai  Pavlovich  Smirnoff  had  literary  tastes.  At
that  time,  under  the  wild  censorship  of  Nicholas  I.,
many  quite  inoffensive  works  by  our  best  writers  could
not  be  published ;  others  were  so  mutilated  as  to  de-
prive many  passages  in  them  of  any  meaning.  In  the
genial  comedy  by  Griboyedoff,  '  Misfortune  from
Intelligence/  which  ranks  with  the  best  comedies  of
Moliere,  Colonel  Skaloziib  had  to  be  named  '  Mr.
Skaloziib,'  to  the  detriment  of  the  sense  and  even  of
the  verses ;  for  the  representation  of  a  colonel  in  a  com-
ical light  would  have  been  considered  an  insult  to  the
army.  Of  so  innocent  a  book  as  G6gol's  '  Dead  Souls  '
the  second  part  was  not  allowed  to  appear,  nor  the
first  part  to  be  reprinted,  although  it  had  long  been  out
of  print.  Numerous  verses  of  Pushkin,  Lermontoff,
A.  K.  Tolstoy,  Byleeff,  and  other  poets  were  not  per-
mitted to  see  the  light ;  to  say  nothing  of  such  verses
as  had  any  political  meaning  or  contained  a  criticism
of  the  prevailing  conditions.  All  these  circulated  in
manuscript,  and  my  teacher  used  to  copy  whole  books  of
Gogol  and  Pushkin  for  himself  and  his  friends,  a  task


CHILDHOOD  77

in  which  I  occasionally  helped  him.  As  a  true  child  of
Moscow  he  was  also  imbued  with  the  deepest  veneration
for  those  of  our  writers  who  lived  in  Moscow — some  of
them  in  the  Old  Equerries'  Quarter.  He  pointed  out
to  me  with  respect  the  house  of  the  Countess  Salias
(Eugenie  Tour),  who  was  our  near  neighbour,  while
the  house  of  the  noted  exile  Alexander  Herzen  always
was  associated  with  a  certain  mysterious  feeling  of
respect  and  awe.  The  house  where  Gogol  lived  was  for
us  an  object  of  deep  respect,  and  though  I  was  not  nine
when  he  died  (in  1851),  and  had  read  none  of  his
works,  I  remember  well  the  sadness  his  death  pro-
duced at  Moscow.  Turgueneff  well  expressed  that
feeling  in  a  note,  for  which  Nicholas  I.  ordered  him
to  be  put  under  arrest  and  sent  into  exile  to  his  estate.

Pushkin's  great  poem,  '  Evgheniy  Onyeghin,'  made
but  little  impression  upon  me,  and  I  still  admire  the
marvellous  simplicity  and  beauty  of  his  style  in  that
poem  more  than  its  contents.  But  Gogol's  works,
which  I  read  when  I  was  eleven  or  twelve,  had  a
powerful  effect  on  my  mind,  and  my  first  literary
essays  were  in  hnitation  of  his  humorous  manner.  An
historical  novel  by  Zagoskin,  '  Yiiriy  Miloslavskiy,'
about  the  times  of  the  great  uprising  of  1612,  Pushkin's
'  The  Captain's  Daughter,'  dealing  with  the  Pugachoff
uprising,  and  Dumas'  '  Queen  Marguerite '  awakened
in  me  a  lasting  interest  in  history.  As  to  other  French
novels,  I  have  only  begun  to  read  them  since  Daudet
and  Zola  came  to  the  front.  Nekrasoff's  poetry  was
my  favourite  from  early  years :  I  knew  many  of  his
verses  by  heart.

Nikolai  Pavlovich  Smirnoff  early  began  to  make  me


78  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

write,  and  with  his  aid  I  wrote  a  long  '  History  of  a  Six-
pence,' for  which  we  invented  all  sorts  of  characters,
into  whose  possession  the  sixpence  fell.

My  brother  Alexander  had  at  that  time  a  much  more
poetical  turn  of  mind.  He  wrote  most  romantic  stories,
and  began  early  to  make  verses,  which  he  did  with
wonderful  facility  and  in  a  most  musical  and  easy  style.
If  his  mind  had  not  subsequently  been  taken  up  by
natural  history  and  philosophical  studies,  he  undoubtedly
would  have  become  a  poet  of  mark.  In  those  years
his  favourite  resort  for  finding  poetical  inspiration  was
the  gently  sloping  roof  underneath  our  window.  This
aroused  in  me  a  constant  desire  to  tease  him.  '  There
is  the  poet  sitting  under  the  chimney-pot,  trying  to
write  his  verses,'  I  used  to  say  ;  and  the  teasing  ended
in  a  fierce  scrimmage,  which  brought  our  sister  Helene
to  a  state  of  despair.  But  Alexander  was  so  devoid  of
revengefulness  that  peace  was  soon  concluded,  and  we
loved  each  other  immensely.  Among  boys,  scrimmage
and  love  seem  to  go  hand  in  hand.

I  had  even  then  taken  to  journalism.  In  my
twelfth  year  I  began  to  edit  a  daily  journal.  Paper
was  not  to  be  had  at  will  in  our  house,  and  my  journal
was  of  a  Liliputian  size.  As  the  Crimean  war  had  not
yet  broken  out,  and  the  only  newspaper  which  my  father
used  to  receive  was  the  Gazette  of  the  Moscow  Police,
I  had  not  a  great  choice  of  models.  As  a  result  my
own  Gazette  consisted  merely  of  short  paragraphs
announcing  the  news  of  the  day  :  as,  '  Went  out  to
the  woods.  N.  P.  Smirn6ff  shot  two  thrushes,'  and
the  like.

This soon ceased to  satisfy  me,  and  in 1855 I


CHILDHOOD  79

started  a  monthly  review  which  contained  Alexander's
verses,  my  novelettes,  and  some  sort  of  '  varieties.'
The  material  existence  of  this  review  was  fully
guaranteed,  for  it  had  plenty  of  subscribers ;  that  is,
the  editor  himself  and  Smirn6ff,  who  regularly  paid  his
subscription,  of  so  many  sheets  of  paper,  even  after  he
had  left  our  house.  In  return,  I  accurately  wrote  out
for  my  faithful  subscriber  a  second  copy.

When  Smirnoff  left  us,  and  a  student  of  medicine,
N.  M.  Pavloff,  took  his  place,  the  latter  helped  me  in
my  editorial  duties.  He  obtained  for  the  review  a  poem
by  one  of  his  friends,  and — still  more  important — the
introductory  lecture  on  physical  geography  by  one  of
the  Moscow  professors.  Of  course  this  had  not  been
printed  before  :  a  reproduction  would  never  have  found
its  way  into  so  serious  a  publication.

Alexander,  I  need  not  say,  took  a  lively  interest  in
the  review,  and  its  renown  soon  reached  the  corps  of
cadets.  Some  young  writers  on  the  way  to  fame
undertook  the  publication  of  a  rival.  The  matter  was
serious  :  in  poems  and  novels  we  could  hold  our  own  ;
but  they  had  a  '  critic,'  and  a  '  critic  '  who  writes,  in
connection  with  the  characters  of  some  new  novel,  all
sorts  of  things  about  the  conditions  of  life,  and  touches
upon  a  thousand  questions  which  could  not  be  touched
upon  anywhere  else,  makes  the  soul  of  a  Kussian
review.  They  had  a  critic,  and  we  had  none  !  Happily
enough,  the  article  he  wrote  for  the  first  number  was
shown  to  my  brother.  It  was  rather  pretentious
and  weak,  and  Alexander  at  once  wrote  an  anti-
criticism,  ridiculing  and  demolishing  the  critic  in  a
violent  manner.  There  was  great  consternation  in  the


80  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

rival  camp  when  they  learned  that  this  anti-criticism
would  appear  in  our  next  issue  ;  they  gave  up  publishing
their  review  and  their  best  writers  joined  our  staff.
We  triumphantly  announced  the  future  '  exclusive
collaboration '  of  so  many  distinguished  writers.

In  August  1857  the  review  had  to  be  suspended,
after  nearly  two  years'  existence.  New  surroundings
and  a  quite  new  life  were  before  me.  I  went  away
from  home  with  regret,  the  more  so  because  the  whole
distance  between  Moscow  and  St.  Petersburg  would  be
between  me  and  Alexander,  and  I  already  considered
it  a  misfortune  that  I  had  to  enter  a  military  school.


PART  SECOND
THE CORPS OF PAGES


VOL.  I.


G


THE  long-cherished  ambition  of  my  father  was  thus
realized.  There  was  a  vacancy  in  the  corps  of  pages
which  I  could  fill  before  I  had  got  beyond  the  age  to
which  admission  was  limited,  and  I  was  taken  to  St.
Petersburg  and  entered  the  school.  Only  a  hundred
and  fifty  boys — mostly  children  of  the  nobility  be-
longing to  the  court — received  education  in  this
privileged  corps,  which  combined  the  character  of  a
military  school  endowed  with  special  rights  and  of  a
court  institution  attached  to  the  imperial  household.
After  a  stay  of  four  or  five  years  in  the  corps  of  pages,
those  who  had  passed  the  final  examinations  were
received  as  officers  in  any  regiment  of  the  Guard  or  of
the  army  tfiey  chose,  irrespective  of  the  number  of
vacancies  in  that  regiment ;  and  each  year  the  first
sixteen  pupils  of  the  highest  form  were  nominated  pages
de  chambre  :  that  is,  they  were  personally  attached  to
the  several  members  of  the  imperial  family — the
emperor,  the  empress,  the  grand  duchesses,  and  the
grand  dukes.  That  was  considered,  of  course,  a  great
honour ;  and,  moreover,  the  young  men  upon  whom
this  honour  was  bestowed  became  known  at  the  court,
and  had  afterward  every  chance  of  being  nominated
aides-de-camp  of  the  emperor  or  of  one  of  the  grand
dukes,  and  consequently  had  every  facility  for  making

o  2


84  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

a  brilliant  career  in  the  service  of  the  State.  Fathers
and  mothers  took  due  care,  therefore,  that  their  boys
should  not  miss  entering  the  corps  of  pages,  even
though  entrance  had  to  be  secured  at  the  expense  of
other  candidates  who  never  saw  a  vacancy  opening  for
them.  Now  that  I  was  in  the  select  corps  my  father
could  give  free  play  to  his  ambitious  dreams.

The  corps  was  divided  into  five  forms,  of  which  the
highest  was  the  first,  and  the  lowest  the  fifth,  and
the  intention  was  that  I  should  enter  the  fourth  form.
However,  as  it  appeared  at  the  examinations  that  I  was
not  sufficiently  familiar  with  decimal  fractions,  and  as
the  fourth  form  contained  that  year  over  forty  pupils,
while  only  twenty  had  been  mustered  for  the  fifth  form,
I  was  enrolled  in  the  latter.

I  felt  extremely  vexed  at  this  decision.  It  was
with  reluctance  that  I  entered  a  military  school,  and
now  I  should  have  to  stay  in  it  five  years  instead  of
four.  What  should  I  do  in  the  fifth  form,  when  I  knew
already  all  that  would  be  taught  in  it  ?  With  tears  in
my  eyes  I  spoke  of  it  to  the  inspector  (the  head  of  the
educational  department),  but  he  answered  me  with  a
joke.  'You  know,'  he  told  me,  'what  Caesar  said —
better  to  be  the  first  in  a  village  than  the  second  in
Borne.'  To  which  I  warmly  replied  that  I  should  prefer
to  be  the  very  last  if  only  I  could  leave  the  military
school  as  soon  as  possible.  '  Perhaps,  after  some  time,
you  will  like  the  school,'  he  remarked,  and  from  that
day  he  became  friendly  to  me.

To  the  teacher  of  arithmetic,  who  also  tried  to
console  me,  I  gave  my  word  of  honour  that  I  would
never  cast  a  glance  into  his  textbook ;  '  and  never-


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  85

theless  you  will  have  to  give  me  the  highest  marks.'
I  kept  my  word  ;  but  thinking  now  of  this  scene,
I  fancy  that  the  pupil  was  not  of  a  very  docile  dis-
position.

And  yet,  as  I  look  back  upon  that  remote  past,  I
cannot  but  feel  grateful  for  having  been  put  in  the
lower  form.  Having  only  to  repeat  during  the  first
year  what  I  already  knew,  I  got  into  the  habit  of
learning  my  lessons  by  merely  listening  to  what  the
teachers  said  in  the  class-room ;  and,  the  lessons  over,
I  had  plenty  of  time  to  read  and  to  write  to  my  heart's
content.  I  never  prepared  for  the  examinations,  and
used  to  spend  the  time  which  was  allowed  for  that  in
reading  aloud  to  a  few  friends  the  dramas  of  Shake-
speare or  of  Ostrovskiy.  When  I  reached  the  higher
'  special '  forms,  I  was  also  better  prepared  to  master
the  variety  of  subjects  we  had  to  study.  Besides,
I  spent  more  than  half  of  the  first  winter  in  the  hospital.
Like  all  children  who  are  not  born  at  St.  Petersburg,
I  had  to  pay  a  heavy  tribute  to  '  the  capital  on  the
swamps  of  Finland,'  in  the  shape  of  several  attacks  of
local  cholera,  and  finally  one  of  typhoid  fever.

When  I  entered  the  corps  of  pages,  its  inner  life  was
undergoing  a  profound  change.  All  Russia  awakened
at  that  time  from  the  heavy  slumber  and  the  terrible
nightmare  of  Nicholas  I.'s  reign.  Our  school  also  felt
the  effects  of  that  revival.  I  do  not  know,  in  fact,
what  would  have  become  of  me,  had  I  entered  the  corps
of  pages  one  or  two  years  sooner.  Either  my  will
would  have  been  totally  broken,  or  I  should  have  been
excluded  from  the  school  with  no  one  knows  what


86  MEMOIRS  OF A REVOLUTIONIST

consequences.  Happily,  the  transition  period  was
already  in  full  sway  in  the  year  1857.

The  director  of  the  corps  was  an  excellent  old  man,
General  Zheltukhin.  But  he  was  the  nominal  head
only.  The  real  master  of  the  school  was  '  the  Colonel,'
— Colonel  Girardot,  a  Frenchman  in  the  Russian
service.  People  said  he  was  a  Jesuit,  and  so  he  was,  I
believe.  His  ways,  at  any  rate,  were  thoroughly  im-
bued with  the  teachings  of  Loyola,  and  his  educational
methods  were  those  of  the  French  Jesuit  colleges.

Imagine  a  short,  extremely  thin  man,  with  dark,
piercing,  and  furtive  eyes,  wearing  short  clipped
moustaches,  which  gave  him  the  expression  of  a  cat ;
very  quiet  and  firm ;  not  remarkably  intelligent,  but
exceedingly  cunning ;  a  despot  at  the  bottom  of  his
heart,  who  was  capable  of  hating — intensely  hating —
the  boy  who  would  not  fall  under  his  fascination,  and
of  expressing  that  hatred,  not  by  silly  persecutions,  but
unceasingly  by  his  general  behaviour — by  an  occcasion-
ally  dropped  word,  a  gesture,  a  smile,  an  interjection.
His  walk  was  more  like  gliding  along,  and  the  explor-
ing glances  he  used  to  cast  round  without  turning  his
head  completed  the  illusion.  A  stamp  of  cold  dryness
was  impressed  on  his  lips,  even  when  he  tried  to  look
well  disposed,  and  that  expression  became  still  more
harsh  when  his  mouth  was  contorted  by  a  smile  of
discontent  or  of  contempt.  With  all  this  there  was
nothing  of  a  commander  in  him;  you  would  rather
think,  at  first  sight,  of  a  benevolent  father  who  talks  to
his  children  as  if  they  were  full-grown  people.  And  yet,
you  soon  felt  that  everyone  and  everything  had  to  bend
before  his  will.  Woe  to  the  boy  who  would  not  feel


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  87

happy  or  unhappy  according  to  the  degree  of  good  dis-
position shown  toward  him  by  the  Colonel.

The  words  '  the  Colonel '  were  continually  on  all
lips.  Other  officers  went  by  their  nicknames,  but  no
one  dared  to  give  a  nickname  to  Girardot.  A  sort  of
mystery  hung  about  him,  as  if  he  were  omniscient  and
everywhere  present.  True,  he  spent  all  the  day  and
part  of  the  night  in  the  school.  Even  when  we  were
in  the  classes  he  prowled  about,  visiting  our  drawers,
which  he  opened  with  his  own  keys.  As  to  the  night,
he  gave  a  good  portion  of  it  to  the  task  of  inscribing
in  small  books — of  which  he  had  quite  a  library — in
separate  columns,  by  special  signs  and  in  inks  of  differ-
ent colours,  all  the  faults  and  virtues  of  each  boy.

Play,  jokes,  and  conversations  stopped  when  we  saw
him  slowly  moving  along  through  our  spacious  rooms,
hand  in  hand  with  one  of  his  favourites,  balancing
his  body  forward  and  backward  ;  smiling  at  one  boy,
keenly  looking  into  the  eyes  of  another,  casting  an
indifferent  glance  upon  a  third,  and  giving  a  slight
contortion  to*  his  lip  as  he  passed  a  fourth  :  and  from
these  looks  everyone  knew  that  he  liked  the  first  boy,
that  to  the  second  he  was  indifferent,  that  he  inten-
tionally did  not  notice  the  third,  and  that  he  disliked
the  fourth.  This  dislike  was  enough  to  terrify  most  of
his  victims — the  more  so  as  no  reason  could  be  given
for  it.  Impressionable  boys  had  been  brought  to  de-
spair by  that  mute,  unceasingly  displayed  aversion  and
those  suspicious  looks ;  in  others  the  result  had  been  a
total  annihilation  of  will,  as  one  of  the  Tolstoys —
Theodor,  also  a  pupil  of  Girardot — has  shown  in  an
autobiographic  novel,  the  'Diseases  of  the  Will.'


88  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

The  inner  life  of  the  corps  was  miserable  under  the
rule  of  the  Colonel.  In  all  boarding-schools  the  newly
entered  boys  are  subjected  to  petty  persecutions.  The
'  greenhorns  '  are  put  in  this  way  to  a  test.  What  are
they  worth  ?  Are  they  not  going  to  turn  '  sneaks '  ?
And  then  the  '  old  hands  '  like  to  show  to  new-comers
the  superiority  of  an  established  brotherhood.  So  it  is
in  all  schools  and  in  prisons.  But  under  Girardot's
rule  these  persecutions  took  on  a  harsher  aspect,  and
they  came,  not  from  the  comrades  of  the  same  form,
but  from  the  first  form — the  pages  de  chambre,  who
were  non-commissioned  officers,  and  whom  Girardot
had  placed  in  a  quite  exceptional,  superior  position.
His  system  was  to  give  them  carte  blanche ;  to  pretend
that  he  did  not  know  even  the  horrors  they  were
enacting  ;  and  to  maintain  through  them  a  severe  dis-
cipline. To  answer  a  blow  received  from  a  page  de
chambre  would  have  meant,  in  the  times  of  Nicholas  I.,
to  be  sent  to  a  battalion  of  soldiers'  sons,  if  the  fact
became  public ;  and  to  revolt  in  any  way  against  the
mere  caprice  of  a  page  de  chambre  meant  that  the
twenty  youths  of  the  first  form,  armed  with  their  heavy
oak  rulers,  would  assemble  in  a  room,  and,  with  Girar-
dot's tacit  approval,  administer  a  severe  beating  to
the  boy  who  had  shown  such  a  spirit  of  insubordina-
tion.

Accordingly,  the  first  form  did  what  they  liked ;  and
not  farther  back  than  the  preceding  winter  one  of  their
favourite  games  had  been  to  assemble  the  '  greenhorns '
at  night  in  a  room,  in  their  night-shirts,  and  to  make
them  run  round,  like  horses  in  a  circus,  while  the  pages
de  chambre,  armed  with  thick  india-rubber  whips,


THE COUPS  OF PAGES  89

standing  some  in  the  centre  and  the  others  on  the
outside,  pitilessly  whipped  the  boys.  As  a  rule  the
'  circus  '  ended  in  an  Oriental  fashion,  in  an  abominable
way.  The  moral  conceptions  which  prevailed  at  that
time,  and  the  foul  talk  which  went  on  in  the  school  con-
cerning what  occurred  at  night  after  a  circus,  were  such
that  the  least  said  about  them  the  better.

The  Colonel  knew  all  this.  He  had  a  perfectly
organized  system  of  espionage,  and  nothing  escaped
his  knowledge.  But  so  long  as  he  was  not  known  to
know  it,  all  was  right.  To  shut  his  eyes  to  what  was
done  by  the  first  form  was  the  foundation  of  his
system  of  maintaining  discipline.

However,  a  new  spirit  was  awakened  in  the  school,
and  only  a  few  months  before  I  entered  it  a  revolution
had  taken  place.  That  year  the  third  form  was  differ-
ent from  what  it  had  hitherto  been.  It  contained  a
number  of  young  men  who  really  studied,  and  read  a
good  deal ;  some  of  them  became,  later,  men  of  mark.
My  first  acquaintance  with  one  of  them — let  me  call  him
von  Schauff — was  when  he  was  reading  Kant's '  Critique
of  Pure  Reason.'  Besides,  they  had  amongst  them  some
of  the  strongest  youths  of  the  school.  The  tallest
member  of  the  corps  was  in  that  form,  as  also  a  very
strong  young  man,  Koshtoff,  a'  great  friend  of  von
Schauff.

This  third  form  did  not  bear  the  yoke  of  the  pages
de  chambre  with  the  same  docility  as  their  predecessors  ;
they  were  disgusted  with  what  was  going  on,  and
in  consequence  of  an  incident,  which  I  prefer  not  to
describe,  a  fight  took  place  between  the  third  and  the


90  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

first  form,  with  the  result  that  the  pages  de  chambre
got  a  severe  thrashing  from  their  subordinates.
Girardot  hushed  up  the  affair,  but  the  authority  of
the  first  form  was  broken  down.  The  india-rubber
whips  remained,  but  were  never  again  brought  into
use.  The  circuses  and  the  like  became  things  of
the  past.

That  much  was  won  ;  but  the  lowest  form,  the  fifth,
composed  almost  entirely  of  very  young  boys  who  had
just  entered  the  school,  had  still  to  obey  the  petty
caprices  of  the  pages  de  chambre.  We  had  a  beautiful
garden,  filled  with  old  trees,  but  the  boys  of  the  fifth
form  could  enjoy  it  little ;  they  were  forced  to  run  a
roundabout,  while  the  first  form  boys  sat  in  it  and
chattered,  or  to  send  back  the  balls  when  these  gentle-
men played  nine-pins.  A  couple  of  days  after  I  had
entered  the  school,  seeing  how  things  stood  in  the  gar-
den, I  did  not  go  there,  but  remained  upstairs.  I  was
reading,  when  a  page  de  chambre,  with  carroty  hair
and  a  face  covered  with  freckles,  came  upon  me,  and
ordered  me  to  go  at  once  to  the  garden  to  run  the
roundabout.

'  I  sha'n't ;  don't  you  see  I  am  reading,'  was  my
reply.

Anger  disfigured  his  never  too  pleasant  face.  He
was  ready  to  jump  upon  me.  I  took  the  defensive.
He  tried  to  give  me  blows  on  the  face  with  his  cap.
I  fenced  as  best  I  could.  Then  he  flung  his  cap  on
the  floor.

'  Pick  it  up.'

'  Pick  it  up  yourself.'

Such  an  act  of  disobedience  was  unheard  of  in  the


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  91

school.  Why  he  did  not  beat  me  unmercifully  on
the  spot  I  do  not  know.  He  was  much  older  and
stronger  than  I  was.

Next  day  and  the  following  days  I  received  similar
commands,  but  obstinately  remained  upstairs.  Then
began  the  most  exasperating  petty  persecutions  at
every  step — enough  to  drive  a  boy  to  desperation.
Happily,  I  was  always  of  a  jovial  disposition,  and
answered  them  with  jokes,  or  took  little  heed  of  them.

Moreover,  it  all  soon  came  to  an  end.  The  weather
turned  rainy,  and  we  spent  most  of  our  time  indoors.
In  the  garden  the  first  form  smoked  freely  enough,  but
when  we  were  indoors  the  smoking  club  was  '  the
tower.'  It  was  kept  beautifully  clean,  and  a  fire  was
always  burning  there.  The  pages  de  chambre  severely
punished  any  of  the  other  boys  whom  they  caught
smoking,  but  they  themselves  sat  continually  at  the
fireside  chattering  and  enjoying  cigarettes.  Their
favourite  smoking  time  was  after  ten  o'clock  at  night,
when  all  were  supposed  to  have  gone  to  bed ;  they
kept  up  their*  club  till  half -past  eleven,  and,  to  protect
themselves  from  an  unexpected  interruption  by  Girardot,
they  ordered  us  to  be  on  the  watch.  The  small  boys
of  the  fifth  form  were  taken  out  of  their  beds  in  turn,
two  at  a  time,  and  they  had  to  loiter  about  the  stair-
case till  half -past  eleven,  to  give  notice  of  the  approach
of  the  Colonel.

We  decided  to  put  an  end  to  these  night  watches.
Long  were  the  discussions,  and  the  higher  forms  were
consulted  as  to  what  was  to  be  done.  At  last  the
decision  came  :  '  Refuse,  all  of  you,  to  keep  the  watch  ;
and  when  they  begin  to  beat  you,  which  they  are  sure  to


92  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

do,  go,  as  many  of  you  as  you  can,  in  a  block,  and  call  in
Girardot.  He  knows  it  all,  but  then  he  will  be  bound
to  stop  it.'  The  question  whether  that  would  not  be
'  reporting '  was  settled  in  the  negative  by  experts  in
matters  of  honour  :  the  pages  de  chambre  did  not
behave  towards  the  others  like  comrades.

The  turn  to  watch  fell  that  night  to  a  Prince
Shahovskoy,  an  old  hand,  and  to  Selanoff,  a  new-comer,
an  extremely  timid  boy,  who  even  spoke  in  a  girlish
voice.  The  old  hand  was  called  upon  first,  but  refused
to  go,  and  was  left  alone.  Then  two  pages  de  chambre
went  to  the  timid  new-comer,  who  was  in  bed  ;  and  as
he  refused  to  obey,  they  began  to  flog  him  brutally  with
heavy  leather  braces.  Shahovskoy  woke  up  several
comrades  who  were  near  at  hand,  and  they  all  ran  to
find  Girardot.

I  was  also  in  bed  when  the  two  came  upon  me,
ordering  me  to  take  the  watch.  I  refused.  Thereupon,
seizing  two  pairs  of  braces — we  always  used  to  put  our
clothes  in  perfect  order  on  a  bench  by  the  bedside,
braces  uppermost,  and  the  necktie  across  them — they
began  to  flog  me.  Sitting  up  in  bed,  I  fenced  with  my
hands,  and  had  already  received  several  heavy  blows,
when  a  command  resounded,  '  The  first  form  to  the
Colonel !  '  The  fierce  fighters  became  tame  at  once,
and  hurriedly  put  my  things  in  order.

'  Don't  say  a  word,'  they  whispered.

'  The  necktie  across,  in  good  order,'  I  said  to  them,
while  my  shoulders  and  arms  burned  from  the  blows.

What  Girardot's  talk  with  the  first  form  was  we
did  not  know  ;  but  next  day,  as  we  stood  in  the  ranks
before  marching  downstairs  to  the  dining-room,  he


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  93

addressed  us  in  a  minor  key,  saying  how  sad  it  was
that  pages  de  chambre  should  have  fallen  upon  a  boy
who  was  right  in  his  refusal.  And  upon  whom  ?  A
new-comer,  and  so  timid  a  boy  as  Selanoff  was  !  The
whole  school  was  disgusted  at  this  Jesuitic  speech.

It  surely  was  also  a  blow  to  Girardot's  authority,
and  he  resented  it  very  much.  He  regarded  our  form,
and  me  especially,  with  great  dislike  (the  roundabout
affair  had  been  reported  to  him),  and  he  manifested  it
at  every  opportunity.

During  the  first  winter  I  was  a  frequent  inmate  of
the  hospital.  After  suffering  from  typhoid  fever,
during  which  the  director  and  the  doctor  bestowed  on
me  a  really  parental  care,  I  had  very  bad  and  persis-
tently recurring  gastric  attacks.  Girardot,  as  he  made
his  daily  rounds  of  the  hospital,  seeing  me  so  often
there,  began  to  say  to  me  every  morning,  half -jokingly,
in  French,  '  Here  is  a  young  man  who  is  as  healthy  as
the  New  Bridge,  and  loiters  in  the  hospital.'  Once  or
twice  I  replied  Jestingly,  but  at  last,  seeing  malice  in
this  constant  repetition,  I  lost  patience  and  grew  very
angry.

'  How  dare  you  say  that  ?  '  I  exclaimed.  '  I  shall
ask  the  doctor  to  forbid  your  entering  this  room,'  and
so  on.

Girardot  recoiled  two  steps ;  his  dark  eyes  glittered,
his  thin  lip  became  still  thinner.  At  last  he  said,  '  I
have  offendedjyou,  have  I?  Well,  we  have  in  the  hall
two  artillery  guns  :  shall  we  have  a  duel  ?  '

'  I  don't  make  jokes,  and  I  tell  you  that  I  shall  bear
no  more  of  your  insinuations,'  I  continued.


94  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

He  did  not  repeat  his  joke,  but  regarded  me  with
even  more  dislike  than  before.

Happily  enough,  there  was  little  opportunity  for
punishing  me.  I  did  not  smoke ;  my  clothes  were
always  hooked  and  buttoned,  and  properly  folded  at
night.  I  liked  all  sorts  of  games,  but,  plunged  as  I
was  in  reading  and  in  a  correspondence  with  my
brother,  I  could  hardly  find  time  to  play  a  laptd
match  (a  sort  of  cricket)  in  the  garden,  and  always
hurried  back  to  my  books.  But  when  I  was  caught  in
fault,  it  was  not  I  that  Girardot  punished,  but  the  page
de  chambre  who  was  my  superior.  Once,  for  instance,
at  dinner,  I  made  a  physical  discovery  :  I  noticed  that
the  sound  given  out  by  a  tumbler  depends  on  the
amount  of  water  it  contains,  and  at  once  tried  to
obtain  a  chord  with  four  glasses.  But  there  stood
Girardot  behind  me,  and  without  saying  a  word  to  me
he  ordered  my  page  de  chambre  under  arrest.  It  so
happened  that  this  young  man  was  an  excellent  fellow,
a  third  cousin  of  mine,  who  refused  even  to  listen  to  my
excuses,  saying,  '  All  right.  I  know  he  dislikes  you.'
His  comrades,  though,  gave  me  a  warning.  '  Take
care,  naughty  boy  ;  we  are  not  going  to  be  punished
for  you,'  they  said  ;  and  if  reading  had  not  been  my
all-absorbing  occupation,  they  probably  would  have
made  me  pay  dearly  for  my  physical  experiment.

Everyone  spoke  of  Girardot's  dislike  for  me ;  but  I
paid  no  attention  to  it,  and  probably  increased  it  by  my
indifference.  For  full  eighteen  months  he  refused  to
give  me  the  epaulettes,  which  were  usually  given  to
newly  entered  boys  after  one  or  two  months'  stay  at  the
school,  when  they  had  learned  some  of  the  rudiments


THE CORPS  OF PAGES  96

of  military  drill ;  but  I  felt  quite  happy  without  that
military  decoration.  At  last,  an  officer — the  best
teacher  of  drill  in  the  school,  a  man  simply  enamoured
of  drill — volunteered  to  teach  me  ;  and  when  he  saw
me  performing  all  the  tricks  to  his  entire  satisfaction,
he  undertook  to  introduce  me  to  Girardot.  The  Colonel
refused  again,  twice  in  succession,  so  that  the  officer
took  it  as  a  personal  offence  ;  and  when  the  director  of
the  corps  once  asked  him  why  I  had  no  epaulettes
yet,  he  bluntly  answered,  '  The  boy  is  all  right ;  it  is
the  Colonel  who  does  not  want  him ; '  whereupon,
probably  after  the  remark  of  the  director,  Girardot
himself  asked  to  examine  me  again,  and  gave  me  the
epaulettes  that  very  day.

But  the  Colonel's  influence  was  rapidly  vanishing.
The  whole  character  of  the  school  was  changing.  For
twenty  years  Girardot  had  realized  his  ideal,  which  wras
to  have  the  boys  nicely  combed,  curled,  and  girlish
looking,  and  to  send  to  the  court  pages  as  refined  as
courtiers  of  Louis  XIV.  Whether  they  learned  or  not,
he  cared  little ;  «his  favourites  were  those  whose  clothes-
basket  was  best  filled  with  all  sorts  of  nail-brushes  and
scent-bottles,  whose  '  private  '  uniform  (which  could  be
put  on  when  we  went  home  on  Sundays)  was  of  the
best  make,  and  who  knew  how  to  make  the  most  elegant
salut  oblique.  Formerly,  when  Girardot  had  held  re-
hearsals of  court  ceremonies,  wrapping  up  a  page  in  a
striped  red  cotton  cover  taken  from  one  of  our  beds,  in
order  that  he  might  represent  the  Empress  at  a
baisemain,  the  boys  almost  religiously  approached  the
imaginary  Empress,  seriously  performed  the  ceremony
of  kissing  the  hand,  and  retired  with  a  most  elegant


96  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

oblique  bow ;  but  now,  though  they  were  very  elegant
at  court,  they  would  perform  at  the  rehearsals  such
bearlike  bows  that  all  roared  with  laughter,  while
Girardot  was  simply  raging.  Formerly,  the  younger
boys  who  had  been  taken  to  a  court  levee,  and  had  been
curled  for  that  purpose,  used  to  keep  their  curls  as
long  as  they  would  last ;  now,  on  returning  from
the  palace,  they  hurried  to  put  their  heads  under  the
cold  water  tap,  to  get  rid  of  the  curls.  An  effeminate
appearance  was  laughed  at.  To  be  sent  to  a  levee,  to
stand  there  as  a  decoration,  was  now  considered  a
drudgery  rather  than  a  favour.  And  when  the  small
boys  who  were  occasionally  taken  to  the  palace  to
play  with  the  little  grand  dukes  remarked  that  one  of
the  latter  used,  in  some  game,  to  make  a  hard  whip  out
of  his  handkerchief,  and  use  it  freely,  one  of  our  boys  did
the  same,  and  so  whipped  the  grand  duke  that  he  cried.
Girardot  was  terrified,  while  the  old  Sebastopol  admiral
who  was  tutor  of  the  grand  duke  only  praised  our  boy.
A  new  spirit,  studious  and  serious,  developed  in  the
corps,  as  in  all  other  schools.  In  former  years,  the  pages,
being  sure  in  one  way  or  another  that  they  would  get
the  necessary  marks  for  being  promoted  officers  of  the
Guard,  spent  the  first  years  in  the  school  hardly  learning
at  all,  and  only  began  to  study  more  or  less  in  the  last
two  forms ;  now  the  lower  forms  learned  very  well.
The  moral  tone  also  became  quite  different  from  what
it  was  a  few  years  before.  Oriental  amusements  were
looked  upon  with  disgust,  and  an  attempt  or  two  to
revert  to  old  manners  resulted  in  scandals  which
reached  the  St.  Petersburg  drawing-rooms.  Girardot
was  dismissed.  He  was  only  allowed  to  retain  his


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  97

bachelor  apartment  in  the  building  of  the  corps,  and  we
often  saw  him  afterward,  wrapped  in  his  long  military
cloak,  pacing  along,  plunged  in  reflections — sad,  I
suppose,  because  he  could  not  but  condemn  the  new
spirit  which  rapidly  developed  in  the  corps  of  pages.


II


ALL  over  Russia  people  were  talking  of  education.
As  soon  as  peace  had  been  concluded  at  Paris,  and  the
severity  of  censorship  had  been  slightly  relaxed,  educa-
tional matters  began  to  be  eagerly  discussed.  The
ignorance  of  the  masses  of  the  people,  the  obstacles
that  had  hitherto  been  put  in  the  way  of  those  who
wanted  to  learn,  the  absence  of  schools  in  the  country,
the  obsolete  methods  of  teaching,  and  the  remedies  for
these  evils  became  favourite  themes  of  discussion  in
educated  circles',  in  the  press,  and  even  in  the  drawing-
rooms  of  the  aristocracy.  The  first  high  schools  for
girls  had  been  opened  in  1857,  on  an  excellent  plan  and
with  a  splendid  teaching  staff.  As  by  magic  a  number
of  men  and  women  came  to  the  front  who  have  not
only  devoted  their  lives  to  education,  but  have  proved
to  be  remarkable  practical  pedagogists  :  their  writings
would  occupy  a  place  of  honour  in  every  civilized
literature,  if  they  were  known  abroad.

The  corps  of  pages  also  felt  the  effect  of  that  revival.
Apart  from  a  few  exceptions,  the  general  tendency  of
the  three  younger  forms  was  to  study. The  head  of
VOL.  i.  H


98  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

the  educational  department,  the  inspector,  Winkler,
who  was  a  well-educated  colonel  of  artillery,  a  good
mathematician,  and  a  man  of  progressive  opinions,  hit
upon  an  excellent  plan  for  stimulating  that  spirit.
Instead  of  the  indifferent  teachers  who  formerly  used
to  teach  in  the  lower  forms,  he  endeavoured  to  secure
the  best  ones.  In  his  opinion,  no  professor  was  too
good  to  teach  the  very  beginnings  of  a  subject  to  the
youngest  boys.  Thus,  to  teach  the  elements  of  algebra
in  the  fourth  form  he  invited  a  first-rate  mathema-
tician and  a  born  teacher,  Captain  Sukh6nin,  and  the
form  took  at  once  to  mathematics.  By  the  way,  it  so
happened  that  this  captain  was  a  tutor  of  the  heir  of
the  throne  (Nikolai  Alexandrovich,  who  died  at  the  age
of  twenty-two),  and  the  heir-apparent  was  brought
once  a  week  to  the  corps  of  pages  to  be  present  at  the
algebra  lessons  of  Captain  Sukhonin.  The  Empress
Marie  Alexandrovna,  who  was  an  educated  woman,
thought  that  perhaps  the  contact  with  studious  boys
would  stimulate  her  son  to  learning.  He  sat  among
us,  and  had  to  answer  questions  like  all  the  others.
But  he  managed  mostly,  while  the  teacher  spoke,  to
make  drawings,  very  nicely,  or  to  whisper  all  sorts  of
droll  things  to  his  neighbours.  He  was  good-natured
and  very  gentle  in  his  behaviour,  but  superficial  in
learning  and  still  more  so  in  his  affections.

For  the  fifth  form  the  inspector  secured  two  remark-
able men.  He  entered  our  class-room,  one  day,  quite
radiant,  and  told  us  that  we  should  have  a  rare  chance.
Professor  Klas6vsky,  a  great  classical  scholar  and  expert
in  Bussian  literature,  had  consented  to  teach  us  Bussian
grammar,  and  would  take  us  through  all  the  five  forms


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  99

in  succession,  shifting  with  us  every  year  to  the  next
form.  Another  university  professor,  Herr  Becker,
librarian  of  the  imperial  (national)  library,  would  do
the  same  in  German.  Professor  Klas6vsky,  he  added,
was  in  weak  health  that  winter,  but  the  inspector  was
sure  that  we  would  be  very  quiet  in  his  class.  The
chance  of  having  such  a  teacher  was  too  good  to  be
lost.

He  had  thought  aright.  We  became  very  proud  of
having  university  professors  for  teachers,  and  although
there  came  voices  from  the  Kamchatka  (in  Russia,  the
back  benches  of  each  class  bear  the  name  of  that
remote  and  uncivilized  peninsula)  to  the  effect  that  '  the
sausage-maker  ' — that  is,  the  German — must  be  kept
by  all  means  in  obedience,  public  opinion  in  our  form
was  decidedly  in  favour  of  the  professors.

'  The  sausage-maker  '  won  our  respect  at  once.  A
tall  man,  with  an  immense  forehead  and  very  kind,
intelligent  eyes,  slightly  veiled  by  his  spectacles,  came
into  our  class,  and  told  us  in  quite  good  Russian  that
he  intended  to  divide  our  form  into  three  sections.  The
first  section  would  be  composed  of  Germans,  who
already  knew  the  language,  and  from  whom  he  would
require  more  serious  work  ;  to  the  second  section  he
would  teach  grammar,  and  later  on  German  literature,
in  accordance  with  the  established  programmes ;  and
the  third  section,  he  concluded  with  a  charming  smile,
would  be  the  Kamchatka.  '  From  you,'  he  said, '  I  shall
only  require  that  at  each  lesson  you  copy  four  lines
which  I  will  choose  for  you  from  a  book.  The  four  lines
copied,  you  can  do  what  you  like  ;  only  do  not  hinder
the  rest.  And  I  promise  you  that  in  five  years  you

H 2


100  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

will  learn  something  of  German  and  German  literature.
Now,  who  joins  the  Germans?  You,  Stackelberg?
You,  Lamsdorf  ?  Perhaps  some  one  of  the  Russians  ?
And  who  joins  the  Kamchatka  ? '  Five  or  six  boys,
who  knew  not  a  word  of  German,  took  residence  in  the
peninsula.  They  most  conscientiously  copied  their  four
lines — a  dozen  or  a  score  of  lines  in  the  higher  forms
— and  Becker  chose  the  lines  so  well,  and  bestowed  so
much  attention  upon  the  boys  that  by  the  end  of  the  five
years  they  really  knew  something  of  the  language  and
its  literature.

I  joined  the  Germans.  My  brother  Alexander
insisted  so  much  in  his  letters  upon  my  acquiring
German,  which  possesses  so  rich  a  literature  and  into
which  every  book  of  value  is  translated,  that  I  set
myself  assiduously  to  learn  it.  I  translated  and  studied
most  thoroughly  one  page  of  a  rather  difficult  poetical
description  of  a  thunderstorm ;  I  learned  by  heart,  as
the  professor  had  advised  me,  the  conjugations,  the
adverbs,  and  the  prepositions — and  began  to  read.  A
splendid  method  it  is  for  learning  languages.  Becker
advised  me,  moreover,  to  subscribe  to  a  cheap  illustrated
weekly,  and  its  illustrations  and  short  stories  were  a
continual  inducement  to  read  a  few  lines  or  a  column.
I  soon  mastered  the  language.

Toward  the  end  of  the  winter  I  asked  Herr  Becker
to  lend  me  a  copy  of  Goethe's  'Faust.'  I  had  read  it
in  a  Eussian  translation  ;  I  had  also  read  Turgueneff's
beautiful  novel,  '  Faust ' ;  and  I  now  longed  to  read  the
great  work  in  the  original.  '  You  will  understand
nothing  in  it ;  it  is  too  philosophical,'  Becker  said,
with  his  gentle  smile ;  but  he  brought  me,  nevertheless,


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  101

a  little  square  book,  with  the  pages  yellowed  by  age,
containing  the  immortal  drama.  He  little  knew  the
unfathomable  joy  that  that  small  square  book  gave  me.
I  drank  in  the  sense  and  the  music  of  every  line  of  it,
beginning  with  the  very  first  verses  of  the  ideally
beautiful  dedication,  and  soon  knew  full  pages  by  heart.
Faust's  monologue  in  the  forest,  and  especially  the
lines  in  which  he  speaks  of  his  understanding  of  nature,

Thou

Not  only  cold,  amazed  acquaintance  yield'st,
But  grantest  that  in  her  profoundest  breast
I  gaze,  as  in  the  bosom  of  a  friend,

simply  put  me  in  ecstasy,  and  till  now  it  has  retained
ts  power  over  me.  Every  verse  gradually  became  a
dear  friend.  And  then,  is  there  a  higher  aesthetic  de-
light than  to  read  poetry  in  a  language  which  one  does
not  quite  thoroughly  understand  ?  The  whole  is  veiled
with  a  sort  of  slight  haze,  which  admirably  suits
poetry.  Words,  the  trivial  meanings  of  which,  when
one  knows  the  language  colloquially,  sometimes  inter-
fere with  the  poetical  image  they  are  intended  to  con-
vey, retain  but  their  subtle,  elevated  sense ;  while  the
music  of  the  poetry  is  only  the  more  strongly  impressed
upon  the  ear.

Professor  Klasovsky's  first  lesson  was  a  revelation
to  us.  He  was  a  small  man,  about  fifty  years  of  age,
very  rapid  in  his  movements,  with  bright,  intelligent
eyes,  a  slightly  sarcastic  expression,  and  the  high
forehead  of  a  poet.  When  he  came  in  for  his  first
lesson,  he  said  in  a  low  voice  that,  suffering  from  a
protracted  illness,  he  could  not  speak  loud  enough,  and


102  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

asked  us,  therefore,  to  sit  closer  to  him.  He  placed  his
chair  near  the  first  row  of  tables,  and  we  clustered
round  him  like  a  swarm  of  bees.

He  was  to  teach  us  Russian  grammar  ;  but,  instead
of  the  dull  grammar  lesson,  we  heard  something  quite
different  from  what  we  expected.  It  was  grammar  :
but  here  came  in  a  comparison  of  an  old  Eussian  folk-
lore expression  with  a  line  from  Homer  or  from  the
Sanskrit  Mahabharata,  the  beauty  of  which  was
rendered  in  Eussian  words ;  there,  a  verse  from  Schiller
was  introduced,  and  was  followed  by  a  sarcastic  remark
about  some  modern  society  prejudice ;  then  solid  gram-
mar again,  and  then  some  wide  poetical  or  philo-
sophical generalization.

Of  course,  there  was  much  in  it  that  we  did  not
understand,  or  of  which  we  missed  the  deeper  sense.
But  do  not  the  bewitching  powers  of  all  studies  lie  in
that  they  continually  open  up  to  us  new  and  unsus-
pected horizons,  not  yet  understood,  which  entice  us  to
proceed  farther  and  farther  in  the  penetration  of  what
appears  at  first  sight  only  in  vague  outline  ?  Some  with
their  hands  placed  on  one  another's  shoulders,  some
leaning  across  the  tables  of  the  first  row,  others  stand-
ing close  behind  Klasovsky,  we  all  hung  on  his  lips.
As  toward  the  end  of  the  hour  his  voice  fell,  the  more
breathlessly  we  listened.  The  inspector  opened  the
door  of  the  class-room,  to  see  how  we  behaved  with  our
new  teacher  ;  but  on  seeing  that  motionless  swarm  he
retired  on  tiptoe.  Even  DaurofF,  a  restless  spirit,  stared
at  Klasovsky  as  if  to  say,  '  That  is  the  sort  of  man  you
are  ? '  Even  von  Kleinau,  a  hopelessly  obtuse  Circassian
with  a  German  name,  sat  motionless.  In  most  of  the


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  103

others  something  good  and  elevated  simmered  at  the
bottom  of  their  hearts,  as  if  a  vision  of  an  unsuspected
world  was  opening  before  them.  Upon  me  Klas6vsky
had  an  immense  influence,  which  only  grew  with  years.
Winkler's  prophecy,  that,  after  all,  I  might  like  the
school,  was  fulfilled.

In  western  Europe,  and  probably  in  America,  this
type  of  teacher  seems  not  to  be  widely  spread;  but
in  Russia  there  is  not  a  man  or  woman  of  mark,  in
literature  or  in  political  life,  who  does  not  owe  the  first
impulse  toward  a  higher  development  to  his  or  her
teacher  of  literature.  Every  school  in  the  world  ought
to  have  such  a  teacher.  Each  teacher  in  a  school  has
his  own  subject,  and  there  is  no  link  between  the
different  subjects.  Only  the  teacher  of  literature,
guided  by  the  general  outlines  of  the  programme,  but
left  free  to  treat  it  as  he  likes,  can  bind  together  the
separate  historical  and  humanitarian  sciences,  unify
them  by  a  broad  philosophical  and  humane  conception,
and  awaken  higher  ideas  and  inspirations  in  the
brains  and  Hearts  of  young  people.  In  Russia,  that
necessary  task  falls  quite  naturally  upon  the  teacher  of
Russian  literature.  As  he  speaks  of  the  development
of  the  language,  of  the  contents  of  the  early  epic  poetry,
of  popular  songs  and  music,  and,  later  on,  of  modern
fiction,  of  the  scientific,  political,  and  philosophical
literature  of  his  own  country,  and  the  divers  eesthetical,
political,  and  philosophical  currents  it  has  reflected,  he
is  bound  to  introduce  that  generalized  conception  of
the  development  of  the  human  mind  which  lies  beyond
the  scope  of  each  of  the  subjects  that  are  taught
separately.


104  MEMOIRS  OF A  REVOLUTIONIST

The  same  thing  ought  to  be  done  for  the  natural
sciences  as  well.  It  is  not  enough  to  teach  physics  and
chemistry,  astronomy  and  meteorology,  zoology  and
botany.  The  philosophy  of  all  the  natural  sciences — a
general  view  of  nature  as  a  whole,  something  on  the
lines  of  the  first  volume  of  Humboldt's  '  Cosmos  ' — must
be  conveyed  to  the  pupils  and  the  students,  whatsoever
may  be  the  extension  given  to  the  study  of  the  natural
sciences  in  the  school.  The  philosophy  and  the  poetry
of  nature,  the  methods  of  all  the  exact  sciences,  and
an  inspired  conception  of  the  life  of  nature  must  make
part  of  education.  Perhaps  the  teacher  of  geography
might  provisionally  assume  this  function ;  but  then  we
should  require  quite  a  different  set  of  teachers  of  this
subject,  and  a  different  set  of  professors  of  geography
in  the  universities  would  be  needed.  What  is  now
taught  under  this  name  is  anything  you  like,  but  it  is
not  geography.

Another  teacher  conquered  our  rather  uproarious
form  in  a  quite  different  manner.  It  was  the  teacher
of  writing,  the  last  one  of  the  teaching  staff.  If  the
'  heathen ' — that  is,  the  German  and  the  French
teachers — were  regarded  with  little  respect,  the  teacher
of  writing,  Ebert,  who  was  a  German  Jew,  was  a  real
martyr.  To  be  insolent  with  him  was  a  sort  of  chic
amongst  the  pages.  His  poverty  alone  must  have  been
the  reason  why  he  kept  to  his  lesson  in  our  corps.
The  old  hands,  who  had  stayed  for  two  or  three  years
in  the  fifth  form  without  moving  higher  up,  treated
him  very  badly  ;  but  by  some  means  or  other  he  had
made  an  agreement  with  them  :  '  One  frolic  during


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  105

each  lesson,  but  no  more ' — an  agreement  which,  I  am
afraid,  was  not  always  honestly  kept  on  our  side.

One  day,  one  of  the  residents  of  the  remote  penin-
sula soaked  the  blackboard  sponge  with  ink  and  chalk
and  flung  it  at  the  caligraphy  martyr.  '  Get  it,  Ebert !  '
he  shouted,  with  a  stupid  smile.  The  sponge  touched
Ebert's  shoulder,  the  grimy  ink  spirted  into  his  face  and
down  on  to  his  white  shirt.

We  were  sure  that  this  time  Ebert  would  leave  the
room  and  report  the  fact  to  the  inspector.  But  he
only  exclaimed,  as  he  took  out  his  cotton  handkerchief
and  wiped  his  face,  '  Gentlemen,  one  frolic — no  more
to-day !  The  shirt  is  spoiled/  he  added  in  a  subdued
voice,  and  continued  to  correct  someone's  book.

We  looked  stupefied  and  ashamed.  Why,  instead
of  reporting,  he  had  thought  at  once  of  the  agreement !
The  feelings  of  the  whole  class  turned  in  his  favour.
'What  you  have  done  is  stupid,'  we  reproached  our
comrade.  '  He  is  a  poor  man,  and  you  have  spoiled
his  shirt !  Shame  ! '  somebody  cried.

The  culprit  went  at  once  to  make  excuses.  '  One
must  learn,  sir,'  was  all  that  Ebert  said  in  reply,  with
sadness  in  his  voice.

All  became  silent  after  that,  and  at  the  next  lesson,
as  if  we  had  settled  it  beforehand,  .most  of  us  wrote  in
our  best  possible  handwriting,  and  took  our  books  to
Ebert,  asking  him  to  correct  them.  He  was  radiant,
he  felt  happy  that  day.

This  fact  deeply  impressed  me,  and  was  never  wiped
out  from  my  memory.  To  this  day  I  feel  grateful  to
that  remarkable  man  for  his  lesson.


106  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

With  our  teacher  of  drawing,  who  was  named  Ganz,
we  never  arrived  at  living  on  good  terms.  He  con-
tinually reported  those  who  played  in  his  class.  This,
in  our  opinion,  he  had  no  right  to  do,  because  he  was
only  a  teacher  of  drawing,  but  especially  because  he
was  not  an  honest  man.  In  the  class  he  paid  little
attention  to  most  of  us,  and  spent  his  time  in  improving
the  drawings  of  those  who  took  private  lessons  from
him,  or  paid  him  in  order  to  show  at  the  examinations
a  good  drawing  and  to  get  a  good  mark  for  it.  Against
the  comrades  who  did  so  we  had  no  grudge.  On  the
contrary,  we  thought  it  quite  right  that  those  who
had  no  capacity  for  mathematics  or  no  memory  for  geo-
graphy, should  improve  their  total  of  marks  by  ordering
from  a  draughtsman  a  drawing  or  a  topographical  map
for  which  they  would  get  '  a  full  twelve.'  Only  for  the
first  two  pupils  of  the  form  it  would  not  have  been  fair
to  resort  to  such  means,  while  the  remainder  could  do
it  with  untroubled  consciences.  But  the  teacher  had
no  business  to  make  drawings  to  order ;  and  if  he  chose
to  act  in  this  way,  he  ought  to  bear  with  resignation
the  noise  and  the  tricks  of  his  pupils.  These  were  our
ethics.  Instead  of  this,  no  lesson  passed  without  his
lodging  complaints,  and  each  time  he  grew  more
arrogant.

As  soon  as  we  were  moved  to  the  fourth  form,  and
felt  ourselves  naturalized  citizens  of  the  corps,  we  de-
cided to  tighten  the  bridle  upon  him.  '  It  is  your  own
fault,'  our  elder  comrades  told  us,  '  that  he  takes  such
airs  with  you  ;  we  used  to  keep  him  in  obedience.'  So
we  decided  to  bring  him  into  subjection.

One day,  two excellent comrades of our form


THE CORPS OF PAGES  107

approached  Ganz  with  cigarettes  in  their  mouths,  and
asked  him  to  oblige  them  with  a  light.  Of  course,
that  was  only  meant  fora  joke — no  one  ever  thought  of
smoking  in  the  class-rooms — and,  according  to  our
rules  of  propriety,  Ganz  had  merely  to  send  the  two  boys
away ;  but  he  inscribed  them  in  the  journal,  and  they
were  severely  punished.  That  was  the  last  drop.  We
decided  to  give  him  a  '  benefit  night.'  That  meant
that  one  day  all  the  form,  provided  with  rulers  borrowed
from  the  upper  forms,  would  start  an  outrageous  noise
by  striking  the  rulers  against  the  tables,  and  send  the
teacher  out  of  the  class.  However,  the  plot  offered
many  difficulties.  We  had  in  our  form  a  lot  of  '  goody  '
boys  who  would  promise  to  join  in  the  demonstration,
but  at  the  last  moment  would  grow  nervous  and  draw
back,  and  then  the  teacher  would  name  the  others.  In
such  enterprises  unanimity  is  the  first  requisite,  because
the  punishment,  whatsoever  it  may  be,  is  always  lighter
when  it  falls  on  the  whole  class  instead  of  on  a  few.

The  difficulties  were  overcome  with  a  truly
Machiavellian  craft.  At  a  given  signal  all  were  to  turn
their  backs  to  Ganz,  and  then,  with  the  rulers  laid  in
readiness  on  the  desks  of  the  next  row,  they  would  pro-
duce the  required  noise.  In  this  way  the  goody  boys
would  not  feel  terrified  at  Ganz  staring  at  them.  But
the  signal  ?  Whistling,  as  in  robbers'  tales,  shouting,
or  even  sneezing  would  not  do  :  Ganz  would  be  capable
of  naming  anyone  of  us  as  having  whistled  or  sneezed.
The  signal  must  be  a  silent  one.  One  of  us  who  drew
nicely,  would  take  his  drawing  to  show  it  to  Ganz,  and
the  moment  he  returned  and  took  his  seat— that  was
to  be  the  time  !


108  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

All  went  on  admirably.  Nesadoff  took  up  his  draw-
ing, and  Ganz  corrected  it  in  a  few  minutes,  which
seemed  to  us  an  eternity.  He  returned  at  last  to  his
seat ;  he  stopped  for  a  moment,  looking  at  us,  he  sat
down.  .  .  .  All  the  form  turned  suddenly  on  their  seats,
and  the  rulers  rattled  merrily  within  the  desks,  while
some  of  us  shouted  amidst  the  noise,  '  Ganz  out !
Down  with  him  !  '  The  noise  was  deafening  ;  all  the
forms  knew  that  Ganz  had  got  his  benefit  night.  He
stood  there,  murmuring  something,  and  finally  went
out.  An  officer  ran  in — the  noise  continued ;  then  the
sub-inspector  dashed  in,  and  after  him  the  inspector.
The  noise  stopped.  Scolding  began.

'  The  elder  under  arrest,  at  once ! '  the  inspector
commanded ;  and  I,  who  was  the  first  in  the  form,  and
consequently  the  elder,  was  marched  to  the  black  cell.
That  spared  me  seeing  what  followed.  The  director
came  ;  Ganz  was  asked  to  name  the  ringleaders,  but  he
could  name  nobody.  '  They  all  turned  their  backs  to
me,  and  began  the  noise,'  was  his  reply.  Thereupon
the  form  was  taken  downstairs,  and  although  flogging
had  been  completely  abandoned  in  our  school,  this  time
the  two  who  had  been  reported  because  they  asked  for
a  light  were  flogged  with  the  birch  rod,  under  the
pretext  that  the  benefit  night  was  a  revenge  for  their
punishment.

I  learned  this  ten  days  later,  when  I  was  allowed
to  return  to  the  class.  My  name,  which  had  been
inscribed  on  the  red  board  in  the  class,  was  wiped  off.
To  this  I  was  indifferent ;  but  I  must  confess  that
the  ten  days  in  the  cell,  without  books,  seemed  to  me
rather  long,  so  that  I  composed  (in  horrible  verses)  a


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  109

poem,  in  which  the  deeds  of  the  fourth  form  were  duly
glorified.

Of  course  our  form  became  now  the  heroes  of  the
school.  For  a  month  or  so  we  had  to  tell  and  retell  all
about  the  affair  to  the  other  forms,  and  received  con-
gratulations for  having  managed  it  with  such  unanimity
that  nobody  was  caught  separately.  And  then  came  the
Sundays — all  the  Sundays  down  to  Christmas — that  the
form  had  to  remain  at  the  school,  not  being  allowed  to
go  home.  Being  all  kept  together,  we  managed  to  make
those  Sundays  very  gay.  The  mammas  of  the  goody
boys  brought  them  heaps  of  sweets ;  those  who  had
some  money  spent  it  in  buying  mountains  of  pastry —
substantial  before  dinner,  and  sweet  after  it— while  in
the  evenings  the  friends  from  the  other  forms  smuggled
in  quantities  of  fruit  for  the  brave  fourth  form.

Ganz  gave  up  inscribing  anyone  ;  but  drawing  was
totally  lost  for  us.  No  one  wanted  to  learn  drawing
from  that  mercenary  man.


Ill


MY  brother  Alexander  was  at  that  time  at  Moscow,
in  a  corps  of  cadets,  and  we  maintained  a  lively  corre-
spondence. As  long  as  I  stayed  at  home  this  was
impossible,  because  our  father  considered  it  his  preroga-
tive to  read  all  letters  addressed  to  our  house,  and  he
would  soon  have  put  an  end  to  any  but  a  commonplace
correspondence.  Now  we  were  free  to  discuss  in  our


110  MEMOIRS OF  A  EE VOLUTION  1ST

letters  whatever  we  liked.  The  only  difficulty  wras  to
get  money  for  stamps ;  but  we  soon  learned  to  write
in  so  small  a  hand  that  we  could  convey  an  incredible
amount  of  matter  in  each  letter.  Alexander,  whose
handwriting  was  beautiful,  contrived  to  get  four
printed  pages  on  one  single  page  of  notepaper,  and  his
microscopic  lines  were  as  legible  as  the  best  small  type
print.  It  is  a  pity  that  these  letters,  which  he  kept
as  precious  relics,  have  disappeared.  The  State
police,  during  one  of  their  raids,  robbed  him  even  of
these  treasures.

Our  first  lettirs  were  mostly  about  the  little  details
of  my  new  surroundings,  but  our  correspondence  soon
took  a  more  serious  character.  My  brother  could  not
write  about  trifles.  Even  in  society  he  became  animated
only  when  some  serious  discussion  was  engaged  in,
and  complained  of  feeling  '  a  dull  pain  in  the  brain  ' — a
physical  pain,  as  he  used  to  say — when  he  was  with
people  who  cared  only  for  small  talk.  He  was  very
much  in  advance  of  me  in  his  intellectual  development
and  he  urged  me  forward,  raising  new  scientific  and
philosophical  questions  one  after  another,  and  advising
me  what  to  read  or  to  study.  What  a  happiness  it  was
for  me  to  have  such  a  brother  ! — a  brother  who,  more-
over, loved  me  passionately.  To  him  I  owe  the  best
part  of  my  development.

Sometimes  he  would  advise  me  to  read  poetry,  and
would  send  me  in  his  letters  quantities  of  verses  and
whole  poems,  which  he  wrote  from  memory.  '  Head
poetry,'  he  wrote  :  '  poetry  makes  men  better.'  How
often,  in  my  after  life,  I  realized  the  truth  of  this
remark  of  his !  Bead  poetry  :  it  makes  men  better !


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  111

He  himself  was  a  poet,  and  had  a  wonderful  facility  for
writing  most  musical  verses ;  indeed,  I  think  it  a  great
pity  that  he  abandoned  poetry.  But  the  reaction
against  art,  which  arose  among  the  Russian  youth  in
the  early  sixties,  and  which  Turgueneff  has  depicted  in
'Bazaroff'  (Fathers  and  Sons),  induced  him  to  look
upon  his  verses  with  contempt,  and  to  plunge  headlong
into  the  natural  sciences.  I  must  say,  however,  that  rny
favourite  poet  was  none  of  those  whom  his  poetical  gift,
his  musical  ear,  and  his  philosophical  turn  of  mind
made  him  like  best.  His  favourite  Russian  poet  was
Venevitinoff,  while  mine  was  Nekrasoff,  whose  verses
were  very  often  unmusical,  but  appealed  most  to  my
heart  by  their  sympathy  for  '  the  downtrodden  and  ill-
treated.'

'  One  must  have  a  set  purpose  in  his  life,'  he  wrote
me  once.  '  Without  an  aim,  without  a  purpose,  life  is
not  life.'  And  he  advised  me  to  get  a  purpose  in  my
life  worth  living  for.  I  was  too  young  then  to  find  one ;
but  something' undetermined,  vague,  '  good  '  altogether,
already  rose  under  that  appeal,  even  though  I  could  not
say  what  that  '  good  '  would  be.

Our  father  gave  us  very  little  spending  money,  and
I  never  had  any  to  buy  a  single  book  ;  but  if  Alexander
got  a  few  roubles  from  some  aunt,  he  never  spent  a  penny
of  it  for  pleasure,  but  bought  a  book  and  sent  it  to  me.
He  objected,  though,  to  indiscriminate  reading.  '  One
must  have  some  question,'  he  wrote,  '  addressed  to  the
book  one  is  going  to  read.'  However,  I  did  not  then
appreciate  this  remark,  and  cannot  think  now  without
amazement  of  the  number  of  books,  often  of  a  quite
special  character,  which  I  read,  in  all  branches,  but


112  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

particularly  in  the  domain  of  history.  I  did  not  waste
my  time  upon  French  novels,  since  Alexander,  years
before,  had  characterized  them  in  one  blunt  sentence  :
'  They  are  stupid  and  full  of  bad  language.'

The  great  questions  concerning  the  conception  we
should  form  of  the  universe — our  Weltanschauung,  as
the  Germans  say — were,  of  course,  the  dominant  subjects
in  our  correspondence.  In  our  childhood  we  had  never
been  religious.  We  were  taken  to  church ;  but  in  a
Russian  church,  in  a  small  parish  or  in  a  village,  the
solemn  attitude  of  the  people  is  far  more  impressive
than  the  Mass  itself.  Of  all  that  I  ever  had  heard  in
church  only  two  things  had  impressed  me  :  the  twelve
passages  from  the  Gospels,  relative  to  the  sufferings
of  the  Christ,  which  are  read  in  Russia  at  the  night
service  on  the  eve  of  Good  Friday,  and  the  short
prayer  condemning  the  spirit  of  domination,  which
is  recited  during  the  Great  Lent,  and  is  really  beau-
tiful by  reason  of  its  simple,  unpretentious  words
and  feeling.  Pushkin  has  rendered  it  into  Russian
verse.

Later  on,  at  St.  Petersburg,  I  went  several  times  to
a  Roman  Catholic  church,  but  the  theatrical  character
of  the  service  and  the  absence  of  real  feeling  in  it
shocked  me,  the  more  so  when  I  saw  there  with  what
simple  faith  some  retired  Polish  soldier  or  a  peasant
woman  would  pray  in  a  remote  corner.  I  also  went  to
a  Protestant  church;  but  coming  out  of  it  I  caught
myself  murmuring  Goethe's  words  : —

But  you  will  never  link  hearts  together
Unless  the  linking  springs  from  your  own  heart.


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  113

Alexander,  in  the  meantime,  had  embraced  with  his
usual  passion  the  Lutheran  faith.  He  had  read
Michelet's  book  on  Servetus,  and  had  worked  out  for
himself  a  religion  on  the  lines  of  that  great  fighter.
He  studied  with  enthusiasm  the  Augsburg  declaration,
which  he  copied  out  and  sent  me,  and  our  letters  now
became  full  of  discussions  about  grace,  and  of  texts
from  the  apostles  Paul  and  James.  I  followed  my
brother,  but  theological  discussions  did  not  deeply
interest  me.  Since  I  had  recovered  from  the  typhoid
fever  I  had  taken  to  quite  different  reading.

Our  sister  Helene,  who  was  now  married,  was  at
St.  Petersburg,  and  every  Saturday  night  I  went  to
visit  her.  Her  husband  had  a  good  library,  in  which
the  French  philosophers  of  the  last  century  and  the
modern  French  historians  were  well  represented,  and  I
plunged  into  them.  Such  books  were  prohibited  in
Eussia,  and  evidently  could  not  be  taken  to  school ;  so
I  spent  most  of  the  night,  every  Saturday,  in  reading
the  works  of  the  encyclopaedists,  the  '  Philosophical  Dic-
tionary '  of  Voltaire,  the  writings  of  the  Stoics,  especially
Marcus  Aurelius,  and  so  on.  The  infinite  immensity  of
the  universe,  the  greatness  of  nature,  its  poetry,  its  ever
throbbing  life,  impressed  me  more  and  more  ;  and  that
never-ceasing  life  and  its  harmonies  gave  me  the  ecstasy
of  admiration  which  the  young  soul  thirsts  for,  while
my  favourite  poets  supplied  me  with  an  expression  in
words  of  that  awakening  love  of  mankind  and  faith
in  its  progress  which  make  the  best  part  of  youth  and
impress  man  for  a  life.

Alexander,  by  this  time,  had  gradually  come  to  a
Kantian  agnosticism,  and  the  '  relativity  of  perceptions,'

VOL.  i.  I


114  MEMOIRS  OF A REVOLUTIONIST

'  perceptions  in  time  and  space,  and  time  only,'  and  so
on,  filled  pages  and  pages  in  our  letters,  the  writing  of
which  became  more  and  more  microscopical  as  the
subjects  under  discussion  grew  in  importance.  But
neither  then  nor  later  on,  when  we  used  to  spend
hours  and  hours  in  discussing  Kant's  philosophy,
could  my  brother  convert  me  to  become  a  disciple
of  the  Konigsberg  philosopher.

Natural  sciences — that  is,  mathematics,  physics,
and  astronomy — were  my  chief  studies.  In  the  year
1858,  before  Darwin  had  brought  out  his  immortal
work,  a  professor  of  zoology  at  the  Moscow  University,
Boulier,  published  three  lectures  on  transformism,  and
my  brother  took  up  at  once  his  ideas  concerning  the
variability  of  species.  He  was  not  satisfied,  however,
with  approximate  proofs  only,  and  began  to  study  a
number  of  special  books  on  heredity  and  the  like,
communicating  to  me  in  his  letters  the  main  facts,  as
well  as  his  ideas  and  his  doubts.  The  appearance  of
the  '  Origin  of  Species '  did  not  settle  his  doubts  on
several  special  points,  but  only  raised  new  questions  and
gave  him  the  impulse  for  further  studies.  We  after-
ward discussed — and  that  discussion  lasted  for  many
years — various  questions  relative  to  the  origin  of
variations,  their  chances  of  being  transmitted  and
being  accentuated ;  in  short,  those  questions  which
have  been  raised  quite  lately  in  the  Weismann-Spencer
controversy,  in  Galton's  researches,  and  in  the  works
of  the  modern  Neo-Lamarckians.  Owing  to  his  philo-
sophical and  critical  mind,  Alexander  had  noticed
at  once  the  fundamental  importance  of  these  ques-
tions for  the  theory  of  variability  of  species,  even


THE CORPS OF PAGES  115

though  they  were  so  often  overlooked  then  by  many
naturalists.

I  must  also  mention  a  temporary  excursion  into  the
domain  of  political  economy.  In  the  years  1858  and
1859  everyone  in  Eussia  spoke  of  political  economy ;
lectures  on  free  trade  and  protective  duties  attracted
crowds  of  people,  and  my  brother,  who  was  not  yet
absorbed  by  the  variability  of  species,  took  a  lively
though  temporary  interest  in  economical  matters,
sending  me  for  reading  the  '  Political  Economy '  of  Jean
Baptiste  Say.  I  read  a  few  chapters  only  :  tariffs  and
banking  operations  did  not  interest  me  in  the  least ;
but  Alexander  took  up  these  matters  so  passionately
that  he  even  wrote  letters  to  our  stepmother,  trying  to
interest  her  in  the  intricacies  of  the  customs  duties.
Later  on,  in  Siberia,  as  we  were  re-reading  some  of  the
letters  of  that  period,  we  laughed  like  children  when
we  fell  upon  one  of  his  epistles  in  which  he  complained
of  our  stepmother's  incapacity  to  be  moved  even  by
such  burning  questions,  and  raged  against  a  green-
grocer whom  he  had  caught  in  the  street,  and  who,
'  would  you  believe  it,'  he  wrote  with  signs  of
exclamation,  '  although  he  was  a  tradesman,  affected  a
pig-headed  indifference  to  tariff  questions  ! '

Every  summer  about  one-half  of  the  pages  were
taken  to  a  camp  at  Peterhof.  The  lower  forms,  how-
ever were  dispensed  from  joining  the  camp,  and  I  spent
the  first  two  summers  at  Nik61skoye.  To  leave  the
school,  to  take  the  train  to  Moscow,  and  there  to
meet  Alexander  was  such  a  happy  prospect  that  I
used  to  count  the  days  that  had  to  pass  till  that

i  2


116  MEMOIES  OF A  REVOLUTIONIST

glorious  one  should  arrive.  But  on  one  occasion  a  great
disappointment  awaited  me  at  Moscow.  Alexander
had  not  passed  his  examinations,  and  was  left  for
another  year  in  the  same  form.  He  was,  in  fact,  too
young  to  enter  the  special  classes ;  hut  our  father  was
very  angry  with  him,  nevertheless,  and  would  not
permit  us  to  see  each  other.  I  felt  very  sad.  We
were  not  children  any  more,  and  had  so  much  to  say  to
each  other.  I  tried  to  obtain  permission  to  go  to  our
aunt  Sulima,  at  whose  house  I  might  meet  Alexander,
but  it  was  absolutely  refused.  After  our  father  re-
married we  were  never  allowed  to  see  our  mother's
relations.

That  spring  our  Moscow  house  was  full  of  guests.
Every  night  the  reception-rooms  were  flooded  with
lights,  the  band  played,  the  confectioner  was  busy
making  ices  and  pastry,  and  card-playing  went  on  in
the  great  hall  till  a  late  hour.  I  strolled  aimlessly  about
in  the  brilliantly  illuminated  rooms,  and  felt  unhappy.

One  night,  after  ten,  a  servant  beckoned  me,  telling
me  to  come  out  to  the  entrance  hall.  I  went.  '  Come
to  the  coachmen's  house,'  the  old  major-domo  Frol
whispered  to  me.  '  Alexander  Alexeievich  is  here.'

I  dashed  across  the  yard,  up  the  flight  of  steps
leading  to  the  coachmen's  house,  and  into  a  wide,  half-
dark  room,  where,  at  the  immense  dining-table  of  the
servants,  I  saw  Alexander.

'  Sasha,  dear,  how  did  you  come  ?  '  and  in  a  moment
we  rushed  into  each  other's  arms,  hugging  each  other
and  unable  to  speak  from  emotion.

'  Hush,  hush !  they  may  overhear  you,'  said  the
servants'  cook,  Praskovia,  wiping  away  her  tears  with


THE COEPS  OF  PAGES  117

her  apron.  '  Poor  orphans  !  If  your  mother  were  only
alive '

Old  Frol  stood,  his  head  deeply  bent,  his  eyes  also
twinkling.

'  Look  here,  Petya,  not  a  word  to  anyone ;  to  no
one,'  he  said,  while  Praskovia  placed  on  the  table  an
earthenware  jar  full  of  porridge  for  Alexander.

He,  glowing  with  health,  in  his  cadet  uniform,
already  had  begun  to  talk  about  all  sorts  of  matters,
while  he  rapidly  emptied  the  porridge  pot.  I  could
hardly  make  him  tell  me  how  he  came  there  at  such  a
late  hour.  We  lived  then  near  the  Smolensky  boulevard,
within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  house  where  our  mother
died,  and  the  corps  of  cadets  was  at  the  opposite  out-
skirts of  Moscow,  full  five  miles  away.

He  had  made  a  doll  out  of  bedclothes,  and  had  put
it  in  his  bed,  under  the  blankets  ;  then  he  went  to  the
tower,  descended  from  a  window,  came  out  unnoticed,
and  walked  the  whole  distance.

'  Were  you  not  afraid  at  night  in  the  deserted  fields
round  your  corps  ?  '  I  asked.

'  What  had  I  to  fear  ?  Only  lots  of  dogs  were
upon  me ;  I  had  teased  them  myself.  To-morrow  I
shall  take  my  sword  with  me.'

The  coachmen  and  other  servants  came  in  and  out ;
they  sighed  as  they  looked  at  us,  and  took  seats  at  a  dis-
tance, along  the  walls,  exchanging  words  in  a  subdued
tone  so  as  not  to  disturb  us  ;  while  we  two,  in  each  other's
arms,  sat  there  till  midnight,  talking  about  nebulae  and
Laplace's  hypothesis,  the  structure  of  matter,  the
struggles  of  the  papacy  under  Boniface  VIII.  with  the
imperial  power,  and  so  on.


118  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

From  time  to  time  one  of  the  servants  would  hur-
riedly run  in,  saying,  '  Petinka,  go  and  show  thyself  in
the  hall ;  they  may  ask  for  thee.'

I  implored  Sasha  not  to  come  next  night ;  but  he
came,  nevertheless — not  without  having  had  a  scrimmage
with  the  dogs,  against  whom  he  had  taken  his  sword.
I  responded  with  feverish  haste,  when,  earlier  than  the
day  before,  I  was  called  once  more  to  the  coachmen's
house.  Alexander  had  made  part  of  the  journey  in  a
cab.  The  previous  night,  one  of  the  servants  had
brought  him  what  he  had  got  from  the  card-players
and  asked  him  to  take  it.  He  took  some  small  coin  to
hire  a  cab,  and  so  he  came  earlier  than  on  his  first  visit.

He  intended  to  come  next  night,  too,  but  for  some
reason  it  would  have  been  dangerous  for  the  servants,
and  we  decided  to  part  till  the  autumn.  A  short '  official '
note  made  me  understand  next  day  that  his  nocturnal
escapades  had  passed  unnoticed.  How  terrible  would
have  been  the  punishment,  if  they  had  been  discovered.
It  is  awful  to  think  of  it  :  flogging  before  the  corps  till
he  was  carried  away  unconscious  on  a  sheet,  and  then
degradation  to  a  soldiers'  sons'  battalion — anything  was
possible,  in  those  times.

What  our  servants  would  have  suffered  for  hiding
us,  if  information  of  the  affair  had  reached  our  father's
ears,  would  have  been  equally  terrible  ;  but  they  knew
how  to  keep  secrets  and  not  to  betray  one  another.
They  all  knew  of  the  visits  of  Alexander,  but  none  of
them  whispered  a  word  to  anyone  of  the  family.  They
and  I  were  the  only  ones  in  the  house  who  ever  knew
anything  about  it.


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  119


IV


THAT  same  year  I  made  my  first  start  as  an  explorer  of
popular  life,  and  this  little  work  brought  me  one  step
nearer  to  our  peasants,  making  me  see  them  under  a  new
light ;  it  also  helped  me  later  on  a  great  deal  in  Siberia.

Every  year,  in  July,  on  the  day  of  '  the  Holy  Virgin
of  Kazan '  which  was  the  fete  of  our  church,  a  pretty
large  fair  was  held  in  Nik61skoye.  Tradesmen  came
from  the  neighbouring  towns,  and  many  thousands  of
peasants  flocked  from  thirty  miles  round  to  our  village,
which  for  a  couple  of  days  had  a  most  animated  aspect.
A  remarkable  description  of  the  village  fairs  of  South
Russia  had  just  been  published  that  year  by  the  Slavo-
phile Aksakoff,  and  my  brother,  who  was  then  at  the
height  of  his  politico-economical  enthusiasm,  advised
me  to  make  a  statistical  description  of  our  fair,  and  to
determine  the  return  of  goods  brought  in  and  sold.  I
followed  his  advice,  and  to  my  great  amazement  I  really
succeeded  :  my  estimate  of  returns,  so  far  as  I  can  judge
now,  was  not  more  unreliable  than  many  similar  esti-
mates in  books  of  statistics.

Our  fair  lasted  only  a  little  more  than  twenty-four
hours.  On  the  eve  of  the  fete,  the  great  open  space  given
to  it  was  full  of  life  and  animation.  Long  rows  of  stalls,
to  be  used  for  the  sale  of  cottons,  ribbons,  and  all  sorts  of
peasant  women's  attire,  were  hurriedly  built.  The
restaurant,  a  substantial  stone  building,  was  furnished
with  tables,  chairs  and  benches,  and  its  floor  was  strewn
over  with  bright  yellow  sand.  Three  wine-shops  were


120  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

erected  in  three  different  places,  and  freshly  cut  brooms,
planted  on  high  poles,  rose  high  in  the  air  to  attract  the
peasants  from  a  distance.  Rows  and  rows  of  light  shops
for  the  sale  of  crockery,  boots,  stoneware,  ginger-bread,
and  all  sorts  of  small  things,  rose  as  if  by  a  magic  wand ;
while  in  a  special  corner  holes  were  dug  in  the  ground
to  receive  immense  cauldrons  in  which  bushels  of  millet
and  sarrasin  and  whole  sheep  were  boiled,  for  supplying
the  thousands  of  visitors  with  hot  schi  and  kasha
(soup  and  porridge).  In  the  afternoon,  the  four  roads
leading  to  the  fair  were  blocked  by  hundreds  of  peasant
carts,  and  cattle,  corn,  casks  rilled  with  tar,  and  heaps
of  pottery  were  exhibited  along  the  roadsides.

The  night  service  on  the  eve  of  the  fete  was  per-
formed in  our  church  with  great  solemnity.  Half  a
dozen  priests  and  deacons  from  the  neighbouring  villages
took  part  in  it,  and  their  chanters,  reinforced  by  young
tradespeople,  sang  in  the  choir  with  such  ritornellos  as
-could  only  be  heard  at  the  bishop's  in  Kaluga.  The
church  was  crowded ;  all  prayed  fervently.  The  trades-
people vied  with  each  other  in  the  number  and  sizes
of  the  wax  candles  which  they  lighted  before  the  ikons,
as  offerings  to  the  local  saints  for  the  success  of  their
trade  ;  and  the  crowd  being  so  thick  as  not  to  allow  the
last  comers  to  reach  the  altar,  candles  of  all  sizes — thick
and  thin,  white  and  yellow,  according  to  the  offerer's
wealth — were  transmitted  from  the  back  of  the  church
through  the  crowd,  with  whispers  :  '  To  the  Holy
Virgin  of  Kazan,  our  Protector,'  '  To  Nicholas  the
Favourite,'  '  To  Frol  and  Laur  '  (the  horse  saints — that
was  from  those  who  had  horses  to  sell),  or  simply  to
'  the  Saints  '  without  a  further  specification.


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  121

Immediately  after  the  night  service  was  over,  the
'  fore-fair '  began,  and  I  had  now  to  plunge  headlong
into  my  work  of  asking  hundreds  of  people  what  was
the  value  of  the  goods  they  had  brought  in.  To  my
great  astonishment  my  task  went  on  admirably.  Of
course,  I  was  myself  asked  questions  :  '  Why  do  you
do  this  ?  '  '  Is  it  not  for  the  old  prince,  who  intends
increasing  the  market  dues  ?  '  But  the  assurance  that
the  '  old  prince '  knew  and  would  know  nothing  of  it
(he  would  have  found  it  a  disgraceful  occupation)
settled  all  doubts  at  once.  I  soon  caught  the  proper
way  of  asking  questions,  and  after  I  had  taken  half  a
dozen  cups  of  tea  in  the  restaurant  with  some  trades-
people (oh,  horror,  if  my  father  had  learned  that!),
all  went  on  very  well.  Vasily  Ivanoff,  the  elder  of
Nikolskoye,  a  beautiful  young  peasant  with  a  fine
intelligent  face  and  a  silky  fair  beard,  took  an  interest
in  my  work.  '  Well,  if  thou  wantest  it  for  thy  learning,
get  at  it ;  thou  wilt  tell  us  later  on  what  thou  hast
found  out ' — ^was  his  conclusion,  and  he  told  some  of
the  people  that  it  was  '  all  right.'  Everyone  knew  him
for  miles  round,  and  the  word  passed  round  the  fail-
that  no  harm  would  ensue  to  the  peasants  by  giving
me  the  information.

In  short,  the  '  imports '  were  determined  very
nicely.  But  next  day,  the  '  sales  '  offered  certain  diffi-
culties, chiefly  with  the  dry  goods'  merchants,  who  did
not  themselves  yet  know  how  much  they  had  sold.  On
the  day  of  the  fete  the  young  peasant  women  simply
stormed  the  shops,  each  of  them  having  sold  some  linen
of  her  own  making  and  now  buying  some  cotton  print
for  a  dress  and  a  bright  kerchief  for  herself,  a  coloured


122  MEMOIRS OF A  REVOLUTIONIST

handkerchief  for  her  husband,  perhaps  some  neck  lace,
a  ribbon  or  two,  and  a  number  of  small  gifts  to  grand-
mother, grandfather,  and  the  children  who  had  remained
at  home.  As  to  the  peasants  who  sold  crockery,
or  ginger-cakes,  or  cattle  and  hemp,  they  at  once
determined  their  sales,  especially  the  old  women.
'  Good  sale,  grandmother  ? '  I  would  ask.  '  No  need
to  complain,  my  son.  Why  should  I  anger  God  ?
Nearly  all  is  sold.'  And  out  of  their  small  items  the
tens  of  thousand  roubles  grew  in  my  note-book.  One
point  only  remained  unsettled.  A  wide  space  was
given  up  to  many  hundreds  of  peasant  women  who
stood  in  the  burning  sun,  each  with  her  piece  of  hand-
woven  linen,  sometimes  exquisitely  fine,  which  she  had
brought  for  sale — scores  of  buyers,  with  gypsy  faces
and  shark -like  looks,  moving  about  in  the  crowd  and
buying.  Only  rough  estimates  of  these  sales  could
evidently  be  made.

I  made  no  reflections  at  that  time  about  this  new
experience  of  mine  ;  I  was  simply  happy  to  see  that  it
was  not  a  failure.  But  the  serious  good  sense  and
sound  judgment  of  the  Russian  peasants  which  I
witnessed  during  this  couple  of  days,  left  upon  me  a
lasting  impression.  Later  on,  when  we  were  making
socialist  propaganda  among  the  peasants,  I  could  not
but  wonder  why  some  of  my  friends,  who  had  received
a  seemingly  far  more  democratic  education  than  myself,
did  not  know  how  to  talk  to  the  peasants  or  to  the
factory  workers  from  the  country.  They  tried  to
imitate  the  '  peasants'  talk,'  by  introducing  into  it  lots
of  so-called  '  popular  phrases  '  and  only  rendered  it  the
more  incomprehensible.


THE CORPS  OF PAGES  123

Nothing  of  the  sort  is  needed,  either  in  talking  to
peasants  or  in  writing  for  them.  The  Great  Eussian
peasant  perfectly  well  understands  the  educated  man's
talk,  provided  that  it  is  not  stuffed  with  words  taken
from  foreign  languages.  What  the  peasant  does  not
understand  is  abstract  notions  when  they  are  not
illustrated  by  concrete  examples.  But  when  you  speak
to  the  Kussian  peasant  plainly,  and  start  from  concrete
facts — and  the  same  is  true  with  regard  to  village-folk
of  all  nationalities — my  experience  is  that  there  is  no
generalization  from  the  whole  world  of  science,  social
or  natural,  which  could  not  be  conveyed  to  the
averagely  intelligent  man  if  you  yourself  understand  it
concretely.  The  chief  difference  between  the  educated
and  the  uneducated  man  is,  I  should  say,  in  the  latter
not  being  able  to  follow  a  chain  of  conclusions.  He
grasps  the  first  of  them,  and  may  be  the  second,  but  he
gets  tired  at  the  third,  if  he  does  not  see  what  you  are
driving  at.  But,  how  often  do  we  meet  with  the  same
difficulty  in  educated  people  !

One  more  impression  I  gathered  from  that  work  of
my  boyhood — an  impression  which  I  formulated  but
later  on,  and  which  will  probably  astonish  many  a
reader.  It  is  the  spirit  of  equality  which  is  highly
developed  in  the  Bussian  peasant  and,  in  fact,  in  the
rural  population  everywhere.  The  Kussian  peasant  is
capable  of  much  servile  obedience  to  the  landlord  or  to
the  police  officer  ;  he  will  bend  before  their  will  in  a
servile  manner  ;  but  he  does  not  consider  them  superior
men,  and  if  the  next  moment  that  same  landlord  or
officer  talks  to  the  same  peasant  about  hay  or  ducks,
the  latter  will  converse  with  them  as  an  equal  to  an


124  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

equal.  I  never  saw  in  a  "Russian  peasant  that  servility,
grown  to  be  a  second  nature,  with  which  a  small
functionary  talks  to  a  highly  placed  one,  or  a  valet  to
his  master.  The  peasant  much  too  easily  submits  to
force,  but  he  does  not  worship  it.

I  returned  that  summer  from  Nikolskoye  to
Moscow  in  a  new  fashion,  There  being  then  no
railway  between  Kaluga  and  Moscow,  a  man,  Buck  by
name,  kept  some  sort  of  carriages  running  between  the
two  towrns.  Our  people  never  thought  of  travelling  in
such  a  way  :  they  had  their  own  horses  and  convey-
ances ;  but  when  my  father,  in  order  to  save  my  step-
mother a  double  journey,  offered  me,  half  in  joke,  to
travel  alone  in  that  way,  I  accepted  his  offer  with
delight.

An  old  and  very  stout  tradesman's  wife  and  myself
on  the  back  seats,  and  a  small  tradesman  or  artisan
on  the  front  seat,  were  the  only  occupants  of  the
carriage.  I  found  the  journey  very  pleasant — first  of
all  because  I  travelled  by  myself  (I  was  not  yet  sixteen),
and  next  because  the  old  lady,  who  had  brought  with
her  for  a  three  days'  journey  a  colossal  hamper  full
of  provisions,  treated  me  to  all  sorts  of  home-made
delicacies.  All  the  surroundings  during  that  journey
were  delightful.  One  evening  especially  is  still  vivid
in  my  memory.  We  came  at  night  to  one  of  the  great
villages  and  stopped  at  some  inn.  The  old  lady  ordered
a  samovar  for  herself,  while  I  went  out  in  the  street,
walking  about  anywhere.  A  small  '  white  inn '  at
which  only  food  is  served,  but  no  drinks,  attracted  my
attention  and  I  went  in.  Numbers  of  peasants  sat


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  125

round  the  small  tables,  covered  with white napkins,
and  enjoyed  their  tea. I  did  the  same.

All  was  so  new  for  me  in  these  surroundings.  It
was  a  village  of  '  Crown  peasants' — that  is,  peasants
who  had  not  been  serfs  and  enjoyed  a  relative  well-being,
probably  owing  to  the  weaving  of  linen  which  they
carried  on  as  a  home  industry.  Slow,  serious  con-
versations, with  occasional  laughter,  were  going  on  at
those  tables,  and  after  the  usual  introductory  questions,
I  soon  found  myself  engaged  in  a  conversation  with  a
dozen  peasants  about  the  crops  in  our  neighbourhood,
and  answering  all  sorts  of  questions.  They  wanted  to
know  all  about  St.  Petersburg,  and  most  of  all  about
the  rumours  concerning  the  coming  abolition  of  serf-
dom. And  a  feeling  of  simplicity  and  of  the  natural
relations  of  equality,  as  well  as  of  hearty  good-will,
which  I  always  felt  afterwards  when  among  peasants
or  in  their  houses,  took  possession  of  me  at  that  inn.
Nothing  extraordinary  happened  that  night,  so  that  I
even  ask  myeelf  if  the  incident  is  worth  mentioning  at
all ;  and  yet  that  warm,  dark  night  in  the  village,  that
small  inn,  that  talk  with  the  peasants,  and  the  keen
interest  they  took  in  hundreds  of  things  lying  far
beyond  their  habitual  surroundings,  have  made  ever
since  a  poor  '  white  inn '  more  attractive  to  me  than
the  best  restaurant  in  the  world.


126  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST


STOEMY  times  came  now  in  the  life  of  our  corps.  When
Girardot  was  dismissed,  his  place  was  taken  by  one  of
our  officers,  Captain  B .  He  was  rather  good-
natured  than  otherwise,  but  he  had  got  into  his  head
that  he  was  not  treated  by  us  with  due  reverence,
corresponding  to  the  high  position  which  he  now
occupied,  and  he  tried  to  enforce  upon  us  more  respect
and  awe  toward  himself.  He  began  by  quarrelling
about  all  sorts  of  petty  things  with  the  upper  form,
and — what  was  still  worse — he  attempted  to  destroy
our  'liberties/  the  origin  of  which  was  lost  in  the
darkness  of  time  and  which,  insignificant  in  themselves,
were  perhaps  on  that  same  account  only  the  dearer
to  us.

The  result  of  it  was  that  the  school  broke  for  several
days  into  an  open  revolt,  which  ended  in  wholesale
punishment,  and  the  exclusion  from  the  corps  of  two
of  our  favourite  pages  de  chambre.

Then,  the  same  captain  began  to  intrude  in  the
class-rooms,  where  we  used  to  spend  one  hour  in  the
morning  in  preparing  our  lessons  before  the  classes
began.  We  were  considered  to  be  there  under  our
teaching  staff,  and  were  happy  to  have  nothing  to  do
with  our  military  chiefs.  We  resented  that  intrusion
very  much,  and  one  day  I  loudly  expressed  our  dis-
content, saying  to  the  captain  that  this  was  the  place
of  the  inspector  of  the  classes,  not  his.  I  spent  weeks
under  arrest  for  that  frankness,  and  perhaps  should


THE CORPS  OF PAGES  127

have  been  excluded  from  the  school,  were  it  not  that
the  inspector  of  the  classes,  his  assistant,  and  even  our
old  director,  judged  that  after  all  I  had  only  expressed
aloud  what  they  all  used  to  say  to  themselves.

No  sooner  all  these  troubles  were  over,  than
the  death  of  the  Dowager-Empress — the  widow  of
Nicholas  I. — brought  a  new  interruption  in  our  work.

The  burial  of  crowned  heads  is  always  so  arranged
as  to  produce  a  deep  impression  on  the  crowds,  and  it
must  be  owned  that  this  object  is  attained.  The  body
of  the  empress  was  brought  from  Tsarkoye  Selo,  where
she  died,  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  here,  followed  by  the
imperial  family,  all  the  high  dignitaries  of  the  state,
and  scores  of  thousands  of  functionaries  and  corpora-
tions, and  preceded  by  hundreds  of  clergy  and  choirs,
it  was  taken  from  the  railway  station  through  the
main  thoroughfares  to  the  fortress,  where  it  had  to  lie
in  state  for  several  weeks.  A  hundred  thousand  men  of
the  Guard  were  placed  along  the  streets,  and  thousands
of  people,  dressed  in  the  most  gorgeous  uniforms,
preceded,  accompanied,  and  followed  the  hearse  in  a
solemn  procession.  Litanies  were  sung  at  every
important  crossing  of  the  streets,  and  here  the  ringing
of  the  bells  on  the  church  towers,  the  voices  of  vast
choirs,  and  the  sounds  of  the  militar)^  bands  united  in
the  most  impressive  way,  so  as  to  make  people  believe
that  the  immense  crowds  really  mourned  the  loss  of
the  empress.

As  long  as  the  body  lay  in  state  in  the  cathedral  of
the  fortress,  the  pages,  among  others,  had  to  keep  the
watch  round  it,  night  and  day.  Three  pages  de
chambre  and  three  maids  of  honour  always  stood  close


128  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

by  the  coffin,  placed  on  a  high  pedestal,  while  some
twenty  pages  were  stationed  on  the  platform  upon
which  litanies  were  sung  twice  every  day,  in  the
presence  of  the  emperor  and  all  his  family.  Conse-
quently, every  week  nearly  one-half  of  the  corps  was
taken  in  turns  to  the  fortress,  to  lodge  there.  We
were  relieved  every  two  hours,  and  in  the  daytime  our
service  was  not  difficult ;  but  when  we  had  to  rise  in
the  night,  to  dress  in  our  court  uniforms,  and  then  to
walk  through  the  dark  and  gloomy  inner  courts  of  the
fortress  to  the  cathedral,  to  the  sound  of  the  gloomy
chime  of  the  fortress  bells,  a  cold  shiver  seized  me  at
the  thought  of  the  prisoners  who  were  immured  some-
where in  this  Eussian  Bastille.  '  Who  knows,'  thought
I,  '  whether  in  my  turn  I  shall  not  also  have  to  join
them  one  day  or  other  ?  '

The  burial  did  not  pass  without  an  accident  which
might  have  had  serious  consequences.  An  immense
canopy  had  been  erected  under  the  dome  of  the  cathe-
dral over  the  coffin.  A  huge  gilded  crown  rose  above
it,  and  from  this  crown  an  immense  purple  mantle
lined  with  ermine  hung  towards  the  four  thick  pilas-
ters which  support  the  dome  of  the  cathedral.  It  was
impressive,  but  we  boys  soon  made  out  that  the  crown
was  made  of  gilded  cardboard  and  wood,  the  mantle
was  of  velvet  only  in  its  lower  part,  while  higher  up  it
was  red  cotton,  and  that  the  ermine  lining  was  simply
cotton  flannelette  or  swandown  to  which  black  tails
of  squirrels  had  been  sewn,  while  the  escutcheons
which  represented  the  arms  of  Russia,  veiled  with
black  crepe,  were  simple  cardboard.  But  the  crowds
which  were  allowed  at  certain  hours  of  the  night  to


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  129

pass  by  the  coffin,  and  to  kiss  in  a  hurry  the  gold  brocade
which  covered  it,  surely  had  no  time  to  closely  examine
the  flannelette  ermine  or  the  cardboard  escutcheons,
and  the  desired  theatrical  effect  was  obtained  even  by
such  cheap  means.

When  a  litany  is  sung  in  Kussia  all  the  people
present  hold  lighted  wax  candles,  which  have  to  be  put
out  after  certain  prayers  have  been  read.  The  Imperial
family  also  held  such  candles,  and  one  day  the  young
son  of  the  grand  duke  Constantine,  seeing  that  the
others  put  out  their  candles  by  turning  them  upside
down,  did  the  same.  The  black  gauze  which  hung
behind  him  from  an  escutcheon  took  fire,  and  in  a
second  the  escutcheon  and  the  cotton  stuff  were  ablaze.
An  immense  tongue  of  fire  ran  up  the  heavy  folds  of  the
supposed  ermine  mantle.

The  service  was  stopped.  All  looks  were  directed
with  terror  towards  the  tongue  of  fire,  which  went  higher
and  higher  towards  the  cardboard  crown  and  the  wood-
work which  supported  the  whole  structure.  Bits  of
burning  stuff  began  to  fall  down,  threatening  to  set  fire
to  the  black  gauze  veils  of  the  ladies  present.

Alexander  II.  lost  his  presence  of  mind  for  a  couple
of  seconds  only,  but  he  recovered  immediately  and  said
in  a  composed  voice :  '  The  coffin  must  be  taken ! '
The  pages  de  chambre  at  once  covered  it  with  the
thick  gold  brocade,  and  we  all  advanced  to  lift  the  heavy
coffin  ;  but  in  the  meantime  the  big  tongue  of  flame  had
broken  into  a  number  of  smaller  ones,  which  now  slowly
devoured  only  the  fluffy  outside  of  the  cotton  stuff  and,
meeting  more  and  more  dust  and  soot  in  the  upper  part
of  the  structure,  gradually  died  out  in  the  folds.

VOL.  I.  K


130  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

I  cannot  say  what  I  looked  most  at :  the  creeping
fire  or  the  stately  slender  figures  of  the  three  ladies  who
stood  by  the  coffin,  the  long  trains  of  their  black
dresses  spreading  over  the  steps  which  led  to  the  upper
platform,  and  their  black  lace  veils  hanging  down  their
shoulders.  None  of  them  had  made  the  slightest  move-
ment :  they  stood  like  three  beautiful  carved  images.
Only  in  the  dark  eyes  of  one  of  them,  Mdlle.  Gamaleya,
tears  glittered  like  pearls.  She  was  a  daughter  of
South  Eussia,  and  was  the  only  really  handsome  lady
amongst  the  maids  of  honour  at  the  Court.

At  the  corps,  in  the  meantime,  everything  was  up-
side down.  The  classes  were  interrupted  ;  those  of  us
who  returned  from  the  fortress  were  lodged  in  temporary
quarters,  and,  having  nothing  to  do,  spent  the  whole  day
in  all  sorts  of  frolics.  In  one  of  them  we  managed  to
open  a  cupboard  which  stood  in  the  room  and  contained
a  splendid  collection  of  models  of  all  kinds  of  animals
for  the  teaching  of  natural  history.  That  was  its
official  purpose  ;  but  it  was  never  even  so  much  as
shown  to  us,  and  now  that  we  got  hold  of  it  we  utilised
it  in  our  own  way.  With  the  human  skull  which  made
part  of  the  collection  we  made  a  ghostly  figure  where-
with to  frighten  at  night  other  comrades  and  the  officers.
As  to  the  animals,  we  placed  them  in  the  most  unappro-
priate  positions  and  groups  :  monkeys  were  seen  riding
on  lions,  sheep  were  playing  with  leopards,  the  giraffe
danced  with  the  elephant,  and  so  on.  The  worst  was
that  a  few  days  later  one  of  the  Prussian  princes  who
had  come  to  assist  at  the  burial  ceremony  (it  was  the
one,  I  think,  who  became  later  on  the  Emperor
Frederick)  visited  our  school,  and  was  shown  all  that


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  131

concerned  our  education.  Our  director  did  not  fail  to
boast  of  the  excellent  educational  appliances  which  we
had  at  the  school,  and  brought  him  to  that  same  un-
fortunate cupboard.  .  .  .  When  the  German  prince
caught  a  glimpse  of  our  zoological  classification,  he
drew  a  long  face  and  quickly  turned  away.  Our  old
director  looked  horrified ;  he  had  lost  the  power  of  speech,
and  only  pointed  repeatedly  with  his  hand  at  some  star-
fishes which  were  placed  in  glass  boxes  on  the  walls
by  the  sides  of  the  cupboard.  The  suite  of  the  prince
tried  to  look  as  if  they  had  noticed  nothing,  and  only
threw  rapid  glimpses  at  the  cause  of  so  much  disturb-
ance, while  we  wicked  boys  made  all  sorts  of  faces  in
order  not  to  burst  with  laughter.


VI


THE  school  years  of  a  Russian  youth  are  so  very
different  from  what  they  are  in  West  European
schools  that  I  must  dwell  upon  my  school  life.
Russian  youths,  as  a  rule,  while  they  are  yet  at  a
lyceum  or  in  a  military  school,  already  take  an  interest
in  a  wide  circle  of  social,  political,  and  philosophical
matters.  It  is  true  that  the  corps  of  pages  was,  of  all
schools,  the  least  congenial  medium  for  such  a  develop-
ment ;  but  in  those  years  of  general  revival,  broader  ideas
penetrated  even  into  our  midst  and  carried  some  of  us
away,  without,  however,  preventing  us  from  taking  a

K  2


132  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

very  lively  part  in  '  benefit  nights  '  and  all  sorts  of
frolics,

While  I  was  in  the  fourth  form  I  took  an  interest
in  history,  and  with  the  aid  of  notes  made  during  the
lessons — I  knew  that  university  students  do  it  that
way — and  helping  myself  with  reading,  I  wrote  quite  a
course  of  early  mediaeval  history  for  my  own  use.
Next  year  the  struggle  between  Pope  Boniface  VIII,
and  the  Imperial  power  attracted  my  special  attention,
and  now  it  became  my  ambition  to  gain  admission  to
the  Imperial  library  as  a  reader,  in  order  thoroughly
to  study  that  great  struggle.  This  was  contrary  to
the  rules  of  the  library,  pupils  of  secondary  schools
not  being  admitted ;  our  good  Herr  Becker,  however,
smoothed  the  way  out  of  the  difficulty,  and  I  was
allowed  one  day  to  enter  the  sanctuary  and  to  take  a
seat  at  one  of  the  readers'  small  tables,  on  one  of  the
red  velvet  sofas  with  which  the  reading-room  was
then  furnished.

From  various  text-books  and  some  books  from  our
own  library,  I  soon  got  to  the  sources.  Knowing  no
Latin,  I  discovered  nevertheless  a  rich  supply  of  original
sources  in  Old  Teutonic  and  Old  French,  and  found  an
immense  aesthetic  enjoyment  in  the  quaint  structure
and  expressiveness  of  the  latter  in  the  Chronicles.
Quite  a  new  structure  of  society  and  quite  a  world  of
complicated  relations  opened  before  me  ;  and  from  that
time  I  learned  to  value  far  more  the  original  sources  of
history  than  works  in  which  it  is  generalized  in  accord-
ance with  modern  views — the  prejudices  of  modern
politics,  or  even  mere  current  formulae  being  substi-
tuted for  the  real  life  of  the  period.  Nothing  gives


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  m

more  impetus  to  one's  intellectual  development  than
some  sort  of  independent  research,  and  these  studies
of  mine  immensely  helped  me  afterwards.

Unhappily,  I  had  to  abandon  them  when  we  reached
the  second  form  (the  last  but  one).  The  pages  had  to
study  during  the  last  two  years  nearly  all  that  was
taught  in  other  military  schools  in  three  '  special '
forms,  and  we  had  an  immense  amount  of  work  to  do
for  the  school.  Natural  sciences,  mathematics,  and
military  sciences  necessarily  relegated  history  to  the
background.

In  the  second  form  we  began  seriously  to  study
physics.  We  had  an  excellent  teacher — a  very  intelli-
gent man  with  a  sarcastic  turn  of  mind,  who  hated
learning  from  memory,  and  managed  to  make  us  think
instead  of  merely  learning  facts.  He  was  a  good
mathematician,  and  taught  us  physics  on  a  mathe-
matical basis,  admirably  explaining  at  the  same  time
the  leading  ideas  of  physical  research  and  physical
apparatus.  Some  of  his  questions  were  so  original
and  his  explanations  so  good  that  they  have  engraved
themselves  for  ever  on  my  memory.

Our  text-book  of  physics  was  pretty  good  (most  text-
books for  the  military  schools  had  been  written  by  the
best  men  at  the  time),  but  it  was  rather  old,  and  our
teacher,  who  followed  his  own  system  in  teaching,
began  to  prepare  a  short  summary  of  his  lessons — a
sort  of  aide-memoire — for  the  use  of  our  form.
However,  after  a  few  weeks  it  so  happened  that  the
task  of  writing  this  summary  fell  upon  me,  and  our
teacher,  acting  as  a  true  pedagogist,  trusted  it  entirely


134  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

to  me,  only  reading  the  proofs.  When  we  came  to
the  chapters  of  heat,  electricity,  and  magnetism,  they
had  to  be  written  entirely  anew,  and  this  I  did,  thus
preparing  a  nearly  complete  text-book  of  physics,  which
was  printed  for  the  use  of  the  school.

In  the  second  form  we  also  began  to  study  chemistry,
and  we  also  had  a  first-rate  teacher — a  passionate
lover  of  the  subject  who  had  himself  made  valuable
original  researches.  The  years  1859-61  were  years  of
a  universal  revival  of  taste  in  the  exact  sciences  :
Grove,  Clausius,  Joule,  and  Seguin  showed  that  heat
and  all  physical  forces  are  but  divers  modes  of  motion  ;
Helmholtz  began  about  that  time  his  epoch-making
researches  in  sound ;  and  Tyndall,  in  his  popular
lectures,  made  one  touch,  so  to  say,  the  very  atoms  and
molecules.  Gerhardt  and  Avogadro  introduced  the
theory  of  substitutions,  and  Mendeleeff,  Lothar  Meyer,
and  Newlands  discovered  the  periodical  law  of  elements ;
Darwin,  with  his  '  Origin  of  Species,'  revolutionised  all
biological  sciences ;  while  Karl  Vogt  and  Moleschott,
following  Claude  Bernard,  laid  the  foundations  of
true  psychology  in  physiology.  It  was  a  great  time
of  scientific  revival,  and  the  current  which  directed
men's  minds  towards  natural  science  was  irresistible.
Numbers  of  excellent  books  were  published  at  that
time  in  Russian  translations,  and  I  soon  understood
that  whatever  one's  subsequent  studies  might  be,  a
thorough  knowledge  of  the  natural  sciences  and
familiarity  with  their  methods  must  lie  at  the  foun-
dation.

Five  or  six  of  us  joined  together  to  get  some  sort  of
laboratory  for  ourselves. With  the  elementary  appa-


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  135

ratus  recommended  for  beginners  in  Stockhardt's
excellent  text-book  we  started  our  laboratory  in  a  small
bedroom  of  two  of  our  comrades,  the  brothers  Zas6tsky.
Their  father,  an  old  retired  admiral,  was  delighted
to  see  his  sons  engaged  in  so  useful  a  pursuit,  and  did
not  object  to  our  coming  together  on  Sundays  and
during  the  holidays  in  that  room  by  the  side  of  his
own  study.  With  Stockhardt's  book  as  a  guide,  we
systematically  made  all  experiments.  I  must  say  that
once  we  nearly  set  the  house  on  fire,  and  that  more
than  once  we  poisoned  all  the  rooms  with  chlorine  and
similar  stuffs.  But  the  old  admiral,  when  we  related
the  adventure  at  dinner  time,  took  it  very  nicely,  and  told
us  how  he  and  his  comrades  also  nearly  set  a  house  on
fire  in  the  far  less  useful  pursuit  of  punch  making ;
while  the  mother  only  said,  amidst  her  paroxysms  of
coughing:  'Of  course,  if  it  is  necessary  for  your
learning  to  handle  such  nasty  smelling  things,  then
there's  nothing  to  be  done  !  '

After  dinner  she  usually  took  her  seat  at  the  piano,
and  till  late  at  night  we  would  go  on  singing  duos,
trios,  and  choruses  from  the  operas.  Or  else  we  would
take  the  score  of  some  Italian  or  Eussian  opera  and  go
through  it  from  the  beginning  fco  the  end,  recitatives
and  all — the  mother  and  her  daughter  taking  the  parts
of  the  prime  donne,  while  we  managed  more  or
rather  less  successfully  to  maintain  all  other  parts.
Chemistry  and  music  thus  went  hand  in  hand.

Higher  mathematics  also  absorbed  a  great  deal  of
my  time.  Four  or  five  of  us  had  already  decided  that
we  should  not  enter  a  regiment  of  the  Guards,  where


136

all  our  time  would  be  given  to  military  drill  and
parades,  and  we  intended  to  enter,  after  promotion,
one  of  the  military  academies — artillery  or  engineering.
In  order  to  do  so  we  had  to  prepare  in  higher  geometry,
the  differential  and  the  beginnings  of  the  integral
calculus,  and  we  took  private  lessons  for  that  purpose.
At  the  same  time,  elementary  astronomy  being  taught
to  us  under  the  name  of  mathematical  geography,  I
plunged  into  astronomical  reading,  especially  during
the  last  year  of  my  stay  at  school.  The  never  ceasing
life  of  the  universe,  which  I  conceived  as  life  and
evolution,  became  for  me  an  inexhaustible  source  of
higher  poetical  thought,  and  gradually  the  sense  of
man's  oneness  with  Nature,  both  animate  and  inanimate
— the  poetry  of  Nature — became  the  philosophy  of  my
life.

If  the  teaching  in  our  school  were  only  limited  to
the  subjects  I  have  mentioned,  our  time  would  already
be  pretty  well  occupied.  But  we  also  had  to  study
in  the  domain  of  humanitarian  science,  history,  law
(that  is,  the  main  outlines  of  the  Eussian  Code),  and
political  economy  in  its  essential  leading  principles,
including  a  course  of  comparative  statistics ;  and  we
had  to  master  formidable  courses  of  military  sciences  :
tactics,  military  history  (the  campaigns  of  1812  and
1815  in  all  their  details),  artillery,  and  field  fortification.
Looking  now  back  upon  this  education  I  think  that
apart  from  the  subjects  relative  to  military  warfare,
which  might  have  been  advantageously  substituted  by
more  detailed  studies  in  the  exact  sciences,  the  variety
of  subjects  which  we  were  taught  was  not  beyond  the
capacities  of  the  average  youth.  Owing  to  a  pretty


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  137

good  knowledge  of  elementary  mathematics  and  physics,
which  we  gained  in  the  lower  forms,  nearly  all  of  us
managed  to  master  all  these  subjects.  Some  subjects
were  neglected  by  most  of  us,  especially  law,  as  also
modern  history,  for  which  we  had  unfortunately  an
old  wreck  of  a  master  who  was  only  kept  at  his  post  in
order  to  give  him  his  full  old  age  pension.  Moreover,
some  latitude  was  given  to  us  in  the  choice  of  the
subjects  we  liked  best,  and,  while  we  underwent
severe  examinations  in  these  chosen  subjects,  we  were
treated  rather  leniently  in  the  remainder.  But  the
chief  cause  of  the  relative  success  which  was  obtained
in  the  school  was  that  the  teaching  was  rendered  as
concrete  as  possible.  As  soon  as  we  had  learned
elementary  geometry  on  paper,  we  re-learned  it  in  the
field  with  poles  and  the  surveyor's  chain,  and  next
with  the  astrolabe,  the  compass,  and  the  surveyor's
table.  After  such  a  concrete  training,  elementary
astronomy  offered  no  difficulties,  while  the  surveys
themselves  were  an  endless  source  of  enjoyment.

The  same  system  of  concrete  teaching  was  applied
to  fortification.  In  the  winter  we  solved  such
problems  as,  for  instance,  the  following :  '  Having
a  thousand  men  and  a  fortnight  at  your  disposal,
build  the  strongest  fortification  you  can  build  to
protect  that  bridge  for  a  retreating  army  ; '  and  we
hotly  discussed  our  schemes  with  the  teacher  when  he
criticised  them.  In  the  summer  we  applied  that
knowledge  in  the  field.  To  these  practical  and
concrete  exercises  I  entirely  attribute  the  easiness
with  which  most  of  us  mastered  such  a  variety  of
subjects  at  the  age  of  seventeen  and  eighteen.


138  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

With  all  that,  we  had  plenty  of  time  for  amuse-
ment. Our  best  time  was  when  the  examinations  were
over,  and  we  had  three  or  four  weeks  quite  free  before
going  to  camp ;  or  when  we  returned  from  the  camp,
and  had  another  three  weeks  free  before  the  beginning
of  the  lessons.  The  few  of  us  who  remained  then  in
the  school  were  allowed,  during  the  vacations,  to  go
oat  just  as  we  liked,  always  finding  bed  and  food  at
the  school.  I  worked  then  in  the  library,  or  visited
the  picture  galleries  of  the  Hermitage,  studying  one  by
one  all  the  best  pictures  of  each  school  separately ;  or
I  went  to  the  different  Crown  factories  and  works  of
playing  cards,  cottons,  iron,  china  and  glass,  which  are
open  to  the  public.  Or  we  went  out  rowing  on  the
Neva,  spending  the  whole  night  on  the  river,  some-
times in  the  Gulf  of  Finland  with  fishermen — a
melancholy  northern  night,  during  which  the  morning
dawn  meets  the  afterglow  of  the  setting  sun,  and  a  book
can  be  read  in  the  open  air  at  midnight.  For  all  this
we  found  plenty  of  time.

Since  those  visits  to  the  factories  I  took  a
liking  to  strong  and  perfect  machinery.  Seeing  how
a  gigantic  paw,  coming  out  of  a  shanty,  grasps  a  log
floating  in  the  Neva,  pulls  it  inside,  and  puts  it  under
the  saws  which  cut  it  into  boards  ;  or  how  a  huge  red
hot  iron  bar  is  transformed  into  a  rail  after  it  has
passed  between  two  cylinders,  I  understood  the  poetry
of  machinery.  In  our  present  factories,  machinery
work  is  killing  for  the  worker,  because  he  becomes  a
lifelong  servant  to  a  given  machine  and  never  is  any-
thing else.  But  this  is  a  matter  of  bad  organization,
and  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  machine  itself.  Over-


THE CORPS OF PAGES  139

work  and  lifelong  monotony  are  equally  bad  whether
the  work  is  done  with  the  hand,  with  plain  tools,  or
with  a  machine.  But,  apart  from  these,  I  fully  under-
stand the  pleasure  that  man  can  derive  from  the  con-
sciousness of  the  might  of  his  machine,  the  intelligent
character  of  its  work,  the  gracefulness  of  its  move-
ments, and  the  correctness  of  what  it  is  doing,  and  I
think  that  William  Morris's  hatred  of  machines  only
proved  that  the  conception  of  the  machine's  power  and
gracefulness  was  missing  in  his  great  poetical  genius.

Music  also  played  a  very  great  part  in  my  develop-
ment. From  it  I  borrowed  even  greater  joys  and
enthusiasm  than  from  poetry.  The  Russian  opera
hardly  existed  in  those  times ;  but  the  Italian  opera,
which  had  a  number  of  first-rate  stars  in  it,  was  the
most  popular  institution  at  St.  Petersburg.  When
the  prima  donna  Bosio  fell  ill,  thousands  of  people,
chiefly  of  the  youth,  stood  till  late  at  night  at  the  door
of  her  hotel  to  get  news  of  her.  She  was  not  beauti-
ful, but  was  •  so  much  so  when  she  sang  that  young
men  madly  in  love  with  her  could  be  counted  by
the  hundred ;  and  when  she  died  she  had  a  burial
which  no  one  before  had  ever  had  at  St.  Petersburg.
'All  Petersburg '  was  then  divided  into  two  camps:
the  admirers  of  the  Italian  opera  and  those  of  the
French  stage,  which  already  then  was  showing  in  germ
the  putrid  Offenbachian  current  which  a  few  years
later  infected  all  Europe.  Our  form  was  also  divided,
half  and  half,  between  these  two  currents,  and  I
belonged  to  the  former.  We  were  not  permitted  to  go
to  the  pit  or  to  the  balcony,  while  all  the  boxes  in  the
Italian  opera  were  always  taken  months  in  advance


140  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

by  subscription,  and  even  transmitted  in  certain
families  as  an  hereditary  possession.  But  we  gained
admission,  on  Saturday  nights,  to  the  passages  in  the
uppermost  gallery,  and  had  to  stand  there  on  our  legs
in  a  Turkish  bath  atmosphere ;  while  to  conceal  our
showy  uniforms  we  used  to  wear,  in  that  Turkish  bath,
our  black  overcoats,  lined  with  wadding  and  with  a  fur
collar,  tightly  buttoned.  It  is  a  wonder  that  none  of
us  got  pneumonia  in  this  way,  especially  as  we  came
out  overheated  with  the  ovations  which  we  used  to
make  to  our  favourite  singers,  and  stood  afterwards  at
the  stage  door  to  catch  once  more  a  glimpse  of  our
favourites,  and  to  cheer  them.  The  Italian  opera  in
those  years  was  in  some  strange  way  intimately  con-
nected with  the  Radical  movement,  and  the  revolu-
tionary recitatives  in  '  Wilhelm  Tell '  and  '  The
Puritans '  were  always  met  with  stormy  applause  and
vociferations  which  went  straight  to  the  heart  of
Alexander  II. ;  while  in  the  sixth  story  galleries,  in  the
smoking-room  of  the  opera,  and  at  the  stage  door  the
best  part  of  the  St.  Petersburg  youth  came  together  in
a  common  idealist  worship  of  a  noble  art.  All  this
may  seem  childish ;  but  many  higher  ideas  and  pure
inspirations  were  kindled  in  us  by  this  worship  of  our
favourite  artists.


THE  COUPS  OF  PAGES  141


VII

EVEEY  summer  we  went  out  camping  at  Peterhof,  with
the  other  military  schools  of  the  St.  Petersburg  district.
All  things  considered,  our  life  there  was  very  pleasant,
and  certainly  was  excellent  for  our  health :  we  slept
in  spacious  tents,  we  bathed  in  the  sea,  and  spent  all
the  six  weeks  in  open-air  exercise.

In  military  schools  the  main  purpose  of  camp  life
was  evidently  military  drill ,  which  we  all  disliked  very
much,  but  the  dulness  of  which  was  occasionally
relieved  by  making  us  take  part  in  manceuvres.
One  night,  as  we  were  already  going  to  bed,
Alexander  II.  aroused  the  camp  by  having  the  alert
sounded.  In  a  few  minutes  all  the  camp  was  alive —
several  thousand  boys  gathering  round  their  colours,
and  the  guns  of  the  artillery  school  booming  in  the
stillness  of  ^he  night.  All  military  Peterhof  was
galloping  to  our  campr  but,  owing  to  some  misunder-
standing, the  emperor  remained  on  foot.  Orderlies
were  sent  in  all  directions  to  get  a  horse  for  him,  but
there  was  none,  and  he,  not  being  a  good  rider,  would
not  ride  any  horse  but  one  of  his  own.  Alexander  II.
was  very  angry,  and  freely  ventilated  his  anger.
'  Imbecile  (durdk) ,  have  I  only  one  horse  ?  '  I  heard  him
shout  to  an  orderly  who  reported  that  his  horse  was  in-
another  camp.

What  with  the  increasing  darkness,  the  booming  of
the  guns,  and  the  rattling  of  the  cavalry,  we  boys  grew
very  much  excited, and  when  Alexander  ordered  charging.


142  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

our  column  charged  straight  upon  him.  Tightly  packed
in  the  ranks,  with  lowered  bayonets,  we  must  have  had
a  menacing  aspect,  for  I  saw  Alexander  II.  who  was
still  on  foot,  clearing  the  way  for  the  column  in  three
formidable  jumps.  I  understood  then  the  meaning  of
a  column  which  is  marching  in  serried  ranks  under  the
excitement  of  the  music  and  the  march  itself.  There
stood  before  us  the  emperor — our  commander,  whom
we  all  venerated  very  much  ;  but  I  felt  that  in  this
moving  mass  not  one  page  or  cadet  would  have  moved
an  inch  aside,  or  stopped  awhile,  to  make  room  for  him.
We  were  the  marching  column — he  was  but  an  obstacle
— and  the  column  would  have  marched  over  him.
'  Why  should  he  be  in  our  way  ? '  the  pages  said  after-
wards. Boys,  rifle  in  hand,  are  even  more  terrible  in
such  cases  than  old  soldiers.

Next  year,  when  we  took  part  in  the  great
manoeuvres  of  the  St.  Petersburg  garrison,  I  got  an
insight  into  the  sidelights  of  warfare.  For  two  days
in  succession  we  did  nothing  but  march  up  and  down
on  a  space  of  some  twenty  miles,  without  having  the
slightest  idea  of  what  was  going  on  round  us  or  for
what  purpose  we  were  marched.  Cannon  boomed  now
in  our  neighbourhood  and  now  far  away :  sharp
musketry  fire  was  heard  somewhere  in  the  hills  and
the  woods ;  orderlies  galloped  up  and  down  bringing
the  order  to  advance  and  next  the  order  to  retreat — and
we  marched,  marched,  and  marched,  seeing  no  sense  in
all  these  movements  and  counter-movements.  Masses
of  cavalry  had  passed  along  the  same  road,  making  out
of  it  a  deep  mass  of  movable  sand;  and  we  had
to  advance  and  retreat  several  times  along  the  same


THE CORPS OF PAGES  143

road,  till  at  last  our  column  broke  all  discipline  and
represented  an  incoherent  mass  of  pilgrims  rather  than
a  military  unit.  The  colours  alone  remained  in  the
road  ;  the  remainder  slowly  paced  along  the  sides  of
the  road,  in  the  wood.  The  orders  and  the  supplications
of  the  officers  were  of  no  avail.

Suddenly  a  shout  came  from  behind :  '  The
emperor  is  coming !  The  emperor  ! '  The  officers  ran
about  supplicating  us  to  gather  in  the  ranks  :  no  one
listened  to  them.

The  emperor  came  and  ordered  to  retreat  once  more
— '  Turn  round !  '  the  words  of  command  resounded.
*  The  emperor  is  behind  us,  please  turn  round,'  the
officers  whispered ;  but  the  battalion  hardly  took  any
notice  of  the  command,  and  none  whatever  of  the
presence  of  the  emperor.  Happily,  Alexander  II.  was
no  fanatic  of  militarism,  and,  after  having  said  a  few
words  to  cheer  us  with  a  promise  of  rest,  he  galloped
off.

I  understood  then  how  much  depends  in  warfare  upon
the  state  of  mind  of  the  troops,  and  how  little  can  be  done
by  mere  discipline  when  more  than  an  average  effort  is
required  from  the  soldiers.  What  can  discipline  do
when  tired  troops  have  to  make  a  supreme  effort  to
reach  the  field  of  battle  at  a  given  hour?  It  is
absolutely  powerless.  Only  enthusiasm  and  confidence
can  at  such  moments  induce  the  soldiers  to  do  '  the
impossible  ' — and  it  is  the  impossible  that  continually
must  be  accomplished  to  secure  success.  How  often,
later  on  in  Siberia,  I  recalled  to  memory  that  object
lesson  when  we  also  had  to  do  the  impossible  during
our  scientific  expeditions !


144  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

Comparatively  little  of  our  time  was,  however,  given
during  our  stay  in  the  camp  to  military  drill  and
manoeuvres.  A  good  deal  of  it  was  given  to  practical
exercises  in  surveys  and  fortification.  After  a  few  pre-
liminary exercises  we  were  given  a  reflecting  compass
and  told :  '  Go  and  make  a  plan  of,  say,  this  lake  or
those  roads,  or  that  park,  measuring  the  angles  with  the
compass  and  the  distances  with  your  pace.'  And  early
in  the  morning,  after  a  hurriedly  swallowed  breakfast,
the  boy  would  fill  his  spacious  military  pockets  with
slices  of  rye  bread,  and  would  go  out  for  four  or  five
hours  every  day  in  the  parks,  miles  away,  mapping  with
his  compass  and  paces  the  beautiful  shady  roads,  the
rivulets,  and  the  lakes.  His  work  was  later  on  com-
pared with  accurate  maps,  and  prizes  in  optical  and
drawing  instruments  at  the  boy's  choice  were  awarded.
For  me  these  surveys  were  a  deep  source  of  enjoyment.
That  independent  work,  that  isolation  under  the  cen-
turies-old trees,  that  life  of  the  forest  which  I  could
enjoy  undisturbed,  while  there  was  at  the  same  time  the
interest  in  the  work — all  these  left  deep  traces  in  my
mind  ;  and  if  I  later  on  became  an  explorer  of  Siberia
and  several  of  my  comrades  became  explorers  in
Central  Asia,  the  ground  for  it  was  prepared  in  these
surveys.

And  finally,  in  the  last  form,  parties  of  four  boys
were  taken  every  second  day  to  some  villages  at  a  con-
siderable distance  from  the  camp,  and  there  they  had  to
make  a  detailed  survey  of  several  square  miles  with  the
aid  of  the  surveyor's  table  and  a  telescopic  ruler.
Officers  of  the  General  Staff  came  from  time  to  time  to
verify  their  work  and  to  advise  them.  This  life  amidst


THE  COUPS  OF  PAGES  145

the  peasants  in  the  villages  had  the  best  effect  upon  the
intellectual  and  moral  development  of  many  boys.

At  the  same  time,  exercises  were  made  in  the  con-
struction of  natural  sized  cross-sections  of  fortifications.
We  were  taken  out  by  an  officer  in  the  open  field,  and
there  we  had  to  make  the  cross-sections  of  a  bastion,  or
of  a  bridge  head,  nailing  poles  and  battens  together  in
exactly  the  same  way  as  railway  engineers  do  in  tracing
a  railway.  When  it  came  to  embrasures  and  barbettes,
we  had  to  calculate  a  great  deal  to  obtain  the  inclina-
tions of  the  different  planes,  and  after  that  geometry  in
the  space  ceased  to  be  difficult  to  understand.

We  delightei  in  such  work,  and  once,  in  town,  find-
ing in  our  garden  a  heap  of  clay  and  gravel,  we  at  once
began  to  build  a  real  fortification  on  a  reduced  scale,
with  well  calculated  straight  and  oblique  embrasures
and  barbettes.  All  was  done  very  neatly,  and  our  am-
bition now  was  to  obtain  some  planks  for  making  the
platforms  for  the  guns,  and  to  place  upon  them  the
model  guns  which  we  had  in  our  class-rooms.

But,  alas,  our  trousers  wore  an  alarming  aspect.
'  What  are  you  doing  there  ?  '  our  captain  exclaimed.
'  Look  at  yourselves  !  You  look  like  navvies '  (that  was
exactly  what  we  were  proud  of).  '  What  if  the  Grand
Duke  comes  and  finds  you  in  such  a  state  ! '

'  We  will  show  him  our  fortifications  and  ask
him  to  get  us  tools  and  boards  for  the  platforms.'

All  protests  were  vain.  A  dozen  workers  were  sent
next  day  to  cart  away  our  beautiful  work,  as  if  it  were  a
mere  heap  of  mud !

I  mention  this  to  show  how  children  and  youths
long  for  real  applications  of  what  they  learn  at  school

VOL.  I.  L


146  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

in  abstract,  and  how  stupid  are  the  educators  who  are
unable  to  see  what  a  powerful  aid  they  could  find  in
concrete  applications  for  helping  their  pupils  to  grasp
the  real  sense  of  the  things  they  learn.

In  our  school  all  was  directed  towards  training  us
for  warfare.  But  we  should  have  worked  with  the  same
enthusiasm  at  tracing  a  railway,  at  building  a  log-house,
or  at  cultivating  a  garden  or  a  field.  But  all  this  long-
ing of  the  children  and  youths  for  real  work  is  wasted
simply  because  our  idea  of  the  school  is  still  the  mediae-
val scholasticism,  the  mediseval  monastery  !


VIII

THE  years  1857-61  were  years  of  rich  growth  in  the
intellectual  forces  of  Russia.  All  that  had  been  whis-
pered for  the  last  decade,  in  the  secrecy  of  friendly
meetings,  by  the  generation  represented  in  Russian
literature  by  Turgueneff,  Tolstoy,  Herzen,  Bakunin,
Ogary6£f,  Ravelin,  Dostoevsky,  Grigorovich,  Ostrovsky,
and  Nekrasoff,  began  now  to  leak  out  in  the  press.
Censorship  was  still  very  rigorous  ;  but  what  could  not
be  said  openly  in  political  articles  was  smuggled  in  under
the  form  of  novels,  humorous  sketches,  or  veiled  com-
ments on  West  European  events,  and  everyone  read
between  the  lines  and  understood.

Having  no  acquaintances  at  St.  Petersburg  apart
from  the  school  and  a  narrow  circle  of  relatives,  I  stood
outside  the  radical  movement  of  those  years — miles,


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  147

in  fact,  away  from  it.  And  yet  this  was,  perhaps,  the
main  feature  of  the  movement — that  it  had  the  power
to  penetrate  into  so  '  well  meaning '  a  school  as  our
corps  was,  and  to  find  an  echo  in  such  a  circle  as  that
of  my  Moscow  relatives.

I  used  at  that  time  to  spend  my  Sundays  and  holi-
days at  the  house  of  my  aunt,  mentioned  in  a  previous
chapter  under  the  name  of  Princess  Mirski.  Prince
Mirski  thought  only  of  extraordinary  lunches  and
dinners,  while  his  wife  and  their  young  daughter  led  a
very  gay  life.  My  cousin  was  a  beautiful  girl  of  nine-
teen, of  a  most  amiable  disposition,  and  nearly  all  her
male  cousins  were  madly  in  love  with  her.  She,  in  turn,
fell  in  love  with  one  of  them,  and  wanted  to  marry
him.  But  to  marry  a  cousin  is  considered  a  great  sin
by  the  Russian  Church,  and  the  old  princess  tried  in
vain  to  obtain  a  special  permission  from  the  high  eccle-
siastical dignitaries.  Now  she  brought  her  daughter  to
St.  Petersburg,  hoping  that  she  might  choose  among
her  many  admirers  a  more  suitable  husband  than  her
own  cousin.  It  was  labour  lost,  I  must  add ;  but  their
fashionable  apartment  was  full  of  brilliant  young  men
from  the  Guards  and  from  the  diplomatic  service.

Such  a  house  would  be  the  last  to  be  thought  of  in
connection  with  revolutionary  ideas  ;  and  yet  it  was  in
that  house  that  I  made  my  first  acquaintance  with  the
revolutionary  literature  of  the  times.  The  great  refugee,
Herzen,  had  just  begun  to  issue  at  London  his  review,
'  The  Polar  Star,'  which  made  a  commotion  in  Russia,
even  in  the  palace  circles,  and  was  widely  circulated
secretly  at  St.  Petersburg.  My  cousin  got  it  in  some
way,  and  we  used  to  read  it  together.  Her  heart

L 2


148  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

revolted  against  the  obstacles  which  were  put  in  the  way
of  her  happiness,  and  her  mind  was  the  more  open  to
the  powerful  criticisms  which  the  great  writer  launched
against  the  Kussian  autocracy  and  all  the  rotten  system
of  misgovernment.  "With  a  feeling  near  to  worship  I
used  to  look  on  the  medallion  which  was  printed  on  the
paper  cover  of  '  The  Polar  Star,'  and  which  represented
the  noble  heads  of  the  five  '  Decembrists  '  whom
Nicholas  I.  had  hanged  after  the  rebellion  of  Decem-
ber 14,  1825— Bestuzheff,  Kahovskiy,  Pestel,  Ryleeff,
and  Muraviov-Apostol.

The  beauty  of  the  style  of  Herzen — of  whom
Turgueneff  has  truly  said  that  he  wrote  in  tears  and
blood,  and  that  no  other  Russian  had  ever  so  written—
the  breadth  of  his  ideas,  and  his  deep  love  of  Russia
took  possession  of  me,  and  I  used  to  read  and  re-read
those  pages,  even  more  full  of  heart  than  of  brain.

In  1859,  or  early  in  1860,  I  began  to  edit  my  first
revolutionary  paper.  At  that  age,  what  could  I  be  but
a  constitutionalist? — and  my  paper  advocated  the
necessity  of  a  constitution  for  Russia.  I  wrote  about
the  foolish  expenses  of  the  Court,  the  sums  of  money
which  were  spent  at  Nice  to  keep  quite  a  squadron  of
the  navy  in  attendance  on  the  dowager  Empress,  who
died  in  1860 ;  I  mentioned  the  misdeeds  of  the  func-
tionaries which  I  continually  heard  spoken  of,  and  I
urged  the  necessity  of  constitutional  rule.  I  wrote
three  copies  of  my  paper,  and  slipped  them  into  the
desks  of  three  comrades  of  the  higher  forms,  who,  I
thought,  might  be  interested  in  public  affairs.  I  asked
my  readers  to  put  their  remarks  behind  the  Scotch
grandfather  clock  in  our  library.


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  149

With  a  throbbing  heart,  I  went  next  day  to  see  if
there  was  something  for  me  behind  the  clock.  Two
notes  were  there,  indeed.  Two  comrades  wrote  that
they  fully  sympathized  with  my  paper,  and  only
advised  me  not  to  risk  too  much.  I  wrote  my  second
number,  still  more  vigorously  insisting  upon  the
necessity  of  uniting  all  forces  in  the  name  of  liberty.
But  this  time  there  was  no  reply  behind  the  clock.
Instead  the  two  comrades  came  to  me.

'  We  are  sure/  they  said,  '  that  it  is  you  who  edit
the  paper,  and  we  want  to  talk  about  it.  We  are
quite  agreed  with  you,  and  we  are  here  to  say,  "  Let  us
be  friends."  Your  paper  has  done  its  work — it  has
brought  us  together  ;  but  there  is  no  need  to  continue
it.  In  all  the  school  there  are  only  two  more  who
would  take  any  interest  in  such  matters,  while  if  it
becomes  known  that  there  is  a  paper  of  this  kind  the
consequences  will  be  terrible  for  all  of  us.  Let  us  con-
stitute a  circle  and  talk  about  everything ;  perhaps
we  shall  put  something  into  the  heads  of  a  few  others.'

This  was  so  sensible  that  I  could  only  agree,  and
we  sealed  our  union  by  a  hearty  shaking  of  hands.
From  that  time  we  three  became  firm  friends,  and
used  to  read  a  great  deal  together  and  discuss  all  sorts
of  things.

The  abolition  of  serfdom  was  the  question  which
then  engrossed  the  attention  of  all  thinking  men.

The  Revolution  of  1848  had  had  its  distinct  echo  in
the  hearts  of  the  Russian  peasant  folk,  and  from  the
year  1850  the  insurrections  of  revolted  serfs  began  to
take  serious  proportions.  When  the  Crimean  war


1£0  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

broke  out,  and  militia  was  levied  all  over  Russia,  these
revolts  spread  with  a  violence  never  before  heard  of.
Several  serf-owners  were  killed  by  their  serfs,  and  the
peasant  uprisings  became  so  serious  that  whole
regiments,  with  artillery,  were  sent  to  quell  them,
whereas  in  former  times  small  detachments  of
soldiers  would  have  been  sufficient  to  terrorize  the
peasants  into  obedience.

These  outbreaks  on  the  one  side,  and  the  profound
aversion  to  serfdom  which  had  grown  up  in  the
generation  which  came  to  the  front  with  the  advent  of
Alexander  II.  to  the  throne,  rendered  the  emancipation
of  the  peasants  more  and  more  imperative.  The
emperor,  himself  averse  to  serfdom,  and  supported,  or
rather  influenced,  in  his  own  family  by  his  wife,  his
brother  Constantine,  and  the  grand  duchess  Helene
Pdvlovna,  took  the  first  steps  in  that  direction.  His
intention  was  that  the  initiative  of  the  reform  should
come  from  the  nobility,  the  serf -owners  themselves.
But  in  no  province  of  Eussia  could  the  nobility  be
induced  to  send  a  petition  to  the  Tsar  to  that  effect.
In  March  1856  he  himself  addressed  the  Moscow
nobility  on  the  necessity  of  such  a  step ;  but  a  stubborn
silence  was  all  their  reply  to  his  speech,  so  that
Alexander  II.,  growing  quite  angry,  concluded  with
those  memorable  words  of  Herzen :  'It  is  better,
gentlemen,  that  it  should  come  from  above  than  to
wait  till  it  comes  from  beneath.'  Even  these  words
had  no  effect,  and  it  was  to  the  provinces  of  Old  Poland
—Grodno,  Wilno,  and  K6vno — where  Napoleon  I.  had
abolished  serfdom  (on  paper)  in  1812,  that  recourse
was  had.  The  Governor-General  of  those  provinces,


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  151

Nazimoff,  managed  to  obtain  the  desired  address  from
the  Polish  nobility.  In  November  1857  the  famous
'  rescript '  to  the  Governor-General  of  the  Lithuanian
provinces,  announcing  the  intention  of  the  emperor  to
abolish  serfdom,  was  launched,  and  we  read,  with  tears
in  our  eyes,  the  beautiful  article  of  Herzen,  '  Thou
hast  conquered,  Galilean,'  in  which  the  refugees  in
London  declared  that  they  would  no  more  look  upon
Alexander  II.  as  an  enemy,  but  would  support  him  in
the  great  work  of  emancipation.

The  attitude  of  the  peasants  was  very  remarkable.
No  sooner  had  the  news  spread  that  the  liberation
long  sighed  for  was  coming  than  the  insurrections
nearly  stopped.  The  peasants  waited  now,  and  during
a  journey  which  Alexander  made  in  Middle  Russia  they
flocked  around  him  as  he  passed,  beseeching  him  to
grant  them  liberty — a  petition,  however,  which
Alexander  received  with  great  repugnance.  It  is  most
remarkable — so  strong  is  the  force  of  tradition — that
the  rumour  went  among  the  peasants  that  it  was
Napoleon  III.  who  had  required  of  the  Tsar,  in  the
treaty  of  peace,  that  the  peasants  should  be  freed.  I
frequently  heard  this  rumour ;  and  on  the  very  eve  of
the  emancipation  they  seemed  to  doubt  that  it  would
be  done  without  pressure  from  abroad.  'Nothing  will
be  done  unless  Garibaldi  comes,'  was  the  reply  which  a
peasant  made  at  St.  Petersburg  to  a  comrade  of  mine
who  talked  to  him  about  '  freedom  coming.'

But  after  these  moments  of  general  rejoicing
years  of  incertitude  and  disquiet  followed.  Specially
appointed  committees  in  the  provinces  and  at  St.
Petersburg  discussed  the  proposed  liberation  of  the


152  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

serfs,  but  the  intentions  of  Alexander  II.  seemed
unsettled.  A  check  was  continually  put  upon  the
press,  in  order  to  prevent  it  from  discussing  details.
Sinister  rumours  circulated  at  St.  Petersburg  and
reached  our  corps.

There  was  no  lack  of  young  men  amongst  the
nobility  who  earnestly  worked  for  a  frank  abolition  of
the  old  servitude ;  but  the  serfdom  party  drew  closer
and  closer  round  the  emperor,  and  got  power  over  his
mind.  They  whispered  into  his  ears  that  the  day
serfdom  was  abolished  the  peasants  would  begin  to  kill
the  landlords  wholesale,  and  Russia  would  witness  a  new
Pugachoff  uprising,  far  more  terrible  than  that  of  1773.
Alexander,  who  was  a  man  of  weak  character,  only  too
readily  lent  his  ear  to  such  predictions.  But  the  huge
machine  for  working  out  the  emancipation  law  had
been  set  to  work.  The  committees  had  their  sittings  ;
scores  of  schemes  of  emancipation,  addressed  to  the
emperor,  circulated  in  manuscript  or  were  printed  in
London.  Herzen,  seconded  by  Turgueneff,  who  kept
him  well  informed  about  all  that  was  going  on  in
government  circles,  discussed  in  his  '  Bell '  and  his
'  Polar  Star '  the  details  of  the  various  schemes,  and
Chernyshevsky  in  the  '  Contemporary '  (Sovremennik) .
The  Slavophiles,  especially  Aksakoff  and  Belyaeff,  had
taken  advantage  of  the  first  moments  of  relative  freedom
allowed  the  press,  to  give  the  matter  a  wide  publicity  in
Eussia,  and  to  discuss  the  features  of  the  emancipation
with  a  thorough  understanding  of  its  technical  aspects.
All  intellectual  St.  Petersburg  was  with  Herzen,  and
particularly  with  Chernyshe'vsky,  and  I  remember  how
the  officers  of  the  Horse  Guards,  whom  I  saw  on


THE  COEPS OF  PAGES  153

Sundays,  after  the  church  parade,  at  the  home  of  my
cousin  (Dmitri  Nikolaevich  Kropotkin,  who  was  aide-
de-camp  of  that  regiment  and  aide-de-camp  of  the
emperor),  used  to  side  with  Chernyshevsky,  the  leader
of  the  advanced  party  in  the  emancipation  struggle.
The  whole  disposition  of  St.  Petersburg,  in  the
drawing-rooms  and  in  the  street,  was  such  that  it  was
impossible  to  go  back.  The  liberation  of  the  serfs  had
to  be  accomplished  ;  and  another  important  point  was
won — the  liberated  serfs  would  receive,  besides  their
homesteads,  the  land  that  they  had  hitherto  cultivated
for  themselves.

However,  the  party  of  the  old  nobility  were  not
discouraged.  They  centred  their  efforts  on  obtaining  a
postponement  of  the  reform,  on  reducing  the  size  of
the  allotments,  and  on  imposing  upon  the  emancipated
serfs  .so  high  a  redemption  tax  for  the  land  that  it
would  render  their  economical  freedom  illusory;  and
in  this  they  fully  succeeded.  Alexander  II.  dismissed
the  real  soul  ot  the  whole  business,  Nikolai  Milutin
(brother  of  the  minister  of  war),  saying  to  him,  'I  am
so  sorry  to  part  with  you,  but  I  must :  the  nobility
describe  you  as  one  of  the  Reds.'  The  first  committees,
which  had  worked  out  the  scheme  of  emancipation,
were  dismissed,  too,  and  new  committees  revised  the
whole  work  in  the  interest  of  the  serf -owners ;  the
press  was  muzzled  once  more.

Things  assumed  a  very  gloomy  aspect.  The  ques-
tion whether  the  liberation  would  take  place  at  all  was
now  asked.  I  feverishly  followed  the  struggle,  and
every  Sunday,  when  my  comrades  returned  from  their
homes,  I  asked  them  what  their  parents  said.  By  the


164  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

end  of  1860  the  news  became  worse  and  worse.  '  The
Valueff  party  has  got  the  upper  hand.'  '  They  intend
to  revise  the  whole  work.'  '  The  relatives  of  the
Princess  X.  [a  friend  of  the  Tsar]  work  hard  upon
him.'  '  The  liberation  will  be  postponed  :  they  fear  a
revolution.'

In  January  1861  slightly  better  rumours  began  to
circulate,  and  it  was  generally  hoped  that  something
would  be  heard  of  the  emancipation  on  the  day  of  the
emperor's  accession  to  the  throne,  February  19.

The  19th  came,  but  it  brought  nothing  with  it.
I  was  on  that  day  at  the  palace.  There  was  no  grand
levee,  only  a  small  one ;  and  pages  of  the  second  form
were  sent  to  such  levees  in  order  to  get  accustomed  to
the  palace  ways.  It  was  my  turn  that  day ;  and  as  I
was  seeing  off  one  of  the  grand  duchesses  who  came  to
the  palace  to  assist  at  the  Mass,  her  husband  did  not
appear  and  I  went  to  fetch  him.  He  was  called  out
of  the  emperor's  study,  and  I  told  him,  in  a  half  jocose
way,  of  the  perplexity  of  his  wife,  without  having  the
slightest  suspicion  of  the  important  matters  that  may
have  been  talked  of  in  the  study  at  that  time.  Apart
from  a  few  of  the  initiated,  no  one  in  the  palace  sus-
pected that  the  manifesto  had  been  signed  on  February
19,  and  was  kept  back  for  a  fortnight  only  because
the  next  Sunday,  the  26th,  was  the  beginning  of  the
carnival  week,  and  it  was  feared  that,  owing  to  the
drinking  which  goes  on  in  the  villages  during  the
carnival,  peasant  insurrections  might  break  out.  Even
the  carnival  fair,  which  used  to  be  held  at  St.  Peters-
burg on  the  square  near  the  winter  palace,  was


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  165

removed  that  year  to  another  square,  from  fear  of  a
popular  insurrection  in  the  capital.  Most  sanguinary
instructions  had  been  issued  to  the  army  as  to  the
ways  of  repressing  peasant  uprisings.

A  fortnight  later,  on  the  last  Sunday  of  the  carnival
(March  5,  or  rather  March  17,  new  style),  I  was  at  the
corps,  having  to  take  part  in  the  military  parade  at  the
riding-school.  I  was  still  in  bed,  when  my  soldier
servant,  Ivanoff,  dashed  in  with  the  tea  tray,  exclaim-
ing, 'Prince,  freedom!  The  manifesto  is  posted  on
the  Gostinoi  Dvor  '  (the  shops  opposite  the  corps).

'  Did  you  see  it  yourself  ?  '

'Yes.  People  stand  round;  one  reads,  the  others
listen.  It  is  freedom  ! '

In  a  couple  of  minutes  I  was  dressed  and  out.  A
comrade  was  coming  in.

'  Krop6tkin,  freedom  ! '  he  shouted.  '  Here  is  the
manifesto.  My  uncle  learned  last  night  that  it  would
be  read  at  the  early  Mass  at  the  Isaac  Cathedral ;  so
we  went.  There  were  not  many  people  there  ;  peasants
only.  The  manifesto  was  read  and  distributed  after
the  Mass.  They  well  understood  what  it  meant :
when  I  came  out  of  the  church,  two  peasants,  who
stood  in  the  gateway,  said  to  me  in  such  a  droll  way,
"Well,  sir?  now — all  gone?"  'And  he  mimicked
how  they  had  shown  him  the  way  out.  Years  of
expectation  were  in  that  gesture  of  sending  away  the
master.

I  read  and  re-read  the  manifesto.  It  was  written
in  an  elevated  style  by  the  old  metropolitan  of  Moscow,
Philarete,  but  with  a  useless  mixture  of  Eussian  and
old  Slavonian  which  obscured  the  sense.  It  was


166  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

liberty ;  but  it  was  not  liberty  yet,  the  peasants  having
to  remain  serfs  for  two  years  more,  till  February  19,
1863.  Notwithstanding  all  this,  one  thing  was  evident :
serfdom  was  abolished,  and  the  liberated  serfs  would
get  the  land  and  their  homesteads.  They  would  have
to  pay  for  it,  but  the  old  stain  of  slavery  was  removed.
They  would  be  slaves  no  more ;  the  reaction  had  not
got  the  upper  hand.

We  went  to  the  parade ;  and  when  all  the  military
performances  were  over,  Alexander  II.,  remaining  on
horseback,  loudly  called  out,  '  The  officers  to  me ! '
They  gathered  round  him,  and  he  began,  in  a  loud
voice,  a  speech  about  the  great  event  of  the  day.

'  The  officers  .  .  .  the  representatives  of  the  nobility
in  the  army ' — these  scraps  of  sentences  reached  our
ears — 'an  end  has  been  put  to  centuries  of  injustice
....  I  expect  sacrifices  from  the  nobility  .  .  .  the
loyal  nobility  will  gather  round  the  throne '  .  .  .  and
so  on.  Enthusiastic  hurrahs  resounded  amongst  the
officers  as  he  ended.

We  ran  rather  than  marched  back  on  our  way  to
the  corps — hurrying  to  be  in  time  for  the  Italian
opera,  of  which  the  last  performance  in  the  season
was  to  be  given  that  afternoon;  some  manifestation
was  sure  to  take  place  then.  Our  military  attire  was
flung  off  with  great  haste,  and  several  of  us  dashed,
lightfooted,  to  the  sixth-story  gallery.  The  house  was
crowded.

During  the  first  entr'acte  the  smoking  room  of  the
opera  filled  with  excited  young  men,  who  all  talked  to
one  another,  whether  acquainted  or  not.  We  planned
at  once  to  return  to  the  hall,  and  to  sing,  with  the


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  157

whole  public  in  a  mass  choir,  the  hymn  '  God  Save
the  Tsar.'

However,  sounds  of  music  reached  our  ears,  and
we  all  hurried  back  to  the  hall.  The  band  of  the  opera
was  already  playing  the  hymn,  which  was  drowned
immediately  in  enthusiastic  hurrahs  coming  from  the
galleries,  the  boxes,  the  pit.  I  saw  Baveri,  the  conduc-
tor, waving  his  stick,  but  not  a  sound  could  be  heard
from  the  powerful  band.  Then  Baveri  stopped,  but
the  hurrahs  continued.  I  saw  the  stick  waved  again
in  the  air ;  I  saw  the  fiddle  bows  moving  and  musicians
blowing  the  brass  instruments,  but  again  the  sound  of
voices  overwhelmed  the  band.  Baveri  began  conduct-
ing the  hymn  once  more,  and  it  was  only  by  the  end
of  that  third  repetition  that  isolated  sounds  of  the
brass  instruments  pierced  through  the  clamour  of
human  voices.

The  same  enthusiasm  was  in  the  streets.  Crowds
of  peasants  and  educated  men  stood  in  front  of  the
palace,  shouting  hurrahs,  and  the  Tsar  could  not  appeal-
without  being  followed  by  demonstrative  crowds  run-
ning after  his  carriage.  Herzen  was  right  when,  two
years  later,  as  Alexander  was  drowning  the  Polish
insurrection  in  blood,  and  '  Muravioff  the  Hanger '
was  strangling  it  on  the  scaffold,  he  wrote,  '  Alexander
Nikolaevich,  why  did  you  not  die  on  that  day  ?  Your
name  would  have  been  transmitted  in  history  as  that
of  a  hero.'

Where  were  the  uprisings  which  had  been  predicted
by  the  champions  of  slavery?  Conditions  more  in-
definite than  those  which  had  been  created  by  the


168  MEMOIRS  OF A  REVOLUTIONIST

Polozh6nie  (the  emancipation  law)  could  not  have  been
invented. If  anything  could  have  provoked  revolts,  it
was  precisely  the  perplexing  vagueness  of  the  condi-
tions created  by  the  new  law. And  yet — except  in  two
places  where  there  were  insurrections,  and  a  very  few
other  spots  where  small  disturbances,  entirely  due  to
misunderstandings and immediately appeased, took
place — Russia  remained  quiet,  more  quiet than  ever.
With  their  usual  good  sense,  the  peasants  had  under-
stood that  serfdom  was  done  away  with,  that  '  freedom
had  come,'  and  they  accepted  the  conditions  imposed
upon  them,  although  these  conditions  were  very  heavy.
I  was  in  Nik61skoye  in  August  1861,  and  again  in
the  summer  of  1862,  and  I  was  struck  with  the  quiet
intelligent  way  in  which  the  peasants  had  accepted  the
new  conditions. They  knew  perfectly  well  how  difficult
it  would  be  to  pay  the  redemption  tax  for  the  land,
which  was  in  reality  an  indemnity  to  the  nobles  in  lieu
of  the  obligations  of  serfdom. But  they  so  much  valued
the  abolition  of  their  personal  enslavement  that  they
accepted  the  ruinous  charges — not  without  murmuring,
but as a hard  necessity — the  moment  that  personal
freedom  was  obtained. For  the  first  months  they  kept
two  holidays  a  week,  saying  that  it  was  a  sin  to  work
on  Friday  ;  but  when  the  summer  came  they  resumed
work  with  even  more  energy  than  before.

When  I  saw  our  Nik61skoye  peasants,  fifteen  months
after  the  liberation,  I  could  not  but  admire  them.
Their  inborn  good  nature  and  softness  remained  with
them,  but  all  traces  of  servility  had  disappeared.  They
talked  to  their  masters  as  equals  talk  to  equals,  as  if
they  never  had  stood  in  different  relations.  Besides,


THE CORPS OF  PAGES  150

such  men  came  out  from  among  them  as  could  make  a
stand  for  their  rights.  The  Polozhenie  was  a  large  and
difficult  book,  which  it  took  me  a  good  deal  of  time  to
understand ;  but  when  Vasili  Ivanoff,  the  elder  of  Nikols-
koye,  came  one  day  to  ask  me  to  explain  to  him  some
obscurity  in  it,  I  saw  that  he,  who  was  not  even  a  fluent
reader,  had  admirably  found  his  way  amongst  the  in-
tricacies of  the  chapters  and  paragraphs  of  the  law.

The  '  household  people  ' — that  is,  the  servants —
came  out  the  worst  of  all.  They  got  no  land,  and
would  hardly  have  known  what  to  do  with  it  if  they
had.  They  got  freedom,  and  nothing  besides.  In  our
neighbourhood  nearly  all  of  them  left  their  masters  ;
none,  for  example,  remained  in  the  household  of  my
father.  They  went  in  search  of  positions  elsewhere,  and
a  number  of  them  found  employment  at  once  with  the
merchant  class,  who  were  proud  of  having  the  coachman
of  Prince  So-and-So,  or  the  cook  of  General  So-and-So.
Those  who  knew  a  trade  found  work  in  the  towns  :  for
instance,  my  father's  band  remained  a  band,  and  made
a  good  living  at  Kaluga,  retaining  amiable  relations  with
us.  But  those  who  had  no  trade  had  hard  times  before
them,  and  yet  the  majority  preferred  to  live  anyhow
rather  than  remain  with  their  old  masters.

As  to  the  landlords,  while  the  larger  ones  made  all
possible  efforts  at  St.  Petersburg  to  re-introduce  the  old
conditions  under  one  name  or  another  (they  succeeded
in  doing  so  to  some  extent  under  Alexander  III.),  by  far
the  greater  number  submitted  to  the  abolition  of  serfdom
as  to  a  sort  of  necessary  calamity.  The  young  genera-
tion gave  to  Kussia  that  remarkable  staff  of  '  peace
mediators  '  and  justices  of  the  peace  who  contributed  so>


160  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

much  to  the  peaceful  issue  of  the  emancipation.  As  to
the  old  generation,  most  of  them  had  already  discounted
the  considerable  sums  of  money  they  were  to  receive
from  the  peasants  for  the  land  which  was  granted  to  the
liberated  serfs,  and  which  was  valued  much  above  its
market  price  ;  they  schemed  as  to  how  they  would
squander  that  money  in  the  restaurants  of  the  capitals,
or  at  the  green  tables  in  gambling.  And  they  did
squander  it,  almost  all  of  them,  as  soon  as  they  got  it.

For  many  landlords  the  liberation  of  the  serfs  was
an  excellent  money  transaction.  Thus,  land  which  my
father,  in  anticipation  of  the  emancipation,  sold  in
parcels  at  the  rate  of  eleven  roubles  the  Eussian  acre,
was  now  estimated  at  forty  roubles  in  the  peasants'
allotments — that  is,  three  and  a  half  times  above  its
market  value — and  this  was  the  rule  in  all  our  neigh-
bourhood ;  while  in  my  father's  Tambov  estate,  on  the
prairies,  the  mir — that  is,  the  village  community —
rented  all  his  land  for  twelve  years  at  a  price  which
represented  twice  as  much  as  he  used  to  get  from  that
land  by  cultivating  it  with  servile  labour.

Eleven  years  after  that  memorable  time  I  went  to
the  Tambov  estate,  which  I  had  inherited  from  my
father.  I  stayed  there  for  a  few  weeks,  and  on  the
evening  of  my  departure  our  village  priest — an  intelli-
gent man  of  independent  opinions,  such  as  one  meets
occasionally  in  our  southern  provinces — went  out  for  a
walk  round  the  village.  The  sunset  was  glorious ;  a
balmy  air  came  from  the  prairies.  He  found  a  middle-
aged  peasant — Anton  Savelieff — sitting  on  a  small
•eminence  outside  the  village  and  reading  a  book  of


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  161

psalms.  The  peasant  hardly  knew  how  to  spell  in  Old
Slavonic,  and  often  he  would  read  a  book  from  the  last
page,  turning  the  pages  backward  ;  it  was  the  process
of  reading  which  he  liked  most,  and  then  a  word  would
strike  him,  and  its  repetition  pleased  him.  He  was
reading  now  a  psalm  of  which  each  verse  began  with
the  word  '  rejoice.'

'  What  are  you  reading  ?  '  he  was  asked.

'  Well,  father,  I  will  tell  you,'  was  his  reply.  *  Four-
teen years  ago  the  old  prince  came  here.  It  was  in  the
winter.  I  had  just  returned  home,  quite  frozen.  A
snowstorm  was  raging.  I  had  scarcely  begun  undress-
ing when  we  heard  a  knock  at  the  window  :  it  was  the
elder,  who  was  shouting,  "  Go  to  the  prince !  He  wants
you  !  "  We  all — my  wife  and  our  children — were
thunderstricken.  "What  can  he  want  of  you?"  my
wife  cried  in  alarm.  I  signed  myself  with  the  cross  and
went ;  the  snowstorm  almost  blinded  me  as  I  crossed
the  bridge.  Well,  it  ended  all  right.  The  old  prince
was  taking  his'afternoon  sleep,  and  when  he  woke  up
he  asked  me  if  I  knew  plastering  work,  and  only  told
me,  "  Come  to-morrow  to  repair  the  plaster  in  that
room."  So  I  went  home  quite  happy,  and  when  I
came  to  the  bridge  I  found  my  wife  standing  there.
She  had  stood  there  all  the  time  in  the  snowstorm,  with
the  baby  in  her  arms,  waiting  for  me.  "  What  has
happened,  Savelich  ?  "  she  cried.  "  Well,"  I  said,  "no
harm  ;  he  only  asked  me  to  make  some  repairs."  That,
father,  was  under  the  old  prince.  And  now,  the  young
prince  came  here  the  other  day.  I  went  to  see  him,
and  found  him  in  the  garden,  at  the  tea  table,  in  the
shadow  of  the  house ;  you,  father,  sat  with  him,  and

VOL.  I.  M


162  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

the  elder  of  the  canton,  with  his  mayor's  chain  upon
his  breast.  "  Will  you  have  tea,  Savelich  ?  "  he  asks
me.  "  Take  a  chair.  Petr  Grig6rieff  " — he  says  that  to
the  old  one — "  give  us  one  more  chair."  And  Petr
Grig6rieff — you  know  what  a  terror  for  us  he  was  when
he  was  the  manager  of  the  old  prince — brought  the
chair,  and  we  all  sat  round  the  tea  table,  talking,  and
he  poured  out  tea  for  all  of  us.  Well,  now,  father,
the  evening  is  so  beautiful,  the  balm  comes  from  the
prairies,  and  I  sit  and  read,  "  Bejoice  !  Eejoice  !  "

This  is  what  the  abolition  of  serfdom  meant  for  the
peasants.


IX

IN  June  1861  I  was  nominated  sergeant  of  the  Corps
of  Pages.  Some  of  our  officers,  I  must  say,  did  not  like
the  idea  of  it,  saying  that  there  would  be  no  discipline
with  me  acting  as  a  sergeant,  but  it  could  not  be
helped ;  it  was  usually  the  first  pupil  of  the  upper
form  who  was  nominated  sergeant,  and  I  had  been  at
the  top  of  our  form  for  several  years  in  succession.
This  appointment  was  considered  very  enviable,  not
only  because  the  sergeant  occupied  a  privileged  posi-
tion in  the  school  and  was  treated  like  an  officer,  but
especially  because  he  was  also  the  page  de  chambre  of
the  emperor  for  the  time  being  ;  and  to  be  personally
known  to  the  emperor  was  of  course  considered  as  a
stepping-stone  to  further  distinctions.  The  most
important  point  to  me  was,  however,  that  it  freed  me


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  163

from  all  the  drudgery  of  the  inner  service  of  the
school,  which  fell  on  the  pages  de  chambre,  and  that  I
should  have  for  my  studies  a  separate  room  where  I
could  isolate  myself  from  the  bustle  of  the  school.
True,  there  was  also  an  important  drawback  to  it  :  I
had  always  found  it  tedious  to  pace  up  and  down,
many  times  a  day,  the  whole  length  of  our  rooms,  and
used  therefore  to  run  the  distance  full  speed,  which
was  severely  prohibited ;  and  now  I  should  have  to
walk  very  solemnly,  with  the  service  book  under  my
arm,  instead  of  running !  A  consultation  was  even
held  among  a  few  friends  of  mine  upon  this  serious
matter,  and  it  was  decided  that  from  time  to  time  I
could  still  find  opportunities  to  take  my  favourite  runs  ;
as  to  my  relations  with  all  the  others,  it  depended
upon  myself  to  put  them  on  a  new  comrade-like
footing,  and  this  I  did.

The  pages  de  chambre  had  to  be  at  the  palace
frequently,  in  attendance  at  the  great  and  small  levees,
the  balls,  the  deceptions,  the  gala  dinners,  and  so  on.
During  Christmas,  New  Year,  and  Easter  weeks  we
were  summoned  to  the  palace  almost  every  day,  and
sometimes  twice  a  day.  Moreover,  in  my  military
capacity  of  sergeant  I  had  to  report  to  the  emperor  every
Sunday,  at  the  parade  in  the  riding-school,  that  '  all
was  well  at  the  company  of  the  Corps  of  Pages,'  even
when  one-third  of  the  school  was  ill  of  some  contagious
disease.  '  Shall  I  not  report  to-day  that  all  is  not
quite  well?'  I  asked  the  colonel  on  this  occasion.
1  God  bless  you,'  was  his  reply,  'you  ought  only  to  say
so  if  there  were  an  insurrection  ! '

Court  life  has  undoubtedly  much  that  is  picturesque

H 2


164  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

about  it.  With  its  elegant  refinement  of  manners-
superficial  though  it  may  be — its  strict  etiquette,  and
its  brilliant  surroundings,  it  is  certainly  meant  to  be
impressive.  A  great  levee  is  a  fine  pageant,  and  even
the  simple  reception  of  a  few  ladies  by  the  empress
becomes  quite  different  from  a  common  call  when  it
takes  place  in  a  richly  decorated  drawing-room  of  the
palace  — the  guests  ushered  by  chamberlains  in  gold-
embroidered  uniforms,  the  hostess  followed  by
brilliantly  dressed  pages  and  a  suite  of  ladies,  and  every-
thing conducted  with  striking  solemnity.  To  be  an
actor  in  the  Court  ceremonies,  in  attendance  upon  the
chief  personages,  offered  something  more  than  the
mere  interest  of  curiosity  for  a  boy  of  my  age.  Besides,
I  then  looked  upon  Alexander  II.  as  a  sort  of  hero ;
a  man  wrho  attached  no  importance  to  the  Court  cere-
monies, but  who,  at  this  period  of  his  reign,  began  his
working  day  at  six  in  the  morning,  and  was  engaged  in
a  hard  struggle  with  a  powerful  reactionary  party  in
order  to  carry  through  a  series  of  reforms  in  which
the  abolition  of  serfdom  was  only  the  first  step.

But  gradually,  as  I  saw  more  of  the  spectacular  side
of  Court  life,  and  caught  now  and  then  a  glimpse  of
what  was  going  on  behind  the  scenes,  I  realized,  not
only  the  futility  of  these  shows  and  the  things  they
were  intended  to  conceal,  but  also  that  these  small
things  so  much  absorbed  the  Court  as  to  prevent
consideration  of  matters  of  far  greater  importance.
The  realities  were  often  lost  in  the  acting.  And  then
from  Alexander  II.  himself  slowly  faded  the  aureole
with  which  my  imagination  had  surrounded  him ;  so
that  by  the  end  of  the  year,  even  if  at  the  outset  I  had


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  165

cherished  some  illusions  as  to  useful  activity  in  the
spheres  nearest  to  the  palace,  I  should  have  retained
none.

On  every  important  holiday,  as  also  on  the  birth*
days  and  name  days  of  the  emperor  and  empress,  on  the
coronation  day,  and  on  other  similar  occasions,  a  great
levee  was  held  at  the  palace.  Thousands  of  generals
and  officers  of  all  ranks,  down  to  that  of  captain,  as
well  as  the  high  functionaries  of  the  civil  service,  were
arranged  in  lines  in  the  immense  halls  of  the  palace,  to
bow  at  the  passage  of  the  emperor  and  his  family,
as  they  solemnly  proceeded  to  the  church.  All  the
members  of  the  imperial  family  came  on  those  days  to
the  palace,  meeting  together  in  a  drawing-room  and
merrily  chatting  till  the  moment  arrived  for  putting  on
the  mask  of  solemnity.  Then  the  column  was  formed.
The  emperor,  giving  his  hand  to  the  empress,  opened
the  march.  He  was  followed  by  his  page  de  chambre,
and  he  in  turn  by  the  general  aide-de-camp,  the  aide-de-
camp on  duty  that  day,  and  the  minister  of  the  imperial
household ;  while  the  empress,  or  rather  the  immense
train  of  her  dress,  was  attended  by  her  two  pages  de
chambre,  who  had  to  support  the  train  at  the  turnings
and  to  spread  it  out  again  in  all  its  beauty.  The  heir-
apparent,  who  was  a  young  man  of  eighteen,  and  all
the  other  grand  dukes  and  duchesses,  came  next,  in  the
order  of  their  right  of  succession  to  the  throne — each
of  the  grand  duchesses  followed  by  her  page  de  chambre ;
then  there  was  a  long  procession  of  the  ladies  in  atten-
dance, old  and  young,  all  wearing  the  so-called  Russian
costume— that  is,  an  evening  dress  which  was  supposed
to  resemble  the  costume  worn  by  the  women  of  Old
Russia.


As  the  procession  passed  I  could  see  how  each  of
the  eldest  military  and  civil  functionaries,  before
making  his  bow,  would  try  to  catch  the  eye  of  the
emperor,  and  if  he  had  his  bow  acknowledged  by  a
smiling  look  of  the  Tsar,  or  by  a  hardly  perceptible
nod  of  the  head,  or  perchance  by  a  word  or  two,  he
would  look  round  upon  his  neighbours,  full  of  pride,
in  the  expectation  of  their  congratulations.

From  the  church  the  procession  returned  in  the
same  way,  and  then  everyone  hurried  back  to  his  own
affairs.  Apart  from  a  few  devotees  and  some  young
ladies,  not  one  in  ten  present  at  these  levees  regarded
them  otherwise  than  as  a  tedious  duty.

Twice  or  thrice  during  the  winter  great  balls  were
given  at  the  palace,  and  thousands  of  people  were
invited  to  them.  After  the  emperor  had  opened  the
dances  with  a  polonaise,  full  liberty  was  left  to  every
one  to  enjoy  the  time  as  he  liked.  There  was  plenty
of  room  in  the  immense  brightly  illuminated  halls,
where  young  girls  were  easily  lost  to  the  watchful  eyes
of  their  parents  and  aunts,  and  many  thoroughly
enjoyed  the  dances  and  the  supper,  during  which  the
young  people  managed  to  be  left  to  themselves.

My  duties  at  these  balls  were  rather  difficult.
Alexander  II.  did  not  dance,  nor  did  he  sit  down,  but
he  moved  all  the  time  amongst  his  guests,  his  page  de
chambre  having  to  follow  him  at  a  distance,  so  as  to
be  within  easy  call,  and  yet  not  inconveniently  near.
This  combination  of  presence  with  absence  was  not
easy  to  attain,  nor  did  the  emperor  require  it :  he
would  have  preferred  to  be  left  entirely  to  himself ;  but
such  was  the  tradition,  and  he  had  to  submit  to  it.  The


THE  COEPS  OF  PAGES  167

worst  was  when  he  entered  a  dense  crowd  of  ladies  who
stood  round  the  circle  in  which  the  grand  dukes  danced,
and  slowly  circulated  among  them.  It  was  not  at  all
easy  to  make  a  way  through  this  living  garden,  which
opened  to  give  passage  to  the  emperor,  but  closed  in
immediately  behind  him.  Instead  of  dancing  them-
selves, hundreds  of  ladies  and  girls  stood  there,  closely
packed,  each  in  the  expectation  that  one  of  the  grand
dukes  would  perhaps  notice  her  and  invite  her  to
dance  a  waltz  or  a  polka.  Such  was  the  influence  of
the  Court  upon  St.  Petersburg  society  that  if  one  of
the  grand  dukes  cast  his  eye  upon  a  girl,  her  parents
would  do  all  in  their  power  to  make  their  child  fall
madly  in  love  with  the  great  personage,  even  though
they  knew  well  that  no  marriage  could  result  from
it  —  the  Russian  grand  dukes  not  being  allowed  to
marry  '  subjects '  of  the  Tsar.  The  conversations
which  I  once  heard  in  a  '  respectable '  family,  con-
nected with  the  Court,  after  the  heir-apparent  had
danced  twice  or  thrice  with  a  girl  of  seventeen,  and  the
hopes  which  were  expressed  by  her  parents,  surpassed
all  that  I  could  possibly  have  imagined.

Every  time  that  we  were  at  the  palace  we  had
lunch  or  dinner  there,  and  the  footmen  would  whisper
to  us  bits  of  news  from  the  scandalous  chronicle  of  the
place,  whether  we  cared  for  it  or  not.  They  knew
everything  that  was  going  on  in  the  different  palaces  — -
that  was  their  domain.  For  truth's  sake,  I  must  say
that  during  the  year  which  I  speak  of  that  sort  of
chronicle  was  not  as  rich  in  events  as  it  became  in  the
seventies.  The  brothers  of  the  Tsar  were  only  recently


168  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

married,  and  his  sons  were  all  very  young.  But  the
relations  of  the  emperor  himself  with  the  Princess  X.,
whom  Turgueneff  has  so  admirably  depicted  in  '  Smoke '
under  the  name  of  Irene,  were  even  more  freely  spoken
of  by  the  servants  than  by  St.  Petersburg  society.
One  day,  however,  when  we  entered  the  room  where
we  used  to  dress,  we  were  told,  '  The  X.  has  to-day
got  her  dismissal  —  a  complete  one  this  time.'  Half
an  hour  later  we  saw  the  lady  in  question  coming  to
assist  at  Mass,  with  her  eyes  swollen  from  weeping,
and  swallowing  her  tears  during  the  Mass,  while  the
other  ladies  managed  so  to  stand  at  a  distance  from
her  as  to  put  her  in  evidence.  The  footmen  were
already  informed  about  the  incident,  and  commented
upon  it  in  their  own  way.  There  was  something  truly
repulsive  in  the  talk  of  these  men,  who  the  day  before
would  have  crouched  down  before  the  same  lady.

The  system  of  espionage  which  is  exercised  in  the
palace,  especially  around  the  emperor  himself,  would
seem  almost  incredible  to  the  uninitiated.  The  follow-
ing incident  will  give  some  idea  of  it.  A  few  years
later,  one  of  the  grand  dukes  received  a  severe  lesson
from  a  St.  Petersburg  gentleman.  The  latter  had  for-
bidden the  grand  duke  his  house,  but,  returning  home
unexpectedly,  he  found  him  in  his  drawing-room  and
rushed  upon  him  with  his  lifted  stick.  The  young  man
dashed  down  the  staircase,  and  was  already  jumping
mto  his  carriage  when  the  pursuer  caught  him,  and
dealt  him  a  blow  with  his  stick.  The  policeman  who
stood  at  the  door  saw  the  adventure  and  ran  to  report
it  to  the  chief  of  the  police,  General  Trepoff,  who,  in
his  turn,  jumped  into  his  carriage  and  hastened  to  the


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  169

emperor,  to  be  the  first  to  report  the  'sad  incident.'
Alexander  II.  summoned  the  grand  duke  and  had  a  talk
with  him.  A  couple  of  days  later,  an  old  functionary
who  belonged  to  the  Third  Section  of  the  emperor's
chancery  —  that  is,  to  the  state  police  —  and  who  was
a  friend  at  the  house  of  one  of  my  comrades,  related
the  whole  conversation.  '  The  emperor,'  he  informed
us,  'was  very  angry,  and  said  to  the  grand  duke  in
conclusion,  "  You  should  know  better  how  to  manage
your  little  affairs."  He  was  asked,  of  course,  how  he
could  know  anything  about  a  private  conversation,  but
the  reply  was  very  characteristic  :  '  The  words  and  the
opinions  of  his  Majesty  must  be  known  to  our  depart-
ment. How  otherwise  could  such  a  delicate  institution
as  the  state  police  be  managed  ?  Be  sure  that  the
emperor  is  the  most  closely  watched  person  in  all
St.  Petersburg.'

There  was  no  boasting  in  these  words.  Every
minister,  every  governor-general,  before  entering  the
emperor's  sturdy  with  his  reports,  had  a  talk  with  the
private  valet  of  the  emperor,  to  know  what  was  the
mood  of  the  master  that  day;  and  according  to  that
mood  he  either  laid  before  him  some  knotty  affair,  or
let  it  lie  at  the  bottom  of  his  portfolio  in  hope  of  a
more  lucky  day.  The  governor-general  of  East  Siberia,
when  he  came  to  St.  Petersburg,  always  sent  his  private
aide-de-camp  with  a  handsome  gift  to  the  private  valet
of  the  emperor.  '  There  are  days,'  he  used  to  say,
'  when  the  emperor  would  get  into  a  rage,  and  order  a
searching  inquest  upon  everyone  and  myself,  if  I
should  lay  before  him  on  such  a  day  certain  reports  ;
whereas  there  are  other  days  when  all  will  go  off  quite


170  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

smoothly.  A  precious  man  that  valet  is.'  To  know
from  day  to  day  the  frame  of  mind  of  the  emperor  was
a  substantial  part  of  the  art  of  retaining  a  high  position
— an  art  which  later  on  Count  Shuvaloff  and  General
Trepoff  understood  to  perfection  ;  also  Count  Ignatieff,
who,  I  suppose  from  what  I  saw  of  him,  possessed  that
art  even  without  the  help  of  the  valet.

At  the  beginning  of  my  service  I  felt  a  great
admiration  for  Alexander  II.,  the  liberator  of  the  serfs.
Imagination  often  carries  a  boy  beyond  the  realities  of
the  moment,  and  my  frame  of  mind  at  that  time  was
such  that  if  an  attempt  had  been  made  in  my  presence
upon  the  Tsar  I  should  have  covered  him  with  my
body.  One  day,  at  the  beginning  of  January  1862,  I
saw  him  leave  the  procession  and  rapidly  walk  alone
toward  the  halls  where  parts  of  all  the  regiments  of
the  St.  Petersburg  garrison  were  aligned  for  a  parade.
This  parade  usually  took  place  outdoors,  but  this  year,
on  account  of  the  frost,  it  was  held  indoors,  and
Alexander  II.,  who  generally  galloped  at  full  speed  in
front  of  the  troops  at  the  reviews,  had  now  to  march
in  front  of  the  regiments.  I  knew  that  my  Court  duties
ended  as  soon  as  the  emperor  appeared  in  his  capa-
city of  military  commander  of  the  troops,  and  that
I  had  to  follow  him  to  this  spot,  but  no  further.
However,  on  looking  round,  I  saw  that  he  was  quite
alone.  The  two  aides-de-camp  had  disappeared,  and
there  was  with  him  not  a  single  man  of  his  suite.  '  I
will  not  leave  him  alone ! '  I  said  to  myself,  and
followed  him.

Whether  Alexander  II.  was  in  a  great  hurry  that


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  171

day,  or  had  other  reasons  to  wish  that  the  review
should  be  over  as  soon  as  possible,  I  cannot  say,  but
he  dashed  in  front  of  the  troops,  and  marched  along
their  rows  at  such  a  speed,  making  such  big  and  rapid
steps — he  was  very  tall  —  that  I  had  the  greatest
difficulty  in  following  him  at  my  most  rapid  pace,  and
in  places  had  almost  to  run  in  order  to  keep  close
behind  him.  He  hurried  as  if  he  ran  away  from  a
danger.  His  excitement  communicated  itself  to  me,
and  every  moment  I  was  ready  to  jump  in  front  of
him,  regretting  only  that  I  had  on  rny  ordnance  sword
and  not  my  own  sword,  with  a  Toledo  blade,  which
pierced  coppers  and  was  a  far  better  weapon.  It  was
only  after  he  had  passed  in  front  of  the  last  battalion
that  he  slackened  his  pace,  and,  on  entering  another
hall,  looked  round,  to  meet  my  eyes  glittering  with  the
excitement  of  that  mad  march.  The  younger  aide-
de-camp  was  running  at  full  speed,  two  halls  behind.
I  was  prepared  to  get  a  severe  scolding,  instead  of  which
Alexander  II /said  to  me,  perhaps  betraying  his  own
inner  thoughts  :  '  You  here  ?  Brave  boy  !  '  and  as  he
slowly  walked  away  he  turned  into  space  that  proble-
matic, absent-minded  gaze  which  I  had  begun  often
to  notice.

Such  was  then  the  attitude  of  my  mind.  However,
various  small  incidents,  as  well  as  the  reactionary
oharacter  which  the  policy  of  Alexander  II.  was
decidedly  taking,  instilled  more  and  more  doubts  into
my  heart.  Every  year,  on  January  6,  a  half  Christian
and  half  pagan  ceremony  of  sanctifying  the  waters  is
performed  in  Eussia.  It  is  also  performed  at  the
palace.  A  pavilion  is  built  on  the  Neva  Eiver,  opposite


172  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

the  palace,  and  the  imperial  family,  headed  by  the
clergy,  proceed  from  the  palace,  across  the  superb  quay,
to  the  pavilion,  where  a  Te  Deum  is  sung  and  the
cross  is  plunged  into  the  water  of  the  river.  Thousands
of  people  stand  on  the  quay  and  on  the  ice  of  the  Neva
to  witness  the  ceremony  from  a  distance.  All  have  to
stand  bareheaded  during  the  service.  This  year,  as
the  frost  was  rather  sharp,  an  old  general  had  put  on  a
wig,  and  in  the  hurry  of  drawing  on  his  cape,  his  wig
had  been  dislodged  and  now  lay  across  his  head,  with-
out his  noticing  it.  The  grand  duke  Constantine,
having  caught  sight  of  it,  laughed  the  whole  time  the
Te  Deum  was  being  sung,  with  the  younger  grand
dukes,  looking  in  the  direction  of  the  unhappy  general,
who  smiled  stupidly  without  knowing  why  he  was
the  cause  of  so  much  hilarity.  Constantine  finally
whispered  to  the  emperor,  who  also  looked  at  the
general  and  laughed.

A  few  minutes  later,  as  the  procession  once  more
crossed  the  quay,  on  its  way  back  to  the  palace,  an  old
peasant,  bareheaded  too,  pushed  himself  through  the
double  hedge  of  soldiers  who  lined  the  path  of  the  pro-
cession, and  fell  on  his  knees  just  at  the  feet  of  the
emperor,  holding  out  a  petition,  and  crying  with  tears
in  his  eyes,  '  Father,  defend  us  ! '  Ages  of  oppression
of  the  Russian  peasantry  was  in  this  exclamation ;  but
Alexander  II.,  who  a  few  minutes  before  laughed
during  the  church  service  at  a  wig  lying  the  wrong
way,  now  passed  by  the  peasant  without  taking  the
slightest  notice  of  him.  I  was  close  behind  him,  and
only  saw  in  him  a  shudder  of  fear  at  the  sudden
appearance  of  the  peasant,  after  which  he  went  on


THE CORPS  OF  PAGES  173

without  deigning  even  to  cast  a  glance  on  the  human
figure  at  his  feet.  I  looked  round.  The  aides-de-camp
were  not  there  ;  the  grand  duke  Constantine,  who
followed,  took  no  more  notice  of  the  peasant  than  his
brother  did ;  there  was  nobody  even  to  take  the  peti-
tion, so  that  I  took  it,  although  I  knew  that  I  should
get  a  scolding  for  doing  so.  It  was  not  my  business
to  receive  petitions,  but  I  remembered  what  it  must
have  cost  the  peasant  before  he  could  make  his  way  to
the  capital,  and  then  through  the  lines  of  police  and
soldiers  who  surrounded  the  procession.  Like  all
peasants  who  hand  petitions  to  the  Tsar,  he  was  going
to  be  put  under  arrest,  for  no  one  knows  how  long.

On  the  dajr  of  the  emancipation  of  the  serfs
Alexander  II.  was  worshipped  at  St.  Petersburg ;  but
it  is  most  remarkable  that,  apart  from  that  moment  of
general  enthusiasm,  he  had  not  the  love  of  the  city.
His  brother  Nicholas — no  one  could  say  why — was  at
least  very  popular  among  the  small  trades-people  and
the  cabmen ;  but  neither  Alexander  II.,  nor  his  brother
Constantine,  the  leader  of  the  reform  party,  nor  his
third  brother,  Michael,  had  won  the  hearts  of  any
class  of  people  in  St.  Petersburg.  Alexander  II.  had
retained  too  much  of  the  despotic  character  of  his
father,  which  pierced  now  and  then  through  his  usually
good-natured  manners.  He  easily  lost  his  temper,  and
often  treated  his  courtiers  in  the  most  contemptuous
way.  He  was  not  what  one  would  describe  as  a
reliable  man,  either  in  his  policy  or  in  his  personal
sympathies,  and  he  was  vindictive.  I  doubt  whether
he  was  sincerely  attached  to  anyone.  Some  of  the


174  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

men  in  his  nearest  surroundings  were  of  the  worst
description — Count  Adlerberg,  for  instance,  who  made
him  pay  over  and  over  again  his  enormous  debts,  and
others  renowned  for  their  colossal  thefts.  From  the
beginning  of  1862  he  commenced  to  show  himself
capable  of  reviving  the  worst  practices  of  his  father's
reign.  It  was  known  that  he  still  wanted  to  carry
through  a  series  of  important  reforms  in  the  judicial
organization  and  in  the  army ;  that  the  terrible  corporal
punishments  were  about  to  be  abolished,  and  that  a
sort  of  local  self-government,  and  perhaps  a  constitu-
tion of  some  sort,  would  be  granted.  But  the  slightest
disturbance  was  repressed  under  his  orders  with  a
stern  severity ;  he  took  each  movement  as  a  personal
offence,  so  that  at  any  moment  one  might  expect  from
him  the  most  reactionary  measures.

The  disorders  which  broke  out  at  the  universities  of
St.  Petersburg,  Moscow,  and  Kazan  in  October  1861
were  repressed  with  an  ever-increasing  strictness.  The
university  of  St.  Petersburg  was  closed,  and  although  free
courses  were  opened  by  most  of  the  professors  at  the
Town  Hall,  they  also  were  soon  closed,  and  the  best
professors  left  the  university.  Immediately  after  the
abolition  of  serfdom,  a  great  movement  began  for  the
opening  of  Sunday  schools ;  they  were  opened  every-
where by  private  persons  and  corporations — all  the
teachers  being  volunteers — and  the  peasants  and
workers,  old  and  young,  flocked  to  these  schools.
Officers,  students,  even  a  few  pages,  became  teachers  ;
and  such  excellent  methods  were  worked  out  that
(Eussian  having  a  phonetic  spelling)  we  succeeded  in
teaching  a  peasant  to  read  in  nine  or  ten  lessons.  But


THE CORPS  OF PAGES  175

suddenly  all  Sunday  schools,  in  which  the  mass  of  the
peasantry  would  have  learned  to  read  in  a  few  years,
without  any  expenditure  by  the  State,  were  closed.  In
Poland,  where  a  series  of  patriotic  manifestations  had
begun,  the  Cossacks  were  sent  out  to  disperse  the
crowds  with  their  whips,  and  to  arrest  hundreds  of
people  in  the  churches  with  their  usual  brutality.  Men
were  shot  in  the  streets  of  Warsaw  by  the  end  of  1861,
and  for  the  suppression  of  the  few  peasant  insurrec-
tions which  broke  out  the  horrible  flogging  through
the  double  line  of  soldiers — that  favourite  punishment
of  Nicholas  I. — was  applied.  The  despot  that  Alex-
ander II.  became  in  the  years  1870-81  was  fore-
shadowed in  1862.

Of  all  the  imperial  family,  undoubtedly  the  most
sympathetic  was  the  empress  Marie  Alexandrovna.
She  was  sincere,  and  when  she  said  something  pleasant
she  meant  it.  The  way  in  which  she  once  thanked  me
for  a  little  courtesy  (it  was  after  her  reception  of  the
ambassador  of  the  United  States,  who  had  just  come  to
St.  Petersburg)  deeply  impressed  me :  it  was  not  the
way  of  a  lady  spoiled  by  courtesies,  as  an  empress  is
supposed  to  be.  She  certainly  was  not  happy  in  her
home  life  ;  nor  was  she  liked  by  the  ladies  of  the  court,
who  found  her  too  severe,  and  could  not  understand
why  she  should  take  so  much  to  heart  the  ttourderies
of  her  husband.  It  is  now  known  that  she  played  a  by
no  means  unimportant  part  in  bringing  about  the  aboli-
tion of  serfdom.  But  at  that  time  her  influence  in  this
direction  seems  to  have  been  little  known,  the  grand
duke  Constantine  and  the  grand  duchess  Helene


176  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

Pavlovna,  who  was  the  main  support  of  Nicholas
Milutin  at  the  Court,  being  considered  the  two  leaders  of
the  reform  party  in  the  palace  spheres.  The  empress
was  better  known  for  the  decisive  part  she  had  taken  in
the  creation  of  girls'  gymnasia  (high  schools),  which  re-
ceived from  the  outset  a  high  standard  of  organization
and  a  truly  democratic  character.  Her  friendly  rela-
tions with  Ushinsky,  a  great  pedagogist,  saved  him
from  sharing  the  fate  of  all  men  of  mark  of  that  time —
that  is,  exile.

Being  very  well  educated  herself,  Marie  Alexan-
drovna  did  her  best  to  give  a  good  education  to  her
eldest  son.  The  best  men  in  all  branches  of  knowledge
were  sought  as  teachers,  and  she  even  invited  for  that
purpose  Kavelin,  although  she  knew  well  his  friendly
relations  with  Herzen.  When  he  mentioned  to  her
that  friendship,  she  replied  that  she  had  no  grudge
against  Herzen,  except  for  his  violent  language  about
the  empress  dowager.

The  heir-apparent  was  extremely  handsome — per-
haps, even  too  femininely  handsome.  He  was  not  proud
in  the  least,  and  during  the  levees  he  used  to  chatter
in  the  most  comradelike  way  with  the  pages  de  cham-
bre.  (I  even  remember,  at  the  reception  of  the  diplo-
matic corps  on  New  Year's  Day,  trying  to  make  him
appreciate  the  simplicity  of  the  uniform  of  the  ambassa-
dor of  the  United  States  as  compared  with  the  parrot-
coloured  uniforms  of  the  other  ambassadors.)  How-
ever, those  who  knew  him  well  described  him  as  pro-
foundly egoistic,  a  man  absolutely  incapable  of  contract-
ing an  attachment  to  anyone.  This  feature  was  pro-
minent in  him,  even  more  than  it  was  in  his  father.


THE  CORPS  OF  PAGES  177

As  to  his  education,  all  the  pains  taken  by  his  mother
were  of  no  avail.  In  August  1861  his  examinations,
which  were  made  in  the  presence  of  his  father,  proved
to  be  a  dead  failure,  and  I  remember  Alexander  II.,  at
a  parade  of  which  the  heir-apparent  was  the  com-
mander, and  during  which  he  made  some  mistake,
loudly  shouting  out,  so  that  everyone  would  hear  it,
'  Even  that  you  could  not  learn  !  '  He  died,  as  is
known,  at  the  age  of  twenty-two,  from  some  disease  of
the  spinal  cord.

His  brother,  Alexander,  who  became  the  heir-
apparent  in  1865,  and  later  on  was  Alexander  III.,  was
a  decided  contrast  to  Nikolai  Alexandrovich.  He  re-
minded me  so  much  of  Paul  I.  by  his  face,  his  figure,
and  his  contemplation  of  his  own  grandeur,  that  I  used
to  say,  '  If  he  ever  reigns,  he  will  be  another  Paul  I.  in
the  Gatchina  palace,  and  will  have  the  same  end  as  his
great-grandfather  had  at  the  hands  of  his  own  courtiers.'
He  obstinately  refused  to  learn.  It  was  rumoured  that
Alexander  II.,  having  had  so  many  difficulties  with  his
brother  Constantine,  who  was  better  educated  than  him-
self, adopted  the  policy  of  concentrating  all  his  atten-
tion on  the  heir-apparent  and  neglecting  the  education
of  his  other  sons  ;  however,  I  doubt  if  such  was  the
case :  Alexander  Alexandrovich  must  have  been  averse
to  any  education  from  childhood  ;  in  fact,  his  spelling,
which  I  saw  in  the  telegrams  he  addressed  to  his  bride
at  Copenhagen,  was  unimaginably  bad.  I  cannot
render  here  his  Russian  spelling,  but  in  French  he
wrote,  'Ecri  a  oncle  a  propos  parade  .  .  .  les  nouvelles
sont  mauvaisent,'  and  so  on.

He  is  said  to  have  improved  in  his  manners  toward
VOL.  I.  N


178  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

the  end  of  his  life,  but  in  1870,  and  also  much  later,  he
was  a  true  descendant  of  Paul  I.  I  knew  at  St.  Peters-
burg an  officer,  of  Swedish  origin  (from  Finland),  who
had  been  sent  to  the  United  States  to  order  rifles  for
the  Eussian  army.  On  his  return  he  had  to  report
about  his  mission  to  Alexander  Alexandrovich,  who  had
been  appointed  to  superintend  the  re-arming  of  the
army.  During  this  interview,  the  Tsarevich,  giving
full  vent  to  his  violent  temper,  began  to  scold  the
officer,  who  probably  replied  with  dignity,  whereupon
the  prince  fell  into  a  real  fit  of  rage,  insulting  the
officer  in  bad  language.  The  officer,  who  belonged  to
that  type  of  very  loyal  but  self-respecting  men  who  are
frequently  met  with  amongst  the  Swedish  nobility  in
Russia,  left  at  once,  and  wrote  a  letter  in  which  he
asked  the  heir-apparent  to  apologize  within  twenty-four
hours,  adding  that  if  the  apology  did  not  come  he
would  shoot  himself.  It  was  a  sort  of  Japanese  duel.
Alexander  Alexandrovich  sent  no  excuses,  and  the  officer
kept  his  word.  I  saw  him  at  the  house  of  a  warm
friend  of  mine,  his  intimate  friend,  when  he  was
expecting  every  minute  to  receive  the  apology.  Next
morning  he  was  dead.  The  Tsar  was  very  angry  with  his
son,  and  ordered  him  to  follow  the  hearse  of  the  officer
to  the  grave.  But  even  this  terrible  lesson  did  not
cure  the  young  man  of  his  Romanoff  haughtiness  and
impetuosity.


PAET  THIRD
SIBERIA


K 2


IN  the  middle  of  May  1862,  a  few  weeks  before  our
promotion,  I  was  told  one  day  by  the  Captain  to  make
up  the  final  list  of  the  regiments  which  each  of  us
intended  to  join.  We  had  the  choice  of  all  the  regi-
ments of  the  Guards,  which  we  could  enter  with  the
first  officer's  grade,  and  of  the  Army  with  the  third
grade  of  lieutenant.  I  took  a  list  of  our  form,  and
went  the  round  of  my  comrades.  Everyone  knew  well
the  regiment  he  was  going  to  join,  most  of  them
already  wearing  in  the  garden  the  officer's  cap  of
that  regiment.

'  Her  Majesty's  Cuirassiers,'  '  The  Body  Guard
Preobrazhensky,'  '  The  Horse  Guards,'  were  the  replies
which  I  inscribed  in  my  list.

'But  you,  Kropotkin?  The  artillery?  The
Cossacks  ? '  I  was  asked  on  all  sides.  I  could  not
stand  these  questions,  and  at  last,  asking  a  comrade  to
complete  the  list,  I  went  to  my  room  to  think  once
more  over  my  final  decision.

That  I  should  not  enter  a  regiment  of  the  Guard,
and  give  my  life  to  parades  and  court  balls,  I  had  settled
long  before.  My  dream  was  to  enter  the  university
— to  study,  to  live  the  student's  life.  That  meant,  of
course,  to  break  entirely  with  my  father,  whose
ambitions  were  quite  different,  and  to  rely  for  my


182  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

living  upon  what  I  might  earn  by  means  of  lessons.
Thousands  of  Russian  students  live  in  that  way,  and
such  a  life  did  not  frighten  me  in  the  least.  But— how
should  I  get  over  the  first  steps  in  that  life  ?  In  a  few
weeks  I  should  have  to  leave  the  school,  to  don  my
own  clothes,  to  have  my  own  lodging,  and  I  saw  no
possibility  of  providing  even  the  little  money  which
would  be  required  for  the  most  modest  start.  Then,
failing  the  university,  I  had  been  often  thinking  of  late
that  I  could  enter  the  Artillery  Academy.  That  would
free  me  for  two  years  from  the  drudgery  of  military
service,  and  by  the  side  of  the  military  sciences  I  could
study  mathematics  and  physics.  But  the  wind  of
reaction  was  blowing,  and  the  officers  of  the  academies
had  been  treated  during  the  previous  winter  as  if
they  were  schoolboys ;  in  two  academies  they  had
revolted,  and  in  one  of  them  they  had  left  in  a  body.

My  thoughts  turned  more  and  more  toward  Siberia.
The  Amur  region  had  recently  been  annexed  by  Eussia ;
I  had  read  all  about  that  Mississippi  of  the  East,  the
mountains  it  pierces,  the  sub-tropical  vegetation  of  its
tributary,  the  Usuri,  and  my  thoughts  went  further — to
the  tropical  regions  which  Humboldt  had  described,  and
to  the  great  generalizations  of  Eitter,  which  I  delighted
to  read.  Besides,  I  reasoned,  there  is  in  Siberia  an
immense  field  for  the  application  of  the  great  reforms
which  have  been  made  or  are  coming :  the  workers
must  be  few  there,  and  I  shall  find  a  field  of  action  to
my  tastes.  The  worst  would  be  that  I  should  have  to
separate  from  my  brother  Alexander ;  but  he  had  been
compelled  to  leave  the  university  of  Moscow  after  the
last  disorders,  and  in  a  year  or  two,  I  guessed  (and


SIBERIA  183

guessed  rightly),  in  one  way  or  another  we  should  be
together.  There  remained  only  the  choice  of  the  regi-
ment in  the  Amur  region.  The  Usuri  attracted  me
most ;  but,  alas,  there  was  on  the  Usuri  only  one
regiment  of  infantry  Cossacks.  A  Cossack  not  on
horseback — that  was  too  bad  for  the  boy  that  I  still
was,  and  I  settled  upon  '  the  mounted  Cossacks  of  the
Amur.'

This  I  wrote  on  the  list,  to  the  great  consternation
of  all  my  comrades.  '  It  is  so  far,'  they  said,  while
my  friend  Dauroff,  seizing  the  Officers'  Handbook,  read
out  of  it,  to  the  horror  of  all  present :  '  Uniform,  black,
with  a  plain  red  collar  without  braids ;  fur  bonnet  made
of  dog's  fur  or  any  other  fur ;  trousers,  gray.'

'  Only  look  at  that  uniform  !  '  he  exclaimed.
'  Bother  the  cap  ! — you  can  wear  one  of  wolf  or  bear
fur  ;  but  think  only  of  the  trousers  !  Gray,  like  a  sol-
dier of  the  Train  !  '  The  consternation  reached  its
climax  after  that  reading.

I  joked  as'  best  I  could,  and  took  the  list  to  the
captain.

'  Krop6tkin  must  always  have  his  joke  ! '  he  cried.
'  Did  I  not  tell  you  that  the  list  must  be  sent  to  the
grand  duke  to-day  ?  '

I  had  some  difficulty  in  making  him  believe  that
the  list  really  stated  my  intention.

However,  next  day  my  resolution  almost  gave  way
when  I  saw  how  Klasovsky  took  my  decision.  He  had
hoped  to  see  me  in  the  university,  and  had  given  me
lessons  in  Latin  and  Greek  for  that  purpose  ;  and  I  did
not  dare  to  tell  him  what  really  prevented  me  from  en-
tering the  university  :  I  knew  that  if  I  told  him  the


184  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

truth  he  would  offer  to  share  with  me  the  little  that
he  had.

Then  my  father  telegraphed  to  the  director  that  he
forbade  my  going  to  Siberia,  and  the  matter  was  re-
ported to  the  grand  duke,  who  was  the  chief  of  the
military  schools.  I  was  called  before  his  assistant,  and
talked  about  the  vegetation  of  the  Amur  and  like  things,
because  I  had  strong  reasons  for  believing  that  if  T  said
I  wanted  to  go  to  the  university  and  could  not  afford  it,
a  bursary  would  be  offered  to  me  by  some  one  of  the
imperial  family — an  offer  wrhich  by  all  means  I  wished
to  avoid.

It  is  impossible  to  say  how  all  this  would  have
ended,  but  an  event  of  much  importance — the  great  fire
at  St.  Petersburg — brought  about  in  an  indirect  way  a
solution  to  my  difficulties.

On  the  Monday  after  Trinity — the  day  of  the
Holy  Ghost,  which  was  that  year  on  May  26,  o.s. — a
terrible  fire  broke  out  in  the  so-called  Apraxin  Dvor.
The  Apraxin  Dvor  was  an  immense  space,  nearly
half  a  mile  square,  which  was  entirely  covered  wTith
small  shops — mere  shanties  of  wood — where  all  sorts
of  second-  and  third-hand  goods  were  sold.  Old  furni-
ture and  bedding,  second-hand  dresses  and  books,  poured
in  from  every  quarter  of  the  city,  and  were  stored  in  the
small  shanties,  in  the  passages  between  them,  and  even
on  their  roofs.  This  accumulation  of  inflammable
materials  had  at  its  back  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior
and  its  archives,  where  all  the  documents  concerning
the  liberation  of  the  serfs  were  kept ;  and  in  the  front
of  it,  which  was  lined  by  a  row  of  shops  built  of  stone,


SIBERIA  185

was  the  State  Bank.  A  narrow  lane,  also  bordered  with
stone  shops,  separated  the  Apraxin  Dvor  from  a  wing
of  the  Corps  of  Pages,  which  was  occupied  by  grocery
and  oil  shops  in  its  lower  story  and  with  the  apart-
ments of  the  officers  in  its  upper  story.  Almost  oppo-
site the  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  on  the  other  side  of  a
canal,  there  were  extensive  timber  yards.  This  laby-
rinth of  small  shanties  and  the  timber  yards  opposite
took  fire  almost  at  the  same  moment,  at  four  o'clock  in
the  afternoon.

If  there  had  been  wind  on  that  day,  half  the  city
would  have  perished  in  the  flames,  including  the  Bank,
several  Ministries,  the  Gostinoi  Dvor  (another  great
block  of  shops  on  the  Nevsky  Perspective),  the  Corps  of
Pages,  and  the  National  Library.

I  was  that  afternoon  at  the  Corps,  dining  at  the
house  of  one  of  our  officers,  and  we  dashed  to  the  spot
as  soon  as  we  noticed  from  the  windows  the  first  clouds
of  smoke  rising  in  our  close  neighbourhood.  The  sight
was  terrific.'  Like  an  immense  snake,  rattling  and
whistling,  the  fire  threw  itself  in  all  directions,  right
and  left,  enveloped  the  shanties,  and  suddenly  rose  in  a
huge  column,  darting  out  its  whistling  tongues  to  lick
up  more  shanties  with  their  contents.  Whirlwinds  of
smoke  and  fire  were  formed ;  and  when  the  whirls  of
burning  feathers  from  the  bedding  shops  began  to
sweep  about  the  space,  it  became  impossible  to  remain
any  longer  inside  the  burning  market.  The  whole  had
to  be  abandoned.

The  authorities  had  entirely  lost  their  heads.  There
was  not,  at  that  time,  a  single  steam  fire-engine  in  St.


186  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

Petersburg,  and  it  was  workmen  who  suggested  bring-
ing one  from  the  iron  works  of  Kolpino,  situated  twenty
miles  by  rail  from  the  capital.  When  the  engine  reached
the  railway  station,  it  was  the  people  who  dragged
it  to  the  conflagration.  Of  its  four  lines  of  hose,  one
was  damaged  by  an  unknown  hand,  and  the  other  three
were  directed  upon  the  Ministry  of  the  Interior.

The  grand  dukes  came  to  the  spot  and  wrent  away
again.  Late  in  the  evening,  when  the  Bank  was  out
of  danger,  the  emperor  also  made  his  appearance,  and
said,  what  everyone  knew  already,  that  the  Corps  of
Pages  was  now  the  key  of  the  battle,  and  must  be  saved
by  all  means.  It  was  evident  that  if  the  Corps  had
taken  fire,  the  National  Library  and  half  of  the  Nevsky
Perspective  would  have  perished  in  the  flames.

It  was  the  crowd,  the  people,  who  did  everything  to
prevent  the  fire  from  spreading  further  and  further.
There  was  a  moment  when  the  Bank  was  seriously
menaced.  The  goods  cleared  from  the  shops  opposite
were  thrown  into  the  Sadovaya  street,  and  lay  in  great
heaps  upon  the  'walls  of  the  left  wing  of  the  Bank.
The  articles  which  covered  the  street  itself  continually
took  fire,  but  the  people,  roasting  there  in  an  almost
unbearable  heat,  prevented  the  flames  from  being
communicated  to  the  piles  of  goods  on  the  other  side.
They  swore  at  all  the  authorities,  seeing  that  there  was
not  a  pump  on  the  spot.  '  What  are  they  all  doing  at
the  Ministry  of  the  Interior,  when  the  Bank  and  the
Foundlings'  House  are  going  to  take  fire  ?  They  have
all  lost  their  heads  !  Where  is  the  chief  of  police  that
he  cannot  send  a  fire  brigade  to  the  Bank  ?  '  they  said.
I  knew  the  chief,  General  Annenkoff,  personally,  as  I


SIBERIA  187

had  met  him  once  or  twice  at  our  sub-inspector's  house>
whereto  he  came  with  his  brother  the  well-known
literary  critic,  and  I  volunteered  to  find  him.  I  found
him,  indeed,  walking  aimlessly  in  a  street ;  and  when  I
reported  to  him  the  state  of  affairs,  incredible  though  it
may  seem,  it  was  to  me,  a  boy,  that  he  gave  the  order
to  move  one  of  the  fire  brigades  from  the  Ministry  to
the  Bank.  I  exclaimed,  of  course,  that  the  men  would
never  listen  to  me,  and  I  asked  for  a  written  order;
but  General  Annenkoff  had  not,  or  pretended  not  to
have,  a  scrap  of  paper,  so  that  I  asked  one  of  our  officers,
L.  L.  Gosse,  to  come  with  me  to  transmit  the  order.
We  at  last  prevailed  upon  the  captain  of  one  fire
brigade — who  swore  at  all  the  world  and  at  his  chiefs —
to  move  his  men  and  engines  to  the  Bank.

The  Ministry  itself  was  not  on  fire ;  it  was  the
archives  which  were  burning,  and  many  boys,  chiefly
cadets  and  pages,  together  with  a  number  of  clerks,
carried  bundles  of  papers  out  of  the  burning  building
and  loaded  them  into  cabs.  Often  a  bundle  would  fall
out,  and  the  wind,  taking  possession  of  its  leaves,  would
strew  them  about  the  square.  Through  the  smoke  a
sinister  fire  could  be  seen  raging  in  the  timber  yards  on
the  other  side  of  the  canal.

The  narrow  lane  which  separated  the  Corps  of
Pages  from  the  Apraxin  Dvor  was  in  a  deplorable
state.  The  shops  which  lined  it  were  full  of  brimstone,
oil,  turpentine,  and  the  like,  and  immense  tongues  of
fire  of  many  hues,  thrown  out  by  explosions,  licked  the
roofs  of  the  wing  of  the  Corps,  which  bordered  the  lane
on  its  other  side.  The  windows  and  the  pilasters
under  the  roof  began  already  to  smoulder,  while  the


188  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

pages  and  some  cadets,  after  having  cleared  the  lodgings,
pumped  water  through  a  small  fire  engine,  which
received  at  long  intervals  scanty  supplies  from  old-
fashioned  barrels,  which  had  to  be  filled  with  ladles.  A
couple  of  firemen  who  stood  on  the  hot  roof  continually
shouted  out,  '  Water !  Water  !  '  in  tones  which  were
heartrending.  I  could  not  stand  these  cries,  and
rushed  into  the  Sadovaya  street,  where,  by  sheer
force,  I  compelled  the  driver  of  one  of  the  barrels
belonging  to  a  police  fire  brigade  to  enter  our  yard
and  to  supply  our  pump  with  water.  But  when  I
attempted  to  do  the  same  once  more,  I  met  with  an
absolute  refusal  from  the  driver.  '  I  shall  be  court -
martialled,'  he  said,  '  if  I  obey  you.'  On  all  sides  my
comrades  urged  me,  '  Go  and  find  somebody — the  chief
of  the  police,  the  grand  duke,  anyone — and  tell  them
that  without  water  we  shall  have  to  abandon  the  Corps
to  the  fire.'  '  Ought  we  not  to  report  to  our  director  ?  '
somebody  would  remark.  '  Bother  the  whole  lot !  you
won't  find  them  with  a  lantern.  Go  and  do  it  yourself.'
I  went  once  more  in  search  of  General  Annenkoff,
and  was  at  last  told  that  he  must  be  in  the  yard  of  the
Bank.  Several  officers  stood  there,  indeed,  around  a
general  in  whom  I  recognized  the  Governor-General  of
St.  Petersburg,  Prince  Suvoroff.  The  gate,  however,  was
locked,  and  a  Bank  official  who  stood  at  it  refused  to
let  me  in.  I  insisted,  menaced,  and  finally  was  admitted.
Then  I  went  straight  up  to  Prince  Suvoroff,  who  was
writing  a  note  on  the  shoulder  of  his  aide-de-camp.
When  I  reported  to  him  the  state  of  affairs,  his  first
question  was,  '  Who  has  sent  you  ? '  '  Nobody — the
comrades,'  was  my  reply.  '  So  you  say  the  Corps  will


SIBERIA  189

soon  be  on  fire  ? '  '  Yes.'  He  started  at  once,  and
seizing  in  the  street  an  empty  hatbox,  covered  his  head
with  it,  in  order  to  protect  himself  from  the  scorching
heat  that  came  from  the  burning  shops  of  the  Apraxin
Dvor  and  ran  full  speed  to  the  lane.  Empty  barrels,
straw,  wooden  boxes,  and  the  like  covered  the  lane,
between  the  flames  of  the  oil  shops  on  the  one  side  and
the  buildings  of  our  Corps,  of  which  the  window  frames
and  the  pilasters  were  smouldering,  on  the  other  side.
Prince  Suvoroff  acted  resolutely.  '  There  is  a  company
of  soldiers  in  your  garden,'  he  said  to  me :  '  take  a
detachment  and  clear  that  lane— at  once.  A  hose  from
the  steam  engine  will  be  brought  here  immediately.
Keep  it  playing.  I  trust  it  to  you  personally.'

It  was  not  easy  to  move  the  soldiers  out  of  our
garden.  They  had  cleared  the  barrels  and  boxes  of
their  contents,  and  with  their  pockets  full  of  coffee,  and
with  conical  lumps  of  sugar  concealed  in  their  kepis,
they  were  enjoying  the  warm  night  under  the  trees,
cracking  nuts!  No  one  cared  to  move  till  an  officer
interfered.  The  lane  was  cleared,  and  the  pump  kept
going.  The  comrades  were  delighted,  and  every  twenty
minutes  we  relieved  the  men  who  directed  the  jet  of  water,
standing  by  their  side  in  an  almost  unbearable  heat.

About  three  or  four  in  the  morning  it  was  evident
that  bounds  had  been  put  to  the  fire ;  the  danger  of  its
spreading  to  the  Corps  was  over,  and  after  having
quenched  my  thirst  with  half  a  dozen  glasses  of  tea,
in  a  small  '  white  inn '  which  happened  to  be  open,  I
fell,  half  dead  from  fatigue,  on  the  first  bed  that  I
found  unoccupied  in  the  hospital  of  the  corps.

Next  morning  I  woke  up  early  and  went  to  see  the


190

site  of  the  conflagration,  when  on  my  return  to  the  corps
I  met  the  Grand  Duke  Michael,  whom  I  accompanied,
as  was  my  duty,  on  his  round.  The  pages,  with  their
faces  quite  black  from  the  smoke,  with  swollen  eyes
and  inflamed  lids,  some  of  them  with  their  hair
burned,  raised  their  heads  from  the  pillows.  It  was
hard  to  recognise  them.  They  were  proud,  though,
of  feeling  that  they  had  not  been  merely  '  white  hands,'
and  had  worked  as  hard  as  anyone  else.

This  visit  of  the  grand  duke  settled  my  difficulties.
He  asked  me  why  did  I  conceive  that  fancy  of  going  to
the  Amur — whether  I  had  friends  there  ?  whether  the
Governor-General  knew  me?  and,  learning  that  I  had
no  relatives  in  Siberia  and  knew  nobody  there,  he
exclaimed,  '  But  how  are  you  going,  then  ?  They  may
send  you  to  a  lonely  Cossack  village.  What  will  you
be  doing  there  ?  I  had  better  write  about  you  to  the
Governor-General,  to  recommend  you.'

After  such  an  offer  I  was  sure  that  my  father's
objection  would  be  removed ;  and  so  it  was.  I  was
free  to  go  to  Siberia.

This  great  conflagration  became  a  turning-point
not  only  in  the  policy  of  Alexander  II.,  but  also  in  the
history  of  Russia  in  that  part  of  the  century.  That  it
was  not  a  mere  accident  was  self-evident.  Trinity  and
the  day  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  great  holidays  in  Russia
and  there  was  nobody  inside  the  market  except  a  few
watchmen ;  besides,  the  Apraxin  market  and  the  timber
yards  took  fire  at  the  same  time,  and  the  conflagration
at  St.  Petersburg  was  followed  by  similar  disasters  in
several  provincial  towns.  The  fire  was  lit  by  some-


SIBERIA  191

body,  but  by  whom  ?  This  question  remains  un-
answered to  the  present  time.

Katkoff,  the  ex- Whig,  who  was  inspired  with  per-
sonal hatred  of  Herzen,  and  especially  of  Bakiinin,  with
whom  he  had  once  to  fight  a  duel,  on  the  very  day  after
the  fire  accused  the  Poles  and  the  Russian  revolutionists
of  being  the  cause  of  it ;  and  that  opinion  prevailed  at
St.  Petersburg  and  Moscow.

Poland  was  preparing  then  for  the  revolution  which
broke  out  in  the  following  January,  and  the  secret
revolutionary  government  had  concluded  an  alliance
.with  the  London  refugees,  and  had  its  men  in  the  very
heart  of  the  St.  Petersburg  administration.  Only  -a
short  time  after  the  conflagration  occurred,  the  Lord
Lieutenant  of  Poland,  Count  Liiders,  was  shot  at  by  a
Russian  officer ;  and  when  the  grand  duke  Constantine
was  nominated  in  his  place  (with  intention,  it  was  said>
of  making  Poland  a  separate  kingdom  for  Constantine)
he  also  was  immediately  shot  at,  on  June  26.  Similar
attempts  were  made  in  August  against  the  Marquis
Wielep61sky,  the  Polish  leader  of  the  pro-Russian  Union
party.  Napoleon  III.  maintained  among  the  Poles
the  hope  of  an  armed  intervention  in  favour  of  their
independence.  In  such  conditions,  judging  from  the
ordinary  narrow  military  standpoint,  to  destroy  the
Bank  of  Russia  and  several  Ministries,  and  to  spread  a
panic  in  the  capital  might  have  been  considered  a  good
plan  of  warfare  ;  but  there  never  was  the  slightest
scrap  of  evidence  forthcoming  to  support  this  hypothesis.

On  the  other  side,  the  advanced  parties  in  Russia
saw  that  no  hope  could  any  longer  be  placed  in
Alexander's  reformatory  initiative :  he  was  clearly


192  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

drifting  into  the  reactionary  camp.  To  men  of  fore-
thought it  was  evident  that  the  liberation  of  the  serfs,
under  the  conditions  of  redemption  which  were  imposed
upon  them,  meant  their  certain  ruin,  and  revolutionary
proclamations  were  issued  in  May  at  St.  Petersburg
calling  the  people  and  the  army  to  a  general  revolt,
while  the  educated  classes  were  asked  to  insist  upon
the  necessity  of  a  National  Convention.  Under  such
circumstances,  to  disorganize  the  machine  of  the
government  might  have  entered  into  the  plans  of  some
revolutionists.

Finally,  the  indefinite  character  of  the  emancipa-
tion had  produced  a  great  deal  of  fermentation  among
the  peasants,  who  constitute  a  considerable  part  of  the
population  in  all  Russian  cities ;  and  through  all  the
history  of  Russia,  every  time  such  a  fermentation  has
begun  it  has  resulted  in  anonymous  letters  foretelling
fires,  and  eventually  in  incendiarism.

It  was  possible  that  the  idea  of  setting  the  Apraxin
market  on  fire  might  occur  to  isolated  men  in  the
revolutionary  camp,  but  neither  the  most  searching
inquiries  nor  the  wholesale  arrests  which  began  all
over  Russia  and  Poland  immediately  after  the  fire
revealed  the  slightest  indication  showing  that  such  was
really  the  case.  If  anything  of  the  sort  had  been
found,  the  reactionary  party  would  have  made  capital
out  of  it.  Many  reminiscences  and  volumes  of  corre-
spondence from  those  times  have  since  been  published,
but  they  contain  no  hint  whatever  in  support  of  this
suspicion.

On  the  contrary,  when  similar  conflagrations  broke
out  in  several  towns  on  the  Volga,  and  especially  at


SIBERIA  193

Saratoff,  and  when  Zhdanoff,  a  member  of  the  Senate,
was  sent  by  the  Tsar  to  make  a  searching  inquiry,  he
returned  with  the  firm  conviction  that  the  conflagration
at  Saratoff  was  the  work  of  the  reactionary  party.
There  was  among  that  party  a  general  belief  that  it
would  be  possible  to  induce  Alexander  II.  to  postpone
the  final  abolition  of  serfdom,  which  was  to  take  place
on  February  19,  1863.  They  knew  the  weakness  of
his  character,  and  immediately  after  the  great  fire  at
St.  Petersburg  they  began  a  violent  campaign  for  post-
ponement, and  for  the  revision  of  the  emancipation
law  in  its  practical  applications.  It  was  rumoured  in
well-informed  legal  circles  that  Senator  Zhdanoff  was
in  fact  returning  with  positive  proofs  of  the  culpability
of  the  reactionaries  at  Saratoff;  but  he  died  on  his
way  back,  his  portfolio  disappeared,  and  it  has  never
been  found.

Be  it  as  it  may,  the  Aprdxin  fire  had  the  most
deplorable  consequences.  After  it  Alexander  II.  sur-
rendered to  the  reactionaries,  and — what  was  still
worse — the  public  opinion  of  that  part  of  society  at
St.  Petersburg,  and  especially  at  Moscow,  which  carried
most  weight  with  the  government  suddenly  threw  off
its  liberal  garb,  and  turned  against  not  only  the  more
advanced  section  of  the  reform  party,  but  even  against
its  moderate  wing.  A  few  days  after  the  conflagration
I  went  on  Sunday  to  see  my  cousin,  the  aide-de-camp  of
the  emperor,  in  whose  apartment  I  had  often  heard  the
Horse  Guard  officers  expressing  sympathy  with  Cherny-
shevsky ;  my  cousin  himself  had  been  up  till  then  an
assiduous  reader  of  '  The  Contemporary  '  (the  organ  of
the  advanced  reform  party).  Now  he  brought  several

VOL.  i.  o


194  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

numbers  of  '  The  Contemporary,'  and,  putting  them  on
the  table  I  was  sitting  at,  said  to  me  :  '  Well,  now,  after
this  I  will  have  no  more  of  that  incendiary  stuff;
enough  of  it ' — and  these  words  expressed  the  opinion
of  '  all  St.  Petersburg.'  It  became  improper  to  talk  of
reforms.  The  whole  atmosphere  was  laden  with  a
reactionary  spirit.  '  The  Contemporary '  and  other
similar  reviews  were  suppressed ;  the  Sunday  schools
were  prohibited  under  any  form;  wholesale  arrests
began.  The  capital  was  placed  under  a  state  of  siege.

A  fortnight  later,  on  June  13  (25),  the  time  which
we  pages  and  cadets  had  so  long  looked  for  came  at
last.  The  emperor  gave  us  a  sort  of  military  examina-
tion in  all  kinds  of  evolutions — during  which  we  com-
manded the  companies  and  I  paraded  on  a  horse  before
the  battalion — and  we  were  promoted  to  be  officers.

When  the  parade  was  over,  Alexander  II.  loudly
called  out,  '  The  promoted  officers  to  me ! '  and  we
gathered  round  him.  He  remained  on  horseback.

Here  I  saw  him  in  a  quite  new  light.  The  man
who  the  next  year  appeared  in  the  role  of  a  blood-
thirsty and  vindictive  suppressor  of  the  insurrection  in
Poland  rose  now,  full  size,  before  my  eyes,  in  the
speech  he  addressed  to  us.

He  began  in  a  quiet  tone.  '  I  congratulate  you :
you  are  officers.'  He  spoke  about  military  duty  and
loyalty  as  they  are  usually  spoken  of  on  such  occasions.
'  But  if  any  one  of  you,'  he  went  on,  distinctly  shouting
out  every  word,  his  face  suddenly  contorted  with  anger,
'but  if  any  one  of  you — which  God  preserve  you
from — should  under  any  circumstances  prove  disloyal


SIBERIA  195

to  the  Tsar,  the  throne,  and  the  fatherland — take
heed  of  what  I  say— he  will  be  treated  with  all  the
se-ve-ri-ty  of  the  laws,  without  the  slightest  com-
mi-se-ra-tion ! '

His  voice  failed ;  his  face  was  peevish,  full  of  that
expression  of  blind  rage  which  I  saw  in  my  childhood
on  the  faces  of  landlords  when  they  threatened  their
serfs  'to  skin  them  under  the  rods.'  He  violently
spurred  his  horse,  and  rode  out  of  our  circle.  Next
morning,  June  14,  by  his  orders  three  officers  were
shot  at  Modlin  in  Poland,  and  one  soldier,  Szur  by
name,  was  killed  under  the  rods.

'  Reaction,  full  speed  backwards,'  I  said  to  myself
as  we  made  our  way  back  to  the  corps.

I  saw  Alexander  II.  once  more  before  leaving  St.
Petersburg.  Some  days  after  our  promotion,  all  the
newly  appointed  officers  were  at  the  palace,  to  be
presented  to,  him.  My  more  than  modest  uniform,
with  its  prominent  grey  trousers,  attracted  universal
attention,  and  every  moment  I  had  to  satisfy  the
curiosity  of  officers  of  all  ranks,  who  came  to  ask  me
what  was  the  uniform  that  I  wore.  The  Amur  Cos-
sacks being  then  the  youngest  regiment  of  the  Eussian
army,  I  stood  somewhere  near  the  end  of  the  hundreds
of  officers  who  were  present.  Alexander  II.  found  me
and  asked,  '  So  you  go  to  Siberia  ?  Did  your  father
consent  to  it,  after  all  ?  '  I  answered  in  the  affirmative.
'  Are  you  not  afraid  to  go  so  far  ?  '  I  warmly  replied  :
'  No,  I  want  to  work.  There  must  be  so  much  to  do  in
Siberia  to  apply  the  great  reforms  which  are  going  to
be  made.'  He  looked  straight  at  me ;  he  became

o  2


196  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

pensive ;  at  last  he  said,  '  Well,  go ;  one  can  be  useful
everywhere ; '  and  his  face  took  on  such  an  expression
of  fatigue,  such  a  character  of  complete  surrender,  that
I  thought  at  once,  '  He  is  a  used-up  man ;  he  is  going
to  give  it  all  up.'

St.  Petersburg  had  assumed  a  gloomy  aspect.  Sol-
diers marched  in  the  streets.  Cossack  patrols  rode
round  the  palace,  the  fortress  was  filled  with  prisoners.
Wherever  I  went  I  saw  the  same  thing — the  triumph
of  the  reaction.  I  left  St.  Petersburg  without  regret.

I  went  every  day  to  the  Cossack  administration  to
ask  them  to  make  haste  and  deliver  me  my  papers,
and  as  soon  as  they  were  ready  I  hurried  to  Moscow
to  join  my  brother  Alexander.


II

THE  five  years  that  I  spent  in  Siberia  were  for  me  a
genuine  education  in  life  and  human  character.  I  was
brought  into  contact  with  men  of  all  descriptions  :  the
best  and  the  worst ;  those  who  stood  at  the  top  of  society
and  those  who  vegetated  at  the  very  bottom  —  the
tramps  and  the  so-called  incorrigible  criminals.  I  had
ample  opportunities  to  watch  the  ways  and  habits  of
the  peasants  in  their  daily  life,  and  still  more  opportu-
nities to  appreciate  how  little  the  State  administration
could  give  to  them,  even  if  it  were  animated  by  the
very  best  intentions.  Finally,  my  extensive  journeys,
during  which  I  travelled  over  fifty  thousand  miles  in


SIBERIA  197

carts,  on  board  steamers,  in  boats,  but  chiefly  on
horseback,  had  a  wonderful  effect  in  strengthening  my
health.  They  also  taught  me  how  little  man  really
needs  as  soon  as  he  comes  out  of  the  enchanted  circle
of  conventional  civilization.  With  a  few  pounds  of
bread  and  a  few  ounces  of  tea  in  a  leather  bag,  a  kettle
and  a  hatchet  hanging  at  the  side  of  the  saddle,  and
under  the  saddle  a  blanket,  to  be  spread  at  the  camp
fire  upon  a  bed  of  freshly  cut  spruce  twigs,  a  man  feels
wonderfully  independent,  even  amidst  unknown  moun-
tains thickly  clothed  with  woods  or  capped  with  snow.
A  book  might  be  written  about  this  part  of  my  life,  but
I  must  rapidly  glide  over  it  here,  there  being  so  much
more  to  say  about  the  later  periods.

Siberia  is  not  the  frozen  land  buried  in  snow  and
peopled  with  exiles  only  that  it  is  imagined  to  be,  even
by  many  Russians.  In  its  southern  parts  it  is  as  rich
in  natural  productions  as  are  the  southern  parts  of
Canada,  which  it  resembles  very  much  in  its  physical
aspects;  and 'beside  half  a  million  of  natives,  it  has  a
population  of  more  than  four  millions  of  Russians.
The  southern  parts  of  West  Siberia  are  as  thoroughly
Russian  as  the  provinces  to  the  north  of  Moscow.

In  1862  the  upper  administration  of  Siberia  was
far  more  enlightened  and  far  better  all  round  than  that
of  any  province  of  Russia  proper.  For  several  years
the  post  of  Governor-General  of  East  Siberia  had  been
occupied  by  a  remarkable  personage,  Count  N.  N.
Muravioff,  who  annexed  the  Amur  region  to  Russia.
He  was  very  intelligent,  very  active,  extremely  amiable,
and  desirous  to  work  for  the  good  of  the  country.
Like  all  men  of  action  of  the  governmental  school,  he


198  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

was  a  despot  at  the  bottom  of  his  heart ;  but  he  held
advanced  opinions,  and  a  democratic  republic  would
not  have  quite  satisfied  him.  He  had  succeeded  to  a
great  extent  in  getting  rid  of  the  old  staff  of  civil  service
officials,  who  considered  Siberia  a  camp  to  be  plundered,
and  he  had  gathered  around  him  a  number  of  young
officials,  quite  honest,  and  many  of  them  animated  by
the  same  excellent  intentions  as  himself.  In  his  own
study,  the  young  officers,  with  the  exile  Bakiinin
among  them  (he  escaped  from  Siberia  in  the  autumn
of  1861),  discussed  the  chances  of  creating  the  United
States  of  Siberia,  federated  across  the  Pacific  Ocean
with  the  United  States  of  America.

When  I  came  to  Irkutsk,  the  capital  of  East  Siberia,
the  wave  of  reaction  which  I  saw  rising  at  St.  Peters-
burg had  not  yet  reached  these  distant  dominions.  I
was  very  well  received  by  the  young  Governor-General,
Korsakoff,  who  had  just  succeeded  Muravioff,  and  he
told  me  that  he  was  delighted  to  have  about  him  men
of  liberal  opinions.  As  to  the  commander  of  the  General
Staff,  Kukel — a  young  general  not  yet  thirty-five  years
old,  whose  personal  aide-de-camp  I  became — he  at
once  took  me  to  a  room  in  his  house,  where  I  found,
together  with  the  best  Kussian  reviews,  complete
collections  of  the  London  revolutionary  editions  of
Herzen.  We  were  soon  warm  friends.

General  Kiikel  temporarily  occupied  at  that  time
the  post  of  Governor  of  Transbaikalia,  and  a  few  weeks
later  we  crossed  the  beautiful  Lake  Baikal  and  went
further  east,  to  the  little  town  of  Chita,  the  capital  of
the  province.  There  I  had  to  give  myself,  heart  and


SIBERIA  199

soul,  without  loss  of  time,  to  the  great  reforms  which
were  then  under  discussion.  The  St.  Petersburg
Ministries  had  applied  to  the  local  authorities,  asking
them  to  work  oat  schemes  of  complete  reform  in  the
administration  of  the  provinces,  the  organization  of  the
police,  the  tribunals,  the  prisons,  the  system  of  exile,
the  self-government  of  the  townships — all  on  broadly
liberal  bases  laid  down  by  the  emperor  in  his  mani-
festoes.

Kiikel,  supported  by  an  intelligent  and  practical
man,  Colonel  Pedashenko,  and  by  a  couple  of  well-
meaning  civil  service  officials,  worked  all  day  long,
and  often  a  good  deal  of  the  night.  I  became  the
secretary  of  two  committees — for  the  reform  of  the
prisons  and  the  whole  system  of  exile,  and  for  pre-
paring a  scheme  of  municipal  self-government — and  I
set  to  work  with  all  the  enthusiasm  of  a  youth  of
nineteen  years.  I  read  much  about  the  historical
development  of  these  institutions  in  Kussia  and  their
present  condition  abroad,  excellent  works  and  papers
dealing  with  these  subjects  having  been  published  by
the  Ministries  of  the  Interior  and  of  Justice ;  but  what
we  did  in  Transbaikalia  was  by  no  means  merely
theoretical.  I  discussed  first  the  general  outlines,  and
subsequently  every  point  of  detail,  with  practical  men,
well  acquainted  with  the  real  needs  and  the  local
possibilities ;  and  for  that  purpose  I  met  a  considerable
number  of  men  both  in  town  and  in  the  province.
Then  the  conclusions  we  arrived  at  were  re-discussed
with  Kukel  and  Pedashenko  ;  and  when  I  had  put  the
results  into  a  preliminary  shape,  every  point  was  again
very  thoroughly  thrashed  out  in  the  committees.  One


200

of  these  committees,  for  preparing  the  municipal
government  scheme,  was  composed  of  citizens  of  Chita,
elected  by  all  the  population,  as  freely  as  they  might
have  been  elected  in  the  United  States.  In  short,  our
work  was  very  serious  ;  and  even  now,  looking  back  at
it  through  the  perspective  of  so  many  years,  I  can  say
in  full  confidence  that  if  municipal  self-government  had
been  granted  then,  in  the  modest  shape  which  we  gave
to  it,  the  towns  of  Siberia  would  be  very  different  from
what  they  are.  But  nothing  came  of  it  all,  as  will
presently  be  seen.

There  was  no  lack  of  other  incidental  occupations.
Money  had  to  be  found  for  the  support  of  charitable
institutions;  an  economic  description  of  the  province
had  to  be  written  in  connection  with  a  local  agricultural
exhibition ;  or  some  serious  inquiry  had  to  be  made.
'It  is  a  great  epoch  we  live  in ;  work,  my  dear  friend ;
remember  that  you  are  the  secretary  of  all  existing  and
future  committees,'  Kukel  would  sometimes  say  to  me,
— and  I  worked  with  doubled  energy.

One  example  or  two  will  show  with  what  results.
There  was  in  our  province  a  '  district  chief  ' — that  is,
a  police  officer  invested  with  very  wide  and  indeter-
minate rights — who  was  simply  a  disgrace.  He  robbed
the  peasants  and  flogged  them  right  and  left — even
women,  which  was  against  the  law;  and  when  a
criminal  affair  fell  into  his  hands,  it  might  lie  there  for
months,  men  being  kept  in  the  meantime  in  prison  till
they  gave  him  a  bribe.  Kukel  would  have  dismissed
this  man  long  before,  but  the  Governor-General  did  not
like  the  idea  of  it,  because  he  had  strong  protectors  at
St.  Petersburg.  After  much  hesitation,  it  was  decided


SIBERIA  201

at  last  that  I  should  go  to  make  an  investigation  on
the  spot,  and  collect  evidence  against  the  man.  This
was  not  by  any  means  easy,  because  the  peasants,
terrorized  by  him,  and  well  knowing  an  old  Eussian
saying,  '  God  is  far  away,  while  your  chief  is  your
next-door  neighbour,'  did  not  dare  to  testify.  Even
the  woman  he  had  flogged  was  afraid  at  first  to  make
a  written  statement.  It  was  only  after  I  had  stayed  a
fortnight  with  the  peasants,  and  had  won  their  con-
fidence, that  the  misdeeds  of  their  chief  could  be
brought  to  light.  I  collected  crushing  evidence,  and
the  district  chief  was  dismissed.  We  congratulated  our-
selves on  having  got  rid  of  such  a  pest.  What  was,
however,  our  astonishment  when,  a  few  months  later,
we  learned  that  this  same  man  had  been  nominated  to
a  higher  post  in  Kamchatka  !  There  he  could  plunder
the  natives  free  of  any  control,  and  so  he  did.  A  few
years  later  he  returned  to  St.  Petersburg  a  rich  man.
The  articles  he  occasionally  contributes  now  to  the
reactionary  press  are,  as  one  might  expect,  full  of  high
'  patriotic  '  spirit.

The  wave  of  reaction,  as  I  have  already  said,  had
not  then  reached  Siberia,  and  the  political  exiles  con-
tinued to  be  treated  with  all  possible  leniency,  as  in
Muravioff's  time.  When,  in  1861,  the  poet  Mikhailoff
was  condemned  to  hard  labour  for  a  revolutionary  pro-
clamation which  he  had  issued,  and  was  sent  to  Siberia,
the  Governor  of  the  first  Siberian  town  on  his  way,
Tobolsk,  gave  a  dinner  in  his  honour,  in  which  all  the
officials  took  part.  In  Transbaikalia  he  was  not  kept
at  hard  labour,  but  was  allowed  officially  to  stay  in  the
hospital  prison  of  a  small  mining  village.  His  health


202  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

being  very  poor — he  was  dying  from  consumption,  and
did  actually  die  a  few  months  later — General  Kukel
gave  him  permission  to  stay  in  the  house  of  his  brother,
a  mining  engineer,  who  had  rented  a  gold  mine  from
the  Crown  on  his  own  account.  Unofficially  that  was
well  known  in  East  Siberia.  But  one  day  we  learned
from  Irkutsk  that,  in  consequence  of  a  secret  denuncia-
tion, a  General  of  the  gendarmes  (state  police)  was
on  his  way  to  Chita  to  make  a  strict  inquiry  into  the
affair.  An  aide-de-camp  of  the  Governor-General
brought  us  the  news.  I  was  despatched  in  great  haste
to  warn  Mikhailoff,  and  to  tell  him  that  he  must  return
at  once  to  the  hospital  prison,  while  the  General  of  the
gendarmes  was  kept  at  Chita.  As  that  gentleman
found  himself  every  night  the  winner  of  considerable
sums  of  money  at  the  green  table  in  Kiikel's  house,  he
soon  decided  not  to  exchange  this  pleasant  pastime  for
a  long  journey  to  the  mines  in  a  temperature  which
was  then  a  dozen  degrees  below  the  freezing-point  of
mercury,  and  eventually  went  back  to  Irkutsk  quite
satisfied  with  his  lucrative  mission.

The  storm,  however,  was  coming  nearer  and
nearer,  and  it  swept  everything  before  it  soon  after  the
insurrection  broke  out  in  Poland.


Ill

IN  January  1863  Poland  rose  against  Eussian  rule.
Insurrectionary  bands  were  formed,  and  a  war  began
which  lasted  for  full  eighteen  months.  The  London


SIBERIA  203

refugees  had  implored  the  Polish  revolutionary  com-
mittees to  postpone  the  movement.  They  foresaw  that
it  would  be  crushed,  and  would  put  an  end  to  the
reform  period  in  Kussia.  But  it  could  not  be  helped.
The  repression  of  the  nationalist  manifestations  which
took  place  at  "Warsaw  in  1861,  and  the  cruel,  quite
unprovoked  executions  which  followed,  exasperated
the  Poles.  The  die  was  cast.

Never  before  had  the  Polish  cause  so  many  sym-
pathizers in  Russia  as  at  that  time.  I  do  not  speak  of
the  revolutionists ;  but  even  among  the  more  moderate
elements  of  Eussian  society  it  was  thought,  and  was
openly  said,  that  it  would  be  a  benefit  for  Russia  to
have  in  Poland  a  friendly  neighbour  instead  of  a  hostile
subject.  Poland  will  never  lose  her  national  character,
it  is  too  strongly  developed ;  she  has,  and  will  have,  her
own  literature,  her  own  art  and  industry.  Russia  can
keep  her  in  servitude  only  by  means  of  sheer  force
and  oppression — a  condition  of  things  which  has
hitherto  favoured,  and  necessarily  will  favour,  oppression
in  Russia  herself.  Even  the  peaceful  Slavophiles  were
of  that  opinion  ;  and  while  I  was  at  school  St.  Peters-
burg society  greeted  with  full  approval  the  '  dream '
which  the  Slavophile  Ivan  Aksakoff  had  the  courage  to
print  in  his  paper,  '  The  Day.'  His  dream  was  that  the
Russian  troops  had  evacuated  Poland,  and  he  discussed
the  excellent  results  which  would  follow.

When  the  revolution  of  1863  broke  out,  several
Russian  officers  refused  to  march  against  the  Poles,
while  others  openly  took  their  part,  and  died  either
on  the  scaffold  or  on  the  battlefield.  Funds  for  the
insurrection  were  collected  all  over  Russia — quite


204  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

openly  in  Siberia — and  in  the  Russian  universities  the
students  equipped  those  of  their  comrades  who  were
going  to  join  the  revolutionists.

Then,  amidst  this  effervescence,  the  news  spread
over  Russia  that  during  the  night  of  January  10  bands
of  insurgents  had  fallen  upon  the  soldiers  who  were
cantoned  in  the  villages,  and  had  murdered  them  in
their  beds,  although  on  the  very  eve  of  that  day  the
relations  of  the  troops  with  the  Poles  seemed  to  be
quite  friendly.  There  was  some  exaggeration  in  the
report,  but  unfortunately  there  was  also  truth  in  it,
and  the  impression  it  produced  in  Russia  was  most
disastrous.  The  old  antipathies  between  the  two
nations,  so  akin  in  their  origins  but  so  different  in
their  national  characters,  woke  up  once  more.

Gradually  the  bad  feeling  faded  away  to  some
extent.  The  gallant  fight  of  the  always  brave  sons  of
Poland,  and  the  indomitable  energy  with  which  they
resisted  a  formidable  army,  won  sympathy  for  that
heroic  nation.  But  it  became  known  that  the  Polish
revolutionary  committee,  in  its  demand  for  the  re-
establishment  of  Poland  with  its  old  frontiers,  included
the  Little  Russian  or  Ukrainian  provinces,  the  Greek
Orthodox  population  of  which  hated  their  Polish  rulers,
and  more  than  once  in  the  course  of  the  last  three
centuries  slaughtered  them  wholesale.  Moreover,
Napoleon  III.  began  to  menace  Russia  with  a  new  war
— a  vain  menace,  which  did  more  harm  to  the  Poles
than  all  other  things  put  together.  And  finally,  the
radical  elements  of  Russia  saw  with  regret  that  now
the  purely  nationalist  elements  of  Poland  had  got  the
upper  hand,  the  revolutionary  government  did  not  care


SIBERIA  205

in  the  least  to  grant  the  land  to  the  serfs— a  blunder
of  which  the  Kussian  government  did  not  fail  to  take
advantage,  in  order  to  appear  in  the  position  of  pro-
tector of  the  peasants  against  their  Polish  landlords.

When  the  revolution  broke  out  in  Poland  it  was
generally  believed  in  Russia  that  it  would  take  a  demo-
cratic, republican  turn  ;  and  that  the  liberation  of  the
serfs  on  a  broad  democratic  basis  would  be  the  first  thing
which  a  revolutionary  government,  fighting  for  the
independence  of  the  country,  would  accomplish.

The  Emancipation  Law,  as  it  had  been  enacted
at  St.  Petersburg  in  1861,  provided  ample  opportunity
for  such  a  course  of  action.  The  personal  obligations
of  the  serfs  towards  their  owners  only  came  to  an
end  on  February  19,  1863.  Then  a  very  slow  process
had  to  be  gone  through  in  order  to  obtain  a  sort  of
agreement  between  the  landlords  and  the  serfs  as  to  the
size  and  the  locality  of  the  land  allotments  which  were
to  be  given  to  the  liberated  serfs.  The  yearly  pay-
ments for  these  allotments  (disproportionately  high)
were  fixed  by  law  at  so  much  per  acre ;  but  the  peasants
had  also  to  pay  an  additional  sum  for  their  homesteads,
and  of  this  sum  the  maximum  only  had  been  fixed  by  the
statute — it  having  been  thought  that  the  landlords  might
be  induced  to  forgo  that  additional  payment,  or  to  be
satisfied  with  only  a  part  of  it.  As  to  the  so-called  '  re-
demption '  of  the  land — in  which  case  the  Government
undertook  to  pay  the  landlord  its  full  value  in  State
bonds  and  the  peasants  receiving  the  land  had  to  pay
in  return,  for  forty-nine  years,  six  per  cent,  on  that  sum  as
interest  and  annuities — not  only  were  these  payments
extravagant  and  ruinous  for  the  peasants,  but  no  term


206  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

was  even  fixed  for  the  redemption  :  it  was  left  to
the  will  of  the  landlord ;  and  in  an  immense  number
of  cases  the  redemption  arrangements  had  not  been
entered  upon  twenty  years  after  the  emancipation.

Under  such  conditions  a  revolutionary  government
had  ample  opportunity  for  immensely  improving  upon
the  Russian  law.  It  was  bound  to  accomplish  an
act  of  justice  towards  the  serfs — whose  condition  in
Poland  was  as  bad  as,  and  often  worse  than,  in
Russia  itself — by  granting  them  better  and  more
definite  conditions  of  emancipation.  But  nothing  of
the  sort  was  done.  The  purely  nationalist  party  and
the  aristocratic  one  having  obtained  the  upper  hand
in  the  movement,  this  all-absorbing  matter  was  left  out
of  sight.  It  was  thus  easy  for  the  Russian  Govern-
ment to  win  the  peasants  to  its  side.

Full  advantage  was  taken  of  this  fault  when
Nicholas  Milutin  was  sent  to  Poland  by  Alexander  II.
with  the  mission  to  liberate  the  peasants  in  the  way
he  intended  doing  it  in  Russia.  '  Go  to  Poland ;
apply  there  your  Red  programme  against  the  Polish
landlords,'  said  Alexander  II.  to  him  ;  and  Milutin,  to-
gether with  Prince  Cherkassky  and  many  others,  really
did  their  best  to  take  the  land  from  the  landlords  and
give  full-sized  allotments  to  the  peasants.

I  once  met  one  of  the  Russian  functionaries  who
went  to  Poland  under  Milutin  and  Prince  Cherkassky.
'  We  had  full  liberty,'  he  said  to  me,  '  to  hold  out  the
hand  to  the  peasants.  My  usual  plan  was  to  go  to  a
village  and  convoke  the  peasants'  assembly.  "  Tell  me
first,"  I  would  say,  "what  land  do  you  hold  at  this


SIBERIA  207

moment  ?  "  They  would  point  it  out  to  me.  "  Is  this
all  the  land  you  ever  held  ?"  I  would  then  ask.  "Surely
not,"  they  would  reply  with  one  voice;  "years  ago
these  meadows  were  ours ;  this  wood  was  once  in  our
possession  ;  and  these  fields  belonged  to  us."  I  would
let  them  go  on  talking  it  all  over,  and  then  would
ask  :  "  Now,  which  of  you  can  certify  under  oath  that
this  land  or  that  land  has  ever  been  held  by  you  ?  "  Of
course  there  would  be  nobody  forthcoming — it  Was
all  too  long  ago.  At  last,  some  old  man  would  be  thrust
out  from  the  crowd,  the  rest  saying  :  "  He  knows  all
about  it,  he  can  swear  to  it."  The  old  man  would  begin
a  long  story  about  what  he  knew  in  his  youth,  or  had
heard  from  his  father,  but  I  would  cut  the  story
short.  .  .  .  "  State  on  oath  what  you  know  to  have  been
held  by  the  gmina  (the  village  community) — and  the  land
is  yours."  And  as  soon  as  he  took  the  oath — one  could
trust  that  oath  implicitly — I  wrote  out  the  papers  and
declared  to  the  assembly  :  "  Now,  this  land  is  yours.
You  stand  no  longer  under  any  obligations  whatever  to
your  late  masters :  you  are  simply  their  neighbours ;
all  you  will  have  to  do  is  to  pay  the  redemption  tax,  so
much  every  year,  to  the  Government.  Your  homesteads
go  with  the  land :  you  get  them  free."

One  can  imagine  the  effect  which  such  a  policy
produced  upon  the  peasants.  A  cousin  of  mine,  Petr
Nikolaevich,  a  brother  of  the  aide-de-camp  whom  I  have
mentioned,  was  in  Poland  or  in  Lithuania  with  his
regiment  of  uhlans  of  the  Guard.  The  revolution  was
so  serious  that  even  the  regiments  of  the  Guard  had  been
sent  against  it  from  St.  Petersburg ;  and  it  is  now
known  that  when  Mikhael  Muravioff  was  ordered  to


208  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

Lithuania,  and  came  to  take  leave  of  the  Empress  Marie,
she  said  to  him  :  '  Save  at  least  Lithuania  for  Russia.'
Poland  was  regarded  as  lost.

'  The  armed  bands  of  the  revolutionists  held  the
country,'  my  cousin  said  to  me,  '  and  we  were  power-
less to  defeat  them,  or  even  to  find  them.  Small
bands  over  and  over  again  attacked  our  small  detach-
ments, and  as  they  fought  admirably,  and  knew  the
country  and  found  support  in  the  population,  they  often
had  the  best  of  the  skirmishes.  We  were  thus  com-
pelled to  march  in  large  columns  only.  We  would  cross
a  region,  marching  through  the  woods  without  finding
any  trace  of  the  bands ;  but  when  we  inarched  back
again  we  learned  that  bands  had  appeared  in  our  rear,
that  they  had  levied  the  patriotic  tax  in  the  country,  and
if  some  peasant  had  rendered  himself  useful  in  any  way
to  our  troops  we  found  him  hanged  on  a  tree  by  the
revolutionary  bands.  So  it  went  on  for  months,  with  no
chance  of  improvement,  until  Milutin  came  and  freed
the  peasants,  giving  them  the  land.  Then — all  was
over.  The  peasants  sided  with  us ;  they  helped  us  to
lay  hold  of  the  bands,  and  the  insurrection  came  to  an
end.'

I  often  spoke  with  the  Polish  exiles  in  Siberia  upon
this  subject,  and  some  of  them  understood  the  fault  that
had  been  committed.  A  revolution,  from  its  very  outset,
must  be  an  act  of  justice  towards  the  'down-trodden
and  the  oppressed ' — not  a  promise  of  making  such  re-
paration later  on — otherwise  it  is  sure  to  fail.  Unfor-
tunately, it  often  happens  that  the  leaders  are  so  much
absorbed  with  mere  questions  of  military  tactics  that
they  forget  the  main  thing.  To  be  revolutionists,  and


SIBEKIA  209

fail  to  prove  to  the  masses  that  anew  era  has  really  begun
for  them,  is  to  ensure  the  certain  ruin  of  the  attempt.

The  disastrous  consequences  for  Poland  of  this  revo-
lution are  known  ;  they  belong  to  the  domain  of  history.
How  many  thousand  men  perished  in  battle,  how  many
hundreds  were  hanged,  and  how  many  scores  of
thousands  were  transported  to  various  provinces  of
Kussia  and  Siberia,  is  not  yet  fully  known.  But  even
the  official  figures  which  were  printed  in  Russia  a  few
years  ago  show  that  in  the  Lithuanian  provinces  alone
— not  to  speak  of  Poland  proper — that  terrible  man
Mikhael  Muravioff,  to  whom  the  Eussian  Government
has  just  erected  a  monument  at  Wilno,  hanged  by  his
own  authority  128  Poles,  and  transported  to  Russia  and
Siberia  9,423  men  and  women.  Omcial  lists,  also  pub-
lished in  Russia,  give  18,672  men  and  women  exiled  to
Siberia  from  Poland,  of  whom  10,407  were  sent  to
East  Siberia.  I  remember  that  the  Governor-General  of
East  Siberia  mentioned  to  me  the  same  number,  about
11,000  persons',  sent  to  hard  labour  or  exile  in  his
domains.  I  saw  them  there,  and  witnessed  their  suffer-
ings. Altogether,  something  like  60,000  or  70,000
persons,  if  not  more,  were  torn  out  of  Poland  and
transported  to  different  provinces  of  Russia,  to  the
Urals,  to  Caucasus,  and  to  Siberia.

For  Russia  the  consequences  were  equally  disastrous.
The  Polish  insurrection  was  the  definitive  close  of  the
reform  period.  True,  the  law  of  provincial  self-govern-
ment (Zemstvos)  and  the  reform  of  the  law  courts  were
promulgated  in  1864  and  1866  ;  but  both  were  ready  in
1862,  and,  moreover,  at  the  last  moment  Alexander  II.
gave  preference  to  the  scheme  of  self-government

VOL.  i.  p


210  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

which  had  been  prepared  by  the  reactionary  party  of
Valiieff,  as  against  the  scheme  which  had  been  pre-
pared by  Nicholas  Milutin  ;  and  immediately  after  the
promulgation  of  both  reforms  their  importance  was
reduced,  and  in  some  cases  destroyed,  by  the  enactment
of  a  number  of  by-laws.

Worst  of  all,  public  opinion  itself  took  a  further  step
backward.  The  hero  of  the  hour  was  Katkoff,  the
leader  of  the  serfdom  party,  who  appeared  now  as  a
Russian  '  patriot/  and  carried  with  him  most  of  the  St.
Petersburg  and  Moscow  society.  After  that  time,  those
who  dared  to  speak  of  reforms  were  at  once  classed  by
Katkoff  as  '  traitors  to  Russia.'

The  wave  of  reaction  soon  reached  our  remote
province.  One  day  in  March  a  paper  was  brought  by
a  special  messenger  from  Irkutsk.  It  intimated  to
General  Kiikel  that  he  was  at  once  to  leave  the  post  of
Governor  of  Transbaikalia  and  go  to  Irkutsk,  waiting
there  for  further  orders,  but  without  reassuming
there  the  post  of  commander  of  the  general  staff.

Why  ?  What  did  that  mean  ?  There  was  not  a
word  of  explanation.  Even  the  Governor- General,  a
personal  friend  of  Kiikel,  had  not  run  the  risk  of  adding
a  single  word  to  the  mysterious  order.  Did  it  mean
that  Kukel  was  going  to  be  taken  between  two
gendarmes  to  St.  Petersburg,  and  immured  in  that
huge  stone  coffin,  the  fortress  of  St.  Peter  and  St.  Paul  ?
All  was  possible.  Later  on  we  learned  that  such  was
indeed  the  intention ;  and  so  it  would  have  been  done
but  for  the  energetic  intervention  of  Count  Nicholas
Muravioff,  '  the  conqueror  of  the  Amur,'  who  personally


SIBERIA  211

implored  the  Tsar  that  Kiikel  should  be  spared  that
fate.

Our  parting  with  Kiikel  and  his  charming  family
was  like  a  funeral.  My  heart  was  very  heavy.  I  not
only  lost  in  him  a  dear  personal  friend,  but  I  felt  also
that  this  parting  was  the  burial  of  a  whole  epoch,  full
of  long-cherished  hopes — '  full  of  illusions,'  as  it  became
the  fashion  to  say.

So  it  was.  A  new  Governor  came — a  good-natured*
'  leave-me-in-peace '  man.  With  renewed  energy,  see-
ing that  there  was  no  time  to  lose,  I  completed  our
plans  of  reform  of  the  system  of  exile  and  municipal
self-government.  The  Governor  made  a  few  objections
here  and  there  for  formality's  sake,  but  finally  signed
the  schemes,  and  they  were  sent  to  headquarters.  But
at  St.  Petersburg  reforms  were  no  longer  wanted.
There  our  projects  lie  buried  still,  with  hundreds  of
similar  ones  from  all  parts  of  Kussia.  A  few  '  improved '
prisons,  even  more  terrible  than  the  old  unimproved
ones,  have  been  built  in  the  capitals,  to  be  shown
during  prison  congresses  to  distinguished  foreigners  ;
but  the  remainder,  and  the  whole  system  of  exile,  were
found  by  George  Kennan  in  1886  in  exactly  the  same
state  in  which  I  left  them  in  1862.-  Only  now,  after
thirty-six  years  have  passed  away,  the  authorities  are
introducing  the  reformed  tribunals  and  a  parody  of
self-government  in  Siberia,  and  committees  have  been
nominated  again  to  inquire  into  the  system  of  exile.

When  Kennan  came  back  to  London  from  his
journey  to  Siberia  he  managed,  on  the  very  next  day
after  his  arrival  in  London,  to  hunt  up  Stepniak,
Tchayk6vsky,  myself,  and  another  Eussian  refugee.  In

p  2


212  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

the  evening  we  all  met  at  Kennan's  room  in  a  small
hotel  near  Charing  Cross.  We  saw  him  for  the  first
time,  and  having  no  excess  of  confidence  in  enterprising
Englishmen  who  had  previously  undertaken  to  learn
all  ahout  the  Siberian  prisons  without  even  learning  a
word  of  Russian,  we  began  to  cross-examine  Kennan.
To  our  astonishment,  he  not  only  spoke  excellent
Russian,  but  he  knew  everything  worth  knowing  about
Siberia.  One  or  another  of  us  had  been  acquainted
with  the  greater  proportion  of  all  political  exiles  in
Siberia,  and  we  besieged  Kennan  with  questions :
1  Where  is  So-and-So  ?  Is  he  married  ?  Is  he  happy
in  his  marriage  ?  Does  he  still  keep  fresh  in  spirit  ?  '
We  were  soon  satisfied  that  Kennan  knew  all  about
every  one  of  them.

When  this  questioning  was  over,  and  we  were  pre-
paring to  leave,  I  asked,  '  Do  JTOU  know,  Mr.  Kennan,
if  they  have  built  a  watchtower  for  the  fire  brigade  at
Chita  ?  '  Stepniak  looked  at  me,  as  if  to  reproach  me
for  abusing  Kennan's  good  will.  Kennan,  however,
began  to  laugh,  and  I  soon  joined  him.  And  with
much  laughter  we  tossed  each  other  questions  and
answers  :  '  Why,  do  you  know  about  that  ?  '  '  And
you  too  ? '  '  Built  ?  '  '  Yes,  double  estimates  ! '  and
so  on,  till  at  last  Stepniak  interfered,  and  in  his  most
severely  good-natured  way  objected  :  '  Tell  us  at  least
what  you  are  laughing  about.'  Whereupon  Kennan
told  the  story  of  that  watchtower  which  his  readers
must  remember.  In  1859  the  Chita  people  wanted  to
build  a  watchtower,  and  collected  the  money  for  it ;
but  their  estimates  had  to  be  sent  to  the  Ministry  of
the  Interior.  So  they  went  to  St.  Petersburg ;  but


SIBERIA  213

when  they  came  back,  two  years  later,  duly  approved,
all  the  prices  for  timber  and  work  had  gone  up  in  that
rising  young  town.  This  was  in  1862,  while  I  was  at
Chita.  New  estimates  were  made  and  sent  to  St.
Petersburg,  and  the  story  was  repeated  for  full  twenty-
five  years,  till  at  last  the  Chita  people,  losing  patience,
put  in  their  estimates  prices  nearly  double  the  real  ones.
These  fantastic  estimates  were  solemnly  considered  at
St.  Petersburg,  and  approved.  This  is  how  Chita  got
its  watchtower.

It  has  often  been  said  that  Alexander  II.  committed
a  great  fault,  and  brought  about  his  own  ruin,  by  rais-
ing so  many  hopes  which  later  on  he  did  not  satisfy.
It  is  seen  from  what  I  have  just  said — and  the  story  of
little  Chita  was  the  story  of  all  Kussia — that  he  did
worse  than  that.  It  was  not  merely  that  he  raised
hopes.  Yielding  for  a  moment  to  the  current  of  public
opinion  around  him,  he  induced  men  all  over  Russia  to
set  to  work,  to  issue  from  the  domain  of  mere  hopes
and  dreams,  a'nd  to  touch  with  the  finger  the  reforms
that  were  required.  He  made  them  realize  what  could
be  done  immediately,  and  how  easy  it  was  to  do  it ;  he
induced  them  to  sacrifice  whatever  of  their  ideals  could
not  be  immediately  realized,  and  to  demand  only  what
was  practically  possible  at  the  time.  And  when  they
had  framed  their  ideas,  and  had  shaped  them  into  laws
which  merely  required  his  signature  to  become  realities,
then  he  refused  that  signature.  No  reactionist  could
raise,  or  ever  has  raised,  his  voice  to  assert  that  what
was  left — the  unreformed  tribunals,  the  absence  of
municipal  government,  or  the  system  of  exile — was
good  and  was  worth  maintaining :  no  one  has  dared  to


214  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

say  that.  And  yet,  owing  to  the  fear  of  doing  anything,
all  was  left  as  it  was ;  for  thirty-five  years  those  who
ventured  to  mention  the  necessity  of  a  change  were
treated  as  '  suspects ;  '  and  institutions  unanimously
recognized  as  bad  were  permitted  to  continue  in  exist-
ence only  that  nothing  more  might  be  heard  of  that
abhorred  word  '  reform.'


IV


SEEING  that  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  done  at
Chita  in  the  way  of  reforms,  I  gladly  accepted  the
offer  to  visit  the  Amur  that  same  summer  of  1863.

The  immense  domain  on  the  left  (northern)  bank  of
the  Amur,  and  along  the  Pacific  Coast  as  far  south  as
the  Bay  of  Peter  the  Great  (Vladivostok),  had  been
annexed  to  Bussia  by  Count  Muravioff,  almost  against
the  will  of  the  St.  Petersburg  authorities  and  certainly
without  much  help  from  them.  When  he  conceived
the  bold  plan  of  taking  possession  of  the  great  river
whose  southern  position  and  fertile  lands  had  for  the
last  two  hundred  years  always  attracted  the  Siberians  ;
and  when,  on  the  eve  of  the  opening  of  Japan  to
Europe,  he  decided  to  take  for  Russia  a  strong  position
on  the  Pacific  coast  and  to  join  hands  with  the  United
States,  he  had  almost  everybody  against  him  at
St.  Petersburg  :  the  Ministry  of  War,  which  had  no
men  to  dispose  of,  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  which  had
no  money  for  annexations,  and  especially  the  Ministry


SIBERIA  215

of  Foreign  Affairs,  always  guided  by  its  pre-occupation
of  avoiding  '  diplomatic  complications.'  Muravioff  had
thus  to  act  on  his  own  responsibility,  and  to  rely  upon
the  scanty  means  which  thinly  populated  Eastern
Siberia  could  afford  for  this  grand  enterprise.  More-
over, everything  had  to  be  done  in  a  hurry,  in  order  to
oppose  the  '  accomplished  fact '  to  the  protests  of  the
West  European  diplomatists,  which  would  certainly
be  raised.

A  nominal  occupation  would  have  been  of  no  avail,
and  the  idea  was  to  have  on  the  whole  length  of  the
great  river  and  of  its  southern  tributary,  the  Usuri —
full  2,500  miles — a  chain  of  self-supporting  settle-
ments, and  thus  to  establish  a  regular  communication
between  Siberia  and  the  Pacific  Coast.  Men  were
wanted  for  these  settlements,  and  as  the  scanty  popula-
tion of  East  Siberia  could  not  supply  them,  Muravioff
did  not  recoil  before  any  kind  of  means  of  getting  men.
Released  convicts  who,  after  having  served  their  time,
had  become  serfs  to  the  Imperial  mines,  were  freed  and
organized  as  Transbaikalian  Cossacks,  part  of  whom
were  settled  along  the  Amur  and  the  Usuri,  forming
two  new  Cossack  communities.  Then  Muravi6ff
obtained  the  release  of  a  thousand  hard-labour  convicts
(mostly  robbers  and  murderers),  who  had  to  be  settled
as  free  men  on  the  lower  Amur.  He  came  himself  to
see  them  off,  and,  as  they  were  going  to  leave,  addressed
them  on  the  beach :  '  Go,  my  children,  be  free  there,
cultivate  the  land,  make  it  Russian  soil,  start  a  new
life,'  and  so  on.  The  Russian  peasant  women  nearly
always  follow,  of  their  own  free  will,  their  husbands  if
the  latter  happen  to  be  sent  to  hard  labour  to  Siberia,


216  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

and  many  of  the  would-be  colonists  had  their  families
with  them.  But  those  who  had  none  ventured  to
remark  to  Muravioff  :  '  What  is  agriculture  without  a
wife  ?  We  ought  to  be  married.'  Whereupon  Muravioff
ordered  to  release  all  the  hard-labour  convict  women  of
the  place — about  a  hundred — and  offered  them  the
choice  of  the  man  each  of  them  would  like  to  marry
and  to  follow.  However,  there  was  little  time  to  lose ;
the  high  water  in  the  river  was  rapidly  going  down,  the
rafts  had  to  start,  and  Muravioff,  asking  the  people  to
stand  in  pairs  on  the  beach,  blessed  them,  saying  :  '  I
marry  you,  children.  Be  kind  to  each  other ;  you  men,
don't  ill-treat  your  wives — and  be  happy  ! '

I  saw  these  settlers  some  six  years  after  that  scene.
Their  villages  were  poor,  the  land  they  had  been
settled  on  having  had  to  be  cleared  from  under  virgin
forests ;  but,  all  taken,  their  settlements  were  not  a
failure,  and  '  the  Muravioff  marriages '  were  not  less
happy  than  marriages  are  on  the  average.  That
excellent,  intelligent  man,  Innocentus,  bishop  of  the
Amur,  recognized,  later  on,  these  marriages,  as  well  as
the  children  which  were  born,  as  quite  legal,  and  had
them  inscribed  on  the  Church  registers.

Muravioff  was  less  successful,  though,  with  another
batch  of  men  that  he  added  to  the  population  of  East
Siberia.  In  his  penury  of  men  he  had  accepted  a
couple  of  thousand  soldiers  from  the  punishment
battalions.  They  were  incorporated  as  '  adopted  sons '
in  the  families  of  the  Cossacks,  or  were  settled  in  joint
households  in  the  villages.  But  ten  or  twenty  years  of
barrack  life  under  the  horrid  discipline  of  Nicholas  I.'s
time  surely  was  not  a  preparation  for  an  agricultural


SIBERIA  217

life.  The  '  sons '  deserted  their  adopted  fathers  and
constituted  the  floating  population  of  the  towns,  living
from  hand  to  mouth  on  occasional  jobs,  spending
chiefly  in  drink  what  they  earned,  and  then  again
living  as  birds  in  the  sky  in  the  expectation  of  another
job  turning  up.

The  motley  crowd  of  Transbaikalian  Cossacks,  of
ex-convicts,  and  '  sons/  who  were  settled  in  a  hurry  and
often  in  a  haphazard  way  along  the  banks  of  the  Amurr
certainly  did  not  attain  prosperity,  especially  in  the  lower
parts  of  the  river  and  on  the  Usuri,  where  every  square
yard  had  often  to  be  won  upon  a  virgin  sub-tropical
forest,  and  deluges  of  rain  brought  by  the  monsoons.
in  July,  inundations  on  a  gigantic  scale,  millions  of
migrating  birds,  and  the  like  continually  destroyed  the
crops,  finally  bringing  whole  populations  to  sheer
despair  and  apathy.

Considerable  supplies  of  salt,  flour,  cured  meat,  and
so  on  had  thus  to  be  shipped  every  year  to  support
both  the  regular  troops  and  the  settlements  on  the
lower  Amur,  and  for  that  purpose  some  hundred  and
fifty  barges  used  to  be  built  and  loaded  at  Chita,  and
floated  with  the  early  spring  floods  down  the  Ingoda,
the  Shilka,  and  the  Amur.  The.  whole  flotilla  was
divided  into  detachments  of  from  twenty  to  thirty
barges,  which  were  placed  under  the  orders  of  a  number
of  Cossack  and  civil-service  officers.  Most  of  them
did  not  know  much  about  navigation,  but  they  could  be
trusted,  at  least,  not  to  steal  the  provisions  and  then
report  them  as  lost.  I  was  nominated  assistant  to  the
chief  of  all  that  flotilla — let  me  name  him,  Major
Marovsky.


218  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

My  first  experiences  in  my  new  capacity  of
navigator  were  all  but  successful.  It  so  happened  that
I  had  to  proceed  with  a  few  barges  as  rapidly  as
possible  to  a  certain  point  on  the  Amur,  and  there  to
hand  over  my  vessels.  For  that  purpose  I  had  to  hire
men  exactly  from  among  those  '  sons '  whom  I  have
already  mentioned.  None  of  them  had  ever  had  any
experience  in  river  navigation,  nor  had  I.  On  the
morning  of  our  start  my  crew  had  to  be  collected  from
the  public  houses  of  the  place,  most  of  them  being  so
drunk  at  that  early  hour  that  they  had  to  be  bathed
in  the  river  to  bring  them  back  to  their  senses.
When  we  were  afloat,  I  had  to  teach  them  everything
that  had  to  be  done.  Still,  things  went  pretty  well
during  the  day ;  the  barges,  carried  along  by  a  swift
current,  floated  down  the  river,  and  my  crew,  inexpe-
rienced though  they  were,  had  no  interest  in  throwing
their  vessels  upon  the  shore — that  would  have  required
special  exertion.  But  when  dusk  came,  and  our  huge
heavily  laden  fifty-ton  barges  had  to  be  brought  to  the
shore  and  fastened  to  it  for  the  night,  one  of  the  barges,
which  was  far  ahead  of  the  one  upon  which  I  was,  was
stopped  only  when  it  was  fast  upon  a  rock,  at  the  foot
of  a  tremendously  high  inaccessible  cliff.  There  it
stood  immovable,  while  the  level  of  the  river,  tempo-
rarily swollen  by  rains,  was  rapidly  going  down.  My
ten  men  evidently  could  not  move  it.  So  I  rowed  down
to  the  next  village  to  ask  assistance  from  the  Cossacks,
and  at  the  same  time  despatched  a  messenger  to  a  friend
— a  Cossack  officer  who  stayed  some  twenty  miles  away
and  who  had  experience  in  such  things.

The  morning  came  ;  a  hundred  Cossacks — men  and


SIBERIA  219

women — had  come  to  my  aid,  but  there  was  no  means
whatever  to  connect  the  barge  with  the  shore,  in  order
to  unload  it — so  deep  was  the  water  under  the  cliff.
And,  as  soon  as  we  attempted  to  push  it  off  the  rock,
its  bottom  was  broken  in  and  water  freely  entered  it,
sweeping  away  the  flour  and  the  salt  of  the  cargo.  To
my  great  horror,  I  perceived  lots  of  small  fish  entering
through  the  hole  and  freely  swimming  about  in  the
barge — and  I  stood  there  helpless,  not  knowing  what
to  do  next.  There  is  a  very  simple  and  effective  remedy
for  such  emergencies.  A  sack  of  flour  is  thrust  into
the  hole,  and  it  soon  takes  its  shape,  while  the  outer
crust  of  paste  which  is  formed  in  the  sack  prevents
water  from  penetrating  through  the  flour  ;  but  none  of
us  knew  anything  about  it.  Happily  enough,  a  few
minutes  later  a  barge  was  signalled  coming  down  the
river  towards  us.  The  appearance  of  the  swan  who
carried  Lohengrin  was  not  greeted  with  more  enthu-
siasm by  the  despairing  Elsa  than  that  clumsy  vessel
was  greeted  '  by  me.  The  haze  which  covered  the
beautiful  Shilka  at  that  early  hour  in  the  morning  added
even  more  to  the  poetry  of  the  vision.  It  was  my  friend
the  Cossack  officer,  who  had  realized  by  my  descrip-
tion that  no  human  force  could  drag  my  barge  off  the
rock — that  it  was  lost — and  taking '  an  empty  barge
which  by  chance  was  at  hand,  came  with  it  to  place
upon  it  the  cargo  of  my  doomed  craft.  Now  the  -hole
was  filled  up,  the  water  was  pumped  out,  and  the  cargo
was  transferred  to  the  new  barge,  which  was  fastened
alongside  mine ;  and  next  morning  I  could  continue  my
journey.  This  little  experience  was  of  great  profit  to
me,  and  I  soon  reached  my  destination  on  the  Amur


220  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

without  further  adventures  worth  mentioning.  Every
night  we  found  out  some  stretch  of  steep  but  relatively
low  shore  where  to  stop  with  the  barges  for  the  night,
and  our  fires  were  soon  lighted  on  the  bank  of  the
swift  and  clear  river,  amidst  most  beautiful  mountain
scenery.  In  daytime,  one  could  hardly  imagine  a  more
pleasant  journey  than  on  board  a  barge  which  leisurely
floats  down,  without  any  of  the  noises  of  a  steamer —
one  or  two  strokes  being  occasionally  given  with  its
immense  stern  rudder  to  keep  it  in  the  main  current.
For  the  lover  of  nature,  the  lower  part  of  the  Shilka
and  the  upper  part  of  the  Amur,  where  one  sees  a  most
beautiful,  wide,  and  swift  river  flowing  amidst  mountains
rising  in  steep  wooded  cliffs  a  couple  of  thousand  feet
above  the  water,  offers  one  of  the  most  delightful  scenes
in  the  world.  But  on  that  very  account  communication
along  the  shore,  on  horseback,  along  a  narrow  trail,  is
extremely  difficult.  I  learned  this  that  same  autumn
at  my  own  expense.  In  East  Siberia  the  seven  last
stations  along  the  Shilka  (about  120  miles)  were  known
as  the  Seven  Mortal  Sins.  This  stretch  of  the  Trans-
Siberian  railway— if  it  is  ever  built — will  cost  unimagin-
able sums  of  money :  much  more  than  the  stretch  of
the  Canadian  Pacific  line  in  the  Eocky  Mountains,  in
the  Canyon  of  the  Fraser  Biver,  has  cost.

After  I  had  delivered  my  barges,  I  made  about  a
thousand  miles  down  the  Amur  in  one  of  the  post  boats
which  are  used  on  the  river.  The  boat  is  covered  with
a  light  shed  in  its  back  part,  and  has  on  its  stem  a  box
filled  with  earth  upon  which  a  fire  is  kept  to  cook  the
food.  My  crew  consisted  of  three  men.  We  had  to


SIBERIA  221

make  haste,  and  therefore  used  to  row  in  turns  all  day
long,  while  at  night  the  boat  was  left  to  float  with  the
current,  and  I  kept  the  watch  for  three  or  four  hours
to  maintain  the  boat  in  the  midst  of  the  river  and  to
prevent  it  from  being  dragged  into  some  side  branch.
These  watches — the  full  moon  shining  above,  and  the
dark  hills  reflected  in  the  river — were  beautiful  beyond
description.  My  rowers  were  taken  from  the  same
'  sons  ;  '  they  were  three  tramps  who  had  the  reputation
of  being  incorrigible  thieves  and  robbers — and  I  carried
with  me  a  heavy  sack  full  of  bank-notes,  silver,  and
copper.  In  Western  Europe  such  a  journey  on  a
lonely  river  would  have  been  considered  risky — not  so  in
East  Siberia  ;  I  made  it  without  even  having  so  much
as  an  old  pistol,  and  I  found  my  three  tramps  excellent
company.  Only  as  we  approached  Blagoveschensk
they  became  restless.  '  Khanshina '  (the  Chinese
brandy)  is  cheap  there,'  they  reasoned  with  deep  sighs.
'  We  are  sure  to  get  into  trouble !  It's  cheap,  and  it
knocks  you  over  in  no  time  from  want  of  being  used  to
it  !'  ...  I  offered  to  leave  the  money  which  was  due
to  them  with  a  friend,  who  would  see  them  off  with
the  first  steamer.  '  That  would  not  help  us,'  they
replied  mournfully ;  '  somebody  will  offer  a  glass  .  .  .
it's  cheap,  .  .  .  and  a  glass  knocks  you  over  ! '  they
persisted  in  saying.  They  were  really  perplexed,  and
when,  a  few  months  later,  I  returned  through  the  town
I  learned  that  one  of  '  my  sons  ' — as  people  called
them  in  town — had  really  got  into  trouble.  When  he
had  sold  the  last  pair  of  boots  to  get  the  poisonous  drink,
he  had  made  some  theft  and  was  locked  up.  My  friend
finally  obtained  his  release  and  shipped  him  back.


222  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

Only  those  who  have  seen  the  Amur,  or  know  the
Mississippi  or  the  Yang-tse-kiang,  can  imagine  what
an  immense  river  the  Amur  becomes  after  it  has
joined  the  Sungari  and  can  realize  what'  tremendous
waves  roll  up  its  bed  if  the  weather  is  stormy.  When
the  rainy  season,  due  to  the  monsoons,  comes  in  July,
the  Sungari,  the  Usuri,  and  the  Amur  are  swollen  by
unimaginable  quantities  of  water;  thousands  of  low
islands,  usually  covered  with  willow  thickets,  are  inun-
dated or  torn  away,  and  the  width  of  the  river  attains
in  places  two,  three,  and  even  five  miles ;  water  rushes
into  hundreds  of  branches  and  lakes  which  spread  in
the  lowlands  along  the  main  channel ;  and  when  a
fresh  wind  blows  from  an  eastern  quarter,  against  the
current,  tremendous  waves,  higher  than  those  which
one  sees  in  the  estuary  of  the  St.  Lawrence,  roll  up
the  main  channel  as  well  as  up  its  branches.  Still
worse  is  it  when  a  typhoon  blows  from  the  Chinese
Sea  and  spreads  over  the  Amur  region.

We  experienced  such  a  typhoon.  I  was  then  on
board  a  large  decked  boat,  with  Major  Marovsky,
whom  I  had  joined  at  Blagoveschensk.  He  had  well
provided  his  boat  with  sails,  which  permitted  us  to
sail  close  to  the  wind,  and  when  the  storm  began
we  managed,  nevertheless,  to  bring  our  boat  on  the
sheltered  side  of  the  river  and  to  find  refuge  in  some
small  tributary.  There  we  stayed  for  two  days
while  the  storm  raged  with  such  fury  that  when  I
ventured  for  a  few  hundred  yards  into  the  surrounding
forest,  I  had  to  retreat  on  account  of  the  number  of
immense  trees  which  the  wind  was  blowing  down
round  me.  We  began  to  feel  very  uneasy  for  our


SIBERIA  223

barges.  It  was  evident  that  if  they  had  been  afloat
this  morning,  they  never  would  have  been  able  to  reach
the  sheltered  side  of  the  river,  but  must  have  been
driven  by  the  storm  to  the  bank  exposed  to  the  full
rage  of  the  wind,  and  there  they  must  have  been
destroyed.  A  disaster  was  almost  certain.

We  sailed  out  as  soon  as  the  main  fury  of  the
storm  had  abated.  We  knew  that  we  must  soon  over-
take two  detachments  of  barges ;  but  we  sailed  one
day,  two  days,  and  there  was  no  trace  of  them.  My
friend  Marovsky  lost  both  sleep  and  appetite,  and
looked  as  if  he  had  just  had  a  serious  illness.  He  sat
whole  days  on  the  deck,  motionless,  murmuring  :  '  All  is
lost,  all  is  lost ! '  The  villages  are  few  and  rare  in  this
part  of  the  Amur,  and  nobody  could  give  us  any
information.  A  new  storm  came  on,  and  when  we
reached  at  last  a  village,  we  learned  that  no  barges
had  passed  by  it,  and  that  quantities  of  wreck  had
been  seen  floating  down  the  river  during  the  previous
day.  It  was  evident  that  at  least  forty  barges,  which
carried  a  cargo  of  about  2,000  tons,  must  have
perished.  It  meant  a  certain  famine  next  spring  on
the  lower  Amur  if  no  supplies  were  brought  in  time.
We  were  late  in  the  season,  navigation  would  soon  be
closed,  and  there  was  no  telegraph  yet  along  the
river.

We  held  a  council  and  decided  that  Marovsky
should  sail  as  quickly  as  possible  to  the  mouth  of  the
Amur.  Some  purchases  of  grain  might  perhaps  be
made  in  Japan  before  the  close  of  the  navigation.
Meanwhile  I  was  to  go  with  all  possible  speed  up  the
river,  to  determine  the  losses,  and  do  my  best  to  cover


224  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

the  two  thousand  miles  of  the  Amur  and  the  Shilka—
in  boats,  on  horseback,  or  on  board  steamer  if  I  met
one.  The  sooner  I  could  warn  the  Chita  authorities,
and  despatch  any  amount  of  provisions  available,  the
better  it  would  be.  Perhaps  part  of  them  would
reach  this  same  autumn  the  upper  Amur,  whence  it
would  be  easier  to  ship  them  in  the  early  spring  to  the
lowlands.  Even  if  a  few  weeks  or  only  days  could  be
won,  it  might  make  an  immense  difference  in  case  of  a
famine.

I  began  my  two  thousand  miles'  journey  in  a
rowing  boat,  changing  rowers  each  twenty  miles  or  so,
at  each  village.  It  was  very  slow  progress,  but  there
might  be  no  steamer  coming  up  the  river  for  a  fort-
night, and  in  the  meantime  I  could  reach  the  spots
where  the  barges  were  wrecked  and  see  if  any  of  the
provisions  had  been  saved.  Then,  at  the  mouth  of  the
Usuri  (Khabarovsk)  I  might  find  a  steamer.  The
boats  which  I  took  in  the  villages  were  miserable,  and
the  weather  very  stormy.  We  kept  evidently  along
the  shore,  but  we  had  to  cross  some  branches  of  the
Amur  of  great  width,  and  the  waves,  driven  by  the
high  wind,  threatened  continually  to  swamp  our  little
craft.  One  day  we  had  to  cross  a  branch  of  the  Amur
nearly  half  a  mile  wide.  Chopped  waves  rose  like
mountains  as  they  rolled  up  that  branch.  My  rowers,
two  peasants,  were  seized  with  terror ;  their  faces
were  white  as  paper;  their  blue  lips  trembled,  they
murmured  prayers.  Only  a  boy  of  fifteen,  who  held
the  rudder,  calmly  kept  a  watchful  eye  upon  the  waves.
He  glided  between  them  as  they  seemed  to  sink
around  us  for  a  moment :  but  when  he  saw  them


SIBERIA  225

rising  to  a  menacing  height  in  front  of  us  he  gave  a
slight  turn  to  the  boat  and  steadied  it  across  the  waves.
The  boat  shipped  water  from  each  wave,  and  I  threw  it
out  with  an  old  ladle,  noting  at  times  that  it  accumu-
lated more  rapidly  than  I  could  get  rid  of  it.  There
was  a  moment  when  the  boat  shipped  two  such  big
waves  that,  on  a  sign  given  to  me  by  one  of  the
trembling  rowers,  I  unfastened  the  heavy  sackful  of
copper  and  silver  that  I  carried  across  my  shoulder.  .  .
For  several  days  in  succession  we  had  such  crossings.
I  never  forced  the  men  to  cross,  but  they  themselves,
knowing  why  I  had  to  hurry,  would  decide  at  a  given
moment  that  an  attempt  must  be  made.  '  There  are
not  seven  deaths  in  one's  life,  and  one  cannot  be
avoided,'  they  would  say,  and,  signing  themselves  with
the  cross,  would  seize  the  oars  and  pull  over.

I  soon  reached  the  places  where  the  main  destruc-
tion of  our  barges  took  place.  Forty-four  barges  had
been  destroyed,  by  the  storm.  Unloading  had  been
impossible,  and  very  little  of  the  cargo  had  been  saved.
Two  thousand  tons  of  flour  had  perished  in  the  waves.
With  this  message  I  continued  my  journey.

A  few  days  later  a  steamer  slowly  creeping  up
the  river  overtook  me,  and  when  I  boarded  her  the
passengers  told  me  that  the  captain  had  drunk  so
much  that  he  was  seized  with  delirium  and  jumped
overboard.  He  was  saved,  though,  and  was  now  lying
ill  in  his  cabin.  They  asked  me  to  take  the  command
of  the  steamer,  and  I  had  to  accept  it ;  but  soon  I
realized,  to  my  great  astonishment,  that  everything  went
on  by  itself  in  such  an  excellent  routine  way  that,
though  I  paraded  all  day  on  the  bridge,  I  had  almost

VOL.  I.  Q


226  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

nothing  to  do.  Apart  from  a  few  minutes  of  real
responsibility  when  the  steamer  had  to  be  brought  to
the  landing-places,  where  we  took  wood  for  fuel,  and
saying  a  few  words  now  and  then  for  encouraging  the
stokers  to  start  as  soon  as  dawn  permitted  us  faintly  to
distinguish  the  outlines  of  the  shores,  everything  went
on  by  itself,  requiring  but  little  interference  of  mine.
A  pilot  who  would  have  been  able  to  interpret  the  map
would  have  managed  as  well.

Travelling  by  steamer  and  a  great  deal  on  horseback
I  reached  at  last  Transbaikalia.  The  idea  of  a  famine
that  might  break  out  next  spring  on  the  lower  Amur
oppressed  me  all  the  time.  I  found  that  the  small
steamer  on  board  of  which  I  was  did  not  progress
up  the  swift  Shilka  rapidly  enough,  and  in  order  to
gain  some  twenty  hours,  or  even  less,  I  abandoned  it
and  rode  with  a  Cossack  a  couple  of  hundred  miles  up
the  Argun,  along  one  of  the  wildest  mountain  tracks  in
Siberia,  stopping  to  light  our  camp  fire  only  after  mid-
night would  have  overtaken  us  in  the  woods.  Even
the  ten  or  twenty  hours  that  I  might  gain  by  this
exertion  had  not  to  be  despised,  because  every  day
brought  us  nearer  to  the  close  of  navigation  :  at  nights,
ice  was  already  forming  on  the  river.  At  last  I  met
the  Governor  of  Transbaikalia,  and  my  friend,  Colonel
Pedashenko,  on  the  Shilka,  at  the  convict  settlement  of
Kara,  and  the  latter  took  in  hand  the  care  of  shipping
immediately  all  available  provisions.  As  to  me,  I  left
immediately  to  report  all  about  the  matter  at  Irkutsk.

People  at  Irkutsk  wondered  that  I  had  managed  to
make  this  long  journey  so  rapidly,  but  I  was  quite  worn
out.  However,  youth  quickly  recovers  its  strength,


SIBERIA  227

and  I  recovered  mine  by  sleeping  for  some  time  such  a
number  of  hours  every  day  that  I  should  be  ashamed  to
say  how  many.

'  Have  you  taken  some  rest  ? '  the  Governor- General
asked  me  a  week  or  so  after  my  arrival.  '  Could  you
start  to-morrow  for  St.  Petersburg,  as  a  courier,  to
report  there  yourself  upon  the  loss  of  the  barges  ?  '

It  meant  to  cover  in  twenty  days — not  one  day
more — another  distance  of  3,200  miles  between  Irkutsk
and  Nijni-N6vgorod,  where  I  could  take  the  railway  to
St.  Petersburg  ;  to  gallop  day  and  night  in  post-carts
which  had  to  be  changed  at  every  station,  because  no
carriage  would  stand  such  a  journey  full  speed  over  the
ruts  of  the  roads  frozen  at  the  end  of  the  autumn.  But
to  see  my  brother  Alexander  was  too  great  an  attraction
for  me  not  to  accept  the  offer,  and  I  started  the  next
night.  '  When  I  reached  the  lowlands  of  West  Siberia
and  the  Urals  the  journey  really  became  a  torture.
There  were  days  when  the  wheels  of  the  carts  would  be
broken  over  the  frozen  ruts  at  every  successive  station.
The  rivers  were  freezing,  and  I  had  to  cross  the  Ob  in
a  boat  amidst  the  floating  ice,  which  menaced  at  every
moment  to  crush  our  small  craft.  When  I  reached
the  Tom  river,  on  which  the  ice  had  only  stopped  float-
ing during  the  preceding  night,  the  peasants  refused
for  some  time  to  take  me  over,  asking  me  to  give  them
'  a  receipt.'

'  What  sort  of  receipt  do  you  want  ?  '

'Well,  you  write  on  a  paper:  "I,  undersigned,
hereby  testify  that  I  was  drowned  by  the  will  of  God
and  by  no  fault  of  the  peasants,"  and  you  give  us  that
paper.'

a  2


228  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

'  With  pleasure,  on  the  other  shore.'

At  last  they  took  me  over.  A  boy — a  brave,  bright
boy  whom  I  had  selected  in  the  crowd — opened  the
procession,  testing  the  strength  of  the  ice  with  a  pole  ;
I  followed  him,  carrying  my  despatch-box  on  my
shoulders,  and  we  two  were  attached  to  long  reins  which
five  peasants  held,  following  us  at  a  distance — one  of
them  carrying  a  bundle  of  straw,  to  be  thrown  on  the
ice  if  it  should  not  seem  strong  enough.

At  last  I  reached  Moscow,  where  my  brother  met
me  at  the  station,  and  we  proceeded  at  once  to  St.
Petersburg.

Youth  is  a  grand  thing.  After  such  a  journey,
which  lasted  twenty-four  days  and  nights,  when  I  came,
early  in  the  morning,  to  St.  Petersburg,  I  went  the
same  day  to  deliver  my  despatches,  and  did  not  fail  also
to  call  upon  an  aunt — or,  rather,  upon  a  cousin —
who  resided  at  St.  Petersburg.  She  was  radiant.
'We  have  a  dancing  party  to-night.  Will  you
come  ?  '  she  said.  Of  course  I  would  !  And  not  only
come,  but  dance  until  an  early  hour  of  the  morning.

When  I  came  to  St.  Petersburg  and  saw  the
authorities,  I  understood  why  I  had  been  sent  to
make  the  report.  Nobody  would  believe  the  possibility
of  such  a  destruction  of  the  barges.  '  Have  you  been
on  the  spot  ?  Did  you  see  the  destruction  with
your  own  eyes?  Are  you  perfectly  sure  that
"they"  have  not  simply  stolen  the  provisions  and
shown  you  the  wreck  of  some  barges  ? '  Such  were
the  questions  I  had  to  answer.

The  high  functionaries  who stood  at  the  head  of


SIBERIA  229

Siberian  affairs  at  St.  Petersburg  were  simply  charming
in  their  innocent  ignorance  of  Siberia.  'Mais,  mon
cher,'  one  of  them  said  to  me — he  always  spoke
French — '  how  is  it  possible  that  forty  barges  should
be  destroyed  on  the  Neva  without  anyone  rushing  to
help  save  them  ?  '  '  The  Neva,'  I  exclaimed ;  '  put
three,  four  Nevas  side  by  side,  and  you  will  have  the
lower  Amur ! '

'  Is  it  really  as  big  as  that  ?  '  And  two  minutes
later  he  was  chatting,  in  excellent  French,  about  all
sorts  of  things.  '  When  did  you  last  see  Schwartz,  the
painter?  Is  not  his  "  John  the  Terrible  "  a  wonderful
picture  ?  Do  you  know  for  what  reason  Kiikel  was
going  to  be  arrested?  Do  you  know  that  Cherny-
shevsky  is  arrested  ?  He  is  now  in  the  fortress.'

'  What  for  ? What  has  he  done?  '  I  asked.

'  Nothing  particular ;  nothing  !  But,  mon  cher,  you
know,  State  considerations !  Such  a  clever  man,
awfully  clever  \,t  And  such  an  influence  he  has  upon  the
youth.  You  understand  that  a  Government  cannot
tolerate  that :  that's  impossible  !  intolerable,  mon  cher,
dans  un  ]£tat  Hen  ordonne  ! '

Count  Ignatieff  made  no  such  questions ;  he  knew
the  Amur  very  well,  and  he  knew  St.  Petersburg  too.
Amidst  all  sorts  of  jokes,  and  witty  remarks  about  Siberia
which  he  made  with  an  astounding  vivacity,  he  dropped
to  me  :  '  It  is  a  very  lucky  thing  that  you  were  there  on
the  spot,  and  saw  the  wrecks.  And  "  they "  were
clever  to  send  you  with  the  report !  Well  done !  At
first,  nobody  wanted  to  believe  about  the  barges.
Some  new  swindling,  it  was  thought.  But  now  people
say  that  you  were  well  known  as  a  page,  and  you  have


230  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

only  been  a  few  months  in  Siberia  ;  so  you  would  not
shelter  the  people  there  if  it  were  swindling.  They
trust  in  you."

The  Minister  of  War,  Dmitri  Miliitin,  was  the  only
man  in  the  high  administration  of  St.  Petersburg  who
took  the  matter  seriously.  He  asked  me  many  ques-
tions :  all  to  the  point.  He  mastered  the  subject  at
once,  and  all  our  conversation  was  in  short  sentences,
without  hurry,  but  without  any  waste  of  words.  '  The
coast  settlements  to  be  supplied  from  the  sea,  you  mean  ?
The  remainder  only  from  Chita  ?  Quite  right.  But
if  a  storm  happens  next  year,  will  there  be  the  same
destruction  once  more  ?  '  '  No,  if  there  are  two  small
tugs  to  convoy  the  barges.'  'Will  it  do?'  'Yes,
with  one  tug  the  loss  would  not  have  been  half  so
heavy.'  '  Very  probably.  Write  to  me,  please ;  state
all  you  have  said,  quite  plainly  ;  no  formalities.'


I  DID  not  stay  long  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  returned
to  Irkutsk  the  same  winter.  My  brother  was  going  to
join  me  there  in  a  few  months ;  he  was  accepted  as  an
officer  of  the  Irkutsk  Cossacks.

Travelling  across  Siberia  in  the  winter  is  supposed
to  be  a  terrible  experience ;  but,  all  things  considered,
it  is  on  the  whole  more  comfortable  than  at  any  other
season  of  the  year.  The  snow-covered  roads  are
excellent,  and,  although  the  cold  is  fearful,  one  can  stand


SIBERIA  231

it  well  enough.  Ikying  full  length  in  the  sledge — as
everyone  does  in  Siberia — wrapped  in  fur  blankets,  fur
inside  and  fur  outside,  one  does  not  suffer  much  from
the  cold,  even  when  the  temperature  is  forty  or  sixty
Fahrenheit  degrees  below  zero.  Travelling  in  courier
fashion — that  is,  rapidly  changing  horses  at  each  station
and  stopping  only  once  a  day  for  one  hour  to  take  a
meal — I  reached  Irkutsk  nineteen  days  after  I  had
left  St.  Petersburg.  Two  hundred  miles  a  day  is  the
normal  speed  in  such  cases,  and  I  remember  having
covered  the  last  660  miles  before  Irkutsk  in  seventy
hours.  The  frost  was  not  severe  then,  the  roads  were  in
an  excellent  condition,  the  drivers  were  kept  in  good
spirits  by  a  free  allowance  of  silver  coins,  and  the  team
of  three  small  and  light  horses  seemed  to  enjoy  running
swiftly  across  hill  and  vale,  and  across  rivers  frozen
as  hard  as  steel,  amidst  forests  glistening  in  their
silver  attire  in  the  rays  of  the  sun.

I  was now  nominated attache to  the  Governor-

'j

General  of  East  Siberia  for  Cossack  affairs,  and  had
to  reside  at  Irkutsk ;  but  there  was  nothing  particular
to  do.  To  let  everything  go  on,  according  to  the
established  routine,  with  no  more  reference  to  changes,
such  was  the  watchword  that  came  now  from  St.
Petersburg.  I  therefore  gladly  accepted  the  proposal
to  undertake  geographical  exploration  in  Manchuria.

If  one  casts  a  glance  on  a  map  of  Asia  one  sees  that
the  Russian  frontier,  which  runs  in  Siberia,  broadly
speaking,  along  the  fiftieth  degree  of  latitude,  suddenly
bends  in  Transbaikalia  to  the  north.  It  follows  for
three  hundred  miles  the  Argun  river  ;  then,  on  reaching
the  Amur,  it  turns  south-eastwards — the  town  of


232  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

Blagoveschensk,  which  was  the  capital  of  the  Amur
land,  being  situated  again  in  about  the  same  latitude
of  fifty  degrees.  Between  the  south-eastern  corner  of
Transbaikalia  (New  Tsurukhaitu)  and  Blagoveschensk
on  the  Amur,  the  distance  west  to  east  is  only  five
hundred  miles  ;  but  along  the  Argun  and  the  Amur  it  is
over  a  thousand  miles,  and  moreover  communication
along  the  Argun,  which  is  not  navigable,  is  extremely
difficult.  In  its  lower  parts  there  is  nothing  but  a  most
wild  mountain  track.

Transbaikalia  is  very  rich  in  cattle,  and  the  Cossacks
who  occupy  its  south-eastern  corner,  and  are  wealthy
cattle-breeders,  wanted  to  establish  a  direct  com-
munication with  the  middle  Amur,  which  would  be  a
good  market  for  their  cattle.  They  used  to  trade  with
the  Mongols,  and  they  had  heard  from  them  that  it
would  not  be  difficult  to  reach  the  Amur,  travelling
eastwards  across  the  Great  Khingan.  Going  straight
towards  the  east,  they  were  told,  one  would  fall  in
with  an  old  Chinese  route  which  crosses  the  Khingan
and  leads  to  the  Manchurian  town  of  Merghen  (on  the
Nonni  river,  a  tributary  to  the  Sungari),  whence  an
excellent  road  leads  to  the  middle  Amur.

I  was  offered  the  leadership  of  a  trading  caravan
which  the  Cossacks  intended  to  organize  in  order  to
find  that  route,  and  I  accepted  it  with  enthusiasm.
No  European  had  ever  visited  that  region,  and  a
Russian  topographer  who  went  that  way  a  few  years
before  was  killed.  Only  two  Jesuits,  in  the  time  of  the
emperor  Kan-si,  had  penetrated  from  the  south  as
far  as  Merghen,  and  had  determined  its  latitude.  All
the  immense  region  to  the  north  of  it,  five  hundred


SIBERIA  233

miles  wide  and  five  hundred  miles  deep,  was  totally,
absolutely  unknown.  I  consulted  all  the  available
sources  about  this  region.  Nobody,  not  even  the
Chinese  geographers,  knew  anything  about  it.  Besides,
the  very  fact  of  connecting  the  middle  Amur  with
Transbaikalia  had  its  importance  ;  Tsurukhaitu  is  now
going  to  be  the  head  of  the  Trans-Manchuria  railway.
We  were  thus  the  pioneers  of  that  great  enterprise.

There  was,  however,  one  difficulty.  The  treaty
with  China  granted  to  the  Kussians  free  trade  with
the  'Empire  of  China  and  Mongolia.'  Manchuria
was  not  mentioned  in  it,  and  could  as  well  be  excluded
as  included  in  the  treaty.  The  Chinese  frontier
authorities  interpreted  it  one  way,  and  the  Russians
the  other  way.  Moreover,  only  trade  being  mentioned,
an  officer  would  not  be  allowed  to  enter  Manchuria.
I  had  thus  to  go  as  a  trader,  and  accordingly  I  bought
at  Irkutsk  various  goods,  and  went  disguised  as  a

merchant. The Governor-General delivered me a

•

passport,  '  To  the  Irkutsk  second  guild  merchant
Petr  Alexeiev  and  his  companions,'  and  he  warned
me  that  if  the  Chinese  authorities  arrested  me  and
took  me  to  Pekin,  and  thence  across  the  Gobi  to  the
Eussian  frontier — in  a  cage  on  a  camel's  back  was
their  way  of  conveying  prisoners  across  Mongolia — I
must  not  betray  him  by  naming  myself.  I  accepted,
of  course,  all  the  conditions,  the  temptation  to  visit  a
country  which  no  European  had  ever  seen  being  too
great  for  an  explorer.

It  would  not  have  been  easy  to  conceal  my
identity  while  I  was  in  Transbaikalia.  The  Cossacks
are  an  extremely  inquisitive  sort  of  people — real


234  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

Mongols — and  as  soon  as  a  stranger  comes  to  one  of
their  villages,  while  treating  him  with  the  greatest
hospitality,  the  master  of  the  house  submits  the  new-
comer to  a  formal  interrogatory.

'A  tedious  journey,  I  suppose,'  he  begins;  '  a  long
way  from  Chita,  is  it  not  ?  And  then,  perhaps,
longer  still  for  one  who  comes  from  some  place
beyond  Chita  ?  Maybe  from  Irkutsk  ?  Trading
there,  I  believe?  Many  tradesmen  come  this  way.
You  are  going  also  to  Nerchinsk,  I  should  say? —
Yes,  people  are  often  married  at  your  age  ;  and  you,
too,  must  have  left  a  family,  I  suppose  ?  Many
children  ?  Not  all  boys,  I  should  say  ?  '  And  so  on
for  quite  half  an  hour.

The  local  commander  of  the  Cossacks,  Captain
Buxhovden,  knew  his  people,  and  consequently  we
had  taken  our  precautions.  At  Chita  and  at  Irkutsk
we  often  had  had  amateur  theatricals,  playing  in
preference  dramas  of  Ostrovsky,  in  which  the  scene
of  action  is  nearly  always  amongst  the  merchant
classes.  I  played  several  times  in  different  dramas,  and
found  such  great  pleasure  in  acting  that  I  even  wrote
on  one  occasion  to  my  brother  an  enthusiastic  letter
confessing  to  him  my  passionate  desire  to  abandon
my  military  career  and  to  go  on  the  stage.  I  played
mostly  young  merchants,  and  had  so  well  got  hold
of  their  ways  of  talking  and  gesticulating,  and  tea-
drinking  from  the  saucer — I  knew  these  ways  since
my  Nik61skoye  experiences — that  now  I  had  a  good
opportunity  to  act  it  all  out  in  reality  for  useful
purposes.

'  Take  your  seat,  Petr  Alexeievich,'  Captain  Bux-


SIBERIA  285

hovden  would  say  to  me,  when  the  boiling  tea-urn,
throwing  out  clouds  of  steam,  was  placed  on  the  table.

'  Thank  you ;  we  may  stay  here,'  I  would  reply,
sitting  on  the  edge  of  a  chair  at  a  distance,  and
beginning  to  drink  my  tea  in  true  Moscow-merchant
fashion.  Buxhovden  meanwhile  nearly  exploded  with
laughter  as  I  blew  upon  my  saucer  with  staring  eyes,
and  bit  off  in  a  special  way  microscopic  particles  from
a  small  lump  of  sugar  which  was  to  serve  for  half  a
dozen  cups.

We  knew  that  the  Cossacks  would  soon  make  out
the  truth  about  me,  but  the  important  thing  was  to
win  a  few  days  only,  and  to  cross  the  frontier  while  my
identity  was  not  yet  discovered.  I  must  have  played
my  part  pretty  well,  as  the  Cossacks  treated  me  as  a
small  merchant.  In  one  village  an  old  woman
beckoned  me  in  the  passage  and  asked  me :  '  Are
there  more  people  coming  behind  you  on  the  road,
my  dear?'  'None,  grandmother,  that  we  heard  of.'
'  They  said  a  prince,  Rapotsky,  was  going  to  come.
Is  he  coming  ?  '

'  Oh,  I  see.  You  are  right,  grandmother.  His
Highness  intended  to  go,  too,  from  Irkutsk.  But
how  can  he  ?  Such  a  journey  !  Not  suitable  for
them.  So  they  remained  where  they  were.'

'  Of  course,  how  can  he  ?  '

In  short,  we  crossed  the  frontier  unmolested.  We
were  eleven  Cossacks,  one  Tungus,  and  myself,  all  on
horseback.  We  had  with  us  about  forty  horses  for
sale  and  two  carts,  one  of  which,  two-wheeled,
belonged  to  me,  and  contained  the  cloth,  the  velveteen,
the  gold  braid,  and  so  on,  which  I  had  taken  in  my


23(5  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

capacity  of  merchant.  I  attended  to  it  and  to  my
horses  entirely  myself,  while  we  chose  one  of  the
Cossacks  to  be  the  '  elder '  of  our  caravan.  He  had  to
manage  all  the  diplomatic  talk  with  the  Chinese
authorities.  All  Cossacks  spoke  Mongolian,  and  the
Tungus  understood  Manchurian.  The  Cossacks  of
the  caravan  knew,  of  course,  who  I  was — one
of  them  knew  me  at  Irkutsk — but  they  never
betrayed  that  knowledge,  understanding  that  the  suc-
cess of  the  expedition  depended  upon  it.  I  wore  a
long  blue  cotton  dress,  like  the  others,  and  the
Chinese  paid  no  attention  to  me,  so  that  I  could  make,
unnoticed  by  them,  the  compass  survey  of  the  route.
The  first  day  only,  when  all  sorts  of  Chinese  soldiers
hung  about  us  in  the  hope  of  getting  a  glass  of  whisky,
I  had  often  to  cast  only  a  furtive  glance  at  my  compass
and  to  inscribe  the  bearings  and  the  distances  in  my
pocket,  without  taking  my  paper  out.  "We  had  with
us  no  arms  whatever.  Only  our  Tungus,  who  was
going  to  marry,  had  taken  his  matchlock  gun  and
used  it  to  hunt  for  fallow  deer,  bringing  us  meat  for
supper,  and  making  a  provision  of  furs  with  which  to
pay  for  his  future  wife.

When  there  was  no  more  whisky  to  be  obtained
from  us  the  Chinese  soldiers  left  us  alone.  So  we
went  straight  eastwards,  finding  our  way  as  best  we
could  across  hill  and  dale,  and  after  a  four  or  five  days'
inarch  we  really  fell  in  with  the  Chinese  track  which
had  to  take  us  across  the  Khingan  to  Merghen.

To  our  astonishment  we  discovered  that  the  crossing
of  the  great  ridge,  which  looked  so  black  and  terrible
on  the  maps,  was  most  easy.  We  overtook  on  the


SIBERIA  237

road  an  old  Chinese  functionary,  miserably  wretched,
who  travelled  in  the  same  direction  in  a  two-wheeled
cart.  For  the  last  two  days  the  road  was  going  up  hill,
and  the  country  bore  testimony  to  its  high  altitude.
The  ground  became  marshy,  and  the  road  was  muddy ;
the  grass  was  very  poor,  and  the  trees  grew  thin,  un-
developed, often  crippled  and  covered  with  lichens.
Mountains  devoid  of  forests  rose  right  and  left,  and  we
thought  already  of  the  difficulties  we  should  experience
in  crossing  the  ridge,  when  we  saw  the  old  Chinese
functionary  alighting  from  his  cart  before  an  060 — that
is,  before  a  heap  made  of  stones  and  branches  of  trees
to  which  bundles  of  horsehair  and  small  rags  had  been
attached.  He  drew  several  hairs  out  of  the  mane
of  his  horse,  and  attached  them  to  the  branches.

'  What  is  that  ?  '  we  asked.

'  The  obo — the  waters  before  us  flow  now  to  the
Amur.'

'  Is  that  all  pf  the  Khingan  ?  '

'  Yes !  No  mountains  more  to  cross  as  far  as  the
Amur  :  only  hills !  '

Quite  a  commotion  spread  in  our  caravan.  '  The
rivers  flow  to  the  Amur,  the  Amur ! '  shouted  the
Cossacks  to  each  other.  All  their  lives  they  had  heard
the  old  Cossacks  talking  about  the  great  river  where
the  vine  grows  wild,  where  the  prairies  extend  for
hundreds  of  miles  and  could  give  wealth  to  millions  of
men ;  then,  after  the  Amur  was  annexed  to  Kussia,
they  heard  of  the  long  journey  to  it,  the  difficulties  of
the  first  settlers,  and  the  prosperity  of  their  relatives
settled  on  the  upper  Amur ;  and  now  we  had  found
the  short  way  to  it !  "We  had  before  us  a  steep


238  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

slope  upon  which  the  road  went  downwards  in  zig-zags
leading  to  a  small  river,  which  pierced  its  way  through
a  chopped  sea  of  mountains,  and  led  to  the  Amur.  No
more  obstacles  lay  between  us  and  the  great  river.  A
traveller  will  imagine  my  delight  at  this  unexpected  geo-
graphical discovery.  As  to  the  Cossacks,  they  hastened
to  dismount  and  to  attach  in  their  turn  bundles  of  hair
taken  from  their  horses  to  the  branches  thrown  on  the
obd.  The  Siberians  altogether  have  a  sort  of  awe  for
the  gods  of  the  heathen.  They  don't  think  much  of
them,  but  these  gods,  they  say,  are  wicked  creatures,
bent  on  mischief,  and  it  is  never  good  to  be  on  bad
terms  with  them.  It  is  far  better  to  bribe  them  with
small  tokens  of  respect.

'  Look,  here  is  a  strange  tree :  it  must  be  an  oak,'
they  exclaimed,  as  we  went  down  the  steep  slope.  The
oak  does  not  grow,  indeed,  in  Siberia.  None  is  found
until  the  eastern  slope  of  the  high  plateau  has  been
reached.  '  Look,  nut  trees !  '  they  exclaimed  next.
'  And  what  tree  is  that  ? '  they  said,  seeing  a  lime  tree,
or  some  other  tree  which  does  not  grow  in  Eussia  either,
but  which  I  knew  as  part  of  the  Manchurian  flora.
The  northerners,  who  for  centuries  had  dreamed  of
warmer  lands,  and  now  saw  them,  were  in  delight.
Lying  on  the  ground  covered  with  rich  grass,  they
caressed  it  with  their  eyes — they  would  have  kissed  it.
Now  they  burned  with  the  desire  to  reach  the  Amur  as
soon  as  possible.  When,  a  fortnight  later,  we  stopped
at  our  last  camp  fire  within  twenty  miles  from  the
river,  they  grew  impatient  like  children.  They  began
to  saddle  their  horses  shortly  after  midnight,  and
hurried  me  to  start  long  before  daybreak ;  and  when  at


SIBERIA  239

last  we  caught  from  an  eminence  *  a  sight  of  the
mighty  stream,  the  eyes  of  these  unimpressionable
Siberians,  generally  devoid  of  poetical  feeling,  gleamed
with  poetical  ardour  as  they  looked  upon  the  blue
waters  of  the  majestic  Amur.  It  was  evident  that,
sooner  or  later— with  or  without  the  support,  or  even
against  the  wish,  of  the  Russian  Government — both
banks  of  this  river,  a  desert  now  but  rich  in  possibilities,
as  well  as  the  immense  unpopulated  stretches  of  North
Manchuria,  would  be  invaded  by  Russian  settlers,  just
as  the  shores  of  the  Mississippi  were  colonized  by  the
Canadian  voyageurs.

In  the  meantime  the  old  half-blind  Chinese
functionary  with  whom  we  had  crossed  the  Khingan,
having  donned  his  blue  coat  and  official  hat  with  a
glass  button  on  its  top,  declared  to  us  next  morning
that  he  would  not  let  us  go  further.  Our  '  elder '  had
received  him  and  his  clerk  in  our  tent,  and  the  old
man,  repeating  what  the  clerk  whispered  to  him,  raised
all  sorts  of  objections  to  our  further  progress.  He
wanted  us  to  camp  on  the  spot  while  he  would  send
our  pass  to  Pekin  to  get  orders,  which  we  absolutely
refused  to  do.  Then  he  sought  to  quarrel  with  our
passport.

'  What  sort  of  a  passport  is  that  ?  '  he  said,  looking
with  disdain  into  our  pass,  which  was  written  in  a  few
lines  on  a  plain  sheet  of  foolscap  paper,  in  Russian  and
Mongolian,  and  had  a  simple  sealing-wax  seal.  '  You
may  have  written  it  yourselves  and  sealed  it  with  a
copper,'  he  remarked.  '  Look  at  my  pass :  this  is
worth  something,'  and  he  unrolled  before  us  a  sheet  of
paper,  two  feet  long,  covered  with  Chinese  characters.


240  MEMOIRS  OF A REVOLUTIONIST

I  sat  quietly  aside  during  this  conference,  packing
something  in  my  box,  when  a  sheet  of  the  '  Moscow
Gazette  '  fell  under  my  hand.  The  Gazette,  being  the
property  of  the  Moscow  University,  had  an  eagle
printed  on  its  title-heading.  '  Show  him  this,'  I  said  to
our  elder.  He  unfolded  the  large  sheet  of  print  and
pointed  out  the  eagle.  '  That  pass  was  to  show  to  you,'
our  elder  said,  '  but  this  is  what  we  have  for  ourselves.'

'  Why,  is  it  all  written  about  you  ?  '  the  old  man
asked  with  terror.

'All  about  us,'  our  elder  replied,  without  even  a
twinkle  in  his  eyes.

The  old  man — a  true  functionary — looked  quite
dumbfounded  at  seeing  such  a  profusion  of  writing.
He  examined  every  one  of  us,  nodding  with  his  head.
But  the  clerk  was  still  whispering  something  to  his
chief,  who  finally  declared  that  he  would  not  let  us
continue  the  journey.

'  Enough  of  talking,'  I  said  to  the  elder  ;  '  give  the
order  to  saddle  the  horses.'  The  Cossacks  were  of  the
same  opinion,  and  in  no  time  our  caravan  started,
bidding  good-bye  to  the  old  functionary  and  promising
him  to  report  that  short  of  resorting  to  violence — which
he  was  not  able  to  do — he  had  done  all  in  his  power  to
prevent  us  from  entering  Manchuria,  and  that  it  was
our  fault  if  we  went  nevertheless.

A  few  days  later  we  were  at  Merghen,  where  we
traded  a  little,  and  soon  reached  the  Chinese  town  of
Aigun,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Amur,  and  the  Kussian
town  of  Blagoveschensk,  on  the  left  bank.  We  had  dis-
covered the  direct  route  and  many  interesting  things
besides :  the  border-ridge  character  of  the  Great


SIBERIA  241

Khinghan,  the  ease  with  which  it  can  be  crossed,  the
tertiary  volcanoes  of  the  Uyun  Kholdontsi  region,
which  had  so  long  been  a  puzzle  in  geographical
literature,  and  so  on.  I  cannot  say  that  I  was  a  sharp
tradesman,  for  at  Merghen  I  persisted  (in  broken
Chinese)  in  asking  thirty-five  roubles  for  a  watch  when
the  Chinese  buyer  had  already  offered  me  forty-five;
but  the  Cossacks  traded  all  right.  They  sold  very
well  all  their  horses,  and  when  my  horses,  my  goods,
and  the  rest  were  sold  by  the  Cossacks  it  appeared  that
the  expedition  had  cost  the  government  the  modest
sum  of  twenty-two  roubles — a  little  over  two  pounds.


VI


ALL  this  summer  I  travelled  on  the  Amur.  I  went  as
far  as  its  mouth,  or  rather  its  estuary — Nikolaevsk — to
join  the  Governor-General,  whom  I  accompanied  in  a
steamer  up  the  Usuri ;  and  after  that,  in  the  autumn,  I
made  a  still  more  interesting  journey  up  the  Sungari,
to  the  very  heart  of  Manchuria,  as  far  as  Ghirfn  (or
Kirin,  according  to  the  southern  pronunciation).

Many  rivers  in  Asia  are  formed  by  the  junction  of  two
equally  important  streams,  so  that  it  is  difficult  for  the
geographer  to  say  which  of  the  two  is  the  main  one  and
which  is  a  tributary.  The  Ingoda  and  the  Onon  join
to  make  the  Shilka ;  the  Shilka  and  the  Argun  join  to
make  the  Amur ;  and  the  Amur  joins  the  Sungarf  to
form  that  mighty  stream  which  flows  north-eastwards

VOL.  I.  E


242  MEMOIRS OF A REVOLUTIONIST

and  enters  the  Pacific  in  the  inhospitable  latitudes  of
the  Tartar  Strait.

Up  to  the  year  1864  the  great  river  of  Manchuria
remained  very  little  known.  All  information  about  it
dated  from  the  times  of  the  Jesuits,  and  that  was  scanty.
Now  that  a  revival  in  the  exploration  of  Mongolia  and
Manchuria  was  going  to  take  place,  and  the  fear  of
China  which  had  hitherto  been  entertained  in  Russia
appeared  to  be  exaggerated,  all  of  us  younger  people
pressed  upon  the  Governor-General  the  necessity  of
exploring  the  Sungari.  To  have  next  door  to  the  Amur
an  immense  region  almost  as  little  known  as  an  African
desert  seemed  to  us  provoking.  Quite  unexpectedly,
General  Korsakoff  decided  that  same  autumn  to  send  a
steamer  up  the  Sungari,  under  the  pretext  of  carrying
some  message  of  friendship  to  the  Governor-General  of
the  Ghirin  province.  A  Russian  consul  from  Urga  had
to  take  the  message.  A  doctor,  an  astronomer,  two
topographers,  and  myself,  all  placed  under  the  command
of  a  Colonel  Chernyaeff,  had  to  take  part  in  the  ex-
pedition on  board  a  tiny  steamer,  Usuri,  which  had  in
tow  a  barge  with  coal.  Twenty-five  soldiers,  whose
rifles  were  carefully  concealed  in  the  coal,  went  with  us
on  the  barge.

All  was  organized  very  hurriedly,  and  there  was  no
accommodation  on  the  small  steamer  to  receive  such  a
numerous  company ;  but  we  were  all  full  of  enthusiasm,
and  huddled  as  best  we  could  in  the  tiny  cabins.  One
of  us  had  to  sleep  on  a  table,  and  when  we  started  we
found  that  there  were  even  no  knives  and  forks  for  all
of  us — not  to  speak  of  other  necessaries.  One  of  us
resorted  to  his  penknife  at  dinner  time,  and  my  Chinese


SIBERIA  243

knife  with  two  ivory  sticks  was  a  welcome  addition  to
our  equipment.

It  was  not  an  easy  task  to  go  up  the  Sungari.  The
great  river,  in  its  lower  parts,  where  it  flows  through
the  same  lowlands  as  the  Amur,  is  very  shallow,  and,
although  our  steamer  had  only  three  feet  draught,  we
often  could  not  find  a  channel  deep  enough  to  pass
through.  There  were  days  when  we  advanced  but  some
forty  miles,  and  scraped  many  times  the  sandy  bottom
of  the  river  with  our  keel ;  over  and  over  again  a  rowing
boat  was  sent  out  to  find  the  necessary  depth.  But  our
young  captain  had  made  up  his  mind  that  he  would
reach  Ghirin  this  autumn,  and  we  progressed  every  day.
As  we  advanced  higher  and  higher  up  we  found  the  river
more  and  more  beautiful,  and  more  and  more  easy  for
navigation  ;  and  when  we  had  passed  the  sandy  deserts
at  its  junction  with  its  sister-river,  the  Nonni,  navigation
became  easy  and  pleasant.  In  a  few  weeks  we  reached
the  capital  of  this  province  of  Manchuria.  An  excel-
lent map  of  the  river  was  made  by  the  topographers.

There  was  no  time,  unfortunately,  to  spare,  and  so
we  very  seldom  landed  in  any  village  or  town.  The
villages  are  few  and  rare  along  the  banks  of  the  river,
and  in  its  lower  parts  we  found  only  lowlands,  which
are  inundated  every  year.  Higher  up  we  sailed  for  a
hundred  miles  amidst  sand  dunes.  It  was  only  when
we  reached  the  upper  Sungari  and  began  to  approach
Ghirin  that  we  found  a  dense  population.

If  our  aim  had  been  to  establish  friendly  relations
with  Manchuria — and  not  simply  to  learn  what  the
Sungari  is — our  expedition  ought  to  have  been  con-
sidered a  dead  failure.  The  Manchurian  authorities  had

B 2


244  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

it  fresh  in  their  memories  how,  eight  years  before,  the
'  visit '  of  Muravioff  ended  in  the  annexation  of  the  Amur
and  the  Usuri,  and  they  could  not  but  look  with  suspicion
on  these  new  and  uncalled-for  visitors.  The  twenty-
five  rifles  concealed  in  the  coal,  which  had  been  duly
reported  to  the  Chinese  authorities  before  wre  left,  still
more  provoked  their  suspicions ;  and  when  our  steamer
cast  her  anchor  in  front  of  the  populous  city  of  Ghirin
we  found  all  its  merchants  armed  with  rusty  swords,
unearthed  from  some  old  arsenal.  We  were  not  pre-
vented, however,  from  walking  in  the  streets,  but  all
shops  were  closed  as  soon  as  we  landed  and  the
merchants  were  not  allowed  to  sell  anything.  Some
provisions  were  sent  on  board  the  steamer — as  a  gift,
but  no  money  was  taken  in  return.

The  autumn  was  rapidly  coming  to  its  end,  the  frosts
began  already,  and  we  had  to  hurry  back,  as  we  could  not
winter  on  the  Sungari.  In  short,  we  saw  Ghirin,  but
spoke  to  none  but  the  couple  of  interpreters  who  came
every  morning  on  board  our  steamer.  Our  aim,  how-
ever, was  fulfilled.  We  had  ascertained  that  the  river  is
navigable,  and  a  detailed  map  of  it  was  made,  from
its  mouth  to  Ghirin,  with  the  aid  of  which  wre  were  able
to  steam  on  our  return  journey  at  full  speed  without
any  accident.  Our  steamer  only  once  touched  the
ground.  But  the  Ghirin  authorities,  desirous  above  all
that  wTe  should  not  be  compelled  to  winter  on  the  river,
sent  us  two  hundred  Chinese,  who  aided  us  in  getting
off  the  sands.  When  I  jumped  into  the  water  and,  also
taking  a  stick,  began  to  sing  our  river  song, ' Dubinushka,'
which  helps  all  present  to  give  a  sudden  push  at  the  same
moment,  the  Chinese  enjoyed  immensely  the  fun  of  it,


SIBERIA  245

and  after  several  such  pushes  the  steamer  was  soon
afloat.  The  most  cordial  relations  were  established  after
this  little  adventure  between  ourselves  and  the  Chinese
—I  mean,  of  course,  the  people,  who  seemed  to  dislike
very  much  their  arrogant  Manchurian  officials.

We  called  at  several  Chinese  villages  peopled
with  exiles  from  the  celestial  empire,  and  we  were
received  in  the  most  cordial  way.  One  evening
especially  impressed  itself  on  my  memory.  We  came
to  a  small,  picturesque  village  as  night  was  already
falling.  Some  of 'us  landed,  and  I  went  alone  through
the  village.  A  thick  crowd  of  a  hundred  Chinese
soon  surrounded  me,  and  although  I  knew  not  a  word
of  their  tongue,  and  they  knew  no  more  of  mine,  we
chatted  in  the  most  amicable  way  by  mimicry  and  we
understood  each  other.  To  pat  one  on  the  shoulders
in  sign  of  friendship  is  decidedly  international  language.
To  offer  each  other  tobacco  and  to  be  offered  a  light  is
again  an  international  expression  of  friendship.  One
thing  interested  them — why  had  I,  though  young,  a
beard  ?  They  wear  none  before  they  are  sixty.  And
when  I  told  them  by  signs  that  in  case  I  should  have
nothing  to  eat  I  might  eat  it — the  joke  was  trans-
mitted from  one  to  the  other  through  the  whole  crowd.
They  roared  with  laughter,  and  began  to  pat  me  even
more  caressingly  on  the  shoulders ;  they  took  me
about,  showing  me  their  houses,  everyone  offered  me
his  pipe,  and  the  whole  crowd  accompanied  me  as  a
friend  to  the  steamer.  I  must  say  that  there  was  not
one  single  boshko  (policeman)  in  that  village.  In  other
villages  our  soldiers  and  the  young  officers  always  made
friends  with  the  Chinese,  but  as  soon  as  a  boshko  appeared


246  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

all  was  spoiled.  In  return,  one  must  have  seen  what
'  faces '  they  used  to  make  at  the  boshkd  behind  his
back  !  They  evidently  hated  these  representatives  of
authority.

Our  expedition  has  since  been  forgotten.  The
astronomer,  Th.  Usoltzeff,  and  I  published  reports  about
it  in  the  '  Memoirs '  of  the  Siberian  Geographical
Society  ;  but  a  few  years  later  a  great  conflagration
at  Irkutsk  destroyed  all  the  copies  left  of  the  Memoirs
as  well  as  the  original  map  of  the  Sungari,  and  it  was
only  last  year,  when  the  Trans-Manchurian  railway
began  to  be  built,  that  Russian  geographers  unearthed
our  reports,  and  found  that  the  great  river  had  been
explored  five-and-thirty  years  ago.


VII


As  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  done  in  the  direction
of  reform,  I  tried  to  do  what  seemed  to  be  possible
under  the  existing  circumstances — only  to  become
convinced  of  the  absolute  uselessness  of  such  efforts.
In  my  new  capacity  of  attache  to  the  Governor-General
for  Cossack  affairs,  I  made,  for  instance,  a  most
thorough  investigation  of  the  economical  condition  of
the  Usuri  Cossacks,  whose  crops  used  to  be  lost  every
year,  so  that  the  government  had  every  winter  to  feed
them  in  order  to  save  them  from  famine.  When  I
returned  from  the  Usuri  with  my  report,  I  received


SIBERIA  247

congratulations  on  all  sides,  I  was  promoted,  I  got
special  rewards.  All  the  measures  I  recommended
were  accepted,  and  special  grants  of  money  were  given
for  aiding  the  emigration  of  some  and  for  supplying
cattle  to  others,  as  I  had  suggested.  But  the  practical
realization  of  the  measures  went  into  the  hands  of  some
old  drunkard,  who  would  squander  the  money  and
pitilessly  flog  the  unfortunate  Cossacks  for  the  purpose
of  converting  them  into  good  agriculturalists.  And
thus  it  went  on  in  all  directions,  beginning  with  the
winter  palace  at  St.  Petersburg  and  ending  with  the
Usuri  and  Kamchatka.

The  higher  administration  of  Siberia  was  influenced
by  excellent  intentions,  and  I  can  only  repeat  that,  every-
thing considered,  it  was  far  better,  far  more  enlightened,
and  far  more  interested  in  the  welfare  of  the  people  than
the  administration  of  any  other  province  of  Russia.
But  it  was  an  administration — a  branch  of  the  tree
which  had  its  roots  at  St.  Petersburg — and  that  was
enough  to  paralyse  all  its  excellent  intentions,  enough
to  make  it  interfere  with  and  kill  all  the  beginnings
of  local  life  and  progress.  Whatever  was  started  for
the  good  of  the  country  by  local  men  was  looked  at
with  distrust,  and  was  immediately  paralysed  by  hosts
of  difficulties  which  came,  not  so  much  from  the  bad
intentions  of  the  administrators,  but  simply  from  the
fact  that  these  officials  belonged  to  a  pyramidal,  centra-
lised administration.  The  very  fact  of  their  belonging
to  a  government  which  radiated  from  a  distant  capital
caused  them  to  look  upon  everything  from  the  point
of  view  of  functionaries  of  the  government,  who
think  first  of  all  about  what  their  superiors  will  say,


248  MEMOIRS OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

and  how  this  or  that  will  appear  in  the  administrative
machinery.  The  interests  of  the  country  are  a  secondary
matter.

Gradually  I  turned  my  energy  more  and  more
toward  scientific  exploration.  In  1865  I  explored  the
western  Sayans,  where  I  caught  a  new  glimpse  of  the
structure  of  the  Siberian  highlands  and  came  upon
another  important  volcanic  region  on  the  Chinese  fron-
tier ;  and  finally,  the  year  following,  I  undertook  a  long
journey  to  discover  a  direct  communication  between
the  gold  mines  of  the  Yakutsk  province  (on  the  Vitini
and  the  Olokma)  and  Transbaikalia.  For  many  years
the  members  of  the  Siberian  expedition  (1860-1864)
had  tried  to  find  such  a  passage,  and  had  endeavoured
to  cross  the  series  of  very  wild,  stony  parallel  ridges
which  separate  these  mines  from  the  plains  of
Transbaikalia  ;  but  when,  coming  from  the  south,
they  reached  that  gloomy  mountain  region,  and  saw
before  them  the  dreary  mountains  spreading  for
hundreds  of  miles  northward,  all  of  these  explorers,  save
one  who  was  killed  by  natives,  returned  southward.  It
\vas  evident  that  in  order  to  be  successful  the  expedi-
tion had  to  move  from  the  north  to  the  south — from
the  dreary  unknown  wilderness  to  the  warmer  and
populated  regions.  It  so  happened,  also,  that  while  I
was  preparing  for  the  expedition  I  was  shown  a  map
which  a  Tungus  had  traced  with  his  knife  on  a  piece
of  bark.  This  little  map — a  splendid  specimen,  by  the
way,  of  the  usefulness  of  the  geometrical  sense  in  the
lowest  stages  of  civilization,  and  one  which  would  con-
sequently interest  A.  E.  Wallace — so  struck  me  by  its
seeming  truth  to  nature  that  I  fully  trusted  to  it,  and


SIJ3EEIA  249

began my journey from the north, following the
indications  of  the  map.

In  company  with  a  young  and  promising  naturalist,
Polak6ff,  and  a  topographer,  we  went  first  down  the
Lena  to  the  northern  gold  mines.  There  we  equipped
the  expedition,  taking  provisions  for  three  months,  and
started  southward.  An  old  Yakut  hunter,  who  twenty
years  before  had  once  followed  the  passage  indicated  in
the  Tungus  map,  undertook  to  act  for  us  as  a  guide  and
to  cross  the  mountain  region — 250  miles  wide — following
the  river-valleys  and  gorges  indicated  by  the  Tungus
with  his  knife  on  the  birch-bark  map.  He  really
accomplished  that  astounding  feat,  although  there  was
no  track  of  any  sort  to  follow,  and  all  the  valleys  that
one  saw  from  the  top  of  a  mountain  pass,  all  equally
covered  with  wood,  seemed  to  be  absolutely  alike  to  the
unpractised  eye.  This  time  the  passage  was  found.
For  three  months  we  wandered  in  the  almost  totally
uninhabited  mountain  deserts  and  over  the  marshy
plateau,  till  at  last  we  reached  our  destination,  Chita.
I  am  told  that  this  passage  is  now  of  value  for  bringing
cattle  from  the  south  to  the  gold  mines ;  as  for  me,  the
journey  helped  me  immensely  afterwards  in  finding  the
key  to  the  structure  of  the  mountains  and  plateaus  of
Siberia — but  I  am  not  writing  a  book  of  travel,  and
must  stop.

The  years  that  I  spent  in  Siberia  taught  me  many
lessons  which  I  could  hardly  have  learned  elsewhere.
I  soon  realized  the  absolute  impossibility  of  doing  any-
thing really  useful  for  the  masses  of  the  people  by
means  of  the  administrative  machinery.  With  this


250  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

illusion  I  parted  for  ever.  Then  I  began  to  understand
not  only  men  and  human  character,  but  also  the  inner
springs  of  the  life  of  human  society.  The  constructive
work  of  the  unknown  masses,  which  so  seldom  finds
any  mention  in  books,  and  the  importance  of  that
constructive  work  in  the  growth  of  forms  of  society,
appeared  before  my  eyes  in  a  clear  light.  To  wit-
ness, for  instance,  the  ways  in  which  the  communi-
ties of  Dukhob6rtsy  (brothers  of  those  who  are  now
settling  in  Canada,  and  who  found  such  a  hearty  support
in  England  and  the  United  States)  migrated  to  the  Amur
region  ;  to  see  the  immense  advantages  which  they  got
from  their  semi-communistic  brotherly  organization  ;
and  to  realize  what  a  success  their  colonization
was,  amidst  all  the  failures  of  State  colonization,  was
learning  something  which  cannot  be  learned  from
books.  Again,  to  live  with  natives,  to  see  at  work
the  complex  forms  of  social  organization  which  they
have  elaborated  far  away  from  the  influence  of  any
civilization,  was,  as  it  were,  to  store  up  floods  of  light
which  illuminated  my  subsequent  reading.  The  part
which  the  unknown  masses  play  in  the  accomplishment
of  all  important  historical  events,  and  even  in  war,
became  evident  to  me  from  direct  observation,  and  I
came  to  hold  ideas  similar  to  those  which  Tolstoy
expresses  concerning  the  leaders  and  the  masses  in  his
monumental  work,  '  War  and  Peace.'

Having  been  brought  up  in  a  serf-owner's  family,  I
entered  active  life,  like  all  young  men  of  my  time,  with
a  great  deal  of  confidence  in  the  necessity  of  command-
ing, ordering,  scolding,  punishing,  and  the  like.  But
when,  at  an  early  stage,  I  had  to  manage  serious  enter-


SIBERIA  261

prises  and  to  deal  with  men,  and  when  each  mistake
would  lead  at  once  to  heavy  consequences,  I  began  to
appreciate  the  difference  between  acting  on  the  princi-
ple of  command  and  discipline,  and  acting  on  the  prin-
ciple of  common  understanding.  The  former  works
admirably  in  a  military  parade,  but  it  is  worth  nothing
where  real  life  is  concerned  and  the  aim  can  be  achieved
only  through  the  severe  effort  of  many  converging  wills.
Although  I  did  not  then  formulate  my  observations  in
terms  borrowed  from  party  struggles,  I  may  say  now  that
I  lost  in  Siberia  whatever  faith  in  State  discipline  I  had
cherished  before.  I  was  prepared  to  become  an  anarchist.

From  the  age  of  nineteen  to  twenty-five  I  had  to
work  out  important  schemes  of  reform,  to  deal  with
hundreds  of  men  on  the  Amur,  to  prepare  and  to  make
risky  expeditions  with  ridiculously  small  means,  and  so
on ;  and  if  all  these  things  ended  more  or  less  success-
fully, I  account  for  it  only  by  the  fact  that  I  soon  under-
stood that  in  serious  work  commanding  and  discipline
are  of  little  avail.  Men  of  initiative  are  required
everywhere ;  but  once  the  impulse  has  been  given,  the
enterprise  must  be  conducted,  especially  in  Bussia,  not
in  military  fashion,  but  in  a  sort  of  communal  way,  by
means  of  common  understanding.  I  wish  that  all
framers  of  plans  of  State  discipline  could  pass  through
the  school  of  real  life  before  they  begin  to  frame  their
State  Utopias  :  we  should  then  hear  far  less  than  at
present  of  schemes  of  military  and  pyramidal  organiza-
tion of  society.

With  all  that,  life  in  Siberia  became  less  and  less
attractive  for  me,  although  my  brother  Alexander  had
joined  me  in  1864  at  Irkutsk,  where  he  commanded  a


252  MEMOIRS OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

squadron  of  Cossacks.  We  were  happy  to  be  together ;
we  read  a  great  deal  and  discussed  all  the  philosophical,
scientific,  and  sociological  questions  of  the  day ;  but  we
both  longed  after  intellectual  life,  and  there  was  none
in  Siberia.  The  occasional  passage  through  Irkutsk  of
Raphael  Pumpelly  or  of  Adolph  Bastian — the  only  two
men  of  science  who  visited  our  capital  during  my  stay
there — was  quite  an  event  for  both  of  us.  The
scientific  and  especially  the  political  life  of  Western
Europe,  of  which  we  heard  through  the  papers,
attracted  us,  and  the  return  to  Russia  was  the  subject
to  which  we  continually  came  back  in  our  conversa-
tions. Finally,  the  insurrection  of  the  Polish  exiles  in
1866  opened  our  eyes  to  the  false  position  we  both
occupied  as  officers  of  the  Eussian  army.


VIII

I  WAS  far  away  in  the  Vitim  mountains  when  some
Polish  exiles,  who  were  employed  in  piercing  a  new  road
in  the  cliffs  round  Lake  Baikal,  made  a  desperate  attempt
to  break  their  chains  and  to  force  their  way  to  China
across  Mongolia.  Troops  were  sent  out  against  them,
and  a  Russian  officer  was  killed  by  the  insurgents.
I  heard  of  it  on  my  return  to  Irkutsk,  where  some  fifty
Poles  were  to  be  tried  by  a  court-martial.  The  sittings
of  courts-martial  being  open  in  Russia,  I  followed  this,
taking  detailed  notes  of  the  proceedings,  which  I  sent
to  a  St.  Petersburg  paper,  and  which  were  published


SIBERIA  253

in  full,  to  the  great  dissatisfaction  of  the  Governor-
General.

Eleven  thousand  Poles,  men  and  women,  had  been
transported  to  East  Siberia  in  consequence  of  the
insurrection  of  1863.  They  were  chiefly  students,
artists,  ex-officers,  nobles,  and  especially  skilled  artisans
from  the  intelligent  and  highly  developed  working-
men's  population  of  Warsaw  and  other  towns.  A  great
number  of  them  were  kept  in  hard  labour,  while  the
remainder  were  settled  all  over  the  country  in  villages
where  they  could  find  no  work  whatever  and  lived  in  a
state  of  semi-starvation.  Those  who  were  condemned  to
hard  labour  worked  either  at  Chita,  building  the  barges
for  the  Amur — these  were  the  happiest — or  in  iron
works  of  the  Crown,  or  in  salt  works.  I  saw  some  of
the  latter,  on  the  Lena,  standing  half-naked  in  a  shanty,
round  an  immense  cauldron  filled  with  salt-brine,  and
mixing  the  thick,  boiling  brine  with  long  shovels,  in  an
infernal  temperature,  while  the  gates  of  the  shanty
were  wide  open  to  make  a  strong  current  of  glacial  air.
After  two  years  of  such  work  these  martyrs  were  sure
to  die  from  consumption.

Lately,  a  considerable  number  of  Polish  exiles  were
employed  as  navvies  building  a  road  along  the  southern
coast  of  Lake  Baikal.  This  narrow  Alpine  lake,  four
hundred  miles  long,  surrounded  by  beautiful  mountains
rising  three  to  five  thousand  feet  above  its  level,  cuts  off
Transbaikalia  and  the  Amur  from  Irkutsk.  In  winter  it
may  be  crossed  over  the  ice  and  in  summer  there  are
steamers,  but  for  six  weeks  in  the  spring  and  another
six  weeks  in  the  autumn  the  only  means  to  reach  Chita
and  Kyakhta  (for  Pekin)  from  Irkutsk  was  to  travel  on


254  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

horseback  a  long  circuitous  route,  across  mountains
7,000  to  8,000  feet  in  altitude.  I  once  travelled  along
this  track,  greatly  enjoying  the  scenery  of  the  mountains,
which  were  snow-clad  in  May,  but  otherwise  the  journey
was  really  awful.  To  climb  eight  miles  only,  to  the  top
of  the  main  pass,  Khamar-daban,  it  took  me  the  whole
day  from  three  in  the  morning  till  eight  at  night.  Our
horses  continually  fell  through  the  thawing  snow,
plunging  with  the  rider  many  times  a  day  into  icy
water  which  flowed  underneath  the  snow-crust.  It  was
decided  accordingly  to  build  a  permanent  road  along
the  southern  coast  of  the  lake,  blowing  up  a  passage
in  the  steep,  almost  vertical  cliffs  which  rise  along
the  shore,  and.  spanning  with  bridges  a  hundred  wild
torrents  which  furiously  rush  from  the  mountains  into
the  lake.  Polish  exiles  were  employed  at  this  hard  work.
Several  batches  of  Russian  political  exiles  had  been
sent  during  the  last  century  to  Siberia,  but,  with  the
submissiveness  to  fate  which  is  characteristic  of  the
Russians,  they  never  revolted  ;  they  allowed  themselves
to  be  killed  inch  by  inch,  without  ever  attempting  to
free  themselves.  The  Poles,  on  the  contrary — this  must
be  said  to  their  honour — were  never  so  submissive  as
that,  and  this  time  they  broke  into  open  revolt.  They
evidently  had  no  chance  of  success — they  revolted
nevertheless.  They  had  before  them  the  great  lake,
and  behind  them  a  girdle  of  absolutely  impracticable
mountains,  beyond  which  begin  the  wildernesses  of
North  Mongolia ;  but  they  nevertheless  conceived  the
idea  of  disarming  the  soldiers  who  guarded  them,
forging  those  terrible  weapons  of  the  Polish  insurrec-
tions— scythes  planted  as  pikes  on  long  poles — and


SIBERIA  2/55

making  their  way  across  the  mountains  and  across
Mongolia,  towards  China,  where  they  would  find
English  ships  to  take  them.  One  day  the  news  came
to  Irkutsk  that  part  of  those  Poles  who  were  at  work
on  the  Baikal  road  had  disarmed  a  dozen  soldiers  and
broken  out  into  revolt.  Eighty  soldiers  were  all  that
could  be  despatched  against  them  from  Irkutsk.
Crossing  the  lake  in  a  steamer,  they  went  to  meet  the
insurgents  on  the  other  side  of  the  lake.

The  winter  of  1866  had  been  unusually  dull  at
Irkutsk.  In  the  Siberian  capital  there  is  no  such
distinction  between  the  different  classes  as  one  sees  in
Kussian  provincial  towns  ;  and  the  Irkutsk  '  society,'
composed  of  numerous  officers  and  officials,  together
with  the  wives  and  daughters  of  local  traders  and  even
clergymen,  met  during  the  winter,  every  Thursday,
at  the  Assembly  Booms.  This  winter,  however,
there  was  no  '  go '  in  the  evening  parties.  Amateur
theatricals,  too,  were  not  successful ;  and  gambling,
which  was  usually  pursued  on  a  grand  scale  at  Irkutsk,
only  dragged  just  along  :  a  want  of  money  was  felt
this  winter  among  the  officials,  and  even  the  arrival  of
several  mining  officers  did  not  bring  with  it  the  heaps
of  bank-notes  with  which  these  privileged  gentlemen
usually  enlivened  the  knights  of  the  green  tables.  The
season  was  decidedly  dull — just  the  season  for  starting
spiritualistic  experiences  with  talking  tables  and  talka-
tive spirits.  A  gentleman  who  had  been  during  the
previous  winter  the  pet  of  Irkutsk  society  on  account
of  the  tales  which  he  recited  with  great  talent,  seeing
that  interest  in  himself  and  his  tales  was  failing,  now
took  to  spiritualism  as  a  new  amusement.  He  was


256  MEMOIRS  OF  A  REVOLUTIONIST

clever,  and  in  a  week's  time  the  Irkutsk  ladies  were
mad  over  talking  spirits.  A  new  life  was  infused
amongst  those  who  did  not  know  how  to  kill  time.
Talking  tables  appeared  in  every  drawing-room,  and
love-making  went  hand  in  hand  with  spirit  rapping.
An  officer,  whom  I  will  call  Potaloff,  took  it  all  in
deadly  earnest — talking  tables  and  love.  Perhaps  he
was  less  fortunate  with  the  latter  than  with  the  tables  ;
at  any  rate,  when  the  news  of  the  Polish  insurrection
came  he  asked  to  be  sent  to  the  spot  with  the  eighty
soldiers.  He  hoped  to  return  with  a  halo  of  military
glory.  '  I  go  against  the  Poles,'  he  wrote  in  his  diary ;
'  it  would  be  so  interesting  to  be  slightly  wounded  ! '

He  was  killed.  He  rode  on  horseback  by  the  side
of  the  Colonel  who  commanded  the  soldiers,  when  '  the
battle  with  the  insurgents  ' — the  glowing  description  of
which  may  be  found  in  the  annals  of  the  General  Staff-
began.  The  soldiers  slowly  advanced  along  the  road,
when  they  met  some  fifty  Poles,  five  or  six  of  whom
were  armed  with  rifles  and  the  remainder  with  sticks
and  scythes ;  they  occupied  the  forest,  and  from  time
to  time  fired  their  guns.  The  chain  of  soldiers  did
the  same.  Lieutenant  Potaloff  twice  asked  permission
of  the  Colonel  to  dismount  and  to  dash  into  the  forest.
The  Colonel  very  angrily  ordered  him  to  stay  where  he
was.  Notwithstanding  this,  the  next  moment  the
Lieutenant  had  disappeared.  Several  shots  resounded
in  the  wood,  followed  by  wild  cries  ;  the  soldiers  rushed
that  way,  and  found  the  Lieutenant  bleeding  on  the
grass.  The  Poles  fired  their  last  shots  and  surrendered  ;
the  battle  was  over,  Potaloff  was  dead.  He  had  rushed,
revolver  in  hand,  into  the  thicket,  where  he  found


SIBERIA  267

several  Poles  armed  with  pikes.  He  fired  all  his
shots  at  them  in  a  haphazard  way,  wounding  one  of
them,  whereupon  the  others  rushed  upon  him  with
their  pikes.

At  the  other  end  of  the  road,  on  this  side  of  the
lake,  two  Kussian  officers  behaved  in  the  most  abomin-
able way  towards  those  Poles  who  were  building  the
same  road  but  took  no  part  in  the  insurrection.  One
of  the  two  officers  rushed  into  their  tent,  swearing  and
shooting  at  the  peaceful  convicts  with  his  revolver,
badly  wounding  two  of  them.

Now,  the  logic  of  the  Siberian  military  authorities
was  that  as  a  Kussian  officer  had  bsen  killed  several
Poles  had  to  be  executed.  The  court-martial  con-
demned five  of  them  to  death  :  Szaramowicz,  a  pianist,
a  handsome  man  of  thirty  who  was  the  leader  of  the  in-
surrection ;  Celinski,  an  ex-officer  of  the  Russian  army,
a  man  of  sixty,  because  he  had  once  been  an  officer ;
and  three  others  whose  names  I  do  not  remember.

The  Governor-General  telegraphed  to  St.  Petersburg
asking  permission  to  reprieve  the  condemned  insurgents,
but  no  answer  came.  He  had  promised  us  not  to  exe-
cute them,  but  after  having  waited  several  days  for  the
reply,  he  ordered  the  sentence  to  be. carried  out  secretly
early  in  the  morning.  The  reply  from  St.  Petersburg
came  four  weeks  later,  by  post :  the  Governor  was  left
to  act  '  according  to  the  best  of  his  understanding.'  In
the  meantime  five  brave  men  had  been  shot.

The  insurrection,  people  said,  was  foolish.  And
yet  this  handful  of  insurgents  obtained  something.
The  news  of  it  reached  Europe.  The  executions,
the  brutalities  of  the  two  officers,  which  became

VOL.  i.  s


258  MEMOIRS  OF  A REVOLUTIONIST

known  through  the  proceedings  of  the  court,  pro-
duced a  commotion  in  Austria,  and  Austria  interfered
in  favour  of  the  Galicians  who  had  taken  part  in  the
revolution  of  1863  and  had  been  sent  to  Siberia.  Soon
after  the  Baikal  insurrection  the  fate  of  the  Polish
exiles  in  Siberia  was  substantially  bettered,  and  they
owed  it  to  their  insurgents — to  those  five  brave  men
who  were  shot  at  Irkutsk,  and  those  who  had  taken
arms  by  their  side.

For  my  brother  and  myself  this  insurrection  was  a
great  lesson.  We  realized  what  it  meant  to  belong  in
any  way  to  the  army.  I  was  away ;  but  my  brother  was
at  Irkutsk,  and  his  squadron  was  dispatched  against  the
insurgents.  Happily,  the  commander  of  the  regiment
to  which  my  brother  belonged  knew  him  well,  and,
under  some  pretext,  he  ordered  another  officer  to  take
command  of  the  mobilized  part  of  the  squadron.
Otherwise  Alexander,  of  course,  would  have  refused  to
march.  If  I  had  been  at  Irkutsk,  I  should  have  done
the  same.

We  decided,  then,  to  leave  the  military  service  and
to  return  to  Bussia.  This  was  not  an  easy  matter,
especially  as  Alexander  had  married  in  Siberia ;  but  at
last  all  was  arranged,  and  early  in  1867  we  were  on  our
way  to  St.  Petersburg.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME


Spottisieoode  &  Co.  Printers,  New-street  Squrre,  London


SMITH,  ELDER,  &  CO.'S  NEW  BOOKS.

SIR ALGERNON  WEST'S  REMINISCENCES.

In  2  Volume*. With  Portraits  and  Sketches,  including  Portraits  of  Sir  Algernon  West
aud  of  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Alfred  Lyttelton,  by  the  Marchioness  of  Granby.
Demy  8vo.  X\s.

RECOLLECTIONS, 1832  to  1886. By  the  Eight  Hon.

8ir  ALGERNON  WEST,  K.C.B.,  for  many  years  1'rivate  Secretary  to  tue  Right  Hou.
W.  E.  Gladstone,  and  subsequently  Chairman  of  the  Inland  Keeenue  Board.

LIBRARY  EDITION  OF  SIDNEY  LEE'S LIFE  OF  SHAKESPEARE.

In  1  Volume. Medium  8vo. Profusely  Illustrated  with  Photogravures,
Original  Sketches,  <tc. Pricj  16*.

THE  LIFE  OF  WILLIAM  SHAKESPEARE. By  SIDNEY

LEK,  Editor  of  '  The  Dictionary  of  National  Biography.'

TRAVELS  IN  SOUTHERN  ARABIA  AND  THE  SOUDAN.

With  24  lull-page  Illustrations  and  5  Maps. Demy  8vo.  18*.

SOUTHERN  ARABIA. By  the  late  THEODORE  BENT  and

Mrs.  THEODOUB  BENT.

HEALTH  ABROAD  :  a  Medical  Handbook  for  Travellers.

Eiiiied  by  ED.XIU.NL>  HOBHOUSE.  M.A.,  M.D.Oxon.,  M.H.C.P.,  Assistant  Physician
to  the  Sussex  County  Hospital.  Crown  8vo.  6*.

With  Special  Chapters  on  EGYPT  and  NORTH  AFRICA,  by  Dr.  LEIGH  OANNKT  ;
CENTRAL  AFRICA,  by  Dr.  HARFOHU  BATI-EKSBY;  CONTINENTAL  TRAVEL,  by
Dr.  tSTOAK-r  TIDK.Y  ami  the  EDITOR;  SOUTH  AFRICA,  by  Dr.  ii.  J.  GUILLEMAKD  ;
SOUTH  AMERICA,  by  Pr.  G.  H.  PE.VNBLL;  INDIA,  by  Dr.  W.  J.  SIMPSON;  and
AUSTRALIA,  NEW  ZEALAND,  and  NORTH  AMERICA,  by  the  EDITOR.

THE  STORY  OF  THE  HUDSON'S  BAY  COMPANY.

In  2  Volumes. Large  crown  8vo. With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Maps. 18*.

THE  GREAT  COMPANY,  1667-1871. Being  a  History  of

the  Honourable  Company  of  Merchant  Adventurers  Trading  in  Hudson's  Bay.
Compiled  now  for  the  first  time  from  the  Company's  Archives  ;  from  the  Journals
of  its  Factors  aud  Traders ;  from  French  and  English  Diplomatic  Documents  and
State  Papers  ;  and  from  many  Accounts  and  Memoirs.  By  BKCKLBS  WILLSON.
With  an  Introduction  by  LOUD  STKATHCONA  AND  MOUNT  ROYAL.

TRAVEL  AND  ADVENTURE  IN  AUSTRALIA.

With  Portraits  and  Maps. Demy  8vo.  16*.

THE  LIFE  OF  CHARLES  STURT,  sometime  Captain  39th

Foot,  aud  Australian  Explorer. By  Mrs.  NAPUEB  GEORQE  STCJBT.
With  a  Portrait. Crown  8vo.  7s.  6d.

THE LIFE OF MADAME DE LONGUEVILLE (ANSE

GENEVIEVK  DE  BOURBON).  By  Mrs.  ALFRED  COCK.

A  VOLUME  OF  MR.  JAMES  PAYN'S  ESSAYS.

With  a  Portrait,  and  a  Memoir  by  LESLIE  STEPHEN. Crown  870.  6*.

THE BACKWATER  OF  LIFE  ;  or,  Essays  of  a  Literary

Veteran. By  the  late  JAMES  PAYN.

UNWRITTEN LAWS AND IDEALS. Edited  by  Miss

PnvAiiiN. Large  crown  8vo. 7s.  (d.

London: SMITH,  ELDER,  &  CO.,  15  Waterloo  Place,  S.W.


SMITH,  ELDER,  &  CO.'S  NEW  BOOKS.

IMPORTANT  NEW  WORK  BY  THE  AUTHOR  OF  '  DEEDS  THAT  WON
THE  EMPIRE.'

IN  POUR  VOLS.  CROWN  8vo.  WITH  PORTRAITS,  FACSIMILES  AND  PLANS,

6*.  EACH.

HOW  ENGLAND  SAVED  EUROPE:

The  Story  of  the  Great  War  (1793-1815).

By  W.  H.  FITCHETT,  LL.D.,

AUTHOR OF 'DEEDS THAT WON THE EMPIRE,'

'FIGHTS  FOR  THE  FLAG,'  4c.

Vol.  I.,  FROM  THE  LOW  COUNTRIES  TO  EGYPT

IS  READY,
and  the  remaining  volumes  will  be  issued  at  intervals.


NEW  WORK  FOR  JUVENILES  BY  HIS  HONOUR  JUDGE  PARRY.

With  Illustrations  by  ATHELSTAN  RCSDKN. Small  4to.  6s.

THE  SCARLET  HERRING,  and  other  Stories.  By  His  Honour
Judge  EDWARD  ABBOTT  PARRY,  Author  of  '  Katawampus  :  its  Treatment  and
Cure,' '  Butter-Scotia,'  Sic.

*.*  Also  an  Edition  of  50  Copies,  printed  on  Japanese  vellum  and  bound  in  white
vellum,  price  21s.  net.  Each  copy  of  this  edition  is  signed  by  the  Author  and  numbered.

VOL.  II.  OF  MR.  ROBERT  BRIDGES'  COLLECTED  WORKS.

JUST  PUBLISHED. Small  post  8vo.  6s.

THE  POETICAL  WORKS  OF  ROBERT  BRIDGES. Volume  II.

CONTESTS  : — Shorter  Poems ;  New  Poems  ;  Notes.

COLLECTIONS  AND  RECOLLECTIONS. By  •  ONE  WHO  HAS  KEPT

A  IJIARY.' Revised,  Enlarged,  and  Cheaper  Edition. With  Frontispiece. Large
crown  8vo.  Is.  6d.

MORE  POT-POURRI  FROM  A  SURREY  GARDEN. By  Mrs.  C.  W.

EARLB,  Author  of  '  Put-Pourri.  irom  a  Surrey  Garden.' SECOND  IMPRESSION.

Large  crown  8vo.  7s.  6d.

WORLD. — '"More  Pot-Pourri  from  a  Surrey  Garden"  is  very  pleasant  to  read.  It
ranges,  like  its  predecessor,  over  a  variety  of  subjects,  all  discussed  in  an  amiable,
gossiping,  old-world  vicarage  style.  Mrs.  Earle  is  never  tedious,  and  often  most  instructive.'

THE  LOG  OF  A  SEA- WAIF  :  being  Kecollections  of  the  First  Four
Tears  of  My  Sea  Life.  By  FRANK  T.  BOLLES,  F.R.G.S.,  Author  of  '  The  Cruise  of
the  "Cachalot,"'  'Idylls  of  the  Sea,'  &c.  With  8  Full-Page  Illustrations
specially  drawn  by  Arthur  Twidle.  Large  post  8vo.  8*.  6d.

BOOKMAN.—1  A  mine  of  information  and  of  interest  for  those  who  concern  them-
selves with  seafaring  folk.  ...  A  brave  and  inspiriting  story.'


THE 'HAWORTH' EDITION OF THE

LIFE  AND  WORKS  OF  THE  SISTERS  BRONTE.

In  7  Volumes.  Large  crown  8vo.  gilt  top,  6*.  each.  With  Portraits  and  Illustrations,
including  Views  of  Places  described  in  the  Works,  reproduced  from  Photographs
taken  specially  for  the  edition  by  Mr.  W.  R.  BLAND,  of  Derby,  in  conjunction
with  Mr.  C.  BARROW  KEENE.  Introductions  to  the  Works  are  supplied  by  Mrs.
HUMPHRY  WARD,  and  an  Introduction  and  Notes  to  Mrs.  GASKKLL'S  '  Life  of
Charlotte  Bronte  '  by  Mr.  CLEMENT  K.  SHORTER,  the  eminent  Bronte  authority.

Vols.  I.  and  II.,  JANE  EYRE  and  SHIRLEY,  by  CHARLOTTE  BRONTfi,
are  ready,  and  the  remaining  volumes  will  be  issued  at  monthly
intervals. /j

London: SMIKl,  ELDER,  &  CO.,  15  Waterloo  Place,  S.W.


